... Environmental Health Perspectives 
Vol. 58, pp. 9-319, 1984 
A Carcinogenic Potency Database of the 
Standardized Results of ·Animal Bioassays 
Lois Swirsky Gold,** Charles B. Sawyer,* Renae Magaw,* 
Georganne M. Backman,* Margarita de Veciana,* 
Robert Levinson,* N. Kim Hooper,t William R. Havender, * 
Leslie Bernstein,§ Richard Peto**, Malcolm C. Pike§, 
and Bruce N. Amest* 
The preceding paper described our numerical index of carcinogenic potency, the TD50 and the statistical 
procedures adopted for estimating it from experimental data. This paper presents the Carcinogenic Potency 
Database, which includes results of about 3000 long-term, chronic experiments of 770 test compounds. Part 
II is a discussion of the sources of our data, the rationale for the inclusion of particular experiments and 
particular target sites, and the conventions auopied in summarizing the literature. Part III is a guide to the 
plot of results presented in Part IV. A number of appendices are provided to facilitate use of the database. 
The plot includes information about chronic cancer tests in mammals, such as dose and other aspects of 
experimental protocol, histopathology and tumor incidence, TD,0 and its statistical significance, dose 
response, author's opinion and literature reference. The plot readily permits comparisons of carcinogenic 
potency and many other aspects of cancer tests; it also provides quantitative information about negative 
tests. The range of carcinogenic potency is over 10 million-fold. 
Part I: Introduction 
This paper presents the Carcinogenic Potency Data­
base, which includes data on approximately 3000 long­
term, chronic animal experiments with about 770 
chemicals. The preceding paper (1) described our nu­
merical index of carcinogenic potency, the TD50, and the 
statistical procedures adopted for estimating it from 
experimental data. In a simplified way, TD50 may be 
defined as follows: for a given target site(s), if there 
are no tumors in control animals, then TD50 is that 
chronic dose rate in mg/kg body weight/day which 
would induce tumors in half the test animals at the end 
of a standard lifespan for the species. Since the tumor(s) 
of interest often does occur in control animals, TD50 is 
more precisely defined as: that dose rate (in mg/kg body 
*Biology and Medicine Division, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory , 
Berkeley, CA 94720. 
!Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Berkeley, 
CA 94720. 
+Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed, at the 
Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 
94720. Copies of this issue are available from the U. S. Government 
Printing Office. 
§Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern 
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033. 
**l.C.R.F. Cancer Studies Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Medicine, Radcliffe Infirmar y, Oxford OX2 6HE, United Kingdom. weight/day) which, if administered chronically for the 
standard lifespan of the species, will halve the probabil­
ity of remaining tumorless throughout that period. A 
TD50 can be computed for any particular type of 
neoplasm, for any particular tissue, or for any combina­
tion of these. 
Part II of this paper discusses the sources of bioassay 
results and the rationale for including particular experi­
ments and particular target sites in the database. The 
conventions adopted in summarizing and standardizing 
the literature are also described. In Part IV we present 
a plot of the database. In order for the reader to use this 
plot most effectively, Part III includes a full description 
of the contents, variable by variable. Several appendi­
ces which define codes and give additional details about 
particular tests are included after the plot. 
Efforts to use animal bioassays in the evaluation of 
the potential health risks of chemicals to humans have 
been hampered by the lack of a standardized method to 
compare experimental results. Experimental protocols 
as well as the type of information reported in the 
literature are quite diverse. Moreover, quantitative 
estimates of carcinogenic potency have not yet been 
applied to the results of tests on a broad range of 
chemicals. 
Our Carcinogenic Potency Database is an attempt to 
quantify and standardize the animal bioassay literature 10 GOLD ET AL. 
and to organize it systematically. It has become clear 
that the dose levels of different chemicals which induce 
tumors in rats and mice vary enormously, i.e., some 
chemicals are observed to be more powerful carcinogens 
than others. Moreover, the total number of known and 
suspected carcinogens, both natural and man-made, to 
which humans are exposed is much larger than pre­
viously thought (2). Therefore, quantifying the carcino­
genic potency of various chemicals is one important 
aspect of developing a policy response to the problem of 
chemical hazards to humans. 
Ideally, for human risk assessment and regulatory 
policy, one would like to have quantitative information 
about the potency of various chemicals in man, but with 
rare exceptions tqis information is not available. The 
next best source of information is the extensive litera­
ture on animal bioassays. Although it is clear that 
animal models are not a completely satisfactory model 
for man, it is essential to examine the published animal 
literature in a more organized and quantitative way. 
We would like to emphasize the complexities of animal 
bioassay results, and to caution that no single number 
such as the TD50 fully describes the data. We have 
included in the database presented in Part rv, informa­
tion about a variety of factors which are important in 
the interpretation of bioassays, such as: the TD50 and its 
statistical significance, the species and strains which 
have been tested chronically, the route and duration of 
compound administration, the tumor types, the propor­
tion of animals with specific types of tumors in dosed 
and control groups, the shape of the dose-response 
curve and the author's opinion about carcinogenicity. 
Future analyses of this database should help to 
identify similarities and differences in response among 
strains and species. In addition, quantitative estimates 
of carcinogenic potency should be useful in determining 
the extent to which potency in animals is predictable 
from mutagenic potency calculated from short-term 
tests. 
A word of caution is necessary about the limitations 
of the database . We have not attempted to evaluate 
whether or not a compound is a carcinogen; rather, we 
report the opinions of the authors whose data we 
present, as well as the statistical significance of the 
TD50 calculated from their results. Moreover, the 
database contains only long-term tests which fit a set of 
criteria designed to measure potency, and therefore 
does not cover all cancer tests or all carcinogens. The 
limitations and criteria are discussed further in Part II. 
Part II: Materials and Methods of the 
Carcinogenic Potency Database 
Sources of Data 
One major goal of the Carcinogenic Potency Database 
has been to obtain data which would give the best 
estimates of carcinogenic potency, i.e., experiments for which detailed time-to-tumor data would permit adjust­
ment for the gross effects of intercurrent mortality (see 
preceding paper). Full lifetable information was avail­
able for the calculations of potency from the Carcinoge­
nesis Bioassay Program of the National Cancer Insti­
tute (NCI)/Nationai Toxicology Program (NTP) and 
from a set of bioassays of aromatic amines (3-5). For all 
other estimates of potency from the published literature, 
we have calculated TD50 using the final proportions of 
animals with tumors, since only this summary informa­
tion is consistently published. A description of each of 
these two sources of data, (1) NCI/NTP Bioassays and 
(2) bioassays in the published literature, is given below. 
NCIINTP Bioassays. The Carcinogenesis Bioassay 
Program of the NCI/NTP was designed to use a similar 
experimental protocol for a large number of compounds, 
and to report results in a consistent format including 
full histopathology. We obtained computer tapes contain­
ing the individual animal pathology tables from the 
Chemical Package Report of the Carcinogenesis Bioas­
say Data System (6) for which Technical Reports were 
published prior to July 1980. These tapes contain 
information about the time of death (in weeks) and full 
histopathology for each animal in each experiment. By 
using the tapes in combination with the series of 
technical reports (Appendix 15) published by NCI/NTP 
we have been able to estimate a TD50 for each site which 
was evaluated as treatment-related, as well as for each 
site found to be statistically significant but not consid­
ered evidence for carcinogenicity, in the text of the 
technical report. 
The Carcinogenesis Bioassay Program protocol rec­
ommends that tests be conducted in two species of 
rodents (rats and mice) with both sexes tested indivi­
dually at the maximally tolerated dose and half that 
dose, and includes a control group (vehicle control 
where appropriate) (7). The actual conduct of the 
bioassays published prior to July 1980 varied from one 
experiment to another, and details about each are given 
in the plot in Part IV. (An experiment is defined here as 
the dose groups and control group for one sex in one 
species from a single research report.) Comparisons of 
results from the 776 NCI/NTP experiments are particu­
larly useful for the following reasons: our analyses 
utilized full lifetable data; each compound was usually 
tested in both sexes of rats and mice; the same mouse 
hybrid, B6C3Fl, was used throughout ; the rat bioas­
says utilized mostly the Fischer F344 strain, and less 
frequently either the Osborne-Mendel or Sprague­
Dawley stocks; test agents were usually administered 
by an oral route, and dosing continued for the majority 
of the animals' lives (18-24 months); and terminal 
sacrifice was usually performed after 21 to 25 months on 
test. For many of the reports, the quality of the 
pathology was monitored by a detailed review system 
(8). For the others, target sites were always selectively 
reviewed to verify the conclusions in the Report. 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. In the 
literature at large, experimental designs as well as the CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 11 
authors' choice of information to report, are quite 
diverse. For the Carcinogenic Potency Database, we 
have developed a set of standard criteria, and experi­
ments from the literature have been included only if 
they meet all of the following conditions: (A) animals on 
test were mammals; (B) administration was begun early 
in life (100 days of age or less for rats, mice and 
hamsters); (C) route of administration was diet, water, 
gavage, inhalation, intravenous or intraperitoneal injec­
tion (i.e., where the whole body was more likely to have 
been exposed rather than only a specific site, as with 
subcutaneous injection or skin painting); (D) test agent 
was administered alone, rather than in combination 
with other chemicals; (E) exposure was chronic, with 
not more than 7 days between administrations; (F) 
duration of exposure was at least one-fourth the stan­
dard lifespan for that species; (G) duration of experi­
ment was at least half the standard lifespan for that 
species; (H) research design included a control group; 
(I) research design included at least 5 animals per 
group; (J) surgical intervention was not performed; (K) 
pathology data were reported for the number of animals 
with tumors rather than the total number of tumors; (L) 
results reported were original data, rather than second­
ary analyses of experiments already reported by other 
authors. 
A search of the published literature through July 
1981 was conducted for all bioassays which met the 
standard criteria, whether or not the authors consid­
ered the test agent related to tumor induction. The 
literature search covered the Public Health Service 
publication, Survey of Compounds Which Have Been 
Tested for Carcinogenic Activity 1948-1973 and 1978 
(9). Since the years 1974-1977 and 1979-1981 are not 
covered by the PHS Survey, a search of the cancer 
journals which contain most of the bioassay literature 
was conducted for those years, including Carcinogenesis 
Abstracts and the following journals through July 1981: 
British Journal of Cancer, Cancer Letters, Cancer 
Research, Carcinogenesis, Chemosphere, Environmen­
tal Health Perspectives, European Journal of Cancer, 
Food and Cosmetics Toxicology, Gann, International 
Journal of Cancer, Journal of Cancer Research and 
Clinical Oncology (formerly Zeitschrift fur Krebsfor­
schung und Klinische Onkologie), Journal of Environ­
mental Pathology and Toxicology, Journal of Toxicol­
ogy and Environmental Health, Journal of the Nation­
al Cancer Institute, and Toxicology and Applied Phar­
macology. The monographs on chemical carcinogens 
prepared by the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (1972-1981) and Current Contents (1976-1981) 
were also used. 
From the literature search, more than 2000 experi­
ments on approximately 600 chemicals met the inclusion 
criteria and are in the database. Most experiments used 
rats or mice, many used hamsters, and a small number 
used dogs, monkeys, tree shrews or bush babies. For 
any single chemical, the number of experiments in the 
database may vary. For example, some chemicals may have only one test in one sex of one species, while others 
may have multiple tests including both sexes of a few 
strains of rats and mice, utilizing different protocols. 
Similarly, the number of TD50 values reported for an 
experiment may vary, depending upon the results of the 
test and what the author reported. 
Because we have adhered quite strictly to the stan­
dard inclusion criteria and the publication date of July 
1981, a number of well-known carcinogens are not in the 
database. There are no single injection or skin painting 
tests, and no experiments on initiation-promotion. 
Bioassays of particulate or fibrous matters are not 
included, e.g., asbestos, cigarette smoke and dusts. For 
a few carcinogens, the only tests which met the 
inclusion rules were negative, and therefore no positive 
results are given in the plot*. 
Although we have excluded mixtures of chemicals 
from the database, some commercial preparations such 
as pesticides and drugs to which humans are frequently 
exposed have been included. A few exceptions have 
been made about the cutoff date of July 1981, either 
because partial results were published before that date 
or because the data were relevant for our own analyses 
already in progress. 
For the relatively small literature on the long-lived 
nonhuman primates, we have relaxed some of our 
standard rules in order to include the maximum number 
of experiments (see Appendix 13). 
Selection of Tissue and Tumor Types for 
Calculation of Carcinogenic Potency 
In order to standardize the very diverse bioassay 
literature, a great many decisions have had to be made 
in the construction of the database. Such decisions were 
based on two major considerations: to provide the most 
accurate estimates of TD50 and to provide a large 
resource with comparable data to facilitate the analysis 
of the results of animal cancer tests. 
Our choice of which sites and pathology to report 
from the published literature is limited by what individ­
ual authors have reported, and this varied considerably 
from paper to paper. The precision of pathology analy­
ses has increased over the years, and nomenclature has 
changed, thus creating further differences in the 
literature. 
For reasons of both accuracy and consistency through­
out the database , our general approach has been to 
calculate a TD50 for each category of neoplasm , benign 
or malignant, which an author evaluated as treatment­
related, regardless of the statistical or biological basis 
for the evaluation. (Hyperplasia and non-neopla stic 
*For seven chemicals evaluated as having sufficient evidence for 
carcinogenicit y by IARC, only negative tests met the inclusion rules: 
cadmium chloride, cadmium sulfate, epichlorohydrin , glycidaldehyde, 
isosafrole, mestranol, 2-nitropropane (10). These are flagged in the 
plot of the database with a double asterisk (**) after the chemical 
name. 12 GOLD ET AL. 
lesions are not included in the database.) In addition, a 
TD50 has been estimated for the category "all tumor­
bearing animals" (TBA) wherever this was reported. 
In order to provide information which would permit 
comparisons of target sites across experiments, an 
additional category of histopathology was developed for 
the database- "mandatory sites?' Whenever there is 
adequate documentation in the published paper or 
report, a TD50 is estimated for tumors of the liver in 
rats and mice, and for tumors of the lung in mice. These 
tissues were selected as mandatory because they oc­
curred most often in a frequency count of the positive 
sites in the NCI/NTP bioassays. From the general 
literature, whenever possible, we have also taken both 
the liver and lung as mandatory sites in hamsters, dogs 
and monkeys. 
In summary, for each experiment in the database, a 
TD50 is calculated whenever documentation is adequate 
for the following categories: (1) each target site evalu­
ated by the author as treatment-related; (2) mandatory 
sites; (3) all tumor-bearing animals (TBA). 
Some special considerations about selection of pathol­
ogy for the calculation of TD50 from each source of data 
are as follows. 
NCIINTP Bioassays. From the NCI/NTP Techni-
cal Reports, TD50 values have been calculated for all 
categories of tissues and tumors listed in the Tables of 
Analyses of Primary Tumors as positively related to 
dose. (See description of statistical tests in Technical 
Reports.) For our plot we always report a target site 
when there was a positive evaluation in the text of the 
report; however, in the absence of a positive evaluation, 
sites that are reported in the statistical tables but that 
are not considered treatment-related, are included only 
if the TD50 itself is significant at the p < 0.05 level 
(two-tailed p-value for the test that the slope of the close 
response is different from zero). We refer to these cases 
as "statistical sites" to indicate that the report did not 
evaluate them as evidence for carcinogenicity. t 
Because the computer tapes from the Individual 
Animal Pathology Tables of the NCI/NTP contain 
individual pathology results, it has been possible to 
calculate a TD50 for a composite category of all tumors 
which the report evaluated as associated with admini­
stration of the test compound. For purposes of risk 
assessment this seems prudent, despite the bias which 
this can, in principle, cause. It has not been possible to 
formulate such a composite category for other experi­
ments in the database. 
tln a few cases, a compound was evaluated in the Technical Report 
as negative in rats and mice of both sexes, yet the statistica l 
significance associated with a TDr,0 "statistical site" is p < 0.01. For 
these cases which raise questions about the evaluation of the com­
pound, we have forwarded our findings to the NTP. For the NCI 
bioassay of Kepone, the Technical Report's positive evaluation of 
hepatocellular carcinomas in male and female rats was based on 
pooled controls. No TDr,0 values were calculated for these sites 
howeve1; because the lifetable data for the pooled controls were not 
available. Therefore, on the plot the negative opinion for male and 
female rats reflects only the evaluation for matched controls. In the NCI/NTP data, for each mandatory site, a 
TD50 is estimated for a specific combination of tumors. 
These were selected because they are the common 
histopathology reported for the specified tissue by the 
NCI/NTP. For the liver, neoplastic nodule, hepatocel­
lular adenoma, and hepatocellular carcinoma are com­
bined in the mandatory TD50• For the lung, alveolar/ 
bronchiolar aclenoma and alveolar/bronchiolar carci­
noma are combined. In all cases, the incidence repre­
sents the proportion of animals with any of the tumors; 
animals with multiple tumors of the given tissue are 
counted only once. For the category TBA, we have 
excluded interstitial-cell tumors of the testis for Fischer 
344 rats, since these tumors occur spontaneously in 
nearly all male animals by the encl of their standard 
lif.,_,rnrn 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. Authors 
of papers published in the general literature rarely indi­
cate which animals were diagnosed as having more than 
one tumor. Therefore, it has been generally impossible 
for us to combine data on various tumors within a single 
tissue, or to specify particular tumor types which 
should be included in mandatory sites. To attempt to 
combine incidence data would risk multiple counting of 
animals. 
For the mandatory sites from the published literature, 
a TD50 is estimated for individual tumor types reported 
in the mandatory tissue, as well as for any combination 
of tumors which is reported or could be created for that 
tissue without risking multiple counting. 
In the interest of completeness, we have added to the 
database results for tissues and tumors in the literature 
which the authors did not consider treatment-related, 
but which we calculate as statistically significant 
(standard chi-square test, one-sided p < 0.05). 
Throughout the database, when we report results 
separately for benign and malignant tumors at a given 
site in a single experiment, we often do not know 
whether the author counted animals only for the most 
malignant tumor. For example, we may not know 
whether the proportion of animals with adenomas 
represents only those animals which did not have 
carcinomas. 
Estimation of Average Daily Dose Level 
Because a variety of routes of administration, dosing 
schedules, species, strains, and sexes are used in 
carcinogenesis bioassays, some standardization of dose 
is required for a single index of potency. Our convention 
in estimating TD50 is to determine for each dose group 
in an experiment the daily dose rate (in mg/kg of body 
weight) averaged over the duration of the experiment. 
It may be that a different measure of dose (such as 
mg/cm2 surface area) will prove to be most similar 
across species (11). 
To convert parts per million (ppm) or percent in the 
food, water or air, into milligrams per kilo body weight 
during the dosing period, we assume 100% absorption 
and then use a set of standard values for each sex of CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 13 
each species, including body weight and average intake 
per day (Table 1). Using standard values, the daily dose 
rate is calculated as follows: 
Doserate =dose x intake/day x number of doses/week 
animal weight x 7 days/week 
or, equivalently, 
Dose rate = 
dose x intake/day as a proportion of body weight 
x proportion of week dose is administered 
In an experiment where the animals were dosed the 
entire time on test this value would equal the average 
daily dose level. For example, in a bioassay of male mice 
fed 50 ppm of some test agent in the diet for the entire 
time on test, the calculation would be: 
Dose rate = 50 ppm x 0.12 x 1 
= 6 mg/kg body weight/day 
In this example, the exposure time is equal to the 
experiment time. 
In using standard values we recognize that there is no 
single factor which precisely reflects the entire experi­
mental literature. For example, strains within a species 
will vary in weight; younger animals have lower body 
weight and food intake than adults; some test agents 
will reduce appetite due to taste; or illness may result in 
loss of appetite. However, the values used here are within reasonab le limits of those usually found in the 
published literature and are unlikely to produce substan­
tial error. 
In many experiments the administrat ion of the test 
compound is stopped before the terminal sacrifice or 
before the death of the last animal. In such cases, 
averaging the dose over the course of the experiment 
will lower the daily dose level. By convention we take 
the total dose administered and spread this over the 
entire experimental period; thus, for male mice which 
are dosed at 50 ppm in the feed for 70 weeks and then 
continued on test to 100 weeks, the dose is considered as 
equivalent to 35 ppm for the entire 100 weeks, (i.e., 50 
ppm x 70/100), resulting in a 4.2 mg/kg body weight/day 
average dose. In calculating the dose, we utilize the 
concept of exposure time (the period of active treatment) 
and experiment time (the actual time on test). When 
terminal sacrifice is performed, the experiment time is 
the length of time from the start of the experiment to 
sacrifice. When, however, animals are permitted to 
survive to natural death, we define experiment time by 
using the time of the death of the last dosed animal. 
Extrapolation of TD50 to the Standard 
Lifespan 
TD50 is defined in terms of the dose rate that will 
halve the probability ofremaining tumor-free at the end 
of a standard lifespan. For each species the assumed 
value for the standard lifespan is given in Table 1; these 
values are within reasonable limits usually found in the 
Table 1. Standard values for dose calculation: animal lifespans, weights, and intake by diet, water, and inhalation .a 
Experimental Standard lifespan, Weight Food/day, Food as % body Water, Inhalation 
animal Sex yrb kgc gc weight/day mL/dayrl volume, L/min• 
Rodents 
Mouse Male 2 0.03 3.6 12.00 5 0.03 
Female 2 0.025 3.25 13.00 5 0.03 
Rat Male 2 0.5 20 4.00 25 0.10 
Female 2 0.35 17.5 5.00 20 0.10 
Hamster Male 2 0.125 11.5 9.20 15 0.06 
Female 2 0.110 11.5 10.45 15 0.06 
Monkeys 
African green Both 20 
(Cercopithecus aethiops) 
Cynomolgus Both 20 
(M acaca jascicularis) 
Rhesus Both 20 
(Macaca mulatta) 
Prosimians 
Bush babies Both 10 
(Galago crassicaudatus) 
Tree shrews Both 4.5 
(Tupaia glis) 
Dog Both 11 16 400 2.50 500 
•Although values sometimes vary depending on the source, those given here are within reasonable limits of those usually found in the 
published literature . No value is given when this information was not necessary for our dose calculation. 
bRat and mouse: data based on NCI trichloroethylene bioassay(1 2); hamster: data of Williams (13); nonhuman primates: data of S. M. Sieber 
(Laboratory of Chemical Pharmacology, NCI, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD.), personal communicat ion; bush babies: ages adapted 
from Dittmer (14); tree shrews: data of D. J. Reddy (Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.) personal communication; dog: data of M. S. 
Redfearn (Division of Animal Resources, University of California, Berkeley, CA.) personal communication. 
0Rat and mouse: data based on NCI trichloroethylene bioassay (12); hamster and dog: data of D. Brooks (University of California, Davis) 
personal communication. 
dMouse, rat and dog: data from NIOSH (15); hamster: data from Hoeltge, Inc. (16). 
•Mouse: data of Sanoskij (17); rat: data of Baker et al. (18); hamsters: data of Guyton (19). 14 GOLD ET AL. 
published literature. The use of two years as standard 
for rats and mice reflects both the standard NCI/NTP 
protocol and values that appear frequently in the 
literature. 
When an experiment is terminated before the stan­
dard lifespan, animals are not at risk of developing 
tumors later in life. Thus the number of tumors found 
will be reduced, and the TD50 will be greater than the 
true TD50, i.e., the compound will appear to be less 
potent than it actually is. Because tumor incidence 
increases markedly with age, our convention has been 
to adopt as a correction factor.r, where.f = experiment 
time/standard lifespan. The basis for selecting f2 is 
discussed in the preceding paper (1). 
Note that the correction factorf2 is based on the time 
the animals are on test, rather than upon age. In an 
experiment which began when the animals were 6 
weeks of age and which terminated when the animals 
were 100 weeks of age, the experiment time is 94 weeks. 
Thus, TD50 is defined in terms of the dose rate which 
would be administered throughout life, from birth to 
death, or the entire standard lifespan. 
By omitting from the database any experiments 
lasting less than half the standard lifespan for that 
species, the necessity for great extrapolation has been 
reduced. Few bioassays in any species are continued for 
much longer than the period we have adopted for a 
standard lifespan, so the reverse correction is minimal. 
Taking the example above of male mice fed some test 
agent at 50 ppm for 70 weeks and then continued on test 
for 30 more weeks, the experiment time would be 100 
weeks. The standard lifespan for mice is 104 weeks, so 
the extrapolation factor would be (100/104)2, or 0.92. 
Further details about the estimation of TD50 can be 
found in the preceding paper (1). 
We have made an exception to the experiment- length 
rule by including in the database bioassays of four 
compounds in nonhuman primates for which the results 
were positive in a short time and the standard lifespan 
is quite long. For these experiment s, considerable 
extrapolation has been required, thus making the 
estimate of TD50 less reliable (see Appendix 13). 
Range of Carcinogenic Potency 
The TD50 values we have estimated according to the 
rules and conventions just described are presented in 
Part IV. The plot format provides a systematic means of 
distinguishing among the carcinogenic potencies of a 
variety of chemicals. The range of TD50 values is more 
than 10 million-fold. 
For male rats, the range of carcinogenic potency is 
shown in Figure 1, where we present the most potent 
TD50 values for a selected group of compounds which 
were evaluated as tumorigens in either an NCI/NTP 
Technical Report or the general literature. In each case, 
we have indicated the value for the most potent TD50 for 
a target site(s) which was considered positive, and for 
which the statistical significance of TD50 is less than 0.01. At the two extremes are the most potent TD50 
values for 2,3, 7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 
TD50 = 101 ng, and for FD&C Green No. 1, TD50 = 
5.98 g. 
It is our intention to present analyses of potency in 
future publications which will discuss such issues as 
comparisons of potency across species and strains, and 
among different bioassays of the same chemical. 
Part Ill: Guide to the Plot of the 
Carcinogenic Potency Database 
The results of our estimates ofTD50 and the standard­
ization of the bioassay literature are summariz ed and 
presented graphically below in the plot of the database. 
This plot includes information on many aspects of the · 
2944 experiments it summarizes. The following descrip­
tion of the plot, in conjunction with the appendices, is 
intended as a guide for the reader to facilitate use of the 
data. Because so much information is included in the 
'O IOOng TCDD c 
::J 
0 ... 
O' _.........Actinomycin D ~~ 1 µ.g 0 0 Aflatoxin 81 0 ..c 
LO ... Bis-(chloromethyl) ether Cl> 0 -->---'O 10µ.g Cl Cl> 
0 u; 
... ::J -:o _,,..-sterigmatocystin ~o 
~ iV 100µ.g DBCP 
- E -......_Diethylstilbestrol 
.s=. --
O' - Procarbazine . HC I --Cl> Cl>-
3: = >-u 'O ... tmg EDB 
0 0 ..c 'O 2-AAF O' c 
..><: 0 
....... u; IOmg Auramine-0 .,, -0 
c c 
::J ·-.,, Aniline. HCI Cl> ... IOOmg .,, 0 -..._DDT o E 
'O ::J - 2 ,4,6-Trichlorophenol .?: .,, 
0 0 Cl> Metronidazole CJ tg Cl E c --....,FD S C Red No. 1 -· ·-Cl> 0 c 'O 
LO o ·-o-g FD 8 C Green No.1 ..... 0 ·-10g 
FIGURE 1. Range of carcinogenic potency in male rats. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 15 
output, the reader may find it helpful to go over the 
description once and to refer back to specific variables 
when using the plot. 
The plot covers two facing pages and is organized 
alphabetically by chemical name. The left side includes 
a logarithmic scale of TD50 values on which is plotted 
the TD50 for the most potent site in each experiment. 
Experiments are listed under the name of the test 
agent, and each experiment can be identified by a 
unique number in the plot. 
Figures 2 and 3 show an example from the plot of one 
experiment on 1,2-dibromoethane from the NCI/NTP 
bioassays, which will be used to describe the variables 
included in the plot, the codes and conventions , and the 
appendices. At the top of the example, as at the top of 
the plot of the entire database, is a two-line header 
describing the type of information in each field. The 
header should be read across using both lines together, 
first top line "Spe," then bottom line "Sex," then top line 
"Strain", etc. Each title in the header begins where the 
data it describes begins, with the exception of ''AuOp" 
and "Brkly Code" which are in the last column on each 
side. Immediately beneath the header in this example, 
we have inserted a set of numbers (1)-(28) which will be 
used in the text to give details of the information in each 
field; this set of numbers does not appear in the actual 
output. 
(1) The chemical name in capitals is indicated under 
(1) in the top line for a set of experiment s. An 
alphabetical list of all chemicals in the plot is given in 
Appendix 1. Common synonyms are also provided 
which refer the reader to the compound name used in 
the plot e.g., ethylene dibromide (see 1,2-dibromo­
ethane). A list of the chemicals sorted by Chemical 
Abstracts Service (CAS) registry number is presented 
in Appendix 2. Also under the number (1), immediately 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
(1) (2)(3)(4)(5) (6) (7) (8)(9)(10) (11) below the chemical name, is the unique plot number for 
each experiment , i.e., one sex of one species from one 
research report. Since only one experiment is used in 
this example, it is assigned the number one. In the 
larger output, each new number indicates a separate 
experiment . A set oflower case letters-in the example 
"a" through"f" -identifies each TD50 calculated for that 
same experiment using a different set of sites and/or 
histopathology; only the most potent site is plotted on 
the graph. 
(2) The species used in this experiment is indicated 
in the column headed by "Spe:' The letter "M" refers to 
mice, "R" to rats, "H" to hamsters and "D" to dogs. 
Other test animals are indicated by an "N" for prosimi­
ans and a "P" for monkeys. 
(3) The sex is indicated by "f" for female, "m" for 
male. Occasionally an author will report data only for 
both sexes together, and in these cases the notecode "b" 
for both is used. 
(4) The strain or stock of animal is reported as a 
three-letter code under "Strain"; a list of all strain codes 
and definitions appears in Appendix 3. Strains are 
coded just as they are referred to in the original 
publication . No attempt has been made to standardize 
the strain names; therefore , if different nomenclature is 
used by two authors who actually tested the same 
strain, then two different codes are used in the database. 
For monkeys and prosimians , this column is used for the 
species code, e.g., "rhe" for rhesus. 
(5) The route of administration is indicated in the 
header line by "Route" and reported as a three-letter 
code. In the example, "gav" stands for gavage. Other 
routes are listed in Appendix 4 and use mnemonic codes 
like "eat" for administration in the diet. 
(6, 7) The site and histopathology used in the calcula­
tion of the TD50 are reported in these columns, and are 
TD50 2Tai lpvl 
DR AuOp 
<12) (13) <14)(15)16) 
1 ,2·DIBROMOETHANE 100 •••• : •• lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 10lg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• lg ••••. : •• 10 
1 M f b6c gav MXB MXB 53w78 BY : + : 3. 74mg * P<. 0005 
a M 
f b6c gav Bto sqc 53w78 BY 4.0701g * P<.0005c 
b M f b6c gav lun MXA 53w78 SY 15.40lg * P<.04 c 
M f b6c gav lun a/a 53w78 sv 17 .3.,g * P<.03 c 
d M f b6c gav TBA MXB 53w78 SY 3.520lg * P<.0005 
e M f b6c gav l iv MXB 53w78 sv no dre P•1. 
M f b6c gav lun MXB 53w78 BY 15.40lg * P<.04 
FIGURE 2. Left side of database plot. 
Ref Nu" LoConf UpConf Cntr l 1Dose 11nc 2Dose 21nc 
( 17)( 18)( 19> <20> <21> <22> (23) <24) <25> (26) Citation or Pathology 
(27) Br kl y Code 
(28) 
1, 2 · DIBROMOETHANE (ethylene dibro11ide, EDB. c00522 is NCI TR# 86; c00523 is NCl/NTP TR# 210) 106·93·4 
1 c00522 2.5801g 6.93mg 0120 26.0mg 
a c00522 2.810lg 8.090lg 0/20 26.0mg 
b c00522 8.0611g n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 
c c00522 8.8511g n.s.s. 0/20 26.011g 
d c00522 2.420lg 6.310lg 0/20 26.011g 
c00522 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 26.0mg 
c00522 8.060lg n.s.B. 0120 26.00lg 
FIGURE 3. Right side of database plot. 46/50 52.00lg 
46/50 52.00lg 
11/50 52.0mg 
10/50 52.0mg 
47/50 52.0mg 
1/50 52.0mg 
11/50 52.0mg 30/50 
28/50 
6/50 
6/50 
31/50 
0/50 
6/50 lun:a/a,a/c; sto:sqc. C 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 16 GOLD ET AL. 
marked in the header line by "Site" and "Hist!' Each is 
indicated by a three-letter code, and the respective 
codes and definitions are provided in Appendices 5 and 
6. Three-letter codes have been created so that they are 
similar to the words they represent; for example line la 
reports "sto sqc" which stands for stomach, squamous­
cell carcinoma; and line le reports "lun a/a" for lung, 
alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma. 
For the NCI/NTP bioassays, the pathology nomencla­
ture is identical to, that reported in the Technical 
Reports and/or on the computer tapes. For the general 
literature, the nomenclature reflects exactly the termi­
nology employed by the original authors in their pub­
lished papers. The operational rule has been to retain 
what is in the published paper and not to reinterpret or 
rename any diagnostic categories. Thus, when authors 
use different nomenclature for the same tissue or 
morphologic type of tumor, two different codes are used 
in the database. Occasionally it has been necessary to 
replace an adjective used for a tissue with a noun, e.g., 
the database uses kidney when renal is used in a paper. 
Some special considerations about the reporting of site 
and histopathology information from each source of 
data are as follows. 
NCI!NTP Bioassays. In the 1,2-dibromoethane ex­
ample (Figs. 2 and 3), certain tissue and tumor codes 
are given in capital letters; these denote particular 
mixes of sites or tumor types from the NCI/NTP 
bioassays; capital letters are not used for other sources 
of data. When these capitals appear, additional informa­
tion about the specific pathology is presented on the 
right side of the plot, where the header line reads 
"Citation or Pathology" in field (27). These special 
capitalized codes are used in the plot when the 
calculation of TD50 is based on special mixes of tissue 
and tumor types from the NCI/NTP bioassays. 
1. The mandatory sites are denoted by "MXB" (for 
"Mix Berkeley") to indicate that the site was created 
especially for the database and is not based upon the 
NCI/NTP evaluations in the Technical Reports. For 
every NCI/NTP experiment, the same sites are given 
per species: liv MXB (liver mandatory), lun MXB (lung 
mandatory) and TBA MXB (all tumor-bearing animals) 
for mice; liv MXB and TBA MXB for rats. For the 
NCI/NTP bioassays, these mandatory sites are always 
listed as the last TD50 values for the experiment, in the 
order TBA, liv, and lun. Thus in the example given 
here, lines Id, e, and f, report for mice the TBA MXB, 
liv MXB, and then lun MXB. The specific pathology is 
given for liv MXB and lun MXB under column (27). 
2. "MXA'' (for "Mix Author") is used to denote a 
combination of sites or pathologies which is taken 
directly from the Technical Report Tables of Analyses of 
Primary Tumors, and denotes a mix of tissues or 
tumors created in those tables. In the example, the site 
and histopathology for line 16, "lun MXA" are listed in 
column (27). Whenever MXA appears, as in line lb "lun 
MXA," the sites and/or histopathology which were 
combined are listed in column (27). 3. "MXB MXB" denotes that a combination of tissues 
and tumors has been created for the database, which 
consists of the aggregate of all sites and histopathology 
considered to be treatment-related in the NCI/NTP 
Technical Reports. In the example, in field (27) of 
line 1, MXB MXB is described as a combination of 
"lun: a/a, ale; sto: sqc!' (This stands for lung alveolar/ 
bronchiolar adenoma , lung alveolar/bronchiolar carci­
noma, and stomach squamous-cell carcinoma.) 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. The site 
and pathology information from the literature experi­
ments is given in the plot for individual tissues and 
tumors just as it is for the NCI/NTP bioassays. As 
described earlier, it is usually not possible to combine 
sites from the published literature because, unlike the 
data available from the NCI/NTP bioassays, informa­
tion is seldom reported about multiple tumor incidence 
in the same animal. When an author does give informa­
tion about aggregated tissue or tumor types, the code 
"mix" is used in the plot to denote that the specific 
sites or tumors are described in the paper. When the 
tumor types are not specified, the code "tum" is used. 
Mandatory sites from experiments in the literature are 
included in the database for the same tissues as the 
NCI/NTP bioassays. A TD50 is calculated for any mix of 
tumors reported in the mandatory site and for individ­
ual tumor types as well;* see, for example, "hydrazine 
sulfate" for female mice, lines 1434 and 1434a and b in 
the large plot. All codes are in lower case letters. 
Whenever an author reported results for all animals 
with malignant tumors separately from all animals with 
benign tumors, we have included a TD50 for each 
category of "tba''. 
(8, 9) The exposure and experiment times are indicated 
in the header line by "Xpo + Xpt!' Exposure time is the 
period over which the test agent is administered; if 
administration was once a week for 40 weeks, for 
example, the exposure time is 40 weeks. Experiment 
time is the total time on test; it is not the age of the 
animals. It is measured from the start of the experi­
ment to the time of death of the last closed animal. 
Within a single experiment, all TD50 values have the 
same exposure time and the same experiment time. 
Both times are always reported in the same units. When 
both are less than 100 weeks, exposure and experiment 
times are reported as "w" for weeks; when greater than 
this, "m" for months is used. For tests in long-lived 
experimental animals like clogs and nonhuman primates, 
"y" for years may also be used. When exposure time and 
experiment time are equal, then the duration of dosing 
was for the entire experiment . In Figure 2 lines la-If, 
the mice were dosed for 53 weeks, and the experiment 
lasted a total of 78 weeks. 
(10) Notes, indicated in the header line in (10), pro-
*If an author reported many individual types of tumors in a 
mandatory tissue, and all are statistically nonsignificant, we have 
calculated TD50 values for the tumor types with the highest inci­
dence among dosed animals. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 17 
vide additional information about the experiment in 
single-letter codes which are defined in Appendix 7. 
This supplementary information is helpful in evaluating 
the experimental data. In the example, for instance, the 
notecode "s" is used to denote that survival was poor 
due to toxicity or disease and the notecode "v" that 
dosing was variable or irregular, e.g., dose level changed 
during the course of the experiment. 
(11) The logarithmic scale is used for presenting the 
values of TD50 and its confidence limits (in units/kilo­
gram body weight/day). The plot extends from 100 
nanograms to 10 grams. On the scale itself, the location 
of 100 ng, 1 µg, 10 µg, etc., is indicated by under­
scoring; the points for 5, 50, 500 are denoted by a colon 
(":"). For each experiment, only the TD50 for the "most 
potent site" is plotted; this TD50 is listed first. For other 
sites within an experiment , the TD50 is not plotted, but 
all other information about it is given in the plot. 
The "most potent site" is determined by ordering the 
TD50 values in each experiment by statistical signifi­
cance. If any TD50 values are significant at the p < 0.01 
level, then these are listed first, in order of potency; 
then follow all TD50 values with p < 0.10 sorted in order 
of potency. Last, all other TD50 values are listed in order 
of potency. We have excluded the category TBA from 
this sorting of the target sites and have listed it last. For 
the NCI/NTP bioassays, the mandatory sites are also 
excluded from this sorted order, and are listed at the 
end in the order TBA MXB, !iv MXB, and Jun MXB. 
In the example of 1,2-dibromoethane (Fig. 2), there 
are two TD50 values (excluding TBA) with statistical 
significance of p < 0.01. The TD50 for MXB MXB is the 
more potent and thus appears first. The plotted point 
for this most potent site lies between 1 mg and 10 mg on 
the scale, and the estimated TD50, 3. 74 mg, appears in 
the column to the right of the scale under the header 
title"TD50:' These results indicate that 3. 74 mg/kg body 
weight/day would halve the proportion of tumorless 
survivors at the end of a standard lifespan for mice (in 
the absence of all other causes of death). 
(12) The TD50 value on the plot is indicated by one of 
three symbols: "+" "±;' or">", depending upon the 
p-value associated with the TD50 for the most potent 
site. In an experiment where the statistical significance 
of the TD50 is p < 0.01, the symbol"+" is used, and the 
plotted point is the most potent estimate of TD50, i.e., 
the smallest value of TD50 from among those with p < 
0.01. In an experiment where the statistical significance 
is between 0.01 and 0.10 a"±" symbol is used to plot the 
most potent site. If there is no evidence for any 
statistical association , i.e., for all TD50 values, p > 0.10, 
then the symbol ">" appears just to the right of the 
lower confidence limit. For these statistically nonsignifi­
cant experiments, the symbol ">" provides a lower 
bound for TD50, i.e., it is extremely unlikely that TD50 
could be less than (more potent than) the value plotted. 
A special symbol"<+ "is used for cases where 100% 
of all dosed animals had the tumor(s) of interest and the 
TD50 was calculated with summary data; the " < + " appears at the upper confidence limit. With summary 
data, only an upper bound, but no TD50, can be 
estimated in such cases. 
Occasionally, the symbol for the most potent TD50 is 
plotted with parentheses around it to indicate that the 
test did not meet our standard criteria; usually the 
experiment time was too short. All NCI/NTP bioassays 
have been included in the database, and some do not 
meet the criteria. For experiments in nonhuman 
primates, the criteria have been relaxed. (See Appendix 
13.) For an example of such a case, see C.I. Direct 
Brown 95 for female rats, line 404 in the large plot. 
The plot symbol is a convenient way to determine 
quickly the number of experiments reported for any 
particular test agent, since each experiment will have 
one symbol for its most potent TD50. 
Since there are both statistical and nonstatistical 
uncertainties in the estimation of TD50, we have calcu­
lated 99% confidence intervals for it. A discussion is 
given in the preceding paper (1). Whenever the TD50 
calculation is based on lifetable data, as in the NCI/NTP 
bioassays and a set of experiments on aromatic amines, 
the symbol " : " denotes the confidence limits. When 
the TD50 calculation is based on summary data, then 
the symbol ":' denotes the confidence limits. 
In an experiment where the statistical significance of 
TD50 is p < 0.01, both the lower and upper confidence 
limits are plotted. The calculated values for these 
intervals are presented on the right side of the plot in 
columns (20) and (21) (Fig. 3), where the header line 
reads "LoConf" and "U pConf" for lower confidence and 
upper confidence limits. In the example, the plotted 
confidence interval is 2.58-6.93 mg (Fig. 3), suggesting 
that the lower value would not reduce t~ proportion of 
tumorless survivors by half, while •• Wmg/kg body 
weight/day would more than halve it. 
In an experiment where the statistical significance of 
TD50 is p > 0.01, the confidence interval will be open at 
the upper end. In such a case, the lower limit dose rate 
would be unlikely to halve the proportion of tumor-free 
survivors, but no statement can be made about the 
carcinogenic effect of higher doses. In such cases, there 
is no " : " or " . " to the right of the TD50 on the plot. 
When the plotted symbol is" < + "because 100% of 
the animals had tumors and we estimated TD50 with 
summary data, the " < + " appears at the upper 
confidence limit. In such cases, the upper limit dose rate 
would induce tumors in all animals and the rate which 
would reduce the proportion of tumorless survivors by 
half cannot be estimated with only summary informa­
tion. 
Occasionally, for a TD50 with statistical significance p 
< 0.01, the upper confidence limit is too large to be 
printed within the range up to 10 grams; in such rare 
instances the symbol for the upper confidence level also 
will not appear, although the value will be printed in the 
field headed UpConf (21). 
(13) The value of each TD50 is presented just to the 
right of the plot range (13) and includes the appropriate 18 GOLD ET AL. 
units (per kg) of body weight per day. The symbol " no 
TD50 " appears instead of a numerical value whenever 
100% of the dosed animals had the tumor(s) of interest 
and the TD50 was calculated with summary data. The 
symbol "no dre," for no dose-related effect, indicates 
that TD50 is not estimable for some other reason. For 
statistically non-significant TD50 values the numerical 
value may be impossibly large. 
(14) The shape of the dose-response curve for each 
TD50 appears in column (14) under the header "DR?' The 
codes and definitions for the curvatures are listed in 
Appendix 8. The shape of the dose-response has been 
determined by a test for departure from linearity. If 
there was no significant departure from a linear dose 
response, then the curve shape is listed as linear, and 
the asterisk symbol "*" appears. For experiments with 
three groups of animals including controls, a significant 
departure from linearity with upward curvature is 
denoted by a bar slanting to the right (the symbol"/"). If 
there was a significant departure from linearity with 
downward curvature, then the TD50 is calculated with­
out the data from the highest dose group, and a bar 
slanting to the left (the symbol ""'-") appears. We have 
adopted this convention to obtain the best estimate of 
TD50 by using only the linear portion of the dose­
response curve in the calculation. 
When there are more than three dose groups (includ­
ing controls) in the TD50 calculation and there is a 
significant departure from linearity, the symbol "Z" is 
listed in column (14). When there is a blank space for 
the shape of the dose-response, there are two possible 
reasons. First, there may be only one dose group and a 
control group in the experiment, in which case there is 
not enough information to determine a curve shape. 
Most tests in the general literature have only a control 
and one dose group. Second, there may be no dose­
related effect, in which case the code "no dre" appears in 
column (13) and "P = l:' appears in column (15). 
(15) The two-tailed p-value appears in column (15), 
under the header "2Tailpvl:' This value indicates the 
statistical significance associated with testing whether 
the slope of the dose-response curve is different from 
zero. All values are given to one significant figure. 
When there is no dose-related effect or the slope is 
negative, then "P = l:' appears in column (15). Due to 
rounding, the lowest p-value reported is p < 0.0005; a 
calculated p-value which is > 0.0005 and < 0.001 is 
reported as p < 0.001. Note that the significance level 
listed in this column determines which symbol will be 
plotted for the most potent site in each experiment. 
(16) The opinion of the original author, as to the 
tumorigenicity of the test agent at the site for which the 
TD50 was calculated, is given in the last column on the 
left side of the plot (16) under the heading "AuOp" for 
author's opinion. Our rule for reporting opinions from 
all sources of data has been to record all clearly stated 
evaluations of tumorigenicity at the site(s) included in a 
TD50 calculation. Some special considerations about our 
codes for the opinions of authors from various sources 
are as follows. NCI!NTP Bioassays. Our conventions for coding 
the author's opinions from the NCI/NTP Technical 
Reports are based upon the text of the Report, includ­
ing thee' ·luation of the Clearinghouse on Environmen­
tal Carcinogens (Data Evaluation /Risk Assessment 
Subgroup), and the Tables of Analyses of Primary 
Tumors. An author's opinion is listed for all target sites 
except: Berkeley Mixes (MXB) and the statistical sites, 
i.e., those included in the Tables of Analyses but not 
considered evidence for carcinogenicity in the text of 
the Technical Report. For these cases, the opinion 
column is blank, as in lines 1, ld, le, and 1f of the 
1,2-dibromoethane example (Fig. 2). 
A "c" in the author's opinion column indicates that the 
Clearinghouse evaluation or the text of the Report 
stated that at the site(s) on which TD50 is based, the 
compound was carcinogenic under the conditions of the 
bioassay. See for example, the opinion column in the 
example for lines la, lb, and le. An "a" indicates an 
opinion that the incidence of tumors at that site(s) was 
associated with administration of the compound under 
the conditions of the bioassay, or that the evidence for 
carcinogenicity was suggestive. 
The symbol "-" will appear in the opinion column for 
the most potent site in an NCI/NTP bioassay to denote 
the evaluation that the compound was not carcinogenic 
in that sex of that species under the conditions of the 
bioassay. In most cases, the "-" appears for the TD50 
calculated for TBA, which is our convention whenever 
there is no evidence for carcinogenicity. For experi­
ments evaluated as inadequate in the Technical Report, 
the opinion column is always blank. For a list of ex­
periments evaluated as inadequate, see Appendix 12. 
There are some cases when the "-" appears for a 
statistical site, i.e., one not evaluated as evidence for 
carcinogenicity in the Report, but which was statisti­
cally significant according to the Tables of Analyses of 
Primary Tumors and also had a TD50 significance level of 
p < 0.05. When this TD50 is the only evidence for a 
treatment-related effect, and thus the most potent site, 
we have indicated this by placing a "-" in the opinion 
column and flagging the TD50 with a # sign in the plot 
just to the left of the TD50 value. For example, refer 
to "calcium cyanamide," for female mice, line 697 in 
the large graphic output. Note that the p-value associ­
ated with the TD50 determines the symbol plotted for 
the TD50; this is independent of the author's opinion. 
For bioassays in which some target sites were evalu­
ated as treatment-related, the statistical sites are also 
reported but the opinion column is left blank. In order 
to make it clear that the Report itself did not contain 
positive evaluations of any statistical sites, we put an 
"S" for statistical in the last column on the right side of 
the plot, column (28), under the header "Brkly Code:'* 
*For some chemicals, the NCIINTP Technical Report indicated that 
experiments in one or more sex-species groups were inadequat e 
carcinogen esis bioassays, primarily based on the insufficient survival 
of the animals on test. We have indicated this opinion by placing 
an asterisk ("*") after the chemical name on the left side of the 
plot. See Appendix 12 for a list of the particular sex-species groups. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 19 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. In the 
general literature whenever the author evaluated the 
proportion of animals with tumors at a particular site as 
treatment-related, a "+" will appear in the opinion 
column (16) for the TD50 calculated for that site. Such 
stated opinions as "positive," "carcinogenic," "active," 
and "tumorigenic ," fit this category. The symbol"+" will 
only appear in the opinion column for a TD50 in one of 
the following two cases: either, the author gave a 
positive opinion for the particular target sites included 
in the TD50, or in the occasional case where an author 
evaluated the compound as carcinogenic without specify­
ing the target site, and we have indicated this with a"+" 
symbol in the opinion column for the category "all tumor 
bearing animals (tba)?' 
Similarly, the opinion column will contain a "-" only 
when either the author stated an opinion that the 
particular sites included in the TD50 are negative, or the 
author concluded that there was no treatment-related 
effect in the experiment, in which case all sites report­
ed for the experiment have a "-" in the opinion column. 
Target sites which an author did not evaluate as 
positive are included in the database only when the 
statistical significance associated with an increased 
percentage of dosed animals with tumors is p < 0.05 
(standard chi-square test, one-sided p-value), or when 
the tissue is a mandatory site (liver and lung for mice 
and hamsters; liver for rats). 
When no opinion about carcinogenicity is stated for 
sites which are nevertheles s used for TD50 calculations, 
the author's opinion column is left blank. This may 
occur either for mandatory sites, or for included sites 
which were not unequivocabl y evaluated by the author. 
In those rare cases where the author provided enough 
information to permit the combining of tissues and 
tumors into a mandatory site, the author's opinion 
column is also blank, since the mix was created espe­
cially for the database. 
In summary, the symbol for the author's opinion 
column in the general literature reflects what the 
author actually stated in the paper. Sites evaluated as 
positive are given a"+". Sites evaluated as negative are 
given a "-". A "+" is used for tba when the compound 
was evaluated as positive, and no specific target site was 
evaluated as positive. For all other opinions the author's 
opinion column is blank. 
Occasionally, when there is a "c" or an "a" in the 
opinion column for an NCI/NTP bioassay, or a"+" for a 
test from the general literature, the positive evaluation 
was made because the incidence among dosed animals 
was high in comparison to historical control incidences; 
this occurs, for example, when there is a rare tumor 
among the dosed animals. The actual numbers of 
animals bearing such tumors may be quite low, thus 
making the estimate of TD50 unreliabl e. In such cases, 
we have indicated that the author's opinion was based 
on historical control comparisons by putting the words 
"+historical" in the TD50 column. See, for example, 
"ally! chloride" for female mice, line 152 in the large 
plot. (17, 18) The plot continues on the right side (Fig.3), 
by first repeating the identification numbers given for 
each line on the left side of the output, e.g., 1, la, lb, 
etc. In field (17) the chemical name is also repeated, 
followed by common synonyms, in some cases. In the 
example, "ethylene dibromide " and "EDB" are given as 
synonyms for 1,2-dibromoethane. The Chemical Ab­
stracts Service registry number (CAS#) is reported in 
field (18); in the example, 106-93-4 (Fig.3). 
(19) Under the header "RefNum" , is the unique 
reference number assigned to each paper in the data­
base. For NCI/NTP bioassays, this is the number used 
in the computer tapes; here, c00522. In the case of 
1,2-dibromoethane , NCI/NTP conducted two bioassays: 
in one, the compound was administered by gavage and 
in the other, by inhalation . In such cases, we have 
assigned a consecutive number to distinguish the sec­
ond bioassay and have included the appropriate Techni­
cal Report number. NCI/NTP uses a single number for 
both bioassays. 
(20, 21) The lower and upper confidence limits for 
each TD50 are presented in (20) "LoConf' and (21) 
"UpConf," respectively. When the abbreviation "n.s.s?' 
appears for either the lower or upper confidence limit, it 
denotes "not statistically significant ." Whenever the 
statistical significance of TD50 is p > 0.01, then the 
upper 99% confidence limit will not be calculated; see, 
for example, line 1f for 1,2-dibromoethane (Fig.3). 
When the lower confidence limit is "n.s.s?' this usually 
indicates that there were no tumors or only one tumor 
of the specified type in the experiment, and the lower 
confidence limit was not estimable; most often this 
occurs for mandatory sites as in le in the 1,2-dibromo­
ethane example. Occasionally the n.s.s. occurs for the 
lower confidence limit because 100% of dosed animals 
had the tumor(s) of interest and hence no lower con­
fidence limit could be estimated with summary data. 
(22-26) Beginning in (22) on the right side, and 
extending through (26), we report the proportion of 
animals with tumors and the average dose level in 
mg/kg body weight/day which we have calculated for 
each dose group in the experiment. The proportion of 
animals with tumors for TD50 values which have been 
calculated with lifetable data are presented here in 
summary form, i.e., the number of animals with tumors 
by the end of the experiment. 
Reading across (22)-(26), under "Cntrl" (22), we list 
the proportion of control animals with the tumor types 
in the TD50 calculation; the average dose in the lowest 
dose group is given under "lDose" (23); the proportion 
of animals in that group with the tumor(s) is listed 
under "llnc," for incidence, (24); the next highest 
average dose "2Dose" (25) and the proportion of those 
animals with the tumor(s) "2Inc" (26) is given next, etc., 
for as many dose groups as there are in the experiment. 
Whenever the TD50 was calculated without the data 
from the high dose group (i.e., there was a significant 
downward departure from linearity) , we have indicated 
this fact with parentheses around the data which were 
omitted from the final calculation. Thus, whenever the 20 GOLD ET AL. 
shape of the dose-response on the left side of the plot is 
""'-!.' column (14), the parentheses appear on the right 
side around the appropriate data. See, for example, 2-
aminoanthraquinone for male rats, line 202 in the large 
plot. Whenever there were more than three groups 
(including controls), and the dose-response was non­
linear, there is a "Z" in column (14) on the left side; ifthe 
departure from linearity in such cases was downward, 
then this fact is indicated by parentheses around the 
group that was excluded from the TD50 calculation. 
NCI/NTP Bioassays. For the data on the propor-
tion of animals with tumors, the number of animals in 
each group is the number at the start of the experiment. 
In the example, there were 20 in the control group, and 
50 in both the low and high dose groups. When pooled 
controls have been used as evidence for carcinogenicity 
in the Technical Report, we have calculated TD50 values 
with those controls as well as the matched controls. 
(This convention has also been followed for the lifetable 
calculations of the experiments of aromatic amines.) 
Data using the pooled controls are indicated by the 
letter "p" following the control incidence in column (22); 
see, for example, "aldrin" for male mice in the large 
plot, line 135. The use of pooled controls is also reflected 
on the left side of the output by the word "pool" 
following the notes in column (10) and by assigning a 
different line number to the pooled data. 
In the conduct of several of the NCI/NTP bioassays, 
the dose level administered to the high dose group was 
sufficiently toxic to necessitate starting a new dose 
group and a new control group. For some of the 
bioassays in which this was done, the statistical analysis 
in the Technical Report was performed separately for 
the control and dose groups which were started later. 
For these cases, we compared the proportion of animals 
with tumors in the earlier and later control groups, and 
since we found no significant difference, we combined 
the data from the control groups and analyzed the 
experiment as one dose response, using both the high 
and low dose groups. Appendix 10, "NCI/NTP Bioas­
says with Combined Controls," lists all such cases. 
In some instances, the data for the proportion of 
animals with tumors is slightly different from what is 
reported in the Technical Report because the pathology 
diagnoses were updated after the Report was published; 
the revised data were on the computer tapes provided to 
us. These cases are listed in Appendix 11, "NCI/NTP 
Bioassays with Revised Data:' 
Bioassays in the Published Literature. The pro-
portion of animals with tumors presented here reflects 
exactly the number of animals used in the TD50 
calculation. Many authors have reported only the start­
ing number of animals. Whenever additional informa­
tion was given, i.e., number of animals alive at the time 
of appearance of the first tumor, or number examined 
histologically, then this number is used in the denomina­
tor of the proportion of animals with tumor. This is a 
more accurate description of the number of animals at 
risk of tumor. These data were used in the TD50 
calculation and are reflected in columns (22), (24) and (26). In these cases, the notecode "e" for "effective 
number" appears on the left side of the plot under 
"Notes" in column (10). Otherwise, the data reflect the 
number of animals started in each group. Since experi­
mental designs vary in the literature, the incidence and 
dose-rate data may include a control and only one dose 
group or perhaps, a control and several dose groups. 
In the general literature, pooled control data re­
ported by the author are used in TD50 calculations only 
when no matched data were reported. Our conventions 
for plotting pooled data are the same as those described 
for the NCI/NTP bioassays . 
(27) Reading across the right side of the plot, under 
"Citation or Pathology" for the NCI/NTP bioassays, we 
present the three-letter codes for all of the sites and 
histopathology which are ''Author's Mix" (MXA) or 
"Berkeley Mix" (MXB). This includes the MXB manda­
tory liver and lung pathologies, our combinations of 
sites which were individually evaluated as positive in 
the Report (MXB), the statistical sites which included 
more than one site in the Tables of Analyses (MXA), 
and any combination of sites evaluated as treatment­
related in the Technical Report (MXA). The three-letter 
code for each tissue in the TD50 calculation is followed by 
a ":" and then by the three-letter codes for each 
category of neoplasm included in the calculation. A ":' 
follows the last three-letter tumor code in each mix. The 
definitions for these codes are given in Appendices 5 
and 6. 
For the published literature, a citation to the paper is 
provided, giving the first author, code for the journal or 
book title, volume number, pages, and year. The full 
titles of the four-letter codes for the names ofreferences 
are listed in Appendix 9, "Reference Codes and 
Definitions:' The abbreviation "pers.comm:' indicates 
that additional data for the TD50 calculation were 
acquired through personal communication with the 
author(s). On the plot a new citation for a published 
paper is listed whenever there is a change in paper. 
When the following experiment is an NCI/NTP bioassay, 
then codes for pathology appear in field (27) instead 
of a citation. In Appendices 14 and 15 we have provided 
a complete bibliography of all papers in the database. 
Appendix 14 includes the articles, books, and reports in 
the general literature; Appendix 15 lists the NCI/NTP 
Technical Reports. 
(28) The last column of the plot, is used only for 
NCI/NTP bioassays. Under the header "Brkly Code," 
we indicate that a TD50 has been included in the 
database because of a decision by the Carcinogenic 
Potency Project (Berkeley) rather than because the 
sites were evaluated as treatment-related in the NCI/ 
NTP Technical Report. 
The letters "C," ''N.' and "T" are used in the Berkeley 
Code column for Berkeley Mixes (MXB). The letter "C" 
denotes a TD50 calculated for all sites evaluated in 
the Technical Report as evidence for carcinogenicity. 
(Fig. 3). The letter ''N.' denotes a combination of tumors 
evaluated as associated with administration of the 
compound. The letter "T," for together, denotes a CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 21 
combination of all sites evaluated as "C" or ''N.' in a 
bioassay where the weaker "associated" opinion and the 
stronger "carcinogenic" opinion were both reported. 
The letter "S" indicates that the TD50 has been included 
in the plot because the sites were statistically significant 
in the Tables of Analyses of Primary Tumors and the 
TD50 was significant at the p < 0. 05 level; however, no 
positive opinion was provided in the Report. An "S" may 
appear for either a mix of sites or a single site. For all 
mandatory sites, the column for "Brkly Code" is blank. 
The information in the plot is ordered systematically 
to facilitate use of the data. All bioassays of a particular 
chemical are organized under the chemical name, and 
these names are ordered alphabetically. Within each 
compound, the bioassays are ordered alphabetically by 
species code, so that dogs would appear first, then 
hamsters, mice, prosimians , monkeys, and finally rats. 
Within a species, the bioassays are ordered by the code 
for the strain or stock. (For monkeys and prosimians, 
the tests are ordered by the code for the species.) If 
there is an NCI/NTP bioassay of the chemical, then all 
experiments using that strain are reported first, fol­
lowed by the strain used in any other experiments 
providing lifetable data, and finally by any remaining 
strains ordered alphabetically. Within the strain, the 
bioassays of females are reported first. Thus, when 
there is an NCI/NTP bioassay, "b6c" mice will appear 
first, and all experiments using "b6c" female mice would 
be reported before any experiments using "b6c" males. 
The reader may find it convenient, when utilizing the 
plot, to refer back to this guide. Abbreviations and 
symbols are defined in detail in the Appendices. When 
using the database , readers may find that we have not 
identified an experiment which does meet the standard 
inclusion criteria. Therefore, we welcome information 
about additional tests, as well as corrections of any 
errors in the database. 
We wish to thank Jerrold Ward and Kenneth Chu for their valuable 
and consistent expertise in pathology and toxicology during the 
course of our work. For their significant contributions we would like to 
acknowledge Cathy St. Hilaire and Robert Harris in the early stages 
of this project, and Mary Argus, Susan Sieber, and Joan Staats more 
recently. Numerous experimentalists have assisted us in the interpre­
tation and details of their published papers, and we are grateful for 
their time and work. 
This work was completed with the assistance also of D. Ang, 
J. Bertucelli , M. Blumenthal, M. DaCosta, A. Friedman, K. Gould, 
T. Haggin, E. Higgins, H. Hurd, P. Kato, T. Liou, P. M. MacLeod, 
M. Needels, M. Nichols, M. Rosenfeld, W E. Rouse and M. Smith. 
This work was supported by NIEHS/DOE Interagency Agreement 
222-YOl-AS-10066 and EPA-NCI/DOE Interagency Agreement 
YOl-CP-15791 through the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, and by 
DOE Contract DE-AT03- 80EV70156 to B.N.A. 
REFERENCES 
1. Peto, R., Pike, M. C., Bernstein, L., Gold, L. S., and Ames, B. A. 
The TD50: a proposed general convention for the numerical de-scription of the carcinogenic potency of chemical s in chronic­
exposure animal experiments . Environ. Health Perspect. 58: 
1-8 (1984). 
2. Ames, B. N. Dietary carcinogens and anti-carcinogens. Science 
221: 1256-1264 (1983). 
3. Russfield, A. B., Hamburger, F., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisburger, J. H. The carcinogenic effect 
of 4,4' -methylene-bis-(2-chloroaniline) in mice and rats. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 31: 47-54 (1975). 
4. Russfield, A. B., Homburger, F., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
Weis burger, E. K., and Weisberger, J. H. Carcinogenicity of 
Chemicals Present in Man's Environment. Final Report, Contract 
No. NIH-NCI-E-68-1311. Bio-Research Consultants Inc., Cam­
bridge, MA, 1973. 
5. Weisburger, E. K., Russfield , A. B., Hamburger , F., Weisburge1; 
J. H., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., and Chu, K. Testing of 
twenty-one aromatic amines or derivatives for long-term toxicity 
or carcinogenicity. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 325-356 (1978). 
6. Linhart, M., Cooper, J., Martin, R., Page, N., and Peters, J. 
Carcinoge nesis bioassay data system. Comp. Biomed. Res. 7: 
230-248 (1974). 
7. Sontag, J. A., Page, N. P., and Saffiotti, U. Guidelines for 
carcinogen bioassay in small rodents. Carcinogenesis Technical 
Reports Series 1, DHEW Pub. No. (NIH) 76-801 Bethesda, 
MD, 1976. 
8. Ward, J.M., Goodman, D. G., Griesmer, R. A., Hardisty, J. F., 
Schueler, J. D., Squire, R. A., and Strandberg, J. D. Quality 
assurance for pathology in rodent carcinogenesis tests. J. Environ. 
Pathol. Toxicol. 2:371-378 (1978). 
9. U. S. Public Health Service. Survey of Compounds Which Have 
Been Tested for Carcinogenic Activity, 1948-1973. Shubik and 
Hartwell, DHEW Pub. No. (NIH) 75 P.H.S. Pub. No. 149 (NIH 
Pub. No. 80-453, formerly P.H.S. 149), 1978. 
10. IARC Monographs. Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of 
Chemicals to Humans. Chemicals, Industrial Processes and 
Industrie s Associated with Cancer in Humans, Supplement 4. 
IARC, Lyon, France, 1982, pp. 267-270. 
11. Freireich, E. J., Gehan, E. A., Rall, D. P., Schmidt, L. H., and 
Skipper, H. E. Quantitative comparison of toxicity of anticancer 
agents in mouse, rat, hamster, dog, monkey, and man. Cancer 
Chemotherapy Reports 50: 219-244 (1966). 
12. National Cancer Institute. Carcinogenesis Bioassay of Trichloro­
ethylene. Technical Report Series No. 2. DHEW Pub. No. (NIH) 
76-802, 1976. 
13. Williams, C. S. F. Practical Guide to Laboratory Animals. C. V. 
Mosby, St. Louis, 1976. 
14. Dittmer, D. S. Biology Data Book, 2nd ed., Vol. I (P. Altman, 
Ed.), Federation of American Societies for Experim ental Biology, 
Bethesda, MD, 1973. 
15. NIOSH. Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances, 
Publication 79-100 (R. Lewis and R. Tatken, Eds.), National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH 
1980, p. xxxii. 
16. Hoeltge Inc. Animal Care Equipment Catalog. Cincinnati, OH, p. 
15. 
17. Sanockij, I. V. (Ed.) Methods for Determining Toxicity and 
Hazards of Chemicals. Medicina, Moscow, 1970, pp. 62-63 (in 
Russian); cited in Principles and Methods for Evaluating the 
Toxicity of Chemicals, Part I. World Health Organization, Geneva, 
1971. 
18. Baker, H.J., Lindsey, J. R., and Weisbroth, S. H. (Eds.) Selected 
normative data. In: The Laboratory Rat, Vol. I., Academic Press, 
New York, 1979. 
19. Guyton, A. C. Measurement of the respiratory volumes of 
laboratory animals. Am J. Physiol. 150:70-77 (1947). 
20. Maltoni, C. Vinyl chloride carcinogenicity: an experimental model 
for carcinogenesis studies. In: Origins of Human Cancer, Book A, 
Vol. 4 (H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson and J. A. Winsten, Eds.), Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 1977, pp. 
119-146. 22 GOLD ET AL. 
Part IV: Plot of the Carcinogenic Potency Database 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
ACETAMIDE 
1 f cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 e 
a cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 e 
2 m cb6 eat sto sqp 52w69 e 
b 
c 
d 
e m cb6 eat 11ln ..no 52w69 e 
m cb6 aat mix 52w69 e 
m cb6 eat mno 52w69 e 
m cb6 eat mlh 52w69 e 
m cb6 eat 11ln mlh 52w69 e 
g 
3 m cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 e 
m cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 e 
f34 eat l iv hpc 52w69 e 
f34 eat l iv nnd 52w69 e 
m f34 eat l iv hpc 52w69 es 
m f34 eat l iv nnd 52w69 es 
m wis eat l iv hpt 52~65 ek a 
4 
ACETAMINOPHEN 
6 M f swi eat Leu 32w52 
a M swi eat Liv tu11 32w52 v 
b M swi eat lun tum 32w52 v 
7 R m sda eat l iv tum 271127 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 
8 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 240t25 sv 
M b6c eat l iv MXB 24m25 sv 
b M b6c eat l un MXB 24m25 sv 
9 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 241125 v 
a M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 24m25 v 
b M " b6c aat l un MXB 240t25 v 
10 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24m25 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 24m25 
11 m f34 eat Leu 24m24 
a m f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 
b m f34 eat l iv MXB 24m24 .100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• 10 •..•. : .• .100 .... :. -.1Y· •.•• :. -.10 
pool . > 
pool 
• + 
+ • 
... no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P• 1. 
1 • 89g11 \ P<. 0005 
2.66gm P<.002 
3.01gm * P<.0005+ 
3. 05g11 \ P<. 002 
6.24g11 * P<.002 
9.52g11 * P<.02 
57 .5gOI * P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
230.11g P<.0005+ 
4.15gm P<.04 
104.mg P<.0005+ 
9.96gm P<.3 
372. mg P<. 02 
.100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••..• :. -.100 •.•• : .• .1mg .••. : .• 10 ••••• :. -.100 •.•• :. -.1Y· .•.• : •• 10 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.> no dre 
.100ng .• : •. .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• 10 •.•.. : .. .100 .•.• : .• .ig •.•.• : .. .10 
:> 
:> 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
2.37gm \ P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
:#527 .mg P<.008 
2.12gm * P<.6 
16.6gm * P<.4 
ACETONE [ 4· ( 5 • NITR0·2 • FURYLl-2 ·TH IAZOL YL J HYDRAZONE •• :. -.10 .•••• : • -.100 ••.• : .• .1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. .100 .•.• : .• .lg •.•.• : •. .10 
12 R f hza eat for sqp 36w54 es ... 11.0Rlg 
a hza eat l iv tu11 36w54 es no dre 
13 hza eat for sqp 44w60 es 6.0511g 
a hza eat l iv tu11 44w60 es 
1° ·ACETOXYSAFROLE 
14 M 11 cd1 eat Liv car 56w69 s 
a M 11 cd1 eat lun tum 56w69 s 
b M m cd1 eat tba 11ix 56w69 
15 M m cd1 eat l iv car 30w69 s 
a M m cd1 eat lun tu11 30w69 s 
b M m cd1 eat tba mix 30w69 
16 m cdr eat for pam 47w69 sv 
a m cdr eat l iv car 47w69 sv 
b " cdr eat tba Rlix 47w69 sv 
17 " cdr eat for pao1 36w52 s 
a " cdr eat l iv hpc 36w52 s 
b R " cdr eat tba mix 36w52 no dre 
.100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• .100 •.•. : .. .111g •... : •• 10 ..••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .lg ••... :. -10 
.> 
. > 
+ no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
30. 7mg 
no dre 
32.4mg 
21.111g 
348.mg 
21.1mg 
N ° ·ACETYL • 4· (HYDROXYMETHYL )PHENYLHYDRAZINE. • .lug •••• : •• .10 ••••• : .• .100 •••• : .. .111g •••• : • -.10 ••... : .• .100 ...• : •. .lg .•..• : .• .10 
18 M f swa wat blv Rlix 271127 287.mg 
a M swa wat lun mix 271127 329.mg 
b M swa wat l iv tum 271127 no dre 
19 M m swa wat lun mix 271127 e 208.mg 
a M m swa wat blv Rlix 27m27 e 252.mg 
b M m swa wat l iv hpt 270t27 e no dre 
1 ·ACE TYL· 2 ·I SON I COTINOYLHYDRAZ !NE .100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : . -.10 •.••• : . -.100 ..•• : •. .1mg •••• : •. .10 .•••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .lg .•••• : . -.10 
20 M f swa wat lun mix 94w94 319.mg 
M f swa wat Liv mix 94w94 e 55.7gm 
21 M m swa wat lun mix 92w92 e 342.mg 
M 11 swa wat l iv he"' 92w92 e no dre 
3·ACETYL·6·METHYL ·2,4·PYRANDIONE .100ng •. : .• .lug •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .101g ••.• : •. .10 .•.•• : •• .100 •••• : •• .lg ••••• : •• .10 
22 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
23 M ., b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M m b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx . > 
• > 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.05 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P· 1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 . 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P-1. 
P<.003 + 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.9 
P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 24 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx no dre P• 1. 
b M f b6c or l tba tum 76w76 evx no dre p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 23 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose 1 Inc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkl)· Code 
ACETAMIDE 60-35-5 
1 1343 2 .22gm n.s.s. 2/89p 1-15gm 0/34 2.31gm 0/28 Fleischman; jept,3, 149-170; 1980 
1343 6.96gm n.s.s. 1/89p 1.15gm 2/41 2.31gm 0/46 
1343 717.mg 7. 92gm 0/82p 1.07gm 5/32 C2.13gm 0!22) 
1343 1-01gm 13.2gm 0/74p 1.07gm 5/44 C2.13gm 0!39) 
b 1343 1.62gm 6. 73gm 0/95p 1.07gm 7/50 2.13gm 7/46 
1343 1.16gm 14.1gm 0/95p 1.07gm 5/50 C2.13gm 1/46) 
d 1343 2. 70gm 23.9gm 0/95p 1.07gm 2/50 2.13gm 5/46 
e 1343 3. 29gm n.s.s. 0/79p 1.07gm 1/44 2.13gm 3/39 
1343 6.31gm n.s.s. 2!91p 1.07gm 0/50 2.13gm 2/46 
g 1343 1.55gm n.s.s. 1/87p 1.07gm 0/24 2.13gm 0/24 
3 1343 147 .mg 382 .mg 0/49 888.mg 33/48 
1343 1.26gm n.s.s. 0/49 888.mg 3/48 
4 1343 65.2mg 171-mg 0/50 710.mg 41/47 
1343 1-62gm n.s.s. 0/50 710.mg 1/47 
158.mg n.s.s. 017 800.mg 7/16 Wei sburger; txap, 14, 163 · 175; 1969 
ACETAMINOPHEN (Tylenol, paracetaR1ol) 103-90-2 
6 1118 805.mg n.s.s. 1/30 863.mg 1/30 Cohen;canr ,38, 1398-1405; 1978 
• 1118 1-33gm n.s.s. 0/30 863.mg 0/30 
b 1118 1-33gm n.s.s. 0!30 863.mg 0!30 
7 1459 1-65gm n.s.s. 0!30 214.mg 0!30 Johansson; i j cn,27, 521-529; 1981 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 968-81-0 
8 c03247 939.mg n.s.s. 2/15 568.mg 7135 1-14gm 3!35 
a c03247 1-78gm n.s.s. 1/15 568.mg 1/35 1-14gm 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03247 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/15 568.mg 1/35 1.14gm 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
9 c03247 348.mg n.s.s. 6/ 15 525 .mg 14/35 C 1-05gm 5/35> 
c03247 3.66gm n.s.s. 3/15 525 .mg 2/35 1.05gm 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03247 2.34gm n.s.s. 2/15 525.mg 3/35 1.05gm 2/35 Lun:a/a,a/c. 
10 c03247 751.mg n.s.s. 9/15 348.mg 23/35 694.mg 18/35 
• c03247 n.s.s. n.s.s . 0/15 348.mg 0/35 694.mg 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
11 c03247 256.mg 7.11gm 0/15 278.mg 10/35 C561-mg 4/35) 
• c03247 386.mg n.s.s. 7 /15 278.mg 19/35 561-mg 21/35 
b c03247 2.70gm n.s.s. 0/15 278.mg 0/35 561.mg 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
ACETONE 14-C5 -N ITR0-2-FURYLl -2-TH I AZOL YL J HYDRAZONE 18523-69-8 
12 1063m 3.23mg n.s.s. 0/5 33.3mg 317 Morr; s;canr ,29,2145 -2156;1969 
• 106311 13.0mg n.s.s. 0/5 33.3mg 017 
13 1063n 3.10mg 13.3mg 0/16 36.8mg 15/20 
1063n 50.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 36.8mg 0120 
1' -ACETOXYSAFROLE 34627-78-6 
14 1042b 92.9mg n.s.s. 3/35 29.3mg 0/35 Borchert; canr, 33, 590-600;1973 
1042b 92 .9mg n.s.s. 0/35 29.3mg 0/35 
b 1042b 92.9mg n.s.s. 3/35 29.311g 0/35 
15 1042c 83.3mg n.s.s. 3/35 26.311g 0/35 
a 1042c 83.3mg n.s.s. 0/35 26.3mg 0/35 
b 1042c 83.3mg n.s.s. 3!35 26.3mg 0/35 
16 1042b 14.2mg 81-2mg 0/18 112.mg 10/15 
1042b 152.mg n.s.s. 0/18 112.mg 0/15 
b 1042b 14.5mg 107 .mg 1/18 112.mg 10/15 
17 1042c 10.2mg 52.6mg 0/18 116.mg 11/18 
• 1042c 56. ?mg n.s.s. 0/18 116.mg 1/18 
b 1042c 10.2mg 52.6mg 0/18 116.mg 11/18 
N' -ACETYL-4-C HYDROXYMETHYL JPHENYLHYDRAZ I NE 65734-38-5 
18 410 143.mg 950.mg 8/96 125.mg 16/44 Toth; canr, 38, 177 -180; 1978 
410 148.mg 3.05gm 15/96 125.mg 17/44 
b 410 1.57gm n. s. s. 0/99 125.mg 0/50 
19 410 98.6mg 1-38gm 22/92 104.mg 24/48 
410 127 .mg 762.mg 5/88 104.mg 15/45 
b 410 997.mg n.s.s. 2!62 104.mg 0!38 
1-ACETYL-2 -1 SONI COTI NOYLHYDRAZINE 1078-38 -2 
20 1055 196.mg 567 .mg 14/104 800.mg 37/47 Toth; e j ca, 9, 285 -289; 1973 
• 1055 2.66gm n.s.s. 3!73 800.mg 2/41 
21 1055 202.mg 664 .mg 11/91 667 .mg 29/42 
1055 968.mg n. s. s. 2/40 667 .mg 0/9 
3-ACETYL -6-METHYL-2, 4-PYRAND IONE Cdehydroacetic acid> 520-46-5 
22 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/17 33.9mg 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 1/17 33.9mg 0/18 
b 1294 32.0mg n.s.s. 2/17 33.911g 2/18 
23 1294 38.9mg n.s.s. 2/18 31.6mg 1/ 17 
1294 59.1mg n.s.s. 1/18 31.6mg 0/17 
b 1294 41.6mg n.s.s. 3/18 31.6mg 1/17 
24 1294 67 .211g n.s.s. 0/16 33.911g 0/18 
• 1294 67.2mg n. s. s. 0/16 33.9mg 0/18 
b 1294 67.2mg n.s.s. 0/16 33.911g 0/18 24 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
25 M 111 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M 111 b6e orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
M m b6e orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1·ACETYL ·2 • PHENYLHYDRAZI NE 
26 M f swa wat l iv mix 26m26 e 
M swa wat blv mix 26m26 e 
M swa wat l iv agm 26m26 e 
e M swa wat l iv ang 26m26 e 
swa wat bl v ang 26m26 e 
swa wat bl v agm 26m26 e 
swa wa t l un ade 26m26 e d M 
e M 
M 
g M swa wat lun mix 26m26 e 
27 M m swa wat blv mix 25m25 
M m swa wat l iv mix 25Wl25 
M m swa wat blv agm 25m25 e 
M m swa wat l iv agm 25in25 e 
d M m swa wat l iv ang 25m25 e 
M m swa wat bl v ang 25m25 e 
M ., swa wat l un ade 25m25 e 
M 111 swa wat lun ade 25m25 e 
M m swa wat lun mix 25in25 e 
4-ACETYLAMINOB I PHENYL 
28 f nss eat mg l ade 43w65 
R f nss eat l iv tu11 43w65 
1 ·ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
29 R f buf eat pit ade 47w88 e 
R buf eat i le 47w88 e 
b 
c R buf eat ova gee 47w88 e 
buf eat ute cas 47w88 e 
buf eat adr car 47w88 e d 
2 · ACETYLAMI NOFLUORENE 
30 H m nss eat l iv bde 32w56 
31 H m nss ipj s111i ade 34w69 
a H 111 nss ipj per sar 34w69 
b H m nss ipj for pam 34w69 
32 syg eat l iv cac 26w68 e 
33 H m syg eat l iv cac 40w84 e 
34 H m syg aat l iv cac 26w80 e 
35 asw eat tba mix 84w84 
asw eat tba mal 84w84 e 
36 m asw eat tba mal 84w84 e 
m asw eat tba mix 84w84 e 
37 
a 
38 
39 
a 
40 
a 
41 
42 
43 M 
M 
M M 
M f ben eat ubl tee 65w78 ekr 
ben eat l iv hpe 65w78 ekr 
ben eat l iv hpe 15m24 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 15m24 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 52w52 ekr 
ben eat l iv hpe 52w52 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 60w60 ekr 
ben eat l iv hpe 60w60 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 65w65 ekr 
ben eat l iv hpe 65w65 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 69w69 ekr 
ben eat l iv hpe 69w69 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 73w73 ekr 
M ben eat l iv hpe 73w73 ekr 
44 M bcn eat ubl tee 78w78 ekr 
M ben eat l iv hpe 78w78 ekr 
45 M ben eat l iv hpe 24m24 ekr 
a M ben eat ubl tee 24m24 ekr 
46 M ben eat l iv hpe 33m33 ekr 
a M b en eat ubl tee 33m33 ekr 
47 M ben eat l iv hpe 39w78 ekr 
M ben eat ubl tee 39w78 ekr 
48 M ben eat l iv hpe 9m24 ekr 
a M ben eat ubl tee 911124 ekr 
49 M ben eat ubl tee 52w78 ekr 
M ben eat l iv hpe 52w78 ekr • > no dre P• 1 • 
no dre P-1. 
202.mg P<.3 
100ng .• :. -1ug ...• : •. 10 •.••• :. -100 •..• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••. :. -100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
44 .8mg 
49.0mg 
105.mg 
105.mg 
117 .mg 
117.mg 
413.mg 
no dre 
59.8mg 
62.1mg 
113.lllg 
128.mg 
146.mg 161.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.005 
P<.005 
P<.5 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.01 
P<.01 
P<.008 
P<.03 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •... : •• 10 ...•• :. -100 •.•• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••• : •• 1g •••.. : .. 10 
1.18mg 
no dre P<.0005+ 
P=1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 .•.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1111g .••. : •. 10 ..••. : .• 100 ..•. : .• 1g •.... : •• 10 
.> 43.5mg P<.6 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.3 54.8mg 54.8mg 
54.8mg 
54.8111g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •... :. -1mg •... : .. 10 .•..• : .• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ..••. : •• 10 
_.. 17.4mg 
.> 7 .26mg 
no dre 
no dre 
17.3mg 
15.3mg P<.04 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.03 
P<.003 
P<.2 .> 
.> 
• + 
+ 
• +. 
• +. 
• + 31.5mg 
no dre 
51.1mg 
17 .4mg 
21. 7mg 
66.5mg 
120.mg • 
30.6mg • 
95.5mg Z 
150.mg Z 
226.mg • 
68.8111g 
747.mg • 
45.8mg 
199.mg • 
62.1mg 
218.mg • 
64.1mg p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.006 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.07 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 
P<.0005+ 
147.mg • P<.05 
101.111g Z P<.0005+ 
154.mg • P<.0005+ 
41. 7mg P<.0005+ 
96.0mg P<.0005+ 
19.6mg • P<.008 + 
82.1mg Z P<.0005+ 
110.mg • P<.002 + 
142.mg • P<.004 + 
19.1mg • P<.0005+ 
97. 2mg Z P<. 0005+ 
82. 811g Z P<. 0005+ 
156.mg Z P<.009 + CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
25 
b 1294 62.6m9 n.s.s. 
1294 62.6m9 n.s.s. 
1294 32.9m9 n.s.s. 
1·ACETYL·2 · PHENYLHYORAZ !NE 
26 1054 23.8m9 106.m9 
1054 24.9m9 140.m9 
b 1054 45.1mg 463.119 
1054 45.1mg 463.mg 
d 1054 46. 9mg 1.19gm 
e 1054 46.9m9 1.199m 
1054 65.8mg n.s.s. 
9 1054 78.8m9 n.s.s. 
27 1054 27. 8m9 245. mg 
1054 29.1mg 217.m9 
b 1054 42.9mg 9.849m 
1054 47.111g 9.32gm 
d 1054 52.1119 3.67gm 
1054 53.7m9 n.s.s. 
1054 158.mg n.s.s. 
g 1054 97.2mg n.s.s. 
h 1054 112.m9 n.s.s. 0/16 
0/16 
0/16 31.6mg 
31.6mg 
31.6m9 
114·83-0 
4/94 
8/94 
2/94 
2/94 
4/94 4/94 
10/89 
15/89 
5/87 
3/87 
3/87 
2/87 
1/87 
2/87 
6/87 
17/87 
22/87 30.0mg 
30. Om9 
30.0m9 30.0m9 
30.0mg 
30.0mg 
30.0m9 30.0mg 
25.0m9 
25 .Om9 
25.0mg 
25.011g 
25.0mg 
25.0m9 
25 .Omg 
25.0mg 
25.0mg 0/18 
0/ 18 
1/ 18 
16/37 
16/37 
8/37 
8/37 
8/37 
8/37 
5/31 
5/31 
12/40 
11/40 
7/40 
6/40 
5/40 
5/40 
1/40 
5/40 
5/40 
4· ACETYLAHINOBIPHENYL C4' ·phenyl acetani l i de) 4075 · 79 · 0 
28 1424 .444mg 3.21mg 0/15 11.3mg 12/13 
1424 11.9mg n.s.s. 0/15 11.3mg 0/13 
1-ACETYLAHINOFLUORENE C N · 1 · f luoreny l acetami de) 28314 · 03-6 
29 144 6.02mg n.s.s. 2/18 6.77mg 3/17 
a 144 8.9211g n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
b 144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77m9 1/17 
d 144 8.92mg n.s.s. 0/18 6.77mg 1/17 
2. ACETYLAHINOFLUORENE ( N-2. fluoreny l acetem ide) 53. 96 .3 
30 308m 5.24.,g n.s.s. 0/17 15.9mg 3/18 
31 308n 1.18m9 n.s.s. 0/8 3.21mg 1/8 
a 308n 2.33mg n.s.s. 0/8 3.21mg 0/8 
b 308n 1.34.,g n.s.s. 1/8 3.21mg 1/8 
32 347n 4.02119 n.s.s. 1/59 16.0mg 2/8 
33 347m 3.65mg 211.mg 0/39 17.5mg 2/5 
34 347n 5.10mg n.s.s. 0/16 12.0mg 1/7 
35 213b 8.63119 n.s.s. 14/16 39.0mg 15/18 
a 213b 13.2mg n.s.s. 6/16 39.0m9 10/18 
36 213b 7.28.,g 200.mg 1/10 36.011g 9/14 
37 
38 
• 
39 
a 
40 
41 
a 
42 
43 213b 6.89"'9 n.s.s. 4/10 36.0mg 10/14 
1344a 40.3.,g 123.11g 1/400 6.50mg 1/196 8.13mg 
1344a 61.6"'9 389.m9 1/401 6.50mg 4/196 8.13m9 
1344b 19.7m9 55.2m9 9/383 4.88mg 15/114 6.09m9 
1344b 48.6mg 234.mg 1/384 4.88mg 0/114 6.09mg 
1344m 70.7mg 457.mg 0/140 7.80mg 0/268. 9.75mg 
134411 92.401g n.s.s. 0/140 7.8011g 2/268 9.75mg 
1344n 41.1mg 128.mg 0/113 7.80mg 0/221 9.75mg 
1344n 184.0lg n.s.s. 0/113 7.8001g 0/224 9.75mg 
13440 29.4m9 77 .Omg 0/88 7 .80mg 0/181. 9. 75mg 
13440 86.2mg n.s.s. 0/88 7.8001g 1/182 9.75mg 
1344r 42.0mg 97.3mg 0/183 5.85mg 1/271 7.80mg 
1344r 97.9mg n.s.s. 1/183 5.8501g 2/272°7.80119 
1344s 44.1mg 98.211g 0/127 4.55mg 1/389 5.85mg 
19.5119 36/65 2111<: 
0/130 10.8m9 
5/130 10.8m9 
14/86 8.13mg 
0/86 8.13m9 
0/137 13.0mg 
0/137 13.0m9 
0/110 13.0mg 
0/110 13.0m9 
1/94 13.0mg 
1/94 13.0mg 
0/265 9. 75mg 
4/265 9. 75mg 
1/264 7 .80m9 0/64 
1/64 
6/35 
1/35 
0/138 
3/138 
0/117 16.3mg 
16.3mg 
12.2mg 
12.20lg 
19.5m9 
19.5m9 
19.5m9 
1/117 19.510g 
0/89 19.5m9 
4/90 
0/175 
5/174 
0/206 19.5m9 
13. Omg 
13. Om9 
9. 75m9 
1344s 86.0mg n.s.s. 0/128 4.5511g 2/389 5.85mg 5/264 7.80m9 6/206 9.75mg 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 19.5mg 0/65 
1344t 76.4m9 139.mg 1/400 3.90mg 4/1573 4.55mg 1/796 5.85mg 1/383 7.80m9 
13.0mg 5/131 19.5mg 62/121 
1344t 105.mg 310.0lg 1/401 3.9011g 17/1573 4.55mg 7/792 5.85mg 7/383 7.80m9 
13.0mg 6/131 19.5mg 7/121 
1344u 35.1mg 51.401g 9/383 3.90"9 55/900 4.55mg 55/639 5.85m9 57/445 7.80m9 
13.0mg 47/160 19.5m9 56/130 
1344u 77.411g 121.mg 1/384 3.9001g 0/900 4.55m9 2/638 5.85mg 1/445 7.80mg 
13.0m9 25/160 19.5m9 100/130 
1344v 10.1mg 409.mg 8/23 3.90mg 44/92 4.55mg 20/45 5.85mg 5/12 7.80m9 
13.0mg 8/10 
1344v 44.2mg 179.mg 0/24 3.9010g 1/92 4.5501g 0/45 5.85mg 0/12 7.80019 
1344w 49.1mg 585.0lg 
1344w 57. 7m9 1.16gOI 
1344x 12.1mg 35.2m9 
1344x 40. 8m9 388. "'9 
1344y 44.8m9 185.mg 
1344y 67 .6m9 4.459m 13.00lg 8/10 
1/401 3.900lg 
1/400 3.90mg 
9/383 2.93mg 
1 /384 2. 93mg 
1 /400 5. 200lg 
1/401 5.200lg 1/186 4. 88mg 
0/ 184 4. 88m9 
13/108 3.66mg 
1/108 3.66mg 
0/ 190 6. 50mg 
1/190 6.50mg 3/128 6.50mg 
2/128 6.50mg 
10/66 4.88mg 
0/66 4.88m9 
0/132 8.67mg 
6/132 8.67m9 1/64 
1/64 
5/35 
0/35 
1/65 
0/65 9. 75mg 
9. 75119 
7.31m9 
7.31mg 
13.0m9 
13.0m9 Citation or 1-'atholn,l!» 
Brk\y Code 
Toth ;b j ca, 39, 584 · 587; 1979 
Hiller; jnci, 15, 1571-1590; 1955 
Morris; jnc i ,24, 149· 180; 1960 
Hiller ;canr ,24,2018 -2026;1964 
Della Porta;jnci,22 ,463·471;1959 
22/65 
4/65 
6/28 
11/28 
9/141 
1/141 
21/ 114 
1/ 114 
28/90 
1/90 
1/90 19.5119 
1/90 19.5m9 
0/134 13.0m9 
5/134 13.0mg 
3/269 9. 75mg 
7 / 268 9. 75m9 Prier; txap, 5, 526-542; 1963 
Littlefield; j ept ,3, 17-34; 1980 
36/85 
3/86 
4/67 
1/67 
1/267 
6/267 
7/415 9.75mg 62/311 
3/415 9.75119 3/311 
7/11 9.75m9 8/12 
1/11 9. 75mg 4/12 
4/63 4/63 
9!33 
6!33 
14/63 
2/63 25 26 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
50 
a 
51 
a 
b 
52 
a 
53 
a 
b 
54 
a 
55 
a 
b 
c 
56 
a 
b 
e 
57 
a 
b 
58 
59 
a 
60 
a 
61 
a 
62 
a 
b 
63 
• 64 
65 
e 
b 
66 • 
b ben Ht l iv hpe 12•24 ekr 
ben eat ubl tee 12•24 ekr 
ed1 Ht l iv hpt 78w78 e 
ed1 Ht l iv nod 78w78 • 
ed1 Ht lun ade 78w78 e 
11 ed1 Ht l iv hpt 78w78 e 
• ed1 Ht lun ade 78w78 • 
f ef 1 ••t •gl car 52w52 e 
cf1 Ht l iv lee 52w52 e 
cf1 Ht lun tu11 52w52 • 
• cf1 Ht l iv lee 52w52 e 
• cf1 Ht lun ode 52w52 • 
f ifc Ht l iv •ix 64w64 
ife Ht l iv hpt 64w64 
ifc Ht ubl car 64w64 
ifc Ht ubl pa• 64w64 
• ifc Ht Liv •ix 64w64 
• ifc Ht ubl car 64w64 
• ifc Ht l iv hpt 64w64 
11 ifc oat ubl pa11 64w64 
if• oat Liv 11ix 60w60 
if• Ht l iv hpt 60w60 
if11 Ht ubl •ix 60w60 
if• gov Liv ode 60w60 
11 if11 eat l iv 11ix 60w60 
• if• oat l iv hpt 60w60 
• if• gov ubl •ix 60w60 
• if• gav Liv 11ix 60w60 
f r311 Ht ubl •ix 60w60 
r311 Ht liv 11ix 60w60 
• r311 eat ubl •ix 60w60 
• r311 eat ubl car 60w60 
• r311 eat l iv •ix 60w60 
cdr eat 11gl •ix 15•24 ae 
cdr Ht l iv hpc 15•24 ae 
11 cdr eat l iv hpc 151124 ae 
f hza eat ., .. tu• 36w54 ea 
hu eat eae car 36w54 es 
hza eat l iv tu11 36w54 eo 
hza Ht mHI tum 44w60 es 
hza eat Ht car 44w60 eo 
hza Ht l iv tu11 44w60 eo 
4 · ACETYLAM I NOFLUOAENE 
67 A f buf Ht i le 62w97 e 
1 A buf Ht •gl adf 62w97 a 
b A t>uf eat ute oar 62w97 a 
ACETYLATED DIAMYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
68 A f wie Ht l iv tu• 241124 e 
1 A f wia Ht tbe mix 24•24 • 
69 A • wia Ht l iv tu11 241124 e 
1 A 11 wia Ht tba •ix 24•24 e + 
• + 
.> 24.3•g * P<.0005+ 
101.•g Z P<.0005+ 
21.3•g P<.0005 
76.2•g P<.0005 
354.•g P<.6 
22. 5•g P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
14.6•g P<.0005 
16.5•g P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
31.4•g P<.006 + 
149.•g P<.5 
4. 7811g P<. 0005+ 
5. 95•g P<. 0005 
565.•g P<.4 
565.•g P<.4 + 
36.1•g P<.005 + 
36.1•g P<.005 + 
43. 7•g P<.01 
69.8•g P<.04 + 
19.6•g P<.0005+ 
31.5•g P<.0005 
44. 9•g P<. 0005+ 
91.2•g P<.2 
42.9•g P<.002 + 
77 .S.g P<.004 
12.9•g P<.0005+ 
57.2•g P<.3 
104.•g P<.07 + 
no dre P-1. 
51.0•g P<.04 + 
86.0•g P<.1 
no dre P•1. 
4. 75•g * P<. 0005+ 
26.911g * P<.02 + 
3. 78•g * P<. 0005+ 
.841•g P<.0005+ 
13.S.g P<.4 
no dre 
.98111g 
8. 75•g 
no dre P•1. 
P<.0005+ P<.02 
p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •.•. : •. 10 .••.• : .• 100 .••• : •• 1g •.••• : •• 10 
.> 59.4•g 
59.4•g 
59.411g 
.• : .• 1ug •.•. : •• 10 ••.•• : .• 100 .••• :. ·1•g •.•• : •. 10 •.••. : •. 100 ••.. : •• 1g ..•.• : •• 10 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.2 
ACETYLATED DI STARCH ADI PATE 100ng •• : •. 1ug •.•• : •. 10 ••••. : .. 100 •••. :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 •.••. : •• 100 ..•. : •• 1g .•.•• : •. 10 
70 A f ofa Ht l iv tu• 241124 eg no pre 
a A f ofa Ht tba •ix 24•24 eg no ilre 
71 A • ofa Ht l iv he• 241124 • no dre 
a A 11 ofa Ht tbe 11ix 241124 • 14.0g• 
ACETYLATED DI STARCH GLYCEROL 100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•. : •• 10 ••.•. : .• 100 •.•• :. ·1•g ••.• : •• 10 •..•. : •. 100 •••. : •• 1g .•.•. : •. 10 
72 A f ofa oat l iv tu• 241124 eg no dre 
a A f ofa Ht tbe •ix 241124 eg no dre 
73 A 11 ofa Ht l iv he• 241124 a no dre 
• A m ofa Ht tbe 11ix 241124 a 26.1g• 
ACETYLATED DISTAACH PHOSPHATE 
74 A f wia Ht l iv tu11 24•24 e 
• A f wia eat tbe 11ix 24•24 e 
75 A 11 wia eat l iv tu• 241124 a 
a 11 wis Ht tba 11ix 241124 a 
ACAONYC I NE* 100ng •• : •. 1ug •..• : •. 10 .•.•• : •• 100 ..• •:. ·1•g ••.• : .• 10 ••••• : .• 100. · · ·: · .1g. • · • ·: • .10 
no dre 
20.4g11 
no dre 
37 .6g• 
100ng •• : .• 1ug .•.. : •• 10 .••.• : •• 100 ••.• :. -1•g •••• : .• 10 •••.• : •• 100 .... : •• 1g •.•.. : •• 10 P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.06 -
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P<.8 
76 M f b6c 
a M f b6c 
b M f b6c ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj TBA MXB 48w78 aa 
l iv MXB 48w78 aa 
lun MXB 48w78 ea 
TBA MXB 66w78 ea 
l iv MXB 66w78 as 
l un MXB 66w78 aa :> no dre P• 1. 
2.46•g * P<.3 
2.4611g * P<.3 
77 M 11 b6e :> no dre P•1. 
a M 11 b6c no dre P-1. 
b M 11 b6c no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 27 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Patholog)' 
Brkly Code 
50 1344z 15.61111 43.4•11 9/313 3.90119 11/118 4.11911 14/74 6.50•11 5/33 9.75•11 9/29 
• 1344z 46.6•11 306.•ll 1/384 3.90•11 0/118 4.1199 1/74 6.50•11 1/33 9.75•11 7/29 
51 66• 13.5•11 37.3•11 1/57 32.5•11 30/66 Epauln<rnl•w> ( lrdc}; atev ,6, 103-154; 1976 
• 66• 37 .1•11 211.•11 0/57 32. 5119 10/66 
b 66• 56.0•11 n.a.a. 6/57 32.5•11 9/66 
52 66• 12.7•11 56.5•11 4/47 30.0•11 24/53 • 66• 155.119 n.a.a. 1/47 30.0tag 1/53 
53 469 7.2h11 36.3•11 0/29 39.0119 11/30 N•wb•rn•; tup,41, 535·546;1977 
• 469 7 .9h11 43. 7•11 0/29 39.0•11 10/30 
b 469 60.3•8 n.a.a. 0/29 39.0119 0/30 
54 469 11.91111 290.•11 0/31 36.0.11 5/28 • 469 22.3911 n ••• a. 1/31 36.0•11 2/28 
55 1447 2.161111 9.44•11 0/17 65.0•11 33/34 llood;•J c•,6,433-440; 1970 
• 1447 3.13•8 11.1•11 0/17 65.0•11 32/34 
b 1447 92.0•11 n.a.a. 0/17 65.0•11 1/34 
c 1447 92.0•11 n.a.a. 0/17 65.0.11 1/34 
56 1447 15.5•11 260.•8 0/13 60.0tag 7/20 
• 1447 15.5•11 260.•11 0/13 60.0119 7/20 
b 1447 17. 7•11 1. 94119 0/13 60.0tag 6/20 
c 1447 24.0119 n.a.a. 0/13 60.0tag 4/20 
57 106911 10.9q 39.hll 0/31 65.0tag 17/32 llood;ej c•,5,41-47; 1969 
• 106911 16.1•8 74.4119 0/31 65.0tag 12/32 
b 106911 21.1•11 131.•11 0/31 65.0.11 9/32 
58 1069n 14.hg n.a.a. 0/31 22.9q 1/18 
59 106911 19.3911 113.•11 1/42 60.0•11 9/31 
• 106911 29.5•11 475.•11 0/42 60.0119 5/31 
60 1069n 5.23•11 46.5•11 0/42 19.0•11 6/21 
• 1069n 11.2•8 n ••• a. 1/42 19.0•8 2/21 
61 1069• 35.7•11 n.a.a. 0/15 65.0q 4/30 
• 106911 134.•8 n.a.a. 0/15 65.0q 0/30 
62 106911 23.0•11 n.a.a. 0/10 60.0•11 8/34 
• 106911 32.61111 n.a.a. 0/10 60.0•11 5/34 
b 1069• 54.4•11 n.a.a. 1/10 60.0•11 3/34 
63 1112 2.4h11 10.4•11 0/32 3.00•11 8/16 12.5•11 7/10 ll•labur11•r; jnc 1,67, 75-88; 1981 
• 1112 9.24•11 n.a.a. 0/32 3.00•11 2/16 12.5•11 2/10 
64 1112 1. 7h9 9.52•11 1/32 2.40•11 3/16 10.0•11 10/10 
65 1063• .2861111 2.9h11 0/5 10.0•8 819 Morr I a;canr, 29, 2145·2156;1969 
• 10639 2.24•11 n.a.a. 0/5 10.0•11 1/8 
b 1063• 5.00•8 n.a.a. 0/5 10.0•11 0/9 
66 1063n • 36 7119 2 • 961111 3/16 11.0•11 15/16 
• 1063n 3.00•11 n.a.a. 0/16 11.0•11 4/16 
b 1063n 12.1•11 n.a.a. 0/16 11.0•11 0/16 
4 · ACETYLAMI NOFLUOltENE (N·4·f luorenyl•c•U•ld•> 28322-02·3 
67 144 9.67•11 n.a.a. 0/18 7.9h11 1/13 Morr la; jnci ,24, 149· 180; 1960 
• 144 9.67•11 n.a.a. 0/18 7.9h11 1/13 
b 144 9.67•11 n.a.a. 0/18 7.9hg 1/13 
ACETYLATED DIAMYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
68 1407 86.611• n.a.a. 0/29 15.011• 0/28 d• Groot;fctx, 12,651·663;1974 
• 1407 12.611• n.a.a. 21/29 15.0119 11/28 
69 1407 69.211• n.a.a. 0/30 12.011• 0/28 
• 1407 4.6211• n.a.a. 26/30 12.0119 24/28 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE 
70 1408 179.a• n.a.a. 0/24 31.011• 0/28 Truhaut; fctx, 17, 11-17; 1979 
• 1408 20.69• n.a.a. 24/24 31.0p 23/28 
71 1408 107.p n.a.a. 1/25 24.lg• 0/21 
• 1408 4.44119 n.a.a. 17/25 24.89• 19/21 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH &LYCEROL 
72 1408 172.11• n.a.a. 0/24 31.08• 0/27 Truh•ut; fctx, 17, 11·17; 1979 
• 1408 20.9119 n.a.a. 24/24 31.0gm 22/27 
73 1408 123.p n.a.a. 1/25 24.811• 0/24 
• 1408 7.2811• n.a.a. 17/25 24.lp 20/24 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
74 1407 92. 711• n.a.a. 0/29 15.011• 0/30 de &root;fctx,12,651-663;1974 
• 1407 5.1211• n.a.a. 21/29 15.0p 25/30 
75 1407 69.211• n.a.a. 0/30 12.09• 0/28 
• 1407 3.48119 n.a.a. 26/30 12.011• 25/28 
ACRONYCINE* 7008-42·6 
76 c01536 .8661111 n.a.a. 20/30 .850•11 9/40 (2.57•11 0/35> 
• c01536 .400•11 n.a.a. 0/30 .850•11 1/40 2.57•11 0/35 l iY:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01536 . 400.11 n.a.a. 0/30 .850•11 1/40 2.57119 0/35 lun:1/a,1/c . 
77 c01536 1.13•11 n.a.a. 11/30 .850.11 14/40 (2.57•11 0/35> 
• c01536 2.77•11 n.a.a. 2/30 .850.11 0/40 2.57•11 0/35 l iv:hp•,hpc,nnd. 
b c01536 n.a.a. n.a.1. 0/30 .850•8 1/40 2.57•11 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 28 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
78 
R 
b R 
R 
d Sex Route Hist NoteR 
sda ipj mgl MXA 52w80 e 
sda ipj mgl fba 52w80 e 
sda i p j MXB MXB 52w80 e 
sda ip'j per MXA 52w80 e 
sda ipj per srn 52w80 e 
sda ipj TBA MXB 52w80 e 
R sda ipj l iv MXB 52w80 e 
79 R 11 sda ipj MXB MXB 51w80 ae 
R m sda ipj ost 51w80 ae 
b R m sda ipj MXA MXA 51w80 .. 
R 11 sda ipj per MXA 51w80 ae 
d R m sda ipj adr coa 51w80 ae 
R m sda ipj TBA MXB 51w80 ae 
R m sda ipj l iv MXB 51w80 ae GOLD ET AL. 
Tfl50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
. 395mg Z P<. 003 c 
• 455mg P<. 005 c 
• 873mg P<. 0005 
5 .86mg • P<. 0005c 
11.4mg 
.568mg P<.003 c 
P<.0005 
8. 75mg * P<.06 
. 497mg Z P<. 0005 
.698.,g Z P<.0005c 
1. 03mg • P<. 0005c 
1. 49mg • P<. 0005c 
1 . 85mg P<. 0005 
• 227mg P<. 0005 
2.11t .1g * P<.06 
ACRYLONITRILE 100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : •. 100 ••.• : .• 1mg •.•. : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.. : .. 1g ....• : .• 10 
80 R f sss i nh ens ast 24m24 aes . + 49 .6mg • P<. 0005+ 
a R SSS inh CCX ast 24m24 aes 62.0mg • P<.0005 
b sss inh zym mix 24m24 aes 81.5mg • P<.0005+ 
SSS i nh zym SSC 24m24 aes 89. Omg • P<. 0005 
d sss inh brs ast 24m24 aes 123.mg • P<.002 
e sss i nh ntu rsc 24m24 aes 52. Omg * P<. 06 
sss inh mgl adc 24m24 aes 69.1mg • P<.02 
g R sss inh l iv cho 24m24 aes 362.0lg • P<.9 
h R sss inh l iv clc 24•24 aes 362.mg * P<.9 
sss inh mgl aff 24m24 aes no dre P=1. 
j R sss inh tba mix 24"'24 aes no dre P-1. 
81 sss wat ens ast 24m25 aesv 5.31mg P<.0005+ 
sss wat smi muc 24m25 aesv 8.19mg P<.0005+ 
b R sss wat brs ast 24m25 aesv 11. 40lg P<. 0005 
R 
d R 
R sss wat stn mix 24m25 aesv 13.3mg • P<.0005+ 
sss wat ccx ast 24•25 aesv 13.6mg • P<.0005 
sss wet stn sqp 24m25 aesv 13.8mg • P<.0005 
sss wat zym mix 24m25 aesv 22.6mg • P<.0005+ 
g R sss wat zym ssc 24m25 aesv 31.4mg • P<.0005 
h R sss wat mgl mal 24.,25 aesv 42.6mg • P<.004 + 
R sss wat stn sqc 24m25 aesv 46.1mg P<.0005 
R sss wat er l ast 24m25 aesv 
R sss wat spd ast 24m25 aesv 
R sss wat zym ade 24m25 aesv 
"' R sss wat l iv mix 24m25 aesv 
n R sss wat 11gl mix 24m25 aesv 
R sss wat tba •ix 24m25 aesv 
82 R sss wat ton rd x 22"'25 esv 
sss wat ton sqc 22m25 ·esv 
83 R m sss inh ens ast 24m24 aes 
R m sss inh itl mix 24m24 aes 
b m sss lnh ccx ast 24m24 aes 
R m sss i nh zym ssc 24m24 aes 
d R M sss inh zym mix 24m24 aes 
e ·R m sss inh stn mix Z4m24 aes 
R m sss inh l iv hpc 24m24 aes 
g R ·m sss inh tba mix 24m24 aes 
84 m sss i nh sm i muc 24m24 es 
R m sss i nh ton sqp 24m24 es 
b m sss inh ton mix 24m24 es 
85 R m sss wat stn mix 24m25 aesv 
a R m sss wat ens ast 24in25 aesv 
b R m sss wet ccx ast 24m25 aesv 
m sss wat stn sqp 24m25 aesv 
d R m sss wat stn sqc 24m25 aesv 
R m sss wet brs ast 24m25 aesv 
R m sss wat zym ssc 24m25 aesv 
R m sss wat smi muc 24m25 aesv 
R m sss wat l iv hpc 24m25 aesv 
m sss wet tba mix 24m25 aesv 
86 ~ m sss wat ton mix 96w96 esv 
R m sss wat ton sqc 96w96 esv .. 65. 9mg * P<. 002 
90. 8mg * P<. 0005 
93. 7mg w P<. 004 
169.mg • P<.2 
no dre Pz1. 
1 • 75mg * P<. 1 
34.5mg P<.0005+ 
42. 601g P<. OOOS 
32.4mg • P<.0005+ 
37. 8mg * P<. 0005 
38. 8mg • P<. 0005 
50. 1mg * P<. 0005 
53.0mg * P<.003 + 
99.0mg • P<.02 
403.mg * P<.2 
no dre P=-1. 
37. 7mg P<. 0005+ 
73.0mg P<.007 
89. 1mg P<. 02 
6. 36mg • P<. 0005+ 
10. ?mg * P<. 0005+ 
12.0mg * P<.0005 
1~.2mg * P<.0005 
14.1mg * P<.0005 
18.6mg P<.0005 
34.1mg * P<.0005+ 
128.mg P<.3 
no dre p,.1. 
5. 55mg * P<. 005 
66. 6mg P<. 02 
66.6mg P<.02 
ACTINOMYCIN C 100ng .. : .. 1ug ..•• : •• 10 •.•.. : .• 100 •... : .. 1mg ••.• : •. 10 ....• : .• 100 .••• : •• 1g •.... : .. 10 
87 R m b46 ivj tbe mix 12m24 es 
m b46 ivj tbe ben 12m24 es 
b R m b46 ivj tba mel 12m24 es 
ACTINOMYCIN D 
88 R f cdr ipj per sar 26w78 e 
b R cdr ipj lun ede 26w78 
cdr ipj l iv tum 26w78 e 
cdr ipj tba mal 26w78 e .. 1.68mg 
2. 23mg 
10.8mg 
100ng .. : .. 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.... : .• 100 ...• : .. 1mg ••.. : •• 10 ..... : •. 100 .••• :. ·19· .... : .. 10 P<.08 
P<.07 
P<.7 
1.99ug * P<.0005+ 
50.1ug * P<.03 
no dre P=1. 
1.21ug * P<.0005 Ref:-.ium LoConf t.:pConf Cntrl 
78 
b 
d 
79 
b 
d c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 
c01536 • 200mg 2 .10mg 
• 222mg 3. 99mg 
. 495mg 3. 02mg 
2.80mg 17.?mg 
4. 20mg 61.8mg 
.353mg 1.24mg 
2.9801g n.s.s. 
• 290mg • 843mg 
.39001g 1.21mg 
.55101g 1.95mg 
.57301g 6.91mg 
. 624mg 9. 40mg 
.135mg .412mg 
.51901g n.s.s. 
ACRYLONITRILE 107·13·1 
80 1251n 29.6mg 94.201g 
1251n 35.2mg 130.mg 
b 1251n 42.0mg 193.01g 
1251n 44.?mg 217.mg 
d 1251n 55.6mg 444.01g 
e 1251n 12.8mg n.s.s. 
1251n 31.?mg 13.1gm 
g 1251n 58.9mg n.s.s. 
h 1251n 58.9mg n.s.s. 
1251n 21.6mg n.s.s. 
j 1251n 9.07mg n.s.s. 
81 1268n 3. 52mg 8. 79mg 
1268n 3. 07mg 34. 3mg 
b 1268n 6. 74mg 22.5mg 
1268n 9. 08mg 20. 801g 
d 1268n 9.11mg 24.1mg 
e 1268n 9.38mg 21. ?mg 
1268n 14.111g 43.5mg 
g 1268n 18.30\g 71.?mg 
h 1268n 20. 2mg 353. mg 
1268n 23. ?mg 108.mg 
1268n 33.1mg 285.0lg 
1268n 41.1ftlg 260.mg 
1268n 42.4mg 798.mg 
m 1268n 34.0mg n.s.s. 
n 1268n 11.0mg n.s.s. 
o 1268n .287mg n.s.s. 
82 12680 17. ?mg 80. 9mg 
12680 20.?mg 110.mg 
83 1251m 18.9mg 63.8mg 
1251m 20.0mg 117.0lg 
b 1251m 21.?0lg 80.1mg 
1251m 25.3mg 174.mg 
d 1251m 25.4mg 310.mg 
1251m 38.9mg n.s.s. 
1251m 65.?mg n.s.s. 
g 1251m 10.9mg n.s.s. 
84 12510 19.0mg 127.01g 
12510 25.2mg 1.03gm 
b 12510 35.1mg n.s.s. 
85 1268m 4.58mg 9.11mg 
a 1268m 7. 33mg 17. 9mg 
b 1268m 8. 03mg 21 . Omg 
1268m 8.40mg 18.6mg 
d 1268m 9.38mg 22.6mg 
e 1268m 9.34mg 49.5mg 
126801 18.3mg 93.5mg 
g 1268., 29.9mg n.s.s. 
1268m 82.9mg n.s.s. 
1268m 2.31mg 70.8mg 
86 1268r 23.5mg n.s.s. 
1268r 23.5mg n.s.s. 
ACTINOMYCIN 
87 1017 
1017 
b 1017 
ACTINOMYCJN 
88 1336 
1336 
b 1336 
1336 C ( sana"'yc in> 
.504mg n.s.s. 
.635mg n.s.s. 
1.03mg n.s.s. 
50-76·0 
1 • 14ug 3. 87ug 
8.16ug n.s.s. 
3.24ug n.s.s. 
658. ng 2. 74ug 4/20 
4/20 
4/20 
0!20 
0/20 
7120 
0120 
0120 
0120 0120 
0/20 
1/20 
4/20 
0120 
0/99 
0!99 
0/93 
0/93 
0/93 
0/ 11 
9/99 
0/72 
0/72 
79/99 
97/99 
1/80 
0/79 
0178 
1/80 
1/80 
1/80 
1/80 
1 /80 
6!80 
0/79 
0/79 
0/78 
0!80 
1/68 
57/80 
78/80 
0!78 
0/78 
0!96 
4/96 
0/96 
1/96 
2/96 
1/95 
0/74 
86/100 
2/96 
0172 
1/95 
0/79 
1/73 
1/73 
0/79 
0173 
0/73 
3/73 
3/73 
1/50 
67/80 
1/68 
1/68 
8052· 16·2 
7/65 
3/65 
4/65 
0/182 
0/182 
0/182 
44/182 lDose 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 1.04mg 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 
1.040lg 
1.04mg 
1.040\g 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 
1.04mg 
3.24mg 
3. 24mg 
3.24mg 
3.24mg 
3. 24mg 
3.240lg 
3. 24mg 
3.2401g 
3. 24mg 
3.2401g 
3.2401g 
2 .OOmg 
2.00mg 
2. OOmg 
2.000lg 
2.00mg 
2.000lg 
2.00mg 
2. OOmg 
2.000lg 
2 .OOmg 
2.00mg 
2. OOmg 
2. OOmg 
2 .OOmg 
2.00mg 
2.00mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
2. 27mg 
2. 27mg 
2. 27mg 
2. 27mg 
2.27mg 
2. 27mg 
2.2701g 
2. 27mg 
9.10mg 9.10mg 
9.10mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1.75mg 
1. 750lg 
1. 75mg 
1. 75mg 
1. 750lg 
1. 75mg 
14.90\g 
14.9mg 
.500mg 
. 500mg 
.5000\g 
3.15ug 
3.15ug 
3.15ug 
3.15ug CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABA SE 
I Inc :lDu~e 
22/35 C2.090lg 
20/35 C2.09mg 
23/35 2. 09mg 
1/35 2.09mg 
0/35 2.09mg 
31/35 2.09mg 
0/35 2.09mg 
9/35 2.09mg 
4/35 2.09mg 
3/35 2.09mg 
5/35 2.09mg 
1/35 2.090\g 
18/35 2. 09mg 
2/35 2.09mg 
4/100 
3/99 
1/98 
0198 
1/96 
0/10 
8/100 
1/68 
1/68 
96/100 
99/100 
17/48 
1/7 
9/48 
1/47 
10/48 
1 /47 
5/48 
4/48 
7 /48 
0/46 
2/47 
0/48 
1/48 
0/34 
42/48 
47/48 
12/44 
10/44 
4/93 
3193 
2/93 
3193 
4/93 
2193 
0/64 
75/100 
14/81 
4/48 
7/89 13.0mg 13.0mg 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
13.
0mg 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
13.0mg 
5 .69mg 
5 .69mg 
5.69mg 5.69mg 
5.69mg 
5 .69mg 
5.69mg 
5.69mg 
5.69mg 
5.69mg 
5 .69mg 
5 .69mg 
5 .69mg 
5 .69mg 
5 .69mg 
5.69mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
9.10mg 
3/46 4.98mg 
8/45 4.980lg 
8/45 4.98mg 
2/46 4.98mg 
1/44 4.98mg 
3/44 4.98mg 
4/45 4.98mg 
6/16 4.98mg 
1/31 4.98mg 
37/47 4.98mg 
5/37 
5/37 
6/22 
4/22 
2/22 
18/30 
0/30 
0/30 
25/30 7. 93ug 
7. 93ug 
7. 93ug 
7. 93ug 21nc 
16/35 4. 20mg 
13/35 4. 20mg 
17/35 4.20mg 
2135 4.20mg 
0/35 4.20mg 
20/35 4.20mg 
4/35 4.20mg 
13/35 6. 40mg 
13/35 6.40mg 
11/35 6.40mg 
1/35 6.40mg 
2/35 6.40mg 
16/35 6.40mg 
0/35 6. 40mg 
17/99 
14/99 
11/89 
11/89 
7188 
2110 
20/99 
0/23 
0/23 
75/99 
93/99 5135) 
3/35) 
12/35 
7 /35 
5/35 
25/35 
0/35 
13/35 
12/35 
8/35 
2/35 
4/35 
16/35 
0/35 
22/48 C15.4mg 24/47) 
4/10 C15.4mg 
11/47 C15.4mg 
12/48 15 .4mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 
15.4mg 4/34) 
8/46) 
30/47 
21/47 
29/47 
18/47 
14/47 
13/47 
12/34 17/47 
12/48 
8/48 
6/48 
9/48 
0/45 
3/48 
2/47 
3/48 
1/25 15.4mg 6/46 
15.4mg 6/46 
15.4mg 4/47 
15 .4mg 1 /11 
42/48 
48/48 15.4mg 35/47 
15.4mg 48/48 
15/82 
17/82 
14/82 
11/82 
11/82 
6/81 
1/48 
80/100 
23/47 14. 9mg 
19/47 14.9mg 
18/47 14.9mg 
17 /47 14. 9mg 
10/47 14. 9mg 
8/47 C14.9mg 
3/47 14.9mg 
1/11 14.9mg 
0/31 14.9mg 
47/48 14.9mg 39/47 
23/44 
21/44 
25/47 
25/43 
6/44) 
15/44 
6/42 
0/18 
46/48 Ciwtiun or 1-'athulugy 
Brkl;· Cude 
mg l: acn, ecn, cyn, fba, pac . 
mgl: acn, ccn, cyn, f ba ,pac; per: tbs, msm, srn . 
per: fbs, msm, srn. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
---:ost; bon:ost; per:fbs,men,111sm,srn; ver:ost. 
bon:ost; ver:ost. 
per: fbs, men, insm, srn. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
Quast;dcrp; 1980 
Quast;dcfr;1980 
Quast ;dcrp; 1980 
Quast;dcfr;1980 
Schmahl; arzn, 20, 1461-1467; 1970 
1 /5 
1/5 
0/5 
3/5 Skipper; srf r; 1976/We i sburger 1977 /Prejean pers. comm. 29 30 
d 
e 
89 
• 
b 
c 
d 
e 
f Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
A cdr ipj tba 11ix 26w78 • 
A cdr i p J tba ben 26w7~ • 
A • cdr ipj par ur 26w78 a 
., cdr ipj plc 26w78 a 
A 11 cdr ipj ly1 26w78 • 
A " cdr ipj l iv hH 26w78 a 
A 11 cdr ipj tb1 11ix 26w78 a 
11 cdr ipj tb1 Hl 26w78 a 
11 cdr i p j tba ban 26w78 a GOLD ET AL. 
.. TD50 2Tuilpvl 
DR AuOp 
1.45ug • 
no dr• 
769.ni 
20.1ug 
20.1ug 
40. 7ug 
501.ng 
708.ng 
no dre P<.003 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.008 
P<.008 
P<.06 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
p.1. 
AOIPAMIOE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •••• :. -l•g •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• :. ·ll· •••• : •. 10 
90 M f cb6 aat lun a/e 52w69 a po«1l .> 8.55g• \ P<.2 
a M f cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 a no dra P•1. 
91 M 11 cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 a pool • > no dre P•1 . 
a M " cb6 eat lun a/1 52w69 a no dre P•1. 
92 A f f34 Ht l iv tu11 52w69 a .> no dre P•1. 
93 A 11 f34 eat l iv hpc 52w69 a + 6.421• * P<.007 
AF ·2 
94 100n9 •• :. ,1u1 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•1· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·ll· •••• : .• 10 
a 
b 1yg eat for 11i x 94w94 a 
1yg eat for 1qc 94w94 a 
1yg eat OH P•• 94w94 a 
1yg eat l iv tu• 94w94 • 
d 1yg eat lun tu11 94w94 • 
95 11 1yg eat for 11ix 94w94 • 
a • 1yg eat for 1qc 94w94 a 
b " 1yg eat OH •ix 94w94 a 
• syg eat oa1 1qc 94w94 • 
d " 1yg eat l iv tu• 94w94 • 
• " 1yg eat lun tu11 94w94 • 
96 cdf eat for p•• 181124 
a cdf eat for 1qc 181124 
b cdf eat lun tu• 18•24 
97 • cdf eat for p .. 181124 
a " cdf eat for 1qc 18•24 
b • cdf Ht lun tu• 18•24 
98 • ddy eat for •ix 44w80 
a 11 ddy eat for 1qc 44w80 
b 11 ddy eat lun ad• 44w80 
c 11 ddy aat l iv tu• 44w80 
d " ddy eat tba •ix 44w80 
99 f icr eat for •ix 62w62 
a i er eat for 1qc 62w62 
b icr ut leu 62w62 
icr Ht l iv tu• 62w62 
100· icr Ht l iv hct 24•24 
101 M • i er eat for •ix 62w62 
a M " i er eat for 1qc 62w62 
b M " icr eat l iv tu• 62w62 
102 M " icr eat l iv hct 24•24 
103 A f 1da eat 11gl •ix 46w66 a 
a A 1da Ht •g l adc 46w66 a 
104 A wi1 eat •gl •ix 18•~4 
a A wil eat for p .. 18•24 
b A wi1 eat l iv h"' 18•24 
105 A 11 wi1 eat for pa• 18•24 
a • wil eat •gl 11ix 18•24 
b 11 wi1 eat l iv h"' 181124 .. 
.. • + 59.1•g * P<.0005 
.. 
.. 
.. . 
.> ... 
• > 
... 
• 2.341• • P<.3 • 
2.341• • P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
30. 5•1 * P<. 0005 
164.•g • P<.0005+ 
328 .•g • P<. 003 
2.181• * P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
no dr• P•1. 
714.•I * P<.0005+ 
2.54g• • P<.002 • 
16.4g• • P<. 7 
753 .•g * P<. 0005+ 
928.•1 • P<.0005+ 
9.271• • P<.5 
60. 811g P<. 005 
72.911g P<.002 + 
299.•g P<.09 
no dr• P•1. 
60.811g P<.005 
95 • 0•11 • P<. 0005 • 
225. •I I P<. 0005+ 
1.80g• • P<.3 
no dr• P•1. 
7.07p. P<.9 
90.3tlg * P<.0005+ 
208.•1 I P<.0005+ 
no dra p.1. 
no dra P•1 • 
11.4•1 P<.0005+ 
26.4•g P<.0005+ 
74. 7119 * P<. 0005+ 
424 ·•I • P<. 0005 
2.001111 • P<.02 
409. •II * P<. 0005 
1.201111 • P<.05 • 
1.601111 • P<.02 
AFLATOXICOL 100ng •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·l•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
106 A • f34 eat l iv hpc 12•24 
A " f34 Ht kid edc 12•24 • + 2.47ug * P<.0005+ 
32.9ug • P<.06 
AFLATOXIN B1 100ng •• : •• 1u11., •• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·l•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
107 N b tit eat l iv hpc 40•40 er 
108 P b CYll llix g/b edc 14y14 .. uw 
P b CYll llix l iv h•I 14y14 HUW 
b P b cy• •ix • • • oat 14y14 .. uw 
c 
109 b cy11 11ix tba 11al 14y14 .. uw 
b rhe •ix l iv h111 14y14 .. uw 
a P b rhe 11ix g/b adc 14y14 .. uw 
b P b rho •ix pen ode 14y14 .. uw 
c P b rhe •ix l iv hpc 14y14 .. uw 
d P b rha llix · · · Olt 14y14 .. uw 
• P b rhe •ix tba Hl 14y14 e•uw 
110 A " buf eat l iv hpc 35w65 akr 
a A 11 buf eat l iv •ix 35w65 ekr 
b A " buf eat l iv nnd 35w65 ekr 
111 A 11 cdr eat Liv 11ix 24•24 r ... + 26.9ug 
• .107•g 
.145•g 
.301•g 
43.8ug 
71.4ug 
.1081111 
.194•1 
.194•1 
.398111 
30.2u1 
noT050 noT050 noT050 
4.19ug P<.0005+ 
P<.06 • 
P<.03 • 
P<.2 
P<.002 
P<.003 + 
P<.06 • 
P<.06 + 
P<.06 • 
P<.2 
P<.0005 
P<.004 + 
P<.004 + 
P<.004 • 
P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 31 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkl)' Corle 
d 1336 618.n9 10.00u9 103/182 3.15u9 26/30 7.93u9 4/5 
• 1336 11.8u9 n.a.a. 59/182 3.15u9 1/30 7.93u9 1/5 
89 1336 456.n9 1.38u9 0/177 3.15u9 27/34 
• 1336 4.93u9 .571•9 0/177 3.15ug Z/34 
b 1336 4.93u9 .571•9 0/177 3.15u9 2/34 
c 1336 6.63u9 n.a.a. 0/177 3.15u9 1/34 
d 1336 244.n9 1.10u9 59/177 3.15u9 3Z/34 
• 1336 394.n9 1.41u9 3Z/177 3.15u9 29/34 
f 1336 6.99u9 n.a.a. 27 /177 3.15u9 3/34 
ADIPAMIDE 628·94·4 
90 1343 1.99g• n.a.a. Z/89p 1.579• 3/40 (Z.35g11 0/39) FleischHn; jept ,3, 149-170; 1980 
I 1343 8.839• n.a.a. 1/89p 1.579• 1/40 2.35g• 0/39 
91 1343 3.05911 n.a.a. 2/91p 1.449• 0/38 2.17911 0/40 
• 1343 8.139• "····· 1/87p 1.449• 1/38 2.179• 0/40 
92 1343 2.159• n.a.a. 0/49 903.llg 0/34 2.189• 0/48 
93 1343 2.449• 71.79• 0/50 722.•g 0/35 1.759• 5/49 
AF ·2 (furyl fur1•id1) 3688·53 · 7 
94 1315 34.5•g 110.•9 0/16 83.611g 10/17 167.llg 13/17 Ki nebuch i; fctx, 17, 339· 341; 1979 
• 1315 381.•9 "····· 0/16 83.6•9 0/17 167.•9 1/17 
b 1315 381.•9 n.a.a. 0/16 83.6•g 0/17 167.•9 1/17 
1315 160.•9 n.a.a. 0/16 83.611g 0/17 167.119 0/17 
d 1315 160.•9 n.a.a. 0/16 83.6119 0/17 167.•9 0/17 
95 1315 17 .6•9 55.0•9 0/19 73.6•g 13/20 147.•9 17/17 
1315 81. 7•g 452.•9 0/19 73.611g 3/20 147.•9 8/17 
b 1315 133.•9 1.669• 0/19 73.6119 0/20 147.•9 6/17 
c 1315 355.•9 "····· 0/19 73.6•g 0/20 147.•9 1/17 
d 1315 156.•9 n.a.a. 0/19 73.611g 0/20 147.119 0/17 
e 1315 156.•9 n.a.a. 0/19 73.6•g 0/20 147.•9 0/17 
96 1316 415.•g 1.38g• 0/50 78.0119 Z/50 390.•9 17/50 Takaya11a ;cl et, 3, 115·120;1977 
e 1316 1.039• 10.2911 0/50 78.011g 0/50 390.llg 6/50 
b 1316 1.739• "····· 1/50 78.0119 2/50 390.•g Z/50 
97 1316 426. •9 1 • 52g• 0/50 72.0119 Z/50 360.119 15/50 
e 1316 499.119 2.03g• 0/50 72.0119 0/50 360.119 14/50 
b 1316 1.5311• n.a.a. Z/50 72.01111 1/50 360.1111 3/50 
98 455 22. 7•11 629.1111 1/10 165.1111 7/10 Sano;zkko,89,61 ·68;1977 
• 455 28.21111 309.1111 0/10 165.1111 6/10 
b 455 73.2•11 n.a.a. 0/10 165.1111 2/10 
c 455 201.1111 "····· 0/10 165.1111 0/10 
d 455, 22. 7•11 629.1111 1/10 165.•g 7/10 
99 359 65.6•11 143.1111 0/65 104.1111 13/50 520.1111 36/50 Yokoro;11ann,68,825 ·828;1977 
• 359 140.•11 393.•11 0/65 104.1111 1/50 520.1111 25/50 
b 359 464.•ll n.a.a. Z/65 104.1111 5/50 520.1111 5/50 
c 359 317 .•9 n.a.a. 0/65 104.1111 0/50 520.1111 0/50 
100 362 501.•11 n.a.a. 6/30 16.3•11 Z/30 65.01111 6!30 260.llg 5/30 Miyaj; ;tje11, 103,331·369; 1971 
101 359 62 .6•11 151.•11 0/25 96.0•11 15/50 480.1111 34/50 Yokoro;11ann,68,825 ·828; 1977 
e 359 129.•11 363.1111 0/25 96.01111 1/50 480.119 25/50 
b 359 293.mg n.a.a. 0/25 96.0•g 0/50 480.•g 0/50 
102 362 489.•11 n.a,a. 9/30 15.0•g 6/30 60.0•g 14/30 240.•g 6/30 Miya] i ;tje11, 103,331·369;1971 
103 517 6.31•g 22.8119 2/29 69.7119 24/29 Cohen ;gann, 68,473·476;1977 
• 517 14.2•g 56.51111 0/29 69.7119 15/29 
104 1316 49.9•9 125.•g 3/50 30.01111 17/50 150.llg 37/50 TakayaH;clet,3, 115· 120; 1977 
• 1316 223.•11 962.•9 0/50 30.01111 1/50 150.llg 1Z/50 
b 1316 606.1111 n.a.a. 0/50 30.01111 0/50 150.•11 3/50 
105 1316 205. •II 1. 04g• 0/50 24.0•g 1/50 120.•g 10/50 
• 1316 415 .1111 n.a. a. 0/50 24.0•g 1/50 120.11g 3/50 
b 1316 485.•9 n.a.a. 0/50 24.0•g 0/50 120.•g 3/50 
AFLATOXICOL 29611·03·8 
106 1083 1.38u11 4.97ug 0/20 1000.ng 4/20 4.00ug 14/20 Nixon; jnc i ,66, 1159-1163; 1981 
1083 8.08u11 n.a.a. 0/20 1000.ng 0/20 4.00ug 2/20 
AFLATOXIN 81 1162·65·8 
107 1439 11.5ug 80.9ug 0/8 99. 7ug 9/12 Reddy ;canr ,36, 151·160; 1976 
108 2000 29.2ug n.a.a. 1/38 54.6ug 3/16 Ada11son;ossc, 129· 156; 198Z/Sieber pers. co1111. 
• 2000 35. 7ug n.a.a. 0/38 54.6u9 2/16 
b 2000 49.0ug n.a.a. 0/38 54.6ug 1/16 
c 2000 17 .Oug .236•g 1/38 54.6ug 6/16 
109 2000 27. Oug • 364•g 0/32 54.6ug 5/21 
• 2000 33.1ug n.a.a. 1/32 54.6ug 4/21 
b 2000 47.7ug n.a.a. 0/32 54.6ug 2/21 
c 2000 47.7ug n.a.a. 0/32 54.6ug 2/21 
d 2000 64.8ug n.a.a. 0/32 54.6ug 1/21 
• 2000 13.6ug .128•g 3/32 54.6ug 11/21 
110 1071 n.a. a. 6. 75ug 0/8 21.5ug 6/6 Angsubhakorn;b j ca, 43,881·883; 1981 
I 1071 n.a. a. 6. 75ug 0/8 21.5ug 616 
b 1071 n.a. a. 6. 75ug 0/8 21.5ug 616 
111 1454 2.55u11 7 .52ug 0/50 4.00ug 24/50 Newbern• ; jnc i ,50,439-444; 1973 32 GOLD ET AL. 
Spc Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hi.st Notes DR AuOp 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 f34 eat col mix 75w75 e 
m f34 eat l iv hpc 12m24 
m f34 eat kid adc 12m24 
m f34 eat col mix 75w75 e 
fis eat liv hpt 24m24 e 
m fis eat liv hpt 24m24 e 
m f is eat l iv hpc 22m24 ae 
por eat l iv hpc 241124 e 
" por eat l iv hpc 24 .. 24 e 
b sda eat l iv sar 95w95 e 
b sda eat tbs mal 95w95 e 
m wag eat l iv hpt 69w69 er 
wio eat liv hpt 24m24 e 
m wio eat l iv hpt 24m24 e 
m wis eat kid car 55w55 er 
AFLATOXIN, CRUDE 
125 K m swi gav l yk 52w52 e 
K m swi gav l iv hpt 52w52 e 
126 R m cdr eat l iv tum 52w52 e 
127 m chm eat l iv car 68w68 
a m chm eat l iv nod 68w68 
128 R m 
l ev eat k tu ade 58w78 
Rm lev eat liv nod 58w78 
b R m lev eat l iv hpc 58w78 
ALOICARB 
129 K f b6c eat TBA KXB 24m24 
K f b6c eat l iv KXB 24m24 
b K b6c eat lun KXB 24m24 
130 K m b6c eat TBA KXB 24m24 
K m b6c eat l iv KXB 24m24 
b K m b6c eat lun KXB 24m24 
131 R f f34 eat TBA KXB 24m24 
R f34 eat l iv KXB 24m24 
132 m f34 eat TBA KXB 24m24 
m f34 eat l iv KXB 24m24 
ALORI 
133 
b 
134 
b 
c 
d 
135 
136 
137 
b 
138 
139 b6c eat TBA KXB 80w90 s 
b6c eat l iv KXB 80w90 s 
b6c eat lun KXB 80w90 s 
m b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 
m b6c eat l un KXA 80w90 
m b6c eat TBA KXB 80w90 
m b6c eat l iv KX8 80w90 
m b6c eat l un MXB 80w90 
m b6c eat l iv hpc 80w89 
b c3e eat l iv hpa 24m24 e 
b c3e eat lun car 24m24 e 
b c3e eat lun ade 24m24 e 
b c3h eat l iv hpt 24m24 
b c3h eat l iv hpc 24m24 
b c3h eat tba ben 24m24 
b c3h eat tba ma l 24m24 
b osm eat lun l ys 24m24 es 
b osm eat tba mix 24m24 es 
osm eat TBA KXB 19m26 
osm eat l iv MXB 19m26 .> 
+ • 
+ 
.> 
<+ • 148mg 
1 .34ug 
13.4ug 
55 .8ug 
9.93ug 
1.13ug 
932.ng * P<.05 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P<.06 
P<.3 
P<.003 + 
P<.0005+ 
12.5ug * P<.0005+ 
3. 52ug * P<. 0005+ 
12.0ug 
+historical 
noT050 P<.3 
P<.03 
P<.0005+ 
7. 49ug * P<. 0005+ 
6. 76ug * P<.0005+ 
36.6ug * P<.006 + 
100ng •. : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1mg •... :. -10 .•... :. -100. • • ·: • ·19· • • · ·: · -10 
. 343mg P<. 002 + 
no dre P=1. 
7. 48ug P<. 002 + 
1. 87ug P<. 0005+ 
6. 96ug P<. 002 + 
3.44mg * P<.0005 
6. 18mg * P<.002 
14.5mg * P<.05 
100ng •. : .. 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• :. -100 .••. :. -1mg •.•. : •. 10 ..•.• :. -100 .•.• : •. 1g .• •. ·: • .10 
:> 
:> 
:> 
:> no dre p.,. 1. 
52. 7mg P<. 9 
no dre P-1. 
1. 74mg * P<.3 
2 .83mg * P<. 4 
14.8mg * P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
10.4mg P<1. 
1.33mg * P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug ..•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .... :. -1mg ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· .... : .. 10 
:> 
pool 
• + 
.> 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P=1. 
9.02mg * P<.6 
• 741mg * P<.007 c 
3.20mg * P<.05 
1.01mg * P<.08 
. 741mg * P<.007 
3.20mg * P<.05 
.861mg * P<.0005c 
4.41mg 
129.mg 
no dre 
3.45mg 
no dre 
4.25mg P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
no dre P=1. 
42.3mg * P<.5 
no dre 
no dre Ps1. 
466.mg * P<1. 
140 
141 osm eat adr coa 19m25 pool #3. 12mg P<.0005-
142 
b 
143 
144 
145 
146 
• 147 
148 osm eat l iv tum 26m27 ev 
osm eat tba mix 26m27 ev 
osm eat lmr tum 24m24 es 
osm eat l iv tum 24m24 es 
osm eat tbs tum 24m24 es 
osm eat tba ma l 24m24 es 
osm eat l iv tum 25m25 
osm eat tba mix 25m2~ 
m osm eat T8A MXB 17m26 
m osm eat l iv KXB 17m26 
m osm eat l iv hem 29m31 ev 
m OSlll eat tba mix 29m31 ev 
m osm eat l iv tum 25m25 
m osm eat tba mix 25m25 
nss eat tba tum 24m24 
m nss eat tba tum 24m24 . > 
:> 
.> • > 
.. 
• > 
.> 
• > no dre p..,1 . 
no dre P-1. 
4.35mg P<.03 
no dre P=1 ~ 
1 .69mg P<. 3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre Ps 1 . 
no dre P=1. 
16.4mg * P<.9 
no dre P=1. 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre 
4.21mg 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P-1 • RefNurn LoConf UpConf Cntrl I Dose 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 17 44.5ug n.s.s. 
1083 600.ng 4.24ug 
1083 2.17ug n.s.s. 
17 13.3ug n.s.s. 
1041 1.62ug n.s.s. 
1041 422.ng 6.52ug 
18 614.ng 1.49ug 
118 
119 
120 13 7 .83ug 21. 2ug 
13 2.11ug 6.01ug 
1070 1.96ug n.s.s. 
1070 1.20ug n.s.s. 
121 
122 
123 
124 1075 
1041 1041 
15 n.s.s. 2.13ug 
3.36ug 22.1ug 
2.89ug 21.9ug 
18. 7ug . 392mg 
AFLATOXIN, CRUDE 
125 309 .133mg 2. 34mg 
309 1 . 72mg n. s. s. 
126 16 2.90ug 31. 7ug 
127 333 1.12ug 3.38ug 
333 3.38ug 25.8ug 
128 1514 1.92mg 6.89mg 
1514 3.05mg 23.5mg 
b 1514 5.91mg n.s.s. 
ALDICARB (lemikl 116·06·3 
129 c08640 1.27mg n.s.s. 
c08640 2.83mg n.s.s. 
b c08640 3.30mg n.s.s. 
130 c08640 • 508mg n. s. s. 
c08640 .776mg n.s.s. 
b c08640 1.53mg n.s.s. 
131 c08640 .178mg n.s.s. 
c08640 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
132 c08640 . 194mg n. s. s. 
c08640 .411mg n.s.s. 
ALDRIN 309-00-2 
133 c00044 • 844mg n. s. s. 
a c00044 1.14mg n.s.s. 
b c00044 2.22mg n.s.s. 
134 c00044 .411mg 10.0mg 
c00044 1.45mg n.s.s. 
b c00044 .433mg n.s.s. 
c00044 .411mg 10.0mg 
d c00044 1.45mg n.s.s. 
135 c00044 
136 20a .467mg 3.01mg 
2.55mg 12.3mg 
a 20a 21.0mg n.s.s. 
b 20a 28.4mg n.s.s. 
137 22a 2 .13mg 7. 96mg 
22a 24.4mg n.s.s. 
b 22a 2.43mg 13.8mg 
22a 24.7mg n.s.s. 
138 23 7.89mg n.s.s. 
23 
139 c00044 c00044 
140 c00044 
141 1004 1004 
142 1040 
1040 10.0mg n.s.s. 
1.55mg n.s.s. 
9.99mg n.s.s. 
1.41mg 10.2mg 
5.05mg n.s.s. 
5.18mg n.s.s. 
1.76mg n.s.s. 
7 .36mg n.s.s. 
b 1040 .487mg n.s.s. 
1040 5.80mg n.s.s. 
143 21 1.67mg n.s.s. 
21 .298mg n.s.s. 
144 c00044 
a c00044 
145 1004 
1004 
146 21 
21 
147 1002 
148 1002 .875mg n.s.s. 
6.34mg n.s.s. 
5.75mg n.s.s. 
22.9mg n.s.s. 
1.33mg n.s.s. 
.579mg n.s.s. 
8.27mg n.s.s. 
8.67mg n.s.s. 0/ 12 
0/20 
0/20 
0/6 
0/15 
0/16 0/18 
0/34 
0/46 
0/90 
0/90 
0/10 
0/18 
0/17 
019 
11/37 
0137 
0/10 0/20 
0/20 
0/10 
1/10 
0/10 
15/25 
3/25 
1/25 
8/25 
5/25 
1 /25 
21/25 
0/25 
16/25 
1/25 
1/10 
0/ 10 
0/10 
3/20 
0/20 
7/20 
3/20 
0120 
17 /95p 
9/134 
0/134 100.ug 
1000.ng 
1000.ng 
80.0ug 
1000.ng 
800. ng 
40.0ng 
5 .OOug 
4.00ug 
279.ng 
279.ng 
10.0ug 
1000.ng 
800.ng 
40.0ug 
2.38mg 
2.38mg 
40.0ug 
8.00ug 
8.00ug 
.368mg .368mg 
.368mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
.260mg 
• 240mg 
.240mg .240mg 
100.ug 
100.ug 
80 .Oug 
80.0ug 
.330mg 
.330mg 
.330mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
1.25mg 
1.25mg 
3/ 134 1. 25mg 
27/200 1.25mg 
4/200 1. 25mg 
30/200 1.25mg 
21/200 1.25mg 
1/17 22.5ug 
6. 75mg 1/9 
3/17 22.5ug 
6. 75mg 1/9 
5/10 1.07mg 
1/10 1.07mg 
0/60p 1. 07mg 
0/88 • 956mg 
6Q / 88 • 956mg 
2/50 1.00mg 
0/50 1.00mg 
35/50 1.00mg 
10/50 1.00mg 
0/30 .250mg 
13/30 .250mg 
9/10 .800mg 
1/10 .800mg 
1/75 . 765mg 
19/75 • 765mg 
0/30 • 200mg 
1/30 • 200mg 
6/60 .125mg 
3/60 100.ug CARCINOGENIC POTENC Y DATABASE 
line: ~Du:->e 
3/14 
8/20 
1/20 
2/5 
1/15 
5/ 13 2Inc 
2/22 200.ng 1/22 600.ng 
5/30 25. Oug 26/33 
17 /34 20. Oug 25/25 
1/76 
3176 
12/12 
0/19 5.00ug 
0/20 4.00ug 
3/12 80.0ug 8/18 
7/17 
3/12 .120mg 
11/14 
0/ 14 
6/ 10 
25/35 
10/35 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
21 /50 
0/50 
4/50 
27 /50 
14/50 
6/50 
45/50 
0/50 
23/50 
1/50 
11/50 
5/50 
1/50 
16/50 
3/50 
18/50 
16/50 
3/50 
16/50 
35/151 
1/ 151 
1 /151 
65/200 
3/200 
61 /200 
9/200 2 .45mg 
2 .45mg 
2 .45mg 
• 780mg 
• 780mg 
• 780mg 
. 720mg 
. 720mg 
• 720mg 
.300mg 
.300mg 
. 240mg 
• 240mg 
.640mg 
. 640mg 
. 640mg 
.840mg 
.840mg 
.840mg 
.840mg 
.840mg 
. 840mg 1/10 7.36mg 
1/10 7.36mg 
2/ 10 7 .36mg 
22/50 
4/50 
1/50 
30/50 
18/50 
5/50 
46/50 
0/50 
28/50 
5/50 
5/50 
2/50 
1/50 
25/50 
5/50 
28/50 
25/50 
5/50 
25/50 
5/19 90.0ug 2/19 .450mg 
10/19 90.0ug 7/19 .450mg 
35/50 
1/50 
8/50 
0/47 
20/47 
9/50 
0/50 
40/50 
14/50 
0130 
13/30 
30/50 
1/50 
0/45 
5/45 
0130 
2/30 
1/40 
1/40 2.14mg 
2.14mg 
(2.14mg 
1.44mg 
1.44mg 
(2.50mg 
2. 50mg 
(2.50mg 
2. 50mg 32/50 
3/50 
1/50) 
0/44 2.38mg 
24/44 <2.38mg 
4/50) 
0/50 
18/50) 
10/50 
1.60mg 30/50 
1.60mg 1/50 
1.15mg 0/46 1.93mg 
1 • 15mg 7 / 46 1 . 93mg 
.625mg 
. 500mg 3/40 1.25mg 
0/40 1.00mg Citation or Patholog>· 
Brkl;· Code 
Ward; jnc i, 55, 107-110;1975 
Nixon; j nc i , 66, 1159 · 1163; 1981 
Ward; jnc i, 55, 107-110;1975 
Nixon; jnc i, 53,453-458; 1974 
4/21 2.00ug 20/25 4.00ug 28/28 Wogan; 
6/12 
7/10 9.81mg 
5/10 9.81mg 
0/10 9.81mg 10/15 
7 /15 
4/ 15 fctx, 12,681·685;1974 
Butler ;fctx,6, 135-141; 1968 
Fong;fctx, 19, 179-183; 1981 
Burt i n;b j ca, 43, 684 ·688; 1981 
Nixon; jnc i, 53,453-458 ; 1974 
Merk ow; canr, 33, 1608-1614; 1973 
Louria; sabo, 12,371-375; 1974 
Newberne; Li vt, 15, 962 · 969; 1966 
Newberne; aenh, 19, 489 · 498; 1969 
Lee; jnc i ,43, 1037-1041;1969 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
Davis; txap,4, 187-189;1962 
EpsteinCreview) { H J Davis} ;stev,4, 1-52; 1975 
2/22 2.25mg 2/18 4.50mg 4/11 
Fitzhugh; fctx, 2, 551-562; 1964 
8/22 2.25mg 5/18 4.50mg 5/11 
l ;v:hpa,hp c,nnd. 
0/31 Deichmann; i med, 39, 426 -434; 1970 
11/31) 
Deichmann; txoc, 407 -413; 1979 
De; chmann; txap, 11, 88-103; 1967 
l iv:hpa,hp c,nnd. 
0/45 Deichmann; i med, 39, 426· 434; 1970 
4/45 
Deichmann; txap, 11, 88-103; 1967 
1/40 Cleveland;aenh, 13, 195-198; 1966 
1/40 33 34 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
149 ad• Ht l iv tu• 24-24 H 
• ad• Ht tb• tu• 24•~4 H 
b R ada Ht tb• Hl 24•24 .. GOLD ET AL. 
• > TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
no dr-e P•1 • 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
ALKYLBENZENESULFONATE, LI NEAR 100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111 •••.• : •. 10 
150 R f ala Ht pre •ix 33•34 er 
151 R • ala Ht pre •ix 29•32 er .> no dre 
• > no dre p.1. 
p.1 • 
ALLYL 
152 CHLORIDE* 100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• :. ·100. •• ·: · ·111· • • • ·: • ·10 
f b6e 11av ato MXA 78v91 dv :> +hiatorie•l • P<.2 • a f b6e 11av TBA MXB 78v91 dv 343.•11 * P<.3 
b f b6e 11•v l Iv MXI 711v91 dv 2.1811• • P<.4 
e f b6e 11av l un MXB 711v91 dv 1 • 2511• * P<. 6 
153 • 
b 
e 
154 • 155 • b6e 11•v ato MXA 67v91 adav 
• b6e 11av TIA MXB 67v91 adav 
• b6e 11av 11 v MXI 67v91 adav 
• b6e 11av lun MXI 67v91 adav 
f OH 11•v TBA MXI 1S.26 av 
f OH 11av l Iv MXB 1S.26 av 
• OH 11av TBA MXB 18•26 av 
• OH 11•v l Iv MXB 18•26 av :> 
:> +hiatorical ·• P<.4 
1114.•ll * P<.4 
457 ·•II * P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
35.2•11 • P<.2 
no dre P•1 . 
28.1•11 • P<. 2 
no dre p.1. • 
ALL YLHYDRAZINE. HC l 100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·111· •••• : •• 10 
156 M f ava vat lun •Ix 24•24 • 
M av• vat l un ad• 24-24 • 
b M awa vat l un ade 24-24 • 
M ava vat blv •ix 2,t.•24 • 
d M av• vat bl v a11• 24-24 • 
a M av• vat l Iv •ix 24•24 • 
157 M • av• vat lun ede 93v93 • 
a M • av• vat lun •Ix 93v93 • 
b M • ava vat l Iv hpt 93v93 • 
M • ava vat llv •Ix 93v93 • 
ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
158 M f ed1 vat · • • lk• 31•31 • 
a M ed1 vet lun tu• 31•31 • 
b M ed1 vat tba Hl 31•31 • 
e M ed1 vat tb• •Ix 31•31 • 
159 M • ed1 vat lun tu• 35-35 • 
a M • ed1 vat tba H l 35•35 • 
b M • ed1 vat tba •ix 35•35 • 
160 R f leb vat tb• •Ix 3a.311 • 
a R f leb vat tb• Hl 3a.311 • 
161 R • leb vat tba •ix 3"36 • 
R • leb vat tb• Hl 36•36 • + 311.4•11 
46.1•11 
96.0•11 
119.•11 
163.•11 
234.•ll 
+ 28.9•11 
30.9•11 
274.•11 
no dre 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 111 ••••• : •• 10 
.. 5.32•11 
11.4•11 
4.42•11 
4.23•11 
·> 11.4•11 
6.29•11 
10.7•11 
.> 4.6S.11 
+ no dr• 
.663•11 
1.93•11 P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.003 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 P<.09 
P<.0005 
P<.005 
+ 
P<.04 -
p.1. 
P<.02 -
P<.4 
P<.02 -
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.03 -
P<.5 
P<.9 
p.1. 
P<.006 -
P<.2 
3·AMIN0· 1,4·DIMETHYL·5H·PYRIDO [ 4,3·b J INDOLE ACETATE 
162 M f edf Ht l Iv •Ix llllvllll •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·111· •••• : •• 10 
• + 25.0•11 P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. • M f edf Ht l Iv hpe llllvllll 
b M f edf Ht lun ade 811vllll 
e M f edf ••t lun ad• llllvllll 
163 M • edf Ht l Iv •Ix llllvllll 
• M • edf Ht liv hpe llllvllll 
b M • edf Ht lun ade llllvllll 
M • edf Ht lun ad• 118vllll 
3·AMIN0·4·ETHOXYACETANILIDE 
164 f b6e Ht pit MXA 78v93 
• b6e Ht TBA MXB 78v93 
b b6e Ht l iv MXB 711v93 
e b6e Ht l un MXB 711v93 
165 • b6e Ht thy MXA 711v93 
a • b6e Ht thy fee 78v93 
b • b6e Ht thy MXA 711v93 
e • b6e Ht TIA MXB 78v93 
d • b6e Ht l Iv MXB 78v93 
• • b6e Ht l un MXB 78v93 
166 f f34 Ht adr MXA 18•25 
a f f34 Ht TBA MXB 111•25 
b f f34 Ht l Iv MXB 18•25 
167 • f34 Ht thy eer 18•25 
a • f34 Ht TIA MXB 1S.25 
b • f34 Ht l Iv MX8 1S.25 
3·AMIN0·9· ETHYLCARBAZOLE. HCl 
1611 M f b6e Ht l iv hpe 78v95 
M f b6e Ht TBA MXB 711v95 
b M f b6e Ht l iv MXI 711v95 
M f b6e Ht l un MXB 711v95 29.6•11 
no dre 
no dre 
109.•11 
112.•11 
no dre 
no dre 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 111 ••.•• : •• 10 p.1. 
P<.011 + 
P<.02 + 
p.1. 
p.1. 
+ #1.0511• \ P<.009 
569.•11 \ P<.02 
no dre P•1. 
11.6311• * P<.4 
2.0711• I P<.0005e 
3. 7711• I P<.0005e 
4.0211• * P<.02 e 
no dre P•1. 
8.9911• \ P<.9 
no dr• P·1. 
#415.•11 \ P<.005 
no dre P•1. 
717 ·•II \ P<.002 
#610.•ll P<.05 
no dre P•L 
no dr• p.1. 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••. : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 111 ••••• : •• 10 
: + : 33.01111 
41.8•11 
33.0•11 
1.71111• P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.6 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc 
149 1040 7 .361111 n.a.a. 0/50 1.00•11 0/50 2. 50•11 0/50 • 1040 11.5•11 n.a.a. 9/50 1.00•11 8/50 2.50•11 5/50 
b 1040 17 .S.11 n.a.a. 2/50 1.00•11 2/50 2.50•11 1/50 
ALKYLIENZENESULFONATE, L !NEAR 
150 570 1.0911• n.a.a. 1/13 20.0•g 3/15 80.0•g 3/13 300.•11 1/15 
151 570 1.04g• n.a.a. 1/12 16.0•g 2/12 64.0•g 1/12 240.•g 0/12 
ALL YL CHLORIDE* (chloropropene> 107-05-1 
152 c04615 288.•g n.a.a. 0/20 78.0•g 3/50 156.•g 3/50 • c04615 106.•g n.a.a. 4/20 78.0•g 18/50 156.•g 15/50 
b c04615 536.•g n.a.a. 0/20 78.0•g 1/50 156.•g 1/50 
c c04615 258.•g n.a.a. 1/20 78.0•g 5/50 156.•g 4/50 
153 c04615 176.•g n.a .a. 0/20 106.•g 2/50 198.•g 0/50 • c04615 46.9•g n.a.a. 5/20 106.•g 19/50 198.•g 3/50 
b c04615 83.S.g n.a.a. 2/20 106.•g S/50 198.•g 1/50 
c c04615 144.•g n.a.a. 3/20 106.•g 6/50 198.•g 0/50 
154 c04615 13.4•g n.a.a. 12/20 27 .9•g 26/50 37.1•g 11/50 
• c04615 175.•g n.a.a. 2/20 27 .9•g 0/50 37.1•g 0/50 
155 c04615 8.98•g n.a.a. 9/20 28.8•g 15/50 39.S.g 4/50 
c04615 n.a.a. n.a.1. 0/20 28.S.g 0/50 39.S.g 0/50 
ALL YLHYDRAZINE. HCl 52207·83·7 
156 1051 19.3•g 156.•g 21/99 25.0•g 25/50 
• 1051 22.3•g 232.•g 18/99 25.0•g 22/50 
b 1051 41.4•g 688.•g 4/99 25.0•g 10/50 
c 1051 46.5•g n.a.a. 5/99 25.0•g 9/50 
d 1051 59.1•g n.a.a. 2/99 25.0•g 6/50 
e 1051 69.611g n.a.a. 3/99 25.0•g 5/50 
157 1051 14.4•g 112.•g 15/99 20.8•g 21/49 
e 1051 14.2•g 312.•g 23/99 20.S.g 23/49 
b 1051 67 .4•g n.a.a. 0/99 20.S.g 2/49 
1051 95.1•g n.a.a. 6/99 20.S.g 2/49 
ALUlllNUll POTASSIUM SULFATE 
158 1395 2.1'hlg n.a.a. 3/47 1.00•g 10/41 
e 1395 2.55•g n.a.a. 9/47 1.00•g 11/41 
b 1395 1.90•g n.a.a. 4/47 1.00•g 12/41 
c 1395 1.4S.g n.a.a. 14/47 1.00•g 19/41 
159 1395 2.95•g n.a.a. 5/38 .833•g 9/41 
• 1395 2.52•g n.a.a. 2/38 .833•g 9/41 
b 1395 2.21•g n.a.a. 11/38 .833•g 15/41 
160 1456 .305•g n.a.a. 17/24 .286•g 14/19 
e 1456 • 795•g n.a.a. 8/24 .286•g 6/19 
161 1456 • 295•g 7. 63•g 4/26 .250•g 13/25 • 1456 .615•g n.a.a. 2/26 .250•g 6/25 
3·AlllN0· 1,4·DlllETHYL·5H·PYRIDO [ 4,3·b J INDOLE ACETATE (trp·P·1 acetate) 75104-43-7 
162 1224 13.S.11 51. 7-11 0/40 26.0•11 16/40 • 1224 15.S.11 64.S.11 0/40 26.0•11 14/40 
b 1224 110.•11 n.a.a. 3/40 26.0•11 1/40 
c 1224 153.•11 n.a.a. 1/40 26.0•11 0/40 
163 1224 35.5•11 n.a.a. 1/40 24.0•11 5/40 
• 1224 38.61111 n.a.a. 0/40 24.0•11 4/40 
b 1224 59.4•11 n.a.a. 3/40 24.0•11 3/40 
1224 142.•11 n.a.a. 1/40 24.0•11 0/40 
3 • AlllNO • 4 • ETHOXYACETANI LIDE 17026·81·2 
164 c01887 452.•11 39.211• 7/100 432.•11 14/50 (845.•11 3/50> 
• c01887 253.•11 n.a.a. 27 /100 432.•11 32/50 (845.•g 21/50) 
b c01887 2.9411• n.a.a. 5/100 432.•11 4/50 845.•11 2/50 
c c01887 1.92119 n.1.1. 4/100 432.•11 6/50 845.•g 3/50 
165 c01887 1. 0411• 6. 7011• 2/100 398.•11 2/50 780.•11 12/48 • c01887 1.6311• 12.611• 0/100 398.•g 0/50 780.•11 7/48 
b c01887 1.6011• n.1.1. 2/100 398.•11 1/50 780.•11 7/48 
c c01887 879.•11 n.1.1. 41/100 398.•11 28/50 780.•11 19/48 
d c01887 660.•11 n.1.1. 20/100 398.•11 13/50 <780.•11 2/48> 
• c01887 3.4711• n.1.1. 17/100 398.•11 7/50 780.•11 3/48 
166 c01887 175.•11 5.0211• 5/100 138.•11 11/48 <552.•11 0/50) 
• c01887 763.•11 n.1.1. 80/100 138.•11 37/48 552.•11 30/50 
b c01887 272.•g 3.45g• 0/100 138.•11 5/48 <552.•11 2/50> 
167 c01887 213.•11 n.1.a. 3/99 110.•11 7/50 (442.•11 4/50> 
e c01887 142.•11 n.1.1. 62/99 110.•11 34/50 (442.•ll 24/50) 
b c01887 2.6611• n.1.1. 6/99 110.•11 5/50 442.•11 1/50 
3 ·All! NO· 9 • ETHYLCARIAZOLE. HC l 6109·97·3 
168 c03043 22.2•11 54.1•11 1/50 127.•11 43/50 • c03043 25.4•11 86.2•11 10/50 127.•11 46/50 
b c03043 22.2•11 54.1•11 1/50 127.•11 43/50 
c03043 256.•g n.1.1. 3/50 127.•11 4/50 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Dei ch••nn; txoc ,407·413;1979 
Hi ra11a;genn,68,369· 370; 1977 
ato:aqc,aqp. 
l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
lun:e/e,e/c. 
ato:aqc,aqp . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:e/e,e/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Toth;bj ce,34,90·93; 1976 
Schroeder; j nut, 105 ,452 -458; 1975 
Schroeder; Jnut, 105,421·427;1975 
lletaukure; ac i• ,213,346 ·347; 1981 
p;t:adn,can,cra. 
l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
lun:e/e,e/c. 
thy :acn, 1dn, fca, fee. 
thy:ecn,fcc . 
l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
lun:e/a,e/c. 
adr:coa,coc. 
l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
lun:e/e,e/c. 35 
s 
s 36 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hi~t Note~ 
169 M m b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 
M m b6c eat l iv MXA 78w95 
b M m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 
M m b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 
d M m b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 
170 f f34 eat MXB MXB 18m25 
f34 eat ute acn 18m25 
b f34 eat zym MXA 18m25 
f34 eat zym sqc 18m25 
d f34 eat l iv MXA 18m25 
f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 
f34 eat l iv MXB 18m25 
171 m f34 eat MXB MXB 18m25 
m f34 eat l iv MXA 18m25 
b m f34 eat l iv hpc 18m25 
m f34 eat MXA MXA 18m25 
d m f34 eat zym MXA 18m25 
m f34 eat MXA MXA 18m25 
m f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 
Rm f34 eat liv MXB 18m25 GOLD ET AL. 
TIJ,;o 2Tailpl'i 
46.4mg 
49.8mg 
70.6mg 
49.8mg 
no dre 
55.1mg 
106.mg 
151.mg 
212.mg 
237 .mg 
44. 7mg 
237 .mg 
28.1mg 
39.2mg 
156.mg 
203.mg 
240.mg 
257 .mg 
42. 7mg 
39. 2mg !JR AuOp 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.005 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.007 
P<.002 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.007 c 
P<.003 c 
P<.003 c 
P<.007 c 
P<.03 
P<.0005 
3 ·AMINO-9 · ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE 100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
172 f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 
b 
173 
174 
b 
d 
175 
b 
d b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 
b6c eat ti v MXB 78w95 
b6c eat tun MXB 78w95 
m b6c eat l iv hpc 78w94 
m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w94 
m b6c eat l iv MXB 78w94 
m b6c eat lun MXB 78w94 
f f34 eat zym MXA 18m24 
f f34 eat zym sqc 18m24 
f34 eat zym can 18m24 
f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
f34 eat ti v MXB 18m24 
m f34 eat MXB MXB 18m24 
m f34 eat l iv MXA 18m24 
m f34 eat liv hpc 18m24 
m f34 eat ski MXA 18m24 
m f34 eat ski MXA 18m24 
R m f34 eat zym MXA 18m24 
m f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
R m f34 eat t iv MXB 18m24 :+ 30.5mg 
59.7mg 
30 .5mg 
7 .49gm 
50.4mg 
64.9mg 
50.4mg 
4.13gm 
58.0mg 
95.4mg 
148.mg 
18.2mg 
no dre 
11.8mg 
17.1mg 
42.6mg 
45.0mg 
62.8mg P<.0005c 
P<.008 
P<.0005 
P<1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.007 
P<.0005 
P<1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.006 c 
F<.01 
P<.04 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<. 0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.0005c 
P<.003 c 
104.mg P<.009 c 
10.6mg P<.0005 
17 .1mg P<.0005 
3-AMIN0· 1 ·METHYL ·5H ·PYRIDO [ 4, 3-b [IN DOLE ACETATE •••• :. -10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1mg •••• :. -10 •••.• : •• 100 •••• : •• lg ••••• :. -10 
176 M f cdf eat l iv hpc 88w88 e 6.81mg P<.0005+ 
p.1. M cdf eat tun adc 88w88 no dre 
b M cdf eat tun ade 88w88 
177 M m cdf eat tun adc 88w88 
M m cdf eat t iv hpc 88w88 e 
b M m cdf eat t iv mix 88w88 
M m cdf eat lun ado 88w88 
178 ac i eat l iv nnd 29m29 
aci eat liv mix 29m29 e 
b aci eat l iv hms 29m29 
aci eat jej adc 29m29 
d aci eat i lm ade 29m29 e 
179 m aci eat l iv tum 29m29 e .> no dre 
81.1mg 
88.2mg 
83 .2mg 
224.mg 
5.32mg 
5 .32mg 
46.2mg 
46.2mg 
46.2mg 
no dre P•1. 
P<.1 
P<.04 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.1 
p.1. 
1·AMIN0·2·METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 100ng •• : •• lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• lg ••••• :. -10 
180 M f b6c eat l iv MXA 70w97 aesv 174.mg • P<.07 
M b6c eat TBA MXB 70w97 aesv no dre P-1. 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 70w97 aesv 174.mg * P<.07 
M b6c eat lun MXB 70w97 aesv 
181 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 70w97 aesv 
M m b6c eat l iv MXB 70w97 aesv 
b M m b6c eat lun MXB 70w97 aesv 
182 R f f34 eat ti v MXA 18m24 v 
f f34 eat t iv hpc 18m24 v 
b f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 v 
f34 eat tiv MXB 18m24 v 
183 m f34 eat MXB MXB 18m24 v 
m f34 eat liv MXA 18m24 v 
b m f34 eat kid MXA 18m24 v 
m f34 eat pit MXA 18m24 v 
d m f 34 eat l iv hpc 18m24 v 
e m f34 eat kid tla 18m24 v 
m f34 eat thy MXA 18m24 v 
g m f34 eot kid MXA 18m24 v :> no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
115. mg * P<. 003 c 
182.mg * P<.002 c 
no dre P=1. 
115.mg * P<.003 
34.1mg * P<.0005 
39.9mg * P<.0005c 
131.mg * P<.0005c 
136.mg * P<.006 
150.mg * P<.008 c 
196.mg * P<.003 
283. mg * P<. 007 
441.mg * P<.02 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
169 c03043 28.6mg 95.0mg 
c03043 29. 801g 111 • mg 
b c03043 34. 7mg 688. mg 
c03043 29. 801g 111 • mg 
d c03043 277. mg n. s. s. 
170 c03043 32. 7mg 105. mg 
a c03043 50. 9mg 339. mg 
b c03043 75.5mg 355.mg 
c03043 96. 9mg 616. mg 
d c03043 93. 90lg 1. 04gm 
e c03043 21 • 2mg 699. mg 
c03043 93. 9mg 1 • 04gm 
171 c03043 17. 7mg 49. 7mg 
c03043 22.8mg 82.3mg 
b c03043 64. 8mg 2. 66gm 
c c03043 81. 4.,g 1.13gm 
d c03043 102.mg 1.06gm 
e c03043 95.5mg 3.17gm 
c03043 18.7mg n.s.s. 
g c03043 22. 8mg 82. 3mg 6/50 
8/50 
22/50 
8/50 
10/50 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50 
0/50 
0/50 
38/50 
0/50 
1/49 
1/49 
1/49 
0/49 0/49 
0/49 
32/49 
1/49 118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 
58.4mg 1 lnc 2Do::e 
41/50 
41/50 
45/50 
41/50 
7 /50 
25/50 
11 /50 
12/50 
9/50 
6/50 
45/50 
6/50 
33/50 
22/50 
8/50 
6/50 
7/50 
5/50 
46/50 
22/50 2lnc: Cil;1tinn or Pathology 
Brkl,v Code 
l iv: hpa, hpc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
liv:hpc,nnd; ute:acn; zym:can,sqc. 
zym: can, sqc. 
l iv:hpc,rmd . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
liv:hpc,nnd; ski:bcc,sqc,sqp; sub:sqc; zym:can,sqc. 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
ski:bcc,sqc,sqp; sub:sqc. 
zym: can, sqc. 
ski :sqc,sqp; sub:sqc. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
3 ·AMI NO· 9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE <3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole and 3-amino·9 ·ethylcarbazole .HCL. CAS# 132-32·1 and 6109-97-3) mixture 
172 c01898 20.00lg 52.1mg 1/50 
c01898 28.1mg 1.26gm 20/50 
b c01898 20.0mg 52.101g 1/50 
c01898 204.mg n.s.s. 4/50 
173 c01898 28. 7mg 130 ·"'9 7 /50 
a c01898 30.9mg 914.mg 17/50 
b c01898 28.7mg 130.mg 7/50 
c01898 165.mg n.s.s. 6/50 
174 c01898 26.2mg 163.mg 0/50 
a c01898 33.1mg 1.05gm 0/50 
b c01898 55.4mg 7.12gm 0/50 
c01898 7.4201g n.s.s. 32/50 
d c01898 95.3mg n.s.s. 2/50 
175 c01898 6.73mg 22.6mg 0/50 
a c01898 8.64mg 41.7mg 0/50 
b c01898 16.8.,g 189.mg 0/50 
c01898 19.2mg 150.mg 0/50 
d c01898 24.0"'g 324.mg 0/50 
c01898 37 .4mg 3.31gm 0/50 
c01898 5.45mg 41.8mg 20/50 
g c01898 8.64mg 41.7mg 0/50 85 .8mg 
85.8mg 
85.8mg 
85.8mg 
79.2mg 
79.2mg 
79.2mg 
79.2mg 
30.0mg 
30.0mg 
30. Omg 
30.0mg 
30. Omg 
24. Omg 
24. Omg 
24.0mg 24.0mg 
24.0mg 
24. Omg 
24.0mg 24.0mg 37 /50 
38/50 
37/50 
4/50 
32/50 
35/50 
32/50 
6/50 
10/50 
5/50 
5/50 
40/50 
1/50 
22/50 
12/50 
6/50 
8/50 
6/50 
5/50 
37/50 
12/50 
3·AMIN0-1-METHYL -5H-PYRID014,3·bllNDOLE ACETATE (trp-P·2 acetate) 72254-58·1 
176 1224 3.70.,g 13.3mg 0/24 26.0mg 22/26 
1224 64.301g n.s.s. 3/40 26.0mg 3/40 
b 1224 93.1mg n.s.s. 1/40 26.0mg 1/40 
177 1224 27.3mg n.s.s. 3/40 24.0mg 8/40 
1224 26.601g n.s.s. 0/25 24.0mg 3/24 
b 1224 23.7mg n.s.s.. 1/25 24.0"'g 4/24 
1224 49.4mg n.s.s. 1/40 24.0mg 3/40 
178 1225 2.06mg 19.5mg 0/30 5.00mg 6/10 
1225 2.06mg 19.5mg 0/30 5.00mg 6/10 
b 1225 7.51mg n.s.s. 0/30 5.00mg 1/10 
1225 7.5101g n.s.s. 0/30 5.00mg 1/10 
d 1225 7.51mg n.s.s. 0/30 5.00mg 1/10 
179 1225 11.7mg n.s.s. 0/30 4.00mg 0/10 
1-AMIN0 ·2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 82-28·0 
180 c01901 68.1.,g n.s.s. 4/50 61.1mg 
a c01901 112 . .,g n.s.s. 22/50 61.1mg 
b c01901 68.101g n.s.s. 4/50 61.101g 
c01901 325.mg n.s.s. 1/50 61.1mg 
181 c01901 89.901g n.s.s. 21/50 56.4mg 
a c01901 129.0lg n.s.s. 10/50 56.4mg 
b c01901 189.mg n.s.s. 11/50 56.4mg 
182 c01901 60.8mg 602.m~ 2/50 37.0mg 
c01901 89.9mg 832.mg 1/50 37 .001g 
b c01901 78.4mg n.s.s. 45/50 37.00lg 
c01901 60.8mg 602.mg 2/50 37.0mg 
183 c01901 22.8mg 64.6mg 3/50 30.4mg 
c01901 25.8mg 83.7mg 3/50 30.4mg 
b c01901 73.2mg 270.mg 0/50 30.4mg 
c01901 -70.5mg 1.61gm 1/50 30.4mg 
d c01901 72.9mg 3.56gm 2/50 30.4.,g 
e c01901 98.4mg 929.mg 0/50 30.4mg 
c01901 127.mg 3.06gm 0/50 30.4mg 
g c01901 167.mg n.s.s. 0/50 30.4mg 12/49 58. 5mg 
16/49 58.5mg 
12/49 58.5mg 
0/49 58.50lg 
18/50 54.0"'g 
8/50 54.0mg 
5/50 (54.00lg 
11/45 74.0mg 
3/45 74.0mg 
31/45 74.0mg 
11/45 74.0mg 
21150 60. o .. g 
25/50 60.0mg 
6/50 60.0mg 
10/50 60.0mg 
7/50 60.00lg 
5/50 60.0mg 
3/50 60.00lg 
1/50 60.0mg 2/50 
4/50 
2/50 
1/50 
1/50 
1/50 
0/50) 
11/48 
10/48 
28/48 
11/48 
28/50 
24/50 
10/50 
8/50 
10/50 
6/50 
5/50 
4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
zym:can,sqc. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
liv:hpc,nnd; ski:bcc,sqc,sqp; zym:can,sqc. 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
ski :bcc,sqc,sqp . 
ski :sqc,sqp. 
zym: can, sqc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
Matsukura; sci e, 213, 346.347;1981 
Hosaka; c let, 13, 23 · 28; 1981 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a ,a/c. 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
l iv :hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
kid:acn,tla,uac; liv:hpc,nnd . 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
kid: acn, t La, uac. 
pit:adn ,cra. 
thy:cca,ccr. 
kid:acn,uac. 37 38 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
• 134 Ht TBA MXB 181124 v 
R • f34 Ht l iv MXB 181124 v 
2·AMIN0·5· <5·NITR0·2·FURYL> · 1 ,3,4·0XADIAZOLE 
184 R f ad• Ht •al •Ix 461166 av 
• R ad• Ht •al ade 461166 av 
b R ada eat for aqp 461166 av 
e R ad• aat kip tee 461166 av 
d R ad• Ht lun ale 461166 av 
a R ad• Ht l Iv tu• 461166 av 
f R ad• Ht tba •Ix 461166 av 
2·AMIN0·5· <5·111TR0·2·FURYL> • 1 ,3,4·THIADIAZOLE 
185 R f ada Ht •al •Ix 451166 av 
• R f ad• Ht mg l ade 451166 av 
b ada Ht for aqp 451166 av 
e R ada aat lun ale 451166 av 
d R ada Ht kip tee 451166 av 
a R ada Ht l Iv tu• 451166 av 
f R ada Ht tba •Ix 451166 av GOLD ET AL. 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
64.4•g * P<.07 
39. 911g * P<. 0005 
•••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.1•9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.19· •••• : •• 10 
• + 3.67•g 
7 .9811g 
37 .O•g 
+hlatorleal 
242.•g 
no dre 
2.74mg 
•••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.1•9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• :. ·.19· •••• : •• 10 
+ .662•9 
1.20•9 
23. 7•g 
73.4•9 
+hlatorlcol 
no dr• 
.662•g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.009 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.3 + 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.07 + 
P<.3 + 
P<.3 + 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
2·AMl110·4· (5 ·lllTR0·2· FURYL>THIAZOLE 
186 M f a11I Ht for •Ix 461155 a •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.1•&· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.19· •••• : •• .10 
• M a11I eat for aqp 461155 a 
b M a11 I Ht l Iv tu• 461155 a 
M a11I Ht lun tum 461155 • 
d M a11I Ht tba •Ix 461155 a 
4·AMlllO· 2 · lllTROPHEllOL 
187 f b6e Ht TIA MXI 24•24 
• f b6e Ht l Iv llXB 24•24 
b f b6e Ht lun llXI 24•24 
188 • b6e Ht TIA llXB 24•24 
a • b6e Ht l IV llXI 24•24 
b • b6e Ht lun llXB 24•24 
189 f f34 Ht ubl tee 24•24 
a f f34 Ht TIA llXI 24•24 
b f f34 Ht l Iv llXB 24•24 
190 • f34 Ht ubl tee 24•24 
a • f34 Ht TBA llXI 24•24 
b • f34 Ht l Iv llXI 24•24 • + 7.87•g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.0005 11.5•g 
no dra 
no dre 
6.83•11 
.100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 .••.• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.l•a •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.19· •••• : •• 10 
:> :> no dre P•1. 
3.65g• * P<.3 
no dr• P·1. 
no dre P-1. 
2.25g• * P<.7 
no dre P•1. 
:> +hlatodeal * P<.3 a 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
309.•g I P<.002 e 
270.•g I P<.4 
no dre P·1. 
2-Alllll0-4· (p·NITROPHENYL>THIAZOLE .100n11 •• : •• 1ua •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• :. ·.19· ••.• : •• 10 
191 II f a11I Ht lla 461166 a -* 9.95•g P<.03 + 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.03 • II f a11i Ht llv tu• 461166 a no dre 
b II a11I aat lun tu• 461166 a no dra 
II a11I Ht tba •Ix 461166 e 9.95•g 
2·Alllll0·5 ·lllTROTHIAZOLE 
192 f b6e Ht TIA llXI 24•24 
a f b6e Ht l Iv llXI 24•24 
b f b6e aat l un llXI 24•24 
193 • b6e Ht TBA llXB 24•24 
a • b6e Ht l Iv llXB 24•24 
b • b6e eat l un llXI 24•24 
194 f f34 Ht uta Hp 261126 
a f 134 Ht TIA llXI 26•26 
b f f34 Ht llv llXI 261126 
195 • f34 Ht • · · llXA 261126 
a • f34 Ht llXI llXI 26•26 
b • f34 Ht 11Ul grl 261126 
e • f34 Ht llXA llXA 26•26 
d • f34 Ht TBA llXI 26•26 
e • f34 Ht l Iv llXB 261126 
196 f ada Ht •al •Ix 461166 av 
• ad• Ht kip tee 461166 v 
b ada Ht lun ale 461166 v 
e ada Ht l Iv tu• 461166 V 
d ada Ht tba •IX 461166 V .100n11 •• :. ·.lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.1•9· ••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. ·.19· ••.. : •• .10 
:> no dr• 
109.•g * 
63.5•g * p.1. 
P<.4 
P<.09 
p.1. 
p.1. :> 
+ no dra 
no dre 
no dr• P•1. 
•57 .2•g \ P<.03 
326.•g * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
27 .6•g * P<.003 a 
27. 6119 * P<. 003 
90.2•9 * P<.02 a 
445.•g * P<. 7 
32.3•9 * P<.2 
318.•g * P<.2 
44.6119 P<.03 + 
+hi1toric•l 
157.•g 
no dre 
32.5•g P<.09 + 
P<,09 + 
p.1. 
P<.006 
2-AlllN0·5·PHENYL ·2·0XAZOLl11·4·011E + ll9(0H)2 • .1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• :. ·.1•9· ••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. ·.19· •.•. : •• .10 
197 f ada Ht 11 v tu• 461166 • .> no dra 
• R ad• Ht tba •Ix 461166 • 3.01•g 
198 ada Ht 11 v tu• 461166 • .> no dra 
• ada Ht tba •Ix 461166 • no dre 
2 ·AlllNOANTHRAQUlllOllE .100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·.1•9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• .lg .•••. : .• 10 p.1. 
P<.04 -
p.1. 
p.1. 
199 II f b6e Ht llXB llXB 791194 
• II f b6e Ht l Iv hpe 791194 : + 1. 49g• * P<. 0005 
2.82&• * P<.004 c CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 39 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Jnc Citation or Patholog,v 
Brkly Corle 
c01901 26.1•g n.a.a. 26/50 30.4•g 42/50 60.0•g 35/50 
c01901 25.S.g 83. 7•g 3/50 30.4•g 25/50 60.0•g 24/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2 ·AIUN0·5· (5 ·NITRO· 2·FURYL)·1,3, 4 ·OXAOIAZOLE 3775·55·1 
184 1126 2. 0611g 7. 05•g 2124 26.9•g 29/33 Cohan; jnci ,54,841·850;1975 
• 1126 4.59•g 15.4•g 0/24 26.9•g 20/33 
b 1126 15.1•g 855.•g 0/24 26.911g 6/33 
c 1126 17.1•g n.a.a. 0/24 26.9•g 5/33 
d 1126 39.3-g n.a.a. 0/24 26.9•g 1/33 
• 1126 73.S.g n.a.a. 0/24 26.9•g 0/33 
f 1126 1.41•g 5.35•g 2/24 26.911g 31/33 
2·AMIN0·5· (5·NITR0·2·FURYL> • 1,3,4·THIADIAZOLE 712·68·5 
185 1126 • 293•g 1 • 3611g 2/24 8.1811g 32/33 Cohen; Jnc i ,54,841·850;1975 
• 1126 • 695•g 2 • 1611g 0/24 8.1811g 28133 
b 1126 7.17-a n.a.a. 0/24 8.1811g 3/33 
c 1126 11.911g n.a.a. 0/24 8.1811g 1/33 
d 1126 11.911g n.a.a. 0/24 8.1811g 1/33 
e 1126 22.4•g n.a.a. 0/24 8.1811g 0/33 
f 1126 • 293•g 1 • 3611g 2/24 8. 1a.u 32/33 
2 ·AMIN0·4· <5 ·NITRO· 2 • FURYL>THIAZOLE 38514· 71 ·5 
186 1076 4.20•g 15.3•g 0/29 90.2•g 24/27 Cohen;cenr ,33, 1593°1597; 1973 
e 1076 6.42•g 22.3•g 0/29 90.2•g 21/27 
b 1076 140.•g n.a.a. 0/29 90.2•g 0/27 
c 1076 140.•g n.a.a. 0/29 90.2•g 0/27 
d 1076 3.40•g 14.0•g 2/29 90.2•g 25/27 
4 ·AMIN0·2·NITROPHENOL 119·34·6 
187 c03963 558.•g n.a.a. 8120 159.•g 17/50 319.•g 16/50 
• c03963 1.26g• n.a.a. 0/20 159.•g 2/50 319.mg 2/50 l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
b c03963 1.73g• n.a.a. 2120 159.•g 3/50 319.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
188 c03963 301.•g n.a.a. 12120 147.•g 32/50 294.•g 28150 
• c03963 336.•g n.a.a. 6/20 147.•g 18150 294.•g 19/50 l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
b c03963 863.•g n.a.a. 5/20 147.•g 10/50 294.•g 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
189 c03963 563.•g n.a.a. 0/20 61.3•g 1/49 123.•g 2/50 
• c03963 140.•g n.a.a. 13/20 61.3•g 34/49 123.•g 28150 
b c03963 n.a.a. n.a.a. 0/20 61.3•g 0/49 123.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
190 c03963 155.•g 1.14g• 0120 49.0•g 0/50 98.1•g 11/50 
• c03963 71.2•g n.a.a • 12120 49.0•g 22/50 98.1•g 35/50 
b c03963 604.•g n.a.a. 0/20 49.0•g 1/50 98.1•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2 ·AMIN0·4· (p· NITROPHENYL>THIAZOLE 2104·09·8 
191 1076 3.42•g n.a.a. 1/28 9.0611g 5/20 Cohen;canr ,33, 1593· 1597; 1973 
• 1076 15.0•g n.a.a • 0/28 9.06•g 0/20 
b 1076 15.0•g n.a.a. 0/28 9.06•g 0/20 
1076 3.42•g n.a.a. 1/28 9.0611g 5/20 
2·AMIN0·5·NITROTHIAZOLE 121 ·66·4 
192 c03065 15.3•g n.a.a. 26/50 6.50•g 31/50 13.0•g 28150 
I c03065 29.0•g n.a.a. 2/50 6.50•g 6/50 13.0•g 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03065 24.6•g n.a.a. 2/50 6.50•g 4/50 13.0•g 8/50 lun:o/a,1/c. 
193 c03065 10.5•g n.a.a. 39/50 6.00•g 32/50 12.0•g 34/50 
• c03065 19.5•g n.a.a. 20/50 6.00•g 16/50 12.0•g 15/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03065 20.S.g n.a.a. 14/50 6.00•g 12/50 12.0•g 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
194 c03065 22.S.g n.a.a. 2/50 14. 911g 9/50 <29. 7•g 3/50) s 
• c03065 21.1•11 n.a.a. 40/50 14.9•g 44/50 29.7•g 44/50 
b c03065 n.a.1. n.a.a. 0/50 14.9•g 0/50 29.7•g 0/50 l iv: hp1, hpc,nnd. 
195 c03065 14.611g 147 •• g 13/50 11.9•g 19/50 23.S.g 28150 · · -:leu,ly•. 
• c03065 14.611g 147 •• g 13/50 11.911g 19/50 23.S.g 28/50 ···:leu,lle,ly•,•ly; •ul:grl,ule. A 
b c03065 40.1•g n.a.a. 2/50 11.9•g 4/50 23.S.g 9/50 
c03065 56.5•g n.a.a. 6/50 11.9•g 4/50 23.S.g 6/50 · · ·: l le,•l y; aul :ule. 
d c03065 11.7•g n.a.a. 36/50 11.911g 37/50 23.S.g 39/50 
• c03065 78.3•g n.a.a. 0/50 11.9•g 1/50 23.S.g 1/50 l iv: hp•, hpc, nnd. 
196 1126 17.4•g n.a.a. 2/39 33.4•g 8135 Cohen; jnci ,54,841·850;1975 
• 1126 38.6•g n.a.a. 0/39 33.4•g 2/35 
b 1126 38.611g n.a.a. 0/39 33.4•g 2/35 
c 1126 97.1•g n.a.a. 0/39 33.4•g 0/35 
d 1126 14.2•g 371.•g 2/39 33.4•g 10/35 
2·AMIN0·5·PHENYL·2·0XAZOLIN·4·0NE + Mg(0Hl2 (HgnHiu• pe110l in•> 18968·99·5 
197 200.• 8.10•11 n.a.a. 0/35 2.79•g 0/35 Cohen; jnci ,51,403·417; 1973 
• 200•• 1.1811g n.a.a. 4/35 2. 7911g 11/35 
198 200an 162.•g n.a.a. 0/35 55.S.g 0/35 • 200an 122.•g n.a.a. 4/35 55.S.g 1/35 
2 ·AMI NOANTHRACIUI NONE 117.79.3 
199 c01876 805 • •g 4 • 96g• 11/100 539.•g 9/50 1.08g• 23/50 ... :ly•; l iv:hpc. C 
• c01876 1.33g• 23.711• 5/100 539.•g 5/50 1.08g• 12/50 40 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b M b6c eat l ym 79w94 
d 
e 
200 
b 
201 
202 
b M b6c eat TBA MXB 79w94 
b6c eat l iv MXB 79w94 
b6c eat lun MXB 79w94 
m b6c eat l iv hpc 79w93 
m b6c eat l iv MXA 79w93 
m b6c eat TBA MXB 79w93 
m b6c eat l iv MXB 79w93 
m b6c eat l un MXB 79w93 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 s 
f34 eat l iv MXB 18m25 s 
m f34 eat l iv MXA 18m25 v 
m f34 eat l iv hpc 18.,25 v 
m f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 v 
m f34 eat Liv MXB 18m25 v 
o ·AM I NOAZOTOLUENE 
203 M m cf1 eat lun ade 26w65 e 
Mm cf1 eet Liv mix 26w65 e 
204 alb eat l iv mix 63w63 ems 
b 
205 
a 
b alb eat l iv hpn 63w63 ems 
alb eat Liv lea 63w63 ems 
m alb eat l iv m;x 67w67 ems 
m alb eat l iv hpn 67w67 ems 
m alb eat Liv lea 67w67 ems 
4· AMI NOD I PHENYL 
206 M f abi gav ubl car 39w94 
M abi gav l iv hpt 39w94 e 
207 M m abi gav l iv hpt 39w94 e 
M m abi gav ubl car 39w94 e 
208 M cif gev l iv mix 50w70 
M cif gav l iv mhp 50w70 r 
209 M m cif gav l iv mix 50w70 
M m cif gav l iv mhp 50w70 r 
M m cif gav ubl car 50w70 r 
2·AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 
210 M f cif eat l iv mhp 52w58 r 
M cif eat Liv mix 52w58 
211 Mm cif eat Liv mix 52w67 
a Mm cif eat Liv mhp 52w67 r 
b M m cif eat ubl car 52w67 r :> 3.16gm * P<.02 
1. 62gm P<. 02 
2. 82gm * P<. 004 
33.4gm * P<. 7 
755.mg • P<.0005c 
798. mg • P<. 0005c 
952. mg I P<. 008 
798.mg * P<.0005 
19.4gm * P<.8 
124.mg P<.6 
no dre p.1. 
101.mg \ P<.0005c 
268.mg \ P<.002 c 
759.mg * P<.6 
101.mg P<.0005 
100ng .. : •. 1ug •••. : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.. : •. 111g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •..• : .• 1g .•... : .• 10 
.> 80.2 .. g 
no dre 
3. 70mg 
8.49mg P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 
21.4mg P<.2 
4. 46mg P<. 005 + 
11. 5mg P<.06 
15.2mg P<.1 
100ng .. : .. 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 •••.. : .• 100 .••• : .. 1g ..•.. : •. 10 
.> ... 5.94mg 
no dre 
3.84mg 
11.6mg 
.993mg 
3.05mg 
3.91mg 
7. 50mg 
32. 5mg 
100ng •. : .. 1ug •... : •. 10 ••••. : •• 100 •••• : •. 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : .. 1g ..... : .. 10 
<+ noTD50 P<.05 
p.1. 
P<.5 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 
P<.3 
P<. 0005 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
5. 73mg 
8.67mg 
22.3mg P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.004 + 
3·AMINOTRIAZOLE 100ng .• : •. 1ug •... : •. 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1mg •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· .... : .• 10 
212 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 59w59 evx 24.5mg 
a M b6a orl tun mix 59w59 evx no dre 
b M b6a orl tba mix 59w59 evx 25.6mg 
213 M 11 b6a orl Liv hpt 52w52 evx 26.00lg 
a M m b6a orl lun ade 52w52 evx no dre 
b M m b6a orl tba mix 52w52 evx 28.0mg 
214 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 57w57 evx <+ noTD50 
M f b6c orl lun ade 57w57 evx no dre 
b M b6c or l tba mix 57w57 evx noTD50 
215 Mm b6c orl Liv hpt 53w53 evx 25.4mg 
M m b6c orl lun ado 53w53 evx no dre 
b M m b6c orl tba mix 53w53 evx 30.8mg P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.002 
216 b nss eat thy ade 24.,24 er • + 3. 74mg * P<. 0005 
217 wis wat tyf mal 160124 
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
218 M f ifc wat ubl car 93w93 r 
219 M f i fc wat ubl tum 52\,52 ekr 
AMMONIUM CITRATE 
220 R m wis eat l iv tum 52w65 ek 
AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 
221 M f c3h wet mgl adc 240l24 
222 M swi wat lun mix 28m28 ae 
M swi wat Liv mix 28m28 ae 
223 M "' swi wat lun adc 28m29 ae 
a M m s111i wet lun mix 28m29 ae 
b M m swi wat l iv mix 28m29 ae 
1-AMYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
224 R f don wat eso tum 65w65 
don wet dgt mix 65w65 
b don wat for tum 65w65 102.mg P<.002 
100ng .. : •. 1ug •.•. : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg ...• : •• 10 •.•.. : .. 100 •••. : .. 1g .••.. : .. 10 
.no dre 
.> no dre 
100ng .• : •. 1ug •... : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : .. 10 ••••• : .. 100 .•.. : .• 1g •.... : .. 10 
.> no dre p.1. 
100ng •. : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .•.•• : .. 100 •..• : .. 1mg .•.. : .. 10 ..•.. : .• 100 .•.. : .• 1g •••.• : •• 10 
. > 
. > no dre P•1 . 
no dre P= 1 . 
no dre P-1. 
.._ 7. 33gm * P<. 03 
15.3gm * P<.7 
26. 7gm * P<. 7 
100ng .. : .. 1ug •••• : .. 10 •.••• : •• 100 •..• : .• 1mg .... : •• 10 .••.. : .. 100 .•.. :. -19· •... : .. 10 
. 967mg P<. 0005 
1.150lg * P<.0005+ 
1. 350lg * P<. 0005 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 41 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Patholog,v 
Brkl)' Code 
b c01876 1.38g., n.s.s. 7/100 539.mg 6/50 1.08g., 1Z/50 
c c01876 74Z.Olg n.s.s. Z7 /100 539.mg 16/50 1.08gm Z9/50 
d c01876 1.33gOI Z3. 7gm 5/100 539 ... g 5/50 1.08gOI 1Z/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
e c01876 3. 75gm n.s.s. 4/100 539.mg Z/50 1.08gm 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
zoo c01876 449 ... g 1.83gm 18/100 498.mg Z0/50 1.01g'1 36/50 
c01876 463.'1g Z.11gm Z0/100 498.mg Z0/50 1.01gm 36/50 l iv:hpa,hpc . 
b c01876 458.'1g ZO.Ogm 41/100 498.'1g Z8/50 1.01g"' 4Z/50 
c c01876 463.'1g Z.11gOI Z0/100 498.mg Z0/50 1 .01g., 36/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c01876 1.94gm n.s.s. 17/100 498.mg 8/50 1.01gm 11/50 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
Z01 c01876 18.9'1g n.s.s. 19/Z5 71.0"'g 17 /50 
c01876 89.0'1g n.s.s. Z!Z5 71.0mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
zoz c01876 57.8'1g Z04.'1g 0/50 10Z.Rlg 18/50 <Z03.mg 18/50) l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c01876 1Z1.'1g 1.13gm 0/50 10Z.Olg 8/50 <Z03.0lg 5/50) 
b c01876 145.'1g n.s.s. Z0/50 10Z.mg Z6!50 Z03.mg 30/50 
c01876 57 .8Rlg Z04.'1g 0/50 10Z.'1g 18/50 <Z03.mg 18/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
o· AMI NOAZOTOLUENE 97-56·3 
Z03 103 11.5mg n.s.s. 95/Z88 Z8.8.,g 9/Z3 Walker ;fctx, 11,415-43Z; 1973 
• 103 zz. 7'1g n.s.s . 58/Z88 Z8.8"'g 4/Z3 
Z04 30 1.16Mg 16.911g 0/5 Z8.6.,g 617 Waters;y jb.,, 10, 179· 184; 1937 
• 30 z. 77mg n.s.s . 0/5 Z8.6mg 417 
b 30 5.18mg n.s.s. 0/5 Z8.6.,g Z17 
Z05 30 1.9111g Z7. 7mg 0/4 Z1. 7mg 9/1Z 
30 4.Z70lg n.s.s. 0/4 Z1. 7mg 5!1Z 
b 30 5. ZOmg n.s.s. 0/4 Z1. 7mg 4/1Z 
4 ·AMI NOD I PHENYL 9Z-67-1 
Z06 1165 .957mg n.s.s. O!Z8 Z.37mg 1/5 Clayson ;b j ca, 19, Z97-310;1965/Wi l l i a"'s 196Z 
1165 1.99mg n.s.s . 4/Z6 Z.37mg 0/5 
Z07 1165 • 761.,g n.s.s. 5/13 1.97mg 7/13 
1165 1.88Rlg n.s.s. 0/5 1.97mg 1/11 
Z08 31 • 544mg 1 • 94mg 1/31 6.1Zmg Z4/Z8 Clayson ;b j ca, Z1, 755 • 76Z; 1967 
31 1 .58mg 6.9Zmg 0/31 6.1Zmg 13/Z8 
Z09 31 1.67.,g 16.Z.,g 0/19 5. 10 .. g 7/Z1 
• 31 Z.58Rlg n.s.s. 0/19 5.100lg 4/Z1 
b 31 5.Z811g n.s.s. 0/19 5.10mg 1/Z1 
Z·AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 3693-ZZ-9 
Z10 31 n.s.s. 3.310lg 0/31 35. Omg 30/30 Clayson;bj ca,Z1, 755-76Z; 1967 
31 n.s.s. 3.36Rlg 1/31 35 .Omg 30/30 
Z11 31 Z.94Mg 1Z.6mg 0/19 Z7 .9mg 15/ZO 
31 4.3ZOlg Z0.711g 0/19 Z7.9Rlg 12/ZO 
b 31 9.0ZRlg 1Z6.0lg 0/19 Z7.9Rlg 6/ZO 
3 ·AMINOTR IAZOLE <amitrol) 61 ·8Z·5 
Z1Z 35• 9.88'1g 58.Zllg 0/17 3Z1 ... g 17/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
35• 384.0lg n.s.s. 0/17 3Z1 ... g 0/18 
b 35a 10.0 .. g 66.8'1g Z/17 3Z1 ... g 17/18 
Z13 35a 11 .5'1g 72.3 .. g 3/18 306.'1g 16/18 
35a Z83 ... g n.s.s. Z/18 306.mg 0/18 
b 35• 11.8Rlg 98.411g 5/18 306.'1g 16/18 
Z14 35• n.s.s. 37.3'1g 0/18 3Z3.mg 18/18 
35a 359 ... g n.s.s. 1/18 3Z3.mg 0/18 
b 35a n.s.s. 4Z.Zmg 3/18 3Z3.mg 18/18 
Z15 35a 11.6.,g 61 .4mg 1/17 305.'1g 16/18 
• 35• Z94 ... g n.s.s. Z/17 305.llg 0/18 
b 35• 1Z.5"'g 146.0lg 6/17 305 .mg 16/18 
Z16 1513 z. 1711g 8.86.,g 0/5 .4500lg 1/10 Z.Z511g Z/15 4.50Rlg 17/Z6 Jukes; sci e, 13Z, Z96 • Z97; 1960 
Z17 35 58.9Rlg Z99.'1g 0/10 96.ZRlg 19/40 Tsuda; jnci ,57 ,861·864;1976 
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE 1Z1Z5-0Z-9 
Z18 14Za 8.57g"' n.s.s. O!Z6 Z.OOgm 0126 F Laks ;b j ca, 31, 585 · 587; 1975 
Z19 14Zb Z.68g11 n.s.s. O!Z6 Z.OOgm O!Z6 F Laks; jnci, 51,Z007 -Z008;1973 
AMMONIUM CITRATE 301Z-65·5 
zzo z Z.10gRI n.s.s. 017 1.54gRI 0/17 Wei sburger; txap, 14, 163-175; 1969 
AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 1336-Z1 ·6 
ZZ1 1117 Z64.'1g n.s.s. Z3!30 ZOO.mg Z4/40 Toth; i j cn,9, 109-118; 1972/1969a 
zzz 1117 Z.78g., n.s.s. 14/109 Z00.'1g 12/50 400.'1g 8/48 600.0lg 4/4Z 
1117 7.33g"' n.s.s. 3/89 zoo ... g 1/47 400.mg 2/41 600 ... g 0/4Z 
ZZ3 1117 Z.99g., n.s.s. 0!86 167 ... g 2/49 333 ... g 2/48 500.'1g Z/44 
1117 Z.36g., n.s.s. 10/86 167 ... g 5/49 333.mg 5/48 500.mg 7/44 
b 1117 3.47g11 n.s.s. Z/67 167.mg 1/46 333.mg 3!Z8 500.mg 1/43 
1·AMYL·1 ·NITROSOUREA 10589-74·9 
ZZ4 13Z8 .55911g 1.8611g O!ZO 3.06mg Z0/35 (6. 1Z11g 15/33 1Z.Zmg 18/33) Fuji i ;gann, 71, 464·470;1980 
• 13Z8 .835Rlg 1.7711g O!ZO 3.06mg Z4/35 6.1Z.,g Z7!33 1Z.Zmg Z7!33 
b 13Z8 .98Z11g Z.1711g O!ZO 3.06mg Z1/35 6. 1Zmg Z7!33 1Z.Zmg Z5/33 42 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
e don wat l iv hpa 65w65 
d R don wat mye 65w65 
e R don wat •gl •ix 65w65 
f don wat tba •ix 65w65 
225 R • don wat for tu• 65w65 • + • 
a " don wat dgt 11ix 65w65 
b " don wat eso tu11 65w65 
e 11 don wat •Ye 65w65 
d " don wat l iv hpa 65w65 
e " don wat tba •ix 65w65 13.3•g * P<.0005 
19.9•g * P<.005 + 
11.9•g • 
1.93•g • 
.532•g z 
.532•g z 
1.44•g z 
9.17•g • 
no dre 
.541•g P<.3 
P<.002 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.005 + 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL jOOng •• : •• jug •.•• : •• jO ••.•• : •• jOO •••• : •• j•g •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
226 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 19.5•g P<.6 
a M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
P<.6 
p.1. b M f b6a or l tba "ix 76w76 evx 17. 3•g 
227 M • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a M • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre p.1. 
b M 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre p.1. 
228 M f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre p.1. 
M f b6e orl lun •ix 76w76 evx no dre p.1. 
b M f b6e or l tba tum 76w76 evx no dre p.1. 
P<.05 -
P<.2 
P<.009 -229 M 11 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 1 7 .2711g 
a M • b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 11.2•g 
b M " b6e orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 4.07Mg 
ANILAZINE 
230 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 24•25 
M b6e eat l iv MXB 24•25 
b M b6e eat l un MXB 24•25 
231 M m b6e eat TBA MXB 24m25 
a M " b6e eat l iv MXB 24•25 
b M 11 b6e eat l un MXB 24•25 
232 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
233 " f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 24m24 
ANILINE 
234 11 w ii wat for pH 80w80 
a R 11 wi1 wat ubl tu• 80w80 
ANILINE .Htl 
235 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 241125 
a M f b6e eat l iv MXB 24M25 
b M f b6e eat lun MXB 24m25 
236 M .. b6e eat TBA MXB 24•25 
a M • b6e eat l iv MXB 241125 
b M 11 b6e eat lun MXB 24•25 
237 R f f34 eat MXA MXA 24•25 
a R f f34 eat TBA MXB 24m25 
b f34 eat l iv MXB 24•25 
238 R M f34 eat MXB MXB 24M25 
a R " f34 eat MXA MXA 24•25 
b R "' f34 eat 1pl hes 241125 
e R " f34 eat MXA MXA 24M25 
d R " f34 eat 1pl MXA 24m25 
e R 11 f34 eat MXA MXA 24•25 
R " f34 eat adr MXA 24•25 
g R " f34 eat TBA MXB 241125 
h R " f34 eat l iv MXB 24M25 
O·ANISIDINE.HCl 
239 f b6e eat ubl MXA 24•24 
a b6e eat ubl tee 24•24 
b b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
e b6e eat l iv MXB 24m24 
d b6e eat lun MXB 24•24 
240 11 b6e eat ubl MXA 24•24 
a " b6e eat ubl tee 24•24 
b " b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
e " b6e eat l iv MXB 24m24 
d • b6e eat l un MXB 24•24 
241 f f34 eat ubl MXA 22•24 .. 
a f34 eat ubl tee 221124 as 
b f34 eat ubl tpp 221124 as 
e R f34 eat TBA MXB 22m24 .. 
d f34 eat l iv MXB 22•24 as 
242 R " f34 eat MXB MXB 22m24 as 
R 11 f34 eat ubl MXA 221124 as jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO •.••• : •• jOO •.•• : •• jmg •••• : •• jO •..•• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
:> '" ~.hg \ P<.02 -
P<.5 
P<.2 
p.1. :> 2.55g11 • 
1.69g• • 
no dre 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P• 1. 
1.05g• * P<.5 
246.mg * P<. 7 
no dre P•1. 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO •••.• : •• jOO •••• : •. j•g •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
.> 587 .•g * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
jOOng •• : •• jug •..• : •• jO •.••• : •. jOO •••• : •• j•g •••• : •• jO ••.•• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg .•••• : •. jO 
:+ :> 9.15gm * P<.6 
8.85gm * P<. 2 
no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
1. 74g• * P<.02 e 
no dre p.1. 
13.0gm * P<.4 
88.0•g * P<.0005 
146.11g * P<.0005e 
160.•g * P<.0005e 
263. Mg * P<. 0005e 
451.•g * P<.006 e 
572.llg * P<.002 e 
556.0lg * P<.05 
124.JOg * P<.005 
no dre p.1. 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j•g •••. : •• jO •.••• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
+: : + 1. OOg• P<. 0005e 
1 • 34g• I P<. 0005e 
21.1gm * P<1. 
+ no dre p.1. 
no dre 
935.11g 
1.62g• 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
27 .8•g 
29.1•g 
693.mg • 
37.0mg p.1. 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P<.002 
P<.0005 
no dre p.1. 
31.9mg I P<.0005 
31 • 9Mg I P<. 0005e CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 43 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
c 1328 7.01•g 37.2•g 0/20 3.06•g 0/35 6.1211g 5/33 12.211g 8/33 
d 1328 9.3511g 172.Mg 0/20 3.06•g 1/35 6.12•g 2/33 12.211g 6/33 
• 1328 3.8011g n.1.1 . 6/20 3.0611g 12/35 6.12•g 15/33 12.2•g 15/33 
f 1328 1.01•g 10.2 .. g 8/20 3.0611g 27/35 6.12•g 28/33 12.2•g 28/33 
225 1328 .367•g .84011g 0/14 2.1411g 29/35 4.29•g 27/35 (8.5711g 20/35) 
a 1328 . 36 7•g . 840•g 0/14 2.14•g 29/35 4.2911g 27/35 <8.57•g 22/35) 
b 1328 .926•g 3.19•g 0/14 2.14•g 13/35 4.29•g 18/35 (8.57•g 13/35) 
c 1328 4.9311g 69.611g 0/14 2.1411g 1/35 4.29•g 6/35 8.5711g 7/35 
d 1328 21. 7•g n.1.1. 0/14 2.1411g 5/35 4.29•g 0/35 8.5711g 0/35 
• 1328 .35911g 1.0311g 1/14 2.14•g 29/35 4.2911g 28/35 (8.57•g 26/35> 
ANHYOROGLUCOCHLORAL <alpha·chloralooe> 15879-93-3 
226 1297 2.8611g n.1.1. 1/17 3.89•g 2/16 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1297 6.85•g n.1.1. 0/17 3.89•g 0/16 
b 1297 2.41•g n.1.1. 2117 3.8911g 3/16 
227 1297 4. 75•g n.a.1. 2/18 3.6211g 1/18 
a 1297 7.17•g n.1.1. 1/18 3.6211g 0/18 
b 1297 3. 75•g n.1.1. 3/18 3.62•g 2118 
228 1297 7.2811g n.1.1. 0/16 3.8911g 0/17 
a 1297 7 .28•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.89•g 0/17 
b 1297 7 .28•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.8911g 0/17 
229 1297 2.19•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.62•g 3/18 
a 1297 2.7611g n.1.1. 0/16 3.6211g 2/18 
b 1297 1.54•g 89.3•g 0/16 3.6211g 5/18 
ANILAZINE 101-05·3 
230 c08684 47.6•g n.1.1. 4/25 62.011g 22/50 <124.•g 18/50) 
• c08684 628.llg n.1.1 . 0/25 62.011g 1/50 124.llg 1/50 liv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c08684 511.llg n.s.1. 0/25 62.011g 1/50 124.llg 2150 lun:a/a,a/c. 
231 c08684 224.llg n.1.1. 15/25 57. 711g 20/50 114.llg 25/50 
c08684 365.llg n.1.1. 9/25 57. 711g 6/50 114.llg 12150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c08684 391.llg n.1.1. 4/25 57. 7•g 7/50 114.llg 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
232 c08684 32.911g n.s.1. 22/25 25.011g 42/50 50.0•g 43/50 
• c08684 257.llg n.a.1 . 0/25 25.011g 1/50 50.0Mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
233 c08684 34.211g n.a.1. 12/25 20.0•g 26/50 40.011g 28/50 
c08684 n.1.1. n.a.1. 0/25 20.0llg 0/50 40.011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
ANILINE 62·53·3 
234 1460 144.llg n.1.1. 0/28 15.0•g 0/28 30.011g 1/28 60.0•g 1/28 Hag i war a; txl t ,6, 71-75; 1980 
1460 29.311g n.1.1. 0/28 15.011g 0/28 30.011g 0/28 60.0•g 0/28 
ANILINE.HCl 142-04·1 
235 c03736 1.61g11 n.1.1. 21/50 741.llg 22/50 1.50g11 28/49 
• c03736 3.27g11 n.1.1. 1/50 741.llg 5/50 1.50g• 5/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03736 n.1.1. n.s.1. 0/50 741.llg 0/50 1.50gll 0/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
236 c03736 2.45g• n.1.1. 24/50 693.llg 27/50 1.39g• 22150 
c03736 5. 78g• n.s.1. 12/50 693.•g 9/50 1.39gll 7/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03736 5.15g11 n.s.1. 4/50 693.•g 8/50 1.39g• 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
237 c03736 786.•g 248.g• 0/25 144.•g 1/50 286.•g 7/50 •ul:fbs,srn; spl:fbs,srn. 
a c03736 265.•g n.s.1. 17/25 144.Mg 32/50 286.llg 35/50 
b c03736 2.12g• n.s.1. 0/25 144.•g 0/50 286.Mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
238 c03736 64.211g 133.mg 0/25 115.mg 27/50 229.11g 38/50 bod:11en; riul:fbs,hes,srn; spl:fbs,hes,srn. 
c03736 99.9•g 277.llg 0/25 115.llg 19/50 229.llg 23/50 bod:"8n; 11ul :hes; spl :hes. 
b c03736 108.•g 344.llg 0/25 115.0lg 19/50 229.0lg 20/50 
c c03736 168.•g 565.llg 0/25 115.•g 11/50 229.•g 18/50 bod:Men; 11ul :fbs,srn; spl :fbs,srn. 
d c03736 251.llg 4.10g• 0/25 115.llg 7/50 229.llg 9/50 spl: fbs,srn. 
• c03736 312.•g 2.01g• 0/25 115.llg 4/50 229.•g 11/50 bod:11en; 11ul :fbs,srn. 
c03736 249.llg n.a.a. 2125 115.llg 6/50 229.llg 12/50 adr :phe,ph11. s 
g c03736 65.911g 1.25g11 10/25 115.•g 42150 229.llg 45/50 
h c03736 2.38g11 n.1.1. 1/25 115.Mg 0/50 229.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
O·ANISIDINE.HCl (NCI UHi CAS# 134·29·0) 134·29·2 
239 c03747 611.llg 1.81g11 0/55 319.llg 1/55 638.•g 22/55 ubl:tcc,tpp. 
c03747 771.•g 2.64g11 0/55 319.llg 0/55 638.•g 18/55 
b c03747 761.llg n.1.1. 34/55 319.11g 20/55 638.llg 33/55 
c c03747 4.37g11 n.s.a. 11/55 319.11g 1/55 638.•g 4/55 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c03747 4.67g11 n.1.1. 4/55 319.llg 2155 638.llg 1/55 lun:a/a,a/c . 
240 c03747 575.•g 1.67g• 0/55 297.llg 2/55 589.11g 22155 ubl :tcc,tpp. 
a c03747 888.•g 3.46g• 0/55 297.•g 0/55 589.llg 15/55 
b c03747 1.14g• n.1.1. 43/55 297.•g 27/55 589.•g 30/55 
c03747 1.08g11 n.1.1. 28/55 297.llg 13/55 (589.•g 7 /55) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c03747 824.•g n.1.1. 12155 297.•g 9/55 <589.•g 2155) lun:a/a,a/c. 
241 c03747 11.0llg 48.611g 0/55 248.•g 46/55 500.•g 50/55 ubl:tcc ,tpp. 
• c03747 11.211g 52.911g 0/55 248.•g 41/55 500.llg 50/55 
b c03747 208.•g 3.85g11 0/55 248.Mg 5/55 500.•g 0/55 
c c03747 21.011g 62.011g 52/55 248.•g 50/55 500.•g 51/55 
d c03747 n.1.1. n.1.1. 1/55 248.•g 0/55 500.llg 0/55 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
242 c03747 20.6•g 48.811g 0/55 198.•g 52155 400.•g 52/55 k/p: tee; thy: cyn, f ca, f cc ,pen ,pcy; tyf:pcn,pcy; ubl:tcc,tpp. 
c03747 20.611g 48.811g 0/55 198.llg 52155 400.llg 52155 ubl:tcc,tpp . 44 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b 
d 
e 
g m f34 eat ubL tee 22.,24 as 
m f34 eat thy MXA 22m24 as 
m f34 eat MXA MXA 220l24 as 
m f34 eat k/p tee 22m24 as 
m f34 aat TBA MXB 22m24 as 
"' f34 eat Liv MXB 220124 as 32. 7mg 
235.0lg 
535.0lg * 
1.04gm * 
30.9mg 
483.0lg * P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P<.002 e 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
p·ANIS ID !NE. HC L 100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
243 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 24m24 
M f b6e eat L iv MXB 24m24 
b M f b6e eat Lun MXB 24.,24 
244 M II b6e eat TBA MXB 240l24 
M " b6e eat Liv MXB 24•24 
b M " b6e eat L un MXB 24m24 
245 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
R f34 eat Liv MXB 24m24 
246 R m f34 eat pre MXA 24m24 
a R " f34 eat MXB MXB 241124 
b R m f34 eat Lun a/a 24m24 
m f34 eat ski sqe 24m24 
d R m f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 
e "' f34 eat Liv MXB 24m24 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 
24 7 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 18m24 
a M b6e eat Liv MXB 18•24 
b M b6e eat Lun MXB 180!24 
248 M "' b6e eat TBA MXB 18m24 
a M m b6e eat Liv MXB 18m24 
b M m b6e eat Lun MXB 18m24 
249 f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
a Rf f34 eat Liv MXB 18m24 
250 R " f34 aat TBA MXB 181124 
R ., f34 eat Liv MXB 18m24 
9, 10· ANTHRAQUI NONE 
251 f b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 evx 
b6a or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
252 "' b6a or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a "' b6a orL Lun ade 76w76 evx 
b m b6a orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
253 b6e orL Lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6e or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6e orL tba mix 76w76 evx 
254 " b6e or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6e orL Lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b " b6e orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE 
255 M b ed1 w&t Lun tu11 331133 e 
a M b ed1 wat Liv tu11 33m33 e 
b M b ed1 wat tba tu• 331133 e 
M b ed1 wat tba "'8 L 33m33 e 
AR AMITE 
256 f b6a or L L un ade 80w80 evx 
a b6a or L L iv hpt 80w80 evx 
b b6a orL tba 11ix 80w80 evx 
257 m b6a or L Liv hpt 77w77 evx 
a m b6a or L Lun ade 77w77 evx 
b 11 b6a orL tba •ix 77w77 evx 
258 
b 
259 
a 
b 
e 
260 b6e or L Liv hpt 77w77 evx 
b6e orL Lun ade 77w77 evx 
b6e or L tba mix 77w77 evx 
m b6e orL Liv mix 80w80 evx 
m b6e or L L iv hpt 80w80 evx 
11 b6e orL Lun 01ix 80w80 evx 
m b6e or L tba mix 80w80 evx 
b efn eat Liv hnd 24m24 
b cfn eat bil ade 24m24 :> :> no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
12.6gRI * P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
6.83g11 * P<.5 
493.Mg P<.02 
942. mg * P<. 05 
3.59gm * P<.06 
3. 72gm * P<.06 
no dre P•1. 
1 • 56g11 * P<. 03 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1mg .••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••••• : .• 10 
:> 
:> :> 68.4gm * 
26.4gm * 
80.7gOI * 
:> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .•.• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •••• : •. 1g ••••. : •• 10 
.> 847.mg 
. > no dre 
749.11g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
494.0lg 
no dre 
494.mg 
460.mg 
no dre 
460.0lg P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P•1 • 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.1 
P-1. 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P•1. 
P<.1 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• : •• 10lg •.•• : •. 10 •••.• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
. > no dre p.1 • 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1mg •.•. : •. 10 ..•.• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• + .> 432.11g P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.4 
. > 
.> 
+ no dre 
391.0lg 
15.9gm 
no dre 
no dre 
973.0lg 
973.0lg 
92. 7Rlg 
126.mg 
158.Rlg P<1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.003 
P<. 006 + 
no dre P-1. 
103.0lg P<.002 
a 
261 
262 
a 
263 b fds eat l iv mix 22m24 agrs 
osm eat l iv hem 27m27 .> + 61.80lg * P<.0005+ 
1.01gm * P<.05 
430.mg * P<.002 
256.mg P<.3 
a 
b os"' eat tba "ix 27m27 
osn1 eat l iv tum 24m24 e 
osm eat tba ben 24m24 a 
osm eat tba mal 24m24 e 
264 R 11 osOI eat Liv tum 27m27 
R m osm eat tba "'8 L 271127 
b R m osm eat tba mix 27m27 • > 
. > no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
31.5mg 
no dre 
no dre 
101.mg 
198.Rlg P-1 • 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
P<.1 
P<.6 RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
b 
c 
d 
g c03747 21.0mg 50.4mg 
c03747 98.9mg 595.mg 
c03747 191.mg 1.90gm 
c03747 304.mg 5.61gm 
c03747 20.311g 49.2mg 
c03747 148.mg 3.15gm 
p·ANISIOINE. HCl 20265 ·97 ·8 0/55 
0/55 
0/55 
0/55 
39/55 
0/55 
243 c03758 2. 32g11 n. s. s. 34/55 
c03758 4.69gm n.s.s. 11/55 
b c03758 5. 15g11 n. s. s. 4/55 
244 c03758 2.19gm n.s.s. 43/55 
a c03758 2. 78g11 n. s. s. 28/55 
b c03758 2.35gm n.s.s. 12155 
245 c03758 568.11g n. s.s. 52155 
c03758 1.41gm n.s.s. 1/55 
246 c03758 202 .mg n. s. s. 1 /55 
c03758 428.mg n.s.s. 1/55 
b c03758 1.09g11 n.s.s. 0/55 
c03758 1.12gm n.s.s. 0/55 
d c03758 424 • .,g n.s.s. 39/55 
e c03758 673.mg n.s.s. 0/55 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 118·92·3 
247 c01730 4.53g11 n.s.s. 
c01730 7 .83g11 n.s.s. 
b c01730 
248 c01730 
c01730 13.1gM n.s.s. 
1.48g11 n.s.s. 
1. 79g11 n.s.s. 
b c01730 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
249 c01730 361.0lg n.s.s. 
a c01730 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
250 c01730 867 .mg n.s.s. 
c01730 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
9, 10·ANTHRAQUINONE 
251 1229 124.llg 
a 1229 297 .Olg 
b 1229 104.mg 
252 1229 312.0lg 
1229 312.mg 
b 1229 312.mg 
253 1229 121.mg 
• 1229 316.11g 
b 1229 121.mg 
254 1229 113.mg 
1229 294.mg 
b 1229 113.llg 84-65-1 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 1/15 
0115 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
0/15 
10/15 
0/15 
6/15 
0/15 
1/17 
0/17 
2117 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 IDose 
198.mg 
198.mg 
198.mg 
198.mg 
198.mg 
198.mg 
638.mg 
638.mg 
638.mg 
589.mg 
589.mg 
589.mg 
146.mg 146.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
118.mg 
1.
73gm 
1.73gm 
1.73gm 
1.59gm 
1.59gm 
1.59g .. 
402 .mg 
402.mg 
318.mg 
318.mg 
169.mg 
169.mg 
169.mg 
157.mg 
157.mg 
157 .mg 
169.mg 
169.11g 
169.mg 
157 .mg 
157 .mg 
157 .mg 
ANTl"ONY POTASSIU" TARTRATE 28300-74·5 
255 1036 9.1211g n.s.s. 
a 1036 19.711g n.s.s. 
b 1036 6.8311g n.s.s. 
1036 9.91119 n.s.s. 
AR AMITE 
256 
a 
b 
257 
a 
b 
258 
a 
b 
259 
b 
260 
a 
261 
262 
8 
263 
• 
b 
264 
b 140·57·8 
40a 99.0119 
40a 305 .11g 
40a 85.9119 
40a 166.119 
40a 281.11g 
40e 145.11g 
40a 158.11g 
c:~ -1s8.mg 
40a 41.1mg 
40a 50. 7m~ 
1,0. 59.4mg 
40a 285.mg 
40a 43.611g 
42 38.4mg 
42 248.llg 
1133 202.mg 
21 41.7119 
21 16.1mg 
84a 24. 711g 
84a 5.40mg 
84a 13.011g 
21 62.6119 
21 24. 711g 
21 27.211g n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s .. s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.r..s. 
295.mg 
617.;-:; 
1.56g'1 
n.s.s. 
375.llg 
122.llg 
n.s.s. 
1.99gm 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s . 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. 
n.s.s. n.s.s. 15/71 
4/71 
24/71 
8/71 
1/17 
0/17 
2117 
1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
5/180 
0/180 
0!22 
0!30 
13/30 
1/30 
6!30 
6/30 
0!30 
0!30 
1/30 .877mg 
.877mg 
.877mg 
.877mg 
157.mg 157.mg 157.mg 146.mg 146.mg 146.mg 
157 
.mg 
157 .mg 
1:;7.mg 
1 ';: ... ~ 
146.mg 146.mg 
146.mg 
4. 50mg 
4.5011g 
22.5mg 
10.011g 10.0mg 
4.00mg 4.00mg 4.0011g 
8.
0011g 
8.00mg 
8.00mg CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
llnc 2Do::;e 
50/55 
7 /55 
4/55 
2/55 
53/55 
4/55 
33/55 
10/55 
5/55 
29/55 
22/55 
8/55 
38/55 
1/55 
8/55 
8/55 
0/55 
0/55 
36/55 
3/55 
5/35 
1/35 
0/35 
13/35 
6/35 
5/35 
19/35 
0/35 
14/35 
0/35 
2116 
0/16 
3/16 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
2117 
0/17 
2/17 
2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
10/76 
1/76 
18/76 
6/76 
3/16 
0/16 
4/16 
1/17 
0/17 
2117 
1/ 17 
1/17 
8/17 
1\/16 
5/16 
0/16 
7/16 
3!93 
0/93 
1/20 
1/30 
12130 
0!30 
8/30 
3/30 
0/30 
2130 
2/30 400.mg 
400.mg 
400.mg 
400.mg 
400.mg 
400.mg 
1.28gm 
1.28gm 
1.28gm 
1.18gm 
1.18gm 
1.18gll 
291.mg 
291.mg 
<233.mg 
233.mg 
233.mg 
233.mg 
233.mg 
233.mg 
3.45gm 
3.45g11 
3.45gm 
3.18gm 
3.18gm 
C3.18gm 
<804.mg 
804.mg 
643.mg 
643.mg 
9.00mg 9.00mg 
71.1mg 21nc 
51/55 
6/55 
4/55 
4/55 
53/55 
0/55 
24/55 
6/55 
3/55 
36/55 
23/55 
17/55 
42155 
3/55 
3/55) 
7 /55 
3/55 3/55 
31/55 
4/55 
5/35 
2135 
1/35 
6/35 
5/35 
0/35) 
11 /35) 
0/35 
11/35 
0/35 
10/90 
0!90 
2121 18.0mg 
18.0mg 
225.llg 22196 
2196 
6/20 Citation or Pathology 
Brki)· Corle 
thy: cyn, f ca, f cc, pcn,pcy. 
thy:fca; tyf:pcn,pcy. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
pre:adn,can. 
lun:a/a; pre:adn,can; ski :sqc. A 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Kani sawa; canr, 29 ,892-895; 1969 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Popper; cane, 13, 1035 -1046; 1960 
Oser; txap, 2, 441·457; 1960 
Deichmann; txap, 11,88·103;1967 
Radomski ;txap, 7,652-656; 1965 
Deichmann; txap, 11,88-103;1967 45 46 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
265 R • OH eet l ;y tuM 24•24 e 
e R • OH eat tbe ben 24•24 e 
b R M OH Ht tbe Hl 24•24 e 
266 R b sde eat li v hnd 24•24 
267 R b w;d Ht l ;y hnd 241124 
a R b w;d eat b; l ade 24•24 
b R b w;d Ht l ;v hpe 24•24 
AROCLOR 1254 
268 M " ba) Ht l ;y hpt 47w47 e 
269 M 11 ba) Ht l ;v hpt 26w47 e 
270 f f34 Ht l; v adn 24•24 a 
e f f34 Ht MXB MXB 24M24 
b R f34 eat sto aen 241124 
e R f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 a 
d R f34 eat l ;y MXB 241124 a 
271 R 11 f34 eat MXA 24•24 
• R " f34 Ht ..• Leu 24•24 
b R 11 f34 eat MXB MXB 24•24 
e 
d 
• 
f 01 f34 Ht l; v MXA 241124 
11 f34 Ht MXA MXA 24•24 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
11 f34 eat li v MXB 24•24 
AROCLOR 1260 
272 R f she eat l ;v .,;x 89w95 e 
a R she eat l ;v nnd 89w95 e 
b R she eat l ;v hpe 89w95 e 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 
273 b OH eat tba 1181 241124 I 
ARSENIOUS OXIDE 
274 M b ebl wat l ;v tu11 23•23 sv 
a M b ebl wet tba 1dx 231123 sv 
275 M 11 ua wat sbg pH 24•24 
276 M f aw; wat lun ede 65w65 e 
a M sw; wet l ;v hpt 65w65 e 
277 M 11 aw; wet lun ade 65w65 • 
M • aw; wet l ;y hpt 65w65 e 
ARSENITE, SODIUM 
278 M b ed1 wet lun 1dx 241124 e 
a M b ed1 wet l ;v 11h 24•24 e 
b M b ed1 wet tba Hl 24•24 e 
e M b ed1 wet tbe •h 24•24 • 
d M b ed1 wet tbe ben 24•24 e 
279 b leb wet l ;v tu11 391139 e 
• R b leb wet tbe 11el 391139 e 
b R 
b leb wat tbe tu11 39.,39 e 
280 R b OH eat tbe Hl 24•24 s 
e b oH eat tbe 11h 241124 • . > 
.> no dre 
64. 7•g 
no dre 
760.llg 
79.90lg 
397.llg P-1 . 
P<.3 
P•1. 
* P<.3 
Z P<.0005+ 
* P<.002 + 
+historical * P<.04 + 
100ng .• :. -1ug ..•. : •. 10 •.•.• : .• 100 .•.• : •. 111g •..• : .• 10 •..•. :. -100 ..•• : .• 1g ••.•. : .. 10 
+ (+) 9.5811g P<.0005+ 
( .>) 64.611g P<.2 
s +historical * P<.07 a 
21.711g * P<.2 
+historical P•1. a 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
5.9411g * P<.004 
6. 75•g • P<.009 
10.4•g * P<.004 
+hhtor;eel * P<.008 • 
+historical * P<.3 
3. 23•g * P<. 004 
20.811g * P<.03 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •.•• : .• 10 •..•. : •. 100 .•.• :. ·1•g .•.• : •. 10 .•.•• : .• 100 •••• : .• 1g .•... : .• 10 
.+ • 1.0411g 
1.76mg 
18.311g 
100ng .• : •• 1ug •.•• : .• 10 .•.•. : .. 100 ..•• :. -1•g •••. : .• 10 ....• : •. 100 •.•. : .• 1g .•... : .. 10 
• > no dre 
no dre 
100ng .• : .• 1ug •..• : .• 10 ••.•. : .. 100 .... :. ·1•g .•.. : .. 10 .•..• : •. 100 •.•. : .• 1g .•.• •: .• 10 
.> 
.> • > no dre 
no dre 
54.8•g 
215.•g 
no dre 
31.411g 
no dre 
100ng •. : •• 1ug ••.. : •. 10 .••.• : .. 100 •... : •. 111g ••.• : .• 10 ••.•. : .. 100 ..•• : .. 1g •.•.. : •. 10 
• > 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
10.611g 
no dre 
no dre 
626.llg P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P•1 . 
P•1. 
p.1 . 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.9 
P•1. 
P<.06 
P• 1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
ASPARTA ME 100ng •• : •• 1ug .••. : •. 10 •.•.• : •. 100 •••. :. ·1•g •..• : .• 10 •..•. : .• 100. • ·.: · ·1g. · • • ·: · ·10 
281 R f sls eet bre tu• 52w52 ekr .> no dre P· 1. 
282 R 1!1 eat bre •;x 241124 er .> no dre P•1. 
283 R •ala eat bra tu11 52w52 ekr .> no dre P•1. 
284 R 11 als eat bra 11h 24•24 er .> 7 .43g11 • P<.5 
ASPIRIN 
285 M f cb6 eat l ;y tu11 77w77 e 
286 M " eb6 eat l ;y tu• 77w77 e 100ng •• : .• 1ug .••. : •• 10 •••.• : .• 100 •.•. :. ·1•g •.•• : •. 10 •.... : .• 100 ••.• : •. 1g •. · .• : •. 10 
.> no dre 
.> no dre 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug .••• : •. 10 ..•.• : .• 100 •.•. : .• 111g •.•• : .• 10 •.••. :. ·100. · • ·: • .1g. · • • ·: · ·10 P-1. 
P-1. 
287 f b6e Ht TBA MXB 78w94 :> no dre P• 1. 
e b6e eet l ;v MXB 78w94 18.0g• * P<.4 
b b6e eat lun MXB 78w94 no dre P•1. 
288 " b6e eat TBA MXB 78w94 :> 3.01g• • P<.3 
e m b6e eat l iv MXB 78w94 44.5g• * P<.9 
b II b6c Ht lun MXB 78w94 3.68gM • P<.07 
289 f eb6 eat l iv hnd 77w77 e .> 8. 76gM P<.3 
e eb6 eat l ;y hpc 77w77 e no dre P• 1. 
290 11 eb6 eat l ;v hnd 77w77 e .> 9.54g11 P<.3 
e " eb6 eat l ;y hpe 77w77 e no dre P• 1. 
291 f f34 Ht TBA MXB 18•25 :> no dre P• 1. 
e f f34 eat l ;v MXB 181125 3.05g11 * P<.07 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose 1 Inc 2Do!'e 
265 
a 
b 
266 
267 
b 84a 19.811g n.1.1. 
84a 10.5•g n.1.s. 
84a 10.6•g n.a.a. 
42 187 ... g n. a.•. 
42 48.211g 155.llg 
42 151 .Ilg 1.86g• 
42 246.11g n.s.a. 0/30 0/30 
3/30 
0182 
21193 
0/193 
0/193 3.2011g 
3.20•g 
3.2011g 
4.5011g 
4.50•g 
4.5011g 
4.5011g 0130 
1 /30 
2/30 
0/46 
2193 
0/93 
0193 9.00mg 
9.0011g 
9.0011g 
9.0011g 
AROCLOR 1254 CPCBl 27323· 18·8 
268 1029 4.4611g 
10.51"g 
10.511g 
8.23•g 
15.2•g 
4.250lg 26.3•g 
269 1029 n.s.s. 
n.1.1. 
n.1.s. 
n.1.s. 
n.s.a. 270 c02664 
a c02664 
b c02664 
d 
271 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e c02664 c02664 
n.1.1. n.a.1. 
c02664 2. 78•g 52. 3•g 
c02664 3.01•g 275.•g 
c02664 4. 19•g 36.4•g 
c02664 5.2111g 338.11g 
c02664 8.4011g n.a.s. 
c02664 1. 60•g 23. 4•g 
c02664 6. 29•g n. 1. •. 0/58 
0/58 
0/24 
0/24 
0/24 
11/24 
0/24 
3/24 
3/24 
0/24 
0/24 
0/24 
7/24 
0/24 36.011g 
19.60lg 1.3011g 
1.3011g 
1.30•g 
1 .30•g 
1.300lg 
1 .OO•g 
1.00 .. g 
1.00•g 
1 .0011g 
1.00•g 
1.00•g 
1.000lg 9122 
1/24 
0/24 2.5011g 
1/24 2.5011g 
1/24 2.5011g 
18/24 2. 5011g 
0/24 2. 5011g 
2124 2 .0011g 
2124 2 .OOmg 
0/24 2.00mg 
0/24 2.00•g 
0/24 2.0011g 
7/24 2.00mg 
0/24 2.0011g 
AROCLOR 1260 (PCB) 11096·82·5 
272 1320 
a 1320 
b 1320 .80411g 1 .35•g 
1.390lg 2.24•g 
11.3•g 34.3•g 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 7631·89·2 0/173 4.69•g 170/184 
0/173 4.690lg 144/184 
1/173 4.69"1g 26/184 2Inc 
1 /41 
3/100 
0/100 0/100 18.0mg 
18.011g 18.011g 
18.0•g 
1/24 5.0011g 
2124 5.00•g 
1/24 5.0011g 
13/24 5.00•g 
0/24 5.0011g 
5/24 4.0011g 
5/24 4.00•g 
3/24 4.000lg 
1/24 4.0011g 
2124 4.00•g 
12124 4.0011g 
1/24 4.00•g 1/92 
20/90 
5/90 
2/90 
2124 
2124 
0/24 
12124 
0/24 
9/24 
8/24 
3/24 
3/24 
0/24 
13/24 
2124 Citation or Pathology 
Brkl;· Corle 
Rado11sk i ;txap, 7,652·656;1965 
Popper; cane, 13, 1035·1046;1960 
K i11brough ; j nc i, 53, 547·549;1974 
liv:adn; sto:1cn. A 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
---:leu,ly•. 
cec:acn; jej :acn; l iv:adn,hpc; sto:acn. A 
l iv:adn,hpc . 
cec:acn; jej :acn; sto:acn. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Ki 11brough; j nc i, 55, 1453-1456; 1975 
273 1507 116.0lg n.1.1. 8/50 1.4111g 14/50 2.8111g 8/50 5.6311g 10/50 11.311g 6/50 18.0•g 5/50 Byron; 
txap, 10, 132· 147; 1967 
1507 121.11g n.1.1. 17/50 1.41•g 21/50 2.8111g 15/50 5.63"1g 16/50 11.311g 13/50 18.0•g 6/50 
ARSENIOUS OXIDE 1327·53 ·3 
274 1505 39.4•g n.1.a. 0/50 
1/50 
1/50 a 1505 39.4•g n.a.a. 
275 1506 12.111g n.1.s. 
276 1509 8.5211g n.1.s. 
1509 24.211g n.s.s. 341137 
4/137 
18/133 
21133 277 1509 11 . 40lg n. I. I. 
1509 80.5•g n.1.1. 
ARSENITE, SODIUM 
278 1512 14.2•g 
a 1512 14.60lg 
b 1512 7.97•g 
c 1512 10.911g 
d 1512 14.5•g 
279 1036 3.350lg 
1036 8.080lg 
b 1036 2.9011g 
280 1507 13.80lg 7784·46·5 
n.1.1. 26/170 
n.1.1. 7/170 
n.1.1. 15/170 
n.1.1. 55/170 
n.1.1. 29/170 
n.1.1. 1/82 
n.1.1. 9/82 
n.1.1. 31/82 
n.1.1. 8/50 4.1311g 
4.1311g 
3.3311g 
20.011g 
20.0"1g 
16.70lg 
16. 7•g 
.87711g 
.877•g 
.877•g 
.877•g 
.87711g 
.265•g 
.265•g 
.265•g 
. 703•g 0/50 0/50 
3/50 
4/15 
0/15 
15/60 
0/60 
3/103 
1/103 
6/103 
11/103 
3/103 
5/91 
3/91 
25/91 
8/50 1 .41"1g 9/50 2.81•g 15/50 5.63"1g Huepar ;aenh, 5,445·462; 1962 
Sanderson ;becc ,39 ,628 ·629; 1961 
Baroni ;aenh, 7,668·674; 1963/Shubik 1962 
Kani aawa; canr, 27, 1192·1195; 1967 
Kani saw a; canr, 29 ,892 · 895; 1969 
7/50 C11.311g 1/50> Byron; 
txap, 10, 132· 147; 1967 
1507 60.211g n.1.1. 16/50 .703•g 14/50 1.4111g 15/50 2.8111g 18/50 5.6311g 15/50 11.311g 6/50 
ASPARTAME 22839·47·0 
281 132711 23.611g n.1.1. 
282 1327n 2.29g11 n.1.a. 
283 132711 18.811g n.1.1. 
284 1327n 1.41g11 n.1.a. 
ASPIRIN 50· 78·2 
285 1028 1. 77g11 n.1.1. 
286 1028 1. 94g• n. 1. s. 0/16 
1/60 
0/16 
0/59 
0136 
0/35 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, ANO CAFFEINE 
287 c02697 2.92g11 n.1.1. 20/50 
a c02697 4.46g• n.1.1. 1/50 
b c02697 3.65g11 n.1.1. 4/50 
288 c02697 975.11g n.a.1. 17/50 
a c02697 2.35g11 n.1.1. 7/50 
b c02697 1 .46g• n.1.1. 6/50 
289 1028 1 .43g11 n.1.1. 0/36 
1028 2.67g11 n.1.1. 0/36 
290 1028 1.55g11 n.1.1. 0/35 
a 1028 2.91g11 n.1.1. 0/35 
291 c02697 222.11g n.1.1. 42/50 
a c02697 1. 32g11 n. 1. 1. 0/50 50.0•g 
50.0•g 
40.0•g 40.0•g 0/16 100.0lg 
0/60 100.0lg 
0/16 80.0•g 
1/59 80.0•g 
382.llg 
382.0lg 0/41 
0/45 
CAPC> 8003·03 ·0 
755 .Ilg 17 /50 
755 .Ilg 2/50 
755.0lg 7/50 
697 ... g 24/50 
697.llg 11/50 
697.•g 9/50 
696.11g 1/34 
696.0lg 0/34 
696.•g 1/37 
696.0lg 0/37 1 .51g"1 
1.51g11 1.51g11 1.39g11 
1.39gll 
1.39g• 0/16 
2160 
0/16 
0/60 
14/50 
3/50 
4/50 
21/50 
6/50 
12150 
245.llg 41/50 
245.0lg 4/50 (485.0lg 32/49) 
485.llg 3/49 200 ... g 
200.11g 
160.0lg 
160.llg 0/16 
0160 
0/16 
1/60 lshi i ;txl t, 7,433·437; 1981 
Mack l in;dact, 3, 135 · 163; 1980 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
Mack l in ;dact ,3, 135·163;1980 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 47 48 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Note~ DR AuOp 
292 m f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 
m f34 eat l iv MXB 18m25 :> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
ATRAZINE _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
293 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
294 M m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
295 M b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b M b6c orl tba 01ix 76w76 evx 
296 M m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M m b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b M m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
ATROPINE 
297 R f sda ipj tba mal 24m24 e 
298 m sda ipj liv hae 24m24 e 
R m sda ipj tba mal 24m24 e 
AURAMINE ·O 
299 M f alb eat l iv hpt 52w79 e 
300 M m alb eat l iv hpt 52w84 e 
301 M cba eat liv hpt 52w99 e 
302 M m cbe eat l iv hpt 52w79 e 
303 m wsw eat l iv hpt 20m29 e 
5 • AZACYTID INE* 
304 f b6c ipj MXA MXA 52w81 
b 
d 
305 
a 
b 
306 
307 b6c ipj mul MXA 52w81 
b6c ipj lym 52w81 
b6c ipj TBA MXB 52w81 
b6c ipj l iv MXB 52w81 
b6c ipj lun MXB 52w81 
m b6c ipj TBA MXB 52w81 s 
m b6c ipj l iv MXB 52w81 s 
m b6c ipj lun MXB 52w81 s 
sda ipj TBA MXB 34w80 s 
sda ipj l iv MXB 34w80 s 
m sda i p j TBA MXB 34w80 s 
m sde i p j l iv MXB 34w80 s 
AZASERINE 
308 b wis ipj pae car 26w78 e 
b wis ipj kid tum 26w78 e 
b b wis ipj liv tum 26w78 e 
AZIDE, SODIUM 
309 R f cdr eat mg l tum 18m24 e 
cdr eat pit era 18m24 e 
310 m cdr eat pit era 18m24 e 
AZ I NPHOSMETHYL 
311 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 
M b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 80w92 
312 Mm b6c eat Liv hpc 80w92 
a M m b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 
b M 
m b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 
M m b6c eat lun MXB 80w92 
313 osm eat TBA MXB 19m27 
osm eat l iv MXB i9m27 
314 osm eat pit acn 19m25 
a osm eat thy MXA 19m25 
b osm eat adr coa 19m25 
315 m osm eat pni MXA 19m27 
m osm eat TBA MXB 19m27 v 
b m osm eat l iv MXB 19m27 v 
316 m osm eat pit MXA 19m25 v 
m osm eat pit era 19m25 ·1 
b m osm eat thy MXA 19m25 v 
m osm eat thy 19m25 v 
d m osm eat thy MXA 19m25 v 
e m osm eat adr MXA 19m25 v 
m osm eat pit MXA 19m25 v 
g m osm eat l iv hpa 19m25 v 
h m osm eat pni MXA 19m25 v 
m osm eat adr acn 19m25 v • > 
.> 
. > 
.. no dre 
no dre 
58.8mg 
28.2mg 
no dre 
54.6mg 
no dre 
no dre 
71.0mg 
15.0mg 
no dre 
9.29mg p.1 • 
p.1. 
P<. 7 
P<.4 
p.1. 
P<. 7 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.02 
P-1. 
P<.004 -
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!Olg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
.> 90. 7mg 
. > no dre 
no dre P<1. 
p.1 • 
P=1. 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• ,100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
± 94.3mg 
39.2mg 
67. 7mg 
77 .5mg 
11.0mg P<.08 
P<.008 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<. 0005+ 
.!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
:> • 256mg * P<. 0005a 
• 520mg * P<. 008 a 
.615mg * P<.03 
.219mg * P<.003 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
1.05mg * P<.2 
15. 7mg * P<.9 
61 • 4mg * P<1. 
• 487mg P<. 09 
no dre P-1. 
• 328mg * P<. 004 
no dre p.1. 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
• 793mg 
• 942mg 
3.02mg P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.03 
_!COng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
3.01mg P<.003 
16.1mg * P<.5 
.> no dre P· 1. 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
:> 
pool 
pool :> 2.58gm P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
118.mg * P<.3 
+ a14.3mg * P<.007 
.. 46.6mg * P<.8 
12.6mg * P<.2 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
164.mg P<.9 
#6. 93mg \ P<. 0005-
15. 9mg * P<.004 
16.4mg * P<.02 
22.9mg * P<.04 
5.42mg * P<.3 
52. 7mg * P<.6 
3. 99mg \ P<. 008 
3. 99mg P<. 008 
6. 06mg * P<. 0005a 
7. 87mg * P<. 003 
10.5mg * P<.006 a 
15.3mg * P<.006 
7 .43mg * P<.02 
23.3mg * P<.02 
30.6mg * P<.03 
44.3mg * P<.02 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefN um LoConf U pConf Cntrl 1Dose line 2Dose ~Inc 
292 c02697 406. Mg n. s. s. 
c02697 2. 75gm n. s. s. 
ATRAZINE 1912·24 ·9 
293 1244 12.4mg n.s.s. 
1244 20. 7Mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 7.41mg n.s.s. 
294 1244 5.90mg n.s.s. 
a 1244 20.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 6.40mg n.s.s. 
295 1244 22.0mg n.s.s. 
1244 22.0mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 11.601g n.s.s. 
296 1244 5.160lg n.s.s. 
a 1244 20.4mg n.s.s. 
b 1244 3. 75Mg 56.8mg 
ATROPINE 51·55·8 
297 1134 2.23mg n.s.s. 
298 1134 5.30mg n.s.s. 
a 1134 5.30mg n.s.s. 
AURAHINE ·O 2465·27·2 
299 45 28.2mg n.s.s. 
12.8mg 860.mg 
45 30. 5mg 197 .mg 
45 30.3mg 666.mg 
45 4.06mg 31.2mg 300 45 
301 
302 
303 
5·AZACYTIDINE* 320·67·2 
304 c01569 .138mg .716mg 
c01569 .243mg 6.56mg 
b c01569 .249mg n.s.s. 
c01569 .11201g 1.35mg 
d c01569 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
e c01569 1.65mg n.s.s. 
305 c01569 .360Mg n.s.s. 
c01569 
b c01569 
306 c01569 .919mg n.s.s. 
1.36Mg n.s.s. 
.164mg n.s.s. 
a c01569 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
307 c01569 .156mg 2.32mg 
a c01569 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
AZASERINE 
308 1172 
a 1172 
b 1172 115·02·6 
. 342mg 2. 54mg 
.38401g 3.38mg 
.7420\g n.s.s. 
AZIDE, SODIUM 26628·22·8 
309 1112 1.45mg 19.1mg 
1112 3.92Mg n.s.s. 
310 1112 13.5mg n.s.s. 
AZINPHOSHETHYL <Gusathionl 
311 c00066 18.2mg n.s.s. 
a c00066 96.3Mg n.s.s. 
b c00066 40.6mg n.s.s. 
312 cOOD66 7 .82.,g 169.0lg 
a c00066 4.69mg n.s.s. 
b c00066 5. 1801g n. s. s. 
c00066 16.8mg n.s.s. 
313 c00066 2.5801g n.s.s. 
a c00066 12.00lg n.s.s. 
314 c00066 3.140lg 20.4mg 
c00066 7 .2001g 123.0lg 
b c00066 6. 72mg n.s.s. 
315 c00066 9.810\g n.s.s. 
a c00066 1.68mg n.s.s. 
b c00066 10.501g n.s.s. 
316 c00066 1. 77mg 90.00lg 
c00066 1. 77.,g 90. O"g 
b C00066 3.69Mg 11.00\g 
c c00066 3. 980lg 44. OOlg 
d c00066 4.92mg 143.0lg 
e c00066 6. 93.,g 183. "g 
c00066 3. 3201g n. s. s. 
g c00066 9.6301g n.a.s. 
h c00066 11.30lg n.s.s. 
c00066 15.3mg n.s.s. 30/50 
5/50 196.mg 37/50 388.mg 33/50 
196.mg 4/50 388.mg 1/50 
1/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
3/33 
1/36 
1/36 
0/6 
0/7 
3/41 
1/14 
0/12 
0/14 
0/14 
0/14 
2/14 
0/14 
2/14 
2/16 
1/16 1/16 
7 /15 
0/15 
1/15 
0/15 
0/76 
0/76 
0/76 
3/16 
6/16 
3/16 
86·50·0 11.1mg 
11.1mg 
11.1mg 
10.30\g 10.3mg 
10.3mg 
11.1mg 
11.1mg 
11.1mg 
10.3mg 
10.3mg 
10.3mg 
.857mg 
.857mg 
.857mg 
85.0mg 
74.3mg 
136.mg 
157 .mg 
27. 7mg 
. 610mg 
.610mg 
.610Mg 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.610mg 
.600mg .600mg 
. 600mg 
.470mg .470mg 
.470mg 
.470mg 
.475mg 
.475mg 
.475Mg 
3. 75mg 
3. 75mg 
3.00mg 
5/10 7.020lg 
1/10 7 .02mg 
0/10 7.020\g 
0/10 3.240lg 
4/10 3.24mg 
2/10 3.24mg 
2/10 3.24mg 
7/10 2.170lg 
2/10 2.170\g 
0/105p 2.170\g 
1/105p 2.17mg 
5/105p 2.17mg 
0/10 2.180\g 
7/10 2.180\g 
1/10 2.18mg 
15/105p 2.180\g 
15/105p 2.180lg 
0/105p 2.18mg 
8/105p 2.180lg 
7/105p 2.180lg 
4/105p 2 .180lg 
20/105p 2.18mg 
1/105p 2.180lg 
2/105p 2.18mg 
0/105p 2.180lg 1/17 
0/17 
3/17 
4/18 
0/18 
4/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 
4/18 
0/18 
6/18 
3/31 
0/30 
0/30 
3/10 
4/7 
11 /15 
7/12 
11/12 
17/35 
10/35 
7/35 
22/35 
0/35 0/35 
6/35 
1/35 
0/35 
15/35 
0/35 
11 /35 
0/35 
7/34 
6/34 
2/34 1.60mg 1.60mg 
1.60mg 
1.60mg 
1.
60mg 
1.60Mg 
1. 20Mg 
1.20mg 
1.20mg 
1.68mg 
1.68Mg 
1.72mg 1.72mg 
17/26 (7.50mg 
19/26 7.50mg 
6/26 6.00mg 
10/50 14.30lg 
0/50 14.30lg 
1/50 14.30\g 
3/50 6.48Mg 
23/50 6. 48Mg 
11/50 6.480\g 
8/50 6.480lg 
37/49 4.34Mg 
2/49 4.340lg 
8/49 (4.340lg 
6/49 4.34mg 
4/49 4.34Mg 
1/50 4.35mg 
40/50 4.35mg 
3/50 4.350lg 
21/50 <4.35mg 
21/50 (4.35mg 
10/50 4.350\g 
14/50 4.350\g 
10/50 4.35mg 
4/50 4.35mg 
21/50 4.35mg 
3/50 4.35mg 
1/50 4.350\g 
1/50 4.35Mg 0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
1/35 
0/35 
0/35 
5/35 
1/35 
1 /35 
3/35 
0/35 
1/35 
0/35 
10/26) 
14/26 
3/26 
17/50 
1/50 
3/50 
12/50 
23/50 
19/50 
4/50 
26/50 
5/50 
1/50) 
4/50 
8/50 
6/50 
41/50 
5/50 
15/50) 
13/50) 
13/50 
14/50 
12/50 
10/50 
20/50 
5/50 
6/50 
3/50 Citation or Pathology 
Brki;' Code 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Schmahl ;zkko,86, 77·84;1976 
Willi ams;bj ca, 16,87·91;1962 
---:Lym; mul:grl,gsa . 
tnul :grl ,gsa. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
Longnecker; cane, 47, 1562·1572;1981 
Wei sburger; j nc i ,67, 75-88; 1981 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a ,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
thy:adn ,cyn. 
pni: isa, isc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
pit:cra,crc. 
thy: acn, cyn, pen. 
thy: adn, cyn, f ca. 
adr:acn,coa. 
pit: adn, era, ere, cyn. 
pni:isa,isc. 49 
s 50 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
AZOBENZENE 
317 f b6c Ht TBA MXB 241124 v 
a b6c Ht l iv MXB 241124 y 
b b6c Ht lun MXB 24Rl24 v 
318 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 avx 
319 M b6c Ht TBA MXB 241124 
a 
b 
320 
a 
b 
321 
a 
b 
322 
a 
b 
323 
b 
c 
d 
e 
324 
a 
b 
d 
• • b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
11 b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
" b6c orl l iv mix 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
" b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
11 b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
f f34 Ht MXA MXA 241124 
f34 Ht MXB MXB 241124 
f34 Ht spl Olt 24•24 
f34 eat apl fba 24•24 
f34 Ht TBA MXB 241124 
f34 Ht l iv MXB 241124 
11 f34 Ht MXA MXA 24•24 a 
"' f34 Ht MXB MXB 24•24 a 
• f34 eat •u l fba 241124 a 
11 f34 Ht spl fbs 241124 a 
11 f34 Ht TBA MXB 241124 a 
"' f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 a 
BARIU ACETATE 
325 f cd1 wat • • • l km 271127 1 
a cd1 wat lun tu11 27M27 1 
b cd1 wat tba 11al 27•27 • 
c cd1 wat tba 11ix 271127 e 
326 • cd1 wat lun tu• 271127 e 
11 cd1 wat tba 11ix 271127 e 
b 11 cd1 wat tba 11al 271127 e 
327 f leb wat tba 11ix 371137 1 
a leb wat tba 11al 371137 a 
328 • leb wat tba •ix 371137 e 
11 leb wat tba 11al 37m37 e 
BENZENE 
329 
330 
a 
b 
331 
a 
b 
d 
332 
a 
b 
333 11 aka inh · •• •Ly 72w72 e 
11 c56 inh th• l y11 69w69 
11 c56 inh 
11 c56 inh lcl 69w69 
sda gav zyM car 12M33 e 
ada gav ak i car 121133 e 
ada gav 11gl car 121133 e 
ada gav l iv hpt 121133 e 
ada gav l eu 121133 e 
m ada gav 11aR1 fib 12Rl33 e 
11 sda gav Leu 12•33 e 
11 sda gav l iv hpt 12•33 e 
"' ada gav sub ang 12•33 e 
m sda gav zym car 121133 e 
"' ada inh l iv tu• 98w98 
"' sda i nh tba tu• 98w98 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111; •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
47.311g 
no dre 
47.311g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
3.8511g 
4.54•g 
no dre 
3.8511g 
39.311g 
no dre 
343.llg 
44.1•g 
no dre 
no dre 
32.311g • 
32.3•g • 
90.511g • 
102.llg • 
51 .511g • 
276.llg • 
19.211g 
19.211g 
43.9Rlg p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.6 
P·1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.008 c 
P<.02 c 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
44.411g P<.004 c 
11.411g P<.0005 
122.Rlg * P<.07 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> .. 4.2811g 
.> no dre 
7 .2111g 
no dre 
no dre 
14.611g 
5.9811g 
no dre 
no dre 
2.8711g 
2.8711g P<.05 -
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.8 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.4 
P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
.> 114.•g P<.3 
P<.004 + 
.> .+historical 
+historical P<.04 + 
+historical P<.2 
+historical • P<.0005+ 
+historical * P<.06 + 
545.mg * P<.2 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P·1. 
77. 511g \ P<. 007 
697.IOg * P<.009 + 
+historical * P<.2 + 
+historical • P<.2 + 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZ I DE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.. : .• 111g •.•• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
334 M f swi gav liv let 50w60 ev 
M f aw i gav l un tu11 50w60 ev 
BENZIDINE 
335 R b alb inh 11yl 20•28 e 
b alb inh 11gl car 201128 1 
b alb inh l iv hpt 201128 1 
R b alb inh tba 11ix 20•28 e 
BENZO(a)PYRENE 
336 M f alb eat for palO 60w60 er 
337 M m cf1 wat eso pH 95w95 
a M 11 cf 1 wat for pa11 95w95 
b M • cf 1 wat Ho car 95w95 .. 46.60lg 
46.611g 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.. 2.0811g 
5.51Rlg 
11.2mg 
1.7311g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : .. 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••.•. : •• 10 
.. 1.8611g 
11.0llg 
12.411g 119.
0lg P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.02 + 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.1 
P<.05 
P<.0005+ 
P<.03 
P<.3 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 51 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathol og~· 
Brkl;' Corle 
AZOBENZENE 103.33.3 
317 c02926 78.411g n.a.a. 9/20 27 .011g 20/50 70.8mg 12/50 
a c02926 247 .Mg n.a. 1. 0/20 27.011g 2/50 70.811g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02926 232.11g n.a.a. 2/20 27.0llg 2/50 70.811g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
318 1104 7.7011g n.1.1. 0/16 7.8411g 1/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1104 14.7•g n.1.1. 0/16 7.8411g 0/17 
b 1104 7 • 70Mg n.1.1. 0/16 7.840lg 1/17 
319 c02926 34.611g n.1.1. 13/20 24.0llg 25/50 (48.011g 20/50> 
a c02926 43.611g n.1.1. 8/20 24.011g 16/50 (48.011g 2/50) l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c02926 287.llg n.1.1. 2/20 24.011g 4/50 48.011g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
320 1104 1.78•g 11.111g 0/16 7.3011g 9/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1104 2.02•g 14.9•g 0/16 7.3011g 8/18 
b 1104 14.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 7.30mg 0/18 
c 1104 1.78•g 11.1•g 0/16 7.3011g 9/18 
321 1104 5.7611g n.1.1. 1/17 7.8411g 2/16 
a 1104 13.8•g n.1.1. 0/17 7.8411g 0/16 
b 1104 6.39•g n.1.1. 2/17 7.8411g 2/16 
322 1104 6.12•g n.1.1. 1/18 7.3011g 2/18 
a 1104 9.58•g n.1.1. 2/18 7 .30•g 1/18 
b 1104 5. 74•g n ••••• 3/18 7.30mg 3/18 
323 c02926 19.8•g 69.9Mg 0/20 10.0IOg 5/50 20.011g 19/50 J8J :srn; 1nul :sar; spc:fbs; spl :hp11,ost,sar. 
a c02926 19.8•g 69.9•g 0/20 10.011g 5/50 20.011g 19/50 jej:srn; inul:sar; spc:fbs ; spl:fbs,hpin,ost ,sar. 
b c02926 42. 711g 1.39g11 0/20 10.011g 1/50 20.011g 8/50 
c c02926 46.2•g n.a.a. 0/20 10.0•g 1/50 20.011g 7/50 
d c02926 13.011g n.a.a. 10/20 10.011g 32/50 20.0•g 33/50 
• c02926 83.5Mg n.a.a. 0/20 10.011g 1/50 20.011g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
324 c02926 11.4•g 39.1•g 0/20 8.0011g 6/50 16.011g 16/50 abc:hes; l iv:hes; 1ney:srn; 1tul :lftsm; spl :npm,sar. 
a c02926 11.4•g 39.111g 0/20 8.0011g 6/50 16.011g 16/50 abc:hes; liv:hes; 11ey:srn; inul:,..s11; spl:fbs,np11,sar . 
b c02926 22.910g 110.•g 0/20 8.0011g 0/50 16.011g 13/50 
c c02926 20.810g 121.•g 0/20 8.0011g 2/50 16.011g 7/50 
d c02926 6.61•g 37.1•g 10/20 8.0011g 19/50 16.011g 43/50 • c02926 41.4•g n.a.a. 0/20 8.00•g 1/50 16.011g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
BARIUM ACETATE 543·80·6 
325 1395 1.34•g n.a.a. 3/47 1.00•g 5/21 Schroeder; j nut, 105 ,452·458;1975 
a 1395 2.6310g n.a.a. 9/47 1.0011g 3/21 
b 1395 1.65•g n.a.a. 4/47 1.00•g 4/21 
c 1395 2.1011g n.a.a. 14/47 1.0011g 5/21 
326 1395 3.28•g n.a.a. 5/38 .83311g 4/37 
a 1395 1.53•g n.a.a. 11/38 .83311g 12/37 
b 1395 1.8811g n.1.1. 2/38 .83311g 6/37 
327 1456 1.14•g n.1.1. 17/24 .28611g 15/33 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 421·427;1975 
a 1456 1. 1811g n.1.1. 8/24 .28611g 9/33 
328 1456 .738•g n.1.1 . 4/26 .25011g 8/30 
a 1456 • 844•g n.1.1. 2/26 . 250•g 6/30 
BENZENE 71·43·2 
329 1048 32.4•g n.1.1. 24/50 83.711g 29/49 Snyder ;txap,54,323 -331; 1980 
330 1048 190.•g 2.81g• 0/40 251.•g 6/40 
a 1048 167 .• g n.1.1. 2/40 251 .Ilg 8/40 
b 1048 212.•g n.1.1. 2/40 251.mg 6/40 
331 1047 125.•g 916.•g 0/30 11.611g 2/30 58.011g 8/32 Hal toni; l11dl, 70,352·357; 1979 
a 1047 347.llg n.1.1. 0/30 11.611g 0/30 58.011g 2/32 
b 1047 156.llg n.1.1. 3/30 11.611g 4/30 58.011g 7/32 
c 1047 116.•g n.1.1. 0!30 11.6•g 0/30 58.011g 0/32 
d 1047 425.llg n.1.1. 1/30 11 .611g 2/30 58.0•g 1/32 
332 1047 29.4•g 1.11g• 0/28 11.6•g 5/28 (58.0IOg 2/33> 
a 1047 241.•g 27.4g• 0/28 11.6•g 0/28 58.0IOg 4/33 
b 1047 473.•g n.1.1. 0/28 11.6•g 0/28 58.011g 1/33 
c 1047 473.•g n.1.1. 0/28 11.6•g 0/28 58.0•g 1/33 
d 1047 110.Mg n.1.1. 0/28 11.6•g 0/28 58.011g 0/33 
333 518 415.Mg n.1.1. 0/27 50.411g 0/45 Snyder; j txe, 4 ,605·618;1978 
a 518 415.Mg n.1.1. 0/27 50.411g 0/45 
BE NZ ENE SULPHONOHYDRAZ I DE <BSH) 5351 ·65·5 
334 1060 13.7•g n.1.1. 1/29 30.111g 4/24 Cre11l yn; fctx,9,319·321; 1971 
a 1060 13.7•g n.1.1. 1/29 30. 111g 4/24 
BENZIDINE 92·87·5 
335 598 . 786•g n.1.1. 0/21 .440•g 5/28 Zabezh insk ii ;beb11, 69, 72·74;1970 
a 598 1.35•g n.1.1. 0/21 .440•g 2/28 
b 598 1.8311g n.1.1 . 0/21 .440•g 1/28 
598 • 610•g n.1.1. 2/21 .440•g 8/28 
BENZO( 1)PYRENE 50·32·8 
336 1274 .707•g n.1.1. 0/40 .52011g 5/81 Chouroul i nkov ;bdca, 54 ,67 · 78; 1967 
337 1129 5.37•g 29.311g 0/67 3.34•g 10/63 Hori e;gann, 56,429· 441; 1965 
a 1129 5.10•g n.1.1. 5/67 3.3411g 13/63 
b 1129 19.4•g n.1.1. 0167 3.3411g 1/63 52 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR A uOp 
BENZOATE, SODIUH 
338 R f f34 eat tba !Rix 24m25 e 
f f34 eat tba ma l 24m25 e 
339 R m f34 eat tba mix 24m25 e 
R m f34 eat tba ma l 24m25 e 
BENZOGUANA H I NE 
340 H f chi eat l iv mix 77w94 
a H f chi eat lun mix 77w94 
b H chi eat tba mix 77w94 
341 H m chi eat lun mix 73w94 
H m chi eat Liv mix 73w94 
b H m chi eat tba mix 73w94 
342 m cdr eat l iv mix 77w94 
m cdr eat tba mix 77w94 
1, 2 • BENZOPYRONE 
343 H f syg eat l iv tum 22m24 ae 
syg eat tba mix 22m24 ae 
344 m syg eat l iv tum 24m24 e 
m syg eat tba mix 24m24 e 
BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE 
345 H f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
H b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b H b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
346 M m b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a H m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b H m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
347 H f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
H f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b H f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
348 H m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M m b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b H m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1H · BENZOTRIAZOLE 
349 f b6c eat lun HXA 24m25 v 
d 
350 
a 
b 
351 
b 
352 
b b6c eat lun a/c 24m25 v 
b6c eat TBA HXB 24m25 v 
b6c eat l iv HXB 24m25 v 
b6c eat l un HXB 24m25 v 
m b6c eat TBA HXB 24m25 v 
m b6c eat l iv HXB 24m25 v 
m b6c eat lun HXB 24m25 v 
f f34 eat bra gln 18m24 v 
f f34 eat TBA HXB 18m24 v 
f34 eat l iv HXB 181R24 v 
m f34 eat l iv nnd 18m24 v 
m f34 eat bra HXA 18m24 v 
m f34 eat TBA HXB 18m24 v 
m f34 eat l iv HXB 18m24 v 
BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 
353 H f swa wat l un ade 26m26 e 
M swa wat tun mix 261126 e 
b H swa wat lun adc 26m26 e 
c H swa wat ml y 26m26 e 
d H swa wat l iv mix 26m26 e 
354 H m swa wat lun mix 92w92 e 
H m swa wat lun ade 92w92 e 
b H m swa wat lun adc 92w92 e 
c H m swa wat mly 92w92 e 
d H m swa wat l iv hem 92w92 e 
355 H sw i gav l un tum 40w55 
BENZYLHYDRAZI NE. 2HC l 
356 H f swa wat lun mix 28m28 e 
H swa wat l iv ang 28m28 e 
b H swa wat l iv mix 28m28 e 
357 H m swa wat l iv mix 23m23 e 
H m swa wat lun ade 23m23 e 
b M m swa 111at lun mix 23m23 
BERYLLIUM SULFATE 
358 H f cd1 wat lun tum 33m33 e 
H cd1 wat tba mix 33m33 e 
b H cd1 wat tba '1a l 33.,33 e 100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •• 10 ••••. :. -100 •.•. :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ...•• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.. : .• 10 
.> 24.9g11 * P<.9 
104.gm * P<1. 
.> no dre p., 1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng .• : •. 1ug ••.• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1'1g •••• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.• : •• 1g •••• ·: · -10 
:> 2.04gm * P<.3 
9.34g'1 * P<.9 
932.mg * P<.5 
_. 304.mg * P<.03 
3.20gm * P<. 7 
439.mg * P<.2 
:> no dre P• 1. 
16.3mg P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •. 100 .••. :. -1mg •.•• : .• 10 ••... : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .•.•. :. -10 
• > 
.> no dre P• 1 . 
5.52gm * P<.9 
no dre p.1. 
603.mg * P<.04 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •••. : .. 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••. : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 ...• :. -19-•••• :. -10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
1.38gm 
1.13gm 
no dre 
511.mg 
669.mg 
no dre 
432.mg 
621.mg 
no dre 
401.mg P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<. 7 
p.1. 
P<.5 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.05 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.05 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 •••. :. -1mg •••• : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .••.• : •• 10 
: + 3. 89gm \ P<. 0005a 
:> 4. 39gm P<. 002 a 
18.9gm P<.8 
no dre Pz1. 
3. 89gm \ P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre p.1. 
+historical * P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
10.1gm * P<.2 
_. 2.72gm * P<.02 
+histor ical P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
2. 72gm * P<. 02 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••.•. :. -100 •••• :. -1mg •••. : •. 10 ••.•• :. -100 •••• : · -19· • • • ·: • -10 
13.4mg 
13.8mg 
39.0mg 
52.1mg 
no dre 
7 .35mg 
8. 52mg 
24.1mg 
52 .Omg 
no dre P<. 0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.004 + 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.07 
P=1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
100ng .• : •• lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•. : .• 1mg •••• : .. 10 ••.•. : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
" 85.3mg 
252.mg 
304 .mg 
86.2mg 
711.mg 
no dre 
100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •. 10 .••.. : •• 100 •••• : •. 1mg •.•. : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 ...• : .. 1g ..••• : •• 10 
. > no dre 
9.42mg 
36.9mg P<.02 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.08 
P<.8 
p.1. 
p.1 . 
P<.4 
P<.7 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 53 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose I Inc 2Do~e 2lnc Citation or Patholog-~· 
Brkly Code 
BENZOATE, SOOIUM 532·32· 1 
338 1319 2.03gm n.s.s. 8/43 480.mg 16/52 960.0lg 11/52 Sodemoto; j ept, 4, 87.95;1980 
a 1319 4.00gm n.s.s. 3/43 480.mg 5152 960.mg 4/52 
339 1319 2. 78gm n.s.s. 9/25 384.mg 7/50 768.mg 11/50 
1319 7.17gm n.s.s. 0/25 384.mg 1/50 768.0lg 0/50 
BENZOGUANAMINE 91·76·9 
340 381 503.llg n.1.s. 0/20 223.0lg 1/17 446.mg 1/18 Wei sburger; j ept, 2, 325 ·356; 1978/pers. comm. /Russf i e ld 1973 
a 381 433.11g n.s.s. 6/20 223.mg 2/ 17 446.mg 3/18 
b 381 200.11g n.s.s. 17/20 223.0lg 8/17 446.0lg 9/18 
341 381 119.llg n.s.s. 5/18 240.mg 2/13 411.0lg 7114 
a 381 378.mg n.s.s. 3/18 240.mg 0/13 411.mg 2/14 
b 381 131.Mg n.s.s. 12/18 240.0lg 3/13 411.mg 9/14 
342 381 144.llg n.s.s. 1/22 17.111g 0/20 34 .3mg 0/21 
381 5.02mQ n.s.s. 14/22 17 .1mg 13/20 C34.3mg 9/21) 
1, 2 · BENZOPYRONE (couinar in) 91·64·5 
343 1340 222.0lg n.s.s. 0/12 105.llg 0/13 523.mg 0/10 Ueno; f ctx, 19, 353.355; 1981 
a 1340 350.0lg n.s.s. 5/12 105.0lg 3/13 523.mg 4/10 
344 1340 174.0lg n.s.s. 0/12 92.00lg 0/11 460.mg 0/11 
1340 212.otg n.s.s. 1/1? 92.00lg 2/11 460.mg 5/11 
BENZOTHIAZYL OISULFIOE CAltax) 120-78·5 
345 1301 256.0lg n.s.s. 1/ 17 215.11g 1/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1301 426.0lg n.s.s. 0/17 215.0lg 0/18 
b 1301 155.11g n.s.s. 2117 215.0lg 3/18 
346 1301 142.0lg n.s.s. 2/18 200.0lg 3/18 
a 1301 396.11g n.s.s. 1/18 200.0lg 0/18 
b 1301 102.11g n.s.s. 3/18 200.0lg 5/18 
347 1301 164.0lg n.s.s. 0/16 215.mg 2/18 
a 1301 426.11g n.s.s. 0/16 215.mg 0/18 
b 1301 130.01g n.s.s. 0/16 215.mg 3/18 
348 1301 153.0lg n.s.s. 0/16 200.mg 2/18 
a 1301 396.llg n.s.s. 0/16 200.0lg 0/18 
b 1301 121.11g n.s.s. 0/16 200.mg 3/18 
1H · BENZOTR IAZOLE 95· 14· 7 
349 c03521 2.21gm 7. 77g11 0/50 1.50gm 10/50 C2.99gm 4/50) lun:a/a,a/c . 
c03521 2.43gm 9.15g11 0/50 1.50gm 9/50 (2.99gm 3/50) 
b c03521 2.21g"' n.s.s. 21/50 1.50g11 25/50 C2.99g11 14/50) 
c c03521 25.8g"' n.s.s. 1/50 1.50gm 2/50 2.99gm 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c03521 1.89g11 11.6g11 0/50 1.50g11 10/50 (2.99gll 4/50> lun:a/a,a/c. 
350 c03521 1.68got n.s.s. 24/50 1.38gm 23/50 (2.76gRI 18/50) 
c03521 9.88gm n.1.s. 12/50 1.38gOI 12/50 2.76gm 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03521 7 .62g"' n.s.s. 4/50 1.38gm 7/50 2.76gRI 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
351 c03521 3.31g11 n.s.s. 0/50 250.llg 0/50 450.mg 1/50 
a c03521 535.oog n.s.s. 27/50 250.Rlg 27/50 450.0lg 30/50 
b c03521 2.48g11 n.s.s. 0/50 250.llg 0/50 450.llg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
352 c03521 1.03g"' n.s.s. 0/50 202.mg 0/50 360.llg 5/50 
c03521 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/50 202.llg 3/50 360.0lg 0/50 bra:gln,ol i. 
b c03521 368.11g n.s.s. 28/50 202.0lg 20/50 <360.mg 18/50) 
c03521 1.03gOI n.s.s. 0/50 202.llg 0/50 360.llg 5/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
BENZOYL HYORAZINE 613·94·5 
353 48 8.18mg 24.90lg 12/89 20.011g 34/47 Toth ;e j ca, 8, 341·345; 1972/ 1969a 
a 48 8.2911g 26.111g 14/89 20.00lg 34/47 
b 48 21.00lg 89.411g 2/89 20.011g 16/47 
48 23.611g 463.llg 16/106 20.00lg 18/49 
d 48 145.0lg n.s.s. 3/88 20.011g 1/47 
354 48 4.40mg 13.711g 10/86 16.711g 31/42 
a 48 5.05mg 16.501g 10/86 16.70lg 29/42 
b 48 12. 711g 54.511g 0/86 16.70lg 13/42 
48 16.411g n.s.s. 2/40 16.7mg 5/25 
d 48 67.2mg n.s.s. 2/40 16.7Rlg 0/25 
355 1095 10.8mg n.s.s. 8/85 10.411g 1/25 Roe;natu , 216, 375·376 ;1967 
BENZYLHYORAZ !NE. 2HC l 20570-96 ·1 
356 1056 36.8•g n.s.s. 21/90 30.011g 21/47 Toth; zkko, 87, 267·273 ;1976/ 1974 
1056 61.4Rlg n.s.s. 2/56 30.0mg 3/22 
b 1056 63.811g n.s.s. 3/56 30.011g· 3/22 
357 1056 24.8•g n.s.s. 6/71 25.011g 5/21 
1056 59.501g n.1.1. 15/99 25.0mg 8/47 
b 1056 70.90lg n.s.s. 23/99 25.0mg 9/47 
BERYLLIUM SULFATE 13510·49 · 1 
358 1395 9.0711g n.1.1. 9/47 1.000lg 5/52 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452 ·458; 1975 
1395 2.3411g n.s.s. 14/47 1.000lg 20/52 
b 1395 5.36•g n.s.s. 4/47 1.0011g 6/52 54 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
359 M 11 cd1 wat lun tu" 41M41 e 
a M 11 cd1 wat tba 11ix 411141 e 
b M 11 cd1 wat tba 111l 411141 e 
360 R f leb wat tba 11ix 47M47 e 
a R leb wat tba 111l 471147 e 
361 R 11 leb wat tba 11ix 38M38 e 
R 11 leb wat tba 111l 381138 e .> .> 
.> 98.811g 
17.111g 
49.611g 
1.4811g 
3.Z411g 
Z.7811g 
8.5611g 
Bl PHENYL !OOng •• :. -!ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• !11g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
36Z f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a or l tba 11 ix 76w76 evx 187. 11g 
363 11 b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 18Z.11g 
a 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx Z90.11g 
364 f b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx .> 467 .Ilg 
f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx ZZ7 .11g 
365 m b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx -. 1Z8.11g 
11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 199. Mg 
b 11 b6c orl tba Mix 76w76 evx 71.511g 
BIS<Z·CHLOR0 · 1 ·METHYLETHYLl ETHER 100ng .• :. -!ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• :. -100 •••• : •• !11g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• !g ••••• : .• 10 
366 R f f34 gav TBA MXB Z411Z4 s 65. 611g 
a R f f34 gav l iv MXB Z4MZ4 s no dre 
367 11 f34 gav TBA MXB Z411Z4 s -. 101.mg 
R M f34 gav l iv MXB Z4mZ4 1 no dre 
BIS·Z·CHLOROETHYLETHER !OOng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• !Mg •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• !g ••••• :. -10 
368 M f b6a or l l iv hpt 79w79 evx .> no dre 
M b6a orl lun 11ix 79w79 evx no dre 
b M b6a orl tba 11ix 79w79 evx no dre 
369 M 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 79w79 evx ZO. Z11g 
a M 11 b6a orl lun ade 79w79 evx no dre 
b M m b6a orl tba Mix 79w79 evx 21 .611g 
370 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 79w79 evx -. 65.011g 
a M f b6c or l l un ade 79w79 evx no dre 
b M f b6c orl tba 11ix 79w79 evx 122.11g 
371 M 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 79w79 evx 8.1911g 
a M 11 b6c or l l un ade 79w79 evx no dre 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 79w79 evx noTD50 
BIS· 1,4· <CHLOROMETHOXY)BUTANE 
372 M f hie ipj abd sar 81w81 
Bl S • 1, 2 • ( CHLOROMETHOXYlETHANE 
373 M f hie ipj abd 11ix 78w78 
BIS· 1,6· ( CHLOROMETHOXY)HEXANE 
374 M f hie ipj abd sar 81w81 !OOng •• :. -!ug •••• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -!mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
• > no dre 
!OOng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
-. 4.6Z11g 
!OOng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
.> no dre 
BIS· 1,4· <CHLOROMETHOXY) ·p·XYLENE 100ng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• !11g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• !g ••••• : •• 10 P<.9 
P<.6 
P<.6 
P<.4 
P<.4 
P<.3 
P<.6 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.4 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P<.04 -
P<.1 
P<.007 -
P<.006 -
P•1. 
P<.02 -
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.01 
P<.02 
p.1. 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.007 
P•1 • 
P<.OZ + 
375 M f hie ipj abd sar 77w77 -. 3.1111g P<.1 
BIS·<CHLOROMETHYLl ETHER 100ng •• : •• !ug ••.• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 .••. : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
376 M f hie ipj abd sar 60w60 
377 M 11 hie inh lun 11ix 61125 es 
a M 11 hie inh lun ade 61125 es 
b M 11 hie inh l iv 11ix 6M25 es 
c M 11 hi c i nh l iv hpc 611Z5 es 
378 R m ass i nh nap ene 6mZ8 e 
a R 11 111 inh lun ade 611Z8 e 
b R " sss inh nap car 6m28 e 
R II SIS i nh l i V bht 61128 e 
d R " sss i nh tba 11 ix 61128 e .+. -. .18Z11g P<.02 + 
.> 1.1611g * P<.4 
1.Z611g * P<.3 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
3.57ug P<.0005+ 
.19611g * P<. OOZ + 
• 7950lg * P<. Z 
no dre p.1. 
2. 34ug * P<. 0005 
4-BIS(Z· HYDROXYETHYL)AMINO · Z· (5-NITRO ·Z· THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE •• :. -100 •••• : •• !Ilg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• !g ••••• : •• 10 
379 R 11 sda eat 111i sar 50w5Z e • + 3.1411g 
a R 11 sda eat 110i lei 50w52 e 3.60mg 
b R 11 1da eat •gl 11ix 50w52 e 6.45•g 
c 11 sda eat 01gl adc 50w52 e 11.5Mg 
d R 11 sda eat tba Mix 50w52 e 1.1011g 
4·BIS(Z·HYDROXYETHYL)AMINO ·Z· <Z· THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• !mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• !g ••••• : •• 10 
380 R f 1da eat tba 11ix 46w66 e .> 60.111g 
Bl S • 2 • HYDROXYETHYLDITH IOCARBA MI C ACID, 
381 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 79w79 evx 
a M b6a or l lun ade 79w79 evx 
b M b6a orl tba 11ix 79w79 evx POTASSIUM ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• !mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : .• 1g .•••. : •• 10 
-. 298.11g 
850.0lg 
138.0lg P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.007 + 
P<.0005 
P<.3 
P<.04 
P<.6 
P<.04 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 55 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
359 1395 6.34•g n.1.1. 5/38 .833•g 7/48 
a 1395 3.29•g n.1.1. 11/38 .83311g 17/48 
b 1395 7.7011g n.1.1. 2/38 .833•g 4/48 
360 1456 .298•g n.1.1. 17/24 .286•g 14/17 Schroeder; j nut, 105 ,421·427; 1975 
a 1456 .689ag n.1.1. 8/24 .286ag 8/17 
361 1456 • 76811g n.1.1. 4/26 .25011g 9/33 
1456 1.33•g n.1.1. 2/26 .250•g 4/33 
Bl PHENYL 92·52·4 
362 1307 137.•g n.1.1. 0/17 73.0ag 0/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1307 137.ag n.1.1. 1/17 73.011g 0/17 
b 1307 39.1ag n.1.1. 2/17 73.0ag 4/17 
363 1307 41.6ag n.1.1. 1/18 68.011g 3/17 
1307 83. 7ag n.1.1. 2/18 68.0•g 1/17 
b 1307 39.111g n.1.1. 3/18 68.0•g 4/17 
364 1307 76.111g n.1.1. 0/16 73.0•g 1/18 
a 1307 145.•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.0llg 0/18 
b 1307 55. 7ag n.1.1. 0/16 73.0•g 2/18 
365 1307 38.711g n.a.a. 0/16 68.011g 3/17 
a 1307 48.811g n.a. 1. 0/16 68.0•g 2/17 
b 1307 26.9ag 966.•g 0/16 68.011g 5/17 
BIS(2·CHLOR0 · 1 ·"ETHYLETHYL> ETHER 108·60·1 
366 c50044 30. 7ag 907.•g 39/50 70.1•g 32/50 140.llg 15/50 
a c50044 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/50 70.111g 0/50 140.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
367 c50044 45.3ag n.1.1. 30/50 70. 7•g 30/50 141.llg 18/50 
a c50044 366.ag n.a.1. 1/50 70.711g 1/50 141.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Bl S· 2· CHLOROETHYLETHER 111-44·4 
368 1227 88.4•g n.1.1. 0/15 41.311g 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1227 88.411g n.a.1. 0/15 41.311g 0/18 
b 1227 53. 7•g n.1.1. 1/15 41.3•g 1/18 
369 1227 9.2511g 56.111g 0/18 38.411g 9/17 
a 1227 40.011g n.a.1. 3/18 38.4ag 2/17 
b 1227 8. 80•g 1. 09g11 3/18 38.411g 10/17 
370 1227 22.4•g n.1.1. 0/18 41.3•g 4/18 
a 1227 88.4ag n.1.1. 1/18 41.311g 0/18 
b 1227 25 .6ag n.1.1. 2/18 41.311g 4/18 
371 1227 3.46ag 27.611g 3/15 38.411g 14/16 
a 1227 73.1ag n.1.1. 2/15 38.4•g 0/16 
b 1227 n.1.1. 12. 711g 5/15 38.4ag 16/16 
BIS· 1, 4 · ( CHLORO"ETHOXY>BUTANE 
372 582 2.14ag n.1.1. 0/30 .57111g 0/30 Van Duuren;canr,35,2553 -2557;1975 
Bl S · 1, 2 · <CHLORO"ETHOXY>ETHANE 13483· 18·6 
373 582 1.5911g n.1.1. 0/30 1.71ag 4/30 Van Duuren; canr ,35, 2553· 2557; 1975 
BIS· 1, 6 · ( CHLORO"ETHOXY>HEXANE 
374 582 6.43ag n.1.1. 0/30 1. 71ag 0/30 Van Duuren; canr, 35, 2553· 2557; 1975 
BIS· 1,4 · (CHLORO"ETHOXY) · p· XYLENE 56894-91 ·8 
375 582 • 765ag n.1.1. 0130 .571ag 2/30 Van Duuren;canr ,35,2553·2557; 1975 
BIS·(CHLORO"ETHYL) ETHER <BC"El 542·88·1 
376 582 62 .8ug n.a.a. 0130 .11411g 4/30 Van Duuren; canr, 35, 2553 -2557; 1975 
377 1086 .253ag n.a.a. 10/157 295.ng 7/138 2.95ug 3/143 33.6ug 10/144 Leong;tup,58,269 ·281; 1981 
a 1086 .291ag n.1.1. 6/157 295.ng 4/138 2.95ug 2/143 33.6ug 7/144 
b 1086 1.1711g n.1.1. 4/157 295.ng 1/138 2.95ug 0/143 33.6ug 0/144 
1086 1.1711g n.1.1. 3/157 295.ng 1/138 2.95ug 0/143 33.6ug 0/144 
378 1086 2.63ug 4.90ug 0/104 52.8ng 0/105 528.ng 0/ 103 7. 78ug 96/103 
a 1086 67. 7ug 1.0911g 0/104 52.8ng 0/105 528.ng 0/103 7.78ug 4/103 
b 1086 .129•g n.1.1. 0/104 52 .8ng 0/105 528.ng 0/103 7.78ug 1/103 
c 1086 .234•g n.1.1. 0/104 52.8ng 1/105 528.ng 0/103 7.78ug 0/103 
d 1086 1.43ug 3.88ug 56/104 52.8ng 48/105 528.ng 43/ 103 7. 78ug 102/103 
4·BIS(2· HYDROXYETHYL >A"INO· 2 · ( 5 ·NITRO· 2 ·TH I ENYL )QUINAZOL INE 
379 1390 1 . 5911g 7. 2511g 0/20 19.211g 13/20 Cohen; jnc i, 57,277-282;1976 
a 1390 1. 79ag 8. 5811g 0120 19.2•g 12/20 
b 1390 2.88ag 20.411g 0/20 19.2ag 8/20 
c 1390 4.32ag 132.11g 0/20 19.2ag 5/20 
d 1390 .452•g 2.5211g 0/20 19.2•g 19/20 
4 ·BIS (2 ·HYDROXY ETHYL )A"INO· 2· (2 · THIENYL )QUINAZOL INE 
380 1390 12.7ag n.a.a. 6/84 17 .4•g 4/28 Cohen; jnci ,57,277-282;1976 
BIS· 2 · HYDROXYETHYLD ITHIOCARBA"I C ACID, POT ASS IU" 23746·34· 1 
381 1217 90.011g n.1.1. 0/17 157 .Ilg 3/16 Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
a 1217 124.ag n.1.1. 1/17 157.0lg 2/16 
b 1217 49.5ag n.1.1. 2/17 157.llg 7/16 56 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
382 M m b6a or l l iv hpt 79w79 evx 
M m b6a or l l un ade 79w79 evx 
b M m b6a orl tba "1ix 79w79 evx 
383 M f b6c or l l iv hpt 79w79 evx 
M b6c orl lun ado 79w79 evx 
b M b6c orl tba "'ix 79w79 evx 
384 M m b6c or l l iv hpt 79w79 evx 
M m b6c orl lun mix 79w79 evx 
b M m b6c orl tba mix 79w79 evx GOLD ET AL. 
T[)50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
41.5 .. g 
no dre 
45.6 .. g 
56.4 .. g 
1.08gm 
48.4 .. g 
34.5 .. g 
no dre 
27 .8mg P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 100ng •• :. ·1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••• :. ·l"g ..•. : .• 10 .•..• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••. : .• 10 
385 M f b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evx ' .> 26.3mg P<.6 
p.1. 
P•1. a M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
386 M m b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx .> 
a M m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M m b6a orl tba "'ix 76w76 evx 
387 M b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx . > no dre 
no dre 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P• 1 • 
no dre P• 1. 
b M b6c or l tba tum 76w76 evx. no dre P•1. 
388 M m b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx· 
M " b6c orl l iv agm 76w76 evx 12.6.,g P<.1 
26.0"g P<.3 
b M m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 
389 b bdr eat mg l fba 24m28 
b bdr eat mg l car 24m28 
b b bdr eat hpl ade 24m28 
BLACK PN 
390 M f cws eat l iv tum 80w80 e 
a M f cws eat lun ade 80w80 e 
391 M "' cws eat lun ado 80w80 e 
M m cws eat t iv tum 80w80 e 
392 cfe eat l iv tum 24m24 es 
393 R m cfe eat l iv tum 24.,24 es 
C. I. DIRECT BLACK 38 
394 Rf f34 eat liv nnd 13w13 
• R f f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
b R f f34 eat l iv MXB 13w13 
395 R m f34 eat l iv MXA 13w13 
a Rm f34 eat liv hpc 13w13 
b R "' f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
R "' f34 eat l iv MXB 13w13 
C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6 
396 R f f34 eat l iv MXA 13w13 
a R f f34 eat l iv hpc 13w13 
b R f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
c R f f34 eat l iv MXB 13w13 
397 R " f34 eat l iv MXA 13w13 
a "' f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
b Rm f34 eat liv MXB 13w13 
FD & C BLUE NO. 1 
398 R b OS"' eat l iv hpt 24.,24 
a R 
b osm eat tba "'ix 24m24 
FD & BLUE NO. 2 
399 M f cd1 eat l iv nod 84w84 es 
a M f cd1 eat lun ado 8tw84 es 
400 M " cd1 eat l iv nod 84w84 es 
a M " cd1 eat lun ado 84w84 es 
401 R b osm eat tba "'ix 24.,24 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 
402 M f the eat l iv h9"' 80w80 e 
403 M m the eat l iv tum 80w80 e 
a M m the eat tba mal 80w80 e 
C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 
404 f f34 eat l iv MXA 13w13 
a f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
b f34 eat l iv MXB 13w13 
405 R m f34 eat TBA MXB 13w13 
a R "' f34 eat l iv MXB 13w13 4.53.,g P<.007 -
100ng •. : .• 1ug •••• : •. 10 ••.•• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ...• : •. 1g •.••• : •. 10 
150.gm * P<.8 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •. : •• 1ug .••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 •.•.• :. -100 ...• : •• 1g .•••• : •• 10 
. > 
.> . > 
.> no dre P• 1 • 
no dre P•1. 
3.66g"' * P<.3 
no dre ?· 1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P• 1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug .••. : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 ..•• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• :. -10 
(+) (+) 2.61.,g * P<.003 c 
2.61.,g * P<.003 
2.61mg * P<.003 
. 945.,g Z P<. 0005c 
2. 22mg * P<. 004 
.945.,g P<.0005 
. 945.,g P<. 0005 
100ng .• : •• 1ug •.•• : .• 10 •••.. : .• 100 •••• :. -1mg ..•. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••.•. :. -10 
:(+) (+) 3.21"'g Z P<.0005c 
5. 97mg * P<. 003 
3.21mg Z P<.0005 
3.21.,g Z P<.0005 
1. 1811g Z P<. 0005c 
1. 18.,g Z P<. 0005 
1.18mg Z P<.0005 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1"'g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••. : •. 1g ••... :. -10 
62.1gm * P<.2 
no dre p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1Mg •••• : •• 10 ••.•. :. -100 •.•• : .• 1g .•.•. :. -10 
. > no dre P•1 • 
no dre p.1. 
.> 20.2g"' * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
.to 5.43gm * P<.06 -
100ng •• : •. 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : .• 100 •..• :. ·l"'g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 347 ... g * P<.6 
.> no dre P-1. 
no dre p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 111g •.•. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••••. :. -10 
(+) 2.07 .. g 
2.07mg 
2.07 .. g 
no dre 
no dre Z P<.002 c 
P<.002 
P<.002 
p.1. 
p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
382 
b 
383 
b 
384 
b RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
1217 19.7•g 110.•g 
1217 194.0lg n.s.s. 
1217 20.5•g 170.•g 
1217 27.7•g 136.0lg 
1217 176.•g n.s.s. 
1217 23.9•g 113.•g 
1217 16.2•g 82. 70lg 
1217 278.•g n.s.s. 
1217 12.50lg 66.5•g 1/18 
2/18 
3/18 
0/ 16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/ 16 lDose 
146.•g 
146.•g 
146.•g 
157 ... g 
157 ... g 
157 ... g 
146.•g 
146.0lg 
146.mg 
BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (bi&11ate) 
385 1218 3.66mg n.s.s. 1/17 4.64•g 
1218 8.68•g n.s.s. 0/17 4.6411g 
b 1218 4.08•g n.s.s. 2/17 4.64mg 
386 1218 4.03•g n.s.s. 2/18 4.31mg 
1218 5.1001g n.s.s. 1/18 4.3101g 
b 1218 3.39•g n.a.s. 3/18 4.31•g 
387 1218 9.19•g n.s.s. 0/16 4.64•g 
a 1218 9.1901g n.s.s. 0/16 4.6411g 
b 1218 9.19•g n.s.s. 0/16 4.64"'g 
388 1218 3.10•g n.s.s. 0/16 4.31mg 
1218 4.24"'g n.s.s. 0/16 4.31•g 
b 1218 1.71•g 61.2•g 0/16 4.31•g 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 7787·59-9 
389 432 11. 9gOI n. I. & • 2/60 
a 432 2.55g• n.s.s. 1/60 
b 432 22.0g11 n.s.1. 2/60 391.Mg 
391.0lg 
391.0lg 
BLACK PN <brilliant black BNl 2519-30·4 
390 378 262.•g n.s.s. 0/58 130.mg 
a 378 2.00gM n.s.1. 14/58 130.mg 
391 378 1.02g• n.s.s. 9/54 120.•g 
a 378 234.11g n.s.s. 0/54 120.0lg 
392 1321 177.0lg n.1.1. 0/22 50.0•g 
393 1321 144.11g n.s.s. 0/21 40.Q•g 
C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38 1937·37 ·7 
394 c54557 .992mg 14.8•g 0/10 
c54557 .992•g 14.811g 0/10 
b c54557 .99211g 14.8•g 0/10 
395 c54557 .43811g 2.5B•g 0/10 
c54557 .75511g 10.1•g 0/10 
b c54557 .43811g 2.5811g 0/10 
c54557 .43811g 2.581Dg 0/10 
C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6 2602·46·2 
396 c54579 1.3711g 10.201g 0/10 
c54579 2.0501g 37.311g 0/10 
b c54579 1.37•g 10.211g 0/10 
c54579 1.37•g 10.211g 0/10 
397 c54579 .532•g 3.5911g 0/10 
a c54579 .532•g 3.59•g 0/10 
b c54579 .53211g 3.59•g 0/10 9.5011g 
9.5011g 
9.5011g 
7.6011g 7.600lg 
7.
60•g 
7 .6011g 
9.50•g 
9.5011g 
9.5011g 
9.500lg 
7 .600lg 
7.60•g 
7 .6011g linc 2Do:-::.e 
13/17 
1/17 
13/17 
12/18 
1/18 
13/18 
13/16 
0/16 
14/16 
21260-46-8 
2/17 
0/17 
2/ 17 
2/18 
1/ 18 
3/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
2/17 
1/17 
5/17 
2/40 802.mg 
0/40 802 .11g 
0/40 802.11g 
0/28 325 ... g 
6/28 325.Mg 
1/27 300.0lg 
C/27 300.11g 
0/22 250.•g 
0/23 200.11g 
0/10 18. 7•g 
0/ 10 18. 7•g 
0/ 10 18. 711g 
0/10 15.00lg 
0/10 15.00lg 
0/10 15.00lg 
0/10 15.00lg 
0/10 18. 711g 
0/10 18.7•g 
0/10 18. 7mg 
0/10 18. 7•g 
0/10 15.00lg 
0/10 15.0mg 
0/10 15.011g 
FO & C BLUE NO. 1 <brilliant blue FCFl 3844-45-9 
398 415 10.1g11 n.1.1. 0/24 225.mg 0/24 450.mg 
415 3.75g11 n.s.s. 7/24 225.•g 10/24 450.•g 
FD & 
399 
a 
400 
a 
401 BLUE NO. 2 (indigo car11ine) 860-22-0 
411 432.11g n.s.s. 0/50 260.•g 
411 6.04g11 n.s.a. 3/50 260.Mg 
411 3.49g• n.s.s. 1/42 240.•g 
411 4.04gm n.s.s. 3/42 240.•g 
415 1.98g• n.a.1. 6/24 225.11g 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 7758-01-2 
402 719 56. 4•g n.s.s. 0/53 
403 719 21.30lg n.s.1. 0/35 
8 719 63.911g n. s.s. 1/35 
C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 16071-86-6 
404 c54568 . 765•g 9.32•g 0/10 
a c54568 . 765•g 9.32mg 0/10 
b c54568 . 765•g 9.3211g 0/10 
405 c54568 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 
c54568 n.s.1. n.s.1. 0/10 6.5011g 
6.000lg 
6.0011g 
9.50•g 
9.50mg 
9.5011g 
7.6011g 
7.60•g 0/28 
0/28 
1/23 
7/23 
5/24 520.llg 
520.11g 
480 ... g 
480.11g 
450.0lg 
1/54 9. 75tng 
0/46 9.000lg 
1/46 9.0011g 
0/10 18. 711g 
0/10 18. 7mg 
0/10 18. 711g 
0/10 15.00lg 
0/10 15.0•g 2Inc 
1/40 1.98gm 
0/40 1.98g11 
0/40 1.98gm 
0/28 650.0lg 
3/28 650.11g 
8/28 600.11g 
0/28 600.11g 
0/23 500.llg 
0/22 400.11g 
0/10 37. 511g 
0/10 37.511g 
0/10 37.50lg 
0/10 30.0mg 
0/10 30.00lg 
0/10 30.011g 
0/10 30.0mg 
0/10 37 .5mg 
0/10 37 .5mg 
0/10 37 .5mg 
0/10 37 .5 .. g 
0/10 30.0mg 
0/10 30.0mg 
0/10 30.0 .. g 
0/24 900.mg 
7/24 900.mg 
0/19 
0/19 
1/17 
0/17 
5/24 
0/52 
0/53 0/53 1.04g• 
1.04gm 
960.•g 
960.•g 
900.11g 
0/10 37.5•g 
0/10 37.50lg 
0/10 37.511g 
0/10 30.00lg 
0/10 30.00lg 2/40 
0/40 
1/40 
0/28 1. 30gm 
5/28 1.30gOI 
5/26 1.20gM 
0/26 1.20g" 
0/24 
0/21 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 75.00lg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 60.011g 
0/10 60.011g 
0/10 60.00lg 
0/10 60.0•g 
0/10 75.0Mg 
0/10 75.0•g 
0/10 75.0•g 
0/10 75.011g 
0/10 60.011g 
0/10 60.0•g 
0/10 60.011g 
0/24 2.25g11 
9/24 2.25gM 
0/18 2.08g• 
1/18 2.08gm 
0/18 1.92g11 
1/18 1.92gOI 
4/24 2.25gm 
0/10 75.0Mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 75.0mg 
0/10 60.011g 
0/10 60.0Mg Citation or Patholog~' 
Brkly Corle 
Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
Preuss11ann; f ctx, 13, 543-544; 1975 
0/29 
6/29 
7/29 
C/29 
5/10 150.Mg 
5/10 150.•g 
5/10 150.•g 
9/10 ( 120.mg 
4/10 120.mg 
9/10 ( 120.•g 
9/10 < 120.mg 
0/10 150.mg 
0/10 150.11g 
0/10 150.mg 
0/10 150.11g 
8/10 (120.0lg 
8/10 <120.mg 
8/10 (120.llg 
1/24 
6/24 
0/25 
1/25 
2/24 
2/24 
11/24 
5/10 (150.0lg 
5/10 (150.mg 
5/10 (150.Mg 
0/10 120.mg 
0/10 120.Mg Drake; f ctx, 15, 503· 508; 1977 
Gaunt; f ctx, 10, 17·27;1972 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10) 
0/10 
0/10) 
0/10) 
7/10 
4/10 
7/10 
7/10 
1/10) 
1/10) 
1/10) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpc,nnd . 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
l iv:hpc,nnd . 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
l iv:hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Hansen; txap, 8, 29-36; 1966 
Hooson;fctx , 13, 167-176; 1975 
Hansen; txap, 8, 29-36; 1966 
G inocch io;fctx, 17,41-47;1979 
0/10) 0/10) 
0/10) 
0/10 
0/10 l iv:hpc,nnd . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 57 
s 58 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex: Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2-sec -BUTYL-4, 6-DINITROPHENOL 
406 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
407 M " b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
M m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
408 M b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
409 M m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M m b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b M " b6c or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
N-N-BUTYL-N- FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
410 M f swa wat lun mix 92w92 e 
M swa wat cl i mix 92w92 e 
b M swa wat cl i sqc 92w92 e 
M swa wat l iv •ix 92w92 
411 M m swa wat lun mix 90w90 e 
a M m swa wat pre •ix 90w90 e 
b M " swa wat pre sqc 90w90 e 
M m swa wat pre fbs 90w90 a 
d M m swa wat pre ang 90w90 e 
a M " swa wat l iv ag• 90w90 e .100ng .• : .• ,1ug •.•. : .. ,10 ••••. : .• ,100 •••. : .• ,1mg •••. : •• ,10 ••••. : .• ,100 •.•• : •• ,1g ••••• : •• ,10 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
2.17•g 
94.1•g 
1.29•g 
6.14mg 
no dre 
6. 14•g 
1.30•g 
2.77mg 
.662mg 
!OOng •• : •• ,1ug .••• : •• ,10 .•••• : •• ,100 •••• : •• ,1mg •••• : •• ,10 ••••• : •• ,100 •••• : .• ,1g ..••• : .. ,10 
• + 19.4mg 
.. 252.mg 
321.llg 
no dre 
19.2mg 
28.2mg 
35.611g 
304.mg 
519.mg 
no dre P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.4 
P<1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.02 
P<.2 
P<.002 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 
P<.01 
Ps1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.02 
P•1. 
N-BUTYL -N-(4-HYDROXYBUTYL lNI TROSAMINE •• : •• ,1ug •••• : •• ,10 ••••• : •• ,100 •••. : •. ,1mg .••. : •• ,10 .•.•• : •• ,100 •••• : .• ,1g •..•• : .• ,10 
3.30mg 
271.mg 412 m sda wat ubl car 24m24 
R " sda wat l iv lee 24•24 P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
Dl-tert-BUTYL -4-HYDROXYMETHYL PHENOL 
413 R f nbw aat •gl fba 24m24 .. : .• ,1ug •.•• : .. ,10 ••.•. : •• ,100 •••• : •• ,1mg •••• : •• ,10 ••••. : .• ,100 ..•. : •. ,1g .•••• : .• ,10 
.> 3. 71gRI * P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
3. 71g11 * P<.3 a nbw eat l iv tum 24m24 
b nbw eat tba "ix 241124 
414 m nbw eat l iv tum 24m24 
a m nbw eat tba tum 24m24 .> no dre p. 1. 
no dre P•1. 
N-BUTYL -N' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANID !NE 
415 R m wis wat stg tum 52w78 er .. : .• ,1ug •••• : •. ,10 ••.•. : •• ,100 •••• : •• ,1Rlg •••• : •• ,10 ••••• : •. ,100 •••• : .• ,1g ••••. :. -.10 
.> no dre P•1. 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE 
416 M f b6c eat lun MXA 25m25 a 
a M b6c eat TBA MXB 25m25 a 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 25m25 a 
c M b6c eat lun MXB 25•25 a 
417 " m b6c eat TBA MXB 25•25 • 
a M " b6c eat l iv MXB 25m25 e 
b M " b6c eat lun MXB 25m25 a 
418 M bal eat lun tu• 69w69 
a M f bal eat l iv tum 69w69 
419 M " bal aat lun tu• 69w69 
a M " bal eat l iv •ix 69w69 
420 M " bal eat lun ppa 69w69 e 
a 
b M m bal eat sto sqc 69w69 e 
M " bal eat rts 69w69 e 
M " bal eat l iv tu• 69w69 e 
421 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
a R f f34 eat l iv MXB 24m24 
422 R " f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 
a R " f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
423 R wis eat pit ede 241124 e 
a R wis eat l iv hnd 24m24 e 
b wis eat tba •ix 24m24 e 
424 " wis eat l iv hnd 24m24 e 
a R " wis eat tba 11ix 241124 e 
1, 1-01-n-BUTYLHYDRAZI NE 
425 M f swa wat lun ade 251125 es 
a M swa wat lun 11ix 251125 es 
b M swa wat for mix 25m25 es 
M swa wat for sqp 25m25 es 
d M swe wat l un adc 25m25 es 
e M swa wat for sqc 25m25 es 
f M swa wat l iv ag• 25•25 es 
426 M " swa wat lun •ix 25•25 es 
a M " swa wat lun ade 25•25 es 
b M m swa wat lun adc 25•25 es 
M " swa wat for •ix 25•25 es 
d M • swa wat l iv •ix 25•25 es !OOng •• : •• ,1ug •••• : •• ,10 .•••• : •• ,100 ••.• : .• ,111g ••.• : •• ,10 .••.• : •• ,100 •••• : •• ,1g ••..• : •• ,10 
:> "' #715.llg P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
10.7g11 * P<.6 
715.•g P<.02 
:> no dre P-1. 
• > 
.> 
:> 
.> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre 
no dre 
7.33g11 
no dre 
368.•g 
2.03gRI 
no dre P•1 . 
P•1. 
P<.8 
P-1. 
P<.03 
P<.09 
P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
2.30g11 * P<.4 
613.•g P<.02 
5.99g11 * P<.4 
2.31g• * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
!OOng •• : •. ,1ug •••• : •• ,10 ••••• : •• ,100 •••• : •• ,111g •••• : •• ,10 •.•.• : •. ,100 •••• : •• ,1g ••••• : •• ,10 
51.511g 
55.5•g 
71 .5•g 
95.9mg 
133.•g 
152 ... g 
no dre P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ .. 38. 111g 
44.911g 
82.3•g 
84.2Mg 
105.llg CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 59 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose I Inc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2-sec-BUTYL -4 ,6-DINI TRDPHENOL 88-85-7 
406 1289 1. 0711g n. s. a. 1/17 .95911g 1/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1289 1.7911g n.1.1. 0/17 .95911g 0/17 
b 1289 -84311g n.1.1. 2/17 .95911g 2/17 
407 1289 -47511g n.s.a . 2/18 .89111g 4/17 
1289 • 98711g n.1.1. 1/18 .89111g 1/17 
b 1289 .35111g n.1.1 . 3/18 .89111g 6/17 
408 1289 • 99911g n.1.1. 0/16 .95911g 1/18 
1289 1.9011g n.a.a. 0/16 .95911g 0/18 
b 1289 .999ag n.a.1. 0/16 .95911g 1/18 
409 1289 .446•g n.1.1 . 0/16 .89111g 4/18 
• 1289 • 68011g n.s.1 . 0/16 .89111g 2/18 
b 1289 • 28211g 2. 70•g 0/16 .89111g 7/18 
N-N-BUTYL -N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
410 1057 11. 2•g 35.3•g 25199 80-011g 45/49 Toth; care, 1, 589-593; 1980 
• 1057 95. 7•g 1. 78g• 0/40 80.011g 5/32 
b 1057 111.llg 25.8g• 0/40 80. O•g 4/32 
1057 184.•g n.1.1. 6/47 80.011g 5/41 
411 1057 11.4•g 35.8•g 26/100 66. 711g 42/48 
• 1057 18.0•g 47.0•g 0/85 66.711g 33/47 
b 1057 22.4•g 60.9•g 0/85 66. 711g 29/47 
1057 115.Mg 1.44g• 0/85 66.711g 5/47 
d 1057 157.•g n.1.1. 0/85 66.711g 3/47 
• 1057 123-•g n.1.1. 7170 66-711g 2/23 
N-BUTYL-N -(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NI TROSAMINE 3817-11-6 
412 1192 1. 98•g 5. 64•g 0/40 10.011g 35/40 Sch1!8hl ;arzn,28,49-51; 1978 
• 1192 44.1•g "-···· 0/40 10.011g 1/40 
01-tert -BUTYL-4. HYDROXYMETHYL PHENOL 
413 127 604.•g n.1.1. 0/20 100-l!g 0/20 175.llg 1/20 Dacre; txap, 17, 669-678; 1970 
a 127 262.llg n.s.1. 0/20 100-llg 0120 175-llg 0120 
b 127 604.•g n.1.1. 0120 100.llg 0/20 175.llg 1/20 
414 127 210-•g n.1.1. 0120 80.011g 0120 140.11g 0120 
a 127 210-llg n.1.1. 0/20 80.011g 0/20 140-llg 0120 
N-BUTYL-N' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANI DI NE 13010-08-7 
415 1082 1 .9911g n.s.s. 0/9 2.1411g 0/8 Matsukura ;gann, 70, 181-185; 1979 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE <BHT> 128-37-0 
416 c03598 357 .Mg n.s.s- 1/20 390.11g 16/50 <780.•g 7/50) lun:a/a,a/c. s 
• c03598 336.llg n.1.1. 14/20 390.llg 32/50 (780.11g 23/50) 
b c03598 2.18g• n.s.s. 1/20 390.Mg 4/50 780-llg 5/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c03598 357 .11g n.s.a. 1/20 390.llg 16/50 (780.Mg 7/50) lun:a/a,a/c . 
417 c03598 355.•g n.s.a. 17/20 360.llg 39/50 (720.Mg 32/50) 
• c03598 531.llg n.1.1. 11/20 360.11g 23/50 (720.•g 13/50) l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03598 1 .23g11 n.s.s. 7/20 360.l!g 21/50 720.llg 17/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
418 1006 1.15g• n.s.a. 13/50 975.llg 11/50 Clapp; jnci ,61, 177-180;1978 
1006 4-42g11 n.a.s. 0/50 975.llg 0/50 
419 1006 711.11g n.s.a. 45/100 900.llg 47I100 
a 1006 8.16g11 n.1.1. 2/100 900.llg 0/100 
420 53 122.•g n.s.1. 6/25 900.l!g 7 /11 Clapp;fctx, 12,367-371;1974 
• 53 330.llg n.1.1. 0/25 900.•g 1/8 
b 53 509.•g n.1.1. 14/25 900.llg 1/8 
53 898.llg n.1.1. 0/25 900.llg 0/11 
421 c03598 374.l!g n.1.1. 12/20 150.llg 36/50 300.11g 26/50 
a c03598 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0120 150.l!g 0/50 300.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
422 c03598 210.llg n.1.1. 17/20 120.l!g 36/50 240.llg 35/50 
• c03598 796.llg n.1.1. 0/20 120.l!g 2/50 240.llg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
423 1087 250.llg 171.g• 0/32 125.l!g 6/46 (500.llg 3/51) Hirose; fctx, 19, 147-151; 1981 
• 1087 1 .45g11 n.1.1. 0/32 125.llg 3/46 500.l!g 3/51 
b 1087 476.Mg n.a.a. 11/32 125.llg 25/46 500.l!g 25/51 
424 1087 2-23g11 n-•-•-2/26 100.•g 2/43 400.llg 1/38 
1087 1-12g• n-•·•- 6/26 100.llg 13/43 400.llg 10/51 
1, 1 -DI -n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE 
425 1438 30.3•g 107.llg 20/99 62. 5•g 34/50 Toth; care, 2, 651-654; 1981 
a 1438 31.511g 128.llg 25/99 62.5•g 34/50 
b 1438 41.411g 147.llg 4/71 62.5Mg 23/45 
1438 52.511g 227.llg 4/71 62.5•g 19/45 
d 1438 69.3•g 371.•g 6/99 62.5•g 17/50 
• 1438 77 .911g 355.l!g 0/71 62.511g 12/45 
f 1438 474.•g n.a.a. 5171 62.5•g 1/45 
426 1438 21. 7•g 84. 7•g 26/96 52. 111g 34/46 
• 1438 26.1•g 93.811g 16/96 52.1•g 30/46 
b 1438 43.3•g 235.•g 12/96 52. 111g 21/46 
1438 46. 7•g 174-•g 0!96 52.1•g 16/43 
d 1438 39. 4•g 437. •g 0/40 52. 111g 5/16 60 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
e II 111 s11a 11at for sqp 25•2:5 es 
f M . ._ s11a 118t l i • bhp 25•25 es 
g M • s11a 11at for sqc 2511125 es 
1, 2 ·DI -n-BUTYltllDRAZINE. 2HC l 
427 M f s11a 11at lwi •ix 93w93 e 
e M f s11a 11at 11ly 93w93 e 
b M s11a 11at l iv ang 93w93 e 
M s111 111t l i• aga 93w93 a 
42.8 11" s111 111t lu.n 11i¥ 871187 e 
M 11011111at kid 111ix 871187 e 
b M11s11awat •ly87..S7e 
c II 11 s11a wat l iv ag" 8711187 e 
d II 11 s11a wet l iv ang 87w87 e 
n • BUTYLlllDRAZINE. UC l 
429 II f s11a 11at lun oaix 28•28 e 
M f s111 111t lwi ade 281128 e 
b M f s11a 11at lu.n adc 28m28 e 
c M f s111 11at l iv. •ix 28•28 e 
430 II 11 s111 11at lwi ade 231123 e 
a II •. s111 11at lwi •ix 23•23 e 
b M 11 s11a 111at liv 111ix 23•23 e 
N • BUTYLUREA 
431 M f cb6 ut l iv hpc 521169 e 
a M f cb6 ut lwi ade 5211169 e 
b K f cb6 eat tba. ai i.x 52J,i69. e 
432 M •. cb6 eat lwi ede 5211169 • 
a M 11 cb6 ut l iv. hpc 5211169 e 
b M 11 cb6 eat tba 11ill. 5211169 e 
433 R f f34 eat l iv. tua 5211169 e 
a f f34 aet tba •ix 5211169 e 
434 R " f34 11at l iv tu•. 52:w.69 e 
R • f14 eat tbe 11ix 52"69 e 
beta· BUTYROLACTQNE 
435 R f es.d gav fQr sqc 70,.70 
CADIUUM ACETATE 
436 M f cd1 wet l un car 3°"30 e 
a M f cd1 wet tba tum 30a30 e 
437 M. "· cd1 wet lun car 28a28 e 
a M 111 cd1 wet tba tum 2811128 e 
438 R b leb 111t l iv tum 4111.41 es 
a R b leb 11at tbe tu• 41ni41 es 
b R b leb 11et tba .. l 41&41 es 
CADll.IUM CHLORIDE MONOltlORATE** 
439 R. f ""' eat l i• hpt 2411124 e 
a R f w11s eat tba •ix 24•24 e 
b R f wws eat tbe ben 24•24 e 
f w111 eat tba ael 24•24 e 
440 11 w11s eat adr ph.e 241124 e 
a 11 w11s eat l iv hpt 2411124 e 
b R "w11s eat tba 1111l 2:4•24 e 
R " w11s eat tba ben 2411.24 e. 
d R. m W>(S eat tba 11ix 2:411124 a 
CADlllUM DIETltYLDITl\lQCAR.llAMATE 
441 M f b6a orl lwi ade 76w76 evx 
a II f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b II f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
442 M ._ b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M m. b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b ll" b6e orl tba •ix 76w.76 avx 
443 ll f b6c orl lun ede 76w.76 evx 
a II f b6.c orl l i• hpt 76w.76 evx 
b II f b6c orl tba 11ix 761176 evx 
444 M 11 b6c or l l iv. hpt 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b6c orl luo ade. 76w76 evx 
b II 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
CADKIUM SULPHATE** 
445 II 11 swi gav lwi •ix 78w78 e 
II 11. swi 9av l iv. 11.ix 781178 e 
446 R. • cbo gav l i • I.ca 2411126 109.119 P<.0005 
189.'1g P<.006 
317 .119 P<.0005 
100ng •• : .• 1u9 ••.• : .. 10 ..... : .. 100 .•.. : .. 111.g ..•. : .. 10 ..... : .• 100 .... :. ·19· ..•. : .. 10 
. + 69.81119 
198.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
34.50lg 
449.mg 
886.m9 
no dre 
no dre 
10Qng .. : .. 1ug ...• : .• 10 ..... : .. 100 .•.. :. -1•9· ... : .. 10 ...•. : .. 100 ••.. :. ·19· .... : .. 10 
18.4•9 
19.3•9 
50.6•g 
no dre 
8.40•g 
9.03n19 
no dre 
100ng .. : .. 1u9 •.•• : .• 10 ...•. : .• 100 .... :. -1•9· ... : .. 10 ..... : .. 100 .... :. -19· .... : .. 10 
.> 
.> 
• > . > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
5.51911 
no dre 
699.m9 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100n9 .. :. ·1U9· .•. : .• 10 ...•. : .. 100 .•.. : .. 111.g .•.. : .. 10 .•..• : .. 100 •... :. ·19· .... : .• 10 
.. 13.81119 
100ng •. : .. 1u9 •... : .. 10 ..... : .• 100 .... :. -1•9·· .. : •. 10 ....• : .. 100 .... :. -19· ...• : .. 10 
.> 
.> .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
37 .7•9 
1.81•9 
5.10•9 
10009 .. : •. 1u9 .••. : .• 10 ..... : .. 100 .•.. : .. 1119 ...• : .• 10 ..... : •. 100 •.•. :. -19· ••.. : •. 10 
.> no dre 
21.6119. 
44.0•g • 
124.mg • P<.0005+ 
P<.003 + 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<.4 
p.1. 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P•1 . 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.4 
p.1. 
P<.02 -
p. 1. 
P•1. 
p.1 . 
p.1. 
P<.02 + 
P· 1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.8 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P •. 1. 
P<.7 
P<.8 
P<.9 
1.HOlg P<.04 -
no dre P•1. 
47 .40lg * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
100n9 •• : .• 1ug .•.• : .. 10 •.•.• : •. 100 ..•. :. -1•9· ..• : •. 10 •.•.. : .• 100 .... :. ·19· .... : .. 10 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
47.5119 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
57.4119 
no dre 
18.0119 
16.7119 
25.911g 
6.20119 
10Qng .. : .• 1ug .... : .. 10 •.... : .. 100 .... :. ·1"9· ... : •. 10 ....• : .. 100 .... :. ·19· .•.• : .. 10 p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.7 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.05 -
P<.05 -
P<.2 
P<.002 -
.> 1. 78oag * P<.6 
no dre P.1. 
_. 1.17119 * P<.07 -CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 61 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl I Dose !Inc 2Dose ~Inc Citation or Patholog~1 
Brkly Code 
e 1438 57.211g 246.llg 0!96 52.111g 13/43 
1438 56.911g 2.40g11 0/40 52.111g 3/16 
g 1438 120.llg 1.37g11 0!96 52.111g 5/43 
1, 2 ·DI· n· BUTYLHYDRAZI NE. 2HC l 7422-80 -2 
427 1116 40.511g 149.llg 25/99 125.llg 36/50 Toth ;expa,37, 773· 775; 1981 
8 1116 93.211g 1.29g11 18/100 125.mg 21 /50 
b 1116 379.llg n.s.s. 3/47 125.•g 2/36 
c 1116 517.llg n.s.s. 3/47 125.llg 1/36 
428 1116 20.211g 67 .311g 26/100 104.•g 38/46 
• 1116 155.llg 3.51g11 0170 104.llg 4/38 
b 1116 186.•g n.1.s. 8/100 104.llg 6/46 
1116 416.llg n.s.s. 5/70 104.llg 1/38 
d 1116 420.llg n.s.s. 3/80 104.llg 1/42 
n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE. HC l 56795-65-4 
429 252 10.711g 37.611g 21/90 25.011g 34/44 Nagel ;ej ca, 11,473-478 ; 1975/Toth 1974 
• 252 11.311g 38.511g 18/90 25.011g 33/44 
b 252 27.211g 121.11g 4/90 25.011g 17/44 
c 252 101.llg n.1.1. 3/56 25.0•g 0/15 
430 252 4.21•g 19.911g 15/92 20.811g 19/23 
• 252 4.3611g 24.1Mg 23/92 20.811g 19/23 
b 252 47.611g n.s.s. 6/71 20.811g 1/18 
N • BUTYLUREA 592-31·4 
431 1361 1.24gm n.s.s. 1/92 567 .Ilg 0/24 Murthy; i j en, 23, 253-259; 1979 
1361 1.24g11 n.s.s. 2/92 567 .Ilg 0/24 
b 1361 501.11g n.s. •· 17/92 567 .Ilg 4/24 
432 1361 682.11g n.s.s. 1/95 523.llg 1/26 
• 1361 1.23g11 n.s.s. 2/95 523.llg 0/26 
b 1361 244.llg n.s.s. 8/95 523.llg 7/26 
433 1361 317.llg n.1.a. 0/44 218.11g 0/16 
• 1361 127 .Ilg n.1.1. 20/44 218.llg 5/16 
434 1361 253.llg n.s.s. 0/50 175.llg 0/16 
1361 84.411g n.s.s. 30/50 175.llg 7/16 
bat a. BUTYROLACTONE 3068-88-0 
435 55 3.8511g n.1.1. 0/5 40.811g 3/5 Van Duuren;jnci,37,825 -838;1966 
CADMIUM ACETATE 543-90-8 
436 56 4.7111g n.1.1 . 9!60 1.0011g 5/39 Schroeder; j nut ,83, 239-250; 1964 
56 4.1411g n.s.s. 22/60 1.0011g 10/39 
437 56 11.011g n.1.1. 8/44 .83311g 0/48 
56 9.5511g n.1.1. 11/44 .833Mg 1/48 
438 1036 3.2911g n.s.1 . 1/34 .26511g 2/47 Kan i sawa; canr, 29, 892-895;1969 
• 1036 • 66811g n.s.s. 10/34 • 26511g 22/47 
b 1036 1.5611g n.s.s. 2/34 .265•g 7/47 
CADMIUM CHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE** 35658-65-2 
439 1139 .34311g n.1.1. 0/94 49.5ug 0/48 .149•g 0/48 .495mg 0/48 2.4811g 0/46 Loser; cl et, 9, 191-198; 1980 
1139 2. 7411g n.1.1. 54/94 49.5ug 23/48 .149•g 17/48 .49511g 31/48 2.48119 25/46 
b 1139 3.5611g n.s.s. 46/94 49.5ug 19/48 .14911g 16/48 .495119 22/48 2.48119 21/46 
1139 6.66119 n.s.s . 10/94 49.5ug 6/48 .149•g 7/48 .495m9 11/48 2.48•9 6/46 
440 1139 • 43211g n.s.s. 2/98 39.6ug 0/50 .11911g 5/50 (.396119 2/50 1.9811g 2/50) 
1139 24.211g n.1.1. 0/98 39.6ug 1/50 .11911g 0/50 .39611g 0/50 1.9811g 0/50 
b 1139 7.9411g n.1.1. 4/98 39.6ug 4/50 .119mg 2/50 .396119 1/50 1.98mg 4/50 
c 1139 6.3211g n.1.1. 40/98 39.6ug 18/50 .11911g 25/50 .396119 23/50 1.9811g 15/50 
d 1139 5.23119 n.s.s. 43/98 39.6ug 21/50 .119•g 26/50 .396119 24/50 1.98119 18/50 
CADMIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE <ethyl cad•ate) 14239-68·0 
441 1140 9.9911g n.s.s. 1/17 8.96•g 1/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1140 16.8•g n.s.s. 0/17 8.96119 0/17 
b 1140 5.9911g n.s.s. 2/17 8.9611g 3/17 
442 1140 16.5119 n.1.1. 1/18 8.34•9 0/18 
• 1140 16.5119 n.1.1. 2/18 8.34119 0/18 
b 1140 11. 711g n.1.1. 3/18 8.34•g 1/18 
443 1140 9.34119 n.s.s. 0/16 8.96119 1/18 
1140 17.811g n.s.s. 0/16 8.9611g 0/18 
b 1140 5.4311g n.s.s. 0/16 8.9611g 3/18 
444 1140 5 .05Mg n.a.s. 0/16 8.34119 3/18 
• 1140 6.36•g n.s.s. 0/16 8.34119 2/18 
b 1140 2.6411g 25.211g 0/16 8.34119 7/18 
CADMIUM SULPHATE** 7790-84-3 
445 1044 .30711g n.1.1 . 33/149 62.9ug 14/50 .12611g 9/50 .25011g 14/49 Levy; anoh, 17, 213-220; 1975 
• 1044 • 492•g n.1.1. 50/149 62.9ug 18/50 .12611g 18/50 .25011g 11/49 
446 1045 .359•9 n.1.1. 1/90 26.2u9 2/30 52.3ug 0/30 .105•g 3!30 Levy ;anoh, 17,205-211;1975 62 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
CAFFEINE 
447 M f cb6 eat l iv tu11 77w77 e 
448 M 11 cb6 eat l iv hnd 77w77 e 
449 " ada eat l iv tu11 251125 a 
CAPT A 
450 b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 80w91 
b b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 
451 b6c eat duo ace 80w90 
452 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6c or l lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
453 • b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 
a • b6c eat l iv MXB 80w91 
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 
454 • b6c eat duo ad11 80w90 
a 11 b6c eat duo ace 80w90 
455 11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
456 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
457 • b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
458 R 0111 eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
• R 0111 eat l iv MXB 191126 v 
459 R OH eat adr MXA 191125 v 
460 R " OH eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
a 11 o .. eat l iv MXB 191126 v 
CARBAMYL HYDRAZ !NE. HC l 
461 M f swa wet lun Mix 271127 e 
a M swa wet lun ade 271127 e 
b M swa wet bl v 11ix 271127 e 
c M awe wet l iv 11ix 27•27 e 
d M swa wet bl v ang 271127 e 
M awe wet bl v ag• 271127 e 
462 M 11 awe wet l iv hpt 27•27 e 
a M 11 awe wet lun ade 271127 e 
b M 11 owe wet lun •ix 27•27 • 
M • awe wet l iv •ix 271127 e 
1·CARBAMYL·2 ·PHENYLHYDRAZ !NE 
463 M f awe wet lun ade 79w79 e 
a M swa wet lun •ix 79w79 e 
b M awe wet lun adc 79w79 e 
c M swa wet l iv ang 79w79 • 
d M awe wet l iv ag11 79w79 e 
464 M • swa wet lun ade 79w79 e 
a M • awe wet lun •ix 79w79 e 
b M • awe wet l iv •ix 79w79 e 
M • swa wet l iv ang 79w79 e 
CARBARSONE 
465 f fdr eat 
466 R 11 fdr eat th• rts 22•24 au 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••. : •• 1g ••.•• : .• 10 
• > 
.> 
. > no dre 
775.llg 
no dre p.1 • 
P<.3 
p.1 • 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.. : •• 100 •.•• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••. : .• 10 
pool 
• > 
pool 
.> 
.> 
pool 
:> :> no dre P• 1. 
:> no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
21.6g11 * P<.03 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre 
244.llg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
+ 7.39g• * 
15.1g• * 
86.111g 
187.llg 
42.511g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
195.•g 
3.62g11 
161.llg 
no dre p.1. 
P<.2 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.003 a 
P<.03 
P<.02 
P<.09 -
P<.0005-
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<1. 
P<.4 
P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
#253. 11g P<. 02 
4. 78g11 * P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• : •. 1g ...•• : •• 10 
+ 223.llg 
333.mg 
395.11g 
798.llg 
798.llg 
975.llg 
% 1.42g• 
745.0lg 
833.Mg 
933.Mg P<.002 
P<.007 
P<.003 + 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P<.05 
P<.03 
P<.2 
P<.4 + 
P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 .•.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• + 150.•g P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.007 
P<.03 
P<.06 
P<.0005 • + 155.llg 
1.25g"' 
1.98g• 
2.67g• 
158.llg 
176.•g P<.0005+ 
1. 79g11 P<.3 
2.00g11 P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •.•• : .• 1g ••••• :. -10 
.> 4.59gM * P<.4 
.> 4.50gm * P<.4 
CARBARYL 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••. :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•. : .• 1g •• • • ·: • 010 
467 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx 
468 
• 
b 
469 
• 
b 
470 
• 
b 
471 "' b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
b 11gr gav l iv tu11 221124 e 
b 11gr gav tba •ix 221124 e .> 
. > 
. > 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre 
no dre 
no dr• 
no dre 
12.411g 
3.3911g 
3.3911g 
1.51Mg 
no dre 
14.1mg P•1 . 
p.1. 
P•1 . 
P•1 . 
P<.3 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P<.003 
p.1 • 
P<.003 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •. 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •. 1g •.... : • 010 
472 M f b6c gav l iv hpc 78w91 era pool 165.•g * P<.0005+ 
473 M • b6c gav l iv hpc 78w84 ers pool • + • 114.•g * P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 63 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose J Inc 2Dose 21nr Citation 01· Pathol og~· 
Brkl,-Code 
CAFFEINE 58-08-2 
447 1028 230.llg n.s.s. 0136 55.011g 0137 Hackl in;dact,3, 135-163; 1980 
448 1028 126.Mg n.s.s. 0/35 55.011g 1/38 
449 1459 267.llg n.a.s. 0/30 40.811g 0130 Johansson; i j en, 27, 521-529; 1981 
CAPT AN 133-06-2 
450 c00077 4.11g11 n.s.s. 3/10 914.llg 5/50 1.83gll 8/50 
c00077 11.0g11 n.1.1. 1/10 914.llg 1/50 1.83g11 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00077 n.a.s. n.s.s. 0/10 914.Mg 0/50 1.83gm 0/50 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
451 c00077 6. 53g11 n.s.s. 0/79p 914.llg 0/50 1.83g11 3/50 
452 1092 155.llg n.s.a. 0/16 78.411g 0/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
8 1092 155.llg n.a.s. 0/16 78.411g 0/18 
b 1092 59.811g n.a.a. 0/16 78.411g 2/18 
453 c00077 3.94g• n.s.s. 5/10 844.llg 7/50 1.69g11 10/50 
• c00077 8.87g• n.s.s . 3/ 10 844.llg 1/50 1.69gll 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00077 3.04g• n.a.s. 2/10 844.llg 3/50 (1.69g 11 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c . 
454 c00077 3.35g11 38.5gm 0/80p 844.llg 3/50 1.69g11 5/50 
c00077 5.22g• n.s.s. 0/80p 844.•g 1/50 1.69g11 3/50 
455 1092 29.511g n.a.s. 0/16 73.0llg 4/15 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1092 45.811g n.a.s. 0/16 73.0llg 2/15 
b 1092 18.011g 149.llg 0/16 73.011g 7/15 
456 1092 147.llg n.s.s. 0/17 78.411g 0/17 
1092 147.llg n.a.s. 1/17 78.411g 0/17 
b 1092 97.011g n.s.s. 2/17 78.411g 1/17 
457 1092 44.611g n.a.s. 1/18 73.011g 3/17 
• 1092 63.511g n.s.s . 2/18 73.0•g 2/17 
b 1092 34.311g n.a.a. 3/18 73.0llg 5/17 
458 c00077 170.llg n.a.a. 8/10 89.011g 39/50 212.llg 36/50 
I c00077 888.11g n.a.s. 0/10 89.011g 3/50 212.llg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
459 c00077 109.llg n.s.a. 4/75p 89.011g 13/50 <212.11g 7150) adr: coa, coc. 
460 c00077 124.llg n.a.s. 5/10 71.211g 32/50 170.llg 25/50 
c00077 798.Mg n.a.s. 1/10 71.211g 1/50 170.llg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
CARBAMYL HYDRAZ !NE. HC l 563-41-7 
461 60 111.•g 950.llg 21/90 125.llg 25/47 Toth;ej ca, 11, 17-22; 1975/1974 
8 60 149.•g 5.61g11 18/90 125.llg 20/47 
b 60 164.llg 2.88gll 5/81 125.llg 9/31 
60 256.11g n.a.s. 3/81 125.11g 5/31 
d 60 256.llg n.s.a. 3/81 125.llg 5/31 
• 60 292.llg n.a.a . 2/81 125.llg 4/31 
462 60 350.llg n.a.a. 0/87 104.llg 2/32 
8 60 224.•g n.a.s. 15/99 104.llg 12/48 
b 60 207.llg n.a.s. 23/99 104.llg 15/48 
60 240.llg n.a.a. 6/87 104.llg 5/32 
1-CARBAMYL -2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 103·03-7 
463 601 92.111g 273.llg 18/100 500.llg 39/50 Toth; jnci ,52,241-251 ;1974 
I 601 93. 7•g 289.llg 21/100 500.llg 39/50 
b 601 513.•g 19.6g11 4/100 500.llg 9/50 
601 682.11g n.s.1. 0/34 500.0lg 4/42 
d 601 807 .Mg n.1.1. 0/34 500.0lg 3/42 
464 601 94.811g 305.llg 15/96 417.llg 33/47 
I 601 101.llg 388.llg 23/96 417.0lg 33/47 
b 601 429.11g n.s.a. 3/40 417.0lg 5/32 
601 477.11g n.a.a. 2/40 417.llg 4/32 
CARBARSONE 121-59-5 
465 65 747.llg n.s.s. 0/89 25.011g 0/43 50.0llg 1/45 69.2Mg 0/49 Oser; txap, 9, 528· 535; 1966 
466 65 732.•g n.1.1. 0/85 25.0•g 0/39 50.011g 1/43 69.2Mg 0/50 
CARBARYL <Sevin) 63·25-2 
467 1228 2.3011g n.s.a. 1/17 1.9311g 1/18 Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1228 3.8211g n.s.1. 0/17 1.93•g 0/18 
b 1228 1.8211g n.1.1. 2/17 1.93•g 2/18 
468 1228 2. 1211g n.s.1. 1/18 1.8011g 1/18 
I 1228 2.36•g n.a.a. 2/18 1.8011g 1/18 
b 1228 1.86•g n.a.s. 3/18 1.8011g 2/18 
469 1228 3.8211g n.a.a. 0/16 1.930lg 0/18 
a 1228 3.82•g n.a.a. 0/16 1.9311g 0/18 
b 1228 2.01•g n.s.a. 0/16 1.93•g 1/18 
470 1228 1.02 .. g n.s.a. 0/16 1.8011g 3/17 
a 1228 1.0211g n.a.s . 0/16 1.8011g 3/17 
b 1228 . 609•g 8.19•g 0/16 1.8011g 6/17 
471 1426 19.511g n.a.s. 0/46 7.8811g 0/12 Andr i anova;vpi t ,29, 71-74; 1970 
I 1426 4.6211g 139.11g 1/46 7 .8811g 4/12 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 56-23-5 
472 1469 101.llg 258.11g 1/80p 824.llg 40/40 1.52gll 43/45 National Cancer Institute;bccr;1976 
473 1469 63. 711g 188.llg 5/77p 824.llg 49/49 1.65g• 47/48 64 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
474 
b 
475 
a 
476 nu ivj Liv tu• 47w69 
nu ivj 11gl •ix 47w69 
nu ivj tba •ix 47w69 
R OH gav Ii v hpc 181126 er 
R f OH gav I iv nnd 181126 er 
11 osin gev l iv nnd 181126 er 
R 11 OH gay I iv hpc 181126 er 
CARBOXYMETHYLN I TROSOUREA 
477 R 11 •rw wat epi 11ix 171130 
a • inrw wat l iv tu11 17m30 
b " •rw wat tba •ix 171130 
CARBROMAL 
478 M f b6c eat lun MXA 181124 
a M f b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 
b " b6c eat I iY MXB 181124 
M b6c eat lun MXB 181124 
479 M " b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 
M II b6c eat I iY MXB 18m24 
b M " b6c eat lun MXB 18•24 
480 R f 134 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a R f f34 eat I iY MXB 24•24 
481 11 134 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
R "' 134 eat I iy MXB 241124 
CARRAGEENAN, AC ID ·DEGRADED 
482 R b ada wat cir mix 65w65 er 
R b ada gay cir •ix 65w65 er 
CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 
483 H f ayg eat Ii y he11 78w78 
H f syg eat tba mix 78w78 
484 H 11 syg eat I iv hem 251126 a 
H m ayg eat tba mix 251126 a 
485 11rc eat pns tum 331134 a 
a mrc eat ski tu11 331134 a 
486 " 11rc eat tba mix 32m33 a 
CHENODEOXYCHOLI C AC ID 
487 M b cba eat i tn tu11 54w54 r 
CHLORAMBEN 
488 f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 
b6c eat Ii v MXB 80w91 
b b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 
489 b6c eat Ii y hpc 80w90 
490 " b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 
II b6c eat Ii y MXB 80w91 
b 11 b6c eat l un MXB 80w91 
491 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 
492 osm eat TBA MXB 191126 
a 
493 
a 
494 OH eat l iY MXB 191126 
11 os11 eat TBA MXB 191126 
11 os11 eat l iv MXB 191126 
II 05" eat · · · hell 19•25 
CHLORAMBUC IL 
495 f swi ipj lun mix 26w78 e 
a f swi ipJ lys 26w78 e 
b swi ipj l iv lys 26w78 e 
swi ipj tba 11ix 26w78 e 
d swi ipj tba Hl 26w78 e 
e awi ipj tba ben 26w78 e 
496 m awi ipj lun 11ix 26w78 e 
a 
b 
d 
• 497 
b 
c 
d m swi 
m swi 
11 swi 
11 swi ipj lys 26w78 e 
ipj l iv mix 26w78 e 
ipj tba 11ix 26w78 e 
ipj tba 11al 26w78 e 
m awi ipj tba ben 26w78 e 
11 cdr ipj leu 26w78 e 
" cdr ipj lya 26w78 e 
11 cdr ipj l iv tum 26w78 e 
" cdr ipj tba mix 26w78 e 
"' cdr ipj tba mal 26w78 e 
" cdr ipj tba ban 26w78 e 
CHLORAMPHENICOL 
498 sda eat l i Y hpt 66w75 e 
R f sda eat tba mix 66w75 e pool 
pool .87711g 
• 76511g 
.17611g 
365.llg 
1.46gm * 
900.llg • 
952 .Ilg • P<.1 
P<.3 
P<.007 
P<.004 
P<.3 
P<.08 
P<.2 
.100ng •• : •• .!ug ••.• : •• 10 .•••• : .• 100 •••• :. -.!•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. .100 .•.• : •. .!g ..•.. : •. 10 
A M.~g 
no dre 
13.111g P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.09 
100ng •• :. -.!ug •••• : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -.!•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •.•• : .• 1g •..•• : •• 10 
:> 
:> A #553.llg • P<.05 
5. 32g• * P<1. 
1 • 95g• * P<. 09 
553.•g * P<.05 
:> no dre P•1. 
1.58gm * P<.6 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
1 .03g11 * P<.8 
no dre P• 1. 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •..• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 .•.• : •. .!g ..... : .. _10 
2. 20gm P<. 0005+ 
5.16gm * P<.0005+ 
100ng •• : •• .!ug ••.• : •• 10 .•..• :. -.100 .••. :. -1•g •••• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.• : .• 1g ••••• :. -10 
.> no dre P-1. 
177.g• * P<.9 
.> no dre P• 1. 
54. 1gm * P<.3 
35.4g• * P<.03 
no dre P·1. 
.>no dre p. 1 . 
.100ng •• : •. .!ug ..•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g .••• : •. 10 ••••• : •. 100 .••• : .• 1g ••..• : •• 10 
• > no dre P-1 • 
.100ng •• : •• .!ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• : •. .!mg ••.• : .. 10 •.••. : .• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 3.62gm * P<.2 
3.97gm * P<.2 
58.0gm * P<.8 
pool 5.23gm * P<.006 c 
:> 9.80g• * P<.7 
no dre P• 1. 
18.0g11 * P<.1 
pool 4.96gm * P<.07 
:> 
pool :> no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
1.28gm * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
#3.03gm * P<.02 
100ng •• : •• .iug .••. : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• :. -.!•g •••• : •• 10 ••••. : .• 100 •••• : •. 1g .•••• : •• 10 
• + 97. Oug * P<. 0005+ 
. 70911g * P<. 003 
no dre P-1. 
30. 6ug * P<. 0005 
60. 4ug * P<. 0005 
3.60mg * P<. 7 
.210mg * P<.0005+ 
. 435mg * P<. 0005 + 
no dre P-1. 
. 10211g * P<. 0005 
.126mg * P<.0005 
no dre P•1 • 
1.41mg * P<.004 + 
1 • 73mg * P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
.603mg * P<.07 
• 712mg * P<.03 
no dre 
100ng •. : •• .!ug ••.. : .. 10 •.•.• : .• 100 •••• : •• .!mg •.•• : •• _10 •.•.. : .• 100 •••. : .. 1g ..... : •• 10 
.> 278.llg 
no dre P<.2 
p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 65 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl IOose line> 2Dose 2Inc itation or Patholog,\· 
Brkl)· Code 
474 1515 .26511g n.s.s . 0/34 .15711g 3/57 Tourkev itch; i j en, 20, 1446-1449; 1964 
• 1515 • 21411g n.s.s . 1/34 .15711g 5/57 
b 1515 87 .Oug 2.2711g 2/34 .15701g 16/57 
475 1469 126.llg 2.57g11 0/98p 40.511g 4/49 C81.001g 1/49) National Cancer Institute;bccr;1976 
1469 383.•g n.s.s. 2/98p 40.511g 2/49 81.011g 3/49 
476 1469 272.llg n.s.s. 0/99p 23.801g 2/50 47.6mg 1/50 
1469 251.llg n.s.s. 1/99p 23.811g 2/50 47.6mg 2/50 
CARBOXYMETHYLN I TROSOUREA CCMNUl 60391-92-6 
477 1246 14.211g n.s.s. 0/26 5.29 .. g 6/40 Bul ay; jnc i ,62, 1523-1528; 1979 
1246 68.111g n.s.s. 0/26 5.29mg 0/40 
b 1246 5.0611g n.s.s. 10/26 5.29mg 24/40 
CARBROMAL Cbro.,odi ethyl acety l urea) 77-65·6 
478 c03805 314.mg n.s.s. 0120 122.mg 8/50 244 ... g 9/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c03805 210.llg n. s. s. 7/20 122 ... g 30/50 244.mg 25/49 
b c03805 739.llg n. s. s. 0120 122.mg 1/50 244.lllg 4/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c03805 314.llg n. s. s. 0120 122 ... g 8/50 244 ... g 9/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
479 c03805 344.llg n.s.s. 12/20 112.lllg 16/49 225 ... g 21/50 
• c03805 321.llg n.s.s. 4/20 112.llg 8/49 225.llg 13/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03805 748.llg n.s.s. 7/20 112 ... g 4/49 225.llg 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
480 c03805 138.llg n.s.s. 10/20 61.911g 24/50 124.llg 26/50 
a c03805 n.s.s. n.1.s. 0120 61.911g 0/50 124.0lg 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
481 c03805 125.llg n.a.s. 8/20 49.5 .. g 14/50 99.0 .. g 24/50 
c03805 886.11g n.s.s. 1/20 49.5mg 0/50 99.0 .. g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
CARRAGEENAN, ACIO·DEGRADED 
482 611 1.10g11 5. 92gm 0/30 2 .65gm 11/40 Wakabayashi; cl et ,4, 171-176; 1978 
611 2.33g11 15.2gm 0!30 1.00g01 0/30 5.00gM 8/29 
CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 9000-07 -1 
483 1330 1.40gm n.a.s. 1/100 523.Mg 0/30 2.61g"' 0/30 5.23gm 0130 Rust i a;clet, 11, 1·10; 1980 
1330 11.0g"' n.s.s. 5/100 523.lllg 0/30 2.61g"' 3/30 5.23g .. 1/30 
484 1330 2 .49g• n.s.s. 1/100 460.llg 0/30 2.30g .. 0!30 4.60g"' 0/30 
a 1330 12.8g"' n.s.s. 6/100 460 ... g 2/30 2.30gm 2/30 4.60g"' 4/30 
485 1330 11.7g01 n.s.s. 2/100 250 ... g 1/30 1.25g"' 1/30 2.50g"' 4/30 
• 1330 35.2g01 n.s.s. 1/100 250.lllg 3/30 1.25g11 0/30 2. 50gm 0!30 
486 1330 6.34g11 n.s.s. 56/100 200 ... g 15/30 1.oog., 19/30 2.00g"' 12/30 
CHENODEOXYCHOLI C AC ID 474-25-9 
487 1445 17 •. 4.,g n.s.s. 0/10 31.3 .. g 0/10 Martin; b j ca, 43 ,884-886;1981 
CHLORAMBEN 133-90-4 
488 c00055 1.80g11 n.s.s. 0/10 1.14g"' 12/50 2.26g11 13/50 
• c00055 2 .28gm n.s.s . 0/10 1.14g"' 8/50 2.26gm 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00055 9.57g11 n.s.s. 0/10 1.14gm 1/50 2.26g"' 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
489 c00055 2.58g"' 57 .4g11 2/69p 1.14g01 7/50 2.26gm 10/50 
490 c00055 1.53g"' n.s.s. 2/10 1.05g"' 20/50 2.09g"' 20/50 
c00055 2.26g11 n.1.s. 2/10 1.05g"' 18/50 2.09gll 14/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c00055 6.22g11 n.1.s. 0/10 1. 05g01 0/50 2.09gll 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
491 c00055 2.01g11 n.s.s. 9/70p 1.05g11 16/50 2.09g11 14/50 
492 c00055 616.llg n.s.s. 6/10 354.llg 36/50 708.llg 34/50 
a c00055 2.90g11 n.s.s. 0/10 354.llg 2/50 708.llg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
493 c00055 339.llg n.s.s. 2/10 286.mg 25/50 566.llg 24/50 
a c00055 1.79g11 n.1.s. 0/10 286.llg 4/50 566.llg 1/50 ti v: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
494 c00055 1.31g11 n.s.s. Ot75p 286.llg 4/50 566.llg 3/50 
CHLORAMBUCIL 305-03-3 
495 1336 51.4ug • 225111g 20/154 .213mg 16/19 .42601g 4/8 Skipper ; srfr; 1976/We i sburger 1977 /Prejean pars. comm . 
a 1336 .229 .. g 8.3911g 3/154 .21311g 1/19 .42611g 3/8 
b 1336 .215.,g n.1.s. 1/154 .213mg 0/19 .426mg 0/8 
1336 11.8ug 77 .2ug 42/154 .21311g 18/19 .42611g 8/8 
d 1336 30.9ug .136 .. g 29/154 .21301g 16/19 .426 .. g 7/8 
• 1336 .35011g n.s.s . 13/154 .21311g 2/19 .42611g 1/8 
496 1336 .10811g .56711g 9/101 .21311g 10/26 .42611g 7/12 
• 1336 .19411g 1.6111g 2/101 .21311g 6/26 .426 .. g 3/12 
b 1336 .30811g n.s.s. 2/101 .21311g 0/26 .42611g 0/12 
c 1336 54.3ug .256 .. g 28/101 .21311g 18/26 .42611g 10/12 
d 1336 67. 7ug .305Mg 19/101 .21311g 14/26 .42611g 10/12 
• 1336 • 53511g n.s. s . 9/101 .213mg 4/26 .426 .. g 0/12 
497 1336 .45611g 19.311g 2/177 .31411g 2/21 .64311g 2/12 
• 1336 .52411g 12.411g 0/177 .31411g 1/21 .64311g 2/12 
b 1336 .41211g n.s.s . 0/177 .31411g 0/21 .64311g 0/12 
1336 • 19811g n.s.s . 59/177 .31411g 9/21 .64301g 7/12 
d 1336 • 25211g n.s.s. 32/177 .31411g 5/21 .643 .. g 6/12 
• 1336 .68111g n.s.s . 27/177 .31411g 4/21 .64311g 1/12 
CHLORAMPHENICOL CChloro11ycetinl 56-75-7 
498 200a 45.311g n.a.a. 0/71 22.0llg 1/36 Cohen; j nci, 51,403-417; 1973 
• 200a 22.211g n.s.s. 18/71 22.011g 9/36 66 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Note8 DR AuOp 
CHLORANIL _!OOng •• : •. _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
499 f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.1 
P-1. 
P<.1 
P<.002 
P<.02 
P<.0005 a f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
500 • b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b M b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 440.Mg 
501 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 1 261.11g 
f b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba Mix 76w76 evx 261.11g 
502 " b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 57. 2•g 
a " b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 113.0lg 
b " b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 34.2•g 
CHLORDANE 
503 f b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 v 
a b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 v 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 v 
c b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 v 
504 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w89 v 
505 • b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 ev 
a • b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 ev 
b " b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 ev 
" b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 ev _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!•g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
:+ : 4.8911g 
5.16•g I 
4.89Mg I 
228.0lg * 
pool : + 5.2811g I 
2.1511g I 
2.310lg * 
2.15•g I P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.4 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
c 
506 
507 • b6c eat l iv hpc 80w89 ev pool :+ 
+ • 656."'g * P<1. 
2.4811g I P<.0005c 
1 • 780lg Z P<. 0005 
71.8mg * P<.2 
b 
508 
b 
509 cd1 eat l iv nod 78w78 e 
f cd1 eat Liv hpt 78w78 e 
f cd1 eat lun ade 78w78 a 
" cd1 eat l iv nod 78w78 e 
" cd1 eat l iv hpt 78w78 e 
" cd1 eat lun •ix 78w78 
OH eat TBA MXB 19•25 ev 
a OH eat l iv MXB 19•25 ev • + • no dre P-1. 
1 • 4511g * P<. 0005 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
18.411g * P<.5 
121.11g * P<. 9 
510 R OH eat ute MXA 19•25 ev pool #101.0lg * P<.05 
#41.611g * P<.04 
42.5•g * P<.03 
21.611g * P<.4 
no dre P• 1. 511 OI OIOI eat thy MXA 191125 V 
OI OSOi eat fih 190l25 V 
b R 01 OH eat TBA MXB 190l25 v 
c R II OH eat l iv MXB 19M25 v 
512 R 11 OH eat fih 19•25 v pool #60. 411g * P<. 05 
CHLORINE 
513 R b bd2 wat tba 11ix 35.,35 g 
a b bd2 wat tba 11a l 351135 g 
b b bd2 wat tba ben 35.,35 g 
CHLORMADINONE ACETATE 
514 M f c3h eat 11a01 tu• 241124 er 
515 M crf eat MaM tu• 24•24 er 
516 M r3• eat 11111 tu• 24•24 er 
4 • CHLORO· 4' ·AMINODIPHENYLETHER 
517 f chi eat l iv •ix 68w86 av 
chi eat lun •ix 68w86 av 
b chi eat tba 01ix 68w86 av 
518 chi eat vsc 68w86 av 
a chi eat ubl Mix 68w86 av 
519 •chi eat liv •ix 51w55 
" chi eat lun "'ix 51w55 
b " chi eat tba •ix 51w55 
520 " cdr eat l iv hpt 77w98 v 
a " cdr eat l iv •ix 77w98 
b " cdr eat tba 11ix 77w98 
521 " cdr eat l iv hpt 77w98 v _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •. _100 •••• : •• _!Olg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
_!OOng •• : •. _!ug •••• : .• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••. : •• _!Olg •••• : •• _10 ••••. : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
.> 3.7711g * P<.5 
pool .> no dre P• 1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
pool 
pool 1 905.mg * P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
598.11g * P<.4 
346.mg * P<.0005+ 
1.13911 * P<. 0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
37 .911g \ P<.005 + 
37 .90lg \ P<.005 + 
25. 111g * P<. 004 
37 .611g P<.0005+ 
2·CHLOR0·5· (3,5·DIMETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL)8ENZOIC ACID ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!•g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •.•• : •• _!g •.••• : •• _10 
522 R " f34 eat l iv hpc 70w71 erv 4.85.,g P<.0005+ 
1-CHLORO· 2, 4 · DINITROBENZENE 
523 H f chi eat lun 11ix 77w94 
a :If chi eat Liv 11ix 77w94 
b M f chi aat tba •ix 77w94 
524 M " chi eat l iv mix 77w94 
M " chi eat lun Mix 77w94 
b M " chi eat tba •ix 77w94 
525 R • cdr eat l iv •ix 18•24 
a R " cdr eat tba Mix 18•24 
1-CHLORO· 2 -NITROBENZENE 
526 M f chi eat Liv hpt 77w98 v 
M f chi eat Liv •ix 77w98 v _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •. _10 .•••• : .• _100 ••.• : •• _!•g •.•. : .• _10 .•.•• : •• _100 •••. : •• _!g •...• : •. _10 
150.0lg \ P<.007 
1 • 52g"' * P<. 3 
124.mg * P<.004 
1 365.mg * P<.03 
541.mg * P<.06 
255.mg \ P<.09 
:> no dre P• 1. 
12.30lg P<.01 
_!OOng •. : •• _!ug .••• : •• _10 •.•.. : .• _100 •••• : .. _!•g •••. : .• _10 ..••• : •. _100 •••• : .• _!g ••••. : .• _10 
289 • .,g \ P<.007 + 
289. 11g \ P<. 007 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 67 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
CHLORANIL < tetrach loro·p·benzoqu inone> 118· 75 · 2 
499 1241 106.•g n.1.1. 1/17 89.111g 1/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1241 177.•g n.1.1. 0/17 89.1•g 0/18 
b 1241 84.1•g n.1.1. 2/17 89.111g 2/18 
500 1241 77 .5•g n.1.1. 2/18 82.911g 2/18 
a 1241 98.0•g n.1.1. 1/18 82.9•g 1/18 
b 1241 51.511g n.1.1. 3/18 82.911g 4/18 
501 1241 64.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 89.1•g 2/17 
a 1241 167.•g n.1.1. 0/16 89.111g 0/17 
b 1241 64.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 89.111g 2/17 
502 1241 24.3•g 220.•g 0/16 82.911g 7/17 
a 1241 38.911g n.1.1. 0/16 82.911g 4/17 
b 1241 16.1•g 89.9•g 0/16 82.911g 10/17 
CHLORDANE 57.74.9 
503 c00099 3.28•g 7 .88•g 0/20 3.5111g 3/50 7.41•g 34/50 
a c00099 3.28•g 11. 711g 2/20 3.5111g 6/50 7.4111g 35/50 
b c00099 3.28•g 7 .88•g 0/20 3.5111g 3/50 7.41•g 34/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c00099 37 .1•g n.1.1. 0/20 3.5111g 0/50 7.41•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
504 c00099 3.4111g 9.3011g 3/80p 3.5111g 3/50 7.41•g 34/50 
505 c00099 1.45•g 4.08•g 2/18 3.1211g 16/50 6.00•g 43/50 
a c00099 1.47•g 5.5511g 4/18 3.1211g 19/50 6.0011g 43/50 
b c00099 1.4511g 4.08•g 2/18 3.1211g 16/50 6.00•g 43/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c00099 9.9811g n.1.1. 1/18 3.1211g 6/50 6.00•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
506 c00099 1.6111g 4.44•g 17 /95p 3.1211g 16/50 6.00•g 43/50 
507 66a 1.1511g 2.9411g 0/57 .65011g 0/62 3.2511g 32/51 (6.5011g 36/51) Epstein(rev i ew> { i rdc}; stev ,6, 103-154; 1976 
a 66a 19.011g n.1.1. 1/57 .65011g 0/62 3.2511g 2/51 6.5011g 2/51 
b 66a 13.111g n.1.1. 6/57 .65011g 2/62 3.2511g 2/51 (6.5011g 0/51) 
508 66a 1.07•g 2 .05•g 1/47 .60011g 6/58 3.0011g 34/52 6.00•g 38/50 
a 66a 14.511g n.1.1. 4/47 .60011g 6/58 3.00•g 10/52 6.0011g 2/50 
b 66a 32.711g n.1.1. 8/47 .600•g 7/58 3.0011g 2/52 6.0011g 2/50 
509 c00099 4.4611g n.1.1. 7/10 4.4011g 34/50 8.9011g 29/50 
a c00099 11.211g n.1.1. 1/10 4.4011g 11/50 8.9011g 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
510 c00099 30.411g n.1.1. 0/60p 4.4011g 1/50 8.9011g 2/50 ute:adc,sar. s 
511 c00099 17.911g n.1.1. 0/10 5.9611g 1/50 11.911g 6/50 thy:fca,fcc. s 
a c00099 18.911g n.1.1. 0/10 5.9611g 1/50 11.911g 7/50 s 
b c00099 6.1311g n.1.1. 3/10 5.9611g 21/50 11.911g 23/50 
c c00099 40.9•g n.1.1. 0/10 5.9611g 2/50 11.911g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
512 c00099 22.311g n.1.1. 2/60p 5.9611g 1/50 11.9•g 7/50 
CHLORINE 7782-50·5 
513 1421 52.611g n.1.a. 3/20 5.2911g 5/60 Druckrey ;fctx,6, 147-154; 1968 
a 1421 64.6•g n.1.a. 2/20 5.2911g 3160 
b 1421 69.1•g n.a.a. 1/20 5.2911g 2/60 
CHLORMADINONE ACETATE 302-22·7 
514 1175 .71311g n.1.1. 54/92 .10411g 28/43 1.0411g 24/36 Rudal i; jnc i ,49,813-819;1972 
515 1175 .96611g n.1.1. 161/167p .10411g 45/46 1.0411g 34/40 
516 1175 1.11•g n.1.1. 50/73 .10411g 10/19 1.0411g 18/30 
4 · CHLORO· 4' ·AMI NOD IPHENYLETHER 101-79-1 
517 381 225.•g n.a.a. 1/15 287.llg 1/17 624.•g 2/18 Wei sburger ; j ept, 2, 325·356;1978/pers. co1111. /Russf i eld 1973 
• 381 286.•g n.1.1. 5/15 287.llg 2/17 624.llg 0/18 
b 381 126.•g n.1.1. 10/15 287.•g 7/17 624.llg 5/18 
518 381 130 .Ilg 1. 49g• 8/102p 287.llg 5/17 624.llg 3/18 
• 381 389.11g 5.82g11 0/102p 287.llg 0/17 624.•g 4/18 
519 381 n.1.1. n.1.1. 1/14 300.llg 0/16 600.11g 0/9 
a 381 n.1.1. n.1.1. 3/14 300.llg 0/16 600.llg 019 
b 381 110.11g n.1.1. 7/14 300.llg 3/16 600.•g 0/9 
520 381 11.811g 381.llg 0/16 38.211g 4/13 <84.0•g 1/23) 
a 381 11.811g 381.•g 0/16 38.211g 4/13 (84.0•g 1/23> 
b 381 8.14•g 248.•g 10/16 38.211g 9/13 84.0•g 9/23 
521 381 12.111g 258.•g 2/111p 38.211g 4/13 C84.011g 1/23) 
2· CHLORO· 5 · (3, 5 · DIMETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL >BENZOIC ACID 
522 1331 2.15•g 9.78•g 0/30 52.111g 30/31 Reddy ;natu,283,397-398; 1980 
1·CHLOR0 ·2,4-DINITROBENZENE 97-00·7 
523 381 51. 7•g 2.37g• 3/13 169.llg 5/19 <306.•g 5/16> Wai sburger; j ept, 2, 325 · 356; 1978/pers. co1111. /Russf ield 1973 
a 381 247.•g n.s.1. 0/13 169.llg 0/19 306.•g 1/16 
b 381 57 .411g 1.03g11 9/13 169.llg 9/19 306.•g 11/16 
524 381 138.11g n.s.s. 2/16 207.llg 2/15 354.•g 4/21 
a 381 203.11g n.1.1. 2/16 207.llg 3/15 354.llg 3/21 
b 381 79.211g n.1.1. 9/16 207 .Ilg 6/15 <354.llg 10/21) 
525 381 66.5•g n.1.1. 1/17 17.611g 2/18 32.211g 0/18 
381 5.0511g 1.78g11 13/17 17.611g 12/18 (32 .211g 14/18) 
1·CHLORO·2 · NITROBENZENE 88· 73.3 
526 381 109.llg 3. 78g11 0/20 241.llg 5/22 (461.•g 5/19) Wei sburger ; j apt, 2, 325-356;1978/pers . co1111. /Russf i e ld 1973 
381 109.llg 3. 78g11 0/20 241.•g 5/22 (461.•g 7/19) 68 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b M chi eat lun 11ix 77w98 v 
c M chi eat tba mix 77w98 
527 M chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 v pool 
528 Mm chi eat Liv mix 73w81 av 
M m chi eat lun mix 73w81 av 
b M 11 chi eat tba mix 73w81 av 
529 M • chi eat l iv hpt 73w81 av pool 
530 R m cdr eat l iv mix 77w98 
R m cdr eat tba 11 ix 77w98 GOLD ET AL. 
:> TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
10.9gm * P<1. 
287 .mg \ P<.2 
289. mg \ P<. 0005+ 
113.mg * P<.003 
no dre P-1. 
186.mg * P<.07 
108.11g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
1·CHLORO·4 • NITROBENZENE _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
531 f chi eat vsc 73w90 a 
chi eat lun mix 73w90 
b chi eat Liv mix 73w90 a 
chi eat tba mix 73w90 
532 
533 
b 
534 
a 
535 chi eat 
11 chi eat VSC 73w90 a 
vsc 73w86 a 
11 chi eat l iv 11ix 73w86 a 
m chi eat lun mix 73w86 a 
m chi eat tba mix 73w86 a 
m chi eat vsc 73w86 a 
11 chi eat l iv hpt 73w86 a 
11 cdr eat l iv •ix 77w98 v 
11 cdr eat tba mix 77w98 v pool 
+ 
pool 526.mg * P<.0005+ 
539.mg * P<.08 
1.44g11 * P<.04 
125.mg * P<.0005 
634.11g * P<.0005+ 
430.mg * P<.006 + 
262.mg * P<.03 
1.69gm P<.4 
215.mg * P<.02 
483.mg * P<.0005+ 
558.mg * P<.02 
no dre P~1. 
60.4'1g * P<.5 
4·CHLORO·11 • PHENYLENEDIAMINE _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
536 f b6c eat l iv MXA 78w95 v 
b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 v 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 v 
d b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 v 
537 m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w94 v 
11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w94 v 
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78w94 v 
538 f f34 eat ute esp 18m24 
a f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
b f34 eat l iv MXB 18m24 
539 11 f34 eat adr phe 18m24 
R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
b R II f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 .. + 1. 23gm \ P<. 0005c 
1 • 78gm \ P<. 002 c 
15.4gm * P<.8 
:> 1 • 23gm P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
7 .32g11 * P<. 7 
7.05g11 * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
#175.mg \ P<.007 -
479.mg * P<.5 
2.68gm * P<.1 
315.'1g * P<.03 
422.11g P<.5 
1.57gm * P<.2 
4· CHLORO· O· PHENYLENED !AMI NE _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
540 f b6c eat l iv MXA 78w95 v 
a f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 v 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 v 
d b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 v 
541 11 b6c eat l iv MXA 78w95 v 
a 
b 
c 
d 
542 
a 
b 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 v 
m b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 v 
m b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 v 
f f34 eat MXB MXB 181124 
f f34 eat ubl MXA 181124 
f34 eat ubl MXA 181124 
f34 eat thy MXA 18m24 
d f34 eat sto sqp 181124 
e f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
543 11 f34 eat MXB MXB 181124 
11 f34 eat ubl MXA 181124 
b R ., f34 eat ubl tee 18.,24 
R • f34 eat sto MXA 180!24 
d R 11 f34 eat thy MXA 18m24 
e R m f34 eat ubl sqc 181124 
f R II f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
g m f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
2· CHLORO· p· PHENYLENED !AMINE SULFATE 
544 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 22•24 a 
a M b6c eat l iv MXB 22m24 a 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 221124 a 
545 M 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 220!24 a 
M m b6c eat l iv MXB 22m24 a 
b M ., b6c eat lun MXB 22.,24 a 
546 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 a 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 24.,24 a 
547 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 a 
a 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 a :+ : + 2. 24gm * P<. 0005c 
5.06g" * P<.006 c 
4.09g'1 * P<.4 
2. 24gm * P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
957 .Olg * P<.002 c 
1.37g11 * P<.002 c 
905. mg * P<. 005 
957.mg * P<.002 
21.3gm * P<.8 
212.mg P<.0005 
212.'1g P<.0005c 
429.'1g P<.0005c 
2.16g11 * P<.02 
5.27g11 * P<.04 
351.mg * P<.03 
6.50g11 * P<.08 
197.mg * P<.0005 
216.mg * P<.0005c 
363.11g * P<.0005c 
+historical * P<.02 
3.38gm * P<.04 
3. 78gm * P<.04 
362. mg * P<. 07 
1 • 24gm * P<. 02 
•• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
:> 
:> :> 1.43gm • 
1.59g11 • 
3.33g• • 
:> 4.38g11 P<.5 
P<.07 
P<.2 
P<.8 
1.31gm * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
3.60gOI * P<.6 
244.0lg * P<.2 
665.11g * P<.4 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 69 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl I Dose line 2Do~e 2Inc Citation or Patholog~ ' 
Brki)· Code 
b 381 395.0lg n.s.s. 6/20 241.0lg 4/22 461.0lg 4/19 
e 381 86.3•g n.s.s. 17/20 241.llg 12122 <461.mg 11/19) 
527 381 109.llg 1.19gOI 1/102p 241.0lg 5/22 (461.11g 5/19> 
528 381 46.011g 885.0lg 3/18 260.0lg 8/17 540.0lg 3/16 
381 246.0lg n.s.s. 5/18 260.llg 1/17 540.llg 0/16 
b 381 56.40lg n.s.s. 12118 260.0lg 9/17 540.llg 4/16 
529 381 45. 2mg 352.llg 7/99p 260.0lg 7117 540.mg 3/16 
530 381 46.211g n.s.s. 1/22 20.911g 2122 43.60lg 0/19 
381 15.3mg n.s.s. 14/22 20.911g 14/22 43.60lg 8/19 
1 · CHLOR0·4 · N ITROBENZENE 100·00·5 
531 381 208.•g 1.88g11 0/ 15 351.11g 2120 780.llg 7/18 Wei sburger; j ept, 2, 325 · 356; 1978/pers . eom11. /Russf i eld 1973 
381 46.8mg n. I. S. 8/15 351.Rlg 3120 780.mg 4/18 
b 381 338.llg n.s.s. 0/15 351.mg 1/20 780.llg 2118 
e 381 31.311g 512.0lg 11/15 351.llg 10/20 780.0lg 12118 
532 381 240.llg 2.39g11 8/102p 351.llg 2120 780.0lg 7/18 
533 381 146.llg 4.99g11 0/14 341.Rlg 2114 720.mg 4/ 14 
381 96.211g n. s. s. 1/14 341.llg 5/14 720.11g 1/14 
b 381 293.'1g n.s.s. 4/ 14 341.mg 0/14 720.mg 3/14 
e 381 83.9mg n.s.s. 8/14 341.0lg 7114 720.mg 7/14 
534 381 158.mg 2.62gm 5/99p 341.mg 2114 720.mg 4/14 
8 381 153 ... g n.s.s. 7/99p 341.mg 4/14 720.0lg 0/14 
535 381 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/16 22.6mg 0/14 45. 2mg 0/ 15 
381 12.011g n.s.s. 9/16 22.60lg 10/14 45.211g 10/15 
4 · CHLORO· m· PHENYLENED I AMINE 5131-60·2 
536 e03305 620.llg 3. 25gm 0/50 732.mg 11 /50 C1.46g" 8/49) l iv:hpa,hpe. 
8 e03305 804.0lg 6.61gm 0/50 732.mg 8/50 C1.46gOI 5/49) 
b e03305 1.49gm n.s.s. 14/50 732 ... g 21/50 1.46gm 16/49 
e03305 620.llg 3.25g11 0/50 732.llg 11/50 ( 1.46g11 8/49) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d e03305 9. 28gm n.s.s. 4/50 732.mg 1/50 1.46gOI 1 /49 lun:a/a,a/c . 
537 e03305 1.20gm n.s.s. 22/50 676.mg 19/50 1.35gm 25/50 
8 e03305 1.53g11 n.s.s. 15/50 676.119 10/50 1.35g11 19/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b e03305 5. 75g .. n.s.s. 7150 676.llg 4/50 1.35g11 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
538 e03305 79.811g 3.15gOI 2150 75 .Omg 12150 < 149.mg 5150) 
e03305 105.llg n.s.s. 27/50 75 .Omg 33/50 149.0lg 30/50 
b e03305 660.llg n.s.s. 0/50 75.011g 0/50 149.0lg 2150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
539 e03305 144.mg n. s. s. 4/50 60.0mg 7150 119.mg 14/49 
e03305 97 .911g n.s.s. 28/50 60.011g 21/50 119.mg 36/49 
b e03305 474 .mg n.s.s. 0/50 60.011g 1/50 119 ... g 2/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
4 · CHLORO· o· PHENYLENED !AMINE 95-83·0 
540 e03292 1.34g11 6.00g11 0/50 752.0lg 11/50 1.50gm 10/50 liv:hpa,hpe. 
8 e03292 2.47gm 42.9gm 0/50 752.0lg 4/50 1.50gm 6/50 
b e03292 1.15g11 n.s.s. 14/50 752.llg 24/50 1.50gll 21/50 
e03292 1.34g11 6.00gm 0/50 752.llg 11/50 1.50gOI 10/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d e03292 6.11gm n.s.s. 4/50 752.mg 2150 1.50gm 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
541 e03292 521.llg 4.25gOI 15/50 701.0lg 28/50 1.39gOI 34/50 l iv:hpa,hpe. 
a e03292 729.11g 7 .14gm 10/50 701.llg 18/50 1.39g11 26/50 
b e03292 460.11g 8.99gm 22/50 701.mg 37/50 1.39gOI 39/50 
e03292 521.llg 4.25g11 15/50 701.11g 28/50 1.39gOI 34/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d e03292 2.41gll n.s.s. 7/50 701.'1g 9/50 1.39g11 7 /50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
542 e03292 148.llg 318.•g 0/50 184.mg 15/50 368.0lg 32/50 sto:sqp; ubl: pas, ppe, ppn, tee, tpp. 
8 e03292 148.llg 318.11g 0/50 184.llg 15/50 368.11g 32150 ubl :pas,ppe,ppn , tee, tpp. 
b e03292 270.llg 740.11g 0/50 184.0lg 5/50 368.llg 22150 ubl:ppe,tee. 
e03292 878.11g n.s.s. 0/50 184.mg 2150 368.mg 4/50 thy:fea,fee. 
d e03292 1.58gm n.s.s. 0/50 184.mg 0/50 368 ... g 3/50 
e e03292 157 .Ilg n.s.s. 27/50 184.llg 35/50 368.mg 37/50 
e03292 1.60g .. n.s.s. 0/50 184.llg 0/50 368.0lg 2150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
543 e03292 136.0lg 301.oag 0/50 149.0lg 15/49 294.mg 29/50 sto:sqc,sqp; ubl :ppn,sqe, tee, tpp. 
a e03292 146.llg 337 •• g 0/50 149.0lg 15/49 294.mg 25/50 ubl :ppn, tee, tpp. 
b e03292 224.0lg 650.mg 0/50 149.llg 7/49 294.mg 18/50 
e03292 862 .mg n.s.s. 0/50 149.mg 0/49 294.mg 4/50 sto:sqc,sqp . 
d e03292 1.02g11 n.s.s. 0/50 149.0lg 0/49 294.0lg 3/50 thy:fea,fee. 
e e03292 1.13gm n. s. s. 0/50 149.mg 0/49 294.mg 3/50 
e03292 147.mg n.s.s. 28/50 149.mg 31/49 294.mg 39/50 
g e03292 558.•g n.s.s. 0/50 149.mg 4/49 294.0lg 4/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2 • CHLORO·p· PHEKYLENED !AMINE SULFATE 61702-44· 1 
544 e03316 359 • .,g n.s.s. 12120 390.llg 27/50 646 ... g 22150 
8 e03316 656.•g n.s.s. 2120 390.mg 5/50 646.mg 9/50 L; v: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b e03316 1.26gm n.s.s. 0120 390.mg 3/50 646.mg 2150 lun:a/a,a/c. 
545 e03316 527.0lg n.s.s. 12120 360.0lg 21 /50 596.mg 30/50 
e03316 543.0lg n.s.s. 4/20 360.llg 12150 596.mg 20/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b e03316 1.55gm n.s.s. 3120 360.mg 7150 596.mg 6/50 Lun:a/a,a/c . 
546 e03316 112 ... g n.s.s. 17/20 75.0 .. g 26/50 < 150.mg 19/50) 
8 e03316 886.llg n.s.s. 0/20 75 .Omg 1/50 150.0lg 1/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
547 e03316 95. Omg n~s .s. 7/20 60.0mg 21150 120.mg 27/50 
e03316 301.llg n.s.s. 0120 60.0mg 5150 120.mg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 70 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
3 · CHLORO· p· TOLUID !NE 
548 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 
M f b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 
b M f b6c eat l un MXB 78w90 
549 M .. b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 
M " b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 
b M " b6c eat l un MXB 78w90 
550 f f34 eat ute up 18.,24 v 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 18,,24 v 
b f f34 eat l iv MXB 18oi24 v 
551 " f34 eat TBA MXB 180l24 v 
R " f34 eat l iv MXB 18 .. 24 v 
5 • CHLORO·o· TOLUI DINE 
552 f b6c eat MXB MXB 78w91 
a b6c eat l iv MXA 78w91 
b b6c eat l iv hpc 78w91 
b6c eat hes 78w91 
b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 
b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 
b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 
553 " b6c eat MXB MXB 78w91 
"' b6c eat hes 78w91 
b " b6c eat l iv MXA 78w91 
c " b6c eat l iv hpc 78w91 
d " b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 
" b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 
" b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 18 .. 24 554 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 18on24 
555 " f34 eat adr phe 18•24 
a R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
b on f34 eat l iv MXB 18on24 
4 • CHLORO· o· TOLUID !NE. HC l 
556 f b6c eat · • · MXA 95w99 as 
b6c eat · · · hes 95w99 as 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 95w99 as 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 95w99 as 
d b6c eat lun MXB 95w99 as 
557 " b6c eat MXA 99w99 s 
" b6c eat hes 99w99 s 
b " b6c eat TBA MXB 99w99 s 
" b6c eat l iv MXB 99w99 s 
d " b6c eat lun MXB 99w99 s 
558 f chi eat • • • vsc 51w60 a 
a chi eat l iv "ix 51w60 a 
b chi eat lun .,;. 51w60 a 
chi eat tba mix 51w60 a 
559 chi eat · · · vsc 51w60 a 
560 "' chi eat lun 11ix 55w60 
a "' chi eat • · · vsc 55w60 
b " chi eat l iv "ix 55w60 
c " chi eat tba •ix 55w60 
561 • chi eat · · • vsc 55w60 
562 f34 eat TBA MXB 25.,25 
f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
563 " f34 eat pit era 25.,25 
a " f34 eat TBA MXB 251125 
b " f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
564 " cdr eat l iv "ix 77w98 
e "' cdr eat tba "ix 77w98 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ..••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 •...• :. -100 •••• :. ·19· •••• :. -10 
:> 1.98911 * P<.8 
919.119 * P<.6 
5.11gm P<.8 
:> 3.11gm * P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
733."9 * P<.3 
.z #406.119 * P<.02 -
365.•g * P<.4 
5.68gm * P<.4 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •. 10 .•... : .• 100 •..• :. ·1•9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• :. -19· ••.• :. -10 
:+ : 143.mg * P<.0005 
180 • .,g * P<.0005c 
217 • .,g * P<.0005c 
373 • .,g P<.0005c 
164.119 * P<.0005 
180.mg * P<.0005 
7. 489m * P<. 5 
:> 134 • .,g I P<.0005 
213.119 I P<.0005c 
249.11g * P<.0005c 
271.llg * P<.002 c 
132 .11g P<. 0005 
249. •g * P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
#714 • .,g * P<.03 
1.02g" * P<. 7 
3.34gon * P<.6 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.. : .• 100 •••• :. -1"9· .•. : .• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -19· • ••• : •• 10 
: +: 40.0"g P<.0005c 
42. 3m9 P<. 0005c 
38.8mg P<.0005 
754.mg * P<.3 
798.mg * P<.01 
:+ 743.119 P<.0005c 
911.mg P<.0005c 
537. 11g P<. 0005 
3.26911 * P<.03 
no dre P•1. 
+ 15.711g * P<.0005+ 
139.119 * P<.02 -
153.119 * P<.06 -
15.6119 * P<.0005 
pool 18.4ong • P<.0005+ 
8. 850lg \ P<. 0005-
15. 40lg * P<.0005+ 
95. 7119 * P<.04 -
7. 72.,g * P<. 0005 
pool + 
:> 
:> 15.4119 * P<.0005+ 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
#576.119 * P<.05 -
no dre P-1. 
6.18911 * P<.8 
123.119 * P<.2 
24.9•g * P<.03 
[ 4·CHLOR0·6· <2,3·XYLIDIN0) ·2·PYRIMIDINYL THIO[ACETIC ACID ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•9· ••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 .••• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
565 R "' f34 eat l iv hpc 65w65 e <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
P<.005 R m f34 eat tba •ix 65w65 e noTD50 
4. CHLOR0·6· <2,3·XYLIDIN0) ·2·PYRIMIDINYL THIO<N·beta·HYDROXYETHYl)ACETAMIDE.1"9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
566 M f csb eat liv hpc 82w82 er + 44.6.,g P<.0005+ 
567 R " f34 eat l iv hpc 75w82 aer 6.49119 • P<.0005+ 
CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 
568 M f hi c gav for tu11 90w90 
569 M " hi c gav for tu11 90w90 
4' • <CHLOROACETYL) ·AC ETAN IL IDE 
570 M f b6c eat l iv hpa 21•24 v 
a M b6c eat TBA MXB 211124 v 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 211124 v 
M b6c eat lun MXB 21•24 v 100ng •• :. -1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1119 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
.> 13.6•g P<.4 
P-1. .> no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ..••. : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
: .z 4. 70911 * P<.02 a 
3.50911 \ P<. 7 
4. 70911 * P<.02 
3.02911 \ P<.09 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 71 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation 01· Pathology 
B1·kly Corle 
3 · CHLORO· p · TOLU ID INE 95.74.9 
548 c02040 220.mg n.s.s. 5/20 67.60lg 6/50 135.0lg 11/50 
a c02040 310.•g n.s.s. 0/20 67.6•g 4/50 135.mg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02040 483.mg n.s.s. 2/20 67.60lg 0/50 135.mg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
549 c02040 148.mg n.s.s. 5/20 62.4mg 15/50 125.0lg 14/50 
c02040 261.mg n.s.s. 4/20 62.40lg 10/50 125.mg 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02040 299.0lg n.s.s. 0/20 62.4•g 3/50 125.mg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
550 c02040 214.mg n.s.s. 0/20 62.00lg 4/50 124.mg 9/50 
c02040 102.mg n.s.s. 7/20 62.0•g 22/50 124.mg 28/50 
b c02040 925 .mg n.s.s. 0/20 62.0•g 0/50 124.0lg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
551 c02040 196.mg n.s.s. 9/20 49.6mg 21/50 100.mg 17 /50 
c02040 761.mg n.s.s. 0/20 49.6mg 1 /50 100.mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
5 · CHLORO· o · TOLUI DI NE 95. 79.4 
552 c02051 104.mg 221.mg 0/20 222 .mg 26/50 446.mg 35/50 ---:hes; l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c02051 128.mg 290.0lg 0/20 222 .mg 21 /50 446.mg 31/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
b c02051 151.mg 379.mg 0/20 222.0lg 19/50 446.0lg 26/50 
c02051 237 .mg 676.mg 0/20 222 .mg 6/50 446.mg 22/50 
d c02051 103.mg 446.•g 4/20 222.mg 32/50 446.mg 38/50 
e c02051 128.mg 290.•g 0/20 222 .mg 21/50 446.mg 31/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
f c02051 1.39g OI n.s.s. 1/20 222 .mg 0/50 446.0lg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
553 c02051 88.6mg 269.mg 5/20 205 .mg 29/50 412.mg 45/50 ---:hes; l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c02051 145.mg 356.mg 1/20 205 .mg 11 /50 412.0lg 37/50 
b c02051 146.mg 876.mg 4/20 205 .mg 20/50 412.mg 27 /50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c02051 155.mg 1.16gm 4/20 205 .mg 19/50 412.mg 25/50 
d c02051 85.9mg 279.mg 6/20 205 .mg 31/50 412.0lg 46/50 
e c02051 146.mg 876.mg 4/20 205 .mg 20/50 412.mg 27 /50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c02051 1.18g• n.s.s. 2/20 205.0lg 2/50 412.mg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
554 c02051 218.mg n.s.s. 8/20 94.0mg 22/50 189.mg 23/50 
a c02051 1.44g• n.s.s. 0/20 94.0mg 1/50 189.0lg 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
555 c02051 336.mg n.s.s. 0/20 75.20lg 2/50 151.mg 7/50 
a c02051 166.mg n.s.s. 8/20 75.2mg 17/50 151.mg 24/50 
b c02051 821.mg n.s.s. 0/20 75. 2mg 1 /50 151.0lg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
4 · CHLORO·o · TOLUI DINE. HC l 3165-93·3 
556 c02368 26.90lg 62.0•g 1/20 162.•g 43/50 650.0lg 39/50 · -·:hem, hes. 
c02368 28.6mg 64.0•g 0/20 162.mg 40/50 650.0lg 39/50 
b c02368 25.6mg 63.4•g 5/20 162.mg 45/50 650.mg 42/50 
c02368 191.mg n.s.s. 1/20 162.0lg 4/50 650.mg 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d c02368 217.0lg 76.0gm 0/20 162.mg 2/50 650.mg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
557 c02368 507 .mg 1.13gm 0/20 450.0lg 6/50 1.80gm 41/50 ---:he11,hes . 
c02368 605.mg 1.44gm 0/20 450.0lg 3/50 1.80gm 37/50 
b c02368 336.mg 1.09gm 11/20 450.0lg 28/50 1.80gm 45/50 
c02368 1.29gOI n.s.s. 4/20 450.0lg 7 /50 1.80gm 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c02368 2.15gm n.s.s. 4/20 450.mg 14/50 1.80gm 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
558 381 6.23•g 37 .4mg 0/15 260.mg 18/19 520.0lg 12/16 Wei sburgor; j opt, 2, 325 · 356; 1978/pors. co•m. /Russ field 1973 
a 381 24.8•g n.s.s. 0/15 260.0lg 1/19 520.0lg 1/16 
b 381 25.0•g n.s.s. 8/ 15 260.0lg 1/19 520.0lg 0/16 
381 6.21mg 36.4mg 11/15 260 ... g 18/19 520.0lg 13/16 
559 381 7 .46mg 41.3mg 8/102p 260.0lg 18/19 520.0lg 12/16 
560 381 2.51•g 55.60lg 4/14 90.0•g 7/20 ( 180 ... g 2/20) 
• 381 8.3501g 30.2mg 0/14 90.0•g 12/20 180.mg 13/20 
b 381 17.2mg n.s.s. 1/ 14 90.0mg 0120 180.0lg 2/20 
c 381 4.02mg 15.1mg 8/14 90.0•g 18/20 180.0lg 16/20 
561 381 8.35mg 27 .4mg 5/99p 90.0mg 12/20 180.0lg 13/20 
562 c02368 299 .mg n.s.s. 12/20 62.5mg 34/50 250.mg 32/50 
a c02368 1.90g11 n.s.s. 1/20 62.5mg 0/50 250.11g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
563 c02368 239.mg n.s.s. 2/20 50.0mg 6/50 200.mg 15/50 s 
c02368 209.0lg n.s.s. 13/20 50.0mg 30/50 200.0lg 33/50 
b c02368 452.llg n.s.s. 0/20 50.0mg 5/50 200.0lg 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
564 381 36.20lg n.s.s. 0/16 24.60lg 2/19 49.1mg 1/13 Wei sburger; j opt, 2, 325 · 356; 1978/pers. comm. /Russf i eld 1973 
381 10. 70lg n.s.s. 9/16 24.60lg 12/19 49.10lg 10/13 
14· CHLORO· 6· ( 2, 3· XYLIDI NO)· 2 · PYR IMI D INYL TH 10 I ACETIC ACID 50892·23 ·4 
565 1332 n.s.s. 13.8mg 0/12 80.0mg 14/14 Lal wani; care, 2 ,645 · 650; 1981 
1332 n.s.s. 17.8mg 3/12 80.0mg 14/14 
4 • CHLORO· 6· <2, 3 · XYL !DINO>· 2 · PYR IMI D INYL TH IO(N ·beta· HYDROXYETHYL )ACETAMIDE 
566 1331 16.4mg 126.mg 0/ 15 260.mg 11/12 Reddy; natu, 283, 397 -398; 1980 
567 1331 2.770lg 14. 70lg 0130 20.0•g 7 /10 80.00lg 20/20 
CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 107-20·0 
568 1011 2.430lg n.1.s. 5/100 1.43mg 3/30 Van Duuran;jnci,63,1433-1439;1979 
569 1011 4.29•g n.1.s. 8160 1.190lg 1/30 
4' · ( CHLOROACETYL) ·ACETANI LIDE 140·49·8 
570 c03770 2.29g11 n.s.s. 0/20 557 .Olg 2/50 1.11g• 8/50 
c03770 590.0lg n.s.s. 6/20 557 .mg 21/50 (1.11g11 12/50) 
b c03770 2.29g• n.s.s. 0/20 557 .mg 2/50 1.11g• 8/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
c03770 1.14g11 n.s.s. 0/20 557 .Olg 5/50 (1.11g• 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 72 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
571 M " b6c eat TBA MXB 21 .. 24 v 
a M"' b6c eat liv MXB 21m24 v 
b M "' b6c eat lun MXB 210124 v 
572 f f34 oat TBA MXB 20m24 v 
a 
573 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 20m24 v 
" f34 eat TBA MXB 20m24 v 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 200l24 v GOLD ET AL. 
:> :> 
:> TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
325.0lg • P<. 7 
2.47g11 • P<.8 
p · CHLOROANI LI NE 
574 M f b6c eat 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .••.. : .• 100 •••• :. ·1"'g ••.• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •... :. ·19· •••• : •• 10 
MXA 78w91 
a M b6c eat hes 78w91 
b M b6c eat l iv MXA 78w91 
M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 
d b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 
e 
575 
a 
b 
576 
577 
a 
b 
d b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 
"' b6c eat MXA 78w91 
"' b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 
" b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 
" b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m24 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 18m24 
" f34 eat spl MXA 18•24 
" f34 eat MXA MXA 18m24 
m f34 eat spl fib 18m24 
.. f34 eat TBA MXB 180l24 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 18m24 
CHLOROBENZILATE 
578 M f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w90 dv 
a M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 dv 
b M b6c oat l iv MXB 78w90 dv 
M b6c eat l un MXB 78w90 dv 
579 M b6c or l l un ado 82w82 evx 
M b6c or l l iv hpt 82w82 evx 
b M b6c orl tba mix 82w82 evx 
580 M "' b6c eat l iv hpc 78w90 dv 
M " b6c oat TBA MXB 78w90 dv 
b M m b6c oat l iv MXB 78w90 dv 
M " b6c eat l un MXB 78w90 dv 
581 M m b6c orl l iv hpt 82w82 evx 
a M m b6c orl lun mix 82w82 ovx 
b M " b6c orl tba 01ix 82w82 evx 
582 M f b6a or l lun ado 82w82 evx 
a M f b6a orl l iv hpt 82w82 evx 
b M f b6a orl tba mix 82w82 evx 
583 M " b6a or l l iv hpt 82w82 evx 
a M " b6a or l l un ade 82w82 evx 
b M " b6a orl tba mix 82w82 evx 
584 R f osm eat adr coa 18.,26 dv 
a R f OSOi eat TBA MXB 18m26 dv 
b f OSOi eat l iv MXB 18m26 dv 
585 R m osm oat adr coo 180126 dv 
a " OSOi eat TBA MXB 18m26 dv 
b R " osm eat l iv MXB 18m26 dv 
586 cwf eat mgl adf 24m24 :> 
+ 1.48gOI • P<.01 
1.65911 • P<.02 a 
2.35gm • P<.02 
889.•g • P<.05 
2.35gm • P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
:> +historical * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
60. 7mg • P<.4 
867 .mg • P<.4 
+historical I P<.009 a 
72.0mg I P<.03 
101.0lg • P<.02 
31.4mg * P<.09 
609.mg * P<.4 
100ng .. : .. 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•• :. -1"9· .•• : .. 10 .•••• : .• 100 •••• :. -19· •..• :. -10 
.> 
.. 
.> 
• > : + 848.mg • P<.004 c 
3.93gm * P<. 7 
848.0lg • P<.004 
no dre P•1. 
621.0lg P<.3 
no dre p.1. 
302.mg P<.2 
235.mg \ P<.03 
256.0lg \ P<.05 
235.0lg \ P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
43. 8mg P<. 0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
31 • 7"'9 P<. 0005 
621 • .,g P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
621.mg P<. 7 
69.811g P<.01 
no dre P-1. 
72.8mg P<.06 
#490.mg • P<.01 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
#186.mg P<.007 
no dre P-1. 
1.60g"' • P<.4 
no dre P• 1 . 
<2-CHLOROETHYL>TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM CHLORIDE • -1ug •.•• :. -10-..•. :. -100 .... :. -10lg .... : •• 10 •.••• :. -100 •••• :. -19-••.. :. -10 
587 M b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 :> no dre P-1. 
a M b6c eat l iv MXB 24m24 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 24m24 
588 M b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx . > 
a M b6c orl lun mix 7~w76 evx 
b M b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
589 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 24.,24 
a M " b6c eat l iv MXB 24m24 
b M m b6c eat lun MXB 24m24 
590 M "' b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M "' b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b M m b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
591 M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx -> 
M b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
592 M m b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .. 
a M "' b6a or l lun ado 76w76 evx 
b M " b6a or l tba "'ix 76w76 evx 
593 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 25m25 :> 
R f f34 eat l iv MXB 25.,25 
594 R " f34 eat pn i i sa 25.,25 
a R "' f34 oat TBA MXB 25•25 
b R m f34 eat l iv MXB 25.,25 :> 
.. no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
57 .4mg P<.3 
3.24gm • P<.9 
599.mg • P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
9. 38•g P<. 009 
no dre P· 1. 
5. 19mg P<. 0005 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
33.5mg P<.6 
11.40lg P<.07 
no dre P-1. 
21.3mg P<.5 
no dre p.1. 
8.09gm * P<.4 
#458.0lg * P<.02 
3.36gOI * P<1. 
no dre P-1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 73 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
571 c03770 877.11g n.s.s. 9/20 514.llg 19/50 ( 1.03g11 5/50> 
c03770 1.51g11 n.s.s. 3/20 514.mg 6/50 (1.03g11 0!50> l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03770 3. 711111 n.s.s. 3/20 514.llg 6/50 1.03gm 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
572 c03770 90.111g n.s.s. 11/20 42.2m11 31/50 84.511g 29/50 
c03770 616.llg n.s.s. 1/20 42.2•g 1/50 84.5mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
573 c03770 54.6mg n.s.s. 9/20 33.8mg 27 /50 67 .6mg 28/50 
c03770 242.llg n.s.s. 1/20 33.811g 2!50 67.611g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
p· CHLOROANI LI NE 106-47·8 
574 c02039 744.0lg 86.1gm 0120 278.mg 3/50 558.0lg 8/50 - -·:hem, hes. 
a c02039 802.0lg n.s.s. 0120 278.llg 3/50 558.0lg 7/50 
b c02039 1.02gll n.s.s. 0/20 278.0lg 1/50 558.0lg 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c02039 405.mg n.s.s. 3/20 278.0lg 11/50 558.llg 18/50 
d c02039 1.02gOI n.s.s. 0120 278.llg 1/50 558.0lg 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e c02039 1.89g11 n.s.s. 1/20 278 ... g 2/50 558.mg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
575 c02039 332.0lg n.s.s. 2/20 257 ... g 10/50 275.mg 14/50 - --:he11,hes. 
c02039 374.0lg n.s.s. 9/20 257 .Ilg 18/50 275.0lg 19/50 
b c02039 1.01gOI n.s.s. 3/20 257 .Ilg 7/50 275.0lg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c02039 2.25g11 n.s.s. 2/20 257 ... g 1/50 275.0lg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
576 c02039 16.011g n.s.s. 7/20 9.6011g 24/50 19.00lg 25/50 
• c02039 141.llg n.s.s . 0/20 9.600lg 0!50 19.011g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
577 c02039 37.011g 2.23g11 0120 7.7011g 0/50 15. 211g 7150 spl :fbs,fib. 
• c02039 31.411g n.s.s . 1/20 7.7011g 0/50 15.211g 10/50 spc: srn; spl :fbs,fib,hes,ost. 
b c02039 41.311g n.s.s. 0120 7.7011g 0/50 15.211g 6!50 
c02039 13.111g n.s.s. 7/20 7.7011g 14/50 15.211g 26/50 
d c02039 99.211g n.s.s. 0/20 7.7011g 0!50 15 .211g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
CHLOROBENZILATE 510· 15·6 
578 c00408 523.llg 4.51g11 0/20 356.llg 11/50 658.llg 13/50 
a c00408 623.llg n.s.s. 5/20 356.llg 18/50 658.mg 15/50 
b c00408 523.•g 4.51g11 0/20 356.llg 11/50 658.0lg 13/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c00408 2.93g11 n.s.s. 2/20 356.llg 2/50 658.0lg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
579 67a 101.•g n.s.s. 0/16 83.411g 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
67a 192.m~ n.s.s. 0/16 83.411g 0/18 
b 67a 74.11111 n.s.s. 0/16 83.41111 2/18 
580 c00408 114.llg n.s.s. 4/20 440.llg 32/50 (773.1111 22/50> 
a c00408 117.1111 n.s.s. 5!20 440.m11 34/50 (773.0lll 25/50> 
b c00408 114.1111 n.s.s. 4/20 440.IOll 32/50 (773.0lll 22/50> l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
c00408 4.20g11 n.s.s. 1/20 440.llg 1/50 773.0lll 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
581 67a 20.1 .. 11 124.1111 0/16 77.60lg 9/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 67a 169.oog n.s.s . 0/16 77.6•11 0/17 
b 67a 15.21111 79.61111 0/16 77.6•11 11/17 
582 67a 81.71111 n.s.s. 1/17 83.41111 2/18 
a 67a 192.1111 n.s.s. 0/17 83.41111 0/18 
b 67a 69.71111 n.s.s. 2/17 83.41111 3/18 
583 67a 27.61111 4.091111 1/18 77.611g 7/17 
a 67a 169.•11 n.s.s. 2/18 77 .611g 0/17 
b 67a 25.81111 n.s.s. 3/18 77.61111 8/17 
584 c00408 211.1111 28.51111 0!50 41.01111 2/50 78.01111 5/50 s 
c00408 81.411g n.s.s. 36/50 41.01111 38/50 78.01111 34/50 
b c00408 635.1111 n.1.1. 1/50 41.0•g 0!50 78.01111 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
585 c00408 75.11111 2.251111 0/50 45.6•11 6/50 (84.81111 3/50) s 
• c00408 145.1111 n.s.s . 28/50 45.61111 31/50 84. Sllg 23/50 
b c00408 395.1111 n.s.a. 0/50 45.61111 1/50 84.81111 1/50 l; v: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
586 67 73.211g n.s.s. 3/20 25.01111 1/20 Horn; a11f c, 3, 752·756;1955 
<2 • CHLOROETHYL )TR IMETHYLAMMONIUM CH LOR IDE <CCC> 999·81 ·5 
587 c02960 404.1111 n.s.s. 14/20 65.01111 25/50 260.•11 26/50 
a c02960 1.1111• n.s.s. 4/20 65.01111 7/50 260 ... 11 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02960 1.151111 n.s.s. 1/20 65.01111 3/50 260.1111 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
588 1103 17.81111 n.s.s. 0/16 8.96m11 0/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1103 17.8•11 n.s.s. 0/16 8.96•11 0/18 
b 1103 9.34•11 n.s.s. 0/16 8.961111 1/18 
589 c02960 218.1111 n.s.s. 12/20 60.0•11 29/50 240.1111 29/50 
c02960 214.llg n.s.s. 7/20 60.01111 13/50 240.IOg 23/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02960 806.1111 n.s.s. 4/20 60.01111 9/50 240.•11 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
590 1103 3.531111 206.1111 0/16 8.341111 5/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1103 16.51111 n.s.s. 0/16 8.341111 0/18 
b 1103 2.311111 17 .11111 0/16 8.34"11 8/18 
591 1103 14.81111 n.1.1. 0/17 8.961111 0/15 
a 1103 14.8•11 n.s.1. 1/17 8.961111 0/15 
b 1103 5.111111 n.s.s. 2/17 8.961111 3/15 
592 1103 3. 7311g n.s.s. 1/18 8.341111 5/18 
a 1103 10.91111 n.s.s. 2/18 8.341111 1/18 
b 1103 4.251111 n.s.s. 3/18 8.341111 5/18 
593 c02960 135.1111 n.s.s. 13/20 75.01111 41/50 150.0lll 37/50 
a c02960 1.321111 n.1.1. 0/20 75.0•11 0!50 150.1111 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
594 c02960 216.1111 n.s.s. 0/20 60.01111 2/50 120.llg 7/50 s 
a c02960 83.91111 n.1.s. 16/20 60.01111 37/50 120.0lll 36/50 
b c02960 487.•11 n.s.s. 1/20 60.011g 2/50 120.11g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 74 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Thilpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
CHLOROFORM 
595 D f beg eat l iv tu• 87•92 e 
a D f beg eat tba 11ix 871192 e 
596 D 11 beg eat l iv tu11 871192 e 
a 0 11 beg eat tba 11ix 87•92 e 
597 f b6c gav l iv hpc 78w92 v 
a f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w92 v 
b f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w92 v 
c f b6c gov l un MXB 78w92 v 
598 11 b6c gov l iv hpc 78w92 v 
o 11 b6c gov TBA MXB 78w92 v 
b • b6c gov l iv MXB 78w92 v 
c 11 b6c gav l un MXB 78w92 v 
599 11 c5l gav lun 11ix 191124 e 
o 11 c5l gov l iv tu• 19•24 e 
b 11 c5l gov tba 11ix 191124 e 
600 11 cbo gov l iv •ix 19•24 e 
11 cbo gov lun 11ix 19•24 e 
11 cbo gov tbo 11ix 191124 e 
11 cf1 gov lun 11ix 80w93 e 
11 cf1 gov l iv tu• 80w93 e 
11 cf1 gov tbo •ix 80w93 e 
11 cfl gov kid 11ix 19•24 e 
11 cfl gov lun tuM 191124 e 
11 cfl gov l iv tu11 191124 e 
11 cfl gov tbo 11ix 191124 e b 
601 
0 
b 
602 
0 
b 
603 
0 
b 
604 
• 
b 
c 
605 
0 
b 
606 
0 
b 
c 
607 
0 
b 
608 
0 
b 
609 
0 
b 
610 
b i c i gov l un tuo• 80w96 e 
i c i gov l iv tu11 80w96 e 
ici gov tba 11ix 80w96 e 
11 ici gov kid 11ix 80w96 e 
• ici gov l iv tu• 80w96 e 
• i c; gav lun tu11 80w96 e 
11 i c i gov tbo •ix 80w96 e 
11 ici gev kid Mix 80w98 e 
11 ici gov lun 11ix 80w98 e 
11 ici gov liv •ix 80w98 e 
• ici gov tbo 11ix 80w98 e 
• ici gov kid •ix 80w98 e 
11 ici gov liv 11ix 80w98 e 
11 ici gov lun 11ix 80w98 e 
11 ici gov tbo 11ix 80w98 e 
f OH gov thy MXA 181126 v 
OH gov TBA MXB 18•26 v 
OH gov l iv MXB 18•26 v 
11 0111 gov kid MXA 181126 
" 0111 gov TBA MXB 18M26 
• OH gov l iv MXB 181126 
f sdo gov l iv eye 80w95 e 
sdo gov tbo 11 ix 80w95 e 
ada gov tbo u l 80w95 e 
11 sda gav l iv tu11 80w95 e 
11 ado gov tbo •ix 80w95 e 
11 sdo gov tbo 110 l 80w95 e 
CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER 
611 11 syg inh 11ix 11ix 261129 
o 11 syg i nh l un ode 26M29 
612 R 11 sdo inh 11ix 11ix 26•28 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL )PYR IO !NE. HC l 
613 M f b6c gov TBA MXB 231124 
a M f b6c gov l iv MXB 231124 
b M f b6c gav lun MXB 231124 
614 M II b6c gov TBA MXB 231124 
e M 11 b6c gov l iv MXB 231124 
b M 11 b6c gov l un MXB 231124 
615 R f f34 gov TBA MXB 231124 
e R f f34 gov l iv MXB 231124 
616 R "' f34 gev sub fib 231124 
o R 11 f34 gev TBA MXB 231124 
b R II f34 gev l iv MXB 231124 
3-( CHLOROMETHYL )PYRIDINE. HC l 
617 M f b6c gov ato MXA 211124 as 
o M f b6c gov TBA MXB 211124 os 
b M b6c gev l iv MXB 211124 es 
c M b6c gev lun MXB 211124 es 
618 M " b6c gov ato MXA 21M24 as 
M II b6c gov TBA MXB 211124 .. .!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••• : •• ,!O •••.• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!11g •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : .. ,!00 •..• : •• ,!g ••••• : •• ,!O 
. > 
. > 
:+ 
.> 
. > 
.> 
.> 
.> 
• > no dre P•1 • 
10.011g \ P<.3 
no dre P•1 . 
13.3119 * P<.008 
48.011g * P<.0005c 
54.111g * P<.0005 
48.0•g * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
56. 211g I P<.0005c 
71.111g * P<.004 
56. 211g P<. 0005 
no dre 
728.llg 
no dre P•1. 
P<.5 
P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre 
no dre 
376.llg 
1.43g• 
140.Mg 
153.11g 
4.35g11 
no dre P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.6 
P<.9 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<1. 
P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
316.11g * P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
139.11g * 
324.mg * 
9.83g• * 
45.411g * 
278.llg 
336.llg 
437.llg 
88.511g 
95.5Mg 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.4 
P<1. 
P<.006 
P<.08 
P<.3 
P<.6 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
a126.11g * P<.004 
68.2•g * P<.05 
1.13g11 * P<.7 
119. mg I P<. 0005c 
194.11g * P<.5 
455.11g * P<.08 
1.20g11 P<.3 
78.311g P<.2 
276.11g P<.2 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 • 
.!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!11g •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!g ••.•. : •. ,!O 
... 16.411g P<.1 
32.911g P<.3 
... 5.5011g P<.1 
.!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : .• ,!00 .••• : .• ,!11g •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!00 ••.. : .• ,!g •.••• : •• ,!O 
:> :> 9. 79g11 * P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
2.17g11 * P<.6 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 . 
. 2'.l14g11 * P<. 9 
114.11g * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
#515.llg * P<.03 
671.11g * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
.!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••• : .• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!00 .••. : .• ,!11g ••.• : .• ,!O •.•.• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!g •••.• : .. ,!O 
+historical • P<.04 
141.llg * P<.2 
16.3gm * P<1. 
1.97g11 * P<. 7 
161.11g I P<.003 c 
64.911g * P<.02 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 75 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Patholog~ ' 
Brki)' Code 
CHLOROFORM 67-66-3 
595 1003 6.5211g n.1.1. 0/16 12.211g 0/8 24.411g 0/8 Heywood; j ept, 2, 835 ·851; 1979 
1003 2.22•g n.1.1. 4/16 12.211g 4/8 <24.4•g 0/8) 
596 1003 6.5211g n.1.1. 0/16 12.211g 018 24.411g 0/8 
1003 5.3911g 230.llg 0/16 12.211g 4/8 24.411g 2/8 
597 c02686 35.211g 68.011g 0/20 144.llg 36/50 289.llg 39/50 
• c02686 37.811g 91.811g 2/20 144.llg 37/50 289.llg 39/50 
b c02686 35.211g 68.011g 0/20 144.•g 36/50 289.•g 39/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02686 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 144.llg 1/50 289.llg 0/50 lun:e/a,a/c . 
598 c02686 38. 711g 118.llg 1/20 83.611g 19/50 168.llg 44/50 
• c02686 40.411g 491.llg 4/20 83.611g 26/50 168.llg 44/50 
b c02686 38. 7•g 118.llg 1/20 83.6•g 19/50 168.llg 44/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02686 490.llg n.1.1. 1/20 83.611g 3/50 168.llg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
599 71011 134.llg n.1.1. 2/46 39.611g 4/51 Roe; japt, 2, 799-819; 1979 
• 71011 416.•g n.1.1 . 2/46 39.6•g 0/51 
b 71011 112.•g n.1.1. 16/46 39.611g 13/51 
600 71011 70.711g n.1.1. 37/51 39.6•g 29/51 
• 710• 155.•g n.a.a . 13/51 39.611g 8/51 
b 71011 64. 7•g n.1.1. 42/51 39.611g 33/51 
601 71011 64.2•g n.1.1. 9/45 44.211g 12/48 
• 71011 111.•g n.1.1 • 4/45 44.211g 5/48 
b 710• 37 .211g n.1.1. 16/45 44.211g 22/48 
602 71011 66.611g 613.llg 6/240 39.611g 9/49 
71011 65.811g n.1.1. 102/240 39.611g 21/49 
b 710• 189.11g n.1.1. 69/240 39.611g 8/49 
c 71011 68.411g n.1.1. 170/240 39.611g 30/49 
603 710• 81 .311g n.1.1. 5/59 12. 111g 2/35 42.9•g 6/38 
• 71011 59.211g n.1.1. 1/59 12. 111g 0/35 42.911g 0/38 
b 71011 71.511g n.1.1. 29/59 12. 111g 10/35 42.911g 15/38 
604 710• 62.8•g 407.llg 0/72 12. 1•g 0/37 42.911g 8/38 
• 710• 73.511g n.1.1 • 5/72 12. 111g 6/37 42.911g 5/38 
b 71011 95.411g n.1.1. 7/72 12. 111g 7/37 42.911g 4/38 
c 710• 21 .O•g 643.11g 20/72 12. 111g 20/37 42.911g 21/38 
605 710n 91 .211g n.1.1. 1/49 42.0llg 5/47 
• 710n 83.711g n.1.1. 4/49 42.011g 7/47 
b 710n 78.3•g n.1.1. 7/49 42.0•g 9/47 
c 710n 31.811g n.1.1. 17/49 42.0•g 24/47 
606 7100 47.1•g 325.llg 1/50 42.011g 12/48 
7100 105.•g n.1.1. 9/50 42.011g 8/48 
b 7100 182.•g n.1.1. 5/50 42.0llg 3/48 
c 7100 66.811g n.1.1. 24/50 42.011g 20/48 
607 c02686 65.8•g 936.•g 1/20 50.211g 8/50 100.llg 11/50 thy: cca, ccr, f ca, f cc. 
• c02686 28.811g n.1.1 . 12/20 50.211g 24/50 100.llg 25/50 
b c02686 156.mg n.1.1. 2/20 50.211g 4/50 100.mg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
608 c02686 65.511g 334.llg 0/20 45.2•g 4/50 90.3•g 12/50 kid:tla,uac. 
• c02686 43.511g n.1.1 . 9/20 45. 2•g 24/50 90.311g 20/50 
b c02686 157 .Ilg n.1.1. 0/20 45.211g 1/50 90.311g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
609 711 196.llg n.1.1. 0/50 43.3•g 1/49 Pal11er; j ept, 2, 821·833; 1979 
• 711 27.1•g n.1.1. 22/50 43.3•g 29/49 
b 711 86.011g n.1.1. 2/50 43.311g 6/49 
610 711 365.11g n.1.1. 0/48 43.311g 0/49 
• 711 115.•g n.1.1 . 12/48 43.3•g 9/49 
b 711 195.llg n.1.1. 6/48 43.311g 3/49 
CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER CCMME> 107-30-2 
611 348 4.0211g n.1.1. 0/88 .377•g 2190 Laskin; aenh, 30, 70·72;1975 
• 348 5.3611g n.1.1. 0/88 .37711g 1/90 
612 348 1.3511g n.1.1. 0/74 .160•g 2/74 
2 • ( CHLOROMETHYL )PYRIDINE. HCL 6959-47-3 
613 c03907 174.•g n.1.1. 5/20 51.011g 11/50 102.•g 10/50 
• c03907 n.1.1. n.1.1 . 0/20 51 .011g 1/50 102.11g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03907 368.11g n.1.1. 1/20 51 .011g 1/50 102.llg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
614 c03907 162.11g n.1.1. 9/20 51.0llg 18/50 102.•g 13/50 
• c03907 266.llg n.1.1. 3/20 51.0•g 6/50 102.Mg 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03907 210.llg n.1.1. 2/20 51 .011g 5/50 102.llg 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
615 c03907 32.811g n.1.1. 12/20 30.3Mg 35/50 60.611g 39/50 
• c03907 n.1.1 . n.1.1. 0/20 30.311g 0/50 60.6•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
616 c03907 194.llg n.1.1. 0/20 30.311g 0/50 60.611g 5/49 
• c03907 54.0llg n.1.1. 13/20 30.3•g 28/50 60.6Mg 29/49 
b c03907 743.•g n.1.1. 3/20 30.311g 0/50 60.611g 0/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
3· ( CHLOROMETHYL >PYRIDINE. HC l 6959-48-4 
617 c03838 161.llg n.1.1. 0/20 42.0•g 1/50 66.8tog 5/50 sto:sqc,sqp. 
• c03838 56.811g n.1.1. 5/20 42.011g 15/50 66.811g 20/50 
b c03838 376.llg n.1.1. 1/20 42.0•g 0/50 66.8Mg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c03838 269.11g n.1.1. 1/20 42.0•g 1/50 66.8Mg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
618 c03838 81.911g 683.llg 0/20 42.011g 2/50 66.811g 10/50 sto:sqc,sqp . 
• c03838 32.3Mg n.1.1 . 7/20 42.0•g 20/50 66.8•g 28/50 76 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD30 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b M • b6c gav l ;v MXB 21•24 11 
M • b6c gav lun MXB 21•24 u 
619 f f34 gav TBA MXB 22m24 H 
a f f34 gav l iv MXB 221124 11 
620 • f34 gav ato MXA 22•24 u 
a • f34 gav TBA MXB 221124 ea 
b R • f34 gav l iv MXB 22•24 ea :> 324.11g • P<.4 
624.11g • P<.6 
160.11g • P<.6 
no dra P-1. 
+historical * P<.07 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
p· CHLOROPHENYL ·p· CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE.: •• ,!ug •••• : •• ,!0 ••••• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!•g •••• : •• ,!0 ••••• : •. ,!00 •••• : •• ,!g ••••• : •. ,!0 
621 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre p.1. 
f b6a orl l ;v hpt 76w76 evx no dra P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.0005-b f b6a orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
622 • b6e orl lun ada 76w76 avx .> no dre 
a • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dra 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 avx no dra 
623 b6c orl l ;v hpt 76w76 evx .> 931.•g 
a 
b 
624 
b b6c or l lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl l ;v hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l lun ada 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl tba mix 76w76 avx .> no dre 
931.JOg 
422.llg 
869.•g 
84.5•g 
3· (p-CHLOROPHENYLl -1, 1-DIMETHYLUREA •• : .• ,!ug •••. : •• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!•g •••• : .• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!00 •••. : .• ,!g •.••• : •• ,!O 
625 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 avx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6e or l tba •ix 76w76 avx 
626 " b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
b • b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 avx 
627 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c or l tba tu• 76w76 avx 
628 • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
a • b6c or l lun ada 76w76 evx 
b • b6c or l tba '"ix 76w76 evx .> 414.0lg 
.> no dre 
387.•g 
70.7•g 
no dre 
86.611g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
112.0lg 
174.llg 
39.611g P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.07 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.09 
P<.0005 
1 • (4-CHLOROPHENYll -1-PHENYL·2·PROPYNYL CARBAMATE ••• : •• ,!O •••.. : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!11g •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : .. ,!00 •••• : •• ,!g ••••• :. -10 
629 R • hrl eat l•I adc 72w94 ae + 8. 78mg • P<.0005+ 
a R • hrl eat duo adc 72w94 .. 24.9119 • P<.0005+ 
b R • hrl eat liv •ix 72w94 H 58.511g • P<.2 
c R • hrl eat bra •ix 72w94 ea +historical • P<.8 
d R • hrl eat tba •ix 72w94 ea 3.88"g • P<.0005 
p-CHLOROPHENYL ·2, 4, 5· TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE 
630 R f wia eat l iv tu• 27•27 •••• : •• ,!O ••••• : •• ,!OD •••• : •• ,!11g •••• : .. ,!O ••..• : •• ,!00 •••• : .• ,!9 •.•.. : .• ,!O 
.> no dre P•1. 
631 R f wis eat l ;v tu• 24•Z4 
632 R • wia eat l iv hpt 27•27 
633 R • wia eat l iv tu• 24•24 
CHLOROP I CR IN* 
634 M f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w91 v 
a M f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w91 v 
b M f b6c gav lun MXB 78w91 v 
635 " • b6c gav TBA MXB 78w91 v 
a M • b6c gav l iv MXB 78w91 v 
b M • b6c gav lun MXB 78w91 v 
636 OH gav TBA MXB 18"'26 dsv 
a R o .. gav l iv MXB 18•26 dsv 
637 R 11 osm gav TBA MXB 18•26 dsv 
a R • OH gev l iv MXB 18•26 dsv 
2· CHLOROPROPANAL 
638 M f hi c gav for tu• 89w89 
639 M • h; c gav for tu• 89w89 
1-CHLOROPROPENE 
640 M f hi c 11av for tum 89w89 
641 M • hie gav for tu• 89w89 
CHLOROTHALONIL 
642 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 v 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w91 v 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 v 
643 M • b6c Ht TBA MXB 80w91 v 
a M " b6c eat l iv MXB 80w91 v 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 v 
644 R f OH eat TBA MXB 19•26 v 
a R f OH eat l iv MXB 19"26 v 
645 R f OH eat kid MXA 19•25 V 
a R f OH eat kid MXA 19•25 V • > 
.> no dre P-1 • 
4.59g• • P<.2 
no dre Pz 1. 
.!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••. : •• ,!O .•••• : •• ,!OD •••• : •• ,!mg •••• : •. ,!O .•..• : •• ,!OD •••• : •• ,!g •.•.. : •• ,!O 
:> 82.011g • P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
111.11g • P<.06 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dra p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1 . 
.!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!mg .••• : .. ,!O •.••• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!9 •.••. : •• ,!O 
12.9119 P<.004 + 
'*' 22.7119 . P<.04 
,!OOng •• : •• ,!ug •••• : •• ,!O •••.• : •. ,!00 •••• :. ·.!"II· ••• : •• ,!O •...• : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!9 ••••. : .• ,!O 
5.05mg P<.0005+ 
P<.02 16.711g 
,!OOn11 •• : •• ,!u11 •••• : •• ,!O •••.• : •• ,!00 .•.• : •• ,!1111 •••. : •• ,!O •••.. : •• ,!00 •••• : •• ,!g ••••• : .• ,!O 
:> 
pool no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre Ps1. 
1.58g11 • P<. 7 
no dre P•1. 
2.51901 * P<.009 c 
4.97911 * P<.04 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc 
b c03838 93.611g n.s.s. 3/20 42.011g 5/50 66.811g 9/50 
c03838 122.mg n.s.s. 2/20 42.0mg 4/50 66.811g 5/50 
619 c03838 32.3mg n.s.s. 14/20 31.811g 31/49 51.311g 23/50 
c03838 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0120 31.811g 0/49 51.311g 0/50 
620 c03838 148.llg n.s.s. 0/20 31.8mg 1/50 51.311g 3/50 
a c03838 70.711g n.s.s. 14/20 31.811g 21/50 51.311g 11/50 
b c03838 377.llg n.s.s. 1/20 31.811g 1/50 51.311g 0/50 
p-CHLOROPHENYL · p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE (ovexl 80-33-1 
621 1287 162.mg n.s.s. 1/17 145.llg 1/17 
1287 272.mg n.s.s. 0/17 145.0lg 0/17 
b 1287 128.mg n.s.s. 2/17 145.0lg 2/17 
622 1287 127.mg n.s.s. 2/18 136.llg 2/18 
1287 160.mg n.s.s. 1/18 136.llg 1/18 
b 1287 107 .Ilg n.s.s. 3/18 136.llg 3/18 
623 1287 152.mg n.s.s. 0/16 145.llg 1/18 
1287 288.mg n.s.s. 0/16 145.11g 0/18 
b 1287 152.llg n.s.s. 0/16 145.11g 1/18 
624 1287 104.llg n.s.s. 0/16 136.llg 2/18 
1287 141.mg n.s.s. 0/16 136.mg 1/18 
b 1287 37 .6mg 278.mg 0/16 136.llg 8/18 
3 · (p· CHLOROPHENYL) · 1, 1-D IMETHYLUREA <Tel var, inonuron> 150-68-5 
625 1278 57 .6mg n.s.s. 1/17 73.0mg 2/17 
1278 137.0lg n.s.s. 0/17 73.011g 0/17 
b 1278 48.811g n. s. s. 2/17 73.0llg 3/17 
626 1278 23.311g n.s.s. 2/18 68.0mg 6/16 
1278 120.11g n.s.s. 1/18 68.011g 0/16 
b 1278 24.50lg n.s.s. 3/18 68.011g 6/16 
627 1278 145.llg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0 .. g 0/18 
1278 145.0lg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0mg 0/18 
b 1278 145.0lg n.s.s. 0/16 73.011g 0/18 
628 1278 33.60lg n.s.s. 0/16 68.011g 3/15 
1278 42.70lg n.s.s. 0/16 68.0mg 2/15 
b 1278 16. 711g 139.0lg 0/16 68.011g 7 /15 
1-(4 -CHLOROPHENYLl • 1·PHENYL·2 • PROPYNYL CARBAMATE 10473· 70-8 
629 1348 4.78mg 18.311g 0/10 10.00lg 6/10 20.011g 5/10 40.00lg 10/10 
1348 12.2mg 65. 5mg 0/10 10.0mg 1/10 20. Omg 2/10 40.00lg 8/10 
b 1348 23.8mg n.s.s. 0/10 10.0mg 2/10 20.011g 2/10 40.011g 2/10 
1348 39. 70lg n.s.s. 0/10 10.011g 2/10 20.011g 0/10 40.011g 1/10 
d 1348 1. 7311g 10.90lg 2/10 10.011g 9/10 20.0mg 9/10 40.00lg 10/10 
p -CHLOROPHENYL · 2, 4, 5 ·TR I CHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE (tetrasull 2227-13-6 
630 28111 15.611g n.s.s. 0/32 2.5011g 0/32 10.0mg 0/32 50.0mg 0/32 150.llg 0/32 
631 281n 2.360lg n.s.s. 0/32 .50011g 0/32 1.2511g 0/32 
632 281 .. 747.mg n.s.s. 0/32 2.00mg 0/32 8.00mg 0/32 40.00lg 0/32 120.mg 1/32 
633 281n 1.88mg n.s.s. 0/32 .40011g 0/32 1.0011g 0/32 
CHLOROP I CR IN* 76-06-2 
634 c00533 29.90lg n.s.s. 4/20 20.011g 9/50 40.0mg 10/50 
c00533 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 20.0mg 0/50 40.011g 0/50 
b c00533 44.2.,g n.s.s. 1/20 20.0mg 3/50 40.011g 6/50 
635 c00533 36.50lg n.s.s. 5/20 20.00lg 7/50 34.00lg 9/50 
c00533 63.811g n.s.s. 2/20 20.00lg 4/50 34.0llg 2/50 
b c00533 67. 70lg n.s.a. 3/20 20.0mg 1/50 34.0mg 5/50 
636 c00533 7.120lg n.s.s. 11/20 10.011g 14/50 11.011g 9/50 
a c00533 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 10.00lg 0/50 11.0mg 0/50 
637 c00533 9.9711g n.s.1. 5/20 12.4mg 3/50 <13.0mg 0/50) 
a c00533 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 12.4mg 0/50 13.0mg 0/50 
2 · CHLOROPROPANAL 683-50-1 
638 1011 5.2311g 73. 7mg 0!30 5. 7111g 6!30 
639 1011 6.8611g n.s.s. 0!30 4. 76mg 3/30 
1 ·CHLOROPROPENE 590·21·6 
640 1011 2.63mg 11.50lg 0!30 5. 71mg 13/30 
641 1011 5. 7611g n.s.s. 0!30 4. 76mg 4/30 
CHLOROTHALON IL 1897·45·6 
642 c00102 1.38g11 n.s.s. 3/10 343.llg 6/50 679.mg 8/50 
c00102 n.s.a. n.a.a. 0/10 343.mg 0/50 679.llg 0/50 
b c00102 2.16gm n.s.s. 1/10 343.llg 2/50 679.11g 3/50 
643 c00102 460.mg n.s.s. 3/10 283.mg 9/50 (560.mg 1 /50) 
a c00102 1.42gm n.s.s. 2/10 283.mg 1/50 (560.0lg 1 /50) 
b c00102 634.llg n.s.a. 1/10 283.mg 4/50 <560.mg 0/50) 
644 c00102 240.0lg n.s.s. 5/10 184.llg 25/49 368.0lg 34/50 
c00102 1.19gm n.s.s. 0/10 184.mg 3/49 368.mg 2/50 
645 c00102 1.02g11 58.1gOI 0/65p 184.llg 1/49 368.mg 5/50 
c00102 1.50gm n.s.a. 0/65p 184.llg 0/49 368.•g 3/50 Citation 01· Pathology 
Brkly Code 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
sto:sqc,sqp. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
Innes;ntis , 1968/1969 
Innes ;nt is, 1968/1969 
Harris; txap, 21,414-418; 1972 
Verschuuren; txcy, 1, 63· 78; 1973 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Van Duuren;jnci,63,1433 -1439;1979 
Van Duuren;jnci,63,1433 -1439;1979 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
tun: a/a, a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
k id:adn,can, tla,uac. 
kid:adn,tla. 77 78 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2'failp,·J 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
646 11 0111 eat TBA MXB 19•26 v 
a • 0111 eat l iv MXB 19•26 v :> 20.1g11 * P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
647 R II 0111 eat kid MXA 19•25 v pool 1. 18g11 * P<. 003 
2.08gm * P<.02 
2.81gm * P<.02 R 11 0111 eat kid MXA 19m25 v 
b R • 0111 eat sub fih 19.,25 v 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g ••.• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 CHLOROZOTOCIN 
648 R f ada ipj pee 11ix 201126 aea 84.4ug • P<.0005+ 
a R f ada ipj tbe .. 1 20m26 au .108•g * P<.0005+ 
649 R m sda ipj pee mix 181123 aea + 24.1ug \ P<.0005+ 
a • sda ipj tba .. 1 181123 au 52.1ug • P<.0005+ 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 
650 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 IV 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 IV 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 241124 IV 
651 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 IV 
a M II b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 IV 
b M II b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 IV 
652 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 a 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 24m24 a 
653 R • f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 a 
R 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 a 
CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 
654 M f CVI eat l iv tUll 80v80 • 
a M f cva eat lun ade 80v80 a 
655 M 11 cv1 eat lun ode 80v80 a 
M m cv1 eat l iv tu• 80v80 a 
656 R cfe eat l iv tum 241124 a 
657 R 11 cfa eat l iv tum 241124 a 
CHOCOLA.TE BROWN HT 
658 M f tf1 eat ly1 80v80 a 
a M tf1 eat l iv hnd 80v80 a 
b M tf1 eat lun ade 80v80 a 
659 M m tf1 eat l iv hnd 80v80 a 
a M • tf1 eat Liv lea 80v80 • 
b M • tf1 eat lun ad• 80v80 a 
CHROMIC OXIDE PIGMENT 
660 b bdr eat •gl fba 201143 
a b bdr eat 11gl car 201143 
b R. b bdr eat hpl ade 201143 
CHROMIUM (I II) ACETATE 
661 M f cd1 vat lun tu• 341134 a 
a M cd1 vat tba tu• 341134 • 
662 M 11 cd1 vet lun tu• 321132 a 
a M 11 cd1 vat tba tu• 321132 a 
663 R b lab vat l iv tum 421142 a 
a b 
l eb vat tba tu• 421142 a 
b R 
b lab vat tbe .. 1 421142 a 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
1.44g• * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P· 1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.. : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••. : •• 10 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
.> 3.67gm * P<.3 
no dre p.1. 
.> no dre p.1. 
• > no dre p.1 • 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
36.3•g P<.007 -
8.44g• * P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
.> 106.gm * P<1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g .••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
237.g• * P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
• > 
. > 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.61mg 
7.62mg P-1 • 
P-1. 
P-1 . 
P-1. 
P•1 • 
P<.06 
P<.3 
CLIVORINE 100ng •• : •• lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• :. -10 
664 R b aci vat Liv mix 48v68 a +historical P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.06 a Rb aci vat Liv nnd 48v68 a +historical 
b Rb aci vat Liv hH 48v68 a +historical 
CLOFIBRATE 
665 R • f34 eat l iv hpc 28•28 a 
a R • f34 eat pan ace 281128 a 
CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 
666 M f c1c gav lun tu• 69v69 ek 
a M f c1c gav tba mix 69v69 ak 
667 M c1c gav tba 11ix 69v82 ek 
CLONITRALID* 
668 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78v91 IV 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 78v91 IV 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 78v91 IV 
669 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 78v91 IV 
a M m b6c eat l iv MXB 78v91 IV 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 78v91 av 
670 f 0111 eat Ute Hp 181126 V 
a 0111 eat thy MXA 181126 v 
b 0111 eat TBA MXB 181126 v 
0111 eat l iv MXB 181126 v 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• : •• 1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• 169.•g 
+historical P<.0005+ 
P<.09 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• : •• 10 
.> 5.00mg 
3.62•g 
.> no dre P<.3 
P<. 7 
P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•. :. ·1•g ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
175.•g * P<. 7 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
* a5.06g11 * P<.03 
6.67g11 * P<.04 
2.07g11 * P<.4 
13.3g11 * P<.3 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 79 
RefNum LoConf UpConf ·cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
646 c00102 212.llg n.s.s. 4/10 147.llg 22/50 292.llg 16/49 
c00102 n.s.s. n.s.a. 0/10 147.llg 0/50 292.llg 0/49 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
647 c00102 500.llg 6.60g11 0/65p 147.llg 3/50 292.llg 4/49 kid: adc, can,ppa, tla,uac. 
c00102 701.llg n.s.s. 0/65p 147.llg 1/50 292.llg 3/49 kid:adc,can,uac. 
b c00102 835.11g n.s.s. 0/65p 147.llg 0/50 292.llg 3/49 
CHLOROZOTOCIN 54749·90·5 
648 1195 44.6ug .19911g 1/17 57 .1ug 10/16 .28611g 16/18 Habs; cl et ,8, 133·137;1979 
a 1195 50.6ug .37011g 4/17 57.1ug 10/16 .28611g 16/18 
649 1195 11.9ug 55.1ug 0/20 57 .1ug 14/18 (.28611g 13/16) 
1195 26.9ug .14011g 2/20 57.1ug 15/18 .28611g 14/16 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 94-20·2 
650 c01752 425.llg n.s.s. 1/15 301 .Ilg 9/35 616.llg 2/35 
c01752 693.llg n.1.1. 0/15 301.llg 4/35 616.llg 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01752 546.llg n.s.s. 0/15 301.llg 3/35 616.llg 2/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
651 c01752 642.llg n.s.s. 4/15 284.•g 7/35 569.11g 5/35 
• c01752 952.llg n.s.s . 2/15 284.llg 3/35 569.11g 2/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01752 n.s.s. n.a.s. 0/15 284 ... g 1/35 569.11g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
652 c01752 115.llg n.s.s. 13/15 107.llg 21/35 <214.llg 8/35> 
c01752 n.1.1. n.s.s. 0/15 107.llg 0/35 214.llg 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
653 c01752 313.llg n.a.s. 7 /15 85.611g 4/35 <171.11g 3/35> 
c01752 n.s.s. n.a.s. 0/15 85.6•g 0/35 171.llg 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 12236·46·3 
654 1335 98.711g n.s.s. 0160 39.011g 0/30 130.llg 0/30 390.llg 0/26 1.30g11 0/30 Gaunt; f ctx, 11, 375 · 382; 1973 
1335 3.07g• n.s.s. 19/60 39.011g 13/30 130.llg 9/30 390.llg 6/26 1.30g• 4/30 
655 1335 907.•g n.s.s. 13/53 36.011g 2/29 120.llg 5/29 360.11g 8/29 1.20g• 8/29 
• 1335 89.011g n.s.s . 0/53 36.0•g 0/29 120.llg 0/29 360.11g 0/29 1.20g11 0/29 
656 1334 205.llg n.1.1. 0/29 50.0•g 0/29 150.11g 0/30 500.•g 0/29 1.50g• 0/29 Gaunt;fctx , 10,3· 15; 1972 
657 1334 158.llg n.1.1. 0/29 40.011g 0/28 120.llg 0/28 400.•g 0/29 1.20g• 0/30 
CHOCOLATE BROWN HT 4553.59.3 
658 1337 13.8•g 447.•g 0/39 13.0•g 5/37 (130.•g 3/41 650.llg 1/42) Drake;txcy, 10, 17·27;1978 
• 1337 1.21g• n.s.s . 2/39 13.011g 1/37 130.llg 3/41 650.•g 3/42 
b 1337 1.76g11 n.1.1. 6/39 13.0llg 3/37 130.llg 4/41 650.llg 3/42 
659 1337 956.•g n.1.1. 8/42 12.0•g 4/39 120.llg 6/43 600.•g 6/40 
1337 2.55g• n.a.s. 1/42 12.011g 1/39 120.llg 2/43 600.11g 0/40 
b 1337 1.35g11 n.s.s. 5/42 12.011g 2/39 120.llg 4/43 600.•g 3/40 
CHROMIC OXIDE PIGMENT 1308·39·9 
660 413 20. 7g11 n.a.s. 2/60 215.llg 3/60 459.llg 1/60 1.09g• 3/60 Ivankovic;fctx, 13,347·351;1975 
• 413 5.16g11 n.1.1 . 1/60 215.llg 0/60 459.llg 0/60 1.09g• 0160 
b 413 45.7g• n.1.1. 2/60 215.llg 0160 459.11g 0160 1.09g• 1/60 
CHROMIUM (Ill) ACETATE 1066·30·4 
661 56 4.6011g n.1.1. 9160 1.0011g 4/29 Schroeder; jnut,83,239·250; 1964 
• 56 3.3411g n.s.s . 22/60 1.0011g 9/29 
662 56 4.0611g n.s.s. 8/44 .83311g 6/39 
• 56 4.87•g n.1.1 . 11/44 .83311g 6/39 
663 1036 5.96•g n.1.1 . 1/34 .26511g 1/56 Kani sawa;canr ,29,892 ·895; 1969 
1036 • 68111g n.1.1. 10/34 .26511g 28/56 
b 1036 2.0911g n.1.1. 2/34 .26511g 7/56 
CLIVORINE 
664 1338 .213•g 1.5111g 0/17 1.88•g 8/12 Kuhar a; cl et, 10, 117·122; 1980 
• 1338 .27411g 2.5611g 0/17 1.88•g 6/11 
b 1338 • 738•g n.1.1. 0/17 1.8811g 2/12 
CLOFIBRATE 637·07·0 
665 1339 77.911g 447.llg 0/15 200.11g 10/15 Reddy ;bj ca,40,476-482; 1979 
1339 318.llg n.s.s. 0/15 200.•g 2/15 
CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 43054·45 ·1 
666 585• .81311g n.1.1 . 0/15 1.1411g 1/15 Poel; cenr, 28, 845·859;1968 
a 58511 • 41311g n.1.1. 4/15 1.1411g 5/15 
667 585n .367•g n.1.1. 8/15 .96211g 8/15 
CLONITRALID* <niclo1111ide> 1420-04·8 
668 c00431 275.•g n.1.s. 9/20 29.911g 5/50 61.111g 5/50 
e c00431 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 29.911g 0/50 61.111g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00431 493.•g n.1.1. 3/20 29.911g 0/50 61.111g 1 /50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
669 c00431 24.811g n.1.1. 1/20 27.611g 5/50 56.4•g 5/50 
c00431 44.111g n.1.1. 0/20 27 .6mg 1/50 56.4•g 0/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd . 
b c00431 28.511g n.1.1. 0120 27.611g 1/50 56.411g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
670 c00431 2.29g• n.1.1. 0/20 504.llg 2/50 999 ... g 6/50 
a c00431 2. 72g• n.1.1. 0/20 504.•g 1/50 999.•g 5/50 thy:cca,ccr. 
b c00431 607.•g n.1.1. 11/20 504.•g 33/50 999.•g 37/50 
c00431 4.01g• n.1.1. 0/20 504.mg 1/50 999.•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 80 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
671 II OH eat TBA MXB 181126 v 
• OH eat l iv MXB 181126 v :> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
COLCEMID 100ng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•. : .• 100 •..• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •. 1g ..•.• : .. 10 
672 11 b46 iv j tbe 11ix 12m24 ea 
11 b46 iv j tbe 111l 12m24 es 
b • b46 iv] tba ben 12m24 ea .> 78. 7ug 
.129mg 
.248mg P<.5 
P<.6 
P<.7 
COP PE 
673 DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE ,100ng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 .•••. : • -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
f b61 orl lun bro 76w76 evx .> 146.11g P<.3 
b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b 
674 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre p.1. 
P<.9 • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 655.•g 
• 
b • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P•1 . 
P•1. • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
675 f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P•1. 
• 
b f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx no dre p.1 • 
f b6e or l tbe • i.x 76w76 evx 70. 8mg P<.2 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P<.005 -676 11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 34. 711g 
• 
b 11 b6e orl lun 1d1 76w76 evx 112.mg 
• b6e orl tbe mix 76w76 evx 19.111g 
COPPER·8-HYDROXYQUINOLJNE 100ng •• : •• !ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g .••• :. -10 ....• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
677 M f b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 IVX 
1 M f b61 orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 
678 M 11 b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M • b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
b M • b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
679 M f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 M f b6e orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6e orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 
680 M 11 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 M 11 b6e orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6e orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 
COUMAPHOS 
681 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
1 M b6e eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M b6e eat lun MXB 24•24 
682 M " b6e eat TBA MXB 24•24 
1 M 11 b6e eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M 11 b6e eat lun MXB 241124 
683 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
684 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
R II f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
•·CRESIDINE* 
685 M f b6e gev l iv MXA 53w93 IV 
• M f b6e gev TBA MXB 53w93 IV 
b M b6e gev l iv MXB 53w93 IV 
M b6e gav lun MXB 53w93 1v 
686 M " b6e gav TBA MXB 53w93 IV 
M • b6e gav l iv MXB 53w93 IV 
b M • b6e gav lun MXB 53w93 1v 
687 R f f34 gav •gl fba 18•25 
a R f f34 gav ubl tee 18•25 
b R f34 gav TBA MXB 18•25 
R f34 gav l iv MXB 18•25 
688 R • f34 gav ubl tee 181125 
a 11 f34 gav TBA MXB 181125 
b R • f34 gav l iv MXB 181125 
p-CRESIDINE 
689 f b6e eat ubl MXA 97w97 IV 
a b6e eat MXB MXB 97w97 av 
b b6e eat ubl MXA 97w97 av 
e b6e eat l iv MXA 97w97 IV 
d b6e eat l iv hpe 97w97 1v 
• b6e eat TBA MXB 97w97 IV 
f b6e eat l iv MXB 97w97 IV 
g b6e eat lun MXB 97w97 1v 
690 • b6e eat ubl MXA 97w97 IV 
• • b6e eat TBA MXB 97w97 IV 
b • b6e eat l iv MXB 97w97 IV 
11 b6e eat lun MXB 97w97 1v 
691 f f34 eat ubl MXA 24•24 I 
a f f34 eat MXB MXB 241124 1 
b f f34 eat ute esp 24•24 • -> 
.> 
.> 
• > no dre 
no dre 
2.49gm 
967.llg 
no dre 
11.2g• 
no dre 
no dre 
2.49gm 
no dre 
no dre 
2.05g11 P·1. 
p.1. 
P<.7 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<1. 
p.1, 
p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
P<.3 
100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -!mg •.•. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· ..•• :. -10 
:> 10.1mg * 
11.611g • 
42.6mg * P<.5 
P<.08 
P<.7 
p.1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<1. 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.4 :> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
98.111g • 
6.991Rg • 
1.5811g • 
12.3mg * 
100ng .• : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •. 111g •••. : •• 10 •.•.. : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
_. #206.11g * P<.02 
69.211g * P<.03 
206. mg * P<. 02 
250.11g * P<.08 
:> 72.2mg * P<.6 
.. 
.. no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
52. 7mg \ P<. 03 
+historical * P<.2 
51.511g \ P<.3 
1.10g11 * P<.4 
470.11g * P<.02 
368.•g * P<. 7 
506.llg * P<.4 
100ng •• :. -lug •••• :. -10-•••• : --100 •. -• : • -1•g •••• : •• 10 •••. -: • -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
: +: 69.0mg P<.0005e 
P<.0005 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.6 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005 
P<.01 
:+: 69.0•g 
70.111g 
301.•g • 
315.•g • 
75.0•g 
301.•g • 
3.81g11 • 
44. 711g I 
46.4•g I 
255.llg • 
1.17g11 P<.4 
110.•g I P<.0005e 
110.•g I P<.0005 
913.0lg * P<.007 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 81 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkl)' Code 
671 c00431 1.44gm n.s.s. 10/ZO 403.mg 20/50 799.mg 20/50 
c00431 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 403.mg 0/50 799.mg 0/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
COLCEMID 477-30·5 
672 1017 14.2ug n.s.s. 7/65 7 .86ug 5/30 Schmahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
1017 18.4ug n.s.s. 4/65 7 .86ug 3!30 
b 1017 22 .4ug n.s.s. 3/65 7 .86ug 2/30 
COPPER D IMETHYLD I TH IOCARBAMATE <cumate) 137-29-1 
673 1203 23.8mg n. s. s. 0/17 22.8119 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1203 45 .2mg n.s.s. 0/ 17 22.8.,g 0/18 
b 1203 30.1mg n.s.s. 2/17 22.811g 1/ 18 
674 1203 20.4mg n.s.s. 1/18 21.2 .. g 1/ 15 
a 1203 22.6mg n.s.s. 2/18 21.211g 1/ 15 
b 1203 17.411g n.s.s. 3/18 21 .211g 2/15 
675 1203 45.2Rlg n.s.s. 0/16 22.811g 0/18 
1203 45.2Rlg n.s.s. 0/16 22.8mg 0/18 
b 1203 17 .4mg n.s.s. 0/16 22.811g 2/18 
676 1203 10.511g n.s.s. 0/16 21.2mg 3/15 
1203 18.3mg n.s.s. 0/16 21.211g 1/ 15 
b 1203 7.1811g 151.11g 0/16 21.211g 5/15 
COPPER ·8· HYDROXYQU !NOL I NE 10380-28 ·6 
677 1295 771."'g n.s.s. 0/17 389.mg 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1295 771 .mg n.s.s. 1/17 389.mg 0/18 
b 1295 279.mg n.s.s. 2/17 389.mg 3/18 
678 1295 221 .'11g n.s.s. 1/18 362.mg 3/17 
• 1295 677 .mg n.s.s. 2/18 362.mg 0/17 
b 1295 263.mg n.s.s. 3/18 362.mg 3/17 
679 1295 771 .Ilg n.s.s. 0/16 389.mg 0/18 
1295 771.mg n.s.s. 0/16 389.mg 0/18 
b 1295 405.mg n.s.s. 0/16 389.mg 1/18 
680 1295 638.mg n.s.s. 0/16 362.mg 0/16 
• 1295 638.mg n.s.s. 0/16 362.mg 0/16 
b 1295 334.mg n.s.s. 0/16 362.mg 1/16 
COUMAPHOS 56· 72.4 
681 c08662 2.50Rlg n.s.s. 8/25 1 .30mg 20/50 2.60mg 24/50 
c08662 5.46mg n.s.s. O/Z5 1 .30mg 4/50 2.60mg 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c08662 7.02mg n.s.s. 1/25 1.30mg 4/50 2.60mg 4/50 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
682 c08662 3.31mg n.s.s. 15/25 1 .20mg 26/50 2.40mg 22/50 
• c08662 5.22mg n.s.s. 7 /25 1 .20mg 14/50 2.40mg 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c08662 6.82mg n.s.s. 4/25 1 .20mg 4/50 2.40mg 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
683 c08662 .63511g n.s.s. 17/23 .500mg 41/50 1.00mg 38/50 
c08662 2.65mg n.s.s. 0/23 .500mg 2/50 1. OORlg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
684 c08662 .471mg n.s.s. 12/25 .400mg 32/50 .800mg 32/50 
c08662 3.02mg n.s.s. 0/25 .400mg 1/50 .800mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
11-CRESIDINE* 102·50· 1 
685 c02993 83.911g n.s.s. 0/25 22.611g 1/50 45.3mg 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c02993 32.9mg n.s.s. 3/25 22.6mg 10/50 45.3mg 15/50 
b c02993 83.9mg n.s.s. 0/25 22.611g 1/50 45.3mg 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c02993 95. 1mg n.s.s. 0/Z5 22.6 .. g 2150 45.3mg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
686 c02993 12.5mg n.s.s. 9/25 22.9mg 10/50 54.611g 0/50 
a c02993 23.8Rlg n.s.s. 5/25 22.9Rlg 3/50 54.6Rlg 0!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c02993 26.9mg n.s.s. 4/25 22. 9mg 4/50 54.6Rlg 0!50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
687 c02993 24.911g n.s.s. 3/25 40.4mg 21/49 <80.0mg 8/50) 
a c02993 232.llg n.s.s. 0/25 40.411g 1/49 80.011g 2/50 
b c02993 17. 1mg n.s.s. 12/25 40 .4mg 38/49 <80.0mg 20/50) 
c02993 270.mg n.s.s. 0/25 40.4mg 1/49 80.0mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
688 c02993 178.mg n.s.s. 0/25 40.4mg 0/50 80.0Rlg 5!50 
• c02993 56.411g n.s.s. 14/25 40.411g 30/50 80.0mg 21/50 
b c02993 191.mg n.1.s. 0/25 40.4mg 4/50 80.0mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
p·CRESIDINE 120·71·8 
689 c02982 49. 911g 97. 7Rlg 0/50 281.Rlg 42/50 563.Rlg 45/50 ubl: can, nen, npm, sqc, tee. 
• c02982 49.9Rlg 97. 7mg 0/50 281.Rlg 42/50 563.mg 45/50 l iv:hpa,hpc; ubl: can, nen, npm, sqc, tee. 
b c02982 50.5mg 99.5mg 0/50 281 .Rig 41/50 563.mg 44/50 ubl: can, sqc, tee. 
c c02982 172.mg 587 .mg 0/50 281.mg 14/50 563.Rlg 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
d c02982 177 .mg 627 .mg 0/50 281.mg 13/50 563.mg 6/50 
e c02982 51 .5mg 117.mg 14/50 281.11g 45/50 563.Rlg 45/50 
c02982 172.mg 587 .Rig 0!50 281.mg 14/50 563.mg 6!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
g c02982 573.mg n.s.s. 4/50 281.mg 4/50 563 .mg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
690 c02982 28. 711g 70.9mg 0/50 260.mg 40/50 552.•g 31/50 ubl: sqc r tee. 
• c02982 29.3mg 78.2mg 22/50 260.Rlg 42/50 552.mg 32/50 
b c02982 95. 5Rlg 32 .7gm 15/50 260.mg 11/50 552.mg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c02982 207 .mg n.s.s. 7150 260.mg 2/50 552.mg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
691 c02982 79.6mg 157 .mg 0/50 245 .mg 31/50 491 .Ilg 43/50 ubl :nen,ppc, sqc, tee. 
• c02982 79.6mg 157 .Rig 0/50 245.mg 31/50 491 .mg 43/50 nas:oln; ubl: nen,ppe, sqc, tee. 
b c02982 401.Rlg 14.2gRI 2/50 245.mg 8/50 491 .mg 4/50 82 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
c 
d 
• 
f 
692 
a 
b 
d 
e 
g 
h R f34 eat nu oln 241124 s 
R f34 eat adr coa 24•24 s 
R f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 1 
R f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 1 
11 f34 eat MXB MXB 241124 I 
R II f34 eat ubl MXA 24•24 • 
" f34 eat tea i ct 241124 s 
" f34 eat nu MXA 24•24 s 
" f34 eat l iv MXA 24m24 s 
R 11 f34 eat nas MXA 241124 1 
R • f34 eat MXA MXA 241124 1 
R " f34 eat MXA MXA 241124 I 
R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 1 
R II f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
CUP FERRON 
693 M f b6c eat MXB MXB 78N95 v 
a M 
b b6c eat l iv MXA 78N95 v 
b6c eat MXA 78N95 v 
c b6c eat l iv hpc 78N95 v 
d b6c eat hag adn 78N95 v 
e b6c eat lun MXA 78N95 v 
b6c eat ---hes 78N95 v 
g b6c eat Zyll MXA 78N95 v 
h b6c eat TBA MXB 78N95 v 
b6c eat l iv MXB 78N95 v 
j b6c eat lun MXB 78N95 v 
694 11 b6c eat ---hes 78N95 v 
11 b6c eat hag adn 78N95 v 
b II b6c oat TBA MXB 78N95 v 
c II b6c eat l iv MXB 78N95 v 
d 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78N95 v 
695 f f34 oat MXB MXB 181125 
f f34 eat • • · hH 181125 
b f34 oat l iv MXA 181125 
c f34 oat l iv hpc 181125 
d f34 oat 1to MXA 18•25 
e f34 eat 1to 1qc 181125 
f f34 eat zy11 MXA 18•25 
g f34 eat TBA MXB 181125 
h f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 
696 " f34 eat MXB MXB 181124 
a 11 f34 eat •.. hes 181124 
b II f34 eat 1to MXA 181124 
c R 11 f34 oat 1to 1qc 18•24 
d R 11 f34 eat l iv MXA 181124 
e R 11 f34 eat sub fib 18•24 
f R 11 f34 eat l iv hpc 181124 
g R " f34 eat bod MXA 181124 
h R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
R II f34 oat l iv MXB 18•24 
CYANAMIOE, CALCIUM 
697 f b6c eat MXA 231123 
a b6c eat TBA MXB 231123 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 231123 
b6c eat lun MXB 231123 
698 b6c or l l iv hpt 76N76 evx 
a b6c orl lun 11ix 76N76 evx 
b b6c or l tba •ix 76N76 evx 
699 
a 
b 
700 
a 
b 
c 
701 
a 
b 
702 
b 
703 
a 
704 
b 11 b6c eat • • • hes 231123 
II b6c eat TBA MXB 231123 
II b6c eat l iv MXB 231123 
" b6c eat lun MXB 23•23 
11 b6c or l rt1 76N76 evx 
11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76N76 evx 
11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76N76 evx 
11 b6c or l tba mix 76N76 evx 
f b6e orl l iv hpt 76N76 evx 
f b6a or l l un ade 76N76 evx 
f b6a orl tba 11ix 76N76 evx 
• b6a or l l iv hpt 76N76 evx 
• b6a or l l un ade 76N76 evx 
• b6a orl tba 11ix 76N76 evx 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 251125 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
" f34 oat • • • MXA 251125 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 251125 
11 f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 :+ 1.19g11 
1.49gll * 
93.811g 
2.18g• * 
76.311g 
88.411g 
165.llg 
397.llg 
406.llg * 
450.llg 
3.51gm 
4.62g11 * 
98.011g 
443.11g * P<.0005c 
P<.02 
P<.0005 
P<.06 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.006 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<:.02 
P<.03 c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •..•• :. -10 
: + : 253.•g * P<.0005 
413.11g * P<.0005c 
419.11g P<.003 c 
564.llg * P<.0005c 
1. 27g11 * P<. 002 c 
798.11g * P<.04 
1.33g11 * P<.03 
3.93g11 * P<.04 c 
211.11g * P<.0005 
413.•g * P<.0005 
798.llg * P<.04 
+ : 1. OOg• * P<. 005 c 
1 • 04g11 * P<. 004 
252.mg * P<.004 
5.45g• * P<.9 
2.39g• * P<.6 
14.111g * P<.0005 
17. 411g I P<. 0005c 
17. 711g * P<.0005c 
20.111g * P<.0005c 
27 .S.g I P<.0005c 
31.311g I P<.0005c 
* P<.002 c +h;storical 
11.211g 
17.711g * 
5.33•g I 
5.4911g I 
6.28•g 
6.9411g 
9.2811g * 
10.511g * 
30. 711g * 
139.llg * 
8.8511g 
9.2811g * P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
·P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
100ng •• : •. 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• > 
• > 
.> 
:> ~ #478.11g * P<.03 
+ no dre P•1. 
no dre 
4.04g11 
no dre 
no dre 
68.011g p.1. 
P<.6 
p.1 • 
P•1. 
P<.05 
#766.11g * P<.009 
909.11g * P<.6 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
30. 911g P<. 006 
55. 7Rlg P<.04 
no dre P•1. 
16. 711g P<.0005 
no dre p.1 • 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
191.11g P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
267 .11g * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
#7. 45•g P<. 05 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 83 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
cOZ98Z 568.llg Z.89gll 0/50 Z45 .mg 0/50 491.mg 11/50 
d cOZ98Z 578.llg n.1.1. 0/50 Z45.11g 5/50 491.llg 1 /50 s 
e c0Z98Z 6Z.411g 16Z.11g Z7/50 Z45.11g 48/50 491.llg 44/50 
f cOZ98Z 71Z.11g n.1.1. 0/50 Z45.•g 4/50 491.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
69Z c0Z98Z 55. 711g 107 .mg 0/50 198.llg 35/50 396.llg 46/50 l iv:hpc,11hc,nnd; nas: adn, can, neu, np•,oln; nsp: acn; 
ubl :ppc, sqc, tee, tpp,ul c. 
a cOZ98Z 63.911g 1Z6.11g 0/50 198.mg 30/50 396.llg 44/50 ubl :ppc, sqc, tee, tpp,ul c. 
b cOZ98Z 81.111g Z.05gll 37/50 198.llg 45/50 396.llg Z3!50 
cOZ98Z Z36.mg 711.llg 0/50 198.llg Z/50 396.•g Z3/50 nas: adn, can,neu ,np11, oln. 
d cOZ98Z ZZ0.11g 968.•g 0/50 198.llg 13/50 396.llg Z/50 l iv: hpc, 11hc, nnd. 
e cOZ98Z Z60.11g 836.11g 0/50 198.llg 1/50 396.llg Z1/50 nas:neu,oln. 
f c0Z98Z 94Z.11g n.s.s. 0/50 198.llg 0/50 396.mg 3/50 bra:gln; brs:gln. 
g cOZ98Z 1.35g• n.1.1. 0/50 198.llg 0/50 396.llg 3/50 nas:can,np•; nsp:acn. 
h cOZ98Z 63.611g 181 .Ilg Z8/50 198.11g 44/50 396.llg 46/50 
cOZ98Z 235.llg 1 .11g• 0/50 198.0lg 12/50 396.llg Z/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
CUP FERRON 135-Z0-6 
693 c03Z58 163.llg 495.mg 3/50 ZOO.mg 18/50 405.llg Z5/50 ---:he11,hes; hag:adn; l iv:hpa,hpc; zy11:1ec,aqc. 
• c03Z58 Z43.11g 1 .05g11 Z/50 ZOO.mg 12/50 405.•g 16/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
b c03Z58 19Z.11g Z.ZOg11 1/50 Z00.11g 10/50 <405.11g 6/50> ---:he11,he1 . 
c c03Z58 309.llg 1.96g• Z/50 Z00.11g 9/50 405.•g 13/50 
d c03Z58 576.11g 5.56g• 0/50 Z00.11g Z/50 405.llg 6/50 
e c03Z58 344.llg n.1.1. 4/50 ZOO.mg 11/50 405.llg 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c03Z58 58Z.11g n.1.1. 1/50 Z00.11g 5/50 405.mg 6/50 
g c03Z58 1.19g11 n.1.s. 0/50 Z00.11g 0/50 405.llg 3/50 zy•: sec, sqc. 
h c03Z58 1Z5.11g 591.mg 1Z/50 Z00.11g 33/50 405.mg 31/50 
c03Z58 Z43.11g 1 .05g11 Z/50 ZOO.mg 1Z/50 405.mg 16/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
j c03Z58 344.llg n.1.1. 4/50 Z00.11g 11/50 405.llg 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
694 c03Z58 451.llg 8.40g• 1/50 185.llg 3/50 374.mg 7/50 
a c03Z58 450.llg 6.19g11 0/50 185.llg 3/50 374.llg 4/50 
b c03Z58 1Z8.•g 1. 78g• Z0/50 185.mg Z5/50 374.llg Z6!50 
c03Z58 416.mg n.1.1. 15/50 185.llg 9/50 374.llg 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c03Z58 449.11g n.1.1. 7/50 185.mg 8/50 374.llg 5/50 lun: a/a,a/c. 
695 c03Z58 9.Z311g Z1 .811g 2150 55.Zmg 40/50 110.mg 40/50 ---: hes; l iv: hpc,nnd; 1to:1qc,sqp; zy11: cue, sqc. 
a c03Z58 10.911g Z7 .911g 0/~0 55.Z11g Z8/50 110.llg 37/50 
b c03Z58 10.6•g 31.Zmg 1/50 55.Zmg Z6!50 110.llg 12/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
c03Z58 11.911g 36.0•g 1/50 55.Z11g Z4/50 110.mg 10/50 
d c03Z58 17.011g 45.711g 0/50 55.Z11g 19/50 110.•g Z4/50 sto:aqc,sqp. 
e c03Z58 18.311g 53.911g 0/50 55.Zmg 14/50 110.mg ZZ/50 
f c03Z58 53.911g 1.18g11 1/50 55.Z11g 5/50 110.mg 4/50 zy11: cue, sqc. 
g c03Z58 7.18•g 18.911g 31/50 55.Z11g 4Z/50 110.llg 4Z/50 
h c03258 10.611g 31.Zmg 1/50 55.211g 26/50 110.•g 12/50 l; v: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
696 c03Z58 Z.0611g 9. 7911g 0/50 45.0mg 42/50 96.511g 38/49 ---:hes; l iv:hpc,nnd; sto:aqc,aqp. 
a c03258 Z.0911g 10.411g 0/50 45.0mg 38/50 96.5•g 35/49 
b c03Z58 Z.1711g 13.111g 0/50 45.0mg 32/50 96.511g 24/49 sto:aqc,sqp. 
c03258 2. 2411g 16. 511g 0/50 45.0mg 19/50 96.511g 17/49 
d c03258 Z.4011g 28.611g 0/50 45.0mg 1Z/50 96.511g 5/49 l iv:hpc ,nnd. 
e c03258 2.4311g 35.711g 1/50 45.0•g 15/50 96.511g 5/49 
f c03258 10.811g 80.811g 0/50 45.0llg 8/50 96.511g 4/49 
g c03258 54.411g 571.mg 0/50 45.0mg 5/50 96.511g 1/49 bod:•en,•10 . 
h c03Z58 5.0111g 14.611g 31/50 45.0mg 45/50 96.511g 41/49 
c03258 2.4011g 28.611g 0/50 45 .Omg 1Z/50 96.511g 5/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM 156-6Z-7 
697 cOZ937 213.llg n.1.1. 1/20 65.0mg 11/50 260.mg 18/50 ···:Leu, Ly•. 
• c02937 Z64.11g n.1.1. 11/ZO 65.0mg 25/50 260.mg Z7!50 
b c02937 685.mg n.1.1. 0/20 65.0mg 6/50 Z60.11g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c02937 716.llg n.1.1. 3/20 65.0llg 1/50 Z60.11g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
698 1066 67.211g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 0/18 lnnea;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1066 67 .211g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 0/18 
b 1066 20.511g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 3/18 
699 cOZ937 349.•g 26.9g11 1/ZO 60.011g Z/50 240.mg 10/50 
a c02937 174.llg n.1.1. 13/ZO 60.0•g 29/50 240.11g 30/50 
b c02937 675.llg n.1.1. 8/ZO 60.0mg 11/50 Z40 ... g 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c02937 411.llg n.1.1. 7/20 60.0•g 11/50 Z40.11g 11/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
700 1066 11.611g 305.•g 0/16 31.611g 5/16 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1066 16.811g n.1.1. 0/16 31.611g 3/16 
b 1066 55.611g n.1.1. 0/16 31.611g 0/16 
c 1066 7 .37•g 51. 711g 0/16 31.611g 8/16 
701 1066 63.411g n.1.1. 0/17 33.911g 0/17 
• 1066 63.411g n.1.1. 1/17 33.911g 0/17 
b 1066 Z9.811g n.1.1. 2/17 33.911g 2/17 
702 1066 Z6.511g n.1.1. 1/18 31.611g 2/18 
a 1066 41 .511g n.1.1. Z/18 31.611g 1/18 
b 1066 Z4.811g n.1.1. 3/18 31.611g 3/18 
703 c02937 13.811g n.1.1. 18/20 5.0011g 40/50 Z0.011g 42/50 
a c02937 138.llg n.1.1. 1120 5.0011g 0/50 Z0.011g 1/50 l; v: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
704 c02937 3.3911g n.1.1. 2/20 4.0011g 18/50 <8. 0011g 7/50) ··-:leu,ly•,nen .. 
a cOZ937 5.3911g n.1.1. 18/20 4.00•g 43/50 8.0011g 45/50 
b c0Z937 40.511g n.1.1. 1/20 4.0011g 3/50 8.00•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 84 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 
705 f asp eat rel l ys 80w82 e 
a f asp eat lun ado 80w82 e 
b asp eat l iv tum 80w82 e 
706 m asp eat l iv tu" 80w82 e 
m asp eat lun ado 80w82 e 
707 e3h wat l iv tu" 24m24 e 
a e3h wat lun tu" 24m24 e 
b e3h wat tba mix 24m24 e 
708 
b 
709 
a 
b 
710 
8 
b 
711 
a 
b 
712 
713 
714 
715 
b 
716 
a 
b 
717 "e3h wat Liv mix 24m24 
" e3h wat lun mix 24m24 
" e3h wat tba "ix 24m24 
ed1 eat Liv tum 240l24 e 
ed1 eat lun tum 24m24 e 
ed1 eat tba mix 24.,24 
11 crf wat l iv mix 241124 e 
" erf wat lun mix 24m24 
m erf wat tba mix 240124 e 
m r3m wat lun mix 24m24 
m r3m wat l iv tum 24m24 e 
" r3m wat tba mix 24.,24 
swa eat l iv hpt 76w76 e 
swi eat ubl ape 91w91 eg 
" swi eat ubl tuRI 91w91 e 
xvi wat lun mix 24m24 e 
xvi wat l iv mix 2411124 e 
f xvi wat tba mix 24m24 
b sda eat ubl pam 30m30 • 
b sda eat ubl tee 30m30 e 
b sda eat tba ma l 30m30 e 
b wis eat ubl tum 24m24 er 
CYCLOCHLOROT I NE 
718 M m ddn eat l iv mix 37,.37 e 
M m ddn eat l iv lea 37m37 e 
b M m ddn eat l iv lee 37,.37 e 
M m ddn eat l iv hpt 37,.37 e _100ng •• : •• _1ug ••.• : •• _10 ..••• : .. _100 .•.. : •• _101g •••• : •• _10 ••••. : .• _100 .... : •. _1g ..•.• : •• _10 
.> 16. 7gOI * P<.04 
228. gm * P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
.> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1 .42gm 
4.38gm 
772.0lg 
_. 4.67gm P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.09 
P<.2 
P<.03 
P<.05 
P•1. 
P<.05 
P•1. 
P•1. no dre 
4.67gm 
no dre 
.no dre 
no dre 
587.mg 
16.0gm 
587 .mg 
no dre P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.3 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
30.7gm * P<.3 
83.9gm * P<.2 
.100ng •. : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •. _101g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •.•. : •• _1g ..... : .• _10 
_. 23.6mg * P<.1 
48.6mg * P<.2 
98.9mg * P<.4 
99.5mg * P<.9 + 
+ 
N·CYCLOHEXYL·2 ·BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE.: •• _1ug .•.• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •. _1mg •..• : .• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : .• _1g •••.. : .• _10 
719 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre p.1. 
8 
b 
720 
a 
b 
721 
b 
722 
a 
b b6a orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
" b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6a orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
m b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b6e or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6e orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
m b6e or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE. HC l 
723 f asp eat lun ado 80w84 e 
a asp eat l iv nod 80w84 e 
b asp eat tba mix 80w84 e 
724 m asp eat l iv nod 80w84 e 
a " asp eat lun ade 80w84 e 
b m asp eat lun ado 80w84 e 
e m asp eat tba 01ix 80w84 e 
725 b fdr eat l iv 11ix 24m24 
a b fdr eat tba Mix 24m24 
726 b sda eat l iv lea 300130 e 
a b sda eat ubl tu" 30.,30 e 
b b sda eat tba 018l 30m30 e 
727 wis eat Liv hem 24m24 e 
728 m wis eat l iv nod 24M24 e 
a m ",;s eat l iv hein 241124 e 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE SULFATE 
729 M f swi eat ubl ape 91w91 eg 
730 M m swi eat ubl tum 91w91 e 
731 f esa eat ubl tum 240l24 r 
732 R " esa eat ubl tee 24.,24 r 
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE 
733 M f swi ipj lys 26w79 e 
a M f sw i i p j ski sqe 26w79 e 
b M swi ipj lun 01ix 26w79 e • > 
• > no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1 . 
no dre 
243.mg 
92.711g 
532 .mg 
50.8mg P-1. 
P<.09 
P<.007 -
P<.3 
P<.0005-
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •. _10 •••.• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1.,g •.•• : •• _10 ..••• : .. _100 .••• : •• _1g ••••• : .. _10 
.> 
. > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
231 .Ilg P-1. 
P-1. 
P·1. 
P<.02 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre 
no dre 
14.5gm 
no dre P•1 . 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
_. 1 .33gm P<.04 
.> 47 .Ogm * P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 .••.. : •• _100 .••. : •• _1mg •••• : •• _10 •.•.. : .. _100 .••• : •• _1g ••••• : •. _10 
. > 
.> .> no dre P· 1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1 • 
280.0lg * P<.2 
_100ng •. : •• ]ug .•.• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1mg ..•. : •. _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •. _1g •...• : •• _10 
7. 09mg * P<. 003 
11.10lg * P<.002 
6. 15•g * P<.06 CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 139-05-9 
705 1341 6.45g11 n.s.s. 
a 1341 9.13g11 n.s.s. 
b 1341 1.29g"' n.s.s. 
706 1341 1.39g"' n.s.s. 
1341 12.4g11 n.s.s. 
707 1275 2.47gm n.s.s. 
1275 2.47g11 n.s.s. 
b 1275 201.11g n.s.s. 
708 1275 652.Rlg n.s.s. 
1275 1.85g11 n.s.s. 
b 1275 795.11g n.s.s. 
709 1450 8.27gRI n.s.s. 
1450 16.2g11 n.s.s. 
b 1450 10.5g11 n.s.s. 
710 1275 528.11g n. s. s. 
1275 1.44g11 n.s.s. 
b 1275 314.Mg n.s.s. 
711 1275 1.41gm n.s.s. 
e 1275 4.53g11 n.s.s. 
b 1275 1.41g11 n.s.s. 
712 1090 24.3g11 n.s.s. 
713 1349 9.41g11 n.s.s. 
714 1349 11.1g11 n.s.s. 
715 1275 277.llg 1.95gRI 
1275 2.61g11 n.s.s. 
b 1275 277 .11g 1.95goo 
716 1416 56.6g11 n.s.s. 
a 1416 56.6g11 n.s.s. 
b 1416 9.59g11 n.s.s. 
717 1465 25.4g11 n.s.s. 
CYCLOCHLOROT I NE 12663 · 46 · 6 
718 1346 8.15Mg n.s.s. 
1346 12.011g n.s.s. 
b 1346 16.111g n.s.s. 
1346 16.211g n.s.s. 3/45 
6/45 
0/45 
0/46 
15/46 
0/19 
0/19 
18/19 
3/9 
2/9 
5/9 
0/17 
4/17 
11/17 
12/28 
2/28 
16/28 
0/19 
0/19 
0/19 
3/45 
1/41 
0/40 
3/16 
0/16 
3/16 
0/98 
0/98 
13/98 
0/98 
0/11 
0/11 
0/11 
0/11 !Dose 
888.llg 
888.11g 
888.mg 
820 ... g 
820.llg 
1.20gm 
1.20g11 
1.20g11 
1.00gm 
1.00g11 
1.00g11 
1.30g11 
1.30g11 
1.30g11 
1.00gRI 
1.00g11 
1.00gRI 
1. OOgRI 
1.00gm 
1.00g11 
6.50g11 
2.60gRI 
2.40gRI 
1.20gRI 
1. 20g11 
1.20g11 
900.llg 
900.llg 
900.•g 
1.00gOI 
1.3311g 
1.3311g 
1.3311g 
1.3311g line 2Dose 
2/19 2.22g11 
2/19 2.22g11 
0/19 2.22gm 
0/21 2.05gm 
5/21 2.05gm 
0/10 
0/10 
9/10 
3/9 
0/9 
3/9 
0/38 6.50gm 
6/38 6.50gm 
19/38 6.50gm 
22/34 
7/34 
28/34 
3/22 
0/22 
3/22 
1/47 
0130 6.50glR 
0/41 6.00g11 
16/20 
1/20 
16/20 
1/97 2.25g11 
1/97 2.25g11 
16/97 2. 25gOI 
1/84 2.00g11 
1/18 
0/18 
0/18 
1/18 2.0011g 
2.0011g 
2.0011g 
2.00 .. g 
N · CYCLOHEXYL · 2 · BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE CDuraX) 95·33·0 
719 1299 177.11g n.s.s. 
1299 177.mg n.s.s. 0/17 94.911g 0/17 
1/17 94.911g 0/17 
b 1299 83.411g n.s.s. 2/17 94.911g 2/17 
720 1299 104.mg n.s.s. 1/18 88.211g 1/18 
e 1299 116.11g n.s.s. 2/18 88.211g 1/18 
b 1299 69.411g n.s.1. 3/18 88.211g 3/18 
721 1299 157 .11g n.1.1. 0/16 94.911g 0/15 
e 1299 157 .11g n.s.s. 0/16 94.9 .. g 0/15 
b 1299 59.511g n.s.s. 0/16 94.9•g 2/15 
722 1299 34. 911g 1. 25g11 
1299 86.711g n.s.1. 0/16 88.211g 5/17 
0/16 88.211g 1/17 
b 1299 22.511g 161.llg 0/16 88.211g 8/17 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE.HCL 4998-76·9 
723 398 875.11g n.s.1. 6/44 
398 1.72g• n.1.1. 1/44 
b 398 595.11g n.s.1. 11/44 
724 398 95 .111g n.s. 1. 5/46 
e 398 1.54g• n.1.1. 0/46 
b 398 1.00gM n.1.1. 14/46 
398 665.11g n.1.1. 16/46 
725 1458 1.91g• n.s.1. 0/60 
a 1458 324.11g n.s.1. 16/60 
726 1416 2.35g11 n.1.s. 0/98 
1416 4.38g11 n.s.1. 0/98 
b 1416 1.81g11 n.s.1. 13/98 9/46 
3/46 
15/46 
3/45 
0/45 
10/45 
14/45 
2160 
18/60 
1/68 
0/68 
6/68 124.llg 
124.llg 
124.0lg 
114.llg 
114.llg 
114.llg 
114.llg 
50.011g 
50.00lg 
727 396 404.11g n.s.s. 0/38 
728 396 1.43g11 n.1.1. 
396 2.54g11 n.1.1. 2/34 
3/34 37.111g 
37.111g 
37 .10lg 
34.311g 
34.311g 
34.311g 
34.311g 
15.011g 
15.011g 
200.llg 200.llg 
200.11g 
30.011g 
24.011g 
24.00lg 0/43 100.llg 
1/40 80.011g 
1/40 80.011g 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE SULFATE 19834-02- 7 
729 1349 3.49g• n.s.s. 
730 1349 3.98g11 n.s.s. 
731 1350 .69611g n.1.1. 
732 1350 45.6•g n.s.s. 
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE (Endoxan) 
733 1336 2.5011g 61.311g 
1336 3.350lg 81.611g 
b 1336 1.97.,g n.1.s. 1/41 
0/40 
0/25 
0/25 
50· 18-0 650.llg 
600.llg 
.15011g 
.15011g 
3/154 1.6911g 
0/154 1.6911g 
20/154 1.6911g 0/34 
0/42 
0/25 
0/25 1.50•g 
1.5011g 
1/19 3.52•g 
1/19 3.5211g 
4/19 3.5211g 2Inc 
3/18 
6/18 
0/18 
0127 
6/27 
0133 
5/33 
14/33 
0/39 
0/41 
0/101 0/101 
20/101 
2/143 
3/19 
2/19 
1/19 
0/19 4.44gll 
4.44g11 
4.44g11 
4.10g11 
4.10g11 
7 /42 371.llg 
0/42 371.11g 
15/42 371.llg 
10/31 (343.llg 
1/31 343.llg 
4/31 343.llg 
10/31 343.llg 
0160 100.llg 
15/60 100.11g 
3/47 <300 ... g 
0/39 240.11g 
1/39 240 ... g 
0/25 
0/25 
4/16 
2/16 
5/16 15.011g 
15.011g 4/21 
6/21 
0/21 
0/23 
1/23 
5/44 
1/44 
10/44 
3/46) 
0/46 
7/46 
11/46 8.88g11 
8.88g11 
8.88gm 
8.20g11 
8.20g11 
0/60 150.llg 
14/60 (150.•g 
0/41) 
2/46 
0/46 
0/25 
1/25 6/25 
3/25 
0/25 
0/24 
7/24 
1/60 
3/60) Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Branto11; f ctx, 11, 735 · 746; 1973 
Rude Ii; adsc, 269, 1910·1913;1969 
Ho11burger ;ctxf ,359-373; 1978 
Rudal i; adsc, 269, 1910-1913; 1969 
Roe;fctx,8, 135-145; 1970 
Kroes; txcy, 8, 285 -300; 1977 
Rudel i; edsc, 269, 1910-1913;1969 
Sch11ehl ;arzn,23, 1466-1470; 1973 
Hicks; car11, 2, 475 -489; 1978 
Uraguchi ;fctx, 10, 193-207; 1972 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Hardy; f ctx, 14, 269·276;1976 
Oser; txcy ,6, 47-65;1976 
Schmahl ;arzn,23, 1466-1470; 1973 
Gaunt; f ctx, 14, 255 · 267; 1976 
Kroes; txcy, 8, 285·300;1977 
Pr ice;scie, 167, 1131-1132; 1970 
Skipper ;srfr; 1976/Weisburger 1977 /Prejean pars.co .... 85 86 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
swi ipj liv lys 26w79 e 
d swi ipj tbe 11ix 26w79 e 
e swi ipj tba ••l 26w79 e 
f swi ipj tbe ben 26w79 e 
734 11 swi ipj leu 26w79 e 
a " swi ipj lun •ix 26w79 e 
b m swi ipj l iv •ix 26w79 e 
c m swi ipj tbe •ix 26w79 e 
d "' swi ipj tbe "8l 26w79 e 
e "' swi ipj tbe ben 26w79 e 
735 "' b46 iv] tba •ix 121124 es 
• "' b46 ivj tbe "8l 121124 es 
b "' b46 ivj tbe ben 12.,24 es 
736 •d• ipj ..... ••l 241124 .. 
• ad• ipj tbe ••l 241124 ea 
737 R " sde ipj l iv hee 251125 ea 
• R m ad• ipJ tbe "'"l 2~"'25 es 
DACARBAZINE 
738 f 1wi ipj lun •ix 26w61 e 
ipj ute adc 26w61 e 
ipj lys 26w61 e 
ipj 1pl hee 26w61 e 
ipj l iv lys 26w61 e 
ipj tbe 118l 26w61 e 
ipj tbe ben 26w61 e 
ipj tbe "'ix 26w61 e 
ipj lun 11ix 26w78 e 
ipj apl mix 26w78 e a awi 
b ,.,; 
c swi 
d swi 
e awi 
f swi 
g swi 
739 " swi 
• swi 
b " swi ipj lyk 26w78 e 
c m swi ipj lya 26w78 e 
d " swi ipj l iv mix 26w78 e 
e 11 swi ipj tba 11ix 26w78 e 
11 awi ipj tbe "'"l 26w78 e 
g 11 swi ipj tbe ben 26w78 e 
740 f 1de eat mgl adf 46w60 
a 1da eat th• l ya 46w60 
b ada eat ute lei 46w60 
DAMINOZIDE 
741 f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 24m24 
b f b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
742 " b6c eat l iv hpc 241124 
a " b6c eat l iv MXA 24m24 
b " b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
c " b6c eat l iv MXB 24.,24 
d 11 b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
743 f 1wa vat blv 11ix 92w92 e 
a 1wa wit lun 11ix 92w92 e 
b 1wa wit l iv tu• 92w92 e 
744 " 1wa wat blv 11ix 81w81 e 
a 11 swa wat lun 11ix 81w81 e 
b " awe wet kid ode 81 w81 e 
c " awe wet l iv hpt 81w81 e 
745 f f34 eat lun a/a 24•24 
a f f34 eat MXB MXB 24•24 
b f34 eat ut11 acn 24•24 
c f34 eat ute lei 24•24 
d f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
e f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
746 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a II f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
DAPSO E 
747 f b6c eat TBA MXB 18•25 
a 
b 
748 
a 
b 
749 
a 
750 
a 
b 
751 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 18•25 
b6c eat lun MXB 181125 
" b6c eat TBA MXB 181125 
• b6c eat l iv MXB 181125 
11 b6c eat lun MXB 181125 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
11 f34 eat 1pl MXA 181124 
11 f34 eat 1pl fib 181124 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
II f34 eat apl MXA 18n124 
II f34 eat lpl fib 18•24 • > no dre P•1. 
1 • 78mg * P<. 0005 
1 • 7811g * P<. 0005 
no dre 
8.69•g * 
5. 78mg * 
40.9•g * 
3.66•g * 
3. 77•g * 
no dre 
3.01•g 
5.36 .. g 
9.02mg 
1.7011g 
1.26•g 
no dre 
2.87mg P-1. 
P<.004 
P<.07 
P<.5 
P<.09 
P<.05 
P-1. 
P<.04 
P<.1 
P<.3 
P<.05 
P<.02 + 
P•1 • 
P<.06 + 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg ••.• : •• 10 ..•.. : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.595mg 
3.2011g 
8.00mg 
14.5mg 
no dre 
.80711g 
7.0311g 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 + 
P<.03 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<.07 + 
P<.7 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.05 + + 2.57•g 
5.1711g 
13.011g 
16.111g 
98.811g 
.81311g 
1.54mg 
10.6•g 
.710mg 
4.21mg 
6.55.,g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 •...• : .. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 56.4gm * P<1. 
6.82g11 \ P<.5 
2.92g11 * P<.06 
2.15g• * P<.005 a 
2.45g11 * P<.05 a 
1.50g11 * P<.2 
2.45gm * P<.05 
3.40g11 * P<.4 
• + 1. 24g11 P<. 0005+ 
1. 37g11 P<. 0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
• + • 880.mg P<.0005+ 
1.11g11 P<.0005+ 
10.9gm P<.002 + 
38.8g11 P<.3 
'" 4.89g11 * P<.05 
1.84g11 * P<.2 
+historical * P<.3 
+histor ical * P<.2 
3.45g11 * P<.8 
9.64gm * P<.5 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
pool no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
22.411g * P<.0005c 
28.511g * P<.004 c 
22.411g * P<.1 
no dre P-1. 
22.411g * P<.0005c 
28.5•g * P<.0005c CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 87 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Patholog~' 
Brkl~ · Code 
1336 2.4311g n.1.s . 1/154 1.6911g 0/19 3. 52•g 0/16 
d 1336 . 81511g 8.25mg 42/154 1.6911g 9/19 3. 5211g 11/16 
• 1336 .858•g 5.9311g 29/154 1.6911g 7/19 3. 5211g 11/16 
f 1336 6.9911g n.a.s. 13/154 1.6911g 2/19 3.5211g 0/16 
734 1336 2.63•g 84.811g 0/101 1.7211g 2/22 3.5211g 1/9 
1336 1.7811g n.a.s. 9/101 1.7211g 5/22 3.52mg 219 
b 1336 4.6011g n.s.s. 2/101 1.7211g 0/22 3.5211g 1/9 
c 1336 1.1511g n.s.s. 28/101 1.7211g 8/22 3.5211g 5/9 
d 1336 1.2711g n.s.s. 19/101 1.7211g 7/22 3.52mg 4/9 
• 1336 4.4211g n.s.s . 9/101 1. 7211g 1/22 3.5211g 1/9 
735 1017 1.1211g n.1.1. 7/65 .92911g 10/36 Schmahl ;arzn, 20, 1461-1467; 1970 
• 1017 1.6211g n.s.s . 4/65 .92911g 6!36 
b 1017 2.1211g n.s.s . 3/65 .92911g 4/36 
736 1134 • 66011g n.1.s . 3/33 .571mg 10/36 Schmahl ; zkko, 86, 77-84; 1976 
• 1134 • 54911g n.s.s . 3/33 .571mg 12/36 
737 1134 3.9111g n.1.1 . 1/36 .571mg 0/32 
1134 • 95611g n.s.s. 1/36 .57111g 5/32 
OACARBAZINE CDIC) 4342-03 ·4 
738 1336 .24911g 1.7411g 20/154 4.5611g 12/14 Skipper ;srfr; 1976/Waisburger 1977 /Prejean pers.co11m. 
1336 1.0911g 16.511g 0/154 4.5611g 4/14 
b 1336 1.7611g n.1.1. 3/154 4.5611g 2/14 
1336 2.3611g n.1.1. 0/154 4.56•g 1/14 
d 1336 4.5311g n.s.s. 1/154 4.5611g 0/14 
• 1336 .33611g 2.84•g 29/154 4.5611g 11/14 
1336 1.5011g n.1.s. 13/154 4.56•g 3/14 
g 1336 n.1.1. n.s.s. 42/154 4.5611g 14/14 
739 1336 1.2611g 7.7111g 9/101 3.5611g 14/30 
1336 2.2311g 16.611g 0/101 3.5611g 7/30 
b 1336 3.9411g 114.llg 0/101 3.5611g 3/30 
1336 4.1610g n.1.s. 2/101 3.5611g 3/30 
d 1336 7.2211g n.1.1 . 2/101 3.56mg 1/30 
• 1336 • 41911g 1.8611g 28/101 3.5611g 26/30 
1336 .79611g 4.06mg 19/101 3.5611g 20/30 
g 1336 2.9711g n.a.s. 9/101 3.5611g 6/30 
740 1412 .31611g 2.3811g 4/28 3.8311g 12/16 Beal; jnci ,54,951-957;1975 
1412 1.2711g n.1.1. 0/28 3.8311g 3/16 
b 1412 1.6111g n.1.s. 0/28 3.8311g 2/16 
DA"INOZIDE Csuccinic acid 2,2-dimethyl hydrazide, D"ASA) 1596-84-5 
741 c03827 1.04g11 n.1.s. 13/20 644.llg 27/50 1.29g11 25/50 
• c03827 1.36g11 n.s.s. 1/20 644.llg 4/50 C1.29g11 0/50> l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03827 1.35g11 n.s.s. 1/20 644.mg 8/50 1.29g11 10/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
742 c03827 1.26g11 14.9g11 0/20 594.•g 7/50 1.19gll 13/50 
• c03827 1.20gm n.s.1. 1/20 594.mg 9/50 1.19g11 14/50 l iv:hpa,hpc • 
b c03827 588.11g n.1.1. 8/20 594.llg 28/50 1.19g11 37/50 
c c03827 1.20g• n.1.1. 1/20 594.llg 9/50 1.19g11 14/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c03827 1.01g11 n.s.1. 4/20 594.llg 15/50 1.19g11 18/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
743 401 757 .Ilg 2 .16g11 8/96 4.00g11 36/43 Toth; canr, 37, 3497-3500;1977 
• 401 831.11g 2.47g11 15/99 4.00g11 37/45 
b 401 29.0g11 n.1.1. 0171 4.00g11 0/45 
744 401 552 •• g 1. 49g11 5/89 3.33g11 37/46 
• 401 649.llg 2.21g11 22/92 3.33g11 36/46 
b 401 4.15gll 51.1g11 0/77 3.33g11 5/42 
c 401 7.39g• n.s.s. 1/77 3.33gll 2/42 
745 c03827 1.69g11 n.1.1. 0/20 248.llg 0/50 495.11g 4/50 
• c03827 922.•g n.s.s. 0/20 248.•g 6/50 495.llg 5/50 ute: lei; ut11:acn . 
b c03827 1.13g11 n.1.1. 0/20 248.llg 5/50 495.mg 3/50 
c c03827 1.81g• n.1.s. 0/20 248.llg 1/50 495.llg 3/50 
d c03827 404.11g n.1.s. 11/20 248.llg 32/50 495.llg 28/50 
• c03827 2.37g11 n.1.1. 0/20 248.llg 1/50 495.mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd . 
746 c03827 771.llg n.1.1. 10/20 198.llg 21 /50 396.llg 19/50 ' • c03827 3.37g11 n.s.s . 0/20 198.llg 1/50 396.mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
DAPSONE 80-08-0 
747 c01718 45.811g n.1.1. 6/14 33.811g 4/35 (67.611g 2/36> 
• c01718 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/14 33.811g 0/35 67.611g 0/36 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01718 262.11g n.1.1. 1/14 33.811g 0/35 67.6mg 0/36 lun:a/a,a/c. 
748 c01718 67.211g n.1.1. 0/14 31.211g 11/35 62.411g 5/34 
• c01718 106.mg n.1.1 . 0/14 31.211g 6/35 62.4•g 2/34 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01718 133.llg n.1.1. 0/14 31.211g 5/35 62.411g 1/34 lun:a/a,a/c. 
749 c01718 35.711g n.1.1. 8/15 16.011g 15/35 32.011g 14/35 
• c01718 n.1.1. n.1.1 • 0/15 16.011g 0/35 32.0•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
750 c01718 13.111g 61.011g 0/15 12.811g 6/35 25.611g 14/35 spl: fbs, fib, srn. 
• c01718 15.711g 157.llg 0/15 12.811g 6/35 25.6•g 10/35 
b c01718 8.9111g n.1.1. 6/15 12.811g 23/35 25.611g 24/35 
c c01718 n.1.1. n.a.s. 0/15 12.811g 0/35 25.611g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
751 c01718 13.111g 42.811g 0/45p 12.811g 6/35 25.611g 14/35 spl :fbs,fib,srn. 
• c01718 15.711g 62.211g 0/45p 12.811g 6/35 25.6•g 10/35 88 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b R m f34 eat l Y"' 18m24 
R " t34 eat per MXA 181124 
d " t34 eat par srn 181124 
e m t34 eat par tbs 18m24 
m f34 eat spl tbs 18m24 
g " f34 eat spl srn 180024 
o,p' ·DOD 
752 t b6a orl lun ado 76w76 avx 
a b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a or l tba "ix 76w76 evx 
753 m b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
" b6a or l l un car 76w76 evx 
b " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
" b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
754 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
a t b6c orl lun Mix 76w"f6 evx 
b t b6c or l tba tum 76w76 avx 
755 m b6c or l r ts 76w76 evx 
"' b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b " b6c or l l un ado 76w76 evx 
" b6c or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx 
p,p' ·DOD 
756 f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 v 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 v 
b b6c eat lun MXB 78w90 v 
757 b6c or l lun ado 76w76 evx 
a b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
758 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 v 
a 
b 
759 
b 
760 
a 
b 
761 
a 
b 
762 
b 
763 
a 
b 
764 
a 
765 
• 
b 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 v 
" b6c eat l un MXB 78w90 v 
11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
"' b6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
m b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l lun ado 76w76 evx 
" b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
ct1 eat lun mix 29m29 
ct1 eat liv hpt 29m29 
ct1 eat tba 11ix 29m29 
" cf1 eat lun mix 29•29 
m cf1 eat l iv hpt 29m29 
m cf1 eat tba •ix 29.,29 
05" eat TBA MXB 181126 
osm eat l iv MXB 181126 
m OSM eat thy MXA 18m26 v 
" OSll eat TBA MXB 181126 v 
"' OSll eat l iv MXB 181126 v 
p,p'·DDE 
766 t b6c eat l iv hpc 78w92 dv 
a b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 dv 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 dv 
c b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 dv 
767 • b6c eat l iv hpc 78w92 dsv 
a "' b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 dsv 
b 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 dsv 
c "' b6c eat l un MXB 7Sw92 dsv 
768 t cf1 eat l iv hpt 251125 
a f cf1 eat lun •ix 25m25 
b cf1 eat tba •ix 251125 
769 11 cf1 eat l iv hpt 251125 
a • cf1 eat lun 11ix 25•25 
b " ct1 eat tba 11ix 251125 
770 o.., eat thy MXA 181126 dev 
a os11 eat TBA MXB 18•26 dev 
b OSll eat l iv MXB 18•26 dev 
771 R "' o.., eat TBA MXB 181126 dv 
a R " osm eat l iv MXB 181126 dv 50. 111g P<. 008 
56.3•g * P<.002 c 
91 .311g * P<.02 
148.m9 * P<.03 
167.m9 * P<.03 
170.•g * P<.03 
100ng .. : .• 1ug .•.• : .• 10 •.•.. : .. 100 •.•. :. -1•g •.•. : .• 10 •.... : .• 100 .... :. -19· .•.. : .. 10 
.> 236.•g 
.> 
.> no dre 
102.llg 
414.m9 
467 .mg 
no dre 
187 ... g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
82.1•g 
147.•9 
467 ... 9 
38.5119 P<.4 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P<.7 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.5 
P-1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.009 
P<.05 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
100ng .• : .• 1ug .•.. : •. 10 •.•.• : .. 100 •.•. : .. 1mg ..•. : .. 10 ..... :. -100 .... :. -19· .•.• : .. 10 
.> 
.> 
• + :> 108.11g P<.2 
493.mg * P<.1 
no dre P-1. 
.> 250.mg P<.3 
no dra P•1. 
250.•g P<.3 
:> 997. •g * P<. 9 
116.mg * P<.2 
:> no dra P-1. 
43.3119 P<.009 
120.11g P<.2 
34. 8"'g P<. 004 
73.0119 P<.2 
no dra P-1. 
37.411g P<.05 
82.9•g P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
49.0119 P<.2 
39.9"'9 P<.0005+ 
4.83g• P<.8 
67. 1119 
24.9119 
86.8mg 
33.2119 P<.3 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 
P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
2 .08g11 * P<. 7 
75.8mg \ P<.05 
82.6119 \ P<.4 
no dre p.1. 
100ng •. :. -1ug .... : •. 10 .•... : .• 100 .... :. -1•9· ... : .• 10 ..•.• : .• 100 ..•. :. -19· .•.• : .. 10 
:+ : 9.45•g P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
• + • 
:> 11.9119 I 
9.45119 I 
no dre P·1. 
11.1•g * P<.03 
7.48119 * P<.05 
11.1•g * P<.03 
119.•g * P<.5 
10.5.,g P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
14.8•g P<.0005 
33.9•g P<.0005+ 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
#33.2119 * P<.04 
58.0•g * P<. 7 
no dre P•1. 
48.1•g * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
DDT 
772 100ng •• : .• 1ug ...• : .. 10 •.••• : •. 100 •.•. :. -1mg •.•. : .. 10 ..••. : .• 100 •.•. :. -19· ...• : •• 10 
773 syg eat l iv tu• 281128 e 
syg eat tba 11ix 281128 e 
syg eat tba •ix 48w88 e .> • > no dre P•1 . 
639.119 * P<.4 
no dre P•1. RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
b 
d 
e 
g c01718 16.901g 1.09gm 
c01718 27.8mg 202.mg 
c01718 38.7Rlg n.s.s. 
c01718 50.0mg n.s.s. 
c01718 50.0Rlg n.s.s. 
c01718 50.701g n.s.s. 
o,p' -ODD 
752 1202 
a 1202 
b 1202 
753 1202 
a 1202 
b 1202 
1202 
754 1202 
a 1202 
b 1202 
755 1202 
1202 
b 1202 
1202 53·19-0 
51.4mg n.s.s. 
155.mg n.s.s. 
31.8mg n.s.s. 
52.0mg n.s.s. 
76.1mg n.s.s. 
86.3mg n.s.s. 
37.2mg n.s.s. 
155.mg n.s.s. 
155.mg n.s.s. 
155.mg n.s.s. 
30. 9mg 1. 80gm 
44.2mg n.s.s. 
76.1mg n.s.s. 
17.8mg 111.mg 
p,p' ·DOD (TOE) 72·54·8 
756 c00475 40.9mg n.s.s. 
c00475 201.mg n.s.s. 
b c00475 240.mg n.s.s. 
757 79 40. 7mg n. s. s. 
a 79 77.4mg n.s.s. 
b 79 40. 7mg n. s. s. 
758 c00475 53.0mg n.s.s. 
c00475 48.5mg n.s.s. 
b c00475 173.mg n.s.s. 
759 79 16.3mg 950 • .,g 
a 79 29.4mg n.s.s. 
b 79 14.0mg 212.mg 
760 79 20. 7mg n.s.s. 
a 79 77.4mg n.s.s. 
b 79 13.2mg n.s.s. 
761 79 19.00lg n.s.s. 
a 79 67.8mg n.s.s. 
b 79 13.9mg n.s.s. 
762 80 21.8mg 115.mg 
80 328.mg n.s.s. 
b 80 18.5mg n.s.s. 
763 80 13.5mg 68.6mg 
80 37.6mg n.s.s. 
b 80 9.92mg n.s.s. 
764 c00475 59.0mg n.s.s. 
a c00475 295.mg n.s.s. 
765 c00475 35.9mg n.s.s. 
c00475 25.3mg n.s.s. 
b c00475 450.mg n.s.s. 
p,p' ·DOE 72-55-9 
766 c00555 6.69mg 14.3mg 
a c00555 7 .3101g 32.8mg 
b c00555 6.69mg 14.3mg 
c c00555 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
767 c00555 6.6801g n.s.s. 
c00555 4.86mg n.s.s. 
b c00555 6.68mg n.s.s. 
c c00555 35.8mg n.s.s. 
768 80 6.80mg 16.311g 
80 231.mg n.s.s. 
b 80 8.34mg 32.3Rlg 
769 80 18.4mg 103.11g 
80 136.11g n.s.s. 
b 80 35.9mg n.s.s. 
770 c00555 15.511g n.s.s. 
a c00555 9.0011g n.s.s. 
b c00555 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
771 c00555 13.611g n.s.s. 
c00555 n.s.s. n.s.s. 
DDT 
772 
• 773 50·29·3 
1179 59.901g n.s.s. 
1179 154.0lg n.s.s. 
1400 34.801g n.s.s. 0/45p 12.8mg 
0/45p 12.8mg 
0/45p 12.8mg 
0/45p 12.8mg 
0/45p 12.8mg 
0/45p 12.8Rlg 
1 /17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
0/18 
1/18 
3/18 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 0/16 
0/16 
2/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/16 0/16 
0/16 
8/20 
2/20 
1/20 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
1/ 17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/18 
1/18 
3/18 
37/97 
1/97 
79/97 
53/101 
33/101 
89/101 
17/20 
1/20 
1 /20 
7/20 
1/20 
0/20 
5/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
0/20 
1/97 
37/97 
48/97 
33/101 
53/101 
89/101 
2/20 
16/20 
0/20 
9/20 
0/20 
0/39 
5/39 
316 78.4Rlg 
78.4mg 
78.40lg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 73.0mg 
78.40lg 
78.4mg 
78.4mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
73.0mg 
45. 5mg 
45. 5mg 
45. 5mg 
41.4mg 
41.4mg 
41.4mg 
42 .Omg 
42.0Rlg 
42.0mg 
38. 5mg 
38. 5mg 
38.5mg 
41.4Rlg 
41.4mg 
41.4mg 
38.5mg 
38.5mg 
38.511g 
32. 5mg 
32.50lg 
32.50lg 
30.0mg 
30.00lg 30.0mg 
29.0mg 
29.011g 
45.6mg 
45 .6mg 
45 .6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
15.60lg 15.60lg 
15.6mg 
15.6mg 
32. 5mg 
32. 5mg 
32.5mg 
30.0mg 
30.011g 
30.0mg 
8.4011g 
8.40mg 
8.4011g 
12.011g 
12.0mg 
13.1mg 
13.1mg 
28.50lg CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 
line 2Do~e 
4/35 ( 25. 6mg 
5/35 25.6mg 
4/35 25.6mg 
1/35 25.6mg 
0/35 25.6mg 
0/35 25.6mg 
3/18 
0/18 
6/18 
3/18 
1/18 
1 /18 
5/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
5/18 
3/18 
1/18 
9/18 
13/50 
2/50 
4/50 
1/17 
0/17 
1/17 
19/50 
12/50 
4/50 
5/18 
2/18 
6/18 
4/17 
0/17 
7/17 
4/ 16 
0/16 
6/16 
43/60 
1/60 
53/60 51/60 
31/60 
57 /60 
35/50 
0/50 
16/50 
33/50 
1/50 
19/50 
25/50 
19/50 
0/50 
7/50 
15/50 
7/50 
1/50 
54/60 
9/60 
54/60 
39/60 
19/60 
48/60 
9/50 
36/50 
0/50 
21/50 
0/50 (89. 7mg 
89.7 .. g 
89. 7mg 
84.0mg 
84.011g 
84.0Rlg 
59.0mg 
59.0 .. g 
<91. 2mg 
<91.2mg 
91.2 .. g 
28.6mg 
28.60lg 
28.6mg 
28.6mg 
26.411g 
26.4mg 
26.4mg 
26.401g 
14.4 .. g 
14.4mg 
14.40lg 
23.201g 
23.2mg 
0/28 26.10lg 
3/28 26.1 .. g 
3/17 21nc 
0/35) 
6/35 
3/35 
3/35 
3/35 3/35 
6/50) 
4/50 
1/50 
19/50 
14/50 
2/50 
36/50 
3/50 
11/50) 
25/50) 
2/50 
34/50 
35/50 
34/50 
0/50 
17/50 
22/50 
17/50 
2/50 
12/50 
29/50 
0/50 
20/50 
0/50 
0/28 52.30lg 
2/28 52.301g 0/40 
8/40 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
per:fbs,srn. 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
Lun:a/a,a/c. 
Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Tomat is; jnci, 52,883·891; 1974 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
thy:fca,fcc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
Tomat is; j nc i, 52 ,883-891; 1974 
thy:fca,fcc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Cabral; tu010, 68, 5 -10; 1982 
Agthe ;pseb, 134, 113 · 116; 1970 89 90 
n4 
a 
775 
776 
a 
b 
c 
777 
a 
b 
778 
• 
b 
779 
a 
b 
c 
780 
b 
c 
781 
a 
b 
782 
a 
b 
783 
a 
784 
a 
785 
a 
786 
• 
b 
787 
a 
b 
788 
a 
b 
789 
a 
790 
• 791 
• 
792 
a 
b 
c 
793 
a 
b 
794 
• 
b 
795 
a 
796 
a 
797 
798 Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
H " syg eat l iv olix 28•28 e 
" ayg eat tba •ix 28M28 e 
" syg eat tba •ix 48w85 e 
f b6c eat l Y" 78w92 v 
b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 v 
b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 v 
b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 v 
b6c or l l iv hpt 80w80 evx 
b6c orl lun •ix 80w80 evx 
b6c orl tba •ix 80w80 evx 
" b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 SY 
"b6c eat Liv MXB 78w91 sv 
" b6c eat l un MXB 78w91 sv 
" b6c or l l iv hpt 80w80 evx 
• b6c or l lun ade 80w80 evx 
" b6c or l l un car 80w80 avx 
" b6c orl tba •ix 80w80 avx 
b6a orl rts 80w80 evx 
b6a or l l iv hpt 80w80 avx 
b6a or l l un ade 80w80 evx 
b6a orl tba •ix 80w80 ovx 
" b6a or l l iv hpt 80w80 evx 
" b6o orl lun ode 80w80 ovx 
" b6o orl tbo •ix 80w80 ovx 
f bal eat Liv let 311131 og 
bal eat lun ado 31•31 g 
bal eat tba Rlix 31m31 g 
cf1 eat l iv hpt 7m28 
cf1 eat tba tu• 7M28 
cf1 eat l iv hpt 30w95 
cf1 eat tba tu• 30w95 
cf1 eat l iv hpt 30w65 
cf1 eat tba tu• 30w65 
cf1 eat l iv •ix 26•26 e 
cf1 eat l iv lpb 26m26 e 
cf1 eat lun ade 26•26 e 
cf1 eat lun car 26•26 o 
cf1 eat l iv •ix 26•26 
cf1 eat l iv let 26•26 e 
cf1 eat lun tu• 26m26 o 
cf1 eat l iv hpt 31•31 eg 
cf 1 eat lun tu• 31m31 eg 
cf1 eat ute tu• 31•31 eg 
cf1 eat tba •ix 31•31 og 
" cf1 eat l iv hpt 7•28 
" cf1 eat tba tu• 7•28 
" cf1 eat l iv hpt 30w95 
" cf1 eat tba tu• 30w95 
" cf1 eat l iv hpt 30w65 
11 cf1 eat tba tu• 30w65 
"cf1 eat Liv •ix 26m26 
m cf1 eat Liv lpb 26•26 o 
" cf1 eat lun ade 26•26 o 
" cf1 eat lun car 26•26 o 
" cf1 eat l iv Mix 26•26 
"cf1 eat Liv let 26•26 e 
" cf 1 eat lun tu• 26•26 e 
"cf1 eat Liv hpt 29•31 e 
"' cf 1 eat lun tu"' 29•31 o 
" cf1 eat tba •ix 29•31 
OH eat TBA MXB 18•26 v 
OHi eat l i y MXB 18•26 y 
OHi eat l iv hpt 27•27 
OHi eat tba •ix 27M27 
OH eat l iv Hl 24•24 
m OH eat TBA MXB 18•26 y 
a " OSOi eat l iv MXB 18•26 y 
799 R " OH eat l i y tu• 27M27 
a R • os• eat tba •ix 27•27 
800 R " OH eat l iv Hl 24•24 
801 b alb eat l iv tu• 60w60 
802 R por eat l iv let 33•33 
a R por eat tba •ix 331133 
803 " por eat l iv let 33•33 
a " por eat tba •ix 33•33 
804 w ia eat l iv hpt 34•34 ev 
a wis eat tba •ix 34•34 
805 • wis eat l iv hpt 34,.34 e 
a R • wis eat tba •ix 34•34 GOLD ET AL. 
:> 
• + 
• + 
• > + 
:> 
• > 
:> 
. > .> 
... 
• + 
.> 
• > 
+ .> TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
311.0lg P<.03 
145.Rlg * P<.02 
113.0lg P<.2 
#61.2mg * P<.02 
59.ZRlg * P<.2 
151.11g * P<.09 
no dre P• 1. 
31.10lg P<.02 
no dre P• 1. 
24.0Rlg P<.009 
2.04Rlg \ P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre 
8.95•g 
127 .• g 
127 ... g 
7.69•g 
19.3•g 
137.•g 
no dre 
21.3mg p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.003 + 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.07 
16. 7mg P<.02 
no dre P•1. 
17.9•g P<.07 
59. 5•g * P<. 0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
34.2•g 
no dre 
26.311g p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
17 .9•g P<.4 
52.211g P<.01 
150.•g P<.9 
9. 11•g * P<. 0005+ 
76.5mg * P<.007 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
5.8211g P<.0005+ 
20.0•g P<.0005+ 
no dre P• 1. 
43. O•g * P<. 0005+ 
121.•g * P<.04 
no dre P• 1. 
106.•g * P<.5 
12.511g P<.002 + 
no dre P•1. 
6. 7011g P<. 0005+ 
4.59Mg P<.02 
4.55•g P<.0005+ 
5. 35•g P<. 02 
15. O•g * P<. 0005+ 
72.6•g * P<.02 
49.3•g * P<.4 
no dre P• 1. 
8.04•g P<.0005+ 
30.3Mg P<.003 + 
no dre P-1. 
34. 7•g * P<. 0005+ 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
256.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1 . 
140. Mg * P<. 002 + 
no dre p.1. 
902.mg * P<.4 
90.1•g * P<.3 
57 .2•g 
116.•g 
92.6•g 
no dre P<.0005+ 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
774 1179 94.101g n.s.s. 0/40 
a 1179 68.701g n.s.s. 3/40 
775 1400 34.101g n.s.s. 0/11 
776 e00464 29.80lg n.s.s. 0/20 
a e00464 22.401g n.s.s. 2/20 
b e00464 52.101g n.s.s. 0/20 
e00464 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
777 133 10. 70lg n.s.s. 0/16 
a 133 42.301g n.s.s. 0/16 
b 133 9.050lg 526.llg 0/16 
778 e00464 .34511g n.s.s. 4/20 
a e00464 4.6711g n.s.s. 2/20 
b e00464 4.670lg n.s.s. 1/20 
779 133 4.2411g 23.7mg 0/16 
a 133 20. 7•g n.s.s. 0/16 
b 133 20. 701g n.s.s. 0/16 
133 3. 7211g 19.2•g 0/16 
780 133 7. 7811g 106.•g 0/17 
a 133 22.20lg n.s.s. 0/17 
b 133 42.311g n.s.s. 1/17 
133 7 .4211g n.s.s. 2/17 
781 133 6.5611g n.s.s. 1/18 
a 133 18.511g n.s.s. 2/18 
b 133 6.210lg n.s.s. 3/18 
782 88 37.811g 101.0lg 0/50 
a 88 238.0lg n.s.s. 20/62 
b 88 73.111g n.s.s. 56/62 
783 1012 16.711g 99.90lg 1/90 
a 1012 13.00lg n.s.s. 77/90 
784 101211 13.211g 64.311g 0/72 
a 101211 4.6501g n.s.s. 52/72 
785 1012n 18.011g 5.13gOI 0/69 
a 1012n 9.2011g n.s.s. 27/69 
786 103 5.5311g 18.611g 8/47 
a 103 31.211g 895.0lg 0/47 
b 103 52.101g n.s.s. 19/47 
103 48.811g n.s.s. 3/47 
787 89 3.0611g 13.0mg 10/44 
89 10.211g 47.111g 0/44 
b 89 40.411g n.s.s. 27/44 
788 90 28.111g 71.80lg 2/56 
a 90 47. 711g n.s.s. 13/56 
b 90 334.•g n.s.s. 2/56 
90 20.1mg n.s.s. 45/56 
789 1012 6.40•g 53.111g 33/98 
1012 8.2211g n.s.s. 83/98 
790 1012" 3.8611g 15.9mg 24/83 
a 101211 1.90•g n.s.s. 65/83 
791 1012n 2. 76•g 9.1311g 12/70 
1012n 2.3911g n.s.s. 42/70 
792 103 8.4011g 43.311g 6/47 
a 103 29.6mg n.s.s. 0/47 
b 103 12.911g n.s.s. 18/47 
e 103 30.611g n.s.s. 0/47 
793 89 4.1711g 21.3•g 11/45 
a 89 13.1•g 195 • .,g 2/45 
b 89 29.5mg n.s.s. 27/45 
794 90 19.411g 86.6•g 12/55 
90 151.•g n.s.s. 23/55 
b 90 24.9•g n.s.s. 46/55 
795 e00464 16.811g n.s.s. 16/20 
a e00464 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 
796 21 41.7•g n.s.s. 0/30 
21 24.3•g n.s.s. 13/30 
797 84a 24. 701g n.s.s. 1/30 
798 e00464 14.2•g n.s.s. 10/20 
a e00464 n. s. s. n. s. s. 0/20 
799 21 62.6•g n.1.1. 0/30 
a 21 37 .811g n.s.s. 1/30 
800 84• 19.8•g n.s.s. 0/30 
801 1457 .148•g n.s.s. 0/6 
802 1178 74.011g 552.0lg 0/38 
1178 47.011g n.s.s. 32/38 
803 
• 804 
• 805 1178 174.11g n.s.s. 
1178 24.5mg n.s.s. 
85 31.111g 122.llg 
85 29.5•g n.s.s. 
85 43. 5•g 272 .Ilg 
85 42.6•g n.s.s. 1/38 
20/38 
0/32 
19/35 
0/35 
19/36 !Dose 
11.50lg 
11.5mg 
26.00lg 
9.50•g 
9. 50mg 
9.500lg 
9. 50mg 
19.30lg 
19.311g 
19.3mg 
2.3011g 
2.3011g 
2.3011g 
17 .90lg 
17.911g 
17.911g 
17.90lg 
19.30lg 
19.3•g 
19.3•g 
19.3•g 
17.911g 
17.911g 
17.911g 
.2600lg 
.26011g 
.26011g 
8.13•g 
8.13 .. g 
10.30lg 
10.311g 
15.011g 
15.0•g 
6. 50mg 
6. 50mg 
6.5011g 
6.50•g 
12.6mg 
12.6•g 
12.6•g 
.260•g 
.26011g 
.26011g 
.26011g 
7 .5011g 
7 .5011g 
9.47mg 
9.4711g 
13.811g 
13.811g 
6.0011g 
6.00•g 
6.0011g 
6.00•g 
11.711g 
11. 7mg 
11.711g 
.24011g 
.2400lg .24011g 
7 .40•g 
7 .4011g 
10.011g 
10.011g 
4.0011g 
8.8011g 
8.8011g 8.0011g 8.0011g 
3.2011g 
.36011g 
6.2511g 6.
2511g 
5.00•g 5.00•g 
25.011g 25.011g 
20.011g 
20.011g CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 
line 2Dose 
0/30 23.0mg 
5/30 23.00lg 
3/30 3/50 
8/50 
1/50 1/50 
4/18 
0/18 
5/18 
6/50 
1/50 
1/50 19.5mg 
19.5.,g 
19.50lg 
19.5.,g 
(4.4011g 
4.4011g 
4.40mg 2lnc 
3/31 (46.00lg 
8/31 46.00lg 
7/50 
10/50 
3/50 
0/50 
4/50) 
1/50 
0/50 0/39) 
11/39 
10/18 
1/18 
1/18 
11/18 
6/18 
1/18 
0/18 
7/18 
7/18 
2/18 
8/18 
0/58 
20/63 
51/63 
11/54 
41/54 
11/55 
44/55 2. 6011g 1 /50 32. 511g 28/57 
2.600lg 20/61 32.511g 14/63 
2 .6011g 48/61 32. 511g 48/63 
4/54 
22/54 
15/30 
2/30 
6/30 
5/30 
26/30 
12/30 
9/30 
3/56 
17/56 
8/56 
50/56 
37/60 
49/60 
41/60 
56/60 
38/60 
48/60 13.011g 
13.00lg 
13.011g 
13.011g 
1.30mg 
1.3011g 
1.3011g 
1.300lg 
12/32 12.011g 
3/32 12.011g 
13/32 12.0 .. g 
0/32 12.011g 
23/30 
9/30 
11/30 24/32 
4/32 
7/32 
1/32 
2/59 6.5011g 
22/59 6. 500lg 
3/59 6. 5011g 
52/59 6. 500lg 
17/32 
3/32 
16/32 
0/32 7/55 
23/55 
4/55 
48/55 32.511g 
32.511g 
32.511g 
32.511g 31/49 
23/49 
2/49 
44/49 
25/58 
38/58 
53/58 
38/50 1.2011g 1.
2011g 
1.2011g 
15.0mg 
15.011g 28/53 6. 0011g 24/53 30. O•g 38/50 
29/53 6.000lg 27/53 30.00lg 19/50 
48/53 6.000lg 49/53 30.011g 44/50 
27/50 
0/50 
1/30 
9/30 
0/30 
29/50 
0/50 
0!30 
1/30 
0/30 
0/6 
2/30 
26/30 
0/30 
19/30 
15/34 
23/35 
9/36 
19/37 0/50 
18.40lg 32/50 
18.411g 0/50 
12.5 .. g 
12.511g 
10.00lg 
10.011g 4/30 
27/30 
1/30 
18/30 25.0llg 
25.011g 
20.011g 20.011g 7/38 
27/38 
2/38 
25/38 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Cabral; tu010 ,68, 5·10;1982 
Ag the ;pseb, 134, 113 · 116; 1970 
s 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Terrae ini; i j en, 11, 747·764 ;1973 
To"8t is;zkko,82,25·35; 1974 
Walker; fetx, 11,415·432; 1973 
Thorpe; f etx, 11, 433-442;1973 
To111t is; i j en, 10,489-506; 1972 
To•at is; zkko,82 , 25 ·35; 1974 
Walker; f etx, 11,415·432;1973 
Thorpe; f etx, 11, 433· 442; 1973 
ToHt is; i j en, 10,489·506; 1972 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
DeiehHnn; txap, 11,88· 103; 1967 
Rado.,.k i ;txap, 7,652·656;1965 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Dai eh"'8nn;txap, 11,88· 103; 1967 
Rado•sk i; txap, 7 ,652·656;1965 
Ca.eron;b11j l ,2,819-821; 1951 
Cabral ;tu110,68, 11-17; 1982 
Rossi; i j en, 19, 179· 185; 1977 91 92 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
DESERPIDINE 
806 R b wis eat mix mix 78w78 r 
N· 1 ·DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE 
807 f buf eat pit ade 53w93 e 
f buf eat mgl adc 53w93 e 
b buf eat l iv hem 53w93 e 
buf eat edu sqc 53w93 e 
DIAL LATE 
808 M f b6a or l l iv hpt 85w85 evx 
M b6a or l l un ade 85w85 evx 
b M b6a orl tba mix 85w85 evx 
809 M m b6a or l l iv hpt 84w84 evx 
a M 11 b6a or l l un ade 84w84 evx 
b M " b6a orl tba mix 84w84 evx 
810 M f b6c orl liv mix 83w83 evx 
M f b6c or l l un ade 83w83 evx 
b M f b6c orl tba mix 83w83 evx 
811 M m b6c orl l iv hpt 84w84 evx 
M m b6c or l lun ade 84w84 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba mix 84w84 evx 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••. : .. 100 •••• : •. 111g •••• : •• 10 .•••. :. -100 •.•. : •• 1g ••• · ·: • -10 
.> 1.28mg P<.6 
100ng •• : •• 1ug ..•• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ...• : •. 1mg •.•. : •• 10 •.•.• :. -100 •••. : .. 1g •..•• : •• 10 
± 8.63mg 
19.0mg 
61.2mg P<.3 
61.2mg P<.3 
100ng .• :. ,lug ••.• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •..• : .. 1g ••• ·.: · .10 
.> 516.mg 
4. 26gm 
1.99gm 
43.0mg 
243.mg 
35.4119 
164.mg 
255.mg 
90.8mg P<.3 
P<1. 
P<.9 
P<.002 + 
P<.4 
P<.003 
P<.04 
P<.09 
P<.006 
19.4mg P<.0005+ 
113.mg P<.02 
15.6mg P<.0005 
4,6·DIAMIN0 ·2· <5·NITR0 ·2· FURYL) ·•· TRIAZINE •• 1ug ..•• : •• 10 ....• : .• 100 ..•• : •• 1mg •••. : •• 10 •••.. : •. 100 .••• : •• 1g •••.• : .. 10 
812 R f sda eat mgl otix 46w66 e 1. 71mg P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 f sda eat mgl adc 46w66 e 4.49mg 
b sda eat l iv tum 46w66 e 
sda eat tba mix 46w66 e no dre P-1. 
1. 71Rlg P<. 0005 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 100ng •• : •• lug •..• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1mg .•.• : .. 10 ....• :. -100. • • ·: • .1g. • · · ·: • -10 
813 M f b6c eat lym 78w96 
a M b6c eat thy MXA 78w96 
b M b6c eat thy fca 78w96 
M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 
d M b6c eat l iv MXB 78w96 
e M b6c eat lun MXB 78w96 
814 M m b6c eat thy fca 78w96 
a M m b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 
b M m b6c eat l iv MXB 78w96 
M m b6c eat l un MXB 78w96 
815 R f f34 eat MXB MXB 18ot25 v 
R f f34 eat MXA MXA 18m25 v 
b R f34 eat cl i MXA 18m25 v 
R f34 eat thy MXA 18m25 v 
d R f34 eat zy11 sec 18m25 v 
e f34 eat TBA MXB 18ot25 v 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 18ot25 v 
816 f34 eat cl i mix 83w86 ae 
a f34 eat cl i ssc 83w86 ae 
b R f34 eat thy mix 83w86 ae 
f34 eat thy fca 83w86 ae 
d f34 eat "'gl Rlix 83w86 ae 
e R f34 eat tba 11 ix 83w86 ae 
817 R m f34 eat MXB MXB 18.,25 v 
a " f34 eat thy MXA 181125 v 
b R "' f34 eat thy acn 18m25 v 
R "' f34 eat thy MXA 18m25 v 
d R 11 f34 eat pre MXA 18m25 v 
e R m f34 eat ski MXA 18.,25 v 
R m f34 eat pre MXA 18m25 v 
" f34 eat MXA MXA 180l25 v 
R ot f34 eat TBA MXB 18.,25 v 
R 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 18m25 
2 ,4· DIAMINOTOLUENE 
818 f b6c eat MXB MXB 23m23 
a b6c eat MXA 23m23 
b b6c eat l iv hpc 23m23 
b6c eat TBA MXB 231123 
d b6c eat l iv MXB 23m23 
e b6c eat lun MXB 23.,23 
819 11 b6c eat lun a/c 23m23 
a m b6c eat TBA MXB 23m23 
b m b6c eat l iv MXB 23m23 
c 11 b6c eat lun MXB 23m23 
820 f f34 eat MXB MXB 221124 asv 
a f f34 eat 11gl ade 221124 asv 
b f f34 eat 11gl MXA 221124 asv • + 
+ 262.otg 
1.06gm 
1.45g11 • 
311.mg • P<.005 
P<. 0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.02 
7 .35gm * P<.6 
10.9gm * P<.9 
791 • .,g I P<.0005c 
354.mg * P<.04 
926.llg * P<.2 
2. 56gm P<. 5 
301.mg * P<. 0005 
408. "'g * P<. 0005 
416.mg * P<.003 
425.mg • P<.0005c 
665 .11g * P<. 0005c 
181.11g * P<.09 
14.5gm * P<.8 
113. 11g Z P<. 0005+ 
162.11g Z P<.0005+ 
162 .Ilg Z P<. 0005+ 
296. mg P<. 0005 
1.29gm * P<.5 
67 .311g * P<.0005 
72. 6mg * P<. 0005 
192.mg • P<.0005c 
252.11g • P<.0005c 
319.mg • P<.0005c 
351.11g * P<.0005c 
358.otg * P<.0005c 
530.0lg * P<.002 c 
709.11g * P<.0005c 
135.mg • P<.03 
1.61g"' * P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •. 1mg •••• : •. 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.••• : •• 10 
: + 7 .18mg \ P<.002 
10.6mg P<.004 a 
26. 7mg * P<.002 c 
8.640lg \ P<.01 
26. 711g • P<. 002 
no dre P-1. 
#35. 8mg \ P<. 02 
105.mg * P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
35.8mg \ P<.02 
1. 430lg I P<. 0005 
1. 46mg • P<. 0005c 
5. 54mg • P<.0005c CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 93 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Do:-;e 21nc Citation 01· Patholog-,v 
Bl'kly Corle 
OESERPIDINE 131-01·1 
806 1188 .272mg n.s.s. 17 /130 100.ug 36/230 Tuchmann · Duplessis; adsc, 254, 1535 -1537; 1962 
N· 1 ·0IACETAMIDOFLUORENE 
807 144 3.1401g n.s.s. 2/ 18 7.21mg 7/16 Morris; j nc i, 24, 149-180; 1960 
144 5. 74mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.21mg 3/16 
b 144 9.96mg n.s.s. 0/18 7.21mg 1/16 
144 9.96mg n.s.s. 0/18 7 .21mg 1/16 
DIAL LATE CAvadex) 2303· 16·4 
808 1219 84.0mg n.s.s. 0/17 77 .8mg 1 /15 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
8 1219 94.1mg n. s. s. 1/17 77 .8mg 1 /15 
b 1219 73. Zmg n.s.s. 2117 77 .8mg 2115 
809 1219 19.5mg 172 .mg 1/18 72.5mg 10/18 
8 1219 50. 7mg n.s.s. 2118 72.5mg 4/18 
b 1219 15.6mg 210.mg 3/18 72.5mg 12118 
810 1219 49.4mg n.s.s. 0/16 77 .9mg 3/16 
8 1219 62.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 77 .9mg 2116 
b 1219 34.1mg 898.mg 0/16 77 .9mg 5/16 
811 1219 9.11mg 46.4mg 0/16 72.5mg 13/16 
1219 38. 7mg n.s.s. 0/16 72.5mg 4/16 
b 1219 7 .03mg 37 .3mg 0/16 72.5mg 14/16 
4, 6· D !AMINO· 2 · C 5 ·NITRO· 2 · FURYL) • s ·TR I AZ I NE 720-69·4 
812 ZOO a • 895mg 3. 23mg 2139 17.4mg 33/35 Cohen; j nci, 51,403-417; 1973 
ZOO a 2.66mg 8.28mg 0/39 17.4mg 23/35 
b ZOO a 50.6mg n.s.s. 0/39 17.4mg 0/35 
ZOO a • 895mg 3. 23mg 2139 17.4mg 33/35 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE C NC I uses CAS# 615-05·4) 39156-41 ·7 
813 c01989 116.mg 2.51gm 7/100 126.mg 14/50 C253.mg 9/50) 
c01989 480.mg 3.18gm 0/100 126.mg 0/50 253 .mg 8/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
b c01989 591.mg 5.87gm 0/100 126.mg 0/50 253.mg 6150 
c c01989 145.mg n.s.s. 30/ 100 126.mg 25/50 253.mg 30/50 
d c01989 1.03gm n.s.s. 21100 126.mg 1 /50 253.mg 2150 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
e c01989 716.mg n.s.s. 7/100 126.mg 5/50 253.mg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
814 c01989 383.mg 2.47gm 1/100 116.mg 0/50 234.mg 11/50 
8 c01989 148.mg n.s.s. 39/100 116.mg 24/50 234.mg 33/50 
b c01989 296.mg n.s.s. 15/100 116.mg 14/50 234.mg 12/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c01989 480.mg n.s.s. 16/100 116.mg 3/50 234.mg 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
815 c01989 155.mg 785 .mg 3/100 44.0mg 1 /50 182.mg 14/50 thy:acn,fcc,pcn; zym:sec. 
8 c01989 191.mg 1.11gm 0/100 44 .Omg 4/50 182.mg 5/50 cl i:can; utm:acn ,can,ppc. 
b c01989 184.mg 2.88gm 3/100 44.0mg 5/50 182.0lg 8/50 cl i :adn,can,cyn,sqc,sqp . 
c01989 195.mg 1.62gm 3/100 44.0mg 1/50 182.mg 10/50 thy: acn, f cc, pen. 
d c01989 284.mg 2.08gm 0/100 44.0mg 0/50 182.mg 7/50 
e c01989 65.1mg n.s.s. 70/100 44 .Omg 44/50 182.mg 37/50 
c01989 773.0lg n.s.s. 21100 44.0mg 0/50 182.mg 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
816 1027 68.8mg 206.mg 0137 60.0mg 8/47 120.mg 15/33 C250.mg 9/40) Evarts; j nc i, 65, 197·204;1980 
8 1027 91.4mg 336.mg 0137 60.0mg 5/47 120.mg 12133 <250.mg 9/40) 
b 1027 107.mg 267 .mg 1/37 60.0mg 2147 120.mg 3/33 250.Mg 31/40 
1027 178.mg 545.mg 0/37 60 .Omg 0/47 120.mg 1/33 250.Mg 21/40 
d 1027 297 .mg n.s.s. 2137 60 .Omg 7 /47 120.mg 8/33 250.0lg 5/40 
e 1027 47. 3mg 103.mg 3137 60. Omg 14/47 120.mg 19/33 250 .mg 36/40 
817 c01989 48.001g 123.mg 4/99 35.211g 11/50 146.mg 36/50 eac:sec,sqc; ear:sqc; pre: adn, can, cyn, ppa; ski:bcc,sec; 
thy: acn, ccr, f cc, pac ,pen; zym: sec. 
8 c01989 107 .mg 430.mg 2/99 35 .Zmg 2150 146.mg 17/50 thy: acn, f cc ,pac, pen. 
b c01989 131.mg 648.mg 2/99 35 .Zmg 1/50 146.mg 14/50 
c c01989 154.mg 1.27g01 2/99 35.Zmg 4/50 146.mg 10/50 thy:cca,ccr. 
d c01989 171.mg 954 .mg 0/99 35 .Zmg 2150 146.mg 8/50 pre: adn, can, cyn ,ppa. 
e c01989 177.mg 875.mg 0/99 35 .Zmg 2/50 146.mg 9/50 ski:bcc,sec,sqc. 
f c01989 228.mg 2.44gm 0/99 35 .Zmg 2/50 146.llg 5/50 pre: adn, cyn,ppa . 
g c01989 305 .mg 2.51gm 0/99 35 .Zmg 1/50 146.mg 6/50 eac: sec, sqc; ear:sqc; zym:sec. 
h c01989 57 .501g n.s.s. 52/99 35 .Zmg 35/50 146.mg 41/50 
c01989 356.mg n.s.s. 1/99 35.Zmg 2/50 146.mg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2, 4 · D IAHINOTOLUENE 95-80-7 
818 c02302 4.32mg 24.3mg 2/20 13.0mg 36/50 C26.0mg 24/50) · · ·: leu, lym; l iv:hpc. 
c02302 5.9301g 75. 5mg 2/20 13.0mg 29/50 C26.0mg 11/50) ·.·:Leu, lym. 
b c02302 17.3mg 99.8mg 0/20 13.0mg 13/50 26.001g 18/50 
c02302 4.5201g 629.mg 5/20 13.0mg 40/50 C26.0mg 26/50) 
d c02302 17 .3mg 99.811g 0/20 13.0mg 13/50 26.001g 18/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
e c02302 134.mg n.s.s. 0/20 13.001g 2/50 26.0mg 0150 lun:a/a,a/c . 
819 c02302 16.9mg n.s.s. 0/20 12.0mg 9/50 C24.0mg 6150> 
• c02302 17.4mg n.s.s . 10/20 12.0mg 31/50 24.0mg 30/50 
b c02302 34.901g n.s.s. 5/20 12.0mg 17/50 24.0mg 13/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c02302 16.9mg n.s.s . 0/20 12.001g 9/50 C24.001g 6/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
820 c02302 • 98401g 2. 24mg 1/20 3. 95mg 34/50 8. 55mg 41/50 l iv:hpc,nnd; 11gl: ade, ade, car. 
c02302 1.0001g 2.3311g 1 /20 3.9501g 34/50 8.5511g 38/50 
b c02302 3.14mg 11.5mg 0/20 3.9501g 11/50 8.55mg 14/50 mgl:ade,car. 94 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
134 Ht •gl car 22m24 asv 
d f34 Ht sub fib 22m24 aav 
e 134 Ht l iv MXA 22m24 asv 
134 Ht TBA MXB 22m24 asv 
g R f34 Ht l iv MXB 22 .. 24 asv 
821 R " 134 Ht sub fib 21•24 asv 
R " 134 eat 1100 211R24 asv 
b R " 134 Ht l iv MXA 211124 asv 
R " f34 Ht sub lip 21•24 asv 
d R "' f34 eat TBA MXB 211124 asv 
R " f34 Ht l iv MXB 211124 asv 
2,4-D AMINOTOLUENE.2HCL 
822 f chi eat lun mix 77w90 
a 
b 
823 
824 
a 
b 
825 
826 
827 chi eat liv •ix 77w90 
chi eat tbe 11ix 77w90 
chi eat liv hpt 77w90 
11 chi eat l iv 11ix 77w90 
" chi Ht lun Rlix 77w90 
., chi eat tbe mix 77w90 
"'chi eat liv hpt 77w90 
"' chi eat vsc 77w90 
., cdr eat sub fib 64w73 av 
., cdr eat l iv 11ix 64w73 av 
., cdr Ht tbe mix 64w73 av 
., cdr eat sub fib 64w73 av 
., cdr Ht l iv hpt 64w73 av 
2,5·DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
828 M f b6c Ht lun MXA 78w94 
M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w94 
b M b6c Ht l iv MXB 78w94 
c M b6c Ht lun MXB 78w94 
829 M "' b6c eat TBA MXB 78w94 
a M m b6c eat l iv MXB 78w94 
b M " b6c eat lun MXB 78w94 
830 f f34 eat TBA MXB 18m25 v 
f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 v 
831 R "' f34 Ht TBA MXB 18•25 v 
R "' f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 v 
DIAZ! ON 
832 f b6c eat TBA MXB 24m24 
a b6c eat Liv MXB 24 .. 24 
b b6c eat Lun MXB 24.,24 
833 "' b6c eat TBA MXB 24m24 
11 b6c eat l iv MXB 24.,24 
b 
834 835 
a 
b • b6c eat lun MXB 24.,24 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
f34 Ht l iv MXB 241124 
"' f34 eat MXA 240l24 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 24.,24 
"' f34 eat l iv MXB 24.,24 
DIBENZ(a, h lANTHRACENE 
836 M 11 dba wet lun ale 60w60 
DI BENZO· p ·DIOXIN 
837 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 90w91 • 
a M f b6c Ht l iv MXB 90w91 • 
b M f b6c Ht lun MXB 90w91 • 
838 M • b6c Ht lun a/c 88w92 as 
M "' b6c eat TBA MXB 88w92 as 
b M ., b6c eat l iv MXB 88w92 11 
M II b6c Ht l un MXB 88w92 .. 
839 R OH eat TBA MXB 26•26 • 
a R OHi Ht l iv MXB 26•26 I 
840 R "' 0111 Ht TBA MXB 26•26 
R "' OH eat l iv MXB 261126 
3· DIBENZOFURANAMINE 
841 R " wia eat l iv hpt 89w89 a 
R ., wis eat tbe ban 89w89 e 
b R " wis Ht tba mel 89w89 a 
1, 2 -DIBROM0-3-CHLOROPROPANE 
842 M f b6c gev sto sqc 53w59 av 
a M b6c gev TBA MXB 53w59 av 
b M b6c gev l iv MXB 53w59 av 
M b6c gev l un MXB 53w59 av 8. 98.,g * P<. 002 
16.411g * P<.002 
58.011g * P<.02 
1 . 4611g P<. 0005 
58.011g * P<.02 
2. 5211g P<. 0005 
6.8111g P<.0005 
8.1111g P<.0005c 
13.2•g * P<.002 
.99110g P<.0005 
8.11•g P<.0005 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••. : .• _100 •••• : .• _1•g ••.• : •. _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g •.•.• : •. _10 
pool 
:> 
pool .. 
pool 72.011g \ P<.007 
180.llg * P<.09 
100.llg \ P<.4 
206.0lg * P<.006 + 
191.0lg * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
201.0lg * P<.1 
317 • .,g * P<.2 
5. 42•g P<. 0005+ 
26.2.,g * P<.02 
2.9811g P<.0005 
4. 42•g I P<. 0005+ 
22.2Mg * P<.003 + 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 •.••• : •. _100 •••. : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •. _100 .••• : .• _1g ..•.• : •• _10 
:> 
:> 
:> _. #364 • .,g * P<.03 
33.2g11 * P<1. 
1.96gl0 * P<.6 
364.llg • 
272.llg • 
288.0lg 
3.56gOI * 
no dre 
no dre P<.03 
P<.3 
P<.06 
P<.9 
P•1. 
P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
233.11g \ P<.09 
_100ng •• : .• _1ug .••. : •• _10 .••.• : .• _100 •••• : •• _1.,g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : .• j_O 
:> 
.. :> 230.11g * P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
6.23g11 * P<1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
26.8•g \ P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
51.311g * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
#20.40lg \ P<.03 
53.411g \ P<.7 
no dre P• 1. 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••.•. : •. _100 .••. : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 •••.• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
5.8811g P<.0005+ 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1.,g •••• : .• _10 ••••• : •. _100 .•.• : •• _1g •.••• : •• _10 
:> 
:> :> no dre P•1. 
+ no dre p.1. 
8.09g11 * P<.2 
#2.84g• 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.01 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
5.37g11 * P<.08 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
_100ng .• : •• _1ug •••. : .• _10 ••••• : •. _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••.•• : •• _10 
.> 9.44•g 
1.5711g 
2.4811g 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••. : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••. : .• _10 ••••• : .• _100 •••• : •. _1g ••••• : •• _10 P<.3 
P<.06 
P<.02 
: + : 4. 2911g P<. 0005c 
4.2911g P<.0005 
1.42g• * P<.3 
150.•g * P<.04 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 95 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Corle 
c cOZ30Z 4. 5311g 3Z.3mg O!ZO 3.9511g 9/50 8.5511g 8/50 
d cOZ30Z 7 .8511g 55.911g O!ZO 3.95 .. g 4/50 8.5511g 10/50 
• cOZ30Z Z3.6•g n.s.s . 0/20 3.95mg 0/50 8.5511g 6/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
c0Z30Z .91811g Z.9611g 13/ZO 3.95 .. g 49/50 8.5511g 49/50 
g cOZ30Z Z3.611g n.s.s. O!ZO 3.9511g 0/50 8.5511g 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
8Z1 cOZ30Z 1.5011g 4.4811g 0/ZO 3.Z011g 15/50 7 .0011g 19/50 
• cOZ30Z 3.1311g 18.9•g 0/20 3.Z011g 5/50 7.0011g 8/50 
b cOZ30Z 3.81mg Z1.Z11g 0/20 3.Z011g 5/50 7 .0011g 10/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
c0Z30Z 5.4811g 49.311g O!ZO 3.Z011g 3/50 7 .0011g 8/50 
d c0Z30Z .6Z7mg 1.8511g 13/ZO 3.ZOmg 42/50 7 .0011g 44/50 
e c0Z30Z 3.81•g Z1.Z11g 0/ZO 3.zo .. g 5/50 7 .OO•g 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Z, 4 · DIA"INOTOLUENE. ZHC l <Z,4· toluenedi811ine.ZHCl > 636·Z3·7 
8ZZ 381 Z9.311g 894.llg 5/ZZ 58.511g 6/19 (111.•g 2/17) Wei sburger; j ept, Z, 3Z5 · 356; 1978/pers. co11•. /Russf ield 1973 
381 58. 711g n.s .s. 1/ZZ 58.5 .. g 1/19 111.llg 5/17 
b 381 Z4.611g n.s.s. 18/ZZ 58.511g 1Z/19 <111.mg 10/17) 
8Z3 381 65.911g 3.37gm 1/10Zp 58.511g 1 /19 111.llg 3/17 
8Z4 381 54.Z11g n.s.s. 1/18 54.011g 2/ZZ 103.llg 4/17 
a 381 118.llg n.s.s. 8/18 54.011g 1/ZZ (103.•g 2/17) 
b 381 45.111g n.s.s. 13/18 54.011g 7/ZZ 103.llg 11/17 
8Z5 381 54.811g n.s.1. 7/99p 54.0mg 2/ZZ 103.llg 4/17 
381 76. 711g n.s.s. 5/99p 54.011g 0/ZZ 103.llg 4/17 
8Z6 381 Z.8111g 10.7mg O/Z4 1Z.411g 6/19 Z5. 711g 15/Z4 
a 381 6.43mg n.s.s. 0/Z4 1Z.411g 1/19 Z5.711g 3/Z4 
b 381 1.5811g 7.3511g 7/Z4 1Z.411g 1Z/19 Z5. 711g Z0/Z4 
8Z7 381 Z.Z711g 10.z .. g 14/111p 1Z.4mg 6/19 Z5.711g 15/Z4 
381 5.7011g Z63.11g 2/111p 1Z.4mg 1/19 Z5.711g 3/Z4 
Z,5·DIA"INOTOLUENE SULFATE <Z, 5·toluenedia11ine 1ul fate) 6369-59· 1 
8Z8 c0183Z 15Z.11g n.s.s. 5/100 64.711g 6/50 104.llg 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
• c0183Z 1Z8.mg n.s.s. 42/100 64.7mg 15/50 104 ... g ZZ/50 
b c0183Z 307 .Ilg n .. s.s. 5/100 64.711g 2/50 104.llg 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c0183Z 15Z ... g n.1.1. 5/100 64.711g 6/50 104.llg 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
8Z9 c0183Z 83.911g n.s.s. 38/100 59.811g 19/50 96.511g Z7/50 
• c0183Z 113.llg n.s.s . 17/100 59.8mg 8/50 96.511g 18/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c0183Z Z11."'g n.s.1. 17/100 59.8 .. g 6/50 96.511g 10/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
830 c0183Z Z7 .Omg n.s.s. 51/75 Z1.9mg 34/50 <71.611g 33/50) 
a c0183Z 5Z0.11g n.s.s. 4/75 z1.9 .. g 1/50 71.611g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
831 c0183Z 10Z.llg n.s.s. 36/75 17.111g Z0/50 57 .8mg Z5/50 
• c0183Z 57 .111g n.s.s . 0/75 17.111g Z/50 <57.811g 0/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
DIAZINON 333-41-5 
83Z c08673 33.4mg n.s.s. 9/Z5 1Z. 7mg 14/50 Z5.511g 21/50 
• c08673 143.llg n.1.1 . 2/Z5 1Z.711g 0/50 Z5.5mg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c08673 139.llg n.s.s. 1/Z5 12.711g 1/50 Z5. 511g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
833 c08673 29.611g n.s.s. 1Z/Z5 11.811g 30/50 23.511g Z4/50 
a c08673 9.5611g n.s.a. 5/Z5 11.8mg Z0/50 (23.511g 13/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c08673 1Z6.11g n.s.s. 2/Z5 11.811g 3/50 Z3. 5•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
834 c08673 14. 711g n.1.1. Z0/Z5 19.811g 44/50 39.611g 41/50 
c08673 Z31.11g n.1.1. 1/25 19.811g 1/50 39.611g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
835 c08673 9.4911g n.a.s. 5/Z5 15.7mg Z5/50 <31.4mg 12/50) · ·· :leu,ly•. 
c08673 7.6411g n.s.s. ZO/Z5 15. 7mg 41/50 (31.411g 33/50) 
b c08673 Z03.11g n.s.a. 1/Z5 15.7•g 2/50 31.4•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
DI BENZ<•, hlANTHRACENE 53.70.3 
836 11Z8 3.0311g 13.Z11g 0/Z5 Z8.311g 14/Z1 Snell; jnc i ,Z8, 1043-1051; 196Z 
DIBENZO -p-D I OX IN Z6Z-1Z·4 
837 c03656 1. 74g• n.1.1. 15/50 636.mg 12/50 1.Z9g11 9/50 
a c03656 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/50 636.llg 1/50 1.Z9g11 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03656 Z.Z8g11 n.s.1. 3/50 636.0lg Z/50 1.Z9gOI 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
838 c03656 1.08g11 Z89.g11 0/50 557 ... g 5/50 (1.1ZgOI 1/50> 
c03656 1.67g11 n.1.1. 19/50 557 .Ilg 19/50 1.1ZgM 16/50 
b c03656 3.33g11 n.1.1. 8/50 557.llg 8/50 1.1Zg11 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c03656 Z.58g11 n.1.1. 8/50 557.0lg 11/50 1.1Zg11 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
839 c03656 500.11g n.s.s. Z6/35 Z50 ... g 19/35 500.llg 13/35 
a c03656 1.3Zg11 n.1.1. 0/35 Z50.11g 0/35 500.llg 2/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
840 c03656 1.13g11 n.1.1. Z1/35 Z00.11g 11/35 400.llg 11/35 
• c03656 3.5Zg• n.1.1. 1/35 Z00.11g 0/35 400.0lg 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
3· D IBENZOFURANA"INE 4106-66-5 
841 14ZO 1.530lg n.1.1 . 016 3.4311g 1/6 HackHnn;zkko,61,45 ·54; 1956 
a 14ZO • 3Z911g n.s.s . 0/3 3.430lg 213 
b 14ZO • 8Z511g n.a.a. 016 3.4311g 4/8 
1, Z-0 I BR°"O • 3-CHLOROPROPANE CDBCP. NCI UIU CAS# 1836-75-5. c00500 ii the NCI TR# Z8; c00501 is NCl/NTP TR# Z06) 96· 1Z-8 
84Z c00500 Z.790lg 6.5711g 0/20 79.0•g 50/50 149.11g 47/50 
a c00500 2.7911g 6.57mg O!ZO 79.011g 50/50 149.0lg 47/50 
b c00500 Z31.llg n.a.s. O!ZO 79.011g 0/50 149.11g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c00500 Z9.4•g n.1.s. 0120 79.011g 1/50 149.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 96 
Spe Strain Site X p o+ Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
843 M b6c inh MXB MXB 21m24 a 
b 
c 
d 
g 
h 
m 
n 
0 
844 
b 
845 b6c inh MXA MXA 21m24 a 
b6c inh MXA MXA 21m24 a 
b6c inh lun MXA 21m24 a 
b6c inh nas can 21m24 a 
b6c inh lun a/a 21m24 a 
b6c i nh hag adn 21m24 a 
b6c i nh nas MXA 21m24 a 
b6c inh nas acn 211124 a 
b6c i nh nas sqc 211124 
b6c inh nas cas 211124 a 
b6c inh nas fbs 211124 a 
b6c inh l/b ppc 21m24 a 
b6c inh TBA MXB 211124 a 
b6c inh l iv MXB 211124 a 
b6c inh lun MXB 21m24 a 
m b6c gav sto sqc 53w59 av 
m b6c gav TBA MXB 53w59 av 
11 b6c gav l iv MXB 53w59 av 
11 b6c gav lun MXB 53w59 av 
m b6c i nh MXB MXB 76w76 
M m b6c i nh MXB MXB 76w76 
b M m b6c i nh MXA MXA 76w76 
M 11 b6c i nh MXB MXB 76w76 
d M m b6c inh lun 76w76 
M m b6c i nh l un MXA 76w76 
M m b6c i nh nas apn 76w76 
M 11 b6c i nh nas can 76w76 
M m b6c i nh nas sqc 76w76 
M m b6c inh lun a/a 76w76 
M m b6c i nh nas has 76w76 
M 11 b6c inh sto MXA 76w76 
M m b6c inh sto sqp 76w76 
m M m b6c inh TBA MXB 76w76 
n M m b6c inh l iv MXB 76w76 
o M m b6c inh lun MXB 76w76 
846 f f 34 i nh MXB MXB 221124 a 
b 
d 
e R 
R 
R 
R 
"' R 
n R 
o R f34 inh MXA MXA 221124 a 
f34 inh mgl 221124 a 
f34 inh 11gl fba 221124 a 
134 inh nas sqp 22•24 a 
134 i nh adr coa 221124 a 
134 inh nas adn 221124 a 
134 i nh nas apn 221124 a 
134 i nh ton MXA 221124 a 
134 inh nas can 22m24 a 
134 i nh ntu apn 22m24 a 
134 i nh ton sqp 22m24 a 
134 i nh nas sqc 22m24 a 
f34 inh nas acn 22m24 a 
f34 inh phr MXA 221124 a 
f34 inh phr sqp 221124 a 
p f34 inh ton sqc 221124 a 
q R f34 i nh TBA MXB 221124 a 
f34 inh l iv MXB 221124 a 
847 11 134 inh MXB MXB 221124 a 
R m f34 i nh MXA MXA 22m24 a 
ti R m f34 i nh nas apn 22m24 a 
c m f34 i nh nas adn 22m24 a 
d m f34 i nh nas acn 22m24 a 
a m f34 i nh ntu apn 22m24 a 
m f34 i nh nas sqp 22m24 a 
g 11 f34 inh nas can 22m24 a 
h R m f34 i nh nas sqc 22m24 a 
R 11 f 34 i nh ton MXA 22m24 
R m f34 i nh tnv 11so 221124 
m f34 inh ton sqp 22m24 a 
m f34 i nh ski tr i 22m24 a 
m 11 f34 inh tnv man 221124 a 
n • f34 inh tnv 11an 221124 a 
o m f34 inh ton sqc 22m24 a 
p 11 f34 i nh TBA MXB 221124 a 
q 11 f34 inh liv MXB 221124 a 
848 osm gav MXB MXB 68w72 av 
osm gav sto sqc 68w72 av 
b 0111 gav 11gl MXA 68w72 av GOLD ET AL. 
:+ 
+: TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
1 • Z8m9 P<. 0005 
2.13mg 
2.27mg 
5.21mg 
6.49mg 
7 .89mg 
8.21mg * 
10.2mg * P<. 0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.003 
P<.0005c 
14. 5119 * P<. 0005c 
19. 0119 * P<. 0005c 
40.0119 * P<.003 c 
46.8119 * P<.003 c 
72.2119 * P<.02 a 
• 945119 P<. 0005 
9.84119 * P<.02 
5.21m9 P<.0005 
4.62mg I P<.0005c 
4. 64m9 I P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
1.119m * P<.3 
1. 44119 * P<. 0005 
1 . 44mg * P<. 0005 
1. 82m9 * P<. 0005c 
2. 05m9 * P<. 0005 
2. 48m9 * P<. 0005a 
3.95119 * P<.002 c 
4. 75119 * P<. 002 c 
6. 09119 * P<. 0005 c 
7 .05119 * P<.002 c 
7 .38mg * P<.003 c 
16.3119 * P<.02 
16.8119 * P<.02 
21.5m9 * P<.05 a 
1. 32m9 * P<. 0005 
32.4m9 * P<. 7 
3. 95m9 * P<. 002 
• 199mg P<. 0005 
• 252119 P<. 0005c 
• 727mg P<. 0005 
• 896119 * P<. 0005 
• 948119 * P<. 0005c 
1 • 20119 * P<. 0005 c 
1.51119 * 
1. 70119 * 
1.80119 * 
1.83mg 
2.08mg * 
2.46mg * 
2.90mg 
3.55mg * 
4. 70m9 
5 .86mg P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
6. 75m9 * P<.003 c 
• 164mg P<. 0005 
5.52mg * P<.4 
• 106119 I P<. 0005 
.107mg I P<.0005c 
• 567mg * P<. 0005c 
.837mg * 
.864mg * 
.976mg * 
• 978m9 * 
1.15m9 
1.44m9 
2.08mg 
2. 73119 * 
2. 75119 * 
3. 25m9 
3. 70m9 * 
3. 70119 * 
9.14119 * 
.112m9 
5.65m9 * 
.855mg 
• 909m9 I 
2.33mg I P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<. 005 c 
P<.0005 
P<.03 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 97 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 1Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
843 c00501 .851mg 2.03mg 4/50 1.80mg 20/50 9.oo .. g 43/50 b/ l: ppa, ppc; l/b:ppc,sqc; lun: a/a, a/c, sqc; 
nas: ---, acn, can, cas, fbs, sqc, sqp; ntu: apn. 
c00501 1.35.,g 3.43mg 0/50 1.80mg 11/50 9.oo .. g 38/50 nas:-·-; ntu:apn. 
b c00501 1.33mg 4.37mg 4/50 1.80mg 13/50 9.00mg 20/50 b/l :ppa,ppc; l/b:ppc,sqc; lun: a/a, a/c, sqc. 
c00501 2. 54mg 13.8mg 4/50 1.80mg 5/50 9.00mg 13/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
d c00501 3.28mg 12. 7mg 0/50 1.80mg 3/50 9.00mg 17/50 
e c00501 3.39.,g 25.9mg 3/50 1.80mg 3/50 9.oo.,g 10/50 
c00501 3.19mg 50.0mg 0/50 1.80mg 5/50 9.00mg 1/50 
g c00501 3.99mg 33.2mg 0/50 1.80mg 3/50 9.00mg 6/50 nas:sqc,sqp. 
h c00501 5.14mg 51.6mg 0/50 1.80mg Z/50 9.00mg 6/50 
c00501 6.40mg 69.0mg 0/50 1.80mg 1/50 9.00mg 6/50 
c00501 11.3mg 346.mg 0/50 1.80mg 0/50 9.00mg 3/50 
c00501 14.1mg 395 .mg 0/50 1.80mg 0/50 9.00mg 3/50 
c00501 17.6mg n.s.s. 0/50 1.80mg 0/50 9.00mg 2/50 
m c00501 .629mg 1.53mg 23/50 1.80mg 32/50 9.00mg 45/50 
n c00501 3.41mg n.s.s. 2/50 1.80mg 5/50 9.00mg Z/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
0 c00501 2.54mg 13.8mg 4/50 1.80mg 5/50 9.00mg 13/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
844 c00500 2.96mg 7.21mg 0/20 81.0mg 43/50 156.mg 47/50 
c00500 2.98mg 7.51mg 2/20 81.0mg 43/50 156.mg 47/50 
b c00500 50.6mg n.s.s. 2/20 81.0mg 1/50 156.mg 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c00500 181 ... g n. s. s. 0/20 81.0mg 0/50 156.mg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
845 c00501 .847mg 2.61mg 0/50 1.50mg 4/50 7 .50mg 22150 l/b:sqc ; lun:---,a/a,a/c; nas:---,apn,can,hes,sqc; sto:sqc,sqp; 
trh: .... T 
c00501 .847mg 2.61mg 0/50 1.50mg 4/50 7 .50mg 22150 l /b: sqc; lun:a/a,a/c; nas:---,apn,can,sqc; trh:---. c 
b c00501 1.03mg 3.42mg 0/50 1.50mg 1/50 7 .50mg 21/50 l/b:sqc; nas:---; trh:···· 
c c00501 1.12mg 4.32mg 0/50 1.50mg 3/50 7.50mg 15/50 lun:---; nas:hes; sto: sqc, sqp. A 
d c00501 1.26mg 6.41mg 0/50 1.50mg 3/50 7 .50mg 11/50 
e c00501 1.81mg 20. 5mg 0/50 1.50mg 3/50 7.50mg 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
f c00501 1.85mg 26. 7mg 0/50 1.50mg 1/50 7 .50.,g 5/50 
c00501 2.48mg 20.9mg 0/50 1.50mg 0/50 7.50mg 7/50 
c00501 2. 70mg 28.8mg 0/50 1.50mg 0/50 7 .50.,g 6/50 
c00501 3.06mg 42.1mg 0/50 1.50mg 1 /50 7 .50mg 6/50 
c00501 4.77mg n.s.s. 0/50 1.50mg 0/50 7 .50.,g 3/50 
c00501 4.8511g n.s.s. 0/50 1.50mg 0/50 7 .50Rlg 3/50 s to: sqc, sqp. 
c00501 5. 20mg n.s.s. 0/50 1.50mg 0/50 7 .5011g 2/50 
" c00501 . 73511g 3.11mg 3/50 1.5011g 7/50 7 .5011g 23/50 
c00501 3.68mg n.s.s. 3/50 1.50mg 2/50 7 .50mg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
0 c00501 1.81mg 20. 5mg 0/50 1.50mg 3/50 7 .5011g 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
846 c00501 .139mg .295mg 1/50 .429mg 32150 2.14mg 45/51 adr:coa; nas: acn, adn, apn, can, sqc, sqp; ntu:---; phr:sqc,sqp; 
ton: sqc, sqp . 
c00501 .17Zmg • 382mg 1/50 .429mg 26/50 2.14mg 42/51 nas:acn,adn,apn,can ,sqc,sqp; ntu: · · ·. 
b c00501 .392mg 1.7911g 5/50 .429mg 14/50 2.1411g 9/51 
c c00501 .444mg 3.03mg 4/50 .429mg 13/50 2.14mg 4/51 
d c00501 .486mg 2.19mg 0/50 .42911g 10/50 2.14mg 3/51 
e c00501 .586mg 2.93mg 0/50 .429mg 7/50 2.14mg 5/51 
c00501 .683mg 4.25mg 0/50 .429mg 6/50 2.1411g 5/51 
g c00501 . 75011g 4.8811g 0/50 .42911g 5/50 2.14mg 5/51 
h c00501 .82811g 4.33mg 0/50 .429mg 4/50 2.14mg 9/51 ton: sqc, sqp. 
c00501 1.0511g 3.3611g 0/50 .42911g 0/50 2.14mg 23/51 
c00501 .830.,g 10.1mg 0/50 .429mg 5/50 2.14mg 1/51 
c00501 .985mg 7 .58mg 0/50 .429mg 3/50 2.1411g 6/51 
c00501 1.1311g 11.411g 1/50 .429mg Z/50 2.14mg 7/51 
II c00501 1.2711g 12.911g 0/50 .429mg Z/50 2.14mg 6/51 
n c00501 1.7111g 22.1mg 1/50 • 429mg 0/50 2.14mg 6/51 phr:sqc,sqp • 
0 c00501 2.1411g 24.211g 0/50 .429mg 0/50 2.1411g 5/51 
p c00501 1.96mg 54.811g 0/50 .429mg 1/50 2.14mg 3/51 
q c00501 .110mg .26411g 33/50 .429mg 44/50 2.14mg 47/51 
c00501 1.17mg n.s.s. Z/50 .429mg 4/50 2.14.,g 0/51 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
847 c00501 75 .6ug .154mg 0/50 .30011g 41/50 1.50mg 40/49 nas: acn, adn, apn, can, cas, sqc, sqp; nsM: sqc; ntu: · · · ; ton: sqc, sqp . 
c00501 76.4ug . 156 .. g 0/50 .30011g 40/50 1.50mg 39/49 nas:acn,adn,apn,can,cas,sqc,sqp ; nsin:sqc; ntu:. · ·. 
b c00501 .301mg 1.29mg 0/50 .300mg 13/50 1.50mg 1/49 
c c00501 .399mg 2.4611g 0/50 .30011g 9/50 1.5011g 1/49 
d c00501 .424mg 2.09.,g 0/50 .300mg 8/50 1.50mg 6/49 
• c00501 .442mg 3.7111g 0/50 .30011g 8/50 1.5011g 0/49 
c00501 .456mg 2.7Zmg 0/50 .30011g 7/50 1.50mg 3/49 
g c00501 .62511g 2.0111g 0/50 .300 .. g 2/50 1.50mg 22/49 
h c00501 .68411g 3.1811g 0/50 .30011g 2/50 1.50mg 11/49 
c00501 1.0111g 4.8511g 0/50 .300mg 1/50 1.50mg 11/49 ton: sqc, sqp. 
c00501 .94711g 18.011g 1/50 .300 .. g Z/50 1.50.,g 5/49 
c00501 1.23mg 7 .53mg 0/50 .300mg 1/50 1.50mg 8/49 
c00501 1.0711g 18.811g 0/50 .30011g 1/50 1.50mg 3/49 
II c00501 1.19mg 16.3 .. g 0/50 .30011g 1/50 1.50mg 5/49 
n c00501 1.19mg 16.311g 0/50 .30011g 1/50 1.50mg 5/49 
0 c00501 2.47.,g 104.llg 0/50 .300 .. g 0/50 1.50.,g 3/49 
p c00501 75.9ug .179mg 30/50 .30011g 48/50 1.5011g 47/49 
q c00501 1.3011g n.s.s. 0/50 .300mg 1/50 1.50mg 1/49 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
848 c00500 .54411g 1.38mg 1/20 10.011g 43/50 20.011g 42/50 11gl :acn, fba; sto:sqc,sqp. 
c00500 .56811g 1.4711g 0/20 10.011g 38/50 20.0mg 29/50 
b c00500 1.35mg 4.1511g 1/20 10.0mg 24/50 20.011g 30/50 11gl :acn, fba. 98 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'l'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
d 
e 
f 
849 
b os• gav 11gl acn 68w72 av 
OH gav s to sqp 68w72 av 
R 0111 gav TBA MXB 68w72 av 
R OSll gav l iv MXB 68w72 av 
" os11 gav sto aqc 71w83 av 
• OH gav · • · MXA 71w83 av 
11 0111 gav TBA MXB 71w83 av 
R II OSll gav l iv MXB 71w83 av 
DIBRO ODULCITOL 
850 f swi ipj lun •ix 26w78 e 
a swi ipj lys 26w78 e 
b swi ipj leu 26w78 e 
swi ipj l iv lys 26w78 e 
d swi ipj tba •ix 26w78 e 
e swi ipj tba Mal 26w78 e 
f swi ipj tba ben 26w78 a 
851 "' swi ipj • • • ly1 26w78 e 
" swi ipj · · · lyk 26w78 e 
b " swi ipj lun •ix 26w78 e 
" swi ipj l iv •ix 26w78 e 
d " swi ipj tba •ix 26w78 e 
e • swi ipj tba Hl 26w78 e 
f " swi ipj tba ben 26w78 e 
852 "' cdr ipj ski •ix 26w78 e 
a " cdr ipj per sar 26w78 e 
b " cdr ipj •gl aqc 26w78 e 
• cdr ipj l y1 26w78 e 
d • cdr ipj l iv tu• 26w78 e 
e " cdr ipj tba 11ix 26w78 e 
m cdr ipj tba Hl 26w78 e 
g • cdr ipj tba ben 26w78 e 2.3711g • 
30.1•g 
.89211g 
90.311g • 
.96711g 
4.2311g • 
.98811g 
no dre 
.!OOng .• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _!O P<.0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.0005 
P<.4 
P<.0005c 
P<.02 
P<.0005 
P•1 • 
9.23•g * P<.003 + 
12.2•g * P<.0005+ 
46. 3•g * P<. 006 
no dre P-1. 
2.45•g * P<.0005 
4. 7511g * P<. 0005 
24.511g * P<.09 
17 .6•g * P<.002 + 
32.4•g * P<.002 + 
13.5•g \ P<.05 
no dre P-1. 
12.7•g * P<.06 
15.2•g * P<.04 
no dre P• 1. 
8.37•g * P<.0005+ 
59. 2•g * P<. 002 
182.•g * P<.04 
182.•g * P<.04 
no dre P•1. 
3.13•g * P<.0005 
5. 0511g * P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
1, 2·D IBROMOETHANE .!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!•g ••.• : .• _!O •.•.• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _!O 
853 M f b6c gav MXB MXB 53w78 SY : + 3. 7411g • P<. 0005 
a M f b6c gav sto sqc 53w78 av 4.07•g • P<.0005c 
b M f b6c gav lun MXA 53w78 IV 15.4•g • P<.04 c 
M 
d M 
e M 
f M 
854 M 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
f 
g 
h 
.. 
n 
0 
p 
q 
• 
u 
855 
a 
b 
d 
e 
f 
856 
a 
b 
c 
d 
e 
g b6c gav lun a/a 53w78 av 
b6c gav TBA MXB 53w78 SY 
b6c gav l iv MXB 53w78 av 
b6c gav l un MXB 53w78 av 
b6c i nh MXB MXB 22•24 s 
b6c i nh l un MXA 221124 a 
b6c i nh l un MXA 22•24 a 
b6c i nh MXA 221124 • 
b6c inh hes 22•24 a 
b6c inh •gl acn 22•24 s 
b6c inh lun a/c 22•24 s 
b6c inh lun a/a 221124 s 
b6c inh sub fbs 221124 s 
b6c i nh l /b MXA 22•24 s 
b6c i nh nas 22•24 
b6c i nh · · · he11 22•24 a 
b6c inh l /b can 221124 a 
b6c inh l /b MXA 22•24 • 
b6c i nh nas MXA 221124 s 
b6c i nh nas MXA 22•24 s 
b6c i nh l /b adn 22•24 a 
b6c inh nas can 22•24 s 
b6c inh nas apn 22•24 s 
b6c i nh TBA MXB 22•24 s 
b6c inh l iv MXB 22•24 s 
b6c i nh l un MXB 221124 s 
II b6c gav MXB MXB 53w78 esv 
11 b6c gav sto MXA 53w78 esv 
"' b6c gav sto sqc 53w78 esv 
• b6c gav lun a/a 53w78 esv 
• b6c gav TBA MXB 53w78 esv 
• b6c gav l iv MXB 53w78 esv 
m b6c gav l un MXB 53w78 esv 
11 b6c i nh MXB MXB 78w78 
• b6c inh lun 78w78 
• b6c inh lun MXA 78w78 
11 b6c inh lun ate 78w78 
11 b6c inh lun a/a 78w78 
11 b6c inh l /b MXA 78w78 
m b6c inh MXA MXA 78w78 
• b6c inh • · · MXA 78w78 :+ 
+ 17 .3•g * P<.03 c 
3. 52•g * P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
15.411g * P<.04 
9.6011g P<.0005 
18.411g 
18.711g 
24.111g 
25. 711g 
26.211g • 
30.311g 
38.6•g 
90. 711g • 
169.llg • 
187.llg 
245.•g • 
259.llg • 
272.mg 
337 .Ilg • 
353.llg • 
361.llg • P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
443.llg * P<.0005c 
470.11g * P<.004 c 
6.830lg I P<.0005 
107 .Ilg * P<.07 
18. 711g I P<.0005 
2.34•g * P<.0005 
2. 3611g * P<. 0005c 
2.3811g * P<.0005c 
13.411g * P<.003 c 
2. 6611g * P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
13:411g * P<.003 
18.011g * P<.0005 
18.211g * P<.0005c 
21.0•g * P<.0005c 
24. 711g * P<. 0005c 
60. 111g * P<. 0005c 
124.11g * P<.02 
124.11g * P<.02 
200.llg * P<.03 c CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 99 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose Zinc Citation or Patholog~· 
Brkly Corle 
c00500 1.3911g 3.8411g 0/20 10.011g 24/50 20.011g 30/50 
d c00500 13.511g 117.llg 0120 10.0mg 1/50 20.0mg 9/50 
• c00500 .56011g 1.4911g 4/20 10.0mg 44/50 20.0mg 43/50 
f c00500 14. 711g n.s.s. 0120 10.0mg 1/50 20.011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
849 c00500 .58411g 1.5511g 0120 10.011g 47/50 21.011g 47/50 
• c00500 1. 7111g n.s.s . 0120 10.0mg 13/50 21.011g 2/50 ---:he11 ,hes. 
b c00500 .600•g 1.61mg 1/20 10.011g 49/50 21.011g 48/50 
c00500 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0120 10.0IRg 0/50 21.0mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
DIBROMODULC ITOL 10318·26·0 
850 1336 3.8311g 79.311g 20/154 6.4011g 9/21 12.8mg 3/9 Skipper; sr fr; 1976/We i sburger 1977 /Prejean pers. co1111. 
a 1336 5.0511g 46.711g 3/154 6.4011g 2/21 12.811g 5/9 
b 1336 11 .411g 1.06g11 0/154 6.4011g 1/21 12.8mg 1/9 
c 1336 7.19mg n.s.s. 1/154 6.4011g 0/21 12.811g 0/9 
d 1336 1 .23mg 6.2011g 42/ 154 6.4011g 14/21 12.811g 9/9 
• 1336 2.2811g 15.211g 29/154 6.4011g 10/21 12.8•g 719 
f 1336 6.9511g n.s.s. 13/154 6.4011g 4/21 12.811g 2/9 
851 1336 7 .3711g 97 .011g 2/101 6.40•g 6/29 15.S.g 2/11 
8 1336 11.211g 179.llg 0/101 6.4011g 2/29 15.811g 2/11 
b 1336 4.4511g n.s.s. 9/101 6.4011g 7/29 (15.8•g 0/ 11) 
1336 10.411g n.s.s. 2/101 6.4011g 0/29 15.811g 0/11 
d 1336 4.5311g n.s.s. 28/101 6.4011g 14/29 15.811g 5/11 
• 1336 5.5611g n.s.s. 19/101 6.4011g 9/29 15.811g 5/11 
f 1336 16.1mg n.s.s. 9/101 6.40mg 5/29 15.811g 0/11 
852 1336 4.50•g 18.211g 4/177 10.711g 8/23 21.511g 8/11 
a 1336 17 .911g 435.llg 0/177 10.711g 2/23 21.511g 1/11 
b 1336 29.611g n.s.s. 0/177 10.711g 0/23 21.511g 1/11 
1336 29.611g n.s.s. 0/177 10.711g 0/23 21.511g 1/11 
d 1336 14.011g n.s.s. 0/177 10. 711g 0/23 21.5•g 0/11 
• 1336 1 .5811g 7 .3511g 59/177 10.711g 18/23 21 .511g 11/11 
f 1336 2.6911g 11.411g 32/177 10. 711g 12/23 21.511g 11/11 
g 1336 21.611g n.s.a. 27/177 10.711g 6/23 21.511g 0/11 
1,2·DIBROMOETHANE <ethylene dibro•ide, EDB. c00522 is NCI TR# 86; c00523 is NCl/NTP TR# 210) 106-93-4 
853 c00522 2.5811g 6.9311g 0/20 26.0mg 46/50 52.011g 30/50 lun:a/a,a/c; sto:sqc. 
• c00522 2.8111g 8.0911g 0120 26.0•g 46/50 52.0•g 28/50 
b c00522 8.0611g n.s.s. 0/20 26.011g 11/50 52.011g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c00522 8.8511g n.s.s. 0/20 26.0•g 10/50 52.011g 6/50 
d c00522 2.4211g 6.3111g 0/20 26.0mg 47/50 52.011g 31/50 
• c00522 n.s.s. n.a.s . 0/20 26.011g 1/50 52.011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
f c00522 8.0611g n.a.s. 0/20 26.011g 11/50 52.011g 6/50 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
854 c00523 6.4111g 14.811g 6/50 23.911g 31/50 95.611g 47/50 ---:he11,hes; l un:a/ a, ate, adn, apn, can; •gl: acn; 
nas:---,adn,apn,can; sub:fbs . 
c00523 11.311g 30.911g 4/50 23.911g 11/50 95.611g 42/50 lun :a/a, a/c, adn, apn, can. 
b c00523 11.411g 31.611g 4/50 23.9•g 11/50 95.611g 41/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
c c00523 14.111g 41.611g 0/50 23.911g 12/50 95.611g 25/50 ---:he11,hes . 
d c00523 14.711g 45.611g 0/50 23.9•g 11/50 95.611g 23/50 
e c00523 13.711g 61.711g 2/50 23.911g 14/50 95.611g 8/50 
f c00523 18.011g 50.311g 1/50 23.911g 5/50 95.611g 37/50 
g c00523 18.6•g 98.311g 3/50 23.911g 7/50 95.611g 13/50 
h c00523 41.511g 201.llg 0/50 23.911g 4/50 95.611g 11/50 
c00523 64.511g 470.llg 0/50 23.911g 1/50 95.611g 8/50 l/b:adn,can. 
c00523 89.0•g 425.llg 0/50 23.911g 0/50 95.611g 12/50 
c00523 81.6•g 1.18g• 0/50 23.911g 1/50 95.6•g 4/50 
c00523 74. 711g 1.51g11 0/50 23.911g 1/50 95.611g 4/50 
II c00523 105.•g 968.llg 0/50 23.911g 0/50 95.611g 6/50 l/b:adn,apn. 
n c00523 148.11g 978.llg 0/50 23.911g 0/50 95.611g 8/50 nas:adn,can. 
0 c00523 122.•g 1.57g11 0/50 23.9•g 0/50 95.611g 5/50 nas:adn,apn . 
p c00523 129.llg 1.55g11 0/50 23.911g 0/50 95.611g 5/50 
q c00523 173.llg 1.67g11 0/50 23.911g 0/50 95.611g 6/50 
c00523 133.llg 4.80g11 0/50 23.911g 0/50 95.611g 3/50 
c00523 4.5511g 10.9•g 23/50 23.911g 45/50 95.611g 49/50 
c00523 31.411g n.s.s. 2/50 23.911g 6/50 95.611g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
u c00523 11.411g 31.611g 4/50 23.9•g 11/50 95.6•g 41/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
855 c00522 1.07•g 4.2311g 0/20 30.0•g 45/50 53.0•g 33/50 lun:a/a; sto:sqc,sqp. 
• c00522 1.0711g 4.32•g 0/20 30.011g 45/50 53.0•g 31/50 sto:sqc,sqp . 
b c00522 1.0811g 4.43•g 0120 30.011g 45/50 53.011g 29/50 
c c00522 4.5811g 55.811g 0/20 30.011g 4/50 53.011g 10/50 
d c00522 1.19•g 5.8311g 2/20 30.011g 45/50 53.011g 33/50 
• c00522 51.5•g n.s.s . 2/20 30.011g 1/50 53.011g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c00522 4.5811g 55.811g 0/20 30.0•g 4/50 53.011g 10/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
856 c00523 11.311g 32. 511g 0/50 19.9•g 3/50 79.5•g 26/50 ---:hH1,hes; lun: ---,8/8,8/C. 
a c00523 11.4•g 33.611g 0150 19.911g 3/50 79.511g 25/50 
b c00523 13.0•g 40.211g 0150 19.911g 3/50 79.511g 23/50 lun:8/a,a/c. 
c c00523 14.711g 53.711g 0150 19.911g 3/50 79.511g 19/50 
d c00523 29.9•g 146.•g 0/50 19.911g 0/50 79.511g 11/50 
e c00523 47.111g n.s.s. 0/50 19.911g 0/50 79.511g 5/50 l/b:adn,apn. 
f c00523 47.111g n.s.s. 0150 19.911g 0150 79.511g 5150 b/l :apn; l/b:apn. 
g c00523 67.211g n.s.s. 0150 19.911g 0150 79.511g 4/50 · · · :he11,hes. 100 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
M m b6c inh l /b apn 78w78 
M m b6c i nh TBA MXB 78w78 
j M m b6c inh l iv MXB 78w78 
k M m b6c inh lun MXB 78w78 
857 f f34 inh MXB MXB 23m24 as 
e f34 inh nas 23m24 as 
b f34 inh mgl fba 23m24 as 
c f34 inh nas acn 23m24 as 
d R f34 inh pit adn 23m24 as 
e R f34 i nh nas adn 23'124 as 
f34 inh nas can 23'124 as 
g R f34 inh nas apn 23m24 as 
h f34 i nh nas sqc 23m24 as 
f34 inh l iv hpc 23m24 as 
R f34 inh lun MXA 23•24 as 
f34 inh spt hes 23m24 as 
f34 i nh has 23m24 as 
m f34 inh tun a/c 23m24 as 
n f34 i nh sub MXA 23m24 as 
o f34 inh sub fib 23m24 as 
p f34 inh mgt acn 23m24 as 
q f34 inh TBA MXB 23m24 as 
f34 inh t iv MXB 23m24 as 
858 m f34 i nh MXB MXB 22m24 as 
m f34 inh MXA MXA 22m24 as 
b m f34 inh nas acn 22m24 as 
., f34 inh nas apn 22m24 as 
d m f34 i nh tnv "80 22m24 as 
a m f34 inh tnv men 22m24 as 
., f34 inh nas adn 22m24 as 
g m f34 inh pit adn 22m24 as 
h R m f34 inh spt hos 22m24 as 
R m f34 inh nas can 22m24 as 
R m f34 inh mut msm 22m24 as 
m f34 inh stg sar 22m24 as 
m f34 i nh thy MXA 22m24 as 
m m f34 inh TBA MXB 220024 as 
n R m f34 inh t iv MXB 22m24 as 
859 R f osm gav MXB MXB 50w61 ados 
a osm gav sto sqc 50w61 ades 
b osm gav t iv MXA 50w61 ados 
osm gav t iv hpc 50w61 ados 
d osm gav adr MXA 50w61 a des 
osm gav TBA MXB 50w61 a des 
f osm gav t iv MXB 50w61 ades 
860 m osm gav MXB MXB 40w49 adsv 
a m osm gav sto sqc 40w49 adsv 
b m osm gav hes 40w49 adsv 
m osm gav thy MXA 40w49 adsv 
d m OHi gav TBA MXB 40w49 adsv 
e In 0511 QIY l i y MXB 4011149 adsv 
861 R f cdr inh nas tu• 78w78 e 
a R f cdr inh nas ben 78w78 e 
b cdr inh nas mat 78w78 e 
cdr inh 01gt car 78w78 
d R cdr inh t iv hpc 78w78 
e R cdr inh spt hes 78w78 
862 R " cdr i nh nas tu., 78w78 e 
a R m cdr inh nas ben 78w78 e 
b R " cdr inh nas mat 78w78 e 
c R " cdr inh spt hes 78w78 
d R " cdr i nh bra 01ng 78w78 
e R m cdr i nh t iv hpc 78w78 GOLD ET AL. 
:+ 
:+ 
+ 
(+): TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR Au Op 
217 .mg * P<.05 
21 .2mg * P<.0005 
no dre P·1. 
21 .Omg * P<.0005 
1 .81'1g P<.0005 
2.33mg 
3.60mg 
4.28mg 
7 .46mg • 
10.8mg • 
21.6'1g 
22.9mg • 
54.2mg 
66.4mg • 
83.50lg • 
87 .30lg • 
87 .3mg • 
99.9 .. g • 
170.mg • 
170.119 • 
98.8mg 
2.02mg 
45.6mg P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<. 0005c 
P<. 002 c 
P<.002 
P<.0005c 
P<. 0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<. 002 c 
P<.008 
P<.008 
P<.02 
P<.0005 
P<.003 
1.10mg P<.0005 
1. 230lg I P<. 0005c 
2. 730lg I P<. 0005c 
3.97mg • 
5.63mg 
6. 06mg 
7.66mg • 
13.8mg • P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
16.501g P<.0005c 
18.0mg P<.0005c 
18.5mg * P<.003 
58.8mg * P<.004 
86. 1mg * P<. 004 
1 • 34mg P<. 0005 
78.5mg * P<.06 
1. 26mg * P<. 0005 
1. 26mg • P<. 0005c 
5. 38mg P<. 0005c 
5. 52mg P<. 0005c 
20. 9mg P<. 02 
1. 19mg * P<.0005 
5. 38mg P<. 0005 
1 . 64mg I P<. 0005 
1. 65.,g I P<. 0005c 
9.62.,g * P<.002 c 
10.4mg P<.002 
1 • 56mg P<. 0005 
23.8mg * P<.03 
2. 20mg P<. 0005+ 
5. 0201g P<. 0005+ 
8. 59mg P<. 0005+ 
19.9mg 
59.4mg 
122.mg 
1. 19mg 
2. 52mg 
3. 52mg 
12.6mg 
56. 1mg 
85. 1mg P<.0005+ 
P<.02 
P<. 1 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<. 0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.1>4 
P<. 1 
DI BRDMOMANN ITOL 100ng .. :. -1ug .•.• : .. 10 ••..• :. -100 •... : •. 1mg .•.. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •... : .• 10 
863 M f swi ipj tun mix 26w78 e 
M swi ipj t ys 26w78 e 
b M swi ipj sub car 26w78 e 
M sw i i p j t yk 26w78 e 
d M swi ipj adr coa 26w78 e 
e M swi ipj tiv tys 26w78 e 
M swi ipj tba mix 26w78 e 
M swi ipj tba mat 26w78 
M swi ipj tba ben 26w78 e 
864 M m swi ipj tun mix 26w78 
M m swi ipj t iv mix 26w78 
b M m swi ipj tba mix 26w78 
c M m swi ipj tba mat 26w78 
d M m swi ipj tba ben 26w78 e + 21 .411g * P<.002 + 
38.4mg * P<. 0005+ 
66. Omg * P<. 0005 
89.8mg * P<.002 
136.mg * P<.006 
no dre P-1. 
7 .67mg * P<.0005 
11 .2mg • P<.0005 
130.mg * P<.4 
11 • 4mg P<. 002 + 
65.7mg P<.2 
6. 03mg P<. 0005 
8.53mg P<.002 
92.8mg P<.6 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 101 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
c00523 65. 7mg n.s.s. 0/50 19.9mg 0!50 79. 5mg 3!50 
c00523 11. 711g 65.5mg 3/50 19.9mg 5!50 79.511g 27/50 
c00523 87.511g n.s.s. 3/50 19.911g 1/50 79.5mg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c00523 13.011g 40.2mg 0/50 19.9mg 3/50 79.5mg 23/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
857 c00523 1.2711g 2.7111g 6/50 5. 71mg 44/50 22.8mg 45/50 ---:hes; lun:a/a,a/c; 1ngl :fba; nas: --· ,acn,adn,apn, can,sqc; 
pit:adn; spl:hes. 
8 c00523 1.64mg 3.43mg 1/50 5. 71mg 34/50 22.8mg 43/50 
b c00523 2.37 .. g 5.9111g 4/50 5. 71mg 29/50 22.811g 24/50 
c00523 2.8111g 6. 7811g 0!50 5. 71mg 20/50 22.8.,g 29/50 
d c00523 4.25 .. g 16.0mg 1/50 5. 7111g 18/50 22.8mg 4/50 
c00523 5.67mg 24.0mg 0/50 5.71mg 11/50 22.8 .. g 3!50 
c00523 13.0 .. g 38.3 .. g 0/50 5. 71.,g 0!50 22.8 .. g 25/50 
c00523 10.0 .. g 62.411g 0/50 5. 71mg 5/50 22 .8mg 5/50 
c00523 18.6mg 358.mg 1/50 5.71mg 1/50 22.8 .. g 5/50 
c00523 20.4mg 461 ... g 0!50 5. 71mg 1/50 22.8mg 3!50 
c00523 30.911g 350 ... g 0/50 5. 71mg 0/50 22.8.,g 5!50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c00523 31.8 .. g 319.mg 0/50 5. 71mg 0/50 22.8mg 5!50 
c00523 31.811g 319 ... g 0/50 5.71mg 0/50 22.8 .. g 5/50 
" c00523 33.611g 555.mg 0!50 5.71mg 0/50 22.8mg 4/50 
n c00523 47. 7.,g 4.00gm 0!50 5. 71mg 0/50 22.8mg 3!50 sub: fbs, fib. s 
0 c00523 47. 7.,g 4.00g• 0/50 5. 71mg 0/50 22.8mg 3!50 s 
p c00523 26.5 .. g 27.1gm 1/50 5.71mg 0!50 22.8mg 4/50 
q c00523 1.36 .. g 3.30mg 33/50 5. 71mg 49/50 22.811g 48/50 
c00523 16.0llg 364 ... g 2/50 5. 7111g 1/50 22.811g 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
858 c00523 .787 .. g 1.6011g 1/50 4.0011g 43/50 15.9mg 48/50 nas:---,acn,adn,apn,can; nse:sqp; pit:adn ; spl :hes; tnv:11en,1nso. 
8 c00523 .872 .. g 1. 79mg 0/50 4.oo .. g 39/50 15.9mg 41/50 nas:--·; nse:sqp. 
b c00523 1.7811g 4.36mg 0/50 4.oo .. g 20/50 15.9 .. g 28/50 
c00523 2.34 .. g 7 .4511g 0/50 4.00 .. g 18/50 15.911g 5!50 
d c00523 3.36mg 10.1mg 1/50 4.00mg 8/50 15.9mg 25/50 
• c00523 3.6111g 10.6mg 0/50 4.0011g 7150 15.911g 25/50 
c00523 3.84mg 19.7mg 0/50 4.0011g 11/50 15.911g 0/50 
g c00523 6.07mg 46.3mg 0/50 4.0011g 7/50 15.911g 2/50 
h c00523 8.48mg 33. 7mg 0/50 4.oo .. g 1/50 15.911g 15/50 
c00523 10.411g 33.2mg 0/50 4.0011g 0/50 15.911g 21/50 
c00523 7.21mg 109.mg 0/50 4.00mg 5!50 15.911g 1/50 s 
c00523 17.3mg 528.llg 0/50 4.00mg 1/50 15.9 .. g 3/50 s 
c00523 24.611g 856.llg 0/50 4.00 .. g 0!50 15.9 .. g 3/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
m c00523 .904mg 2.14mg 30/50 4.00mg 48/50 15.9mg 49/50 
n c00523 15.3mg n.s.s. 0!50 4.oo .. g 1/50 15.9 .. g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
859 c00522 .665mg 2.14mg 0/20 26.7mg 40/50 28.1 .. g 29/50 l iv:hpc,nnd; sto:sqc . 
8 c00522 .665mg 2.14mg 0/20 26.7 .. g 40/50 28.1 .. g 29/50 
b c00522 1.51.,g 32.811g 0/20 26.7mg 1/50 28.1mg 6!50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
c00522 1.5211g 38.611g 0/20 26.711g 1/50 28.1 .. g 5/50 
d c00522 5.40 .. g n.s.s. 0/20 26.7 .. g 0!50 28.1 .. g 4/50 adr:coa,coc. 
• c00522 .628mg 2.2311g 2/20 26.7 .. g 40/50 28.111g 29/50 
f c00522 1.5111g 32.811g 0/20 26. 711g 1/50 28.1mg 6!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
860 c00522 1.18mg 2.33mg 0/20 27.4mg 45/50 29.211g 34/50 · · -:hes; sto:sqc . 
8 c00522 1.18mg 2.35 .. g 0/20 27 .411g 45/50 29.211g 33/50 
b c00522 4.9811g 21.1•g 0/20 27 .411g 11/50 29.211g 4/50 
c c00522 5.2011g 34.211g 0/20 27.4mg 5/50 29.211g 8/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
d c00522 1.12mg 2.22mg 0/20 27 .4mg 46/50 29.211g 35/50 
e c00522 8.97 .. g n.s.s. 0/20 27 .411g 3/50 29.211g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
861 1032 1.3111g 3.7510g 0/47 13.4mg 38/42 Wong; txap, 63, 155·165;1982/P l otn i ck pers. co1111. 
a 1032 3.0911g 8.79 .. g 0/47 13.4mg 27/42 
b 1032 4.9611g 16. 7.,g 0/47 13.4mg 19/42 
c 1032 9.9511g 49.511g 0/48 13.4mg 11/48 
d 1032 20.5mg n.s.s. 0/48 13.4mg 4/48 
• 1032 29.911g n.a.s . 0/48 13.4 .. g 2/48 
862 1032 .645mg 2.1111g 0/47 9.39 .. g 40/42 
• 1032 1.57 .. g 4.2711g 0/47 9.39mg 32/42 
b 1032 2.17mg 6.1511g 0/47 9.39 .. g 27/42 
1032 6.47 .. g 29. 7•g 0/48 9.39 .. g 12/48 
d 1032 17.0mg n.s.s. 0/48 9.39mg 3/48 
• 1032 20.9 .. g n.s.s . 0/48 9.39 .. g 2/48 
DI BRO"O"ANN ITOL COB"> 488-41·5 
863 1336" 9.53 .. g 136.llg 20/154 12.811g 11/23 25.7 .. g 5/17 Skipper; srfr; 1976/We i sburger 1977 /Prejean pers. co1111. 
• 1336" 15.8 .. g 162.llg 3/154 12.8mg 1/23 25.711g 6/17 
b 1336" 22.8 .. g 340.mg 0/154 12.8mg 1/23 25. 7mg 3/17 
133611 27.2 .. g 684.llg 0/154 12.811g 1/23 25. 7mg 2/17 
d 133611 33.411g 2.86g11 0/154 12.8 .. g 0/23 25. 711g 2/17 
• 1336m 20.4mg n.s.s. 1/154 12.8mg 0/23 25.7 .. g 0/17 
133611 4.0511g 19.211g 42/154 12.811g 12/23 25. 711g 15/17 
g 133611 5. 76mg 30. 7.,g 29/154 12.8•g 10/23 25. 711g 12/17 
h 1336m 25.311g n.1.s. 13/154 12.8 .. g 2/23 25. 7.,g 3/17 
864 133611 4. 7511g 60.4•g 9/101 12.8mg 9/22 
• 133611 13.411g n.s.s. 2/101 12.811g 2/22 
b 133611 2.64mg 28.7 .. g 28/101 12.8 .. g 15/22 
133611 3.6211g 50.3.,g 19/101 12.811g 12/22 
d 133611 12.411g n.a.s. 9/101 12.811g 3/22 102 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist N otes DR AuOp 
865 R cdr ipj •gl adc 26w78 e 
a R cdr ipj per ur 26w78 e 
b cdr ipj lun car 26w78 e 
c cdr ipj l iv tu• 26w78 e 
d cdr ipj tba Hl 26w78 e 
e cdr ipj tba mix 26w78 e 
f cdr i p j tba ben 26w78 e 
866 ., cdr ipj per aar 26w78 e 
a R ., cdr i p j ak i ., ix 26w78 e 
b R ., cdr ipj •gl fba 26w78 e 
c R " cdr ipj l iv tu• 26w78 e 
d R 11 cdr ipj tba •ix 26w78 e 
e R 11 cdr ipj tba ban 26w78 e 
f 11 cdr ipj tba Hl 26w78 e 
1, 3-D !BUTYL· 1 ·N ITROSOUREA 
867 R f don wat .,.., fba 75w75 e 
a R 
b R 
R 
d 
e R 
f R don wat .,.., 11ix 75w75 e 
don wat •g l adc 75w75 e 
don wet ute •ix 75w75 e 
don wat leu 75w75 e 
don wat l iv ade 75w75 e 
don wat tba 11 ix 75w75 e 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE* 
868 M f b6c eat l iv hpa 78w92 ev 
a M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 ev 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 ev 
c M b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 av 
869 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 v 
a M " b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 v 
b M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 v 
870 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18•24 v 
a Rf f34 eat liv MXB 18•24 v 
871 R M 04 eat TBA MXB 18•24 v 
a RM f34 eat liv MXB 18•24 v 
2,3 · DICHLORO·p ·DIOXANE 
872 M f hie ipj lun pt• 64w64 24.9•g P<.003 + 
79.2•g P<.004 
84.6•g P<.03 
no dre P• 1. 
11.5•g P<.002 
12.5•g P<.08 
no dre P• 1. 
30.9•g \ P<.0005+ 
103.llg * P<.03 
255.0lg * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
7. 9511g \ P<. 0005 
16.60lg \ P<.003 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •. :. -lug .•.. : .. 10 ...•• :. -100 .... :. -l•g .•.. : .. 10 •.... : •. 100 ..•. : .. 1g .•... :. -10 
2.23•g P<.0005 
4. 28•g * P<. 002 
22. 711g * P<. 002 
15.3•g P<.03 
32.011g * P<.06 
303.•g * P<.6 
2.67mg * P<.0005 
100ng •• : •• 1ug .... : .. 10 .••.. :. -100 ..•. :. ·l•g .••. : •. 10 ....• : •. 100 .•.. :. -19· ..•. : .. 10 
:> 
:> : + #31.611g * P<.006 -
:> 29.6•g * P<.07 
31.6•g * P<.006 
no dre P•1. 
178.•g * P<.9 
29.2Mg * P<.06 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
94.4•g * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •. : .. 1ug •••. : •• 10 •..•. :. -100 .... :. -1•9· •.. :. -10 .•.•. :. -100 ..•. : .. 1g .•.•. :. -10 
.> 7 .04•g P<.6 
alpha,beta·DICHLORO -bete·FORMYLACRYLIC ACID.lug ••.• : .. 10 ••.•. :. -100 ...• :. -l•g ••.. : .• 10 ••.•• :. -100 .... :. ·19· .... :. -10 
873 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P-1. 
a b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
874 " b6a orl lun •ix 76w76 evx .> 17 .811g P<.4 
• 
b 
875 
b 
876 
• 
b ., b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l tba "ix 76w76 evx 
b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
., b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
3,4' ·DICHLOR0 ·2·METHYLACRYLANILIOE 
877 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
878 • b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
879 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
880 • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx .> 
.> 771.•g 
16.1•g 
no dre 
no dre 
24.411g 
44.1•g 
44.1•g 
5.03•g 
.• : • -lug ••.• : .. 10 •.•.• :. -100 •..• : .. 111g •... : .• 10 ...•• :. -100 ..•. : .. 1g .•.•. : .• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
27 .1 .. g 
no dre 
49.1•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
15.2•g 
23.7•g 
5.39•g 
2,3·DICHLOR0· 1,4·NAPHTHOQUINONE 100ng •. : •• lug .•.. : .• 10 .•... :. -100 •.•. :. -111g •... :. -10 ....• :. -100 .... :. -19· •.•. :. -10 
881 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 26.5•g 
a M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b M f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
882 M • b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a M • b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b M 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
883 M b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 26.5•g 
a M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx no dre 
b M f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 8.31•g P<1 • 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.002 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.09 
P<.0005-
P<.3 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.05 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 103 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Jnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
865 1336n 9.3511g 232.llg 12/182 17.911g 7/24 
a 1336n 19.511g 1.19g11 0/182 17.911g 2/24 
b 1336n 19.8•g n.1.1. 1/182 17.911g 2/24 
c 1336n 49.811g n.1.1. 0/182 17.911g 0/24 
d 1336n 4.9211g 68.111g 44/182 17.911g 14/24 
• 1336n 3.9511g n.1.1 . 103/182 17.911g 18/24 
f 1336n 27 .8•g n.1.1. 59/182 17.911g 4/24 
866 1336n 11. 711g 129.llg 0/177 17.911g 5/25 C53.011g 0/12> 
a 1336n 32.511g n.s.s. 4/177 17.911g 4/25 53.0llg 1/12 
b 1336n 52.711g n.1.1. 1/177 17.90lg 2125 53.011g 0/12 
c 1336n 30.411g n.1.1. 0/177 17.911g 0/25 53.0•g 0/12 
d 1336n 3.5711g 34.30lg 59/177 17.911g 18/25 C53.011g 2/12) 
• 1336n 6.83•g 125.11g 27 /177 17.911g 11/25 C53.011g 1/12) 
f 1336n 44.311g n.s.s. 32/177 17.911g 7/25 53.011g 1/12 
1,3·DIBUTYL • 1 ·NITROSOUREA 56654·52-5 
867 1216 1.3111g 4.9311g 5/25 5.7111g 21/26 11.411g 19/24 C22.911g 11/19) Ogiu;zkko,96,35-41; 1980 
a 1216 2.2611g 18.111g 8/25 5. 7111g 21/26 11.4•g 20/24 22.911g 15/19 
b 1216 11. 711g 86.611g 0/25 5. 7111g 1/26 11.411g 7/24 22.911g 4/19 
1216 7 .2211g n.a.s. 0/25 5. 7111g 6/26 11.4Mg 3/24 C22.911g 2/19) 
d 1216 13.0Mg n.1.1. 1/25 5. 7111g 3/26 11 .411g 5124 22.911g 4/19 
• 1216 49.411g n.1.1 . 0/25 5.7111g 0/26 11.411g 1/24 22.911g 0/19 
1216 1.4511g 7 .8811g 10/25 5.7111g 23/26 11.411g 22/24 22.9•g 17/19 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE* 1067·33-0 
868 c02028 16.111g 313.llg 1/20 8.3011g 4/50 16.811g 12/50 
a c02028 12.811g n.1.s. 3/20 8.3011g 12/50 16.8Mg 13/50 
b c02028 16.111g 313.llg 1/20 8.3011g 4/50 16.811g 12/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c02028 69.411g n.1.1. 2/20 8.3011g 4/50 16.811g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
869 c02028 15.411g n.1.1. 6/20 7.7011g 19/50 15.511g 16/50 
a c02028 13.311g n.1.1. 2/20 7.7011g 11/50 15.511g 15/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c02028 47.6•g n.s.s. 2/20 7.7011g 8/50 15.511g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
870 c02028 3.3511g n.1.1. 12/19 2.5011g 26/50 (5.00•g 13/50) 
a c02028 23.211g n.s.s. 0/19 2.5011g 1/50 5.00•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
871 c02028 5. 1211g n.1.s. 8/20 2.0011g 20/50 4.0011g 11/50 
a c02028. n.1.1. n.1.s. 0/20 2.0011g 2/50 4.00•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2 ,3·DICHLORO -p-DIOXANE 3883-43-0 
872 1143 1.11•g n.1.1. 10/30 2.8611g 12/30 Van Duuren; jnci ,53,695-700;1974 
alpha ,beta· DI CHLORO·beta • FORMYLACRYL IC AC ID Cinucochloric acid) 87·56·9 
873 1296 15.511g n.1.1. 0/17 7.8411g 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1296 15.511g n.s.s. 1/17 7.8411g 0/18 
b 1296 10.3•g n.1.1. 2/17 7 .8411g 1/18 
874 1296 3.89•g n.1.1. 2/18 7.3011g 4/17 
a 1296 8.09•g n.1.1. 1/18 7 .3011g 1/17 
b 1296 3.4311g n.1.1. 3/18 7.3011g 5/17 
875 1296 15.511g n.1.1. 0/16 7.8411g 0/18 
a 1296 15.511g n.1.1. 0/16 7 .84•g 0/18 
b 1296 5.9811g n.1.1. 0/16 7.8411g 2/18 
876 1296 7.1711g n.s.s .. 0/16 7.3011g 1/17 
a 1296 7.1711g n.1.1. 0/16 7.3011g 1/ 17 
b 1296 2.14•g 19.311g 0/16 7.30Mg 7/17 
3,4' -DICHLOR0·2·METHYLACRYLANILIDE Cdicryl> 2164-09-2 
877 1279 18.6•g n.1.1. 0/17 9.96Mg 0/17 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1279 18.611g n.s.s. 1/17 9.96Mg 0/17 
b 1279 18.6•g n.1.1. 2/17 9.9611g 0/17 
878 1279 6.0511g n.1.1. 1/18 9.2611g 3/18 
a 1279 18.311g n.1.1. 2/18 9.26•g 0/18 
b 1279 5. 7511g n.1.1. 3/18 9.2611g 4/18 
879 1279 19.7•g n.1.1. 0/16 9.9611g 0/18 
a 1279 19.7•g n.1.1. 0/16 9.9611g 0/18 
b 1279 19.711g n.1.1. 0/16 9.9611g 0/18 
880 1279 4.58•g n.1.1. 0/16 9.26Mg 3/15 
a 1279 5.8111g n.1.1. 0/16 9.2611g 2/15 
b 1279 2.28•g 18.911g 0/16 9.2611g 7 /15 
2, 3-DICHLOR0-1, 4 • NAPHTHOQUINONE Cdichlono) 117-80-6 
881 1240 4.3111g n.1.1. 0/17 4. 1411g 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1240 4.9211g n.1.1. 1/17 4.1411g 1/18 
b 1240 3.9111g n.1.1. 2/17 4.1411g 2/18 
882 1240 7 .6311g n.1.1. 1/18 3.8511g 0/18 
a 1240 7 .6311g n.1.s. 2/18 3.8511g 0/18 
b 1240 7 .6311g n.1.1. 3/18 3.8511g 0/18 
883 1240 4.3111g n.1.1. 0/16 4.1411g 1/18 
a 1240 8.2011g n.1.1. 0/16 4.1411g 0/18 
b 1240 2.5111g n.1.1. 0/16 4.1411g 3/18 104 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
884 M " b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2,6· DICHLORO· 4 • NITROAN IL !NE 
885 f b6e or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
886 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
887 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
888 " b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
889 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
890 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
891 11 b6c orl l iv mix 76w76 evx 
m b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b oo b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
892 • b6c orl l iv ag11 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M " b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
3, 3' • DICHLOROBENZ !DINE 
893 D f beg cap l iv 11ix 86oi86 ev 
a f beg cap ubl 11ix 861186 ev 
b beg cap tba 11ix 86m86 ev 
894 cdr eat 11gl adc 69w69 
a R cdr eat l iv tu11 69w69 
895 R 11 cdr eat zy11 sqc 69w69 
R 11 cdr eat 01gl adc 69w69 
b R " cdr eat grl 69w69 
R 11 cdr eat l iv tu11 69w69 ... 7.26Mg 
23.2M9 
3.24119 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••. : •. 100 •••• :. -19· .••• : •. 10 
• > 
.> 
. > 
.> 
.> 
.> 
+ 
.> no dre 
no dre 
182.119 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
471.119 
no dre 
no dre 
602.Mg 
no dre 
188.119 
506.Mg 
no dre 
114.llg 
104.mg 
594.019 
57. 7119 
499.11g 
499.Mg 
499.llg 
156.mg 
100ng •• : •• 1ug .••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 111g .••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
<+ noTD50 
• + 
+ noTD50 
noTD50 
18.311g 
no dre 
60.111g 
69.611g 66.211g 
no dre 
trans· 1,4·DICHLOROBUTENE·2 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•• : •• 1g .••.• : •• 10 
896 M f hie ipj abd aar 76w76 ... 1.5211g DR AuOp 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P<.003 
p.1 • 
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1 . 
P•1. 
P• 1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.04 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.02 
P<.009 
P<.3 
P<.0005-
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.05 
P<.008 
P<.008 
P<.6 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.002 + 
P<.002 + 
P<.03 
P•1. 
P<.1 
2, 7·DICHLORODIBENZO·p ·DIOXIN 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·19· •••• : •• 10 
897 f b6c eat TBA MXB 90w91 
b6c eat l iv MXB 90w91 
b b6c eat lun MXB 90w91 
898 " b6c eat MXB MXB 90w92 
a 11 b6c eat MXA 90w92 
b 11 b6c eat MXA 90w92 
c • b6c eat l iv MXA 90w92 
d 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 90w92 
e 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 90w92 
f 11 b6c eat lun MXB 90w92 
899 0111 eat TBA MXB 261126 :> 
a OH eat l iv MXB 261126 
900 • OH eat TBA MXB 261126 :> 
a 11 OH eat l iv MXB 261126 :> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
640.119 P<.003 
1.92g11 \ P<.003 a 
2. 75g11 \ P<.01 
2.12g11 * P<.07 
2.91g11 * P<.4 
2.12g11 * P<.07 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
12.9g11 * P<.8 
1 , 1 ·DI CHLOROETHANE , 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.• :. -10 
901 M f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 av 
a M f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 IV 
b M b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 av 
902 M b6c gav ute eap 78w90 sv pool 
903 M 11 b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 esv ... 
a M 11 b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 eav 
b M 11 b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 eav 
904 R f 0111 gav MXB MXB 18•26 dav 
a R 0111 gav •gl adc 181126 dav 
b oH gav hea 18•26 dav 
R OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 dav 
d R OH gav l iv MXB 181126 dav 
905 R OH gav hes 18•26 dav pool ... 
906 R 11 oaoo gav TBA MXB 181126 dsv :> 
a R " OH gav l iv MXB 18•26 dav :> 8.40g• 
no dre 
no dre 
11.2g11 • 
1.37g11 • 
2.04g11 • 
7 .32g11 • 
535.llg • 
986.llg • 
1.35gOI * 
336.0lg • P<.5 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.004 a 
P<.07 
P<.05 
P<.04 
P<.005 
P<.04 
P<.05 
P<.2 
4.65g11 * P<.4 
1.36g11 * P<.02 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 105 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose Zinc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
884 1240 2.1901g n.s.s. 0/16 3.85"1g 3/17 
a 1240 3.78119 n.s.s. 0/16 3.8511g 1/17 
b 1240 1.3111g 17.611g 0/16 3.8511g 6/17 
2, 6· DI CHLORO· 4 · N ITROANI LINE <Botran> 99·30·9 
885 1291 119.llg n.s.s. 1/17 99.7mg 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1291 198.mg n.s.s. 0/17 99.7mg 0/18 
b 1291 47. 711g n.s.s. 2/17 99.711g 5/18 
886 1292 157 .mg n.s.s. 0/17 83.8mg 0/17 
a 1292 157.llg n.s.s. 1/17 83.811g 0/17 
b 1292 157.llg n.s.s. 2/17 83.811g 0/17 
887 1291 184.mg n.s.s. 1/18 92.7mg 0/18 
a 1291 184.llg n.s.s. 2/18 92.711g 0/18 
b 1291 130.llg n.s.s. 3/18 92.711g 1/18 
888 1292 65.3119 n.s.s. 1/18 78.011g 2/18 
a 1292 102.llg n.s.s. 2/18 78.011g 1/18 
b 1292 61.3mg n.s.s. 3/18 78.011g 3/18 
889 1291 98.011g n.s.s. 0/16 99.711g 1/17 
a 1291 187.llg n.s.s. 0/16 99.7.,g 0/17 
b 1291 56.711g n.s.s. 0/16 99.711g 3/17 
890 1292 82.30lg n.s.s. 0/16 83.811g 1/17 
a 1292 157 .Ilg n.s .. s. 0/16 83.811g 0/17 
b 1292 39.311g n.s.s. 0/16 83.811g 4/17 
891 1291 39.311g 2.29g11 0/16 92.711g 5/18 
1291 96.611g n.s.s. 0/16 92.7.,g 1/18 
b 1291 25.711g 190.llg 0/16 92. 711g 8/18 
892 1292 81.2 .. g n.s.s. 0/16 78.0mg 1/18 
a 1292 81.211g n.s.s. 0/16 78.011g 1/18 
b 1292 81.211g n.s.s. 0/16 78.0"'g 1/18 
1292 47 .211g n.s.s. 0/16 78.0mg 3/18 
3,3° ·DICHLOROBENZIDINE <DCB> 91·94·1 
893 1379 n.s.s. 1.7811g 016 4.4211g 5/5 Stu la; jept, 1,475·490;1978 
1379 n.s.s. 1.780lg 0/6 4.42mg 5/5 
b 1379 n.s.s. n.a.s. 5/6 4.420lg 5/5 
894 192 10.811g 36.6•g 3/44 50.011g 26/44 Stul a; txap, 31, 159-176 ; 1975/pers . co0111. 
192 ZOO.Ilg n.s.s. 0/44 50.0mg 0/44 
895 192 27 .211g 203 ... g 0/44 40.011g 8/44 
a 192 30.011g 290.0lg 0/44 40.0•g 7/44 
b 192 26.911g n.s.s. 2/44 40.0mg 9/44 
192 160.•g n.s.s. 0/44 40.0llg 0/44 
trans· 1, 4· DI CHLOROBUTENE · 2 110-57·6 
896 582 .37311g n.s.s. 0/30 .28611g 2/30 Van Duuren; canr, 35, 2553 · 2557; 1975 
2, 7 ·DI CHLOROD IBENZO·p· DIOXIN <DCDD) 33857·26·0 
897 c03667 2.30gOI n.s.s. 15/50 636 ... g 18/50 1.19g11 9/50 
c03667 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/50 636 ... g 1/50 1.19gm 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03667 8.39g11 n.s.s. 3/50 636 ... g 2150 1.19gm 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
898 c03667 321.llg 4.17g11 8/50 540 ... g 26/50 (1.09g11 20/50) · --:he11,hes, Leu, lyin; l iv:hpa,hpc. A 
• c03667 831.llg 9.58g11 0/50 540 ... g 7 /50 < 1.09gm 3/50) -- -: Leu, ly11. 
b c03667 1.04g11 281.g"1 0/50 540.mg 5/50 <1.09g11 1/50) ---:hein,hes. 
c c03667 885.11g n.s.s. 8/50 540 ... g 20/50 1.09gOI 17/50 liv:hpa,hpc. 
d c03667 787.llg n.s.s. 19/50 540.llg 30/50 1.09gOI 25/50 
• c03667 885.11g n.s.s. 8/50 540.llg 20/50 1.09gOI 17/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c03667 3.95g• n.s.s. 8/50 540.mg 5/50 1.09gOI 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
899 c03667 456.11g n.s.s. 26/35 250.llg 22/35 500.0lg 16/35 
c03667 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/35 250 ... g 0/35 500.llg 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
900 c03667 131.11g n.s.s. 21/35 198.llg 14/35 <396.11g 6/35) 
• c03667 716.11g n.s.s. 1/35 198.llg 0/35 396.11g 1/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1, 1 ·DI CHLOROETHANE 75.34.3 
901 c04535 2.03gm n.s.s. 6/20 1.02gm 6/50 2.04g"1 12/50 
c04535 10.3gOI n.s.s. 1/20 1.02g"' 1/50 2.04g11 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c04535 8.16g11 n.s.s. 1/20 1.02g"1 2/50 2.04gll 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
902 c04535 3.89g11 86.3g11 0/80p 1.02g11 0/50 2.04gll 4/50 
903 c04535 588.11g n.s.s. 4/20 883.llg 19/50 1.77gll 15/50 
• c04535 936.11g n.s.s. 1/20 883 ... g 8/50 1.77g"' 8/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04535 2.67g• n.s.s. 0120 883.llg 1/50 1.77g"' 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
904 c04535 248.llg 3.68g11 0120 238.llg 1/50 477.0lg 9/50 -· -:hes; 11gl :adc. A 
a c04535 377 .mg n.s.s. 0/20 238.mg 1/50 477.llg 5/50 
b c04535 450.11g n.s.s. 0/20 238.llg 0/50 477.llg 4/50 
c04535 119.llg n.s.s. 4/20 238.11g 12/50 477.llg 18/50 
d c04535 758 ... g n.1.s. 0120 238.otg 0/50 477.11g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
905 c04535 456.•g n.1.1. 0/40p 238.llg 0/50 477.11g 4/50 
906 c04535 258.llg n.s.s. 6/20 192 ... g 6/50 383.mg 5/50 
a c04535 926.llg n.s.1. 1/20 192.llg 0/50 383.IRg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 106 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1, 2 ·DI CHLOROETHANE 100ng .. :. -1ug •... : •• 10 .•.•• :. -100 ..•. :. -1•g .•.. : .. 10 •.•.• : .• 100 .••• : •• 1g ...•. :. -10 
907 f b6c gov MXB MXB 78w90 v 
b6c gov lun 1/1 78w90 v 
b b6c gov 11gl ecn 78w90 v 
c b6c gov TBA MXB 78w90 v 
d b6c gov l iv MXB 78w90 v 
• b6c gav l un MXB 78w90 v 
908 b6c gav lun a/a 78w90 v 
a b6c gav agl acn 78w90 v 
b b6c gav ute MXA 78w90 v 
c b6c gav ato aqc 78w90 v 
909 • b6c gav lun 1/1 78w90 v 
a " b6c gov l iv hpc 78w90 v 
b II b6c gov TBA MXB 78w90 v 
c 11 b6c gov l iv MXB 78w90 v 
d 11 b6c gov l un MXB 18w90 v 
910 
• 911 
• 
b 
c 
d 
912 
• 
b 
d 
913 
• 
b 
d " b6c gov lun 1/1 78w90 v 
11 b6c gov l iv hpc 78w90 v 
f awi inh l iv 11ix 18•25 ev 
swi inh lun ada 18•25 ev 
1wi inh l iv ang 18•25 ev 
1wi inh l iv hpt 18a25 ev 
1wi inh tba aix 18•25 ev 
• 1wi inh l iv hpt 18•25 ev 
• 1wi inh l iv ang 18•25 ev 
• 1wi inh l iv aix 18a25 ev 
• 1wi inh lun ade 18a25 ev 
• awi inh tba •ix 181125 ev 
f OH gov 11gl MXA 181126 div 
0111 gav 11gl fba 18•26 div 
OHi gov 11gl acn 18•26 div 
OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 dsv 
o"' gav l iv MXB 18•26 dsv pool 
pool 
914 
• 
b 08" gav •gl MXA 18•26 dav pool 
08" gav •gl fba 18•26 dav 
c 
915 
• 
b 
c 
d 
916 
• 
b 
917 
• 
b 
918 
• 
b 
919 
• 920 
• o"' gav hes 18•26 div 
OHi gav •gl acn 18a26 dsv 
• OH gov MXB MXB 18•26 dav 
• 0111 gav hes 18•26 dav 
• 0111 gav 1to aqc 18•26 div 
• OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 div 
• OH gav l iv MXB 18•26 div 
" 0111 gav hes 18•26 div pool 
• 0111 gav aub fib 18a26 div 
" OH gav 1to 1qc 18a26 div 
f 1da inh l iv •ix 18a31 ev 
1da inh H• •ix 181131 ev 
1d1 inh tba 11ix 18•31 ev 
1da inh ••• •ix 18a31 ev 
1da inh l iv •ix 18•31 ev 
1da inh tba 11ix 18•31 ev 
" ada inh l iv 11ix 18•33 ev 
" ada inh tba •ix 18•33 ev 
" ada inh l iv •ix 18•33 ev 
11 1da inh tba 11ix 181133 ev + 
.> 
. > 
• > : + 61.211g P<.0005 
118.11g I P<.0005c 
133.•g I P<.0005c 
.> 
.> 36.011g P<.0005 
4.74g• P<.8 
112.11g P<.0005 
116.•g P<.0005c 
133.11g P<.0005c 
230 .11g P<. 0005c 
438 .11g P<. 003 
89. 711g * P<. 0005c 
133.ag * P<.04 
57. 711g * P<.02 
133.11g * P<.04 
89. 711g * P<. 0005 
89. 7•g * 
148 ... g * 
16.9g• * 
55.4g• * 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.0005c 
P<.02 
P<.7 
P<1 • 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
5.49ag P<.0005c 
5. 8411g P<. 0005 
74.811g P<.0005c 
3.19Mg P<.0005 
60.611g * P<.2 
5. 6311g I P<. 0005c 
6. 38mg I P<. 0005 
19.5•g * P<.0005 
54.011g P<.0005c 
11 • 5•g I P<. 0005 
15.011g * P<.0005c 
46.3•g P<.0005c 
3.18ag P<.0005 
132.11g 
18.4•g * 
43.2•g 
46.3•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
38.111g 
no dre 
48.811g 
no dre 
2.40g11 
no dre 
no dre P<.07 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P-1. 
P-1 . 
P-1. 
P<.07 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P•1 • 
P<1 • 
P•1 . 
P•1 • 
al phe · ( 2 ,4·DI CHLOROPHENOXY)PROPION IC ACID --1ug ••.• : •. 10 •..•• : .. 100 ..•. : .• 111g •.•. : .• 10 •.•.. : .. 100 .... : •. 1g ••.•. : .. 10 
921 f b6a orl l iv ag• 76w76 evx 
a b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b6a or l tba "ix 76w76 evx 
922 b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
923 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
924 " b6a orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
a " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
925 f b6c or l l un ode 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
926 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b b6c or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
927 11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx . > 
. > 
.> .> 233.•g 
. > 
.> no dre 
66.5•g 
364.ag 
no dre 
no dre 
3.58g11 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
9.26•g 
220.•g 
no dre 
106.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
99.1•g 
no dre 
99.111g P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P<1 . 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<1 . 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1 . 
P-1. 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.1 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.1 
P•1. 
P<.1 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 107 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1, 2 ·DI CHLOROETHANE (ethylene dichloride, EDC> 107-06·2 
907 c00511 38.2•g 113.•g 1/20 92.5•g 16/50 183 ... g 19/50 lun:a/a; •ul :acn. c 
c00511 65.2•g 280.11g 1/20 92.5•g 7/50 183.•g 15/50 
b c00511 71.4•g 312.•u 0120 92.5•g 9/50 183.•g 7/50 
c c00511 23.511g 65.4•U 6!20 92.5•g 33/50 183.•g 29/50 
d c00511 349.llg n.1.a. 1/20 92.5•u 0/50 183.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e c00511 63.211g 253.•g 1/20 92.5•g 7/50 183 ... g 16/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
908 c00511 64.511g 244.llg 2/60p 92.5•g 7/50 183.•g 15/50 
a c00511 71.411g 280.•u 0/60p 92.5•g 9/50 183.•g 7/50 
b c00511 108.llg 598 ... g 0/60p 92. 5mg 5/50 183.•g 5/50 ute:esp,ess. 
c c00511 170.•g 3.27gll 1/60p 92.511g 2/50 183.•g 5/50 
909 c00511 49. 7•u 230.•g 0/20 60.0llg 1/50 120.11g 15/50 
a c00511 62.1•g n.1.1. 1/20 60.011g 6/50 120 ... g 12/50 
b c00511 29.311g n.1.1. 4/20 60.011g 15/50 120.•g 28/50 
c00511 62.111g n.1.1. 1/20 60.0•g 6/50 120.llg 12/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c00511 49. 711g 230.llg 0120 60.011g 1/50 120.llg 15/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
910 c00511 49.711g 186.•g 0/60p 60.011g 1/50 120.11g 15/50 
a c00511 67.0•g n.1.1. 4/60p 60.0•g 6/50 120.•g 12/50 s 
911 100111 2. 76g11 n.1.1. 0/133 5.31•g 0/89 11.9•g 0/88 53.111g 1/87 195.•g 0/84 Mal toni ;banb, 5, 3 ·33; 1980 
a 1001• 1.80g• n.a.1. 4/133 5.3111g 4/89 11.911g 2/88 53.1•g 2/87 195.llg 3/84 
b 1001• 67.7•g n.1.1. 0/133 5.3111g 0/89 11.9•g 0/88 53.111g 0/87 195.llg 0/84 
1001m 67.711g n.1.1. 0/133 5.31•g 0/89 11.911g 0/88 53.111g 0/87 195.llg 0/84 
d 100111 1.52g11 n.1.a. 27/133 5.3111g 19/89 11.9•g 17/88 53.1•g 15/87 195.11g 11/84 
912 1001• 47 .1•g n.1.1. 4/111 4.43•g 0!69 9.1911g 0/89 49.711g 0/87 156.llg 0/81 
a 100111 47.111g n.a.1. 0/111 4.43•g 0!69 9.1911g 0/89 49.7•g 0/87 156.•g 0/81 
b 1001• 47.111g n.1.1. 1/111 4.43•g 0/69 9.1911g 0/89 49.7•g 0/87 156.•g 0/81 
1001• 2.69g• n.a.s. 4/111 4.4311g 1/69 9.1911g 4/89 49.7•g 3/87 156.llg 0/81 
d 100111 285.llg n.1.1. 14/111 4.43•g 4/69 9.19•g 12/89 49.7•g 9/87 <156.llg 2/81) 
913 c00511 1.98•g 13.7•g 0/20 24.0•g 15/50 48.0•g 24/50 11gl :acn, fba. 
a c00511 2 .02•g 17.211g 0/20 24.0•g 14/50 48.0•g 8/50 
b c00511 40.811g 147.•g 0120 24.0•g 1/50 48.0•g 18/50 
c c00511 1.4711g 7.6011g 7/20 24.0•g 24/50 48.011g 33/50 
d c00511 10.4•g n.1.1. 0/20 24.0•g 2/50 48.011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
914 c00511 2.27•g 13.811g 6/60p 24.0•g 15/50 48.0•g 24/50 11gl :acn,fba . 
a c00511 2.42•g 18.911g 5/60p 24.0•g 14/50 48.011g 8/50 
b c00511 4.35•g 99.1•g 0/60p 24.0•g 4/50 48.0•g 4/50 s 
c c00511 20.3•g 125.•g 1/60p 24.0•g 1/50 48.011g 18/50 
915 c00511 3.9111g 27 .311g 0120 24.011g 12/50 48.0•g 14/50 ---:hes; sto:sqc . 
a c00511 4.16•g 56.211g 0/20 24.0•g 9/50 48.0•g 7/50 
b c00511 17.411g 153.•g 0/20 24.0llg 3/50 48.011g 9/50 
c c00511 1.1211g 10.7•g 4/20 24.0•g 20/50 48.011g 20/50 
d c00511 23.811g n.1.1. 0120 24.0•g 0/50 48.0•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
916 c00511 4.9811g 61.011g 1/60p 24.0•g 9/50 48.0•g 7/50 
a c00511 17 .6•g 108.•g 0/60p 24.0•g 5/50 48.0•g 6/50 
b c00511 17.411g 121.•g 0/60p 24.0•g 3/50 48.0•g 9/50 
917 100111 19.711g n.1.1. 0/90 1.0811g 0!90 2.15•g 0!90 10.4•g 0/90 39.811g 0/90 Mal toni ;benb,5,3-33; 1980 
a 1001 .. 117.•g n.1.1. 52/90 1.0811g 65/90 2.15•g 43/90 10.4•g 58/90 39.811g 52/90 
b 100111 111.11g n.1.1. 56/90 1.0811g 65/90 2.15•g 43/90 10.411g 56/90 39.811g 54/90 
918 1001n 14.6•g n.1.a. 38/90 1.0811g 65/90 2.1511g 43/90 10.411g 58/90 (39.8•g 52/90) 
1001n 19.7•g n.1.1. 0/90 1.08•g 0/90 2.15•g 0/90 10.4•g 0!90 39.8•g 0!90 
b 1001n 16.411g n.1.1. 38/90 1.08•g 65/90 2.1511g 43/90 10.411g 56/90 (39.811g 54/90) 
919 1001 .. 15.911g n.1.1. 0!90 .67011g 0!90 1.7911g 0/89 7.09•g 0!90 26.8•g 0/89 
a 100111 45.611g n.1.1. 14/90 .670•g 30/90 1.79•g 13/89 7.0911g 20/90 <26.811g 15/89) 
920 1001n 15.9•g n.1.1. 0/90 .670•g 0/90 1.79•g 0/89 7.0911g 0/90 26.8•g 0/89 
1001n 51.5•g n.1.1. 17/90 .67011g 30/90 1.7911g 13/89 7.0911g 20/90 <26.811g 15/89> 
alpha· <2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXY>PROPIONIC ACID (2 · <2, 4·d i ch lorophenoxylprop ionic acid) 120·36·5 
921 1230 37 .9•g n.1.1. 0/17 36.4•g 1/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1230 43.3•g n.1.1. 1/17 36.4•g 1/18 
b 1230 17 .4•g n.1.1. 2/17 36.4•g 5/18 
922 1238 4.05•g n.1.1. 1/17 3.89•g 1/16 
1238 6.85•g n.1.1. 0/17 3.89•g 0/16 
b 1238 4.49•g n.1.1. 2/17 3.89•g 1/16 
923 1230 37 .6•g n.1. I. 1/18 33.9•g 1/17 
a 1230 41.711g n.1.1. 2/18 33.911g 1/17 
b 1230 32. 711g n.1.1. 3/18 33.911g 2/17 
924 1238 3.38•g n.1.1. 2/18 3.62•g 2/18 
a 1238 4.2811g n.1.1. 1/18 3.62•u 1/18 
b 1238 1.8411g n.1.1. 3/18 3.62•g 5/18 
925 1230 35.811g n.1.1. 0/16 36.4•g 1/17 
a 1230 68.111g n.1.1. 0/16 36.411g 0/17 
b 1230 26.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.411g 2/17 
926 1238 7.7111g n.1.1. 0/16 3.89•g 0/18 
a 1238 7.71•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.8911g 0/18 
b 1238 7.71•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.89•g 0/18 
927 1230 24.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 2/17 
a 1230 63.4•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 0/17 
b 1230 24.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 2/17 108 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
928 M m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M m b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b M m b6c or l tba mix 76w76 evx GOLD ET AL. 
.. TD50 
4.27mg 
no dre 
2.59mg 2Tailp,·I 
DR AuOp 
P<.02 
p.1. 
P<.002 
alpha· ( 2, 5 ·DI CHLOROPHENOXY>PROPIONI C ACID •. _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1mg ••.• : •. _10 •.••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••.•• : •. _10 
929 f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
930 m b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b m b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
931 
• 
b 
932 
b b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b6c orl tba tum 76w76 evx 
m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
m b6c or l tba mix 76w76 evx . > 
• > 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre p.1 • 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
P•1. 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre 
no dre 
36. 7mg 
36.7mg 
10.5mg p.1 • 
p.1. 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.003 
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID _100ng •. : .• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••. : .. _1mg •... : .. _10 .•••• : •• _100 .••. : •• _1g .•.•• : .. _10 
933 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 2. 75gm * P<1. 
f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 1.07gm • P<.9 
934 m b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P• 1. 
m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
935 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
936 m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6c orl l.un mix 76w76 evx 
m b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx b 
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n·BUTYL ESTER 
937 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
938 m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
939 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
940 " b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
" b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b " b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx .> 
.> no dre 
123.mg 
no dre 
123.mg 
no dre P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
no dre P-1. 
55.5mg P<.1 
•••• : •• _10 •.•.• : .• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 ..•. : •• _1g ••••. : .. _10 
.> 
.> 
• > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
29. 711g 
59.0oog 
122.oog 
38.1mg P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
P<.02 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.05 
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER •••• : •. _10 ••••. : .. _100 •.•. : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 .•.• : •. _1g •.•.. : •. _10 
941 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx 
942 
• 
b 
943 
b 
944 
• 
b m b6a orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
m b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx • > .> 
.. 
.. no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
34.011g 
no dre 
24.61Rg 
31. 711g 
no dre 
17.711g P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
p.1 . 
p.1. 
P<.04 
p.1. 
P<.02 
P<.04 
p.1. 
P<.007 -
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER ••.• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1mg •••• : •• _10 •.•.• : •. _100 •••• : •. _1g •.••• : •• _10 
945 f b6a orl l iv hpc 76w76 evx .> 94. 7mg P<.3 
b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 83.2mg P<. 7 
946 m b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre P• 1. 
m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b " b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre p.1. 
947 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 100.mg P<.3 
b 
948 
• 
b f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
" b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
" b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
m b6c or l tba mix 76w76 evx .. 100.mg P<.3 
48. 7mg P<.2 
21.3mg P<.02 
93.6mg P<.3 
16.4mg P<.009 
3-<3 ,4· DICHLOROPHE NYL) · 1, 1 · DIMETHYLUREA •. : •• _1ug .••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1•g ••.• : •• _10 •...• : •. _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
949 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre P•1. 
M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P• 1. 
b M b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx no dre p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
928 
a 
b RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
1238 1 .4611g n.s.s. 
1238 5.9811g n.s.s. 
1238 1. 0411g 11. 711g 0/16 
0/16 
0/16 !Dose 
3.6211g 
3.6211g 
3.6211g 
alpha· (2, 5 ·DI CHLOROPHENOXY) PROP IONIC AC ID 
929 1231 16.011g n.s.s. 1/17 13.411g 
a 1231 26.611g n.s.s. 0/17 13.411g 
b 1231 17. 711g n.s.s. 2/17 13.411g 
930 1231 15.411g n.s.s. 2/18 12.511g 
1231 23.511g n.s.s. 1/18 12.511g 
b 1231 16.511g n.s.s. 3/18 12.511g 
931 1231 25.111g n.s.s. 0/16 13.411g 
a 1231 25. 111g n.s.s. 0/16 13.411g 
b 1231 25.111g n.s.s. 0/16 13.411g 
932 1231 9.0011g n.s.&. 0/16 12.511g 
a 1231 9.0011g n.s.s. 0/16 12.511g 
b 1231 4.2511g 57 .211g 0/16 12.511g llnc 2Dose 
4/ 15 
0/15 
6/15 
6965·71·5 
1/18 
0/18 
1/18 
1/17 
0/17 
1/17 
0/17 0/17 
0/17 
2/17 
2/17 
6/17 
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID <2,4·Dl 94.75.7 
933 1232 64.611g n.s.s. 1/ 17 20.411g 0/16 44.3•g 
a 1232 24.111g n.s.s. 0/17 20.411g 0/16 44.311g 
b 1232 43.411g n.s.s. 2/17 20.411g 1/16 44.311g 
934 1232 22.2Mg n.s.s. 1/18 19.011g 0/18 41.211g 
8 1232 40.0llg n.s.s. 2/18 19.011g 2/18 41.211g 
b 1232 45.011g n.s.s. 3/18 19.011g 2/18 41.2mg 
935 1232 20.111g n.s.s. 0/16 20.411g 1/17 
a 1232 38.211g n.s.s. 0/16 20.411g 0/17 
b 1232 20.111g n.s.s. 0/16 20.411g 1/17 
936 1232 35.511g n.s.a. 0/16 19.011g 0/17 
1232 35.511g n.s.s. 0/16 19.011g 0/17 
b 1232 13.611g n.s.s. 0/16 19.011g 2/17 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n·BUTYL ESTER 94·80·4 
937 1237 36.011g n.s.s. 0/17 20.411g 0/16 
a 1237 36.011g n.s.s. 1/17 20.4mg 0/16 
b 1237 36.0llg n.s.s. 2/17 20.411g 0/16 
938 1237 24.911g n.s.s. 2/18 19.011g 1/18 
1237 37.611g n.s.s. 1/18 19.011g 0/18 
b 1237 14.911g n.s.s. 3/18 19.011g 3/18 
939 1237 40.5Mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.4mg 0/18 
a 1237 40.5Mg n.s.s. 0/16 20.411g 0/18 
b 1237 10.211g n.s.a. 0/16 20.411g 4/18 
940 1237 14.511g n.s.s. 0/16 19.011g 2/18 
1237 19.811g n.s.s. 0/16 19.011g 1/18 
b 1237 11.5mg n.s.s. 0/16 19.011g 3/18 
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, I SOOCTYL ESTER 25168·26 · 7 
941 1236 33.811g n.s.s. 0/17 18.111g 0/17 
a 1236 33.811g n.s.s. 1/17 18.111g 0/17 
b 1236 22.311g n.s.s. 2/17 18.1mg 1/17 
942 1236 15.711g n.s.a. 2/18 16.811g 2/18 
a 1236 19.911g n.s.s. 1/18 16.811g 1/18 
b 1236 13.211g n.s.s. 3/18 16.811g 3/18 
943 1236 10.311g n.s.s. 0/16 18.111g 3/17 
a 1236 33.811g n.1.1. 0/16 18.1•g 0/17 
b 1236 8.4611g n.s.s. 0/16 18.1mg 4/17 
944 1236 9.5611g n.s.s. 0/16 16.811g 3/17 
1236 31.4•g n.s.s. 0/16 16.811g 0/17 
b 1236 6.6511g 239.llg 0/16 16.811g 5/17 
2,4·DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER 94-11·1 
945 1235 15.411g n.1.1. 0/17 15.711g 1/17 
e 1235 29.311g n.s.s. 1/17 15.711g 0/17 
b 1235 10.511g n.1.s. 2/17 15. 7Mg 3/17 
946 1235 13. 7•g n.s.s. 2/18 14.611g 2/18 
1235 29.011g n.a.s. 1/18 14.6•g 0/18 
b 1235 11.511g n.s.s. 3/18 14.6•g 3/18 
947 1235 16.311g n.s.s. 0/16 15. 711g 1/18 
1235 16.311g n.s.a. 0/16 15. 711g 1/18 
b 1235 12.011g n.s.s. 0/16 15.711g 2/18 
948 1235 7 .32•g n.s.s. 0/16 14.611g 4/18 
a 1235 15.211g n.s.s. 0/16 14.611g 1/18 
b 1235 6.20•g 361.•g 0/16 14.611g 5/18 2lnc 
1/15 
0/15 
2/15 
0/12 
1/12 
1/12 
3· C3,4·DICHLOROPHENYLl · 1, 1 ·DIMETHYLUREA (Karmex, diuronl 330-54· 1 
949 1276 215.•g n.1.1. 1/17 193.11g 1/17 
a 1276 361.•g n.1.1. 0/17 193.mg 0/17 
b 1276 170.•g n.1.1. 2/17 193.•g 2/17 109 
Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 110 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
950 M 11 b6a orl lun ado 76w76 ovx 
M " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 ovx 
b M " b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 ovx 
951 M b6c orl lun ado 76w76 ovx 
a M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
b M f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 ovx 
952 M '" b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 ovx 
M " b6c orl lun ado 76w76 ovx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 ovx -> 
-> 
-> 437.llg 
no dre 
260.11g 
600.11g 
no dre 
388.llg 
1.15g11 
1.15gll 
361.llg P<.4 
P·1-
P<.3 
P<.2 
P•1-
P<.05 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.05 
2, 4-DI CHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE __ : _ -.!ug. ___ : _ -.10-____ : _ -.!00. ___ : _ -.!11g. _ --: --.10--- --: --.!00. ---: --.!g---- -: --.10 
953 f b6a orl lun 11ix 76w76 ovx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 ovx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 ovx 
954 11 b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 ovx 
955 f b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
956 11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
DICHLORVOS 
957 f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 v 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 v 
b b6c eat lun MXB 80w92 v 
958 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 v 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 v 
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 80w92 v 
959 OSll eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
a 
960 
a 
961 
a 
b 
962 
a 
b 
DICOFOL OSll eat l iv MXB 191126 v 
11 OSll eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
" 0111 eat l iv MXB 19M26 v 
cfe inh pit tu11 241124 e 
cfo inh liv tu11 24•24 o 
cfe inh tba 11ix 241124 o 
11 cfe inh pit tu11 241124 o 
• cfe inh l iv tu• 241124 e 
11 cfe inh thy tu• 241124 e 
11 cfe inh tba •ix 241124 o 
963 f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 v 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 v 
b b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 v 
964 11 b6c eat l iv MXA 78w91 v 
a 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 78w91 v 
b 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 v 
11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 v 
d 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 v 
965 o .. eat TBA MXB 181126 
.- OH eat l iv MXB 181126 
966 • o .. eat TBA MXB 181126 v 
11 0&11 eat l iv MXB 181126 v 
N ,N' -DICYCLOHEXYL THI OUR EA 
967 f b6c eat TBA MXB 25•24 
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 251124 
b f b6c eat lun MXB 251124 
968 " b6c eat TBA MXB 25•24 
a 
b 
969 
a 
970 
a 
b 
c 
d II b6c eat l iv MXB 251124 
11 b6c eat lun MXB 251124 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 25•25 
f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
11 f34 eat thy cca 251125 
11 f34 eat thy MXA 25•25 
11 f34 eat ak i bee 25•25 
M f34 eat TBA MXB 25•25 
• f34 eat l iv MXB 25•25 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 
971 M f chi eat lun 11ix 64w86 a 
a M chi eat l iv 11ix 64w86 a 
b M chi eat tba •ix 64w86 a 
972 M 11 chi eat lun •ix 77w86 
a M • chi eat l iv •ix 77w86 
b M • chi eat tba •ix 77w86 -> .> 1-92gm 
-> 
+ no dre 
867.mg 
866.11g 
no dre 
1-68g11 
1.92g11 
no dre 
929.llg 
266.llg 
924.llg 
218.11g P<.6 
P•1-
P<.4 
P<.4 
p.1_ 
P<. 7 
P<.3 
P•1-
P<.09 
P<.003 -
P<.1 
P<.002 
.!OOng. _: _ -.!ug. ___ : _ -.10-____ : _ -.!00. ___ :. -.!11g. -•• : --.10-----: --.!00. ---: --.!;-----: --.10 
+ 
-> :> 7. 85g11 * P<1-
no dra P· 1-
1.53g11 * P<.8 
-* 40.311g \ P<.08 
no dre P·1-
725.11g * P<.8 
:> no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dro P·1-
no dra P·1-
4.6511g * P<.009 -
no dro P•1-
24.511g * P<.9 
11-311g * P<.3 
50.011g * P<.2 
no dro P·1-
no dro P·1-
.!OOng. _: _ -.!ug. ___ : _ -.10-____ : _ -.100. ___ : _ -.!•g. ---: --.10-----: --.100. -- -: -• .!g. ----: • -.10 
:> 
:> 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dro P·1-
no dro P·1-
32.911g * P<.04 
34.811g * P<.04 
59.211g * P<.4 
32.911g * P<.04 
616.11g * P<.6 
no dro P· 1-
no dro p.1. 
no dro P·1-
517.11g * P<.7 
.!OOng. _: _ -.!ug. ___ : _ -.10-____ : _ -.100. ___ : _ -.!•;----: --.10-----: --.!00. ---: -• .!g-----: --.10 
:> 122.g• * P<1-
no dro P·1-
no dre P•1-
:> no dre P•1. 
no dro P·1-
no dro P·1-
:> no dro P· 1-
no dro P·1-
"' #5.48g• * P<.03 
7 .41g11 * P<.04 
26.1g• * P<.04 
3.91g11 * P<.3 
15.6g11 * P<.09 
.!OOng. _: _ -.!ug. ___ : _ -.10--___ : _ -.100. __ -: _ -.!•;----: --.10-- ---: --.!00. ---: --.!g-----: --.10 
:> 1.66g11 * P<.2 
no dro P·1-
789.11g * P<.2 
373.mg \ P<.009 
930.11g * P<.05 
149.11g \ P<.003 -CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE lll 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
950 1276 95.611g n.a.a. 2/18 180.llg 4/17 
a 1276 336.llg n.1.1. 1/18 180.llg 0/17 
b 1276 70. 711g n.1.1. 3/18 180.11g 6/17 
951 1276 147.llg n.1.1. 0/16 193.11g 2/18 
a 1276 382.llg n.1.1. 0/16 193.llg 0/18 
b 1276 117.llg n.a.1. 0/16 193.llg 3/18 
952 1276 187.llg n.s.1. 0/16 180.llg 1/18 
a 1276 187.llg n.1.s. 0/16 180.11g 1/18 
b 1276 109.•g n.s.s. 0/16 180.•g 3/18 
2 ,4· DI CHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE <Gani te·R99> 97·16·5 
953 1288 267.•g n.1.1. 1/17 339.•g 2/17 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
• 1288 634.•g n.1.s. 0/17 339.llg 0/17 
b 1288 182.llg n.1.1. 2/17 339.•g 4/17 
954 1288 181.•g n.1.1. 2/18 316.•g 4/18 
1288 626.llg n.s.1. 1/18 316.•g 0/18 
b 1288 196.llg n.1.1. 3/18 316.llg 4/18 
955 1288 313.•g n.s.1. 0/16 339.•g 1/16 
a 1288 597.•g n.1.a. 0/16 339.•g 0/16 
b 1288 228.11g n. •·•. 0/16 339.11g 2/16 
956 1288 107 .Ilg 1 .44g• 0/16 316.•g 6/17 
1288 227.11g n.a.a. 0/16 316.•g 2/17 
b 1288 92. 711g 837 .Ilg 0/16 316.•g 7/17 
DICHLORVOS CDDVP, Vepona) 62· 73. 7 
957 c00113 86.511g n.a.a. 1/10 35.111g 11/50 70.211g 9/50 
c00113 n.1.a. n.1.s. 0/10 35. 111g 0/50 70.2•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00113 277.•g n.a.1. 0/10 35. 1•g 1/50 70.211g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
958 c00113 20. 111g n.a.a. 1/10 32.411g 22/50 C64.811g 14/50) 
a c00113 76. 1•g n.a.a. 0/10 32.4•g 12/50 64.811g 7/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c00113 103.•g n.a.a. 0/10 32.411g 7/50 64.811g 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
959 c00113 5.7311g n.a.a. 8/10 5.50•g 34/50 (11.911g 30/50> 
c00113 75. 7•g n.a.a. 1/10 5.50•g 3/50 11.911g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
960 c00113 8. 1011g n.a.a. 6/10 4.40•g 21/50 9.5011g 33/50 
a c00113 n.1.1. n.s.1. 0/10 4.4011g 0/50 9.5011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
961 96 1.97•g 172.•g 7/47 18.9ug 5/47 .18911g 12/47 1.8911g 16/46 Blair ;artx,35,281-294; 1976 
a 96 .16511g n.a.1. 0/47 18.9ug 0/47 .18911g 0/47 1.8911g 0/46 
b 96 1.4811g n.1.1. 36/47 18.9ug 28/47 .18911g 36/47 1.89•g 33/46 
962 96 2.7611g n.a.a. 4/50 13.3ug 10/50 . 133•g 6/50 1.3311g 10/50 
a 96 8.1411g n.a.a. 0/50 13.3ug 0/50 .133•g 0/50 1.33•g 1/50 
b 96 5.0411g n.a.1. 2/50 13.3ug 9/50 .13311g 5/50 1.3311g 5/50 
96 1.9711g n.a.1. 18/50 13.3ug 30/50 • 13311g 26/50 1.3311g 24/50 
DICOFOL CKel thane) 115·32·2 
963 c00486 65.1•g n.a.a. 5/20 13.0•g 6/50 26.0•g 8/50 
a c00486 309.•g "····· 1/20 13.0•g 0/50 26.0•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c00486 296.llg n.a.a. 1/20 13.011g 0/50 26.0•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
964 c00486 15.9•g n.a.1. 3/20 26.4•g 23/50 54.0•g 36/50 liv:hpa,hpc. 
a c00486 16.811g n.1.s. 3/20 26.411g 22/50 54.0•g 35/50 
b c00486 16. 111g n.a.1. 5/20 26.411g 34/50 54.011g 38/50 
c c00486 15.911g n.a.a. 3/20 26.411g 23/50 54.011g 36/50 l iv:~pa,hpc,nnd. 
d c00486 114.11g n.1.a. 1/20 26.411g 2/50 54.0•g 5/50 lun:a/11,a/c. 
965 c00486 46.311g n.1.a. 16/20 13.011g 27/50 26.0•g 28/50 
a c00486 n.1.a. n.a.1. 0/20 13.0•g 0/50 26.0•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
966 c00486 13.4•g n.1.1. 10/20 12.811g 23/50 (26.411g 16/50) 
a c00486 103.•g n.1.1. 0/20 12.811g 1/50 26.4•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
N, N' ·DI CYCLOHEXYL TH IOUREA 1212·29·9 
967 c04524 4.84g• n.1.a. 36/49 3.25g• 37/50 6. 50g• 37/50 
a c04524 30. 1g• n.a.1. 5/49 3.25g• 2/50 6. 50g• 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04524 23.9g• n.a.1. 4/49 3.25g11 2/50 6. 50g• 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
968 c04524 4.43g• n.1.1. 39/50 3.00g• 37/50 6.00g• 39/50 
a c04524 6.61g11 n.1.1. 26/50 3.00g• 18/50 6.00g11 25/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c04524 13.6g• n.1.1. 9/50 3.00g11 5/50 6.00g• 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
969 c04524 3.02g• n.1.1. 48/50 1.25g• 31/50 2.501111 43/50 
a c04524 15.2g11 n.1.a. 1 /50 1 .25g11 1/50 2.50gll 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
970 c04524 2.45g• n.a.a. 4/50 1.00g• 9/50 2.00g• 12/50 
c04524 3.32g• n.a.a. 1/50 1.00g11 7/50 2.00g• 6/50 thy: fee, fee. 
b c04524 7 .90g• n.a.a. 0/50 1.00g• 0/50 2.00g11 3/50 
c c04524 1.18g• n.a.a. 36/50 1.00g11 36/50 2.00g• 43/50 
d c04524 5.92g11 n.a.a. 0/50 1.00g• 3/50 2.00g• 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 81·21-0 
971 381 407 .11g n.1.a. 3/13 493.•g 2/19 1.04g• 0/15 Weiaburger; jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers .co••· /Russf ield 1973 
a 381 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/13 493.llg 0/19 1.04g• 0/15 
b 381 232.•g n.a.1. 9/13 493.•g 7/19 1.04g11 1/15 
972 381 140.•g 12.1g• 2/16 455.•g 5/15 (909.11g 2/16) 
381 380.11g n.a. a. 2/16 455.llg 3/15 909.11g 3/16 
b 381 66.511g 962.•g 9/16 455.•g 13/15 <909.•g 8/16) 112 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
973 R m cdr eat l iv 01ix 18.,25 
R m cdr eat tba mix 18m25 GOLD ET AL. 
:> T050 2Tailpvl 
OR AuOp 
3.91g11 * P<.8 
176.0lg * P<.03 
DIELDRIN jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ..... : •• jOO •••• : •• jmg .... : .. jO ..... : .• jOO .••. : •. jg ••••• : •• jO 
974 f syg eat l iv hpt 23.,26 e 
f syg eat lun tum 23.,26 e 
b syg eat tba 11ix 231126 e 
975 H " syg eat l iv hpt 26.,26 e 
H " syg eat lun ade 26M26 e 
b H " syg eat tba 01ix 26m26 e 
976 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 s 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w91 s 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 s 
977 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 80w91 s 
M "' b6c eat l iv MXB 80w91 s 
b M " b6c eat lun MXB 80w91 s 
978 M m b6c eat l iv hpc 80w89 s pool 
979 M b c3e eat l iv hpa 241124 e 
M b c3e eat lun ade 24m24 e 
b M b c3e eat lun car 241124 e 
980 M b c3h eat l iv hpt 24m24 
a M b c3h eat l iv hpc 241R24 
b M b c3h eat tba ben 241124 
b c3h eat tba Hl 241124 
981 f cf1 eat lun ade 28.,32 ae 
cf1 eat l iv 11ix 281132 ae 
b cf1 eat l iv lpb 281132 ae 
cf1 eat lun car 281132 ae 
982 
b 
983 
a 
b 
c 
984 
b 
c 
985 
a 
b 
986 
b 
987 
b 
c 
988 
b 
989 
a 
b 
990 
a 
b 
c 
991 
b 
992 
a 
b 
993 
a 
994 
a 
995 
a cf1 eat l iv 11ix 251130 aea 
cf1 eat l iv lpb 251130 aes 
cf1 eat lun ade 251130 aes 
cf1 eat lun car 251130 aea 
cf1 eat l iv lpb 90w90 e 
cf1 eat l iv 11ix 90w90 e 
cf1 eat lun ade 90w90 e 
cf1 eat lun car 90w90 e 
cf1 eat l iv 11ix 30.,30 e 
cf1 eat l iv lpb 301130 e 
cf1 eat lun ade 301130 e 
cf1 eat lun car 301130 e 
cf1 eat l iv 01ix 251125 e 
cf1 eat l iv lpb 251125 e 
cf 1 eat l un ade 251125 e 
cf 1 eat lun car 251125 e 
cf1 eat l iv 11ix 261126 e 
cf1 eat l iv let 261126 e 
cf1 eat lun tu11 26•26 e 
11 cf1 eat l iv •ix 281131 ae 
11 cf1 eat Liv lpb 281131 ae 
11 cf1 eat lun ade 281131 ae 
11 cf 1 eat lun car 281131 ae 
11 cf1 eat l iv 11ix 26m30 aea 
11 cf1 eat l iv lpb 261130 111 
11 cf 1 eat lun ade 26•30 aea 
11 cf1 eat lun car 26•30 aes 
11 cf1 eat l iv •ix 301130 e 
11 cf1 eat l iv lpb 30•30 e 
11 cf1 eat lun ade 301130 e 
11 cf1 eat lun car 301130 e 
11 cf1 eat l iv 11ix 30•30 e 
• cf1 eat l iv lpb 30•30 e 
• cf1 eat lun ade 301R30 e 
11 cf1 eat lun car 301130 e 
11 cf1 eat l iv 11ix 261129 e 
11 cf1 eat l iv lpb 261129 e 
m cf1 eat lun ade 261129 e 
'" cf 1 eat lun car 26•29 e 
• cf1 eat l iv 11ix 26•26 e 
• cf1 eat l iv let 261126 e 
11 cf1 eat lun tu• 261126 e 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 a 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 a 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 a 
• 134 eat l iv MXB 241124 a 
b OH eat lun ly1 241124 ea 
b OH eat tba •ix 24•24 ea 
996 R OH eat TBA MXB 21•26 IV 
R OH eat l iv MXB 21•26 IV .> 176.mg * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
355.0lg * P<.6 
.> 198.0lg * P<.4 
732.0lg * P<.2 
69.9mg * P<.05 
:> no dre P-1. 
1.090lg \ P<.06 
5.05Rlg * P<.4 
:> 1.060lg * P<.2 
• + 
• + 
.+. 
.+ 
<+ 
:> 
:> 
.> 
:> 1.04.,g * P<.2 
24. 70lg * P<.9 
1.35mg * P<.08 a 
4.09mg P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
3. 0811g P<. 0005 
167.0lg P<.8 
3.1011g P<.0005 
no dre P-1 . 
• 606mg Z P<. 002 -
.6420lg * P<.0005+ 
1 . 96mg Z P<. 0005 
1. 78mg Z P<.06 
1. 4911g * P<. 0005+ 
9. 7Z01g * P<. 0005 
no dre 
no dre 
2.5911g 
1.05mg 
no dre 
no dre 
3.1111g 
12.111g 
no dre 
no dre 
1.1611g 
3.9611g 
5.6911g 
no dre 
.5671Rg 
1.5911g P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.007 
P<.02 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.02 + 
P<.06 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.002 
P<.007 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1 . 
. 547•g * P<.0005+ 
1. 6811g * P<. 0005 
2.13mg Z P<.5 
3. 71mg Z P<.4 
1.1211g P<.0005+ 
4. 6611g * P<. 0005 
no dre 
no dre 
• 91311g 
5.1211g 
no dre 
no dre 
1.9111g 
6.5811g 
no dre 
no dre 
.71311g 
4.0211g 
no dre P-1. 
P-1 . 
P<.002 
P<.04 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.04 + 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.002 
P<.006 
P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
1. 2811g P<. 0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
489.11g * P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
7 .28mg * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
38.411g * P<.8 CARCINOGE NIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose llnc 2Dose 2lnc 
973 381 309.m9 n.s.s. 1/17 
381 74.511g n.s.s. 13/17 120.mg 1/19 240.mg 
120.llg 10/19 240.R19 1/13 
9/13 
DIELDRIN CHEOD. c00124 is 
974 1000 28. 711g n.s.s. 
1000 11.811g n.s.s. 
1000 54.3Mg n.s.s. b 
975 
b 1000 
1000 
1000 
976 c00124 32.2Mg n.s.s. 
119.Mg n.s.s. 
26.511g n.s.s. 
.878Mg n.s.s. 
.44611g n.s.s. 
1.75mg n.s.s. 
.399Mg n.s.s. 
.42211g n.s.s. 
1.30Mg n.s.s. 
.50811g n.s.s. 
2.40Mg 10.611g 
27 .8mg n.s.s. 
38.111g n.s.s. 
1.95Mg 6.43Mg 
16.811g n.s.s. 
1 . 9411g 6. 7911g 
24. 7mg n.s.s. 
.300Mg 2.84Mg 
.48111g .87011g 
1.49Mg 2.6611g 
.62411g n.1.s. 
.95911g 2.6911g 
4.8711g 29.5Mg 
2.0311g n.s.s. 
30.611g n.s.s. 
.97811g 31.811g 
.438Mg n.s.s. 
2.9311g n.1.1. a 
b c00124 
c00124 
977 c0D124 
a 
b c00124 
c00124 
978 c00124 
979 20a 
a 
b 
980 
a 
b 
981 
b 
c 
982 
b 
c 
983 
b 20a 
20• 
22a 
22a 
22a 
22a 
1031 
103• 
103• 
103• 
103b 103b 
103b 
103b 
103c 
103c 
103c 103c 
4.4111g n.s.s. 
984 103d 1.2011g n.s.s. 
103d 2.9811g n.1.s. 
b 103d 7.7111g n.1.s. 
c 103d 7.7111g n.s.s. 
985 103e • 54811g 5. 3211g 
1038 1.5011g 51.4Mg 
b 103e 1.4111g n.s.s. 
986 
a 
b 
987 
b 
988 
a 
b 
989 
a 
b 
990 1031 6.6811g n.s.s. 
89 . 298mg 1 . 27mg 
89 .84211g 3.4811g 
89 4.3611g n.s.s. 
.41611g .72911g 
1.2911g 2.2511g 
.439mg n.s.s. 
.84411g n.s.1. 103a 
103• 
103• 
1031 
103b 
103b 
103b 
103b 
103c . 714Mg 
2.5911g 
3.9611g 
14.711g 
.42011g 2.09Mg 
9.94Mg 
n.s.s. 
n.a.s. 
3.8711g 
103c 1.8511g n.1.1. 
103c 4.1311g n.1.1. 
103c 8. 9911g n.s. s. 
103d . 58911g n. s.s. 
a 103d 1.4111g n.1.1. 
b 103d 2.9311g n.1.1. 
103d 3.7511g n.s.a. 
991 103• . 30511g 3. 9611g 
103• 1. 5211g 35. 711g 
b 103• 1.9311g n.1.1. 
103• 6.8611g n.1.1. 
992 89 n. S. I. • 46911g 
• 89 • 68211g 3. 0311g 
b 89 2.8711g n.a.1. 
993 c00125 1.6211g n.a. s. 
c00125 n.1.1. n.a.a. 
994 c00125 1.6411g n.s.s. 
a c00125 n.a.1. n.s.s. 
995 23 35.411g n.1.1. 
e 23 23.311g n.1.1. 
996 c00124 .63511g n.1.1. 
a c00124 9.4411g n.1.1. NCI TR# 21; c00125 is NCI TR# 22> 60-57-1 
016 2.0911g 0/2 6.2711g 0/8 18.811g 
0/39 2.0911g 0/32 6.2711g 0/34 18.811g 
5/39 2.0911g 1/32 6.2711g 5/34 18.811g 
012 1.8411g 0/3 5.5211g 0/5 16.611g 
0/40 1.8411g 0/32 5.5211g 0/32 16.6mg 
3/40 1.8411g 5/32 5.5211g 5/32 16.611g 
3/20 .29011g 13/50 .560Mg 9/50 
0120 .29011g 6/50 C.56011g 2/50) 
0/20 .29011g 2/50 .560mg 2/50 
4/20 .26011g 14/50 .520Mg 18/50 
3/20 . 26011g 12/50 . 52011g 16/50 
1/20 .260Mg 4/50 .520m9 3/50 
17/95p .260mg 12/50 .520mg 16/50 
9/134 1.25Mg 36/148 
3/134 1.25mg 1/148 
0/134 1.2511g 0/148 
27 /200 1. 2511g 69/200 
4/200 1.25Mg 5/200 
30/200 1.2511g 71/200 
21/200 1.2511g 9/200 
48/297 12.8ug 23/90 
39/297 12.8ug 24/90 
0/297 12.8ug 4/90 
18/297 12.8ug 12/90 
8/78 .162Mg 5/30 
0/78 .16211g 0/30 
24/78 .16211g 7 /30 
8/78 . 16211g 0/30 
0/22 1.3011g 5/22 
5/22 1.3011g 13/22 
7 /22 1. 3011g 2/22 
0122 1.3011g 0/22 
3/28 1.3011g 8/19 
0/28 1.3011g 2/19 
5/28 1.30Mg 0/19 
0/28 1.3011g 0/19 
4/24 1.3011g 15/24 
0/24 1.3011g 5/24 
4/24 1.3011g 7 /24 
3/24 1.3011g 0/24 
10/44 1.3011g 26/30 
0/44 1.3011g 14/30 
27/44 1.3011g 8/30 .12411g 
.124mg 
.124Mg 
.124Mg 
.32511g 
.32511g 
.32511g 
.32511g 30/87 
32/87 
5/87 
12/87 
12/28 
1/28 
3/28 
0/28 (1.30•g 
1.3011g 
1.3011g 
(1.3011g 
.65011g .65011g 
( .65011g 
.650 .. g 
58/288 11.8ug 32/124 
12/288 11.8ug 5/124 
95/288 11.8ug 47/124 
23/288 11.8ug 14/124 .11811g 
.11811g 
.11811g 
.11811g 
.30011g 
.30011g 
.30011g 
.30011g 34/1111.15119 
9/111 1.1511g 
9!78 .15011g 6/30 
0/78 .15011g 2/30 
45/78 .15011g 17 /30 
1/78 .150Mg 1/30 
8/23 1. 2011g 20/24 
1 /23 1. 2011g 6/24 
7/23 1.20Mg 4/24 
0/23 1.2011g 0/24 
7/30 1.2011g 6/10 
1/30 1.2011g 2/10 
13/30 1.2011g 1/10 
1/30 1.2011g 0/10 
10/24 1.0611g 19/22 
0/24 1.06 .. g 5/22 
11 /24 1. 0611g 8/22 
1/24 1.0611g 0/22 
11/45 1.2011g 30/30 
2/45 1.2011g 16/30 
27/45 1.2011g 11/30 
17/24 100.ug 17/24 
0/24 100.ug 0/24 
5/24 80.0ug 9/24 
0/24 80.0ug 0/24 
1/17 22.5ug 4/22 
6.7511g 0/11 .50011g 
.5oo .. 9 
.40011g 
.40011g 
90.0ug 42/111( 1.1511g 
13/111( 1.1511g 
13/30 . 60011g 
1/30 .60011g 
11/30 .60011g 
1/30 .600mg 
16/24 
0/24 
7/24 
0/24 
2/23 2.5011g 
2.5011g 
2.00mg 2.0011g 
.45011g 
3/17 22.5ug 8/22 90.0ug 8/23 .45011g 
6. 7511g 0/11 
7/10 1.1011g 39/50 (1.7011g 27/50) 
0/10 1.1011g 1/50 1.7011g 1/50 1/9 
0/38 
5/38 
1/13 
1/40 
10/40 
15/148) 
136/148 
81/148 
0/148) 
18/30 
5/30 
3/30 
1/30 
165/176 
100/176 
32/176) 
2/176) 
26/30 
3/30 
14/30 
1/30 
14/24 
0/24 
9/24 
0/24 
2/18 1.3011g 
1.3011g 
1.3011g 
1.3011g 
1.2011g 
1.2011g 
1.20mg 
1.2011g 
2.2511g 
4/18 2.2511g Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Cabral ;cl et, 6, 241·246; 1979 
l; v: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
Davis; txap, 4, 187·189; 1962 
Epstein( review> I H J Davis} ;stev,4, 1·52;1975 
9/17 2.60119 
2/17 2.6011g 
1/17 2.60119 
0/17 2.6011g 
5/11 2.40119 
1/11 2.4011g 
2/11 (2.4011g 
0/11 2.4011g Walker; fctx, 11, 415 -432; 1973 
16/21 
3/21 
0/21) 
0/21 
Thorpe; f ctx, 11, 433-442; 1973 
Walker; fctx, 11, 415 -432; 1973 
12/17 
9/17 
1/17> 
0/17 
Thorpe; f ctx, 11, 433-442; 1973 
l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1/20 4.5011g 0/18 
Fitzhugh; f ctx, 2, 551-562; 1964 
4/20 4.5011g 3/18 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 113 114 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
997 R 0111 eat adr MXA 21•25 IV pool #4. 4211g \ P<. 003 -
998 R f 0111 eat l iv tu• 28•29 ev 
a R f OH eat tba 11ix 281129 ev 
999 R 11 0111 eat TBA MXB 211126 IV 
a • OH eat l iv MXB 21•26 IV 
1000 • OH eat l iv he• 29•29 ev 
a • OH eat tba 11ix 29•29 ev 
1001 R f cfe eat tbe 11ix 24•24 e 
1002 R 11 cfe eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
1003 nH eat tba tu• 24•24 
1004 11 n11 eat tba tu• 24•24 • > 
.> :> • > 
• > 
.> 
.> no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P-1. 
3.3411g * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
2.0111g * P<.5 
57 .211g * P<.9 
40.511g * P<.8 
DIELDRIN, PHOTO· _100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 .••. : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
1005 f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 
b f b6c eat lun MXB 80w92 
1006 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 80w93 
11 b6c eat l iv MXB 80w93 
b 11 b6c eat l un MXB 80w93 
1007 0111 eat 11gl MXA 161126 av 
OH eat TBA MXB 161126 av 
b OH eat l iv MXB 16•26 av 
1008 II OH eat TBA MXB 19•26 
a 11 os• eat l iv MXB 19•26 
1009 11 0111 eat he11 191125 :> 
pool :> • 74311g * P<.6 
2.5311g * P<.4 
6.78119 * P<.9 
:> .49411g * P<. 7 
1. 9611g * P<1 • 
. 46511g * P<. 09 
#.612mg * P<.04 
.32711g * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
7. 7211g * P<.4 
#2.8911g * P<.02 
D, L • DIEPOXYBUTANE _100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •.•• : .. _1g ••••• : .• _10 
1010 R f ead gav 1to tu11 52w52 .> no dre 
DIETHYL-beta,glllH·EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••. : •• _100 .••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••.•• : •• _100 •••• : •. _19 •..•• : .• _10 
1011 M f hie ipj lun pt11 64w64 -* 12.4119 P<.02 
N,N·DIETHYL·4· (4' • i PYRIDYL· 1' ·OXIDE J AZOlANILINE .••. : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• :. -.1•9· ••• : •• _10 ••••• : •. _100 .••• : •• _19 ••••• : •• _10 
1012 R 11 ada eat l iv tu• 52w52 bfr <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
O,O·DIETHYL·O · <3,5,6· TRICHLOR0-2-PYRIDYL)PHOSPHOROTHIOATE •••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1119 •••• : •• _10 ..•.• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •. _10 
1013 R f 1he eat l iv tu• 24•24 e .> no dre P-1. 
ahe eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
1014 • ahe eat l iv bda 24•24 e 
• 1he eat tba •ix 241124 e 
DI ETHYLACETAMIDE 
1015 R • wis 9av kid ptc 73w73 e 
a R 11 wi1 9av l iv tu11 73w73 e 
b R • wi1 9av tba 11ix 73w73 e .> no dre P•1. 
70.6119 * P<.4 
203.119 * P<1. 
_100n9 •• : •• _1u9 •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1•g •••• : •• _10 •••.• : •• _100 .••• : •• _19 ••••• : •• _10 
.> 8.85119 
no dre 
11.8119 P<.5 
P•1. 
P<.9 
DI ETHYLENE GLYCOL _100n9 •• : •• _1u9 •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 •••• : •• _1119 •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _19 .•.•• : •• _10 
1016 R 11 OH eat ubl 11ix 24•24 r 1.669• * P<.002 + 
DIETHYLFORMAMIDE 
1017 R 11 wil 9av l iv tu• 73w73 e 
a R • wil 9av tba •ix 73w73 e 
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL 
1018 M • c3c eat 1191 
1019 M • c3c eat •91 
1020 M • c3c eat •91 
1021 M f c3h eat •91 car 24•24 er 
car 24•24 er 
car 24•24 er 
car 85w85 r 
1022 
1023 
1024 
• 
1025 
a 
1026 
1027 
• 
1028 
1029 
• 
1030 
1031 
1032 
• 
b c3h eat •91 adc 24•24 r 
c3j eat •91 adc 52w52 ek 
c3j eat ova tua 78w78 ek 
c3j eat •91 adc 78w78 ek 
c3J eat •91 adc 24•24 ek 
c3 j eat ova tua 24•24 ek 
cb J eat •9 l tu• 52w52 ek 
cbj eat •91 adc 78w78 ek 
cb j eat ova tua 78w78 ek 
cbj eat ova tua 24•24 ek 
cbj eat ova tua 301130 ek 
cbj eat •91 adc 30•30 ek 
cdr eat l iv hpt 21•24 aea 
• cdr eat l iv tu• 21•24 111 
• cdr eat pit era 66w66 
11 cdr eat adr coa 66w66 
11 cdr eat l iv nod 66w66 
• cdr eat l iv car 66w66 _100n9 •• : •• _1u9 •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 •••• : •• _1119 •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •. _19 .•.•• : •• _10 
.> no dre 
no dre 
_100n9 •• : •• _1u9 •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••.•• : •• _100 •••• : •• _19 ••••• : •• _10 
.> 
• > 
• > • +. 35. 9u9 * P<. 0005+ 
• .. .. 
. > 
.> 
. > 42 .1u9 P<.0005+ 
78.9u9 * P<.0005+ 
29.2u9 * P<.0005+ 
26.0u9 P<.0005+ 
82.5u9 * P<.03 
22.2u9 * P<.3 
no dre P-1 • 
14.211g * P<1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 . 
• 295119 * P<. 04 
• 329119 * P<. 3 
• 597119 * P<. 8 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1 • 
• 130119 \ P<. 1 
no dre P• 1 . 
.114119 P<.002 + 
• 390119 P<. 07 
• 390119 P<. 07 
1.21119 P<.3 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 115 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
997 c00124 1.80•g 22.2•g 0/60p 1.1011g 6/50 (1.70•g 2/50> adr:coa,coc. S 
998 1004 6.1911g n.a.s. 0/88 .96011g 0/48 1.4411g 0/41 2.4011g 0/41 Deich111nn; iHd,39,426·434;1970 
a 1004 15.111g n.a.s. 60/88 .96011g 23/48 1.4411g 16/41 2.4011g 16/41 
999 c00124 .77411g n.1.s. 5/10 .88011g 24/50 1.3611g 22/50 
c00124 7 .38•g n.1.1. 1/10 .88011g 0/50 1.3611g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1000 1004 4.9011g n.s.s. 1/75 . 76811g 0/48 1.15•g 0/38 1.9211g 0/44 De i ch11ann; iHd, 39, 426-434; 1970 
a 1004 8.93•g n.1.1. 19/75 .76811g 4/48 1.1511g 7/38 <1.92mg 1/44> 
1001 100 .38811g n.s.s. 18/43 5.00ug 18/23 50.0ug 16/23 .50011g 13/23 Stevenson; txap, 36, 247-254; 1976 
1002 100 .38411g n.a.s. 12/43 4.00ug 9/23 40.0ug 5/23 .400•g 9/23 
1003 1002 3.29•g n.1.s. 6160 .12511g 7/40 .62511g 7/40 1.2511g 5/40 Cleveland;aenh, 13, 195-198; 1966 
1004 1002 4.0911g n.s .. s. 3160 100.ug 1/40 .50011g 3/40 1.0011g 2/40 
DIELDRIN, PHOTO-13366-73-9 
1005 c00599 .14711g n.1.1. 3/20 38.0ug 3/50 71.5ug 8/50 
a c00599 .41211g n.1.s. 0/20 38.0ug 0/50 71.5ug 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00599 .368•g n.1.1. 1/20 38.0ug 0/50 71.5ug 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1006 c00599 73.1ug n.1.1. 3/20 34.0ug 14/50 66.0ug 13/50 
a c00599 97.7ug n.1.1. 3/20 34.0ug 10/50 66.0ug 10/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd .. 
b c00599 .176•g n.1.1. 0/20 34.0ug 1/50 66.0ug 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1007 c00599 .32711g n.s.s. 0/10 .120•g 5/50 .20011g 9/50 11gl :ade, fba. 
a c00599 .106•g n.1.1. 4/10 .12011g 29/50 .200.g 29/50 
b c00599 1.3011g n.1.s. 0/10 .12011g 1/50 .20011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1008 c00599 .263•g n.1.a. 5/10 .14011g 23/50 .29011g 21/50 
a c00599 1.2611g n.1.a. 0/10 .14011g 0/50 .290•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1009 c00599 .86811g n.s.s. 0/75p .140mg 0/50 .290•g 3/50 
D, L ·DI EPOXYBUTANE 298· 18-0 
1010 55 .506•g n.1.1. 0/5 2.0411g 0/5 Van Duuren;jnci,37,825-838;1966 
DI ETHYL -beta, gHlll • EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE 7316-37-2 
1011 1143 5.2311g n.a.1. 10/30 28.6•g 19/30 Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
N,N-DIETHYL-4-<4' -[ PYRIOYL · 1' -OXIDE JAZOlANILINE 7347-49-1 
1012 1176 n.1.1. 1.63•g 0/10 12.0•g 10/10 Brown; jnci ,37,365 -367; 1966 
O, 0-0 I ETHYL-0 -(3, 5 ,6-TRI CHLOR0-2 -PYR !DYL )PHOSPHOROTH IOATE 2921-88-2 
1013 1333 35.6ug n.s.s. 0/25 10.0ug 0/25 30.0ug 0/25 100.ug 0/25 1.0011g 0/25 3.00•g 0/25 McColl i st er; 
fctx, 12,45-61;1974 
a 1333 4 .6011g n.s.1. 12/25 10.0ug 6/25 30.0ug 11/25 100.ug 4/25 1.00•g 8/25 3.0011g 8/25 
1014 1333 11.5•g n.s.1. 0/25 10.0ug 0/25 30.0ug 0/25 100.ug 0/25 1.0011g 1/25 3.00•g 0/25 
1333 6.32•g n.s.a. 4/25 10.0ug 2/25 30.0ug 3/25 100.ug 6/25 1.0011g 3/25 3.0011g 4/25 
01 ETHYLACETAMIOE 685-91-6 
1015 104 1.4411g n.a.1. 0/9 .889•g 1/30 Argus; j nc i ,35, 949-958; 1965 
a 104 2.71•g n.s.1. 0/9 .889•g 0/30 
b 104 .85411g n.1.1. 1/9 .88911g 4/30 
DIETHYLENE GLYCOL 111-46-6 
1016 105 824.•g 5.28g• 0/12 400.•g 0/12 800.•g 6/12 1.60g11 5/12 Fitzhugh; j iht,28,40 -43; 1946 
0 IETHYLFORMAMIDE 617-84-5 
1017 104 2.14•g n.1.1. 0/9 .780•g 0/27 Argus; j nc i, 35, 949-958; 1965 
104 1.40•g n.s.a. 1/9 .78011g 1/27 
DIETHYLSTILBESTROL <DES> 56-53-1 
1018 10911 27 .9ug 46.9ug 0/78 30.0ug 48/92 60.0ug 58/94 Okey; j nc i, 40, 225-230; 1968 
1019 109n 27.7ug 68.1ug 0178 30.0ug 34/88 <60.0ug 35/92> 
1020 1090 57.1ug .11311g 0178 30.0ug 26/93 60.0ug 32/89 
1021 106a 19.4ug 48.1ug 40/121 813.ng 27/56 1.63ug 26/60 3.25ug 26/60 6.50ug 36/68 13.0ug 42/64 
65.0ug 50/59 .130•g 50/58 Gass; jnc i ,33,971-977; 1964 
1022 1131 15.7ug 55.6ug 16/64 32.5ug 45/66 Gass;obgy ,5,477; 1977 
1023 1468• 30.2ug n.1.s. 2/43 1.30ug 0/29 13.0ug 3/35 65.0ug 6/41 High111n; jept,4,81-95; 1980/pers. co••· 
1024 1468n 5.68ug n.s.a. 2/14 1.30ug 5/24 13.0ug 6/18 
a 1468n 11.8ug n.s.s. 1/13 1.30ug 7/22 13.0ug 2/16 
1025 14680 35.5ug n.1.s. 4/24 1.30ug 10/38 13.0ug 3/9 65.0ug 1/5 
a 14680 35.7ug n.1.s. 12/24 1.30ug 19/40 13.0ug 7/11 65.0ug 2/6 
1026 1468r 2.06ug n.a.s. 0/17 1.30ug 0/38 13.0ug 0/18 65.0ug 0/30 
1027 14681 89.2ug n.1.s. 0/31 1.30ug 0/40 13.0ug 1/33 65.0ug 2/29 
a 14681 70.9ug n.1.s. 0/34 1.30ug 5/42 13.0ug 3/34 65.0ug 4/31 
1028 1468t 48.1ug n.s.s. 9/29 1.30ug 10/31 13.0ug 12/36 65.0ug 4/11 
1029 1468u 2.14ug n.1.s. 4/11 1.30ug 3/12 
a 1468u 3.54ug n.1.s. 3/11 1.30ug 1/12 
1030 108 32.0ug n.a.s. 0/20 20.0ug 2/20 (.200•g 0/20) Gibson;txap, 11,489·510; 1967 
1031 108 74.9ug n.1.1. 0/20 20.0ug 0/20 .200•g 0/20 
1032 333 53.3ug .391•g 0/20 .160•g 9/28 Newberne;aenh, 19,489-498; 1969 
a 333 .118•g n.1.1. 0120 .16011g 3/28 
b 333 .11811g n.1.1 . 0/20 .160•g 3/28 
333 • 19S.g n.1.1. 0/20 .160•g 1/28 116 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
N, N' ·DIETHYL THI OUR EA 
1033 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
M b6c eat l iv MXB 24m24 
b M b6c eat l un MXB 241124 
1034 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M II b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 
1035 f f34 eat thy MXA 241124 
a R f f34 eat thy fee 241124 
b f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
f34 eat 
1036 R • f34 eat 
R 11 f34 eat 
b 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
thy MXA 241124 
thy fee 241124 
TBA MXB 241124 
• f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
1, 2·01 FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
1037 M f swa wit lun ade 83w83 e 
a M f awa wit lun 11ix 83w83 e 
b M awa wit lun adc 83w83 e 
c M aw1 wat l iv hpt 83w83 e 
d M aw1 wat l iv 11ix 83w83 e 
1038 M 11 awa wat l un ade 83w83 e 
M 11 1wa wat lun 11ix 83w83 e 
b M 11 awa wat lun adc 83w83 e 
M 11 awa wat l iv 11ix 83w83 e 
d M 11 awa wat l iv hpt 83w83 e .100ng •. :. -.1ug •••• : .• .10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• :. -.1"g •••• :. -.10 ••••• :. -.100 •••. : .• .1g •.••• : •. .10 
:> no dre P•1. 
687.11g * P<.3 
no dre p.1. 
:> no dre P· 1. 
+ no dre 
no dre 
23.811g • 
57 .911g • 
21.511g • 
no dre 
24.311g 
33.611g • 
12.911g • 
no dre 
.100ng •• : •• .1ug •••• : •• .10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• : •• .111g •••• :. -.10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .1g •••.• :. -.10 
561.llg 
571.llg 
2.17g11 
7.82gm 
89.2g11 
• + 779.llg 
806.llg 
4.53g11 
8.14g11 
11.3g• p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.008 c 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.003 c 
P<.04 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.07 
P<.8 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.02 
P<.02 
1,2·DIHYDR0·2 ·(5·NITR0·2 ·THIENYL)QUINAZOLIN·4(3H) ·ONE • .10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• : •• .111g .••. :. -.10 ..••. :. -.100 •••• : •• .1g •...• : •• .10 
1039 R f sda eat 11gl adc 46w66 e 13.3mg P<.0005 
Rf sda eat tba 11ix 46w66 e 1.53mg P<.0005+ 
•• : •• .1ug •••• : •• .10 •••.• :. -.100 .••• :. -.1•g •••• :. -.10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• :. -.1g •••.• :. -.10 3, 6 ·DI HYDRO· 2 ·N ITROS0-2H -1, 2 ·OXAZINE 
1040 R b sda wat l iv hpt 201123 .> 417 .11g P<.3 
R b ad1 wat tba 118 l 201123 90.611g P<.07 
b R b ada wat tba 11ix 201123 110.11g P<.3 
OIHYDROSAFROLE .100ng •• : •• .1ug .•.. :. -.10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• :. -.1•g •••• : •• .10 ••.•• :. -.100 •••• : •• .1g ••••• :. -.10 
1041 f b6a orl sto P""' 81w81 evx 84. 711g 
a b6a orl lun ade 81w81 evx 739.mg 
b b6a orl liv ag11 81w81 evx 1.40g11 
c b61 orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx no dre 
d b6a orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 305.11g 
1042 11 b6a orl liv hpt 81w81 evx 117.11g 
a 11 b6a orl lun ade 81w81 evx 323.11g 
b 11 b6a orl lun •ix 81w81 evx 448.11g 
11 b6a orl tba •ix 81w81 evx 86.611g 
1043 f b6c orl lun ade 81w81 evx 230.11g 
f b6c orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 170.mg 
1044 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 90.011g 
a 11 b6c orl lun ade 81w81 evx 358.11g 
b 11 b6c orl tba •ix 81w81 evx 107 .11g P<.0005 
P<.6 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.004 
P<.006 + 
P•1. 
P<.02 
P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.09 
1045 b 0111 eat eao 11ix 241124 • + • 143.11g * P<.0005+ 
DIMETHOATE 
1046 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w93 
M b6c eat l iv MXB 80w93 
b M b6c eat l un MXB 80w93 
1047 M 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 69w93 
a M II b6c eat l iv MXB 69w93 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 69w93 
1048 R OH eat TBA MXB 191126 av 
R 0111 eat l iv MXB 191126 sv 
1049 R 11 0811 eat TBA MXB 191126 av 
a R 11 oa11 eat l iv MXB 191126 av 
DIMETHOXANE 
1050 R 11 wis wat l iv hpt 201123 e 
a R 11 wis wat kid ptc 201123 e 
b R 11 wis wat 11lk 201123 e 
R • wis wat ski epc 201123 e 
d 11 wia wit sub fbs 201123 e 
• 
f 
g R11wi1w1t l ya 20•23 e 
11 w;1 wat lun tu• 201123 e 
11 wis wat tba 11ix 201123 e 
2, 5 ·DIMETHOXY • 4' ·AMI NOST! LB ENE 
1051 M f chi eat lun 11ix 77w90 
M f chi eat l iv 11ix 77w90 .100ng •• : •. .1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. -.111g ••.• :. -.10 .•••• :. -.100 •••• :. -.1g ••... :. -.10 
:> 
:> 
:> 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre p.1. 
222.11g * P<.4 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
92.411g * P<.8 
126.mg * P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
215.11g * P<.8 
.100ng •• : •• .1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •..• : •• .111g •••• :. -.10 ••.•• :. -.100 •••. :. -.1g ...•• :. -.10 
716.llg 
6. 77g11 
6.77gll 
6.77g11 
6.77g11 
29.8g11 
no dre 
419.mg P<.005 + 
P<.4 
P<.4 
P<.4 
P<.4 
P<1 • 
p.1. 
P<.004 
.100ng .• :. -.1ug •••• :. -.10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• :. -.10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• : •. .1g .•••• : •. .10 
± 152.11g \ P<.09 
no dre p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 117 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Patholog~· 
Brkl,-Code 
N,N' ·DIETHYL THIOUREA 1D5-55·5 
1033 e03816 102.11g n.s.s. 11/20 32.211g 23/50 64.311g 15/50 
• e03816 208.llg n.s.s. 0120 32.211g 1/50 64.3mg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b e03816 472.Rlg n.s.s. 1/20 32.211g 1/50 64.311g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1034 e03816 77.7 .. g n.s.s. 8/19 29.811g 21/50 59.411g 23/50 
• e03816 94.1 .. g n.s.s. 5'/19 29.811g 7 /50 <59.4mg 3/50> l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b e03816 163 ... g n.s.s. 2/19 29.811g 4/50 59.411g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1035 e03816 14.211g 55.011g 0120 6.2011g 4/50 12.411g 17/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
8 e03816 27.311g 774.llg 0/20 6.2011g 1/50 12.4 .. g 8/50 
b e03816 6.9011g n.s.s. 13/20 6.2011g 33/50 12.411g 41/50 
e03816 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0120 6.2011g 0/50 12.411g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1036 e03816 13.511g 50.011g 0120 5.0011g 1/50 9.9011g 15/50 thy: fea, fee. 
• e03816 17.311g 136.llg 0120 5.00mg 1/50 9.9011g 11/50 
b e03816 6.1511g n.s.s. 5/20 5.0011g 23/50 9.9011g 31/50 
e03816 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0120 5.0011g 0/50 9.9011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1, 2 ·DI FORMYLHYDRAZINE 628-36-4 
1037 491 307 .Ilg 987 .Ilg 10/100 4.00g11 48/50 Toth; zkko, 92, 11·16; 1978 
• 491 310.11g 1.02gon 15/100 4.00gon 48/50 
b 491 1.33gon 3.98g11 6/100 4.00g11 29/50 
491 1.26gll n.s.s. 0/19 4.00g .. 1/5 
d 491 7.47gll n.s.s. 3/46 4.00gll 3136 
1038 491 469 ... g 1.38g11 17/98 3.33gon 41/47 
491 479.llg 1.48g• 22/98 3.33g" 41/47 
b 491 2.25g" 14.5gll 6/98 3.33g11 15/47 
e 491 2.86g• n.s.s. 3/69 3.33g11 6/30 
d 491 3.62g• n.s.s. 1/69 3.33g11 4/30 
1, 2 ·DI HYDRO· 2-( 5 • N ITR0-2 ·TH IENYL)QUINAZOLIN • 4(3H) ·ONE 33389·33·2 
1039 1390 5. 7611g 48. 511g 2/84 17.411g 8/25 Cohen; jne i, 57, 277·282;1976 
1390 .64711g 3.36 .. g 6/84 17.4 .. g 24/25 
3, 6-DIHYDRO· 2-NITROSO· 2H • 1, 2 ·OXAZINE <N-n i troso-3, 6-di hydrooxaz i ne -1, Z> 3276-41 ·3 
1040 1417 67.911g n.s.s. 0120 33.1 .. g 1/20 Wiessler; zkko, 79, 114-117; 1973 
1417 29.711g n.s.s. 1/20 33.1 .. g 5/20 
b 1417 28.511g n.s.s. 3/20 33.111g 6120 
DI HYDROSAFROLE 94-58-6 
1041 111 41.011g 212 ... g 0/15 192 ... g 11/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 111 128.11g n.s.a. 2/15 192.llg 4/18 
b 111 228.11g n.s.s. 0/15 192.llg 1/18 
111 263.llg n.s.s. 1/15 192 ... g 1/18 
d 111 89.711g n.s.s. 2/15 192.llg 6/18 
1042 111 51.911g 358.llg 0/18 179 ... g 8/17 
• 111 89.711g n.s.s. 2/18 179.llg 5/17 
b 111 95.611g n.1.s. 3/18 179.llg 5/17 
111 37.0llg 685 ... g 3/18 179.llg 11/17 
1043 111 86.511g 2.37g11 0/17 192.ong 5/17 
• 111 409.llg n.s.s . 0/17 192.llg 0/17 
b 111 66.811g n.s.s. 1/17 192.mg 7/17 
1044 111 40.611g 352.Mg 1/17 179 ... g 10/17 
• 111 101.llg n.s.s. 1/17 179.llg 4/17 
b 111 36.111g n.a.s. 7/17 179.mg 12/17 
1045 110 98.511g 215.llg 0120 225.llg 37/50 450.11g 15/20 Hagan; txap, 7, 18-24; 1965 
DIMETHOATE 60·51·5 
1046 e00135 85.111g n.s.s. 3/10 28.0tog 15/50 55.411g 12/50 
• e00135 632.llg n.s.s . 1/10 28.011g 0/50 55.4 .. g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b e00135 102.llg n.s.s. 0/10 28.011g 4/50 55.4 .. g 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1047 e00135 48.011g n.s.s. 617 22.311g 11/50 (38.3Mg 11/50) 
• e00135 51.011g n.1.s. 4/7 22 .311g 8/50 <38.3 .. g 6/50> l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b e00135 101.llg n.a.s. 317 22.311g 2/50 (38.3Mg 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1048 e00135 9.1811g n.s.s. 7/10 6. 70 .. g 30/50 13.411g 21/50 
e00135 35.811g n.1.1. 1/10 6. 7011g 1/50 13.411g 5/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1049 e00135 9.6211g n.s.1. 7/10 4.30 .. g 23/50 8.60 .. g 24/50 
e00135 39.511g n.s.1. 0/10 4.3011g 1/50 8.60 .. g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
DIMETHOXANE 828-00·2 
1050 112 322.llg 4.88g11 0/14 436.llg 8/25 Hoeh·L iget i; j ne i, 53, 791-793; 1974 
112 1.10g• n.s.1. 0/14 436.llg 1/25 
b 112 1.10g11 n.1.1. 0/14 436.llg 1/25 
112 1.10g11 n.s.s. 0/14 436.llg 1/25 
d 112 1.10g11 n.a.1. 0/14 436 ... g 1/25 
e 112 946.llg n.s.a. 1 /14 436.llg 2/25 
f 112 2.08g11 n.a.a. 0/14 436.llg 0/25 
g 112 203.•g 2.46g11 1/14 436.llg 13/25 
2, 5-D IMETHOXY-4' • AMINOSTILBENE 5803·51·0 
1051 381 39.1•g n.1.a. 5/15 234.llg 6/16 (468.llg 3/17) Wei sburger; j ept, 2, 325. 356; 1978/pers. eo1111. /Russf i el d 1973 
381 n .. a.a. n.s.s. 1/15 234.llg 0/16 468.llg 0/17 118 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b chi Ht tba 11ix 77v90 
1052 • chi Ht tun •ix 77v90 
• chi aat l iv 11ix 77v90 
b 11 chi aat tba •ix 77v90 
1053 11 chi Ht tun •ix 77v90 pool 
a " chi Ht l iv hpt 77v90 
1054 • cdr eat 1to •ix 47v51 v 
a • cdr eat Hi •ix 47v51 
b • cdr eat ear •ix 47v51 
c • cdr eat l iv •ix 47v51 v 
d " cdr eat tba •ix 47v51 v 
1055 • cdr eat 1to •ix 47v51 v pool 
a • cdr eat Hi 11ix 47v51 
b • cdr Ht ski •ix 47v51 
• cdr eat ear •ix 47w51 GOLD ET AL. 
(+) 
(+) TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
118.11g \ P<.06 -
95.911g \ P<.02 + 
329.llg \ P<.04 
126.•g \ P<.09 
115.11g \ P<.0005+ 
376.•g \ P<.005 + 
.721Mg * P<.0005+ 
.866•g * P<.0005+ 
1.45•g * P<.0005+ 
2.6111g * P<.02 
• 269•g * P<. 0005 
.721•g * P<.0005+ 
.86611g * P<.0005+ 
1.48•g * P<.0005+ 
1. 54•g * P<. 0005+ 
2,4·DIMETHOXYANI L INE. HCl !OOng •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -!•g •.•• : •. 10 .••.• :. -!00 •••• :. -19· ••.• : •• 10 
1056 M f b6c Ht TBA MXB 241124 
a M f b6c aat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M f b6c Ht lun MXB 241124 
1057 M • b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a M • b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M • b6c Ht l un MXB 241124 
1058 R f f34 Ht TBA MXB 241124 
a R f f34 Ht l iv MXB 241124 
1059 R 11 f34 aat TBA MXB 241124 
" f34 aat l iv MXB 24•24 :> 
:> ;, 986.•g * P<.08 
2.79g• * P<.4 
50.6g• * P<.9 
:> 1.65g• P<.3 
1.39g• P<.09 
no dra p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
3,3' ·DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4' ·DllSOCYANATE • -!ug .••. :. -!O ••••• :. -!00 •••• :. -!•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• !00 •.•. :. -19· •••• : •• !0 
1060 M f b6c Ht TBA MXB 181124 :> 32. 8g11 * P<. 8 
1 M f b6c Ht l iv MXB 181124 no dre P•1. 
b M f b6c 11t tun MXB 181124 no dre P•1. 
1061 M 11 b6c Ht TBA MXB 181124 :> 24.0gll * P<. 7 
a M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 
b M " b6c eat lun MXB 181124 
1062 R f f34 or l MXB MXB 181124 v 
a f f34 or l MXB MXB 181124 v 
b f34 or l MXA 18•24 v 
c f34 or l utl esp 181124 v 
d R f34 or l MXA MXA 181124 v 
e R f34 or l TBA MXB 181124 v 
R f34 orl l iv MXB 181124 v 
1063 R • f34 or l MXB MXB 181124 ev 
I R • 134 or l MXB MXB 181124 IV 
b R • f34 or l MXA 181124 IV 
c R 11 f34 or l MXA MXA 181124 ev 
d R II f34 or l MXA MXA 181124 IV 
• R II f34 or l MXB MXB 18•24 ev 
R II f34 or l MXA MXA 181124 IV 
g R • f34 or l TBA MXB 18•24 ev 
h R 11 f34 orl l iv MXB 18•24 ev + 12.1911 * P<.2 
87 .9g• * P<.9 
1.21g11 * P<.0005 
1. 45gm * P<. 0005 
2.28g11 * P<.004 c 
2. 74g11 * P<.003 c 
2.59g11 \ P<.02 a 
773.119 * P<.006 
17 .1gll * P<.2 
662. mg * P<. 0005 
742.119 * P<.0005 
1.27g• * P<.0005c 
1.33g11 * P<.002 c 
1. 77g11 * P<.006 c 
7 .01g11 * P<.02 
7 .01gll * P<.02 I 
809.119 * P<.005 
6.60g11 * P<.5 
5, 7 · D IMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENE I c I COUMARIN 
1064 R • fi1 gav l iv tu• 52v87 r •• : •• !ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• :. -!00 •••• :. -!•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -!00 •••• :. -19· •.•• :. -10 
. > no dre p.1 • 
5, 7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE 12,3-c J COUMARIN •• !ug •••• : •• !0 ••••• : •• !00 •••• : •. !11g •••• :. -!O ••••• :. -!00 •••• : •• !g ••••• :. -!0 
1065 R 11 f i 1 gav l iv tu11 52v74 r .> no dre P• 1. 
5, 7·DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE 13,2-c J COUMARIN. -!ug •••• : •• !0 •••.• :. -!00 ••.• : •• !11g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• !00 •••• :. -19-•.•• :. -10 
1066 R • fi1 gav liv tu• 52v87 r .> no dre p.·1. 
N, N ·DIMETHYL ·4·AMINOAZOBENZENE 
1067 R f val aat l iv hpt 33v56 fv 
a val eat l iv bdt 33v56 fv 
b val eat l iv cca 33v56 fv !OOng •• :. -!ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -!00 •••• :. -!11g ••.• : •• 10 •.••• :. -!00 •••• :. -19· •••. : .• 10 
3.31119 
4.90119 
7 .4211g 
N,N' ·DIMETHYL ·N,N' ·DINITROSOPHTHALAMIDE •• : •• !ug •••. :. -!0 .•••. :. -!00 •.•• : •• !11g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• !00 •..• : •• !g ••••• :. -10 
1068 R 11 vis gav l iv tu• 67v67 ev .> no dre 
a R 11 wi1 gav tba •ix 67w67 ev no dre 
4,6-DIMETHYL·2·<5·NITR0 ·2·FURYL)PYRIMIDINE. .!ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -!00 •••• :. -!Ilg •.•• :. -10-.••• :. -!00 •••• :. -19· •••• :. -!0 
1069 R f sda aat for sqc 42v59 e <+ noTD50 
a R sda eat itn aar 42v59 e 2.61•9 
b R sda Ht itn h.,. 42v59 e 3.43119 
c R sda aat 11gl adc 42v59 a 6.4511g 
d 1da eat kid tee 42v59 a 45. 5•9 
• sda eat tba 11 ix 42v59 e noTD50 P<.002 + 
P<.006 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.03 + 
P<.0005 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 
b 381 39.2•g n.s.s. 10/15 234.•g 12/16 (468.•g 
1052 381 41.6•g n. 1.1. 3/14 227.•g 11/17 (432.•g 
a 381 111.11g n.1.s. 1/14 227.llg 4/17 <432.llg 
b 381 44.511g n.1.1. 7/14 227 .Ilg 14/17 (432.Mg 
1053 381 50.2•g 389.•g 23/99p 227.•g 11/17 <432 .Ilg 
a 381 119.0lg 5.61g11 7/99p 227.llg 4/17 (432.•g 
1054 381 .361•g 1.69•g 0/16 3.2011g 6/23 6.4011g 
381 • 36911g 2. 8211g 0/16 3.2011g 3/23 6.4011g 
b 381 .712•g 4.5111g 0/16 3.2011g 8/23 6.4011g 
c 381 • 77711g n. 1.1. 0/16 3.2011g 2/23 6.40•g 
d 381 • 162•g • 458•g 10/16 3.2011g 18/23 6.40•g 
1055 381 .36111g 1.6111g 2/111p 3.2011g 6/23 6.4011g 
a 381 .36911~ 2.5411g 0/111p 3.2011g 3/23 6.4011g 
b 381 .60111g 4.0111g 0/111p 3.2011g 4/23 6.4011g 
381 • 75911g 3. 3511g 1/111p 3.20•g 8/23 6.40•g 
2, 4· OIMETHOXYANI L !NE. Ht l 54150-69·5 
1056 c02255 427 .11g n.s.s. 5/20 325.•g 25/50 650.llg 
a c02255 805.•g n.1.1. 3120 325.llg 12/50 650.llg 
b c02255 3.01g• n.1.1. 1/20 325.•g 1/50 650.llg 
1057 c02255 521.11g n.1.1. 11/20 300.llg 15/50 600.11g 
a c02255 573.•g n.1.1. 7/20 300.llg 9/50 600.•g 
b c02255 1.03g• n.1.1. 4/20 300.Mg 6/50 <600.•g 
1058 c02255 124.llg n.a.a. 16/20 75.011g 31/50 <150.•g 
a c02255 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0120 75 .011g 0/50 150.llg 
1059 c02255 143.llg n.1.s. 11/20 60.011g 28/50 120.11g 
a c02255 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 60.011g 0/50 120.•g 
3, 3' · 0 IMETHOXYBENZ !DINE· 4, 4' · D IISOCYANATE 91-93·0 
1060 c02175 4.03g• n.1.1. 6120 1.67g11 14/50 3.33g11 
a c02175 24.2g11 n.s.s. 1/20 1.67g• 1/50 3.33g• 
b c02175 18.6g• n.s.s. 3/20 1.67g• 2/50 3.33g11 
1061 c02175 3.71g• n.1.s. 7120 1.67g• 17/50 3.33g• 
a c02175 4.87g• n.s.s. 1/20 1.67g• 8/50 3.33g• 
b c02175 6. 79g• n.1.1. 2/20 1.67g• 8/50 3.33g• 
1062 c02175 759.•g 3.64g• 1/20 819.0lg 20/50 1.64g• 
a c02175 869.•g 4.77g11 1/20 819.0lg 13/50 1.64g• 
b c02175 1.25g• 16.1g• 1/20 819.0lg 8/50 1.64g• 
c c02175 1.47g• 11.9g11 0/20 819.0lg 5/50 1.64g• 
d c02175 1.14g• n.1.1. 0120 819.11g 8/50 (1.64g• 
• c02175 405.llg 8.45g• 10/20 819.•g 40/50 1.64g• 
f c02175 4.21g• n.a.s. 0/20 819.llg 0/50 1.64g• 
1063 c02175 456.•g 1.24g• 1/20 819.11g 31/50 1.64g• 
• c02175 498.•g 1.56gOI 1/20 819.11g 29/50 1.64g• 
b c02175 826.•g 2.97g11 0120 819.0lg 18/50 1.64g11 
c c02175 775.0lg 6.21g11 1/20 819.0lg 17/50 1.64g11 
d c02175 954.•g 17.9g• 1/20 819.11g 12/50 1.64g• 
c02175 3.07g11 n.s.s. 0120 819.11g 2/50 1.64g• 
c02175 3.07g• n.1.1. 0120 819.0lg 2/50 1.64g• 
g c02175 430.•g 7.28g11 10/20 819.11g 42/50 1.64g• 
h c02175 1.76g• n.1.s. 1/20 819.0lg 8/50 1.64g• 
5, 7·DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENE I c I COUMARIN 1146-71·0 
1064 1455 . 591•g n. 1.1. 0/9 .512•g 0/8 
5, 7·DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE 12, 3 · c J COUMAR IN 
1065 1455 .566•g n.1.s. 019 .60211g 0/9 
5, 7 ·D IMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE 13, 2 · c I COUMAR IN 
1066 1455 .665•g n.1.1. 0/9 .51211g 0/9 
N, N ·DIMETHYL· 4 ·AMINOAZOBENZENE (DAB) 60·11·7 
1067 27 1.12•g 16.311g 0/8 20.911g 
a 27 1.6011g 56.0•g 0/8 20.90lg 
b 27 2.18•g n.1.1. 0/8 20.911g 
N,N' ·DIMETHYL ·N,N' ·DINITROSOPHTHALAMIDE 
1068 104 8.2811g n.1.s. 0/9 3.46•g 
a 104 5.45•g n.1.1. 1/9 3.4611g 
4 ,6·D !METHYL· 2 • (5 ·NITRO· 2 · FURYL )PYRIMIDINE 
1069 1390 n.1.a. 1.3911g 0/84 14.211g 
a 1390 1.49•g 4.99•g 0/84 14.211g 
b 1390 1.92•g 6.85•g 0/84 14.211g 
c 1390 3.2111g 16.8•g 2/84 14.211g 
d 1390 11.2•g n.1.1. 0/84 14.211g 
e 1390 n.a.a. 1.4411g 6/84 14.211g 5/7 
4/7 
3/7 
3851·16·9 
0/28 
1/28 
59.35.3 
30/30 
21/30 
18/30 
12/30 
2/30 
30130 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
10/17) 
7/20> 
3/20> 
10/20> 
7/20) 
2/20> 
8/24 
6/24 
8/24 
2/24 
22/24 
8/24 
6/24 
5/24 
8/24 
24/50 
11/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
33/50 
27/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
21/50) 
0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
25/50 
0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
13/50 
0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
21/50 
10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
24/49 ---:leu,ly11; ear:sec,sqc,tri; ute:esp; zy11: sec, sqc, tr i. 
20/49 --·:Leu, ly11; ute:esp. 
15/49 ---: Leu, ly11. 
10/49 
6/49) ear: sec, sqc, tr i; zy11:sec,sqc,tri. 
44/49 
2/49 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
32/50 ---: Leu, ly11; ear:sqc; sft:ker; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; 
ski :bet ,ker ,ppn,sea,seb,sqc, tr i; zy•:sqc. 
27/50 ---:leu,ly11; sft:ker; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; 
ski: bet, ker ,ppn, sea, seb, sqc, tr i. 
16/50 ···:Leu, ly11. 
15/50 sft:ker; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; ski:bct,ker,ppn,seb,1qc,tri . 
12/50 sft :ker; skb:bct,ker; skf:bct; ski :bct,ker,ppn,sea,tri . 
6/50 ear:sqc; zy11:sqc. 
6/50 ear: sqc; zy11:sqc. 
38/50 
3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
Wogan;canr ,31, 1936· 1942; 1971 
Wogan; canr, 31, 1936·1942;1971 
Wogan; canr, 31, 193ti · 1942; 1971 
IC irby; j pat,59, 1·18; 1947 
Argus; jnc i ,35,949·958; 1965 
Cohen; jnci ,57,277-282; 1976 119 
T 
A 120 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1, 2-DIMETHYL-5 -N ITROIMIDAZOLE 
1070 R f ada eat mgl fba 46w66 e 
a R ada eat l iv tu• 46w66 e 
b R ada eat tba Mix 46w66 e 
DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE 100ng. -: • -1ug. ---: • -10---•• : • -100 •••• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 •••• -: •• 100 •••• : •• 1g. -• -• : •• 10 
17.00lg 
no dre 
17 .0mg 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10---• -: --100. -•• : • -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : --100. -•• : --1g ••••• : •• 10 2'f'•ilpvl 
DR AuOp 
P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
1071 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 24m24 :> 4.34gm P<.7 
a M f b6e eat l iv MXB 241124 no dre P•1. 
b M f b6e eat l un MXB 24m24 44.0g11 \ P<1. 
1072 M m b6e eat lun MXA 241124 + #1. 16g• • P<. 002 
a M m b6e eat TBA MXB 24M24 no dre P-1-
b M m b6e eat l iv MXB 24M24 no dre P·1-
M m b6e eat lun MXB 24•24 1.16gm • P<.002 
1073 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 :> 342.mg P<.5 
a f 134 eat l iv MXB 24m24 no dre P•1. 
1074 m 134 eat TBA MXB 24m24 :> no dre P-1. 
a " 134 eat l iv MXB 24m24 no dre P-1. 
trans-2- [ <DIMETHYLAMINOJMETHYLIMINO \ -5-[ 2-(5-NITR0-2-FURYLlVINYL \ -1,3,4-0XADIAZOLE . -10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g. ----: • -10 
1075 R f ada eat mgl ade 46w66 e + • 20.4mg 
a R sda eat Olgl mix 46w66 e 22.4Mg 
b R ada eat for aqp 46w66 e 221-mg 
R ada eat duo adp 46w66 e 336.•g 
d ada eat duo ade 46w66 e 336.•g 
e 
f 
g R 
R ada eat lun ale 46w66 e 
ada eat l iv tu• 46w66 e 
sda eat tba mix 46w66 e +historical 
no dre 
20 .6mg 
4-DIMETHYLAMIN0 -3,5-XYLENOL 100ng. -: • -1ug. --• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : • -1mg. --• : • -10-----: • -100 •• --: •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
1076 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6a orl l fv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1077 • b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 
a m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b " b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1078 f b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1079 • b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx -> 
-> no dre 
no dre 
220.Mg 
207 .Ilg 
no dre 
1-19gOI 
265.mg 
no dre 
265.mg 
56.1mg 
247 .mg 
34.8mg 
DIMETHYLARSINIC ACID 100ng •• :. -1ug. -•• : -.10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1mg. -•• : --10----• : • -100 .••• : •• 1g •• ---: • -10 
1080 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx -> 108.•g 
a b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 34.0•g 
1081 " b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 95.2mg 
a 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a or l tba ,,; x 76w76 evx no dre 
1082 f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a f b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.08 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
p.i_ 
P<.7 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.3 
p.i_ 
P<.3 
P<.02 
P<.3 
P<.004 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P•1-
P·1-
P•1-
P•1. 
P•1. 
1083 11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx -> no dre P-1. 
a 11 b6e orl lun •ix 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b • b6e or l tba mix 76w76 evx no dre P-1-
7, 12-DIMETHYLBENZ(aJANTHRACENE 
1084 M f alb eat mei ane 60w60 er 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10. --•• : • -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : --100 •• --: --1g •••• -: •• 10 
a M f alb eat for pa11 60w60 er 
DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORIDE 
1085 H • ayg inh naa aqe 261126 er 
1086 M hie ipj abd 11ix 64l.64 
a M hie ipj abd aar 64w64 
b M hie ipj lun pt11 64w64 • + _ 84.0ug 
.287•g 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100. --• : • -1•g •••• : -.10 ••••• : -.100 •• --: --1g ••••• : •• 10 
.+ • +historical 
4.5911g 
5.370lg 
6.65mg 
DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, DIMETHYLAMINE. -1ug .••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g. --• : .• 10. ---• : • -100 •••• : •• 1g •••• -: . -10 
1087 f b6a or l l iv ag11 76w76 evx .> 233 -•g 
a f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1088 • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx -> 99.1•g 
a " b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 180.•g 
1089 f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx -> 233.•g 
a f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1090 • b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a • b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6e or l tba •h 76w76 evx no dre 
113.mg 
63.911g 
99.111g 
19.5mg P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 
P<.008 + 
P<.3 
P<.3 
p.i_ 
p.i_ 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.7 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P<.04 
P<.1 
P<.0005-CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose Zinc 
1, 2 ·D !METHYL· 5 · NITROIMIDAZOLE 551-92-8 
1070 200a 9.67•g 35.9•g 4/35 69.7•g 25/35 
a 200a 202.•g n.1.1. 0/35 69.7•g 0/35 
b 200a 9.67•g 35.911g 4/35 69.711g 25/35 
DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE (DMT> 120-61-6 
1071 c50055 660 ... g n.1.a. 29/50 319.llg 20/50 638 ... g 32/50 
a c50055 2.21g11 n.s.a. 5/50 319.•g 1/50 (638.IOg Ot50l 
b c50055 926.0lg n.s.s. 4/50 319.0lg 5/50 (638.•g 0/50) 
1072 c50055 640 ... g 5.49gm 1/50 294.llg 8/50 589 ... g 13/50 
a c50055 731.0lg n.1.1. 36/50 294 ... g 33/50 589 ... g 34/50 
b c50055 1.33g11 n.1.1. 19/50 294.llg 13/50 589.llg 16/50 
c50055 640.•g 5.49gll 1/50 294.llg 8/50 589.llg 13/50 
1073 c50055 75.711g n.1.s. 38/50 123.llg 38/50 <245.llg 29/50) 
a c50055 2.03g11 n.1.s. 1/50 123.•g 1/50 245.•g 0/50 
1074 c50055 168.llg n.1.1. 40/50 98.2•g 28/50 .(196.11g 26/50) 
c50055 1.91g11 n.s.s. 4/50 98.2mg 0!50 196.llg 1/50 
trani-2-[ CDIMETHYLAMINOlMETHYL!MlNO J -5-[ 2-(5·NITRD·2· FURYLlVINYL J -1,3,4-0XADIAZOLE 55738-54 -0 
1075 1126 12.011g 37.911g 0/24 69.711g 22/36 
a 1126 12.611g 53.511g 2/24 69.711g 22/36 
b 1126 66.911g n.1.1. 0/24 69.711g 3/36 
c 1126 82.711g n.1.1. 0/24 69.711g 2/36 
d 1126 82.7•g n.1.1. 0/24 69.711g 2/36 
e 1126 111.mg n.1.1. 0/24 69.711g 1/36 
1126 208.mg n.s.1. 0/24 69.7mg 0/36 
g 1126 11.711g 46.811g 2/24 69.7 .. g 23/36 
4 ·DlMETHYLAMIN0·3, 5 · XYLENOL 6120-10·1 
1076 1248 46.111g n.1.1. 1/17 41.4•g 1/17 
a 1248 77 .411g n.1.1. 0/17 41.411g 0/17 
b 1248 27. 711g n.1.s. 2/17 41.411g 3/17 
1077 1248 30.211g n.1.1. 1/18 38.511g 2/17 
a 1248 47 .4•g n.1.1. 2/18 38.511g 1/17 
b 1248 28.011g n.1.1. 3/18 38.511g 3/17 
1078 1248 43.111g n.1.1. 0/16 41.4 .. g 1/18 
1248 82.011g n.1.1. 0/16 41.411g 0/18 
b 1248 43.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 41.411g 1/18 
1079 1248 19.311g n.1.1. 0/16 38.511g 4/18 
a 1248 40.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 38.511g 1/18 
b 1248 14.011g 212.•g 0/16 38.511g 6/18 
DIMETHYLARSINIC ACID (cacodyl ic acid> 75-60-5 
1080 1198 17.611g n.1.1. 0/18 16.911g 1/18 
a 1198 33.511g n.s.1. 0/18 16.9•g 0/18 
b 1198 10.3•g n.1.1. 0/18 16.911g 3/18 
1081 1198 15.511g n.1.1. 0/18 15.8•g 1/17 
a 1198 29.5•g n.1.1. 1/18 15.811g 0/17 
b 1198 19.411g n.1.1. 2/18 15.8•g 1/17 
1082 1198 33.511g n.1.1. 0/18 16.9•g 0/18 
a 1198 33.511g n.1.1. 1/18 16.911g 0/18 
b 1198 33.511g n.1.1. 2/18 16.9•g 0/18 
1083 1198 17.111g n.1.a. 3/14 15.811g 1/14 
a 1198 24.311g n.1.a. 0/14 15.811g 0/14 
b 1198 10.3•g n.1.1. 4/14 15.811g 3/14 
7, 12 · DlMETHYLBENZ<alANTHRACENE 57-97-6 
1084 1274 58.2ug .126•g 0/40 .39011g 49/75 
a 1274 • 16911g . 5630lg 0/40 .39011g 20/75 
DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORIDE 79.44. 7 
1085 1142 .439•g .92811g 0/50 .553•g 50/99 
1086 1143 2.0211g 34.711g 1/30 5. 7111g 9/30 
a 1143 2.25•g 134.•g 1/30 5. 7111g 8/30 
b 1143 1.7611g n.1.1. 10/30 5.7111g 14/30 
DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, DIMETHYLAM!NE 598-64-1 
1087 1222 37 .911g n.1.1. 0/17 36.4•g 1/18 
a 1222 43.3.,g n.1.1. 1/17 36.4•g 1/18 
b 1222 34.411g n.1.1. 2/17 36.411g 2/18 
1088 1222 22.111g n.1.1. 1/18 33.9•g 3/18 
a 1222 44.511g n.1.1. 2/18 33.911g 1/18 
b 1222 21.1•g n.1.1. 3/18 33.911g 4/18 
1089 1222 37.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.4•g 1/18 
a 1222 72.111g n.1.1. 0/16 36.4•g 0/18 
b 1222 27.811g n.1.1. 0/16 36.411g 2/18 
1090 1222 19.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 3/17 
a 1222 24.311g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 2/17 
b 1222 8.6611g 62.111g 0/16 33.911g 8/17 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Cohen; jnc i, 51,403-417; 1973 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Cohen; jnci ,54,841-850; 1975 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
Chouroul i nkov ;bdca, 54, 67 -78; 1967 
Sal lakumar; jept,4, 107·115; 1980 
Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 121 122 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1, 1-0l"ETHYLHYORAZINE 
1091 f ayg wet cec •ix 79w79 1 
ayg wet blv •ix 79w79 e 
b ayg wot l iv 11ix 79w79 e 
c ayg wet lun tu• 79w79 e 
1092 H • ayg wet cec 11ix 91w91 e 
H • ayg wet l iv •ix 91w91 e 
b H • ayg wet bl v aix 91w91 e 
c H • ayg wet l iv 1ng 91w91 e 
d H " ayg Wit CIC edc 91w91 • 
• H • ayg Wit CIC ple 91w91 • 
H 11 ayg wet l iv eg• 91w91 1 
g H • ayg wet lun tu• 91w91 1 
1093 " awe wet bl v 1ng 72w72 1 • 
b 
c 
d 
• 
1094 
• 
b 
c 
d 
• 
f 
1095 awe wet blv •ix 72w72 e 
awe wet lun 1d1 72w72 1 
awe wet lun •ix 72w72. e 
awe wet lun edc 72w7i e 
awe wet kid 1d1 72w72 1 
awe wet l iv tu• 72w72 1 
• 1w1 wet bl v eng 62w62 1 
• awe wet blv •ix 62w62 1 
• awe wet lun 1d1 62w62 1 
• 1w1 wet lun •ix 62v62 e 
• 1w1 wet kid 1de 62w62 1 
• awe wet l iv hpt 62w62 e 
• awe wet l un edc 62w62 e 
aw i gev l un tu11 40w55 
1, 2-0l"ETHYLHYORAZINE. 2HC l 
1096 f ayg wet bl v 1ng 67w67 e 
1 ayg wet l iv eng 67w67 e 
b ayg wet tun eng 67w67 e 
ayg Wit CIC •ix 67w67 I 
d ayg wet l iv •ix 67w67 e 
e ayg wet •ua 1ng 67w67 1 
f ayg wet l iv hpt 67w67 1 
g ayg wet c1c ple 67w67 1 
h ayg wet he1 eng 67w67 1 
ayg Wit CIC 1dc 67w67 • 
j ayg wet pen 1ng 67w67 e 
1097 • ayg wet blv 1ng 71w71 e 
• 
b 
c 
d 
• 
f 
g 
1098 
• 
b 
1099 
• 
b 
c 
d 
• 
f 
g 
h • ayg wet l iv eng 71w71 e 
11 ayg wet tun 1ng 71w71 1 
• ayg wet •ua eng 71w71 e 
• ayg wet l iv •ix 71w71 e 
• ayg wet h11 1ng 71w71 1 
• ayg Wit CIC pl• 71w71 • 
• ayg wet pen 1ng 71w71 1 
f awe wet blv eng 52w52 1 
awe wet l un ede 52w52 1 
awe wet l iv hpt 52w52 e 
• awe wet bl v 1ng 52w52 1 
• awe wet prn 1ng 52w52 1 
• awe wet •ua 1ng 52w52 1 
• awe wet fat 1ng 52w52 e 
• awe wet pep 1ng 52w52 e 
• awe wet l iv 1ng 52w52 e 
• awe wet aub 1ng 52w52 1 
• awe wet l yd eng 52w52 1 
• awe wet tun •ix 52w52 1 100ng •. :. -1ug ••.. : .• 10 .••.. :. -100 .•.. :. -1•g •... :. -10 ••..• :. -100 .•.. : .. 1g •.•.• :. -10 
• + • 
• + • 
.> + 104.llg 
• + 620.llg 
620.•g 
no dre 
155.llg 
183.•g 
183.Mg 
242.Mg 
322.Mg 
372.llg 
975.llg 
no dre 
3.57•g 
3.6511g 
5.58•g 
5.6911g 
51.611g 
148.llg 
no dre 
2.0911g 
2.1111g 
2.6211g 
2.62•g 
19.511g 
30.411g 
46.611g 
16.011g 
100ng •• :. -1ug •.•• : .• 10 ••.•• :. -100 .•.• :. -1•g •.•• : •• 10 •.••• : .• 100 •.•. : •• 1g ••.•. : .• 10 
• + .156•g 
.15611g 
.39511g 
.864•g 
.917•g 
1.03•g 
1.40•g 
2.08•g 
2.13•g 
2.84•g 
18.4•g 
. + • .21111g 
<+ 
+ • .211•g 
.685•g 
1.36•g 
2.05•g 
2.49•g 
2.4211g 
18.611g 
noTD50 
.559•g 
13.9•g 
.102•g 
.180•g 
.20311g 
.21511g 
.33711g 
.377•g 
.78111g 
1.02•g 
1.81•g 
2· <2,2-0l"ETHYLHYDRAZINO) ·4· (5-NITR0-2 · FURYL)THIAZOLE .10 ..••• :. -100 •... :. -1•g •••• :. -10 ...•. :. -100 ...• : •• 1g •...• :. -10 
1100 R f 1d1 eet •gl •ix 46w66 e <+ noTD50 
1 ade Ht •gl edc 46w66 1 .391•g 
b ade Ht lbl 46w66 e +historical 
c 
d ade Ht l iv tu• 46w66 1 
ade eat tb1 •ix 46w66 • 
Dl"ETHYLNITRA"INE 
1101 R f nzd wet l iv tu• 12•24 
R nzd wet bi l ede 12•24 
b nzd wet tb1 11ix 12•24 
1102 R • nzd wet ti v tu• 12•24 
1 R • nzd wet tb1 •ix 12•24 no dre 
noTD50 
100ng •• : .• 1ug ••.• : •. 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••. :. -1•g ••.• : •. 10 .•.•. : •• 100 •••. : •. 1g ••... : .• 10 
.25611g 
1.6511g 
.321•g 
.32211g 
.40311g 
DINITRO( 1 ·"ETHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL CROTONATE •. : .. 1ug .••. : •. 10 •.••• : •• 100 •.•. :. -1•g ••.• : •. 10 ••.•. : •. 100 •.•. : •• 1g .•.•. :. -10 P<.0005+ 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.02 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.007 
P<.2 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.005 + 
P<.005 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 
P<.004 
P<.004 + 
P<.02 
P<.4 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.006 + 
P<.008 + 
P<.02 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.5 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.06 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.09 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005-
P<.002 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
1103 " f b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P• 1. 
1 " b61 orl tun ede 76w76 1vx no dre P-1. 
b " b61 or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx no dre P-1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 123 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1, 1 ·DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE 57-14-7 
1091 367 49.0•g 301.11g 1/50 136.•g 10/24 Toth; cane, 40, 2427·2431;1977 
a 367 152.•g n.1.1. 0/50 136.llg 2/24 
b 367 152 .•g n.1. 1. 0/50 136.llg 2/24 
c 367 519.•g n.1.1. 0/100 136.•g 0/32 
1092 367 84.8•g 329.llg 0/64 120.•g 15/45 
367 98.011g 399.llg 0/85 120.llg 14/48 
b 367 98.0•g 399.11g 0/85 120.llg 14/48 
c 367 121.•g 592.•g 0/85 120.•g 11/48 
d 367 145.llg 957 .Ilg 0/64 120.llg 8/45 
• 367 161.•g 1.25g• 0/64 120.•g 7/45 
367 295.•g n.1.1. 0/85 120.llg 3/48 
g 367 909.11g n.1.1. 0/88 120.llg 0/48 
1093 117 2.23•g 5.9411g 0/47 20.0•g 37/44 Toth; j nc i, 50, 181·194; 1973 
117 2.26•g 6. 1711g 4/104 20.0•g 37/44 
b 117 3.38•g 10.311g 12/104 20.011g 32/44 
117 3.4111g 10.7•g 14/104 20.0•g 32/44 
d 117 19.2•g 1.11g11 2/104 20.011g 6/44 
• 117 24. 1•g n.a.1. 0/32 20.0•g 1/23 
f 117 94.8•g n.1.1. 0/109 20.011g 0/48 
1094 117 1.33•g 3.3711g 0/50 16.7•g 42/49 
a 117 1.34•g 3.4411g 2/91 16.711g 42/49 
b 117 1.63•g 4.53•g 10/86 16.711g 39/48 
c 117 1.63•g 4.53•g 10/86 16.711g 39/48 
d 117 9. 19•g 59.311g 0/45 16.711g 9/48 
• 117 12.4•g 218.llg 0/45 16.711g 6/48 
f 117 16. 1•g 391 .Ilg 0/86 16.7•g 4/48 
1095 1095 4.0011g n.1.1. 8/85 10.411g 5/25 Roe ;natu, 216, 375 · 376; 1967 
1, 2· D IMETHYLHYDRAZINE . 2HCl 306-37·6 
1096 1108 94.9ug .25811g 0/32 1.3611g 44/48 Toth; cenr, 32,804·807;1972/1967• 
• 1108 94.9ug .25811g 0/32 1.3611g 44/48 
b 1108 .250•g .670•g 0/32 1.3611g 30/48 
c 1108 • 48711g 1 . 7611g 0/32 1.3611g 17/47 
d 1108 .444•g 2.51•g 0/25 1.3611g 10/29 
• 1108 . 56611g 2. 2711g 0/32 1.36•g 15/48 
f 1108 .60411g 6.57•g 0/25 1.3611g 7/29 
g 1108 • 94011g 1 1. 011g 0/32 1.3611g 8/47 
h 1108 . 962•g 11 .811g 0/32 1.3611g 8/48 
1108 1. 16•g n.1.1. 0/32 1 .36•g 6/47 
j 1108 3.00•g n.1.1 . 0/32 1.3611g 1/48 
1097 1108 • 13511g .342•g 0/31 1.20•g 41/49 
1108 .135•g .34211g 0/31 1.20•g 41/49 
b 1108 • 40611g 1. 2811g 0/31 1.2011g 21/49 
1108 • 701•g 3.69•g 0/31 1.20•g 12/49 
d 1108 .88311g 18.3•g 0/28 1.2011g 7/41 
• 1108 1.07•g 37.511g 0/31 1.2011g 7/49 
f 1108 .987•g n.1.1. 0/28 1.2011g 6/41 
g 1108 3.03•g n.1.1. 0/31 1.2011g 1/49 
1098 119 n.1.1 . . 12811g 4/109 2.0011g 49/49 Toth; aj pa, 64, 585 ·600; 1971 
a 119 • 33411g 1 .11•g 0/18 2.0011g 22/48 
b 119 2.26•g n.1.1. 0/15 2.00•g 1/41 
1099 119 60.3ug .17111g 0/40 1.6711g 46/49 
a 119 . 116•g .29111g 0/40 1.67•g 39/49 
b 119 . 131•g .330•g 0/40 1.67•g 37/49 
119 .13911g .35111g 0/40 1.6711g 36/49 
d 119 .211•g .58011g 0/40 1.67•g 28/49 
• 119 .23311g .662•g 0/40 1.6711g 26/49 
f 119 .42711g 1.66•g 0/40 1.67•g 15/49 
g 119 .52211g 2.4911g 0/40 1.6711g 12/49 
h 119 .655•g n.1.1. 11/95 1.6711g 12/49 
2 · ( 2 ,2 · DIMETHYLHYDRAZINO) -4 · (5 ·NITRO· 2· FURYL >THIAZOLE 26049-69·4 
1100 2001 n.1.1. .410•g 2/39 3.48•g 35/35 Cohen; jnci ,51,403 -417;1973 
I 200a .219•g • 707•g 0!39 3.4811g 32/35 
b 200a 4.02•g n.1.1. 0!39 3.48•g 2/35 
200• 10.1•g n.1.1. 0!39 3.48•g 0/35 
d 200a n.1.1. .410•g 2/39 3.4811g 35/35 
D IMETHYLNITRAMINE 4164-28· 7 
1101 1191 89.8ug .796•g 0/107 .86011g 9/10 Goodall ;clot, 1,295-298;1976 
a 1191 .494•g 11. 9•g 0/107 .86011g 3/10 
b 1191 96.7ug 2.35•g 40/107 .860•g 9/10 
1102 1191 .126•g 1.0211g 1/107 .753•g 8/10 
a 119a .137•g 3.1211g 30/107 • 753•g 8/10 
DINITRO< 1 ·METHYLHEPTYLlPHENYL CROTONATE <Karathane) 6119-92-2 
1103 1290 • 774•g n.a.1. 0/17 .414•g 0/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1290 • 774•g n.1.1 . 1/17 .414•g 0/17 
b 1290 • 774•g n.1.1. 2/17 .414•g 0/17 124 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1104 M 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1105 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx 
1106 M • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M • b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2 ,4-DI NITROPHENOL 
1107 M b c5l eat pit ade 73w73 er 
DIN I TROSOHOMOP I PERAZ I NE -> 
.> 
.> 2.07119 
19.1119 
11.9119 
2.50"'9 
no dre 
1.21 .. 9 
2.32119 
no dre 
.405"'9 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 •••• : •. 111g •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19-•... :. -10 
.> no dre 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 •.•• :. -19· •••• :. -10 P<.6 
P<1. 
P<1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.1 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.007 
1108 f f34 wat ugi car 71131-es • + .240"'9 P<.0005+ 
f34 wet eso 11ix 71131 es 
b R f34 wat ugi 11ix 71131 es 
d 
1109 R 
a R 
b 
c 
1110 
b 
R f34 wat l iv 11ix 71131 es 
f34 wat nas ale 7•31 es 
f34 wat ugi •h 60w82 es 
f34 wat ugi car 60w82 ea 
f34 wat eso 11ix 60w82 es 
f34 wat nas ale 60w82 ea 
f34 wet ugi 11ix 281131 es 
f34 wet l iv 11ix 28•31 es 
f34 wet eso •ix 28•31 es 
f34 wat ton bcp 28•31 es + 
• + • 253"'9 Z P<. 0005 + 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. + 
29. 7u9 P<.0005+ 
46.9u9 P<.0005+ 
55. 3u9 P<. 0005+ 
• 207mg P<. 002 + 
91. 4u9 • P<. 0005+ 
97 .3u9 \ P<.006 + 
.105m9 * P<.0005+ 
• 630119 • P<. 004 + 
N, N -DIN I TROSOPENTAMETHYLENETETRAM I NE 
1111 R 11 cbr ipj Liv hpt 61123 e •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• :. -100 .••• : •• 111g •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.• :. -10 
.> no dre P• 1. 
DIN I TROSOP I PE RAZ I NE 
1112 M f c17 gav for aqc 91124 e 
M c 17 gav ute rna 91124 e 
1113 M 11 c17 gav for sqc 9•24 e 
1114 M swi wat lun ade 12•23 e 
M swi wat l iv hpc 12•23 e 
b M swi wat tba 11ix 121123 e 
1115 M 11 awi wat lun ade 121123 e 
a M • swi wat Liv hpc 121123 e 
b M 11 swi wat tba 11ix 12•23 e 
2, 4-DINITROTOLUENE 
1116 f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w93 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 78w93 
b b6c eat lun MXB 78w93 
1117 II b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 
1118 f f34 eat 11gl fba 181125 v 
a f f34 eat TBA MXB 181125 v 
b f f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 v 
1119 11 f34 eat MXA MXA 181125 v 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 18.,25 v 
11 f34 eat l iv MXB 18•25 v b 
1,4-DIOXANE 
1120 f b6c wat liv MXA 90w90 
a b6c wat l iv hpc 90w90 
b b6c wat TBA MXB 90w90 
c b6c wat l iv MXB 90w90 
d b6c wat lun MXB 90w90 
1121 11 b6c wat l iv hpc 90w91 
a 11 b6c wat l iv MXA 90w91 
b • b6c wat MXA 90w91 
c 11 b6c wat l y11 90w91 
d II b6c wat TBA MXB 90w91 
e 11 b6c wat l iv MXB 90w91 
f 11 b6c wat lun MXB 90w91 
1122 f OH wat MXB MXB 261126 
b 
c R 
d R 0&11 wat l iv hpa 26•26 
OH wet ntu aqc 261126 
OH wet TBA MXB 261126 
OH "et l i V MXB 261126 100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •.•• : •• 10 .•••• :. -100 •.•. :. -19-.••• :. -10 
+ 4.66 .. g 
4.1311g 
2.01119 P<.003 + 
P<.02 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
8.70 .. g 
51.911g 
8.24119 p.1. 
p.1. + 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.02 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• :. -10 
:> 
:> 
"' no dre p.1. 
no dre P-1. 
68.0"'9 \ P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P·1. 
no dre P·1. 
12. 7"'9 * P<.02 a 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
9. 35.,g * P<. 0005a 
43. 711g • P<.8 
31.1.,g • P<.04 
100ng •• :. -1ug •.•• : .• 10 •.••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••. : •• 10 
:+ : 594.11g • P<.0005c 
938. 11g P<. 0005c 
847. 11g • P<. 0005 
594. mg * P<. 0005 
71.99m * P<.8 
+ 1. 42g11 • P<. 0005c 
1 • 46g• * P<. 0005c 
3.15g11 \ P<.005 
3.93g11 \ P<.009 
1.88g11 • P<.03 
1 • 46g11 * P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
126.•g • P<.0005 
160.11g • P<.0005c 
476.11g * P<.0005c 
40. 5•g \ P<. 0005 
124.11g • P<.0005 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 125 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1104 1290 .302119 n.s.s . 1/18 .38511g 2/17 
1290 • 33511g n.s.s . 2/18 .38511g 2/17 
b 1290 • 28011g n.s.s . 3/18 .385mg 3/17 
1105 1290 • 407mg n.s.s . 0/ 16 .414mg 1/17 
a 1290 • 77411g n.s.s. 0/16 .41411g 0/17 
b 1290 .29711g n.s.s . 0/16 .41411g 2/17 
1106 1290 • 37811g n.s.s . 0/16 .38511g 1/17 
1290 • 72111g n.s.s . 0/16 .3850lg 0/17 
b 1290 . 152mg 5.4711g 0/16 .385'1g 5/17 
2 ,4 ·OINITROPHENOL 51-28-5 
1107 257 241.0lg n.s.s. 0/28 62.5mg 0/38 King;pseb, 112,365 -366; 1963 
0 IN ITROSOHOMOPIPERAZINE 55557-00·1 
1108 1375., .144'1g .501mg 0120 10.1ug 1/20 26.4u9 3/20 72.0ug 7/20 .269'1g 13/20 ( 1.18119 10/20 
2.9311g 14/20) Li j i nsky ;eaes ,6, 513-527; 1982/pers . comin. 
a 1375., .151•g .5380lg 0120 10.1ug 1/20 26.4ug 3/20 72.0ug 6/20 .26911g 13/20 ( 1. 1811g 10/20 
2.93Mg 14/20) 
b 137511 .398119 1.43mg 0/20 10.1ug 1/20 26.4ug 4/20 72.0ug 9/20 .26911g 16/20 1.1811g 15/20 
2.9311g 19/20 
137511 29.311g n.s.s. 1/20 10.1ug 6/20 26.4ug 4/20 72.0ug 1/20 .26911g 0120 1.1811g 0120 
2.9311g 0/20 
d 137511 26.811g n.s.s. 0120 10.1ug 0120 26.4ug 0/20 72.0ug 7/20 .26911g 0120 1.18'1g 0/20 
2.9311g 0120 
1109 1375n 12.2ug 68.1ug 0/20 .209 .. g 19/20 
1375n 23.4ug .102 .. g 0/20 .20911g 17/20 
b 1375n 28.2ug .120mg 0/20 .209'1g 16/20 
1375n 88.4ug .783'1g 0120 .20911g 7/20 
1110 13750 52.8ug .17311g 0120 39.9ug 5/20 .11611g 17/20 
a 13750 40.6ug 1.20 .. g 1/20 39.9ug 8/20 (.116'1g 6/20) 
b 13750 59.4ug .20311g 0/20 39.9ug 3/20 .11611g 17/20 
13750 .23911g 4.4311g 0120 39.9ug 0/20 .11611g 5/20 
N, N • 0 IN I TROSOPENTAMETHYLENETETRAMI NE 101-25· 7 
1111 1258 4.93'1g n.s.s. 1/22 1.860lg 1/23 Boyl and; e j ca, 4, 233· 239; 1968 
0 INITROSOPIPERAZ !NE 140-79.4 
1112 1347 1.5911g 28.111g 0122 3.08'1g 4/11 Pai ;carc,2, 175-177;1981 
• 1347 1.3611g n.s.a . 2/22 3.0811g 5/11 
1113 1347 .83111g 7.0011g 0/12 2.5611g 7 /12 
1114 1250 11. 711g n.s.a. 7/29 10.411g 3/14 Borzsonyi; canr ,40, 2925·2927;1980 
1250 27 .811g n.s.s. 4/29 10.4'1g 0/14 
b 1250 5.2611g n.s.s. 25/29 10.411g 10/14 
1115 1250 4.07mg 27 .611g 3/50 8.6711g 11/22 
a 1250 12.211g n.s.s. 2/50 8.6711g 3/22 
b 1250 3.17Mg n.s.s. 19/50 8.67 .. g 15/22 
2, 4 ·D INITROTOLUENE 121-14·2 
1116 c01865 18.6'1g n.s.s. 39/100 8.800lg 14/50 <44.2'1g 11/50) 
a c01865 234.llg n.s.s. 8/100 8.800lg 1/50 44.211g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01865 18.6Mg n.s.s. 2/100 8.8011g 4/50 (44.2'1g 0/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1117 c01865 86.70lg n.s.s. 40/100 8.200lg 13/50 40.8'1g 13/50 
c01865 86.711g n.s.s. 22/100 8.2011g 6/50 40.811g 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01865 39.4'1g n.1.1. 18/100 8.200lg 3/50 (40.811g 2/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1118 c01865 5.7811g n.s.s. 13/75 3.0011g 12/50 7 .50Mg 23/50 
a c01865 5.9711g n.s.s. 57/75 3.00'1g 41/50 7 .5011g 40/50 
b c01865 35 .0119 n.s.s. 3/75 3.0011g 0/50 7 .50.,g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1119 c01865 5.49.,g 19.1mg 0175 2.4011g 7/50 6.0011g 13/50 ski:fib; sub:fib. 
• c01865 4.84'1g n.s.s .. 40/75 2.40'1g 29/50 6.0011g 35/50 
b c01865 12.6'1g n.s.s. 0/75 2.4011g 3/50 6.0011g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1, 4 • 0 IOXANE <p·dioxane> 123-91-1 
1120 c03689 426.llg 861.llg 0/50 984.0lg 21/50 1.99g11 35/50 l iv:npa,hpc. 
c03689 639.llg 1.45g11 0/50 984.llg 12/50 1.99g11 29/50 
b c03689 501.0lg 2.19g11 15/50 984.llg 31/50 1.99QOI 35/50 
c03689 426.0lg 861.llg 0/50 984.mg 21/50 1.99g11 35/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d c03689 6.34g11 n.a.a. 3/50 984.mg 0/50 1.99gm 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1121 c03689 863.llg 3.66gll 4/50 820.llg 18/50 1.65g11 24/50 
• c03689 833.llg 5.11g11 8/50 820.llg 19/50 1.65g11 28/50 l iv:npa,hpc. 
b c03689 1.29g11 22.1g11 0/50 820.llg 6/50 ( 1.65g11 3/50> ---:he11,hes. s 
c03689 1.49g11 16.3g11 0/50 820.llg 5/50 ( 1.65g11 2/50) s 
d c03689 841.11g n.1.1. 19/50 820.llg 28/50 1.65g11 33/50 
c03689 833.llg 5.11g11 8/50 820.11g 19/50 1.65g11 28/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c03689 8.27g11 n.1.1. 8/50 820.llg 3/50 1.65g11 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1122 c03689 69.711g 218.llg 0/35 284.llg 18/35 569.mg 18/35 liv:hpa; ntu:sqc. 
a c03689 79.111g 323.llg 0/35 284.11g 10/35 569.11g 11/35 
b c03689 249.ag 970.llg 0/35 284.llg 10/35 569.11g 8/35 
c03689 20.011g 108.•g 26/35 284.llg 28/35 <569.llg 22/35> 
d c03689 60.111g 263.llg 0/35 284.llg 10/35 569.llg 12/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 126 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tai!pvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
11Z3 R M OSM wot ntu 1qc Z611Z6 
1 M o .. wot TBA "XB Z611Z6 
b M 0811 Wit l iv "XB Z611Z6 + 168.0lg * P<.0005c 
114.11g * P<.0005 
796.0lg * P<.Z 
11Z4 "' cdr wat n11 1qc 56w69 r 
11Z5 b she wat Liv 11ix Z411Z4 e 
1 b she wat l iv hpc Z411Z4 e 
b b she Wit ntu 1qc Z4MZ4 e .%.+historical • P<.07 
Z.1Zg• * P<.0005+ 
Z.50gm * P<.0005+ 
15.9gm * P<.006 + 
c b she wat tb1 11ix Z411Z4 e no dre P• 1. 
11Z6 b wi1 wat Liv hpt 63w64 515.Mg P<.05 + 
1 b wis wat tb1 Mix 63w64 690.Mg P<.4 
DIOXATHION 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •... : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .. • • ·: .• 10 
11Z7 " f b6c eat TBA "XB 78w90 v 
1 " f b6c eat Liv "XB 78w90 v 
b " f b6c eat lun "XB 78w90 v :> Z.59g11 * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
1.8Zg11 * P<. 5 
11Z8 " II b6c eat TBA "XB 78w90 v :> no dre P-1. 
" 11 b6c eat l iv "XB 78w90 v 
b " 11 b6c eat lun "XB 78w90 v no dre P-1. 
6Z8.11g * P<.5 
11Z9 R 0111 eat TBA "XB 1811Z6 v 
a R 0811 eat Liv "XB 1811Z6 v :> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
1130 R 11 0111 eat TBA "XB 1811Z6 v :> no dre P-1. 
R 11 0111 eat Liv "XB 1811Z6 v no dre P-1. 
D IPENTA"ETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULF IDE 
1131 f b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
1 f b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b61 orl tba 11ix 76w76 1vx 
113Z 11 b61 orl lun ade 76w76 1vx 
M b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 1vx 
b • b61 orl tba 11ix 76w76 1vx 
1133 f b6c or l lun ade 76w76 1vx 
1 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c or l tba 11 ix 76w76 evx 
1134 11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 11 b6c or l tun ode 76w76 evx •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ...•. : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
1ZO.Olg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
83.111g 
no dre 
83.111g 
113.•g 
113.11g P-1 • 
P-1. 
P<.5 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.05 
P•1. 
P<.05 
P<.1 
P<.1 
b 11 b6c or l tba Mix 76w76 evx 5Z. 511g P<. OZ 
DI PHENYL ·p · PHENYLENED IA"INE 
1135 " f b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
1 " f b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 1vx 
b " f b61 orl tb1 Mix 76w76 evx 
1136 " 11 b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
1 " • b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b " " b61 orl tb1 •ix 76w76 evx 
1137 " f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a " f b6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b " f b6c orl tb1 mix 76w76 evx 
1138 " M b6c or l Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 " 11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b " 11 b6c orl tb1 •ix 76w76 evx 100ng •• : •• 1ug •..• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g ..... : .• 10 
• > .> Z. 79gm 
no dre 
Z.79gOI 
-" 1.33gll 
no dre 
no dre 
• > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
4.11g11 
DIPHENYLACETONITRILE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .... : .. 1g. • • • ·: • -10 
1139 f b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1140 • b6a orl lun ado 76w76 avx .> 3.6Zg11 
a • b6a or l Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1141 f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx -" ZZ9.11g 
a f b6c or l Liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 148.11g 
114Z • b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx -" 1Z9.11g 
a • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx Z00.11g 
b • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 46.411g 
DIPHENYLCARBONATE 100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100. • ·.: • .1g. • • • ·: • -10 
1143 " f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> Z06.11g 
a " f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b " f b6a or l tb1 •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1144 " • b6a or l l un ade 76w76 1vx .> no dre 
a " • b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b " 11 b61 or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1145 " f b6c orl Liv h•• 76w76 evx .> Z33.11g 
a " f b6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx Z33.•g 
b " f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 73.111g 
1146 " 11 b6c or l Liv hpt 76w76 evx -" 68. 011g 
a " 11 b6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx Z17 .Olg 
b " • b6c orl tb1 •ix 76w76 evx Z5.Z11g P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.09 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P<.9 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.1 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P<.09 -
P<.OOZ -
P<.6 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.05 
P<.05 
P<.3 
P<.OOZ -CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 127 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl lDose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1123 c03689 94.3•g 304.•g 0/35 250.•g 12/35 500.llg 16/35 
• c03689 59.3•g 339.•g 21/35 250.•g 18/35 500.•g 27/35 
b c03689 190.•g n.a.a. 1/35 250.•g 2/35 500.•g 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1124 124 1.20g• n.a.a. 0/30 305.mg 1/30 406.•g 1/30 569.•g 2/30 731.Mg 2/30 Hoch-Li get; ;bj co, 24, 164-167; 1969 
1125 125 1.08g• 5.36gM 2/106 5.29•g 0/110 52.9•g 1/106 529 ... g 12/66 Koc ib•; txap, 30, 275 · 286; 1974 
• 125 1.22g• 6. 73g• 1/106 5.29•g 0/110 52.9•g 1/106 529.•g 10/66 
b 125 4.82g• 231.g• 01120 5.29•g 0/120 52.9•g 0/120 529.•g 3/120 
c 125 4.33gM n.1.1. 31/120 5.29•g 34/120 52.9•g 28/120 529.llg 21/120 
1126 104 209.•g n.1.a. 0/9 521.•g 6/26 Argus; jnc i ,35,949 -958; 1965 
• 104 206.•g n.a.a . 1/9 521.•g 7/26 
DIOXATHION 78-34·2 
1127 c00395 207.•g n.1.1. 2/20 52.5•g 6/50 105.•g 6/50 
• c00395 623.•g n.1.1 . 0/20 52.5•g 1/50 105.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00395 447.•g n.1.1. 0/20 52.5•g 1/50 105.•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1128 c00395 77 .O•g n.a.a. 7/20 29.5•g 10/50 58.8•g 13/50 
• c00395 128.llg n.1.1 . 4/20 29.5•g 4/50 58.8•g 6/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c00395 141.•g n.1.1. 1/20 29.5•g 1/50 58.8•g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1129 c00395 3.98•g n.1.1. 36/50 1.60•g 27/50 3.00•g 29/50 
• c00395 36.3•g n.1.1. 1/50 1.60•g 0/50 3.00•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd . 
1130 c00395 6.81•g n.1.1. 28/50 2.40•g 23/50 4.80•g 21/50 
• c00395 n.1.1 . n.1.1. 0/50 2.40•g 0/50 4.80•g 0/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
DIPENTAMETHYLENETH !URAM HEXASULF IDE Caulfeda> ... 
1131 1221 49.2•g n.1.1. 1/17 41.4•g 1/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
1221 82.0•g n.1.1. 0/17 41.4•g 0/18 
b 1221 23.9•g n.1.1. 2/17 41.4•g 4/18 
1132 1221 47 .4mg n.1.1. 2/18 38.5•g 1/17 
• 1221 72.1•g n.1.1. 1/18 38.5•g 0/17 
b 1221 50.7•g n.1.1. 3/18 38.5•g 1/17 
1133 1221 25.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 41.4•g 3/18 
• 1221 82.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 41.4•g 0/18 
b 1221 25.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 41.4•g 3/18 
1134 1221 27 .6•g n.1.1. 0/16 38.5•g 2/17 
1221 27.6•g n.1.1. 0/16 38.5•g 2/17 
b 1221 18.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 38.5•g 4/17 
DI PHENYL -p · PHENYLENED I AMI NE (Ager i te DPPD l 74-31-7 
1135 1158 454.•g n.1.1. 0/18 462.•g 1/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1158 864.•g n.1.1. 0/18 462.•g 0/17 
b 1158 454.•g n.1.1. 0/18 462.•g 1/17 
1136 1158 328.•g n.1.1. 0/18 430.•g 2/18 
• 1158 851.•g n.1.1. 1/18 430.•g 0/18 
b 1158 401.•g n.1.1. 2/18 430.•g 2/18 
1137 1158 915.•g n.1.1. 0/18 462.•g 0/18 
• 1158 915.•g n.1.1. 1/18 462.•g 0/18 
b 1158 915.•g n.1.1. 2/18 462.•g 0/18 
1138 1158 306.•g n.1.1. 3/14 430.•g 3/16 
• 1158 756.•g n.1.1. 0/14 430.•g 0/16 
b 1158 213.•g n.1.1. 4/14 430.•g 5/16 
DIPHENYLACETON ITRILE 86-29·3 
1139 1311 93.2•g n.1.1. 1/17 78.4•g 1/18 lnnea;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1311 155.•g n.1.1 . 0/17 78.4•g 0/18 
b 1311 74.0•g n.1.1. 2/17 78.4•g 2/18 
1140 1311 63.5•g n.1.1. 2/18 73.0•g 2/17 
1311 137.•g n.1.1. 1/18 73.0•g 0/17 
b 1311 70.3•g n.1.1. 3/18 73.0•g 2/17 
1141 1311 56.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.4•g 2/17 
• 1311 147.•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.4•g 0/17 
b 1311 44.6•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.411g 3/17 
1142 1311 38.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.0•g 3/16 
• 1311 49.1•g n.1.1 . 0/16 73.0•g 2/16 
b 1311 19.7•g 170.•g 0/16 73.0•g 7/16 
DI PHENYL CARBONATE 102·09·0 
1143 1313 28.7•g n.1.1. 1/17 36.4•g 2/17 Innes; nt; s, 1968/ 1969 
• 1313 68.1•g n.1.1 . 0/17 36.4•g 0/17 
b 1313 32.0•g n.1.1. 2/17 36.4•g 2/17 
1144 1313 38.9•g n.1.1. 2/18 33.9•g 1/16 
• 1313 59. 7•g n.1.1. 1/18 33.9•g 0/16 
b 1313 41.6•g n.1.1. 3/18 33.9•g 1/16 
1145 1313 37.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.4•g 1/18 
• 1313 37.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.4•g 1/18 
b 1313 22.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.4•g 3/18 
1146 1313 20.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.9mg 3/18 
• 1313 35.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.9•g 1/18 
b 1313 10.7•g 103.•g 0/16 33.9•g 7/18 128 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'l'•ilpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
5, 5-0!PHENYLHYOANTOIN 
1147 Rf hza eat ·•• 11ly 60w60 ea 
a hza eat l iv tu11 60w60 ea 
b hza eat 11a• tuM 60w60 es 100ng •. : •• 1ug ••.• : •. 10 •.••• : •• 100 ..•• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.• :. -10 
.> 422.llg 
no dre 
no dre P<.3 
P•1. 
P•1. 
N,N·OIPROPYL-4 · (4' ·I PYRIDYL • 1' ·OXIDE I AZO>ANILINE .•• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•. : .• 1g .•.•• :. -10 
1148 R • ada eat l iv tu11 52w52 bfr .> no dre P-1. 
2, 5 • OITHIOBIUREA 
1149 M f b6c eat l iv hpc 94w94 
• M b6c eat TBA MXB 94w94 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 94w94 
c M b6c eat l un MXB 94w94 
1150 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 94w94 
a M • b6c eat l iv MXB 94w94 
b M 11 b6c eat l un MXB 94w94 
1151 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 25•25 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 2511i25 
1152 11 f34 eat pit can 251125 
a R m 134 eat TBA MXB 251125 
b 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 100ng'..: •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •.•• : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
:> "' 5.67g11 * P<.03 a 
4.35g11 * P<.2 
5.67gm * P<.03 
22.9g11 * P<.6 
:> 20.0g• * P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
842.119 * P<.3 
131.911 * P<1. 
#2.62911 * P<.02 
960.mg I P<.4 
5.01gm * P<.09 
DITHIOOXAMIDE 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 •.•.• :. -100 •.•• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g .•. • ·: • -10 
1153 R f cdr eat 11gl tu• 181124 ev "' 12.6119 \ P<.02 
n-OOOECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••.•. :. -100 .••• :. ·19· •••. :. -10 
1154 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P•1. 
M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b M f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 avx no dre P-1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.9 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.04 -
P<.1 
P<.007 -1155 M • b6a orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx .> 41.9119 
a M 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b M 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 149.119 
1156 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 54. 7119 
a M f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b M f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 54. 7119 
1157 M 11 b6c orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx "' 19.4m9 
a M 11 b6c orl lun ada 76w76 evx 30.1119 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 10.8119 
EDIFAS A 
1158 f apa eat l iv tull 23•23 e 
a ap1 eat lun ade 23•23 e 
b apa eat tba 11ix 23•23 e 
1159 11 ap1 eat l iv hpt 23•23 e 
a 11 apa eat lun ada 23•23 e 
b 11 apa eat tba 11ix 231123 e 
1160 f ap1 eat lun ade 241124 e 
a ap1 eat l iv •ix 24•24 e 
b ap1 eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
1161 11 apa eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
a 11 apa eat lun ade 241124 e 
b • apa eat tba •ix 241124 e 
EDI FAS 
1162 M ap1 eat l iv hpt 23•23 e 
a M f ap1 eat lun ade 231123 e 
b M f 1p1 eat tba 11ix 23•23 e 
1163 M 11 apa eat lun ade 231123 e 
M 11 epa eat l iv hpt 231123 e 
b M 11 •P• eat tba 11ix 23•23 e 
1164 R f 1p1 eat l iv tu11 24•24 e 
a R f 1p1 eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
1165 R • 1p1 eat l iv hpt 241124 e 
• R • apa eat tba •ix 24•24 e 
EOTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE 
1166 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M f b6c Ht lun MXB 24•24 
1167 M .. b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a M • b6c Ht l iv MXB 241124 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
1168 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a R f 134 eat l iv MXB 241124 
1169 R • 134 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
EMETI NE. 2HC l * 
1170 M f b6c ip) TBA MXB 40w78 a1 
a M f b6c ip) l iv MXB 40w78 81 100ng .• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. :. -19· •••• : •. 10 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
254.g11 * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
19.4g11 * P<.4 
161.g11 * P<.2 
375.g11 * P<.7 
113.g11 * P<.9 
.> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
27.3911 * P<.4 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •.•. :. -19· •••• :. -10 
538.g11 * P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
132.g11 * P<.9 
.> no dre P-1. 
7. 79g11 * P<. 2 
133.g11 * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••. :. -10 
:> no dre P-1. 
18.8g11 * P<.5 
5.29g11 * P<.2 
4.92g11 * P<. 7 
12.3g11 * P<.8 
3.19gm * P<.2 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
1.86g11 * P<. 7 
6.59g11 * P<.6 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• :. -19· •.•• : •• 10 
"' 1.20119 * P<.03 
no dre P• 1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 129 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
5, 5 ·DIPHENYLHYDANTO!N 57-41-0 
1147 1063 68.711g n.s.s. 0/16 100.llg 1/19 Morris; canr, 29, 2145·2156;1969 
1063 130.11g n.s.s. 0/16 100.llg 0/19 
b 1063 93.9"'g n.s.s. 3/16 100 ... g 1/19 
N, N -D IPROPYL -4 · (4' · [ PYR !DYL -1' -OXIDE [ AZOlANI LINE 
1148 1176 6.1811g n.s.s. 0/10 12.00lg 0/10 Brown; jnci ,37 ,365-367;1966 
2, 5 · D ITH!OBIUREA 142·46-1 
1149 c03009 2.60g11 n.s.s. 2/50 1.08g11 8/50 2.16g11 9/50 
• c03009 1. 58g11 n.s. s. 12/50 1.08gm 24/50 2.16gll 20/50 
b c03009 2.60g11 n.s.s. 2/50 1.08g11 8/50 2.16gll 9/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c03009 4.47g• n.s.s. 4/50 1.08g11 5/50 2.16g11 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1150 c03009 1.94g11 n.s.s. 20/50 996.llg 23/50 1.99g11 18/50 
c03009 5. 70g• n.s.s. 15/50 996.mg 9/50 1.99gll 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03009 3.98g11 n.s.s. 7/50 996.llg 13/50 1.99gOI 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1151 c03009 262 ... g n.s.s. 31/50 215 ... g 36/50 429.11g 32/50 
a c03009 3.07g11 n.s.s. 1/50 215.llg 0/50 429.llg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1152 c03009 905.•g n.s.s. 0/50 172.mg 0/50 343.0lg 4/50 
a c03009 251.11g n.s.s. 31/50 172.llg 28/50 343.0lg 30/50 
b c03009 1.46g• n.s.s. 0/50 172.llg 1/50 343.11g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
DITH!OOXAMIDE 79-40-3 
1153 1112 5.7211g n.s.s. 3/16 12.0llg 15/26 <24.011g 9/27) Wei sburger; j nc i, 67, 75-88; 1981 
n·DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 2439-10-3 
1154 1293 22.00lg n.s.s. 0/17 11.1 .. g 0/18 !nnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1293 22.0llg n.s.s. 1/17 11.111g 0/18 
b 1293 10.511g n.s.s. 2/17 11.111g 2/18 
1155 1293 6.3211g n.s.s. 2/18 10.311g 3/16 
• 1293 18.1•g n.s.s . 1/18 10.311g 0/16 
b 1293 6.9011g n.s.s. 3/18 10.311g 3/16 
1156 1293 8.9011g n.s.s. 0/16 11.111g 1/14 
1293 17.111g n.a.s. 0/16 11.111g 0/ 14 
b 1293 8.9011g n.s.s. 0/16 11.1mg 1/14 
1157 1293 5.8511g n.s.s. 0/16 10.311g 3/17 
a 1293 7.3911g n.s.s. 0/16 10.311g 2/17 
b 1293 4.0711g 146.0lg 0/16 10.311g 5/17 
EDI FAS A (11ethyl ethyl cellulose> 9004-59-5 
1158 127a 5.78g• n.s.s. 0/35 1.30g• 0/25 13.0gll 0/35 McEl l igott;fctx,6,449-460; 1968 
a 127• 38.9g11 n.s.s. 1/35 1.30g• 3/25 13.0g• 2/35 
b 127• 12.6gm n.s.s. 16/35 1.30g11 16/25 13.0gll 18/35 
1159 127a 14.8g11 n.a.s. 4/29 1.20g11 6/24 12.0gll 4/20 
127a 18.3gll n.s.s. 8/29 1.20gOI 2/24 12.0gll 4/20 
b 127• 4.17g• n.s.s. 18/29 1.20g11 16/24 12.0gll 15/20 
1160 127• 26.2g11 n.a.s. 0/43 500.llg 0/44 5.00g11 1/43 
a 127a 28.3gll n.a.s. 1/43 500.llg 0/44 5.00g11 1/43 
b 127• 5.18g• n.s.s. 22/43 500.llg 26/44 5.00gll 24/43 
1161 127a 3.26g• n.s.s. 0/46 400.mg 0/43 4.00gll 0/49 
127• 3.26g11 n.s.s. 1/46 400.llg 0/43 4.00g11 0/49 
b 127• 6. 71g11 n. s.s. 6/46 400.11g 10/43 4.00g11 12/49 
EDI FAS B (eel lulose carboxy118thyl ether, sodiu•> 9004-32-4 
1162 127• 42.9g11 n.s.s. 0/23 1.30g11 1/32 13.0gll 1/35 Mc Elli gott; f ctx ,6, 449-460; 1968 
a 127a 44. 7g11 n.s.s. 1/23 1.30gOI 5/32 13.0gll 2/35 
b 127• 17 .3g• n.s.s. 12/23 1.30g• 25/32 13.0gll 18/35 
1163 127• 18.9g11 n.s.s. 5/31 1.20gll 9/27 12.0g• 7/31 
a 127• 51.1g11 n.s.a. 3/31 1.20g11 1/27 12.0g• 1/31 
b 127• 9.17g11 n.s.s. 18/31 1.20g11 14/27 12.0gll 18/31 
1164 127a 4.46g11 n.s.s. 0/43 500.llg 0/48 5.00g11 0/44 
• 127a 2.57g• n.s.s . 27/43 500.llg 29/48 5.00g11 33/44 
1165 127a 21. 7g• n.s.s. 0/49 400.llg 0/42 4.00gll 1/45 
127• 8.70g11 n.s.s. 21/49 400.llg 14/42 4.00g11 15/45 
EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE (EDTA) 150-38-9 
1166 c03974 1.22g• n.s.s. 12/20 483.•g 24/50 966.llg 23/50 
• c03974 4.62g• n.s.s. 0/20 483.llg 1/50 966 ... g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03974 2.29g11 n.s.s. 0/20 483.llg 3/50 966.llg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1167 c03974 739.•g n.s.s. 9120 446.'1g 24/50 891.11g 27/50 
a c03974 1.41g11 n.s.s. 3/20 446.'1g 10/50 891 ... g 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03974 1.16g• n.1.s. 2/20 446.llg 8/50 891.11g 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1168 c03974 563.11g n.1.s. 14/20 186.llg 28/50 371.llg 27/50 
• c03974 2.96g11 n.s.s. 0/20 186.llg 1/50 371.mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1169 c03974 263.11g n.s.s. 9/20 149.•g 25/50 297.llg 30/50 
c03974 1.62g11 n.1.s. 0/20 149.11g 1/50 297 .mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
EMETINE.2HCl* <NCI uses CAS# 483-18-1) 316-42-7 
1170 c01605 .298•g n.a.a. 0/25 .46011g 2/35 1.4011g 0/35 2.7011g 1/35 
c01605 n.1.1. n.a.a. 0/25 .46011g 0/35 1.40•g 0/35 2.7011g 0/35 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 130 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b M f b6c ipj lun MXB 40w78 11 
1171 M • b6c ipj TBA MXB 44w78 .. 
e M 11 b6c ipj l iv MXB 44w78 as 
b M 11 b6c ipj lun MXB 44w78 aa 
1172 ode ipj TBA MXB 52w83 1 
a ode ipj l iv MXB 52w83 s 
1173 11 ode ipj TBA MXB 52w83 s 
R • ode ipj l iv MXB 52w83 I 
EMULSIFIER YN 
1174 M f nos eat l iv tu11 80w80 e 
a M f n11 eat lun ade 80w80 e 
1175 M 11 n11 eat lun ede 80w80 e 
a M 11 n11 eat l iv ade 80w80 e 
1176 R wil eat pit ere '\4•24 e 
• R wis eat l iv nod 241124 e 
1177 R 11 wil eat liv cho 241124 e 
ENOOSULFAN * 
1178 f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 v 
a b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 v 
b b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 v 
1179 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 
1180 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 av 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 av 
b 11 b6c eat l un MXB 78w91 av 
1181 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6c orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1182 f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6e or l l un ede 76w76 evx 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1183 11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6e or l l un ede 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6e orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 
1184 f 0111 eat TBA MXB 181126 dv 
0111 eat l iv MXB 181126 dv :> 49.4•g * P<.2 
. 55211g * P<.09 
1.3010g * P<.3 
1.1911g * P<.2 
. 23511g * P<. 3 
no dre P-1. 
. 382•g * P<. 5 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : •. 10 •••.• : •. 100 .••. :. -1•g •.•. : .• 10 ••... : .• 100 ••.• :. ·1G· ..• ·: .. 10 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
+ 5.54g11 * P<.009 -
511.g11 * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug .••. : •. 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .•.• : .• 111g ..•• : •• 10 ..•.• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1G· .••. : · .10 
. > 
:> 
• > 
• > 
:> no dre P-1. 
15.9Mg * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
• 42511g \ P<. 02 
6.3611g * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
1.7011g * P<.2 
. 58411g \ P<. 03 
.91411g \ P<.08 -
.31911g \ P<.004 
no dre P-1 . 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1 . 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
224.11g * P<.4 
1185 11 0111 eat TBA MXB 70w74 ed1v no dre P• 1. 
• 
ENORI 
1186 
• 
b 
1187 
• 
b 
1188 
• 1189 
• 1190 
1191 
• 1192 
b 
c 
1193 
ENOVIO 
1194 
• 1195 
• 1196 
1197 
1198 
1199 
1200 
1201 1202 
1203 1204 
1205 • 
0111 eat l iv MXB 70w74 ed1v no dre P-1 . 
b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 
b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 
b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 
11 b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 div 
" b6c Ht l iv MXB 80w90 div 
• b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 div 
0111 Ht TBA MXB 191126 IV 
0111 eat l iv MXB 191126 IV 
0111 eat edr MXA 191125 IV 
OH eat pit adn 191125 IV 
0111 Ht l iv he• 271128 ev 
OH Ht tbe •ix 271128 ev 
11 OH eat TBA MXB 191126 
• OH eat l iv MXB 19•26 
• OH eat edr MXA 19•26 
11 0111 eat edr adn 191126 
• 0111 eat he• 191126 
11 OH eat pni i1c 191126 
• OH eat l iv he• 281129 ev 
• OH eat tbe 11ix 281129 ev 
uh eat lun tu• 241124 g 
eah Ht l iv hpt 241124 g 
Hh eat lun tu• 241124 
eah Ht l iv hpt 241124 
Hh eat lun tu• 241124 
bel Ht 11ix 1qc 861186 r 
bee Ht lun tu• 241124 g 
bee eat l un tu• 241124 g 
bee eet lun tu11 241124 
c7l gev pit tu• 89w89 • 
cfl eat l iv hct 78w78 er 
• cfl Ht l iv hct 78w78 er 
f che eat lun tu• 241124 g 
che eat hpl ere 241124 100ng •• :. -1ug .•.. : .• 10 ••.•. : .• 100 ••.• : •. 111g •••. : •• 10 .•••. : .. 100 ••.. :. ·1G· •.•. : •. 10 
pool 
pool :> 6.8811g * P<.8 
no dre P•1 . 
67 .011g * P<1. 
"' .54611g • P<.04 
.85411g * P<.2 
1.27Mg * P<.08 
no dre P•1. 
7 .4411g * P<.8 
.> 
. > #.227•g \ P<.003 -
. 57911g * P<.02 
42.311g * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
• 77611g * P<. 8 
no dre P-1 . 
#.55311g * P<.04 
• 66011g * P<. 04 
.66111g • P<.03 
1. 7511g * P<.04 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 .•.•. : .• 100 ••.. :. ·1•g ••.. : •. 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •.•. : •. 1g .•.•• : •. 10 
.> 4.6211g P<.6 
25.211g P<.3 
.> 4.3111g P<.2 
+ . > 
.> 
. > 
.> • > 
• > 
• > no dre P•1 . 
no dre P• 1 . 
2.0011g P<.1 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1 • 
.15111g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre 
20.711g 
1.7511g P•1 • 
P<.3 
P<.008 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntl'i I Dose line 2Dose 
b c01605 
1171 c01605 
c01605 
b c01605 
1172 c01605 8.0511g n.1.1. 
• 17511g n.1.1. 
.29311g n.1.1. 
• 27911g n.1.1. 
71.5ug n.1.1. 
c01605 n.1.1. n.1.1. 
1173 c01605 96.7ug n.1.a. 
c01605 n.1.1. n.1.1. 
EMULSIFIER YN 
1174 425 
• 425 
1175 425 
• 425 
1176 1359 
• 1359 
1177 1359 55965·13 ·4 
10.1g11 n.1.1. 
n.s.a. n.s.s. 
15.8g• n.1.1. 
32.5g11 n.1.1. 
2.58g• 214.gll 
21.7g11 n.s.s. 
14.7g• n.1.1. 0125 
3/25 
1/25 
1/25 
6/10 
0/10 
3/10 
0/10 
0/41 
1/41 
2/25 
1/25 
13/47 
1/47 
0/41 
ENDOSUL FAN* 
1178 c00566 
c00566 <Thiodan> 115-29·7 
b c00566 
1179 283 
• 283 
b 283 
1180 c00566 
a c00566 
b c00566 
1181 283 
a 283 
b 283 
1182 283 
283 
b 283 
1183 283 
• 283 
b 283 
1184 c00566 
c00566 
1185 c00566 
c00566 .25011g n.1.1. 7/20 
2.59•g n.1.1. 0/20 
. 49711g n.1.1. 2/20 
.353•g n.1.1. 0/16 
1.0911g n.1.1. 0/16 
.12711g n.1.1. 0/16 
.364•g n.1.1. 4/20 
.40811g n.1.1. 1/20 
• 57611g n. I. I. 0/20 
.17611g n.1.1. 0/16 
.224•g n.1.1. 0/16 
.12011g 2.1111g 0/16 
.50611g n.1.1. 0/17 
1.6811g n.1.1. 1/17 
1.2911g n.1.1. 2/17 
.43311g n.1.1. 1/18 
.62011g n.1.1. 2118 
.63711g n.1.1. 3/18 
10.511g n.1.1. 15/20 
55.0•g n.1.1. 0/20 
15.3•g n.1.1. 12/20 
n. 1.1. n.1. 1. 0/20 
ENDRIN 72·20·8 
1186 c00157 .956•g n.1.1. 
c00157 .97311g n.1.1. 
b c00157 1.8311g n.1.1. 
1187 c00157 .26111g n.1.1. 
a c00157 .33511g n.1.1. 
b c00157 .52011g n.1.1. 
1188 c00157 .214•g n.1.1. 
a c00157 1.2111g n.1.1. 
1189 c00157 .11011g 1.2711g 
a c00157 .27711g n.1.1. 
1190 1004 6.8811g n.1.1. 
I 1004 1. 7711g n.1. I. 
1191 c00157 .10.111g n.1. 1. 
a c00157 n.1.1. n.1.1. 
1192 c00157 .233•g n.1 .1. 
a c00157 .265•g n.1.1. 
b c00157 . 29811g n. 1. 1. 
c c00157 .52911g n.1.1. 
1193 1004 • 70611g n. I. I. 
1004 2.0811g n.1.1. 2/10 2/10 
0/10 
1/10 
1/10 
0/10 
8/10 
0/10 
4/60p 
4/60p 
0/88 
60/88 
5/10 
0/10 
2160p 
2/60p 
0/60p 
0/60p 
1/75 
19/75 .46011g 
.46011g 
.46011g 
.46011g 
.13011g 
.13011g 
.13011g 
.13011g 
2.60g11 
2.60g• 
2.40g• 
2.40g• 
1.00g11 
1.00g11 
800.•g 
.210•g 
.21011g .21011g 
. 414•g 
.414•g 
.414•g 
.35011g 
.350•g 
. 35011g 
. 38511g 
.385•g 
.38511g .41411g 
.414•g 
.414•g 
.38511g 
.385•g .385•g 
6.60•g 
6.6011g 
15.7•g 15.7•g 
.29011g .29011g 
.29011g 
.170•g 
.17011g 
.170•g .110•g 
.110•g 
.110•g 
.11011g 
95.6ug 
95.6ug 
70.0ug 
70.0ug 
70.0ug 
70.0ug 
70.0ug 
70.0ug 
76.5ug 
76.5ug 0/35 
7/35 
3/35 
3/35 
26/35 
0/35 
13/35 
2/35 
0/41 
0/41 
4/34 
1/34 
9/45 
0/45 
1/39 
18/50 
0/50 
5150 
0/10 
1/10 
3/10 
8/50 
6/50 
2/50 
3/14 
2114 
5/14 
0/16 
1/16 
3/16 
0/16 
4/16 
5/16 
30/50 
1/50 
8150 
0/50 
5/50 
3150 
2/50 
3/50 
3/50 
1/50 
37/50 
1/50 
16/50 
11/50 
0/48 
37/48 
25/50 
0/50 
4/50 
2150 
5150 
0150 
0/47 
11/47 
ENOVID (norethynodral/H1tranol 166: 11) 8015 ·30·3 
1194 1367• .763•g n.1.1. 28/61 .65011g 29/57 
a 1367• 4.1011g n.1.1. 0/61 .65011g 1/57 
1195 1367n 1.42•g n.1.1. 21/59 1.30•g 30/63 
a 1367n 16.9•g n.1.1. 1/59 1.3011g 0/63 
1196 13670 6.12•g n.1.1. 17/49 2.6011g 16/54 
1197 1472 .49211g n.1.1. 0/20 .45011g 2120 
1198 1367• 4.2111g n.1.1. 18/52 .65011g 6/55 
1199 1367n 3.7711g n.1.1. 15/53 1.3011g 11/50 
1200 13670 19.S.g n.1.1. 12/55 2.6011g 3/55 1.40•g 
1.0011g 
1.00•g 
1.00•g 
.27011g 
.270•g 
.270•g 
.270•g 
7 .80g• 
7.80gll 
7 .20g• 
7 .20g• 
3.00g• 
3.00g11 
2.40g• 
C.43011g 
.430•g 
( .430•g 
.834•g 
.834•g 
( .834•g 
• 700•g 
.70011g 
• 700•g 
(. 776•g 
(. 77611g 
(. 776•g 
.834•g 
.83411g 
.834•g 
• 776•g 
• 77611g 
• 77611g 
15.6•g 
15.6•g 
<32.9•g 
32.911g 
.57011g 
( .570•g 
.570•g 
.34011g 
.340•g 
.34011g 
.21011g 
.210•g 
(.21011g 
.210•g 
.287•g 
.287•g 
.140•g 
.14011g 
.140•g 
.140•g 
.140•g 
.140•g .230•g 
.23011g 
1201 230 52.7ug .99511g 1/8 .20011g 6/11 2.00•g 
1202 1453 23.811g n.1.1. 0/39 .12511g 1/40 1.5011g 
1203 1453 17 .811g n. 1.1. 6/39 .12511g 4/40 1. 5011g 
1204 1367• 3.37•g n.1.1. 0/50 .650•g 1/47 
1to5 1367n .830•g 40.3•g 17/50 1.3011g 32153 2Inc 
0/35 
0/35 
0/35 
0135 
22/35 
0/35 
5/35 
0/35 
0/47 
1/47 
2/37 
0/37 
23/44 
1/44 
0139 
8/50) 
1/50 
0/50) 
0/17 
0/17 
0/17) 
7/50 
2/50 
2150 
0/16) 
0/16) 
0/16) 
0/18 
0/18 
0/18 
0/14 
1/14 
1/14 
24/50 
1/50 
3/50) 
0/50 
8/50 
1/50) 
1/50 
14/50 
10/50 
5/50 
33/50 
1/50 
6/50> 
13/50 
1/45 
26/45 
27/50 
0/50 
8/50 
8/50 
3/50 
3/50 
0/44 
6/44 
717 2. 7011g 
2.7011g 2.7011g 
2.7011g 1/35 
0/35 
0135 
0135 
.575•g 0/49 
.57511g 27/49 
.461•g 0/42 
.461•g 10/42 
1/40 5.00•g 
5/39 5.0011g 0/38 
1/40 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
Gaunt; f ctx, 15, 1·5; 1977 
8ranto11; f ctx, 11, 755·769;1973 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c . 
Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
adr:adn,can. S 
Deich111nn; iHd,39,426·434; 1970 
l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
adr:adn,can. S 
s 
Deich11ann; ; .. d,39,426-434; 1970 
Heston; jnc i ,51,209·224; 1973 
Munoz;canr ,38, 1504· 1508; 1973/Dunn 1969 
Heston; j nc i, 51, 209·224; 1973 
Poel ;scie, 154,402·403;1966 
Barrows; j txe, 3, 219-230; 1977 
Heston; jnc i ,51,209 ·224; 1973 s 131 132 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site X po+ Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1206 
a 
1207 
b 
1208 
1209 
a 
1210 
1211 
a 
1212 
1213 
ENOVID-E che eat hpl era 24m24 
che eat l iv hpt 241124 
chf eat fbs 241124 g 
chf eat lun tum 24m24 g 
chf eat l iv hpt 24M24 g 
chf eat lun tu" 24m24 g 
chf eat l iv hpt 24m24 g 
chf eat lun tu" 24M24 
chf eat l iv hpt 24m24 
chh eat l iv hpt 24m24 g 
csc gav lun tum 69w69 ek 
csc gav tba 11ix 69w69 ek 
csc gav tba mix 69w82 ek 
r3m eat 11am tu11 241124 r 
1214 M f cfl eat l iv hct 78w78 er 
1215 M 11 cfl eat liv hct 78w78 er 
1216 M sww gav l iv hct 65w80 er 
EP I CHLOROHYDR IN** 
1217 M f hie ipj lun pt11 64w64 
1218 R " sda inh 11ly 301132 as 
a R 11 sda inh l iv tu11 301132 as 
ESTRADIOL 
1219 M f c3h eat 11gl adc 241124 r 
1220 M c3j eat mgl adc 52w52 ek 
1221 M c3J eat ova tua 78w78 ek 
1222 M c3j eat mgl adc 241124 ek 
ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
1223 f b6c gav MXB MXB 52w84 s 
a f b6c gav lun MXA 52w84 s 
b b6c gav - --l ym 52w84 s 
c b6c gav 11yc srn 52w84 s 
d b6c gav sto sqc 52w84 s 
e b6c gav mg l MXA 52w84 s 
b6c gav TBA MXB 52w84 s 
g b6c gav l iv MXB 52w84 s 
h b6c gav lun MXB 52w84 s 
1224 b6c gav l un MXA 52w82 s 
b6c gav l y11 52w82 s 
b b6c gav lun a/c 52w82 s 
b6c gav •ye 1rn 52w82 s 
d b6c gav •g l MXA 52w82 s 
1225 "' b6c gav MXB MXB 52w83 s 
a "' b6c gav -- -MXA 52w83 s 
b "' b6c gav ato 1qc 52w83 s 
"' b6c gav TBA MXB 52w83 s 
d "' b6c gav l iv MXB 52w83 s 
e • b6c gav l un MXB 52w83 s 
1226 11 b6c gav l un MXA 52w81 s 
a "' b6c gav lun a/c 52w81 s 
b 11 b6c gav ---MXA 52w81 s 
"' b6c gav Myc srn 52w81 s 
1227 sda gav TBA MXB 52w85 
1da gav l iv MXB 52w85 
1228 II sda gav TBA MXB 52w85 
a 11 sda gav l iv MXB 52w85 
1229 11 ada gav 11g l fba 52w85 
ETHIONAMIDE 
1230 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 18•24 • 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 18•24 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 181124 s 
1231 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 • 
a M II b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 I 
b M II b6c aat lun MXB 18•24 • 
1232 M f bal gav thy car 50w69 e 
a M bal gav lun ado 50w69 e 
b M bal gav l iv ppc 50w69 e 
1233 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 s 
a R f f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 s 
1234 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
R II f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 -> 
. > 
• > 
. > 
.> 
• > 1.82m9 
no dre 
3_93.,9 
27.6M9 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.0005+ 
P· 1-
P<.005 -
P<.8 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P-1 . 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
.332119 P<.8 
no dre P-1 . 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : .• 10 •.••• :. -100 •••• :. -1Mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ...• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
.> 143.m9 * P<.8 
.> no dre P•1. 
.> 20.8119 P<.6 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1"g •••• : •. 10 .••.• : •. 100 •••• :. -19· •••• : · -10 
.> 28.9m9 P<.8 
.> 462.m9 * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1u9 •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•• : .• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.. :. -19· .•.• :. -10 
.> . 282119 P<. 7 
.> ... . 904.,g * P<. 02 
. > no dre P•1 . 
2. 75m9 * P<.6 
100ng •• : •• 1u9 •••• : •• 10 .•••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 .•.• :. -19· •.•• : •. 10 
pool 
pool 
:> 
:> 
pool .682mg * P<.0005 
1. 14.,g * P<. 0005c 
2.34mg * P<.0005c 
3.01"9 * P<.006 c 
+historical * P<.009 c 
13.4mg * P<.02 
. 562.,g * P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
1. 14M9 * P<. 0005 
1. 28"9 * P<. 0005c 
2.23119 * P<.0005c 
2. 8711g * P<. 002 
3.22"9 * P<.0005c 
12.8119 * P<.007 
4.10"9 * P<.0005 
4. 39.,g * P<. 0005c 
+historical * P<.08 c 
1 . 96mg * P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
2.34mg \ P<.02 
1. 99"9 \ P<. 0005c 
3. 6111g \ P<. 0005c 
4.31119 * P<.0005c 
5.55019 \ P<.003 c 
.189"9 * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
3.8511g * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
#. 756"9 * P<. 02 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••. :. -1•; •.•• :. -10-•.•• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· .•.. : .• 10 
:> 
:> :> 450.119 * P<.5 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
69.311g P<.01 + 
124.llg P<.4 
240.mg P<.2 
no dre P• 1. 
508.11g * P<. 2 
no dre P-1. 
623.llg * P<. 5 
ETHIONINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111; ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• :. -19-.... : •. 10 
1235 R • wia eat l iv car 34w52 e <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 133 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1206 13670 1.0311g 4.55Mg 15/51 2.6011g 36/49 
13670 26.30lg n.s.s. 1/51 2.60Mg 0/49 
1207 136711 1.60•g 26.9•g 0/54 .65011g 6/56 
a 1367 .. 2.2111g n.1.s. 5/54 .65011g 6/56 
b 136711 4.3611g n.a.s .. 46/54 .65011g 13/56 
1208 1367n 10.211g n.a.s. 3/52 1.30mg 1/53 
1367n 11.411g n.a.s. 34/52 1.30mg 4/53 
1209 13670 12.511g n.s.s. 6/50 2.6011g 4/52 
13670 24.011g n.s.a. 37/50 2.6011g 3/52 
1210 13670 28.411g n.a.a . 2/55 2.6011g 0/53 
1211 58511 . 1940lg n.s.s. 0/15 .14311g 0/15 Poel; canr, 28,845-859;1968 
a 58511 83.4ug n.s.s. 4/15 .143mg 3/15 
1212 585n 36. 7ug n.a.a. 8/15 .12011g 9/15 
1213 1463 1.9311g n.s.s. 50/73 1.95Mg 12/21 Rudal i ;g11cr, 17, 243· 252; 1975 
ENOVIO·E (norethynodrel /11estranol i 25: 1 J> 
1214 145311 9.9511g n.a.s. 0!39 .130mg 1/39 1.560lg 0/38 2.600lg 1/39 Barrows; j txe, 3, 219-230; 1977 
1215 145311 8.8711g n.s.a. 6/39 .13011g 8/40 1.5611g 7/40 2.6011g 1/39 
1216 1453n 2.84mg n.s.a. 1/50 1.0611g 2/50 
EP I CHLOROHYOR IN** 106-89-8 
1217 1143 2.54mg n.a.a. 10/30 5.7111g 11/30 Van Ouuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
1218 1167 114.llg n.a.s. 0/100 1.9811g 1/100 5.950lg 1/100 Lask in; jnci ,65, 751-757;1980 
1167 52.4Mg n.s.s. 0/100 1.98mg 0/100 5.9511g 0/100 
ESTRADIOL (estradiol • 17betal 50-28-2 
1219 1131 38.1ug n.a.a. 11/23 56.8ug 12/22 Gass ;obgy, 5 ,477; 1977 
1220 1468 .33811g n.a.s . 2/43 13.0ug 1/34 .13011g 1/34 .650mg 7/45 Hi gh11an; j ept, 4,81-95;1980/pers. co""'. 
1221 146811 • 52511g n.s.s . 2/14 13.0ug 0/5 .13011g 2/16 .65011g 017 
1222 1468n • 36811g n.s.s. 4/24 13.0ug 5/23 .1300lg 5/18 .65011g 2/7 
ESTRAOIOL MUSTARO 22966-79-6 
1223 c01570 .33011g 1.3811g 0/16 3.980lg 21/36 8.800lg 14/35 ---:ly11; lun:a/a,a/c; inyc:srn; sto:sqc. 
a c01570 .40911g 5.2911g 0/16 3.9811g 7/36 8.8011g 1/35 lun:a/a,a/ c. 
b c01570 .991mg 5.45mg 0/16 3.980lg 9/36 8.8011g 11/35 
c c01570 .92511g 35.0mg 0/16 3.9811g 8/36 8.8011g 1/35 
d c01570 1.43mg 178.llg 0/16 3.9811g 2/36 8.800lg 2/35 
c01570 2.9311g n.a.s . 0/16 3.9811g 0/36 8.8011g 3/35 1ngl:acn,can. 
c01570 . 29811g .99811g 0/16 3.9811g 25/36 8.8011g 20/35 
c01570 n.s.s. n.a.s. 0/16 3.9811g 0!36 8.8011g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c01570 .40911g 5.2911g 0/16 3.9811g 7136 8.800lg 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1224 c01570 .44211g 6.82mg 1/31p 3.9811g 7/36 8.8011g 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c01570 .94411g 4.6511g Ot31p 3.9811g 9/36 8.8011g 11/35 
b c01570 .80711g 22.7mg 0/31p 3.9811g 4/36 8.8011g 0/35 
c01570 1.0911g 11.0mg 0/31p 3.9811g 8/36 8.8011g 1/35 
d c01570 2.79mg 272.llg 0/31p 3.980lg 0/36 8.8011g 3/35 111gl :acn,can . 
1225 c01570 2.4111g 8.0011g 0/14 3.9811g 6/34 8.2011g 18/35 ---: Leu, ly111; sto:sqc. 
• c01570 2.5611g 8.9011g 0/14 3.9811g 6/34 8.20Mg 17/35 -· • :leu,ly11. 
b c01570 7 .1311g n.a.a. 0/14 3.98•g 0/34 8.2011g 2/35 
c01570 1.1211g 6.7711g 4/14 3.980lg 24/34 8.200lg 23/35 
d c01570 5.2311g n.a.s. 2/14 3.980lg 5/34 8.2011g 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e c01570 1.0111g n.a.s . 2/14 3.9811g 12/34 (8.200lg 5/35) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1226 c01570 • 9290lg 7.1611g 2/29p 3.980lg 12/34 (8.2011g 5/35) lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c01570 1.4611g 12.711g 0/29p 3.9811g 6/34 (8.2011g 1/35) 
b c01570 2.5411g 7.8911g 0/29p 3.9811g 6/34 8.20mg 17/35 ---: Leu, ly11. 
c c01570 2.1811g 27 .411g 0/29p 3.9811g 6/34 (8.2011g 2/35) 
1227 c01570 65. 7ug n.a.s. 5/10 .16011g 27/35 .33011g 26/35 
c01570 n.a.a. n.s.a. 0/10 • 160•g 0/35 .33011g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd . 
1228 c01570 .23411g n.a.a. 4/10 .160mg 10/35 .33011g 10/35 
• c01570 n.s.a. n.a.a. 0/10 .160•g 0/35 .33011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1229 c01570 .32711g n.a.s. 0/20p .16011g 2/35 .33011g 5/35 
ETHIONAHIOE 536·33·4 
1230 c01694 113.11g n.a.s. 4/15 70.211g 7/35 139.llg 14/35 
• c01694 n.s.a. n.1.1. 0/15 70.211g 0/35 139.llg 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd . 
b c01694 650.•g n.s.s. 1/15 70.211g 0/35 139.llg 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1231 c01694 101.•g n.1.1. 7/15 64.811g 16/35 128.11g 10/34 
• c01694 159.mg n.1.1. 3/15 64.811g 6/35 128.11g 4/34 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c01694 192.llg n.1.1. 2/15 64.811g 5/35 128.llg 2/34 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1232 1014 29.911g 7.42gll 0/20 49. 7mg 7/36 Bianci f ior i; lapp,24, 145-165; 1964 
1014 31.811g n.1.a. 2/18 49. 711g 7/33 
b 1014 58.911g n.1.1. 0/18 49.711g 2/33 
1233 c01694 49.511g n.s.s. 12/15 40.011g 26/35 81.011g 25/35 
• c01694 175.•g n.a.s. 0/15 40.0•g 1/35 81.011g 3/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1234 c01694 33.411g n.a.s. 10/15 32.011g 16/35 <64.8•g 4/34> 
c01694 153.llg n.a.1. 0/15 32.0•g 1/35 64.811g 1/34 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
ETH ION I NE 13073-35-3 
1235 1373 n.s.s. 4.9711g 0/30 65.411g 30/30 Argus; zkko, 75, 201-208; 1971 134 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
ETHYL ALCOHOL 
1236 R f nbr vat l iv tu11 64w64 
1237 
1238 11 nbr vat l iv tu• 64w64 
b 1da vat tba 11a l 261126 e 
ETHYL BRO"OACETATE 
1239 " f hie ipj lun pt11 64w64 100ng •• : •. 1ug •..• : .• 10 ••.•• : •. 100 ••.• : •. 111g ••.. : •. 10 .•..• : .• 100 •..• : •. 1g .••.. : .. 10 
.no dre P-1. 
.>no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •. : •. 1ug ..•. : •• 10 •..•. : •. 100 ••.. :. -1•g •.•. : .• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 ..•. : .. 1g .•••• :. -10 
.> no dre P• 1. 
S·ETHYL·L·CYSTEINE 100ng •. : .• 1ug ..•. :. -10 ..••. :. -100 ..•. :. ·1•g •.•• : •• 10 ...•• :. -100 •... : •• 1g ...•• :. -10 
1240 R 11 vis eat abd lpa 581189 aev .> 3.63g• * P<.4 
a R •vis eat liv tu• 581189 aev no dre P•1. 
b R • vis eat tba 11ix 58"89 aev 3.63g• * P<.4 
p,p' ·ETHYL·DDD 
1241 f b6c eat l iv "XA 241124 v 
a b6c eat l iv hpc 24•24 v 
b b6c eat TBA "XB 24•24 v 
c b6c eat l iv "XB 241124 v 
d b6c eat lun "XB 241124 v 
1242 b6c orl l iv hpt 761176 evx 
a b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b b6c or l tba 11ix 761176 evx 
1243 • b6c eat lun a/a 241124 
a • b6c eat TBA "XB 24•24 
b • b6c eat l iv "XB 24•24 
11 b6c eat lun "XB 24•24 
1244 • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1245 f b6a orl l iv hpt 761176 evx 
a " f b6a orl lun ade 761176 evx 
b " f b6a or l tba 11i x 761176 evx 
1246 " • b6a or l lun ade 761176 evx 
a " 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b " 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1247 R f f34 eat TBA "XB 24•24 
a R f f34 eat l iv "XB 24•24 
1248 11 f34 eat TBA "XB 241124 
a R 11 f34 eat l iv "XB 24•24 
N ·ETHYL· N • FOR"YLHYDRAZINE 
1249 " f 1wa vat blv •ix 611161 e 
a " 1wa vat lun •ix 611161 e 
b " 1wa •at liv tu11 61w61 e 
1250 " • 1wa vat lun •ix 60w60 e 
a " 11 1wa vat blv •ix 60w60 • 
b "• 1wa vat liv •ix 601160 e 
c " 11 1wa vat gal •ix 60w60 e 
d " 11 1we vat pre •ix 601160 e 100ng .• : .• 1ug •••. : .• 10 •.••. : .• 100 •.•. :. -1•g •.•. : .• 10 .•..• : •• 100 •.•. : •. 1g .••.. : •. 10 
.> 
+ 
• > 
.> 
:> 
:> ± 2.67g• * 
3.16g• * 
2.36gll * 
2.67g• * 
no dre 
665.llg 
no dre 
322.llg P<.04 
P<.04 
P<.4 
P<.04 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.1 
e1.64g11 * P<.02 
no dre P•1. 
9.16g• * P<.9 
5.07g11 * P<.6 
65.1•g P<.002 
581.11g P<.3 
54 .111g P<. 0005 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
581.•g P<. 7 
no dre P•1. 
543.11g P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
8.54g• * P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. a 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 .•.• : •. 111g .•.• : •• 10 •.••. : •. 100 .••. : .. 1g .•.•. : .• 10 
2.4911g 
2.52•g 
no dre P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 
P<.003 + + • 3.1911g 
3.55•g 
17.711g 
47 .4•g 
50.811g 
N ·ETHYL· N' ·NITRO· N • NITROSOGUANIDINE 
1251 " b cbh wet duo •ix 43w69 e •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••. : .• 100 .•.• :. -1•g •••• : •. 10 ••..• : .. 100 .... : •• 1g ••..• : .• 10 
• + 2.84•g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P•1. a " b cbh vat HO 11ix 43w69 e 
b " b cbh vat duo adc 431169 e 
c " b cbh vat HO 1qc 431169 e 
d " b cbh vat 1to •ix 431169 e 
e " b Cbh Wit l i V hH 431169 e 
" b cbh vat lun ade 431169 e 
g " b cbh Wit l i V hpt 431169 e 
h " b cbh vat tba 11ix 43w69 e 
ETHYL TELLURAC 
1252 f b6c eat TBA "XB 25•25 v 
1 b6c eat l iv "XB 251125 v 
b b6c eat lun "XB 25•25 v 
1253 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
1 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba 11ix 761176 evx 
1254 • b6c eat eye adn 25•25 v 
1 • b6c eat lun "XA 25•25 v 
b 11 b6c eat lun 1/c 25•25 v 
c • b6c eat TBA "XB 251125 v 
d • b6c eat l iv "XB 25•25 v 
e • b6c eat lun "XB 251125 v 
1255 • b6c or l l iv hpt 761176 evx 
• b6c or l l un •ix 76w76 evx 
b • b6c orl lun car 761176 evx 
• b6c or l lun ade 761176 evx 
d • b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 3.85•g 
4.2011g 
5.60•g 
8.0311g 
70.311g 
no dre 
no dre 
284.llg 
100ng .. : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 .•..• : •• 100 .•.• :. -1•g ••.• : •• 10 •.••. : •. 100 .••. : .• 1g .•.•. : •• 10 
:> 1.03g• * 
2.27gll * 
3.40g• * 
.> 131.•g 
no dre 
63.5•g 
201.•g \ 
228.•g \ 
260.•g \ 
902.•g * 
no dre 
228.•g \ 
24.2•g 
52.1•g 
108.•g 
108.llg 
8.41•g P<1. 
P<.3 
P<.2 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P<.002 1 
P<.002 
P<.003 
P<.5 
P•1. 
P<.002 
P<.02 
P<.09 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.0005 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 135 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
ETHYL ALCOHOL 64-17-5 
1236 162a 8.92g• n.1.s. O!ZO 5. 71g• O!ZO Yamamoto; i j cn,2,337-343; 1967 
1237 162a 7 .80g11 n.s.1. O!ZO 5 .OOg• 0/20 
1238 1264 39.9g11 n.1.1. 4/48 9.45g• 4/48 Sch11ahl ;cl et, 1, 215·218;1976 
ETHYL BROMOACET ATE 105-36·2 
1239 1143 .39011g n.s.1. 12/30 .571•g 9130 Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
S ·ETHYL· L • CYSTEINE 2629·59·6 
1240 1373 592.•g n.1.1. 0/30 116.llg 0/30 127.11g 1/30 Argus; zkko, 75, 201·208; 1971 
a 1373 275.•g n.1.1. 0130 116.llg 0130 127.0lg 0/30 
b 1373 592.•g n.1.1. 0130 116.•g 0130 127.•g 1/30 
p,p' ·ETHYL·DDD (Per thane> 72-56-0 
1241 c02868 1.23g• n.1.1. 1/20 368.llg 3/50 806.Mg 11/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c02868 1.39g• n.s.1. 1/20 368.11g 2/50 806.•g 10/50 
b c02868 617 .11g n. s .1. 7/20 368.•g 24/50 806.•g 26/50 
c02868 1.23g• n.1.1. 1/20 368.•g 3/50 806.•g 11/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c02868 2.94g• n.1.1. O!ZO 368.•g 3/50 806.0lg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1242 1098 108.•g n.s.1. 0/16 110.llg 1/17 Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
a 1098 206.•g n.s.1. 0/16 110.Mg 0/17 
b 1098 79.1•g n.1.s. 0/16 110.llg 2/17 
1243 c02868 866.•g n.1.1. 0/20 300.llg 4/50 600.•g 9/50 
a c02868 430.11g n.1.1. 11/20 300.llg 38/50 600.llg 33/50 
b c02868 508.•g n.1.s. 8/20 300 ... g 27/50 600.11g 25/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c02868 988.11g n.s. 1. 4/ZO 300.•g 5/50 600.•g 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1244 1098 27.611g 238.•g 0/16 102.•g 7/16 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1098 94.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 102.•g 1/16 
b 1098 23.9•g 167.•g 0/16 102.•g 8/16 
1245 1098 218.11g n.1.1. 0/17 110.•g 0/18 
a 1098 218.•g n.s. 1. 1/17 110.•g 0/18 
b 1098 104.11g n.s.1. 2/17 110.•g 2/18 
1246 1098 72.911g n.1.1. 2/18 102.•g 3/18 
a 1098 121.•g n.1.1. 1/18 102.0lg 1/18 
b 1098 63.611g n.s.1. 3/18 102.•g 4/18 
1247 c02868 166.•g n.s. 1. 15/20 175.•g 32/50 <350.•g 21/50) 
a c02868 1.59g• n.1.1. 0/20 175.•g 2/50 350.•g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1248 c02868 286.•g n.1.1. 13/20 140.•g 36/50 280.•g 30/50 
a c02868 1.59g• n.1.1. 0/20 140.•g 2/50 280.0lg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
N· ETHYL ·N · FORMYLHYDRAZINE 74920-78-8 
1249 1052 1.17•g 4.67•g 8/96 40.0•g 47/48 Toth; care, 1, 61-65; 1980 
a 1052 1.17•g 4. 76•g 15/99 40.0•g 49/50 
b 1052 142.•g n.1.1. 0/21 40.011g 0/50 
1250 1052 1.7611g 6.03•g 22/98 33.3•g 39/42 
a 1052 2.04•g 6.45•g 5/88 33.3•g 32/36 
b 1052 9.0711g 45.6•g 1/52 33.3•g 13/36 
1052 16.411g 452.•g 0/44 33.3•g 4/27 
d 1052 19.311g 290.•g 0/52 33.3•g 5136 
N ·ETHYL· N' ·N ITRO·N · NITROSOGUANID !NE 
1251 600 1.6411g 5.50•g 0/38 5.48•g 19/43 NakHura; jnci, 52,519-522; 1974 
a 600 2.1011g 8.18Mg 0/38 5.4811g 15/43 
b 600 2.25•g 9.20•g 0/38 5.48•g 14/43 
c 600 2.8011g 14.3•g 0/38 5.48•g 11/43 
d 600 3.63•g 29.511g 0/38 5.4811g 8/43 
• 600 11.4•g n.1.1. 0/38 5.4811g 1/43 
f 600 21 .411g n.1.1. 3/38 5.48•g 0/43 
g 600 13.8•g n.1.1. 19/38 5.4811g 5/43 
h 600 2.37•g n.1.1. 22/38 5.4811g 25/43 
ETHYL TELLURAC 20941-65-5 
1252 c02857 325.•g n.1.s. 8/20 277.•g 36/50 639.llg 36/50 
c02857 908.•g n.1.a. 1/20 277.•g 7/50 639.llg 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02857 856.•g n.1.1. 3/20 277.•g 9/50 639 ... g 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1253 132 21.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 20.4•g 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 132 40.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 20.4•g 0/18 
b 132 15.6•g n.1.1. 0/16 20.4•g 2/18 
1254 c02857 112.•g 617.•g 0/20 151.•g 16/50 <376.•g 10/50) 
a c02857 127.•g 706.•g O!ZO 151.llg 16/50 <376.•g 11/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
b c02857 140.•g 1.02g• 0/20 151.•g 14/50 <376.•g 11 /50) 
c c02857 198.llg n.1.1. 10/20 151.•g 39/50 376.•g 35/50 
d c02857 518.•g n.1.1. 8/20 151.•g 15/50 376.•g 16/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
• c02857 127.•g 706.•g O!ZO 151.•g 16/50 (376.•g 11/50> lun:a/a,a/c. 
1255 132 8.30•g n.1.1. 0/16 19.0•g 4/16 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 132 12.S.g n.1.1. 0/16 19.0•g Z/16 
b 132 17.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 19.0•g 1/16 
c 132 17.511g n.1.1. 0/16 19.0•g 1/16 
d 132 3.84•g 23.6•g 0/16 19.0•g 9/16 136 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt '1'050 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1256 M b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orl tba "ix 76w76 evx 
1257 M " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M " b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b M "' b6a orl tba "'ix 76w76 evx 
1258 R f f34 eat pit adn 24.,24 
f34 eat TBA MXB 24.,24 
b f34 eat l iv MXB 24.,24 
1259 " f34 eat "en 24.,24 
m f34 eat MXB MXB 24m24 
b 
c 
d " f34 eat bod .an 24m24 
m f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
1260 M f hi c i p j l un pt., 64w64 
ETHYLENE !MINE 
1261 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1262 " b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
., b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl lun bro 76w76 evx 
m b6a orl tba "ix 76w76 evx 
1263 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1264 " b6c orl l iv hpt 77w77 evx 
11 b6c orl lun "'ix 77w77 evx 
b " b6c orl lun ade 77w77 evx 
" b6c orl tba 11ix 77w77 evx 
ETHYLENE THIOUREA .> 28.2 .. g 
no dre 
26.7 .. g 
55.5mg 
no dre 
31.2 .. g 
#12.3mg P<.08 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.04 
no dre P-1. 
650 • .,g * P<.4 
77 .6.,g * P<.009 a 
77. 6mg * P<. 009 
181."g * P<.05 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
.100ng •• : •• .lug ••.• : .• 10 •.••• : •• 100 .••• : .• .1W1g ••.• : •. 10 .•••• : •. 100 •••• :. -19· •••• : .• 10 
.> no dre 
.!OOng •• :. -.lug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• .lg ..•.. :. -10 
.283mg 
3.29mg 
noT050 
.485•g 
.8001Rg 
2.14Wlg 
noTD50 
<+ noTD50 
.500 .. g 
noTD50 
.295•g 
.295 .. g 
.364mg 
.223Wlg 
.!OOng •• :. -.lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• :. -!mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• .lg •.••• :. -10 P<.0005+ 
P<.05 
P<.003 
P<.0005 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 
P<.002 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
1265 f b6a orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 44. 7•g P<.0005 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.05 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.003 a f b6a orl lun ade 81w81 evx no dre 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 29.3Wlg 
1266 ., b6a orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 
11 b6a orl lun ade 81w81 evx 
b " b6a orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 
1267 b6c orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 
a b6c orl lun ade 81w81 evx 
b b6c orl tba mix 81w81 evx 
1268 11 b6c orl liv hpt 82w82 evx 
a "' b6c orl lun ade 82w82 evx 
b 11 b6c or l tba •ix 82w82 evx 
1269 b cdr eat fbs 24.,24 e 
a b cdr eat thy 11ix 241124 e 
b b cdr eat thy ade 24•24 e 
b cdr eat l iv hpt 24•24 e 
d b cdr eat •gl adc 24•24 e 
e R b cdr eat tba •ix 241124 e 
R b cdr eat tba Mal 24•24 e 
1270 cdr eat thy fee 181124 e 
1271 cdr eat thy car 18•24 
a cdr eat thy sea 18•24 
b R cdr eat l iv hnd 18•24 
1272 11 cdr eat thy fee 181124 e 
1273 11 cdr eat thy car 18•24 
a 11 cdr eat l iv hnd 1~•24 + <+ 
<+ noTD50 
no dre 
noTD50 
noTD50 
203.0lg 
noTD50 
16.911g 
545.mg 
16.90lg 
13.2•g 
16.611g Z P<.0005+ 
33.9"g P<.0005+ 
330.•g * P<.04 
no dre P• 1. 
7. 2311g * P<. 0005 
13.4.,g Z P<.0005 
39.80lg * P<.03 
34.40lg * P<.002 + 
98.9"'g * P<.2 
304.•g * P<.6 
12.8•g I P<.0005+ 
10.811g I P<.0005+ 
79.111g * P<.2 
ETHYLENE UREA .100ng •. :. -.lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g .•.• : .• 10 •.••. :. -100 .••• : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1274 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a or l tba iii x 76w76 evx 
1275 M ., b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M • b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1276 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b M b6c or l tba tu11 76w76 evx 
1277 M " b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DI SOD !UM 
1278 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 505 •• g 
no dre 
473.•g 
.> 
. > 500.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
242.•g 
242.llg 
87.111g 
•• : • -.lug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g .••• : •• 10 •.••• : . -100 .•.• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> no dre P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.6 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.007 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 137 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1256 132 9.1711g n.1.1. 1/17 20.411g 5/18 
• 132 40.5•g n.1.1 . 0/17 20.4•g 0/18 
b 132 8.28•g n.1.1. 2/17 20.4•g 6/18 
1257 132 12.4•g n.1.1. 1/18 19.0•g 3/18 
a 132 17.8•u n.1.1. 2/18 19.0•g 2/18 
b 132 8.12•u n.1.1. 3/18 19.0•g 6/18 
1258 c02857 5. 7811g n.1.1. 2/20 7 .50•g 19/50 <15.0•u 9/50) 
c02857 11. 7•g n.1.1. 15/20 7 .50•g 40/50 15.0•g 39/50 
b c02857 106.•g n.1.1. 0/20 7 .50•g 0/50 15.0•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1259 c02857 37.1•g 2.43g• 0/20 12.011g 2/50 24.0•g 8/50 
a c02857 37 .1•g 2.43g• 0/20 12.0•g 2/50 24.0•g 8/50 ---:•en; bod:•en. A 
b c02857 61.8•u n.1.1. 0120 12.0•g 0/50 24.0•u 4/50 
c02857 12.711g n.1.1. 17/20 12.0•g 43/50 24.0•u 39/50 
d c02857 119.•g n.1.1. 1/20 12.0•g 2/50 24.0•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
ETHYLENE GLYCOL (glycol 1ul fate) 1072.53.3 
1260 1143 .169•g n.1.1. 10/30 .286•g 9/30 Van Duuren;jnci,53,695-700;1974 
ETHYLENE !MINE 151·56·4 
1261 1245 • 100•g • 900•g 1/17 1.81•g 10/11 lnnaa;ntii, 1968/1969 
• 1245 .806•g n.1.1. 0/17 1.81•g 2/11 
b 1245 n.1.1., .551•g 2/17 1.81•g 11/11 
1262 1245 .219•g 1.59•g 2/18 1.68•g 12/16 
• 1245 • 349•g 3. 45•g 1/18 1.68•g 9/16 
b 1245 .734•g n.1.a. 0/18 1.68•g 4/16 
c 1245 n.1.1. .419•g 3/18 1.68•g 16/16 
1263 1245 n.1.1. .409•g 0/16 1.81•g 15/15 
• 1245 .233•g 1.27•g 0/16 1.81•g 11/15 
b 1245 n.1.1. .409•g 0/16 1.81•g 15/15 
1264 1245 .135•g .68S.g 0/16 1.68•g 15/17 
• 1245 .135•g .688•g 0/16 1.68•g 15/17 
b 1245 .174•g .847•u 0/16 1.68•g 14/17 
1245 88. 7ug .540•g 0/16 1.68•g 16/17 
ETHYLENE THIOUREA (ETU) 96·45·7 
1265 1141 20.4•g 124.•g 0/17 88.8•u 9/16 lnnaa;ntii, 1968/1969 
• 1141 178.•g n.1.1. 1/17 88.8•u 0/16 
b 1141 13.2•g 99.9•g 2/17 88.8•u 12/16 
1266 1141 n.1 .. 1. 20.0•g 1/18 82.6•g 18/18 
• 1141 87. 7•u n.1.1. 2/18 82.6•g 2/18 
b 1141 n.1.1. 21.8•g 3/18 82.6•g 18/18 
1267 1141 n.1.1. 20. 7•g 0/16 88.8•u 18/18 
• 1141 61.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 88.8•u 3/18 
b 1141 n.1.1. 20. 7•g 0/16 88.8•g 18/18 
1268 1141 7 .63•g 40.5•g 0/16 82.5•g 14/16 
• 1141 88. 7•u n.1.1. 0/16 82.5•u 1/16 
b 1141 7 .63•g 40.5•g 0/16 82.5•u 14/16 
1269 139 5.00•u 75.7•u 0/72 .225•g 0175 1.13•g 5173 (5.63•g 4/73 11.3•g 5/69 22.5•g 3/70> Grahe•; 
fctx, 13,493-499; 1975 
• 139 12.5•u 22.9•g 2/72 .225•g 2/75 1.13•g 1173 5.63•g 2/73 11.3•g 16/69 22.5•g 62/70 
b 139 20.0•g 70.6•g 2172 .225•g 0175 1.13•g 5/73 5.63•g 1/73 11.3•g 21/69 <22.5•g 3/70) 
139 117.•g n.1.1. 1/72 .225•g 1175 1.13•g 1/73 5.63•g 2/73 11.3•g 1/69 22.5•g 5/70 
d 139 100.•g n.1.1. 2/72 .225•g 14/75 1.13•g 4/73 5.63•g 2/73 11.3•g 5/69 C22.5•g 0/70) 
• 139 4.58•g 13.5•g 51/72 .225•g 49/75 1.13•g 45/73 5.63•g 54/73 11.3•g 61/69 22.5•g 68/70 
f 139 9.62•u 19.9•u 15/72 .225•g 23175 1.13•g 13/73 5.63•g 16/73 11.3•g 31/69 22.5•g 63/70 
1270 1112 18.0•g n.1.a. 0/10 6.56•g 2/26 13.1•g 6/26 Wai1burgar; jnci ,67, 75-88; 1981 
1271 141• 15.6•g 149.•g 0/32 6.56•g 3/26 13.1•g 5/21 Ulland; Jnci ,49,583-584; 1972 
• 141• 29.9•g n.1.1. 0/32 6.56•g 2/26 13.1•g 1/21 
b 141• 49.4•g n.1.1. 0/32 6.56•g 1/26 13.1•g 0/21 
1272 1112 7 .21•g 28. 7•g 0/10 5.25•u 2/26 10.5•g 15/26 Wai1burger; jnci ,67, 75-88; 1981 
1273 141• 6.03•g 21.S.g 0/32 5.25•g 3/26 10.5•g 14/21 Ulland; Jnci ,49,583-584; 1972 
• 141• 23.9•g n.1.1. 0/32 5 .25•g 2/26 10.5•g 1/21 
ETHYLENE UREA <2· i•iduol idinone> 120-93-4 
1274 1197 70.3•g n.1.1. 1/17 89.1•g 2/17 lnnaa;ntii, 1968/1969 
a 1197 167 .•g n. 1.1. 0/17 89.1•g 0/17 
b 1197 59.5•g n.1.1. 2/17 89.1•g 3/17 
1275 1197 69.5•u n.1.1. 1/18 82.9•g 2/18 
a 1197 109.•g n.1.1. 2/18 82.9•g 1/18 
b 1197 65.2•g n.1.1. 3/18 82.9•g 3/18 
1276 1197 167 .•g n.1.1. 0/16 89.1•g 0/17 
a 1197 167 .•g n.1.1. 0/16 89.1•g 0/17 
b 1197 167 .•g n.1.1. 0/16 89.1•g 0/17 
1277 1197 59.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 82.9•g 2/17 
• 1197 59.5•u n.1.1. 0/16 82.9•g 2/17 
b 1197 32.8•g 1.18g• 0/16 82.9•g ,5/17 
ETHYLENEBI SD I TH IOCARBAMATE, DI SODIUM (Di thane, nabH) 142·59·6 
1278 1215 19.7•g n.1.1. 0/17 9.96•g 0/18 lnnea;nt ii, 1968/1969 138 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
e M f b6• orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6e orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1279 M • b6e or l lun ede 76w76 evx 
e M • b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M • b6e orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1280 M f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
e M f b6c or l lun ede 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1281 M • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
e M • b6c or l l un ede 76w76 evx 
b M • b6c orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1-ETHYLENEOXY · 3, 4 · EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 
1282 R f Hd uev 1to tu• 84w84 
ETHYLHYDRAZINE. HCl 
1283 M f owe wet lun •ix 82w82 e 
e M f owe wet l un ede 82w82 e 
b M awe wet bl v •ix 82w82 e 
c M owe wet l iv •ix 82w82 e 
d M owe wet l un edc 82w82 e 
e M owe wet bl v enu 82w82 e 
f M awe wet l iv anu 82w82 e 
u M owe wet l iv •U• 82w82 e 
h M owe wet bl v •u• 82w82 e 
1284 M • owe wet l un ade 72w72 e 
e M • owe wet lun •ix 72w72 e 
b ·M • owe wet blv •ix 72w72 e 
M • awe wet bl v anu 72w72 e 
d M • owe wet l iv enu 72w72 e 
e M • owe wet l iv •ix 72w72 e 
ETHYLNITROSOCYANAMIDE 
1285 f •rw wet rH tu• 52w90 
e f mrw wet l iv tu• 52w90 
b f •rw wet tba •ix 52w90 
1286 • •rw wet rH tu• 52w90 
• • •rw wet l iv tu• 52w90 
b • •rw wet tba •ix 52w90 • > 
• > .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
866.•u 
no dre 
no dre 
• • : •• 1uu •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. :. -1•u .•.• : •. 10 •.••• : •• 100 .••• :. ·1U· •••• : •• 10 
• > no dre 
100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•U· •.• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 .••• : •• 1u ••••• : •• 10 
• • 5.22•u 
5.62•u 
11.6•u 
13.0•u 
14.0•u 
27 .6•u 
27 .6•u 
42.9•u 
42.9•u 
• • 7 .82•u 
8.81•u 
38.6•u 
46.9•u 
46.9•u 48.1•u 
100nu .• : •. 1uu .••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• :. -1•u •••. : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1U· •.•. : .• 10 
+ 2.91•u 
• no dre 
3.17•u 
4.99•u 
no dre 
no dre p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<1 • 
P•1. 
p.1 • 
p.1 • 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.09 + 
P<.08 
P<.08 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P<.005 + 
p.1. 
P•1. 
4· ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE • 1 ·SULFONAMIDE 
1287 M f aif Ht ubl car 23•23 e •. 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••. : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• :. -1U· •••• : •• 10 
34.2•U 
53.4•u 
15.3•u P<.0005+ 
P.<.005 
P<.0005+ • M f aif Ht lun ade 23•23 e 
1288 M f ifc Ht ubl car 92w92 r 
ETHYNODIOL DI ACETATE 100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •. 10 •.••• : .• 100 ••.• :. ·1•U· .•. : .• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• : •. 1u ••.•. : .• 10 
1289 M f crf Ht H• tu• 24•24 er pool .> no dre P•1. 
EUCALYPTOL 
1290 M • cfl u•v lun tu• 19•24 e 
• M • cfl u•v l iv tu• 19•24 e 
b M • cfl uev tba •ix 19•24 e 
M • cfl uev tba Hl 19•24 e 
FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED 
1291 M f b6c Ht l iv MXA 78w95 v 
• M b6c Ht TBA MXB 78w95 v 
b M b6c Ht l iv MXB 78w95 v 
c M b6c Ht l un MXB 78w95 v 
1292 M • b6c Ht TBA MXB 78w94 v 
• M • b6c Ht l iv MXB 78w94 v 
b M • b6c Ht lun MXB 78w94 v 
1293 R f f34 Ht TBA MXB 1S.24 v 
a R f f34 Ht l iv MXB 1S.24 v 
1294 R • f34 Ht TBA MXB 1S.24 v 
e R • f34 Ht liv MXB 1S.24 v 
FENTHION 
1295 M f b6c Ht TBA MXB 24-24 
• M f b6c Ht l iv MXB 24•24 
b M f b6c Ht lun MXB 24•24 
1296 M • b6c Ht MXA MXA 24•24 
e M • b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
b M • b6c Ht l iv MXB 24•24 
c M • b6c Ht lun MXB 24•24 
1297 R f f34 Ht TBA MXB 24•24 
e R f 134 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
1298 R • 134 Ht TBA MXB 24•24 
e R • 134 eat l iv MXB 24•24 1oonu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 ••.• :. -1•u •••. : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ••.• : •. 1u ••••• : •. 10 
• > no dre p.1 • 
no dre P•1. 
119.•U * P<.7 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •. 1uu •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •. 100 ••.• :. ·1•u •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 .••• : •• 1u •••.• : •• 10 
:> 
:> * a1~. •u P<.02 -
P<.2 
P<.02 
P<.7 
p.1. :> 259.•u * 
152.•u \ 
1.75u• * 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
100nu .• : •• 1uu ••.• : •. 10 •••.• : •• 100 ••• :: . -1•U· ••. : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
:> :> 17 .8•u * P<. 7 
no dre 
no dre 
6.12•u * 
1.03•u \ 
9.44•u * 
13.3•u * 
29.4•U * p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.02 e 
P<.02 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•L 
10.3•u * P<.7 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 139 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• 1215 19. 7•g n.1.1. 0/17 9.96•g 0/18 
b 1215 19.7•g n.1.1. 2/17 9.96•; 0/18 
1279 1215 12.2•; n.1.1. 2/18 9.26•g 1/18 
• 1215 18.3•9 n.1.1. 3/18 9.26•9 0/18 
b 1215 14.1•9 n.1.1. 5/18 9.26•9 1/18 
1280 1215 17.5•9 n.1.1. 0/18 9.96•; 0/16 
• 1215 17.511,11 n.1.1. 1/18 9.96•; 0/16 
b 1215 17.5•9 n.1.1. 3/18 9.96•; 0/16 
1281 1215 9.63•; n.1.1. 1/17 9.26•g 1/16 
a 1215 10. 7•g n.1.1. 2/17 9.26•g 1/16 
b 1215 10.1•9 n.1.1. 6/17 9.26•9 2/16 
1 · ETHYLENEOXY · 3, 4 • EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 106·87·6 
1282 55 27 .4•g n.1.1. 0/5 40.811; 0/5 Yan Duuren;Jnci,37,825-838;1966 
ETHYLHYDRAZINE. HC l 18413· 14·4 
1283 142 3.11•9 9.34•9 21/97 25.0•g 44/49 Sh i•izu; i J cn, 13, 500-505; 1974 
a 142 3.40•9 9.90•; 18/97 25.0•g 43/49 
b 142 7.37•9 19.6•9 0/43 25.0•g 30/50 
c 142 8.13•9 22.3•9 0/43 25.0•g 28/50 
d 142 8.54•9 25.S.g 4/97 25.0•g 27/49 
• 142 15.4•9 57.0•g 0/43 25.0•g 16/50 
f 142 15.4•9 57 .O•g 0/43 25.0•g 16/50 
g 142 21.5•9 111.•g 0/43 25.0•g 11/50 
h 142 21.5•9 111.•g 0/43 25.0•g 11/50 
1284 142 4.62•9 15. 7•g 15/100 20.8•9 31/48 
• 142 4.93•9 21.1•9 23/100 20.811g 31/48 
b 142 13.7•9 n.1.1. 2/28 20.811; 8/36 
c 142 16.3•9 n.1.1. 1/28 20.8•g 6/36 
d 142 16.3•; n.1.1. 1/28 20.811g 6/36 
• 142 15.4•9 n.1.1. 2/28 20.8•; 7/36 
ETHYLNITROSOCYANAMIDE Cnl tro1oeth1necarbe•onitr ii el 38434· 77 · 4 
1285 1246 1.35•9 8.02•9 0/25 3.40•g 9/20 Buley; jnci ,62, 1523-1528; 1979 
a 1246 10.5•9 n.1.1. 0/25 3.40•; 0/20 
b 1246 .981•9 n.1.1. 12/25 3.40•; 14/20 
1286 1246 1.88•9 36.2•9 0/22 2.97•9 5/19 
• 1246 8.71•; n.1.1. 0/22 2.97•9 0/19 
b 1246 1.67•9 n.1.1. 12/22 2.97•9 10/19 
4 -ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE -1 ·SULFONAMIDE 842-00-2 
1287 142c 16.1•9 102.•g 0/40 13.0•g 9/42 Flek1;bj ca,28,227-231; 1973 
• 142c 21.811; 360.•g 0/40 13.0•g 6/42 
1288 142• 8.89•g 31.0•g 0/26 13.0•g 19/52 Fl ak1;bJ ca,31, 585·587;1975 
ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 297-76· 7 
1289 1175 .190•9 n.1.1. 161/167p 9. 75ug 30/32 .130•9 46/56 Rudel i; jnci ,49,813-819; 1972 
EUCALYPTOL 470-82-6 
1290 710 38.5•g n.1.1. 102/240 5.27•9 30/52 21.1•9 18/47 Roe; jept,2, 799-819; 1979 
• 710 72.811g n.1.1. 69/240 5.27•9 5/52 21.1•9 12/47 
b 710 16.2•9 n.1.1. 170/240 5.27•g 36/52 21.1•g 35/47 
710 67 .8119 n.1.1. 75/240 5.27•9 18/52 21.1•9 11/47 
FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED <•ethyl orange Bl 140-56-7 
1291 c03010 47 .6•g n.1.1. 2/100 54.3•9 4/50 (103.•g 3/49) l iv:hp1,hpc. 
• c03010 82.6•9 n.1.1. 26/100 54.3•g 10/50 103.•g 16/49 
b c03010 47 .6mg n.1.1. 2/100 54.3•9 4/50 (103.•g 3/49) l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
c c03010 210.•g n.1.1. 8/100 54.3•g 3/50 103.•g 4/49 lun:1/1,a/c. 
1292 c03010 137 .•g n.1.1. 20/50 94. 7•g 20/50 189.•g 3/50 
• c03010 265.•g n.1.1. 15/50 94.7•9 9/50 189.•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
b c03010 249.•g n.1.1. 7/50 94.7•g 7/50 189.•g 1/50 lun:a/1,1/c. 
1293 c03010 36. 7•g n.1.1. 31/50 19.3•9 33/50 34.4•9 30/50 
• c03010 325.•; n.1.1. 1/50 19.3•g 1/50 34.4•9 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
1294 c03010 19.3•9 n.1.1. 31/50 15.4•9 18/50 (27 .5•g 17 /50> 
• c03010 n.1.1 • n.a.a. 0/50 15.4•g 1/50 27 .5•g 0/50 l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
FENTHION 55-38-9 
1295 c08651 2.57•; n.1.1. 12/25 1.30•9 22/50 2.60•g 24/50 
• c08651 11.0•g n.1.1. 2/25 1.30•9 4/50 2.60•g 2/50 l lv:hp1,hpc,nnd • 
b c08651 11.2•9 n.1.1. 3/25 1.30•9 3/50 2.60•9 3/50 lun:1/1,1/c. 
1296 c08651 3.34•9 n.1.1. 0/25 1.20•g 7/50 2.40•9 8/50 ski :fb1,1rn; 1ub: fb1, rhb, orn. 
• c08651 .500•9 n.1.1. 10/25 1.20•; 35/50 (2.40•g 26/50> 
b c08651 2.37•; n.1.1. 6/25 1.20•g 17/50 2.40•g 17/50 l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
c c08651 4.15•g n.1.1. 2/25 1.20•g 5/50 2.40•g 8/50 lun:a/1,1/c. 
1297 c08651 .581•9 n.1.1. 18/25 .500•9 44/50 1.00•g 39/50 
• c08651 9. 77•g n.1.1. 1/25 .500•g 0/50 1.00•g 0/50 l lv:hp1,hpc,nnd • 
1298 c08651 1.04•9 n.1.1. 17/25 .400•g 32/50 .800•g 26/50 
• c08651 2.82•9 n.1.1. 0/25 .400•g 2/50 .800•g 1/50 l lv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 140 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
FERRIC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
1299 f b61 orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
1300 • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
1 • b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1301 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1302 • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 100ng •. : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •.•• : •. 10 ••••. :. -100 .•.• : •• 1g •••.• : · 010 
.> 
.> .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
11.2•g 
no dre 
21.611g 
24.9•g 
no dre 
12.0•g 
5.57•g 
11.911g 
2.81•g 
N· C2·FLUORENYll ·2,2,2· TRIFLUOROACETAMIDE.: •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .•••• :. -100 .••• :. ·1•g •••• :. -10 •.•.. : • 0100. • • ·: • .1g. • • • ·: • 010 P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.4 
p.1. 
P<.7 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.09 -
P<.02 -
P<.1 
P<.002 -
1303 R f buf eat 11gl adc 53w54 e + 1.62•g P<.0005+ 
a R buf eat liv hpt 53w54 e 1.90•g P<.0005+ 
b R buf eat edu aqc 53w54 e 4.94•g P<.002 + 
FLUORIDE, SODIUM 
1304 M b cd1 wat lun tu11 301130 e 
a M b cd1 wat l iv tum 301130 e 
b M b cd1 wat tba tu• 301130 e 
M b cd1 wat tba H l 30•30 e 
4' ·FLUOR0·4·AMINODIPHENYL 
1305 M f cba gav l iv hpt 6Dl26 e 
1306 M 11 cba gav l iv hpt 61124 e 
M 11 cba gav l iv 11ix 61124 e 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••..• : .• 100 ..•• :. -1•g .••. : •. 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •. 1g. · • ·.: • -10 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng .• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •. 10 •.••• : •• 100 •..• : •. 1g •. • • ·: • -10 
•• 1.09•g 
• • 1.1911g 
1.1911g 
N·4· C4' ·FLUOROBIPHENYllACETAMIDE 100ng .• : •. 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g ••.• : •. 10 ••••• :. 0100 •. • ·: • .1g. • · • ·: · 010 p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 + 
P<.005 
1307 R 11 134 eat kid adc 52w52 ekr + 1.01•g P<.0005+ 
5 · F LUOROURAC IL 
1308 R • b46 ivj 
a R 11 b46 iv J 
b • b46 iv J 
R 11 b46 iv J l iv ade 12•24 .. 
tba ben 12•24 ea 
tba •ix 12•24 ea 
tba •al 12•24 ea 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 •••. : •• 1g ••.•• :. -10 
"' 34.711g 
16.3•g 
18.6•g 
no dre 
FORMIC ACID 2· i 4· C2·FURYL) ·2· THIAZOL Yl I HYDRAZIDE ••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : .• 10 ••••. :. -100 .•.• : .• 1g •••• ·:. ·10 P<.1 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P•1. 
1309 R f ada eat l iv tum 46w64 ev .> no dre P• 1. 
a f ada eat tba 11ix 46w64 ev no dre P•1. 
FORMIC ACID 2·(4·METHYl·2·THIAZOLYllHYDRAZIDE 
1310 R f 1d1 Ht •gl adf 46w64 IV 
a R 1d1 eat l iv tu• 46w64 av 
b R ado eat tba •ix 46w64 ev •.•. : .• 10 ••••. : •• 100 .••• :. ·1•g •••• : •. 10 •.•.• : .• 100 •••• : •. 1g •.••• : •. 10 
"' 14.4•g 
no dre 
14.4•g 
FORMIC ACID 2· i 4· C5·NITR0·2 · FURYl) ·2· THIAZOL Yl J HYDRAZIDE ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g •.•• : .• 10 ••.•• :. -100 •••• : .• 1g .•••. :. 010 
1311 • ayg eat ubl tee 48w70 e 16.6•g 
a 11 ayg eat for aqp 48w70 e 25 .111g 
b 11 ayg eat lun tu• 48w70 a no dre 
c 
1312 
a 
b 
c 
d 
1313 
a 
b 
1314 
a 
b 
c 
d 
• 
f 
g R 
1315 R 
a R 
b R 
c R 
d R 
a R 
f R 
1316 R 
a R • 1yg eat l iv tu• 48w70 e 
1wi eat for aqp 33w52 e 
IWi Ht l le 33w52 I 
awi Ht lun ale 33w52 a 
awi eat l iv tu• 33w52 e 
awi eat tba •ix 33w52 e 
awi eat for pa11 33w52 
1wi Ht leu 33w52 
1wi Ht l iv tu• 33w52 
awi eat lun tu• 33w52 
buf eat •gl mix 46w64 e 
buf eat 11gl adc 46w64 e 
buf eat kid 11ix 46w64 e 
buf eat l iv eye 46w64 e 
buf eat kid uac 46w64 e 
buf eat 11gl adf 46w64 a 
buf eat kid tua 46w64 • 
buf eat tba •ix 46w64 • 
hza eat H• tum 44w60 11 
hza eat kid ade 44w60 ea 
hza eat 111i adc 44w60 ea 
hza eat kid car 44w60 es 
hza eat eac aqc 44w60 11 
hza eat cec adc 44w60 ea 
hza eat l iv hH 44w60 11 
ada eat •gl •ix 46w64 a 
ada Ht kid 11ix 46w64 • • 
• • no dre 
8.85•g 
11.4•g 
67.111g 
no dre 
2.42•g 
13.8•g 
25.6•g 
no dre 
no dre 
5.54•g 
13.1•g 
17.5119 
39.111g 
44.111g 
80.5•g 
98.6•g 
noTD50 
5.50•g 
17.6•g 
78.511g 
78.511g 
+historical 
210.llg 
428.11g 
5.85•g 
9. 96"g P<.03 + 
P•1. 
P<.03 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P·1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.06 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.008 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 • 
P<.007 + 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.03 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.05 + 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABAS E 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 
FERR IC DI HETHYLD ITH IOCARBAHATE <ferba11) 14484-64·1 
1299 1209 8.21•g n.1.1. 0/17 4.39•g 
a 1209 8.21•g n.1.1. 1/17 4.39•g 
b 1209 5.4311g n.1.1. 2/17 4.3911g 
1300 1209 2.34•g n.1.1. 2/18 4.08•g 
a 1209 4.82•g n.1.1. 1/18 4.08•g 
b 1209 2.54•g n.1.1. 3/18 4.08•g 
1301 1209 4.05•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.39•g 
a 1209 7. 73•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.39•g 
b 1209 2.95•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.39•g 
1302 1209 1.91•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.08•g 
a 1209 2.93•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.08•g 
b 1209 1.20•g 10.8•g 0/16 4.08•g 
N · <2 • FLUORENYLl ·2,2, 2· TRIFLUOROACETAMIDE 
1303 144 .800•g 3. 71•g 0/18 13.2•g 
144 .940•g 4.44•g 0/18 13.2•g 
b 144 2.11•g 18.4•g 0/18 13.2•g 
FLUORIDE, SODIUM 7681-49 -4 
1304 1036 11.0•g n.1.1. 15/71 1.75•g 
a 1036 15.3•g n.1.1. 4/71 1.75•g 
b 1036 7.10•g n.1.1. 24/71 1.75•g 
1036 17 .4•g n.1.1. 8/71 1.75•g 
4' ·FLUOR0·4·AMINODIPHENYL 0/17 
0/17 
1/17 
4/18 
1/18 
4/18 
1/16 
0/16 
2/16 
4/17 
2/17 
7/17 
363-17-7 
14/18 
13/18 
7/18 
12/72 
4/72 
22/72 
5/72 
1305 1165 .663•g 1.96•g 
1306 1165 .601•g 8.97•g 
• 1165 .601•g 8.97•g 324-93-6 
0/18 
2/15 
2/15 1.30•g 25/40 
1.19•g 18/32 
1.1911g 18/32 
N·4· (4' ·FLUOROBIPHENYL>ACETAMIDE 398-32·3 
1307 1150 .392•g 2.58•g 0/15 16.0•g 14/15 
5 · F LUOROURAC IL 51-21-8 
1308 1017 5.65•g n.1.1. 0/65 2.36•g 1/22 
a 1017 3.65•g n.1.1. 3/65 2.36•g 3/22 
b 1017 3.37•g n.1.1. 7/65 2.36•g 4/22 
1017 6.96•g n.1.1. 4/65 2.3611g 1/22 2Inc 
FORMIC ACID 2 · [ 4· (2 · FURYLl · 2 • THIAZOL YL J HYDRAZIDE 31873-81-1 
1309 1073 52.9•g n.1.1. 0/29 29.5•g 0/23 
a 1073 52.9•g n.1.1. 2/29 29.5•g 0/23 
FORMIC ACID 2· (4·METHYL · 2 · THIAZOL YL)HYDRAZ !DE 32852-21 -4 
1310 1073 5.54•g n.1.1. 2/29 14.7•g 8/28 
1073 32.1•g n.1.1. 0/29 14.711g 0/28 
b 1073 5.54•g n.1.1. 2/29 14.711g 8/28 
FORMIC ACID 2· J 4· (5·NITR0·2· FURYLl ·2· THIAZOLYL J HYDRAZIDE (FNT) 3570-75-0 
1311 1077 7 .32•g 46.9•g 0/17 63.111g 9/13 
1077 12.9•g 57 .3•g 0/24 63.111g 13/24 
b 1077 141.•g n.1.1. 0/24 63.1•g 0/24 
c 1077 141.•g n.1.1. 0/24 63.1•g 0/24 
1312 1076 4.33•g 21.9•g 0/29 41.311g 11/20 
• 1076 5.09•g 47 .4•g 2/29 41.3•g 10/20 
b 1076 16.5•g n.1.1. 0/29 41.311g 2/20 
c 1076 42.5•g n.1.1 • 0/29 41.311g 0/20 
d 1076 • 980•g 5. 76•g 2/29 41.3•g 19/20 
1313 1118 7 .06•g 32.6•g 0/30 41.311g 12/30 
• 1118 10.7•g 639.•g 1/30 41.311g 8/30 
b 1118 63. llllg n.1.1. 0/30 41.3•g 0/30 
c 1118 63.8•g n.1.1. 0/30 41.3•g 0/30 
1314 1073 2.43•g 11.411g 0/30 71.9•g 28/29 
• 1073 7 .4811g 25.0•g 0/30 71.9•g 22/29 
b 1073 9.87•g 34.5•g 0/30 71.9•g 19/29 
c 1073 19.511g 96.4•g 0/30 71.911g 11/29 
d 1073 21.3•g 116.•g 0/30 71.9•g 10/29 
• 1073 32. 7•g 434.•g 0/30 71.9•g 6/29 
f 1073 37 .3•g 1.20g• 0/30 71.9•g 5/29 
g 1073 n.1.1. 8.39•g 0/30 71.9•g 29/29 
1315 1063 2.28•g 13.1•g 3/16 73.6•g 25/26 
• 1063 9.51•g 37 .O•g 0/16 73.6•g 16/26 
b 1063 29. 7•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.6•g 5/26 
c 1063 29.7•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.6•g 5/26 
d 1063 34.6•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.6•g 4/26 
• 1063 51.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.6•g 2/26 
f 1063 69.6•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.6•g 1/26 
1316 1073 2.49•g 12.8•g 2/29 71.911g 25/26 
• 1073 5.42•g 19.5•g 0/29 71.9•g 22/26 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
lnnes;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
Morris; jnc i ,24, 149-180; 1960 
Kanisewa;canr, 29,892-895;1969 
Clay1on;bj ca, 19,297-310; 1965/Wi l l ia.s 1962 
H inton;bect, 23, 464-469;1979 
Schmahl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
Er turk; j nc i, 47 ,437 ·445; 1971 /1970a 
Er turk; j nc i, 47 ,437-445;1971/1970• 
Croft; j nc i, 51, 941-949; 1973 
Cohen;canr ,33, 1593-1597; 1973 
Cohen; canr, 38, 1398-1405; 1978 
Er turk; j nc i, 47 ,437·445;1971/1970a 
Morr i 1;canr ,29, 2145 -2156; 1969 
Er turk; j nc i ,47, 437·445;1971 /1970a 141 142 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b 1d1 eat •g l edc 46w64 e 
c 1d1 eat l ;v •ix 46w64 e 
d ldl llt kid UIC 46w64 I 
e 1d1 Ht l iv eye 46w64 e 
f 1d1 Ht kid tue 46w64 e 
g 1d1 eat •g l edf 46w64 e 
h 1d1 eat tbe •ix 46w64 e 
1317 1d1 Ht •gl edc 45w75 ev 
a 1da Ht k;d rec 45w75 ev 
b 1da eat for 1qp 45w75 ev 
c 1d1 eat k/p tee 45w75 ev 
d 1da eat lbl 45w75 ev 
e 1d1 Ht l iv tu• 45w75 ev 
f 1d1 Ht tbe 11; x 45w75 ev 
1318 • 1d1 Ht k;d 11ix 46w64 er 
a • 1d1 Ht k; d uec 46wil4 er 
b 11 1d1 eat l ; v eye 46w64 e 
c • 1d1 eat •gl edf 46w64 e 
d • 1d1 eat k; d tue 46w64 er 
1 • 1d1 eat k/p tee 46w64 er 
f • 1d1 eat tbe 11 ix 46w64 e + • 
+ 19.5•g 
30.1•g 
33.9•g 
43.9•g 
50. 7•g 
52.811g 
noTD50 
3.54•g 
65.4•g 
65.4•g 
+hi1torical 
+historical 
no dre 
3. 79•g 
5.82•g 
19.3•g 
35.3•g 
+historical 
47 .6•g 
69.9•g 
noTD50 
1 · FORMYL .3. THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••. : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •.•• : •• 10 •.••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g •.••• : •• 10 
1319 f 1d1 Ht l iv tu• 46w64 e 
R f 1d1 eat tbe 11ix 46w64 1 
FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
1320 M f IWI Wit lun •ix 83w83 • 
• M f IWI Wit l iv 11ix 83w83 • 
1321 M • IWI Wit lun •ix 83w83 • 
M • 1wa wat l iv 11ix 83w83 a .> no dre 
140.•g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• jg ••••• : •• 10 
36.0•g 
6.86g• 
<+ noTD50 
1.15g• 
2 · FURALDEHYDE SEMI CARBAZONE 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •. 10 .•••• : •• 100 .••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .•••• : •• 10 
1322 R f 1da eat •gl fba 46w66 er .> 48.8•g 
FURFURAL 100ng •• : •. 1ug ••.• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••. :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 ••.• : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1323 H f 1yg inh l iv tu• 52w81 av .> no dra 
a H f 1yg inh lun tu• 52w81 ev no dre 
1324 • 1yg inh l iv tu• 52w81 ev .> no dra 
a H • 1yg inh lun tu• 52w81 ev no dra 
GERMANATE, SODIUM 
1325 M b cd1 wat lun •ix 24•24 e 
a M b cd1 wat l ;v •ix 24•24 e 
b M b cd1 wat tba •ix 241124 a 
M b cd1 wat tbe ben 24•24 • 
d M 
b cd1 wat tba 111l 24•24 • 
1326 R b leb wat l iv tu• 35•35 • 
a R 
b l eb wat tbe tu• 35•35 • 
b R 
b lab wat tba •al 35•35 e 
GIBBERELLIC ACID 
1327 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b61 or l l un ede 76w76 evx 
b f b61 or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1328 • b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 • b61 or l l un •ix 76w76 evx 
b • b61 orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1329 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 
1330 f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
f b6c or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g .••. : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• : •• JO 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.> no dre 
no dra 
no dre 
100ng •• : •. 1ug •.•• : .• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••••. : .• 10 
.> no dre 
.> 
.> 
• 
b • b6c or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
no dre 
316.•g 
460.•g 
151.•g 
no dra 
no dra 
1.15g• 
460.•g 
952.•g 
214.•g 
100ng .• : •• 1ug .•.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1g •.••• : •• 10 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.009 + 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.008 + 
P<.03 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
+ 
P<.006 + 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.9 
P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.07 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.09 -
P<.3 
P<.02 -
GLYCEROL alpha·MONOCHLOROHYDRIN 
1331 R f cdr gev pty 1d1 17•24 av 
1332 R • cdr gav pty ade 17•24 ev .> no dre P-1. 
GLYCIDALDEHYDE** 
1333 R f 11d gav 1to tu• 70w70 
GLYCOL SULFITE 
1334 M f hie ipj lun pt• 64w64 
FD & C GREEN NO. 
1335 M f cbJ eat Liv •ix 24•24 
a M f cbj eat lun ade 24•24 
b M f cbJ eat tba •al 24•24 
M f cbJ eat tba •ix 24•24 "' 116.•g * P<.06 
100ng .• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 •.••. : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
"' 1.03•g P<.07 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •. 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g •••.• : •. 10 
146.g• * P<.6 
146.g• * P<.6 
18.4g• \ P<.1 
no dr• P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 143 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1073 10.6•g 41.0•g 0/29 71.9•g 16/26 
c 1073 15.3•g 71.1•g 0/29 71.9•g 12/26 
d 1073 16.8•g 83.4•g 0/29 71.9•g 11/26 
e 1073 20.5•g 123.•g 0/29 71.9•g 9/26 
f 1073 22.8•g 157 •• g 0/29 71.9•g 8/26 
g 1073 22.0•g 2.37g• 2/29 71.9•g 9/26 
h 1073 n.1.1. 9.13•g 2/29 71.9•g 26/26 
1317 200e 1.95•g 6.19•g 6/71 31.3•g 49/51 Cohen; Jnci ,51,403·417; 1973 
e 200e 29.6•g 196.•g 0/71 31.3•g 8/51 
b 200e 29.6•g 196.•g 0/71 31.3•g 8/51 
200e 47 .2•g 3.07g• 0/71 31.3•g 4/51 
d 200e 55.7•g n.1.1. 0/71 31.3•g 3/51 
• 200e 171.•g n.1.1. 0/71 31.3•g 0/51 
f 200e 2.02•g 7 .04•g 18/71 31.3•g 49/51 
1318 1073 2.92•g 11. 7•g 0/28 57 .5•g 24/26 Er turk; jnci ,47,437·445;1971/1970e 
1073 10.2•g 42.6•g 0/28 57 .5•g 14/26 
b 1073 17.1•g 92.9•g 0/29 57.5•g 10/29 
1073 20.8•g 151.•g 0/29 57 .5•g 8/29 
d 1073 20.4•g 177 •• g 0/28 57 .5•g 7/26 
• 1073 26.4•g 690.•g 0/28 57 .5•g 5/26 
f 1073 n. 1.1. 6. 71•g 0/29 57. 5•g 29/29 
1 · FORMYL .3. THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 2302·84·3 
1319 1073 151.•g n.1.1. 0/29 71.9•g 0/27 Er turk; j nc i, 47 ,437.445;1971/ 1970a 
a 1073 38.6•g n.1.1. 2/29 71.9•g 5/27 
FORMYLHYDRAZ I NE 624-84·0 
1320 397 19.5•g 64.9•g 15/96 250.•g 47/49 Toth;bj ca,37,960-964;1978 
e 397 292.•g n.1.1. 3/33 250.•g 2/19 
1321 397 n.1.1. 36.9•g 22/92 208.•g 50/50 
a 397 316.•g n.1.1. 3/69 208.•g 5/43 
2 · FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 2411-74·7 
1322 1120 15.1•g n.1.1. 2/29 26.8•g 6/30 Er turk; cenr, 30, 1409-1412; 1970 
FURFURAL 98-01·1 
1323 1078 92.4•g n.1.1. 016 123.•g 0/6 Feron; txcy, 11, 127·144; 1978 
a 1078 216.•g n.1.1. 0/14 123.•g 0/14 
1324 1078 81.3•g n.1.1. 016 108.•g 016 
a 1078 203.•g n.1.1. 0/15 108.•g 0/15 
GERMANATE, SODIUM 
1325 1512 7 .48•g n.1.1. 26/170 .877•g 14/131 Kaniaawa;canr ,27, 1192· 1195; 1967 
a 1512 10.5•g n.1.1. 7/170 .877•g 4/131 
b 1512 7 .84•g n.1.1. 55/170 .877•g 25/131 
c 1512 8.97•g n.1.1. 29/170 .877•g 13/131 
d 1512 10.0•g n.1.1. 15/170 .877•g 7/131 
1326 1036 6.82•g n.1.1. 1/82 .265•g 1/98 Kani aawa;cenr, 29 ,892·895;1969 
1036 2.70•g n.1.1. 31/82 .265•g 25/98 
b 1036 8.11•g n.1.1. 9/82 .265•g 2/98 
GIBBERELLIC ACID 77·06·5 
1327 1281 318.•g n.1.1. 0/17 180.•g 0/16 lnnea;ntia, 1968/1969 
a 1281 318.•g n.1.1. 1/17 180.•g 0/16 
b 1281 208.•g n.1.1. 2/17 180.•g 1/16 
1328 1281 89.6•g n.1.1. 1/18 168.•g 4/18 
a 1281 96.2•g n.1.1. 2/18 168.•g 4/18 
b 1281 52.6•g n.1.1. 3/18 168.•g 8/18 
1329 1281 357 .•g n.1.1. 0/16 180.•g 0/18 
a 1281 357.•g n.1.1. 0/16 180.•g 0/18 
b 1281 188.•g n.1.1. 0/16 180.•g 1/18 
1330 1281 113.•g n.1.1. 0/16 168.•g 2/16 
a 1281 155.•g n.1.1. 0/16 168.•g 1/16 
b 1281 73.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 168.•g 4/16 
GLYCEROL alphe·MONOCHLOROHYDRIN 96·24·2 
1331 1112 24.2•g n.1.1. 0/20 6. 79•g 0/26 13.6•g 0/26 Wei1burger; jnci ,67, 75-88; 1981 
1332 1112 35.1•g n.1.1. 0/20 6. 79•g 0/26 13.6•g 3/26 
GL YC IDALDEHYDE** 765·34·4 
1333 55 6.29•g n.1.1. 0/5 13.5•g 0/5 Ven Duuren;jnci,37,825-838;1966 
GLYCOL SULFITE 3741 ·38·6 
1334 1143 .385•g n.1.1. 10/30 1.71•g 17/30 Ven Duuren;Jnci,53,695-700;1974 
FD & C GREEN NO. 1 <guinH grHn Bl 4680· 78·8 
1335 143 18.2g• n.1.1. 1/101 1.30g• 1/53 2.60g• 1/49 HanHn; fctx, 4, 389·410; 1966 
a 143 18.2g• n.1.1. 1/101 1.30g• 1/53 2.60g• 1/49 
b 143 4.84g• n.1.1. 1/101 1.30g• 3/53 (2.60g• 0/49> 
143 16.5g• n.1.1. 6/101 1.30g• 3/53 2.60g• 2/49 144 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1336 
a 
b 
1337 
a 
b 
1338 
b 
1339 
b 
FD & 
1340 
a 
b 
1341 
b 
1342 11 cbj eat l iv 11ix 241124 
11 cbj eat lun 11ix 241124 
11 cbj eat tba 11ix 24on24 
11 cb J eat tba 111 l 241124 
0111 eat l iv 11ix 24on24 e 
0111 eat tba 11ix 241124 
0111 eat tba 111 l 241124 e 
11 0111 eat l iv 11;x 241124 e 
11 0111 eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
11 0111 eat tba 11a l 24•24 e 
b vis eat 11ix 11ly 93v93 er 
b vis eat •d• •Ly 93v93 er 
b vis eat abd 11ly 93v93 er 
GREEN NO. 
f cbj eat lun 11ix 241124 
cbj eat l iv mix 241124 
cbj eat tba 11ix 241124 
cbj eat tba onel 24m24 
11 cbj eat l iv mix 241124 
on cbj eat lun mix 24m24 
m cb j eat tba ma l 24m24 
11 cbj eat tba mix 241124 
11 nss eat l iv tu11 65v65 e 
a 11 nss eat tba tuin 65w65 e 
1343 os11 eat l iv tum 241124 e 
0H1 eat tba 11 ix 241124 e 
b 0111 eat tba H l 241124 e 
1344 11 OSll eat l iv hpe 241124 e 
11 OH eat tba 11ix 241124 e 
b 11 0111 eat tba Hl 241124 e 
1345 b vis eat cec 11ly 95v95 er 
FD & GREEN NO. 3 
1346 M f cbj eat lun ade 241124 
a M 1 cbj eat l iv hpa 241124 
b M f cbj eat tba 11al 241124 
f cbj eat tba 11ix 241124 
1347 11 cbj eat l iv 11ix 241124 
a 11 cbj eat lun ade 241124 
b 11 cbj eat tba 11ix 241124 
11 cbj eat tba 11al 241124 
1348 on eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
a 0111 eat 11gl fba 24m24 e 
b 0111 eat tba 11ix 241124 e 
0111 eat tba 111l 24•24 e 
1349 11 OH eat l iv hpa 241124 e 
11 os• eat tba •ix 24•24 e 
b 11 OH eat tba 1181 24•24 e 
GRISEOFULVIN 
1350 f 1yg eat lun tu11 231123 ae 
a 1yg eat l iv clc 231123 ae 
b syg eat l iv 11ix 231123 ae 
1351 H " syg eat l iv tu11 291129 ae 
H 11 syg eat lun tu11 291129 ae 
1352 M svi eat lun tu11 271127 e 
M 1vi eat l iv hem 271127 e 
1353 M 11 1vi eat l iv hpt 271127 e 
a M 11 av i eat l iv he11 271127 e 
b M 11 avi eat lun tu11 271127 e 
HCDD MIXTURE 
1354 f b6c gav l iv MXA 241124 
a f b6c gav l iv hpa 241124 
b b6c gav TBA MXB 241124 
c b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
d b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
1355 II b6c gav l iv MXA 24•24 
11 b6c gav l iv hpa 241124 
b • b6c gav TBA MXB 241124 
• b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
d 11 b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
1356 0111 gav l iv MXA 241124 
0111 gav TBA MXB 241124 
b 0111 gav l iv MXB 241124 
1357 II OSll gav l iv MXA 241125 
a II OH gav TBA MXB 241125 
b II OH gav l iv MXB 241125 .> 26.1g11 * P<. 5 
59.2g11 * P<.3 
20.8g11 * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
13.8g11 * P<.003 
97 .5g11 • P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
5. 98g11 * P<. 003 
11.4g11 * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
3.92g11 P<.006 + 
8.37g11 P<.05 + 
8.37g11 P<.05 
.100ng .. : .• .lug •••. : .. 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •.•. : .. 10 ...•. : .• 100 •••• : •• 1g ...•. : .. 10 
• > 
.> 
. > 43.8gm • P<.04 
no dre P-1. 
148.gm * P<.9 
152.gm * P<.8 
.> 18.9gm P<.4 
58.2gm * P<.3 
49.3g11 * P<.5 
318.g11 * P<1. 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
.t 5.64g11 P<.04 
.100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• .100 ..•• : •• 111g .••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 ..•• : •• .lg ••••• : •• 10 
. > 133.gOI * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
18.1g11 \ P<. 5 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P-1. 
18.5g11 • P<.8 
46. 7g11 * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
.100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 ••.• : .. 111g ..•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.. :. ·1S· •••• : •. .10 
• > 
.> .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.66gll 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1 • 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1 • • 
.100ng •. : .• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .. 100 ••.. : .• .111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .. 100 •••• : •• .lg ••••• : •• 10 
• 3.87ug * P<.005 c 
4.31ug * P<.005 c 
6.60ug * P<.5 
3.87ug * P<.005 
63.0ug * P<.9 
876.ng * P<.007 c 
1.26ug * P<.005 c 
1.02ug * P<.2 
876.ng * P<.007 
40.1ug * P<1. 
596.ng • P<.0005c 
no dre P•1. 
596. ng * P<. 0005 
#2.30ug * P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
2.30ug * P<.02 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 145 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1336 143 5.50g11 n.s.a. 12/101 1.20g11 13/50 2.40gOI 7 /51 
a 143 13.4g11 n.a.a. 1/101 1.20g11 1/50 2.40gm 2/51 
b 143 4.B4g11 n.1.s. 15/101 1.20g• 15/50 2.40g• 9/51 
143 9.44g11 n.1.s. 11/101 1.20gOI 9/50 2.40gm 4/51 
1337 143 5.23g• B5.1g11 0/25 250.llg 0/25 500.0lg 0/25 1.00g11 1/25 2.50g11 4/25 
143 2. 54g11 n.1.1. 12/25 250.llg 10/25 500.0lg 13/25 1.00g11 9/25 2.50g• 12/25 
b 143 5.09g• n.a.a. 6/25 250.llg 5/25 500.0lg B/25 1.00g• 4/25 2.50g• 5/25 
133B 143 2.B2g11 31.6gOI 0/25 200.0lg 0/25 400.llg 2/25 BOO.Olg 2/25 2.00g• 5/25 
a 143 2.59gOI n.a.s. 4/25 200.0lg 7/25 400.0lg 2/25 BOO.Olg 5/25 2.00g• 7/25 
b 143 4. 77g11 n.s.s. 2/25 200.llg 5/25 400.•g 1/25 BOO.Olg 5/25 2.00g• 2/25 
1339 1136 95B.•g 76.Bg• 0/50 1.BOg• 219 Iii l l he i•;gaga, 23, 1·19; 1953 
a 1136 1.36g11 n.s.1. 0/50 1.BOg11 1/9 
b 1136 1.36g11 n.s.1. 0/50 1.BOgRI 1/9 
FD & GREEN NO. 2 (light green SF yellowish) 5141 ·20·B 
1340 143 13.3g11 n.s.s. 0/100 1.30g11 1/50 2.60g• 2/50 Hansen; f ctx, 4, 3B9· 410; 1966 
a 143 22.3g11 n.s.s. 3/100 1.30g11 1/50 2.60g• 1/50 
b 143 11.0g• n.1.s. 7/100 1.30g11 4/50 2.60gll 4/50 
c 143 14.5g11 n.s.s. 3/100 1.30g• 2/50 2.60g• 2/50 
1341 143 3.6Bg• n.1.1. 6/100 1.20g• 5/50 (2.40g11 0/50) 
a 143 13.2g• n.a.s. 1/100 1.20g11 1/50 2.40g11 2/50 
b 143 9.39gOI n.s.s. 3/100 1.20g11 5/50 2.40g• 2/50 
c 143 9.31g11 n.s.s. 7/100 1.20g• 7/50 2.40gll 3/50 
1342 176a 5. 750lg n.1.1. 0/5 12.011g 0/6 1.20g11 0/B All.ark; jphp,B,417·424; 1956 
• 176a 5.7511g n.1.1. 0/5 12.011g 0/6 1.20g• O!B 
1343 143 696.oog n.s.s. 0/25 250.•g 0/25 500.•g 0/25 1.00gOI 0/25 2.50g• 0/25 Hansen; fctx ,4, 3B9-410; 1966 
• 143 4.73g• n.s.s. 10/25 250.llg 15/25 500.•g 16/25 1.00g11 10/25 2.50g• B/25 
b 143 4.B1g• n. s.s. 6/25 250.llg 6/25 500.•g 9/25 1.00g11 6/25 2.50g• 5/25 
1344 143 557 .•g n. s. 1. 1/25 200.llg 0/25 400.•g 0/25 B00.11g 0/25 2.00g• 0/25 
143 4.57g11 n.s.1. B/25 200.llg 7/25 400.llg 10/25 BOO.Mg 6/25 2.00g11 5/25 
b 143 4.99g• n.s.s. 4/25 200.0lg 3/25 400.llg 4/25 BOO.Mg 3/25 2.00g• 3/25 
1345 1136 913.11g n.a.1. 0/50 1.BOg• 1/6 Iii l l hei•;gaga, 23, 1-19; 1953 
FD & GREEN NO. 3 (fast green FCF> 2353.45.9 
1346 143 21.7g11 n.a.s. 0/100 1.30gll 1/50 2.60g• 0/50 Hansen; f ctx, 4 ,3B9· 410; 1966 
• 143 25.6g• n.s.s. 2/100 1.30g• 0/50 2.60g• 1/50 
b 143 25.4g11 n.s.s. 3/100 1.30goo 2/50 2.60g• 0/50 
c 143 19.2g11 n.s.s. 5/100 1.30g11 3/50 2.60g• 1/50 
1347 143 19.1g11 n.s.s. B/100 1.20g11 4/50 2.40g• 1/50 
a 143 21.3g• n.s.1. 2/100 1.20g11 2/50 2.40g11 0/50 
b 143 3.21g• n.s.s. 10/100 1.20g11 7/50 (2.40g11 1/50) 
143 23.5g• n.1.s. B/100 1.20g• 2/50 2.40g• 1/50 
134B 143 696.•g n.s.s. 0/25 250.llg 0/25 500.11g 0/25 1.00g11 0/25 2.50g11 0/25 
• 143 2. 70g11 n.1.1. 6/25 250.0lg 6/25 500.•g 10/25 1.00g• 15/25 2. 50g• 6/25 
b 143 1.90g11 n.1.s. 13/25 250.llg 10/25 500.•g 11/25 1.00g• 1B/25 2.50g11 12/25 
143 3.30g11 n.1.1. 7/25 250.•g 6/25 500.Mg 3/25 1.00g11 11/25 2.50g11 6/25 
1349 143 10.6g• n.s.1. 0/25 200.llg 0/25 400.•g 1/25 B00.11g 0/25 2.00g11 0/25 
a 143 5.03g11 n.s.s. 2/25 200.llg 3/25 400.llg 5/25 BOO.Olg 3/25 2.00goo 2/25 
b 143 5.37g11 n.s.s. 1/25 200.•g 2/25 400.•g 3/25 BOO.Ilg 3/25 2.00g11 1/25 
GRISEOFULVIN 126-07-B 
1350 402 1.01g11 n.a.a. 0/29 314.llg 0/21 1.57g11 0/24 3.14g11 0/22 Rust i a;b j ca, 3B, 237·249;197B 
a 402 3.34g• n.a.a. 0/16 314.llg 1/9 1.57g• 0/5 3.14g11 0/5 
b 402 4.25g• n.a.a. 1/16 314.llg 1/9 1.57g• 0/5 3.14g• 0/5 
1351 402 1.13g• n.a.1. 0/22 276.llg 0/16 1.3Bg• 0/23 2.76g11 0/24 
a 402 1.13gll n.a.1. 0/22 276.llg 0/16 1.3Bg• 0/23 2. 76g• 0/24 
1352 402 471.llg n.a.1. 19/B9 130.•g 6/37 
• 402 B45.•g n.1.a . 5/76 130.11g 1/36 
1353 402 270.llg n.a.a. 0/32 120.•g 1/17 
• 402 525.llg n.a.1 . 6/B6 120.llg 2/33 
b 402 326.llg n.1.a. 16/79 120.•g 6/32 
HCDD MIXTURE (1,2,3, 7 ,B,9·hexachlorodibenzo·p ·dioxin and 1,2,3,6,7,8 ·;10••r. CAS# 1940B-74 -3 and 57653-B5 -7> Mixture 
1354 c03703 1.86ug 36.0ug 3/75 344.ng 4/50 6BB.ng 6/50 1.39ug 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c03703 2.05ug 42.4ug 2/75 344.ng 4/50 6BB.ng 4/50 1.39ug 9(50 
b c03703 1.42ug n.s.s. 36/75 344.ng 24150 6B8.ng 22150 1.39ug 28(50 
c c03703 1.86ug 36.0ug 3175 344.ng 4150 688.ng 6(50 1.39ug 10150 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d c03703 4.57ug n.s.s. 2175 344.ng 2150 688.ng 5150 1.39ug 1150 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1355 c03703 420.ng 16.6ug 15175 172.ng 14150 347 .ng 14(50 68B.ng 24150 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c03703 612.ng 11.9ug 7175 172.ng 5150 347.ng 9150 68B.ng 15150 
b c03703 350.ng n.s.s. 40175 172.ng 33150 347 .ng 29150 68B.ng 38(50 
c c03703 420.ng 16.6ug 15175 172.ng 14150 347.ng 14150 688.ng 24150 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d c03703 1.04ug n.s. s. 10175 172.ng 11/50 347 .ng 10(50 688.ng 7150 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1356 c03703 369.ng 1.33ug 5175 174.ng 10(50 347.ng 12150 694.ng 30/50 l iv:hpc,nnd . 
• c03703 756.ng n.1.1 • 54/75 174.ng 36/50 347 .ng 33/50 694.ng 41150 
b c03703 369.ng 1.33ug 5(75 174.ng 10150 347 .ng 12/50 694.ng 30150 l h:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1357 c03703 B42.ng n.1.1. 0175 175.ng 0/50 347.ng 1150 694.ng 4150 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
• c03703 B07 .ng n.1.1 . 40175 175.ng 22/50 347 .ng 22/50 694.ng 25(50 
b c03703 842.ng n.a.1. 0175 175.ng 0(50 347.ng 1(50 694.ng 4(50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 146 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt TD50 21'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
HEMATOXYLIN 
1358 R b wi1 eat •ix •ly 78w78 er 
e R b w;1 eat fhd •ly 78w78 er 
b R b wh eat abd 11ly 78w78 er 
HEPTACHLOR 
1359 f b6e eat l ;v hpe 80w89 v 
b6e Ht TBA MXB 80w89 v 
b b6e Ht l ;v MXB 80w89 v 
e b6e eat lun MXB 80w89 v 
1360 b6e eat l ;v hpe 80w89 v 
1361 • b6e eat l ;v hpe 73w89 av 
a • b6e eat TBA MXB 73w89 av 
b 11 b6e eat l ;v MXB 73w89 ev 
• b6e eat lun MXB 73w89 av 
1362 • b6e eat l ;v hpe 73w89 av 
1363 f OH eat thy MXA 19•26 v 
a 0111 eat TBA MXB 19•26 v 
b R OH eat l iv MXB 191126 v 
1364 0111 eat thy MXA 19•25 v 
a R f oH eat Uy fee 19•25 v 
1365 R • OH eat TBA MXB 19•26 v 
a R • o .. eat l; v MXB 19•26 v 
1366 R f efr eat tba tu• 26•26 r 
a efr eat tba .. 1 261126 r 
b R efr eat tba ben 26•26 r 
1367 R • efr eat tba tu• 26•26 r 
a • efr eat tba HI 26•26 r 
b • efr eat tba ben 26•26 r 
HEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
1368 f •re wet Uv tu11 17•24 e 
a R f •re wet tba •;x 17•24 e 
1369 R • •re wet l ;v tu11 171124 e 
R • •re wet tba •;x 171124 e 
HEPTYLAMINE 
1370 R • wh wet l ;v tu• 61w61 e 
R • w;1 wet tba 11;x 61w61 e 
HEXACHLOROBENZENE 
1371 f 1yg eat l ;v hpt 24•24 
a 1yg eat l ; v hae 24•24 
b 1yg eat tba •;x 24•24 
1372 • 1yg eat l; v hpt 24•24 
a • 1yg eat l ; v hae 24•24 
b • 1yg eat thy a ld 24•24 
e • syg eat tba •ix 24•24 
1373 f 1w; eat l ;v let 86w93 aes 
a aw; eat l un tu• 86w93 aes 
b aw; eat tba •;x 86w93 aes 
1374 • 1w; eat l ;v let 23•25 aes 
a • 1w; eat lun tu• 23•25 aes 
b • 1w; eat tba •;x 231125 aes 
1375 f agu eat l ;v let 90w90 r 
HEXACHLOROBUTAD I ENE 
1376 R f 111 eat k;d •;x 24•24 e 
a R 
f UI eat l; v •ht 24•24 e 
b R 
f 111 eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
1377 R • 111 eat k;d •ix 95w95 es 
a R • 111 eat l ; v hpe 95w95 H 
b R • 111 eat tba •ix 95w95 es 100ng •• : .. 1ug •.•. : •• 10 ..... : .• 100 •.•. : •. 111g ..•. : •• 10 ..... : .• 100 ••.• : .• 1g •.••. : .• 10 
+ 1.00g• 
2.41g• 
2.41g• P<.002 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 + 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •.•. : .• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .•.• : .. 111g •.•. : •• 10 •.•.• : .• 100 .•.• : •• 1g .•••• : .• 10 
: + 1.4711g P<.0005e 
1.46•g P<.007 
1. 4711g P<. 0005 
26.511g * P<.6 
pool 1 . 37•g P<. 0005e 
1. 09•g P<. 006 e 
1 . 3511g P<. 03 
1.0911g P<.006 
7 .15•g * P<.2 
pool 1. 09•g I P<. 0005e 
pool 
:> 
.> 
• > ~ e4.11•g I P<.02 
125.•g * P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
#4. 0511g I P<. 002 
10.511g * P<.04 
no dre P•1. 
18.111g * P<.5 
1.25•g * P<.2 
1.8711g * P<.2 
3.0711g * P<.4 
no dre P•1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng .• :. -1ug •.•• : .• 10 .•••. : •. 100 ••.• :. ·1•g ••.• : •• 10 .•..• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g ..•.• : .• 10 
• > 
• > no dre 
15.8•g 
no dre 
6.37•g P•1 . 
P<.3 
P•1 • 
P<.07 
100ng .. : •• 1ug .•.• : .. 10 .•.•• : .• 100 •..• :. ·1•g ••.. : •• 10 .•..• : •• 100 .... : .• 1g ..... : •• 10 
• > no dre 
no dre P•1 . 
P•1. 
100ng •. : •• 1ug .•.• : •• 10 .•.•• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 .••.• : .• 100 •••• : •. 1g. • • •• :. -10 
<+ .+ . 7.4211g * P<.0005+ 
125 .Mg * P<. 003 + 
7.68•g * P<.0005+ 
.+. 
• + 5. 4811g * P<. 0005+ 
32.3•g * P<.0005+ 
108.•g • P<.002 + 
3.72•g * P<.0005+ 
46.4•g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
109.•g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
noTD50 P<. 0005+ 
100ng •• : •. 1ug ••.. : .• 10 .•••• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1•g ••.• : •. 10 .•.•• : .• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.. : .• 10 
94.4•g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
9.8411g * P<.1 
50. 5•g * P<. 0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
alphe-1,2,3,4,5,6 -HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE .• : .• 1ug •.•. : •• 10 ..••. : .• 100 •.•• :. -1•g •.•. : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •. 1g .•.•• : .• 10 
1378 M • ddy eat I ;v •ix 36w72 ekr <+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
1379 R • buf eat I ;v •ix 35w65 ekr .> no dre P-1. 
1380 R •wheat l;v nod 72w72 ekr 11.2•g • P<.0005+ 
R • w;s eat l ;v hpe 72w72 ekr 107 .•g • P<.09 + 
beta· 1, 2 ,3,4, 5 ,6· HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
1381 M f cf1 eat I ;v let 26•26 e 
a M ef1 eat l ;v •ix 26•26 e 
b M ef1 eat lun tu• 26•26 e 
1382 M 11 ef1 eat I ;v •;x 26•26 e 
a M • ef1 eat 1;v let 26•26 e 
b M • ef1 eat lun tu• 26•26 e •. : .• 1ug .... : .• 10 ••••. : .. 100 .... :. ·1•g •.•• : •• 10 .•.•• : •. 100 .... : .. 1g •..•• : •. 10 
139.•g 
64.3•g 
no dre 
+ 17.7•g 
51.1•g 
no dre P<.007 + 
P<.07 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 147 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
HEPIATOXYL IN 517-28-2 
1358 1136 231.•g 13.6g• 0/50 1.80g• 2/4 w; l lhei•;gaga,23, 1-19; 1953 
• 1136 386.•g n.a.a. 0/50 1.80g• 1/4 
b 1136 386.•g n.a. a. 0/50 1.80g• 1/4 
HEPTACHLOR 76-44-8 
1359 e00180 .887•g 3.94•g 2/10 1.00•g 3/50 2.10•g 30/50 
a e00180 • 779•g 24.9•g 4/10 1.00•g 12/50 2.10•g 31/50 
b e00180 .887•g 3.94-g 2/10 1.00•g 3/50 2.10•g 30/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e00180 6.52•g n.1.1 . 0/10 1.00•g 1/50 2.10•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1360 e00180 • 866•g 2.47•g 3/80p 1.00•g 3/50 2.10•g 30/50 
1361 e00180 .586•g 12.2•g 5/20 .650•g 11/50 1.30•g 34/48 
• e00180 .645•g n.1.1 • 7/20 .650•g 11/50 1.30•g 34/48 
b e00180 • 586•g 12.2•g 5/20 .650•g 11/50 1.30•g 34/48 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e e00180 2.51•g n.1.1. 1/20 .650•g 1/50 1.30•g 7/48 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1362 e00180 .628•g 2.83•g 17 /95p .650•g 11/50 1.30•g 34/48 
1363 e00180 2.03•g n.1.1 . 1/10 .920•g 3/49 1.85•g 14/50 thy:fca,fee . 
a e00180 • 998•g n.1.1. 9/10 .920•g 37/49 1.85•g 33/50 
b e00180 3.28ag n.1.1. 1/10 .920•g 9/49 1.85ag 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1364 e00180 2.05•g 16.1•g 3/60p .920•g 3/49 1.85ag 14/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
a e00180 4.01•g n.1.1. 1/60p .920•g 2/49 1.85•g 5/50 
1365 e00180 2.33•g n.1.1. 7/10 1.10•g 24/50 2.20•g 20/50 
a e00180 4.46ag n.1.1 • 1/10 1.10•g 3/50 2.20ag 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpe,nnd. 
1366 66b • 426•g n.1.1. 6/20 75.0ug 7/20 .150•g 7/20 .250•g 6/20 .350•g 11/20 .500•g 9/20 
Epate in< review> {S Witherup};stev,6,103·154;1976 
a 66b .695•g n.1.1 . 1/20 75.0ug 3/20 .150ag 2/20 .250•g 4/20 .350•g 6/20 . 500•g 3/20 
b 66b • 728•g n.1.1. 5/20 75.0ug 4/20 .150•g 5/20 .250•g 2/20 .350•g 6/20 .500ag 7/20 
1367 66b 1.34•g n.1.1. 10/20 60.0ug 2/20 .120•g 6/20 .200•g 6/20 .280ag 4/20 .400•g 3/20 
a 66b 1.46•g n.1.1. 5/20 60.0ug 1/20 .120•g 5/20 .200•g 2/20 .280•g 1/20 .400•g 3/20 
b 66b 1.82•g n.1.1. 5/20 60.0ug 1/20 .120ag 1/20 .200•g 4/20 .280•g 3/20 .400•g 0/20 
HEPTAPIETHYLENE IPllNE 1121-92-2 
1368 216 22. 7•g n.1.1. 0/15 7 .36•g 0/15 Gare i a; zkko, 79, 141-144; 1973 
a 216 4.09•g n.1.1. 4/15 7 .36•g 7/15 
1369 216 19.9•g n.1.1. 0/15 6.44•g 0/15 
a 216 2.17•g n.a.a. 5/15 6.44•g 10/15 
HEPTYLAPllNE 1241-27 -6 
1370 104 2. 72•g n.1.1. 0/9 1.92•g 0/20 Argus; jne; ,35,949-958; 1965 
a 104 1.74•g n.a.a. 1/9 1.92•g 1/20 
HEXACHLOROBENZENE (HCB) 118-74-1 
1371 151a 5.47•g 10.3•g 0/40 5.23•g 14/30 10.5•g 17/30 20.9•g 51/60 Cabral ;natu, 265, 510 · 511; 1977 
a 151a 58.8ag 577.•g 0/40 5.23•g 0/30 10.5•g 2/30 20.9•g 7160 
b 151a 5.41•g 11.9•g 5/40 5.23•g 16/30 10.5•g 18/30 20.9ag 52/60 
1372 151a 4.05•g 7 .55•g 0/40 4.60•g 14/30 9.20•g 26/30 18.4ag 49/59 
151a 20.4•g 56.1•g 0/40 4.60•g 1/30 9.20•g 6130 18.4•g 20/59 
b 151a 50.9ag 382.•g 0/40 4.60•g 0130 9.20~g 1/30 18.4ag 8/59 
e 151a 2.62•g 5.40•g 3/40 4.60•g 18/30 9.20•g 27/30 18.4•g 56/59 
1373 384 26.3•g 93.4•g 0/49 6.50•g 0/30 13.0•g 3/30 26.0•g 14/41 Cabral; ; j en, 23, 47 · 51; 1979 
a 384 32.2•g n.1.s. 14/49 6.50•g 4/30 13.0•g 6130 <26.0ag 2/41) 
b 384 63.5ag n.1.1. 39/49 6.50•g 21/30 13.0•g 13/30 26.0ag 19/41 
1374 384 53.3•g 329.ag 0/47 6.00•g 0130 12.0•g 3/29 24.0•g 7/44 
a 384 189.•g n.1.1. 13/47 6.00•g 4/30 12.011g 0/29 24.0•g 4/44 
b 384 86. 7•g n.1.1. 22/47 6.00•g 15/30 12.0•g 10/29 24.0•g 12/44 
1375 1180 n.1.1. 1.65•g 0/12 5.00•g 14/14 S11i th;elet, 11, 169-172; 1980 
HEXACHLOROBUTAD I ENE 87-68-3 
1376 373 38. 5•g 338.•g 0/90 .200•g 0/40 2.00•g 0/40 20.0ag 6/40 Koeiba;amih,38, 589-602; 1977 
a 373 1.49•g n.1.1. 1/90 .200•g 0/40 2.0011g 0/40 20.0•g 0/40 
b 373 2.42•g n.1.1. 82/90 .200ag 35/40 2.00•g 37/40 20.0ag 39/40 
1377 373 23.4•g 148.•g 1/90 .200•g 0/40 2.00•g 0/40 20.0•g 9/39 
a 373 1.24•g n.1.1. 1/90 .200•g 0/40 2.00•g 0/40 20.0•g 0/39 
b 373 34.8ag n.1.1. 39/90 .200•g 24/40 2.00•g 13/40 20.0•g 15/39 
a lpha-1, 2,3. 4. 5 ,6· HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE <alpha· I indane) 319-84-6 
1378 1149n n.1.1. 6.62•g 0/18 30.0•g 13/13 Ito; eanr ,36, 2227·2234;1976 
1379 1071 6.07•g n.1.1. 0/8 10.8ag 017 Angsubhakor n;bj ea,43,881-883; 1981 
1380 45a 6.37•g 23.3•g 0/8 40.0ag 12/16 60.011g 10/13 I to; j ne i, 54 ,801·804;1975 
• 45• 37 .Oag n.1.1. 0/8 40.0•g 1/16 60.011g 3/13 
beta· 1, 2, 3 ,4, 5, 6· HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEX ANE <beta· I indane) 319-85-7 
1381 89 48.1•g 1.92g• 0/44 26.0•g 4/30 Thorpe; fetx, 11,433-442; 1973 
• 89 23.2•g n.a.a. 10/44 26.0•g 13/30 
b 89 116.•g n.a.a. 27/44 26.0•g 5/30 
1382 89 9.03•g 51.011g 11/45 24.0•g 22/30 
• 89 23.1•g 231.•g 2/45 24.0•g 10/30 
b 89 79.6ag n.1.1. 27/45 24.0•g 8/30 148 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
gam.a-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE. -; --lug. ---; --10-----; --100. ---; --111g. ---; --10-----; --100. ---; --lg-----; --10 
1383 f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 :> no dre P• 1-
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 no dre P·1-
b f b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 no dre P-1-
1384 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 :> no dre P· 1-
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 no dre P· 1-
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 no dre P-1. 
1385 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 pool + #12.0119 P<.004 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXA 80w90 15.311g \ P<.04 
1386 cf1 eat l iv 11ix 261126 e + 43. 711g P<.0005+ 
a cf 1 eat l iv l ct 26M26 e 94. 311g P<. 0005+ 
b cf1 eat lun tu11 26m26 a no dre P-1-
1387 11 cf1 eat l iv Mix 26M26 + 15.4119 P<.0005+ 
a 11 cf1 eat l iv let 26•26 e 48.6Mg P<.0005+ 
b 11 cf 1 eat lun tu11 26•26 e no dre P• 1. 
1388 n11r eat l iv 11ix 80w80 -> 803.Mg * P<1. 
1389 11 n11r eat Liv 11ix 80w80 -> no dre P•1-
a "' n11r eat l iv ret 80w80 r no dre P-1-
1390 f osm eat TBA MXB 191125 av :> no dre P-1-
e osm eat -1 iv MXB 19m25 sv no dre P-1-
1391 "' OSOi eat TBA MXB 19m25 v :> 38.4Mg * P<.6 
R .. 0811 eat l iv MXB 19M25 v 
1392 R 11 0&11 eat ---hem 191125 v pool 143.Mg * P<.8 
#131-•g * P<.03 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 
1393 f b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
b 
c 
1394 
1395 
a 
b b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 v 
b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 v 
b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
11 b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
" b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 v 
11 b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
11 b6c gav l un MXB 78w90 v 
1396 11 b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
1397 OHi gav TBA MXB 18M26 dv 
a osM gav l iv MXB 18•26 dv 
1398 R II OH gav TBA MX8 181126 dv 
R 11 os11 gav l iv MXB 181126 dv 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 
1399 f c5l eat l iv hpt 24m24 
a c5l eat tba Mix 24M24 
1400 " c5l eat l iv tum 241124 
a 
b 
1401 
a 
b 
1402 
a 
b 
1403 " c5l eat lun tu11 24•24 
11 c5l eat tba '1ix 24'124 
xvi eat lun tu• 24'124 
xvi eat l iv tum 24•24 
xvi eat tba 11ix 24•24 
11 xvi eat lun tu11 241124 
11 xvi eat l iv ade 24M24 
" xvi eat tba '1ix 24'124 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 25M25 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
1404 11 f34 eat sub fbs 251125 
a " f34 eat tnv men 25•25 
b "' f34 eat TBA MXB 25•25 
"' f34 eat l iv MXB 25M25 100ng. -: • -lug. ---: --10-----: • -100. ---: •• 111g. ---: --10-----: • -100. ---: • -lg-----: • -10 
pool 
:> 
pool 
:> 
:> :> 873.Mg * P<.2 
1.19g11 * P<.4 
873.11g * P<.2 
6.95gm * P<.4 
+ 319.mg P<.0005c 
585.119 * P<.2 
675.Mg * P<.4 
585.Mg * P<.2 
23.6gm * P<1-
359. mg * P<. 0005c 
no dre P· 1-
no dre P-1-
no dre P· 1-
no dre P-1-
100ng. -: --lug. ---: --10-----: --100 .• --: --111g. ---: --10-----: --100. ---: --lg-••.• : •• 10 
.> 
:> .> 434.llg P<.3 
P-1. 
P-1 • 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.07 
P<.3 
P<.07 
P-1. . > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
900.llg 
33.4•g 
no dre 
39.411g 
17.8'1g 
450.'1g 
17.8'1g 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
#41.3'1g * P<.02 
57 .5Mg * P<.05 
30.4'1g * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
3-<HEXAHYOR0 ·4, 7-METHANOINOAN-5-YL>-1, 1-0IMETHYLUREA .• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -l•g •••• : •• 10 •••• -: • -100. -• -: •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
1405 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx no dre 
1406 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
e " b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b "' b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1407 b6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx .> 1. 23gM 
a f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 1 .23g11 
1408 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .., 359.11g 
a 11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b " b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 259.11g 
HEXAMETHYLENETETRAM I NE 
1409 M f c3d wat l iv ag11 14•24 e 
a M c3d wat liv hpt 14•24 e 
b M c3d wat lun ade 14•24 e 
M c3d wat tba •ix 141124 e 100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •• 10 •..•• : •• 100 •••• :. -l•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •.•• : •• 1g .•. • ·: • .10 
.> 51 .9g11 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.04 -
P•1. 
P<.02 
P<.7 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1. CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 149 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
ga.11a-1, 2 ,3, 4, 5, 6· HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE Cl indane> 58-89-9 
1383 c00204 46.411g n.s.s. 4/10 9.2011g 7/50 18.5•g 8/50 
c00204 56.911g n.1.1. 1/10 9.2011g 4/50 18.511g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00204 86.011g n.1.1. 1/10 9.2011g 1 /50 18.511g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1384 c00204 19.911g n.1.1. 4/10 8.5011g 21/50 17 .011g 15/50 
e c00204 25.811g n.s.1. 3/10 8.5011g 19/50 17 .011g 10/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c00204 65.511g n.s.s. 2/10 8.5011g 2/50 17 .011g 3/50 lun:a/a, a/c. 
1385 c00204 5.8411g 95.411g 5/50p 8.50•g 19/50 C17.011g 9/50) 
c00204 6.39•g n.s.s. 8/50p 8.5011g 19/50 C17.011g 10/50> l iv:hpc,nnd. 
1386 89 21.911g 140.•g 10/44 52.011g 20/29 Thorpe; f ctx, 11, 433· 442; 1973 
89 45.611g 243.llg 0/44 52.0mg 10/29 
b 89 133.mg n.1.1. 27/44 52.011g 10/29 
1387 89 7 .43•g 34.411g 11/45 48.0•g 27/29 
• 89 25.811g 114.•g 2/45 48.011g 16/29 
b 89 95.011g n.1.1. 27/45 48.0mg 12/29 
1388 1119 16.711g n.1.1. 6/100 1.63•g 7/50 3.25•g 2/50 6.50•g 4/50 Herbst;txcy ,4,91-96; 1975 
1389 1119 22.911g n.1.1. 7/100 1. 5011g 5/50 3.0011g 1/50 6.0011g 3/50 
• 1119 25.211g n.1.1. 0/100 1.50•g 3/50 3.00•g 0/50 6.0011g 0/50 
1390 c00204 3.27•g n.1.1. 9/10 4.9011g 44/50 (9.80•g 34/50) 
a c00204 24. 7•g n.1.1. 0/10 4.90•g 4/50 9.8011g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1391 c00204 7.2911g n.1.1. 3/10 6.9011g 21/50 13.6•g 19/50 
c00204 27.811g n.1.1. 0/10 6.9011g 3/50 13.611g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1392 c00204 39.511g n.1.1. 0/55p 6.9011g 0/50 13.6•g 3/50 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 67-72-1 
1393 c04604 362.•g n.1.1. 2/20 361.•g 20/50 722.•g 15/50 
c04604 313.mg n.1.1. 8/20 361.0lg 32/50 722.llg 26/50 
b c04604 362.•g n.1.1. 2/20 361.•g 20/50 722.llg 15/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c04604 1.65g• n.1.1. 1/20 361.•g 1/50 722.•g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1394 c04604 178.ltg 760.•g 2/60p 361.llg 20/50 <722.11g 15/50> 
1395 c04604 236.•g n.1.1. 3/20 361.•g 15/50 722.•g 31/50 
e c04604 216.•g n.1.1. 4/20 361.•g 17/50 722.•g 34/50 
b c04604 236.llg n.1.1. 3/20 361.llg 15/50 722.•g 31/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c04604 883.•g n.1.1. 0120 361.•g 2/50 722.llg 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1396 c04604 213.•g 958.0lg 6/60p 361.llg 15/50 722.llg 31/50 
1397 c04604 169.•g n.1.1. 14/20 105.•g 33/50 210.11g 20/50 
a c04604 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0120 105.11g 0/50 210.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1398 c04604 118.•g n.1 .. a. 9/20 105.•g 17/50 210.llg 11/50 
a c04604 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0120 105.llg 0/50 210.•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 70-30-4 
1399 706 70. 7•g n.1.1. 0/25 19.511g 1/33 Rudal; ;clet,5,325-332; 1978 
a 706 31.2•g n.1.1. 7 /25 19.511g 9/33 
1400 706 130.•g n.1.1. 0/25 18.011g 0/35 
• 706 130.•g n.1.1. 1/25 18.011g 0/35 
b 706 37.0•g n.1.1. 4/25 18.0•g 6/35 
1401 706 10.711g n.1.1. 21/38 19.511g 28/40 
a 706 161.11g n.1. 1. 0/38 19.511g 0/40 
b 706 11.1•g n.1.1. 22/38 19.511g 28/40 
1402 706 6.56•g n.s.s. 23/37 18.011g 30/37 
a 706 73.3•g n.1.1. 0/37 18.0•g 1/37 
b 706 6.5611g n.1.1. 23/37 18.0•g 30/37 
1403 c02653 9.8211g n.1.1. 21/24 .850•g 17/24 2.5011g 21/24 7 .50•g 13/24 
c02653 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/24 .85011g 0/24 2.50•g 0/24 7 .5011g 0/24 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1404 c02653 12.411g n.1.1. 0/24 .68011g 0/24 2.0011g 0/24 6.0011g 3/24 
a c02653 14.111g n.1.1. 0/24 .68011g 0/24 2.0011g 0/24 6.00•g 2/24 
b c02653 5.68•g n.1.1. 11/24 .680•g 5/24 2.00•g 7/24 6.00•g 11/24 
c02653 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/24 .68011g 0/24 2.00•g 0/24 6.0011g 0/24 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
3· <HEXAHYDR0-4, 7 -METHANOINDAN· 5· YL) -1, 1 ·D IMETHYLUREA <Hercules· 7531 > 2163· 79·3 
1405 1277 383.llg n.1.1. 0/17 205.llg 0/17 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1277 383.•g n.1.1. 1/17 205.•g 0/17 
b 1277 253.llg n.1.1. 2/17 205.ltg 1/17 
1406 1277 250.llg n.1.1. 2/18 190.•g 1/18 
a 1277 377.llg n.1.1. 1/18 190.11g 0/18 
b 1277 197.llg n.1.1. 3/18 190.11g 2/18 
1407 1277 201.•g n.1.1. 0/16 205.•g 1/17 
a 1277 383.•g n.1.1. 0/16 205.llg 0/17 
b 1277 201.•g n.1.1. 0/16 205.•g 1/17 
1408 1277 108.•g n.1.1. 0/16 190.•g 3/17 
a 1277 356.•g n.1.1. 0/16 190.llg 0/17 
b 1277 89.211g n.1.1. 0/16 190.•g 4/17 
HEXAMETHYLENETETRAMI NE 100-97-0 
1409 155• 4. 76g• n.1.1. 2/63 1.14g• 2/43 Della Porta;fctx ,6,707-715;1968 
• 155• 5.98g• n.1.1. 15/63 1.14g• 4/43 
b 15511 6.38g• n.1.1. 12/63 1.14g• 3/43 
155• 3.01g• n.1.1. 46/63 1.14g• 20/43 150 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1410 " c3d wat l iv ag11 14•24 a 
• c3d wat lun ada 141124 a 
b "c3d wat liv hpt 141124 e 
c " c3d wat tba 01ix 14.,24 e 
1411 ctn wat 11ix tuOI 120123 ae 
a ctn wat hag tu11 12•23 ae 
b ctn wat lun ada 12 .. 23 ae 
ctn wat l iv ag" 121123 ae 
d ctn wet tba Mix 12•23 ae 
1412 • ctn wat lun ade 12•23 ae 
a • ctn wat l iv ag• 12•23 aa 
b • ctn wat tba 11ix 12•23 ae 
1413 1wr wat lun ade 14•24 e 
1wr wat l iv tu• 14•24 e 
b 1wr wat tba 11ix 14•24 e 
1414 11 1wr wat lun ade 14•24 a 
a " 1wr wat l iv ag11 14•24 e 
b • 1wr wat tba 11ix 141124 e 
1415 f wis wat l iv tum 241134 e 
a wia wet tba 11ix 241134 e 
1416 11 wia wat l iv lee 241134 a 
" wi1 wat tba 11ix 241134 a 
HEXAMETHYLMELAMINE .> 32.3911 P<.4 
293.g11 P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
.20.9g" * P<.02 
26. 3gOI P<. 05 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
11.6g• * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
• > no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
. > no dre P•1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
.>no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
.>no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 . 
.100ng •. : •• _1ug ..•. : •. _10 ..•.• : .• _100 •..• : .. _111g .••• : •. _10 .•••• : •. _100 .•.. : .. _1g .•... : .• _10 
1417 f sda eat •gl adc 44w66 av 10. 2•g P<.003 + 
P<.03 
P<.09 
P-1. 
P<.003 a ada eat •gl •ix 44w66 av 11.911g 
b 1da eat k/p tee 44w66 av +historical 
c R 
d R 1da eat l iv tu" 44w66 av 
1da eat tba 11ix 44w66 av 
HEXANAMIOE 
1418 M f cb6 eat 1to 1qp 52w69 a 
a M cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 a 
b M cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 a 
1419 M " cb6 eat 11ix 52w69 e 
a M 11 cb6 eat 11lh 52w69 e 
b M • cb6 eat 11ul 11lh 52w69 e 
c M 11 cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 a 
d M 11 cb6 eat liv has 52w69 a 
e M 11 cb6 eat liv •lh 52w69 a 
1420 R f f34 eat l iv tu• 52w69 e 
1421 R • f34 eat liv tu• 52w69 e 
HYDRAZINE 
1422 M f 1wi gav lun tu11 40w55 
1423 M 
a M 
b M 1wi wat lun 11ix 26•26 e 
1wi wat lun ade 261126 e 
1wi wat lun adc 261126 e 
M 1wi wat l iv •ix 261126 e 
1424 M " awi wat lun •ix 261126 a 
a M " 1wi wat lun ade 261126 a 
b M " 1wi wat lun adc 26•26 a 
M " swi wet •ly 26•26 a 
d M • swi wat liv 11ix 26•26 a 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 
1425 f 1yg wat cec tu11 25•25 a 
a 1yg wat thy ada 25•25 a 
b 1yg wat lun tu11 25•25 a 
c 1yg wat l iv tu11 25•25 a 
1426 H • 1yg wat cac tu11 28•28 e 
a H • 1yg wat l iv hH 281128 e 
b 11 1yg wat lun tu11 281128 a 
1427 akr wat l iv tu11 69w69 a 
a akr wat lun tu11 69w69 a 
1428 11 akr wat lun ada 69w69 a 
a 
1429 
1430 
a 
1431 
a 
1432 
a 
1433 
a 
1434 
a 
b 11 akr wat l iv hH 69w69 a 
f c3h wat lun ada 92w92 a 
f cbc gev lun 11ix 36w74 a 
cbc gav l iv hpt 36w74 a 
11 cbc gav lun 11ix 36w84 a 
11 cbc gav l iv hpt 36w84 a 
f ic3 gav lun adc 73w73 
ic3 gav l iv tu11 73w73 
• ic3 gav lun adc 73w73 
• ic3 gav l iv tu11 73w73 
f 1wa wat lun 11ix 95w95 
1wa wat lun ade 95w95 a 
1wa wat l un adc 95w95 a no dre 
6.8211g 
.100ng .. : .• _1ug .••. : •• _10 .••.• : .• _100 •... : .. _111g •.•. : •. _10 ••••• : •. _100 .•.• : .. _1g ..•.. : •• _10 
pool .z8.90g11 • P<.07 
37 .2g11 * P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
pool + 1.95g" * P<.0005+ 
2.14g• * P<.0005 
2. 66g• * P<. 0005 
3.49g• \ P<.06 
25.3gOI * P<.2 
25.3gm * P<.2 
.> no dre P• 1 . 
.> no dre P• 1. 
.100ng .• : •• _1ug ••.• : .• _10 •••.• : .• _100 .•.. : .• _111g .... : .. _10 .•..• : •. _100 ••.. : •• _1g ....• : •. _10 
"' 5.6711g 
2.54•g 
2.81•g 
9.00•g 
no dre 
2.20•g 
2. 770lg 
6.190lg 
9.520lg 
29.811g 
.100ng •. : •. _1ug .••. : •• _10 .••.• : .• _100 •..• : .. _1•g •..• : •. _10 .••.• : •• _100 .•.• : .• _1g •.•.• : •• _10 
115.11g 
124.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
136.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
. > 
.> 
• + • > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
109.llg 
3.3511g 
6.2711g 
5.10•g 
8.4311g 
10.311g 
no dre 
79.511g 
no dre 
23.8•g 
26. 7•g 
146.llg P<.08 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.007 
P<.5 
P<.004 -
P<.004 -
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
P-1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P<.05 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.03 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 151 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1410 15511 5.25g11 n.1.1. 0/30 95Z.11g 1/49 
• 15511 3.16g11 n.1.1. 3/30 952.llg 5/49 
b 155• 3.24g11 n.1.s. 20/30 952.•g 16/49 
155• 2.21g11 n.1.1. 21/30 952.llg 22/49 
1411 155• 9.06g• n.1.1. 1/99 600.•g 1/48 1.20g• 6/102 3.00g• 4/50 
• 155• 9.65g• n.a.1 . 3/99 600.11g 4/48 1.20g• 1/102 3.00g11 7/50 
b 15511 8.34g• n.1.1. 17/99 600.11g 10/48 1.20g• 21/102 3.00g• 8/50 
c 155• 14.7g• n.1.1. 3/99 600.•g 2/48 1.20g• 7/102 3.00g• 1/50 
d 155• 1.97g• n.1.1. 67/99 600.11g 36/48 1.20g• 77/102 3.00g11 36/50 
1412 155• 10.3g• n.1.1. 19/99 500.•g 10/50 1.00g• 19/94 2 .50g• 1/29 
• 155• 12.6g• n.1.1 . 9/99 500.llg 3/50 1.00g• 10/94 2.50g11 0/29 
b 15511 5.51g• n.1.1. 55/99 500.llg 27/50 1.00g• 57/94 2.50g11 8/29 
1413 155• 1.77g• n.1.1. 15/30 1.17g• 10/27 
• 155• 6.36g• n.1.1 . 0/30 1.17g• 0/27 
b 15511 1.61g• n.1.1. 18/30 1 .17g• 12/27 
1414 155• 1.33g• n.1.1. 19/45 971.•g 11/29 
• 155• 5.69g• n.1.1. 1/45 971.llg 0/29 
b 155• 1.3·4g• n.1.1. 22/45 971.llg 12/29 
1415 155n 7.94g• n.1.1. 0/48 407.mg 0/48 
155n 1.56g• n.1.1. 37/48 407.llg 27/48 
1416 155n 6.94g• n.1.1. 1/48 356.•g 0/48 
155n 627.llg n.1.1. 39/48 356.llg 36/48 
HEXAMETHYLMELAMI NE 531·18·0 
1417 200a 4.13•g 52.411g 0/25 10.611g 6/24 Cohen; jnc i ,51,403 ·417; 1973 
200• 4.33•g n.1.1. 1/25 10.611g 6/24 
b 200a 8.27•g n.1.1. 0/25 10.611g 2/24 
c 200• 21.111g n.1.1. 0/25 10.6•g 0/24 
d 200• 3.0111g 40. 7•g 1/25 10.6•g 9/24 
HEXANAMIDE 628-02-4 
1418 1343 2.69g• n.1.1. Ot86p 978.•g 3/41 1.47g• 0/34 FleischHn; jept,3, 149· 170; 1980 
• 1343 3.94g11 n.1.1. 2/89p 978.•g 0/41 1.47g• 2/37 
b 1343 2.09g• n.1.1. 1/89p 978.•g 0/41 1.47g• 0/37 
1419 1343 1.00g• 4.56g• 0/95p 903.•g 6/35 1.35g• 6/39 
• 1343 1 .08g• 5.28g• 0/95p 903.•g 6/35 1.35g• 5/39 
b 1343 1.25g• 7. 72g• 0/91p 903.•g 5/35 1.35g• 4/39 
c 1343 952.•g n.1.1. 1/87p 903.•g 3/35 C1.35g11 0/39) 
d 1343 4.11g• n.1.1. 0/91p 903.•g 0/35 1.35g• 1/39 
e 1343 4.11g• n.1.1. 0/91p 903.•g 0/35 1.35gll 1/39 
1420 1343 1.89g• n.1.1. 0/49 564.•g 0/37 
1421 1343 655.•g n.1.a. 0/50 452.•g 0/16 
HYDRAZINE 302-01·2 
1422 1095 1. 7111g n.1.1. 8/85 5.1911g 6/25 Roe ;natu,216, 375 · 376; 1967 
1423 1117 1.45•g 5.59•g 14/108 2.00•g 27/50 Toth; i j en, 9, 109· 118; 1972/ 1969a 
• 1117 1. 59•g 6. 34•g 12/108 2.00•g 25/50 
b 1117 4.00•g 37 .211g 2/108 2.00•g 9/50 
1117 13.111g n.1.1. 3/88 2.00•g 1/41 
1424 1117 1.23•g 5.1111g 10/86 1.67•g 24/46 
• 1117 1.47•g 7 .69•g 10/86 1.6711g 21/46 
b 1117 2.91•g 16.9•g 0/86 1.6711g 9/46 
c 1117 3.7311g 180.•g 2/86 1.67•g 7/46 
d 1117 4.9011g n.1.1. 2/41 1.67•g 3/33 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 10034-93·2 
1425 1108 39.6•g 813.•g 0179 16.4•g 4/40 Toth; canr, 32 ,804·807;1972/ 1967a 
• 1108 42.8•g 895.•g 0/84 16.411g 4/43 
b 1108 156.•g n.1.1. 0/84 16.4•g 0/43 
c 1108 156.•g n.1.1. 0/84 16.4•g 0/43 
1426 1108 41.0•g 241.g• 0/64 14.4•g 3/33 
• 1108 23.3•g n.1.1. 1/22 14.4•g 016 
b 1108 194.•g n.1.1. 0/86 14.4•g 0/50 
1427 158 87.1•g n.1.1. 0/30 24.0•g 0/40 Toth; j nc i ,42 ,469-475; 1969a/ 1966a 
• 158 87.1•g n.1.1. 0/30 24.0•g 0/40 
1428 158 22.9•g n.1.1. 1/11 20.0•g 1/20 
• 158 52 .611g n.1.1. 1/16 20.0•g 0/29 
1429 158 37.711g n.1.1. 0/22 24.0•g 4/36 
1430 1074 1. 58•g 7 .60•g 4/47 21.811g 19/21 B ianc if ior i ;bj ca, 18, 543· 550; 1964 
• 1074 3.19•g 14.5•g 2/47 21.811g 15/21 
1431 1074 2.62•g 11 .3•g 1/37 16.0•g 16/21 
• 1074 4.01•g 26. 7•g 4/37 16.0•g 13/21 
1432 156 5.58•g 21.6•g 0/12 37. 7•g 17/24 Bh; de; i j cn, 18, 530· 535; 1976 
• 156 91.9•g n.1.1. 0/12 37. 7•g 0/24 
1433 156 19.511g n.1.1. 0/12 31.4•g 2/16 
• 156 51.1•g n.1.1 • 0/12 31.411g 0/16 
1434 158 13.1•g 57 .1•g 14/109 24.0•g 24/47 Toth; J nci, 42, 469·475; 1969a/ 1966a 
• 158 14.5•g 66.411g 12/109 24.0•g 22/47 
b 158 49.0•g n.1.1. 2/109 24.0•g 5/47 152 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
M awe wet l iv h9" 95w95 • 
1435 M " IWI Wit lun OliX 94w94 
1 M 11 awe wet lun ode 94w94 e 
b M " swe wat lun adc 94w94 e 
c M in awe wet l iv inix 94w94 e 
1436 R cbs gav lun 01ix 68w94 
cbs gav l iv "ix 68w94 e 
1437 R " cbs gav l iv 01ix 68w94 e 
R " cbs gav lun 01ix 68w94 
2 • HYDRAZIN0·4 · <p·AMI NOPHENYL )TH IAZOLE 
1438 M f swi eat l le 46w66 
a M swi eat l iv tu" 46w66 
b M swi eat lun tuOI 46w66 e 
c M awi eat tba 11ix 46w66 e 
1439 sda eat 11gl adc 46w75 e 
a sda eat 11gl 11ix 46w75 e 
b sda eat lbl 46w75 e 
sda eat l iv tum 46w'75 e 
d sda eat tba mix 46w75 e GOLD ET AL. 
TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
• + 
+ no dre 
18.70lg 
23.10lg 
74.2.,g 
78.4.,g 
42.40lg 
no dre 
+hi st or ice l 
60.1•g 
•• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .... : •• 1g •.•.• : •• 10 
• + .. 11.3.,g 
no dre 
no dre 
11.311g 
1.02 .. g 
1.0311g 
+historical 
no dre 
.582.,g P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.004 + 
P-1. 
P<.002 
P<.009 
P<.04 + 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.04 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
2-HYD AZIN0·4· <5·NITR0·2 · FURYLHHIAZOLE •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••..• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"9· •.• : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1440 f swi eat for sqp 46w55 e + 16.4.,g P<.0005+ 
P-1. 1 f swi eat l iv tuin 46w55 e no dre 
b swi eat tun tuin 46w55 e no dre P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.000! 
P<.000' 
P<.04 
P<.02 
P-1. 
P<.OC 
P<.01 15+ 
P<.0 05+ 
P<.' swi eat tba 11ix 46w55 e 7 .57.,g 
1441 ada eat 11gl 11ix 46w57 ev 2.8311g 
a sda eat "gl adc 46w57 ev 7. 7911g 
b sda eat "gl adf 46w57 ev 25.211g 
ada eat kid 11ix 46w57 ev 36.8.,g 
d sda eat l iv tu11 46w57 ev no dre 
e ada eat tba 11 ix 46w57 ev 2. 83•g 
1442 ada eat 11gl mix 46w66 e • + 3.6611g 
a sda eat "gl adc 46w66 e 10.911g 
b sda eat slg adc 46w66 e 145.11g 
c ada eat l iv cya 46w66 e 295. 11g P<.·, 
P<.0005 d ada eat tba 01ix 46w66 e noTD50 
2 • HYDRAZIN0-4· <p·NITROPHENYL) TH IAZOLE •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"g ••.• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 .••• : •• 1g •••.• :. -10 
1443 M f swi eat l le 46w66 e 
a M 
b M 
M 
1444 
b 
c R 
d 
1445 
b 
d awi eat lun ale 46w66 e 
swi eet liv tuin 46w66 e 
swi eat tba mix 46w66 e 
sda eat 01gl mix 45w52 ev 
sda eat 01gl adc 45w52 ev 
sde eat al g adc 45w52 ev 
sda eat l iv tu11 45w52 ev 
sda eat tba 11ix 45w52 ev 
sda eat •gl 11ix 46w75 e 
ada eat 01gl adc 46w75 e 
sda eat for sqp 46w75 e 
ada eat l iv tu" 46w75 e 
ada eat tba •ix 46w75 e 
2· HYDRAZIN0 ·4·PHENYL THIAZOLE 
1446 f ada eat l iv tuOI 46w66 ev 
R f ada eat tba 11ix 46w66 ev 
p·HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 
1447 M f swi gav lun tu" 40w55 
HYDRAZOBENZENE , 
1448 f b6c eat l iv MXA 78w95 
f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 
d b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 
1449 " b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 v 
" b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 v 
b • b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 v 
1450 f f34 eat MXB MXB 181125 
a f34 eat 11gl acn 18.,25 
b f34 eat l iv nnd 18•25 
c f f34 eat TBA MXB 180l25 
d f34 eat l iv MXB 180125 
1451 " f34 eat MXB MXB 18 .. 25 v 
• " f34 eat l iv MXA 181125 v 
b • f34 eat l iv hpc 181125 v 
• f34 eat adr phe 18•25 v .. 10.611g 
25.0"g 
no dre 
8.33mg 
8.6601g 
9.5h1g 
21. 7Mg P<.03 
P<.07 
P•1. 
P<.02 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
noTD50 P<. 0005 
1 • 970lg P<. 002 
3. 780lg P<.004 
9.00mg P<.003 
no dre P-1. 
• 7430lg P<. 0005 
100ng •• : •• 1ug .•.• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•• : •• 1.,g •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••. : .• 10 
.> no dre 
311.0lg P-1. 
P<.8 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 .••• : •• 1g ••••• : .• 10 
.> no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •. 1ug .••• : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .. 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
+ 26.00lg * P<.0005c 
29. 70lg * P<. 0005c 
31.511g * P<.0005 
26.011g * P<.0005 
8. 76g" * P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
1.09gOI * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
6. 740lg * P<.0005 
11.411g * P<.002 c 
18. 1119 * P<. 0005c 
4.500lg * P<.2 
18.10lg * P<.0005 
3.550lg * P<.0005 
3. 70.,g * P<. 0005c 
4. 6711g I P<. 0005c 
16.211g * P<.007 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 153 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Patholog~1 
Brkly Code 
c 158 97.1•g n.1.a. 3/78 24.0mg 1/36 
1435 158 10. 811g 39. 811g 10/110 20.011g 25/50 
a 158 12. 711g 55. 211g 10/110 20.0•g 22/50 
b 158 32.0•g 237 .Ilg 0/110 20.00lg 7/50 
158 18.711g n.1.1. 2/40 20.0•g 3/17 
1436 157 16.0•g 274.•g 0/22 24.7•g 5/18 Severi; jnci ,41,331-349; 1968 
157 54.0Rlg n.a.s. 0/22 24.711g 0/13 
1437 157 13.5•g 231.•g 0/28 25.911g 4/13 
157 18.1•g 1.95g• 0/28 25.911g 3/14 
2 · HYDRAZIN0 ·4· (p·AMINOPHENYL >TH IAZOLE 26049· 71-8 
1438 1076 3.84•g n.1.a. 1/28 9.0611g 5/22 Cohen; canr ,33, 1593-1597;1973 
a 1076 16.511g n.1.1. 0/28 9.0611g 0/22 
b 1076 16. 511g n.a.1. 0/28 9.0611g 0/22 
1076 3.8411g n.a.a. 1/28 9.0611g 5/22 
1439 200a .58711g 2.05•g 6/71 3.07•g 24/35 Cohen; j nc i, 51, 403·417; 1973 
a 200a . 548Rlg 2. 56•g 18/71 3.07•g 26/35 
b 200a 2.69•g 31.4•g 0/71 3.0711g 5/35 
c 200a 11.5•g n.a.a. 0/71 3.0711g 0/35 
d 200a .315•g 1.21•g 18/71 3.0711g 31/35 
2· HYDRAZIN0-4- <5-NITR0-2· FURYL >THIAZOLE (HNT> 26049-68-3 
1440 1076 7 .2711g 48.511g 0/29 54.4•g 8/17 Cohen; canr ,33, 1593· 1597; 1973 
a 1076 53.311g n.a.a. 0/29 54.4•g 0/17 
b 1076 53.3•g n.a.a. 0/29 54.4•g 0/17 
c 1076 3. 58•g 20. 011g 2/29 54.411g 13/17 
1441 1073 1.0911g 7 .37•g 2/29 37.1•g 15/16 Er turk; j nc i ,47, 437 · 445; 1971/1970a 
1073 3.6411g 20.5•g 0/29 37.111g 10/16 
b 1073 8.1811g n.a.a. 2/29 37.111g 5/16 
c 1073 11.1•g n.a.a. 0/29 37.1•g 3/16 
d 1073 36.811g n.a.1. 0/29 37.1•g 0/16 
• 1073 1.0911g 7 .3711g 2/29 37.111g 15/16 
1442 1121 2.0011g 7 .OO•g 4/35 31.0•g 32/35 Cohen; canr, 30 ,897·901;1970 
1121 6.26•g 21.3•g 0/35 31.0•g 19/35 
b 1121 35.811g n.1.1. 0/35 31.0•g 2/35 
c 1121 48.1•g n.1.1. 0/35 31.0•g 1/35 
d 1121 n.1.1. 3.77•g 4/35 31.0•g 35/35 
2 · HYDRAZINO· 4 · (p· NITROPHENYL )THIAZOLE 26049-70-7 
1443 1076 3.63•g n.a.a. 1/28 9.06•g 5/21 Cohen; canr, 33, 1593·1597; 1973 
a 1076 6.1411g n.1.a. 0/28 9.0611g 2/21 
b 1076 15.8•g n.a.a. 0/28 9.06•g 0/21 
c 1076 3.13•g n.a.a. 1/28 9.06•g 6/21 
1444 1121 4.95•g 17 .3•g 4/35 73.8•g 27/34 Cohen; canr, 30 ,897-901;1970 
a 1121 5.64•g 17 .3•g 0/35 73.8•g 25/34 
b 1121 11.8•g 46.3•g 0/35 73.8•g 15/34 
c 1121 129.•g n.a.a. 0/35 73.8•g 0/34 
d 1121 n.a.a. 5.63•g 4/35 73.8•g 34/34 
1445 200• .917•g 11.611g 18/71 3.0711g 20/35 Cohen; j nc i, 51,403·417;1973 
a 200• 1.62•g 34.6•g 6/71 3.0711g 11/35 
b 200a 3.11•g 61.2•g 0/71 3.0711g 4/35 
c 200e 11.5•g n.a.a. 0/71 3.07•g 0/35 
d 200• • 406•g 1 • 62•g 18/71 3.07•g 29/35 
2 · HYDRAZINO· 4 ·PHENYL TH IAZOLE 34176·52·8 
1446 200a 70.9•g n.s.a. 0/25 26.711g 0/32 Cohen; jnci, 51,403-417;1973 
a 200a 31.5•g n.a.a. 1/25 26. 711g 2/32 
p·HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 619·67·0 
1447 1095 21.7•g n.a.a. 8/85 20.8•g 1/25 Roe ;natu, 216,375·376;1967 
HYDRAZOBENZENE <NCI usu CAS# 530·50· 7) 122·66-7 
1448 c01854 15.2•g 53.2•g 3/100 4.30•g 4/47 42.211g 22/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c01854 16.9•g 63. 7•g 3/100 4.30•g 4/47 42.2•g 20/50 
b c01854 15.7•g 126.•g 29/100 4.30•g 19/47 42.2•g 29/50 
c c01854 15.2•g 53.211g 3/100 4.30•g 4/47 42.2•g 22/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c01854 100.•g n.1.1. 5/100 4.30•g 3/47 42.2•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1449 c01854 49.6•g n.1.1. 45/100 7 .90•g 18/50 39.411g 17/50 
a c01854 61.0•g n.1.1. 20/100 7.9011g 11/50 39.411g 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01854 148.•g n.a.1. 15/100 7 .9011g 2/50 39.4•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1450 c01854 3.58•g 15.9•g 1/100 1.40•g 3/50 3.60•g 12/50 l iv:nnd; 1ngl :acn. 
a c01854 5.11•g 50. 7•g 1/100 1.4011g 3/50 3.6011g 6/50 
b c01854 7 .2711g 64.911g 0/100 1.40•g 0/50 3.60•g 6/50 
c01854 1.61•g n.a.1. 80/100 1.40•g 39/50 3.60•g 36/50 
d c01854 7 .2711g 64.9•g 0/100 1.4011g 0/50 3.60•g 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1451 c01854 2.37•g 5.9711g 6/99 2.30•g 14/50 8.80•g 38/50 l iv:hpc,nnd; zy•:sqc. 
a c01854 2.44•g 6.30•g 6/99 2.30•g 13/50 8.8011g 37/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
b c01854 3.05•g 7.77•g 1/99 2.30•g 5/50 8.80•g 31/50 
c01854 7.08•g 323.•g 15/99 2.30•g 7/50 8.8011g 16/50 154 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
d 
• 
f 
u • f34 eat llXA llXA 181125 v 
11 134 eat zy11 sqc 18•25 v 
11 134 eat TBA llX8 181125 v 
• 134 eat l iv llXB 181125 v 
HYDROCORTISONE 
1452 R f ad• u•v tb• H l 261126 e 
1453 R • •d• UIV l iv hee 241124 • 
R II sd1 UIV tbl H l 241124 e 35.811u * P<.003 
38.511u * P<.0005c 
6.8511u * P<.01 
3. 7011u * P<. 0005 
100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 111u •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1u •.••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 100nu .• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111u •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••. :. ·1U· •••• : •• 10 
1454 II b c56 wet duo car 231123 er +9.01u11 * P<.006 + 
HYDROUUINONE llONOBENZYL ETHER 
1455 f b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a or l l un 1de 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1456 • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tb1 Mix 76w76 evx 
1457 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1458 • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••• :. -10 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.23u11 
382.•u 
382.•u 
141.•u 
3-HYDROXY -4-ACETYLAlllNOBIPHENYL 100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••. : •• 10 P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.05 -
P<.05 -
P<.002 -
1459 R f nu eat l iv tu• 43w65 .> no dre P-1. 
N· HYDROXY· 2 ·ACETYLAlllNOFLUORENE 
1460 • nu eat for 11ix 32w56 
H 11 nu eat l iv bda 32w56 
1461 H 11 nu ipj per fbs 34w69 
1 H 11 nu ipj for pa11 34w69 
b 11 nu ipj 111i adc 34w69 
1462 f nbr eat l iv •ix 64w64 
f nbr eat l iv cho 64w64 
1463 • nbr eat l iv •ix 64w64 
11 nbr eat l iv cho 64w64 
3 ·HYDROXY ·4 ·AlllNOB I PHENYL 100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•u •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••• : •• 10 
• 2.10•u 
20.811u 
.. 2.20•u 
no dre 
no dre 
1.74uu 
2.03uu 
690.nu 
16.2uu 
100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•u •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••. : .• 10 P<.0005+ 
P<.05 
P<.03 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
1464 R f nu eat l iv tu11 43w65 .> no dre P• 1. 
1-(2·HYDROXYETHYL) -3-1 (5·NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AlllNO J ·2· llllDAZOLIDINONE ••• : •• 111u •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••• : •• 10 
1465 R f ada eat 11ul adc 46w66 e 16. 7•u P<.0005+ 
1 f sda eat liv tu• 46w66 e no dre P-1. 
b R sda eat tba 11ix 46w66 e 18.0•u P<.0005 
1·(2·HYDROXYETHYL)·1 ·NITROSOUREA 
1466 11 11rw wat bon oat 52w70 
1 • 11rw wat -• -11l y 52w70 
b • 11rw wat ---lcl 52w70 
• 11rw wat tba 11 ix 52w70 100nu •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1U· •••• : •• 10 
1.5211u 
2.03•u 
2.03•u 
.360•u 
4-<2-HYDROXYETHYLAlllNOl -2· <5-NITR0·2-THIENYLlQUINAZOLINE •.••• : .• 100 •••• :. ·1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1U· •••• :. -10 P<.002 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
1467 R f sda eat itn lei 46w66 e • + 3.8411u P<.0005 
1 f ad1 eat l iv bd1 46w66 e 132.11u P<.1 
b R &di eat tbl 11ix 46w66 e 1.8711u P<.0005+ 
2 • HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZ I NE 
1468 f ayu Wit l iv hpt 84w84 a 
• •YU wet lun tu• 84w84 a 
1469 • •YU wat l iv hpt 84w84 • 
I 11 •YU wat lun tu11 84w84 • 
1470 b61 orl lun ade 78w78 evx 
a b6a orl l iv hpt 78w78 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 781178 evx 
1471 • b61 orl l iv hpt 781178 evx 
a • b61 or l l un ade 78w78 evx 
b • b61 orl lun •ix 78w78 evx 
• b6a orl tba 11ix 78w78 evx 
1472 f b6c orl l iv hpt 78w78 evx 
a f b6c orl lun ade 78w78 evx 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 78w78 evx 
1473 • b6c orl l iv hpt 78w78 evx 
• b6c orl lun ade 78w78 evx 
b • b6c or l tba •ix 781178 evx 100nu •• : •• 1uu •••. : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1U· •••• : •• 10 
.> 
• 
.> .. 148.llU 
no dre 
84.4•u 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
5.34•u 
.314•u 
no dre 
no dre 
.404•u 
4. 77•u 
4.7711u 
4.7711u 
.541•u 
no dre 
• 713•u P<.02 -
P-1. 
P<.02 -
P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.8 
P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.02 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.6 
P<.02 + 
P•1 • 
P<.4 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose !Inc 2Dose 2Inc 
d c01854 14.8•11 258.•11 1/99 2.30•11 2/50 8.80•11 6/50 
c01854 15. 5•11 157 ·•II 0/99 2.30•11 1/50 8.80•11 5/50 
c01854 3. 13•11 342 ·•II 62/99 2.30•11 36/50 8.80•11 43/50 
II c01854 2.44•11 6.30•11 6/99 2.301111 13/50 8.801111 37/50 
HYDROCORTISONE Ccorti1ol> 50·23·7 
1452 1134 27.51111 n.1.1. 3/33 5.361111 2/40 
1453 1134 32.0•11 n.1.1. 1/36 5.361111 0/29 
1134 32.0•11 n.1.1. 1/36 5.361111 0/29 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 7722-84 -1 
1454 1381 3.6811• 98.211• 0/98 175.•11 1/101 702.•11 5/99 
HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZYL ETHER CA11erite alba> 103-16-2 
1455 1308 383.•11 n.1.1. 0/17 205.•11 0/17 
e 1308 383.1111 n.1.1. 1/17 205.1111 0/17 
b 1308 180.•11 n.1.1. 2/17 205.1111 2/17 
1456 1308 178.•11 n.1.1. 2/18 190.1111 2/18 
a 1308 225.•11 n.1.1. 1/18 190.1111 1/18 
b 1308 150.•11 n.1.1. 3/18 190.•11 3/18 
1457 1308 383.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 205.•11 0/17 
a 1308 383.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 205.•11 0/17 
b 1308 201.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 205.•11 1/17 
1458 1308 115.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 190.•11 3/18 
1308 115.•ll n.1.1. 0/16 190.•11 3/18 
b 1308 60.3•11 576.•ll 0/16 190.•11 7/18 
3-HYDROXY· 4-ACETYLAMI NOB I PHENYL 4463-22-3 
1459 1424 7.94•11 n.1.1. 0/15 12.3•11 018 
N ·HYDROXY· 2 • ACETYLAMINOF LUORENE Chydroxy-N -2-f luoreny l acetHi de) 53.95.2 
1460 30811 1.07•11 4.56•11 0/17 17.01111 16/20 
a 308• 6.27•11 n.1.1. 0/17 17.0•11 3/20 
1461 308n .6521111 n.1.1. 018 3.431111 3/8 
a 308n 2.491111 n.1.1. 0/8 3.431111 018 
b 308n 2.491111 n.1.1. 0/8 3.431111 0/8 
1462 162a 805.n11 4.90u11 0/20 4.00u11 9/20 
a 162a 908.n11 6.43u11 0/20 4.00u11 8/20 
1463 162a 352.n11 1.55u11 0/20 3.20u11 14/20 
a 162a 2.64u11 n.1.1. 0/20 3.20u11 1/20 
3· HYDROXY ·4·AMINOBIPHENYL c 4-a• i no-3-hydroxyb i phany l > 4363-03-5 
1464 1424 5.45•11 n.1.1. 0/15 9.671111 017 
1-C2·HYDROXYETHYL) -3· i (5 ·NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO J ·2· IMIDAZOLIDINONE 5036-03 -3 
1465 200• 8.90•11 36.91111 0/25 34.81111 14/32 
a 200a 92.61111 n.1.1. 0/25 34.81111 0/32 
b 200a 9.19•11 56.5•11 1/25 34.81111 14/32 
1 • C 2 -HYDROXYETHYL) • 1 ·NI TROSOUREA 13743-07 ·2 
1466 1246 .7861111 5.401111 1/26 2.10•11 15/40 
a 1246 1. 02•11 5. 89•11 0/26 2.10•11 11/40 
b 1246 1. 021111 5. 89•11 0/26 2.10•11 11/40 
1246 .190•11 • 903•11 10/26 2.101111 36/40 
4-C2·HYDROXYETHYLAMIN0l -2· C5-NITR0·2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 33389-36-5 
1467 1390 2.16•11 7.49•11 0/84 17.4•11 20/28 
a 1390 21.5•11 n.1.1. 0/84 17.4•11 1/28 
b 1390 • 939•11 3. 79•11 6/84 17.41111 26/28 
2 • HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZ I NE CBOH> 109·84-2 
1468 160 44. 7•11 28.11111 0/100 20.51111 3/50 
a 160 137 ·•II n.1.1. 0/100 20.51111 0/50 
1469 160 29.9•11 49.01111 1/100 18.01111 5/50 
• 160 121.•11 n.a.a. 0/100 18.01111 0/50 
1470 159 .6701111 n ••••• 2/15 .7081111 2/17 
a 159 1.391111 n.a.a. 1/15 .7081111 0/17 
b 159 .508•11 n.a.a. 2/15 .7081111 3/17 
1471 159 • 148•11 • 8201111 0/18 .6601111 10/18 
a 159 .912•11 n.1.1. 2/18 .6601111 1/18 
b 159 .975•11 n.a.a. 3/18 .6601111 1/18 
159 • 1631111 n. I. I. 3/18 .6601111 10/18 
1472 159 • 777•11 n. •·•· 0/17 .7081111 1/18 
a 159 • 7771111 n.a.a. 0/17 .708•11 1/18 
b 159 .6281111 n.1. •· 1/17 .7081111 2/18 
1473 159 .212•11 n ••••• 1/17 .6601111 7/17 
a 159 • 7741111 n.a.a. 1/17 .6601111 1/17 
b 159 .1771111 n ••••• 7/17 .6601111 10/17 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
eac:sqc,sqp; zya:sqc. S 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
SchHhl ;zkko,86, 77·84; 1976 
Ito;11ann, 72, 174· 175; 1981 
Innes;nt ii, 1968/1969 
Miller; jnc i, 15, 1571-1590; 1955 
Miller ;canr ,24,2018·2026; 1964 
YHa11oto; i j cn,2,337·343; 1967 
Miller; jnc i, 15, 1571·1590; 1955 
Cohen; jnci ,51,403-417;1973 
Bu lay; jnci ,62, 1523-1528; 1979 
Cohen; jnci ,57,277·282;1976 
Sh i11i zu; j nc i, 52, 903·906; 1974 
Inne1; nt i 1, 1968/ 1969 155 156 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'I'•ilpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1474 M f swi wet tun tu11 75w75 s 
• M f swi wet tiv 11ix 75w75 s 
1475 M " swi wet tun tuM 75w75 s 
M 11 swi wet l iv 11ix 75w75 s 
HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
1476 R f wis Ht t iv tu11 241124 e 
1 R f wis Ht tbe 01ix 24•24 e 
1477 R " wis Ht t iv hpt 24•24 e 
a R " wis eat tbe 01ix 24•24 e 
8· HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
1478 "' f34 Ht ti v tu11 52w52 e 
1479 R • f34 Ht tea tdc 78w78 
R • f34 Ht t iv tu• 78w78 . > no dre P-1 • 
no dre P•1. 
• > no dre p.1 • 
no dre P-1. 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!Mg •••• : •• _10 •.•.• : •• _100 .••• : •• _1g .•••• : •• _10 
no dre 
930.gOI 
243.g• 
no dre 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 •.••• : •• _100 •.•. : .• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••.•. : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
. > no dre 
398.0lg 
no dre P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
p.1 . 
P<.02 -
P•1. 
1' ·HYDROXYSAFROLE _100ng .• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••. : •• _100 .••• : •• _1g .•.•• : •• _10 
1480 f cd1 Ht t iv hpc 51w73 ev + • 68.011g P<.0005+ 
P<.007 
P-1. cd1 eat sub ang 51w73 ev 1. 55g11 
b cd1 Ht tun tu11 51w73 ev no dre 
1481 11 cd1 Ht t iv car 51w73 ev 
a " cd1 Ht tun tu11 51w73 ev 
1482 • cd1 Ht isp ang 56w69 
• cd1 Ht tun ade 56w69 
b • cd1 Ht t iv car 56w69 
1483 " cdr eat t iv hpc 58w95 ae 
1484 "' cdr Ht t iv car 43w69 
a " cdr Ht for pa., 43w69 
1485 • cdr eat t iv car 36w52 
• cdr Ht for p8" 36w52 
ICRF·159 
1486 f b6c i p j MXB 52w86 
a b6c i p j MXA 52w86 
b b6c ipj lhc 52w86 
c b6c i p j TBA MXB 52w86 
d b6c ipj l iv MXB 52w86 
e b6c ipj tun MXB 52w86 
1487 b6c i p j MXA 52w86 
b6c ipj l he 52w86 
1488 " b6c ipj TBA MXB 52w86 
a • b6c ipj l iv MXB 52w86 
b " b6c ipj lun NXB 52w86 
1489 f sda ipj ute acn 52w81 
sda i p j TBA MXB 52w81 
b sda ipj l iv MXB 52w81 
1490 1da ipj ute ecn 52w79 
1491 • sda ipj TBA MXB 52w81 s 
11 sda ipj l iv MXB 52w81 • > 
+ no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
429.11g * P<.0005+ 
5.47g11 * P<.5 
18. 9g11 * P<. 9 
47 .801g * P<.0005+ 
16. 711g P<.0005+ 
59. 811g P<. 002 + 
12.10lg P<.0005+ 
65. 811g P<. 003 + 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••.•• : •• _100 ••.• : •• _1•g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g •.•.• : •• _10 
pool 
pool : + : + 23. 711g * P<.005 
23. 7Mg * P<.005 c 
53. 7Mg * P<.03 c 
16.811g * P<.003 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
25. 911g * P<. 0005 
53. 711g * P<.003 c 
262.11g * P<.8 
no dre p.1. 
212.11g * P<.3 
11 • 311g * P<. 002 c 
6.4811g * P<.005 
no dre P•1. 
10.7•g * P<.0005c 
9.5511g * P<.03 
105.11g * P<.5 
3, 3' • IMINOBI S • 1 ·PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE (ESTER l. Ht l (!PD) •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••.•. : •• _100 .••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
1492 f b6c ipj TBA MXB 52w86 e : + 1.17Mg • P<.0005-
f b6c ipj Liv MXB 52w86 e no dre P•1. 
b f b6c ipj lun MXB 52w86 e 6.8811g * P<.04 
1493 • b6c ipj ly11 52w78 .t #37. 711g * P<.04 
a • b6c ipj TBA MXB 52w78 2.0711g I P<.0005 
b " b6c ipj l iv MXB 52w78 no dre P-1. 
c "' b6c ipj lun MXB 52w78 no dre P•1. 
1494 f sda ipj per MXA 36w80 as 2.74mg Z P<.003 a 
ode ipj TBA MXB 36w80 es .61611g * P<.006 
b sde ipj l iv MXB 36w80 as 5.0111g * P<.05 
1495 11 sde ipj per MXA 36w80 .. + .915oog * P<.003 a 
e " sda i p j TBA MXB 36w80 u 1 • 3011g * P<. 0005 
b • sda ipj l iv MXB 36w80 as no dre p.1. 
IMINODIACETIC ACID, MONOSODIUM 
1496 f 11rc wet tba 11ix 20M24 e 
1497 R 11 11rc wet tb• 11ix 20m24 e _100ng •• : •• _1ug •.•• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 .•.•• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
.t 143.0lg 
.> no dre 
INDOLE·3·ACETIC ACID _100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 .•..• : •• _100 •••• : •• _10lg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : .. _10 
1498 M f b6a ort lun ade 76w76 evx 
M f b6e ort l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a ort tbe 01ix 76w76 evx 
1499 M " b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• M " b6e or l lun ode 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6e orl tbe ooix 76w76 evx 
1500 M f b6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
M b6c or t l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b6c orl tbe 1Rix 76w76 evx • > 
. > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
538.llg 
no dre 
538.llg P<.03 -
P•1. 
p.1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.3 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 157 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose Jlnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1474 160 65.1•11 n.a.s. 21/100 30.01111 7 /50 Sh i11i zu; j nc i, 52, 903·906;1974 
a 160 107 ·•II n.a. a. 3/100 30.01111 1/50 
1475 160 84.2•11 n.a.s. 23/100 25.00lg 4/50 
160 100.1111 n.a. 1. 6/100 25.01111 1/50 
HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
1476 1407 80.41111 n.a.1. 0/30 15.01111 0/26 de Groot; fctx, 12,651-663; 1974 
a 1407 7 .411111 n.a.1. 23/30 15.01111 20/26 
1477 1407 39.51111 n.a.1. 0/23 12.01111 1/30 
1407 14.81111 n.a.1. 21/23 12.01111 19/30 
8· HYDROXYQUINOLINE 148-24-3 
1478 16611 165.1111 n.a.a. 0/10 320.1111 0/10 Ya11a11oto; txap, 19 ,687 -698; 1971 
1479 166n 136.•11 n.1.1. 0/15 320.1111 4/15 
166n 556.1111 n.1.s. 0/15 320.1111 0/15 
1'. HYDROXYSAFROLE 5208-87-7 
1480 1035c 37. 71111 125.1111 0/53 483.1111 30/33 Wi a lock i; canr, 37, 1883-1891;1977 
• 1035c 587.1111 17.21111 0/55 483.1111 5/50 
b 1035c 2.451111 n.a.a. 0/55 483.1111 0/50 
1481 1035c 1.131111 n.a.a. 0/44 446.1111 0/25 
a 1035c 2.041111 n.1.1. 0/55 446.1111 0/45 
1482 1042• 245.1111 972.1111 1/50 429.1111 7/25 536.1111 13/40 Borchert; canr ,33, 590-600; 1973 
1042a 1.051111 n.1.1. 1/50 429.1111 1/25 536.1111 2/40 
b 1042• 872.1111 n.1.1. 4/50 429.1111 3/25 536.1111 3/40 
1483 1035c 28.21111 88.31111 0/18 77 .3•11 7/18 100.1111 16/18 Wialock i ;canr ,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
1484 1042a 6.141111 47.11111 0/12 138.1111 11/12 Borchert; canr ,33, 590-600; 1973 
• 1042• 23. 71111 269.1111 0/12 138.1111 6/12 
1485 1042c 5.641111 27. 71111 0/18 156.1111 16/18 
1042c 26.61111 334.1111 0/18 156.1111 6/18 
ICRF-159 21416-87-5 
1486 c01627 12.7•11 187.1111 0/15 10.0•11 5/35 21.01111 9/35 ··-:leu,lhc,ly•. 
• c01627 12.71111 187.1111 0/15 10.01111 5/35 21.0•11 9/35 -· · :leu,ly111. 
b c01627 21.9•11 n.1.1. 0/15 10.01111 1/35 21.01111 5/35 
c c01627 9. 721111 86.41111 0/15 10.01111 8/35 21.0•11 11/35 
d c01627 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 10.01111 0/35 21.01111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e c01627 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 10.0•11 0/35 21.0•11 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1487 c01627 13.21111 90.51111 1/45p 10.01111 5/35 21.01111 9/35 · ·· :leu,ly11. 
• c01627 21.91111 268.1111 0/45p 10.01111 1/35 21.01111 5/35 
1488 c01627 23.01111 n.a .a. 2/15 10.0•11 2/35 21.01111 3/35 
a c01627 65.81111 n.a.1. 2/15 10.01111 0/35 21.01111 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c01627 34.51111 n.a.a. 0/15 10.01111 0/35 21.01111 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1489 c01627 6.671111 34.91111 0/10 13.01111 10/34 26.01111 11/35 
• c01627 3.481111 66.81111 4/10 13.01111 24/34 26.01111 22/35 
b c01627 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 13.01111 0/34 26.01111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1490 c01627 6.341111 20.11111 0/40p 13.01111 10/34 26.01111 11/35 
1491 c01627 4.341111 n.a.1. 1/10 13.01111 11/36 26.01111 4/35 
a c01627 17.21111 n.a.1. 0/10 13.01111 1/36 26.01111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
3, 3' · IMINOBIS • 1 • PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE <ESTER> .HCL <IPDl 3458-22-8 
1492 c01547 .5411111 3.201111 3/15 5.201111 13/36 11.61111 14/35 
• c01547 n.1.1 . n.1.1. 0/15 5.201111 0/36 11.61111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01547 1.771111 n.1.1. 1/15 5.201111 2/36 11.61111 2/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1493 c01547 9.011111 n.1.1. 0/15 5.801111 0/34 14.01111 3/35 s 
• c01547 .7281111 7.511111 1/15 5.801111 6/34 14.01111 4/35 
b c01547 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 5.801111 0/34 14.01111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c01547 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 5.801111 0/34 14.01111 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1494 c01547 • 7221111 27. 71111 0/20 3.301111 0/35 4.901111 3/35 21.01111 0/35 per:fbs,srn. 
a c01547 .2281111 9.061111 12/20 3.301111 8/35 4.901111 3/35 21.01111 0/35 
b c01547 .8161111 n.1.1. 0/20 3.301111 0/35 4.901111 1/35 21.01111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1495 c01547 .1601111 23.91111 0/20 4.901111 3/70 21.01111 0/35 per: fbs, fib, srn. 
a c01547 .2261111 11.11111 5/20 4.901111 7170 21.01111 1/35 
b c01547 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 4.901111 0170 21.01111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
IMINOD !ACETIC AC ID, MONOSODIUM 32607-00-4 
1496 213 53.51111 n.a.a. 4/15 165.1111 10/15 Li j in1ky; jnci ,50, 1061-1063; 1973 
1497 213 134.1111 n.a.a. 8/15 115.1111 5/15 
INDOLE·3·ACETIC ACID (heteroaux in) 87-51-4 
1498 1280 99.31111 n.1.a. 1/17 89.11111 1/17 lnnea;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1280 167.1111 n.a.a. 0/17 89.11111 0/17 
b 1280 78.31111 n.a.a. 2/17 89.11111 2/17 
1499 1280 98.01111 n.a.1. 1/18 82.91111 1/18 
a 1280 109.1111 n.1.1. 2/18 82.91111 1/18 
b 1280 65.21111 n.a.1. 3/18 82.91111 3/18 
1500 1280 87 .51111 n.1.1. 0/16 89.11111 1/17 
a 1280 167.1111 n.a.1. 0/16 89.11111 0/17 
b 1280 87.51111 n.1.1. 0/16 89.11111 1/17 158 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1501 M • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M • b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 ovx 
IODOFORM 
1502 f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 v 
a f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
b f b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 v 
1503 • b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 v 
a • b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
b • b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 v 
1504 f OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 y 
• OH gav l iv MXB 18•26 y 
1505 • OH gav thy MXA 18•26 v 
• • OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 v 
b • OH gav l iv MXB 18•26 v 
1506 • OH gav thy MXA 18•26 v 113.•g 
500.•g 
40.3•g P<.02 
P<.3 
P<.0005-
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•. : .• 10 •.•.• : .• 100 •.•• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 •..•• :. -100 •..• : •• 1g .• • •. : .• 10 
:> 
:> 
pool no dre p.1. 
no dro P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
73.8•g * P<.2 
1.66g• * P<.9 
630.•g * P<. 7 
11.3•g \ P<.05 
no dre p.1. 
#82.2•g * P<.02 
113.•g * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
#116.•g * P<.05 
N· ISOBUTYL·N' -NITRO·N·NITROSOGUANIDINE •• : •• 1ug •.•• : .• 10 .•••• : •. 100 ••.• :. ·1•g ••.. : •• 10 ••.•• :. -100 •.•• : .• 1g •.•.. :. -10 
1507 R • wi1 wet 1tg tu• 52w78 er 
ISONIAZID 
1508 f 1yg wet for pa• 28•28 e 
a f 1yg wet l iv tu• 28•28 e 
b 1yg wet lun tu• 28•28 e 
1509 • 1yg wet l iv hH 30•30 e 
a • 1yg wet lun tu• 30•30 e 
1510 akr wet lun tu• 70w70 e 
a akr wet l iv tu• 70w70 
1511 • akr wet lun tu11 59w59 o 
a • akr wet l iv hH 59w59 • 
1512 • aH gav l iv car 79w79 r 
a • •• gav lun cer 79w79 r 
b • ••• gav •ix car 79w79 r 
1513 f c3h wet lun ade 72w72 e 
1514 • c3h wet lun ede 72w72 e 
1515 f cbc gov lun •ix 36w84 • 
1 cbc gov l iv hpt 36w84 e 
1516 • cbc gov lun •ix 36w74 e 
1 • cbc gov l iv hpt 36w74 e 
1517 b nu gav lun ade 52w52 • 
1 b nu gov •g l ode 52w52 e 
b b nu gav tbe •ix 52w52 e 
1518 awe wet lun •ix 80w80 e 
1 awe wet lun ode 80w80 e 
b 1w1 wet l un ode 80w80 e 
c 1wa wet l iv hH 80w80 e 
1519 awe Wit lun ad• 23•25 .. 
a awa wet l iv he• 23•25 ee 
1520 • awe wet lun ade 80w80 e 
1 • awe wet l iv hH 80w80 e 
1521 • awe wet lun ode 86w87 ee1 
a • awa wet liv •ix 86w87 ee1 
1522 f awi gov •ix car 83w83 r 
a awi gov lun car 83w83 r 
b 1wi gov liv car 83w83 r 
1523 1wi gev •ix car 81w83 gr 
1 1wi gov lun car 81w83 gr 
b awi gov liv car 81w83 gr 
1524 • awi gov •ix car 85w85 r 
a • 1wi gav lun car 85w85 r 
b • awi gav l iv car 85w85 r 
1525 • awi gav •ix car 79w79 fr 
a • awi gav lun car 79w79 fr 
b • awi gav l iv car 79w79 fr 
1526 • 1wi gav •ix car 79w79 br 
a • 1wi gav lun car 79w79 br 
b • 1wi gav l iv car 79w79 br 
1527 cb1 wet •gl fba 48w64 a 
a cb1 wat lun tu• 48w64 a 
b cb1 wet l iv tu• 48w64 a 
1528 • cb1 wet l iv tu• 48w84 ea 
1 • cb1 wet lun •ix 48w84 
ISONICOTINIC ACID 
1529 f 1yg wet cec tu• 281128 e 
a f 1yg wet l iv tu• 28•28 • 
b 1yg wet lun tu• 2S.28 • . > no dre p.1 • 
100ng~.: •. 1ug •.•. : .• 10 •••.• : .. 100 ••.• :. -1•g •..• : •. 10 •••.• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g •.•.• : •. 10 
.> 
.> 
.> 
.> 
.> 
+ 
• + 
• + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
• + 
+ 
+ -* 575.•g P<.02 
P•1. 
P•1. 
• > no dre 
no dre 
no dre p.1 . 
no dre 
89.611g 
no dre 
202.•g 
no dre 
159.•g \ 
206.•g • 
219.•g • 
755.11g 
219.•g 
11.211g 
187.•g 
12.2•g 
165.•g 
19.3•g 
80.9•g p.1. 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.5 
P<.5 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.6 
P<.0005+ 
P<.06 + 
14.1•g P<.0005+ 
153. •g P<. 0005+ 
189.•g P<.0005+ 
435.•g P<.01 
no dre p.1. 
386. •g * P<. 0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
124 .•g P<. 0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
104.•g \ P<.0005+ 
no dre p.1. 
53.1•g P<.0005+ 
53.1•g P<.0005 
no dre 
39.9•g 
88.6•g 
88.6•g 
24.0•g • 
28.9•g • 
211.•g • 
25. 7•g • 
41.1•g • 
88.811g * 
21.2•g 
39.211g 
71.3•g 
120.•g p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.008 
P<.008 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.3 
P<.003 + 
P<.007 
P<.3 
P<.005 + 
P<.05 
P<.05 
P<.002 + 
no dre p.1. 
no dre 
199.•g 
1.07g• p.1. 
P<.07 
P<.2 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••. :. -100 •••. :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .•.• : •. 1g .•.•• : •. 10 
.t8.08g• 
no dre 
no dre CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 159 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1501 1280 38.9•g n.a.a. 0/16 82.9•g 4/17 
• 1280 81.5•g n.a.a. 0/16 82.911g 1/17 
b 1280 18.511g 114.•g 0/16 82.9•g 9/17 
IOOOFORH (triiodoHthane> 75-48-8 
1502 c04568 40.2•g n.a.a. 7/20 28.5•g 14/50 <56.3•g 5/50) 
• c04568 418.•g n.a.a. 1/20 28.5•g 1/50 56.3•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c04568 418.•g n.a.a. 1/20 28. 5•g 1/50 56.3•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1503 c04568 30.0•g n.a.a. 5/20 28.511g 14/50 56.9•g 23/50 
• c04568 81.1•g n.a.a. 3/20 28.5•g 5/50 56.9•g 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04568 91.4•g n.a.a. 1/20 28.5•g 4/50 56.9•g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1504 c04568 4.66•g n.a.a. 10/20 13.6•g 27/50 <27.1•g 23/50) 
I c04568 241.•g n.a.a. 1/20 13.6•g 0/50 27.1•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1505 c04568 40.8•g n.a.a. 0/20 35.2•g 8/50 70.4•g 4/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
• c04568 28.411g n.a.a. 7/20 35. 2•g 17/50 70.4•g 10/50 
b c04568 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 35.2•g 0/50 70.4•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1506 c04568 46.2•g n.a.a. 2/40p 35.2•g 8/50 70.411g 4/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
N· ISOBUTYL·N' -NITRO·N ·NITROSOGUANIDINE 5461-85·8 
1507 1082 2.24•g n.a.a. 0/9 2.14•g 0/9 Hatsukura;gann, 70, 181·185; 1979 
ISONIAZID (INHl 54-85·3 
1508 170 195.•g n.a.a. 2/54 136.•g 5/22 Toth ;ej ca, 5, 165-171;1969 
170 1.37g• n.a.a. 0/72 136.•g 0/36 
b 170 1.37g• n.a.a. 0/72 136.•g 0/36 
1509 170 425.•g "····· 2/25 120.•g 0/11 
• 170 1.51g• n.a.a. 0/67 120.•g 0/39 
1510 169 13.2•g n.a.a. 0/1 200.•g 1/2 Toth; i jcn,2,413-420; 1967 
I 169 560.•g n.a.a. 0/30 200.•g 0/30 
1511 169 32.6•g n.a.a. 019 167.•g 1/6 
I 169 155.•g n.a.a. 1/14 167.•g 0/14 
1512 584• 48.2•g n.a.a. 0/20 31.4•g 3/40 (62.9•g 0/40) Bhide; i j cn,21,381-386; 1978 
• 584• 64.0•g "····· 1/20 31.4•g 7/40 62.9•g 6/40 
b 584• 55.8•g n.a.a. 1/20 31.4•g 10/40 62.9•g 6/40 
1513 1115 123.•g n.a.a. 0/4 200.•g 1/12 Toth;acie, 152, 1376-1377; 1966• 
1514 1115 71.3•g n.a.a. 1/12 167.•g 6/21 
1515 1074 5.26•g 29.S.g 4/47 34.1•g 13/17 B; inc if ior i ;bj c1, 18, 543· 550; 1964 
I 1074 32.3•g n.a.a. 2/47 34.1•g 2/17 
1516 1074 5.80•g 32. 7•g 1/37 32.2•g 11/18 
• 1074 22.1•g "····· 4/37 32.2•g 3/18 
1517 1425 11.1•g 47 .4•g 5/94 30.1•g 27/98 Per sh in; vopr, XVI 11, 50· 53; 1972 
• 1425 30.1•g n.a.a. 2/94 30.1•g 8/98 
b 1425 8.62•g 29.9•g 7/94 30.1•g 35/98 
1518 1127 82.3•g 426.•g 9/68 200.•g 23/47 Toth;canr ,26, 1473-1475; 1966 
• 1127 97 .3•g 635.•g 8/68 200.•g 20/47 
b 1127 165.•g 27.1g• 1/48 200.•g 6/32 
c 1127 534.•g n.a.a. 3/48 200.•g 1/32 
1519 169 201.•g 1.37g• 14/108 100.•g 17/39 300.•g 13/32 Toth; i j en, 2,413-420; 1967 
• 169 413.•g n.a.a. 3/88 100.•g 0/30 300.•g 0/18 
1520 1127 67 .5•g 311.•g 8/80 167.•g 21/44 Toth; canr, 26, 1473-1475; 1966 
I 1127 203.•g n.1.1. 2/35 167.•g 0/10 
1521 169 49.2•g 437.•g 10/90 83.3•g 15/38 <250.•g 3/14) Toth; i jcn,2,413-420; 1967 
• 169 555.•g n.1.1. 2/85 83.3•g 1/38 250.•g 0/10 
1522 584• 23.9•g 174.•g 0/30 37 .7•g 8/30 &hide;; j cn,21,381-386; 1978 
• 584• 23.9•g 174.•g 0/30 37 .7•g 8/30 
b 584• 149.•g n.1.1. 0/30 37. 7•g 0/30 
1523 584n 19.3•g 105.•g 0/30 37 .O•g 10/30 
• 584n 33.6•g 1.32g• 0/30 37 .O•g 5/30 
b 584n 33.6•g 1.32g• 0/30 37 .O•g 5/30 
1524 584• 13.9•g 53.4•g 1/30 15.7•g 6/30 31.4•g 16/30 
• 584• 16.2•g 70.0•g 1/30 15.7•g 4/30 31.4•g 15/30 
b 584• 63.8•g n.a.a. 0/30 15. 7•g 2/30 31.4•g 1/30 
1525 5840 14.1•g 107.•g 0/15 15.7•g 6/25 31.4•g 9/25 
• 5840 20.0•g 420.•g 0/15 15. 7•g 3/25 31.4•g 7/25 
b 5840 33.7•g "····· 0/15 15.7•g 3/25 31.4•g 2/25 
1526 584r 10 .1•g 158.•g 1/15 31.4•g 12/25 
• 584r 15.4•g "····· 1/15 31.4•g 8/25 
b 584r 24.6•g n.a.a. 0/15 31.4•g 4/25 
1527 157 60.1•g 399.•g 0/22 149.•g 11/40 Severi; jnc i ,41,331-349; 1968 
• 157 465.•g n.a.a. 0/22 149.•g 0/40 
b 157 465 .•g n.a.a. 0/22 149.•g 0/40 
1528 157 32.1•g n.a.a. 0/21 99.4•g 1/5 
• 157 262.•g n.1.1 • 0/28 99.4•g 2/49 
ISON I COTI NI C ACID 55-22-1 
1529 1108 1.99g• n.a.a. 0/66 682.•g 2/27 Toth; canr, 32,804-807; 1972/19671 
• 1108 6.36g• "····· 0/72 682.•g 0/34 
b 1108 6.36g• "····· 0/72 682.•g 0/34 160 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1530 H 11 syg wat l iv lee 281128 e 
a H • ayg wat l iv 11ix 281128 e 
b H 11 syg wat lun tu"' 28•28 e 
1531 M ebe gav l iv hpt 36w89 e 
M ebe gav l un ade 36w89 e 
1532 M 11 ebe gav lun ade 36w89 e 
M 11 ebe gav l iv hpt 36w89 e GOLD ET AL. 
.> 
.> TD50 
"'6.95gll 
10.3g11 
no dre 
612 ... g 
no dre 
101.•g 
no dre 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
P<.1 
P<.5 
P-1. 
P<.8 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
ISONICOTINIC ACID VANILLYLIOENEHYDRAZIOE.: •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : .• 100 •••. : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.. : •• 10 
1533 M b nsa gav lun ade 52w52 e "' 45.011g P<.03 
P<.07 
P<.003 a M 
b nsa gav 11gl ade 52w52 e 86.6•g 
b M b nu gav tba 11ix 52w52 e 27 .4•g 
I SOPHOSPHAM I DE 100ng •• :. -1ug •••. : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 .••• : •. 111g ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1534 M f b6e ipj lhe 52w79 s 
a M b6e ipj TBA MXB 52w79 s 
b M b6e ipj l iv MXB 52w79 a 
M b6e ipj lun MXB 52w79 s 
1535 M b6e ipj lhe 52w79 s pool 
1536 M II b6e ipj TBA MXB 52w79 • :> 
a M 11 b6e ipj l iv MXB 52w79 s 
b M II b6e ipj lun MXB 52w79 • 
1537 • b6e ipj l iv MXA 52w79 s pool 
1538 sda i p j MXB MXB 52w83 s + 
a sda ipj 11gl fba 52w83 s 
b ada ipj ute lei 52w83 s 
e sda i p j TBA MXB 52w83 s 
d sda ipj l iv MXB 52w83 s 
1539 sda ipj 11gl fba 52w80 a pool 
a sda ipj ute lei 52w80 s 
b sda ipj 11gl MXA 52w80 
1540 II sda ipj TBA MXB 52w79 • 
a • ada ipj l iv MXB 52w79 s 
1541 • sda ipj · •• MXA 52w79 s pool 5. 0611g * P<. 0005e 
3.6311g * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
5. 0611g * P<. 0005e 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
37. 611g * P<. 5 
#2. 4211g \ P<. 02 
• 28411g * P<. 0005 
.30111g * P<.0005a 
• 73911g * P<. 003 e 
. 38311g P<. 009 
17.2•g * P<.5 
• 35811g * P<. 0005a 
.81411g * P<.0005e 
2. 9611g * P<. 007 
1.0111g P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
#3. 2311g * P<. 0005-
p· ISOPROPOXYOIPHENYLAMINE 100ng •• : •. 1ug ••.• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1•g •.•• : •• 10 •••.. : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1542 f b6a orl l iv ag• 76w76 evx .> 2.65g• 
a f b6a orl lun ada 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 1.20g• 
1543 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 1 .13g"' 
a 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 2. 18g11 
b • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 985.11g 
1544 f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 2.65g11 
a f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 1.29g11 
1545 11 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx "' 679.11g 
11 b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 2.18g11 
b 11 b6e or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 300 .11g 
ISOPROPYL • N • (3· CHLOROPHENYL )CARBAMATE •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1546 f syg eat l iv tu11 331133 e .> no dre P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P<.7 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P<.003 
a ayg eat lun aqe 33•33 e no dre P•1. 
1547 11 ayg eat l iv hpe 331133 e 
1548 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1549 • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1550 f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6e or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
1551 11 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b " b6e or l tba 11 ix 76w76 evx 
1552 b awi eat lun ade 271127 e 
a b awi eat lun ade 27•27 e 
b b awi eat l iv tu• 27•27 e 
1553 alb eat •ix 11ly 24•24 
1554 11 alb eat l iv tu• 24•24 a 
11 alb eat 11d1 11ly 241124 a . > 
.> 
.> 
.> 
. > . > no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
258.11g 
830.•g 
114.llg 
682.llg 
4.95g11 
no dre 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P<.003 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
P-1. 
1 • ISOPROPYL·3·METHYL·a·PYRAZOL YLDIMETHYL CARBAMATE.: •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• : •• 10 
1555 M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P•1. 
M f b6a orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1556 M " b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
M " b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M • b6a or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
23.0ug P<.08 
14. 7ug P<.04 
41 .9ug P<.6 
12.4ug P<.2 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 161 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1530 1108 1.13g• n.1.1. 0/39 600.llg 1/13 
a 1108 1.19g• n.1.1. 1/39 600.11g 1/13 
b 1108 4.85g• n.1.1. 0/64 600.llg 0/29 
1531 1074 31.4•g n.1.1. 2/47 20.9•g 1/17 Bianci f ior i ;bj ca, 18,543·550; 1964 
a 1074 32.6•g n.1.a. 4/47 20.9•g 1/16 
1532 1074 16.3•g n.1.1. 0/13 17.411g 1/12 
1074 24.6•g n.1.1. 4/27 17.411g 2/18 
ISONICOTINIC ACID VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE (phthivazidl 
1533 1425 19.21111 n.s.1. 5/94 30.1•g 14/90 Per shin; vopr, XVI 11, 50· 53; 1972 
• 1425 30.3•11 n.a.1 . 2/94 30.111g 7/90 
b 1425 13.611g 174.llg 7/94 30.1•g 21/90 
ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 3778·73·2 
1534 c01638 2.81•g 14.1•g 0/15 2.8011g 3/35 5.60•g 13/35 
• c01638 2. 18•11 9.4811g 0/15 2.80•g 7/35 5.601111 15/35 
b c01638 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 2.80Mg 1/35 5.6011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c01638 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 2.8011g 0/35 5.60•g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1535 c01638 2.81Mg 10.9Mg 0/30p 2.8011g 3/35 5.60oog 13/35 
1536 c01638 1.8511g n.1.1. 0/15 2.801111 6/35 5.6011g 4/35 
• c01638 2.7011g n.1.1. 0/15 2.801111 5/35 5.6011g 2/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c01638 6.13•g n.a.1. 0/15 2.8011g 0/35 5.60 .. g 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1537 c01638 .90011g n.s.1. Ot30p 2.80•g 5/35 <5 .60oog 2/35) liv:hpa,hpc. 
1538 c01638 • 152•g . 872•11 3/10 1.60•g 30/35 3.30•g 6/35 •gl:fba; ute:lei. 
a c01638 .15811g 1.01Mg 3/10 1.60•g 28/35 3.3011g 6/35 
b c01638 • 37511g 3. 07•g 0/10 1.6011g 15/35 3.30•g 1/35 
c c01638 .175•g 17 .4•g 9/10 1.60•11 32/35 3.30•g 9/35 
d c01638 2.79•g n.s.s. 0/10 1.6011g 1/35 3.301111 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1539 c01638 .199•11 .841•g 8/30p 1.6011g 28/35 3.30oog 6/35 
• c01638 . 429•g 1 • 76•11 0/30p 1.60•g 15/35 3.30•g 1/35 
b c01638 .977•g 49.3•11 0/30p 1.60•g 3/35 3.30•g 1/35 mgl :ccn,cyn. s 
1540 c01638 .47611g n.1.1. 5/10 1.60•g 17/35 3.30•g 12/35 
• c01638 n.1.1 • n.1.1. 0/10 1.60•11 0/35 3.30•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1541 c01638 1.37•g 11.211g 0/30p 1.6011g 3/35 3.30•11 5/35 · ··:lau,ly• . s 
p· ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMINE <Ager i te 150) 101·73.5 
1542 1306 431.•g n.1.1. 0/17 414.•g 1/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1306 492.•g n.1.1. 1/17 414.llg 1/18 
b 1306 239.•g n.1.1. 2/17 414.llg 4/18 
1543 1306 252.•g n.1.1. 1/18 385.•g 3/18 
• 1306 274.•g n.1.1. 2/18 385.llg 3/18 
b 1306 196.•g n.1.1. 3/18 385.•g 5/18 
1544 1306 431.•g n.1.1. 0/16 414.llg 1/18 
a 1306 820.llg n.a.a. 0/16 414.•g 0/18 
b 1306 316.•g n.1.1. 0/16 414.•g 2/18 
1545 1306 205.•g n.1.1. 0/16 385.•g 3/16 
a 1306 355.llg n.1.1. 0/16 385.llg 1/16 
b 1306 121.•g 1.47g• 0/16 385.•g 6/16 
ISOPROPYL · N · (3· CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE (CIPC, chlorpropha11> 101 ·21·3 
1546 171a 2.12g• n.1.1. 0/27 209.•g 0126 Van Esch;fctx, 10,373-381;1972 
• 171a 2.12g• n.1.1. 1/27 209.11g 0126 
1547 171a 1.65g11 n.1.1. 1/22 184.•g 0/23 
1548 1196 175.•g n.1.1. 1/17 157.•g 1/17 Innes;nti1, 1968/1969 
• 1196 294.•g n.1.1. 0/17 157.•g 0/17 
b 1196 138.1111 n.1.1. 2/17 157.•g 2/17 
1549 1196 258.•g n.1.1. 1/18 146.•g 0/16 
a 1196 258.•g n.1.1. 2/18 146.•g 0/16 
b 1196 180.•g n.1.1. 3/18 146.Mg 1/16 
1550 1196 311.•g n.1.1. 0/16 157.•g 0/18 
• 1196 311.•g n.1.1. 0/16 157.•g 0/18 
b 1196 311.•g n.1.1. 0/16 157.•g 0/18 
1551 1196 77.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 146.llg 3/16 
1196 135.•g n.1.1. 0/16 146.•g 1/16 
b 1196 45.9•g 559.•g 0/16 146.•g 6/16 
1552 171• 209.•g n.1.1. 10/49 125.llg 15/47 Van Esch;fctx , 10,373-381;1972 
a 171• 807 .•g n.1.1. 0/49 125.•g 1/47 
b 171• 1.51g• n.1.1. 0/49 125.•g 0/47 
1553 170• 4.86g• n.1.1. 1/25 10.0•g 0/25 100.•g 1/25 1.00g• 0/25 Larson; txap, 2,659·673;1960 
1554 170a 37.1•11 n.1.1. 0/25 8.00•g 0/25 80.0•g 0/25 800.•g 0/25 
1701 3.1111• n.1.1. 0/25 8.001111 0/25 80.0•g 1/25 800.•g 0/25 
1·ISOPROPYL·3 ·METHYL· 1 • PYRAZOL YLD !METHYL CARBAMA TE < i1olan) 119-38·0 
1555 1247 14.7ug n.1.1. 0/18 8.38ug 0/16 Innaa;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1247 14.7ug n.1.1 . 0/18 8.38ug 0/16 
b 1247 5.63ug n.1.1. 0/18 8.38ug 2/16 
1556 1247 4.43ug n.1.1. 0/18 7 .80ug 3/17 
• 1247 6.12ug n.1.1. 1/18 7 .80ug 2/17 
b 1247 3.44ug n.1.1. 2/18 7 .80ug 5/17 162 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt TD50 2Tai\pvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1557 M b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c or l lun ada 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1558. M 11 b6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
I SOPROPYL · N ·PHENYL CARBAMATE 
1559 H f ayg eat l iv tu11 33•33 e 
a H 
f ayg eat lun aqc 33•33 a 
1560 11 ayg eat l iv hpc 33•33 e 
1561 f b6e orl lun ade 76w76 avx 
a b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1562 • b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b61 orl lun ada 76w76 evx 
b • b61 orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1563 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1564 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
a • b6c orl lun ada 76w76 avx 
b • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 avx . > no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
15.6ug P<.06 -
no dre P•1. 
41 .3ug P<.8 
100ng •• :. -1ug ..•• : •• 10 ..••• : •. 100 •.•. :. -1•g •••. : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• : •. 1g .•.•. : .. 10 
• > 
.> 
.> .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
444.llg 
no dre 
416.•g 
350.•g 
1.70g• 
254.•g 
244.•g 
502.llg 
88.1•g 
120.•g 
387.•g 
52.3•g P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1 • 
P<.6 
P-1. 
P<.7 
P<.5 
P<1. 
P<.6 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.009 -
P<.04 -
P<.3 
P<.002 -
ISOSAFROLE** 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .•••• : .. 100 •••• :. ·1•g ••.• : •. 10 .•.•. : •. 100 •..• : .• 1g •..•. : .• 10 
1565 f b61 orl l iv hpt 81w81 avx 
a f b61 orl lun ade 81w81 evx 
b f b61 orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 
1566 • b61 orl l iv hpt 81w81 avx 
a • b61 orl lun 11ix 81w81 evx 
b • b61 orl tba •ix 81w81 evx 
1567 f b6c orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 
a f b6c orl lun ade 81w81 evx 
b f b6c or l tba 11ix 81w81 evx 
1568 11 b6c orl liv hpt 81w81 evx 
a • b6c orl lun ada 81w81 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba •ix 81w81 evx 
KE PONE 
1569 
• 
b 
c 
1570 
• 
b 
c 
1571 
• 1572 
• 
1573 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 v 
b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 v 
b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 v 
b6c eat l un MXB 80w90 v 
11 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w89 dv 
• b6c eat TBA MXB 80w89 dv 
• b6c eat l iv MXB 80w89 dv 
• b6c eat l un MXB 80w89 dv 
f o .. 11t TBA MXB 19•25 v 
f OH eat l iv MXB 19•25 v 
11 OH eat TBA MXB 191125 v 
II OH eat l iv MXB 191125 v 
11 ada eat l iv nnd 91w91 
LASIOCARPINE 
1574 f f34 eat MXB MXB 21•24 as 
a f34 eat •ul MXA 21•24 as 
b f34 eat l iv ang 21•24 as 
c f34 eat 11ul MXA 21•24 as 
d f34 eat l iv MXA 21•24 as 
e f f34 Ot TBA MXB 211124 as 
f f f34 eat l iv MXB 21•24 as 
1575 • f34 eat l iv MXB 231124 as 
a • f34 eat l iv ang 23•24 as 
b • f34 eat · • · MXA 23•24 as 
c • f34 eat l iv MXA 23•24 as 
d • f34 eat TBA MXB 23•24 as 
e 11 f34 eat liv MXB 231124 as 
1576 • f34 ipj liv •ix 56w76 ev 
a • f34 ipj liv hpc 56w76 ev 
b • f34 ipJ ak i aqc 56w76 ev 
c • f34 ipj lun ade 56w76 ev 
d • f34 ipj .. i adc 56w76 ev 
e • f34 ipj tba 11ix 56w76 ev 
1577 • f34 eat l iv ang 55w59 e 
a • f34 eat l iv car 55w59 e 
b • f34 11t tba •ix 55w59 a 
LEAD ACETATE 
1578 M f cd1 wet lun tu• 28•28 • 
a M f cd1 wet tba •ix 281128 • • > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
225.•g 
no dre 
327.0lg 
468.llg 
468.•g 
414.llg 
106.0lg 
231.llg 
492.llg P•1 . 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.09 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.6 
P<.08 
P<.4 
P<.9 
100ng •. : •. 1ug .••• : .. 10 .•.•. : •• 100 •.•. :. ·1•g •..• : .• 10 .•... : .• 100 •.•• : •. 1g .•.•. :. -10 
:> 
.> 1.62•g \ 
1.57•g \ 
1.62•g \ 
no dre 
. 705•g • 
. 70511g • 
. 70511g • 
29.311g • 
1.8311g • 
2.9611g I P<.003 c 
P<.003 
P<.003 
P•1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.3 
P<.5 
P<.08 
1.4211g * P<.4 
2.4911g * P<.2 
• 1990lg P<.3 
100ng .• : .• 1ug •..• : •. 10 •.•.• : •. 100 ••.• :. -1•g ..•. : .. 10 ..•.• : •• 100 .••• : .• 1g .... ·: · .10 
: + : .14111g Z P<.0005 
.32511g * P<.0005c 
.35511g * P<.0005c 
• 387•g * P<. 0005c 
.45311g P<.0005c 
• 102•g P<. 0005 
22.7•g * P<.2 
. 25011g Z P<. 0005 
. 35511g P<. 0005c 
.51411g P<.0005 
. 908•g P<. 0005c 
.15211g P<.0005 
7 .4311g Z P<.03 
.34111g 
.39711g 
.79411g 
1.3311g 
+historical 
.15211g 
.68811g 
.954•g 
.217•g 
100ng •. : •. 1ug •.•. : .• 10 .•.•• :. -100 •••. :. ·1•g •.•. : .. 10 •.••• : .• 100 .••. : .• 1g •.••• : .• 10 
... 7 .56•g 
45.3•g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P<.09 
P<.06 
P<.0005 
P<.004 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.0005 
P<.05 -
P<.9 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 163 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1557 :247 14. 7ug n.1.1. 0/18 8.38ug 0/16 
• 1247 14. 7ug n.1.1. 1/18 8.38ug 0/16 
b 1247 14.7ug n.1.1. 2/18 8.38ug 0/16 
1558 1247 4.72ug n.1.1. 0/14 7 .80ug 3/18 
• 1247 11.2ug n.1.1. 3/14 7 .80ug 1/18 
b 1247 3.81ug n.1.1. 4/14 7 .80ug 6/18 
ISOPROPYL -N-PHENYL CARBAMATE (!PC) 122-42-9 
1559 1711 2.12g• n.a.1. 0127 209.•g 0/26 Van Esch;fctx, 10,373-381;1972 
1711 2.12g• n.1.1_ 1/27 209.•g 0/26 
1560 171• 995.•g n.1.1. 1/22 184.•g 1/23 
1561 171 61.8•g n.1.1. 1/17 78.411g 2/17 Innea;ntia, 1968/1969 
• 171 147 .•g n. 1.1. 0/17 78.4•g 0/17 
b 171 52.4•g n.1.1. 2/17 78.4•g 3/17 
1562 171 53.4•g n.1.1. 1/18 73.011g 2/16 
• 171 58.911g n.1.1. 2/18 73.0llg 2/16 
b 171 38.6•g n.1.1. 3/18 73.011g 4/16 
1563 171 59.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.411g 2/18 
• 171 81.711g n.1.1. 0/16 78.411g 1/18 
b 171 33.2•g 1.93g• 0/16 78.4•g 5/18 
1564 171 36.1•g n. 1. 1. 0/16 73.0•g 3/15 
• 171 63.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 73.0•g 1/15 
b 171 21.0•g 236.•g 0/16 73.011g 6/15 
ISOSAFROLE** 120·58·1 
1565 172 145.llg n.1.1. 1/15 72.711g 0/16 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 172 145.llg n.1.1. 2/15 72.711g 0/16 
b 172 145.•g n.1.1. 2/15 72.711g 0/16 
1566 172 55.2•g n.1.1. 0/18 67.711g 2/17 
• 172 144.•g n.1.1 . 3/18 67.711g 0/17 
b 172 44.2•g n.1.1. 3/18 67.711g 4/17 
1567 172 76.2•g n.1.1. 0/17 72. 7•g 1/16 
• 172 76.2•g n.1.1 . 0/17 72. 7•g 1/16 
b 172 60. 7•g n.1.1. 1/17 72. 7•g 2/16 
1568 172 34.5•g n.1.1. 1/17 67.711g 5/18 
• 172 50.4•g n.1.1 . 1/17 67. 7•g 3/18 
b 172 31.4•g n.1.1. 7/17 67. 7•g 8/18 
KE PONE (chlordecone) 143-50·0 
1569 c00191 1.01•g 6.36•g 0/10 2.30•g 26/50 (4.70•g 23/50) 
• c00191 .992•g 5.65•g 0/10 2.30•g 27/50 (4. 70•g 25/50) 
b c00191 1.01•g 6.36•g 0/10 2.30•g 26/50 <4.70•g 23/50) l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
c c00191 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 2.30•g 0/50 4.70•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1570 c00191 .462•g 1.59•g 6/20 2.40•g 43/50 2.20•g 39/50 
• c00191 .462•g 1.59•g 6/20 2.40•g 43/50 2.20•g 39/50 
b c00191 • 462•g 1.59-g 6/20 2.40•g 43/50 2.20•g 39/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c c00191 7.2111g n.1.1 • 0/20 2.4011g 2/50 2.20•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1571 c00191 • 469•g n.1.1. 7/10 .640•g 29/50 .930•g 29/50 
• c00191 1.30•g n.1.a . 1/10 .640•g 1/50 .930•g 12/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1572 c00191 • 45911g n.1.1. 3/15 .23011g 24/50 .69011g 16/50 
• c00191 1.2211g n.1.1 . 0/15 .230•g 3/50 .69011g 3/50 l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
1573 1160 32.4ug n.1.1. 0/10 40.0ug 1/10 Chu; txap, 59,268-278;1981 
LASIOCARPINE 303-34-4 
1574 c01478 85.9ug .247•g 2/24 .35011g 17/24 . 750•g 19/24 1.50•g 8/24 l iv:adn,ang,hpc; •ul :grl, Leu, l le, l y•,ule. 
• c01478 .165•g .822•g 2/24 .35011g 9/24 . 750•g 11/24 1.50•g 1/24 •ul: Leu, l Y•· 
b c01478 .183•g • 741•g 0/24 .350•g 8/24 . 75011g 7/24 1.50•g 2/24 
c c01478 • 186•g 1.04•g 1/24 .350•g 7/24 • 75011g 8/24 1.50•g 1/24 •ul :grl, l le,ule . 
d c01478 .195•g 1.2611g 0/24 .350•g 5/24 . 750•g 1/24 1.50•g 7/24 l iv:adn,hpc. 
• c01478 60.1ug .205•g 18/24 .350•g 22/24 . 750•g 22/24 1.50•g 8/24 
f c01478 3. 70•g n.1.1. 0/24 .350•g 0/24 .75011g 0/24 1.50•g 1/24 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1575 c01478 • 149•g .428•g 0/24 .28011g 5/24 .600•g 14/24 1.20•g 17/24 l iv:adn,ang,hpc . 
• c01478 .20811g .621•g 0/24 .280•g 5/24 .600•g 11/24 1.20•g 13/24 
b c01478 • 256•g 1. 45•g 4/24 .280•g 3/24 .600•g 11/24 1.20•g 7/24 ···:Leu, lya . 
c01478 • 329•g 3.21•g 0/24 .280•g 0/24 .600•g 3/24 1.20•g 5/24 l iv:1dn,hpc . 
d c01478 97.2ug .257•g 7/24 .280•g 14/24 .600•g 22/24 1.20•g 23/24 
• c01478 1.82•g n.1.1. 0/24 .280•g 0/24 .600•g 0/24 1.20•g 2/24 l iv:hp1,hpc,nnd. 
1576 1013 .165•g .851•g 0/25 .880•g 11/18 Svobod1;c1nr ,32,908-911; 1972 
• 1013 .188•g 1.04•g 0/25 .880•g 10/18 
b 1013 .321•g 3.1011g 0/25 .880•g 6/18 
c 1013 .40611g n.1.1. 2/25 .880•g 5/18 
d 1013 .671•g n.1.1. 0/25 .880•g 2/18 
• 1013 69.2ug .372•g 2/25 .880•g 16/18 
1577 390 .319•g 3.32•g 0/10 1.86•g 9/20 Rao;bjca,37,289-293;1978 
• 390 .408•g 170.•g 0/10 1.86•g 7120 
b 390 .108•g .469•g 0/10 1.86•g 17/20 
LEAD ACETATE 301-04-2 
1578 1395 2.54•g n.1.1. 1/45 1.00•g 5/37 Schroeder; j nut, 105,452 -458;1975 
• 1395 2.62•g n.1.1. 9/45 1.00•g 8/37 164 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'l'•ilpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b cd1 wat tba 11al 28.,28 e 
1579 cd1 wat lun tu• 30.,30 e • > 
a cd1 wat tba tu" 30.,30 e 
1580 11 cd1 wat lun tum 25.,25 e .> 
a 11 cd1 wat tba •al 25.,25 e 
b • cd1 wat tba •ix 251125 e 
1581 11 cd1 wat lun tu• 291129 e 
a • cd1 wat l iv aar 29.,29 e 
b • cd1 wat tba •ix 291129 e 
1582 11 f34 eat kid adc 52w52 ekr 
a • f34 eat l iv hpc 52w52 ekr 
1583 b leb wat l iv tu" 41M41 ea • > 
a b leb wet tba tu" 411141 es 
b b leb wet tba "81 411141 ea • > 
.> no dre P-1. 
no dre 
51.511g 
7.78 .. g 
4.04 .. g 
6. 22•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
993 ... g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
133 ... g P-1 • 
P<1. 
P<.4 
P<.04 -
P<.5 
P-1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P•1 . 
P•1. 
P<1. 
LEAD ACETATE, BASIC 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : .. 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1U· ... ·: • -10 
1584 f 1yg eat l iv tu• 231125 ea 
1585 " ayg eat l iv tu" 24.,24 1 
1586 f swi eat kid car 24•24 ·.•v 
a swi eat kid ade 241124 av 
b swi eat l iv hpt 24.,24 1v 
c 1wi eat lun ade 241124 1v 
1587 • 1wi eat kid car 201124 asv 
• aw i eat kid ade 20•24 aav 
b • 1wi eat l iv hpt 201124 asv 
• 1wi eat lun ade 201124 asv 
1588 f wis eat kid "ix 291129 e 
1589 f wil eat kid 11ix 24•24 e 
1590 " wi1 eat kid 11ix 291129 e 
1591 • wi1 eat kid 11ix 241124 e 
LEAD D IMETHYLD I TH IOCARBAMA TE 
1592 f b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
1593 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1594 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
• • b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b • b6c eat lun 11XB 24.,24 
1595 11 b6c orl · · • rtl 76w76 evx 
a • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
c • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1596 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1597 11 b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1598 f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
a f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
1599 • f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
a • f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
LEUPEPTIN 
1600 M f aj j eat lun 11ix 68w68 e 
a M 
f ajj eat liv lpb 68w68 e 
1601 M 11 aj j eat l iv 11ix 68w68 e 
a M • aj j eat lun •ix 68w68 e 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
1602 M f b6c gav TBA MXB 241124 
a M f b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
b M f b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
1603 M • b6c gev TBA MXB 241124 
a M • b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
b M 11 b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
1604 R f f34 gav TBA MXB 241124 
a R f f34 gav l iv MXB 24•24 
1605 R • f34 gav TBA MXB 24•24 
a R m f34 gav l iv MXB 241124 
LUTEOSKYR IN 
1606 M f ddn eat l iv 11ix 371137 e 
a M 
f ddn eat liv lea 37•37 e 
b M f ddn eat l iv l cc 371137 e 
1607 M 11 ddn eat l iv •ix 371137 e 
a M 11 ddn eat l iv l ca 371137 e . > 
• > 
.> 
• no dre P•1 • 
no dre P•1 • 
14.8glR * P<.2 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
472 .•g \ P<.02 + 
986 • .,g \ P<.1 
no dre P-1. 
no dre 
107.llg 
339.llg 
107.llg 
443.•g P•1. 
P<.003 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.008 + 
P<.002 + 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••..• : •• 100 ..•• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g .••.• : •• 10 
. > 
. > 
. > no dre P•1. 
149.0lg * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre 
116.0lg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
16.4 .. g 
95.30lg 
no dre 
10.7•g P•1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.006 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.002 
no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
833 • .,g P<1 . 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
27.8•g * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
72.6.,g * P<.4 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 229 ... g P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.006 + 
P<.9 933 ... g 
55.811g 
422.llg 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 ..•• : .• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 960.11g * P<.8 
1.14g11 • P<.2 
1.03g11 * P<.2 
:> no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
834.•g • P<.6 
686.11g * P<.6 
1.89g11 * P<.3 
501.11g * P<.3 
2.25g11 * P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•. :. -1U· •••• : •• 10 
.> 79.411g P<.3 
122.11g P<.4 + 
248.0lg P<.5 
14.811g P<.0005+ 
83. 7•g • P<.03 • CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 165 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1395 3.06•11 n.1.s. 9/45 1.001111 7/37 
1579 56 3.581111 n.s.s. 9/60 1.001111 4/29 Schroeder; j nut, 83, 239· 250; 1964 
a 56 1.901111 n.1.1. 22/60 1.001111 11/29 
1580 1395 1.981111 n.s.s. 4/43 .8331111 8/49 Schroeder; jnut, 105,452 ·458; 1975 
8 1395 1.591111 n.1.1. 2/43 .8331111 9/49 
b 1395 1.391111 n.1.1. 10/43 .8331111 15/49 
1581 56 8.231111 n.s.s. 8/44 .833'111 1/39 Schroeder; j nut, 83, 239· 250; 1964 
a 56 9.991111 n.s.s. 1/44 .8331111 0/39 
b 56 8.571111 n.s.s. 11/44 .8331111 1/39 
1582 1150 162.1111 n.a.s. 0/15 400.0011 1/15 Hi nton;bect, 23,464·469;1979 
1150 309.•11 n.s.s. 0/15 400.1111 0/15 
1583 1036 5.00'111 n.s.s. 1/34 .265Mll 0/32 Kani sawa; canr, 29 ,892·895;1969 
a 1036 1.67•11 n.s.s. 10/34 .2651111 7/32 
b 1036 2.40Mll n.s.s. 2/34 .2651111 2/32 
LEAD ACETATE, BASIC 1335·32·6 
1584 176 456.•11 n.s.a. 0/23 105.1111 0/24 523.1111 0/24 Van Esch;bjca ,23, 765· 771; 1969 
1585 176 348.Mll n.s.s. 0/22 92.01111 0/22 460.Mll 0/22 
1586 176 2.4211• n.s.s. 0/25 130.1111 0/25 751.Mll 1/25 
a 176 2.9311M n.s.s. 0/25 130.1111 1/25 751.Mll 0/25 
b 176 2.9311M n.s.s. 0/25 130.1111 1/25 751.•11 0/25 
c 176 2.5811• n.s.s. 3/25 130.Mll 5/25 751.1111 1/25 
1587 176 163.•11 n.s.s. 0/25 120 ... 11 4/25 <713.•11 0/25) 
a 176 242.Mll n.1.1. 0/25 120.1111 2/25 (713.Mll 0/25) 
b 176 529.1111 n.1.1. 0/25 120 ... 11 0/25 713.1111 0/25 
176 2. 7511• n.s.a. 3/25 120.1111 1/25 713.Mll 1/25 
1588 17511 43. 1Mll 571.1111 0/15 50.01111 6/16 Van Esch;bjca , 16,289-297;1962 
1589 175n 138.•11 1.1311• 0/13 500.Mll 7/11 
1590 175• 40.4•11 2.2111• 0/14 40.0•11 5/16 
1591 175n 176.Mll 2.0411• 0/13 400.1111 6/13 
LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE c ledate> 19010·66·3 
1592 c02891 11.9•11 n.s.s. 9/20 3.251111 18/50 6.501111 18/50 
a c02891 36.6•11 n.s.a. 0/20 3.251111 1/50 6.50Mll 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02891 23.0•11 n.1.1. 3/20 3.251111 4/50 6.50Mll 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1593 1093 35.8•11 n.1.1. 0/16 18.11111 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1093 35.8•11 n.1.s. 0/16 18. 11111 0/18 
b 1093 18.81111 n.1.1. 0/16 18.11111 1/18 
1594 c02891 5.92•11 n.1.1. 12/20 3.001111 32/50 6.00•11 28/50 
8 c02891 16.01111 n.s.s. 4/20 3.001111 11/50 6.oo .. 11 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02891 12.01111 n.1.1. 9/20 3.001111 14/50 6.001111 15/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1595 1093 6.171111 162.1111 0/16 16.81111 5/16 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1093 15.51111 n.1.1. 0/16 16.81111 1/16 
b 1093 29.6•11 n.1.1. 0/16 16.81111 0/16 
c 1093 4.541111 39.01111 0/16 16.8'111 7/16 
1596 1093 35.8•11 n.1.1. 0/17 18.11111 0/18 
1093 35.8•11 n.1.1. 1/17 18.1•11 0/18 
b 1093 35.8•11 n.1.s. 2/17 18.1'111 0/18 
1597 1093 14.6•11 n.a.s. 2/18 16.8•11 2/17 
a 1093 31.4•11 n.1.s. 1/18 16.81111 0/17 
b 1093 16.2Mll n.1.1. 3/18 16.81111 2/17 
1598 c02891 1.82•11 n.1.1. 15/20 1.251111 33/50 2. 50•11 36/50 
c02891 16.3•11 n.1.1. 1/20 1 .251111 1/50 2.50•11 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1599 c02891 1.40•11 n.1.1. 17 /20 1.00•11 40/50 2.00•11 37/50 
a c02891 11.8•11 n.1.1. 0120 1.001111 0/50 2.001111 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
LEUPEPTIN 
1600 1432 59.6•11 n.1.1. 3/20 130.1111 7/25 Hosaka;11ann, 71,913·917; 1980 
a 1432 152.•11 n.1.1. 0/20 130.1111 1/25 
1601 1432 25.2Mll 641.•11 4/23 120.1111 14/25 
a 1432 29.01111 n.1.1. 15/23 120.1111 17/25 
L ITHOCHOLI C ACID 434-13-9 
1602 c03861 111.1111 n.a.s. 6/20 52.51111 20/50 105.•11 23/50 
a c03861 392.1111 n.s.1. 0/20 52.5•11 1/50 105.1111 3/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03861 357.1111 n.1.s. 0/20 52.51111 1/50 105.•11 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1603 c03861 132.1111 n.1.1. 12/20 52. 51111 26/50 105.•11 20/50 
a c03861 187.•11 n.1.1. 6/20 52.51111 17/50 105.Mll 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03861 180.•11 n.1.1. 1/20 52. 51111 7/50 105.Mll 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1604 c03861 129.•11 n.1.1. 14/20 106.Mll 35/49 212.•11 35/50 
a c03861 653.•11 n.a.a. 0120 106.Mll 2/49 212.Mll 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1605 c03861 150.•11 n.a.1. 9/20 106.1111 26/50 212.•11 30/50 
a c03861 778.•11 n.a.a. 0/20 106.•11 1/50 212.Mll 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
LUTEOSKYR IN 21884-44-6 
1606 1346• 24.0•11 n.1.1. 017 6.00•11 3/26 Ura11uchi ;fctx, 10, 193·207; 1972 
a 134611 29.9•11 n.a.a. 017 6.00•11 2/26 
b 1346• 40.4•11 n.1.1. 017 6.00•11 1/26 
1607 134611 7.711111 45.5Mll 0/10 1.67•11 2/18 5.001111 11/24 C16.7•11 11/29) 
1346• 42.0•11 n.a.1. 0/10 1.67•11 0/18 5.00•11 5/24 16.7•11 6/29 166 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2'failpvl 
Sex Route Hist N otes DR AuOp 
b M 11 ddn eat l iv hpt 37,.37 e 
M " ddn eat l iv lee 371137 e 
d M " ddn eat l iv akt 37•37 e 
1608 M " ddn eat l iv lea 371137 e 
a M 11 ddn eat l iv hpt 37,.37 e 
b M " ddn eat l ;v ak t 37•37 e 
1609 M " ddn eat l iv hpt 37•37 e 
M • ddn eat l iv lea 371137 e 
LUTESTRAL 
1610 M f e3h eat 11e01 tu11 24•24 er 
1611 M crf eat .. ., tu" 24.,24 er 
1612 M " erf eat '""" tu11 24.,24 r 
1613 M r311 eat •a11 tu11 24•24 er 
MALAOXON 
1614 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M f b6e eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M f b6e eat l un MXB 241124 
1615 M " b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M II b6e eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M 11 b6e eat lun MXB 241124 
1616 R f f34 eat thy MXA 24•24 
a R f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b R f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
1617 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
R " f34 eat l iv MXB 24.,24 
MALATHION 
1618 f b6e eat TBA MXB 80w94 
a b6e eat l iv MXB 80w94 
b b6c eat lun MXB 80w94 
1619 • b6c eat l iv nnd 80w94 
a • b6c eat TBA MXB 80w94 
b "' b6e eat l iv MXB 80w94 
e • b6e eat l un MXB 80w94 
1620 f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
1621 11 f34 eat adr phe 24.,24 
a • f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b • f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
1622 f 0111 eat TBA MXB 190125 v 
a OSll eat l iv MXB 19 .. 25 v .> 89.511g * P<.08 
332.11g * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
25. 111g P<.03 
74.30lg P<.2 
113.11g P<.3 
113.llg P<.3 
231.0lg P<.5 
100ng .. : •. 1ug ••.• : •. 10 .••.• : •. 100 ..•. :. -1•g •..• : .. 10 ••.•. : .• 100 .•.• : •• 1g .••.• : •. 10 
pool .> 5.9811g 
.> 
.> no dre 
1.76•g 
2. 1211g P<.7 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.4 
100ng •. : •. 1ug •..• : •. 10 .•.•• : •. 100 .•.• : •• 111g •.•. : .. 10 •..•. :. -100 .••• : •. 1g ••.•• :. -10 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
2.76gM * P<.3 
472.0lg * P<.4 
579.•g I P<.2 
3.23g11 * P<.8 
#296. •g * P<. 02 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P·1. 
no dre P•1. 
1 .56g• * P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •... : .• 10 .••.. : .. 100 •••• :. ·1•g ••.• : •. 10 .•.•. : •. 100 ••.• : .• 1g ..••. :. -10 
:> no dre P•1. 
31.7g11 * P<.3 
no dre P· 1. 
#10.2g• * P<.04 
5. 19g11 * P<.3 
4.40g11 * P<.2 
44. 7g• * P<.8 
293.11g * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
#145.Mg * P<.0005-
66.611g * P<.002 
411 .•g * P<.05 
434.11g * P<.2 
3.87g11 * P<.2 
1623 OH eat thy MXA 19•25 v pool #2.96g11 * P<.03 
335.11g * P<.2 
3.07g11 * P<. 7 1624 • 0111 eat TBA MXB 191125 v 
11 0111 eat l iv MXB 19•25 v 
MALEIC HYORAZIOE 
1625 f b6a or l li v hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1626 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1627 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
e b6e orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1628 • b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
e 11 b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1629 nu eat l iv hpt 23•23 e 
a nu eat tba 01ix 231123 
1630 " nu eat l iv hpt 23•23 e 
a 11 nu eat tba 11ix 23•23 
MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE 
1631 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1632 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1633 f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6e or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
1634 • b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a " b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1635 b •gr gav l iv tu• 22•24 e 
a b •gr gav tba •ix 22•24 • :> 
100ng •• : .• 1ug ••.. : •• 10 •.•.. : .• 100 •.•• :. ·1•g .••• : •• 10 .•••• : •. 100 •.•. : •• 1g •..•. : .• 10 
.> 2.35g• 
38.7gll 
932.llg 
.> 2.07g11 
.> no dre 
11.9g11 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.06g11 
no dre 
679.•g 
• > no dre 
3. 72g• 
.. > no dre 
12.3g• 
•• : •• 1ug ••.• : .• 10 •.•.• : •. 100 .••. :. -1•g .•.• : •. 10 .•.•. : •• 100 .•.• : .• 1g ..••• : .• 10 
.> 
.> 
.> .> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
138.•g 
54.9•g 
no dre 
106.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
128.•g 
128.•g 
62.30lg 
no dre 
157.•g P<.3 
P<1. 
P<.4 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.09 -
p.1. 
P<.04 
p.1 • 
P<.8 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.02 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 167 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1346• 34.0•g n.1.1. 0/10 1.6711g 1/18 5.0011g 7124 16.711g 7/29 
134611 100.•g n.1.1. 0/10 1.6711g 0/18 5.0011g 1/24 16.711g 2129 
d 1346• 108.•g n.1.1. 0/10 1.6711g 1/18 5.0011g 3/24 16.711g 1/29 
1608 1346n 11.3•g n.s.s. 019 5.0011g 8/29 
a 1346n 22. 5•g n.1.1. 019 5.0011g 3/29 
b 1346n 27.911g n.1.1. 019 5.0011g 2129 
1609 13460 27 .9•g n.1.1. 0/10 5.00•g 2129 
13460 37.611g n.1.1. 0/10 5.0011g 1/29 
LUTESTRAL 8065·91 ·6 
1610 1175 .75911g n.1.s . 54/92 1.0411g 19/30 Rudat i; j nc i ,49,813-819;1972 
1611 1175 • 487•g n.1.s. 161/167p 1.0411g 28/31 
1612 1463 .85111g 4.5211g 0176 .96011g 10/32 Rudat i ;g•cr, 17,243·252; 1975 
1613 1175 .53111g n.1.1. 50173 1.04•g 31/40 Rudat i; jnc i ,49,813 ·819;1972 
"ALAOXON (Htath ion·O·anatog) 1634·78 ·2 
1614 c08628 265.11g n.1.1. 15/50 65.011g 15/50 130.llg 15/50 
a c08628 263.•g n.1.1. 6/50 65.0•g 3/50 (130.•g 1/50> l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c08628 680.•g n.1.1. 0/50 65.0•g 1/50 130.•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1615 c08628 127.llg n.1.1. 23/50 59.4•g 18/50 119.llg 26/50 
a c08628 183.llg n.1.1. 12/50 59.411g 5/50 119.•g 17/50 t iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c08628 315.llg n.1.1. 6/50 59.4•g 5/50 119.11g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1616 c08628 120.•g n.1.1. 0/50 25.0•g 1/50 49.511g 5/50 thy: cca, ccr. s 
a c08628 41.911g n.1.s. 45/50 25.011g 44/50 49.511g 44/50 
b c08628 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/50 25.0•g 3/50 49.511g 0/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1617 c08628 27. 7•g n.1.1. 44/50 20.011g 43/50 40.011g 40/50 
c08628 254.llg n.1.1. 0/50 20.0•g 0/50 40.0•g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
"ALATHION (c00215 is NCI TR# 24; c00216 ii NCI TR# 192> 121-75·5 
1618 c00215 4.12g• n.a.1. 1/10 884.•g 5/50 1.75gll 5/50 
a c00215 7 .80g• n.1.1. 0110 884.•g 0/50 1.75g• 2150 l iv:hpa,hp c,nnd. 
b c00215 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 884.•g 0/50 1.75g• 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1619 c00215 4.17g• n.1.1. 0/10 816.llg 0/50 1.62g• 6/50 s 
a c00215 1.66g• n.1.1. 3/10 816.•g 9/50 1.62g11 19/50 
b c00215 1.74g• n.1.1. 2/10 816.llg 7 /50 1.62g11 17/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c00215 7 .80g• n.1.1. 0/10 816.•g 1/50 1.62g• 1/50 lun: a/a,a/c. 
1620 c00216 82.411g n.1.1. 43/50 97 .211g 45/50 194.llg 45/50 
a c00216 1.16g• n.1.1. 2/50 97.211g 0/50 194.llg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1621 c00216 64.8•g 587.llg 2150 78.511g 11/50 157 .Ilg 6/49 
a c00216 32.011g 340.llg 32/50 78.511g 30/50 157.•g 26/49 
b c00216 101.llg n.1.1. 0/50 78.5•g 2150 157 .Ilg 0/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1622 c00215 175.llg n.1.1. 7/15 166.llg 28/50 299.11g 32/50 
c00215 1.17g• n.1.1. 0/15 166.•g 0/50 299.llg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1623 c00215 1.02g• n.1.1. 0/55p 166.mg 0/50 299.llg 4/50 thy:fca,fcc. s 
1624 c00215 139.•g n.1.1. 4/15 133.•g 23/50 239.•g 25/50 
c00215 851.llg n.1.1. 0/15 133.11g 2150 239.llg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
"ALEIC HYDRAZIDE < 1, 2-di hydro-3 ,6· pyr idaz inedione> 123-33-1 
1625 1193 382.11g n.1.1. 0/17 414.llg 1/16 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1193 431.llg n.1.1. 1/17 414.•g 1/16 
b 1193 205.llg n.1.1. 2/17 414.•g 4/16 
1626 1193 302.•g n.a.s. 1/18 385.•g 2/17 
1193 721.•g n.s.s. 2/18 385.•g 0/17 
b 1193 280.llg n.a.s. 3/18 385.•g 3/17 
1627 1193 774.•g n.a.s. 0/16 414.llg 0/17 
a 1193 774.•g n.a.s. 0/16 414.•g 0/17 
b 1193 774.llg n.a.1. 0/16 414.llg 0/17 
1628 1193 259.•g n.a.s. 0/16 385.•g 2/16 
a 1193 678.llg n.a.s. 0/16 385.llg 0/16 
b 1193 205.•g n.1.1. 0/16 385.•g 3/16 
1629 1109 1.33g11 n.1.1. 0/9 500.•g 0/14 Barnes;natu, 180,62-64; 1957 
a 1109 393.11g n.1.1. 219 500.11g 4/14 
1630 1109 1.07g• n.1.1. 018 400.11g 0/14 
a 1109 467 .Ilg n. I. I. 1/8 400.11g 2/14 
"ANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOC ARBA"ATE ( .. nab) 12427-38-2 
1631 1214 25 .6•g n. 1. 1. 1/17 21.6•g 1 /18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1214 42.711g n.1.1. 0/17 21.611g 0/18 
b 1214 15.5•g n.1.1. 2/17 21.6•g 3/18 
1632 1214 11.5•g n.a.s. 2/18 20.0•g 4/18 
a 1214 39.711g "····· 1/18 20.0•g 0/18 
b 1214 12.4•g n.a.a. 3/18 20.0•g 4/18 
1633 1214 40.3•g n.a.a. 0/16 21.6•g 0/17 
a 1214 40.311g n.1.a. 0/16 21.6•g 0/17 
b 1214 40.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 21.6•g 0/17 
1634 1214 20.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 20.0•g 1/18 
a 1214 20.911g n.1.1. 0/16 20.0•g 1/18 
b 1214 15.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 20.0•g 2/18 
1635 1426 109.•g n.1.1. 0/46 88.0•g 0!6 Andrianova ;vpi t,29, 71·74; 1970 
1426 36.3•g n.1.1. 1/46 88.0•g 216 168 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD _!OOng •. : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!11g •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _!0 
1636 R • b46 ivj tbe 11ix 12•24 es .> 3.11•g P<.5 
P<.5 
P<.9 • R 11 b46 ivj tbe 1111 121124 es 3.8511g 
b R M b46 ivj tbe ben 12•24 es 23.5•g 
MELPHALAN _!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!11g •••• : •• _!O •...• : •. _!00 •.•• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _!O 
1637 f swi ipj lun olix 26w79 e 
e swi ipj 11gl ode 26w79 e 
b swi ipj lya 26w79 e 
c swi ipj edr fba 26w79 e 
d swi ipj I iv lys 26w79 e 
e awi ipj tbe 11ix 26w79 e 
f swi ipj tbe ••I 26w79 e 
g swi ipj tbe ben 26w79 e 
1638 " swi ipj lun •ix 26w77 e 
I " SW i i p j · · · I YI 26w77 e 
b " swi ipj I iv Mix 26w77 e 
c " swi ipj tbe •ix 26w77 e 
d " swi ipJ tbe ••I 26w77 e 
e " awi ipj tbe ben 26w77 e 
1639 f cdr ipj per aer 26w78 e 
• cdr ipj pen ode 26w78 e 
b cdr ipj lun 1/1 26w78 e 
cdr ipj lys 26w78 e 
d cdr ipj I iv tu• 26w78 e 
e cdr ipJ tbe "'81 26w78 e 
f cdr ipj tbe •ix 26w78 e 
g cdr ipj tbe ben 26w78 e 
1640 M cdr ipj per Mix 26w67 e 
e " cdr ipj lys 26w67 • 
b M cdr ipj I iv tu• 26w67 e 
M cdr ipj the Mix 26w67 e 
d 11 cdr ipj th• Mel 26w67 e 
e " cdr ipj the ben 26w67 e 
di ·MENTHOL 
1641 M f h6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
M f h6c Ht I iv MXB 241124 
h M f h6c Ht lun MXB 24•24 
1642 M M h6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
• M • h6c eat I iv MXB 241124 
h M • h6c eat lun MXB 241124 
1643 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
R f f34 eat I iv MXB 241124 
1644 R M f34 eet TBA MXB 241124 
R 11 f34 Ht I iv MXB 24•24 
MER-25 
1645 R f nss gov .... tu• 52w52 er 
2 • MERCAPTOBENZOTH IAZOLE 
1646 f h6e or I lun ede 76w76 evx 
h6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b h6a or l tha "ix 76w76 evx 
1647 11 h6e or l lun ade 76w76 avx 
a " h6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
h 11 h6a orl the Mix 76w76 evx 
1648 h6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a h6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
h h6c orl the •ix 76w76 evx 
1649 • h6c orl Ii v hpt 76w76 evx 
a " h6c orl lun ade 76,.w76 evx 
h " h6c orl the •ix 76w76 evx 
2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC 
1650 M f h6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
e M f h6e orl I iv hpt 76w76 evx 
h M f h6e orl the 11ix 76w76 evx 
1651 M M h6e orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
• M M h6a or I li v hpt 76w76 evx 
h M • h6a orl tha •ix 76w76 evx 
1652 M f h6c or I Ii v hpt 76w76 evx 
e M f h6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
h M f h6c orl the 11ix 76w76 evx 
1653 M M h6c or l Ii v hpt 76w76 evx 
e M • h6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
h M • h6c orl the 11ix 76w76 evx 
6·MERCAPTOPURINE 
1654 R • b46 ivj the •ix 12•24 es + + • 165Mg * P<. 007 
.617mg * P<.004 
• 70211g * P<. 06 
1.26•g * P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
51.0ug * P<.0005 
.104•g * P<.002 
• 365Mg * P<. 08 
• 137119 P<. 005 + 
• 302•g P<. 02 + 
no dre P-1. 
91.4ug P<.02 
.115119 P<.02 
2.02Mg P<.8 
.135119 * P<.0005+ 
1. 44•g * P<. 02 
1.44Mg * P<.02 
1.54Mg * P<.09 
no dre P-1. 
78 .1ug * P<. 0005 
.106Mg * P<.07 
no dre P• 1. 
71. 9ug P<. 0005+ 
• 359119 P<. 003 
no dre P•1. 
23. 6ug P<. 0005 
4 7. Oug P<. 0005 
.493119 P<.5 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug ••.• : •• _!O ••.•• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!11g •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •. _!O 
:> 
:> 
:> no dre 
5.19911 
3.17gm 
2. 75911 
1.96g11 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
* P<.3 
* P<.06 
* P<.7 
* P<.3 
P-1. 
P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
1.41911 * P<.7 
5.69911 * P<.6 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •.•• : •. _!O •.•.• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!11g •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!g •.••. : •• _!O 
. > no dre P-1 • 
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!Mg •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •. _!00 •••• : •• _!g ••••. : •• _!0 
• > 
.> 
.> 
.. no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
105.mg 
283.119 
no dre 
283.Mg 
56.2Mg 
120.•g 
17.0•g P•1 . 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.02 -
P<.1 
P<.0005-
.!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!•g ..•• : •• _!O .•.•• : .• 100 •.•• : •. _!g •.••• : •. _!O 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
2. 79g• 
388.Mg 
2.75gm 
319.119 P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.004 -
P<.3 
P<.002 -
_!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!11g •••• : •• _!O ••••• : •• _!00 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •. _!O 
.> 58.111g P<.9 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 169 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD (Degranol) 576-68-1 
1636 1017 . 58311g n.a .a. 7 /65 .28611g 6137 Sch11ah l; arzn, 20, 1461-1467; 1970 
a 1017 . 70611g n.a .s. 4/65 .286mg 4/37 
b 1017 1.0511g n.s.s. 3/65 .28611g 2/37 
MELPHALAN (L-aarcolyain) 148-82-3 
1637 133611 61.7ug 4.11.,g 20/154 .10611g 6/15 • 21211g 3/8 Skipper; arfr; 1976/Wei &burger 1977 /Prejean pers. co"'" . 
8 1336" .15211g 10.1 .. g 0/154 .106 .. g 1/15 .21211g 1/8 
b 1336• .154 .. g n.s.s. 3/154 .106 .. g 0/15 .212 .. g 2/8 
1336m .20411g n.s.s. 0/154 .106 .. g 0/15 .212 .. g 1/8 
d 1336• 97 .5ug n.s.s. 1/154 .10611g 0/15 .21211g 018 
e 1336" 23.3ug .167 .. g 42/154 .106 .. g 10/15 .212mg 7/8 
133611 43.4ug .617 .. g 29/154 .10611g 7/15 .21211g 5/8 
g 1336" .100 .. g n.s.s. 13/154 .106•g 3/15 .212 .. g 2/8 
1638 1336" 54.6ug 1.57 .. g 9/101 .108.,g 9/28 
8 133611 94.4ug n.s.s. 2/101 .10811g 4/28 
b 1336" .341•g n.a.s. 2/101 .10811g 0/28 
1336• 36.2ug n.s.s. 28/101 .10811g 15/28 
d 1336• 44.9ug n.a.a. 19/101 .108 .. g 12/28 
e 133611 .14011g n.a.a. 9/101 .10811g 3/28 
1639 1336n 63.2ug .37111g 0/182 .129•g 8/16 .30411g 1/6 
• 1336n .234•g n.a.a. 0/182 .129 .. g 0/16 .304 .. g 1/6 
b 1336n .234 .. g n.1.1 . 0/182 .12911g 0/16 .30411g 1/6 
1336n . 236•g n.s.s . 1/182 .129•g 0/16 .304•g 1/6 
d 1336n . 11211g n.s.s .. 0/182 .12911g 0/16 .304•g 0/6 
e 1336n 35 .2ug .310•g 44/182 .129 .. g 13/16 .304•g 3/6 
f 1336n 33.1ug n.s.s . 103/182 .129•g 14/16 .304•g 4/6 
g 1336n . 319•g n.1.1. 59/182 .12911g 1/16 .304•g 1/6 
1640 1336n 32.0ug .21211g 0/177 .149•g 8/18 
• 1336n 88.1ug 4.84.,g 0/177 .14911g 2/18 
b 1336n .229•g n.1.1. 0/177 .149•g 0/18 
c 1336n 9. 76ug 77 .1ug 59/177 .14911g 16/18 
d 1336n 20.7ug .171•g 32/177 .14911g 12/18 
e 1336n 74.1ug n.1.1. 27/177 .14911g 4/18 
dl ·MENTHOL (NCI UHi CAS# 89-78-1) 15356-70-4 
1641 c50000 723.•g n.s.s. 30/50 257 .Ilg 20/50 515.•g 24/50 
8 c50000 1.54goo n.s.s. 1/50 257 .Ilg 3/50 515.llg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c50000 1.22g• n.s.s. 1/50 257 .Ilg 3/50 515.0lg 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1642 c50000 357 ... g n.1.1. 29/50 238 ... g 28/50 475 ... g 33/50 
• c50000 601.llg n.s.s. 8/50 238 ... g 8/50 475.•g 14/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c50000 1.10g• n.1.1. 6/50 238.llg 7/50 475.llg 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1643 c50000 462 ... g n.s.s. 41/50 184.mg 36/50 368 ... g 32/50 
8 c50000 2.11g• n.s.s. 1/50 184.llg 1/50 368.•g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1644 c50000 200.llg n.1.s. 32/50 147 ... g 41/50 294.•g 37/50 
c50000 932.•g n.s.s. 1/50 147 ... g 3/50 294.llg 2150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
MER-25 67-98-1 
1645 481 13.9•g n.1.1. 0/9 12.2•g 0/22 Shay;•poc,305-318; 1962 
2 ·MERCAPTOBENZOTH IAZOLE (Captax, rotax> 149-30-4 
1646 1302 49.3•g n.1.1. 1/17 44.311g 1/17 lnnes;nt ii, 1968/1969 
• 1302 82.8•g n.1.a. 0/17 44.3•g 0/17 
b 1302 54.8•g n.a.1. 2/17 44.311g 1/17 
1647 1302 38.511g n.1.1. 2/18 41.2•g 2/18 
• 1302 48. 7•g n.a.1. 1/18 41.211g 1/18 
b 1302 21.0•g n.1.a. 3/18 41.2•g 5/18 
1648 1302 46.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 44.3•g 1/18 
• 1302 87. 711g n.s.s. 0/16 44.311g 0/18 
b 1302 46.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 44.311g 1/18 
1649 1302 19.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 41.211g 4/17 
• 1302 29.511g n.1.1. 0/16 41.2•g 2/17 
b 1302 7 .9911g 44.611g 0/16 41.211g 10/17 
2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC (zetax> 155-04-4 
1650 1300 515.llg n.1.1. 1/17 462.llg 1/17 lnnes;ntii, 1968/1969 
• 1300 864.llg n.1.1. 0/17 462.llg 0/17 
b 1300 572.•g n.1.1. 2/17 462.•g 1/17 
1651 1300 564.llg n.1.1. 2/18 430.llg 1/18 
• 1300 851.•g n.1.1. 1/18 430.llg 0/18 
b 1300 603.•g n.1.a. 3/18 430.llg 1/18 
1652 1300 864.•g n.1.1. 0/16 462.•g 0/17 
• 1300 864.•g n.1.1. 0/16 462.•g 0/17 
b 1300 454.llg n.s.s. 0/16 462.llg 1/17 
1653 1300 157.llg 2.37g• 0/16 430.•g 6/18 
• 1300 448.•g n.1.1 . 0/16 430.•g 1/18 
b 1300 136.llg 1.30g• 0/16 430.•g 7/18 
6 ·MERCAPTOPURINE 50-44-2 
1654 1017 2.5111g n.1.1. 7/65 1.18•g 3/25 SchHhl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 170 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
100ng •• : •• 1ug .••• : •. 10 ••.•• : •• 100 .•.• :. ·1•g .•.. : •• 10 .•.•. : •. 100 ••.• : •. 1g .•.•. : •. 10 MERCURIC CHLORIDE 
1655 M f ed1 wet lk• 27•27 e + 3.58•g P<.009 -
e M ed1 wet lun tu• 27•27 e 
b M ed1 wet tbe 11ix 271127 e 
e M ed1 wet tbe .. 1 27•27 e 
1656 M • ed1 wet lun tu• 281128 e .> 
e M • ed1 wet tbe 11ix 28•28 e 
b M • ed1 wet tbe •el 28•28 e no dre 
2.42•g 
5.5511g 
11.2•g 
3.2011g 
no dre p.1. 
P<.05 -
P<.08 -
P<.5 
P<.2 
p.1. 
MERCURY (II) ACETATE 100ng •• : ·, .1ug •••. : •. 10 ..... : •. 100 ••.• :. ·1•g .•.• : •• 10 ••.•. : •. 100 .••. : •. 1g ...•. : •. 10 
1657 f b6e or I Ii v hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. e f b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6e orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1658 • b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
e • b6e orl I iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
1659 f b6e or I Ii v hpt 76w76 evx 
e f b6e or I I un ede 76w76 evx 
b f b6e orl tbe 11ix 76w76 'vx 
1660 11 b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
e • b6e orl I iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6e or I tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLOR I DE 
1661 M f ed1 wet lun tu11 331135 HY 
e M f ed1 wet tbe •ix 33•35 HY 
b M f ed1 wet tbe .. 1 33•35 eav 
1662 M • ed1 wet lun tu11 31•37 HV 
e M • ed1 wet tbe •ix 31•37 Hv 
b M • ed1 wet tbe .. 1 31•37 Hv 
MESTRANOL** 
1663 M f efl eat I iv het 78w78 er 
1664 M 11 efl eat I iv het 78w78 er 
1665 M f erf eat •e• tu11 241124 r 
1666 M f r3• eat •e• tu• 241124 r 
METE PA 
1667 R • ohe gev • · • I yk 60w60 e 
METHIMAZOLE • > no dre p.1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
.> 21. 7•g P<.3 
21.711g P<.3 
10.5•g P<.2 
9.2411g P<.1 
no dre p.1. 
9.2411g P<.1 
100ng .• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .••.• : •• 100 .••. :. ·1•g •••. : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •.•. : .• 1g .•.•. :. ·10 
.> 
• > no dre P-1. 
2.1311g \ P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 . 
5.6311g * P<.8 
9.6411g * P<.6 
100ng •. : •. 1ug •..• : •• 10 ..... : .• 100 •••. :. ·1•g •.•. : •. 10 •.•.. :. -100 •.•. : .• 1g ...•. : .• 10 
.> 6.27•g * P<. 7 
.> 1.81•g * P<. 5 
.> no dre P•1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 •••.• : .• 100 ..•• :. -1•g •.•• : •. 10 .•••. : .• 100 ..•• : .• 1g .•.•. : •. 10 
-* 4.46•g * P<.02 + 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .••• :. ·1•g •••• : •. 10 ••••. : .• 100 •••. : •. 1g .•.•. : •• 10 
1668 R f hrl eat 
e R hrl eat 
1669 R • hrl eat 
e R • hrl eet thy 
thy 
thy 
thy foe 24•24 eo + 1. 57•g P<.0005+ 
P<.007 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 + fde 24•24 H 9.47•g z 
foe 24•24 ea • 900•g z 
fde 24•24 H 37. 6•g * 
METHOTREXATE 100ng,.:. ·1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• :. ·100 •.•• : •• 111g •.•• : •. 10 ••••. : .• 100 •.•• : •• 1g .•.•. : .. 10 
1670 f oyg eat liv hp• 23•24 11 .> 51.111g * P<.2 
e oyg eat I iv •ix 23•24 11 167 .•g * P<.8 
b oyg eat lun tu• 23•24 11 no dre P• 1. 
e oyg eat tbe •ix 23•24 11 no dre P• 1. 
1671 • oyg eat Ii v tu• 25•27 11 .> no dre p.1. 
e • oyg eet lun tu• 25•27 ea no dre P-1. 
b • oyg Ht tbe •ix 25•27 11 no dre P•1. 
1672 f owi Ht I iv hpe 28•28 .> 65.2•g * P<.4 
e owi eat lun 11ix 28•28 no dre P•1. 
b owi eat tbe •ix 28•28 48.0•g * P<1. 
1673 • ow i eat Ii v h .. 27•28 e .> no dre P• 1. 
e • owi eat lun •ix 27•28 e 
b • owi eat tbe •ix 27•28 1 
1674 • b46 iv j tbe ben 12•24 ea 
e • b46 iv j tbe •ix 12•24 ea 
b • b46 ivj tbe .. 1 12•24 ea 
1675 f ode ipj tbe .. 1 24•24 • 
1676 • ode ipj I iv hH 24•24 e 
e • ode ipj tbe .. 1 24•24 • 
2 · METHOXY · 3 ·AMI NOD I BENZOFURAN 
1677 R f fio eat ubl •ix 75w75 e 
e R fio eat ubl tee 75w75 e 
b R fio eat eue oqe 75w75 • 
fia eat •gl ede 75w75 e 
d fia eat I iv tu• 75w75 e 
e fio eat tbe .. 1 75w75 • 
1678 R 11 fio eat ubl •ix 75w75 e 
e • f ii eat ubl tee 75w75 e 
b R • fia eat eue oqe 75w75 e 
e R • fio Ht I iv tu• 75w75 e 
d • fio eat tbe HI 75w75 • • > 
. > no dre 
no dre 
.409•g 
.33011g 
2.96•g 
no dre 
no dre p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.1 
P<.2 
P<.8 
p.1 • 
p.1 • 
no dre p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •..• : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .••• :. ·1•g •.•. : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••. : .• 1g ••••• : .• 10 
+ 25. 7•g 
43.9•g 
43.911g 
205.llg 
no dre 
33.1•g 
+ 26.4•g 
78.2•g 
78.2•g 
no dre 
78.2•g P<.002 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.005 
P<.005 
P<.09 + 
P<.09 + 
p.1. 
P<.09 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 171 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
MERCURIC CHLORIDE 7487-94-7 
1655 1395 1-55•g 105-•g 3/47 1.0011g 11/41 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452-458; 1975 
a 1395 3.36•g n.s.1. 9/47 1.0011g 7/41 
b 1395 .97311g n.1.1. 14/47 1.0011g 21/41 
1395 1.9511g n.1.1. 4/47 1-0011g 9/41 
1656 1395 2.2511g n.1.1. 5/38 .833•g 9/48 
1395 1-09•g n.1.1. 11/38 .83311g 21/48 
b 1395 7.4311g n.1.1. 2/38 .83311g 1/48 
MERCURY Cl I l ACETATE (phenyl11ercuric acetate> 62-38-4 
1657 1286 6.34•g n.1.1. 0/17 3.39•g 0/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1286 6.3411g n.1.1. 1/17 3.3911g 0/17 
b 1286 6.3411g n.1.1. 2/17 3.39•g 0/17 
1658 1286 3.8911g n.1.1. 2/18 3.16•g 1/17 
a 1286 5.91•g n.a.1. 1/18 3.1611g 0/17 
b 1286 3.04•g n.1.1. 3/18 3.16•g 2/17 
1659 1286 3.53•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.3911g 1/18 
a 1286 3.53•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.39•g 1/18 
b 1286 2.59•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.3911g 2/18 
1660 1286 2.27•g n.a.1. 0/16 3.16•g 2/17 
1286 5.91•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.1611g 0/17 
b 1286 2.27•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.1611g 2/17 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLOR I DE c .. thyl .. rcuric acetate) 115-09-3 
1661 1395 3.28•g n.1.1. 9/47 .20011g 3/31 .253•g 3/40 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452-458; 1975 
1395 .446•g n.1.1. 14/47 .20011g 12/31 (.25311g 4/40) 
b 1395 4.64•g n.1.1. 4/47 .20011g 2/31 . 253•g 0140 
1662 1395 1.57•g n.1.1 . 5/38 .167•g 4/25 .208•g 3/32 
a 1395 . 727•g n.1.1. 11/38 .16711g 9/25 .208•g 10/32 
b 1395 1.53•g n.1.1. 2/38 .16711g 3/25 .20811g 2/32 
MESTRANOL** 72-33-3 
1663 1453 .55111g n.1.1. 1/40 5.00ug 0140 30.0ug 1/40 60.0ug 1/39 .200•g 1/39 Barrows; j txe, 3, 219-230; 1977 
1664 1453 .335•g n.1.1. 2/40 5.00ug 4/40 30.0ug 4/40 60.0ug 0/40 .20011g 5/40 
1665 1174 60.3ug n.1.1. 145/160 -130•g 30/34 Rudal i ;reec, 16,425-429; 1971 
1666 1174 12.2ug n.1.1. 12/15 13.0ug 26/40 
METEPA 57-39-6 
1667 179 1.35•g n.1.1. 0/20 -625•g 0/20 2.5011g 3/20 Gaines ;bwho, 34, 317-320; 1966 
METHIMAZOLE 60-56-0 
1668 180 .83411g 3.46•g 0/50 .250•g 0/25 1.5011g 14/25 (9.00•g 12/25> Owen;fctx, 11,649-653; 1973 
a 180 2.86•g 150.llg 0/50 .25011g 0/25 1.50•g 3/25 (9.0011g 2/25> 
1669 180 .500•g 1.85•g 1/50 .200•g 1/25 1.2011g 17/25 (7 .20•g 5/25) 
180 11. 5•g n.1.1. 1/50 .200•g 0/25 1.2011g 2/25 7 .20•g 3/25 
METHOTREXATE 59-05-2 
1670 1324 8.3211g n.1.a. 0/49 .261•g 0/42 .523•g 0/42 1.0511g 1/39 Rust ia; txap, 26, 329· 338; 1973 
a 1324 9.1411g n.1.1. 1/49 .261•g 0/42 • 523•g 0/42 1.0511g 1/39 
b 1324 1.3011g n.1.1. 0/49 .26111g 0/42 .52311g 0/42 1.05•g 0/39 
c 1324 6.0111g n.1.1. 7/49 .26111g 4/42 .52311g 2/42 1.0511g 3/39 
1671 1324 1.38•g n.a.1. 0/49 .230•g 0/42 .460•g 0/42 .920•g 0/40 
a 1324 1.3811g n.1.1. 0/49 .230•g 0/42 .460•g 0/42 .92011g 0/40 
b 1324 12.8•g n.1.1. 8/49 .23010g 1/42 .46011g 0/42 .92011g 1/40 
1672 1324 10.6•g n.1.1. 0170 .19511g 0/36 .325•g 0/36 .520•g 1/42 .650•g 0/48 
1324 3.5711g n.1.1. 14/70 .195•g 8/36 .325•g 8/36 .52011g 6/42 .65011g 8/48 
b 1324 1.3511g n.1.1. 34/70 .195•g 21/36 .32511g 13/36 .52011g 19/42 .650•g 26/48 
1673 1324 3.2011g n.1.1. 6/70 .18011g 2/36 .30011g 6!36 .48011g 1/42 ( .600•g 0/48) 
1324 3.4511g n.1.1. 13/70 .18011g 6/36 .300•g 3/36 .48011g 9/42 .600•g 6/48 
b 1324 1.99•g n.1.1. 29/70 .180•g 15/36 .30011g 17/36 .480•g 18/42 .600•g 15/48 
1674 1017 .111•g n.1.1. 3/65 71.4ug 4/26 Sch .. hl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
1017 90.2ug n.1.1. 7/65 71.4ug 6/26 
b 1017 .18111g n.1.1. 4/65 71.4ug 2/26 
1675 1134 .40611g n.1.1 . 3/33 89.3ug 1/31 Sch .. hl ;zkko,86, 77-84; 1976 
1676 1134 . 552•g n.1.1. 1/36 89.3ug 0!30 
a 1134 .55211g n.1.1. 1/36 89.3ug 0/30 
2-METHOXY · 3· AMINODIBENZOFURAN 5834-17-3 
1677 183n 10.2•g 115.•g 0/12 50.0•g 6/12 Rado111k i; jnci ,39, 1069-1080; 1967 
a 183n 15.0•g n.1.1. 0/12 50.0•g 4/12 
b 183n 15.0•g n.1.1. 0/12 50.0•g 4/12 
c 183n 33.3•g n.1.1. 0/12 50.0•g 1/12 
d 183n 64.3•g n.1.1. 0/12 50.0•g 0/12 
e 183n 12.3•g 265.•g 0/12 50.0•g 5/12 
1678 183n 9.84•g 212.•g 0/12 40.0•g 5/12 
a 183n 19.2•g n.1.1. 0/12 40.0•g 2/12 
b 183n 19.2•g n.1.1. 0/12 40.0•g 2/12 
c 183n 51.4•g n.1.1. 0/12 40.0•g 0/12 
d 183n 19.2•g n.1.a. 0/12 40.0•g 2/12 172 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1679 sda eat ubl 11ix 75w75 e .. 43.9•g P<.02 
a sda eat auc sqc 75w75 e 
b R sda eat 11gl adc 75w75 e 
c R sda eat ubl tee 75w75 e 
d R sda eat l iv tu" 75w75 e 
sda eat tba •al 75w75 e 
1680 " sda eat kid sqc 75w75 e 
a " sda eat ubl tpp 75w75 e 
b " sda eat I iv tu11 75w75 e 
c 11 sda eat tba 11a I 75w75 e 
1681 wis eat ubl •ix 75w75 e 
a R wis eat 11gl adc 75w75 e 
b wis eat ubl tee 75w75 e 
wis eat l iv eye 75w75 e 
d R wia eat tba 11al 75w75 e 
1682 R 11 wis eat ubl 11ix 84w84 e 
" wis eat tba 11al 84w84 e 
b R 11 wis eat tba ben 84w84 e 
1683 R 11 wis eat ubl mix 75w75 e 
a m wis eat auc sqc 75w75 e 
b 11 wis eat ubl tee 75w75 e 
c " wis eat kid sqc 75w75 e 
d " wis eat l iv tu11 75w75 e 
R " wis eat tba •al 75w75 e 
METHOXYCHLOR 
1684 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w92 v .> 
.. 
<+ 
.. 61.911g 
61.911g 
205.'1g 
no dre 
25.7'1g 
164.mg 
164.llg 
no dre 
78.2mg 
43.9oog 
97.7'1g 
97.7mg 
205 ... g 
43.9mg 
noTD50 
noTD50 
53.311g 
35.2mg 
78.2mg 
78.2mg 
164 ... g 
no dre 
26.4•g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : • -10 
no dre P<.04 + 
P<.04 + 
P<.3 + 
p.1. 
P<.002 
P<.3 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.09 
P<.02 + 
P<.09 + 
P<.09 
P<.3 
P<.02 
P<.004 
P<.004 + 
P<.07 
P<.02 + 
P<.09 + 
P<.09 + 
P<.3 + 
P•1. 
P<.005 
Pa1. 
a M b6c eat l iv MXB 78w92 v no dre P-1. 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 v no dre P• 1. 
1685 " b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 v 
" b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 v no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
b oo b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 v 
1686 f OllO eat TBA MXB 180026 dv 
a OSOi eat l iv MXB 181126 dv 
1687 o"' eat l iv tum 270027 
a o"' eat tba mix 271127 
1688 OIM eat l iv tu• 240l24 
a os" eat tba ben 240024 
b oH eat tba ooal 241124 
1689 II OSll eat TBA MXB 180026 dv 
II OH eat l iv MXB 181126 dv 
1690 II 0111 eat l iv tu• 27•27 
a 11 OH eat tba •ix 271127 
1691 • OH eat l iv tu11 241124 
a " OH eat tba ben 241124 
b 11 0111 eat tba •al 24•24 .> 
• > .> 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
234.mg 
no dre 
31.8mg 
no dre 
METHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID 100ng •• :. ·1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1oog ••.• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·19· •••• :. -10 
1692 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 236.11g 
a b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 227 ·"9 
1693 m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 157 .mg 
a " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 3.62g11 
b " b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 139.0lg 
1694 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 244.•g 
f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 157 .•g 
1695 11 b6c orl rts 76w76 evx 82.111g 
" b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 227 ·"9 
b " b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
" b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 54.2•g 
METHYL CARBAZATE 
1696 R f w i a eat tba tum 240024 
1697 R II w i. eat tba tuOI 240l24 100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g ••.• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 .••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
1-METHYL • 1, 4 ·DI HYDRO· 7 • [ 2 • (5 • NITROFURYL )VINYL J ·4 ·OX0· 1,8· NAPHTHYRIDINE -3-CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUM •••• : •• 1g •.•.• : •• 10 
8.03•g 
10.3•g 
21.90lg 
26.5•g 1698 M b i er eat lun ada 54w54 + 
a M b icr eat for sqc 54w54 s 
b M b icr eat lun car 54w54 1 
M b icr eat th• lyk 54w54 s 
N ·METHYL· N, 4-D IN ITROSO AN IL I NE 
1699 " cbr ipj pee •ix 26w86 e 
R " cbr ipj l iv hpt 26w86 e 
N-METHYL ·N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
1700 f syg wat •h• 24•24 e 
H f ayg wat l iv 01ix 24•24 e 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : .• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 1.300lg 
1.50•g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·19· ••• ·: · .10 
• • 4. 7111g 
11.3•g p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
P<.08 
P•1 . 
P<.1 
P•1. 
P<.4 
p.1. 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P<1. 
P<.4 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.05 
P<.009 -
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.002 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.05 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 173 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl JDose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1679 183• 15.011g n.s.s. 0/12 50.011g 4/12 
a 18311 18.611g n.s.s. 0/12 50.0mg 3/12 
b 18311 18.611g n.s.a. 0/12 50.011g 3/12 
18311 33.3mg n.s.s. 0/12 50.0mg 1/ 12 
d 18311 64.311g n.s.1. 0/12 50.011g 0/12 
e 18311 10.211g 115.llg 0/12 50.011g 6/12 
1680 18311 26.611g n.s.s. 0/12 40.011g 1/12 
a 18311 26.611g n.s.s. 0/12 40.011g 1/12 
b 18311 51.411g n.s.s. 0/12 40.011g 0/12 
18311 19.211g n.s.s. 0/12 40.011g 2/12 
1681 183n 15.0mg n.a.s. 0/12 50.011g 4/12 
183n 23.911g n.s.s. 0/12 50.011g 2/12 
b 183n 23.911g n.s.s. 0/12 50.011g 2/12 
c 183n 33.3mg n.a.s. 0/12 50.011g 1/12 
d 183n 15.0llg n.s.s. 0/12 50.011g 4/12 
1682 1420 n.a.a. 17.911g 017 34.311g 616 Hackll8nn;zk ko,61,45·54 ; 1956 
a 1420 n.s.s. 17.911g 0/7 34.311g 616 
b 1420 13.011g n.s.s. 0/9 34.311g 2/8 
1683 183n 12.011g n.s.s. 0/12 40.011g 4/12 Radomski; jnci ,39, 1069· 1080; 1967 
183n 19.211g n.a.s. 0/12 40.011g 2/12 
b 183n 19.211g n.s.s. 0/12 40.011g 2/12 
c 183n 26.611g n.s.a. 0/12 40.011g 1/12 
d 183n 51.411g n.s.a. 0/12 40.0•g 0/12 
• 183n 9.8411g 212.llg 0/12 40.011g 5/12 
METHOXYCHLOR 72.43.5 
1684 c00497 828.11g n.a.1. 3/20 109.•g 6/50 217 .Ilg 3/50 
a c00497 1.41g11 n.s.1. 0/20 109.•g 1/50 217.llg 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c00497 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 109.llg 0/50 217.llg 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1685 c00497 466.mg n.s.s. 3/20 178.11g 5/50 352.llg 9/50 
c00497 664.•g n.a.a. 3/20 178.•g 3/50 352.llg 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c00497 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 178.11g 0/50 352.llg 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1686 c00497 63.811g n.1.1. 12/20 26.4•g 30/50 48.211g 30/50 
a c00497 329.11g n.1.1. 1/20 26.411g 1/50 48.211g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1687 21 391.11g n.a.a. 0/30 50.011g 0/30 De i chlftann; txap, 11, 88· 103; 1967 
21 181.11g n.s.a. 13/30 50.011g 6130 
1688 84• 24. 7mg n.s.a. 1/30 4.00•g 0!30 Rado11sk i; txap, 7 ,652·656;1965 
a 84a 7 .3611g n.1.s. 6!30 4.0011g 6/30 
b 84a 8.82•g n.a.s. 6!30 4.0011g 5/30 
1689 c00497 44.61ftg n.a.s. 11/20 12.611g 23/50 23.811g 21/50 
c00497 145.llg n.1.1. 0/20 12.611g 2/50 23.811g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1690 21 313.llg n.s.s. 0130 40.011g 0!30 DaichHnn;txap, 11,88· 103; 1967 
a 21 76.311g n.s.s. 1/30 40.0llg 5/30 
1691 84a 19.8119 n.1.1. 0!30 3. 20•g 0/30 Radomski ;txap, 7,652·656;1965 
a 84a 7.81mg n.s.s. 0!30 3.2011g 2/30 
b 84a 19.811g n.s.a. 3/30 3.2011g 0130 
METHOXYPHENYLACETI C ACID 1701·77·5 
1692 1312 51.4•g n.1.1. 1/17 78.411g 3/18 Jnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1312 155.mg n.1.1. 0/17 78.411g 0/18 
b 1312 45.211g n.s.s. 2/17 78.411g 4/18 
1693 1312 35.911g n.1.1. 2/18 73.0•g 4/16 
1312 n.s.s. n.a.s. 1/18 73.011g 1/16 
b 1312 31.511g "····· 3/18 73.0llg 5/16 
1694 1312 59.811g n.a.s. 0/16 78.411g 2/18 
a 1312 155.mg n.1.1. 0/16 78.411g 0/18 
b 1312 47 .511g n.1.1. 0/16 78.411g 3/18 
1695 1312 30.911g 1.80g11 0/16 73.011g 5/18 
a 1312 55.711g n.a.s. 0/16 73.011g 2/18 
b 1312 145.llg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0•g 0/18 
1312 23.111g 221.llg 0/16 73.011g 7/18 
METHYL CAR BAZA TE 6294·89 ·9 
1696 1389 8.2611g n.a.s. 16/24 2.5011g 11/24 5.00•g 15/24 10.011g 14/24 Truhaut; txcy, 22, 219· 221; 1981 
1697 1389 17 .511g n.s.1. 7/24 2.5011g 6/24 5.0011g 8/24 10.0•g 5/24 
1·METHYL ·1,4·DIHYDRO · 7. I 2· <5·NITROFURYL)VINYL I ·4·0X0· 1,8·NAPHTHYRIDINE ·3·CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUM 
1698 211 4.40•g 19.911g 0/30 12.511g 15/60 Matauzak i ;gann,66, 259·267; 1975 
a 211 5.33•g 34.811g 0/30 12.5•g 12/60 
b 211 8.9411g n.1.1. 0130 12.5•g 6/60 
211 10.111g n.1.1. 0!30 12.511g 5/60 
N ·METHYL· N, 4 · DINITROSOANI LINE 99·80·9 
1699 1258 .319•g n.s.s. 0/10 .429•g 2/14 Boyl and; ej ca ,4, 233·239; 1968 
a 1258 .244•g "····· 017 .429•g 1/8 
N ·METHYL · N • FORMYL HYDRAZINE 758-17·8 
1700 716 2. 73•g 8. 73•g 0/13 10.6•g 24/31 Toth; zkko, 93, 109· 121; 1979 
a 716 6.50•g 21.911g 0179 10.6•g 19/41 174 
b 
e 
d 
• 
f 
1701 
a 
b 
e 
d 
• 
g 
h 
1702 
a 
b 
e 
d 
1703 
• 
b 
e 
1704 
a 
b 
d 
• 
f 
1705 
b 
e 
1706 
a 
b 
d 
1707 
a 
b 
e 
d Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
ayg wat l iv lee 24•24 e 
H ayg wat l iv hpt 241124 e 
H ayg wat gal 11ix 241124 e 
ayg wat tun tu11 24•24 e 
ayg wat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
11 1yg wat l iv •ix 241124 e 
11 1yg wat •h• 241124 e 
11 ayg wat l iv hpt 24•24 e 
• ayg wat bil •ix 241124 e 
• ayg wat gal 11ix 241124 e 
11 ayg wat l iv lee 241124 e 
11 ayg wat gal ppa 241124 e 
11 ayg wat l un tu• 241124 e 
• ayg wat tba 11ix 241124 e 
awe wat l un 11 ix 65w73 aea 
awa wat l iv 11ix 65w73 aea 
awa wat l iv hpt 65w73 aea 
awa wat l iv lee 65w73 aH 
1wa wat gal ede 65w73 aea 
awa wat lun 11ix 231123 aea 
awa wat blv mix 23•23 ae1 
awa wat gal mix 23•23 aea 
awa wat l iv bhp 231123 aea 
awa wat lun •ix 92w92 ea 
awa wat l iv •ix 92w92 ea 
awa wat blv 11ix 92w92 ea 
1wa wat l iv bhp 92w92 ea 
awa wat l iv lee 92w92 ea 
awa wat gal 11ix 92w92 ea 
1wa wat gal ade 92w92 ea 
• awa wat l iv •ix 65w?2 aea 
11 awa wet bil •ix 65w72 aea 
11 awa wat gal ade 65w72 aea 
11 awa wat lun •ix 65w72 aea 
11 1wa wat lun •ix 22•23 ae 
11 awe wat blv •ix 22•23 ae 
• awa wat l iv •ix 22•23 ae 
11 awa wet gal 11ix 22•23 ae 
11 awa wet gal ada 22•23 ae 
11 awe wet l iv •ix 82w82 es 
• awa wat lun •ix 82w82 ea 
• 1wa wat bi l eho 82w82 ea 
• 1wa wet gal ade 82w82 ea 
11 awa wet aev ade 82w82 ea GOLD ET AL. 
• 
... 
... 
.. 
.. TD50 2'failpvl 
DR AuOp 
25.1•g 
28.3•g 
29.1•g 
no dre 
6.0411g 
7 .5511g 
12.711g 
13.311g 
19.711g 
25.311g 
30.011g 
42.511g 
no dre 
4.8911g 
6.44•g \ 
10.411g * 
19.511g * 
19.911g \ 
31.511g * 
.92111g * 
6.0411g * 
57 .911g * 
24.7•g * 
2.16•g 
8.6611g 
12.211g 
17 .511g 
22.411g 
31.311g 
39. 711g 
16.811g \ 
36.211g * 
38.0•g \ 
14.211g \ 
1. 7211g * 
3.4711g \ 
5.4711g * 
9.1011g * 
9.8811g * 
1.03•g 
1.8711g 12.411g 
15.211g 
20.711g P
<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.5 
P•1 . 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P<.0005 
P<.007 + 
P<.002 + 
P<.0005 
P<.01 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.008 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.003 + 
P<.006 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 
P<.002 + 
P<.02 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.009 -
METHYL METHANESULFONATE 100ng .. : •• 1ug ••.• : .• 10 •.••• : .• 100 •••. :. -1•g •.•. : •. 10 •.••. : •. 100 •••. : .• 1g •..•. : .. 10 
1708 M • rf• wat lun ade 241124 e 
a M • rf• wat th• l Y• 241124 e 
b M • rf• wat l iv tu• 241124 e 
N ·METHYL ·N' ·NITRO· N • NITROSOGUANIDINE 
1709 • bf• wet atg ive 52w52 er 
a • bf• wet atg pve 52w52 er 
1710 f wia wet bil eye 35w60 er 
a wia wet atg end 35w60 er 
1711 • wia wat atg end 35w60 er 
a • wia wat bil eye 35w60 er 
1712 • wia wat atg 11ix 77w77 e 
b 
e 
1713 
1714 • wia wat atg ade 77w77 • 
• wia wat atg ade 77w77 • 
• wia wat l iv hpa 77w77 e 
• wia wat atg ade 30w65 er 
• w•f wet atg i ve 52w52 er 
1715 • war wet atg ive 52w52 er 
• war wat atg pve 52w52 er • 31.8•g 
185.mg 
3.98g• 
•• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 .••.• : •• 100 ••.• :. ·1•g •••• : .. 10 ••••. : .• 100 •••. : •. 1g ••.•. : •. 10 
• 
.> 
• 
• .> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
.178•g 
2.3811g 
2.09ag 
no dre 
. 69311g 
1.1311g 
3.06•g 
14.3•g 
.523ag 
6. 75•g 
1.03•g 
2. 72•g P<.0005+ 
P<.02 
P<.9 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P•1 • 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 + 
P<.06 
P<.4 
P<.002 + 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
2 ·METHYL· 1 • N ITROANTHRAQU I NONE 100ng •. : •. 1ug .•.• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••. :. -1•g •.•• : •. 10 ••••. : •• 100 .••• : .• 1g •..•. : .• 10 
1716 f b6e eat sub hes 49w49 
a f b6e eat TBA MXB 49w49 
b b6e eat l iv MXB 49w49 
e b6e eat lun MXB 49w49 
1717 • b6e eat sub hes 46w46 
a • b6e eat TBA MXB 46w46 
b • b6e eat l iv MXB 46w46 
e 11 b6e eat lun MXB 46w46 
1718 f f34 eat MXB MXB 18•25 a 
a f34 eat MXB MXB 18•25 a 
b f34 eat sub fib 18•25 a 
e f34 eat ubl MXA 18•25 a 
d f34 eat pit ad• 18•25 a : (+) : 1.88•g * P<.0005e 
1 • 7611g * P<. 0005 
no dre P• 1. 
(+): 
• 97 .3•g * P<.06 
1.3411g I P<.0005e 
1.02•g I P<.0005 
no dre P•1. 
45.5•g * P<.08 
59. 611g I P<. 0005 
70. 311g I P<. 0005 
131.•g I P<.0005a 
224.•g * P<.01 a 
63.4•g * P<.04 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 175 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 716 12.211g 64.511g 0/79 10.6•g 10/41 
c 716 13.311g 77 .2•g 0/79 10.6•g 9/41 
d 716 8. 75•g n.1.1. 0/1 10.6•g 3/14 
• 716 92.8•g n.1.1 . 0/100 10.6•g 0/44 
716 3.63•g 11.311g 13/100 10.611g 32/44 
1701 716 4.57•g 13.6•g 0/65 9.36•g 24/43 
• 716 6.13•g 41.1•g 0/16 9.36•g 10/26 
b 716 7 .35•g 27 .4•g 0/65 9.36•g 16/43 
c 716 8.45•g 218.•g 0/16 9.36•g 7/26 
d 716 11.4•g 89.1•g 0/34 9.3611g 8/37 
• 716 13.5•g 88.4•g 0/65 9.3611g 8/43 
f 716 16.1•g 1.95g• 0/34 9.36•g 5/37 
g 716 85.4•g n.1.1. 0/88 9.36•g 0/46 
h 716 3. 04•g 8. 58•g 7/88 9.36•g 34/46 
1702 1110 3. 77•g 13.3•g 15/100 15.6•g 30/48 (31.2•g 9/37) Toth; j nc i ,60, 201·204; 1978 
• 1110 6.4411g 18.811g 0/33 15.611g 22/43 31.2•g 3/11 
b 1110 10. 7•g 47 .2•g 0/33 15.6•g 12/43 31.2•g 3/11 
1110 9.6711g 59.0•g 0/33 15.6•g 10/43 C31.2•g 0/11> 
d 1110 11.9•g 510.•g 0/29 15.611g 4/23 31.2•g 1/5 
1703 1265 . 636•g 1 • 37•g 15/99 2.00•g 39/49 4.00•g 47/50 Toth ;npl11, 27, 25·31;1980 
• 1265 3.49•g 14.5•g 8/95 2.00•g 10/44 4.00•g 20/48 
b 1265 17 .5•g n.1.1. 0/82 2.00•g 0/44 4.00•g 3/48 
1265 4.02•g n.1.1. 0/32 2.00•g 1/10 4.0011g 0/5 
1704 1314 1.32•g 3. 73•g 15/99 7 .8011g 43/49 Toth;11yco,68, 121·128; 1979 
a 1314 4.9511g 17.1•g 0/68 7 .8011g 18/47 
b 1314 6.17•g 39. 7•g 8/99 7 .8011g 17/49 
c 1314 8.50•g 45.0•g 0/68 7 .8011g 10/47 
d 1314 10.111g 66.6•g 0/68 7 .8011g 8/47 
• 1314 11.9•g 164.•g 0/63 7 .8011g 5/40 
f 1314 13.7•g 449.•g 0/63 7 .8011g 4/40 
1705 1110 8.19•g 48.211g 1/81 13.0•g 11/47 <26.0•g 3/26) Toth; J nc i, 60, 201·204; 1978 
a 1110 13.8•g 203.•g 0/75 13.0•g 5/29 26.0•g 0/8 
b 1110 14.4•g 186.•g 0/81 13.0•g 5/47 <26.0•g 0/26) 
c 1110 6.00•g n.1.1. 22/98 13.0•g 20/47 (26.0•g 4/26) 
1706 1265 1.12•g 3.09•g 22/98 1.67•g 36/49 3.3311g 31/46 Toth;npl11,27,25-31; 1980 
• 1265 1.64•g 14.5•g 5/78 1.67•g 13/42 (3.33•g 7/36) 
b 1265 3.10•g 12.2•g 2/78 1.67•g 6/42 3.33•g 14/36 
c 1265 4.90•g 20.0•g 0/90 1.67•g 6/46 3.33•g 8/43 
d 1265 5.2111g 22.811g 0/90 1.67•g 6/46 3.33•g 7/43 
1707 1314 • 527•g 1 • 9911g 1/69 6.50•g 28/30 Toth;11yco,68, 121·128; 1979 
• 1314 1.07•g 3.7S.g 22/88 6.50•g 34/41 
b 1314 5.05•g 44.5•g 0/69 6.50•g 6/30 
c 1314 5.75•g 64.611g 0/69 6.50•g 5/30 
d 1314 6.27•g 618.•g 0/51 6.50•g 3/24 
METHYL NETHANESULFONATE (NHS) 66-27·3 
1708 195 16.0•g 113.•g 63/162 33.3•g 33/47 Clapp;scie, 161,913·914; 1968 
• 195 67 .5•g n.1.1. 6/162 33.3•g 7/47 
b 195 160.•g n.1.1. 6/162 33.3•g 2/47 
N ·METHYL -N' -NITRO·N ·NITROSOGUANIDINE (NNNG) 70-25-7 
1709 196 10.7•g n.1.1. 0/20 4.15•g 0/50 Bralow;onco,27, 168-180; 1973 
• 196 10.7•g n.1.a. 0/20 4.15•g 0!50 
1710 1105 73.1ug .411•g 0/5 2.3311g 19/20 Tahara; zkko, 100, 1-12; 1981 
• 1105 .821•g n.1.1 . 0/5 2.33•g 4/20 
1711 1105 • 510•g n.1.1. 015 2.04•g 2/10 
• 1105 1.40•g n.1.1. 0/5 2.04•g 0/10 
1712 199 • 28911g 2. 05•g 016 3.30•g 10/12 Sugi11ura; canr, 30 ,455 ·465; 1970 
• 199 .480•g 5.3111g 016 3.30•g 8/12 
b 199 1.04•g n.1.a. 016 3.3011g 4/12 
c 199 2.32•g n.1.1. 016 3.30•g 1/12 
1713 435 .186•g 2.54•g 0/10 1.9211g 5/8 Nat1ukura; j nc i, 61, 141-143; 1978 
1714 196 1.66•g n.1.1 . 0/16 4.15•g 2/20 Bralow;onco,27, 168-180; 1973 
1715 196 • 684•g 1 • 63•g 0/40 4.15•g 37/74 
196 1.54•g 5.91•g 0/40 4.15•g 17/74 
2 -METHYL· 1 · N ITROANTHRAQU I NONE 129-15-7 
1716 c01923 1.12•g 3.17•g 0/50 32.0•g 29/50 64.0•g 38/50 
• c01923 1.07•g 2.85•g 10/50 32.0•g 34/50 64.0•g 44/50 
b c01923 n.1.1. n.1.1. 1/50 32.0•g 0/50 64.0•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
c01923 15.9•g n.1.1. 3/50 32.0•g 0/50 64.0•g 1/50 lun:a/a,1/c. 
1717 c01923 .780•g 2.31•g 0!50 29.5•g 25/50 59.0•g 36/50 
• c01923 .621•g 1.65•g 22/50 29.5•g 42/50 59.0•g 46/50 
b c01923 n.1.1. n.1.1. 8/50 29.5•g 0!50 59.0•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c01923 7 .41•g n.1.1. 10/50 29.5•g 1/50 59.0•u 0/50 lun:1/1,e/c. 
1718 c01923 36.0•u 119.•u 1/50 21.0•u 4/50 43.0•u 21/50 l iv:hpc,nnd; sto:aqc; sub: fib; ubl :ppn,1rn, tpp. T 
• c01923 41.1•u 150.•u 1/50 21.0•u 3/50 43.0•u 19/50 1to:1qc; sub: fib; ubl :ppn,1rn, tpp. A 
b c01923 66.1•u 403.•u 1/50 21.0•u 0/50 43.0•u 13/50 
c01923 96.4•g 28.311• 0150 21.0•11 3/50 43.0•11 4/50 ubl :ppn,arn, tpp. 
d c01923 27 .4•g n.1.1. 17/50 21.0•u 26/50 43.0•11 25/50 s 176 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
e f34 eat l iv MXA 180125 a 
f34 eat ato aqc 18•25 1 
g f34 eat Liv hpc 13.,25 a 
h f f34 eat TBA MXB 18•25 1 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 18.,25 a 324.0lg * P<.02 c 
507 .•g * P<.03 a 
547.•g * P<.04 c 
47.10lg * P<.08 
324.0lg * P<.02 
1719 " f34 eat MX8 MXB 18 .. 25 
a " f34 eat sub fib 13.,25 
b " f34 eat Liv MXA 18.,25 
c 11 f34 eat l iv hpc 18.,25 
d " 134 eat l iv nnd 18•25 
e " 134 eat TBA MXB 18•25 
• f34 eat l iv MXB 18•25 :+ 19. 70lg I P<. 0005 
25. 8•g I P<. 0005a 
48.80lg * P<.0005c 
89.211g • P<.005 c 
133.11g • P<.004 
31.911g * P<.05 
48.80lg * P<.0005 
4·METHYL· 1 • i <5·NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO i ·2· IMIDAZOLIDINONE ••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 •••.• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.. : •• 10 
1720 R f ada eat •gl adc 46w66 e 5.3411g 
a ada eat l iv tu• 46w66 e 
b R sda eat tba •ix 46w66 e no dre 
5.59119 
4. (4·N·METHYL·N·NITROSAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLin .1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•• : •• 1g .•••• : •• 10 
1721 R f fia eat Liv hnd 34w52 .468m9 
1722 "' f ia eat Liv hnd 34w52 ... 1. 38"1g 
11 f is eat Liv car 34w52 4. 37mg 
N ·METHYL· N • NITROSOBENZAMI DE 
1723 f 11rw wat l iv tu• 12•30 
a f 11rw wat tba •ix 12•30 
1724 11 01rw wat for •ix 12•30 
11 11rw wat for aqp 12•30 
b "' "1rw wat for aqc 121130 100ng •• : .. 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g .••• : •• 10 •.•.. :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
. > no dre 
11.2"1g 
3.2311g 
7 .73•g 
9.6611g P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.04 + 
P<.3 
P•1 • 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.003 
'" 11rw wat l iv tu11 121130 
'" 01rw wat tba 11ix 12•30 no dre P-1. 
d 2.49119 P<.02 
N-CN·METHYL ·N·NITROSOCARBAMOYLl • l ·ORNITHINE .1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
1725 R f wal ipj kid epn 26w52 es .633.,g 
a f wal ipj kid mnp 26w52 es .63311g 
b f wal ipj ak i neo 26w52 es 1.42"1g 
c f wal ipj pan aca 26w52 es 11.011g 
d f wal ipj 11H 01ix 26w52 ea no dre 
1726 "wal ipj kid epn 26w52 es • ... 1.04119 
a • wal ipj ak i nao 26w52 es 1.0411g 
b 11 wal ipj kid "1np 26w52 ea 1.5711g 
c • wal ipj pan 11ix 26w52 es 5.2511g 
d • wal ipj pan adc 26w52 ea 11.011g 
e "wal ipJ zy• car 26w52 ea 11.801g 
R( .J ·2·METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .•.. : .• 111g •.•. : •• 10 •••.. :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
1727 R b ada wat nol epd 24•24 22.1119 
a b sda wat l iv hpa 241124 108.11g 
b b ada wat tba 111 l 241124 20. 4119 
SC+l-2-METHYL·N·NITROSOPIPERIDINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1"1g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : .• 10 
1728 R b ada wat "'ix epd 24•24 + 34.511g 
a b sda wat l iv Mix 24•24 49.411g 
b b ada wat Liv lee 241124 61.211g 
b ada wat tba Mal 24•24 13.211g 
METHYL PARATHION 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••. : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P<.3 
P•1. + 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.3 + 
P<.5 
P<.5 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.04 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 
P<.007 
P<.0005+ 
1729 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 !> no dre P• 1. 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 
1730 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 v 
a M • b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 v 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 v 
1731 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 1 
R f f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 1 
1732 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
R 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
<N-6>-METHYLADENINE 
1733 M f acd wat lun tu• 6•24 1 
a M f acd wat l iv hct 6•24 a 
1734 M • acd wat l iv hct 6•25 1 
a M • acd wat lun tu• 61125 1 
( N -6) -METHYLADENOS I NE 
1735 M f acd wat Liv •i• 
a M f acd wat lun tu• 
1736 M • acd wat lun tu• 
M • 1cd wet l iv •ix 8•27 • 
8•27 
8•27 8•27 
• no dre P•1. 
125.•g * P<.5 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
58.10lg * P<. 5 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• :. -10 
.> .> 364.llg 
no dre 
55.6•g 
108.•g P<.9 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P<.8 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 177 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• c01923 123 ... g n.s.s . 0!50 21.011g 1/50 43.0"'g 4/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
f c01923 154.•g n.a.a. 0!50 21.011g 0/50 43.011g 3/50 
g c01923 165.llg n.s.s. 0!50 21.011g 0/50 43.011g 3/50 
h c01923 18.6 .. g n.s.s. 38/50 21.011g 43/50 43.001g 44/50 
c01923 123.0lg n.s.a. 0/50 21.011g 1/50 43.001g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1719 c01923 13.111g 35.511g 4/49 16.811g 17/50 34.411g 38/50 l iv:hpc,nnd; sub: fib. 
c01923 16.8 .. g 47.401g 3/49 16.811g 10/50 34.401g 34/50 
b c01923 28.0llg 130.0lg 1/49 16.811g 7 /50 34.411g 15/50 l iv:hpc,nnd . 
c c01923 43.8 .. g 879.•g 1/49 16.811g 5/50 34.411g 9/50 
d c01923 60.2 .. g 779.llg 0/49 16.8 .. g 2/50 34.4 .. g 6/50 
• c01923 13.611g n.s.a. 32/49 16.811g 41/50 34.411g 47/50 
f c01923 28.0•g 130.llg 1/49 16.801g 7 /50 34.411g 15/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
4 ·METHYL· 1 · [ (5 • N ITROFURFURYLI DENE)AMI NO [ • 2 • IMIDAZOLI DI NONE 21638·36·8 
1720 200• 3.04•g 10.511g 0/25 17.411g 19/32 Cohen; j nc i, 51,403· 417; 1973 
a 200• 46.311g n.s.s. 0/25 17.4 .. g 0/32 
b 200• 3.1111g 12.411g 1/25 17.411g 19/32 
4 • (4· N ·METHYL ·N • NITROSAMI NOSTYRYL)QUINOL I NE 16699· 10·8 
1721 1162 .21711g 1.3211g 0/20 1.6311g 9/20 Ya11Hoto; j nc i ,51, 1313· 1315; 1973 
1722 1162 .41611g n.s.s. 0120 1.3111g 3/20 
1162 .711•g n.a.a. 0/20 1.3111g 1/20 
N ·METHYL· N • NITROSOBENZAMIDE 63412·06 ·6 
1723 1246 22.011g n.1.s. 0/25 3.5911g 0/19 Bul ay; j nc i ,62, 1523-1528; 1979 
a 1246 2.67•g n.s.s. 12/25 3.5911g 12/19 
1724 1246 1.55•g 8.10•g 0122 3.1411g 11/17 
• 1246 3.12•g 31.1•g 0122 3.1411g 6/17 
b 1246 3.6411g 56.411g 0/22 3.1411g 5/17 
c 1246 17.2•g n.a.1. 0122 3.1411g 0/17 
d 1246 .856•g n.a.1. 12/22 3.14•g 15/17 
N • (N ·METHYL· N · NITROSOCARBAMOYL) · L ·ORNITHINE (n i trosourea a11ino acid> ·•• 
1725 1317 .27111g 1.8111g 0/14 5.1211g 9/12 Longnecker; j opt ,4, 117 -129; 1980 
• 13"i7 .271 .. g 1.8111g 0/14 5.1211g 9/12 
b 1317 .56511g 6.1311g 0/14 5.12•g 6/13 
1317 1.7811g n.s.a. 0/14 5.1211g 1/13 
d 1317 1.8811g n.s.a . 5/14 5.1211g 3/15 
1726 1317 • 45211g n.s.s . 0/4 5.1211g 8/14 
1317 • 45211g n.s.s . 0/4 5.1211g 8/14 
b 1317 • 62811g n.s.s. 0/4 5.1211g 6/14 
c 1317 1.29 .. g n.s.s. 0/4 5.1211g 2/13 
d 1317 1. 7811g n.s.s. 0/4 5.1211g 1/13 
e 1317 1.9311g n.s.s. 0/4 5.1211g 1/14 
R ( ·) • 2 ·METHYL· N · NITROSOPIPERID INE 14026-03·0 
1727 1418 10.811g 54. 711g 0120 25. 711g 11/20 Wiessler; zkko, 79, 118· 122; 1973 
1418 32. 711g n.s.s. 0120 25. 711g 3/20 
b 1418 9.8311g 61.111g 1/20 25. 711g 12/20 
SC+)· 2 ·METHYL· N · N ITROSOP IPERID INE 36702-44-0 
1728 1418 15.411g 109.•g 0120 25. 711g 8/20 Wiesslor; zkko, 79, 118· 122; 1973 
• 1418 20.0 .. g 258.llg 0/20 25. 711g 6!20 
b 1418 23.111g 706.llg 0/20 25. 711g 5/20 
1418 6.6211g 31.911g 1/20 25. 711g 15/20 
METHYL PARATHION 298·00·0 
1729 c02971 7.7911g n.1.1. 14/20 8.1011g 30/50 (16.211g 20/50) 
a c02971 58.511g n.s.s. 1/20 8.1011g 4/50 16.2 .. g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c02971 47.311g n.s.s. 0120 8.10 .. g 3/50 16.211g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1730 c02971 10.011g n.s.s. 13/20 4.2011g 31/50 9.2011g 28/50 
• c02971 8.8611g n.s.s. 10/20 4.2011g 14/50 (9.2011g 12/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c02971 13.9 .. g n.s.s. 1/20 4.2011g 10/50 9.2011g 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1731 c02971 1.4911g n.s.s. 18/20 1. 0011g 33/50 2.0011g 20/50 
a c02971 7.8011g n.s.s. 2/20 1.0011g 5/50 2.0011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1732 c02971 1.5211g n.s.s. 16/20 .80011g 37/50 1.6011g 32/50 
c02971 19.7•g n.s.s. 2120 .80011g 0!50 1.60•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
CN ·6>-METHYLADEN INE 
1733 1255 6.0811g n.s.a. 3/16 4.3311g 3/17 Andarson; i j en, 24, 319-322; 1979 
• 1255 15.211g n.1.1 . 1/16 4.3311g 0/17 
1734 1255 5. 7011g n.s.s. 5/21 3.5211g 3/17 
1255 6.9211g n.a.s. 4/21 3.5211g 2/17 
CN·6) ·METHYLADENOSINE 
1735 1255 16.911g n.s.s. 1/16 9. 76•g 1/12 Anderson; i j cn,24,319·322; 1979 
• 1255 14.1•g n.a.s. 3/16 9. 7611g 2/12 
1736 1255 8.6511g n .. s.s. 4/21 7.8911g 4/14 
• 1255 9.22•g n.s.a. 5/21 7.8911g 4/14 178 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN 
1737 P b rhe ipj I iv hpc 8y9 euw 
P b rhe ipj kid car 8y9 euw 
b b rhe ipj uo 1qc 8y9 euw 
c b rhe ipj Hi adc 8y9 euw 
d b rhe ipj tba .. 1 8y9 euw 
1738 b rhe eat kid adc 14y14 .. uw 
P b rhe eat I iv hpc 14y14 .. uw 
b P b rhe eat kid car 14y14 .. uw 
c b rhe eat pan adc 14y14 e11uw 
d b rhe eat bi I adc 14y14 HIUW 
b rhe eat tba HI 14y14 .. uw GOLD ET AL. 
TD50 
MIXTURE •••• : .• 10 .•.•. :. -100 ••.• :. ·1•g ••.• : •• 10 •..•. :. -100 ••.• : •• 1g .•.•. :. -10 
C+> 72.2ug 
.521•g 
.521•g 
.521•g 
77 .Oug 
.t 25.3•g 
25.3•g 
25.311g 
25.311g 
31.9•g 
16.4•g 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 + 
P<.05 + 
P<.05 
P<.002 
P<.06 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.3 
P<.3 
3 ·METHYLCHOLANTHRENE 100ng •. : .• 1ug ••.• : .• 10 •.•.• : •. 100 •.•. : .• 111g •.•. : .. 10 ..•.. :. -100 ..•. : •• 1g .•.•• :. -10 
1739 R f nu gav 11a11 tu11 52w52 er 
1740 f wia gav •gl adc 52w52 " 
1741 R 
1742 1743 
1744 R 
1745 R 
1746 R 
1747 R 
1748 R 
1749 R w i a gav Hll tu11 52w52 
w is gav •g I adc 26w52 
w i a gav 11g I adc 39w52 
w i 1 gav 11g I adc 52w52 
wis gav 11gl adc 52w52 
wi1 gav •gl adc 52w52 
w i 1 gav •g I adc 52w52 
wis gav •gl adc 52w52 
wis gav 11gl ode 52w52 
4 ,4' ·METHYLENE· Bl SC2 · CHLOROANILI NE) 
1750 f bag eat ubl ptc 9y9 .. v 
1 beg eat I iv hnd 9y9 .. v 
b beg eat 11gl 11ix 9y9 e11v 
1751 cdr eat lun ode 67w67 ef 
a cdr eat •gl adc 67w67 ef 
b cdr eat I iv hpa 67w67 ef 
c cdr eat I iv hpc 67w67 ef 
1752 cdr eat lun adc 24•24 e 
a cdr eat I iv hpc 24•24 e 
b cdr eat I iv hpa 24•24 e 
c R cdr eat I iv cho 24•24 e 
1753 R • cdr eat lun neo 18•24 ea 
a R 11 cdr eat lun •ix 18•24 es 
b • cdr eat •gl adc 18•24 ea 
R • cdr eat I iv hpc 18•24 ea 
d R • cdr Ht zy• car 18•24 ea 
e R • cdr eat ker 18•24 es 
f R " cdr eat ski 1qc 18•24 es 
g • cdr eat tba 11ix 181124 es 
1754 R • cdr eat lun neo 18"24 efl 
1 R • cdr eat lun •ix 18•24 afl 
b R • cdr eat zy• car 18•24 afl 
R • cdr Ht Ii v hpc 18•24 ah 
d 11 cdr eat •gl adc 18•24 afa 
e R • cdr eat heo 18•24 ah 
f • cdr eat 1k i 1qc 18"24 ah 
g • cdr eat tba •ix 18"24 eh 
1755 • cdr eat Ii v hpc 67w67 ef 
a • cdr eat I iv hpa 67w67 ef 
b • cdr eat lun adc 67w67 ef 
1756 • cdr eat lun adc 24•24 e 
a • cdr Ht I iv hpc 24•24 e 
b • cdr eat I iv hpa 24•24 e 
1757 wi2 eat I iv •ix 16•28 e 
a wi2 eat •gl •ix 16•28 e 
b wi2 eat lun •ix 16•28 e 
c wi2 eat tba •ix 16•28 e 
1758 • wi2 eat I iv •ix 16•29 e 
a • wi2 Ht lun •ix 16•29 e 
b • wi2 Ht tba •ix 16•29 e <+ + • . 5060lg 
.+ 1.2511g 
+ .66911g 
+ 
+ 
+ • .20211g 
.30411g 
.76411g 
.50611g 
noTD50 
.714•g 
.689•g 
.59011g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
• . : .• 1ug ..•• : .• 10 ••..• : .• 100 ••.• :. -1•g ..•• : •• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 ••.• : .• 1g ••.•. : .. 10 
+ 2.12•g P<.003 + 
• + 
+ 3.7211g P<.02 + 
no dre P•1. 
42.311g P<.003 + 
42.311g P<.003 + 
142.Mg P<.1 
291.Mg P<.3 
. + • 34.7•g P<.0005+ 
• + • 
+ • 467.11g P<.04 -
708.Mg P<.1 
1.43g• P<.3 
20.8•g * P<.0005+ 
29.211g * P<.0005+ 
87 .611g * P<.0005+ 
92.2Mg P<.0005+ 
107 .Mg * P<. 0005+ 
144.llg P<.01 
286.•g * P<.2 
10.411g * P<.0005 
35.1•g * P<.0005+ 
60.9•g * P<.0005+ 
112.•g * P<.0005+ 
124.Mg Z P<.0005+ 
162.llg * P<.006 + 
138.•g * P<.02 + 
263.Mg * P<.03 
14.8•g * P<.0005 
15.3•g P<.0005+ 
41.811g P<.007 + 
41.8Mg P<.007 + 
42. 3•g P<. 0005+ 
388.•g P<.04 -
388.11g P<.04 -
15.811g P<.0005+ 
51.4•g P<.003 
104.Mg P<.005 + 
11.6•g P<.0005+ 
10.8Mg P<.0005+ 
59.5•g P<.0005+ 
9.09•g P<.0005+ 
4,4' ·METHYLENE·BISC2·CHLOROANILINE> .2HCI.:. -1ug .••• : .• 10 ..•.• :. -100 •••• :. ·1•g •.•. : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •.•. : •. 1g .••.• : •• 10 
1759 M f chi eat I iv hpt 77w90 66.6•g I P<.0005+ 
a M chi eat I iv •ix 77w90 66.611g I P<.0005+ 
b M chi Ht lun •ix 77w90 556.11g * P<.4 
c M chi Ht tba •ix 77w90 52.811g I P<.0005 
1760 M • chi Ht lun •ix 77w94 :> 342.11g • P<.2 
a M • chi Ht I iv •ix 77w94 471.•g * P<.4 
b M • chi eat tba •ix 77w94 97 .9•g • P<.02 
1761 R 11 cdr eat I iv •ix 77w98 :> 70.111g • P<.2 
a R • cdr eat tba •ix 77w98 33.411g * P<.5 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 179 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE CCAS# 592-61·1 and 14901-08· 7) •ixture 
1737 2000 20 .Oug .403•g 0/32 .91011g 4/5 AdHson;ossc, 129-156; 1982/Sieber pers. co1111. 
a 2000 84.0ug n.a.a. 0/32 .91011g 1/5 
b 2000 84.0ug n.a.a. 0/32 .91011g 1/5 
2000 84.0ug n.1.1. 0/32 .91011g 1/5 
d 2000 20.3ug .69311g 3/32 .91011g 4/5 
1738 2000• 4.1011g n.a.s. 0/32 11.111g 1/7 
a 200011 4.10 .. g n.1.1. 0/32 11.111g 1/7 
b 2000• 4.1011g n.1.s. 0/32 11.1•g 1/7 
c 2000• 4.1011g n.1.1. 0/32 11.111g 1/7 
d 2000• 4.2311g n.1.1. 1/32 11.111g 1/7 
• 2000• 3.01•g n.1.1. 3/32 11.111g 2/7 
3 ·METHYLCHOLANTHRENE 56·49·5 
1739 481 .26111g 1.08•g 0/9 4.90•g 17/21 Shay ;11poc ,305·318;1962 
1740 1130• .808•g 2.0411g 1/54 8.5711g 37/53 Gruenste in; canr, 24, 1656· 1658; 1964 
1741 1130n .363•g 1.39•g 1/54 4.90•g 18/25 
1742 188b• 91.4ug .485•g 0/20 2.46•g 14/16 Shay; jnc i, 27, 503· 513; 1961 
1743 188bn .137•g • 727•g 0/20 3.69•g 14/16 
1744 188bo .375•g 1.84•g 0/20 4.90•g 12/18 
1745 188br .261•g 1.08•g 0/20 4.90•g 17/21 
1746 188b1 n.1.1. .486•g 0/20 4.90•g 17/17 
1747 188bt .343•g 1.53•g 0/20 9.80•g 19/21 
1748 188bu .286•g 1.5511g 0/20 12.2•g 20/21 
1749 188bv .336•g 1.12•g 0/20 4.90•g 22/29 
4, 4' ·METHYLENE ·BIS(2 · CHLOROANI LINE) <3,3' -dichloro-4,4' -diHinodiphenyl118thane, MOCA) 101·14·4 
1750 1030 .586•g 14.8•g 016 7.31•g 4/5 Stu la; jept, 1,31·50;1977 
a 1030 1.04•g n.a.a. 0!6 7.31•g 3/5 
b 1030 2.29•g n.1.1. 4/6 7.31•g 2/5 
1751 192• 17.1•g 223.•g 0/21 50.0•g 6/21 Stula;txap,31, 159-176; 1975/pers. co ... 
a 192• 17.1•g 223.•g 0/21 50.0•g 6/21 
b 192• 34.9•g n.1.1. 0/21 50.0•g 2/21 
c 192• 47.4•g n.1.1. 0/21 50.0•g 1/21 
1752 192n 21.411g 60.5•g 0/44 50.0•g 27/44 
a 192n 141.•g n.1.1. 0/44 50.0•g 3/44 
b 192n 174.•g n.1.1. 0/44 50.0•g 2/44 
c 192n 233.•g n.1.1. 0/44 50.0•g 1/44 
1753 1031• 15.7•g 28.6•g 1/100 7 .53•g 23/100 15.111g 28/75 34.0•g 35/50 Ko .. ineni; j ept,2, 149-171; 1979 
a 1031• 21.5•g 41.1•g 0/100 7 .53•g 14/100 15.1•g 20/75 34.0•g 31/50 
b 1031• 53. 7•g 174.•g 1/100 7 .53•g 5/100 15.1•g 8175 34.0•g 14/50 
c 1031• 56.811g 164.•g 0/100 7 .53•g 3/100 15.111g 3175 34.0ag 18/50 
d 1031• 61.4•g 288.•g 1/100 7 .53•g 8/100 15.111g 5/75 34.0•g 11/50 
• 1031• 63.9•g 6.58g• 1/100 7 .53•g 3/100 15.1ag 7/75 (34.0•g 1/50) 
f 1031• 109.ag n.1.1. 1/100 7 .53•g 4/100 15.1ag 7/75 34.0•g 2/50 
g 1031• 6.48•g 21.1•g 58/100 7 .53ag 80/100 15.1•g 61/75 34.0ag 48/50 
1754 1031n 22. 7ag 58.9•g 0/100 3. 76•g 6/100 7. 53•g 11/75 15.1•g 13/50 
a 1031n 35.0•g 127.•g 0/100 3. 76•g 3/100 7.53•g 7/75 15.1•g 8/50 
b 1031n 54.5•g 298.•g 0/100 3. 76•g 0/ 100 7. 53ag 4/75 15.1•g 6/50 
c 1031n 58. 3•g 337. •g 0/100 3. 76•g 0/100 7.53•g 0175 15.1•g 9/50 
d 1031n 70.1•g 1.51g• 0/100 3. 7611g 1/100 7.53ag 3/75 15.1•g 3/50 
• 1031n 58.8•g n.1.1. 1/100 3. 76•g 2/100 7.53•g 4175 15.1•g 4/50 
1031n 90.3•g n.1.1. 1/100 3. 76•g 0/100 7.53•g 1/75 15.1•g 4/50 
g 1031n 8.87•g 37 .511g 37/100 3.76•g 34/100 7 .53•g 40/75 15.1•g 36/50 
1755 192• 7 .53•g 38.0•g 0/21 40.0•g 11/21 Stul a; txap,31, 159-176; 1975/peri. co••· 
a 192• 15.S.g 498.ag 0/21 40.0•g 5/21 
b 192• 15.8•g 498.•g 0/21 40.0•g 5/21 
1756 192n 25.0•g 79.2•g 0/44 40.0•g 21/44 
a 192n 117.•g n.a.a. 0/44 40.0•g 3/44 
b 192n 117.•g n.1.1. 0/44 40.0•g 3/44 
1757 1018 8.23•g 32.9•g 0/25 29.9•g 18/22 Grund11ann;zkko, 74,28·39; 1970 
a 1018 22. 5•g 352. 11g 2/25 29.9ag 10/22 
b 1018 39.4•g 827 •• g 0/25 29.9ag 5/22 
c 1018 5.53•g 25.9•g 2/25 29.9•g 20/22 
1758 1018 5.69•g 21.6•g 0/25 22.5ag 22/25 
a 1018 26.8•g 192.•g 0/25 22. 511g 8/25 
b 1018 4.52•g 18.4•g 0/25 22.5•g 23/25 
4,4' ·METHYLENE ·BISC2·CHLOROANILINE) .2HCL 64049-29·2 
1759 191 35.3•g 147.•g 0/20 117 .ag 9/21 246.•g 7/14 Ru11f i eld; txap, 31,47·54;1975 
a 191 35.3•g 147.•g 0/20 117.•g 9/21 246.•g 7/14 
b 191 108.•g n.1.1. 6/20 117 .•g 3/21 246.•g 2/14 
c 191 26.1•g 196.•g 17/20 117.•g 16/21 246.•g 12/14 
1760 191 86.4•g n.1.1. 5/18 108.•g 3/13 206.•g 4/20 
a 191 112.•g n.1.1. 3/18 108.•g 4/13 206.•g 4/20 
b 191 28.0•g n.1. 1. 12/18 108.•g 7/13 206.•g 16/20 
1761 191 18.6•g n.1.1. 1/22 18.0•g 1/22 31.3•g 4/19 
a 191 6.57•g n.1.1. 14/22 18.0•g 13/22 31.3•g 14/19 180 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
4 ,4' ·METHYLENE ·BIS( 2·METHYLAN IL I NE) 
1762 R f cdr eat l iv hpc 82w82 v 
a R cdr eat l iv hpa 82w82 v 
b R cdr eat l iv clc 82w82 v 
1763 11 cdr eat 11gl fba 68w68 v 
a 11 cdr eat ski fib 68w68 v 
b 11 cdr eat l iv hpc 68w68 v 
"' cdr eat l iv hpa 68w68 v 
d R 11 cdr eat l iv he11 68w68 v •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 111g ••.• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••.•. : .• 10 
• + 7 .9211g 
30.511g 
96.311g 
6.9111g 
8.1911g 
12.411g 
17.0llg 
35.211g 
4,4' ·METHYLENEBIS(N,N·DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• :. -1•g •.•• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.0005+ 
P<.004 
P<.1 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 + 
P<.002 + 
P<.004 
P<.04 
1764 f b6c eat l iv MXA 78w91 : + 207 .11g • P<.003 c 
a b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 280.llg • P<.07 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 207 .11g • P<.003 
c b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 1.08g11 \ P<.2 
1765 II b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 :> 367 .Ilg • P<.2 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 558.11g • P<.2 
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 1.41g• • P<.4 
1766 f34 eat thy MXA 141124 16. 411g I P<. 0005c 
a f 134 eat thy fee 141124 27. 711g I P<.0005c 
b f34 eat l iv nnd 141124 203.11g • P<.05 
c f34 eat TBA MXB 141124 41. 711g P<.4 
d f34 eat l iv MXB 141124 203. Ilg • P<. 05 
1767 II 134 eat thy MXA 141124 + 16.511g I P<.0005c 
a 11 134 eat thy fee 141124 28.611g I P<.002 c 
b 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 141124 42. 911g • P<. 5 
11 f34 eat Liv MXB 141124 no dre P-1. 
METHYL GUAN ID I NE 
1768 R 11 wis eat l iv h111 68w68 e 
7 ·METHYLGUAN INE 
1769 R b b46 iv J tba 111 l 251129 
METHYL HYDRAZINE 
1770 f syg wat l iv 11ha 86w86 e 
1yg wat cec mix 86w86 e 
b ayg wat cec pla 86w86 e 
c syg wat l iv 11ix 86w86 e 
d syg wat l un ang 86w86 e 
1771 H 11 ayg wat l iv 11ha 231123 e 
a H 11 ayg wat cec 11i x 231123 e 
b 11 syg wat cec pla 231123 e 
c H 11 syg wat lun tu• 231123 e 
1772 M f sw i wat l un ade 62w62 ea 
a M swi wat bil 11ix 62w62 ea 
b M swi wat bil cho 62w62 ea 
M awi wat lun 11ix 62w62 es 
d M awi wat l iv hpt 62w62 ea 
1773 M 11 swi wat l iv 11ix 69w69 es 
a M 11 awi wat l iv hpt 69w69 ea 
b M 11 awi wat lun ade 69w69 ea 
M 11 awi wat bil •ix 69w69 ea 
METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
1774 M f swi gav lun tu• 40w55 
1775 M f 1wi wat lun 11ix 261126 e 
a M swi wat lun ade 261126 e 
b M awi wat lun adc 261126 e 
c M swi wat l iv •ix 261126 e 
1776 M 11 1wi wat lun 11ix 261126 e 
a M 11 awi wat lun ade 261126 e 
b M 11 awi wat lun adc 261126 e 
M 11 awi wat 11l y 261126 e 
d M 11 awi wat l iv •ix 261126 e 
(N·6> · CMETHYLNITROSO>ADENINE 
1777 M f 1cd wat l iv •ix 241124 
a M f 1cd wat lun tu• 241124 
1778 M 11 scd wat lun tu• 241124 
a M 11 scd wat Liv •ix 241124 
(N·6) • CMETHYLNITROSO>ADENOSINE 
1779 M f scd wat rap 11ix 241124 
a M 1cd wat lun tu• 241124 
b M 1cd wat 11gl car 241124 
c M acd wat ute tu• 241124 
d M acd wat l iv 11ix 241124 
1780 M 11 1cd wat lun tu11 241124 
a M • 1cd wat l iv •ix 241124 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••. : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : .. 1g ••••. : .• 10 
.> 84.0llg 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.••. : .• 10 
.> 8.2411g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
+ • + 15.4mg 
• + 25.811g 
29.811g 
30.811g 
297.llg 
9.20•g 
42.111g 
50. 711g 
no dre 
19.611g 
24.611g 29.211g 
21.4mg 
51.111g 
4.5811g 
7 .2511g 
10.111g 
22.511g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••• : •• 1g ••••• : .• 10 
.> 
• + no dre 
2.9811g 
4.0211g 
5.6311g 
47 .211g 
2.5111g 
2.9311g 
12.0llg 
7.8511g 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••..• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• : •• 1g ..••• : •• 10 
.> 63.2•g 
909.llg 
.. 18.011g 
62.611g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• :. -100 •••. : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••.•• : •• 10 
15.811g 
17.4•g 
28.711g 
84.911g 
no dre 
21.611g 
no dre P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.006 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 
P<.01 
P•1. 
P<.008 
P<.003 
P<.006 
P<.02 
P<.05 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.002 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<. 0005 
P<.0005 
P<.5 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<1. 
P<.02 + 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P-1. 
P<.002 + 
P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 181 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
4, 4' ·METHYLENE· Bl 5(2 ·METHYLAN I LI NE l 838-88-0 
1762 192 4.5811g 15.4Mg 0/44 10.5mg 19/44 Stul a; txap,31, 159-176; 1975/pers. co1111. 
• 192 12.4•g 187.llg 0/44 10.5mg 6/44 
b 192 23.711g n.s.s. 0/44 10.511g 2/44 
1763 192 3.5811g 19.211g 1/44 8.4911g 14/44 
• 192 3.9711g 37 .411g 2/44 8.4911g 13/44 
b 192 5.6111g 41.811g 0/44 8.4911g 8/44 
c 192 6.9211g 104.llg 0/44 8.4911g 6/44 
d 192 10.711g n.1.1. 0/44 8.4911g 3/44 
4, 4' -METHYLENEBISCN, N ·DI METHYL )BENZENAMINE 101-61-1 
1764 c01990 126.llg 1.14g11 1/20 139.11g 19/50 278.llg 23/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c01990 122.mg n.s.a. 6/20 139.mg 26/50 278.llg 30/50 
b c01990 126.llg 1.14g• 1/20 139.11g 19/50 278.11g 23/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c01990 328.llg n.s.s. 0/20 139.0lg 3/50 C278.0lg 0/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1765 c01990 140.0lg n.1.a. 7/20 128.llg 24/50 257 .Ilg 31/50 
c01990 216.llg n.s.a. 5/20 128.llg 12/50 257 .Ilg 22/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01990 437.0lg n.a.a. 1/20 128.llg 6/50 257 .Ilg 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1766 c01990 11.211g 25.811g 0/20 11.011g 4/50 21.011g 36/50 thy:fca,fcc . 
• c01990 17 .411g 51.40lg 0/20 11.011g 3/50 21.0•g 23/50 
b c01990 70.20lg n.1.1. 0/20 11.011g 0/50 21.011g 4/50 
c01990 10.811g n.s.a. 17/20 11.011g 33/50 21.0•g 44/50 
d c01990 70.211g n.s.s. 0/20 11.011g 0/50 21.00lg 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1767 c01990 10.711g 33.511g 1/20 8.800lg 4/50 16.811g 34/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
• c01990 16.511g 117.11g 1/20 8.80•g 4/50 16.811g 21/50 
b c01990 10.2•g n.1.1. 14/20 8.8011g 29/50 16.811g 44/50 
c01990 76.011g n.1.1. 3/20 8.8011g 5/50 16.811g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
METHYLGUANID !NE 471-29·4 
1768 1471 13.511g n.1.1. 0/10 64.011g 1/5 Matsukura; zkko, 90 ,87-94;1977 
7 ·METHYL GUAN I NE 578· 76· 7 
1769 1443 2.0311g n.1.1. 0/20 .56511g 2/30 Kruger; zkko, 75, 253·254;1971 
METHYL HYDRAZINE 60-34-4 
1770 194 8.5311g 31.7•g 0/85 13.611g 16/47 Toth; canr, 33, 2744-2753; 1973 
• 194 11. 7•g 93.311g 1/67 13.611g 9/39 
b 194 12.911g 132.llg 1/67 13.611g 8/39 
c 194 9.2811g 418.llg 0/39 13.611g 3/16 
d 194 48.4•g n.1.1. 0/85 13.611g 1/47 
1771 194 5.7211g 16.00lg 0/72 12.011g 27/48 
194 17.111g 359.11g 1/59 12.011g 7/39 
b 194 19.211g 4.28g11 1/59 12.011g 6/39 
c 194 110.llg n.1.1. 0187 12.011g 0/48 
1772 1117 8.0311g 558.llg 12/107 20.011g 12/39 Toth; i j en, 9, 109-118; 1972/ 1969a 
• 1117 10.60lg 119.0lg 0/34 20.0•g 7/39 
b 1117 11.911g 247.Mg 0/34 20.011g 6/39 
1117 8.30•g n.1.a. 14/107 20.011g 12/39 
d 1117 15.50lg n.1.a. 0/31 20.00lg 3/33 
1773 1117 1.4311g 24.511g 0/45 16.711g 4/6 
• 1117 2.1011g 52.811g 0/45 16.711g 3/6 
b 1117 4.4511g 44.811g 10/91 16.70lg 11/24 
1117 6.7911g 167.llg 0/64 16.7•g 3/15 
METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 302· 15·8 
1774 1095 10.811g n.1.a. 8/85 10.411g 1/25 Roe ;natu, 216 ,375·376;1967 
1775 1117 1. 5811g 8.6011g 14/88 2.0011g 23/45 Toth; i j en, 9, 109-118; 1972/ 1969a 
• 1117 1.9911g 15.711g 12/88 2.00•g 19/45 
b 1117 2.780lg 16.311g 2/88 2.0011g 12/45 
c 1117 8.1611g n.1.1. 3!88 2.00•g 3/45 
1776 1117 1.37•g 6.32•g 10/86 1.6711g 23/48 
• 1117 1.5411g 8.52Mg 10/86 1.67mg 21/48 
b 1117 4.5711g 57.4Mg 0/86 1.67•g 5/48 
1117 3.12•g n.a.1. 2/55 1.67Mg 8/43 
d 1117 7 .98Mg n.1.1. 2/41 1.6711g 2/41 
CN -6) · <METHYLNITROSOlADEN INE 
1777 1255 19.8Mg n.1.1. 1/16 20.611g 5/20 Anderson; i j cn,24,319·322; 1979 
• 1255 28. 5•g n.a.s. 3/16 20.611g 4/20 
1778 1255 7.3711g n.a.1. 4/21 17.1Mg 11/19 
• 1255 13.811g n.1.s . 5/21 17.1•g 7/19 
(N ·6) • CMETHYLNITROSOlADENOSINE 
1779 1255 7 .88Mg 38.3Mg 1/16 35.7•g 16/20 Anderson; i j cn,24,319-322; 1979 
• 1255 8.2211g 58.011g 3/16 35.711g 16/20 
b 1255 13.711g 101.0lg 1/16 35. 7•g 12/20 
c 1255 32.111g n.s.a. 0/16 35.711g 5/20 
d 1255 89.9•g n.1.1. 1/16 35.711g 1/20 
1780 1255 9.6511g 115.•g 4/21 29.711g 13/19 
• 1255 54.011g n.s.a. 5/21 29.711g 3/19 182 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'l'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
METHYL THIOURACIL 100ng •• : •• lug •.•• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •.•. :. ·1•g .••• : .• 10 .•••• :. -100 .••• : .• 1g .••.• : •• 10 
1781 H f nu wot thy •ix 52w52 ekr 53.411g P<.006 + 
METIAPINE 100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : .• 100 •.•. :. ·1•g •.•• : .• 10 .•.•• : •. 100 •..• : .• 1g ....• : .• 10 
1782 R f alb 11t •gl fb1 78w78 e 
1783 R • elb 11t pit ede 78w78 e 
METRONIOAZOLE 
1784 f swi 11t lun •ix 28•30 e 
e swi 11t · · · •Ly 28•30 e 
b swi 11t l iv •ix 28•30 o 
1785 11 swi 11t lun •ix 27•29 e 
e • swi eat l iv •ix 27•29 e 
1786 f sde 11t ute .. Y 66w75 e 
e sde 11t l i Y tu• 66w75 e 
b sda 11t tbe •ix 66w75 e 
1787 HW eet •gl fbe 34'"35 11 
e ..,., 11t 11gl •ix 34•35 11 
b SllW eet l iY hpc 34•35 II 
c Hw 11t sub •ix 34•35 1 
d Hw 11t ute •ix 34•35 a 
e HW 11t pit •ix 34•35 a 
..... llt tb• •ix 34•35 • 
1788 • HW 11t pit •ix 33•33 1 
e • ..,., 11t tea •ix 33•33 1 
b 11 Hw 11t sub •ix 33•33 e 
• Hw 11t •gl fba 33•33 a 
d • HW 11t l iv hpc 33•33 a 
• • HW llt tb• Iii x 331133 • 
MEXACARBATE 
1789 f b6c 11t TBA MXB 78w92 v 
a 
b 
1790 • 
b 
1791 
a 
b b6c llt l i y MXB 78w92 y 
b6c eat lun MXB 78w92 y 
b6c orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b6c or l l i Y hpt 76w76 evx 
b6c orl tb1 •ix 76w76 evx 
'" b6c eet l iv MXA 78w91 HY 
• b6c 11t l iv hpc 78w91 eav 
• b6c llt TBA MXB 78w91 HY 
• b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 HY 
• b6c eet lun MXB 78w91 eav • > 
• > no dre 
no dre p.1 • 
p.1 • 
100ng,.: .• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 •.••• : •. 100 ••.. :. -1•g •.•• : .• 10 •.••• : •. 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••.•. : .. 10 
+ + 937 .•g * P<.0005+ 
1.30g11 * P<.002 + 
24.2g• * P<.6 
347 .•g * P<.0005+ 
20.7g• * P<.8 
180.•g P<.004 -
no dre P•1. 
61.1•g P<.03 -
431.11g * P<.0005+ 
446.llg * P<.0005+ 
1.86g• * P<.0005+ 
4.05g11 * P<.03 
2.97g• * P<.2 
no dre P•1 . 
139.•g * P<.0005 
731.•g * P<.004 + 
993.•g * P<.01 
2.36g11 * P<.06 
2.49g11 P<.02 
45.9g11 * P<.8 
211.llg * P<.0005 
100ng •• : •. 1ug •••. : •. 10 .•••• : •• 100 •.•. : .• 111g •.•. : .• 10 •...• : •. 100 •.•. : .. 1g •.•.• : •. 10 
:> no-dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
2.9311g P<.04 
no dre p.1 . 
2.12•g P<.02 
e76.4•g * P<.03 
85.5•g * P<.02 
53. 2•g * P<.3 
76.4•g * P<.03 
391.•g * P<.6 d 
1792 11 b6c eat sub fbs 78w90 HY pool #137.•g * P<.05 
242. 11g * P<. 03 a 
1793 
a 
b 
1794 • b6c Ht ski fib 78w90 HY 
• b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l l un ede 76w76 evx 
• b6c or l tb1 •ix 76w76 evx 
f b61 or l l i Y hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l l un ode 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1795 • b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6e or l l un 1d1 76w76 evx 
b '" b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1796 f OH llt TBA MXB 18•26 Y 
a f OH llt l iv MXB 18•26 Y 
1797 • OH Ht TBA MXB 18•26 Y 
a • OH eet l iY MXB 18•26 Y 
MICHLER' S KETONE 
1798 M f b6c 11t l i Y MXA 78w91 
M f b6c 11t l iv hpc 78w91 
b M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 
c M 
f b6c Ht l iY MXB 78w91 
d M 
f b6c Ht lun MXB 78w91 
1799 M • b6c eat ... MXA 78w91 
a • b6c 11t · • · hes 78w91 
b • b6c Ht MXA MXA 78w91 
• b6c 11t TBA MXB 78w91 
d 11 b6c oat l iv MXB 78w91 
e • b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 
1800 f f34 Ht l iY MXA 18•25 
a f34 11t l iv hpc 18•25 
b f34 11t TBA MXB 18•25 
c f34 11t l i Y MXB 18•25 
1801 • f34 eet l iv MXA 18•25 
a • f34 11t l iv hpc 18•25 
b • f34 Ht TBA MXB 18•25 
• f34 Ht l iY MXB 18•25 • > 
.> 
:> 1.4211g P<.006 
1.84•g P<.02 
• 642•g P<. 0005 
no dre p.1 • 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
7.80•g P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
44.8•g P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
1.06g• * P<.4 
24. 7•g \ P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •. 10 .•••• : .• 100 .•.• : •• 1g .•••• : •. 10 
:+ 
+: : +: 53. 011g * P<. 0005c 
111.•g I P<.0005c 
69.1•g * P<.0005 
53.0•g * P<.0005 
+ no dre P•1. 
203 .•g I P<. 0005c 
233. •g I P<. 0005c 
753. •g * P<. 008 
99.3•g P<.0005 
459.11g * P<.07 
1.14g• I P<.3 
4. 87•g I P<. 0005c 
5. 4 7•g I P<. 0005c 
5. 97•g I P<. 0005 
4. 87•g I P<. 0005 
6.69•g I P<.0005c 
8. 86•g I P<. 0005c 
7 .29•g P<.0005 
6. 69•g P<. 0005 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 183 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose Zinc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
METHYL THIOURACIL 56-04·2 
1781 1385 22.111g 507.llg 016 273.llg 7/12 Christov ;zkko, 77, 171·179; 1972 
METIAPINE 5800-19·1 
1782 200 38.911g n.a.1. 1/22 3.0011g 6/20 10.011g 1/21 30.011g 2/20 Gibson; txap, 25, 220 · 229; 1973 
1783 200 8.00mg n.a.s. 3/18 3.00mg 7/20 10.011g 3/19 <30.0 .. g 0/20> 
METRONIOAZOLE 443·48· 1 
1784 201 498.llg 3.54g11 14/65 78.0"g 4/10 195.llg 10/20 390.llg 14/19 650.0lg 16/32 Rustia; jnci ,48, 721-729; 1972 
a 201 654. Ilg 6. 48g11 16/68 78.011g 3/10 195.mg 5/20 390.11g 10/19 650.0lg 18/34 
b 201 3.34g• n.1.1. 2/53 78.011g 0/10 195 ... g 0/18 390.11g 2/19 650.•g 1/25 
1785 201 217.11g 635.mg 13/67 72.0llg 3/8 180 ... g 11/15 360.0lg 12/16 600.mg 27/34 
a 201 2.06g• n.s.1. 6/64 72.011g 0/8 180.llg 3/14 360 ... g 3/16 600.•g 3/32 
1786 200a 62.011g 1.27g• 0/71 59.4 .. g 4/36 Cohen; jnci ,51,403-417; 1973 
a 200a 229.11g n.a.s. 0171 59.411g 0/36 
b 2001 24.3•g n.1.1. 18/71 59.4 .. g 17/36 
1787 1064 231.mg 1.25g• 30/95 30.011g 17/29 150.mg 14/28 300.11g 23/29 Rust ia; j nc i ,63,863·868; 1979 
• 1064 232. Mg 1 , 46gM 34/95 30.0mg 17/29 150.llg 15/28 300.•g 23/29 
b 1064 842.llg 5.46g• 0/58 30.011g 0/28 150.llg 1/21 300.llg 7/25 
c 1064 1.54g• n.1.1. 0/100 30.0llg 1/30 150 ... g 3/30 300.•g 1/30 
d 1064 855.11g n.1.1. 13/100 30.011g 9/30 150.Mg 8/30 300.llg 7/30 
• 1064 761.11g n.1.1. 61/100 30.0"g 24/30 150.llg 19/30 300 ... g 17/30 
1064 53.2 .. g 720.•g 80/100 30.0•g 27/30 150.llg 28/30 300 ... g 30/30 
1788 1064 338.11g 6.36g• 20/100 24.011g 11/30 120.Mg 10/30 240.11g 15/30 
• 1064 424.llg 178.g• 18/100 24.011g 9/30 120.llg 6/30 240.•g 14/30 
b 1064 816.11g n.1.s. 5/100 24.0llg 2/30 120.•g 5/30 240.llg 4/30 
c 1064 989.11g n.1.1. 0/100 24.011g 2/30 120.•g 1/30 240.llg 3/30 
d 1064 2. 70g11 n.1.s. 2/100 24.011g 0/30 120.llg 0/30 240.llg 1/30 
• 1064 112, Ilg 592, Mg 47 /100 24.011g 22/30 120.11g 21/30 240.llg 27/30 
MEXACARBATE <Zectran> 315·18·4 
1789 c00544 11.211g n.1.1. 5/20 7.5011g 16/50 <14.9•g 13/50> 
a c00544 57. 7•g n.1.1. 1/20 7.5011g 1/50 14.9•g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00544 28.411g n.1.1. 1/20 7.50 .. g 2/50 <14.9•g 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c . 
1790 1102 .88511g n.1.1. 0/16 1.5611g 3/17 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1102 2.91•g n.1.1. 0/16 1.56•g 0/17 
b 1102 .72911g n.1.1. 0/16 1.56•g 4/17 
1791 c00544 45.511g n.1.1. 0/20 33.611g 6/50 66.0•g 15/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c00544 49.8 .. g n.1.1. 0/20 33.611g 4/50 66.0•g 15/50 
b c00544 20.211g n.1.1. 0/20 33.611g 24/50 66.011g 28/50 
c c00544 45.5•g n.1.1. 0/20 33.6 .. g 6/50 66.011g 15/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c00544 109.llg n.1.1. 0/20 33.611g 3/50 66.0•g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1792 c00544 72.211g n.1.1. 0/40p 33.611g 6/50 66.0 .. g 7/50 
c00544 105.llg n.1.1. 0/40p 33.611g 1/50 66.011g 6/50 
1793 1102 .53311g 14.0"g 0/16 1.4511g 5/16 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1102 .63311g n.1.1. 0/16 1.45 .. g 4/16 
b 1102 .293•g 1.80•g 0/16 1.4511g 9/16 
1794 1102 2.91•g n.1.1. 0/17 1.5611g 0/17 
1102 2.91•g n.1.1. 1/17 1. 56•g 0/17 
b 1102 1.9311g n.1.1. 2/17 1.5611g 1/17 
1795 1102 1.14•g n.1.1. 1/18 1.45•g 2/17 
a 1102 1.7811g n.1.s. 2/18 1.45 .. g 1/17 
b 1102 1.0611g n.1.1. 3/18 1.45•g 3/17 
1796 c00544 23.711g n.1.a. 12/20 11.9•g 33/50 23.611g 28/50 
a c00544 173.•g n.1.1. 0/20 11.911g 0/50 23.6•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1797 c00544 3.26•g n.1.1. 6/20 5.8011g 21/50 (11.811g 16/50) 
a c00544 n.1.1. n.1.a. 0/20 5.8011g 0/50 11.811g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
MICHLER' S KETONE 90-94·8 
1798 c02006 40.511g 77.0•g 0/20 139.llg 41/50 278.•g 49/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c02006 79.2•g 168.llg 0/20 139.llg 16/50 278.0lg 38/50 
b c02006 45.6•g 159.•g 4/20 139 ... g 43/50 278.llg 49/50 
c02006 40.5•g 77 .011g 0/20 139.oog 41/50 278.llg 49/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c02006 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 139.11g 0/50 278.•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1799 c02006 126.•g 349.oog 0/20 128.llg 5/50 257 .Ilg 23/50 ---:hem, hes. 
a c02006 141.llg 425.llg 0/20 128.0lg 5/50 257 .Ilg 20/50 
b c02006 331.•g 13.1g• 0/20 128.•g 2/50 257 .Ilg 6/50 ski: fbs; sub:fbs,srn. 
c c02006 63.111g 207.llg 7/20 128.•g 21/50 257.llg 39/50 
d c02006 183.llg n.a.a. 3/20 128.llg 8/50 257.llg 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
• c02006 310.11g n.1.a. 2/20 128.•g 2/50 257 .11g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1800 c02006 3.53•g 6.8611g 0/20 18.0•g 46/50 37 .O•g 48/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c02006 3.9311g 7 .81•g 0/20 18.0•g 41/50 37.0llg 44/50 
b c02006 4.06•g 10.1•g 7/20 18.0•g 47/50 37.0 .. g 48/50 
c c02006 3.53•g 6.8611g 0/20 18.011g 46/50 37.011g 48/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1801 c02006 4.85•g 9. 78•g 0/20 7.4011g 17/50 14.411g 43/50 l iv:hpc,nnd . 
a c02006 6.24•g 13.311g 0120 7 .40•g 9/50 14.411g 40/50 
b c02006 4. 74•g 16.3•g 5120 7.4011g 26/50 14.4•g 48/5(; 
c02006 4.85•g 9. 7S.g 0/20 7.4011g 17/50 14.4•g 43/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 184 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
MIREX 
1802 
a 
b 
1803 
a 
b 
1804 
a 
b 
1805 
a 
b 
1806 .!OOng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• : •• .!mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• : •• .!g ••••• :. 0.10 
b6a or l li v hpt 68w68 evx • + 1. 1011g 
b6a orl lun ade 68w68 evx no dre 
b6a orl tba 11ix 68w68 evx 1.2611g 
11 b6a orl liv hpt 58w58 evx -" 2.1311g 
11 b6a or l l un ade 58w58 evx no dre 
11 b6a orl tba 11ix 58w58 evx 3.3211g 
f b6c orl liv hpt 69w69 evx + 1.6011g 
b6c orl lun aix 69w69 evx no dre 
b6c orl tba 11ix 69w69 evx 1.6011g 
11 b6c orl l iv 11ix 58w58 evx 1.5011g 
m b6c or l l iv hpt 58w58 evx 1. 8311g 
11 b6c orl lun 11ix 58w58 evx no dre 
11 b6c or l tba 11ix 58w58 evx 1. 5011g 
11 sda eat l iv nnd 91w91 .> no dre 
MIREX, PHOTO· .!OOng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• :. -.111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• .!g .•••• :. 0.10 P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.003 
P<.04 + 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.004 
P· 1. 
P<.002 
P•1 • 
1807 R 11 ada eat thy ade 91w91 
a 11 sda eat l iv nnd 91w91 1.4611g * P<.007 + 
6.68•g * P<.5 
MITOMYCIN·C 
1808 R f cdr 
a R f cdr 
b cdr 
cdr 
d cdr 
1809 R 11 cdr 
a "' cdr 
b 11 cdr 
in cdr 
d 11 cdr ipj per sar 26w78 a 
ipj l iv tu11 26w78 a 
ipj tba 11al 26w78 a 
ipj tba 11ix 26w78 a 
ipj tba ban 26w78 a 
ipj per aar 26w63 e 
ipj l iv lys 26w63 e 
ipj tba 11al 26w63 e 
ipj tba 11ix 26w63 e 
ipj tba ban 26w63 e .100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• 10 .•.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• :. -.10 
• + 981.ng 
• no dre 
1.13ug 
1.23ug 
no dre 
1.07ug 
39.3ug 
732.ng 
805.ng 
no dre 
MONOCHLOROACETIC ACID .100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. -.!•g •.•• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .!g ..••• : •• .10 
1810 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx -" 59.711g 
a f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 38.511g 
1811 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 115.ag 
11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 2.01g11 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 942.11g 
1812 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 1.01g11 
1813 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 122.11g 
11 b6c or l li v hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6c or l tba 11 ix 76w76 evx no dre 
4·MORPHOLIN0·2 · (5·NITR0·2· THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •.•• : .• .!g ••••• : •• .10 P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.04 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P-1. 
P<.09 -
P-1. 
P<.04 -
P<.3 
P<1. 
P<1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P-1. 
1814 R f ada eat tba 11ix 46w66 e + 5.0311g P<.0005+ 
l ·5·MORPHOLINOMETHYL·3· i <5·NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO \ ·2·0XAZOLIOINONE.HCl •• .111g •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. ·.!g ••••• : •• .10 
1815 R f sda eat 11gl 11ix 46w66 e 2.8111g 
a f sda eat 11gl adc 46w66 e 6.3311g 
b sda eat lbl 46w66 e +historical 
c 
d R 
e R ada eat k/p tee 46w66 e 
sda eat l iv tu• 46w66 e 
ada eat tba 11ix 46w66 e +historical 
no dre 
2.8111g 
MYLERAN .!OOng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. ·.!•g •••• :. -.10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .!g. • • ·.: •• .10 
1816 11 b46 gav tba 11ix 121124 es .> 93.1ug 
a 11 b46 gav tba 11al 121124 es .11711g 
b 11 b46 gav tba ban 121124 es .64211g 
1·NAPHTHALENE ACETAMIDE .!OOng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• .10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• : •• .long •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •. .!g ••••• :. -.10 
1817 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 avx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1818 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1819 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
b f b6c orl tba aix 76w76 evx 
1820 11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c or l l un ada 76w76 avx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 avx • > 
• > no dre 
no dre 
956.llg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
461.llg 
956.llg 
213.llg 
316.llg 
1.01g• 
141.llg 
1-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID .!00ng •• : •• .1ug •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• .10 ••.•• : •• .100 •••• : •• .1g ••••• : •• .10 
1821 M f b6a orl liv aga 76w76 evx -" 213.ag P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<.2 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.6 
P<.5 
P<.9 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1 . 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.09 -
P<.3 
P<.02 -
P<.04 -
P<.3 
P<.003 -
P<.09 -CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 185 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
MIREX 2385-85-5 
1802 202 .51211g 2.89•g 0/17 3.6711g 10/16 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 202 5.1811g n.s.s. 1/17 3.6711g 0/16 
b 202 .5400lg 7 .4511g 2/17 3.67mg 10/16 
1803 202 . 71811g n.s.s. 1/18 3.4811g 5/ 15 
202 3.34•g n.1.1 . 2/18 3.4811g 0/15 
b 202 • 79711g n.s.s . 3/18 3.4811g 5/15 
1804 202 • 70511g 4.9511g 0/16 3.6711g 8/16 
a 202 5 .32•g n.s.s. 0/16 3.6711g 0/16 
b 202 . 70511g 4.9511g 0/16 3.6711g 8/16 
1805 202 .64111g 6.1311g 0/16 3.4811g 7/18 
a 202 .73811g 11.211g 0/16 3.4811g 6/18 
b 202 4.0111g n.s.s. 0/16 3.4811g 0/18 
c 202 .6410lg 6.1311g 0/16 3.4811g 7/18 
1806 1160 52.6ug n.s.1. 0/10 40.0ug 0/10 .20011g 0/10 Chu; txap, 59, 268· 278; 1981 
MIREX, PHOTO· 39801-14-4 
1807 1160 .47411g 28.7•g 1/10 8.00ug 0/10 40.0ug 0/10 .200•g 0/10 1.0011g 4/10 Chu; txap, 59, 268· 278; 1981 
1160 1.06•g n.s.s. 0/10 8.00ug 1/10 40.0ug 0/10 .200•g 1/10 1.00•g 1/10 
MITOMYCIN ·C 50-07-7 
1808 1336 516.ng 1.95ug 0/182 5 .40ug 22/25 Skipper ; srf r; 1976/We isburger 1977 /Prejean pers. co1111. 
• 1336 15.6ug n.1.1 • 0/182 5.40ug 0/25 
b 1336 553.ng 2.67ug 44/182 5.40ug 22/25 
c 1336 490.ng 5.41ug 103/ 182 5.40ug 23/25 
d 1336 13.8ug n.s.s. 59/182 5.40ug 1/25 
1809 1336 575.ng 2.16ug 0/177 6.65ug 19/24 
a 1336 6.40ug n.1.1. 0/177 6.65ug 1/24 
b 1336 346.ng 1.66ug 32/177 6.65ug 22/24 
1336 361.ng 2.11ug 59/177 6.65ug 22/24 
d 1336 12.1ug n.1.1. 27/177 6.65ug 0/24 
MONOCHLOROACETIC ACIO 79-11·8 
1810 1263 14.711g n.1.1. 0/18 20.4•g 2/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1263 38.211g n.1.1. 0/18 20.411g 0/17 
b 1263 11.6•g n.1.1. 0/18 20.411g 3/17 
1811 1263 18. 7•g n.s.s. 0/18 19.0•g 1/17 
• 1263 21. O•g n.s.1. 1/18 19.0•g 1/17 
b 1263 16.511g n.a.s. 2/18 19.0•g 2/17 
1812 1263 38. 2•g n.1.1. 0/18 20.411g 0/17 
• 1263 38.211g n.1.1. 1/18 20.411g 0/17 
b 1263 17.811g n.1.1. 2/18 20.4•g 2/17 
1813 1263 19.811g n.s.s. 0/14 19.011g 1/18 
1263 20. 511g n.1.1. 3/14 19.011g 2/18 
b 1263 11.311g n.1.1. 4/14 19.011g 5/18 
4 ·MORPHOL IN0·2 · ( 5 ·NITRO· 2 · THIENYL )QUINAZOL INE 58139-48-3 
1814 1390 2.7011g 11.211g 6/84 17.411g 18/28 Cohen; jnc i, 57,277-282;1976 
l · 5 · MORPHOLINOMETHYL · 3 · i (5 · NITROFURFURYLI DENE )AMINO J • 2-0XAZOLIDINONE. Ht l 3031·51 ·4 
1815 200a 1.2511g 5.7111g 1/25 34.811g 31/32 Cohen; jnc i ,51,403 -417; 1973 
• 200a 3. 70•g 11.611g 0/25 34.811g 25/32 
b 200a 16.811g 219.11g 0/25 34.8•g 7/32 
200a 36.611g n.a.1. 0/25 34.811g 2/32 
d 200a 92.6•g n.1.1. 0/25 34.811g 0/32 
• 200a 1.25•g 5. 7111g 1/25 34.8•g 31/32 
MYLERAN (buaul fen) 55-98-1 
1816 1017 12.7ug n.1.1. 7/65 9.29ug 3/18 Sch11ah l; arzn, 20, 1461-1467; 1970 
a 1017 15.1ug n.s.s. 4/65 9.29ug 2/18 
b 1017 20.6ug n.s.s. 3/65 9.29ug 1/18 
1 ·NAPHTHALENE ACETAMIDE 86-86·2 
1817 1156 337 .11g n.1.1. 0/17 180.11g 0/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1156 337 .•g n.1.1. 1/17 180.•g 0/17 
b 1156 120.11g n.1.s. 2/17 180.llg 3/17 
1818 1156 314.•g n.1.1. 1/18 168.11g 0/17 
a 1156 314.•g n.1.1. 2/18 168.•g 0/17 
b 1156 314.•g n.1.1. 3/18 168.llg 0/17 
1819 1156 113.•g n.a.1. 0/16 180.llg 2/15 
• 1156 156.llg n.1.1. 0/16 180.•g 1/15 
b 1156 73.011g n.s.s. 0/16 180.llg 4/15 
1820 1156 95.4•g n.1.s. 0/16 168.•g 3/17 
1156 165.•g n.1.1. 0/16 168.•g 1/17 
b 1156 56.911g 765.llg 0/16 168.•g 6/17 
1 ·NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID (Planofix) 86·87-3 
1821 1157 52.411g n.1.1. 0/17 73.0•g 2/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 186 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
a M f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1822 M • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1823 M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c or l tba tu11 76w76 evx 
1824 M • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M • b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b M • b6c or l tbe •ix 76w76 evx GOLD ET AL. 
.> TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
no dre P• 1. 
387 .11g P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
"' 199.1111 P<.1 
no dre P•1. 
71 • 51111 P<. 007 -
1, 5-NAPHTHALENED !AMINE 100ng •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•11· ••• :. -10-•••. : .• 100 ..•• :. -111· ••.• :. -10 
1825 f b6c eat MXB MXB 24•24 
a f b6c eat l iv hpc 24•24 
b b6c eat l iv MXA 241124 
c b6c eat thy MXA 241124 
d b6c eat lun MXA 241124 
• b6c eat thy MXA 241124 
f b6c eat thy ccr 241124 
II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
h b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
1826 II b6c eat thy MXB 241124 
a 11 b6c eat thy MXA 241124 
b 11 b6c eat thy MXA 241124 
c 11 b6c eat thy ccr 24•24 
d II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
e 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
11 b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 
1827 f f34 eat MXB MXB 241125 
a f f34 eat ute eap 241125 
b f34 eat cl i MXA 241125 
c f34 eat thy MXA 241125 
d f34 eat TBA MXB 241125 
e f34 eat l iv MXB 24•25 
1828 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241125 
a 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 241125 
N • ( 1 • NAPHTHYL lETHYLENEDIAMINE. 2HC l 
1829 " f b6c eat TBA MXB 241125 av 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 241125 av 
b M f b6c eat l un MXB 241125 av 
1830 " • b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
1831 R f f34 eat l iv MXA 241125 
a R f 134 eat TBA MXB 241125 
b R f f34 eat l iv MXB 241125 
1832 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241125 
a R 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 241125 :> : + 66.611g \ P<.0005 
115.11g \ P<.0005c 
129.1111 * P<.0005c 
327 .11g * P<.002 c 
331 • 1111 \ P<. 0005c 
936.•g * P<.002 c 
1.32gm * P<.005 c 
223.•g * P<.03 
129.•g * P<.0005 
331.1111 \ P<.0005 
+ 217 ·"II * P<.0005 
276. "II * P<. 0005c 
1. 2611• * P<.02 c 
1.91gm * P<.02 c 
583.•g * P<.5 
1.64g• * P<.6 
no dre P• 1. 
50. 811g * P<. 002 
69.61111 * P<.009 c 
137.1111 * P<.009 c 
57. 6•11 P<. 03 
55.8•g * P<.2 
236.•g * P<.2 
48.1•g * P<.2 
1. 041111 * P<. 9 
•• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 11111 •••• : •• 10 ••.•• :. 0100 •••• :. ·111· •••• :. 010 
:> 
:> 
"' 
:> no dre P•1. 
25.61111 * P<.8 
4.391111 * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
#93. 5•g P<. 02 -
no dre P• 1. 
93.5•g \ P<.02 
41.6•11 \ P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
ay11. ·dibeta·NAPHTHYL ·p·PHENYLENEDIAMINE •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·111· •.•• :. -10 
1833 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 221.1111 
a f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 63.81111 
1834 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
1835 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 235.mg 
1836 " b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx "' 59. 41111 
a 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 192.1111 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 25.91111 
1 • ( 1·NAPHTHYL)·2 • THIOUREA 
1837 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1838 11 b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a • b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1839 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c or l tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1840 11 b6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 100ng •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111 •••.• :. -10 
. > 
.> 
"' . > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
5.34•11 
1.27•11 
no dre 
.700•g P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.04 -
P<.3 
P<.002 
P-1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.04 -
P-1. 
P<.005 -CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 187 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• 1157 81.411g n.a.a. 1/17 73.011g 1/17 
b 1157 48.811g n.a.a. 2/17 73.011g 3/17 
1822 1157 80.411g n.1.1. 1/18 68.011g 1/18 
• 1157 89.311g n.a.a . 2/18 68.011g 1/18 
b 1157 53.511g n.1.1. 3/18 68.0mg 3/18 
1823 1157 129.llg n.1.1. 0/16 73.011g 0/16 
• 1157 129.llg n.1.1. 0/16 73.0llg 0/16 
b 1157 129.llg n.1.1. 0/16 73.011g 0/16 
1824 1157 48.811g n.1.1. 0/16 68.011g 2/17 
• 1157 127 .Ilg n.a.a. 0/16 68.011g 0/17 
b 1157 26.911g 966.llg 0/16 68.011g 5/17 
1, 5 · NAPHTHALENED !AMINE ( 1, 5·diHinonaphthalene> 2243·62· 1 
1825 c03021 42.111g 129.llg 3/50 127.llg 38/50 <253.•g 34/50> l iv:hpa,hpc; lun:a/a,a/c; thy: cca, ccr, f ca ,pcy ,ppa. 
c03021 69.511g 236.llg 1/50 127.11g 25/50 <253.11g 16/50> 
b c03021 89.811g 223.llg 1/50 127 .Ilg 28/50 253.llg 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c c03021 186.llg 1.46g11 2/50 127.11g 17/50 253.•g 14/50 thy:fca,pcy,ppa. 
d c03021 161.0lg 1.00g11 0/50 127.llg 10/50 <253.•g 5/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c03021 455.llg 3.26g• 0/50 127.llg 2/50 253.llg 8/50 thy:cca,ccr. 
c03021 571.0lg 9.23g• 0/50 127.llg 1/50 253.•g 6/50 
g c03021 102.11g n.a.a. 21/50 127.llg 41/50 253.llg 37/50 
h c03021 89.811g 223.llg 1/50 127.llg 28/50 253.•g 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c03021 161.•g 1.00g• 0/50 127 .Ilg 10/50 <253.•g 5/50> lun:a/a,a/c. 
1826 c03021 139.llg 373.llg 0/50 118.llg 10/50 235.llg 19/50 thy: cca, ccr, fca ,pcy, ppa. 
c03021 170.11g 510.•g 0/50 118.llg 8/50 235.•g 16/50 thy: fca, pcy, pp•. 
b c03021 515.11g n.a.a. 0/50 118.11g 2/50 235.•g 4/50 thy:cca,ccr. 
c c03021 661.•g n.a.a. 0/50 118.•g 0/50 235.llg 4/50 
d c03021 131.•g n.a.a. 24150 118.llg 40/50 235.llg 25/50 
• c03021 291.•g n.a.a. 12/50 118.•g 13/50 235.•g 13/50 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
f c03021 607 .•g n.a.a. 4/50 118.llg 9/50 235.11g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1827 c03021 29. 5•g 242. •g 3/25 24.311g 16/50 48.1•g 28/50 cl i :adn,can; ute:esp . 
• c03021 37. 7•g 2.04g• 2125 24.3•g 14150 48.1•g 20/50 
b c03021 69.111g 4.53g• 1125 24.311g 3/50 48.1•g 13/50 cl i :adn,can . 
c c03021 26.2•g n.a.a. 1125 24.311g 12/50 (48.1•g 4/50> thy:cca,ccr. 
d c03021 19.7•g n.a.a. 17/25 24.3•g 41/50 48.111g 49/50 
• c03021 107 .Ilg n.1.1. 0/25 24.311g 4/50 48.111g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1828 c03021 19.211g n.1.1. 10/25 19.411g 32/50 38.9•g 38/50 
c03021 86.4•g n.1.1. 1125 19.4•g 7/50 38.9•g 4/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
N · ( 1 ·NAPHTHYL) ETHYL EN ED !AMINE. 2HC l 1465·25·4 
1829 c03281 851.11g n.a.a. 21/50 253.11g 15150 392.11g 9/50 
• c03281 1.94g• n.1.1. 1/50 253.llg 1/50 392.•g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c03281 1.33g• n.1.1. 0/50 253.llg 2/50 392.llg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1830 c03281 119.•g n.1.1. 24/50 60.011g 19/50 <120.•g 16150) 
• c03281 368.llg n.1.1. 12/50 60.0•g 5150 120.llg 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03281 384.llg n.1.1. 4/50 60.011g 7/50 120.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1831 c03281 42.3•g n.1.1. 0/25 25.0•g 8/50 (50.011g 1/50> l iv:hpc,nnd. s 
• c03281 69.211g n.1.1. 17/25 25.011g 36/50 50.0•g 30150 
b c03281 42.3•g n.1.1. 0/25 25 .O•g 8/50 <50.0•g 1150> l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1832 c03281 12.511g n.a.a. 10/25 20.011g 35150 (40.0•g 27 /50) 
• c03281 265.•g n.a.a. 1/25 20.011g 2/50 40.011g 1/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd • 
•Yll •. di beta. NAPHTHYL ·p. PHENYLENED !AMINE <Agerite white> 93·46·9 
1833 1305 30. 7•g n.1.1. 1117 38.9•g 2117 Innes ;nt is, 196811969 
• 1305 72.8•g n.1.1. 0/17 38.911g 0117 
b 1305 17.3•g n.1.1. 2/17 38.9•g 5117 
1834 1305 47.511g n.1.1. 2/18 36.2•g 1118 
• 1305 71.7•g n.1.1. 1/18 36.2•g 0/18 
b 1305 37 .5•g n.1.1. 3118 36.2•g 2118 
1835 1305 72.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 38.9•g 0117 
• 1305 72.811g n.1.1. 0/16 38.911g 0117 
b 1305 38.2•g n.1.1. 0/16 38.911g 1117 
1836 1305 17.911g n.1.1. 0/16 36.2•g 3115 
• 1305 31.2•g n.a.a. 0/16 36.2•g 1/15 
b 1305 10.411g _117 •• g 0/16 36.2•g 6/15 
1 · ( 1·NAPHTHYL)·2 ·THI OUR EA (ANTU) 86-88·4 
1837 1155 .99111g n.1.1. 1117 .834•g 1/18 lnnea;nt is, 1968/1969 
1155 1.65•g n.1.1. 0/17 .834•g 0/18 
b 1155 1.10•g n.1.1. 2/17 .834•g 1118 
1838 1155 1.02•g n.1.1. 2118 .776•g 1/18 
• 1155 1.54•g n.a.a. 1118 . 77611; 0/18 
b 1155 .803•; n. a. a. 3/18 • 776•; 2/18 
1839 1155 1.65•g n.a.a. 0116 .83411; 0/18 
• 1155 1.65•g n.a.a. 0/16 .834•; 0/18 
b 1155 .869•g n.a.a. 0/16 .834•g 1/18 
1840 1155 .38311; n.1.1. 0/16 .776•; 3/15 
• 1155 1.28•g n.1.1 . 0/16 .776•; 0/15 
b 1155 • 26311g 5.52•; 0/16 • 776•; 5/15 188 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2-NAPHTHYLAlll NE 
1841 M f bal eat l iv hnd 40w55 er 
a M f bal eat liv ade 40w55 er 
b M bal eat l iv •ix 40w55 ar 
M bal eat l iv hpt 40w55 er 
d M f bal eat ubl tu• 40w55 ar 100ng. -: --1ug. ---: --10-----: --100. ---: • -111g. -- -: --10--_ --: • -100. --_: --1g---__ : _ -10 
17.411g 
36.9•g 
63.011g 
175.•g 
no dre 
1842 M b cba gav l iv hpt 79w79 e 
1843 P f rhe •ix ubl •ix 60•60 Hrv 20.5•g 
5.7411g 
25.8•g 
25.8•g 
25 .8•g 
53. 7•g 
53.711g 
no dre 
9.6S.g 
35.411g a f rhe •ix ubl p .. 60•60 Hrv 
b P rhe 11ix ubl tee 60•60 e11rv 
P rhe •ix ubl ppa 60•60 .. rv 
d P rhe •ix ubl car 60•60 .. rv 
e P rha •ix ubl ppc 60•60 .. rv 
1844 R b alb eat ubl p .. 24•24 r 
1845 R b alb eat ubl p .. 24•24 er 
1846 R b alb eat ubl p .. 24-24 efr .> 
.> 
-> 
NICKEL 100ng.::. -1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••. : .• 100 ..•. :. -1•g •... : •. 10 ....• :. -100 .••. : .• 1g ••.•• : .• 10 
1847 R leb wet tba 11ix 431143 e 
e R lab wet tba Hl 43•43 e 
1848 R • lab wet tba •ix 37•37 e 
a R • lab wet tba Hl 37•37 e 
NICKEL (II) ACETATE 
1849 M f cd1 wet tba •ix 29•29 e 
1850 M f cd1 wet l un tllll 33a33 • 
M f cd1 wet l iv car 33•33 e 
b M f cd1 wet tba •ix 331133 • 
1851 M • cd1 wet tba •ix 32•32 e 
1852 M • cd1 wet lun tu• 3Z.32 • 
• M • cd1 wet tba tu• 32•32 • 
NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
1853 f b6a or l l un 1de 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1854 • b6e or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
1 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1855 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
1856 • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
NICOTINE 
1857 R f ada ipj 
1858 R • ada ipj 
a R • ada ipj tba Hl 24•24 H 
l iv haa 24•24. ea 
tba Hl 24•24 ea 
NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE 
1859 M f awe wet lun •ix 24•24 • 
• M awe wet lun ade 24•24 • 
b M awa wet l un adc 24•24 e 
c M awe wat l iv 1ng 24•24 • 
d M awe wet l iv ag• 24-24 • 
1860 M • swa wet lun ade 23•23 e 
a M • awa wat lun •ix 23•23 • 
b M • IWI wat l iv hpt 23•23 • 
M • awe wet l iv ang 231123 • .> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••.•. : .• 100 •••• : •• 111g .•.• : .• 10 •...• :. -100 ••.• : .• 1g •.•.• :. -10 
-> 29.0•g 
.> 
-> 
-> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •. :. -1ug ••.• : •• 10 •.••• :. -100 .••• :. -1•g •.•. : •• 10 .••.. : •. 100 .•.• : .. 1g •.... :. -10 
.> 86.9ug 
-> 
-> no dre 
.185•g 
.153•g 
no dre 
no dre 
.174•g 
no dre 
.174•g 
50.9ug 
.163•g 
28.3ug 
100ng •• :. -1ug •.•• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g ••.• : •. 10 ...•. :. -100 •••• : •. 1g ••.•• : •. 10 
-> 
. > no dre 
no dre 
6.38•g 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •. 10 .•..• :. -100 •.•• :. -1•g •••• : •. 10 .•.•. : •. 100 .••• : •. 1g •..•• : •. 10 
• + 145.•g 
181.llg 
511.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
428.•g 
528.•g 
1.41g• 
no dre P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.04 + 
P•1. 
P<.002 + 
P<.06 
P<.4 
P<.4 
P<.4 
P<.6 
P<.6 
p.1. 
P<.Z 
P<.4 
P<.4 
p.1. 
P<.7 
P<.7 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.04 -
P<.3 
P<.007 -
p.1. 
p.1 . 
P<.6 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
p.1. p.1. 
P<.004 
P<.05 + 
P<.08 -
P•1. 
d M • awe wit l iv 1g• 23•23 e no dre P• 1. 
NIGROSINE 
1861 R f nu eat l iv tu• 64w64 e 
1 R f nu eat tb1 •ix 64w64 e 
1862 R • nu eat l iv tu• 64w64 • 
a lt • nu eat tba •ix 64w64 e 
NIOBATE, SODIUM 
1863 M b cd1 wat lun tu• 31•31 e 
1 Mb cd1 wet Liv tllll 31•31 • 
b M b cd1 wit tba tu• 31•31 e 
M b cd1 wat tb1 Hl 31•31 e 
NITHIAZIDE 
1864 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 22•24 v 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 22•24 v 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 22•24 v 100ng •. :. -1ug ••.• : .• 10 •.••. : .• 100 .••• :. -1•g ..•• : •• 10 .••.• : •• 100 •.•. : .• 1g •.•.• : .• 10 
-> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre Pa1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••. : .• 111g ..•. : •. 10 .•••• : •. 100 •.•• : •• 1g •••.• : •. 10 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 .••.• : •• 100 .•.• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 .•... : .• 100 ..•. : •. 1g .•.•• :. -10 
:> 1.40g• * P<.2 
2.72g11. P<.3 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 189 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2 · NAPHTHYLAlllNE 91-59-8 
1841 1446 7 .8711g 41. 7"1g 0/17 189 ... g 14/16 Yosh ida;gann, 70, 645-652;1979 
a 1446 17.211g 97.211g 0/17 189.11g 10/16 
b 1446 26. 711g 223.llg 0/17 189.11g 7/16 
c 1446 52.611g n.s.s. 0/17 189.11g 3/16 
d 1446 174.llg n.s.s. 0/17 189.llg 0/16 
1842 207 10.5•g 67.511g 017 50.111g 13/21 Bonser ;b j ca, 6, 412 · 424; 1952 
1843 1470 2.4211g n.s.s. 0/3 90.511g 7/14 Conzel 11an; j nc i, 42 ,825-831;1969 
1470 6.3411g n.s.s. 0/3 90.511g 2/14 
b 1470 6.3411g n.s.s. 013 90.511g 2/14 
1470 6.3411g n.s.s. 013 90.511g 2/14 
d 1470 8.7411g n.s.s. 013 90.511g 1/ 14 
e 1470 8. 7411g n.s.s. 013 90.511g 1/14 
1844 20711 15.811g n.s.s. 0/17 4.5011g 0/17 Bonser ;b j ca ,6 ,412· 424; 1952 
1845 207n 2.9011g n.1.s. 0/5 4.5011g 3/11 
1846 2070 5.7611g n.s.s. 0/5 4.5011g 1/12 
NICKEL 7440-02-0 
1847 1464 1.29mg n.1.s. 10/26 .28611g 9/27 Schroeder; j nut, 104, 239· 243; 1974 
a 1464 2.8311g n.s.s. 7/26 .28611g 3/27 
1848 1464 .91911g n.1.s. 9/23 .250•g 4/17 
1464 1.1011g n.s.a. 4/23 .25011g 2/17 
NICKEL <II> ACETATE 373-02-4 
1849 1395 2.8911g n.1.1. 9/45 1.0011g 10/44 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452·458;1975 
1850 56 6.580lg n.s.s. 9/60 1.001111 3/33 Schroeder; j nut, 83, 239· 250; 1964 
a 56 12. 71111 n.s.s. 1/60 1.00•g 0/33 
b 56 8.9811g n.1.1. 22/60 1.00•g 3/33 
1851 1395 5.8211g n.1.1. 10/43 .83311g 4/37 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452·458;1975 
1852 56 4.9411g n.a.1. 8/44 .83311g 5/41 Schroeder; j nut ,83, 239· 250; 1964 
a 56 4.3611g n.a.a. 11/44 .83311g 7/41 
NICKEL D IBUTYLDI TH IOCARBA llATE <Vanguard N) 13927-77-0 
1853 1357 19.0ug n.1.1. 1/17 28.9ug 3/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1357 57 .3ug n.s.1. 0/17 28.9ug 0/18 
b 1357 20.8ug n.s.s. 2/17 28.9ug 3/18 
1854 1357 19.2ug n.1.1. 2/18 27 .Oug 3/18 
a 1357 53. 5ug n.s.s. 1/18 27 .Oug 0/18 
b 1357 21.2ug n.1.1. 3/18 27 .Oug 3/18 
1855 1357 28.4ug n.s.s. 0/16 28.9ug 1/17 
a 1357 54.1ug n.a.s. 0/16 28.9ug 0/17 
b 1357 28.4ug n.1.1. 0/16 28.9ug 1/17 
1856 1357 15.3ug n.a.s. 0/16 27.0ug 3/17 
• 1357 26. 5ug n.s.s. 0/16 27.0ug 1/17 
b 1357 10.7ug .383•g 0/16 27 .Oug 5/17 
NICOTINE 54-11·5 
1857 1134 1.0011g n.a.1. 3/33 .28611g 2/32 Sch11ah l; zkko, 86, 77-84;1976 
1858 1134 2.06•11 n.a.s. 1/36 .28611g 0/35 
1134 .89811g n.a.1. 1/36 .28611g 2/35 
NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE <3-pyridoyl hydrazine) 553.53.7 
1859 1084 85.811g 294.llg 25/98 250.llg 38/50 Toth;onco,38, 106-109; 1981 
a 1084 106.11g 376.llg 20/98 250.llg 34/50 
b 1084 259.•g 1.57g• 6/98 250.mg 16/50 
c 1084 1.41g• n.1.1. 3/71 250.llg 1/42 
d 1084 1.54g11 n.1.1. 5/71 250.llg 1/42 
1860 1084 197.llg 3.4911• 16/99 208.llg 19/49 
a 1084 203.11g n.a.s. 26/99 208.llg 21/49 
b 1084 230.11g n.s.s. 0/43 208.11g 1/11 
c 1084 1.30g• n.a.s. 4/90 208.llg 0/32 
d 1084 1.01g• n.1.1. 8/80 208.llg 0/25 
NIGROSINE 
1861 1372 89.311g n.a.a. 017 150.11g 0/9 1.50g11 0/5 Al l11ark; j php, 9 ,622-628; 1957 
a 1372 586.11g n.a.s. 1/7 150.11g 1/9 1. 50g11 0/5 
1862 1372 4.2611g n.s.s. 0/5 12.011g 0/5 120.llg 0/5 
1372 4.2611g n.a.a. 0/5 12.011g 0/5 120.llg 0/5 
NIOBATE, SODIUM 12034-09 -2 
1863 1036 7.8211g n.s.s. 15171 .877•g 11/79 Kanisawa;canr ,29,892-895; 1969 
a 1036 24.1•g n.a.1. 4/71 .87711g 0/79 
b 1036 6.5611g n.1.1. 24/71 .87711g 18/79 
1036 10.811g n.a.s. 8/71 .877•g 5/79 
NITHIAZIDE 139-94-6 
1864 c03792 522.11g n.a.a. 6/20 294.llg 13/50 587 .Ilg 23/50 
c03792 924.11g n.a.1. 3/20 294.•g 4/50 587.11g 12/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03792 3. 71g11 n.a.1. 3/20 294.11g 1/50 587.llg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 190 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1865 M • b6c Ht l iv MXA 22•24 v 
a M • b6c Ht l iv hpc 22•24 v 
b M 11 b6e Ht TBA MXB 22•24 v 
M " b6e Ht l iv MXB 22•24 v 
d M • b6e Ht lun MXB 22•24 v 
1866 R f f34 Ht MXA MXA 22•24 v 
a R f f34 eat TBA MXB 22•24 v 
b f f34 eat l iv MXB 22•24 v 
1867 • f34 Ht TBA MXB 22•24 v 
a 11 f34 Ht l iv MXB 22•24 v 
NITRATE, SODIUM 
1868 R f •re wat pit tu• 20•24 e 
a R •re wat tba •ix 20•24 e 
1869 R 11 11re wat tbe mix 20•24 e 
NITRIC OXIDE 
1870 M f j ie inh lun ade 29•29 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 
1871 M f b6e eat kid uee 77w91 
e M b6e Ht TBA MXB 77w91 
b M b6e Ht l iv MXB 77w91 
e M b6e Ht lun MXB 77w91 
1872 M 11 b6e Ht MXA MXA 77w91 
M • b6e Ht TBA MXB 77w91 
b M • b6e eat l iv MXB 77w91 
e M • b6e eat lun MXB 77w91 
1873 R f f34 eat l iv nnd 77w99 
e f34 Ht MXA MXA 77w99 
b f34 Ht ubl MXA 77w99 
e f34 Ht edr phe 77w99 
d f34 eat lun a/e 77w99 
e f34 eat TBA MXB 77w99 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 77w99 
1874 • f34 Ht MXA MXA 18•24 
e • f34 Ht MXA MXA 18•24 
b • f34 Ht TBA MXB 18•24 
e • f34 Ht l iv MXB 18•24 
1875 f 11re wet tbe •ix 201124 
1876 • •re wet tbe •ix 20•24 :> 758.•g * P<.05 e 
1. 90g• * P<. 2 
4. 75g• * P<.9 
758.11g * P<.05 
no dre P•1. 
131.•g * P<.02 e 
175.•g * P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
508.•g * P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 •.••. : •. 100 •.•• : •. 111u •••• : .• 10 •••.• : •• 100 .•.• : .• 1u •.•.. : .• 10 
• 1~.~ 
86.9•g 
.> 750.•g P<.004 -
P<.004 -
P<.8 
100ng .• : •• 1uu •.•• : •. 10 •..•. : .• 100 ..•• :. ·1•u ••.. : .• 10 •••.• : •. 100 .•.• : .• 1u ...•. : .• 10 
. > no dre P-1 . 
100ng •. : .• 1uu •.•• : •. 10 .•.•. : .• 100 ..•. : •. 111u .••. : .• 10 .•••• : •. 100 .•.• : .• 1u ••••. : .• 10 
.> 
.> 13.8911 * P<.06 e 
3.95g11 * P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
9.31g• * P<.2 
: + 1. 47g• I P<. 0005e 
2.21g• I P<.09 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
810.•g * P<.004 
1.45g• * P<.002 e 
1.57g• * P<.002 e 
1.71g• I P<.005 
2.25g• * 
631.•g * 
810.•g * 
446.•g \ 
2.26gll * 
7 .12g• * 
no dre 
221.•g 
248.•g P<.03 
P<.2 
P<.004 
P<.05 
P<.02 e 
P<.9 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P<.3 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYORATE.: •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •.•• : •. 111g ..•. : •. 10 •.••• : .• 100 •.•• :. ·1U· · • · ·: •• 10 
1877 f b6e Ht TBA MXB 78w91 :> 5.31g• * P<.8 
e f b6e Ht l iv MXB 78w91 no dre P-1. 
b f b6e Ht lun MXB 78w91 61.8911 * P<.9 
1878 • b6e eat ... MXA 78w91 ~ #1. 55g• * P<. 02 
a • b6e eat TBA MXB 78w91 no dre P•1. 
b • b6e eat Liv MXB 78w91 no dre P•1. 
e • b6e Ht lun MXB 78w91 1.99g• \ P<.6 
1879 f f34 Ht MXA MXA 24•24 783. •u * P<. 0005e 
a f f34 Ht ubl MXA 241124 1. 99g11 * P<. 002 e 
b f34 Ht ure tee 241124 2.28g• * P<.0005e 
f34 eat kid MXA 24•24 2.88911 * P<.002 e 
d f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 2.99g• * P<.6 
a f34 Ht l iv MXB 24•24 no dre P• 1. 
1880 f34 Ht TBA MXB 181125 :> no dre P• 1. 
• f34 eat liv MXB 181125 12.0g• * P<.5 
1881 • f34 Ht MXA MXA 24•24 511.•g * P<.0005e 
e • f34 eat kid MXA 24•24 826.11g * P<.0005e 
b • f34 eat ure tee 24•24 965. •u * P<. 0005e 
e • f34 eat kid tee 24•24 2.53g• * P<.002 e 
d • f34 eat TBA MXB 24-24 329. Ilg P<. 0005 
a • f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 2. 20g• * P<. 05 
1882 • f34 eat TBA MXB 18•25 :> 2.63g• * P<.7 
e • f34 Ht liv MXB 18•25 no dre P-1. 
1883 • edr wet kid ade 24•24 e ~ 320.11g P<.02 + 
a • edr wet tbe 11ix 24•24 e 88.4•g P<.07 
1884 • edr wet kid ad• 24•24 e 224.•g P<.0005+ 
a • edr wet tbe •ix 24•24 e 105.11g P<.2 
NITRITE, SODIUM 
1885 M f eb6 Ht l iv hpe 52w69 e 
e M f eb6 Ht lun ede 52w69 • 
b M f eb6 Ht tbe 11ix 52w69 e 
1886 M • eb6 eat lun ade 52w69 e 
a M • eb6 eat l iv hpe 52w69 e 
b M • eb6 eat tba •ix 52w69 • 100ng .• : •• 1uu •.•• : •. 10 ••.•. : .• 100 •.•• : .• 111u ••.• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 .••. : .• 1u •..•. : .. 10 
• > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.61g• 
no dre 
1.21g• P-1 . 
P-1. 
P·1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.4 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 191 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1865 e03792 349.llg n.s.s. 4/20 271.llg 15/50 542.11g 25/50 l iv:hpa,hpe. 
e03792 721.llg n.s.s. 2/20 271.0lg 6/50 542.mg 12/50 
b e03792 415.0lg n.1.s. 10/20 271.0lg 27/50 542.llg 28/50 
e03792 349.11g n.s.s. 4/20 271.llg 15/50 542.llg 25/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d e03792 874.llg n.1.s. 3/20 271.llg 4/50 C542.11g 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1866 e03792 68.2•g n.s.s. 1/20 28.211g 5/50 56.5•g 15/50 11gl: cyn, fba; ski :fba; sub:fba. 
a e03792 36.511g n.1.1. 13/20 28.211g 28/50 56.511g 38/50 
b e03792 n.1.1. n.a.s. 0/20 28.211g 0/50 56.511g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1867 e03792 48.5•g n.1.1. 11/20 22.611g 25/50 45.211g 24/50 
e03792 154.•g n.1.1. 0/20 22.611g 1/50 45.211g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
NITRATE, SODIUM 7631·99-4 
1868 213 42.811g 764.•g 3/15 165.•g 11/15 Li j insky; jnei ,50, 1061·1063; 1973 
a 213 35.3•g 665.•g 4/15 165.llg 12/15 
1869 213 83.511g n.a.a. 5/15 115.llg 6/15 
NITRIC OXIDE 10102-43-9 
1870 1388 38.411g n.a.a. 6/64 5.1911g 5/65 Oda;envr ,22,254-263; 1980 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 139-13·9 
1871 e02766 4.77g• n.a.a. 0/20 836.llg 0/50 1.67g• 4/50 
• e02766 1.33g• n.a.a. 4/20 836.•g 13/50 1.67g11 19/50 
b e02766 9.71g• n.a.a. 0/20 836.11g 1/50 1.67g11 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
e02766 3.80g• n.a.a. 0/20 836.•g 2/50 1.67g• 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1872 e02766 1. 04g11 2. 17g11 0/20 771.11g 5/50 1.54g11 24/50 k/p:pa11; kid:tla,uae. 
• e02766 1.06g• n.a.a. 10/20 771.•g 14/50 1.54g• 31/50 
b e02766 9.66g11 "····· 3/20 771.•g 3/50 1.54g11 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e e02766 4.68g• n.1.1. 4/20 771.llg 5/50 1.54g11 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1873 e02766 508.•g 2.19g• 2/20 281.•g 8/50 562.•g 22/50 
a e02766 908.•g 2. 72g• 0/20 281.•g 2/50 562.•g 13/50 kid:tla,tpp; ubl :sqe,tee. 
b e02766 967 .• g 3.08g• 0/20 281.•g 2/50 562.•g 12/50 ubl :sqc,tcc. 
e e02766 984 • •g 4 . 86g• 1/20 281.•g 0/50 562.•g 14/50 
d e02766 1.28gll 10.1g11 0/20 281.•g 3/50 562.llg 7/50 
• e02766 278.•g n.a.a. 14/20 281.•g 33/50 562.•g 47/50 
f e02766 508.llg 2 .19g• 2/20 281.llg 8/50 562.•g 22/50 l iv:hpa,hpe,nnd. 
1874 e02766 234.•g 10.6g• 2/20 225.•g 16/50 C450.11g 8/50) adr:phe ; pit:bsa,cra ; pni: isa; thy: fea, fee. s 
a e02766 1.21g• 7.43g• 0/20 225.•g 1/50 450.llg 7/50 kid:tla,uac; ure:pa•,ppa. 
b e02766 442.11g n.s.a. 8/20 225.•g 26/50 450.11g 22/50 
e e02766 3.30g• n.a.a. 3/20 225.•g 5/50 450.•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1875 213 67 .2•g n.1.1. 5/15 165.llg 9/15 Li j insky; jne i ,50, 1061·1063; 1973 
1876 213 64.211g n.a.a. 4/15 115.•g 7/15 
NITR I LOTR !ACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 18662-53·8 
1877 e01446 667.•g n.1.1. 6/20 279.11g 11/50 557 .Ilg 16/50 
• e01446 2.31g• n.1.1. 2/20 279.11g 3/50 557.•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b e01446 2.72gll n.1.1. 1/20 279.11g 0/50 557.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1878 e01446 778.•g n.1.1. 0/20 257.•g 3/49 514.•g 8/50 ·· · :leu,ly• . 
• e01446 730.•g n.1.1. 7/20 257.llg 17/49 514.llg 14/50 
b e01446 2.12g• n.s.1. 4/20 257.11g 4/49 514.•g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
e e01446 409.llg n.1.1. 2/20 257.•g 7/49 (514.IOQ 0/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1879 e01445 417.llg 1.73g• 0/24 10.011g 0/24 100.•g 1/24 1.00g• 13/24 kid:tla,uac; ubl:pa•,tcc; ure:tcc. 
• e01445 808.•g 10.9g• 0/24 10.0•g 0/24 100.•g 1/24 1.00g• 5/24 ubl :pa•, tee . 
b e01445 919.•g 8.10g• 0/24 10.011g 0/24 100.llg 0/24 1.00g• 6/24 
e01445 994.•g 17.1g• 0/24 10.011g 0/24 100.11g 0/24 1.00g• 4/24 kid:tla,uac . 
d e01445 481.•g n.a.a. 18/24 10.011g 19/24 100.•g 17/24 1.00g• 20/24 
e e01445 2.37g11 n.a.a. 1/24 10.011g 3/24 100.11g 1/24 1.00g• 1/24 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1880 e01446 559.11g n.a.a. 13/20 276.llg 36/50 552.•g 26/49 
• e01446 2.96g• n.a.a. 0/20 276.llg 1/50 552.llg 1/49 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd . 
1881 e01445 261.•g 1.10g• 0/24 8.0011g 0/24 80.0•g 0/24 800.IOQ 14/24 kid:he11,tcc,tla,uac; ubl:tcc; ure:tcc. 
• e01445 367.•g 2.13g• 0/24 8.0011g 0/24 80.0•g 0/24 800.•g 9/24 k id:he11, tee, tla,uac . 
b e01445 412.llg 2.66g• 0/24 8.0011g 0/24 80.0MQ 0/24 800 ... g 8/24 
e01445 830.•g 13.7g• 0/24 8.00•g 0/24 80.0•g 0/24 800.llg 4/24 
d e01445 157.•g 1.21g• 8/24 8.00•g 15/24 80.0•g 10/24 800.•g 18/24 
e e01445 579.llg n.a.a. 2/24 8.00•g 0/24 80.0•g 1/24 800.•g 3/24 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1882 e01446 409.•g n.a.a. 10/20 221.•g 26/50 441.•g 24/50 
• e01446 3.59g• n.a.a. 1/20 221.•g 0/50 441.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1883 1089• 139.•g n.a.a. 4/101 50.0•g 13/96 Goyer; jnei ,66,869-880; 1981/pers .eo ... 
• 1089• 35. 5•g n.a.a. 61/101 50.0•g 70/96 
1884 1089n 113.•g 748.Mg 1/85 50.011g 13/87 
• 1089n 37 .9•g n.a.a. 50/85 50.011g 61/87 
NITRITE, SODIUM 7632-00·0 
1885 1361 532 .•g n.a.a. 1/92 489.•g 0/12 Murthy; i j en, 23, 253-259; 1979 
• 1361 532.•g n.a.a. 2/92 489.11g 0/12 
b 1361 268.•g n.a.a. 17/92 489.•g 2/12 
1886 1361 236.•g n.a.a. 1/95 452.•g 1/11 
• 1361 451.•g n.a.a. 2/95 452.•g 0/11 
b 1361 185.•g n.a.a. 8/95 452.•g 2/11 192 
1887 
• 
1888 
a 
1889 
a 
b 
1890 
a 
1891 
a 
1892 
a 
1893 
1894 
• 
1895 
1896 Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
scd wat l iv hct 81129 a 
scd wat lun tu• 8•29 • 
• scd wat lun tu• 8•27 • 
• scd ~at l iv hct 8•27 • 
b cdr eat 11l y 29•29 
b cdr eat spl l Y• 29•29 
b cdr eat l iv ang 29•29 
b cdr eat l iv •ix 29•29 
f f34 eat l iv tu• 52w69 e 
f f34 eat tba •ix 52w69 e 
• f34 eat l iv tu• 52w69 e 
• f34 eat tba •ix 52w69 e 
f •re wat l iv tu• 16•28 e 
f •re wat tba tu• 16•28 e 
f •re ~at tba •ix 20•24 e 
• •re wat l iv tu• 16•28 e 
• •re wat tba tu• 16•28 e 
• •re wat tba 11ix 20•24 e 
• wis eat l iv •ix 92w92 e GOLD ET AL. 
.> .> 
• > 
... 
.> .> 
... 
.> 
• > TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
744.llg 
no dre 
103.Mg 
no dre 
539.mg 
601.llg 
5.84g11 
no dre 
no dre P<.7 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.03 + 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 . 
no dre P-1. 
57.311g P<.03 -
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
61.911g P<.2 
155.Mg * P<.007 + 
3·NITRO ·p·ACETOPHENETIDE 100ng •. : .. 1ug •••. : •. 10 .•..• : .• 100 •.•. :. ·1•g •.•. : .• 10 .••.• : •. 100 •..• : .. 1g .•.•. : .• 10 
1897 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w97 v 
a M 
f b6c eat l iv MXB 78w97 v 
b M 
f b6c eat lun MXB 78w97 v 
1898 M • b6c eat l iv MXA 78w98 v 
a M • b6c eat TBA MXB 78w98 v 
b M • b6c eat l iv MXB 78w98 v 
c M • b6c eat lun MXB 78w98 v 
1899 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18•25 v 
a R f f34 eat l iv MXB 18•25 v 
1900 R • f34 eat TBA MXB 18•24 v 
a R • f34 eat l iv MXB 18•24 v :> :> no dre 
... no dra P-1. 
30.8gM * P<.7 
2.27gM * P<.03 c 
3.49g11 * P<.3 
2.27g11 * P<.03 
no dre P• 1. 
no dra P-1. 
6.24g11 * P<.7 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
5 ·NITRO·o·ANISIDINE 100ng •. : •. 1ug ..•• : •• 10 •.... : •• 100 ...• : •. 111g •.•• : •. 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .•.• : .• 1g ..... :. -10 
1901 f b6c eat MXA 78w96 v 
a b6c eat l iv hpc 78w96 v 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 v 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 78w96 v 
d b6c eat l un MXB 78w96 v 
1902 • b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
a • b6c eat l iv MXA 78w95 v 
b • b6c eat TBA MXB 78w95 v 
c • b6c eat l iv MXB 78w95 v 
d • b6c eat lun MXB 78w95 v 
1903 f f34 eat MXB MXB 1S.25 
a f34 eat •gl MXA 18•25 
b 
c 
d 
e 
f 
g 
h 
i 
1904 
a 
b 
d 
• 
f 
g 
h f34 eat cl i MXA 18•25 
f34 eat •gl acn 18•25 
f34 eat lun MXA 18•25 
f34 eat MXA MXA 18•25 
f34 eat cl i MXA 18•25 
f34 eat cl i can 181125 
f34 eat TBA MXB 1S.25 
f34 eat l iv MXB 18•25 
• f34 eat MXB MXB 18•25 
• f34 eat ski MXA 18•25 
• f34 eat ski tr i 18•25 
• f34 eat ski bee 18•25 
• f34 eat ski MXA 181125 
• f34 eat MXA MXA 18•25 
• f34 eat pit adn 1S.25 
• f34 eat Ski HC 18•25 
• f34 eat pre MXA 18•25 
• f34 eat ski sqc 18•25 
• f34 eat adr MXA 181025 
11 f34 eat TBA MXB 18•25 
11 f34 eat l iv MXB 18•25 
5 ·NITR0·2 · FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
1905 R f hza eat •gl fba 36w54 es 
a R hza eat l iv tu• 36w54 es 
1906 R hza eat •a• tu• 44w60 es 
a R hza eat l iv tu• 44w60 es 
1907 R sda eat •a• tu• 46w66 er + 
+ 
+ ... 2.33gm * 
3.72g11 
1.82g11 • 
3.72g11 P<.04 
P<.06 c 
P<.2 
P<.06 
no dre P•1. 
#1.05gM \ P<.003 -
1.12g11 \ P<.005 
1.69g11 \ P<.2 
1.12g11 \ P<.005 
no dre P-1. 
170.11g * P<.0005 
222. •g \ P<. 0005 
230.11g * P<.0005c 
254. 11g \ P<. 0005 
280. 11g \ P<. 0005 
602.llg * P<.0005c 
966.mg * P<.0005c 
1. 26g• I P<. 0005c 
73.411g * P<.0005 
3.20g11 * P<.2 
28.1•g * P<.0005 
30.511g * P<.0005c 
43. 711g * P<.0005c 
52. 011g P<. 0005c 
66.011g * P<.0005c 
105.11g P<.0005c 
115.11g * P<.0005 
162.mg P<.0005c 
196.mg * P<.0005 
252. 11g P<. 0005c 
345. mg * P<. 0005 
12.811g * P<.0005 
194.11g * P<.002 
•• : .• 1ug •••• : •. 10 .•••• : •• 100 .... :. ·1•g ..•. : .• 10 ..... : •• 100 .•.• : .. 1g ..•.• : •. 10 
6.5211g 
no dre P<.006 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ <+ noTD50 
no dre 
7 .1211g 
5 ·NITR0·2 · FURAMIDOXIME 100ng .• : .• 1ug ••.• : .• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •.•. : .• 111g ..•. : .• 10 •...• : •. 100 •.•• : •. 1g ••.•. : .. 10 
1908 R f ada eat l iv tu• 46w66 a 
R f sda eat tba •ix 46w66 e • > no dre 
42.011g P•1 . 
P<.5 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 193 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1887 1255 79.311g n.s.a. 1/16 30. 711g 2/20 Anderson; i j en, 24 ,319-322; 1979 
• 1255 132.llg n.s.1. 3/16 30. 711g 1/20 
1888 1255 25. 711g n.1.1. 4/21 27. 711g 6/17 
1255 52.811g n.s.s. 5/21 27.711g 3/17 
1889 471 231.llg n.s.s. 6/136 45.0llg 16/136 Newberne;scie,204, 1079-1081; 1979 
471 246.llg n.s.s. 6/136 45.0IRg 15/136 
b 471 952.llg n.s.s. 0/136 45.011g 1/136 
c 471 1.08g11 n.s.s. 1/136 45.011g 1/136 
1890 1361 273.llg n.1.1. 0/44 188.•g 0/16 Murthy; i j en, 23, 253-259; 1979 
a 1361 88.411g n.1.1. 20/44 188.11g 6/16 
1891 1361 218.•g n.s.s. 0/50 151.llg 0/16 
a 1361 58.811g n. s .s. 30/50 151.llg 8/16 
1892 1189 41.3•g n.s.s. 0/20 11.211g 0/13 Greenblatt; jnc i ,50, 799-802; 1973 
• 1189 6.4811g n.s.s. 14/20 11.211g 9/13 
1893 213 21.411g n.s.s. 4/15 65.911g 10/15 L; j insky; jnci ,50, 1061-1063; 1973 
1894 1189 33.411g n.1.1. 0/20 7 .8511g 0/15 Greenblatt; jnc; ,50, 799-802; 1973 
• 1189 12.911g n.s.s. 7/20 7.8511g 4/15 
1895 213 18.811g n.1.1. 5/15 46.211g 9/15 L; j insky; jnci ,50, 1061-1063;1973 
1896 1352 63.211g 2.04gll 0/19 32.011g 1/22 64.011g 5/19 Aoyagi; jnc i ,65,411-414; 1980 
3-NITRO ·p· ACETOPHENETIDE 1777-84 -0 
1897 c01978 1.44g• n.s.1. 22/50 763.llg 17/50 (1.53g11 15/50) 
• c01978 8.86g11 n.s.s. 4/50 763.llg 3/50 1.53g11 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01978 4.33g11 n.a.s. 1/50 763.llg 4/50 1.53g11 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
1898 c01978 1.02g11 n.a.s. 10/50 697.11g 13/49 1.39gll 23/50 l iv:hpa,hpc . 
• c01978 989.llg n.1.1. 21/50 697.11g 20/49 1.39g11 29/50 
b c01978 1.02g11 n.1.1. 10/50 697.llg 13/49 1.39gll 23/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c01978 5. 73g11 n.1.1. 11/50 697.llg 2/49 1.39g11 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1899 c01978 649.llg n.1.1. 45/50 66.011g 12/50 130.•g 15/50 
• c01978 692.llg n.1.1. 2/50 66.011g 0/50 130.llg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1900 c01978 118.llg n.1.1. 26/50 52.811g 19/50 <105 .Ilg 13/50) 
• c01978 1.38g11 n.a.s. 3/50 52.811g 0/50 105.11g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
5 · H ITRO-o-ANIS !DINE 99-59-2 
1901 c01934 917.llg n.1.1. 9/100 836.llg 5/50 666.11g 10/50 · · ·: leu, ly11. S 
• c01934 1.32g11 n.1.1. 3/100 836.llg 0/50 666.11g 8/50 
b c01934 632.11g n.1.1. 29/100 836.llg 9/50 666.llg 22/50 
c c01934 1.32g• n.1.1. 3/100 836.llg 0/50 666.llg 8/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d c01934 3.87g11 n.1.1. 5/100 836.llg 0/50 666.11g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1902 c01934 504.llg 6.19g11 18/100 780.llg 25/50 (615.llg 3/50) 
• c01934 518.•g 11.3g11 20/100 780.llg 25/50 <615.llg 3/50) l iv:hpa,hpc. s 
b c01934 516.llg n.a.1. 45/100 780.llg 32/50 (615.llg 17 /50) 
c c01934 518.llg 11.3g11 20/100 780.llg 25/50 (615.11g 3/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c01934 2.53g• n.1.1. 15/100 780.llg 5/50 (615.llg 2/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1903 c01934 107 .•g 292.llg 3/100 147.llg 17/50 294.llg 22/50 cl i :adn,can,ppa,sqc; ski : sec, sqc; zy111: sec, sqc. 
• c01934 102.•g 642.llg 2/100 147 .Ilg 11/50 C294.11g 4/50) 11gl :acn,adn,pac . 
b c01934 133.llg 454.llg 3/100 147.llg 12/50 294.llg 14/50 cl i :adn,can ,ppa,sqc . 
c c01934 117.•g 609.11g 0/100 147.•g 10/50 (294.•g 4/50) s 
d c01934 99.1•g 1.63g• 1/100 147 .Ilg 5/50 (294.llg 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c01934 306.•g 1.23g11 0/100 147.llg 5/50 294.llg 10/50 ski :sec,sqc; zy11:sec,sqc. 
f c01934 458. Ilg 2. 42g11 0/100 147.llg 1/50 294.llg 9/50 cl i :can,sqc. 
g c01934 529. •g 3. 95g11 0/100 147 .Ilg 0/50 294.llg 7/50 
h c01934 44.811g 154.llg 83/100 147.•g 45/50 294.•g 41/50 
c01934 589.11g n.a.a. 2/100 147.llg 0/50 294.llg 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1904 c01934 16.411g 43.811g 2/99 118.llg 36/50 235.•g 45/50 ski :bcc,cuc ,aea,sec,sgc, sqc, tri; zy•: cue, sec, sqc. 
• c01934 17.3•g 49.611g 2/99 118.llg 30/50 235.11g 42/50 ski :bee, sec,sgc,sqc, tri. 
b c01934 21.511g 78.811g 0/99 118.llg 20/50 235.•g 9/50 
c c01934 22.711g 105.llg 1/99 118.llg 7/50 235.llg 30/50 
d c01934 27.1•g 113.0lg 0/99 118.•g 14/50 235.llg 26/50 ski : sea, sec. 
• c01934 61.3•g 176.0lg 1/99 118.llg 10/50 235.•g 29/50 ski: cue, sec, sqc; zy•: cue, sec, sqc . 
c01934 38.0•g 528.•g 10/99 118.llg 8/50 235.llg 5/50 s 
g c01934 87.711g 286.llg 0/99 118.llg 5/50 235.llg 21/50 
h c01934 45. 7•g 1.17g• 2/99 118.llg 2/50 235.11g 5/50 pre:adn,can. 
c01934 107.•g 627.•g 1/99 118.•g 3/50 235.llg 12/50 
c01934 55. 5•g 2.47g• 1/99 118.•g 1/50 235.11g 5/50 adr:coa,coc. 
c01934 7.9411g 21.3•g 58/99 118.llg 44/50 235.llg 48/50 
c01934 49.911g 1.68g• 4/99 118.llg 3/50 235.llg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
5-NITRO· 2· FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 59-87·0 
1905 1063• 3.1511g 54.311g 0/5 33.311g 11/18 Morris; cenr, 29, 2145-2156; 1969 
• 106311 33.3•g n.a.1. 0/5 33.311g 0/18 
1906 1063n n.a.1. 4.6411g 3/16 36.8•g 24/24 
1063n 60.5•g "····· 0/16 36.811g 0/24 
1907 1120 3.96•g 14.711g 2/29 34.811g 22/29 Er turk; c1nr, 30, 1409-1412; 1970 
5-NITRO· 2-FURAMIDOXIME 772-43·0 
1908 2001 18.5•g n.1.1. 0/39 6.9711g 0/32 Cohen; jnc i ,51,403-417; 1973 
• 2001 6. 7811g n.1.1. 2/39 6.9711g 3/32 194 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'failpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
5·NITR0 ·2· FURANMETHANEOIOL DIACETATE 
1909 R f hza eat l iv tu• 36w54 ea •• : • -1ug •.•. : •• 10 •••.. : •• 100 .•.• :. -1•g ••.. : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .•.• : •• 1g ••.•• :. -10 
a R hza eat H• tu• 36w54 H 
1910 R hza eat ••• tu• 44w60 .. 
• R hza eat l iv tu• 44w60 ea 
3· (5 ·NITRO· 2-FURYL) · IMIDAZO( 1, 2 ·alpha)PYRIOINE 
1911 f ctn eat •ix car 40w79 H 
a ctn eat •ix pH 40w79 H 
b ctn eat thy l ya 40w79 H 
c ctn eat lun tu• 40w79 ea 
d ctn eat l iv hpt 40w79 H 
e ctn eat tba •ix 40w79 H 
1912 • ctn eat •ix car 40w73 H 
• ctn eat •ix pH 40w73 H 
b • ctn eat lun tu• 40w73 H 
• ctn eet l iv hpt 40w73 H 
d • ctn eat tbe •ix 40w73 H 
1913 wia eat •ix pH 40w89 H 
e wia eat H• tu• 40w89 ea 
b wia eat kid tu• 40w89 H 
wia eat •ix car 40w89 •• 
d wia eat l iv hpt 40w89 ea 
• wia eat tba •ix 40w89 H 
1914 • wia eat kid tu• 40w83 .. 
1 • wia eat •ix p•• 40w83 H 
b • wia eat •ix car 40w83 H 
c • wia eat l iv hpt 40w83 H 
d • wia eat tbe •ix 40w83 H • > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
105.•g 
no dre P•1 . 
P•1. 
P<.5 
P•1. 
•••. : •• 10 .•.•• : •• 100 .•.• :. -1•g •••. : .. 10 ••••• : •. 100 ...• : •. 1g ••.•. : •. 10 
. + • 21.6•g P<.0005+ 
117 .•g Z P<.0005+ 
781.•g * P<.0005 
• + • 
• + no dre 
no dre 
noTD50 
40.1•g 
65.8•g P-1. 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
763.•g * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
57 .1•g * P<.002 + 
27. 5•g P<. 0005+ 
33.311g P<.0005+ 
116.•g P<.0005+ 
443.•g P<.04 + 
644.•g P<.3 
15.8•g P<.0005+ 
21. 4•g P<. 0005+ 
43.7•g P<.0005+ 
104.•g P<.0005+ 
959.•g P<.3 
11.9•g P<.0005+ 
5· (5·NITR0·2 · FURYL> -1,3,4·0XADIAZOLE·2·0L . -1ug ••.• : .• 10 ••.•• :. -100 .••• :. -1•g .•.. : .• 10 •.•.• :. -100 ••.. : •. 1g ••••• :. -10 
1915 R f ade eat •gl •ix 46w66 • 8.61•g 
1 R ade eat •gl edc 46w66 e 31.2•g 
b R ada eat l iv tu• 46w66 e no dre 
ada eat tba •ix 46w66 • 8.61•g 
N· { [ 3· <5·NITR0·2· FURYL) · 1,2,4-0XADIAZOLE·5 ·YL [·METHYL} ACETAMIDE.100 .••• :. -1•g •••. : •. 10 •.•.• : •• 100 .••• : •. 1g ..•.• :. -10 
1916 R f ada eat •gl •ix 46w66 • + 6.3511g 
a R ada eat •gl adc 46w66 e 10.3•g 
b R ada eat lun ale 46w66 • 59.6•g 
c R 
d R 
e R ad• eat k/p tee 46w66 • 
ad• eat l iv tu• 46w66 • 
ad• eat tbe •ix 46w66 • 
N · [ 5· <5 ·NITRO· 2· FURYL> • 1,3,4· THIADIAZOL · 2· YL J ACETAMIDE 
1917 f awi eat for •ix 46w55 • 
• awi eat for aqp 46w55 • 
b awi eat for aqc 46w55 • 
awi Ht l iv tu• 46w55 • 
d awi eat lun tu• 46w55 • 
e awi eat tbe •ix 46w55 • 
1918 ad• eat for •ix 40w59 ev 
• ada eat •ix h .. 40w59 ev 
b ad• Ht for aqp 40w59 ev 
ada eat lun ale 40w59 ev 
d ada eat k/p tee 40w59 av 
• ada eat i tn h .. 40w59 ev 
f ade eat l iv h•a 40w59 av 
g ade Ht •gl adc 40w59 ev 
h ade Ht lun hH 40w59 ev 
ade Ht •gl •ix 40w59 ev 
j ade Ht pen h .. 40w59 ev 
k ada Ht lbl 40w59 ev 
ade Ht Hi edc 40w59 ev 
• ade Ht .. i lei 40w59 ev 
n ade eat tbe •ix 40w59 ev +hi1toric1l 
no dre 
5.20•g 
•.••. : •. 100 ••.• :. ·1•g •.•. : .• 10 .•.•. : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••.•• : •. 10 
+ 6. 74•g 
14.1•g 
104.•g 
no dre 
no dre 
6.90•g 
• + 8.84•g 
10.6•g 
11.6•g 
15.3•g 
+historical 
18.6•g 
22.9•g 
37.711g 
52.3•g 
43.3•g 
81.6•g 
111.•g 
111.•g 
111.•g 
noTD50 
N· [ 4· (5·NITR0·2· FURYL) ·2· THIAZOL YL J ACETAMIOE 
1919 H • ayg Ht ubl •ix 48w70 • •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •. 100 ...• :. ·1•g ••.• : •. 10 ••.•. : .. 100 .••• : .• 1g •.•.• : .• 10 
1 H • ayg eat ub l aqc 48w70 • 
b H • ayg Ht for aqp 48w70 • 
c H • ayg Ht l iv tu• 48w70 • 
d H • ayg Ht lun tu• 48w70 • 
1920 R f ade Ht ••• •ix 46w66 • 
1 R ade Ht •gl edc 46w66 • 
b ad• Ht •g l fba 46w66 • 
c ada Ht l iv tu• 46w66 • 
d ad• Ht tba •ix 46w66 • + 8.91•g 
• + • 60.2•g 
68.1•g 
no dre 
no dre 
10.5•g 
36.2•g 
56.9•g 
no dre 
7 .25•g P<.0005 
P<.006 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.008 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.007 + 
P<.05 
P<.03 + 
P<.06 + 
P<.06 
P<.06 + 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.004 + 
P<.003 + 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 195 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose Zinc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
5-NITRO- 2-FURANMETHANEDIOL DI ACETATE 
1909 106311 18. Sag n.a.1. 0/5 66.711g 0/5 Morris; canr, 29, 2145-2156; 1969 
• 106311 18.511g n.1.1. 0/5 66.7•g 0/5 
1910 1063n 18.S•g n.1.1. 3/16 73.6 .. g 4/13 
a 1063n 6S.611g n.1.1. 0/16 73.60lg 0/13 
3-( 5-NITR0-2- FURYL) -IMIDAZO( 1, 2-alpha>PYR ID !NE <NFIP) 75198-31-1 
1911 1163 13.311g 37.711g 0/39 65.811g 28/40 (160.ag 23/36 371.ag 35/44) Cabral; tu110,66, 131-144; 1980 
a 1163 68.011g 329.11g 2/39 6S.811g 12/40 160.ag 16/39 <371.llg 15/50) 
b 1163 412.llg 2.15g• 0139 6S.811g 0/40 160.llg 5/40 371.ag 8/50 
c 1163 704.11g n.1.1. 6139 6S.811g 6/40 160.•g 3/35 371.11g 6/43 
d 1163 138.11g n.1.1. 1/37 6S.811g 0136 160.llg 0/23 371.11g 0/16 
a 1163 n.1.1. 20.311g 28/39 65.8ag 40/40 160.llg 40/40 371.11g 50/50 
1912 1163 26.811g 63.311g 0/39 65 .Sag 19/35 143.llg 20/33 <409.ag 18/30) 
a 1163 39.4ag 174.11g 3/39 65.8ag 19/38 143.•g 17/37 (409.ag 18/30) 
b 1163 248.ag n.1.1. 5/39 65.811g 5/36 143.ag 8/35 409.mg 8/31 
c 1163 765.ag n.1.1. 7/37 6S.811g 1/33 143.ag 1/28 409.11g 1/15 
d 1163 26.0mg 338.11g 21/39 65.811g 38/38 143.ag 37/37 409.llg 38/42 
1913 1163 15.9ag 50. 711g 0/32 89.911g 25/31 
a 1163 17.511g 85.0•g 8/32 89.911g 25/31 
b 1163 56.111g 304.•g 0/32 89.911g 10/31 
c 1163 134.•g n.1.1. 0/32 89.911g 3/31 
d 1163 145.•g n.1.1. 1/32 89.911g 3/31 
a 1163 6.2911g 43.011g 14/32 89.911g 30/31 
1914 1163 12.111g 40.411g 0/31 77.111g 23/29 
a 1163 23.4•g 101.•g 1/31 77.111g 16/29 
b 1163 47.0•g 331.llg 0/31 77.111g 8/29 
c 1163 156.11g n.1.1. 0/31 77.111g 1/29 
d 1163 4. 72•g 32.9•g 13/31 77.111g 28/29 
5-(5 -N ITR0-2- FURYL> -1,3, 4·0XADIAZOLE -2-0L 2122-86 ·3 
1915 1126 4.53•g 22. 7•g 2/39 17.411g 16/35 Cohan; j nc i, 54 ,841-850; 1975 
a 1126 11.8•g 302.•g 0139 17.411g 5/35 
b 1126 50.6•g n.1.1. 0/39 17.411g 0/35 
1126 4.5311g 22. 7ag 2/39 17.411g 16/35 
N-{ j 3-(5·NITR0-2-FURYL> • 1,2,4-0XADIAZOLE·5·YL J -METHYL )ACETAMIDE 36133-88-7 
1916 1126 3.24•g 22.9•g 2/24 13.911g 16/32 Cohen; jnci, 54,841-850; 1975 
a 1126 4.98•g 30.0•g 0/24 13.911g 10/32 
b 1126 14.7•g n.a.1. 0/24 13.911g 2/32 
c 1126 14. 7•g n.a.1. 0/24 13.9•g 2/32 
d 1126 37.0•g n.a.a. 0/24 13.9•g 0/32 
e 1126 2.76•g 14.7•g 2/24 13.911g 18/32 
N-J 5-<5·NITR0·2·FURYL) · 1,3,4· THIADIAZOL-2-YL J ACETAMIDE 2578-75·8 
1917 1076 2.8211g 15.0•g 0/29 109.•g 21/22 Cohen; canr ,33, 1593-1597; 1973 
a 1076 7.41•g 29.6•g 0/29 109.•g 17/22 
b 1076 35.8•g 2.28g• 0/29 109.•g 4/22 
c 1076 138.•g n.a. 1. 0/29 109.•g 0/22 
d 1076 138.•g n.a. 1. 0/29 109.•g 0/22 
• 1076 2.8511g 15.911g 2/29 109.•g 21/22 
1918 1126 S.0811g 16.7•g 0/24 53.0•g 22/30 Cohen; j nc i, 54 ,841-850; 1975 
• 1126 6.0611g 20.6•g 0/24 53.0•g 20/30 
b 1126 6.5911g 22.9•g 0/24 53.0•g 19/30 
c 1126 8.40•g 31.9•g 0/24 53.0•g 16/30 
d 1126 9.10•g 36.0•g 0/24 53.0•g 15/30 
e 1126 9.87•g 40.9•g 0/24 53.011g 14/30 
f 1126 11.7•g 55.1•g 0/24 53.0•g 12/30 
g 1126 17 .011g 145.•g 0/24 53.0•g 8/30 
h 1126 21.3•g 561.•g 0/24 53.0•g 6/30 
1126 16.9•g n.a.a. 2/24 53.0•g 9/30 
j 1126 28.2•g n.a.a. 0/24 53.0•g 4/30 
k 1126 33.5•g n.a.a. 0/24 53.0•g 3/30 
1126 33.5•g n.a.a. 0/24 53.0•g 3/30 
• 1126 33.511g n.a.a. 0/24 53.0•g 3/30 
n 1126 n.1.a. 5.41•g 2/24 53.0•g 30/30 
N · j 4-< 5-NITR0 ·2· FURYL> ·2-THIAZOL YL J ACETAMIDE (NFTA> 531-82·8 
1919 1077 4.14•g 20.3•g 0/22 63.1•g 16/18 Croft; jnc i, 51,941-949; 1973 
• 1077 22.7•g 388.•g 0/22 63.1•g 5/18 
b 1077 27.6•g 372.•g 0/24 63.111g 6/24 
c 1077 141.•g n.a.a. 0/24 63.1•g 0/24 
d 1077 141.•g n.a.a. 0/24 63.1•g 0/24 
1920 1122 6.8911g 16.4•g 0/28 69.311g 47/56 Er turk; canr, 30, 936-941; 1970 
• 1122 21.9•g 66.4•g 0/28 69.3•g 23/56 
b 1122 31.7•g 132.•g 0/28 69.3•g 16/56 
c 1122 322.•g n.a.a. 0/28 69.3•g 0/56 
d 1122 4.51•g 11.6•g 0/28 69.311g 52/56 196 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
1921 R 
a R 
b R 
R 
1922 R 
a R 
b R 
R Sex Route Hist Notes 
sda aat 11gl fba 46w66 e 
sda aat k/p tee 46w66 e 
sda aat l iv tu11 46w66 e 
sda aat tbe 11ix 46w66 e 
ada aat 11gl fbe 46w66 e 
sda aat k/p tee 46w66 e 
sda aat l iv tu11 46w66 e 
sda aat tba 11ix 46w66 e 
N · 14 · ( 5·NITRO· 2 · FURYL) ·2 • THIA~OL YL I FORMAMI DE 
1923 11 ayg aat ubl 11ix 48w70 e 
a 11 syg aat ubl sqc 48w70 e 
b 11 syg aat for sqp 48w70 e 
c 11 ayg aat l iv tu11 48w70 e 
d • syg aat lun tu11 48w70 e 
1924 swi aat ubl tum 46w53 
b 
1925 
• 
b 
c 
d 
e 
1926 
b 
c 
1927 
a swi eat leu 46w53 
awi eat lun car 46w53 
swi aat ubl tee 46w66 e 
swi eat lun ale 46w66 e 
swi aat l le 46w66 e 
swi eat for sqp 46w66 e 
swi eat liv tu• 46w66 e 
swi aat tba 11ix 46w66 
swi eat ubl car 33w52 
swi aat leu 33w52 
swi eat lun ala 33w52 
swi eat l iv tu11 33w52 
m 134 eat ubl 11ix 30w52 e 
R 11 134 eat ubl ppc 30w52 e 
b 11 f34 eat l iv tu11 30w52 a 
1928 R sda aat ubl 11ix 46w63 
1929 R sda eat ubl 11ix 26w70 er 
sda aat ubl tee 26w70 er 
b sda aat ubl ppc 26w70 er 
1930 sda aat ubl 11ix 46w70 er 
a sda aat ubl tee 46w70 er 
b sda eat ubl ppc 46w70 er 
1931 
1932 
1933 11 sda eat ubl tee 26w52 er 
11 ada eat ubl tee 46w52 er 
wia aat ubl tee 34w52 er GOLD ET AL. 
• + 
• + TD50 2'failpvl 
DR AuOp 
25.011g 
316.llg 
no dre 
22.811g 
30.211g 
660.llg 
no dre 
27 .711g P<.0005+ 
P<.09 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
.••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •.•. : .• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •. 10 
<+ noTD50 P<.0005+ 
P<.003 + 
P<.007 + 
<+ 
<+ 
<+ 
<+ • + • 
<+ 54.011g 
83.811g 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
18.211g P<.0005+ 
55.411g 
163.llg 
7.7211g 
86.4mg 
78.311g 
235.llg 
no dre 
noTD50 
19.8mg P<.03 
P<.03 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 
P<.02 
P<.07 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
47 .611g P<.08 
208.11g P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
1.3111g * P<.0005+ 
5. 9211g * P<. 0005 
no dre P• 1. 
5.0711g P<.0005+ 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
noTD50 P<. 0005+ 
48.6mg P<.003 + 
noTD50 P<. 0005+ 
noTD50 P<. 0005+ 
82. 711g P<. 003 + 
noTD50 
noTD50 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
N,N' • 16· <5·NITR0·2 · FURYL> ·I· TRIAZINE·2,4·DIYL J BISACETAMIDE ••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1934 R f ada aat 11gl 11ix 46w66 e • + 14.111g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005 a R sda aat 11gl adc 46w66 e 29.011g 
b ada aat l iv tu11 46w66 e no dre 
sda eat tba 11ix 46w66 e 12.811g 
3·NITR0·3· HEXENE 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1935 M b awi inh lun adc 62w62 _., .34611g P<.02 + 
1936 M aww inh lun adc 62w62 r _., . 36311g P<. 09 
a M sww inh lun 11ix 62w62 .68711g P<.6 
1937 M aww inh lun adc 62w62 r .> • 768mg P<. 3 
1938 R b cfn inh lun ulc 371137 e + 8.6611g * P<.0005+ 
NITR0·4·HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •. 111g •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .••.• : •• 10 
1939 M f aaw aat tba tu• 241124 e .> no dre P• 1. 
a M aow aat tba 11al 24•24 e 93.611g * P<.8 
1940 M • aaw aat l iv hpt 24•24 e .> 185.11g * P<.3 
M • asw aat tba .. 1 24•24 e 85.611g * P<.7 
b M 11 aaw eat tba tu•,24•24 e no dre P-1. 
1941 R aad aat tba tu• 24•24 e .> no dre P• 1. 
a R aad aat tba "81 24•24 e no dre P•1. 
1942 R • asd aat tba tu• 24•24 e .> no dre P-1. 
• aad aat tba Hl 24•24 e 1.30g11 * P<1. 
2 ·N ITRO·p· PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
1943 M f b6c eat l iv MXA 78w90 
a M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 
c M b6c aat lun MXB 78w90 
1944 " • b6c aat TBA MXB 78w90 
a M • b6c aat l iv MXB 78w90 
b M 11 b6c aat lun MXB 78w90 
1945 R f f34 eat MXA 18•24 100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •. 111g ••.• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : .. 10 
: + 614.llg * 
468.•g * 
614.mg * 
1.98g11 * 
:> no dre P<.006 c 
P<.02 
P<.006 
P<.3 
P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
945.mg \ P<.3 
a892.11g * P<.05 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc 
1921 112611 13.4•g 66.111g 4/35 69.311g 20/34 
• 1126• 77.6•g n.s.s. 0/35 69.311g 2/34 
b 112611 196.•g n.s.a. 0/35 69.311g 0/34 
112611 12.411g 56.411g 4/35 69.311g 21/34 
1922 1126n 16.5•g 70.411g 1/32 69.311g 17/35 
• 1126n 108.11g n.s.s. 0/32 69.311g 1/35 
b 1126n 201.11g n.a.s. 0/32 69.311g 0/35 
1126n 15.311g 61.8•g 1/32 69.311g 18/35 
N· i 4· (5·NITR0·2· FURYL) ·2· THIAZOL YL I FORMAMIDE (FANFT> 24554-26·5 
1923 1077 n.1.1. 9. 77•g 0/20 63.111g 23/23 
• 1077 23.2•g 238.•g 0/20 63.111g 7 /23 
b 1077 31. 711g 1. 09g• 0/24 63.1•g 5/24 
c 1077 141.•g n.1.1. 0/24 63.111g 0/24 
d 1077 141.•g n. 1.1. 0/24 63.111g 0/24 
1924 1068 11.5•g 30.611g 0/56 106.11g 31/48 
a 1068 23.411g n.1.1. 15/56 106.ag 23/48 
b 1068 60.3•g n.1.1. 1/56 106.11g 6/48 
1925 1076 3.2111g 17 .411g 0/28 85.2•g 20/21 
8 1076 32.711g 508.Mg 0/28 85.2Mg 5/21 
b 1076 29.411g n.1.1. 1/28 85.2•g 6/21 
1076 57. 7•g n.1.1. 0/28 85.2•g 2/21 
d 1076 148.•g n.a.a. 0/28 85.2•g 0/21 
e 1076 n.1.1. 12.5•g 1/28 85.211g 21/21 
1926 1118 9.28•g 57.1•g 0/30 41.3•g 9/30 
• 
b 
1927 
• 
b 
1928 
1929 
• 
b 
1930 
• 
b 
1931 
1932 
1933 1118 15.6•g n.a.1. 1/30 41.3•g 5/30 
1118 33.9•g n.1.1. 0/30 41.311g 1/30 
1118 63.8•g n.1.1. 0/30 41.3•g 0/30 
727 . 739•g 2.38•g 0/20 .115•g 0/16 .231•g 
23. 1•g 16/ 16 
727 3.0911g 13.4•g 0/20 .11511g 0/16 .23111g 
23.1•g 9/16 
727 55.8ug n.1.1. 0/20 .11511g 0/16 .231•g 
1124 2.2411g 
112511 
112511 
1125• 
1125n n.1.1. 
n.1.1 . 
19.8•g 
n.1.1. 
1125n n.1.1. 
1125n 33.6•g 
1125• 
1125n 
1123 n.1.1. 
n.1.1. 
n.1.1. 10.311g 
4.8111g 
5.3011g 
234.llg 
8.63•g 
9.56Mg 
383.•g 
3.99•g 
6.07•g 
4. 76•g 23.1•g 0/16 
0/30 68.611g 29/30 
0/34 34.9•g 30/30 
0/27 34.911g 
0/34 34.911g 
0/34 61.811g 24/24 
6/30 
29/29 
0/27 61.8•g 23/23 
0/34 61.811g 6/29 
0/30 37 .611g 
0/30 66.5•g 
0/15 62. 7•g 15/15 
20/20 
30/30 0/15 
0/15 0/15 1.15•g 
1.15•g 
1.1511g 
N ,N' · i 6· (5 ·NITRO· 2 · FURYL) ·I· TRIAZINE · 2 ,4 · D IYL J Bl SACETAMIDE 51325 · 35 · 0 
1934 200a 8.1711g 27 .011g 2/39 69. 711g 25/33 
• 200• 16.0•g 60.3•g 0/39 69.7•g 16/33 
b 200a 191.•g n.1.1. 0/39 69.7•g 0/33 
200a 7. 4411g 24. 3•g 2/39 69. 7•g 26/33 
3· N ITR0·3 · HEXENE 4812-22·0 
1935 1360 .131•g n.1.1. 0/21 .291•g 5/27 
1936 1366• 88.6ug n.1.1. 0/10 .332•g 2/10 
• 1366• 97.1ug n.1.1 . 1/10 .332•g 2/10 
1937 1366n • 125•g n.1.1. 0/10 .332•g 1/10 
1938 1360 4.91•g 19.811g 0/100 .326•g 6/100 .651•g 11/100 
NITRO· 4 · HYDROXYPHENYLARSON IC ACID 121·19·7 
1939 213b 6.8S.g n.1.1. 14/16 6.50•g 20/30 13.0•g 27/33 
• 213b 10.911g n.1.1. 6/16 6. 50•g 16/30 13.011g 15/33 
1940 213b 30.1•g n.1.1. 0/10 6.00•g 0/22 12.0•g 1/12 
• 213b 12.511g n·.a.a . 1/10 6.00•g 5/22 12.0•g 2/12 
b 213b 12.6•g n.1.1. 4/10 6.00•g 6/22 12.0•g 4/12 
1941 213b 15.2•g n.1.1. 14/27 2.50•g 18/28 10.011g 11/28 
• 213b 45.4•g n.1.1 . 4/27 2.50•g 2/28 10.0•g 1/28 
1942 213b 21.7•g n.1.1. 4/24 2.00•g 2/24 8.0011g 2/22 
• 213b 22.9•g n.1.1. 1/24 2.00•g 1/24 8.00•g 1/22 
2 ·NITRO· p· PHENYLENEDIAMINE 5307-14 ·2 
1943 c02222 346.•g 6.17g• 1/20 248.•g 10/50 490.•g 17/50 
• c02222 244.•g n.1.1. 4/20 248.Mg 18/50 490.•g 27/50 
b c02222 346.•g 6.17g• 1/20 248.•g 10/50 490.•g 17/50 
c02222 898.•g n.1.1. 0/20 248.•g 5/50 490.•g 3/50 
1944 c02222 326.•g n.1.1. 9/20 229.Mg 17/50 (457 .Mg 7/50) 
• c02222 1.60g• n.1.1. 3/20 229.Mg 7/50 457.•g 3/50 
b c02222 318.•g n. 1.1. 1/20 229.•g 8/50 <457 .• g 2/50) 
1945 c02222 308.•g n.1.1. 0/20 41.0•g 0/50 82.0•g 4/50 0/16 2.31•g 1/15 
0/16 2.31•g 0/15 
0/16 2.31•g 0/15 Citation or Pathology 
11.5•g 
11.511g 11.511g Brkly Code 
Cohen; j nc i, 54, 841·850;1975 
Croft; ]nci ,51,941 -949; 1973 
Er turk; canr, 30, 1309-1311; 1970 
Cohen;canr ,33, 1593· 1597; 1973 
Cohen; canr, 38, 1398-1405; 1978 
13/ 14 
Arai; j nc i, 62, 1013·1016 ;1979 
4/14 
0/14 
Er turk; canr, 27, 1998· 2002; 1967 
Er turk; canr, 29, 2219· 2228; 1969 
Adolphs;urre,6, 19·27; 1978 
Cohen; j nc i, 51, 403-417;1973 
Deich.ann; i11ed,34,800·807; 1965 
Dei cheann; txap, 5 ,445·456;1963 
Deich.ann; i•ed,34,800 ·807; 1965 
Prier; txap, 5, 526-542; 1963 
l iv:hpe,hpc. 
l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/a,a/c. 
l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
lun:a/11,a/c. 
---:leu,ly•. 197 198 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1 f f34 eat TBA MXB 18•24 
b R f f34 eat l iv MXB 18•24 
1946 R • f34 eat thy MXA 181124 
1 R • f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
b R • f34 eat l iv MXB 18•24 
4·N ITRO·o· PHENYLENED !AMINE 
1947 M f b6c Ht TBA MXB 24•24 
1 M f b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M f b6c Ht lun MXB 24•24 
1948 M 11 b6c Ht TBA MXB 24•24 
• M • b6c Ht l iv MXB 241124 
b M • b6c Ht lun MXB 241124 
1949 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
1 R f34 Ht l iv MXB 24•24 
1950 R • f34 11t TBA MXB 24•24 
R • f34 Ht l iv MXB 24•24 
5· NITRO· O· TOLUIDINE 
1951 f b6c Ht MXB MXB 78w96 v 
• b6c eat l iv hpc 78w96 v 
b b6c 11t hea 78w96 v 
c b6c Ht TBA MXB 78w96 v 
d b6c Ht l iv MXB 78w96 v 
e b6c eat lun MXB 78w96 v 
1952 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
• II b6c Ht MXB MXB 78w95 v 
b II b6c eat ..• MXA 78w95 v 
c • b6c Ht TBA MXB 78w95 v 
d • b6c Ht l iv MXB 78w95 v 
e • b6c Ht lun MXB 78w95 v 
1953 f 134 eat TBA MXB 18•25 v 
1 f 134 eat l iv MXB 18•25 v 
1954 • 134 eat l iv hpc 18•25 v 
I • f34 Ht TBA MXB 181125 v 
b • f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 v 
5 • NITROACENAPHTHENE 
1955 f 1yg eat bi l cho 26w71 
1956 b6c eat MXB MXB 78w96 ev 
f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w96 ev 
b b6c eat OVI MXA 78w96 ev 
c b6c Ht OVI tu• 78w96 IV 
d b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 ev 
e b6c eat l iv MXB 78w96 ev 
f b6c eat l un MXB 78w96 1v 
1957 • b6c Ht TBA MXB 78w95 .. 
• • b6c Ht l iv MXB 78w95 .. 
b • b6c Ht lun MXB 78w95 es 
1958 f f34 Ht MXB MXB 18•23 e 
• f f34 eat lun MXA 18•23 e 
b f f34 eat eec MXA 18•23 I 
C f f34 Ht HC CUC 181123 I 
d f f34 eat cl i can 18•23 1 
e f f34 Ht 11gl MXA 18•23 e 
f f34 eat •gl 1cn 18•23 e 
g f f34 Ht HC lqC 181123 8 
h f f34 eat TBA MXB 181123 e 
f f34 Ht l iv MXB 181123 e 
1959 11 f34 eat MXB MXB 171123 H 
I 11 f34 Ht eec MXA 171123 H 
b II f34 Ht HC CUC 171123 H 
II f34 Ht l un MXA 171123 .. 
d 11 f34 Ht lun e/c 171123 H 
e 11 f34 eat thy MXA 171123 H 
f • f34 Ht kid MXA 171123 H 
g 11 f34 Ht thy MXA 171123 H 
h II f34 Ht HC 1qc 171123 18 
11 f34 Ht TBA MXB 171123 H 
11 f34 Ht l iv MXB 171123 H 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
1960 M f b6c Ht TBA MXB 78w93 
1 M f b6c eat li v MXB 78w93 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 78w93 
1961 M II b6c Ht ... MXA 78w93 
1 M 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 78w93 
b M 11 b6c Ht liv MXB 78w93 
M II b6c Ht lun MXB 78w93 no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
#224. 11g * P<. 03 -
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug •.•• : •• 10 .••.• :. -100 ..•• : •. 111g •.•. : .• 10 .•.•. :. -100 .••• :. -19· •.•. :. -10 
:> 
:> 
:> :> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug •... : •• 10 .•..• :. -100 ..•• : •• 111g •.•. : .• 10 ...•. :. -100 •.•. :. -19· .... : .. 10 
:> : + 242.11g * P<.0005 
288.llg I P<.0005c 
+historical • P<.4 
989.•g * P<.5 
288. 11g P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
266. oog P<. 005 c 
269.11g P<.005 
+historical * P<.2 
431.llg * P<.2 
266.11g P<.005 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
43.011g * P<.3 
127. 711g * P<.04 -
43. 711g * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
100ng .• : •• 1ug •... : •. 10 .•.•• :. -100 .••• : .• 111g •.•. : .• 10 .•••. : .• 100 ..•. : •• 1g .••.• : •. 10 
: + 
:> 
+ 354. •g P<. 003 
45. 311g * P<. 0005 
45.811g * P<.0005c 
217. •g * P<. 0005c 
395.11g * P<.005 c 
90.411g * P<.02 
45.811g * P<.0005 
1 . 32g11 * P<. 5 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
5.9811g P<.0005 
9.6311g * P<.0005c 
14.9•g P<.0005c 
17. 411g * P<. 0005c 
52. 211g * P<. 0005c 
77.911g * P<.0005c 
81. 711g * P<.0005c 
90. 511g P<. 0005c 
6. 4411g P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
6.4511g P<.0005 
7 .8811g * P<.0005c 
8.9211g * P<.0005c 
29.911g * P<.0005c 
35 .111g * P<. 0005c 
37. 7•g I P<. 0005 
42.911g * P<.0005 
58. 511g * P<. 0005 
68. 211g * P<. 0005c 
5. 5811g P<. 0005 
71.411g * P<.08 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 .••• : •• 111g •.•. : •• 10 .•.•. :. -100 •.•. :. -19· ...• : •• 10 
:> no dre 
no dre P• 1. 
2.56goo \ P<.05 
#12.6g• * P<.02 -
1.66g11 \ P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 199 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• c02222 153.•g n.a.a . 11/20 41.011g 12/50 82 .011g 17/50 
b c02222 666.•g n.1.1. 1/20 41.0•g 0/50 82.0•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1946 c02222 96.6•g n.1.1. 0/20 16.011g 1/50 32.811g 6/50 thy:cca,ccr. 
• c02222 90.8•g n.a.a. 9/20 16.011g 15/50 32.8•g 13/50 
b c02222 489.•g n.a.a. 1/20 16.0•g 0/50 32.8•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
4· NI TRO·O· PHENYLENEDIAMI NE 99-56·9 
1947 c03941 924.•g n.a.a. 8/20 478.•g 18/50 <956.•g 11/50) 
• c03941 2.64g• n.a.a . 1/20 478.•g 9/50 956.•g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03941 3.79g• n.a.a. 3/20 478.•g 5/50 956.•g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1948 c03941 539.•g n.a.a. 12/20 441.•g 25/50 <883.•g 12/50) 
• c03941 3. 51g• n.a.a. 4/20 441.•g 5/50 883.11g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03941 1.96g• n.a.a. 3/20 441.llg 13/50 883.llg 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1949 c03941 36.0•g n.1.1. 15/20 18.4•g 31/50 36.811g 33/50 
• c03941 217.•g n.1.1. 0/20 18.4•g 2/50 36.8•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1950 c03941 47 .2•g n.1.1. 9/20 14.7•g 26/50 29.4•g 19/50 
• c03941 147.•g n.1.1. 1/20 14. 7•g 2/50 29.4•g 2/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
5 ·NITRO· o· TOLUIDINE 99-55·8 
1951 c01843 142.•g 698.•g 3/50 125.•g 12/50 240.•g 22/50 ···:hes; liv:hpc. C 
• c01843 168.•g 787 .• g 2/50 125.•g 7/50 240.•g 20/50 
b c01843 529.•g n.a.a. 1/50 125.•g 5/50 240.llg 3/50 
c c01843 205.•g n.a.a. 19/50 125.•g 19/50 240.•g 25/50 
d c01843 168.•g 787 •• g 2/50 125.•g 7/50 240.•g 20/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
• c01843 1.36g• n.a.a. 2/50 125.•g 3/50 240.•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1952 c01843 135. •g 2. 35g• 12/50 115.•g 12/49 224.•g 29/50 
• c01843 135.•g 2.90g• 13/50 115.•g 12/49 224.•g 30/50 ---:he•, hes; l iv:hpc. 
b c01843 718.•g n.a.a. 1/50 115.•g 0/49 224.•g 4/50 ---:he•, hes. 
c c01843 146.•g n.a.a. 23/50 115.•g 20/49 224.•g 31/50 
d c01843 135.•g 2.35g• 12/50 115.•g 12/49 224.•g 29/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
• c01843 1.03g• n.a.a. 5/50 115.•g 3/49 224.•g 2/50 lun:a/11,a/c. 
1953 c01843 3.72•g n.a.a. 42/50 1.80•g 33/50 3.60•g 35/50 
• c01843 13.0•g n.a.a • 0/50 1.80•g 2/50 3.60•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1954 c01843 8.39•g n.a.a. 0/50 1.40•g 0/50 2.90•g 3/50 
• c01843 2.67•g n.a.a. 30/50 1.40•g 20/50 2.90•g 27/50 
b c01843 9.23•g n.1.1. 5/50 1.40•g 1/50 2.90•g 4/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
5 · NITROACENAPHTHENE 602·87·9 
1955 1091 152.•g 1.66g• 0/20 382.•g 7/24 TekHure;b j ce,30 ,481·483; 1974 
1956 c01967 29.3•g 87 .4•g 2/50 53.3•g 23/50 127.•g 19/50 l iv:hpc; ova:gct,lut,tua. c 
• c01967 29.5•g 90.3•g 2/50 53.311g 23/50 127.•g 18/50 
b c01967 108.•g 623.•g 0/50 53.3•g 4/50 127.•g 7/50 ova: get, lut, tua. 
c c01967 161.•g 3.08g• 0/50 53.3•g 2/50 127.Mg 4/50 
d c01967 40.3•g n.a.a. 19/50 53.311g 29/50 127.•g 21/50 
• c01967 29.5•g 90.3•g 2/50 53.3•g 23/50 127.•g 18/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
f c01967 232.•g n.a.a. 2/50 53.3•g 3/50 127.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1957 c01967 74.6•g n.a.a. 23/50 58.8•g 15/50 140.11g 1/50 
• c01967 132.•g n.a.a. 12/50 58.8•g 7/50 140.•g 0/50 l iv: hp•, hpc, nnd. 
b c01967 152.•g n.a.a. 5/50 58.8•g 4/50 140.•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1958 c01967 1.96•g 11.3•g 1/100 43.0•g 37/50 87 .011g 38/50 cl i :can; eac:caa,cuc,aqc; lun:a/a,a/c; 1ngl :acn,pcn. 
• c01967 2.18•g 44.511g 1/100 43.0•g 8/50 87 .O•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
b c01967 7.28•g 24.8•g 0/100 43.0•g 27/50 87 .O•g 35/50 eac: cas, cue, sqc. 
c c01967 7.85•g 30.9•g 0/100 43.0•g 25/50 87 .O•g 26/50 
d c01967 18.7•g 143.•g 0/100 43.0•g 6/50 87 .O•g 5/50 
• c01967 31.5•g 198.•g 0/100 43.0•g 6/50 87 .O•g 5/50 •gl :acn,pcn. 
f c01967 32.1•g 220.•g 0/100 43.0•g 5/50 87 .O•g 5/50 
g c01967 29 • 9•g 230 . •g 0/100 43.0•g 3/50 87 .O•g 9/50 
h c01967 3. 7S.g 10.5•g 83/100 43.0•g 46/50 87 .O•g 45/50 
i c01967 n.1.1. n.1.1. 2/100 43.011g 0/50 87 .O•g 0/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
1959 c01967 1.67•g 17. 7•g 1/99 34.4•g 25/50 62.4•g 21/50 eac : cue, aqc; lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c01967 1. 71•g 27 .8•g 0/99 34.4•g 21/50 62.4•g 20/50 eac: cuc, sqc . 
b c01967 1. 7511g 45 .1•g 0/99 34.4•g 14/50 62.411g 18/50 ' c01967 9.96•g 93.811g 1/99 34.4•g 7/50 62.411g 3/50 tun: a/a,a/c. 
d c01967 10.4•g 171.•g 1/99 34.4•g 5/50 62.4•g 0/50 
• c01967 10.6•g 210.•g 0/99 34.4•g 4/50 62.4•g 1/50 thy:fcc,pec . 
f c01967 13.5•g 204.•g 0/99 34.4•g 4/50 62.4•g 0/50 kid:tle,uec. 
g c01967 15.4•g 323.•g 0/99 34.4•g 4/50 62.4•g 0/50 thy:fce,pp1. 
h c01967 27.4•g 188.•g 0/99 34.4•g 7/50 62.4•g 2/50 
c01967 2.91•g 10.1•g 58/99 34.4•g 39/50 62.4•g 30/50 
c01967 5.92•g n.a.a. 4/99 34.4•g 1/50 62.4•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
4 ·NIT ROAN THRAN ILIC ACID 619·17·0 
1960 c01945 1.35g• n.a.a. 39/100 502.•g 18/50 1.09g• 18/50 
• c01945 6.86g• n.1.a . 8/100 502.•g 1/50 1.09g• 1/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
b c01945 824.•g n.1.a. 2/100 502.•g 5/50 (1.09g• 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
1961 c01945 3.81g• n.1.a. 0/100 463.•g 0/50 1.01g• 3/50 ···:he•,he1. 
• c01945 381.•g n.a.a. 40/100 463.•g 30/50 (1.01g• 15/50> 
b c01945 2.25g• n.a.a. 22/100 463.•g 16/50 1.01g• 9/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd. 
c01945 4.11g• n.a.a. 18/100 463.•g 10/50 1.01g• 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 200 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
1962 R f 134 eat TBA NXB 18•24 v 
a R f f34 eat l iv NXB 18•24 v 
1963 R • f34 eat TBA NXB 18•24 v 
a R 11 f34 eat l iv NXB 18M24 V GOLD ET AL. 
:> 
:> TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
no dre P-1. 
11.8gM * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
3. 71gm * P<.09 
6· NITROBENZINIDAZOLE 100ng •• :. -lug •••• : .. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••... :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
1964 f b6c eat l iv NXA 78w95 v 
a f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
b b6c eat pit NXA 78w95 v 
c b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 v 
d b6c eat l iv NXB 78w95 v 
e b6c eat lun NXB 78w95 v 
1965 • b6c eat l iv NXA 78w95 v 
a • b6c eat l iv hpc 78w95 v 
b • b6c eat TBA NXB 78w95 v 
c • b6c eat l iv NXB 78w95 v 
d • b6c eat lun NXB 78w95 v 
1966 f f34 eat TBA NXB 18•24 v 
f f34 eat l iv NXB 18•24 v 
1967 11 f34 eat TBA NXB 181124 v 
11 134 eat l iv NXB 18•24 v :> : + 354. 11g P<. 0005c 
762.•g * P<.002 c 
335. •g \ P<. 03 
429. 11g * P<. 05 
354.11g I P<.0005 
:> no dre P•1. 
392. Mg * P<. 02 
423. •g * P<. 02 
1.98g11 * P<.8 
392. 11g • P<. 02 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
8.83gOI * P<.7 
NITROFEN* 100ng •• : •• 1ug .••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g ..•• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g •••• ·: · -10 
1968 f b6c eat l iv NXA 78w91 
b6c eat l iv hpc 78w91 
b b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 
c b6c eat l iv NXB 78w91 
d b6c eat lun NXB 78w91 
1969 b6c eat l iv hpc 78w92 v 
a b6c eat TBA NXB 78w92 v 
b b6c eat l iv NXB 78w92 v 
c b6c eat lun NXB 78w92 v 
1970 b6c Ht l iv hpc 78w90 v pool 
b6c eat · · · hea 78w90 v 
1971 • b6c eat l iv NXA 78w91 
a • b6c eat l iv hpc 78w91 
b 11 b6c eat TBA NXB 78w91 
• b6c oat l iv NXB 78w91 
d • b6c eat lun NXB 78w91 
1972 • b6c eat l iv hpc 78w92 v 
a • b6c eat TBA NXB 78w92 v 
b 11 b6c eat l iv NXB 78w92 v 
c 11 b6c oat l un NXB 78w92 v 
1973 • b6c eat l iv hpc 78w90 v pool 
a • b6c eat · · • hea 78w90 v 
b • b6c eat aub NXA 78w90 v 
1974 f f34 eat TBA NXB 181124 
e f34 oat l iv NXB 181124 
1975 • f34 eat TBA NXB 181124 
a • f34 eat l iv NXB 181124 
1976 f o .. eat pan can 18•26 
a o .. eat ova get 18•26 
b o .. oat Ly• 18•26 
o .. oat TBA NXB 18•26 
d o .. eat l iv NXB 181126 
1977 o .. eat pan can 181124 pool 
a OH eat ova NXA 18•24 
b o .. eat ova get 181124 
o .. eat • · • Ly• 18•24 
1978 • OH oat TBA NXB 18•26 av 
e • o .. oat l iv NXB 181126 av :> • : + 406. •g * P<. 0005c 
1.20g• * P<.008 c 
606.11g * P<.05 
406.•g * P<.0005 
4. 73g11 * P<.3 
64.211g \ P<.0005c 
74.60lg \ P<.0005 
64. 211g \ P<. 0005 
:> 
:> 
.t no dre P-1. 
67. 70lg \ P<. 0005c 
2.84gOI * P<.02 a 
204.11g * P<.0005c 
540.11g * P<.0005c 
310.•g * P<.003 
204. •g * P<. 0005 
no dre P-1. 
133.•g * P<.007 c 
167 .•g * P<.04 
133.•g * P<.007 
no dre P•1. 
85.311g * P<.0005c 
1.49g11 * P<.005 c 
481.11g \ P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
#459. •g * P<. 02 -
827. •g * P<. 04 
934. •g * P<. 05 
100.•g P<.07 
no dre P•1. 
420.•g * P<.0005c 
820.•g * P<.03 
1 • 02g• * P<. 04 
1.06g11 * P<.04 
202.•g * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
1 · i C5·NITROFURFURYLIDENE)At.INO I HYDANTOIN.: •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. :ioo .... : .. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1979 R f hza eat 11gl fba 36w54 ea .> 120.•g 
a hza eat l iv tu• 36w54 ea no dre 
1980 hza eat ... tu• 44w60 ea .> 214.11g 
a R hza eat l iv tu• 44w60 ea no dre 
1981 R ada eat l iv tu• 75w80 ev .> no dre 
R ada eat tba •ix 75w80 ev 185.•g 
1 • J C5·NITROFURFURYLIDENE>ANINO J ·2-INIDAZOLIDINONE •• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••... :. -100 ••.. : .. 1g ••••• :. -10 
1982 R f ada eat •gl •ix 46w66 a <+ noTD50 
ada eat 11gl adc 46w66 e 5.2611g 
b R ada eat lbl 46w66 e +historical 
c R ada eat l iv tu• 46w66 e 
d R ada eat tba 11ix 46w66 • no dre 
noTD50 
NITROGEN MUSTARD 100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
1983 R • b46 iv j tba •ix 121124 u + 11. 4ug P<. 0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 201 
RefNurn LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Corle 
1962 c01945 411.11g n.1.a. 57/75 170.mg 35/50 557 .mg 22/50 
c01945 1.31g• n.s.s. 3/75 170.11g 0!50 557 .• g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
1963 c01945 353.11g n.1.1. 40/75 136.11g 24/50 446.llg 15/50 
c01945 911.11g n.s.s. 0/75 136.mg 1/50 446.mg 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
6-N ITROBENZ !MI DAZOLE 94-52-0 
1964 c01912 206.llg 769.llg 3/100 127.llg 4/50 253.llg 20/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c01912 359. Ilg 3 -92g• 3/100 127.llg 2/50 253.llg 11/50 
b c01912 131.11g n.s.s. 8/100 127.•g 12/50 <253.11g 0/50) pit:adn,cra. 
c c01912 176.11g n.1.s. 29/100 127 .Ilg 22/50 253.mg 25/50 
d c01912 206.llg 769.•g 3/100 127.llg 4/50 253.llg 20/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
• c01912 870.•g n.1.1. 5/100 127.llg 4/50 253.llg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1965 c01912 180.11g n.1.1. 20/100 118.11g 19/50 234.mg 22/50 l iv:hpa,hpc . 
a c01912 194.•g n.1.s. 18/100 118.mg 16/50 234.Mg 21/50 
b c01912 229.•g n.1.1. 45/100 118.llg 29/50 234.11g 25/50 
c c01912 180.11g n.1.1. 20/100 118.llg 19/50 234.llg 22/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c01912 901.•g n.1.s. 15/100 118.llg 8/50 234.llg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1966 c01912 55.811g n.s.1. 70/100 45.011g 31/50 <182.llg 26/50) 
• c01912 1.92g• n.s.s. 2/100 45.011g 0/50 182.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1967 c01912 247 .11g n.s.1. 54/102 36.011g 22/50 146.llg 22/50 
c01912 797 .•g n.1.1. 1/102 36.011g 0/50 146.•g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
NITROFEN* Cc00420 is NCI TR# 184; c00421 is NCI TR# 26) 1836-75-5 
1968 c00420 282.•g 942.•g 0/20 334.llg 14/50 668.•g 30/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c00420 692.11g 20.6g• 0/20 334.•g 5/50 668.llg 13/50 
b c00420 287 .•g n.1.1. 3/20 334.•g 23/50 668.Mg 33/50 
c00420 282.•g 942.llg 0/20 334.Mg 14/50 668.•g 30/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c00420 1.80g• n.1.1. 0/20 334.llg 2/50 668.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1969 c00421 42.811g 102.llg 0/20 264.llg 42/50 C529.11g 44/50) 
a c00421 46.4•g 157.•g 3/20 264.•g 43/50 <529.•g 44/50) 
b c00421 42.8•g 102.•g 0/20 264.llg 42/50 <529.•g 44/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c c00421 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 264.11g 1/50 529.•g 0!50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1970 c00421 45.2•g 108.•g 1/80p 264.llg 42/50 <529.•g 44/50) 
a c00421 993.1111 n.1.1. 1/80p 264.llg 0/50 529.Mg 5/50 
1971 c00420 144.•g 401.•g 1/20 308.llg 31/50 617.Mg 40/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c00420 355. •g 1 • 20g• 0/20 308.llg 13/50 617.llg 20/50 
b c00420 175.llg 1.70g11 7/20 308.11g 31/50 617.llg 43/50 
c c00420 144.Mg 401.llg 1/20 308.llg 31/50 617.llg 40/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
d c00420 2.90g11 n.1.1. 3/20 308.11g 0/50 617.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1972 c00421 73.011g 1.86g• 4/20 244.llg 38/50 488.11g 46/50 
a c00421 78. 711g n.1.1. 6/20 244.•g 40/50 488.11g 46/50 
b c00421 73.0•g 1.86g• 4/20 244.llg 38/50 488.llg 46/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c c00421 1.40g• n.1.1. 1/20 244.llg 1/50 488.llg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1973 c00421 60.911g 129.llg 5/80p 244.llg 38/50 488.llg 46/50 
a c00421 566.•g 13.6g• 0/80p 244.•g 1/50 488.llg 4/50 
b c00421 193.llg n.a.1. 3/80p 244.llg 10/50 C488.11g 0/50) sub:fbs,fib. 
1974 c00420 206.llg n.1.1. 15/20 113.llg 21/50 C225.11g 15/50) 
a c00420 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 113.llg 0/50 225.llg 0150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1975 c00420 441.•g n.1.1. 10/20 90.4•g 20/50 180.•g 14/50 
a c00420 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 90.411g 0150 180.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1976 c00421 215.•g n.1.1. 0/20 46.111g 2/50 92.0•g 7/50 
a c00421 286.•g n.1.1. 0/20 46.1•g 0/50 92.0•g 4/50 s 
b c00421 320.•g n.1.1. 0/20 46.111g 0150 92.011g 4/50 s 
c c00421 42.4•g n.1.1. 14/20 46.1•g 31/50 92.011g 42/50 
d c00421 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 46.111g 0150 92.011g 0!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1977 c00421 197 .Mg 1.17g• 0/110p 46.111g 2/50 92.011g 7/50 
a c00421 281.•g n.1.1. 1/110p 46.111g 1/50 92.011g 4/50 ova:gcc,gct. 
b c00421 321.•g n.1.1. 1/110p 46.1•g 0/50 92.0•g 4/50 
c c00421 333.•g n.1.1. 1/110p 46.1•g 0150 92.0•g 4/50 
1978 c00421 45.911g n.1.1. 10/20 65.311g 30150 136.llg 4/50 
c00421 n.a.1. n.1.1. 0/20 65.3•g 0/50 136.•g 0!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1-I cs -NITROFURFURYLIDENE JAMINO I HYDANTOIN 67-20-9 
1979 1063• 19.4•g n.1.1. 0/5 100.•g 117 Morris; canr, 29, 2145-2156; 1969 
• 1063• 38.9•g n.1.1 • 015 100.•g 017 
1980 1063n 35.8•g n.1.1. 3/16 110.llg 5/18 
a 1063n 136.•g n.1.1. 0/16 110.•g 0/18 
1981 200• 244.•g n.1.1. 0/30 55.6•g 0136 Cohen; j nc i, 51, 403-417; 1973 
a 200a 28.6•g n.1.1. 14/30 55.6•g 19/36 
1· I <5-NITROFURFURYLIDE NE)AMINO[ ·2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 555-84-0 
1982 200a n.1.1. 6.44mg 1/25 52.3•g 31/31 Cohen; jnci ,51,403-417; 1973 
• 200a 2. 72•g 10.0•g 0/25 52.3•g 29/31 
b 200• 31.1•g n.1.1. 0/25 52.3•g 5/31 
c 200a 134.Mg n.1.1. 0/25 52.311g 0/31 
d 200• n.1.1. 6.44•g 1/25 52.3•g 31/31 
NITROGEN MUSTARD (2,2' -dichloro·N· .. thyldiethyla.ine> 51-75-2 
1983 1017 5.13ug 51.Sug 7165 7 .86ug 12/27 SchHhl ;arzn, 20, 1461-1467; 1970 202 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
a • b46 iv] tba 11al 12•24 es 22.8ug P<.02 + 
b R • b46 iv] tba ben 121124 es 34.2ug P<.05 
NITROGEN MUSTARO N·OXIOE 100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• : •• 10 
1984 11 b46 iv] Mix 121124 ea + 1.4011g P<.002 
P<.008 + 
P<.003 + 
P•1. • b46 iv j tba 11ix 12•24 es . 76411g 
b • b46 iv] tba 11al 12•24 es .80611g 
R • b46 ivj tba ben 12•24 es no dre 
1 • NITRONAPHTHALENE 
1985 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78v96 
a M 
f b6c eat l iv MXB 78v96 
b M f b6c eat l un MXB 78v96 
1986 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 78v96 
a M • b6c eat l iv MXB 78v96 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 78v96 
1987 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 181125 v 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 v 
1988 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181125 "y 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 18•25 v 
2 • N ITROPROPANE** 
1989 R f 1da inh l iv tu11 95v95 e 
a R 
f 1da i nh tba ban 95v95 e 
b R ada inh tba 11al 95v95 e 
1990 R 1da inh l iv tu11 52v52 ek 
a R 1da i nh tba ban 52v52 ek 
b R sda i nh tba 111 l 52v52 ek 
1991 R sda inh l iv tu11 52v95 ek 
a R 1da inh tba ban 52v95 ek 
b R 1da i nh tba 11a l 52v95 ek 
1992 • 1da inh Liv ag11 95v95 e 
a • 1da i nh tba ban 95v95 e 
b 11 sda inh tba 111l 95v95 e 
1993 " ada i nh l iv tu11 52v52 ek 
a R 11 sda i nh tba ban 52v52 ek 
b " 1da i nh tba 111 l 52v52 ek 
1994 11 sda inh l iv ag• 52v95 ek 
a • 1da inh tba ban 52v95 ek 
b " 1da inh tba 11al 52v95 ek 
3·NITROPROPIONIC ACID 
1995 f b6c gay TBA MXB 241124 
a b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
b b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
1996 • b6c gav TBA MXB 241124 
a • b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
b • b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
1997 f f34 gav TBA MXB 261126 
a f f34 gav l iv MXB 261126 
1998 11 f34 gav MXB MXB 261126 
11 f34 gav l iv MXA 261126 
b 11 f34 gav l iv nnd 261126 
c • f34 gav pni iu 261126 
d 11 f34 gav TBA MXB 26•26 
e 11 f34 gav l iv MXB 261126 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
682.Mg * P<.2 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
509.11g • P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. :. ·1•g •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> 
. > 
• > .> 293.llg 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1 • 
9.0611g P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 • 
7. 7811g P<.6 
23.611g P<.4 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• :. -100 .••• : •. 111g •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 •..• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
:> 
:> 
+ no dre P-1. 
337 .11g * P<.5 
499.11g * P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
43.811g * P<1. 
29.011g * P<.3 
2.31Mg * P<.003 
4.4111g * P<.004 a 
5.0311g * P<.008 a 
4.5311g * P<.06 
7 .0211g * P<. 7 
4.4111g * P<.004 
NITROSO·BAYGON 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1999 R 11 1da gav for tu• 31v90 erv .36411g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ a R 11 1da gav for car 31v90 erv .434•g 
1·NITROS0 ·5,6·01HYOROURAC IL 
2000 f •rv vat l iv hpc 41v70 
a 11rv vat Liv •ix 41v70 
b 11rv vat tba 11ix 41v70 
2001 " 11rv ot l iv hpc 41v70 
a " 11rv wat l iv 11ix 41v70 
b • 11rv vat tba 11ix 41v70 
HI TROSO • 2, 6 ·.O IMETHYLMORPHOL INE 
2002 H f 1yg gav trh ppp 59v83 a 
a f 1yg gav 11ix 11ix 59v83 a 
b 1yg gav l iv 11ix 59v83 a 
c 1yg gav 11ix 11ix 59v83 
d 1yg gav pen 11ix 59v83 
e 1yg gav pdu ade 59v83 a 
1yg gav for •ix 59v83 a 
g 1yg gav gal •ix 59v83 a 
h H 1yg gav pdu car 59v83 a 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
+ .10411g 
.10411g 
.13011g 
93.2ug 
93.2ug 
.12511g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
6.4011g * P<.0005+ 
9.1711g * P<.0005 
11. 011g * P<. 0005 
16.911g * P<.008 
5. 75Mg * P<. 02 
6.9911g * P<.02 
9.4511g • P<.03 
12.911g P<.04 
32.111g * P<.3 + CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 203 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• 1017 8.41ug n.1.1. 4/65 7 .86ug 7127 
b 1017 10.8ug n.1.1. 3/65 7 .86ug 5/27 
NITROGEN MUSTARD N·OXJDE <•i to•en> 126·85-2 
1984 1017 . 571•g 5 .62•g 0/65 .300•g 6/44 SchHhl ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
• 1017 .335•g 15.9•g 7/65 .30011g 14/44 
b 1017 . 364•g 5. 46•g 4/65 .30011g 12/44 
1017 1.36•g n.1.1. 3/65 .300•g 2/44 
1 ·NITRONAPHTHALENE 86·57·7 
1985 c01956 230.•g n.1.1. 42/100 63. 7•g 12/50 127.•g 20/50 
I c01956 1.01g• n.1.1. 5/100 63. 7•g 0/50 127.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c01956 231.•g n.1.1. 5/100 63. 7•g 4/50 127.•g 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1986 c01956 168.•g n.1.1. 38/100 58.8•g 19/50 118.•g 21/50 
• c01956 323.•g n.1.1. 17/100 58.8•g 8/50 118.•g 8/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
b c01956 290.11g n.1.1. 17/100 58.8•g 8/50 118.•g 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1987 c01956 72.0•g n.1.1. 51175 21.0•g 32/50 66.0•g 34/50 
• c01956 346.•g n.1.1. 4/75 21.0•g 0/50 66.0•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
1988 c01956 23.4•g n.1.1. 36175 16.8•g 21/50 <52.8•g 19/50) 
c01956 175.•g n.1.1. 0175 16.8•g 2/50 52.8•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2-NITROPROPANE** 79·46·9 
1989 1444 47 .8•g n.1.1. 0/85 7 .96•g 1/65 Griff in;eaas,5, 194-201; 1981 
• 1444 24.1•g n.1.1. 66/85 7 .96•g 32/65 
b 1444 45.9•g n.1.1. 18/85 7 .96•g 6/65 
1990 1444• 4.10•g n.1.1. 0/10 7 .96•g 0/10 
• 1444• 2.3811g n.1.1. 1/10 7 .96•g 1/10 
b 1444• 4.10•g n.1.1. 0/10 7 .96•g 0/10 
1991 1444n 7 .46•g n.1.1. 0/48 4.34•g 0/10 
• 1444n 1.43•g n.1.1. 36/48 4.34•g 7/10 
b 1444n 4.83•g n.1.1. 7/48 4.34•g 1/10 
1992 1444 62.2•g n.1.1. 1/85 5.57•g 0/65 
• 1444 12.2•g n.1.1. 42/85 5.57•g 26/65 
b 1444 21.1•g n.1.1. 11/85 5.57•g 7/65 
1993 1444• 2.87•g n.1.1. 0/10 5.5711g 0/10 
• 1444• 1.47•g n.1.1. 0/10 5.57•g 1/10 
b 1444• 2.87•g n.1.1. 0/10 5.57•g 0/10 
1994 1444n 5.22•g n.1.1. 1/64 3.0411g 0/10 • 1444n 1.02•g n.1.1. 32/64 3.04•g 6/10 
b 1444n 2.81•g n.1.1. 2/64 3.0411g 1/10 
3·NITROPROPJONJC ACID 504-88· 1 
1995 c03076 22.1•g n.1.1. 26/50 8.80•g 32/50 17.7•g 26/50 
• c03076 65.8•g n.1.1. 2/50 8.80•g 1/50 17.7•g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03076 49.0•g n.1.1. 2/50 8.80•g 6/50 17.7•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1996 c03076 17 .9•g n.1.1. 39/50 8.80•g 28/50 17.711g 38/50 
• c03076 39.7•g n.1.1. 20/50 8.80•g 10/50 17.7•g 16/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03076 49.1•g n.1.1. 14/50 8.80•g 8/50 17.7•g 10/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
1997 c03076 1.43•g n.1.1. 40/50 .850•g 30/50 1.70•g 39/50 
• c03076 7.14•g n.1.1. 0/50 .850•g 1/50 1.70•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
1998 c03076 1.20•g 14. 5•g 4/50 .600•g 8/50 1.20•g 17/50 liv:hpc,nnd; pni:isa .. A 
• c03076 2.08•g 27.1•g 0/50 .600•g 3/50 1.20•g 6/50 l iv:hpc,nnd • 
b c03076 2.28•g 87 .3•g 0/50 .600•g 3/50 1.20•g 5/50 
c03076 1.85•g n.1.1. 4/50 .600•g 6/50 1.20•g 11/50 
d c03076 .998•g n.1.1. 36/50 .600•g 31/50 1.20•g 38/50 
• c03076 2.08•g 27 .1•g 0/50 .600•g 3/50 1.20•g 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
NJTROSO·BAYGON 38777· 13·8 
1999 1409 .173•g .891•g 0/40 .98411g 12/16 Li j in1ky ;eaea,2,413·419; 1978 
• 1409 .206•g 1.1011g 0/40 .984•g 11/16 
1 -NI TROSO · 5, 6-D I HYDROURAC IL 16813·36-8 
2000 1246 44. 5ug • 222•g 0/25 1.08•g 24/25 Bul ay; j nc i ,62, 1523-1528; 1979 
I 1246 44.5ug .222•g 0/25 1.08•g 24/25 
b 1246 48.6ug .45811g 12/25 1.08•g 24/25 
2001 1246 39.4ug .204•g 0/22 .941•g 22/23 
I 1246 39.4ug .204•g 0/22 .941•g 22/23 
b 1246 43 • 9ug • 639•g 12/22 .941•11 22/23 
NI TROSO· 2, 6· D IMETHYLMORPHOL I NE 1456-28-6 
2002 430 3.54•g 21.8•g 0/15 1.31•g 2/15 2.63•g 3/15 5.2411g 3/15 10.5•g 8/15 Raznik; jnci ,60,371·378;1978 
• 430 4. 70•g 27. 7•g 0/15 1.31•11 0/15 2.63•11 1/15 5.24•11 7/15 10.5•11 4/15 
b 430 5.34-11 32.0•11 0/15 1.31•11 0/15 2.631111 1/15 5.24•11 3/15 10.5•11 6/15 
c 430 7 . 29•11 279. •II 0/15 1.31•11 0/15 2.63•11 0/15 5.24•11 5/15 10.51111 2/15 
d 430 2.77•g n.1.1. 0/15 1.31•11 3/15 2.63•11 7/15 5.24•11 6/15 10.5•11 6/15 
• 430 3.39•11 n.1.1. 0/15 1.31•11 2/15 2.63•11 6/15 5.24•11 5/15 10.5•11 5/15 
f 430 4.86•11 n.1.1. 0/15 1.31•11 1/15 2.63•g 3/15 5.24•11 5/15 10.5•11 3/15 
II 430 6.07•11 n.1.1. 0/15 1.31•11 0/15 2.63•11 5/15 5.24•11 0/15 10.51111 4/15 
h 430 8.48•11 n.1.1. 0/15 1.31•11 1/15 2.63•11 2/15 5.241111 1/15 10.5•11 2/15 204 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
k 
20Q3 
• 
b 
c 
d 
• 
f ayg gav lun •ix 59"83 a 
ayg gav l er aqp 591t83 a 
ayg gav tba 11 i.x 591t83 • 
., ayg gav ll!n 11ix 66w87 a 
•. ayg gav pan 111ix ~w87 o 
• ayq gav fQr -.ix 66w87 a 
11 syg gav pdu ctr 66w87 a 
• ayg gav l iv •.tx 66w87 • 
11 a.yq gav trh PPP 66w87 a 
•. ayg qav pdu ade 66w87 a 
• ayg gav l e.r aqp 66w87 • 
•. ayg gav tbo ID ix 66w87 a 34 .611g * P<.6 
no dre P• 1. 
1 . 55•g * P<. 0005 
1. 2111g Z P<. 0005+ 
2. 78mg Z P<. 0005+ 
2.9111g Z P<.002 
6.67•g * P<.0005+ 
10.111g * P<.002 
10.5•g • P<.03 + 
21.211g P<.3 
27 .311g • P<. 3 
1.6811g • P<.0005 
NITRQSO -l(·MHHYL·N· <2-PHENn)eTHYL~INE .. : .. 1ug ••.• : -.10 .. -• -: . -100. -. -: . ·1•g .. -. : -.10. -..• : •. 100 ..•. : .• 1g •.•.. : .• 10 
2004 R 11 f34 wet ugi •ix 71129 e . + 7 .88ug z P<.0005+ 
b 
d 
• 
f 
2005 
• 
b 
d 
• • f34 wet e10 11ix 7•29 e 
" f34 wet for bcp 7•29 e 
11 f34 wet for bee 71129 e 
., f34 1t•t l iv hnd 71129 e 
• f.34 wet 11,Ul •l• 71129 e 
" f34 wat ton bee 71129 • 
11 f34 wot ugi •ix 24•29 e 
• f34 wet for b~c 24•29 e 
• f34 wot HO 11i x 24•29 e 
" f34 wet •.ul •l• 24•29 .• 
" f34 wet tQn bee 241129, e 
11. f34 1(8t l i V· hnd: 2.41129 e • 40. 1ug P<.0005+ 
2.2111g P<.4 
2.57•g P<.3 + 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P·1 . 
no dre P·1. 
13.6ug P<.0005+ 
42.2ug P<.02 + 
42. 2ug P<. 02 
98.9ug P<.8 
.18411g P<.3 
.18411g P<.3 
l(-NlTROS0-1(-llfTHYllJREA 
2006 P b CYlll eat HO aqc 10Qng .• : .. 1ug •.•. : .. 10 •.•.• : •. 100 ••.• : •. 111g ..•. : .. 10 ..••• : .• 100 •.•. : .• 1g •.... :. -10 
6396(! euw. (£) 3. 4911g 
a P b cy• ot opx 1qc 631166 euw 3. 4911g 
b p b cy• ot l iv •et 631166 euw no dre 
C. P b CYI!. Ht tbe 11.81 63•66· eUW 4. 2211g 
2007 p. b rhe. eet eao aq.c 11y11 euw 3.00•g 
a P b rhe eat 11th aqc 1•1y11 euw 5.2411g 
b P. b rhe •et opx 1qc 11y11 euw 11.811g 
c P b rhe. ee.t tQn, •qc 1'1:y•1'1' euw. 24. 8mg 
d P b rhe eo.t. gnv aqc My11 euw 24.8mg 
•· P b rhe. eat pla aqc 11y11 euw 24.8•g 
f p b rhe Ht liv •ol 1:1y11 euw no dre 
g P b rhe e,at tb• 11•l 11y11 euw 2.5911g 
N-NITRQSO .· I( ··METHYLIJ .RET~N 1Q0ng •• : •• 1ug ••.. : •. 10 .•.•. : .• 100 ..•. : .. 111g ••.. : .• 10 .•..• : •. 100 .... : .• 1g ..•.• : .. 10 
2008 H b ayg. gav fQr epc 27w73 ev <+ noTD50 
a K b ayg gav e10. epc-27w73 ev .127•g 
•• : . -1ug •.•• :. -10-..•. : .• j_OO •••• : •• jllg ••.• :. -10 .•... :. -100 .•.• : .• !g ..... :. -10 P<.06 + 
P<.06 + 
P·1. 
P<.3 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.1 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
N ITRQSO · 1, 2, 3, 6-TETRAIJ.YDROPYU DI NE 
2009 R f f34 wet ug_i 11ix 6•30 eay • (+) .142•g Z P<.0005+ 
b R f34 wot ug i car 6-.30 eay 
d f34 wet l iv hpc 6-.30 esy 
• 
201.0 R f34. w.ot ugi •ix 161123 " 
e R f34. wet ugi. ctr 161123 ea 
b R 134 wot •10 11ix 16111.23 e• 
c R 134 1t•t l iv hnd 16•23 e• 
2011 R f 134 wot ugi •h 231130 e 
•· R f f34 wot •tn bcp 23,1130 e 
b R 
f f34 wet eao •ix 23•30 e 
c R f34 wet ugi ctr 23•30 e 
d R f34 1tat l iv •.ix 2l•30 e 
e R f f34 wot e10 aqc 231130 e 
f R f f34 wet l iv hnd 231130 e 
N·NHRQS0 ·212.,4· TRll!IETHYL· 1,2·QIKYDROQUINOLINE POLYMER 
2<U2: R " cbr i P,.)' pee ur 6•23 e <+ .216mg P<.0005+ 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P.1 . 
no dre P•1. 
noTD50 
96.6ug 
.12711g 
2.15•g 
37 .4ug • 
55. 1ug 
66.9ug 
85.6ug 
.132mg • 
.430•g • 
. 28411g • P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.6 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 + 
P<.005 + 
P<.03 + 
..•.• : •. 100 ••.• : •. 111g .•.. : •. 10 ..... : .• 100 •.•. : •. 1g ..... : .. 10 
3.31•g P<.003 + 
N llROSQ All.U~SI NE 
2Q13. R f cbt wot eao 11ix 73w73 e 10Qng .. :. -1ug .•.. : .• 10 ••.•• :. -100 •.•• :. -1•g .•.. : •. 10 ....• :. -100. · ·.: •. 1g. · · • ·: • .10 
12.911g P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 205 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl lDose I Inc 2Dose Zinc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
430 5.06•g n.a.s. 0/15 1.3111g 3/15 2.6311g 5/15 5.2411g 5/15 10.511g 2/15 
430 16.511g n.a.1 . 0/15 1.3111g 3/ 15 2.6311g 2/15 5.2411g 0/ 15 10.511g 1/15 
k 430 • 98711g 4.9911g 0/15 1.3111g 8/15 2.6311g 12/15 5.24mg 14/15 10.511g 10/15 
2003 430 • 65911g 2. 7211g 0/15 1.31mg 7/15 2.6311g 9/15 (5.2411g 5/15 10.511g 5/15) 
• 430 1.5811g 7.4111g 0/15 1.31•g 2/15 2.6311g 10/15 5.24•g 6/15 C10.511g 9/15) 
b 430 1.31•g 10.611g 0/15 1.3111g 1/15 2.6311g 7/15 (5.2411g 3/15 10.511g 4/15) 
c 430 3. 75•g 18.811g 0/15 1.31•g 0/15 2.6311g 5/15 5.2411g 6/15 10.511g 6/15 
d 430 5.16•g 38.4•g 0/15 1.3111g 0/15 2.6311g 3/15 5.2411g 4/15 10.511g 5/15 
• 430 4.2511g n.1.1 . 0/15 1.31•g 4/15 2.6311g 3/15 5.2411g 3/15 10.511g 6/15 
430 5.29•g n.1.1. 0/15 1.3111g 2/15 2.63•g 7/15 5.2411g 1/15 10.511g 4/15 
g 430 7. 74•g n.1.1. 0/15 1.3111g 2/15 2.6311g 1/15 5.2411g 3/15 10.511g 2/15 
h 430 1.0711g 2.9011g 0/15 1.3111g 5/15 2.63•g 10/15 5.2411g 12/15 10.5•g 13/15 
NITROSO· N ·METHYL· N • C 2·PHENYL) ETHYLAHINE 13256·11·6 
2004 1374• 4.57ug 17.1ug 0/20 2.92ug 9/20 8.10ug 11/20 C44.6ug 16/20 .19711g 19/20 .60011g 19/20) Lijinsky; 
fctx,20,393 -399; 1982 
• 1374• 22.3ug 80.6ug 0/20 2.92ug 1/20 8.10ug 2/20 44.6ug 15/20 ( .19711g 13/20 .60011g 16/20> 
b 1374• .424•g n.1.1. 0/20 2.92ug 6/20 8.10ug 1/20 44 .6ug 1/20 .19711g 4/20 ( .60011g 5/20> 
c 137411 .66611g n.1.1. 0/20 2.92ug 4/20 8.10ug 7/20 44.6ug 15/20 .19711g 4/20 .600mg 9/20 
d 1374• 4.94•g n.1.1. 0/20 2.92ug 0120 8.10ug 5/20 44.6ug 0/20 .19711g 0120 .60011g 0120 
• 1374• 4.81•g n.1.1. 9/20 2.92ug 16/20 8.10ug 13/20 44.6ug 9/20 .19711g 0120 .60011g 0/20 
1374• 3.60•g n.1.1. 0/20 2.92ug 0/20 8.10ug 0/20 44.6ug 6/20 .19711g 0/20 .60011g 0/20 
2005 1374n 6.49ug 35.5ug 0120 9.22ug 10/20 
• 1374n 14.5ug n.1.1. 0120 9.22ug 4/20 
b 1374n 14.5ug n.1.1. 0/20 9.22ug 4/20 
c 1374n 9.81ug n.1.1. 9/20 9.22ug 10/20 
d 1374n 29.9ug n.1.1. 0/20 9.22ug 1/20 
• 1374n 29.9ug n.1.1 . 0/20 9.22ug 1/20 
N • N ITROSO· N ·METHYLUREA CHNUJ 684·93· 5 
2006 2000 .56511g n.1.1. 0/38 10.411g 1/7 Ada11son;ossc, 129· 156; 1982/Siebar pn·s. co..,. 
• 2000 .56511g n.a.1 . 0!38 10.411g 1/7 
b 2000 1.1311g n.1.1 • 0/38 10.411g 017 
2000 • 58011g n.s.1. 1/38 10.411g 1/7 
2007 2000 1.1811g 10.911g 0/32 10.611g 6/11 
• 2000 1.7811g 27 .311g 0/32 10.611g 4/11 
b 2000 2.8911g n.1.1. 0/32 10.611g 2/11 
c 2000 4.0411g n.1.1. 0/32 10.611g 1/11 
d 2000 4.0411g n.1.1. 0/32 10.611g 1/11 
• 2000 4.0411g n.1.1. 0/32 10.611g 1/11 
2000 7 .83•g n.1.1 • 0/32 10.6•g 0/11 
g 2000 • 99111g 13.511g 3/32 10.6•g 7/11 
N • NITROSO· N ·METHYLURETHAN 615·53·2 
2008 1181 n.1.1. .12711g 0/16 .62911g 16/16 Herrold; jnci ,37,389 -394;1966 
• 1181 59. 7ug • 30511g 0/16 .62911g 13/16 
NITROS0 · 1,2,3,6 · TETRAHYOROPYRIDINE 55556·92 ·8 
2009 137511 76. 3ug • 35011g 0/20 7 .94ug 6/20 20.6ug 1/20 50.8ug 4/20 .14011g 15/20 (.78511g 17/20 
2.8311g 15/20> Li j i nsky ;eaea, 6, 513· 527; 1982/pers. colll•. 
• 137511 .129•g .37811g 0120 7 .94ug 0/20 20.6ug 0120 50.8ug 1/20 .14011g 16/20 • 78511g 19/20 
(2.8311g 15/20) 
b 137511 .141•g .614•g 0120 7 .94ug 0/20 20.6ug 0/20 50.8ug 0120 .14011g 13/20 (. 78511g 10/20 
2.8311g 8/20) 
137511 2.1411g 8.9111g 0/20 7 .94ug 0/20 20 .6ug 0/20 50.8ug 0/20 .14011g 0/20 . 78511g 0120 
2.8311g 14/20 
d 1375• 12.811g n.1.a. 0/20 7 .94ug 2/20 20.6ug 6/20 50.8ug 4/20 .14011g 2/20 • 78511g 0/20 
2.8311g 2/20 
• 1375• 14.4•g n.1.1. 0/20 7 .94ug 6/20 20.6ug 0120 50.8ug 2/20 .14011g 4/20 • 785•g 1/20 
2.8311g 1/20 
137511 8.0911g n.1.1. 1/20 7 .94ug 4/20 20.6ug 9/20 50.8ug 6!20 .140•g 5/20 • 78511g 0/20 
2.8311g 5/20 
2010 1375n n.1.1. 62.0ug 0120 .18411g 20/20 
• 1375n 49.3ug .217•g 0120 .18411g 14/20 
b 1375n 63.3ug .30311g 0120 .184•g 12/20 
c 1375n .29811g n.1.1. 1/20 .18411g 2/20 
2011 13750 22.0ug 66.7ug 0/20 31.8ug 10/20 82.6ug 19/20 
• 13750 25.6ug .156•g 0/20 31.8ug 9/20 C82.6ug 3/20> 
b 13750 37.6ug .13111g 0/20 31.8ug 0120 82.6ug 20/20 
c 13750 47 .9ug .171•g 0120 31.8ug 2/20 82.6ug 16/20 
d 13750 66. 5ug • 85211g 1/20 31.8ug 7120 82.6ug 9/20 
• 13750 .163•g 3.43•g 0/20 31.8ug 0120 82 .6ug 5/20 
f 13750 .115•g n.1.1. 1/20 31.8ug 3/20 82.6ug 6/20 
N·NITROS0·2,2,4·TRIMETHYL • 1,2·01HYOROQUINOLINE POLYMER 29929·77·9 
2012 1258 1.34•g 15.4•g 0/22 1.8611g 6/20 Boyl and;a J ca, 4, 233· 239; 1968 
N ITROSOANABASI NE 1133·64·8 
2013 1260 4.84•g 35.911g 0/5 98.0•g 12/13 Boyl and;bj ca, 18, 265 -270; 1964 206 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
1 cbt wet eao ban 73w73 1 
b cbt Wit HO 1qc 73w73 • 
c cbt wet I iv tu• 73w73 1 
2014 R • cbt wet 110 11ix 73w73 • 
1 R • cbt wet 110 ban 73w73 1 
b R " cbt Wit HO 1qc 73w73 • 
R • cbt wet I iv tu• 73w73 1 
N·NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON 
2015 b wi1 gov for •ix 51w58 
1 b wil gov for 1qc 51w58 
b b wil gov for pH 51w58 
b wi1 gov I iv •ix 51w58 
N ·NI TROSOB IS< 2 · HYDROXYPROPYL) AM I NE 
2016 • wil wet lun 1d1 45w52 H 
1 • wi1 wet lun 1dc 45w52 11 
b • wi1 wet I iv he• 45w52 H 
• wi1 wet lun crt 45w52 11 
d R " Wil Wit I iv hpc 45w52 II + 17. 7•11 
413.•g 
no dre 
11.0•g 
28.1•11 
86.0•g 
no dre 
100ng •• : .• 1u11 •.•• : •. 10 •.••• : •• 100 .••. :. -1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••. : •. 100 •.•. : .• 111 ••• ·.: • -10 P<.0005+ 
P<.5 
p.1. 
P<.002 + 
P<.03 + 
P<.2 
P•1. 
• + 1. 13•11 * P<. 0005+ 
1.48•g * P<.0005+ 
3.75•g \ P<.0005 
11.3•11 * P<.03 
•• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : .. 100 •.•. :. ·1•11· •.• : .• 10 •..•• : •. 100 •.•. : .• 111 .•••. : .• 10 
+ .881•11 * P<.0005+ 
3.36•g * P<.0005 
4.55•g * P<.0005 
9.481111 * P<.003 
2.40•11 \ P<.03 
N·NITROSOBIS(2,2,2· TRI FLUOROETHYL)AMINE •• : .• 1ug •••• : •. 10 ••••• :. -100 •..• :. ·1•11· .•. : .• 10 .•••• : • 0100. • · ·: • ·111· · • · ·: • ·10 
2017 R f f34 Wit I iv .. 1 7•30 I .> 4.98•11 P<.3 
2018 R • 1d1 wet •ix .. 1 7•26 1 .> no dre P•1. 
1 • 1d1 wet Ii v tu• 7•26 e no dre P• 1. 
NI TROSOCHLORD I AZEPOX I DE 
2019 M f c7b wet lun tu• 17•25 
1 M f c7b wet I iv tu• 17•25 
b M f c7b wet tb1 •ix 17•25 
2020 M • c7b wet lun tu• 17•25 
1 M • c7b wet tb1 •ix 17•25 
N ITROSOD IBUTYLAMI NE 
2021 M 11 icr Ht for 11ix 52w65 
1 M • i er 11t for 1qc 52w65 
b M • icr eat liv •ix 52w65 
c M • icr eat I iv 1de 52w65 
d M • i er Ht for aqp 52w65 
e M • icr Ht lun 1de 52w65 
f M • icr Ht 110 PH 52w65 
N-NITROSOD IETHYLAMINE 
2022 N b bbb ipj nee HC 27•29 e 
1 N b bbb ipj I iv car 27•29 e 
b N b bbb ipj tb1 .. 1 27•29 I 
2023 P b cy• eat I iv hpc 11y11 euw 
I P b CY• Ht tbl .. 1 11y11 IUW 
2024 P b cy• ipj I iv hpc 45•63 ew 
1 P b cy• ipj tb1 .. 1 45•63 ew 
2025 b rhe Ht I iv hpc 12y12 euw 
I b rhl Ht tbl •II 12y12 IUW 
2026 b rhe ipj I iv hpc 37•73 ew 
1 P b rhe ipj tb1 ••I 37•73 ew 
2027 R f34 Wit 110 •ix 7•30 
e f34 wet I iv hpc 7•30 
b f34 wet ton bee 7•30 
2028 f34 wet I iv •ix 14•30 
I f34 Wit HO •ix 14•30 
2029 f34 Wit •ix •ix 24•30 
I f34 Wit HO •ix 24•30 
b f34 wet for bcp 24•30 
c f34 wet I iv •ix 24•30 
2030 f34 Wit •ix •II 7•30 I 
2031 fil Wit I iv hpt 86w86 I 
1 fia wet tb1 •ix 86w86 e 
2032 • f i I Wit Ii V hpt 86w86 I 
I • f i I Wit tbl tu• 86w86 I 
2033 • ldl Wit • i X tu• 27•27 
1 • 1d1 wet I iv tu• 27•27 
b • ldl Wit HO tu• 27•27 
2034 f wio wet I iv hpt 60w63 e 
1 f wio wet tb1 •ix 60w63 • 
2035 • wio wet I iv hpt 60w63 • 
I • W io Wit tbl •ix 60w63 I 
2036 W ii lllV •II I 1dc 28•28 I 
1 wia gav I iv hnd 28•28 e 
b w i 1 gov tb1 ben 28•28 • 100ng •. : •. 1u11 .••• : •• 10 .•••• : .• 100 .••• :. ·1•11· .•. : •. 10 .••.• : .• 100 •..• :. ·111· • • · ·: • .10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P·1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1u11 •••• : .• 10 ••.•. : .• 100 •••• : •• 11111 ..•• : •. 10 .••.• : .• 100 .• • ·: • ·111· • • · ·: • .10 
• +. .6861111 
1.091111 
2.65•11 
4.341111 
7 .69•11 
8.00•11 
11.9•11 P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.008 
P<.1 
P<.03 
100ng •• : •. 1u11 •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 .••. :. ·1•11· .•• : •. 10 •.••• : · .100. · • ·: • ·111· • · · ·: • .10 
(<+) noTD50 P<.0005+ 
P<.06 + 
P<.0005 
<+ 
(+) 
<+ 
(+) 
+ 
+ 
• > 
• > 
+ • .246•11 
noTD50 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
noTD50 P<. 0005 
21.1ug * P<.0005+ 
21.4ug * P<.0005 
noTD50 P<.0005+ 
noTD50 P<. 002 
15 .8ug * P<.0005+ 
16.6ug * P<.0005 
25.5ug Z P<.0005+ 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
7 .87ug \ P<.0005+ 
20. 7ug I P<. 0005+ 
13.1ug P<.0005+ 
15.0ug P<.0005+ 
54. 9ug P<. 007 + 
41.6ug P<.02 + 
30.8ug * P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
70.6ug 
.119•11 
.133•11 
49.3ug 
53. 7ug 
.104•11 
.1041111 
.127•11 
31.3•11 
35 .5ug P•1. 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.02 + 
P<.02 
P<.08 
P<1. 
P<.08 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 207 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1260 7 .54•g 53.0•g 0!5 98.011g 11/13 
b 1260 67.2•g n.1.a. 0/5 98.0•g 1/13 
1260 129.Mg n.a.a. 0/5 98.0•g 0/13 
2014 1260 4. 19•g 37.0•g 0/3 85.7•g 13/14 
• 1260 12.6•g n.1.1 . 0/3 85. 7•g 9/14 
b 1260 29.5•g n.1.1. 0/3 85. 7•g 4/14 
1260 122.•g n.1.1. 0/3 85. 7•g 0/14 
N · NITROSOBENZTH IAZURON < 1 · <2' ·banzothiazolyl > ·3· .. thyl ·3·ni troaourea> 51542·33 ·7 
2015 1422 . 746•g 1. 74•g 0/22 7.14•g 27/30 14.3•g 25/30 Unger er; zkko,81, 217·224;1974 
• 1422 .984•g 2.31•g 0/22 7.14•g 21/30 14.3•u 25/30 
b 1422 1 .82•g 11 .O•g 0/22 7.14•g 10/30 c 14.3•u 4/30> 
1422 5.67•g n.1.1. 0/22 7.14 .. g 6/30 14.3•g 5/30 
N ·NITROSOBISC2 · HYDROXYPROPYL )AMINE 53609-64 -6 
2016 1191 .358•g 2.34•g 0/12 5.00•g 6/10 25.0•g 9/9 Konishi ;gann,69,573 -577;1978 
1191 1.51•g 12.6•g 0/12 5 .OO•g 3/10 25.0•g 6/9 
b 1191 1.88•g 15.8•g 0/12 5.00•g 1/10 25.0•g 6/9 
1191 3.22•u 61 .8•u 0/12 5.00•g 0/10 25.0•g 4/9 
d 1191 • 718•g n. 1.1. 0/12 5.00•g 3/10 (25.0•g 1/9) 
N ·NITROSOBISC2, 2, 2· TR I FLUOROETHYL )AMI NE C6·F·DEN> 
2017 1342 .931•g n.1.1. 1/20 .610•g 2/12 Preuss•ann; care, 2, 753-756; 1981 
2018 1342 2.36•g n.1.1. 2/35 .561•g 2/35 
1342 4.86•g n.1.1. 0/35 .561•g 0/35 
NI TROSOCHLORD I AZEPOXI DE 
2019 1257 5.85•g n.1.1. 14/43 4.02•g 6/21 Giner· Sorol l 1; f ctx, 18, 81·83;1980 
• 1257 18. 1•g n.a.a . 0/43 4.0211g 0/21 
b 1257 8.43•g n.1.1. 24/43 4.02•g 6/21 
2020 1257 3.32•g n.1.1. 15/18 3.35•g 14/23 
1257 3. 12•g n.1.1. 16/18 3.35•g 15/23 
NITROSODIBUTYLAMINE 924· 16·3 
2021 1434 .416•g 1. 18•g 0/30 4.80•g 33/39 Tlk1y1H;g1nn,60,353; 1969 
• 1434 .666•g 1.92•g 0/30 4.80•g 27/39 
b 1434 1.44•g 5.65•g 0/30 4.80•g 15/39 
c 1434 2.11•g 12.7•g 0/30 4.80•g 10/39 
d 1434 3.13•g 122.•g 0/30 4.80•g 6/39 
• 1434 2.82•g n.1.1 . 2/30 4.80•g 8/39 
1434 4.1011g n.1.1. 0/30 4.80•g 4/39 
N · NITROSODI ETHYL AMINE (DEN) 55· 18-5 
2022 2000n n.1.1. 43.5ug 0/13 1.33•g 10/10 Ada11aon;ossc, 129-156; 1982/Sieber pers. co••· 
• 2000n 60.2ug n.1.1. 0/13 1.3311g 2/10 
b 2000n n.1.1. 43.5ug 0/13 1.33•g 10/10 
2023 2000 n.1.1. 4.05•g 0/38 28.6•g 14/14 
• 2000 n.1.1 . 4. 13•g 1/38 28.6•g 14/14 
2024 20000 5.95ug 81.8ug 0/38 . 714•g 4/5 2 .65•u 5/5 
• 20000 5.97ug 85.9ug 1/38 .71411g 4/5 2.65•g 5/5 
2025 2000 n.1.1. 5.20•g 0/32 28.4•g 12/12 
• 2000 n.1.1 . 5 .62•g 3/32 28.4•g 12/12 
2026 20000 6.02ug 41.4ug 0/32 .357•g 4/6 .675•g 5/5 1.33•g 6/6 2.56•g 5/5 
• 20000 6. 15ug 46.8ug 3/32 .357•g 4/6 .675•g 5/5 1.33•g 6/6 2.56•g 5/5 
2027 1173• 14. 7ug 48.3ug 0/20 4.40ug 0/20 10.4ug 3/20 26.4ug 18/19 (. 119•g 13/20 .538•g 10/12) Lijinsky; 
canr, 41,4997·5003; 1981 /pera. co••. 
• 1173• 1.53•g n.1.1. 0/20 4.40ug 1/20 10.4ug 5/20 26.4ug 5/19 • 119•g 1/20 .538•g 1/12 
b 1173• 2.24•g n.1.1. 0/20 4.40ug 0/20 10.4ug 1/20 26.4ug 6/19 • 119•g 0/20 .538•g 0/12 
2028 1173n 3. 92ug 20. Oug 1/20 8.48ug 14/20 (20. 7ug 5/20> 
a 1173n 11.7ug 40.8ug 0/20 8.48ug 2/20 20. 7ug 17/20 
2029 11730 6. 70ug 29.5ug 0/20 14.8ug 14/20 
• 11730 7 .61ug 34.8ug 0/20 14.8ug 13/20 
b 11730 20. 7ug • 633•g 0/20 14.8ug 5/20 
11730 16.4ug n.1.1. 1/20 14.8ug 7/20 
2030 1342 14. 7ug 65.0ug 1/20 65.9ug 18/20 • 170•u 12/12 Preuss 11ann; care, 2, 753-756; 1981 
2031 1041 • 109•g n.1.1. 0/15 51.6ug 0/15 Nixon; j nc i, 53, 453-458;1974 
• 1041 . 109•g n.1.1. 3/15 51.6ug 0/15 
2032 1041 84.3ug n.1.1. 0/16 46.0ug 0/13 
• 1041 84.3ug n.1.1. 0/16 46.0ug 0/13 
2033 1303 49.8ug .104•g 0!90 71.4ug 52/90 Habs;onco,37,259-265; 1980 
• 1303 79.4ug .190•g 0/90 71.4ug 36/90 
b 1303 87 .4ug .217•g 0/90 71.4ug 33/90 
2034 1041 23.5ug • 131•g 0/18 • 136•g 10/20 Nixon; j nc i, 53 ,453· 458; 1974 
• 1041 24.3ug .262•g 1/18 • 136•g 10/20 
2035 1041 35.9ug n.1.1. 0/17 • 104•g 4/18 
• 1041 35.9ug n.1.1 • 0/17 • 104•g 4/18 
2036 1399 41.5ug n.1.1. 1/59 10.2ug 5/58 Kroes; fctx, 12,671-679;1974 
• 1399 98. 7ug n.1.1. 1/59 10.2ug 1/58 
b 1399 13.6ug n.1.1. 18/59 10.2ug 27/58 208 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
e w ii gav tba 118 l 28•28 a 
2037 11 wia gav l iv tu11 281128 e 
• R 11 wi1 gav tba 11al 281128 e 
b 11 wia gav tba ben 281128 e 
N • NITROSOOIMETHYLAMINE 
2038 M f bal wet lun ade 85w85 gs 
• M bal wet tba 11ix 85w85 g1 
2039 R por eat l iv tu• 25•28 er 
2040 R por eat l iv tu• 12•28 r 
2041 11 por eat l iv tu• 281128 r 
2042 wia eat l iv nod 96w96 
wi1 eat leu 96w96 
b wia ~·t l iv hae 96w96 
e wis eat l iv hpe 96w96 
2043 R 11 wi1 eat l iv nod 96w96 
R 11 wis eat l iv hae 96w96 
b R 11 wis eat liv hpe 96w96 
2044 R 11 wi 1 eat tu lde 54w69 er 
• wis eat l iv car 54w69 er 
N ·NI TROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
2045 f b6e eat TBA MXB 23•23 v 
• b6e eat l iv MXB 231123 v 
b 
2046 b6e ·eat l un MXB 231123 v 
b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
• b6e or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2047 11 b6e eat TBA MXB 231123 
• 11 b6e eat l iv MXB 23•23 
b 11 b6e eat l un MXB 23•23 
2048 11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6e or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2049 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
• f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2050 11 b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2051 f 134 eat ubl tee 23•23 
a f 134 eat TBA MXB 23•23 
b f 134 eat l iv MXB 23M23 
2052 • 134 eat ubl tee 231123 
11 134 eat fib 231123 
b 11 134 eat TBA MXB 231123 
e 11 134 eat l iv MXB 231123 
2053 11 ebr ipj l iv hpt 61123 e .> 4.0111g 
no dre 
77 .4ug 
.257"1g P<1. 
P•1. 
P<.4 
P<.9 
.!OOng •. :. -.!ug •••• :. -.10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• .10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• : •. .!g ••••• : •• .10 
.32411g 
.39611g P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
+ 
.> + • 1.4011g * P<.0005+ 
.44311g P<.01 
1.18•g * P<.2 
• 11311g Z P<. 002 
1.46 .. g * 
1.8311g * 
4.1011g * 
. 78211g * 
1.95"1g * 
5.5211g * 
.136"1g 
no dre P<.005 
P<.03 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.007 + 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
.!OOng •• : •• .!ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 .••• :. -.111g .••• : •• .10 •.••. :. -.100 •••• : •• .!g ••••• : •• .10 
:> 
. > 
:> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
385."1g 
9.67gm 
897."1g 
1.02gm 
no dre 
3.26g11 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
116.llg 
159.llg 
no dre 
299.llg P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.02 
P<.9 
P<.6 
P<.04 
P-1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P• 1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.008 
P· 1. 
P<.0005e 
537 .•g * P<.01 
136.g11 * P<1. 
5.45g11 * P<.3 
18.911g P<1. 
p·NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE .!OOng •• : •. .!ug •••• : •• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. -.!Rig •••• : •• .10 ••.•• :. -.100 •••• : •• .!g ••••• :. -.10 
2054 f b6e eat TBA MXB 53w92 Hv :> 2. 17g"1 * P<. 5 
a f b6e eat l iv MXB 53w92 HV 2.25g11 * P<.2 
b b6e eat lun MXB 53w92 HV 5.41g• * P<.4 
2055 II b6e Ht l iv MXA 53w92 HV "' 340. Ilg \ P<. 02 
• • b6e Ht l iv hpe 53w92 Hv 661.11g \ P<.02 
b • b6e eat TBA MXB 53w92 HV 260.llg \ P<.03 
• b6e eat l iv MXB 53w92 Hv 340.11g \ P<.02 
d • b6e eat lun MXB 53w92 Hv 3.52g11 * P<.7 
2056 f 134 eat TBA MXB 18•24 :> no dre P• 1. 
a f 134 eat l iv MXB 18•24 1.21g11 * P<.06 
2057 • 134 eat l iv MXA 18•24 : + 201.11g * P<.0005e 
a • f34 eat TBA MXB 18•24 no dre P-1. 
b • 134 eat l iv MXB 18•24 201.11g * P<.0005 
N · NITROSOEPHEDR !NE 
2058 R 11 ada gav l iv 11ix 241124 
• 11 ada gav l iv hpc 24•24 
b R • ada gav lun 11ix 24•24 
e 11 ada gav for pH 241124 
d • sda gav for aqe 24•24 
e • ada gav tba •ix 241124 .!OOng •• : •• .!ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -.100 .••. : .• .!g •.••• :. -.10 
95.2Rlg 
138.mg 
217 ... g 
239.0lg 
740.0lg 
40.0Rlg 
NITROSOHEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE .!OOng •• : •• .!ug •••• : .• .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••. :. -.!•g •••• : •. .10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .!g .•.•• : .• .10 P<.0005+ 
P<.004 
P<.1 
P<.03 + 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
2059 R • f34 wat ugi car 61127 uy • (+) 36.3ug z P<.0005+ 
a R • f34 wet ugi •ix 61127 uy 51.2ug Z P<.0005+ 
b R. f34 wat HO 11ix 61127 HY .11811g z P<.0005+ 
e R • f34 wat l iv hH 61127 HY no dre P•1. 
2060 R • 134 wat ugi 11ix 12•29 H • + • 57 .1ug * P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 209 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl I Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1399 47.3ug n.s.s. 7/59 10.2ug 7/58 
2037 1399 78.4ug n.s.s. 0/39 7.14ug 0/40 
1399 18.1ug n.s.s. 4/39 7.14ug 7/40 
b 1399 18.2ug n.s.s. 8/39 7.14ug 9/40 
N ·NI TROSOD IMETHYLAMINE <DMNl 62-75·9 
2038 88 .18611g .82411g 20/62 .600mg 44/62 Terrac ini; i j en, 11, 747-764; 1973 
• 88 97.8ug n.s.s . 56/62 .60011g 59/62 
2039 122 .. .893•g 2.36•g 0/29 100.ug 0/18 .25011g 4/62 .500119 2/5 1.00mg 15/23 2.50•g 10/12 Terrac ini; 
b j ca, 20, 559-565; 1967 
2040 122n .133•g 23. 7•g 0/29 .10811g 3/15 
2041 122 .. .28911g n.s.s. 0/12 80.0ug 1/19 .200•g 1/6 
2042 1201 46.0ug .4390lg 0/18 5.00ug 0/24 50.0ug 6/24 (. 500•g 4/24) Arai ;gann, 70, 549· 558; 1979 
1201 .54611g 16.3•g 0/18 5.00ug 1/24 50.0ug 0/24 .50011g 5/24 
b 1201 .631•g n.s.s . 0/18 5. OOug 0/24 50.0ug 1/24 .50011g 3/24 
1201 • 666•g n.1.s. 0/18 5.00ug 0/24 50.0ug 3/24 .50011g 2/24 
2043 1201 .3370lg 3.0511g 0/18 4.00ug 0/24 40.0ug 1/24 .400•g 6/24 
• 1201 .5910lg 32.711g 0/18 4.00ug 0/24 40.0ug 0/24 .400•g 3/24 
b 1201 .780•g n.s.s. 0/18 4.00ug 0/24 40.0ug 1/24 .400•g 1/24 
2044 707 57 .3ug .44111g 0/29 .31311g 7/14 Terao; f ctx, 16, 591·596; 1978 
707 .398•g n.s.s. 0/29 .31311g 0/14 
N-NI TROSOD IPHENYLAMINE Credax, diphenylnitro1a1nine> 86-30-6 
2045 c02880 912.0lg n.s.s. 9/20 322.•g 24/50 798.llg 15/50 
• c02880 1.89g11 n.s.s. 3/20 322.mg 7/50 798.llg 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c02880 1.48gll n.s.s. 3/20 322 ... g 11/50 798.llg 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2046 1094 842.•g n.s.s. 0/18 510 ... g 0/15 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1094 842.llg n.s.s. 1/18 510 ... g 0/15 
b 1094 582.•g n.1.1. 3/18 510 ... g 1/15 
2047 c02880 2.44g• n.1.s. 10/20 1.20g" 29/50 2.40g .. 22/50 
c02880 6.54gll n.s.s. 6/20 1.20gOI 12/50 2.40g• 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c02880 5. 78g• n.s.s. 4/20 1.20gll 9/50 2.40g• 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2048 1094 142.llg n.s.s. 1/17 474 ... g 6/15 lnnes;ntis , 1968/1969 
• 1094 356.•g n.s.s. 2/17 474 ... g 2/15 
b 1094 154.llg n.s.s. 6/17 474.llg 7/15 
2049 1094 309.llg n.s.s. 0/17 510.llg 3/18 
1094 1.01g• n.s.s. 0/17 510.0lg 0/18 
b 1094 366.mg n.s.s. 2/17 510.0lg 3/18 
2050 1094 443.llg n.s.s. 2/18 474.0lg 2/18 
• 1094 939.llg n.s.s. 3/18 474 ... g 0/18 
b 1094 445.mg n.s.s. 5/18 474.•g 3/18 
2051 c02880 78.4mg 181.mg 0/20 50.0 .. g 0/50 200 ... g 40/50 
c02880 76.711g 3.27gm 13/20 50.0llg 23/50 200.mg 43/50 
b c02880 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/20 50.0 .. g 0/50 200.mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hp c,nnd. 
2052 c02880 167.mg 616 ... g 0/20 40.0"g 0/50 160.llg 16/50 
• c02880 242.mg 24.5gm 1/20 40.0"g 1/50 160 ... g 10/50 
b c02880 137 .Ilg n.s.s. 16/20 40.0"g 29/50 160.llg 33/50 
c c02880 887.llg n.s.s. 0/20 40.0"g 0/50 160.mg 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2053 1258 .44111g n.s.s. 1/24 .1860lg 1/21 Boyl and;e j ca, 4, 233-239; 1968 
p· N ITROSOD IPHENYLAMI NE 156-10-5 
2054 c02244 493.llg n.s.s. 4/20 343.0lg 16/50 636 ... g 9/50 
• c02244 974.0lg n.s.s. 0/20 343.0lg 5/50 636.llg 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02244 1.64gOI n.1.1. 0/20 343.•g 2/50 636.llg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2055 c02244 172 ... g n.s.s. 2/20 316.•g 22/50 <587 .Ilg 12/50) l iv:hpa,hpc . 
• c02244 323 ... g n.s.s. 0/20 316 ... g 10/50 <587 .mg 1/50) 
b c02244 128.0lg n.1.1. 4/20 316.•g 30/50 (587.llg 17/50) 
c02244 172.•g n.1.1. 2/20 316.llg 22/50 <587.•g 12/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
d c02244 711 ... g n.1.1. 1/20 316.•g 10/50 587.llg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2056 c02244 195.llg n.a.s. 11/20 92.9•g 36/50 186.llg 28/50 
• c02244 522 ... g n.a.1 . 0/20 92.911g 2/50 186.llg 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
2057 c02244 129.llg 547.llg 0/20 74.3•g 10/50 149.llg 19/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
• c02244 129.llg n.1.s. 13/20 74.30lg 34/50 149 ... g 33/50 
b c02244 129.llg 547.llg 0/20 74.3•g 10/50 149 ... g 19/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
N· NITROSOEPHEDR INE 17608-59·2 
2058 1259 41.0"g 332.llg 0/40 34.311g 7/32 E isenbrand;clet, 5, 103-106; 1978 
• 1259 52.4•g 974 ... g 0/40 34.3•g 5/32 
b 1259 64.111g n.a.1. 1/40 34.311g 4/32 
c 1259 72.2•g n.a.s. 0/40 34.311g 3/32 
d 1259 120.11g n.a.a. 0140 34.3•g 1/32 
• 1259 20.111g 129.llg 4/40 34.30lg 16/32 
NI TROSOHEPTAMETHYLENE I Ml NE 20917 .49.1 
2059 1376• 18.1ug 86. 7ug 0/20 39.8ug 12/20 c.197•g 11/20 .73311g 10/20) Li j inaky; j nc i ,69, 1127·1133; 1982/pers .co•ll. 
• 1376• 30.3ug 96.3ug 0/20 39.8ug 15/20 .19711g 17/20 (. 733•g 15/20) 
b 137611 66.9ug .233•g 0/20 39.8ug 5/20 .19711g 15/20 ( .733•g 12/20) 
1376• .160•g n.a.1. 1/20 39.8ug 0/20 .19711g 0/20 • 733•g 0/20 
2060 1376n 35.3ug 99.6ug 0/20 11.4ug 2/20 31.5ug 13/20 .12511g 16/20 210 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
• R • f34 wet 110 bee 12a29 ea 
b R • f34 wet ton bee 12a29 ea 
c 11 f34 wet Liv hpc 121129 ea 
2061 R 11 f34 wet ugi 11ix 231127 e 
• R • f34 wet HO 11ix 231127 I 
b • f34 wet ton bee 23a27 1 
R 11 f34 wet l iv aix 23a27 e 
1 ·NITROSOHYDANTOIN 
2062 f arw wet l iv tu11 12a26 
R arw wet tba 11ix 12a26 
2063 R • arw wet for 1qp 12•26 
a R • arw wet phr 1qc 12a26 
b R " 11rw wet l iv tua 12a26 
R • 11rw wet tbe 11ix 121126 
NI TROSOHYDROXYPROL I NE 
2064 R f arc wet l iv tua 171124 
a R f arc wet tba 11ix 171124 
2065 R '" 11rc wet l iv tu• 171124 
R 11 arc wet tba •ix 171124 
NITROSOIMINODIACETIC ACID 
2066 f arc wet tba aix 171124 1 
2067 11 11rc wet pit tu11 171124 1 
• •re wet tba 11ix 171124 1 
2 ·NI TROSOMETHYLAM I NOP YR ID I NE 
2068 R f bdf gav 110 11ix 72w72 e 
• 
b 
d f bdf gav l iv 11ix 72w72 e 
bdf gav tba •• l 72w72 1 
f bdf gav tba •ix 72w72 1 
f bdf gav tba ben 72w72 1 
3 ·N ITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYR ID INE 
2069 f bdf gov l iv •ix 27•27 e 
a R f bdf gav tba •ix 27•27 e 
b R f bdf gav tba 111 l 271127 1 
f bdf gav tba ban 271127 e 
4 ·NI TROSOMETHYLAMI NOP YR ID I NE 
2070 R f bdf gav l iv aix 23•23 e 
a R f bdf gov tba 11ix 23•23 e 
b R f bdf gav tba bin 23•23 e 
R f bdf gav tba 111 l 231123 e 
NI TROSOMETHYLAN IL I NE 
2071 R f cbt wet 110 11ix 67w67 ev 
• R cbt wet HO 1qc 67w67 ev 
b R cbt wet 110 ben 67w67 ev 
R cbt wet l iv tu• 67w67 av 
2072 R II cbt Wit 110 11ix 60w60 IV 
• R II cbt Wit 110 1qc 60w60 IV 
b R • cbt wet 110 ban 60w60 1v 
c R • cbt wet l iv tu• 60w60 ev 
2073 R b ad• Wit HO 11ix 241124 • 
NI TROSOMETHYLPHEN I DATE 
2074 M f c7b wet lun tu• 17a25 
a M c7b wet l iv tua 17•25 
b " c7b wet tbe 11ix 171125 
2075 M • c7b wet lun tu• 171125 
M M c7b Wit tbl lliX 171125 
NI TROSOMETHYLUNDECYLAM I NE 
2076 11 f34 gov lun 1qc 30w65 
1 R 11 f34 gav l iv hpc 30w65 
b R • f34 gav lun aid 30w65 
c R 11 f34 gav l iv clc 30w65 
d • f34 gav lun ala 30w65 
• R 11 f34 gav 110 1qc 30w65 
f R 11 f34 gov 1tn p111 30w65 
NITROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 
2077 R f 11rc wet l iv tu• 171124 e 
a R f •re wet tba 11ix 171124 e 
2078 11 •re wet l iv tu• 17•24 a 
• arc wet tbe 11ix 17•24 1 • + .159ag * P<.0005+ 
.17111g * P<.0005+ 
no dr1 P•1. 
29. 2ug * P<. 0005+ 
73.5ug * P<.0005+ 
.105•g * P<.004 + 
.198•g \ P<.1 
100ng .• : •. 1ug •.•• : •• 10 .•.•. : •. 100 ...• :. -1•u-•.• : .• 10 •..•. : .• 100 •... :. -1u-.•.. :. -10 
• > no dre 
19.611g 
27 .811g 
43.811g 
no dre 
7 .31119 
100ng •• : •. 1ug ••.• : •. 10 ....• : •. 100 ..•• : •. 111u .••. : •. 10 ••.•• : •. 100 .•.. :. -1u-•... : .. 10 
• > 
. > no dre 
3.8411g 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •.•. :. -1•u-.•. : •. 10 .••.• : .• 100 .•.• :. -1u-•.•. : .• 10 
.. 63.911g 
66.911g 
76.0ag 
100ng .• : •. 1uu .••. : •. 10 •••.. : .• 100 ..•. : .• 111g •.•. : .. 10 ..... : .. 100 .••. :. -1u-•.•. : .• 10 
.214119 P•1 . 
P<.2 + 
P<.005 
P<.03 
P•1. 
P<.03 
P•1 . 
P<.03 
P-1 . 
P-1. 
P<.07 
P<.006 -
P<.3 
P<.003 + 
no dre P-1 . 
• 66811g P<. 08 
.28011g P<.2 
3.0511g P<.9 
100ng .• :. -1ug .••• : •• 10 ..••. : .• 100 •..• : •. 111g •..• : •• 10 ..•.• : .• 100 •.•. : .. 1g •.•.. : •• 10 
• > no dre 
no dre 
6.0911g 
no dre 
100ng •. :. -1ug •..• : .• 10 .•... : .• 100 ••.• : •. 111g •..• : .• 10 •.•.. : .. 100 •.•• : •. 1g ••... :. -10 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
26.811g 
100ng .. : .. 1ug ••.• : .• 10 •..•. : •. 100 ••.• :. -1•U· •.• : .. 10 •..•. :. -100 •..• : •. 1g. · · ·.: · -10 P-1 • 
P•1. 
P<.4 
P•1. 
P-1 . 
P-1. 
P·1. 
P<.5 
<+ noTD50 P<. 0005+ 
26.411g P<.02 
32.0ag P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
5. 2711g P<. 002 + 
10.511g P<.009 + 
70.411g P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
• + . 34.3ug \ P<.0005+ 
100ng •. : •. 1ug •..• : •• 10 ••.•• : •. 100 •.•• : .. 111g ..•. : .. 10 ••... : .• 100 ..•. :. -1u-.•.• : .• 10 
.> no dre 
no dre P-1. 
no dr1 P•1. 
• > no dr1 P•1 . 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug •.•• : •• 10 .•.•• : •. 100 .•.• : •. 111g .•.. : .. 10 ..•.• : •• 100 •.•. :. -1u-.•.. : .• 10 
2.3711g 
2.3811g 
2.4111g 
3.1811g 
4.9911g 
15.411g 
15.411g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug .•.. : .• 10 .••.. : .. 100 .•.• :. -1•g .•.• : •• 10 ..•.. : .. 100 ..•. :. -1u-•... : .• 10 
• > 
• > no dre 
4.9911g 
no dre 
3.8211g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.002 
P•1 . 
P<.07 
P-1 • 
P<.07 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 211 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• 1376n 85.8ug .34011g 0/20 11.4ug 0/20 31.5ug 2/20 .12511g 13/20 
b 1376n 92. 7ug .41011g 0/20 11.4ug 1/20 31.5ug 4/20 .12511g 10/20 
e 1376n • 72911g n. 1. 1. 0/20 11.4ug 5/20 31.5ug 0/20 .12511g 0/20 
2061 13760 17 .4ug 52.1ug 0120 24.8ug 10/20 64.6ug 17/20 
e 13760 39. 7ug .15811g 0/20 24.8ug 3/20 64 .6ug 12/20 
b 13760 53. 7ug • 73611g 0/20 24.8ug 6/20 64.6ug 6/20 
13760 48.5ug n.a.a. 0/20 24.8ug 2/20 <64.6ug 0/20> 
1 · N ITROSOHYOANTOIN 42579·28·2 
2062 1246 63.0•g n.a.1. 0/25 11.411g 0/24 Buley; j ne i ,62, 1523 · 1528; 1979 
e 1246 5.9011g n.1.1. 12/25 11.411g 16/24 
2063 1246 11.311g 198.11g 0/22 9.9611g 6/25 
e 1246 15.111g n.1.1. 0/22 9.96•g 4/25 
b 1246 57 .4•g n.1.1. 0/22 9.9611g 0/25 
1246 2.84•g n.1.1. 12/22 9.96•g 21/25 
NI TROSOHYDROXYPROL I NE 30310·80·6 
2064 216 13.611g n.1.1. 0/15 4.42•g 0/15 Gare i e; zkko, 79, 141-144; 1973 
e 216 1.4311g n.1.1. 4/15 4.42•g 10/15 
2065 216 11.911g n.1.1. 0/15 3.86•g 0/15 
e 216 3.47•g n.1.1. 5/15 3.8611g 5/15 
NITROSOIMINODIACETIC ACID 25081 ·31 ·6 
2066 213 22.0•g n.1.1. 4/15 56.511g 9/15 Li j insky; jnei ,50, 1061· 1063; 1973 
2067 213 25.111g 631.•g 0/15 39.6•g 5/15 
e 213 19.411g n.1.1. 5/15 39.6•g 8/15 
2 ·NI TROSOMETHYLAMI NOP YR ID !NE 16219-98·0 
2068 1261 .11811g .82611g 0/5 .714•g 18/27 Pr1usS11enn; jne i ,62, 153-156; 1979 
e 1261 .964•g n.1.1. 1/5 .714•g 2/27 
b 1261 .30111g n.1.1. 0/5 .714•g 8/27 
e 1261 .11211g n.1.1. 215 .714•g 20/27 
d 1261 .263•g n.1.1. 2/5 .714•g 12/27 
3· NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYR I DINE 69658·91 ·0 
2069 1261 1.9211g n.1.1. 1/5 .571•g 2/26 Preuu111nn; jnei ,62, 153-156; 1979 
• 1261 1.1011g n.1.1. 2/5 .571•g 6/26 
b 1261 1.50•g n.1.1. 0/5 .57111g 2/26 
1261 1.51•g n.1.1. 2/5 .571•g 4/26 
4 ·NI TROSOMETHYLAM I NOP YR ID I NE 16219-99· 1 
2070 1261 8.33•g n.1.1. 1/5 2.86•g 0/15 Preu1111enn; jne i ,62, 153· 156; 1979 
e 1261 2.85•g n.1.1. 2/5 2.86•g 4/15 
b 1261 3.56•g n.1.1. 2/5 2.8611g 3/15 
1261 4.35•g n.1.1. 0/5 2.86•g 1/15 
N ITROSOMETHYLANIL INE 614·00·6 
2071 1260 n.1.1. 12.4•g 0/5 70.7•g 15/15 Boyland;bjce, 18,265·270; 1964 
e 1260 11.6•g n.1.1. 0/5 70. 711g 8/15 
b 1260 13.511g n.1.1. 0/5 70. 711g 7/15 
e 1260 90.711g n.1.1. 0/5 70.711g 0/15 
2072 1260 2.0711g 16.211g 0/3 64.1•g 15/16 
e 1260 5.0211g 241.•g 0/3 64.1•g 12/16 
b 1260 21.211g n.1.1. 0/3 64.1•g 3/16 
1260 70.4•g n.1.1. 0/3 64.1•g 0/16 
2073 1264 22.0ug 55. 7ug 0/48 83.8ug 39/48 (.31911g 42/48) Sch111hl ;cl et, 1,215·218; 1976 
NITROSOMETHYLPHENIDATE 55557·03·4 
2074 1257 19.311g n.1.1. 14/43 8.0511g 7/31 Giner· Sorol le; f etx, 18,81·83;1980 
e 1257 53.4•g n.1.1. 0/43 8.0511g 0/31 
b 1257 10.611g n.1.1. 24/43 8.0511g 15/31 
2075 1257 4.6911g n.1.1. 15/18 6. 70•g 17/24 
1257 3. 59•g n.1.1. 16/18 6. 70•g 19/24 
NITROSOMETHYLUNDECYLAMINE 68107-26·6 
2076 1207 1.1211g 6.28•g 2/260 6.0711g 10/20 Li J in1ky ;clet,5,209 ·213; 1978 
e 1207 1.1311g 6.3811g 3/260 6.0711g 10/20 
b 1207 1.13•g 6.5911g 5/260 6.0711g 10/20 
e 1207 1.42•g 9.3711g 0/260 6.0711g 8/20 
d 1207 1.9111g 24.911g 8/260 6.0711g 6/20 
• 1207 3.7911g 205.llg 0/260 6.0711g 2/20 
f 1207 3.7911g 205.llg 0/260 6.0711g 2/20 
NITROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 4515· 18·8 
2077 216 13.6•g n.1.a. 0/15 4.42•g 0/15 Gere ie;zkko, 79, 141-144; 1973 
• 216 1.7211g n.1.1. 4/15 4.4211g 9/15 
2078 216 11.9•g n.1.1. 0/15 3.86•g 0/15 
216 1.30•g n.1.1. 5/15 3.8611g 10/15 212 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 
2079 f 01rc wat l iv tu'" 141129 e 
a f 11rc wat tba 11ix 140l29 e 
2080 " 01rc wat l iv hpt 14m29 e 
11 11rc wat tba 11ix 1411129 e 
N-N ITROSOP IPERIDINE 
2081 M " i c11 eat for sqc 52w52 
a M • ic• eat l iv inix 52w52 
b M " icOI eat l iv ade 52w52 
M " ic" eat lun ade 52w52 
2082 b cy" eat l iv hpc 90m92 aw 
b cy" eat tba 11al 90•92 aw 
2083 P b rhe eat l iv hpc 8y9 ew 
a b rhe eat tba 11al ,8y9 ew 
2084 P b rhe ipj l iv hpc 9·11193 euw 
P b rhe ipj tba 11al 911193 euw 
N ITROSOPROLI NE 
2085 R f 11rc wat l iv tu" 171R24 e 
R 11rc wat tba 11ix 17,.24 e 
2086 R 11 •re wat l iv tu11 17•24 a 
R 11 11rc wat tba 11ix 17•24 a 
N-NITROSOPYRROLI DINE 
2087 R f 11rc wat l iv adc 161128 e 
a R mrc wat tba tu11 161128 a 
2088 R •re wat l iv hpc 67w90 a 
R 11rc wat tba 11ix 67w90 a 
2089 R " 11rc wat tba tu11 16,.28 e 
2090 R 11 11rc wat l iv hpc 67w90 e 
11 11rc wat tes pms 67w90 a 
b R " 11rc wat tba 11ix 67w90 a 
2091 R b sda wat l iv hpc 231130 as 
a R b ada wat l iv hpa 231130 as 
b R b sda wat tba 11al 23•30 as 
R b sda wat tba ben 231130 as 
N-NITROSOTH IOMORPHOLINE 
2092 f 11rc wat eso 11ix 9•24 a 
a R 11rc wat ton sqc 9.,24 e 
b R 11rc wat l iv tu11 9,.24 e 
c mrc wat tba mix 9m24 a 
2093 " 11rc wat eso 11ix 38w95 a 
a R " 11rc wat l iv tu11 38w95 a 
b R 11 11rc wat tba 11ix 38w95 e 
NORETHYNODREL 
2094 M f c3h eat ••11 tuM 241124 er 
2095 M cfl eat l iv hct 78w78 er 
2096 M " cfl Ht l iv hct 78w78 er 
2097 M 
2098 M 
2099 M 
NOR HARMAN crf eat 11111 tu11 24in24 er 
r3• eat 11a• tu• 241124 er 
oww 9av l iv hct 65w80 er 
2100 R 11 wis eat for pam 80w80 
a R 11 wis eat ubl tu11 80w80 
NORLESTRIN 
2101 M f c7l 9ev pit tu• 89w89 a 
2102 M cac 9av lun tu• 69w69 ek 
a M coc 9av tba 11ix 69w69 ek 
2103 M f cac 9av tba mix 69w82 ek 
2104 R b aad eat l iv hnd 241124 a 
a R 
b asd Ht pit era 24M24 a 
b R 
b aad Ht 1191 mix 241124 a 
R b asd eat 1191 ade 241124 a 
d b aad Ht ute aep 24M24 a 
R b asd Ht l iv hpa 241124 a 
R b aod Ht 1191 adc 241124 a 
R b asd eat 1191 fep 241124 e 
R b asd eat tba 11ix 241124 a 100n9. -: • -1u9. ---: -.10 ••• -• : . -100 •• -.: . -1"9· -•• : . -10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -19· •••• :. -10 
.> no dre P• 1. 
5.51•9 * P<.2 
6.52m9 \ P<.05 
21.6m9 * P<. 5 
100n9 •• :. -1u9. --• : --10 ••••• : --100. ---: . -1•9·. --: •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -19· -••• : • -10 
1.30119 
2.53119 
5.12119 
3.52119 
(<+) 
(+) 
(+) noTD50 
noTD50 
18.7119 
19.7119 
.635119 
• 712119 
100n9 •• : •• 1u9 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1"9·. -• : . -10. ----: • -100. ---: --19· ----: • -10 
.> 
.> no dre 
6.69•9 
no dre 
no dre P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 
P<.02 
P<.003 + 
P<.02 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P·1. 
P·1. 
100n9. -: • -1U9-••• : --10. • • • •: --100. • --: • .1119. • • •: • -10. • • • •: • -100. • • •: • ·19· • • • •: • -10 
<+ 
<+ 
• +. 2. 10"9 P<. 0005+ 
5.21m9 P<.3 
noTD50 P<. 0005+ 
noTD50 
2.51•9 
noTD50 
5.38•g P<.07 
P<.008 
P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
noTD50 P<. 008 
3 -26m9 Z P<. 0005 
55. 5m9 * P<. 005 
2. 37m9 Z P<. 0005+ 
71.1m9 * P<.2 
100n9 •• : •• 1u9 •••• : --10----• : • -100 •• --: • -1•9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••• -: • -19· •••• : •• 10 
7. 69119 * P<. 002 
22.0m9 * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
7 .38m9 * P<.2 
4 .15119 * P<. 0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
2.29m9 * P<.02 
100ng. -: -.1ug. -•• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1119 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •• --: • -19· •• --: --10 
.> no dre p. 1. 
49.1119 * P<.04 
.> no dre P·1-
pool .> 2.13•g P<.6 
-> no dre P•1. 
.> no dre P-1. 
100n9 •• : •• 1ug •• -• : •• 10. -•• -: •• 100 •••• :. -1•9· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••• : •• 10 
.> 191.119 
no dre P<.3 
P•1. 
100n9 •• : •• 1u9. --• : -.10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1119. -• -: -.10 ••••• : --100. ---: • -19·. -•• : • -10 
.> .> 1. 34119 * P<. 2 
.> no dre p. 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
1. 94119 \ P<. 0005+ 
5.31m9 I P<.0005+ 
6.66119 * P<.0005+ 
14.8119 * P<.0005+ 
27 .4m9 * P<.002 + 
7 -59119 P<. 02 
76.8•9 * P<.05 
21.0119 * P<.2 
14.2•9 * P<.6 
NOVADELOX 100n9. -: •• 1u9 •• --: --10-•••• : --100 ••• -: • -1119 •••• :. -10--• --: --100. -• -: • -19· ----: --10 
2105 M b alb eat lun ade 80w80 e .no dre P·1. 
a M b alb eat lun 11ix 80w80 e no dre P•1. 
b M b alb eat l iv hpt 80w80 a no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 213 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkl)' Code 
N·NITROSOPIPERAZINE 5632-47-3 
2079 229 2.48mg n.s.s. 0/13 .96411g 0/10 4.9011g 0/10 Gare ia;zkko, 74, 179-184; 1970 
229 1.5511g n.s.a. 4/13 .96411g 8/10 4.9011g 7/10 
2080 229 1.0611g n.s.a. 0/57 .672mg 1/10 (3.3011g 0/10) 
229 3.1611g n. a. s. 12/57 .67211g 4/10 3.3011g 3/10 
N · NITROSOPIPER !DINE CPIP) 100-75-4 
2081 225 • 73611g 2. 6011g 0/30 6.0011g 18/33 Takayama ;naw i, 56, 142; 1969 
225 1.26•g 6.3611g 0/30 6.0011g 11/33 
b 225 2.0911g 36.611g 0/30 6.0011g 6/33 
225 1.4911g n.s.s. 2/30 6.0011g 10/33 
2082 2000 n.1.1. 39.311g 0/38 279.llg 5/5 Ada11son;ossc, 129-156; 1982/S i eber pers. co1111. 
• 2000 n.s.s. n.s.s. 1/38 279.llg 5/5 
2083 2000 5.8911g 74.611g 0/32 280.llg 6/7 
a 2000 5.9911g 97 .611g 3/32 280.•g 6/7 
2084 200011 .17711g 4.6911g 0/32 5.5911g 3/5 
a 200011 .18211g n.s.s. 3/32 5.5911g 3/5 
N ITROSOPROL I NE 7519-36-0 
2085 216 13.611g n.a.s. 0/15 4.42•g 0/15 Gare ia;zkko, 79, 141-144; 1973 
a 216 2.0511g n.a.s. 4/15 4.4211g 8/15 
2086 216 11.911g n.a.a. 0/15 3.8611g 0/15 
a 216 4.3911g n.s.a. 5/15 3.8611g 4/15 
N·NITROSOPYRROLIDINE 930-55·2 
2087 1189 .93211g 5.1811g 0/20 4.4811g 13/15 Greenblatt; jnc i ,50, 799-802; 1973 
a 1189 1.2311g n.1.s. 14/20 4.4811g 13/15 
2088 228 n.1.1. 2.0911g 0/33 6.0811g 13/13 Greenblatt; jnci ,48, 1687-1696;1972 
a 228 n.1.1. n.1.1. 14/33 6.0811g 13/13 
2089 1189 .95911g 58.3•g 7120 3.14•g 12/15 Greenblatt ; jnci ,50, 799-802; 1973 
2090 228 n.1.1. 1.54•g 0/34 4.25•g 12/12 Greenblatt; jnc i ,48, 1687-1696; 1972 
a 228 1.8411g 28.311g 0/34 4.2511g 4/12 
b 228 n.1.1. 1.8011g 6/34 4.25•g 12/12 
2091 371 2.2311g 5.0111g 0/61 .30011g 0160 1.00•g 13/62 3.00•g 30/38 (10.011g 9124> Preusseann;zkko, 90, 161-166; 1977 
a 371 20.911g 857 .Ilg 0/61 .30011g 3160 1.0011g 4/62 3.0011g 1/38 10.011g 5/24 
b 371 1.6011g 3.9011g 6/61 .30011g 12/60 1.0011g 20/62 3.0011g 32/38 C10.011g 11/24> 
371 20.911g n.a.a. 5/61 .30011g 7160 1.0011g 9/62 3.0011g 3/38 10.011g 6/24 
N • N ITROSOTHIOMORPHOLINE 26541-51-5 
2092 229 3.1111g 34.411g 0/13 • 73911g 0/10 4.2511g 6/17 Gare; a; zkko, 74, 179-184;1970 
a 229 5.3111g n.a.a. 0/13 • 73911g 1/10 4.2511g 2/17 
b 229 1.41•g n.a.a. 0/13 • 73911g 0/10 4.25mg 0/17 
c 229 2.22•g n.s.a. 4/13 • 739•g 3/10 4.2511g 9/17 
2093 229 1.4211g 21.511g 0/57 .57111g 0/11 2.900lg 4/10 
a 229 .88811g n.1.1 . 0/57 .571•g 0/11 2.9011g 0/10 
b 229 • 79411g n.1.1. 12/57 .571•g 4/11 2.90mg 6/10 
NORETHYNQDREL 68-23-5 
2094 1175 2.48•g n.a.a. 54/92 1.76•g 45/77 Ruda l i; jnc i ,49,813 -819;1972 
2095 1453• 12.111g n.a.1. 0/39 .125•g 0/39 1.5011g 0/40 5.00Mg 2/39 Barrows; j txe, 3, 219-230; 1977 
2096 145311 16.311g n.a.a . 6/39 .125Mg 7/40 1.5011g 1/40 5.0011g 3/40 
2097 1175 • 243•g n.s.a. 161/167p 1.7611g 48/49 Ruda l i; jnc i ,49,813-819;1972 
2098 1175 1.86•g n.1.1. 50/73 1.76•g 19/31 
2099 1453 6.1911g n.1.1. 1/50 1.02•g 0/50 Barrows; j txe, 3, 219· 230; 1977 
NOR HARMAN 244-63-3 
2100 1460 31.011g n.a.a. 0/28 20.011g 1/24 Hag iwara; txl t,6, 71-75; 1980 
1460 58.511g n.a.a. 0/28 20.011g 0/24 
NORLESTRIN 8015-12-1 
2101 230 .34711g n.a.a. 1/8 .20011g 7 /15 2.0011g 5/8 Poel ;seie, 154,402-403; 1966 
2102 585• .19411g n.a. a. 0/15 .143•g 0/15 Poel ;canr ,28,845 -859; 1968 
a 585• 83.4ug n.a.a. 4/15 .14311g 3/15 
2103 585n 57.2ug n.a.a. 8/15 .120•g 7/15 
2104 1403 .941•g 6.8811g 4/200 .33811g 13/100(3.38 11g 10/100> Schardein; txap, 16, 10· 23; 1970 
a 1403 3.0711g 13.311g 64/200 .33811g 19/100 3.3811g 55/100 
b 1403 3.47•g 27 .911g 61/200 .338•g 34/100 3.3811g 51/100 
c 1403 7.9111g 37.3•g 5/200 .338•g 2/100 3.3811g 17/100 
d 1403 12.011g 164.•g 4/200 .33811g 2/100 3.3811g 10/100 
• 1403 2.3011g 37 .2g• 0/200 .33811g 3/100(3.38 •g 4/100> 
f 1403 22.911g "····· 2/200 .338•g 0/100 3.3811g 4/100 
g 1403 6.3811g n.1.1. 58/200 .33811g 33/100 3.3811g 37 /100 
h 1403 2.59•g n.1.1. 159/200 .33811g 82/100 3.3811g 83/100 
NOVADELOX 
2105 1345 9.23g• n.a.a. 0/41 19.611g 1/42 196.•g 1/42 1.96g• 0/42 Sharratt; f etx, 2, 527 · 538; 1964 
a 1345 9.85g• n.1.a. 1/41 19.6•g 1/42 196.mg 1/42 1.96g• 0/42 
b 1345 11.0g• n.1.1. 1/41 19.611g 1/42 196.Mg 0/42 1.96g• 0/42 214 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2106 
a 
b b alb eat l iv •hp 28•28 e 
R b alb eat tba ban 281128 e 
R b alb eat tba 111l 28•28 e 
OCHRATOXIN A 
2107 R b wit gav l iv tu• 12•26 e 
a R 
b wia gav tba tu• 12•26 e 
OVULEN 
2108 M f crf eat •aM tu11 24•24 r 
2109 M " crf eat .,.., tu• 241124 r 
N-C9-0X0-2-FLUORENYL )ACETAMIDE 
2110 R f buf eat •gl adc 861186 e 
a R buf eat edu aqc 861186 e 
b buf eat l iv hpt 861186 e 
1' -OXOSAFROLE 
2111 R "cdr eat liv car 73w95 e 
OXPRENOLOL -HC l 
2112 f cf1 eat liv car 78w91 e 
a cf1 aat lun ade 78w91 e 
b cf1 eat lun nfa 78w91 e 
2113 cf1 eat lun car 78w78 e 
a cf1 eat l iv tum 78w78 e 
2114 " cf1 eat l iv pea 78w91 e 
a • cf1 eat lun ade 78w91 e 
2115 • cf1 eat l iv car 78w78 e 
a " cf1 eat lun ade 78w78 a 
b 11 cf1 eat lun car 78w78 a 
2116 f cdr eat liv tu• 78w78 a 
2117 • cdr eat liv hpa 78w78 a .>no dre P· 1-
6.48g11 * P<.04 -
15.6g11 * P<.5 
100ng. -: --1ug. ---: •• 10 •• --• : •. 100 .•.• :. -1•g ••.. : •. 10 •.•• -: . -100 .•.• : •. 1g •..•. :. -10 
.> no dre 
no dre P•1. 
P•1-
100ng •• : .• 1ug •..• : .• 10 ••.•• :. -100 .•.. : --1•g--•• : •• 10 •.•.. :. -100 ••.• : •. 1g ••. -. : . -10 
-> .85811g P<.8 
P<.0005 + .300•g 
100ng .. :. -1ug •..• : .• 10 •..•• :. -100 .••. :. -1•g •.•• : •. 10 •.•.. :. -100 ..• -: -.1g •• --. : . -10 
6.17Mg 
32.0•g 
102.•g P<.0005+ 
P<.04 + 
P<.3 + 
100ng .• : -.1ug. -•• : .• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 .•.. :. -1•g .... :. -10-...• :. -100 .•.• : •• 1g •..•. :. -10 
-> no dre P-1. 
100ng .• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : .• 100 •... :. -1•g ••.• :. -10 •.... :. -100 .•.. : .• 1g •..•. :. -10 
.> 2.40g11 * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
.> 425. Ilg P<. 2 
no dre P•1. 
.> 2.12g• * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
-> 2 .62g11 P<. 7 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
-> no dre P•1. 
-> 1.68g11 * P<.3 
N·OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE·2·SULFENAMIDE. -1ug ..•. : •. 10 •.••• :. -100 ••.• :. -1•g ..•. :. -10 .•.•• :. -100 •••• : .• 1g •.•.• :. -10 
2118 f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre P• 1. 
a f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 1.31g• P<. 7 
2119 " b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 20. 1g• P<1. 
11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b 
2120 
a 
b 
2121 
a 
b • b6a or l tba "ix 76w76 evx 
b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6c orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
" b6c or l l un ado 76w76 evx 
" b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
598.•g 
1.23g• 
386.•g 
359.llg 
556.llg 
200.•g P-1. 
P<.1 
P<.3 
P<.04 -
P<.04 -
P<.1 
P<.007 -
PARATHION 100ng •• :. -1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••.•• :. -100 •... :. -1•g ..•. :. -10-•••. : .• 100 ...• : •• 1g .•.•. :. -10 
2122 f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w89 
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w89 
b f b6c eat lun MXB 80w89 
2123 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 67w89 a 
a • b6c eat l iv MXB 67w89 a 
b • b6c eat lun MXB 67w89 a 
2124 f OH eat TBA MXB 19•26 V :> 
• OH eat l iv MXB 19•26 v 
2125 OH eat •gl fba 191125 v pool 
a OH eat adr MXA 19•25 v 
b OH eat adr coa 19•25 v 
2126 " OH eat TBA MXB 191126 v :> 
a II OH eat l iv MXB 19•26 v 
2127 • OH eat adr MXA 19•25 v pool 
a • OH eat edr coa 19•25 v 
b " OH eat pni itc 19•25 v :> 
:> 
+ no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
75.111g * P<. 7 
111.•g * P<.7 
52.511g * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
16.411g * P<.2 
2.0711g \ P<.004 
3.9311g * P<.00051 
5.3111g * P<.004 a 
3.6511g * P<.4 
17. 711g * P<.09 
5.220lg * P<.005 a 
6.39•g * P<.007 a 
19.2•g * P<.03 
PA TU LIN 100ng •• : .• 1ug .••. : •. 10 .••.. :. -100 •.•. :. ·1•g .•.• :. -10 ••.•. : .• 100 .•.• : •• 1g. · · ·.:. -10 
2128 R f ada gav l iv •ha 17•37 v 
a R ada gav tba 11ix 17•37 v 
b R ada gav tba ban 171137 v 
R ada gav tba Hl 171137 v 
PENTACHLORON I TROBENZENE 
2129 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 v 
a M b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 v 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 v 
2130 M b6c orl l iv hpt 77w77 evx 
a M b6c orl lun ade 77w77 evx 
b M f b6c orl tba •ix 77w77 evx .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : .• 10 •..•. :. -100 ••.. :. -1•g .••. : •. 10 .•••. :. -100 .••• : .• 1g .•.•• :. -10 
:> 3.32g11 * P<.2 
9.69g• * P<.09 
30. 7g• * P<.4 
"' 252. 11g P<. 02 
1.11g• P<.3 
195 .•g P<.009 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 215 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose !Inc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2106 1345 6.57g• n.1.1. 0/46 7 .07•g 0/47 70.70lg 1/47 707.•g 0/45 
• 1345 2.16g• n.1.1. 3/46 7.0711g 1/47 70. 711g 1/47 707.•g 6/45 
b 1345 2.84g• n.1.1. 6/46 7.0711g 2/47 70.711g 1/47 707 .Ilg 5/45 
OCHRATOX IN A 303·47·9 
2107 1365 .132•g n.1.1 . 0/10 76.4ug 0/10 .22911g 0/10 Purchaae;fctx,9,681-682;1971 
1365 . 132•g n.1.1. 0/10 76.4ug 0/10 .22911g 0/10 
OVULEN (ethynodiol diacetate/ethinyl utradiol I 10: 1 J> 8056·92·6 
2108 1463 57 .Oug n.1.1. 161/167 .390•g 37/38 Ruda Ii; g•cr, 17 ,243·252;1975 
2109 1463 .15811g .66411g 0176 .36011g 14/25 
N · <9·0XO· 2 · FLUORENYL lACETAMIDE 3096·50·2 
2110 144 2.98•g 15.4•g 0/18 12.4•g 11/18 Morris; jnc i ,24, 149· 180; 1960 
• 144 9.65•g n.1.1. 0/18 12.4•g 3/18 
b 144 16.611g n.1.1. 0/18 12.4•g 1/18 
1' ·OXOSAFROLE 
2111 1035d 239.llg n.1.1. 0/18 77 .3•g 0/18 Wialock i ;canr ,37, 1883· 1891; 1977 
OXPRENOLOL. HC l 6452·73·9 
2112 469• 391.•g n.1.1. 0/24 12.9•g 0/28 42.9•g 0/28 129.llg 1/24 Nawbarne; txap,41, 535·546;1977 
• 469• 464.•g n.1.1 . 5/49 12.911g 6/49 42.9•g 4/49 129.llg 4/50 
b 469• 529.•g n.1.1. 0/24 12.911g 1/28 42.9•g 0/28 129.llg 0/24 
2113 469n 143.•g n.1.1. 1/25 150.llg 6137 
469n 939.•g n.1.1. 0/40 150.•g 0/54 
2114 469• 366.•g n.1.1. 0/49 12.911g 4/49 42.9•g 1/49 129.11g 3/49 
• 469• 453.•g n.1.1 . 4/49 12.9•g 7/49 42.911g 3/49 129.•g 4/49 
2115 469n 279.•g n.1.1. 1/29 150.•g 2/36 
• 469n 316.•g n.1.1. 2/29 150.•g 2/36 
b 469n 291.•g n.1.1. 9/44 150.llg 7/48 
2116 469• 37.3•g n.1.1. 0/30 15.0•g 0/30 50.0•g 0130 150.•g 0/30 
2117 469• 317 .•g n.1.1. 1/29 15.0•g 0/30 50.0•g 0/30 150.•g 2/30 
N · OXYO I ETHYLENEBENZOTH I AZOLE · 2 ·SUL F ENAMI OE (HIX) 102· 77·2 
2118 1298 243.•g n.1.1. 1/17 205.•g 1/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
• 1298 405.•g n.1.1. 0/17 205.llg 0/18 
b 1298 147 .•g n.1.1. 2/17 205.llg 3/18 
2119 1298 211.•g n.1.1. 1/18 190.•g 1/17 
• 1298 356.•g n.1.1. 2/18 190.•g 0/17 
b 1298 250.•g n.1.1. 3/18 190.llg 1/17 
2120 1298 147.•g n.1.1. 0/16 205.llg 2/17 
• 1298 201.•g n.1.1. 0/16 205.•11 1/17 
b 1298 116.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 205.•11 3/17 
2121 1298 108.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 190.•11 3/17 
• 1298 137.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 190.1111 2/17 
b 1298 75.3•11 2. 70g• 0/16 190.•11 5/17 
PARATHION 56·38·2 
2122 c00226 33.0•11 n.1.1. 3/10 9.40•11 12/50 18.5•11 9/50 
• c00226 107.•11 n.1.1. 1/10 9.40•11 1/50 18.5•11 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c00226 94.0•11 n.1.1. 1/10 9.40•11 0/50 18.5•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2123 c00226 12.6•11 n.1.1. 2/10 7.701111 14/50 13.2•g 12/50 
• c00226 19.6•11 n.1.1. 2/10 7.701111 6/50 13.2•11 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c00226 23.8•11 n.1.1. 0/10 7.701111 3/50 13.2•11 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2124 c00226 1.57•11 n.1.1. 10/10 .820•11 34/50 1.60•11 32/50 
• c00226 5.67•11 n.1.1 . 0/10 .820•11 1/50 1.60•11 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2125 c00226 . 947•11 16.4•11 9/90p .8201111 16/50 (1.60•11 8/50) 
• c00226 2.01•11 15.0•11 4/90p .8201111 6/50 1.601111 13/50 adr:coa,coc . 
b c00226 2.48•11 38.8•11 4/90p .820•11 4/50 1.60.11 11/50 
2126 c00226 1.03•11 n.1.1. 5/10 .9001111 25/50 1.80•g 35/50 
• c00226 6.12•11 n.1.1. 0/10 .9001111 0/50 1.80•11 4/50 l iv: hpf, hpc, nnd . 
2127 c00226 2.54•11 54.31111 3/90p .900•11 7/50 1.80•11 11/50 adr:coa,coc. 
• c00226 2.99•11 111.•ll 2/90p .900•11 5/50 1.80•11 9/50 
b c00226 6.62•11 n.1.1. 0/90p .900•11 1/50 1.80•11 3/50 s 
PATULIN 149·29·1 
2128 393 7 .80•11 n.1.1 . 1/50 .316•11 0/50 011w1ld;fctx, 16,243·247; 1978 
• 393 • 809•11 n.1.1. 42/50 .316•11 37/50 
b 393 1.23•11 n.1.1. 29/50 .3161111 25/50 
393 1.80•11 n.1.1. 13/50 .316•11 12/50 
PENTACHLORON ITROBENZENE <PCNBl 82·68-8 
2129 c00419 1.2211• n.1.1. 2/20 446.•11 5/50 893.•11 10/50 
• c00419 2.9311• n.1.1. 0/20 446.•11 0/50 893.•11 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd • 
b c00419 5.0011• n.1.1. 0120 446.•11 0/50 893.•11 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2130 1101 86. 711g n. 1. 1. 0/16 169.•11 4/18 lnnu;ntii, 1968/1969 
• 1101 180.•11 n.1.1. 0/16 169.•11 1/18 
b 1101 73.4•11 4.2711• 0/16 169.•11 5/18 216 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2131 
a " b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 v 
"' b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 v 
" b6c eat lun MXB 78w91 v :> no dre P-1. 
b 
2132 
b 
2133 
b 
2134 
a 
b 
2135 m b6c or l l iv hpt 77w77 evx 
"' b6c or l lun ade 77w77 evx 
"' b6c orl tba mix 77w77 evx 
b6a or l l iv hpt 77w77 evx 
b6a or l lun ade 77w77 evx 
b6a orl tba •ix 77w77 evx 
"' b6a or l l iv hpt 77w77 evx 
"' b6a or l lun ade 77w77 evx 
" b6a orl tba "1ix 77w77 evx 
f OHi eat TBA MXB 181126 dv .> 
.> 
:> no dre 
no dre 
501.0lg 
501.0lg 
181.119 
1. 05911 
no dre 
no dre 
71.1119 
no dre 
68.7m9 
no dre p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.009 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.004 
p.1. 
os11 eat l iv MXB 181126 dv no dre P• 1. 
2136 "' OSll eat TBA MXB 18"126 dv 
"' OSll eat l iv MXB 181126 dv :> no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
2,3,4,5,6 -PENTACHLOROPHENOL 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 •.•.. :. -100 •..• : .• 1mg •••• : •• 10 ••..• :. -100 •.•. :. -1g ••••• : •• 10 
2137 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx no dre 
2138 m b6a orl liv 11ix 76w76 evx .> 90.411g 
"' b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b m b6a orl tba "1ix 76w76 evx 520.11g 
2139 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 56.1mg 
b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6c orl tba mix 76w76 evx 26.3mg 
2140 "' b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 108.m9 
a "' b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 108.119 
b 11 b6c orl tba "1ix 76w76 evx 33. 7m9 
2141 sss eat tba tu"' 24"124 e .> no dre 
2142 11 SH eat tbe tum 95w95 e .> no dre 
• • : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : .. 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .•.•. : .• 10 P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.02 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.05 
P•1. 
p.1 • 
N-PENTYL -N' ·NITRO· N · NITROSOGUANID !NE 
2143 R m wis wat stg tuOI 52w78 er . > no dre P•1 • 
n·PENTYLHYDRAZI NE. HC l 
2144 M f swa wat lun "1ix 94w94 
a M swa wat lun ade 94w94 
b M swa wat lun adc 94w94 
c M swa wat blv 11ix 94w94 
d M swa wat bl v ag"1 94w94 
M swa wat bl v ang 94w94 
M swa wat l iv mix 94w94 
2145 M m swa wat lun ade 94w94 
a M "' swa wat lun 11ix 94w94 
b M " swa wat blv mix 94w94 
M 111 swa wat l iv 11ix 94w94 
PEPPERMINT OIL 
2146 M "' cfl gav lun tu"' 19m24 e 
Mm cfl gav liv tum 19"124 e 
b M "' cfl gav tba mix 19m24 e 
M "' cfl gav tba Hl 191124 e 100ng •• : •• 1ug .•.• : •• 10 .•••. : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• :. -10-•.•• : .• 100 •••• :. ·19· •••• :. -10 
• + 5.87m9 
7 .95119 
18.7"1g 
35.5"1g 
71.9mg 
82.2119 
223.119 
30.0mg 
46.9mg 
65.6"1g 
271.mg 
100ng •• : •. 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1119 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .•.• : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• > no dre P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.003 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P<.4 
P<.04 
P<.3 
P<.2 
P<.7 
P•1 • 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
112.mg * P<.6 
PETASITENINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1"1g .••. :. -10-•••. : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
2147 f aci wat Liv h11s 68w68 er +historical P<.003 + 
P<.003 + 
P<.05 
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 + 
P<.2 aci wat liv inix 68w68 er +historical 
b R aci wat Liv lea 68w68 er +historical 
2148 Rm aci wat Liv mix 58w58 er +historical 
a R"' aci wat Liv lea 58w58 er +historical 
b R"' aci wat liv h111 58w58 er +historical • 
PHENACETIN 
2149 M f cb6 eat l iv tu11 77w77 e 
2150 M 11 cb6 eat l iv hnd 77w77 e 
2151 sda eat mgl adc 261126 e 
R sda eat edu sqc 26"126 e 
2152 R sda eat myl 181124 
a R 
b R 
R 
d R 
e R 
f R 
g R 
h R 
2153 
a sda eat mix mix 18"124 
sda eat nas adc 180124 
sda eat ubl tee 18"124 
sda eat ubl pa11 18.,24 
sda eat nas tee 18•24 
sda eat nas sqc 18•24 
sda eat l iv tum 181124 
sda eat tba mix 18•24 
• sda eat k/c rct 27m27 
" sda eat for sqp 271127 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1"1g •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .•.•. :. -10 
. > 
.> no dre P-1 • 
12.99"1 * P<.2 
1.38gm P<.08 
1.43gm 
2.56gm * 
2. 73gm * 
7. 739m * P<.02 
P<.0005-
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 + 
11.79m * P<.02 
23.8gm * P<.08 
23.8gm * P<.2 
48.0g"1 * P<.7 
no dre P• 1. 
1.21911 * P<.0005 
+historical 
+historical P<.02 
P<.1 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 217 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose Jlnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2131 c00419 498.llg n.s.s. 6/20 265.llg 11/50 530.Mg 12/50 
a c00419 669.Rlg n.s.s. 2/20 265.llg 8/50 530.Mg 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00419 n.s.1. n.1.a. 0/20 265.Mg 0/50 530.Mg 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2132 1101 123.llg n.1.1. 0/16 157 .Mg 2/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
8 1101 123.llg n.s.s. 0/16 157.llg 2/18 
b 1101 68.411g 3.98g• 0/16 157.llg 5/18 
2133 1101 170.llg n.1.1. 0/17 169.llg 1/17 
a 1101 324.•g n.1.s. 1/17 169.llg 0/17 
b 1101 152.•g n.1.1. 2/17 169.•g 2/17 
2134 1101 32.2•g 264.•g 1/18 157.llg 10/17 
1101 198.0lg n.s.s. 2/18 157.llg 1/17 
b 1101 29.411g 544.llg 3/18 157.•g 11/17 
2135 c00419 322.11g n.a.a. 14/20 272.Rlg 34/50 <514.•g 20/50) 
a c00419 n.1. 1. n.s.1. 0/20 272.IOg 0/50 514.llg 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2136 c00419 409.11g n.a.a. 8/20 152.llg 20/50 280.11g 18/50 
a c00419 1.67g• n.a.a. 0/20 152.•g 1/50 280.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2 ,3, 4, 5 ,6· PENTACHLOROPHENOL CDowicide-7, PCP> 87·86·5 
2137 1285 35.811g n.a.a. 0/17 18.111g 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1285 35.811g n.s.1. 1/17 18.111g 0/18 
b 1285 17 .011g n.1.1. 2/17 18.111g 2/18 
2138 1285 13.211g n.a.s. 1/18 16.8•g 2/17 
a 1285 20.711g n.a.s. 2/18 16.8Rlg 1/17 
b 1285 12.2 .. g n.s.1. 3/18 16.811g 3/17 
2139 1285 13.811g n.s.a. 0/16 18.111g 2/18 
a 1285 35.811g n.1.1. 0/16 18.111g 0/18 
b 1285 9.04•g n.s.1. 0/16 18.111g 4/18 
2140 1285 17 .5Mg n.1.1. 0/16 16.8•g 1/18 
a 1285 17 .511g n.s.1. 0/16 16.8mg 1/18 
b 1285 10.2•g n.1.1. 0/16 16.8•g 3/18 
2141 1401 10.0•g n.s.s. 27/27 1.00•g 26/27 3.0011g 25/27 10.0•g 25/27 30.0•g 25/27 Schwetz;pcpl ,301·309;1978 
2142 1401 33.411g n.1.1. 11/27 1.00R!g 13/26 3.0011g 13/27 10.011g 12/27 30.0mg 11/27 
N · PENTYL · N' · NITRO·N ·NITROSOGUAN ID !NE 13010·10·1 
2143 1082 1.6011g n.a.a. 0/9 2.30•g 016 Hataukura;gann, 70, 181-185; 1979 
n· PENTYLHYDRAZINE. HC l 1119-68 ·2 
2144 36 3.5411g 11.211g 21/100 12.511g 38/50 Sh;.,; zu ;bj ca, 31,492·496;1975 
a 36 4.6911g 16.311g 18/100 12.511g 33/50 
b 36 10.0•g 45.4•g 4/100 12.5•g 17/50 
c 36 15.611g 245.•g 5/100 12.511g 11/50 
d 36 24.411g n.1.1. 3/100 12.5•g 6/50 
• 36 26.9•g n.1.1. 2/100 12.5Mg 5/50 
f 36 39.311g n.s.s. 3/100 12.511g 3/50 
2145 36 11.6•g n.1.1. 15/100 10.411g 15/50 
a 36 12.8•g n.s.a. 23/100 10.411g 16/50 
b 36 19.8•g n.a.a. 6/100 10.411g 7/50 
36 31.111g n. a.a. 6/100 10.411g 4/50 
PEPPERMINT OIL 8006-90·4 
2146 710 21.1mg n.1.1. 102/240 2.6411g 19/51 10.511g 20/49 Roe; j ept ,2, 799-819; 1979 
a 710 25.311g n.1.1. 69/240 2.6411g 13/51 10.511g 14/49 
b 710 11.011g n.1.1. 170/240 2.64•g 37/51 10.511g 34/49 
710 17.311g n.1.1. 75/240 2.6411g 20/51 10.511g 17/49 
PETASITENINE 
2147 427 .47711g 9.69•g 0/9 5. 7111g 4/6 Hirono;jnci ,58, 1155· 1157; 1977 
a 427 .47711g 9.6911g 019 5.7111g 4/6 
b 427 .994•g n.1.1. 0/9 5. 7111g 2/6 
2148 427 .18311g 3.7111g 0/10 5.0011g 4/5 
a 427 .324•g 13.1•g 0/10 5.00•g 3/5 
b 427 .77011g n.1.1. 0/10 5.0011g 1/5 
PHENACETIN 62·44·2 
2149 1028 848.•g n.a.a. 0/36 268.•g 0/37 754.•g 0/41 Hackl in;dact,3, 135· 163; 1980 
2150 1028 2.11g• n.a.a. 0/35 268.11g 0/40 754.llg 1/32 
2151 1449 451.•g n.a.a. 1/30 268.•g 5/30 Johansson; ap111,84,375·383;1976 
a 1449 494.•g n.a.a. 0130 268.•g 4/30 
2152 708 1.45g• 5.32g• 0/65 469.llg 6/50 938.llg 11/50 Isaka;gann, 70,29·36; 1979 
a 708 1.52g• 5. 79g• 0/65 469.•g 5/50 938.llg 11/50 
b 708 3.15g• 58.5g• 0/65 469.•g 1/50 938.•g 5/50 
c 708 4.05g• n.1.1. 0/65 469.llg 0/50 938.•g 4/50 
d 708 5.85g• n.1.1. 0/65 469.•g 0/50 938.llg 2/50 
• 708 5.87g• n ••.•• 0/65 469.•g 1/50 938.•g 1/50 
f 708 7.82g• n.a.a. 0/65 469.llg 1/50 938.llg 0/50 
g 708 3.22g11 n.a.a. 0/65 469.•g 0/50 938.•g 0/50 
h 708 728.•g 2.89g• 6/65 469.•g 19/50 938.llg 21/50 
2153 1459 447.•g n.1.1. 0/30 214.llg 4/30 Johansson; i j cn,27 ,521·529;1981 
a 1459 661.•g n.1.1. 0/30 214.•g 2/30 218 
b 
d 
2154 
• 
b 
d 
• 
f 
g 
h Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
11 ad• eat ubl tu• 27•27 
11 ado oat k/p tu• 271127 
• ado Ht l i V hH 27•27 
• ad• Ht 11ix •ix 18•24 
II ado Ht llY l 18•24 
11 1da eat nu ode 181124 
• ad• eat ubl tee 18•24 
11 ad• eat nu tee 18•24 
11 ad• eat nu aqc 18•24 
11 ado eat k/p rec 18•24 
11 ado eat l iv tu• 181124 
11 ad• eat tb• 11ix 181124 GOLD ET AL. 
.+ • TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
1.64g11 P<.3 
+historical P<.3 
5.47g11 P<.3 
741.11g * P<.0005+ 
2.38g11 * P<.0005-
2.38g11 * P<.0005+ 
2. 71gll P<.0005+ 
4.05g• * P<.002 + 
7 .53g11 * P<.06 + 
38.3g11 * P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
631.llg. P<.0005 
PHENAZONE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2155 R 11 ado eat k/p 11ix 26•26 '" 1.23g11 P<.02 + 
a R 11 ada eat l iv ccy 261126 2.55g11 P<.1 
b R 11 ada eat ubl tuo• 26•2(> 1.55g11 P<.3 
PHENAZOPYRIDINE. HCl 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2156 f b6c eat l iv MXA 191124 
a b6c eat l iv hpc 191124 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 19•24 
b6c eat l iv MXB 19•24 
d b6c eat lun MXB 19•24 
2157 " b6c eat TBA MXB 191124 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 191124 
b " b6c Ht lun MXB 191124 
2158 f f34 eat col acn 18•24 
a f 134 eat TBA MXB 181124 
b f 134 eat l iv MXB 181124 
2159 11 f34 eat MXA MXA 181124 
a 11 f34 eat MXA MXA 181124 
b 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
m f34 Ht l iv MXB 181124 + 71.111g * P<.007 c 
132.11g * P<.03 c 
89. 711g * P<.2 
71.111g * P<.007 
4.65g• * P<.9 
496.11g * P<.8 
811.11g * P<.9 
1.30g11 * P<.8 
+historical • P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
303.11g * P<.02 c 
333.11g * P<.02 c 
no dre P•1. 
2.17g11 * P<.5 
PHENE TERIN 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .•.• : • .1g. • • • ·: • 010 
2160 f b6c gov MXB MXB 70w83 aea • 21111g Z P<. 0005 
• 
b 
d 
• 
f 
g 
h 
2161 
2162 
• 
b 
d 
• 
f 
g 
2163 
b 
2164 
• 2165 
2166 
• 2167 b6c gav l un MXA 70w83 aea 
b6c gav MXA 70w83 aea 
b6c gav ova tu• 70w83 aes 
b6c gav •ye arn 70w83 aea 
b6c gav hea 70w83 aea 
b6c gav TBA MXB 70w83 aea 
b6c gav l iv MXB 70w83 aea 
b6c gov l un MXB 70w83 aea 
b6c gov · · -MXA 70w82 aea pool 
• b6c gov MXB MXB 64w81 a 
11 b6c gov l un MXA 64w81 • 
11 b6c gov lun a/c 64w81 • 
11 b6c gov • • • MXA 64w81 • 
• b6c gov •Ye arn 64w81 • 
11 b6c gov TBA MXB 64w81 a 
11 b6c gov l iv MXB 64w81 • 
11 b6c gov l un MXB 64w81 • 
11 b6c gov MXA 64w81 • pool 
11 b6c gov • • • hea 64w81 • 
11 b6c gov 11yc arn 64w81 • 
f ada gav TBA MXB 52w85 
ada gav l iv MXB 52w85 
ada gav 11g l acn 52w85 pool 
• ada gov TBA MXB 52w84 
11 ada gov l iv MXB 52w84 
• ado gov • • • MXA 52w84 pool + 
+ 
+ .41611g * P<.0005c 
• 65211g Z P<. 0005c 
.91211g * P<.0005 
.95111g * P<.0005c 
1 • 5211g * P<. 0005 
.18311g P<.0005 
no dre P•1. 
.41611g * P<.0005 
2. 0711g * P<. 0005c 
• 75711g * P<. 0005 
1. 1911g * P<. 0005c 
2.0511g P<.0005c 
2.1311g * P<.0005c 
3.87•g * P<.0005c 
• 72811g * P<. 0005 
32.911g * P<.9 
1.1911g * P<.0005 
1 . 8911g * P<. 0005c 
6.1511g * P<.002 
6.2811g * P<.003 c 
.27111g * P<.0005-
no dre P-1 . 
• 52311g * P<. 0005c 
.48111g * P<.002 -
no dre P•1 . 
#2. 7311g * P<. 003 -
PHENFORMIN. Ht l 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2168 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 
• M f b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 181124 
2169 M 11 b6c Ht TBA MXB 181124 a 
• M " b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 a 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 181124 a 
2170 f f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
2171 f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
• f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
m 134 eat l iv MXB 181124 
PHENOBARBITAL 
2172 M f c3l Ht l iv tu• 52w52 r 
2173 M f c3l eat l iv tu11 52w52 r :> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
36.411g 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
<+ noTD50 
+ 12.211g P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 219 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1459 435.llg n.1.1. 2/30 214.•g 5/30 
1459 891.11g n.1.1. 0/30 214.•g 1/30 
d 1459 891.llg n.1.1. 0!30 214.•g 1/30 
2154 708 503.llg 1.15g11 0/65 375 ... g 17/50 750.11g 23/50 Isaka;gann, 70,29·36; 1979 
• 708 1.30g11 6.32g11 0/65 375 ... g 8/50 750.llg 7150 
b 708 1.30g• 6.32gll 0/65 375.•g 8/50 750.•g 7/50 
c 708 1.43g• 6.12g11 0/65 375 ... g 1/50 750.•g 12/50 
d 708 1.91g• 13.5g• 0/65 375.•g 2/50 750.llg 7150 
e 708 2.86g• n.1.1. 0/65 375.llg 3!50 750.11g 2/50 
f 708 6.24g• n.1.1. 0/65 375.•g 0!50 750.•g 1/50 
g 708 2.58g11 n.1.1. 0/65 375.•g 0/50 750.•g 0/50 
h 708 432.•g 990.llg 1/65 375.llg 20/50 750.llg 26/50 
PHENAZONE 60·80-0 
2155 1459 425.•g n.1.1. 0/30 214.llg 4/30 Johansson; i jcn,27 ,521-529 ;1981 
• 1459 628.•g n.1.1 . 0/30 214.llg 2/30 
b 1459 413.•g n.1.1. 2/30 214.llg 5/30 
PHENAZOPYRID !NE. HC l 136-40-3 
2156 c01672 38.011g 991.llg 2/15 41.6•g 11/35 84.511g 19/35 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c01672 61.611g n.1.a . 2/15 41.611g 6/35 84.511g 14/35 
b c01672 34.1•g n.1.1. 8/15 41.611g 20/35 84.511g 27/35 
c c01672 38.011g 991.•g 2/15 41.6•g 11/35 84.511g 19/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c01672 252.•g n.1.1. 1/15 41.611g 1/35 84.511g 2/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2157 c01672 51.8•g n.1.1. 7/15 39.611g 17/35 78.0•g 20/35 
c01672 62.1•g n.1.1. 5/15 39.611g 15/35 78.0•g 15/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c01672 144.•g n.1.1. 1/15 39.611g 4/35 78.0•g 4/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2158 c01672 311.•g n.1.1. 0/15 98.011g 3/34 199.llg 5/35 
• c01672 232.•g n.1.1. 5/15 98.011g 10/34 199.•g 13/35 
b c01672 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 98.0•g 0/34 199.•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2159 c01672 160.llg 43.4g• 0/15 78.4•g 4/35 161.•g 9/35 col :acn,adn; rec: acn. 
c01672 172.•g n.1.1. 0/15 78.411g 4/35 161.•g 8/35 col:acn; rec:acn . 
b c01672 210.•g n.1.1. 9/15 78.4•g 19/35 161.•g 14/35 
c01672 535.•g n.1.1. 0/15 78.411g 1/35 161.•g 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PHENESTER IN 3456-10-9 
2160 c01558 .10311g .44011g 7/35 3.00•g 30/40 5.40•g 16/35 10.811g 21/35 ---: leu,ly•; lun:a/a,a/c; •yc:srn . 
• c01558 .152•g 1.25•g 2/35 3.00•g 15/40 5.4011g 1/35 10.811g 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
b c01558 .28811g 1.65•g 5/35 3.00•g 12/40 5.4011g 14/35 10.811g 17/35 ---: leu,ly11. 
c01558 .273•g 3.43•g 0/35 3.0011g 8/40 5.4011g 0/35 10.811g 0/35 
d c01558 .288•g 2. 78•g 0/35 3.00•g 8/40 5.4011g 2/35 10.811g 3/35 
e c01558 .465•g 6.27•g 0/35 3.00•g 4/40 5.40•g 1/35 10.8•g 2/35 
f c01558 96.1ug .36811g 11/35 3.0011g 33/40 5.4011g 17/35 10.811g 21/35 
g c01558 n.1.1. n.1.1. 3/35 3.00•g 1/40 5.4011g 0/35 10.8•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
h c01558 . 152•g 1.25•g 2/35 3.00•g 15/40 5.40•g 1/35 10.8•g 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2161 c01558 • 862•g 3.97•g 0/31p 5.4011g 14/35 10.8•g 17/35 ---:leu,ly111 . 
2162 c01558 .49111g 1.30•g 3/35 3.0011g 25/40 4.10•g 19/35 9.00•g 15/35 ---: leu,ly•; lun:a/a,a/c; 11yc:srn. 
• c01558 .684•g 2.84•g 2/35 3.00•g 18/40 4.1011g 6/35 9.00•g 2/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
b c01558 1.0S.g 5.5711g 0/35 3.0011g 14/40 4.10•g 0/35 9.0011g 0/35 
c01558 1.20•g 4.46•g 1/35 3.0011g 11/40 4.1011g 9/35 9.00•g 11/35 -··:Leu, Ly•. 
d c01558 1.85•g 11.2•g 0/35 3.00•g 5/40 4.10•g 7/35 9.0011g 2/35 
e c01558 .446•g 1.4311g 11/35 3.00•g 29/40 4.1011g 20/35 9.00•g 17/35 
f c01558 2.07•g n.1.1. 7/35 3.00•g 10/40 4.10•g 2/35 9.00•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
g c01558 .68411g 2.84•g 2/35 3.00•g 18/40 4.1011g 6/35 9.0011g 2/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2163 c01558 . 78411g 4.4611g 0/29p 4.10•g 9/35 9.0011g 11/35 ---:leu,ly11 . 
• c01558 1.99•g 36.311g 0/29p 4.1011g 1/35 9.00•g 3/35 
b c01558 2.64•g 30.511g 0/29p 4.1011g 7/35 9.00•g 2/35 
2164 c01558 .137•g .88011g 7/10 1.3011g 28/35 2.60•g 22/35 
c01558 n.a.a. n.1.a . 0/10 1.30•g 0/35 2.6011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2165 c01558 • 25111g 1.30•g 1/20p 1.30•g 12/35 2.60•g 12/35 
2166 c01558 .258•g 2.10•g 1/10 1.30•g 18/35 2.6011g 11/35 
• c01558 n.a.a. n.a.a . 0/10 1.30•g 0/35 2.6011g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2167 c01558 1.07•g 8.49•g 0/20p 1.30•g 2/35 2.60•g 5/35 ···:Leu, ly11. s 
PHENFORMIN. HC l (NCI UHi CAS# 114-86·3) 834·28·6 
2168 c01741 203.•g n.a.a. 7/15 117.•g 13/35 <244.•g 9/35) 
• c01741 701.•g n.a.a. 1/15 117.•g 3/35 244.•g 2/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c01741 n.a.a. n.a.a. 0/15 117.•g 0/35 244.•g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2169 c01741 266.•g n.a.a. 8/15 108.•g 10/35 226.llg 11/35 
• c01741 262.•g n.a.a . 1/15 108.•g 6/35 226.11g 4/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c01741 376.•g n.a.a. 1/15 108.•g 4/35 226.•g 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2170 c01741 39.3•g n.a.a. 14/15 15.0•g 28/35 30.0•g 26/35 
• c01741 n.a.a . n.a.a. 0/15 15.0•g 0/35 30.0•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2171 c01741 13.0•g n.a.a. 7/15 12.0•g 14/35 24.0•g 24/35 
• c01741 n.a.a. n.1.1. 0/15 12.0•g 0/35 24.0•g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
PHENOBARBITAL <phenobarbitone) 50-06·6 
2172 235• n.1.1. 5.3611g 5/39 65.0•g 29/29 Pera i no; j nc i, 51, 1349-1350; 1973 
2173 235n 5.45•g 46.2•g 1/16 65.0•g 10/16 220 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2174 M " e3l eat l iv tum 52w52 r 
2175 M " e3l eat l iv tu• 52w52 r 
2176 aei eat l iv tuOI 67w67 
a aei eat tba Olix 67w.67 
2177 " aei eat l iv tu"' 67w67 
a R "' aei eat tba mix 67w67 
2178 R sda ipj tba Rial 24m24 es 
2179 R "' sda ipj l iv hae 24m24 es 
a m sda ipj tba 01al 240l24 es 
PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM 
2180 f ef1 wat l iv hpt 28m28 e 
a ef1 wat lun ade 28m28 e 
b ef1 wat tba mix 28m28 
2181 ef1 eat l iv mix 261126 
ef1 eat l iv let 26.,26 e 
b ef1 eat lun tum 26m26 e 
2182 "' cf1 wat l iv hpt 280J28 e 
a "' cf1 wat tun ade 28.,28 e 
b " cf1 wat tba 01ix 281128 e 
2183 " cf1 eat l iv 11ix 26.,26 e 
11 ef1 eat l iv let 260126 e 
b 11 ef1 eat lun tu11 261126 e 
2184 " edr wat l iv sad 95w95 e 
2185 "fis eat Liv hnd 24.,24 ev 
2186 f wis wat l iv hpt 341134 e 
wis wat tba tu11 34.,34 e 
2187 R 11 wis wat l iv hpt 34.,34 e 
a R "' wis wat tba tum 34m34 e 
PHENOTHIAZINE 
2188 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2189 " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
e " b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b " b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2190 f b6e orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6e orl lun "1ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6e or l tba tum 76w76 evx 
2191 "b6e orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx 
a " b6e or l lun mix 76w76 evx 
b " b6e orl tba "1iX 76w76 evx 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE. HC l 
2192 f b6e ipj abe srn 52w.84 
a b6e i p J TBA MXB 52w.84 s 
b 
2193 
a 
b 
2194 
a b6e ipj Liv MXB 52w.84 
b6e ipj lun MXB 52w84 s 
"' b6e ipj abe srn 51w83 as 
" b6e ipj TBA MXB 51w83 as 
" b6e ipj l iv MXB 51w83 as 
m b6e ipj lun MXB 51w83 as 
sda ipj per srn 52w.83 
sda i p J TBA MXB 52w83 .> 
.> .> 
.> 4.18Rlg 
4.460lg 
no dre 
81.7R19 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
54.7R19 
100n9 •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1"'g .••. : .• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 •... : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.+ • 95.2mg 
.+ 
+ .> 
+ no dre 
no dre 
44.2Rlg 
128.019 
no dre 
62.2mg 
no dre 
132.019 
34.611g 
174.0lg 
no dre 
500.019 
67.30lg 
102.0lg 
73.1 .. g 
74.311g 
206.019 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"9· •.• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •... : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• > 
.> 
.> .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
393.0lg 
no dre 
311.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
414.0lg 
no dre 
200."1g 
100n9 •• : •• 1u9 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"9· ••• : .• 10 ••••• :. -100 •..• : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
5.85"19 
3.08019 
no dre 
no dre 
4.95"19 
2.17019 
5.840lg * 
63.0•g * 
2.36119 I 
1.34019 * P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
p.1. 
P<1. 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.006 + 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.6 
P•1 • 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.6 
p.1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.09 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.9 
P<.0005e 
P<.05 
b sda ipj l iv MXB 52w83 no dre P•1 • 
2195 " sda ipj per s.rn 52w83 s + • 710"1g I P<. 0005e 
a R .. sda ipj TBA MXB 52w83 • • 555Mg I P<. 0005 
b 11 sda ipJ l iv MXB 52w83 s no dre P• 1. 
100n9 •• : .• 1u9 •.•. : .• 10 .•.•• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g ••.• : •. 10 ..•.• : •• 100 ..•. :. -19· •••• : •• 10 1 ·PHENYL ·3,3 ·DIMETHYL TRIAZENE 
2196 R b bdr 9av bra 01ix 24m24 
a b bdr 9av tba 111.l 24m24 5.810lg * P<.0005+ 
2.31m9 * P<.0005+ 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 100n9 •• : •• 1u9 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1119 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •.•. :. -10 
2197 f b6a orl l iv he"' 76w76 evx .> 138.mg 
a b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w.76 evx 39.4119 
2198 " b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w.76 e.vx no dre 
b .11 b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
2199 f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a 
b 
2200 
a 
b f b6e orl lun •ix 76w.76 evx 
f b6e or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
" b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx .> no dre 
no dre 
128.119 
128.0lg 
40.211g 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •.•. : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 111g •••• : •. 10 .••.• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••• : •• 10 P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.05 
1 ·PHENYL ·3·METHYL -5 · PYRAZOLONE 
2201 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 24•24 :> no dre p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 221 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Patholog> ' 
Brkl)• Code 
2174 235'1 1.52'1g 19.0mg 25/37 60.0mg 35!36 
2175 235n 1.5611g 21.4mg 7/17 60.00lg 16/17 
2176 1448 25. 7'1g n.s.s. 0/10 25.0'1g 0/12 Uchida; zkko, 100, 231-238; 1981 
a 1448 13.3mg n.s.s. 0/10 25.0mg 1/12 
2177 1448 20.50lg n.s.s. 0/10 20.011g 0/12 
a 1448 15.3•g n.s.s. 4/10 20.0'1g 1/12 
2178 1134 1.25mg n.s.s. 3/33 .28611g 1/30 Schmahl ;zkko,86, 77-84; 1976 
2179 1134 1.880lg n.s.s. 1/36 .286'1g 0/32 
1134 n.s.s. n .. s.s. 1/36 .286mg 1/32 
PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM Cphenobarbitone, sodiuM) 57-30-7 
2180 237 65.2mg 145.mg 0/47 100.mg 45/73 Pono01arkov; cl et, 1, 165 -172; 1976 
a 237 338.llg n.s.s. 15/47 100.•g 21/73 
b 237 93.411g n.s.s. 45/47 100.0lg 65/73 
2181 89 22.511g 122.'1g 10/44 65.0'1g 21/28 Thorpe; fctx, 11, 433-442; 1973 
89 60.111g 352.llg 0/44 65.011g 9/28 
b 89 175.'1g n.s.s. 27/44 65.0'1g 9/28 
2182 237 41.6•g 109 ... g 12/44 83.3'1g 77/98 PonoHrkov; clet, 1, 165-172; 1976 
a 237 244.'1g n.s.s. 20/44 83.3'1g 40/98 
b 237 33.0llg n.s.s. 40/44 83.3Mg 93/98 
2183 89 18.1'1g 86.111g 11/45 60.0'1g 24/30 Thorpe; fctx, 11, 433-442;1973 
89 70.9•g 2.46gM 2/45 60.0•g 8/30 
b 89 86.711g n.s.s. 27/45 60.0ag 15/30 
2184 1035 81.4'1g n.s.s. 0/15 50 .Oag 1/18 Wislocki ;canr ,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
2185 389 33.6'1g 177.11g 0/25 39.8'1g 11/33 Butler ;bj ca,37,418 -423;1978 
2186 85 48.011g 287.llg 0/32 28.611g 9/29 Rossi;; j cn, 19, 179-185; 1977 
85 22.511g n.s.s. 19/32 28.6'1g 22/29 
2187 85 38.911g 168.11g 0/35 25.011g 13/36 
85 35.811g n.s.s. 19/35 25.0•g 22/36 
PHENOTHIAZINE 92-84-2 
2188 1254 87 .3ag n.s.s. 1/17 78.411g 1/17 Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
1254 147.•g n.s.s. 0/17 78.40lg 0/17 
b 1254 68.911g n.s.s. 2/17 78.4•g 2/17 
2189 1254 57.311g n.s.s. 1/18 73.0•g 2/17 
• 1254 89.8ag n.s.s . 2/18 73.011g 1/17 
b 1254 41.911g n.1.1. 3/18 73.0llg 4/17 
2190 1254 155.ag n.s.s. 0/16 78.411g 0/18 
1254 155.ag n.s.s. 0/16 78.411g 0/18 
b 1254 155.llg n.s.s. 0/16 78.411g 0/18 
2191 1254 67.411g n.s.s. 0/16 73.011g 1/16 
a 1254 129.llg n.s.s. 0/16 73.0 .. g 0/16 
b 1254 49. 1•g n.s.s. 0/16 73.0llg 2/16 
PHENOXYBENZAMI NE. Ht l 63-92·3 
2192 c01661 3.11•g 12.0•g 0/15 3.30•g 0!35 10.311g 16/35 
c01661 1.59ag 8.85ag 5/15 3.3011g 7135 10.311g 16/35 
b c01661 7 .21•g n.1.s. 1/15 3.3011g 1/35 10.3•g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c01661 7.2111g n.s.1. 1/15 3.3011g 1/35 10.3•g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2193 c01661 2.6311g 9.9111g 0/15 3.4011g 0/35 10. 711g 17/35 
• c01661 1.1711g 4.88•g 3/15 3.4011g 7135 10. 711g 18/35 
b c01661 1.98•g n.s.s. 1/15 3.4011g 6!35 10. 7•g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c01661 3.24'1g n.s.s. 2/15 3.4011g 3/35 10. 7mg 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2194 c01661 1.30•g 5.1611g 0/10 1.30'1g 0/35 2. 70ag 16/35 
• c01661 .610•g n.s.s . 5/10 1.30'1g 20/35 2. 7011g 20/35 
b c01661 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 1.30•g 0/35 2.70ag 0!35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2195 c01661 .40311g 1.31'1g 0/10 1.3011g 11/35 3.80•g 16/35 
• c01661 .3030lg 1.3511g 3/10 1.300lg 15/35 3.80'1g 16/35 
b c01661 n.s.s. n.s.s. 0/10 1.3011g 0/35 3.80•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
1-PHENYL -3, 3-DIMETHYL TRIAZENE 7227-91-0 
2196 1467 2.6511g 16.1•g 0/120 3.5711g 1/7 7.14•g 8/12 Preuss.,.nn ;zkko,81,285-310; 1974 
1467 1.10•g 5.34•g 2/120 3.5711g 4/7 7.140lg 11/12 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 103-72-0 
2197 1304 22.511g n.1.1. 0/17 21.611g 1/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
1304 25.6•g n.s.s. 1/17 21.611g 1/18 
b 1304 10.311g n.s.s. 2/17 21.611g 5/18 
2198 1304 21.4•g n.s.a. 2/18 20.011g 1/15 
• 1304 33.1•g n.a.a . 1/18 20.0ag 0/15 
b 1304 22.9•g n.s.s. 3/18 20.011g 1/15 
2199 1304 42. 711g n.a.a. 0/16 21.611g 0/18 
1304 42.7•g n.a.a. 0/16 21.611g 0/18 
b 1304 42. 711g n.a.a. 0/16 21.611g 0/18 
2200 1304 20.9ag n.1.1. 0/16 20.011g 1/18 
• 1304 20.9•g n.a.s . 0/16 20.011g 1/18 
b 1304 12.1•g n.s.a. 0/16 20.0ag 3/18 
1·PHENYL·3-METHYL- 5-PYRAZOLONE 89-25-8 
2201 c03952 2.85g• n.a.a. 9/20 956.ag 19/50 1.91g• 15/50 222 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
a H f b6c eat li v HXB 241124 
b H f b6c eat l un HXB 241124 
2202 " " b6c eat TBA HXB 24•24 
a " II b6c eat l iv HXB 241124 
b H 11 b6c eat lun HXB 241124 
2203 f f34 eat TBA HXB 24M24 
a f f34 eat l iv HXB 241124 
2204 11 f34 eat TBA HXB 240l24 
a 11 f34 eat l iv HXB 24•24 
PHENYL ·beta· NAPHTHYLAHINE 
2205 f ayg gav l iv tuM 84w84 e 
a 1yg gav lun tuM 84w84 e 
b syg gav tba 11ix 84w84 e 
2206 • ayg gav l iv tu11 84w84 e 
a 11 ayg gav lun tu11 84w84 e 
b " syg gav tba 11ix 84w84 e 
2207 f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2208 11 b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba Mix 76w76 evx 
2209 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2210 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a H " b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b H 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
N ·PHENYL ·p ·PHENYLENEDIAHINE. HC l 
2211 H f b6c eat TBA HXB 48w91 av 
a H f b6c eat l iv JIXB 48w91 av 
b H f b6c eat lun HXB 48w91 av 
2212 " • b6c eat TBA HXB 48w91 IV 
a H 11 b6c eat l iv HXB 48w91 1v 
b H • b6c eat lun HXB 48w91 av 
2213 R f f34 eat TBA HXB 181124 
a R f f34 eat l iv HXB 180l24 
2214 R 11 f34 eat TBA HXB 181124 
a R II f34 eat l iv HXB 181124 
1·PHENYL·2 ·THI OUR EA 
2215 H f b6c eat TBA HXB 78w91 
a H f b6c eat l iv HXB 78w91 
b H f b6c eat lun HXB 78w91 
2216 " II b6c eat TBA HXB 78w91 
a H 11 b6c eat l iv HXB 78w91 
b H 11 b6c eat lun HXB 78w91 
2217 R f f34 eat TBA HXB 181124 
R f f34 eat l iv HXB 181124 
2218 R II f34 eat TBA HXB 181124 
R • f34 eat liv HXB 181124 :> 
:> 
:> no dre 
no dre 
no dre p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
3.70gm * P<.5 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g •.••• : .• _10 
. > 
.> 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.08gM 
431.119 
460.11g 
186.llg 
1.08g11 
no dre 
1.08g11 
165.llg 
no dre 
1D8.11g p.1 • 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.7 
P<.4 
P<.3 
P<.2 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.007 
P•1. 
P<.002 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : .• _10 
:> 
:> 
:> :> no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
213.11g \ P<.06 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P· 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
161.11g * P<.5 
no dre P• 1. 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
:> 
:> :> 133.11g * P<.4 
268.11g * P<.06 
134.11g * P<.07 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P· 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
1·PHENYLAZO·2 • NAPHTHOL _100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g •••.• : •. _10 
2219 Hf cba eat Liv hpt 121124 
2220 H • cba eat l iv hpt 121124 
•· PHENYLENEDIAHINE. 2HC l 
2221 H f chi eat lun 11ix 64w77 
a H chi eat l iv 11ix 64w77 
b H chi eat tba 11ix 64w77 
2222 H • chi eat lun •ix 64w77 
a H • chi eat l iv •ix 64w77 
b H 11 chi eat tba 11ix 64w77 
2223 R " cdr eat l iv 11ix 18a25 
a R • cdr eat tba 11ix 18•25 
o-PHENYLENED IAHINE. 2HC l 
2224 H f chi eat l iv 11ix 77w90 v 
a " 
b " " chi eat l iv hpt 77w90 v 
chi eat lun 11ix 77w90 
chi eat tba 11ix 77w90 
2225 H chi eat l iv hpt 77w90 v 
2226 H 11 chi eat l iv hpt 77w86 v 
a H 11 chi eat liv 11ix 77w86 v 
b H 11 chi eat lun 11ix 77w86 v 
c H • chi eat tba 11ix 77w86 v 
2227 H • chi eat l iv hpt 77w86 v • > 
. > no dre 
no dre p.1 . 
P•1 • 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
:> ± 253.11g * P<.03 
1.17g11 * P<.3 
370.11g * P<.3 
421.11g * P<.08 
889.11g * P<.3 
307 .11g * P<.3 
1.69g" * P<.9 
114.11g * P<.3 
.100ng •. : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1Mg .•.• : •. _10 •.••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
pool 
pool + 507. 11g * P<. 002 
611.11g * P<.002 + 
2.26g11 * P<.3 
676.11g * P<.07 
611.0lg * P<.0005+ 
921.11g * P<.04 
921.0lg * P<.04 
3.21g• * P<.6 
1.97911 * P<.5 
1.11g11 * P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 223 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• c03952 14.2g• n.1.1. 2/20 956.•g 2/50 1.91g• 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03952 8.43g• n.1.1. 1/20 956.•g 3/50 1.91g• 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2202 c03952 1.38g• n.1.1. 11/20 883 ... g 20/50 <1.77g• 14/50) 
c03952 2.85g• n.1.1. 8/20 883 ... g 8/50 <1.77g11 6/50> l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03952 3.62g11 n.a.a. 3/20 883 ... g 3/50 (1.77g• 0/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
2203 c03952 115.•g n.1.1. 12/20 123 ... g 36/50 (245.•g 25/50) 
• c03952 n.1.1. n.1.1 . 0/20 123.•g 0/50 245.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2204 c03952 192.•g n.1.1. 14/20 98.111g 32/49 196.•g 31/50 
c03952 907.•g n.1.1. 0/20 98.1•g 1/49 196.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PHENYL. beta. NAPHTHYLAlll NE (Agerite powder) 135·88·6 
2205 1151 202.•g n.a.a. 0/40 31 .5 .. g 0/40 Green; zkko, 95, 51·55; 1979 
• 1151 202.•g n.1.1. 0/40 37 .511g 0/40 
b 1151 72.3•g n.1.1. 8/40 37.511g 6/40 
2206 1151 202.llg n.1.1. 0/40 37 .5•g 0/40 
• 1151 202.•g n.1.1. 0/40 37 .511g 0/40 
b 1151 84.5•g n.1.1. 3/40 37 .511g 3/40 
2207 1153 201.mg n.1.1. 1/17 169 ... g 1/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1153 334.•g n.1.1. 0/17 169.•g 0/18 
b 1153 121 ... g n.1.1. 2/17 169.•g 3/18 
2208 1153 90.1•g n.1.1. 2/18 157.•g 4/18 
• 1153 103.•g n.1.1 . 1/18 157.•g 3/18 
b 1153 57 .2•g n.1.1. 3/18 157.•g 7/18 
2209 1153 176.•g n.1.1. 0/16 169.•g 1/18 
• 1153 334.•g n.1.1. 0/16 169.•g 0/18 
b 1153 176.llg n.1.1. 0/16 169.•g 1/18 
2210 1153 62.2•g 2.23g• 0/16 157 .Ilg 5/17 
• 1153 294.•g n.a.1. 0/16 157.llg 0/17 
b 1153 46.1•g 417.•g 0/16 157.llg 7/17 
N ·PHENYL ·p· PHENYLENEDIAlllNE. Ht L (NCI UHi CAS# 101·54·2) 2198-59·6 
2211 c02233 648.•g n.1.1. 5/20 252.•g 4/50 (478.•g 2/50) 
• c02233 1. 53g• n.1.1. 1/20 252.•g 2/50 478.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02233 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 252.11g 0/50 478.11g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2212 c02233 404.•g n.1.1. 10/20 131.llg 25/49 260.llg 15/50 
• c02233 96.5•g n.1.1. 2/20 131.•g 18/49 (260.•g 10/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02233 818.•g n.1.1. 4/20 131.•g 4/49 260.11g 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2213 c02233 68.6•g n.1.1. 13/20 22.5•g 26/50 45.0•g 24/50 
• c02233 n.1.1 . n.1.1. 0/20 22.511g 0/50 45.0•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2214 c02233 40.5•g n.1.1. 6/20 18.0•g 17/50 36.0•g 20/50 
c02233 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 18.0•g 0/50 36.0•g 0/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1·PHENYL·2 ·THI OUR EA 103-85·5 
2215 c02017 35.3•g n.1.1. 4/20 16.911g 11/50 33.811g 15/50 
• c02017 92. 7•g n.1.1. 0/20 16.9•g 0/50 33.8•g 4/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02017 60.5•g n.1.1. 0/20 16.9•g 3/50 33.811g 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2216 c02017 49.0•g n.1.1. 6/20 15.6•g 16/50 31.2•g 12/50 
c02017 74.6•g n.1.1. 1/20 15.6•g 7/50 31.2•g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02017 73. 7•g n.1.1. 3/20 15.6•g 6/50 31.2•g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2217 c02017 2.46•g n.a.1. 12/20 2.3011g 37/50 <4.5011g 30/50) 
• c02017 n.1.a . n.1.1. 0120 2.3011g 0/50 4.50•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2218 c02017 2.7111g n.1.1. 7/20 1.80•g 22/50 (3.60•g 22/50) 
c02017 17.3•g n.1.1. 0/20 1.80•g 2/50 3.60•g 1/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1-PHENYLAZO· 2 · NAPHTHOL 842-07·9 
2219 1165 348.•g n.1.1. 0/18 64.9•g 0/26 CL1y1on;bjc1, 19,297·310; 1965/Wi LL iaH 1962 
2220 1165 150.•g n.1.1. 2/15 59.9•g 1/18 
•· PHENYLENED !AMINE. 2HCL 541-69·5 
2221 381 87 .6•g n.1.1. 3/13 260.•g 4/13 520.•g 0/16 Weiaburger; jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers .co•11. /Ru11f ieLd 1973 
• 381 190.•g n.1.1 . 0/13 260.•g 1/13 520.•g 0/16 
b 381 93.9•g n.1.1. 9/13 260.•g 5/13 520.•g 1/16 
2222 381 104.•g n.1.1. 2/16 240.•g 2/15 480.•g 0/10 
• 381 145.•g n.1.1. 2/16 240.11g 1/15 480.•g 0/10 
b 381 77 .9•g n.1.1. 9/16 240.llg 5/15 480.•g 0/10 
2223 381 87 .6•g n.1. 1. 1/17 30.0•g 1/17 60.0•g 1/15 
381 31.5•g n.1.1. 13/17 30.0•g 7/17 60.0•g 6/15 
o·PHENYLENEDIAlllNE. 2HCL 615·28·1 
2224 381 236.•g 1.83g• 1/15 806.•g 7/18 1.70g• 6/15 Weiaburger; jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers.co ... /Ruuf ieLd 1973 
• 381 276.•g 2.46g• 1/15 806.•g 6/18 1.70g• 6/15 
b 381 522.•g n.1.1. 5/15 806.•g 3/18 1.70g• 4/15 
c 381 233.•g n.1.1. 10/15 806.•g 13/18 1.70g• 10/15 
2225 381 276.•g 1.49g11 1/102p 806.•g 6/18 1.70g11 6/15 
2226 381 406.•g n.1.1. 0/14 783.llg 5/17 1.57g• 3/14 
• 381 406.•g n.1.1. 1/14 783.•g 5/17 1.57g• 3/14 
b 381 643.•g n.1.1. 3/14 783.•g 4/17 1.57g• 2/14 
381 381.•g n.1.1. 7/14 783.•g 10/17 1.57g• 6/14 
2227 ~81 456.•g 4.81g• 7/99p 783.•g 5/17 1.57g• 3/14 224 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2'J'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2228 R 11 edr eat l iv hpt 18Rl25 
R 11 edr eat l iv mix 181125 
b R 11 edr eat tba mix 181125 
2229 R 11 edr eat l iv hpt 181125 
p· PHENYLENEDIAMINE. 2HC l 
2230 M f b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M f b6e eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M f b6e eat lun MXB 24m24 
2231 M 11 b6e eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M 11 b6e eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M 11 b6e eat lun MXB 241124 
2232 R f 134 eat TBA MXB 24m27 
a f 134 eat l iv MXB 24m27 
2233 R 11 134 eat TBA MXB 241127 
m f34 eat l iv MXB 24m27 
PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
2234 f swa wat bl v mix 93w93 e 
f swa wat sub ang 93w93 e 
b swa wat bl v ang 93w93 e 
e swa wat 11us ang 93w93 e 
d awa wat fat ang 93w93 e 
awa wat lun ade 93w93 e 
swa wat tun "'ix 93w93 e 
swa wat tun ang 93w93 e 
swa wat l iv 1nix 93w93 e 
2235 m awa wat lun ade 99w99 e 
a m swa wat tun mix 99w99 e 
b "' swa wat l iv mix 99w99 e 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
2236 M f swi gav lun tum 39w55 v 
PHENYLHYDRAZ INE. HC l 
2237 M f swa wat l iv mix 26m26 e 
M swa wat blv 11ix 26m26 e 
b M awa wat bl v ag11 261126 e 
e M 
d M awa wat l iv agm 261126 e 
swa wat bl v ang 261126 e 
e M awa wat l iv ang 26•26 e 
f M awa wat lun Rlix 26m26 e 
2238 M 11 swa wat blv '1ix 261126 
M m swa wat l iv 1nix 261126 e 
b M m awa wat lun '1iX 261126 e 
o·PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUM 
2239 R 11 f3d eat unt Rlix 91w91 er 
R m 13d eat ubl mix 91w91 er 
b m f3d eat k/l tee 91w91 er 
o-PHENYLPHENOL 
2240 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba '1ix 76w76 evx 
2241 " b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba '1ix 76w76 evx 
2242 b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6e orl tba '1ix 76w76 evx 
2243 "' b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b "' b6e orl tba '1ix 76w76 evx 
p-PHENYLPHENOL 
2244 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orl tba '1ix 76w76 evx 
2245 M 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M m b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M "' b6a orl tba '1ix 76w76 evx 
2246 M b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M b6e orl lun '1ix 76w76 evx 
b M b6e or l tba tu" 76w76 evx 248.11g * P<.02 
248.11g * P<.02 
no dre P•1. 
pool 315.11g * P<.02 + 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : .• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 .•.• :. ·19· •••• : •• 10 
:> 1.50gm * 
1.37gm * 
1.39gm * 
:> no dre 
no dre P<.8 
P<.5 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P•1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
247 .mg * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
:> no dre P-1. 
2.23gm * P<.4 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"'g •••. : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 .••. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
• + 14.611g 
19.9mg 
20.4mg 
21. 7mg 
23. 7mg 
25.8mg 
27 .511g 
123.11g 
278.mg 
30.011g 
33.1mg 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •. 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.006 
P<.4 
P<.0005-
P<.004 
P•1. 
• > no dre P• 1 • 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •..• : •. 10 .••.• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••. :. -10 
68.6mg 
72.1'1g 
147.mg 
165.mg 
165.mg 
165.mg 
no dre 
70.6mg 
83.9mg 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"'9· ..• : •. 10 ..•.• : •. 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 
P<.02 
P<.02 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.02 + 
P<.04 
P-1. 
. + • 414.mg * P<.0005+ 
470.11g Z P<.0005 
2. 42gm * P<. 0005 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .. 111g •.•. : •• 10 .•.•• : •. 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.80gRI 
no dre 
no dre 
221.mg 
no dre 
107 .mg 
46.1mg 
205 .mg 
35.4mg P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.09 
P<.02 
P<.3 
P<.006 
100ng •. : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"9· .•. : .• 10 •.•.. : .• 100 .•.. :. -19· •••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
953.mg 
no dre P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 225 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl lDose line 2Dose Zinc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
222B 3B1 92.511g n.s.s. 0/16 57 .611g 0/14 115.11g 5/16 
• 3B1 92.511g n.s.s. 0/16 57 .6mg 0/14 115.llg 5/16 
b 3B1 67.711g n.s.s. 10/16 57.611g 9/14 115.mg 12/16 
2229 3B1 105.11g n.s.s. 2/111p 57.611g 0/14 115.llg 5/16 
p· PHENYLENED !AMINE. 2HC l 624-1B·O 
2230 c03930 19B.11g n.a.s. B/20 B0.511g 17/50 161.llg 21/49 
• c03930 325.llg n.s.s. 2/20 B0.511g 6/50 161.llg B/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03930 527 .Ilg n.s.s. 0/20 BO. 5mg 2/50 161.llg 3/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2231 c03930 167.llg n.s.s. 15/20 74.311g 35/50 149.•g 31/50 
c03930 193.mg n.s.s. 9/20 74.311g 1B/50 149.llg 21/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03930 346.llg n.s.s. 4/20 74.311g 10/50 149.•g B/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2232 c03930 44.011g n.s.s. 10/20 30.611g 37/50 61.311g 36/50 
• c03930 n.s.s. n.s.s . 0/20 30.611g 0/50 61.311g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2233 c03930 65.711g n.s.s. 14/20 24.511g 34/50 49.0•g 29/50 
c03930 364.llg n.1.s. 0/20 24.511g 0/50 49.011g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 156·51·4 
2234 239 B.3711g 2B. 711g 2/52 30.011g 22/32 Toth;canr ,36,917 -921; 1976 
239 11.2mg 39.611g 0/52 30.011g 1B/32 
b 239 11 • 311g 42. 211g 1/52 30.011g 1B/32 
c 239 12.111g 44.111g 0/52 30.011g 17/32 
d 239 13.011g 49.311g 0/52 30.011g 16/32 
• 239 14.211g 65.511g 1B/95 30.011g 2B/49 
f 239 14. 711g B0.111g 21/95 30.011g 2B/49 
g 239 42.511g 1.22g11 0/52 30.011g 4/32 
h 239 56.211g n.1.1. 2/52 30.011g 3/32 
2235 239 14.511g 113.llg 15/93 25.011g 17/34 
a 239 14.611g 304.llg 23/93 25.011g 1B/34 
b 239 136.llg n.1.s. 6/BB 25.011g 2/50 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE 100·63·0 
2236 1095 B.5111g n.1.1. B/B5 5.9111g 0/25 Roe;natu,216,375-376; 1967 
PHENYLHYDRAZ !NE. HC l 59·BB·1 
2237 1056 32.611g 229.llg 2/90 20.0•g 11/49 Toth; zkko, B7, 267 · 273; 1976/ 1974 
• 1056 33.311g 301.llg 3/90 20.011g 11/49 
b 1056 52.B11g n.1.1. 2/90 20.0•g 6/49 
1056 5B.011g n.s.s. 1/90 20.011g 5/49 
d 1056 5B.011g n.1.s. 1/90 20.011g 5/49 
• 1056 5B.011g n.1.1. 1/90 20.011g 5/49 
f 1056 56.911g n.s.s. 21/B7 20.0mg B/3B 
223B 1056 27.B11g n.1.1. 6/B1 16.711g 10/43 
• 1056 30.7mg n.1.1. 6/B1 16.7mg 9/43 
b 1056 94.2•g n.1.s. 23/B7 16.711g 5/43 
o·PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUM 132-27·4 
2239 137B 279.11g 642.llg 0120 50.011g 0/20 100.llg 0/20 200.11g 1/21 400.llg 7/21 B00.11g 20/21 
1.60g• 17/20 Hi raga; f ctx, 19, 303· 310; 19B1 
137B 2B7. Ilg B36. Ilg 0/20 50.011g 0/20 100.11g 0/20 200.llg 0/21 400.•g 6/21 B00.11g 19/21 
(1.60g• B/20> 
b 137B 1. 24g• 5 .6Bg• 0/20 50.011g 0/20 100.llg 0/20 200.llg 1/21 400.llg 0/21 BOO.Ilg 1/21 
1.60g• 10/20 
o·PHENYLPHENOL Corthoxenol, Dowicide·1> 90·43·7 
2240 1310 64.211g n.1.1. 0/17 3B.911g 0/15 Innes;ntis, 196B/1969 
• 1310 64.211g n.1.1. 1/17 3B.911g 0/15 
b 1310 41. 711g n.1.1. 2/17 3B.911g 1/15 
2241 1310 n.1.s. n.s.s. 1/1B 36.211g 1/16 
1310 41.511g n.1.s. 2/1B 36.211g 1/16 
b 1310 32.311g n.s.a. 3/1B 36.211g 2/16 
2242 1310 35.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 3B.911g 1/16 
• 1310 6B.511g n.1.1. 0/16 3B.911g 0/16 
b 1310 26.2mg n.1.s. 0/16 3B.911g 2/16 
2243 1310 15.B•g n.s.s. 0/16 36.2•g 4/16 
• 1310 33.411g n.1.a. 0/16 36.211g 1/16 
b 1310 13.311g 350.llg 0/16 36.211g 5/16 
p· PHENYLPHENOL <paraxenol > 92-69·3 
2244 1309 215.llg n.1.s. 1/17 193.llg 1/17 Innes;ntis, 196B/1969 
• 1309 361.•g n.s.a. 0/17 193.llg 0/17 
b 1309 170.•g n.1.s. 2/17 193.llg 2/17 
2245 1309 212.llg n.1.s. 1/1B 1B0.11g 1/1B 
• 1309 356.•g n.1.a. 2/1B 1BO.ag 0/1B 
b 1309 112.llg n.1.s. 3/1B 1B0.11g 4/1B 
2246 1309 361.llg n.1.1. 0/16 193.llg 0/17 
1309 361.llg n.a.s. 0/16 193.llg 0/17 
b 1309 361.llg n.1.s. 0/16 193.llg 0/17 226 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2247 M 11 b6c orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
M 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M • b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
PHORBOL 
2248 M f aka ipj l11r lyk 241124 er 
2249 M 11 aka ipj l11r l yk 24•24 er 
2250 M f bal ipj l11r tu• 241124 er 
2251 M 11 bal ipj l11r tu• 241124 er 
2252 M f c3p ipj l11r tu• 241124 er 
2253 M 11 c3p ipj l11r tu• 241124 er 
2254 M c5l ipj l11r tu11 241124 er 
2255 M •I• ipj l11r rtb 241124 er 
2256 M awr i p j l 11r l yk 241124 er 
PHOSPHAM I DON* 
2257 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 
2258 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 66w90 
a M • b6c eat l iv MXB 66w90 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 66w90 
2259 R f 0111 eat TBA MXB 191126 
a R f 0111 eat l iv MXB 191126 
2260 R f 0111 eat thy MXA 191125 
2261 11 0111 eat TBA MXB 191126 
a II OHi eat l iv MXB 19•26 
2262 • OH eat spl MXA 191125 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
2263 f wis eat l iv tu11 24•24 e 
a wis eat tba •ix 241124 e 
2264 11 wis eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
a R • wis eat tba 11ix 241124 e 426. Ilg P<. 08 
no dre P-1. 
195.11g P<.01 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> 
. > 
• + • > 
. > 
• > 
. > 
• > no dre 
8.2611g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
92.611g 
2.2111g P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1 • 
P-1 • 
P-1 • 
P•1 • 
P•1 . 
P<1 • 
P<.0005+ 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
pool 
pool :> 215.11g * P<.8 
34.211g P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
#19.011g * P<.008 
no dre P-1. 
185.11g * P<.5 
#26.911g * P<.02 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
24.4g11 P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.6 
PHTHALAMIDE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2265 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 as :> no dre P•1. 
P•1. M b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 as no dre 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 241124 as 
2266 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2267 R f 134 eat TBA MXB 251125 
a f 134 eat l iv MXB 251125 
2268 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 251125 
II f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
PHTHALI C ANHYDRIDE 
2269 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 v 
• M f b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 v 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 241124 v 
2270 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 v 
a M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 v 
b M II b6c eat lun MXB 241124 v 
2271 f f34 eat lun a/a 24•24 
a f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b f f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
2272 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
R II f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
PICLORAM 
2273 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 v 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 80w90 v 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 v 
2274 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 80w90 v 
• M II b6c eat Liv MXB 80w90 v 
b M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 80w90 v 
2275 R 0111 eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
a R f 0111 eat l iv MXB 191126 v 
2276 R f 0111 eat l iv nnd 191126 v 
2277 R 11 0111 eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
R 11 0111 eat l iv MXB 191126 v 
PILOCARPINE 
2278 R f sda ipJ tba 1111 241124 e 
2279 • sda ipJ l iv hee 241124 e 
a R • sda ipj tba 111l 241124 e 
PIMARICIN 
2280 R f cfn eat l iv •hp 241124 :> 
:> no dre P•1. 
:> 1090.g• P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
35.8g11 * P<.5 
722.11g * P<.3 
5.39g11 * P<.5 
no dre P• L 
16.6g11 * P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> :> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
:>no dre P-1. 
7 .46g11 \ P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
-"' #6.23g11 * P<.03 
4.50g11 * P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g ••.• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 
:> 
pool :> no dre P• 1 . 
20.1g11 * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
1 • 64g11 * P<. 09 
1. 70g11 * P<.007 a 
2.93g11 * P<.8 
1.32g11 \ P<.3 
100ng .• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 98.411g 
• > no dre 
1.75g• 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 P<.8 
P•1 • 
P<1. 
• > no dre P•1 • CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 227 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2247 1309 105.•g n.1.1. 0/16 180.•g 2114 
• 1309 277.•g n.1.1 . 0/16 180.•g 0/14 
b 1309 66.9•g 13.2g• 0/16 180.llg 4/14 
PHORBOL 17673-25·5 
2248 1415 1 .35•g n.1.a. 15/15 4. 1611g 11/13 Ar11uth ;b j ca, 34, 516· 522; 1976 
2249 1415 1 .01•g n.s.1. 10/14 3.4711g 11/14 
2250 1415 58.3•g n.1.1. 0/53 4. 16•g 0/68 
2251 1415 29.3•g n.1.1. 0/58 3.47•g 0/41 
2252 1415 39.4•g n.1.1. 0/61 4.16•g 0/46 
2253 1415 42.2•g n.1.1. 0/41 3.4711g 0/59 
2254 1415 25. 7•g n.1.1. 0120 4.16mg 0/30 
2255 1415 1.95•g n.1.1. 26/32 4.16•g 27/33 
2256 1415 1.32•g 4.0711g 3/45 4.16•g 29/39 
PHOSPHAMIDON* 13171-21·6 
2257 c00588 22.4•g n.1.1. 1/10 9.1011g 11/50 18.3•g 9/50 
• c00588 14.0•g n.1.1. 0/10 9.10•g 6/50 <18.3•g 1/50) l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00588 81.7•g n.1.1. 1/10 9.1011g 3/50 18.311g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2258 c00588 18.4•g n.1.1. 3/10 7 .60•g 14/50 13.211g 11/50 
• c00588 23.5•g n.1.1. 2/10 7 .60•g 9/50 13.2•g 7/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00588 47.9•g n.1.a. 1/10 7 .60•g 3/50 13.2•g 2150 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2259 c00588 6.09•g n.1.a. 7/10 2.90•g 29/50 5.80•g 26/50 
• c00588 47.0•g n.a.a. 0/10 2.90•g 1/50 5.80•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2260 c00588 9.26•g 361 .Ilg 2/95p 2.90•g 9/50 5.80•g 8/50 thy:cca,ccr. 
2261 c00588 5.55•g n.1.a. 4/10 2.30•g 26/50 4.60•g 20/50 
• c00588 30.2•g n.1.a. 0/10 2.3011g 0/50 4.60•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2262 c00588 10.9•g n.1.1. 1/95p 2.3011g 3/50 4.60•g 5/50 spl :he•, hes. 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
2263 1407 89.6g• n.1.1. 0/29 15.0g• 0/29 de Groot;fctx, 12,651·663;1974 
• 1407 10.4g• n.1.1. 25/29 15.0g• 22129 
2264 1407 69.2g• n.1.1. 0/28 12.0g• 0/28 
1407 4.43g• n.a.1. 21/28 12.0g• 23/28 
PHTHALAMIDE 88·96·0 
2265 c03612 3.07g• n.1.1. 19/40 806.•g 29/50 1.62g• 27/50 3.25g11 8/50 
• c03612 17 .3g• n.1.1. 4/40 806.•g 2/50 1.62g• 2150 3.25g• 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03612 15.8g• n.1.1. 3/40 806.•g 5/50 1.62g• 1/50 3.25g• 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2266 c03612 4.34g• n.a.1. 15/20 3.00g• 33/50 6.00g• 32/50 
• c03612 10.8g• n.1.1 . 9/20 3.00g• 17/50 6.00g• 13/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03612 9.09g• n.1.1. 3/20 3.00g• 7/50 6.00g• 10/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2267 c03612 217.llg n.1.1. 14/20 250.•g 39/50 500.•g 39/50 
c03612 1.25g• n.1.1. 2/20 250.•g 2/50 500.•g 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2268 c03612 1.06g• n.1.1. 17/20 600.•g 43/50 1.20g• 34/50 
c03612 5.02g• n.1.1. 0/20 600.•g 1/50 1.20g• 2150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PH THALi C ANHYDRIDE 85·44·9 
2269 c03601 5.42g• n.1.1. 10/20 1.56g• 21/50 3.12g• 17/50 
• c03601 25.9g• n.1.1. 1/20 1.56g• 0/50 3.12g• 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03601 10.7g• n.1.1. 1/20 1.56g11 6/50 3.12g• 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2270 c03601 7. 76g• n.1.1. 11/20 1.96g• 22150 3.92g• 18/50 
• c03601 2.27g• n.1.1. 3/20 1.96g• 12150 (3.92g• 7/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03601 13.3g• n.1.1. 7/20 1.96g• 6/50 3.92g• 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2271 c03601 2.37g• n.1.1. 0/20 375.•g 0/50 750.•g 5/50 
• c03601 511.llg n.1.1. 13/20 375.•g 37/50 750.•g 36/50 
b c03601 5 .50g• n.1.1. 0/20 375.•g 1/50 750.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2272 c03601 451.•g n.1.1. 15/20 300.•g 37/50 600.•g 36/50 
• c03601 4.79g• n.a.1. 1/20 300.•g 2150 600.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PICLORAM 1918-02·1 
2273 c00237 1.57g• n.a.1. 1/10 292.•g 6/50 585.•g 3/50 
• c00237 3.28g• n.a.a. 0/10 292.•g 0/50 585.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00237 1.25g• n.a.a. 1/10 292.•g 1/50 (585.•g 0/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
2274 c00237 688.•g n.1.1. 5/10 270.•g 18/50 540.•g 14/50 
c00237 398.•g n.1.1. 5/10 270.•g 13/50 <540.•g 8/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00237 1.33g• n.1.1. 1/10 270.•g 5/50 540.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2275 c00237 397.•g n.1.1. 7/10 263.•g 32/50 527.•g 33/50 
• c00237 864.•g n.1.1 . 0/10 263.•g 5/50 527.•g 8/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2276 c00237 873.•g 23.4g• 0/40p 263.•g 5/50 527.•g 7/50 
2277 c00237 290.•g n.1.1. 3/10 210.•g 28/50 422.•g 22/50 
• c00237 456.•g n.1.1 . 0/10 210.•g 4/50 <422.•g 0/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PILOCARPINE 92-13·7 
2278 1134 10.1•g n.a.1. 3/33 4.29•g 4/34 Sch .. h l ;zkko,86, 77-84; 1976 
2279 1134 30.0•g n.1.1. 1/36 4.29•g 0/34 
• 1134 18.1•g n.1.1 . 1/36 4.29•g 1/34 
PIMARICIN 7681 ·93·8 
2280 240 639.•g n.1.a. 1/40 6.25•g 1/35 12.5•g 0/35 25.0•g 0/35 50.0•g 0/40 Levinakaa;txap,8,97· 109; 1966 228 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2281 R " efn eat lun Ly& 24M24 
R " efn eat thM t.a 24M24 
PIPERAZINE 
2282 f R1re wat l iv tu• 17m24 e 
•re wat tba •lix 17•24 e 
2283 "' •re wat l iv tu• 17M24 e 
11 •re wat tba 11ix 17•24 e 
PIPERIDINE 
2284 R f Mre wet l iv tu• 17m24 e 
a R f Mre wat tba Mix 17"124 e 
2285 R "' "1re wat l iv tu• 17"124 e 
a R 11 11rc wat tba mix 17inZ4 e 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
2286 f b6e eat TBA MXB 26•26 v 
a f b6e eat l h MXB 26•26 v 
b b6e eat lun MXB 26"126 v 
2287 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2288 " b6e eat TBA MXB 26•26 v 
a • b6e eat l iv MXB 26•26 v 
b • b6e eat lun MXB 26•26 v 
2289 11 b6e orl rt& 76w76 evx 
11 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6e orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
e " b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2290 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a or l tba •Ii x 76w76 evx 
2291 11 b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
2292 f f34 eat l Y" 25"125 
a f f34 eat TBA MXB 25•25 
b f f34 eat l iv MXB 25•25 
2293 II f34 eat TBA MXB 25"125 
II f34 eat l iv MXB 25"125 
2294 b wi1 eat l iv hpt 22•24 av 
b wi1 eat l iv hpe 22•24 av .> 1.97g• * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
100ng .• :. -1ug ••.• : .• 10 •..•. : •. 100 ••.. :. -1•g •... : .. 10 .•..• :. -100 .... : .. 1g •. · · ·:. -10 
. > 
• > no dre 
11.2"1g 
no dre 
no dre P•1 . 
P<.2 
P-1 • 
P-1. 
100ng .. : .• 1ug .... : .• 10 •.••. :. -100 ••.• :. -1"1g ..•• : •. 10 ..•.. : .• 100 .... :. -19-•.•. :. -10 
• > 
. > no dre 
63.3"1g 
no dre 
no dre P•1 . 
P<.3 
p.1 . 
p.1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug ...• : •• 10 •..•. : •. 100 .•.• :. -1"'9· ... : .. 10 ..... :. -100 .•.. :. -19· .... :. -10 
-> 
.> 
• > no dre P• 1. 
3.26g• * P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
83.1Mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
34.811g 
98.5mg 
no dre 
22.4mg 
265."1g 
no dre 
265.0lg 
no dre p.1. 
P<.05 
P·1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.005 
P<.09 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.6 
p.1. 
P<.7 
p.1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
#1.18gm * P<.008 
7 .82gM * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dre Pa1. 
.> 22.5gm * P<.5 
26.1g11 * P<.2 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT 100ng .• : .• 1ug ••.. : .• 10 ...•. : •. 100 .... : .• 1Mg .•.• : •. 10 .•.•. : .. 100 .... : •. 1g .•.•. : •. 10 
2295 14 f b61 orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a 14 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 14 f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2296 14 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 14 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 14 11 b6a or l tba 11ix 76w76 avx 
2297 14 f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 14 f b6e orl lun Mix 76w76 evx 
b 14 f b6e or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
2298 14 • b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 14 • b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b 14 11 b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
2299 f b6e eat TBA MXB 24"124 av 
b6e eat l iv MXB 24•24 av 
b b6e eat lun MXB 24•24 av 
2300 b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6e or l lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b b6e or l tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2301 " b6e eat l iv hpe 24"124 a 
M b6e eat TBA MXB 24"124 a 
b " b6e eat l iv MXB. 24•24 a 
e " b6e eat lun MXB 24•24 a 
2302 11 b6e orl rts 76w76 evx 
" b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b " b6e orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
e " b6e orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2303 f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b61 orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
2304 " b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a " b6e orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx .> 
. > 
. > no dre 
no dre 
1.01gM 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
186.•g 
no dre 
93.1mg P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.7 
p.1 . 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1 . 
P-1. 
p.1. 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.002 -
100ng .• :. -1ug •.•. : •• 10 •.•.. : .. 100 ••.. :. -1mg •.•. : .• 10 ..•.• :. -100 •.•. :. -19-...• :. -10 
. > 
. > 
.> no dre p.1. 
725."1g * P<.3 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1 . 
no dre 
100.Mg 
62.2Mg * 
423.Mg * 
62.2Mg * 
no dre 
9.1011g 
45.4•g 
no dre 
7 .7211g 
no dre P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.02 
P<.8 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P•1 . 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
88.211g 
no dre 
no dre p.1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
p.1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 229 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2281 240 320.•g n.s.a. 0/40 5.00oig 0/35 10.0oig 0/35 20.0oig 1/35 40.0oig 0/40 
240 350.oig n.s.s. 0/40 5.00mg 0/35 10.0Mg 1/35 20.0oig 0/35 40.0IRQ 0/40 
PIPERAZINE 110·85·0 
2282 216 22.71Rg n.1.1. 0/15 7.36oig 0/15 Gare i a; zkko, 79, 141-144; 197:"' 
• 216 3.42•g n.s.s. 4/15 7.3611g 8/15 
2283 216 19.9mg n.a.s. 0/15 6.44mg 0/15 
216 5.79•g n.a.s. 5/15 6.4411g 5/15 
PIPERIDINE 110-89-4 
2284 216 91.011g n.s.s. 0/15 29.4oig 0/15 Gare i a; zkko, 79, 141-144; 1973 
a 216 16.411g n.s.s. 4/15 29.4•g 7/15 
2285 216 79.6oig n.a.s. 0/15 25.811g 0/15 
a 216 29.2oig n.a.s. 5/15 25.811g 4/15 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 51-03-6 
2286 c02813 241.11g n.a.s. 15/20 135.11g 22/50 (364.0lg 20/50> 
a c02813 929.11g n.a.a. 1/20 135.llg 2/50 364.llg 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02813 1.49g• n.a.a. 2/20 135.llg 6/50 364.llg 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2287 1096 82.011g n.a.s. 0/16 41.411g 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1096 82.011g n.a.a. 0/16 41.411g 0/18 
b 1096 25.111g n.s.a. 0/16 41.411g 3/18 
2288 c02813 406.11g n.a.a. 16/20 124.llg 32/50 336.llg 31/50 
a c02813 528.11g n.a .a. 10/20 124.llg 17/50 336.llg 20/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02813 998.•g n.a.s. 5/20 124.llg 6/50 336.llg 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2289 1096 13.111g 274.llg 0/16 38.511g 5/15 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1096 24.211g n.a.a. 0/16 38.511g 2/15 
b 1096 63.611g n.a.a. 0/16 38.511g 0/15 
1096 9.4811g 78.6•g 0/16 38.511g 7/15 
2290 1096 34.811g n.a.a. 1/17 41.4•g 2/18 
a 1096 82.0mg n.a.a. 0/17 41.4•g 0/18 
b 1096 29. 711g n.1.1. 2/17 41.4•g 3/18 
2291 1096 50.511g n.a.a. 2/18 38.5•g 1/18 
a 1096 76.311g n.a.a. 1/18 38.511g 0/18 
b 1096 54.011g n.1.1. 3/18 38.5•g 1/18 
2292 c02813 631.llg 27.1g• 1/20 250.•g 7/50 500.•g 15/50 
a c02813 422.•g n.1.1. 15/20 250.•g 33/50 500.•g 33/50 
b c02813 n.1.s. n.1.1. 0/20 250.0lg 0/50 500.•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2293 c02813 384.•g n.a.1. 14/20 200.11g 34/50 400.11g 32/50 
a c02813 5.20g11 n.s.1. 2/20 200.•g 0/50 400.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2294 241 3.48g• n.s.1. 1/24 4.50•g 0/24 45.0•g 0/24 450.llg 1/24 1.11g• 1/24 Sar I es; atmh, 1,862-883; 1952 
a 241 4.25g• n.s.1. 0/24 4.50ag 0/24 45 .011g 0/24 450.llg 0/24 1.11g• 1/24 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT <butacide> ---
2295 1097 187 ... g n.1.1. 1/17 157.11g 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1097 311.llQ n.1.1. 0/17 157.•Q 0/18 
b 1097 113.llg n.1.1. 2/17 157.•g 3/18 
2296 1097 173.•g n.1.1. 1/18 146.llg 1/18 
a 1097 192.•g n.1.1. 2/18 146.•g 1/18 
b 1097 115.•g n.1.1. 3/18 146.11g 3/18 
2297 1097 311.•g n.1.1. 0/16 157.ag 0/18 
a 1097 311.•g n.1.1. 0/16 157.•g 0/18 
b 1097 311.•g n.1.1. 0/16 157.•g 0/18 
2298 1097 63.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 146.llg 4/16 
1097 258.•g n.1.1. 0/16 146.•g 0/16 
b 1097 39.5ag 340.llg 0/16 146.llg 7/16 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 120·62-7 
2299 c02824 110.oig n.1.1. 10/20 38.311g 23/50 98.0oig 25/50 
a c02824 215.•g n.1.1. 1/20 38.3ag 3/50 98.0•g 6/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02824 523.llg n.1.1. 2/20 38.311g 2/50 98.0•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2300 1099 31.111g n.1.1. 0/16 15.7•Q 0/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1099 31.111g n.1.1. 0/16 15. 711g 0/18 
b 1099 16.311g n.1.1. 0/16 15.7•g 1/18 
2301 c02824 31.0•g n.1.1. 6/20 42.211g 31/50 84.0•g 46/50 
a c02824 46.411g n.1.1. 14/20 42.211g 39/50 84.0•g 47/50 
b c02824 31.0•g n.1.1. 6/20 42.211g 31/50 84.0llg 46/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c02824 106.•g n.1.1. 6/20 42.2mg 10/50 <84.0•g 7/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
2302 1099 4.0511g 29.911g 0/16 14.611g 8/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1099 11.211g n.1.1. 0/16 14.611g 2/18 
b 1099 29.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 14.611g 0/18 
c 1099 3.5611g ZZ.211g 0/16 14.611g 9/18 
2303 1099 17.511g n.a.a. 1/17 15.7•g 1/17 
a 1099 29.3•g n.1.1. 0/17 15.7•g 0/17 
b 1099 13.811g n.1.1. 2/17 15.711g 2/17 
2304 1099 12.3•g n.1.1. 1/18 14.611g 2/18 
a 1099 29.011g n.1.1. 2/18 14.6•g 0/18 
b 1099 15.111g n.1.1. 3/18 14.6•g 2/18 230 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2305 R f34 eat TBA KXB 241124 
a R f34 eat l iv KXB 24M24 
2306 R 11 f34 eat TBA KXB 241124 
a R II f34 eat l iv KXB 241124 
PI VALOLACTONE 
2307 f b6c gav TBA KXB 241124 
a b6c gav l iv KXB 241124 
b b6c gav l un KXB 241124 
2308 II b6c gav TBA KXB 241124 
a • b6c gav l iv KXB 241124 
b 11 b6c gav l un KXB 241124 
2309 f f34 gav sto KXA 241124 
a f 134 gav TBA KXB 241124 
b f34 gav l iv KXB 241124 
2310 11 f34 gav sto KXA 241124 
a 11 f34 gav ato sqc 241124 
b • f34 gav TBA KXB 241124 
11 f34 gav l iv KXB 241124 
POLYBROKINATED BIPHENYLS 
2311 R f 11a eat l iv tu11 57w57 
a R 
f 111 eat tba •ix 57w57 
POL YVINYLPYRIDINE • N ·OXIDE 
2312 K f ici ivj lun ada 171124 
a K id ivj tba Hl 171124 
b K i c i iv j tba ban 171124 
2313 wia iv) tba 11al 171124 
a wit iv) tba ban 171124 
PREKARIN 
2314 R f cdr eat l iv tu11 241124 a 
2315 R 11 cdr eat l iv hpt 241124 a 
PROCARBAZ I NE 
2316 11 b46 iv) tba 11ix 121124 
a 11 b46 iv) tba 11al 121124 
b • b46 iv] tba ban 121124 
PROCARBAZINE. HC l 
2317 f b6c ipJ KXB KXB 52w85 I 
a f b6c ipJ uta acn 52w85 1 
b b6c ipj KXA 52w85 
b6c ipJ Ly• 52w85 s 
d b6c ipj lun a/a 52w85 a 
a b6c ipJ bra oln 52w85 a 
f b6c ipJ TBA KXB 52w85 I 
g b6c ipJ l iv KXB 52w85 I 
h b6c ipJ lun KXB 52w85 1 
2318 b6c ipJ uta acn 52w80 1 
a b6c ipJ ••• KXA 52w80 I 
b b6c ipJ · • • Ly• 52w80 a 
c b6c ipJ tun a/a 52w80 1 
d b6c ipJ bra oln 52w80 a 
2319 11 b6c ipJ KXB KXB 52w85 1 
a • b6c ipJ lun KXA 52w85 1 
b 11 b6c ipj lun a/a 52w85 a 
II b6c ipJ KXA 52w85 
d • b6c ipJ bra KXA 52w85 
a 11 b6c ipJ bra oln 52w85 a 
f • b6c ipJ TBA KXB 52w85 I 
g • b6c ipJ liv KXB 52w85 I 
h 11 b6c ipJ lun KXB 52w85 1 
2320 • b6c i p I l un KXA 52w85 1 
• b6c ipj lun a/a 52w85 1 
b • b6c ipj ••• KXA 52w85 I 
c 11 b6c ipj bra KXA 52w85 1 
d 11 b6c ipj bra oln 52w85 1 
2321 f awi ipj tun •ix 26w76 e 
a f awi ipJ leu 26w76 
b awi ipj ute car 26w76 e 
awi ipj ute aar 26w76 
d awi ipj lya 26w76 e 
e awi ipj l iv lya 26w76 e 
f awi ipj tba 11ix 26w76 a 
g awi ipj tba 11al 26w76 e 
h awi ipj tba ban 26w76 e :> 2.30g11 * P<.8 
no dra P•1. 
:> no dra P•1. 
2.65g11 * P<.6 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •..• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •.•. : •• 1g ..... : •• 10 
:> 179.11g * P<.3 
no dra P•1. 
482.11g * P<.6 
:> no dra P-1. 
+ no dra P-1. 
435.llg * P<.5 
333.11g I P<.002 c 
200.11g * P<.3 
no dra P•1. 
154.11g * P<.0005c 
532. Mg * P<. 009 c 
181.11g * P<.2 
850.11g * P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••. : .• 10 ..... : •• 100 .••• :. -19· .•. ·: • .10 
.> no dre 
5.9111g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ..•• : .. 1g ••••• :. -10 
• > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
1.69g11 
175.llg 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••. : .• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• :. -19· •••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·19· •••• : •• 10 
4.0111g 
3.9311g 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g ••.• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.• : • .10 
.19411g 
.25311g 
pool 
pool 
+ • 75811g • 
.90811g • 
3.8311g 
6.3411g 
.19311g 
no dre 
3.8311g 
.41111g 
.69011g • 
.85511g • 
3.3911g 
5.6211g 
.51111g I 
.62311g I 
.72111g 
3.3411g • 
4.5111g 
5.1911g 
.46411g 
3.2811g 
.62311g 
.62311g I 
• 72111g I 
3.3411g • 
4.5111g I 
5.1911g I 
1.0511g 
3. 72•g 
5. 7511g 
6.1111g 
6.9911g 
no dre 
.24411g 
.39111g 
27 .811g P•1. 
P<.4 
P-1 • 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.8 
P•1. 
P<.002 + 
P<.0005 
P-1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.002 c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.002 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<. 0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.009 c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.01 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.004 
P<.03 
P<.09 + 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.8 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 231 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Jnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2305 c02824 283.11g n.1.1. 12/20 150.llg 24/50 300.llg 27/50 
• c02824 n.1.1. n.1.1 . 0/20 150.llg 0/50 300.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
2306 c02824 60.111g n.1.1. 15/20 60.011g 32/50 (120.11g 22/50) 
a c02824 651.ag n.1.1. 0/20 60.011g 1/50 120.11g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PIVALOLACTONE 1955-45 -9 
2307 c04126 55. 711g n.1.1. 6/20 31.811g 20/50 63.711g 22/50 
a c04126 340.11g n. 1.1. 0/20 31.811g 2/50 63.711g 0/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04126 161.•g n.1.s. 0/20 31.811g 4/50 63.7•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/ c. 
2308 c04126 97 .011g n.s.1. 12/20 31.811g 24/50 63.711g 25/50 
a c04126 64.111g n.1.1. 4/20 31.811g 10/50 (63. 711g 4/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04126 114.•g n.1.1. 2/20 31.811g 6/50 63. 711g 10/50 lun:a/a, a/c. 
2309 c04126 175.•g 1.03g• 0/20 63.111g 2/50 126.llg 11/50 sto:sqc,sqp. 
• c04126 62.511g n.a.s. 14/20 63.111g 35/50 126.11g 34/50 
b c04126 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 63.111g 0/50 126.11g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2310 c04126 96. 711g 293.llg 0/20 63.1•g 6/50 126.llg 21/50 sto: sqc, sqp. 
• c04126 241.•g 12.5g• 0/20 63.1•g 1/50 126.llg 7/50 
b c04126 66.411g n.1.1. 11/20 63.111g 29/50 126.•g 34/50 
c04126 323.ag n.1.1. 0/20 63.1•g 3/50 126.ag 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
POL YBROMI NAT ED BIPHENYLS 59536-61-1 
2311 1061 1.86•g n.1. 1. 0/8 2.5011g 0/12 Schwartz; j nc i ,64,63-67;1980 
1061 .96211g n.1.1. 0/8 2.5011g 1/12 
POL YVINYLPYRIDINE · N-OXIDE 
2312 1419 48.0ag n.1.1. 3/39 8.2411g 2/50 Sch111hl ;arzn, 19, 1313-1314; 1969 
• 1419 14.911g n.1.1. 14/39 8.2411g 17/50 
b 1419 30.911g n.1.1. 3/39 8.2411g 4/50 
2313 1419 18.211g n.1.1. 4/48 5.8911g 5/48 
• 1419 21.811g n.1.1. 4/48 5.8911g 4/48 
PREMARIN <conjugated equine estrogens> -· -
2314 108 .26211g n.1.1. 0/20 70.0ug 0/20 .700•g 0/20 Gibaon;t xap, 11,489-510; 1967 
2315 108 2.3211g n.1.1. 0/20 70.0ug 1/20 • 70011g 0/20 
PROCARBAZ I NE 671-16-9 
2316 1017 1.9211g 17.211g 7/89 1.7111g 15/48 Sch.,.h l ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
• 1017 1.95ag 12.4ag 4/89 1.7111g 14/48 
b 1017 11.4•g n.1.1. 3/89 1.7111g 1/48 
PROCARBAZINE. Ht l 366-70-1 
2317 c01810 65.1ug .43211g 0/15 2.00ag 19/35 5.2011g 18/35 ---: Leu, ly11; bra:oln; lun:a/a; ute:acn. 
• c01810 68. 9ug • 72811g 0/15 2.00•g 14/35 5.2011g 8/35 
b c01810 .28911g 2.9611g 0/15 2.0011g 8/35 5.2011g 2/35 · --: Leu, ly11. 
c c01810 -30811g 5. 3411g 0/15 2.0011g 6/35 5.2011g 2/35 
d c01810 1.05•g 19.511g 0/15 2.0011g 1/35 5.2011g 6/35 
• c01810 2.9311g 16.6•g 0/15 2.00•g 0/35 5.2011g 11/35 
f c01810 65. Oug • 422•g 0/15 2.0011g 19/35 5.2011g 20/35 
g c01810 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 2.0011g 0/35 5.2011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
h c01810 1.0511g 19.5•g 0/15 2.00ag 1/35 5.2011g 6/35 lun:a/a,a /c. 
2318 c01810 .20311g .83411g 0/45p 2.0011g 14/35 5.2011g 8/35 
a c01810 .25811g 2.69•g 1/45p 2.00•g 8/35 5.2011g 2/35 -- - : Leu, Ly•. 
b c01810 .28311g 4.5711g 1/45p 2.0011g 6/35 5.2011g 2/35 
c c01810 .92711g 13.6•g 0/45p 2.0011g 1/35 5.20•g 6/35 
d c01810 2.60•g 13.2•g 0/45p 2.0011g 0/35 5.2011g 11/35 
2319 c01810 .289•g .94711g 0/15 1.9011g 14/35 4.8011g 19/35 ---:leu,ly•; bra:oln,ulc; lun:a/a,a/c. 
a c01810 .32311g 1.3911g 0/15 1.9011g 11/35 4.8011g 10/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
b c01810 .36911g 1.6311g 0/15 1.9011g 10/35 4.80•g 10/35 
c c01810 1.3611g 135.•g 0/15 1.9011g 4/35 4.8011g 4/35 ---: leu,lyin. 
d c01810 2.0711g 13.111g 0/15 1.9011g 0/35 4.8011g 10/35 bra:oln,ulc . 
a c01810 2.2811g 17.111g 0/15 1.9011g 0/35 4.8011g 9/35 
f c01810 .27111g .821•g 0/15 1.9011g 18/35 4.8011g 20/35 
g c01810 1.27•g 222.•g 0/15 1.9011g 3/35 4.8011g 3/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
h c01810 .323•g 1.39•g 0/15 1.90•g 11/35 4.8011g 10/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2320 c01810 .323•g 1.31•g 0/45p 1.9011g 11/35 4.80•g 10/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c01810 .369•g 1.53•g 0/45p 1.9011g 10/35 4.BO•g 10/35 
b c01810 1.36•g 13.811g 0/45p 1.9011g 4/35 4.8011g 4/35 ---: leu,ly•. 
c c01810 2.07•g 11.711g 0/45p 1.90•g 0/35 4.8011g 10/35 bra:oln,ulc . 
d c01810 2.2811g 14.6•g 0/45p 1.9011g 0/35 4.8011g 9/35 
2321 1336 . 44611g 4. 6811g 20/154 1.7511g 10/19 Sk ipptir; arfr; 1976/We i sburger 1977/Prejaen pars.co••· 
• 1336 1.1211g 26. 7•g 0/154 1. 7511g 3/19 
b 1336 1.4111g 82.811g 0/154 1. 7511g 2/19 
c 1336 1.43•g n.1.a. 1/154 1.75•g 2/19 
d 1336 1.47•g n.1.1. 3/154 1.7511g 2/19 
a 1336 3.6611g n.1.1. 1/154 1.7511g 0/19 
f 1336 92.6ug .683•g 42/154 1.7511g 18/19 
g 1336 .181•g 1.03•g 29/154 1.75•g 16/19 
h 1336 1.7411g n.1.1. 13/154 1.75•g 2/19 232 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2322 M m swi ipj lun 11ix 26w78 e 
a M 11 awi ipj l iv •ix 26w78 e 
b M 11 awi ipj tba 11ix 26w78 e 
M 11 swi ipj tba 11al 26w78 e 
d M 11 awi ipj tba ben 26w78 e 
2323 b cya 11ix ost 12y13 e11uw 
a P b cym 11ix lka 12y13 e11uw 
b P b cy11 11ix 11lk 12y13 emuw 
c P b cy11 mix lcl 12y13 emuw 
d P b cy11 11ix ule 12y13 e11uw 
• b cya 11ix spl hes 12y13 emuw 
b cy11 11ix hu11 ost 12y13 e11uw 
g P b cy11 mix jaw oat 12y13 emuw 
h P b cy11 11ix l iv 11al 12y13 emuw 
b cya 11ix tba 11al 12y13 emuw 
2324 b rhe mix lka 14y14 e11uw 
a 
b 
c 
d 
2325 
• 
b 
c 
d 
• 
g 
2326 
a 
b 
d 
2327 
a 
b 
c 
d 
• 
2328 b rhe mix 11lk 14y14 e11uw 
b rhe 11ix oat 14y14 emuw 
b rhe 11ix hu11 ost 14y14 e11uw 
b rhe mix kid hms 14y14 e11uw 
b rhe mix l iv mal 14y14 emuw 
b rhe aix tba 11al 14y14 eauw 
sda i p j MXB MXB 26w86 a 
sda i p j MXA MXA 26w86 • 
ada ipj bra oln 26w86 a 
sda ipj 11gl MXA 26w86 a 
sda 
sda 
sda 
sda 
sda 
sda sda 
sda 
sda 
11 sda 
• sda 
• sda 
11 sda 
11 ada 
• sda 
• sda 
11 sda 
• ada ipj 
ipj 
ipj ipj ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj ipj ipj mgl acn 26w86 a 
ly11 26w86 s 
TBA MXB 26w86 a 
l iv MXB 26w86 s 
MXA MXA 26w80 1 
bra oln 26w80 a 
mg l MXA 26w80 s 
11gl acn 26w80 a 
ly11 26w80 a 
MXB MXB 26w61 a 
MXA MXA 26w61 a 
MXA 26w61 s 
mgl MXA 26w61 1 
11gl acn 26w61 • 
TBA MXB 26w61 s 
l iv MXB 26w61 s 
MXA MXA 26w61 s 
MXA 26w61 a 
b 11 ada ipj ly11 26w61 a 
c R II sda ipj •gl MXA 26w61 • 
d R 11 sda ipj olb acn 26w61 1 
e 11 ada ipj 11gl acn 26w61 • 
11 sda ipj leu 26w61 s pool 
pool GOLD ET AL. 
+ TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
1.5311g 
no dre 
1.1511g 
1.74mg 
9.84mg 
8.7011g 
8.70mg 
18.2mg 
18.2mg 
18.211g 
18.211g 
18.2mg 
18.2mg 
no dre 
3.17mg 
9.50mg 
9.50mg 
53.311g 
53.3mg 
53.3mg 
no dre 
5.35mg 
.33711g 
.416mg * 
.41811g • 
.458ag 
.459•g 
5.1811g 
.329mg P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.004 
P<.009 
P<.4 
P<.02 
P<.02 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.1 
P<.1 
p.1. 
P<.002 
P<.002 + 
P<.002 + 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
no dre p.1. 
• 36011g * P<. 0005c 
.361mg • P<.0005c 
.396mg I P<.0005c 
.397mg I P<.0005c 
4.48mg P<.0005c 
• 284mg * P<. 0005 
.343mg • P<.0005c 
2.1011g • 
4.5011g • 
4.85mg * 
.18611g P<.0005c 
P<.003 c 
P<.004 c 
P<.0005 
no dre P•1. 
. 34311g * P<. 0005c 
2. 1 Omg * P<. 0005c 
2.5111g * P<.0005c 
4. 5011g * P<. 0005c 
4.67mg * P<.003 
4.85mg * P<.0005c 
13.311g * P<.02 
PROFLAVINE.HCl HEMIHYORATE* .100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• :. -.111g ••.• : •• 10 ••••• :. -.100 •••• : •• .lg ••••. :. -.10 
2329 f b6c eat l iv MXA 241024 
a b6c eat TBA MXB 241024 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 241024 
c b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2330 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 24a24 
II b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b 11 b6c eat l un MXB 241124 
2331 f f34 eat TBA MXB 250!25 
a f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
2332 11 f34 eat MXA MXA 251125 
11 f34 eat l iv MXA 251125 
b 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 2~1125 
a f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
PRONETHALOL 
2333 M f nu eat th11 tu11 64w64 r 
2334 M • nu eat th., tu• 64w64 r 
PRONETHALOL. Ht l 
2335 M f cf1 eat lun ade 78w78 e 
a M f cf 1 eat l iv tu11 78w78 e 
2336 M 11 cf1 eat lun ade 78w78 e 
a M 11 cf1 eat liv ade 78w78 e 
b M 11 cf1 eat liv car 78w78 e #26. 411g P<. 0005 
86.211g * P<.3 
26. 411g P<. 0005 
487.11g * P<.5 
:> no dre P•1. 
248.11g * P<. 7 
no dre p.1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
a213.11g * P<.02 
254.mg * P<.05 
no dre p.1. 
254.11g * P<.05 
.100ng •• : .• .lug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• .111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -.100 ..•• : .• .lg ••••• : .• 10 
.> 408.11g * P<.3 
.> 1.93g11 * P<. 7 
.100ng •• : •• .lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• .100 ••.• : .• .111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •• .lg ••••. : .• .10 
.> 1.30gm 
.> no dre 
931.11g 
1.82gm 
no dre P<.6 
p.1. 
P<.5 
P<.3 
P•1. 
PROPANE SUL TONE .100ng .• : •• .lug •.•• : •• .10 ••••. :. -.100 ..•• :. -.111g •••• :. -.10 ••••• : •• .100 •••• : •• .lg .••.• :. -.10 
2337 R f cdr gav crb 11ag 46w60 au -" 4.0611g * P<.1 
a R f cdr gav ag l adc 46w60 aea 4. 1311g * P<. 02 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 233 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2322 1336 . 683•g 6. 430lg 9/101 1. 71mg 11/27 
a 1336 5.3511g n.1.1. 2/101 1.7111g 0/27 
b 1336 .492•g 9.99•g 28/101 1. 71•g 16/27 
c 1336 . 689•g 94. 8•g 19/101 1.71•g 12/27 
d 1336 1.74•g n.1.1. 9/101 1.71•g 4/27 
2323 2000 2.1311g n.1.1. 0/38 4.68•g 2/13 Ada11son; ossc, 129-156; 1982/Si eber pars. co••· 
2000 2.13•g n.1.1. 0/38 4.6811g 2/13 
b 2000 2.95•g n.1.1. 0/38 4.6811g 1/13 
2000 2.9511g n.1.s. 0/38 4.6811g 1/13 
d 2000 2.95mg n.1.1. 0/38 4.68ag 1/13 
e 2000 2.9511g n.1.1. 0/38 4.68ag 1/13 
2000 2.950lg n.1.1. 0/38 4.6811g 1/13 
g 2000 2.9511g n.1.1. 0/38 4.6811g 1/13 
h 2000 5.68ag n.1.1. 0/38 4.6811g 0/13 
2000 1.14ag 21.2ag 1/38 4.6811g 5/13 
2324 2000 3.59ag 46.3•g 0/32 8.1711g 5/20 
2000 3.59•g 46.3•g 0/32 8.1711g 5/20 
b 2000 8.68•g n.1.1. 0/32 8.1711g 1/20 
c 2000 8.68•g n.s.s. 0/32 8.17ag 1/20 
d 2000 8.6811g n.1.1. 0/32 8.17ag 1/20 
e 2000 16.411g n.1.1. 0/32 8.17•g 0/20 
2000 2.39•g 15.8•g 0/32 8.17•g 8/20 
2325 c01810 • 106•g • 701•g 0/10 3.15•g 25/36 10.8•g 30/35 --·:ly•; bra:oln; crb:11ua; 11gl :acn,adn . 
• c01810 • 112ag 1.4711g 0/10 3.15•g 17/36 10.S.g 3/35 bra:oln; crb:•ua . 
b c01810 .112•g 1.51•g 0/10 3.15•g 17/36 10.8•g 2/35 
c01810 . 112•g 1.37•g 0/10 3.15•g 17/36 10.8ag 25/35 11gl :acn,adn . 
d c01810 .112ag 1.3711g 0/10 3.15ag 16/36 10.811g 25/35 
e c01810 2.7911g 9.6811g 0/10 3.1511g 0!36 10.8ag 20/35 
c01810 .105•g .66811g 4/10 3.15ag 27/36 10.8•g 30/35 
g c01810 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 3.1511g 0/36 10.8•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2326 c01810 96.8ug 1.10•g 0/40p 3.15 .. g 17/36 10.8•g 3/35 bra:oln; crb:11ua. 
• c01810 96.9ug 1.1111g 0/40p 3.1511g 17/36 10.811g 2/35 
b c01810 96. 7ug 1.14•g 3/40p 3.15•g 17/36 10.811; 25/35 1tgl :acn,adn. 
c c01810 96.8ug 1.15ag 2/40p 3.1511g 16/36 10.8•g 25/35 
d c01810 2.41•g 8.16•g 0/40p 3.15•g 0!36 10.8•g 20/35 
2327 c01810 .104ag .62711g 1/10 2.2011g 16/34 6.2011g 24/35 ---:leu,ly11; bra:can,oln; •gl :acn,adn; olb:acn. 
• c01810 .110•g 1.13•g 0/10 2.20•g 12/34 6.2011g 9/35 bra:can,oln; olb:acn . 
b c01810 1.00•g 5.5911g 1/10 2.2011g 3/34 6.20•g 12/35 ---:leu,ly11. 
c01810 1.93•g 20.1•g 0/10 2.20•g 1/34 6.2011g 8/35 11gl :acn,adn. 
d c01810 2.00•g 29.111g 0/10 2.20•g 1/34 6.2011; 7/35 
e c01810 84.2ug .361ag 4/10 2.20•g 19/34 6.20•g 30/35 
f c01810 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 2.2011g 0/34 6.2011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2328 c01810 . 110•g .885•g 0/40p 2.2011g 12/34 6.2011g 9/35 bra:can,oln; olb:acn . 
• c01810 1.00•g 4.6311g 1/40p 2.2011g 3/34 6.20•; 12/35 ··· :leu,ly11. 
b c01810 1.10•g 6.37•g 1/40p 2.2011g 3/34 6.20•g 9/35 
c01810 1.9311g 12.8•g 1/40p 2.2011g 1/34 6.2011g 8/35 •gl :acn,adn. 
d c01810 1.2211g 50. 7•g 0/40p 2.20•g 0/34 6.20•g 3/35 
e c01810 2.00•g 15.3•g 1/40p 2.2011g 1/34 6. 20•g 7/35 
f c01810 3. 78•g n.1.1. 0/40p 2.2011g 0/34 6.20•g 3/35 
PROFLAVINE.HCl HEMIHYORATE* 952·23·8 
2329 c04137 13.6ag 89.3ag 5/49 26.0•g 20/50 (52.0•g 22/50) l iv:hpa,hpc. s 
• c04137 26.0•u n.1.1. 36/49 26.0•g 37/50 52 .O•g 41/50 
b c04137 13.6ag 89.3•g 5/49 26.0•g 20/50 <52.0•g 22/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,r;nd. 
c04137 107.•g n.a.a. 4/49 26.0•g 3/50 52.0•g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2330 c04137 35.5ag n.1.1. 39/50 24.0•g 38/50 48.0•g 39/50 
a c04137 34.1•g n.1.1. 26/50 24.0ag 28/50 48.0•g 30/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c04137 95.5•g n.1.1. 9/50 24.0mg 11/50 48.0•g 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2331 c04137 21.2•g n.1.1. 48/50 15.0•g 42/50 (30.0•g 35/50) 
a c04137 157 ·"U n.1.1. 1/50 15.0•g 2/50 30.0•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2332 c04137 80.8ag 25.0g• 0/50 12.0•g 0/50 24.0•g 5/50 lgi :srn; smi :acn, lei. s 
c04137 87.8•g n.1.1. 0/50 12.0•g 1/50 24.0•g 3/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. s 
b c04137 35.6•g n.1.1. 36/50 12.0•g 30/50 24.0•g 32/50 
c04137 87.8•g n.1.1. 0/50 12.011g 1/50 24.0•g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
PRONETHALOL <•lderl in> 54·80·8 
2333 20 147 .11g n. 1.1. 0/25 65.0•g 3/25 130.•g 4/25 260.•g 2/25 Howe;natu,207,594-595;1965 
2334 20 266.•g n. 1. 1. 1/25 60.0•g 0/25 120.•g 3/25 240.•g 1/25 
PRONETHALOL. HC l (aldorl in.HCl > 51 ·02·5 
2335 469 239.ag n.a.s. 3/40 150.•g 6/52 Newberno; txap,41, 535 · 546; 1977 
a 469 904.•g n.1.1. 0/40 150.•g 0/52 
2336 469 174.•g n.1.s. 2/29 150.•g 4/32 
469 297.ag n.1.1. 0/29 150.llg 1/32 
b 469 340.ag "····· 1/29 150.•g 1/32 
PROPANE SUL TONE 1120·71 ·4 
2337 1112 2.02•g n.1.1. 1/7 8.00•g 12/26 8.53•g 12/26 Wei sburger; j nc i ,67, 75·88;1981 
• 1112 2.4011g n.1.1. 017 8.00•g 6/26 8.53•g 13/26 234 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site X po+Xpt TD50 2'failpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b 
d 
Z338 
• 
b edr gov er l mag 46w60 111 
edr gov gr l 46w60 111 
edr gov Hi ade 46w60 111 
• edr gav erb mag 46w60 111 
R • edr gav er l mag 46w60 111 
R • edr gov Hi ade 46w60 111 
• edr gov gr l 46w60 111 7 .Z011g * P<.08 
+historical * P<.3 
+historical * P<.5 
3.6411g * P<.OZ 
4. 7511g * P<.03 
+historical * P<.3 
+historical * P<.3 + 
+ 
+ 
PROPAZINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
Z339 M f b61 orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6a orl tb1 11ix 76w76 evx 
Z340 M 11 b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 M • b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b61 or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
Z341 M f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 M f b6e or l l un •ix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6e orl tb1 11ix 76w76 evx 
Z34Z M • b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
1 M 11 b6e orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6e orl tb1 •ix 76w76 evx 
beta· PROPIOLACTONE 
Z343 M f hie gov for tu11 77w77 
1 M hie gov for 1qe 77w77 
Z344 M 11 hie gov for tu• 83w83 
1 M 11 hie gov for 1qe 83w83 
Z345 R f esd gov 1to 1qe 69w69 .> 8Z.611g 
.> 
.> no dre 
37 .Z11g 
73.111g 
673.llg 
57 .8 .. g 
no dre 
no dre 
93.ZOlg 
39.70lg 
8Z.o .. g 
11.411g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1.3311g 
1.4711g 
.+ 1.160lg 
1.43•g 
1.3411g P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.4 
P<.6 
P<1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.1 
P<.3 
P<.003 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.OZ 
PROPYL N ·ETHYL· N ·BUTYL TH IOCARBAMATE 
Z346 M f b61 orl lun 1d1 76w76 evx •• : •• 1ug •••. : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g .•.•• : .• 10 
"' 113.llg P<.09 
P-1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.6 
P-1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1. 1 M f b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
Z347 M • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b61 orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
Z348 M f b6e orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
a M f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
Z349 M 11 b6e orl lun ode 76w76 avx 
a M 11 b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M • b6e orl tb1 11ix 76w76 evx 
N · N' ·PROPYL • N· FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
Z350 M f 1wa wet lun 11ix 75w79 ae 
a M awa vat l iv •ix 75w79 ae 
b M 1w1 wet gal 11ix 75w79 ae 
M 1w1 wet gal ode 75w79 ae 
Z351 M 11 1w1 wat lun 11ix 51w61 an 
a M • 1w1 wat pre •ix 51w61 aea 
b M 11 1w1 wet pre 1qe 51w61 111 
M • 1w1 wet l iv hpt 51w61 an 
N • PROPYL ISOME 
Z35Z f b61 or l l un ode 76w76 evx 
a b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b61 orl tb1 11ix 76w76 evx 
Z353 11 b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
a 11 b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
Z354 f b6e orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6e or l tb1 tu• 76w76 evx 
Z355 • b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a • b6e orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tb1 11ix 76w76 evx .> 
.> 
.> no dre 
Z19.11g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
Z67.11g 
no dre 
Z51.11g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g .••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
+ 8. 7411g \ P<.0005+ 
Z15.11g * P<.0005+ 
444.11g * P<.006 + 
497.11g * P<.OZ 
• + 8.8411g \ P<.0005+ 
60.411g \ P<.0005+ 
75. 711g \ P<. OOZ 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 1g •••.. : •• 10 
.> 4.69g11 
.> no dre 
4.39g11 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
1.05g11 
4.65g11 
374.llg P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P-1 • 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.OZ 
P<.3 
P<.0005-
N ·PROPYL -N' ·NITRO· N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
Z356 R • wil wet 1tg ode 34w65 er 
Z357 R • wi1 wet 1tg ode 5Zw65 er •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 •••.• : •• 100 ..•. : •• 1g ••..• : •• 10 
"' 1.9011g 
+ .919•g P<.04 
P<.OOZ 
P<.05 
P<.06 
P<.06 R • wi1 wet 1tg ode 5Zw65 er 
Z358 R • wi1 wet 1tg ode 5Zw78 er 
1 R • wi1 wet 1tg ode 5Zw78 er 
PROPYLENE Gl YCOL 
Z359 R f edr eat l iv nod Z4•Z4 e 
Z360 R 11 edr 11t l iv nod Z411Z4 e 
PROPYLHYDRAZINE. HC l 
Z361 M f awe wet lun •ix 99w99 e Z.8511g 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 •••.• : .. 100 ...• : •. 1g ••... : •• 10 
. no dre 
.no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g ••.. : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
+ 41.411g P•1 • 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 235 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1112 3. 70•g n.1.1. 017 8.00•g 8/26 8.53•g 4/26 
c 1112 7 .07•g n.1.1. 017 8.00•g 2/26 8.53•g 3/26 
d 1112 9.60•g n.1.1. 017 8.00•g 2/26 8.53•g 1/26 
2338 1112 2.16•g n.1.a. 0/6 8.0011g 10/26 8.53•g 11/26 
a 1112 2.68•g n.1.1. 0/6 8.00•g 6/26 8.5311g 11/26 
b 1112 6. 27•g n.1.1. 016 8.00•g 3/26 8.53•g 3/26 
1112 8.12•g n.1.1. 016 8.00•g 0/26 8.53•g 4/26 
PROPAZINE <Geu•i l > 139-40·2 
2339 1242 11.5•g n.1.1. 1/17 14.6•g 2/17 Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
• 1242 27 .2•g n.1.1. 0/17 14.6•g 0/17 
b 1242 7 .81•g n.1.1. 2/17 14.6•g 4/17 
2340 1242 10.711g n.1.1. 1/18 13.6•g 2/17 
a 1242 11.8•g n.1.1. 2/18 13.6•g 2/17 
b 1242 7.80•g n.1.1. 3/18 13.6•g 4/17 
2341 1242 28.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 14.6•g 0/18 
a 1242 28.S.g n.1. 1. 0/16 14.6•g 0/18 
b 1242 15.2•g n.1.1. 0/16 14.6•g 1/18 
2342 1242 9. 75•g n.1. 1. 0/16 13.6•g 2/17 
a 1242 13.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 13.611g 1/17 
b 1242 4.61•g 61.9•g 0/16 13.6•g 6/17 
beta. PROPIOLACTONE 57-57·8 
2343 1011 .765•g 2.49•g 0/30 5.71•g 24/30 Van Duuren; jnci ,63, 1433· 1439; 1979 
a 1011 .848•g 2. 77•g 0/30 5. 71•g 23/30 
2344 1011 .660•g 2.16•g 0/30 4. 7611g 25/30 
a 1011 .821•g 2.68•g 0/30 4. 76•g 23/30 
2345 55 .374•g n.1.1. 0/5 4.08•g 3/5 Van Duuren;Jnci,37,825·838;1966 
PROPYL N ·ETHYL· N ·BUTYL TH IOCARBAMA TE (Ti l LH·6·El 1114-71·2 
2346 1223 27 .8•g n.1.1. 0/15 44.3•g 2/15 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1223 73.1•g n.1.1. 0/15 44.3•g 0/15 
b 1223 30.5•g n.1.1. 1/15 44.3•g 2/15 
2347 1223 33.S.g n.1.1. 3/18 41.2•g 2/15 
a 1223 68.0•g n.1.1. 0/18 41.2•g 0/15 
b 1223 33.8•g n.1.1. 3/18 41.2•g 2/15 
2348 1223 37.1•g n.1.1. 1/18 44.3•g 2/18 
a 1223 87. 7•g n.1.1. 0/18 44.3•g 0/18 
b 1223 31.511g n.1.1. 2/18 44.3•g 3/18 
2349 1223 48.2•g n.1.1. 2/15 41.2•g 1/16 
a 1223 51.5•g n.1.1. 3/15 41.2•g 1/16 
b 1223 43.8•g n.1.1. 5/15 41.211g 2/16 
N · N' · PROPYL · N · FORMYLHYDRAZINE 77337.54.3 
2350 1053 3.99•g 17.1•g 25/99 80.011g 49/50 (160.•g 22/49) Toth;bj ca,42,922 ·928; 1980 
• 1053 108.•g 653.•g 0/38 80.0•g 6/45 160.•g 5/19 
b 1053 216.llg 3.77g• 0/54 80.0•g 5/50 160.•g 5/49 
c 1053 234.•g n.1.1. 0/54 80.0•g 5/50 160.•g 4/49 
2351 1053 5.21•g 16.5•g 26/100 66. 7•g 42/48 (133.•g 6/37> 
1053 30.2•g 172.•g 0/33 66. 7•g 11/48 <133.•g 1/37> 
b 1053 35.6•g 294.•g 0/33 66. 7•g 9/48 <133.•g 1/37> 
1053 304.•g n.1.1. 0/28 66. 7•g 2/50 133.•g 0/50 
N·PROPYL ISOME 83·59·0 
2352 1252 653.•g n.1.1. 1/17 828.•g 2/17 Innes;nt is, 1968/1969 
a 1252 1.55g• n.1.1. 0/17 828.11g 0/17 
b 1252 553.•g n.1.1. 2/17 828.•g 3/17 
2353 1252 720.•g n.1.1. 2/18 770.•g 2/18 
a 1252 1.53g• n.1.1. 1/18 770.•g 0/18 
b 1252 797 .•g n.1.1. 3/18 770.•g 2/18 
2354 1252 1.64g• n.1.1. 0/16 828.•g 0/18 
a 1252 1.64g• n.1.1. 0/16 828.•g 0/18 
b 1252 1.64g• n.1.1. 0/16 828.•g 0/18 
2355 1252 361.•g n.1,1. 0/16 770.•g 4/17 
a 1252 757 .•g n.1.1. 0/16 770.•g 1/17 
b 1252 172 • •g 1. 06g• 0/16 770.•g 9/17 
N · PROPYL · N' · NITRO·N·NITROSOGUANID !NE 13010-07·6 
2356 1081• .573•g n.1.1. 0/15 1.59•g 3/15 Sasaj iH;zkko,94,201-206; 1979 
2357 1081n .338•g 4.24•g 0/15 2.38•g 5/10 
a 1081n .698•g n.1.1. 0/15 2.38•g 2/10 
2358 1082 .551•g n.1.1. 0/9 1.9S.g 2/7 Matsukura;gann, 70, 181-185; 1979 
• 1082 .551•g n.1.1. 0/9 1.98•g 2/7 
PROPYLENE GLYCOL 57·55·6 
2359 1351 8. 74g• n.1.1. 4/28 313.•g 5/25 625.•g 2/27 1.25g• 4/28 2.50g• 2/27 Gaunt; fctx, 10, 151·162; 1972 
2360 1351 9.11g• n.1.1. 2/26 250.•g 4/27 500.•g 3/27 1.00g• 0/23 2.00g• 1/24 
PROPYLHYDRAZINE. HCl 56795·66·5 
2361 252 22.6•g 104.•g 21/99 50.0•g 27/43 Nagel ;ej ca, 11, 473· 478; 1975/Toth 1974 236 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2'l'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
a M swa wat lun ada 99w99 e 
b M swa wat lun adc 99w99 e 
c M 1wa wat l iv 11ix 99w99 e 
2362 M 11 swa wat lun ade 93w93 e 
a M • swa wat lun 11ix 93w93 e 
b M • swa wat l iv lee 93w93 e 
M • swa wat l iv 11ix 93w93 e 
PROPYL THIOURACIL 
2363 M b c5l eat 
2364 R 11 lev eat 
2365 R f wal wat 
a R f wal wat 
2366 R 11 wal wet 
a R 11 wal wat 
2367 R 11 wis wet 
PRORESID pit 
thy 
thy 
thy 
thy 
thy 
thy ede 73w73 er 
ede 52w52 ers 
ade 78w78 erv 
car 78w78 erv 
ada 78w78 erv 
cer 78w78 ery 
ade 61124 rs· 
2368 R • b46 ivj tba 11ix 12•24 es 
SX PURPLE 
2369 R b non eat l iv tu• 331133 
a b non eat tba 11ix 331133 
2370 R nu eat l iv tu• 64w64 e 
2371 R 11 nsa eat l iv tu11 64w64 e 
R • nss eat tba tu11 64w64 e 
PYRAZ I NAM IDE* 
2372 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 • 
a M b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 s 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 18•24 s 
2373 M 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 18•24 s 
M • b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 s 
b M • b6c eet lun MXB 18•24 s 
2374 R f f34 eat pit MXA 181124 
e f f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
b R f f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
2375 R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
R II f34 eat l iv MXB 18•24 
PYRIMETHAMINE* 
2376 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 
M b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 18•24 
2377 M • b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 • 
• M " b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 • 
b M • b6c eat lun MXB 181124 I 
2378 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 181124 
f f34 eet l; v MXB 18•24 
2379 R " f34 eet TBA MXB 181124 
R II f34 eat l iv MXB 181124 
QUERCETIN 
2380 M f ddy eat lun •ix 281128 e 
• M f ddy eat l iv tu• 281128 e 
2381 M 11 ddy eat l iv 11ix 271127 e 
e M 11 ddy eat lun 11ix 271127 e 
b M • ddy eat he• SCI 271127 e 
2382 f nre eat i l11 •ix 58w58 er 
R nre eat il11 edc 58w58 er 
b R nre eat ubl 11ix 58w58 er 
2383 R 11 nra eet il• 11ix 58w58 er 
e 11 nra eat ubl tee 58w58 er 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 
2384 f ac i eat adr coa 77w77 
a R aci eat pit ade 77w77 
2385 R ac i eat th i aer 281128 
a ac i eet adr coa 281128 
b ac i eat pit ade 28•28 
2386 R 11 ac i eat tes i ct 77w77 
• R • ac i eat cec ade 77w77 
b R 11 ac i eat edr phe 77w77 
2387 • ec i eat cec adc 28•28 
a • ac i eat cec ade 28•28 
b 11 ac i eat pan exa 281128 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT 
2388 M f the eat l un ppa 84w84 e 42. 711g P<.0005 
109.11g P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
41. 311g P<. 0005 
50. 511g P<. 002 + 
102 .Ilg P<. 006 -
80 . 811g P<. 06 
jOOng •• : •. jug •.•• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO ••.• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
+ • + • 409.mg * P<.0005+ 
10.311g P<.0005+ 
15.811g 
115.IOg 
17.211g P<.0005+ 
P<.04 
P<.002 + 
79.311g P<.03 + 
noTD50 P<.2 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : .. jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••. : •• jO •.•.• : .• jOO .••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
.> no dre 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO .•••• : •. jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO •.••• : •• jOO •••• : •. jg •••.. : .. jO 
.> 
.> no dre 
24.5g11 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
jOOng •. : •. jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO ••••• : •. jOO •.•• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
:> 3.43gm * P<.7 
10. 7g11 * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
:> 546.11g * P<.2 
5.18g11 * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
* #178.llg \ P<.03 
182.mg \ P<.4 
no dre P• 1. 
:> 284.11g \ P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : .• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO •••.• : .• jOO •••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
:> 315.mg * P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
405.11g * P<.4 
419.11g * P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
27.811g * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •.•. : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg ••.•• : •• jO 
<+ ... 4.24gll 
no dre 
15.1gm 
5.46g11 
73.4g"' 
5.1211g 
15.4•g 
51.3•g 
noTD50 
21.011g P<.05 
P•1. 
P<.09 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 
P<.09 
P<.004 + 
P<.06 
jOOng •• : •. jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO ••••• : .• jOO •••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
• > no dre P-1 • 
no dre P-1. 
90.4g11 P<.2 
226.g11 P<.8 
461.gll P<1. 
* 2.29g"' * P<.09 
7 .13gm * P<.08 
7 .13g"' * P<.08 
.35.2g11 P<.05 
72.3g11 P<.2 
72.3g.. P<.2 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •.•• : •• jO •.••• : •• jOO •••• : •• jg .•••. : •• jO 
.> no dre P• 1. CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 237 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Oose line 2Dose 21nc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
a 252 23.5m9 103.•9 18/99 50.0119 26/43 
b 252 51.8119 367.119 4/99 50.0•9 12/43 
252 18.7•9 n.a.s. 2/43 50.0•9 0/2 
2362 252 21.8•9 116.119 15/99 41.7•9 22/43 
252 23.9•9 281.119 23/99 41.7119 22/43 
b 252 25.0•9 2.029• 0/56 41.7•9 2/10 
252 20.3119 n.1.1. 4/56 41.7119 3/10 
PROPYL THIOURACIL 51 ·52·5 
2363 257 266.119 663.119 0/28 1.259• 15/24 1.509• 21/29 K ing;pseb, 112,365 -366; 1963 
2364 254 5.69119 21.5119 0/68 40.0•9 16/33 Lindsay; arpa, 81, 308· 316; 1966 
2365 256 8. 77•9 34.7119 1/20 42.9119 20/30 Will is; jpat,82,23·27; 1961 
a 256 39.8119 n.s.s. 0/20 42.9•9 4/30 
2366 256 7. 77119 73.3119 2/20 37 .5M9 11/18 
a 256 23.9119 n.1.a. 0/20 37.5119 3/18 
2367 1273 n.1.1. n.1.1. 3/8 7 .50119 5/5 Stoll ;bdca,50,389·398; 1963 
PRORESID 1508-45·8 
2368 1017 2.58119 n.1.1. 7/65 .714119 1/24 Sch11ah l; arzn, 20, 1461·1467; 1970 
SX PURPLE (ponceau 4R) 2611·82 ·7 
2369 1429 15.09• n.a.s. 0/50 771.•9 0/50 Andr i anova; vpi t, 29,61-65;1970 
a 1429 6.029• n.s.s. 0/50 771.119 2/50 
2370 1372 819.119 n.s.s. 017 1.50911 017 Al l111rk; jphp,9,622 ·628;1957 
2371 1372 562.119 n.s.s. 0/5 1.209• 016 
a 1372 562.119 n.a.s. 0/5 1.20911 016 
PYRAZINAMIDE* 98·96·4 
2372 c01785 575.•9 n.s.s. 1/15 348.119 5/35 697.•9 9/35 
a c01785 1. 75911 n.s.s. 0/15 348.119 0/35 697.•9 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01785 2.62911 n.s.s. 1/15 348.119 0/35 697.119 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2373 c01785 105.119 n.1.a. 2/15 322.M9 5/35 726.119 6/35 
c01785 956.•9 n.s.a. 1/15 322.119 0/35 726.•9 3/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01785 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 322.M9 0/35 726.119 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2374 c01785 78.9119 n.a.1. 2/15 134.119 14/35 <268.•9 7/34) pit: era, ere. 
a c01785 50.4119 n.1.1. 11/15 134.119 26/35 (268.119 19/34) 
b c01785 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 134.119 0/35 268.119 0/34 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2375 c01785 79.4•9 n.1.1. 4/15 107.M9 17/35 <214.119 8/36) 
c01785 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 107.119 0/35 214.•9 0/36 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
PYR IMETHAMINE* <Daraprin> 58·14·0 
2376 c01683 44.2•9 n.a.a. 1/15 34.7•9 5/35 69.5•9 9/35 
c01683 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 34. 7119 0/35 69.5119 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01683 99.6119 n.1.1. 0/15 34.7•9 0/35 69.5119 2/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2377 c01683 30.1119 n.1.1. 0/15 32.0119 1/35 64.2119 1/35 
a c01683 n.a.a. n.1.1. 0/15 32.0119 0/35 64.2119 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c01683 n.a.1. n.1.1. 0/15 32.0119 0/35 64.2119 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2378 c01683 7.01119 n.1.1. 7/15 5.30119 16/35 10.7119 26/35 
c01683 n.a .. a. n.1.1. 0/15 5.30•9 0/35 10.7119 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2379 c01683 14.9119 n.1.1. 8/15 4.20•9 17/35 8.60119 11/35 
c01683 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 4.20119 0/35 8.60•9 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
QUERCETIN 117.39.5 
2380 1146 1.829• n.1.1. 4/15 2.609• 18/31 Saito; tc111, 1,213·221; 1980 
a 1146 23.59• n.1.1. 0/15 2.609• 0/33 
2381 1146 5.20911 n.a.a. 0/14 2.40911 4/32 
a 1146 1.87911 n.1.1. 6/16 2.409• 21/37 
b 1146 12.0911 n.1.1. 0/16 2.40911 1/37 
2382 1392 2.31119 12.3•9 0/9 50.0•11 14/16 Pa•ukcu; canr ,40, 3468-3472; 1980 
a 1392 6. 79119 76.3119 0/9 50.0119 8/16 
b 1392 15.5119 n.1.1. 0/9 50.0119 3/16 
2383 1392 n.1.1. 9.97119 018 40.0119 6/6 
a 1392 5.06119 n.1.1. 018 40.0•9 2/6 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 5117-01·1 
2384 1145• 462.119 n.1.1. 0/22 500.M9 0/10 2.50911 019 H irono;clet, 13, 15·21;1981 
a 114511 462.119 n.1.1. 0/22 500.119 0/10 2.50911 0/9 
2385 1145n 14.7911 n.1.1. 0/33 5 .00911 1/20 
a 1145n 16.09• n.1.1. 1/33 5.009• 1/20 
b 1145n 13.29• n.1.1. 3/33 5.009• 2/20 
2386 114511 593.119 n.1.1. 3/30 400.119 1/10 2.00911 3/8 
a 1145• 1.169• n.1.1. 0/30 400.119 0/10 2.00911 1/8 
b 114511 1.16911 n.1.1. 0/30 400.119 0/10 2.009• 1/8 
2387 1145n 8.65911 n.1.1. 0/33 4.009• 2/20 
1145n 11.8911 n.1.1. 0/33 4.009• 1/20 
b 1145n 11.8911 n.1.1. 0/33 4.00911 1/20 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT (spray-dried aqueous extract of quil laia bark> 
2388 1404 5.84911 n.s.s. 9/44 130.119 5/43 650.119 4/43 1.959• 5/46 Ph; l l ips;fctx, 17,23·27;1979 238 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
• M the eat l iv hnd 84w84 e 
2389 M • the eat lun pp• 84w84 e 
a M 11 the eat l iv •hp 84w84 e 
b M 11 the eat l iv hnd 84w84 e 
p·QUINONE DIOXIME 
2390 f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
• f b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b f b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 
2391 • b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a • b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b • b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2392 f f34 eat ubl MXA 241124 
• f34 eat ubl tee 241124 
b f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
c f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
2393 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
11 f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
C. I. FOOD RED 3 
2394 M f up eat lun pp• 80w80 e 
• M f esp eat l iv tu• 80w80 e 
2395 M 11 esp eat lun pp• 80w80 • 
• M •up eat Liv nod 80w80 e 
b M •up eat Liv ade 80w80 e no dre P•1. 
;, 4.091111 * P<.03 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 .••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •. 11111 •••• : .. 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• :. -111· •••• : •• 10 
:> 
:> :> 6. 7111• * P<1. 
656. 1111 * P<. 02 
6.661111 * P<.8 
936.1111 * P<.6 
1230.1111 P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
106.1111 * P<.003 c 
182.1111 * P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
349.•11 * P<.9 
1.131111 * P<.4 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 11111 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -111· •••• : •• 10 
.> 32.911• * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
.> 12.31111 * P<.7 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
D & C RED NO. 5 100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• :. -10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 11111 •••• : .• 10 ••••. :. -100 •••• :. ·111· •••• :. -10 
2396 M f ddy eat l iv hpc 81w81 erv 784.1111 P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.06 
P<.0005 
P<.02 
P<.06 + • M f ddy eat Liv hp• 81w81 erv 21.511• * 
2397 M • ddy eat l iv hpc 81w81 erv 659.•11 Z 
• M • ddy eat l iv hpa 81w81 erv 8. 7911• * 
2398 R f cfe eat l iv nod 241124 e 704.1111 * 
2399 • cfe eat l iv nod 241124 e "' 2.9111• * 
2400 R 11 wia eat l iv lea 65w65 ea "' 1.131111 * 
D & C RED NO. 9 
2401 R f 0&11 eat pit ade 251125 e 
2402 R • 0&11 eat tea i ca 251125 e 
R 11 01• eat fba 251125 e 
0 & C REO NO. 10 
2403 R f OH eat pit ade 241124 e 
• R f OH eat l iv ade 241124 e 
2404 R 11 OH eat l iv hpa 241124 • 
FD & C RED NO. 1 
2405 b bbl eat l iv •ix 241124 
b bbl eat l iv car 241124 
b b bbl eat l iv nod 241124 
c b bbl eat l iv bht 241124 
2406 nu eat bi l ade 65w65 r 
• nu eat l iv car 65w65 r 
2407 • nu eat bi l ade 65w65 r 
• • nu eat l iv car 65w65 r 
2408 b oH eat l iv nod 241124 
a b OH eat l iv bht 241124 
b 
c 
2409 
2410 
2411 
2412 b OH eat l iv car 241124 
b OH eat tba Hl 241124 
b wia eat l iv tu• 65w65 ekr 
b wia eat l iv tu• 65w65 ekr 
b wia eat l iv tu• 70w70 er 
b wia eat l iv tu• 70w70 er 
FD & C RED NO. 2 
2413 b 1111r eat l iv tu• 251125 e 
• b •11r eat tba •ix 251125 • 
2414 b non eat l iv hpt 331133 
• b non eat tba •ix 33•33 
2415 nu eat l iv tu• 64w64 e 
nu eat tba 11ix 64w64 e 
2416 • nu eat l iv tu• 64w64 • 
a R • nu eat tba 11ix 64w64 e 
2417 R b wia eat abd •LY 91w91 er 
FD & 
2418 
• 
b 
2419 RED NO. 3 
b OH 118Y l ya 201124 e 
b OH 11•• l iv tu• 201124 e 
b OH 118Y tba Hl 201124 e 
b OH eat l iv hpt 201124 • 100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 11111 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -111· •••• :. -10 
. > 
.> no dre p.1 . 
28.611• * P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•11· ••. : .• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• :. ·111· •••• : •• 10 
.> 3.561111 * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
.> no dre P•1. 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 11111 •••• : •• 10 •• • • •: • -100. • • •: • ·111· • • • •: • -10 
+ • + 746.•11 P<.0005 
2.4811• P<.0005+ 
3.0411• P<.003 
3.541111 P<.002 + 
.1.571111 * P<.002 
1.991111 * P<.003 + 
+ 755. 1111 * P<. 0005 
1.241111 * P<.0005+ 
+ 639. 1111 Z P<. 0005 
909. 1111 Z P<. 0005 + 
7 .5411• • 
12.911• • 
225.1111 
394.1111 
314.1111 
420.1111 P<.0005+ 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.006 + 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -111· •••• :. -10 
.> no dre P•1. 
632.1111 P<.0005+ 
.49.51111 P<.3 
3.321111 P<.0005+ 
. > no dre P•1 • 
1.641111 * P<.6 
. > no dre P•1 • 
no dre P•1. 
;, 6.131111 P<.04 + 
100n11 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -111· •••• :. -10 
122.1111 Z P<.004 -
no dre P•1 . 
no dre P•1. 
84.91111 * P<.4 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 239 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
• 1404 12.1u• n.1.1. 1/44 130.•g 2/43 650.•g 1/43 1.95g• 0/46 
2389 1404 1.64g• n.1.1. 7/45 120.•g 3/42 600.•g 7/41 1.80g• 12/43 
• 1404 8.58g• n.1.1. 5/45 120.•g 1/42 600.•g 2/41 1 .80g• 1/43 
b 1404 3.93g• n.a.a. 8/45 120.llg 4/42 600.11g 3/41 1 .80g• 6/43 
p·QUINONE DIOXINE 105· 11·3 
2390 c03850 252.•g n.1.1. 7/20 96.6•g 14/50 193.•g 17/50 
• c03850 329.•g n.a.1. 0/20 96.6•g 3/50 193.•g 8/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03850 664.•g n.1.1. 1/20 96.6•g 2/50 193.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2391 c03850 178.•g n.1.1. 5/18 89.2•g 20/50 178.•g 22/50 
a c03850 398.•g n.a.a. 5/18 89.2•g 6/50 178.•g 12/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03850 466.•g n.1.1. 2/18 89.2•g 7/50 178.•g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2392 c03850 57. 2•g 514.•g 0/20 18.6•g 3/49 37. 1•g 11/50 ubl :aqc,tcc,tpp. 
• c03850 82.6•g n.1.1. 0/20 18.6•g 1/49 37.1•g 7/50 
b c03850 39. 711g n.1.1. 14/20 18.6•g 30/49 37.1•g 28/50 
c03850 204.•g n.1.1. 0/20 18.6•g 2/49 37. 1•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2393 c03850 31.3•g n.1.1. 11/20 14.9•g 21/50 29.7•g 24/50 
• c03850 184.•g n.1.1. 0/20 14.9•g 0/50 29. 7•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
C. I. FOOD RED 3 <c1r•oi1 ine) 3567·69·9 
2394 1325 1.65g• n. 1.1. 4/55 13.0•g 2/23 65.0•g 4/26 325.•g 4/27 1.63g• 2/19 Nuon;fctx, 12,601-607;1974 
• 1325 29.9•g n.1.1. 0/55 13.0•g 0/23 65.0•g 0/26 325.•g 0/27 1.63g• 0/19 
2395 1325 1.33g• n.1.1. 13/48 12.0•g 5/26 60.0•g 7/26 300.•g 4/24 1.50g• 8/28 
• 1325 3.17g• n.1.1. 6/48 12.0•g 1/26 60.0•g 0/26 300.•g 0/24 1.50g• 2/28 
b 1325 30.411g n.1.1. 1/48 12.0•g 0/26 60.0•g 0/26 300.•g 0/24 1.50g• 0/28 
D & C RED NO. 5 <poncHU NX) 3761 ·53·3 
2396 244 365.•u 2.43u• 0/34 260.•g 4/27 1.27g• 5/11 <6.22u• 5/12> lkeda;fctx,6,591·598;1968 
• 244 4.19g• n.1.1 . 1/34 260.•g 2/27 1.27g• 0/11 6.22g• 2/12 
2397 244 218.•g 3.45g• 0/31 240.•g 0/8 1.18g• 4/6 (5. 74g• 6/12) 
• 244 2.47g• n.1.1 . 1/31 240.•g 1/8 1.18g• 1/6 5. 74g• 3/12 
2398 242 414.•g 1.34g• 0/30 62.5•u 1/30 125.•g 0/29 250.•g 5/28 500.•g 14/25 Gr1110; fctx, 7,425·442;1969 
2399 242 1.10g• n.1.1. 0/30 50.0•g 0/30 100.•g 1/29 200.•g 1/30 400.•g 3/29 
2400 243 368.•g n.1.1. 0/12 80.0•g 4/15 400.•g 4/12 2.00g• 6/14 Ikeda; fctx, 4, 485-492;1966 
D & C RED NO. 9 Cbrill iant red> 5160·02·1 
2401 2621 998.•u n.1.1. 4/25 5.00•g 1/25 25.0•g 9/25 125.•g 6/25 500.•g 4/25 Davis; txap, 4, 200· 205; 1962 
2402 2621 1.65g• n.1 .1. 0/25 4.00•u 2/25 20.0•g 0/25 100.•g 0/25 400.•g 1/25 
• 2621 1.68u• n.1. •· 0/25 4.00•g 1/25 20.0•g 1/25 100.•g 2/25 400.•g 0/25 
D & C RED NO. 10 
2403 263 666.•g n.1.1 . 2/25 5.00•g 5/25 25.0•g 9/25 125.•g 3/25 500.•g 7/25 D1vi1;txap,5, 728· 734; 1963 
• 263 . 21.0•g n.1.1. 0/25 5. OO•g 0/25 25.0•g 0/25 125.•g 0/25 500.•g 0/25 
2404 263 2. 70u• n.1.1. 1/25 4.00•g 1/25 20.0•g 0/25 100.•g 0/25 400.•u 0/25 
FD & RED NO. 1 (ponceau 3R) 3564·09·8 
2405 246 460 • •u 1 . 36u• 2/50 900.•g 29/50 H1noen;tx1p,5, 105-118; 1963 
• 246 1.24g• 6.19g• 0/50 900.•g 11/50 
b 246 1 .40u• 17 .3u• 1/50 900.•g 10/50 
c 246 1 .60g• 12.0g• 0/50 900.•g 8/50 
2406 245 596.•u 8.32u• 0/45 150.•g 0/15 500.•g 2/15 1.50g• 3/15 Gr ice;txap,3,509-520; 1961 
• 245 684.•g 13.2g• 0/45 150.•g 0/15 500.•g 1/15 1.50g• 3/15 
2407 245 340.•g 2.92g• 0/45 120.•g 1/15 400.•g 3/15 1.20u• 4/15 
• 245 468.•u 5.35g• 0/45 120.•g 0/15 400.•g 1/15 1.20u• 4/15 
2408 246 411.•g 1.08g• 0/49 225.•g 12/50 450.•g 18/50 (900.•g 9/50 2.25g• 4/49) Hanaen;txap,5, 105-118; 1963 
246 616.•g 1.69g• 1/49 225.•g 12/50 450.•g 17/50 900.•g 22/50 (2.25g• 25/49> 
b 246 4.21g• 19.9g• 0/49 225.•g 1/50 450.•g 2/50 900.•g 4/50 2.25g• 9/49 
c 246 4.09u• n.1.1. 10/49 225.•g 8/50 450.•g 7/50 900.•g 7/50 2.25g• 14/49 
2409 247• 88.2•g 785.•g 0/6 1.35u• 8/10 Nannel l; f ctx, 2, 169-174; 1964 
2410 247n 153.•g 4.09g• 016 1.35g• 6/10 
2411 2470 158.•g 711.•g 0/23 1.35g• 14/19 
2412 247r 208.•g 1.00g• 0/24 1.35u• 12/19 
FD & C RED NO. 2 c .. 1r1nth) 915-67-3 
2413 1427 3.03g• n.1.1. 0/35 758.•g 0/18 Bligu1hev1;vpi t,27,46-50;1968 
• 1427 295.•g 1.87g• 2/35 758.•g 11/18 
2414 1429 8.06u• n.1.1. 0/50 771.•g 1/50 Andr i 1nov1;vpi t ,29 ,61·65;1970 
• 1429 1. 75g• 7 .50g• 0/50 771.•g 13/50 
2415 1358 14.4•u n.1.1. 0/10 15.0•g 0/14 150.•g 0/13 750.•g 0/9 N1nnel l; jphp, 10,625-634; 1958 
• 1358 192.•g n.1.1. 2/10 15.0•g 1/14 150.•g 4/13 750.•g 2/9 
2416 1358 8.41•g n.1.1. 0/11 12.0•g 0/10 120.•g 0/11 600.•g 0/9 
• 1358 8.41•g n.1.1. 1/11 12.0•g 0/10 120.•g 0/11 600.•g 019 
2417 1136 993.•g n.1.1. 0/50 1.80g• 1/7 Wi l lhei•;gaga,23, 1·19; 1953 
FD & RED NO. 3 Carythro1in1> 16423·68·0 
2418 130• 49.8•g 759.•u 0/49 23.3•g 6/49 (54. 7•g 3/47 175.•g 2/46 349.•g 1/43> Hansen; fctx, 11, 535-545; 1973 
I 130• 141.•g n.1.1. 0/49 23.3•g 0/49 54. 7•g 0/47 175.•g 0/46 349.•g 0/43 
b 130• 1.36g• n.1.1. 5/49 23.3•g 12/49 54. 7•g 6/47 175.•g 9/46 349.•g 4/43 
2419 130n 13.8u• n.1.1. 0/89 185.•g 0/48 371.•g 0/41 742.•g 1/45 1.48g• 0/45 240 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
a R b OSll eat tba .. al 20•24 • 
2420 oa11 eat l iv tum 24m24 
06'1 eat tba 11ix 24m24 
2421 R • 08'1 eat l iv tu11 241124 
R m 0111 eat tba 11ix 24m24 
FD & RED NO. 4 
2422 D f beg eat adr mda 85m85 e 
a D beg eat mgl adc 851185 e 
b D beg eat l iv nod 851185 e 
D f beg eat tba mix 85m85 e 
2423 M b che eat l iv hpt 24m24 e 
a M b che eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
2424 M b chj eat l iv hpt 24m24 e 
a M b chj eat tba •ix 24•24 e 
2425 b non eat l iv hpt 33.,33 
a R b non eat tba 11ix 331133 
2426 b 0&11 eat l iv ado 241124 a 
R b 0&11 eat tba mix 24Nl24 e 
2427 b OH eat fbs 241124 e 
R b os11 eat tba mix 241124 e 
2428 R b sda eat tba 11i x 24m24 e 
2429 R b wis eat abd 11ly 91w91 er 
RESERPINE 
2430 f b6c eat mgl 24•24 
a b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
c b6c eat lun MXB 240l24 
2431 11 b6c eat sev ulc 241124 
m b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
b II b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
c 11 b6c eat l un MXB 241124 
2432 f c3h eat Nigl car 241124 
2433 f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
2434 II f34 eat adr MXA 241124 
m f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b "' f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
2435 wis eat pit 11ix 75w75 e 
wis eat 11gl fba 75w75 e 
2436 " wis eat pit ado 75w75 e 
RIFAMPICIN 
2437 f bal wat lun tu11 141126 e 
a f bal wat l iv hpt 141126 e 
b f bal wat tba 11ix 14m26 e 
2438 " bal wat lun tu11 141126 es 
a " bal wat l iv hpt 14m26 es 
b " bal wat tba mix 14Nl26 es 
2439 f c3d wat l iv hpt 14•25 e 
f c3d wat lun tu11 14m25 e 
b c3d wat tba •ix 141125 e 
2440 " c3d wat lun tu11 14m25 e 
a 11 c3d wat l iv hpt 141125 e 
b 11 c3d wat tba 11ix 141125 e 
2441 wia wat l iv hpt 241132 e 
wis wat tba 11ix 24Nl32 e 
2442 " wis wat l iv hpt 24m32 e 
11 wia wat tba 11ix 241132 e 
ROSAN I LINE. HC l 
2443 H f syg gav l iv tu11 68w68 e 
a f syg gav lun tu11 68w68 e 
b syg gav tba 11 ix 68w68 e 
2444 H " ayg gav lun b/a 84w84 e 
a H 11 syg gav l iv tu11 84w84 e 
b H 11 ayg gav tba 11ix 84w84 e 
p· ROSAN I LINE. HCl 
2445 H f syg gav l iv tu• 84w84 e 
a syg gav lun tu11 84w84 e 
b ayg gav tba 11ix 84w84 e 
2446 H " syg gav l iv tu11 84w84 e 
H 11 ayg gav lun tu11 84w84 e 
b " ayg gav tba 11 ix 84w84 e 14.19• * P<.5 
. > no dre P• 1 • 
no dre P-1. 
. > no dre P-1 . 
4.819m * P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1m9 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ••.. : .. 1g ..•.. : .• 10 
.> 316.11g P<.2 
316.m9 P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
670.m9 P<.9 
.>57 .19m * P<. 7 
20.3911 * P<.3 
.>no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
.49.59m P<.3 
12.09m P<.02 
.59.8gm * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
20.3gm * P<.006 -
no dre P-1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
"' 6.139m P<.04 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ..•. :. ·1•g ..•• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· .••• : .• 10 
+ 
.> 
:> 
: + 
. > 
.> 3.58mg * P<.002 c 
6.42m9 * P<.5 
no dre P•1. 
54.5m9 * P<.9 
8.39mg * P<.01 
no dre p.1. 
5.46m9 P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
34.2u9 P<.6 
• 727m9 * P<. 3 
no dre P• 1. 
• 306R19 * P<. 0005c 
no dre P• 1. 
6. 77m9 * P<.4 
no dre P-1 . 
no dre P• 1. 
38.3m9 * P<.8 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1g •..•. : .. 10 
• + .> 1.01gm * P<.8 
3.18gm * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
.> 320."'9 * P<.3 
3.00gm * P<.6 
509.mg * P<.6 
.> 
. > 33.6m9 * P<.0005+ 
no dre P-1. 
39.3Rlg * P<.0005 
356.0lg * P<.2 
1.05gm * P<.9 
474.m9 * P<.9 
436.019 * P<.09 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1 • 
1.38gm * P<1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : •. 100 •••• : •. 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·19· .... : .• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
2.02gRI 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• :. ·1•g •.•. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : .• 19 •.•.• : .• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
ROTENONE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •. 10 .•.•• : •• 100 •••• :. ·19· •••• : •• 10 
2447 M f b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evx .> 2.6511g P<.6 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 241 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
a 130n 3.08g• n.1.a. 20/89 185.•g 6/48 371.•g 8/41 742.0lg 9/45 1.48g• 12/45 
2420 1371 334.llg n.1.1. 0/12 250.llg 0/12 500.0lg 0112 1.00gll 0/12 2.50gll 0/12 Hansen; fctx, 11, 527 · 534; 1973 
1371 7.16g11 n.1.1. 5/12 250.11g 4/12 500.•g 1/12 1.00g• 2/12 2.50gll 0/12 
2421 1371 267.11g n.1.s. 0/12 200.•g 0/12 400.0lg 0/12 800.0lg 0/12 2.00g11 0/12 
1371 1.42g• n.1. a. 2/12 200.0lg 0/12 400.•g 2/12 800.0lg 5/12 2.QQgOI 3/12 
FD & RED NO. 4 <ponceeu SX> 4548·53·2 
2422 248• 51.011g n.1.1. 0/9 250.llg 1/5 Davis; txap,8,306·317;1966 
• 248• 51.011g n.1.a. 019 250.•g 1/5 
b 248• 106.11g n.a.s. 1/9 250.•g 0/5 
c 24811 39.111g n.a.s. 3/9 250.llg 215 
2423 24811 7.69g11 n.1.1. 12/91 1 .25g• 6/47 2.50g• 9/56 
• 24811 5.60g• n.1.s. 13/91 1 .25gll 8/47 2.50gl0 12/56 
2424 24811 6.80g• n.a.s. 0!66 1 .25g11 0/50 2.50g11 0/28 
a 248• 6.80g11 n.1.a. 5/66 1.25g11 0/50 2.50g• 0/28 
2425 1429 8.06g11 n.1.1. 0/50 771.•g 1/50 Andr i anova; vpi t, 29 ,61-65; 1970 
1429 4.14g11 n.1.a. 0/50 771.•g 4/50 
2426 248• 9. 74g11 n.1.1. 0/16 225.•g 0/19 450.11g 0/23 900.•g 0/22 2.25g• 1/24 Dav; s; txap, 8, 306-317; 1966 
248• 5.14g• n.a.a. 7/16 225.•g 10/19 450.llg 8/23 900.•g 10/22 2.25g• 5/24 
2427 248n 7 .OOg11 239.g11 0/171 450.llg 0/89 900.llg 4/89 
• 248n 3.48g• n.1.a. 67/171 450.•g 23/89 900.llg 32/89 
2428 24811 4.95g11 n.1.1. 38/147 450.•g 16/83 900.•g 14/74 
2429 1136 993.0lg n.1.1. 0/50 1.8QgOI 1/7 Will hei11;gaga, 23, 1-19; 1953 
RESERPINE 50· 55· 5 
2430 c50157 1.9211g 12.2 .. g 0/50 .650•g 7/50 1.3011g 7 /50 
a c50157 1.4411g n.1.1. 21/50 .65011g 19/50 1.3011g 23/50 
b c50157 10.1•g n.1.1. 2/50 .650•g 0/50 1.30•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c50157 4.0311g n.1.1. 4/50 .650•g 4/50 1.3011g 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2431 c50157 3.42•g 947.llg 0/50 .60011g 1/50 1.20•g 5/50 
a c50157 1.78•g n.1.1. 30/50 .600•g 34/50 1.20ag 25/50 
b c50157 .868•g n.1.1. 12/50 .60011g 14/50 (1.2011g 4/50) l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c50157 3.89•g n.1.1. 9/50 .600•g 9/50 1.20•g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2432 1187 5. 54ug n.1.1 . 12/22 9.60ug 15/24 Lacassagne; adsc, 810-812; 1959 
2433 c50157 • 216•g n.1.1. 42/50 .25011g 45/50 .500•g 45/50 
a c50157 6.05•g n.1.1. 1/50 .250•g 0/50 .500•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2434 c50157 • 181•g 1.01•g 3/50 .200•g 18/50 .400•g 24/50 adr:pha,ph11 . 
a c50157 .367•g n.1.1. 43/50 .200•g 42/50 .400•g 42/50 
b c50157 1.64•g n.1.1. 0/50 .20011g 1/50 .400•g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2435 1008 5.14•g n.1.1. 1/22 1.5011g 1/18 3.00•g 1/24 TateHtsu;txl t, 1,201-205;1978 
a 1008 7 .52•g n.1.1. 1/22 1.50•g 1/18 3.00•g 0/24 
2436 1008 2.8111g n.1.1. 1/22 1.20•g 1/18 2.4011g 1/15 
RIFAMPICIN 13292-46 · 1 
2437 400 115.•g n.1.1. 13/37 10.7•g 10/36 32.111g 10/37 64.3•g 14/38 Dell a Porta; txap, 43, 293-302; 1978 
• 400 518.•g n.1.1 . 0/37 10.7•g 0/36 32. 111g 1/37 64.3•g 0/38 
b 400 84. 1•g n.1.1. 26/37 10.7•g 30/36 32. 1•g 25/37 64.3•g 25/38 
2438 400 88.4•g n.1.1. 6/42 8.9311g 9/41 26.8•g 14/42 53.6•g 10/43 
400 489.•g n.1.1. 0/42 8.93•g 0/41 26.8•g 1/42 53.6•g 0/43 
b 400 88.5•g n.1.1. 11/42 8.9311g 13/41 26.8•g 15/42 53.6•g 14/43 
2439 400 21.611g 63.711g 8/40 11.3•g 16/40 34.0•g 27/44 67 .9•g 29/36 
a 400 244.•g n.a.1. 3/40 11.3•g 6/40 34.0•g 2/44 67 .9•g 4/36 
b 400 21.0•g 148.•g 18/40 11.311g 27/40 34.0•g 30/44 67 .9•g 31/36 
2440 400 114.•g n.1.1. 3/30 9.4311g 5/40 28.3•g 3/40 56.6•g 9/40 
400 59.8•g n.1.1. 18/30 9.43•g 20/40 28.3•g 21/40 56.6•g 23/40 
b 400 38. 5•g n.1.1. 20/30 9.43•g 30/40 28.3•g 29/40 56.6•g 29/40 
2441 400 107.llg n.1.1. 0/20 12.9•g 0/20 25.8•g 2/19 
a 400 22.0•g n.1.1. 17/20 12.9•g 19/20 25.8•g 14/19 
2442 400 130.•g n.1.1. 1/19 11.3ag 1/21 22.6•g 1/22 
a 400 26. 2•g n.1.1. 12/19 11.311g 12/21 22.61Rg 14/22 
ROSAN I LINE .HCl (aagenta I> 632-99-5 
2443 1151 403.•g n.1.1. 0/40 114.•g 0/40 Green; zkko, 95, 51-55; 1979 
a 1151 403.ag n.1.1. 0/40 114.•g 0140 
b 1151 248.ag n.1.1. 5/40 114.•g 2/40 
2444 1151 329.•g n.1.1. 0/40 114.llg 1/40 
1151 615.•g n.1.1. 0/40 114.•g 0/40 
b 1151 331.•g n.1.1. 3/40 114.•g 2/40 
p-ROSANILINE. HCl <p·Hgenta> 569·61-9 
2445 1151 461 .•g n.1.1. 0/40 85. 7•g 0/40 Green;zkko,95,51·55;1979 
• 1151 461.ag n.1.1. 0/40 85.7•g 0/40 
b 1151 187.•g n.1.1. 5/40 85. 7•g 4/40 
2446 1151 461.•g n.1.1. 0/40 85.7•g 0/40 
• 1151 461.•g n.1.1. 0/40 85. 7•g 0/40 
b 1151 331.ag n.1.1. 3/40 85. 7ag 1/40 
ROTENONE <tubetoxin> 83·79-4 
2447 1253 .348•g n.1.1. 1/17 .414•g 2/18 Innea;nt ia, 1968/1969 242 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt T050 2Tuilpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
a K f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b K f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2448 K • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a K • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b K • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2449 K f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a K f b6c orl lun car 76w76 evx 
b K f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2450 K • b6c orl l iv •ix 76w76 evx 
a K • b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b K • b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
RUTI N TR I HYDRATE 
2451 f aci eat pit ade 77w77 
f ac i eat ubl pa• 77w77 
2452 ac i eat adr phe 28•28 
a R aci eat hea aar 28•28 
2453 R • ac i eat tea i ct 77w77 
a R • ac i eat adr coa 77w77 
2454 R • ac i eat col ade 281128 
R " aci eat il11 ade 281128 
SACCHARIN 
2455 K f awa eat lun tu• 76w76 e 
a " f awa eat l iv hpt 76w76 e 
2456 K f awi eat ubl ape 91w91 eg 
2457 K • awi eat ubl tee 91w91 e 
SACCHARIN, SODIUM 
2458 f chi eat l iv tu• 24•24 e 
a f chi eat lun tu• 24•24 e 
b chi eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
2459 • chi eat lun tu11 241124 e 
a 11 chi eat l iv hpt 24•24 e 
b 11 chi eat tba 11ix 241124 e 
2460 f cdr eat l iv clc 26•26 e 
a cdr eat l iv nod 26•26 e 
2461 cdr eat l iv blc 33•33 eg 
a cdr eat l iv nnd 33•33 eg 
2462 • cdr eat l iv hpc 26•26 e 
2463 • cdr eat pty ade 33•33 e 
a • cdr eat ubl tee 33•33 e 
b • cdr eat l iv blc 33•33 e 
• cdr eat ub l tpp 33•33 e 
2464 • cdr eat tba •ix 24•24 e 
2465 b ada eat ubl tu• 30•30 e 
a R 
b ada eat tba .. 1 30•30 e 
2466 R b wia wat ubl tu• 24•24 er 
2467 R b wia eat ubl tu• 24•24 er • > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
2.65•g 
2.6511g 
.83111g 
• 773119 
2.4711g 
.433•g 
100ng .• : .• 1ug •••• : .• 10 .••.• : .• 100 .•.. : .. 111g •... : .. 10 ••..• : .. 100 ..•. : .. 1g •.••• : .• 10 
.> 8.91g11 
8.91g• 
90.4g• 
90.4911 
.> 3.53911 
5.71g11 
72.3911 
72.3911 
100ng •. :. -1ug ••.• : .• 10 •.••. : .• 100 .••• :. -1•9· •.• : .• 10 ••.•. : .. 100 •.•. :. ·19· •.•. : .. 10 
.>56.3g• 
no dre 
.> no dre 
.> no dre p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 . 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.05 -
P<.05 -
P<.3 
P<.009 -
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
100ng .• :. -1ug ••.• : .• 10 •.•.. : .• 100 •••. :. -1•9· •.. : •• 10 ...•. : .• 100 •.•. :. ·19· •.•. : •. 10 
.>no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
26. 1g• * P<. 7 
1 .36g11 \ P<.002 -
no dre P· 1. 
881.11g \ P<.002 -
78.2911 * P<.03 -
98.4911 * P<.2 
155.g• P<.6 
155.g• P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
.23.2g11 P<.008 
31.1g• P<.05 + 
60.0g• P<.1 
30.8g• P<.2 
.> no dre p. 1. 
.> no dre P•1. 
4. 10911 * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
125.g• P<.08 
SAFROLE 100ng •• : .• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 •.••. : .• 100 ..•• :. ·1•g .•.• : •. 10 .••.. : .• 100 ..•• : •. 1g ...•. : •. 10 
2468 f b6a orl liv 11ix 81w81 evx 23.511g P<.0005 
a b6a orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 31.411g P<.0005+ 
b b6a orl lun ade 81w81 evx 
c b6a orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 
2469 • b6a orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 
a • b6a orl lun •ix 81w81 evx 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 81w81 evx 
2470 f b6c gav l iv •ix 90w90 e 
a f b6c gav l iv hpc 90w90 e 
b b6c gav l un tu• 90w90 e 
2471 b6c orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 
b6c orl lun •ix 81w81 evx 
b b6c orl tba •ix 81w81 evx 
2472 • b6c gav l iv •ix 90w90 e 
a • b6c gav l iv hpc 90w90 e 
b • b6c gav lun 11ix 90w90 e 
2473 • b6c orl l iv hpt 81w81 evx 
a • b6c orl lun ade 81w81 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 81w81 evx 
2474 f cd1 eat l iv hpc 51w73 ev 
a cd1 eat lun tu• 51w73 ev 
2475 • cd1 eat l iv car 51w73 ev 
a • cd1 eat lun tu• 51w73 ev 
2476 • cd1 eat l iv hpc 56w69 
a • cd1 eat lun ade 56w69 
2477 • cd1 eat l iv car 56w69 
a • cd1 eat tba •ix 56w69 
2478 • cdr eat l iv hpc 73w95 e • + • 
<+ 
+ 
+ 
. > .> no dre 
24.211g 
312.•g 
no dre 
5.12g• 
27 .O•g 
33.0•g 
no dre 
noTD50 
no dre 
noTD50 
178.•g 
281.llg 
no dre 
61.7•g p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.04 
P•1. 
P<1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.07 -
P<.02 -
p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
no dre p.1. 
119.•g P<.2 
125.•g P<.0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
249. 11g P<. 0005+ 
no dre P•1. 
731.11g * P<.03 
no dre p.1. 
3.71g• P<.7 
3.71g• P<.7 
no dre P•1 . CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 243 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
I 1253 .820•g n.1.1 . 0/17 .414•g 0/18 
b 1253 • 391•g n.1.1 . 2/17 .414•g 2/18 
2448 1253 . 455•g n.1.1 . 1/18 .38511g 1/18 
a 1253 • 505•g n.a. 1. 2/18 .38511g 1/18 
b 1253 .30311g n.1.1. 3/18 .385•g 3/18 
2449 1253 .431•g n.1 .1. 0/16 .41411g 1/18 
I 1253 .431•g n.1.1 . 0/16 .41411g 1/18 
b 1253 . 251•g n.1.1. 0/16 .414•g 3/18 
2450 1253 .233•g n.1.1 . 0/16 .385•g 3/18 
a 1253 . 401•g n.1.1 • 0/16 .38511g 1/18 
b 1253 . 163•g 9.50•g 0/16 .385•g 5/18 
RUTIN TRI HYDRATE 153·18·4 
2451 1145• 1.45g• n.1.1. 0/22 2.50g• 1/10 Hirono;clet, 13, 15·21 ;1981 
a 114511 1.45g• n.1.1. 0/22 2.50g• 1/10 
2452 1145n 14. 7g• n.1.1. 0/33 5.00g• 1/20 
a 1145n 14.7g• n.1.1. 0/33 5.00g• 1/20 
2453 1145• 777.•g n.1.1. 3/30 2.00g• 3/11 
a 1145• 990.•g n.1.1. 2/30 2.00g• 2/11 
2454 1145n 11.8g• n.1.1. 0/33 4.00g• 1/20 
a 1145n 11.8g• n.1.1. 0/33 4.00g• 1/20 
SACCHARIN 81·07·2 
2455 1090 7 .21g• n.1.1. 7/45 6.50g• 8/42 Roa;fctx,8, 135· 145; 1970 
I 1090 21.4g• n.1.1. 3/45 6.50g• 1/42 
2456 1349 1.12g• n.1.1. 1/41 260.llg 0/37 650.•g 0/42 Kroes;txcy ,8,285·300; 1977 
2457 1349 3.40g• n.1.1. 0/40 240.•g 1/39 600.•g 0/48 
SACCHARIN, SODIUM 128·44·9 
2458 1450 6.49g• n.1.1. 0/17 1.30g• 0/28 6. 50g• 0/36 Ho•burger; ctxf, 359·373; 1978 
a 1450 18.9g• n.1.1. 4/17 1.30g• 6/28 6.50g• 5/36 
b 1450 4.12g• n. 1.1. 11/17 1.30g• 16/28 6.50g• 24/36 
2459 1450 686.•g 4.99g• 1/19 1.20g• 14/29 (6.00g• 9/34) 
a 1450 19.6g• n.1.1. 1/19 1.20g• 5/29 6.00g• 2/34 
b 1450 442.•g 3. 79g• 4/19 1.20g• 20/29 (6.00g• 21/34> 
2460 1114 19.2g• n.1.1. 0/56 90.0•g 0/56 270.•g 0/52 810.•g 0/56 2.43g• 2154 Munro; txap,32, 513·526;1975 
a 1114 20.1g• n.1.1. 1/56 90.0•g 0/56 270.•g 0/52 810.•g 0/56 2.43g• 2/54 
2461 1398 20.8g• n.1.1. 1/48 2.50g• 2/49 Arnold; txap,52, 113· 152; 1980 
a 1398 25 .2g• n.1.1. 0/48 2.50g• 1/49 
2462 1114 31.5g• n.1.1. 0/57 90.0•g 0/51 270.•g 1/54 810.•g 0/52 2.43g• 0/54 Munro; txap, 32, 513· 526; 1975 
2463 1398 8.81g• 378.g• 0/49 2.00g• 5/48 Arnold;txap,52, 113· 152; 1980 
a 1398 9.40g• n.1.1. 0/36 2.00g• 3/38 
b 1398 14.8g• n.1.1. 0/49 2.00g• 2/48 
1398 8.50g• n.1.1. 1/36 2.00g• 4/38 
2464 1450 1.96g• n.1.1. 11/16 400.•g 21/28 2.00g• 15/26 Ho•burg1r ;ctxf ,359·373; 1978 
2465 1416 1.94g• n.1.1. 0/98 90.0•g 0/94 225.•g 0/93 Sch111h l; 1rzn, 23, 1466 · 1470; 1973 
a 1416 1.11g• n.1.1. 13/98 90.0•g 11/94 225.•g 17/93 
2466 1465 47 .4g• n.1.1. 0/98 2.00g• 0/115 Hi cka; car•, 2 ,475-489; 1978 
2467 1465• 37 .8g• n.1.1. 0!98 4.00g• 3/138 
SAFROLE 94.59.7 
2468 267 9.22•g 60.3•g 1/15 156.•g 16/17 lnnas;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 267 14.1•g 79.3•g 1/15 156.•g 15/17 
b 267 332.•g n.1.1. 2/15 156.•g 0/17 
267 9.32•g 66.2•g 2/15 156.•g 16/17 
2469 267 94.1•g n.1.1. 0/18 146.•g 3/17 
a 267 310.•g n.1.1. 3/18 146.•g 0/17 
b 267 120.•g n.1.1. 3/18 146.•g 3/17 
2470 1039 16.2•g 49.9•g 0!98 34.3•g 22/46 V11Hl inovitch ;c1nr ,39,4378·4380; 1979 
a 1039 19.1•g 64.0•g 0/98 34.3•g 19/46 
b 1039 243.•g n.1.1. 0/98 34.3•g 0/46 
2471 267 n.1. 1. 38.8•g 0/17 156.•g 16/16 lnnes;nt i 1, 1968/ 1969 
a 267 313.•g n.1. 1. 0/17 156.•g 0/16 
b 267 n.1.1. 40.5•g 1/17 156.•g 16/16 
2472 1039 50.7•g n.1.1. 3/100 34.3•g 4/33 Vaasal inovitch; canr ,39,4378-4380; 1979 
a 1039 69.2•g n.1.1. 0/100 34.3•g 2/33 
b 1039 185.•g n.1.1. 3/100 34.3•g 0/35 
2473 267 28.6•g 202.•g 1/17 146.•g 11/17 lnnas;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
• 267 310.•g n.1.1. 1/17 146.•g 0/17 
b 267 35.3•g n.1.1. 7/17 146.•g 11/17 
2474 10351 74.9•g 225.•g 0/53 439.•g 25/36 Wislocki; canr ,37, 1883-1891; 1977 
a 1035a 2.23g• n.1.1. 0/55 439.•g 0/50 
2475 10351 123.•g 612.•g 0/44 405.•g 11/26 
I 10351 1.07g• n.1.1. 0/44 405.•g 0/26 
2476 10421 335.•g n.1.1. 4/50 390.•g 11/40 488.•g 8/40 Borchert; canr, 33, 590·600; 1973 
I 10421 786.•g n.1.1. 1/50 390.•g 0140 488.•g 0/40 
2477 1042b 417.•g n.1.1. 3/35 390.•g 4/35 
a 1042b 417.•g n.1.1. 3/35 390.•g 4/35 
2478 10351 210.•g n.1.1. 0/18 68.0•g 0/18 Wislocki; c1nr ,37, 1883· 1891; 1977 244 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2479 m cdr eat Liv hpc 95w95 e 
2480 m cdr eat Liv tum 43w69 
m cdr eat tba tum 43w69 
2481 m cdr eat Liv 11ix 47w69 
a R 
m cdr eat tba mix 47w69 
2482 m cdr eat Liv car 36w52 
m cdr eat tba 11ix 36w52 
2483 b 08'1 eat Liv hpa 241124 s 
b os11 eat Liv mix 24m24 
b osm eat Liv maL 24m24 s 
b os11 eat Liv hpc 24m24 s 
d b osm eat Liv •he 24m24 s 
2484 osm eat Liv tum 24m24 s 
2485 R m os11 eat Liv tum 24m24 s GOLD ET AL. 
. > 
.> 
.> TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
627 .mg P<.05 
no dre P• 1 • 
no dre P• 1. 
576.mg * P<.2 
1.32gm * P<. 7 
425.mg P<.3 
425.mg P<.3 
250.mg Z P<.004 
340.mg * P<.0005+ 
624. mg * P<. 0005+ 
921 • mg * P<. 0005 
1 • 96gm * P<. 0005 
231 .mg * P<.0005 
593.mg * P<.02 
SELENIUM 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•. :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2486 M f c3s eat "1gL adc 81w81 r 
2487 M f c3s eat "1gL adc 53w81 r .> .> no dre 
no dre 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 100ng .• : .• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••..• : •• 100 •••• :. -1"1g •••• : •• 10 •••.. :. -100 •••. : .• 1g ••••• : •. 10 
2488 f b6a or L Lun ade 81w81 evx .> no dre P•1. 
f b6a orL Liv hpt 81w81 evx no dre P•1. 
b f b6a orL tba "1ix 81w81 evx 10.5"1g P<.4 
P<.3 
P<.6 
P<.4 
P<.04 
p.1. 
P<.003 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.0005 2489 m b6a orL Liv hpt 81w81 evx .> 10.2"1g 
m b6a or L lun ade 81w81 evx 18.4"1g 
b m b6a orL tba 11ix 81w81 evx 8.45mg 
2490 
b 
2491 
• 
b b6c orL liv hpt 81w81 evx 
b6c orl lun 11ix 81w81 evx 
b6c orL tba 11ix 81w81 evx 
m b6c orL Liv mix 81w81 evx 
m b6c orL Liv hpt 81w81 evx 
m b6c orL Lun mix 81w81 evx 
m b6c orL tba 11ix 81w81 evx + 7.76mg 
no dre 
3.46mg 
1.28mg 
1.49mg 
no dre 
.638mg 
SELENIUM DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •. 10 •.••. : .• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.••• : •• 10 
2492 f b6a or L Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P• 1. 
f b6a or L Lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P• 1. 
b f b6a orL tba mix 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
2493 " b6a or L l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre p. 1. 
b " b6a or L lun ade 76w76 evx 
m b6a orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2494 b6c or L l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6c orl lun mix 76w76 evx 
b b6c or L tba tu11 76w76 evx 
2495 " b6c or L l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
" b6c orL lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 
2496 f b6c gav MXB MXB 241124 
a f b6c gav l iv MXA 241124 
b b6c gav l iv hpc 241124 
b6c gav l un MXA 241124 
d b6c gav lun a/c 241124 
b6c gav TBA MXB 241124 
b6c gav l iv MXB 241124 
g b6c gav l un MXB 241124 
2497 " b6c gav TBA MXB 240l24 
a " b6c gav l iv MXB 24.,24 
b 11 b6c gav l un MXB 24.,24 
2498 f f34 gav l iv MXA 24 .. 24 
a f f34 gav l iv hpc 241124 
b f f34 gav TBA MXB 24.,24 
f f34 gav l iv MXB 24.,24 
2499 11 f34 gav l iv MXA 24.,24 
a 11 f34 gav l iv hpc 24.,24 
b II f34 gav TBA MXB 240l24 
II f34 gav l iv MXB 241124 
SENKIRKINE 
2500 R 11 aci ipj l iv Lea 56w92 ev • > 
.> no dre P·1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
26.00lg 
no dre 
5.88"1g P•1 • 
P-1. 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P·1. 
P<.02 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••. : .• 1g •.•.. :. -10 
:+ : + : 46.8mg * P<.0005 
69.30lg * P<.0005c 
85. 2mg * P<. 0005c 
137. Olg * P<. 0005c 
433.0lg * P<.02 
69. 70lg * P<.02 
69.3mg * P<.0005 
137. Olg * P<. 0005 
:> 735.11g * P<.9 
202.mg * P<.3 
183.11g * P<.07 
6. 1411g P<.0005c 
13.20lg I P<.0005c 
19.3mg * P<.3 
6. 14mg I P<. 0005 
11. 511g I P<. 0005c 
21.0mg * P<.0005c 
25.00lg * P<.4 
11.50lg P<.0005 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -10lg ••.• : •. 10 ..••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
1.700lg P<.0005+ 
SIMAZINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g •••.. :. -10 
2501 M f b6a orL l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M b6a orL lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M b6a orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2502 M 11 b6a or L lun ade 76w76 evx .> 
1 M ., b61 or L l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b61 orL tba 11ix 76w76 evx . > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
442.mg 
no dre 
199.0lg P•1 • 
p.1. 
P·1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P<.5 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 245 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2479 1035b 189.llg n.s.s. 0/15 200.llg 3/18 
2480 1042• 136.llg n.s.s. 0/12 125.llg 0/12 Borchert; canr, 33, 590·600;1973 
• 1042• 136.0lg n.s.s . 0/12 125.11g 0/12 
2481 1042b 142.11g n.s.s. 0/18 82.511g 0/18 138.mg 2/18 
8 1042b 157.•g n.s.s. 1/18 82.5mg 0/18 138.llg 2/18 
2482 1042c 69.111g n.s.s. 0/18 142.llg 1/18 
a 1042c 69.111g n.a.s. 0/18 142.llg 1/18 
2483 268 113.llg 1. 90g• 1/50 4.5011g 1/50 22.511g 2/50 45.011g 8/50 (225.•g 6/50) Long; arpa, 75, 595·604;1963 
a 268 199.•g 736.llg 3/50 4.5011g 1/50 22.511g 3/50 45.0lllg 8/50 225.•g 19/50 
b 268 331.•g 1.53g11 2/50 4.5011g 0/50 22.511g 2/50 45.011g 0/50 225.llg 14/50 
268 433.llg 3.23g• 2/50 4.5011g 0/50 22.5•g 2/50 45.0•g 0/50 225.llg 10/50 
d 268 743.llg 8.16g11 0/50 4.5011g 0/50 22.511g 0/50 45.0mg 0/50 225.11g 5/50 
2484 268 133.llg 457 .Ilg 0/25 5.0011g 0/25 25.0•g 1/25 50.0•g 6/25 250.•g 12/25 
2485 268 221.•g n.s.a. 3/25 4.00•g 1/25 20.0•g 2/25 40.011g 2/25 200.11g 7/25 
SELENIUM 7782·49 ·2 
2486 1431 .218•g n.a.s. 20/30 .111 .. g 7/30 Schrauzar; care, 1, 199· 201; 1980 
2487 143111 40.4ug n.s.a. 20/30 72.1ug 18/30 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE <ethyl aelenac) 5456·28 ·0 
2488 1211 4.59 .. g n.1.1. 1/17 3.63•g 1/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1211 7.70 .. g n.a.s. 0/17 3.6311g 0/17 
b 1211 2.21 .. g n.1.1. 2/17 3.63•g 4/17 
2489 1211 2.34 .. g n.s.s. 1/18 3.37•g 3/17 
a 1211 2.5411g n.s.s. 2/18 3.3711g 3/17 
b 1211 1.8011g n.s.s. 3/18 3.3711g 5/17 
2490 1211 2.34•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.63•g 3/17 
a 1211 7.70 .. g n.a.s. 0/16 3.6311g 0/17 
b 1211 1.40•g 18.811g 0/16 3.63•g 6/17 
2491 1211 .627•g 3.07•g 0/16 3.37 .. g 12/18 
a 1211 .718•g 3.71•g 0/16 3.37•g 11/18 
b 1211 7.5911g n.s.s. 0/16 3.3711g 0/18 
1211 .296•g 1.45•g 0/16 3.3711g 16/18 
SELENIUM D IMETHYLD ITHIOCARBAMATE (methyl selenac> 144.34.3 
2492 1205 8.6811g n.1.1. 0/17 4.64•g 0/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1205 8.68•g n.1.1. 1/17 4.64•g 0/17 
b 1205 4.0811g n.a.s. 2/17 4.64•g 2/17 
2493 1205 8.54•g n.1.1. 1/18 4.31•g 0/18 
a 1205 8.5411g n.1.1. 2/18 4.31•g 0/18 
b 1205 6.05 .. g n.1.1. 3/18 4.3111g 1/18 
2494 1205 8.68•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.64•g 0/17 
1205 8.68•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.6411g 0/17 
b 1205 8.68•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.64•g 0/17 
2495 1205 4.24•g n.s.s. 0/16 4.3111g 1/17 
a 1205 8.07•g n.1.s. 0/16 4.3111g 0/17 
b 1205 2 .02•g n.1.1. 0/16 4.31•g 4/17 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 7446-34·6 
2496 c50033 31.4•g 74.2 .. g 0/50 14.1 .. g 5/50 70. 7•g 32/50 liv:hpa,hpc; lun:a/a,a/c. 
a c50033 43.711g 119.llg 0/50 14.111g 2/50 70. 7•g 25/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
b c50033 51.8•g 154.•g 0/50 14.1•g 1/50 70. 7•g 22/50 
c c50033 74.9•g 338.llg 0/50 14.1•g 3/50 70.7 .. g 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
d c50033 164.•g n.1.1. 0/50 14.1 .. g 1/50 70.7 .. g 4/50 
e c50033 31.5•g n.1.1. 24/50 14.1•g 31/50 70. 7•g 42/50 
c50033 43.711g 119.llg 0/50 14.1•g 2/50 70. 7•g 25/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
g c50033 74.911g 338.•g 0/50 14.1 .. g 3/50 70. 7•g 12/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2497 c50033 53.5•g n.1.1. 29/50 14.1•g 35/50 70. 7•g 36/50 
c50033 59.911g n.1.1. 15/50 14.1•g 14/50 70.711g 23/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c50033 68.111g n.1.1. 4/50 14.111g 10/50 70. 7•g 14/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2498 c50033 4.08•g 10.1•g 1/50 2.1011g 0/50 10.611g 37/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c50033 7.9011g 24.711g 0/50 2.10•g 0/50 10.6•g 21/50 
b c50033 5.48•g n.1.1. 38/50 2.101111 37/50 10.6•11 47/50 
c50033 4.08•11 10.11111 1/50 2.101111 0/50 10.6•g 37/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2499 c50033 6.96•11 22.1•11 1/50 2.10•11 0/50 10.6•11 24/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
c50033 11.3•11 45.81111 0/50 2.10•g 0/50 10.6•11 14/50 
b c50033 6.01•g n.1.1. 33/50 2.10•g 40/50 10.6•11 43/50 
c50033 6.96•11 22.1•11 1 /50 2.10•g 0/50 10.6•11 24/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
SENKIRKINE <renerdine> 2318· 18·5 
2500 1396 . 784•g 4. 77•g 0/19 2.03•g 9/19 Hi rono; j nc i ,63,469-472; 1979 
SIMAZINE <CDT> 122·34·9 
2501 1243 166.•11 n.1.1. 0/17 83.8•11 0/18 lnnes;ntia, 1968/1969 
1243 166.•11 n.1.1. 1/17 83.8•11 0/18 
b 1243 166.•g n.a.1. 2/17 83.8•11 0/18 
2502 1243 55.5"11 n.1.1. 2/18 78.0•11 3/18 
a 1243 154.•ll n.1.1. 1/18 78.0•11 0/18 
b 1243 39.71111 n.1.1. 3/18 78.0"11 5/18 246 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2503 M b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2504 M 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M 11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b M • b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx .> TD50 2Tuilpvl 
DR AuOp 
536.llg 
no dre 
260.llg 
106.llg 
no dre 
65.511g P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.003 
SODIU BITHIONOLATE jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g ••.• : •• jO ••... : •• jOO .••• : .. jg ••.•• : .• jO 
2505 f b6a or l U v hpt 76w76 evx • > 
1 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
no dre 
5.0811g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
2.2811g 
no dre 
.80511g p.1 . 
p.1. 
P<.7 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
P<.09 
P•1. 
P<.005 b f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2506 • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
• b6e or l l ;v hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2507 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c or l tba tu• 76w76 evx 
2508 • b6c orl l iv •ix 76w76 evx 
a • b6c or l lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b • b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx .> 
.> 
SODIUM 
2509 DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRI HYDRATE.: •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO •..•. : .• jOO .••. : .. jg •••.• : •• jO 
f b6c eat TBA MXB 25•25 a :> no dre P-1. 
a b6c eat Uv MXB 251125 a 27 .Og11 * P<.8 
b 
2510 b6c eat lun MXB 25•25 a 4.76g11 * P<.5 
b6c orl liv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P-1. 
a b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b 
2511 
a b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
• b6c eat TBA MXB 251125 a :> no dre P• 1. 
• b6c eat l iv MXB 251125 a no dre P• 1. 
b 
2512 • b6c eat lun MXB 251125 a 10.3g11 * P<.9 
• b6c ort l iv hpt 76w76 evx "' 68. 711g P<.02 
a • b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 468. 11g P<. 7 
b 
2513 
a • b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 71 .411g P<.2 
f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 607 .11g P<.3 
f b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b 
2514 f b6a or l tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre P• 1. 
• b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 155.11g P<.3 
• b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre P-1. 
b 
2515 • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 403.11g P<.8 
f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 :> no dre p. 1. 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
2516 • f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
a 11 134 eat l iv MXB 241124 
SORBIC ACID 
2517 M f Hp eat l iv hnd 80w80 e 
a M Hp eat lun ade 80w80 e 
2518 M • Hp eat l iv hnd 80w80 e 
M • Hp eat lun ade 80w80 e 
2519 R wia eat l iv he• 24•24 e 
a R f wia eat tba 111l 241124 e 
b f wia eat tba 11ix 241124 e 
2520 R 11 wia eat l iv he• 241124 e 
a R • wia eat tba •ix 241124 e 
b • wia eat tba •al 241124 e 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 
2521 R f wia eat l iv nod 241124 e 
2522 R • wia eat l iv cho 241124 e 
STARCH ACETATE 
2523 f wia eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
R wia eat tba •ix 241124 e 
2524 R • wia eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
a R • wia eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
STERIGMATOCYSTIN 
2525 R • ain eat l iv 11ix 281128 ae 
R 11 ain eat l iv hnd 281128 ae 
b R • ain eat liv hH 281128 ae 
c R • ain eat l iv hpc 28•28 ae 
d R • ain eat tba 11ix 281128 ae 
2526 R • don eat l iv •ix 231123 ae 
a • don eat l iv ade 23•23 ae 
b •don eat liv hes 23•23 ae 
2527 b wia gav l iv hpc 12•29 
2528 b wia eat l iv hpc 121129 av 
2529 • wia eat l iv car 54w69 er no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••. : •. jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •.•• : .. jg ••... : .. jO 
362.g• * P<.2 
no dre p.1. 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
34.0gm * P<.2 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P·1. 
33. 9g11 * P<. 7 
51 .4gm * P<.5 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO ••.• : •• jMg •••. : •• jO •..•• : •• jOO .••• : •• jg ••••• : •• jO 
no dre 
• >42.2g• P•1 • 
P<.3 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : .• jOO •••• : •• j•g •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••. : .. jg ..•.• : •• jO 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
jOOng •• : •• jug •••• : •• jO ••••• : •• jOO •••• : •• j11g •••• : •• jO ••••. : •. jOO .••. : .• jg •••.• : •• jO 
+ +historical * P<.003 
+historical • P<.008 + 
+historical * P<.03 
+historical * P<.2 
no dre P•1. 
82. 5ug * P<. 0005+ 
• 72711g * P<. 007 
1.57•g * P<.07 
. 32211g * P<. 0005+ 
• 12411g P<. 0005+ 
• 11111g P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 247 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2503 1243 87 .3•g n.1.1. 0/16 83.8•g 1/18 
• 1243 166.•g n.1. 1. 0/16 83.8•g 0/18 
b 1243 63.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 83.8•g 2/18 
2504 1243 36.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.0•g 4/17 
1243 146.•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.0•g 0/17 
b 1243 26.4•g 355.•g 0/16 78.0•g 6/17 
SODIUM BITHIONOLATE (Vancide BN) 6385·58·6 
2505 1284 1.79•g n.1.1. 0/17 .959•g 0/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1284 1.7911g n.1.1. 1/17 .959•g 0/17 
b 1284 .641•g n.1.1 . 2/17 .959•g 3/17 
2506 1284 • 833•g n.1.1. 2/18 .891•g 2/18 
a 1284 1.77•g n.1.1 . 1/18 .891•g 0/18 
b 1284 • 922•g n.1.1. 3/18 .891•g 2/18 
2507 1284 1.90•g n.1.1. 0/16 .959•g 0/18 
• 1284 1.90•g n.1.1. 0/16 .959•g 0/18 
b 1284 1.90•g n.1.1. 0/16 .959•g 0/18 
2508 1284 .559•g n.1.1. 0/16 .891•g 2/15 
a 1284 1.47•g n.1.1. 0/16 .891•g 0/15 
b 1284 • 302•g 6. 34•g 0/16 .891•g 5/15 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE <SDDC> 148· 18·5 
2509 c02835 774.•g n.1.1. 13/20 65.0•g 20/50 520.•g 26/50 
c02835 1.98g• n.1.1. 0/20 65.0•g 2/50 520.•g 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02835 941.•g n.1.1. 0/20 65.0•g 7/50 520.•g 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2510 273 188.•g n.1.1. 0/18 94.9•g 0/18 lnnas;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 273 188.•g n.1.1. 1/18 94.9•g 0/18 
b 273 133.•g n.1.1. 3/18 94.9•g 1/18 
2511 c02835 530.•g n.1.1. 13/20 60.0•g 37/50 480.•g 30/50 
a c02835 1.01g• n.1.1. 7/20 60.0•g 11 /50 480.•g 11/50 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
b c02835 742.•g n.1.1. 6/20 60.0•g 14/50 480.•g 14/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2512 273 27 .O•g n.1. 1. 1/17 88.2•g 7/17 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 273 58.9•g n.1.1. 2/17 88.2•g 3/17 
b 273 21.3•g n. 1. 1. 6/17 88.2•g 10/17 
2513 273 98.9•g n.1.1. 0/17 94.9•g 1/18 
a 273 188.•g n.1.1. 0/17 94.9•g 0/18 
b 273 89.6•g n.1.1. 2/17 94.9•g 2/18 
2514 273 42.0•g n.1.1. 2/18 88.2•g 5/18 
a 273 175.•g n.1.1. 3/18 88.2•g 0/18 
b 273 43.4•g n.1.1. 5/18 88.2•g 6/18 
2515 c02835 146.•g n.1.1. 17/20 62.5•g 26/50 125.•g 34/50 
a c02835 1.79g• n.1.1. 1/20 62.5•g 0/50 125.•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2516 c02835 88.9•g n.1.1. 14/16 50.0•g 38/50 100.•g 34/50 
a c02835 684.•g n.1.1. 0/16 50.0•g 1/50 100.•g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
SORBIC ACID 110-44-1 
2517 409 58.9g• n.1.1. 0/48 1.30g• 0/46 6.50g• 0/43 13.0g• 1/43 Hendy; fctx, 14, 181·186; 1976 
a 409 32.3g• n.1.1. 14/48 1.30g• 5/46 6.50g• 10/43 13.0g• 5/43 
2518 409 5.10g• n.1.1. 1/44 1.20g• 0/46 6.00g• 0/43 12.0g• 0/43 
a 409 14.6g• n.1.1. 19/44 1.20g• 16/46 6.00g• 16/43 12.0g• 15/43 
2519 412 10.9g• n.1.1. 3/42 750.•g 2/45 5.00g• 7/46 Gaunt; f ctx, 13 ,31·45; 1975 
a 412 44. 7g• n.1.1. 3/42 750.•g 3/45 5.00g• 0/46 
b 412 1.02g• n.1.1. 35/42 750.•g 30/45 (5.00g• 17 /46> 
2520 412 25.8g• n.1.1. 0/43 600.•g 1/43 4.00g• 0/41 
a 412 4.11g• n.1.1. 20/43 600.•g 21/43 4.00g• 21/41 
b 412 9.48g• n.1.1. 5/43 600.•g 3/43 4.00g• 6/41 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 8002·43·5 
2521 1359 19.4g• n.1.1. 1/47 2.00g• 0/47 Branto11; f ctx, 11, 755 · 769; 1973 
2522 1359 6.87g• n.1.1. 0/41 1.60g• 1/39 
STARCH ACETATE 
2523 1407 92. 7g• n.1.1. 0/30 15.0g• 0/30 de Groot; fctx, 12 ,651·663;1974 
a 1407 19.4g• n.1.1. 23/30 15.0g• 17/30 
2524 1407 66.8g• n.1.1. 0/23 12.0g• 0/27 
1407 3.91g• n.1.1. 21/23 12.0g• 24/27 
STER I GMATOCYSTIN 10048· 13·2 
2525 1184 .679•g 10.4•g 0/11 4.00ug 0/27 40.0ug 1/29 .400•g 5/26 Maekaw1;gann, 70, 777· 781; 1979 
a 1184 1.05•g 91.1•g 0/11 4.00ug 0/27 40.0ug 0/29 .400•g 3/26 
b 1184 .898•g n.a.a. 0/11 4.00ug 0/27 40.0ug 1/29 .400•g 3/26 
c 1184 1.76•g n.a.1. 0/11 4.00ug 0/27 40.0ug 0/29 .400•g 1/26 
d 1184 . 753•g n.1.1. 7 /11 4.00ug 13/27 40.0ug 6/29 .400•g 10/26 
2526 392 42.6ug .166•g 0/17 .200•g 11/13 .400•g 12/13 Ohtsubo; f ctx, 16, 143-149; 1978 
a 392 .295•g 9.46•g 0/17 .200•g 2/13 .400•g 4/13 
b 392 .474•g n.1.1. 0/17 .200•g 1/13 .400•g 2/13 
2527 275• .165•g .982•g 0/10 .107•g 4/10 .213•g 5/10 1.07•g 9/10 Purchase;fctx,8,289 ·295; 1970 
2528 275n 53.6ug .286•g 0/10 .239•g 8/10 .477•g 10/10 (2.39•g 3/10) 
2529 707 48.6ug .333•g 0/25 .313•g 8/14 Terao; f ctx, 16, 591·596; 1978 248 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 21'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
STREPTOZOTOCI N 
2530 f svi ipj lun 11ix 26v78 o 
a svi ipJ kid ado 26v78 e 
b svi ipj uto sar 26v78 o 
avi ipj l iv lys 26v78 e 
d avi ipj tba bon 26v78 e 
o avi ipj tba 11ix 26v78 o 
f svi ipj tba 11al 26v78 e 
2531 11 avi ipJ lun 11ix 26v72 e 
a 11 svi ipJ kid tla 26v72 o 
b 11 svi ipj l iv 11ix 26v72 o 
• avi ipj tba 11ix 26v72 e 
d 11 svi ipj tba bon 26v72 e 
e 11 avi ipj tba 11al 26v72 e 
2532 cdr ipj kid 11ix 26v78 e 
a cdr ipj 11gl car 26v78 e 
b cdr ipj ute sar 26v78 e 
c cdr ipJ l iv 11ix 26v78 o 
d cdr ipj liv cvh 2&1178 o 
o cdr ipj tba 11al 26v78 e 
cdr ipj tba 11ix 26v78 e 
g cdr i p j tba ben 26v78 e 
2533 • cdr ipj kid 11ix 26v78 o 
a • cdr ipJ l iv lee 26v78 o 
b 11 edr ipj tba 11ix 26v78 o 
e 11 cdr ipJ tba 11al 26v78 e 
d 11 cdr ipj tba bon 26v78 e 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ...• : •• 1g .•••• : •• 10 
+ .19311g \ P<.0005+ 
1.3911g \ P<.0005+ 
13.911g * P<.04 
• + no dre p.1. 
• 18811g \ P<. 0005 
.48611g • 
6.3211g I 
.46211g \ 
2.44 .. g \ 
27 .311g • 
.21711g 
.698•g 
3.53•g • P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.006 + 
P<.6 
P<.0005 
P<.003 
P<.3 
1.2711g * P<.0005+ 
1.4111g \ P<.009 
2.4611g \ P<.003 
4. 4311g * P<. 0005 
5. 6311g * P<. 0005 
. 363.,g \ P<. 0005 
1.1411g * P<.06 
no dro P•1. 
• 77611g * P<. 0005+ 
20.411g * P<.2 
. 75111g * P<.0005 
1 • 0311g * P<. 0005 
16.811g * P<.7 
STROBANE 100ng •• : .. 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .. 100 .... : .. 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2534 f b6a or l l iv hpt 79v79 evx .> no dre p.1. 
a b6a orl lun ade 79v79 evx no dre P•1. 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 79v79 evx no dre p.1. 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.006 
P<.3 2535 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 79v79 evx .64411g 
a • b6a orl lun ade 79v79 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a orl tba •ix 79v79 evx • 75011g 
2536 f b6e or l l un ade 79v79 evx .> 10. 7.,g 
a f b6e or l l iv hpt 79v79 evx no dro P•1. 
P<.05 
P<.005 + 
P<.09 
P<.3 
P<.0005 b f b6e orl tba •ix 79v79 evx 3.3711g 
2537 • b6e orl rta 79v79 evx 1.4111g 
11 b6e orl l iv hpt 79v79 ovx 4.0011g 
b 11 b6e or l l un ade 79v79 evx 8. 2911g 
• b6e orl tba 11ix 79v79 evx .75011g 
STYRE E 
2538 f b6e gav l iv hpa 78v91 
a b6e gav TBA MXB 78v91 
b b6e gav l iv MXB 78v91 
b6e gav l un MXB 78v91 
2539 11 b6e gav lun MXA 78v91 
a 11 b6e gav TBA MXB 78v91 
b • b6e gav l iv MXB 78v91 
e 11 b6e gav l un MXB 78v91 
2540 f f34 gav TBA MXB 90v97 as 
a f f34 gav l iv MXB 90v97 as 
2541 • f34 gav TBA MXB 90v97 as 
11 f34 gav l iv MXB 90v97 as 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : .• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••. : .• 100 ••.. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
+ " a905.11g * P<.04 
:> 
:> 625.11g * P<.4 
905. 11g * P<. 04 
1.38g• * P<.2 
360.•g * P<.007 a 
659.11g * P<.5 
895.11g * P<.5 
360.11g * P<.007 
no dre P•1. 
25.2g• * P<.4 
3.41g11 Z P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
STYRENE AND beta·NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE 
2542 M f b6e gav TBA MXB 78v92 •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••. : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 216.11g * P<.3 
a M f b6e gav l iv MXB 78v92 
b M 
f b6e gav l un MXB 78v92 
2543 M • b6e gav l un MXA 79v92 
a M • b6c gav TBA MXB 7¢v92 
b M • b6e gav l iv MXB 79v92 
c M • b6e gav l un MXB 79v92 
2544 R f 134 gav TBA MXB 181125 
a R f f34 gav l iv MXB 181125 
2545 R 11 f34 gav TBA MXB 181125 
a R • f34 gav l iv MXB 181125 
SUCROSE 
2546 M f sva eat lun 11ix 76v76 e 
a M f ava eat l iv hpt 76v76 e no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
a61.511g P<.007 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
61.511g \ P<.007 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
:> no dre p.1. 
1.57g11 * P<.4 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •..• : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
129.gll 
no dre P<.8 
P•1. 
SULFALLATE 100ng .• : •. 1ug •••. : •. 10 ••••• : •. 100 ••.• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .. 100 .... : .. 1g •.•.. : •• 10 
2547 M f b6c eat 11gl MXA 78v90 dv : + : 27 .311g • P<.0005c 
a M f b6c eat 11gl acn 78v90 dv 39.311g • P<.0005c 
b M b6e eat l un MXA 78v90 dv 87. 511g * P<. 007 
M b6e eat •gl as• 78v90 dv 98.311g • P<.0005c CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 249 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation m· Pathology 
Brkly Code 
STREPTOZOTOCIN 18883-66-4 
2530 133611 91.5ug .4770lg 20/154 .855mg 16/19 (2.5011g 14/21) Skipper; srfr; 1976/Wei sburger 1977 /Prejean pers. coinm . 
133611 . 480mg 7.18mg 0/154 .855mg 4/19 (2.5011g 2/21> 
b 1336m 3.19mg n.s.s. 1/154 .85511g 0/19 2.5011g 2/21 
133611 1.4411g n.s.s. 1/154 .855mg 0/19 2.5011g 0/21 
d 133611 90.2ug .443mg 13/154 .85511g 16/19 <2.50Rlg 9/21> 
e 1336m .263mg 1.09mg 42/154 .855mg 16/19 2. 5011g 17 /21 
f 133611 1.6611g n.s.s. 29/154 .85511g 0/19 2. 50mg 8/21 
2531 133611 .197mg 1.82mg 9/101 .930mg 9/17 <2.08mg 5/16) 
• 133611 .59911g 47.111g 0/101 .93011g 2/17 (2.0811g 0/16) 
b 133611 2. 74•g n.s.s . 2/101 .93011g 0/17 2.0811g 1/16 
1336m 92.5ug • 76111g 28/101 .93011g 14/17 <2.08mg 6/16) 
d 1336m .26411g 5.5311g 9/101 .93011g 7/17 (2.0811g 2/16) 
e 1336m .89011g n.1.s. 19/101 .930mg 7/17 2.0811g 4/16 
2532 1336n .69311g 2. 7011g 0/182 .85911g 5/23 1.8211g 10/23 
• 1336n .48711g 65.711g 12/182 .85911g 6/23 C1.82•g 1/23) 
b 1336n • 724mg 30.711g 1/182 .859mg 3/23 (1.8201g 0/23> 
1336n 1.68mg 18.411g 0/182 .85911g 1/23 1.8211g 4/23 
d 1336n 1.94Rlg 29.011g 0/182 .85911g 1/23 1.8211g 3/23 
e 1336n .16911g 1.2211g 44/182 .85911g 16/23 (1.8211g 8/23> 
1336n .410Mg n.a.s. 103/ 182 .85911g 21/23 1.8211g 15/23 
g 1336n 2 .05mg n.s.s. 59/182 .85911g 5/23 1.8211g 7/23 
2533 1336n .44611g 1.5111g 0/177 .85911g 7/22 1.7211g 12/20 
a 1336n 3.31mg n.s.s. 0/177 .859mg 1/22 1.7211g 0/20 
b 1336n .365mg 2.9411g 59/177 .85911g 15/22 1.7211g 13/20 
c 1336n .50411g 3.8311g 32/177 .85911g 14/22 1.7211g 8/20 
d 1336n 1.8611g n.1.1. 27/177 .85911g 1/22 1.7211g 5/20 
STROBANE Cd i ch Lori c ide 11othproofer > 8001·50 ·1 
2534 277 3.3211g n.s.s. 0/17 1.5511g 0/18 Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
a 277 3.32•g n.s.s. 1/17 1.5511g 0/18 
b 277 3.3211g n.s.s . 2/17 1.5511g 0/18 
2535 277 • 30011g 2.1411g 1/18 1.451111 11/18 
a 277 3.101111 n.1.1. 2/18 1.4511g 0/18 
b 277 .3191111 9.631111 3/18 1.451111 11/18 
2536 277 1. 7511g n.1.1. 0/16 1.55•11 1/18 
277 3.3211g n.1.1. 0/16 1.551111 0/18 
b 277 1.0211g n.1.1. 0/16 1.551111 3/18 
2537 277 .5301111 11.11111 0/16 1.451111 5/15 
277 .980Rlg n.1.1. 0/16 1.451111 2/15 
b 277 1.351111 n.1.1. 0/16 1.4511g 1/15 
277 • 3300lg 2. 281111 0/16 1.4511g 8/15 
STYRENE 100·42·5 
2538 c02200 369.1111 n.s.s. 0/20 92.01111 1/50 184.mg 5/50 
a c02200 188.1111 n.1.1. 2/20 92.01111 11/50 184.1111 10/50 
b c02200 369.1111 n.1.1. 0/20 92.01111 1/50 184.1111 5/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c02200 477 .mg n.1.1. 0/20 92.01111 1/50 184.1111 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2539 c02200 198.1111 4.601111 0/20 92.011g 6/49 184.llg 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c02200 154.llg n.1.1. 9/20 92.0mg 14/49 184.mg 21/50 
b c02200 219.11g n.1.1. 5/20 92.01111 8/49 184.1111 13/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02200 198.llg 4.601111 0/20 92.01111 6/49 184.llg 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2540 c02200 1.081111 n.1.1. 23/40 354.1111 25/50 530.1111 17/50 1.061111 3/50 
a c02200 4.111111 n.1.s. 0/40 354.1111 0/50 530.1111 1/50 1.061111 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2541 c02200 765.llg n.s.s. 14/40 354.mg 14/50 530.1111 15/50 1.06gl0 4/50 
c02200 6.851111 n.a. 1. 1/40 354.llg 0/50 530.1111 0/50 1.06g11 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
STYRENE AND beta·NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE (CAS# 100-42·5 and 102-96·5) inixture 
2542 c02211 70.11Rg n.s.s. 2/20 31.81111 10/50 63.611g 10/50 
a c02211 467.1111 n.1.1. 1/20 31.81111 1/50 63.61111 0/50 L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02211 288.1111 n.s.s. 0/20 31.81111 2/50 63.6Mg 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2543 c02211 30.811g 556.1111 0/20 31.81111 11/50 C63.611g 2/50) lun:a/a,a/c . 
• c02211 72.911g n.1.1 . 8/20 31.81111 19/50 63.61111 12/50 
b c02211 118.11g n.s.s. 6/20 31.81111 6/50 63.61111 8/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02211 30.811g 556.1111 0/20 31.81111 11/50 <63.61111 2/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
2544 c02211 34. 71111 n.1.1. 12/20 23.51111 34/50 47 .011g 30/50 
• c02211 270.11g n.1.1. 0/20 23.51111 1/50 47 .01111 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2545 c02211 198.llg n.1.1. 10/20 47.011g 18/50 94.01111 11/50 
c02211 387.llg n.1.1. 0120 47 .011g 1/50 94.01111 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
SUCROSE 57-50· 1 
2546 1090 14.911• n.1.1. 7/45 13.01111 8/43 Roe; f ct•, 8, 135·145; 1970 
a 1090 32.91111 n.1.1. 3/45 13.01111 2/43 
SULFALLATE 95-06-7 
2547 c00453 18.41111 41.61111 0/20 73.11111 33/50 146.IRg 27/50 ingl :acn,as11. 
c00453 24.011g 72.51111 0/20 73.11111 23/50 146.•g 11/50 
b c00453 42.811g 1.16g11 1/20 73.111g 13/50 146.llg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c00453 57.411g 190.llg 0/20 73.111g 10/50 146.11g 16/50 250 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
d b6c eat l iv hpc 78w90 dv 
b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 dv 
b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 dv 
g b6c eat lun MXB 78w90 dv 
2548 11 b6c eat lun MXA 78w91 dv 
a 11 b6c eat lun a/c 78w91 dv 
b 11 b6c eat hes 78w91 dv 
11 b6c eat TBA MXB 78w91 dv 
d • b6c eat l iv MXB 78w91 dv 
a • b6c eat l un MXB 78w91 dv 
2549 OH eat 11gl acn 18•24 dv 
a OH eat TBA MXB 18•24 dv 
b OSll eat l iv MXB 18•24 dv 
2550 " OH eat thy MXA 181124 dv 
a 11 OH eat sto MXA 181124 dv 
b II OSll eat TBA MXB 181124 dv 
II 0111 eat l iv MXB 181124 dv 
SULFATE, SODIUM 
2551 M f 1wi eat leu 32w52 v 
a M 1wi eat l iv tu" 32w52 v 
b M swi eat lun tu11 32w52 v 
SULF ISOXAZOLE 
2552 M f b6c eat l iv hpc 241124 
M b6c eat lun MXA 241124 
b M b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
c M b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
d M b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2553 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
M II b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M 11 b6c eat l un MXB 241124 
2554 f f34 eat TBA MXB 241125 
a R f f34 eat l iv MXB 241125 
2555 R " f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
" f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
SULFITE, POTASSIUM MET AB I· 
2556 M f icr wat lun ade 241124 
M icr wat lun adc 241124 
b M icr wat l iv h111 241124 
2557 M • i c r wat l un ade 241124 
a M • icr wat lun adc 241124 
b M • icr wat l iv tu11 241124 
3·SULFOLENE 
2558 M f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 IV 
a M f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 1v 
b M f b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 1v 
2559 M II b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 IV 
a 
b 
2560 M II b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 IV 
M II b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 IV 
OH gav TBA MXB 181126 dv 
OH gav l iv MXB 181126 dv 107 .11g * P<.0005 
21.311g * P<.0005 
107 .11g * P<.0005 
87. 511g * P<. 007 
92. 5.,g * P<. 0005c 
269. 11g * P<. 006 
539.11g * P<.03 
65.511g * P<.03 
188.11g * P<.3 
92. 5.,g * P<. 0005 
17 .211g * P<.0005c 
9.0611g * P<.03 
69.111g * P<.2 
24.011g * P<.007 
53.9•g I P<.007 c 
12.611g * P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
.100ng •. : .• _!ug .••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 •••• : .• _!g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 3.96gm 
no dre 
no dre P<.6 
p.1. 
p.1. 
.100ng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1.,g •••• : •• _10 ••..• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• :. -10 
:> 
:> #2.65g" \ P<.008 
11.9g• * P<.007 
8.18g11 * P<.5 
2. 65g11 \ P<. 008 
11.9g11 * P<.007 
no dre p.1. 
6.91g11 * P<.3 
49.5g11 \ P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
135.mg \ P<.09 
26.3g" * P<.9 
.!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •..• :. -.1"9· ••• : •. _10 .•••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
.33.6g11 \ P<.1 
100.g11 * P<.4 
204.g11 * P<.3 
84.8g11 * P<.3 
84.8g11 * P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
.100ng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••.•• : •. _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre p.1. 
:> 
:> 
2561 • OH gav TBA MXB 161126 adsv 1.94g" * P<.4 
631.11g * P<. 5 
415.11g * P<.09 
882 • .,g * P<.2 
5.37g11 * P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
30.811g * P<.04 
• OH gav l iv MXB 16•26 adsv no dre P• 1. 
4,4' • SULFONYLBISACETANIL IDE 
2562 R f buf eat •gl adc 43w92 e 
SYMPHYTINE 
2563 R 11 aci ipj l iv 11ix 56w92 ev 
R 11 aci ipj tba 11ix 56w92 ev 
TACE 
2564 R 
2565 cdr eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
11 cdr eat l iv tu11 241124 e 
TELODRIN 
2566 M f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M b61 orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2567 M • b61 orl lun ode 76w76 evx 
M • b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M • b61 orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2568 M f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx .100ng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• ' .. _100 •••• : •• _!11g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••.•• : •• _10 
.> 55 .611g 
.!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •. _10 
"' 1.9111g 
4.5011g 
.!OOng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 •••.• : .• _100 •.•• : .• _111g •••• : •• _10 .•••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!g ••••• : •• _10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
.100ng •• : •• _!ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• 100 •••. : •. _!g .•••. : •. _10 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
.14611g 
no dre 
.136•g 
.57111g 
no dre 
.27711g P<.3 
P<.02 
P<.5 
P·1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.2 + CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 251 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
d c00453 53.411g 272.llg 0/20 73.111g 5!50 146.llg 8/50 
• c00453 13.711g 39.211g 7/20 73.111g 42/50 146.llg 37/50 
f c00453 53.411g 272.llg 0/20 73.111g 5/50 146.llg 8/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
g c00453 42.811g 1.16g11 1/20 73.111g 13/50 146.llg 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2548 c00453 59.611g 276.llg 0/20 69.611g 14/50 140.llg 17/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c00453 138.•g 2.29g• 0/20 69.611g 3/50 140.11g 9/50 
b c00453 230.llg n.1.1. 0/20 69.611g 1/50 140.llg 6!50 
c00453 31.111g "····· 8/20 69.611g 37/50 140.•g 39!50 
d c00453 62.411g n.1.1. 7/20 69.6•g 22/50 140.•g 24150 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
• c00453 59.611g 276.11g 0/20 69.611g 14/50 140.llg 17/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
Z549 c00453 9.6311g 34.811g 0!50 6. 7011g 7/50 10.811g 11/50 
• c00453 4.0111g n.1.1 . 36/50 6. 7011g 37/50 10.811g 30/50 
b c00453 21.411g n.1.1. 1/50 6. 7011g 3/50 10.811g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2550 c00453 9.7511g 321.llg 0/50 5.4011g 4/50 8.8011g 2/50 thy:cca,ccr . s 
• c00453 18.711g 703.•g 0/50 5 .40•g 0/50 8.8011g 5/50 sto:ppn,sqc,sqp • 
b c00453 3.9411g n.1.1. 28/50 5.4011g 27/50 8.8011g 19/50 
c00453 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/50 5.40•g 0/50 8.80•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
SULFATE, SODIUM Cdi1odiu11 1ul fate> 7757·82 ·6 
2551 1118 544.llg n.1.1. 1/30 811.•g 2/30 Cohen; canr, 38, 1398· 1405; 1978 
• 1118 1.25g• n.1.1. 0!30 811.•g 0/30 
b 1118 1.25g• n.1.1. 0!30 811.•g 0/30 
SULF I SOXAZOLE 127-69-5 
2552 c50022 1.01g• 11.0g• 0/50 490.•g 5/50 (1.96g11 2/50> 
a c50022 4.84g• 161.g• 0/50 490.llg 1/50 1.96g• 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
b c50022 1.71g• n.1.1. 24/50 490.•g 29/50 1.96g• 31/50 
c50022 1.01g• 11.0g• 0/50 490.•g 5/50 C1.96g11 2/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c50022 4.84g• 161.g• 0!50 490.llg 1/50 1.96g• 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2553 c50022 2.17g• n.1.1. 29/50 495.•g 31/50 1.98g• 28/50 
• c50022 1.87g• n.1.1 . 15/50 495.•g 13/50 1.98g• 21/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c50022 1.30g• n.1.1. 4/50 495.llg 5/50 (1.98g• 0/50> lun:a/a,a/c. 
2554 c50022 470.•g n.1.1. 38/50 97 .211g 37/50 389.•g 35/50 
c50022 4.33g• n.1.1. 1/50 97 .211g 0/50 389.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2555 c50022 50.611g n.1.1. 28/50 97.211g 36/50 <392.•g 31/50> 
c50022 1.10g• n.1.a. 1/50 97.211g 4/50 392.•g 2/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
SULFITE, POTASSIUM METABI · 
2556 1391 8.26g• n.1.1. 0/50 2.00g11 2/50 (4.00g• 0/50) Tanaka;eaes, 3, 451·453; 1979 
• 1391 22.0g• n.1.1. 1/50 2.00g• 0/50 4.00g• 3!50 
b 1391 33.3g• n.1.1. 0/50 2.00g11 0/50 4.00g• 1/50 
2557 1391 20.9g• n.1.1. 0/50 1.67g• 1/50 3.33g• 1/50 
• 1391 20.9g• n.1.1. 0/50 1.67g• 1/50 3.33g• 1/50 
b 1391 11.4g11 n.1.1. 0/50 1.67g11 0/50 3.33g• 0/50 
3 · SULFOLENE 77.79.2 
2558 c04557 426.llg n.1.1. 4/20 235.llg 10/50 470.11g 1/50 
a c04557 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 235.11g 1/50 470.•g 0!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04557 480.•g n.1.1. 1/20 235.•g 5/50 470.•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2559 c04557 152.•g n.1.1. 5/20 190.llg 20/50 381.llg 8/50 
a c04557 179.•g n.1.1. 1/20 190.•g 11/50 381.•g 5/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04557 350.•g n.1.1. 0/20 190.•g 4/50 381.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2560 c04557 60.111g n.1.1. 14/20 52.511g 39/50 105.•g 21/50 
a c04557 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 52.511g 2/50 105.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2561 c04557 8.9011g n.1.1. 9/20 88.511g 13/50 249.•g 1/50 
c04557 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 88.511g 1/50 249.•g 0!50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
4 ,4' · SULFONYLBISACETANILIOE 77·46·3 
2562 144 9.0511g n.1.1. 0/18 5.93•g 1/18 Morris; j nc i, 24, 149-180; 1960 
SYMPHYTINE 22571·95·5 
2563 1396 .655•g n.1.1. 0/13 1.20•g 4/14 Hirono; jnci ,63,469·472; 1979 
a 1396 .895•g n. 1. 1. 3/18 1.20•g 5/18 
TACE <chlorotrianisenel 569·57-3 
2564 108 .16211g n.a.1. 0/20 50.0ug 0/20 .20011g 0/20 2.00•g 0/20 Gib1on;txap, 11,489·510; 1967 
2565 108 .16211g n.1.1. 0/20 50.0ug 0/20 .200•g 0/20 2.00•g 0/20 
TELODRIN C ilobenzan) 297 · 78 · 9 
2566 1249 .106•g n.1.1. 1/17 89.1ug 1/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1249 .177•g n.1.1. 0/17 89.1ug 0/18 
b 1249 84.1ug n.1.1. 2/17 89.1ug 2/18 
2567 1249 39.4ug n.1.1. 2/18 82.9ug 5/18 
a 1249 98.0ug n.1.a. 1/18 82.9ug 1/18 
b 1249 35.4ug n.1.1. 3/18 82.9ug 6/18 
2568 1249 92.9ug n.1.1. 0/16 89.1ug 1/18 
a 1249 .17711g n.1.1. 0/16 89.1ug 0/18 
b 1249 68.0ug n.1.1. 0/16 89.1ug 2/18 252 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2569 H • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> .500oog P<.3 
a H " b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx .500•g P<.3 
b H 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx .24211g P<.1 
3,3' ,4,4' ·TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCl 
2570 H f chi eat lun 11ix 77w98 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
a H f chi eat l iv 11ix 77w98 
b H f chi eat tba 11ix 77w98 
2571 H DI chi eat lun 11ix 77w94 
H 11 chi eat l iv Dlix 77w94 
b H ,. chi eat tba 11ix 77w94 
2572 11 cdr eat l iv 11ix 18•25 
a • cdr eat tba •ix 181125 
2573 • cdr eat l iv hpt 181125 
2 ,3, 5 ,6· TETRACHLOR0·4-NITROANISOLE 
2574 f b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
f b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b f b6c eat l un MXB 241124 
2575 " b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a II b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b " b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2576 f f34 eat ute esp 241124 
a f f34 eat l iv MXA 24•24 
b f f34 eat TBA MXB 24•24 
c f f34 eat l iv MXB 24•24 
2577 DI f34 eat l iv MXA 24•24 
a ., f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b • f34 eat l iv PIXB 241124 -" 1. 03g11 * P<. 07 
1.69g11 * P<.03 
599. •g * P<. 05 
288. •g \ P<. 003 + 
4.17g• * P<. 7 
224. •g \ P<. 003 
-" 259.11g * P<.02 
200.11g * P<.2 
pool -" 395.•g * P<.02 
•• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> 61.711g * P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
1.77g• * P<1. 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
215.11g * P<.8 
#19.1•g * P<.05 
45.R•g * P<.02 
106.•g * P<.9 
45.8•g * P<.02 
#20.0•g * P<.03 
no dre P•1. 
20.0•g * P<.03 
2,2' ,5,5' -TETRACHLOROBENZIDINE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•9· ••• : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·19· •• • ·: · -10 
2578 H f ddx eat 11l y 24•24 e 
a H f ddx eat tba 11a l 24•24 e 
2579 R wi• eat l iv hpt 24•24 e 
a R wia eat ubl tee 241124 e 
2580 R • wia eat ubl tee 241124 e 
R '" wia eat l iv tu• 241124 e 
2,3, 7 ,8· TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
2581 
a 
b 
c 
d 
• 
f 
g 
h 
j 
2582 
a 
b 
c 
d 
g 
2583 
b 
2584 
a 
b 
c 
2585 
b 
c 
d 
g 
2586 
a 
2587 
a • .> • 109.•g 
87 .2•g P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.2 
P-1. .> 735.•g 
-> 2.31g• 
561.llg 
no dre 
•• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
f b6c gav MXB MXB 24•24 
f b6c gav l he 24m24 
b6c gav l iv MXA 24•24 
b6c gav 
b6c gav ly• 241124 
MXA 241124 
b6c gav l iv hpc 241124 
b6c gav thy fca 24•24 
b6c gav sub fba 24•24 
b6c gav TBA MXB 241124 
b6c gav l iv MXB 24•24 
b6c gav l un PIXB 24•24 
'" b6c gav l iv 14XA 24•24 
11 b6c gav l iv hpc 24•24 
" b6c gav l un PIXA 24•24 
• b6c gav l un a/ a 24•24 
11 b6c gav l iv hpa 24•24 
II b6c gav TBA MXB 24•24 
II b6c gav l iv MXB 24•24 
" b6c gav lun MXB 24•24 
" shr gav lun tu• 12•24 e 
" shr gav l iv 11ix 12•24 e 
11 shr gav tba •ix 12•24 e 
f 0811 gav l iv MXA 241124 
OH gav l iv nnd 24•24 
OH gav TBA MXB 24•24 
0111 gav l iv MXB 24•24 
II OH gav thy MXA 24•24 
• 0111 gav thy fca 240024 
.. OH gav l iv MXA 241124 
• o .. gav l iv nnd 241124 
• os• gay adr coa 241124 
• osm gav sub fib 24•24 
• OH gav TBA MXB 24•24 
.. OH gav l iv MXB 24•24 
11 sda eat l un sqa 78w95 
R 11 sda eat l iv •ix 78w95 
R sds eat l iv hph 24•24 
ads eat l iv hpc 24•24 526. ng Z P<. 002 
705. ng * P<. 008 
756.ng * P<.008 c 
682.ng * P<.04 
709.ng * P<.05 
1.30ug * P<.02 
1 • 59ug * P<. 03 
1. 72ug * P<.02 
494.ng * P<.06 
756.ng * P<.008 
no dre P•1. 
86.8ng * P<.003 c 
147 .ng * P<.02 
198.ng * P<.02 
219.ng * P<.02 
271.ng * P<.07 
141.ng * P<.2 
86.8ng * P<.003 
198.ng * P<.02 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre p.1. 
127 .ng * P<.0005c 
154.ng * P<.003 c 
1.58ug * P<1. 
127 .ng * P<.0005 
101.ng * P<.002 c 
113.ng * P<.003 c 
391.ng * P<.004 
391.ng * P<.004 
12.1ng Z P<.04 
169.ng * P<.02 
133.ng * P<.3 
391.ng * P<.004 
79. 6ng * P<. 0005 
83.1ng * P<.0005 
6.67ng Z P<.0005+ 
65.1ng * P<.0005+ CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 253 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2569 1249 81.5ug n.1.a. 0/16 82.9ug 1/17 
1249 81.5ug n.1.1. 0/16 82.9ug 1/17 
b 1249 59.5ug n.1.1. 0/16 82.9ug 2/17 
3,3' ,4,4° ·TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCl (3,3° -diHinobenz idine.4HCl > 7411-49-6 
2570 381 377.•g n.1.1. 4/17 468.llg 6/19 851.•g 4/17 Wei sburger; j ept, 2 ,325·356;1978/pers. coMll. /Russf ield 1973 
a 381 526.•g n.1.1. 0/17 468.llg 1/19 851.11g 3/17 
b 381 231.llg n.1.1. 11/17 468.•g 9/19 851.•g 11/17 
2571 381 117.•g 1.52g• 1/19 432.llg 6/ 18 (785.•g 7/22) 
a 381 321.11g n.1.1. 1/19 432.llg 1/18 785.llg 1/22 
b 381 95.111g 1.50g11 4/19 432.•g 9/18 (785.•g 13/22) 
2572 381 89. 711g n.1.1. 0/16 120.•g 1/16 240.llg 3/15 
381 63.411g n.1.1. 11/16 120.11g 8/16 240.llg 12/15 
2573 381 115.llg n.a.1. 2/111p 120.llg 1/16 240.•g 3/15 
2 ,3, 5, 6· TETRACHLORO· 4· NITROANISOLE 2438-88-2 
2574 c03032 11.8•g n.1.1. 34/55 7. 70•g 37/55 15.511g 38/55 
c03032 83.111g n.1.1. 11/55 7. 70•g 3/55 15.5•g 5/55 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03032 43.311g n.1.1. 4/55 7. 70•g 8/55 15.511g 4/55 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2575 c03032 16.9•g n.1.1. 43/55 7 .2011g 38/55 14.3•g 36/55 
• c03032 17.9•g n.1.1 . 28/55 7 .20•g 16/55 (14.3•g 10/55) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03032 22.911g n.1.1. 12/55 7.2011g 17 /55 14.3•g 13/55 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2576 c03032 8.3011g n.1.1. 2/50 3.0011g 9/50 5.90•g 8/50 
a c03032 17.411g n.1.1. 0/50 3.00•g 1/50 5.90•g 4/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
b c03032 5.1011g n.1.1. 27/50 3.0011g 34/50 5.9011g 28/50 
c c03032 17 .411g n.1.1. 0/50 3.00•g 1/50 5.90•g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2577 c03032 9.41•g n.1.1. 0/50 2.40•g 5/50 4. 70•g 1/25 4.60•g 3/24 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c03032 6.5711g n.1.1. 28/50 2.4011g 27/50 4. 70•g 12/25 4.6011g 14/24 
b c03032 9.41•g n.1.1. 0/50 2.4011g 5/50 4. 70•g 1/25 4.60•g 3/24 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2,2° ,5,5° ·TETRACHLOROBENZIDINE 15721-02-5 
2578 558 57 .011g 240.llg 0120 130.•g 14/25 Yosh i11oto; j k•l, 25, 123-128; 1978 
a 558 47.011g 184.•g 0/20 130.•g 16/25 
2579 558 222.llg n.1.1. 0/10 150.•g 3/23 
a 558 376.•g n.1.1. 0/10 150.•g 1/23 
2580 558 169.•g n.1.1. 0/11 120.•g 3/22 
558 544.•g n.1.1. 0/11 120.•g 0/22 
2, 3, 7 ,8· TETRACH LORODIBENZO·p· DIOXIN <TCDD, dioxin) 1746-01 ·6 
2581 c03714 236.ng 2.99ug 3/75 5 .55ng 9150 27 .8ng 7/50 278.ng 15/50 l iv: hpa, hpc; thy: fca. 
a c03714 294.ng 19.3ug 9/75 5.55ng 4/50 27.8ng 8/50 278.ng 14/50 
b c03714 303.ng 20.5ug 3/75 5. 55ng 6150 27 .8ng 6/50 278.ng 11/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
c03714 262.ng n.1.1. 18/75 5.55ng 11/50 27 .8ng 13/50 278.ng 20/50 
d c03714 266.ng n.1.1. 18/75 5 .55ng 12/50 27 .8ng 13/50 278.ng 20/50 --·:Leu, ly111. 
e c03714 466.ng n.1.1. 1/75 5. 55ng 2/50 27 .8ng 2/50 278.ng 6/50 
f c03714 523.ng n.a.a. 0/75 5. 55ng 3/50 27 .8ng 1/50 278.ng 5/50 
g c03714 594.ng n.1.1. 1/75 5. 55ng 1/50 27 .8ng 1/50 278.ng 5/50 
h c03714 184.ng n.1.1. 36/75 5. 55ng 25/50 27 .8ng 28/50 278.ng 34/50 
c03714 303.ng 20.5ug 3/75 5. 55ng 6/50 27 .8ng 6/50 278.ng 11/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
j c03714 956.ng n.1.1. 2/75 5. 55ng 3/50 27 .8ng 4/50 278.ng 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2582 c03714 40.6ng 613.ng 15/75 1.39ng 12/50 6.94ng 13/50 69.4ng 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c03714 59.8ng n.1.1. 8/75 1.39ng 9/50 6.94ng 8/50 69.4ng 17/50 
b c03714 78.4ng n.1.1. 10/75 1.39ng 2/50 6.94ng 4/50 69.4ng 13/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c03714 84.1ng n.1.1. 7/75 1.39ng 2/50 6.94ng 4/50 69.4ng 11/50 s 
d c03714 90.3ng n.1.1. 7/75 1.39ng 3/50 6.94ng 5/50 69.4ng 10/50 
e c03714 43.3ng n.1.a. 40/75 1.39ng 25/50 6.94ng 27/50 69.4ng 37/50 
f c03714 40.6ng 613.ng 15/75 1.39ng 12/50 6.94ng 13/50 69.4ng 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
g c03714 78.4ng n.1.1. 10/75 1.39ng 2/50 6.94ng 4/50 69.4ng 13/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2583 383a 105.ng n.1.1. 15/38 .502ng 27/44 50.2ng 18/44 (502.ng 11/43) Toth ;natu, 278, 548-549; 1979 
383a 890.ng n.1.1. 7/38 .502ng 13/44 50.2ng 21/44 502.ng 13/43 
b 383a 899.ng n.1.1. 27/38 .502ng 39/44 50.2ng 36/44 502.ng 27/43 
2584 c03714 60.1ng 520.ng 5/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/50 69.4ng 14/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c03714 67. 7ng 1.05ug 5/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/50 69.4ng 12/50 
b c03714 52.1ng n.1.a. 54/75 1.39ng 40/50 6.94ng 36/50 69.4ng 43/50 
c c03714 60.1ng 520.ng 5/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/50 69.4ng 14/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2585 c03714 41.9ng 664.ng 1/75 1.39ng 5/50 6.94ng 6/50 69.4ng 11/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
a c03714 45.9ng 875.ng 1/75 1.39ng 5/50 6.94ng 4/50 69.4ng 10/50 
b c03714 110.ng 3.83ug 0175 1.39ng 0/50 6.94ng 0/50 69.4ng 3/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
c c03714 110.ng 3.83ug 0175 1.39ng 0/50 6.94ng 0/50 69.4ng 3/50 
d c03714 4.62ng n.1.1. 6/75 1.39ng 9/50 6.94ng 12/50 (69.4ng 9/50) 
• c03714 60.1ng n.1.1. 3/75 1.39ng 1/50 6.94ng 3/50 69.4ng 7/50 
f c03714 33.8ng n.1.1. 40/75 1.39ng 29/50 6.94ng 33/50 69.4ng 32/50 
g c03714 110.ng 3.83ug 0/75 1.39ng 0/50 6.94ng 0/50 69.4ng 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2586 377 17.5ng 545.ng 0/9 .035ng 0/9 .117ng 0/10 1.17ng 0/9 11.7ng 0/10 51.2ng 0/10 
248.ng 4/10 Van Miller ;cHp, 10,625·632; 1977 /pers. co1111. 
a 377 26.4ng 360.ng 019 .035ng 0/9 .117ng 0/10 1.17ng 019 11. 7ng 0/10 51.2ng 1/10 
248.ng 4/10 
2587 366 3.26ng 22.5ng 8/86 1.00ng 3/50 10.0ng 18/50 (100.ng 23/50) Koc iba; txap, 46, 279· 303; 1978/pers. co••· 
a 366 28.9ng 173.ng 1/86 1.00ng 0/50 10.0ng 2/50 100.ng 11/50 254 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b 
2588 
a 
b + R f ads eat lun aqk 241124 
R f ads eat hnt aqs 241124 
DI ads eat adr coa 24•24 
R 11 1da eat hnt aqa 241124 
R 11 ads eat ton aqa 241124 192-ng * P<-0005+ 
205-ng * P<-0005+ 
217-ng * P<.002 
393-ng * P<.002 + 
628-ng * P<-D4 + 
2,4, 5 ,4' -TETRACHLOROOIPHENYL SULFONE 
2589 f b6a or l li v hpt 76w76 evx -• : -.1u11-•. -: . -10 ••• -• : --100. -• -: --1•9·. -• : • -10-. --• : • -100-•• -: -.1g-. -• -: -.10 
-> 233-•g P<-3 
p.1. 
P<-7 
p.1. 
p.1_ a f b6a or l l un ode 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba •h 76w76 evx 
2590 • b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
11 b6a orl liv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba •h 76w76 evx 
2591 f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c or l lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2592 • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
1,1,2 2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
2593 f b6c gav l iv hpc 78w92 v 
a b6c gav TBA MXB 78w92 v 
b b6c gav l iv MXB 78w92 v 
b6c gav l un MXB 78w92 v 
2594 b6c gav l iv hpc 78w91 v 
2595 • b6c gav l iv hpc 78w92 av 
a • b6c gav TBA MXB 78w92 av 
b • b6c gav l iv MXB 78w92 av 
• b6c gav l un MXB 78w92 av -> 
-> no dre 
233-•g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
220-•g 
46.211g 
205.1111 
35.611g 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •• -. -: • -10 P•1. 
P•1-
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<-02 -
P<-3 
P<-007 -
:+ : 35.411g P<-0005c 
37. 2mg * P<. 0005 
35. 41111 I P<. 0005 
1.91g11 * P<.3 
pool :+ : 35.8•g • P<.0005c 
: + : 41.6•g I P<.0005c 
38. 7•g I P<. 0005 
41.6•g I P<.0005 
2596 
2597 
a 
2598 • b6c gav l iv hpc 78w91 av pool 
f OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 adv + 895.•g * P<.5 
45.411g I P<.0005c 
84.2•g * P<-5 
f OH gav l iv MXB 181126 adv 
" OHi gav TBA MXB 18•26 adv 
• oaao gav l iv MXB 18•26 adv 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE* 
2599 f b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
a b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 v 
b b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
c b6c 9av l un MXB 78w90 v 
2600 11 b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
a • b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 v 
b • b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
c • b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 v 
2601 f OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 div 
a f OH gav l iv MXB 18m26 div 
2602 • OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 dav 
a II DIDI gav l iv MXB 181126 div 
TETRACHLORYINPHOS 
2603 M f b6c eat l iv MXA 80w92 
a M b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 
c M b6c eat l un MXB 80w92 
2604 M b6c eat l iv MXA 80w90 
a M b6c eat l iv nnd 80w90 
2605 M • b6c eat l iv MXA 80w92 
a M • b6c eat l iv hpc 80w92 
b • b6c eat TBA MXB 80w92 
c • b6c eat l iv MXB 80w92 
d • b6c eat lun MXB 80w92 
2606 • b6c eat l iv MXA 80w90 
a • b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 
b • b6c eat l iv nnd 80w90 
2607 oH eat pit era 191126 v 
a 0111 eat TBA MXB 191126 v 
b OH eat l iv MXB 191126 v no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
624.11g * P<.2 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
: + 75. 611g * P<. 0005c 
98.111g * P<.0005 
75. 611g * P<. 0005 
2.95g• * P<.2 
:+ 123.•g * P<.0005c 
160.mg * P<-002 
123.mg * P<.0005 
no dre P•1. 
1.71g11 * P<.7 
:> no dre P•1. 
3.02gm * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : --1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -111-. -•. : • -10 
: "' 905.mg \ 
7 .88g11 • 
905.llg \ 
7. 79g• • 
pool + 1.07g11 \ 
1.38g• \ 
228.mg \ 
466.•g • 
295.•g \ 
228.•11 \ 
pool + 401.11• • 
280.•g \ P<.02 a 
P<.8 
P<-02 
P<.5 
P<.002 a 
P<.00051 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 c 
P<.007 
P<.0005 
P<1. 
P<.0005c 
534.•g * P<.0005c 
1. 77g11 \ P<.02 a 
#1.58gm * P<-03 -
no dre P·1-
no dre P•1. 
2608 OH eat thy CCI 19•25 v pool 1.92g• * P<.05 1 
2-28g• * P<.4 a a OH eat adr coa 19m25 v 
2609 II OH eat TBA MXB 19m26 v 
a • OH eat l iv MXB 19•26 v 
TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 
2610 " f b6c eat TBA MXB 251125 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 25•25 
b M b6c eat l un MXB 251125 
2611 M b6c orl lun Dlix 76w76 avx 
a M b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx :> no dre p.1. 
no dre P·1-
100n9 •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : --1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g •• -•• : •• 10 
.> no dre 
120.llg \ 
323.m11 • 
138.•g 
283.llg p.1. 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.3 CARCINOGEN IC POTENCY DATABASE 255 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 366 66. 7ng 559.ng 0/86 1.00ng 0/50 10.0ng 0/50 100.ng 7/50 
366 73.9ng 972.ng 0/86 1.00ng 0/50 10.0ng 1/50 100.ng 4/50 
2588 366 81.1ng 1.27ug 0/86 1.00ng 0/50 10.0ng 2/50 100.ng 5/50 
366 126.ng 2.05ug 0/86 1.00ng 0/50 10.0ng 0/50 100.ng 4/50 
b 366 161.ng n.1.1. 0/86 1.00ng 1/50 10.0ng 1/50 100.ng 3/50 
2,4, 5, 4' • TETRACHLOROD I PHENYL SULFONE (tetrafidon) 116-29-0 
2589 1282 37.911g n.1.1. 0/17 36.411g 1/18 Innes ;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
a 1282 43.311g n.s.1. 1/17 36.411g 1/18 
b 1282 26.1•g n.1.1. 2117 36.411g 3/18 
2590 1282 31. 711g n.a.1. 2/18 33.911g 2/18 
a 1282 67.211g n.1.1. 1/18 33.911g 0/18 
b 1282 35.1•g n.1.1. 3/18 33.911g 2/18 
2591 1282 68.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.411g 0117 
a 1282 68.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 36.411g 0117 
b 1282 35.811g n.1.1. 0/16 36.411g 1/17 
2592 1282 15.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.911g 4/17 
a 1282 33.3•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.9•g 1/17 
b 1282 13.411g 481.•g 0/16 33.911g 5/17 
1, 1,2,2· TETRACHLOROETHANE 79.34.5 
2593 c03554 25.911g 50.211g 0/20 87. 711g 30/50 175.•g 43/50 
a c03554 26.1•g 61.6•g 2/20 87.711g 33/50 175.•g 43/50 
b c03554 25.911g 50.211g 0/20 87. 711g 30/50 175.llg 43/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c c03554 449.llg n.1.1. 0/20 87. 7•g 1/50 175.llg 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2594 c03554 26. 2•g 50.3•g 0/40p 87. 7•g 30/50 175.11g 43/50 
2595 c03554 27 .411g 66.811g 1/20 87. 711g 13/50 175.•g 44/50 
c03554 25.211g 66.611g 4/20 87. 7•g 17/50 175.•g 45/50 
b c03554 27.411g 66.8•g 1/20 87. 711g 13/50 175.•g 44/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c03554 162.•g n.1.1. 1/20 87. 7•g 2/50 175.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2596 c03554 29. 711g 75.111g 3/40p 87. 711g 13/50 175.llg 44/50 
2597 c03554 20.711g n.1.1. 12/20 21.911g 28/50 39.011g 23/50 
a c03554 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0120 21.9•g 0/50 39.0•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2598 c03554 60.211g n.1.1. 11/20 31.611g 17/50 55.211g 20/50 
c03554 185.•g n.1.1. 0/20 31.611g 0/50 55.211g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE* 127·18·4 
2599 c04580 47.1•g 130.llg 0120 240.llg 19/50 478.•g 19/50 
a c04580 54.111g 259.11g 5/20 240.•g 19/50 478.11g 19/50 
b c04580 47.1•g 130.•g 0/20 240.llg 19/50 478.11g 19/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c04580 480.•g n.1.1. 0/20 240.llg 0/50 478.•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2600 c04580 79.5•g 260.llg 2/20 332.•g 32/50 663.11g 27/50 
a c04580 90.111g 622.llg 6/20 332.llg 33/50 663.•g 27/50 
b c04580 79.511g 260.•g 2/20 332.•g 32/50 663.•g 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c04580 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0120 332.•g 3/50 663.•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2601 c04580 263.•g n.1.1. 1120 240.11g 17/50 480.•g 15/50 
a c04580 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 240.llg 0/50 480.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2602 c04580 239.•g n.1.1. 5/20 238.•g 5/50 477.•g 5/50 
a c04580 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 238.•g 0/50 477.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 961·11·5 
2603 c00168 528.•g n.1.1. 0/9 904.•g 19/50 ( 1.81g• 11/49) l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c00168 1.04g• n.1.1. 1/9 904.•g 25/50 1.81g• 19/49 
b c00168 528.•g n.1.1. 019 904.llg 19/50 (1.81g11 11/49) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c00168 2.87g• n.1.1. 019 904.llg 5/50 1.81g• 5/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2604 c00168 558.•g 4.20g• 3/49p 904.•g 19/50 (1.81g• 11/49) l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c00168 705.•g 4. 79g• 1/49p 904.•g 14/50 (1.81g• 9/49) 
2605 c00168 158.•g 432.•g 0/10 835.llg 47/50 (1.67g• 42/50) l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c00168 348.11g 1.93g• 0/10 835.•g 36/50 1.67g• 40/50 
b c00168 175.•g 3.98g• 2/10 835.•g 47/50 (1.67g• 42/50) 
c c00168 158.•g 432.•g 0/10 835.•g 47/50 (1.67g• 42/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c00168 3.40g• n.1.1. 0/10 835.•g 4/50 1.67g• 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2606 c00168 176.•g 541.•g 8/50p 835.•g 47/50 ( 1.67g• 42/50) l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c00168 371.•g 905.•g 5/50p 835.11g 36/50 1.67g• 40/50 
b c00168 737 •• g n .• 1.1. 3/50p 835.•g 11/50 ( 1.67g• 2/50) 
2607 c00168 743.•g n.1.1. 0/10 153.llg 1/50 306.•g 8/50 
a c00168 454.•g n.1.1. 7/10 153.llg 23/50 306.llg 25/50 
b c00168 2.01g• n.1.1. 0110 153.•g 2150 306.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2608 c00168 775.•g n.1.1. 1/55p 153.•g 2/50 306.•g 7/50 
• c00168 667 .•g n.1.1. 2/55p 153.•g 7/50 306.11g 6/50 
2609 c00168 226.11g n.1.1. 6/10 122.•g 24/50 245.•g 18/50 
• c00168 1.10g• n.1.1. 0/10 122.•g 2/50 245.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
TETRAETHYL THI URAM DISULFIDE (ethyl tuad1> 97-77·8 
2610 c02959 99.511g n.1.1. 8/20 13.0•g 18/50 65.0•g 20/50 
a c02959 36.411g n.1.1. 0120 13.0•g 3/50 (65.0•g 0/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02959 111.•g n.1.1. 1/20 13.011g 4/50 65.0•g 9/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2611 1100 33.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 44.3•g 2/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1100 46.1•g n.1.1. 0/16 44.311g 1/18 256 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b b6c orl tun car 76w76 evx 
b6c or l tun ade 76w76 evx 
d b6c or l tba "'ix 76w76 evx 
2612 m b6c eat TBA MXB 25•25 
a m b6c eat l iv MXB 25•25 
b "' b6c eat tun MXB 25m25 
2613 " b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c or l tun ade 76w76 evx 
b "' b6c or l tba 01ix 76w76 evx 
2614 f b6a or l tun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
2615 11 b6a or l sub fbs 76w76 evx 
a " b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a or l tun ade 76w76 evx 
c m b6a or l tba 11i x .76w76 evx 
2616 f 134 eat TBA MXB 251125 
f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
2617 " f34 eat TBA MXB 250125 
a 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 
2618 f cdr eat 11gl 11ix 78w78 e 
a cdr eat l iv he• 78w78 e 
b cdr eat l iv hct 78w78 e 
cdr eat tba mix 78w78 e 
2619 11 cdr eat l iv hct 78w78 e 
a in cdr eat tba mix 78w78 e 
TETRAFLUORO- m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE. 2HC l 
2620 M f chi eat l iv mix 77w94 
M chi eat tun 11ix 77w94 
b M chi eat tba 11ix 77w94 
2621 N m chi eat l iv 11ix 77w94 
a M ., chi eat l iv hpt 77w94 
b M m chi eat tun 11ix 77w94 
M m chi eat tba 11ix 77w94 
2622 M m chi eat l iv hpt 77w94 pool 
2623 R "' cdr eat l iv 11ix 77w98 
R m cdr eat tba 11ix 77w98 
TETRAHYDRO· 2 • N ITROS0-2H • 1, 2-0XAZ !NE 
2624 b sda wat tun 11ix 66w82 
b sda wat tba 11ix 66w82 
b b sda wat tba 11al 66w82 GOLD ET AL. 
:> 
.> 
+ 
:> 
:> 
.> TD50 2'fai!pvl 
DR AuOp 
283.llg 
283.llg 
64.5.,g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
23.7mg 
43.211g 
17.011g 
4.14g"' 
no dre 
1.94g"' 
15.4•g 
197.mg 
no dre 
10.111g P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.02 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
P<.007 
P<.0005 
P<1. 
p.1. 
P<1. 
P<.0005 
P<.5 
P•1. 
P<.0005 
no dre P• 1. 
1.43gm * P<.4 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
68.90lg 
no dre 
no dre 
193.•g 
366 ... g 
no dre P•1. 
P<.04 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.6 
P<.3 
P•1. 
•• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 ••.• : .• _1g ••••• : .• _10 
:> 6.50g"' * P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P· 1. 
78.3mg * P<.02 
86.3mg * P<.02 
1. 13gm * P<. 7 
331.mg * P<. 7 
109 • .,g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P• 1. 
14.6mg * P<.003 -
•• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _111g •••• : •. _10 ••.•. : .• _100 .••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
46.1mg 
17.6mg 
24.3mg P<.007 
P<.004 
P<.003 + 
TETRA ETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE _100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 ••.• : •• _111g ••.• : •. _10 ••.•• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
2625 f b6a or l tun ada 76w76 evx 
b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6a or l tba mix 76w76 evx 
2626 ., b6a or l tun ada 76w76 evx 
a m b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a orl tba mix 76w76 evx 
2627 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6c orl tun 01ix 76w76 evx 
b b6c or l tba 11i x 76w76 evx 
2628 ., b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a "' b6c or l lun "'ix 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c or l tba 11ix 76w76 evx ~ 159.~ 
• > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
9.91mg 
no dre 
6.39mg 
TETRAMETHYL THI URAM MONOSULFIDE _100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _!mg •••• : •• _10 ••••• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 
2629 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 327. mg 
a b6a or l tun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 148.mg 
2630 m b6a or l lun ade 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a m b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a orl tba 01ix 76w76 evx no dre 
2631 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre 
a b6c orl tun •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b b6c or l tba tum 76w76 evx no dre 
2632 11 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 89.3mg 
m b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 139. "'g 
b m b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 49.8.,g 
_100ng •• : •• _1ug •••• : •• _10 ••••• : .• _100 ••.• : •. _!mg ••.• : •• _10 ••.•• : •• _100 •••• : •• _1g ••••• : •• _10 P<1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P<.1 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.5 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P·1. 
P<.04 
P<. 1 
P<.007 
THIO-TEPA 
2633 M f b6c ipj 
ipj 
ipJ 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj MXA 47w86 as 
TBA MXB 4 7w86 as 
l iv MXB 47w86 as 
tun MXB 47w86 as : + : .21611g P<.0005c 
a M f b6c 
b M b6c 
M b6c 
2634 M b6c 
M b6c MXA 47w86 as 
tun a/a 47w86 as 85. 5ug P<. 0005 
1.12mg * P<.2 
.408mg * P<.02 
pool .210mg I P<.0005c 
• 40811g * P<. 003 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 257 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1100 46.110g n.a.s. 0/16 44 .311g 1/18 
0 1100 46.111g n.s.s. 0/16 44.311g 1/18 
d 1100 22.211g n.a.a. 0/16 44.311g 4/18 
2612 002959 110.llg n.s.s. 11/20 60.0mg 21/50 C240.mg 18/50> 
002959 232.llg n.1.1. 5/20 60.011g 6/50 C240.11g 4/50> l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b 002959 127.llg n.s.s. 4/20 60.0•g 11/50 C240.11g 4/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
2613 1100 10.511g 75.411g 0/16 41.211g 8/17 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1100 16.311g 585.llg 0/16 41.211g 5/17 
b 1100 7 .9911g 44.611g 0/16 41.2•g 10/17 
2614 1100 46.011g n.s.s. 1/17 44.311g 1/16 
1100 77.911g n.s.s. 0/17 44.311g 0/16 
b 1100 36.111g n.a.a. 2/17 44.311g 2/16 
2615 1100 7.1711g 40.411g 0/18 41.2•g 10/16 
1100 30.111g n.a.a. 1/18 41.211g 2/16 
b 1100 47.211g n.a.s. 2/18 41.2•g 1/16 
0 1100 4.45•g 34.411g 3/18 41.211g 13/16 
2616 002959 49.6mg n.s.s. 19/20 15.0oog 28/50 30.011g 33/50 
a 002959 232.•g n.a.1. 0/20 15.011g 0/50 30.011g 1/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2617 c02959 13.2•g n.a.a. 15/20 12.0•g 33/50 C24.011g 24/50> 
• c02959 164.•g n.1.a . 0120 12.0•g 1/50 24.011g 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2618 1032 26.1•g n.s.s. 2/48 25 .O•g 8/48 Wong; txap,63, 155 -165; 1982/P lotni ck pers. 001111. 
• 1032 139.•g n.s.s . 0/48 25.011g 0/48 
b 1032 139.11g n.1.1. 0/48 25.0•g 0/48 
1032 30.7•g n.1.1. 7/48 25.011g 9/48 
2619 1032 59.6•g n.a.s. 0/48 20.011g 1/48 
1032 55.511g n.a.1. 8/48 20.011g 4/48 
TETRAFLUOR0 ·11· PHENYLENED !AMINE. 2HCl 63886· 77-1 
2620 381 221.•g n.a.s. 1/15 106.llg 2/20 213.•g 2/15 Wei sburger; j apt, 2, 325-356;1978/pers . 001111. /Russf i el d 1973 
381 94.811g n.s.s. 5/15 106.llg 5/20 (213.0lg 1/15) 
b 381 53.611g n.1.a. 10/15 106.llg 14/20 (213.llg 7/15> 
2621 381 42.711g n.a.s. 1/14 103 ... g 8/18 206.mg 7/16 
• 381 46.111g n.s.s. 0/14 103.mg 7/18 206.llg 7/16 
b 381 160.•g n.1.1. 3/14 103.llg 2/18 206.Mg 4/16 
0 381 51.1•g n.a.s. 7/14 103.•g 13/18 206.llg 10/16 
2622 381 53.0•g 324.aog 7/99p 103.llg 7/18 206.•g 7/16 
2623 381 n.a.a. n.a.a. 0/16 19.111g 0/16 38.211g 0/ 15 
381 6.81•g 101.llg 10/16 19.111g 8/16 38.2•g 12/15 
TETRAHYDR0 ·2·NITROS0 ·2H-1,2-0XAZ INE 40548-68·3 
2624 1417 17 .4Mg 531.Mg 0120 31.1•g 5/20 Wiessler ;zkko, 79, 114-117; 1973 
• 1417 7 .8111g 123.ag 3/20 31.111g 12/20 
b 1417 10.6mg 142.•g 1/20 31.111g 9/20 
TETRAMETHYL THIURAM DISULFIDE <TMTD, thiram> 137-26-8 
2625 1194 3.52•g n.a.a. 1/17 3.64•g 1/15 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
1194 6.0111g n.a.a. 0/17 3.6411g 0/ 15 
b 1194 3.9011g n.a.a. 2/17 3.6411g 1/15 
2626 1194 3.1711g n.a.1. 2/18 3.3911g 2/18 
a 1194 4.01mg n.a.s. 1/18 3.3910g 1/18 
b 1194 2.67•g n.1.1. 3/18 3.3911g 3/ 18 
2627 1194 7.21•g n.a.a. 0/16 3.64•g 0/18 
• ,1194 7.21mg n.a.s . 0/16 3.6411g 0/18 
b 1194 7.21•g n.a.a. 0/16 3.64•g 0/18 
2628 1194 2.43•g n.a.a. 0/16 3.3911g 2/17 
a 1194 6.34•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.3911g 0/17 
b 1194 1.93•g n.1.1. 0/16 3.3911g 3/17 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM MONOSULFIDE cunad1> 97-74-5 
2629 1199 53.2•g n.a.a. 0/17 51.011g 1/18 Innas;ntis, 1968/1969 
1199 101.11g n.a.a. 1/17 51.011g 0/18 
b 1199 29.4•g n.a.a. 2/17 51.0•g 4/18 
2630 1199 58.311g n.1.1. 2/18 47.4•g 1/17 
a 1199 88. 7•g n.1.1. 1/18 47.411g 0/17 
b 1199 62.3•g n.1.1. 3/18 47 .411g 1/17 
2631 1199 89.811g n.a.1. 0/16 51.011g 0/16 
a 1199 89.8•g n.a.a. 0/16 51.011g 0/16 
b 1199 89.8•g n.a.a. 0/16 51.0mg 0/16 
2632 1199 26.9•g n.a.a. 0/16 47 .4•g 3/17 
a 1199 34.0•g n.1.1. 0/16 47.411g 2/17 
b 1199 18.811g 673.•g 0/16 47.411g 5/17 
THIO· TEPA 52-24-4 
2633 c01649 • 13311g .352•g 0/15 .300•g 5/35 1.0011g 32/35 ·• ·: l le, ly11 . 
• c01649 53.3ug .142•g 0/15 .300•g 17/35 1.00•g 32/35 
b 001649 .277•g n.s.a. 0/15 .300•g 2/35 1.00•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpo,nnd. 
c 001649 • 155•g n.a.a. 0/15 .300•g 5/35 1.00•g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2634 001649 • 127•g .357•g 1/30p .300•g 5/35 1.00•g 32/35 · ··: l le,ly• • 
• 001649 .155•g 2.35•g 0/30p .30011g 5/35 1.00•g 0/35 258 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2635 " b6e 
" b6e 
b 11 b6e 
e 11 b6e 
d • b6e 
• b6e 
II b6e 
2636 II b6e 
., b6e 
b m b6e 
e " b6e 
d II b6e 
·2637 f ada 
a ada 
b sda 
sda 
d R sda 
e sda 
2638 ada 
sda 
b sda sda 
2639 " •d• 
a 11 sda 
b 11 sda 
• sda 
d • •d• 
2640 11 ado 
a 11 sda 
b R 11 sde 
c • sda 
d 11 sda 
e R in sda 
2641 R 11 b46 
R 11 b46 
b R 11 b46 ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ipj 
ivj 
ivj ivj sqe 52w83 s 
MXA 52w83 s 
MXB 52w83 s 
MXA 52w83 s 
TBA MXB 52w83 s 
l iv MXB 52w83 s 
l un MXB 52w83 s 
sqe 52w83 s pool 
MXA 52w83 s 
MXA 52w83 s 
ski sqe 52w83 • 
pre sqe 52w83 a 
MXB MXB 36w81 aes 
MXA MXA 36w81 aea 
ute aen 36w81 aes 
MXA MXA 36w81 aes 
TBA MXB 36w81 aes 
l iv MXB 36w81 aes 
11g l aen 36w79 as pool 
MXA MXA 36w79 as 
uta aen 36w79 as 
eae sqe 36w79 as 
MXB MXB 32w82 aes 
• • • lau 32w82 aes 
MXA MXA 32w82 aes 
TBA MXB 32w82 aes 
l iv MXB 32w82 aes 
MXA MXA 32w79 aes pool 
ski sqe 32w79 aes 
sub srn 32w79 aes 
MXA 32w79 aes 
leu 32w79 aea 
l la 32w79 aes 
tba 11ix 121124 
~ba 11al 121124 
tba ban 121124 GOLD ET AL. 
+ TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
.10211g I 
.241•g I 
.24111g I 
.26511g 
69.0ug 
1.1211g • 
.58411g • 
.10211g 
.23811g .26211g 
.28011g • 
.30011g 
.
17Z11g 
.21711g 
.24311g P<.0005 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.6 
P<.4 
P<.0005 
P<.0005e 
P<.0005e 
P<.003 e 
P<.002 e 
P<.0005 
P<.0005e 
P<.002 
+historical • P<.07 a 
40. 4ug I P<. 0005 
no dre p.1. 
• 18211g * P<. 0005 
.21411g I P<.0005e 
. 23611g I P<. 0005 
• 32711g I P<. 0005e 
• 14911g * P<. 0005 
.31211g • P<.002 e 
+historical • P<.03 a 
33. 2ug I P<. 0005 
no dra P•1. 
. 122mg • P<. 0005c 
.15511g * P<.0005e 
. 22011g • P<. 0005 
• 22411g • P<. 0005e 
• 29011g • P<.0005e 
• 37411g * P<. 0005e 
• 18611g P<. 002 
. 30311g P<. 009 
.64611g P<.2 
THIOACETAMIDE 
2642 M f swi eat l iv hpt 65w65 kr 
2643 M. 11 sw i eat l iv hpt 65w65 kr 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
5.3611g P<.0005+ 
P<.005 + 
2, 2· THIOBIS(4 ,6·01 CHLOROPHENOL> 
2644 f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 avx 
1 f b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
b f b6a orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 
2645 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
a 11 b6a orl lun ode 76w76 avx 
b • b6a orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
2646 f b6e or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6e orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2647 11 b6e orl l iv ag11 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6e or l l un ode 76w76 evx 
b • b6e orl tbe •ix 76w76 evx 
4,4' ·THIODIANILINE 
2648 f b6e eat MXB MXB 78w91 a 
• b6e eat l iv hpe 78w91 1 
b b6e eat thy MXA 78w91 • 
b6c eat thy fee 78w91 • 
d b6e eat TBA MXB 78w91 • 
a b6e eat l iv MXB 78w91 1 
b6e eat lun MXB 78w91 • 
2649 II b6e eat MXB MXB 78w91 • 
a ,. b6e eat l iv MXA 78w91 • 
b 11 b6e eat l iv hpe 78w91 a 
e 11 b6e eat thy MXA 78w91 1 
d ., b6e eat thy fee 78w91 a 
• II b6e eat TBA MXB 78w91 • 
11 b6e eat l iv MXB 78w91 • 
g m b6e eat lun MXB 78w91 a 
2650 R f f34 eat MXB MXB 161124 s 
a R f f34 eat ute aen 161124 s 
b R f34 eat thy fee 16•24 a 
R f34 eat eae MXA 16•24 a 
d R f34 eat TBA MXB 16•24 1 
• f34 eat l iv MXB 16 .. 24 • 
2651 R 11 f34 eat MXB MXB 16M24 
a R • f34 eat thy MXA 16•24 <+ noTD50 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g •.••• : .. 10 
.> 100.llg 
• > 
• > 
.> no dre 
28.711g 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
43.00lg 
88.211g 
88.2.,g 
10.111g P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.3 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
p.1. 
p.1 • 
p.1. 
P<.09 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.002 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 111g •..• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ••.• : .. 1g ••..• : •• 10 
+ 
+ + : 33.211g * P<.0005 
33. 311g * P<. 0005e 
88.411g * P<.0005e 
165.11g P<.0005e 
33.211g • P<.0005 
33.311g * P<.0005 
+ no dre p.1. 
32. 7•g * P<. 0005 
33. 211g • P<. 0005e 
33.811g * P<.0005e 
51.811g P<.0005e 
70. 711g P<.0005e 
32. 711g * P<. 0005 
33. 2•g * P<. 0005 
1.07g11 * P<.3 
8. 5311g * P<. 0005 
8. 7911g • P<.0005e 
11. 511g P<.0005e 
+histor ical * P<.006 c 
8. 3511g * P<. 0005 
42. 011g • P<. 0005 
5. 5211g \ P<. 0005 
5. 5911g \ P<. 0005e CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 259 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2635 c01649 55.1ug .281•g 0/15 .30011g 15/34 .90011g 1/35 
c01649 • 13311g .461•g 1/15 .300•g 3/34 .90011g 26/35 --·: leu, ly11 • 
b c01649 . 13311g .46111g 1/15 .300•g 3/34 .900•g 26/35 --- : Leu, l le, ly111 • 
c01649 . 146•g .50611g 1/15 .300•g 2/34 .90011g 26/35 ···:lle, ly11 . 
d c01649 40.6ug .137•g 4/15 .30011g 19/34 .90011g 27/35 
e c01649 • 18711g n.a.a. 1/15 .30011g 4/34 .90011g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd • 
f c01649 . 14011g n.a.s. 1/15 .30011g 5/34 .90011g 0/35 Lun:a/a,a/c • 
2636 c01649 55.1ug .218•g 0/30p .300Mg 15/34 .90011g 1/35 
a c01649 . 13411g .44111g 1/30p .30011g 3/34 .900Mg 26/35 • --: Leu, lyin • 
b c01649 . 14611g .485•g 1/30p .300Mg 2/34 .90011g 26/35 ···:lle, ly11 . 
c01649 .119•g 1.2811g Ot30p .300Mg 7/34 .900•g 0/35 
d c01649 .126•g 1.2511g 0/30p .30011g 6/34 .900•g 1/35 
2637 c01649 87. 7ug .412•g 0/20 .19011g 4/31 .25011g 10/35 bra:oln; eac:sqc; nas:can; ski :sqc. T 
a c01649 • 101•g .666•g 0/20 .19011g 2/31 .25011g 8/35 eac:sqc; ski :sqc . 
b c01649 .107mg .86811g 0/20 .190•g 2/31 .25011g 7/35 s 
c c01649 .260•g n.1.a. 0/20 .190•g 2/31 .25011g 2/35 bra:oln; nas:can. 
d c01649 24.2ug 88.2ug 8/20 .19011g 26/31 .25011g 26/35 
e c01649 n.a.a. n.a.1. 0/20 .190•g 0/31 . 25011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2638 c01649 89.5ug .491•g 2/60p .19011g 7/31 .25011g 8/35 
a c01649 • 10111g .537•g 0/60p .190•g 2/31 .25011g 8/35 eac:sqc; ski :sqc • 
b c01649 .105•g .637•g 0/60p .190•g 2/31 .250•g 7/35 
c c01649 .13811g 1.0511g 0/60p .190•g 2/31 .250oog 5/35 
2639 c01649 57 .9ug .41211g 0/20 .190•g 8/39 .270•g 6/35 ·--:Leu; bra:neu,oln; nas:can • 
• c01649 • 14411g 1.14•g 0/20 .19011g 5/39 .27011g 6/35 
b c01649 68. 7ug n.1.a. 0/20 .19011g 3/39 .27011g 0/35 bra:neu,oln; nas:can. 
c c01649 17.6ug 75.6ug 8/20 .19011g 27/39 .27011g 14/35 
d c01649 n.1.1. n.a.1. 0/20 .190•g 0/39 • 27011g 0/35 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd • 
2640 c01649 52.4ug .31711g 0/60p .19011g 7/39 .270•g 3/35 eac: sqc; ski : sqc. 
• c01649 59. 5ug • 482•g 0/60p .190•g 5/39 .27011g 3/35 
b c01649 68.9ug 1.0711g Ot60p .19011g 5/39 .270•g 0/35 
c01649 91. 5ug .674•g 1/60p .19011g 6/39 .270•g 6/35 ---: leu,ly•. 
d c01649 • 134•g • 70811g 0/60p .190•g 5/39 .27011g 6/35 
e c01649 .153•g 1.1511g 0/60p .190•g 3/39 .270Mg 5/35 
2641 1017 86.1ug 1.02•g 7/89 71.4ug 14/48 Sch.ah l ;arzn,20, 1461-1467; 1970 
• 1017 .122•g 13.2•g 4/89 71.4ug 9/48 
b 1017 .188•g n.a.1. 3/89 71.4ug 5/48 
THIOACETAMIDE 62·55·5 
2642 282 1.69•g 22.6•g 0/6 39.0•g 617 Gothoskar ;bj ca, 24 ,498· 503; 1970 
2643 282 n.a.a. 11.311g 016 36.0•g 6/6 
2, 2· TH 10815(4, 6·DICHLOROPHEN0Ll (TSP, Vancid• BL> 97-18·7 
2644 1283 13.2•g n.a.1. 1/17 15.711g 2/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
• 1283 31.1•g n.1.1. 0/17 15.7•g 0/18 
b 1283 7.51•g n.1.a. 2/17 15.7•g 5/18 
2645 1283 27 .411g n.1.a. 1/18 14.6•g 0/17 
• 1283 27.411g n.a.a. 2/18 14.6•g 0/17 
b 1283 19.211g n.a.a. 3/18 14.611g 1/17 
2646 1283 27 .6•g n.a. a. 0/16 15.7•g 0/16 
• 1283 27 .6•g n.a. a. 0/16 15.7•g 0/16 
b 1283 10.6•g n.a.a. 0/16 15.7•g 2/16 
2647 1283 14.4•g n.a.a. 0/16 14.611g 1/17 
• 1283 14.4•g n.1.a. 0/16 14.611g 1/17 
b 1283 4.29•g 38. 7•g 0/16 14.6•g 7/17 
4,41 ·THIODIANILINE 139-65·1 
2648 c01707 18.5•g 60.2•g 0/14 232.•g 33/35 464.•g 30/35 l iv:hpc; thy:fca,fcc. 
• c01707 18.5•g 60.5•g 0/14 232.•g 32/35 464.•g 30/35 
b e01707 45.5•g 178.•g 0/14 232.•g 11/35 464.•g 18/35 thy:fca,fee. 
e e01707 72.9•g 386.•g 0/14 232.llg 3/35 464.llg 15/35 
d e01707 18.5•g 60.211g 2/14 232.llg 33/35 464.•g 30/35 
• e01707 18.5•g 60.5•g 0/14 232.•g 32/35 464.•g 30/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
f e01707 n.a.a. n.1.1. 0/14 232.•g 0/35 464.•g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2649 e01707 20.111g 54.0•g 4/14 214.•g 34/35 428.•g 24/35 l iv:hpa,hpc; thy:fea,fee . 
• e01707 20.3•g 55.3•g 4/14 214.llg 33/35 428.11g 23/35 l iv:hpa,hpe . 
b c01707 20.5•g 56.911g 1/14 214.•g 32/35 428.•g 22/35 
c01707 30. 7•g 88.8•g 0/14 214.•g 22/35 428.•g 20/35 thy:fea,fec. 
d e01707 40.7•g 125.•g 0/14 214.•g 15/35 428.•g 20/35 
• e01707 20.1•g 54.0•g 4/14 214.llg 34/35 428.•g 24/35 
f e01707 20.311g 55.3•g 4/14 214.•g 33/35 428.llg 23/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
g c01707 174.•g n.a.a. 0/14 214.llg 1/35 428.•g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2650 c01707 4.53•g 15.211g 0/15 53. 5•g 32/35 107.•g 33/35 eac: sqc, sqp; thy:fcc; ute:acn. 
• c01707 4.61•g 16.0•g 0/15 53.5•g 31/35 107.llg 23/35 
b c01707 6.13•g 20.211g 0/15 53. 5•g 24/35 107.•g 32/35 
e e01707 49. Bllg 1 • 34g• 0/15 53.5•g 6/35 107.•g 3/35 eac:sqc,sqp. 
d e01707 4.44•g 16.1•g 6/15 53.5•g 32/35 107.•g 33/35 
• e01707 15.911g 137 •• g 0/15 53.5•g 6/35 107.•g 3/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2651 e01707 2.00•g 11. 7•g 0/15 42.8•g 32/35 <85.6•g 33/35> col :acn; e1c:1qc,1qp; l iv:hpa,hpe; thy:fea,fee. 
a e01707 2.01•g 12.2•g 0/15 42.8•g 30/35 C85.6•g 32/35> thy: fca, fee. 260 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b R 11 134 eat thy fee 161124 
R " 134 eat l iv MXA 161124 
d R 11 f34 eat l iv hpc 161124 
e R " 134 eat eac MXA 16M24 
R 11 f34 eat col acn 161124 
g R m 134 eat TBA MXB 161124 
h R " 134 eat l iv MXB 16Al24 
beta·THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE* 
2652 f b6c i p j TBA MXB 43w77 as 
a f b6c ipj l iv MXB 43w77 as 
b f b6c ipj lun MXB 43w77 as 
2653 " b6c i p j TBA MXB 38w77 as 
a 11 b6c ipj l iv MXB 38w77 as 
b 11 b6c ipj lun MXB 38w77 H 
2654 f sda ipj eac MXA 52w78 ea 
a sda ipJ eac sqc 52w78 ea 
b sda ipj TBA MXB 52w78 ea 
sda ipj l iv MXB 52w78 ~· 
2655 sda ipj eac MXA 52w78 ea 
1da ipj eac aqc 52w78 ea 
2656 11 1da ipj eac MXA 52w78 ea 
a 11 sda ipj TBA MXB 52w78 es 
b 11 1da ipj l iv MXB 52w78 ea 
2657 11 ada ipj eac MXA 52w78 ea 
a 11 sda i p j l Y" 52w78 es 
TH IOSEMI CARBAZ IDE 
2658 R f cdr eat •u l tu• 181124 e 
THIOURACIL 
2659 M f c3h eat l iv hpt 73w73 r 
2660 M 11 c3h eat l iv hpt 73w73 r 
2661 M f tH eat l iv hpt 73w73 r 
2662 M 11 tH eat l iv hpt 73w73 r 
THI OUR EA 
2663 M f c3h wat lun tu11 61124 e 
2664 R " hew 11 ix aur epc 95w95 Hv 
a R 11 hew 11ix eld epc 95w95 e11v 
b R " hew 11ix tba 11ix 95w95 e11v 
2665 R '" hew wat aur epc 26•26 e 
R 11 hew wat eld epc 261126 e 
b R " hew wat tba 11ix 261126 e 
2666 R oam eat l iv tu• 26•26 
a R 0111 eat tba 11ix 261126 
2667 R o .. eat l iv tu11 241124 
a R 0111 eat tba ben 241124 
b R OH eat tba 11al 24•24 
2668 R 11 0111 eat l iv tum 26•26 
a R 11 0111 eat tba 11ix 261126 
2669 11 0111 eat l iv tu11 241124 
a 11 0111 eat tba ben 241124 
b R 11 OH eet tba 111 l 241124 
TIN (II) CHLORIDE 
2670 M b cd1 wat lun 11ix 241124 e 
a M b cd1 wat l un ade 241124 e 
b M b cd1 wat tba •ix 241124 e 
M b cd1 wat tba mal 241124 e 
d M b cd1 wat tba ben 24•24 e 
2671 R b lab wat l iv tu• 361136 e 
a R b leb wat tba tu• 361136 e 
b R b leb wat tba 1111 36•36 e 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 
2672 " f b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
M f b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 
2673 M 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
a M m b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2674 R f f34 eat thy MXA 24•24 
a R f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b R 134 eat l iv MXB 241124 
2675 R '" f34 eat · · · ker 241124 
a R 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
b R '" f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 6. 3611g \ P<. 0005c 
7 .1811g \ P<.0005c 
7.3111g \ P<.0005c 
20.311g \ P<.0005c 
+historical \ P<.02 c 
5.9611g \ P<.0005 
7 .180lg \ P<.0005 
100ng •• :. -1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• : •. 111u ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g. • • .• : .• 10 
pool 
pool :> 4.4811g P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
6.870lg * P<.3 
:> no dre P-1. 
no dre 
no dre 
2.1011g 
2.31mg 
4.11mg 
no dre 
2.1011g 
2.3111g 
4.3811g • 
no dre p.1. 
P-1. 
P<.005 c 
P<.008 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P<.0005c 
P<.002 
P<.08 a 
p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
4.3811g * P<.02 a 
5. 7511g * P<.03 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 •••• :. -1•U· ••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1U· •••• : •• 10 
.> 3.07•g * P<.2 
100ng .• : •• 1uu •••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111u .••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1u-••.• : •• 10 
63.3mg 
48.611g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. .> no dre 
.> no dre p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•u ..•• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ..... : • -10 
+ 
. > 
. > 
. > 
• > • > no dre 
104.0lg 
225.mg 
50.811g 
93.50lg 
93.5mg 
27 .511g 
no dre 
16.2mg 
no dre 
15.0mg 
no dre 
no dre 
46.1mg 
no dre 
64.711g 
no dre p.1 • 
P<.0005+ 
P<.02 + 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
p.1 . 
P<.7 
P•1 • 
P<.3 
P-1. 
p.1 • 
P<.6 
p.1 . 
P<.3 
P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••... :. -100 •••• :. ·1U· •••• : •• 10 
.> 
. > no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1 • 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •••. : .• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111u •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• : •• 1u •..•. : .. 10 
:>55.8gm * P<.8 
55.5gm * P<.2 
50.4gm * P<.1 
:no dre P-1. 
38. 7gm * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
#17 .2g11 I P<.04 
5.01g11 * P<.4 
no dre P•1. 
:#25.9g11 * P<.05 -
23.0g11 * P<.9 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 261 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl I Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b c01707 2.08•g 15.3•g 0/15 42.8•g 28/35 (85.6•g 32/35) 
c c01707 2.15•g 18.5•g 0/15 42.8•g 23/35 (85.611g 12/35) l iv:hpa,hpc. 
d c01707 2.16mg 19.311g 0/15 42.811g 21/35 (85.611g 10/35) 
• c01707 6.4211g 57 .011g 0/15 42.811g 15/35 C85.611g 8/35) eac: sqc, sqp . 
f c01707 38.511g n.1.1. 0/15 42.811g 6/35 <85.611g 1/35) 
c01707 2.2811g 13.6•g 4/15 42.811g 32/35 <85.6mg 33/35) 
c01707 2.1511g 18.5•g 0/15 42.8•g 23/35 <85.6mg 12/35) l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE * Cbeta-TGdR. NCI uses CAS# 789·61-7) 64039-27-6 
2652 c01581 .15011g n.1.1. 21/30 .30011g 20/35 .60011g 21/35 (1.7011g 1/35) 
• c01581 n.1.1. n.1.1 . 0/30 .30011g 0/35 .60011g 0/35 1.7011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c01581 1.12•g n.1.1. 0/30 .300•g 0/35 .60011g 1/35 1.7011g 0/35 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
2653 c01581 .173•g n.1.1. 20/30 .30011g 19/35 .60011g 19/35 1.7011g 0/35 
a c01581 .421•g n.1.1. 2/30 .30011g 1/35 .60011g 1/35 1.7011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01581 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/30 .30011g 0/35 .60011g 0/35 1.7011g 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2654 c01581 .938•g 14.3•g 0/10 1.00•g 2/35 2 .OO•g 6/35 eac:can,sqc. 
a c01581 .99011g 44.0•g 0/10 1.00•g 2/35 2.0011g 5/35 
b c01581 .572•g n.1.1. 9/10 1.00•g 17/35 2.0011g 10/35 
c c01581 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 1.0011g 0/35 2.0011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2655 c01581 .93811g 6.68•g 0/30p 1.0011g 2/35 2.0011g 6/35 eac:can,sqc. 
a c01581 .99011g 8.66•g 0/30p 1.00•g 2/35 2.00•g 5/35 
2656 c01581 1.32•g n.1.1. 0/10 1.00•g 1/35 2.0011g 2/35 eac:can,sqc . 
a c01581 .839•g n.1.1. 7/10 1.00•g 9/35 2.00•g 5/35 
b c01581 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/10 1.00•g 0/35 2.0011g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2657 c01581 1.32•g n.1.a. 0/30p 1.00•g 1/35 2.0011g 2/35 eac: can, sqc. 
c01581 1.73•g n.s.s. 0/30p 1.00•g 1/35 2.0011g 2/35 
THIOSEMI CARBAZIDE 79-19·6 
2658 1112 1.11•g n.1.1. 3/10 1.41•g 19/26 2.8111g 16/26 Wei sburger; j nc i, 67, 75 · 88; 1981 
THIOURACIL 141·90·2 
2659 284 28.6•g 152.•g 0/24 390.mg 14/16 Casas ;pseb, 113, 493· 494; 1963 
2660 284 17 .9•g 139.•g 2/32 360.•g 12/13 
2661 284 871.•g n.s.s. 0/20 390.•g 0/22 
2662 284 804.•g n.1.1. 0/20 360.•g 0/22 
THI OUR EA 62·56·6 
2663 1135 331.•g n.s.s. 1/94 25.1•g 0/64 Vazquez· Lopez ;bj ca, 3, 401·414;1949 
2664 288a 43.0•g 363.•g 0/12 159.•g 7/12 Rosin;canr, 17,302-305;1957 
• 288a 76.6•g n.1.1 . 0/12 159.mg 4/12 
b 288• 21.2•g 141.llg 0/12 159.llg 10/12 
2665 288b 45. 5•g 249.•g 0/12 100.•g 11/19 
288b 45.5•g 249.•g 0/12 100.•g 11/19 
b 288b 11.2•g 64.0•g 0/12 100.•g 18/19 
2666 21 18.211g n.1.1. 0/30 2.50•g 0/30 De; chmann; txap, 11,88-103; 1967 
a 21 2.51•g n.1.1. 13/30 2.50•g 15/30 
2667 84a 24.7•g n.s.s. 1/30 4.00•g 0/30 RadoHk i ;txap, 7,652-656;1965 
84a 4.19•g n.s.s. 6!30 4.00•g 10/30 
b 84a 19.7•g n.s.s. 6!30 4.00•g 1/30 
2668 21 14.611g n.1.1. 0/30 2.0011g 0/30 De; ch11ann; txap, 11,88-103; 1967 
a 21 6.34•g n.1.1. 1/30 2 .OO•g 2/30 
2669 84a 19.8•g n.1.1. 0/30 3.20•g 0!30 Rado11sk;; txap, 7,652-656;1965 
a 84a 10.5•g n.1.1. 0/30 3.20•g 1/30 
b 84a 19.8•g n.1.1. 3/30 3.20•g 0/30 
TIN (Ill CHLORIDE (stannous chloride) 7772-99 -8 
2670 1512 5.26•g n.1.1. 26/170 .877•g 10/86 Kanisawa;canr ,27, 1192-1195; 1967 
a 1512 12.0•g n.1.1. 7/170 .877•g 1/86 
b 1512 3.83•g n.1.1. 55/170 .877•g 22/86 
c 1512 6.06•g n.1.1. 15/170 .877•g 6/86 
d 1512 6.42•g n.1.1. 29/170 .877•g 9/86 
2671 1036 11.5•g n.s.s. 1/82 .265•g 0/94 Kani sawa; canr, 29 ,892-895;1969 
• 1036 2.08•g n.s.s. 31/82 .265•g 29/94 
b 1036 5.54•g n.s.s. 9/82 .265•g 5/94 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 13463-67·7 
2672 c04240 6.64g• n.s.s. 30/50 3.22g• 24/50 6.44g 11 26/50 
• c04240 17 .Og• n.s.s. 1/50 3.22g• 3/50 6.44g11 3/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c04240 16.9g• n.s.s. 1/50 3.22g• 2/50 6.44g11 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2673 c04240 9.26g• n.s.s. 29/50 2.97g• 25/50 5.94g• 28/50 
• c04240 9.45g• n.s.s. 8/50 2.97g• 9/50 5.94g11 14/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c04240 24.2g• n.s.s. 6/50 2.97g• 3/50 5.94g• 5/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2674 c04240 6.25g• n.s.s. 1/50 1.24g• 0/50 2.48g• 6/50 thy: cca, ccr. 
c04240 1.23g• n.s.s. 41/50 1.24g• 43/50 2.48g• 46/50 
b c04240 28.2g• n.s.s. 1/50 1.24g• 0/50 2.48g• 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2675 c04240 7 .81g• n.s.s. 0/50 990.•g 0/50 1.98g• 3/50 
• c04240 1.54g• n.s.s. 32/50 990.•g 40/50 1.98g• 36/50 
b c04240 16. 7g• n.s.s. 1/50 990.•g 1/50 1.98g• 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 262 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM 
2676 M f cd1 wat tba •ix 26•26 
2677 M cd1 wat lun tu• 31•31 e 
a M cd1 wat tba tu• 311131 e 
2678 M " cd1 wat tba mix 281128 e 
2679 M " cd1 wat lun tum 251125 e 
M " cd1 wat tba tu11 25•25 e 
TOLAZAMIDE 
2680 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
a M b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M b6c eat lun MXB 24•24 
2681 M II b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 
M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
b M • b6c eat l un MXB 24•24 
2682 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 24m24 
a R f f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
2683 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
R " f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
TOLBUTAMIDE 
2684 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 
M f b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 181124 
2685 M " b6c eat TBA MXB 181124 
a M " b6c eat l iv MXB 181124 
b M " b6c eat lun MXB 181124 
2686 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 18•25 
a f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 
2687 " f34 eat TBA MXB 181125 
a R II f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 
o-TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 
2688 f cdr eat 01gl adc 33.,33 eg 
cdr eat l iv kca 331133 eg 
b cdr eat l iv nnd 331133 eg 
2689 • cdr eat l iv ang 33.,33 e 
a 11 cdr eat l iv nnd 331133 e 
b 11 cdr eat l iv blc 33•33 e 
2690 R b 1da eat leu 311133 a 
a R b 1da eat ubl •ix 31•33 a 
b R b 1da eat l iv car 31•33 a 
c R b 1da eat tba mal 31•33 a 
2691 R wi1 wat l iv hpc 241124 e 
11-TOLUIDINE.HCl 
2692 M f chi eat l iv •ix 77w90 v 
M chi eat lun 11ix 77w90 v 
b M chi eat tba 11ix 77w90 v 
2693 M chi eat lun mix 77w81 v 
M chi eat l iv •ix 77w81 v 
b M chi eat tba •ix 77w81 v 
2694 M • chi eat l iv •ix 77w90 v 
a M 11 chi eat lun •ix 77w90 v 
b M • chi eat tba •ix 77w90 v 100ng •. :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•. :. -100 •••• :. ·1•g •.•. : •• 10 ••.•• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 3.6611g P<.2 
P<1. 
p.1. 
P<.2 
P•1 • 
P•1. .> .> 150.mg 
• > no dre 
3.62mg 
no dre 
no dre 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 11111 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -111-.•.• : •• 10 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
24.6gm * P<.9 
:> no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
:> no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng .• : •. 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•11· ••. : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -111· •••• :. -10 
:> 
:> :> 24.2gm \ P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
:> no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
100ng •• :. -1Ug •••• : •• 10. • • • •:. ·100. • • •: • .11111. • • •: • -10. • • • •: • -100. • • •: • .1g. • • • •: • ·10 
• > 12.2mg P<.02 
8.52gm * P<.03 
21. 7gm * P<.6 
.> 17. 2g11 * P<. 2 
35.9g• * P<. 7 
no dre P•1 • 
• 375.mg \ P<.009 
3.96g• * P<.06 
no dre P•1. 
13.3g• * P<.9 
no dre P• 1 • 
100ng •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g •••.• :. -10 
:> 9.99g• 
:> no dre 
no dre 
:> no dre 
no dre P-1. 
1.9511• P<.09 
6. 7711• * P<. 7 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. + 
2695 M • chi eat l iv hpt 77w90 v pool :> 1.44g• \ P<.2 + 
2696 R • cdr eat l iv •ix 77w98 v 
a R 11 cdr eat tba 11ix 77w98 no dre p.1. 
98.41111 \ P<.2 
o-TOLUIDINE. HC l 100ng •• : •• 1u11 •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ••.• :. -1•11· ••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
2697 M f b6c eat l iv MXA 241124 
a M b6c eat l iv hpc 24•24 
b b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 
d b6c eat lun MXB 241124 
2698 ., b6c eat MXA 241124 a 
11 b6c eat hes 241124 a 
b II b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 a 
• b6c eat l iv MXB 24•24 a 
d • b6c eat l un MXB 24•24 a 
2699 f chi eat l iv •ix 68w90 av 
• 
b 
2700 
2701 
• 
b 
c 
2702 chi eat lun •ix 68w90 av 
chi eat tba •ix 68w90 av 
chi eat v1c 68w90 av pool 
II chi eat VIC 68w90 IV 
• chi eat l iv •ix 68w90 av 
• chi eat lun •ix 68w90 av 
• chi eat tba •ix 68w90 av 
• chi eat v1c 68w90 av pool : + 754.0lg * P<.002 c 
1.5211• * P<.02 
1.35g• * P<.4 
754. Olg * P<. 002 
+ 
+ no dre P• 1. 
:926.0lg * P<.005 c 
1.2211• P<.01 
no dre p.1. 
12.7gM * P<1. 
no dre P-1. 
1 • 65g• * P<. 008 
no dre P•1. 
699.•g * P<.007 
1. 2411• * P<. 0005+ 
646. •g I P<. 0005+ 
1.40gOI * P<.005 -
1.16g• * P<. 1 
325. Mg I P<. 0005 
660.•g I P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 263 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM 
2676 1395 1.24ag n.1.1. 9/45 1.0011g 13/36 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452·458;1975 
2677 56 3.59ag n.1.1. 9160 1.00ag 5/32 Schroeder; j nut ,83, 239·250;1964 
a 56 4.45ag n.a.1. 22/60 1.00ag 7/32 
2678 1395 1.23•g n.1. 1. 10/43 .83311g 17/45 Schroeder; j nut, 105 ,452·458;1975 
2679 56 6.12ag n.1.1. 8/44 .83311g 1/40 Schroeder; jnut, 83, 239·250;1964 
56 4.0911g n.1.1. 11/44 .833mg 4/40 
TOLAZAMI DE 1156·19·0 
2680 c03327 867 .11g n.1.1. 8/15 455.llg 6/35 919.11g 9/34 
a c03327 1.61g• n.1.1. 1/15 455.•g 1/35 919.ag 1/34 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03327 3.33ga n.1.1. 1/15 455.•g 0/35 919.ag 1/34 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2681 c03327 643.ag n.1.1. 8/15 420.•g 11/35 <848.oog 5/35) 
c03327 2.87g• n.1.1. 3/15 420.ag 2/35 848.llg 3/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03327 2.07g• n.1.1. 0/15 420.•g 2/35 848.ag 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2682 c03327 214.ag n.1.1. 13/15 175.•g 23/35 354.Mg 20/35 
a c03327 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 175.ag 1/35 354.llg 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2683 c03327 277.ag n.1.1. 9/15 140.ag 19/35 283.Mg 20/35 
a c03327 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 140.Mg 0/35 283.ag 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
TOLBUTAMIDE 64·77·7 
2684 c01763 1.63g• n.1. 1. 3/15 1.76g• 11/35 C3.52g11 3/35) 
• c01763 10.6ga n.1.1. 1/15 1.76g11 2/35 3.52g11 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01763 10.3ga n.1.1. 0/15 1.76g• 2/35 3.52g• 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2685 c01763 1.16g• n.1.1. 8/15 1.62g• 13/35 (3.28g11 2/35> 
• c01763 1.96g• n.1.1. 3/15 1.62g11 4/35 (3.28g• 1/35) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01763 9.12g• n.1.1. 1/15 1.62g• 2/35 3.28g11 0/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2686 c01763 662.ag n.1.1. 13/15 315.ag 15/35 631.ag 16/35 
• c01763 n.1.1. n.1.1 . 0/15 315.ag 0/35 631.•g 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2687 c01763 654.ag n.1.1. 8/15 252.•g 13/35 505.ag 17/35 
• c01763 n.1.1. n.1.1 • 0/15 252.ag 0/35 505.ag 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
o· TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 88·19·7 
2688 1398 5.34ag n.1.1. 6/48 2.501111 16/49 (25.0•g 6/49 250.•11 5/49) Arnold; txap, 52, 113· 152; 1980 
• 1398 2.1011• n.1.1. 0/48 2.501111 0/49 25.0ag 0/49 250.1111 2/49 
b 1398 2.01g• n.1.1. 0/48 2.50•11 0/49 25 .01111 2/49 250.•11 1/49 
2689 1398 2.81g• n.1.1. 0/49 2.50•11 0/49 25.0•11 0/50 250.Mll 1/49 
• 1398 4.05ga n.1.1. 0/49 2.50•11 1/49 25.0•11 1/50 250.1111 1/49 
b 1398 5.0411• n.1.1. 0/49 2.50•11 1/49 25.0•g 0/50 250.1111 0/49 
2690 1397 143.ag 8.6011• 0/76 20.01111 5176 <200.ag 3/76) SchHhl ;zkko,91, 19·22; 1978 
• 1397 1.2611• n.1.1. 0/76 20.0•11 3/76 200.Mg 5/76 
b 1397 531.•11 n.1. 1. 1/76 20.0•11 0176 200.ag 0!76 
c 1397 1.0211• n.1.1. 13/76 20.01111 20/76 200.ag 17/76 
2691 1433 544.1111 n.1. 1. 1/50 57.11111 0/48 Hooaon;bj ca, 42, 129· 147; 1980 
a·TOLUIDINE.HCl 638·03·9 
2692 381 1.2911• n.1.1. 1/22 1.14g• 2/18 Weiaburger; jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers.co•11. /Rusaf ield 1973 
• 381 1.0411• n.1.1. 5/22 1.14g• 4/18 
b 381 919.1111 n.1.1. 18/22 1.14g• 10/18 
2693 381• 2. 7511• n.1.1. 8/15 2.66g• 2/19 
• 381• n.1.1. n.1.1 • 0/15 2.66g• 0/19 
b 381• 410.•11 n.1.1. 11/15 2.6611• 7/19 
2694 381 1.0611• n.1.1. 1/18 754.ag 4/16 1.5111• 2/16 • '381 1.4511• n.1.1. 8/18 754.•11 2/16 1.51g• 5/16 
b 381 751.ag n.1.1. 13/18 754.•11 10/16 1.51ga 10/16 
2695 381 368.ag n.1.1. 7/99p 754.1111 4/16 (1.5111• 1/16> 
2696 381 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/16 146.•11 0/20 292.1111 0/18 
• 381 31.7ag n.1.1. 9/16 146.ag 17/20 <292.1111 9/18) 
O·TOLUIDINE.HCL 636·21 ·5 
2697 c02335 428.•11 2.8611• 0/20 130.•11 4/50 390.•11 13/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c02335 716.•11 n.1.1. 0/20 130.•11 2/50 390.Mll 7/50 
b c02335 344.1111 n.1.1. 8/20 130.1111 19/50 390.ag 26/50 
c c02335 428.1111 2.8611• 0120 130.•11 4/50 390.•11 13/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c02335 1.6611• n.1.1. 1/20 130.•11 2/50 390.1111 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2698 c02335 453.•11 8.1911• 1/20 120.•11 2/50 360.1111 12/50 ---:he•, hes. 
• c02335 554.•ll 80.1g• 1/20 120.1111 1/50 360.1111 10/50 
b c02335 304.•11 n.1.1. 17/20 120.1111 28/50 360.1111 30/50 
c c02335 404.•11 n.1.1. 5/20 120.ag 19/50 360.ag 14/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c02335 473.•11 n.1.1. 5/20 120.•11 5/50 <360.ag 3/50) lun:a/a,a/c . 
2699 381 544.1111 46.211• 0/15 1.09g• 3/18 2.5011• 2/21 Wei1bur11er; Jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers. coa11. /Rusaf ield 1973 
• 381 1.1811• n.1.1. 8/15 1.0911• 3/18 2.5011• 0/21 
b 381 283.•11 12.111• 11/15 1.09g• 12/18 2.5011• 8/21 
2700 381 513.•11 3. 7511• 8/102p 1.09g• 4/18 2.5011• 8/21 
2701 381 300. •11 1. 7511• 0/14 1.01g• 4/14 2.3011• 8/11 
• 381 474.1111 12.011• 1/14 1.01ga 2/14 2.3011• 4/11 
b 381 353.1111 n.1.1. 4/14 1.01ga 5/14 2.3011• 2/11 
c 381 154.1111 1.1311• 8/14 1.0111• 10/14 2.3011• 11/11 
2702 381 301.1111 1.8411• 5/99p 1.0111• 4/14 2.30g• 8/11 264 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2703 R 134 eat llXB llXB 241124 s 
a 134 eat 11gl fba 241124 a 
b f34 aat •gl llXA 241124 a 
c f34 eat ubl llXA 241124 a 
d f34 eat ubl tee 241124 a 
e f34 eat mul llXA 241124 s 
f34 eat spl llXA 241124 a 
f34 eat 11ul oat 241124 • 
f34 eat spl ang 241124 a 
f34 eat TBA llXB 241124 
J 
2704 
a 
b 
d f34 eat l iv llXB 241124 a 
11 f34 eat llXB llXB 241124 as 
11 f34 eat sub fib 241124 as 
• f34 eat 11ul llXA 241124 as 
11 f34 eat MXA llXA 241124 as 
• f34 eat apl fib 241124 as 
e 11 f34 eat MU l fba 241124 as 
11 f34 eat 11ul srn 241124 as 
g 11 f34 eat TBA HXB 241124 as 
h 11 f34 eat l iv llXB 241124 as 
2705 11 cdr eat sub 11ix 64w68 
a m cdr eat l iv 11ix 64w68 v 
b • cdr eat tba 11ix 64w68 :+ 
+ 77 .911g I P<.0005 
115.ftlg I P<.0005c 
119.mg P<.0005c 
175.mg P<.0005c 
185.ftlg P<.0005c 
332. ftlg P<. 0005c 
337. mg * P<. 0005c 
423. 119 P<. 0005c 
450.mg * P<.002 c 
75.811g * P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
23. 3•g I P<. 0005 
33. 3119 I P<. 0005c 
93.2•g P<.0005c 
97 .4•g * P<.0005c 
134.•g * P<.0005c 
2706 • cdr eat sub 11ix 64w68 pool 
• cdr eat ubl 11ix 64w68 184.'1g 
394.mg 
24.4mg 
645.mg 
36. 7mg * 
2.96gm * 
36.1 .. g • 
38.8 .. g • P<.0005c 
P<.0005c 
P<.0005 
P<.06 
P<.0005+ 
P<.3 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
131.0lg * P<.0005+ 
p-TOLUIDINE.Htl 
2707 II f chi eat Liv •ix 77w98 
a II f chi eat lun 11ix 77w98 
b II chi eat tba 11ix 77w98 
2708 II chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 v 
2709 II • chi eat lj v hpt 77w98 v 
II • chi eat l iv 11ix 77w98 
b II 11 chi eat lun •ix 77w98 
c II " chi eat tba 11ix 77w98 
2710 II " chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 v 
2711 Rm cdr eat Liv •lix 77w98 
m cdr eat tba 11ix 77w98 
p-TOL YLUREA 
2712 II f cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 e 
a II cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 e 
2713 II • cb6 eat 111 y 52w69 e 
a II • cb6 eat •lh 52w69 e 
b II • cb6 eat 11ul 11lh 52w69 e 
c II 11 cb6 eat •In •lh 52w69 e 
d II • cb6 eat l iv hpc 52w69 e 
e II 11 cb6 eat lun a/a 52w69 e 
2714 f f34 eat l iv tu• 52w69 e 
2715 R 11 f34 eat l iv hpc 52w69 e 
TOXAPHENE 
2716 f b6c eat l iv llXA 80w90 v 
a b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 v 
b b6c eat TBA llXB 80w90 v 
c b6c eat l iv llXB 80w90 v 
d b6c eat lun llXB 80w90 v 
2717 b6c eat l iv llXA 80w90 v 
a b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 v 
2718 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 v 
a • b6c eat l iv llXA 80w90 v 
b 11 b6c eat TBA llXB 80w90 v 
11 b6c eat l iv llXB 8~w90 v 
d 11 b6c eat lun llXB 80w90 v 
2719 11 b6c eat l iv llXA 80w90 v 
a 11 b6c eat l iv hpc 80w90 v 
2720 f 0011 eat TBA llXB 191125 v 
0111 eat l iv llXB 191125 v 
2721 OH eat thy fca 191125 v 
2722 11 OH eat TBA llXB 19•25 v 
a " OH eat l iv llXB 191125 v 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 ..•• :. ·1"'g •••. : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .••• : .. 1g ..... :. -10 
1 256.119 * P<.06 
400.0lg * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
pool 278 • .,g • P<.01 
1 49.1'1g \ P<.02 
49. 1mg P<. 02 
pool 
:> 78.6mg 
49.4mg 
50.1 .. g 
no dre P<.06 
P<.06 
P<.0005+ 
P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••. : .• 111g ..•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •.•• :. -19· ••.• : .. 10 
pool .> no dre 
no dre 
pool 206.11g 
. > 
.> 265 ... g 
441.llg 
626.119 
722.llg 
no dre 
no dre 
699.119 P•1. 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.009 
P<.08 
P•1. 
p.1 • 
P<.2 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••. : .• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1"g •••• : .• 10 ..... :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••• ·.: · -10 
pool 
+: 
pool + 
pool :+ : 8.78mg P<.0005c 
:+ 
:> 
1 
:> 15.20lg P<.0005c 
9.19mg * P<.0005 
8. 78"'g P<. 0005 
no dre P•1. 
9.1011g P<.0005c 
15.211g P<.0005c 
4. 0811g * P<. 0005c 
4.230lg * P<.0005c 
4.13"'g * P<.0005 
4. 2311g * P<. 0005 
1.13g11 * P<.9 
4.460lg * P<.0005c 
4. 7911g * P<.0005c 
596.0lg * P<1. 
no dre P• 1. 
209.•g * P<.03 
1. 02g11 * P<1 • 
949.11g * P<1. 
2723 • OHi eat thy llXA 191125 v pool 58.911g * P<.002 a 
92.111g * P<.03 a " OHi eat l iv nnd 19•25 v 
TRENlllON 
2724 R 11 b46 
a R 11 b46 
b R m b46 
" b46 iv) 
iv) iv) iv) l iv lee 121124 ea 
tba 11ix 121124 es 
tba 118 l 121124 es 
tba ban 121124 es 100ng .• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •... : .. 111g •••• : .• 10 ••••• :. -100 .••• : .. 1g ..••. :. -10 
.> 65.3ug 
5.04ug 
6.77ug 
32 .Oug P<.2 
P<.005 
P<.007 + 
P<.4 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 265 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2703 c02335 51.9•g 141.•g 7/20 150.•g 32/50 300.•g 48/50 •gl :adn,fba; 11u l: ang, fbs,ost, srn; spl: ang ,ost, srn; ubl:tcc,tpp. 
a c02335 72.0•g 244.•g 6/20 150.•g 20/50 300.•g 35/50 
b c02335 73.4•g 268.•g 7/20 150.•g 20/50 300.•g 35/50 •gl :adn,fba. 
c c02335 111.•g 299.11g 0/20 150.•g 10/50 300.•g 22/50 ubl :tcc,tpp. 
d c02335 116.•g 318.•g 0/20 150.•g 9/50 300.•g 22/50 
• c02335 199.llg 605.•g 0/20 150.•g 3/50 300.•g 21/50 11ul :ang, fbs, ost, srn. 
f c02335 193.•g 810.•g 0/20 150.•g 9/50 300.•g 12/50 spl :ang,ost,srn. 
g c02335 236.•g 844.•g 0/20 150.•g 0/50 300.•g 18/50 
h c02335 239. •g 1. 53g• 0/20 150.•g 7/50 300.•g 9/50 
c02335 47.1•g 174.•g 13/20 150.•g 43/50 300.•g 48/50 
j c02335 n.a.a. n.a.a. 0/20 150.•g 2/50 300.•g 0/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2704 c02335 15.5•g 35.311g 0/20 120.•g 44/50 240.•g 48/50 11ul :ang, fbs,11so,ost,srn; spl: fib; sub:fib; tnv:11so. 
a c02335 20.9•g 54.6•g 0/20 120.•g 28/50 240.llg 27/50 
b c02335 59.7•g 140.•g 0/20 120.•g 15/50 240.•g 37/50 inul: ang, fbs ,ost, srn. 
c c02335 53.3•g 189.•g 0120 120.•g 17/50 240.•g 9/50 •ul :1110; tnv:11so. 
d c02335 64.1•g 355.•g 0/20 120.•g 10/50 240.•g 2/50 
• c02335 99.1•g 336.•g 0/20 120.•g 8/50 240.•g 20/50 
c02335 192.•g 981.•g 0/20 120.•g 3/50 240.•g 11/50 
g c02335 15.8•g 40.6•g 10/20 120.•g 50/50 240.•g 48/50 
h c02335 169.•g n.a.a. 1/20 120.•g 1/50 240.•g 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2705 381 22.4•g 62.5•g 0/16 192.•g 18/23 384.•g 21/24 Weiaburger; jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers.coH. /Ruuf ield 1973 
a 381 482.•g n.a.a. 0/16 192.•g 0/23 384.•g 1/24 
b 381 20.2•g 82.4•g 9/16 192.•g 19/23 384.•g 23/24 
2706 381 23.6•g 65.9•g 18/111p 192.•g 18/23 384.•g 21/24 
a 381 48.9•g 535.•g 5/111p 192.•g 3/23 384.•g 4/24 
p· TOLUIDINE. HC l 540·23·8 
2707 381 93.6•g n.1.a. 0/20 74.3•g 2/21 142.•g 3/17 Weisburger; jept,2,325·356; 1978/pers.co••. /Russf ield 1973 
a 381 86.3•g n.1.1. 6/20 74.3•g 3/21 142.•g 7/17 
b 381 97.1•g n.1.1. 17/20 74.3•g 6/21 142.•g 10/17 
2708 381 94. 7•g 29.2g• 1/102p 74.3•g 2/21 142.•g 3/17 
2709 381 19.3•g n.a.a. 3/18 68.6•g 8/17 (131.•g 9/18) 
a 381 19.3•g n.a.a. 3/18 68.6•g 8/17 (131.•g 9/18) 
b 381 26.8•g n.o.a. 5/18 68.6•g 6/17 (131.•g 8/18) 
381 17.2•g n.1.1. 12/18 68.6•g 12/17 ( 131.•g 14/18> 
2710 381 20.2•g 212.•g 7/99p 68.6•g 8/17 ( 131.•g 9/18> 
2711 381 116.•g n.1.1. 1/22 31.3•g 1/22 62.6•g 1/21 
a 381 42.9•g n.1.1. 14/22 31.3•g 12/22 62.6•g 12/21 
p·TOLYLUREA 622·51·5 
2712 1343 674.•g n.1.1. 1/89p 196.•g 0/38 FleischHn; jept,3, 149-170; 1980 
a 1343 674.•g n.1.1. 2/89p 196.•g 0/38 
2713 1343 100.•g 529.•g 0/95p 181.•g 10/43 
a 1343 120.•g 776.•g 0/95p 181.•g 8/43 
b 1343 167.•g 1.93g• 0/91p 181.•g 5/43 
1343 189.•g 17.3g• 0/79p 181.•g 3/36 
d 1343 207.•g n.1.1. 2/91p 181.•g 4/43 
• 1343 705.•g n.a.1 . 1/87p 181.•g 0/43 
2714 1343 287.•g n.1.1. 0/49 75.3•g 0/42 
2715 1343 114.•g n.1.1. 0/50 60.2•g 1/39 
TOXAPHENE 8001·35·2 
2716 c00259 6.34•g 14.8•g 0/10 11.3•g 18/50 22.9•g 40/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
a c00259 10.3•g 24.9•g 0/10 11.3•g 5/50 22.9•g 34/50 
b c00259 6.22•g 22. 7•g 1/10 11.3•g 22/50 22.9•g 40/50 
c c00259 6.34•g 14.8•g 0/10 11.3•g 18/50 22.9•g 40/50 l iv:hpe,hpc,nnd . 
d c00259 217 .•g n.a.a. 1/10 11.3•g 0/50 22.9•g 0/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2717 c00259 6.48•g 13.9•g 1/49p 11.3•g 18/50 22.9•g 40/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
• c00259 10.3•g 23. 7•g 0/49p 11.3•g 5/50 22.9•g 34/50 
2718 c00259 3.04•g 6.21•g 0/10 10.4•g 34/50 21.1•g 45/50 
a c00259 2.88•g 9.30•g 2/10 10.4•g 40/50 21.1•g 45/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
b c00259 2.79•g 9.59•g 2/10 10.4•g 44/50 21.1•g 45/50 
c c00259 2.8S.g 9.30•g 2/10 10.4•g 40/50 21.1•g 45/50 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
d c00259 56.5•g n.1.a. 1/10 10.4•g 1/50 21.1•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2719 c00259 3.09•g 7 .36•g 9/50p 10.4•g 40/50 21.1•g 45/50 l iv:hpc,nnd . 
• c00259 3.37•g 7.58•g 6/50p 10.4•g 34/50 21.111g 45/50 
2720 c00259 22.5•g n.1.1. 6/10 20.0•g 31/50 40.0•g 40/50 
a c00259 106.•g n.1.1. 1/10 20.0•g 5/50 40.0•g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2721 c00259 84.2•g n.1.1. 1/55p 20.0•g 1/50 40.0•g 7/50 
2722 c00259 17 .2•g n.1.1. 7/10 16. 5•g 33/50 33.0•g 24/50 
• c00259 46.9•g n.1.1 • 1/10 16.5•g 6/50 33.0•g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2723 c00259 29.3•g 298.•g 2/55p 16.5•g 7/50 33.0•g 9/50 thy:fca,fcc. 
• c00259 39.4•g n.1.1 • 1/55p 16.5•g 6/50 33.0•g 4/50 s 
TRENHION 68·76·8 
2724 1017 10.6ug n.a.a. 0/65 2.14ug 1/45 SchHhl ;arzn,20, 1461·1467; 1970 
• 1017 2.29ug 48.2ug 7/65 2.14ug 15/45 
b 1017 2.91ug .117•g 4/65 2.14ug 11/45 
1017 6.37ug n.a.a. 3/65 2.14ug 4/45 266 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Thilpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR Au Op 
1,2,3· TRICHLOR0·4 ,6· DINITROBENZENE 
2725 f b6a orl lun ado 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2726 11 b6a orl lun ada 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2727 f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl lun ada 76w76 avx 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 avx 
2728 11 b6c or l l i y hpt 76w76 avx 
a 11 b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 avx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2, 4 ,6· TRI CHLOROANIL !NE 
2729 M f chi eat l iv •ix 68w77 
a M chi eat lun •ix 68w77 
b M chi eat tba •ix 68w77 
2730 M • chi eat vsc 68w77 a 
a M • chi eat lun •ix 68w77 
b M • chi eat l iv 11ix 68w77 
c M • chi eat tba •ix 68w77 
2731 M • chi eat vac 68w77 a 
a M • chi eat l iv hpt 68w77 a 
2732 R • cdr eat l iv 11ix 18•27 v 
a R • cdr eat tba •ix 181127 v 
1, 1, 1-TRICHLOROETHANE* 
2733 M f b6c gay TBA MXB 78w90 SY 
a M f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 SY 
b M b6c gay lun MXB 78w90 SY 
2734 M • b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 av 
• M • b6c gay l iv MXB 78w90 SY 
b M II b6c gay l un MXB 78w90 SY 
2735 R f 0111 gay TBA MXB 181126 a 
a R 
f OH gay l iv MXB 181126 a 
2736 R 11 OH gay TBA MXB 18•25 s 
8 R II OSll gay l iv MXB 181125 • 
1, 1, 2· TRICHLOROETHANE 
2737 f b6c gay MXB MXB 78w90 y 
a b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
b b6c gav adr pha 78w90 v 
b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 Y 
d b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
a b6c gav l un MXB 78w90 v 
2738 II b6c gay MXB MXB 78w90 y 
a 11 b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 v 
b 11 b6c gav adr pha 78w90 v 
• b6c gav TBA MXB 78w90 Y 
d • b6c gav l iv MXB 78w90 v 
a • b6c gav lun MXB 78w90 v 
2739 OH gay TBA MXB 18•26 Y 
a OSll gay l iv MXB 18•26 y 
2740 11 oa11 gav TBA MXB 18•26 Y 
a II OH gay l iv MXB 18•26 y 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 
2741 f syg inh tba 11al 18•30 a 
a ayg inh tba ban 18•30 a 
2742 • syg inh tba •al 18•30 a 
a 11 syg inh tba ban 18•30 a 
2743 f b6c gav l iv hpc 78w90 sv 
a f b6c gay TBA MXB 781190 SY 
b f b6c gay l i y MXB 781190 SY 
f b6c gay lun MXB 781190 SY 
2744 • b6c gav l iv hpc 781190 sv 
a • b6c gav TBA MXB 781190 av 
b • b6c gay l i y MXB 781190 SY 
c 11 b6c gav lun MXB 781190 sv 
2745 f hi c gav for tu• 881188 r 
2746 M hi c gav for tu• 881188 r 
2747 f n11h inh 11ly 181130 a 
a n11h inh tba Hl 18•30 a 
b n11h inh tba ban 18•30 a 
2748 • n11h inh •LY 181130 a 
a • n11h inh tba Hl 181130 a 
b • n11h inh tba ban 18•30 a 
2749 OH gay TBA MXB 18•26 dsv •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••. : .• 10 •..•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 108.11g P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.09 
P<.09 
P-1. 
P-1. 
.> 
. > no dre 
52.611g 
49.011g 
no dre 
no dr.a 
no dra P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dra P-1 • 
no dra P-1. 
19.8Mg P<.4 
100ng •• :. -lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •..• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
+ 
pool + 
:> _. 927 .Mg * P<.02 
1.37g11 * P<.02 
914.Mg * P<.06 
273. Mg * P<. 0005+ 
385.11g * P<.0005-
452 .11g * P<. 004 
206.11g * P<.0005 
259.Mg * P<.0005+ 
560.11g * P<.0005+ 
no dre P• 1. 
45.911g \ P<.01 
100ng •• : •• lug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ••.• : •• 111g ••.• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:> :>no dre P• 1. 
no dre 
260.gll • 
30.5g11 • 
39. 7g11 I 
5080.gM 
226.llg • P-1. 
P<.9 
P<.8 
P<.8 
P<1. 
P<.0005 
no dre P-1. 
950.11g \ P<.009 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1Mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •..• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
:+ : 47 .611g * P<.0005 
47 .611g * P<.0005c 
248.11g I P<.0005c 
52.911g * P<.0005 
47.611g * P<.0005 
787.11g * P<.2 
65. 0Mg I P<. 0005 
65. 011g I P<. 0005c 
588.11g P<.007 c 
79. 511g * P<. 006 
65.0•g P<.0005 
1.56g11 * P<.8 
:> no dre P•1. 
771.11g * P<. 7 
:> no dre P• 1. 
no dra P•1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1Mg •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
.> 
:> .> 9.22g11 * P<.8 
.> 
: + no dre P-1. 
no dra P-1. 
5.64g11 * P<.4 
: 1.93g11 * P<.004 c 
1.85g11 * P<.2 
1. 93gM * P<. 004 
4.35g11 * P<.2 
421.Mg * P<.0005c 
553.11g * P<.01 
421.11g * P<.0005 
7 .16gM * P<. 7 
41.311g P<.3 
16.9•g P<.1 
846.•g * P<.03 
573.11g * P<.03 
no dra P•1. 
.> no dre P· 1 . 
no dra P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
a OH gay l i y MXB 18•26 dsv 5.62g11 * P<.9 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 267 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Jnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
1, 2, 3· TRI CHLOR0-4,6-D INITROBENZENE <Vandde PB> 6379-49·0 
2725 1262 17.6•g n.1.1. 0/18 16.9•g 1/18 lnnes;nti s, 1968/1969 
• 1262 33.511g n.1.1. 0/18 16.9•g 0/18 
b 1262 12.9•g n.a.1. 0/18 16.9•g Z/18 
2726 1262 12.0•g n.a.1. 0/18 15.8•g Z/18 
• 1262 31.2•g n.1.1. 1/18 15.8•g 0/18 
b 1262 14.7•g n.1.1. 2/18 15.8•g 2/18 
2727 1262 33.5•g n.1.1. 0/18 16.9•g 0/18 
• 1262 33.5•g n.1.1. 1/18 16.911g 0/18 
b 1262 22.2•g n.1.1. Z/18 16.9•g 1/18 
2728 1262 18.5•g n.1.1. 3/14 15.8•g 1/15 
• 1262 26.0•g n.1.1. 0/14 15.8•g 0/15 
b 1262 4-75•g n.1.1. 4/14 15.8•g 7/15 
2 ,4,6-TRICHLOROANI LINE 634-93-5 
2729 381 369.•g n.1.1. 0/13 780.•g 5/21 1. 56g• 1/14 Weisburger; jept,2,325 -356; 1978/pers. co .... /Russf ield 1973 
• 381 490.•g n.1.1. 3/13 780.•g 3/21 1.56g• Z/14 
b 381 333.•g n.1.1. 9/13 780.•g 7 /21 1.56g• 4/14 
2730 381 140.•g 725.•g 2/16 720.llg 8/18 1.44g• 12/16 
• 381 166-•g 1.45g• 2/16 720.•g 6/18 1.44g• 3/16 
b 381 178-•g 3.14g• 2/16 720.•g 5/18 1.44g• 1/16 
c 381 104.•g 590.•g 9/16 720.•g 12/18 1.44g• 12/16 
2731 381 137 •• g 537 •• g 5/99p 720.•g 8/18 1.44g• 12/16 
• 381 202. 11g 2. 72g• 7/99p 720.•g 5/18 1.44g• 1/16 
2732 381 462.•g n.1.1. 1/17 57. 5•g 0/18 102.•g 0/16 
381 18.7•g 3.80g• 13/17 57. 5•g 13/18 (102.•g 10/16) 
1, 1, 1-TRICHLOROETHANE* 71-55-6 
2733 c04626 6.79g• n.1.1. 7/20 1.72g• 2/50 3.44g• 3/50 
• c04626 13.6g• n.1.1. 1/20 1.72g• 0/50 3.44g• 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
b c04626 7.97g• n.1.1. 1/20 1.72g• 0/50 3.44g• 1/50 lun: a/a,a/c. 
2734 c04626 3.09g• n.1.1. 5/20 1.74g• 2/50 3.48g• 6/50 
c04626 4.18g• n.1.1. 3/20 1.74g• 0/50 3.48g• 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04626 5.52g• n.1.1. 1/20 1.74g• 1/50 3.48g• 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2735 c04626 81.4•g 685.•g 10/20 380.llg 6/50 760.•g 9/50 
• c04626 n.a.1. n.a.1 . 1/20 380.•g 0/50 760.•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2736 c04626 334.•g 22.2g• 7/20 380.•g 6/50 (760.•g 4/50) 
c04626 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 380.•g 0/50 760.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
1, 1,2-TR I CHLOROETHANE 79-00-5 
2737 c04579 33.3•g 70.8•g 0120 119.•g 16/50 239.•g 40/50 adr:phe; liv:hpc. C 
• c04579 33.3•g 70.8•g 0/20 119.•g 16/50 239.•g 40/50 
b c04579 127.•g 611.•g 0/20 119.•g 0/50 239.•g 12/50 
c c04579 33.9•g 106.•g 5/20 119.•g 20/50 239.•g 41/50 
d c04579 33.3•g 70.8•g 0/20 119.•g 16/50 239.11g 40/50 l iv: hpa, hpc ,nnd. 
• c04579 287.•g n.1.1. 0/20 119.•g 3/50 239.•g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2738 c04579 42.2•g 146.•g Z/20 121.•g 18/50 239.•g 37/50 adr:phe; l iv:hpc. 
• c04579 42.2•g 146.•g 2/20 121.•g 18/50 239.•g 37/50 
b c04579 263.•g 6.05g• 0120 121.•g 0/50 239.llg 8/50 
c c04579 42.3•g 872.llg 6/20 121.•g 28/50 239.llg 38/50 
d c04579 42.2•g 146.•g Z/20 121.•g 18/50 239.•g 37/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
• c04579 338.•g n.1.1 . 0/20 121.•g 3/50 239.•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2739 c04579 31.0•g n.1.1. 4/20 23.0•g 34/50 45. 511g 22/50 
• c04579 182.•g n.1.1. 0120 23.0•g 1/50 45. 5•g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2740 c04579 11.8•g n.1.1. 6/20 23.0•g 21/50 <45.911g 11/50) 
c04579 436.•g n.1.1. 1/20 23.0•g 0/50 45.9•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
TR I CHLOROETHYLENE 79-01-6 
2741 1010 821.•g n.1.1. 2/30 46.1•g 3/29 230.•g 3/30 Hansch I er ;artx,43,237 -248; 1980 
• 1010 2.14g• n.1.1. 1/30 46.1•g 1/29 230.•g 0/30 
2742 1010 863.•g n. 1.1. 6/30 40.511g 2/30 203.•g 4/30 
• 1010 999.•g n.1.1. 1/30 40.5•g 0/30 203.•g Z/30 
2743 c04546 1.06g• 9.81g• 0/20 538.•g 4/50 1.08g• 11/50 
• c04546 716.•g n.1. 1. 4/20 538.•g 14/50 1.08g• 19/50 
b c04546 1.06g• 9.81g• 0/20 538.•g 4/50 1.08g11 11/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
c c04546 1.55g• n.1.1. 1/20 538.•g 4/50 1.08g11 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2744 c04546 277. •g 1 • 13g• 1/20 724.•g 26/50 1.45g• 30/50 
• c04546 288.•g 28.9g11 5/20 724.llg 30/50 1.45g11 33/50 
b c04546 277 •• g 1. 13g• 1/20 724.•g 26/50 1.45g• 30/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c04546 1.79g• n.1.1. 0120 724.•g 5/50 1.45g• Z/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2745 1011 6.73•g n.1.1. 0/30 2.86•g 1/30 Van Duuren; j nc; ,63, 1433-1439; 1979 
2746 1011 4.16•g n.1.1. 0/30 2.38•g 2/30 
2747 1010 339.•g n.1.1. 9/29 102.•g 17/30 509.•g 18/28 Hens ch I er; artx, 43, 237 · 248; 1980 
• 1010 230.•g n.1.1. 13/29 102.•g 22/30 509.•g 22/28 
b 1010 2.03g• n.1.1. 6/29 102.•g 1/30 509.•g 4/28 
2748 1010 1.33g• n.1.1. 7/30 84.8•g 7129 424.•g 6/30 
• 1010 1.12g• n.1.1. 11/30 84.8•g 10/29 424.•g 9/30 
b 1010 2.37g• n.1.1. 8/30 84.8•g 6/29 424.•g 3/30 
2749 c04546 302.•g n.1.1. 7/20 242.•g 12/50 484.•g 12/50 
• c04546 n.1.1. n.1.1 • 0/20 242.•g 0/50 484.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 268 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
2750 • OH gav TBA MXB 181126 dav 
a R • 0111 gav l iv MXB 181126 dav 
2751 wsh inh tba 11al 18•36 e 
a wah i nh tba ben 181136 e 
2752 11 wah inh tba 11al 18•36 e 
11 wah i nh tba ben 181136 e GOLD ET AL. 
• > TD50 2Tail pv I 
DR AuOp 
16.0g11 * P<1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1 • 
2.12g11 * P<.4 
351.mg * P<.03 
no dre P-1. 
TR I CHLOROFLUOROMETHANE* 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1U· •••• : •• 10 
2753 M f b6c gav TBA MXB 78w91 av 
a M f b6c gav l iv MXB 78w91 av 
b M f b6c gav lun MXB 78w91 av 
2754 M " b6c gav TBA MXB 78w91 IV 
a M 11 b6c gav l iv MXB 78w91 av 
b M 11 b6c gav lun MXB 78w91 av 
2755 R f OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 av 
a f 0111 gav l iv MXB 18•26 av 
2756 " OH gav TBA MXB 18•26 av 
a • 0011 gav l iv MXB 181126 IV 
N ·CTR I CHLOROMETHYL TH IO)PHTHALIMI DE 
2757 f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2758 11 b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
a • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2759 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b b6c or l tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2760 11 b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c or l tba 11ix 76w76 evx :> :> 11.5g11 * P<.6 
no dre P•1. 
111.gll * P<.8 
:> 5.81g11 * P<.6 
15.0g11 * P<.8 
no dre P•1. 
± 326.11g * P<.09 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1 • 
• • : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
. > 
• > 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
8.23g11 
no dre 
no dre p.1 • 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<1 • 
p.1. 
p.1. 
no dre P·1. 
no dre p.1. 
260.11g P<.2 
156.11g P<.05 
242.•g P<.2 
87. 711g P<. 009 -
2,4 ,6· TR I CHLOROPHENOL 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : .• 111g •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g. • · • ·: • -10 
2761 f b6c eat l iv MXA 241124 v 
• b6c eat TBA MXB 24•24 v 
b b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 v 
b6c eat l un MXB 241124 v 
2762 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2763 II b6c eat l iv MXA 241124 
" b6c eat TBA MXB 241124 
b 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 241124 
c 11 b6c eat l un MXB 241124 
2764 11 b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6c orl l un ade 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6c orl tba 11 ix 76w76 evx 
2765 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2766 11 b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b 11 b6a or l tba 11 ix 76w76 evx 
2767 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 251125 a 
a R f f34 eat l iv MXB 251125 a 
2768 R 11 f34 eat 11le 251125 
a R II f34 eat MXA 25•25 
b 11 f34 eat MXB 25•25 
c 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 25•25 
d 11 f34 eat l iv MXB 25•25 
2· (2, 4, 5 • TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONI C 
2769 f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
b f b6a orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2770 • b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a orl tba "ix 76w76 evx 
2771 
• 
b 
2772 
b f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
f b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx 
f b6c or l tba •ix 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
11 b6c or l l un ade 76w76 evx 
• b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx : + 1.41g11 * P<.0005c 
1.51g11 * P<.05 
1.41g11 * P<.0005 
114.gll * P<1. 
.> 113.0lg P<.2 
113.•g P<.2 
27. O•g P<. 002 
+ 856.•g * P<.01 
10.7g• * P<.9 
856.11g * P<.01 
no dre P•1. 
± 68.011g P<.05 
105.11g P<.2 
17. 911g P<. 0005 
.> 220.llg P<.3 
no dre P· 1. 
no dre P· 1. 
.> 1.68gOI P<1. 
3.58gOI P<1. 
1.05g11 P<1. 
:> no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
:405.11g * P<.008 c 
445.11g * P<.02 
445.11g * P<.02 
1.43g• * P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
ACID.: •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100. • •• : •• 1g. • • • ·: • ·10 
.> 
. > 
.> 
+ no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
52.611g 
16.611g 
95. 2•g 
9.07•g P• 1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
p.1 • 
P·1. 
p.1. 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.2 
P<.007 -
P<.3 
P<.0005-
2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXYACETJC ACID 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• :. -10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. -1U· •••• :. -10 
2773 M f b6a orl I iv hpt 76w76 evx .> no dre P• 1. 
1 M f b61 orl lun ade 76w76 evx no dre P•1. 
b M f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre P• 1 • CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 269 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose linc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2750 c04546 305.•g n.a.a. 5/20 242.•g 7 /50 484.•g 5/50 
a c04546 n.1.1. n.a.a. 0/20 242.•g 0/50 484.otg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2751 1010 277.•g n.1.a. 16/28 20.111g 12130 101 ... g 14/30 Henschler ;artx,43,237·248; 1980 
a 1010 448.•g n.1 .. a. 2128 20. 1otg 2130 101.•g 4/30 
2752 1010 141.llg n.1.1. 4/29 14. 1otg 5/30 70.411g 11/30 
1010 385.•g n.1.1. 7/29 14.111g 2/30 70.411g 5/30 
TR I CHLOROFLUOROMETHANE* 75-69·4 
2753 c04637 2.49g11 n.a.a. 3/20 1.20g11 11/50 2.40g• 9/50 
• c04637 5.59g11 n.a.a. 1/20 1.20gll 4/50 2.40g11 2150 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c04637 9.23g11 n.a.1. 1/20 1.20got 0/50 2.40g• 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2754 c04637 1.14g11 n.a.1. 7/20 1.20g• 22/50 2.40g• 16/49 
a c04637 1.54g11 n.a.1. 5/20 1.20g• 15/50 2.40g• 10/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c04637 10.3g11 n.1.a. 2/20 1.20g11 0/50 2.40g• 1/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2755 c04637 91.011g n.1.a. 7/20 270.llg 4/50 540.•g 7/50 
a c04637 n.1.1. n.1.a. 0/20 270.•g 0/50 540.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2756 c04637 117.llg n.1.a. 5/20 257.llg 4/50 490.•g 1/50 
a c04637 n.1.1. n.1.a. 0/20 257.llg 0/50 490.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
N· <TRICHLOROMETHYL THIOlPHTHALIMIDE <fol pet> 133-07·3 
2757 1239 138.•g n.1.1. 0/17 83.811g 0115 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1239 138.•g n.1.a. 1/17 83.8•g 0/15 
b 1239 89.8•g n.1.1. 2/17 83.8•g 1/15 
2758 1239 86.4•g n.1.1. 1/18 78.0•g 1/17 
• 1239 95.9•g n.1.1. 2118 78.011g 1/17 
b 1239 75. 111g n.1.1. 3/18 78.0•g 2117 
2759 1239 166.llg n.1.1. 0/16 83.811g 0/18 
• 1239 166.•g n.a.a. 0/16 83.811g 0/18 
b 1239 63.9•g n.a.a. 0/16 83.8•g 2/18 
2760 1239 47.2•g n.1.1. 0/16 78.0•g 3/18 
• 1239 59.5•g n.a.1. 0/16 78.011g 2118 
b 1239 33.111g 1.92g• 0/16 78.0•g 5/18 
2, 4 ,6· TRICHLOROPHENOL (Dowicide-25) 88-06·2 
2761 c02904 874.•g 4.56g11 1/20 678.•g 12150 1.36got 24/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
a c02904 686.11g n.a. 1. 6/20 678.llg 30/50 1.36gm 33/50 
b c02904 874.•g 4.56g11 1/20 678.•g 12/50 1.36g11 24/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02904 4.39g• n.a.a. 1/20 678.llg 4/50 1.36g11 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2762 292 27 .8•g n.a.a. 0/16 36.411g 2118 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 292 27 .811g n.a.a. 0/16 36.411g 2/18 
b 292 11.511g 110.llg 0/16 36.411g 7/18 
2763 c02904 457.•g 66.3g11 4/20 600.mg 32/50 1 .20g• 39/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c02904 708.•g n.1.1. 14/20 600.mg 42/50 1 .20g11 42/50 
b c02904 457.llg 66.3g• 4/20 600.•g 32/50 1.20gm 39/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02904 2.89g11 n.a.a. 3/20 600.•g 13/50 1.20g• 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2764 292 20.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 33.9•g 3/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/1969 
292 25.911g n.a.a. 0/16 33.9•g 2/18 
b 292 8.25•g 51.6•g 0/16 33.911g 9/18 
2765 292 35.811g n.1.1. 0/17 36.411g 1/17 
• 292 68.111g n.1.1. 1/17 36.411g 0/17 
b 292 32.011g n.1.1. 2117 36.4•g 2/17 
2766 292 29.511g n.1.1. 2118 33.911g 2/17 
• 292 37 .6•g n.1.1. 1/18 33.911g 1/17 
b 292 24.711g n.1.1. 3/18 33.911g 3/17 
2767 c02904 301.llg n.1.1. 16/20 250.l!g 32/50 (500.•g 27 /50) 
a c02904 n.1.1. n.a.1. 0/20 250.•g 0/50 500.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2768 c02904 222.11g 8.89g11 3/20 200.llg 23/50 400.llg 28/50 
• c02904 227.llg n.1.1. 4/20 200.llg 25/50 400.llg 29/50 --·:Leu, LY"'· 
b c02904 227.llg n.1.1. 4/20 200.•g 25/50 400.llg 29/50 ---: Leu, ly•,11le. 
c c02904 229.11g n.a.a. 16/20 200.11g 40/50 400.llg 41/50 
d c02904 3.93g11 n.a.s. 1/20 200.l!g 1/50 400.11g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2 · (2 ,4 ,5· TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONI C ACID 93.72.1 
2769 1234 29.811g n.1.a. 0/17 16.911g 0/16 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
• 1234 29.811g n.a.a. 1/17 16.911g 0/16 
b 1234 19.6•g n.1.1. 2/17 16.911g 1/16 
2770 1234 20.711g n.1.1. 2/18 15.8•g 1/18 
• 1234 31.211g n.1.1. 1/18 15.8•g 0/18 
b 1234 22. 111g n.1.1. 3/18 15.8•g 1/18 
2771 1234 33.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 16.911g 0/18 
• 1234 33.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 16.9•g 0/18 
b 1234 12.911g n.1.1. 0/16 16.911g 2/18 
2772 1234 6.2411g 224.llg 0/16 15.811g 5/17 
1234 15.511g n.1.1. 0/16 15.811g 1/17 
b 1234 4.0311g 28.911g 0/16 15.8•g 8/17 
2 ,4, 5 ·TR I CHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4,5·Tl 93-76·5 
2773 1233 16.5•g n.1.a. 0/17 8.3411g 0/18 lnnes;nt is, 1968/ 1969 
• 1233 16.511g n.a.a. 1/17 8.3411g 0/18 
b 1233 7.87•g n.1.a. 2/17 8.3411g 2118 270 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2774 M • b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M • b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2775 M f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2776 M • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M • b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 
2777 R f 1da eat thy cca 24•24 e 
a 1da eat l iv hnd 24•24 e 
b R 1da eat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
2778 R 11 sda eat l iv hpc 24•24 e 
R 11 1da eat tba •ix 24•24 e 
TR IETHANOLAMINE 
2779 M f icr eat •ix 25•25 e 
a M icr eat l iv tu• 25•25 e 
b M icr eat lun ade 25•25 e 
M icr eat tba 11ix 25•25 e 
d M f icr eat tba Hl 251125 e 
2780 M • i er eat l iv tu• 26•27 e 
a M • icr eat lun •ix 26•27 e 
b M • icr eat tba Hl 26•27 e 
M • icr eat tba 11ix 26•27 e 
TR !ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
2781 R • OH eat ubl tu• 24•24 r • > 
.> 
.> 
.> no dre P•1 • 
no dre P•1. 
no dre 
53.411g 
no dre 
53.4•g 
11.311g p.1. 
P<.3 
p.1. 
P<.3 
P<.02 -
49.7•g P<.3 
7.0011g P<.004 -
488.11g Z P<. 5 
no dre P•1. 
10.6•g * P<.2 
no dre P•L 
no dre p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1•g ••.• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •..•• :. -10 
• > "' 1.29g• * P<.04 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P•1. 
88.8•g \ P<.002 
100.•g \ P<.003 + 
no dre P• 1 . 
no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre p.1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••. : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ••.• : •• 111g ••.. : •• 10 •.•.• : •• 100 •••. : •. 1g ••.•. : .• 10 
• > no dre P•1 • 
2,2,2· TRIFLUORO-N- j 4-C5·NITR0-2-FURYL) ·2· THIAZOL YL J ACETAMIDE.:. -100 ..•. :. ·1•g .•.• : •• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 •.•• : •• 1g ••.•• : .. 10 
2782 M f swi eat for 11ix 46w55 e + 9.98•g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
p.1. a M 1wi eat for 1qc 46w55 • 38.611g 
b M 1wi eat for 1qp 46w55 e 43.511g 
M awi eat l iv tu• 46w55 e no dre 
d M awi eat lun tu• 46w55 • no dre p.1. 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P•1. 
P<.0005 e M awi eat tba 11ix 46w55 e 8.01•g 
2783 1da eat •gl 11ix 46w66 e 6.79•g 
a 
b ada eat •gl adc 46w66 e 7 .27•g 
sda eat l iv tu• 46w66 • 
1da eat tba 11 ix 46w66 • 
TRIFLURALIN 100ng •• : •• 1ug .••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .•.• : •• 111g. • .. :. -10 •.... :. -100. • • ·: • .1g. • • • ·: • -10 
2784 M f b6c eat l iv MXA 78w90 dv : + : 330. •g • P<. 0005c 
a M f b6c eat l iv hpc 78w90 dv 368.•g • P<.0005c 
b M b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 dv 263 .•g * P<. 0005 
c b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 dv 330.11g • P<.0005 
d b6c eat lun MXB 78w90 dv 1.36g• • P<.08 
2785 b6c eat l iv MXA 78w90 dv pool 330.•g • P<.0005c 
a b6c eat l iv hpc 78w90 dv 368.•g • P<.0005c 
b b6c eat l un MXA 78w90 dv 1 . 36g• • P<. 003 c 
c b6c eat lun a/a 78w90 dv 1.52g• * P<.003 c 
d b6c eat 1 to 1qc 78w90 dv 3. 09g• • P<. 05 c 
2786 11 b6c eat TBA MXB 78w90 dv :> 1 . 50g• * P<. 8 
a 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w90 dv 1.50g• • P<.8 
b 11 b6c eat lun MXB 78w90 dv 5.44g• • P<.4 
2787 f OH eat thy MXA 18•26 dv ... #663.•g \ P<.03 
a f 0111 eat TBA MXB 18•26 dv 2. 64g• \ P<1. 
b f OH eat l iv MXB 18•26 dv no dre P• 1. 
2788 II OH eat TBA MXB 18•26 dv :> no dre p.1 • 
• OH eat l iv MXB 18•26 dv 
2, 4, 5-TRIMETHYLANIL !NE 
2789 M f b6c eat l iv hpc 23•23 
a M b6c eat TBA MXB 23•23 
b M b6c eat l iv MXB 23•23 
M b6c eat l un MXB 23•23 
2790 " II b6c eat TBA MXB 23•23 
" II b6c eat l iv MXB 231123 
b M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 23•23 
2791 f f34 eat MXB MXB 23•23 
a f34 eat l iv MXA 23•23 
b f34 eat lun MXA 231123 
c R f34 eat l iv hpc 23•23 
d R f34 eat TBA MXB 231123 
e f34 eat l iv MXB 23•23 
2792 R • f34 eat l iv MXA 23•23 
a R 11 f34 eat l iv hpc 23•23 
b R 11 f34 eat lun MXA 231123 
11 f34 eat l iv bdc 23•23 
d II f34 eat TBA MXB 23•23 
e • f34 eat l iv MXB 23•23 no dre P•1. 
100ng •. : .• 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••.•. :. -100 •••. : .• 111g •.•. : •• 10 .•.•. :. -100 •.•• : •• 1g .••.• :. -10 
:+ : 6.1311g * P<.0005c 
22.4•g * P<.4 
6.13•g * P<.0005 
47.6•g * P<.09 
52.5•g * P<.7 
14.4•g * P<.08 
+ 
+ no dre P•1. 
20.4•g * P<.0005 
27. 2•g • P<. 0005c 
88.111g * P<.003 c 
142.11g * P<.002 c 
396.11g * P<.9 
27. 211g * P<. 0005 
43.8•g * P<.002 c 
71.811g * P<.004 c 
180.11g * P<.05 
268.11g * P<.03 
138.•g • P<. 7 
43.S.g * P<.002 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 271 
RefNum LoConf U pConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
2774 1233 9.17•g n.1.1. 1/18 7. 76•g 1/18 
• 1233 15.4•g n.1.1. 2/18 7. 76•g 0/18 
b 1233 6.10•g n.1.1. 3/18 7. 76•g 3/18 
2775 1233 8.69•g n.1.1. 0/16 8.34•g 1/18 
• 1233 16.5•g n.1.1. 0/16 8.34•g 0/18 
b 1233 8.69•g n.1.1. 0/16 8.34•g 1/18 
2776 1233 3.89•g n.1.1. 0/16 7. 76•g 4/18 
• 1233 8.09•g n.1.1. 0/16 7. 76•g 1/18 
b 1233 2.83•g 42.8•g 0/16 7. 76•g 6/18 
2777 1353 87 .9•g n.1.1. 3/86 3.00•g 10/50 10.0•g 2/50 30.0•g 6/50 Koc ;ba; f ctx, 17 ,205·221;1979 
• 1353 208.•g n.1.1. 4/86 3.00•g 2/50 10.0•g 3/50 30.0•g 1/50 
b 1353 2.34•g n.1.1. 83/86 3.00•g 48/50 10.0•g 48/50 30.0•g 50/50 
2778 1353 279.•g n.1.1. 3/86 3.00•g 1/50 10.0•g 0/50 30.0•g 1/50 
• 1353 17.5•g n.1.1. 76/86 3.00•g 44/50 10.0•g 40/50 30.0•g 44/50 
TRIEYHANOLAMINE 102-71·6 
2779 550 471.•g n.1.1. 1/36 39.0•g 7/37 390.•g 9/36 Ho1h ino;canr, 38, 3918-3921; 1978 
• 550 291.•g n.1.1. 0/36 39.0•g 0/37 390.•g 0/36 
b 550 2.52g• n.1.1. 0/36 39.0•g 1/37 390.•g 0/36 
550 42.2•g 371.•g 1/36 39.0•g 11/37 (390.•g 13/36) 
d 550 46.1•g 559.•g 1/36 39.0•g 10/37 (390.•g 13/36) 
2780 550 277 .•g n.1.1. 0/35 36.0•g 0/33 360.•g 0/28 
• 550 2.38g• n.1.1. 1/35 36.0•g 2/33 360.•g 0/28 
b 550 1.53g• n.1.1. 1/35 36.0•g 3/33 360.•g 1/28 
550 1.70g• n.1.1. 2/35 36.0•g 4/33 360.•g 1/28 
TR I ETHYLENE GLYCOL 112-27·6 
2781 105 565 .•g n.1.1. 0/12 400.•g 0/12 800.•g 0/12 1.60g• 0/12 Fitzhugh; j i ht ,28,40-43; 1946 
2,2,2· TRIFLUORO·N· 14· (5·NITR0 ·2· FURYL) ·2· THIAZOL YL IACETAMIDE 42011-48·3 
2782 1076 4.97•g 20.2•g 0/29 132.•g 23/25 Cohen;canr ,33, 1593· 1597; 1973 
• 1076 19.5•g 91.1•g 0/29 132.•g 12/25 
b 1076 21. 5•g 107 •• g 0/29 132.•g 11/25 
c 1076 190.•g n.1.1. 0/29 132.•g 0/25 
d 1076 190.•g n.1.1. 0/29 132.•g 0/25 
• 1076 3.39•g 17. 7•g 2/29 132.•g 24/25 
2783 1126 3.55•g 20.5•g 2/24 17.4•g 17/31 Cohen; j nc i, 54,841·850;1975 
• 1126 3.93•g 15.5•g 0/24 17.4•g 15/31 
b 1126 44.Bllg n.1.1. 0/24 17.4•g 0/31 
1126 3.01•g 14.2•g 2/24 17 .4•g 19/31 
TRIFLURALIN 1582·09·8 
2784 c00442 220.•g 577 •• g 0/20 309.•g 15/50 585.•g 21/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c00442 242.•g 648.•g 0/20 309.•g 12/50 585.•g 21/50 
b c00442 170.•g 639.•g 2/20 309.•g 24/50 585.•g 26/50 
c c00442 220.•g 577 •• g 0/20 309.•g 15/50 585.•g 21/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
d c00442 664.•g n.1.1. 0/20 309.•g 7/50 585.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2785 c00442 220.•g 526.•g 0/60p 309.•g 15/50 585.•g 21/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
• c00442 242.•g 600.•g 0/60p 309.•g 12/50 585.•g 21/50 
b c00442 664.•g 5. 71g• 0/60p 309.•g 7/50 585.•g 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c c00442 718.•g 7.46g• 0/60p 309.•g 6/50 585.•g 3/50 
d c00442 1.17g• n.1.1. 0/60p 309.•g 4/50 585.•g 1/50 
2786 c00442 170.•g n.1.1. 9/20 208.•g 20/50 389.•g 17/50 
• c00442 195.•g n.1.1. 4/20 208.•g 14/50 389.•g 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00442 886.•g n.1.1. 0/20 208.•g 0/50 389.•g 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2787 c00442 255.•g n.1.1. 1/50 145.•g 7/50 <278.•g 0/50) thy:fca,fcc. 
• c00442 118.•g n.1.1. 36/50 145.•g 39/50 (278.•g 22/50) 
b c00442 3.39g• n.1.1. 1/50 145.•g 0/50 278.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2788 c00442 410.•g n.1.1. 28/50 116.•g 22/50 225.•g 22/50 
c00442 n.a.1. n.1.a. 0/50 116.•g 0/50 225.•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2,4,5· TRIMETHYLANILINE 137·17·7 
2789 c02299 4.44•g 9.97•g 0/20 6.50•g 18/50 13.0•g 40/50 • c02299 5.84•g n.1.1. 12/20 6.50•g 41/50 13.0•g 45/50 
b c02299 4.44•g 9.97•g 0/20 6.50•g 18/50 13.0•g 40/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c c02299 23.9•g n.1.1. 0/20 6.50•g 5/50 13.0•g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2790 c02299 7 .35•g n.1.1. 12/20 6.00•g 34/50 12.0•g 32/50 
• c02299 6.14•g n.1.1. 5/20 6.00•g 26/50 12.0•g 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02299 13.1•g n.1.1. 4/20 6.00•g 9/50 (12.0•g 1/50) lun:a/a,a/c. 
2791 c02299 13.S.g 54.5•g 0/20 10.0•g 14/50 40.0•g 33/50 l iv:hpc,nnd; lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c02299 17 .3•g 88.2•g 0/20 10.0•g 12/50 40.0•g 27/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
b c02299 47.4•g 545.•g 0/20 10.0•g 3/50 40.0•g 11/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c c02299 67 .O•g 388.•g 0/20 10.0•g 0/50 40.0•g 9/50 
d c02299 23.S.g n.1.1. 17/20 10.0•g 39/50 40.0•g 45/50 
• c02299 17 .3•g 88.2•g 0/20 10.0•g 12/50 40.0•g 27/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2792 c02299 23.9•g 205.•g 1/20 8.00•g 6/50 32.0•g 20/50 l iv:hpc,nnd. 
• c02299 38. 7•g 497. •g 0/20 8.00•g 3/50 32.0•g 11/50 
b c02299 68.2•g n.1.1. 1/20 8.00•g 0/50 32.0•g 7/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
c c02299 92.5•g n.1.1. 0/20 8.00•g 0/50 32.0•g 4/50 
d c02299 19.2•g n.1.1. 17/20 8.00•g 33/50 32.0•g 45/50 
• c02299 23.9•g 205.•g 1/20 8.00•g 6/50 32.0•g 20/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 272 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2'failpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2,4, 5 • TRINETHYLANIL INE. HC l 
2793 f chi eat lun 11ix 77w98 
a f chi eat l iv 11ix 77w98 
b chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 
c chi eat tba 11ix 77w98 
2794 chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 
a chi eat lun 11ix 77w98 
2795 • chi eat l iv •ix 77w98 
a 
b 
c 
2796 
a 
b • chi eat lun •ix 77w98 
• chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 
11 chi eat tba 11ix 77w98 
11 chi eat l iv hpt 77w98 
• chi eat lun •ix 77w98 
II chi Ht vac 77w98 
2797 R • cdr eat l iv •ix 77w98 
a • cdr eat l iv hpt 77w98 
b R • cdr eat sub •ix 77w98 
R • cdr eat tba 11ix 77w98 
2,4, 6· TRINETHYLANIL INE. HC l 
2798 f chi eat l iv hpt 77w94 v 
a chi eat l iv •ix 77w94 v 
b chi eat lun •ix 77w94 v 
c chi eat tba •ix 77w94 v 
2799 chi eat l iv hpt 77w94 v 
2800 11 chi eat l iv •ix 77w94 v 
11 chi eat l iv hpt 77w94 v 
b • chi eat lun 11ix 77w94 v 
• chi eat tba •ix 77w94 v 
2801 • chi eat l iv hpt 77w94 v 
a 11 chi eat vac 77w94 v 
2802 11 cdr eat lun •ix 73w77 
11 cdr eat l iv •ix 73w77 v 
b 11 cdr eat l iv hpt 73v77 v 
c • cdr eat tba 11ix 73w77 v 100ng •• : •• 1uu •••. : •• 10 ••••. :. -100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •.•• :. -1u-•••• : •• 10 
5Z.811g • P<.0005+ 
60.4•g I P<.0005 
6Z.9•g I P<.0005+ 
47.Z•g I P<.002 
pool + 6Z.311g I P<.0005+ 
64.711g • P<.0005+ 
35. 411g I P<. 0005 
40.011g • P<.0005+ 
46.Z11g P<.0005+ 
40.30lg P<.0005 
pool + 44.Z11g P<.0005+ 
63.011g • P<.0005+ 
260. 11g * P<. OZ 
'*' 47 .911g • P<.08 
98.511g • P<.Z + 
no dre P•1. 
37 .Z11g • P<.3 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 •••.• :. -100 ••.• :. -1U· •••• : •• 10 
34.611g 
34.611g 
Z3.911g • 
Z0.611g • 
pool + 34.611g I 
18.211g I 
19.30lg • 
38.Z11g • 
18.411g • 
pool + zz. 711g • 
120.llg • 
5.1711g • 
6. 1511g • P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.04 -
P<.02 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.05 
P<.009 
P<.0005+ 
P<.005 + 
P<.002 + 
P<.002 + 
2803 • cdr eat lun 11ix 73w77 v pool 6.1511g • P<.002 + 
Z. 1511g * P<.0005 
5. 27•g • P<. 0005+ 
6.ZZ•g • P<.0005+ 
ZZ.011g • P<.002 + a • cdr eat l iv hpt 73w77 v 
b 11 cdr eat ato 11ix 73w77 
TR I NETHYLPHOSPHATE 
2804 f b6c gav ut• acn 241124 
a b6c gav TBA NXB 241124 
b b6c gav l iv NXB 241124 
b6c gav lun NXB 241124 
280S • b6c gav TBA NXB 241124 
a • b6c gav l iv NXB 241124 
b • b6c gav l un NXB 241124 
2806 f f34 gav TBA NXB 241124 
a f f34 gav l iv NXB 241124 
2807 11 f34 gav aub fib 241124 
11 f34 gav TBA NXB 241124 
b • f34 gav l iv NXB 241124 
TRINETHYL THIOUREA 
2808 f b6c eat TBA NXB 77w91 
a f b6c eat l iv NXB 77w91 
b f b6c eat lun NXB 77w91 
2809 11 b6c eat TBA NXB 77w91 
a 11 b6c eat l iv NXB 77w91 
b • b6c eat lun NXB 77w91 
2810 f f34 eat thy NXA 181125 
a f f34 eat thy fee 181125 
b f f34 eat TBA NXB 181125 
c f f34 eat Liv NXB 181125 
2811 11 f34 eat TBA NXB 181125 
11 f34 eat l iv NXB 18•25 100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 •.••• : •• 100 •.•• :. -1u-•••• : •• 10 
:> 
:> 
+ + 335.11g • P<.002 c 
385.mg * P<.3 
6.39g• \ P<1. 
3.90g11 I P<.7 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
61 .3g11 • P<1. 
73.011g • P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
123.•g * P<.005 a 
54.5•g * P<.3 
485.0lg • P<.5 
100ng .• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•u •••• : •. 10 •.•.• : •• 100 •••• :. -1u-•••• : •• 10 
+ 
:> :> 1.97g11 • P<.8 
no dre P-1. 
1.Z6g11 • P<.3 
:> no dre P· 1. 
no dre P•1. 
478.11g • P<.3 
25. 811g I P<. 0005c 
45. 011g I P<. 0005c 
17.411g • P<.005 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
TRIPH NYL TIN ACETATE 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 .••.• : •. 100 •••• :. -1u-•••• : •• 10 
2812 f b6e orl lun ede 76w76 evx .> 964.11g 
a f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6e orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 437.11g 
2813 11 b6e orl Liv hpt 76w76 evx .> 241.•g 
a 11 b6e or l lun ade 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a or l tba 11 ix 76w76 evx 307. •g 
2814 b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx '*' 440.•g 
f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 909. 11g 
b f b6c orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 284.llg 
2815 11 b6c orl lun ade 76v76 evx ~ Z6Z.11g 
11 b6c orl l iv hpt 76v76 evx 407 .•g 
b 11 b6c orl tbe 11ix 76w76 evx 117.•g P<.6 
P-1. 
P<.5 
P<.Z 
P·1. 
P<.4 
P<. 1 
P<.3 
P<.04 
P<.04 
P<.1 
P<.003 -CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 273 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Patholog~ ' 
Brkly Code 
2, 4, 5 -TR I MET HYLAN I LINE. HC l 21436-97-5 
2793 381 24.811g 182.mg 6/20 106.llg 11/15 246.mg 12/22 Wei sburger; j ept, 2, 325-356; 1978/pers. comm. /Russf i eld 1973 
a 381 31.9.,g 123.mg 0/20 106.mg 6/15 246.mg 15/22 
b 381 32.611g 131-•g 0120 106.llg 6/15 246.mg 14/22 
381 21.211g 255.llg 17/20 106.llg 15/15 246.11g 19/22 
2794 381 32.1mg 134.mg 1/102p 106.mg 6/15 246.mg 14/22 
a 381 31.311g 184-llg 31/102p 106.mg 11/15 246 ... g 12/22 
2795 381 19.111g 83. 511g 3/18 98.2"1g 11 /14 227 .mg 19/21 
a 381 19.4mg 136.llg 5/18 98.211g 11/14 227.mg 10/21 
b 381 24.3"1g 115 ... g 3/18 98.211g 9/14 227 .mg 18/21 
c 381 19.311g 140-•g 12/18 98.211g 13/14 227 .Ilg 19/21 
2796 381 24.411g 91.2"1g 7/99p 98.211g 9/14 227.mg 18/21 
a 381 28.8 .. g 216.llg 23/99p 98.211g 11/14 227 .Ilg 10/21 
b 381 78.111g n.s.s. 5/99p 98.2"1g 3/14 227.mg 3/21 
2797 381 15.011g n.s.s. 1/22 31.3mg 5/17 68.611g 2/25 
381 23.5 .. g n.s.s. 1/22 31.311g 3/17 68.611g 2/25 
b 381 27 .311g n.s.1. 4/22 31.311g 7/17 68.611g 1/25 
381 9.2511g n.s .. s. 14/22 31.311g 15/17 68.611g 13/25 
2, 4 ,6· TR I MET HYLAN IL !NE. HC l 6334-11 -8 
2798 381 15.911g 107.llg 1/15 37.111g 1/12 78.011g 12/16 Wei sburger; j ept, 2, 325-356; 1978/pers. comm. /Russ field 1973 
381 15.911g 107.llg 1/15 37.111g 1/12 78.0mg 12/16 
b 381 7 .6311g n.a. a. 5/15 37.111g 7/12 78.011g 7/16 
381 7 .2711g n.a.a. 10/15 37.111g 10/12 78.011g 16/16 
2799 381 15.9 .. g 73.911g 1/102p 37.1 .. g 1/12 78.0mg 12/16 
2800 381 9.03•g 43.411g 1/14 34.311g 5/15 75.8mg 11/13 
a 381 9.3111g 51.411g 0/14 34.311g 5/15 75.8 .. g 9/13 
b 381 12.911g n.a.1. 3/14 34_3.,g 5/15 75.8mg 5/13 
c 381 7 .3411g 966 ... g 7/14 34.311g 11/15 75.8 .. g 12/13 
2801 381 10.511g 60.011g 7/99p 34.311g 5/15 75.8 .. g 9/13 
a 381 36. 511g 1.84gm 5/99p 34.311g 1/15 75.8mg 4/13 
2802 381 2.6411g 17.711g 0/16 5.9011g 5/20 11.811g 8/21 
381 3.0711g 21.111g 0/16 5.9011g 4/20 11.811g 8/21 
b 3111 3.0711g 21.111g 0/16 5.900lg 4/20 11.8 .. g 8/21 
c 381 1.21•g 6.3811g 10/16 5.9011g 13/20 11.811g 18/21 
2803 381 2.6511g 12.911g 1/111p 5.9011g 5/20 11.8mg 8/21 
a 381 3.06"1g 15.711g 2/111p 5.9011g 4/20 11.8 .. g 8/21 
b 381 6.5711g 159.llg 2/111p 5.9011g 0120 11.811g 3/21 
TR IMETHYLPHOSPHATE 512-56-1 
2804 c03781 197.mg 995.•g 0120 107.llg 7/50 214.mg 13/49 
a c03781 125.llg n.1.a. 11/20 107.llg 29/50 214.mg 30/49 
b c03781 258.llg n.1.a. 2/20 107.llg 4/50 C214."1g 0/49) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c c03781 599.llg n.1.1. 3/20 107.llg 0/50 214."1g 6/49 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
2805 c03781 227.llg n.1.a. 11/20 107.llg 26/50 214.llg 26/49 
a c03781 471.llg n.a.a. 4/20 107 ... g 10/50 214.mg 8/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03781 381.llg n.a.a. 3/20 107.llg 11/50 214 ... g 9/49 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2806 c03781 20.111g n.1.a. 15/20 21.2 .. g 40/50 42.511g 42/49 
• c03781 n.1.1. n.1.1 . 0/20 21.2"1g 0/50 42.5 .. g 0/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2807 c03781 60.411g 850."1g 0120 21.2mg 2/50 42.511g 9/49 
a c03781 16.411g n.a.1. 12/20 21.211g 38/50 42.511g 38/49 
b c03781 119.11g n.a.1. 0120 21.211g 1/50 42.5mg 1/49 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
TR !METHYL TH I OUR EA 2489-77-2 
2808 c02186 274.•g n.a.a. 1/20 54.6 .. g 3/50 110.llg 4/50 
a c02186 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 54.611g 0/50 110.mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02186 381.•g n.1.1. 0/20 54.611g 1/50 110 ... g 2/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2809 c02186 174.•g n.1.1. 8/20 50.411g 11/50 102.llg 15/50 
a c02186 244.llg n.1.a. 6/20 50.411g 2/50 (102.mg 2/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c02186 165.•g n.a.1. 1/20 50.411g 5/50 102.llg 8/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2810 c02186 15.811g 47.411g 0120 9.1011g 1/50 18.0llg 23/50 thy:fca,fcc . 
c02186 24.511g 114.mg 0120 9.1011g 1/50 18.0mg 14/50 
b c02186 9.3511g 169.•g 7/20 9.10 .. g 20/50 18.0"'g 37/50 
c02186 143.•g n.s.s. 2/20 9.1011g 2/50 18.011g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2811 c02186 33.7.,g n.1.1. 9/20 7 .3011g 13/50 14.4mg 16/50 
a c02186 128.11g n.s.1. 1/20 7 .300lg 0/50 14.411g 1/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
TRI PHENYL TIN ACETATE 900-95-8 
2812 295 127 .11g n.a.s. 1/17 151.llg 2/18 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 295 298.11g n.a.a. 0/17 151.llg 0/18 
b 295 86.911g n.a.a. 2/17 151.0lg 4/18 
2813 295 69.211g n.1.s. 1/1~ 139.llg 4/17 
a 295 171.mg n.s.a. 2/18 139.llg 1/17 
b 295 65.411g n.1.1. 3/18 139.11g 5/17 
2814 295 108.llg n.1.a. 0/16 151.llg 2/17 
295 148.llg n.1.a. 0/16 151.•g 1/17 
b 295 85.6•g n.1.1. 0/16 151.Mg 3/17 
2815 295 79.111g n.1.1. 0/16 139.llg 3/17 
a 295 99.811g n.a.a. 0/16 139.11g 2/17 
b 295 47 .211g 634.llg 0/16 139.0lg 6/17 274 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 21'ailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 
2816 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 15.,z4 
a M f b6c eat l iv MXB 15.,z4 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 18mZ4 
2817 M m b6c eat TBA MXB 18 .. Z4 
M m b6c eat t iv MXB 15.,z4 
b M m b6c eat lun MXB 15.,z4 
2818 f f34 eat TBA MXB 15.,z4 
a f34 eat l iv MXB 15.,z4 
2819 R " f34 eat TBA MXB 18mZ4 
R"' f34 eat Liv MXB 18mZ4 100ng .. : .. 1ug •..• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1"g ...• : •. 10 ..•.. : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• :. -10 
:> no dre P-1. 
136 . .,g • P<. 7 
90.9mg • P<.3 
31.1mg • P<.6 
11Z.mg • P<.8 
147 .mg • P<.8 
Z.36mg \ P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P-1. 
TRIS· 1,Z,3-(CHLOROMETHOXYlPROPANE 100ng .• : .. 1ug •..• : .. 10 ••••• :. -100 •••• :. ·1"g .... :. -10 ...•• :. -100 •••• : •• 1g ••... : •• 10 
Z8ZO M f hie ipj abd ser 76w76 3.44mg P<.008 + 
TR IS(Z, 3· D IBROMOPROPYL )PHOSPHATE 
Z8Z1 f b6c eat MXB MXB z4.,z4 
a b6c eat l iv MXA z4.,z4 
b b6c eat sto MXA Z4mZ4 
b6c eat l iv hpc Z4mZ4 
d b6c eat lun MXA Z4mZ4 
b6c eat ute esp z4.,z4 
b6c eat sto sqc z4.,z4 
b6c eat TBA MXB z4.,z4 
b6c eat l iv MXB Z4ooZ4 
b6c eat lun MXB z4.,z4 
Z8ZZ "' b6c eat MXB MXB Z4mZ4 
m b6c eat sto MXA z4.,z4 
b " b6c eat kid MXA z4.,z4 
" b6c eat kid uac z4.,z4 
d " b6c eat lun MXA Z4ooZ4 
"' b6C eat lun 8/C z4.,z4 
" b6c eat TBA MXB z4.,z4 
"' b6c eat l iv MXB z4.,z4 
"' b6c eat lun MXB z4.,z4 
Z8Z3 f f34 eat kid tl a Z4ooZ4 
R 134 eat ova set z4.,z4 
b 134 eat TBA MXB Z4ooZ4 
c 134 eat l iv MXB z4.,z4 
Z8Z4 " 134 eat kid tla z4.,z4 
" 134 eat kid MXA Z4mZ4 
b "' 134 eat pre MXA Z411Z4 
m 134 eat l iv MXA z4.,z4 
d R "' f34 eat kid uac z4.,z4 
e R m f34 eat TBA MXB Z4mZ4 
R " f34 eat l iv MXB z4.,z4 
L · TRYPTOPHAN 
Z8Z5 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 15.,z4 
a M f b6c eat t iv MXB 181124 
b M b6c eat tun MXB 181124 
Z8Z6 M .. b6c eat TBA MXB 18 .. Z4 
a M "' b6c eat t iv MXB 15.,z4 
b M 11 b6c eat tun MXB 18ooZ4 
Z8Z7 f f34 eat TBA MXB 18•Z4 
a f34 eat ti v MXB 15.,z4 
Z8Z8 m f34 eat TBA MXB 15.,z4 
m f34 eat l; v MXB 15.,z4 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUM 
Z8Z9 f teb wat tba •ix 35.,35 e 
a R f teb wat tba Hl 351135 e 
2830 R "' teb wat tba •ix 3z.,3z es 
a R "' teb wat tba 11al 3z.,3z es 
UREA 
2831 M cb6 eat l iv 11th 5Zw69 e 
a M cb6 eat 11l y 5Zw69 e 
b M cb6 eat l iv "ix 5Zw69 e 
M cb6 eat lun a/a 5Zw69 e 
Z83Z M " cb6 eat l iv fbs 5Zw69 e 
M " cb6 eat t iv "ix 5Zw69 e 
b M 11 cb6 eat tun a/a 5Zw69 e 
2833 R f f34 eat ti v tum 5Zw69 e 
2834 "' f34 eat tea ice 5Zw69 e 
a R " f34 eat t iv tu• 5Zw69 e 
URETHANE 
2835 f ayg wat for p111 90w90 e 
a H f ayg wat der .. tc 90w90 e 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : .. 100 •••• :. ·1"'g •••• : •• 10 •.•.. :. -100 •... : •• 1g .•••• : • .10 
: + 80.111g • P<.0005 
95. O"g • P<. 0005c 
1Z7 .11g • P<.0005c 
ZZ1 .mg • P<.005 c 
ZZ5 .11g • P<. OOZ c 
264 • .,g \ P<.003 
611 • .,g • P<.DZ 
148.11g • P<.09 
95. 011g • P<. 0005 
ZZ5. mg • P<. DOZ 
103.mg • P<.0005 
197 .mg • P<.0005c 
Z56. "'g • P<. 0005c 
8ZZ.mg • P<.009 c 
Z 11 • 11g • P<. 03 
449.mg • P<.1 
Z.ZZg" • P<1. 
17Z . .,g P<.4 
Z11.mg • P<.03 
13.8mg • P<.0005c 
66.4mg • P<.05 
Z3.0mg • P<.8 
Z.8Zgm • P<1. 
1. 57.,g \ P<. 0005c 
1. 57.,g \ P<. 0005c 
zo.3 .. g • P<.03 
34.3.,g * P<.DZ 
63.3.,g • P<.05 
8.31.,g • P<.4 
34.3.,g • P<.OZ 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 .••.• : •. 100 .••• :. ·1"'g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .•.• : .• 1g .••.• : •• 10 
:>no dre P•1. 
30.Zg" • P<.6 
no dre P-1. 
:> 1.47g" \ P<.Z 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : .• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 ••.• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• :. -100 .... : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
. > 
• > no dre 
no dre 
40.1•g 
87 .7 .. g P-1 • 
P-1. 
P<1 • 
P<1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : .• 100 .••• : .• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 ••.• : .. 1g ••••• :. -10 
pool .40.4g" • P<.03 
19.5g"' • P<.5 
50.1g" • P<.Z 
no dre P• 1. 
pool 70.8g11 • P<.Z 
Z75.g" • P<.9 
no dre P-1. 
• > no dre P-1 • 
684 • .,g • P<.009 
no dre P-1. 
100ng .• :. -1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•9· ••• : •• 10 •.•.. : •• 100 •.•• :. ·19· •••• : •• 10 
44.511g 
74.411g P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 275 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
TR I PHENYL TIN HYDROXIDE 76-87-9 
2816 c00260 12.9Mg n.1.1. 10/20 3.6011g 15/50 7.3011g 18/50 
a c00260 22.4Mg n.1.1. 1120 3.6011g 2150 7.3011g 4/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00260 27 .5•g n.1.1. 0/20 3.6011g 1/50 7.3011g 2150 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2817 c00260 6.34Mg n.1.1. 10120 3.4011g 19/50 6. 70Mg 22150 
a c00260 12.9Mg n.1.1. 5120 3.40•g 6/50 6.70•g 10/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c00260 14.311g n.1.1. 3/20 3.4011g 5/50 6.70•g 6/50 lun:a/a,a/c . 
2818 c00260 . 753Mg n.1.1. 12120 1.40Mg 39/50 <2.80•g 31/50) 
a c00260 21-2Mg n.a.a. 0120 1.40•g 1/50 2.80Mg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
2819 c00260 4.2411g n.a.s. 9/20 1.1011g 22150 2.2011g 16/50 
a c00260 12.2•g n.1.1. 0/20 1.10•g 2150 2.20•g 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
TR I S-1, 2, 3-( CHLOROMETHOXY>PROPANE 38571-73-2 
2820 582 1.3011g 51.111g 0/30 1.71•g 5/30 Van Duuren; canr, 35, 2553-2557; 1975 
TR IS<2, 3-DI BROMOPROPYL )PHOSPHATE (TRIS) 126-72-7 
2821 c03270 51.3Mg 171.Mg 16/55 64.311g 34/50 129.11g 40/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ; lun:a/a ,a/c; sto:sqc,sqp. 
a c03270 62.211g 188.Mg 11/55 64.3Mg 23/50 129.llg 35/50 l iv:hpa,hpc. 
b c03270 88.111g 212 .Mg 2155 64.311g 14/50 129.llg 22150 sto:sqc,sqp. 
c c03270 128.Mg 692.•g 7/55 64.311g 12150 129.llg 20/50 
d c03270 135.Mg 576.llg 4/55 64.3Mg 9/50 129.11g 17/50 lun:a/a ,a/c. 
• c03270 130.Mg 682.•g 0/55 64.311g 6/50 (129.llg 2/50) 
c03270 328.11g 2.15gM 0/55 64.311g 4/50 129.llg 4/50 
g c03270 67. 7•g n.1.1. 34/55 64.311g 42/50 129.Mg 44/50 
h c03270 55. 711g 268.llg 11/55 64.311g 23/50 129.llg 35/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
c03270 119.llg 1.13gM 4/55 64.311g 9/50 129.11g 17/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2822 c03270 58. 7•g 336. •g 12155 59.011g 23/50 119.11g 37/50 kid:tla,uac; lun:a/a,a/c ; sto:sqc,sqp. 
a c03270 120.11g 406.Mg 0/55 59.011g 10/50 119.llg 13/50 sto:sqc,sqp. 
b c03270 147 .Mg 531.Mg 0/55 59.011g 4/50 119.llg 14/50 kid:tla,uac. 
c c03270 335 .Mg 25. 7gM 0/55 59.011g 1/50 119.•g 5/50 
d c03270 95.111g n.1.1. 12155 59.011g 18/50 119.llg 25/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
• c03270 170.Mg n.1.1. 6/55 59.0•g 8/50 119.llg 13/50 
f c03270 86.1Mg n.1.1. 43/55 59.0•g 41/50 119.11g 43/50 
g c03270 43.2Mg n.1.1. 28/55 59.0Mg 31/50 (119.11g 23/50) l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
h c03270 95.111g n.1.1. 12/55 59.011g 18/50 119.11g 25/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2823 c03270 7.41Mg 35.7Mg 0/55 2.50Mg 4/55 4.95Mg 10/55 
a c03270 20.1Mg n.1.1. 0/55 2.50•g 0/55 4.95Mg 3/55 
b c03270 2.88Mg n.1.1. 52/55 2.5011g 47/55 4.95mg 54/55 
c03270 29.8Mg n.1.1. 1/55 2.50Mg 1/55 4.95Mg 1/55 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2824 c03270 • 975Mg 2. 75Mg 0/55 2.00Mg 26/55 (4.00Mg 26/55) 
c03270 • 97511g 2 -75Mg 0/55 2.0011g 26/55 (4.0011g 29/55) kid:tla,uac . 
b c03270 8.69Mg n. 1.1. 1/55 2.0011g 3/55 4.0011g 7/55 pre: acn, adn, can. 
c c03270 13.0•g n.1.1. 0/55 2.00Mg 1/55 4.0011g 4/55 l iv:hpc,nnd . 
d c03270 18.9Mg n.1.1. 0/55 2.00Mg 0/55 4.00Mg 3/55 
• c03270 2.3111g n.1.1. 39/55 2.00Mg 44/55 4.0011g 48/55 
c03270 13.0Mg n.1.1. 0/55 2.00Mg 1/55 4.0011g 4/55 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
L -TRYPTOPHAN 73-22-3 
2825 c01729 5.55gM n.1.1. 3/15 1.74gM 11/35 3.48gM 3/35 
a c01729 7 .40gM n.1.1. 0/15 1.74g• 1/35 3.48gll 1/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01729 11.9gM n.1.1. 1/15 1.74gM 0/35 3.48g11 1/35 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2826 c01729 602.Mg n.1.1. 1/15 1.61gM 15/35 (3.21gM 12133) 
a c01729 3.33g11 n.1.1. 1/15 1.61g11 5/35 3.21g11 7/33 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c01729 4.66gM n.1.1. 0/15 1.61gM 4/35 3.21gM 2133 lun:a/a,1/c. 
2827 c01729 1.53gM n.1.1. 11/15 690.Mg 24/35 1.33gM 19/35 
a c01729 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 690.•g 0/35 1.33g11 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2828 c01729 560.Mg n.1.1. 11/15 552.Mg 21/35 (1.07gM 14/35) 
c01729 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/15 552.llg 0/35 1.07g11 0/35 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUM 13472-45-2 
2829 1456 .380Mg n.1.1. 17124 .286Mg 13120 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 421-427; 1975 
a 1456 .88411g n. 1. 1. 8124 .28611g 5/20 
2830 1456 • 78011g n.1.1. 4/26 • 250Mg 4/25 
1456 1.0511g n.1.1. 2126 .250Mg 2125 
UREA 57-13-6 
2831 1343 9.95gM n.1.1. 0/89p 440.Mg 0/43 881.11g 0/38 4.40g• 2150 Fl a i sch11an; j apt, 3, 149-170 ; 1980 
a 1343 3.90gM n.1.1. 10/92p 440.11g 7/43 881.Mg 10/38 4.40g11 9/50 
b 1343 10.4gM n.1.1. 1/89p 440.•g 0/43 881.•g 0/38 4.40gM 2150 
c 1343 646.Mg n.1.1. 2/89p 440.llg 0/28 881.•g 0123 4.40gM 0/23 
2832 1343 11.5gM n.1.1. 0/91p 406.Mg 0/41 813.Mg 0/36 4.06g11 1/47 
a 1343 12.9gM n.1.1. 2/91p 406.Mg 0/41 813.Mg 0/36 4.06g11 1/47 
b 1343 8.00gM n.1.1. 1/87p 406.llg 0127 813.Mg 1/21 4.06gM 0124 
2833 1343 473.Mg n .. 1.1. 0/49 169.Mg 0/50 339.Mg 0/48 1.69gM 0/48 
2834 1343 305.•g 36.6g• 21/50 135.llg 27/48 271.11g 25/47 1.35g11 35/50 
a 1343 369.Mg n.1.1. 0/50 135.Mg 0/48 271.llg 0/48 1.35gM 0/48 
URETHANE 51-79-6 
2835 170 27.911g 74.7Mg 1/67 136.Mg 35/44 Toth; aj ca, 5, 165-171; 1969 
• 170 45.2Mg 133.Mg 0/62 136.Mg 25/41 276 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+ Xpt 
Sex Route Hist Notes 
b syg wat coc adp 90w90 o 
syg wat vag car 90w90 o 
d syg wat adr 11ix 90w90 o 
o syg wat adr coc 90w90 o 
f syg wat for car 90w90 o 
9 syg wat thy 11ix 90w90 
h syg wat gal pam 90w90 o 
syg wat ova car 90w90 o 
syg wat l un ado 90w90 e 
syg wat l iv tum 90w90 e 
2836 syg wat for pHI 55w55 e 
syg wat ski ml t 55w55 e 
2837 H 11 syg wat for pam 24m24 e 
a H 11 syg wat dor 11lc 241124 e 
b H M syg wat for car 241124 e 
c H 11 syg wat coc adp 24m24 e 
d H 11 syg wat l iv 11ix 24m24 e 
e H 11 syg wat adr coa 24m24 e 
f 11 syg wat lun ado 241124 e 
2838 H 11 syg wat ski ml t 76w76 e 
a m syg wat for pa11 76w76 e 
2839 b6a orl lun Mix 73w73 evx 
f b6a orl lun ade 73w73 evx 
b f b6a or l agM 73w73 evx 
b6a or l hag ado 73w73 evx 
d b6a or l l un car 73w73 evx 
e b6a or l l iv hpt 73w73 evx 
f b6a orl tba mix 73w73 evx 
2840 M b6a orl lun mix 72w72 evx 
M b6a orl l iv mix 72w72 evx 
b M b6a or l l un ade 72w72 evx 
c M b6a or l hag ado 72w72 evx 
d H 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 72w72 evx 
e 11 b6a orl rts 72w72 evx 
f 11 b6a orl tba mix 72w72 evx 
2841 b6c orl l iv mix 68w68 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 68w68 ovx 
b f b6c orl lun 11ix 68w68 evx 
c b6c orl lun ade 68w68 evx 
d b6c orl tba mix 68w68 evx 
2842 11 b6c orl l iv 11ix 70w70 evx 
m b6c orl lun 11ix 70w70 evx 
b 11 b6c orl lun ade 70w70 evx 
c 11 b6c orl l iv hpt 70w70 evx 
d 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 70w70 evx 
2843 f cf1 wat lun tu11 31M31 eg 
a cf1 wat liv hpt 31m31 eg 
b cf1 wat tba 11ix 31m31 eg 
2844 11 cf1 wat lun tuM 29m29 e 
a m cf1 wat l iv hpt 291129 e 
b m cf1 wat tba mix 291129 e 
2845 b nMr wat tba bon 23M24 ae 
a b n11r wat tba ma l 23M24 ae 
2846 b swi eat lun ado 27m27 e 
a b swi eat lun ade 27M27 e 
b b swi eat lun adc 27M27 e 
b swi eat l iv tuM 27m27 e 
2847 P b rhe eat joj adc 5y19 euw 
a b rhe eat l iv hpc 5y19 euw 
b P b rhe eat tba Hl 5y19 euw 
2848 b sda wat tba H l 23•24 ae 
a b sda wat tba ben 23•24 ae GOLD ET AL. 
+ 
• + 
+ TD50 2Tailpvl 
DR AuOp 
294.119 
314.119 
318.m9 
349.mg 
374.mg 
538.m9 
682.119 
682.11g 
1.369m 
no dre 
102.mg 
496.mg 
64 .2m9 
109.119 
135.m9 
765.mg 
1.289m 
564.llg 
927 .mg 
74.2m9 
95.8mg 
12.5m9 
29.3119 
31.7mg 
59. 7119 
89.9mg 
89.9mg 
9.7311g 
24.2mg 
26.0m9 
27 .8m9 
35.8m9 
39.011g 
77.9mg 
11.211g 
32.4mg 
55.9mg 
79.011g 
97.4119 
13.7mg 
46.0119 
65.911g 
81.7mg 
81.7mg 
22.411g 
23.8mg 
no dre 
23.311g 
13.2m9 
no dre 
12.1mg 
.434m9 P<.0005+ 
P<.002 
P<.003 + 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.003 
P<.007 
P<.007 
P<.2 
p.1. 
P<.005 + 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.009 + 
P<.03 
P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.009 
P<.009 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.002 + 
P<.006 + 
P<.0005 
P<.0005 
P<.003 
P<.009 + 
P<.02 
P<.0005 
P<.002 
P<.006 
P<.02 
P<.02 
P<.0005 
P<.0005+ 
p.1. 
P<.09 
P<.0005+ 
P•1. 
P<.04 
P<.004 
14. 7119 * P<.0005+ 
36.1119 P<.0005+ 
36.111g P<.0005+ 
5.06g11 P<.3 
no dre P• 1. 
166.mg P<.06 
166.11g P<.06 
98. 7119 P<.2 
41. 311g * P<. 0005+ 
91.211g * P<.02 
VANADYL SULFATE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 •...• : •• 100 •••• :. -1Mg •..• : •. 10 •.•.. :. -100 •••. :. -19· •••• : •• 10 
2849 H b cd1 wat lun 11ix 241124 e 
a H b cd1 wat l iv ade 24m24 e 
b H b cd1 wat tba Hl 241124 e 
c H b cd1 wat tba ben 241124 e 
d H b cd1 wat tba 11ix 24•24 e 
2850 H cd1 wat tba Mix 331133 e 
2851 H • cd1 wat tba 11ix 311131 e .> 29.2Mg 
.> no dre 
5.00119 
no dre 
no dre 
5.1111g 
no dre 
VANGUARD GF 100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •. 100 •••• :. -1Mg •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· •••• : •. 10 
2852 H f b6a or l lun ade 76w76 avx .> 170. 119 
a H b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dra 
b H b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 150.11g 
2853 H M b6a orl lun Mix 76w76 evx .> 1.579M 
a H • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b H " b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre P<.8 
P-1. 
P<.06 
p.1. 
p.1. 
P<.07 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P<1. 
p.1. 
P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 277 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 2lnc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 170 126.mg 949.0lg 0155 136.0lg 7/33 
170 108.0lg 1.77g11 0/49 136.llg 4/20 
d 170 130.llg 2.05g11 1/55 136.11g 7/33 
170 142.•g 1.31g11 0/55 136.mg 6/33 
170 161.•g 1.23g• 0/62 136.mg 7/41 
g 170 204.•g 2.94g• 0/62 136.11g 5/41 
h 170 235.mg 8.99gm 0/62 136.mg 4/41 
170 235.•g 8.99g• 0/62 136.llg 4/41 
j 170 222.0lg n.a.s. 0/49 136.llg 1/20 
k 170 926.mg n.s.s. 0/67 136.0lg 0/44 
2836 297a 34.6•g 965.mg 0/14 273.llg 4/10 Pietra; jnci ,25,627-630;1960 
297a 80.6•g n.s.s. 0/14 273.0lg 1/10 
2837 170 40.5•g 110.0lg 6/88 120.0lg 36/49 Toth;ej ca, 5, 165·171; 1969 
a 170 66.711g 197.llg 1/62 120.0lg 26/49 
b 170 76.8•g 267.•g 0/53 120.11g 18/40 
170 264.•g 25.2g11 0/53 120.0lg 4/40 
d 170 386.0lg n.s.a. 0/62 120.llg 3/49 
e 170 114.Mg n.a.a. 1/26 120.•g 2112 
f 170 151.•g n.a.s. 0/26 120.Mg 1/12 
2838 297a 29.2•g 260.Mg 1/49 240.mg 7 /10 Pietra; j nc i, 25 ,627·630;1960 
a 297a 37.1Mg 352.Mg 0/49 240.11g 6/10 
2839 297 5.80•g 29.5•g 1/17 81.311g 17/19 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
297 14.0•g 92.3mg 1/17 81.311g 12/19 
b 297 15.4•g 79.1•g 0/17 81.3•g 11/19 
297 25.5Mg 245.llg 0/17 81.3Mg 7/19 
d 297 33.9•g 2.02g• 0/17 81.311g 5/19 
e 297 33.9•g 2.02g• 0/17 81.3Mg 5/19 
f 297 3.86Mg 24.8•g 2117 81.3•g 18/19 
2840 297 11.9•g 76.30lg 2/18 75.60lg 15122 
e 297 13.1Mg 72.1Mg 1/18 75.6Mg 14/22 
b 297 13.4Mg 103.•g 2118 75.6•g 14/22 
c 297 17.60lg 90.2•g 0/18 75.6•g 11/22 
d 297 18.2Mg 174.Mg 1/18 75.6•g 11/22 
e 297 31.6•g 645.•g 0/18 75.6Mg 6/22 
297 5.20Mg 27. 70lg 3/18 75.60lg 20/22 
2841 297 16.3•g 79.2•g 0/16 81.5•g 12/23 
e 297 25 .1•g 238.•g 0/16 81.5•g 8/23 
b 297 32.1•g 1. 76gOI 0/16 81.5•g 6/23 
c 297 36.9•g n.1.1. 0/16 81.5•g 5/23 
d 297 7 .21•g 28.0•g 0/16 81. 5•g 19/23 
2842 297 20.611g 165.11g 0/16 75. 7•g 8/20 
8 297 26. 711g 555.llg 0/16 75. 711g 6/20 
b 297 30.8•g n.1.s. 0/16 75. 711g 5/20 
c 297 30.8•g n.1.1. 0/16 75. 7•g 5120 
d 297 11.3•g 51. 7•g 0/16 75. 7mg 13/20 
2843 90 13.10lg 59.411g 13/56 20.00lg 28/40 To"8t is; i jcn, 10,489-506; 1972 
a 90 175.•g n.1.1. 2156 20.0•g 1/40 
b 90 7.5111g n.1.1. 45/56 20.0mg 37/40 
2844 90 7.18•g 34.611g 23/55 16.7•g 40/48 
a 90 78.0•g n.s.a. 12155 16.7•g 8/48 
b 90 4.11•g n.1.1 . 46/55 16.70lg 46/48 
2845 298 • 198•g 3.1411g 2174 100.ug 11/65 (. 500•g 12169 2.50•g 21/59 12.5•g 30/65) Sch.ahl; i j cn, 19, 77·80;1977 
a 298 8.6111g 32.7•g 6/74 100.ug 11/65 .500•g 17/69 2.50•g 21/59 12.5•g 32165 
2846 171a 19.311g 66.9•g 10/49 125.0lg 46/48 Van Esch;fctx, 10,373·381; 1972 
a 171a 19.311g 66.911g 10/49 125.mg 46/48 
b 171a 824.•g n.1.1. 0/49 125.0lg 1/48 
c 171a 1.54gll n.a.a. 0/49 125.mg 0/48 
2847 2000 26.9•g n.1.1. 0/32 46.60lg 1/6 Adalftson ;ossc, 129-156; 1982/S i eber pars. co11111. 
a 2000 26.911g n.1.1. 0/32 46.60lg 1/6 
b 2000 19.011g n.1.1. 3/32 46.611g 216 
2848 298 21.411g 129.•g 2174 100.ug 2170 .500•g 4/65 2.50•g 7170 12.5•g 15/74 Sch"8hl ; i j cn, 19, 77-80; 1977 
e 298 35.6•g n.1.1. 1/74 100.ug 3/70 .500mg 2165 2.50•g 5170 12.5mg 8/74 
VANADYL SULFATE 27774· 13·6 
2849 1512 2.3311g n.1.1. 26/170 .877•g 8/47 Kanisawa;canr ,27, 1192· 1195; 1967 
a 1512 6.0011g n.1.s. 7/170 .877•g 1/47 
b 1512 1.6511g n.1.1. 15/170 .87711g 9/47 
c 1512 4.1011g n.1.1. 29/170 .87711g 5/47 
d 1512 1.7911g n.1.1. 55/170 .877•g 15/47 
2850 1395 2.01•g n.1.1. 9/45 1.00•g 19/51 Schroeder; j nut, 105, 452 · 458; 1975 
2851 1395 4.93•g n.1.1. 10/43 .833mg 5/38 
VANGUARD GF (ferric nitrosodiHthyldi thiocerbe•ete and tetra.ethylthiur.., disulfide . CAS# ·•· and 137·26·8> 11ixture 
2852 1356 24.911g n.1.1. 1/17 33.9•g 2116 lnnes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1356 59. 7•g n.1.1. 0/17 33.911g 0/16 
b 1356 21.0•g n.a.a. 2117 33.9ag 3/16 
2853 1356 27 .511g n.1.1. 2118 31.6•g 2117 
a 1356 59.1•g n.1.1. 1/18 31.6•g 0/17 
b 1356 30.4•g n.1.1. 3/18 31.6•g 2117 278 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
2854 M b6c orl l un ade 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c orl tba 01ix 76w76 evx 
2855 M " b6c or l l un car 76w76 evx 
M " b6c or l lun ade 76w76 avx 
b M " b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
M " b6c orl tba 01ix 76w76 evx 
VINBLASTINE 
2856 R 11 b46 iv j tba "'ix 12.,24 es .> 99.1•g 
no dre 
99.10lg 
179 ... g 
179.0lg 
no dre 
40.20lg P<.1 
P-1. 
P<.1 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.02 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. ·1"g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : .• 100 •..• : •• 1g ••.•. : .. 10 
.> no dre P-1. 
VINYL BROMIDE 100ng .• :. :1ug .... : .• 10 ••••. : .. 100 ••.• : •. 10lg •... : .• 10 ....• :. -100 •••. : .. 1g .•••• : •• 10 
2857 f sda inh l iv nnd 19m24 aes 18.9.,g P<.003 
P<.0005+ 
P<.0005 
P<.04 
P<.04 a sda inh mix ang 191124 aes 19.201g 
b sda inh zym sqc 191124 aes 2.24g"' • 
c sda inh l iv "'ix 19•24 aes 433 . .,g 
d sda inh l iv hpc 19.,24 aes 749 • .,g 
2858 R " sda inh 01ix ang 18Rl24 aes 17.911g P<.0005+ 
" sda i nh zym sqc 18.,24 aes 409. "'g • P<. 0005 
b " sda i nh zy" P"" 18.,24 a~s 2. 76gm • P<. 004 
R " sda inh l iv mix 18.,24 aes 303.0lg P<.02 
d " sda inh l iv hpc 181124 aes 387 .Olg Z P<.02 
"sda inh liv nnd 18.,24 aes no dre P-1. 
VINYL CHLORIDE 100ng •• : •. 1ug •••. : .. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : • ·1•g •••• : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••••• : •• 10 
2859 H " syg inh for •ix 7.,25 ez 126 • .,g P<.0005+ 
H "' syg inh adu epo 7.,25 ez 3. 42gm P<.2 
b H "' ayg inh ski epo 7.,25 ez 
H " ayg inh l iv ang 7.,25 ez 
2860 M cd1 inh l iv hes 26w58 es 
M cd1 inh lun a/t 26w58 es 
b M cd1 inh "'gl "'ix 26w58 es 
2861 M " cd1 inh l iv hes 26w78 es 
a M " cd1 inh lun a/t 26w78 es 
2862 M b swi inh lun tu11 30w81 ez 
Mb swi inh liv ang 30w81 ez 
b M b awi inh l iv agOI 30w81 ez 
M b swi inh Mgl car 30w81 ez 
d M b swi inh ski epo 30w81 ez 
M b swi inh ehp ag" 30w81 ez 
M b swi inh ehp ang 30w81 ez 
2863 cdr inh l iv 11ix 26w78 es 
2864 cdr i nh l iv hes 43w95 es 
2865 R " cdr inh l iv nnd 26w78 es 
R " cdr inh l iv hpc 26w78 es 
2866 " cdr inh l iv hes 43w95 es 
2867 b sda inh l iv hpt 121131 ez 
R b sda inh l iv ang 12Rl31 ez 
b b ade inh zy" car 120l31 ez 
b sda inh bra neu 121131 ez 
d b ada inh ehp ang 12•31 ez 
b sda inh kid nep 12•31 ez 
2868 b sda gav l iv ang 121132 ez 
b ada gav kid nep 121132 ez 
b b sda gav ehp ang 121132 ez 
c b sda gav zy" car 121132 ez 
2869 b sda i nh mg l adc 121134 ez 
b sda inh l iv ang 121134 ez 
b b sda inh zyM car 121134 ez 
c b sda i nh ehp ang 121134 ez 
d R b sda inh kid nep 121134 ez 
2870 R b sda i nh kid nap 12.,33 ez 
Rb sda inh liv ang 12•33 ez + 
+. 
.. 
.. 
• + • 
• + + 
+ 15 .4g"' P<. 7 
no dre P-1. 
98.9mg * P<.0005+ 
142 • .,g * P<.02 
142.0lg * P<.02 
32.0Rlg Z P<.0005+ 
88. 711g * P<. 004 
21.10lg Z P<.0005+ 
59.40lg P<.0005+ 
99.80lg P<.0005 
5. 04g11 P<. 009 + 
5. 99g11 * P<. 0005 
22.4gm * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
75.5"'g * P<.04 
69. 511g * P<. 0005 
11.511g P<.02 
52.9.,g * P<.04 
103.0lg * P<.002 
+historical Z P<.003 + 
843.0lg P<.0005+ 
1 . 70gm P<. 0005 + 
+historical * P<.0005+ 
9.60g11 * P<.1 
+historical * P<.3 
54. 1"g * P<. 0005+ 
+historical • P<.05 
1.14gOI * P<.5 
1.97gOI * P<.8 
3.6911g Z P<.008 + 
+historical • P<.002 + 
64.5.,g * P<.2 
124.11g * P<.4 
+historical * P<.2 
+historical * P<.0005+ 
136.mg * P<.0005+ CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose line 2Dose 
2854 
a 
b 
2855 
a 
b 1356 24.311g n.a.s. 
1356 63.411g n.s.s. 
1356 24.311g n.a.s. 
1356 29.211g n.a.a. 
1356 29.211g n.1.1. 
1356 55.611g n.1.a. 
1356 13.811g n.s.s. 
VINBLASTINE 865·21 ·4 
2856 1017 37 .8ug n.a.a. 
VINYL BROMIOE 593·60·2 
2857 1466 8. 7411g 107 .Ilg 
a 1466 13.911g 27 .911g 
b 1466 1.12g11 6.44gM 
1466 175.11g n.a.s. 
d 1466 282.11g n.a.1. 
2858 1466 12. 311g 27. 211g 
a 1466 281.llg 647 .Ilg 
b 1466 1. 14gll 27. 3g11 
1466 129.11g n.1.1. 
d 1466 161.11g n.a.1. 
a 1466 2.91g11 n.1.1. 
VINYL CHLORIDE 75·01·4 
2859 1BT8 72.911g 274.11g 
1BT8 872. 11g n. 1. a. 
b 1BT8 1. 73g11 n.1.a. 
1BT8 4.04g11 n.1.1. 
2860 111311 45.211g 316.llg 
a 111311 52.411g n.a.1. 
b 111311 52.411g n.a.1. 
2861 1113• 13.411g 104.•g 
a 111311 37.311g 927.llg 
2862 1BT4 15.611g 29.511g 
1BT4 34.611g 115.llg 
b 1BT4 51.411g 234.11g 
1BT4 2.21g11 235.gll 
d 1BT4 2.91g11 25.3g11 
e 1BT4 5.45g11 n.1.1. 
1BT4 7 .81g11 n.1.1. 
2863 111311 22.711g n.1.1. 
2864 1113n 34.411g 195.11g 
2865 111311 3.4311g n.1.1. 
a 111311 15.911g n.1.1. 
2866 1113n 41.711g 483.11g 
2867 1BT1 147 .11g 1.82g11 
a 1BT1 528.11g 1.94g11 
b 1BT1 1.08g11 3.29g11 
d 
• 
2868 
a 
b 
2869 
a 
b 
c 
d 
2870 1BT1 1.98g11 8.17g11 
1BT1 
1BT1 
1BT11 
1BT11 
1BT11 
1BT11 
1BT15 
1BT15 
1BT15 
1BT15 
1BT15 
1BT2 
1BT2 3.07g11 n.1.1. 
2.44g• n.a.1. 
34.211g 93.0•g 
121.11g n.1.1. 
177.11g n.1.1. 
192.11g n.1.1. 
1. 7911g 83.211g 
16.7•g 167.llg 
17.911g n.1.1. 
30.611g n.1.1. 
40.5•g n.1.1. 
58.3•g 170.•g 
79.211g 264.llg 0/16 
0/16 
0/16 0/16 
0/16 
0/16 
0/16 33.911g 
33.911g 
33.911g 
31.611g 
31.611g 
31.611g 
31.611g 2/17 
0/17 
2/17 
1/16 
1/16 
0/16 
4/16 
7/65 10.0ug 1/25 
3/ 142 2. 9511g 
1/144 2. 9511g 
0/ 139 2. 9511g 
7/142 2.9511g 
4/142 2.9511g 
0/144 2.1111g 
2/142 2.1111g 
0/142 2.1111g 
4/143 2.1111g 
3/143 2.1111g 
1/143 2.1111g 12/101( 14.411g 
10/120 14.411g 
0!99 14.411g 
18/101 14.411g 
6/101 14.411g 
7/120 8.8811g 
1/99 8.8811g 
0/99 8.8811g 
5/103 8.8811g 
1/103 8.8811g 
4/ 103 8. 8811g 
3!60 2. 9511g 3/30 14. 711g 
590.llg 10/30> 
0!60 2. 9511g 0/30 14. 711g 
(590.llg 1/30) 
3/60 2.9511g 9/30 14. 711g 
590.llg 7 /30 
0160 2. 9511g 0/30 14. 711g 
590.llg 0/30 
1/28 17 .911g 
7/28 17.911g 
7/28 17.911g 
0/28 11.211g 
4/28 11.211g 
15/150 8.7011g 
1. 74g• 46/56) 1/8 
1/8 
1/8 
0/8 
2/8 
6/60 161.llg 
161.llg 
161.llg 
60.911g 
60.911g 
43.511g 
0/150 8.7011g 1/60 43.511g 
1. 74gll 10/56) 
0/150 8.7011g 1/60 43.5Mg 
1.74g• 6/56) 
1/150 8.7011g 12/60 43.511g 
1. 74g11 13/56 
2/150 8.7011g 0!60 43.511g 
1. 74g• 4/56 
1/150 8.7011g 5/60 43.511g 
1. 74g• 4/56 
1/150 8. 7011g 1/60 43.511g 
1.74g• 1/56 
0/8 3.1911g 0/8 
0/16 4.3511g 0/16 
0/8 2.2311g 0/8 
0/8 2.2311g 
0/16 3.0411g 
0/58 2 .0211g 
405.•g 1/60) 0/8 
0/10 
0/60 15.911g 
21.711g 
11.211g 
11.211g 
15.211g 
10.111g 
0/58 2.0211g 1/60 10.111g 
(405.11g 7/60) 
0/58 2.0211g 0/60 10.111g 
405.llg 16/60 
0/58 2. 0211g 0/60 10. 111g 
405.llg 7/60 
0/58 2.0211g 1/60 10.111g 
405.llg 3/60 
0/58 2.0211g 1/60 10.111g 
405.llg 5/60 
0/80 .81911g 0/80 
0/80 .81911g 
0/80 .81911g 
1/80 .81911g 
7/120 37.2ug 
0/120 37 .2ug 
2/120 37 .2ug 
0/120 37 .2ug 
0/120 37 .2ug 0!80 
2/80 
0/80 
15/118 
0/118 
1/118 
0/118 
0/118 
0/185 3.8211g 10/120 
0/185 3.8211g 1/120 4.0911g 
4.0911g 
4.0911g 
4.0911g 
.186•g 
.18611g 
.18611g 
.18611g 
.18611g 
5.7311g 
5. 7311g 2Inc 
9/113 63.511g 
50/120(63.511g 
3/113 63.511g 
12/113 63.511g 
3/113 63.511g 
36/120(38.911g 
1/112 38.911g 
1/112 38.911g 
10/119 38.911g 
7/119 38.911g 
3/119 38.911g 
4/30 29.511g 
0/30 29.511g 
3/30 29. 511g 
0/30 29. 511g 
2/8 
4/8 4/8 
7 /12 
8/12 
41/60 459.llg 
459.llg 
459.11g 
<244.llg 
244.llg 
87.011g 
18/60 (87. 011g 
11/60 <87.011g 
12/60 87.011g 
1/60 87.011g 
3/60 87 .011g 
3/60 87 .011g 
1/8 63.811g 
4/12 87 .011g 
3/8 (44.611g 
1/8 44.611g 
1/16 60.911g 
1/59 20.211g 
3/59 20.2•g 
0/59 20.2•g 
0/59 20.2•g 
2/59 20.211g 
5/59 20.211g 
10/80 12.311g 
3/80 12.3•g 
0/80 12.3•g 
2/80 12.311g 
22/119 .37211g 
0/119 .37211g 
1/119 .37211g 
0/119 .37211g 
0/119 .37211g 
11/119 7.6411g 
6/119 7.64•g Citation 01· Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Sch11ah l; arzn, 20, 1461-1467; 1970 
10/118 343.llg 
61/120 343.llg 
2/119 343.llg 
21/118(343.llg 
11/118(343.•g 
61/120 232.llg 
13/114 232.11g 
3/114 232.llg 
13/120<232.•g 
9/120<232.mg 
4/ 120 232 .Ilg 5/112> 
41/120> 
11/114 
9/112> 
4/112) 
43/ 120) 
35/ 116 
5/116 
5/119) 
3/119) 
2/119 Benj a; txap,64, 367 .379; 1982 
9/30 147.llg 17/30 (354.llg 10/30 
Mal toni ;enhp,41,3-29; 1981/1977a 
3/30 147 .Ilg 1/30 354.Mg 2/30 
7 /30 147. Ilg 3/30 354. Ilg 1 /30 
2/30 147 .Ilg 0/30 354.11g 1/30 
8/12 Hong;jtxe,7,909·924;1981 
7/12 
7/12 
5/12> 
7/12 
50!60 (435 .oog 40/59 1. 04g11 47 /60 
Mal toni ;enhp,41,3 -29; 1981/1977a 
14/60 435.llg 16/59 1.04g11 13/60 
5/60 435.llg 5/59 1.04gll 7/60 
8!60 435. Ilg 8/59 1. 04g11 8/60 
2/60 435.llg 4/59 1.04g11 7/60 
3/60 435.llg 1/59 1.04g11 3/60 
7 /60 435. Ilg 8/59 1. 04g• 1 /60 
2/8 
7/16 
1/8) 
2/8 
5/16 Hong; j txe, 7,909·924;1981 
5/60 <101.mg 2/60 243.•g 1/59 
Mal toni; enhp, 41, 3· 29; 1981/1977a 
6!60 101.llg 13/60 243.11g 13/59 
4/60 101.llg 2/60 243.llg 7/59 
0/60 101.llg 4/60 243.•g 3/59 
1/60 101.llg 3/60 243.11g 3/59 
6/60 101.•g 6/60 243.llg 5/59 
17/80 
2/80 
2/80 
1/80 
21/119(.92911g 
1/119 .929•g 
2/119 .92911g 
2/119 .92911g 
0/119 .92911g 
7/120 
12/120 17/120> 
5/120 
4/120 
0/120 
1/120 279 280 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo + Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist N otes DR AuOp 
b 
d 
e 
2871 
a 
b 
c 
2872 
b 
d 
f 
2873 
b 
2874 
b 
c 
d 
2875 
b 
c 
d 
e 
2876 
a 
b 
d b sda inh mgl adc 12m33 ez 
b sda inh l iv agm 12m33 ez 
b sda inh l iv hpt 12m33 ez 
b sda inh zym car 12m33 ez 
b sda gav zym car 14m32 ez 
b sda gav l iv ang 14m32 ez 
b sda gav Liv hpt 141132 ez 
b sda gav ehp ang 14m32 ez 
b sda inh Liv ang 12m33 ez 
b sda inh 11gl adc 12m33 ez 
R b sda inh ahp agm 12m33 ez 
b sda inh ehp ang 12•33 ez 
b sda inh zym car 12m33 ez 
b sda inh l iv ag11 12•33 ez 
b sda inh kid nep 12m33 ez 
b sda inh zy11 car 6m36 eyz 
b sda inh l iv ang 6m36 eyz 
b sda i nh ehp ang 6m36 eyz 
b sda i nh zym car 6m36 eyz 
b sda i nh mam ma l 6m36 eyz 
b sda inh kid nep 6m36 eyz 
b sda inh l iv ang 6m36 eyz 
b sda inh Liv hpt 6m36 eyz 
b sda inh bra neu 6m36 eyz 
b sda i nh ehp ang 61136 eyz 
wis inh l iv ang 52w52 ek 
wis inh nas oec 52w52 ek 
w is i nh zym sqc 52w52 ek 
wis inh lun ppa 52w52 ek 
wis inh Liv nnd 52w52 ek 
wis inh l iv hpc 52w52 ek 
m wis inh ehp agm 121031 ez 
m wis inh ehp ang 12m31 ez 
in wis inh Liv agm 12m31 ez 
m wis inh l iv hpt 12m31 ez 
m wis inh zym car 12m31 ez 
in wis inh l iv ang 12m31 ez 
2877 m wis inh l iv ang 12m38 ez 
m wis inh bra neu 12m38 ez 
b in wis inh zyin car 12in38 ez 
11 wis inh l iv hpt 121138 ez 
d 11 wis inh kid nep 121138 ez 
e R 11 wis inh ehp ang 121138 ez 
2878 11 wis inh zym sqc 52w52 ek 
a m wis inh Liv ang 52w52 ek 
b 11 wis inh nas oec 52w52 ek 
11 wis inh l iv hpc 52w52 ek 
d 11 wis inh lun ppa 52w52 ek 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 
2879 f cd1 inh lab tu• 26w78 e 
a cd1 inh Liv hct 26w78 e 
b cd1 inh l iv hes 26w78 e 
2880 cd1 inh l iv hea 52w52 e 
a cd1 inh l iv hpt 52w52 e 
b cd1 inh lun tu11 52w52 e 
2881 11 cd1 inh lab tu11 281178 e 
a 11 cd1 inh l iv hct 26w78 e 
2882 m swi inh kid adc 52w82 eu 
2883 cdr inh l iv mix 26w78 e 
2884 cdr inh l iv 11ix 43w95 e 
2885 cdr i nh l iv hes 52w52 e 
2886 
2887 11 cdr inh l iv 11ix 26w78 e 
11 cdr inh l iv 11ix 43w95 e 
FD & VIOLET NO. 1 
2888 " f asp eat l un ade 80w80 e 
a " asp eat l iv tum 80w80 e 
2889 " 11 asp eat lun adc 80w80 e 
" • asp eat l iv tu11 80w80 e 
b " 11 asp eat lun ade 80w80 e 
2890 R asd eat •gl car 52w52 e 
asd eat edu car 52w52 e • (+) • 
• (+) • 216.mg * P<.02 
528.mg * P<.02 
+historical • P<.05 
44 7. mg * P<. 2 
14.2mg * P<.02 
+historical • P<.02 
+historical * P<.2 
64.5mg * P<.2 
50. 4mg P<. 005 + 
19.011g P<.02 
64.411g P<.02 
79.0mg P<.03 
79.011g P<.03 
89. 111g P<.04 
+historical P<.5 
672.mg * P<.0005 
2.41gm * P<.05 
4.85gm * P<.3 
555 .mg * P<. 0005 
569.mg * P<.02 
4.87gm * 
4 .87gm * 
4 .88gm * 
9. 76gm * 
9. 77gm * 
209.11g 
276.11g 
857.llg 
1.81gm 
1.81gm 
1 .81gm 
.761mg 
1.28mg 
3.88mg 3.
88mg 
no dre P<.2 
P<.2 
P<.3 
P<.2 
P<.4 
P<.002 + 
P<.004 
P<.09 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P<.01 
P<.05 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P•1. 
no dre P• 1. 
1. 55gm * P<. 0005+ 
4. 77gm * P<.003 
6. OOgm * P<. 004 
8.14g11 * P<.07 
13.6g11 * P<.4 
no dre P-1. 
330.mg P<.03 
330.mg P<.03 
533.11g P<.08 
1. 14gm P<.3 + 
no dre P-1. 
100ng •• : •• 1ug •••• : •• 10 ••.•• : .. 100 ••.• :. -1mg •••. : •. 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.••. :. -10 
. > 
.> 
. > 
.> 
. > 
• > 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dee 
no dre 
170.llg 
170.mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
23.6mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P•1 . 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P-1 • 
P-1. 
P<.0005+ 
P· 1. 
P•1 • 
P•1 • 
P•1. 
P-1. 
100ng •. : .• 1ug •..• : .. 10 .•.•• : •• 100 •••• :. -1•g •••• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g ••.•• :. -10 
.> 1 .91g• * P<.3 
no dre P•1. 
.> 4.66g• * P<.3 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P-1. 
1. 14g11 P<. 02 
1. 60gM P<. 05 RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl 
b 1BT2 101.11g n. s. s. 
c 1BT2 201.•g n.s.s. 
d 1BT2 267.11g n.s.s. 
e 
2871 
b 
c 
2872 
b 
c 
d 
e 1BT2 
1BT27 
1BT27 18T27 
18T27 
1BT9 
1BT9 
1BT9 
1BT9 
1BT9 
1BT9 
18T9 
2873 1BT1011 
a 1BT1011 
b 1BT1011 
2874 18T10n 
a 1BT10n 
b 1BT10n 
1BT10n 
d 1BT10n 
1BT10n 
f 1BT10n 
2875 1170 
a 1170 
b 1170 
1170 
d 1170 
e 1170 
2876 1BT17 
a 1BT17 
b 1BT17 
c 1BT17 2/185 
0/185 
0/185 
2/185 
1/150 
0/150 
0/150 
0/150 
0/98 
10/98 
0/98 
0/98 0/98 
0/98 
0/98 
0/227 0/227 
0/227 
0/227 
17 /227 
0/227 
0/227 
0/227 
0/227 
0/227 
0/10 
0/10 0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/10 
0/94 
0/94 
0/94 
0/94 !Dose 
3.8211g 
3.8211g 
3.8211g 
3.8211g 
8.37ug 
8.37ug 
8.37ug 
8.37ug 
1.9211g 
1.9211g 
1.9211g 
1.9211g 
1.92oog 
1. 9211g 
1.9211g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20.511g 
20 .511g 
20.50lg 
1.12gll 
1.12g11 
1.12g11 
1.12g11 1.12g11 1.12g11 
34.6ug 
34.6ug 
34.6ug 
34.6ug 
d 1BT17 157.•g n.s.s. 
5.0111g n.s.s. 
5.5411g n.s.s. 
7.9311g n.s.s. 
10.511g n.s.s. 
27. 111g 305. Ilg 
10.211g n.s.s. 
32.411g n.s.s. 
37.211g n.s.s. 
37.211g n.s.1. 
40.311g n.s.1. 
117.11g n.s.s. 
362.•g 1.47g• 
834.•g n.s.1. 
1.19g11 n.s.s. 
315.•g 1.13gll 
261.11g n.s.s. 
1.20g• n.s.a. 
1.20g• n.s.1. 
1.20g11 n.s.1. 
1.59g• n.s.s. 
1.59g11 n.1.a. 
80.811g 884.llg 
101.llg 1.93g• 
209.11g n.s.s. 
295.•g n.a.s. 
295.11g n.s.s. 
295.11g n.s.a. 
• 28911g 48. 811g 
.388•g n.1.1. 
.63211g n.s.s. 
.63211g n.s.s. 
.64711g n.s.1. 
1.17Mg n.1.s. 
762.•g 5.08g• 3/94 34.6ug 
e 1BT17 0/94 34.6ug 
2877 1BT7 0/38 1.4111g 
281.llg 8127 
a 1BT7 1.81g11 27.0g11 0/38 1.4111g 
281.•g 3/27 
b 1BT7 2. 07g11 43. 5g• 0/38 1.41•g 
281.•g 2127 
1BT7 2.46g• n.1.s. 0/38 1.4111g 
281.•g 0/27 
d 1BT7 2.46g11 n.1.s. 0/38 1.4111g 
281.mg 1/27 
e 1BT7 3.86g• n.1.s. 1/38 1.4111g 
281.11g 0/27 
2878 1170 98.3Mg n.1.s. 0/ 10 781.llg 
a 1170 98.311g n.1.1. 0/ 10 781.llg 
b 1170 130.11g n.1.1. 0/10 781.llg 
c 1170 185.11g n.s.s. 0/10 781.11g 
d 1170 362.11g n.s.a. 0/10 781.11g 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 
2879 1113• 31.811g 
111300 31.811g 
b 111311 31.811g 
2880 357 27. 711g 
357 27. 711g 
b 357 53.0•g 
2881 111311 17.511g 
a 1113• 17.511g 
2882 1BT402 13.211g 
2883 111311 5. 0511g 
2884 1113n 20.411g 
2885 357 12. 611g 
2886 1113• 3. 53•g 
2887 1113n 12.5•g 75.35.4 
n.1. 1. 7 /28 
n.1.s. 1/28 
n. s. 1. 1/28 
n.1.1. 0/16 
n.s.1. 0/16 
n. s.1. 0/16 
n.s.1. 4/28 
n. 1.1. 4/28 
50.011g 0170 
n.s.a. 0/8 
n.s.a. 0/16 
n.1.s. 0/15 
n.1.s. 0/8 
n. 1.1. 1 /16 
FD & 
2888 
a 
2889 VIOLET NO. 1 1964-09·3 
a 
b 
2890 
a 1354 480.11g n.1.1. 8/42 
1354 42.611g n.s.1. 0/42 
1354 1.15g11 n.1.1. 0/42 
1354 40.9•g n.1.1. 0/42 
1354 519.•g n.1.1. 18/42 
1364 430.•g n.s.1. 0/10 
1364 549.•g n.1.1. 0/10 22.9 .. g 
22.911g 22.911g 
68.6•g 
68.611g 
68.611g 
19.0•g 
19.0llg 
9.8811g 
5.4411g 
7 .4211g 
16.3Mg 
3.8111g 
5.1911g 
9.1011g 
9.1011g 
8.4011g 
8.4011g 
8.40•g 
2.50g• 
2. 50g11 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
line 2Dose 
4/120 5. 7311g 
1/120 5. 7311g 
0/120 5.7311g 
1/120 5. 7311g 
0/150 83. 7ug 
0/150 83. 7ug 
0/150 83. 7ug 
0/150 83. 7ug 
14/294 
62/294 
11/294 
9/294 
9/294 
8/294 
1/294 
5/118 34.111g 
3/118 34.111g 
2/118 34.111g 
9/120 34.111g 
12/120 34.111g 
1/120 34.111g 
1/120 34.111g 
2/120 34.1•g 
0/120 34.111g 
1/120 34.111g 
6/10 
5/10 
2/10 
1/10 
1/10 
1/10 
5/99 
3/99 
1/99 
1/99 
2/99 
0/99 
0/28 7 .0311g 
0/28 7 .0311g 
0/28 7.0311g 
0/28 7 .0311g 
1/28 7 .0311g 
0/28 7 .0311g 
3/9 
3/9 
219 
1/9 
0/9 
0/12 
0/12 
0/12 
1/15 1/15 
0/15 
1/12 1/12 
16/98 
0/8 
0/16 
0/15 
0/8 
0/14 
7/43 91.011g 
0/43 91.0•g 
0/45 84.0•g 
0/45 84.0•g 
13/45 84.0•g 
5/16 
4/17 2lnc 
6/119 7.64•g 
0/119 7.64•g 
0/119 7.64 .. g 
4/119 7.64 .. g 
0/148 .27911g 
1/148 .27911g 
1/148 .27911g 
0/148 . 27911g 
9/119 
1/119 
0/119 
8/119 
20/119 
1/119 1/119 
0/119 
1/119 
0/119 
1/27 14.111g 
0/27 14.111g 
0/27 14.111g 
0/27 14 .111g 
0/27 14.111g 
1/27 14.111g 
7/42 455.llg 
0/42 455 .Ilg 
1/42 420.llg 
0/42 420.•g 
18/42 420.•g 6/120 
4/120 
3/120 
4/120 
5/149 
3/149 
1/149 
1/149 
3/28 70.3•g 
0/28 70.3•g 
0/28 70.311g 
0/28 70.311g 
2/28 70.311g 
0/28 70.311g 
12/48 
0/48 
1/46 
0/46 
15/46 Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
Feron; txcy, 13, 131-141; 1979/1979a 
Mal toni ;enhp,41,3 -29; 1981/1977a 
3/25 169 .Ilg 3/26 
1/25 169.•g 1/26 
0125 169 •• g 2/26 
1 /25 169 .Ilg 2/26 
0/25 169 .Ilg 2/26 
1125 169.llg 1/26 
Feron; txcy, 13, 131-141; 1979/ 1979a 
Hong; j txe, 7,909·924;1981 
Lee; jtxe,4, 15-30;1978 
Hong; j txe, 7,909-924;1981 
Mel toni; l11dl ,64,241 -262; 1977 /pers .coH. 
Hong; j txe, 7,909-924;1981 
Lee; j txe,4, 15-30; 1978 
Hong; j txe, 7,909-924;1981 
Grasso; fctx, 12,21-31; 1974 
UeHtsu; jnci ,51, 1337-1338; 1973 281 282 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
b asd eat tba 11al 52w52 e 
ud eat tba 11ix 52w52 
2891 11 ud eat tba tu11 52w52 
VITAMIN D2 
2892 M f c3h eat 11gl adc 241124 r 
VITAMIN A ACID 
2893 R f ada ipj tba 11al 241124 e 
2894 R 11 sda ipj l iv hae 241124 e 
11 sda ipj tba 11al 241124 e 
2, 4 • XYL !DINE. HC l 
2895 M f chi eat lun 11ix 77w90 
M chi eat l iv 11ix 77w90 
b M chi eat tba 11ix 77w90 
2896 M chi eat lun 11ix 77w90 
2897 M 11 chi eat l iv 11ix 77w90 
a M 11 chi eat lun 11ix 77w90 
b M "' chi eat tba 11ix 77w90 
2898 11 cdr eat l iv 11ix 77w98 v 
11 cdr eat tba 11ix 77w98 v 
2, 5 ·XYL !DINE. HC l 
2899 f chi eat l iv hpt 68w94 a 
a chi eat l iv 11ix 68w94 a 
b chi eat lun 11ix 68w94 
chi eat tbe mix 68w94 a 
2900 chi eat l iv hpt 68w94 a 
2901 " chi eat lun mix 68w94 
a 11 chi eat l iv 11ix 68w94 
b 11 chi eat tba 11ix 68w94 
2902 11 chi eat VSC 68w94 a 
2903 11 cdr eat l iv 11ix 181124 
m cdr eat tba mix 181124 
2904 11 cdr eat sub 11 ix 181124 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 
2905 f b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 
a f b6c eat l iv MXB 78w96 
b b6c eat lun MXB 78w96 
2906 II b6c eat TBA MXB 78w96 
11 b6c eat l iv MXB 78w96 
b 11 b6c eat l un MXB 78w96 
2907 b n11r eat tba tu11 241124 
2908 f 134 eat TBA MXB 181125 
a f f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 
2909 11 f34 eat TBA MXB 181125 
11 f34 eat l iv MXB 181125 
2910 b ada eat tbe tu11 241124 
C. I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 
2911 M b n11r eat tba tu11 241124 a 
2912 R b sda eat tba tu11 241124 a 
C. I. PIGMENT YEL LOii 83 
2913 M b n11r eat tba tu11 241124 a 
2914 R b sda eat tbe tu11 241124 a 
C. I. VAT YELLOW 4 
2915 M f b6c eat TBA MXB 251125 
M f b6c eat l iv MXB 251125 
b M f b6c eat lun MXB 251125 
2916 M 11 b6c eat l ym 25•25 
a " II b6c eat TBA MXB 251125 
b M 11 b6c eat l iv MXB 251125 
c M 11 b6c eat lun MXB 251125 
2917 R f f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
f f34 eat l iv MXB 241124 
2918 R II f34 eat TBA MXB 241124 
II 134 eat l iv MXB 241124 
FD & YELLOW NO. 5 
2919 f nss eat l iv tu11 64w64 e 
a nss eat tba 11ix 64w64 e 
2920 11 nu eat l iv tu11 64w64 e 
a 11 n11 eat tba 11ix 64w64 e 
2921 R b OH eat l iv ade 241124 e 
a R 
b OH eat tba Hl 241124 • 
b R 
b o"' eat tba 11ix 241124 e • > 568.llg 
660.llg 
no dre P<.002 
P<.02 
p.1 . 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 •.•.• : .• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.• :. -10 
.> 39.611g Z P<1. 
100ng .• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111u ••.• : .• 10 ••..• :. -100 ..•. :. -19· •••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
188.119 P• 1. 
P•1. 
P<1. 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 .••• : •• 111u .... : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• :. -19· ...• :. -10 
pool + 12.411g P<.004 + 
p.1. 
P<.08 
P<.002 + 
:> no dre 
12.2Mg 
13.5mg 
65.4mg * P<.5 
no dre P• 1. 
646.mg * P<1. 
260.11g * P<.4 
16.811g P<.02 
100ng •. : •• 1uu ..•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111u •••• : •. 10 .•... : •. 100 .••• :. -1u-•••• : •• 10 
pool + 
pool 
:> 
pool 552.119 * P<.003 + 
552 .mg * P<. 003 + 
1.29g11 * P<.006 -
475 .mg * P<. 003 
552. mg * P<. 0005+ 
765. mg * P<. 005 
805.llg * P<.01 
321.mg I P<.002 
723. 11g * P<. 0005+ 
3.26g11 * P<.8 
67 .2mg \ P<.005 
152.11g * P<.0005+ 
100ng .• : •• 1uu •.•• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mg •••• : •• 10 •.... :. -100 •.•• :. -19· •••• : •• 10 
.> 
.> no dre P• 1. 
no dre P-1. 
no dre P• 1. 
:no dre P•1. 
no dre p.1. 
no dre P• 1. 
9.11gm * P<.3 
4.14gM * P<.4 
71.9g" * P<.6 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P· 1. 
5.33gm P<.6 
100ng •. : •. 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111u •••• : .. 10 ...•. : •. 100 •••• : •• 1u ••••• : •• 10 
.> 11.7gm * P<.5 
.> 13.7911 P<.8 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •••• : •• 10 ••••. : .• 100 ••.. : .• 111u ••.• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1g •.•.. : .• 10 
.> no dre 
.> 3.56gm 
100ng •• : •• 1uu •.•• : •• 10 .•••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 111g •••• : •• 10 ••.•. : •• 100 .... : .. 1g ••••• : .• 10 
:> 
:> :> no dre P• 1. 
23.9911 * P<.5 
no dre P-1. 
10.9gm * P<.009 c 
4.41gm * P<.05 
8.61gm * P<.07 
19.1gm * P<.4 
no dre P• 1. 
no dre P•1. 
787 ·"U * P<. 5 
2. 79gm * P<. 2 
100ng •• :. -1ug •••• : •• 10 ••••• : •• 100 •••• : •• 1mu •••• : .. 10 ....• :. -100 ..•• :. -1U· •••• : •• 10 
. > no dre P•1 . 
no dre P•1. 
.> no dre p.1. 
no dre P• 1. 
.>231.gm * P<.9 
no dre P•1. 
no dre P•1. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 283 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
b 1364 261.llg 2.03g• 0/ 10 2.50g• 9/17 
1364 274.11g n.1.1. 1/10 2.50g11 9/17 
2891 1364 2.06g11 n.s.s. 0/10 2.00g"' 0/20 
VITAMIN D2 50-14·6 
2892 1131 .88911g n.1.s. 16/64 65.0ug 18/68 .130Slg 23/46 .26011g 17/66 .52011g 9/31 (1.0411g 0/7) Gass;obgy , 5,477;1977 
VITAMIN A ACID 302·79·4 
2893 1134 2.8011g n.1.1. 3/33 .71411g 2/35 Schuhl; zkko,86, 77-84; 1976 
2894 1134 4.86•g n.1.1. 1/36 . 71411g 0/33 
1134 2.9111g n.s.1. 1/36 .71411g 1/33 
2 ,4 ·XYL !DINE. Ht l 21436-96-4 
2895 381 5.4511g 103.llg 5/22 13.911g 5/18 29.311g 11/19 Wei sburger; j ept, 2, 325 · 356; 1978/pers. co1111. /Russf i eld 1973 
a 381 122.llg n.a.s. 1/22 13.911g 0/18 29.311g 0/19 
b 381 4.2811g n.1.1. 18/22 13.911g 11/18 29.311g 16/19 
2896 381 5. 7411g 89.611g 31/102p 13.911g 5/18 29.311g 11/19 
2897 381 9.1111g n.s.a. 1/18 12.911g 2/20 27.0llg 1/19 
381 14.511g n.1.1. 8/18 12.911g 2/20 27.011g 3/19 
b 381 8.4011g n.1.1. 13/18 12.911g 8/20 27.011g 9/19 
2898 381 63.911g n.1.1. 0/16 23.611g 1/20 47.311g 1/24 
381 6.8611g n.1.1. 9/16 23.611g 14/20 (47 .311g 15/24) 
2, 5-XYL I DINE. Ht l 51786-53-9 
2899 381 217 .Ilg 3.20gll 0/13 669.llg 5/16 1.56g11 2/20 Wei &burger; j apt, 2, 325 · 356; 1978/pers. co1111. /Russf i eld 1973 
a 381 217 .Ilg 3.20g11 0/13 669.llg 5/16 1.56g11 2/20 
b 381 403.llg 15.3g11 3/13 669 ... g 2/16 1.56g"' 4/20 
c 381 196.llg 3.12g11 9/13 669.11g 8/16 1.56g11 7/20 
2900 381 217.llg 2.01gll 1/102p 669 .Sig 5/16 1.56g11 2/20 
2901 381 294.llg 6.83gll 2/16 617.llg 4/18 1.44gll 3/19 
a 381 299.llg 48.4g11 2/16 617.llg 4/18 1.44g11 2/19 
b 381 149. Ilg 1. 55g11 9/16 617.llg 12/18 1.44g11 12/19 
2902 381 324.llg 2.11g11 5/99p 617.llg 5/18 1.44g11 7/19 
2903 381 272.11g n.1.1. 1/17 120.llg 1/17 240.llg 1/17 
381 19.111g 747.llg 13/17 120.llg 12/17 <240.11g 12/17) 
2904 381 69.611g 475.•g 18/111p 120.llg 7/17 240.llg 9/17 
C. I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 (diarylani l ide yellow) 6358·85·6 
2905 c03269 10.1g• n.1.1. 12/50 2.61gll 10/50 5.23gll 9/50 
a c03269 51. 7g11 n.1.s. 2/50 2.61gll 0150 5.23g11 0/50 l ;v:hpa,hpc,nnd . 
b c03269 25.5g11 n.s.s. 4/50 2.61gll 3/50 5.23g11 1/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2906 c03269 8.17g11 n.1.s. 20/50 2.44gll 21/50 4.82g11 13/50 
a c03269 5.41g11 n.1.s. 15/50 2.44g11 11/50 <4.82g11 4/50) L iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
b c03269 16.6g11 n.a.s. 7/50 2.44g11 5/50 4.82gll 4/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2907 1021 2.46g11 n.s.s. 33/100 125.llg 21/100 375.11g 26/100 1.12g11 34/100 Leuschner; txl t, 2, 253-260; 1978 
2908 c03269 1.13g"' n.1.1. 31/50 920.llg 40/50 1.84gll 34/50 
a c03269 10.4g11 n.1.1. 1/50 920.llg 0/50 1.84g11 2/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2909 c03269 2.64g11 n.s.s. 31/50 736.llg 25/50 1.47g11 23/50 
a c03269 n.s.s. n.1.1. 0/50 736.llg 1/50 1.47g• 0/50 l iv: hpa, hpc, nnd. 
2910 1021 1.03g11 n.s.s. 43/100 45.011g 20/100 135.llg 18/100 405.llg 37/100 Leuschner; tx l t, 2, 253·260;1978 
C. I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 5979·28 ·2 
2911 1021 2.50g11 n.a.a. 33/100 125.llg 22/100 375.llg 33/100 1.13g11 33/ 100 Leuschner; tx l t, 2, 253-260; 1978 
2912 1021 1.19g11 n.1.1. 43/100 45.011g 24/100 135.llg 16/100 405.llg 36/100 
c. I. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 5567-15·7 
2913 1021 4.66g11 n.s.s. 33/100 125.•g 23/100 375.llg 19/100 1.13g11 26/ 100 Leuschner; tx l t, 2, 253-260; 1978 
2914 1021 897.llg n.s.a. 43/100 45.0"'g 23/100 135 ... g 20/100 405.llg 40/100 
c. I. VAT YELLOW 4 128-66·5 
2915 c03565 3. 77g11 n.s. a. 13/20 1.62g11 29/50 3.25gll 29/50 
a c03565 5.84g11 n.1.1. 2/20 1.62g11 6/50 3.25g11 9/50 l iv:hpa,hpc ,nnd. 
b c03565 11.6g11 n.s.1. 2/20 1.62g11 5150 3.25g• 3/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2916 c03565 5.66g• 333.g• 3/20 3.00g• 7150 6.00g11 22/50 
a c03565 1.94g• n.s.s. 12/20 3.00g• 42/50 6.00g11 48/50 
b c03565 3.87g11 n.1.1. 3/20 3.00gll 22/50 6.00g11 21/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
c03565 5.69g• n.1.1. 4/20 3.00g• 14/50 6.00g11 15/50 lun:a/a,a/c. 
2917 c03565 474.•g n.1.1. 9/20 175.•g 26/50 350.•g 23/50 
a c03565 n.1.1. n.1.1. 0/20 175.llg 0/50 350.llg 0/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
2918 c03565 185.llg n.1.1. 11/20 140.llg 32/50 280.llg 31/50 
a c03565 963.llg n.1.1. 0/20 140.llg 1/50 280.llg 3/50 l iv:hpa,hpc,nnd. 
FD & YELLOW NO. 5 Ctartrazine> 1934-21-0 
2919 1358 13.611g n.1.1. 0/10 15.011g 0/13 150.llg 0/14 750.llg 0/10 Mannel l; j php, 10,625-634;1958 
a 1358 273.llg n.1.1. 2/10 15.011g 4/13 150.llg 5/14 750.llg 2/10 
2920 1358 11.4•g n.1.1. 0/11 12.0•g 0/14 120.llg 0/12 600.•g 0/9 
a 1358 439.•g n.1.1. 1/11 12.0•g 2/14 120.llg 1/12 600.•g 0/9 
2921 305• 7 .86g• n.1.1. 0/18 225.llg 2/22 450.•g 0/21 900.llg 0/24 2. 25g• 1/23 Davis; txap ,6, 621-626; 1964 
a 305a 4. 76g• n.s.s. 6/18 225.11g 4/22 450.•g 6/21 900.11g 6/24 2. 25g• 4/23 
b 305a 5.13g• n.s.s. 8/18 225.•g 9/22 450.11g 9/21 900.11g 8/24 2.25g• 5/23 284 GOLD ET AL. 
Spe Strain Site Xpo+Xpt TD50 2Tailpvl 
Sex Route Hist Notes DR AuOp 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 6 100ng •• : •. 1ug •.•. : •. 10 •..•. : •. 100 ..•. :. -1•g .... : .. 10 ..... :. -100 ..•. : •. 1g ..•.• :. -10 
2922 M f cdr eat l iv tuOI 80w80 e . > no dre P• 1 • 
a M cdr eat lun ada 80w80 e no dre P-1. 
2923 M • cdr eat l iv tu• 80w80 e • > no dre P-1 . 
a M 11 cdr ·eot lun ade 80w80 e no dre P-1. 
29'24 R nu eat l iv tu11 64w64 e . > no dre P•1 • 
a R f nu eat tba Mix 64w64 e 87 .4019 P<.02 
2925 R • nu eat l iv tu• 64w64 a 
R • nu eat tba •ix 64w64 e • > no dre P-1 . 
14.0g11 * P<1. 
ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 100ng •• :. ·1ug .••. : •• 10 •.... :. -100 •.•. : .. 111g •..• : .• 10 •.... : .• 100 •.•. : •. 1g •.•.. : .. 10 
2926 f b6a orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 1.09g11 
a f b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 avx 2.33g11 
2927 • b6a orl lun ada 76w76 evx .> no dre 
• b6a or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx no dre 
2928 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 2.33g11 
• f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 731.119 
2929 " b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx ., 680.•9 
• b6c orl lun ada 76w76 avx 1.059m 
b • b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 252.11g 
ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 100ng •. : .• 1ug ••.• : .• 10 ..•.. : .• 100 •... : .. 111g ..•. : •. 10 •.•.. : .. 100 ..•. : .. 1g ..... : .. 10 
2930 M f b61 or l l iv hpt 76w76 IVX 
a M f b61 orl lun ada 76w76 avx 
b M f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 avx 
2931 M 11 b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 avx 
M • b6a orl lun ada 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b61 orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2932 M b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a M f b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
b M f b6c or l tba tu• 76w76 avx 
2933 M " b6c or l lun ade 76w76 avx 
a M • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b M 11 b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 avx . > 
.> 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
205.119 
no dre 
86.7Mg 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
46.2Mg 
no dre 
28.5•g 
ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 100ng •• : •• 1ug •..• : .• 10 ..... :. -100 •.•. :. ·1•g •.•. : .• 10 •.••• : .• 100 •... : •. 1g •.•.• : .• 10 
2934 f b61 orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
a b61 orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
b b61 orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 
2935 • b61 orl lun ade 76w76 evx 
a • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6a or l tba '•i·x 76w76 evx 
2936 f b6c or l lun ade 76w76 evx 
a f b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b b6c or l tba "ix 76w76 evx 
2937 11 b6c orl lun •ix 76w76 evx 
a • b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx 
b • b6c or l tba Mix 76w76 evx 
'2938 b Mgr gav l iv 11hp 22•24 e 
a b •gr gav tba •ix 22•24 • .> 
.> .> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
9.15•g 
202.•g 
4.21119 
13.1•g 
no dre 
13.111g 
5.23Mg 
10.811g 
3.37mg 
56.511g 
25.811g 
ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE 100ng •• : •. 1ug •.•• : •• 10 ••.•• : •• 100 ...• :. ·1•g •••. : •• 10 ..... :. ·100 ••.• : •• 1g ••... :. -10 
2939 f b6a or l l un ade 76w76 evx .> 1. 15g11 
a f b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 1.15g11 
2940 • b6a orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx .> 903.•g 
a • b6a orl lun ada 76w76 avx no dre 
b • b6a orl tba •ix 76w76 evx 715.119 
2941 f b6c orl lun ade 76w76 evx .> 1.15g• 
a f b6c or l l iv hpt 76w76 evx no dre 
b f b6c orl tba 11ix 76w76 evx 1.15911 
2942 • b6c orl l iv hpt 76w76 evx ., 244.11g 
a 11 b6c orl lun 11ix 76w76 evx no dre 
b 11 b6c orl tba •ix 76w76 avx 189.11g 
2943 b •gr gav l iv tu11 22•24 a .> no dre 
b Mgr gav tba •ix 22•24 a 255. Ilg 
ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 
2944 M b cd 1 wat l un tu• 32•32 e 
a Mb cd1 wat liv tu11 32•32 e 
b M b cd1 wat tba tu• 32•32 e 
M b cd1 wat tba .. 1 32•32 a 100ng •• : •• 1ug ••.• : •. 10 ••••. : •• 100 •... :. ·1•g .... : •• 10 ....• : .• 100 .••. : •. 1g •.•.. : •• 10 
.> no dre 
no dre 
no dre 
no dre P<.4 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P•1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.05 
P<.05 
P<.2 
P<.002 
P-1 . 
P•1. 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.5 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P-1. 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.003 -
P-1. 
P-1. 
P•1. 
P<.6 
P<1. 
P<.4 
P<.3 
P•1. 
P<.3 
P<.09 
P<.3 
P<.04 
P<.008 
P<.002 + 
P<.6 
P-1. 
P<.7 
P<.6 
P•1. 
P<.7 
P<.3 
P-1. 
P<.3 
P<.02 
P•1. 
P<.009 
P•1. 
P<.06 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 285 
RefNum LoConf UpConf Cntrl !Dose llnc 2Dose 2Inc Citation or Pathology 
Brkly Code 
FD & YELLOW NO. 6 <sunset yellow FCF) 2783-94·0 
2922 1355 476.•g n.s.1. 0/47 260.IRg 0/29 520.•g 0/27 1.04911 0/27 2.08g• 0/29 Gaunt; fctx, 12, 1-10; 1974 
1355 6.02911 n.s.s. 12/47 260.llg 6/29 520.119 3/27 1.04911 2/27 2.08911 3/29 
2923 1355 412.119 n.s.s. 0/50 240.llg 0/26 480.llg 0!30 960.llg 0/27 1.92911 0/19 
• 1355 2.34g• n.s.s . 7/50 240.llg 2/26 480.•g 8/30 960.119 2/27 1.92911 3/19 
2924 1358 15.3119 n.s.s. 0/10 15.0119 0/15 150.119 0/13 750.llg 0/9 Nannel l; Jphp, 10,625-634;1958 
• 1358 31.1119 n.a.a . 2/10 15.0119 0/15 150.119 6/13 C750.11g 2/9) 
2925 1358 6.91119 n.s.a. 0/11 12.0119 0/8 120.mg 0/12 600.119 0/9 
a 1358 264.119 n.s.s. 1/11 12.0119 1/8 120.llg 1/12 600.119 1/9 
ZINC DI BUTYLD ITH IOCARBANATE <butyl z i•ate> 136·23·2 
2926 1220 239.119 n.s.1. 1/17 364.119 3/18 Innes;nth, 1968/1969 
a 1220 721.119 n.a.s. 0/17 364.119 0/18 
b 1220 261.llg n.s.s. 2/17 364.119 3/18 
2927 1220 317.llg n.s.s. 2/18 339.119 2/18 
a 1220 672.llg n.1.1. 1/18 339.119 0/18 
b 1220 351.llg n.s.a. 3/18 339.119 2/18 
2928 1220 379.119 n.a.s .. 0/16 364.119 1/18 
• 1220 721.119 n.1.1. 0/16 364.119 0/18 
b 1220 220.119 n.a.s. 0/16 364.llg 3/18 
2929 1220 205.119 n.1.1. 0/16 339.119 3/18 
a 1220 259.119 n.1.1. 0/16 339.119 2/18 
b 1220 107.119 1.03911 0/16 339.119 7/18 
ZINC DI ETHYLDITHIOCARBANATE Cathyl zi•ate> 14324-55·1 
2930 1210 68.1•9 n.s.s. 0/17 36.4119 0/17 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1210 68.1119 n.1.1. 1/17 36.4119 0/17 
b 1210 32.0•9 n.1.1. 2/17 36.4119 2/17 
2931 1210 28.4119 n.s.1. 1/18 33.9119 2/18 
• 1210 31. 7•9 n.a.s. 2/18 33.9•9 2/18 
b 1210 17.3•9 n.a.1. 3/18 33.9119 5/18 
2932 1210 68.1119 n.a.a. 0/16 36.4•9 0/17 
a 1210 68.1119 n.a.a. 0/16 36.4•9 0/17 
b 1210 68.1119 n.s.a. 0/16 36.4•9 0/17 
2933 1210 15.9119 n.a.a. 0/16 33.9•9 4/17 
1210 63.4119 n.1.1. 0/16 33.9119 0/17 
b 1210 11 • 5•g 155. Ilg 0/16 33.9119 6/17 
ZINC DI NETHYLD I TH IOCARBANATE (11ethyl zi11ate) 137-30-4 
2934 1204 4.07119 n.s.s. 0/17 2.05119 0/18 Innes; nt is, 1968/ 1969 
a 1204 4.07•9 n.s.s. 1/17 2.05119 0/18 
b 1204 4.07119 n.s.s. 2/17 2.05119 0/18 
2935 1204 1.27•g n.s.a. 2/18 1.91•9 3/17 
1204 2. 12119 n.s.s. 1/18 1.91119 1/17 
b 1204 .898•9 n.s.s. 3/18 1.91119 5/ 17 
2936 1204 2.14•g n.1.1. 0/16 2.05119 1/18 
• 1204 4.07•9 n.1.1 . 0/16 2.05119 0/18 
b 1204 2.14119 n.1.1. 0/16 2.05119 1/18 
2937 1204 1.28119 n.1.1. 0/16 1.91119 2/16 
• 1204 1.76119 n.1.1. 0/16 1.91119 1/16 
b 1204 1.01119 n.a.a. 0/16 1.91119 3/16 
2938 1426 13.8•g 1.94911 0/46 18.4119 2/10 Andr i anova; vp it, 29, 71·74; 1970 
1426 8.47•9 198.llg 1/46 18.4119 4/10 
ZINC ETHYLENES! STH IOCARBANATE Czineb> 12122-67·7 
2939 1213 152.119 n.1.s. 1/17 180.•9 2/18 Innes;ntis, 1968/1969 
a 1213 357.•9 n.s.s. 0/17 180.119 0/18 
b 1213 130.•9 n.1.1. 2/17 180.llg 3/18 
2940 1213 132.•9 n.1.1. 1/18 168.•g 2/17 
a 1213 206.•9 n.a.s. 2/18 168.•g 1/17 
b 1213 96.4•9 n.s.1. 3/18 168.•9 4/17 
2941 1213 188.•9 n.1.1. 0/16 180.119 1/18 
1213 357.•9 n.1.1. 0/16 180.•g 0/18 
b 1213 188.•9 n.1.1. 0/16 180.•9 1/18 
2942 1213 84.0119 n.1.1. 0/16 168.119 4/18 
a 1213 333.119 n.a.a. 0/16 168.119 0/18 
b 1213 71.2•9 4.14911 0/16 168.•g 5/18 
2943 1426 154.•9 n.1.1. 0/46 74.9119 0/10 Andr; anova; vpi t, 29, 71·74; 1970 
1426 57 .5•9 n.1.1. 1/46 74.9119 2/10 
ZIRCONIUM CIV) SULFATE 14644-61·2 
2944 1036 8.41•9 n.1.1. 15171 .877•g 9/72 Kanisawa;canr, 29,892·895;1969 
a 1036 10.4•9 n.1.1. 4/71 .877•9 3/72 
b 1036 7.10119 n.1.1. 24/71 .877•g 15/72 
1036 9.64•9 n.1.1. 8/71 .877•g 5/72 286 GOLD ET AL. 
APPENDIX 1: CHEMICAL NAMES AND SYNONYMS 
CAS 
NUMBER' 
60-35-5 
103-90-2 
968-81-0 
18523-69-8 
34627-78-6 
65734-38 -5 
1078-38-2 
520-46-5 
114·83-0 
4075-79·0 
28314-03·6 
53-96-3 
28322-02-3 
7008-42-6 
107-13-1 
8052-16-2 
50-76-0 
628·94-4 
3688-53-7 
29611-03-8 
1162-65-8 
101-73-5 
103·16-2 
74-31-7 
135-88-6 
93-46-9 
54-80-8 
51-02-5 
116-06-3 
309-00-2 
107-05-1 
52207-83-7 
120-78-5 
915-67·3 
102-77·2 
97-56-3 
75104-43-7 
97-56-3 
17026-81-2 
6109-97-3 
mixture 
4363-03-5 
59-05-2 
72254-58-1 
82-28-0 
3775-55-1 
712-68-5 
38514-71-5 
119-34-6 
2104-09-8 
121-66-4 
18968-99-5 
117-79-3 
97-56-3 
118-92-3 
92-67-1 
92-67-1 
3693-22-9 
119-34-6 
61-82-5 
61-82-5 
12125-02-9 
3012-65-5 CHEMICAL NAME 
ACETAMIDE ACETAMINOPHEN 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 
ACETONF.(4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2 -THIAZOL YLJHYDRAZONE 
1'-ACETOXYSAFROLE 
N'-ACETYL-4-(HYDROXYMETHYL)PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
l-ACETYL-2-ISONICOTINOYLHYDRAZINE 
3-ACETYL-6-METHYL-2,4-PYRANDIONE 
l-ACETYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL 
1-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
4-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
ACETYLATED DIAMYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
ACRONYCINE 
ACRYLONITRILE 
ACTINOMYCIN C 
ACTINOMYCIN D 
AD IP AMIDE 
AF-2 
AFLATOXICOL 
AFLATOXIN Bl 
AFLATOXIN, CRUDE 
AGERITE 150 (see p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMINE) 
AGERITE ALBA (see HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZYL ETHER) 
AGERITE DPPD (see DIPHENYL -p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE) 
AGERITE POWDER (see PHENYL-beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE) 
AGERITE WHITE (see oym.-dibeta-NAPHTHYL-p-
PHENYLENEDIAMINE) 
ALDERLIN (see PRONETHALOL) 
ALDERLIN.HCl (see PRONETHALOL. HCl) 
ALDICARB 
ALDRIN 
ALKYLBENZENESULFONA TE, LINEAR 
ALL YL CHLORIDE 
ALL YLHYDRAZINE .HCl 
ALTAX (see BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE) 
ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
AMARANTH (see FD & C RED NO. 2) 
AMAX (see N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE -
2-SULFENAMIDE) 
2-AMIN0-5-AZOTOLUENE (see o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE) 
3-AMINO-l,4-DIMETHYL-5H-PYRIDOl4,3-b]INDOLEACETATE 
4-AMIN0-2,3-DIMETHYLAZOBENZENE 
(see o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE) 
3-AMIN0-4-ETHOXY ACETANILIDE 
3-AMIN0-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE .HCl 
3-AMIN0-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE MIXTURE (3-amino-9-ethylcarbazo le 
and 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole .HCl. CAS NUMBER 132-32-1 
and 6109-97-3) 
4-AMIN0-3-HYDROXYBIPHENYL (see 3-HYDROXY-4-
AMINOBIPHENYL) 
4-AMINO-NIO -METHYL -PTEROYLGLUTAMIC ACID 
(see METHOTREXATE) 
3-AMINO-l-METHYL-5H-PYRIDOl4,3-bllNDOLE ACETATE 
1-AMIN0-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 
2-AMIN0-5-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-l,3,4-0XADIAZOLE 
2·AMIN0-5-(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)-l ,3,4-THIADIAZOLE 
2-AMIN0-4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE 
4-AMIN0-2-NITROPHENOL 
2-AMIN0-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2-AMIN0-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 
2-AMIN0-5-PHENYL -2-0XAZOLIN-4-0NE + Mg(OH)2 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE 
AMINOBENZOIC ACID (see ANTHRANILIC ACID) 
p-AMINOBIPHENYL (see 4-AMINODIPHENYL) 
4-AMINODIPHENYL 
2-AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 
p-AMINONITROPHENOL (see 4-AMIN0-2-NITROPHENOL) 
3-AMINOTRIAZOLE 
AMITROL (see 3-AMINOTRIAZOLE) 
AMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
AMMONIUM CITRATE CAS 
NUMBER' 
1336-21-6 
10589-74-9 
1119-68-2 
15879-93-3 
101-05-3 
62-53-3 
142-04-1 
134-29-2 
20265-97-8 
118-92-3 
84-65-1 
28300-74-5 
60-80-0 
86-88-4 
8003-03-0 
140-57-8 
27323-18-8 
11096-82-5 
7631-89-2 
1327-53-3 
1327-53-3 
7784-46-5 
22839-47-0 
50-78-2 
8003-03-0 
1912-24-9 
51-55-8 
2465-27-2 2303-16-4 
320-67-2 
115-02-6 
26628-22-8 
86-50-0 
103-33-3 
543-80-6 
542-88-1 
71-43-2 
319-84-6 
5351-65-5 
613-94-5 
92-87-5 
50-32-8 
532-32-1 
91-76-9 
91-64-5 
51542-33-7 
120-78-5 
95-14-7 
613-94-5 
50-32-8 
50-32-8 
20570-96-1 
13510-49-1 
64039-27-6 
128-37-0 
92-52-4 
108-60-1 
111-44-4 
13483-18-6 
56894-91 -8 
542-88-1 
23746-34-1 
53609-64-6 
21260-46-8 
21260-46-8 
7787-59-9 
2519-30-4 
1937-37-7 
2602-46-2 CHEMICAL NAME 
AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 
l-AMYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
n-AMYLHYDRAZINE.HCl (see n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE .HCl) 
ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL 
ANILAZINE 
ANILINE 
ANILINE .HCI 
o-ANISIDINE.HCI 
p-ANISIDINE.HCl 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 
9,10-ANTHRAQUINONE 
ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE 
ANTIPYRINE (see PHENAZONE) 
ANTU (see 1-(1-NAPHTHYL) -2-THIOUREA) 
APC (see ASPIRIN , PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE) 
ARA MITE 
AROCLOR 1254 
AROCLOR 1260 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 
ARSENIC TRIOXIDE (see ARSENIOUS OXIDE) 
ARSENIOUS OXIDE 
ARSENITE , SODIUM 
ASPARTAME 
ASPIRIN 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN , AND CAFFEINE 
ATRAZINE 
ATROPINE 
AURAMINE -0 
AVADEX (see DIALLATE) 
5-AZACYTIDINE 
AZASERINE 
AZIDE, SODIUM 
AZINPHOSMETHYL 
AZOBENZENE 
BARIUM ACETATE 
BCME (see BIS-(CHLOROMETHYL) ETHER) 
BENZENE 
alpha-BENZENE HEXACHLORIDE (see alpha-
1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE) 
BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE 
BENZHYDRAZIDE (see BENZOYL HYDRAZINE) 
BENZIDINE 
BENZO(a)PYRENE 
BENZOATE, SODIUM 
BENZOGUANAMINE 
1,2-BENZOPYRONE 
1-(2' -BENZOTHIAZOL YL)-3-METHYL-3-NITROSOUREA 
(see N-NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON) 
BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE 
IH-BENZOTRIAZOLE 
BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 
BENZPYRENE (see BENZO(a)PYRENE) 
3,4-BENZPYRENE (see BENZO(a)PYRENE) 
BENzyLHYDRAZINE .2HCl 
BERYLLIUM SULFATE 
beta-TGdR (see beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE) 
BHT (see BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE) 
BIPHENYL 
BIS(2-CHLORO-l -METHYLETHYL) ETHER 
BIS-2-CHLOROETHYLETHER 
BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)BUTANE 
BIS-1,2-(CHLOROMETHOXY)ETHANE 
BIS-1,6-(CHLOROMETHOXY)HEXANE BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)-p-XYLENE 
BIS-(CHLOROMETHYL) 
ETHER 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMIN0-2-(5-NITR0-2-
THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMIN0 -2-(2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
BIS-2-HYDROXYETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, POTASSIUM 
N-BIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)NITROSAMINE 
(see N-NITROSOBIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)AMINE) 
BISMATE (see BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 
BLACKPN 
C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38 
C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6 CAS 
NUMBER ' 
3844-45-9 
860-22-0 
109-84-2 
99-30-9 
2519-30-4 
3844-45-9 
5160-02-1 
7758-01-2 
77-65-6 
16071-86-6 
5351-65-5 
55-98-1 
3817-11-6 
88-85-7 
3817-11-6 
13010-08-7 
136-23-2 
128-37-0 
7422-80-2 
56795-65-4 
592-31-4 
3068-88-0 
75-60-5 
543-90-8 
35658-65-2 
14239-68-0 
7790-84-3 
58-08-2 
8003-03-0 
156-62-7 
133-06-2 
149-30-4 
563-41-7 
103-03-7 
121-59-5 
63-25-2 
56-23-5 
60391-92-6 
77-65-6 
3567-69-9 
9000-07-1 
999-81-5 
122-34-9 
9004-32-4 
474-25-9 
15879-93-3 
133-90-4 
305-03-3 
56-75-7 
118-75-2 
106-47-8 
57-74-9 
143-50-0 
80-33-1 
7782-50-5 
302-22-7 
101-79-1 
97-00-7 
88-73-3 
100-00-5 
5131-60-2 
95-83-0 
61702-44-1 
95-74-9 
95-79-4 
3165-93-3 
50892-23-4 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
CHEMICAL NAME 
FD & C BLUE NO. 1 
FD & C BLUE NO. 2 
BOF (see 2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE) 
BOTRAN (see 2,6-DICHLOR0-4-NITROANILINE) 
BRILLIANT BLACK BN (see BLACK PN) 
BRILLIANT BLUE FCF (see FD & C BLUE NO. I) 
BRILLIANT RED (see D & C RED NO. 9) 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 
BROMODIETHYLACETYLUREA (see CARBROMAL) 
C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 
BSH (see BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE) 
BUSULFAN (see MYLERAN) 
BUTACIDE (see PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT) 
BUTYL-BUTANOL-NITROSAMINE (see N-BUTYL-N-
(4-HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSAMINE) 
2-sec-BUTYL-4,6-DINITROPHENOL 
N-N-BUTYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
N-BUTYL-N-(4 -HYDROXYBUTYL)NITROSAMINE 
DI-tert-BUTYL-4-HYDROXYMETHYL PHENOL 
N-BUTYL-N ' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
BUTYL ZIMATE (see ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE 
1,1-Dl-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE 
l,2-DI-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.2HCI 
n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
N-BUTYLUREA 
beta-BUTYROLACTONE 
CACODYLIC ACID (see DIMETHYLARSINIC ACID) 
CADMIUM ACETATE 
CADMIUM CHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE 
CADMIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
CADMIUM SULPHATE 
CAFFEINE 
CAFFEINE, ASPIRIN, AND PHENACETIN (see ASPIRIN, 
PHENACETIN , AND CAFFEINE) 
CALCIUM CYANAMIDE (see CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM) 
CAPT AN 
CAPTAX (see 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE) 
CARBAMYL HYDRAZINE.HCI 
l-CARBAMYL-2 -PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
CARBARSONE 
CARBARYL 
CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 
CARBOXYMETHYLNITROSOUREA CARBROMAL 
CARMOISINE 
(see C.I. FOOD RED 3) 
CARRAGEENAN , ACID-DEGRADED 
CARRAGEENAN, NATIVE 
CCC (see (2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM 
CHLORIDE) 
CDT (see SIMAZINE) 
CELLULOSE CARBOXYMETHYL ETHER, SODIUM 
(see EDIFAS B) 
CHENODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 
alpha-CHLORALOSE (see ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL) 
CHLORAMBEN 
CHLORAMBUCIL 
CHLORAMPHENICOL 
CHLORANIL 
4-CHLORANILIC (see p-CHLOROANILINE) 
CHLORDANE 
CHLORDECONE (see KEPONE) 
CHLORFENSON (see p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE 
SULFONATE) 
CHLORINE 
CHLORMADINONE ACETATE 
4,CHLOR0-4 '-AMINODIPHENYLETHER 
2-CHLOR0-5-(3,5-DIMETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL)BENZOIC 
ACID 
l-CHLOR0-2,4-DINITROBENZENE 
l-CHLOR0-2-NITROBENZENE 
l-CHLOR0-4-NITROBENZENE 
4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
2-CHLORO-p -PHENYLENEDIAMINE SULFATE 
3-CHLORO-p-TOLUIDINE 
5-CHLORO-o-TOLUIDINE 
4-CHLORO-o -TOLUIDINE.HCI 
[4
-CHLOR0-6-(2,3-XYLIDIN0)-2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIOJACETIC 
ACID CAS 
NUMBER' 
107-20-0 
140-49-8 106-47-8 
510-15-6 
54749-90-5 
999-81-5 
67-66-3 
107-30-2 
6959-47-3 
6959-48-4 
56-75-7 
100-00-5 
80-33-1 
150-68-5 
10473-70-8 
2227-13-6 
94-20-2 
76-06-2 
683-50-1 
107-05-1 
590-21-6 
1897-45-6 
54749-90-5 
94-20-2 
101-21-3 
2921-88-2 
12236-46-3 
4553-89-3 
1308-39-9 
1066-30-4 
101-21-3 
637-07-0 
43054-45-1 
1420-04-8 
107-30-2 
477-30-5 
137-29-1 
10380-28-6 
56-72-4 
91-64-5 
102-50-1 
120-71-8 
137-29-1 
135-20-6 
156-62-7 
139-05-9 
12663-46-6 
95-33-0 
4998-76-9 
19834-02-7 
50-18-0 
60-11-7 
4342-03-4 
1897-45-6 
1596-84-5 
80-08-0 
58-14-0 
96-12-8 
488-41-5 
91-94-1 
33857-26-0 
53-19-0 
72-54-8 
72-55-9 
50-29-3 
62-73-7 
576-68-1 520-46-5 
55-
18-5 
64039-27-6 CHEMICAL NAME 
4-CHLOR0-6 -(2,3-XYLIDIN0) -2-PYRIMIDINYLTHIO(N-beta-
HYDROXYETHYL) ACETAMIDE 
CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 
4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 
p-CHLOROANILINE 
CHLOROBENZILATE 
2-[3-(2-CHLOROETHYL)-3-NITROSOUREIDO [-D-
GLUCOPYRANOSE (see CHLOROZOTOCIN) 
(2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
CHLOROFORM 
CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE.HCI 
3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE .HCI 
CHLOROMYCETIN (see CHLORAMPHENICOL) 
p-CHLORONITROBENZENE (see l-CHLOR0-4-NITROBENZENE) 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE 
3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA 
1-( 4-CHLOROPHENYL)-1-PHENYL-2 -PROPYNYL CARBAMATE 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE 
l-(p-CHLOROPHENYLSULFONYL) -3-PROPYLUREA 
(see CHLORPROPAMIDE) 
CHLOROPICRIN 
2-CHLOROPROPANAL 
CHLOROPROPENE (see ALL YL CHLORIDE) 
1-CHLOROPROPENE 
CHLOROTHALONIL CHLOROZOTOCIN 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 
CHLORPROPHAM 
(see ISOPROPYL-N-(3-
CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMA TE) 
CHLORPYRIFOS (see O,O-DIETHYL -0-(3,5,6-
TRICHLOR0-2 -PYRIDYL) PHOSPHOROTHIOATE) 
CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 
CHOCOLATE BROWN HT 
CHROMIC OXIDE PIGMENT 
CHROMIUM (III) ACETATE 
CIPC (see ISOPROPYL-N-(3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE) 
CLIVORINE 
CLOFIBRATE CLOMIPHENE 
CITRATE 
CLONITRALID 
CMME (see CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER) 
COLCEMID CONJUGATED 
EQUINE ESTROGENS (see PREMARIN) 
COPPER DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMA TE 
COPPER-8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE COUMAPHOS 
COUMARIN 
(see 1,2-BENZOPYRONE) 
m-CRESIDINE 
p-CRESIDINE 
CUMATE (see COPPER DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
CUPFERRON 
CYANAMIDE , CALCIUM 
CYCLAMATE , SODIUM 
CYCLOCHLOROTINE 
N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE.HCI 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE SULFATE 
CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE 
DAB (see N,N-DIMETHYL-4-AMINOAZOBENZENE) 
DACARBAZINE 
DACONIL (see CHLOROTHALONIL) 
DAMINOZIDE 
DAPSONE 
DARAPRIN (see PYRIMETHAMINE) 
DBCP (see l,2-DIBROM0-3-CHLOROPROPANE) 
DBM (see DIBROMOMANNITOL) 
DCB (see 3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE) 
DCDD (see 2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p -DIOXIN) 
o,p'-DDD 
p,p'-DDD 
p,p'-DDE 
DDT 
DDVP (see DICHLORVOS) 
DEGRANOL (see MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD) 
DEHYDROACETIC ACID (see 3-ACETYL-6-METHYL -
2,4-PYRANDIONE) 
DEN (see N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE) 
beta-2' -DEOXY -6-THIOGUANOSINE MONOHYDRATE 
(see beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE) 287 288 GOLD ET AL. 
CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
56-53-1 DES (see DIETHYLSTILBESTROL) 
131-01-1 DESERPIDINE 
N-1-DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE 
2303-16-4 DIALLATE 
720-69-4 4,6-DIAMIN0-2-(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE 
39156-41-7 2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 
7411-49-6 3,3'-DIAMINOBENZIDINE.4HCI (see 3,3',4,4'­
TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCI) 
2243-62-1 1,5-DIAMINONAPHTHALENE (see 1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE) 
95-80-7 2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE 
636-23-7 2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE .2HCI 
6369-59-1 2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
6358-85-6 DIARYLANILIDE YELLOW (see C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12) 
333-41-5 DIAZINON 
53-70-3 DIBENZ(a,h)ANTHRACENE 
262-12-4 DIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
4106-66-5 3-DIBENZOFURANAMINE 
96-12-8 1,2-DIBROM0-3-CHLOROPROPANE 
10318-26-0 DIBROMODULCITOL 
106-93-4 1,2-DIBROMOETHANE 
488-41-5 DIBROMOMANNITOL 
56654-52-5 1,3-DIBUTYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
924-16-3 DIBUTYLNITROSAMINE (see NITROSODIBUTYLAMINE) 
1067-33-0 DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
4342-03-4 DIC (see DACARBAZINE) 
117-80-6 DICHLONE (see 2,3-DICHLOR0-1 ,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE) 
51-75-2 DICHLOREN (see NITROGEN MUSTARD) 
8001-50-1 DICHLORICIDE MOTHPROOFER (see STROBANE) 
101-14-4 3,3' -DICHLOR0 -4,4' -DIAMINODIPHENYLMETHANE 
(see 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2 -CHLOROANILINE)) 
3883-43-0 2,3-DICHLORO-p-DIOXANE 
87-56-9 alpha,beta-DICHLORO-beta-FORMYLACRYLIC ACID 
2164-09-2 3,4'-DICHLOR0-2-METHYLACRYLANILIDE 
51-75-2 2,2' -DICHLORO-N-METHYLETHYLAMINE 
(see NITROGEN MUSTARD) 
117-80-6 2,3-DICHLORO-l,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE 
99-30-9 2,6-DICHLOR0-4-NITROANILINE 
91-94-1 3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE 
110-57-6 trans-1,4-DICHLOROBUTENE -2 
33857-26-0 2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
75-34-3 1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 
107-06-2 1,2-DICHLOROETHANE 
120-36-5 2-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
(see alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID) 
120-36-5 alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
6965-71-5 alpha-(2,5-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
94-75-7 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID 
94-80-4 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n-BUTYL ESTER 
25168-26-7 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER 
94-11-1 2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER 
330-54-1 3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-l,1-DIMETHYLUREA 
97-16-5 2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE 
62-73-7 DICHLORVOS 
115-32-2 DICOFOL 
2164-09-2 DICRYL (see 3,4'-DICHLOR0-2 -METHYLACRYLANILIDE) 
1212-29-9 N,N'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIOUREA 
81-21-0 DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 
60-57-1 DIELDRIN 
13366-73-9 DIELDRIN, PHOT0-
298-18-0 D,L-DIEPOXYBUTANE 
7316-37-2 DIETHYL-beta,gamma-EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE 
7347-49-1 N,N-DIETHYL-4-(4 ' -[PYRIDYL -1' -OXIDEJAZO)ANILINE 
2921-88-2 O,O-DIETHYL-0 -(3,5,6-TRICHLOR0-2 -PYRIDYL) 
PHOSPHOROTHIOATE 
685-91-6 DIETHYLACETAMIDE 
148-18-5 DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE , SODIUM 
(see SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE) 
111-46-6 DIETHYLENE GLYCOL 
617-84-5 DIETHYLFORMAMIDE 
55-18-5 DIETHYLNITROSAMINE (see N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE) 
55-18-5 N,N-DIETHYLNITROSAMINE (see N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE) 
56-53-1 DIETHYLSTILBESTROL 
105-55-5 N,N'-DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
628-36-4 1,2-DIFORMYLHYDRAZINE 
33389-33-2 l,2-DIHYDR0-2-(5-NITR0-2 -THIENYL)QUINAZOLIN-
4(3H)-ONE 
3276-41-3 3,6-DIHYDR0-2-NITROS0-2H-1,2-0XAZINE 
123-33-1 1,2-DIHYDR0-3,6 -PYRIDAZINEDIONE (see MALEIC 
HYDRAZIDE) CAS 
NUMBER" 
94-58-6 
60-51-5 
828-00-2 
5803-51-0 
54150-69-5 
91-93-0 
1146-71-0 
60-11-7 
57-97-6 
3851-16-9 
59-35-8 
551-92-8 
120-61-6 
55738-54-0 
6120-10-1 
75-60-5 
57-97-6 
79-44-7 
79-44-7 
598-64-1 
57-14-7 
306-37-6 
26049-69-4 
4164-28-7 
62-75-9 
62-75-9 
6119-92-2 
51-28-5 
55557-00-1 
101-25-7 
140-79-4 
121-14-2 
123-91-1 
123-91-1 
78-34-2 
1746-01-6 
74-31-7 
86-29-3 
102-09-0 
57-41-0 
86-30-6 
142-59-6 
7757-82-6 
97-77-8 
142-59-6 
142-46-1 
79-40-3 
330-54-1 
1596-84-5 
57-97-6 
62-75-9 
120-61-6 
2439-10-3 
2439-10-3 
90-43-7 
88-06-2 
87-86-5 
95-33-0 
106-93-4 
107-06-2 
9004-59-5 
9004-32-4 
150-38-9 
150-38-9 
316-42-7 
55965-13-4 
115-29-7 
50-18-0 CHEMICAL NAME 
DIHYDROSAFROLE 
DIMETHOATE 
DIMETHOXANE 
2,5-DIMETHOXY-4 ' -AMINOSTILBENE 
2,4-DIMETHOXYANILINE.HCI 
3,3'-DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4'-DIISOCYANATE 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENEjc[COUMARIN 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONEj2,3 -c[COUMARIN 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONEj3,2-c [COUMARIN 
N,N-DIMETHYL-4-AMINOAZOBENZENE 
9,10-DIMETHYL -l,2-BENZANTHRACENE (see 7,12-
DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE) 
N,N'-DIMETHYL-N ,N'-DINITROSOPHTHALAMIDE 
4,6-DIMETHYL -2-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)PYRIMIDINE 
l,2-DIMETHYL -5-NITROIMIDAZOLE 
DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE 
trans-2-[(DIMETHYLAMINO)METHYLIMIN0 [-5-[2-(5-
NITR0-2-FURYL)VINYLJ -1,3,4-0XADIAZOLE 
4-DIMETHYLAMIN0-3,5 -XYLENOL 
DIMETHYLARSINIC ACID 
7,12-DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE 
DIMETHYLCARBAMOYL CHLORIDE (see DIMETHYLCARBAMYL 
CHLORIDE) 
DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORIDE 
DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, DIMETHYLAMINE 
1,1-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE 
l,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE .2HCI 
2-(2,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZIN0)-4-(5-NITR0-2-
FURYL)THIAZOLE 
DIMETHYLNITRAMINE 
DIMETHYLNITROSAMINE (see N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE) 
N,N-DIMETHYLNITROSAMINE 
(see N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE) 
DINITRO(l-METHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL CROTONATE 
2,4-DINITROPHENOL 
DINITROSOHOMOPIPERAZINE 
N,N-DINITROSOPENTAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
DINITROSOPIPERAZINE 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
1,4-DIOXANE 
p-DIOXANE (see 1,4-DIOXANE) 
DIOXATHION 
DIOXIN (see 2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN) 
DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULFIDE 
DIPHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
DIPHENYLACETONITRILE DIPHENYLCARBONATE 
5,5-DIPHENYLHYDANTOIN 
DIPHENYLNITROSAMINE (see 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE) 
N,N-DIPROPYL-4-(4 '-[PYRIDYL-1 '-0XIDE[AZO)ANILINE 
DISODIUM ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE (see 
ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE , DISODIUM) 
DISODIUM SULFATE (see SULFATE, SODIUM) 
DISULFIRAM (see TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
DITHANE (see ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE , DISODIUM ) 
2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 
DITHIOOXAMIDE 
DIURON (see 3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-
1,1-DIMETHYLUREA) 
DMASA (see DAMINOZIDE) 
DMBA (see 7,12-DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRACENE) 
DMN (see N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE) 
DMT (see DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE) 
n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 
DODINE (see n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE) 
DOWICIDE-1 (see o-PHENYLPHENOL) 
DOWICIDE-2S (see 2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL) 
DOWICIDE-7 (see 2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL) 
DURAX (see N-CYCLOHEXYL -2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE) 
EDB (see 1,2-DIBROMOETHANE) 
EDC (see 1,2-DICHLOROETHANE) 
EDIFAS A 
EDIFAS B 
EDTA (see EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE) 
EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE 
EMETINE. 2HCI 
EMULSIFIER YN 
ENDOSULFAN 
ENDOXAN (see CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE) CARCINOGENI C POTENCY DATABASE 289 
CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
72-20-8 ENDRIN 
8015-30-3 ENOVID 
ENOVID-E 
106-89-8 EPICHLOROHYDRIN 
16423-68-0 ERYTHROSINE (see FD & C RED NO. 3) 
50-28-2 ESTRADIOL 
50-28-2 ESTRADIOL-17beta (see ESTRAD!OL) 
22966-79-6 ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
536-33-4 ETH!ONAMIDE 
13073-35-3 ETHIONINE 
64-17-5 ETHYL ALCOHOL 
105-36-2 ETHYL BROMOACETATE 
14239-68-0 ETHYL CADMATE (see CADMIUM DIETHYLDITH!OCARBAMATE) 
637-07-0 ETHYL-alpha-p-CHLOROPHENOXYISOBUTYRATE 
(see CLOFIBRATE) 
2629-59-6 S-ETHYL-L-CYSTEINE 
72-56-0 p,p'-ETHYL-DDD 
74920-78-8 N-ETHYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
N-ETHYL-N ' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
5456-28-0 ETHYL SELENAC (see SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
20941-65-5 ETHYL TELLURAC 
97-77-8 ETHYL TUADS (see TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
14324-55-1 ETHYL ZIMATE (see ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
106-93-4 ETHYLENE DIBROMIDE (see 1,2-DIBROMOETHANE) 
107-06-2 ETHYLENE DICHLORIDE (see 1,2-DICHLOROETHANE) 
1072-53-3 ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
151-56-4 ETHYLENE !MINE 
96-45-7 ETHYLENE THIOUREA 
120-93-4 ETHYLENE UREA 
142-59-6 ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE , DISODIUM 
106-87-6 l-ETHYLENEOXY -3,4-EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 
18413-14-4 ETHYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
38434-77-4 ETHYLNITROSOCY ANAMIDE 
842-00-2 4-ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE -1-SULFONAMIDE 
297-76-7 ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 
8056-92-6 ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE/ETHINYL ESTRADIOL llO:lJ 
(see OVULEN) 
96-45-7 ETU (see ETHYLENE THIOUREA) 
470-82-6 EUCALYPTOL 
24554-26-5 FANFT (see N-J4-(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)-2-
THIAZOLYLJFORMAMIDE) 
2353-45-9 FAST GREEN FCF (see FD & C GREEN NO. 3) 
140-56-7 FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED 
55-38-9 FENTHION 
14484-64-1 FERBAM (see FERRIC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
14484-64-1 FERRIC DIMETHYLDITH!OCARBAMATE 
mixture FERRIC NITROSODIMETHYLDITH!OCARBAMATE AND 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE (see VANGUARD GF) 
363-17-7 N-(2-FLUORENYL)-2 ,2,2-TRIFLUOROACETAMIDE 
53-96-3 FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
28314-03-6 N-1-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 1-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
53-96-3 N-2-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
28322-02-3 N-4-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see 4-ACETYLAM!NOFL UORENE) 
N-1-FLUORENYLDIACETAMIDE (see N-1-
DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE) 
7681-49-4 FLUORIDE , SODIUM 
324-93-6 4' -FLUOR0 -4-AM!NODIPHENYL 
398-32-3 N-(4' -FLUOR0-4 -BIPHENYLYL)A CETAMIDE 
(see N-4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETAMIDE) 
398-32-3 N-4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETAMIDE 
51-21-8 5-FLUOROURACIL 
3570-75-0 FNT (see FORMIC ACID 2-J4-(5-NITR0 -2-FURYL) -2-
THIAZOLYL JHYDRAZIDE) 
133-07-3 FOLPET (see N-(TRICHLOROMETHYLTH!O)PHTHALIMIDE) 
31873-81-1 FORMIC ACID 2-J4-(2-FURYL) -2-THIAZOLYL JHYDRAZIDE 
32852-21-4 FORMIC ACID 2-(4-METHYL -2-THIAZOLYL)HYDRAZIDE 
3570-75-0 FORMIC ACID 2-14-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-
THIAZOLYL JHYDRAZIDE 
140-56-7 FORMULATED FENAMINOSULF (see FENAMINOSULF , 
FORMULATED) 
2302-84-3 l-FORMYL-3 -THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
624-84-0 FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
2411-74-7 2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
98-01-1 FURFURAL 
3688-53-7 2-(2-FURYL)-3 -(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)ACRYLAMIDE (see AF-2) 
3688-53-7 FURYLFURAMIDE (see AF-2) 
97-16-5 GENITE-R99 (see 2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE ) 
GERMANATE, SODIUM 
139-40-2 GESAMIL (see PROPAZINE) CAS 
NUMBER " 
77-06-5 
96-24-2 
765-34-4 
1072-53-3 
3741-38-6 
4680-78-8 
5141-20-8 
2353-45-9 
126-07-8 
4680-78-8 
86-50-0 
118-74-1 
mixture 
517-28-2 
76-44-8 
1121-92-2 
1241-27-6 
2163-79-3 
87-51-4 
118-74-1 
87-68-3 
319-84-6 
319-85-7 
58-89-9 
67-72-1 
70-30-4 
2163-79-3 
100-97-0 
531-18-0 
628-02-4 
26049-68-3 
302-01-2 
10034-93-2 
26049-71-8 
26049-68-3 
26049-70-7 
34176-52-8 
619-67-0 
122-66-7 
50-23-7 
7722-84-1 
103-16-2 
53-95-2 
4463-22-3 
53-95-2 
4363-03-5 
53-95-2 
103-90-2 
5036-03-3 
13743-07-2 
33389-36-5 
109-84-2 
148-24-3 
5208-87-7 
21416-87-5 
120-93-4 
3458-22-8 
32607-00-4 
860-22-0 
87-51-4 
54-85-3 
75-48-8 
122-42-9 
3458-22-8 
297-78-9 
5461-85-8 
119-38-0 
54-85-3 
55-22-1 CHEMICAL NAME 
GIBBERELLIC ACID 
GLYCEROL alpha-MONOCHLOROHYDRIN 
GLYCIDALDEHYDE 
GLYCOL SULFATE (see ETHYLENE GLYCOL) 
GLYCOL SULFITE 
FD & C GREEN NO. 1 
FD & C GREEN NO. 2 
FD & C GREEN NO. 3 
GRISEOFULVIN 
GUINEA GREEN B (see FD & C GREEN NO. 1) 
GUSATHION (see AZINPHOSMETHYL ) 
HCB (see HEXACHLOROBENZENE) 
HCDD MIXTURE (1,2,3,7,8,9-hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 
1,2,3,6,7,8-iaomer. CAS NUMBER 19408-74-3 and 57653-85-7) 
HEMATOXYLIN 
HEPTACHLOR 
HEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
HEPTYLAMINE 
HERCULES -7531 (see 3-(HEXAHYDR0 -4,7-METHANO!NDAN -
5-YL)-l,l-DIMETHYLUREA) 
HETEROAUXIN (see INDOLE-3 -ACETIC ACID) 
HEXACHLOROBENZENE HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE 
alpha-1,2,3,4,5,6 -HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
beta-1
,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
gamma-1 ,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE 
HEXACHLOROETHANE HEXACHLOROPHENE 
3-(HEXAHYDR0-4,7-METHANOINDAN-5-YL)-l,l -DIMETHYLUREA 
HEXAMETHYLENETETRAMINE HEXAMETHYLMELAMINE HEXANAMIDE 
HNT (see 2-HYDRAZIN0-4-(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)THIAZOLE) 
HYDRAZINE 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 
2-HYDRAZIN0-4-(p-AMINOPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2-HYDRAZIN0 -4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)THIAZOLE 
2-HYDRAZIN0-4 -(p-N!TROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2-HYDRAZIN0-4-PHENYL THIAZOLE 
p-HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 
HYDRAZOBENZENE 
HYDROCORTISONE 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 
HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZYL ETHER 
N-HYDROXY -N-ACETYL -2-AMINOFLUORENE (see N-HYDROXY- 2-
ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE ) 
3-HYDROXY-4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL 
N-HYDROXY -2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE 
3-HYDROXY-4-AM!NOBIPHENYL 
HYDROXY -N-2-FLUORENYLACETAMIDE (see N-HYDROXY-2 -
ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE) 
p-HYDROXYACETANILIDE (see ACETAMINOPHEN) 
l-(2-HYDROXYETHYL )-3-1(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
AMINO J-2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL) -l-NITROSOUREA 
4-(2-HYDROXYETHYLAMIN0)-2-(5-NITR0-2-
THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE 
HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
l'-HYDROXYSAFROLE 
ICRF-159 
2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE (see ETHYLENE UREA) 
3,3' -IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE 
(ESTER) .HCI (!PD) 
IMINODIACETIC ACID, MONOSODIUM 
INDIGO CARMINE (see FD & C BLUE NO. 2) 
INDOLE- 3-ACETIC ACID 
!NH (see ISONIAZID) 
!ODO FORM 
!PC (see ISOPROPYL -N-PHENYL CARBAMATE) 
!PD (see 3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL 
DIMETHANESULFONATE (ESTER) .HCI (!PD)) 
ISOBENZAN (see TELODR!N) 
N-ISOBUTYL-N' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
!SOLAN (see l-ISOPROPYL- 3-METHYL-s-
PYRAZOL YLDIMETHYL CARBAMATE) 
ISONIAZID ISONICOTINIC ACID 290 
CAS 
NUMBER' 
54-85-3 
3778-73-2 
101-73-5 
101-21-3 
119-38-0 
122-42-9 
120-58-1 
6119-92-2 
330-54-1 
115-32-2 
143-50-0 
303-34-4 
301-04-2 
1335-32-6 
19010-66-3 
1335-32-6 
19010-66-3 
5141-20-8 
58-89-9 
434-13-9 
21884-44-6 
8065-91-6 
632-99-5 
569-61-9 
18968-99-5 
1634-78-2 
121-75-5 
1634-78-2 
123-33-1 
mixture 
12427-38-2 
12427-38-2 
576-68-1 
148-82-3 
15356-70-4 
67-98-1 
149-30-4 
155-04-4 
50-44-2 
7487-94-7 
62-38-4 
115-09-3 
72-33-3 
57-39-6 
60-56-0 
59-05-2 
5834-17-3 
5834-17-3 
72-43-5 
1701-77-5 
6294-89-9 
99-80-9 
9004-59-5 
758-17-8 
66-27-3 
70-25-7 
129-15-7 
21638-36-8 
16699-10-8 
63412-06-6 
14026-03-0 
36702-44-0 
684-93-5 
140-56-7 
298-00-0 
614-00-6 
144-34-3 GOLD ET AL. 
CHEMICAL NAME 
ISONICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE (see ISONIAZID) 
ISONICOTINIC ACID V ANILL YLIDENEHYDRAZIDE 
ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 
p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMINE 
ISOPROPYL-N-(3 -CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE 
l-ISOPROPYL-3 -METHYL -s-PYRAZOL YLDIMETHYL CARBAMA TE 
ISOPROPYL-N-PHENYL CARBAMATE 
ISOSAFROLE 
KARATHANE (see DINITRO(l-METHYLHEPTYL)PHENYL 
CROTONATE) 
KARMEX (see 3-(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-l,l-
DIMETHYLUREA) 
KELTHANE (see DICOFOL) 
KEPONE 
LASIOCARPINE 
LEAD ACETATE 
LEAD ACETATE , BASIC 
LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
LEAD SUBACETATE (see LEAD ACETATE, BASIC) 
LEDATE (see LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
LEUPEPTIN 
LIGHT GREEN SF YELLOWISH (see FD & C GREEN NO. 2) 
LINDANE (see gamma-1,2,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE) 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
LUTEOSKYRIN 
LUTESTRAL 
MAGENTA I (see ROSANILINE .HCI) 
p-MAGENTA (see p-ROSANILINE .HCI) 
MAGNESIUM PEMOLINE (see 2-AMIN0-5-PHENYL-2-
0XAZOLIN-4-0NE + Mg(OH)2) 
MALAOXON 
MALATHION 
MALATHION -0-ANALOG (see MALAOXON) 
MALEIC HYDRAZIDE 
MAM ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE (see 
METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE) 
MANEB (see MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE) 
MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMA TE 
MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD 
MELPHALAN 
di-MENTHOL 
MER-25 
2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE 
2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC 
6-MERCAPTOPURINE 
MERCURIC CHLORIDE 
MERCURY (I!) ACETATE 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE 
MESTRANOL 
METEPA 
METHIMAZOLE METHOTREXATE 
2-METHOXY-3-AMINODIBENZOFURAN 
2-METHOXY-3-DIBENZOFURANAMINE (see 2-METHOXY-
3-AMINODIBENZOFURAN) 
METHOXYCHLOR METHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID 
METHYL CARBAZA TE 
1-METHYL-1,4-DIHYDRO- 7-[2-(5-NITROFURYL)VINYLJ -4-0X0-
1,8-NAPHTHYRIDINE-3-CARBOXYLATE, POTASSIUM 
N-METHYL-N,4-DINITROSOANILINE 
METHYL ETHYL CELLULOSE (see EDIFAS A) 
N-METHYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
METHYL METHANESULFONATE 
N-METHYL-N ' -NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 
4-METHYL-l- [(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO J-2-
IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
4-(4-N-METHYL-N -NITROSAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLINE 
N-METHYL-N-NITROSOBENZAMIDE 
N-(N-METHYL-N-NITROSOCARBAMOYL)-L -ORNITHINE 
R(-)-2-METHYL -N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
S(+ )-2-METHYL-N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
N-METHYL-N -NITROSOUREA (see N-NITROSO -N-METHYLUREA) 
METHYL ORANGE B (see FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED) 
METHYL PARATHION 
METHYL -PHENYL-NITROSAMINE (see 
NITROSOMETHYLANIL!NE) 
METHYL SELENAC (see SELENIUM 
DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
137-30-4 METHYL ZIMATE (see ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
(N-6)-METHYLADENINE 
(N-6)-METHYLADENOSINE 
mixture METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE 
(CAS NUMBER 592-61-1and14901-08-7) 
56-49-5 METHYLCHOLANTHRENE (see 3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE) 
56-49-5 3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE 
101-14-4 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE) 
64049-29 -2 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE).2HCI 
838-88-0 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-METHYLANILINE) 
101-61-1 4,4'-METHYLENEBIS(N ,N-DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE 
471-29-4 METHYLGUANIDINE 
578-76-7 7-METHYLGUANINE 
60-34-4 METHYLHYDRAZINE 
302-15-8 METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
115-09-3 METHYLMERCURIC ACETATE (see 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE) 
115-09-3 METHYLMERCURY CHLORIDE (see 
MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE) 
(N-6)-(METHYLNITROSO)ADENINE 
(N-6)-(METHYLNITROSO)ADENOSINE 
56-04-2 METHYL THIOURACIL 
5800-19-1 METIAPINE 
443-48-1 METRONIDAZOLE 
315-18-4 MEXACARBATE 
90-94-8 MICHLER'S KETONE 
137-30-4 MILBAM (see ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE) 
2385-85-5 MIREX 
39801-14-4 MIREX, PHOT0-
126-85-2 MITOMEN (see NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE) 
50-07-7 MITOMYCIN -C 
66-27-3 MMS (see METHYL METHANESULFONATE) 
70-25-7 MNNG (see N-METHYL -N'-NITRO-N -NITROSOGUANIDINE) 
684-93-5 MNU (see N-NITROSO-N -METHYLUREA) 
101-14-4 MOCA (see 4,4'-METHYLENE -BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE)) 
79-11-8 MONOCHLOROACETIC ACID 
32607-00-4 MONOSODIUM IMINODIACETIC ACID (see IMINODIACETIC 
ACID, MONOSODIUM) 
150-68-5 MONURON (see 3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA) 
58139-48-3 4-MORPHOLIN0-2-(5-NITR0-2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
3031-51-4 1-5-MORPHOLINOMETHYL-3- [(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
AMINOJ-2-0XAZOLIDINONE.HCI 
87-56-9 MUCOCHLORIC ACID (see alpha,beta -DICHLORO-beta -
FORMYLACRYLIC ACID) 
55-98-1 MYLERAN 
142-59-6 NABAM (see ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM) 
86-86-2 1-NAPHTHALENE ACETAMIDE 
86-87-3 1-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID 
2243-62-1 1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE 
1465-25-4 N-(l-NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
93-46-9 sym.-dibeta-NAPHTHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
86-88-4 1-(1-NAPHTHYL)-2-THIOUREA 
91-59-8 2-NAPHTHYLAMINE 
91-59-8 beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE (see 2-NAPHTHYLAMINE) 
2611-82-7 NEW COCCINE (see SX PURPLE) 
531-82-8 NFTA (see N-[4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2 -THIAZOLYL J 
ACETAMIDE) 
7440-02-0 NICKEL 
373-02-4 NICKEL (II) ACETATE 
13927-77-0 NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
1420-04-8 NICLOSAMIDE (see CLONITRALID) 
54-11-5 NICOTINE 
553-53-7 NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE 
NIGROSINE 
12034-09-2 NIOBATE, SODIUM 
139-94-6 NITHIAZIDE 
7631-99-4 NITRATE , SODIUM 
10102-43-9 NITRIC OXIDE 
139-13-9 NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 
18662-53-8 NITRILOTR!ACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 
7632-00-0 NITRITE, SODIUM 
1777-84-0 3-NITRO-p -ACETOPHENETIDE 
99-59-2 5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 
59-87-0 5-NITR0 -2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
772-43-0 5-NITR0-2-FURAMIDOXIME 
5-NITR0-2-FURANMETHANEDIOL DIACETATE 
75198-31-1 3-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-IMIDAZO(l,2-alpha)PYRIDINE 
2122-86-3 5-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-0XADIAZOLE-2-0L 
36133-88-7 N-{!3-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-1 ,2,4-0XADIAZOLE -5-YLJ­
METHYL)ACETAMIDE CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
CAS 
NUMBER• CHEMICAL NAME 
2578-75-8 N-15-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-l,3 ,4-THIADIAZOL-
2-YLJACETAMIDE 
531-82-8 N-14-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJACETAMIDE 
24554-26-5 N-14-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOL YLJFORMAMIDE 
51325-35-0 N,N'-16-(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)-s-TRIAZINE-2 ,4-
DIYLJBISACETAMIDE 
4812-22-0 3-NITR0-3-HEXENE 
121-19-7 NITR0-4-HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID 
5307-14-2 2-NITRO -p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
99-56-9 4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
99-55-8 5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 
602-87-9 5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 
619-17-0 4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
94-52-0 6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 
1836-75-5 NITROFEN 
67-20-9 1-1(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO IHYDANTOIN 
555-84-0 1-1(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO J-2-IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
51-75-2 NITROGEN MUSTARD 
126-85-2 NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE 
86-57-7 1-NITRONAPHTHALENE 
56-75-7 D-(-)-threo-1-(p-NITROPHENYL) -2-DICHLOROACETAMIDO ­
l,3-PROPANEDIOL (see CHLORAMPHENICOL) 
79-46-9 2-NITROPROPANE 
504-88-1 3-NITROPROPJONJC ACID 
38777-13-8 NJTROSO-BAYGON 
3276-41-3 N-NITROS0-3,6-DIHYDROOXAZINE-l ,2 
(see 3,6-DIHYDR0-2-NITROS0-2H-1,2-0XAZINE) 
16813-36-8 1-NITROS0-5 ,6-DIHYDROURACJL 
1456-28-6 NITROS0-2,6-DIMETHYLMORPHOLINE 
13256-11-6 NITROSO-N-METHYL-N-(2-PHENYL)ETHYLAMINE 
684-93-5 N-NITROSO-N -METHYLUREA 
615-53-2 N-NITROSO-N-METHYLURETHAN 
55556-92-8 NITROS0-1 ,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE 
29929-77-9 N-NITROS0-2,2,4-TRIMETHYL-l,2-DIHYDROQUINOLINE 
POLYMER 
1133-64-8 NJTROSOANABASINE 
51542-33-7 N-NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON 
53609-64-6 N-NITROSOBIS (2-HYDROXYPROPYL)AMINE 
N-NJTROSOBIS(2,2 ,2-TRIFLUOROETHYL)AMINE 
NITROSOCHLORDIAZEPOXIDE 
924-16-3 NITROSODIBUTYLAMINE 
55-18-5 N-NITROSODIETHYLAMJNE 
62-75-9 N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE 
86-30-6 N-NJTROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
156-10-5 p-NJTROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
17608-59-2 N-NITROSOEPHEDRINE 
38434-77-4 NITROSOETHANECARBAMONITRILE 
(see ETHYLNJTROSOCY ANAMIDE) 
20917-49-1 NJTROSOHEPT AMETHYLENEIMINE 
42579-28-2 1-NJTROSOHYDANTOIN 
30310-80-6 NJTROSOHYDROXYPROLINE 
25081-31-6 NITROSOIMINODIACETIC ACID 
16219-98-0 2-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
69658-91-0 3-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
16219-99-1 4-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
614-00-6 NJTROSOMETHYLANILINE 
55557-03-4 NJTROSOMETHYLPHENIDATE 
68107-26-6 NITROSOMETHYLUNDECYLAMINE 
684-93-5 NITROSOMETHYLUREA (see N-NITROSO -N-METHYL UREA) 
4515-18-8 NITROSOPJPECOLIC ACID 
5632-47-3 NITROSOPIPERAZINE (see N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE) 
5632-47-3 1-NITROSOPIPERAZINE (see N-NITROSOPJPERAZINE) 
5632-47-3 N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 
100-75-4 N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
7519-36-0 NITROSOPROLINE 
930-55-2 NITROSOPYRROLIDINE (see N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE ) 
930-55-2 N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE 
26541-51-5 N-NITROSOTHJOMORPHOLINE 
mixture beta-NITROSTYRENE AND STYRENE MIXTURE (see STYRENE 
AND beta-NJTROSTYRENE MIXTURE) 
68-23-5 NORETHYNODREL 
NORETHYNODREL/MESTRANOL 125:11 (see ENOVID -E) 
8015-30-3 NORETHYNODREL/MESTRANOL 166:11 (see ENOVID ) 
244-63-3 NORHARMAN 
8015-12-1 NORLESTRIN 
NOVADELOX 
303-47-9 OCHRATOXIN A 
50-28-2 17beta-OESTRADJOL (see ESTRADIOL) 
90-43-7 ORTHOXENOL (see o-PHENYLPHENOL) 
80-33-1 OVEX (see p-CHLOROPHENYL -p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE) CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
8056-92-6 OVULEN 
3096-50-2 N-(9-0X0-2 -FLUORENYL)ACETAMIDE 
1'-0XOSAFROLE 
6452-73-9 OXPRENOLOL.HCI 
102-77-2 N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENZOTHIAZOLE -2-SULFENAMIDE 
103-90-2 PARACETAMOL (see ACETAMINOPHEN ) 
56-38-2 PARATHION 
92-69-3 PARAXENOL (see p-PHENYLPHENOL) 
149-29-1 PATULIN 
11096-82-5 PCB (see AROCLOR 1260) 
27323-18-8 PCB (see AROCLOR 1254) 
82-68-8 PCNB (see PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE) 
87-86-5 PCP (see 2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL) 
82-68-8 PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE 
87-86-5 2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL 
13010-10-1 N-PENTYL-N '-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
1119-68-2 n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE .HCI 
8006-90-4 PEPPERMINT OIL 
72-56-0 PERTHANE (see p,p'-ETHYL-DDD) 
PETASITENINE 
62-44-2 PHENACETIN 
8003-03-0 PHENACETIN , ASPIRIN, AND CAFFEINE (see ASPIRIN , 
PHENACETIN , AND CAFFEINE) 
60-80-0 PHENAZONE 
136-40-3 PHENAZOPYRIDINE .HCI 
3456-10-9 PHENESTERIN 
834-28-6 PHENFORMIN .HCI 
50-06-6 PHENOBARBITAL 
57-30-7 PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM 
50-06-6 PHENOBARBITONE (see PHENOBARBITAL) 
92-84-2 PHENOTHIAZINE 
63-92-3 PHENOXYBENZAMINE .HCI 
7227-91-0 1-PHENYL -3,3-DIMETHYL TRIAZENE 
103-72-0 PHENYL ISOTHJOCYANATE 
89-25-8 l-PHENYL -3-METHYL-5-PYRAZOLONE 
135-88-6 PHENYL -beta-NAPHTHYLAMINE 
2198-59-6 N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE .HCI 
103-85-5 l-PHENYL-2-THJOUREA 
4075-79-0 4'-PHENYLACETANILIDE (see 4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL) 
842-07-9 l-PHENYLAZ0 -2-NAPHTHOL 
541-69-5 m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
615-28-1 o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE .2HCI 
624-18-0 p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE .2HCI 
50-06-6 PHENYLETHYLBARBITURIC ACID (see PHENOBARBITAL) 
156-51-4 PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
100-63-0 PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
59-88-1 PHENYLHYDRAZINE .HCI 
62-38-4 PHENYLMERCURIC ACETATE (see MERCURY (II) ACETATE) 
132-27-4 o-PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUM 
90-43-7 o-PHENYLPHENOL 
92-69-3 p-PHENYLPHENOL 
17673-25-5 PHORBOL 
13171-21-6 PHOSPHAMIDON 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
13366-73-9 PHOTODIELDRIN (see DIELDRIN , PHOTO-) 
39801-14-4 PHOTOMIREX (see MIREX, PHOTO-) 
88-96-0 PHTHALAMIDE 
85-44-9 PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 
PHTIV AZID (see ISONJCOTINIC ACID 
VANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE) 
1918-02-1 PICLORAM 
92-13-7 PILOCARPINE 
7681-93-8 PIMARICIN 
100-75-4 PIP (see N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE) 
110-85-0 PIPERAZINE 
110-89-4 PJPERIDINE 
51-03-6 PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE JN SOLVENT 
120-62-7 PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
1955-45-9 PIVALOLACTONE 
86-87-3 PLANOFIX (see I-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID) 
59536-61-1 POLYBROMINATED BIPHENYLS 
POLYVINYLPYRIDINE-N-OXIDE 
3564-09-8 PONCEAU 3R (see FD & C RED NO. 1) 
2611-82-7 PONCEAU 4R (see SX PURPLE) 
3761-53-3 PONCEAU MX (see D & C RED NO. 5) 
4548-53-2 PONCEAU SX (see FD & C RED NO. 4) 
7758-01-2 POTASSIUM BROMATE (see BROMATE , POTASSIUM ) 
POTASSIUM METABISULFITE (see SULFITE, 
POTASSIUM METABI- ) 291 292 
CAS 
NUMBER" 
671-16-9 
366-70-1 
952-23-8 
54-80-8 
51-02-5 
1120-71-4 
139-40-2 
57-57-8 
1114-71-2 
77337-54-3 
83-59-0 
13010-07-6 
57-55-6 
56795-66 -5 
51-52-5 
1508-45-8 
2611-82-7 
98-96-4 
553-53-7 
58-14-0 
117-39-5 
5117-01-1 
105-11-3 
82-68-8 
3567-69-9 
3761-53-3 
5160-02-1 
3564-09-8 
915-67-3 
16423-68-0 
4548-53-2 
86-30-6 
2318-18-5 
50-55-5 
13292-46-1 
632-99-5 
569-61-9 
149-30-4 
83-79-4 
153-18-4 
153-18-4 
81-07-2 
128-44-9 
94-59-7 
8052-16-2 
148-82-3 
148-18-5 
7782-49-2 
5456-28-0 
144-34-3 
7446-34-6 
2318-18-5 
63-25-2 
122-34-9 
7784-46-5 
26628-22-8 
532-32-1 
6385-58-6 
139-05-9 
148-18-5 
7681-49-4 
12034-09-2 
7631-99-4 
7757-82-6 
13472-45-2 
110-44-1 
8002-43-5 
7772-99-8 
10048-13-2 
18883-66-4 
8001-50-1 
100-42-5 
mixture 
1596-84-5 GOLD ET AL. 
CHEMICAL NAME 
PREMARIN 
PROCARBAZINE 
PROCARBAZINE.HCI 
PROFLAVINE.HCI HEMIHYDRATE 
PRONETHALOL 
PRONETHALOL.HCI 
PROPANE SULTONE 
PROPAZINE 
beta-PROPIOLACTONE 
PROPYL N-ETHYL-N-BUTYLTHIOCARBAMATE 
N-N' -PROPYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
N-PROPYL ISOME 
N-PROPYL-N '-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
PROPYLENE GLYCOL 
PROPYLHYDRAZINE.HCI PROPYL THIOURACIL 
PRORESID 
SX 
PURPLE 
PYRAZINAMIDE 
3-PYRIDOYL HYDRAZINE (see NICOTINIC ACID HYDRAZIDE) 
PYRIMETHAMINE 
QUERCETIN 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT 
p-QUINONE DIOXIME 
QUINTOZINE (see PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE) 
C.I. FOOD RED 3 
D & C RED NO. 5 
D& C RED NO. 9 
D & C RED NO. 10 
FD & C RED NO. 1 
FD & C RED NO. 2 
FD & C RED NO. 3 
FD & C RED NO. 4 
REDAX (see N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE) 
RENARDINE (see SENKIRKINE) 
RESERPINE 
RIFAMPICIN 
ROSANILINE.HCI 
p-ROSANILINE.H CI 
ROTAX (see 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE) 
ROTEN ONE 
RUTIN (see RUTIN TRIHYDRATE) 
RUTIN TRIHYDRATE 
SACCHARIN 
SACCHARIN, SODIUM 
SAFROLE 
SANAMYCIN (see ACTINOMYCIN C) 
L-SARCOL YSIN (see MELPHALAN) 
SDDC (see SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE) 
SELENIUM 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
SELENIUM DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 
SENKIRKINE 
SEVIN (see CARBARYL) 
SIMAZINE 
SODIUM ARSENITE (see ARSENITE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM AZIDE (see AZIDE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM BENZOATE (see BENZOATE , SODIUM) 
SODIUM BITHIONOLATE 
SODIUM CYCLAMATE (see CYCLAMATE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE 
SODIUM FLUORIDE (see FLUORIDE , SODIUM) 
SODIUM NIOBATE (see NIOBATE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM NITRATE (see NITRATE, SODIUM) 
SODIUM SULFATE (see SULFATE , SODIUM ) 
SODIUM TUNGSTATE (see TUNGSTATE , SODIUM) 
SORBIC ACID 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 
STANNOUS CHLORIDE (see TIN (II) CHLORIDE) 
STARCH ACETATE 
STERIGMATOCYSTIN 
STREPTOZOTOCIN STROBANE 
STYRENE STYRENE 
AND beta-NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE 
(CAS NUMBER 100-42-5 and 102-96-5) 
SUCCINIC ACID 2,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZIDE 
(see DAMINOZIDE) CAS 
NUMBER" 
57-50-1 
95-06-7 
7757-82-6 
127-69-5 
77-79-2 
77-46-3 
2783-94-0 
22571-95-5 
569-57-3 
1934-21-0 
97-18-7 
1746-01-6 
72-54-8 
297-78-9 
150-68-5 116-06-3 
7411-49-6 
118-75-2 
2438-88-2 
15721-02-5 
1746-01-6 
116-29-0 
79-34-5 
127-18-4 
961-11-5 
97-77-8 
116-29-0 
63886-77 -1 
40548-68-3 
137-26-8 
mixture 
97-74-5 
2227-13-6 
52-24-4 
62-55-5 
97-18-7 
115-29-7 
139-65-1 
64039-27-6 
79-19-6 
141-90-2 
62-56-6 
137-26-8 
1114-71-2 
7772-99-8 
13463-67-7 
137-26-8 
1156-19-0 
64-77-7 
636-23-7 
6369-59-1 
88-19-7 
638-03-9 
636-21-5 
540-23-8 
622-51-5 
8001-35-2 
68-76-8 
6379-49-0 
634-93-5 
71-55-6 
79-00-5 79-01-6 
75-69-4 
133-07-3 
88-06-2 
93-72-1 
93-76-5 
102-71-6 
112-27-6 CHEMICAL NAME 
SUCROSE 
SULFADS (see DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULFIDE) 
SULFALLATE 
SULFATE, SODIUM 
SULFISOXAZOLE 
SULFITE, POTASSIUM METABI -
3-SULFOLENE 
4,4' -SULFONYLBISACETANILIDE 
SUNSET YELLOW FCF (see FD & C YELLOW NO. 6) 
SYMPHYTINE 
TACE 
TARTRAZINE (see FD & C YELLOW NO. 5) 
TBP (see 2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL)) 
TCDD (see 2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN) 
TDE (see p,p'-DDD) 
TELODRIN TELVAR (see 
3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL)-l,l-DIMETHYLUREA) 
TEMIK (see ALDICARB) 
3,3',4,4' -TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL.4HCI 
TETRACHLORO -p-BENZOQUINONE (see CHLORANIL) 
2,3,5,6-TETRACHLOR0-4-NITROANISOLE 
2,2',5,5' -TETRACHLOROBENZIDINE 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
2,4,5,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL SULFONE 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 
TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 
TETRAFIDON (see 2,4,5,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL 
SULFONE) 
TETRAFLUORO-m -PHENYLENEDIAMINE .2HCI 
TETRAHYDR0-2 -NITROS0 -2H-l,2-0XAZINE 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE AND FERRIC 
NITROSODIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (see VANGUARD GF) 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM MONOSULFIDE 
TETRASUL (see p-CHLOROPHENYL-2 ,4,5-
TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE) 
THIO-TEPA 
THIOACETAMIDE 
2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL) 
THIODAN (see ENDOSULFAN) 
4,4' -THIODIANILINE 
beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE (beta-TGdR . 
NCI uses CAS NUMBER 789-61-7) 
THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
THIOURACIL 
THIOUREA 
THIRAM (see TETRAMETHYL THIURAM DISULFIDE) 
TILLAM -6-E (see PROPYL N-ETHYL -N-
BUTYLTHIOCARBAMATE) 
TIN (II) CHLORIDE 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 
TITANIUM OXALATE, POTASSIUM 
TMTD (see TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE) 
TOLAZAMIDE 
TOLBUTAMIDE 
2,4-TOLUENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
(see 2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE.2HCI) 
2,5-TOLUENEDIAMINE SULFATE 
(see 2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE) 
o-TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 
m-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
o-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
p-TOLUIDINE .HCI 
p-TOLYLUREA 
TOXAPHENE 
TRENIMON 
l,2,3-TRICHLOR0 -4,6-DINITROBENZENE 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROANILINE 
1,1,!-TRICHLOROETHANE 
l,l,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE 
N-(TRICHLOROMETHYLTHIO)PHTHALIMIDE 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL 
2-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY ACETIC ACID 
TRIETHANOLAMINE 
TRIETHYLENE GLYCOL CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
CAS 
NUMBER ' 
42011-48-3 
1582-09-8 
75-48-8 
137-17-7 
21436-97-5 
6334-11-8 
512-56-1 
2489-77-2 
900-95-8 
76-87-9 
126-72-7 
38571-73-2 
126-72-7 
150-38-9 
75104-43-7 
72254-58-1 
73-22-3 
83-79-4 
13472-45-2 
103-90-2 
97-74-5 
57-13-6 
51-79-6 
27774-13-6 
97-18-7 
6385-58-6 
6379-49-0 CHEMICAL NAME 
2,2,2-TRIFLUORO-N- [4-(5-NITR0 -2-FURYL)-2 -
THIAZOL YLIACETAMIDE 
TRIFLURALIN 
TRIIODOMETHANE (see IODOFORM) 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCI 
2,4,6-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCI 
TRIMETHYLPHOSPHATE 
TRIMETHYLTHIOUREA 
TRIPHENYLTIN ACETATE 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 
TRIS (see TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE) 
TRIS-1,2,3-(CHLOROMETHOXY)PROPANE 
TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE 
TRISODIUM ETHYLENEDJAMINETETRAACETATE TRI HYDRA TE 
(see EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE) 
TRP-P-1 ACETATE (see 3-AMINO-l ,4-DIMETHYL-5H­
PYRID0 [4,3-b[INDOLE ACETATE) 
TRP-P-2 ACETATE (see 3-AMIN0-1-METHYL-5H-
PYRID0 [4,3-bj!NDOLE ACETATE) 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 
TUBATOXIN (see ROTENONE) 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUM 
TYLENOL (see ACETAMINOPHEN) 
UNADS (see TETRAMETHYL THIURAM MONOSULFIDE) 
UREA 
URETHANE 
VANADYL SULFATE 
VANCIDE BL (see 2,2-THIOBIS(4,6-DICHLOROPHENOL)) 
VANCIDE BN (see SODIUM BITHJONOLATE) 
VANCIDE PB (see l,2,3-TRICHLOR0-4,6-DINITROBENZENE) CAS 
NUMBER' 
13927-77-0 
mixture 
62-73-7 
865-21-4 
593-60-2 
75-01-4 
75-35-4 
1964-09-3 
50-14-6 
302-79-4 
21436-96-4 
51786-53-9 
6358-85-6 
5979-28-2 
5567-15-7 
128-66-5 
6358-85-6 
1934-21-0 
2783-94-0 
315-18-4 
155-04-4 
136-23-2 
14324-55-1 
137-30-4 
12122-67-7 12122-67-7 
137-30-4 
14644-61 -2 CHEMICAL NAME 
VANGAURD N (see NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHJOCARBAMATE) 
VANGUARD GF (ferric nitrosodimethyldithiocarbamate and 
tetramethylthiuram disulfide. CAS NUMBER ---and 137-26-8) 
VAPONA (see DJCHLORVOS) 
VINBLASTINE 
VINYL BROMIDE 
VINYL CHLORIDE 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 
FD & C VIOLET NO. 1 
VITAMIND2 
VITAMIN A ACID 
2,4-XYLIDINE.HCI 
2,5-XYLIDINE.HCI 
CJ. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 
CJ. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 
CJ. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 
CJ. VAT YELLOW 4 
DIARYLANILIDE YELLOW (see CJ. PIGMENT YELLOW 12) 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 5 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 6 
ZECTRAN (see MEXACARBATE) 
ZETAX (see 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE, ZINC) 
ZINC DIBUTYLDITHJOCARBAMA TE 
ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
ZINC DIMETHYLDITHJOCARBAMATE 
ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHJOCARBAMATE 
ZINEB (see ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE) 
ZIRAM (see ZINC DJMETHYLDITHJOCARBAMATE) 
ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 
'CAS NUMBER • Chemical Abstracts Service registry number 
APPENDIX 2: CHEMICAL NAMES LISTED BY CAS NUMBER 
CAS 
NUMBER ' CHEMICAL NAME 
minun 3-AMIN0-9-ETHYLCARBAWLE MIXTURE (3-amino-9-
ethylcarbazole and 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole .HCI. 
CAS NUMBER 132-32-1 and 6109-97-3) 
mixture HCDD MIX.TIJRE (1,2,3,7,8,9-be.uchJorodibenzo-p-diozin 
and 1,2,3,6,7,8-ieomu. CAS NUMBER 19408-7<-3 and 57653-85-7) 
mature STYRENE AND beta-NITROSTYRENE MIXTURE 
(CAS NUMBER 100-42-5 and 102-96-5) 
mixture VANGUARD GF (ferric nitroeodimethyldithiocarbamate and 
utramethylthiuram disulfide. CAS NUMBER ---and 137-26-8) 
minun METHYLAZOXYMETHANOL ACETATE AND CYCASIN MIXTURE 
(CAS NUMBER 592-61-1and14901-08-7) 
50-06-6 PHENOBARBITAL (phenobarbitone) 
50-07-7 MITOMYCIN-C 
50-U-6 VITAMIN D2 
50-18-0 CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE (Endoun) 
50-23-7 HYDROCORTISONE (conieol) 
50-28-2 ESTRADIOL (eotradiol-17beta) 
50-29-3 DDT 
50-32-8 BENZO(a )PYRENE 
50-«-2 6-MERCAPTOPURINE 
50-55-5 RESERPINE 
50-76-0 ACTINOMYCIN D 
50-78-2 ASPIRIN 
51-02-5 PRONETHALOL .HCI (alderlin.HCI) 
51-03-6 PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
51-21-8 5-FLUOROURACIL 
51-28-5 2.<-DINITROPHENOL 
51-52-5 PROPYLTHIOURACIL 
51-55-8 ATROPINE 
51-75-2 NITROGEN MUSTARD (2,2'-dichloro·N-methyldietbylamine) 
51-79-6 URETHANE 
52-2<-< THIO-TEPA 
53-19-0 o,p'-DDD 
53-70-3 DIBENZ(a ,b)ANTHRACENE 
53-95-2 N-HYDROXY-2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE (bydrozy-N-
2-0uorenylacetamide) 
53-96-3 2-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE (N-2-nuo,.nylacetamide) 
5<-11-5 NICOTINE 
5<-80-8 PRONETHALOL (alderlin) 
5<-85-3 ISONIAZID (INH) CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
55-18-5 N-NITROSODIETHYLAMINE (DEN) 
55-22-1 ISONICOTINIC ACID 
55-38-9 FENTHION 
55-98-1 MYLERAN (buaul!an) 
56-04-2 METHYLTHIOURACIL 
56-23-5 CARBON TETRACHLORIDE 
56-38-2 PARATHION 
56-49-5 3-METHYLCHOLANTHRENE 
56-53-1 DIETHYLSTILBESTROL (DES) 
56-72-4 COUMAPHOS 
56-75-7 CHLORAMPHENICOL (Chloromycetin) 
57-13-6 UREA 
57-14-7 1,1-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE 
57-30-7 PHENOBARBITAL, SODIUM (phenobarbitone , aodium) 
57-39-6 METEPA 
57-41-0 5,5-DIPHENYLHYDANTOIN 
57-50-1 SUCROSE 
57-55-6 PROPYLENE GLYCOL 
57-57-8 beta-PROPIOLACTONE 
57-7'-9 CHLORDANE 
57-97-6 7,12-DIMETHYLBENZ(a)ANTHRA CENE 
58-08-2 CAFFEINE 
58-14-0 PYRIMETHAMINE (Daraprin) 
58-89-9 gamma-1,2,3,<,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (lindane) 
59-05-2 METHOTREXATE 
59-35-8 4,6-DIMETHYL-2-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)PYRIMIDINE 
59-87-0 5-NITR0-2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
59-88-1 PHENYLHYDRAZINE .HCI 
60-11-7 N,N-DIMETHYL-4-AMINOAWBENZENE (DAB) 
60-3<-4 METHYLHYDRAZINE 
60-35-5 ACET AMIDE 
60-51-5 DIMETHOATE 
60-56--0 METHIMAWLE 
60-57-1 DIELDRIN (HEOD) 
60-80-0 PHENAZONE 
61-82-5 3-AMINOTRIAWLE (amitrol) 
62-38-4 MERCURY (II) ACETATE (phenylmercuric acetat.) 
62-«-2 PHENACETIN 
62-53-3 ANILINE 
62-55-5 THIOACET AMIDE 293 294 
CAS 
NUMBER' 
62-56-6 
62-73-7 
62-75-9 
63-25-2 
63-92-3 
64-17-5 
64-77-7 
66-27-3 
67-20-9 
67-66-3 
67-72-1 
67-98-1 
68-23-5 
68-76-8 
70-25-7 
70-30-4 
71-43-2 
71-55-6 
72-20-8 
72-33-3 
72.43.5 
72-54-8 
72-55-9 
72-56-0 
73-22-3 
74-31-7 
75-01-4 
75-34-3 
75-35-4 
75-48-8 
75-60-5 
75-69-4 
76-06-2 
76-44-8 
76-87-9 
77-06-5 
77-48-3 
77-65-6 
77-79-2 
78-34-2 
79-00-5 
79-01-6 
79-11-8 
79-19-6 
79-34-5 
79-40-3 
79.44.7 
79-48-9 
80-08-0 
80-33-1 
81-07-2 
81-21-0 
82-28-0 
82-68-8 
83-59-0 
83-79-4 
84-65-1 
85-44-9 
86-29-3 
86-30-6 
86-50-0 
86-57-7 
86-86-2 
86-87-3 
86-88-4 
87-51-4 
87-56-9 
87-68-3 
87-86-5 
88-06-2 
88-19-7 
88-73-3 
88-85-7 
88-96-0 
89-25-8 
90.43.7 
90-94-8 
91-59-8 CHEMICAL NAME 
TH IO UREA 
DICHLORVOS (DDVP, Vapona) 
N-NITROSODIMETHYLAMINE (DMN) 
CARBARYL (Sevin) 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE.HCJ 
ETHYL ALCOHOL 
TOLBUTAMIDE 
METHYL METHANESULFONATE (MMS) 
1-{(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO JHYDANTOIN 
CHLOROFORM 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 
MER-25 
NORETHYNODREL 
TRENIMON 
N-METHYL -N'-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE (MNNG) 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 
BENZENE 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE 
ENDRIN 
MESTRANOL 
METHOXYCHLOR 
p,p'-DDD (TDE) 
p,p'-DDE 
p,p'-ETHYL-DDD (Perthane) 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 
DIPHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE (Agerite DPPD) 
VINYL CHLORIDE 
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 
VINYLIDENE CHLORIDE 
IODOFORM (triiodomethane) 
DIMETHYLARSINIC ACID (cacodylic acid) 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE 
CHLOROPICRIN 
HEPTACHLOR 
TRIPHENYLTIN HYDROXIDE 
GIBBERELLIC ACID 
4,4' -SULFONYLBISACET ANILIDE 
CARBROMAL (bromodiethylacetylurea) 
3-SULFOLENE 
DIOXATHION 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 
TRICHLOROETHYLENE 
MONOCHLOROACETIC ACID 
THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
DITHIOOXAMIDE 
DIMETHYLCARBAMYL CHLORIDE 
2-NITROPROPANE 
DAPSONE 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-p-CHLOROBENZENE SULFONATE (ovu) 
SACCHARIN 
DICYCLOPENTADIENE DIOXIDE 
1-AMIN0-2 -METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE (PCNB) 
N-PROPYL ISOME 
ROTENONE (tuhatozin) 
9,10-ANTHRAQUINONE 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 
DIPHENYLACETONITRILE 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE (..du, diphenylnit.roaamine ) 
AZINPHOSMETHYL (Guaathion) 
I-NITRO NAPHTHALENE 
I-NAPHTHALENE ACETAMIDE 
I-NAPHTHALENE ACETIC ACID (Planofu) 
1-(1-NAPHTHYL )-2-THIOUREA (ANTU) 
INDOLE-3-ACETIC ACID (heteroauzin) 
alpha,heta-DICHLORO -heta-FORMYLACRYLIC ACID 
(mucochloric acid) 
HEXACHLOROBUTADIENE 
2,3,4,5,6-PENTACHLOROPHENOL (Dowicide -7, PCP) 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL (Dowicide -2S) 
o-TOLUENESULFONAMIDE 
1-CHLOR0-2 -NITROBENZENE 
2-llOC·BUTYL-4,6-DINITROPHENOL 
PHTHALAMIDE 
1-PHENYL -3-METHYL-5-PYRAZOLONE 
o-PHENYLPHENOL (orthoxenol, Dowicide -1) 
MICHi.ER'S KETONE 
2-NAPHTHYLAMINE GOLD ET AL. 
CAS 
NUMBER' 
91-64-5 
91-76-9 
91-93-0 
91-94-1 
92-13-7 
92-52-4 
92-67-1 
92-69-3 
92-84-2 
92-87-5 
93-48-9 
93-72-1 
93-76-5 
94-11-1 
94-20-2 
94-52-0 
94-58-6 
94.59.7 
94-75-7 
94-80-4 
95-06-7 
95-14-7 
95-33-0 
95-74-9 
95-79-4 95-80-7 
95-83-0 
96-12-8 
96-24-2 
96-45-7 
97-00-7 
97-16-5 
97-18-7 
97-56-3 
97.74.5 
97-77-8 
98-01-1 
98-96-4 
99-30-9 
99-55-8 
99-56-9 
99-59-2 
99-80-9 
100-00-5 
100-42-5 
100-63-0 
100-75-4 
100-97-0 
101-05-3 
101-14-4 
101-21-3 
101-25-7 
101-61-1 
101-73-5 
101-79-1 
102-09-0 
102-50-1 
102-71-6 
102-77-2 
103-03-7 
103-16-2 
103-33-3 
103-72-0 
103-85-5 
103-90-2 
105-11-3 
105-36-2 105-55-5 
106-47-8 
106-87-6 106-89-8 
106-93-4 
107-05-1 
107-06-2 
107-13-1 CHEMICAL NAME 
1,2-BENWPYRONE (countarin) 
BENWGUANAMINE 
3,3'-DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4' -DIISOCYANATE 
3,3'-DICHLOROBENZIDINE (DCB) 
PILOCARPINE 
BIPHENYL 
4-AMINODIPHENYL 
p-PHENYLPHENOL (paruenol) 
PHENOTHIAZINE 
BENZIDINE 
oym.-diheta-NAPHTHYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
(Agerite white) 
2-(2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4,5-T) 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOPROPYL ESTER 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAWLE 
DIHYDROSAFROLE 
SAFROLE 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID (2,4-D) 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, n-BUTYL ESTER 
SULFALLATE 
lH-BENZOTRIAWLE 
N-CYCLOHEXYL-2-BENZOTHIAZOLE SULFENAMIDE (Duru) 
3-CHLORO -p-TOLUIDINE 
5-CHLORO-o -TOLUIDINE 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE 
4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
1,2-DIBROM0- 3-CHLOROPROPANE (DBCP. NCI W1e8 
CAS NUMBER 1836-75-5) 
GLYCEROL alpha-MONOCHLOROHYDRIN 
ETHYLENE THIOUREA (ETU) 
1-CHLOR0-2,4 -DINITROBENZENE 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENYLBENZENE SULFONATE (Genite-R99 ) 
2,2-THIOBIS(4 ,6-DICHLOROPHENOL) (TBP, Yancide BL) 
o-AMINOAZOTOLUENE 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM MONOSULFIDE (unada) 
TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE (ethyl tuada) 
FURFURAL 
PYRAZINAMIDE 
2,6-DICHLOR0-4 -NITROANILINE (Botran) 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 
4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 
N-METHYL-N,4-DINITROSOANILINE 
1-CHLOR0-4-NITROBENZENE 
STYRENE 
PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE (PIP) 
HEXAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
ANILAZINE 
4,4'-METHYLENE -BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE) (3,3'-
dichloro-4 ,4'-diaminodiphenylmethane , MOCA) 
ISOPROPYL -N-(3-CHLOROPHENYL)CARBAMATE (CIPC, 
chlorpropbam) 
N,N-DINITROSOPENTAMETHYLENETETRAMINE 
4,4'-METHYLENEBIS(N,N-DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE 
p-ISOPROPOXYDIPHENYLAMINE (Agerite 150) 
4-CHLOR0-4' -AMINODIPHENYLETHER 
DIPHENYLCARBONATE 
m-CRESIDINE 
TRIETHANOLAMINE 
N-OXYDIETHYLENEBENWTHIAZOLE-2 -SULFENAMIDE (amu) 
1-CARBAMYL -2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
HYDROQUINONE MONOBENZVL ETHER (Agerite alba) 
AW BENZENE 
PHENYL ISOTHIOCYANATE 
1-PHENYL -2-THIOUREA 
ACETAMINOPHEN (Tylenol, paracetamol) 
p-QUINONE DIOXJME 
ETHYLBROMOACETATE 
N,N'-DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
p-CHLOROANILINE 
1-ETHYLENEOXY -3,4-EPOXYCYCLOHEXANE 
EPICHLOROHYDRIN 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE (ethylene dibromide, EDB) 
ALLYL CHLORIDE (chloropropene) 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE (ethylene dichloride, EDC) 
ACRYLONITRILE CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
107-20-0 CHLOROACETALDEHYDE 
107-30-2 CHLOROMETHYL METHYL ETHER (CMME) 
108-60-1 BIS(2-CHLORO-l -METHYLETHYL) ETHER 
109-84-2 2-HYDROXYETHYLHYDRAZINE (BOH) 
110-44-1 SORBIC ACID 
110-57-6 t,.,,.-1,4-DICHLOROBUTENE -2 
110-85-0 PIPERAZINE 
110-89-4 PIPERIDINE 
lll-44-4 BIS-2-CHLOROETHYLETHER 
111-46-6 DIETHYLENE GLYCOL 
112-27-6 TRIETHYLENE GLYCOL 
114-83-0 l-ACETYL-2-PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
115-02-6 AZASERINE 
115-09-3 MERCURYMETHYLCHLORIDE (methylmereuric aceteto) 
115-29-7 ENDOSULF AN (Tbiodan) 
115-32-2 DICOFOL (Kelthane) 
116-06-3 ALDICARB (Temil<) 
116-29-0 2,4,5,4'-TETRACHLORODIPHENYL SULFONE (totrafidon) 
117-39-5 QUERCETIN 
117-79-3 2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
117-80-6 2,3-DICHLORO-l,4-NAPHTHOQUINONE (fablone) 
118-74-1 HEXACHLOROBENZENE (HCB) 
118-75-2 CHLORANIL (tetrachloro-p -bemoquinone) 
118-92-3 ANTHRANILIC ACID 
119-34-6 4-AMIN0-2 -NITROPHENOL 
119-38-0 l-ISOPROPYL-3-METHYL-e-PYRAZOLYLDIMETHYL CARBAMATE 
120-36-5 
120-58-1 
120-61-6 
120-62-7 
120-71-8 
120-78-5 
120-93-4 
121-14-2 
121-19-7 
121-59-5 
121-66-4 
121-75-5 
122-34-9 
122-42-9 
122-66-7 
123-33-1 
123-91-1 
126-07-8 
126-72-7 
126-85-2 
127-18-4 
127-69-5 
126-37-0 
128-44-9 
128-66-5 
129-15-7 
131-01-1 
132-27-4 
133-06-2 
133-07-3 
133-90-4 
134-29-2 
135-20-6 
135-88-6 
136-23-2 
136-40-3 
137-17-7 
137-26-8 
137-29-1 
137-30-4 
139-06-9 
139-13-9 
139-40-2 
139-66-1 
139-94-6 
140-49-8 
140-66-7 140-57-8 
140-79-4 
141-90-2 
142-04-1 (ootan) 
alpha-(2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
(2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy) propionic acid) 
ISOSAFROLE 
DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE (DMT) 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
p-CRESIDINE 
BENZOTHIAZYL DISULFIDE (Altu) 
ETHYLENE UREA (2-imidazolidinone} 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
NITR0-4 -HYDROXYPHENYLARSONIC ACID 
CARBARSONE 
2-AMIN0-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 
MALATHION 
SIMAZJNE (CDT) 
ISOPROPYL -N-PHENYL CARBAMATE (IPC) 
HYDRAZOBENZENE (NCI UMO CAS NUMBER 530-50-7) 
MALEIC HYDRAZIDE (l,2-diltydro-3,6-pyridezrnedione) 
1,4-DIOXANE (p-dioune) 
GRISEOFULVIN 
TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE (TRIS) 
NITROGEN MUSTARD N-OXIDE (mit<>men) 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE 
SULFISOXAZOLE 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE (BHT) 
SACCHARIN , SODIUM 
CJ. VAT YELLOW 4 
2-METHYL-1 -NITROANTHRAQUINONE 
DESERPIDINE 
o-PHENYLPHENATE, SODIUM 
CAPTAN 
N-(TRICHLOROMETHYLTHIO)PHTHALIMIDE (folpet) 
CHLORAMBEN 
o-ANISIDINE.HCl (NCI """" CAS NUMBER 134-29-0) 
CUPFERRON 
PHENYL-bete-NAPHTHYLAMINE (Aprito powder) 
ZINC DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (butyl •lln&to) 
PHENAWPYRIDINE.HCl 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE 
TETRAMETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE (TMTD, thinun) 
COPPER DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (cwnato) 
ZINC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (methyl zlln&to) 
CYCLAMATE, SODIUM 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID 
PROPAZINE (G..amil) 
4,4'-THIODIANILINE 
NITHIAZIDE 
4'-(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETAN!LIDE 
FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED (methyl oranp B) 
ARAMITE 
DINITROSOPIPERAZINE 
THIOURACIL 
AN!LlNE.HCl CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
142-46-1 2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 
142-59-6 ETHYLENEBISDITHIOCARBAMATE, DISODIUM (D;ituUle, 
nehem) 
143-50-0 KEPONE (chlordecone) 
144-34·3 SELENIUM DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (methyl aelenec) 
148-18-5 SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE TRIHYDRATE (SDDC) 
148-24-3 8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
148-82-3 MELPHALAN (L-oarcolyern) 
149-29-1 PATULIN 
149-30-4 2-MERCAPTOBENZOTHIAZOLE (Captu, rotu) 
150-38-9 EDTA, TRISODIUM SALT TRIHYDRATE (EDTA) 
150·68·5 3-(p-CHLOROPHENYL) -1,1-DIMETHYLUREA (Telvar, monuron) 
151-66-4 ETHYLENE !MINE 
153-18-4 RUTIN TRIHYDRATE 
155-04-4 2-MERCAPTOBENWTHIAZOLE, ZINC (zetu) 
166-10-5 p-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
166-51-4 PHENYLETHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
166-62-7 CYANAMIDE, CALCIUM 
244-63-3 NORHARMAN 
262-12-4 DIBENW-p -DIOXIN 
297-76-7 ETHYNODIOL DIACETATE 
297-78-9 TELODRIN (ooben ... ) 
298-00-0 METHYL PARATHION 
298-18-0 D,L-DIEPOXYBUTANE 
301·04·2 LEAD ACETATE 
302-01-2 HYDRAZINE 
302-15-8 METHYLHYDRAZINE SULFATE 
302-22-7 
302-79-4 
303.34.4 
303.47.9 
305-03-3 
306-37-6 
309-00-2 
315-18-4 
316-42-7 319-84-6 
319-85-7 320-67-2 324-93-6 
330-54-1 
333-41-5 
363-17-7 
366-70-1 
373-02-4 
398-32-3 
434-13-9 
443-46·1 
470-82-6 
471-29-4 
474-25-9 
477-30-5 
488-41-5 
504-88-1 510-15-6 
612-66-1 
517-28-2 
520-46-5 
531-18-0 531-82-8 532-32-1 536-33-4 
640-23-8 
541-69-5 
542-88-1 
543-80-6 543-90-8 
551-92-8 
553.53.7 
655-84-0 
663-41-7 
669-57-3 
669-61·9 
676-68-1 
678-76-7 
690-21-6 
692-31-4 
693-60-2 
698-64-1 CHLORMADINONE ACETATE 
VITAMIN A ACID 
LASIOCARPINE 
OCHRATOXIN A 
CHLORAMBUCIL 
l,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZINE .2HCl 
ALDRIN 
MEXACARBA TE (Zectran) 
EMETINE .2HCl (NCI uaee CAS NUMBER 483-18-1) 
alpha-1,2 ,3,4,5,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (alpha-lrndane ) 
bete-1,2,3,4,6,6-HEXACHLOROCYCLOHEXANE (bete-lrndane) 
6-AZACYTID!NE 
4'-FLUOR0-4 -AMINODIPHENYL 
3·(3,4-DICHLOROPHENYL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA (Karmex, diuron) 
DIAZINON 
N-(2-FLUORENYL)-2,2,2-TR!FLUOROACETAMIDE 
PROCARBAZINE .HCl 
NICKEL (II) ACETATE 
N-4-(4'-FLUOROBIPHENYL)ACETAMIDE 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
METRONIDAWLE 
EUCALYPTOL 
METHYLGUANIDINE 
CHENODEOXYCHOLIC ACID 
COLCEMID 
DIBROMOMANNITOL (DBM) 
3-NITROPROPION!C ACID 
CHLOROBENZILA TE 
TRIMETHYLPHOSPHATE 
HEMATOXYLIN 
3-ACETYL-6-METHYL-2,4-PYRANDIONE (dehydroacetic acid) 
HEXAMETHYLMELAMINE 
N-!4-(6-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLJACETAMIDE (NFTA) 
BENWATE, SODIUM 
ETHIONAMIDE 
p-TOLUIDINE.HCl 
m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE .2HCl 
BIS-(CHLOROMETHYL) ETHER (BCME) 
BARIUM ACETATE 
CADMIUM ACETATE 
l,2-DIMETHYL-5-NITROIMIDAWLE 
NICOT!NIC ACID HYDRAZIDE (3-pyridoyl hydrazrne) 
1·!(6-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO J-2-IMIDAWLIDINONE 
CARBAMYL HYDRAZINE .HCl 
TACE (chlorotrianitene) 
p-ROSANILINE .HCl (p-mapnte) 
MANNITOL NITROGEN MUSTARD (Degranol) 
7-METHYLGUANINE 
1-CHLOROPROPENE 
N-BUTYLUREA 
VINYL BROMIDE 
DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, DIMETHYLAMINE 295 296 
GAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
602-87-9 5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 
613-94·5 BENZOYL HYDRAZINE 
614-00-6 NITROSOMETHYLANILINE 
615-28-1 o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
615-53-2 N-NITROSO-N-METHYLURETHAN 
617-84-5 DIETHYLFORMAMIDE 
619-17-0 4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
619-67-0 p-HYDRAZINOBENZOIC ACID 
622-51-5 p-TOLYLUREA 
624-18-0 
624·84·0 
628-02·4 
628-36-4 
628-9•-• 
632-99-5 
634-93-5 
636-21·5 
636-23-7 
637-07-0 
638-03-9 
671-16-9 
683-50-1 
684-93-5 
685-91-6 
712-68-5 
720-69-4 
758-17-8 
765-34-4 
772-43-0 
828-00-2 
834-28-6 
838-88-0 
842-00-2 
842-07-9 
860-22-0 
865-21-4 
900-95-8 
915-67-3 
924-16-3 
930-55-2 
952-23-8 
961-11-5 
968-81-0 
999-81-5 
1066-30-4 1067-33-0 
1072-53-3 
1078-38-2 
1114-71-2 
1119-68-2 
1120-71-4 
1121-92-2 
1133-84-8 
1146-71-0 
1156-19-0 
1162-65-8 
1212-29·9 
1241-27-6 
1308-39-9 
1327-53-3 
1335-32-6 
1336-21-6 
1420-04-8 
1456-28-6 
1465-25-4 
1508-45-8 
1582-09-8 
1596-84-5 
1634-78-2 
1701-77-5 
1746-01-6 
1777-84-0 
1836-75-5 
1897-45-6 
1912-24-9 
1918-02-1 
1934-21-0 
1937-37-7 p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE .2HCI 
FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
HEXANAMIDE 
1,2-DIFORMYLHYDRAZINE 
ADIPAMIDE 
ROSANILINE .HCI (magenta I) 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROANILINE 
o-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE .2HCI (2,4-toluenediamine.2HCI) 
CLOFIBRATE 
m-TOLUIDINE.HCI 
PROCARBAZINE 
2-CHLOROPROPANAL 
N-NITROSO -N-METHYLUREA (MNUJ 
DIETHYLACETAMIDE 
2-AMIN0-5 -(5-NITR0-2-FURYL) -l,3,4-THIADIAZOLE 
4,6-DIAMIN0-2-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-s -TRIAZINE 
N-METHYL -N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
GLYCIDALDEHYDE 
5-NITR0-2-FURAMIDOXIME 
DIMETHOXANE 
PHENFORMIN.HCI (NCI uoee CAS NUMBER 114-86-3) 
4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2 -METHYLANILINE) 
4-ETHYLSULPHONYLNAPHTHALENE-1-SULFONAMIDE 
l-PHENYLAZ0-2 -NAPHTHOL 
FD & C BLUE NO. 2 (indigo carmine) 
VINBLASTINE 
TRIPHENYLTIN ACETATE 
FD & C RED NO. 2 (8Dl8181lth) 
NITROSODIBUTYLAMINE 
N-NITROSOPYRROLIDINE 
PROFLAVINE .HCI HEMIHYDRATE 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 
(2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM CHLORIDE (CCC) 
CHROMIUM (III) ACETATE 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
ETHYLENE GLYCOL (glycol oulfata) 
l-ACETYL-2-ISONICOTINOYLHYDRAZINE 
PROPYL N-ETHYL-N-BUTYLTHIOCARBAMATE (Tillam-6-E) 
n-PENTYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
PROPANE SULTONE 
HEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
NITROSOANABASINE 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENl!lc!COUMARIN 
TOLAZAMIDE 
AFLATOXIN Bl 
N,N'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIOUREA 
HEPTYLAMINE 
CHROMIC OXIDE PIGMENT 
ARSENIOUS OXIDE 
LEAD ACETATE , BASIC 
AMMONIUM HYDROXIDE 
CLONITRALID (nic~ide) 
NITROS0 -2,6-DIMETHYLMORPHOLINE 
N-(l-NAPHTHYLJETHYLENEDIAMINE.2HCI 
PRORESID 
TRIFLURALIN 
DAMINOZIDE (1uccinic acid 2,2-dimethyl hydrazide, 
DMASA) 
MALAOXON (malathion -0-analog) 
METHOXYPHENYLACETIC ACID 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p -DIOXJN (TCDD, dio•in) 
3-NITRO-p-ACETOPHENETIDE 
NITRO FEN 
CHLOROTHALONIL 
ATRAZINE 
PICLORAM 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 5 (tart.-azine) 
C.I. DIRECT BLACK 38 GOLD ET AL. 
GAS 
NUMBER" CHEMICAL NAME 
1955-45-9 PIV ALOLACTONE 
1964-09-3 FD & C VIOLET NO. I 
2104-09-8 2-AMIN0-4-(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2122-86-3 5-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-0XADIAZOLE-2-0L 
2163-79-3 3-(HEXAHYDR0 -4, 7 -METHANOINDAN -5-YL)-1,1-DIMETHYLUREA 
(Herculeo- 7531) 
2184-09-2 3,4'-DICHLOR0-2-METHYLACRYLANILIDE (dicryl) 
2198-59-6 N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE.HCI (NCI uoee CAS 
2227-13-6 
2243-62-1 
2302-84-3 
2303-16-4 
2318-18-5 
2353-45-9 
2385-85-5 
2411-74-7 
2438-88-2 
2439-10-3 
2465-27-2 
2489-77-2 
2519-30-4 
2578-75-8 
2602-46-2 
2611-82-7 
2629-59-6 
2783-94-0 
2921-88-2 
3012-65-5 
3031-51-4 
3068-88-0 
3096-50-2 
3165-93-3 
3276-41-3 
3456-10-9 
3458-22-8 3564-09-8 
3567-69-9 
3570-75-0 
3688-53-7 
3693-22-9 
3741-38-6 
3761-53-3 3775-55-1 
3778-73-2 
3817-11-6 
3844-45-9 
3851-16-9 
3883-43-0 
4075-79-0 
4106-66-5 4164-28-7 
4342-03-4 
4363-03-5 
4463-22-3 
4515-18-8 
4548-53-2 
4553-89-3 4680-78-8 4812-22-0 
4998-76-9 
5036-03-3 
5117-01-1 
5131-60-2 
5141-20-8 
5160-02-1 
5208-87-7 
5307-14-2 
5351-65-5 
5456-28-0 NUMBER 101-54-2) 
p-CHLOROPHENYL-2,4,5-TRICHLOROPHENYL SULFIDE 
(tatruul) 
1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE (1,5-diaminonaphthalene) 
l-FORMYL-3- THIOSEMICARBAZIDE 
DIALLATE (Avade:s:) 
SENKIRKINE (renardine) 
FD & C GREEN NO. 3 (fut green FCF) 
MIREX 
2-FURALDEHYDE SEMICARBAZONE 
2,3,5,6-TETRACHLOR0 ·4-NITROANISOLE 
n-DODECYLGUANIDINE ACETATE 
AURAMINE -0 
TRIMETHYLTHIOUREA 
BLACK PN (brilliant black BN) 
N-!5-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-1,3,4-THIADIAZOL-
2-YLJACETAMIDE 
C.I. DIRECT BLUE 6 
SX PURPLE (poncaau 4R) 
S-ETHYL-L-CYSTEINE 
FD & C YELLOW NO. 6 (aunoet yellow FCF) 
O,O-DIETHYL-0-(3,5,6- TRICHLOR0 -2-PYRIDYL) 
PHOSPHOROTHIOATE 
AMMONIUM CITRATE 
l-5-MORPHOLINOMETHYL-3- !(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE) 
AMINOj-2-0XAZOLIDINONE .HCI 
beta-BUTYROLACTONE 
N-(9-0X0 -2-FLUORENYL)ACETAMIDE 
4-CHLORO -o-TOLUIDINE .HCI 
3,6-DIHYDR0 ·2-NITROS0-2H-l,2-0XAZINE (N-nitroao-
3,6-dihydroouiine-I,2) 
PHENESTERIN 
3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE 
(ESTERJ .HCI (!PD) 
FD & C RED NO. I (ponceau 3R) 
C.I. FOOD RED 3 (carmoiaine) 
FORMIC ACID 2-j4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYL! 
HYDRAZIDE (FNT) 
AF-2 (furylfuramide) 
2-AMINODIPHENYLENE OXIDE 
GLYCOL SULFITE 
D & C RED NO. 5 (ponceau MX) 
2-AMIN0-5-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-l,3,4-0XADIAZOLE 
ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 
N-BUTYL-N -(4-HYDROXYBUTYLJNITROSAMINE 
FD & C BLUE NO. I (brilliant blue FCF) 
N,N'-DIMETHYL-N,N '-DINITROSOPHTHALAMIDE 
2,3-DICHLORO -p-DIOXANE 
4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL (4'-phenylacetanilide) 
3-DIBENZOFURANAMINE 
DIMETHYLNITRAMINE 
DACARBAZINE (DIC) 
3-HYDROXY-4-AMINOBIPHENYL (4-amino-3-
hydrozybipbenyl) 
3-HYDROXY-4-ACETYLAMINOBIPHENYL 
NITROSOPIPECOLIC ACID 
FD & C RED NO. 4 (ponceau SX) 
CHOCOLATE BROWN HT 
FD & C GREEN NO. I (guinea green BJ 
3-NITR0-3-HEXENE 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE.HCI 
1-(2-HYDROXYETHYL) -3·!!5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE ) 
AMINOj-2-IMIDAWLIDINONE 
QUERCETIN DIHYDRATE 
4-CHLORO-m -PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
FD & C GREEN NO. 2 (light green SF yellowish) 
D & C RED NO. 9 (brilliant red) 
l'-HYDROXYSAFROLE 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
BENZENESULPHONOHYDRAZIDE (BSH) 
SELENIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ethyl oelenec) CARCINOGENI C POTENCY DATABASE 
CAS 
NUMBER' 
5461-85-8 
5567-15-7 
5632-47-3 
5800-19-1 
5803-51-0 
5834-17-3 
5979-28-2 
6109-97-3 
6119-92-2 
6120-10-1 
6294-89-9 
6334-11-8 
6358-85-6 
6369-59-1 
6379-49-0 
6385-58-6 
6452-73-9 
6959-47-3 
6959-48-4 
6965-71-5 
7008-42-6 
7227-91-0 
7316-37-2 
7347-49-1 
7411-49-6 
7422-80-2 
7440-02-0 
7446-34-6 
7487-94-7 
7519-36-0 
7631-89·2 
7631-99-4 
7632-00-0 
7681-49-4 7681-93-8 
7722-64-1 
7757-82-6 
7758-01-2 
7772-99-8 
7782-49-2 
7782-50-5 
7764-46-5 
7787-59-9 
7790-64-3 
8001-35·2 
8001-50-1 
8002-43-5 
8003-03-0 
8006-90-4 
8015-12-1 
8015-30-3 
8052-16-2 
8056-92-6 
8065-91-6 
9000-07-1 
9004-32-4 
9004.59.5 
10034-93-2 
10048-13 -2 
10102-43-9 
10318-26-0 
10380-28-6 
10473-70-8 CHEMICAL NAME 
N-ISOBUTYL-N '-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 83 
N-NITROSOPIPERAZINE 
METIAPINE 
2,5-DIMETHOXY -4'-AMINOSTILBENE 
2-METHOXY-3-AMINODIBENZOFURAN 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 16 
3-AMIN0-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE.HCI 
DINITRO(l -METHYLHEPTYLJPHENYL CROTONATE 
(Karathane) 
4-DIMETHYLAMIN0-3 ,5-XYLENOL 
METHYL CARBAZATE 
2,4,6-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCI 
C.I. PIGMENT YELLOW 12 (diarylanll;de yellow) 
2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE (2,5-toluenediamine 
1ulfate) 
l,2,3-TRICHLOR0-4,6-DINITROBENZENE (Vancide PB) 
SODIUM BITHIONOLATE (Vancide BNJ 
OXPRENOLOL .HCl 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE .HCI 
3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE .HCI 
alpha-(2,5- DICHLOROPHENOXY)PROPIONIC ACID 
ACRONYCINE 
l-PHENYL -3,3-DIMETHYLTRIAZENE 
DIETHYL -beta,gamma-EPOXYPROPYLPHOSPHONATE 
N,N-DIETHYL-4-(4 '-jPYRIDYL -l'-OXIDE)AZO)ANILINE 
3,3',4,4'-TETRAAMINOBIPHENYL .4HCI 
(3,3' -diaminobenzid.ine . .f,HCI} 
l,2-Dl-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE .2HCI 
NICKEL 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 
MERCURIC CHLORIDE 
NITROSOPROLINE 
ARSENATE, SODIUM 
NITRATE, SODIUM 
NITRITE, SODIUM 
FLUORIDE , SODIUM 
PIMARICIN 
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE 
SULFATE, SODIUM (diaodium eulfate) 
BROMATE, POTASSIUM 
TIN (II) CHLORIDE (etannoua chloride) 
SELENIUM 
CHLORINE 
ARSENITE, SODIUM 
BISMUTH OXYCHLORIDE 
CADMIUM SULPHATE 
TOXAPHENE 
STROBANE (dichloricide mothproofer) 
SOYBEAN LECITHIN 
ASPIRIN, PHENACETIN, AND CAFFEINE (APC) 
PEPPERMINT OIL 
NORLESTRIN 
ENOVID (norethyn00..l/meotn.nol j66'1j) 
ACTINOMYCIN C (118Jl8lnycin) 
OVULEN (ethynodiol diacetat./ etbinyl eatradiol jlO:lp 
LUTESTRAL 
CARRAGEENAN,NATIVE 
EDIFAS B (cellulose carboi:ymethyl ether, sodium) 
EDIFAS A (methyl ethyl celluloee) 
HYDRAZINE SULFATE 
STERIGMATOCYSTIN 
NITRIC OXIDE 
DIBROMODULCITOL 
COPPER-8-HYDROXYQUINOLINE 
1-(4-CHLOROPHENYL)-1-PHENYL-2-PROPYNYL CARBAMATE 
10589-74-9 l-AMYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
11096-82 -5 AROCLOR 1260 (PCB) 
12034-09-2 NIOBATE , SODIUM 
12122-67 -7 ZINC ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE (zineb) 
12125-02-9 AMMONIUM CHLORIDE 
12236-46-3 CHOCOLATE BROWN FB 
12427-38-2 MANGANESE ETHYLENEBISTHIOCARBAMATE (maneb) 
12663-46-6 CYCLOCHLOROTINE 
13010-07·6 N-PROPYL -N'-NITRO-N -NITROSOGUANIDINE 
13010-08 -7 N-BUTYL-N '-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
13010-10·1 N-PENTYL-N '-NITRO-N-NITROSOGUANIDINE 
13073-35-3 ETHIONINE 
13171-21-6 PHOSPHAMIDON CAS 
NUMBER' 
13256-11-6 
13292-46-1 
13366-73-9 
13463-67-7 
13472-45-2 
13483-18-6 
13510-49-1 
13743-07-2 
13927-77-0 
14026-03-0 
14239-68-0 
14324-55-1 
14484-64-1 
14644-61-2 
15356-70-4 
15721-02-5 
15879-93-3 
16071-86-6 
16219-98-0 
16219-99-1 
16423-68-0 
16699-10-8 
16813-36-8 
17026-81-2 
17608-59-2 
17673-25-5 
16413-14-4 
18523-69-8 
18662-53-8 
18683-66-4 
18968-99-5 
19010-66-3 
19834-02-7 
20265-97-8 
20570-96-1 
20917-49-1 
20941-65-5 
21260-46-8 
21416-87-5 
21436-96-4 
21436-97-5 
21638-36-8 
21864-44-6 
22571-95-5 
22839-47-0 
22966-79-6 
23746-34-1 
24554-26-5 
25061-31-6 
25168-26-7 
26049-68-3 26049-69-4 
26049-70-7 
26049-71-8 
25541-51-5 
26628-22-6 
27323-18-8 
27774-13-6 
28300-74-5 
28314-03-6 
28322-02-3 
29611-03-8 
29929-77-9 CHEMICAL NAME 
NITROSO-N-METH YL-N-(2-PHENYLJETHYLAMINE 
RIFAMPICIN 
DIELDRIN , PHOTO· 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 
TUNGSTATE, SODIUM 
BIS-1,2-(CHLOROMETHOXY)ETHANE 
BERYLLIUM SULFATE 
1·(2-HYDROXYETHYL) -1-NITROSOUREA 
NICKEL DIBUTYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (Vanguud NJ 
R(-)-2-METHYL -N-NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
CADMIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ethyl cadmet.) 
ZINC DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ethyl zimate) 
FERRIC DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (!erbam) 
ZIRCONIUM (IV) SULFATE 
di-MENTHOL (NCI uaea CAS NUMBER 89-78-1) 
2,2',5,5'-TETRACHLOROBENZIDINE 
ANHYDROGLUCOCHLORAL (alpha-chloraloee) 
C.I. DIRECT BROWN 95 
2-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
4-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
FD & C RED NO. 3 (erythroeine) 
4-(4-N-METHYL -N-NITROSAMINOSTYRYL)QUINOLINE 
1-NITROS0-5 ,6-DIHYDROURACIL 
3-AMIN0-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE 
N-NITROSOEPHEDRINE 
PHORBOL 
ETHYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
ACETONE!4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOL YLjHYDRAZONE 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 
STREPTOZOTOCIN 
2-AMIN0-5-PHENYL -2-0XAZOLIN-4-0NE + Mg(0H)2 
(magneaium pemoline) 
LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (ledat.) 
CYCLOHEXYLAMINE SULFATE 
p-ANISIDINE.HCI 
BENzyLHYDRAZINE.2HCI 
NITROSOHEPTAMETHYLENEIMINE 
ETHYL TELLURAC 
BISMUTH DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE (bismat.) 
ICRF-159 
2,4-XYLIDINE.HCI 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE.HCI 
4-METHYL-1- /(5-NITROFURFURYLIDENE)AMINO j-2· 
IMIDAZOLIDINONE 
LUTEOSKYRIN 
SYMPHYTINE 
ASPARTAME 
ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
BIS-2-HYDROXYETHYLDITHIOCARBAMIC ACID, POTASSIUM 
N-/4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2-THIAZOLYLjFORMAMIDE (FANFT) 
NITROSOIMINODIACETIC ACID 
2,4-DICHLOROPHENOXYACETIC ACID, ISOOCTYL ESTER 
2-HYDRAZIN0-4 -(5-NITR0-2-FURYLJTHIAZOLE (HNT) 
2-(2,2-DIMETHYLHYDRAZIN0)-4-(5-NITR0-2-
FURYL)THIAZOLE 
2-HYDRAZIN0-4 -(p-NITROPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
2-HYDRAZIN0-4-(p-AMINOPHENYL)THIAZOLE 
N-NITROSOTHIOMORPHOLINE 
AZIDE, SODIUM 
AROCLOR 1264 (PCB) 
VANADYL SULFATE 
ANTIMONY POTASSIUM TARTRATE 
1-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE (N -1-fluoreny!acetamide) 
4-ACETYLAMINOFLUORENE (N-4-fluoreny!acetamide) 
AFLATOXICOL 
N-NITROS0-2 ,2,4-TRIMETHYL-l,2-DIHYDROQUINOLINE 
POLYMER 
30310-80-6 NITROSOHYDROXYPROLINE 
31873-81-1 FORMIC ACID 2-/4-(2-FURYL)-2 -THIAZOLYLjHYDRAZIDE 
32607-00-4 IMINODIACETIC ACID, MONOSODIUM 
32852-21-4 FORMIC ACID 2-(4-METHYL-2 -THIAZOLYLJHYDRAZIDE 
33389-33-2 l,2-DIHYDR0 -2-(5-NITR0-2-THIENYLJQUINAZOLIN-
4(3H)-ONE 
33389-36-5 4-(2-HYDROXYETHYLAMINOJ-2-(5-NITR0-2 -
THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
33857-26-0 2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p -DIOXIN (DCDD) 
34176-52-8 2-HYDRAZIN0-4 -PHENYL THIAZOLE 
34627-78-6 l'-ACETOXYSAFROLE 
36658-65 -2 CADMIUM CHLORIDE MONOHYDRATE 297 298 
CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
36133·88· 7 N ·{[3·(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)-1,2,4-0XADIAWLE -5-YLJ· 
METHYL)ACETAMIDE 
36702-44-0 S(+)·2-METHYL-N -NITROSOPIPERIDINE 
38434· 77 ·4 ETHYLNITROSOCY ANAMIDE (nitrosoethanecarbamonitrile) 
38514-71 ·5 2·AMIN0-4-(5-NITR0-2 -FURYL)THIAZOLE 
38571-73·2 TRIS-1,2,3-(CHLOROMETHOXY)PROPANE 
38777-13·8 NITROSO-BAYGON 
39156-41-7 2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE (NCI uen CAS 
NUMBER 615-05·4) 
39801-14-4 MIREX, PHOTO· 
40548-68-3 TETRAHYDR0 -2-NITROS0 -2H-l,2-0XAZINE 
42011-48-3 2,2,2-TRIFLUORO-N -{4-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-2· 
THIAZOL YLJACET AMIDE 
42579-28-2 1-NITROSOHYDANTOIN 
43054-45-1 CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 
50892-23-4 J4-CHLOR0-6-(2,3,,XYLIDIN0)·2 -PYRIMIDINYLTHIOJACETIC 
ACID 
51325-35-0 N,N'-[6-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-o-TRIAZINE -2,4-
DIYLJBISACETAMIDE 
51542-33-7 N-NITROSOBENZTHIAZURON (l-(2'-benzothiuolyl) -
3-methyl-3-nitroeourea) 
51786-53-9 2,5-XYLIDINE.HCI 
52207-83-7 ALLYLHYDRAZINE .HCI 
53609-64-6 N-NITROSOBIS(2-HYDROXYPROPYL)AMINE 
54150·69-5 2,4-DIMETHOXY ANILINE .HCI 
54749-90-5 CHLOROZOTOCIN 
55556-92-8 NITROS0 -1,2,3,6-TETRAHYDROPYRIDINE 
55557-00-1 DINITROSOHOMOPIPERAZINE 
55557-03-4 NITROSOMETHYLPHENIDATE 
55738-54-0 lnlDA-2-[(DIMETHYLAMINO )METHYLIMINO J-5-[2-(5-
NITR0-2 -FURYL)VINYL [-1,3,4-0XADIAZOLE 
55965-13-4 EMULSIFIER YN 
56654-52-5 l,3-DIBUTYL-1-NITROSOUREA 
56795-65-4 o-BUTYLHYDRAZINE .HCI 
56795-66-5 PROPYLHYDRAZINE.HCI 
56894-91-8 BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY) -p-XYLENE 
58139-48-3 4-MORPHOLIN0-2 -(5-NITR0 -2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
59536-61-1 POLYBROMINATED BIPHENYLS 
60391-92-6 CARBOXYMETHYLNITROSOUREA (CMNU) 
61702-44-1 2-CHLORO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE SULFATE 
63412-06·6 N-METHYL -N-NITROSOBENZAMIDE 
63886-77-1 TETRAFLUORO-m -PHENYLENEDIAMINE .2HCI 
64039-27-6 beta-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBOSIDE (beta-TGdR. 
NCI uaet1 CAS NUMBER 789·61-7) 
64049-29-2 4,4'-METHYLENE-BIS(2-CHLOROANILINE ).2HCI 
65734-38-5 N'-ACETYL-4- (HYDROXYMETHYL)PHENYLHYDRAZINE 
68107-26-6 NITROSOMETHYLUNDECYLAMINE 
69658·91-0 3-NITROSOMETHYLAMINOPYRIDINE 
72254-58-1 3-AMIN0-1-METHYL-5H -PYRID0[4,3 -b[INDOLE ACETATE 
(trp-P-2 acetate) 
74920-78-8 N-ETHYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
75104-43-7 3-AMIN0-1,4-DIMETHYL-5H-PYRID0[4,3-bpNDOLE ACETATE 
(trp-P-1 acetate) 
75198-31-1 3-(5-NITR0-2-FURYL)-IMIDAZO(l,2-alphe)PYRIDINE 
(NFIP) 
77337-54-3 N-N'-PROPYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE 
l'-OXOSAFROLE GOLD ET AL. 
CAS 
NUMBER' CHEMICAL NAME 
1,1-Dl-n-BUTYLHYDRAZINE 
1-METHYL-1,4-DIHYDR0 -7-[2-(5-NITROFURYL)VINYL J-4-0X0-
1,8-NAPHTHYRIDINE-3-CARBOXYLATE , POTASSIUM 
2-CHLOR0-5-(3,5-DIMETHYLPIPERIDINOSULPHONYL)BENZOIC 
ACID 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMIN0 -2-(2-THIENYL)QUINAZOLINE 
4-BIS(2-HYDROXYETHYL)AMIN0 -2-(5-NITR0-2 -THIENYL) 
QUINAWLINE 
4-CHLOR0-6 -(2,3-XYLIDIN0) -2-PYRIMIDINYL THIO(N-beta-
HYDROXYETHYL)ACETAMIDE 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONEl2,3-cJCOUMARIN 
5,7-DIMETHOXYCYCLOPENTENONE!3,2-cJCOUMARIN 
5-NITR0-2-FURANMETHANEDIOL DIACETATE 
ACETYLATED DIAMYLOPECTIN PHOSPHATE 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH ADIPATE 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
ACETYLATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
AFLATOXIN , CRUDE 
ALKYLBENZENESULFONATE, LINEAR 
ALUMINUM POTASSIUM SULFATE 
CARRAGEENAN, ACID-DEGRADED 
CLIVORINE 
D & C RED NO. 10 
DI-tort-BUTYL-4-HYDROXYMETHYL PHENOL 
DIPENTAMETHYLENETHIURAM HEXASULFIDE (oulfada) 
ENOVID-E (no,.thynodrel/meotran ol [25,lJ) 
GERMANATE, SODIUM 
HYDROXYPROPYL DISTARCH GLYCEROL 
ISONICOTINIC ACID V ANILLYLIDENEHYDRAZIDE (phthivazid ) 
LEUPEPTIN 
N,N-DIPROPYL-4 -(4'-[PYRIDYL-l'-OXIDEJAZO)ANILINE 
N-(N-METHYL -N-NITROSOCARBAMOYL)-L-ORNITHINE 
(nitroeourea amino acid) 
N-ETHYL-N '-NITRO-N -NITROSOGUANIDINE 
N-N-BUTYL-N-FORMYLHYDRAZINE N-NITROSOBIS(2,2
,2-TRIFLUOROETHYL)AMINE (6-F-DEN) 
NIGROSINE 
NITROSOCHLORDIAZEPOXIDE 
NOVADELOX 
PETASITENINE 
PHOSPHATED DISTARCH PHOSPHATE 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE IN SOLVENT (butacide) 
POL YVINYLPYRIDINE -N-OXIDE 
PREMARIN (conjugated equine ntrogena) 
QUILLAIA EXTRACT (1pray-dried aqueout ertract of quillaia bark) 
STARCH ACETATE 
SULFITE, POTASSIUM METABI ­
TITANIUM OXALATE , POTASSIUM 
BIS-1,4-(CHLOROMETHOXY)BUTANE 
BIS-1,6-(CHLOROMETHOXY)HEXANE 
N-1-DIACETAMIDOFLUORENE 
(N-6)-(METHYLNITROSO)ADENINE 
(N-6)-(METHYLNITROSO)ADENOSINE 
(N-6)-METHYLADENINE 
(N-6)-METHYLADENOSINE 
-CAS NUMBER • Chemical Abet.ract.9 Service registry number 
APPENDIX 3: STRAIN CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
Code 
aah 
abi 
aci 
afr 
agu 
aif 
ain 
ajj 
akr 
aks 
alb 
amm 
aps 
asd Strain 
A/He 
Ab X IF 
ACI 
African green (Cercopithecus aethiops) 
AGUS 
AX IF 
ACl/n 
A/JJms 
AKR 
AKR/J 
albino 
A 
Alderly Park 
Sprague-Dawley albino Code 
asp 
asw 
b46 
b6a 
b6c 
baj 
bal 
bbb 
bbl 
bee 
bcn 
bd2 
bdf 
bdr Strain 
ASH-CSl 
Swiss-Webster albino 
BR 46 
B6AKF1 
B6C3Fl 
BALB/cJ 
BALB/c 
Bush babies (Galago crassicauda tus) 
Bethesda black 
BALB/cHe 
BALB/c StCrlfC3Hf /Nctr 
BD II 
BD VI 
BD CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 299 
Code Strain Code Strain 
beg beagle jic JCL: ICR 
bfm Buffalo-Mai leb Long-Evans BLU: (LE) 
buf Buffalo lev Long-Evans 
cl7 Cl7 mgr mongrel 
c3c C3H/AnCum mrc MRC 
c3d C3Hf/Dp mrw MRC-Wistar 
c3e C3HeB/Fe nbr NBR 
c3h C3H nbw NZBW (hooded black and white strain) 
c3j C3H/HeJ nmh Han: NMRI 
c31 C3H (C3H/Anl) (Anl 70) nmr NMRI 
c3p C3HeB non non-inbred 
c3s C3H/St nra Norwegian albino 
c56 C57BL/6J nss not specified 
c51 C57BL nzd NZR/Gd 
c7b (C57BL/6 X BALB/c)Fl ofs OFA (Sprague-Dawley derived) 
c71 C57L osm Osborne-Mendel 
cb6 C57BL/6 por MRC Porton (Wistar derived) 
cha CBA r3m RIII 
cbc CBA/Cb/Se rfm RF 
cbh CBA/H-T6 rhe Rhesus (Macaca mulatta) 
cbj C3HeB/FeJ scd Swiss CD-1 
cbo C.B. hooded sda Sprague-Dawley 
cbr CB she Sherman COBS 
cbs Cb/Sc she Sherman 
cbt Chester Beatty albino shr Swiss/H/Riop 
cdl Charles River CDl sjs SJL/J 
cdf CD Fl sis Slc-Wistar 
cdr Charles River CD smw Sas: MRC(WI)BR 
cfl CF-1 SSS Sprague-Dawley Spartan 
cfe CFE swa Swiss albino 
cfl CFLP swi Swiss 
cfn CFN swr SWR 
cfr CF sww Swiss Webster 
che C57BL/He syg Syrian Golden 
chf C3HfB tfl Tuck 
chh C3H/He the Theiller's Original 
chi CD-1 HaM/ICR tmm TM 
chj C3HeB/Jax tst Tree shrew (Tupaia glis) 
chm Charles River wag WAG 
cif (C57 x IF)Fl wal Wistar albino 
crf (C3H x RIII)Fl wi2 Wistar II 
csa Charles River albino wid Wistar/FDRL 
csb CSb wio Wistar-OSU 
csc C57L/He x 129/Rr x C3HeB/De x SWR/Ly (hybrid of wis Wis tar 
these parent strains) wmf Wistar-Mai-Furth 
ctn CTM wsh Han: WIST 
cwf Carworth Farms wsr Wis tar-random 
cws CFW WSW Wilmslow Wistar 
cym Cynomolgus (M acaca fascicularis) WWS Wistar W74 
dba DBA/2 xvi XVII/G 
ddn ddNi 
ddx dd 
ddy DDY 
don Donryu APPENDIX 4: ROUTE OF ADMINISTRATION 
esd Eastern Sprague-Dawley CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
f.34 Fischer 344 
f.3d F344/DuCrj Code Route of Administration fdr FDRL 
fds Food and Drug Research Laboratories cap gelatin capsule, p.o. 
stock rats eat diet 
tis Fischer gav gavage 
hew Hebrew University inh inhalation 
hie Ha/ICR ipj intraperitoneal injection 
hr! Harlan ivj intravenous injection 
hza Holtzman albino (Sprague-Dawley derived) mix multiple routes 
ic3 ICRC x C3h (Jax) Used for two compounds: l)thiourea (rats): intraperito-
ici ICI neat injection followed by water; 2) procarbazine· HCI 
icm ICR (monkeys): a variety of combinations of diet, subcu-
icr ICR/Jcl taneous, intraperitoneal, and intravenous injection. 
ifc IF x C57 or! gavage preweanling, followed by diet 
ifm IF wat water 300 GOLD ET AL. 
APPENDIX 5: SITE CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
Code Site Code Site 
all target sites mix more than one ·site; sites specified in published paper 
abc abdominal cavity min mesenteric lymph node 
abd abdomen mth mouth 
adr adrenal gland mu! multiple organs 
adu acoustic duct mus muscle 
auc external auditory canal MXA more than one site, combined by NCIINTP 
aur auricular region MXB more than one site, combined by Berkeley 
b/l lung/bronchiole myc myocardium 
bcm bucal mucosa nae nasal mucosa 
bi! bile duct nap nasal passageway 
blv blood vessels nas nasal cavity 
bod body cavities no! n. olfactorius 
born bone marrow nse nose 
bon bone nsm nasal septum 
bra brain nsp nasopharynx 
brs brain stem ntu nasal turbinate 
CCX cerebral cortex oes oesophagus 
cec cecum olb olfactory bulb 
cli clitoral gland opx oropharynx 
cir colorectum ova ovary 
ens central nervous system pae pancreas, exocrine 
col colon pan pancreas 
crb cerebrum pdu pancreatic duct 
er! cerebellum pee peritoneal cavity 
der dermis pep paraepididymal tissue 
dgt digestive tract per peritoneum 
duo duodenum phr pharynx 
eac ear canal pit pituitary gland 
ear ear pis palate, soft 
edu ear duct pni pancreatic islets 
ehp extrahepatic tissue pns peripheral nervous system 
eld eyelid pre preputial gland 
epi epidermis prn pararenal tissue 
eso esophagus pty parathyroid 
eye eye rec rectum 
fat fat rel reticuloendothelium 
fbd forehead rep reproductive tract 
for forestomach res respiratory system 
gfb gall bladder/bile duct sev seminal vesicle 
gal gall bladder sft skin of foot and toe 
gnv gingiva skb skin of back 
hag Harderian gland skf skin of flank 
hea heart ski skin 
hnt hard palate/nasal turbinates slg salivary gland 
hp! hypophysis smi small intestine 
hum humerus spc splenic capsule 
ilm ileum spd spinal cord 
isp interscapulum spl spleen 
it! intestinal tract stg stomach, glandular 
itn intestine stn stomach, nonglandular 
jaw jaw sto stomach 
jej jejunum sub subcutaneous tissue 
k/c kidney/cortex tba all tumor bearing animals 
k/l kidney/papilla tes testis 
kip kidney/pelvis thi thigh 
kid kidney thm thymus gland 
ktu kidney tubule thy thyroid gland 
lib lung/bronchus tnv tunica vaginalis 
lab lung/alveoli/bronchioles ton tongue 
Jar larynx trh trachea 
lgi large intestine tyf thyroid follicle 
!iv liver ubl urinary bladder 
lmr lymphoreticular system ugi upper gastrointestinal tract 
Jun lung unt urinary tract 
!yd lymph node ure ureter 
mam mammary tissue (other than or including more than ute uterus 
mammary gland) utm uterus/endometrium 
mds mediastinum vag vagina 
mei mesenteric intestine ver vertebra 
mey mesentery zym Zymbal's gland 
mg! mammary gland CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 301 
APPENDIX 6: 
HISTOPATHOLOGY CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
Code Histopathology Code Histopathology 
all tumors esp endometrial stromal polyp 
ala alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma ess endometrial stromal sarcoma 
ale alveolar/bronchiolar carcinoma exa exocrine adenoma 
alt alveolar/bronchiolar tumor fba fibroadenoma 
aca adenocarcinoma in adenomatous polyp tbs fibrosarcoma 
ace acinar-cell carcinoma fca follicular-cell adenoma 
acn adenocarcinoma, NOS• fee follicular-cell carcinoma 
ace acidophil adenoma fdc follicular adenocarcinoma 
adc adenocarcinoma fep fibroepithelial tumor 
ade adenoma fib fibroma 
adf adenofibroma fih fibrous histiocytoma 
adm adenomatous polyp, NOS or adenocarcinoma in foa follicular adenoma 
adenomatous polyp gee granulosa-cell carcinoma 
adn adenoma, NOS get granulosa-cell tumor 
adp adenomatous polyp gin glioma, NOS 
aep adenomatous endometrial polyp gr! granulocytic leukemia 
aff adenofibromalfibroadenoma gsa granulocytic sarcoma 
agm angioma hae hemangioendothelioma 
akt adenoma-like tumor hct hepatocellular tumor 
ala alveolar-cell adenoma hem hemangioma 
ale alveolar-cell carcinoma hes hemangiosarcoma 
aid alveolar adenoma hms hemangioendothelial sarcoma 
am! acute myeloblastic leukemia hnd hyperplastic nodules 
amy adenomyoma hpa hepatocellular adenoma 
ane angio-endothelioma, malignant hpc hepatocellular carcinoma 
ang angiosarcoma hph hepatocellular hyperplastic nodule 
ape anaplastic carcinoma hpm hemangiopericytoma , malignant 
apn adenomatous polyp, NOS hpn hepatocellular neoplastic nodule 
asm adenocarcinoma with squamous metaplasia hpt hepatoma 
ast astrocytoma ica interstitial-cell adenoma 
b/a bronchiolar adenoma ict interstitial-cell tumor 
bee basal-cell carcinoma ile leukemia, indeterminat e type 
bcp basal-cell papilloma isa islet-cell adenoma 
bet basal-cell tumor isc islet-cell carcinoma 
bda bile duct adenoma ivc carcinoma , invasive 
bdc bile duct carcinoma kcs Kuppfer-cell sarcoma 
bdt bile duct tumor ker keratoacanthoma 
ben benign tumor !bl lymphoblastic lymphoma 
bhp hepatoma, benign lea liver-cell adenoma 
bht hepatocellular tumor, benign Ice liver-cell carcinoma 
blc biliary cystadenoma lei lymphocytic lymphoma 
bro bronchogenic carcinoma let liver-cell tumor 
bsa basophil adenoma Ide Leydig-cell tumor 
cac cholangioadenocarcinoma lei leiomyosarcoma 
can carcinoma , NOS leu leukemia 
car carcinoma !he lymphoma, histiocytic type 
cas carcinosarcoma lip lipoma 
cca c-cell adenoma lka acute leukemia 
ccn cystadenocarcinoma , NOS !km lymphoma /leukemia 
ccr c-cell carcinoma lie lymphocytic leukemia 
ccy cholangioma, cystic lpb liver-cell tumor, type B 
cho cholangioma lps liposarcoma 
clc cholangiocarcinoma Jut luteoma 
end carcinoid lyk lymphatic leukemia 
coa cortical adenoma lym lymphoma 
coc cortical carcinoma lys lymphosarcoma 
era chromophobe adenoma mag malignant glioma 
ere chromophobe carcinoma ma! malignant tumor 
crt carcinoma, combined glandular and squamous type mda medullary adenoma 
cue ceruminous carcinoma mec muco-epidermoid carcinoma 
cvh cavernous hemangioma men mesothelioma, NOS 
eye cystadenoma mhc mixed hepato/cholangio carcinoma 
cyn cystadenoma, NOS mhp malignant hepatoma 
ea! leukemia, early mhs histiocytoma, malignant 
ene esthesioneuroepithelioma mht hepatocellular tumor, malignant 
epc epidermoid carcinoma mix more than one tumor type; 
epd ependymoblastoma tumor types specified in published paper 
epn epithelial neoplasm mlc melanocytoma 
epo epithelioma mle monocytic leukemia 302 
Code 
mlh 
mlk 
mlt 
mly 
mng 
mno 
mnp 
msm 
mso 
mua 
muc 
MXA 
MXB 
mye 
my! 
nen 
neo 
nep neu 
nfs 
nnd 
nod 
npm 
oec 
olc 
oli 
oln 
ost 
pac 
pam 
pas 
pea pen 
pcy 
phe 
phm 
pla 
pie 
pms 
pol 
ppa 
ppc 
ppn 
PPP 
ptc ptm 
pvc 
rec 
rct 
ret 
rhb 
rna 
rsc 
rtb 
rts 
sad 
sar 
sea 
scs 
set 
sea 
seb sec 
sgc 
sqa 
sqc 
sqk sqp 
sqs Histopathology 
malignant lymphoma , histiocytic type 
myelogenous leukemia 
melanotic tumor 
malignant lymphoma 
meningioma 
malignant lymphoma, 
NOS 
mesenchymal neoplasm 
mesothelioma, malignant 
mesothelioma ' 
mucinous adenocarcinoma 
mucinous cystadenocarcinoma 
more than one tumor type, 
combined by NCI/NTP 
more than one tumor type, 
combined by Berkeley 
myelocytic l~ukemia 
myeloid leukemia 
neoplasm, NOS 
neoplasm 
nephroblastoma 
neuroblastoma 
neurofibrosarcoma 
neoplastic nodule 
nodular hyperplasia 
neoplasm, NOS, malignant 
olfactory epithelial carcinoma 
olfactory carcinoma 
oligodendroglioma 
olfactory neuroblastoma 
osteosarcoma 
papillary adenocarcinoma 
papilloma 
papillomatosis 
parenchymal adenoma 
papillary cystadenocarcinoma, NOS 
papillary cystadenoma, NOS 
pheochromocytoma pheochromocytoma, malignant 
polypoid adenoma 
plasmacytoma 
papillary mesothelioma 
polyp 
papillary adenoma 
papillary carcinoma 
papilloma, 
NOS 
papillary polyp 
papillary transitional-cell carcinoma 
papillary tumor 
carcinoma, preinvasive 
renal-cell carcinoma 
renal-cell tumor 
reticulum-cell tumor 
rhabdomyosarcoma 
reticulum-cell neoplasm, type A 
respiratory epithelial carcinoma 
reticulum-cell sarcoma, type B 
reticulum-cell sarcoma 
scirrhous adenocarcinoma 
sarcoma 
solid-cell adenoma 
spindle-cell sarcoma 
Sertoli-cell tumor 
sebaceous adenoma 
sebaceous adenoma and adenocarcinoma 
sebaceous adenocarcinoma 
sweat gland carcinoma 
squamous-cell tumor 
squamous-cell carcinoma 
squamous-cell carcinoma, keratinized 
squamous-cell papilloma 
squamous-cell carcinoma, stratified GOLD ET AL. 
Code Histopathology 
srn sarcoma, NOS 
ssc sebaceous squamous-cell carcinoma 
tee transitional-cell carcinoma 
tla tubular-cell adenoma 
tma thymoma 
tpp transitional-cell papilloma 
tri trichoepithelioma 
tua tubular adenoma 
tum tumor or more than one tumor type; 
tumor types not specified in published paper 
uac tubular-cell adenocarcinoma 
ulc undifferentiated carcinoma 
ule undifferentiated leukemia 
vsc all vascular tumors 
•NOS = not otherwise specified. 
APPENDIX 7: NOTECODES AND DEFINITIONS 
Code Definition 
a The exposure time reported on the plot is an average of the 
different exposure times of the individual dose groups in the 
experiment. In addition, for NCI/NTP bioassays an "a" may 
indicate that all animals in one group were dead long before those 
in another group, and therefore the experiment time on the plot 
is an average of experiment times for the different dose groups. 
(In the TD50 calculation for the NCI/NTP bioassays, full lifetable 
data have been used.) 
b Diet was specially prepared to be deficient in one or more 
vitamins. 
d A cyclic dosing schedule was followed for part of the exposure 
time, with at least one week between cycles, e.g., 3 weeks dosed, 
one week not dosed. 
e For the general literature we have used an effective number of 
animals in a group whenever possible. This effective number is 
either: (1) the number of animals examined, or (2) the number of 
animals alive at the time of appearance of the first tumor. For 
some NCI/NTP bioassays the Technical Report includes both 
time-adjusted and unadjusted statistical analyses. Effective 
number indicates that some sites in these experiments have been 
included in the plot on the basis of the time-adjusted analysis. 
f Diet was specially prepared to have a lower than average protein 
level. 
g Some or all of the animals were used as breeders during the 
course of the experiment. 
k For interim and serial sacrifice experiments, we have reported 
each sacrifice time as a separate experiment. The k notecode 
identifies these sacrificed groups. Unscheduled deaths have been 
included with the terminal sacrifice data, wherever possible and 
do not receive a notecode . 
m The calculated dose level for a group is an average of either (1) 
different doses administered to individual animals, or (2) the 
range of doses administered. 
r Authors either examined or chose to report data for only a few 
selected tissues. Therefore, this is a restricted site analysis. 
s Authors noted that survival was decreased due to toxicity or 
disease. 
u Tests in monkeys are still in progress. The vinylidene chloride 
experiment in mice has been completed, but the final report has 
not yet been published. 
v Variable or irregular dosing schedules have been used, e.g., dose 
level changed during the experiment. 
w Monkey control animals are from a colony which includes both 
vehicle and untreated controls. Some animals have been used as 
breeders. Seventy percent of the animals are born in the colony; 
thirty percent are brought in from the wild as adults. The age of 
controls ranges from neonate to greater than 16 years. Only 
controls which have died are included in the TD50 calculations. 
x Exposure began before the animals were weaned. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 303 
Code Definition 
y In experiments from two papers, animals were dosed for only 25 
weeks; one week short of the standard criterion. Due to 
rounding, 6 months is reported as the exposure time on the plot. 
z In a report of these vinyl chloride experiments (20), the author 
notes '~ll the animals exposed to the highest doses (30,000 and 
10,000 ppm for 52 weeks), with or without tumors, were 
examined radiologically during treatment and/or at death; 
moreover, radiologic examinations have also been made on 
several animals bearing tumors even though these animals had 
been exposed to the lower doses?' The experiment at the highest 
dose (30,000 ppm) is not included in the database. The reported 
data include the 10,000 ppm or lower doses. 
APPENDIX 8: DOSE-RESPONSE CURVE 
SYMBOLS AND DEFINITIONS 
Symbol Dose-Response Curve 
* 
" z 
blank consistent with linearity 
significant departure from linearity, upward curvature 
significant departure from linearity, downward curvature 
significant departure from linearity, more than three dose 
groups including controls 
either no dose-related effect, or only two dose groups 
including controls, so not enough information to deter­
mine a curve shape 
APPENDIX 9: 
REFERENCE CODES AND DEFINITIONS 
Code 
adsc 
aenh 
agfc 
ajpa 
amih 
an oh 
apms 
arpa 
artx 
arzn 
atmh 
banb 
beer 
bdca bebm 
beet 
bjca bmjl 
bwho Reference 
Academie des Sciences, Memoires 
et Communications des 
Membres et des Correspondants de l'Academie 
Archives of Environmental Health (formerly A.M.A. Ar­
chives of Industrial Health, prior to July 1, 1960) 
Agricultural and Food Chemistry: Past, Present, Future 
(R. Teranishi, Ed.), Avi Publishing Company , Inc., 
Westport, Conn., 1978 
American Journal of Pathology 
American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal (formerly 
American Industrial Hygiene Association Quarterly, prior 
to Feb. 1958) 
The Annals of Occupational Hygiene 
Acta Patholologica et Microbiologica Scandinavica Section 
A. Pathology 
Archives of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (formerly 
Archives of Pathology, Mar. 1928-Sept. 1950; A.M.A. Ar­
chives of Pathology, Oct. 1950-June 1960) 
Archives of Toxicology 
Arzneimittel-Forschung American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 
(formerly American Journal of Tropical Medicine, 
1921-
1951) 
Banbury Report 5 Ethylene Dichloride: A Potential Health 
Risk? (B. Ames, P. Infante and R. Reitz, Eds.), Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1980. 
N. C. I. Brief Communication 
Bulletin du Cancer 
Byulleten ' Eksperimental 'noi Biologii i Meditsiny 
Bulletin of Environmenta l Contamination and Toxicology 
British Journal of Cancer 
British Medical Journal 
Bulletin WH.O. (World Health Organization) Code 
cane 
canr 
care 
ca rm 
clet cmsp 
ctxf 
dact dcfr 
dcrp 
ea es 
ejca 
enhp 
envr 
ex pa 
fctx 
gaga 
gann 
gmcr 
ijcn 
imed 
jept 
jiht 
jkmj 
jnci 
jnut 
jpat 
jphp 
jtxe 
la pp 
livt 
lmdl 
mpoc 
my co 
natu 
nawi nplm 
ntis 
obgy 
on co 
ossc Reference 
Cancer 
Cancer Research 
Carcinogenesis 
Carcinogenesis, Vol. 2. Mechanisms of Tumor Promotion 
and Cocarcinogenesis (T. J. Slaga, A. Sivak, and R. K. 
Boutwell, Eds.), Raven Press, New York, 1978 
Cancer Letters 
Chemosphere 
Chemical Toxicology of Food. Proceeding s of the Interna­
tional Symposium on Chemical Toxicology of Food, Milan, 
June 8-10, 1978 (C. L. Galli, R. Paoletti and G. Vettorazzi, 
Eds.), Elsevier/North-Holland Biomedical Press, New 
York, 1978 
Drug and Chemical Toxicology 
A Two-year Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study with Acryloni­
trile Incorporated in the Drinking Water of Rats. (J. F. 
Quast, C. E. Wade, C. G. Humiston , R. M. Carreon, E. A. 
Hermann, C. N. Park and B. A. Schwetz). Final Report. 
Dow Chemical U.S.A., Midland, MI, 1980 
A Two-year Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study with Acryloni­
trile Following Inhalation Exposure of Rats (J. F. Quast, D. 
J. Schuetz, M. F. Balmer, T. S. Gushow, C. N. Park and M. 
J. McKenna) . Final Report. Dow Chemical U.S. A., Midland, 
MI, 1980 
Ecotoxicology and Environmenta l Safety 
European Journal of Cancer (European Journal of Cancer 
and Clinical Oncology since 1982) 
Environmenta l Health Perspectives 
Environmental Research 
Experientia 
Food and Cosmetics Toxicology (Food and Chemical Toxi­
cology since 1982) 
Gastroenterology Gann 
Gann Monograph on Ca
ncer Research 
International Journal of Cancer (formerly International 
Union Against Cancer. Acta. Vols. 1-20, 1936-64) 
International Journal of Occupationa l Health and Safety 
(formerly Industrial Medicine and Surgery of Trauma, 
June-July 1949; Industrial Medicine and Surgery, Aug. 
1949-73) 
Journal of Environmenta l Pathology and Toxicolog y 
Journal of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology (formerly 
Journal of Industrial Hygiene, 1919-35) 
Jikeikai Medical Journal 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute (U.S. National 
Cancer Institute. Journal) 
Journal of Nutrition 
Journal of Pathology (formerly Journal of Pathology and 
Bacteriology, prior to 1969) 
Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health 
Lavori dell Instituto di Anatomia e Istologia Patologica, 
Universita degli Studi, Perugia, Italy 
Laboratory Investigation 
La Medicina del Lavoro 
Morphological Precursors of Cancer (L. Severi, Ed.) Divison 
of Cancer Research, Perugia, Italy, 1962 
Mycopathologia 
Nature 
N aturwissenschaften 
Neoplasma 
National Technical Informati on Service. Evaluation of 
Carcinogenic, Teratogenic , and Mutagenic Activities of 
Selected Pesticides and Industrial Chemicals. Vol. 1: 
Carcinogenic Study. NTIS, Springfie ld, VA, 1968 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Oncology 
Organ and Species Specificity in Chemical Carcinogenesis. 
(R. Langenbach , S. Nesnow, and J. M. Rice, Eds.), 
Plenum Press, New York, 1982 304 GOLD ET AL. 
Code Reference 
pcpl Pentachloroph enol (K. Ranga Rao, Ed.), Plenum Press, 
New York, 1978 
pseb Proceedings of the Society for Experimental Biology and 
Medicine (New York) 
reec Revue Europeen d'Etudes Cliniques et Biologiques 
sabo Sabouraudia 
scie Science 
srfr Booklet 1, 1976. Phase I Studies on the Carcinogenic 
Activity of Anticancer Drugs in Mice and Rats (H. E. 
Skipper) Final Report. Southern Research Institute. 
Birmingham, AL, 1976 
stev Science of the Total Environment 
team Teratogenesis, Carcinogenesis, and Mutagene sis 
tjem Tohoku Journal of Experimental Medicine 
tumo Tumori 
txap Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology 
txcy Toxicology 
txlt Toxicology Letters 
txoc Toxicology and Occupational Medicine. Proceedings of the 
10th Inter-Ameri can Conference on Toxicology and Occupa­
tional Medicine. Oct. 22nd-25th, 1978. Miami, FL (W 
Deichmann, Ed.), Developments in Toxicology and Environ­
mental Science, Vol. 4. Elsevier/North-Holland, New York, 
1979 
urre Urological Research 
vopr Voprosy Onkologii (Problems in Oncology) 
vpit Voprosy Pitaniya (Problems in Nutrition) 
yjbm Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine 
zkko Journal of Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology (formerly 
Zeitschrift fur Krebsforschung und Klinische Onkologie, 
prior to Vol. 92, 1979) 
APPENDIX 10: NCI/NTP BIOASSAYS 
WITH COMBINED CONTROLS 
Chemical Name 
ACRONY CINE 
3-AMIN0-4 -ETHOXYACETANILIDE 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 
2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
FENAMINOSULF, FORMULATED 
HYDRAZOBENZENE 
5-N ITRO-o-AN ISi DI NE 
5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 
1-NITRONAPHTHALENE 
PHENESTERIN 
STYRENE 
THIO-TEPA Experiments 
with Combined Controls 
rats, female mice 
rats, mice 
mice 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
female mice 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
rats 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
mice 
rats 
rats 
APPENDIX 11: NCI/NTP BIOASSAYS 
WITH REVISED DATA 
Chemical Name 
2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
AZINPHOSMETHYL 
CAPTAN 
CHLORAMBEN Experiments 
with Revised Data 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
rats 
rats Chemical Name 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE 
DI CO FOL 
DIELDRIN, PHOT0-
1,4-DIOXANE 
DIOXATHION 
ENDRIN 
HYDRAZOBENZENE 
2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 
5-NITRO-o-TOL UIDINE 
PHOSPHAMIDON 
PI CLO RAM Experiments 
with Revised Data 
rats 
mice 
rats 
mice 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
rats, mice 
mice 
rats, mice 
rats 
rats 
APPENDIX 12: NCI/NTP BIOASSAYS EVALUATED 
AS INADEQUATE IN TECHNICAL REPORTS 
Chemical Name 
ACRONYCINE 
ALLYL CHLORIDE 
5-AZACYTIDINE 
CHLOROPICRIN 
CLONITRALID 
m-CRES IDINE 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
EMETINE·2HCl 
ENDOSULFAN 
NITRO FEN 
PHOSPHAMIDON 
PROFLAVINE· HCl HEMIHYDRATE 
PYRAZINAMIDE 
PYRIMETHAMINE 
TETRACHLOROETHYLENE 
f3-THIOGUANINE DEOXYRIBO SIDE 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE Experiments Evaluated 
as Inadequate 
mice 
rats 
rats, male mice 
rats 
male mice 
male mice 
female rats 
rats, mice 
male rats, male mice 
male rats (C00421 only) 
rats 
rats, mice 
female mice 
male mice 
rats 
mice 
rats, mice 
rats 
APPENDIX 13: NONHUMAN PRIMATES 
A special literature search was conducted for chemical carcinogene­
sis experiments in nonhuman primates. While many research reports 
were identified , few fit the standard inclusion criteria used for the rest 
of the database. Most of the tests did not meet the inclusion rules for 
one of the following reasons: (1) fewer than five dosed animals; (2) no 
control group; or (3) short experiment time. 
We subsequently relaxed the standard criteria in order to include 
tests from which a reasonable estimate of TD50 could be made. The 
major change has been to reduce the required experiment length from 
half the standard lifespan to 3 years for monkeys and 2 years for bush 
babies, if the author evaluated the compound as carcinogenic in that 
short time. The TD50 values from these shorter tests have been 
calculated with an extrapolation factor greater than that for other 
tests in the database, and are therefore less reliable. These cases are 
flagged in the plot with parentheses around the TD50. 
Most of the experiments on nonhuman primates in the database are 
from the Laboratory of Chemical Pharmacology, National Cancer 
Institute (NCI). Several of these experiments are still in progress and 
have been included in the database only if the researcher s have 
already reported that the test compound is carcinogenic. We have 
excluded experiments still in progress and without evidence of 
carcinogenicity because tumor induction may still occur. (For example, 
the test of saccharin is excluded.) The TD50 calculations for the 
experiments still in progress are based only on dosed and control 
animals which have already died. CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 305 
Some special considerations about these tests from the Laboratory 
of Chemical Pharmacology, (NCI) are as follows: (1) Data for males 
and females have been combined because the results for both sexes of 
control animals were reported together. (2) Histopathology was 
reported only for malignant neoplasms. (3) The first dose was usually 
administered at birth; however, in some experiments, the age at first 
dose ranged from neonate to adult. (4) Dosing may have been as 
infrequent as one time per month. (5) Monkey control animals are 
from a colony which includes both vehicle and untreated controls. 
Some animals have been used as breeders. Seventy percent of the 
animals are born in the colony, 30% are brought in from the wild as 
adults. The age of controls ranges from neonate to greater than 16 
years. Only controls which have died are included in the TD50 
calculations. (6) For one compound, procarbazine· HCl, we accepted 
subcutaneous injection as a route of administration when given in 
combination with either diet or intraperitoneal injection. 
APPENDIX 14 
Bibliography: General Literature 
1. Adamson , R. H., and Sieber, S. M. Chemical carcinogene sis 
studies in nonhuman primates . In: Organ and Species Specificity 
in Chemical Carcinogenesis. (R. Langenback and S. Newnow, 
Eds.), Plenum Press, New York and London, 1982 pp. 129-156. 
2. Adolphs, H. D., Thiele, J., Kiel, H., and Steffens, L. Induction 
of transitional cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder in rats by 
feeding N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl}-2-thiazolyl]formamide. Urol. Res. 
6: 19-27(1978). 
3. Agthe, C., Garcia, H., Shubik, P., Tomatis, L., and Wenyon, E. 
Study of the potential carcinogenicity of DDT in the Syrian 
golden hamster (34740). Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 134: 
113-116(1970). 
4. Allmark, M. G., Grice, H. C., and Mannell, W A. Chronic 
toxicity studies on food colours. Part II. Observations on the 
toxicity ofFD&C Green No. 2 (light green SF yellowish), FD&C 
Orange No. 2 (orange SS) and FD&C Reel No. 32 (oil reel XO) in 
rats. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 8: 417-424(1956). 
5. Allmark, M. G., Mannell, W A., and Grice, H. C. Chronic 
toxicity studies on food colours. Part III. Observations on the 
toxicity of malachite green, new coccine and nigrosine in rats. J. 
Pharm. Pharmacol. 9: 622-628( 1957). 
6. Anderson, L. M., Giner-Sorolla , A., Greenbaum, J. H., Last­
Barney, K., and Budinger, J. M. Induction of reproductive 
system tumors in mice by N6-(methylnitroso)-adenos ine and a 
tumorigenic effect of its combined precursors. Int. J. Cancer 24: 
319-322(1979) . 
7. Andrianova , M. M. Carcinogenic properties ofred food pigments 
-amaranth, SX purple and ponceau 4R. Vopr. Pitan. 29: 
61-65(1970). 
8. Andrianova, M. M., and Alekscev, I. V. On carcinogenic proper­
ties of the pesticides Sevin, maneb, ziram and zineb. Vopr. Pi tan. 
29: 71-74(1970). 
9. Angsubhakorn , S., Bhamarapravati, N., Romruen , K., Saha­
phong, S., Thamavit, W, and Miyamoto, M. Further study of 
alpha benzene hexachloride inhibition of aflatoxin Bl hepatocar­
cinogenesis in rats. Brit. J. Cancer 43: 881-883(1981). 
10. Aoyagi, M., Matsukura, N., Uchida, E., Kawachi, T., Sugimura, 
T., Takayama, S., and Matsui, M. Induction of liver tumors in 
Wistar rats by sodium nitrite given in pellet diet. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 65: 411-414(1980) . 
11. Arai, M., Aoki, Y., Nakanishi, K., Miyata, Y., Mori, T., and Ito, 
N. Long-term experiment of maximal non-carcinogenic dose of 
dimethylnitrosamine for carcinogenesis in rats. Gann 70: 549-558 
(1979). 
12. Arai, M., Cohen, S. M., Jacobs, J.B., and Friedell, G. H. Effect 
of dose on urinary bladder carcinogenesis induced in F344 rats 
by N-(4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazo lyl]formamide. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 62: 1013-1016 (1979). 
13. Argus, M. F., Arcos, J. C., and Hoch-Ligeti, C. Studies on the 
carcinogenic activity of protein-denaturin g agents: hepatocarci­
nogenicity of dioxane. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 35: 949-958(1965). 14. Argus, M. F., White, L. E., Bryant, G. M., Arcos, J. C., and 
Hoch-Ligeti, C. Molecular specificity of the tumorigenic action 
of ethionine: the inactivity of S-ethylcyste ine. Action on respira­
tory parameters. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 75: 201-208 (1971). 
15. Armuth, V. Leukaemogenic action of phorbol in intact and 
thymectomized mice of different strains. Brit. J. Cancer 34: 
516-522(1976) . 
16. Arnold, D. L., Moodie, C. A., Grice, H. C., Charbonneau, S. 
M., Stavric, B., Collins, B. T., McGuire, P. F., Zawidzka, Z. Z., 
and Munro, I. C. Long-term toxicity of ortho-toluenesulfonamide 
and sodium saccharin in the rat. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmaco l. 52: 
113-152 (1980). 
17. Baigusheva, M. M. Carcinogenic properties of the amaranth 
paste. Vopr. Pitan. 27: 46-50(1968). 
18. Barnes, J.M., Magee, P. N., Boyland, E., Haddow, A., Passey, 
R. D., Bullough , W S., Cruickshank, C. N. D., Salaman, M. H., 
and Williams, R. T. The non-toxicity of maleic hydrazide for 
mammalian tissues. Nature 180: 62-64(195 7). 
19. Barrows, G. H., Christopherson, W M., and Drill, V. A. Liver 
lesions and oral contraceptive steroids. J. Toxicol. Environ. 
Health 3: 219-230(1977). 
20. Baroni, C., van Esch, G. J., and Saffiotti, U. Carcinogenesis 
tests of two inorganic arsenicals. Arch. Environ. Health 7: 
668-674(1 963). 
21. Beal, D. D., Skibba, J. L., Croft, W A., Cohen, S. M., and 
Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicit y of the antineoplastic agent, 5-
(3,3-dimethyl-l-triazeno)-imidazole-4-carboxamicle , and its me­
tabolites in rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 54: 951-957(1975). 
22. Benya, T. J., Busey, W M., Dorato, M. A., and Berteau, P. E. 
Inhalation carcinogenicity of vinyl bromide in rats. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 64: 367-379(1982). 
23. Bhide, S. V., Maru, G. B., Sawai, M. M., and Ranadive, K. J. 
Isoniazid tumorigenicity in mice under different experimental 
conditions. Int. J. Cancer 21: 381-386(1978). 
24. Bhide, S. V., D'Souza, R. A., Sawai, M. M., and Ranaclive , K. J. 
Lung tumour incidence in mice treated with hydrazine sulphate. 
Int. J. Cancer 18: 530-535(1976). 
25. Biancifiori, C., Bucciarelli, E., Clayson, D. B., and Santilli, F. E. 
Induction of hepatomas in CBA/Cb/Se mice by hydrazine sul­
phate and the lack of effect of croton oil on tumour induction in 
BALB/c/Cb/Se mice. Brit. J. Cancer 18: 543-550(1964). 
26. Biancifiori, C., Milia, U., and Di Leo, F. P. Tumori della tiroicle 
indotti mediante etionamicle (ET) in topi femmina vergini 
BALB/c/Cb/Se substrain. Lav. Inst. Anat. Istol. Patol. Univ. 
Studi Perugia. 24: 145-165(1964). 
27. Blair, D., Dix, K. M., Hunt, P. F., Thorpe, E., Stevenson, D. E., 
and Walker, A. I. T. A 2-year inhal ation carcinogenesis study in 
rats. Arch. Toxicol. 35: 281-294(197 6). 
28. Bonser, G. M., Clayson, D. B., Juli, J. W, and Pyrah, L. N. The 
carcinogenic properties of 2-amino-1-naphthol hydrochloride and 
its parent amine 2-naphthylamine. Brit. J. Cancer 6: 412-424 
(1952). 
29. Borchert, P., Miller, J. A., Miller, E. C., and Shires, T. K. 
l'-Hyclrox ysafrole, a proximate carcinogenic metabolite of saf­
role in the rat and mouse. Cancer Res. 33: 590-600(1973) . 
30. Borzsonyi, M., Torok, G., Pinter, A., Surjan, A., Nadascli, L., 
and Roller, P. Carcinogenic effect of dinitrosopiperazine in adult 
Swiss mice and after trans placental or translactational exposure. 
Cancer Res. 40: 2925-2927(1980). 
31. Boyland, E., Carter, R. L., Gorrod, J. W, and Roe, F. J. C. 
Carcinogenic properties of certain rubber additives . Eur. J. 
Cancer 4: 233-239(1968). 
32. Boyland, E., Roe, F. J.C., Gorrod, J. W, and Mitchley, B. C. V. 
The carcinogenicity of nitrosoanabasine a possible constituent of 
tobacco smoke. Brit. J. Cancer 18: 265-270(1964). 
33. Bralow, S. P., Gruenstein, M., and Meranze, D. R. Host 
resistance to gastric adenocarcinomatosis in three strains ofrats 
ingesting N-methyl-N' -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Oncology 27: 
168-180(1973) . 
34. Brantom, P. G., Gaunt, I. F., and Grasso, P. Long-term toxicity 
of sodium cyclamate in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 
735-746(1973). 306 GOLD ET AL. 
35. Bran tom, P. G., Gaunt, I. F., Hardy, J., Grasso, P., and Gangolli, 
S. D. Long-term feeding and reproduction studies on emulsifier 
YN in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 755-769(1973). 
36. Brown, E. V., and Hamdan, A. A. Carcinogenic activity of 
analogues of p-dimethylaminoazobenzene. V. Effect of added 
methyl groups in the pyridine series. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 37: 
365-367(1966). 
37. Bulay, 0., Mirvish, S. S., Garcia, H., Pelfrene, A. F., Gold, B., 
and Eagen, M. Carcinogenicity test of six nitrosamides and a 
nitrosocyanamide administered orally to rats. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 62: 1523-1528(1979) . 
38. Burtin, C., Scheinmann, P., Salomon, J. C., Lespinats, G., 
Frayssinet , C., Lebel, B., and Canu, P. Increased tissue 
histamine in tumour-bearing mice and rats. Brit. J. Cancer 43: 
684-688(1981). 
39. Butler, W H. Long-term effects of phenobarbit one-Na on male 
Fischer rats. Brit. J. Cancer 37: 418-423(1978). 
40. Butler, W H., and Barnes, J. M. Carcinogenic action of 
groundnut meal containing aflatoxin in rats. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 6: 135-141 (1968). 
41. Byron, W R., Bierbower, G. W, Brower, J. B., and Hansen, W 
H. Pathologic changes in rats and dogs from two-year feeding of 
sodium arsenite or sodium arsenate. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
10: 132-147 (1967) 
42. Cabral, J. R. P., Hall, R. K., Bronczyk, S. A., and Shubik, P. 
A carcinogenicity study of the pesticide dieldrin in hamsters. 
Cancer Lett. 6: 241-246 (1979). 
43. Cabral, J. R. P., Hall, R. K., Bronczyk, S. A., and Shubik, P. 
Lack of carcinogenicity of DDT in hamsters. Tumori 68: 5-
10 (1982). 
44. Cabral, J. R. P., Hall, R. K., Rossi, L., Bronczyk, S. A., and 
Shubik, P. Effects of long-term DDT intake on rats. Tumori 68: 
11-17 (1982). 
45. Cabral, J. R. P., Mollner, T., Raitano, F., and Shubik, P. 
Carcinogenesis of hexachlorobenz ene in mice. Int. J. Cancer 23: 
47-51 (1979). 
46. Cabral, J. R., Rossi, L., Dragani, T. A., and Della Porta, G. 
Carcinogenicity study of 3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-imidazo(l,2-alpha) 
pyridine in mice and rats. Tumori 66: 131-144 (1980). 
47. Cabral, J. R. P., Shubik, P., Mollner, T., and Raitano, F. 
Carcinogenic activity of hexachlorobenz ene in hamsters. Nature 
265: 510-511 (1977). 
48. Cameron, G. R., and Cheng, K. K. Failure of oral D.D.T. to 
induce toxic changes in rats. Brit. Med. J. 2: 819-821 (1951). 
49. Casas, C. B. Induction of hepatoma s by thiouracil in inbred 
strains of mice. Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 113: 493-494 (1963). 
50. Chouroulinkov, I., Gentil, A., and Guerin, M. Etude de l'activite 
carcinogene du 9,10-dimethyl-benzanthracene et du 3,4-benzo­
pyrene administres par voie digestive. Bull. Cancer 54: 67-78 
(1967). 
51. Christov, K., and Raichev, R. Thyroid carcinogenesis in hamsters 
aftertreatment with 131-iodine and methyl thiouracil. Cancer Res. 
Clin. Oncol. 77: 171-179(1972). 
52. Chu, I., Villeneuve , D. C., Valli, V. E., Secours, V. E., and 
Becking, G. C. Chronic toxicity ofphotomirex in the rat. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 59: 268-278(1981). 
53. Clapp, N. K., Craig, A. W, and Toya, R. E. Oncogenicity by 
methyl methanesulfonate in male RF mice. Science 161: 913-914 
(1968). 
54. Clapp, N. K., Tyndall, R. L., Cumming, R. B., and Otten, J. A. 
Effects of butylated hydroxytoluene alone or with diethylnitro­
samine in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 367-371(1974). 
55. Clapp, N. K., Tyndall, R. L., Satterfield, L. C., Klima, W C., 
and Bowles, N. D. Selective sex-related modification of diethyl­
nitrosamine-induced carcinogenesis in BALB/c mice by con­
comitant administration of butylated hydroxytoluene. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 61: 177-180(1978). 
56. Clayson, D. B., Lawson, T. A., and Pringle, J. A. S. The 
carcinogenic action of 2-aminodiphenylene oxide and 4-amino­
diphenyl on the bladder and liver of the C57 x IF mouse. 
Brit. J. Cancer 21: 755-762(1967). 
57. Clayson, D. B., Lawson, T. A., Santana, S., and Bonser, G. M. 
Correlation between the chemical induction ofhyperplasi<i and of malignancy in the bladder epithelium. Brit. J. Cancer 19: 
297-310 (1965). . 
58. Cleveland, F. P. A summary of work on aldrin and dieldrin 
toxicity at the Kettering Laboratory. Arch. Environ. Health 13: 
195-198(1966). 
59. Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Effect of p-hydroxyacetanilide, 
sodium sulfate, and L-methionine on the leukemogenicity of 
N-[ 4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide. Cancer Res. 38: 
1398-1405(1978). 
60. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., and Bryan, G. T. Comparativ e 
carcinogenicity of 5-nitrothiophenes and 5-nitrofuran s in rats. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 57: 277-282(1976) . 
61. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., Price, J. M., and Bryan, G. T. 
Comparat ive carcinogenicity in the rat of 2-hydrazinothiazoles 
with nitrofuryl, nitrophenyl, or aminophenyl substituents in the 
4-position. Cancer Res. 30: 897-901(1970) . 
62. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., Von Esch, A. M., Crovetti, A. J., and 
Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicit y of 5-nitrofurans, 5-nitroimidazol es, 
4-nitrobenzenes, and related compounds. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
51: 403-417(1973). 
63. Cohen, S. M., Erturk, E., Von Esch, A. M., Crovetti, A. J., and 
Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 5-nitrofuran s and related com­
pounds with amino-heterocyclic substituents. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 54: 841-850(1975). 
64. Cohen, S. M., Ichikawa, M., and Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 
2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide (AF-2) fed to female 
Sprague-Dawley rats. Gann 68: 473-476(1977). 
65. Cohen, S. M., Lower, G. M., Erturk, E., and Bryan, G. T. 
Comparative carcinogenicity in Swiss mice of N-(4-(5-nitro-2-
furyl)-2-thiazolyl]a cetamide and structurally related 5-nitro­
furans and 4-nitrobenzenes. Cancer Res. 33: 1593-1597(197 3). 
66. Conzelman, G. M., Moulton, J. E., Flanders , L. E., Springer, 
K., and Crout, D. W Induction of transitional cell carcinoma of 
the urinary bladder in monkeys fed 2-naphthylamine. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 42: 825-831(1969). 
67. Cremlyn, R. J. W, and Roe, F. J. C. A study of certain 
substituted sulphonoh ydrazides for carcinogenicity in mice. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 9: 319-321(1971). 
68. Croft, W A., and Bryan, G. T. Production of urinary bladder 
carcinomas in male hamsters by N-[ 4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thia­
zolyl]formamid e, N-[ 4-( 5-nitro-2-fur y 1)-2-thiazolyl]acetamid e, 
or formic acid 2-( 4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]hydrazide. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 941-949(1973). 
69. Dacre, J.C. Toxicologic studies with 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-hydroxy­
methylphenol in the rat. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 17: 669-678 
(1970). 
70. Davis, K. J., and Fitzhugh, 0. G. Pathologic changes noted in 
rats fed D&C Red No. 9 for two years. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
4: 200-205(1962). 
71. Davis, K. J., and Fitzhugh, 0. G. Tumorigenic potential of aldrin 
and dieldrin for mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 4: 187-189(1962). 
72. Davis, K. J., and Fitzhugh, 0. G. Pathologic changes noted in 
rats fed D&C Red No. 10 [monosodium salt of 2-(2-hydroxy-
1-naphthylazo)-1-naphthalenesulfonic acid] for two years. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 5: 728-734(1963). 
73. Davis, K. J., Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Nelson, A. A. Chronic rat and 
dog toxicity studies on tartrazine. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmac ol. 6: 
621-626(1964). 
74. Davis, K. J., Nelson, A. A., Zwickey, R. E., Hansen, W H., and 
Fitzhugh, 0. G. Chronic toxicity of ponceau SX to rats, mice, 
and dogs. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 8: 306-317(1966). 
75. De Groot, A. P., Til, H. P., Feron, V. J., Dreef-Van der Meulen, 
H. C., and Willems, M. I. Two-year feeding and multigeneration 
studies in rats on five chemically modified starches. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 651-663(1974 ). 
76. Deichmann, W B., Keplinger, M., Sala, F., and Glass, E. 
Synergism among oral carcinogens: IV. The simultaneous feed­
ing of four tumorigens to rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 11: 
88-103(1967). 
77. Deichmann, W B., MacDonald, WE., Anderson, WA. D., and 
Bernal, E. Adenocarcinoma in the lungs of mice exposed to 
vapors of3-nitro-3-hexene. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 5: 445-456 
(1963). CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 307 
78. Deichmann , W B., MacDonald , W E., Blum, E., Bevilacqua, 
M., Radomski, J., Keplinger, M., and Balkus, M. Tumorigenicit y 
of aldrin, dieldrin and endrin in the albino rat. Ind. Med. 39: 
426-434(1970) . 
79. Deichmann, W B., MacDonald, W E., Lampe, K. F., Dressler, 
I., and Anderson, W A. D. Nitro-olefins as potential carcinogens 
in air pollution. Ind. Med. 34: 800-807(1965). 
80. Deichmann, W B., MacDona ld, W E., and Lu, F. C. Effects of 
chronic aldrin feeding in two strains of female rats and a 
discussion on the risks of carcinogens in man. In: Developm ents 
in Toxicolog y and Environm ental Science, Vol. 4 (W Deichman , 
Ed.), Elsevier North Holland, Amsterdam, 1979, pp. 407-413. 
81. Della Porta, G., Cabral, J. R., and Rossi, L. Carcinogenicity 
study of rifampicin in mice and rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
43: 293-302(1978). 
82. Della Porta, G., Colnaghi , M. I., and Parmiani , G. Non­
carcinogenicity of hexamethylen etetramine in mice and rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 6: 707-715(1968). 
83. Della Porta, G., Shubik, P., and Scortecci, V. The action of 
N-2-fluoreny lacetamide in the Syrian golden hamster. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 22: 463-471(1959). 
84. Drake, J. J-P., Butterworth , K. R., Gaunt, I. F., and Grasso, P. 
Long-term toxicity study of black PN in mice. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 15: 503-508(1977) . 
85. Drake, J. J-P., Butterworth , K. R., Gaunt, I. F., and Hardy, J. 
Long-term toxicity studies of chocolate brown HT in mice. 
Toxicology 10: 17-27(197 8). 
86. Druckrey, H. Chloriertes Trinkwasser, Toxizitats-Prufungen an 
Ratten uber sieben Generationen. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 6: 
147-154 (1968). 
87. Dunn, T. B. Cancer of the uterine cervix in mice fed a liquid diet 
containing an antifertility drug. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 14: 
671-692 (1969). 
88. Eisenbrancl, G., Preussmann, R., and Schmahl, D. Carcinogenic­
ity of N-nitrosoephedrine in rats. Cancer Lett. 5: 103-106(197 8). 
89. Epstein, S. S. The carcinogenicity of dielclrin. Part 1. (Review 
of: Davis, H.J., Hansen, W, and Fitzhugh, O.G., Pathology 
report on mice for aldrin, dieldrin, heptachlor or heptachlor 
epoxide for two years [ref. 2, p. 341].) Sci. Total Environ. 4: 
1-52(1975). 
90. Epstein, S. S. Carcinogenicity of heptachlor and chlordane . 
(Review of: Witherup , S., Cleveland, F. P., Shaffer, F. G., 
Schlecht, H., and Muser, L., The physiological effects of 
introduction of heptachlor into de [sic] diet of experimental 
animals in varying levels of concentration [ref. 1, p. 341].) Sci. 
Total Environ. 6: 103-154(1976) . 
91. Epstein, S. S. Carcinogenicity of heptachlor and chlordane. 
(Review of: Eighteen month oral carcinogenic study in mice, 
report of the International Research and Development Corpora­
tion (IRDC) to Velsicol Corporation [ref. 1, p. 127].) Sci. Total 
Environ. 6: 103-154 (1976). 
92. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Carcinogenicity of 
N-[ 4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]acetamide in female rats. Can­
cer Res. 30: 936-941(1970) . 
93. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Induction, histogenesis, 
and isotransplantability of renal tumors induced by formic acid 
2-[-4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazo lyl]hyclrazide in rats. Cancer Res. 
30: 2098-2106(1970a). 
94. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., and Bryan, G. T. Urinary bladder 
carcinogenicity of N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazo lyl]formamicle in 
female Swiss mice. Cancer Res. 30: 1309-1311(1970). 
95. Erturk, E., Cohen, S. M., Price, J. M., and Bryan, G. T. 
Pathogenesis, histology, and transplantability of urinary bladder 
carcinomas induced in albino rats by oral administration of 
N-[4-(5-nitro-2-furyi)-2-thiazolyl]formamide. Cancer Res. 29: 
2219-2228(1969). 
96. Erturk, E., Morris, J. E., Cohen, S. M., Price, J. M., and 
Bryan, G. T. Transplantable rat mammary tumors induced by 
5-nitro-2-furaldehyde semicarbazone and by formic acid 2-[4-
(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]hydrazide. Cancer Res. 30: 1409-
1412(1970). 
97. Erturk, E., Morris, J. E., Cohen, S. M., Von Esch, A. M., 
Crovetti, A. J., Price, J. M., and Bryan, G. T. Comparative carcinogenicit y of formic acid 2-[ 4-(5-nitro-2-furyl)-2-thiazol yl]hy­
drazide and related chemicals in the rat. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
47: 437-445(1971). 
98. Erturk, E., Price, J.M., Morris, J.E., Cohen, S., Leith, R. S., 
Von Esch, A. M., and Crovetti, A. J. The production of 
carcinoma of the urinary bladder in rats by feeding N-[4-(5-nitro-
2-furyl)-2-thiazolyl]formamide . Cancer Res. 27: 1998-2002(1967). 
99. Evarts, R. P., and Brown, C. A. 2,4-Diaminoanisole sulfate: 
early effect on thyroid gland morphology and late effect on 
glandular tissue of Fischer 344 rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 65: 
197-204(1980). 
100. Feron, V. J., and Kroes, R. One-year time-sequence inhalation 
toxicity study of vinyl chloride in rats. II. Morphological changes 
in the respirator y tract, ceruminous glands, brain, kidneys, 
heart and spleen. Toxicology 13: 131-141(1979) . 
101. Feron, V. J., and Kruysse, A. Effects of exposure to furfural 
vapour in hamsters simultaneously treated with benzo[ a ]pyrene 
or diethylnitro samine. Toxicology 11: 127-144(197 8). 
102. Feron, V. J., Spit, B. J., Immel, H. R., and Kroes, R. One-year 
time-sequence inhalation toxicity study of vinyl chloride in rats. 
III. Morphological changes in the livers. Toxicolog y 13: 
143-154(1979) . 
103. Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Nelson, A. A. Comparison of the chronic 
toxicity of triethylene glycol with that of diethylene glycol. J. 
Incl. Hyg. Toxicol. 28: 40-43(1946). 
104. Fitzhugh, 0. G., Nelson, A. A., and Quaife, M. L. Chronic oral 
toxicity of alclrin and dieldrin in rats and clogs. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 2: 551-562(1964). 
105. Flaks, A., and Clayson, D. B. The influence of ammonium 
chloride on the induction of bladder tumours by 4-ethylsul­
phonylnaphthalene-1-sulphonamide. Brit. J. Cancer 31: 585-
587(1975). 
106. Flaks, A., Hamilton , J. H., and Clayson, D. B. Effect of 
ammonium chloride on incidence of bladder tumors induced by 
4-ethylsulfonylnaphthalene-1-sulfonamide. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
51: 2007-2008(1973). 
107. Flaks, A., Hamilton, J. M., Clayson, D. B., and Burch, P.R. J. 
The combined effect of radiation and chemical carcinogen s in 
female Ax IF mice. Brit. J. Cancer 28: 227-231(1973) . 
108. Fleischman, R. W, Baker, J. R., Hagopian , M., Wade, G. G., 
Hayden, D. W, Smith, E. R., Weisburger, J. H., and Weisburger, 
E. K. Carcinogenesis bioassay of acetamide, hexanamide , 
adipamide, urea and p-tolylurea in mice and rats. Environ. 
Pathol. Toxicol. 3: 149-170(19 80). 
109. Fong, L. Y. Y., and Chan, W C. Long-term effects of feeding 
aflatoxin-contaminated market peanut oil to Sprague-Dawley 
rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 179-183(1981). 
110. Fujii, K., N akadate, M., Ogiu, T., and Odashima, S. Induction of 
digestive tract tumors and leukemias in Donryu rats by admini­
stration of 1-amyl-1-nitrosour ea in drinking water. Gann 71: 
464-470(1980). 
111. Gaines, T. B., and Kimbrough, R. D. The sterilizing, carcino­
genic and teratogenic effects of MeTEPA in rats. Bull. WH.O. 
34: 317-320 (1966). 
112. Garcia, H., Keefer, L., Lijinsky, W, and Wenyon, C. E. M. 
Carcinogenicit y of nitrosothiomorpholine and 1-nitrosopipera­
zine in rats. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 74: 179-184(1970). 
113. Garcia, H., and Lijinsky, W Studies of the tumorigenic effect in 
feeding of nitrosamino acids and of low doses of amines and 
nitrite to rats. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 79: 141-144(197 3). 
114. Gass, G. H., and Allaben, W T. Preliminary report on the 
carcinogenic dose-response curve to oral vitamin D2. Obstet. 
Gynecol. 5: 477(1977). 
115. Gass, G. H., Coats, D., and Graham, N. Carcinogenic dose­
response curve to oral diethylstilbestrol. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
33: 971-977(1964). 
116. Gaunt, I. F., Brantom, P. G., Grasso, P., Creasey, M., and 
Gangolli, S. D. Long-term feeding study on Chocolate Brown FB 
in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 3-15(1972). 
117. Gaunt, I. F., Brantom, P. G., Grasso, P., and Kiss, I. S. 
Long-term toxicity studies of Chocolate Brown FB in mice. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 375-382(1973). 
118. Gaunt, I. F., Butterworth, K. R., Grasso, P., and Ginocchio, A. 308 GOLD ET AL. 
V. Long-term toxicity study of emulsifier YN in the mouse. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 15: 1-5(1977). 
119. Gaunt, I. F., Butterworth, K. R., Hardy, J., and Gangolli, S. D. 
Long-term toxicity of sorbic acid in the rat. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 13: 31-45(1975). 
120. Gaunt, I. F., Carpanini, F. M. B., Grasso, P., Kiss, I. S., and 
Gangolli, S. D. Long-term feeding study on Black PN in rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 17-27(1972). 
121. Gaunt, I. F., Carpanini, F. M. B., Grasso, P., and Lansdown, A. 
B. G. Long-term toxicity of propylene glycol in rats. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. lQ: 151-162(1972). 
122. Gaunt, I. F., Hardy, J., Grasso, P., Gangolli, S. D., and 
Butterworth, K. R. Long-term toxicity of cyclohexylamine 
hydrochloride in the rat. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 14: 255-267(1976). 
123. Gaunt, I. F., Mason, P. L., Grasso, P., and Kiss, I. S. Long-term 
toxicity of Sunset Yellow FCF in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 
1-10(1974). 
124. Gibson, J.P., Newberne, J. W, Kuhn, W L., and Elsea, J. R. 
Comparative chronic toxicity of three oral estrogens in rats. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 11: 489-510(1967). 
125. Gibson, J.P., Rohovsky, M. W, Newberne , J. W, and Larson, E. 
J. Toxicity studies with metiapine. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 25: 
220-229(1973). 
126. Giner-Sorolla, A., Greenbaum, J., Last-Barney, K., Anderson, 
L. M., and Budinger, J. M. Lack of carcinogenic effect of 
nitrosochlordiazepoxide and of nitrosomethylphenidate given 
orally to mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 18: 81-83(1980). 
127. Ginocchio , A. V., Waite, V., Hardy,J., Fisher, N., Hutchinson,J. 
B., and Berry, R. Long-term toxicity and carcinogenicity studies 
of the bread improver potassium bromate. 2. Studies in mice. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 41-47(1979) . 
128. Goodall, C. M., and Kennedy, T. H. Carcinogenicityofdim ethyl­
nitramine in NZR rats and NZO mice. Cancer Lett. 1: 
295-298(1976). 
129. Gothoskar, S. V., Talwalkar , G. V., and Bhide, S. V. Tumorigeni c 
effect of thioacetamide in Swiss strain mice. Brit. J. Cancer 24: 
498-503(1970). 
130. Goyer, R. A., Falk, H. L., Hogan, M., Feldman, D. D., and 
Richter, W Renal tumors in rats given trisodium nitrilotriacetic 
acid in drinking water for 2 years. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 66: 
869-880(1981). 
131. Graham, S. L., Davis, K. J., Hansen, W H., and Graham, C.H. 
Effects of prolonged ethylene thiourea ingestion on the thyroid 
of the rat. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 493-499(1975). 
132. Grasso, P., Hardy, J., Gaunt, I. F., Mason, P. L., and Lloyd, A. 
G. Long-term toxicity of Violet 6B (FD & C Violet No. 1) in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 21-31(1974). 
133. Grasso, P., Lansdown, A. B. G., Kiss, I. S., Gaunt, I. F., and 
Gangolli, S. D. Nodular hyperplasia in the rat liver following 
prolonged feeding of Ponceau MX. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 7: 
425-442 (1969). 
134. Green, U., Holste, J., and Spikermann, A. R. A comparative 
study of the chronic effects of magenta, paramagenta , and 
phenyl-beta-naphthylamine in Syrian golden hamsters. Cancer 
Res. Clin. Oncol. 95: 51-55(1979). 
135. Greenblatt, M., Kommineni, V. R. C., and Lijinsky, W Null 
effect of concurrent feeding of sodium nitrite and amino acids to 
MRC rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 50: 799-802(1973) . 
136. Greenblatt, M., and Lijinsky, W Nitrosamine studies: neo­
plasms of liver and genital mesothelium in nitrosopyrrolidine­
treated MRC rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 48: 1687-1696(1972). 
137. Grice, H. C., Mannell, WA., and Allmark, M. G. Liver tumors 
in rats fed Ponceau 3R. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 3: 509-520 
(1961). 
138. Griffin, T. B., Stein, A. A., and Coulston, F. Histologic study of 
tissues and organs from rats exposed to vapors of2-nitropropane 
at 25 ppm. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 5: 194-201(1981). 
139. Gruenstein, M., Shay, H., and Shimkin, M. B. Lack of effect of 
norethynodre l (Enovid) on methylcholanthrene-induced mam­
mary carcinogenesis in female rats. Cancer Res. 24: 1656-1658 
(1964). 140. Grundmann , E., and Steinhoff, D. Leber-und Lungentumoren 
nach 3,3'-Dichlor-4,4'-diaminodiph enylmethan bei Ratten. Can­
cer Res. Clin. Oncol. 74: 28-39(1970). 
141. Habs, M., Eisenbrand , G., and Schmahl, D. Carcinogenic 
activity in Sprague-Daw ley rats of 2(3-(2-chloroethyl)-3-nitro­
soureido]-D-glucopyrano se (chlorozotocin). Cancer Lett. 8: 133-
137(1979). 
142. Habs, M., and Schmahl, D. Synergistic effects of N-nitroso 
compounds in experimental long-term carcinogenesis studies. 
Oncology 37: 259-265(1980) . 
143. Hackmann, C. Erzeugung von Blasencarcinomen und Tumoren 
verschiedener Lokalisation bei Ratten durch Verfutterung von 
2-Amino-3-methoxy-diphenylenoxyd und 2-Amino-diphenylenoxyd. 
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 61: 45-54(1956). 
144. Hagan, E. C., Jenner, P. M., Jones, W I., Fitzhugh , 0. G., 
Long, E. L., Brouwer, J. G., and Webb, W K. Toxic propertie s 
of compounds related to safrole. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 7: 
18-24(1965). 
145. Hagiwara, A., Arai, M., Hirose, M., Nakanowatari , J., Tsuda, 
H., and Ito, N. Chronic effects ofnorharman in rats treated with 
aniline. Toxicol. Lett. 6: 71-75(1980). 
146. Hansen, W H., Davis, K. J., Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Nelson, A. A. 
Chronic oral toxicity of Ponceau 3R. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
5: 105-118(1963 ). 
147. Hansen, W H., Davis, K. J., Graham, S. L., Perry, C. H., and 
Jacobson, K. H. Long-term toxicity studies of erythrosine. II. 
Effects on haematolo gy and thyroxine and protein-bound iodine 
in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 535-545(1973). 
148. Hansen, W H., Fitzhugh, 0. G., Nelson, A. A., and Davis, K. J. 
Chronic toxicity of two food colors, Brilliant Blue FCF and 
indigotine. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 8: 29-36(1966). 
149. Hansen, W H., Long, E. L., Davis, K. J., Nelson, A. A., and 
Fitzhugh, 0. G. Chronic toxicity of three food colourings: Guinea 
Green B, Light Green SF Yellowish and Fast Green FCF in rats, 
dogs and mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 4: 389-410(1966). 
150. Hansen, W H., Zwickey, R. E., Brouwer, J.B., and Fitzhugh , 
0. G. Long-term toxicity studies of erythrosine. I. Effects in 
rats and dogs. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 527-534(1973). 
151. Hardy, J., Gaunt, I. F., Hooson, J., Hendy, R. J., and Butterworth , 
K. R. Long-term toxicity of cyclohexylamine hydrochloride in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 14: 269-276(1976). 
152. Harris, P. N., Gibson, W R., and Dillard, R. D. Oncogenicity of 
1-(4-chlorophenyl )-1-phenyl-2-propynyl carbamate for rats. Toxi­
col. Appl. Pharmacol. 21: 414-418(1972). 
153. Hendy, R. J., Hardy, J., Gaunt, I. F., Kiss, I. S., and 
Butterworth, K. R. Long-term toxicity studies of sorbic acid in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 14: 181-186(1976). 
154. Renschler , D., Romen, W, Elsasse1~ H. M., Reichert, D., Eder, 
E., and Radwan, Z. Carcinogenicity study of trichloroethylene 
by long-term inhalation in three animal species. Arch. Toxicol. 
43: 237-248(1980). 
155. Herbst, M., Weisse, I., and Koellmer, H. A contribution to the 
question of the possible hepatocarcinogenic effects of lindane. 
Toxicology 4: 91-96(197 5). 
156. Herrold, K. M. Epidermoid carcinomas of esophagu s and 
forestomach induced in Syrian hamsters by N-nitroso-N-methylure­
than. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 37: 389-394(1966). 
157. Heston, W E., Vlahakis, G., and Desmukes, B. Effects of the 
antifertility drug Enovid in five strains of mice, with particular 
regard to carcinogenesis . J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 209-224(1973) . 
158. Heywood, R., Sortwell, R. J., Noel, P. R. B., Street, A. E., 
Prentice, D. E., Roe, F. J.C., Wadsworth, P. F., and Worden, A. 
N. Safety evaluation of toothpaste containing chloroform. III. 
Long-term study in beagle dogs. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 
835-851(1979). 
159. Hicks, R. M., Chowaniec , J., and StJ. Wakefield, J. Experimen­
tal induction of bladder tumors by a two-stage system. In: 
Carcinogene sis: Mechanisms of Tumor Promotion and Cocarcino­
genesis, Vol. 2, (T. J. Slaga, A. Sivak and R. K. Boutwell, Eds.), 
Raven Press, New York, 1978, pp. 475-489. 
160. Highman, B., Greenman , D. L., Norvell, M. J., Farmer, J., and CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 309 
Shellenberger, T. E. Neoplastic and preneoplastic lesions in­
duced in female C3H mice by diets containing diethylstilbestrol 
or 17-beta-estradiol. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 81-95(1980). 
161. Hinton, D. E., Lipsky, M. M., Heatfield , B. M., and Trump, B. 
F. Opposite effects of lead on chemical carcinogene sis in kidney 
and liver of rats. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 23: 464-469 
(1979). 
162. Hiraga, K. Tumors of the preputial gland in rats. Gann 68: 
369-370(1977) . 
163. Hiraga, K., and Fujii, T. Induction of tumours of the urinary 
system in F344 rats by dietary administration of sodium 
o-phenylphenate. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 303-310(1981). 
164. Hirono, I., Haga, M., Fujii, M., Matsuura, S., Matsubara, N., 
Nakayama, M., Furuya, T., Hikichi, M., Takanashi, H., Uchida, 
E., Hosaka, S., and Ueno, I. Induction of hepatic tumors in rats 
by senkirkine and symphytine. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 63: 
469-472(1979). 
165. Hirono, I., Mori, H., Yamada, K., Hirata, Y., Haga, M., 
Tatematsu, H., and Kanie, S. Carcinogenic activity of petasite­
nine, a new pyrrolizidine alkaloid isolated from Petasites_japonicus 
Maxim. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 58: 1155-1157(1977 ). 
166. Hirono, I., Ueno, I., Hosaka, S., Takanashi, H., Matsushima, 
T., Sugimura, T., and Natori, S. Carcinogenicit y examination of 
quercetin and rutin in ACI rats. Cancer Lett. 13: 15-21(1981). 
167. Hirose, M., Shibata, M., Hagiwara, A., Imaida, K., and Ito, N. 
Chronic toxicity of butylated hydroxytoluene in Wistar rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 147-151(19 81). 
168. Hoch-Ligeti, C., Argus, M. F., and Arcos, J. C. Induction of 
carcinomas in the nasal cavity of rats by clioxane. Brit. J. Cancer 
24: 164-167(1969). 
169. Hoch-Ligeti, C., Argus, M. F., and Arcos, J. C. Oncogenic 
activity of an m-dioxane derivative: 2,6-dimethyl-m-dioxan-4-ol 
acetate (dimethoxane). J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 791-793(1974) . 
170. Hom burger, F. Negative lifetime carcinogen studies in rats and 
mice fed 50,000 ppm saccharin. In: Chemical Toxicology of Food 
(C. L. Galli, R. Paoletti and G. Vettorazz i, Eds.), Elsevier/North­
Holland Biomedical Press, 1978, pp. 359-373. 
171. Hong, C. B., Winston, J.M., Thornburg , L. P., Lee, C. C., and 
Woods, J. S. Follow-up study on the carcinogenicit y of vinyl 
chloride and vinylidene chloride in rats and mice: tumor inci­
dence and mortality subsequent to exposure . J. Toxicol. Environ. 
Health 7: 909-924( 1981). 
172. Hooson, J., Gaunt, I. F., Kiss, I. S., Grasso, P., and Butterworth, 
K. R. Long-term toxicity of indigo carmine in mice. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 167-176(1975). 
173. Hooson, J., Hicks, R. M., Grasso, P., and Chowaniec , J. 
Ortho-toluene sulphonamide and saccharin in the promotion of 
bladder cancer in the rat. Brit. J. Cancer 42: 129-147(1980). 
174. Horie, A., Koh chi, S., and Kuratsune, M. Carcinogenesi s in the 
esophagus. II. Experimental production of esophageal cancer by 
administration of ethanolic solution of carcinogens. Gann 56: 
429-441 (1965). 
175. Horn, H.J., Black, Bruce R., and Paynter, 0. E. Toxicology of 
chlorobenzilate. In: Agricultural and Food Chemistry: Past, 
Present, Future, Vol. 3 (R. Teranishi, Eel.), Avi Publishing 
Company, Inc., Westport, CT, 1955, pp. 752-756. 
176. Hosaka, S., and Hirono, I. Effect of leupeptin, a protease 
inhibitor, on the development of spontaneous tumors in strain A 
mice. Gann 71: 913-917(19 80). 
177. Hosaka, S., Matsushima, T., Hirono, I., and Sugimura, T. 
Carcinogenic activity of3-amino-1 -methyl-5H-pyriclo[ 4 ,3-b ]inclole 
(trp-P-2), a pyrolysis product of tryptophan. Cancer Lett. 13: 
23-28(1981). 
178. Hoshino, H., and Tanooka, H. Carcinogenicity oftriethano lamine 
in mice and its mutagenicity after reaction with sodium nitrite in 
bacteria. Cancer Res. 38: 3918-3921(1978). 
179. Howe, R. Carcinogenicity of 'alclerlin' (pronethalol) in mice. 
Nature 207: 594-595(1965). 
180. Hueper, W C., and Payne, WW Experimental studies in metal 
carcinogenesis . Chromium, nickel, iron, arsenic. Arch. Environ. 
Health 5: 445-462( 1962). 181. Ikeda, Y., Horiuchi, S., Furuya, T., and Omori, Y. Chronic 
toxicity of ponceau MX in the rat. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 4: 
485-492(1966 ). 
182. Ikeda, Y., Horiuchi, S., Kobayashi, K., Furuja, T., and Kohgo, 
K. Carcinogenicity of ponceau MX in the mouse. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 6: 591-598(1968). 
183. Innes, J. R. M. Evaluation of Carcinogenic , Teratogenic, and 
Mutagenic Activities of Selected Pesticides and Industrial 
Chemicals. Volume 1: Carcinogenic Study. Bionetics Research 
Laboratorie s, Inc. Distributed by National Technical Informa­
tion Service, Springfield, VA, 1968. 
184. Innes, J. R. M., Ulland, B. M., Valerio, M. G., Petrucelli, L., 
Fishbein, L., Hart, E. R., Pallota, A. J., Bates, R.R., Falk, H. 
L., Gart, J. J., Klein, M., Mitchell I., and Peters, J. Bioassay of 
pesticides and industrial chemicals for tumorigenicity in mice: a 
preliminary note. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 42: 1101-1114(1969 ). 
185. Isaka, H., Yoshii, H., Otsuji, A., Koike, M., Nagai, Y., Koura, 
M., Sugiyasu, K., and Kanabayashi, T. Tumors of Sprague­
Dawley rats induced by long-term feeding of phenacetin. Gann 
70: 29-36(1979). 
186. Ishii, H. Incidence of brain tumors in rats feel aspartame. 
Toxicol. Lett. 7: 433-437(1981). 
187. Ito, A., Watanabe, H., Naito, M., and Naito, Y. Induction of 
duodenal tumors in mice by oral administration of hydrogen 
peroxide. Gann 72: 174-175(1981). 
188. Ito, N., Hananouchi, M., Sugihara , S., Shirai, T., Tsuda, H., 
Fukushima, S., and Nagasaki, H. Reversibility and irreversibil­
ity of liver tumors in mice induced by the alpha isomer of 
1,2,3,4,5,6-hexachlorocyclohexane. Cancer Res. 36: 2227-2234 
(1976). 
189. Ito, N., Nagasaki, H., Aoe, H., Sugihara , S., Miyata, Y., Arai, 
M., and Shirai, T. Development of hepatocellular carcinoma s in 
rats treated with benzene hexachloride . J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 54: 
801-804(1975). 
190. I vankovic, S., and Preussmann, R. Absence of toxic and 
carcinogenic effects after administration of high closes of chromic 
oxide pigment in subacute and long-term feeding experiments in 
rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 347-351(1975). 
191. Johansson, S. L. Carcinogenicity of analgesic s: long-term treat­
ment of Sprague-Dawley rats with phenacetin , phenazone, 
caffeine and paracetamol (acetamiclophen) . Int. J. Cancer 27: 
521-529(1981). 
192. Johansson, S., and Angervall, L. Urothelial changes of the renal 
papillae in Sprague-Daw ley rats induced by long term feeding of 
phenacetin. Acta Pathol. Microbiol. Scancl. Sect. A. Suppl. 84: 
375-383(1976). 
193. Jukes, T. H., and Shaffe1; C. B. Antithyroid effects of aminotriazo le. 
Science 132: 296-297(1960 ). 
194. Kanisawa, M., and Schroeder, H. A. Life term studies on the 
effects of arsenic, germanium, tin and vanadium on spontaneous 
tumors in mice. Cancer Res. 27: 1192-3195(1967). 
195. Kanisawa, M., and Schroeder, H. A. Life term studies on the 
effect of trace elements on spontaneou s tumors in mice and rats. 
Cancer Res. 29: 892-895(1969). 
196. Kimbrough, R. D., and Linder, R. E. Induction ofadenofibros is 
and hepatomas of the liver in BALB/cJ mice by polychlorinated 
biphenyls (Aroclor 1254). J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 547-549(1974 ). 
197. Kimbrough , R. D., Squire, R. A., Linder, R. E., Strandberg, J. 
D., Montali, R. J., and Burse, V W Induction of liver tumors in 
Sherman strain female rats by polychlorinated biphenyl Aroclor 
1260. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 55: 1453-1456(1975). 
198. Kinebuchi, M., Kawachi, T., Matsukura , N., and Sugimura , T. 
Further studies on the carcinogenicit y of a food additive, AF-2, 
in hamsters . Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 339-341(1979 ). 
199. King, D. W, Bock, F. G., and Moore, G. E. Dinitroph enol 
inhibition of pituitary aclenoma formation in mice fed propyl­
thiouracil. Proc. Soc. Exptl. Biol. Med. 112: 365-366(1963). 
200. Kirby, A. H. M., and Peacock, P. R. The induction of liver 
tumours by 4-aminoazobenz ene and its N:N-dim ethyl derivative 
in rats on a restricted diet. J. Pathol. 59: 1-18(1947). 
201. Kociba, R. J., Keyes, D. G., Beyer, J.E., Carreon, R. M., Wade, 310 GOLD ET AL. 
C. E., Dittenber, D. A., Kalnins, R. P., Frauson, L. E., Park, C. 
N., Barnard, S. D., Hummel, R. A., and Humiston, C. G. 
Results of a two-year chronic toxicity and oncogenicity study 
of 2,3, 7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in rats. Thxicol. Appl. 
Pharmacol. 46: 279-303(1978). 
202. Kociba, R. J., Keyes, D. G., Jersey, G. C., Ballard, J. J., 
Dittenber , D. A., Quast, J. F., Wade, C. E., Humiston, C. G., 
and Schwetz, B. A. Results of a two year chronic toxicity study 
with hexachlorobutadien e in rats. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 38: 
589-602(1977). 
203. Kociba, R. J., Keyes, D. G., Lisowe, R. W, Kalnins, R. P., 
Dittenber , D. D., Wade, C. E., Gorzinski, S. J., Mahle, N. H., 
and Schwetz, B. A. Results of a two-year chronic toxicity and 
oncogenic study of rats ingesting diets containing 2,4,5-tri­
chlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T). Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 
205-221(1979) . 
204. Kociba, R. J., McCollister , S. B., Park, C., Torkelson , T. R., 
and Gehring, P. J. 1,4-Dioxane. I. Results of a 2-year ingestion 
study in rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 30: 275-286(1974). 
205. Kommineni, C., Groth, D. H., Frockt, I. J., Voelker, R. W, and 
Stanovick, R. P. Determination of the tumorigenic potential of 
methylene-bis-orthochloroaniline. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 
149-171 (1979). 
206. Konishi, Y., Kondo, H., Ikeda, T., Kawabata , A., Shoji, Y., and 
Denda, A. Effect of dose on the carcinogenic activity of orally 
administered N-bis(2-hyd roxypropyl)nitrosam ine in rats. Gann 
69: 573-577(1978). 
207. Kroes, R., Peters, P. W J., Berkvens, J. M., Verschuuren, H. 
G., De Vries, T., and Van Esch, G. J. Long term toxicity and 
reproduction study (including a teratogenicit y study) with 
cyclamate, saccharin and cyclohexylamine. Toxicology 8: 285-300 
(1977). 
208. Kroes, R., Van Logten, M. J., Berkvens, J. M., De Vries, T., 
and Van Esch, G. J. Study on the carcinogenicity of lead 
arsenate and sodium arsenate and on the possible synergistic 
effect of diethylnitrosamine . Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 671-679 
(1974). 
209. Kruger, F. W, and Schmahl, D. Fehlen einer carcinogenen 
Wirkung von 7-Methylguanin bei Ratten. Cancer Res. Clin. 
Oncol. 75: 253-254(1971). 
210. Kuhara, K., Takanashi, H., Hirono, I., Furuya, T., and Asada, 
Y. Carcinogenic activity of clivorine, a pyrrolizidine alkaloid 
isolated from Ligularia dentata. Cancer Lett. 10: 117-122(19 80). 
211. Lacassagne, A., and Duplan, J. F. Cancerologie . Le mecanisme 
de la cancerisation de la mamelle chez la souris, considere 
d'apres !es resultats d'experiences au moyen de la reserpine. 
Academie des Sciences. Memoires et Commun ications des Mem­
bres et des Correspondants de l'Academie. 1959, pp. 810-812. 
212. Lalwani, N. D., Reddy, M. K., Qureshi, S. A., and Reddy, J. K. 
Development of hepatocellular carcinomas and increased peroxi­
somal fatty acid beta-oxidation in rats fed [ 4-chloro-6-(2, 3-xyli­
dino)-2-pyrimidinylthio]acetic acid (WY-14,643) in the semipuri­
fied diet. Carcinogenesi s 2: 645-650(1981) . 
213. Larson, P. S., Crawford, E. M., Blackwell Smith, R., Hennigar, 
G. R., Haag, H. B., and Finnegan, J. K. Chronic toxicologic 
studies on isopropyl N-(3-chlorophenyl) carbamate (CIPC). Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 2: 659-673(1960) . 
214. Laskin, S., Drew, R. T., Cappiello, V., Kuschner, M., and 
Nelson, N. Inhalation carcinogenicity of alpha halo ethers. II. 
Chronic inhalation studies with chloromethyl methyl ethe1: 
Arch. Environ. Health 30: 70-72(1975). 
215. Laskin, S., Sellakumar, A. R., Kuschner, M., Nelson, N., La 
Mendola, S., Rusch, G. M., Katz, G. V., Dulak, N. C., and 
Albert, R. E. Inhalation carcinogenicity of epichlorohydrin in 
noninbred Sprague-Dawley rats. J. Nat!. Cancer Inst. 65: 
751-757(1980). 
216. Lee, C. C., Bhandari , J. C., Winston, J. M., House, W B., 
Dixon, R. L. , and Woods, J. S. Carcinogenicity of vinyl chloride 
and vinylidene chloride. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 4: 15-30 
(1978). 
217. Lee, D. J., Wales, J. H., and Sinnhuber, R. 0. Hepatoma and 
renal tubule adenoma in rats fed aflatoxin and cyclopropenoid 
fatty acids. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 43: 1037-1041(1969). 218. Leong, B. K. J., Kociba, R. J., and Jersey, G. C. A lifetime 
study of rats and mice exposed to vapors of bis(chloromethyl) 
ether. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 58: 269-281(1981). 
219. Leuschner, F. Carcinogenicity studies on different diarylide 
yellow pigments in mice and rats. Toxicol. Lett. 2: 253-260(1978). 
220. Levinskas, G. J., Ribelin, W E., and Shaffer, C. B. Acute and 
chronic toxicity of pimaricin. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 8: 
97-109 (1966). 
221. Levy, L. S., and Clack, J. Further studies on the effect of 
cadmium on the prostate gland. I. Absence of prostatic changes 
in rats given oral cadmium sulphate for two years. Ann. Occup. 
Hyg. 17: 205-211(1975). 
222. Levy, L. S., Clack, J., and Roe, F. J. C. Further studies on the 
effect of cadmium on the prostate gland. II. Absence of pros ta tic 
changes in mice given oral cadmium sulphate for eighteen 
months. Ann. Occup. Hyg. 17: 213-220(1975). 
223. Lijinsky, W, Greenblatt, M., and Kommineni, C. Feeding 
studies of nitrilotriacetic acid and derivatives in rats. J. Nat!. 
Cancer Inst. 50: 1061-1063(1973). 
224. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., Davies, T. C., and Riggs, C. W 
Dose-response studies with nitroso-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine 
and dinitrosohomopiper azine in F344 rats. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 6: 513-527(1982). 
225. Lijinsky, W, Reube1~ M. D., Davies, T. S., and Riggs, C. W 
Dose-response studies with nitrosoheptamethyleneimine and its 
alpha-deuterium-labeled derivative in F344 rats. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 69: 1127-1133(1982). 
226. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., Davies, T. S., Saavedra, J.E., and 
Riggs, C. W Dose-response studies in carcinogenesis by nitroso­
N-methy l-N-(2-phenyl)ethylamine in rats and the effects of 
deuterium substitution. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 20: 393-399 
(1982). 
227. Lijinsky, W, Reuber, M. D., and Riggs, C. W Dose response 
studies of carcinogenesis in rats by nitrosodiethylamine . Cancer 
Res. 41: 4997-5003(1981). 
228. Lijinsky, W, and Schmahl, D. Carcinogenicity of N-nitroso 
derivative s of N-methylcarbamate insecticides in rats. Ecotoxi­
col. Environ. Saf. 2: 413-419(197 8). 
229. Lijinsky, W, Taylor, H. W, Mangino, M., and Singer, G. M. 
Carcinogene sis of nitrosomethylundecylamine in Fischer rats. 
Cancer Lett. 5: 209-213(1978). 
230. Lindsay, S., Nichols, C. W, and Chaikoff, I. L. Induction of 
benign and malignant thyroid neoplasms in the rat. Induction of 
thyroid neoplasms by injection of 131-I with or without the 
feeding of diets containing propylthiouracil and/or dessicated 
thyroid. Arch. Pathol. 81: 308-316(1966). 
231. Littlefield, N. A., Farmer, J. H., Gaylor, D. W, and Sheldon, W 
G. Effects of dose and time in a long-term, low-dose carcinogenic 
study. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 3: 17-34(1980). 
232. Long, E. L., Nelson, A. A., Fitzhugh, 0. G., and Hansen, W H. 
Liver tumors produced in rats by feeding safrole. Arch. Pathol. 
75: 595-604(1963). 
233. Longnecker, D. S., Curphey, T. J., Lilja, H. S., French, J. I., 
and Daniel, D. S. Carcinogenicity in rats of the nitrosourea 
amino acid N-delta-(N-methy l-N-nitrosocarbamoyl)-L-ornithine. 
Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 117-129(1980). 
234. Longnecker , D. S., Roebuck, B. D., Yager, J. D., Lilja, H. S., 
and Siegmund, B. Pancreatic carcinoma in azaserine-treated 
rats: induction , classification and dietary modulation of incidence. 
Cancer 47: 1562-1572(1981). 
235. Loser, E. A 2 year oral carcinogenicity study with cadmium on 
rats. Cancer Lett. 9: 191-198(1980). 
236. Louria, D. B., Finkel, G., Smith, J. K., and Buse, M. Aflatoxin­
induced tumors in mice. Sabouraudia 12: 371-375(1974) . 
237. Macklin, A. W, and Szot, R. J. Eighteen month oral study of 
aspirin, phenacetin and caffeine in C57BL/6 mice. Drug Chem. 
Toxicol. 3: 135-163(1980). 
238. Maekawa , A., Kajiwara , T., Odashima, S., and Kurata, H. 
Hepatic changes in male ACI/N rats on low dietary levels of 
sterigmatocystin. Gann 70: 777-781(1979). 
239. Maltoni, C. Vinyl chloride carcinogenicity: an experimental 
model for carcinogene sis studies. In: Origins of Human Cancer, 
Book A, Vol. 4 (H. H. Hiatt, J. D. Watson and J. A. Winsten, CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABA SE 311 
Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laborator y, Cold Spring Harbor, 
NY, 1977, pp. 119-146. 
240. Maltoni, C., Cotti, G., Morisi, L., and Chieco, P. Carcinogenicity 
bioassays of vinylidene chloride. Research plans and early 
results. Med. Lavoro 64: 241-262(1977). 
241. Maltoni, C., Lefemine, G., Ciliberti, A., Cotti, G., and Carretti, 
D. Carcinogenicity bioassays of vinyl chloride monomer: a model 
of risk assessment on an experimental basis. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 41: 3-29(1981). 
242. Maltoni, C., and Scarnato , C. First experimental demonstration 
of the carcinogenic effects of benzene. Med. Lavoro 70: 
352-357(1979). 
243. Maltoni, C., Valgimigli , L., and Scarnato, C. Long-term carcino­
genic bioassays on ethylene dichloride administered by inhala­
tion to rats and mice. In: Banbury Report 5 Ethylene Dichloride: 
A Potential Health Risk? (B. Ames, P. Infante and R. Reitz, 
Eds.), Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1980. 
244. Mannell, W A. Further investigations on production of liver 
tumours in rats by ponceau 3R. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 2: 
169-174 (1964). 
245. Mannell, W A., Grice, H. C., Lu, F. C., and Allmark, M. G. 
Chronic toxicity studies on food colours. Part IV. Observations 
on the toxicity of tartrazine , amaranth and sunset yellow in rats. 
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 10: 625-634(1958) . 
246. Martin, M. S., Justrabo, E., Jeannin, J. F., Leclerc, A., and 
Martin, F. Effect of dietary chenodeoxycholic acid on intestinal 
carcinogenesis induced by 1.2 dimethylhydrazine in mice and 
hamsters. Brit. J. Cancer 43: 884-886(1981). 
247. Mason, P. L., Gaunt, I. F., Butterworth , K. R., Hardy, J., Kiss, 
I. S., and Grasso, P. Long-term toxicity studies of carmoisine in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 601-607(1974). 
248. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Morino, K., Ohgaki, H., and 
Sugimura, T. Carcinogenicity in mice of mutagenic compound s 
from a tryptophan pyrolyzate. Science 213: 346-347(1981) . 
249. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Sasajima, K., Sano, T., Sugimura, 
T., and Hirota, T. Induction of intestinal metaplasia in the 
stomachs of rats by N-methyl-N' -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. J. 
Natl_. Cancer Inst. 61: 141-143(1978). 
250. Matsukura, N., Kawachi, T., Sasajima, K., Sano, T., Sugimura , 
T., and Ito, N. Induction of liver tumors in rats by sodium nitrite 
and methylguanidine . Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 90: 87-94(1977). 
251. Matsukura , N., Kawachi, T., Sugimura, T., Nakadate, M., and 
Hirota, T. Induction of intestinal metaplasia and carcinoma in 
the glandular stomach of rats by N-alkyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguan­
idines. Gann 70: 181-185(1979). 
252. Matsuzaki, 0. Histogenesis and growing patterns of lung tumors 
induced by potassium 1-methyl-1 ,4-dihydro-7-(2-(5-nitrofur yl) 
vinyl] -4-oxo-1,8-naphthyridine-3-carb oxylate in ICR mice. Gann 
66: 259-267(1975 ). 
253. McCollister, S. B., Kociba, R. J., Humiston, C. G., McCollister, 
D. D., and Gehring, P. J. Studies of the acute and long-term oral 
toxicity of chlorpyrifos (0,0-diethyl-0- (3,5,6-trichloro-2-p yridyl) 
phosphorothioate) . Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 45-61(1974 ). 
254. McElligott, T. F., and Hurst, E. W Long-term feeding studies of 
methyl ethyl cellulose ('edifas' A) and sodium carboxymethyl 
cellulose ('edifas' B) in rats and mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 6: 
449-460(1968). 
255. Merkow, L. P., Epstein, S. M., Slifkin, M., and Pardo, M. The 
ultrastructure of renal neoplasms induced by aflatoxin Bl. 
Cancer Res. 33: 1608-1614(1973 ). 
256. Miller, E. C., and Miller, J. A. Biochemical investigation s on 
hepatic carcinogenesis. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 15: 1571-1590(1955). 
257. Miller, E. C., Miller, J. A., and Enomoto, M. The comparative 
carcinogenic ities of 2-acetylam inofluorene and its N-hydroxy 
metabolit e in mice, hamsters, and guinea pigs. Cancer Res. 24: 
2018-2026 (1964). 
258. Miyaji, T. Acute and chronic toxicity offurylfuram ide in rats and 
mice. Tohoku J. Exp. Med. 103: 331-369(1971). 
259. Morris, H. P., Velat, C. A., Wagner, B. P., Dahlgard , M., and 
Ray, F. E. Studies of carcinogenicity in the rate of derivative s of 
aromatic amines related to N-2-fluoreny lacetamide. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 24: 149-180(1960). 
260. Morris, J. E., Price, J. M., Lalich, J. J., and Stein, R. J. The carcinogenic activity of some 5-nitrofuran derivatives in the rat. 
Cancer Res. 29: 2145-2156(1969 ). 
261. Munoz, M. Effect of herpes virus type 2 and hormonal imbalance 
on the uterine cervix of the mouse. Cancer Res. 33: 1504-1508 
(1973). 
262. Munro, I. C., Moodie, C. A., Krewski, D., and Grice, H. C. A. 
A carcinogenicity study of commerc ial saccharin in the rat. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 32: 513-526(1975). 
263. Murthy, A. S. K., Baker, J. R., Smith, E. R., and Zepp, E. 
Neoplasms in rats and mice fed butylurea and sodium nitrite 
separately and in combination. Int. J. Cancer 23: 253-259(1979) . 
264. Nagel, D., Shimizu, H., and Toth, B. Tumor induction studies 
with n-butyl-and n-propylhydrazine hydrochloride s in Swiss 
mice. Eur. J. Cancer 11: 473-478(1975). 
265. Nakamura , T., Matsuyama, M., and Kishimoto, H. Tumors of 
the esophagus and duodenum induced in mice by oral administra­
tion of N-ethyl-N'-nitro-N-nitrosoguanid ine. J. Natl. Cancer 
Inst. 52: 519-522( 1974). 
266. National Cancer Institute. Report on carcinogenesis bioassay of 
chloroform . N. C. I. Brief Communication . 1976. 
267. Newberne, J. W, Newberne, P. M., Gibson, J.P., Huffman, K. 
W, and Palopoli, F. P. Lack of carcinogenicity of oxprenolol, a 
beta-adrenergic blocking agent. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 41: 
535-546( 1977). 
268. Newberne, P. M. Nitrite promotes lymphoma incidence in rats. 
Science 204: 1079-1081(1979). 
269. Newberne, P. M., Harrington, D. H., and Wogan, G. N. Effects 
of cirrhosis and other liver insults on induction of liver tumors by 
aflatoxin in rats. Lab. Invest. 15: 962-969(1966). 
270. Newberne, P. M., and Rogers, A. E. Rat colon carcinomas 
associated with aflatoxin and marginal vitamin A. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 50: 439-444(1973). 
271. Newberne, P. M., and Williams, G. Inhibition of aflatoxin 
carcinogenesis by diethylstilbestrol in male rats. Arch. Environ. 
Health 19: 489-498(1969). 
272. Nixon, J. E., Hendricks, J. D., Pawlowski, N. E., Loveland, P. 
M., and Sinnhuber, R. 0. Carcinogenicity of aflatoxicol in 
Fischer 344 rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 66: 1159-1163(1981). 
273. Nixon, J.E., Sinnhuber, R. 0., Lee, D. J., Landers, M. K., and 
Harr, J. R. Effect of cyclopropeno id compounds on the carcino­
genic activity of diethylnitrosamine and aflatoxin Bl in rats. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 453-458(1974). 
274. Oda, H., Nogami, H., Kusumoto, S., Nakajima , T., and Kurata, 
A. Lifetime exposure to 2.4 ppm nitric oxide in mice. Environ. 
Res. 22: 254-263(1980). 
275. Ogiu, T., Kajiwara , T., Furuta, K., Takeuchi, M., Odashima, S., 
and Tada, K. Mammary tumorigenic effect of a new nitrosourea, 
1,3-dibutyl-1-nitro sourea (B-BNU), in female Donryu rats. Can­
cer Res. Clin. Oncol. 96: 35-41(1980). 
276. Ohtsubo, K., Saito, M., Kimura, H., and Tsuruta, 0. High 
incidence of hepatic tumours in rats fed mouldy rice contami­
nated with Aspergillus versicolor containing sterigmatocystin. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 16: 143-149(1978). 
277. Okey, A. B., and Gass, G. H. Continuous versus cyclic estrogen 
administration: mammary carcinoma in C3H mice. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 40: 225-230(1968). 
278. Oser, B. L., Carson, S., Cox, G. E., Vogin, E. E., and Stern­
berg, S. S. Long-term and multigenefation toxicity studies with 
cyclohexylamine hydrochloride . Toxicology 6: 47-65(1976). 
279. Oser, B. L., Morgareidge, K., Weinberg , M. S., and Oser, M. 
Carcinogenicit y study of carbarson e. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
9: 528-535(1966). 
280. Oser, B. L., and Oser, M. 2-(p-tert-Butylphenoxy)isopropyl 
2-chloroethyl sulfite (Aramite). 1. Acute, subacute, and chronic 
oral toxicity. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2: 441-457(1960). 
281. Osswald, H., Frank, H. K., Komitowski, D., and Winter, H. 
Long-term testing of patulin administered orally to Sprague­
Dawley rats and Swiss mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 16: 
243-247( 1978). 
282. Owen, N. V., Worth, H. M., and Kiplinger, G. F. The effects of 
long-term ingestion of methima zole on the thyroids of rats. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 649-653(1973). 
283. Pai, S. R., Shirke, A. J., and Gothoskar, S. V. Long-term feeding 312 GOLD ET AL. 
study in C17 mice administered saccharin coated betel nut and 
1,4-dinitrosopiperazine in combination. Carcinogenesis 2: 175-177 
(1981). 
284. Palmer, A. K., Street, A. E., Roe, F. J. C., Worden, A. N., and 
Van Abbe, N. J. Safety evaluation of toothpaste containing 
chloroform. II. Long term studies in rats. Environ. Pathol. 
Toxicol. 2: 821-833 (1979). 
285. Pamukcu, A. M., Yalciner, S., Hatcher, J. F., and Bryan, G. T. 
Quercetin, a rat intestinal and bladder carcinogen present in 
bracken fern (Pteridiwn aquilinmn). Cancer Res. 40: 3468-
3472(1980). 
286. Peraino, C., Fry, R. J. M., and Staffelclt, E. Enhancement of 
spontaneo us hepatic tumorigenesis in C3H mice by dietary 
phenobarbital. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 1349-1350(1973). 
287. Pershin, G. N., Makeeva, 0. 0., Grushina, A. A., and Chernov, 
V. A. An experimental study of the carcinogen ic effect oftubazicl 
(isoniazicl) and phtivazid. Vopr. Onkol. 18: 50-53(1972). 
288. Phillips, J.C., Butterworth, K. R., Gaunt, I. F., Evans, J. G., 
and Grasso, P. Long-term toxicity study of quillaia extract in 
mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 23-27(1979). 
289. Pietra, G., and Shubik, P. Induction of melanotic tumors in the 
Syrian golden hamster after administration of ethyl carbamate. 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 25: 627-630(1960). 
290. Poe!, W E. Pituitary tumors in mice after prolonged feeding of 
synthetic progestins. Science 154: 402-403(1966). 
291. Poe!, W E., Ciocco, A., and Doolittle, D. P. Unusual neoplasms 
and hyperplastic lesions in "random-bred" mice derived from 
four-way crossed inbred lines. Cancer Res. 28: 845-859(1968). 
292. Ponomarkov, V., Toma tis, L., and Turusov, V. The effect of 
long-term administration of phenobarbitone in CF-1 mice. Can­
cer Lett. 1: 165-172(1976) . 
293. Popper, H., Sternberg, S. S., Oser, B. L., and Oser, M. The 
carcinogenic effect of aramite in rats. A study of hepatic 
nodules. Cancer 13: 1035-104 6(1960). 
294. Preussmann, R., Habs, M., and Pool, B. L. Carcinogenicity and 
mutagenicity testing of three isomeric N-nitroso-N-methylamino­
pyriclines in rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 62: 153-156(1979). 
295. Preussmann, R., Habs, M., Pool, B., Stummeyer, D., Lijinsky, 
W, and Reube1 ~ M. D. Fluoro-substitutecl N-nitrosamines. 1. 
Inactivity of N-nitroso-bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)amine in carcino­
genicity and mutagenicity tests. Carcinogenesis 2: 753-756(1981). 
296. Preussmann , R., and I vankovic, S. Absence of carcinogenic 
activity in BD rats after oral administration of high closes of 
bismuth oxychloricle. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 13: 543-544(1975). 
297. Preussmann, R., Ivankovic , S., Lanclschutz, C., Gimmy, J., 
Flohr, E., and Griesbach, U. Carcinogene Wirkung von 13 
Arylclialkyltriazenen an BD-Ratten. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 
81: 285-310(1974). 
298. Preussmann, R., Schmahl, D., and Eisenbrancl, G. Carcinogeni­
city of N-nitosopyrrolidine: close-response study in rats. Cancer 
Res. Clin. Oncol. 90: 161-166(1977). 
299. Price, J.M., Biava, C. G., Oser, B. L., Vogin, E. E., Steinfeld, 
J., and Ley, H. L. Bladder tumors in rats feel cyclohexylamine or 
high closes of a mixture of cyclamate and saccharin. Science 167: 
1131-1132(1970). 
300. Prier, R. F., Nees, P. 0., and Derse, P. H. The toxicity of an 
organic arsenical, 3-nitro-4- hydroxyphenylarsonic acid. II. Chronic 
toxicity. Toxicol. ApiJI. Pharmacol. 5: 526-542(1963). 
301. Purchase, I. F. H., and van der Watt, J. J. Carcinogenicity of 
sterigmatocystin. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 8: 289-295(1970). 
302. Purchase, I. F. H., and van cler Watt, J. J. The long-term 
toxicity of ochratoxin A to rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 9: 
681-682(1971). 
303. Quast, J. F., Schuetz, D. J., Balmer, M. F., Gush ow, T. S., Park, 
C. N. , and McKenna, M. J. A Two-year Toxicity and Oncogeni c­
ity Study with Acrylonitrile Following Inhalation Exposure of 
Rats. Final Report. Dow Chemical U.S.A., Micllancl, MI, 1980. 
304. Quast, J. F., Wade, C. E., Humiston, C. G., Carreon, R. M., 
Hermann, E. A., Park, C. N., and Schwetz, B. A. A Two-year 
Toxicity and Oncogenicity Study with Acrylonitrile Incorpo­
rated in the Drinking Water of Rats. Final Report. Dow 
Chemical U.S.A., Micllancl, MI, 1980. 
305. Radomski, J. L., Brill, E., and Glass, E. M. Induction of bladder tumors and other malignancies in rats with 2-methoxy-3-aminocli­
benzofuran. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 39: 1069-1080(1967 ). 
306. Radomski, J. L., Deichmann, W B., Macclonalcl, W E., and 
Glass, E. M. Synergism among oral carcinogens: I. Results of 
the simultaneous feeding of four tumorigens to rats. Toxicol. 
Appl. Pharmacol. 7: 652-656(1965). 
307. Rao, M. S., and Reddy, J. K. Malignant neoplasms in rats fed 
lasiocarpine. Brit. J. Cancer 37: 289-293(1978). 
308. Reddy, J. K., Azarnoff, D. L., and Hignite, C. E. Hypolipiclaemic 
hepatic peroxisome proliferators form a novel class of chemical 
carcinogens. Nature 283: 397-398(1980). 
309. Reddy, J. K., and Qureshi, S. A. Tumorigenicit y of the 
hypolipiclaemic peroxisome proliferator ethyl-alpha-p-chloro­
phenoxyisobutyrate (clofibrate) in rats. Brit. J. Cancer 40: 
476-482(1979). 
310. Reclcly, J. K., Svoboda, D. J., and Rao, M. S. Induction of liver 
tumors by aflatoxin Bl in the tree shrew (Tupaia glis) a 
nonhuman primate. Cancer Res. 36: 151-160(1976). 
311. Reznik, G., Moh1; U., and Lijinsky, W Carcinogenic effect of 
N-nitroso-2,6-dimethylmorpholine in Syrian golden hamsters. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 60: 371-378(1978). 
312. Roe, F. J. C., Grant, G. A., and Millican, D. M. Carcinogenicity 
of hydrazine and 1,1-climethylhyclrazine for mouse lung. Nature 
216: 375-376(1967). 
313. Roe, F. J. C., Levy, L. S., and Carter, R. L. Feeding studies on 
sodium cyclamate, saccharin and sucrose for carcinogenic and 
tumour-promoting activity. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 8: 135-145 
(1970). 
314. Roe, F. J.C., Palmer, A. K., Worden, A. N., and Van Abbe, N. J. 
Safety evaluation of toothpaste containing chloroform. I. Long­
term studies in mice. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 799-819(1979). 
315. Rosin, A., and Ungar, H. Malignant tumors in the eyelids and 
the auricular region of thiourea-treatecl rats. Cancer Res. 17: 
302-305 (1957). 
316. Rossi, L., Ravera, M., Repetti, G., and Santi, L. Long-term 
administration of DDT or phenobarbital-Na in Wistar rats. Int. 
J. Cancer 19: 179-185(1977). 
317. Ruclali, G. Induction of tumors in mice with synthetic sex 
hormones. Gann Mono. Cancer Res. 17: 243-252(1975). 
318. Rudali, G., and Assa, R. Lifespan carcinogenicity studies with 
hexachlorophene in mice and rats. Cancer Lett. 5: 325-332(1978). 
319. Ruclali, G., Coezy, E., and Chemama, R. Mammary carcinoge­
nesis in female and male mice receiving contraceptives or 
gestagens. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 49: 813-819(1972). 
320. Ruclali, G., Coezy, E., Frederic, F., and Apiou, F. Susceptibility 
of mice of different strains to the mammary carcinogenic action 
of natural and synthetic oestrogens. Rev. Em: Etucl. Clin. Biol. 
16: 425-429(1971). 
321. Ruclali, G., Coezy, E., and Muranyi-Kovacs, I. Cancerologie. 
-recherches sur !'action cancerigene du cyclamate de soude chez 
Jes souris. Acaclemie des Sciences, Memoires et Communications 
des Membres et des Corresponclants de I' Acaclemie . 269: 
1910-1913(1969 ). 
322. Russfielcl, A. B., Homburge1; F., Boge1; E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisburger, J. H. Carcinogenicity of 
Chemicals in Man's Environment. Final Report, Contract No. 
NIH-NCI-E-68-1311. Bio-research Consultants, Inc .. Cam­
bridge, MA, 1973. 
323. Russfielcl, A. B., Hamburger, F., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., 
Weisburger, E. K., and Weisburge1~ J. H. The carcinogenic 
effect of 4,4'-methylene-bis-(2-chloroaniline) in mice and rats. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 31: 47-54(1975). 
324. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P. Induction of lung tumors and 
malignant lymphomas in mice by metroniclazole. J. Nat!. Cancer 
Inst. 48: 721-729(1972) . 
325. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P. Life-span carcinogenicity tests with 
4-amino-N-(10)-methylpteroylglutamic acid (methotrexate) in 
Swiss mice and Syrian golden hamsters. Toxicol. Appl. Pharma­
col. 26: 329-338(1973). 
326. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P. Thyroid tumours in rats and 
hepatoma s in mice after griseofulvin treatment. Brit. J. Cancer 
38: 237-249(1978). 
327. Rustia, M., and Shubik, P. Experimental induction of hepatomas, CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 313 
mammary tumors, and other tumors with metronidazole in 
noninbred Sas:MRCCWl)BR rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 63: 
863-868Cl979). 
328. Rustia, M., Shubik, P., and Patil, K. Lifespan carcinogenicity 
tests with native carrageenan in rats and hamsters. Cancer 
Lett. 11: l-10Cl980) . 
329. Saito, D., Shirai, A., Matsushima, T., Sugimura, T., and Hirano, 
I. Test of carcinogenicity of quercetin, a widely distributed 
mutagen in food. Teratog. Carcinog. Mutagen. 1: 213-221(1980). 
330. Sanderson, K. V. Arsenic as a co-carcinogen in mice. British 
Empire Cancer Campaign, 39th Annual Report 39: 628-629 
Cl961). 
331. Sano, T., Kawachi, T., Matsukura, N., Sasajima, K., and 
Sugimura, T. Carcinogenicity of a food additive, AF-2, in 
hamsters and mice. Cancer Res. Clin. Oneal. 89: 61-68(1977). 
332. Sarles, M. P., and Vandegrift , W B. Chronic oral toxicity and 
related studies on animals with the insecticide and pyrethrum 
synergist, piperonyl butoxide. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 1: 
862-883 Cl952). 
333. Sasajima, K., Kawachi, T., Matsukura, N., Sano, T., and 
Sugimura, T. Intestinal metaplasia and adenocarcinoma induced 
in the stomach of rats by N-propyl-N' -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. 
Cancer Res. Clin. Oneal. 94: 201-206Cl979). 
334. Schardein, J. L., Kaump, D. H., Woosley, E. T., and J ellema, M. 
M. Long-term toxicologic and tumorigenesis studies on an oral 
contraceptive agent in albino rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
16: 10-23Cl970). 
335. Schmahl, D. Prufung von Polyvinylpyridin -N-oxid CPVNO) auf 
carcinogene Wirkung bei Ratten und Mausen. Arzneim. -Forsch. 19: 
1313-1314Cl969) . 
336. Schmahl, D. Fehlen einer kanzerogenen Wirkung von Cyclamat, 
Cyclohexylamin und Saccharin bei Ratten. Arzneim. -Forsch. 23: 
1466-1470Cl973). 
337. Schmahl, D. Investigations on esophageal carcinogenicity 
by methyl-phenyl-nitrosamine and ethyl alcohol in rats. 
Cancer Lett. 1: 215-218Cl976). 
338. Schmahl, D. Experiment s on the carcinogenic effect of ortho­
toluol-sulfonamid COTS). Cancer Res. Clin. Oneal. 91: 19-22 
Cl978). 
339. Schmahl, D., and Habs, M. Life-span investigations for carcino­
genicity of some immune-stimulating , immunodepressive and 
neurotropic substances in Sprague-Dawley-rats. Cancer Res. 
Clin. Oneal. 86: 77-84Cl976) . 
340. Schmahl, D., and Habs, M. Experiments on the influence of an 
aromatic retinoid on the chemical carcinogenesis in rats by 
butyl-butanol-nitrosamine and 1,2-dimethylhydrazine. Arzneim. 
-Forsch. 28: 49-51(1978). 
341. Schmahl, D., and Osswald, H. Experimentelle Untersuchungen 
uber carcinogene Wirkungen von Krebs-Chemotherapeutica und 
Immunosuppressiva . Arzneim.-Forsch. 20: 1461-1467Cl970). 
342. Schmahl, D., Port, R., and Wahrendorf, J. A dose-response 
study on urethane carcinogenesis in rats and mice. Int. J. 
Cancer 19: 77-80(1977) . 
343. Schrauzer, G. N., McGinness, J. E., and Kuehn, K. Effects of 
temporary selenium supplementation on the genesis of spontane­
ous mammary tumors in inbred female C3H/St mice. Carcinogen­
esis 1: 199-201(1980). 
344. Schroeder, H. A., Balassa, J. J., and Vinton, W H. Chromium, 
lead, cadmium, nickel and titanium in mice: effect on mortality, 
tumors and tissue levels. J. Nutr. 83: 239-250Cl964) . 
345. Schroeder, H. A., and Mitchener, M. Life-term effects of 
mercury, methyl mercury, and nine other trace metals on mice. 
J. Nutr. 105: 452-458Cl975). 
346. Schroeder, H. A., and Mitchener, M. Life-term studies in rats: 
effects of aluminum, barium, beryllium, and tungsten. J. Nutr. 
105: 421-427Cl975). 
347. Schroeder, H. A., Mitchener, M., and Nason, A. P. Life-term 
effects of nickel in rats: survival, tumors, interactions with trace 
elements and tissue levels. J. Nutr. 104: 239-243Cl974). 
348. Schwartz, E. L., Kluwe, WK., Sleight, S. D., Hook, J.B., and 
Goodman, J. I. Inhibition of N-2-fluorenylacetamide-induced 
mammary tumorigenesis in rats by dietary polybrominated 
biphenyls. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 64: 63-67(1980). 349. Schwetz, B. A., Quast, J. F., Keeler, P.A., Humiston, C. G., and 
Kociba, R. J. Results of two-year toxicity and reproduction 
studies on pentachlorophenol in rats. Pentachlorophenol CK. 
Ranga Rao, Ed.), Plenum Press, New York, 1978, pp. 301-309. 
350. Sellakumar, A. R., Laskin, S., Kuschner , M., Rusch, G., Katz, 
G. V., Snyder, C. A., and Albert, R. E. Inhalation carcinogenesis 
by dimethylcarbamoyl chloride in Syrian golden hamsters. 
Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 107-115Cl980). 
351. Severi, L., and Biancifiori, C. Hepatic carcinogenesis in CBA/Cb/Se 
mice and Cb/Se rats by isonicotinic acid hydrazide and hydrazine 
sulfate. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 41: 331-349Cl968). 
352. Sharratt, M., Frazer, A. C., and Forbes, 0. C. Study of the 
biological effects of benzoyl peroxide. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 2: 
527-538(1964) . 
353. Shay, H., Gruenstein, M., and Kessler, W B. Experimental 
mammary adenocarcinoma of rats: some considerations of 
methylcholanthr ene dosage and hormonal treatment . J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 27: 503-513Cl961). 
354. Shay, H., Gruenstein, M., and Kessler, W B. Methylcholanthrene 
induced breast cancer in the rat: studies on mechanism of 
inhibition by large doses of estrogen. Morphological Precursors 
of Cancer, CL. Severi, Ed.), Div. Cane. Res., Perugia, 1962, pp. 
305-318. 
355. Shimizu, H., Nagel, D., and Toth, B. Ethylhydrazine hydrochlo­
ride as a tumor inducer in mice. Int. J. Cancer 13: 500-505(1974). 
356. Shimizu, H., Nagel, D., and Toth, B. Tumour induction study 
with N-amylhydrazine hydrochloride in Swiss mice. Brit. J. 
Cancer 31: 492-496(1975). 
357. Shimizu, H., and Toth, B. Effect of lifetime administration of 
2-hydroxyethylhydrazine on tumorigenesis in hamsters and mice. 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 52: 903-906(1974). 
358. Skipper, H. E. Booklet 1, 1976. Phase I Studies on the 
Carcinogenic Activity of Anticancer Drugs in Mice and Rats. 
Final report. Southern Research Institute, Birmingham, AL, 
1976. 
359. Smith, A. G., and Cabral, J. R. Liver-cell tumours in rats fed 
hexachlorobenzene . Cancer Lett. 11: 169-172(1980). 
360. Snell, K. C., and Stewart, H. L. Pulmonary adenomatosis 
induced in DBA/2 mice by oral administration of dibenz[a,h]an­
thracene. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 28: 1043-1051Cl962). 
361. Snyder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., Sellakumar, A. R., Bromberg, 
I., Laskin, S., and Albert, R. E. The inhalation toxicology of 
benzene: incidence of hematopoietic neoplasms and hematotoxi­
city in AKR/J and C57BL/6J mice. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 54: 
323-331(1980) . 
362. Snyder, C. A., Goldstein, B. D., Sellakumar, A., Wolman, S. R., 
Bromberg, I., Erlichman, M. N., and Laskin, S. Hematotoxicity 
of inhaled benzene to Sprague-Dawley rats and AKR mice at 300 
ppm. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health 4: 605-618(1978). 
363. Sodemoto , Y., and Enomoto, M. Report of carcinogenesis 
bioassay of sodium benzoate in rats: absence of carcinogenicity of 
sodium benzoate in rats. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 4: 87-95Cl980). 
364. Stevenson, D. E., Thorpe, E., Hunt, P. F., and Walker, A. I. T. 
The toxic effects of dieldrin in rats: a reevaluation of data 
obtained in a two-year feeding study. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
36: 247-254(1976). 
365. Stoll, R., and Maraud, R. Sur !'induction de tumeurs thyroi­
diennes chez le rat traite par le propylthiouracil et le radio-iode. 
Bull. Cancer 50: 389-398(1963). 
366. Stula, E. F., Barnes, J. R., Sherman, H., Reinhardt, C. F., and 
Zapp, J. A. Urinary bladder tumors in dogs from 4,4'-methylene­
bisC2-chloroaniline) CMOCA). Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 1: 
31-50(1977). 
367. Stula, E. F., Barnes, J. R., Sherman, H., Reinhardt, C. F., 
and Zapp, J. A. Liver and urinary bladder tumors in dogs 
from 3,3'-dichlorobenzidine. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 1: 475-
490Cl978). 
368. Stula, E. F., Sherman, H., Zapp, J. A., and Clayton, J. W 
Experimental neoplasia in rats from oral administration of 
3,3' -dichlorobenzidine, 4,4' -methylene-bisC2-chloroaniline), and 
4,4' -methylene-bisC2-methylaniline). Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 
31: 159-176 (1975). 
369. Sugimura, T., Fujimura, S., and Baba, T. Tumor production in 314 GOLD ET AL. 
the glandular stomach and alimentary tract of the rat by 
N-methyl-N' -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Cancer Res. 30: 455-
465(1970). 
370. Svoboda, D. J., and Reddy, J. K. Malignant tumors in rats given 
lasiocarpine. Cancer Res. 32: 908-911(1972) . 
371. Tahara, E., Ito, H., Nakagami, K., and Shimamoto, F. Induction 
of carcinoids in the glandular stomach of rats by N-methyl-N' -
nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 100: 1-12 
(1981). 
372. Takayama, S. Induction of tumors in ICR mice with N-nitrosopi­
peridine, especially, in forestomach. Naturwissenschaften 56: 
142 (1969). 
373. Takayama, S., and Imaizumi, T. Carcinogenic action of N-nitro­
sodibutylamine in mice. Gann 60: 353(1969) . 
374. Takayama, S., and Kuwahara, N. Carcinogenic activity of 
2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-furyl)acrylamide, a food additive, in mice 
and rats. Cancer Lett. 3: 115-120(1977) . 
375. Takemura, N., Hashida, C., and Terasawa , M. Carcinogenic 
action of5-nitroacenaphthene. Brit. J. Cancer 30: 481-483(1974). 
376. Tanaka, T., Fujii, M., Mori, H., and Hirono, I. Carcinogenicity 
test of potassium metabisulfite in mice. Ecotoxicol. Environ. 
Saf. 3: 451-453(1979). 
377. Tatematsu, M., Takahashi, M., Tsuda, H., Ogiso, T., and Ito, N. 
The administration of reserpine to rats for 75 weeks. Toxicol. 
Lett. 1: 201-205(1978). 
378. Terao, K., Aikawa, T., and Kera, K. A synergistic effect of 
nitrosodimethylamine on sterigmatocystin carcinogenesis in rats. 
Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 16: 591-596(1978). 
379. Terracini, B., Magee, P. N., and Barnes, J. M. Hepatic pathology 
in rats on low dietary levels of dimethylnitrosamine. Brit. J. 
Cancer 20: 559-565(1967). 
380. Terracini, B., Testa, M. C., Cabral, J. R., and Day, N. The 
effects of long-term feeding of DDT to BALB/c mice. Int. J. 
Cancer 11: 747-764(1973) . 
381. Thorpe, E., and Walker, A. I. T. The toxicology of dieldrin 
(HEOD). II. Comparative long-term oral toxicity studies in mice 
with dieldrin, DDT, phenobarbitone, beta-BHC and gamma­
BHC. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 433-442(1973). 
382. Tomatis, L., Turusov, V., Charles, R. T., and Boicchi, M. Effect 
of long-term exposure to 1, 1-dichloro -2,2-bis(p-chlorophen yl) 
ethylene, to 1, 1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)ethan e, and to 
the two chemicals combined on CF-1 mice. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 
52: 883-891(1974). 
383. Tomatis, L., Turusov, V., Charles, R. T., Boiocchi, M., and Gati, 
E. Liver tumours in CF-1 mice exposed for limited periods to 
technical DDT. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 82: 25-35(1974). 
384. Tomatis, L., Turusov, V., Day, N., and Charles, R. T. The effect 
of long-term exposure to DDT on CF-1 mice. Int. J. Cancer 10: 
489-506(1972) . 
385. 'lbth, B. Studies on the incidence, morphology, transplantation 
and cell-free filtration of malignant lymphomas in the Syrian 
golden hamster. Cancer Res. 27: 1430-1442(1967). 
386. Toth, B. Lung tumor induction and inhibition of breast adenocar­
cinomas by hydrazine sulfate in mice. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 42: 
469-4 75(1969). 
387. Toth, B. Benzoylhydrazine carcinogenesis in lungs and lymphor e­
ticular tissues of Swiss mice. Eur. J. Cancer 8: 341-345(1972). 
388. Toth, B. Hydrazine, methylhydrazine and methylhydrazine sul­
fate carcinogenesis in Swiss mice. Failure of ammonium hydrox­
ide to interfere in the developm ent of tumors. Int. J. Cancer 9: 
109-118(1972). 
389. Toth, B. Tumorigenesi s studies with 1,2-dimeth ylhydrazine 
dihydrochloride, hydrazine sulfate, and isonicotinic acid in Golden 
hamsters. Cancer Res. 32: 804-807(1972). 
390. Toth, B. 1,1-Dimethylhydrazine (unsymmetrical) carcinogenesis 
in mice. Light microscopic and ultrastructural studies on neoplas­
tic blood vessels. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 50: 181-194(1973). 
391. Toth, B. Tumorigenicity of beta-phenylethylhydrazine sulfate in 
mice. Cancer Res. 36: 917-921(1976). 
392. Toth, B. The large bowel carcinogenic effects of hydrazine s and 
related compounds occurring in nature and in the environment. 
Cancer 40: 2427-2431(1977). 393. Toth, B. Formylhydrazine carcinogenesis in mice. Brit. J. 
Cancer 37: 960-964(1978). 
394. 'lbth, B. 1-Acetyl-2-phenylhydrazine carcinogenesis in mice. Brit. 
J. Cancer 39: 584-587(1979). 
395. 'lbth, B. Nicotinic acid hydrazide carcinogenesis in mice. Oncol­
ogy 38: 106-109(1981). 
396. Toth, B., and Boreisha, I. Tumorigenesis with isonicotinic acid 
hydrazide and urethan in the Syrian golden hamsters. Eur. J. 
Cancer 5: 165-171(1969). 
397. 'lbth, B., and Erickson, J. Lung tumorigenesis by 1,2-diformyl­
hydrazine in mice. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 92: 11-16(1978). 
398. Toth, B., and Nagel, D. Tumour induction study with allyl­
hydrazine HCl in Swiss mice. Brit. J. Cancer 34: 90-93(1976). 
399. Toth, B., and Nagel, D. Tumors induced in mice by N-methyl­
N-formylhydrazine of the false morel Gyrornitra esculenta. 
J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 60: 201-204(1978). 
400. Toth, B., and Nagel, D. N-Ethyl-N-formylhydrazine tumori­
genesis in mice. Carcinogenesis 1: 61-65(1980). 
401. 'lbth, B., and Nagel, D. 1,2-Di-n-butylhydrazin e dihydrochloride 
carcinogenesis in mice. Experientia 37: 773-775(1981). 
402. Toth, B., Nagel, D., and Patil, K. Tumorigenesis by N-N-propyl­
N-formylhydrazine in mice. Brit. J. Cancer 42: 922-928(1980). 
403. Toth, B., Nagel, D., and Patil, K. Tumorigenic action of 
N-N-butyl-N-formylhydrazine in mice. Carcinogenesis 1: 589-
593(1980). 
404. Toth, B., Nagel, D., and Patil, K. Carcinogenic effects of 
1, 1-di-n-butylhydrazine in mice. Carcinogenesis 2: 651-654(1981). 
405. Toth, B., Nagel, D., Patil, K., Erickson, J., and Antonson, K. 
Tumor induction with the N' -acetyl derivative of 4-hydroxy­
methylphenylhydrazine, a metabolite of agaritine of Agaricus 
bisporus. Cancer Res. 38: 177-180(1978). 
406. Toth, B., and Patil, K. Carcinogenic effects in the Syrian golden 
hamster of N-methyl-N-formylhydrazine of the false morel 
mushroom Gyrornitra esculenta . Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 93: 
109-121(1979). 
407. Toth, B., and Patil, K. The tumorigenic effect of low dose levels 
of N-methyl-N-formylhydrazine in mice. Neoplasma 27: 25-31 
(1980). 
408. Toth, B., Patil, K., Erickson, J., and Kupper, R. False morel 
mushroom Gyromitra esculenta toxin: N-methyl-N-formylhydra­
zine carcinogenesis in mice. Mycopathologia 68: 121-128(1979). 
409. Toth, B., and Rustja, M. The effect of isonicotinic acid hydrazide 
on the development of tumors. Int. J. Cancer 2: 413-420(1967). 
410. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. Lung carcinogenesis with 1-acetyl-
2-isonicotinoylhydrazine, the major metabolite of isoniazid. Eur. 
J. Cancer 9: 285-289(1973). 
411. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. Methylhydrazine tumorigenesis in 
Syrian golden hamsters and the morphology of malignant 
histiocytomas. Cancer Res. 33: 2744-2753(1973). 
412. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. 1-Carbamyl-2-phenylhydrazine tumori­
genesis in Swiss mice. Morphology of lung adenomas. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 52: 241-251(1974). 
413. Toth, B., and Shimizu, H. Tumorigenic effects of chronic 
administration ofbenzylhydrazine dihydrochloride and phenylhy­
drazine hydrochloride in Swiss mice. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 
87: 267-273(1976). 
414. Toth, B., Shimizu, H., and Erickson, J. Carbamylhydrazine 
hydrochloride as a lung and blood vessel tumour inducer in Swiss 
mice. Eur. J. Cancer 11: 17-22(1975) . 
415. Toth, B., and Shubik, P. Carcinogenesis in Swiss mice by 
isonicotinic acid hydrazide. Cancer Res. 26: 1473-1475(1966) . 
416. Toth, B., and Shubik, P. Mammary tumor inhibition and lung 
adenoma induction by isonicotinic acid hydrazide. Science 152: 
1376-1377(1966). 
417. Toth, B., Wallcave, L., Patil, K., Schmeltz, I., and Hoffmann, D. 
Induction of tumors in mice with the herbicide succinic acid 
2,2-dimethylhydrazide. Cancer Res. 37: 3497-3500(1977). 
418. Toth, B., and Wilson, R. B. Blood vessel tumorigenesis by 
1,2-dimethylhydrazine dihydrochloride (symmetrical). Am. J. 
Pathol. 64: 585-600(1971). 
419 Toth, K., Somfai-Relle, S., Sugar, J., and Bence, J. Carcinogeni­
city testing of herbicide 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyethanol containing CARCINOGENI C POTENCY DATABASE 315 
dioxin and of pure dioxin in Swiss mice. Nature 278: 548-549 
(1979). 
420. Tourkevitch , N. M., Gorevaia, A. N., Kounitsa , L. K., and Mao, 
L. S. Developpement des tumeurs des glandes mammaires chez 
Jes rats en cas de trouble de la regulation endocrine provoque par 
differentes actions. Int. J. Cancer 20: 1446-1449(1964). 
421. Truhaut, R., Coquet, B., Fouillet, X., Galland, D., Guyot, D., 
Long, D., and Rouaud, J. L. Two-year oral toxicity and multi­
generation studies in rats on two chemically modified maize 
starches. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 17: 11-17(1979). 
422. Truhaut, R., Ferrando , R., Faccini, J. M., and Monro, A. M. 
Negative results of carcinogenicity bioassay of methyl carbazate 
in rats: significance for the toxicological evaluation of carbadox. 
Toxicology 22: 219-221(19 81). 
423. Tsuda, H., Hananouchi, M., Tatematsu, M., Hirose, M., Hirao, 
K., Takahashi , M., and Ito, N. Tumorigenic effect of 3-amino­
lH-1,2,4- triazole on rat thyroid. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 57: 861-
864(1976). 
424. Tuchmann-Duplessis, H., and Mercier-Parot, L. Cancerologie.­
apparition de tumeurs malignes dans une lignee de rats "Wistar". 
Academie des Sciences, Memoires et Communications des 
Membres et des Correspondants de l'Academie. 254: 1535-1537 
(1962). 
425. Uchida, E., and Hirono, I. Effect of phenobarbital on the 
development of neoplastic lesions in the liver of cycasin-treated 
rats. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 100: 231-238(198 1). 
426. Uematsu, K., and Miyaji, T. Induction of tumors in rats by oral 
administration of technical acid violet 6B. J. Nat!. Cancer Inst. 
51: 1337-1338(1973). 
427. Ueno, I., and Hirono, I. Non-carcinogenic response to coumarin 
in Syrian golden hamsters . Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 19: 353-355 
(1981). 
428. Ulland, B. M., Weisburger, J. H., Weisburger, E. K., Rice, J. 
M., and Cypher, R. Brief communication: thyroid cancer in rats 
from ethylene thiourea intake. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 49: 
583-584( 1972). 
429. Ungerer, 0., Eisenbrand , G., and Preussmann, R. Zur Reaktion 
von Nitrit mit Pestiziden. Bildung, chemische Eigenschaften 
und cancerogene Wirkung der N-Nitrosoverbindung des Herbizids 
N-Methy l-N' -(2-benzothiazoly l-harnstoff (Benthiazuron). Cancer 
Res. Clin. Oncol. 81: 217-224(1974 ). 
430. Uraguchi, K., Saito, M., Noguchi, Y., Takahashi, K., Enomoto, 
M., and Tatsuno, T. Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity in mice 
of the purified mycotoxin s, luteoskyrin and cyclochlorotine. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 10: 193-207(1972). 
431. Van Duuren, B. L., Goldschmidt, B. M., Katz, C., Seidman, I., 
and Paul, J. S. Carcinogenic activity of alkylating agents. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 53: 695-700(1974). 
432. Van Duuren, B. L., Goldschmidt, B. M., Loewengart , G., Smith, 
A. C., Melchionne, S., Seidman, I., and Roth, D. Carcinogenic­
ity of halogenated olefinic and aliphatic hydrocarbons in mice. J. 
Natl. Cancer Inst. 63: 1433-1439(1979) . 
433. Van Duuren, B. L., Goldschmidt, B. M., and Seidman, I. 
Carcinogenic activity of di-and trifunctiona l alpha-chloro ethers 
and of 1,4-dichlorobutene-2 in I CR/Ha Swiss mice. Cancer Res. 
35: 2553-2557(1975). 
434. Van Duuren, B. L., Langseth , L., Orris, L., Teebor, G., Nelson, 
N., and Kuschner, M. Carcinogenicity of epoxides, lactones, and 
peroxy compounds. IV. Tumor response in epithelial and connec­
tive tissue in mice and rats. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 37: 825-
838(1966). 
435. Van Esch, G. J., and Kroes, R. The induction of renal tumours 
by feeding basic lead acetate to mice and hamsters. Brit. J. 
Cancer 23: 765-771(1969). 
436. Van Esch, G. J., and Kroes, R. Long-term toxicity studies of 
chlorpropham and propham in mice and hamsters. Food Cosmet. 
Toxicol. 10: 373-381(1972). 
437. Van Esch, G. J., Van Genderen, H., and Vink, H. H. The 
induction of renal tumours by feeding of basic lead acetate to 
rats. Brit. J. Cancer 16: 289-297(1962). 
438. Van Miller, J. P., Lalich, J. J., and Allen, J. R. Increased 
incidence of neoplasms in rats exposed to low levels of 2,3, 7 ,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. Chemosphere 10: 625-632(1977) . 
439. Vazquez-Lopez , E. The effects ofthiourea on the development of 
spontaneou s tumours on mice. Brit. J. Cancer 3: 401-414(194 9). 
440. Verschuuren, H. G., Kroes, R., and Van Esch, G. J. Toxicity 
studies on tetrasul. I. Acute, long-term and reproducti on 
studies. Toxicology 1: 63-78(1973). 
441. Vesselinovitch, S. D., Rao, K. V. N., and Mihailovich, N. 
Transplacental and lactational carcinogene sis by safrole. Cancer 
Res. 39: 4378-4380(1979). 
442. Wakabayashi , K., Inagaki, T., Fujimoto , Y., and Fukuda, Y. 
Induction by degraded carrageen an of colorectal tumors in rats. 
Cancer Lett. 4: 171-176(197 8). 
443. Walker, A. I. T., Thorpe, E., and Stevenson, D. E. The 
toxicology of dieldrin (HEOD). I. Long-term oral toxicity 
studies in mice. Food Cosmet. Toxicol. 11: 415-432(1973). 
444. Ward, J.M., Sontag, J. M., Weisburger, E. K., and Brown, C. 
A. Effect of lifetime exposure to aflatoxin Bl in rats. J. Natl. 
Cancer Inst. 55: 107-110(1975 ). 
445. Waters, L. L. o-Aminoazotolu ene as a carcinogenic agent. Yale 
J. Biol. Med. 10: 179-184(1937). 
446. Weisburger, E. K. Bioassay program for carcinogenic hazards of 
cancer chemotherapeutic agents. Cancer 40: 1935-1949(1977 ). 
447. Weisburger, E. K., Russfield, A. B., Hamburger , F., Weisburger, 
J. H., Boger, E., Van Dongen, C. G., and Chu, K. Testing of 
twenty-one aromatic amines or derivative s for long-term toxicity 
or carcinogenicity. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 2: 325-356(1978). 
448. Weisburger, E. K., Ulland, B. M., Nam, J., Gart, J. J., and 
Weisburger , J. H. Carcinogenicit y tests of certain environmental 
and industrial chemicals. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 67: 75-88(19 1). 
449. Weisburger, J. H., Yamamoto, R. S., Glass, R. M., and Frankel, 
H. H. Prevention by arginine glutamate of the carcinogenicity of 
acetamide in rats. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 14: 163-175(1969). 
450. Wiessler, M., and Schmahl, D. Zur carcinogenen Wirkung von 
N-N itroso-Verbindungen. 1. Mitteilung: N-N itroso-3, 6-dihydroo­
xazin-1,2 und N-Nitroso-tetrahydrooxazin-1,2. Cancer Res. Clin. 
Oneal. 79: 114-117 (1973). 
451. Wiessler, M., and Schmahl, D. Zur carcinogenen Wirkung von 
N-Nitroso-Verbindungen. 2. Mitteilung: S( +) und R(-)-N-Nitroso-
2-methyl-piperid in. Cancer Res. Clin. Oneal. 79: 118-122 (1973). 
452. Willheim , R., and Ivy, A. C. A preliminar y study concerning the 
possibility of dietary carcinogenesis. Gastroenterology 23: 
1-19(1953). 
453. Williams, M. H. C., and Bonser, G. M. Induction ofhepatomas in 
rats and mice following the administration of auramine. Brit. J. 
Cancer 16: 87-91(1962 ). 
454. Willis, J. The induction of malignant neoplasms in the thyroid 
gland of the rat. J. Pathol. 82: 23-27(1961). 
455. Wislocki, P. G., Miller, E. C., Miller, J. A., McCoy, E. C., and 
Rosenkranz, H. S. Carcinogenic and mutagenic activities of 
safrole, l'-hydroxysafrole, and some known or possible metabo­
lites. Cancer Res. 37: 1883-1891(1977). 
456. Wogan, G. N., Edwards, G. S., and Newberne , P. M. Structure­
activity relationships in toxicity and carcinogenicit y of aflatoxins 
and analogs. Cancer Res. 31: 1936-1942(1971 ). 
457. Wogan, G. N., Paglialunga, S., and Newberne, P. M. Carcino­
genic effects of low dietary levels of aflatoxin Bl in rats. Food 
Cosmet. Toxicol. 12: 681-685(1974). 
458. Wong, L. C. K., Winston, J. M., Hong, C. B., and Plotnick, H. 
Carcinogenic ity and toxicity of 1,2-dibromoethan e in the rat. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 63: 155-165(1982). 
459. Wood, M. Factors influencing the induction of tumours of the 
urinary bladder and liver by 2-acetylaminofluorene in the mouse. 
Eur. J. Cancer 5: 41-47(1969). 
460. Wood, M., Flaks, A., and Clayson, D. B. The carcinogenic 
activity of dibutylnitro samine in IF X C57 mice. Em: J. Cancer 
6: 433-440(1970) . 
461. Yamamoto , R. S., Korzis, J., and Weisburger, J. H. Chronic 
ethanol ingestion and the hepatocarcinog enicity of N-hydroxy­
N-2-fluorenylacetamid e. Int. J. Cancer 2: 337-343(1967 ). 
462. Yamamoto, R. S., Richardson, H. L., Weisburger, E. K., 
Weisburger, J. H., Benjamin , T., and Bahner, C. T. Carcinogenic­
ity of proposed cancer chemotherapeutic agents with stil-316 GOLD ET AL. 
benearylnitrosamine structures. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 51: 1313-
1315(1973). 
463. Yamamoto , R. S., Williams, G. M., Frankel, H. H., and 
Weisburger, J. H. 8-Hydroxyquinoline: chronic toxicity and 
inhibitory effect on the carcinogenicity of N-2-fluorenylaceta­
mide. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 19: 687-698(1971) . 
464. Yokoro, K., Kajihara, H., Kodama, Y., Nagao, K., Hamada, K., 
and Kinomura , A. Chronic toxicity of 2-(2-furyl)-3-(5-nitro-
2-furyl)acrylamide (AF-2) in mice with special reference to 
carcinogenicity in the forestomach. Gann 68: 825-828(1977). 465. Yoshida, M., Numoto, S., and Otsuka, H. Histopathological 
changes induced in the urinary bladder and liver of female 
BALB/c mice treated simultaneously with 2-naphthylamine and 
cyclophosphamide. Gann 70: 645-652(1979). 
466. Yoshimoto , S. Carcinogenicity and mutagenicit y of tetrachloro­
benzidine. Jikeikai Med. J. 25: 123-128(1978). 
467. Zabezhinskii, M. A. Effectiveness of inhalation as a method of 
administration of atomized carcinogens. Byull. Eksp. Biol. Med. 
69: 72-74(1970). 
APPENDIX 15 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
National Cancer Institute/National 
Toxicology Program Technical Reports 
All Technical Reports are entitled "Bioassay of [Chemical Name] for Possible Carcinogenicity" 
CHEMICAL NAME 
ACETOHEXAMIDE 
ACRONYCINE 
ALDICARB 
ALDRIN 
ALL YL CHLORIDE 
3-AMIN0-4-ETHOXYACETANILIDE 
3-AMIN0-9-ETHYLCARBAZOLE HYDROCHLORIDE 
1-AMIN0-2-METHYLANTHRAQUINONE 
4-AMIN0-2-NITROPHENOL 
2-AMIN0-5-NITROTHIAZOLE 2-AMINOANTHRAQUINONE 
ANILAZINE 
ANILINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
o-ANISIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
p-ANISIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
ANTHRANILIC ACID 
AROCLOR 1254 
5-AZACYTIDINE 
AZINPHOSMETHYL 
AZOBENZENE 
lH-BENZOTRIAZOLE 
beta-TGdR 
BIS(2-CHLOR0-1-METHYLETHYL) ETHER 
BUTYLATED HYDROXYTOLUENE (BHT) 
C.I. VAT YELLOW 4 
CALCIUM CYANAMIDE 
CAPT AN 
CARBROMAL 
CHLORAMBEN 
CHLORDANE 
4-CHLORO-m-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
4-CHLORO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
2-CHLORO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE SULFATE 
3-CHLORO-p-TOLUIDINE 
5-CHLORO-o -TOLUIDINE 
4-CHLORO-o -TOLUIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
4' -(CHLOROACETYL)-ACETANILIDE 
p-CHLOROANILINE 
CHLOROBENZILATE 
(2-CHLOROETHYL)TRIMETHYLAMMONIUM CHLORIDE (CCC) 
CHLOROFORM 
2-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
3-(CHLOROMETHYL)PYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE TECHNICAL 
REPORT NUMBER 
50 
49 
136 
21 
73 
112 
93 
111 
94 
53 
144 
104 
130 
89 
116 
36 
38 
42 
69 
154 
88 
57 
191 
150 
134 163 
15 
173 
25 
8 
85 
63 
113 
145 
187 
165 
177 
189 
75 
158 
A 
178 
95 PUBLICATION 
DATE 
1978 1978 
1979 
1978 1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 
1978 1978 
1978 
1979 1978 
1978 
1979 
1979 
1979 
1979 
1977 
1979 1977 
1977 
1978 
1978 
1978 1978 
1979 
1979 
1979 
1979 
1978 
1979 
1976 
1979 
1978 CHEMICAL NAME 
CHLOROPICRIN 
CHLOROTHALONIL 
CHLORPROPAMIDE 
CLONITRALID 
COUMAPHOS 
m-CRESIDINE 
p-CRESIDINE 
CUPFERRON 
DAMINOZIDE 
DAPSONE 
p,p'-DDE 
DDT 
2,4-DIAMINOANISOLE SULFATE 
2,4-DIAMINOTOLUENE 2,5-DIAMINOTOLUENE SULFATE 
DIARYLANILIDE YELLOW 
DIAZINON CARCINOGENI C POTENCY DATABASE 
DIBENZO-p-DIOXIN 
DIBROMOCHLOROPROPANE DIBROMOCHLOROPROPANE 
(INHALATION) 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE 
1,2-DIBROMOETHANE (INHALATION) 
DIBUTYLTIN DIACETATE 
2,7-DICHLORODIBENZO-p -DIOXIN (DCDD) 
1,1-DICHLOROETHANE 
1,2-DICHLOROETHANE 
DICHLORVOS DICOFOL 
N,N'-DICYCLOHEXYLTHIOUREA 
DIELDRIN 
DIELDRIN 
N,N' -DIETHYLTHIOUREA 
DIMETHOATE 
2,4-DIMETHOXYANILINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
3,3' -DIMETHOXYBENZIDINE-4,4' -DIISOCY ANATE 
DIMETHYL TEREPHTHALATE 
2,4-DINITROTOLUENE 
1,4-DIOXANE 
DIOXATHION 
DIRECT BLACK 38 
DIRECT BLUE 6 
DIRECT BROWN 95 
2,5-DITHIOBIUREA 
EMETINE 
ENDOSULFAN 
ENDRIN 
ESTRADIOL MUSTARD 
ETHIONAMIDE 
p,p'-ETHYL-DDD 
ETHYL TELLURAC 
FENTHION 
FORMULATED FENAMINOSULF 
HEPTACHLOR 
HEXACHLOROETHANE 
HEXACHLOROPHENE 
HYDRAZOBENZENE 
ICRF-159 
3,3'-IMINOBIS-1-PROPANOL DIMETHANESULFONATE (ESTER) 
HYDROCHLORIDE (IPD) 
IODOFORM 
ISOPHOSPHAMIDE 
KEPONE 
LASIOCARPINE 
LEAD DIMETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 317 
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION 
REPORT NUMBER DATE 
65 1978 
41 1978 
45 1978 
91 1978 
96 1979 
105 1978 
142 1979 
100 1978 
83 1978 
20 1977 
131 1978 
131 1978 
84 1978 
162 1979 
126 1978 
30 1978 
137 1979 
122 1979 
28 1978 
206 1982 
86 1978 
210 1982 
183 1979 
123 1979 
66 1978 
55 1978 
10 1977 
90 1978 
56 1978 
21 1978 
22 1978 
149 1979 
4 1977 
171 1979 
128 1979 
121 1979 
54 1978 
80 1978 
125 1978 
108 1978 
108 1978 
108 1978 
132 1979 
43 1978 
62 1978 
12 1979 
59 1978 
46 1978 
156 1979 
152 1979 
103 1979 
101 1978 
9 1977 
68 1978 
40 1978 
92 1978 
78 1978 
18 1978 
110 1978 
32 1977 
B 1976 
39 1978 
151 1979 318 
CHEMICAL NAME 
LINDANE 
LITHOCHOLIC ACID 
MALAOXON 
MALATHION 
MALATHION 
ell-MENTHOL 
METHOXYCHLOR 
2-METHYL-1-NITROANTHRAQUINONE 
METHYL PARATHION 
4,4'-METHYLENEBIS(N,N-DIMETHYL)BENZENAMINE 
MEXACARBATE 
MICHLER'S KETONE GOLD ET AL. 
A MIXTURE OF ASPIRIN , PHENACETIN , AND CAFFEINE 
MIXTURE OF 1,2,3,6,7,8-HEXACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN AND l, 
2,3,7,8,9-HEXACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN (GAVAGE) 
1,5-NAPHTHALENEDIAMINE 
N-(1-NAPHTHYL)ETHYLENEDIAMINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE 
NITHIAZIDE 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID (NT A) 
NITRILOTRIACETIC ACID, TRISODIUM SALT, MONOHYDRATE 
(Na NTA H 0) 
3-NI.JikO -p-AC~TOPHENETIDE 
5-NITRO-o-ANISIDINE 
2-NITRO-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
4-NITRO-o-PHENYLENEDIAMINE 
5-NITRO-o-TOLUIDINE 
5-NITROACENAPHTHENE 
4-NITROANTHRANILIC ACID 
6-NITROBENZIMIDAZOLE 
NITRO FEN 
NITRO FEN 
1-NITRONAPHTHALENE 
3-NITROPROPIONIC ACID 
N-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
p-NITROSODIPHENYLAMINE 
PARATHION 
PENTACHLORONITROBENZENE 
PHENAZOPYRIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
PHENESTERIN 
PHENFORMIN 
PHENOXYBENZAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
1-PHENYL-3-METHYL-5-PYRAZOLONE 
N-PHENYL-p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
1-PHENYL-2-THIOUREA 
p-PHENYLENEDIAMINE DIHYDROCHLORIDE 
PHOSPHAMIDON 
PHOTODIELDRIN 
PHTHALAMIDE 
PHTHALIC ANHYDRIDE 
PICLORAM 
PIPERONYL BUTOXIDE 
PIPERONYL SULFOXIDE 
PIV ALOLACTONE 
PROCARBAZINE 
PROFLAVINE 
PYRAZINAMIDE 
PYRIMETHAMINE 
p-QUINONE DIOXIME 
RESERPINE 
SELENIUM SULFIDE 
SODIUM DIETHYLDITHIOCARBAMATE 
A SOLUTION OF beta-NITROSTYRENE AND STYRENE 
STYRENE TECHNICAL PUBLICATION 
REPORT NUMBER DATE 
14 1977 
175 1979 
135 1979 
24 1979 
192 1979 
98 1979 
35 1978 
29 1978 
157 1979 
186 1979 
147 1978 
181 1979 
67 1978 
198 1980 
143 1978 
168 1979 
146 1979 
6 1977 
6 1977 
133 1979 
127 1978 
169 1979 
180 1979 
107 1978 
118 1978 
109 1978 
117 1979 
26 1979 
184 1979 
64 1978 
52 1978 
164 1979 
190 1979 
70 1979 
61 1978 
99 1978 
60 1978 
7 1977 
72 1978 
141 1978 
82 1978 
148 1978 
174 1979 
16 1979 
17 1977 
161 1979 
159 1979 
23 1978 
120 1979 
124 1979 
140 1978 
19 1979 
5 1977 
48 1978 
77 1978 
179 1979 
193 1980 
194 1980 
172 1979 
170 1979 
185 1979 CARCINOGENIC POTENCY DATABASE 
CHEMICAL NAME 
SULFALLATE 
SULFISOXAZOLE 
3-SULFOLENE 
TDE 
2,3,5,6-TETRACHLOR0-4-NITROANISOLE 
2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-p-DIOXIN IN OSBORNE-MENDEL 
RATS AND B6C3Fl MICE (GAVAGE STUDY) 
1,1,2,2-TETRACHLOROETHANE 
TETRA CHLO RO ETHYLENE 
TETRACHLORVINPHOS 
TETRAETHYLTHIURAM DISULFIDE 
THIO-TEPA 
4,4' -THIODIANILINE 
TITANIUM DIOXIDE 
TOLAZAMIDE 
TOLBUTAMIDE 
o-TOLUIDINE HYDROCHLORIDE 
TOXAPHENE 
1,1,1-TRICHLOROETHANE 
1,1,2-TRICHLOROETHANE 
TRI CHLO RO ETHYLENE 
TRICHLOROFLUOROMETHANE 
2,4,6-TRICHLOROPHENOL 
TRIFLURALIN 
2,4,5-TRIMETHYLANILINE 
TRIMETHYLPHOSPHATE 
TRIMETHYLTHIOUREA 
TRIPHENYL TIN HYDROXIDE 
TRIS(2,3-DIBROMOPROPYL)PHOSPHATE 
TRISODIUM ETHYLENEDIAMINETETRAACETATE TRIHYDRATE (EDTA) 
L-TRYPTOPHAN 
A -No Technical Report number 8B8igned by NCI. 
B -NCI (brief communication) . 319 
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION 
REPORT NUMBER DATE 
115 1978 
138 1979 
102 1978 
131 1978 
114 1978 
209 1982 
27 1978 
13 1977 
33 1978 
166 1979 
58 1978 
47 1978 
97 1979 
51 1978 
31 1977 
153 1979 
37 1977 
3 1977 
74 1978 
2 1976 
106 1978 
155 1979 
34 1978 
160 1979 
81 1978 
129 1979 
139 1978 
76 1978 
11 1977 
71 1978 SUBSCRIPTION INFORMATION 
Subscription rates are as follows: Single copies: $11.00-
domestic, $13. 75-foreign; per year: $46.00-domestic, 
$57.50-foreign. The yearly subscription is for 6 regu­
lar issues. Please send check or money order, in 
advance, to the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402. 
The Secretary of Health and Human Services has determined that the publication of this 
periodical is necessary in the transaction of the public business required by law of this 
Department. Use of funds for printing this periodical has been approved by the Director of 
the Office of Management and Budget through September 30, 1986. 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVES is a publication of the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Department of 
Health and Human Services. Opinions expressed herein, however, are not necessarily 
endorsed nor shared by any of the above agencies. 
DHHS publication No. (NIH) 84-218 
Address communications to: 
Assistant Managing Editor 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PERSPECTIVES 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
Box 12233 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709 
Reprints of Articles Should Be Requested from the Principal Authors 
Unless Stated Otherwise 
Print Schedule: Volume 59 will be the Proceedings of the Japan-U.S. Symposium on 
Toxicity of Chlorinated Biphenyls, Dibenzofurans, Dibenzodioxins, and 
Related Compounds. 
Volume 58, December 1984 
DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED-Under the prov1s10ns of applicable public 
laws enacted by Congress since 1964, no person in the United States shall, on the 
grounds of race, color, national origin, handicap, or age, be excluded from 
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under 
any program or activity (or, on the basis of sex, with respect to any education 
program or activity) receiving Federal financial assistance . In addition, Executive 
Order 1141 prohibits discrimination on the basis of age by contractors and 
subcontractors in the performance of Federal contracts , lJ,nd Executive Order 11246 
states that no federally funded contractor may discriminate against any employee or 
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. 
Therefore, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences must be 
operated in compliance with these laws and Executive Orders. 