 A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-1 A Brief History of Activated 
Sludge Process Models and Simulators 
Background 
Computer modeling of system behavior has had a significant impact on the 
development of design procedures for activat ed sludge systems in recent years.  For 
full-scale plant operation it has also found application as an optimization tool in assessing the effects of changes in waste flows and loads, operational modifications 
(e.g. changes in recycles), and proposed modifications to plant configuration.  
Modeling has also proved valuable in operator training; through simulation exercises using the model, the operator acquires "instant" experience in the behavior to be 
expected with changes in inputs, system configuration and operational strategies. 
The utility of simulation models becomes almost essential for nutrient removal 
systems incorporating nitrification, denitrification and excess biological phosphorus 
removal (NDEBPR), in addition to carbonac eous removal.  In these systems the 
behavior involves a large number of compounds and biological reactions, many of 
which interact.  An NDEBPR system involves at least three separate groups of 
microorganism (polyP or phosphorus-accumulating heterotrophs, non-polyP heterotrophs, nitrifying autotrophs) operating on a large number of chemical 
components in three distinct environmental regimes (aerobic zones, anoxic zones 
where nitrate but not oxygen is present, an d anaerobic zones where both nitrate and 
oxygen are excluded as far as possible).  These features make for complex behavior 
that has increased the level of difficulty in design, operation and control. 
Activated Sludge Models  
A full appreciation of the 
models can only be obtained 
through a detailed study of 
the literature. Currently the approach to modeling activated sludge systems is to use mechanistic 
models. These mechanistic models incorp orate mathematical expressions that 
represent the biological interactions, based on hypotheses proposed for the biological 
processes occurring within the system (Dold et al. , 1980; Grady et al. , 1986; Dold 
and Marais, 1986; Henze et al. , 1987a, b; Dold, 1990; Wentzel et al. , 1992; Henze et 
al., 1994, 1995; Barker and Dold, 1997a,b; Henze et al. , 1999).  It is useful to briefly 
review the historical development of the current generation of models.  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-2 In 1982 the International Association on Water Pollution Research and Control 
(IAWPRC, then IAWQ, and now IWA) appointed a task group to review modeling 
of activated sludge systems incorporating carbonaceous energy removal, 
nitrification and denitrification .  The initial deliberations of the group resulted in a 
preliminary version of the "IAWPRC model" (Grady et al. , 1986).  Dold and Marais 
(1986) conducted a comprehensive evaluatio n of the preliminary model.  It was 
proposed that certain changes should be made, in particular with respect to the way in which the fate of organic nitrogen was modeled.  These changes were 
subsequently adopted in the final version of the IAWPRC Activated Sludge Model 
No. 1 [ASM1] (Henze et al. , 1987a, 1987b). 
The task group drew on a wide range of information in formulating the ASM1 
model.  One research initiative that had a major influence on the model was the 
dynamic activated sludge model developed by Marais and co-workers at the 
University of Cape Town (Dold et al. , 1980; van Haandel et al. , 1981).  This 
dynamic model evolved out of the steady state model of Marais and Ekama (1976).  The steady state model, in turn, constituted a development from a number of 
previous models for carbonaceous and nitrogenous material conversion and removal 
(McKinney, 1962; McKinney and Ooten, 1969; Lawrence and McCarty, 1970; Downing et al., 1964). 
The ASM1 model did not include the phenomenon of excess biological phosphorus 
removal (EBPR).  Excess biological phosphorus removal (EBPR) is a microbial 
process which involves the cultivation, within the mixed community, of 
microorganisms that have the ability to take up phosphorus in excess of that required for growth.  The net effect of this uptake is a reduced effluent phosphorus 
concentration that can be less than 1mg/L in a well-operated system.  The removal of 
phosphorus is achieved through the microbially mediated storage of polyphosphate granules which can occupy up to 60% of the cell volume with a phosphorus mass as 
much as 38% of the volatile suspended solids (Lotter et al. , 1986; Wentzel et al. , 
1989).  Polyphosphate storage is encouraged in these systems by exposing the biomass to anaerobic and aerobic stages  sequentially, favoring the growth of 
polyphosphate-accumulating f acultative anaerobes.  
Within an EBPR system, characteristic beha vior is observed in each stage of the 
process (Figure 1).  During the anaerobi c stage, substrate is sequestered by the 
biomass and converted internally to  polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) while 
phosphorus is released from the biomass causi ng an increase in soluble phosphate.  
During the aerobic stage, PHA degradation occurs and soluble phosphate is 
accumulated as polyphosphate within the biomass, leaving a reduced level of 
phosphorus in the effluent. 
TimeConcentrationsAEROBIC ANAEROBIC
Soluble Phosphate
PHA
Soluble Substrate
  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-3 Figure 1. Schematic illustrati on of characteristic EBPR be haviour in an anaerobic/aerobic 
sequenced bioreactor. 
Proposed explanations of the biochemical behavioral patterns associated with P 
release and uptake (and net P removal) have been presented in a number of models; 
for example, that of Comeau et al.  (1986), extended and modified by Wentzel et al.  
(1986), and that of Mino et al.  (1987).  The biochemical models are largely in 
agreement regarding the biochemical control mechanisms and have provided an 
explanation for the essential requirements for attaining EBPR; namely, an alternating 
anaerobic/aerobic sequence w ith the provision of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) 
during the anaerobic phase [also referred to as volatile fatty acids (VFA)].  These 
SCFA are taken up by the polyP organisms and stored as organic polymers, 
generally as either poly- β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) or poly- β-hydroxyvalerate (PHV) 
[referred to collectively as poly- β-hydroxyalkanaotes (PHA).] 
Since Comeau et al.  (1986) and Wentzel et al.  (1986) first introduced their 
biochemical models of excess biological phosphorus removal (EBPR), a substantial 
amount of research has resulted in variations to the original models (Mino et al. , 
1987; Arun et al. , 1988; Wentzel et al. , 1991; Satoh et al. , 1994; Smolders et al. , 
1994).  However, the essence of the orig inal models remains.   More recently 
biochemical models have been proposed as extensions of these, but which include 
both glycogen-accumulating organisms (GAO s) and PAOs co-existing in these 
systems (Copp and Dold, 1999).   It is proposed that observed behavior in EBPR 
systems is the net result of the combined behavior of both GAOs and PAOs and that 
the proportion of GAOs and PAOs in a si ngle culture can significantly affect the 
behavior of the mixed microbial community.  It is proposed that PAOs possess a 
selective advantage in the presence of  sufficient phosphorus, but limiting PAO 
growth by limiting the available phosphorus allows for the proliferation of GAOs.  Both PAOs and GAOs anaerobically sequester substrate that is stored internally as 
PHA.  Under aerobic conditions, the brea kdown of PHA provides the carbon and 
energy for growth utilizing ox ygen as a terminal electr on acceptor.  In PAOs, excess 
energy generation is stored as polyphosphate whereas GAOs store excess energy as 
carbohydrate (glycogen). 
For "normal" municipal wastewater the SCFA  content usually is minimal.  In EBPR 
systems the readily biodegradable COD comp onent is transformed to SCFA by the 
non-polyP organism mass, thereby making SCFA available to the polyP organisms (Meganck et al. , 1985; Brodisch, 1985; Wentzel et al. , 1985).  Aside from this 
linkage, the polyP and non-polyP organisms in EBPR systems have been shown to 
act essentially independently of one another.  For this reason Wentzel et al.  (1988) 
adopted the approach of developing "enhanced" cultures of polyP organisms as the 
basis for studying the kinetics and stoichiometry of EBPR without the behavior 
being masked by that of the non-polyP organisms. 
Enhanced cultures of polyP organisms were developed by Wentzel et al.  (1988) in 
continuous flow activated sludge systems (modified Bardenpho and UCT process 
configurations), with acetate as the only or ganic substrate.  The sludge mass in these 
systems was shown to comp rise the polyP organism Acinetobacter spp. in excess of 
90 percent.  Based on observations of the continuous flow systems and batch experiments using mixed liquor drawn from these systems, Wentzel et al.  (1989a, 
1989b) developed a kinetic mechanistic model for the enhanced culture EBPR 
system.  The model provided a very reasonable description of the response observed in a number of continuous flow enhanced culture systems and the batch experiments 
with a single set of kinetic and stoichiometric parameters .  The enhanced culture 
model constituted a most significant step towards the development of a general activated sludge model capable of modeling the biological processes of  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-4 carbonaceous energy removal, n itrification, de nitrification and excess biological 
phosphorus removal . 
Dold (1990, 1991) merged the ASM1 model for non-polyP heterotrophic organisms 
and autotrophic organisms (Henze et al. , 1987a, 1987b) and the Wentzel et al. 
(1989b) model for polyP organisms.  In combining the models, certain extensions 
and modifications were incorporated in  both the ASM1 and the Wentzel model 
components.  Since the initial development this NDEBPR model has been evaluated 
extensively against experimental data from  laboratory-scale and full-scale treatment 
plants.  This has lead to further model refinement (Barker and Dold, 1997a, 1997b).  
The IAWQ task group also extended ASM1 to include simulation of combined 
NDEBPR processes.  The initial ASM2 model was proposed as “a compromise 
between complexity and simplicity, and between the many viewpoints on how the 
correct model should look like.  It should  be used as a conceptual platform for 
further model development.” (Henze et al. , 1994a).  Since the initial presentation of 
ASM2 the model has undergone refinements, and the current version is denoted as 
ASM2d  (Henze et al. , 1999). 
Different simulators may 
incorporate slightly different 
activated sludge models. Most municipal wastewater  treatment plant simulators incorporate the ASM2d 
activated sludge model (e.g. GPS-X, Stoat, EFOR).  One exception is the BioWin 
simulator, which is based on the Barker and Dold (1997a) model.  In many respects 
the models are very similar.  However, a number of differences should be recognized; for example: 
• In anoxic growth the heterotroph biomass yield is less than for aerobic 
growth (Copp and Dold, 1998).  This is incorporated in the BioWin 
model, but not in ASM2d. 
• A number of studies have identified COD mass balance problems in 
nutrient removal sludge systems (Power et al. , 1992; Randall et al. , 
1992; Wable et al. , 1992; Smyth, 1994; Wable et al. , 1994; Barker and 
Dold, 1995, 1996).  This manifests itself as a reduction in both sludge 
production and oxygen demand in NDEBPR systems (with anaerobic 
zones) compared to aerobic-only or  anoxic-aerobic systems.  This 
apparent COD “disappearance” is incorporated empirically in the 
BioWin model, but not in ASM2d. 
The mechanistic activated sludge NDEBPR models incorporate a large number of 
stoichiometric and kinetic parameters relating to the different organism masses.  It 
should be recognized that the different variations of the IAWQ-type models imply differences in model structure.  Therefor e, it is important to recognize that 
parameters in one model cannot necessarily be transferred directly to other models 
(even where the parameters sometimes have the same name) .  Nevertheless, the true 
test (and utility) of any particular model should be whether or not the model can:  
• satisfactorily track the changes in a range of key parameters (e.g. 
soluble phosphorus, ammonia, nitrate concentrations; volatile 
suspended solids concentration; oxygen demand; etc.). 
• in different types of systems [e.g . aerobic systems (with and without 
nitrification), ND systems, EBPR  systems, NDEBPR systems (under 
steady state and dynamic conditions)] 
• operated over a range of conditions (sludge age, recycle rates, etc.) 
using a single set of model kinetic and stoichiometric parameters .  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-5 Models versus  Simulators 
The biological models should not be confused with simulation models.  A simulator 
incorporates the biological model (and also models for other unit operations), and 
must link the units of a specific system acco rding to the particular flow scheme.  
Figure 2 highlights the requirements for setting up a simulation of a typical 
wastewater treatment facility that incorp orates the activated sludge process.  
Depending upon the intended use of the simulator, information is needed on the inputs to the process, its configuration, and its operating conditions (Wilson and 
Dold, 1998). 
 
Figure 2.  Essential Requirements for Wast ewater Treatment Proc ess Simulation (Wilson and 
Dold, 1998). 
The BioWin Simulator 
BioWin is a Microsoft Windows-based simulator used world-wide in the analysis 
and design of wastewater treatment plants.   Figure 3 shows an example of a nutrient 
removal system configuration set up in BioWin.  Many different process units can be 
included to “build” a specific treatment  plant configuration; for example: 
• Various influent elements for setting up wastewater inputs, storm flow 
inputs, or methanol addition streams. 
• Equalization tanks. 
• Continuous flow bioreactors incorp orating sophisticated means for 
simulating the performance of diffused aeration systems. 
• Variable volume / batch reactors. 
• Various sequencing batch reactor (SBR) modules: single tank units, or 
SBRs with one or two hydraulically -linked prezones that are either 
continuously mixed or that allow settling of solids when the decant 
zone is in a settling phase.  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-6 • Aerobic digesters. 
• Grit removal tanks. 
• Primary settling tanks. 
• Secondary settling tanks, where solid s removal performance is either 
specified by the user, or where sludge settling behavior is based on flux 
theory using a one-dimensional model. 
• A generic dewatering unit where the user specifies both solids capture 
and flow split between the thickened and un-thickened streams.  This 
unit can be applied to simulating a range of dewatering processes such 
as centrifuges, belt presses, disso lved air flotation units, etc. 
• Mixers and splitters for directing flow between units in the 
configuration.  The user has full flexibility for specifying details of 
splits in streams (by actual rate, fr action, ratio, flow  pacing, according 
to a timed schedule, etc.). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of a process configuration set up in BioWin. 
The facility to view simulation results ra pidly, and in detail, is of paramount 
importance in the design and analysis of systems.  BioWin incorporates an Album 
for this purpose.  The Album consists of a series of tabbed pages (somewhat like 
spreadsheet programs) showing simulation results in tabular and/or graphical format.  Figure 4 shows example views of Album pages. 
BioWin offers a number of features to aid in creating attractive, professional reports, 
and includes its own internal Notes editor to help keep track of project details.  It is very easy to get results from BioWin into a word processor or spreadsheet. Charts, 
tables, system configuration layouts, etc. can be copied and pasted from BioWin to 
reports. Tables can be exported as tabbed text and then quickly converted to tables.  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-7 BioWin’s on-line Help and Tutorials prov ide comprehensive user support.  Further 
resources, such as downloadable configur ation files and a Discussion Forum, are 
available from the EnviroSim Web site http://www.envirosim.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Examples of Album pages in BioWin.  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-2 Simulator Calibration 
Some degree of calibration usually is required for a simulator to accurately predict 
effluent characteristics, sludge produc tion, oxygen requirements, etc.  The 
importance of this step in the simulation process cannot be over-emphasized since inappropriate calibration can lead to erroneous interpretation of simulator output as 
well as incorrect or non-optimal designs. 
Different  terminology is 
sometimes used to describe 
“sludge age”.  For example, solids retention time (SRT) or 
mean cell residence time 
(MCRT). In terms of Figure 2, to simulate an activat ed sludge system, it is necessary to obtain 
details of the physical conf iguration (reactor volumes, clarifier dimensions, etc.), 
operating conditions (wastage rate, recycle rates, DO concentrations, etc.) and the 
influent loading pattern (flow rate, COD, TKN, etc.).  All of this information 
essentially is “measurable”, and it should be  possible to establish this data without 
difficulty.  [In practice, problems often ar e encountered with determining the sludge 
wastage.  This is crucial as it determines the system sludge age / solids retention time 
(SRT).  Also, influent concentration measurements often are unreliable as a result of 
sampling problems]. 
In addition to the “measurable” parameters, the current generation of biological 
models require information on: 
• Influent wastewater composition 
• Model kinetic and stoichiometric parameters 
Influent Wastewater Characteristics 
Even though model structures 
may differ, the division of 
influent COD and TKN is 
common to the different models. The term “wastewater characteristics” refers to the partitioning of influent organic 
material into biodegradable and inert portions, the ammonia portion of the total nitrogen, and so on.  The influent wastewater characteristics may vary, often 
appreciably, from one municipa l waste to another.  Wastewater characteristics have a 
very significant impact on system performance, particularly for nutrient removal 
systems.  A single characteristic such as  the readily biodegradable COD fraction can 
determine whether or not a system designed for excess phosphorus removal will in fact remove phosphorus.  Therefore, if the model is to provide reasonable predictions 
of system behavior, adequate knowledge of  wastewater characteristics is extremely 
important. 
Activated Sludge Model Kinetic and Stoichiometric 
Parameters 
The biological models contain many stoichiometric and kinetic parameters ; for 
example, yields and growth rates.  Several studies have shown that the stoichiometric 
and kinetic parameters (with one notable exception discussed below) do not change 
appreciably for different systems treating municipal wastewaters .  For example, the 
decay rate estimated from the decline in oxygen utilization rate in a batch aerobic 
sludge digestion test is very similar for activated sludge drawn from aerobic systems 
in different parts of the world (at least at 20°C).  The uniformity of parameters likely 
reflects uniformity in the composition of municipal wastewaters, and a resultant similarity in the diversity of the microorganism populations in different systems.  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-3 If large changes in default 
kinetic and stoichiometric 
parameters are necessary to 
match simulated and 
measured results this usually 
indicates that the system or the wastewater was not 
properly characterized.  The 
most common problem is poor information on sludge 
wastage. 
 
Consult Peer Review Group:  
Is there agreement on this broad statement?  Note that 
the statement applies only to 
municipal systems. It is proposed that the values for the stoichiometric and kinetic model parameters 
tabulated for a particular model (presumably derived from calibration studies on a 
range of treatment systems) should be acce ptable initial estimat es, and should not 
require substantial adjustment in model calibration exercises. 
The exception referred to above is the maximu m specific growth rate of the nitrifiers, 
µ
A.  This parameter shows marked varia tions between systems treating different 
wastewaters.  In the models, nitrification usually is considered as a single step 
process mediated by one group of nitrifying  autotrophic bacteria.  The growth rate 
parameter for the nitrifiers ( µA) defines the maximum specific growth rate of this 
surrogate organism mass.  Values for µA (at 20 oC) ranging from 0.2 to 1.0 d-1 have 
been observed in activated sludge system s treating a number of different municipal 
wastewaters (WRC, 1984).  It has been suggested that the variation appears to 
correlate with the extent of the industrial component in the wastewater; with increased industrial input there likely is an increased possibility of inhibition of 
nitrifying organisms.  However, many other factors influence nitrification behavior; 
for example, pH, Alkalinity, etc.  This pa rameter has a major impact on  nutrient 
removal system design and performance, and obviously on model predictions as 
well.  Therefore, special attention should be paid to measurement or estimation of 
µ
A.  In a sense, µA can be regarded as a wastewater characteristic. 
References 
Barker, P. S., and Dold, P. L. (1995).  COD and nitrogen mass balances in 
activated sludge systems.  Wat. Res.,  29, 633. 
Barker, P. S., and Dold, P. L. ( 1996).  Sludge production and oxygen 
demand in nutrient removal activated sludge systems.  Wat. Sci. Tech. , 
34(5-6), 43-50. 
Barker, P.S. and Dold, P.L. (1997a).  General Model for Biological Nutrient 
Removal Activated Sludge Systems:  Model Presentation.  Water 
Environ. Res. , 69, 969. 
Barker, P.S. and Dold, P.L. (1997b).  General Model for Biological Nutrient 
Removal Activated Sludge Systems:  Model Application.  Water 
Environ. Res. , 69, 985. 
Brodisch, K. E. U. (1985).  Interaction of different groups of micro-
organisms in biological phosphate removal. Wat. Sci. Tech. , 17(11/12), 
89. 
Comeau, Y., Hall, K. J., Hancock, R. E. W., and Oldham, W. K. (1986).  
Biochemical model for enhanced biological phosphorus removal.  
Water Research , 20, 1511-1521. 
Copp J. B. and Dold P. L. (1999).  Influence of influent phosphorus 
concentration on an excess biological phosphorus removal sequencing 
batch reactor   Part III:  biochemical explanation. Wat Res . (submitted).  
Copp J. B. and Dold P. L. (1999).  Comparing sludge production under 
aerobic and anoxic conditions.  Wat. Sci. Technol. , 38, 285-294. 
Dold, P. L. (1990).  A general activated sludge model incorporating 
biological excess phosphorus removal. Proc. C.S.C.E. Annual Conf.   
May, Hamilton, Canada.   A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-4 Dold, P. L. (1991).  Modification du modele general des boues activees 
pour tenir compte de la dephosphatation.  Sciences et Techniques de 
L'eau , 24, 229. 
Dold, P. L., Ekama, G. A., and Marais, G. v R. (1980).  A general model for 
the activated sludge process.  Prog. Water Technol. , 12, 47. 
Dold, P. L., and Marais, G. v R. (1986).  Evaluation of the general activated 
sludge model proposed by the IAWPRC task group. Wat. Sci. Tech. , 
18(6), 63. 
Downing, A. L., Painter, H. A., and Knowles, G. (1964).  Nitrification in 
the activated sludge process. J. Proc. Inst. Sew. Purif. , 64, 130. 
Ekama, G. A., Dold, P. L., and Marais,G. v R. (1986).  Procedures for 
determining influent COD fractions and the maximum specific growth 
rate of heterotrophs in activated sludge systems.  Wat. Sci. Tech. , 18(6), 
91. 
Gibson, J. (1991).  Activated sludge system modelling using the IAWPRC 
model. M.Eng. Thesis, Dep. Civ. Eng., McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.  
Grady, C. P. L., Gujer, W., Henze, M., Marais, G. v R., and Matsuo, T. 
(1986).  A model for single-sludg e wastewater treatment systems. Wat. 
Sci. Tech. , 18(6), 47. 
Henze, M., Grady, C. P. L., Gujer, W., Marais, G. v R., and Matsuo, T. 
(1987a).  Activated Sludge Model No. 1,  IAWPRC Scientific and 
Technical Report No. 1 , IAWPRC, London. 
Henze, M., Grady, C. P. L., Gujer, W., Marais, G. v R., and Matsuo, T. 
(1987b).  A general model for single sludge wastewater treatment 
systems. Water Research , 21, 505. 
Henze, M., Gujer, W., Mino, T., Mats uo, T., Wentzel, M., and Marais, G. v 
R. (1994a).  Activated sludge model no. 2.  IAWQ Scientific and 
Technical Report No. 3 , IAWQ, London.  
Henze, M., Gujer, W., Mino, T., Mats uo, T., Wentzel, M., and Marais, G. v 
R. (1995a).  The Activated Sludge Model No. 2 : Biological 
Phosphorus Removal.  Wat. Sci. Tech., 31(2), 1-11. 
Henze, M., Gujer, W., Mino, T., Mats uo, T., Wentzel, M., and Marais, G. v 
R. (1995b).  Wastewater and bioma ss characterization for the activated 
sludge model no. 2: biological phosphorus removal.  Wat. Sci. Tech., 
31(2), 13-23. 
Henze, M., Gujer, W., Mino, T., Matsuo , T., Wentzel, M., Marais, G. v R. , 
and van Loostrecht, M. (1999).  Activated Sludge Model No. 2d, 
ASM2D.  Wat. Sci. Tech., 39(1), 165-182. 
Lawrence, A. W., and McCarty, P. L. (1970).  Unified basis for biological 
treatment design and operation. J. San. Eng. Div. , ASCE , 96, 757. 
Marais, G. v. R., and Ekama, G. A. (1 976).  The activated sludge process: 
part 1 - steady state behaviour. Water SA , 2, 163. 
McKinney, R. E. (1962).  Mathemat ics of complete mixing activated 
sludge. J. San. Eng. Div. , ASCE , 88, SA3, Proc Paper 3133, 87. 
McKinney, R. E., and Ooten, R. J. (1969).  Concepts of complete mixing 
activated sludge. Trans 19th San Eng Conf , University of Kansas, 32.  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-5 Meganck, M., Malnou, D., Le Flohic, P., Faup, G. M., and Rovel, J. M. 
(1985).  The importance of acidogenic microflora in biological 
phosphorus removal.  Wat. Sci. Tech.  , 17(11/12), 199. 
Mino, T., Arun, V., Tsuzuki, Y., and Matsuo, T. (1987).  Effect of 
phosphorus accumulation on acetate metabolism in the biological 
phosphorus removal process. In: Advances in Water Pollution Control - 
Biological Phosphate Removal from Wastewaters  (R Ramadori: ed.), 
Pergamon Press, Oxford. 
Power, S. P. B., Ekama, G. A., Wentzel, M. C., and Marais, G. v R. (1992). 
Chemical phosphorus removal from municipal wastewater by the 
addition of waste alum sludge to the activated sludge system.  Research 
Report W66, Dept. Civil Eng., Univ. Cape Town. 
Smolders, G. J. F., van der Meij, J., van Loosdrecht, M. C. M., and Heijnen, 
J. J. (1994).  Model of the anaerobic metabolism of the biological phosphorus removal process: stoichiometry and pH influence. Biotech. 
Bioeng. , 43, 461. 
Smyth, S. A. (1994).  Sludge production in aerobic and anoxic activated 
sludge systems. M.Eng. Thesis, Dept . Civ. Eng., McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 
Van Haandel, A. C., Ekama, G. A., and Marais, G. v. R. (1981).  The 
activated sludge process: part 3 - single sludge denitrification. Water 
Research , 15, 1135. 
Wentzel, M. C., Dold, P. L., Ekama, G. A., and Marais, G. v. R. (1985).  
Kinetics of biological phosphorus release.  Wat. Sci. Tech. , 17(11/12), 
57. 
Wentzel, M. C.,  Ekama, G.A., and Marais, G. v. R. (1992).  Processes and 
Modelling of Nitrification Den itrification Biological Excess 
Phosphorus Removal Systems - A Review.  Water Sci. Tech. , 25(6), 
59-82. 
Wentzel, M. C., Lotter, L. H., Loewenthal, R. E., and Marais, G. v. R. 
(1986).  Metabolic behaviour of a cinetobacter spp. in enhanced 
biological phosphorus removal - a biochemical model. Water SA , 12, 
209. 
Wentzel, M. C., Loewenthal, R. E., Ek ama G. A. and Marais, G. v. R. 
(1988).  Enhanced polyphosphate organism cultures in activated sludge 
systems. part I: enhanced culture development. Water SA , 14, 81. 
Wentzel, M. C., Ekama, G. A., Loewenthal, R. E., Dold, P. L., and Marais, 
G. v. R. (1989a).  Enhanced polyphosphate organism cultures in 
activated sludge systems. part II: experimental behaviour. Water SA , 
15, 71. 
Wentzel, M. C., Dold, P. L., Ekama, G. A., and Marais, G. v. R. (1989b).  
Enhanced polyphosphate organism cultures in activated sludge 
systems. part III: kinetic model.  Water SA , 15, 89. 
Wentzel, M. C., Ekama, G. A., Dold, P. L., and Marais, G. v. R. (1990).  
Biological excess phosphorus removal - steady state process design. 
Water SA , 16, 29. 
Wilson A W and P L Dold (1998).  General methodology for applying 
process simulators to wastewater treatment plants.  Proc. 71
st Annual 
Conference of the Water Environment Federation , Miami (October).  A Brief History of Activated Sludge Process Models and Simulators  •  1-6 WRC (1984) Theory, design and operation of nutrient removal activated 
sludge processes .  Water Research Commission, P. O. Box 824, 
Pretoria, South Africa. 