Comparisons of the mortality and clinical presentations of status epilepticus in
private practice community and university hospital settings in Richmond, Virginia
Robert J. DeLorenzoa,c,*, Batool Kirmania, Laxmikant S. Deshpandea, Vamsy Jakkampudia,
Alan R. Townea, Elizabeth Waterhousea, Linda Garnetta, Viswanathan Ramakrishnanb
aDepartment of Neurology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, United States
bDepartment of Biostatistics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, United States
cDepartment of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, United States
1. Introduction
Status epilepticus (SE) is a major medical and neurological
emergency that requires immediate treatment to avoid signiﬁcant
morbidity and mortality. Status epilepticus has been estimated to
affect as many as 200,000 people in the United States annually and
causes as many as 55,000 deaths per year.1,2Despite signiﬁcant
improvements in the diagnosis and treatment of SE over the past
30 years, SE in adults is still associated with a signiﬁcant morbidity
and mortality.1–4The economic burden of SE is also high with SE
patients having 30–60% higher reimbursements than patients
admitted for other acute health problems including acute
myocardial infarction or congestive heart failure.5Thus, under-
standing the prognosis and clinical presentation of SE is ofconsiderable importance in improving the evaluation and treat-
ment of this major neurological condition.
The varied clinical presentations of SE make it difﬁcult to
study.2,6Individuals with epilepsy comprise a large group at risk to
develop SE; however, a large proportion of SE cases occurs in the
context of an acute medical or neurological illness.2,4,6,7All of the
major adult clinical studies on SE have been obtained from large
tertiary care university and medical school afﬁliated hospital-
based populations.7–16Thus, the natural clinical presentation and
mortality associated with SE in a community private practice
setting is completely unknown. Since private practice hospitals
make up the largest group of patients it is essential to determine
whether SE has the same high mortality in the private practice
hospital setting that represents the largest patient hospital
population. It is especially important to target educational
programs and treatment protocols on SE at private practicing
neurologists and intensive care physicians if SE presents with a
high mortality in this setting. Despite the importance of evaluating
the mortality and clinical presentation of SE in the private practice
setting, this population of SE patients has not been evaluated. It has
been assumed that SE in the private practice setting is less severeSeizure 18 (2009) 405–411
ARTICLE INFO
Article history:
Received 1 December 2008
Received in revised form 10 February 2009
Accepted 27 February 2009
Keywords:
Status epilepticusEtiologyEpilepsyMortality
University
Private practice community hospitalsABSTRACT
We prospectively compared the clinical course of 119 patients treated for status epilepticus (SE) in
private practice community hospitals and 344 SE patients treated in the VCU university hospitals in
Richmond, Virginia USA over a 2-year period to test the hypothesis that SE presents with the samemortality and clinical patterns in both clinical settings. Of the patients reviewed, the major etiologies for
SE were cerebrovascular disease, decreased anti-epileptic drug levels in epileptic patients, anoxia–
hypoxia, and remote symptomatic. The other etiologies included were alcohol related, trauma, centralnervous system infections, tumors, systemic infection, metabolic disorders, idiopathic, and hemorrhage.These observations provide the ﬁrst direct prospective comparison of SE present in university and
private practice community hospital settings in the same geographic area. Mortality was the highest in
the elderly population while the pediatric population had low mortality in both clinical settings. Etiologyrisk factors for outcome were similar for both the populations. The data also suggest that the higher
degree of illness severity in university hospitals may be associated with a higher incidence of SE, but not
with mortality or a different clinical presentation of the condition. The results of this study demonstratethat SE has the same mortality and is present in an essentially identical manner in university and private
practice community hospitals and underscores the fact that mortality in SE is not just associated with
tertiary care hospitals and the importance of recognizing the severity of SE in the private practice setting.
/C2232009 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author at: Virginia Commonwealth University School of
Medicine PO Box 980599 Richmond, VA 23298, United States.Tel.: +1 804 828 8969; fax: +1 804 828 6432.
E-mail address: rdeloren@hsc.vcu.edu (R.J. DeLorenzo).Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Seizure
journal homepage: www.el sevier.com/locate/yseiz
1059-1311/$ – see front matter /C2232009 British Epilepsy Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.seizure.2009.02.005
brought to you by CORE View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Elsevier - Publisher Connector and may not be associated with a high mortality. Thus, it is
essential to study SE in the private practice setting to address this
important issue and determine the natural presentation of SE in a
private practice setting and compare it to the tertiary university
studies.
The present study was initiated to utilize the Richmond SE
database to test the hypothesis that SE manifests the same high
mortality in the private practice community hospital setting as
observed in the tertiary care hospital studies. Our ﬁndings provide
the ﬁrst prospective study of SE in both a tertiary care academic
medical center and in community private practice hospitals in
Richmond, VA over a 2-year time period. Thus, the results from this
study will provide important data to test the hypothesis that the
presentation of SE in the private practice community setting has
the same mortality and clinical presentation as in a major tertiary
care center. The data demonstrate that SE has the same mortality
and is present in an essentially identical manner in both tertiary
care and private practice hospital settings.
2. Materials and methods
Patients presenting to private practice community and
university hospitals in the greater Richmond metropolitan area
were prospectively collected over the same 2-year time period
from 1988–1990 by the same team of investigators. This data base
represents a unique resource to test the hypothesis presented in
this study and to our knowledge is the only data base in the United
States that can compare a large number of SE cases in private
practice and tertiary care hospitals in the same data set, studied
with the same team of investigators and over the same time period.
We used this unique data set to conduct this study and directly
compare the mortality and clinical presentation of SE in the private
practice and university care settings. The Institutional ReviewBoard for the Protection of Human Subjects approved all data
collection and handling in this study.
3. Data collection
Data on each case was entered into the Virginia Common-
wealth University (VCU) SE database for analysis. Utilizing the
same data collection criteria and research staff to obtain
information from both private practice community and university
hospital settings greatly improved the reliability and uniformity
of the data. The private practice neurologists reported SE cases to
the VCU SE Research Project by direct contact, or by utilizing a well
publicized referral phone number staffed 24 h a day, 7 days a
week. Within 8 h of notiﬁcation, a member of the SE team
reviewed the hospital record and extracted the appropriate study
intake information. The SE research team determined if each case
met the deﬁnition of SE for inclusion in the study then reviewed
intake data weekly. Onset of SE was based upon observations from
witnesses or paramedics in non-hospital initiated SE, and
observations by nurses or physicians for hospital initiated SE.
Of the cases reported to the SE team in a prospective manner,
approximately 86% met the deﬁnitional criteria for SE and the
remaining 14% had to be excluded because the diagnosis could not
be established with certainty. All patient records were kept
completely conﬁdential by the SE data management team.
Medical records for included cases were reviewed in detail
following discharge or death. A standardized data form entry
system was completed on each patient including the following
information: demographic data, detailed seizure history, electro-
physiology data, and previous medical or neurological history,
immediate precipitating etiology of SE, laboratory studies,
hospital course, and outcome. A careful time line of each SE
event was compiled to evaluate the duration of SE and the time torecovery or mortality. Outcome was evaluated as alive or dead
within 30 days after the cessation of SE.
4. Deﬁnitions
4.1. Status epilepticus
The SE research team to determine if each case fulﬁlled the
International Classiﬁcation of Epileptic Seizures deﬁnitional
criteria for SE
17reviewed the charts and case histories of the
identiﬁed patients. SE was deﬁned as continuous or intermittent
seizure activity without regaining consciousness lasting for 30 min
or longer. Seizure duration was deﬁned as the time from the onset
of SE until both clinical and electrographic evidence demonstrated
that seizure activity had subsided. SE seizure types were deﬁned as
partial or generalized SE based on standard International
Classiﬁcation of Seizure Types and Types of Status Epilepti-
cus.7,10,17–19
4.2. Etiology
Etiologies of SE were deﬁned as the immediate precipitating
cause of SE employing established procedures.4,7Medical condi-
tions that were not directly the cause of SE or previous medical
conditions or that were not related to the initiation of SE were not
considered acute etiologies. Occasionally, SE was caused by more
than one etiology. Unknown SE represented patients that had no
identiﬁable immediate precipitating cause for SE. A large
percentage of these idiopathic cases were found to have remote
symptomatic etiologies that were deﬁned as previous episode of
cerebral vascular disease or other neurological injuries as
described.20These previous conditions were not acute at the
initiation of SE. Alcohol withdrawal SE was deﬁned as SE caused by
a documented withdrawal of alcohol. Decreased anti-epileptic
drug withdrawal was deﬁned as a case of documented cessation or
decrease of anticonvulsant medication in a patient with epilepsy
leading to the initiation of seizures and SE. Systemic infections
were deﬁned as a systemic infection without any evidence of a
central nervous system infection or meningitis. The idiopathic
etiology represented cases where no remote or precipitating eventwas identiﬁable as a cause of SE. Anoxia, hypoxia, hemorrhage,
cerebral vascular accidents (CVA), tumor, metabolic conditions,
and trauma were deﬁned as a precipitating cause of SE using
standard clinical deﬁnitions for these precipitating events.
7,21
4.3. Age
The pediatric population included patients between 1 month
and 15 years of age. The adult group included patients aged 16
years and older.
5. Results
The results in this study are directed at testing the hypothesis
that SE presents with the same mortality and clinical patterns in
both clinical settings. It is important to directly evaluate the
mortality and clinical presentation of SE in the private practice
setting and compare it to tertiary care studies to determine if SE is
associated with the high mortality. The evaluation of this study
will provide the ﬁrst evidence to test this hypothesis.
5.1. Clinical presentation
SE was a common neurological condition presenting in both
university and private practice community hospitals. The com-
bined total population in this study was composed of 59% whiteR.J. DeLorenzo et al. / Seizure 18 (2009) 405–411 406and 41% non-white patients. The mortalities for males and females
were not signiﬁcantly different in the two populations and the
Caucasian versus non-Caucasian populations had no signiﬁcant
differences in mortality between the private practice community
and university populations. The overall mortality of SE in the adult
population was 29%. The number of patients with SE was higher in
the adult population ( Fig. 1 ).
Fig. 1 A presents the number of adult and pediatric patients
present in both hospital settings. The numbers of cases in the
university hospital was higher (344 patients) than in the combined
population in the private practice community hospitals (119) over
the 2-year time period. In addition, the majority of pediatric SE
cases in Richmond were treated at the university hospital. This in
part was a reﬂection of fact that the majority of acutely ill pediatric
cases were taken by EMS to the university hospital for treatment.
Despite the differences in the number of SE cases in the two
hospital settings, both the private practice community and
university hospital studies exceeded 100 patients, allowing for
adequate comparison of the two populations.
The age distribution of SE from infancy to the elderly for
university and private practice community hospitals is shown in
Fig. 1 B and C. Both populations had a similar age distribution, with
the highest number of SE patients occurring in the elderly
population. The private practice community hospital populationmanifested a higher overall percentage of patients in the elderly
population. This in part may reﬂect the fact that the majority of
pediatric cases were treated at the university hospital ( Fig. 1 A) and
that the younger adults with more serious medical and surgical
conditions presented to the tertiary care center. However, the age
distributions were very similar for both clinical settings and
demonstrate the signiﬁcant presentation of SE in elderly patients
in both populations.
5.2. Mortality due to SE
Mortality during and after SE for university and private practice
community hospitals is shown in Fig. 2 A. The overall mortality in
the private practice community population was 31% and 27% in the
university population. There was no statistically signiﬁcant
difference in mortality between university and private practice
community hospitals. Thus, despite the tertiary care setting of the
university hospitals, the mortalities for SE in these two populations
were the same. In addition, the majority of mortality from SE
occurred after cessation of SE in both populations.
The majority of patients in both populations died at some time
interval following the control and successful treatment of SE. The
deﬁnition of mortality in this study was death during or up to 30
Fig. 1. Number of pediatric and adult patients and their age distribution present
with SE in private practice community and university hospital. (A) 344 patientspresented with SE at the university hospital while 119 SE patients presented atprivate practice community hospitals. The pediatric SE population was higher at the
university hospital. (B and C) Both hospital settings had similar age distributions for
patients from infancy to elderly. The highest number of patients occurred in theelderly (60–79) age group in both populations.
Fig. 2. Mortality during and after SE for private practice community and university
hospitals. (A) Overall mortality 31% and 27% in the private practice community anduniversity hospital populations, respectively, which were not signiﬁcantly different
from each other. The majority of mortality from SE occurred after SE in both
populations. (B) Mortality curves for patients with SE in the private practicecommunity and university populations. Percent mortality from the cessation of SEfollowing successful treatment to 30 days after SE was plotted. Mortality timecurves were almost identical for both the populations with the majority of deathsoccurring in the ﬁrst 2-week after SE. Twenty days after SE the mortality ratesleveled off, indicating that the majority of SE related deaths had reached a plateau.R.J. DeLorenzo et al. / Seizure 18 (2009) 405–411
407days after SE. Treatment of SE was essentially the same in both
clinical settings. Both private practice community and university
SE treatment protocols were well developed and were essentially
identical due to a coordinated effort in the Richmond private
practice community to provide the best possible care for SE
through physician and hospital staff education programs.
Fig. 2 B presents the percent mortality from the cessation of SE
following successful treatment to 30 days after SE for the private
practice community and university populations. Both populations
demonstrated essentially identical mortality time curves with the
majority of deaths occurring in the ﬁrst 2 weeks after SE. Twenty
days after SE the mortality rates leveled off, indicating that the
majority of SE related deaths had reached a plateau.
5.3. Age distribution of mortality
Fig. 3 shows the age distribution of mortality for university and
private practice community hospitals. The highest mortality in
both populations was seen in the elderly. Elderly patients (60 years
or older) with SE had mortality rates that exceeded 40% in both
populations. The low number of pediatric patients and the level of
medical severity of the pediatric cases in the private practice
community hospitals accounted in part for the absence of deaths in
the private practice community pediatric population. The overall
university mortality for the pediatric population was less than 5%.
This data demonstrates that the elderly patients in both clinical
populations were the highest at risk groups to develop mortality
from SE.5.4. Seizure duration and mortality
Previous studies have indicated that seizure duration signiﬁ-
cantly affected mortality in adult SE.4,7,10,18To determine if there
was a difference in mortality between patients with prolonged SE
versus non-prolonged SE, the database was divided into patients
who seized from 30 to 60 min (non-prolonged SE group) and
patients who seized for greater than 60 min (prolonged SE group).
The mortality after SE for the prolonged seizure group in the
private practice community and university was 37% and 35%,
respectively. In the non-prolonged SE group the mortality for the
private practice community and university populations was 8%
and 7%, respectively. The differences between prolonged versus
non-prolonged SE in mortality for the two populations were
statistically signiﬁcant ( p<0.05), demonstrating a signiﬁcant
effect of seizure duration in both populations. In addition, in both
the university and private practice community populations the
non-prolonged and prolonged SE groups had a very similar
mortality levels and these levels between the populations for
these two seizure durations were not statistically signiﬁcant
(Fig. 4 ). These results support the previous ﬁndings from university
studies4,7,10that seizure duration plays a signiﬁcant role in
contributing to mortality and to our knowledge provides the ﬁrst
demonstration that the same ﬁnding occurs in the private practice
community hospital SE population.
5.5. Etiologies of SE
The major etiologies of SE in both clinical settings were very
similar with CVA, withdrawal or decrease from antiepileptic drugs,
remote symptomatic, alcohol withdrawal, and anoxia and hypoxia
being the most common etiologies in adults ( Fig. 5 ). In children
infections presented as the major etiology accounting for morethan 30% of the cases in both populations (data not shown).
Because of the higher complexity of the overall patient cases in the
tertiary care center, the university hospital setting had a higher
percentage of acutely ill etiologies. The most common etiology in
the private practice community population was CVA accounting
for 38%. Decreased anti-epileptic drug, anoxia/hypoxia, and
unknown were other major etiologies. Remote symptomatic
etiologies were also major etiologies in both populations and
the majority of remote symptomatic cases were related to a
Fig. 3. Age distribution and mortality for private practice community and university
hospitals. The data present the number of patients in the database plotted againstage groups. The elderly population exhibited the highest mortality ( >40%) while the
pediatric population had a low level of mortality in both hospital settings. Theoverall mortality for the pediatric population in the university settings was lessthan 5%.
Fig. 4. Seizure duration and mortality outcome for private practice community and
university hospitals. The database was divided into patients who seized from 30–60 min (non-prolonged SE) and patients who seized for >60 min (prolonged SE).
Mortality for the non-prolonged SE group was 8% and 7%, respectively while themortality for the prolonged SE group was 37% and 35%, respectively in the privatepractice community and university hospital settings.R.J. DeLorenzo et al. / Seizure 18 (2009) 405–411
408previous CVA as described.20These cases had no acute precipitat-
ing cause of SE, but had a documented CVA or neurological insult in
the past that probably contributed to the initiation of SE. Other
minor etiologies in both populations included hemorrhage, and
tumors. Metabolic disorders, systemic infections and alcohol
related SE, central nervous system infections and trauma
represented a larger percentage of the patients in the university
population. Over 32% of the SE patients had a previous seizure
history. However, the majority of patients (68%) had no previous
history of seizures.
5.6. Etiology and mortality in SE
It was important to evaluate the mortality for each etiology for
both populations. The mortality of SE for each etiology for
university and private practice community hospital populations
is presented in Fig. 6 . The mortalities for each of the major
etiologies were very similar in the two populations. Mortalities
greater than 40% were observed for anoxia and hypoxia in both
populations. CVA in the private practice community study had
mortality greater than 40% and in the university setting the
mortality for CVA was 25%. Etiologies of tumor, metabolic
disorders, and infections also had signiﬁcant mortality in both
populations. Decreased anti-epileptic drug, alcohol related and
remote symptomatic were associated with a mortality of less than
20%. Although no mortality was observed in the hemorrhage, CNS
infection or trauma categories in the private practice community
population this may be the result of the smaller number of patients
representing these categories in this population compared to theuniversity series. Anoxia/hypoxia and CVA etiologies demon-
strated a statistically signiﬁcant association with increased
mortality. These results indicate that speciﬁc etiologies of SE are
associated with higher mortality rates as described pre-
viously.2,4,7,10
6. Discussion
To our knowledge this study provides the ﬁrst direct
prospective evaluation of SE by a coordinated research team
evaluating the presentation of SE in a tertiary referral university
hospital and the surrounding private practice community hospitals
in a deﬁned geographic area, Richmond, VA. Evaluating the
presentation of SE in the private practice setting is a major advance
in our understanding of this condition in all hospital settings and
tests the hypothesis that SE has the same mortality and clinical
presentation in tertiary care and private practice settings. The
results demonstrated that both university and private practice
community hospital populations manifested essentially identical
mortality patterns and clinical presentation of SE. This was an
important ﬁnding in this study and demonstrates that the
signiﬁcant mortality of SE described in university hospital settings
is not merely a factor of the high severity of illness associated with
tertiary referral centers. Both small and large private practice
community hospital populations in Richmond, VA were included
in this study and the mortality between these populations was not
signiﬁcantly different from the VCU university tertiary care facility.
This ﬁnding with a large prospective sample size for SE patients
indicates that the presentation of SE in these different health care
Fig. 5. Adult etiologies for SE in the university and private practice community
population. The data represent the number of patients in each category of etiologyfor the database (multiple etiologies are included for some patients). The majoretiologies of SE in both clinical settings were very similar in the two populations.
Fig. 6. Etiologies of adult patients with SE and mortality in the university and
private practice community population. The data give the number of patients ineach category of etiology for the database (multiple etiologies are included for somepatients). The mortalities for each of the major etiologies were very similar in thetwo populations.R.J. DeLorenzo et al. / Seizure 18 (2009) 405–411
409environments does not inﬂuence the mortality of this condition.
This further underscores the importance of developing prognostic
indicators for outcome and novel treatment methods for SE to
improve outcome in all clinical settings.
Although the data demonstrate that SE has essentially the same
mortality and clinical features in the private practice community
and university populations, there are several minor differences in
the presentation of SE in these populations. Cerebrovascular
accidents were the most common cause of SE in the private
practice community, representing 38% of the cases. Cerebrovas-
cular accidents were found to represent 25% of the cases in the VCU
hospital setting and have been reported to comprise 10–25% of the
cases of SE presenting in tertiary care facilities in several large
series.7–16The increased percentage of CVA related SE cases in the
private practice community hospital setting may indicate the
patient care demographics of the Greater Richmond Metropolitan
Area or may reﬂect the presentation of SE in non-tertiary care
facilities. Cerebrovascular disease is cared for in private practice
community hospitals with an equal or greater percentage than in
the university setting in Richmond, VA. However, alcohol and drug
related etiologies of SE were clearly more centralized in the tertiary
care university facilities, as demonstrated by comparing the lower
percentage of these etiologies in the private practice community
population compared with the VCU population and with previous
studies from VCU and other university-based series.1,2,4,6,7,10
The private practice community population also represented a
large number of cases diagnosed with anoxia/hypoxia. Cardiac
arrest is the most common etiology of these etiologies and is
present similarly in both hospital settings. It is also clear from
these results that SE associated with anoxia/hypoxia, CVA, tumors,
metabolic disorders and generalized infections were associated
with a high mortality in both studies despite the increased
percentage of these cases in the university population. Decreasedanti-epileptic drugs had a lower mortality rate in both series and
accounted for a similar percentage of SE cases in both populations.
Alcohol related etiologies also had a similar mortality and overall
percent of SE cases in both populations. These results conﬁrm the
lower mortality rates observed with alcohol related and decreased
anti-epileptic drugs etiologies seen in other larger university
series.
7–16The lack of mortality seen with hemorrhage, CNS
infection, and trauma in the private practice community setting
most likely represents the smaller number of patients seen in the
private practice setting with these serious neurological problems.
Many of these cases were referred to the VCU tertiary care facility
in Richmond. However, these differences may reﬂect other
differences in the severity or presentation of these cases in the
different populations and larger studies are needed to evaluate
these differences more deﬁnitively.
Clinical SE series that contain a high percentage of anti-
epileptic drug or alcohol withdrawal etiologies of SE have a lower
overall mortality rate.1,2,4,6,7,10Three series in the literature6,11,22
have indicated a lower mortality associated with SE in adults.Their series also had a large percentage of patients with alcohol
related and anticonvulsant withdrawal etiologies. The VCU
retrospective series demonstrated a lower total percentage of
patients with alcohol withdrawal and decreased anti-epileptic
medications.
4,7This was also shown in private practice commu-
nity setting. The CVA and anoxia/hypoxia represented over 55% of
the patients in the private practice population. Decreased anti-
epileptic medications and alcohol withdrawal represented only
25% of the patients. Thus, the overall mortality of 32% seen in
private practice community setting is consistent with our
previous observations and others.6The mortality associated with
SE for each etiology in the private practice setting was similar to
the mortalities observed in our large university studies4,7and
those of other investigators.2,4,6,7Age was shown to be an important factor contributing to
mortality in association with SE in both populations. A signiﬁcant
increase in mortality was demonstrated with advancing age.
Patients beyond 60 years of age have a dramatically higher
increase in mortality than younger patients. In addition, the
number of patients experiencing SE also was signiﬁcantly
increased in the later decades. These ﬁndings are consistent with
previous studies.1,2,4,6,7,10,14SE clearly is a signiﬁcant condition for
the older population and further study of this condition in the later
years is an important aspect of aging research.
This study provided direct evidence that the mortality and
clinical presentation of SE in university and private practice
community hospitals were essentially identical. Mortality, age
distribution, etiologies were nearly identical in the two popula-
tions. In addition, this study directly tested the proposed
hypothesis and demonstrated that the signiﬁcant morbidity and
mortality observed in the large academic medical centers are not
primarily the result of the tertiary care patient population, but
rather are mainly determined by the underlying pathophysiology
of SE. private practice community hospitals need to initiate SE
protocols and treatment education programs for SE with the same
vigor as academic medical centers to achieve favorable outcomes
for SE. To our knowledge this study provides the ﬁrst direct
prospective comparison of SE present in university and private
practice hospital settings in the same geographic area. Mortality
was the highest in the elderly population in both study groups. The
pediatric population in both clinical settings had a very low
mortality. Etiology risk factors for outcome were similar for both
populations. The higher degree of illness severity observed in
university hospitals may be associated with a higher incidence of
SE. Further studies are needed to evaluate the epidemiology of SE
in university and private practice community hospitals to address
these issues.
Acknowledgements
The invaluable cooperation and assistance of all of the following
private practice community neurologists in the Greater Richmond
Metropolitan Area were greatly appreciated: Drs. D. Basavaraj, J.
Brush, M. Carmichael, R. Cohen, A. Harrelson, J. Harris, J. Hennessey,E. Isaacs, S. Jaffe, B. Katchinoff, E. Leaton, S. Mathe, F. McGee, P.
Millet, J. O’Bannon, P. O’Donnell, C. Picone, L. Rennie, N. Richards, T.
Smith, B. Stelmack, P. Subramanian, R. Waller, R. White, A.
Worthington, I. Zfass and E. Zuckerman.
The generous support of the private practice community
hospitals and their administrative staff were also greatly
appreciated. This study could not have been conducted without
excellent university–community physician interactions and col-
laborations.
The authors would also like to thank Drs. J. Pellock, R. Jaitly, S.
Shinar, B.J. Wilder, Ilo Leppik and A. Hauser for their advice at
various stages of the research.
The SE clinical research grant award R01NS051505 from the
National Institutes of Health to Robert J. DeLorenzo and the Sophie
and Nathan Gumenick Neuroscience and the Markel Alzheimer’s
Research Funds supported this research.
Reference
1. DeLorenzo RJ. Epidemiology and clinical presentation of status epilepticus. Adv
Neurol 2006; 97:199–215.
2. Hauser WA. Status epilepticus: frequency, etiology, and neurological sequelae.
Adv Neurol 1983; 34:3–14.
3. DeLorenzo RJ, Pellock JM, Towne AR, Boggs JG. Epidemiology of status epilep-
ticus. J Clin Neurophysiol 1995; 12:316–25.
4. DeLorenzo RJ, Towne AR, Pellock JM, Ko D. Status epilepticus in children, adults,
and the elderly. Epilepsia 1992; 33. S4:S15–25.R.J. DeLorenzo et al. / Seizure 18 (2009) 405–411 4105. Penberthy LT, Towne A, Garnett LK, Perlin JB, DeLorenzo RJ. Estimating the
economic burden of status epilepticus to the health care system. Seizure
2005; 14:46–51.
6. Hauser WA. Status epilepticus: epidemiologic considerations. Neurology
1990; 40:9–13.
7. Towne AR, Pellock JM, Ko D, DeLorenzo RJ. Determinants of mortality in status
epilepticus. Epilepsia 1994; 35:27–34.
8. Aicardi J, Chevrie JJ. Convulsive status epilepticus in infants and children. A
study of 239 cases. Epilepsia 1970; 11:187–97.
9. Aminoff MJ, Simon RP. Status epilepticus. Causes, clinical features and con-
sequences in 98 patients. Am J Med 1980; 69:657–66.
10. DeLorenzo RJ, Hauser WA, Towne AR, Boggs JG, Pellock JM, Penberthy L, et al. A
prospective, population-based epidemiologic study of status epilepticus in
Richmond, Virginia. Neurology 1996; 46:1029–35.
11. Lowenstein DH, Alldredge BK. Status epilepticus at an urban public hospital in
the 1980s. Neurology 1993; 43:483–8.
12. Oxbury JM, Whitty CW. Causes and consequences of status epilepticus in
adults. A study of 86 cases. Brain 1971; 94:733–44.
13. Rowan AJ, Scott DF. Major status epilepticus. A series of 42 patients. Acta Neurol
Scand 1970; 46:573–84.14. Towne AR. Epidemiology and outcomes of status epilepticus in the elderly.
International review of neurobiology . Academic Press; 2007. pp. 111–27.
15. Waterhouse EJ, Garnett LK, Towne AR, Morton LD, Barnes T, Ko D, et al.
Prospective population-based study of intermittent and continuous convulsive
status epilepticus in Richmond, Virginia. Epilepsia 1999; 40:752–8.
16. Koubeissi M, Alshekhlee A. In-hospital mortality of generalized convulsive
status epilepticus: a large US sample. Neurology 2007; 69:886–93.
17. Gastaut H. Classiﬁcation of Status Epilepticus. In: Delgado-Escueta AV, Was-
terlain C, Treiman DM, Porter RJ, editors. Status epilepsticus: mechanisms of
brain damage and treatment . New York: Raven Press; 1983.
18. Lowenstein DH, Alldredge BK. Status Epilepticus. N Engl J Med 1998; 338:970–6.
19. DeLorenzo RJ, Garnett LK, Towne AR, Waterhouse EJ, Boggs JG, Morton L, et al.
Comparison of status epilepticus with prolonged seizure episodes lasting from
10 to 29 minutes. Epilepsia 1999; 40:164–9.
20. Barry E, Hauser WA. Status epilepticus: the interaction of epilepsy and acute
brain disease. Neurology 1993; 43:1473–8.
21. Engel J. Causes of human epilepsy. In: Engel J, editor. Seizures and Epilepsy .
Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis Co.; 1989.
22. Leppik IE. Diagnosis and treatment of status epilepticus. Merritt Putnam Quar-
terly 1987.R.J. DeLorenzo et al. / Seizure 18 (2009) 405–411 411