Journal of Technology and Science Education
JOTSE, 2019 – 9(3): 404-419 – Online ISSN: 2013-6374 – Print ISSN: 2014-5349
https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse. 554
TEACHING AS COACHING: EXPERIENCES WITH A VIDEO-BASED
FLIPPED CLASSROOM COMBINED WITH PROJECT-BASED APPROACH
IN TECHNOLOGY AND PHYSICS HIGHER EDUCATION
Herena Torío 
Institute of  Physics, University of  Oldenburg (Germany)
herena.torio@uni-oldenburg.de
Received September 2018
Accepted April 2019
Abstract
The role of  faculty in higher education as knowledge disseminators within the knowledge and digital
society can be completely redefined. This paper presents results from a video-based flipped classroom
approach combined with a project-oriented learning arrangement. I show that videos combined with a
project-based learning setting can be a powerful tool to facilitate the shift from knowledge dissemination
to knowledge appropriation. Besides, results show a high level of  student's satisfaction and achievement
during the course. The self-perceived competences obtained by the students during the course and those
estimated qualitatively by the lecturer on the ground of  the formative and summative evaluations reach far
beyond those possible in a similar course with a traditional teaching approach. 
Keywords – Active learning, Video-based, Flipped-classroom, Project-based, Higher education on energy
and technology. 
To cite this article: 
Torío, H. (2019). Teaching as coaching: experiences with a video-based flipped classroom combined
with project-based approach in technology and physics higher education.  Journal of  Technology and
Science Education, 9(3), 404-419. https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse. 554
----------
1. Introduction
With an enormous amount of  educational material, books and papers available per mouse-click explaining
from the more fundamental to highly complex physical principles, the role of  lecturers as knowledge
disseminators needs to be completely rethought. Information, from any topic and in virtually any level of
depth is widely available via digital technologies. In such a context the role of  higher education lecturers
should not be limited to merely making accessible contents in terms of  information and knowledge to the
students.  An  appropriate  role  understanding  of  teaching  faculty  should  rather  focus  on  knowledge
production, transformation, application and its critical appraisal instead (McDaniel et al., 2000). 
Numerous approaches such as situated learning (Wildt, 2005), research-based learning (Wildt, 2011) or
more generally stated active learning approaches (Misseyanni, Lytras, Papadopoulou & Marouli, 2018)
support this new role understanding (Blom, 2000). All of  them foster and promote strongly the so-called
"shift from teaching to learning" (Berkemeyer & Schneider, 2009: pag e 123; Schneider, Szcyrba, Welbers  &
-404-
Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
Wildt, 2009: page 5).  Teaching  activities and faculty roles in such paradigms should  create learning
environments and settings where learning process can be effectively supported by means of  suitable
coaching and consulting by the teacher. Such approaches lead to an increased students motivation while
giving also orientation and feedback (Wildt, 2011; McDaniel et al., 2000). 
However, despite a growing evidence of  the benefits of  such active learning approaches (Arnold, 2013;
Bonvillian & Singer, 2013; Dadach, 2013; Fry, Ketteridge & Marshall, 2009; Waltdrop, 2015), there is still a
big potential for fostering their implementation in engineering and physics higher education (Torío &
Brudler, 2015; Waltdrop, 2015). Innovative teaching approaches are implemented based on the personal
engagement  of  motivated  faculty  members  (Torío  &  Brudler,  2015).  The  identification  of  suitable
educational tools can greatly encourage faculty members to rearrange their course design and implement
such active teaching. In this work the combined use of  videos, a flipped-classroom and project-based
arrangement for successfully promoting such active learning settings is analyzed.
In this paper a practical experience from the implementation of  such a didactic approach, aiming at
fostering active learning by bridging the gap between theory and practice and enhanced coaching by the
lecturer by means of  a flipped-classroom methodology, is presented. Simple “slides-with-voice-over”
videos developed with relatively low faculty effort were used as a basis for establishing a flipped-classroom
approach. This enabled self-learning of  theory to happen outside the classroom and promoted discussion
and problem-solving during the presence lecture time. The theory presented in the videos needed to be
applied by the students in order to complete a project. This project-work was chosen as examination form
and intended to motivate students to achieve a deep understanding of  the theory presented in the videos. 
The main research questions in this paper address (i) whether simple videos are a suitable educational
resource able to engage students in the understanding of  complex theoretical concepts, (ii) whether the
use of  theory videos combined with project-work creates a useful coaching environment promoting a
significant learning experience. 
After a thorough description of  the created learning environment, the research methodology and main
results addressing student’s satisfaction with the course design as well as their self-perceived achievement
within it are presented.
2. The Course Design
The postgraduate level course presented here dealt with the physical principles governing the operation of
solar thermal systems and their components as well as relevant methods for assessing their performance.
The course had a workload of  90h for each student, corresponding to 3 ECTS credit points. It is part of
the compulsory curriculum of  the Master Programme “Postgraduate Programme Renewable Energy
(PPRE)” taught at the University of  Oldenburg. The course is elective to students from other master
programmes.  The  analysis  here  corresponds  to  the  following  cohorts:  7  students  from  the  PPRE
Programm; 5 students from the European Master in Renewable Energy; 1 student from the Master
Physics; 8 students from the Engineering Physics Master and 3 students from Sustainability Economics
and Management of  the University of  Oldenburg. In total 24 Students from 17 countries of  4 continents
with  previous  degrees  going  from  mechanical  and  electrical  engineering  to  physics  and  economics
attended the course. Results presented here correspond to a single course conducted from October 2017
to January 2018. 
The theory of  the course was structured following a bottom-up approach: first we dealt with the main
physical principles underlying the operation of  solar thermal system components (e.g. solar collectors,
thermal storage, heat exchangers...) in detail. Once all relevant components were introduced, the system
perspective followed, introducing  the detailed characterization  of  the system behavior and the links
between component and system behavior.
The course followed a project-based learning approach. The goal of  the course was to give students a
sound and solid understanding on the principles governing solar thermal systems, their main components
-405-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
and the main factors influencing system's performance. Based on the theory presented in the videos,
students were asked to develop a project analyzing the performance of  a solar thermal system in detail
using state-of-the-art empirical assessment methods. The group project-work was chosen as an essential
part of  the course and represented its summative examination form. The project-work aimed at sizing a
solar thermal system for a particular application for solar heat production (domestic hot water and /or
space heating supply, process heat or solar cooling supply) in a particular location and assessing its annual
performance. Paired in groups of  two, students had the choice of  defining the system application as well
as  its  location.  They  defined  their  own  particular  application  (project)  and  performed  all  required
calculations following either the F-chart or F-chart-utilizability methods (Duffie & Beckmann, 2013).
Finally, student groups presented and reported on their system design, their chosen system size and the
resulting system performance for the given application. A sensitivity analysis on the performance of  the
project as a function of  relevant system criteria (e.g. size of  the solar collector field, chosen field mass
flow, storage size, etc.) was also part of  the project work. Through the project calculations and its results
students could get a thorough understanding of  the interlinks between different system variables and their
influence on the whole system performance. 
The methods used for system performance assessment (F-chart and F-chart-utilizability methods) are
empirical methods allowing to analyze system performance soundly without requiring dynamic system
simulations, which would be out of  the scope and possible workload of  such a course. However, they are
complex methods requiring a sound understanding of  several variables and a previous accurate calculation
of  several system parameters. To facilitate the understanding of  these processes and steps, I intended to
enhance  the  coaching  time  during  the  presence  lectures.  In  order  to  maximize  the  student-lecturer
interaction and the room for coaching within the lecture time I chose a flipped-classroom approach.
Figure 1 shows the time structure of  the course for the first two weeks. Every week students received a
video-based lecture of  20-40 minutes as theoretical input with the necessary background and explanations
for thoroughly understanding the theory related to (i) either a system component or (ii) the system
performance and its assessment method. Additionally, weekly assignments related to the theory gave
students the chance to apply the theoretical knowledge to concrete steps for developing their project. The
students had 7 days to go through the video-lectures and weekly assignments at their own pace. After the
self-working time on the weekly videos and assignments, students had the full length of  the presence
lecture time to clarify doubts and questions on the explained theory.
Figure 1. Structure of  the course and timeline showing the
interaction between the videos, presence time (sessions) and
weekly assignments. Exemplary, the first two weeks and three first
presence lecture sessions are shown. The structure, with different
content, is the same for all other weeks of  the semester
Each week a presence lecture session of  90 minutes took place. Through the flipped-classroom approach
chosen the whole presence time was used for answering students´ questions on the theory. The first 30 to
-406-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
45 minutes a plenary session took place for answering existing questions collaboratively. Peer- Instruction
tools such as CliqR were used occasionally to obtain feedback on the level of  comprehension of  the
theory by the students and to motivate them to question themselves their understanding of  the theory.
The  last  60-45  minutes  were  used  to  coach  each  of  the  groups  with  their  own  specific  questions
(depending on their level of  progress) individually. 
To extend the coaching activity beyond the presence lecture time each group received a separate group
blog where they could insert and post their project results and make their progress visible to the rest of
the course participants. All other course members and the lecturer could read the blog. Group members
were the only ones with writing and editing permits for their own group blog. Hereby I intended to
provide a virtual room for coaching and giving feedback on each project progress on a more regular and
individual pace. The posted results on the blogs constituted a valuable part of  the unmarked formative
evaluation, where I could see the level of  comprehension and conceptual errors in each of  the groups
work as the project work developed. Answers of  the peer-instruction tools and collaborative discussions
during presence time were also part of  the unmarked formative evaluation during the course. 
As introduced above, the course design was complex and involved several tools and didactic milestones.
The following subsections provide detailed insight on each of  the components of  the didactic design of
the course as well as the theoretical background and motivation for using them. 
2.1. Project-Oriented Learning
Project-oriented collaborative learning settings have a strong focus on the students´ learning process and
their particular needs, requiring teachers to act as supervisors and consultants. Being a postgraduate level
course addressing such a heterogeneous students group as mentioned above represented a challenge
regarding  previous  students´  knowledge  in  the  solar  thermal  field.  The  main  aims  of  such  a
project-oriented learning setting were to (i) engage students in their learning process, (ii) facilitate it by
addressing diverse students´ interests as well as (iii) adapting the learning process to existing differences in
their previous knowledge.
The  assessment  methods  used  for  analyzing  the  performance  of  the  solar systems chosen  by  each
students group are state of  the art methods used in the scientific literature for that purpose (Duffie &
Beckmann,  2013;  Carrera ,  Camara,  Casanova,  Farré  &  Serra .,  2011;  Poles  &  Venturin,  2018).  The
application of  those methods to the self-defined project allowed the students to generate new results,
acquiring insight on the topic but also generating new knowledge rather than receiving existing knowledge
or results from the literature. The assessment methods used allowed the students to perform a sensitivity
analysis  on  their  own  results  and  system  sizing.  Thereby,  students  could  check  the  plausibility  and
meaningfulness of  their own results, contrasting them with relevant literature and with other similar
projects in the course.
Students defined their own projects, based on their previous knowledge and on their own interests.
Groups wanting to get deeper into the solar thermal systems design chose solar systems combined with
seasonal storage, solar process or solar cooling applications. In turn, groups approaching solar thermal
systems for the first time went for simple domestic hot water providing systems. This intended to actively
engage students on their own self-chosen learning process and fostered an active appropriation of  related
knowledge.
In this sense, the didactic design of  the course addresses the three main theoretical motivations for
research-based learning (Karber & Wustmann, 2015). These are: (i) participation on the scientific process;
(ii) active appropriation of  knowledge; (iii) development of  the scientifically relevant critical-reflexive
attitude. 
The timeline and project milestones proposed for the students projects was the same as for the theory
videos and weekly tasks. The tasks proposed for each week were the steps required to get the basic system
components defined and be able to perform the project calculations successfully. The unmarked formative
-407-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
evaluation and intermediate deliverables for crosschecking each project development were the results from
the proposed weekly tasks. Student group blogs, where these results and intermediate deliverables were to
be uploaded facilitated as a valuable didactic tool the feedback and formative evaluation within the course.
However, following that proposed timeline and content roadmap strictly was not compulsory. Students
could choose their own pace for developing the project.
2.2. Videos as Educational Resource for Enhancing Coaching
The use of  videos as part of  higher education teaching has increased over the last years, "challenging the
(traditional) role of  the lec turer and the format of  delivering course content via a lecture ."(Woolfitt, 2015:
page 7). There exist a wide variety of  video formats which can be used in an educational context
(Woolfitt, 2015). Great differences can be found on video features such use, length as well as technological
challenges and effort for the lecturer. Since the main purpose of  using videos in this course was to flip the
classroom and use contact time as discussion and coaching time, I chose the format of  "presentation
slides  with  voice  over"  (Woolfitt,  2015:  page  13).  This  format  is  relatively  simple  in  its  technical
implementation and, thereby, suitable for a first pilot implemen tation of  presenting the theory outside the
lecture time. 
The length seems to be one of  the most relevant parameters influencing student's engagement (Guo, Kim
& Rubin, 2014). Guo et al. (2014) found in a vast empirical study that videos lasting between 3 and 9
minutes showed the best engagement (in terms of  viewing time) from the students. For videos longer
than of  9 minutes students engagement was significantly reduced. In consequence, the study concludes
recommending  instructors  to  split  their  videos  into  smaller  pieces.  The  videos  used  in  the  course
presented in this paper had a length between 17 and 32 minutes, being well over the limit recommended as
optimum by the literature. I opted for the longer duration to test the viability and usability of  longer
videos as a compromise to reduce the processing time required from the lecturer for creating such videos
as educational resources. Students had access to the full-length videos via the Vimeo ( www.vimeo.com)
platform, where they could watch the videos at their own pace and wished frequency.
2.3. Weekly Learning Tasks
To structure the project-work during the course I used weekly assignments. These assignments were non-
compulsory proposed tasks relating the weekly theory input with their own project. In that sense the tasks
proposed were intending to help students applying the theory to their own project, thereby aiming at
fostering the transfer and link between theory and praxis. Assignments as used in the presented course are,
thus, in line with learning tasks as defined by Gravett and Vella (1999) as an open question along with the
resources students need to respond to the open question. 
Gravett and Petersen (2002) classify learning tasks in four main types: (i) inductive tasks, which are
typically used in the initial stages of  the learning process and aim at encouraging students to clarify and
question their knowledge and conceptions; (ii) input tasks, which aim at presenting new concepts but
inviting also students to question and analyze the introduced concepts and theories but also to contest,
reflect on, and challenge them; (iii) implementation tasks, aiming at a concrete development of  practice
skills related to the application of  the presented concepts, to analyze, review, question them on a concrete
context; (iv) integration tasks, which intend to consolidate the knowledge and often serve as summative
assessment tasks. 
The learning tasks used in the presented course design were mainly input, implementation and integration
tasks. The videos were input tasks. Weekly assignments were implementation tasks aiming at the concrete
transfer of  the theoretical concepts to the concrete application context of  each students group project.
Both input and implementation tasks were proposed on a weekly basis. Table 1 shows an example of
implementation tasks for given input tasks for two different weeks. 
-408-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
Week
nr.Input tasks
/ video
contentImplementation tasks/ 
Weekly assignments
2Solar
collectors1.Define the collector type which would be able to meet your demands at better
efficiency and performance. Justifyyourchoice!
2.Choose from the collector’s database two different collectors of  your chosen type
and  one  of  a  different  one.  With  the  given  collector  parameters,  calculate  the
efficiency of  the collector for two radiation conditions (300W/m2 and 1000 W/m2)
and two different temperature differences. Choose the temperature differences in
such a way that represent the demands your system should meet: e.g. maximum and
minimum  or  average  temperature  differences  for  the  season  with  greatest
demands…
3.Based on your efficiency calculations: do you need to reconsider the collector type
you chose? Or maybe your collector’s choice? If  so, repeat the previous steps until
you find a suitable solution for your case.
4Thermal
storage1.Given your particular application, infer the importance of  stratification for  the
performance of  your solar system and argue on its limits and strategies promoting it
2.Select a reasonable storage size for your system configuration. Try to predict in a
qualitative  way  the  influence  of  bigger/smaller  storage  tanks  in  the  system
performance: Why is it so? Which processes are leading to that behavior in your
particular system?
3.Select a suitable effective heat transfer coefficient for your tank and calculate the
resulting insulation thickness required assuming that the effective heat transfer could
be calculated as the analytical heat losses coefficient.
4.Based on the storage size chosen, calculate the self-discharge time for the maximum
supply temperature required for your system. Given the seasonal distribution of
your energy demands: would that be enough to overcome low radiation periods?
Table 1. Example of  the input and implementation tasks proposed for the second and fourth week of  the course
The whole project work was as such an integration task and constituted the marked summative evaluation
of  the course. It aimed at allowing a competence-oriented examination, making the links between all
knowledge on each system component and the theoretical principles governing them analyzable and
understandable, as well as to reflect on the impact and role of  different principles for the whole system
performance. The project work for the summative evaluation was presented in the form of  a short 15
minutes presentation and 6 pages (max. 5000 words) scientific paper showing the project design, its results
and conclusions.
2.4. Blogs as Coaching Tools
The  course design  presented  here  intended strongly  to  enhance the  coaching  dialogue  between  the
students and the teacher. In order to extend the possibility of  such coaching processes beyond the weekly
lecture time, seminar blogs for each of  the project-groups were settled. Seminar-blogs are a powerful tool
providing  space  for  an  ongoing  digitally-based  collaborative  communication  among  learners  (Torio ,
Behrendt, Heidkamp & Kergel,  2016). I requested students to upload their project-work and weekly
assignment results onto their own seminar-blog. This was, however, requested on a voluntary basis and
was not an examination requirement. The content created by the students was visible to the teacher at all
times, allowing a direct feedback to take place at any time beyond the lecture times.
3. Research Methodology
In order to investigate the students´ satisfaction with the course design and its different milestones, an
anonymous self-developed survey among the course participants was conducted. Responses from 17 of
the 24 participants attending the course were complete, corresponding to a participation rate of  nearly
-409-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
71% of  the students in the survey. I decided to use a non-forced-choice Likert scale with an even point
for all not open questions in order to give the students the possibility of  showing features that could have
been improved without being necessarily negative for their learning process. The survey was carried out
during the last two weeks of  the course via an online form on a voluntary basis. Besides the closed
questions, open fields for additional comments about the course were available to allow students to
formulate their main points on the strengths and weaknesses of  the course design. Due to both the low
number of  students and the fact that a self-developed and not validated questionnaire was used, no
general conclusions can be derived from the results. However, results are suitable to show plausible trends
and  interdependencies  between  the  tools  and  didactic  approaches  used  and  the  resulting  students
engagement and satisfaction with the course design and their learning experience. 
In the following sections I present the main results and insights that can be extracted from them.
4. Results and Discussion 
4.1. Long Videos as Successful Educational Resource
Figure 2 shows the average (beams) and standard deviation (error bars) of  the responses to the questions
related to the use of  long videos as input task and educational resource for presenting the theory. 
The answers show a clearly positive evaluation of  the videos used. This is in line with experiences from
other researchers using videos of  similar length (Fowler, 2014; Valero, Martinez, Pozo & Planas,  2018). All
positively formulated items regarding the videos used reached very high values on the students´ evaluation
(ranging from 4.71 to 4.24) and very low standard deviations (ranging 0.56 to 0.75). Despite their extended
length (about 20 to 30 minutes each video) and their simple layout (presentation slides with voice over)
they were estimated to be clear and understandable and, thus, very helpful to understand the theory. Also,
their role for being able to adapt the learning process to the speed of  each student (fourth beam on Figure
2) shows a positive evaluation, achieving 4.52 with a standard deviation of  only 0.62 points.
Figure 2. Average values (beams) and standard deviation (error bars) for the items related to the
use of  the videos as educational resource in the course
The negatively formulated item regarding the preference of  traditional lectures, with 2.59 points, does not
show a very clear preference of  the videos over conventional teaching modes. However, the standard
deviation of  this item is the highest in all results obtained, with a value of  1.28: two people fully agreed
-410-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
and one person agreed preferring traditional lectures. The only comment referring explicitly to these issues
was "Personally I prefer "classic" teaching as I pick up more information than through video... (since) classic classes brings
me in interaction and question mode ". Six people were undecided and chose the partly agree/partly disagree
option. A plausible reason supporting this relatively strong undecided tendency would be the students´
perception of  not having enough time to deal with their particular issues during the contact weekly lecture
hours (see section 3.3 for further insight into this issue). In turn, four people disagreed and another four
fully disagreed with the statement, respectively. Thus, most of  the students showed a positive evaluation
of  the videos as substitute for traditional theory lectures. 
4.2. The Role of  Project Work
Figure 3 shows the average (beams) and standard deviation in the responses about the project group work.
It  represented  both  an  implementation  and  integration  task  but  also  consisted  on  the  summative
examination task in the end of  the course. 
The  level  of  the  responses  is  around  4  (corresponding  to  the  answer  "I  agree")  for  all  positively
formulated questions. The evaluation of  the project work as a tool for fostering the personal learning
process (first beam in Figure 3) is predominantly positive, with an average value of  4.29 points and
showing a small standard deviation (0.59).
The contribution of  the project work to making the learning process to a great extent self-interest lead
was positively evaluated (fifth beam, with an average value of  3.94) but also shows a greater standard
deviation (0.90). Students could choose the particular application for their project (i.e. type of  energy
demands, location and resulting solar resource available). Main system components to be considered and
calculation methods were however provided as guidance. 
Figure 3. Average values (beams) and standard deviation (error bars) for the items related to the project-
oriented work during the course
The lowest value, with 3.64 points, can be seen for the role of  the weekly assignments as a help for
understanding the theory. But this item also shows the greatest standard deviation of  all questions related to
the project work, with a value of  0.96, indicating a bigger disagreement among the participants concerning
-411-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
this issue. The two comments from the students regarding this issue help clarifying the more negative
evaluation of the role of the weekly assignments as compared to the project work in the learning process: 
1.First comment: "The weekly assignments proposed were not so much useful to understand deeply the theory as it
(the theory) was more orientated to the project. I would separate the weekly tasks with "basic" questions and leave the
project as is.” The link between the weekly assignments and the project work was not transparent to
many students. This was often a matter of  discussion during the coaching sessions in the presence-
time. On the light of  this comment the orientation of  the weekly tasks (defined in this approach
mainly as input, implementation and integration learning tasks according to (Gravett & Petersen,
2002) – see section 2.3) could be redefined. Instead of being primarily oriented to develop their own
project, additional inductive tasks (Gravett & Petersen, 2002) would serve as a first intermediate link
between the theory videos and its application to the project. These inductive tasks would also serve
as a feedback for the lecturer on the interaction of  students with the video content and direct self-
control to the students on their understanding of the theory. 
2.Second comment: “It would have been great if  there was more time for the assignments work ". There was
not enough time during the presence coaching sessions to effectively coach all student groups.
The group blogs would have been of  great help for this issue. But unfortunately, only 3 of  the 12
groups used the blogs on the regularity and level of  detail required to use them as coaching tool.
Inductive tasks as proposed above may also foster more focused discussions and questions during
the presence sessions, eventually allowing more effective coaching time for the groups. 
The only negative formulated item (fourth beam in Figure 3) has a value of  2.0 and a standard deviation
of  0.79, representing a relatively strong support for the project group work chosen as examination in the
course. This is in line with the positively formulated item addressing a similar question (third beam on
Figure 3), whose average answer is clearly on the range of  "I agree", with a small standard deviation. The
main criticism of  students to the project work stated in informal talks with the lecturer, was related to the
additional workload it represented as compared to a written exam. 
4.3. Satisfaction with Coaching Time
Figure 4 shows the average (beams) and standard deviation (error bars) in the responses about the
students satisfaction with the coaching time during the presence sessions.
Figure 4. Average values (beams) and standard deviation (error bars) for the items related to the
use of  presence time as coaching time during the course
-412-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
The students evaluate the contact coaching time as positive (first beam with an average of  4.44 and a
standard deviation of  only 0.51 points). However, when it comes to the amount of  time available, i.e.
whether it was "enough" coaching time during the presence hours (second beam from the left) or the
usefulness of  the group work during the presence time when I was available to clarify their questions
(fourth  beam)  the  picture  becomes  more  negative.  Still,  values  for  these  items  are  3.88  ±0.89  and
3.81±0.83 respectively, being yet towards a positive evaluation. A couple of  comments help understanding
this trend: "I felt that for the group work during lecture time there were so many groups that sometimes not all individual
questions could be answered ." and "The coaching time was very helpful but we were competing for time (to ask questions
regarding group work) during class ". Again, a more consequent use of  the blogs might greatly help coping with
the need for coaching and support beyond the contact hours. 
4.4. Results from Summative Evaluation as Compared to a Traditional Lecture
The same course was taught one year before in a traditional lecture manner, before the establishment of
the new teaching approach analysed in this paper. The traditional approach consisted on lectures based on
power point presentations and the summative evaluation consisted on a written exam with calculation
exercises and conceptual questions on the theory. The content and topics covered were very similar in
both courses. However, the performance assessment method for solar thermal systems taught (F-Chart)
could only be understood by the students in a theoretical manner in the traditional lecture approach since
it is too complex to be part of  a written exam. Instead, the F-Chart method was the core component of
the project-work developed by the students in the teaching approach presented in this paper. The method
is complex enough to grasp and depict the behavior of  solar thermal systems for different applications. Its
application to a self-chosen project by the students allowed them to gain deep insight on the influence of
several system parameters and variables on the performance and suitable sizing of  solar thermal systems. 
Table 2 shows the main competences which were the goal in both the traditional and the new developed
teaching  modes.  The table  shows clearly  that  the  level of  competences  intended  with  the  teaching
approach presented in this paper was higher than that possible in a traditional lecture mode. The different
level  of  achievable competences  is due  to the  more  basic calculations  and  examples that  could be
performed by the students in the traditional lecture approach, resulting in a much more theoretical
approximation to the field of  knowledge. Instead, the project-work used in the new teaching approach
lead to hands-on experience applying the theoretical concepts to a real case-study, allowing more holistic
and deeper level of  knowledge and competences to  be acquired. The summative evaluation in this
approach  consisted  on  a  scientific  paper  reporting  the  main  findings  from  the  project-work.  The
evaluation criteria for the paper were (i) correctness, (ii) meaningful presentation and sound understanding
of  the concepts involved, (iii) meaningful understanding of  the interlinks between the concepts, (iv)
critical reflection on the method used, (v) critical reflection on the results achieved, (vi) coherent arguing,
(vii) proper use of  references and citing literature, (viii) clear language and arguments, (ix) consistent
structure, (x) grounded conclusions. 
Figure 6 shows a histogram with the level of  students achievement (in a percentage scale, from 0 to 100%)
obtained in the summative evaluation for both approaches. Despite the higher level of  competences
pursued in the new approach, the level of  achievement of  the students is clearly higher: around 54% of
the  students  reached  a  performance  between  95  and  100%  in  the  flipped-classroom  project-based
approach, whereas in the traditional approach only 6% of  the students reached this performance. The
average performance achieved with the traditional lecture was 82% (with a standard deviation of  8%), the
average level of  achievement in the new approach reached 93% (with a standard deviation of  5%). Six of
the students papers achieved a scientific level similar to that found in relevant literature on the topic such
as (Okafor & Akubue, 2012).
-413-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
Competences:
++ Fully addressed; + Marginally addressed; - not 
addressed at allTraditional Lecture 
(Summative Evaluation:
Written Exam)New Teaching Approach 
(Summative Evaluation:
Paper on project work
Good understanding of  the performance of  solar 
thermal system components++ ++
Good understanding of  the variables influencing the 
performance of  a solar thermal system++ ++
Understand hydraulic plans depicting different 
configurations of  solar thermal systems++ ++
Judge the suitability of  a system layout for a given 
application+ ++
Good understanding of  the relationship between 
components and system performance- ++
Understand the differences, strengths and weaknesses
of  the main parameters characterizing a solar thermal 
system´s behavior+ ++
Good understanding of  the main parameters used for
characterizing the behavior of  a solar thermal system+ ++
Ability to identify improvement options for 
enhancing the performance of  a given solar thermal 
system+ ++
Table 2. Comparison of  intended competences with the traditional and new developed teaching approaches
Figure 5. Histogram of  students performance (in %) in the summative evaluation in
the traditional lecture and video-based flipped classroom with project-work
4.5. Self-Perceived Achieved Competences
The subject-specific learning goal of  the course was to achieve a sound and critical understanding of  solar
thermal systems operation, of  their sizing methods and a deep understanding of  the physical principles
governing these systems. Figure 6 shows the self-perceived competences of  the students as compared to
those rather ambitious aims (see Table 2) after participating in the course. The answers to these items
show values between 4.59 and 4.00 with low standard deviations on the range of  0.6. This indicates a
good success of  the course in promoting a suitable and sound learning process for the students enrolled.
-414-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
Figure 6. Average values (beams) and standard deviation (error bars) for the items related to the self-perceived
competences developed by the students during the course
Despite the rather complex and ambitious learning goals set for the course (see Table 2, e.g. being able to
size  and  design  or  to  judge  the  suitability  of  a  solar  thermal  system  for  a  given  application)  the
self-perceived level of  fulfillment of  those goals is very positive. Assessing the performance of  solar
thermal  systems  requires  complex  and  extensive  calculations  able  to  depict  the  intertwining  in  the
performance between the different system components involved. Even simplified assessment methods
such  as  those  presented  in  the  course  require  a significant  amount  of  data  and  calculations  to  be
performed. Besides, sound assumptions regarding the system configuration and its layout need to be done
in order to perform the calculations. The project work during the course allowed students perform all
these  steps  with  enough  support  to  conduct  them  successfully.  The  high  level  of  self-perceived
competences by the students is in line with results from the summative evaluation shown in Figure 5. Both
results indicate that a more enhanced learning experience as with the traditional lecture teaching approach
was achieved. 
4.6. Discussion and Qualitative Assessment from the Lecturer
Due to the small number of  students participating in the evaluation and to the use of  a self-developed
questionnaire to obtain the students feedback, results presented in this paper cannot be generalized.
However, they show meaningful trends about the usefulness of  the implemented didactic concept and the
different tools used as part of  the course. 
Qualitative assessment by the lecturer indicates a higher level of  student motivation and engagement with
the field of  study than that observed by the same lecturer with a traditional teacher-centered approach in
the previous year. After teaching the course with the flipped classroom approach the number of  students
interested in developing their master thesis project in the solar thermal field increased noticeably. Results
of  the students’ performance in the summative evaluation are coherent with qualitative assessment from
the lecturer both on the competences and cognitive understanding of  the concepts presented during the
course. Despite the higher level of  students competences aimed at in the flipped-classroom approach
students’ performance was clearly higher than that achieved with the traditional teaching mode. These
results are also in line with the high level of  self-perceived competences achieved during the course by the
students (section 4.5). In this sense, results obtained are in line with those from the literature on two of
the main advantages of  flipped classroom approaches in the engineering and science education context
(Kerr, 2015; Valero et al. 2018), namely a greater level of  students’ satisfaction and better students’
performance.
-415-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
One of  the main aspects highlighted as positive by the students in informal feedback with the lecturer was
the flexibility  provided by the  videos: students  were  able to  have a look  at the  description  of  the
theoretical concepts at their own pace, as many times as they required and whenever it was most suitable
for them. Despite the length of  the used videos (20-40 minutes) and their simple design (slides with
voice-over), I could not notice any major complains about their features. Possibly the use of  timestamps
to facilitate students switching between the different chapters within a video helped them get along with
the videos in a satisfactory manner. The additional workload related to flipped-classroom approaches is a
major issue in the literature (Kerr, 2015; Valero et al. 2018). Considerations on the workload can be split
on the student’s workload during the course and the lecturer’s additional workload for preparing the
educational materials required in the flipped-classroom approach:
•Students  often  mentioned  in  informal  discussions  with  the  lecturer  the  higher  workload  as
compared to other courses with the same number of  credit points taught with teacher-centered
lectures and having a written exam as summative evaluation. However, this point was interestingly
nearly  always  mentioned  in  combination  with  the  deeper  and  more  long-lasting  learning
experience perceived by the students. Therefore, in the end it was stated to be a minor drawback
and encountered wide acceptance among the students. Students from the course whose results are
presented in this paper strongly encouraged other students to get enrolled in the course for
coming semesters mentioning the flipped-classroom video and project-based methodology as a
highlight.
•The preparation of  the educational videos for the flipped-classroom methodology, as well as the
setup of  the course and students’ blogs represented an additional workload for the lecturer. The
slide presentations used for recording the voice-over videos had been prepared by the lecturer for
a previous course following a traditional teacher-centered approach. Therefore, the additional
workload was mainly related to the recording of  the videos. For a video of  about 30 minutes (as
most of  those used in the presented course) about 60 to 90 minutes recording time was needed,
including video-post processing and multiple recordings required to correct eventual errors in the
wording and formulation of  the concepts in the first recording. However, once the videos are
prepared their use for future courses does not represent any additional workload. In turn, setting
up the students’ blogs required an additional workload of  about 10 minutes per blog. This
workload still exists for future courses, since for every new group of  students a blog needs to be
settled. The sporadic use of  the group blogs by the students could be identified as one of  the
main weak points of  the proposed approach. In the course presented here blogs were not used
consequently by most of  the groups to upload the results. Instead, the formative evaluation –
which was the main intention of  the students’ blogs - happened during the collaborative plenary
discussions or the coached group work during the presence sessions. As a result, presence time
was not enough to coach all the groups and additional time was offered by the lecturer for
coaching all the groups. This resulted in a relevant additional workload (qualitative estimations
lead to 1h per week required for this aim). This additional workload could significantly be reduced
if  blogs are consequently used by the students groups. To tackle this issue in the future, blogs can
be used for reporting project-work results as the summative evaluation of  the course. 
5. Conclusions
The  combined  use of  long  and  easy  to produce (slides  with  voice-over)  theory videos, fostering  a
flipped-classroom teaching mode, with a project-based arrangement presented here have shown to be
promising tools for successfully promoting active and significant learning. 
Despite strongly deviating from the benchmarks for educational videos found in the literature, the videos
used in this course were positively evaluated. Although additional research is required to validate the
suitability of  long videos as educational resource in graduate higher education and the resulting student
satisfaction with those, long and easy to produce theory videos used in this study showed a high level of
students satisfaction and proved to be a suitable tool for making the theory understandable. After the first
-416-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
pilot  implementation  of  such  videos  as  educational  resource  for  explaining  complex  fundamental
concepts and performance assessment methods of  solar thermal systems I found a higher level of
students’ motivation and engagement with the field of  study as well as higher students’ performance and
achievement.
Thus, I argue firstly (i) that even simple and relatively easy to produce videos are a suitable educational
tool for presenting complex theoretical concepts and secondly (ii) that videos are a suitable and very
useful tool for promoting successful flipped-classroom approaches, enabling to transform into coaching
time the presence lecture time. This result could strongly encourage lecturers and faculty members to use
tailored and self-made videos for explaining theoretical concepts within their lectures. The contribution of
the project work to make the learning process to a great extent self-interest lead was positively evaluated.
The project-work chosen also proved to represent a sound link to the videos, being a great help for
understanding the theory in them. For facilitating the link between the theory and its application into the
project work and make students their appraisal of  the theory more obvious, inductive tasks should be as a
suitable tool. Although leading to a higher workload for the students than that in other courses following a
traditional  teaching  approach,  students  were  generally  satisfied  with  the  project  work.  It  possibly
represented a strong and meaningful facilitator for the high students’ achievement and enabled the high
level of  self-perceived competences reported by the students, despite the rather complex and ambitious
learning goals. Both indicators represent a good proof  of  a significant learning experience within the
course. 
Students  reported  agreeing  with  the  helpfulness  of  using  lecture  time  as  coaching  time.  However,
additional coaching time was required beyond the presence time, representing a significant additional
workload for the lecturer. A more consequent use of  the blogs proposed as part of  the formative
evaluation could possibly reduce this mismatch. Thus, for future courses with this methodology, blogs
could be proposed as summative evaluation for presenting project work results, representing an incentive
for a more continuous use of  them in all the groups. 
Results  in  this  paper  show  encouraging  trends  for  using  video-based  flipped-classroom  approaches
combined with students project work. The simplicity of  the produced videos could encourage other
lecturers using this approach for their courses. However, implementing even this easy to produce videos
for the first time implies an additional workload for faculty. Additional coaching time beyond the presence
lecture sessions required by students also represents an additional workload which, on the contrary to
video production, would not be reduced for the same course taught in future semesters. Benefits from this
additional workload seem promising and may encourage faculty to implement such didactic approaches.
Yet, more detailed studies for quantifying the additional workload for the lecturer and students and
exploring the usability of  availavailable didactic tools (such as blogs or others) to reduce this workload are
required. 
Declaration of  Conflicting Interests 
The author declares no potential conflicts of  interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of  this article. 
Funding 
The author received no financial support for the research of  the results presented in this paper. For
publication of  this article the author thanks the DfG Open Access Publication Funds obtained from the
University of  Oldenburg.
References
Arnold R. (2013). Systemische Erwachsenenbildung - Die transformierende Kraft des begleiteten Selbstlernens . 
Baltmannsweiler: Schneider Hohengehren.
-417-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
Berkemeyer, N., & Schneider, R. (2009). Lehrerbildung in der Wissenschaft. In Wandel der Lehr- und Lernkulturen,
hrsg. (121-147). Bielefeld: Bertelsmann.
Blom, H. (2000). Der Dozent als Coach. Neuwied/Kriftel: Luchterhand. 
Bonvillian, W .B., & Singer, S.R. (2013). The Online Challenge to Higher Education. Issues in Science and 
Technology, 29(4). Online Access: http://issues.org/29-4/the-online-challenge-to-higher-education/   
Carrera, A., Camara, O., Casanova, M., Farré, M., & Serra, I. (2011). New calculation methodology for solar 
thermal systems. Prepublicació nº. 19, setembre. Departament de Matemàtiques. Available at: 
http://www.uab.cat/matematiques  https://doi.org/10.18086/swc.2011.28.05  
Dadach, Z.E. (2013). Quantifying the Effects of  an Active Learning Strategy on the Motivation of  
Students. International Journal of  Engineering Education, 29(4), 1-10.
Duffie, J.A., & Beckmann, W .A. (2013). Solar Engineering of  Thermal Processes (4th ed.). John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118671603  
Fowler, M.L. (2014). Flipping Signals and Systems - Course Structure &  Results. In IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)  (2219-2223). Florence, 
Italy.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICASSP .2014.6853993  
Fry, H., Ketteridge, S., & Marshall, S. (Eds.), (2009). A Handbook for Teaching and Learning in Higher 
Education: enhancing academic practice  (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group.
Guo, P .J, Kim, J., & Rubin R. (2014). How video production affects student engagement: An empirical 
study of  MOOC videos. Proceedings of  the first ACM conference on Learning @ Scale Conference , 
March.https://doi.org/10.1145/2556325.2566239  
Gravett, S., & Petersen, N. (2002).  Structuring Dialogue with Students via Learning Tasks. Innovative Higher
Education, 26, 281. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015833114292  
Gravett, S., & Vella, J. (1999). Learning facilitation for adults . Study guide. Johannesburg: RAU Centre for 
Distance Education.
Karber, A. & Wustmann, C. (2015). Forschendes Lehren und Lernen - Perspektiven der Akteurinnen und 
Akteure in den Blick nehmen und erforschen.  In Egger, R. et al. (Hrsg.), Forschungsgeleitete Lehre in einem 
Massenstudium, Lernweltforschung  ,13, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-
03231-9_2 
Kerr, B. (2015). The flipped classroom in engineering education: a survey of  the research. International 
Conference on Interactive Collaborative Learning (ICL) IEEE , (815-818). Florence, Italy. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICL.2015.7318133  
Missenyanni, A., Lytras, M.D., Papadopoulou, P ., & Marouli, C. (2018). Active Learning Strategies in 
Higher Education: Teaching for Leadership, Innovation, and Creativity. Innovative Higher Education , 25(2). 
https://doi.org/10.1108/9781787144873  
McDaniel, E.A., Dell Felder, B., Gordon, L., Hrutka, M.E., & Quinn, S. (2000). New Faculty Roles in 
Learning Outcomes Education: The Experiences of  Four Models and Institutions. Innovative Higher 
Education (2002), 26, 281. 
Okafor, I.F., & Akubue, G. (2012). F-chart Method for Designing Solar Thermal Water Heating Systems. 
International Journal of  Scientific and Engineering Research , 3(9), September, 69-75.
Poles, S., & Venturin, M. (2018). Design and modeling the utilizability F-chart method for active solar 
energy systems. Open Source Engineering . Available at: 
http://www.openeering.com/sites/default/files/Active_Solar_Energy_Systems.pdf  
-418-Journal of  Technology and Science Education – https://doi.org/10.3926/jotse.554
Schneider, R., Szcyrba, B., Welbers, U., & Wildt, J. (2009).  Einleitung. In: Wandel der Lehr- und Lernkulturen 
(5-13). Bielefeld: Bertelsmann
Torio, H., Behrendt, T., Heidkamp, B., & Kergel, D. (2016). Fostering Participation and Transparency in 
Laboratory Higher Education - Experiences with the "Seminar Blog". In P roceedings of  the International 
Conference New Perspectives in Science Education - 5th Edition  (337-342). Florence 16-18 March.
Torío, H., & Brudler, E., (2015). Competence in Teaching in the Renewable Energy Field -an 
Encouragement for Exchange. In: Proceedings of  the International Conference New Perspectives in Science 
Education - 5th Edition (686-692). Florence 16-18 March..
Valero, M.M., Martinez, M., Pozo, F., & Planas, E. (2018). A Successful Experience with the Flipped 
Classroom in the Transport Phenomena Course. Education for Chemical Engineers. 26, 67-79. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ece.2018.08.003  
Waltdrop, M. (2015). Why we are teaching science wrong, and how to make it right. Nature, International 
weekly journal of  science , 523, 272-274. https://doi.org/10.1038/523272a  
Wildt, J., (2005). Vom Lehren zum Lernen hochschuldidaktische Konsequenzen aus dem Bologna-Prozess für Lehre, 
Studium und Prüfung. Kurzfassung eines Vortrags zur: Expertentagung des EWFT, From Teaching to 
Learning, Berlin. Available at: http://www.ewft.de/files/Wildt-05-Vom%20Lehren%20zum%20Lernen-
hochschuldidaktische%20Konsequenzen.pdf  
Wildt, J. (2011). “Forschendes Lernen” als Hochform aktiven und kooperativen Lernens . In Diedrich, R. 
(Hrsg.), Ökonomisierung der Wissensgesellschaft. Wie viel Ökonomie braucht und wie viel Ökonomie verträgt die 
Wissensgesellschaft (93-108). Berlin: Duncker&Humblot. 
Woolfitt, Z. (2015). The effective use of  videos in higher education.Lectoraat. Teaching, Learning and 
Technology Inholland University of  Applied Sciences . October. Available at: 
https://www.inholland.nl/media/10230/the-effective-use-of-video-in-higher-education-woolfitt-october-2015.pdf
Published by OmniaScience ( www.omniascience.com ) 
Journal of  Technology and Science Education, 2019 ( www.jotse.org) 
Article’s contents are provided on an Attribution-Non Commercial 4.0 Creative commons International License.
Readers are allowed to copy, distribute and communicate article ’s contents, provided the author ’s and JOTSE
journal’s names are included. It must not be used fo r commercial purposes. To see the complete licence contents,
please visit https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ .
-419-