1 МИНИСТЕРСТВО  ОБРАЗОВАНИЯ  И НАУКИ РОССИЙСКОЙ  ФЕДЕРАЦИИ  
НАЦИОНАЛЬНЫЙ  ИССЛЕДОВАТЕЛЬСКИЙ   
ТОМСКИЙ  ГОСУДАРСТВЕННЫЙ  УНИВЕРСИТЕТ  
Химический  факультет  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
ПОЛИФУНКЦИОНАЛЬНЫЕ  
ХИМИЧЕСКИЕ  МАТЕРИАЛЫ   
И ТЕХНОЛОГИИ  
 
 
Материалы  Международной  научной  конференции  
21–22 мая 2015 г . 
 
Том 3 
 
 
 
  
Томск  
Издательский  Дом Томского  государственного  университета  
2015   
brought to you by CORE View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by Tomsk State University RepositoryСекция 4. Химико -аналитический контроль и мониторинг веществ, материалов и объектов окружающей среды  
159 УДК 543.544.45  
ЦВЕТОМЕТРИЧЕСКОЕ ОПРЕДЕЛЕНИЕ РОДАМИНА И ЭОЗИНА В 
НЕФТЯНЫХ МЕСТОРОЖДЕНИЯХ  
 
Гавриленко Михаил Алексеевич, канд. хим.  наук, вед. науч. сотр.  Лаборатории химической 
экологии, Национальный исследовательский Томский государственный университет, химический 
факультет, 634050, Россия, г. Томск, пр. Ленина, 36, E-mail: dce@mail.ru  
Нечаева Анастасия Петровна , студент, Национальный исследовательский Томский 
государственный университет, химический факультет, 634050, Россия, г.  Томск, пр. Ленина, 36,  
E-mail: stasy 93@ sibmail .com  
Газиева Елизавета Александровна, студент, Национальный исследовательский Томский 
государственный университет, химический факультет, 634050, Россия, г.  Томск, пр. Ленина, 36,  
E-mail: bjuice93@mail.ru   
Гавриленко Наталия Айратовна, канд. хим.  наук, доцент к афедры аналитической химии, 
Национальный исследовательский Томский государственный университет, химический факультет, 
634050, Россия, г. Томск, пр. Ленина , 36, E -mail:  gavrilenko@mail.tsu.ru   
 
COLORIMETRIC  DETE RMINATION OF RHODAMINE AND EOSINE IN 
OIL-WATER RESERVOIR  
 
Mikhail A. Gavrilenko , Ph.D.,  Leading  Researcher of Lab Chemical Ecology, National Research Tomsk 
State University, Chemistry Department, 36, Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia, E-mail: dce@mail.ru  
Elizaveta A. Gazieva,  student, National Research Tomsk State University, Chemistry Department, 36, 
Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia, E -mail: bjuice93@mail.ru   
Anastasiya P. Ne chaeva,  student, National Research Tomsk State University, Chemistry Department, 36, 
Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia, E -mail: stasy93@sibmail.com   
Natalia A. Gavrilenko, Ph.D., Associate  Professor of Departme nt of Analytical Chemistry, National 
Research Tomsk State University, Chemistry Department, 36, Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia,  
E-mail: gavrilenko@mail.tsu.ru  
 
Relevance  of the work  is the detection limi ts of the method enables the simultaneous detection of rhodamine and eosine 
used as water or water -oil tracers in large reservoirs.  
The main aim of the study:  Determination of the rhodamine and eosine with a simultaneous separation from the sample 
matrix, choosing the right sorbent material is a very important step. The PMM is organic polymer, theoretically the   
protonated and the deprotonated molecules can be used for extraction.  
The methods used in the study: colorimetric analysis  
The results:  Dyes were enriched out of 50 mL sample and extracted with 1 plate of PMM. The volume ratio results into 
an enrichment factor 380. Extraction efficiencies of dyes were determined by comparing after SPE of water and oil -
water samples containing 2 mg/L of each. The acc uracy and precision of the results of the determination of the test 
components were verified by the standard addition method.  
Key words:  rhodamine, eosine, oil reservoir, trace monitoring, ecology . 
 
Rhodamine and eosine are suitable water tracers in oil re servoirs, ground and soil water 
studies [1,  2]. Currently this dyes are tested as indicators in leaching studies for carbon 
sequestration techniques. The main advantage of xanthene dyes are due to their similar chemical 
and physical behavior and their larg e number the possibility of conducting several simultaneous 
studies at the same reservoir or location without interference [3,  4]. Because of high dilution in 
large reservoirs and high cost for most of the tracers, enhancing their detection limits is still  of great 
importance. Because of the high salinity and organic compounds in samples of oil reservoir studies, 
capillary electrophoresis and HPLC –UV are less suitable techniques for determination at trace level 
due to unwanted interferences in detection or separation [5 –8]. Therefore not applicable for a 
selective solid phase extraction of xanthene dyes from highly saline reservoir samples. The 
detection limits of the method described in this paper enables the simultaneous detection of 
rhodamine and eosine u sed as water or water -oil tracers in large reservoirs.  Полифункциональные химические материалы и технологии  
160 The interactions between dyes and the immobilized in PMM reagents were studied by solid -
phase spectrophotometry under batch conditions [9]. For this purpose, reagent was put into 50.0 mL 
of an analyte  solution of different concentrations and pH and stirred with PMM for 5 –30 min (Fig. 
1,2). After that absorption spectra or absorbance of PMM was measured. Besides, visible color 
changes of PMM were estimated with digital imaging by means of a scanner. The  PMM image was 
captured and transferred to a computer and the color was interpreted using imaging software where 
the colorimetric data in RGB format were related to the concentration of the dyes [10, 11].  
With regard to the adsorption of adsorbates on synt hetic polymeric adsorbent PMM in water 
and water -oil solution, hydrophobic interaction is usually considered to be a dominant driving force. 
When the adsorbates are not easily water -soluble, the adsorption will be significantly reduced 
because of the polar ity mismatching between the adsorbates and the polymeric matrix.  
The working curve of the spectra absorbency of the standard rhodamine and eosine solution 
with different known concentrations was firstly measured, and two well fitted regression equat ions, 
A = 0,23C+0,04 (for rhodamine) and A = 0, 07376C (for eosine), were achieved with the correlation 
coefficient R higher than 0,999 in diapason 0, 05–50 mg/L . The absorbency of the rhodamine and 
eosine solution adsorbed by PMM was measured and the equilibrium concentration, was calculated 
based on the working curves.  
 For separating analytes from interfering sample matrices and for simultaneous 
preconcentrating, solid -phase extraction is a well suited technique, especially when the analytes are 
contained in com plex environments. For a successful enrichment of the rhodamine and eosine with 
a simultaneous separation from the sample matrix, choosing the right sorbent material is a very 
important step. The PMM is organ ic polymer, theoretically the protonated and the  deprotonated 
molecules can be used for extraction. Nevertheless, the high content of inorganic ions in aqueous 
reservoir samples will overload any sorbent. However, the solid -phase extraction material will resist 
the high organic load solved in aqueous sa mples and still enrich the different adsorbates.  
The signal -to-noise ratio is the most frequent parameter used to report the diapason 
concentration (RDC) and the limit of detection (LOD). In this study, the LOD was defined as the 
real concentration requir ed to produce a signal -to-noise ratio of three. The medial for the rhodamine 
was found to be approximately 0,06 mg/L and 1, 2 mg/L in case of eosine. The LOD discounts the 
solid -phase extraction step. Including the enrichment, the detection limits lower dow n by factor 
380.  To proof  the capability of the SPE, the extraction efficiency (EE) was determined. Since the 
SPE is followed by esterification the extraction efficiency instead of the recovery rate is obtained.  
The ratio between sample volume before an d after solid -phase extraction equals to the 
enrichment factor. The concentration of the rhodamin or eosin before SPE is known. The 
concentration after SPE is the product of the concentration prior to SPE multiplied with the 
enrichment factor.  
Conclusions  
Adsorption of rhodamine into PMM was studied in batch mode. The effects of various 
operating conditions, namely, pH, initial dye concentration and temperature were investigated for 
the batch operation. The equilibrium process was investigated as well. The adsorption of rhodamine 
occurred in the pH range from 3 to 12, a chieving maximum values at pH 5 –12. The complete 
sorption on 0.6 mg of the PMM was attained for 150 –170 mL of the solution. For lower initial 
concentration of the dye, the adsorption is very f ast. After 210 min of opera tion, the dye adsorption 
was 99, 2 % for an initial dye concentration of 0.5 mg/L but 46  % for 50 mg/L.  
 
References  
1. Chiang  T.-L., Wang  Y.-C., Ding  W.-H. Trace determination of rhodamine B and rhodamine 6G dyes in aqueous 
samples by solid -phase extraction and high -performance liquid chromatography coup led with fluorescence detectio n // 
J. Chin. Chem. Soc. 2012. Vol. 59. P.515–519. 
2. Desiderio  C., Marra  C., Fanali  S. Quantitative analysis of synthetic dyes in lipstick by micellar elec troki netic 
capillary chromatography // Electrophoresis.  1998. Vol. 8–9. P. 1478–1483.  Секция 4. Химико -аналитический контроль и мониторинг веществ, материалов и объектов окружающей среды  
161 3. Yan J., Xu Y., Zhu  H. Test and the monitor techniques o f waterflood front and fracture //  Fault -block Oil & Gas 
Fiel. 2005. Vol.12. P. 59–62. 
4. Gavrilenko M.A. Trace Determ ination of Rhodamine and Eosine in Oil -Water Reservo ir Using Solid -Phase 
Extraction / M.A. Gavrilenko, N.A. Gavrilenko, S.K. Amerkhanova, A.S. Uali, A.A. Bilyalov / / Advanced Materials 
Research. 2014. Vol.880. P.  276–281. 
5. Gavrilenko  M.A. , Gavrilenko  N.A. Polymethacrylate sorbent for solid phase extraction of amines.  Mendeleev 
Communication . 2006. N o 2. P.117–119. 
6. Gavrilenko  M.A. , Gavrilenko  N.A. , Mokrousov  G.M. , Preconcentration of phenols on a polymethacrylate 
sorbent for their gas -chromat ographic determin ation in water //  J. Analytical Chemistry. 2006. Vol. 61. P.216–218. 
7. Huang  J.-H. Adsorption of rhodamine B and methyl orange on a hypercrosslinked polymeri c adsorbent in 
aqueous solution / J. -H. Huang, K. -L. Huang, S. -Q. Liu, A.T. Wang, C. Yan // Colloids and Surface s A: Phy sicochem. 
Eng. Aspects. 2008. Vol. 330. P.55–61. 
8. Optical sensors: Industrial, Environmental and Diagnostic Applications, Narayanaswamy, R. and Wolfbeis, O.S., 
Eds., New York: Springer, 2004 . 
9. Kim H.N. Recent progress on polymer -based fluo rescent  and colorimetric chemosensors. / H.N. Kim, Z. Guo, 
W. Zhu, J. Yoon a nd H. Tian // Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011. Vol. 40.  P.79–93. 
10. Chatterjee  D., Ruj  B., Mahata  A. Adsorption and photocatalysis of colour removal from waste water using flyash 
and sunlight //  Cataly sis Communications. 2001. Vol. 3 –4. P.113–117. 
11. Mcheik  A. H. , El Jamal  M. M. , Kinetic study of the discoloration of rhodamine B w ith persulfate, iron activation 
// J. Che mical Technology and Metallurgy. 2013. Vol. 48. P.357–365. 
 
 
 
 
УДК 543.544.45  
ТВЕРДОФАЗНАЯ ЭКСТРАКЦИЯ И ХРОМАТОГРАФИЧЕСКОЕ 
ОПРЕДЕЛЕНИЕ ФТОРБЕНЗОЙНЫХ КИСЛОТ В НЕФТЯНЫХ 
МЕСТОРОЖДЕНИЯХ  
 
Гавриленко Михаил Алексеевич, канд. хим.  наук, вед. науч. сотр.  Лаборатории химической 
экологии, Национальный исследовательский Томский государственный у ниверситет, химический 
факультет, 634050, Россия, г. Томск, пр. Ленина, 36, E-mail: dce@mail.ru  
Егошина Анастасия Викторовна, студент, Национальный исследовательский Томский 
политехнический университет, химический факуль тет, 634050, Россия, г.  Томск, пр. Ленина, 30,  
E-mail: stasy 93@ sibmail .com  
Кирсанова Инна Вячеславовна, студент, Национальный исследовательский Томский 
политехнический университет, химический факультет, 634050, Россия, г.  Томск, пр. Ленина, 30,  
E-mail: bjuice93@mail.ru   
Гавриленко Наталия Айратовна, канд. хим.  наук, доцент кафедры аналитической химии, 
Национальный исследовательский Томский государственный университет, хими ческий факультет, 
634050, Россия, г. Томск, пр. Ленина , 36, E -mail: gavrilenko@mail.tsu.ru   
 
SOLID PHASE EXTRACTION AND CHROMATORGAPHIC 
DETERMINATION OF FLOUROBENZENE ACIDS IN OIL -WATER 
RESERVOIR  
 
Mikhail A. Ga vrilenko, Ph.D.,  Leading  Researcher of Lab Chemical Ecology, National Research Tomsk 
State University, Chemistry Department, 36, Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia,  
E-mail: dce@mail.ru  
Inna V. Kirsanova,  student, Natio nal Research Tomsk Polytechnic University, Chemistry Department, 30, 
Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia, E -mail: bjuice93@mail.ru   
Anastasiya V. Egoshina,  student, National Research Tomsk Polytechnic University, Ch emistry Department, 
30, Lenina Avenue, Tomsk, 634050, Russia, E -mail: stasy93@sibmail.com   