Proceedings of the 8th World Congress on Civil, Structural,  and Environmental Engineering (CSEE'2 3) 
Lisbon, Portugal  – March  29 – 31, 2023  
Paper No. ICEPTP  134 
DOI: 10.11159/iceptp23.134 
ICEPTP 134- 1  
Selective Removal and Degradation of Ciprofloxacin  Bearing 
Wastewater by HKUST -1  
 
Divya Dixit1, Sudipta Sarkar1  
1 Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee  
Roorkee, India  
ddixit@ce.iitr.ac.in ; sudipta.sarkar@ce.iitr.ac.in  
 
 
The current  sewage treatment cannot remove many emerging contaminants, including antibiotics which at tiny 
concentrations can give rise to antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in the bacteria. Several researchers have pointed out that most 
such AMR bacteria (ARB) get produced at sewage treatment plants (STPs). Due to conducive growth conditions, there is a 
natural selection of ARBs resulting in selective proliferation  [2]. The STPs generally do not practice rigorous disinfection of 
the treated wastewater to avoid the generation of disinfection by- products . Thus, there is a high risk of the spread of ARBs 
from the STPs, thus posing a potential public health threat . Therefore, it is required to prevent the development of ARBs 
within the STPs. The fundamental working principle of the STPs involves providing conducive conditions for the exponential 
growth of microbes that degrade the organic matter in the wastewater. Tiny concentrations of antibiotics and favorable 
growth conditions cause natural selection and proliferation of ARBs. Thus, the only strategy to check the growth of ARB in 
STPs is to remove the antibiotics before the sewage enters the biological treatment unit of the STP. Efficient treatment 
requires selective removal and selective destruction of trace concentrations of antibiotic residues from the background of 
overwhelmingly high concentrations of organic matter, which is a difficult task. Currently, all remediation technologies 
either target treating treated wastewater post -biological unit or lack selectivity and thus are cost- prohibitive  [3,4] . In this 
study, the idea is to  develop a highly effective process for the selective degradation of antibiotic ci profloxacin from the 
background of high concentrations of organic matter, i.e., wastewater entering the STPs [1]. 
Fundamentally,  the method combines highly selective adsorption of ciprofloxacin by metal organic framework HKUST -
1 followed by the destruction of the ciprofloxacin by advanced oxidation process (AOP). HKUST -1 was synthesized by the 
solvothermal method, and FTIR, XRD, and EDX -SEM analysis confirmed its structural properties. The antibiotic selected 
for the study , i.e., ciprofloxacin , has dissocia tion constants pKa1 and pKa2 as  6.1 and 8.7. At pH less than 6.1, protonation 
of the amine group occurs in piperazine moiety ; thus, ciprofloxacin mainly exists as cations. Also, at a pH greater than 8.7, 
ciprofloxacin molecules behave as anions due to the loss of protons from the carboxylic group. The adsorption capacity of 
HKUST -1 came out to be 61.6 mg/g with the following reaction conditions : [ciprofloxacin]= 1ppm, pH 8, reaction volume 
=200 ml, [Hkust -1]= 10mg, time=40 minutes. Premodified (with a photocatalyst i.e. TiO2 HKUST -1 mineralized the target 
compound ciprofloxacin under UV light within 15 minutes, and the catalyst was regenerated for different cycles.  
The adsorbent HKUST -1 and the target antibiotic molecules (ciprofloxacin) are held by more than two interactions, 
namely electrostatic (ion exchange), hydrophobic, and Lewis acid -base interactions, thus giving rise to immense selectivity. 
Given the novelty of the process, cost -effectiveness, and the need of the hour, the material and process wou ld find commercial 
success when realized.  
 
References  
[1] T. J. Al -Musawi, A. H. Mahvi, A. D. Khatibi, & D. Balarak, “Effective adsorption of ciprofloxacin antibiotic using 
powdered activated carbon magnetized by iron(III) oxide magnetic nanoparticles,” J. of Por. Mat., vol 28, no.3, 835–
852,2021.  
[2] Y. Cai, T. Sun, G. Li, & T. An, “Traditional and Emerging Water Disinfection Technologies Challenging the Control 
of Antibiotic -Resistant Bacteria and Antibiotic Resistance Genes” ACS ES&T Engineering, vol. 1. no. 7, 1046–
1064,2021.   
ICEPTP 134- 2 [3] Osińska, M. Harnisz, E. Korzeniewska, “Prevalence of plasmid -mediated multidrug resistance determinants in 
fluoroquinolone -resistant bacteria isolated from sewage and surface water” Env. Sci. and Pol. Res., vol. 23, no. 11, 
10818–10831,2016.  
[4] Y. Wang, L. Zhang, “Improved performance of 3D hierarchical NiAl -LDHs micro -flowers via a surface anchored ZIF -
8 for rapid multiple -pollutants simultaneous removal and residues monitoring”, J. of Haz. Mat., vol. 39, no. 5, 2020.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 