See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/233631268
Advanced Oxidation Processes for Water and Wastewater T reatment
Article    in  Recent P atents on Engineering  · No vember 2010
DOI: 10.2174/187221210794578574
CITATIONS
86READS
4,926
2 author s:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
EU H2020 ER A-MIN 2 BIOCritic alMe tals View pr oject
The ar senic pr oblem in Latin Americ a View pr oject
Mart a I Litt er
National Univ ersity of Gener al San Martín
211 PUBLICA TIONS    7,819  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Natalia Quici
National Scientific and T echnic al R esearch Council
27 PUBLICA TIONS    596 CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Mart a I Litt er on 15 May 2014.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file. Recent Patents on Engineering  2010,  4, 217-241  217 
 1872-2121/10 $100.00+.00 © 2010 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.  Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes for Water and Wastewater 
Treatment 
Marta I. Litter*1,2,3 and Natalia Quici4 
1Gerencia Química, Comisión Nacional de Energía Atómica, San Martín, Prov. de Buenos Aires, Argentina, 2Consejo 
Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Universidad Nacional de Gral. San 
Martín, San Martín, Prov. de Buenos Aires, Argentina, 4Photocatalysis and Photoreaction Engineering, Department of 
Chemical and Environmental Engineering, The University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK 
Received: June 7, 2010; Accepted: September 15, 2010; Revised: August 17, 2010  
Abstract: Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) are excellent systems for remediation of contaminated wastewaters 
containing recalcitrant organic pollutants. The most studied AOPs are photochemical-based processes (PAOPs), as UV/hydrogen peroxide, heterogeneous photocatalysis (HP), photo-Fenton (PF), UV plus ozone and combination of these technologies. All AOPs are based on the production of very reactive species (especially hydroxyl radicals, HO
•) able to 
degrade or transform chemical pollutants, provoking u ltimately total mineralization. One of the major drawbacks of AOPs 
is that the operational costs are relatively high compared to less expensive technologies such as biological treatments, use of activated carbon, etc. However, these technologies can be used combined with themselves or with conventional tech-nologies. In spite of a huge amount of scientific publications, applications and patented methods on PAOPs are scarce. In this article, a brief review on the most used PAOPs, together with recent patents on the field are presented. The patents describe mostly inventions on HP and PF, most of them using catalysts supported on membranes, perovskites, zeolites or 
other materials, and combination of PAOPs with conventional technologies. 
Keywords:  Advanced oxidation processes, membranes, nanoparticles, ozonation, photo-Fenton, TiO 2, UV/hydrogen peroxide, 
supported photocatalysts, zerovalent iron. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 Historically, different methods have been used for treat-
ment of industrial and domestic wastewaters, drinking water 
purification and disinfection, ultrapurification of water for 
especial uses (pharmaceutics or microelectronics), etc. In most cases, anthropogenically polluted water can be effec-tively treated by conventional methods, such as biological processes, adsorption on activated carbon or other materials, thermal oxidation, chlorination, ozonation, flocculation-
precipitation, reverse osmosis (RO), etc. However, in some 
cases, conventional procedures are not adequate to reach the degree of purity required by international or local regulations or by the subsequent use of the effluent. In these cases, Ad-vanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) or Advanced Oxidation Technologies (AOTs) are efficient novel methods for water 
treatment that permit the total or partial elimination of com-
pounds resistant to conventional treatments, reduction of toxic-ity or destruction of pathogen microorganisms.  
 AOPs are based on physicochemical processes that pro-
duce powerful oxidative species like the hydroxyl radical 
(HO
•), whose standard redox potential is 2.8 V1.  
 
Address correspondence to this author at Gerencia Química, Comisión 
Nacional de Energía Atómica, Av. Gral. Paz 1499, 1650 San Martín, Prov. 
de Buenos Aires, Argentina; Tel: +5411 6772 7016; Fax: +5411 6772 7886; 
E-mail: litter@cnea. gov.ar 
                                                
1 All standard reduction potentials given in this work are vs. NHE.  Other reactive oxygen species (ROS) like HO•,  
O2•-/HO 2•, H 2O2 are also formed and contribute to the redox 
processes enabling the transformation of the target pollutant. 
Depending on the physicochemical process leading to the 
formation of these species, AOPs can be divided into non-photochemical and photochemical processes. If light irradia-tion of low UV-visible fluence is provided, the second group would require less energy consumption and fewer amounts of chemicals than the second type of processes. Thus, photo-
chemical processes are at present more widely employed. 
Most common AOPs are listed in Table 1. 
 Hydroxyl radicals formed in AOPs react principally via 
hydrogen abstraction (eq. (1)), electrophilic addition to  
systems (eq. (2)), and electron transfer reactions (eq. (3)) [1]: 
HO
• + RH  R• + H 2O (1) 
HO• + ArX  HOArX• (2) 
HO• + RX  RX•+ + HO- (3) 
where R represents an aliphatic chain and Ar an aromatic 
group. In the case of aromatic compounds, a hydroxylation of the ring might occur with a subsequent ring opening after successive HO
• attacks, giving place to conjugated structures 
or organic acids. In every case, the process can lead to the 
total mineralization of the compound. 
 AOPs are developed and commercialized to a variable 
degree and are undergoing constant change as technological advances take place. At present, UV/H
2O2, UV/O 3,  218    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
UV/H 2O2/O3, PF and HP are totally or partially commercial-
ized.  
 This review will focus on the description and advances 
related with main PAOPs from last years (ca. 2005), treating only those technologies mentioned in recent patents. The article will include studies of combination of individual 
AOPs and examples of patents. Previous revisions on the 
subject, including AOPs not cited here can be found, for ex-ample, in references [2-14]. 
2. PHOTOCHEMICAL ADVANCED OXIDATION 
PROCESSES 
2.1. UV/H
2O2  
 The oxidizing power of hydrogen peroxide can be sensi-
bly improved by HO• generation through cleavage of the  
O-O union with photons of high energy (  < 280 nm) [11]. 
The reaction has a low quantum yield ( HO• = 0.5) due to 
rapid recombination of the radicals in solution, and produces 
almost quantitatively one HO• per quantum of radiation ab-
sorbed in the 200-300 nm range:  
H2O2 + h  2 HO• (4) 
 H 2O2 photolysis is usually performed with low- or me-
dium-pressure mercury vapor lamps. Almost 50% of the 
energetic consumption is lost in the form of heat or emis-sions less than 185 nm, which are absorbed by the quartz jacket. Generally, cheap germicidal lamps are used; how-ever, since H
2O2 absorption is maximal at 220 nm, it is more 
convenient to use Xe /Hg lamps that - although more expen-
sive - emit in the 210-240 nm range. 
 In addition to H 2O2 ( = 18.6 M-1 cm-1 at 254 nm), other 
species can absorb photons at these short wavelengths, and they can act as light filters. However, if the contaminants can be directly photolyzed, this may improve the efficiency of 
the oxidative destruction process. Since the intensity of UV radiation decays exponentially towards the bulk of the solu-
tion, it is necessary to establish conditions of turbulent flow 
to renew continuously the solution surrounding the luminous source. The UV fluence rate [15] varies with distance from the lamp and it is a function of the absorptive characteristics of the media through which the UV radiation passes. Both the organic contaminant and H
2O2 may absorb UV radiation, 
reducing the transmitted fluence rate and changing the effec-
tiveness of HO• production throughout the photoreactor. Re-
flection, refraction, shadowing, and lamp characteristics in-fluence also the radiant power distribution within a UV reac-tor [16]. 
 In the presence of oxygen and organic compounds, mul-
tiple pathways are operative in the UV /H
2O2 system involv-
ing the generation of hydroxyl, organic and organic peroxyl radicals [5]. 
 In alkaline media, the photochemical process is more 
efficient since the concentration of the conjugate anion of 
hydrogen peroxide increases with pH (eq. (5)), and this spe-cies has a higher absorption coefficient ( 
254 = 240 M-1 cm–1) 
than H 2O2, favoring light absorption and increasing HO• 
production [5]. 
H2O2  HO 2- + H+      pK a = 11.6 (5) 
 However, a high pH should be avoided because bicar-
bonate and carbonate ions (coming from the mineralization or present in the waters) are competitive HO
• trapping spe-
cies. 
 In most degradations performed by UV /H2O2, optimum 
values for H 2O2 concentration have been found, beyond 
which an inhibitory effect takes place [17]. At high H 2O2 
concentrations, competitive reactions occur in accordance with the following scheme [11]: 
HO
• + H 2O2  HO 2• + H 2O (6) 
HO 2• + H 2O2  HO• + H 2O + O 2 (7) Table 1. Advanced Oxidation Processes 
Photochemical Processes  
Non-Photochemical Processes 
Type of Process  Irradiation Wavelength Range ( /nm) 
Alkaline ozonation (O 3/HO-) Water photolysis in vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) < 190 
Ozonation with hydrogen peroxide (O 3/H2O2) UV/hydrogen peroxide (UV/H 2O2) < 280 
Fenton and related processes (Fe2+/H2O2) UV/ozone (UV/O 3) 280-315 
Electrochemical oxidation Photo-Fenton (PF) and related processes  UV-Vis up to 450 
-Radiolysis and electron-beam treatment Zerovalent iron plus UV light  UV range 
Non-thermal plasma (surface corona discharge) Heterogeneous photocatalysis (HP) using TiO 2  UV: up to 380-400 
Electrohydraulic discharge-ultrasound (US, cavitation)   
Wet air oxidation   
Supercritical water oxidation   
Zerovalent iron (ZVI)   
Ferrate   Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3    219 
2 HO 2•  H2O2 + O 2 (8) 
HO 2• + HO•  H2O + O 2 (9) 
 Hydroxyperoxyl (HO 2•) radicals are produced through 
reaction (6), but these radicals are much less reactive than 
HO• (E0 = 1.7 vs. 2.8 V). 
 In all cases, it is necessary to determine the optimal H 2O2 
concentration, which will depend on the concentration and chemical nature of the pollutants in the effluent stream. Con-
sequently, treatability tests are needed to determine the right 
amount of H
2O2 and to validate the technology [11]. 
 The use of UV /peroxide offers some advantages: the oxi-
dant is commercially accessible, thermally stable, and can be stored in the site of use (with the required precautions). 
Since H
2O2 has an infinite solubility in water, it is an effec-
tive source of HO•. There are no mass transfer problems as-
sociated with gases, as in the case of ozone. Since the needed amounts of the reagent are relatively low, the process is rather economical. The method has a low efficiency for treat-ing waters of high absorbance at  < 300 nm, or containing 
substances that compete with HO
• generation. In these cases, 
a large amount of H 2O2 is needed [11]. 
 The UV /H2O2 technology is one of the oldest AOPs and 
has been successfully used in the removal of contaminants from industrial effluents, including organochlorinated 
aliphatics, aromatics, phenols (chlorinated and substituted) 
and pesticides [5, 13]. It allows to extend the earlier UV-C technology for disinfection for simultaneous treatment of chemical detoxification. 
 At present, UV /H
2O2 technology is totally commercial-
ized. The method can be sensibly improved by combination 
with ultrasound or by pretreatment with ozone [11].  
 The kinetics of the UV/H 2O2 process has been explained 
employing various types of kinetic models as shown in  Table 2 [18,19]. The first category of kinetic models is a rate 
expression derived from an empirically determined correla-
tion. Some experimental data from the oxidation of several compounds was successfully correlated using the power law model, including in some cases the effect of the UV intensity on the oxidation rate. The second type is a kinetic model based on reaction mechanism and known chemical and pho-
tochemical reactions. 
 Recently [19], the decolorization of C.I. Acid Orange 7 
(AO7) was investigated using the UV/H
2O2 process in an 
annular continuous-flow photoreactor as a function of oxi-dant, dye concentrations, reactor length and volumetric flow 
rate. A design equation was used to predict the concentration 
of AO7 and the electrical energy per order ( E
EO2 [20]) at 
different conditions. Other authors [21] studied the photo-lytic degradation of AO7 by means of UV/H
2O2 observing 
that the electrical energy needed for the mineralization proc-ess can be notably reduced by using the optimal H
2O2 dos-
age. 
 A more ambitious approach was made by Alpert et al.  
[16] by using numerical models for the design and optimiza-
                                                
2 Electrical energy per order ( EEO) is the electrical energy in kilowatt hours 
(kWh) required to bring about the degradation of a contaminant C by one 
order of magnitude in 1 m3 (1000 L) of contaminated water or air. tion of UV/H 2O2 systems incorporating both reaction design 
(hydrodynamics, lamp orientation) and chemical kinetics (reaction mechanisms, kinetic rate constants) using computa-tional fluid dynamics (CFD) and solving the fluid dynamics equations through space and time, including the conservation 
of mass, momentum, and energy. The authors concluded that 
effective CFD models for AOPs should incorporate rigorous turbulence and fluence rate submodels, kinetic rate equa-tions, and proper characterization of the background water matrix. As soon as oxidation pathways for water contami-nants are identified, a simulation model may become an im-
portant tool for the design and optimization of AOPs, and the 
model will allow evaluation of multiple design scenarios, including number of lamps, layout of r eactors, and upstream 
hydraulic conditions. More advanced turbulence models, including those incorporating the Reynolds Stress Model and/or the Large Eddy Simulation, would enhance the mod-
eling, together with a more rigorous method for validation of 
the UV fluence (dose) distribution in UV/AOP. In addition, reactors should be evaluated using multiple irradiance sen-sors and/or online chemical actinometers. Since the reaction mechanisms for additional emerging contaminants become available, especially quantification of specific byproduct 
formation, CFD should be considered as a tool for predicting 
the outcome of direct photolysis and advanced oxidation on environmentally important compounds. 
2.2. UV/O
3  
 In the absence of light, ozone can react directly with an 
organic substrate, through a slow and selective reaction (eq. 
(10)) or through a fast and non-selective radical reaction 
producing HO• (eq. (11)) [11]:  
O3 + S  Sox             k  1-100 M-1 s-1 (10) 
2 O 3 + 2 H 2O  2 HO• + O 2 + 2 HO 2•    k  108-1010 M-1 s-1  
(11) 
 It has been demonstrated that ozone decomposition in 
aqueous solution forms HO•, especially when initiated by 
OH- [11]: 
O3 + HO-  O2 + HO 2-  (12) 
HO 2- + O 3  O3•- + HO 2•  (13) 
HO 2•  O2•- + H+  (14) 
O2•-
 + O 3  O3•- + O 2  (15) 
O3•- + H+  HO 3•  (16) 
HO 3•  HO• + O 2  (17) 
O3 + HO•  O2 + HO 2•  (18) 
 The route can be initiated in different ways, by HO 2-, 
HCOO-, Fe2+, humic substances or principally by HO-. This 
is why, in principle, ozonation is sensibly more efficient in 
alkaline media, presenting an optimum around pH 9 [11]. 
 It must be highlighted that ozone final products are O 2 
and H 2O, making the method less toxic to other conventional 
treatments that use Cl 2 or chromic acid. Ozonation is a good 
pretreatment before a biological treatment, because complex 
organics are transformed into aldehydes, ketones or carbox-
ylic acids, all easily biodegradable compounds. Ozonation is 220    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
also versatile to be combined with other conventional or 
AOPs.  
 However, from the operational point of view, there are 
limitations associated with the gas-liquid ozone mass trans-fer [11, 13]. Consequently, the process requires efficient reactor design in order to maximize the ozone mass transfer coefficient; increasing the interfacial area of contact (the bubble size by using small size diffusers, ceramic mem-
branes, etc. [13]), good stirring, line mixers, contact towers, 
etc. can favor the process. In addition, increasing the reten-tion time in the reactor by large bubble columns, or increas-ing the solubility of ozone by increasing the pressure to sev-eral atmospheres, may be effective. 
 Addition of H
2O2 to the ozonation system enhances the 
oxidation capacity of the process through secondary reac-tions. Hydrogen peroxide initiates O
3 decomposition by elec-
tron transfer. Set of reactions (12) to (18) is initiated by HO• 
producing reaction (19) [11]: 
O3 + H 2O2  HO• + O 2 + HO 2•  (19) 
 The process is expensive but fast, and can treat organic 
pollutants at very low concentrations (ppb), at pH between 7 and 8; the optimal O
3/H2O2 molar ratio is  2:1. It was sug-
gested that the acceleration of ozonation is due to the in-
crease of ozone transfer in water by H 2O2. 
 One of the principal fields of application of this treatment 
is in the degradation of pesticides [6]. It is also effective for the post-treatment of water previously treated with chlorine because it can decompose trihalomethanes or related com-
pounds.  When ozone is combined with UV irradiation, several 
processes take place. Irradiation of ozone in water leads to quantitative formation of H
2O2 [22]: 
O3 + H 2O + h  H2O2 + O 2 (20) 
 As said before, photolysis of H 2O2 by UV-C radiation 
(see eq. (4)) yields two hydroxyl radicals per each molecule of hydrogen peroxide; the reagent also reacts with O
3: 
H2O2 + h  2 HO• (4) 
O3 + H 2O2  HO 2• + HO• + O 2 (21) 
As well as H 2O2 (eq. (6)), ozone reacts with hydroxyl radi-
cals to form superoxide radicals: 
O3 + HO•  O2 + HO 2• (22) 
 Since ozone has a higher absorption coefficient than 
H2O2 (254 = 3300 M-1 cm-1), this combined AOP can be used 
to treat water with high UV absorption background [11]. The 
efficiency is higher than that of O 3 or direct UV, because 
UV-B light (280-315 nm) can be used, avoiding the use of a quartz reactor.  
 When UV-C irradiation is used, photolysis of O
3 gener-
ates additional HO• and other oxidants, with the subsequent 
increase of the efficiency [11]:  
O3 + h  O2(1g) + O(1D) (23) 
O(1D) + H 2O  2 HO• (24) 
 The Heliozon process combines solar light with ozona-
tion, producing a noticeable increase of the reaction rate of ozone activation as proved in the degradation of phenol and malic acid [23]. This brings a possible way to increase ozone reactivity at a low cost.  Table 2. Kinetic Rate Expression for Removal of Various Organic Compounds with the UV/H 2O2 Process. Taken From [18,19 and 
References Therein] 
Type of Kinetic 
Models Organic Com-
pound Reactor Type UV Source Rate Equation 
Chlorophenols Batch Low-pressure Hg lamp -d[DOC]/d t = kH2O2[DOC]m [H2O2]n + kUV [DOC] 0 Ip + kh 
[DOC]q [H2O2]r Is 
Benzene, tolu-
ene, phenol, 
methylphtalate Batch Low-pressure Hg lamp -d[DOC]/d t = kUV [DOC]m + kh [DOC] 0 [H2O2]n First category of 
kinetic models 
Isoprene Batch Medium-pressure Hg lamp -d[DOC]/d t = kUV [DOC]m In + kh [DOC] 0 [H2O2]p Iq 
Acid Orange 7 Batch and 
continuous 
circulation Low-pressure Hg lamp  -d[DOC]/d t = 2  fH2O2 kh I [DOC] kb-1 [DOC] 0-1 
fH2O2 = H2O2 [H2O2] (DOC [DOC] + H2O2 [H2O2])-1 Second category of 
kinetic models 
Reactive Black 5 Recirculation Medium-pressure Hg lamp -d[DOC]/d t = kb I [H 2O2] [DOC]{( kb1 I + kb2) [DOC] 0 + 
[H2O2])}-1 
m, n, o, p, q, r, s: reaction order. 
kb, kb1, kb2: constants used for the kinetic modeling. 
kh: reaction rate constant for UV/H 2O2 system, min-1. 
kUV: reaction rate constant for UV alone, min-1. 
: quantum yield. 
: molar absorption coefficient M-1 cm-1. 
DOC: dissolved organic carbon. Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3    221 
2.3. Photo-Fenton and Related Processes 
 In acid solution and in the dark, the decomposition of 
H2O2 catalyzed by Fe2+ in solution leads to the production of 
hydroxyl radicals, according to the well known thermal Fen-
ton reaction [6]: 
Fe2+ + H 2O2  Fe3+ + HO- + HO• k = 76 M-1 s-1 [24]    (25) 
 In the presence of H 2O2 and at pH < 3, the reaction sys-
tem is autocatalytic, because Fe3+ decomposes H 2O2 into O 2 
and H 2O through a chain mechanism [24]: 
Fe(III) + H 2O2  Fe(II) + H+ + HO•  k = 0.01-0.02 M-1 s-1 
 (26) 
 The optimum pH value commonly used in the Fenton 
reaction is determined in order to avoid the precipitation of 
iron species that would interfere in the reaction; besides, an 
additional elimination step should be introduced in the treatment with the consequent extra cost. As can be seen in equation (26), the process can be initiated by Fe
3+, but the 
reaction would be slower because Fe2+ must be formed first. 
Copper(II) can be used in place of iron. 
 When a Fenton system is irradiated with ultraviolet light, 
reaction rates are highly improved in most of the cases be-cause several processes contribute to the increase of the HO
• 
formation rate: 
a) UV photolysis of Fe3+ hydroxocomplexes. This process, 
in spite of a low quantum yield of HO• formation, will 
promote the photochemical reduction to Fe2+ : 
Fe(OH)2+ + h  Fe2+ + HO• (27) 
b) When there are ligands (L) present in solution that could 
form photochemically active Fe(III) complexes under excitation by UV-Vis irradiation (like iron complexes with some carboxylic acids), ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) reactions take place yielding Fe(II) and products of oxidation of the ligand (L
ox); in the case of 
oligocarboxylic acids ( e.g., oxalic acid), these reactions 
proceed with high quantum yields (eq. (28)): 
Fe3+-(L) n + h  Fe2+-(L) n-1 + L ox (28) 
c) Depending on the used irradiation wavelength and the 
photoproperties of the target compound, direct photoly-
sis can take place. d) If light of wavelengths lower than 300 nm are employed, 
UV photolysis of H 2O2 takes place, leading to additional 
HO•. 
 Fig. ( 1) is a scheme of all the possible pathways involved 
in the photo-Fenton process.  
 The overall rate of the photo-Fenton process is controlled 
by the rate of the photolytic step that converts Fe3+ back to 
Fe2+, and the continuous Fe(II)/Fe(III) recycle makes the 
process autocatalytic.  
 The most frequent use of the photo-Fenton process has 
been the treatment of industrial waters and lixiviates. Ni-troaromatics, polychlorinated phenols, herbicides (2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic (2,4,5-T), 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D)) and other pesticides have been successfully 
degraded [11]. 
 Photo-Fenton processes can use sunlight instead of UV 
light with a minor decrease in the rate of degradation. Ac-cording to Gogate and Pandit [14], this is a very important factor for the scale-up and commercial use of a PAOP, since 
the costs of treatments will be substantially lowered if sun-
light is used. The photo-Fenton process can take advantage of the presence of constituents of real effluents like iron or copper salts, avoiding an additional dosage, and oligocar-boxylic acids such as oxalate or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), which form photochemically active iron(III) 
complexes and enhance the process. Appropriate selection of 
the iron salts needs to be done, and use of oxalate ions as the counter-ions is recommended for the majority of the pollut-ants and reaction conditions [14].  
 The role of iron on the degradation of different organic 
compounds, differing in their structure (aliphatic versus 
aromatic) and iron complex formation capacity, by conven-tional and photo-Fenton processes was recently investigated by Hermosilla et al. [26]. It has been seen that these chemi-
cal characteristics can affect the degree of treatment in terms of COD (chemical oxygen demand) and TOC (total organic 
carbon) removals. While aromatics exhibited a fast and pro-
nounced reduction in the COD by conventional Fenton proc-ess, aliphatic compounds required the presence of UV light to enhance treatment results. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. (1). Scheme of chemical reactions in the photo-Fenton reaction (adapted from reference [25]). 
222    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
 Many publications can be found in the literature on ap-
plications of Fenton and photo-Fenton processes and the revision will not be done in this article. 
2.4. Heterogeneous Photocatalysis 
 Heterogeneous photocatalysis is a very well known tech-
nology, valuable for purification and remediation of water 
and air. Several excellent revisions exist on the subject, with different approaches (see for example [5, 7-10,13,27-29]). 
 In HP, after excitation of a semiconductor with light of 
energy equal to or higher than the bandgap (E
g), conduction 
band electrons (e cb-) and valence band holes (h vb+) are cre-
ated. TiO 2 is so far the most useful semiconductor material 
for photocatalytic purposes, owing to its exceptional optical 
and electronic properties, chemical stability, non-toxicity and low cost. The energy bandgaps of the photocatalytic forms of TiO
2, anatase and rutile, are 3.23 eV (corresponding to 384 
nm) and 3.02 eV (corresponding to 411 nm). The most popu-
lar and photoactive commercial form of TiO 2 is produced by 
the German company Degussa (now Evonik) under the name 
P-25. For Degussa P-25, the values of the edges of conduc-tion and valence bands at pH 0 have been calculated as -0.3 and +2.9 V, respectively [30]. Photogenerated holes and 
electrons can recombine easily (this being one of the most 
important drawbacks of the process for its application) or migrate to the surface where they can react with donor (D) or acceptor (A) species (Fig. 2).  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
Fig. (2). Simplified diagram of the heterogeneous photocatalytic 
processes occurring at an illuminated TiO 2 particle. 
 
 The energy level at the bottom of the conduction band is 
actually the reduction potential of photoelectrons and the 
energy level at the top of the valence band determines the 
oxidizing ability of photoholes, each value reflecting the ability of the system to promote reductions and oxidations. Valence band holes are strong oxidants that may attack di-rectly oxidizable species D or form HO
• from water or sur-
face hydroxide ions, while conduction band electrons are 
mild reducing acceptors. From a thermodynamic point of view, the couples present in the system can be photocatalyti-cally reduced by conduction band electrons if they have re-
dox potentials more positive than the flatband potential
3 
(Vfb) of the conduction band, and can be oxidized by valence 
band holes if they have redox potentials more negative than the V
fb of the valence band [12 and references therein]. 
 The above-described scheme is completed by the follow-ing basic equations where e
cb-, hvb+ and HO• are involved: 
TiO 2 + h  ecb- + h vb+ (29) 
ecb- + A  surf  A•- (30) 
hvb+ + HO-
surf (H 2O)surf  HO• (+ H+) (31)  
hvb+ + D  surf  D•+ (32) 
where surf indicates that the species are adsorbed or close to 
the TiO 2 surface.  
 Titanium dioxide is an excellent photocatalytic material 
useful for environmental applications [8]. Depending on the exact conditions, holes, HO
•, and O 2•- radicals, H 2O2 and O 2 
will play a very important role in the photocatalytic mecha-
nisms.  
 Donor oxidation can also occur by attack of HO•, follow-
ing eqs. (1)-(3): 
HO• + D   D•+ (33) 
 It is important to note that in addition of oxidizing or-
ganic compounds as proposed in section 2.1, HP can trans-form also toxic metal ions [9,10,12] and even destroy micro-biological contamination (see for example reference [31]). 
 In some cases, addition of a noble metal to the TiO
2 sur-
face increases the photocatalytic activity, although the activ-
ity of the transformed photocatalyst depends largely on the 
target pollutant [27,32]. 
 Solution pH affects HP due to its influence on the super-
ficial electric charge on the semiconductor (influencing the redox level of the charge carriers, i.e ., electron and holes), 
the speciation of compounds in solution, and the values of 
their redox potentials. The pH affects the position of the flat-band, which is reduced in 59 mV with every pH unit, accord-
ing to the following equation [33]: 
E
fb(pH) = E fb(pH 0) - 0.059 pH (34) 
 The point of zero charge (pH pzc), i.e. the pH value in 
which the catalyst superficial charge is zero, is around 6.5 in 
the case of TiO 2. Above and below the pH pzc, the catalyst 
surface is negative or positive, according to the following 
protolytic equilibria: 
TiOH 2+  TiOH + H+ (35) 
TiOH  TiO- + H+ (36) 
 The hydroxyl anions act as receptors of the photogener-
ated holes and are very important for the semiconductor pho-tocatalytic activity because they produce HO
• (eq. (31)). In 
addition, the superficial sites with high acidity favor, in some 
cases, the adsorption, and are better h vb+ traps.  
                                                
3 The flat band potential (V fb) is defined as the potential of the semiconduc-
tor at which there is no excess of charge, no electric field and no space 
charge region. 
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3    223 
 The addition of an oxidant to the system inhibits recom-
bination of electrons and holes and the photocatalytic system can become more efficient. For example, in aerated suspen-sions, O
2 is adsorbed onto the TiO 2 surface, acting as an 
electron acceptor and leading to the formation of superoxide 
anions (eq. (37)) in a thermodynamically feasible but rather 
slow electron transfer reaction. Values of E0(O2/O2•-)  
= -0.3 V and E0(O2/HO 2•) = -0.05 V have been reported for 
homogeneous solutions; the reduction potentials onto the TiO
2 surface are probably less negative. As the following set 
of equations indicates, this cathodic pathway is an additional 
source of hydroxyl radicals and hydrogen peroxide is pro-
duced. 
O2ads + e cb - (+ H+)  O2•- (HO 2•) (37)  
O2•- + H 2O  HO 2• + OH-                   pKa = 4.8 (38) 
2 HO 2•  O2 + H 2O2   (8) 
 HO 2•/O2•- radicals are not very reactive for attacking or-
ganic compounds but their electron transfer reactions can be very fast. 
 Another important oxidant is H
2O2. Besides the amount 
formed by eq. (8), external dosage of hydrogen peroxide to a HP system contributes to the formation of additional hy-droxyl radicals, as well as trapping of conduction band elec-trons (eq. (39)) or reaction with superoxide radicals (eq. 
(40)), especially at high H
2O2 concentrations [9]. 
H2O2 + e cb-  HO- + HO•  (39) 
H2O2 + O 2•-  HO- + HO• + O 2 (40) 
 However, as already said, H 2O2 is a HO• scavenger (see 
eqs. (6) to (9)). 
 Dissolved transition metals Mn+, like Fe3+, increase the 
rate of the photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds due to the reduction of the metallic ion by conduction band 
electrons (eq. (41)), which inhibits the deleterious electron-
hole recombination [9]: 
M
n+ + e cb-  M(n-1)+ (41) 
 In this case, due to H 2O2 production (eq. (8)), photo-
Fenton reactions also take place, enhancing HO• production 
and increasing the oxidizing power of the process. 
 An additional serious limitation for TiO 2 technological 
applications is the requirement of UV light to promote chemical processes due to the wide semiconductor bandgap. 
Attempts to extend the range of activity of TiO
2 to the visible 
have been made in various ways: (a) ion implantation, (b) use of coupled semiconductors like TiO
2-CdS or ZnO-CdS 
photocatalysts; (c) substitution of non-metals like N, C, S, P or B for oxygen sites in the TiO
2 lattice; (d) attachment of 
suitable dyes [34 and references therein]. However, all these 
techniques present several drawbacks and the photoactivity 
of these modified semiconductors is still rather low for real application. 
2.5. Zerovalent Iron (ZVI) 
 Zerovalent iron is an emergent material, increasingly 
used for the treatment of several pollutants, particularly chlo-
rinated organics, nitroaromatics, nitrate, azo-dyes, toxic 
metal ions and arsenic in solution [35-37]. The technology is based on the use of iron in the elemental state and the mate-
rial can be employed in various forms: microparticles (pow-ders), fillings, wires, nails, wool and, in recent times, nanoparticles. The physicochemical processes taking place in this technology depend on pH, the nature of the pollutant and 
other factors. In some cases, a reducing process takes place 
but, depending on the conditions, the process is oxidative [36]. In water and in the absence of oxygen, reductive Fe
0 
corrosion takes place: 
Fe0 + 2 H 2O  Fe2+ + H 2 + 2 OH-                                    (42) 
 This process is increasingly used to remediate profound, 
reducing groundwaters, by means of reactive permeable bar-riers containing zerovalent iron. Several pollutants (chlorin-ated aliphatics, Cr(VI), etc.) could be satisfactory reduced by the method, but the mechanisms are not totally clear so far 
[38]. 
 In H
2O and under O 2, oxidative Fe0 corrosion leads to 
formation of Fe(II), Fe(III) and ROS; reaction of Fe(II) with H
2O2 ends in the Fenton reaction, with HO• production. 
Fresh iron oxyhydroxides (FHO: iron rusts, magnetite, lepi-
docrocite, maghemite) precipitate as flocs with a continuous 
Fe(II)/Fe(III) cycle.  
2 Fe0 + O 2 + 2 H 2O  2 Fe2+ + 4 OH- (43) 
Fe(II) +  O2 +  H2O  Fe(III) + OH- + (HO•; H 2O2, O 2•-, 
Fe(IV))  (44) 
Fe2+ + H 2O2  Fe3+ + HO- + HO• (26) 
Fe (II)/(III) + 3 H 2O + O 2  FHO (flocs) (45) 
 The intermediates formed during ZVI corrosion can oxi-
dize species (e.g. As(III) to As(V)), and fresh FHO are strong adsorbents of metal and metalloid species. Therefore, in these cases, removal by ZVI takes place mainly by ad-sorption and coprecipitation onto these FHO flocs. 
 ZVI has several advantages compared to other materials: 
(i) it is cheap and widely available in many forms, (ii) it is simple and can be easily handled, (iii) the technology can be straightforwardly scalable, (iv) it can be improved by solar light. 
 ZVI reactions are rather slow, but the process can be no-
tably accelerated using iron nanoparticles (NZVI) [36 and references therein]. The tiny particle size, the large surface area and the high density of reactive surface sites (or surface sites of high intrinsic reactivity) lead to a very high effi-ciency, and make these materials very attractive for remedia-
tion.  
 The effect of UV or H
2O2 addition on the ZVI technol-
ogy, involving Fenton-type processes, has been addressed [36 and references therein]. Studies on UV irradiation, eco-nomically promissory because solar light can be used, were 
generally focused on As(III) oxidation. The solar ZVI tech-
nology was used to modify the SORAS technology (Solar Oxidation and Removal of Arsenic) [39]. SORAS removes arsenic from water in polyethyleneterephtalate (PET) bottles by photo-Fenton processes taking place by addition of lemon juice (citrate) and solar light, for example in natural waters 
of Bangladesh. The method was modified for waters not con-
taining enough amounts of natural iron and with consider-able amounts of natural organic matter (NOM) by addition 224    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
of ZVI (wires, wool, nanoparticles). In this case, PF proc-
esses take place by iron corrosion followed by reaction of iron in solution with NOM. As(III) photooxidation at low pH in the presence of oxygen was studied for application in the remediation of acid mine waters [40].  
3. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS 
3.1. Coupling of AOPs with Biological Treatments 
 The use of AOPs as a single treatment stage is not eco-
nomically convenient to treat large volumes of effluents due to high electrical or chemical costs compared with biological treatments. On the contrary, although biological treatments 
are cheaper, they are time-consuming and several pollutants 
are biorecalcitrant. In last times, some studies aimed to re-duce the toxicity of an effluent with an AOP up to a certain level beyond which a biological oxidation is applied to achieve total detoxification; the application of the initial AOP pretreatment decreases the total treatment time. Due to 
the extension of this article, these couplings will not be de-
scribed here, but several references can be found in the lit-erature [41-43].  
3.2. Comparative Studies on AOPs 
 The election of one AOP for the treatment of a wastewa-
ter must be evaluated from an economical and practical point 
of view. Mostly, the choice of the AOP is based on its effec-
tiveness to achieve the target concentration, pH, COD, etc. and, once the process is shown to be adequate, the election must be economical. The criteria to compare the perform-ance depend highly on the properties of the wastewater.  
 From the existing literature, it can be seen that generally 
direct photolysis results in incomplete and slow degradation of the pollutant unless the target compound absorbs strongly at the irradiation wavelength. Addition of H
2O2 to the UV 
illuminated system results in a faster degradation; however, a strict control of the H
2O2 dose is needed to avoid excess of 
the reagent, which becomes a competitor for HO• according 
to reactions (6) to (9)). It has been observed, when compar-ing different technologies, that photo-Fenton is generally the most efficient, and complete mineralization occurs in most cases only using the individual process; however, the ratio of reagents (i.e., the Fe/H
2O2 molar ratio) needs to be always 
optimized. Another drawback of the PF technology is that 
acid pH is needed and must be maintained to prevent precipi-tation of iron compounds. This restriction adds a previous acidification step and the further alkalinization for iron elimination of the media [44].  
 Gogate and Pandit [13] compare five different oxidation 
processes: cavitation, HP, Fenton processes, ozonation and use of H
2O2. Although US/cavitation is not treated in the 
present article, the reference should be consulted as the fol-lowing main points highlighted by the authors are applicable to all AOPs: 
1)
 The efficacy of the process depends strongly on the rate 
of generation of free radicals together with a good con-tact of these radicals and/or chemical oxidants with the pollutant molecules; the efficient design should then aim at maximizing both features.  2) Although a large amount of literature is available for 
application of HP to wastewater treatment for different model pollutants, studies with real effluents are scarce and strong efforts are required in this direction.  
3) The development of global kinetic models to predict the 
reaction rates, helpful in designing large-scale reactors, are needed. The models should be function of critical parameters such as pollutant concentration, presence of radical scavengers, or presence of constituents enhanc-ing the rates by arresting the electron-hole recombina-
tion.  
4) Fenton chemistry seems to be beneficial if used as a 
supplement to enhance the rates of, e.g. , HP and acous-
tic cavitation processes rather than its use as individual technology.  
5) Ozone or hydrogen peroxide as individual processes are 
not economically favorable, and they should be used in combination with others (mainly ultrasound and UV ir-radiation, which lead to the formation of free radicals). 
3.3. Combination of AOPs 
 Although most AOPs can be used individually in waste-
water treatment applications with good economics and high degree of energy efficiency, hybrid methods (mostly a com-bination of AOPs) generally improve the global treatment. These combinations increase the photoprocess efficiency by decreasing the reaction time in respect to the separated op-
erations, or decrease the cost in respect of HP alone, gener-
ally in terms of light energy. The most used combinations are UV/O
3/H2O2, photo-Fenton processes combined with 
TiO 2, combinations with PAOPs with ultrasound, wet air 
oxidation or other non-photochemical AOP, etc. As said be-fore, combination of AOPs with conventional methods, 
mainly biological oxidation, is very much studied at present. 
The choice of the combination will be dictated by the type of wastewater to be treated. It is always mandatory to perform a treatability study of wastewaters before real application of the technologies.  
 Recently, Lucas et al. [45] compared different ozone-
based advanced oxidation processes (O
3, O 3/UV and 
O3/UV/H 2O2) for the treatment of winery wastewater in a 
pilot-scale bubble column reactor. It was found that at the natural pH of the studied wastewater (pH 4), O
3/UV/H 2O2 
was the most effective treatment, followed by O 3/UV and O 3. 
The authors performed an economic analysis of the operating 
costs showing that the O 3/UV/H 2O2 combination was also 
the most economical process (1.31 Euro m-3 g-1 of TOC min-
eralized under optimized conditions).  
 A recent review [22] analyzes combinations of HP with 
chemical and physical operations as tools for improving the 
photoprocess performance. In the specific case of HP, two categories of combinations were considered because the effi-ciency may be affected by different factors. In the first one, the technology influences directly (and can enhance) the photocatalytic mechanism, as this is the case of e.g . ultra-
sonic irradiation, photo-Fenton, ozonation or electrochemical 
treatments. A second category includes the coupling with methods not affecting the photocatalytic mechanism, such as biotreatments, membrane reactor, membrane photoreactor, or Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3    225 
physical; in these cases, the combination increases the effi-
ciency of the overall process. Thus, the application of the combined technologies should be directed to the factors af-fecting these two different aspects. The authors highlight that the main drawback of HP are the very low quantum efficien-
cies reached (< 1%), which implies that only one over one 
hundred of the incident photons is able to produce an oxida-tion/reduction step. Depending on the concentration of the contaminant present and on the desired degree of oxidation, it is necessary to provide the photoreacting system with a photon flow two orders of magnitude higher than that even-
tually utilized. In real contaminated waters, having different 
pollutants, at high concentrations and in high volumes, the magnitude of the photon flow needed for the treatment would be very high, and the process would not be economic. Sun can also give photons but only ca. 5% of them (ca. 30 W m
2) can be used by TiO 2 (due to its bandgap), and this can-
not satisfy the needs of the treatment in a realistic way. 
Based on these considerations, the authors propose that the use of photocatalysis for wastewater remediation would be successful if addressed only to the transformation of recalci-trant to non-recalcitrant compounds, which subsequently can be easily degraded by conventional techniques. Therefore, 
the coupling of HP with other chemical and physical opera-
tions seems a good strategy to achieve the remediation goal. Additionally, for each system, treatability tests in different conditions must be done to find the best technology. 
 Gogate and Pandit [14] detailed a series of important 
observations and recommendations for the use of combined 
AOPs. This corresponds to the first category of combinations cited in the above paragraph: the synergism is mainly due to generation and attack of HO
•, i.e. both methods influence the 
controlling reaction mechanism, resulting in higher oxidation rates. Again, as stated in section 3.2, this reference should be 
consulted because all the observations of the authors are 
relevant for the general combination of AOTs and should be taken into account. The authors cite combination of ultra-sound (not treated here) with O
3 or H 2O2, claiming that the 
process produces enhanced dissociation of the reagents and then, higher degradation rates. In addition, the higher turbu-
lence generated by ultrasound decreases the mass transfer 
resistance, a major limiting factor for the application of the individual reagents. On the other hand, combination of UV irradiation with O
3 and/or H 2O2 is beneficial only when radi-
cal attack is the controlling mechanism and when some of the constituents of the effluent are refractory to the individ-
ual methods or require higher degree of oxidation. Dosage 
and ratio of reagents together with operating pH should be optimized. As always, the reactor design is another crucial factor.  
 An extensive study on the degradation of various carbox-
ylic acids, oxalic acid [46], citric acid [47], gallic acid (Gal) 
[48] and EDTA [49-51] has been performed combining HP and PF, and this study shed light to the influence of the com-position of the effluent in the PAOP treatment. For all the studied compounds, the formation of Fe(III)-L type com-plexes resulted very important due to the possibility of 
LMCT photolytic reactions under UV radiation. However, 
the different Fe(III)-L react with different quantum yields, leading to different efficiencies in the photocatalytic sys-tems. In some conditions, the homogeneous processes were very efficient and TiO
2 acted just as a screen, reducing the 
efficiency of the homogeneous reaction (this is the case of oxalic acid, whose Fe(III) complex photolyzes with very high quantum yield). Gallic acid showed very distinctive results due to the instability of the Fe(III)–Gal complex that 
undergoes homogeneous thermal charge transfer reactions 
strongly dependent on the molar ratio between Fe and Gal but without producing mineralization. Nevertheless, it was found that, even when high percentages of Gal conversion can be achieved in Fenton systems, UV irradiation is neces-sary in order to mineralize the aliphatic compounds produced 
after the thermal degradation of Gal. 
4. RECENT PATENTS ON AOP SYSTEMS 
 As said before, in spite of the big amount of published 
scientific papers, not a large quantity of applications and/or patented work can be found related to photochemical AOPs. Most of them rely on one of the biggest problems when us-
ing photocatalytic techniques for water purification or treat-
ment, which is the necessity of fixing the photocatalyst to a convenient support to avoid a further costly separation.  
 In the case of HP using TiO
2 in suspension, elimination 
and/or recovery of the photocatalyst leads necessarily to ad-
ditional costs [52]. On the other hand, immobilized semicon-
ductors do not offer the same efficiency than slurries, due to mass transfer limitations, mechanical stability and low profit of the incident light; therefore, in last years, many efforts have been made to improve the efficiency of supported cata-lysts.  
 A similar problem appears with the homogeneous photo-
Fenton reaction: in last times, it was observed that the use of immobilized iron was advantageous because: 1) this leads to a synergy as the pollutant gets closer to the vicinity of the photocatalyst, with an additional stability (see section 4.2); 
2) the immobilization allows to extend the operative pH 
range in comparison to that of the homogeneous system (higher working pH can be used). 
 In what follows, recent patents (since 2003) will be 
briefly reviewed. It is important to mention that earlier rele-
vant works can be found in the literature and that the present 
study is not completely exhaustive. 
4.1. HP Related Patents 
4.1.1. System for Photocatalytic Treatment Using TiO
2 as 
Slurry (US7008473B2) 
 A photocatalytic process using TiO 2 as slurry was pro-
posed to treat aqueous wastes [53]. The most relevant feature 
of the system is that it includes a converter (a gas scrubber) used to transfer gaseous contaminants into the aqueous pho-tocatalytic slurry that, in addition to contaminated waters, allows treating other varying types of media, including air, soil or adsorbents (for example, activated carbon). Fig. ( 3) is 
a diagram of the system (1) used to transfer gaseous con-
taminants into the aqueous phase. A contaminated gas stream such as air having airborne contaminants is trans-ferred by pipe (2) into a gas scrubber tower (3) where the pollutants are converted or transferred to the aqueous phase. At the top of the tower, a nozzle (4) disperses a solvent or 
the photocatalytic slurry into the tower. The atomized mole-226    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
cules of the liquid may be passed to the tower through lines 
(5) by a pump. The contaminated air stream encounters the downward moving solvent in the scrubber and the pollutants 
are then transferred to the aqueous phase by adsorption or 
absorption, downward to the bottom of the tower. Then, they are directed to the photocatalytic system (6) by pump (7), where they are treated. Gas free of pollutants is discharged through gas discharge (8). 
 In the case of the airborne contaminants, the process in-
cludes the following steps:  
1) Removal of contaminants from the contaminated media 
using water or another solvent.  
2) Oxidization and/or reduction of contaminants dissolved in the solvent, by mixing in a TiO
2 slurry and exposing 
to UV irradiation. Other oxidants can be added (such as 
H2O2). 
3) Removal of the oxidation by-products from solvent, for 
example, by distillation, RO, etc. 
4) Reuse of the solvent.  
 The invention provides the technical advantage of in-
creasing the mass transfer of the air phase organic contami-
nant and the photocatalyst. In addition, the scaling-up of the 
reactor can be easily accomplished by increasing the number and size of nozzles for air injection and the size of the reac-tion chamber. Air treatment systems can be implemented to treat volumes of air of up to hundreds of thousands of cubic feet per minute. The system could be safely used to treat 
explosives (for example, nitroglycerine) or flammable con-
taminants in the aqueous phase rather than in the air phase.  4.1.2. Three Dimensionally Reticulated Open Cell Com-posed of Supported Semiconductor (US6524447B1) 
 An interesting patent [54] claims to offer an effective, 
quantum efficient, durable, economic, commercial apparatus 
for rapid HP purification and disinfection of water and ul-trapure water, achieving a reduction of the organic charge to 500 ppt (parts-per-trillion) in TOC. In the system, polluted water is directed through a semiconductor unit, where a pho-tocatalyst removes the contaminants. This unit is an open 
cell, three dimensionally reticulated, fluid permeable, com-
posed of a rigid substrate (alumina, titania, silica, glass, quartz or organic polymers) integrated with a semiconductor (TiO
2, ZnO, CaTiO 3, etc.). The creation of turbulence by the 
device is an enhancement of the invention. A light emitting device in optical proximity with the semiconductor unit al-
lows optimizing mass transfer, surface area, illumination, 
water flow, durability, rigidity, etc. A metal like Pt or similar can be incorporated to enhance the photocatalytic efficiency. Lamps to be used can emit from the UV to the visible range. Fig. ( 4) shows an example of a point of use reactor (9) with 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) as the source of irradiation.  
 The water flows into the reactor through inlet (10) and 
then through the reticulated semiconductor unit (11), pho-toactivated by LEDs (12), hold by a support/wiring plate (13). A quartz plate (14) is provided to isolate the LEDs from the water flow. Purified water exits the reactor through 
outlet (15). Enclosure (16) can be constructed from a variety 
of materials resistant to LED light and to corrosion by water, such as thermoplastics (polypropylene, etc.) or metals (stain-less steel). The reactor was designed for commercialization into markets defined by low and intermittent demand for purified water, such as household drinking water. The sys- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (3).  Scheme of a photocatalytic system ( 1) for treatment of air, soil or aqueous contaminants by transference to a liquid phase (adapted 
from [53]). 
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3    227 
tem only requires low power electrical energy per LED, 
making it both safe for the user in an environment that in-cludes water and electricity, and enabling the reactor to be 
utilized in portable applications (battery powered). 
 In the same invention [54], a commercial/industrial reac-
tor (17) with tube type lamps as light sources is presented. The reactor is constituted by a cylindrical tube (18) where the water flows in and passes radially through the reticulated 
photocatalytic substrate and axially past the UV light source 
(Fig. 5). Both the inner (19A) and outer light (19B) tubes are 
enclosed by cylindrical quartz sleeves. The contaminated water flows radially through the reticulated semiconductor unit and passes by the exterior lights. Purified water exits through outlet (20). The configuration of the reactor is de-
signed to be modular so that longer and/or parallel reactors 
can be employed for higher flows. This reactor is designed for commercialization into markets defined by high and con-tinuous demand for purified water. 
 4.1.3. Photocatalytic Membranes (EP1555064A1) 
 The application of photocatalytic membrane reactors 
(PMRs) appears as a promising method for solving problems 
concerning separation of the photocatalyst [55]. Invention 
[56] presents the use of microporous photocatalytic mem-branes (0.2 to 10  μm) suitable for the photochemical degra-
dation and transformation of organic and inorganic pollut-ants. The membrane contains a semiconductor (TiO
2, ZnO), 
a photopromoter and a photosensitizer supported by photo-
grafting on the surface of a microporous support. The sup-
port can be a metal, whose surface is oxidized by different known techniques, or made on glass, ceramic or polymer, either in compact or in fiber form. The photografted layers afford a continuous permeability through the microporous membrane, increasing the reactivity compared with other 
membranes [57], and they do not show any problems con-
nected to degradation of polymeric components, being resis-tant to UV irradiation.  
 The semiconductor nanopowder (25-250 nm thick) was 
deposited first by chemical vapor deposition or plasma tech- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (4). Point of use photoreactor using LEDs as the irradiation source (adapted from [54]). 
  
 
 
 
Fig. (5). Detail of a cylindrical reactor where the water flows in and passes radially through a reticulated photocatalytic substrate (ad apted 
from [54]). 
228    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
niques on the support. A second layer (250 nm-100 m) was 
formed spraying or depositing an organic solvent suspension containing a semiconductor, a photoinitiator (an organomet-allic compound), a photosensitizer (a dye) and a photopro-moter (a peroxometallic compound, triethylvanadate, 
iron(III) potassium oxalate, etc.). The photopromoter and the 
photosensitizer can be the same substance and this allows to extend the photocatalytic activity to the visible range and to increase up to 30-40 times the photocatalytic efficiency. This layer is irradiated by UV for curing, with the objective of exploiting the antenna effect of photopromoters. Thus, dif-
ferent photoreactor geometries and configurations could be 
modeled choosing the adequate membrane geometry: plane, tubular, hollow fibers.  
 A particular test at laboratory scale was performed to 
assess photodegradation of chloroaliphatics. Disc mem-
branes (6 cm diameter), immobilizing only 25-35 wt% of 
TiO
2, were sandwiched through O-rings between optical 
Pyrex plates. The solutions to be irradiated could circulate continuously from and to a gas tight reservoir. The distance between the optical plate and the membrane was 2 mm and the ratio between the overall reacting volume (in the pho-
toreactor and in the reservoir) and the membrane surface area 
of the irradiated side was 1.1 mL cm
-2. The system was irra-
diated with UV light from a solar simulator (2.5 mW cm-2). 
The initial photodegradation rate (Table 3) resulted inde-
pendent of the reactants and depended only on the photocata-lyst amount and on the irradiance. The addition of H
2O2 to 
the system increased markedly the photodegradation rate.  
Table 3. Initial Rate of Photodegradation of Chloroaliphatics 
Submitted to a Laboratory test with a Membrane-TiO
2-Photocatalytic Reactor [56] 
Halo-organic Compound Initial Rate of Photodegradation 
(mol h-1) 
Trichloroethene 5.9 
Tetrachloroethene 5.7 
Monochloroacetic acid 5.6 
Dichloroacetic acid 5.9 
Trichloroacetic acid 6.2 
(*) mean of at least 6 kinetic runs (max deviation 0.6 mol h-1). 
 
 Other photodegradation experiments were carried out in a 
10 kW pilot plant operating under an irradiance of 250 mW 
cm-2 in the UV range, employing a metallic membrane in the 
presence of 7 wt.% of photopromoter. The efficiency of the pilot plant was satisfactory by using methylene dichloride and trichlorethene as model pollutants. 
4.1.4. Photocatalytic Membrane Reactor Combined with 
Wet Air Oxidation (WO2010021551A1) 
 The authors of patent [58] claim that photocatalysis in 
combination with some principles of the Watercatox process gives a unique configuration that facilitates the transport of molecules to the catalytic surface. The Watercatox process 
[59] combines catalytic wet air oxidation with a catalytic 
porous ceramic membrane gas-liquid contactor containing catalyst nanoparticles; this makes possible oxidations in liq-
uid phase at lower pressures (e.g. < 10 bar) and temperatures (< 80 °C) than those used in conventional wet oxidation and combustion processes [60]. In invention [58], the HP treat-ment can be achieved by illuminating a liquid/gas or liq-
uid/liquid phase and a photocatalyst (under UV light) or a 
charge-transfer material (under visible light)  separated from 
the other phase by the porous membrane acting as contactor. Fig. ( 6) shows a flow chart of a reactor according to this in-
vention. The gas, liquid or suspension containing the pollut-ant contained in the tank (21) is pumped to the catalytic 
membrane contactor (22). The contactor is provided with 
glass windows (quartz or polymers with high transmittance) allowing irradiation of the membrane by the light source (23). The gas or liquid flows on one side of the catalytic membrane contactor. The second phase (oxidizing agent, reducing agent, etc.) is introduced to the other side of the 
catalytic membrane contactor. The outlet of the liquid or gas 
can be connected to a recycling line (24) to maintain the pressure or heat by flowing partial liquid or gas back to the feed tank (21). The catalytic membrane contactor can be constructed in flat, tubular, capillary, multichannel or other configurations. 
 Comparison of the claimed process with the Watercatox 
for oxidation of formic acid and humic acid oxidation indi-cated that the processes under light were much faster than the dark processes.  
4.1.5. Modular Photocatalytic Reactor for Aquaculture 
Wastewater (EP1686095A1) 
 Another invention [61] presents a TiO
2-photocatalytic 
reactor with a modular configuration, using UV light and ozone, useful for purifying and disinfecting wastewater from confined aquaculture. The reactor, constructed in black poly-
ethylene, has a cylindrical configuration; in the inner part, 
UV lamps and glass plates covered by supported TiO
2 are 
arranged. The reactor design features are:  
1) A cylindrical configuration that facilitates its construc-
tion. 
2) The supported catalyst is arranged in an annular type 
distribution around UV light lamps. 
3) The modular configuration facilitates its assembly and 
maintenance and allows to handle different capacities 
and configurations (series and/or parallel) for wastewa-
ter treatment. 
4) The reduced size facilitates the transport and installation 
of the device. 
 Fig. ( 7) shows a ground view of one of the support discs 
for the glass strips carrying the catalyst and opening holes of quartz tubes protecting the UV lamps. The main operational feature is that the reactor requires neither the recovery of the catalyst from the treated water nor thermophilic condition-ing.  
 A laboratory assay was carried out for ammonium re-
moval using a real water sample from a trout culture from the Centro de Cultivo Piloto de la Universidad Católica de 
la Santísima Concepción (Concepción, Chile) . The water 
culture was treated using photocatalysis and ozone. The 
process was very effective, achieving in two hours a removal Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3    229 
of 58% of ammonium, total disinfection and a reduction of 
50% of the dissolved organic matter. No other details of the 
experimental conditions are given. 
4.1.6. Thin Film Fixed Bed TiO 2 Photocatalyst 
(WO2004058649A1) 
 Another invention [62] describes an apparatus for the 
photocatalytic oxidation of common industrial effluent con-
taminants in water using a solar driven thin film fixed bed reactor (TFFBR). The use of the process at large-scale is claimed. A thin film photocatalyst was fixed to an inert sup-port using a simple spray technique. The support was Cud-dapah stone, a construction material for houses obtained 
from Andhra Pradesh, a southern state in India. The photo-
catalytic films were easily prepared using a TiO
2 suspension 
(4 g in 100-200 mL water) and 1-5 mL of a binder (a surfac-tant, acrylic emulsion, resin or other polymers). The mixture was spread on the clean stone with a laboratory spray gun and left for drying; neither thermal treatment at high tem-
peratures nor expensive precursors were needed. The coating was repeated until a uniform aspect was obtained, not pre-senting pinholes. A common industrial effluent collected 
from a treatment plant at Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), con-taining nitrophenol, p-nitrotoluene sulfonic acid, paraceta-mol, p-aminophenol among other organic and inorganic compounds, was chosen to test the photoreactor. The effluent contained high COD (> 15000 mg L
-1), intense color and 
odor. After running the effluent through the TFFBR for 3 days under solar irradiation, a 50% of COD decrease was obtained, a similar value being obtained with a TiO
2 slurry 
(Fig. 8). 
4.2. PF Related Patents  
 As already said, in the photo-Fenton technology, immo-
bilization of iron on convenient supports enhances the re-
moval of organic pollution compared with the homogeneous technology, allowing at the same time to extend the working pH range.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (6). Simplified scheme of the catalytic membrane reactor (adapted from [58]). 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
Fig. (7). Ground view of one of the support discs used in the invention for the glass strips carrying the catalyst and the opening holes of the 
quartz tubes, protecting the UV lamps [61]. 
230    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Fig. (8).  COD reduction of an industrial common effluent. 1: TiO 2 
in slurry, 2: with TFFBR over Cuddapah stone of the invention. 
Modified from [62]. 
4.2.1. Bentonite-iron nanocomposite for heterogeneous 
photo-Fenton (US20060076299A1) 
 A patent presents the synthesis of a bentonite (B) clay-
based iron nanocomposite and its use as a heterogeneous PF catalyst to treat wastewaters from chemical and textile indus-tries containing organic pollutants like azo-dyes [63]. The nanocomposite was made using the pillaring technique. For 
the synthesis, an Fe
3+ pillaring solution was obtained by add-
ing powdered NaCO 3 to an Fe(NO 3)3 aqueous solution, 
added to an aqueous B suspension with vigorous stirring. 
Aging of the mixture was performed at room temperature or at 100 °C for 48 hours, followed by centrifugation and wash-ing. In this way, a catalyst precursor forming intercalated 
bentonite iron oxide catalyst nanoparticles (Fe-B) was ob-
tained.  
 The reactor was a cylindrical stainless steel vessel in 
whose inner wall surface Fe-B nanoparticles were sprayed to form a layer; a UV-C lamp (Philips 8 W, 254 nm) was in-
serted in the center of the vessel and H
2O2 was added. Sev-
eral tests to evaluate the performance of the Fe-B nanocom-
posites in PF treatments, using Orange II as model azo-dye pollutant, were performed. Fig. ( 9) shows the results ob-
tained under different experimental conditions.  
 In the presence of Fe-B (curve b) in the dark, the very 
fast initial decrease of Orange II concentration was attributed to the adsorption of the azo-dye on the surface of the nano-composite (adsorption capacity: ca. 20 mg Orange II per g of Fe-B). UV-C alone (a) yielded scarce removal. Under irra-diation with only H
2O2 addition (c), Orange II oxidation was 
significant due to the action of HO• coming from the H 2O2 
photolysis. In the Fenton dark system (d), discoloration was significant; however, the best results were obtained with the photo-Fenton treatment (e), allowing total discoloration in 1 h. Studies were performed to determine whether the faster    
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Fig. (9).  Relative Orange II concentration vs. time. (a) Only UV-C 
irradiation; (b) in the dark, [Fe-B] = 1.0 g L-1; (c) under irradiation 
without Fe-B and with addition of H 2O2; (d) in the dark, [Fe-B] = 
1.0 g L-1 with addition of H 2O2; (e) under irradiation, [Fe-B] = 1.0 g 
L-1 with addition of H 2O2. [Orange II] = 2.0 mM in all cases [63]. 
 
discoloration of Orange II was due to oxidation by HO• com-
ing from the heterogeneous or from the homogenous photo-
Fenton reaction, caused by the leaching of Fe from the Fe-B catalyst. Fe concentration in solution was measured under different experimental conditions and it was found that the amount of Fe passing to solution after 30 min of irradiation was very low in all cases, although the maximum (2.2  
mg L
-1) corresponded to experiment (e). The authors con-
cluded that the discoloration of Orange II is due to three 
processes: 1) adsorption on the Fe-B nanocomposite surface, 2) oxidation by heterogeneous PF reaction and 3) oxidation by homogenous PF reaction (having a minor role due to the low amount of Fe leached in solution).  
4.2.2. Photo-Fenton Catalyst Supported Over HY-zeolite 
(US7407908B2) 
 Another patent [64] describes the preparation, characteri-
zation and evaluation of a claimed eco-friendly, efficient photo-Fenton catalyst with Fe(III) immobilized over an HY-
zeolite support for use in the photocatalytic degradation of 
organic contaminants. Fe(III) ions were immobilized in dif-ferent loadings (0.125-5 wt%) on HY zeolite by impregna-tion. A known weight of Fe(III) was dissolved in water and zeolite was added to this solution, soaked for 12 h under con-tinuous stirring and dried at 100 ºC, followed by calcination 
at 450 ºC for 6 h in open air. The activity of the catalyst was 
evaluated by the degradation of phenol (Table 4). The results 
clearly show that Fe(III)-HY is more efficient compared with the respective homogeneous PF process and this highlights the synergistic role of zeolite: the support not only brings the pollutant molecules closer to the vicinity of the photocatalyst 
but also stabilizes Fe(III)/Fe(II) ions through interaction in 
zeolite cavities. The use of heterogeneous Fe(III)-HY in the photo-Fenton reaction allows the use of a wider pH range 
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3    231 
(up to 5-6) for the reaction against the narrow pH range 
needed in the homogeneous system. The catalyst, regener-ated by calcination, could be reused at least for three cycles. Dissolution of Fe from the catalyst was low (0.1 to 4  
mg L
-1). Table 5 describes the effect of Fe(III) loading over 
HY on phenol degradation. There is an optimum amount of Fe(III) (0.25 wt.%) that has to be incorporated to the zeolite to achieve an efficient degradation.  
 Results of phenol degradation over 0.25 wt% of Fe(III)-
HY at pH 6 with different H
2O2 concentrations indicate that 
with an increase of H 2O2 from 10-4 to 10-3 M, removal in-
creased due to increased HO• in solution. Further increase to 
10-2 M was detrimental, in agreement with the inhibitory role 
of H 2O2 at high concentrations, as explained in section 2.1 of 
this paper.  
4.2.3. High Efficiency Heterogeneous Photo-Fenton  
Process (WO142724A1) 
 Another invention presents the design of a heterogeneous 
photo-Fenton system for the abatement of organic pollutants in wastewater using heterogeneous perovskite-based cata-lysts, in both powder and in structured forms [65]. Three 
types of catalysts have been employed in the experimenta-tion: 
1) Bulk catalysts prepared by kneading powdered mixed 
oxides of elements of rare earths (e.g. La, Ce, Y, etc.) and a transition metal (Fe) with an alumina-based binder (aluminum hydroxide) in acid media, followed by extru-sion of the plastic pastes to obtain a monolith catalyst, dried at 120 °C and calcined at 900 °C for 4 h. The cata-
lytic activity of LnFeO
3 was studied by using acetic acid 
as model compound.  
2) Supported catalysts prepared by impregnation of refrac-
tory monolithic honeycomb cordierite supports with so-
lutions of precursors of perovs kites, i.e. nitrate metallic 
salts (LaMeO 3, Me = Mn, Co, Fe, Ni, Cu or mixtures) in 
ethyleneglycol with added citric acid. The samples were taken out of the solution, dried in air and calcined at 900 °C for 4 h. Foams based on alumina or SiC were pro-posed to be used as supports. Table 4. Effect of Various Experimental Parameters on Photo-Fenton Degradation of Phenol (10-4 M); (A) UV + Fe(III)-HY + 
H2O2; (B) Homogeneous Photo-Fenton; (C) UV + Fe(III)-HY; (D) Dark + Fe(III)-HY + H 2O2; (E) Photolysis [64]. 
Time (min) % Phenol 
 A B C D E 
-30 100 100 100 100 100 
0 86.9 99 85.7 86.2 100 
30 6.2 63 75.7 83.5 97.7 
60 1.5 48 74.6 80.9 93.6 
90 - 35 72.3 79.8 92.8 
120 - 27 69.6 78.1 91.3 
150 - 24 64.7 78 89.8 
180 - 20 - - - 
 
Table 5. Effect of Fe(III) Loading over HY on Heterogeneous Photo-Fenton Degradation of Phenol (10-4 M); H 2O2 = 10-3 M; pH 6 
[64]. 
Time (min) % Phenol  
wt.% of Fe(III)-HY 5 2 1 0.5 0.25 0.125 
-30 100 100 100 100 100 100 
0 77.2 87.3 97.2 89 86.9 96.6 
10 51.7 53.8 50.1 37 35.6 35.6 
20 39.5 34.8 24.3 23 17.6 19.4 
30 27.3 20.9 15.0 13 6.2 8.6 
40 19.9 12 11.5 9 5.4 4.2 
50 11.9 8 6.0 3.6 3.4 - 
60 10.1 7.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 - 232    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
3) A supported catalyst prepared by wet impregnation as 
reported in 2) with addition of Pt (as H 2PtCl 6). The sub-
strate can be either pure or precovered by the oxide 
sublayer. After Pt loading, samples were dried under air or, before drying, treated with reducing species such as 
hydrazine hydrate. 
 The structured perovskite-based catalyst was tested with 
a variety of organic pollutants, including methyl-tert-butylether (MTBE), ethanol, methanol, their mixtures and synthetic winery wastewaters. The obtained results clearly 
indicated that the catalyst is more efficient than the homoge-
neous PF catalyst, due to the adsorption of the pollutant molecules on the surface of the catalyst. In addition, it allows enlarging the operative range of pH (e.g ., pH 5) in compari-
son with the homogeneous system, without the formation of sludge. The photo-Fenton oxidation reaction was carried out 
in a single-pass reactor, in a batch reactor and in a continu-
ous irradiated recirculated reactor, preferably sealed, as shown in Fig. ( 10).  
 The catalytic activity of the PF reaction was checked 
with one of the prepared catalysts, using a 2.5 g LaFeO
3 
(2.24%) honeycomb monolith catalyst in 100 mL of acetic acid solution (0.021 M, TOC = 500 mg L
-1) and H 2O2 (0.083 
M (molar ratio: H 2O2/acetic acid = 4), pH 3.9. An 8 W mer-
cury vapor UV lamp was used. Samples were analyzed for 
TOC and H 2O2. After 4 hours of irradiation, 55% TOC re-
moval was observed, while the homogeneous system using 
ferric oxalate ([Fe3+] = 0.0296 M) yielded only 24% TOC 
removal. In the invention, pH, H 2O2 conc. and H 2O2 dosage 
have been optimized, and pH could be extended for acetic 
acid up to pH 6.  
4.3. Patents Related to Combination of AOPs  
4.3.1. Combined Treatment Technologies for Reclaimed 
Water (WO2009017756) 
 Pilot studies with a process including combinations of 
ozone, UV and H 2O2 followed by pressurized microfiltration are presented in patent [66] for removal and destruction of 
contaminants present in regional US wastewaters. The inter-est was put, especially, in microorganisms and organic com-pounds, e.g. endocrine disruptive substances (N,N-diethyl-toluamide or DEET, ethynilestradiol, triclosan (TCS), etc.), 
pharmaceutically active compounds, pathogens ( Crypto-
sporidium , poliovirus, coliforms) and other contaminants 
(nonylphenol (NP), bisphenol-A (BPA)). A UV/peracetic 
acid (PAA) system was an additional tested PAOP. The stud-ies were designed to test the efficacy of different treatments for accurate prediction of the cost of full-scale implementa-
tion for setting up a 1-million gallon-per-day treatment facil-
ity.  
 In a pilot study (Dublin, CA), the impact of different 
ozone doses, the effect of H
2O2 addition and of the quality of 
water using an ozone-based system was tested. Influent wa-
ter was treated using a HiPO x reactor oxidation system in 
combination with either a microfiltration (MF) device or a 
sand filter. The HiPO x reactor was a 10 gallon-per-minute 
plug-flow-type reactor, which included H 2O2 and O 3 injec-
tion points. The HiPO x process combines O 3 and H 2O2 to 
form HO• while controlling bromate formation, characteristic 
of high O 3 levels. The effluent was then filtered through a 
pressurized 0.2 m pore size microfilter or a continuous 
backwash upflow sand filter (1.27-1.38 mm nominal sand media diameter, 80” media depth). The filtered effluent wa-ter was analyzed for particle size distribution, BOD (biologi-cal oxygen demand), pH/alkalinity, TSS (total suspended 
solids), turbidity, nitrate, ammonia and phosphate. MF was 
more efficient than sand to reduce the content of microorgan-isms in the size range of Giardia, Crystosporidium  and bac-
teria and was also more effective in removing contaminants 
such as DEET, NP, TCS and BPA. Fig. ( 11) shows that virus 
removal is dependent on the applied ozone level but it is not 
affected by peroxide addition or type of filtration means. 
Similarly, coliform removal is affected by high ozone levels but not by H
2O2 addition (Fig. 12). It was established that 
effective coliform removal required higher levels of ozone 
than viruses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (10) . Scheme of a laboratory recirculated reactor for the PF reaction of invention [65]. 
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3    233 
 High levels of O 3 promote bromate formation, but re-
moval of bromate can be accomplished by H 2O2. Fig. ( 13) 
shows the effect of ozone levels on removal of NP, TCS and 
BPA. It can be seen that ozone provides substantial destruc-
tion of NP, triclosan and BPA. The results show that HiPOx treatment can be coupled with MF to remove effectively organic compounds and pathogens. 
 In a second plant (Pinellas county, FL, USA), the impact 
of UV dose and H
2O2 addition on contaminant removal was 
determined. The reactor was a UV/peroxide pilot Trojan 
(London, Ontario, Canada) equipment, with 30 low-pressure, high-output UV lamps and a H
2O2 injection system. The 
particular pollutants of this study were estradiol compounds and the potent carcinogen N-nitrosodimethylamine 
(NDMA). Results indicate that increasing levels of O
3 in-
creased destruction of EEQ (estrogen equivalent), while the 
type of filtration had little effect. Increasing levels of H 2O2 
increased destruction of EEQ while the amount of UV expo-sure had minimal effect. Both UV and H
2O2 treatment re-
duce NDMA levels. Increasing H 2O2 concentration above 5 mg L-1 minimally increased NDMA destruction, suggesting 
that the optimal efficiency can be achieved at moderate H 2O2 
levels. H 2O2 did not affect UV virus disinfection: increasing 
amounts of H 2O2 failed to reduce the levels of MS2 phage 
more than UV alone. As a conclusion, in this invention, UV treatment for virus destruction can be combined with ozone and/or H
2O2 for EEQ and NDMA destruction. 
 A third plant in Bradenton (FL, USA) was employed to 
determine the impact of PAA/UV and UV/H 2O2 on removal. 
The study demonstrated again that MF, after PAA/UV or 
UV/H 2O2, provided a substantially better microorganism 
barrier than sand filtration. Addition of O 3 at high doses sat-
isfied the coliform criteria of California Code (2.2 MPN per 100 mL total coliforms). Ozone at even moderate doses pro-
vided substantial virus destruction. On the other hand, O
3 
and O 3/H2O2 provided substantial contaminant destruction, 
and H 2O2 further reduced disinfection byproducts (DBP). 
The results of this third plant suggested that combinations of 
UV/O 3/H2O2 can be used to remove a diverse range of con-
taminants, taking advantage of the decontamination proper- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (11). Effect of ozone, peroxide and filtration on virus removal performed in pilot studies Dublin, CA, USA, according to invention [6 6]. 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 Fig. (12). Effect of ozone and peroxide levels on the efficiency of coliform removal performed in pilot studies Dublin, CA, USA, according  
to invention [66].   
234    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
ties of each treatment and exploiting the formation of HO• 
produced by UV/H 2O2 and O 3/H2O2 combinations. 
 Based on the pilot studies, a cost estimate for setting up a 
1-million gallon-per-day treatment facility was prepared. 
While the treatment with sand and chlorine is the least ex-pensive, the limited ability of sand to filter microcontami-nants and the undesirable taste and odor associated with chlorine limit the efficacy of the method. While conventional ultrafiltration (UF), RO and AOPs are more effective, the 
cost of these methods can be prohibitive. The studies suggest 
that ozone and UV combined with H
2O2 and MF can ade-
quately decontaminate wastewater at a fraction of the cost of conventional methods, and even substitute conventional methods (Fig. 14). 
4.3.2. Treatment of Water for Zero Liquid Discharge 
Plants (US7531096B2) 
 Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD) systems are used in power 
industry to address problems associated with limitations of water availability, conservation of fresh water supplies and environmental restrictions on discharge. The aim of patent 
[67] is to produce clean feed water for a boiler system of a 
power plant configured for ZLD by reducing the organic contaminants in the source water (TOC < 300 μg L
-1), em-
ploying a pressurized advanced oxidation system in continu-
ous operational mode. The system (Fig. 15) includes an 
ozonation module (25) for applying ozone at high concentra-
tion to the source water followed by an ozone reactor (26) in 
which the mixed stream is retained under pressure, con-nected to a UV reactor (27) downstream for enhanced con-taminant reduction, and a retention tank (28).  
 As explained before, the rate of organic contaminant 
conversion depends on the mass transfer of O
3 from the gas 
to the liquid phase. In this way, important controls on ozone 
transfer efficiency include pressure, temperature, reaction time, ionic strength and ozone feed. It is also necessary to use ozone destructor systems to eliminate the excess of ozone not dissolved in the liquid stream, which cannot be 
discharged into the atmosphere. The system includes two on-
line TOC analyzers (one before and another after the treat-ment) configured to determine TOC levels in a near real-time. The second TOC analyzer can be used to compare the obtained TOC level with the maximum limit established and, if it is exceeded, the effluent can be directed back to the ozonation module.  
4.3.3. Multi-barrier Water Purification System 
(WO2009044288A2) 
 In another patent [68], a method integrating UV radiation 
in an advanced decontamination processes and a honing ma-terial, along with a cross-flow membrane filter (usually a 
ceramics) into a single closed-loop system, is described. One 
of the important achievements of the offered technique is that it provides a 100% fluid recovery system, i.e. zero reject 
stream. In one of the embodiments, a filtration membrane 
and a honing material are located in the effluent to scrub foulants from the membrane. The system comprises an ad-
vanced decontamination process sufficient to destroy, by 
oxidation or reduction, biological and organic contamination. The authors claim that such a combination has not been pro-vided in conventional approaches, and that the system pre-sents enhanced performance over the sum of the individual technologies. In a more specific closed-loop system, a cross-
flow filtration membrane and a TiO
2 photocatalytic slurry 
are placed in the contaminated aqueous system. In this case, 
the slurry has a texture sufficient to scrub foulants from the filtration membrane and acts as honing material. The system includes a UV light source providing a photolytic reaction sufficient for disinfection and it can be located in any place 
in the closed-loop system. Addition of H
2O2 and O 3 can in-
crease the decontaminating power of the system. In other 
cases, the honing may be provided by a honing material and/or by turbulent flow within the reactor. The membrane acts as an ultimate barrier for most biological species. A “blowdown” can be incorporated to eliminate suspended 
solids within the loop. A fourth barrier such as RO or elec-
trodialysis may also be added to the output of the multi-barrier system to remove inorganic salts, etc. The system not only disinfects but also sterilizes: algae, protozoa, mold spore, bacteria or viruses cannot pass the ceramic cross-flow filter membrane. The implementation of the multi-barrier 
system might eliminate the use of more complicating tech- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (13). Effect of ozone levels on removal of NP, TCS and BPA performed in pilot studies Dublin, CA, USA according to invention [66]. 
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3    235 
nologies such as flocculation-coagulation-clarification, 
chemical precipitation, MF & UF, sand filtration, activated carbon adsorption, UV disinfection, greensand filters, etc. It 
is claimed that the filtration membrane, having dynamic fil-
ter coating, can treat 2000 gal ft
-2 per day with an effective 
filtration pore size about 12 nm. Summarizing, the multi-barrier system destroys and mineralizes organic compounds, removes suspended solids, reduces turbidity, color, odor and even remove some heavy metals, and it is proposed to treat 
drinking water or water for reuse. All the steps are performed 
in a stand-alone unit with inlet and outlet for the fluid. A scheme of the proposed system is shown in Fig. ( 16). 
4.3.4. Process for Treatment of Large Amounts of Vinasse Wastewater (WO2009135276A1)  
 In patent [69], a process for treatment of large amounts of 
wastewater of vinasse, a toxic liquid residue abundantly pro-duced on ethanol manufacturing or alcoholic beverage pro-duction, is proposed. In the case of sugar cane, vinasse is generated on large amounts, from 10 to 18 L per liter of pro-duced alcohol. The wastewater leaves the distillation appara-tus at 85-90 ºC, with an elevated amount of pollutants (mainly recalcitrant phenolic compounds), considerable or-ganic charge (high COD and BOD), intense coloring and low 
pH, being highly toxic to the flora and fauna. In addition, the 
slow natural degradation exhales strong and unpleasant toxic odors. The proposed disinfection and degradation process consisted on the sequential application of different stages: oxidation, biodigestion, neutralization, coagulation, floccula-tion, photooxidation by AOPs and demineralization by ab-
sorption. The authors claim that the resulting wastes can be 
utilized as fertilizers and nutrients, the biogas as energy source, and the recycled water for irrigation or other pur-poses.  
 The first stage is an ozonation process for oxidation of 
organic recalcitrant pollutants. When ozone is sparkled for 
several minutes, 50-80% oxidation of the phenolic compo-nents is achieved, enough to allow the effluent entering the biological treatment. The second stage consists in the pas-sage through a bioreactor such as UASB (Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket)-type, mixed bed anaerobic filters, fixed bed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (14).  Comparison of the construction costs of different water treatment facilities studied in invention (adapted from [66]). 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 Fig. (15).  Scheme of the advanced oxidation system employed to produce clean feed water production for a boiler system of a power plant 
configured for ZLD, according to patent (adapted from [67]). 
236    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
anaerobic filters, ascending or descending, with polymeric, 
clayish, zeolitic beds or even vegetal fibers or sponges ( Luffa 
cilindrica ) at a very slow flow. Mesophyll anaerobic micro-
organisms show a great performance for this purpose. The 
obtained biogas is recycled and used on heating parts of the plant or as a fuel. In the third stage, the effluent is submitted to a coagulation-flocculation process where a substantial part 
of the colloidal organic charge is separated from the fluid 
phase with simultaneous elimination of turbidity. Hydrox-ides, oxides or carbonates from alkaline or alkaline earth metals or ferrous sulfate can be used in this stage. The su-pernatant fluid is then submitted to the fourth stage, a PAOP like photo-Fenton, UV/ozone, UV/H
2O2, or TiO 2- or ZnO-
photocatalysis. The remaining fluid already contains low levels of BOD. In the last stage, removal of inorganic ions is performed through adsorbents/ionic exchangers like resins, zeolites, clays, bentonites, kaolin derivatives, molecular sieves, etc. In this way, the organic charge is reduced 95-100% and COD 90-100%, with an important increase on 
BOD
5/COD (biodegradability index).  
4.3.5. Embedded Electron Induced Ozonation and Activa-
tion of Nanostructured TiO 2 (US7691342B2) 
 A recent invention [70] proposes a process using com-
pact embedded electron induced ozonation and activation of 
nanostructured TiO 2 useful for photocatalytic oxidation of 
alcohols, hydrocarbons or other organic pollutants. The 
authors claim that by selectively producing partial oxygen-ates and less by-products and pollutants than conventional oxidation reactions, the process achieves economy of the atomic level by direct oxygenation of hydrocarbons without 
using multiple stages and without loss of atoms.  
 The system is a unitary apparatus, based on the use of an 
emitting UV light surface corona, which pr oduces ozone and 
activates a photocatalyst coated on the surface. Surface co-rona is an electrical discharge (frequently luminous, non-
thermal plasma) at the surface of a conductor or between two 
conductors of the same transmission line, accompanied by ionization of the surrounding atmosphere. The surface co-rona discharge system produces O
3 by passing air or O 2 
through a high voltage electrical discharge (> 5000 V). Sur-
face corona generates low energy electrons (10-20 eV), 
which are accelerated, collide with O 2 and dissociate the  
 molecular bond in two free oxygen atoms; their collision with other oxygen molecules creates ozone. A surface corona 
discharge also produces UV light of low power (about 2.0 W). Several references on the fundamentals and applications of surface corona are included in the patent (see for example [71-76]). Ozone concentrations of 1-2% using air, and 3-8% using oxygen can be obtained by surface corona discharge 
generators. The photocatalyst is a thin film of nanoparticu-
late TiO
2 (primary particle size: 0.02-0.2 m), deposited on a 
substrate by a flame aerosol method. In one example of the application, the method was employed for the treatment of water contaminated with MTBE. Fig. ( 17) is a cross-
sectional schematic diagram of the prototype surface corona 
discharge photocatalytic reactor used in this working exam-
ple.  
 The reactor consisted of two concentric tubes (29) and 
(30). The outer tube (29) had embedded ceramic electrodes on its inner surface, which generate UV light. The inner Py-
rex tube (30) had its inner surface coated with a nanostruc-
tured film, prepared by deposition of a fine-grained, high-surface area TiO
2 (98% anatase, 33 nm crystallite size, 80-
100 m2 g-1). The generated UV light passed through tube 
(30) and activated the TiO 2 film in contact with the MTBE 
contaminated water. Ozone was supplied through fritted 
glass at the bottom of tube (30) and percolated up through 
the contaminated water within the reactor. SEM (scanning electron microscopy) images of the TiO
2 film indicate that 
the material had an uneven granular surface, providing many adsorption sites for MTBE. The TiO
2 film was found to ad-
here very well to the Pyrex tube and was very durable 
throughout several runs. The ozone concentration and UV 
light intensity were adjusted with a variable voltage control. Varying these parameters allowed determination of the role of each AOP on MTBE degradation, al ong with the synergis-
tic effect of using both processes together. The irradiance of 
the generated UV light, measured with a radiome-
ter/photometer was 2.5 and 12 mW cm
-2 for 315-400 nm and 
250-315 nm, respectively. Fig. ( 18) presents the results of 
the experiments conducted under different conditions. The 
enhanced effect of TiO 2 photocatalysis was more noticeable 
with a low ozone concentration, and with a high ozone con-centration, there was no significant enhancement of MTBE 
degradation by the combined effects. The advantage of the  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (16).  Scheme of a closed-loop multi-barrier cross flow-filtration system integrated with AOP proposed in innovation (modified from 
[68]).  
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3    237 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Fig. (17).  Schematic view of the combined liquid phase reactor for 
ozonation and photocalytic oxidation of MTBE [70]. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
Fig. (18).  Concentration of MTBE vs.  time under different condi-
tions in experiments performed with the system of patent [70]. 
 
invention is that the surface corona originates simultaneously 
ozone and UV light, causing a synergistic effect for oxida-tion. Additionally, the surface corona discharge generator accelerates electrons and produces free radicals and ions, able to provoke additional oxidation reactions. 
4.3.6. Regeneration of Adsorbents by AOPs 
(WO2007056717A2)  
 A recent patent proposes the use of zeolites as hosts to 
entrap organics inside the adsorbent pores of hydrophobic molecular sieves, submitting then the materials to AOPs to regenerate the adsorbents, by removing of bound contami-nants [77]. Coupling these two processes, the method leads to ultimate destruction of the contaminants. Particular exam-ples of zeolites used in the invention are siliealite-1, dealu-minated zeolite Y (DAY) and mordenite. Using hydrophobic 
molecular sieves, the disadvantages of common activated 
carbon or other adsorbents (low capacity, competition of NOM, high temperature regeneration costs or costly dis-posal) are avoided due to the smaller pore size that makes them more selective for organic removal. Some of the advan-tages of this invention include: 
1) Much smaller processing volumes.  
2) Water is never in contact with the advanced oxidation 
reagents. 
3) Organics are mineralized to safer end-products (CO
2 + 
H2O). 
4) Reduced oxidant doses. 
5) Hydrophobic molecular sieves can be reused repeatedly 
after regeneration. 
 The proposed oxidation reagent may be O 3 or combined 
technologies such as O 3/H2O2, Fe2+/H2O2, zerovalent 
iron/H 2O2, etc. The method can be designed as sequential 
removal/regeneration systems, continuous flow systems or simultaneous removal/treatment systems using a single-step 
process. The system was proposed to treat organic com-pounds like MTBE, trichloroethylene, BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylenes), etc. The adsorbents are affixed to a substrate, like a permeable membrane (a poly-crystalline particulate aggregate) and they are removed from 
the water by centrifugation or filtration.  
 In one example, silicalite-1 and DAY removed success-
fully DBPs like chloroform (CLF) and trichloroacetic acid at low concentrations after 24 h contact time on an orbital shaker (0.2 g sorbent in 40 mL solution). However, the con-
taminants remained in the sorbents in concentrated form af-
ter adsorption. For regeneration, the zeolite was directly coated with zerovalent iron by a borohydride reduction pro-cedure starting from FeSO
4.7H 2O. The Fe0 coated adsorbent 
was then subjected to 30% H 2O2. The adsorbent was sub-
jected to repeated cycles of adsorption followed by regenera-
tion. Fig. ( 19) indicates that repeated adsorption of CLF to 
silicalite-1 resulted in saturation of the solid, with no further 
CLF uptake after 7 cycles (0.2 g adsorbent in 40 mL solution containing initially 1 mg L
-1 CLF). However, submitting the 
material to advanced oxidation just adding H 2O2 after each 
cycle, resulted in constant capacity for adsorption. 
 The authors claim that the process can be also performed 
under UV irradiation, by a photo-Fenton process or other PAOPs.  
5. CURRENT & FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
 AOPs appear as very strong and important technologies 
to be employed in water and wastewater treatment in very 
especial cases, when very recalcitrant compounds are pre-sent, which cannot be destroyed or transformed by conven-tional technologies into less noxious chemical compounds. From AOPs, those based on photochemical processes 
238    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010, Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
(PAOPs) are the most studied because the required energy is 
not as expensive as in the case of more sophisticated meth-ods, e.g. those using high temperature and pressures or ra-diolytic processes. The final aim, always wished, is the min-eralization of organic compounds to CO
2 plus H 2O and other 
simple inorganic substances. However, this final aim is sel-dom achieved and only some AOPs, in very especial condi-tions, can attain this ultimate goal. It is important to remark also that only small or medium volumes can be treated by these technologies. 
 Many academic studies on PAOPs have been made, gen-
erally using one single model pollutant, which achieved the complete elucidation of mechanisms and identification of intermediate compounds formed in the systems, together with the kinetic regimes taking place. Also, engineering models and design of reactors are rather well developed and 
can be found in the literature. In spite of all these findings, 
AOPs have not been very much applied in real systems, and not many patents on the subject appear in the literature. Among them, photocatalytic oxidation and photo-Fenton treatment, combined or alone, appears to be one step ahead in terms of technological development. It can be observed 
that most of the patented work relies on one of the biggest 
problems when using photocatalytic techniques for water purification or treatment, which is the necessity of fixing the photocatalyst to a convenient support to avoid a further costly separation. In other cases, combination of technolo-gies appears as the most feasible application, using the syn-
ergy of simultaneous technologies or the increase of the deg-
radation at the least cost by application of successive techno-logical steps. 
 Two final conclusions follow. First, only a few authors 
focus on the actual operating cost of the technologies and 
more detailed cost analysis should be performed, since the 
information is fundamental to choose a water treatment sys-tem. Second, although most applied and patented works claim that their proposed methods can be used in a general way, or that the combinations may be extended and even “universal”, it is always mandatory to perform a treatability study of the waters before real application of the technolo-gies.  
 As sophisticated and complex devices are hard to be de-
veloped and used by water and wastewater managers, future developments should focus on simple, non-expensive, easily constructed and easily handled systems. Systems to provide safe and clean water to isolated populations should be also considered by technologists. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 This work was financed by the Agencia Nacional de la 
Promoción de la Ciencia y la Tecnología ANPCyT PAE 22257 and PICT512 projects.  
CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 None. 
ABBREVIATIONS 
A = Acceptor 
AO7 = Acid Orange AOP = Advanced Oxidation Process 
AOT = Advanced Oxidation Technology 
B = Bentonite BOD = Biological oxygen demand 
BPA = Bisphenol-A 
BTEX = Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, 
and xylenes 
CFD = Computational fluid dynamics CLF = Chloroform  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. (19). Regeneration of Fe0-coated silicalite-1 with H 2O2 after CLF contact ([77]).  
Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3    239 
COD = Chemical oxygen demand 
D = Donor DAY = Dealuminated zeolite Y 
DBP = Disinfection byproducts 
DEET = N,N-diethyl-toluamide  DOC = Dissolved organic carbon 
e
cb- = Conduction band electrons 
EDTA = Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid E
EO = Electrical energy per order 
EEQ = Estrogen equivalent 
Eg = Bandgap 
Fe-B = Bentonite iron oxide catalyst nanoparticles 
FHO = Fresh iron oxyhydroxides 
Gal = Gallic acid HO
• = Hydroxyl radical 
HO 2• = Hydroperoxyl radical 
HP = Heterogeneous photocatalysis h
vb+ = Valence band holes 
L = Ligand 
LED = Light-emitting diode LMCT = Ligand to metal charge transfer 
MF = Microfiltration 
MTBE = Methyl-tert-butylether NDMA = N-nitrosodimethylamine 
NOM = Natural organic matter 
NP = Nonylphenol NZVI = Zerovalent iron nanoparticles 
PAA = Peracetic acid 
PAOP = Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Proc-
ess 
PET = Polyethyleneterephtalate 
PF = Photo-Fenton pH
pzc = Point of zero charge 
PMR = Photocatalytic membrane reactor 
RO = Reverse osmosis ROS = Reactive oxygen species 
SEM = Scanning electron microscopy 
SORAS = Solar Oxidation and Removal of Arsenic TCS = Triclosan 
TFFBR = Thin film fixed bed reactor 
TOC = Total organic carbon TSS = Total suspended solids 
UASB = UPFLOW Anaerobic Sludge Blanket  UF = Ultrafiltration 
US = Ultrasound  UV = Ultraviolet 
V
fb = Flatband potential 
VUV = Vacuum ultraviolet  ZLD = Zero Liquid Discharge 
ZVI = Zerovalent iron 
 = Quantum yield 
 = Molar absorption coefficient M-1 cm-1 
REFERENCES 
[1] Buxton GV, Greenstock CL, Helman WP, Ross AB, Tsang W. 
Critical review of rate constants for reactions of hydrated electrons, 
Chemical kinetic data base for combustion chemistry. Part 3: Pro-
pane. J Phys Chem Ref Data 1988; 17: 513-886. 
[2] Glaze WH, Kang JW, Chapin DH. The chemistry of water treat-
ment processes involving ozone, hydrogen peroxide, and ultraviolet 
radiation. Ozone Sci Eng 1987; 9: 335-42.  
[3] Oppenländer T. Photochemical purification of water and air. Wein-
heim, Germany: Wiley-VCH 2002. 
[4] US/EPA Handbook of advanced photochemical oxidation proc-
esses. EPA/625/R-98/004, 1998.  
[5] Legrini O, Oliveros E, Braun AM. Photochemical processes for 
water treatment. Chem Rev 1993; 93: 671-98. 
[6] Pignatello JJ, Oliveros E, MacKay A. Advanced oxidation proc-
esses for organic contaminant destruction based on the Fenton reac-
tion and related chemistry. Crit Rev Environ Sci Technol 2006; 36: 
1-84. 
[7] Hoffmann MR, Martin ST, Choi W, Bahnemann DW. Environ-
mental applications of semiconductor photocatalysis. Chem Rev 
1995; 95: 69-96. 
[8] Fujishima A, Rao TN, Tryk DA. Titanium dioxide photocatalysis. J 
Photochem Photobiol C 2000; 1: 1-21. 
[9] Litter MI. Heterogeneous photocatalysis. Transition metal ions in 
photocatalytic systems. Appl Catal B 1999; 23: 89-114. 
[10] Doménech D, Jardim W, Litter M. Tecnologías avanzadas de oxi-
dación para la eliminación de contaminantes. In: Blesa MA, Sán-
chez B, Eds. Eliminación de Contaminantes por Fotocatálisis Hete-
rogénea: Ediciones CIEMAT 2004; pp. 7-34.  
[11] Litter MI. Introduction to photochemical advanced oxidation proc-
esses for water treatment. In: Bahnemann D, Boule P, Eds. The 
Handbook of environmental chemistry, series, Volume M, Part L: 
Environmental Photochemistry Part II. Springer-Verlag: GmbH 
Publish 2005; pp. 325-66. 
[12] Litter MI. Treatment of chromium, mercury, lead, uranium and 
arsenic in water by heterogeneous photocatalysis. In: De Lasa H, 
Serrano B, Eds. Advances in chemical engineering, photocatalytic 
technologies. Elsevier: Academic Press 2009; vol. 36: pp. 37-67. 
[13] Gogate PR, Pandit AB. A review of imperative technologies for 
wastewater treatment I: oxidation technologies at ambient condi-
tions. Adv Environ Res 2004; 8: 501-51.  
[14] Gogate PR, Pandit AB. A review of imperative technologies for 
wastewater treatment II: hybrid methods. Adv Environ Res 2004; 
8: 553-97. 
[15] Braslavsky, SE. Glossary of terms used in photochemistry. 3rd ed. 
Pure Appl Chem 2007; 79: 293-465.  
[16] Alpert SM, Knappe RUD, Ducoste JJ. Modeling the UV/hydrogen 
peroxide advanced oxidation process using computational fluid dy-
namic. Water Res 2010; 44: 1797-808. 
[17] Cisneros LR, Espinoza GA, Litter MI. Photodegradation of an azo 
dye from the textile i ndustry. Chemosphere 2002; 248: 393-9.  
[18] Mohey el-Dein A, Libra JA, Wiesmann U. Mechanism and kinetic 
model for the decolorization of the azo dye Reactive Black 5 by 
hydrogen peroxide and UV radiation. Chemosphere 2003; 53: 
1069-77. 
[19] Behnajady MA, Modirshahla N, Shokri M, Vahid B. Design equa-
tion with mathematical continuous-flow photoreactor. J Hazard 
Mater 2009; 165: 168-73. 240    Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3 Litter and Quici 
[20] Bolton JR, Bircher KG, Tumas W, Tolman CA. Figures-of-merit 
for the technical development and application of advanced oxida-
tion technologies for both electric- and solar-driven systems (IU-
PAC technical report). Pure Appl Chem 2001; 73: 627-37. 
[21] Aleboyeh A, Olya ME, Aleboyeh H. Electrical energy determina-
tion for an azo dye decolorization and mineralization by UV/H 2O2 
advanced oxidation process. Chem Eng J 2008; 137: 518-24. 
[22] Augugliaro V, L itter M, Palmisano L, Soria J. The combination of 
heterogeneous photocatalysis with chemical and physical opera-
tions: a tool for improving the photoprocess performance. J Photo-
chem Photobiol C 2006; 7: 127-44. 
[23] Domènech X, Casado J, Peral J. Solar activated ozonation of phe-
nol and malic acid. Chemosphere 2003; 50:1085-93. 
[24] Chen R, Pignatello JJ. Role of quinone intermediates as electron 
shuttles in Fenton and photoassisted Fenton oxidations of aromatic 
compounds. Environ Sci Technol 1997; 731: 2399-466. 
[25] Kim SM, Geissen SU, Vogelpohl A. Landfill leachate treatment by 
a photoassisted Fenton reaction. Water Sci Technol 1997; 35: 239-
48.  
[26] Hermosilla D, Cortijo M, Huang CP . The role of iron on the degra-
dation and mineralization of organic compounds using conven-
tional Fenton and photo-Fenton processes. Chem Eng J 2009; 155: 
637-46. 
[27] Linsebigler AL, Lu G, Yates JT Jr. Photocatalysis on TiO 2 surfa-
ces: principles, mechanisms and selected results. Chem Rev 1995; 
95: 735-58. 
[28] Mills A, Le Hunte SJ. An overview of semiconductor photocataly-
sis. J Photochem Photobiol A 1997; 108: 1-35. 
[29] Fujishima A, Zhang X. Titanium dioxide photocatalysis: present 
situation and future approaches. C R Chimie 2006; 9: 750-60. 
[30] Martin ST, Herrmann H, Hoffmann MR. Time-resolved microwave 
conductivity Part 2.-Quantum-sized TiO 2, and the effect of adsor-
bates and light intensity on charge-carrier dynamics. J Chem Soc 
Faraday Trans 1994; 90: 3323-330. 
[31] Ibáñez JA, Litter MI, Pizarro RA. Photocatalytic bactericidal effect 
of TiO 2 on Enterobacter cloacae . Comparative study with other 
Gram (-) bacteria. J Photochem Photobiol A 2003; 157: 81-5. 
[32] Emilio CA, Testa JJ, Hufschmidt D, et al. Features and efficiency 
of some platinized TiO 2 photocatalysts. J Ind Eng Chem 2004: 10; 
129-38.  
[33] Fujishima A, Zhang X, Tryk DA. TiO 2 photocatalysis and related 
surface phenomena. Surf Sci Rep 2008; 63: 515-82. 
[34] Meichtry JM, Rivera V, Di Iorio Y, Román SE, Grela MA, Litter 
MI. Photoreduction of Cr(VI) using hydroxoaluminumtricarboxy-
monoamide phthalocyanine adsorbed on TiO 2. Photochem Photo-
biol Sci 2009; 8: 604-12.  
[35] Litter MI, Morgada ME, Bundsc huh J. Possible treatments for 
arsenic removal in Latin American waters for human consumption. 
Environ Pollut 2010; 158: 1105-18. 
[36] Morgada ME, Levy IK, Salomone V, Farías SS, López G, Litter 
MI. Arsenic (V) removal with nanoparticulate zerovalent iron: ef-
fect of UV light and humic acids. Catal Today 2009; 143: 261-8. 
[37] Bundschuh J, Litter M, Ciminelli V, et al. Emerging mitigation 
needs and sustainable options for solving the arsenic problems of 
rural and isolated urban areas in Iberoamerica - A critical analysis. 
Water Res 2010; 44: 5828-45. 
[38] Noubactep C. Processes of contaminant removal in “Fe0-H2O” 
systems revisited: the importance of co-precipitation. Open Environ 
J 2007; 1: 9-13. 
[39] Hug S, Canonica L, Wegelin M, Gechter D, von Gunten U. Solar 
oxidation and removal of arsenic at circumneutral pH in iron con-
taining waters. Environ Sci Technol 2001; 35: 2114-21. 
[40] Emmett MT, Khoe GH. Photochemical oxidation of arsenic by 
oxygen and iron in acidic solutions. Water Res 2001; 35: 649-56. 
[41] Pulgarin C, Sarria V, Kenfach S, Guillod O. An innovative coupled 
solar-biological system at field pilot. J Photochem Photobiol A 
2003; 159: 89-99. 
[42] Oller I, Malato S, Sanchez-Perez J, et al. A combined solar photo-
catalytic-biological field system for the mineralization of an indus-
trial pollutant at pilot scale. Catal Today 2007; 122: 150-9. 
[43] Kitis M, Adams CD, Daigger GT. The effects of Fenton’s reagent 
pretreatment on the biodegradability of nonionic surfactants. Water 
Res 1999; 33: 2561-8. 
[44] de la Fuente L, Acosta T, Babay P, Curutchet G, Candal R, Litter 
MI. Degradation of nonylphenol ethoxylate-9 (NPE-9) by photo-chemical advanced oxidation technologies. Ind Eng Chem Res 
2010; 49: 6909-15. 
[45] Lucas MS, Peres JA, Li Puma G. Treatment of winery wastewater 
by ozone-based advanced oxidation processes (O 3, O 3/UV and 
O3/UV/H 2O2) in a pilot-scale bubble column reactor and process 
economics. Separ Purif Technol 2010; 72: 235-41. 
[46] Quici N, Morgada ME, Piperata G, Babay P, Gettar RT, Litter MI. 
Oxalic acid destruction at high concentrations by combined hetero-
geneous photocatalysis and photo-Fenton processes. Catal Today 
2005; 101: 253-60. 
[47] Quici N, Morgada ME, Gettar R, Bolte M, Litter MI. Photocata-
lytic degradation of citric acid under different conditions: TiO 2 het-
erogeneous photocatalysis against homogeneous photolytic proc-
esses promoted by Fe(III) and H 2O2. Appl Catal B 2006; 71: 117-
24. 
[48] Quici N, Litter MI. Heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation of 
gallic acid under different experimental conditions. Photochem 
Photobiol Sci 2009; 8: 975-84. 
[49] Emilio CA. Eliminación de ácidos oligocarboxílicos por Fotocatáli-
sis Heterogénea y otras Tecnologías Avanzadas de Oxidación , PhD 
Thesis, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de 
Buenos Aires, December 2006. 
[50] Babay PA, Emilio CA, Ferreyra RE, Gautier EA, Gettar RT, Litter 
MI. Kinetics and mechanisms of EDTA photocatalytic degradation 
with TiO 2, Water Sci Technol 2001; 44: 179-85. 
[51] Babay PA, Emilio CA, Ferreyra RE, Gautier EA, Gettar RT, Litter 
MI. Kinetics and mechanisms of EDTA photocatalytic degradation 
with TiO 2 under different experimental conditions. Int J Pho-
toenergy 2001; 3:193-9. 
[52] Malato S, Fernández-Ibáñez P, Maldonado MI, Blanco J, Gernjak 
W. Decontamination and disinfection of water by solar photocata-
lysis: Recent overview and trends. Catal Today 2009; 147: 1-59. 
[53] Butters BE, Powell AL. System for photocatalytic treatment of 
contaminated media. US7008473B2, 2006. 
[54] Carmignani GM, Frederick LW. Apparatus and method for photo-
catalytic purification and disinfection of water and ultrapure water. 
US6524447B1, 2003. 
[55] Mozia S. Photocatalytic membrane reactors (PMRs) in water and 
wastewater treatment. A review. Separ Purif Technol 2010; 73: 71-
91.  
[56] Stefanelli ML. Photocatalytic membrane, process for its production 
and use thereof. EP1555064A1, 2005.  
[57] Wang KH, Hsieh Y-H, Chao P-W, Cgang C-Y. The photocatalytic 
degradation of trichloroethane by chemical vapor deposition 
method prepared titanium dioxide catalyst. J H azard Mater 2002; 
B25: 161-74. 
[58] Kumakiri I, Bredesen R, Raeder H, Simon C. Photo-catalytic 
membrane reactor. WO2010021551A1, 2010. 
[59] WATERCATOX, Waste Water Treatment by Catalytic Oxidation 
Contactor, A research project under the 5th Framework Program-
me of the European Commission, Contract no. EVK1-CT-2000-
00073, http://www.sintef.no/units/matek/2420/242022/watercatox/ 
(Accessed on: May 28, 2010). 
[60] Iojoiu, EE, Miachon S, Landrivon E, Walmsley JC, Ræder H, Dal-
mon J-A. Wet air oxidation in a catalytic membrane reactor: Model 
and industrial wastewater in single tubes and multichannel contac-
tors. Appl Catal B 2007; 69: 196-206.  
[61] Venegas Cabello PA, Yeber Ortis MC, Narvaez Dinamarca AL, del 
Pilar Sobenes Vennekool C, Ortiz Sanhueza CM. Photocatalytic re-
actor with a modular configuration and advanced oxidation process 
for purifying and disinfecting wastewater from aquaculture. 
EP1686095A1, 2006.  
[62] Subrahmanyam M, Boule P, Valluri DK, Reddy MP, Noorjahan M, 
Raghaan KV. Method and apparatus for purification of industrial 
wastewater with thin film fixed bed TiO 2 photocatalyst. 
WO2004058649A1, 2004.  
[63] Feng J, Yue PL, Hu X, Wong SKR. Synthesis of bentonite clay-
based iron nanocomposite and its use as a heterogeneous photo 
Fenton catalyst. US20060076299A1, 2006. 
[64] Subrahmanyam M, Kumari VD, Noorjahan M. Eco-friendly photo-
Fenton catalyst-immobilized Fe(III) over HY-zeolite. 
US7407908B2, 2008. 
[65] Sannino D, Ciambelli P, Ricciardi M, Isupova LA.  Wastewater 
treatment by high efficiency heterogeneous photo-Fenton process. 
WO142724A1, 2008.   Photochemical Advanced Oxidation Processes Recent Patents on Engineering  2010 , Vol. 4, No. 3    241 
[66] Borg C. Innovative treatment technologies for reclaimed water.  
WO2009017756, 2009. 
[67] Yarbrough ME, Takinen SA. System and method of reducing or-
ganic contaminants in feed water. US7531096B2, 2009. 
[68] Butters BE, Powell AL. Multi-barrier water purification system and 
method. WO2009044288A2, 2009. 
[69] Dos Santos AF, Caetano CA. Process for large amounts of waste-
water desinfection and treatment, water recycling and utilization of 
organic and inorganic charges. WO2009135276A1, 2009.  
[70] Sahle-Demissie E, Pratim BP, Unnikrishnan RP, Chulhan K. Proc-
ess using compact embedded electron induced ozonation and acti-
vation of nanostructured titanium dioxide photocatalyst for photo-
catalytic oxidation. US7691342B2, 2010. 
[71] Yan K, Hui H, Cui M, et al. Corona induced nonthermal plasmas: 
Fundamental study and industrial applications. J Electrostat 1998; 
44: 17-39. [72] Yan K, van Heesch EJM, Pemen AJM, Huijbrechts AHJ. Elements 
of pulsed corona induced nonthermal plasmas for pollution control 
and sustainable development. J Electrostat 2001; 51-52: 218-24. 
[73] Grymonpre DR, Finney WC, Locke BR. Aqueous-phase pulsed 
streamer corona reactor using suspended activated carbon particles 
for phenol oxidation: model-data comparison. Chem Eng Sci 1999; 
54: 3095-105. 
[74] Grymonpre, DR, Sharma AK, Finney WC, Locke BR. The role of 
Fenton's reaction in aqueous phase pulsed streamer corona reactors. 
Chem Eng J 2001; 82: 189-207. 
[75] Futamura S, Zhang AH, Yamamoto T. The dependence of 
nonthermal plasma behavior of VOCs on their chemical structures. 
J Electrostat 1997/98; 42: 51-62.  
[76] Fujii T, Rea M. Treatment of NO x in exhaust gas by corona plasma 
over water surface. Vacuum 2000; 59: 228-35. 
[77] Bergendhal JA, Koryabkina N, Thompson RW. Methods and de-
vices for the removal of organic contaminants from water. 
WO2007056717A2, 2007.  
 
 
 
 
View publication statsView publication stats