36 CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008Purpose: T o report a case of autonomic, neurological and 
neuromuscular instability following methylene blue infusion for 
parathyroidectomy; to advance the argument for a diagnosis 
of serotonin syndrome; and to consider this diagnosis in previ -
ous, unexplained reports of adverse reactions amongst patients 
undergoing parathyroidectomy using methylene blue.
Clinical features: Methylene blue was administered to a 58-
yr-old woman undergoing a parathyroidectomy under general 
anesthesia. The patient had a background of obsessive com -
pulsive disorder treated with paroxetine. Postoperatively, she 
demonstrated symptoms and signs of serotonin syndrome; 
specifically tachycardia, agitation, dystonia and abnormal eye 
movements. These clinical findings spontaneously resolved 
themselves over the subsequent 48 hr.
Conclusion: An interaction between methylene blue and 
serotonergic agents may give rise to the serotonin syndrome. 
Consideration should be given to avoiding methylene blue in 
patients taking serotonergic agents. The diagnosis should be 
considered in patients with autonomic, neuromuscular or neu -
rological changes and should be managed accordingly.
CAN J ANESTH 2008 / 55: 1 / pp 36–41
Objectif  : Présenter un cas d’instabilité autonome, neurologique 
et neuromusculaire suivant une perfusion de bleu de méthylène 
pendant une parathyroïdectomie ; développer les assises du diag -
nostic de syndrome sérotoninergique ; reconsidérer, à la lumière de ce diagnostic, des cas précédents de réactions indésirables 
inexpliquées chez des patients ayant subi des parathyroïdectomies 
et traités avec du bleu de méthylène.
Éléments cliniques  : Du bleu de méthylène a été administré à 
une femme de 58 ans subissant une parathyroïdectomie sous anes -
thésie générale. La patiente présentait des antécédents de troubles 
obsessionnels compulsifs traités avec de la paroxétine. Après 
l’opération, elle a présenté des symptômes et signes d’un syndrome 
sérotoninergique, spécifiquement : tachycardie, agitation, dystonie 
et mouvements oculaires anormaux. Ces observations cliniques se 
sont résolues spontanément durant les 48 h suivantes.
Conclusion  : Une interaction entre le bleu de méthylène et les 
agents sérotoninergiques pourrait provoquer un syndrome séro -
toninergique. Il faudrait considérer l’option d’éviter le bleu de méthy-  
lène chez les patients traités avec des agents sérotoninergiques. Ce 
diagnostic devrait être envisagé chez les patients présentant des 
modifications autonomes, neuromusculaires ou neurologiques et ils 
devraient être pris en charge en conséquence.
A review of the literature reveals that seven 
reports have been published of patients 
who have experienced postoperative com -
plications after the use of methylene blue 
in standard doses for intraoperative identification 
of the glands in elective parathyroidectomy. All of 
the patients experienced symptoms consistent with 36
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008Case Reports/Case Series
Serotonin syndrome following methylene blue 
infusion during parathyroidectomy: a case report 
and literature review  
[Syndrome sérotoninergique suite à une perfusion de bleu de méthylène pendant 
une parathyroïdectomie : présentation de cas et analyse bibliographique ]
Bradley K.W. Ng MBChB, Andrew J.D. Cameron FANZCA , Rhea Liang MBChB, Habib Rahman FRACS
From the Department of Surgery, Middlemore Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
Address correspondence to : Dr. Bradley Ng, P.O. BOX 25-109, St Heliers, Auckland, New Zealand. Phone: +64-9-521-8071;  
E-mail: bkwng@hotmail.com
Sources of funding: Nil.
Relevant affiliations: Nil.
Accepted for publication September 6, 2007.
Revision accepted October 23, 2007.
This article is accompanied by an editorial. Please see Can J Anesth 2008; 55: 1−5Ng et al.: SEROTONIN  SYNDROME  AND METHYLENE  BLUE  37
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity), includ -
ing agitation, confusion, hypertonicity and clonus.1–7 
The most significant common feature of these cases is 
that five patients were concurrently taking a selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), or a serotonin 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. One patient was 
receiving clomipramine, a tricyclic antidepressant with 
high serotonergic activity.8 Despite this, four of the 
previous published cases did not consider the pos -
sibility of serotonin syndrome, two simply mentioned 
the possibility of an unspecified ‘drug interaction’ 
between methylene blue and SSRIs,3,6 and only one 
report specifically mentioned serotonin syndrome but 
dismissed it as ‘unlikely’.7 We present an additional, 
similar case, and consider the evidence for a diagnosis 
of serotonin syndrome.
Case history
A 58-yr-old Caucasian woman underwent a right 
lower parathyroidectomy for a parathyroid adenoma. 
She had a history of an obsessive compulsive disorder 
for which she had been taking paroxetine 60 mg daily 
for several years. She was also taking omeprazole 40 
mg po bid for gastroesophageal reflux, and simvastatin 
20 mg po qhs for hypercholesterolemia. Her medical 
history was otherwise unremarkable. Her only previ -
ous drug reaction had been a rash in response to peni -
cillin and sulfonamides. She had undergone multiple 
previous operations including, most recently, lapa -
rotomies for bowel resection and later, adhesiolysis. 
Anesthesia had been uncomplicated with no episodes 
of postoperative confusion and delirium.
On the morning of surgery she received her normal 
medications and was given methylene blue at a dose 
of 5 mg·kg–1 over one hour. Once the methylene blue 
had been administered she was taken to the operat -
ing room. Anesthesia was induced with midazolam 1 
mg iv, fentanyl 100 mg iv, propofol 100 mg iv and 
rocuronium 40 mg iv. The procedure lasted 90 min, 
during which anesthesia was maintained with sevoflu -
rane. There was a brief period of hypotension (blood 
pressure 75/45 mmHg) on induction which respond -
ed to boluses of ephedrine and metaraminol. The 
patient was otherwise stable throughout the proce -
dure. She was positioned with her neck hyperextended 
throughout surgery. At the end of the procedure, 
neuromuscular block was reversed with neostigmine 
2.5 mg and atropine 1.2 mg iv. The patient was trans -
ferred to the postanesthetic care unit (PACU) with a 
nasopharyngeal airway in situ .
On arrival in the PACU the patient was noted to 
be deeply sedated and, although arousable, she did 
not awaken for 25 min. Upon awakening the patient was agitated, unresponsive, disoriented and moving 
all limbs purposelessly. She had tachycardia at 100 
beats·min–1, an oxygen saturation of 99% and a stable 
blood pressure. A neurological examination revealed 
increased tone in all limbs and normal reflexes. She 
was noted to have rapid, fluid eye movements. She was 
treated with morphine 5 mg iv (in increments) and 
midazolam 2 mg iv, without effect. Postoperative elec -
trolytes, complete blood count, glucose, calcium, and 
coagulation studies were within normal range. A com -
puted tomography of the head (magnetic resonance 
imaging was unavailable) revealed no acute changes.
She was admitted to the intensive care unit where 
her dystonia and agitation resolved themselves slowly 
over five hours. She remained fearful and anxious, 
stating that she was ‘alone’, ‘no-one will help me’ 
and ‘I am at the bottom of a big blue tank’. Her 
anxiety slowly resolved itself over the subsequent 48 
hr. Consent from the patient was later obtained for 
publication of this report.
Discussion
Methylene blue (methylene blue trihydrate) is a 
derivative of phenothiazine, a compound that also 
formed the base for the first generation of antipsy -
chotic medications.9 It is the only dye in common use 
for intraoperative identification of parathyroid glands, 
and it relies on accurate timing to deliver the full dose 
via infusion, in the hour before the operation.10
The above case is the eighth reported occurrence of  
an adverse reaction following administration of meth -
ylene blue in standard dose for parathyroidectomy. In 
all eight cases the cause of the patient’s condition was 
unclear. Referencing two of these patients (and one 
unpublished report), Gillman advanced the possibil -
ity that these cases were unrecognized examples of 
serotonin syndrome from a drug interaction between 
methylene blue and SSRIs.11
Early diagnoses considered in our patient included 
pain and anxiety and, after review by an anesthesiolo -
gist, she received opioids and then midazolam in the 
PACU. She was not hypoglycemic. Consults were 
obtained from general medicine, intensive care, neu -
rology and psychiatry. Assessment was made difficult 
by the facts that the patient was poorly communica -
tive and struggled to participate in a neurological or 
psychiatric assessment.
The possibility of a cerebral ischemic event was 
widely considered, particularly in the context of neck 
hyperextension during the case. She had no history 
of cerebrovascular disease, and hypercholesterolemia 
and age were her only risk factors. Vertebrobasilar 
insufficiency can cause nystagmus and limb ataxia, but Ng et al.: SEROTONIN  SYNDROME  AND METHYLENE  BLUE  3738 CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008would not explain her tachycardia or emotional labil -
ity. She did not suffer vertigo, visual disturbances, dys -
phagia, dysarthria or paraesthesias which commonly 
accompany vertebrobasilar insufficiency.
Atropine toxicity can present with ataxia, confusion 
and tachycardia, and has been known to occur even at 
normal doses.12 The diagnosis was considered highly 
unlikely in our patient, given that she had tolerated 
atropine during a previous anesthetic. Methylene blue, 
like other phenothiazine derivatives, has an antimus -
carinic effect. The antagonistic effect of both atropine 
and methylene blue on muscarinic receptors strength -
ened the possibility of anticholinergic syndrome. 
However, other associated symptoms, (mydriasis and 
dryness of the mouth and skin) were absent. None of 
the seven cases we reviewed reported atropine use.
The use of atropine in conjunction with neostig -
mine to reverse neuromuscular blockade remains 
widespread in New Zealand. This practice is largely 
driven by cost; in 1995 New Zealand hospitals paid 
36-fold more for glycopyrrolate than American insti -
tutions,13 and a large price differential still exists. 
Atropine, therefore, remains a common antimusca -
rinic for reversal of neuromuscular blockade, with many anesthesiologists reserving glycopyrrolate for 
patients intolerant of tachycardia or perceived to be at 
risk of mental status changes (notably the elderly or 
those with a background of postoperative confusion 
or agitation). These concerns were not applicable to 
this patient.
Other differential diagnoses, including acute alco -
hol withdrawal and neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 
were later dismissed after a thorough history was taken 
from the patient, family and general practitioner. 
The psychiatric service did not support a diagnosis of 
conversion disorder or malingering. Both diagnoses 
are dependent on the exclusion of possible organic 
causes, whereas this case report asserts that serotonin 
syndrome would reasonably explain this patient’s 
condition. Ultimately, a definitive diagnosis was not 
made. Due to her ongoing clinical improvement, the 
patient was managed with supportive care only. By the 
time a literature review had raised the possibility of 
serotonin syndrome, her acute symptoms had resolved 
themselves.
A definitive diagnosis was never reached in the seven 
previously reported cases. As with our patient, cranial 
computed tomography and biochemistry values were 
unremarkable in all cases. Important differentials con -
sidered in previous reports included untoward effects 
from midazolam,2 propofol1 or opioid toxicity,4,7 
antimuscarinic effects,4,7 methemoglobinaemia,1,3,5–7 
and malignant hyperthermia.4 Four reports1–3,7 cited 
Nadler’s 1934 monograph on the toxicity of methy -
lene blue.14 
The morbidity which occurred in these patients 
should not be understated. Our patient, and four of 
the seven cases1,4–6 required admission to an intensive 
care unit. Four patients required repeat tracheal intu -
bation1,4–6 and ventilatory support, and one required 
extended hemodialysis and management of myocar -
dial ischemia.4 Recovery times varied from 48 hr to a 
14-day hospitalization. Although these cases are rare, 
the possibility that these undiagnosed episodes may be 
completely avoidable underscores their significance.
Serotonin syndrome is a clinical diagnosis based on 
a triad of mental status changes, autonomic hyperac -
tivity and neuromuscular abnormalities.15 Commonly 
used diagnostic criteria include the Sternbach cri -
teria16 (Table I) and the more recently developed 
Hunter decision rules17 (Table II), the latter providing 
a simple diagnostic criteria with a high sensitivity of 
84% and specificity of 97%. Despite increasing recog -
nition, serotonin syndrome remains under-diagnosed 
due to a lack of clinician knowledge, applications of 
varying diagnostic criteria, the potential for early, mild 
or subacute presentations to be missed by clinicians or 38 CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
TABLE I  Sternbach criteria for serotonin syndrome13
Recent addition or increase in a known serotonergic agent
At least three of the following clinical features
 Mental status changes (confusion, hypomania)
 Agitation
 Myoclonus
 Hyperreflexia
 Diaphoresis
 Shivering
 Tremor
 Diarrhea
 Incoordination
 Fever
Absence of other possible etiologies (infectious, metabolic, sub -
stance abuse or withdrawal, etc).
No recent addition or increase in a neurolpetic agent prior to the 
onset of the above features.
TABLE II  Hunter serotonin toxicity criteria: decision rules 
for predicting serotonin toxicity14
In the presence of a serotonergic agent:
 Spontaneous clonus
 Inducible clonus OR ocular clonus AND  agitation OR  
 diaphoresis
 Inducible clonus OR ocular clonus AND  hypertonicity AND   
 temperature > 38ºC
 Tremor AND  hyperreflexiaNg et al.: SEROTONIN  SYNDROME  AND METHYLENE  BLUE  39
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008TABLE III  Clinical details of cases of postoperative complications after the use of methylene blue
Ref Patient SSRI & other  Methylene Diagnosis of serotonin Diagnosis of serotonin  Other clinical signs Outcome  
  medications blue dose syndrome (Sternbach) toxicity (Hunter)
[1] 60 yr female Fluoxetine 7.5 mg·kg–1 Yes Possible Reduced  Intensive
  Coproxamol  Agitation Possible spontaneous consciousness care unit
  Beclamethasone  Hypertonicity clonus Aggression admission
  Nasal spray  Diaphoresis  Rotational and
    Rigid, jerky   nystagmus reintubation
    movements (possible  Dilated and Complete
    spontaneous clonus)  unreactive pupils recovery
      Bilateral upgoing by day 4
      plantar reflexes
[2] 59 yr male Paroxetine 6 mg·kg–1 Possible  Possible  Aphasia  Complete
  Glyburide  Confusion Possible spontaneous  recovery
  Metformin  Forced foot clonus  by day 2
  Verapamil  dorsiflexion (possible
  Furosemide  spontaneous clonus)
  Potassium
  Simvastatin
  Rabeprazole
[3] 52 yr female Venlafaxine 7.5 mg·kg–1 Possible Possible Aphasia Complete
  Mebeverine  Confusion Confusion Nystagmus recovery
  Ferrous sulphate     by day 2
     
[4] 65 yr male Citalopram 7.5 mg·kg–1 Yes Possible Disorientation Intensive 
  Insulin  Agitation Agitation Reduced care unit
  Quinine   Fever (40.2ºC) Fever (40.2ºC) consciousness admission
  sulphate  Diaphoresis Diaphoresis  and
  Omeprazole     reintubation.
  Clopidogrel     Hemodialysis
  Atorvastatin     used to
  Alfacalcidol     remove
  Aluminium      methylene
  hydroxide     blue. 
  Sildenafil     Complete
       recovery by
       2 weeks
[5] 48 yr male Nil selective 5 mg·kg–1 No No Generalized  Intensive care 
  serotonin     tonic-clonic  unit 
  reuptake     seizures leading  admission 
  inhibitor    to status  and 
      epilepticus reintubation.
       Commenced  
       on 
       antiepileptic  
       medication  
       and seizure  
       free by day 7
[6] 65 yr female Paroxetine 1.75 mg·kg–1 Possible Possible Reduced Intensive
  Insulin  Confusion Agitation consciousness care unit
  Metformin  Agitation  Aphasia admission
  Ramipril     and
  Atenolol     reintubation.
  Aspirin     Discharged
  Simvastatin     on day 7
  Carbimazole
[7] 66 yr female Clomipramine  5 mg·kg Possible Possible Nil Complete
  50 mg  Confusion Agitation  recovery
  Alverine citrate   Agitation Hypertonicity  by day 4
    Jerky movements  Possible
    of all limbs (possible  spontaneous clonus
    spontaneous clonus)
Current  58 yr female Paroxetine  5 mg·kg–1 Possible Possible Nil Complete
case  60 mg  Confusion Agitation  recovery
  Omeprazole  Agitation Hypertonicity  by day 2
  Simvastatin  Rapid fluid eye Possible ocular
    movements (possible clonus
    ocular clonus)
Diagnosis of serotonin syndrome: yes = definitely meets criteria; possible = insufficient data to rule out diagnosis; no = definitely does not 
meet criteria.40 CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF ANESTHESIA
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008criteria, and the misattribution of symptoms to men -
tal conditions or other medications.15 Furthermore, 
both of the above criteria were developed from clini -
cal populations whose serotonin syndrome occurred 
mainly in the context of SSRI overdose, rather than 
medication interactions.
A retrospective review of the seven published case 
reports (Table III) reveals that two cases met the 
diagnosis for serotonin syndrome according to at least 
one of the above criteria. In a further four, a triad of 
autonomic, neuromuscular and mental status signs 
suggested a possible diagnosis. Regrettably, relevant 
examination findings were not documented (and pos -
sibly not undertaken). This illustrates the importance 
of a high level of clinical suspicion and an appropri -
ately focussed assessment. Only one of the seven case 
reports did not meet the diagnostic criteria, as a sero -
tonergic agent had not been administered.5
There are no reports of serotonin syndrome occur -
ring following the administration of methylene blue 
in isolation. Nonetheless, in vivo  studies have shown 
that the dye increases serotonin levels in rats18 and it 
has been shown to have a clinically significant effect 
as an antidepressant.19 Despite this, methylene blue is 
considered to confer a low risk of serotonin toxicity 
but may cause problems when added to an SSRI.11 
Gillman has suggested that methylene blue has limited 
activity as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor.11 In context 
of the high number of patients on SSRIs potentially 
exposed to methylene blue, he hypothesized that the 
rare occurrence of serotonin syndrome may be a con -
sequence of variability in drug dosing or variability of 
cytochrome P450 enzyme activity between patients.11 
Of further relevance is the potential interaction of 
other drugs commonly used in anesthesia. Both fen -
tanyl and ondansetron have been linked to serotonin 
syndrome,15 although our patient only received the 
former medication.
These cases have important implications for future 
practice. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are 
given for a range of indications (depression, bulimia, 
obsessive compulsive and other anxiety disorders, pre -
menstrual dysphoric disorder). Given that serotonin 
syndrome has been described some five weeks after 
stopping an SSRI,15 withholding these drugs perioper -
atively is unlikely to be a pragmatic solution. The use 
of methylene blue itself has been declining since the 
advent of preoperative radionuclide scanning and the 
use of targeted high-resolution ultrasound to localise 
glands. It has also been recognized that primary neck 
exploration by an experienced endocrine surgeon is 
successful in over 95% of cases.20 An audit of practice 
in Australia showed methylene blue being used in 11% of initial neck explorations.21 Avoidance of methylene 
blue in patients taking SSRIs should be discussed with 
surgical colleagues. If methylene blue is to be used in 
such patients, anesthesiologists should be aware of the 
possibility of serotonin syndrome, and assess and man -
age patients accordingly.
References
 1 Martindale SJ, Stedeford JC . Neurological sequelae fol -
lowing methylene blue injection for parathyroidectomy . 
Anaesthesia 2003; 58: 1041–2.
 2 Bach KK, Lindsay FW, Berg LS, Howard RS . Prolonged 
postoperative disorientation after methylene blue infu -
sion during parathyroidectomy. Anesth Analg 2004; 
99: 1573–4.
 3 Majithia A, Stearns MP . Methylene blue toxicity fol -
lowing infusion to localize parathyroid adenoma. J 
Laryngol Otol 2006; 120: 138–40.
 4 Mathew S, Linhartova L, Raghuraman G . Hyperpyrexia 
and prolonged postoperative disorientation following 
methylene blue infusion during parathyroidectomy. 
Anaesthesia 2006; 61: 580–3.
 5 Patel AS, Singh-Ranger D, Lowery KA, Crinnion JN . 
Letter to the editor . Head Neck 2006; 28: 567–8. 
 6 Mihai R, Mitchell EW, Warwick J . Dose-response and 
postoperative confusion following methylene blue infu -
sion during parathyroidectomy. Can J Anesth 2007; 
54: 79–81.
 7 Khan MA, North AP, Chadwick DR . Prolonged post -
operative altered mental status after methylene blue 
infusion during parathyroidectomy: a case report and 
review of the literature. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 2007; 
89: W9–11.
 8 Szabadi E, Bradshaw CM . Affective disorders: 1. 
Antidepressants. In: King DJ (Ed.). Seminars In 
Clinical Psychopharmacology, 2nd ed. London: Gaskell; 
2004: 178–243.
 9 Shen WW . A history of antipsychotic drug develop -
ment. Compr Psychiatry 1999; 40: 407–14.
 10 Wheeler MH, Wade JS . Intraoperative identification of 
parathyroid glands: appraisal of methylene blue stain -
ing. Am J Surg 1982; 143: 713–6.
 11 Gillman PK . Methylene blue implicated in potentially 
fatal serotonin toxicity. Anaesthesia 2006; 61: 1013–4.
 12 Robenshtok E, Luria S, Tashma Z, Hourvitz A . Adverse 
reaction to atropine and the treatment of organophos -
phate intoxication. Isr Med Assoc J 2002; 4: 535–9.
 13 Cooper JO . The relative costs of anesthesia drugs in 
New Zealand versus the United States. Anesth Analg 
1995; 80: 850–1.
 14 Nadler JE, Green H, Rosenbaum A . Intravenous injec -
tion of methylene blue in man with reference to its 
toxic symptoms and effect on electrocardiogram. Am J Ng et al.: SEROTONIN  SYNDROME  AND METHYLENE  BLUE  41
CAN J ANESTH 55: 1    www.cja-jca.or g    January, 2008Med Sci 1934; 188: 15–21.
 15 Boyer EW, Shannon M . The serotonin syndrome . N 
Engl J Med 2005; 352: 1112–20.
 16 Sternbach H . The serotonin syndrome. Am J Psychiatry 
1991; 148: 705–13.
 17 Dunkley EJ, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D, Dawson AH, Whyte 
IM. The Hunter serotonin toxicity criteria: simple and 
accurate diagnostic decision rules for serotonin toxicity. 
QJM 2003; 96: 635–42.
 18 Wegener G, Volke V, Rosenberg R . Endogenous nitric 
oxide decreases hippocampal levels of serotonin and 
dopamine in vivo. Br J Pharmacol  2000; 130: 575–80.
 19 Naylor GJ, Smith AH, Connelly P . A controlled trial 
of methylene blue in severe depressive illness. Biol 
Psychiatry 1987; 22: 657–9.
 20 Dijkstra B, Healy C, Kelly LM, McDermott EW, Hill 
AD, O’Higgins N . Parathyroid localisation - current 
practice. J R Coll Surg Edinb 2002; 47: 599–607.
 21 Sinha SN, Subramaniam P . Initial parathyroid explo -
ration: current trends in Australia. Aust N Z J Surg 
1996; 66: 279–81.
Abbey Church - Italy
