 
    
                                      
 
RESTRAINT AND SECLUSION –  
 
A RISK MANAGEMENT GUIDE  
 
  
  
  
  
    
    
  
  
SStteepphhaann  HHaaiimmoowwiittzz,,  JJ..DD..  
JJeenniiffeerr  UUrrffff,,  JJ..DD..  
KKeevviinn  AAnnnn  HHuucckksshhoorrnn,,  RR..NN..,,  MM..SS..NN,,  CCAAPP,,  IICCAADDCC    
 
 
 September, 2006  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
         
Acknowledgements 
 
The authors thank Susan Stefan, Center for Public Representation, for sharing her 
extensive resources and input in writing this Guide.  We  also thank Betty Bentley 
Watson, former Chair, NASMHPD Legal Di vision, for her helpful insights and 
comments.  The views expressed are solely those of the authors.   
     Table of Contents         
            
 
Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .i 
 
I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1 
 
II. Restraint and Seclusion Use in Mental Health Facilities 
 Is Under Intense Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .2 
 
III. Many Factors Contribute to the Substantial Legal Risks 
 Associated with the Use of Restraint and Seclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6 
 
IV. Overview of Legal Claims and Liability Risks 
 Associated with Restraint and Seclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 
 
V. Effective Tools to Reduce the Use of Restraint and 
 Seclusion are Well-Established and Inexpensive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17 
 
VI. Action Steps for Attorneys and Risk Managers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23 
 
VII. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .25 
 
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Executive Summary 
 
Courts have long recognized that people with  mental illnesses have the right to be free 
from the improper use of seclusion and restraint.  In the landmark 1982 case Youngberg 
v. Romeo , the Supreme Court recognized that the us e of restraint is a drastic deprivation 
of personal liberty, holding that “[t]he right to  be free from undue bod ily restraint is the 
core of the liberty interest protected by  the Due Process Clause from arbitrary 
governmental action.”  Youngberg v. Romeo , 457 U.S. 307, 316 (1982).   
 
In that case, the Supreme Court noted that the use of restraint should reflect “the exercise 
of professional judgment.”  At the time of the Youngberg decision, restraint and 
seclusion were often used to control the beha vior of people with me ntal health conditions 
in a variety of settings, and a broad range of views regarding what constitutes 
“professional judgment” existed among clinicians. 
 
Over the past decade, however, a clear consensus has emerged that restraint and seclusion are safety interventions of la st resort and that the use of  these interventions can and 
should be reduced significantly.  In evaluating the potential legal risks associated with the 
use of restraint and seclusion, risk manage rs should understand this emerging consensus 
as critical to a determination about whether a particular use of these interventions reflects 
“the exercise of professional judgment.”  This  should be considered in the context of the 
following factors: 
 
(1) Each use of restraint or seclusion poses an inhe rent danger, both physical 
and psychological, to the individual w ho is subject to the interventions 
and, frequently, to the sta ff who administer them.   
 
(2) The decision to use restraint or seclusion nearly al ways is arbitrary, 
idiosyncratic, and generally avoidable.   
 
(3) Many inexpensive and effective alte rnatives to restraint and seclusion 
have been developed and successfully  implemented across a broad range 
of mental health facility types. 
 
Recent increased scrutiny regarding the use of restraint and seclusion has resulted in a legal and regulatory environment that discou rages their use and increases the risks of 
litigation for clinicians and fac ilities that rely on these practi ces.  The legal consequences 
of inappropriate use of restra int and seclusion can include civil damages, administrative 
sanctions (including the loss of Medicaid and Medicare certification), and criminal 
prosecution.  Moreover, litigati on about these practices  invariably consumes the facility’s 
attention and resources, no matter what the ultimate outcome, with significant negative 
implications for the facility’s reputation and staff morale. 
 
 
                                                                       i  To minimize these risks, all mental health facilities should devel op a risk management 
strategy that includes the following components: 
 
(1) Review your facility’s current poli cies and practices regarding restraint 
and seclusion; 
 
(2) Advise top management that legal exposure is increasi ng and that reducing 
the use of restraint and seclusion demands  their attention; 
 
(3) Establish a facility-wide task for ce including top management, staff, union 
representatives, and consumers to de velop a plan to reduce restraint and 
seclusion that includes a public commitment to the goal of reduction, a 
strategy for workforce training, and the use of data to set outcomes targets 
and evaluate progress; and 
 
(4) Maintain the priority of constant  reduction in the use and duration of 
restraint and seclusion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                         ii   
RESTRAINT AND SECLUSION: 
A Risk Management Guide 
 
 
 
Wisconsin Mutual Insurance Co mpany has learned a very serious lesson from this case . . 
.  seclusion is a real issue that needs to be dealt with on a proactive basis in order to 
avoid another record verdict of $400,000 in  [compensatory]damages and $5 million in 
punitive damages. 
 
                       Bisek, B., Scott Lawson v. Monroe County - A Lesson Learned , 
                       The Mutual Effort, Vol. 4.3 (Summer, 1999) at 1. 
 
 
I. Introduction  
 
Restraint and seclusion hi storically have been used to co ntrol the behavior of people with 
mental health conditions in a variety of settings, including hospitals and psychiatric 
treatment facilities.   
 
Over the past decade, however, these practices have come under intense scrutiny as 
researchers and clinicians have chronicled  the significant physical and psychological 
risks – including death, disabling physical inju ries, and significant trauma – inherent in 
each use of the interventions.  Also duri ng this time, many effective, inexpensive 
alternatives to restraint and seclusion were  developed, demonstrating that their use can 
safely be reduced significantly and underm ining their legitimacy in a treatment setting. 
 
This attention to the use of restraint and s eclusion has resulted in a legal and regulatory 
environment that discourages their use and increases the risks of litigation for clinicians and facilities that rely on th ese practices.  The legal conseque nces of inappropriate use of 
restraint and seclusion can in clude civil damages, administ rative sanctions (including the 
loss of Medicaid and Medicar e certification), and criminal prosecution.  Moreover, 
litigation about these practices invariably consumes the facil ity’s attention and resources, 
no matter what the ultimate outcome, and the im pact on the facility’s reputation and staff 
morale linger long after the legal dust settles.  
 
This paper is intended to assist the attorn eys and risk managers who advise behavioral 
health facilities.  In pa rticular, this paper will: 
 
• Provide background on the  increased scru tiny  of the use of restraint and 
seclusion, including a discussion of the pol itical, legal, and regulatory context 
regarding the use of thes e interventions for people with mental illnesses; 
 • Provide a brief overview of factors explaining why the use of restraint and 
seclusion poses legal risks, including a description of th e medical risks associated 
with the use of these interventions; 
 
• Provide an overview of the constitutional,  civil, and criminal claims that may 
arise when seclusion and restraint are us ed improperly, and review relevant case 
law;  
 
• Provide examples of effective alternatives to the use of restra int and seclusion and 
related resources;1 and 
 
• Recommend practical strategies to reduce risks to providers  and facilities. 
 
II. Restraint and Seclusion Use in Men tal Health Facilities Is Under  
Intense Focus  
 
Courts have long recognized that people with  mental illnesses have the right to be free 
from the improper use of restraint and seclusion.  In the landmark 1982 case Youngberg 
v. Romeo , the U.S. Supreme Court recognized that the use of restraint is a drastic 
deprivation of personal liberty, holding that “[t]he right to be free from undue bodily 
restraint is the core of the liberty intere st protected by the Due Process Clause from 
arbitrary governmental action.”  Youngberg v. Romeo , 457 U.S. 307, 316 (1982).     
 
In light of the significant consti tutional issues inherent in th e use of restraint, a decision 
by clinicians or other staff to use these in terventions must reflect “the exercise of 
professional judgment.”  Id. at 323.  Liability may be imposed when the decision by the 
professional is “such a substantial departure from accepted professional judgment, 
practice, or standards as to demonstrate that  the person responsible actually did not base 
the decision on such a judgment.”  As w ill be discussed, the standards governing 
professional judgment in this area have evolved considerably since Youngberg .  
 
Although Youngberg  articulated a constitutional right to safety and protection against 
“undue bodily restraint” more than 20 year s ago, little consensus existed at that time 
within the legal or clinical communities c oncerning the appropriate duration, conditions, 
                                                 
1 The restraint and seclusion re duction interventions discusse d in this guide have been 
developed and effectively implemented in inpa tient facilities serv ing individuals with 
mental conditions that are amenable to rec overy-focused treatment. The effectiveness of 
these interventions is not known when used with people with trau matic brain injury 
(TBI); people who present to  care settings such as em ergency rooms in an acutely 
intoxicated condition; or peopl e who demonstrate criminal psycho-pathology such as the 
ability to plan aggressive attacks on others  or who demonstrate low or no remorse for 
hurting others. For mental health  facilities and state forensic mental health hospitals that 
serve the populations describe d above, these interventions will need to be carefully 
adapted for such individuals and othe r interventions ma y be necessary.  
 or the circumstances in which restra int and seclusion were inappropriate.   In a 1985 
report of the American Psychiatric Associatio n’s Task Force on the Psychiatric Uses of 
Seclusion and Restraint, the Task Force repo rted on a survey of state mental health 
directors regarding seclusion and restraint practic es.  The Task Force noted that it was 
“impressed by the variability in the length and specificity of written regulations.”  State 
regulations differed signifi cantly regarding when seclus ion and restraint could be 
employed and who could order their use.  Most  state regulations did not define seclusion 
or restraint, and only four  specified who was responsib le for ending seclusion and 
restraint episodes.  At least eight states permitted the use of seclusion and restraint to 
prevent substantial property damage, two stat es permitted the use of these interventions 
to prevent disruption of the treatment environm ent, and four states allowed their use as 
part of a regular treatment plan.  The Task  Force concluded:  “This survey further 
supports the national need for comprehensive,  widely disseminated, and, hopefully, fully 
implemented guidelines for the seclusion and re straint of patients.”  American Psychiatric 
Association, Seclusion and Restraint, The Psychiatric Uses, Report of the American 
Psychiatric Association Task Force on the Ps ychiatric Uses of S eclusion and Restraint 
(1985). 
 
Over the next 20 years, clinicians, res earchers, consumers, and legal advocates 
increasingly identified the overu se of restraint and seclusion in psychiatric facilities as 
abuse and many advocacy and professional orga nizations worked to reduce the use of 
these interventions.  However, there remained a lack of consensus w ithin the field about 
the appropriate use of restra int and seclusion.  In 1998, the Hartford Courant  published a 
series of articles chronicling the many deaths of adults and children resulting from the 
improper use of restraint in mental health facilities. This gro undbreaking investigative 
series identified 142 deaths across the country  related to these pr ocedures between 1988 
and 1998, with one-fourth of those deaths children.  Weiss, E., et al. , Deadly Restraint: A 
Nationwide Pattern of Death , Hartford Courant (Oct. 11, 1998).  The Courant  also 
retained a researcher from the Center for Ri sk Analysis at Harvar d’s School of Public 
Health who estimated that between 50 and 150 deaths occur each year from the use of restraint and seclusion.  Id. 
 
Following publication of the Courant  series, Connecticut’s Congressional delegation 
introduced legislation and held hearings to regulate the use of these dangerous interventions.   The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) (formerly the 
Health Care Financing Administration, or  HCFA) responded swiftly by publishing an 
Interim Final Rule governing the use of rest raint and seclusion in hospitals, including 
psychiatric hospitals.  That Interim Final Ru le, published in 1999, rema ins in place today.  
It adopts a regulatory framework that distinguishes restraints used for behavior management from other kinds of restraints used in hospitals and provides the following 
principles: 
 
• The patient has the right to be free fro m restraint and secl usion, in any form, 
imposed as a means of coercion, discipline, convenience, or retaliation by staff.  
42 C.F.R. §482.13(f)(1) (1999).  
 • Restraint and seclusion can only be used in emergency situations if needed to 
ensure physical safety and if  less restrictive interventions have been determined to 
be ineffective.  42 C.F.R. §482.13(f)(2) (1999). 
 
The regulations define seclusion broadly to mean  “the involuntary conf inement of a person in 
a room or an area where the person is physic ally prevented from leaving.”  42 C.F.R. 
§482.13(f)(1) (1999).   Restrain t is defined to mean: 
 
• Any manual method, or any physical or mechanical device, material, or 
equipment attached or adjacent to the pa tient’s body that he or she cannot easily 
remove, that restricts freedom of movement or normal access to one’s body; and 
 
• A drug used to control behavior or to restri ct the patient’s freedom of movement that 
is not a standard treatment for the pa tient’s medical or psychiatric condition.  
 
Id. 
 
Today, less than six years after publication of these requirements, most States and 
providers with laws, regulations, or policies governing the use of re straint and seclusion 
have adopted an approach that mirrors th e minimum standards provided in the Federal 
regulations.  Haimowitz, S. and Urff, J., Ending Harm From Rest raint and Seclusion: 
The Evolving Efforts  (submitted for publication). The basi c tenets of these standards are 
also reflected in the Behavioral Health  Standards of the Joint Commission on the 
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO) and in policy statements adopted by 
many of the nation’s leading professional organizations.   
 
The American Psychiatric Association, in a special publication devoted to the reduction 
of restraint and seclusion, notes  that “what is clear in all of  these standards is a national 
intent to see that restraint and seclusion are used appropriately, as infrequently as 
possible, and only when less restrictive methods  are considered and are not feasible.”  
American Psychiatric Association, American  Psychiatric Nurses Association, and the 
National Association of Psyc hiatric Health Systems, Learning from Each Other:  Success 
Stories and Ideas for Reducing Restra int/Seclusion in Behavioral Health  (January, 2003) 
at 4.  
 
Other Federal agencies and professional asso ciations also have pr ioritized reducing the 
use of restraint and seclusion: 
 
• The federal Substance Abuse and Ment al Health Services Administration 
(SAMHSA) issued a National Call to Action  in 2003 concerning restraint and 
seclusion.  “SAMHSA is committed to work with States, communities, 
consumers, families, providers, and provider organizations to ultimately eliminate the use of restraint and seclusion.  Indivi duals with mental illness should not be 
confined, restrained, or retraumatized by the persons and resources put in place to 
help them.” 
http://alt.samhsa.gov/secl usion/SRMay5report4.htm   
 • The National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors 
(NASMHPD) – representing state mental health agencies, which typically 
administer state psychiatric hospitals – adopted a formal position statement 
calling for the reduction and, ultimately, the elimination of the us e of restraint and 
seclusion.   The position statement provi des that these pract ices, which include 
“chemical restraints,” are “safety interventions of last resort” and should never be 
used for the purposes of discipline, co ercion, or staff convenience, or as a 
replacement for adequate levels of staff or active treatment. NASMHPD, Position 
Statement on Seclusion and Restraint  (July 13, 1999). 
 
• The California Service Employees International Union (SEIU), the largest labor 
organization of public mental health wo rkers, and the California Network of 
Mental Health Clients adopted a joint position that the mental health system must 
undergo a fundamental change in culture, from top to bottom, in its attitude toward and use of restraint and seclusi on, stressing the need for de-escalation 
training, individual crisis plans and peer  support. California Service Employees 
International Union and California Ne twork of Mental Health Clients, Five 
Principles in Reducing the Us e of Seclusion and Restraints (2002).     
 
Other national associations which have adopt ed standards, policies or guidance focused 
on the reduction or eliminati on of restraint and seclusi on include the Child Welfare 
League of America, American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, American Association of Community Psychiatrists, NAMI (National Alli ance for the Mentally Ill), 
National Mental Health Associat ion, and The Bazelon Center for Mental Health Law.    
 
 
“[W]hat is clear in all of thes e standards is a national inte nt to see that seclusion and 
restraint are used appropriatel y, as infrequently as possible, and only when less restrictive 
methods are considered and are not feasible. …Clear policies and procedures that are 
well-communicated, understood, consistently im plemented and continuously re-evaluated 
can significantly reduce your economic exposure.” 
 
American Psychiatric Association 
American Psychiatric Nurses Association  
National Association of Ps ychiatric Health Systems 
Learning from Each Other:  Success Stories and Ideas for  
Reducing Restraint/Seclusion in Behavioral Health   
  
The use of seclusion and restraint creates si gnificant risks for pe ople with psychiatric 
disabilities. These risks include serious inju ry or death, retraumatization of people who 
have a history of trauma, and loss of dign ity and other psychological harm. … It is 
NASMHPD's goal to prevent, reduce, and ultimately eliminate the use of seclusion and 
restraint … 
National Association of State Ment al Health Program Directors  
Position Statement on Seclusion and Restraint  
 
Restraints and seclusion must only be used in emergency situations to ensure the physical 
safety of the child and all others and should never be used for purposes of discipline, 
retaliation and convenience.  …The use of chemical restraints  and mechanical restraints 
should be prohibited.  
Child Welfare League of America  
The Use of Restraints and Seclusion in Residential Care Facilities for Children 
 
Overuse and abuse of restraints and seclusion are symptoms of  poor quality care in 
facilities, poor state oversight, and misdirected public policy.  State and federal agencies 
must take a greater role in assuring the safety and protecti on of children and adults who 
experience these interventions.  
National Mental Health Association  
Position Statement:  The Use of Re straining Techniques and Seclusion  
For Persons with Mental or Emotional Disorders  (NMHA Program Policy P-41) 
 
 
 
III. Many Factors Contribute to the Substantial Legal Risks A ssociated with the 
Use of Restraint and Seclusion  
 
In considering the risks associated with the us e of restraint and secl usion, facilities should 
be aware of the following factors: 
 
A. Each use of restraint or seclusion poses an inherent danger, both physical 
and psychological. 
 
Restraint and seclusion are widely acknowledge d to be violent, stressful, and humiliating 
incidents, both for patients and for the st aff members imposing them.  Never benign, the 
use of restraint and seclusion can be lethal.   
   
People have died in restraints  from many causes, including:  
 
• Asphyxia – that is, suffocating, often while being held face down, with staff 
sitting or putting pressure on an indivi dual’s person’s back or abdomen, or when 
staff have placed blankets or towels around the face;  
• Aspiration – that is, swallowing one’s own secretions, generally while being 
restrained face up; and 
• Cardiac events brought on by exertion, medication interactions, and unknown 
cardiac anomalies.   
 
These risks are elevated by nu merous medical conditions ( e.g., obesity, asthma, 
bronchitis, intoxication) and by psychotropic medications that alone can lead to 
hyperthermia, a condition where th e internal temperature rises without normal correction.  
The risk of death or injury also appear s to be more signif icant for children and 
adolescents.  Mohr, W.K., et al., Adverse Effects Associated with Physical Restraint, 48 
Canadian J. of Psychiat ry 5 (2003) at 330-337.    
 
In addition to the risk of deaths to patients described above, physical injuries to patients 
and staff are very common.  Even when stit ches, fractures, and fa talities are avoided, 
restraint and seclusion traumatize the person, damage therapeutic relationships, and can significantly impede recovery.  Restraints are particularly trau matizing to people who 
have been victims of physical and sexual a buse.  For patients who are deaf and use 
American Sign Language to communicate, rest raints eliminate thei r ability to express 
physical or emotional distress, increasing the risk of disabling harm or death
 
 
B.   The decision to use restraint or seclusion nearly always is arbitrary, 
idiosyncratic, and generally avoidable. 
 
Any practice which is inherently dangerous a nd which denies liberty in the most basic 
sense warrants scrutiny.  When the practices also are largely avoidable and imposed in an 
arbitrary and idiosyncratic manner, the risk  of liability increases substantially.   
 
Most research regarding the use of restraint and seclusion su ggest that the use of these 
practices generally is not based on patients’ clinical needs or characteristics. A review of 
the existing literature published in 1 994 reached the following conclusion  
 
Local non-clinical factors, such as cultural bias, staff role perceptions and the attitudes of hospital administrators , have a greater influence on the use 
of these practices than any clinical factors. 
  
Fisher, W., Restraint and Seclusion:  A Review of the Literature , 151 Am. J. Psychiatry 
11 (1994)  at 1584-1591.   See also D’Orio, B.M., et al. , (2004); Duxbury, J. (2002); 
Hinsby, K. and Baker, M. (2004); Ilkiw-Lava lle, M. and Grenyer, B.F.S. (2003); and 
Morrison, E.F. (1989). 
    An assessment of data in New York also  confirmed these findings.  The New York 
Commission on Quality of Care for the Menta lly Disabled, an independent state agency, 
reviewed inpatient use of restraint and seclusion in 1994 and found huge variations 
between state psychiatric centers that could not be explained by patients’ demographic or 
clinical characteristics.  Rather, the NYCQC report concluded, “low use” facilities were 
led by administrators who discouraged these practices, provided grea ter personal liberties 
to patients (such as time off the unit, telephone and visitor privac y, and the freedom to 
take unscheduled showers), and provided at  least 50 percent of the patients 20 hours or 
more therapeutic activities per week.  Ne w York State Commission on Quality of Care, 
Restraint and Seclusion Pr actices in New York State Psychiatric Facilities  (September, 
1994).  
 
An important finding of both these studies is th at, while attitudes and practices of direct 
care staff may affect rates of u tilization of restraint and seclus ion, the driving factor is the 
organizational leadership’s view about the use of these practices, the leadership’s 
commitment to active programmi ng within the facility, and th e organizational culture.   
 
C. The standard of practice in clinical settings is moving toward the reduction 
and even the elimination of restraint and seclusion. 
 
The intense focus on preventing and reducing the use of restraint and seclusion has 
resulted in dramatic shifts in the way many facilities and professionals view these 
practices as well as in significant reductions in their use.   For example, from 2001 until 
2005, the number of hours that patients in Stat e psychiatric hospitals spent in restraints 
decreased by 46 percent and the percentage of patients restrained decreased by about 12 
percent.  Similarly, the number  of hours that patients spen t in seclusion decreased by 36 
percent and the percentage of  patients secluded decreased by about 26 percent. Schacht, 
L., Public Report:  National Trend in the Us e of Seclusion and Restraint Among State 
Psychiatric Hospitals , NASMHPD Research Institute, Inc. (2006).2  Several states and 
specific facilities – spanning geographic areas, socioeconomic  and cultural environments, 
and demographic and clinical ch aracteristics of patients -- report even more dramatic 
reductions.  Specific examples include the following: 
• State mental health authority:  In 1997, Pennsylvania’s state mental health authority became the first in the nation to publicly commit to significantly reduce 
and ultimately eliminate restraint and seclusion in its nine adult state hospitals. A comprehensive program was adopted providing clear goals, sp ecific strategies, 
and ongoing monitoring. During the first five  years of the initiative, restraint and 
seclusion episodes were reduced by 74 pe rcent and the total number of hours 
spent by individuals in restraints or s eclusion decreased 96 percent.  Smith, G., 
Davis, R., and and Bixler, E., Pennsylvania State Hospita l System’s Seclusion and 
Restraint Reduction Program , 56 Psychiatric Services 9 (2005) at 1115–1122. 
                                                 
2 This report tracks 150 State psychiatric  hospitals  that reported  seclusion  and restraint data for 
at least 4 years during the period January, 2001  through  June, 2005 as part of the NASMHPD  
Research  Institute,  Inc.’s Behavioral  Health Performance  Measurement  System.   • Urban state psychiatric hospital :  Creedmoor Psychiatric Center, a large, urban 
state psychiatric hospital in Queens, New York that serves highly disabled 
individuals from one of the most culturally diverse commun ities in the nation, 
initiated a program that reduced the comb ined restraint and seclusion rate by 67 
percent between 1999 and 2001.  Fisher, W., Elements of Successful Restraint and 
Seclusion Reduction Programs and Their Application in a Large, Urban State Psychiatric Hospital.  9 Journal of Psychiatric Practice 1 (2003) at 7-15. 
• Rural state hospital: Western State Hospital, a rural, regional state hospital in 
Virginia, reduced the use of these interventions by 79 percent between 1997 and 
2002. Donat, D.,  An Analysis of Successful Efforts to Reduce the Use of Seclusion and Restraint at a Public Psychiatric Hospital .  54 Psychiatric Services 8 (2003) 
at 1119-1123. 
• Privately-operated state hospital : South Florida State Ho spital, a 350-bed adult 
facility, prioritized reducing the use of restraint and seclusion when it became the 
nation’s first privately-operated state hospital in 1998.  The hospital’s managers, Atlantic Shores Healthcare, Inc., undert ook a total review of  its practices and 
culture, relying a great d eal on consumer input and focusing on the goal of 
recovery.  As a result, re straint and seclusion episode s were reduced from more 
than 15 to less than 1 per month between 1998 and 2000.  National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors (NASMHPD), National Executive 
Training Institutes: Reducing the Use of Seclusion and Restraint -- Curriculum 
Training Manual  (2003).  
 
• Forensic hospital :  North Texas State Hospital’s Forensic Unit, a 50-bed 
maximum security facility, reduced both the incidence of restraint and seclusion 
and the duration of these interventions by more than 50 percent between 1999 and 2001.  Goodness, K. and Refro, N., Changing Cultures: A Brief Program Analysis 
of a Social Learning Program on a Maximum-Security Forensic Unit , 20 
Behavioral Sciences and th e Law 5 (2002) at 495-506.  Th is facility, the only one 
of its type in Texas, serv es individuals found Incompetent to Stand Trial and Not 
Guilty by Reason of Insanity.  Most of its patients are transferred from civil 
hospitals after being determined to be “manifestly dangerous” and thus unable to 
be cared for in any other setting.   
 
• Statewide initiative:  In 2000, the Massachusetts De partment of Mental Health 
implemented a statewide Child and Adol escent Initiative aimed at reducing the 
use of restraint and seclusion with yout hs in inpatient units at all public and 
private facilities under the agency’s jurisdiction.  Within 22 months, significant reductions in the use of restraint and seclusion were achieved in 80 percent of the units. At the same time, injuries to both patients and staff decreased, as did the use 
of involuntary medication. LeBel, J. and Goldstein, R., The Economic Cost of 
Using Restraint and the Value Added by Restraint Reduction or Elimination , 56 
Psychiatric Services 9 ( 2005) at 1109-1114.      
 • Private residential treatment facility :  Millcreek, a 204-bed private psychiatric 
residential facility fo r children and adolescents  in Mississippi, achieved a 99 
percent reduction in the us e of restraint and seclusi on over four years, including 
an 89 percent drop in the first year.  In 2003, Millcreek received an Ernest 
Codman Award from the Joint Commission for the Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations (JCAHO) for sustaining restraint reduction thr ough culture change 
and the treatment planning process.  http://www.jointcommission.org  
 
• General hospital acute care psychiatric unit:   Salem Hospital, a general 
hospital in Salem, Oregon, “virtually eliminated” the use of seclusion and 
restraint from its acute care psychiatric unit when it refocused its treatment 
philosophy to a patient-centered appro ach in 2000.  Bennington-Davis, M. and 
Murphy, T., Eliminating Seclus ion and Restraint , 32 Clinical Psychiatry News 12 
(2004).  In addition to significant and measurable reductions in the use of restraint 
and seclusion, many facilities have documented the positive consequences of these efforts.  For example, a recent study demonstrated that reduced use of 
restraint and seclusion leads to fewer injuries to patients and staff, better clinical outcomes, and significant cost saving s in terms of staff time.  LeBel, supra.  
Moreover, many mental health facilities comply with Occupational Health and Safety Administration’s guide lines on worker safety through programs to prevent 
the need for the use of re straint and seclusion.  Occ upational Health and Safety 
Administration, Guidelines for Preventing Workplace Violence for Health Care 
and Social Workers , OSHA 3148-01R (2004).          
 
As a result of these changing practices and research findings, what constitutes 
professional judgment and reasonable practi ce has changed significantly.  Uses of 
restraint and seclusion that may have been consistent with accepted medical practice only a few years ago would not be acceptable today.  
 
MYTHS AND REALITIES 
Efforts to reduce the use of restraint and seclusion invariably encounter a 
range of longstanding assumptions about these practices – assumptions 
that research has shown are erroneous.  Examples of beliefs expressed by 
staff – and the “reality” associated w ith each of these myths – include the 
following:  
Myth:    Restraint and seclusion are used only to insure safety. 
Reality:    While the consensus in the field is that restraint and 
seclusion should be used only to ensure safety, they 
actually are used mostly for loud, disruptive, or non-
compliant (but not violent) behavior. Myth:    Restraint and secl usion are used only when there is no other 
alternative. 
Reality:   In fact, although there is an emerging consensus in the field 
that these interventions shoul d only be used if no other 
intervention is possible, restraint and seclusion often are 
staff’s first, automatic res ponses to difficult behavior. 
Myth: Restraint and seclusion reduce patient and staff injuries. 
Reality:  Decreasing the use of restrain t and seclusion does not result 
in increased patient and staff injuries, and may actually 
reduce them. 
Myth:    Restraint and seclusion help  individuals feel secure, gain 
self control, and learn to follow rules. 
Reality:  There is absolutely no evid ence that these interventions 
have any therapeutic value. 
For a discussion of these issues and the re lated research, see  Mohr, Petti, Morh, 
2003 and NASMHPD, 2003) 
 
IV. Overview of Legal Claims and Liability Risks Associated with Restraint and 
Seclusion  
 
Providers and facilities that us e restraint and seclusion are vu lnerable to litigation under 
several possible causes of action.  In addition to constitutional claims first identified in 
Youngberg , plaintiffs may bring other civil clai ms (including common law tort claims) 
and civil rights actions.  Prosecutors can bring criminal charges and are increasingly 
doing so. These are briefly summarized below.   
 
A. Basic Rules  
Federal regulations on the use of restraint and seclusion for behavior management in 
hospitals provide minimum standards related to the use of th ese interventions. The rules, 
which were developed in response to po litical and media attention following the Hartford 
Courant  articles on the dangerousness of thes e interventions, were published as an 
Interim Final Rule in 1999.  The rules are a Condition of Participation for all hospitals, 
including psychiatric hospitals, receiving Medi caid and/or Medicare reimbursement.  42 
C.F.R. 482.13 (1999).   
When the rules were published, hospital groups  objected to the requirement that a 
physician or licensed independent practitioner conduct a face-to-f ace assessment within 
one hour of the intervention.  These groups ch allenged in court the Federal government’s 
ability to promulgate the rule s as an Interim Final Rule. Th e court found that the Federal government’s actions did not violate the notice and comment period of the 
Administrative Procedures Act and upheld the Interim Final Rule.  National Association 
of Psychiatric Health Systems, et al., v. Donna E. Shalala , Civil Action # 99-2025 
(D.D.C., Decision September 14, 2000). 
Additional regulations were adopted in another Interim Final Rule, later modified, 
regarding the use of restraint and seclusion in Psychiatri c Residential Treatment Facilities 
for children.  42 C.F.R. Parts 441 and 483.  Another set of regulat ions, required by the 
Children’s Health Act of 2000, Pub. L. N o. 106-310 (2000), regarding the use restraint 
and seclusion in non-medical, community-based facilities fo r children and youth are not 
yet published. 
The Hospital Conditions of Participation focu s principally on ensuring the physical safety 
of patients during a restraint or seclusion episode.  These rules include the following 
basic tenets: 
• Restraint and seclusion are safety interven tions of last resort, to be used only 
when an individual poses an immi nent danger to someone’s safety. 
 
• Restraint and seclusion may be orde red only by a physician or a licensed 
independent practitioner (such as a physic ian’s assistant or nurse practitioner who 
is licensed to deliver medical services without oversight). 
 
• Orders must be time-limited – 4 hours maximum for adults, 2 hours for 
adolescents ages 9-17, and one hour for children under 9 -- a nd the intervention 
must be ended as soon as it is safe to do so. 
 
• Certain risky practices, such as “basket holds” and applying back pressure to a 
person who is prone, are prohibited.  
 
• A physician or licensed independent pr actitioner must c onduct a face-to-face 
assessment of the individual as soon as possible, which can not exceed one hour.  
 
• Appropriately trained staff must continually assess, monitor, and reevaluate 
individuals who are re strained or secluded.3   
 
• Debriefings with the individua l and staff must occur as soon as possible after each 
use of restraint or seclusion. 
 
                                                 
3 According to Interpretive Guidance issu ed by CMS, the frequency of monitoring 
indicated by this requirement may vary according to the type and design of the 
restraint device or in tervention, and the emotional, psyc hological, and physical needs, 
conditions, and symptoms of the individual.  
 • Staff must receive extensive, appropriat e training, including all aspects of de-
escalation. 
 
• Deaths and serious injuries resulting from restraint or seclusion must be reported 
to governmental authorities. 
 
Violation of these regulations can result in  federal investigation and administrative 
sanctions, including the suspension of funding.  Th ey can also serve in some cases as the 
basis for civil and criminal liability. 
 
B. Civil Litigation 
 
The use of restraint and seclus ion creates a risk of litigation under such causes of action 
as deprivation of constitutiona l rights (in the case of state facilities), assault, battery, 
negligence, medical malpractice,  wrongful death, failure to train staff, and failure to 
supervise staff. Such cases have been initia ted by private attorneys and public agencies, 
and have focused both on single incidents a nd systemic patterns.   Although there has 
been less litigation concerning restraint and se clusion than medication refusal, restraint 
and seclusion have been the subjects of nume rous recent cases, including the following:   
   
• The pro se  complaint of a person found not guilty by reason of insanity, which 
alleged a failure to follow a state poli cy requiring physicia n reassessment of a 
person in restraint and seclusion, violat ed accepted professional judgment and 
thus stated a constitutional claim.  Zigmund v. Foster , 106 F. Supp. 2d 352  (D. 
Conn. 2000).  
 
• Placing a prisoner in restraint or seclusion without a physician’s order in each 
instance states is clearly es tablished law under both the 14th and 8th Amendments 
and thus obviates the qualif ied immunity defense. Buckley v. Rogerson , 133 F.3rd 
1125 (8th Cir. 1998).   
 
• An upset but not dangerous woman ordered into restraints and seclusion by an 
emergency room physician stated a claim fo r medical malpractice and battery.     
Threlkeld v. White Castle , 127 F. Supp 2d 986 (D. No. Ill. 2001).   
 
• The civil rights and malpractice compla int on behalf of a woman who died in 
seclusion, which alleged that the physicia n signed the order in response to staff 
requests without conducting an examination and without a showing of an emergency, 
stated claims under professional judgment standards.  Hopper v. Callahan , 562 
N.E.2d 822 (1990)  
 
• A hospital emergency room policy to place all persons seeking psychiatric 
treatment into seclusion is actionable under the American With Disabilities Act.  
Scherer v. Waterbury , 2000 Conn. Super LEXIS 481 (Conn. Super., February 22, 
2000) . 
 • An excessive force and wrongful death case involving the use of a choke hold 
presents a “battle of experts”  issue that must be tried.  Unzueta v. Steele , 291 F. 
Supp. 2d 1230 (D. Kan. 2003). 
 
Although most cases involve a lasting physical in jury to the patient, this is not always a 
required element of a civil claim.  Anyone cl osely involved in the operation of a mental 
health facility will likely recogni ze parts of the following scenario: 
 
An involuntarily committed man in his mi d 20s, upset at not receiving any visitors 
on his birthday, left the state hospital grounds.  He and another patient purchased 
alcohol and were found drinking in the woods  near the hospital.  Staff escorted 
the patients back to the hosp ital without incident.  At the direction of the head 
nurse, who was responsible for 37 patients at  the time, the patient was escorted to 
a medical evaluation.  As he became boisterous, the staff and patient exchanged 
threatening words and gestures. When the head nurse ordered that he be placed 
in 4-point restraint, he physically resi sted and kicked a staff member. During the 
takedown, one of the staff members punche d him in the head 3-5 times. During an 
investigation of the incident, the he ad nurse stated that nothing untoward 
occurred.  
In this case, the individual su stained no serious physical harm  as a result of the restraint 
episode.  He filed a civil rights suit in federal court against the head nurse and five other 
staff members claiming excessive force, failure to protect, and a cover up.   A jury awarded the patient $100,000 in compensatory damages and over $1 million in punitive damages.  The First Circuit Court of App eals rejected all defendants’ arguments, 
including challenges to th e punitive damage award.  
Davis v. Rennie , 264 F.3rd 86 (1st  
Cir. 2000), cert. denied , 535 U.S. 1053 (2002). 
 
The published decisions regarding restraint and seclusion do not cap ture the many cases 
resolved through negotiated settlement agreem ents which provide for monetary payments 
and/or the implementation of new procedur es.  A class action lawsuit against the 
Nebraska mental health agency, for example,  resulted in a Consent Decree with detailed 
requirements concerning restraint and seclus ion, such as admission assessments that ask 
consumers to identify calming methods that work  best for them, staff consideration of the 
potential negative impact of restraint and seclusion, and de briefings after every use of 
these interventions.  Caroline C. v. Dale Johnson , Case No 4:CV95-22 (D. Neb. 1998). 
Moreover, as is widely known, many sett lements involving substantial payments to 
plaintiffs are subject to confidentiality agreements.   
 
It is interesting to note that, even be fore the U.S. Supreme Court’s 1982 Youngberg 
decision, Federal and State courts expresse d concern about the use of restraint and 
seclusion in psychiatric settings.  Throughout  the 1970’s, for example, the use of these 
interventions were central issues in the se minal civil rights cl ass action challenging 
conditions and practices in Alabam a’s psychiatric hospital system.  Wyatt v. Sitckney , 
325 F.Supp 781, 784 (M.D.Ala. 1971).   
 Following the detailed Wyatt  rulings, many states adopted Patient Bills of Rights in the 
1970’s that included a prohibition on the use of restraint or seclusion for punishment or 
for the convenience of staff.  In Alabama, non-compliance with the Wyatt  Consent 
Order’s provisions concerning restraint and s eclusion was one of the reasons that court 
monitoring of the state’s public mental he alth system continued throughout the 1990s. 
Wyatt v. Rogers , 985 F. Supp. 1356 (M. D. Ala. 1997).   
 
In another pre- Youngberg  case, Connecticut’s Supreme Court upheld a judgment of $3.6 
million – four times the highest damage award in Connecticut’s history at the time – in 
favor of a defendant who suffered neurological damage while in seclusion.  Pisel v. 
Stamford Hospital , 430 A.2d 1 (1980).  In that case, a hospital patient who was agitated 
and actively psychotic when placed in seclusion was found with her head wedged between the mattress and the steel bed fr ame, unconscious and without pulse, blood 
pressure, or respiratory function.  The jury found that the defendant’s conduct fell below 
the reasonable standard of care.   
 
 C. Criminal prosecution  
 
Most litigation regarding restra int and seclusion has occurred in civil courts.  However, 
staff have also faced criminal charges, incl uding prosecution for homicide, after incidents 
which resulted in tragedy. For example:  
 
• An aide was convicted of manslaughter following the death of a 15-year-old, 
100-pound boy hospitalized in Illinois.  The boy had been ordered to write sentences as punishment and, when he failed to do so, three staff members tried to put him in restraints and he re sisted.  Placed in a “basket hold,” he 
suffocated on his own vomit when staff fa iled to heed his gasping statements 
that he couldn’t breathe.  The convic tion after a bench trial was upheld on 
appeal.  
People v. Harvey , 528 N.E.2d 1053 (Ill. App. 4 Dist. 1988).    
 
• Staff members were convicted of manslaughter in the death of a 5-foot-tall, 
90-pound woman who died in a mental he alth facility from asphyxiation due 
to compression of her neck while bei ng restrained.  A New York appellate 
court reviewed the factual record in deta il and reinstated a jury conviction for 
manslaughter which the trial court had thrown out, finding that the patient’s 
“erratic behavior appears to have irritated hospital staff rather than to have 
posed a threat . . . Defendants’ violen t reaction was an unwarranted response 
to what can essentially be char acterized as annoying behavior.”  People v. 
Simon,   549 NYS 2d 701, 706 (A.D. 1 Dept. 1990).     
 
Restraint and seclusion result in serious harm  short of death in many cases.  The growing 
concern about these practices generally, as we ll as advocates urging prosecutors to look 
into specific incidents, make it likely that criminal investigations in these cases will 
increase.    
D. Scrutiny from Civil Rights Agencies 
 
In investigating and prosecuting violations under the Civil Rights for Institutionalized 
Persons Act (CRIPA), 42 U.S.C. § 1997(a), the U.S. Justice Department has aggressively 
challenged facility and staff rationales for th e use of restraint and seclusion.  In an 
Investigative Findings letter issued in 2005 concerning the Vermont State Hospital, the 
head of the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Divisi on wrote:    
We found numerous cases where the reason  given for the use of seclusion or 
restraint was that the patient was “assaul tive.”  However, no consistent picture 
ever emerged as to what was meant by that term.  In several instances, 
“assaultive” appeared to mean “verbal assault,” “loud and in trusive speech,” 
“throwing milk and water at staff’” and “spi tting at staff.”  In several other cases 
“assaultive” was not spec ifically defined at all.   In the above examples, patients 
were immediately placed in  restrictive measures without attempts to use less 
restrictive measures and without consider ation of whether the behavior was an 
immediate safety threat to the patient or others.  
Our consultant found that: Far too ofte n the documentation in the record is 
reflective of an automatic process in wh ich certain patient behaviors appear to 
automatically lead to the application of the most restrictive measures. Similarly, 
the documentation of the reasons that le sser restrictive measures utilized to 
prevent an emergency situation were ineffective was often inadequate.  [Vermont State Hospital] consistently uses seclusion and restraint as an intervention of first 
resort and fails to consider lesser restrictive alternatives.  
Bradley J. Schlozman, Acting Assistant Attorney General , Letter to Vermont Governor 
Jim Douglas,  CRIPA Investigation of the Vermont State Hospital  (July 5, 2005)  Another 
Justice Department CRIPA Investigative Findi ng issued in 2005 cite d troubling restraint 
and seclusion practices at the Napa Hospital in California:  
 
Multiple independent sources have alleged that staff at Napa goad patients into 
behaviors that are then punished with re straint or seclusion. More particularly, 
staff frequently provoke patients into verb al confrontations to  justify placing the 
patients in seclusion. If a pa tient resists being placed in seclusion, the patient is 
then restrained. 
Bradley J. Schlozman, Acting Assistant Attorney General, Letter to California Governor 
Arnold Schwarzenegger, CRIPA Investi gation of the Napa State Hospital  (June 27, 
2005).   
 
In addition to the Justice Department’s CRIPA activities, the federal government also funds 
Protection and Advocacy for Indi viduals with Mental Illness  (PAIMI)  programs in every state 
and territory, 42 USC 10801 et seq.   These programs focus on both individual and class action 
cases, often with the goal of achieving system-wide policy change.   
 PAIMIs across the country have identified th e reduction of restrain t and seclusion as a 
priority both for advocacy a nd litigation. The Center for P ublic Representation (CPR) in 
Massachusetts is perhaps the most activ e, conducting investigations, surveying 
consumers, advising PAIMIs on related issues , and consulting for and co-counseling with 
PAIMIs wishing to focus on restraint and seclusion as program priorities. Among the 
CPR’s areas of particular focus are the use of  restraint and seclusion in emergency rooms, 
including the development of model standa rds.  CPR also collects information on 
criminal investigations of restraint and secl usion deaths and damage awards related to 
these practices.  Other PA IMI activities include:  
 
• Equip for Equality, the PAIMI in Illinois, has conducted a number of investigations 
into restraint and seclusion pr actices in the state.  They  found, for example, that no 
attempt at any use of alternative interventi ons occurred prior to the use of restraint 
in 60 percent of the episodes in Illinois.  Koelliker, M., et al. , State of Restraint 
Utilization in the New Millennium: Pr actical Recommendations for Positive 
Intervention  (2000), available at 
http://www.equipforequality.org/pub lications/restraintreport.php.  In 2002, 
Congress appropriated $1 million a year to Equip for Equality for a 5-year 
demonstration project to determine how i ndependent investigations of the use of 
restraint and seclusion and other serious incidents could enhance the safety of 
consumers. 
 
• Protection and Advocacy, Inc., a PAIM I program in California, published 
Reforming Restraint and Seclusi on Practices: An Advocacy Manual in May 
1992 and a 2002 report called The Lethal Hazard of Prone Restraint: 
Positional Asphyxiation.  The latter report was a ke y factor in the state’s 
enactment in 2003 of a statute specifically  aimed at the reduction of restraint 
and seclusion.  The law requires faciliti es to conduct a clinical and quality 
review of each use of restraint and se clusion, as well as centralized reporting 
of each episode and its duration. The law also mandates that aggregate facility 
data regarding restraint a nd seclusion be available on the internet and that 
agencies report progress in reduction to the legislature during annual budget 
hearings. 
 
Additional legislation and regula tion at both the state and federa l levels concerning restraint 
and seclusion are likely, with mandates aimed at prevention through de-e scalation training and 
accountability through the public availa bility of data on the use of these practices.  In addition, 
investigation and litigation concerning specific f acilities and incidents can be expected to 
increase. The success that many facilities have  shown in reducing these practices and the 
inexpensive, easily replicated tools that are r eadily available are likely to fuel increasing 
scrutiny and challenge.  These developments, di scussed below, can elevate legal standards 
regarding professional judgment and reasonable and commun ity practices, increasing exposure 
for facilities and staff.  The risk manageme nt goal should not be “better restraint and 
seclusion,” but exposing the underl ying reasons for use of restra int and seclusion and seeking 
to predict, prevent and eliminate those issues in the future.    
 V. Effective Tools to Reduce the Use of Restraint and Seclusion are Well-
Established and Inexpensive   
 
Given the current state of affairs, issues that may arise in litigation concerning the use of 
these practices can be anticipated.  For example,  an episode of restraint or seclusion could 
result in judicial review of the staff determination that an emergency warranted such an 
intervention. Was there a risk of imminent , serious physical harm or was the goal to 
coerce the individual to comply with ward ru les?  Were such extreme actions necessary 
or could other options been employed?  Were  alternatives to restraint and seclusion 
considered?  Could early intervention have prev ented the incident?   
 
These issues in turn focus attention on the f acility’s administration.  Is the administration 
aware of the frequency and methods of restra int and seclusion use?  Has a restraint and 
seclusion prevention program been established?   Are individual risk s factors related to 
restraint and seclusion systematically identifi ed?  What are the goals and efficacy of the 
training provided to staff?  Does the training address de-esc alation techniques?  Is there 
an effective management system for supervis ing staff and reviewing use of restraint and 
seclusion?   
 
Facility administrators and leaders need focused assistance to quickly identify and 
address legal and financial risk s.  As discussed in more de tail below, these risks are 
manageable through the use of easily repl icated and inexpensive strategies.  
 
The prevention tools discussed below have b een employed with great success at a broad 
range of types of mental health facilities.   These achievements are not, however, easy; 
they require providers to examine basic assu mptions and change long-standing behaviors, 
especially with respect to the coercion a nd conflict which characterize much of the 
mental health service delivery system toda y.  Successful reduction of restraint and 
seclusion require leadership and a change in the culture of psychiat ric inpatient care – 
from a culture that values control and order to one that believes in and promotes 
recovery.   
 
A. Six Core Strategies to Reduce the Use of Seclusion and Restraint in Inpatient 
Facilities©   
 
The National Association of State Mental He alth Program Directors (NASMHPD) is the 
national lobbying and technical assistance orga nization representing st ate mental health 
agencies, which, in most states, administer  the state psychiatric hospitals.  In 2002, 
NASMHPD reviewed the evidence and consulte d with national expe rts on restraint and 
seclusion.  Through this effort, NASMHPD  identified a growing body of knowledge 
about reducing the use of restraint and seclusion, and determined that most of these 
strategies are readily available at  low or no cost.  NASMHPD published Six Core 
Strategies© to Reduce the Use of Seclus ion and Restraint in Inpatient Facilities , outlined 
below.  See Huckshorn, K.A., Re-Designing State Mental He alth Policy to Prevent the 
Use of Seclusion and Restraint , 33 Administration and Policy in Mental Health 4 (2006) 
at 482-491; and  Huckshorn, K.A., Reducing the Use of Seclusi on and Restraint in Mental Health Systems: A Public Health Prevention Approach with Interventions , 42 J. of 
Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Service s 9 (Sept. 2004).    
 
The public health prevention model, at the hear t of the Six Core Strategies, is a disease 
prevention and health promotion approach.  This model focuses on identifying risk 
factors for conflict and violence before they occur , along with early intervention 
strategies to immediately res pond to conflict so that violence and the use of restraint and 
seclusion can be prevented.  The model aims  to transform treatment environments to 
minimize the occurrence of conflict and fac ilitate immediate resolution when conflict 
does occur.  Similar models have been developed and promoted by the American 
Psychiatric Association, American Psychiat ric Nurses Association, American Hospital 
Association, National Associa tion of Psychiatric Health Systems, and the Child Welfare 
League of America.  
 
The Six Core Strategies desc ribed by NASMHPD are:   
 
 1. Leadership Toward Organizational Change.  To be successful, efforts 
to reduce the use of re straint and seclusion begin with clear leadership, generally at the 
level of the executive director or facility administrator and other executive staff.  These 
leaders should take an active and routinely visible role in  announcing and implementing a 
plan to reduce the use of rest raint and seclusion.  Leaders should prio ritize the initiative 
within the facility and ho ld people accountable for all aspects of the plan.  
 
Effective organizational leadership should incl ude a specific plan th at states the mission 
and outlines the roles and respons ibilities of all staff.  Th e development of the formal 
prevention plan is a leadership responsibi lity that requires full and consistent 
participation by a top facility administrator who is firmly committed to the project.   
The reduction plan should be presented in a continuous quality improvement framework 
that understands that culture change takes time a nd that staff at all levels “learn as they 
go.” Id.  The plan should involve consumers, family members, and advocates in all 
aspects of the project and ma ximize the prospects that it wi ll be understood by staff, and 
be viewed in a positive manner. Bluebird, G., Redefining the Role s of Consumers: 
Changing Culture and Practice in Mental Health Settings , 42 J. of Psychosocial Nursing 
and Mental Health Services 9 (2004) at 46- 53.  The plan should formally adopt the 
principles of trauma-informed systems of care and incorporate person-first language in all 
documents. 
 
A key component of this strategy is the elev ation of oversight of  every restraint and 
seclusion event by executive management, including frequent communications and 
hospital rounds done by executives in an effort to change traditional staff practices.  Hardenstine, B. (2001).  Other components of  the comprehensive st rategy include the 
following: 
 
• Develop a facility-wide policy statem ent that outlines for all staff the 
prevention/reduction approach to the use of restraint and seclusion;   
• Identify data-driven goals to reduce use; • Announce a “kick-off” event and ro utinely celebrate successes; 
• Identify restraint and seclusion reduction ch ampions at all horizontal and vertical 
organizational layers; and  
• Assign these staff to specific prevention roles.  
 
Some state mental health authorities and fac ilities have demonstrated their commitment 
by voluntarily lowering the number of hours allowe d in restraint or seclusion orders.   
 
 2. The Use of Data to Inform Practice.  Effective efforts to reduce restraint 
and seclusion use facility-generated data to in form practice and policies.  It is essential 
that data be used in a non-punitive manner to  facilitate health competition among facility 
units or wards and to elevate the general oversight and knowledge of the use of these 
interventions. Hardenstine, B., Leading the Way Toward a Seclusion and Restraint-Free 
Environment: Pennsylvania’s Success Story , Office of Mental Health and Substance 
Abuse Services, Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare (2001). This strategy uses 
data in a way that encourages the administra tion to identify successful staff and treatment 
units so that successful restraint and secl usion prevention practices can be shared.  
 
Facility utilization of restraint and seclusion should be  collected by unit, shift, day, and 
by staff member involved, although this latter strategy should be recorded confidentially 
to identify individual staff training needs and not for disciplina ry actions in general. This 
information should be graphed and posted in all areas of the facility so that it is clearly 
visible for staff and patients.  This transparen t use of data has been identified as one of 
the most important strategies used by  successful projects , including the entire 
Pennsylvania state institutional system of care.  
 
 3. Workforce Development.  Efforts to reduce restraint and seclusion are 
most successful in facilities where policy, procedures, and practices are based on the principles of recovery and the characteristic s of trauma-informed systems of care.  In 
selecting vendors to train staff on the use of  restraint and seclus ion, facilities should 
engage only vendors who have data demons trating a reduction in the use of these 
interventions where their model has been implemented.  The involvement of mental 
health consumers as trainers is essential, whatever the model.  
 
This strategy assures that staff are give n the opportunity to develop and practice 
individualized treatment planning and practice skills that integrate prevention strategies 
for specific high-risk individuals.  Training should include activities that accomplish the 
following objectives:  assure adequate staff education about the experiences of patients 
placed in restraint or seclusi on; address the common myths associated with use; introduce 
the rationale and characteristics of trauma informed care; educate on the neurobiological 
and psychological effects of trauma; and de scribe a prevention-based approach to 
reduction.  It is clear that de-escalat ion skills can be learned by all staff. 
 
Staff training should also address the growing evidence that  many restraint and seclusion 
events occur because of win-lose conflicts  set up by the numerous rules that govern 
facility operations and the role of staff in enforcing these rules.  Facility leadership need procedures in place that provide guidance fo r staff to “suspend” institutional rules and 
procedures, when necessary, to avoid or reso lve conflicts when addressing individual 
needs.  Examples of this include rigid policies regarding attendan ce at activities, wake 
and sleep times, curfews, smoke breaks, meal  times, and other rules designed to “keep 
order” and that do not take in to account individual needs or  the signs and symptoms of 
mental illness.  Staff should be empowered to make decisions – in the moment – to avoid 
the use of restraint a nd seclusion through adap ting rules in the face of real events, and 
then addressing repetitive issues in the treatment team.      
 
Other important components of this strategy include discussing the facility’s reduction 
plan in interviewing potential new staff and incorporating expectations in job 
descriptions, performance evaluations, and new staff orientation activities.  The use of 
mental health consumers, as consultants or staff, can be significantly informative when 
reviewing rules, staff training needs, and staff attitudes. 
 
 4. Use of Prevention Tools.  Numerous clinical and other tools exist to 
prevent the use of restraint and seclusion, including the following: 
  
• Patient assessments to identify the risk for violence (including previous restraint 
and seclusion history);  
• Patient assessments to identify medical risk  factors for death and injury, such as 
obesity, respiratory disease, cardiac anoma lies, medication issues, recent ingestion 
of food, prone positioning, and past trauma histories;  
• Patient assessments to identify psychologica l risk factors that suggest the need for 
a trauma assessment;  
• The development, with patients, of de-e scalation or safety plans (including 
psychiatric advance directiv es), which support the patien t in learning illness self-
management by identifying emotional triggers and environmental stressors that 
can lead to conflict or lack  of emotional control;  
• Creative changes to the physical envi ronment, including comfort and sensory 
rooms; and 
• Implementation of daily, meaningful, and engaging treatment activities. 
 
These activities should be integrated into hospital policy and procedure, as well as each individual patient’s treatment plan.   
 
In addition to these activities, staff should be provided with a behavior scale – a set of 
guidelines to ensure that staff responses  are appropriate to the behavior being 
demonstrated by the patient and to help asse ss whether certain patient behavior meets the 
criteria of imminent danger prior to the im plementation of restraint or seclusion. Many 
incidents involving the use of th ese interventions are initiate d prematurely and before the 
level of “imminent danger” occurs, often due to staff not knowing any other approach to 
use.   
 5. Supporting Consumer and Advocate Roles in Inpatient Settings.  
Involving patients, other mental health c onsumers, family members, and external 
advocates in a variety of role s in the organization – as admi nistrators, managers, direct 
service providers, and in othe r roles -- can have a powerfu l impact, particularly as a 
primary prevention strategy to reduce the use of  restraint and seclusi on.  The presence of 
these stakeholders in an inpatient environm ent sends a strong message to both patients 
and staff that recovery is real , that recovery happens, and that living with a psychiatric 
disability need not be perceived as a reas on to accept anything less than pursuing one’s 
hopes and aspirations.  
 
Successful integration of mental health c onsumers and stakeholders as staff in an 
inpatient setting can be challenging, and lik ely requires refinement  of organizational 
structures and practices.  Solomon, M.L., et al., Positive Partnerships:  How Consumers 
and Nonconsumers Can Work Together as Service Providers , University of Chicago at 
Illinois (1998).  Administrators  can facilitate integration by taking the following steps: 
 
• Positions held by peers and advocates mu st provide equitable pay aligned with 
similar roles in the organization; 
• Peer roles and their importance – includi ng the efficacy of peer support, self-help, 
and the potential for reducing the use of  restraint and seclusion – should be 
defined for all other staff; and 
• Facilities should provide appropriate orientation and training for peers and 
advocates. 
 
 6. Debriefing Tools.  Successful efforts to reduce the use of restraint and 
seclusion use event debriefing procedures to inform policy, procedures, and practices and 
reduce future use of these interventions.  A secondary goal of this strategy is to mitigate 
the adverse and potentially traumatizing eff ects of a restraint or seclusion event for 
involved staff and consumers and for all witnesse s to the event.  Debriefing activities can 
be standardized through the use of a facility gene rated policy and procedure and we have 
provided you with one as a guide.  
 
Debriefing activities are separate d into two distinct but equally important activities that 
follow a restraint or seclusi on event.  The first activity  is an immediate, post-event 
debriefing that is usually led by a nursing supe rvisor or other senior staff person who was 
not involved in the event. The purpose of this activity is to confir m the safety of all 
involved parties, review the documentation, inte rview staff and others who were present, 
and, as much as possible, return the unit to the pre-crisis milieu. The use of an interview 
or event guide and the documentation of ac tivities immediately following the event are 
highly recommended.  
 
The second debriefing activity is more formal , and often occurs a few days later. It 
includes the treatment team, the attending psyc hiatrist, and a representative from the 
facility’s management team, and it uses rigo rous problem-solving methods, such as root 
cause analysis procedures, to review and analyze the event.  The purpose of this debriefing is to identify what can  be changed to avoid an event in the future, and to assure 
that, as much as possible, trauma is mitigated for all involved parties.  
 
The inclusion of the patient’s perspective is critical.  Since attending a large meeting of 
staff can be intimidating for a patient who was very recently restrained or secluded, 
facilities should permit the consumer to appoi nt a staff advocate to present his or her 
perspective.   
 
While documentation that debriefing occurr ed is needed, concerns may arise about 
creating detailed records that mi ght be used in subsequent legal proceedings.  Debriefing 
is focused on the future - the goal is preven ting problems rather than placing blame. The 
discussion and documentation should address what  can be learned from the incident and 
how staff and consumers can utilize that knowledge. 
 
B. Roadmap to a Restraint Free Environment 
 
The Roadmap to a Restraint-Free Environment , developed by the National Association 
of Consumer/Survivor Mental  Health Administrators ( NACSMHA) and published by the 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services  Administration is focused on a recovery 
based framework and was developed by consum ers for training of direct care staff in 
inpatient facilities. This training curriculum explores sustainable so lutions and strategies 
that support the elimination of  the practices of seclusion a nd restraint in mental health 
settings. This training manual is intended to build bridges and increase the understanding 
among staff of what it is like to be a mental health consumer admitted to an inpatient 
mental health setting. It assumes the significan t importance of direct care staff as being 
critical in developing seclusi on and restraint free environm ents and is best used in 
conjunction with the training of senior and middle management leadership such as is done in the NASMHPD traini ng curriculum. The Roadmap is available online at: 
http://www.mentalhealth.samhsa.gov/publications/allpubs/sma06-4055/. 
 
C. Advance Crisis Management Program 
 
The Advance Crisis Management Program (A CM), developed at the National Research 
and Training Center on Psychiat ric Disability at the Univers ity of Illinois, Chicago seeks 
to increase self-determination by helping individuals develop written plans that identify 
personal stress triggers a nd strategies to manage agitation and anger.  See 
www.psych.uic.edu/UICNRTC/dep- training.htm.  The program is based on the idea that 
individuals’ naturally-occu rring crisis management techniques can be used during 
hospitalization if the techniques are documented before the crisis occurs.  This approach 
makes self awareness and symptom manageme nt a central element in the treatment 
process.  The individual and st aff frequently review the pl an and immediately consult it 
whenever either feels it is warranted. Afterward, the manage ment of the situation is 
reviewed and the ACM is revised as neede d. Preliminary research findings have been 
published.  ACM training was provided to patie nts, and Nonviolent Crisis Intervention 
(NCI) training,  developed by the Crisis Prevention Institute (see  
http://www.crisisprevention.com ), was provided to staff, on three units of a university hospital: an adult unit, an adult research unit and an adolescent unit.  During the first two 
quarters following the training, restraint and seclusion declined significantly and 
remained low for the remainder of the year. Jonikas, J., et al. , A Program to Reduce the 
Use of Physical Restraint in Psychiatric Inpatient Facilities,  55 Psychiatric Services 7 
(2004) at 818-820.  
 
VI. Action Steps for Attorneys and Risk Managers    
 
Unlike many difficult problems in the mental h ealth system, reducing the use of restraint 
and seclusion is not primarily a matter of funding.  In fact, numerous examples exist in 
which the use of restraint and seclusion ha ve been reduced without major expenditures 
when facility administrators publicly commit to doing so.  Approaches that focus on 
“doing restraint and seclusion better” leav e a facility exposed to major risks.  The most 
effective risk management strategy is one th at focuses on the constant reduction of the 
use of these interventions and in cludes the following action steps:    
 
9 Review your facility’s current policie s and actual practices regarding 
restraint and seclusion.   
 
• Ensure that your facility’s  written policies and actual practices comply with 
existing laws and regulations and its own internal policies.  This analysis is 
especially important with respect to the following: 
 
• Who has the authority to order these interventions; 
• Whether face-to-face evaluations are performed by a physician or Licensed 
Independent Practitioner within one hour of  initiating restraint or seclusion; 
• Whether debriefings occu r after each episode; and 
• Documentation and review. 
 
• Review the staff training being provided as to fre quency and content.  Staff 
need to receive training pre-service, before they are placed in situations that 
may put them or others at risk, and ha ve mentor supervision on shift for at 
least six months. The focus must be on de-escalation and conflict negotiation 
skills, with the objective preventing restra int and seclusion us e, not principally 
their safe use or application.  Other important issues include: 
 
• Training needs to be competency based, adapted to staff knowledge 
and responsibilities, and on-going. 
 
• Senior clinical and administrative  staff must attend each training 
session to demonstrate its importance a nd to ensure the content reflects 
the agency’s values, especially wh en this training is provided through 
external contracts.  
 
• Training must go beyond the “usual ” annual refresher course on “de-
escalation” and restraint and seclusi on application procedures, as this kind of training falls short of e ffecting the knowledge, skills and 
competencies this kind of practice changes necessitates.  
 
• This training should integrate trau ma informed care, the development 
of  therapeutic relationships, values  clarification, cu ltural competence, 
the use of language, individualized care planning skills, and the 
importance of inclusion of service us ers in their care, in planning for 
restraint / seclusion reduction efforts, and as staff members. 
  
9 Collect and use data to inform your on going risk management strategy.  The 
use of restraint and seclusion should be an established performance measure 
for your facility.   
 
• Critical data points to review include the following:   
 
• Rates of restraint and seclusion use (e pisodes and duration) during the last 
six months, broken down by unit and patient characteristics. 
• Trends in restraint and seclusion use – Are your facility’s  rates increasing 
or decreasing? 
• Comparisons in rates and trends be tween your facility and similar, 
“benchmark,” facilities.  
  
• On a regular basis, share data reports on use and trends with each unit in the 
facility and discuss the data reports  at facility management meetings. 
 
9 Advise top management that exposure related to the use of restraint and 
seclusion is increasing and engage their leadership in a strategy to reduce the 
use of these interventions.   
 
• Explain that compliance with Federal and JCAHO rules is essential but not 
sufficient because (1) evolving profe ssional standards now place any use of 
restraint and seclusion under increased scrutiny; and (2) inexpensive, easily 
replicated tools to reduce restraint and seclusion are readily available. 
 
• Discuss incentives for staff to reduce th eir reliance on restra int and seclusion, 
including but not limited to data collection and feedb ack, recognition, and 
rewards. 
 
• Ensure that actions are taken to (1 ) address any problems in the physical 
environment; and (2) provide active treatment on and off the unit as part of the 
effort to reduce the use of  restraint and seclusion. 
 
9 Establish a facility Task Force, led by top management, as part of the effort 
to reduce restraint and seclusion.  
   
• Involve consumers, top management, st aff, and unions in the Task Force.  
• Invite managers and direct care staff from facilities with successful programs 
to make a presentation at your facility. 
 
• Keep staff abreast of developments re garding restraint a nd seclusion in the 
law and in clinical best practices  
 
9 Maintain the priority of constant re duction in the use and duration of 
restraint and seclusion.  
 
 
 
VII. Conclusion  
 
 
 
I can’t bring myself to describe the mome nt-by-moment struggles and sheer gut -  
 wrenching terror of being put into five-point  restraint.  The whole experience made me 
feel ashamed and that my soul had been dishonored. I sensed that some of that shame rubbed off on the people who were ordered to do that to me . 
 
 W. Pflueger,  NTAC  Networks , Special Edition/Summer/Fall 2002, 7 
 
           
 
Every episode of restraint or seclusion is harmful to the individual and humiliating to 
staff members who understand their job responsibili ties.   The nature of these practices is 
such that every use of these interventions leav es facilities and sta ff with significant legal 
and financial exposure.    
 
Public scrutiny of restraint and seclusion is  increasing and legal standards are changing, 
consistent with growing evidence that the use of these interventions is inherently 
dangerous, arbitrary, and genera lly avoidable.  Effective risk management requires a 
proactive strategy focused on reducing the use of these interventions in order to avoid 
tragedy, media controversy, external ma ndates, and legal judgments.     
 
 
 
 
                      References 
 
American Psychiatric Association, Seclusion and Restraint,  The Psychiatric Uses, Report 
of the American Psychiatric Association Task  Force on the Psychiatric Uses of Seclusion 
and Restraint (1985). 
 
American Psychiatric Association, American  Psychiatric Nurses Association, and the 
National Association of Psyc hiatric Health Systems, Learning from Each Other:  Success 
Stories and Ideas for Reducing Restra int/Seclusion in Behavioral Health  (January, 2003). 
 
Bennington-Davis, M. and Murphy, T., Eliminating Seclusion and Restraint , 32 Clinical 
Psychiatry News 12 (2004).   
 
Bisek, D., Scott Lawson v. Monroe County - A Lesson Learned , The Mutual Effort, Vol. 
4.3 (Summer, 1999) at 1. 
 
Bluebird, G., Redefining the Roles of Consum ers: Changing Culture and Practice 
inMental Health Settings , 42 J. of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Services 9 
(2004) at 46-53.   
 
Buckley v. Rogerson , 133 F.3rd 1125 (8th Cir. 1998).   
 
California Service Employees International Union and California Network of Mental 
Health Clients, Five Principles in Reducing the Use of Seclusion and Restraints (2002). 
 
Caroline C. v. Dale Johnson,  Case No 4:CV95-22 (D. Neb. 1998). 
 
Child Welfare League of America, The Use of Restraints and Seclusion in Residential 
Care Facilities for Children (2000), available at 
http://www.cwla.org/ advocacy/secres000531.htm . 
 
Crisis Prevention Institute, Nonviolent Crisis Intervention Training , available at 
http://www.crisisprevention.com . 
 
Donat, D., An Analysis of Successful Efforts to Reduce the Use of Seclusion and Restraint 
at a Public Psychiatric Hospital   54 Psychiatric Serv ices 8 (2003) at 1119-1123. 
 
D’Orio, B.M., Purselle, D., Stevens, D., and Garlow, S.J., Reduction of Episodes of 
Seclusion and Restraint in a Psychiatric Emergency Service,  55 Psychiatric Services 5 
(2004) at 581-583. 
 
Davis v. Rennie,  264 F.3rd 86 (1st  Cir. 2000), cert. denied,  535 US 1053 (2002). 
 
 
 Duxbury, J., An Evaluation of Staff and Patient Views of and Strategies Employed  
to Manage Inpatient Aggression and Violence on  One Mental Health Unit: A Pluralistic 
Design, 9 J. of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 3 (2002) at 325-337. 
 
Fisher, W., Restraint and Seclusion:  A Review of the Literature , 151 Am. J. Psychiatry 
11 (1994) at 1584-1591.          
 
Fisher, W., Elements of Successful Restrain t and Seclusion Reduction Programs and 
Their Application in a Large, Urban State Psychiatric Hospital , 9 J. of Psychiatric 
Practice 1 (2003) at 7-15. 
 
Goodness K., and Refro, N., Changing Cultures: A Brief Program Analysis of a Social 
Learning Program on a Maximum-Security Forensic Unit, 20 Behavioral Sciences and 
the Law 5 (2002) at 495-506. 
 
Hardenstine, B., Leading the Way Toward a Seclusion and Restraint-Free Environment: 
Pennsylvania’s Success Story , Office of Mental Health a nd Substance Abuse Services, 
Pennsylvania Department of  Public Welfare (2001). 
 
Haimowitz, S. and Urff, J., Ending Harm From Restraint and Seclusion: The Evolving 
Efforts  (submitted for publication, 2005). 
. 
Hinsby, K. and Baker, M., Patient and Nurse Accounts of Violent Incidents in Medium 
Secure Unit, 11 J. of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 3 (2004) at 341-347. 
 
Hopper v. Callahan , 562 N.E.2d 822 (1990). 
 
Huckshorn, K.A., Redesigning State Mental Health  Policy to Prevent the Use of 
Seclusion and Restraint, 33 Administration and Policy in Mental Health 4 (2006) at 482-
491.   
 
Huckshorn, K.A., Reducing Seclusion and Restraint Use in  Mental Health Settings: Core 
Strategies for Prevention , 42 J. of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health Service 9 
(2004) at  22-31. 
 
Ilkiw-Lavalle, M. and Grenyer, B.F.S., Differences Between Patient and Staff             
Perceptions of Aggression in Mental Health Units , 54 Psychiatric Services 3 (2003) at 
389-393. 
 
Jonikas, J., Cook, J., Rosen, C., Laris, A., and Kim, J.-B .  A Program to Reduce the Use 
of                                       Physical Restraint in Psychiatric Inpatient Facilities,  55 
Psychiatric Services 7  (2004)  at 818-820.  
 
Koelliker, M., Norwood, L., and Summerfield, J., State of Restraint Utilization in the 
New Millennium: Practical Recommendations for Positive Intervention  (December, 
2000), available at http://www.equipforequality.org/publications/restraintreport.php .  
LeBel, J. and Goldstein, R., The Economic Cost of Using Restraint and the Value Added 
by Restraint Reducti on or Elimination , 56 Psychiatric Services 9 (2005) at 1109-1114. 
 
Mohr, W.K., Petti, T.A., and Mohr, B.D., Adverse Effects Associated with Physical 
Restraint , 48 Canadian. J. of Psyc hiatry 5 (2003) at 330-337.   
 
Morrison, E.F., The Tradition of Toughness: A Study of the Nonprofessional Nursing 
Care in Psychiatric Facilities , 22 Image: The J. of Nursing Scholarship 1 (1989) at 32-
38. 
 
National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors (NASMHPD), Position 
Statement on Seclusion and Restraint  (July 13, 1999). 
 
National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors (NASMHPD), National 
Executive Training Institutes: Reducing the Use of Seclusion and Restraint -- Curriculum 
Training Manual  (2003).  
National Association of Psyc hiatric Health Systems, et al., v. Donna E. Shalala , Civil 
Action # 99-2025 (D.D.C., Decision September 14, 2000). 
National Mental Hea lth Association, Position Statement: The Use of Restraining 
Techniques and Seclusion For Persons w ith Mental or Emotional Disorders , NMHA 
Program Policy P-41 (2000).  
 
National Research and Training Center on Psychiatric Disabil ity at the University of 
Illinois, Advance Crisis Management Program ( 2004), available at   
www.psych.uic.edu/UICNRTC/dep-training.htm .   
 
New York State Commission on Quality of Care, Restraint and Seclus ion Practices in 
New York State Psychiatric Facilities  (September, 1994).  
 
Occupational Health and Safety Administration, Guidelines for Preventing Workplace 
Violence for Health Care and Social Workers , OSHA 3148-01R (2004).          
 
People v. Harvey , 528 N.E.2d 1053 (Ill. App. 4 Dist. 1988).    
 
People v. Simon,   549 NYS 2d 701, 706 (A.D. 1 Dept. 1990). 
 
Pflueger, W., NTAC  Networks , (Special Edition, Summ er/Fall 2002) at 7.  
 
Pisel v. Stamford Hospital,  430 A.2d 1 (1980). 
 
Protection and Advocacy, Inc.,  Reforming Restraint and Seclusion Practices: An 
Advocacy Manual (1992). 
 Protection and Advocacy, Inc., The Lethal Hazard of Pr one Restraint: Positional 
Asphyxiation (2002). 
 
Scherer v. Waterbury , 2000 Conn. Super LEXIS 481 (Conn. Super., February 22, 2000). 
 
Schlozman, B., Acting Assist ant Attorney General, Letter to California Governor Arnold 
Schwarzenegger, CRIPA Investigation of the Napa State Hospital  (June 27, 2005).   
 
Schlozman, B., Acting Assi stant Attorney General , Letter to Vermont Governor Jim 
Douglas, CRIPA Investigation of the Vermont State Hospital  (July 5, 2005). 
 
Smith, G., Davis, R., and Bixler, E., Pennsylvania State Hospital System’s Seclusion and 
Restraint Reduction Program , 56 Psychiatric Services 9 (2005) at 1115–1122. 
 
Solomon, M.L., Jonikas, J.A., Cook, J.A., and Kerouac, J., Positive Partnerships:  How 
Consumers and Nonconsumers Can Work Together as Service Providers , University of 
Chicago at Illinois (1998).  
 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health  Services Administration (SAMHSA ), A National 
Call to Action ( 2003), available at http://alt.samhsa.gov/seclusion/SRMay5report4.htm . 
 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health  Services Administration (SAMHSA ), Roadmap to a 
Restraint-Free Environment (2005) , available at 
http://www.mentalhealth.samhsa .gov/publications/allpubs/sma06-4055/ . 
 
Threlkeld v. White Castle , 127 F. Supp 2d 986 (D. No. Ill. 2001).   
 
Unzueta v. Steele , 291 F. Supp. 2d 1230 (D. Kan. 2003). 
Youngberg v. Romeo , 457 U.S. 307, 316 (1982).   
 
Weiss, E. M., Altimari, D., Blint, D. F., and Megan, K., Deadly Restraint: A Nationwide 
Pattern of Death , Hartford Courant (Oct. 11, 1998).   
  
Wyatt v. Sitckney , 325 F.Supp 781, 784 (M.D.Ala. 1971). 
 
Wyatt v. Rogers , 985 F. Supp. 1356 (M. D. Ala. 1997). 
 
Zigmund v. Foster , 106 F. Supp. 2d 352 (D. Conn. 2000). 