 International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  1 
 
Activated Carbon  as An Adsorbent : A Review  
 
Mamatha  M 
 
Assistant Professor, Department of Physics, Government First Grade College, Sira, Tumkur district, 
Karnataka, India.  
 
Abstract  
Activated carbon  is highly porous with a large surface area for activity, thus making it highly adsorption 
efficient, and is usually derived from waste products. The proximate and ultimate analysis of agricultural 
waste material and chemical compositions such as hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin contents were 
also discussed. The authors reviewed chemical activators such as alkali hydroxides, KOH , phosphoric 
acid, zinc chloride, potassium carbonate, and NaOH used to produce activated carbon. A detailed 
explanation of the characterization techniques (SEM, FTIR, EDAX, BET, XRD etc.) for precursors and 
activated carbons  are discussed.  The effect of various parameters on adsorption efficiency of activated 
carbon is  discussed . Wastewater containing different toxic dye contaminants causes serious 
environmental problems. Removal of various pollutants ( SO 2, NO 2, H2S, CO 2 etc.) u sing activated 
carbon were reviewed.  In addition, the equilibrium adsorption data were fitted to Isotherm models for 
the determination of constants correlated to the adsorption phenomena  was reviewed .  
 
Keywords : Agricultural  wastes,  Activated carbon, Chemical  activation,  Adsorption  
 
Introduction  
Activated carbon (AC)  is a dark solid, highly porous with a large surface area for activity, thus making it 
highly adsorption efficient, and is usually derived from waste products. Preparing AC from useless and 
throw -away materials such as agricultural byproducts became a challenge. The characterization of AC 
reveals the topography and surface area of the AC. The efficiency of AC depends on its adsorption 
capacity. The preparation of AC from agro -waste materials has led to pollution control and has a wide 
application. AC was characterized for surface properties and adsorption efficiency was studied using 
dyes and heavy metals. The synthesis of AC from waste materials has wide applications and its 
characterization using te chniques such as SEM, EDAX, XRD, and BET analysis were studied. The 
adsorption efficiency of AC was studied using dyes, heavy metals, etc. P reparation of AC from waste 
materials which has no commercial values decreases environmental pollution. AC is subjec ted to remove 
toxic dyes, heavy metals, organic pollutants, etc. by adsorption technique.  
 
Preparation  of activated  carbon  from  agricultural  wastes  
Mohd Adib Yahya et al. reviewed the synthesis of AC from agricultural waste material. The proximate 
and ultimate analysis of agricultural waste material and chemical compositions such as cellulose, 
hemicelluloses, and lignin contents were also discussed. The effects of carbonization and activation 
temperat ure, activation time, types of activating agents, and impregnation ratio were discussed. The 
effects on the textural properties, such as surface area and pore volume, were reviewed. The authors 
reviewed the use of AC derived from agricultural residues in m any fields. They studied the reaction  International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  2 
 
kinetic modeling of the pyrolysis and activation of agricultural wastes [1]. Mohd Adib Yahya et al. 
discussed the preparation of AC from agricultural waste products by physical and chemical activation. 
The effects of a ctivating agents, temperature, and impregnation ratio were also discussed. The 
applications of AC from agricultural waste products were reviewed. Therefore, inexpensive and 
renewable resources of agricultural waste were found to be effectively converted in to useful materials 
[2]. 
Kulumkan Sartova et al. prepared AC from cotton ( Gossypium Malvaceae ) processing waste materials. 
Carbonization was carried out at 500 –800  °C, with subsequent activation at 800 °C by a water stream. 
Characterization was studied us ing an Electronic Microscope and FT -IR. AC showed high adsorptive 
abilities for iodine, chlorine, and sulfur dioxide. The results suggested that the high -quality AC from 
cotton biomass waste materials can be used as an adsorbent to remove pollutants [3].  
Mansooreh Soleimani et al. synthesized AC  from agricultural wastes (such as bagasse, apricot stones , 
almond  shells , walnut  shells and  hazelnut shells) using chemical activation with phosphoric acid. The 
results reveal that AC from the hard shells of apricot  stones showed  best adsorption properties , highest 
surface area and could be used to remove metal ions from wastewater [4].  
Junichi Hayashi et al. prepared AC from lignin by chemical activation with ZnCl 2, H 3PO 4, and some 
alkali metal compounds. The effect of carbonization and activating reagents on the pore structure of the 
AC was studied, and the maximum surface areas were obtained at the carbonization temperature of 600  
0C with ZnCl 2 and H 3PO 4 activation. In a lkali metal activation, the maximum surface areas were 
obtained at the carbonization temperature of 800  0C [5].  
 
Activation of raw materials by physical activation or chemical activation  
Heidarinejad et al. reviewed that AC refers to a wide range of carboni zed materials with a high degree of 
porosity and a large surface area. The authors reviewed chemical activators such as alkali hydroxides, 
KOH, phosphoric acid, zinc chloride, potassium carbonate, and NaOH used to produce AC. Activation 
with phosphoric aci d is commonly used for lignocellulose material at lower temperatures, whereas Zinc 
chloride generates more surface area than phosphoric acid but is used less due to its toxicity. The 
comparison of the physical activation and the impregnation method activat ion with alkali metals 
indicates that the AC obtained through physical mixing had a higher porosity than that produced by the 
impregnation method [6]. Samah Zaki Naji et al. review the preparation a nd modification of AC, which 
involves precursor treatments , carbonization, and physical and/or chemical activation. The temperature, 
activation time, and impregnation ratio of the activating agent to the precursor were found to have a 
significant influence on the surface morphology of the AC during the  activation  process. The effect  of 
AC yield, BET surface area, and pore volume during synthesis from various raw materials are reviewed. 
This could serve as a guideline for designing a high -performance AC-based catalyst for biofuel 
production [7].  
M. Olivares -Marín e t al. prepared AC from cherry st ones by chemical activation using  ZnCl 2. The 
influence of carbonization temperature and impregnation ratio on the textural and chemical -surface 
properties of the products obtained was studied and characterized texturally by the adsorption of N 2 at 
−196 °C. The presence of functional groups on the surface of AC was studied by FT -IR spectroscopy. 
With a 4:1 impregnation ratio, the specific surface area of the resultant AC is as high as 1971 m2g−1. The 
effect of the increase in the impregnation ratio on the porous structure of AC is effective than that of the  International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  3 
 
increase in the carbonization temperature, whereas the reverse applies to the effect on the surface 
functional groups and structures [8].  
Chiung-Fen Chang et al. prepared AC from corn cob using physical activation by gasifying agents such 
as CO 2 and steam. With 50 wt% burn -off, the results reveal that the BET surface area, pore volume, and 
average pore diameter of the resulting AC generally inc rease with the extent of burn -off in both 
gasifying agents and at both temperatures (1073 and 1173 K). The BET surface areas of the AC after 
steam activations at 1173 K are 1705 and 1315 m2/g, respectively, indicating high adsorption capacities 
with microp orous structures [9].  
Kang, HY et al. synthesized  AC using paper mill sludge from pyrolysis, which was chemically activated 
with KOH. The effects of activation agent ratio, activation temperature, and activation time on the 
properties of the char were carr ied out in a rotary kiln reactor. The AC was  characterized by measuring 
iodine and methylene blue numbers and specific surface areas. The AC in this study had maximum 
iodine and methylene blue numbers of 726.0 mg/g and 152.0 mg/g, respectively, and a speci fic surface 
area of 1,002.0 m2/g. Freundlich isotherms yield a fairly good fit to the adsorption data, indicating 
monolayer adsorption of metals onto AC prepared from the char of paper mill sludge using potassium 
hydroxide as the activating agent [10].   
 
Characterization of activated carbon by SEM, XRD, BET method, and EDAX techniques  
Author González -García reviewed the methods of synthesis of AC from lignocellulosic precursors. 
Special attention must be given to the precursor characteristics , the final micr ostructure and properties of 
carbon. A detailed description of the characterization techniques for precursors and AC, comprising 
physicochemical, micro/nanostructural , surface chemistry, textural, and adsorption capacity features, is 
presented. The application of AC in the adsorption of heavy metals, dyes, volatile organic compounds, 
gas storage, and electrochemical capacitors is also included [11]. Ahmad, A.A. et al. Prepared AC from 
biosolids as adsorbents for pollutant removal. Both physical and chemical characterizations provide 
basic knowledge for pollutant removal. The literature illustrates that chemical activation with KOH is 
found to be the most effective techn ique for producing a high BET surface area on AC prepared from 
biosolid is 1,882 m2/g. In this review, the results reveal that the bio -solid AC is comparable with 
commercially AC [12].  
Turgay Tay et al. synthesized  AC from the pyrolysis of soybean oil cake s at 600  oC and 800 °C by 
chemical activation using  K2CO 3 and KOH. The effect of temperature and chemical reagents on porosity 
development was investigated and discussed. K 2CO 3 as a chemical reagent was found to be more 
effective than KOH under identical c onditions (in terms of  porosity development and yield of the AC). 
The maximum surface area (1352.86 m2 g−1) was obtained at 800 °C with K 2CO 3 activation, which was 
in the range of commercial AC. Elemental analyses of the AC indicate insignificant sulfur co ntent. The 
ash and sulfur contents of the AC prepared with chemical activation by K 2CO 3 were lower than those 
prepared with chemical activation by KOH [13].  
R.M. Suzuki et al. studied the preparation of rice bran AC with and without an acid treatment step before 
the activation process. The effect of activation time on the structure of the AC was evaluated. The acid 
treatment had a significant positive influence on the adsorption properties of AC. The BET surface area 
and pore volume of rice bran -AC were 652 m2 g−1 and 0.137 cm3 g−1 respectively, with mesoporous 
predominance (ca. 55%). The study results indicate that the potential use of rice bran as a precursor in 
the preparation of AC is an economically promising material [14].   International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  4 
 
Donni Adinata et al.  prepared activated carbon from Palm shells using potassium carbonate (K 2CO 3) as 
an activating agent by chemical activation. The effect of carbonization temperatures (600 –1000 °C) and 
impregnation ratios (0.5 –2.0) of the prepared AC were studied. The Resul ts revealed that with an 
increase in the carbonization temperature and impregnation ratio, the yield decreased whereas the 
adsorption of CO 2 increased progressively. The specific surface area of AC was maximum (1170 m2/g) 
at 800 °C with an activation perio d of 2 h ours and an impregnation ratio of 1.0 [15].  
 
Adsorption of pollutants on activated carbon  
Author Ayhan Demirbas reviewed several different agricultural waste adsorbents and types of dyes. 
Wastewater containing various dye contaminants causes seriou s environmental problems. Recently, 
growing research interest in the production of AC has been focused on agricultural by -products. Low -
cost adsorbents derived from agricultural wastes have proven to have outstanding capabilities for the 
removal of dyes fr om wastewater. The inexpensive and eco -friendly adsorbents have  been studied as an 
alternative substitution for the removal of dyes from wastewater. The adsorption efficiency of dye on 
agricultural waste adsorbents depend on the characteristics of the indi vidual adsorbent, the extent of 
surface modification, and the initial concentration of adsorbate [16]. Mustafa T. et al. reviewed the 
application of adsorption in the removal of toxic dyes from aqueous solutions. The article provides 
extensive literature i nformation about dyes, their classification and toxicity, various treatment methods, 
and dye adsorption characteristics by various adsorbents. AC from biomass has the advantage of non -
renewable coal -based granular AC, provided that it has better adsorption  efficiency. The effective 
adsorption factors of dye, such as solution pH, initial dye concentration, adsorbent dosage, and 
temperature, and the applicability of various adsorption kinetic models and isotherm models for dye 
removal by a wide range of adsor bents are also reported here [17].  
Santhy et al. investigated the adsorption efficiency of AC prepared from coir pith using reactive dyes in 
the textile industry. The results show that the adsorption of dyes increased with an increase in contact 
time and carbon dose. Maximum adsorption of all the dyes was observed at an acidic pH. The adsorption 
of dyes was fitted with the Freundlich model. Kinetic studies showed that the adsorption followed first 
order . The carbon could be regenerated and used with 1.0 M NaOH. The coir pith -AC was effective in 
removing color and also significantly reduced COD leve ls in the textile wastewater [18].  
Prastuti, O. P., et al. studied the remov al of dyes and heavy ions from t extile waste using banana peel -
AC. Banana peel -AC was characterized using SEM to obtain morphology. Adsorption studies of Cu2+ 
and Cr6+ on AC were obtained using spectrophotometric UV -Vis analysis with a wavelength of 635 nm 
for copper (Cu) and 469 nm for chromium (Cr). The results of the atomic absorpti on spectroscopy 
analysis of AC show that it can reduce copper and chromium ion content by 55.5% and 61%, 
respectively. Therefore, when AC was used as an adsorbent for dyes in wastewater ( textile waste ), the 
average absorption capacity of the dye ion was 12 .21% during the contact time of adsorption of 120 
minutes [19].  
Tsang, D.C.W., et al. studied the adsorption of basic dyes (methylene blue), acid dyes (acid blue 25 and 
acid red 151), and reactive dyes (reactive red 23) using waste wood pallets and AC. The  results reveal 
that phosphoric acid concentration, impregnation ratio, activation temperature, and activation time could 
maximize the surface area and pore volume of AC. The characterization of the carbon surface chemistry 
using Fourier -transform infrared  spectroscopy revealed a decrease in the amount of several functional 
groups with increasing activation temperature. The kinetics and high capacity of dye adsorption on  International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  5 
 
waste wood AC suggest that the production of AC from different types of wood waste shou ld value 
further investigation [20].  
 
Applications of activated carbon  
Norhusna Mohamad Nor et al. studied  the preparation  of activated carbon from lignocellulosic biomass 
and its applications in air pollution control. The effects of carbonization and acti vation parameters such 
as temperature, heating rate, gas flow rate, activating agent, and residence time on the properties of 
activated carbon were discussed. Removal of SO 2, NO 2, and H 2S, simultaneous removal of SO 2 and 
NO X, and removal of VOC using AC were reviewed. Converting lignocellulosic biomass into AC could 
decrease environmental problems such as agricultural waste and air pollution [21]. Reza, Md. Sumon, et 
al. reviewed the preparation of biomass -AC. Fresh water is be ing polluted by industrial and agricultural 
activities, pharmaceuticals, technocratic civilization, pesticides, garments, global changes, etc. 
Environmental pollution and global warming are due to the greenhouse gases and harmful gases 
generated from the d umping and burning of fossil fuels. The synthesis of AC is an easy and safe process, 
mainly from the pyrolysis or gasification of biomass with heat and/or chemicals. The recycling and 
regeneration of AC are also necessary for resource maintenance and envir onmental safety [22].  
Cheol -Soo Yang et al. prepared Bamboo -based AC with or without KOH activation by simple heat 
treatment and characterized it for energy storage applications. The KOH AC has large surface area 
(more than 3000 m2 g−1) resulting in high s pecific capacitance, energy density, and power density in an 
aqueous electrolyte. The specific capacitance retention after 3000 cycles is more than 91% of the 
original capacitance, proving outstanding cyclic stability for supercapacitor applications. The r esults 
indicate that the natural resource of common bamboo could be an essential raw material for energy 
storage devices [23].   
Ana Lea Cukierman et al. discussed the applications of AC cloths, which have received growing 
attention because they offer compa rative advantages over the traditional powdered or granular forms of 
this well -known adsorbent, providing further potential uses for technological innovations in several 
fields. Some fabrics and textile wastes used as precursors and activation process vari ables affect the 
development and physicochemical, mechanical, and/or electrical properties of the resulting AC cloths. 
Then the removal of water and air pollutants by adsorption onto AC cloths, including advances towards 
optimizing their regeneration after  organic vapor saturation, is discussed [24].  
Alberto Adan -Mas et al. prepared AC from spent coffee ground second waste, after polyphenol 
extraction, using a hydrothermal process followed by physical or chemical activation. The resulting AC 
showed micropor ous structures with a total specific area between 585 and 2330 m2g−1. Scanning 
electron microscopy revealed a highly porous microstructure wit h chemically AC where as physical 
activation led to a cracked, micro -sized morphology. After chemical activation, the AC displayed a 
capacitance of 84 F·g−1 at 1 A·g−1 in a 1.9 V voltage window, with 70% capacitance retention at 10 Ag−1 
and 85% retention after 5000 cycles of continuous charge -discharge [25].  
 
Conclusion  
The preparation of AC from useless and throwaway materials such as agricultural byproducts became a 
challenge. Therefore, inexpensive and renewable resources from agricultural waste were found to be 
effectively converted into useful materials. The temperature, impregnation time, and impregnation ratio 
of the activating agent to the precursor were found to have a significant influence on the surface  International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  6 
 
morphology of the AC during the activation process. The characterization technique for precursors and 
activated carbons was discuss ed. The various parameters such as, solution pH, initial dye concentration, 
adsorbent dosage, and temperature, and the applicability of various adsorption kinetic models and 
isotherm models for dye removal by a wide range of adsorbents are also reported he re. Removal of SO 2, 
NO 2, and H 2S, simultaneous removal of SO 2 and NO X, and removal of VOC using AC were reviewed. 
The recycling and regeneration of AC are also important  to preserve the natural resource and decrease 
the pollution . 
 
Acknowledgement  
The auth ors thank  the Department of Physics, Government First Grade College, Sira, Tumkur district, 
Karnataka, India.  
 
References  
1. Mohd Adib Yahya ., Z. Al -Qodah ., C.W. Zanariah Ngah. , "Agricultural  bio-waste  materials  as 
potential  sustainable precursors used for activated carbon production ", Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 2015,  46, 218-235. 
2. Mohd Adib Yahya ., Muhammad Humaidi Mansor ., Wan Amani Auji Wan Zolkarnaini ., Nurul 
Shahnim Rusli ., Anisah Aminuddin ., Khalidah Mohamad ., Fatin Aina Mohamad Sabhan ., Arif 
Abdallah Aboubaker Atik ., Lailatun Nazirah Ozair. , “A brief  review  on activated  carbon  derived  
from    agriculture  by-product ", AIP Conference Proceedings  1972, 2018.   
3. Kulumkan Sartova ., Emil Omurzak ., Gulnara Kambarova ., Isaak Dzhumaev ., Bakyt Borkoev ., 
Zhypargul Abdullaeva. , “Activated  carbon  obtained  from  the cotton  processing  wastes ", Diamond  
and Related  Materials,  2019, 91, 90 -97. 
4. M. Soleimani ., T. Kaghazchi ., “Agricultural  Waste  Conversion  to Activated  Carbon  by Chemical  
Activation  with Phosphoric Acid ", Chem.  Eng. Technol,  2007, 30(5), 649-654. 
5. Hayashi Junichi., Kazehaya  Atsuo ., Muroyama Katsuhiko., Watkinson  Paul. , “Preparation  of 
activated  carbon  from  lignin  by chemical activation ", Carbon, 2000, 38(13) 1873 -1878.  
6. Heidarinejad, Zoha Dehghani ., Mohammad Hadi Heidari ., Mohsen  Javedan ., Gholamali Ali ., Imran 
Sillanpaa  Mika. , “Methods  for preparation  and activation  of activated  carbon:  a review ", Environ  
Chem ., 2020, 393–415. 
7. Samah Zaki  Naji., Ching Thian  Tye., “A review  of the synthesis  of activated  carbon  for biodiesel  
production:  Precursor,  preparation,  and modification ", Energy  Conversion  and Management:  X, 
2022, 13. 
8. M. Olivares -Marin ., C. Fernandez -Gonzalez ., A. Macias -Garcia ., V. Gomez -Serrano ., “Preparation 
of activated carbon from cherry stones by  chemical  activation  with ZnCl 2", Applied  Surface  Science,  
2006, 252(17) 5967 -5971 . 
9. Chiung -Fen Chang ., Ching -Yuan  Chang ., Wen -Tien Tsai., “Effects of Burn -off and Activation 
Temperature on Preparation  of Activated Carbon from Corn Cob Agrowaste by CO 2 and Steam ", 
Journal of Colloid and Interface  Science,  2000, 232(1), 45-49.  
10. Kang  H. Y ., Park  S. S. , Rim  Y. S. , “Preparation  of activated  carbon  from  paper  mill sludge  by 
KOH -activation ", Korean  J. Chem.  Eng.,  2006, 23, 948–953. 
11. P. Gonzalez -Garcia ., “Activated carbon from lignocellulosics precursors: A review of the synthesis  
methods,  characterization  techniques  and applications ", Renewable  and Sustainable  Energy   International Journal for Multidisciplinary Research (IJFMR)  
 
E-ISSN: 2582 -2160   ●   Website: www.ijfmr.com        ●   Email: editor@ijfmr.com  
 
IJFMR2304 5478  Volume 5, Issue 4, July -August 2023  7 
 
Reviews,  2018, 82, 1393 -1414.  
12. A.A. Ahmad.,  A. Idris ., “Preparation  and characterization  of activated  carbons  derived  from  bio-
solid:  a review ", Desalination and Water  Treatment,  2014, 52(25-27), 4848 -4862.  
13. Tay T ., Ucar S ., Karagoz S. , “Preparation  and characterization  of activated  carbon  from  waste  
biomass ", Journal  of Hazardous  Materials,  2009, 165(1-3), 481-485.  
14. R.M.  Suzuki ., A.D.  Andrade ., J.C. Sousa ., M.C.  Rollemberg ., “Preparation  and characterization  of 
activated  carbon  from  rice bran", Bioresource  Technology,  2007, 98(10), 1985 -1991.  
15. Donni  Adinata ., Wan Mohd Ashri  Wan Daud ., Mohd Kheireddine  Aroua ., “Preparation and 
characterization of activated carbon from  palm shell by  chemical activation with K2CO3 ", 
Bioresource Technology, 2007, 98(1), 145 -149. 
16. A. Demirbas ., "Agricultural  based  activated  carbons  for the removal  of dyes from  aqueous  solutions:  
A review" , Journal  of Hazardous  Materials,  2009, 167(1-3), 1-9. 
17. Mustafa T.  Yagub ., Tushar Kanti  Sen., Sharmeen  Afroze ., H.M.  Ang., “Dye and its removal  from  
aqueous  solution  by adsorption:  A review" , Advances  in Colloid and Interface  Science,  2014, 209, 
172-184. 
18. K. Santhy ., P. Selvapathy ., “Removal  of reactive  dyes from  wastewater  by adsorption  on coir pith 
activated  carbon " Bioresource  Technology,  2006, 97(11),  1329 -1336.  
19. Prastuti O. P., Septiani E. L., Kurniati Y., Widiyastuti, Setyawan H., “Banana  Peel Activated  Carbon  
in Removal  of Dyes  and Metals  Ion in Textile Industrial  Waste ", Materials  Science Forum,  2019, 
966, 204–209. 
20. Tsang Dan ., Hu  Jing., Liu  Mei., Zhang Weihua ., Lai Keith ., Lo Irene. , “Activated  Carbon  Produced  
from  Waste  Wood  Pallets:  Adsorption  of Three  Classes  of Dyes ", Water  Air Soil Pollut, 2007, 184,  
141–155. 
21. Mohamad Nor Norhusna ., Lau Lee Chung ., Lee Keat Teong ., Mohamed Abdul. , Synthesis of 
activated carbon from lignocellulosic  biomass and its applications in air pollution control —a 
review ", Journal of Environmental chemical  Engin eering, 2013, 1(4), 658-666. 
22. Md Sumon Reza ., Cheong Sing Yun ., Shammya Afroze ., Nikdalila Radenahmad ., Muhammad S. 
Abu Bakar ., Rahman Saidur ., Juntakan Taweekun ., Abul K. Azad ., “Preparation of activated carbon 
from  biomass and its applications in water and gas purification, a review" Arab Journal of Basic and  
Applied Sciences,  2020, 27(1), 208 -238. 
23. Cheol -Soo Yang ., Yun Su Jang., Hae Kyung  Jeong ., “Bamboo -based  activated  carbon  for super  
capacitor  applications ", Current  Applied  Physics,  2014, 14(12), 1616 -1620.  
24. Ana Lea Cukierman ., “Development  and environmental  Applications  of Activated  Carbon  
Cloths ", Hindawi  Publishing  Corporation  ISRN  Chemical  Engineering,  2013, 2013,  1-31. 
25. Alberto Adan -Mas., Lorena Alcaraz., Pablo Arevalo -Cid., Felix. A. Lopez -Gomez., Fatima 
Montemor., “Coffee -derived  activated  carbon  from  second  biowaste  for super capacitor  
applications"  Waste  Management, 2021, 120,  280-289. 