38 ©2011 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized Use ProhibitedManagement of the Malignant Hyperthermia Patient in Ambulatory Surgery 
Denise J. Wedel, M.D.
Professor of Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine
Rochester, Minnesota
Malignant Hyperthermia (MH) is an inherited 
muscle disorder characterized by hypermetabolism 
and triggered by potent volatile anesthetics and the 
depolarizing muscle relaxant succinylcholine. Clinical 
signs include hypercarbia, tachycardia, hyperthermia 
and metabolic acidosis due to abnormal calcium 
homeostasis resulting in runaway hypermetabolism 
in the skeletal muscle. Rhabdomyolysis can occur 
along with disseminated intravascular coagulopathy 
(DIC) and multi-system organ failure. Early reports of 
mortality in excess of 70% have been reduced to less 
than 10% by improved monitoring resulting in early 
detection and treatment with dantrolene. Management 
of MH has become well-established and availability 
of non-triggering anesthetics as well as increased 
dissemination of information to the anesthetic provider 
community has decreased the risk as well as the fears 
of MH-affected individuals. However, the increase 
in outpatient procedures over the past decade, with 
procedures often performed in ambulatory care settings 
where emergency equipment and access to immediate 
laboratory support may be limited, have increased 
concern about treatment of unexpected MH crises. 
HISTORY
One of the earliest references to an MH-like problem 
was 1929 when the French pathologist Ombredanne1 
reported postoperative pallor and hyperthermia 
associated with high mortality in children, however 
this condition was not identiﬁed as a genetic trait. In 
1960 Australian physicians Denborough and Lovell2 
reported the ﬁrst case of a familial history of anesthetic 
deaths during ether administration. The reported 
patient barely survived a halothane-induced MH 
episode. In 1969 Canadian physicians Kalow and Britt3 
described a metabolic error of muscle metabolism 
noted in patients recovered from MH episodes, 
forming the basis for diagnostic contracture testing. In 
1975 Harrison,4 a South African, described the efﬁcacy 
of dantrolene in treating porcine MH. This became the 
foundation for successfully managing a condition that 
had been termed “the anesthesiologist’s nightmare” 
due to its unexpected nature and high mortality.
INCIDENCE
The incidence of MH is reported to range from 1:4500 
to 1:60,000 general anesthetics (geographic variation is 
related to the gene prevalence). Approximately 50% 
of MH-susceptible individuals have had a previous 
triggering anesthetic without developing MH.5 MH 
is rare in infants and the incidence decreases after 50 
years of age with males more commonly reported than females.6 The reasons for these variations are not 
understood.
MH has been clearly associated with Central 
Core Disease, multiminicore disease, and King or 
King-Denborough Syndrome. Association with other 
disorders such as Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, 
myotonia, mitochondrial myopathies, sudden infant 
death syndrome (SIDS), and neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome (NMS) is controversial. Exercise-induced 
MH-related death in adults, especially during exposure 
to hot environments, has been reported.7,8
MECHANISM 
Exposure to triggering anesthetics (all potent 
volatile anesthetics and succinylcholine) causes 
decreased control of intracellular calcium resulting in 
a release of free unbound ionized Ca++ from storage 
sites in the skeletal muscle. The calcium pumps attempt 
to restore homeostasis which results in ATP utilization, 
increased aerobic and anaerobic metabolism, and 
a runaway metabolic state. Rigidity occurs when 
unbound myoﬁbrillar Ca++ approaches the contractile 
threshold.
 
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Onset of clinical signs can be acute and fulminant 
or delayed. MH can occur at any time during the 
anesthetic, and has been reported to occur as late 
as 24 hours postoperatively. Trismus or masseter 
muscle spasm following inhalation induction and 
succinylcholine is associated with an approximately 
50% incidence of MH diagnosed by contracture testing. 
Trismus is often not associated with signs of a fulminant 
MH episode, however patients must be closely 
observed for evidence of hypermetabolism as well as 
rhabdomyolysis. The presence of whole body rigidity 
or signs of hypermetabolism following trismus increase 
the risk of MH susceptibility as an etiology. Elevation of 
CK postoperatively to greater than 20,000 has a strong 
association with a subsequent MH diagnosis.
Clinical signs and symptoms reﬂect a state 
of increasing hypermetabolism. The onset of 
hyperthermia can be delayed. The earliest signs of 
MH include tachypnea (in the nonparalyzed patient) 
and increased end-tidal CO2 levels. Rigidity, masseter 
or whole body, occurs in about 75% of cases. Signs of 
increased sympathetic activity include tachycardia, 
dysrhythmias, sweating and hypertension. 
Supportive laboratory tests for conﬁrmation of 
MH diagnosis include elevated end-tidal CO2, blood 
gas analysis showing a mixed respiratory-metabolic 
acidosis, elevated serum creatine phosphokinase (CK) 39IARS 2011 REVIEW COURSE LECTURES
©2011 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized Use Prohibitedpostoperatively, elevated serum and urine myoglobin 
and increased serum K+, Ca++, and lactate (these 
ﬁndings can be very transient).
TREATMENT
Discontinue triggers immediately and hyperventil -
ate with 100% oxygen. IV Dantrolene should be given 
early and rapidly when MH is suspected. The initial 
dosage is 2 mg/kg IV , repeated every ﬁve minutes to 
effect or to a maximum of 10 mg/kg (this limit may 
be exceeded if necessary). After successful treatment, 
dantrolene is continued at 1 mg/kg IV q 6 hr for 24 
to 48 hours to prevent recrudescence of symptoms. 
Calcium channel blockers should not be given in the 
presence of dantrolene as myocardial depression has 
been demonstrated in swine. Symptomatic treatment 
during an MH episode may include cooling (stop 
cooling interventions at 38-39 degrees C to avoid post-
treatment hypothermia), antiarrhythmics, management 
of hyperkalemia, mannitol and/or furosemide to induce 
diuresis (note that mannitol is present in dantrolene) and 
sodium bicarbonate. Interventions should be guided 
by blood gas analysis and clinical signs; administration 
of dantrolene will usually reverse symptoms rapidly. 
It is critical that all sites where general anesthesia is 
administered, including ambulatory and oral surgery 
centers, have adequate dantrolene supplies to treat 
an adult patient with MH. Several tragic injuries and 
deaths have occurred due to delay in treatment in these 
settings.9 
Table 1 – Conditions that Mimic MH
Fever
(without rigidity)Fever and/or muscle 
symptomsIncreased End-Tidal 
CO2
Thyrotoxicosis NMS (psych meds) Faulty equipment
Sepsis Hypoxic encephalopathy Tourniquet (children)
Pheochromocytoma CSF ionic contract agents Laparoscopic  
insufﬂation
Iatrogenic overheat -
ingCocaine, amphetamine, 
ecstasy
Anticholinergic 
syndromeDystrophinopathy
Myotonic syndromes
Rhabdomyolysis
ANESTHESIA FOR MH SUSCEPTIBLE MHS PATIENTS
Pretreatment with Dantrolene 1.5-2 mg/kg IV prior 
to induction is no longer recommended. Choose non-
triggering anesthetic agents. Safe anesthetic agents 
include nitrous oxide, etomidate, ketamine, propofol, 
all narcotics, all local anesthetics, all barbiturates, all 
benzodiazepines and all non-depolarizing muscle 
relaxants. Agents used for reversal of muscle relaxants 
are also safe. Prepare the machine by removing 
vaporizers (if possible) or taping over the dials and 
replacing rubber hoses and soda lime. Flush with high 
ﬂow oxygen (5 L/m) for 10 minutes.
Standard monitors are used with an emphasis on 
end-tidal CO2, oxygen saturation, and core temperature 
(skin monitors may not reﬂect core changes). Arterial and central venous pressures need be monitored only 
if indicated by the surgical procedure or the patient’s 
medical condition. Avoidance of perioperative 
exposures to potential trace-gas contamination (e.g. the 
recovery room) is not necessary.
AMBULATORY SETTINGS  SPECIAL CONCERNS  
FOR MANAGING MHS PATIENTS
While the overall incidence of MH episodes is low, 
the increase in the number of anesthetics in ambulatory 
care settings over the past decade has resulted in some 
MH-related deaths in patients with undiagnosed MHS. 
Such settings must be prepared to identify and treat 
acute MH events. Several concerns have been identiﬁed 
in the ambulatory setting:
1. Lack of laboratory backup – identifying MH 
involves evaluation of acid-base status, serum CK 
and myoglobin levels and other tests. Ambulatory 
centers usually do not have immediate access to a 
laboratory for diagnostic testing. 
2. Treatment delay – it is advisable to have dantrolene 
immediately available in all settings where general 
anesthetics are delivered, however mixing and 
administering this medication requires additional 
medical personnel who may not be available in the 
ambulatory setting.
3. Transfer from the ambulatory center – patients  
undergoing an MH episode may be hemody -
namically unstable, and transport personnel may 
not be comfortable with continuing dantrolene 
treatment. Evaluation at a tertiary care center may 
further delay treatment and result in worsening 
symptoms. 
4. Ambulatory patients and their families may be 
“lost to followup” and not receive appropriate 
genetic counseling after an MH episode.
EVALUATION OF SUSCEPTIBILITY
Patients are referred for evaluation for a number 
of reasons including unexplained intraoperative death 
in family members, history of adverse anesthetic event 
(e.g. trismus), perioperative fever, persistently elevated 
serum creatine phosphokinase (CK) levels, history 
of rhabdomyolysis, and associated myopathies (e.g. 
central core disease). A resting level serum CK level 
is often obtained in patients suspected of being MHS 
and may be elevated in approximately 70% of affected 
individuals.
A clinical grading scale has been devised, and while 
imperfect, it can help determine whether an individual 
case ﬁts the diagnosis of MH.
The muscle biopsy contracture testing known as 
either the caffeine/halothane contracture test  (CHCT) 
or the in vitro contracture test  (IVCT) has always been 
considered the “gold standard” diagnostic test for MH. 
Freshly excised muscle, usually from the vastus lateralis 
or gracilis, is dissected into strips which are mounted 
in baths and tested with caffeine and halothane alone 
or in combination; contracture responses are measured 40IARS 2011 REVIEW COURSE LECTURES
©2011 International Anesthesia Research Society. Unauthorized Use Prohibitedand interpreted according to standardized values. 
Testing centers in North America have been reduced 
to ﬁve due to several factors including reluctance of 
insurance companies to pay for the expense of surgery 
and testing and increased availability of genetic testing. 
Contracture testing cannot be done on children under 5 
years or under 20 Kg weight.
MOLECULAR GENETICS   
MH is an autosomal dominant trait; therefore, 
patients with this condition will have inherited it 
from at least one parent. However, it is quite common 
for neither parent to have shown signs of MH either 
because they have not been exposed to triggering 
anesthesia or because they did not react. 
Two MHS-causative genes have been identiﬁed: 
RYR1  (MHS1 locus) and CACNA1S  (MHS5 locus).12 
RYR1  encodes the type 1 ryanodine receptor of skeletal 
muscle and mutations of this gene are identiﬁed in up 
to 70-80% of individuals with conﬁrmed MH and in 
patients with Central Core Disease (CCD). More than 
180 mutations in RYR1  have been associated with 
MH or CCD, with over half appearing in only one or 
a few families. CACNA1S  encodes the Į1-subunit of 
the skeletal muscle dihydropyridine receptor L-type 
calcium channel. Mutations in this gene account for 
about 1% of all MHS (2 gene mutations identiﬁed). 
Three additional loci have been mapped, but the genes 
have not been identiﬁed: MHS2, MHS4 and MHS6.
Patients must be carefully selected for genetic testing 
in order to maximize sensitivity. Usually this means 
either a positive muscle contracture test or strongly 
suggestive family or clinical histories for MH. In these 
cases, complete sequence analysis of the entire RYR1  
coding region increases the detection rate to 70-80%. 
Linkage analysis for all MHS loci is considered in families with multi-generational (at least two) unequivocal MH 
diagnosis in 10 family members or more. Discordance 
between contracture testing and molecular genetic 
testing is observed in up to 10% of individuals. 
MHAUS 
The Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the 
United States (MHAUS) is an active organization which 
provides support for patients and physicians. Their 
website found at www.MHAUS.org provides resources 
for patients, families, and medical providers. MHAUS 
also sponsors a 24-hour hotline for providing assistance 
to physicians who are managing MH susceptible 
patients or treating acute MH episodes. 
Also associated with MHAUS is the North American 
MH Registry, situated in Pittsburgh, PA. Information 
about MH episodes (via the American Medical Record 
Association AMRA report) and testing is stored in the 
Registry where it is available for approved research and 
reporting.
REFERENCES
1. 1. Ombrédanne L. De l’inﬂuence de l’anesthésique employé dans la 
ganése des accidents postopératoires de pâleurhyperthermie observés 
chez les nourrissons. Rev Med Française 1929;10:617.
2. 2. Denborough M, Lovell R. Anaesthetic Deaths In A Family. Lancet 
1960;2:45.
3. 3. Kalow W, Britt B, Terreau M, Haist C. Metabolic Error of Muscle 
Metabolism After Recovery From Malignant Hyperthermia. Lancet 
1970;296:895-8.
4. 4. Harrison GG. Control of the malignant hyperpyrexic syndrome in 
MHS swine by dantrolene sodium. Br J Anaesth 1975;47:62-5.
5. 5. Bendixen D, Skovgaard LT, Ording H. Analysis of anaesthesia in 
patients suspected to be susceptible to malignant hyperthermia before 
diagnostic in vitro contracture test. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1997;41:480-
4.
6. 6. Larach MG, Gronert GA, Allen GC, Brandom BW, Lehman EB. 
Clinical presentation, treatment, and complications of malignant 
hyperthermia in North America from 1987 to 2006. Anesth Analg 
2010;110:498-507.
7. 7. Sambuughin N, Capacchione J, Blokhin A, Bayarsaikhan M, 
Bina S, Muldoon S. The ryanodine receptor type 1 gene variants in 
African American men with exertional rhabdomyolysis and malignant 
hyperthermia susceptibility. Clin Genet 2009;76:564-8.
8. 8. Tobin JR, Jason DR, Challa VR, Nelson TE, Sambuughin N. Malignant 
hyperthermia and apparent heat stroke. Jama 2001;286:168-9.
9. 9. Brandom BW. Ambulatory surgery and malignant hyperthermia. 
Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2009;22:744-7.
10. 10. Pollock N, Langton E, MacDonnell N, et al. Malignant hyperthermia 
and day stay surgery. Anaesth Intensive Care 2006;35:40-45
11. 11. Larach MG, Localio AR, Allen GC, Denborough MA, Ellis FR, 
Gronert GA, Kaplan RF, Muldoon SM, Nelson TE, Ording H, et al. A 
clinical grading scale to predict malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. 
Anesthesiology 1994;80:771-9.
12. 12. Tautz TJ, Urwyler A, Antognini JF, Riou B. Case scenario: Increased 
end-tidal carbon dioxide: a diagnostic dilemma. Anesthesiology 
2010;112:440-6.
13. 13. Rosenberg HS, N.; Dirksen, R. Malignant Hyperthermia 
Susceptibility. GeneReviews 2010.
14. 14. Brandom BW, Larach MG, Chen MA, Young MC. Complications 
associated with the administration of dantrolene 1987 to 2006: A report 
from the North American Malignant Hyperthermia Registry of the 
MHAUS. Anesth Analg 2011; in pressMH HOTLINE
USA and Canada
1 (800) 644-9737 • 1-800-MH HYPER
Outside the US • 0011 315 464 7079Table 2. Criteria Used in the Clinical Grading Scale  
for Malignant Hyperthermia (MH)
Process Clinical Criteria Points
Muscle rigidity Generalized rigidity
Masseter muscle rigidity15
15
Muscle  
breakdownCreatine kinase > 10,000 units/l
Cola-colored urine
Excess myoglobin in urine or serum
K+ > 6 mEq/l15
5
3
Respiratory 
acidosisEnd-tidal CO2 > 55 mmHg; PaCO2 > 60 mmHg
Inappropriate tachypnea15
10
Temperature 
increaseRapidly increasing temperature
Inappropriate temperature > 38.8°C15
10
Cardiac  
involvementUnexplained sinus tachycardia, ventricular  
tachycardiac, or ventricular ﬁbrillation3
Family history MH history in ﬁrst-degree relative
MH history in family, not ﬁrst-degree relative15
5
Only the highest score in any one process should be used when more than one 
event or sign occurs in a process. The more criteria that a patient fulﬁlls, the 
more likely that an MH episode has occurred. If only one criterion is fulﬁlled, 
then malignant hyperthermia is not likely, whereas malignant hyperthermia 
is almost certain if all criterial are fulﬁlled. Other criteria to consider include 
base excess > -8 mEq/L (10 points), pH < 7.25 (10 points), and rapid reversal 
of malignant hyperthermia signs with dantrolene therapy (5 points). The 
likelihood according to point score: 0, almost never; 3-9, unlikely; 10-19, some -
what less than likely; 20-34, somewhat greater than likely; 35-49, very likely; * 
50, almost certain. Adapted from Larach et al,10,11 with permission.