Univ ersity of K entucky Univ ersity of K entucky 
UKnowledge UKnowledge 
Psychiatr y Faculty Publications Psychiatr y 
5-2014 
Clinically Rele vant Inter actions between Newer Antidepr essants Clinically Rele vant Inter actions between Newer Antidepr essants 
and Second-Gener ation Antipsy chotics and Second-Gener ation Antipsy chotics 
Edoar do Spina 
Univ ersity of Messina, Italy 
Jose de Leon 
Univ ersity of K entucky , jdeleon@uky .edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /uknowledge.uky .edu/psy chiatr y_facpub 
 Part of the Psychiatr y and Psy chology Commons 
Right click t o open a f eedback form in a new tab t o let us know how this document benefits y ou. Right click t o open a f eedback form in a new tab t o let us know how this document benefits y ou. 
Reposit ory Citation Reposit ory Citation 
Spina, E doar do and de Leon, Jose, "Clinically Rele vant Inter actions between Newer Antidepr essants and 
Second-Gener ation Antipsy chotics" (2014). Psychiatr y Faculty Publications . 42. 
https:/ /uknowledge.uky .edu/psy chiatr y_facpub/42 
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the Psy chiatr y at UK nowledge. It has been accepted for 
inclusion in Psy chiatr y Faculty Publications b y an authoriz ed administr ator of UK nowledge. F or mor e information, 
please contact UKnowledge@lsv .uky.edu . Clinically Rele vant Inter actions between Newer Antidepr essants and Second- Clinically Rele vant Inter actions between Newer Antidepr essants and Second-
Gener ation Antipsy chotics Gener ation Antipsy chotics 
Digital Object Identifier (DOI) 
http:/ /dx.doi.or g/10.1517/17425255.2014.885504 
Notes/Citation Information Notes/Citation Information 
Published in Exper t Opinion on Drug Metabolism & T oxicology , v. 10, issue 5, p. 721-746. 
© 2014 T aylor & F rancis Gr oup 
This is an Accepted Manuscript of an ar ticle published b y Taylor & F rancis Gr oup in Exper t Opinion on 
Drug Metabolism & T oxicology  in Ma y 2014, a vailable online: http:/ /www .tandfonline.com/10.1517/
17425255.2014.885504 
This ar ticle is a vailable at UK nowledge: https:/ /uknowledge.uky .edu/psy chiatr y_facpub/42 1 
This is an Accepted Manu script of an article published by Taylo r & Francis Group in  Expert 
Opinion on Drug Metabolism & Toxicology in May 2014 , available o nline: http://
www.tand fonline.com/10.1517/17425255.2014.885504 
CLINICALLY RELEVANT INTERACTIONS BETWEEN NEWER ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
AND SECOND-GENERATION ANTIPSYCHOTICS 
Edoardo Spina1, Jose de Leon2 
1Department  of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Messina, and 2University of 
Kentucky Mental Health Research Center at East ern State Hospital, Lexington, KY, and Psychiatry 
and Neurosciences Research Group (CTS-549), Institute  of Neurosciences, University of Granada, 
Granada, Spain. 
Corresponding author: Prof. Edoardo Spina, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Messina, Policlinico Universitario, Via Consolare Valeria, 98125 Messina, ITALY 
Telephone: +39 090 2213647   Fax: +39 090 2213300 E-mail: espina@unime.it 
Acknowledgments  
The authors acknowledge Lorraine Maw, M.A., at the Mental Health Research Center at Eastern State Hospital, Lexington, KY, USA, who helped in editing the article.  
Declaration of interest    
No commercial organizations had any role in the writing of this paper for publication. In the past 
few years, Dr. Spina has participated in speak ers/advisory boards and  lectures supported by 
AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers, Eli Lilly & Co, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Lundbeck and Pfizer. Dr. de 
Leon personally develops his presentations for lecturing, has never lectured using any 
pharmaceutical or pharmacogenetic company presen tations, and has never been a consultant for 
pharmacogenetic or pharmaceutical companies. In the past, Dr. de Leon received researcher-
initiated grants from Eli Lilly (one ended in 2003 and the other, as co-investigator, ended in 2007); 
from Roche Molecular Systems, Inc. (ended in 2007); and, in a collaboration with Genomas, Inc., from the NIH Small Business Innovation Research program (ended in 2010). He has been on the 
advisory boards of Bristol-Myers Squibb ( 2003/04) and AstraZeneca (2003). Roche Molecular 
Systems supported one of his educational presentations, which was published in a peer-reviewed 2 
journal (2005). His lectures were supported once by Sandoz (1997), twice by Lundbeck (1999 and 
1999), twice by Pfizer (2001 and 2001), three times by Eli Lilly (2003, 2006, and 2006), twice by 
Janssen (2000 and 2006), once by Bristol-Myer s Squibb (2006), and seven times by Roche 
Molecular Systems, Inc. (once in 2005 and six times in 2006).  3 
ABSTRACT 
Introduction:  Combinations of newer antidepressant s and second-generation antipsychotics 
(SGAs) are frequently used by clinicians. Pharmacokinetic and poorly understood 
pharmacodynamic drug interactions can occur between them. Areas covered:  Limited 
pharmacodynamic drug interaction information and pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies are 
comprehensively reviewed. Expert opinion: More pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies are 
needed for better establishing dose correction fact ors after adding fluoxetine and paroxetine to 
aripiprazole, iloperidone and risperidone. More pharm acokinetic drug interaction studies and case 
reports are needed for better establishing the  need for dose correction factors after adding i) 
fluoxetine to clozapine, lurasidone, quetiapine and olanzapine; ii) paroxetine to olanzapine; iii) 
fluvoxamine to asenapine, aripiprazole, iloperidone, lurasidone, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone; iv) high sertraline doses to aripipra zole, clozapine, iloperidone and risperidone: v) 
bupropion and duloxetine to aripiprazole, clozapine,  iloperidone and risperidone; and vi) asenapine 
to paroxetine and venlafaxine. Possible beneficial pharmacodynamic drug interaction effects occur 
after adding SGAs to newer antidepressants for treatment-resistant major depressive and obsessive-
compulsive disorders. The lack of studies combining newer antidepressants and SGAs in psychotic 
depression is worrisome. Pharmacodynamic drug interactions between newer antidepressants and 
SGAs may be more likely for mirtazapine and bupropion. Adding selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and SGAs may increase QTc interv al and may very rarely contribute to torsades 
de pointes.   
Keywords : newer antidepressants, second-generat ion antipsychotics, drug interactions, 
pharmacodynamics, pharmacokinetics    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 4 
Highlights box 
- Drug-drug interactions between newer antidepr essants and second-generation antipsychotics 
(SGAs) are frequently clinically relevant. 
- More pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies are needed for better establishing dose correction 
factors after adding fluoxetine and paroxetine to aripiprazole, iloperidone and risperidone. 
- More pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies and case reports are needed for better establishing 
the need for dose correction factors after adding i)  fluoxetine to clozapine, lurasidone, quetiapine 
and olanzapine; ii) paroxetine to olanzapine; iii) fluvoxamine to asenapine, aripiprazole, 
iloperidone, lurasidone, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone; iv) high sertraline doses to 
aripiprazole, clozapine, iloperidone and risperidone; v) bupropion and duloxetine to aripiprazole, 
clozapine, iloperidone and risperidone; and vi) asenapine to paroxetine and venlafaxine. 
- The pharmacodynamic science of drug interactions between newer antidepressants and SGAs is in 
its infancy.  
- There are possible beneficial pharmacodynamic drug interaction effects after adding SGAs to 
newer antidepressants for treatment-resistant majo r depressive disorder and obsessive-compulsive 
disorder (OCD). The lack of studies in psyc hotic depression using combinations of newer 
antidepressants and SGAs is worrisome.  
- Pharmacodynamic drug interactions between newe r antidepressants and SGAs may be more likely 
for mirtazapine and bupropion. Clinicians need to remember that adding selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and SGAs may risk an  increase in QTc interval and very rarely 
contribute to torsades de pointes.   
 5 
1. Introduction  
Drugs used for the treatment of depressive di sorders are usually classified into older or 
classic agents, such as tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
(MAOIs), and newer antidepressants, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) and other antidepressants with variable 
mechanisms of action 1. Over the past two decades, newer antidepressants, particularly SSRIs, 
have gradually replaced TCAs as drugs of choice for the management of depressive disorders, 
mainly because of their improved tolerability a nd safety profile. Some newer antidepressants are 
also approved for the treatment of other psychiatric conditions including anxiety disorders, obsessive compulsive disorder, eating disorders, a nd various forms of chronic pain such as diabetic 
neuropathic pain and fibromyalgia 1. 
Antipsychotic drugs can be similarly divi ded into traditional or first-generation 
antipsychotics (FGAs) and atypical or second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) 2. In recent 
years, SGAs have become the mainstream treatme nt intervention for patients with schizophrenia 
and bipolar disorder, due to a lower risk for acute and chronic extrapyramidal symptoms and 
prolactin elevation, as compared to traditional an tipsychotics. They are also increasingly used to 
treat a variety of psychiatric and neurological disorders including mental and behavioral disorders in dementia, psychosis associated with Parkinson's disease, treatment-resistant obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD), and aggressive behavior 3. However, antiserotonergic SGAs, such as 
clozapine, appear to be associated with a risk  of inducing or aggrava ting obsessive-compulsive 
symptoms in schizophrenia 4.    
Newer antidepressants and SGAs are often prescribed together in patients with concomitant 
psychotic and depressive symptoms, such as those with schizoaffective disorder 5 or psychotic 
depression 6. Moreover, antidepressants, mainly SSRIs, may be used as an adjunctive strategy for 
the treatment of negative symptoms of schizophrenia 7, 8. On the other hand, SGAs may be added 
to antidepressants in patients with refractory OCD 9-11 and in those with treatment-resistant 
major depressive disorder 12-14. In this respect, aripiprazole and quetiapine extended-release 
received United States (US) Food and Drug Admini stration (FDA) approval as  add-ons for patients 
with major depressive disorder, while the co mbination olanzapine-fluoxetine was approved for 
treatment-resistant depression. 
In view of the frequent co-prescription of newer antidepressants and SGAs, sometimes for 
the purpose of augmentation, information on poten tial drug interactions between these compounds 
is important for safe prescribing. While certai n drug combinations may prove beneficial and, 6 
therefore, may be used advantageously in clinical practice, in many cases they may be harmful, 
resulting in either decreased efficacy or in creased risk of adverse drug reactions (ADRs). 
In recent years, a number of comprehensive reviews of clinically relevant DIs involving 
newer antidepressants 15-18 or SGAs have been published 19-22. The aim of the present article 
is to provide an updated revi ew of clinically significant drug interactions between newer 
antidepressants and SGAs.  
Articles for this review were obtained from a PubMed search with no time limit. Searches 
were performed for each of the newer antidepressants and SGAs. Only articles published in peer-
reviewed journals were included, wh ile meeting abstracts were excluded.  Information was also 
obtained from the individual product inserts of each  newer antidepressant or SGA. Additional drug 
interaction information was also obtained from cita tions of the articles that were retrieved during 
our search, and these were also included in our review. This search was beyond the articles 
previously found and listed in the authors’ publishe d literature reviews [16, 19] and drug interaction 
studies. 
  
2. Basic mechanisms of drug interact ions between newer antidepressants and 
SGAs  
Based on their mechanisms, drug interactions are usually divided into two categories, 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic. 
  
2.1 Pharmacokinetic drug interactions 
Pharmacokinetic drug interactions consist of  changes in the absorption, distribution, 
metabolism or excretion of a drug and/or its metabo lite(s) after the addition of another drug. These 
drug interactions are easily verified by a change  in plasma drug concentrations, usually called 
therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM). Pharmacokine tic parameters of newe r antidepressants and 
SGAs are summarized in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.  
Drug interactions can occur at the gastrointest inal level when medications are administered 
orally, which is always the case with newer antidepressants and frequent with SGAs. To our 
knowledge, no interaction at the oral absorption level has been described so far between these two 
drug types.  
Protein binding displacement interactions  may theoretically occur between newer 
antidepressants and SGAs, as many of these agen ts are highly bound to plasma proteins (>90%). 
Competition between two drugs for binding sites on plasma proteins may cause a rise in the free 
fraction of the displaced drug in plasma or tissue, thereby potentially increasing its pharmacological 7 
effects [23].  However, unless additional mechanisms are at work, these interactions are usually not 
clinically relevant, because the free drug is rapidly cleared from the plasma.  
Most pharmacokinetic drug interactions between newer antidepressants and SGAs occur at a 
metabolic level and usually involve the hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) system and, to a lesser 
extent, the uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) system 24. In recent years, the in 
vitro  characterization of the major drug-metabolizing enzymes, in particular the human CYP 
system, with identification of substrates, inhibi tors, and inducers of different CYP isoforms, has 
greatly improved the prediction of metabolic drug in teractions, providing an invaluable resource in 
helping to anticipate and avoid potential drug interactions [24].  In principle, concomitant treatment 
with drugs metabolized by the same enzyme or coadministration of a drug with another medication 
acting as an inhibitor or inducer involves the risk of a drug interaction. The potential occurrence and 
clinical significance of a metabolic drug interac tion will then depend on a variety of drug-related 
(i.e., potency and concentration/dose of the inhibi tor/inducer, therapeutic index of the substrate, 
extent of metabolism of the substrate through the a ffected enzyme, presence of active metabolites), 
patient-related (i.e., age, genetic  predisposition) and environmental factors (i.e., smoking) [23]. As 
shown in Tables 1 and 2, newer antidepressants and SGAs (with the exception of amisulpride and 
paliperidone) are extensively metabolized via CYPs or UGTs. As many compounds of these two 
therapeutic classes share common metabolic pathways, potential metabolically-based drug 
interactions may be anticipated. Furthermore, some newer antidepressant agents act as inhibitors of 
various CYPs and may therefore impair the elimin ation of antipsychotic agents metabolized via 
these isoforms 15, 16, 18 .   On the other hand, most SGAs appear to be neither inhibitors nor 
inducers of the major drug-metabolizing enzymes 19, 21; only asenapine may have weak 
CYP2D6 inhibitory properties that may become clinically relevant in some circumstances 25, 26.  
Drug interactions at the renal excretion leve l are probably not relevant because both newer 
antidepressants and SGAs are mainly eliminated by drug metabolism. 
Pharmacokinetic drug interactions between newer antidepressants and SGAs may also 
involve drug transporters, in partic ular P-glycoprotein (P-gp), which plays an important role in the 
absorption, distribution and excretion of a wide variety of therapeutic agents 27. P-gp is encoded 
by the ATP-binding cassette sub-family B memb er 1 (ABCB1) gene. It is a multidrug efflux 
transporter highly expressed in the small intestine,  brain, liver and kidney. It acts as a natural 
defense mechanism against several drugs by limiting their absorption from the gut and penetration into the brain and promoting their elimination in the bile and urine. A number of newer 
antidepressants, including the SSRIs fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertraline 28, as well 
as many SGAs, such as risperidone, paliperidone, olanzapine, aripiprazole and ziprasidone, are 8 
substrates of P-gp 29. Moreover, in vitro  studies have indicated that some newer antidepressants, 
namely paroxetine, fluvoxamine and sertraline, and the SGAs olanzapine and risperidone may also 
act as P-gp inhibitors 30. Based on this evidence, it cannot be excluded that some 
pharmacokinetic drug interactions between newer an tidepressants and SGAs, currently attributed to 
metabolic enzyme inhibition, may also be explained by P-gp inhibition. 
  
2.2 Pharmacodynamic drug interactions 
Most articles reviewing drug interactions ignore the pharmacodynamic mechanisms of 
newer antidepressants and SGAs, which are poorly  understood.  This subsection provides a very 
brief reference to the pharmacodynamics of antidepressants and SGAs; they are described more 
comprehensively in Figures 1 to 4 and their detailed footnotes. At the end of this section, a 
subsection comments on the types of pharmacodynamic drug interactions. 
 
2.2.1 Antidepressant pharmacodynamics 
Figure 1 summarizes antidepressant mechanisms of action in several disorders including 
depression, OCD, anxiety, pain, and weight lo ss.  Textbooks usually report that most new 
antidepressants act by inhibiting reuptake transporters, but they also usually acknowledge that this 
is not a definitively proven theory, since the chronology of reuptake inhibition does not match the 
chronology of antidepressant response. SSRIs include fluoxetine, paroxetine, fluvoxamine, 
sertraline, citalopram and escitalopram; the name SS RI indicates that they mainly inhibit serotonin 
transporters. SNRIs inhibit both serotonin and norad renaline transporters and include venlafaxine, 
desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levominalcipran, and milnacipran. Other newer antidepressants with 
different mechanisms of action include reboxetine, bupropion, vilazodone, vortioxetine, 
mirtazapine, and agomelatine. Reboxetine is a selective noradrenaline transporter inhibitor. 
Bupropion is an inhibitor of noradrenaline and dopamine transporters.  There is no agreement in the 
literature about mirtazapine’s mechanism of acti on. Vilazadone [31] and recently-introduced 
vortioxetine [32] have SSRI properties and also are antagonists of some serotonin receptors. 
Vilazadone is also a 5-HT 1A receptor antagonist and vortioxetine is also a 5-HT 3A and 5-HT 7 
receptor antagonist, a 5-HT 1B receptor partial agonist, and a 5-HT 1A receptor agonist ( Figure 1, 
footnote 3).  Labbate et al. [33] list mirtazapine as an alpha 2 ( α2) adrenergic receptor antagonist but 
also recognize that it has 5-HT 2A and 5-HT 2C antagonist properties. Other articles and/or textbooks 
endorse other variants of this theory.  Agomelatine is a melatonergic analogue drug acting as 
MT 1/MT 2 agonist and a 5-HT 2C antagonist [34].  9 
Nefazadone and trazadone are not included in or der to simplify this article. Nefazadone is 
no longer used and trazadone is frequently used as a hypnotic rather than an antidepressant agent.  
 Figure 2 summarizes antidepressant mechanisms of action associated with major safety 
issues.  
 2.2.2 SGA pharmacodynamics 
Figure 3 summarizes SGA mechanisms of action,  explaining their efficacy in schizophrenia, 
other psychoses and other psychiatric disorders [ 35]. In summary, the majority of the SGAs are 
dopamine 2 receptor (D
2) antagonists including amisulpride, asenapine, clozapine, iloperidone, 
lurasidone, olanzapine, paliperidone, quetiapine, ri speridone, and ziprasidone, while aripiprazole is 
a D 2 partial agonist. Many SGA ADRs are explained by their blockade of neurotransmitter 
receptors (Figure 4).  
 
2.2.3. Pharmacological knowledge and pharmacodynamic drug interactions  
Pharmacodynamic drug interactions take place di rectly at the site of action of a drug or 
indirectly by interfering with another physiological mechanism. They result in a modification of the 
pharmacological action of a drug without any chan ge in the plasma concentration and are more 
difficult to identify and measure than pharmacokinetic drug interactions. These drug interactions can be additive (i.e., equal to the sum of the effects of the individual drugs), synergistic (i.e., the 
combined effects are greater than expected from the sum of individual effects) or antagonistic (i.e., 
the combined effects are less than additive) [23]. They can be associated with positive effects 
(increased efficacy and/or safety) or negative  effects (decreased effi cacy and/or safety). 
 
3. Specific drug interactions betw een newer antidepressants and SGAs 
3.1 Pharmacokinetic interactions 
3.1.1 Effect of newer antidepressants on the pharmacokinetics of SGAs  
3.1.1.1 SSRIs 
At the present, SSRIs are the most widely prescribed antidepressants. They may cause 
clinically relevant, dose-dependent inhibition of  various CYPs. The six marketed compounds differ 
considerably in their potency to inhibit individual CYP isoenzymes 16, 36.  
 
Fluoxetine 
Fluoxetine and its metabolite norfluoxetine are potent inhibitors of CYP2D6 and moderate 
inhibitors of CYP2C9, while they mildly to moderately affect the activity of CYP2C19 and 10 
CYP3A4 16, 36. Based on this, fluoxetine is expected to interfere with the elimination of SGAs 
metabolized via these CYP isoforms.  
Early pharmacokinetic studies had documented that fluoxetine may impair the elimination 
of clozapine resulting in an increase of approx imately 40-70% of its plasma concentrations in 
patients concomitantly treated with fluoxetine 20 mg/day 37, 38. In a subsequent investigation, 
the effect of an 8-week treatment with fluoxet ine (20 mg/day) on plasma concentrations of 
clozapine and its active metabolite norclozapine was evaluated in 10 schizophrenic patients 
stabilized on clozapine therapy (200-450 mg/day) 39. During fluoxetine administration, mean 
plasma concentrations of clozapine and norclozapine increased significantly (p<0.01) by 58% and 
36%, respectively. A study controlling other variab les estimated that fluoxetine increases plasma 
clozapine concentration by 36% on average, which requires multiplying the clozapine dose by 0.73 
to compensate [40]. This interaction may be attributed to the inhibitory effect of fluoxetine on the 
activity of CYP2D6, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4, wh ich play an important role in clozapine 
metabolism. In addition, norfluoxetine, the major me tabolite of fluoxetine, may also contribute to 
this interaction as a moderate inhibitor of CYP3A4.   
A clinically relevant pharmacokinetic drug interaction may occur between fluoxetine and 
risperidone. In an open-label study involving 10 schi zophrenic patients stabilized on risperidone (4-
6 mg/day), coadministration of fluoxetine (20 mg/day) for 4 weeks caused a significant elevation 
(by 75%; p<0.01) of plasma concentration of the active fraction of risperidone (risperidone plus 9-
hydroxyrisperidone) 41. One patient dropped out after one week of combination treatment due to 
occurrence of akathisia, while two patients developed parkinsonian symptoms, thus requiring 
anticholinergic medication. Bondolfi et al. 42 investigated the pharmacokinetics of risperidone (4 
or 6 mg/day) before and during coadministration of fluoxetine (20 mg/day) in 11 psychotic 
inpatients, 8 of which were extensive metabo lizers (EM) and 3 poor metabolizers (PM) for 
CYP2D6. The area under the plasma concentration/time curve (AUC) of the active moiety of 
risperidone increased from 470.0  170.0 ng.h/ml to 663.0  243.3 ng.h/ml (p<0.05) and from 
576.3  19.6 ng.h/ml to 788.0  89.1 ng.h/ml (not significant) in EMs and PMs, respectively. This 
interaction is presumably due to inhibition of CYP2D6, the major isoenzyme responsible for the 9-
hydroxylation of risperidone, although it is possible that norfluoxetine may also inhibit CYP3A4, 
blocking both metabolic pathways for risperidone. A reduction in risperidone dosage is advisable in 
case of concomitant administration of fluoxetine.  
Coadministration of fluoxetine, 60 mg/day, given for eight days to 15 non-smoking healthy 
volunteers caused a statistically significant, but clinically insignificant, change in the 11 
pharmacokinetic profiles of a sing le 5 mg dose of olanzapine 43. Olanzapine plasma clearance 
decreased by 15% (p<0.01) and peak plasma concentration (C max) increased by 18% (p<0.01).  
In a study of 13 patients with various psychiatric disorders treated with quetiapine, 300 mg 
twice daily, the addition of fluoxetine, 60 mg/d ay, for only 8 days did not substantially alter the 
AUC 0-12 h and the C max of quetiapine 44. A large TDM study provided similar results, showing 
that concomitant administration with fluoxe tine did not affect dose-normalized serum 
concentrations of quetiapine 45. 
In patients comedicated with CYP2D6 inhibi tors (including 9 subjects on fluoxetine) dose-
normalized serum concentrations of aripiprazole  were 45% higher compared with controls 
(p<0.05), while those of the active metabolite, dehydroaripiprazole were unchanged 46. As 
aripiprazole is metabolized by CYP2D6 and CYP3 A4, the inhibitory effect of fluoxetine on the 
activity of these two isoforms may account for the observed changes.  
Iloperidone is metabolized by CYP2D6 and CYP3A4. According to its prescribing 
information, coadministration of fluoxetine (20 mg twice daily for 21 days) and a single 3 mg 
iloperidone dose to 23 EM healthy volunteers increased the AUC of iloperidone and its main 
metabolite P88 by about 2-3 fold, and decreased the AUC of its metabolite P95 by one-half. 
Iloperidone doses should be reduced by one-half when administered with fluoxetine 25, 26.  
A recent case report documented the occurrence of a glossopharyngeal dystonia following 
coadministration of fluoxetine with lurasidone 47. This effect was attributed to the inhibitory 
action of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine on CYP3A4 -mediated biotransformation of lurasidone. 
Paroxetine 
Paroxetine is a potent inhibitor of CYP2D6, while it only minimally affects other CYPs 16, 
36. 
Paroxetine effects upon risperidone dispos ition were documented in two clinical 
pharmacokinetic investigations 48, 49. In the first study involving 10 schizophrenic patients 
stabilized on risperidone therapy (4-8 mg/day), coadministration of paroxetine (20 mg/day)  for 4 
weeks resulted in a mean, statistically significant increase by 45% (p<0.05) in plasma 
concentrations of the active fraction of risperidone 48. The drug combination was well tolerated 
with the exception of one patient who developed ex trapyramidal symptoms in the second week of 
adjunctive therapy. In the second study, 12 schiz ophrenic patients receiving risperidone 4 mg/day 
were, in addition, treated with incremental doses of paroxetine for 12 weeks (10, 20 and 40 mg/day 
for 4 weeks each) 49. Paroxetine resulted in a dose-dependent increase in risperidone and active 
moiety plasma concentrations without changing 9-hydroxyrisperidone levels. Plasma 
concentrations of risperidone active moiety were  not increased during paroxetine 10 mg/day (1.3-12 
fold, not significant) or 20 mg/day (1.6-fold, not significant) dosing, but were significantly 
increased by 1.8-fold (p<0.05) during paroxetine 40 mg/day dosing. This pharmacokinetic 
interaction is probably explained by the inhibitory  effect of paroxetine on the CYP2D6-mediated 9-
hydroxylation of risperidone. An initial low dose of paroxetine (10 or 20 mg/day) may be safe 
whenever paroxetine is coadministered with risperidone. 
Data concerning the possibility of a metabolic interaction between paroxetine and clozapine 
are contradictory. Some studies have documented a moderate elevation of plasma clozapine 
concentrations (by approximately 20-40%), presumab ly not associated with clinically relevant 
effects, following administration of therapeutic doses of paroxetine, 20 mg/day 38, 50. A study 
controlling other variables estimated that paroxetine increased plasma clozapine concentration on 
average by 30% which requires multiplying the clozapine dose by 0.77 to compensate [38]. This 
effect has been attributed to the inhibition of CY P2D6, an isoform which is partially responsible for 
clozapine biotransformation. Conversely, another investigation has documented only minor, 
insignificant changes in serum concentrations of clozapine and its metabolites during concomitant 
treatment with paroxetine 51.  
As expected, data from a TDM study indicated that dose-normalized serum concentrations 
of quetiapine, a CYP3A4 substr ate, did not change during coadministration with paroxetine 45. 
The possibility of a pharmacokinetic drug intera ction between paroxetine and aripiprazole 
has recently been documented. Fourteen Japane se patients with schizophrenia, treated with 
aripiprazole (24 mg/day in 5 cases, 12 mg/day in 5 cases, and 6 mg/day in 4 case) for at least 2 
weeks, received paroxetine 10 mg/day during the first week and 20 mg/day during the second week 
52. Plasma concentrations of aripiprazole increase d significantly (p<0.05) during coadministration 
of both paroxetine 10 mg/day (1.5-fold) and paroxetine 20 mg/day (1.7-fold) as compared to 
baseline, whereas plasma concentr ations of its active metabolite, dehydroaripiprazole, were 
unchanged throughout the study period. Plasma concentrations of the sum of aripiprazole and its 
active metabolite during coadministration of paroxetine 10 and 20 mg/day were also significantly 
(p<0.05) higher (1.4-fold and 1.5-fold) than those before paroxetine coadministration. These effects are probably due to the potent inhibitory effect of paroxetine on CYP2D6, the isoform responsible, 
together with CYP3A4, for aripiprazole biotrans formation. Consistent with these findings, in a 
study of healthy subjects, c oadministration of paroxetine (20 mg/day) decreased systemic clearance 
of aripiprazole by 58 and 23% in CYP2D6 EMs a nd intermediate metabolizers (IMs), respectively, 
demonstrating that the percentage of inhibition  of CYP2D6 activity by coadministration of 
paroxetine was apparently greater in CYP2D6 EMs than in IMs 53.  13 
Iloperidone dose should be reduced by 50% during coadministration with CYP2D6 
inhibitors such as paroxetine 25, 26.  
 
Fluvoxamine 
Fluvoxamine influences the activity of various CYP isoenzymes; it is a potent inhibitor of 
CYP1A2 and CYP2C19 and a moderate inhibitor of CYP2C9 and CYP3A4, while it affects 
CYP2D6 activity only slightly 16, 36. Being an inhibitor of different CYP isoforms, fluvoxamine 
may impair the elimination of various SGAs.  
The pharmacokinetic drug interaction between fluvoxamine and clozapine has been 
extensively investigated. Formal kinetic studie s and case reports have demonstrated that 
concomitant administration of fluvoxamine (50- 100 mg/day) may cause a 5-10-fold increase in 
plasma concentrations of clozapine, along with si gns of toxicity (nausea, dizziness, extrapyramidal 
symptoms) 51, 54-58 . This drug interaction has been attributed not only to the inhibition of 
CYP1A2, the major enzyme responsible for clozapine metabolism, but also to the additional 
inhibitory effects of fluvoxamine on CYP2C19 and CYP3A4, which also contribute to its 
biotransformation 59. Clinicians should be aware of a dr ug interaction between clozapine and 
fluvoxamine. Downward dosage adjustments of clozapine may be necessary. However, given the 
magnitude of this interaction, a pharmacokinetic augmentation strategy has been proposed for the 
co-administration of fluvoxamine with low doses of clozapine 57, 60-62 . Clinicians using that 
strategy should use TDM and have a hi gh level of pharmacokinetic expertise. 
Several studies have documented that fluvoxamine (50-100 mg/day) may also elevate 
plasma levels of olanzapine approximately 2-fold , presumably through inhibition of CYP1A2, with 
possible ADR occurrence 63-66. The magnitude of the effect of fluvoxamine on plasma levels of 
olanzapine is lower than observed with clozapine, as olanzapine is metabolized by multiple enzyme 
systems, namely UGT, whose activity may not be affected by fluvoxamine. The combination of 
olanzapine and fluvoxamine should be used cautiously and with TDM to avoid olanzapine ADRs 
(sedation, orthostatic hypotension, tachycardia, tran saminase elevations, or seizures). Similar to the 
fluvoxamine-clozapine combination, a low dose of  fluvoxamine (25 mg/day) has been proposed as 
an adjunct to reduce olanzapine dose requirements as a cost-saving measure 67. 
D’Arrigo et al. 68 evaluated the possibility of a metabolic drug interaction between 
fluvoxamine and risperidone in schizophrenic patients on a chronic treatment with risperidone, 3-6 
mg/day. While in the 6 patients receiving adjunctive treatment with fluvoxamine 100 mg/day no 
significant modifications in plasma levels of risp eridone and its active metabolite were observed, 
concentrations increased slightly but significantly (by a mean of 26% over pretreatment; p<0.05) in 14 
the subgroup of 5 subjects treated with a final fluvoxamine dose of 200 mg/day. A dose-dependent 
inhibitory effect of fluvoxamine on CYP2D6- and/or CYP3A4-mediated 9-hydroxylation of 
risperidone provides a rational explanation for this drug interaction. 
In a large routine TDM program for quetiapine, concomitant administration with 
fluvoxamine was associated with a significant in crease in quetiapine serum concentration-dose 
(C/D) ratio (p<0.001) 45. This pharmacokinetic drug interaction may be explained by the 
inhibitory effect of fluvoxamine on the CYP3A4-mediated metabolism of quetiapine.   
In an open-label investigation in healthy subjects, coadministration of fluvoxamine (100 
mg/day) resulted in a 40% decrease in the system ic clearance of a single 3 mg oral dose of 
aripiprazole, suggesting inhibition of CYP3A4-mediated biotransformation of aripiprazole by 
fluvoxamine 53. 
In healthy volunteers, during combined administration with a single 5 mg sublingual dose of 
asenapine, a novel antipsychotic partially metabolized by CYP1A2, fluvoxamine 25 mg twice a day 
resulted in a 29% increase in asenapine AUC 25, 26. The full therapeutic dose of fluvoxamine 
would be expected to produce a greater increase in plasma asenapine concentrations. Therefore, 
coadministration of asenapine and fluvoxamine should be approached with caution. 
 
Sertraline 
Sertraline is a mild to moderate in vitro  inhibitor of CYP2D6 and a weak inhibitor of the 
other CYP isoenzymes 16, 36. 
In an open-label pharmacokinetic investigation involving 11 patients with schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disorder stabilized on risperidone therapy (4-6 mg/day), co-medication with sertraline, 50 to 100 mg/day, for 8 weeks did not significantly change steady-state plasma 
concentrations of risperidone active fraction 69. However, in the 2 patients receiving the highest 
dose of sertraline, 150 mg/day, at week 8 total plas ma risperidone concentrations  were increased  
by 36% and 52% respectively, as compared to base line values, presumably due to a dose-dependent 
inhibition of CYP2D6-mediated 9-hydroxylation of risperidone.  
Early clinical pharmacokinetic studies documented that sertraline, at dosages ≤100 mg/day, 
did not significantly affect plasma concentra tions of clozapine and its major metabolite 
norclozapine 38, 50. On the other hand, two case reports have documented a moderate increase in 
plasma concentrations of clozapine after coadministration with sertraline at doses of 50 and 300 
mg/day, respectively 70, 71.  
In a placebo-controlled study in patients with schizophrenia and comorbid major depression, 
the addition of sertraline, 50 to 100 mg/day, to antipsychotic monotherapy caused minimal but not 15 
clinically significant changes in serum levels  of various SGAs, including risperidone and 
olanzapine, which were comparable to those observed in placebo-treated patients 72. In three 
different TDM studies, concomitant intake of se rtraline was found not to affect dose-normalized 
serum concentrations of olanzapine 63, quetiapine 45, and aripiprazole 46. 
 
Citalopram/Escitalopram 
Citalopram and its active S-enantiomer, escitalopram, are weak in vitro  inhibitors of 
CYP2D6 and are negligible inhibitors of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 73, 74. Due 
to their minimal effect on drug-metabolizing enzymes, citalopram and escitalopram are not 
expected to cause clinically relevant drug interactions with SGAs. 
Concomitant administration of citalopram (20-40 mg/day) was found not to modify steady-
state plasma concentrations of clozapine and norclozapine, as reported in two early studies in 
patients with schizophrenia 75, 76. No changes in steady-state plasma concentrations of 
risperidone and 9-hydroxyrisperidone were observed in  7 patients after administration of citalopram 
40 mg/day 76. By using a mixed model to estimate the effects of comedications on plasma 
olanzapine concentrations, Botts et al. found that concomitant medication with citalopram did not 
affect plasma concentrations of olanzapine 77. In a study from a large routine TDM service, dose-
corrected quetiapine serum concentrations were slightly (by 16%), but significantly (p<0.05), 
higher in patients comedicated with citalopram/escitalopram 45. However, due to the limited 
increase in quetiapine concentrations and its wide therapeutic index, quetiapine dose adjustment is 
not considered necessary if citalopram or esci talopram are coadministered. In a routine TDM 
program for patients treated with aripiprazole, steady-state dose-adjusted serum concentrations of aripiprazole and the sum of aripiprazole and de hydroaripiprazole were approximately 20% higher 
(p<0.05) in patients comedicated with escitalopram  (n=26) than in subjects in the monotherapy 
group (n=60) 46. The small, though significant, elevation of aripiprazole concentrations may be 
attributed to the weak inhibitory effect of escitalopram on CYP2D6, which plays a role in the 
biotransformation of aripiprazole.  3.1.1.2 SNRIs 
 This section  includes venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine, and duloxetine studies. To our 
knowledge, no study has investigated the effect of levomilnacipran and milnacipran on the SGA pharmacokinetics.  
 
Venlafaxine/Desvenlafaxine 16 
 According to in vitro  studies, venlafaxine is a weaker CYP2D6 inhibitor than paroxetine, 
fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and sertraline, and has minimal or no effect on the activity of CYP1A2, 
CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 78. Desvenlafaxine, venlafaxine active metabolite, has no inhibitory effect 
on the activity of the major CYP isoforms 78. 
There is limited data on the effects of venlaf axine and desvenlafaxine on SGA metabolism. 
In a study of 30 healthy volunteers, treatment with venlafaxine, 150 mg/day for 9 days, caused 
minimal, presumably not clinically relevant, chan ges in the pharmacokinetics of a single 1 mg oral 
dose of risperidone, a CYP2D6 substrate 79. Plasma concentrations of clozapine were measured 
in 11 schizophrenic male patients with depressive symptoms who were administered both 
clozapine and venlafaxine 80. Low to moderate doses of venlafaxine did not significantly affect 
plasma clozapine levels. Data from TDM studies documented that concomitant administration with 
venlafaxine was associated with no changes in dose -normalized serum concentrations of quetiapine 
45 nor in those of aripiprazole and its active metabolite dehydroaripiprazole 46.  
 
Duloxetine 
Duloxetine is a moderate inhibitor of CYP2D6, while it has minimal or no effect on the 
activity of CYP1A2, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, and CYP3A4 81. 
Two open-label prospective trials evaluate d the potential drug interaction between 
duloxetine and SGAs in patients with psychotic disorders 82, 83. In the first study involving 20 
in- or outpatients on antipsychotic medication, the a ddition of duloxetine (mean final dosage of 83.3 
 26.3 mg/day) over a period of 6 weeks resulted in an  increase of dose-corrected serum levels of 
olanzapine in three patients, while serum levels of clozapine remained substantially unchanged in 
eleven subjects 82. In the second trial, administration of duloxetine, 60 mg/day for up to 6 weeks, 
to 20 outpatients stabilized on clozapine (n=6), olanzapine (n=8) or risperidone (n=7), did not 
modify the plasma concentrations of clozapine and olanzapine, which are not CYP2D6 substrates, 
while it was associated with a modest, but potentially clinically significant, increase in the plasma 
concentration of the active moiety of risperidone (by a mean 26%), presumably through inhibition 
of CYP2D6-mediated 9-hydroxylation of risperidone 83. On the other hand, in a study based on a 
TDM database, coadministration of duloxetine, 30-120 mg/day, was not associated with significant 
effects on the serum concentrations of both risper idone and aripiprazole, another CYP2D6 substrate 
84. 
 
3.1.1.3 Other newer antidepressants 
Reboxetine 17 
Reboxetine has only weak CYP inhibitory effects 85. Therefore, reboxetine is not expected 
to impair SGA elimination. In agreement with this, an open-label pharmacokinetic investigation in 
14 patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder with associated depressive symptoms, 
documented no effect of a 4-week adjunctive treatment with reboxetine 8 mg/day on the plasma 
concentrations of clozapine (250-500 mg/day, n = 7), risperidone (4-6 mg/day, n = 7) and their 
main metabolites 86.  
 
Mirtazapine 
According to in vitro  studies, mirtazapine has minimal inhibitory effects on the various CYP 
isoforms and appears to carry a low risk for drug interactions 87. In a pilot study involving 6 
psychiatric patients treated with risperidone (2-6 mg/day), the addition of mirtazapine, 30 mg/day 
for 2-4 weeks, did not modify plasma concentr ations of risperidone and its active 9-hydroxy 
metabolite 88. A subsequent open-label investigation evaluated the effect of mirtazapine, 30 
mg/day for 6 weeks, on steady-state plasma concen trations of various SGAs  in 24 patients with 
chronic schizophrenia 89. Adjunctive mirtazapine resulted in minimal and statistically 
insignificant changes in the mean plasma con centrations of clozapine (200-650 mg/day, n = 9), 
risperidone (3-8 mg/day, n = 8), olanzapine (10-20 mg/day, n = 7), and their major metabolites 
during the study period, indicating lack of pharm acokinetic drug interaction between mirtazapine 
and these SGAs. By using data from a routine TDM service, concomitant intake of mirtazapine 
(n=12) did not significantly affect serum concentr ations of aripiprazole or dehydroaripiprazole 46. 
 
Bupropion, agomelatine, vilazodone or vortioxetine 
There is no documentation of pharmacokinetic drug interactions between bupropion, 
agomelatine, vilazodone or vortioxetine and S GAs. As bupropion is a moderate inhibitor of 
CYP2D6, it should interfere with the elimination of SGAs partly metabolized by CYP2D6: 
risperidone, aripiprazole and iloperidone.    3.1.2 Effect of SGAs on the pharmacokinetics of newer antidepressants 
As SGAs, except for asenapine, do not significantly affect the activity of CYP isoenzymes, 
they are not expected to impair the elimination of newer antidepressants in usual circumstances 19, 
21, 25, 26 . On the other hand, any substrate competes with others for the corresponding enzyme 
and inhibits it; the potency of the inhibition is in fluenced by substrate affinity and dose. In most 
clinical situations competitive inhibition is probably irrelevant. In unusual polypharmacy situations, 
adding a competitive inhibitor (such as SGAs wh ich are not normally considered inhibitors) in a 18 
patient taking a drug with a narrow therapeutic window may affect another drug’s drug metabolism, 
due to inhibitor accumulation past the tipping point 35.  
In a large investigation including two open-label, non-randomized studies in healthy 
subjects  and two placebo-controlled studies in pa tients with major depressive disorder, adjunctive 
treatment with aripiprazole caused no meaningful  effects on the pharmacokinetics of citalopram, 
fluoxetine, paroxetine, sertraline  or venlafax ine in either healthy subjects or patients 90. 
Asenapine is a weak inhibitor of CYP2D6 and should be administered with caution with 
drugs that are substrates for th is isoform. In this respect, coadministration of paroxetine and 
asenapine has been shown to cause a nearly 2-fold increase in paroxetine exposure 25, 26.  
 
3.2 Pharmacodynamic interactions 
3.2.1. Pharmacodynamic drug inte ractions increasing efficacy 
 According to a meta-analysis of adjunctive therapy for depression, aripiprazole, olanzapine 
(combined with fluoxetine), quetiapine and risper idone showed small to moderately significant 
effects on clinician-rated depression severity measures when compared to adding placebo with 
limited benefits but increased ADRs 91. These positive randomized clinical trials (RCTs) suggest 
that SGAs may have a synergistic effect and incr ease the antidepressant response in patients taking 
antidepressants for major depressive disorder.  
 There are very few randomized RCTs  on psychotic depression [6]. These RCTs suggested a 
synergistic effect between antipsychotic and anti depressant co-treatment since the combination 
appeared superior to monotherapy of either drug  class. However, most of the RCTs have used 
TCAs rather than the newer antidepressants; some of them used FGAs. Therefore, there is little 
information to guide clinicians if they decide to combine newer antidepressants and SGAs for 
psychotic depression [92].    
 The idea of combining fluoxetine and olanzapine in pill form would suggest that they have 
additive or synergistic effects in bipolar depre ssion. A meta-analysis indicates some increase of 
efficacy, but ADRs were frequent [93].       A SGA meta-analysis of OCD studies suggested some evidence that adding quetiapine or 
risperidone to antidepressants increases efficacy [94].  Therefore, the limited data from RCTs do 
not allow commenting on whether SGAs may have additive or synergistic effects on OCD when 
added to SSRIs. On the other hand, clinical guid elines after lack of re sponse to SSRIs usually 
recommend SGAs as one of the options.  
A meta-analysis indicated that adding newer antidepressants to an tipsychotics may reduce 
negative symptoms [8]. Other articles reviewed proposed that the α
2 antagonist properties of some 19 
newer antidepressants such as mirtazapine may explain the improvement of negative symptoms 
[95].  3.2.2. Pharmacodynamic drug interactions decreasing efficacy 
 There is very limited RCT data on maintenan ce treatment after bipolar depression [96] but 
there is general agreement that some antidepressa nts may increase the switch to mania, whereas 
bupropion and SSRIs may have fewer risks than TC As and SNRIs [97]. A meta-analysis suggested 
that mood stabilizers may not prevent the switch to mania but too few SGA studies have been 
conducted to establish certainty [98]. Future stud ies will need to verify whether antidepressants 
decrease the mood-stabilizing properties of SGAs  by increasing mania-switching or not.  
3.2.3. Pharmacodynamic drug in teractions increasing safety 
 As bupropion treatment can be associated with weight loss, one can propose that adding it to 
SGAs may decrease the risk of weight gain from SGAs, but there are no related RCTs in PubMed. 
 Figure 2 indicates that epidemiological stud ies definitively establish SSRIs as producing a 
small increased risk for abnormal bleeding by depleting platelets from serotonin, particularly when 
other risk factors are present. SGAs, particular ly clozapine, appear to increase the risk of 
developing venous thromboembolism by poorly understood mechanisms, including enhancing 
platelet aggregation [99]. From a pharmacological point of view one could hypothesize that the 
combination may decrease the risk of SS RI-induced bleeding or clozapine-induced 
thromboembolism, but we know too little about the pharmacodynamic mechanisms; there is no 
published data to support this idea. 
 Reviews of serotonin syndrome [100, 101] do not usually list SGAPs as drugs contributing 
to serotonin syndrome, but the case report literature is much more complicated. Case reports 
suggest that some SGAs may decrease the risk  for serotonin syndrome while other SGAs may 
increase the risk for serotonin syndrome. In that sense ziprasidone may be a special case, since it 
can inhibit serotonin reuptake and has been proposed as the single agent causing serotonin 
syndrome in one case [102] and as a contributing factor in two others [103, 104].  Other cases 
suggest that withdrawal from olanzapine [105] or clozapine [106] may have contributed to 
serotonin syndrome. Another case suggested that ar ipiprazole may have protected against serotonin 
syndrome [107]. 
 3.2.4. Pharmacodynamic drug interactions decreasing safety 
 Figures 2 and 4 indicate that some newer antidepressants and some SGAs share ADRs but, 
as far as we know, no studies have been published on the combined increased risk of ADRs, other 20 
than the previously mentioned study that the olanzapine-fluoxetine combination is associated with 
substantial risk of ADRs [93].    
 Pharmacodynamic drug interactions possibly associated with specific newer antidepressant 
compounds in combination with SGAs may include increased risk for weight gain, sedation, 
hypertension, decreased seizure threshold, psychotic exacerbation, nausea and anticholinergic 
ADRs. These possible drug interactions have rarely been studied in the literature, but they can be 
hypothesized based on pharmacological knowledge.   Most SGAs are associated with metabolic 
ADRs (Figure 4); therefore, mirtazapine (and to a lesser degree paroxetine) probably has an 
additive risk for metabolic ADRs.  Mirtazapine is also likely to increase the risk of sedation in 
patients taking SGAs.  
 SNRIs are associated with tachycardia and all except for duloxetine with hypertension. 
Clozapine is the only SGA that is associated with hypertension (usually <5%). It is likely that the 
SNRI-clozapine combination may increase the risk for tachycardia and/or hypertension. Most SGAs are associated with increased seizure risk (Fig ure 4); thus, adding bupropion may further increase 
that risk.   
 Bupropion may also exacerbate the risk of psychosis in patients taking SGAs. In smoking 
cessation trials in schizophrenia, bupropion was us ed for a short time and did not appear to cause 
psychotic exacerbations [108]. In a comprehensive review of the use of bupropion in schizophrenia, 
Englisch et al. described the risk of bupropion-induced psychosis as negligible [109].    
Many newer antidepressants are associated with increased risk of nausea and vomiting 
(Figure 2), which may be important to remember when used in combination with three SGAs 
associated with nausea: aripiprazole, lurasidone and ziprasidone (Figure 4). Increased risk for 
antimuscarinic ADRs may occur when combining mirtazapine, paroxetine or reboxetine (Figure 2) with antimuscarinic SGAs: clozapine, olanzapine or high doses of quetiapine (Figure 4).  
 Less common pharmacodynamic drug interactions possibly associated with combinations 
between newer antidepressants and SGAs may include increased risk for akathisia, sexual ADRs, 
long QTc and hepatotoxicity. SSRIs have occasionally been associated with akathisia [110]. Among 
SGAs, risperidone is particularly prone to cause extrapyramidal symptoms including akathisia, but 
aripiprazole may be prone to cause more akathisia th an other SGAs [111].  It will be interesting to 
study whether the combination of aripiprazole and akat hisia is particularly prone to akathisia or not. 
In their review, Kumar and Sachdev [112] indicated that some studies suggest that aripiprazole may 
be particularly more prone to cause akathisia in pa tients taking antidepressants.  It is possible that 
some SSRIs, due to pharmacodynamic and/or pharmac okinetic drug interactions (e.g., fluoxetine or 21 
paroxetine are CYP2D6 inhibitors) may contribute  to increased akathisia risk in patients taking 
aripiprazole.  
 Sexual ADRs are frequent both with newer antidepressants (not all) (Figure 2) and SGAs. 
The literature does not comment on whether the combination increases the risk or not.  
 Lethal arrhythmias are very complicated to study since these deaths are relatively rare and 
are not easily identified in autopsies. Several sy ndromes are associated with sudden cardiac death. 
One of them is Brugada syndrome (see footnote 22 of Figure 2) which has been linked with newer 
antidepressants. Another syndrome associated with sudden cardiac death, long QTc syndrome, is 
more familiar to psychiatrists and can lead to torsades de pointes. In the 1990s, genetic forms of 
long QTc syndrome were found to be channelopathies at the cardiac potassium channels. Most 
clinically relevant drug-related QTc prolongations occur via inhibition of the delayed rectifier 
potassium current, IKr, a current mediated in humans by the ion channel KCNH2 encoded by the 
human ether-a-go-go–related gene (HERG). These pr olongations are acquired presentations similar 
to one of the genetic forms of the disease [113]. Several psychiatric drugs have warnings for QTc 
prolongation; among SGAs iloperidone and ziprasidone appear much more prone to cause QTc 
prolongations (Table 4). The FDA has provided a QTc warning regarding the use of high doses of 
citalopram (Table 4).  Most cases of drug-induced torsades de pointes occur in the context of 
substantial prolongation of the QTc interval, typica lly to values >500 milliseconds, but QTc alone is 
a relatively poor predictor of arrhythmic risk in any individual patient. Some drugs that 
substantially prolong the QTc interval produce very low rates of torsades de pointes while others 
have much smaller QTc effects but are consider ably more proarrhythmic [113]. TCAs and some 
FGAs, particularly phenothiazines, have been clearly associated with torsades de pointes. 
According to a systematic review of case reports, citalopram, fluoxetine and sertraline may be associated with torsades de pointes [114]. A re cent pharmacoepidemiology study suggested that 
ziprasidone and amisulpride had potential torsadogenic risk similar to haloperidol [115]; a review 
of case reports proposed that risperidone may rarely cause torsades de pointes [116].  The literature 
on clinical cases of torsades de pointes is very complex since 1) the cases are frequently associated 
with  polypharmacy and drug interactions, with a pharmacodynamic component involving multiple 
drugs with HERG channel inhibitory properties and sometimes a pharmacokinetic component, an inhibitor increasing the plasma concentrations of one  or several of the drugs [113]; and 2) other risk 
factors such as geriatric age, female gender, bradycardia, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia may 
be important, too [117]. The literature does not discuss the combination of newer antidepressants 
and SGAs as risk factors for torsades de pointe s, but there are two well-controlled SGA studies on 
QTc incorporating SSRIs in the design [118, 119]. The addition of paroxetine to iloperidone was 22 
associated with increased serum iloperidone concentr ations and increased QTc; 10% of the patients 
had increases ≥ 60 msec but no patient had a QTc ≥ 500 msec [119]. Risperidone with paroxetine 
and olanzapine with fluvoxamine were associated with mild increases (<10 msec) in QTc [118].  
 Agomelatine has been definitively associated with liver enzyme elevations. Most cases 
(90%) recover after agomelatine discontinuati on but severe forms can also occur [120]. 
Agomelatine should not be combined with clozapine or olanzapine, the two SGAs most frequently associated with liver enzyme elevations. In a recent review of antidepressant-induced liver injury, 
Voican et al. [121] stated that agomelatine, bupr opion and duloxetine are the most frequent of the 
newer antidepressants that, on rare occasions, can  cause life-threatening hepatotoxicity. They 
suggest that duloxetine should not be administered in those with prior liver problems. Therefore, 
duloxetine should not be used in those with prior hi story of liver injury secondary to antipsychotics, 
or with current liver enzyme elevations during antip sychotic treatment. Figure 4 describes the safest 
newer antidepressants regarding liver injury.    
 
4. Conclusion 
 Table 4 uses mechanistic pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic data which provide a 
summary of the most important practical drug interaction information for clinicians and 
recommendations for dealing with drug interactions . The authors would have preferred to use an 
evidence-based medicine approach in making th ese recommendations but, unfortunately, most of 
the pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies were not completed using clinical doses and durations 
relevant for clinicians. There are almost no pharma codynamic drug interaction studies; therefore, 
Table 4 describes pharmacodynamic drug interactions  leading to ADRs that can be uncommon or 
rare. Statistical theory explains that evidence-based medicine approaches focused on average 
patients cannot rule out rare ADRs in outliers not well represented by the average patient [122]. 
Thus, the idea behind Table 4 is not to convince scientists but to raise clinicians’ awareness of drug 
interaction risks and remind them that both pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug 
interactions can contribute to pharmacological actions.  The information contained in this article 
may not fully account for all of the possible drug interaction risks because of the limited studies available; so future updating as new information becomes available will be necessary. 
 
4.1 Pharmacokinetic drug interactions and clinical implications 
Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and paroxetine are potent inhibitors that are likely to have 
clinically relevant effects on several SGA serum levels (Table 4). Adding any of these potent inhibitors to a specific SGA is associated with an increase in SGA serum concentration which may 23 
be associated with ADRs. The discontinuation of these inhibitors may be associated with a decrease 
in SGA serum concentration which may be associated with loss of efficacy. On the other hand, if 
the patient is taking one of these inhibitors and a SGA with potential to be inhibited needs to be 
added, a lower SGA dose may be advisable. The be st way to control for these drug interactions is 
by checking SGA TDM. When available, as in the cases of clozapine, olanzapine and risperidone, it 
may be a good idea to consider it. When SGA TDM is not available, Table 4 provides a best estimation of a correction factor based on the limited available literature.  
The pharmacokinetic drug interactions associated with the milder inhibitors bupropion, 
duloxetine or high dosages of sertraline have not been  well studied in the literature. Thus, clinicians 
may need to be watchful when using them with CYP2D6-dependent SGAs: aripiprazole, 
iloperidone and risperidone (Table 4).  
The only SGA that may be relevant as an inhibitor is asenapine, which may be a mild 
CYP2D6 inhibitor. Consequently, it may present a low drug interaction risk when added to a CYP2D6-dependent antidepressant: paroxetine or venlafaxine.   4.2 Pharmacodynamic drug interactions and clinical implications 
As described, the literature is very limite d in the description of pharmacodynamic drug 
interactions but in our experience these types of drug interactions are very relevant in clinical 
practice (Table 4). Section 3.2.1 describes ph armacodynamic drug interactions that can be 
considered positive: the addition of SGAs to newer antidepressants as adjunctive therapy for major 
depressive disorder or OCD. These possible additive or synergistic effects are well-known by 
clinicians and are not described in Table 4.       
Table 4 describes some drug interactions with bupropion and mirtazapine that have not been 
well-studied, but are important for clinicians to have in mind. Clinicians considering an 
antidepressant in a patient taking clozapine, which has a relatively narrow therapeutic window, may 
need to check Table 4 before selecting among the newer antidepressants, since some can increase 
clozapine serum levels, some may increase risk of antimuscarinic ADRs and some may increase the 
risk of tachycardia and hypertension.  
Torsades de pointes is very rare but clinicians adding SSRIs and SGAs may need to 
remember that checking QTc in an ECG may be help ful; the literature sugge sts that cases probably 
result from a combination of multiple factors. Clinicians adding SSRIs and SGAs may want to 
check for family history of sudden death; pers onal history of syncopes,  arrhythmias or heart 
conditions; electrolyte disturbances; and co-prescri ption of other medications that may increase 
QTc (Table 4)
. 24 
5. Expert opinion 
 We have limited understanding of the clinical re levance of drug interactions associated with 
the inhibitory properties of fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and paroxetine. Unfortunately, the drug 
interaction studies with SGAs are rather limited. Table 4 provides correction factors based on the 
limited available literature.  These correction factors were calculated using the available pharmacokinetic studies which summarize the data, assuming that the average patient represents the 
population well; however, there is extensive pharmacokinetic variability between patients, and 
TDM measurements are advised for optimal titration of the dosage in each individual. The 
correction factors may not fully account for all of the possible risks of treatment because of the 
limited studies available; thus, there will be a need  to periodically update these correction factors as 
new knowledge becomes available. In spite of thei r limitations, these correction factors are useful 
because: 1) many clinicians have no access to anti psychotic TDM and, as a matter of fact, there is 
limited clinical data on some SGA TDM (amisulpride, aripiprazole, paliperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone) and published TDM data on three compounds (asenapine, iloperidone and lurasidone) 
is virtually absent; and 2) in our experience, havi ng the correction factor helps clinicians to make 
decisions. With a correction factor of 5-10, fluvoxamine is a poor antidepressant choice for 
clozapine patients unless the clinician has access to TDM and sophisticated pharmacokinetic knowledge.  
 Bupropion and duloxetine are moderate CYP2D6 inhibitors but there are almost no DI 
studies on SGAPs to verify the clinical relevance of their inhibitory properties for aripiprazole, 
iloperidone and risperidone. A serious limitation of the SGA drug interaction literature is the lack of 
studies in clinical samples with high doses of sertraline, which may be a CYP2D6 inhibitor only in high doses. Moreover, in some sensitive patients, high sertraline doses may inhibit other CYPs. The 
only SGA that may have some likelihood of being a mild inhibitor is asenapine, which has weak 
CYP2D6 inhibitory properties. Other SGAs and ne wer antidepressants may be  clinically relevant 
inhibitors in very rare circum stances, but clinicians may need to remember that competitive 
inhibition is always possible.    
    It is not easy to conduct drug interac tion studies using clinically relevant doses. 
Pharmaceutical companies tend to invest in si mple pharmacokinetic drug interaction studies in 
volunteers, frequently using single dosing to get ap proval for the marketing of their drugs, but this 
type of pharmacokinetic study rarely reflects clinical practice. Drug interaction data in the 
prescribing information (or package inserts) is usually not designed to provide easy helps for 
clinicians in correcting pharmacokinetic drug intera ctions with dose changes. The pharmacokinetic 
science on newer antidepressants and SGA combinations may be in its adolescence and needing 25 
maturation, while pharmacodynamic drug interaction sc ience appears to be in its infancy. None of 
the studies combining newer antidepressants and SGAs for greater efficacy in major depressive 
disorder or OCD explore whether the combinations are additive or synergistic.  
It would be naïve to simply conclude that more studies of newer antidepressant and SGA 
drug interactions are needed. They are obviously needed, but the lack of funding for clinical 
research is a major limitation. To progress in this area, collaboration from all interested parties is needed, including: i) drug agencies and pharmace utical companies; ii) clinicians using newer 
antidepressant-SGA combinations; iii) researchers with expertise in a) meta-analyses, b) 
pharmacoepidemiology, c) drug interaction pharmacology; and iv)  grant agencies.   
The FDA may need to think “out of the box” and look for new ways to encourage 
pharmaceutical companies possibly interested in marketing new antidepressants and new SGAs for 
psychotic depression by providing special “incenti ves”, assuming the companies seriously want to 
study drug interaction issues.  
Clinicians frequently co-prescribe newer an tidepressants and SGAs. Thousands of US 
patients take these combinations. There is great need of naturalistic studies describing possible 
additive or synergistic efficacy and, more import antly, the long-term safety of these combinations. 
Are early nausea and vomiting more frequent in some of these combinations than in the various 
monotherapies?   
Researchers with expertise in meta-analysis may need to develop better methods to study the 
safety of newer antidepressant and SGA combinations by comparing ADRs in available SGA RCTs 
of monotherapy in schizophrenia versus those of adjuvant therapy in major depressive disorder.  
Researchers with expertise in pharmacoepidemiology need to explore whether rare ADRs such as 
risk of long QTc may be more frequently asso ciated with SSRI-SGA combinations than with 
individual drugs. On the other hand, serotonin syndrome may be less frequent in the presence of 
SGAs (with the probable exception of ziprasidone) and antipsychotic-induced seizures in the 
presence of SSRIs such as fluoxetine, which may decrease seizure threshold in the average patient. 
The complexity of pharmacological treatments in the real world cannot be denied since fluoxetine 
has on rare occasions been associated with seizures.    
Researchers with expertise in in vitro  drug interaction studies or in vivo  clinical studies 
using isotopes to explore drug clearance need to better study the SGA metabolic pathways and how 
they change when inhibitors are added, particularly in the complicated conditions used in clinical 
practices such as adding both an inducer and an  inhibitor to an SGA (e.g., adding carbamazepine 
and fluoxetine to risperidone).  26 
Grant and health agencies need to remember that  pragmatic clinical trials are key in treating 
complex disorders such as OCD, schizophrenia, psychotic depression and bipolar disorder, where 
polytherapy is the norm. Pharmaceutical RCTs do not  substitute for long-term pragmatic trials that 
may better inform clinicians of the effectivenes s of the various types of mono- and polytherapy 
frequently used in the real world of clinical practice.  Pragmatic trials need to pay better attention to 
drug interactions. 
Progress in the next few years, if this research agenda is followed, should also be 
accompanied by a better continuous medical education on drug interactions and improvements in 
psychopharmacology textbooks, so that clinicians be gin to pay more attention to pharmacodynamic 
and pharmacokinetic drug interactions associated  with the frequent co-prescription of newer 
antidepressants and SGAs. Well-educated clinicians will help move the research agenda by 
publishing drug interaction case reports of unus ual combinations and asking for more drug 
interaction studies from pharmaceutical companies and researchers.   27 
Bibliography 
1. Stahl SM. Antidepressants. In: Stahl SM, editor. Stahl’s Essential Psychopharmacology. 4th 
ed. Cambridge University Press; New York: 2013. p. 284-369 
2. Stahl SM. Antipsychotic agents. In: Stahl SM, editor. Stahl’s Essential 
Psychopharmacology. 4th ed. Cambridge University Press; New York: 2013. p.129-236 
3. Maher AR, Maglione M, Bagley S, et al. Efficacy and comparative effectiveness of atypical 
antipsychotic medications for off-label uses in adults: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. JAMA 2011;306:1359-69 
4. Schirmbeck F, Esslinger C, Rausch F, et al. Antiserotonergic antipsychotics are associated 
with obsessive-compulsive symptoms in schizophrenia. Psychol Med 2011; 41: 2361-73 
5. Kantrowitz JT, Citrome L. Schizoaffective disorder: a review of current research themes and 
pharmacological management. CNS Drugs 2011;25:317-31 
6. Farahani A, Correll CU. Are antipsychotics or antidepressants needed for psychotic 
depression? A systematic review and meta-analysis of trials comparing antidepressant or 
antipsychotic monotherapy with combination treatment. J Clin Psychiatry 2012;73:486-96 
•    Comprehensive review of treatment for psychotic depression.  
7. Rummel C, Kissling W, Leucht S. Antidepressants as add-on treatment to antipsychotics for 
people with schizophrenia and pronounced negative symptoms: a systematic review of 
randomized trials. Schizophr Res 2005;80:85-97 
8. Singh SP, Singh V, Kar N, Chan K. Efficacy of antidepressants in treating the negative 
symptoms of chronic schizophrenia: meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry 2010;197:174-9 
9. Bloch MH, Landeros-Weisenberger A, Kelmendi B, et al. A systematic review: 
antipsychotic augmentation with treatment refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Molecular Psychiatry 2006;11:622-32 
10. Skapinakis P, Papatheodorou T, Mavreas V. Antipsychotic augmentation of 
serotonergic antidepressants in treatment-re sistant obsessive-compulsive disorder: a meta-
analysis of the randomized controlled trials. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2007;17:79-93 
11. Dold M, Aigner M, Lanzenberger R, Kasper S. Antipsychotic augmentation of serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors in treatment-resistant obsessive-compulsive disorder: a meta-analysis of double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trials. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 
2013;16:557-574 
•    Comprehensive review of treatment au gmentation in obsessive-compulsive disorder.  28 
12. Papakostas GI, Shelton RC, Smith J, Fava M. Augmentation of antidepressants with 
atypical antipsychotic medications for treatmen t-resistant major depressive disorder: a meta-
analysis. J Clin Psychiatry 2007;68:826-31 
13. Shelton RC, Papakostas GI. Augmentation of antidepressants with 
atypical antipsychotics for treatment-resistant major depressive disorder. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand 2008;117:253-9 
14. Nelson J, Papakostas G. Atypical antipsychotic augmentation in major depressive disorder: 
a meta-analysis of placebo-controlled randomized trials. Am J Psychiatry 2009;166:980-91 
15. Nemeroff CB, Preskorn S, Devane CL. Antide pressant drug-drug interactions: clinical 
relevance and risk management. CNS Spectr 2007;12(suppl 7):1-13 
16. Spina E, Santoro V, D’Arrigo C. Clinically re levant pharmacokinetic drug interactions with 
second-generation antidepressants: an update. Clin Ther 2008;30:1206-27 
      •    Comprehensive review of newer antidepressant drug interactions. 
17. Schellander R, Donnerer J. Antid epressants: clinically relevant drug interactions to be 
considered. Pharmacology 2010;86:203-15 
18. Spina E, Trifirò G, Caraci F. Clinically significant drug interactions with newer 
antidepressants. CNS Drugs 2012;26:39-67 
••    Comprehensive review of the drug interactions of the most recently marketed 
antidepressants. 
19. Spina E, de Leon J. Metabolic drug interac tions with newer antipsychotics: a comparative 
review. Basic & Clin Pharmacol & Toxicol 2007;100:4-22 
      •    Comprehensive review of second-gen eration antipsychotic drug interactions. 
20. Conley RR, Kelly DL. Drug-drug interact ions associated with second-generation 
antipsychotics: considerations for clin icians and patients. Psychopharmacol Bull 
2007;40:77-97 
21. Urichuk L, Prior TI, Dursun S, Baker G.  Metabolism of atypical antipsychotics: 
involvement of cytochrome P450 enzymes and relevance for drug-drug interactions. Curr 
Drug Metab 2008;9:410-8  
22. Kennedy WK, Jann MW, Kutscher EC. Clinically significant drug interactions with atypical 
antipsychotics. CNS Drugs 2013; 12: 1021-1048 
      ••   Updated review of atypical antipsychotic drug interactions. 
23. Spina E. Drug interactions. In: Shorvon S, Perucca E, Engel J, editors. Treatment of 
Epilepsy, 3rd ed. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing Ltd: Oxford: 2009. p. 361-77 29 
24. Cozza KL, Armstrong SC, Oesterheld JR. Concise Guide to Drug interaction Principles for 
Medical Practice: Cytochrome P450s, UGTs, P-Glycoproteins. 2nd ed. American 
Psychiatric Association: Washington, DC, 2003 
25. Tarazi FI, Stahl SM. Iloperidone, asenapine and lurasidone: a primer on their current status. 
Expert Opin Pharmacother 2012;13:1911-22 
26. Bobo VW. Asenapine, iloperidone and lurasidone: critical appraisal of the most recently 
approved pharmacotherapies for schizophrenia in adults. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 
2013;6:61–91 
27. Lin JH. Transporter-mediated drug interacti ons. Clinical implications and in vitro 
assessment. Exp Opin Drug Metab Toxicol 2007;3:81-92 
28. O’Brien FE, Dinan TG, Griffin BT, Cryan JF. Interactions between antidepressants and P-
glycoprotein at the blood-brain barrier: clinical significance of in vitro and in vivo findings. 
Br J Pharmacol 2012;165:289-312 
29. Moons T, de Roo M, Claes S, Dom G. Relationship between P-glycoprotein and second-
generation antipsychotics. Pharmacogenomics 2011;12:1193-1211 
30. Akamine Y, Yasui-Furukori N, Ieiri I, Uno T. Psychotropic drug-drug interactions involving 
P-glycoprotein. CNS Drugs 2012;26:959-73 
31. Citrome L. Vilazodone for major depressive disorder: a systematic review of the efficacy 
and safety profile for this newly approved antidepressant - what is the number needed to 
treat, number needed to harm and likelihood to be helped or harmed? Int J Clin Pract 
2012;66:356-68  
32. Gibb A, Deeks ED. Vortioxetine: first global approval. Drugs 2014; 74: 135-45 
33. Labbate LA, Fava M, Rosenbaum JF, et al. Handbook of Psychiatric Drug Therapy. 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins: Philadelphia: 2010 
34. Pompili M, Serafini G, Innamorati M, et al. Agomelatine, a novel intriguing antidepressant 
option enhancing neuroplasticity: a critical review. World J Biol Psychiatry 2013;14:412-31  
35. de Leon J,  Santoro V, D'Arrigo C, Spina E. Interac tions between antiepileptics and second-
generation antipsychotics.  Expert Opin  Drug Metab Toxicol 2012;8:2-24 
••    Updated review of antiepileptic drugs and atypical antipsychotic drug interactions 
using the same format as this article.  
36. Hemeryck A, Belpaire FM. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and cytochrome P-450 
mediated drug-drug interactions: an update. Curr Drug Metab 2002;3:13-37 30 
37. Centorrino F, Baldessarini RJ, Kando J, et al . Serum concentrations of clozapine and its 
metabolites: Effects of cotreatment with fluoxetine or valproate. Am J Psychiatry 
1994;151:123-5 
38. Centorrino F, Baldessarini RJ, Frankenburg FR, et al. Serum levels of clozapine and 
norclozapine in patients treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Am J 
Psychiatry 1996;153:820-3 
39. Spina E, Avenoso A, Facciolà G, et al. Effect of fluoxetine on the plasma concentrations of 
clozapine and its major metabolites in patients with schizophrenia. Int Clin 
Psychopharmacol 1998;13:141-5 
40. Diaz FJ, Santoro V, Spina E, et al. Estimating the size of the effects of co-medications on 
plasma clozapine concentrations using a model that controls for clozapine doses and 
confounding variables. Pharmacopsychiatry 2008;41:81-91  
41. Spina E, Avenoso A, Scordo MG, et al. Inhibition of risperidone metabolism by fluoxetine 
in patients with schizophrenia : a clinically relevant pharmacokinetic drug interaction. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol 2002;22:419-23 
42. Bondolfi G, Eap CB, Bertschy G, et al. The effect of fluoxetine on the pharmacokinetics and 
safety of risperidone in psychiatric patients. Pharmacopsychiatry 2002;35:50-6 
43. Gossen D, de Suray JM, Vandenhanden F, et al. Influence of fluoxetine on olanzapine 
pharmacokinetics. AAPS PharmSci 2002;4:1-6 
44. Potkin SG, Thyrum PT, Alva G, et al. Effect of fluoxetine and imipramine on the 
pharmacokinetics and tolerability of the antipsychotic quetiapine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
2002;22:174-82 
45. Castberg I, Skogvoll E, Spigset O. Quetiapine and drug interactions: evidence from a 
routine therapeutic drug monitoring service. J Clin Psychiatry 2007;68:1540-5 
46. Waade RB, Christensen H, Rudberg I, et al. Influence of comedication on serum 
concentrations of aripiprazole and dehydr oaripiprazole. Ther Drug Monit 2009;31:233-38 
47. Paul S, Cooke BK, Nguyen M. Glossopharyngeal dystonia secondary to a lurasidone 
fluoxetine CYP-3A4 interaction. Case Rep Psychiatry 2013;Epub 2013 May 16 
48. Spina E, Avenoso A, Facciolà G, et al. Plasma concentrations of risperidone and 9-
hydroxyrisperidone during combined treatment with paroxetine.  Ther Drug Monit 
2001;23:223-7 
49. Saito M, Yasui-Furukori N, Nakagami T, et al. Dose-dependent interaction of paroxetine 
with risperidone in schizophrenic pati ents. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2005;25:527-32 31 
50. Spina E, Avenoso A, Salemi M, et al. A. Plasma concentrations of clozapine and its major 
metabolites during combined treatment with pa roxetine or sertraline. Pharmacopsychiatry 
2000;33:213-7 
51. Wetzel H, Anghelescu I, Szegedi A, et al. Pharmacokinetic interactions of clozapine with 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors: different ial effects of fluvoxamine and paroxetine in 
a prospective study. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1998,18:2-9  
52. Nemoto K, Mihara K, Nakamura A, et al. Effects of paroxetine on plasma concentrations 
of aripiprazole and its active metabolite, dehydroaripiprazole, in Japanese patients with 
schizophrenia. Ther Drug Monit 2012;34:188-92 
53. Azuma J, Hasunuma T, Kubo M, et al. The relationship between clinical pharmacokinetics 
of aripiprazole and CYP2D6 genetic polymorphism: effects of CYP enzyme inhibition by 
coadministration of paroxetine or fluvoxamine. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 2012;68:29-37 
54. Hiemke C, Weighmann H, Hartter S, et al. Elevated serum levels of clozapine after addition 
of fluvoxamine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1994;14:279-81 
55. Jerling M, Lindstrom L, Bondesson U, Bertilsson L. Fluvoxamine inhibition and 
carbamazepine induction of the metabolism of clozapine: evidence from a therapeutic drug 
monitoring service. Ther Drug Monit 1994;16:368-74  
56. Kuo FJ, Lane HY, Chang WH. Extrapyramidal symptoms after addition of fluvoxamine to 
clozapine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1998;18:483-4 
57. Szegedi A, Anghelescu I, Wiesner J, et al. Addition of low-dose of fluvoxamine to low-dose 
clozapine monotherapy in schizophrenia: drug monitoring and tolerability data from a 
prospective clinical trial. Pharmacopsychiatry 1999;32:148-53 
58. Fabrazzo M, La Pia S, Monteleone P, et al. Fluvoxamine increases plasma and urinary 
levels of clozapine and its major metabolites in a time- and dose-dependent manner. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol 2000;20:708-10 
59. Olesen OV, Linnet K. Fluvoxamine-clozapine drug interaction: inhibition in vitro of five 
cytochrome P450 isoforms involved in clozapine metabolism. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
2000;20:35-42 
60. Lammers CH, Deuschle M, Weigmann H, et al. Coadministration of clozapine and 
fluvoxamine in psychotic patients: clinical experience. Pharmacopsychiatry 1999;2:76-7 
61. Lu ML, Lane HY, Chen KP, et al. Fluvoxamine reduces the clozapine dosage needed in 
refractory schizophrenic patients . J Clin Psychiatry 2000;61:594-9 
62. Lu ML, Lane HY, Lin SK, et al.  Adjunctive fluvoxamine inhibits clozapine-related weight 
gain and metabolic disturbances. J Clin Psychiatry 2004;65:766-71 32 
63. Weigmann H, Gerek S, Zeisig A, et al. Fluvoxamine but not sertraline inhibits the 
metabolism of olanzapine: evidence from a th erapeutic drug monitoring service. Ther Drug 
Monit 2001;23:410-3 
64. de Jong J, Hoogenboom B, van Troostwijk LD, de Haan L. Interaction of olanzapine with 
fluvoxamine. Psychopharmacology 2001;155:219-20 
65. Hiemke C, Avi P, Jabarin M, et al. Fluvoxamine augmentation of olanzapine in chronic 
schizophrenia: pharmacokinetic interactions an d clinical effects. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
2002;22:502-6 
66. Chiu CC, Lane HY, Huang MC, et al. Dose-dependent alternations in the pharmacokinetics 
of olanzapine during coadministration of fluvoxamine in patients with schizophrenia. J Clin 
Pharmacol 2004;44:1385-90 
67. Albers LJ, Ozdemir V, Marder SR,  et al.  Low-dose fluvoxamine as an adjunct to 
reduce olanzapine therapeutic dose requirements: a prospective dose-adjusted drug interaction strategy. J Clin  Psychopharmacol 2005;25:170-4 
68. D’Arrigo C, Migliardi G, Santoro V, et al. Effect of fluvoxamine on plasma risperidone 
concentrations in patients with sc hizophrenia. Pharmacol Res 2005;52:497-501 
69. Spina E, D’Arrigo C, Migliardi G, et al. Plas ma risperidone concentrations during combined 
treatment with sertraline. Ther Drug Monit 2004;26:386-90 
70. Chong SA, Tan CH, Lee HS. Worsening of psychos is with clozapine and selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor combination: two case reports. J Clin Psychopharmacol 1997;17:68-9 
71. Pinninti NR, de Leon J. Interaction of sertraline with clozapine. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
1997;17:119-20 
72. Pierson K, Addington D, Addington J, Patten S. Serum monitoring of antipsychotic drug 
levels during concomitant administration of se rtraline and antipsychotic medication. Can J 
Psychiatry 2006;51:715-8  
73. Von Moltke LL, Greenblatt DJ, Grassi JM, et al. Citalopram and desmethylcitalopram in 
vitro: human cytochromes mediating transformation, and cytochrome inhibitory effects. 
Biol Psychiatry 1999;46:839-49 
74. Von Moltke LL, Greenblatt DJ, Giancarlo GM, et al. Escitalopram (S-citalopram) and its 
metabolites in vitro: cytochromes mediating biotransformation, inhibitory effects, and 
comparison to R-citalopram. Drug Metab Dispos 2001;29:1102-9 
75. Taylor D, Ellison Z, Ementon Shaw L, et al. Co-administration of citalopram and clozapine: 
effect on plasma clozapine levels. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 1998;13:19-21  33 
76. Avenoso A, Facciolà G, Scordo MG, et al. No effect of citalopram on plasma concentrations 
of clozapine, risperidone and their active metabolites in patients with chronic schizophrenia. 
Clin Drug Invest 1998;16:393-8 
77. Botts S, Diaz FJ, Santoro V, et al. Estimating the effects of co-medications on plasma 
olanzapine concentrations by using a mixed model. Progr Neuro-Psychopharmacol Biol 
Psychiatry 2008;32:1453-8  
78. Oganesian A, Shilling AD, Young-Sciame R, et al. Desvenlafaxine and venlafaxine exert 
minimal in vitro inhibition of human cytochrome P450 and P-glycoprotein activities. 
Psychopharmacol Bull 2009;42:47-63 
79. Amchin J, Zarycranski W, Taylor KP, et al.  Effect of venlafaxine on the pharmacokinetics 
of risperidone. J Clin Pharmacol 1999;39:297-309 
80. Repo-Tiihonen E, Eloranta A, Hallikainen T, et al. Effects of venlafaxine treatment 
on clozapine plasma levels in schizophrenic patients. Neuropsychobiology 2005;51:173-6 
81. Lobo ED, Bergstrom RF, Reddy S, et al. In vitro and in vivo evaluations of cytochrome 
P4501A2 interactions with duloxetine. Clin Pharmacokinet 2008;47:191-202  
82. Englisch S, Knopf U, Scharnholz B. et al. Duloxetine for major depressive episodes in the 
course of psychotic disorders: an observational  clinical trial. J Psychopharmacol 2009; 23: 
875-82 
83. Santoro V, D’Arrigo C, Micò U, et al. Effect of adjunctive duloxetine on the plasma 
concentrations of clozapine, olanzapine and risperidone in patients with psychotic disorders. 
J Clin Psychopharmacol 2010;30:634-6 
84. Hendset M, Molden E, Enoksen TB, et al. The effect of coadministration of duloxetine on 
steady-state serum concentration of risper idone and aripiprazole: a study based on 
therapeutic drug monitoring data. Ther Drug Monit 2010;32:787-90 
85. Wienkers LC, Allievi C, Hauer MJ, et al. Cytochrome P-450-mediated metabolism of the 
individual enantiomers of the antidepressant agent reboxetine in human liver microsomes. 
Drug Metab Dispos 1999;27:1334-40 
86. Spina E, Avenoso A, Scordo MG, et al. No effect of reboxetine on plasma concentrations of 
clozapine, risperidone and their active metabolites. Ther Drug Monit 2001;23:675-8 
87. Stormer E, von Moltke LL, Shader RI, et al. Metabolism of the antidepressant mirtazapine 
in vitro: contribution of cytochromes P-450 1A2, 2D6, and 3A4. Drug Metab Dispos 
2000;28:1168-75 34 
88. Loonen AJ, Doorschot CH, Oostelbos MC, et al. Lack of drug interaction between 
mirtazapine and risperidone in psychiatric patients. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 1999;10:51-
7 
89. Zoccali R, Muscatello MR, La Torre D, et al . Lack of pharmacokinetic interaction between 
mirtazapine and the newer antipsychotics clozapine, risperidone and olanzapine in patients 
with chronic schizophrenia. Pharmacol Res 2003;48:411-4 
90. Boulton DW, Balch AH, Royzman K, et al. The pharmacokinetics of standard 
antidepressants with aripiprazole as adjunctive therapy: studies in healthy subjects and in 
patients with major depressive disorder. J Psychopharmacol 2010;24:537-46 
91. Spielmans GI, Berman MI, Linardatos E, et al Adjunctive atypical antipsychotic treatment 
for major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of depression, quality of life, and safety 
outcomes. PLoS Med 2013;10:e1001403  
92. Rothschild AJ. Challenges in the treatment of major depressive disorder with psychotic 
features. Schizophr Bull 2013;39:787-96 
•    Personal review of treatment for psychotic depression by an expert.  
93. Silva MT, Zimmermann IR, Galvao TF, et al. Olanzapine plus fluoxetine for bipolar 
disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Affect Disord 2013;146:310-8  
94. Komossa K, Depping AM, Meyer M, et al. Second generation antipsychotics for obsessive 
compulsive disorder. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;12:CD008141 
95. Hecht EM, Landy DC. Alpha-2 receptor antagonist add-on therapy in the treatment of 
schizophrenia; a meta-analysis. Schizophr Res 2012;134:202-6 
96. Vieta E, Günther O, Locklear J, et al. Effectiveness of psychotropic medications in the 
maintenance phase of bipolar disorder: a meta-a nalysis of randomized controlled trials. Int 
Neuropsychopharmacol 2011;14:1029-49  
•    Comprehensive review of maintenance treatment in bipolar disorder.  
97. Pacchiarotti I, Bond DJ, Baldessarini RJ, et al. The International Society for Bipolar 
Disorders (ISBD) task force report on antide pressant use in bipolar disorders. Am J 
Psychiatry 2013;170:1249-62  
•    Comprehensive review of the controversia l use of antidepressants in bipolar disorder.  
98. Tondo L, Vázquez G, Baldessarini RJ. Mania associated with antidepressant treatment: 
comprehensive meta-analytic review. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2010;121:404-14  
99. Jönsson AK, Spigset O, Hägg S. Venous thromboe mbolism in recipients of antipsychotics: 
incidence, mechanisms and management. CNS Drugs 2012;26:649-62  35 
100. Isbister GK, Buckley NA, Whyte IM. Serotonin toxicity: a practical approach to 
diagnosis and treatment. Med J Aust 2007;187:361-5  
101. Ables AZ, Nagubilli R. Prevention, recognition, and management of serotonin syndrome. 
Am Fam Physician 2010;81:1139-42 
••    Excellent and practical review on serotonin syndrome.  
102. Lin PY, Hong CJ, Tsai SJ. Serotonin syndrome caused by ziprasidone alone. Psychiatry 
Clin Neurosci 2010;64:338-9 
103. Rim CL, Gitlin MJ. Ziprasidone, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and the serotonin 
syndrome. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2010;30:470-1 
104. El-Okdi NS, Lumbrezer D, Karanovic D, et al. Serotonin syndrome after the use of 
tramadol and ziprasidone in a patient with a de ep brain stimulator for Parkinson disease. Am 
J Ther 2013 Oct 23. [Epub ahead of print]. 
105. Himmighoffen H, Seifritz E, Boeker H. Serotonin syndrome after discontinuation of 
olanzapine in a combined treatment with duloxetine -- case report. Pharmacopsychiatry 
2011;44:75-6. 
106. Stevenson E, Schembri F, Green DM, et al. Serotonin syndrome associated with 
clozapine withdrawal. JAMA Neurol 2013;70:1054-5  
107. Rittmannsberger H, Werl R. Does aripiprazole protect from serotonin syndrome? 
Psychiatr Danub 2012;24:100-1 
108. Weiner E, Ball MP, Buchholz AS, et al. Bupropion sustained release added to group 
support for smoking cessation in schizophrenia: a new randomized trial and a meta-analysis. 
J Clin Psychiatry 2012;73:95-102  
109. Englisch S, Morgen K, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Zink M. Risks and benefits of bupropion 
treatment in schizophrenia: a systematic review of the current literature. Clin 
Neuropharmacol 2013; 36: :203-15 
110. Koliscak LP, Makela EH. Selective serotoni n reuptake inhibitor-induced akathisia. J Am 
Pharm Assoc. 2009;49:e28-36 
•    Comprehensive review of SSRI-induced akathisia.  
111. Rummel-Kluge C, Komossa K, Schwarz S, et al. Second-generation antipsychotic drugs 
and extrapyramidal side effects: a systematic review and meta-analysis of head-to-head 
comparisons. Schizophr Bull 2012;38:167-77  
112. Kumar R, Sachdev PS. Akathisia and second-generation antipsychotic drugs. Curr Opin 
Psychiatry 2009;22:293-9 
113. Heist EK, Ruskin JN. Drug-induced arrhythmia. Circulation 2010;122:1426-35 36 
••    Very thoughtful and clear review of the complex issue of drug-induced arrhythmias 
to which psychopharmacologists must pay more attention.  
114. Kogut C, Breden Crouse E, Vieweg V, et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and 
torsade de pointes: new concepts and new directions derived from a systematic review of 
cases reports. Ther Adv in Drug Safe 2013;4:189-198 
•    Good update on SSRI-induced torsades de pointes.  
115. Poluzzi E, Raschi E, Koci A, et al. Antipsychotics and torsadogenic risk: signals 
emerging from the US FDA Adverse Event Reporting System database. Drug Saf 
2013;36:467-79 
116. Vieweg WV, Hasnain M, Hancox JC, et al. Risperidone, QTc interval prolongation, and 
torsade de pointes: a systematic review of case reports. Psychopharmacology 2013;228:515-
24  
117. Kannankeril P, Roden DM, Darbar D. Drug-induced long QT syndrome. Pharmacol Rev 
2010;62:760-81 
118.  Harrigan EP, Miceli JJ, Anziano R,  et al. A randomized evaluation of the effects of six 
antipsychotic agents on QTc, in the absence and presence of metabolic inhibition. J Clin 
Psychopharmacol 2004;24:62-9 
119. Potkin SG, Preskorn S, Hochfeld M, et al. A thorough QTc study of 3 doses of  
iloperidone including metabolic inhibition via CYP2D6 and/or CYP3A4 and a comparison 
to quetiapine and ziprasidone. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2013;33:3-10 
120. Gahr M, Freudenmann RW, Connemann BJ, et al. Agomelatine and hepatotoxicity: 
implications of cumulated data derived from spontaneous reports of adverse drug reactions. 
Pharmacopsychiatry 2013;46:214-20 
121. Voican CS, Corruble E, Naveau S, Perlemuter G. Antidepressant-induced liver injury: a 
review for clinicians. Am J Psychiatry. 2013 Dec 20. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13050709. 
[Epub ahead of print]. 
•    Good recent update on the neglected is sue of antidepressant-induced liver injury.  
122. de Leon J.  Evidence-based medicine versus personalized medicine: are they enemies? J 
Clin Psychopharmacol 2012;32:153-64   37 
Table 1 . Pharmacokinetic parameters of newer antidepressants. Based on Refs. 15, 16, 18 and 32.  
 
 Bioavailability 
(%) Protein binding 
(%) Half-life 
(h) Metabolism Active metabolites Inhibitory effect on CYP 
isoenzymes   
SSRI       
Citalopram 95 82 23-45 CYP3A4, CYP2C19,  CYP2D6  CYP2D6 (weak) 
Escitalopram 80 56 27 CYP3A4, CYP2C19, CYP2D6  CYP2D6 (weak) 
Fluoxetine 80 95 2-4 days CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, 
CYP3A4 Norfluoxetine CYP2D6 (potent) 
CYP2C9 (moderate) 
CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 
(weak to moderate) 
CYP1A2 (weak) 
Fluvoxamine <53 77 15-22 CYP1A2, CYP2 D6  CYP1A2 and CYP2C19 
(potent) 
CYP2C9 and CYP3A4 
(moderate) 
CYP2D6 (weak)
Paroxetine >64 93 10-21 CYP2D6 (major), CYP3A4  CYP2D6 (potent) 
CYP1A2, CYP2C9, 
CYP2C19, CYP3A4 (weak) 
Sertraline >44 98 22-36 CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, 
CYP3A4  CYP2D6 (weak to 
moderate) 
CYP1A2, CYP2C9, 
CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 
(weak) 
SNRI       
Desvenlafaxine 80 30 9-15 UGT, CYP3A4 
Excreted unchanged (45%)   
Duloxetine 50 >90 10-12 CYP1A2 (major), CYP2D6  CYP2D6 (moderate) 
Levomilnacipran 92 22 12 
 CYP3A4 (18%), other CYP 
and UGTs Excreted unchanged (58%)   
Milnacipran 85 13 8-10 Glucuronidation (20-30%) 
CYP3A4 (10%) 
Excreted unchanged (50-60%)  CYP3A4 (weak) 38 
Venlafaxine 92 27 5 CYP2D6 (major), CYP3A4 Desvenlafaxine  
Other newer 
antidepressants       
Agomelatine <5 95 1-2 CYP1A2 (90%), CYP2C9 (10%)   
Bupropion 90 84 20 CYP2B6 Hydroxybupropion 
Threohydrobupropion 
Erythrohydrobupropion CYP2D6 (moderate) 
Mirtazapine 50 85 20-40 CYP2D6, CYP3A4, CYP1A2   
Reboxetine >60 97 12-16 CYP3A4   
Vilazodone 72a 96-99 20-24 CYP3A4 (major), CYP2C19, 
CYP2D6, Carboxylesterase   
 CYP2C8 (?) 
Vortioxetine 75 98 57-66 CYP2D6 (major), CYP3A4, 
CYP2C19, CYP2C9, CYP2A6, 
CYP2C8, CYP2B6  
CYP: Cytochrome P450; SNRI: Serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor; SSRI: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor; UGT: Uridine 
diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase.  
aDecreased absorption when not administered with food.39 
Table 2 . Pharmacokinetic parameters of second-generation antipsychotics. Based on Refs. 19, 21, 22 and 35. 
 
 Bioavailability 
(%) 
 Protein 
binding (%) Half-life 
(h) Metabolism Active metabolites 
Amisulpride 43-48 17 12 Unchanged renal excretion   
Aripiprazole 87 99 48-68 CYP2D6, CYP3A4 Dehydroaripiprazole 
Asenapine 35a 95 1-2 UGT 1A4, CYP1A2  
Clozapine 12-81 95 6-33 CYP1A2 (major), 
CYP2C19, CYP3A4, CYP2D6 Norclozapine1 
Iloperidone 96 93 20-24 CYP2D6 (major), CYP3A4 P88,2 P95 
Lurasidone 9-19b 99 18 CYP3A4 ID-14823 
Olanzapine 60-80 93 20-70 CYP1A2 (major), UGT1A4, 
CYP2D6, FMO  
Paliperidone 28 30 24 Minimal hepatic metabolism  
Quetiapine NA 83 5-8 CYP3A4 Norquetiapine 
Risperidone 68 90 3-24 CYP2D6 (major), CYP3A4 9-hydroxyrisperidone 
Ziprasidone 60b 99 4-10 CYP3A4, Aldeh yde oxidase  
CYP: Cytochrome P450; UGT : Uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase.  
aAsenapine is administered sublingually; drinking or eating < 10 minutes after administration may decrease absorption. 
bDecreased absorption when not administered with food. 
1Norclozapine does not appear to have antipsychotic efficacy bu t it may contribute to anticholine rgic effects and hypersalivatio n. 
2It does not cross the blood-brain barrier. It may contribute to peripheral adverse drug reactions. 40 
Table 3 . Summary of pharmacokinetic drug interactions between ne wer antidepressants and second- generation antipsychotics.  
 
Antidepressant Antipsychotic Effect Proposed mechanism 
 References 
Fluoxetine Clozapine Increase in plasma clozapine concentrations (40-70%)  
 Inhibition of various CYP 
isoforms (CYP2D6, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4)  37-40 
 Risperidone Increase in plasma concentrations of the active moiety of 
risperidone by 75% Inhibition of CYP2D6 
and, to a lesser extent, 
CYP3A4 41, 42 
 Olanzapine No change or minimal increase in plasma olanzapine 
concentrations Inhibition of CYP2D6 43 
 Aripiprazole Increase by 45% in plasma concen trations of aripiprazole Inhibition of CYP2D6 
and CYP3A4 46 
 Iloperidone Increase (up to 2-fold) in plasma iloperidone 
concentrations Inhibition of CYP2D6 25, 26 
Paroxetine Clozapine Increase in plasma clozapine conc entrations (20-40%)  Inhibition of CYP2D6 38, 50, 51 
 Risperidone Increase in plasma concentrations of the active moiety of 
risperidone by 40-50% Inhibition of CYP2D6 48, 49 
 Aripiprazole Increase in plasma concentrations of aripiprazole by 40-
50% Inhibition of CYP2D6 52, 53 
 Iloperidone Increase (up to 2-fold) in plasma iloperidone 
concentrations Inhibition of CYP2D6 25, 26 
Fluvoxamine Clozapine Increase (up to 5-10-fold) in plasma clozapine 
concentrations  Inhibition of CYP1A2 
and, to a lesser extent, CYP2C19 and CYP3A4 51, 54-58 
 Olanzapine Increase (up to 2-fold) in plasma olanzapine concentrations Inhibition of CYP1A2 63-66 
 Risperidone No significant changes in plasma risperidone 
concentrations at fluvoxamine dosage of 100 mg/day, 
increase by 26% at fluvoxamine dose of 200 mg/day Inhibition of CYP2D6 
and CYP3A4 68 
 Quetiapine Increase in plasma concentrations of quetiapine by 159% Inhibition of CYP3A4 45 
 Aripiprazole Decrease by 40% in systemic clear ance of aripiprazole Inhibition of CYP3A4 53 
 Asenapine Increase by 29% in the AUC of asenapine at fluvoxamine 
dosage of 50 mg/day Inhibition of CYP1A2 25, 26 41 
Sertraline Risperidone 
 Increased plasma concentrations of risperidone  (36-52%) only 
at high doses of sertraline (150 mg/day) Inhibition of CYP2D6 
 69 
Citalopram/escitalopram Aripipr azole Minimal increase (by 20%) in plasma concentrations of 
aripiprazole and dehydroaripiprazole Inhibition of CYP2D6 46 
Duloxetine Risperidone Minimal increase (by 26%) in plasma concentrations of the 
active moiety of risperidone Inhibition of CYP2D6 83 
 Olanzapine No change or minimal increase in plasma olanzapine 
concentrations Inhibition of CYP2D6 (?) 82, 83 
AUC: Area under the curve; CYP: Cytochrome P450.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 42 
Table 4 . Practical summary of  newer antidepressants  and second-generation antipsychotic (SGA) drug interactions       
ANTIDEPRESSANTS  SGAs  OUTCOME ACTIONS
PK DI . Fluoxetine        
 ↑ level several wks1 after adding fluoxetine 
↓ level several wks1 after D/C fluoxetine In the absence of TDM use dose correction factor:2  
Aripiprazole, iloperidone, risperidone,  0.5 
Clozapine, olanzapine  0.75  
Lurasidone, quetiapine  Unknown in clinical conditions  
Asenapine,  amisulpride, paliperidone, 
ziprasidone  Possibly no clinically relevant changes  
PK DI . Paroxetine       
 ↑ level one wk after adding paroxetine        
↓ level one wk after D/C paroxetine In the absence of TDM use dose correction factor:2  
Aripiprazole, risperidone, iloperidone 0.5 
Clozapine 0.8  
Asenapine,  amisulpride, lurasidone, 
olanzapine paliperidone, quetiapine, 
ziprasidone  Possibly no clinically relevant changes  
PK DI. Fluvoxamine  ↑ level one wk after adding fluvoxamine        
↓ level one wk after D/C fluvoxamine In the absence of TDM use dose correction factor:2  
Clozapine 0.1-0.2. Use TDM; varies according to individual 
Olanzapine 0.5 
Asenapine, aripiprazole, iloperidone, 
lurasidone, quetiapine, risperidoneCaution (not well studied, current approximation  
0.5-0.75)
Amisulpride,  paliperidone, 
ziprasidone  Possibly no clinically relevant changes  
PK DI. Sertraline. It may be 
relevant only in high doses 
 
  
 Aripiprazole, clozapine, iloperidone, 
risperidone ↑ level one wk after adding sertraline           
↓ level one wk after D/C sertraline A. Be aware  
B. Monitor for ADRs (after adding) and lack of 
efficacy (after D/C) 
C. Consider TDM 
Asenapine,  amisulpride, lurasidone, 
olanzapine paliperidone, quetiapine, 
ziprasidone  Possibly no clinically relevant changes 
 
PD DI. Bupropion and 
duloxetine  Aripiprazole, risperidone, iloperidone ↑ level one wk after adding bupropion or 
duloxetine 
↓ level one wk after D/C bupropion or 
duloxetine  A. Be aware  
B. Monitor for ADRs (after adding) and lack of 
efficacy (after D/C) 
C. Consider TDM   
Asenapine,  amisulpride, clozapine,  
lurasidone, olanzapine paliperidone, 
quetiapine ziprasidone  Possibly no clinically relevant changes  
PK DI. Asenapine 
 Paroxetine, venlafaxine ↑ level one wk after adding asenapine         
↓ level one wk after D/C asenapine A. Be aware  
B. Monitor for ADRs (after adding) and lack of 
efficacy (after D/C) 
PD DI. Bupropion  All SGAs Weight loss  Be aware  43 
PD DI. Bupropion  
All SGAs (clozapine>olanzapine, 
quetiapine >other)3 ↑ risk for seizures  Be aware  
PD DI. Bupropion  All SGAs when used in psychosis May rarely cause psychotic exacerbations  Be aware  
PD DI. Mirtazapine  All SGAs Weight gain and increased metabolic ADRs 
↑ sedation risk from most SGAs A. Be aware  
B. Monitor for ADRs 
PD DI. Mirtazapine, 
paroxetine and reboxetine  Clozapine, olanzapine, high quetiapine 
doses ↑ risk for antimuscarinic ADRs A. Be aware  
B. Monitor for ADRs  
PD DI. Desvenlafaxine, 
duloxetine, levominalcipran, 
milnacipran and venlafaxine  Clozapine ↑ risk for tachycardia and/or hypertension A. Be aware  
B. Monitor for ADRs 
PD DI. Most newer 
antidepressants  Aripiprazole, lurasidone, ziprasidone Possible additive risk for nausea and 
vomiting Monitor closely   
PD DI. SSRIs  SGAs Possible additive risk for ↑ QTc  A. Be vigilant (can be lethal) 
B. Consider need for ECG 
C. Torsades de pointes is very rare but additive risk 
factors are family history of sudden death; personal history of syncopes, arrhythmias or heart cond- 
itions; hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, and co-
prescription of other medications that ↑ QTc. Cases 
are more frequent in females aged > 65 years. D. In the US, consider legal risk.  Some SGAPs 
(iloperidone and ziprasidone) have been approved 
with warnings after particular concern for QTc 
prolongation and FDA asked for more studies.  The FDA requires a QTc warning for the use of high 
doses of citalopram. Consider these warnings when 
co-prescribing. 
ADR: Adverse drug reaction; D/C: Discontinuing; FDA: Food and Dr ug Administration; PD DI: Pharmacodynamic drug interaction; PK DI: 
Pharmacokinetic drug interaction; SGA: Se cond-generation antipsychotic; SNRI: Serotoni n and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor; S SRI: Selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor.    
1Norfluoxetine, fluoxetine’s main metabolite , is a more powerful inhibitor than fluox etine and has a very long half-life. Reachi ng norfluoxetine 
steady-state in an average subject may take up to 2-3 months, and 6 months in a non-average patient. 
2A correction factor is used to modify dosing to account for DI. For example, a correction factor of 0.5 indicates that the subs trate dose should be 
halved. The recommendations are based on the limited information available. 
3Drugs preceding ">" will produce a more powerful outcome than the drugs listed after “>”. 
 
 44 
PHARMACODYNAMICS FOR NEWER ANTIDEPRESSANT EFFICACY 
DEPRESSION1
Inhibitors of noradrenaline and serotonin transporter2 
Desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levominalcipran, milnacipran (not approved in the US) and venlafaxine 
Selective inhibitors of the serotonin transporter2 
All SSRIs  
Selective inhibitors of the serotonin tran sporter and serotonin receptor antagonists3 
Vilazodone and vortioxetine 
Inhibitor of the noradrenaline and dopamine transporter2 
Bupropion 
Selective inhibitor of the noradrenaline transporter2 
Reboxetine (not approved in the US) 
Other 
Mirtazapine4 and agomelatine5 (not approved in the US)
OCD 
Inhibitors of the serotonin transporter 
SSRIs (not all are approved in the US6)
ANXIETY 
Probably the same mechanism as antidepressant action7 
Different compounds are approved for different disorders8 but specificity is doubtful  
PAIN 
Inhibition of the noradrenaline transporter9 
Duloxetine and milnacipran are approved in the US for fibromyalgia 
Duloxetine is approved in the US for diabetic peripheral neuropathic and chronic musculoskeletal pain 
WEIGHT LOSS 
Inhibition of the dopamine transporter 
Bupropion (not approved in the US)10 
SMOKING CESSATION 
Inhibition of the dopamine transporter  
Bupropion11 
ATTENTION-DEFICIT HYPERACTVITY DISORDER 
Inhibition of the noradrena line and dopamine transporter  
Bupropion (not approved in the US)12 
INSOMNIA  
Antagonism of brain H 1 receptors 
Mirtazapine (not approved in the US; daily sedation can be a problem)  
Agonism of brain MT 2 receptors 
Agomelatine (not approved in the US)  
STRESS URINARY INCONTINENCE  
Duloxetine (not approved in the US)13 
Not well understood, noradrenergic mechanisms are probably important 
Figure 1 . Pharmacodynamics of efficacy for newer antidepressants  
5-HT: Serotonin receptor; α: Alpha adrenergic receptor; H: Histamine receptor; MT: Melatonin 
receptors; OCD: Obsessive-compulsive disorder; RCT: Randomized clinical trial; SSRI: Selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor.  References were excluded to reduce the total number of references. 
The second author can provide them to interested readers. 
1Different meta-analyses have proposed that 1) escitalopram, mirtazapine, sertraline and 
venlafaxine may be more efficacious and that escita lopram and sertraline have the best profiles for 
efficacy and acceptability; 2) current evidence does not warrant recommending a particular newer 
antidepressant; 3) duloxetine and venlafaxine may have superior efficacy to SSRIs, which 
milnacipran may not have; 4) escitalopram may th e most effective and cost-effective in primary 
care; 5) reboxetine may be less efficacious than  other newer antidepressants; and 6) agomelatine 
may not be superior to placebo. 45 
2Textbooks usually state that most new antidepr essants act by inhibiting reuptake transporters. 
3Vilazadone is described as a dual-acting serotonergic antidepressant that combines selective 5-HT 
reuptake inhibition with partial agonism of the 5-HT 1A receptor. Vortioxetine is decribed as 
combining 5-HT reuptake inhibition  with 5-HT 3A and 5-HT 7 receptor antagonism, 5-HT 1B receptor 
partial agonism, 5-HT 1A receptor agonism. 
4Different textbooks list different me chanisms of action for mirtazapine. Labbate et al. [33] list 
mirtazapine as an α2 adrenergic receptor antagonist but also recognized that it has 5-HT 2A and 5-
HT 2C antagonist properties. Other articles and/or te xtbooks endorse other variants of this theory. 
5Agomelatine is a melatonergic analogue drug acting as a MT 1/MT 2 agonist and a 5-HT 2C 
antagonist.   
6Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine and sertra line are approved in the US for OCD. 
Antidepressants with dual action such as duloxetine, desvenlafaxine and venlafaxine are used off-
label.Vortioxetine has had inconsistent resu lts in generalized anxiety disorder RCTs. 
7There are few attempts to describe the antidepressant pharmacological mechanism in anxiety 
disorders; the literature usually assumes that the various antidepressants work in anxiety using the 
same mechanism as in depression. 
8Duloxetine, escitalopram, paroxetine, and venlafax ine are approved for generalized anxiety in the 
US. Paroxetine, sertraline and venlafaxine are approved for social anxiety in the US. Paroxetine, 
sertraline and venlafaxine are approved for panic disorders in the US. A meta-analysis described the 
following antidepressants as significantly superior  to placebo for panic disorder patients with the 
following increasing order of effectiveness: cita lopram, sertraline, paroxetine, fluoxetine, and 
venlafaxine for panic symptoms and paroxetine, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, citalopram, venlafaxine, 
and mirtazapine for overall anxiety symptoms. Aside from reboxetine and fluvoxamine, all drugs 
were associated with significantly lower dropout rates as compared with placebo. Based on a few agomelatine RCTs and uncontrolled studies, agomel atonine was considered a promising option 
when other pharmacological treatments had failed in anxiety disorders.   
9It is believed that for pain treatment the inhibition of the norepinephrine transporter may be more 
important than the inhibition of the serotonin tran sporter. A review included all antidepressant 
RCTs in pain syndromes including fibromyalgia, painful diabetic neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, and neuropathic pain (or painful neuropathy). Although venlafaxine is not approved in 
the US for pain, some RCTs support its use. The benefits of duloxetine and milnacipran over 
placebo in fibromyalgia are small. 
10A meta-analysis indicated that weight loss with fluoxetine appears to be limited to the acute phase 
of treatment. The combinations bupropion-zonisamide and bupropion-naltrexone are being studied in RCTs for weight loss. 
11Bupropion is approved for smoking cessation in the US.  
12According to a meta-analysis, bupropion is superior  to placebo and effective in adults. However, 
its acceptability and tolerability were not signific antly higher than those of placebo. There is very 
limited data on other antidepressants. 
13Duloxetine can significantly improve the qualit y of life of patients with stress urinary 
incontinence, but it is unclear whether or not benefits are sustainable.  
  46 
PHARMACODYNAMICS FOR NEWER  ANTIDEPRESSANT SAFETY1 
BRAIN 
WEIGHT GAIN2
Mirtazapine>3 paroxetine 
Antagonism of brain H 1  
(antagonism of other receptors  including 5-HT 2C and M may also be relevant for mirtazapine) 
↓ SEIZURE THRESHOLD  
Bupropion>3placebo>3 some new antidepressants4 
Unknown  
DECREASED DOPAMINERGIC ACTIVITY 
Akathisia (rare) 
SSRIs  
Other extrapyramidal symptoms (rare) 
Probably all newer antidepressants5 
Mechanism is not well understood5 
Hyperprolactinemia (rare) 
Probably all newer antidepressants6 
Mechanism is not well understood6 
INCREASED DOPAMINERGIC ACTIVITY 
Psychotic exacerbations (rare) 
Bupropion7 
Inhibition o f the do pamine trans porter
INSOMNIA 
Probably all newer antidepressants except for agomelatine 
Different mechanisms8 
PERIPHERAL (with/without brain component) 
NAUSEA AND VOMITING 
Desvenlafaxine, duloxetine and venlafaxine >3SSRIs,3,9 vilazodone10 vortioxetine10>3levominalcipran and milnacipran 
Possibly inhibition of the serotonin transporter11 
TACHYCARDIA and/or HYPERTENSION12
Desvenlafaxine, duloxetine (no hypertension), levominalcipran, milnacipran, reboxetine and venlafaxine 
Inhibition of the noradrenaline transporter  
DIARRHEA 
Sertraline,13 vilazodone and vortioxetine 
Unknown 
SEXUAL ADRs 
SNRIs and SSRIs14 
Serotonergic mechanisms15 
HYPERLIPIDEMIA 
Secondary to weight gain  (see above) and possible direct effects on triglyceride levels 
Mirtazapine16 
ANTICHOLINERGIC ADRs 
(Tachycardia, constipation, dry mouth,  urinary retention, blurred vision, ↓ sweating)   
Mirtazapine, paroxetine17 and possibly  reboxetine18 
Antagonism of peripheral muscarinic receptors
URINARY SYMPTOMS (dysuria, urinary retention and sensation on incomplete bladder emptying)  
Desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levominalcipran, milnacipran, reboxetine and venlafaxine   
Not well understood, probably noradrenergic mechanisms are important  
MYDRIASIS (risk for uncontrolled narrow-angle glaucoma)  
Desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levominalcipran, milnacipran, reboxetine and venlafaxine   
Inhibition of the noradrenaline transporter  
HYPERHIDROSIS 
Desvenlafaxine, duloxetine, levominalcipran, milnacipran, reboxetine and venlafaxine   
Not well understood, probably noradrenergic mechanisms are important 
DISCONTINUATION SYNDROME  (acute headaches, dizziness and nausea)19 
Paroxetine and venlafaxine>3other>3fluoxetine>3agomelatine and reboxetine (absent)  47 
Not well understood19
RISK FOR BLEEDING (rare but potentially lethal):  
SSRIs usually combined with other drugs with  hemorrhagic risk or delivery or surgery  
Serotonin depletion in platelets due to inhibition of serotonin transporter and other mechanisms20 
SEROTONIN SYNDROME (very rare but potentially lethal)  
Usually require combinations of several drugs increasing serotonin activity  
Increased serotonin activity  in brain and periphery 
SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH ASSOCIATED WITH ARRYTHMIAS (very rare) 
Torsades de pointes  
Citalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline21 
Antagonism of heart repolarizing potassium channels 
Risk for patients with Brugada syndrome22  
Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine and paroxetine23 
Antagonism of heart sodium, potassium or calcium channel 
NEUTROPENIA (rare) 
Mirtazapine 
Unknown 
HYPONATREMIA (rare, more frequent in geriatric females)  
Probably all newer antidepressants24 
SIADH24 
LIVER INJURY 
Live enzyme elevations 
Agomelatine (up to 5% in 50 mg/day)>3probably rare in all other newer antidepressants  
Unknown 
Life-threatening liver-injury 
Agomelatine, bupropion and duloxetine>3other>3citalopram, escitalopram, paroxetine and fluvoxamine  
Poorly understood and considered idiosync ratic (immune-allergic or metabolic)  
Figure 2 . Pharmacodynamics of safety for newer antidepressants. 
5-HT: Serotonin receptor; ADR: Adverse drug re action; ECG: Electrocard iogram; H: Histamine 
receptor; M: Muscarinic receptor; TCA: Tricyclic antidepressant; RCT: Randomized clinical trial; SIADH: Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic  hormone; SNRI: Serotonin and noradrenaline 
reuptake inhibitor; SSRI: Selectiv e serotonin reuptake inhibitor.  References were excluded to 
reduce the total number of references. The second author can provide them to interested readers. 
1The more comprehensive review comparing new antidepressant safety did not include more 
recently marketed compounds. 
2Agomelatine is a 5-HT2 C antagonist. Insufficient data is available on long-term treatment to rule it 
out as a cause of weight gain. Case reports indicate d some patients may gain significant weight with 
agomelatine long-term treatment.   
3Drugs preceding ">" will produce this ADR more frequently than drugs following ">". 
4A comprehensive literature review described bupropion as the only newer antidepressant 
associated with increased seizure risk in RCTs. As a matter of fact, when other newer 
antidepressants (including citalopram, duloxetine, escitalopram, fluoxetine, mirtazapine, paroxetine, 
sertraline, and venlafaxine) were combined, they a ppear to have less risk than placebo.  Moreover, 
animal studies, particularly of fluoxetine, suggest that it may have anti-seizure activity.  In case 
reports, newer antidepressants other than bupropi on have occasionally been associated with 
seizures.   
5Extrapyramidal symptoms have been reported with  different classes of antidepressants, are not 
dose-related, and can develop with short-term or long-term use. 
6Symptomatic hyperprolactinemia has been reported with nearly all antidepressants. Incidence rates 
are not clearly established and symptoms were ve ry rare. The mechanism by which antidepressants 
may cause hyperprolactinemia is not fully understood, though several theories have been 
postulated, such as serotonin stimulation of GABAergic neurons and indirect modulation of 
prolactin release by serotonin. 48 
7The literature is somewhat contradictory but, in selected cases, bupropion appears to be associated 
with the induction of psychotic symptoms in addition to the precipitation or worsening of an 
existing psychotic syndrome. 
8Proposed mechanisms: 1) SSRIs may cause insomnia by 5-HT 2 stimulation; 2) SNRIs and 
reboxetine may cause insomnia by blocking the noradrenaline transporter; and 3) mirtazapine may 
have a reverse-dose response effect with sedation a lower doses and with insomnia at higher doses. H
1 antagonism is predominant at lower doses, while increased noradrenerigic activity is 
predominant at higher doses.   
9Nausea and vomiting are the most frequent causes of discontinuation of newer antidepressants 
during the first 30 days of treatment. They are 10%  more frequent in venlafaxine than in SSRIs.  
10There are no comparisons of vilazodone and vortio xetine with other newer antidepressants. The 
estimate of the frequency of nausea is a rough estimate based on placebo-controlled RCTs.  
11Possibly explained by inhibition of the serotonin transporter. 
12In a comprehensive review comparing newer antide pressant safety, venlafaxine was significantly 
associated with hypertension when compared with other newer antidepressants. Desvenlafaxine and 
milnacipran also appear to cause hypertension.  Duloxetine has not been consistently associated 
with hypertension; increases in blood pressure have been mild, but caution should be used in 
patients with hypertension. 
13Comprehensive reviews and meta-analyses agree that sertraline is associated with more diarrhea 
risk than other newer antidepressants. The literature does not provide a mechanistic explanation for 
this increased risk. 
14Bupropion and mirtazapine may not be different than placebo. Agomelatine and reboxetine are 
probably associated with very low risk for sexual ADRs. Vilazodone appears to have low risk for 
sexual ADRs but is associated with more sexual ADRs than placebo. 
15It has been proposed that sexual ADRS may be related to serotonergic stimulation of 5-HT 2 and 5-
HT 3 receptors but has a complex origin probably also  involving the effect of 5-HT on nitric oxide 
production as well as other systems. 
16Mirtazepine may increase triglyceride levels but this has not been well studied.  
17Mirtazepine and paroxetine have low antimuscarinic activity. There is some data that citalopram, 
escitalopram, fluoxetine and sertraline may have potential to show antimuscarinic activity in some 
circumstances.  
18Reboxetine frequently causes dry mouth and constipation, and more rarely urinary retention.  It 
has been proposed that the noradrenergic mechanism may explain these antimuscarinic symptoms 
because 1) reboxetine’s affinity for muscarinic rece ptors is too low to be relevant at therapeutic 
doses, and 2) no metabolites with greater antimuscarinic activity have been identified.  
19SSRI discontinuation included somatic symptoms such as dizziness, lethargy, and sleep 
disturbances, as well as psychological symptoms su ch as anxiety/agitation, irritability, and poor 
concentration. The literature provides very limited information on possible mechanisms. 
20It has been proposed that an SSRI-induced increa se in gastric acid secretion may explain the 
gastrointestinal bleeding risk and that SSRI-r elated effects on platelet reactivity, endothelial 
reactivity, and inflammatory markers may explain the protective effect against ischemic heart 
disease. 
21A comprehensive literature review indicated that citalopram (8 cases), fluoxetine (6 cases) and 
sertraline (1 case) can rarely be associated with torsade de pointes.   
22Brugada syndrome is identified by a specific ECG pattern (pseudo right bundle branch block and 
persistent ST elevation in leads V1 to V3) and high incidence of ventricular fibrillation in the 
absence of structural heart disease. Brugada syndrome is a channelopathy explained by genetic abnormalities in the cardiac sodium, potassium or calcium channels.  
23Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, and paroxetine should preferably be avoided.   49 
24All newer antidepressants are probably able to cause hyponatremia on rare occasions. It usually 
happens in geriatric patients, particularly females. The literature usually describes these cases as 
SIADH but it is not clear why antidepressants can cause SIADH. 
 50 
PHARMACODYNAMICS FOR SGA EFFICACY 
ANTAGONISM OF D 2 RECEPTORS AT BASAL GANGLIA AND CORTEX1 
Explains antipsychotic efficacy in schizophrenia  
All SGAs are approved in the US except amisulpride2 
Explains antipsychotic efficacy in other psychoses  
None are approved in the US3 
Possibly explains anti-manic properties 
Aripiprazole, asenapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone and ziprasidone are approved in the US as montherapy4 
Possibly explains postulated mood-stabilizing properties (maintenance in bipolar disorder) 
Aripiprazole and olanzapine are approved in the US as monotherapy5 
Possibly explains anti-irritability action in autism 
Aripiprazole and risperidone are approved in the US 
Possibly explains postulated anti-OCD properties when added to serotonergic 
antidepressants 
None are approved in the US but reasonable data exist on risperidone and quetiapine 
DEPRESSION 
Treatment of bipolar depression 
Lurasidone  and quetiapine are approved in the US as monotherapy6 
Adjunctive therapy of treatment-resistant depression 
Aripiprazole, quetiapine, olanzapine are approved in the US7  
Different theories on mechanism of action8 
Figure 3 . Pharmacodynamics of efficacy for SGAs 
5-HT: Serotonin receptor; α: Alpha adrenergic receptor; AP: Antipsychotic; D: Dopamine receptor; 
OCD: Obsessive-compulsive disorder; RCT: Rando mized clinical trial; SGA: Second-generation 
antipsychotic.  This figure is an update from Figure 4 in a prior article [35]. References were 
excluded to reduce the total number of references. The second author can provide them to interested 
readers. 
1All APs are D 2 antagonists except aripiprazole, which is a partial agonist (some authors have 
proposed that occasionally aripiprazole can be associated with worsening of psychosis). Brain 
imaging studies indicate that antipsychotic efficacy may be associated with D 2 antagonism at the 
basal ganglia and cortex. 
2Amisulpride is approved in Europe but has not been studied for approval in the US. 
3No SGA is approved for psychosis (or behaviors) in  dementing illnesses. Paliperidone is approved 
for schizoaffective disorder in the US. 
4Aripiprazole, asenapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and olanzapine have been approved for adjunctive 
therapy with lithium or valproate. Other SGAs have not been studied in RCTs.  
5Quetiapine has been approved for adjunctive therapy with lithium or valproate. 
6Lurasidone has been approved for adjunctive  therapy with lithium or valproate. 
7Olanzapine is approved in combination with fluoxetine.  Risperidone had some positive results in 
RCTs. 
8The mechanisms proposed in bipolar depression include: i) a high ratio between 5-HT 2A/D2 
receptors, and ii) a possible role for 5-HT 2A or α2 antagonism. A mechanism proposed for 
adjunctive treatment in major depressive disorder is a 5-HT 2A antagonism that may be shared by 
approved SGAs. Specific compound mechanisms include:  i) 5-HT 1A partial agonism only for 
aripiprazole and norquetiapine, the main active metabolite of quetiapine; ii) 5-HT2 C antagonism 
and inhibition of the noradrenalin e transporter by norquetiapine, and iii) antagonism at presynaptic 
α2, 5-HT2C, and 5-HT7 receptors by norquetiapine. Ziprasidone at clinical doses blocks reuptake 
of serotonin, noradrenaline and dopamine, which may suggest the potential for antidepressant 
properties, but the only ziprasidone trial in bipolar depression indicated this compound had no more 
efficacy than placebo.   51 
PHARMACODYNAMICS FOR SGA SAFETY 
BRAIN 
EXTRAPYRAMIDAL SYMPTOMS 
Amisulpride, paliperidone, risperidone>1 asenapine, iloperidone, lurasidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone>1aripiprazole, 
quetiapine>1 clozapine2 
Antagonism of D 2 receptors at nigrostriatal system2 
HYPERPROLACTINEMIA  
Amisulpride, paliperidone, risperidone>1 asenapine, iloperidone ,lurasidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone>1 quetiapine, 
clozapine>1 aripiprazole3  
Antagonism of D 2 receptors at tubero-infundibular system4 
WEIGHT GAIN 
Clozapine, olanzapine>1 asenapine, paliperidone, quetiapine, risperidone > 
1amisulpride, aripiprazole, iloperidone, lurasidone, ziprasidone5 
Antagonism of brain H 1 (and others including 5-HT 2C and M) receptors6  
SEDATION 
Clozapine >1asenapine, olanzapine >1 quetiapine >1 other SGAs7 
Antagonism of brain H 1 receptors8 
MEMORY IMPAIRMENT 
Possible with clozapine9 
Associated with high antagonism of brain muscarinic receptors in schizophrenia patients6 
↓ SEIZURE THRESHOLD  
Clozapine >1 olanzapine, quetiapine >1 other SGAs10 
D2, H 1 and α1 receptor antagonism, actions at neurosteroids or by pharmacological kindling11
OC SYMPTOMS 
Clozapine  
Antagonism of serotonergic receptors  
PERIPHERAL (with/without brain component) 
HYPERGLYCEMIA/HYPERLIPIDEMIA 
Clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine12 
Secondary to weight gain  (see above)  
Direct effects on glucose/lipid metabolism 
SEXUAL ADRs 
Clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine >1 aripiprazole, quetiapine, ziprasidone13 
Hyperprolactinemia  (see above)  and antagonism of peripheral α, M and H receptors14 
ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION 
Clozapine, iloperidone, risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone15 
Antagonism of peripheral α1 receptors 
HYPERTENSION 
Clozapine  
Not well understood; probably involves noradrenergic mechanisms  
ANTICHOLINERGIC SYMPTOMS 
(Tachycardia, constipation, dry mouth, ur inary retention, or blurred vision)   
16Clozapine >1 olanzapine >1 quetiapine  
Antagonism of peripheral muscarinic receptors 
NAUSEA 
Aripiprazole, lurasidone, ziprasidone 
Unknown17 
SWALLOWING IMPAIRMENT AND ASPIRATION RISK (potentially lethal) 
(probably important in intellectual disability and dementia) 
Probably all SGAs but not well studied 
Unknown18 
SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH ASSOCIATED WITH ARRYTHMIAS (very rare) 
Torsades de pointes 
Amisulpride, risperidone and ziprasidone19 
Antagonism of heart potassium repolarizing channel20 
AGRANULOCYTOSIS 
Clozapine (<1%) 52 
Probably immunological 
NEUTROPENIA (very rare) 
Possibly ALL 
Unknown  
RISK FOR VENOUS THROMBOEMBOLISM (very rare) 
Clozapine> other SGAs21  
Not well understood22 
RISK FOR HEAT STROKE (very rare) 
Most published cases also involve FGAs23 
Dopamine antagonism interferes  with temperature regulation 
Muscarinic antagonism from antiparkinsonian or from AP (see anticholinergic) inhibits sweating  
RISK FOR HYPONATREMIA (very rare) 
There are case reports of both FGAs and SGAs 
It is difficult to establish the relationship with APs since 2/3 patients had polydipsia 
LIVER ENZYME ELEVATIONS 
Clozapine and olanzapine (<5%) >1 probably rare in all other SGAs  
Unknown  
Figure 4 . Pharmacodynamics of safety for SGAs 
5-HT: Serotonin receptor; ADR:  Adverse drug reaction; AP: Antipsychotic; D: Dopamine receptor; 
FGAP: First-generation antipsychotic; H: Hist amine receptor; M: Muscarinic receptor; OC: 
Obsessive-compulsive; SGA: Second-generation an tipsychotic. This figure is an update from 
Figure 5 in  a prior article  [33]. References were excluded to re duce the total number of references. 
The second author can provide them to interested readers. 
1Drugs preceding ">" will produce this ADR more frequently than drugs following ">". 
2Data from a comprehensive review supplemented with data on asenapine, iloperidone, and 
lurasidone. There are three major extrapyramidal symptoms: acute dystonic reactions, parkinsonian 
symptoms and akathisia, which are associated with the same common mechanism of D 2 receptor 
antagonism of the nigrostriatal system, but minor differences may exist among mechanisms and 
compounds. For example, aripiprazole is thought to have little risk for extrapyramidal symptoms 
except for akathisia. Any attempt to summarize all 3 extrapyramidal symptoms together is a gross 
simplification.  However, there is not enough meta-analytic data to compare antipsychotics 
according to their risk for causing acute dystonic reactions, for causing parkinsonian symptoms, or 
for causing akathisia.      
3Data from a comprehensive review supplemented with data on asenapine, iloperidone and 
lurasidone.  
4All APs are D 2 antagonists except aripiprazole, a partial agonist. The lower propensity of SGAs 
(other than aripiprazole) when compared to FGAs  to cause extrapyramidal symptoms is explained 
by two theories: i) a high ratio between 5-HT 2A/D2 receptors, and ii) low affinity and fast 
dissociation from D 2 (only clozapine and quetiapine will be “atypical” since they are displaced by 
endogenous dopamine).  
5Data from a comprehensive review supplemented with data on asenapine, iloperidone and 
lurasidone.    
6Studies relating weight gain within various APs and receptor affinity indicate that H 1 affinity is the 
best predictor of weight gain. Some animal studi es indicate that other receptor (particularly 5-HT 2C 
and muscarinic) antagonism may be needed to produce hyperphagia in animal studies.  
7Data from a comprehensive review supplemented with data on asenapine and iloperidone.   
8H1 antagonism is probably the major contributing mechanism to sedation but other receptor 
antagonism may also contribute.  Aripiprazole and ziprasidone have also been associated with early insomnia and activation. It is unknown whether these compounds’ pharmacodynamic differences or 
individual susceptibility explain this activation.  
9Antagonism of M 1 and M 2 receptors has been associated with impaired learning and memory in 
animal studies. It is difficult to detect cognitive im pairment in the context of schizophrenia but high 
antimuscarinic activity was associated with worse memory functioning in an AP meta-analysis.  53 
Clozapine had a worse profile than risperidone and olanzapine.  Clozapine has definitively high 
antimuscarinic activity. Olanzapine and high doses of quetiapine may also be associated with 
clinically relevant antimuscarinic activity. Thus, olanzapine and high doses of quetiapine may 
occasionally be associated with memory impairment.  
10A comprehensive review provided no comparative da ta on amisulpride, asenapine, iloperidone, or 
lurasidone. 
11Proposed mechanisms. 
12Other SGAs may not have direct effects on glucos e or lipid metabolism, but this has not been 
completely established.  
13A meta-analysis provided no comparative data on  amisulpride, asenapine, iloperidone, or 
lurasidone.  
14Priapism is rare but is the most severe sexual ADR and is probably explained by α1 (and possible 
α2) receptor antagonism.  
15Clozapine, iloperidone, risperidone, quetiapine, and ziprasidone need dose titration to avoid 
orthostatic hypotension. Orthostatic changes are not seen after intramuscular injections of 
ziprasidone, so ziprasidone probably has low risk of orthostatic hypotension. Other SGAs with 
lower risk for orthostatic hypotension are olanzapine  (particularly in intramuscular preparation) and 
asenapine.  
16Clozapine causes hypersalivation. It is believed that clozapine may be a partial agonist at the M 1 
and M 3 receptors. Norclozapine, clozapine’s main metabolite, is definitively an allosteric agonist of 
M1. In rare cases, severe constipation can lead to AP-induced paralytic ileus and other potentially 
lethal complications.  
17Antipsychotics, because of their dopaminergic antagonism, are considered anti-emetic drugs, so it 
is not known what mechanism explains the association of these three drugs with nausea in the first week of treatment. Other SGAs may also occasionally be associated with nausea.       
18There are some cases that dysphagia is associated with extrapyramidal symptoms. It is possible 
that clozapine, due to frequent hypersalivation a nd high risk for sedation, has greater potential to 
cause aspiration pneumonia. 
19A recent pharmacoepidemiology study suggested that ziprasidone and amisulpride had potential 
torsadogenic risk similar to haloperidol and a revi ew of cases reports proposed that risperidone may 
rarely cause torsades de pointes. 
20These channels are encoded by the human ether-a-go-go-related gene (HERG). 
21Based on case reports, a recent review indicated that clozapine may have greater risk than other 
SGAs. 
22Several hypotheses have been proposed, such as body weight gain, sedation, enhanced platelet 
aggregation, increased levels of antiphospholipid antibodies, hyperprolactinemia and 
hyperhomocysteinemia. 
23Most published cases including SGAs also had FGAs co-prescribed. 
 
 