Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria1Solubility of Salts - KspWe now focus on another aqueous equilibrium system, slightly soluble salts.These salts have a Solubility Product Constant, Ksp.(We saw this in 1B with the sodium tetraborate solubility lab.)For example, Ksp is deﬁned for Cu(OH)2(s) as follows:Cu(OH)2(s) ⾮ Cu2+(aq) + 2 OH–(aq) Ksp=[Cu2+][OH–]2 = 4.8x10–20 at 25 °CFor a list of  Ksp values at 25°C, refer to Appendix D-Table D.3.These slightly soluble salts dissolve until Ksp is satisﬁed. At this point, we say the solution is saturated, and no more salt will dissolve. In terms of Qsp we have the following possibilities:1.Qsp < Ksp 2.Qsp = Ksp 3.Qsp > Ksp 
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria2Ksp SolubilityWrite the chemical equilibrium and the Ksp equilibrium-constant expression for the solubility of Ca3(PO4)2.Solubility and Ksp•The solubility of salts (saturated solution) are often expressed in one or more of the following units with the temperature also specified:mol/L (molar solubility)g/L , g/mL, g/100 mL or mg/L  (Note that these are NOT densities.)ppm or ppb (parts per million or parts per billion) for very insoluble salts.•The above units for solubility are directly related to Ksp through equilibrium stoichiometry. Let’s do some examples.
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria3Solubility and Ksp1.What is the molar solubility of Ca3(PO4)2 at 25°C given a Ksp of 2.0x10–29?1.1.What is the concentration of calcium ions?1.2.What is this solubility in g/L solution?1.3.What is this solubility in parts per million (ppm) and parts per billion (ppb)? (Assume a soln density of 1.0 g/mL)ppm=mass of component in solntotal mass of solnx106ppb=mass of component in solntotal mass of solnx109
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria4Ksp from Experimental DataA saturated solution of magnesium hydroxide in water has a pH of 10.38.  Calculate the Ksp for magnesium hydroxide. Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria5Relative Molar Solubility of SaltsThe relative MOLAR solubility of salts (saturated solution) can be determined by comparing Ksp values. The greater the Ksp the more ions are in solution, hence the greater the molar solubility.However, you can only directly compare salts that give equivalent numbers of ions in solution.For example, you can compare the Ksp’s of all salts with a 1:1 ion ratio like: AgBr, BaSO4 etc.Or, you could compare Ksp’s of all salts with 1:2 and 2:1 ion ratios like: BaCl2, Ag2SO4, etc.But you can’t compare the Ksp AgBr directly to the Ksp Ag2SO4 to determine which is more soluble.Which salt has a greater molar solubility soluble: AgBr or BaSO4?
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria6Ksp Values and Solubility Calcs. LIMITATIONS EXIST!Unfortunately, solubilities calculated using Ksp values sometimes deviate appreciably from the experimentally measured solubilities! Why?Reason 1 of 2: Some salts do not completely dissociate 100% into their respective ions. For example, PbCl2 exists in three different forms in water, each with its own individual K value.1.PbCl2(s) ⾮ PbCl2(aq) (no ions)K = 1.1x10-3; S = 0.0011 2.PbCl2(s) ⾮ PbCl +(aq) + Cl–(aq) (two ions)K = 6.9x10-4; S = 0.0263.PbCl2(s) ⾮ Pb2+(aq) + 2 Cl–(aq) (all ions)K = 1.7x10-5; S = 0.016The experimental solubility of PbCl2 is 0.036 M. Over twice the value predicted by Ksp alone.Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria7
Reason 2: Some anions in salts are strongly basic. They react with water in a Kb equilibrium. This reduces the anion concentration available to satisfy Ksp. This in turn increases the solubility of the salt. The three common ions that are basic enough to have considerable reaction with water are: S2-, CO32-, and PO43-.For example consider Ca3(PO4)2:The Ksp equilibrium is: Ca3(PO4)2 ⾮ 3 Ca+(aq) + 2 PO43–(aq)Ksp = 2.0x10–29Write the chemical reaction for the Kb equilibrium (hydrolysis) for PO43– (aq):Kb = ? (How do you determine the value?)The experimental solubility of Ca3(PO4)2 is somewhat higher than predicted by Ksp alone because some phosphate ion is removed from solution through the Kb reaction.Ksp values are still useful for estimating solubilities, predicting trends and predicting relative solubilities.  We just need to keep in mind that they have limitations!We previously determined the molar solubility of Ca3(PO4)2(s) using Ksp alone.  Now let’s determine its solubility including Kb with Ksp to ﬁnd Knet.Ksp Values and Solubility Calcs. LIMITATIONS
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria8The Ksp of Sulﬁde Salts INCLUDES KbSince the sulﬁde ion is very basic, Kb signiﬁcantly increases the solubility of sulﬁde salts. For the metal sulﬁdes, the  Ksp values are actually Knet for the overall equilibrium that includes two processes:1) the dissolution of the metal sulﬁde2) the Kb hydrolysis reaction of the the sulﬁde ion.(See the footnote at the bottom of Table D.3 in our text book)For CuS write the chemical reaction for each of the above equilibria, and for the net equilibrium:1. K12. Kb >> 1Net: Ksp = K1*Kb = 6x10-37 (Table D.3)Determine the pH of a saturated CuS solution.Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria9Solubility of Salts and the Common Ion Effect•Like the percent ionization of weak acids and bases, the solubility of salts is inﬂuenced by the presence of a common ion. These salts are less soluble when a common ion is present just like a weak acid’s ionization is limited in the presence of signiﬁcant conjugate base.
Play Movie
1.The Ksp of silver iodide in water is 8.3x10–17 M. Calculate the molar solubility of silver iodide in:1.Pure water2.0.010 M NaI (Common Ion Effect)
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria10Solubility of Salts and the Common Ion Effect1.The barium ion, Ba2+(aq), is poisonous when ingested.  The lethal does in mice is about 12 mg Ba2+ per kg of body mass.  Despite this fact, BaSO4 is widely used in medicine to obtain X-ray images of the gastrointestinal tract since Ba is a very good x-ray absorbing element.a)Explain why BaSO4(s) is safe to ingest, even though Ba2+(aq) is poisonous.b)Calculate the concentration of Ba2+, in milligrams per liter, in saturated BaSO4(aq) at 25°C.
c)Soluble MgSO4 is often mixed with BaSO4 when ingested. What function does the MgSO4 serve?Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria11Solubility of Salts with pH AdjustmentsWe have already seen that basic salts containing S2-, CO32-, and PO43- ions are more soluble in water than expected because of the reaction of the basic anion with water through Kb.•All salts that contain a basic anion will have their solubility increased in an acidic solution. In acidic solutions the basic anion reacts with the acid, forcing more of the salt to dissolve to reach equilibrium.For example, PbF2 and Mg(OH)2+ are practically insoluble in water. However, they are very soluble in dilute acids.
Play Movie
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria12Solubility of Salts with pH Adjustments1.Which of the following slightly soluble salts will be more soluble in acidic solution than pure water? For those where the solubility increases, write the net ionic chemical reaction that occurs when a strong acid is present in solution:a)Al(OH)3(s)b)BaSO4(s)c)BaC2O4(s)d)PbCl2Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria13Solubility and pH1.Calculate the molar solubility of iron (II) hydroxide (Ksp = 7.9x10-16) ina)A solution buffered at pH=7.00:
b)What could you say about the solubility of iron (II) hydroxide in a solution buffered at pH=10.00
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria14Solubility and pH1.A chief component in marble is calcium carbonate.  Marble has been widely used for statues and ornamental work on buildings, but marble is readily attacked by acids.  Assume that the overall reaction that occurs in a dilute acid isCaCO3(s) + H3O+(aq) ⾮ Ca2+(aq) + HCO3–(aq) + H2O(l)Determine the equilibrium constant for this reaction* and then determine the solubility of calcium carbonate in a buffer with pH = 5.6 (pH stays constant).*Hint: What combination of reactions yields the overall reaction?Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria15Solubility of Salts and pH-ApplicationsA principle cause of sinkhole formation: dissolution of limestone (CaCO3) by naturally acidic rain water as it percolates through the bedrock.  Voids in the bed rock can cause sudden collapse of the overlying ground. 
Dissolved CaCO3Sinkhole formingSinkhole collapses
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria16Sinkhole Formation
The large sinkhole shown here has destroyed several buildings and part of a highway.
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria171.Two of the main crystalline components of kidney stones are calcium phosphate and calcium oxalate.  What happens to the solubility of these compounds as pH is increased?2.Tooth enamel consists mainly of a mineral called hydroxyapatite, Ca5(PO4)3(OH)(s), Ksp= 6.8x10–37, that is insoluble in pure water.  When acids dissolve tooth enamel, the result is tooth decay.  Write the net ionic equation that occurs between hydroxyapatite and H3O+(aq). Note, the phosphate ions are also pronated along with the hydroxide.3.Fluoridation of water and the use of ﬂuoride toothpaste causes the OH– ion in hydroxyapatite to be replaced with F– forming Ca5(PO4)3F (Ksp=6.8x10–60). Suggest a reason why ﬂuoride helps prevent tooth decay.Solubility of Salts and pH-Applications
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria18Complex Ion Formation, KfComplex ions are ions that usually contain a transition metal cation and one or more ligands. A ligand is either a neutral molecule or an anion that bonds to the metal cation through a Lewis acid-base reaction:Metal Ion:  Lewis acid - LIMITING REACTANTLigand:  Lewis Base - EXCESS REACTANTAg+(aq) + 2 NH3(aq) ⾮ Ag(NH3)2+(aq)  Kf = 1.7x107 = ? (Write the expression)
•What can you conclude about the favorability of complex ion formation?•What can you conclude about the free (uncomplexed) metal cation concentration in solutions where a complex ion can form and the ligand is in excess?Other Aspects of Ionic EquilibriaDetermine the concentration of free (uncomplexed) silver ions in solution when 5.0 mL of a 6.0 M ammonia solution (ligand) is added to 45.0 mL of a 0.10 M silver nitrate solution (metal cation).
19Complex Ion Formation, Kf
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria20Complex Ion Formation and SolubilityFormation of complex ions is one way to dissolve “insoluble” salts. Consider the following sequence of additions to a solution containing Ag+ ions.
Precipitation of AgClComplex ion formationPrecipitation of AgBrComplex ion formation
AgCl is precipitated by adding NaCl(aq) to AgNO3(aq)The AgCl is dissolved by adding excess aqueous NH3The silver-ammonia  complex ion is changed to insoluble AgBr on addition of NaBr(aq).The AgBr is dissolved by adding excess Na2S2O3(aq).Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria21Complex Ion Formation and SolubilityUsing equilibrium constants (Ksp and Kf) we can show why each process in the previous illustration can be made favorable.Step (a):Precipitation of AgCl (Ksp = 1.8x10-10)Ag+(aq) + Cl–(aq) ⾮ AgCl(s)  Kppt = ?What concentration of Cl–(aq) is required to precipitate 99.9% of the Ag+(aq) ions from a 0.10 M AgNO3(aq) solution.  What mass of NaCl (molar mass = 58.44 g/mol) must be added to 100.0 mL of the solution to accomplish this? (Assume that the volume change of the solution is negligible upon addition of the NaCl.)
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria22Complex Ion Formation and SolubilityStep (b):AgCl(s) dissolves when NH3(aq) is added:AgCl(s) ⾮ Ag+(aq) + Cl-(aq) Ksp = 1.8x10–10Ag+(aq) + 2 NH3(aq) ⾮ Ag(NH3)2+(aq)Kf = 1.7x107AgCl(s) + 2 NH3(aq) ⾮ Ag(NH3)2+(aq) + Cl–(aq) Knet = ?A high concentration of the ligand, NH3(aq), in solution ensures that almost all the AgCl(s) will dissolve. This is an application of Le Chatelier’s Principle.This is a key point for dissolving insoluble salts by formation of a complex ion:Salt + Ligand —> Complex ion + AnionKnet = Ksp*KfOther Aspects of Ionic Equilibria23Step (b): What is the molar solubility of AgCl(s) ina)pure H2O(l):
b)a solution where the concentration of NH3(aq) begins at 0.10 M:Calculations: Complex Ion Formation and Solubility
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria24Step (c): Ag(NH3)2+(aq) precipitates as AgBr(s) when NaBr(aq) is added.Find Knet for this system.Determine the concentration of complexed ion still in solution where the Ag(NH3)2+(aq) and NaBr(aq) concentrations both begin at 0.10 M.Calculations: Complex Ion Formation and SolubilityOther Aspects of Ionic Equilibria25Step (d): AgBr(s) dissolves as Na2S2O3(aq) is added. (Write the net ionic equation for the reaction below.)Crystals of AgBr can be removed from black and white photographic ﬁlm by reacting the AgBr(s) with aqueous sodium thiosulfate.  In order to dissolve 2.5 g of AgBr in 1.00 L of solution, what concentration of thiosulfate ion is needed in solution at equilibrium?
Now calculate how many grams of solid Na2S2O3 (molar mass = 158.11g/mol ) must be added to dissolve the AgBr.Complex Ion Formation and Solubility
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria26Amphoterism of Metal Oxides and HydroxidesDeﬁnition of amphoteric: An amphoteric substance is slightly soluble in water, but soluble in either acidic or basic solutions.Example Al3+: (waters of hydration omitted for clarity)1.Al(OH)3(s) + 3 H+(aq) ⾮ Al3+(aq) + 3 H2O(l)2.Al3+(aq) + OH–(aq) ⾮ AlOH2+(aq)3.AlOH2+(aq) + OH–(aq) ⾮ Al(OH)2+(aq)4.Al(OH)2+(aq) + OH–(aq) ⾮ Al(OH)3(s)5. Al(OH)3(s) + OH–(aq) ⾮ Al(OH)4–(aq)} Weakly basic solution, 7 < pH < 9 Strongly basic solution, pH > 10 Basic solution, pH ≈ 10Other amphoteric oxides and hydroxides:Cr3+, Zn2+, and Sn2+Each will complex a different # of hydroxide ions - you will have to check a table of Kf values.pH = 10pH << 10pH > 10 Acidic solution, pH < 7
pptOther Aspects of Ionic Equilibria27Zinc hydroxide is insoluble in water (Ksp= 3.0x10–16), but amphoteric.  Write net ionic equations to show why Zn(OH)2 is readily soluble in the following solutions:(a) CH3COOH(aq)(b) NH3(aq): Zn2+ ions form the following complex ion: [Zn(NH3)4]2+ with a Kf = 4.1x108(c) OH–(aq) Zn2+ ions form the following complex ion: [Zn(OH)4] 2- with a Kf = 4.6x1017(c.1) What is the minimum pH required to dissolve 1.5 g of Zn(OH)2 in a liter of solution?Amphoterism of Metal Oxides and Hydroxides
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria28Precipitation Reactions and Separation of IonsRecall from previous slides about solubility:	Qsp < Ksp : unsaturated soln. - no precipitation.	Qsp = Ksp: saturated soln. - equilibrium.Qsp > Ksp: supersaturated soln. - a ppt. should form.Using Ksp values:1.We can determine if a ppt will form when two solutions are mixed that contain a cation and an anion that can combine to form a slightly soluble salt.2.We can determine if different cations in solution can be quantitatively separated from each other by selective precipitation. In other words, we can determine if one cation can be removed from the solution as a precipitated salt before a second cation in solution is also precipitated.Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria29Single Precipitation ReactionsCalcium ion triggers clotting of blood.  Therefore, when blood is donated the receiving bag contains sodium oxalate to precipitate the Ca2+, and thus prevent clotting.  Typically, blood contains 9.7x10-5 g Ca2+/mL.  To remove the calcium ions, a medical technologist treats a 104-mL blood sample with 100.0 mL of 0.155 M Na2C2O4. Calculate the [Ca2+] left in solution after the treatment.  (Ksp for calcium oxalate = 2.6x10-9)
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria30Single Precipitation Reactions1.Show that a precipitate of Mg(OH)2 will form in an aqueous solution that is 0.350 M MgCl2 and 0.750 M NaOH.2.Show that a precipitate of Mg(OH)2 will also form in an aqueous solution that is 0.350 M MgCl2 and 0.750 M NH3. Hint: Find the [OH-] produced by the hydrolysis of NH3. Is it enough to ppt the Mg2+ ion?
2.1.Explain why the Mg(OH)2 precipitate can be prevented from forming in (2) by adding NH4Cl to the solution containing ammonia.Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria31Single Precipitation ReactionsCalculate the minimum pH needed to precipitate Mn(OH)2 so completely that the concentration of Mn2+ is less than 1 µg per liter, that is 1 part per billion (ppb).
Other Aspects of Ionic Equilibria32Selective Precipitation of CationsDifferences in molar solubilities between compounds containing a common ion can be used to selectively precipitate one ion from solution leaving the other ion in solution. We can calculate the amount of the common ion needed to reach saturation for the most soluble ionic salt.  Addition of just a little less of the common ion will insure the most complete separation possible.Quantitative, or complete, separation is considered possible if 99.9% of the least soluble salt precipitates before any of the most soluble salt starts to precipitate. Typically, the added reagent (containing the common ion) is quite concentrated so that its addition does not appreciable change the volume of the solution and dilute the solution containing the cations to be separated. Solution of cationsAdd ppt agentLeast soluble cation ppts ﬁrstCentrifuge and decantSelective ppt completeA 400.0 mL solution has [Ba2+] = 0.0040 M and [Sr2+] = 0.0010 M.A 0.800 M Na2SO4(aq) solution is added drop-wise.Which ion, Ba2+ or Sr2+, will precipitate ﬁrst?Ksp for BaSO4 is 1.1x10-10, Ksp for SrSO4 is 3.4x10-7Can the two cations be quantitatively (99.9%) separated by selective precipitation? Other Aspects of Ionic EquilibriaApplicationsPrecipitation Reactions:
33•Precipitation of Mg2+ as as Mg(OH)2 from sea water is the source of Mg metal.•Titration of solutions containing Cl–(aq) with AgNO3 to quantitatively determine [Cl–].  For this to work,we must be sure that almost all of the Cl– precipitates as we add the AgNO3.  How can we be sure of this?•Determination of the amount of SO42– in solution by precipitating as BaSO4(s).  The BaSO4 formed is ﬁltered off, dried and weighed.  For this to work, the precipitation of SO42– must be complete (99.9%).  How can we be sure of this?Complex Ion Formation:•Complex ion formation can be used to extract gold from low-grade gold containing rock.  The formation constant of Au(CN)2– is very large.  A very small concentration of Au+ ions are formed through oxidation of Au. This oxidation takes place in the presence of CN– ions.  Complex ion formation removes the Au+ ions from solution, so more are formed.  As a result, even though Au is not oxidized normally by air, bubbling air through a suspension of Au containing ore in the presence of CN– leads to formation of a solution of the complex ion: 4Au(s) + 8CN–(aq) + O2(g) +2H2O(l)  4Au(CN)2–(aq) + 4OH–(aq)The resulting solution is ﬁltered and the Au+ reduced to Au(s).•Aluminum ore contains Fe2O3 impurities along with the desired aluminum hydroxide, Al2O3.  A strong base is added to dissolve the Al2O3 as the Al(OH)4– complex ion (Kf = 3x1033).  The iron (III) ion does not form a complex ion with hydroxide, therefore the Fe2O3 does not dissolve.  The resulting solution is ﬁltered and acid is added to the ﬁltrate to precipitate Al(OH)3.  The ﬁltrate must not be made too acidic or the Al(OH)3 will redissolve! 