APPENDIX F 
 
AQUIFER TESTS  
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 AQUIFER TESTS 
 
Aquifer tests are conducted to determ ine the hydrau lic properties of an aquifer system  such as 
hydraulic conductivity, transm issivity, and stor ativity.  These properties are useful in 
determ ining fate and transport of contam inant plum es and in designing effective groundwater 
remediation system s.   
 
Since a pum ping test and a slug test  evaluate a m uch larger volum e of the aquifer, they are the 
most com monly accepted m ethods for determ ining re presentative aquifer properties at sites with 
groundwater m onitoring wells.  If a site does not  have groundwater m onitoring wells, the aquifer 
properties m ay be estim ated by m ethods discusse d in this section.  Other aquifer evaluation 
methods m ay be used following prior Departm ent approval. 
   
It is essential to have a basic understanding of  groundwater hydraulics and the effects an aquifer 
test will have on the aquif er system .  It is not the intent of  this section to give a detailed 
explanation of every aquifer test and its lim itations, but rather to review basic term inology and 
provide the fundam ental concepts for conducting an aquifer test.  A general discussion of 
pumping tests and slug tests is presented in this sec tion.  The reader is directed to the references 
in this section for m ore detailed procedures in conducting the aquifer tests.  
 
 
AQUIFER DETERMINATION   
 
The type of aquifer m ust be determ ined as unconfined, confined or leaky confined.  An 
unconfined  aquifer is defined as an aquifer where th e groundwater is exposed to the atm osphere 
through openings in the overlying m aterials or a bove which a low perm eable confining layer or 
aquitard is absent.  An unconfined  aquifer is often referred to as a water table aquifer.  In an 
unconfined aquifer, the water level in wells or piezom eters is free to rise and fall under the 
influence of atm ospheric pressure and m ay typically have a static level below the upper 
stratigraphic boundary of the aquifer.   
 
A confined  aquifer is defined as an aquifer in wh ich the groundwater is isolated from  the 
atmosphere at the point of discharge by im perm eable  geologic form ations.  In a confined aquifer, 
the water level rises in wells or piezom eters to som e static level above the upper stratigraphic 
boundary of the aquifer.  Occasionally, a less perm eable confining layer will allow surrounding 
form ation water to slowly seep through to the a quifer.  This is often referred to as a sem i-
confined or leaky confined  aquifer.  
  
An aquitard  is a less perm eable f ormation that transm its water very slowly from  one aquifer to 
another.  An aquifer  system  consists of the aquifer and any aquitards.  
 
The hydraulic head , h, is defined as the total m echanical energy per unit weight of water.  
Hydraulic head has the units of length and is given by the relationship: 
 
h = z  + h p    
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-1  where:  
        
h - hydraulic head (ft.)  
z - elevation head (ft.)                
hp - pressure head (ft.) 
 
In a confined aquifer, the pressure head of groundw ater at the top of the aquifer is always greater 
than zero.  The hydraulic head in a confined aqui fer is typically characterized as the vertical 
distance by which the static water level in a well or piezom eter exceeds the upper stratigraphic 
boundary of the aquifer.   
 
Since an unconfined aquifer is free to rise a nd fall in response to atm ospheric pressure, the 
pressure head is zero.   
 
 
AQUIFER PROPERTIES  
 
Hydraulic Conductivity (K)  
 
Hydraulic conductivity , or “coef ficient of  perm eability” is a m easure of  the capacity of  a 
porous m edium  to transm it water.  It is def ined as the volum e of water that will m ove in a unit 
time under a unit hydraulic gradient through a unit area measured at right angles to the direction 
of flow.  The dim ensions of hydraulic conductivity are length per tim e or velocity.  Hydraulic 
conductivity is governed by the size and the shap e of the pores, the effectiveness of the 
interconnection between pores, roughness of m ineral particles, degree of soil saturation, and the 
physical properties of the fluid.   
Saturated Aquifer Thickness (b) 
 
The saturated thickness  of the aquifer m ay be determ ined from  published reference boring/well 
logs or field data.  The saturated thickness of the aquifer has the dim ensions of length.  For 
confined units, the saturated thickness will corre spond to the thickness of the aquifer.  For 
unconfined units, the saturated thickness represents  the vertical distance from  the m ean annual 
static water level elevation to the base of the aquifer.  For m ulti-layered or interconnected units, 
the saturated thickness of each sub-unit should be determ ined separately.  
 
Transmissivity (T)  
 
Transmissivity  is defined as the rate at which water can be transm itted through a vertical strip of 
aquifer one unit wide, extending the full satura ted thickness of the aquifer, under a unit of 
hydraulic gradient.  Transm issivity is expressed by the relationship: 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-2  T = K ∗ b   
 
where:  
 
T - transm issivity  (f t2/day) 
K - hydraulic conductivity (ft/day) 
b - saturated aquifer thickness (ft) 
 
Specific Yield (S y) 
 
Specific yield  is def ined as the percent ratio of  the volum e of water that an unconfined aquifer 
will yield by gravity to the unit vol ume of the unconf ined aquif er.  As the water level f alls in an 
unconfined aquifer, water is drained from  the pore spaces.  Specific yields cannot be determ ined 
for confined aquifers because the aquifer m aterials are not drained during pum ping (ie. the 
aquifer rem ains saturated).  Specific yield is given by the relationship: 
 
Sy = Vol. of water an unconf ined aquif er will yield by gravity    
    Unit Vol. of the unconfined aquifer  
 
 
Specific Storage (S s) 
 
Specific storage  is defined as the volum e of water that is stored or released from  the aquifer by 
the expansion of water and com pression of the soil or rock.  The dim ensions for specific storage 
are 1/length or length-1.   
 
Storativity (S)  
 
Storativity , or coefficient of storage, is a dim ensionless coefficient defined as the volum e of 
water that a perm eable unit will release from  storage per unit surface area per unit change in 
head.  In an unconfined unit, the level of satura tion rises or falls with changes in the am ount of 
water in storage due to specific yield.  Storativ ity for an unconfined aquifer is expressed by the 
following relationship: 
   
S = S y + S s b     
 
where: 
    
S - storativity (dim ensionless) 
Sy - specific yield  (%)  
Ss - specific storage (ft-1) 
b - saturated aquifer thickness (ft) 
 
In a confined aquifer, the aquifer rem ains satu rated during pum ping and specific yield is zero.  
The storativity for a confined aquifer is given by the relationship: 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-3  S = S s b   
 
where: 
 
S - storativity (dim ensionless) 
Ss - specific storage (ft-1) 
b - saturated aquifer thickness (ft)  
 
Porosity (n)  
 
Porosity  is defined as the percent ratio of the volum e of voids in a rock or sedim ent to the total 
volum e of the rock or sedim ent.  The voids in the rock or sedim ent include all pore spaces that 
are liquid or air filled and not available to conduct flow because of discontinuities.  The void 
spaces that are connected and available to conduct flow are term ed effective  porosity .  
 
 
DETERMINING AQUIFER PROPERTIES BY DIRECT MEASUREMENT  
 
One criterion for determ ining groundwater classifi cation is to estim ate the m aximum sustainable 
well yield of an aquifer.  Maximum sustainable w ell yield  is defined as the m aximum 
sustainable volum e of water that a well will discha rge over a given period of  time.  It is has the 
dimensions of volum e per tim e.  All water wells used to estim ate m aximum sustainable yield 
shall be designed, constructed and developed in acco rdance with the latest versions of the LDEQ 
and LDOTD Construction of Geotechnical Boreholes and  Groundwater Monitoring Systems 
Handbook and the LDOTD Water Well Rules, Regulations, and Standards .   
 
For sites with groundwater m onitoring wells, a quifer properties such as hydraulic conductivity, 
transm issivity, and storativity can be m easured by two com mon m ethods, pum ping tests and slug 
tests, which are discussed below.         
 
 
PUMPING TESTS 
 
In a pum ping test, groundwater is extracted from  a pum ping well with water level m easurem ents 
observed in the pum ping well and in one or m ore observation wells.  Pum ping tests can be 
performed within an aquif er to collect inf ormation relative to the aquif er in which the pum ped 
well and observation wells are located.  In addition, a stress pumping test  can be perform ed to 
determ ine the transm issivity or degree of  leak age between an unconfined aquifer and a deeper 
leaky confined aquifer.  In this test, the pum ped well is located in the lower aquif er while the 
observation wells are located in the overlying aquifer which is separated by a less perm eable 
aquitard.   
 
The difference in hydraulic head in the pum ped well or in the observation wells at the start of the 
test and at som e time after the test begins is ref erred to as draw down, s, and has the dim ension 
of length.  The distance from  the center of the pumping well to the point where drawdown is zero 
is ref erred to as the radius of influence , R, and has the dim ension of length.  The depressed area 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-4  of influence around the pum ped well is referred to as a cone of depression  because it is shaped 
like an inverted cone.  As pum ping continues, drawdown increases and the cone of depression 
expands.  If the pum ping rate is constant and sustained over a sufficient tim e period, the 
drawdown and radius of influence b ecom e constant referred to as an equilibrium  or steady state  
condition.  Non-steady state conditions are referred to as transient  flow.   The rate of change in 
hydraulic head per unit of distance of flow in a given direction is the hydraulic gradient , i, and 
has the dim ensions of length per length.  Groundw ater velocities are highest near the pum ped 
well due to the increase in hydraulic gradient, and decrease radially away from  the well.   
 
There are basically two types of pum ping test s: a constant-rate pum ping test and a step-
drawdown pum ping test.  A constant-rate pumping test  is perform ed by pum ping the well at a 
constant rate for the duration of the test.  It is most often used to obtain aquifer properties such as 
transm issivity and storativity as well as specif ic capacity of the well.  Depending on the type of 
aquifer, the well is pum ped at a constant rate fo r an extended period of tim e.  During this tim e, 
periodic drawdown m easurem ents are taken in  the pum ped well and observation wells.  Upon 
completion of  the test, the recovery data is of ten collected to check the results against the data 
collected from  the actual test.  The aquifer perform ance can be predicted by plotting the 
drawdown data versus the tim e the data was co llected and evaluating the transm issivity and 
storage coefficients.   
 
Another type of pum ping test is the step-draw down pumping test  in which the pum ping rate is 
increased in steps at regular intervals.  Again, the drawdown data is coll ected in both the pum ped 
well and the observation wells and plotted versus time to obtain the transm issivity and storage 
coefficients.  This test is prim arily used to determ ine the reduction in specif ic capacity with 
increasing yields. 
 
 
CONCEPTUAL DESIGN OF A PUMPING TEST     
 
Determine Site Constraints 
  
During the site investigation, soil data should be collected to determ ine the site’s geologic and 
hydrologic characteristics. The site investigati on shall be perform ed in accordance with RECAP 
Appendix B, as well as the guidelines establishe d in the latest versions of the LDEQ and 
LDOTD Construction of Geotechnical Borehol es and Groundwater Monitoring Systems 
Handbook and the LDOTD Water Well Rules, Regulations, and Standards. 
 
When installing groundwater m onitoring wells, c onsideration of well placem ent should be given 
to the vertical and horizontal delineation of th e contam inant, as well as for well placem ent in 
conducting an aquifer test. One should consider well design (i.e., partially penetrating wells, 
fully penetrating wells, etc.) and well location (i.e ., recharge zones, lateral discontinuities in an 
aquifer, etc.) which m ay place additional com plexities in evaluating the aquifer test data. 
 
Existing groundwater m onitoring wells m ay be us ed to conduct the aquifer test provided the 
wells were constructed in accordance with th e latest versions of the LDEQ and LDOTD 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-5  Construction of Geotechnical Boreholes and  Groundwater Monitoring Systems Handbook and 
the LDOTD Water Well Rules, Regulations, and Standards .   
 
Determine Appropriate Conceptual Model   
 
The single m ost im portant step in the analysis of aquifer test data is the selection of an 
appropriate conceptual m odel.  Each conceptu al m odel has a set of assum ptions about the 
geom etry and hydraulic behavior which one m ust determ ine appropriate for the study site.  
Based on the observed site constraints, a concep tual m odel or m odels m ust be selected to 
determ ine the aquifer properties. 
 
The conceptual m odel is usually based on geologi c and hydrologic data generated during the site 
investigation, design of m onitoring wells, the dr awdown data obtained during the aquifer test, 
and the set of assum ptions for the study site. 
   
A list of several conceptual m odels and references  are provided in Table F-1 to direct the reader 
to a m ore detailed description of  the m athem atical m odels and assum ptions.  Other conceptual 
models m ay be used following Departm ent approval. 
 
 
SLUG TESTS 
 
A slug test  involves either injecting or withdrawing a known volum e of water into or out of a 
well and im mediately m easuring the rate at which the water level f alls or rises back to static 
conditions.  For wells that are partially penetra ting, the withdrawal slug test is recom mended to 
overcom e the af fects of  the f ilter pack.  For f ully penetrating wells where the well screen rem ains 
completely saturated, either the injection or withdrawal slug test is appropriate.   
 
The flow of water into or out of the well is gove rned by the form ation characteristics.  The water 
level in the well is m easured prior to and im mediately after the abrupt injection or withdrawal of 
water.  The subsequent water levels are m easur ed until the water level returns to static or 
equilibrium  conditions. In aquifers with high pe rmeability, recovery m ay occur so rapidly that 
the use of a pressure transducer is required.  The pressure transducer m easures the pressure 
changes in the well as the water level changes and stores the data in the recording equipm ent.  
The data is plotted as a change in water level versus tim e from  which aquifer properties such as 
hydraulic conductivity, transm issivity, and storage co efficients are estim ated.  W hen averaging a 
number of hydraulic conductivity results from  a site, the geom etric m ean shall be used.   
 
Several m ethods used to evaluate data from  slug tests are presented in Table F-2.  Other 
conceptual m odels m ay be used following Departm ent approval.  
    
 
DETERMINING AQUIFER PROPERTIES BY ESTIMATION 
 
In som e instances, groundwater m onitoring wells m ay not be present on-site in which to conduct 
pumping or slug tests.  In these situations, it is  acceptable to obtain an estim ate of the aquifer 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-6  properties based on engineering and geological m aterial descriptions as well as from  correlations 
between these descriptions and som e com monly measured soil properties.  Guidelines f or 
estim ating these aquifer properties are provided below.       
 
Hydraulic Conductivity (K) 
 
Published References 
 
Many references are available which give a gene ric range of values for hydraulic conductivity, or 
coefficient of  perm eability, f or various types of  soil media.  First, the soil m edia from the aquif er 
must be analyzed for Atterberg lim its (ASTM D-4318) and particle size distribution (ASTM D-
422) in order to properly classify the soil in  accordance with the Unified Soil Classification 
System  (ASTM D-2487).  Once the soil has been  properly classified, a hydraulic conductivity 
value corresponding to the type of soil m edia m ay be selected from  a published reference.  The 
selected hydraulic conductivity value is subject to  Departm ental approval. If m ultiple soil types 
are encountered within an aquifer, the predom inant soil type should used for the Unified Soil 
Classification System .  
 
Laboratory Determination  
 
Hydraulic conductivity for a soil type can be determ ined from  two standard laboratory 
procedures.  In these tests, an undisturbed sam ple of the aquifer m aterial is used in either a 
constant head (ASTM D-2434) or falling head (ASTM D-5084) perm eability test.  Typically, the 
constant head test is used for sands and gravel s while the falling head is used for fine grained 
soils. 
  
Single Boring Method 
 
The single boring m ethod provides a quick estim ate of hydraulic conductivity for sites without 
groundwater m onitoring wells.  In this m ethod, a bor ing is advanced into the aquifer with the 
water level in the boring allowed to reach static or equilibrium  conditions.  W ater is then quickly 
removed with water level versus tim e measurem ents collected in a sim ilar m ethod as the rising 
head slug test.  The data is then evaluated us ing the Ernst or Hooghoudt equations to provide a 
quick estim ate of hydraulic conductivity. These equations assum e the soil is hom ogeneous, the 
water table rem ains in a horizontal position, and th at water flows horizontally into the sides of 
the borehole and vertically through the bottom  of the borehole.  The Ernst and Hooghoudt 
equations are presented in Figure 1. 
 
Particle Siz e Analysis 
 
The Hazen m ethod is an em pirical relationshi p that m ay be used to determ ine hydraulic 
conductivity from  a particle size analysis (ASTM D 422) of the saturated m edia.  The relationship 
is based on observations of loose, clean sand;  therefore, the m ethod should only be used on 
unconsolidated m aterial having a grain-size of 10 percent finer by weight of 0.1 to 3.0 m m (0.1 < 
D10 < 3.0 m m).  The Hazen equation is presented in Figure 2. 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-7  Saturated Aquifer Thickness (b)  
 
If the saturated aquifer thickness is unknown, an estim ated value can often be obtained from  
many published references or well logs.  This inform ation m ay be available through the United 
States Geological Survey (USGS), the Louisi ana Geological Survey (LGS), the Louisiana 
Departm ent of Natural Resources (LDNR), or th e Louisiana Departm ent of Transportation and 
Developm ent (LDOTD) W ater Resources Section. If  a boring is advanced into an aquifer of 
unknown thickness, the estim ated saturated aquifer thickness shall be set equal to the m aximum 
penetrated thickness of the water-bearing unit (as determ ined from  boring logs) plus 10 feet.  If a 
boring is not advanced, the default aquifer thickness shall be set equal to 10 feet.     
 
Specific Yield (S y) and Specific Storage (S s) 
 
Many published references are available which give  generic values for specific yield and specific 
storage in various types of soil m edia.  Prior to selecting a generic value for these param eters, the 
soil m ust be classified in accordance with th e Unified Soil Classification System  (ASTM D-
2487).  The selected values for specific yield a nd specific storage are subject to Departm ental 
approval.  
      
ESTIMATION OF WELL YIELD  
 
The developm ent of the Theis equation takes in to consideration the effect of pum ping tim e on 
well yield.  The Theis equation is based on assum ptions such as the pum ping well being 100 
percent efficient, the water table is horizontal w ithout slope, the aquifer form ation is uniform  in 
thickness and infinite in areal extent, the hydrau lic conductivity is the sam e in all directions, 
groundwater flow is lam inar, etc.  Cooper and Jacob observed that if the pum ping test is of 
sufficient duration or the distance from  the pum ping well to the observation well is suf ficiently 
small, the exponential integral function of the Th eis equation can be replaced with a logarithm ic 
term simplifying the evaluation of well hydraulics.  Applying som e assum ptions of storativity, 
drawdown, distance from  pum ping well to observa tion well and pum ping duration to the Cooper 
and Jacob m odification of the Theis nonequilibrium  well equation, an estim ate of well yield can 
be obtained.  The estim ated well yield equations are presented in Figure 3.  
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-8  REFERENCES 
 
Aller, L., T.W . Bennett, G. Hackett, R.J. Petty, J.H. Lehr, H. Sedoris, D.M. Nielsen, 1989, 
Handbook of Suggested Practices for the Design and  Installation of Ground-Water Monitoring 
Wells , National W ater W ell Association, Dublin, Ohio.  
 
Borch, M.A., S.A. Sm ith, L.N. Nobil, 1993, Evaluation and Restoration of  Water Supply Wells , 
American W ater W orks Association (AW WA) Research Foundation. 
 
Boulton, N.S. and T.D. Streltsova, 1975, “New equations for determ ining the form ation 
constants of an aquifer from  pum ping test data”, Water Resources Research , Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 
148 - 153. 
 
Boulton, N.S. and T.D. Streltsova, 1976, “The dr awdown near an abstraction well of large 
diam eter under non-steady conditions  in an unconfined aquifer, Journal of Hydrology , Vol. 30, 
pp. 29 - 46. 
 
Boulton, N.S. and T.D. Steltsova, 1977, “Unstea dy flow to a pum ped well in a fissured water-
bearing form ation”, Journal of Hydrology , Vol. 35, pp. 257 - 270. 
 
Bouwer, H., 1989, “The Bouwer and Rice Slug Test - An Update,” Ground  Water , Vol. 27, No. 
3, pp. 304-309. 
 
Bouwer, H., and R.C. Rice, 1976,  “A Slug Test  for Determ ining Hydraulic Conductivity of 
Unconf ined Aquif ers with Com pletely or Partially Penetrating W ells,” Water Resources 
Research , Vol. 12, No. 3, pp. 423-428. 
 
Cooper, H.H., Jr., and C.E. Jacob, 1946, “A Generalized Graphic Method for Evaluating 
Form ation Constants and Sum marizing W ell-Field History,” Transactions, American 
Geophysical Union , Vol. 27, No. 4, pp. 526-534. 
 
Cooper, H.H., Jr., J.D. Bredehoeft, and I.S.  Papadopulos, 1967, “Response of a finite-diam eter 
well to an instantaneous charge of  water”, Water Resource Research , Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 263 - 
269. 
 
Dawson, Karen J., and Jonathan D. Istok,  Aquifer Testing: design and analysis of pumping and 
slug tests , 1991, Lewis Publishers, Inc., Chelsea, Michigan. 
 
Departm ent of Engineering Professional Developm ent, Underground Tank Technology Update , 
Vol. 13, No. 1, January/February 1999, The College of Engineering, University of W isconsin-
Madison. 
 
Driscoll, F.G., Groundwater and Wells , 1986, 2nd ed., Johnson Division, St. Paul, Minnesota. 
 
Dunn, Irving S., Loren R. Anderson, and Fred W . Kiefer, Fundamentals of Geotechnical 
Analysis , 1980, John W iley and Sons, New York, New York.   
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-9   
Ernst, L.F., “Een nieuwe form ule voor de  berekening van de doorlaatfactor m et de 
boorgatenm ethode”, 1950, Rap. Landbouwproefsta. en Bodem kundig Inst. T.N.O., Groningen, 
Netherlands. 
 
Fetter, C.W ., Applied Hydrogeology , 1988, 2nd ed., Macm illan Publishing Com pany, New York, 
New York. 
 
Freeze, R.A., and J.A. Cherry, 1979, Groundwater , Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey. 
 
Hantush, M.S., 1964, “Hydraulics of W ells”, In Chow, V.T. Ed., Advances in Hydroscience , Vol. 
1, Academ ic Press, New York/London, pp. 281 - 442. 
 
Hantush, M.S. and C.E. Jacob, 1955, “Non-steady radi al flow in an infinite leaky aquifer”, 
Transactions, American Geophysical Union , Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 95 - 100. 
 
Hooghoudt, S.B., “Bijdragen tot de kennis van eenige natuurkundige grootheden van den grond, 
4.”, 1936, Versl. Lam db., Ond. 42 (13), B:449- 541, Algem eene Landsdrukkerij, The Hague. 
 
Hvorslev, M.J., 1951, “Tim e lag and soil perm eability  in groundwater observations”, U.S. Arm y 
Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station Bulletin 36 , Vicksburg, MS.  
 
Louisiana Departm ent of  Environm ental Quality  and Louisiana Departm ent of  Transportation 
and Developm ent, Construction of  Geotechnical Boreholes and Groundwater Monitoring 
Systems , 1993. 
 
Louisiana Departm ent of Transportation and Developm ent, State of  Louisiana Water Well Rules, 
Regulations, and Standards , 1985. 
 
Moench, A.F. and T.A. Prickett, 1972, “Radial flow  in an infinite aquifer undergoing conversion 
from  artesian to water table conditions”, Water Resources Research , Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 494 - 499. 
 
Neum an, S.P., 1972, “Theory of flow in unconfined aquifers considering delayed response of the 
water table”, Water Resources Research , Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 1031 - 1045.  
 
Neum an, S.P., 1974, “Effect of partial penetrati on on flow in unconfined aquifers considering 
gravity response”, Water Resources Research , Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 303 - 312.  
 
Papadopulos, I.S., 1965, “Nonsteady flow to a we ll in an infinite anisotropic aquifer”, 
International Association of Scientific Hydrol ogy Sym posium , Dubrovinik, October, Vol. 1, No. 
73, pp. 21 - 31. 
 
Papadopulos, I.S. and H.H. Cooper, Jr., 1967, “D rawdown in a well of large diam eter”, Water 
Resource Research , Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 241 - 244. 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-10  Papadopoulus, I.S., Bredelhoeft, J. D., and H.H. Cooper Jr., 1973.  “On the Analysis of Slug Test 
Data,” Water Resources Research , Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 1087-1089. 
 
Peck, R.B., Hanson, W .E., and T.H. Thornburn, 1974, Foundation  Engineering , John W iley and 
Sons, Inc., New York, New York. 
 
Roscoe Moss Com pany, 1990, Handbook of  Ground Water Development , John W iley and Sons, 
Inc., New York. 
 
Smith, S.A., Monitoring and Remediation Wells: Problem Prevention,  Maintenance, and 
Rehabilitation , 1995, CRC Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton, Florida. 
 
Theis, C.V., 1935, “The Relation Between the Lowe ring of the Piezom etric Surface and the Rate 
and Duration of Discharge of a W ell Using Ground-W ater Storage”,  Transactions, American 
Geophysical Union , Vol. 16, pp. 519-524. 
 
Thiem , G., 1906, Hydrologische Methoden  (Hydrologic Methods), J.M. Gebhardt, Leipzig. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 F-11   
Table F-1 
Conceptual Pumping Test Models  
 
Aquifer 
Type Flow 
Condition Aquitard 
Leakage Aquitard 
Storage Well 
Storage Partial Well 
Penetration Anisotropic 
Properties References 
Confined Equilibrium  No No No No No Thiem  (1906) 
Unconfined Equilibrium  No No No No No Thiem  (1906) 
Confined Transi ent No No No No No Theis (1935) 
Confined Transient Yes No No No No Hantush & Jacob 
(1955) 
Confined Transi ent Yes Yes No No No Hant ush (1964) 
Confined Transi ent No No No Yes Yes Hant ush (1964) 
Confined Transi ent Yes No No Yes Yes Hantush (1964) 
Confined Transi ent No No Yes No No Papadopul os & 
Cooper (1967) 
Confined Transi ent Yes No Yes No No Lai & Su (1974) 
Confined Transient Yes Yes No No No Boulton & 
Streltsova (1977) 
Confined Transi ent No No No No Yes Papadopul os 
(1965) 
Confined to 
Unconfi ned Transient No No No No No Moench & 
Prickett (1972) 
Unconfi ned Transi ent No No No No Yes Neum an (1972) 
Unconfi ned Transi ent No No No Yes Yes Neum an (1974) 
Unconfined Transient No No Yes Yes Yes Boulton & 
Streltsova (1976) 
Unconfined Transient Yes Yes No Yes Yes Boulton & 
Streltsova (1975) 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 TF1-1  Table F- 2 
 
Conceptual Slug Test Models 
 
 
Aquifer 
Type Flow 
Condition Aquitard 
Leakage Aquitard 
Storage Partial 
Penetration Anisotropic 
Properties References 
       
Confined Transient No No Yes Yes Hvorslev (1951) 
Confined Transient No No No No Cooper et al.  (1967) 
Unconfined 
or Leaky  Transient Yes No Yes No Bouwer & Rice (1976) 
 
(After Dawson and Ist ok, 1991) 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 TF2-1  Figure 1 – Ernst and Hooghoudt Equations 
 
Reference:  
 
Dunn, Irving S., Loren R. Anderson, and Fred W . Kiefer, Fundamentals of Geotechnical 
Analysis , 1980, John W iley and Sons, New York, New York.   
 
 
 
 
 
           ∇ 
 
                                          ∇ 
 
 
                                       
 
   ∇ 
 
 
 
 Ground Surface
a
y1y2
H
Hooghoudt Equation       Ernst Equation  
 
21ln) 2( yy
taHaLk+=           
ty
ya
Hy
aH ∆∆


−

+ 2 2040k=  
 
where: 
 
k = coefficient of perm eability, m eters/second 
a = boring radius, m eters 
L = an em pirical length over which the head loss occurs, m eters 
19.0aHL=  
H = water level, m eters 
t = tim e of m easurem ent, seconds 
y1 = initial drawdown, m eters 
y2 = drawdown at tim e t, m eters 
∆y = rise in water level (m eters) during tim e ∆t (seconds) 
y = average drawdown during tim e of m easurem ent, m eters  
 
 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 TF2-2  Figure 2 – Haz en equation 
 
Reference: 
 
Dunn, Irving S., Loren R. Anderson, and Fred W . Kiefer, Fundamentals of Geotechnical 
Analysis , 1980, John W iley and Sons, New York, New York.   
 
 
Note: The equation should only be used if 0.1 m m < D 10 < 3.0 m m 
 
2
10)(Dck=  
 
where: 
 
k = coef ficient of  perm eability, cm /sec 
c = a constant that varies from  1.0 to 1.5 
D10 = grain size (m m) that corresponds to 10 percent finer by weight  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 TF2-3  Figure 3 – Estimation of Well Yield 
 
Reference: 
 
Driscoll, F.G., Groundwater and Wells , 1986, 2nd ed., Johnson Division, St. Paul, Minnesota. 
 
 
The estim ated well yield equations are derived from  the Cooper and Jacob (1946) m odification 
to the Theis (1935) nonequilibrium  well equation.   The Cooper and Jacob m odification using 
English engineering units is given as: 
 
 
SrtT
TQs23.0log264=  
 
where: 
 
s = drawdown at a distance (r) from  the pum ping well, feet 
Q = yield from  pum ping well, gpm  
T = transm issivity, gpd/ft 
t = tim e of pum ping, days 
r = distance from  pum ping well to observation well where drawdown is m easured, feet 
S = storativity, dim ensionless 
 
 
The estim ated well yield equations are derive d using som e assum ptions and logarithm ic 
functions.  The estim ated well yield equations and assum ptions are given as: 
 
Confined Aquifer       Unconfined Aquifer  
 
 
()bKbKhQc
log3.960
+=       ()bKbKQlog3.6162
+=    
 
 
where: 
 
Q = estim ated well yield, gpm  
hc = confining head above the upper stratigraphic boundary of the aquifer, feet   
K = hydraulic conductivity of the aquifer m edia, cm /sec 
b = saturated aquifer thickness, feet 
 
 
 
 
LDEQ RECAP 2003 TF2-4  LDEQ RECAP 2003  TF2-5  Assumptions: 
 
s = 0.75 h c feet (confined aquifer) 
s = 0.2 b feet (unconfined aquifer) 
t = 7 days 
r = 0.5 feet 
S = 1.0E-04 (confined) 
S = 1.0E-01 (unconfined) 
 
 