16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern  2018 
 
Arsenic removal from lake water, river water and 
groundwater using an electrocoagulation system  
 
Nathalie Manetti *, Charlotte Catrouillet*  & Jasquelin Peñ a*  
 
* University of Lausanne IDYST, Geopolis, CH -1015 Lausanne  
 
Arsenic (As) is a toxic element that occurs naturally in the environment. The 
contamination of groundwater by arsenic is a worldwide concern, affecting the 
health of thousands of  people, especially in South- East of Asia (West Bengal, 
Bangladesh, etc.). The cons umption of drinking water represents a major 
source of human exposure to arsenic, which can lead to the development of 
different types of cancer, skin lesions, cardiovascular diseases, etc.  
 
A number of studies have investigated the potential to use iron 
electrocoagulation (EC) as a method to remove arsenic from water. This system 
is a low -cost water treatment method with low energy requirements, both of 
which are important requirements for water treatment in decentralized 
communities. In this system, a current is passed through an Fe(0) electrode 
which is oxidized and dissolved to Fe(II). Successive reactions including Fe(II) 
oxidation to Fe(III) generate oxidants (Fenton reactions) able to oxidize either 
Fe(II) and As(III) to As(V), the less dangerous for m of As. Furthermore, Fe(III) 
forms nanoscale Fe precipitates that efficiently sorb (according to the pH) As(III) 
and As(V). Subsequently, As -rich iron precipitates can be removed from water 
by filtration and/or settling (Ratna Kumar, Chaudhari, Khilar, & Mahajan, 2004).  
 
Ions and substances present in the raw groundwater can compete with As for 
sorption sites of Fe oxides (e.g., phosphates, transition metals, organic matter) 
and/or oxidation (redox sensitive elements such as Mn) (van Genuchten & 
Peña, 20 17). To test the performance of the system for different water 
chemistries, lake water, river water and groundwater were sampled from the 
University of Lausanne campus and spiked with As(III) or As(V).  
 
The different waters were first filtered using a 0. 2 µm filter and spiked with 10 
µM As(III) or As(V). The experiments were conducted in the presence of natural 
O2 (from air) and with the addition of 250 µM of H 2O2, an oxidant naturally 
produced  in the system. As(III), As(V) and Fe aqueous concentrations (a fter 
filtration at 0.2 µM) and Fe and As concentrations in the total phase were 
measured over time (0, 6, 13, 23 and 32 minutes). Total organic carbon and the 
major cations and anions were also determined at the beginning and at the end 
of the experiment t o determine which elements are in competition with As.  
 
River water and groundwater generally contained higher concentrations of ions 
such as Ca, Mg, K and Na compared to lake water . However, the As removal 
was faster for the lake water than for the other waters. The total organic carbon 
(TOC) concentrations were similar for the three waters (less than 5 mg L-1). 
These results provide insight into the control of co- occuring elements on the 
reactions and the As removal efficiency in EC systems.  
 
 
 16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern  2018 
 
REFERENCES    
Kumar, P. R., Chaudhari, S., Khila r, K. C., & Mahajan, S. P. 2004:  Removal of 
arsenic from water by electr ocoagulation. Chemosphere, 55, 1245- 1252.  
 
van Genuchten, C. M. & Peña, J. 2017: Mn(II) Oxidation in Fenton and Fenton 
Type Systems: Identification of Reaction Efficiency and Reaction Products. 
Environmental Science & Technology , 51, 2982- 2991.  
 
 