16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern 2018  Arsenic methylation across microbial phyla  Karen Viacava*, Shannon Dyer*, Karin Lederballe Meibom*, Adrien Mestrot** & Rizlan Bernier-Latmani*  *École Polytechniqeu Fédéral de Lausanne (EPFL), ENAC - IIE -EML Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne (karen.viacava@epfl.ch) **TrES group, Institute of Geography, University of Bern, Hallerstrasse 12, CH-3012 Bern  Arsenic (As) undergoes extensive microbial cycling in the environment, and, because of the toxicity of this metalloid, many bacteria and archaea harbour genes that confer resistance to it [1]. As methylation is one of the many microbially-mediated process, it consists in the addition of one or several methyl groups to inorganic arsenic generating volatile and non-volatile arsenicals. The reaction is catalysed by the enzyme arsenite methyltransferase (ArsM). It has been proposed as a detoxification mechanism but also as an activation pathway or a precursor reaction for the synthesis of more complex arseno-organic molecules. As methylation has been subject of study due to the presence of methylarsenicals in rice, a major source of arsenic in the human diet. The methylarsenicals are derived from microorganisms in paddy soils given that rice plants lack the ability to catalyse the reaction [2].   In paddy soils, arsM-harbouring microorganisms are phylogetically diverse and abundant [3] but it is still unclear whether all synthesize functional proteins and active methylate As once present in the soil. Previous studies have identified a few active As methylators, most of them aerobic microbial species, including the Bacteroidete Arsenicibacter rosenii SM-1 [4]. In contrast, only two anaerobic species were identified: the Firmicute Clostridium sp. BXM [5] and the archaeon Methanorsarcina acetivorans C2A [6]. Thus, the goal of this study is twofold: first, to test the As-methylation activity of arsM-harbouring microbial species belonging to various phyla and representing diverse metabolisms present in paddy soils and, second, to systematically probe the functionality and the in vivo activity of the enzymes encoded in their arsM genes.   As(III) methylation and volatilization was tested across five anaerobic microbial strains: two archaea (Methanosarcina mazei Gö1, Methanosarcina acetivorans C2A); two Firmicutes (Anaeromusa acidaminophila DSM 3853, Clostridium pasteurianum DSM 525); a Deltaproteobacterium (Geobacter metallireducens GS-15); and two aerobic strains: a Streptomycete (Streptomyces vietnamensis DSM 41927); and a Bacteroidete (Arsenicibacter rosenii SM-1). All arsM genes were cloned into the arsenic-sensitive Escherichia coli AW3110(DE3) and As methylation quantified.  The results show that most of the strains were not able to methylate As despite harbouring arsM genes that encode functional ArsM proteins. Our first conclusion is that the presence of arsM does not equate As methylation even in the presence of the metalloid. Further, we hypothesize that more efficient As detoxification pathways might be prevalent, precluding methylation, therefore more work is warranted to deconvolute arsM regulation.  16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern 2018   REFERENCES [1] Andres et al. 2016: The microbial genomics of arsenic, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 40, 299-322. [2] Zhao et al. 2013: Methylated arsenic species in rice: Geographical variation, origin, and uptake mechanisms, Environ. Sci. Technol., 47, 3957-3966. [3] Reid et al. 2017: Arsenic methylation in a rice paddy soil anaerobic enrichment culture, Environ. Sci. Technol., 51, 10546-10554. [4] Huang et al. 2016: Efficient Arsenic Methylation and Volatilization mediated by a novel bacterium from an arsenic-contaminated paddy soil, Environ. Sci. Technol., 50, 6389-6396. [5] Wang et al. 2015: Identification and catalytic residues of the arsenite methyltransferase from a sulfate-reducing bacterium, Clostridium sp. BXM, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 362, 1-8. [6] Wang et al. 2014: Identification and characterization of arsenite methyltransferase from an archaeon Methanorsarcina acetivorans C2A, Environ. Sci. Technol., 48, 12706-12713. 