16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern  2018 
 
Arsenic removal in manganese -containing groundwater  
 
Charlotte Catrouillet *, Sachiko  Hirosue *, Nathalie Manetti * & J asquelin  Peña*,*  
 
*University of Lausanne IDYST , Geopolis , CH-1015 Lausanne 
(charlotte. catrouillet @uni l.ch) 
 
Arsenic (As) can occur naturally in groundwaters  worldwide  (e.g., Bengladesh, 
India, Amazon region, etc.). Because of this large- scale contamination and its 
high toxicity and carconegicity, exposure to As  leads to millions of deaths 
world wide. Therefore, strategies to remove As from water using efficient and 
cheap treatement system are critically needed. Iron(0) electrocoagulation (EC) 
has gained attention as a low -cost method for As removal because it has short 
supply chain and low energy requirements and, importantly, is easy t o operate. 
In EC, a current is passed through an Fe(0) electrode, such that Fe(0) is 
oxidized to Fe(II). The production of Fe(II) generates reactive oxidants that 
oxidize As(III) to form As(V) – a less dangerous form of As, and Fe(II) to Fe(III), 
which for ms nanoscale iron precipitates that remove arsenic from solution (van 
Genuchten et al. 2012, Nidheesh et al. 2017) . However, the mechanism and 
efficicency of As removaldepend strongly on the chemical composition of the 
groundwater. Thus, successful implementation of EC requires systematic 
chemical and mineralogical studies under varying operating conditions and 
groundwater chemistry.  
 
In some waters, As and Mn co- occur at high concentrations (Gillipsie et al. 
2016, de Meyer et al. 2017) . Recent work shows t hat Mn(II) can also be 
removed from water using an EC system. Moreover different oxidants are 
responsible of the oxidation of Fe and Mn at different pH and the greatest Mn 
removal occurs at pH 8.5 (van Genuc hten et al.  2017) . Combined, these studies 
sugges t that As and Mn compete for the same pool of oxidants in an EC system 
and therefore that the efficiency of As removal may be influenced by the 
presence of Mn. The main goal of this work is thus to understand the extent to 
which As and Mn are removed during EC when aqueous As(III) and Mn(II) are 
initially present in the groundwater. In addition, knowledge of the speciation of 
As and Mn in the solid phase is needed in order to understand the mechanism 
of contaminant removal (oxidation and sorption) under var ying conditions 
(concentrations of Mn, As, pH, and presence or absence of H 2O2). 
 
Analysis of aqueous and solid phase samples showed that the kinetics of As 
and Mn oxidation and mechanism of removal to the solid phase vary strongly 
according to the type of oxidant present in the system (e.g., .OH and Fe(IV), 
respectively). At acidic pH, As concentrations were less than the 10 µg L-1 
(WHO recomendation) in the presence of H 2O2 after 30 min, but at basic pH the 
concentrations of As were higher than the  WHO recomendation. In the O 2 
system, As concentrations decreased over time, but did not attain the 10 µg L-1 
target. Solution pH, the initial oxidant (O 2 vs. H 2O2) and Mn concentration 
influenced significantly the extent of As and Mn removal. The speciati on of As 
and Mn in the solid phase, as determined by X -ray absorption spectroscopy 
(Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, BL 4- 1), showed greater As 
oxidation at pH 4.5 than at pH 8.5 and in the presence of Mn. On the contrary, 
greater Mn oxidation w as observed at pH 8.5 than at pH 4.5. Moreover, in the 16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern  2018 
 
O2 system, Mn and As were mainly present in reduced form in the solid phase. 
Then, the acidic pH are the most favorable pH to remove As from water 
because of fav orable oxidation of As(III) and sorption of As(V), but this pH is not 
practical for water treatment. The other best pH to remove As depends on Mn 
concentrations in waters. Determine water matrice is then a very critical point to 
improve the performances of the system.  
 
REFERENCES   
Gillipsie, E.C., Andujar, E., Polizzotto, M., 2016. Chemical controls on aiotic and 
biotic release of geogenic arsenic from Pleistocene aquifer sediments to 
groundwater. Environmental Science Processes & Impacts, 18, 1090- 1103.  
 
de Meyer, C. M. C. , Rodríguez, J. M. , Carpio, E. A. , García, P. A. , Stengel, C.  & 
Berg, M.  2017:  Arsenic, manganese and aluminum contamination in 
groundwater resources of Western Amazonia (Peru). Science of The Total 
Environment , 607-608, 1437- 1450.  
 
Nidheesh, P. V.  & Singh, T. S. A.  2017:  Arsenic removal by electrocoagulation 
process: Recent trends and removal mechanism. Chemosphere,  181, 418- 432. 
 
van Genuchten, C. M. , Addy S.E.A., Peña, J. , Gadgil, A.J. 2012: Removal 
Arsenic from Synthetic Groundwater with Iron Electrocoagulation: An Fe and As 
K-edge EXAFS Study . Environmental Science & Technology , 51, 2982- 2991.  
 
van Genuchten, C. M.  & Peña, J.  2017:  Mn(II) Oxidation in Fenton and Fenton 
Type Systems: Identification of Reaction Efficiency and Reaction Products. 
Environmental Science & Technology , 46, 986-994. 