­
Flypapers for Coral and Othe r
Planktonic Larva e
New materials incorporate morphogens for applications i n 
research, restoration, aquaculture, and medicin e 
Aileen N . C. Morse and Daniel E . Mors e 
M any animals in the sea re -
produce to yield vast num­
bers of minute, weakl y 
swimming larvae that remain ar­
rested in development while the y 
are dispersed in the plankton . In 
many species, the larvae settle ran­
domly and then continue to develop , 
but in other species the larvae emerg e 
from developmental arrest only af­
ter settling in a particular micro -
habitat that is suitable for thei r 
postmetamorphic growth and sur­
vival to reproduction . What cue s 
might indicate to such larvae tha t 
they have reached the appropriat e 
environment? We and other investi­
gators have found that these larva e 
recognize specific chemical signal s 
from the environment that induc e 
settlement from the plankton an d 
metamorphosis to the adult form . 
This requirement helps ensure tha t 
the larvae settle and metamorphos e 
selectively in the most suitable mi­
crohabitats . 
Larval recognition of the require d 
morphogens (signal molecules in­
ducing metamorphosis), in the spe­
cies we have investigated, is medi­
ated by highly specific chemosensor y 
receptors that control downstrea m 
Aileen N. C. Morse is a research biolo -
gist in the Marine Biotechnology Cen ­
ter and the Marine Science Institute an d 
Daniel E. Morse is a professor in th e 
Department of Molecular, Cellular, an d 
Developmental Biology, and chairma n 
of the Marine Biotechnology Center , 
University of California, Santa Barbara , 
CA 93106 . © 1996 American Institut e 
of Biological Sciences . 
254 Larval settlement an d 
metamorphosis in som e 
marine invertebrates ar e 
controlled by sensor y 
recognition of exogenou s 
chemical signal s 
signal transduction pathways closel y 
related to those responsible for in -
formation processing in human brai n 
and other cells specialized for signa l 
recognition . We have developed a n 
artificial substrate containing th e 
purified, immobilized morphogeni c 
cue recognized by certain coral lar­
vae . This morphogen-containin g 
artificial surface acts like a larva l 
"flypaper" because it induces sub-
stratum-specific settlement an d 
metamorphosis of the coral larva e 
in the laboratory and in the natura l 
reef environment . This material i s 
proving useful for the experimenta l 
resolution of factors controlling lar ­
val settlement, metamorphosis, an d 
recruitment in the ocean . 
Experiments now in progress ar e 
aimed at extending this technolog y 
to other species and to the use o f 
larval flypapers as tools for cora l 
reef monitoring, management, an d 
reseeding . Substrata containin g 
morphogenic signal molecules im­
mobilized on their surfaces may serv e 
similar purposes for other ecologi­
cally and commercially valuable spe ­cies, and they may offer potentia l 
applications for aquaculture an d 
human medicine as well . 
Signal recognitio n 
controls recruitmen t 
Laboratory studies have show n 
settlement and metamorphosis in a 
variety of marine invertebrates to b e 
controlled by larval sensory recog­
nition of, and responsiveness to , 
exogenous chemical signals an d 
other environmental stimuli (re -
viewed in Bonar et al . 1990, Fitt e t 
al . 1987, Hadfield 1978, 1986 , 
Hadfield and Pennington 1990 , 
Morse 1985, 1990, 1992, Pawli k 
1992, Rittschof 1993) . In some case s 
this sensory recognition is require d 
to activate the genetically pro­
grammed sequence of behavioral an d 
developmental processes that ha d 
been arrested in the dispersive larva l 
stage (Degnan and Morse 1993 , 
1995, Morse 1990, 1992, Morse e t 
al. 1979, 1980a), whereas in others , 
negative cues deter settlement an d 
metamorphosis on inappropriat e 
substrata (Holmstrom et al . 1992 , 
Johnson and Strathmann 1989 , 
Woodin 1991) . Although for som e 
species larval settlement from th e 
plankton, attachment to a surface , 
and the induction of new gene ex­
pression leading to cellular differen ­
tiation and metamorphosis clearl y 
are induced by the same cue mol­
ecule, it is not clear whether a singl e 
induction event is sufficient to in ­
duce this entire sequence or whethe r 
multiple parallel inductions are in­
volved at different levels (e .g ., be -
BioScience Vol . 46 No . 4 /.null ­ /.null /.null /.null /.null /.null /.null /.null ­ 
havioral and developmental ; A . 
Morse 1994, Morse 1992) . A num­
ber of researchers are now begin­
ning to learn how larval recognitio n 
of these chemical cues interacts with 
other factors, such as the hydrody­
namic flow field and larval delivery , 
to control settlement from the plank -
ton, metamorphosis, and recruit­
ment (e .g ., Butman and Grassl e 
1992, Grassle and Butman 1992 , 
Pawlik and Butman 1993, Turner e t 
al . 1994, Wethey 1986, Zimmer -
Faust and Tamburri 1994) . 
Although the small larvae of mos t 
benthic marine invertebrates are es­
sentially passive with respect to th e 
large-scale advective processes that 
deliver larvae to potential settlemen t 
sites (Sammarco and Heron 1994) , 
in some species the irreversible com­
mitment to attachment and meta ­
morphosis is tightly controlled b y 
sensory information processed b y 
the larvae and not solely by th e 
hydrodynamics of larval delivery an d 
retention (compare Jensen an d 
Morse 1990, Mullineaux an d 
Butman 1991, Pawlik and Butma n 
1993, Pawlik et al . 1991, Turner e t 
al . 1994) . Using artificial substrat a 
with and without a sticky coating , 
Walters (1992), for example, showe d 
that barnacle and bryozoan larva e 
actively select microhabitats fo r 
metamorphosis that are differen t 
from the initial sites of hydrody­
namic delivery . Pawlik et al . (1991 ) 
and Mullineaux and Butman (1991) , 
in experiments analyzing the behav­
ior of larvae in hydrodynami c 
flumes, came to similar conclusion s 
for other species . Zimmer-Faust an d 
his colleagues have used innovativ e 
tracking experiments to show tha t 
oyster larvae can follow plumes o f 
soluble peptides to settlement site s 
near conspecifics (Turner et al . 1994 , 
Zimmer-Faust and Tamburri 1994) . 
For some species, and under certai n 
conditions, field work has demon­
strated that the substratum specificit y 
of larval settlement and meta ­
morphosis is an important determinan t 
of the distribution of recruits (i .e . , 
survivors of various postmetamorphi c 
size and age classes) in the natura l 
environment (Connell 1985, Cris p 
1974, Hadfield 1978, 1986, High -
smith 1982, Jensen and Morse 1984 , 
1990, Keough and Downes 1982, A . 
Morse 1992, 1994, A . Morse and 
April 1996 MORPHOGENETIC PATHWAY REGULATORY PATHWA Y 
Alga l Lysine i n 
Peptide Seawate r 
t _CAMP P CI-1 ' 
DG _ '• Excitatory 
5'-AMP / Depolarizatio n 
v 
Behavio r
Gene Expressio n
Differentiatio n
Growt h
Figure 1 . Two convergent chemosensory signal transduction pathways propose d 
to control substratum-specific settlement and metamorphosis of Haliotis rufescen s 
(red abalone) larvae in response to two different kinds of chemical signals fro m 
the environment—one found on the surfaces of certain algae, the other dissolve d 
in seawater . The morphogenetic inducer recognized by these larvae is a GABA -
mimetic oligopeptide (a small peptide whose structure and function resembl e 
those of the neurotransmitter y-aminobutyric acid) produced by the algae o n 
which the larvae are induced to settle . Binding of this signal molecule to a specifi c 
chemosensory receptor (R-1) activates a membrane-associated adenylate cyclas e 
(AC) that catalyzes the production of the intracellular second messenger cycli c 
AMP (cAMP) . cAMP and calcium ions then activate the protein kinase A (PKA) -
catalyzed phosphorylation of a protein that opens a chloride channel (CC) in th e 
chemosensory membrane, leading to the efflux of chloride ions . The result of thi s 
controlled efflux is an excitatory depolarization of the sensory neuron, causing th e 
cell to fire (i .e., to generate an action potential) . In this way, the chemical signa l 
from the environment is transduced to an electrochemical signal that can b e 
propagated by the larval nervous system, leading to the behavioral changes, gen e 
activation, cellular differentiation, and proliferation that result in metamorpho ­
sis. (PDE = cAMP phosphodiesterase, an enzyme that degrades cAMP and limits th e 
persistence and strength of the morphogenetic signal .) In response to threshol d 
concentrations of lysine in seawater (which may serve as an indicator of nutrient -
rich areas), the sensitivity of the larvae to low concentrations of the required alga l 
morphogen is increased as much as 100-fold . This amplification, by a dissolve d 
amino acid, of larval responsiveness to the algal cue is mediated by a separat e 
signal transduction pathway controlled by a chemosensory receptor specific fo r 
lysine (R-2) ; binding of lysine activates a receptor-associated signal transducin g 
G protein (G) that in turn activates a phospholipase (PL), causing it to produce th e 
second messenger diacylglycerol (DG) . This messenger in turn activates a 
diacylglycerol- and calcium-dependent protein kinase (PKC) that phosphorylate s 
a protein required for amplification . The interaction between these tw o 
chemosensory signal transduction pathways, which allow the larvae to read tw o 
different chemical features of the environment, may provide them with a capacit y 
for fine tuning the selection of microhabitats that are favorable for metamorphosi s 
and subsequent growth (Baxter and Morse 1987, 1990, Morse 1990, 1992, 1993 , 
Trapido-Rosenthal and Morse 1986a, 1986b, Wodicka and Morse 1990 . ) 
Morse 1984, Morse et al . 1980b , 
1988, Raimondi 1988, 1990, 1991 , 
Sebens 1983) . 
We have studied in detail fou r 
species (from three different phyla ) 
in which the stringency (degree o f 
dependence) and specificity of th e 
larval requirement for an exogenou s 
inducer of settlement and metamor­
phosis are high (Morse 1990) . In 
these species—the gastropod mol­lusc Haliotis rufescens (red aba­
lone), the gregarious polychaet e 
Phragmatopoma californica, and th e 
scleractinian (stony) corals Agarici a 
humilis and Agaricia tenuifolia­
stringency and specificity do no t 
deteriorate with age in the labora­
tory, in contrast to the behavio r 
exhibited by the less stringent larva e 
of many species, for example bar­
nacles (Jensen and Morse 1984 , 
255 ­
Morse and Morse 1991, Morse e t 
al. 1979, 1980a, 1988) . This capac­
ity to delay metamorphosis in th e 
absence of a required inducer ma y 
enhance both dispersal and substra­
tum specificity of the final distribu­
tion of recruits . Indeed, the distri­
butions of recruits of these specie s 
in the natural environment reflec t 
closely the requirements for settle­
ment and metamorphosis identifie d 
in the laboratory (Jensen and Mors e 
1984, 1990, A . Morse 1992, 1994 , 
Morse 1990, 1992, A . Morse an d 
Morse 1984, Morse et al . 1980b , 
1988) . 
As illustrated in Figure 1, th e 
chemosensory signal recognition an d 
processing mechanisms controllin g 
metamorphosis of abalone larvae i n 
response to both algal substratum -
associated and waterborne chemi­
cal cues are complex (Baxter an d 
Morse 1987, 1992, Morse 1992 , 
1993, Trapido-Rosenthal and Mors e 
1986a, b, Wodicka and Mors e 
1991) . The complexity of thes e 
mechanisms, and their sensitivity t o 
multiple levels of regulation, ma y 
confer on the larvae of some specie s 
a capacity for fine scale discrimina­
tion of (and regulated responsive­
ness to) chemical features of th e 
environment that had not been an­
ticipated just a few years ago (Mors e 
1993) . 
Although the larvae of many tem ­
perate species of several phyla hav e 
now been shown to exhibit cue-de-
pendent, substratum-specific settle­
ment and metamorphosis, some sci­
entists believed that these specie s 
might represent exceptions to a mor e 
general rule and that in marine eco­
systems with the greatest specie s 
diversity, such as tropical coral reefs , 
recruitment might instead be a lot­
tery-like process in which larva l 
settlement is random and chaotic , 
as it may be for some reef-associate d 
fish (Sale 1978) . In these ecosys­
tems, it was thought, settlemen t 
might depend simply on the unpre­
dictable appearance of availabl e 
space and on the delivery of larva e 
of one species or another in th e 
plankton, with little if any contro l 
by chemosensory recognition of sub-
stratum-specific, morphogenic sig­
nal molecules . But it became eviden t 
that among coral species, difference s 
in larval behavior could significantly 
256 affect the distributions of adults (Ba k 
and Engel 1979, Carlon and Olso n 
1993, Gay and Andrews 1994 , 
Morse and Morse 1991, Morse e t 
al . 1988, 1994, Sammarco 1994) . 
The distances that larvae travel, an d 
the depths they select, proved to b e 
important determinants of the spe­
cies-specific patterns of dispersal an d 
recruitment (Carlon and Olso n 
1993, Gay and Andrews 1994 , 
Sammarco 1994) . Detection o f 
chemical cues controlling the selec­
tion of settlement sites also plays a 
role in determining these pattern s 
for coral . 
A morphogenic signa l 
molecule for coral larva e 
In the group of Caribbean coral s 
that we have studied, larval settle­
ment, metamorphosis, and recruit­
ment are determined strictly b y 
contact-dependent chemosensor y 
recognition of specific signal mol­
ecules uniquely available on the sur ­
faces of specific encrusting re d 
algae . Larvae of the common shal­
low-water corals A. humilis and A. 
tenuifolia (members of the grou p 
commonly known as lettuce and rib -
bon corals) settle and metamorphos e 
specifically in response to a nondif­
fusible morphogenic cue on the sur­
faces of Hydrolithon boergeseni i 
and certain other crustose corallin e 
red algae that grow as thin crusts o n 
rocks and dead corals (Morse an d 
Morse 1991, Morse et al . 1988 , 
1994) . This process is ecologicall y 
significant because recruitment o f 
these corals and their closely relate d 
congenerics dominates patterns o f 
scleractinian recruitment through -
out much of the Caribbean (Bak an d 
Engel 1979, Dustan 1977, Hughe s 
1985, Hughes and Jackson 1985 , 
Rogers et al . 1984, Rylaarsda m 
1983, Smith 1992, van Moorse l 
1989) . 
The requirement of the Agarici a 
larvae for this cue is stringent ; in th e 
absence of this signal, the larvae fai l 
to metamorphose and eventually di e 
(Morse and Morse 1991, Morse e t 
al . 1988, 1994) . Moreover, this sig­
nal appears to be specific to a smal l 
number of algae ; the many othe r 
encrusting red algae that look simi­
lar to the naked eye, and account fo r 
the greatest coverage of surface area in the reef environment, lack th e 
inductive molecule and do not in ­
duce the larvae to settle or meta­
morphose . These observations, to­
gether with our finding that in th e 
field, young A. humilis recruits ar e 
found almost exclusively on induc­
tive species of crustose coralline re d 
algae, suggest that the larval re­
quirement for this inducer may con -
tribute, in part, to the spatial pat -
tern of recruitment of this coral i n 
the natural environment . Becaus e 
these coral larvae retain both th e 
stringency and the specificity of thei r 
requirement for more than 30 days , 
this requirement of the larvae i s 
likely to contribute both to the dis­
persion of the species (e .g., fro m 
island to island) and to the mainte­
nance of substratum specificity o f 
recruitment . 
The settlement-inducing molecul e 
that the coral larvae recognize i s 
associated with the insoluble calci­
fied cell walls of the recruiting alga e 
or their microbial associates (Mors e 
et al . 1988) . This insolubility pose d 
an obstacle to purification of th e 
molecule . To overcome this barrier , 
we partially hydrolyzed the induc­
tive cell walls with purified enzyme s 
that cut polysaccharides (the princi­
pal polymers of the cell walls) a t 
specific chemical bonds . This treat­
ment solubilized a fragment of th e 
inducer while at the same time re­
vealing part of its structure . By us­
ing enzymes to map the essentia l 
structural features of the inductiv e 
molecule in much the same way tha t 
specific restriction enzymes now ar e 
used to map the DNA molecules o f 
the genes, we learned that the induc ­
tive portion of the cell wall polyme r 
is a complex sulfated oligosaccha­
ride (Morse and Morse 1991) . 
Although selective enzymatic hy­
drolysis of the inductive cell wal l 
polymer liberates a small, solubl e 
fragment of the molecule that is rec­ognized by the chemosensory recep­
tors of the coral larva and induce s 
metamorphosis, this fragmen t 
proved too unstable to permit fur­
ther purification . We resolved thi s 
problem by gently dissolving th e 
calcified limestonelike matrix of th e 
algal cell walls to release the induc­
tive polymer in a soluble form tha t 
is larger and more stable than th e 
fragment released by hydrolysi s 
BioScience Vol . 46 No . 4 ­
(Morse et al . 1994) . The procedur e 
solubilized the large polymeri c 
morphogen in high yield and in a 
form that can then be further puri­
fied by chromatography . (These re­
sults also showed that the morph­
ogen is a component of the calcifie d 
walls of the recruiting alga itself , 
rather than a product of any con­
taminating microorganisms tha t 
are uncalcified .) When added in so­
lution, the purified signal molecul e 
rapidly induces the swimming lar­
vae to attach to virtually any avail -
able surface (including clean glas s 
or plastic) and quickly metamor­
phose (Figure 2) . Therefore, it is a n 
exogenous molecular signal, rathe r 
than some textural or other featur e 
of the settlement surface, that is th e 
principal requirement for inductio n 
of metamorphosis of these larvae . 
The solubilized polymeric cu e 
possesses both a negatively charged , 
hydrophilic tail (containing the nega ­
tively charged sulfate groups) and a 
hydrophobic head group ; it is thu s 
described as amphipathic . We hav e 
exploited this useful property t o 
concentrate the morphogen by ad -
sorption of the hydrophobic hea d 
groups to a hydrophobic chroma­
tography resin and then to partiall y 
purify the inductive molecule b y 
hydrophobic-interaction chroma­
tography (Morse et al . 1994) . Be-
cause of its negatively charged sul­
fate groups (functionally, the othe r 
end of the molecule from the hydro -
phobic head), the morphogen ca n 
then be further purified by ion-ex-
change chromatography . Fina l 
purification is achieved by gel filtra ­
tion chromatography, which re -
solves molecules on the basis of thei r 
apparent molecular size . The puri­
fied cue molecule is extremely po­
tent and specific in its action ; larva e 
of coral species that are not induce d 
to settle on the specific crustose re d 
alga from which the molecule wa s 
purified are not induced to settle o r 
metamorphose by the purified mol­
ecule . This finding shows that in­
duction is mediated by specific re­
ceptor recognition rather than b y 
direct activation of a more ubiqui­
tous component of a downstrea m 
signal transduction pathway (e .g., a 
protein kinase) . Structural analyse s 
by stereospecific enzymatic dissec­
tions, biochemical analyses, and 
April 1996 Figure 2. (Left) Swimming planktonic larva of the Caribbean coral, Agarici a 
bumilis ; note thousands of small cilia, responsible for propulsion, covering th e 
larval surface . In the absence of added morphogen or alga, there is no settlemen t 
or metamorphosis . (Right) Attachment and metamorphosis of the larva induce d 
by the soluble morphogen (signal molecule) purified from the recruiting alga ; 
endoskeleton of postmetamorphic, differentiated juvenile shown attached t o 
polystyrene two days after induction by the purified signal molecule . Scannin g 
electron micrographic images are not to scale ; larva is 0 .7 mm and postmetamorphi c 
juvenile is 1 .5 mm . (From Morse and Morse 1991 . ) 
proton nuclear magnetic resonanc e 
have confirmed and extended ou r 
earlier results, indicating that th e 
purified inducer molecule is a highl y 
sulfated iipoglycosaminoglycan ( a 
kind of complex polysaccharide ) 
containing repeating (3(1,4)-linke d 
N-acetyl-lactosamine sulfate unit s 
and a lipidlike aliphatic side chai n 
(Morse and Morse 1991, Morse e t 
al. 1994) . This structure explain s 
the amphipathic properties of th e 
molecule ; the many sulfated sugar s 
provide the negatively charged hy­
drophilic tail, whereas the lipid i s 
the strongly hydrophobic head . 
Morphogen-based flypaper fo r 
Caribbean coral s 
We have further exploited the stron g 
hydrophobic property of the puri­
fied signal molecule to couple it t o 
small (50-micron) inert acrylic bead s 
of a hydrophobic interaction chro­
matography resin that we then ce­
mented to plastic surfaces . The re­
sult is a prototype morphogen-base d 
chemical flypaper for A . humili s 
larvae (Figure 3) that is proving use ­
ful for recruitment studies in th e 
field . 
The purified and immobilize d 
morphogenic cue retains its full ac­
tivity and remains tightly bound t o 
the inert acrylic beads in seawate r 
(Morse et al . 1994) . Activity of thi s 
purified and immobilized cue prove d 
to be identical in the ocean and the laboratory (when tested with A . 
bumilis larvae produced in the labo ­
ratory) . The metamorphosis-induc­
ing activity does not leach off int o 
the seawater because the high salin ­
ity keeps the amphipathic signa l 
molecule tightly bound to the hy­
drophobic surface . 
When tested with larvae in Nylo n 
mesh microcosm containers in th e 
field, the response of the larvae t o 
the purified inducer on these artifi­
cial surfaces was identical to thei r 
response to the natural inductiv e 
alga : all of the larvae settled an d 
metamorphosed . By contrast, i n 
matched controls in the absence o f 
the inducer or the inductive alga , 
settlement was nil (Morse et al . 
1994) . To our knowledge, this puri ­
fied morphogen is the first highl y 
purified natural inducer of larva l 
settlement and metamorphosis to b e 
incorporated into an artificial sub -
stratum suitable for testing factor s 
that control recruitment in the ocean . 
(Although artificial substrata wer e 
used for studies of settlement an d 
recruitment of the polychaete, P . 
californica [Jensen and Morse 1984 , 
1990, Pawlik 1986, 1988], the cue s 
employed in those earlier studie s 
did not satisfy these criteria [Jense n 
et al . 1990] .) This uniform, non -
sticky morphogen-based recruitin g 
surface has the great advantage o f 
eliminating the complexities an d 
variability of the natural algal sub -
strata that usually confound the ef -
257 /.null /.null ­
Larval Flypape r 
Figure 3 . Prototype larval flypaper, il ­
lustrated schematically . The purifie d 
signal molecule (cue) is shown attache d 
to spherical beads of hydrophobic chro ­
matography resin, which is then cemente d 
to a plastic surface . This material induce s 
substratum-specific settlement and meta ­
morphosis of Agaricia humilis coral lar ­
vae in the ocean and in the laborator y 
(Morse et al . 1994) . Binding of induce r 
to narrow channels inside the beads , 
and inefficient contribution by th e 
spherical beads to surface area cover -
age of the plastic sheet, provided tar -
gets for improvement, as shown in Fig ­
ure 4. 
5555 
115 5 
) t) [~I t~J t!1 l 
Larval Flypape r 
Figure 4. Improved larval flypaper . Th e 
purified signal molecule is shown at­
tached to adaptor molecules that ar e 
coupled to an inert, nonporous surface . 
The hydrophobic head groups of th e 
signal molecule are bound by hydro -
phobic pockets on the adaptors . Th e 
result is a uniform deployment of th e 
inducer of larval settlement over th e 
surface . Activity is shown in Figure 5. 
fects of chemical morphogen wit h 
those of heterogeneity of texture an d 
shape, presence or absence of cryp­
tic animal predators or allelopathi c 
competitors, and other chemical an d 
biological interactions . Moreover , 
it allows researchers to experimen­
tally control substratum location an d 
orientation . 
We believe that these and simila r 
cue-containing surfaces are likely t o 
be especially useful for experiment s 
designed to identify the physical and 
258 biological factors that control th e 
settlement and metamorphosis o f 
larvae and the recruitment of coral s 
and other valuable resource specie s 
in the ocean . The results of our ex­
periments with A. humilis larvae i n 
microcosms demonstrate that ther e 
is no difference in the response o f 
competent larvae to inductive sur­
faces over a range of depths from 3 
m to 30 m ; nearly all settle whe n 
they contact the inductive surface , 
and they do so only on inducer -
containing surfaces .' Hence, settle­
ment on the morphogen-containin g 
surfaces in the open reef environ­
ment should provide accurate esti­
mates of the abundance and deliver y 
of cue-responsive larvae and thu s 
help explain the depth distribution s 
of the Agariciid corals . Studies suc h 
as these should allow researchers t o 
use larval flypaper-type surfaces a s 
tools to resolve the contributions o f 
the abundances, delivery, and be­
havior of larvae in the plankton , 
larval recognition of surface-associ­
ated signal molecules, an d of othe r u rrtc~i~ "~ 
features of the environment, to th e 
control of recruitment of many spe­
cies in the natural environment . 
Improvements in larva l 
flypaper technolog y 
To develop an experimental too l 
that can be placed in the open t o 
analyze the availability and behav­
ior of larvae in the plankton, it i s 
necessary to increase the scale o f 
production significantly . Large sur­
face areas of inductive substrate ar e 
likely to be needed if the material i s 
to be useful for the induction o f 
settlement and metamorphosis of so -
called wild larvae out of the plank -
ton. We estimate that the efficienc y 
and scale of production must b e 
increased by an order of magnitude . 
Because all attempts thus far to sub­
stitute a small molecule for the com­
plex natural cue for Agaricia hav e 
been unsuccessful, this increase d 
scale of production must depend o n 
improvements in surface deploymen t 
of the purified natural cue . Recen t 
experiments suggest that this goa l 
'P . Raimondi and A. Morse, 1996, manuscrip t 
in preparation . Marine Science Institute, Uni ­
versity of California, Santa Barbara, CA . Figure 5. Two-day-old coral (Agarici a 
humilis) induced to settle as a larva an d 
to metamorphose on an improved in­
ductive surface prepared by couplin g 
the morphogenic signal molecules to a 
glass disc, as diagrammed in Figure 4. 
The radial white pattern of the cora l 
skeleton (1.5 mm diameter) develope d 
rapidly after metamorphosis . There wa s 
no settlement or metamorphosis on oth ­
erwise identical surfaces that lacked th e 
signal molecule . (Photograph courtes y 
of Larry Friesen . ) 
is feasible . 
We made the first prototype in­
ductive substratum (Figure 3) usin g 
a commercially available hydropho­
bic chromatography resin . This resi n 
is manufactured as porous spherica l 
beads containing a dense networ k 
of minute pores and channels de -
signed to maximize the internal sur­
face area available for adsorption , 
thus maximizing chromatographi c 
efficiency . The large internal sur­
face area within these pores (onl y 
0.0001 mm in diameter) is not ac­
cessible to the much larger cora l 
larvae (approximately 1 mm in di­
ameter) ; thus, only a fraction of th e 
purified inducer molecules adsorbe d 
to these porous beads was actuall y 
on the outer surface, accessible t o 
the larvae . The spherical beads als o 
contribute inefficiently to surfac e 
coverage of a recruitment pane l 
(compare Figure 3) . By substitutin g 
nonporous flat surfaces of hydro -
phobic polymer for the highly po­
rous acrylic beads, it should be pos­
sible to cover large surfaces with a 
uniform, monomolecular layer o f 
the purified inducer, thus ensurin g 
maximal exposure of all of the cu e 
molecules to the coral larvae in th e 
BioScience Vol . 46 No . 4 

environment . Using surface chemis­
try techniques employed in the pro­
duction of new semiconductors an d 
optoelectronic materials (Wudl e t 
al. 1991), we are investigating th e 
synthesis of hydrophobic surface s 
suitable for coupling the purifie d 
inducer to plastic or glass (Figur e 
4) . This approach is proving fea­
sible (Figure 5) and should allow u s 
to produce sufficient quantities o f 
inductive surfaces for new and in­
teresting applications . The versatil­
ity of the new coupling technologie s 
(Wudl et al . 1991) should also mak e 
it possible to adapt other chemica l 
linkages and to produce similar sur­
face-coupled inducers for other spe­
cies as well . 
New applications of larva l 
flypaper technolog y 
Use of the larval flypaper for A . 
humilis has helped to validate th e 
hypothesis that larval recognitio n 
of the purified and immobilize d 
natural inducing molecule is respon ­
sible, in part, for substratum-spe­
cific settlement and recruitment o f 
this coral in the natural environ­
ment . Improvements in this technol­
ogy and its extension to other spe­
cies may prove useful for severa l 
applications . Larval flypapers fo r 
Agariciid corals (and possibly othe r 
species as well) should provide prac ­
tical tools for experiments resolvin g 
the roles of settlement cues, larva l 
behavior, delivery and abundanc e 
of responsive larvae in the plank -
ton, and other factors controllin g 
the recruitment of species in th e 
marine environment . Such materi­
als might be especially useful in stud ­
ies of larval recruitment to the uniqu e 
deep sea hydrothermal vent com­
munities, if inducers of vent specie s 
larvae can be purified and couple d 
to surfaces as described here . Thes e 
materials may also serve as earl y 
warning devices for detecting an d 
monitoring changes in the abun­
dance of responsive larvae that re­
flect the impacts of environmenta l 
changes on reefs and other sensitiv e 
ecosystems in the ocean . Larval fly -
papers may also prove useful for th e 
reseeding of corals and other specie s 
for environmental restoration, start­ing with larvae produced in onshor 
e 
hatcheries and settled on inductive 
April 1996 flypapers for outplanting to the natu ­
ral environment . They may also im­
prove the economic efficiency o f 
cultivation of valuable marine re -
source species for which feeding re­
quirements and growth rates mak e 
intensive on-land aquaculture eco­
nomically impractical . 
We are most interested in usin g 
larval flypapers containing immobi­
lized morphogens prepared fro m 
closely similar algal species to investi -
gate the specificity of morphogen rec ­
ognition by the cognate larval recep -
tors. This should allow us to investigat e 
the possibility that differences in cu e 
recognition may contribute to the dif ­
ferences in substratum specificity o f 
recruitment among closely related sib -
ling species of corals . These experi­
ments would enable us to test ou r 
hypothesis that changes in larval speci ­
ficity may serve as an axis for th e 
rapid evolution of niche diversifica­
tion and speciation (Morse et al . 1994) , 
thereby contributing to the remark -
ably high degree of specialization an d 
niche diversification now recognize d 
in coral reef fauna (e .g., Knowlto n 
and Jackson 1994) . 
We are also interested in the pos­
sibility that larval flypaper-typ e 
materials may prove useful in stud­
ies of the recruitment of some spe­
cies of fish and perhaps also ma y 
enhance the activities of artificia l 
reefs designed to enhance specifi c 
fisheries . Thus far there has bee n 
little success in the identification o f 
factors controlling niche-specifi c 
settlement and metamorphosis o f 
fish larvae from the plankton . Al -
though the larvae of pelagic an d 
midwater fish develop directly int o 
the adult form without an apparen t 
requirement for a substratum-spe­
cific morphogenic inducer, the lar­
vae of some symbiotic or niche-spe­
cific fishes may possess such a 
requirement amenable to flypaper -
like control . 
Prospects fo r 
medical application s 
The larval receptors and signal trans ­
ducers that we have found control -
ling settlement and metamorphosi s 
of planktonic abalone, polychaete , 
and coral larvae in response to sig­
nal molecules from the environmen t 
are functionally, structurally, and (in some cases) genetically homolo­
gous to counterparts that regulat e 
neuronal and hormonal signal rec­
ognition, signal processing, differ­
entiation, and proliferation in hu­
man cells (Baxter and Morse 1987 , 
1992, Morse 1985, 1990, 1993 , 
Morse and Morse 1993, Morse e t 
al. 1979, 1980a, b, Wodicka an d 
Morse 1991) . This homology, whic h 
in turn suggests evolutionary relat­
edness of the larval and mammalia n 
receptors for these signals, led us t o 
predict that the signal molecules tha t 
induce marine invertebrate larva e 
to settle and metamorphose may als o 
bind with high specificity to the cor -
responding receptors from highe r 
organisms and thus be potentiall y 
useful as new pharmaceuticals fo r 
human medicine . 
Such cross-talk has now been see n 
in two widely divergent cases . On e 
morphogen purified from corallin e 
red algae also binds tightly and spe­
cifically to GABA (y-aminobutyri c 
acid) receptors purified from th e 
mammalian brain (A. Morse 1988 , 
Morse and Morse 1992) . This alga l 
oligopeptide inducer of abalon e 
metamorphosis may thus prove use­
ful for the development of new thera ­
peutic and diagnostic agents for dis­
orders of GABA receptors in th e 
human brain, including epilepsie s 
and various depressive and sleep dis -
orders . The second instance of cross -
talk involves the sulfated polysac­
charide that the Agaricia cora l 
larvae recognize on the surfaces o f 
specific algae . This anionic polysac­
charide is structurally similar to th e 
anionic polysaccharide that form s 
an essential component of the signa l 
molecule recognized on the lymp h 
node endothelia by specific recep­
tors on mammalian lymphocytes . 
These mammalian homing receptor s 
regulate recruitment of the lympho­
cytes from the circulation, inducin g 
attachment, proliferation, and dif­
ferentiation of the white blood cell s 
to produce antibodies in a proces s 
that is strikingly parallel to the re­
cruitment, settlement, and metamor­
phosis of the coral larvae from th e 
plankton (Figure 6) . We discovere d 
that the sulfated algal polysaccha­
ride purified on the basis of its activ ­
ity as a morphogen for Agarici a 
coral larvae strongly stimulates th e 
proliferation of mammalian lympho -
259 /.null /.null /.null /.null /.null /.null /.null ­ ­ 
.­ 
Substratum-Specific Proliferatio n 
Recruitment and Differentiatio n 
Agarici a 
Settlemen t 
Lymphocyt e 
Homin g APS 
Figure 6 . Parallels between the substratum-specific induction of recruitment o f 
Agaricia coral larvae and mammalian lymphocyte homing induced by receptor -
mediated chemosensory recognition of morphogenic signal molecules containin g 
anionic polysaccharides (APS) . Recognition of specific APS-containing signa l 
molecules on the algal surface induces the coral larva to settle from the plankton , 
attach to the surface, and commence cellular proliferation and differentiation , 
resulting in metamorphosis . Recognition of specific APS-containing signal mol­
ecules on the capillary endothelium of the lymph node induces the lymphocyte t o 
settle from the circulating blood, attach to the endothelium, invade the lymp h 
node, and commence cellular proliferation and differentiation to produce anti -
bodies (shown in blue) . 
0 10 20 30 40 50 
Morphogenic Sulfated Polysaccharide (pl ) 
Figure 7 . The sulfated polysaccharid e 
inducer of Agaricia hurnilis metamor­
phosis induces proliferation of mous e 
lymphocytes in tissue culture . Cell divi ­
sion is monitored by the incorporatio n 
of tritiated thymidine (TdR) into repli­
cating DNA . 
cytes in tissue culture (Figure 7 ; 
Morse and Morse 1991) . This find­
ing suggests that a new family o f 
pharmaceuticals based on this sig­
nal molecule might be useful a s 
stimulators of the immune system t o 
help combat cancers and a variety o f 
viral and other infectious and im­
munodeficiency diseases . Couplin g 
these agents to flypaper-like sur -
260 faces incorporated into circulator y 
shunts also might enable it to selec­
tively remove specific subpopula ­
tions of lymphocytes from the bod y 
for therapeutic manipulation (includ­
ing, for example, treatment wit h 
doses of agents that might be toxi c 
to the whole body or genetic therap y 
with recombinant DNA) ex situ, be -
fore reintroduction to the patient' s 
circulation . 
Conclusion s 
As the morphogenic inducers recog­
nized by the larvae of more marin e 
species are identified and purified , 
as synthetic analogs of these mol­
ecules are synthesized, and as ne w 
coupling technologies are developed , 
extensions of larval flypaper tech­
nology should become common -
place . Research with morphogen­
containing artificial surfaces can b e 
expected to help resolve those fac­
tors controlling larval settlement , 
metamorphosis, and recruitment i n 
the ocean . Practical applications in 
marine ecosystem monitoring, man­
agement, and reseeding can be ex -
tended from coral reefs to other eco­
systems, and they may prove usefu l 
to commercial aquaculture and eve n 
to human medicine . Acknowledgment s 
This research was supported by a 
grant from the Biological Oceanog­
raphy Program of the National Sci­
ence Foundation (OCE92-01242 ) 
and a Regents Fellowship from th e 
Smithsonian Institution to Daniel E . 
Morse . We thank Peter Raimondi , 
Theodore Fickel, Neal Hooker, an d 
Juliana Hydanus for their importan t 
contributions, and Monika Fritz , 
Angela Belcher, Galen Stucky, an d 
Fred Wudl for helpful suggestion s 
and discussions . We also thank th e 
Government of Bonaire, Netherland s 
Antilles, and our colleagues in 
Bonaire, Roberto Hensen and Kal i 
de Meyer of the Marine Park Au­
thority, Eric Newton of the Depart­
ment of Natural Resources, and Ji m 
Brandon, Rene Haakenberg, and 
Hugo Geraerts for their generou s 
hospitality and assistance . 
References cite d 
1970 . Bak .. .. MC 1979 Distribution, abun -
dance and survival of juvenile hermatypi c 
corals (Scleractinia) and the importance o f 
life history strategies in the parent cora l 
community . Marine Biology 59: 341-352 . 
Baxter G, Morse DE . 1987. G protein an d 
diacylglycerol regulate metamorphosis o f 
planktonic molluscan larvae . Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of th e 
United States of America 84: 1867-1870 . 
. 1992 . Cilia from abalone larvae con ­
tain a receptor-dependent G protein trans ­
duction system similar to that in mammals . 
Biological Bulletin 183 : 147–154 . 
Bonar DB, Coon SL, Walsh M, Weiner RM , 
Fitt WK. 1990 . Control of oyster settlemen t 
and metamorphosis by endogenous an d 
exogenous chemical cues . Bulletin of Ma ­
rine Science 46: 484-498 . 
Butman CA, Grassle JP. 1992 . Active habita t 
selection by Capitella sp. 1 larvae : I. Two -
choice experiments in still water and flum e 
flows . Journal of Marine Research 50 : 
669-715 . 
Carlon DB, Olson RR . 1993 . Larval dispersa l 
distance as an explanation for adult spatia l 
pattern in two caribbean reef corals . Jour ­
nal of Experimental Marine Biology an d 
Ecology 173 : 247-263 . 
Connell JH . 1985 . The consequences of varia ­
tion in initial settlement vs . post-settlemen t 
mortality in rocky intertidal communities . 
Journal of Experimental Marine Biolog y
and Ecology 93: 11–45 . 
Crisp DJ . 1974 . Factors influencing settlemen t 
of marine invertebrate larvae . Page s 
177–265 in Grant PT, Mackie AM, eds . 
Chemoreception in marine organisms . Ne w 
York : Academic Press . 
Degnan BM, Morse DE. 1993 . Identification o f 
eight homeobox-containing transcripts ex -
pressed during larval development and a t 
metamorphsis in the gastropod mollus c 
BioScience Vol . 46 No . 4 /.null 
Haliotis rufescens . Molecular Marine Biol­
ogy and Biotechnology 2 : 1–9 . ­ . 1995 . Developmental and morphoge­
netic gene regulation in Haliotis rufescen s 
larvae at metamorphosis, American Zoolo­
gist 35 : 391-398 . 
Dustan P . 1977 . Vitality of reef coral popula­
tions off Key Largo, Florida : recruitmen t 
and mortality . Environmental Geology an d 
Water Sciences 2 : 51–58 . 
Fitt WK, Hofmann DK, Wolk M, Rahat M . 
1987 . Requirements of exogenous inducer s 
for the development of axenic larvae an d 
buds of Cassiopea andromeda (Cnidaria : 
Scyphozoan) . Marine Biology 94 : 415–422 . 
Gay SL, Andrews JC . 1994 . The effects o f 
recruitment strategies on coral larvae settle ­
ment distributions at Helix Reef . Page s 
73–88 in Sammarco PW, Heron ML, eds . 
The bio-physics of marine larval dispersal . 
Washington (DC) : American Geophysica l 
Union . 
Grassle JP, Burman CA . 1992 . Active habita t 
selection by Capitella sp . 1 larvae : 2. Mul ­
tiple-choice experiments in still water an d 
flume flows . Journal of Marine Researc h 
50: 717–743 . 
Hadfield MG . 1978 . Metamorphosis in marin e 
molluscan larvae : an analysis of stimulu s 
and response . Pages 165–175 in Chia F- S 
Rice ME, eds . Settlement and metamorpho­
sis of marine invertebrate larvae . New York : 
Elsevier . 
. 1986 . Settlement and recruitment o f 
marine invertebrates : a perspective and som e 
proposals . Bulletin of Marine Science 39 : 
418–425 . 
Hadfield MG, Pennington JT . 1990 . Nature o f 
the metamorphic signal and its interna l 
transduction in larvae of the nudibranc h 
Phestilla sibogae . Bulletin of Marine Sci­
ence 46 : 455–464 . 
Highsmith RC . 1982 . Induced settlement an d 
metamorphosis of sand dollar (Dendraste r 
excentricus) larvae in predator-free sites : 
adult sand dollar beds . Ecology 63 : 329-337 . 
Holmstrom C, Rittschof D, Kjelleberg S . 1992 . 
Inhibition of settlement by larvae of Balanu s 
amphitrite and Cliona intestinalis by a sur­
face colonizing marine bacterium . Applie d 
and Environmental Microbiology 58 : 
2111–2115 . 
Hughes TP . 1985 . Life histories and popula­
tion dynamics of early successional corals . 
Pages 101–106 in Proceedings of the 5t h 
International Coral Reef Congress . Moore s 
(French Polynesia ) : Antenne Museu m-Ephe . 
Hughes TP, Jackson JBC . 1985 . Populatio n 
dynamics and life histories of foliaceou s 
corals . Ecological Monographs 55 : 141 – 
166 . 
Jensen R, Morse DE . 1984 . Intraspecific facili­
tation of larval recruitment : gregariou s 
settlement of the polychaete Phragma­
topoma californica . Journal of Experimenta l 
Marine Biology and Ecology 83 : 107–126 . ­ . 1990 . Chemically induced metamor­
phosis of polychaete larvae in both th e 
laboratory and the ocean environment . Jour ­
nal of Chemical Ecology 16 : 911–930 . 
Jensen RA, Morse DE, Petty RL, Hooker N . 
1990 . Artificial induction of larval meta ­
morphosis by free fatty acids . Marine Ecol­
ogy Progress Series 67 : 55–71 . 
Johnson LE, Strathmann RR . 1989 . Settlin g 
barnacle larvae avoid substrata previously 
April 1996 ocupied by a mobile predator . Journal o f 
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecolog y 
128 : 87–103 . 
Keough MJ, Downes BJ . 1982 . Recruitment o f 
marine invertebrates : the role of active lar­
val choices and early mortality . Oecologi a 
54: 348-352 . 
Knowlton N, Jackson JBC . 1994 . New tax­
onomy and niche partioning on coral reefs : 
jack of all trades or master of some? Trend s 
in Ecology & Evolution 9 : 7–9 . 
Morse ANC . 1988 . The role of algal metabo­
lites in the recruitment process . Page s 
463–473 in Thompson MF, Sarojini R , 
Nagabhushanam R, eds . Marine bio­
deterioration . Washington (DC) : America n 
Institute of Biological Sciences . ­ . 1992 . Role of algae in the recruitmen t 
of marine invertebrate larvae . Page s 
385–403 in John DM, et al ., eds . Plant -
animal interactions in the marine benthos . 
Systematics Association Special Vol . 46 . 
Oxford (UK) : Clarendon Press . ­ . 1994 . Biological diversity in benthi c 
communities : the role of molecular an d 
genetic mechanisms in structuring and main ­
taining niche-specific habitats . Page s 
207–212 in Thompson MF, Nagabhus­
hanam R, Sarojini R, Fingerman M, eds . 
Recent developments in biofouling control . 
Washington (DC) : American Institute o f 
Biological Sciences . 
Morse ANC, Morse DE . 1984 . Recruitmen t 
and me tamorphosis of Haliotis larvae ar e 
induced by molecules uniquely available a t 
the surfaces of crustose red algae . Journa l 
of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecol­
ogy 75 : 191–215 . 
Morse DE . 1985 . Neurotransmitter-mimeti c 
inducers of settlement and metamorphosi s 
of marine planktonic larvae . Bulletin o f 
Marine Science 37 : 697–706 . 
. 1990 . Recent progress in larval settle­
ment and metamorphosis : closing the gap s 
between molecular biology and ecology . 
Bulletin of Marine Science 46 : 465–483 . ­ . 1992 . Molecular mechanisms control -
ling metamorphosis and recruitment in aba­
lone larvae . Pages 107–119 in Shepherd SA , 
Tegner MJ, Guzman del Pro SA, eds . Aba­
lone of the world : ecology, fisheries, an d 
culture . Oxford (UK) : Blackwell . ­ . 1993 . Signaling in planktonic larvae . 
Nature 363 : 406 . 
Morse DE, Morse ANC . 1991 . Enzymatic char ­
acterization of the morphogen recognize d 
by Agaricia humilis (scleractinian coral ) 
larvae . Biological Bulletin 181 : 104–122 . ­ . 1992 . Molecular signals, receptors an d 
genes controlling reproduction, develop­
ment and growth in marine invertebrates . 
Bulletin of the Institute of Zoology Aca­
demia Sinica (Taipei) 16 : 441–454 . ­ . 1993 . Marine biotechnology : contro l 
of larval metamorphosis . Pages 206–219 i n 
Tien W, ed . Biotechnology . Taipei : Devel­
opment Center of Biotechnology . 
Morse DE, Hooker N, Duncan H, Jensen L . 
1979 . y-aminobutyric acid, a neurotrans­
mitter, induces planktonic abalone larva e 
to settle and begin metamorphosis . Scienc e 
204: 407–410 . 
Morse DE, Duncan H, Hooker N, Baloun A , 
Young G . 1980a . GABA induces behaviora l 
and developmental metamorphosis in plank -
tonic molluscan larvae . Federation Proceed ­ings 39 : 3237-3241 . 
Morse DE, Tegner M, Duncan H, Hooker N , 
Trevelyan G, Cameron A . 1980h . Induc­
tion of settling and metamorphosis of plank -
tonic molluscan (Haliotis) larvae : III . Sig­
naling by metabolites of intact algae i s 
dependent on contact . Pages 67–86 in 
Muller-Schwarze D, Silverstein RM, eds . 
Chemical signals in vertebrate and aquati c 
animals . New York : Plenum Press . 
Morse DE, Hooker N, Morse ANC, Jensen R . 
1988 . Control of larval metamorphosis an d 
recruitment in sympatric agariciid corals . 
Journal of Experimental Marine Biolog y 
and Ecology 116 : 193–217 . 
Morse DE, Morse ANC, Raimondi PT, Hooke r 
N. 1994 . Morphogen-based chemical fly -
paper for Agaricia bunulis coral larvae . 
Biological Bulletin 186 : 172–181 . 
Mullineaux LS, Butman CA . 1991 . Initial con -
tact, exploration and attachment of bar­
nacle (Balanus amphitrite) cyprids settlin g 
in flow . Marine Biology 110 : 93-103 . 
Pawlik JR . 1986 . Chemical induction of larva l 
settlement and metamorphosis in the reef -
building tube worm Phragmatopom a 
californica (Sabellariidae : Polychaeta) . 
Marine Biology 91 : 59–68 . ­ . 1988 . Larval settlement and metamor­
phosis of two gregarious sabellariid poly­
chaetes : Sabellaria alveolata compared wit h 
Phragmatopoma californica . Journal of th e 
Marine Biological Association of the Unite d 
Kingdom 68 : 1 0 1–124 . ­ . 1992 . Chemical ecology of the settle­
ment of benthic marine invertebrates . 
Oceanography and Marine Biology an An­
nual Review 30 : 273-335 . 
Pawlik J, Butman CA . 1993 . Settlement of a 
marine tube worm as a function of curren t 
velocity : interacting effects of hydrodynam ­
ics and behavior . Limnology and Oceanog­
raphy 38 : 1730–1740 . 
Pawlik J, Butman CA, Starczak VR . 1991 . 
Hydrodynamic facilitation of gregariou s 
settlement in a reef-building tube worm . 
Science 251 : 421-424 . 
Raimondi PT . 1988 . Settlement cues and deter ­
mination of the vertical limit of an inter -
tidal barnacle . Ecology 69 : 400-407 . ­ . 1990 . Patterns, mechanisms, and con -
sequences of variability in settlement an d 
recruitment in an intertidal barnacle . Eco­
logical Monographs 60 : 283-309 . ­ . 1991 . The settlement behavior o f 
Chthamalus anisopoma largely determine s 
its adult distribution . Oecologia 85 : 349–360 . 
Rittschof D . 1993 . Body odors and neutral -
basic peptide mimics : a review of response s 
by marine organisms . American Zoologis t 
33: 487-493 . 
Rogers CS, Fitz HC III, Gilnack M, Beets J , 
Hardin J . 1984 . Scleractinian coral recruit­
ment patterns at Salt River submarine can -
yon, St . Croix, U .S. Virgin Islands . Cora l 
Reefs 3 : 69–76 . 
Rylaarsdam KW . 1983 . Life histories and abun -
dance patterns of colonial corals on Jamai­
can reefs . Marine Ecology Progress Serie s 
13 : 249–260 . 
Sale P . 1978 . Coexistence of coral reef fishes — 
a lottery for living space . Environmenta l 
Biology of Fishes 3 : 85-102 . 
Sammarco PW . 1994 . Larval dispersal an d 
recruitment processes in Great Barrier Ree f 
Coral : analysis and synthesis . Pages 35–7 2 
261 
 
in Sammarco PW, Heron ML, eds . The bio­
physics of marine larval dispersal . Wash­
ington (DC) : American Geophysical Union . 
Sammarco P\V, Heron ML, eds . 1994 . The bio -
physics of marine larval dispersal . Wash­
ington (DC) : American Geophysical Union . 
Sebens KP . 1983 . The larval and juvenile ecol­
ogy of the temperate octocoral Alcyoniu m 
siderium Verrill . I . Substratum selection b y 
benthic larvae . Journal of Experimenta l 
Marine Biology and Ecology 71 : 73-89 . 
Smith SR . 1992 . Patterns of coral recruitmen t 
and post-settlement mortality on Bermuda' s 
reefs : comparisons to Caribbean and Pa­
cific reefs . American Zoologist 32 : 663-673 . 
Trapido-Rosenthal HG, Morse DE . 1986a . 
Availability of chemosensory receptors i s 
down-regulated by habituation of larve to a 
morphogenic signal . Proceedings of th e 
National Academy of Sciences of the Unite d 
States of America 83 : 7658-7662 . ­ . 1986b . Regulation of receptor-medi­
ated settlement and metamorphosis in lar­
vae of a gastropod mollusc (Halioti s 
rufescens) . Bulletin of Marine Science 39 : 
383-392 . 
Turner EJ, Zimmer-Faust RK, Palmer MA , 
Luckenbach BMW . 1994 . Settlement of ous ­
ter (Crassostraea rirginica) larvae : effect s 
of water flow and a water-soluble chemica l 
cue. Limnology and Oceanography 39 : 
1579-1593 . 
Van Nloorsel GWNM . 1989 . Juvenile ecolog y 
and reproductive strategies of reef corals . 
[Ph .D . dissertation .] Rijksuniversireit , 
Groningen, the Netherlands . 
Wethey D . 1986 . Ranking of settlement cues b y 
barnacle larvae : influence of surface con -
tour. Bulletin of Marine Science 39 : 
393-400 . 
Wodicka LM, Morse DE . 1990 . cDNA se­
quences reveal mRNAs for two G a signa l 
transducing proteins from larval cilia . Bio­
logical Bulletin 180 : 318-327 . 
Woodin SA . 1991 . Recruitment of infauna : 
positive or negative cues? American Zoolo­
gist 31 : 797-807 . 
Wudl F, Allemaud PM, Sradnov G, Ni Z , 
McBranch D . 1991 . Pages 683—686 in 
Marder SR, Sohn JE, Stucky GD . Material s 
for nonlinear optics : chemical perspectives . 
Washington (DC) : American Chemical So­
ciety . 
Zimmer-Faust RK, Tamburri MN . 1994 . 
Chemical identity and ecological implica­
tions of a waterborne larval settlement cue . 
Limnology and Oceanography 39 : 1075 -
1087 . 
262 Ir°s TiME To STO P
THE B 
96,000 acres of irreplaceable rain fores t 
are burned every day . 
The rain forest is the world's largest phar­
maceutical storehouse . It provides source s 
for a quarter of today's drugs and medicine s 
and seventy percent of the plants found t o 
have anticancer properties . 
This senseless destruction must stop . NOW ! 
Join The National Arbor Day Foundation, the world's larg­
est tree-planting environmental organization, and suppor t 
Rain Forest Rescue to help stop the destruction . 
You'd better call now . 
Call Rain Forest Rescue . 
The Nationa l 1-800-255-550 0Arbor Day Foundation 
BioScience Vol . 46 No . 4 