HELCOM
2021 updateAction PlanBaltic Sea
helcom.fiOctober 2021Baltic Marine Environment 
Protection CommissionHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 update 
2 3
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 update 
Preamble     4
About      6
Biodiversity     10
Eutrophication     18
Hazardous substances and litter   28
Sea-based activities    36
Horizontal  topics     48
Climate change     50
Monitoring     52
Maritime spatial planning    53
Economic and social analysis   54
Hot Spots     55
Knowledge exchange and awareness raising  55
Financing     56
References     58Content
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updatePreamble
4 5
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updatePreamble
Preamble
1.	 The Commission, represented by:
 —the Minister of the Environment of the Kingdom of Denmark,
 —the Deputy Secretary General, Ministry of the Environment 
of the Republic of Estonia,
 —the Minister of the Environment and Climate Change of the 
Republic of Finland,
 —the State Secretary, Ministry for the Environment, Nature 
Conservation and Nuclear Safety of the Federal Republic 
of Germany,
 —the Minister of Environmental Protection and Regional 
Development of the Republic of Latvia,
 —the Minister of Environment of the Republic of Lithuania,
 —the Deputy Minister of Infrastructure of the Republic of 
Poland,
 —the Deputy Minister for Natural Resources and Environment 
of the Russian Federation,
 —the	Ambassador	 for	the	Ocean,	Ministry	for	Foreign	Affairs	
of the Kingdom of Sweden,
 —and by the Commissioner of Environment, Oceans and 
Fisheries of the European Commission,
2.	 RECALLS  the provisions of the 1992 Convention on the Protec -
tion of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area (Helsinki 
Convention); 
3.	 REITERATES  the commitment of the Contracting Parties to the 
Helsinki Convention to restoring a thriving and resilient Baltic 
Sea ecosystem, as expressed in the HELCOM vision of “a healthy 
Baltic Sea environment, with diverse biological components 
functioning in balance, resulting in good environmental status 
and supporting a wide range of sustainable human economic 
and social activities”; 
4.	 ACKNOWLEDGES  that the work of HELCOM has led to sig -
nificant	environmental	 improvements	 in	many	areas	and,	
specifically,	 that	progress	in	implementing	 the	2007	Baltic	Sea	
Action Plan has contributed to preventing further deterioration 
of the environment of the Baltic Sea; 
5.	 APPRECIATES  that HELCOM policy and work are guided by 
the ecosystem approach and that the Baltic Sea Action Plan 
is	a	practical	reflection	of	that	approach;
6.	 NOTES  with great concern, however, that the goals of the 
2007	Baltic	Sea	Action	Plan	were	not	achieved	 by	2021	as	
envisioned,	 and	that	the	Baltic	Sea	is	still	heavily	affected	by	
multiple pressures caused by human activities;
7.	 NOTES,  in particular, that: (a) eutrophication continues to 
significantly	 impact	the	Baltic	Sea;	(b)	levels	of	hazardous	 sub-
stances are still elevated or unknown and a cause for concern; 
(c) invasive alien species are still being introduced into the 
Baltic Sea; (d) marine litter is a pressure of special concern; (e) 
around half of the sea-bed is potentially disturbed by human 
activity; (f) other pressures such as underwater noise disturb 
marine life; (g) overall the unfavourable conservation status of 
Baltic marine biodiversity results from human activities and is widespread, with several species still in danger of becoming 
extinct, a poor status of most of the assessed habitats and 
various biotopes and habitats at risk of disappearing, as well 
as food webs showing signs of deterioration;
8.	 REITERATES, 	moreover,	 that	the	effects	of	climate	change	on	
the Baltic Sea are already evident and that climate change 
will	continue	 to	have	an	increasingly	 significant	 impact	on	
the Baltic Sea ecosystem, necessitating even more stringent 
action, inter alia in the global framework established by the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement; 
9.	 EMPHASIZES  the need for continued research and adaptive 
management	 to	mitigate	the	effects	and	strengthen	 the	resil -
ience of the Baltic Sea to climate change by reducing other 
human pressures on the ecosystems and also UNDERSCORES  
the need to further adapt HELCOM’s policies and Recommen -
dations	to	take	into	account	the	effects	of	climate	change; 	
10.	 SUPPORTS  a HELCOM process to compile all climate mitigation 
and adaptation measures resulting from the Baltic Sea Action 
Plan that contribute to the Paris Agreement, for publication 
on the UNFCCC Global Climate Action (NAZCA) portal and the 
HELCOM	 homepage	 in	2024	and	thereafter	 updated	 every	
five	years	as	part	of	the	contribution	to	the	Paris	Agreement;
11.	 UNDERSCORES  the need to continue to strive for good environ -
mental status since the current state of the Baltic Sea marine 
environment remains unsatisfactory as a result of pressures from 
land- and sea-based human activities and that recovery is not 
yet	sufficient	 to	achieve	the	goals	of	the	Baltic	Sea	Action	Plan;
12.	 STRESSES  the continued need to safeguard the safety of nav -
igation with a view to preventing accidents and thereby also 
minimize the risk of accidental pollution from ships;
13.	 RECALLS  the decision by the 2018 Brussels Ministerial Meeting 
to update the Baltic Sea Action Plan by 2021 at the latest, with 
the aim of elaborating a robust action plan that will retain at 
least	the	level	of	ambition	 of	the	2007	plan	and	will	address	
new issues in addition to the existing commitments to be 
fulfilled	by	2021	and	will	be	aimed	at	achieving	 the	agreed	
HELCOM vision of a healthy Baltic Sea marine environment; 
14.	 RECALLS  also the Declaration adopted by the Ministers of the 
Environment, Maritime Economy, Agriculture and Fisheries of 
the Baltic Sea Member States of the EU and of the Commis -
sioner for Environment, Oceans and Fisheries on September 
28,	2020,	committing	 to	jointly	boosting	 efforts	to	achieve	a	
good environmental status of the Baltic Sea; 
15.	 AFFIRMS  that, in order to address all relevant aspects of the 
ecosystem and the emerging challenges of marine management, 
the goals underpinning the updated Baltic Sea Action Plan are 
a	“Baltic	Sea	unaffected	 by	eutrophication”,	 a	“Baltic	Sea	unaf -
fected by hazardous substances and litter” , supporting “envi -
ronmentally-sustainable sea-based activities” , all of which will 
lead to that the “Baltic Sea ecosystem is healthy and resilient”; 
16.	 ACKNOWLEDGES 	the	significant	 cost	implications	 of	not	taking	
action against the varied threats to the Baltic Sea ecosystem and NOTES , for example, that according to the most recent 
“State of the Baltic Sea” report losses in recreational values 
alone due to the deterioration of the marine environment are 
estimated	 at	1-2	billion	euros	annually	 and	that	a	significant 	
amelioration of the undesirable status regarding eutrophication 
is	estimated	 to	result	in	annual	economic	 benefits	in	the	order	
of 4 billion euros across all relevant sectors of the economy; 
17.	 UNDERSCORES, 	the	socio-economic	 benefits	of	good	environ -
mental status of the Baltic Sea and therefore the need to imple -
ment the measures and actions contained in the Baltic Sea 
Action Plan with a view to achieving good environmental status; 
18.	 STRESSES  that the achievement of good environmental status 
for	the	Baltic	Sea	will	require	major	efforts	and	transformational 	
change	in	all	sectors	of	the	economy	 affecting	the	sea,	including	
agriculture,	 aquaculture,	 fisheries,	 wind	energy	production, 	
tourism, logistics, maritime transportation and manufacturing, 
and that it necessitates, among other things, an increase in 
efficiency	 in	the	use	of	resources	 and	a	transition	 to	a	clean	
and sustainable circular economy and carbon neutrality;
19.	 UNDERSCORES  the need to integrate environmental objectives 
with socio-economic goals in order to advance sustainable 
development and STRESSES  the need for coherent spatial 
planning of human activities at sea across the region, applying 
the ecosystem-based approach; 
20.	 STRESSES  the continued need for strong regional and 
cross-sectoral cooperation in working towards achieving 
good environmental status, involving relevant international, 
European	 and	national	organizations,	 public	financing	 insti -
tutions,	scientific	 and	research	institutions,	 civil	society	and	
the private sector, including banks and insurance companies; 
21.	 ACKNOWLEDGES  the positive contributions made by intergov -
ernmental organisations and non-governmental organisations 
towards preserving and protecting the Baltic Sea and working 
towards a prudent utilisation of its marine goods and services; 
22.	 NOTES	with	gratification	 that	the	updated	Baltic	Sea	Action	
Plan was developed in a participatory and transparent way, 
involving all appropriate stakeholders;
23.	 WELCOMES  that the updated Baltic Sea Action Plan is 
based	on	the	precautionary	 principle	 and	relevant	scientific 	
research; enables knowledge sharing between science and 
policy across all levels and gives due consideration to eco -
nomic and social impacts of the measures that need to be 
taken to meet its objectives;
24.	 REITERATES  the determination of HELCOM Contracting Parties 
to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as 
well as the post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework adopted 
under the Convention on Biodiversity and to engage with other 
relevant regional and global processes and STRESSES  the role 
of	HELCOM	 in	leading	the	regional	efforts	to	this	effect	and	
as an important and recognized contributor in the context of 
international ocean governance; 
25.	 REITERATES  the need to coordinate and harmonize the work in 
the context of the Baltic Sea Action Plan with various political instruments and ongoing initiatives at the international, Euro -
pean, regional and national levels, including in particular the 
EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive and the European 
Green Deal and all other pertinent EU legislation and pro -
grammes, as well as all pertinent legislation and policies of 
the Russian Federation, such as the Maritime Doctrine and the 
Strategy for Development of Maritime Activities until 2030 of 
the Russian Federation; 
26.	 REAFFIRMS  that the implementation of the actions in the 
updated Baltic Sea Action Plan will be kept track of regularly 
and	the	effectiveness	 of	measures	 will	be	evaluated	 by	using	
appropriate indicators to demonstrate progress towards the tar -
gets and to adjust measures if needed to achieve the objectives;
27.	 ACKNOWLEDGES  that the environmental targets in the vari -
ous segments of the present Baltic Sea Action Plan are based 
on best available knowledge at the time of elaboration and 
that, in line with the principles of adaptive management, the 
targets should be periodically reviewed and revised using a 
harmonised approach and the most up-to-date information;
28.	 AGREES  on the amendment of Annex III part II Prevention of 
pollution from Agriculture of the Convention and to this end 
adopts HELCOM Recommendation 42-43/2;
29.	 ACKNOWLEDGES  that, if deemed necessary, the contents of 
all Annexes to the Convention, including Annex III, should be 
kept under review in line with provisions of the Convention 
using	the	best	available	 scientific	 knowledge	 and	the	most	
up-to-date information;
30.	 AGREES  on the update of the Regional Action Plan on Marine 
Litter and to this end adopts HELCOM Recommendation 42-43/3;
31.	 AGREES  to adopt the following documents:
 —the Baltic Sea Regional Nutrient Recycling Strategy;
 —the Regional Maritime Spatial Planning Roadmap 2021-2030;
 —the HELCOM Science Agenda;
 —the HELCOM Guidelines for sea-based measures to manage 
internal nutrient reserves;
32.	 STRESSES  the continued validity of existing HELCOM Rec -
ommendations	 also	after	adoption	 of	the	present	Baltic	Sea	
Action Plan;
33.	 AGREES  to implement all actions and commitments in the 
updated	Baltic	Sea	Action	Plan	by	the	dates	specified	 in	the	
plan,	with	a	view	to	finalizing	 implementation	 of	the	Baltic	
Sea Action Plan as a whole by 2030 at the latest;
34.	 WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO , and seeking synergies with, national 
legislation, international agreements and the legislation of 
the European Union, as well as the legislation of the Russian 
Federation;
35.	 ADOPTS THE FOLLOWING UPDATED BAL TIC SEA ACTION PLAN, 
AIMED AT ACHIEVING GOOD ENVIRONMENTAL STATUS IN THE 
BALTIC	SEA. 	
Lübeck, Germany, 20 October 2021HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateAbout
6 7
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateAbout
 The Baltic Sea Action Plan (BSAP) is HELCOM’s strategic 
programme of measures and actions for achieving good 
environmental status of the sea, ultimately leading to a 
Baltic	Sea	in	a	healthy	state. 	
Initially adopted by the HELCOM Contracting Parties – the nine 
Baltic Sea countries plus the European Union – during the HELCOM 
Ministerial	 Meeting	held	in	Krakow,	Poland	on	15	November	 2007,	
the original BSAP had set 2021 as the target year for achieving good 
ecological	 status	of	the	sea.	However,	 the	results	of	the	State	of	the	
Baltic Sea report, covering the years from 2011 to 2016, indicated 
already	in	2018	that	this	target	would	not	be	met. 	
The updated BSAP is based on the original BSAP and maintains 
the	same	level	of	ambition.	 It	also	retains	all	actions	previously 	
agreed on that are still to be implemented and includes, in addi -
tion,	new	actions	to	strengthen	 the	existing	efforts	and	tackle	
emerging	concerns.
Guided by the HELCOM vision of “a healthy Baltic Sea environ -
ment with diverse biological components functioning in balance, 
resulting in a good ecological status and supporting a wide range 
of sustainable economic and social activities” , the updated BSAP 
is	divided	into	four	segments	with	specific	goals	(Figure	1):
 —Biodiversity , with its goal of a “Baltic Sea ecosystem is 
healthy and resilient” ,
 —Eutrophication ,	with	its	goal	of	a	“Baltic	Sea	unaffected	by 	
eutrophication”
 —Hazardous substances and litter , with its goal of a “Baltic 
Sea	unaffected	by	hazardous	substances	and	litter”,	and
 —Sea-based activities , with its goal of “Environmentally 
sustainable	sea-based	activities”.
Each of the four segments is structured around the updated HEL -
COM ecological and management objectives and contains concrete 
measures	 and	actions	to	be	implemented	 by	2030	at	the	latest.	The	division	of	the	segments	 seeks	to	reflect	the	pressures	 stem -
ming from land (“Eutrophication” , and “Hazardous substances 
and litter”) and from the activities at sea (“Sea-based activities”), 
as	well	as	the	state	of	the	environment	(“Biodiversity”).
These segments are interconnected: attaining the goal under the 
biodiversity segment also relies on the successful implementation 
of	the	actions	included	under	the	other	three	segments.
In addition, the section on horizontal topics addresses cross-cut -
ting issues including climate change, monitoring, maritime spatial 
planning, economic and social analysis, knowledge exchange and 
awareness	raising,	hot	spots,	and	financing. 	
Furthermore, measures within all segments are designed to 
strengthen the overall resilience of the Baltic Sea, consequently 
improving	its	ability	to	respond	to	the	effects	of	climate	change.
Implementation of the BSAP
The implementation of the actions in the updated BSAP will be 
tracked	through	the	HELCOM	Explorer	online	tool.	The	first	report -
ing on the implementation of actions will take place in 2025 and 
the	second	reporting	 in	2029.	The	HELCOM	Explorer	also	includes	
information as to which actions contribute to achieving which 
management	objective. 	
To monitor the change in the state of the marine environment 
and to measure progress towards the goals, objectives and targets 
under the BSAP , HELCOM will continue to conduct regular moni -
toring	and	assessments.
HELCOM Ministerial Meetings serve to review the progress of 
implementing the BSAP actions and reaching the goals, objectives 
and	targets	under	the	BSAP.	In	addition,	 the	Ministerial	 Declara -
tions, stemming from the Ministerial Meetings, may complement 
the BSAP actions to ensure that the implementation of the BSAP 
remains	up-to-date	and	relevant	throughout	its	lifespan.About
Figure 1: The structure of the updated BSAP including its vision and goalsVision
a healthy Baltic Sea environment with 
diverse biological components functioning 
in balance, resulting in a good ecological 
status and supporting a wide range of 
sustainable	economic	and	social	activities.
Goal
Baltic Sea ecosystem is healthy  
and resilient
Goals
Baltic	Sea	unaffected	by	
hazardous substances and litter
Environmentally sustainable  
sea-based activities
Baltic	Sea	unaffected	by	
eutrophication
Horizontal topics
Climate change; monitoring; maritime 
spatial planning; economic and social 
analysis; financing; hot spots; knowledge 
exchange and awareness raising
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateAbout
8 9
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateAbout
How to read the BSAP? 
Each segment includes a text box with the following information:
Effects of climate change – Each of the four segments includes a 
figure	which	depicts	physicochemical	 parameters	 that	are	directly	
affected	by	climate	change.	The	changes	in	these	parameters	 in	
turn	impact	the	themes	and	topics	covered	by	the	segment.	 More	
information on the parameters and the impacts of climate change 
on the Baltic Sea ecosystem and society is available in the “Climate 
Change	in	the	Baltic	Sea	2021	Fact	Sheet”. 	
United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) targets 
addressed  – Each segment contains a list of the SDG targets that 
are	relevant	for	the	themes	and	topics	covered	by	the	segment.
Pressures addressed  – The main pressures addressed by the BSAP 
actions	are	visualized	under	each	segment	(Figure	2).
Activities addressed  – The main human activities causing pres -
sures	or	directly	affecting	 the	state	of	the	Baltic	Sea	addressed	 by	
the	BSAP	actions	are	visualized	under	each	segment	(Figure	2).
Objectives
Ecological objectives 	reflect	the	desired	state	of	the	environment 	
in	broad	terms. 	
Management objectives  describe the desired change in pressure 
or	conservation	status	as	a	result	of	actions	and	measures. 	
Progress towards reaching the objectives will be monitored by the 
HELCOM indicators and assessments or pressure targets where 
available.
Actions
Code  - All actions in the BSAP are coded to ease referencing to 
the	actions. 	
Cross-reference to actions in other segments  - Actions that are 
linked have been cross-referenced across the segments, with each 
action	displaying	 the	codes	of	the	ones	it	is	relevant	to,	if	applicable. 	
Additional information  on actions can be found in a separate 
supporting	 document.	 Some	of	the	actions	are	existing	HELCOM	
commitments	 originating 	from	the	2007	BSAP	or	subsequent	 Min-
isterial	Declarations.	 The	HELCOM	Explorer	provides	information 	
on	the	origin	of	the	actions.
References
The information presented is based on HELCOM assessments and 
reports	which	are	listed	at	the	end	of	this	document.Figure 2: Main pressures (left column) and activities (right column) 
addressed by the Baltic Sea Action PlanSpecies disturbance
Extraction and by-catch 
of fish
Physical disturbance to 
seabed 
By-catch of mammals 
and birds
Physical loss of seabed
Targeted extraction, 
mortality or injury of 
birds and mammals
Input of nutrients
Input of hazardous 
substances
Input of litter
Input of anthropogenic 
noise 
Input or spread of non-
indigenous speciesFish and shellfish 
harvesting 
Transport – shipping
Tourism and leisure 
activities 
Hunting and population 
control
Offshore structures
Extraction of oil and 
gas
Marine and coastal 
construction
Restructuring of seabed 
morphology
Extraction of minerals
Agriculture
Waste waters 
Transport – land 
Aquaculture
Piling and explosions 
for civilian purposesHistorical munitions and 
haz. submerged objectsTransport infrastructure 
– shippingSolid wasteMain pressures Main activities Policies and legislation of the European Union supporting 
the implementation of the Baltic Sea Action Plan
The objectives and actions of the BSAP are in line with the 
main European policies and in particular the European Green 
Deal, which includes notably the EU Biodiversity Strategy, 
the EU Farm to Fork Strategy, the Zero Pollution Action Plan, 
the	EU	Offshore	energy	strategy,	the	Circular	Economy 	Action	
Plan	and	the	EU	Sustainable 	and	Smart	Mobility	package. 	
More concretely, the main supporting tool is the Marine 
Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) in which Regional 
cooperation	 is	recognized	 and	encouraged.	 Similarly	 to	
the Helsinki Convention and the BSAP, the MSFD is based 
on an integrated approach based on ecosystems with 
the aim to reach the ‘Good Environmental Status’ of the 
marine	waters.	The	other	EU	legislation 	supporting 	the	
implementation of the BSAP are listed below: 
 —Water Framework Directive
 —Nitrates Directive
 —Urban Wastewater Directive 
 —Industrial Emissions Directive 
 —Single Use Plastic Directive
 —Birds and Habitats Directives
 —Action Plan of the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region 
 —Maritime Spatial Planning Directive 
 —Waste Framework Directive
 —Directive on port reception facility
 —Sulphur directive
 —Common Fisheries Policy 
 —Common Agriculture Policy Policies and legislation of the Russian Federation sup -
porting the implementation of the Baltic Sea Action Plan
The Russian legislation complies with the international 
commitments and follows common strategies, including 
the	BSAP.	This	is	a	significant 	element	of	fundamental 	docu -
ments	of	the	Russian	Federation. 	These	include	the	Federal	
Law on Environment Protection, the Water Code, Basis of 
State Policy in the Field of Environmental Development of 
the Russian Federation for the period up to 2030 and the 
Strategy for the Development of Maritime Activities of the 
Russian	Federation	until	2030.
More concretely, key Russian laws and legislative doc -
uments which include statements for supporting actions 
of BSAP implementation are listed below:
 —Federal Law on Environment Protection 
 —Federal	Law	on	Ecological	 Examination.	 Requirements	 to	
Materials of Environmental Impact Assessment
 —Federal Law on Wastes of Production and Consumption 
 —Federal Law on Fisheries and  Conservation of Aquatic 
Biological Resources Federal Law on Air Protection 
 —Federal Law on Limiting Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
 —Federal Law on Nature Protected Areas 
 —Federal Law on Internal Waters, Territorial Sea and 
Contiguous Zone of the Russian Federation 
 —Federal Law on Continental Shelf of the Russian 
Federation 
 —Federal Law on Subsoil (mineral resources) Exploitation 
 —Water Code of the Russian Federation 
 —Forest Code of the Russian Federation 
 —Strategy on Ecological Safety of the Russian Federation 
until 2025 
 —Basis of State Policy in the Field of Environmental 
Development in Russia for the period up to 2030 
 —Water Strategy until 2020 
 —Strategy for the Conservation of Rare and Endangered 
Species of Animals, Plants and Fungi up to 2030 
 —Strategy for the Development of Maritime Activities of 
the Russian Federation until 2030 
 —Industrial Development Strategy for Processing, Recycling 
and Neutralization of Production and Consumption 
Wastes until 2030 
 —Strategy for the Development of the Fisheries Complex 
of the Russian Federation for the period up to 2030 
 —Climate Doctrine of the Russian FederationHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateBiodiversity
10 11
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateBiodiversity
“Baltic Sea ecosystem is 
healthy and resilient”
Ecological 
objectives 
 —Viable populations of all native species 
 —Natural distribution, occurrence and quality of 
habitats and associated communities 
 —Functional, healthy and resilient food webs  —Effectively managed and ecologically coherent 
network of marine protected areas 
 —Minimize disturbance of species, their habitats and 
migration routes from human activities 
 —Human induced mortality, including hunting, fishing, 
and incidental bycatch, does not threaten the viability 
of marine life 
 —Effective and coordinated conservation plans 
and measures for threatened species, habitats, 
biotopes, and biotope complexes 
 —Reduce or prevent human pressures that lead to 
imbalance in the foodwebManagement 
objectives Biodiversity 
goal Biodiversity
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateBiodiversity
12 13
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateBiodiversity
Biodiversity
Current state
Biodiversity in the Baltic Sea is deteriorating as a result of pres -
sures	from	various	human	activities,	 the	effects	of	which	are	fur-
ther	exacerbated	 by	climate	change.	Most	species	of	fish,	birds	
and marine mammals as well as benthic and pelagic habitats 
in	the	Baltic	Sea	are	currently	 not	in	a	healthy	state.	Almost	100	
macro-species (species visible to the naked eye) in the Baltic Sea 
–	approximately	 3.5	percent	of	all	Baltic	Sea	macro-species	 –	are	
regarded as being in danger of becoming regionally extinct, and 
signs of deterioration at the food web and ecosystem levels are 
becoming	 more	widespread	 and	frequent.	 An	incremental	 degra -
dation of various near-shore habitats, which are important to most 
Baltic Sea species during at least some part of the life cycle, and 
the wide distribution of areas with low oxygen conditions close to 
the	seabed	are	of	particular	 concern.	The	impacts	on	biodiversity 	
also	limit	the	potential	 socioeconomic	 benefits	we	can	derive	from	
the	Baltic	Sea	ecosystem.
Many widely distributed or long-lasting pressures have 
far-reaching impacts on both individual species and ecosys -
tems.	Although	 recently	implemented	 measures	 may	lead	to	
an	improvement	 in	the	coming	years,	continued	 and	intensified 	
efforts	to	improve	 the	status	of	biodiversity	 are	of	key	impor -
tance.	All	actions	targeting	 sea-based	 activities	 (including	 fishing),	
eutrophication, and hazardous substances and litter are critical 
for	improving	 the	state	of	biodiversity	 in	the	Baltic	Sea.	Given	the	
increasing	 overall	pressures	 and	legacy	effects	of	many	human	
activities	 affecting	 the	Baltic	Sea,	many	species	and	habitats	
are in urgent need of protection, and enhanced conservation 
actions	are	necessary	 alongside	 the	reduction	 of	pressures.	 In	this	regard, a central overarching aspect is applying the ecosystem 
approach to the management of these multiple pressures and 
their	cumulative	impact. 	
Desired state 
The ultimate goal of the Baltic Sea Action Plan (BSAP) with respect 
to biodiversity and ecosystems is that the Baltic Sea ecosystem is 
healthy	and	resilient.	This	is	supported	 by	ecosystem-based	 man -
agement	 of	human	activities.	 This	is	described	 through	the	mutu -
ally supportive and interlinked ecological objectives of attaining: 
 —Viable populations of all native species;
 —Natural distribution, occurrence and quality of habitats and 
associated communities;
 —Functional,	healthy	and	resilient	food	webs.
A healthy and resilient ecosystem is one which can maintain its 
species	and	communities	 over	time,	despite	external	stress.	This	
includes populations with age and spatial distributions corre -
sponding to their natural limits, and key ecosystem functions and 
processes that are naturally upheld, in an interacting network 
of	species	and	habitats.	 A	prerequisite	 to	securing	 the	vitality	
and long-term survival of species and populations is ensuring an 
adequate quality, distribution and occurrence of natural habitats 
that	are	able	to	support	the	communities	 they	host.	Each	of	these	
key elements strengthen the functionality, health and resilience of 
the food webs, ultimately safeguarding the integrity and long-term 
sustainability	of	the	ecosystem	as	a	whole.Reaching the desired state:  
management objectives
In order to reach the desired state, the following management 
objectives	have	been	identified	for	biodiversity: 	
 —Effectively	managed	and	ecologically	coherent	network	of 	
marine protected areas;
 —Minimize disturbance of species, their habitats and migration 
routes from human activities;
 —Human	induced	mortality,	including	hunting,	fishing,	and	inci -
dental by-catch, does not threaten the viability of marine life;
 —Effective	and	coordinated	conservation	plans	and	measures 	
for threatened species, habitats, biotopes, and biotope 
complexes;
 —Reduce or prevent human pressures that lead to imbalance 
in	the	food	web.
The management objectives of the biodiversity segment target 
both	conservation	 and	restoration.	 Restored	 and	properly	pro-
tected marine ecosystems bring substantial health, social and economic	 benefits	to	coastal	communities	 and	the	region	as	a	
whole.	However,	 achieving	 the	goal	and	objectives	 under	the	
biodiversity segment requires management of human activities 
and	the	resulting	 pressures.	 Thus,	an	achievement	 of	the	goals	
and objectives of the biodiversity segment is strongly linked to the 
successful	implementation	of	actions	under	all	other	segments. 	
Ecosystem-based and adaptive management, with their inte -
grated perspective to the management of human activities, are 
therefore important approaches to ensure successful outcomes 
of	the	commitments	 under	the	biodiversity	 segment.	 Towards	this	
end, HELCOM will, throughout the implementation of the BSAP , 
strive to specify how it can contribute to the operationalization of 
ecosystem-based	management. 	
In addition, adaptive management will be incorporated through 
the review and amendment of existing HELCOM commitments 
closely linked to the management objectives of the biodiversity 
segment, to ensure their content is aligned with new regional 
actions and global initiatives, and to further strengthen the objec -
tives	and	level	of	ambition.	 This	includes,	 but	is	not	limited	to,	
the review and possible amendment of Recommendation 35/1 
by 2023, and the HELCOM guidance on planning and designating 
HELCOM	marine	protected	areas	(MPAs)	by	2025.SDG targets 
addressed 
 —14.2  By 2020, sustainably manage and 
protect marine and coastal ecosystems to 
avoid significant adverse impacts, including by 
strengthening their resilience, and take action 
for their restoration in order to achieve healthy 
and productive oceans
 —14.5  By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent 
of coastal and marine areas, consistent with 
national and international law and based on 
the best available scientific information
Further information on connection to other 
treaties related to biodiversity can be found on 
page 17.
Cross-reference with 
other segments
 —A healthy and resilient Baltic Sea ecosystem 
is the ultimate objective of the Baltic 
Sea Action Plan against which its entire 
performance is measured; 
 —Achieving the goal of a “Baltic Sea ecosystem 
is healthy and resilient” requires that the 
goals of all other segments are met. Biodiversity segment 
The Baltic Sea ecosystem is healthy and resilient“Baltic Sea ecosystem is 
healthy and resilient”Biodiversity 
goal 
Effects of climate change 
impacting biodiversity
Air 
temp. Waves
Sea level
Riverine nutrient 
loads & atmosph. 
deposition
Carbonate chemistry
OxygenRiver
runoﬀStratification & ocean circulationSalinity & 
saltwater 
inflowSolar 
radiation & 
cloudinessSea iceWater temp.
Pressures 
addressedActivities 
addressedHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateBiodiversity
14 15
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateBiodiversity
Code Action
Theme: Spatial conservation measures
B1By	2030	at	the	latest,	establish	a	resilient,	regionally	coherent,	effectively	and	equitably	managed,	ecologically	rep -
resentative and well-connected system of HELCOM marine protected areas (MPAs), supported by those other spa -
tial conservation measures, under alternative regimes for marine protection, which can contribute to the coherence 
of	the	network.	Where	scientifically	justified,	special	attention	should	be	given	to	offshore	areas	beyond	territorial 	
waters.	The	network	of	marine	protected	areas	will:
 —cover	at	least	30%	of	the	marine	area	of	the	Baltic	Sea,	of	which	at	least	1/3	will	be	strictly	protected.	Other 	
Effective	Area-based	Conservation	Measures	(OECMs)	could	be	counted	towards	the	30%	targets	only	if	they,	as 	
a	minimum,	comply	with	the	OECM	criteria	agreed	by	the	Convention	on	Biological	Diversity	(CBD).
 —where	scientifically	justified,	consider	including	no-use	zones	within	marine	protected	areas,	which	can	also 	
serve	as	scientific	reference	areas. 	
 —expand	conservation	efforts	to	actively	include	areas	of	particular	importance	for	biodiversity	and	ecosystem 	
resilience, including important ecosystem elements such as species or areas recognized to be ecologically 
significant	based	on	function	for	the	ecosystem/provisioning	of	ecosystem	services	and	broad	habitat	types,	but 	
which	may	not	necessarily	be	rare	or	threatened. 	
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
HT13 HT14
B2By	2022	come	to	a	common	understanding	of	the	Other	Effective	Area-based	Conservation	Measures	(OECMs) 	
criteria	and	their	use	in	HELCOM,	based	on	definitions	agreed	in	the	Convention	on	Biological	Diversity	(CBD)	and 	
the	EU,	and	define	how	OECMs	can	support	the	coherence	of	the	Baltic	Sea	marine	protected	area	(MPA)	network. 	
By	2025	identification	of	OECMs	in	the	Baltic	Sea	region.
Topic: Spatial conservation management
B3By 2030 strengthen the management of the Baltic Sea marine protected area (MPA) network by introducing key 
elements	into	management	efforts,	including	but	not	limited	to	those	highlighted	here,	to	increase	effectiveness 	
of	protection,	including	by	providing	support	to	Baltic	Sea	MPA	managers	through	capacity	building	e.g.,	through 	
annual	workshops.
By 2023 update, and by 2025, apply HELCOM MPA management guidelines with focus on:
a.	Assessments	and	evaluation	methodology	and	structures	for	management	effectiveness; 	
b.	Setting quantitative conservation objectives;
c.	Effective	conservation	measures	that	reduce	pressures; 	
d.	Establishment of indicators to monitor management performance and status of conservation features;
e.	Establishment of a common monitoring strategy and evaluation of conservation features and pressures;
f.	Adaptive	management.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S42 S47 S54 S57 S64 
B4By 2026 nationally ensure that marine protected area (MPA) management plans and/or measures are legally 
binding and ensure appropriate structures are in place to enforce compliance in order to achieve their conservation 
objectives.
B5Develop,	implement	and	share	information	on	effective	management	measures,	including	measures	to	ensure 	
compliance/control	measures,	to	reduce	the	impact	of	fisheries	inside	marine	protected	areas	(MPAs)	in	order	to 	
contribute	to	achieving	their	conservation	objectives.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S42 S47 S54Reaching the goals and objectives for biodiversity is enabled by implementing the following actions:Actions on biodiversityTopic: Coherence of the marine protected area (MPA) network
B6The coherence of the marine protected area (MPA) network will be periodically assessed at least every ten years, 
with	the	next	such	assessment	to	be	carried	out	by	2025.	By	2027	the	results	from	the	coherence	assessment	are	to 	
be used to take appropriate actions to ensure conservation and resilience of biodiversity, and to identify possible 
spatial	conservation	expansion	needs	to	improve	coherence. 	
B7Ensure	that	by	2030	the	HELCOM	marine	protected	area	(MPA)	network	amongst	other	things	provides	specific 	
protection	to	species	and	biotopes	listed	as	regionally	threatened	or	near	threatened	in	the	HELCOM	Red	Lists. 	
Theme: Conservation of species
B8By 2022 at the latest, specify knowledge gaps on all threats to the Baltic Proper harbour porpoise population, and 
by 2023 for the western Baltic population, including by-catch and areas of high by-catch risk, underwater noise, 
contaminants	and	prey	depletion.	Knowledge	gaps	related	to	areas	of	high	by-catch	risk	are	to	be	addressed	and 	
by	2028	at	the	latest	additional	areas	of	high	by-catch	risk	for	both	Baltic	Sea	populations	are	to	be	determined.	To 	
strengthen the Baltic harbour porpoise population, by 2025 identify possible mitigation measures for threats other 
than	by-catch	and	implement	such	measures	as	they	become	available. 	
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S43 S44 S45 S46 S47 S48 
B9By 2024 assess the status of the Haploops species and the biotopes, as well as key threats and, if relevant based on 
the assessment, by 2026 develop a joint conservation plan for Haploops species including jointly agreed measures 
to	improve	the	status	of	the	species	and	biotopes,	to	be	implemented	by	2028. 	
B10Include information on functional and life history traits for the species in the HELCOM Biodiversity Database, by 
2024.	
Topic: Conservation of birds
B11Maintain an updated map of the sensitivity of birds to threats such as wind energy facilities, wave energy instal -
lations,	shipping	and	fisheries.	Complete,	as	a	first	step,	the	mapping	of	migration	routes,	staging,	moulting	and 	
breeding	areas	based	on	existing	data	by	2022.	By	2025	further	develop	these	maps	by	incorporating	new	data, 	
post-production	investigation	information	and	addressing	the	subject	of	cumulative	effects	from	these	activities	in 	
space	and	time.
B12By	2023	and	onwards	with	new	findings	use	the	maps	on	sensitivity	of	migratory	birds	to	threats	in	environmental 	
impact assessment (EIA) procedures with the aim to protect migratory birds against potential threats arising from 
new	offshore	wind	farms	and	other	installations	with	barrier	effect. 	
B13By the next update cycle of the maritime spatial plans seek to incorporate the maps on sensitivity of migratory birds 
to threats in the work concerning maritime spatial planning to avoid that maritime activities impair birds and their 
habitats.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
 HT13 HT14
B14 By	2027	assess	the	effectiveness	of	conservation	efforts	to	protect	waterbirds	against	threats	and	pressures. 	
Topic: Conservation of fish
B15Develop	and	coordinate	monitoring	and	assessment	methods,	where	ecologically	relevant,	for	specified	repre -
sentative	coastal	fish	species,	populations	and	communities,	by	2023.	Based	on	these	assessment	methods,	to 	
regularly	assess	the	state	of	the	coastal	fish	community	through	selected	coastal	fish	species	and	groups,	including 	
threatened	species,	by	at	latest	2023.	Based	on	the	results	of	the	assessment,	develop	and	implement	manage -
ment	measures	with	the	ambition	to	maintain	or	improve	the	status	of	coastal	fish	species,	including	migratory 	
species	by	2027.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S53 HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateBiodiversity
16 17
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateBiodiversity
B16To	strengthen	native	strains	and	to	reinstate	migratory	fish	species:
 —By	2023	identify	rivers	where	management	measures	for	migratory	fish	species,	including	eel,	would	have	the 	
greatest	positive	impact. 	
 —Starting	from	2023,	in	line	with	relevant	international	commitments,	iteratively	review	and	prioritize	effective 	
mitigation	measures	in	the	identified	rivers	and/or	dams,	including	removal	of	dams	and	migration	barriers 	
where	relevant	and	possible,	especially	in	small	waterways.
 —Develop	and	implement	 habitat	restoration	 plans	of	spawning	 sites	for	anadromous	 species	in	relevant	rivers	by	2025.
B17With the aim to protect and restore eel populations, determine which measures set out in the Convention on the 
Conservation Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), EU Eel Regulation and other relevant instruments would 
benefit	from	regional	cooperation	on	a	Baltic-wide	level.	Finalize	by	2024	and	implement	by	2025	a	Baltic	coordi -
nated	programme	of	such	measures. 	
B18 Restore	functional	populations	of	Baltic	sturgeon	by	2029	implementing	the	HELCOM	Baltic	Sea	Sturgeon	Action	Plan. 	
Topic: Conservation of seals
B19 By	2023	finalise	and	implement	national	or	local	conservation	and/or	management	plans	for	grey	seals. 	
B20 By	2023	finalise	and	implement	national	conservation	and/or	management	plans	for	ringed	seals. 	
B21By	2025	protect	the	ringed	seal	in	the	Gulf	of	Finland,	including	to	significantly	reduce	by-catch	and	to	improve 	
the understanding of the other direct threats on the seals, and urge transboundary co-operation between Estonia, 
Finland	and	Russia	to	support	achieving	a	viable	population	of	ringed	seals	in	the	Gulf. 	
Topic: Red listed species
B22Update the HELCOM Red List Assessments by 2024, including identifying the main individual and cumulative pres -
sures	and	underlying	human	activities	affecting	the	red	listed	species.
B23By	2025	develop,	and	by	2027	implement,	and	enforce	compliance	with	ecologically	relevant	conservation	plans	or 	
other relevant programmes or measures, limiting direct and indirect pressures stemming from human activities for 
threatened	and	declining	species.	These	will	include	joint	or	regionally	agreed	conservation	measures	for	migrating 	
species.
B24Develop	tools	for	and	regularly	assess	the	effectiveness	of	other	conservation	measures	for	species	besides	marine 	
protected	areas	(MPAs),	with	the	first	assessment	to	be	done	by	2025,	as	well	as	assess	the	effect	on	species 	
through	risk	and	status	assessments	by	2029.
Theme: Conservation of habitats and biotopes
B25Map ecosystem services and the present and potential spatial distribution of key ecosystem components, including 
habitat	forming	species	such	as	bladder	wrack,	eelgrass,	blue	mussel	and	stoneworts	Baltic-wide,	by	2025. 	
B26Protect key ecosystem components including habitat forming species by 2030, by: 
 —assessing the state of, and threats to these key ecosystem components by 2023
 —implement	effective	and	relevant	threat	mitigation	measures	based	on	the	threat	and	state	assessments, 	
including restricting human activities associated with causing physical loss or disturbance, by 2030
 —identifying suitable measures and types of habitats, biotopes and key ecosystem components for passive or 
active restoration by 2025 and implementing programmes for restoration as outlined in the HELCOM Restoration 
Action	plan	by	2030.
B27By 2025 develop and by 2026 start implementing a HELCOM Action Plan for habitat and biotope restoration, includ -
ing qualitative and quantitative regional targets, a prioritized list of actions, and an associated implementation 
toolbox	outlining	best	practices	and	methods	for	restoration	in	the	Baltic	Sea	region.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S52 Topic: Red listed habitats and biotopes
B28Update the HELCOM Red List Assessments by 2024, including identifying the main individual and cumulative pres -
sures	and	underlying	human	activities	affecting	the	red	listed	biotopes	and	habitats.
B29By	2025	develop,	and	by	2027	implement,	and	ensure	compliance	with,	ecologically	relevant	conservation	plans	or 	
other relevant programmes or measures, limiting direct and indirect pressures stemming from human activities for 
threatened	and	declining	biotopes	and	habitats.
B30Develop	tools	for	and	regularly	assess	the	effectiveness	of	other	conservation	measures	for	habitats	and	biotopes 	
besides	marine	protected	areas	(MPAs),	with	the	first	assessment	to	be	done	by	2025,	as	well	as	assess	the	effect	on 	
biotopes	and	habitats	through	risk	and	status	assessments	by	2029.
Theme: Enabling ecosystem-based management
B31Identify by 2022 data needs for spatial pressure and impact assessment of human activities, including cumulative 
impacts,	and	implement	by	2024	at	the	latest	methods	for	mapping	and	assessment	of	adverse	effects	on	the	eco -
system	of	human	activities	in	the	Baltic	Sea	region.
B32Update	the	HELCOM	Underwater	biotope	and	habitat	(HUB)	classification	where	gaps	have	been	identified	by	2024, 	
and by 2025 develop a fully functioning translation matrix between HUB, Marine Strategy Framework Directive 
(MSFD) broad habitat types, Habitats Directive habitats and the European Nature Information System (EUNIS), in 
co-operation	with	the	European	Marine	Observation	and	Data	network	(EMODnet). 	
Topic: Indicators
B33By	2024	develop	a	roadmap	to	fill	gaps	to	enable	a	holistic	assessment	for	all	relevant	ecosystem	components	and 	
pressures	and,	by	2030	at	the	latest,	develop	and	fully	operationalise	a	set	of	indicators	fulfilling	HELCOM’s	needs, 	
including	the	need	to	provide	a	regional	platform	for	the	Marine	Strategy	Framework	Directive	(MSFD).
B34Develop core indicators, and threshold values to evaluate the status of food webs by 2026, where applicable, and 
implement	a	holistic	assessment	of	food	webs	no	later	than	2030. 	
B35By	2024	operationalize	a	set	of	indicators	for	the	assessment	of	fish	population	health,	including	size	and	age	distri -
bution,	where	applicable,	and,	by	2029,	for	any	remaining	relevant	species.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S40 S48 
Connection to other treaties
The HELCOM biodiversity commitments are well aligned with 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the United Nations 
Agenda 2030, with the long-term 2050 vision of the Convention 
on Biological Diversity (CBD), the Convention on Conservation of 
Migratory Species of Wild Animals and its regional agreements 
insofar as applicable, and with the EU legislation and policies 
related	to	biodiversity.	 This	holds	true	even	in	those	cases	where	
HELCOM	commitments	predate	these	processes. 	HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateEutrophication
18 19
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateEutrophication
Ecological 
objectives 
 —Concentrations of nutrients close to natural levels
 —Clear waters
 —Natural level of algal blooms
 —Natural distribution and occurrence of plants and 
animals
 —Natural oxygen levels —Minimize inputs of nutrients from human activitiesManagement 
objective Eutrophication 
goal 
“Baltic Sea unaffected  
by eutrophication”Eutrophication
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateEutrophication
20 21
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateEutrophication
Description of current state 
Eutrophication remains the major environmental threat to the 
Baltic	Sea.	It	results	in	intense	algal	growth	and	depletion	 of	oxy-
gen on the bottom of the sea, further leading to vast areas with 
anoxic	or	hypoxic	conditions	 in	the	Baltic	Sea	and	affects	the	
entire	ecosystem.	 Despite	a	slight	long-term	 improvement,	 over	
96 percent of the region is still below good status with regard to 
eutrophication, including all of the open sea area and 86 percent 
of coastal waters, as shown by a HELCOM assessment for the years 
2011-2016.	 Recently	the	eutrophication	 status	has	deteriorated	 in	
four	of	the	17	Baltic	Sea	sub-basins,	 which	might	be	attributed	 to	
temporal	variability	in	climate	and	hydrography. 	
Eutrophication is caused by an excessive input of nutrients –
phosphorus 	and	nitrogen	–	to	the	aquatic	environment.	 The	input	
of nutrients to the Baltic Sea originates from natural sources and 
from various human activities on land and at sea, with nutrients 
reaching	 the	sea	via	water	and	air.	Waterborne	 input	includes	
transport by rivers and direct discharges from point sources such 
as	wastewater	 treatment	 plants	or	industries.	 The	riverine	input	
is	the	main	source	of	both	nitrogen	and	phosphorus,	 with	diffuse	
sources such as losses from agricultural land to rivers making up 
a large share while point sources contribute only a few percent 
of	the	total	input.	Airborne	 transport	 also	plays	a	significant	 role	
for	the	input	of	nitrogen,	 contributing	 27	percent	of	the	total	load.	
Excessive anthropogenic nutrient inputs to the Baltic Sea in the 
past have led to the accumulation of a considerable amount of phosphorus	 in	the	bottom	sediments.	 Under	hypoxic	conditions, 	
or low oxygen levels, phosphate is released from the sediments, 
thus increasing the total nutrient load on the marine ecosystem and 
further	fuelling	the	vicious	circle	of	eutrophication	 in	the	Baltic	Sea.
Inputs of nutrients to almost all sub-basins of the Baltic Sea have 
significantly	 decreased,	 with	substantial	 reductions	 of	12	percent	
for nitrogen and 26 percent for phosphorus having been achieved 
by	all	HELCOM	 Contracting	 Parties	over	the	past	two	decades.	
Nevertheless, the original targets for nutrient inputs as set by the 
initial	Baltic	Sea	Action	Plan	(BSAP)	adopted	 in	2007	were	not	
achieved	by	2021.
Most of the reductions so far have been achieved through mea -
sures addressing point sources, such as wastewater treatment 
facilities and industries, and the airborne input of nitrogen, primar -
ily	due	to	reduced	emissions	 in	the	energy	and	transport	 sectors.	
However,	 no	significant	 reduction	 of	input	from	diffuse	sources	has	
been	observed 	in	the	last	two	decades,	and	diffuse	nutrient	run-off	
contributes	 almost	35	percent	of	the	riverine	input.	Agriculture, 	
which has the highest reduction potential, is currently the main 
contributor	 to	the	diffuse	load	of	nutrients	 to	the	Baltic	Sea.	There	
also is a further reduction potential for point sources, especially in 
the upper parts of river basins, as well as for smaller settlements 
and individual houses that do not have adequate wastewater 
treatment 	in	place	yet.	Despite	the	overall	progress	achieved	in	
reducing nitrogen deposition, further reductions are still required, 
in	particular	 in	the	shipping	sector.	Emissions	 of	ammonia	 remain	at	
a similar level and have even increased recently, indicating a need 
for	more	effective	reduction	 measures	 in	the	agricultural	 sector.
Description of desired state 
The desired state of the Baltic Sea regarding eutrophication is 
described by the ecological objectives:
 —Concentrations of nutrients close to natural levels
 —Clear waters
 —Natural level of algal blooms
 —Natural distribution and occurrence of plants and animals
 —Natural oxygen levels
The achievement of regional nutrient input targets – Maximum 
Allowable Inputs (MAI) and Nutrient Input Ceilings (NIC) – for all 
sub-basins,	 as	identified	 in	this	BSAP,	is	the	key	prerequisite	 for	
achieving	the	ecological	objectives. 	Effects of climate change 
impacting eutrophication“Baltic Sea unaffected  
by eutrophication”Eutrophication 
goal 
Pressures 
addressedActivities 
addressedWater temp.Oxygen
Riverine nutrient 
loads and atmosph. deposition
Carbonate chemistryStratification & 
ocean circulation
Eutrophication segment 
Baltic Sea unaffected by eutrophication —2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food 
production systems and implement 
resilient agricultural practices that increase 
productivity and production, that help 
maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity 
for adaptation to climate change, extreme 
weather, drought, flooding and other disasters 
and that progressively improve land and soil 
quality.
 —6.3 By 2030, improve water quality by 
reducing pollution, eliminating dumping and 
minimizing release of hazardous chemicals and 
materials, halving the proportion of untreated 
wastewater and substantially increasing 
recycling and safe reuse globally
 —6.5 By 2030, implement integrated water 
resources management at all levels, including 
through transboundary cooperation as 
appropriate
 —14.1  By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce 
marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from 
land-based activities, including marine debris 
and nutrient pollution
Further information on connection to other 
treaties related to eutrophication can be found on 
page 26.SDG targets 
addressed 
Cross-reference with 
other segments
 —Reaching the objectives for eutrophication 
is a necessity to meet the goal ‘Baltic Sea 
ecosystem is healthy and resilient’; 
 —Reaching the goal and objectives for sea-
based activities is a requirement for reaching 
the goal for eutrophication. HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateEutrophication
22 23
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateEutrophication
Reaching desired state: management objective 
and strategic decisions
The management objective of the BSAP with respect to eutrophi -
cation	is	to	minimize	inputs	of	nutrients	from	human	activities. 	
The regional input targets to reach good environmental status 
of the Baltic Sea are the maximum allowable inputs of nutrients 
(MAI) – indicating the maximum level of inputs of water and air -
borne	nitrogen	and	phosphorus	 to	the	Baltic	Sea	sub-basins.	 To	
reach good environmental status regarding eutrophication, the 
maximum	 input	to	the	Baltic	Sea	that	can	be	allowed	is	792,209	
tonnes	of	nitrogen	 and	21,716	tonnes	of	phosphorus	 annually. 	
The maximum allowable inputs of nitrogen and phosphorus to 
the Baltic Sea sub-basins, based on the most recent available data 
on	fluxes	in	the	marine	ecosystem,	are	given	in	Table	1.
Attaining the MAI targets in all sub-basins does not imply the 
immediate	 achievement	 of	the	objectives	 for	eutrophication.	 The	
Baltic Sea ecosystem, which has been exposed to anthropogenic 
pressure for more than a century leading to the accumulation of 
legacy nutrients in the sediments, may require several decades to 
fully	recover	even	after	a	significant	 reduction	 of	nutrient	inputs.	
Measures to manage these internal nutrient reserves should utilize 
the	best	available	scientific	knowledge	 and	minimize	 potential	 risks	
through the application of the HELCOM Guidelines for sea-based 
measures	to	manage	internal	nutrient	reserves.
Net	nutrient	input	ceilings	(NIC)	define	maximum	 inputs	via	
water and air to achieve good status with respect to eutrophication 
for	Baltic	Sea	sub-basins	 for	each	country.	They	are	calculated	 as	
shares of the maximum allowable inputs to each sub-basin using 
the proportions of nitrogen and phosphorus inputs in the reference 
period	1997-	2003.	NIC	values	are	given	in	Table	2.	Nitrogen	 and	
phosphorus input ceilings are also calculated for non-HELCOM 
countries in the Baltic Sea catchment area, other countries with 
airborne	input,	Baltic	Sea	shipping	and	North	Sea	shipping.
Net nutrient input ceilings for each country and sub-basin incor -
porate the national shares of the nutrient inputs via transboundary 
rivers.	Thus,	nutrient	input	ceilings	were	specifically	 computed	 for	
these rivers, further indicating the respective national shares of 
their	total	inputs.	Nutrient	input	ceilings	for	transboundary	 rivers	
are given in the HELCOM report “The revised nutrient input ceilings 
(NIC)	to	the	BSAP	update”.
All nutrient input reduction measures necessary to achieve 
the	NICs	should	be	fully	implemented	 by	2027	at	the	latest,	to	
take into account the time-lag associated with the reduction of 
nutrient	inputs	to	the	sea.
The input ceilings for nitrogen and phosphorus are based on 
current	scientific 	knowledge 	and	are	subject	to	uncertainties. 	
This	emphasizes	 the	need	to	follow	the	precautionary	 principle. 	
While recognizing activities of vital societal needs, increased inputs 
of nitrogen or phosphorus to a basin are to be avoided to the 
extent possible until both MAI and good status with respect to 
eutrophication have been reached, even in basins where inputs 
are	already	below	the	NIC.
Reductions of nutrient inputs in a particular sub-basin may have 
effects	on	other	sub-basins	 too.	Therefore,	 a	reduction	 of	nitrogen	
and	phosphorus	 below	the	NIC	for	one	specific	sub-basin	 –	can	
be proportionally taken into account by a country in reaching its 
input	ceiling	for	another	sub-basin.	 The	application	 of	the	mecha -
nism for the reallocation of extra reduction is based on the agreed 
principles.	 MAI	and	NIC	are	based	on	 the	best	available	 scientific	Table 1.  Maximum allowable inputs (MAI) of nitrogen (TN) and phosphorus 
(TP) to the Baltic Sea sub-basins (in tonnes/year)
Maximum allowable inputs (MAI)
Baltic Sea 
sub-basinTotal nitrogen (TN) 
tonnes/yearTotal phosphorous (TP) 
tonnes/year
Kattegat 74,000 1,687
Danish Straits 65,998 1,601
Baltic Proper 325,000 7,360
Bothnian Sea 79,372 2,773
Bothnian Bay 57,622 2,675
Gulf of Riga 88,417 2,020
Gulf of Finland 101,800 3,600
Baltic Sea 792,209 21,716 Bothnian Bay Bothnian Sea Baltic Proper Gulf of Finland Gulf of Riga Danish Straits Kattegat
Germany 947 3,920 34,077 1,645 1,747 23,647 4,661
Denmark 280 1,148 9,025 421 462 28,067 28,538
Estonia 113 404 1,478 11,334 13,099 22 24
Finland 35,087 28,700 1,827 20,457 295 76 89
Lithuania 108 495 25,878 305 8,820 66 80
Latvia 73 330 6,457 246 43,074 31 34
Poland 668 3,125 151,997 1,407 1,596 1,480 1,443
Russia 839 1,993 10,317 61,503 3,296 238 245
Sweden 17,718 32,633 30,690 626 525 6,056 32,799
Other countries 
with airborne input1,375 5,008 26,947 2,986 2,188 4,933 4,502
Belarus - - 13,456 - 12,820 - -
Czech Republic - - 3,551 - - - -
Ukraine - - 1,693 - - - -
Baltic Sea shipping 284 1,141 5,180 675 345 651 701
North Sea shipping 131 475 2,427 196 150 729 884
 Bothnian Bay Bothnian Sea Baltic Proper Gulf of Finland Gulf of Riga Danish Straits Kattegat
Germany - - 109 - - 401 -
Denmark - - 21 - - 979 815
Estonia - - 9 225 185 - -
Finland 1,683 1,246 - 315 - - -
Lithuania - - 703 - 175 - -
Latvia - - 167 - 1,061 - -
Poland - - 4,291 - - - -
Russia - - 242 2,909 99 - -
Sweden 811 1,133 318 - - 116 753
Belarus - - 349 - 407 - -
Czech Republic - - 57 - - - -
Ukraine - - 47 - - - -Table 2a.  Net nutrient input ceilings (NIC) of nitrogen  for the HELCOM countries, non-HELCOM countries in the Baltic Sea catchment area, other countries 
with airborne input, Baltic Sea shipping and North Sea shipping (in tonnes/year).
Table 2b. Net nutrient input ceilings (NIC) of phosphorus  for the HELCOM countries, non-HELCOM countries in the Baltic Sea catchment area (in tonnes/year).information.	 As	such,	they	are	subject	to	review	when	new	scientific	
knowledge	 is	available,	 including	 on	climate	change.	Targeted	
regional	studies	should	be	continued	 in	a	joint	effort	to	improve	
the quality of the assessment data particularly on natural back -
ground losses, atmospheric deposition, retention, transboundary 
loads	and	other	aspects. 	
It should also be ensured that the input of nutrients will not 
increase	after	the	achievement	 of	the	MAI	targets.	This	requires	
efficient	nutrient	management,	 for	instance	through	the	imple -
mentation of the HELCOM Baltic Sea Regional Nutrient Recycling 
Strategy.	 Continuous	 cooperation	 with	river	basin	management 	
authorities will ensure that river basin management plans, includ -
ing for transboundary rivers, consider the environmental targets 
as	set	by	the	BSAP. 	HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateEutrophication
24 25
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateEutrophication
Code Action
Theme: Follow-up of the implementation of nutrient input targets
E1Submit	an	account	listing,	as	detailed	as	possible,	the	planned	and	implemented	measures	in	different	sectors	and 	
catchments	alongside	an	estimation	of	their	effectiveness	to	HELCOM	by	2023	in	order	to	demonstrate	whether 	
national	net	nutrient	input	ceilings	can	be	achieved	with	these	measures. 	
E2Assess progress towards maximum aIlowable inputs annually and national input ceilings every second year, to 
follow	up	implementation	of	regional	and	national	targets	for	inputs	of	nutrients.
E3Provide	timely,	sufficient	and	consistent	data	on	nutrient	loads	to	the	Baltic	Sea,	ensuring	reliability	of	the 	
follow-up system, by maintaining and enhancing monitoring programmes and networks striving for harmonized 
methods	to	estimate	nutrient	inputs,	including	from	unmonitored	areas.
E4Strengthen	cooperation	with	river	basin	management	authorities	of	non-HELCOM	countries	through	official 	
agreements	addressing	transboundary	waterborne	nutrient	inputs	from	non-Contracting	Parties.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
HT26 
Theme: Agriculture
E5Implement and enforce the provisions of part 2 of Annex III “Prevention of pollution from agriculture” of the 1992 
Helsinki	Convention. 	
E6Establish	site	specific	buffer	zones	to	reduce	nutrient	losses	from	agricultural	land,	for	example	on	parts	of	fields 	
where	surface	run-off	and	erosion	occurs,	along	ditches	or	at	surface	water	inlets.
E7Balance	fertilization	rates	site-specifically	and	promote	precision	fertilization	practices	to	improve	nutrient	use 	
efficiency	and	reduce	nutrient	losses.
E8Develop	by	2025	and	apply	by	2027	the	best	practices	to	improve	soil	structure	and	aggregate	stability	on	clay	soils	to 	
reduce	phosphorus	losses	from	agricultural	lands,	for	example	by	using	soil	structure	lime	or	gypsum.
E9 Promote	organic	farming	to	increase	its	proportion	to	at	least	25%	of	agricultural	land	by	2030.
E10Discourage	application	of	manure	and	other	organic	fertilizers	in	the	autumn	in	fields	without	green	plant	cover	in 	
winter.
E11 Improve	knowledge	exchange	by	establishing	dialogue	between	farmers,	authorities	and	decision	makers.
E12 Enhance	mutual	learning	among	farmers	on	best	practices	and	innovative	technologies.
E13Develop by 2025 recommendations for Best Available Technology (BAT)/Best Environmental Practice (BEP) to 
reduce	ammonia	and	greenhouse	gas	emissions	from	livestock	housing,	manure	storage	and	spreading.
E14 Develop	by	2025	recommendations	for	manure	management	specifically	for	horses,	sheep,	goats,	and	fur	farming.To achieve the set objectives, the following actions will be taken:Actions on eutrophication E15Apply as a minimum the EU’s updated Best Available Techniques (BAT) Reference Document and Conclusions on BAT 
for	intensive	rearing	of	poultry	and	pigs,	especially	for	the	facilities	located	within	areas	critical	to	nutrient	losses. 	
E16Review national regulations and voluntary measures and – if relevant – implement further or revised measures, as 
compiled	in	the	revised	palette	of	measures	for	reducing	phosphorus	and	nitrogen	losses	from	agriculture. 	
E17Agree on the national level by 2023 on measures to reduce nutrient surplus in fertilization practices to reduce 
nutrient	losses. 	
E18Investigate opportunities for taxation of mineral fertiliser and/or taxation of nitrogen surplus and/or payments 
for agri-environment measures by 2024 and implement them building on the experiences available in various 
countries.
E19Apply	innovative	water	management	measures	where	appropriate,	for	example,	lime	filter	ditches,	sediment	traps 	
and controlled drainage, and nature-based solutions, such as two-level ditches and constructed wetlands, when 
upgrading	and	renovating	agricultural	drainage	systems.
Theme: Atmospheric nitrogen emissions
E20Revise by 2023 the HELCOM Recommendation 24/3 on “Measures aimed at the reduction of emissions and 
discharges from agriculture” ensuring reduction of agricultural ammonia emissions and considering relevant Best 
Available	Technology	(BAT)	and	Best	Environmental	Practice	(BEP).
E21Continue to reduce the deposition of atmospheric nitrogen on the Baltic Sea through the implementation of the 
national nitrogen reduction commitments of the Gothenburg Protocol and the EU NEC-Directive 2016/2284 for 
those	HELCOM	Contracting	Parties	that	are	also	EU	Member	States.	HELCOM	Contracting	Parties	will	ensure	that 	
measures taken in transportation, combustion and agriculture are tailored to contribute to the reduction of the 
nitrogen	deposition	on	the	Baltic	Sea.
E22Enhance HELCOM cooperation with the UNECE Convention for Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution in order to 
promote the inclusion of the protection of the Baltic Sea ecosystem as an additional criterion in the process of the 
revision	of	the	emission	targets	for	nitrogen	in	the	Gothenburg	Protocol.
Theme: Wastewater sector
E23 Strengthen	the	HELCOM	Recommendation	28E/5	on	municipal	wastewater	treatment	by	2027.
E24Facilitate exchange of information on best available treatment techniques for wastewater treatment plants through 
cooperation with existing regional digital platform(s) acting as a hub for the best knowledge in the wastewater 
management	sector.
E25Encourage educational cooperation with involvement of relevant non-governmental organizations utilizing 
such regional digital platform(s) to solve problems of municipal sewage in smaller municipalities and scattered 
settlements.
E26Cooperate	with	relevant	Policy	Areas	of	the	EU	Strategy	for	the	Baltic	Sea	Region	(EUSBSR)	regarding	e.g. 	
wastewater treatment plants (under “save the sea” objective of the EUSBSR) as well as other regional policies to 
engage	a	wider	network	of	stakeholders	into	cooperation	to	achieve	the	BSAP	targets.
E27Target the elimination of phosphorus in laundry detergents for consumer use as soon as possible, but not later 
than	by	2024. 	
E28Build	a	knowledge	base	to	target	the	reduction	of	phosphorus	in	detergents	for	industrial	&	institutional	use. 	
By 2025, develop and publish a HELCOM progress report about best available techniques, alternative builders, 
especially	on	their	use,	environmental	effects	and	effectiveness.
E29Undertake	efforts	to	reduce	and	where	possible	eliminate	phosphorus	in	detergents	for	industrial	&	institutional 	
use, in particular for institutional use of laundry and dishwater detergents no later than by 2030 based on the 
knowledge	on	best	available	techniques	compiled	during	the	first	step.HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateEutrophication
26 27
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateEutrophication
Theme: Nutrient recycling
E30Implement adequate measures, especially in agriculture and wastewater management, to achieve the objectives of 
the	Baltic	Sea	Regional	Nutrient	Recycling	Strategy	by	2027.
E31Create	legal	and	institutional	tools	to	advance	towards	introducing	annual	field-level	fertilization	planning	and 	
farm-gate nutrient balancing for nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) as a requirement for all farms in the Baltic Sea 
Region	to	reduce	nutrient	surplus	on	farmlands	to	the	highest	possible	degree	in	a	cost-effective	way.
E32Enhance the use of recycled nutrients in agriculture making use of best available technologies and fertilize 
according	to	crop	needs.
E33Develop	by	2027	safety	requirements	for	recycled	fertilizer	products	and	minimise	the	occurrence	of	harmful 	
compounds	in	these	products	to	comply	with	the	requirements.
E34 Increase	the	knowledge	and	promote	education	and	advisory	services	on	nutrient	recycling.
E35Improve the conditions for the development of a market for recycled fertilizer products by setting incentives with 
the	aim	of	making	the	use	of	such	products	equally	attractive	to	farmers	as	the	use	of	mineral	fertilizers.
E36Enhance cooperation and share experiences between sectors and actors to create a holistic view on sustainable 
food	systems	including	nutrient	recycling	across	sectors.
Connection to other treaties 
The achievement of good environmental status in relation to 
eutrophication in the Baltic Sea also relies on additional reduction 
of inputs from third parties by 2030 as follows: 
 —52,758	tonnes	of	airborne	nitrogen	since	the	reference 	
period	(1997–2003)	assuming	full	implementation	of	the 	
Gothenburg Protocol of the UNECE Convention on Long-
range Transboundary Air Pollution and National Emissions 
Ceilings (NEC) Directive,
 —5,561 tonnes of waterborne nitrogen and 930 tonnes of 
waterborne phosphorus since the reference period  
(1997–2003)	assuming	that	non-Contracting	Parties	take 	
the same responsibility to reduce nutrients input as the 
Contracting Parties, 
 —16,803 tonnes of airborne nitrogen from shipping due to 
the implementation of the decision by the International 
Maritime Organization (IMO) to establish a NOx Emission 
Control	Area	(NECA)	in	the	Baltic	Sea	and	North	Sea. 	
In addition to the above-mentioned policies, implementation of 
the EU legislation and policies related to nutrients, as well as the 
Water Code and Law on Environment protection of the Russian 
Federation are prerequisites to the achievement of the goal for 
this	segment	of	the	BSAP. 	
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
28 29
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
Ecological 
objectives 
Hazardous substances
 —Marine life is healthy; 
 —Concentrations of hazardous substances are close 
to natural levels;
 —All sea food is safe to eat;
 —Minimal risk to humans and the environment from 
radioactivity.
Marine litter
 —No harm to marine life from litter.Management 
objectives 
Hazardous substances
 —Minimize input and impact of hazardous 
substances from human activities.
Marine litter
 —Prevent generation of waste and its input to the 
sea, including microplastics;
 —Significantly reduce amounts of litter on shorelines 
and in the sea.Hazardous substances 
and litter goal 
“Baltic Sea unaffected  
by hazardous substances 
and litter”Hazardous substances & litter
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
30 31
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
Description of current state
Hazardous substances
As shown by the latest HELCOM assessments of pollution by heavy 
metals, organic contaminants and radioactive substances, the 
Baltic	Sea	remains	heavily	impacted 	by	hazardous 	substances. 	
In particular, levels of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), 
mercury	and	cesium-137	 are	still	high	in	all	parts	of	the	sea,	and	
contaminants of emerging concern, such as some pharmaceuticals, 
were also found in almost all components of the marine environ -
ment.	Nonetheless,	 due	to	scarcity	of	data	on	contaminants	 of	
emerging concern and other indicator substances it is currently 
not possible to obtain a comprehensive picture of the extent of 
the	contamination	of	the	Baltic	Sea.
Hazardous substances originate from a wide range of human 
activities	 on	land	and	at	sea.	Thousands	 of	chemicals	 and	syn-
thetic materials are widely used in households, and sewage 
treatment systems are their primary pathways to the aquatic 
environment.	 Urban	storm	water	and	agricultural	 run-off	also	
contribute	 to	the	overall	contamination	 of	the	Baltic	Sea.	Indus -
tries use chemical compounds in technological processes or as 
a raw material, and their emissions through air or water also 
pose	an	environmental	 risk.	A	significant	 group	of	hazardous 	
substances are by-products of the combustion of fossil fuels, wood 
or	wastes	as	well	as	fuels	used	in	various	types	of	transport.	 Many	
compounds are highly volatile and can travel through the air for 
long distances, thereby contributing to the contamination of the 
Baltic Sea marine environment – even if their use is prohibited 
in	the	HELCOM	 countries.	 Finally,	offshore	sources	of	pollution	
include, for example, the leaching of chemicals from antifouling 
paints, discharge of polluted water from ships, aquaculture and 
offshore	installations,	 as	well	as	accidental	 or	intentional	 spills	
of	oil	or	other	harmful	substances.	
For many substances inputs to the Baltic Sea are decreasing, and 
some	of	the	most	toxic	compounds	 are	banned	today.	However, 	
several persistent legacy contaminants remain in sediments and can be resuspended, for instance as a result of dredging processes 
or	the	depositing	 of	contaminated	 sediments	 at	sea.	Consequently, 	
they	can	enter	the	food	webs	in	the	marine	ecosystem.	 Further -
more, dumped chemical and conventional munition remain bur -
ied	on	the	seafloor,	and	new	chemicals	 with	currently	 unknown 	
effects	and	unquantified	 inputs	are	being	used	and	released	into	
the	aquatic	environment.
Marine litter
Marine litter, including microlitter, originates from various land- 
and	sea-based 	sources.	Among	land-based 	sources,	the	major	
contributors to the littering of the sea are recreational or tourism 
activities, especially on the seashore, as well as construction 
and	households.	 Microlitter	 including	 microplastics	 is	primarily 	
released to the aquatic environment via sewage waters, untreated 
or	insufficiently	 treated	storm	waters,	and	snowmelt	 run-off.	It	
might also originate from the disintegration of larger plastic litter 
items	in	the	environment. 	
Shipping,	 fisheries,	 aquaculture	 and	offshore	installations	 are	
sources of litter at sea, for example through accidental or inten -
tional	discharges	 of	waste	from	commercial	 or	pleasure	 vessels.	
Abandoned,	 lost	or	otherwise	 discarded	 fishing	gear	(ALDFG)	is	a	
type of litter that poses a particular threat to marine life, causing 
either physical harm or breaking down into smaller particles that 
then	enter	the	food	web.
So far, marine litter is only assessed descriptively at the Baltic 
Sea scale, and monitoring of marine litter is currently under devel -
opment.	However,	 data	series	regarding	 beach	litter	already	allow	
for	the	establishment	 of	a	baseline.	 Most	of	the	litter	items	found	
on beaches consist of plastics, with most of them being single-use 
items and linked to eating, drinking, smoking, or industrial packag -
ing.	It	is	further	worthy	of	notice	that	balloons	or	balloon-related 	
items	are	found	among	the	top	ten	items	in	several	sub-basins. 	
At	sea,	abandoned,	 lost	and	discarded	 fishing	gear	constitutes	 a	
severe	threat	to	marine	life.	The	problem	affects	the	entire	region,	
though its magnitude depends mainly on the bottom morphology 
and	the	intensity	of	fisheries.Description of desired state
The goal of the Baltic Sea Action Plan (BSAP) with regard to hazard -
ous	substances	 and	litter	is	a	“Baltic	Sea	unaffected	 by	hazardous 	
substances	and	litter”.
Hazardous substances
The desired state of the Baltic Sea regarding hazardous substances 
is described by the ecological objectives: 
 —Marine life is healthy; 
 —Concentrations of hazardous substances are close to natural 
levels;
 —All sea food is safe to eat;
 —Minimal	risk	to	humans	and	the	environment 	from	radioactivity.
The BSAP’s goals and objectives for hazardous substances will be 
achieved when chemicals occurring in the marine environment due to human activities do not cause any dysfunction of the 
marine ecosystem, such as mutations or disruption of bio -
chemical	 processes	 or	food	chains.	The	desired	state	of	the	
Baltic Sea, or good environmental status, also requires that 
the occurrence of hazardous substances does not jeopardize 
the functioning of ecosystem services and does not pose any 
risk	to	human	health. 	
Because of the wide array of chemical substances and human 
activities	 involved,	 efforts	towards	achieving	 the	goals	on	haz-
ardous substances require the application of a holistic approach 
for their management on land and at sea, comprising measures 
addressing legacy pollutants such as heavy metals, dioxins or 
organotins, and contaminants of emerging concern such as 
per-	and	polyfluoroalkyl	 substances	 (PFAS)	and	pharmaceuticals. 	
Such a holistic approach also needs to include establishing a 
mechanism	 for	the	identification	 of	regional	priorities	 utilizing	
best	available	 scientific	 knowledge,	 as	well	as	the	review	of	those	
priorities	 to	enable	a	timely	response	 to	emerging	 challenges.	
Cooperation with global treaties is also key to addressing sources 
of	contaminants	beyond	the	region. —12.2  By 2030, achieve the sustainable 
management and efficient use of natural 
resources
 —12.5  By 2030, substantially reduce waste 
generation through prevention, reduction, 
recycling and reuse
 —12.4  By 2020, achieve the environmentally 
sound management of chemicals and 
all wastes throughout their life cycle, in 
accordance with agreed international 
frameworks, and significantly reduce their 
release to air, water and soil in order to 
minimize their adverse impacts on human 
health and the environment
 —14.1  By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce 
marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from 
land-based activities, including marine debris 
and nutrient pollution
Further information on connection to other 
treaties related to eutrophication can be found on 
page 35.SDG targets 
addressed 
Cross-reference with 
other segments
 —Reaching the objectives for hazardous 
substances and litter is a necessity to meet 
the goal ‘Baltic Sea ecosystem is healthy and 
resilient’;
 —Reaching the goal for sea-based activities 
is a requirement for reaching the goal for 
hazardous substances and litter. Effects of climate change impacting 
hazardous substances and litter“Baltic Sea unaffected  
by hazardous substances 
and litter”Hazardous substances 
and litter goal 
Pressures 
addressedActivities 
addressedPrecipitation River runoﬀHazardous substances 
and litter segment 
Baltic Sea unaffected by hazardous substances and litterHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
32 33
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
Marine Litter 
The desired state of the Baltic Sea with regard to marine litter is 
described by the ecological objective of “no harm to marine life 
from	litter”.
As for hazardous substances, achieving the goals and objective 
for marine litter implies that litter items, including microlitter, occur 
in the marine environment only in amounts that do not cause 
dysfunction of the ecosystem, enter food chains or physically 
damage	marine	organisms.	 It	also	means	that	marine	litter	does	
not	adversely	 affect	functionality	 of	marine	ecosystem	 services	
and	does	not	pose	a	risk	to	human	activities.	 This	desired	state	
can only be reached through the implementation of a complex 
system of measures addressing the entire lifecycle of products 
and goods, ensuring that they do not turn into litter, either on 
land	or	at	sea.	Active	cooperation	 with	global	treaties	and	other	
regional sea conventions should be pursued in order to engage 
third	parties	beyond	the	region	in	tackling	this	global	challenge.
Reaching desired state:  
management objectives
Hazardous substances
In order to reach this desired state, the management objective “to 
minimize input and impact of hazardous substances from human 
activities”	was	identified.
HELCOM	acts	as	a	coordinator	 of	the	joint	efforts	of	the	Contract -
ing Parties to identify priority contaminants, quantify their inputs 
and	regional	sources,	and	develop	effective	national	or	regional	
measures 	based	on	such	information.	 Recurrent	 screening	 of	con-
taminants in the marine environment as well as of their potential 
sources and pathways is one of the tools to identify emerging con -
taminants	 of	concern.	The	data	obtained	 through	the	screening,	 in	
combination with the information on substances used in industrial 
processes and consumption products, create a basis for transfor -
mation	of	indicator-based	 evaluation	 to	a	more	flexible	status	
evaluation.	 This	information	 enables	mechanisms	 for	a	regular	
update of the contaminants of regional priority, monitoring and 
assessment targets, and a holistic approach that considers time 
trends	in	inputs	to	the	sea	and	ecotoxicological	 effects	with	a	clear	
link	to	the	total	load	of	contaminants.	 Such	a	holistic	approach 	
strengthens the management cycle, making it possible to keep 
track	of	measures,	 assess	their	effects	and	tailor	these	measures	 to	
target	specific	contaminants	 and	their	groups.	HELCOM	commits	
to developing an action plan for hazardous substances as a part of 
the regional strategic approach to strengthening the management 
cycle for hazardous substances and linking HELCOM activities with 
other	relevant	regional	and	global	policies. 	
Marine litter
In order to reach the desired state, the following management 
objectives	have	been	identified	for	marine	litter:
 —Prevent generation of waste and its input to the sea, 
including microplastics;
 —Significantly	reduce	amounts	of	litter	on	shorelines	and	in 	
the	sea.The HELCOM Regional Action Plan on Marine Litter is the main 
regional tool for achieving the marine litter ecological and man -
agement	 objectives.	 It	ensures	that	there	are	measures	 in	place	
to address the most common and harmful litter items found in 
the Baltic Sea region by: 
 —reducing the impact of abandoned, lost or otherwise 
discarded	fishing	gear	on	the	marine	ecosystem	in	a 	
systematic way by developing HELCOM guidelines and 
recommendations,
 —significantly	reducing	the	consumption	of	single-use 	
plastics, including the phase-out of unnecessary single-use 
plastics which are prone to becoming litter,
 —preventing litter from all sources, 
 —minimizing inputs of microplastics through measures both at 
source and through end-of-pipe solutions,
 —being aware of new and emerging issues related to marine 
litter generation and act if needed and
 —promoting and actively working for a global agreement to 
reduce	input	of	marine	litter	and	microplastics.
HELCOM will reduce marine litter on the beaches by at least 30 
percent by 2025 and by 50 percent by 2030, from the baseline total 
abundance of 40 litter items per one hundred meters of beach for 
the	whole	Baltic	Sea	(except	for	Kattegat	in	2015-2016).	 This	will	
start with the reduction of the most commonly found single-use 
plastic	items	and	items	related	to	fishing	gear.	By	2023	HELCOM	
will further develop regionally coordinated quantitative reduc -
tion targets for marine litter to guide progress towards relevant 
regional	and	EU	threshold	 values.	In	order	to	reach	these	targets,	
Contracting Parties will implement the HELCOM Regional Action 
Plan	on	Marine	Litter	in	addition	to	other	initiatives.
The assessment of progress towards these environmental targets 
should be based on monitoring programmes utilizing regionally 
harmonized	 methodologies.	 Available	 knowledge	 has	improved 	
since	the	first	Action	Plan	on	Marine	Litter	was	adopted,	 however	
further	scientific	 and	technological	 development	 is	crucial	for	
achieving	 the	BSAP	objectives,	 especially	 with	regard	to	microlitter.Code Action
Theme: Hazardous substances
HL1Develop a regional strategic approach and, on the basis of that approach, an action plan for HELCOM work on 
hazardous	substances	by	2024.
HL2Develop national programmes with a particular focus on hazardous substances which are not adequately regulated 
by	other	policies. 	
HL3Submit to HELCOM by 2023 an account listing, as detailed as possible, the planned and implemented measures to 
reduce	releases	of	hazardous	substances	in	the	environment,	including	available	knowledge	on	their	effects.
HL4Strengthen and update HELCOM recommendations for industrial releases of hazardous substances by applying 
information	produced	under	the	EU	Industrial	Emissions	Directive	and	other	sources	in	order	to	sufficiently	protect 	
the	Baltic	Sea	environment.
HL5Decrease the emissions of hazardous substances from small scale emitters in urban areas (municipal entities, 
businesses and private households) by chemical-smart purchasing strategies, substitution and awareness raising 
campaigns.
HL6 Establish	a	chemical	product	register	to	be	built	upon,	e.g.	the	EU	REACH	(EC1907/2006)	framework,	by	2025.
HL7Launch educational and information campaigns by 2025 to raise public awareness regarding responsible handling 
of	hazardous	substances	in	household	chemicals	and	articles	to	prevent	their	release	into	the	environment.
HL8Introduce requirements regarding content of chemicals of high regional environmental concern in public procure -
ment	procedures	by	2025	and	provide	support	for	follow-up.
HL9Establish procedures by 2025 to utilize information obtained under various policies and policy frameworks address -
ing	the	use	of	chemicals	(e.g.	Stockholm	Convention,	SAICM	successor,	REACH	Regulation,	Water	Framework 	
Directive, Industrial Emissions Directive etc) to prioritize measures targeting regional contaminants and to identify 
emerging	pollutants	of	high	concern.
HL10Establish a mechanism for managing the HELCOM list of priority substances starting from 2025 and respond to 
screening and assessment results pointing out regional challenges for the Baltic Sea environment and contami -
nants	of	emerging	concern.
HL11Organize continuous follow-up of the work on hazardous substances under various global and EU policies as well 
as	in	Regional	Sea	Conventions	(RSCs)	starting	from	2024,	and	actively	influence	these	processes	by	promoting 	
international	actions	identified	as	necessary	to	improve	the	environmental	status	with	respect	to	hazardous	sub -
stances	in	the	Baltic	Sea.
HL12HELCOM participation starting from 2023 as a member in the Strategic Approach to International Chemicals 
Manage ment High Ambition Alliance (SAICM HAA) to support international cooperation on global chemical chal -
lenges	that	influence	the	state	of	the	Baltic	Sea.	Identification	of	global	challenges	that	are	of	importance	for	the 	
Baltic	Sea	that	HELCOM	will	put	on	the	SAICM	HAA	agenda.
HL13By	2028	develop	further	relevant	monitoring	for	the	biological	effects	of	hazardous	substances	in	order	to	facilitate 	
a	reliable	ecosystem	health	assessment.To achieve the set objectives, the following actions will be taken:Actions on hazardous substances and litterHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
34 35
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHazardous substances and litter
Topic: Legacy pollutants
HL14Encourage	the	use	of	alternative	less	toxic	metals	and	other	materials	to	replace	lead	in	fishing	gear	and	shooting 	
bullets	with	the	aim	to	minimize	harmful	use	of	metallic	lead.
HL15In order to decrease dioxin emissions, establish information campaigns and other instruments which focus on the 
quality	and	species	of	firewood,	and	what	is	burned	in	small-scale	combustion	appliances,	by	2025.
HL16Enhance implementation of the UNEP 2013 Minamata Convention on Mercury by those Contracting Parties that 
are	parties	to	this	Convention	and	encourage	its	ratification	by	HELCOM	countries	that	are	not	yet	parties	to	the 	
Convention.
HL17 Undertake	all	possible	measures	to	reduce	mercury	emissions	from	the	energy	sector	by	2028.
HL18Control concentration of mercury in dredged material and undertake possible measures to prevent its release 
during	dredging	operations	and	handling	of	dredged	material.
HL19Introduce the ban of the use of mercury-based amalgam in dentistry by 2030, except when deemed strictly 
necessary.
HL20Establish by 2023 and maintain procedures (rules) to handle mercury-containing wastes to prevent entering of the 
contaminant	to	the	environment,	including	public	information	on	the	procedures	(rules).
HL21Introduce	by	2027	measures	based	on	the	best	available	scientific	knowledge	and	technologies	to	restrict	the	use 	
and	prevent	releases	of	perfluorinated	alkyl	substances,	phenolic	compounds	with	endocrine	disrupting	effects 	
and	chlorinated	paraffins.
Topic: Contaminants of emerging concern
HL22Improve the knowledge base on occurrence of pharmaceutical substances in the environment, their persistence 
and	harmful	effects	and	ensure	availability	of	this	information	for	a	broad	expert	community	by	2025.
HL23Identify priority pharmaceuticals by 2024 utilising the best available knowledge on their releases into the aquatic 
environment,	environmental	effects	and	available	data	on	their	use	in	the	region,	for	efficient	risk	reduction	and	for 	
subsequent integration of these substances to HELCOM assessments, as indicators of the state of the Baltic Sea and 
environmental	pressure.
HL24Develop	guidance	for	the	environmental	monitoring	and	analysis	of	pharmaceuticals	identified	as	indicators	of	the 	
state	of	the	Baltic	Sea	by	2025.
HL25 Organize	an	information	campaign	on	what	not	to	flush	by	2025	(addressing	chemicals,	pharmaceuticals	and	litter).
HL26 Strengthen	the	collection	of	unused	pharmaceuticals	from	the	public	in	the	Baltic	Sea	region	by	2026.
HL27In cooperation with health care institutions, increase awareness and knowledge of consumers about pharma -
ceuticals	containing	substances	that	are	persistent	and	harmful	for	the	environment,	when	scientifically	justified 	
information	is	available.
HL28Address substances of emerging concern by commencing recurrent screening campaigns starting from 2021 includ -
ing	broad	analytical	techniques	such	as	suspect	screening	and	non-target	screening	methods.
HL29Limit	the	use	of	firefighting	foam	containing	per-	and	polyfluoroalkyl	substances	(PFAS)	at	sea	and	in	the	catch -
ment	area	and	promote	sustainable	alternatives	by	2027.HL30Minimize	the	release	of	biocides	from	antifouling	products	to	the	marine	environment,	and	preferably	by	2027 	
replace the use of biocidal antifouling products with biocide-free alternatives on structures, equipment and rec -
reational	craft	in	cases	not	already	subject	to	the	International	Convention	on	the	Control	of	Harmful	Anti-fouling 	
Systems	on	Ships	when	available	and	environmentally	and	technically	feasible.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
S8 S9 S10 
Theme: Marine litter
HL31Improve the evidence base on the impact of marine litter on the Baltic Sea region in order to develop and agree on 
new	measures	by	2025.
HL32Agree on core indicators and harmonized monitoring methods to evaluate quantities, composition, distribution 
and sources (including riverine input), of marine litter, including microlitter, by 2022, where applicable and for the 
rest	no	later	than	2026.	Work	should	be	done	in	close	coordination	with	work	undertaken	by	Contracting	Parties	in 	
other	relevant	fora,	such	as	the	Technical	Group	on	marine	litter	under	the	Marine	Strategy	Framework	Directive.
Connection to other treaties 
Cooperation in the framework of HELCOM provides and 
enhances	opportunities	for	synergies	in	national	efforts	in 	
relation	to	various	polices	and	treaties.	The	implementation 	
of EU legislation and policies related to hazardous substances 
and litter, as well as the Water Code and Law on Environment 
protection of the Russian Federation is essential to reaching the 
goal	of	the	segment.	Key	global	treaties	are	those	concluded 	
under the IMO, the Minamata, Basel, Rotterdam, Stockholm 
Conventions, the Convention on the Protection and Use of 
Transboundary	Watercourses	and	International	Lakes.Please note:  The HELCOM Regional Action Plan on Marine Litter is the main regional tool for achieving the marine litter 
ecological	and	management	objectives.HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateSea-based activities
36 37
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateSea-based activities
Ecological 
objectives 
 —No or minimal disturbance to biodiversity and the 
ecosystem 
 —Activities affecting seabed habitats do not 
threaten the viability of species’ populations and 
communities
 —No or minimal harm to marine life from man-made 
noise —Minimize loss and disturbance to seabed habitats 
 —Minimize noise to levels that do not adversely affect 
marine life
 —No introductions of non-indigenous species 
 —Minimize the input of nutrients, hazardous 
substances and litter from sea-based activities
 —Enforce international regulations – no illegal 
discharges
 —Safe maritime traffic without accidental pollution
 —Effective emergency and response capabilities
 —Minimize harmful air emissions 
 —Zero discharges from offshore platforms
 —Ensure sustainable use of the marine resourcesManagement 
objectives Sea-based 
activities goal Sea-based activities
“Environmentally 
sustainable sea-based 
activities”
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateSea-based activities
38 39
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateSea-based activities
Description of current state
Sustainable management of sea-based activities is essential for 
achieving	 good	environmental	 status	of	the	Baltic	Sea.	Sea-based 	
activities comprise all human operations and constructions at sea, 
from	commercial	 shipping	 and	recreational	 boating	to	fisheries,	
and from construction work and dredging to energy production 
and	the	extraction	 of	minerals,	 oil	and	gas.	Achieving	 the	overall	
strategic goal of the segment therefore requires cooperation on a 
wide range of topics, and involves the coordination of numerous 
and	diverse	actors	and	the	inclusion	of	various	objectives.
Emissions and discharges from shipping continue to have harm -
ful impacts on the Baltic Sea environment, despite the reinforced 
existing and developed new international regulations concerning 
ship-source pollution which have been adopted by the Interna -
tional	Maritime	 Organization	 (IMO)	over	the	last	ten	years.	Energy	
efficiency	 of	ships	is	improving,	 and	a	downward	 trend	is	also	
evident	for	other	types	of	emissions	 and	discharges.	 Nevertheless, 	
shipping still contributes to emissions and discharges to the Baltic 
Sea, including nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulphur oxides (SOx), partic -
ulate matter, sewage and discharges from exhaust gas cleaning 
systems, leading to pollution and eutrophication of the marine 
environment.	 In	addition,	 shipping	 contributes	 to	a	number	of	
pressures on the marine environment that are not yet covered by 
mandatory international regulations, such as underwater noise, 
biofouling,	and	grey	water	discharges.
Oil spills observed by aerial surveillance have been decreasing 
in both numbers and size, and while preparedness and response 
to spills of oil and hazardous noxious substances at sea and on 
shore are rather advanced in the Baltic Sea, there is still a need for 
improvement.	 Annual	reports	show	an	increasing	 number	of	spills	
of	unidentified	 chemical	 substances	 and	novel	fuel	types,	for	which	
response options need to be developed, especially in light of the 
increasing 	likelihood 	of	accidents 	as	a	result	of	increased 	traffic	and	
extreme	weather	conditions	due	to	climate	change.
Fishing takes place in large areas of the Baltic Sea, with direct 
effects	on	target	species	as	well	as	on	protected 	species	and	
habitats.	 Currently,	 the	majority	 of	Baltic	Sea	commercial	 fish	
stocks are not in good status with respect to biomass and there 
are	concerns	 with	fishing	mortality	 for	many	stocks.	Physical	
disturbance to the seabed from bottom trawling and by-catches 
of	birds,	marine	mammals	 and	non-target	 fish	species	in	fishing	
gear constitute other pressures on the ecosystem, which need to be	reduced.	 Furthermore,	 fishing	activities	 contribute	 to	shifts	
in the food web, alterations in size-age distribution, as well as 
reductions	 in	reproductive	 capacity	 and	resilience	 of	both	fish	
and	other	marine	organisms. 	
In	addition	to	shipping	 and	fishing,	activities	 such	as	mineral	
extraction, 	dredging, 	installation 	of	offshore	wind	farms,	other	
forms of marine energy production, and laying of underwater 
cables	and	pipelines	 have	negative	effects	on	the	marine	environ -
ment.	One	of	the	effects	from	these	activities	 is	physical	distur -
bance	and	loss	of	the	seabed.	About	40%	of	the	Baltic	Sea	seabed	
is estimated to be potentially disturbed, with many underwater 
biotopes	 and	species	in	unfavourable	 conservation	 status.	Along	
with submerged hazardous objects such as sea-dumped munitions, 
warfare materials and wrecks containing oil, activities causing 
disturbance to the seabed contribute to the potential release of 
harmful	substances	 that	may	affect	the	marine	environment	 and	
activities 	in	the	Baltic	Sea.	Besides	being	sources	of	pollution, 	
submerged hazardous objects are also physical obstacles on the 
seafloor	and	pose	a	risk	to	maritime 	workers.	The	above-men -
tioned	activities, 	including 	the	operation 	of	offshore	windfarms 	
and	aquaculture	 facilities,	 also	affect	marine	organisms	 through	
the	effects	of	noise	and	may	cause	hazards	and	disturbance	 to	sea	
birds	and	other	marine	life. 	
Despite	significant	 progress	in	many	areas	of	sea-based	 activities, 	
it	is	clear	that	further	actions	are	needed.	The	expansion	 of	sea-
based activities through emerging maritime sectors has further 
resulted in several pressures for which regulatory frameworks 
are	not	or	not	yet	in	place.	The	cumulative	 effects	of	existing	and	
new sea-based activities need to be evaluated, and an ecosys -
tem-based approach implemented, where the carrying capacity 
of the ecosystem and the need to set limits for human activities 
are	acknowledged. 	
Description of desired state
The desired state of the Baltic Sea regarding sustainable and safe 
sea-based activities is described by the ecological objectives:
 —No or minimal disturbance to biodiversity and the ecosystem 
 —Activities	affecting	seabed	habitats	do	not	threaten	the	
viability of species’ populations and communities
 —No or minimal harm to marine life from man-made noiseEffects of climate change 
impacting sea-based activities“Environmentally 
sustainable sea-based 
activities” —2.4 By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement 
resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that 
help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate 
change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that 
progressively improve land and soil quality.
 —12.2  By 2030, achieve the sustainable management and efficient use of 
natural resources 
 —12.5  By 2030, substantially reduce waste generation through prevention, 
reduction, recycling and reuse 
 —12.4  By 2020, achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals 
and all wastes throughout their life cycle, in accordance with agreed 
international frameworks, and significantly reduce their release to air, water 
and soil in order to minimize their adverse impacts on human health and the 
environment 
 —13.2  Integrate climate change measures into national policies, strategies 
and planning 
 —14.1  By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, 
in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient 
pollution 
 —14.4  By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, 
unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and 
implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks 
in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum 
sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics 
 —14.c  Enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their 
resources by implementing international law as reflected in UNCLOS, which 
provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of 
oceans and their resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of The Future We Want
 —15.8  By 2020 introduce measures to prevent the introduction and 
significantly reduce the impact of invasive alien species on land and water 
ecosystems, and control or eradicate the priority species
Further information on connection to other treaties related to sea-based 
activities can be found on page 47.SDG targets 
addressed 
Cross-reference with 
other segments
 —Reaching objectives for sea-based activities is a necessity to meet the goal 
of a ‘Baltic Sea ecosystem is healthy and resilient’; 
 —Reaching the goal for sea-based activities is a requirement for reaching 
the goal for eutrophication and hazardous substances and litter.Sea-based 
activities goal 
Pressures 
addressedActivities 
addressedAir 
temp.Sediment transportation & 
erosion
Waves
Wind
Sea level
OxygenPrecipitationSalinitySolar radiation 
and cloudinessSea iceWatertemp.Sea-based activities segment 
Environmentally sustainable sea-based activitiesHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateSea-based activities
40 41
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateSea-based activities
Reaching desired state:  
management objectives 
In order to reach this desired state, the following management 
objectives are to be met:
 —Minimize loss and disturbance to seabed habitats 
 —Minimize	noise	to	levels	that	do	not	adversely	affect	marine	life
 —No introductions of non-indigenous species 
 —Minimize the input of nutrients, hazardous substances and 
litter from sea-based activities
 —Enforce international regulations – no illegal discharges
 —Safe	maritime	traffic	without	accidental	pollution
 —Effective	emergency	and	response	capabilities
 —Minimize harmful air emissions 
 —Zero	discharges	from	offshore	platforms
 —Ensure sustainable use of the marine resources
Implementing the actions of the sea-based activities segment is 
one of the key factors for enabling the vision of the Baltic Sea Action 
Plan (BSAP) of reaching a healthy Baltic Sea environment, and for 
supporting a wide range of activities in the Baltic Sea region that 
do not compromise ecological, societal, and long-term economic 
sustainability.	 HELCOM	 has	the	ambition	 to	work	continuously 	
towards	making	the	Baltic	Sea	a	front-runner	 in	the	field	of	envi -
ronmentally sustainable sea-based activities, including shipping, 
fisheries,	 aquaculture,	 offshore	wind	farms	and	infrastructure. 	
HELCOM	recognises	 the	need	for	significant	 expansion	 of	offshore	
wind energy in order to reach the climate targets for 2030 and 2050 
and	will	take	action	to	ensure	that	the	expansion	 of	the	offshore	
sector is achieved sustainably and with respect to our commitments 
on	biodiversity	 and	a	healthy	marine	environment.	 Also,	in	order	
to minimize the short and long-term impacts of seabed mining 
(excluding sand and gravel extraction), minerals should not be 
exploited	 before	the	effects	of	seabed	mining	on	the	marine	envi -
ronment,	 biodiversity	 and	human	activities	 have	been	sufficiently 	
researched.	 The	risks	need	to	be	understood	 and	technologies 	
and operational practices should be able to demonstrate that the 
environment is not seriously harmed by seabed mining activities, 
in	line	with	the	precautionary	principle.
Apart from implementing the actions set out in the BSAP , this will 
also require the implementation of other instruments such as the 
Regional Action Plan on Underwater Noise and the enforcement 
of applicable national, regional and international regulations in 
the	field	of	sea-based	 activities,	 as	well	as	active	voluntary	 com -
mitments	by	industry. 	Code Action
Theme: Maritime activities
Topic: Discharges from offshore platforms
S1Update	the	Action	Plan	for	the	protection	of	the	environment	from	offshore	platforms	to	put	into	practice	the 	
“zero-discharge” principle in respect of all chemicals and substances used and produced during the operation of 
offshore	platforms	by	2026. 	
Topic: Maritime safety
S2Take actions to ensure the completion of the re-surveys for Category I and II areas used by navigation by 2030 at the 
latest.
S3Ensure the completion of the re-surveys for near shore areas and other areas used typically for safe boating, 
environmental protection, GIS data purposes and oil recovery contingency (also called Category III areas), by the 
time	specified	in	the	revised	Baltic	Sea	Hydrographic	Commission	(BSHC)-HELCOM	Revised	Baltic	Sea	Harmonized 	
Hydrographic	Re-Survey	Scheme.
S4Further work with regard to the regional HELCOM Automatic Information System (AIS) and also new systems such 
as	VHF	Data	Exchange	System	(VDES)	and	other	e-navigation	services	by	2027	in	order	to	increase	safety	of	naviga -
tion	and	gain	environmental	benefits.
S5Further strengthen co-operation with the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and regional co-operation 
in	the	field	of	safety	of	navigation	in	the	framework	of	the	HELCOM	Maritime	Group,	as	appropriate,	in	particular 	
recognizing the need for the exchange of technical expertise regarding risk assessment to avoid shipping accidents 
in	the	Baltic	Sea.
S6Continue close technical cooperation with the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) in collection and analy -
sis of maritime data relevant for the development of safer shipping in the Baltic Sea, such as EMCIP and explore 
possibilities for future cooperation on the provision of data to EMSA, including on drug/alcohol abuse as a cause of 
accidents	as	well	as	data	on	linked	spills	and	cargo	losses	to	the	environment.
Topic: Non-indigenous species
S7Establish by 2024 and subsequently implement the early warning system in case of the introduction of invasive 
species	in	ports.
S8Work for the harmonized implementation of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) Biofouling Guidelines 
and	Guidance,	taking	into	account	e.g.	the	proposed	Biofouling	Management	Roadmap,	and	further	contribute	to 	
the	work	carried	out	in	the	IMO. 	
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
HL30 
S9Promote	the	development	and	use	of	effective,	environmentally	sustainable	biofouling	management	techniques 	
and	antifouling	systems	on	ships	and	recreational	craft,	including	biocide-free	alternatives	to	prevent	biofouling	by 	
supporting	related	research	and	development	activities	in	the	Baltic	Sea	region.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
HL30To achieve the set objectives, the following actions will be taken:Actions on sea-based activitiesHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateSea-based activities
42 43
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateSea-based activities
S10Strengthen cooperation with stakeholders in the development and implementation of sustainable biofouling 
management options by 2026 to minimize the introduction of invasive aquatic species, the release of hazardous 
substances	and	microplastics	from	anti-fouling	systems,	as	well	as	enhancing	energy	efficiency.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
HL30
S11Implement the Joint Harmonised Procedure for the Contracting Parties of OSPAR and HELCOM on the granting of 
exemptions under the Ballast Water Management (BWM) Convention, Regulation A-4, and keep the Ballast Water 
Risk	Assessment	Tool	up	to	date	with	data	from	conducted	port	surveys.
S12Continue close cooperation with OSPAR on the implementation of the Ballast Water Management (BWM) Conven -
tion	and	the	issue	of	biofouling	management	at	the	regional	and	inter-regional	level.
Topic: Recreational boating
S13Promote environmentally sustainable recreational boating, including the use of best environmental practices 
through	education	and	raising	awareness	of	boat	users	and	the	personnel	of	marinas	and	guest	harbours.	Promote 	
also	“green”	marinas	and	guest	harbours	by	e.g.	introducing	eco-labelling	of	marinas	and	developing	guidance	and 	
best	practice	documents	by	2025	as	a	help	for	the	marinas	to	reach	criteria.
Topic: Pollution from ships
S14Carry out a study and impact assessment by 2025, assessing the possible ways for cargo ships to deliver sewage to 
port reception facilities (PRF) or take treatment measures, using onboard treatment plants, before discharging it 
into	the	sea.	Based	on	the	results,	take	relevant	action	in	making	a	decision	by	2027	on	whether	to	widen	the	scope 	
of the Baltic Sea Special Area regulations under the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from 
Ships	(MARPOL)	Annex	IV	to	cover	also	sewage	discharges	from	cargo	ships.
S15Carry	out	a	study	and	impact	assessment	by	2027,	assessing	the	volume	and	potential	harmful	effects	of	grey	water 	
and the possibilities for ships to deliver it to port reception facilities or take treatment measures using onboard 
treatment	plants,	before	discharging	it	into	the	sea.	Based	on	the	results,	take	relevant	action	in	making	a	decision 	
by	2029	on	whether	and	how	to	manage	grey	water	discharges	from	ships.
S16Carry out a study and impact assessment by 2026 to estimate and evaluate the volumes and impact of discharges 
of residues of noxious liquid substances contained in cargo tank washing waters under the International Conven -
tion	for	the	Prevention	of	Pollution	from	Ships	(MARPOL)	Convention	Annex	II	into	the	Baltic	Sea.	Based	on	the 	
results, take relevant action by 2028 on whether and how to further limit discharges of residues of noxious liquid 
substances	contained	in	cargo	tank	washing	waters	under	MARPOL	Annex	II	into	the	Baltic	Sea. 	
S17Study the adequacy and use of port reception facilities (PRF) for the International Convention for the Prevention of 
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) Convention Annex V cargo residues by 2024 and, based on this information, ensure 
adequate	PRFs	in	Baltic	Sea	ports	for	cargo	residues	classified	as	non-HME	substances	under	MARPOL	Annex	V	and 	
further	ensure	incentives	for	ships	to	use	them	by	2027.
S18Develop a Roadmap to minimize the discharges of food waste into the Baltic Sea and subsequently develop by 
2025 a HELCOM Recommendation to encourage voluntary agreements on delivering all food waste from ships to 
port	reception	facilities. 	
S19Enforce the requirements of the Baltic Sea Special Area under the International Convention for the Prevention of 
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL) Convention Annex IV and continuously ensure the availability of adequate port 
reception facilities in passenger ports in the Baltic Sea Area taking into account the “Technical Guidance for the 
handling	of	wastewater	in	Ports	of	the	Baltic	Sea	Special	Area	under	MARPOL	Annex	IV”.
S20 Ensure	the	no-special-fee	system	for	marine	litter	applies	to	all	passively	fished	waste	by	2024.
S21Develop and introduce best technologies, techniques and practices (BAT/BEP) to minimize nutrient losses from dry 
bulk	fertilizer	storage	and	handling	in	ports	in	the	Baltic	Sea	region	by	2024.S22Develop a Roadmap by 2025 to reduce the input of pollutants from Exhaust Gas Cleaning System discharge waters, 
as a minimum in line with existing legislation, taking into consideration the precautionary principle and the out -
come	of	the	work	of	the	International	Maritime	Organization	(IMO).
S23Develop a Roadmap to strengthen the implementation and enforcement of the Baltic Sea NOx Emission Control 
Area	(NECA)	by	2023	based	on	experience	and	lessons	learned.
S24Enhance the use of alternative fuels and sources of energy in shipping as well as recreational boating, as well as 
enhance	the	use	of	digitalization	and	other	innovations	in	technology	by	2027	to	optimize	energy	efficiency	in	the 	
Baltic	Sea	area	with	a	view	to	reducing	emissions	of	both	greenhouse	gases	and	air	pollutants. 	
S25Actively follow and contribute to the discussions at the International Maritime Organization (IMO) on greenhouse gas 
(GHG)	emission	reduction	and	ensure	that	ice	navigation	and	its	special	requirements	are	duly	taken	into	account. 	
Ensure, through the work of the HELCOM Green Team, that shipping in the Baltic Sea area meets targets of the IMO 
GHG	strategy	by	2030	while	at	the	same	not	impairing	efforts	on	reducing	air	pollution	or	other	environmental	effects. 	
S26Work	towards	securing	ship	financing	and	innovation	funding	to	support	more	sustainable	shipping	and	to	ensure 	
maritime	transport	components	in	applicable	funding	mechanisms. 	
S27Enable onshore power in the Baltic Sea region by promoting onshore power supply availability and ensuring initial 
economic	incentives	for	the	use	and	supply	of	onshore	power	by	2027.
S28Develop	and	facilitate	implementation	of	feasible	and	effective	economic	incentives	to	reduce	pollution	from	ships, 	
taking	into	account	HELCOM	Recommendation	28E/13	as	amended	on	19	June	2019.
S29Continue the dialogue established by the Baltic Sea Platform for Green Technology and Alternative fuels in ship -
ping (HELCOM GREEN TEAM) and work jointly in co-operation with other regional governmental and non-govern -
mental organizations, the industry and research community, to further promote development and use of green 
technologies and alternative fuels, in order to reduce harmful exhaust gas emissions and to strive for clean and 
low-carbon	shipping.
Theme: Response
S30Further	develop	regional	preparedness	and	response-related	services	by	e.g.	investigating	options	for	upgrading 	
SeaTrack	Web	to	include	live	data	feed	in	order	to	improve	oil	spill	trajectory	prognoses	no	later	than	by	2027. 	
Investigate	options	to	prepare	SeaTrack	Web	for	integration	with	the	Clean	Sea	Net	satellite	detection	service. 	
S31Conduct a feasibility study by 2022 for, and as appropriate, undertake a risk analysis for oil and hazardous and 
noxious	substances	(HNS)	pollution	of	the	marine	environment	in	the	Baltic	Sea	area	by	2025.
S32Develop a framework for holistic/integrated management of marine pollution incidents to enable coordinated 
response	operations	at	sea	and	on	shore	by	2025.
S33 Strengthen	mutual	assistance	for	oiled	wildlife	response	in	the	Baltic	Region	by	2025.
S34Develop Best Environmental Practice (BEP) for comprehensive risk assessment of munitions, wrecks and hazard -
ous submerged objects by 2025 and implement the Best Available Techniques (BAT) for environmentally sound and 
safe	management	by	2028.
S35Maintain the HELCOM thematic assessment on hazardous submerged objects as a living document, including 
munitions	and	wrecks	and	regularly	update	the	information	in	the	HELCOM	Map	and	Data	Service	by	2024.
S36Implement the Multi-Regional Marine HNS Response Manual in operational response to spills involving hazardous 
and	noxious	substances	as	well	as	exercises	by	2025.
S37 Commit	to	testing	the	procedures	of	the	Multi-Regional	Marine	HNS	Response	Manual	at	BALEX	2022.
S38 Undertake	monitoring	and	pollution	risk	assessment	regarding	species	and	habitats	in	the	Baltic	Region	by	2026.HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateSea-based activities
44 45
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateSea-based activities
Theme: Fisheries management
S39Develop guidance by 2026 in cooperation with the Regional Coordination Groups within the EU Data Collection 
Framework and the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) on how to improve data collected on 
recreational	fisheries	in	a	cost-effective	way,	with	a	view	to	evaluating	the	impacts	of	recreational	fisheries	on	the 	
marine	environment,	where	there	is	a	need.
S40Identify	by	2024	fish	species	for	which	there	is	a	need	for	better	data	for	identified	purposes,	such	as	setting	thresh -
old	levels.	Utilise	dedicated	programmes	and	projects	to	facilitate	recording	and	reporting	of	data	for	these	species 	
by	2025	to	support	the	identification	and	implementation	of	measures	to	achieve	good	environmental	status.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B35
S41Further elaborate cooperation between the Baltic Sea Fisheries Forum (BAL TFISH) and relevant HELCOM working 
groups	by	2023	to	facilitate	a	wide	range	of	actions	to	achieve	good	environmental	status.
S42Update	and	harmonize	by	2024	the	2016	BALTFIMPA	decision	support	tool	approach	with	ongoing	initiatives	e.g. 	
in	the	International	Council	for	the	Exploration	of	the	Sea	(ICES)	on	a	seafloor	assessment	framework	for	the	Baltic 	
Sea.	This	tool	should	also	provide	options	on	how	to	reduce	the	possible	negative	impact	of	fisheries	on	conserva -
tion	values	in	the	most	cost-effective	way,	including	in	marine	protected	areas	(MPAs).
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B3 B5 B8
Topic: By-catch
S43Reduce	the	negative	impacts	of	fishing	activities	on	the	marine	ecosystem	and	to	this	end,	support	the	develop -
ment	of	fisheries	management	including	technical	measures	to	minimize	unwanted	by-catch	of	fish,	birds	and 	
marine mammals and achieve the close to zero target for by-catch rates of relevant species by 2024, especially the 
Baltic	proper	population	of	harbour	porpoise	by	2022.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B8
S44Invite the competent authorities to immediately, but no later than 2022, implement mitigation measures in the 
	Baltic	proper,	in	order	for	by-catch	of	harbour	porpoise	to	be	significantly	reduced,	with	the	aim	of	reaching 	
by-catch	rates	close	to	zero.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B8
S45Invite the competent authorities to implement operational conservation measures for the Belt Sea population of 
harbour	porpoise	by	2024	such	as	permanent	and/or	spatial-temporal	closures	for	relevant	fishing	métiers	in	risk 	
areas	where	technical	mitigation	measures	are	insufficient	to	reach	conservation	goals.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B8
S46Promote	effective	mitigation	measures	to	minimize	by-catch	of	harbour	porpoise	in	the	Baltic	Sea	area	inter	alia 	
via cooperation with the Baltic Sea Fisheries Forum (BAL TFISH), and evaluate and promote adjusted measures as 
needed	by	2025.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B8S47Continually test, promote and introduce new technical and operational by-catch mitigation measures such as alter -
native	and	seal	safe	gears	in	cooperation	with	competent	authorities	with	the	aim	to,	as	appropriate,	replace	fish -
ing	gear	proven	to	be	problematic	with	respect	to	by-catch,	with	evaluation	of	measures	every	five	years	starting	in 	
2023,	and	regularly	update	the	HELCOM	questionnaire	on	trials	of	alternative	fishing	gears	and	fishing	techniques.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B3 B5 B8
S48Develop	and	implement	effective	data	collection	for	more	reliable	data	on	incidentally	by-caught	birds	and	mam -
mals	and	fishing	effort	consistent	and	fully	in	line	with	the	data	needs	identified	by	the	International	Council	for	the 	
Exploration	of	the	Sea	(ICES).	Relevant	sources	of	data	are	e.g.	the	EU	Control	Regulation	and	additional	national	or 	
regional	coordinated	data	collection	programmes	or	projects	for	filling	data-gaps	outlined	in	the	HELCOM	Road -
map	on	fisheries	data.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B5 B8
S49Maintain, develop and extend regulatory or voluntary schemes to protect key seabird areas and seasons by 
establishing	appropriate	fisheries	measures	in	line	with	conservation	objectives	and	to	monitor	incidental	catches 	
of	seabirds	by	2025.	Extend	and	develop	outreach	programmes	for	the	fisheries	sector	concerning	their	possible 	
impacts	on	seabird	populations.
Topic: Fish stock management
S50Competent authorities to jointly further develop protective measures for Baltic Sea salmon to support the devel -
opment of a new regional salmon management plan, and nationally establish salmon management plans by 2023, 
where	appropriate.	These	management	plans	should	be	implemented	by	2025	to	achieve	the	set	targets,	including 	
but	not	limited	to	smolt	production,	genetic	diversity	and	distribution	throughout	the	river	habitat.	In	addition, 	
nationally ensure that granting permits for activities in and near rivers does not compromise the ability to reach set 
river-specific	fish	population	targets.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B16
S51Competent authorities to improve data related to sea trout stocks and to improve populations of sea trout stocks 
by implementing national measures at the latest by 2025 with a view to achieving good ecological condition in sea 
trout	streams.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B16
S52Define	necessary	complementary	measures	by	2024	in	relevant	policy	(fisheries,	environment	etc.)	areas	to 	
improve	the	size/age	structure	for	fish	stocks,	including	cod.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B27
S53Implement	measures	to	restore	coastal	fish	communities,	including	establishment	of	no-take	areas,	seasonal	clo -
sures	and	catch	regulations,	as	appropriate	by	2026	for	the	specific	coastal	area. 	
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B15
S54Share information among Contracting Parties, the Baltic Sea Fisheries Forum (BAL TFISH) and Baltic Sea Advisory 
Council	(BSAC)	on	non-lethal	mitigation	measures	or	other	ways	to	manage	seals-fisheries	interactions	and	imple -
ment	those	measures	by	2025,	as	appropriate.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B3 B5HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateSea-based activities
46 47
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateSea-based activities
Theme: Underwater noise
S55Identify at the latest by 2025, as well as regularly update every two years, mitigation measures according to Best 
Environmental Practice and Best Available Technique for continuous underwater noise in the Baltic Sea and imple -
ment	thereafter	in	line	with	recommendations	and	regulations	of	the	international	Maritime	Organization	(IMO).
S56Actively support and contribute to the ongoing discussions on underwater noise at the International Maritime 
Organization (IMO) by, amongst other things, working towards regionally coordinated implementation of actions 
by	2028.	
S57Start working as soon as possible towards regionally coordinated actions on underwater noise, aiming in the long 
term	towards	addressing	adverse	effects	of	underwater	noise	on	marine	species	identified	as	sensitive	to	noise, 	
whilst safeguarding the potential of the Baltic Sea for sustainable human activities by:
a.	Supporting	a	swift	implementation	of	the	Regional	Action	Plan	on	Underwater	Noise. 			
b.	Initiating	and	supporting	pilot	projects	to	study	efficacy	of	vessel	slowdown,	rerouting	and	other	operational 	
measures,	on	noise	emissions	and	responses	of	target	species	by	the	end	of	2026.	Results	are	to	be	communi -
cated	to	the	International	Maritime	Organization	(IMO)	for	follow-up	and	further	action. 	
c.	By	2027	Mapping	the	contribution	of	recreational	craft	to	the	noise	in	the	marine	environment;	supporting 	
studies	on	efficiency	of	mitigation	measures,	such	as	speed	limitations	and	time-area	restrictions;	and	stud -
ies	on	impact	from	echo	sounders	and	fish-finders.	Based	on	available	evidence	and	new	results,	developing 	
guidelines	for	implementing	regulations	to	reduce	impact	on	sensitive	species.	Simultaneously,	establishing	a 	
discussion with the industry and relevant international standardization bodies and aiming at developing indus -
try	or/and	application	standards	for	underwater	noise	emissions	of	engines	with	respect	to	recreational	craft, 	
echo-sounders	and	fish	finders,	which	can	be	utilized	in	national	regulation	of	activities	in	marine	protected 	
areas	(MPAs)	and	other	noise	sensitive	areas	in	the	Baltic	Sea.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B3
S58Study by 2026 the impacts of continuous underwater noise from the installation, operation and decommissioning 
of	offshore	windfarms	on	marine	biota,	including	cumulative	effects	of	multiple	windfarms.	Based	on	the	results, 	
take relevant action, if necessary, in developing appropriate mitigation measures for the continuous underwater 
noise	generated	by	offshore	wind	farms	by	2029.
S59 Reduce	the	impact	of	impulsive	underwater	noise	on	marine	biodiversity.
S60Identify at the latest by 2023, as well as regularly update every two years, mitigation measures according to Best 
Environmental Practice and Best Available Technique for impulsive underwater noise in the Baltic Sea and imple -
ment	thereafter	without	delay.
S61Develop and implement guidelines for the design and use of acoustic deterrent devices to avoid detrimental 
impacts	on	the	environment	from	underwater	noise	by	2024.
S62Develop	and	implement	threshold	values	and	assessment	methods	for	adverse	effects	of	impulsive	and	ambient 	
noise for marine life, in cooperation with OSPAR, the EU and other relevant expert groups, by 2023 at latest for 
marine	mammals	and	by	2026	for	other	relevant	species	groups.
S63Implement regular and regional harmonized monitoring of ambient and impulsive noise by 2023 to follow up 
effects	of	mitigation	measures.Theme: Seabed loss and disturbance
S64Enforce and implement by 2025, in line with the update of the marine protected area (MPA) management guide -
lines,	effective	management	plans	and/or	conservation	measures	to	not	allow	destructive	and	exploitative	activi -
ties	related	to	the	seabed	that	may	compromise	the	conservation	objectives	of	MPAs.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B3
S65By 2026 implement a common approach to address and where possible minimize the loss of and disturbance to 
seabed	habitats	caused	by	human	activities.
S66Regularly update and improve the HELCOM Recommendation and Guideline for handling dredged material at sea 
using the best available knowledge to minimize environmental impact of these activities further developing Best 
Environmental	Practice	(BEP)	and	Best	Available	Technique	(BAT)	for	dredging	and	depositing	operations.
S67Define	the	characteristics	of	benthic	habitats,	develop	core	indicators	and	undertake	an	integrated	assessment	of 	
the status of benthic habitats, including their structure, function, distribution and extent of loss, no later than 2023, 
leading	to	the	identification	of	measures	to	reduce	adverse	effects	where	needed.	Work	should	be	done	in	close 	
cooperation with work undertaken by Contracting Parties in other relevant fora, taking into account activities in 
EU	Technical	Group	on	seabed	habitats	and	sea-floor	integrity	(TG	Seabed),	and	considering	the	ICES	advice	on	a 	
sea-floor	assessment	process.
S68 Develop	a	map	service	for	lost	and	disturbed	habitats	under	the	HELCOM	Map	and	Data	Service	by	2024.
Connection to other treaties 
The achievement of good environmental status in relation to sea-
based activities in the Baltic Sea also relies on the implementation 
and enforcement of relevant EU legislation and policies as well as 
a number of other treaties, including but not limited to: 
 —Conventions under the International Maritime Organization 
(IMO); 
 —Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans 
of the Baltic, North-East Atlantic, Irish and North Seas 
(ASCOBANS);
 —Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of 
Wild Animals (CMS);
 —World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements;
 —Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
 —Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of 
the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR); and
 —Bonn	Agreement.	
National and regional recommendations and regulations developed 
within HELCOM are important in complementing the international 
regulatory	frameworks.HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHorizontal topics
48 49
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHorizontal topics
Horizontal topicsHELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHorizontal topics
50 51
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHorizontal topics
Horizontal topics
The topics included in this section are by their nature cross-cutting, 
or	“horizontal”,	 thus	potentially	 affecting	 the	implementation	 of	
all	elements	 of	the	Baltic	Sea	Action	Plan	(BSAP)	as	a	whole.	The	
topics	under	the	updated	BSAP	which	have	been	identified 	as	
cross-cutting are:
 —Climate change
 —Monitoring
 —Maritime spatial planning (MSP)
 —Economic and social analysis
 —Hot spots
 —Knowledge exchange and awareness raising
 —Financing
Each of these seven topics is relevant to the achievement of the 
goals	of	the	updated	BSAP.	Monitoring	 and	economic	 and	social	
analyses, for their part, serve to examine and quantify the direct and 
indirect	effects	of	the	implementation	 of,	or	failure	to	implement, 	
the	measures	 included	 in	the	BSAP.	Maritime	 spatial	planning	 is	
a key and increasingly important instrument in ecosystem-based 
management 	and	in	working	towards	good	environmental 	status.	
Finally, the successful implementation of the BSAP depends on 
the	availability	of	sufficient	funding. 	Climate change
 The impacts of climate change on the marine environ -
ment	are	by	nature	very	varied.	They	affect	the	various	
ecological components of, as well as the sectors of activ -
ity related to, the Baltic Sea touching on aspects ranging from 
science	to	high-level	 policy.	Climate	change	is	thus	a	horizontal 	
issue	affecting	the	entire	Baltic	Sea	region.
With	the	entire	marine	environment	 affected	by	climate	change	
its	effects	are	already	evident	in	the	Baltic	Sea:	water	tempera -
ture is rising, the sea ice cover has decreased, and annual mean 
precipitation	 is	increasing	 over	the	northern	 part	of	the	region.	
These	effects	extend	to	impact	the	species	in	the	Baltic	Sea,	the	
ecosystem services it provides and the human activities depending 
on	the	sea.	For	example,	 many	wintering	 birds	have	shifted	their	
wintering	 range	northwards,	 and	the	number	of	warm	water	fish	
species	are	increasing.	 Surface	water	warming	 has	increased	 the	
risk of infection by pathogens and has already led to heightened 
sea-based	 activities	such	as	trawl	fishing	that	now	begins	earlier	in	
the	year,	especially	in	the	northern	parts	of	the	Baltic. 	
However,	 the	various	effects	of	climate	change	are	often	not	easy	
to	understand	 and	can	be	difficult	to	distinguish	 from	other	anthro -
pogenic	pressures.	 Both	climate	change	and	other	human-in -
duced	pressures 	vary	significantly 	between	different	regions	in	Code Action
Theme: Climate change
HT1Using the HELCOM/Baltic Earth Joint Expert Network on Climate Change as a platform and through committed 
implementation	of	the	HELCOM	Science	Agenda,	improve	the	access	of	policy-makers	to	scientific	information 	
on the impacts of climate change together with multiple other pressures on the Baltic Sea marine environment 
through	periodic	updates	of	the	HELCOM	Climate	Change	Fact	Sheet,	and	incorporate	the	possible	effect	of	climate 	
change	into	the	holistic	assessment	of	status	as	well	as	effectiveness	of	measures	by	2030	at	latest.
HT2Identify	the	needs	and	possibilities	to	further	adapt	HELCOM’s	policies	and	recommendations	to	account	for	effects 	
and impacts on the environment under the changing climate and to develop and carry out a climate change policy 
review	process	as	part	of	the	work	of	HELCOM,	starting	e.g.	with	indicators	and	open	recommendations.
HT3HELCOM and its parties will continue to strive to develop the work at the HELCOM Secretariat and the organisation 
of	HELCOM	meetings	so	as	to	further	minimize	emissions	of	greenhouse	gases.
HT4Promote research that increases understanding of the role of the Baltic Sea land-sea system in the carbon cycle 
and	identifies	how	mitigation	by	natural	blue	carbon	processes	can	be	maximised	and	implement	suitable	mea -
sures.	Increased	understanding	should	be	utilised	to	enable	consideration	of	additional	management	measures.
HT5Develop	a	strategic	approach	to	ocean	acidification	for	the	Baltic	Sea	with	first	steps	addressing	the	knowledge 	
gaps	by	2025.
the Baltic Sea, ruling out simple management solutions and a 
one-size-fits-all	 approach	 that	could	be	applied	across	the	entire	
region.	Policies	on	climate	change	and	its	effects	on	the	marine	
environment need to consider the dissimilarities in the Baltic Sea 
region and follow an adaptive management approach based on 
the best available science, tailored to the challenges faced by a 
specific	area	or	subbasin. 	
With regard to climate change, the ultimate aim of HELCOM 
is to increase the resilience of the ecosystem of the Baltic Sea 
to	its	impacts.	All	measures	 that	lead	to	a	stronger	Baltic	marine	
ecosystem resilience should therefore also be regarded as climate 
adaptation	 measures.	 In	order	to	support	adaptive	management, 	
climate change work within HELCOM will focus on long-term, 
multi-disciplinary	 approaches.	 HELCOM	 serves	as	a	platform	 for	
disseminating	 knowledge	 on	the	effects	of	climate	change	and	
ensuring that quality assured science becomes available to pol -
icy makers, other professionals and stakeholders in the Baltic 
Sea	region	as	quickly	as	possible.	 This	includes	cooperation	 and	
communication with other relevant actors within and beyond the 
HELCOM	region.	For	instance,	 HELCOM	cooperates	 closely	with	the	
maritime sector on minimizing the negative impacts from shipping 
on the Baltic Sea, such as through incentivizing the transition to 
greener shipping practices and by supporting initiatives targeted 
at	reducing	greenhouse	gas	emissions	from	shipping.
Globally, naturally occurring emissions of greenhouse gases, such as methane, from lakes and reservoirs amount to a release of 
greenhouse gases comparable to approximately 20% of emissions 
generated	 by	fossil	fuel	combustion.	 In	order	to	make	progress	on	
climate change mitigation measures related to the Baltic Sea, such 
as increasing the “blue carbon” storage we need to better under -
stand the carbon cycle in the Baltic Sea land-sea system, including 
the	links	between	 the	carbon	dynamics	 (e.g.	land-based	 input	of	
organic carbon and outgassing of methane), the eutrophication 
legacy	(e.g.	carbon	in	sediments,	 anoxia)	and	biodiversity	 (e.g.	
carbon	sequestration).
Although	 acidification	 is	currently	 not	a	major	trend	in	the	Bal-
tic	Sea	ecosystem,	 it	is	an	advancing	 and	significant	 trend	in	the	
world’s	oceans,	directly	connected	 to	carbon	dioxide	emissions. 	
The long-term forecast for the Baltic Sea also projects an increased 
acidification,	 but	neither	the	carbon	chemistry	 of	the	Baltic	Sea	
nor	possible	impacts	of	acidification	 on	biota	are	fully	understood 	
yet,	and	mitigation	measures	have	not	been	considered	so	far.
Connection to other treaties
HELCOM’s work on climate change supports the implementation 
of	the	Paris	Climate	Agreement.	 The	extent	of	the	effects	of	climate	
change on the Baltic Sea will depend on whether the goal of the 
Agreement – to limit global warming to well below 2°C, preferably 
to	1.5°C,	compared	 to	pre-industrial	 levels	–	is	reached	and	to	what	
extent	this	will	be	the	case.HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHorizontal topics
52 53
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHorizontal topics
Monitoring
 Monitoring is a well-established activity under the Hel -
sinki	Convention.	 Coordinated	 monitoring	 of	physical,	
chemical and biological variables of the open sea of the 
Baltic	Sea	has	been	carried	out	since	1979.	The	data	stemming	 from	
these coordinated monitoring programmes provide the basis for 
understanding the state of the marine ecosystem and the impacts 
on	the	sea	of	human	activities,	as	well	as	the	effects	of	measures 	
addressing	those	impacts.
The HELCOM Monitoring and Assessment Strategy sets out the 
basis for how the HELCOM Contracting Parties commit themselves 
to cooperating and coordinating when designing and carrying out 
their national monitoring programmes, and to working together to 
produce	and	update	joint	assessments.	 HELCOM	monitoring	 pro-
vides the necessary data needed for the regular assessments of the 
Code Action
Theme: Monitoring
HT6Regularly review, and as necessary revise HELCOM monitoring programmes (once per six years), including the level 
of regional coordination, in line with the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) reporting cycle, to adjust 
them	to	the	latest	technical	and	scientific	developments	for	a	cost-effective	joint	monitoring,	which	fully	supports 	
the indicator-based assessment approach and monitoring of the implementation of the Baltic Sea Action Plan, and 
is	in	line	with	other	international	monitoring	and	reporting	requirements.
HT7The validity of HELCOM Monitoring and Assessment Strategy and Data and Information Strategy should be 
reviewed	within	two	years	after	updating	the	BSAP	and	revised	as	needed. 	
HT8 Ensure	all	HELCOM	monitoring	programs	are	regionally	coordinated	by	2026.
Topic: Monitoring of habitats and biotopes
HT9Map	biotopes	and	habitats	nationally	based	on	regionally	comparable	classification	systems,	including	key	habi -
tats	and	habitat	forming	species,	and	identify	gaps	in	spatial	coverage	of	mapping	efforts,	with	the	aim	to	produce 	
Baltic-wide	models,	including	production	of	maps,	of	distribution	of	habitats	and	biotopes	by	2028.
HT10As	a	first	step	target	the	gaps	identified	in	the	HELCOM	monitoring	programmes	of	biotopes,	habitats,	including	key 	
habitats and key habitats forming species by 2024 and operationalize continual Baltic-wide monitoring of those 
biotopes	and	habitats	by	2030.
HT11 Develop	quality	standards	for	seafloor	habitat	mapping	and	derived	products	by	2024.state of the Baltic Sea, as well as of the human pressures and their 
impacts	on	that	state	to	track	the	effect	of	HELCOM	commitments 	
including	 the	BSAP.	It	also	enables	evaluations	 of	the	extent	to	
which	measures	 are	effective	and	contribute	 to	the	implementation 	
of the BSAP and progress towards the visions, goals and objectives 
of	the	BSAP.	For	those	Contracting	 Parties	who	are	also	EU	member	
states	the	joint	monitoring	 may	also	help	to	fulfill	the	requirements 	
of the EU’s Marine Strategy Framework Directive, the Water Frame -
work	Directive,	 the	Habitats	 Directive	 and	the	Birds	Directive. 	
HELCOM monitoring can also be utilized to detect climate change 
and	its	impacts	on	the	Baltic	Sea	marine	ecosystem	 over	time.	
Sites with relevant long-term data records are maintained, whilst 
continuously making use of improved data collection techniques 
where appropriate, thus sustaining long-term data series needed 
to	identify	change	over	time.	This	can	enable	the	assessment	 of	
the ability of the marine environment to cope with, adapt to or 
recover	from	the	effects	of	climate	change.
Code Action
Theme: Maritime spatial planning
HT12Utilize maritime spatial planning (MSP) applying an ecosystem-based approach to support BSAP objectives and 
targets	and	contributing	to	sustainable	sea-based	activities.
HT13Use	maritime	spatial	planning	(MSP)	as	a	tool	to	signal	areas	of	high	nature	value	as	identified	by	responsible 	
environmental	authorities.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B1 B13
HT14Implement maritime spatial plans with the aim of steering sea-based activities away from areas where they can 
cause	serious	damage	or	disturbance.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
B1 B13Maritime spatial planning
 Maritime spatial planning (MSP) is a process to support 
the integrated management of sea-based human activ -
ities.	By	reducing	 their	negative	impacts	on	the	various	
components	 of	the	marine	environment,	 it	effectively	 contributes 	
to the achievement of the goals and objectives of the various BSAP 
segments.	 MSP	helps	to	safeguard	 biodiversity	 and	to	promote	
the sustainable use of marine resources, while, at the same time, 
balancing the interests of all stakeholders, also in the light of other 
international	 environmental	 commitments.	 As	an	integrated	 tool,	
MSP also contributes to climate change adaptation and mitigation 
by	increasing	climate	resilience.
Maritime spatial planning provides important added value for 
the BSAP as it is a process that considers multiple human activities 
from	a	spatial	perspective.	 MSP	is	based	on	a	comprehensive, 	
coherent cross-border and forward-looking analysis of the use 
of marine space, with the purpose of identifying preferred and 
optimal	locations	for	sea-based	activities.
Maritime spatial planning supports sustainable development 
and sustainable marine economy/ blue economy by applying an 
ecosystem-based	 approach.	 MSP	considers	 social,	economic, 	
cultural and other relevant aspects while also enhancing marine 
nature values, facilitating nature conservation and improving 
marine	ecosystem	services. 	HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHorizontal topics
54 55
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHorizontal topics
Economic and social analysis
 Economic and social analyses of the environment can 
demonstrate the interaction between the ecosystem and the 
social-economic	 system.	Furthermore,	 economic	 and	social	
analyses can support decision-making in relation to environmental 
policies and objectives by illustrating the importance of the marine 
environment in the Baltic Sea to citizens and society, the well-being of 
current	and	future	generations,	 and	national	and	regional	economies.
In recent years, economic and social aspects of protecting the 
Baltic	Sea	have	been	brought	to	the	fore	within	HELCOM.	 For	
instance,	regional	economic 	and	social	analyses	were	carried	out.	
Code Action
Theme: Economic and social analysis
Topic: Enabling ecosystem-based management
HT15By 2023, integrate economic and social analyses in HELCOM work strands to support the implementation of the 
ecosystem-based approach and allow for assessment of the linkages between the marine environment and human 
wellbeing,	including	carrying	out	regionally	coordinated	economic	and	social	analysis	of	the	marine	environment.
HT16By 2028, improve the use of results from economic and social analyses in decision-making, including through 
establishing	a	set	of	indicators	that	describe	the	economic	and	social	aspects	of	the	marine	environment.
HT17By 2030, integrate quantitative and qualitative economic values of the environment into the management of 
human	activities	and	maritime	spatial	planning.
Topic: Ecosystem services
HT18By 2023, identify potential uses of ecosystem services assessment and valuation, further develop and apply region -
ally coordinated methods in support of analyses of ecosystem services and provide an initial demonstration of how 
they	can	be	used	in	policy	development.
Topic: Ecosystem accounting
HT19By 2028, apply the framework of ecosystem accounting to assess the contributions of marine ecosystems to 
economic	activity	(e.g.	Gross	domestic	product	(GDP))	using	values	that	are	compatible	with	the	system	of	national 	
accounts	and	comparable	with	other	economic	sectors.
Topic: Sufficiency and efficiency of measures
HT20By	2024	analyse	existing	tools	for	analysing	sufficiency	of	measures,	with	the	aim	to	plan	monitoring	and	assess -
ment	of	the	effect	and	cost	of	measures,	in	order	to	further	make	use	of	the	experiences	when	the	need	for	new 	
measures	occurs.	By	2028,	further	develop	and	apply	regionally	coordinated	methods	for	analyses	of	sufficiency 	
of	measures	as	well	as	for	cost-effectiveness	of	measures	and	costs	and	benefits	to	achieve	good	environmental 	
status	of	the	Baltic	Sea	marine	environment.
Topic: Incentives and subsidies
HT21By 2025 identify incentives to reduce pressures on the marine environment, including public and private economic 
and	regulatory	incentives,	and	by	2030	increase	the	use	of	incentives	and	fill	possible	gaps. 	
HT22By 2025 HELCOM should identify subsidies or incentives which are harmful for the marine environment and, by 
2030	work,	in	cooperation	with	relevant	international	organizations,	on	phasing	out	such	subsidies	or	incentives.These analyses concerned topics such as the use of marine waters 
and the costs of degradation from not achieving a good status of 
the	marine	environment,	 as	well	as	the	sufficiency,	 effectiveness 	
and	costs	of	measures.	 However,	 several	methodological	 and	
practical	challenges	and	knowledge	gaps	remain.
In order to use and further advance the regional economic 
and social analyses as a means of policy support the BSAP 
actions	cover	specific	priority	areas	for	developing 	and	imple -
menting	 these	analyses	 in	the	Baltic	Sea	region.	The	actions	
provide regionally coherent data and results to support 
ecosystem-based management, sustainable use of marine 
resources,	 and	development	 of	efficient	regional	and	national	
policies,	 including	 the	BSAP	and	maritime	 spatial	planning.Hot Spots
 In 1992, the Baltic Sea Joint Comprehensive Environmen -
tal Action Programme (JCP), an international environmen -
tal management framework for the long-term restoration 
of the ecological balance of the Baltic Sea, was adopted to help 
identify	and	clean	up	pollution	 hot	spots.	The	HELCOM	Hot	Spot	
list established by the JCP includes point sources of pollution such 
as municipal facilities and industrial plants, agricultural areas and 
rural settlements, as well as sensitive areas such as coastal lagoons 
and	wetlands	 where	special	environmental	 measures	 are	needed.	
Good progress has been made in the last three decades by clean -
ing up more than three quarters of the total 162 HELCOM ‘hot spots’ , 
but	further	efforts	are	needed	to	resolve	the	remaining	 40	pollution	
sites.	In	general,	despite	the	delay	in	its	full	implementation,	 the	
JCP	has	demonstrated	 its	effectiveness	 for	prioritizing	 and	tackling	
local	environmental	 issues,	effectively	 contributing	 to	the	overall	
progress	 towards	good	environmental	 status	of	the	Baltic	Sea.
While the criteria for removal of the hot spots as outlined in the 
1992 JCP should remain unchanged to avoid creating a moving 
target, HELCOM will explore widening the scope of the programme 
to include emerging challenges and develop additional criteria for 
the	removal	of	newly	designated	hot	spots. 	
Code Action
Theme: Hot Spots
HT23Renew	the	effort	to	eliminate	remaining	hot	spots	identified	by	the	Baltic	Sea	Joint	Comprehensive	Environmental 	
Action	Programme	(JCP,	1992)	by	2025.
HT24Consider	designating	HELCOM	hot	spots	by	2025	on	the	basis	of	identified	additional	sources	of	major	negative 	
impact on the Baltic marine ecosystem, starting with the development of specifying criteria for the designation and 
deletion of the hot spots by 2023, and based on those criteria, initiate and undertake targeted measures with the 
aim	of	eliminating	where	possible	such	new	hot	spots.
HT25Prioritize inclusion of HELCOM hot spots into investment programmes (national or international) or establish alter -
native	financial	mechanisms	by	2027	at	the	latest	to	eliminate	hot	spots	from	HELCOM	list. 	
HT26Enhance cooperation with non-HELCOM countries in removing existing hot spots and designate new hot spots 
applying	HELCOM	criteria	and	facilitate	undertaking	all	possible	measures	to	eliminate	them.
Cross-reference to actions in other segments
E4Knowledge exchange and awareness raising
 Knowledge exchange and awareness raising are increas -
ingly recognised as key factors in promoting the social, 
environmental and economic impacts of the measures 
for	achieving	 good	environmental	 status	of	the	Baltic	Sea.	They	
improve the sustainable management of natural resources and 
the goods and services provided by those resources, and thereby 
ensure	the	well-being	 of	the	people	that	depend	on	them.	When	
carried out successfully, knowledge exchange and awareness 
raising increase the likelihood that knowledge and evidence will 
be used in policy decisions, consequently increasing the success 
of	those	decisions	 in	meeting	their	objectives.	 The	delivery	of	
messages to stakeholders and the general public should be based 
on science and cover all important topics relevant to the protection 
of	the	marine	environment.
Code Action
Theme: Knowledge exchange and awareness raising
HT27Increase knowledge exchange and awareness raising to promote public and stakeholder support and interest in under -
standing the state of the Baltic Sea and threats to its environment as well as promote opportunities for the general 
public	to	participate	in	citizen	science.
HT28 Share	experiences	and	best	practices	on	measures	that	have	been	implemented.HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 updateHorizontal topics
56 57
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan
2021 updateHorizontal topics
Financing
 The	economic	 benefits	of	achieving	 a	good	status	with	
regard to eutrophication, biodiversity and other aspects 
of the Baltic Sea ecosystem are evident and documented 
by	impressive 	figures.	The	costs	of	protecting 	the	Baltic	Sea	can	be	
reduced	by	a	cost-effective	 allocation	 of	measures	 and,	in	many	
cases,	benefits	have	been	evaluated	 to	exceed	the	costs.	On	the	
other hand, it should also be borne in mind that the cost of insuf -
ficient	protection	 can	be	substantial	 as	the	polluter-pays	 principle	
is one of the fundamental principles and obligations enshrined in 
Article	3.4	of	the	Helsinki	Convention.
In this respect, all Contracting Parties and HELCOM Observers 
will	investigate	 how	to	make	funding	i.e.	financial	and	non-finan -
cial contributions available for the implementation of the BSAP , 
taking into account in particular the need to connect priorities 
within	the	different	 sectors	in	which	projects	are	being	chosen	
for	financing,	 in	order	to	establish	 synergies	 and	make	best	use	
of	limited	financial	resources. 	
It should be underlined that increased public and private invest -
ment is necessary for implementing the actions and achieving the 
objectives of the updated BSAP , and thereby reaching the goal of 
a	healthy	Baltic	Sea. 	
The	private	sector,	financial	institutions 	as	well	as	non-profit 	
foundations and non-Baltic Sea states are therefore invited to join in 
the	efforts	to	restore	the	good	environmental	 status	of	the	Baltic	Sea,	which	also	supports	a	growing	sustainable	 blue	economy	in	the	region.	
The Contracting Parties will promote mobilising private and public 
funding sources to implement the BSAP and where possible also 
promote mobilising external funding in the context of organizations 
including the World Bank, the German Kreditanstalt für Wieder -
aufbau KfW development banking group, the Nordic Investment 
Bank	and	others. 	
The EU and those of its member states that are also Parties to the 
Helsinki Convention will dedicate funding to the implementation 
of the updated BSAP , notably where funding is available through 
programmes under the European Structural and Investment Funds 
in	the	2021-2027	 programming	 period	and	by	funding	adequate 	
measures under the Common Agricultural Policy and the Common 
Fisheries	 Policy.	They	commit	to	taking	into	account	priorities 	
of the revised Action Plan of the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea 
Region (EUSBSR) and its Policy Areas aiming to save the Baltic Sea 
in the development and implementation of post-2020 relevant 
programmes, as well as the Strategy for Social Economic Develop -
ment	of	the	North-West	 Federal	District	of	the	Russian	Federation. 	
Projects	financed	by	the	Interreg	Baltic	Sea	Programme	 2021-2027 	
can	also	support	the	implementation	of	the	BSAP.
In that context, the Baltic Sea Action Plan Fund, hosted by NIB/
NEFCO, can be a tool for supporting the implementation of the 
updated BSAP , and Contracting Parties and other possible con -
tributors can voluntarily contribute to the Fund, with a view to 
replenishing the Fund so that it can provide funding to all actors 
interested	 in	contributing	 to	the	aims	and	objectives	 of	the	BSAP.
HELCOM Baltic Sea Action Plan 
2021 update58References
HELCOM reports
HELCOM (2013): HELCOM Red List of Baltic Sea species in danger of 
becoming	extinct.	Baltic	Sea	Environmental	Proceedings	No.	140. 	
HELCOM (2018): Economic and social analyses in the Baltic Sea region 
–	HELCOM	Thematic	assessment	2011–2016.	Baltic	Sea	Environment 	
Proceedings	No.	160. 	
HELCOM (2018): HELCOM Assessment on maritime activities in the Baltic 
Sea	2018.	Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	152. 	
HELCOM	(2018):	HELCOM	Thematic	assessment	of	biodiversity	2011-2016. 	
Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	158. 	
HELCOM (2018): HELCOM Thematic assessment of eutrophication 2011-
2016.	Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	156. 	
HELCOM (2018): HELCOM Thematic assessment of hazardous substances 
2011-2016.	Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	157.
HELCOM	(2018):	Sources	and	pathways	of	nutrients	to	the	Baltic	Sea. 	
Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	153. 	
HELCOM (2018): State of the Baltic Sea – Second HELCOM holistic 
assessment	2011-2016.	Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	155. 	
HELCOM (2018): Thematic assessment of cumulative impacts on the 
Baltic	Sea	2011-2016.	Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	159. 	
HELCOM (2020): HELCOM Annual report on discharges observed during 
aerial	surveillance	in	the	Baltic	Sea	2019. 	
HELCOM	(2020):	Inputs	of	nutrients	to	the	sub-basins.	HELCOM	core 	
indicator	report.	Online. 	
HELCOM/Baltic Earth (2021): Climate Change in the Baltic Sea 2021 Fact 
Sheet.	Baltic	Sea	Environment	Proceedings	No.	180.
Legislation and policies of the European Union
European Commission Communication: The European Green Deal 
[COM(2019)	640	final] 	
EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 Bringing nature back into our lives 
COM/2020/380 	final
A Farm to Fork Strategy for a fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly 
food	system	COM/2020/381	final
 Pathway to a Healthy Planet for All EU Action Plan: 'Towards Zero Pollu -
tion	for	Air,	Water	and	Soil'	COM/2021/400	final
An	EU	Strategy	to	harness	the	potential	of	offshore	renewable	energy 	
for	a	climate	neutral	future,	COM	(2020)	741
A new Circular Economy Action Plan For a cleaner and more competitive 
Europe	COM/2020/98	final
Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy – putting European transport 
on track for the future
Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
17	June	2008
Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
23 October 2000
Council	Directive	91/676/EEC	of	12	December	1991
Council	Directive	91/271/EEC	of	21	May	1991References
Published by:
Helsinki Commission –   HELCOM
Katajanokanlaituri 6 B 
00160 Helsinki, Finland
www.helcom.fi
For bibliographic purposes this document should be cited as:
“HELCOM	Baltic	Sea	Action	Plan	– 	2021	update.		 HELCOM	2021.”
© 2021 Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission  
(Helsinki Commission –  HELCOM)
All	rights	reserved.	Information	included	in	this	publication 	
or extracts thereof, with the exception of images and graphic 
elements	that	are	not		 HELCOM's	own	and	identified	as	such,	may 	
be reproduced without prior consent on the condition that the 
complete	reference	of	the	publication	is	given	as	stated	above.
Illustrations: Katinka Reinke
Photos: Adobe Stock
Layout: Dominik LittfassDirective	2010/75/EU	of	the	European	Parliament	and	of	the	Council	of 	
24 November 2010
Directive (EU) 2019/904 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 5 June 2019
Directive	2009/147/EC	of	the	European	Parliament	and	of	the	Council	of 	
30 November 2009 and Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992
ACTION	PLAN	[COM(2009)	248	final,	SWD	2021	(24)	final
Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
23 July 2014 establishing a framework for maritime spatial planning
Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
19 November 2008
Directive (EU) 2019/883 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of	17	April	2019
DIRECTIVE (EU) 2016/802 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE 
COUNCIL of 11 May 2016
Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 11 December 2013 on the Common Fisheries Policy
Legislation and policies of the Russian Federation
Federal	Law	on	Environment	Protection	№	7	of	10.01.2002 	
Federal	Law	on	Ecological	Examination	№	174	of	23.11.1995.Order	of 	
the Ministry of Natural Recourses and Ecology of the Russian Federa -
tion	№999	of	01.12.2020	(Requirements	to	Materials	of	Environmental 	
Impact Assessment)
Federal	Law	on	Wastes	of	Production	and	Consumption	№	89	of 	
24.06.1998 	
Federal Law on Fisheries and Conservation of Aquatic Biological 
Resources	№	166	of	20.12.2004 	
Federal	Law	on	Air	Protection	№	96	of	04.05.1999 	
Federal	Law	on	Limiting	Greenhouse	Gas	Emissions	№	296	of	02.07.2021 	
Federal	Law	on	Nature	Protected	Areas	№	33	of	14.03.1995 	
Federal Law on Internal Waters, Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone of 
the	Russian	Federation	№	155	of	31.07.1998 	
Federal	Law	on	Continental	Shelf	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	187	of 	
30.11.1995 	
Federal	Law	on	Subsoil	(mineral	resources)	Exploitation	№	2395-1	of 	
21.02.1992 	
Federal	Law	№74	of	03.06.2006 	
Federal	Law	№200	of	04.12.2006
Decree	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	176	of	19.04.2017
Order	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	№2423-r	of 	
18.12.2012	
Order	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	1235-r	of	27.08.2009 	
Order	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	212-r	of	17.02.2014 	
Order	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	1930-r	of	30.08.2019 	
Order	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	84-r	of	25.01.2018 	
Order	of	the	Government	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	2798-r	of 	
26.11.2019 	
Order	of	the	President	of	the	Russian	Federation	№	861-rp	of	17.12.2009Corrigenda 
22 October 2021: correction of erroneous text in action B24
7	December	2021:	editorial	corrections
30 March 2022: correction of erroneous label order in Table 2a
4	April	2022:	rectification	of	headings	in	the	horizontal	topics	chapterFor a healthy 
Baltic Sea
helcom.fi