BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              119  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  
Bulletin of Environment, Pharmacology and Life Sciences  
Bull. Env. Pharmacol. Life Sci., Spl Issue [3] 2022: 119-125 
©2022 Academy for Environment and Life Sciences, India  
Online ISSN 2277 -1808  
Journal’s URL:http://www.bepls.com  
CODEN: BEPLAD  
 
 
ORIGINAL A RTICLE                                                 OPEN ACCESS  
 
 Biodegradation of Azo Dye (Congo Red) by Bacterial Isolate from 
the Textile Effluent Contaminated Soil  
 
Khushbu Shah 1, Prasad Andhare3, Indrani Bhattacharya2, Anjali Thakur2, Dhwani Upadh yay2* 
1: Student, M.Sc Microbiology, Parul Institute of Applied Science, Parul University, Post Limda, Wagh odiya, 
Gujarat  
2: Assistant Professor, Parul Institute of Applied Science, Parul University, Post Limda, Waghodiya ,  
Gujarat  
3: Assistant Professor,  Biological Sciences, PDPIAS, Charotar University of Science and Technology,  
Changa, Anand, Gujarat.  
*Corresponding Author: Dr. Dhwani Upadhyay;  
E-Mail: dhwaniupadhyay82123@paruluniversity.ac.in  
 
ABSTRACT  
In current situation, azo colors have grown largel y popular than natural dye as a synthetic dye for colourants. The need 
for dye colorants  in industry is growing, posing major health and environmental risks. Congo Red (CR) is an azo dye th at 
has carcinogenic qualities and proposed into large variety in pr inting areas. This printing equipment remove large 
quantity of sewage water containing these colours, posing an environmental threat, environmental con tamination. The 
dye degradation and decolorization processes, which employ a variety of physical and chem ical strategies. The biological 
degradation is regarded a viable technique for eliminating nephrotoxic radical dyes. Bacillus subtil is, Aeromonas 
hydrophilia, and Bacillus cereus have been reported to have color removing activities. In the presen t research , at varied 
aggregations of CR dye (25 to 200 mg/L), red colour breakdown from the isolated bacteriological stra in was observed. 
Soil sample collected from textile industry of surat. Soil sample having types of bacteria, soil sam ple inoculated in 
nutrient medium supplemented with the Congo red dye and then incubated. The dye degrading bacteria were isola ted 
and the optimization was done for the growth of bacteria for degradation of dye. Optimization was do ne for different 
temperature, different pH and diffe rent dye concentration. According to the findings of this investigation, the bacteria 
Bacillus sp. might propose as an excellent bacterial weapon included in sewage management, particula rly from the 
natural humiliation of printing color waste under oxidati ve circumstances and also use as commercially for removal of 
dye.  
Keywords : - Dye Degradation, Bacillus sp., Environmental pollution, Congo Red Dye  
 
Received 01 .08.2022       Revised  27.09.2022                                         Accepted 05 .11.2022  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 Printing, colour, textiles, rubber products, paper, and pharmaceuticals are just a few of the indust ries that 
use dyes. Because of their complex chemical composition, artificial colors have more effective to 
decolorization. Around 280,000 ty pes for printing colors have emitted in textile corporate waste per 
annual all over the universe [1].  Azo colors were identified from the appearance of   azo bonds ( -N=N -), 
and due to their simplicity of use and low cost, the description through equal to 7 0% of coloring matters 
used for printing processer. In their synthesis, they seek stability and cost -effectiveness. A greater range 
of colours is available than with organic colors. As a minimum 10% to 15% of which colour proposed i n 
the process has releas ed within the environment. Available areas as a source of wastewater providing a 
risk to the environment [2]. In 1856, English chemist William Henry Perkin created a black precipita te 
from aniline and found out reddish colour, whoever stained velvet quickl y and has far further strong in 
visible wavelength rathe then any else (organic) reddish color at the time [3].  
Even a little amount of dye hues, such as 10 -50 mgL -1, can pollute the environment. Because azo dyes are 
made up of polyaromatic molecules, the y are reactive dyes that are very water soluble, this is the case. 
Additionally, because the color in the wastewater is highly noticeable, it may pose a threat to 
photosynthetic aquatic plants by decreasing light penetration in water bodies [4]. A substant ial amount of 
waste water is produced, with a bright colour, a high concentration of suspended particulates. Dyes are 
often synthetic and feature complex aromatic chemical structures, making them more lasting and BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              120  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  biodegradable.   Pigments are coloured organ ic compounds that have the ability to transfer their colour to 
other substances, such as textile fibers . They can be natural or synthetic.   When compared to natural dyes, 
artificial colors were widely proposed in printing fabric, printing of the paper, col oring of leather, color 
photographs, also in petroleum manufacturing due to that kind of manufacture, very resistance to 
sunlight, heating, laundry, and natural organisms, and colour types.  
The treatment of dye wastewater often involves comprised and subst antive processes like filtration of 
water, chromatography by using ions, absorbance, congelation, sedimentation, depositing and Fenton's  
oxidization. Decolorization and degradation by biological methods appear to have a number of 
advantages over chemical a nd physical procedures, including being ecologically benign, cost -competitive, 
producing less sludge, and being easier and more appealing to degrade all colours [5].  
 Bioremediation, which has evolved into a vital microbiological tool for dealing with a v ariety of 
contaminants, is a major research topic in environmentalism. A variety of bacteria, fungi, yeasts, a lgae, 
and actinomycetes have demonstrated the capability to decolorize azo dyes.   Bacteria had importantly 
commonly used as biological agent for a zo dye removal because they can reproduce quickly in aerobic, 
anaerobic, facultative, and harsh environmental conditions such as high salinity and extensive pH an d 
temperature fluctuations. Heavy metals can be concentrated, accumulated, and absorbed by mic robes 
within cells or cell walls [6].   
The goal of this investigation was to see if various bacterial strains specified through textile eff luent, soil, 
and water poisoning with petroleum oil may decolorize a Congo Red azo dye solution. In addition, the  
effects of several decolorization -related parameters were investigated.  
 
MATERIAL AND METHODS  
Collection of samples  
 Collection of soil sample was done from the Textile Industry, Surat, Gujarat, 394221. Dye degrading 
bacteria highly present in the textile w aste material contaminant soil, therefore soil sample collection was 
done from this site.  
Dye  
Congo red is a diazo dye, or primary dye, which contains 2 azo groups. It's prepared by mixing two 
napthionic acid molecules with tetrazotised benzidine (4 -amino napthalene -1-sulphonic acid).  
Enrichment and Isolation of Dye Degrading Bacteria  
 Enrichment  
The soil sample collected from the fabric discharge polluted site was placed in a flask containing 5 0 ml 
nutritional media with 30 mg/L Congo red dye to increase t he microbes present in the soil. The flask 
media was rotated at 180 revolution per minute after 3 -4 days under 37 °C.  
Isolation and Characterization of Dye Degrading Bacteria  
The enrichment flask showed some signs of dye removal of dye. This culture was st reaked on nutritional 
medium that included 20gl -1 agar for solidification and 30 mg/L dye. The plates were incubated for 24 
hrs. The basic morphological features of dye -degrading bacteria were identified and described.  
Determination of Degradation by the Optical Density (OD)  
 To separate the bacterial cell mass, the culture was centrifuged for 5 min at 10,000 rpm at room 
temperature. The top layer was removed and separated, which was used for color removal and other 
investigations. The maximum removal proc ess was identified at 600 nm and the absorbance of the 
resulting was measured using different wavelengths with in Visual Spectrophotometer.  
The calculation of degradation number calculated by the formula given below  
   % decolorization= primary absorbance rate - terminal absorbance rate x100  
                                                              Primary absorbance rate         [5].  
Morphological and Biochemical Characterization  
 Morphological characterization  
 Gram's staining technique was used to ch aracterize the morphology of the bacterial isolate from the 24 -
hour old bacterial culture.  
 Biochemical characterization  
 The plate containing the isolated bacteria from the textile waste was chosen and subjected to a seri es of 
biochemical tests, including  the Indole test, Catalase test, Oxidase test, Methyl Red test, Voges -Proskauer 
test, Citrate Utilization test, Carbohydrate Fermentation for Sugars, Lactose, and Mannitol sugar, a nd the 
Triple Sugar Iron (TSI) test, to investigate the characteristic featu res of the isolate.  
 
Optimization of Dye Decolorization  
 Effect of different Congo Red Dye Concentration on Decolorization  BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              121  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  It was carried out to observe the effects of optimum dye concentrations degraded by bacterial isolat e. The 
flasks with various dye co ncentrations of 50, 100, 150, and 200 mg/L and nutrient broth medium were 
inoculated by isolated bacterial culture. Further, they were incubated at 37°C for 24 to 48 hours at  180 
revolutions per minute. The findings had been seen after the incubation perio d. 
Effect of different pH on the decolorization  
 For the purpose of examining the effects of various pH levels on degradation, several pH levels were  used 
(5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12). Acidic and Basic solutions use for pH calibration. The isolated bacteri al culture 
was inoculated and incubated for 24 –48 hours at 37°C at 180 rpm/min in a medium containing nutrient 
medium added with the stain and controlled also with varied pH. The results had been seen after the 
incubation period.  
Effect of the different Tem perature  
Temperatures of 25°C, 37°C, and 55°C were used to evaluate the effects of varying temperatures on 
deterioration. The flask containing nutrient media was dyed and inoculated with the isolated bacteri al 
culture, which was then incubated at various temperatures for 24 –48 hours at 180 rpm/min. The results 
have been seen after the incubation.  
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
Isolation of Congo Red Dye Degrading Bacteria  
Bioremediation research has advanced after the discovery of a bacterial population and diver sity in 
textile wastewater [8]. Bacteria and fungus, such as Actinomycetes , may break down azo colors [9]. The 
efficiency of degradation reduced when color increases concentrations due to the dyes  poisonous for 
biomass either/rather because greater color e fficiency requires larger biological intensity [10]. According 
to a previous study, when the dye concentration was raised, the efficacy of decolorization decreased  and 
the time required for ultimate decolorization [11].  Textile dye manufacturing effluents  are one of the 
most environmentally dangerous pollutants. In addition to impacting water quality, it has a deleteri ous 
influence on the microbiota and aquatic habitats. The dyeing industry has been identified as one tha t 
contributes to pollution.                                                          
Textile Industry , Surat was the dye wastewater polluted land. Colored effluent from the textile industry is 
discharged into the environment without being treated.  For the enrichment of the soil organism firs t soil 
sample collected from the textile effluent added into the nutrient broth containing Congo red dye an d 
incuba ted at 37 ˚C for 3 -4 day at 180 rpm/min shaking condition. After incubation period bacterial 
growth was observed and it was found that bacterial was successfully able to degrade the dye of the 
medium (Figure 2).  
The enriched bacterial culture was streaked on the nutrient plate supplemented with the agar and Congo 
red dye showed the decolorization on the plate (Figure 3). From the enriched soil medium bacteria wh ich 
were able to degrade the dye isolated and used for the further analysis.  
To test the rate of  deterioration, the medium was centrifuged and then supernatant was utilised. The 
isolated bacteria from textile effluent polluted soil decolorized the Congo Red dye.  The degradatio n rate 
of the dye increased day by day and after 4 days of incubation. How ever, the degradation was observed 
on the 1st, 2nd and 3rd day of inoculation with lower percent rate but the maximum dye decolorization was 
observed on 4th day with 73%. (Figure 4).         
Morphological Characterization  
By the use of isolated bacterium g ram staining was done to identify the morphological characters. As 
shown if Figure 5, the isolated bacteria from the textile effluent soil is Gram positive, small in size, rod 
shape and single in arrangement.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Biochemical  Characterization  
The biochemical tests of bacterial isolate reveals that the bacterium is Indole, Methyl Red and Voge s-
Proskauer negative. However, catalase, citrate and oxidase positive. The fermentation tests reveals that 
bacteria is able to ferment suc rose and mannitol but unable to ferment lactose. The motility test showed 
that bacterial isolate is motile (Table 1).  
Optimization of Dye Decolorization  
 To increase the dye degradation process by the organism, the temperature, pH, dye concentration, was  
optimized.  
Effect of Temperature on Dye Degradation  
To check the effect of temperature on the dye degradation activity by isolate, the isolate was inocu lated 
with the congo red dye and incubated at various temperatures such as 25°C, 37°C and 55°C. The 
max imum decolorization was observed at 37 ˚C among all the temperatures which reveals that it is the 
optimum temperature for the growth of bacteria and degradation activity. Also, the bacterial growth and BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              122  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  degradation was o bserved at 25°C and 55°C but it was in  very less amount may be due the metabolic 
inactivity of bacteria at these temperatures (Figure 6).  
Effect of pH on Dye Degradation  
To observe the effect of pH on bacterial growth and dye degradation, the bacterial isolate was inocu lated 
into the various n utrient medium containing congo red dye and pH levels such as 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 
12 respectively. The decolorization was noticed after the incubation period. As shown in Figure 7, I t was 
observed that the isolate has a low degradation rate at low p H and a low very high pH value. At pH 6, the 
most decolorization was achieved. As a result, it may deduce that the bacterium isolated from textil e 
waste is slightly acidophilic.   
Effect of Dye Concentration on Dye Degradation  
To identify the optimum conce ntration of dye degraded by the isolate, the dye -degrading bacteria from 
the soil sample was inoculated in the nutrient medium supplemented with varied Congo Red dye 
concentration (25, 50, 100, 150, and 200 mg/L). The medium was incubated for the specific period. After 
incubation period decolorization observed. At the low concentration of dye the decolorization was le ss 
but as the concentration was increased the isolate was able to degrade the higher concentration of d ye. As 
shown in Figure 8, the maximum d ye degraded by the isolate was 150 mg/L. The bacterium was able to 
decolorize the congo red dye upto 200mg/L. Therefore, we can conclude that the isolate is efficientl y able 
to degrade the textile dye.  
The bacterial isolate of   waste water had shown to ha ve the prospective to remove Congo Red color to the 
greatest extent possible, indicating that there are effective methods for treating textile effluent that 
reduce pollution in the environment.   
 
  
          Figure 1.  The Sample  Collection Site                      Figure 2. Dye Degradation in the medium  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Bacteria isolated from waste water sample  BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              123  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  
 
Figure 4.  Percentage Decolorization observation  
 
 
Figure 5. Opti mization of Temperature  
 
 
Figure 6.  Optimization of pH  BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              124  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  
 
Figure 72. Optimization of Various Congo Red Dye Concentration  
 
Table 1  : Showing the Biochemical test Results of isolate d Bacillus sp.  
     Biochemical characterization  Results  
Gram’s staining  +  
Size  Small  
Shape  Rod  
Indole Production  - 
Methyl Red Test  - 
Voges -Proskauer Test  - 
Citrate Utilization Test  + 
Triple Sugar Iron Test  + 
Carbohydrate Fermentation (Lactose)  - 
Carbohydrate Fermentation (Mannitol)  + 
Carbohydrate fermentation (Sucrose)  + 
Motility  Motile  
Catalase Test  + 
Oxidase Test  +  
 
CONCLUSION  
Textile effluent discharged into the natural environment without treatment causes concerns for the 
ecosystem, human, and other populations. As a result, we must treat the effluent before to disposal. 
Physical and chemical treatments are used for this, which are costly, time -consuming, and create a 
considerable volume of sludge. As a result, we must proceed with th e biological therapy. In this work, we 
have isolated bacteria that can breakdown Congo Red dye and contribute to environmental cleanup . The 
species of bacteria, the content of the medium, and the physical conditions all influence the rate o f 
degradation. I t was deduced from the optimization results that the isolated bacterium showed the 
maximum rate of decolorization when incubated for 4 days at 37°C, pH -6. This research work give the 
contribution in clean the environment from the pollutants of the industr y and other sources also.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
Authors are grateful to the management of Parul University, Waghodiya, and Vadodara , India for 
providing necessary facilities to perform research work presented in this paper.  
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST  
The authors declar e that they have no conflict of interest.  
  
REFERENCES  
1. X. Jin, G. Liu, Z. Xu, W. Yao, (2007). Decolorization of a dye industry effluent by Aspergillus fumi gatus XC6. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol., 74, 239 -243.  BEPLS Vol Spl Issue [3] 2022                              125  | P a g e            ©20 22 AELS, INDIA  2. R.G. Saratale, G.D. Saratale, D.C. Kalyani, J.S . Chang, S.P. Govindwar, (2009). Enhanced decolorization and 
biodegradation of textile azo dye Scarlet R by using developed microbial consortium -GR. Bioresour. Technol., 
100, 2493 –2500.  
3. Lokendra Singh and Ved Pal Singh.(2009). Textile Dyes Degradation: A M icrobial Approach for Biodegradation of 
Pollutants, Research gate .  
4. Marimuthu T, Rajendran S, and Manivannan M (2013a). A review on bacterial degradation of textile dye s. Journal 
of Chemistry and Chemical Sciences, 3(3), pp. 201 –212.  
5. M. A. M. Abo -State1, Y . E. Saleh and H. A. Hazaa, (2017). Decolorization of Congo Red dye by bacterial isolates, 
Journal of Ecology of Health & Environment , 41 -48. 
6. Solis M, Solis A, Perez HI, Manjarrez N, Flores M (2012) Microbial decoloration of azo dyes: a revie w. Process 
Biochem 47:1723 –1748.  
7. Jadhav, I., Vasniwal, R., Shrivastava, D., & Jadhav, K. (2016). Microorganism based treatment of azo  dyes. Journal 
of Environmental Science and Technology, 9, 188 -197.  
8. Chen, K.C., Wu, J.Y.,& Liou, D.J. (2003). Decolorization of the tex tile dyes by newly isolated bacterial strains. 
Journal of Biotechnology, 101, 57 –68. 
9. S. Chakraborty, B. Basak, S. Dutta, B. Bhunia, A. Dey, (2013). Decolorization and biodegradation of Congo red dye 
by a novel white rot fungus Alternaria alternate CMERI F6 . Bioresour. Technol., 147, 662 –666 
10. M.A.M. Abo -State, M.A.M. Metwally, M.E.M. EL -Sawy, (2015). Enhanced decolorization of textile dyes by gamma 
radiation induced Bacillus cereus isolated from wastewater. J. Eco. Heal. Env., 3, 59 -70. 
11. Wuhrmann, K., Mechsner , K .L. & Kappeler, T. (1980), Investigation on rate determining factors in the Microbial 
reduction of azo dyes. European Journal of Applied Microbiology, 9, 325 -338.  
12. Ogawa T.O., Yatome, C. idaka E.  and  Kamiya  H.  (1986). Biodegradation  of  Azo Acid   dye by Continuous 
cultivation of Pseudomonas cepacia 13 NA, JSDC 102: 12 -14. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CITATION OF THIS ARTICLE  
K Shah , P Andhare , I Bhattacharya , A Thakur , D Upadh yay. Biodegradation of Azo Dye (Congo Red) by Bacterial 
Isolate from the Textile Effluent Contaminated Soil . Bull . Env.Pharma col. Life Sci., Vol Spl Issue [3 ] 2022 : 119-125 