 
*Correspondence:  Phone and fax; 091-281-2578512, (M) 91-9879584774) E mail; drgondaliya@yahoo.com  JASEM ISSN 1119-8362 
All rights reserved  
 J. Appl. Sci. Environ. Manage. September , 2007 
Vol. 11(3) 45 - 52 Full-text Available Online at 
 www.bioline.org.br/ja  
 
Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourization by Enterobacteriaceae Species in the Intact Cell 
Assay System 
 
1*SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA; 2SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 
1*M.B.S. Institute of Biochemistry, Saurashtra University, Rajkot, GUJARAT, India.-36005 
2Department of Biosciences, Saurashtra University, Rajkot, India. 
. 
 
ABSTRACT : The method “Intact cell assay” was adopted to assess the influencing factors on the process of 
decolourization ability of the enterobacteriaceaea specie isolates under predisposed environment. Taken into account 
several ingredient are added individually as well in combinations in the assay reaction. Values of dye decolourized in µg ml
-1 with  Multi vitanmins solution (MVS) with glucose 42.53; MVS 36.00; Riboflavin (RF) 39.00; Yeast extract 36.00 
and B- complex 23.00 from the initial dye of 46.00µg ml-1 were observed ,  where as  glucose,  Ascorbic acid, Cysteine, 
Cetyl-trimethyl-ammonium bromide (CTAB),  Sodium molybdate, Biotin, KNO 3, NaNO 2, folic acid and 1-amino-2-
naphtho-4-sulfonic acid (ANSA)  does not shows influence  on   to the process,  but,  some of them showed inhibitory 
effect toward the decolourization.  It was observed that the riboflavin addition  at 19.95 n moles ml-1 in the reaction 
mixture, rate of decolourization was suddenly change from 0.019 ∆A/minutes to 0.20 ∆A/minutes, which is extremely high 
by 10 fold fast and  subsequently remains faster i.e 0.2 ∆A/minutes without further additional  RF in the same assay 
mixture.  Rate of decolourization with different concentrations of riboflavin   i.e. 13.0 n moles ml-1 to 59.9 n moles ml-1 
showed second order kinetic. This indicates that the minimum amount of RF is essential to trigger the process of 
decolourization by the intact cells under the assay condition. While five different azo dyes were subjected, showed diverse behavior on to the rate of decolourization. Results of entire study incite on role of riboflavin could to a certain extent act as 
a redox mediator in the reaction(s) process and electron mediator between intracellular pool to the dye available at 
periplasmic redox sink @ JASEM 
 
In recent years a large number of microorganisms 
have been isolated which are able to degrade 
compound which previously was considered to be non degradable. In nature there is a significant 
resource of biological agents, which can be 
nourished to be exploited and employed for biotechnological applications. Most microbial 
activities that can serve the basis of bioremediation 
do not function optimally under the process conditions. It is thus become necessary to isolate 
potent microbes and study their environmental 
requirements for their best expression and performance for degradation/ decolourization in the 
nature. Studies and explanation view of 
decolourization to degradation and ultimate mineralization varied due to diversity in the both. As 
allude in literatures, azo dye decolourization is a 
reductive process in which azo -N=N- bond (s) is converted to -HN-NH-  or  2 molecules of NH
2 by 
the reductive enzymes present in specified bacterial 
strains. The products generated in process are two 
aromatic amines that do not absorb light in the visible spectrum and therefore azo dye reduction 
represents a decolourization process (Tan 2001) 
Several studies have published on the anaerobic decolourization of azo dyes by using intestinal 
anaerobic bacteria that subsequently found to be 
decolorized with various other anaerobic cultures (Walker and Ryan 1970, Allan and Raxon 1974, 
Chung et al. 1978, Brown and Laboureur 1983, 
Chung et al 1992, Carliell et al. 1994, Donlon et al. 1997, Razo-Flores et al. 1997, Beydilli et al. 1998). 
On the other hand azo dye reduction is a ubiquitous capacity of many microbes under anaerobic 
condition (Walker et al 1970, Rafii and Carliell et al. 
1995, Donlon et al. 1997, Razo, Flores et al. 1997).  An aerobic azo dye bioremediation also possible 
only by the bacterial consortium, but time required in 
days for decolorized 90 % out of 50 µg/ml concentration (Senan et al 2004), which not feasible 
at field level due to high volume of the effluent, 
Further in biodecolourization with anaerobic bacteria, according to Gingell and Walker (1971) and 
Haug et al. (1992) required electrons for the 
reductive cleavage of azo dyes which may derive from co-substrates. Nigam et al. (1996a) also 
reported the similar results thus Azo dye reduction 
by the microbes requires co-substrate as a source of electron equivalent. Various records on the types of 
co-substrates used to suit as electron donors were, 
glucose (Carliell et al. 1995), Nigam et al. (1996a), hydrolyzed starch (Willetts et al. 2000), topioca (Chinwekitvanich et al. 2000), yeast extract (Nigam 
et al. 1996a), a mixture of acetate, butyrate, 
propionate (Donlon et al. 1997, Van Der Zee et al. 2000) and the azo dye reduction product like  5-
aminosalicylic acid as well (Razo-Flores et al. 1997) 
are recorded. Anaerobic decolourization of azo dyes by bacteria, the reduction equivalents generated by 
the oxidation of auxiliary substrates, i.e. organic 
carbon complexes act as electron donor through NAD(P)
+ reduce the azo bond via primarily 
assuming electron carriers (coenzymes) flavins 
nucleotides (FMN, FAD) or riboflavin as cofactors (Roxon et. al. 1967;  Zimmermann et al. 1982, Rafii 
et at 1990, Chung and Stevens 1993). So incite that Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 46
reactions may be multi steps and complex to fulfill 
intracellular donor to xenobiotics (dyes) in the system 
 
The study of enzymes and enzyme-catalyzed reactions has contributed greatly to our 
understanding of microbial metabolism (Philips, 
1999).  It is always not possible to measure 
physiological or biochemical processes of bacteria 
by working with enzymatic reactions individually 
and to obtain molecular mechanisms . Philips (1999) 
again discusses the use of native intact cells to 
overcome the assays of individual enzymes due to 
the inability to make substances available to the enzyme in known and nonmilitant conditions. 
Several workers have recognized that causative 
agent(s) ought to be studied and also it is important, the native intact cell studies provide the confirmation 
of the existence of the causative agent(s) and also 
considerable mechanistic detail. This is also called in vivo method of quantitatively measurement of the process, which is not impossible, in vitro but 
necessitates expensive and cumbersome techniques. 
In this study decolourization rate was measured in different assay conditions created in the reaction 
mixture in vivo intact cell assay system to evaluate 
influencing parameter, subjective remarks that overall phenomenon are may operated by the 
reducing equivalents electron pool generated 
intracellular from anaerobic metabolism, then which are transfer from source to the azo dyes to reduce azo 
bonds via enzymatic system may at periplasmic place of the organism. Present study incite influences 
of supplementary substance and role of riboflavin on 
the kinetic of decolourization for establish a mechanism of the process for applications 
elaboration  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Dyes and chemicals :  Four commercially 
available dyes, Reactive Magenta HB (C.I 
name Reactive Violate 13), Reactive Red PBX, Remazol Magenta HB, Sunzol Violet 
5R were obtained from Saraf Chemical 
Ahemadabad, India and one laboratory dye 
Biebrich Scarlet was from BD chemical UK 
were selected for the studies purpose. stock solution of each dyes were prepared by 
dissolving 2.0g of each dye in 100 ml 
distilled water (20 mg ml
-1), sterilized by 
autoclaving at 110o c for 30 minutes. 
Detailed structure of Reactive Violate 13 is Fig-A as a model structure available. All 
other chemical used are standard analytical 
grade produced from E Merck, BDH, S. D. 
fine chemical and Spectrochem, India
.  
 
 
Fig 1 .  Ractive Violate 13;  5-acetamido-4-cupro-oxy-3 -((4-((sulfooxy)ethyl) sulf ophenyl  (3-oxy(4-))azo)-
2,7-naphthalenedisulfonic acid trisodium salt 
 
Organism:   Enterobacteriaceae  sp. was 
isolated from the activated sludge of comment 
effluent treatment plant of textile industrial waste. Isolation of microbial populations was carried out 
with direct enrichment and isolation techniques from the activated sludge in medium, selected most potent 
species were identified based in biochemical test 
with reference to Burgey”s Manual, selected strain Bio -3 belong to  enterobacteriaceae species were 
conform.( Gondaliya and Pathak  2005) Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 47
 
Medium:   MM4 medium was used containing 
salts (gL-1)   Na 2HPO 4  2.0,  KH 2PO 4 2.0,  (NH 4) 2 
HPO 4  4.0,  NaCl  2.0, Mg SO 4 7H 2O  0.2, Sucrose 
5.0, Yeast extract 1.0, and  Trace elements solution 10 ml, to added per liter pH 7.0 adjusted. 
 
Preparation of intact cell broth for decolourization assays:  After isolation and screening throughout 
procedure, most potent dye decolorizing microbial 
strain Enterobacteriaceae  sp was maintained in agar 
slant. For preparation of intact cell broth, 
Enterobacteriaceae  sp cultured in the 250 ml conical 
flasks with medium MM4 containing dye (Remazol Magenta HB, 20 mg L
-1) was inoculated with 
microbes from the preserved slant and incubated at 
30 +  50c temperature for 8 to 10 hours under static 
condition to get sufficient active biomass having 1.0 
to 1.2  optical density. at 660 nm (high density of the 
bacterial cells). These activated acidified culture broth was neutralized to PH 7.5 with addition of Sodium bicarbonate powder. The neutralized broth 
was adjusted to 1.00 optical density (10
-7 CFUml-1) 
at 660nm to set the fixed amount of biomass with 0.5 M bicarbonate buffer pH 7.5. The preparation was 
made in 100 ml volumetric flask, kept in tightly 
closed condition to avoid oxygen penetration in the cells preparation and are used as required to assay, 
Native intact cells assay method was followed to 
overcome the assaying of individual enzymes responsible for the biodecolourization by the 
microbial cells due to inability to make substances 
available to the enzymes in known and nonmilitant condition(s). To perform the assay termination and 
continued assay were followed. 
 Influence of various auxiliary substances on dye 
decolourization in native intake cell assay :   Various 
chemical ingredients are added individually as well in combinations  such as,  multivitamin solution 
(MVS); MVS+ glucose; MVS + Cetyl-trimethyl-
ammonium bromide (CTAB); riboflavin (RF); ascorbic acid; sodium molybdate; sodium nitrite; 
sodium nitrate; Yeast extract; B-complex (BC); folic 
acid, biotin, 1-amino-2-naphtho-4-sulfonic acid 
(ANSA); and cysteine, were added in the assay 
mixture (in vial with screw cap ϒ irradiated) at 
concentrations as  mention in the fugures-1. 
Reactions were initiated by addition of dye fro stock 
20 mg ml
-1 to the assay mixture. Immediately after 
1.0-hour incubation, the vials were centrifuged at 
12000 RPM for 10 min. in bench centrifuge (REMI- 
RC24), optical density of the supernatants was measured by spectroscopically with spectrophotometer (Systronic 116A) at 540 nm     ( λ 
max of dye). Results in dye content µg ml
-1 were 
calculated from optical density decrease per unit time from standard curve of dyes. All the values of 
graph in figure are means of nine samples reading were mean out in the excel graphic in all the cases. 
 
Intact cell assay for dye decolourization rate determination :  In continued assay, above prepared 
active intact cells broth 3.9 ml was transfer in the 
cuvette and adjusted the spectrophotometer at 540 nm wavelength ( λ max of dye Remazol magenta 
HB), set the 0.0 optical density with intact cell broth 
as a blank, to obtain base line of spectra, Initiation of the reaction in the cuvette was made by addition of 
dye (50 µl from the stock solution 20 mg ml
-1) gently 
mixed well and initial rate of decolourization was measured by monitoring the change in optical 
density at interval of a minute at R.T. (30
0C) up to 
the optical density reached to 0.0 or nearer to stable, assay were perform in the cuvette itself for the 
determination of influencing parameters; Rate of 
decolourization was expressed as a change in absorbance (A) units at λ max of dye under a given 
time (a minute) of reaction with in defined assay 
condition. Rate of dye Decolourization = ∆ 
Absorbance at λ
-max of dye / minute.  
 
Influence of RF stepwise addition on dye 
decolourization rate in the reaction mixture assay:  
 In first set of assay, reaction was initiated 
with addition of dye with riboflavin, repeated the 
process by addition of dye only without RF in same assay cuvette. In second set of assay, reaction was 
initiated with dye without RF, followed with monitor 
change in optical density at 540nm and then in the same cuvette RF at 19.95 n moles ml
-1 in the reaction 
mixture was added at the 14th minutes, continued 
monitoring of decolourization rate at R.T. (300C) up 
to the optical density reached 0.0 or nearer to stable, 
subsequent repeated twice a time to measure rate. 
The rate of dye decolourization with and without riboflavin in the reaction assay were calculated from 
linear section of initial velocity  
 Effect of riboflavin concentrations on 
decolourization rate in intact cell assay:   To 
perceive whether the concentrations of riboflavin is 
effecting or not?, on the rate of decolourization by 
the intact cells in the assay system. Assay was 
performed with addition of varying concentrations of 
RF ranging from 19.95 to 59.85 n moles ml
-1 in the 
reaction mixture. Reaction was initiated with   addition of dye solution and rate of decolourization 
was recorded against time on a minute scale interval 
up to stable absorbance. Decolourization rate of different dyes in the intact 
cells assay:    Five different dyes (Reactive Red 
PBX, Remazol Magenta HB, Reactive magenta HB, Sunzol Violet 5R and Biebrich Scarlet) were Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 48
employed to determine the decolourization rate of 
the cells under given intact cell broth assay system.   In the assay, reaction was initiated with addition of 
dye solution (50 µl from the stock solution 20 mg ml
-
1), gently mixed and the rate of decolourization ware 
measured by monitoring change in absorption at 540 
nm at every minute interval up to the 0.0 absorbance  
at R.T. (300C). Results were directly as absorbance 
unit presented graphically, rate was expressed based 
on decrease in absorbance unit per a minute of time 
interval. In all the figures mean of nine samples reading were presented. 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
It has been a major concern to remove color during 
the treatment processes of wastewater generating 
from dyestuff and textile industries. Generally, a customized process, which probably involves a 
combination of different methods, will be more 
applicable. Azo dyes decolourization was feasible only by first the reduction of dye under anaerobic that can be the initiate the further transformation 
process to ultimate degradation. Thus, to evaluate the 
factors that affecting on to the dye reduction kinetic under semi natural condition becomes an essential. 
Also  decolourization has been consider as a specific 
task of microbes which were carried out under certain environmental condition created either 
themselves or to be  provided to the culture broth in 
vitro or combination of both contributing to fulfill  the  process at optimally 
As Philips (1999) discusses, assaying with intact 
cells is infrequently conducted for semi quantitative analysis and also he stated that the native intact cells 
assay would be better if the conditions where the 
investigators recognize those enzymes in which protein-protein or protein-membrane interactions are 
necessary or channeling the metabolic fluxes toward 
the particular function or if necessary energy flow to the enzyme form the cellular metabolisms, those 
normally found in the cells.   
The study of enzymes and enzyme-catalyzed reactions has contributed greatly to our 
understanding of microbial metabolism (Phillips, 
1999) It is always not possible to measure 
physiological or biochemical processes of bacteria 
by working with enzymatic reactions individually and to obtain molecular mechanisms. But, the use of 
native intact cells to overcome the assays of 
individual enzymes due to the inability to make substances available to the enzyme in known and 
nonmilitant conditions  Also the exact keyed 
factor(s) may be known and not feasible to provide it in their physiologically required environment (i.e. as 
in vivo conditions). Therefore, assess of keyed 
factor(s) that affect on process of dye decolourization were undertaken with the bacterial cells. Organism was cultured in the defined cultural 
condition and then adjusted the biomass in suspension of intact cells with buffer of desire pH to 
maintain the semi natural environmental condition. 
In line of the experiments carried out, it was felt that  to use whole cell assay to study the process of 
decolourization under varying assay conditions and 
to find out and understand the impacts of various parameters on dye decolourization. 
 
Effect of various auxiliary substances on decolourization assay:  Taken in to account 
several  biochemical like, such as glucose, Yeast 
Extract, Ascorbic acid, Cysteine, MVS, CTAB, RF, Sodium molybdate, Biotin, KNO
3, NaNO 2, B-
complex vitamin solution, folic acid and ANSA 
provided  in the assay mixture and reactions were initiated by addition of dye (Remazol Magenta HB). 
Experiment values calculated as µg ml
-1 dye 
decolourized were  showed  as  MVS + glucose, (42.53 µg ml
-1);  MVS, (36.00); RF (39.00)  and YE 
(36.00)  from  the initial value 46.0µg ml-1), (Fig. 1) 
where as  glucose,  Ascorbic acid, Cysteine, CTAB,  
Sodium molybdate, Biotin, KNO 3, NaNO 2, , folic 
acid and ANSA  does not  effected  to the process 
but some of them showed inhibitory effect toward 
the decolourization. However, from the results, it clearly shows that the intact cell assay required an 
essential auxiliary substa nce(s) that may present 
either in any components in MVS, YE, or might be only RF (riboflavin) that enhances the dye 
decolourization. The chemical reluctant, such as 
sodium molybdate, ascorbic acid, and ANSA, when added in the assay mixture to find out whether they 
could donate reducing power via the probable 
enzyme complex present on the cell surface to the dye, results showed that these reducing molecules 
did not play any role toward dye decolourization and 
but metabolically active cell and rich source of carbons in media has favor for the process showing 
evidence that the flow of reducing power must be 
originated intracellularly.  
Addition of MVS with CTAB (CTAB acts as a 
nonionic detergent that disrupt the integrity of the 
cell membrane) in the assay mixture, further, 
provides a proof that even in combination of MVS the decolourization activity was lost. This could be 
explain, as the CTAB (0.05 to 0.1 mg/ml) increases 
the permeability of the cell membrane (Phillips, 1999). But, in the assay mixture CTAB 
concentration was 1.0 mg ml
-1, which was higher 
than the prescribed. Such a high concentration the integrity and functioning of the cells would be lost 
that consequently loosing supply of reducing 
equivalents to and from the membrane to the acceptor. It is clear evidence confirming that the Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 49
flow of reducing equivalents must be from the intact cells via carrier complex (proteins) in the membrane.  
 
Fi g-1  :    Effects of aux i l i ary  subtances on dy e decol ouri zati on i n 
inta c t c e ll a s s a y051015202530354045
Auxiliary subtances
 
 
While in the continued assay system, following the 
conclusions has been drawn in under different assay 
conditions are as following:  
Influence of RF stepwise addition on dye 
decolourization rate in the reaction mixture assay:  
 During the time course of monitoring the 
change in optical density as decolourization in the 
two assays system as shows in Fig. 2 A & B. Results in case of condition (i) decolourization process 
began immediately and ended at 7
th min. The same 
results were noted for the subsequent addition of dye to same reaction cuvette, i.e. every amendment 
showed dye decolourization within 7.0 min. In the 
assay condition (ii), where reaction process initiated by adding dye (but without RF) showed very slow 
rate of decolourization i.e. 0.0199 A units/ minute 
and when RF was added at 14
th minute of on going 
reaction, showed rapidly 10 fold high change in rate 
of decolourization i.e. 0.200 A units/ minutes, with 
which reaction was completed within 7.0 to 8.0 minutes and also similarly in subsequent for every 
amendment. From kinetic data presented graphically 
for assay conditions (i) and (ii) clearly indicated with the addition of minimum amount of RF were significantly change in the rate of decolourization 
and also these is only once addition in low quantity 
are sufficient and necessary to get faster and efficient decolourization. 
 
As observed in the figure 2.A.and 2.B.that without riboflavin in intact assay, rate determined was very 
slow which might be due to the indigenous 
availability of redox mediator or carrier to facilitate the processes of decolourization.  In the reaction 
mixture by addition of RF in the continuous ongoing assay, rate significantly increased that of 10 fold that 
indicative that the RF playing a very important role 
in the process, it may be mediator as suggested by Field 2003. From the figure 2 B it also understand 
that once a addition of RF was sufficient and 
maintains high decolourization rate subsequently, so it was suggestive that RF would be non consumable 
entities in the reaction but simply playing as a carrier 
or as a cofactor in the reaction. 
Fig-2A : Influence of Rf on the dye decolourization 
rate at  initiation of reaction in intact cell assay00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time ( minutes)Absorbance at 540 nmDye addition
Rf 
spike
 
 Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 50
Fig 2B : Effect of Rf on the reaction in continued at 
14th  minutes in continued in intact cell assay00.20.40.60.811.21.4
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60
Time ( minutes)Absorbances at 540nmDye addition
Rf spike
 
Effect of RF concentrations on decolourization rate 
in cell broth assay :    Results were present 
graphically in Fig.3 showing the decolourization 
rates at the different concentrations of RF from 19.95 
to 59, 85 nM, rate of decolourization were increased from 0.126 to 0.154 A units which indicate that there 
are not significant change on rate of decolourization 
with varied concentrations, thus again  indicates that 
minimum amount of RF required is sufficient and necessary for the efficient process of 
decolourization. 
 
Fig- 3  Effect of Rf Concentrations on the dye 
decolourization in intact cell assay00.20.40.60.811.2
0369Time ( minu tes )Absorbance at 540 n m00.00 nM
19.95 mM
29.92 nM
39.99 nM
59.85 nM
 
 
Decolourization rate of different dyes in the intact cells assay:  Five different dyes  Reactive Red 
PBX (# 23), Remazol Magent a HB (# 26), Reactive 
magenta HB (#1), Sunzol Violet 5R(#35) and  
Laboretory Azo dye Biebrich Scarlet( # 41) employed to determine the ability of the cells under 
given  conditions. Fig. 4 shows the first four dyes 
could completely decolourized within almost 15 minute while, the dye Biebrich scarlet showed only 
about 50 % decolourization within 15 minutes. Fig 4    Different dyes decolourization rate in intact 
cell  assay 00.20.40.60.811.21.41.61.8
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Time ( minutes)Absorbances at  λ maxDye # 23
Dye # 26
Dye #31
Dye # 35
Dye # 41
 
Decolourization process are considered to be surface 
going on phenomenon, enzymatic as well as requires 
energy source in form of electrons as reducing equivalents for the azo bond reduction which 
generated from the co substrates (Nigam et al. (1996, 
Carliell et al. 1995, Willetts et al. 2000, Chinwekitvanich et al. 2000, Nigam et al. 1996a, 
Donlon et al. 1997, Van Der Zee et al. 2000. While 
during these studies, co substrata are not added extra 
in the preparation of cell broth due to indigenous components was sufficient for energy, otherwise it 
was necessary to be adding the co substrates for 
energy source (Gondaliya 2002). On one hand process is enzymatic, needs electrons as reducing 
equivalents to reduce the dye molecules, on second 
side, it occurs at the surface of the cell and requires co substrates for metabolic cellular energy to the 
microbes. Thus, there must be a some one as  linker 
are needed to facilitate the process by the acting as carried between the cellular energy and periplasmic 
or outer surface where enzymes or proteins may lead 
to course of the decolourization.  
Considering all the possibilities and physiological 
status of the cells at the time of decolourization as well as in anaerobic condition lead to electrons 
floods in the electron transport system of the  
membrane that make cell to force for respiration 
toward the sink of electrons (Taylor, 1999). The energy harvested by the cell during anaerobic 
respiration is then used to support other cellular 
processes that require energy consumption. Thus, many prokaryotes capable of performing anaerobic 
respiration (facultative / microaerophillic) can switch 
over to anaerobic respiration growth mode from aerobic. Many of these regulate their use of the 
alternative modes of energy generation in order to 
sustain growth and viability.  
The difference in redox potentials between the 
acceptor (azo dye) and donor (the reductase – may Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 51
be called azoreductase), transfer of reducing 
equivalents from the cofactor of the enzyme to the acceptor is highly favorable and the cells would 
continue to flood reducing equivalents to the azo dye 
in the external medium. Thus, to accomplish the process of transfer of reducing equivalents, the cells 
can explore the suitable (appropriate) and favorable 
acceptors occurring in their vicinity, that does not matter to them whether the acceptor(s) has any 
biological significance, since the goal of the cells is 
to become relieved from high reducing power to regenerate the oxidized state of cofactor (coenzyme) 
for their reuse.  As we know riboflavin, FMN and 
FAD contain a cofactor riboflavin (vitamin) consisting of isoalloxazine ring that undergoes 
reversible reduction oxidation, accepting either one 
or two electrons in the form of hydrogen atoms from reduced substrates, usually the flavins are tightly 
bound to respective proteins. Quinone or ubiquinone 
, Menaquinone (found in prokaryotes) also known as coenzymes Q are a fat-soluble and  plays role in carrying electrons in membrane–associated electron 
transfer chains. The Q is freely diffusible in the lipid 
bilayer of the membrane and acts as a shuttle (Lehninger et al. 1993) within membrane 
components.  The coenzyme Q (or any other forms 
in bacteria) is unable to diffuse in the periplasmic space of the bacterial cells, where the enzymes may 
be reductases occurs. Thus, creating an imbalance (in 
terms of equilibrium) in the flux of reducing equivalents from the complex I or complex II 
Consequently, to sustain the flood of electrons from 
the complexes via coenzyme Q, to translocation in the periplasmic space and attaining equilibrium 
toward the end–terminal acceptor(s), the cells may 
use any available carrier / mediator which are water soluble and act as shuttle between fixed donor to 
mobile acceptors (Azo Dyes) this type of propertied 
fulfill by the RF. Thus the study incite on role of riboflavin could to a certain extent act as a redox 
mediator in the reaction(s) process as suggested by 
the. Field 2003  
Results of experiment were clearly established that 
auxiliary substances diversely influences the process 
depend on redox properties of it self and among all, 
the presence of riboflavin in the medium (as individual or in combined with other either in vivo or 
in vitro assay conditions), enhanced the kinetics of 
decolourization by acting as mediator between membrane component to extra cellular outer coat of 
organisms for reductive decolourization. However, 
this is the first report to my knowledge, expressing high degree of decolourization rate i .e within 30 
min. to 60 min. Currently we are continuing for the 
our study for establish a mechanism for the Azo  dyes 
decolourization REFERENCES    
Allan R. and Roxon J. J. (1974). Metabolism by 
intestinal bacteria: the effect of bile salts on 
tartazine azo reduction. Xenobiotica. 4 (10): 637 
– 643  
 
Beydilli, M. I., Pavlostathis, S. G. and Tincher, W. 
C. (1998). Decolourization and toxicity screening of selected reactive azo dyes under 
methanogenic conditions. Water Sci and Tech. 
38 (4–5): 225 – 232. 
 
Brown D. and Laboureur P. (1983). The degradation 
of dyestuffs. Part–I: Primary biodegradation under anaerobic conditions. Chemosphere. 12 : 
397 – 404 
 Carliell C. M., Barklay S. J., Buckley C. A., 
Mulholland D. A. and Senior E. (1995). 
Microbial decolorization of a reactive azo dye under anaerobic conditi ons. Water SA. 21(1) : : 
61 – 69. 
 
Chinwekitvanich S., Tuntoolvest M. and Panswad T. 
(2000). Anaerobic decolorization of reactive 
dyebath effluents by a two–stage UASB system 
with tapioca as a co–substrate. Water Research. 34 (8) : 2223 – 2232. 
 
Chung K. T. and Stevens S. E. Jr. (1993). 
Degradation of azodyes by environmental 
microorganisms and helminth. Environ. Toxicol. 
Chem. 12(11) : 2121 – 2132. 
 
Donlon B. A., Razo–Flores, E., Luijten M., Swarts 
H., Lettinga G. and Field J. A. (1997). Detoxification and partial mineralization of the 
azo mordant orange 1 in a continuous up flow 
anaerobic sludge–blanket reactor.  A:lied Microbiology and Biotechnology. 47(1): 83–90. 
 
Field J. A and  J Brady (2003) Water Science and 
Technology. IWA Publishing, 48, (6) : 187- 103. 
 
Gingell R. and Walker R. (1971). Mechanisms of 
azo reduction by streptococcus faecalis II.  The role of soluble flavins.  Xenobiotica. 1(3) : 231 – 
239. 
 Gondaliya S. B. and S. J. Pathak ( 2005) Isolation of 
textile dyes decolorizing microbes and their 
optimization of  culture conditions. Asian  Jr. of  Microbiol. Biotech. Env. Sc.  7 ( 3) : 545-553  
 
Gondaliya S. B.  (2002) “Biodegradation of 
anthropogenic compounds by microbes”  Ph. D. 
Thesis: ch     Kinetic of Azo Dyes Decolourizatio n… 
SHAILESH B. GONDALIYA;   SIDDHARTH J.  PATHAK 
 52
Haug. W., Schmidt A., Normann B., Hempel D.C., 
Stolr A., Knackmas H. J. (1992). Mineralization of the sulfonated azo dye mordant yellow and by 
a 6-aminoaphthalene and sulfonate degrading 
bacterial consortium. A:l. Environ Microbiol. 57: 3144 – 3149. 
 
Lehninger  (1993). Textbook of Biochemistry.  3
rd 
edition , Published by CBS. 
 
Nigam P., Banat I. M., Singh D. and Marchant R. 
(1996a). Microbial process for the 
decolorization of textile effluent containing azo, 
diazo and reactive dyes.Process Biochemistry. 31(5) : 435 – 442. 
 
Phillips A. T. (1999). “Enzymatic activity” in 
Methods for general and molecular bacteriology. 
(Ed. Philip Gerhardt) Ch. 23 : 555 – 585 
 Rafii F., Franklin W. and Cerniglia C. E. (1990).  
Azo reductase activity of anaerobic bacteria 
isolated from human intestinal microflora.  
Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 56(7) : 2146–2151. 
 
Rafii F. and Cerniglia CE (1995). Reduction of azo 
dyes and Nitroaromatic compounds by bacterial 
enzymes from the human intestinal tract. Envion 
Health Perspect 103 (Su:l 5) : 17 – 19. 
 
Razo–Flores E., Luiten M., Donlon B. A., Lettinga 
G. and Field J. A. (1997). Complete biodegradation of the azo dye azodisalicylate 
under anaerobic conditions.  Environmental 
Science and Technology. 31(7) : 2089 – 2103. 
 
Roxon, J. J., A. J. Ryan, and S. E. Wright. (1967). 
Enzymatic reduction of tartrazine by Proteus vulgaris from rats. Fooptical densityCosmet. 
Toxicol. 5 : 645-656. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 Senan R.C. and T.E Abraham (2004)  
Bioremediation of textile azo dyes by aerobic bacterial consortium Biodegradation. 15: 275-
280 
 Tan, N. C. G. and Field J. A. (2000). Biodegradation 
of sulphonated aromatic compounds. In: 
Environmental technologies to treat sulfur pollution. Principles and engineering, Lens P. 
and Hulshoff  pol. L. IWA publishing, London.: 
377 – 392. 
 
Taylor B. L., Zhulin B. I. and Johnson M. S. (1999). 
Aerotaxis and other energy sensing behaviour in bacteria. Annual. Rev. Microbiol. 53 :  103 – 
128. 
 Van der Zee F. P., Bouwman R. H. M., Strik D. P. B. 
T. B., Lettinga G. and Field J. A. (2000a). 
Application of redox mediators to accelerate the transformation of reactive azo dyes in anaerobic bioreactors, Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 
 
Walker R. (1970) The metabolism of azo 
compounds: a review of the literature.  Fooptical 
densityand Cosmetic Toxicology. 8: 659-676. 
 Willetts J. R. M., Ashbolt N. J., Moosbrugger R. E. 
and Aslam M. R. (2000). The use of a 
thermophillic anaerobic system for pretreatment of textile dye wastewater. Water Science and 
Technology. 42 (5–6): 309–316. 
 Zimmermann T., Kulla H. and Leisinger T. (1982a). 
Properties of purified Orange II azo reductase,  
the enzyme initiating azo dye degradation by Pseudomonas KF46. European Journal of 
Biochemistry. 12: 197-203 