Abstract Many hydrocarbon-contaminated environments
are characterized by low or elevated temperatures, acidicor alkaline pH, high salt concentrations, or high pressure.Hydrocarbon-degrading microorganisms, adapted togrow and thrive in these environments, play an importantrole in the biological treatment of polluted extreme habi-tats. The biodegradation (transformation or mineraliza-tion) of a wide range of hydrocarbons, including aliphat-ic, aromatic, halogenated and nitrated compounds, hasbeen shown to occur in various extreme habitats. Thebiodegradation of many components of petroleum hydro-carbons has been reported in a variety of terrestrial andmarine cold ecosystems. Cold-adapted hydrocarbon de-graders are also useful for wastewater treatment. The useof thermophiles for biodegradation of hydrocarbons withlow water solubility is of interest, as solubility and thusbioavailability, are enhanced at elevated temperatures.Thermophiles, predominantly bacilli, possess a substan-tial potential for the degradation of environmental pollu-tants, including all major classes. Indigenous thermo-philic hydrocarbon degraders are of special significancefor the bioremediation of oil-polluted desert soil. Somestudies have investigated composting as a bioremedia-tion process. Hydrocarbon biodegradation in the pres-ence of high salt concentrations is of interest for the bi-oremediation of oil-polluted salt marshes and industrialwastewaters, contaminated with aromatic hydrocarbonsor with chlorinated hydrocarbons. Our knowledge of thebiodegradation potential of acidophilic, alkaliphilic, orbarophilic microorganisms is limited.
Introduction
Biodegradation is the metabolic ability of microorgan-isms to transform or mineralize organic contaminants in-to less harmful, non-hazardous substances, which are
then integrated into natural biogeochemical cycles. Theintensity of biodegradation is influenced by several fac-tors, such as nutrients, oxygen, pH value, composition,concentration and bioavailability of the contaminants,chemical and physical characteristics and the pollutionhistory of the contaminated environment. Bioremedia-tion, a non-destructive, cost- and treatment-effective andsometimes logistically favorable cleanup technology, attempts to accelerate the naturally occurring biodegra-dation of contaminants through the optimization of limit-ing conditions (Norris 1994; Allard and Neilson 1997; Alexander 1999).
Many environments are characterized by low or ele-
vated temperatures, acidic or alkaline pH, high salt con-centrations, or high pressure. Extremophilic microorgan-isms are adapted to grow and thrive under these adverseconditions. Hydrocarbon degrading extremophiles arethus ideal candidates for the biological treatment of pol-luted extreme habitats. In this review we summarize therecent developments, obtained both in laboratory andfield studies, in biodegradation and bioremediation ofhydrocarbon contaminants that are of environmentalconcern in extreme habitats.
Low and high temperature environments
Temperature plays a significant role in controlling thenature and the extent of microbial hydrocarbon metabo-lism, which is of special significance for in situ bioreme-diation. Bioavailability and solubility of less soluble hy-drophobic substances, such as aliphatic and polyaromatichydrocarbons, are temperature dependent. A temperatureincrease (decrease) effects a decrease (increase) in vis-cosity, thereby affecting the degree of distribution, andan increase (decrease) in diffusion rates of organic com-pounds. Therefore, higher reaction rates due to smallerboundary layers are expected at elevated temperatures.The increased (decreased) volatilization and solubility ofsome hydrocarbons at elevated (low) temperature affects
R. Margesin (✉) · F. Schinner
Institute of Microbiology (NF), University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 25, 6020 Innsbruck, Austriae-mail: rosa.margesin@uibk.ac.atFax: +43-512-5072929Appl Microbiol Biotechnol (2001) 56:650–663
DOI 10.1007/s002530100701
MINI-REVIEW
R. Margesin · F. Schinner
Biodegradation and bioremediation of hydrocarbons 
in extreme environments
Received: 14 February 2001 / Received revision: 12 April 2001 / Accepted: 13 April 2001 / Published online: 26 July 2001
© Springer-Verlag 2001651
toxicity and allows biotransformations with high (low)
substrate concentrations (Müller et al. 1998; Whyte et al.1998; Niehaus et al. 1999).
Cold-adapted microorganisms
Cold-adapted, psychrophilic and psychrotrophic micro-
organisms are able to grow at temperatures around 0°C.They are widely distributed in nature since a large part ofthe Earth’s biosphere is at temperatures below 5°C(Margesin and Schinner 1999a). Psychrophiles have anoptimum growth temperature of ≤15°C and do not grow
above 20°C, whereas psychrotrophs (cold-tolerant) haveoptimum and maximum growth temperatures above15°C and 20°C, respectively (Morita 1975). Cold-adapt-ed indigenous microorganisms play a significant role inthe in situ biodegradation of hydrocarbons in cold envi-ronments, where ambient temperatures often coincidewith their growth temperature range.
Petroleum hydrocarbons
Petroleum hydrocarbons belong to the most widespread
contaminants of water and soil. The biodegradation ofmany components of petroleum hydrocarbons has beenreported in a variety of terrestrial and marine cold eco-systems, including Arctic (Braddock et al. 1997), alpine(Margesin 2000) and Antarctic soils (Aislabie et al.1998), Arctic seawater (Siron et al. 1995) and Antarcticseawater and sediments (Delille et al. 1998; Delille andDelille 2000). Comparable conclusions resulted fromthese studies (reviewed by Margesin and Schinner1999b). Cold habitats possess sufficient indigenous mi-croorganisms, psychrotrophic bacteria being predomi-nant. They adapt rapidly to the contamination, as demon-strated by significantly increased numbers of oil degrad-ers shortly after a pollution event. Significant numbers ofcold-adapted hydrocarbon degraders were even found incontaminated soils from the most northerly inhabited sta-tion in the world, Canadian Forst Station-Alert (Whyte etal. 1999). The winter period was found to be critical foran oil spill in Arctic/sub-Arctic environments because ofthe reduced biodegradation under icy conditions; thetemperature threshold for significant oil biodegradationis around 0°C (Siron et al. 1995).
Bioaugmentation of contaminated cold sites with hy-
drocarbon degraders has been tested as a bioremediationstrategy. Most studies showed that the indigenous micro-bial populations degrade hydrocarbons more efficientlythan the introduced strains. However, bioaugmentationmay result in a shorter hydrocarbon acclimation period.Inoculation of contaminated Arctic soils with consortia(Whyte et al. 1999) or with alkane-degrading Rhodococ-
cussp. (Whyte et al. 1998) decreased the lag time and
increased the rate of C
16mineralization at 5°C. However,
NPK fertilization alone had a comparable effect on hy-drocarbon loss like fertilization plus bioaugmentation,this has been shown both in chronically oil-polluted 
Arctic soil (Whyte et al. 1999) and in artificially dieseloil-contaminated alpine soils (Margesin and Schinner1997a, b).
Several oil tanker accidents, and those of the Bahia
Paraiso in Antarctica and of the Exxon Valdez in Alaskaduring 1989, demonstrated that the effectiveness of oilbiodegradation in cold environments was limited by theavailability of nutrients such as N and P, confirming re-sults obtained in laboratory and field studies (for a re-view see Margesin and Schinner 1999b). The fate of oilfrom the Alaskan spill (estimated 35,500 m
3of crude oil)
has been determined from the most complete and accu-rate mass balance of any oil spill. The most significantterm in the mass balance was about 50% of the oil thatbiodegraded either in situ on beaches or in the water col-umn (Wolfe et al. 1994). Shortly after the spill, elevatedhydrocarbon mineralization (hexadecane, naphthalene,phenanthrene) potentials and significantly (about 10
4-
fold) increased numbers of oil degraders (106cfu g–1
oiled beach material) were found (Braddock et al. 1996).
Nutrients may influence biodegradation of various oil
components to a different extent. Biodegradation of aro-matic hydrocarbons appears to be sensitive to pH andpossibly also to by-products of the biodegradation of thesaturate fraction, which could explain the persistence ofaromatic petroleum hydrocarbons in the environment.Foght et al. (1999) investigated the role of the N sourcein biodegradation of crude oil components by a definedbacterial consortium, consisting of three degraders of ar-omatic hydrocarbons and heterocycles and three degrad-ers of saturated hydrocarbons, under cold, marine condi-tions (10°C). Nitrate did not affect the pH, whereas am-monium amendment led to progressive acidification, ac-companied by an inhibition of the degradation of aromat-ic, particularly polycylic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).These compounds were degraded or co-metabolized inthe absence of nutrients where the pH remained almostunchanged. The best overall biodegradation was ob-served in the presence of nitrate without ammonium,plus high phosphate buffering. However, as a disadvan-tage of nitrate, significant emulsification of the oil wasobserved.
Besides the nutrients, the physical environment is also
important for hydrocarbon biodegradation. This has beendemonstrated in sub-Antarctic intertidal beaches (Delilleand Delille 2000) and in Arctic soils (Mohn and Stewart2000). Soil N and concentrations of total petroleum hy-drocarbons together accounted for 73% of the variabilityof the lag time for dodecane mineralization at 7°C inArctic soils. High total carbon concentrations were asso-ciated with high mineralization rates; high sand contentresulted in longer half-times for mineralization. Dode-cane mineralization was limited by both N and P; miner-alization kinetics varied greatly among different soils(Mohn and Stewart 2000).
The microbial catabolic pathways responsible for the
degradation of petroleum hydrocarbons, including thealk(C
5to C12n-alkanes), xyl(toluene; aromatic hydro-carbons) and nah(naphthalene; PAHs) pathways, are
widespread in cold regions (Sotsky and Atlas 1994;Whyte et al. 1997, 1999). So far, only alkB
+psychro-
trophs but no alkB+psychrophiles have been described
from a variety of Arctic samples (Whyte et al. 1999).Rarely microorganisms possess both the alkandnahcat-
abolic pathways. Whyte et al. (1997) have demonstratedthat both pathways, located on separate plasmids, cannaturally coexist in the same bacterium. Two hydrocar-bon-degrading psychrotrophic Pseudomonas spp. strains
degraded n-alkanes from C
5to C12, toluene and naphtha-
lene both at 5°C and at 25°C.
Alkanes
Alkanes are major constituents of petroleum hydrocar-
bons. Cold-tolerant bacteria, isolated from oil-contami-nated soils in Antarctica, were able to degrade n-alkanes
(C
6to C20) typical of the hydrocarbon contaminants that
persist in Antarctic soil (Bej et al. 2000). Representativeisolates were identified as Rhodococcus species, they re-
tained metabolic activity at sub-zero temperatures of–2°C. A psychrotrophic Rhodococcus sp. from Arctic soil
(Whyte et al. 1998) utilized a broad range of aliphatics(C
10to C21alkanes, branched alkanes, and a substituted
cyclohexane) present in diesel oil at 5°C. The strain min-eralized the short-chain alkanes (C
10and C16) to a signifi-
cantly greater extent (by a factor of about 2–3) than thelong-chain alkanes (C
28and C32) at 0 and 5 °C. The de-
creased bioavailability of the long-chain alkanes at lowtemperature (many form crystals at 0 °C) may be respon-sible for their increased recalcitrance, which affects insitu bioremediation in cold climates. The application ofcold-active solubilizing agents could be useful for en-hancing hydrocarbon bioavailability. Two hydrocarbon-degrading Antarctic marine bacteria, identified as Rhodo-
coccus fascians , produced bioemulsifiers when grown
withn-alkanes as the sole carbon source. The strains uti-
lized hexadecane and biphenyl as sole carbon sources attemperatures ranging from 4 to 35°C, the optimum tem-perature was 15–20°C (Yakimov et al. 1999). Psychro-philic strains with high oil-oxidizing and bioemulsifyingactivities were also described by Chugunov et al. (2000).
Aromatic hydrocarbons
Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylenes (BTEX) . Under-
ground fuel leaks contribute significantly to the contami-nation of groundwater. Non-oxygenated monoaromatichydrocarbons, such as BTEX, are of particular concern.The high water solubility of BTEX enables them to mi-grate in the subsurface and contaminate drinking water.Bradley and Chapelle (1995) demonstrated the technicalfeasibility of in situ bioremediation of hydrocarbons incold groundwater systems. Rapid aerobic toluene miner-alization was demonstrated in sediments from a cold(mean groundwater temperature 5°C) petroleum-contam-inated aquifer in Alaska. The mineralization rate ob-
tained at 5°C in this aquifer was comparable to that mea-sured in sediments from a temperate aquifer (mean tem-perature 20°C). Rates of overall microbial metabolism inthe two sediments were comparable at their respective insitu temperatures. Thus, hydrocarbon biodegradationrates in cold groundwater systems are not necessarilylower than in temperate systems. This study demonstrat-ed that activity measurements should be performed at theprevailing in situ temperature in order to obtain a realis-tic estimate of the naturally occurring biodegradation.
Intrinsic hydrocarbon bioremediation was also dem-
onstrated in a shallow aquifer underlying a natural gasproduction (Gieg et al. 1999). Changes were monitoredover 4 years. All BTEX compounds were biodegradedunder sulfate-reducing conditions, toluene was also de-graded under methanogenic conditions. Other authors(Weiner and Lovley 1998) noted the persistence of ben-zene in the sulfate reduction zones of petroleum-contam-inated aquifers. This benzene persistence was attributedto the lack of benzene-oxidizing sulfate reducers in theaquifer sediments, rather than to the inability of such mi-croorganisms to grow and metabolize under freshwaterconditions. In order to obtain accelerated benzene biore-mediation in contaminated anaerobic aquifers, Weinerand Lovley (1998) proposed to supplement aquifer sedi-ments with benzene-oxidizing sulfate reducers. Such atreatment could be an efficient alternative to commonlyemployed aerobic strategies.
Nearly 20 years after the NARL oil spill in Barrow,
Alaska, benzene mineralization potentials at 10°C(0.1–0.5 mg benzene mineralized l
–1day–1) were compa-
rable to those of temperate systems. Mineralization inboth groundwater and soil was higher in samples fromcontaminated sites than from the reference site. Never-theless, microbial processes and contaminant transportwere limited by the short annual thaw season (Braddockand McCarthy 1996). We investigated biodegradation ofBTEX compounds in soils (R. Margesin and F. Schinner,unpublished data). Within 18 days, a BTEX loss of only25% of the initial contamination (400 mg total BTEXkg
–1soil) was obtained in a high-alpine soil at 10°C,
which was significantly lower than BTEX loss (76%)measured in soil from a temperate area at 20°C. NPKfertilization enhanced benzene and ethylbenzene biodeg-radation in particular.
Phenol. Phenolic compounds are common constituents
of wastewaters from the oil industry. The bacteria in-volved in biodegradation may strongly influence thetemperature-dependent performance of wastewater treat-ment processes. Onysko et al. (2000) determined the ef-fect of temperature (10–25°C), appropriate for wastewa-ter treatment, on growth and phenol degradation kineticsof psychrotrophic Pseudomonas putida . According to the
substrate-inhibition model used, based on the Haldaneequation and valid for substrate concentrations less than400 mg l
–1, the maximum specific growth rate (µmax) and
the Monod constant ( Ks) increased with increasing tem-652perature. The simultaneous increase of the inhibition
constant ( Ki) indicated an increased degree of inhibition
at low temperatures.
Another psychrotrophic Pseudomonas putida was re-
ported to remove a wide variety of phenolic compoundsfrom wastewater under aerobic and pH-neutral condi-tions at temperatures ranging from 1 to 35°C (Pillis andDavis 1985). This strain can be used in trickling filtersystems, activated sludge treatments, and outdoor la-goons, either alone or in combination with other micro-organisms conventionally used in waste treatment. It canbe cultured in wastewater using either a batch process, asemi-continuous or a continuous process, for a sufficientamount of time (24 h to 4 weeks, depending on the tem-perature, the volume to be treated, and the concentrationof the contamination) to achieve a significant reduction.The resulting water is suitable for discharge into riversand streams after conventional processing. Lagoon effi-ciency is often low in winter when microorganisms areless active. The use of this strain allowed a reduction inthe amount of steam required in winter for lagoon heat-ing in order to achieve normal lagoon operation, with aconsiderable saving in energy costs.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are frequent
soil contaminants. Little is known about biodegradationof PAHs in cold habitats. Cold-tolerant isolates from oil-polluted Antarctic soils utilized naphthalene, phenan-threne and fluorene, as well as BTEX, as the sole carbonand energy source (Aislabie et al. 2000). Representativestrains were identified as Sphingomonas orPseudomonas
spp. Mineralization of naphthalene in polluted soil, deter-mined at 8°C, was 4.02% and 1.42% CO
2day–1with and
without N fertilization, respectively, and was consider-ably higher than mineralization of hexadecane (Aislabieet al. 1998). In a field study on the biodegradation of dis-persed crude oil in cold and icy seawater (–1.8 to 5.5°C),half-life times of PAHs ranged from 1.5–1.7 days (naph-thalene) to 2.4–7.5 days (phenanthrene) under favorableconditions, i.e. at a temperature above 0°C and with ef-fective chemical dispersion (Siron et al. 1995).
Chlorinated hydrocarbons
Industrial zones involved in pulp and paper manufactur-
ing and precision machining are contaminated to a largeextent by chlorinated hydrocarbons such as dichlororeth-ylene (DCE) and trichloroethylene (TCE). Mihara et al.(1999) described a novel gram-negative, rod-shaped mi-crobial strain, which is able to degrade DCE and TCE ef-ficiently, as well as aromatic hydrocarbons (phenol, tolu-ene, all three isomers of cresol) at temperatures as low as4°C. The strain does not require an inducer such as phe-nol, toluene or cresol for degrading volatile organic com-pounds (VOCs). No growth occurs under extremelyacidic or alkaline conditions or at high salt concentra-
tions. The strain is used in a patented low-temperaturebioremediation process to treat contaminated wastewa-ter, soil and/or air (i.e. the surrounding gaseous phase ofthe polluted environment) in an open or closed system. Itcan be introduced directly into an aqueous medium or in-to soil (sprayed onto the soil surface, or introduced intosoil underground).
Aquifers are frequently contaminated with TCE. Its
behavior as a dense non-aqueous-phase liquid makes re-moval by classical pump-and-treat methods unsatisfacto-ry. Moran and Hickey (1997) showed that in situ biore-mediation of TCE-contaminated groundwater is feasibleat 12°C, a temperature typical of shallow aquifers. Bio-stimulation of ammonia oxidizers with ammonia was ef-fective at the low temperature, whereas biostimulation ofmethanotrophs with methane was not successful. Thus,the stimulation of ammonia oxidizers could be an alter-native for remediating TCE-contaminated aquifers. Am-monium is inexpensive and non-toxic and has a higheraqueous solubility than methane. However, a problemarises from the production of nitrate from ammonium.
The extensive use of chlorinated phenols and their de-
rivatives (e.g. as wood preservatives) in agriculture andindustry has resulted in extensive environmental contam-ination. High-rate chlorophenol (tri-, tetra- and penta-chlorophenol) biodegradation in groundwater wasachieved in an aerobic fluidized bed system at 5–7°C,and over 99.9% mineralization was obtained at a loadingrate of 740 mg l
–1day–1. The effluent quality was close
to drinking water standard. This system has the advan-tage that it can be operated and maintained at actualgroundwater temperatures and avoids the heating costs(an increase of the process temperature from 7 to 25°Cincreases annual operating costs by a factor of 2.5; Järvinen et al. 1994).
Aerobic degradation of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) with up to three chlorine constituents has beenshown to occur at 4°C in river sediment spiked withAroclor 1242 (70 ppm on a dry weight basis). Loss of di- and trichlorobiphenyls was first indicated after1.4 months, and >50% loss occurred within 5 months at4°C (Williams and May 1997). Biphenyl mineralizationby Arctic soil microorganisms was higher in contaminat-ed than in uncontaminated soil slurries; typical mineral-ization rates at 7°C were 0.5–1 mg biphenyl g
–1dry soil
day–1(initial concentration 5–50 mg biphenyl l–1; Mohn
et al. 1997). The extent of PCB degradation (Aroclor1221; initial concentration 50 mg l
–1) at the low tempera-
ture was significantly lower in soil slurries (14–40% re-moval) than in pure cultures (54–60% removal). Suchisolates are not effective for bioremediation of PCB mix-tures, but could be useful in a sequential process inwhich PCBs are first reductively dechlorinated by aero-bic microorganisms. A comparison of the effect of tem-perature on PCB removal by mesophilic and cold-adapt-ed degraders demonstrated that the PCB-degrading en-zyme system of the Arctic bacteria is cold-adapted (Master and Mohn 1998).653Thermophilic microorganisms
Microorganisms that grow optimally above 40°C are
designated as thermophiles. Most thermophiles knownare moderate and show an upper temperature border ofgrowth between 50 and 70°C. Optimal growth of ex-treme thermophiles and hyperthermophiles occurs at70–80°C and above 80°C, respectively (Stetter 1998).Thermophiles, predominantly bacilli, possess a substan-tial potential for the conversion of environmental pollu-tants, including all major classes (Müller et al. 1998).
Petroleum hydrocarbons
Bioremediation has been evaluated in several studies as
an option to treat the oil pollution remaining after theGulf war in 1991. As a consequence of one of the mostmassive oil spills (estimated 0.95–1.27 Mm
3), about
770 km of the western coast of the Arabian Gulf andabout 50 km
2of the Kuwaiti desert were contaminated
with crude oil from over 700 damaged oil wells. Most ofthe crude oil has been pumped out of the oil lakes, butthe bottom sand remained heavily polluted to depths of30 cm or more (Al-Daher et al. 1998). The Arabian Gulfis situated in a semi-arid region, characterized by highevaporation rates (200 cm year
–1) and high salinities
(4–7%) (Khan and Al-Ajmi 1998). In the long hot sum-mers of the region, the atmospheric temperature fre-quently exceeds 50°C, and the surface-soil temperatureis considerably higher (Sorkhoh et al. 1993). The desertsoil contains accumulated salt in the surface layer. Its ex-tremely high salinity is attributed partly to the large vol-ume of seawater used to extinguish the oil well fires, andthe evaporation of this water (Balba et al. 1998). Such anenvironment is expected to be an ideal habitat for ext-remophilic microorganisms. As the first sign of self-cleaning indigenous activity, blue-green cyanobacterialmats, associated with oil, appeared over oil layers about1 year after the pollution event. These mats have notbeen found to be associated with oil spills before, andappeared to be unique to the extreme environment of theGulf (Sorkhoh et al. 1992). Sorkhoh et al. (1993) investi-gated 38 desert samples, taken from oil-contaminated ar-eas in Kuwait. Thermophilic crude-oil utilizing bacteriaoccurred at a density of 3 ×10
3to 1×107g–1soil. No ther-
mophilic oil-utilizing fungi were found, and water andsediment samples from the Arabian Gulf were also freeof thermophilic oil utilizers. All 368 isolates belonged tothe genus Bacillus, the species B. stearothermophilus be-
ing predominant. Two strains degraded about 80–89% ofthe crude oil (5 g l
–1) within 5 days at their optimum
growth temperature of 60°C, biodegradation was 3- to 4-fold lower at 40°C. The range of efficiently utilized hy-drocarbons was narrow and included C
15to C17n-alk-
anes. Growth of both strains with n-alkanes from C6to
C14and >C17, as well as with several n-alkanes and aro-
matic hydrocarbons, was weak, if any. Al-Maghrabi etal. (1999) isolated two thermophilic Bacillusstrains thatdegrade crude oil (20% v/v) at 40–45°C (the typical am-
bient temperature of the Persian Gulf region), one straincould grow with crude oil even at 80°C. The isolates sur-vived under saline conditions typical of seawater andreservoir connate water. Optimal growth in the presenceof 10% v/v crude oil and 2% salinity was observed at60–80°C.
The efficiency of various bioremediation approaches
to treat oil-polluted desert soil has been evaluated in sev-eral field studies. They all demonstrated the significanceof indigenous oil-degrading bacteria, while inoculationwith biodegraders was not effective (Radwan et al.1995). Unfortunately, in these studies there is no exactindication of field temperatures. Due to the essential roleof moisture in bioremediation, repeated irrigation of pol-luted desert soils is necessary. The use of seawater is un-suitable because of its inhibitory effect on hydrocarbonbiodegradation (Radwan et al. 2000). Saltwater acceler-ates the soil water evaporation, as a consequence salt re-mains and accumulates at the soil surface. Only very di-luted seawater (0.5% w/v NaCl) can be used to stimulateoil biodegradation (Radwan et al. 1995). The use of largevolumes of freshwater in bioremediation of desert soilsleads to the leaching of salts and the reduction of soil sa-linity. A decreased salt concentration was measured afterland farming and windrow composting with continuousirrigation, while the salt content increased in non-irrigat-ed controls due to water evaporation (Balba et al. 1998).
Radwan et al. (1998) proposed vegetation as a feasi-
ble approach for bioremediation of oil-polluted desertsoil. The rhizosphere of the investigated wild desertplants and crop plants ( Vicia faba ,Lupinus albus ) con-
tained more hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria than the soilalone. This effect was much more pronounced for plantsgrowing in oil-polluted than in uncontaminated soil.
Balba et al. (1998) compared the efficiency of three
bioremediation techniques in an oil lake area. In a 1-yearfield study, soil amended with N, P, compost and woodchips was subjected to land farming, windrow compost-ing and bioventing. At the beginning of the study, thesoil scraped from the surface layer contained 133–694 gtotal petroleum hydrocarbons kg
–1soil and was extreme-
ly salty (about 30–40% w/w NaCl). Both contaminationand salinity gradually reduced with soil depth, andreached levels of 0.2–0.7 g hydrocarbons kg
–1soil and
0.03–0.3% w/w NaCl. After 12 months, a significant re-duction in oil concentration was detected in all treat-ments. The loss of total alkanes was 91% (land farming)and 82% (the other two treatments), compared to16–26% loss in untreated controls. The content of totalpetroleum hydrocarbons was reduced by 64% (static bio-venting piles), 74% (windrow piles) and 83% (landfarming). Despite the lower bioremediation efficiency ofbioventing piles, this technique requires considerablylower operation and maintenance costs than other tech-niques; it also requires a much smaller site area, and lesswater for irrigation. Al-Daher et al. (1998) performedcomposting of oil-polluted (33–55 g kg
–1soil), NPK-fer-
tilized desert soil in an oilfield. The applied windrow654soil pile system, subjected to regular irrigation and turn-
over, resulted in a reduction of up to 60% of the contam-ination within 8 months. The concentration of PAHs wasreduced from 11–16 to 5–6 mg kg
–1soil, but PAHs with
five or more rings resisted biodegradation. The soil (1 g)contained about 10
4thermotolerant and 105to 106meso-
philic hydrocarbon-utilizing bacteria.
Several studies investigated composting as a bioreme-
diation process. Contaminated soil can be mixed withtraditional composting substrates such as plant debrisand sewage sludge. This mixture may be treated in awindrow or in an enclosed reactor. Composting offersthe advantages of enhanced opportunities for co-metabo-lism and greater contaminant availability due to highersolubility and mass transfer at elevated temperatures.However, VOCs released during composting require ad-ditional cost-increasing treatment (Williams et al. 1992).The amount of organic amendment, the C:N ratio and thetemperature profile are key factors affecting compostingof soil contaminated with weathered hydrocarbons (17 gmineral oil and grease kg
–1soil) (Beaudin et al. 1999). A
temperature of 50°C maintained for 29 days resulted in68% hydrocarbon loss. The length of the thermophilicphase (50°C) correlated with the measured hydrocarbondegradation. The authors gave no information about thethermophilic microorganisms involved in composting. Inanother study, the maintenance of the thermophilic tem-perature was shown to be influenced by the contaminantconcentration (Chung et al. 2000). During the compost-ing of kerosene-contaminated soil, the temperature de-creased significantly in the presence of 20% kerosene,but was maintained if the kerosene concentration was5% or lower. After 64 days of composting, most of thehexadecane was volatilized, and only a small part wasmineralized to CO
2. Decreasing the aeration rate reduced
volatilization significantly and improved hexadecanebiodegradation.
Aromatic hydrocarbons
Lugowski et al. (1997) developed and patented a process
for the detoxification of liquid effluent streams. A mix-ture of thermophilic aerobic bacteria, comprising pre-dominantly Pseudomonas species, is used to degrade a
wide range of aromatic hydrocarbons, such as phenols,toluene, aniline, benzothiazole, lindane (hexachlorocy-clohexane), and combinations thereof. For seeding, a10–30 l quantity of the bacterial culture is grown at 42°Cand stabilized at a density of 10
8cells ml–1. Bioreactor
contents are maintained at a constant temperature of40–42°C. The detoxified effluent streams can be furthertreated by conventional (i.e. municipal) sewage treat-ment facilities. An advantageous by-product of the pro-cess is heat energy that could be recycled.
BTEX. Chen and Taylor (1995, 1997a) isolated two ther-
mophilic aerobic bacteria ( Thermus aquaticus andTher-
mussp.) that degrade BTEX co-metabolically. Restingcell suspensions of the strains degraded 10–40% of low
BTEX concentrations (initial total concentrations were 2and 7 mg l
–1) within 45 days at 60°C and 70°C. Only
small fractions of benzene and toluene were metabolizedto CO
2. Biodegradation was inhibited by higher BTEX
concentrations, but was enhanced if strains were pre-grown on catechol and o-cresol (Chen and Taylor 1995).
Biomass formation (2.5 g cell dry weight l
–1) and BTEX
degradation (specific activity of 2–10 nmol degradedBTEX mg
–1cell dw min–1) byThermus sp. were higher
in fed-batch culture than in batch culture (Chen and Taylor 1997a). A slow to moderate specific growth rateof 0.02–0.07 h
–1favored BTEX degradation, while a
high growth rate, such as 0.16 h–1, was inhibiting. Bio-
degradation occurred over a broad temperature range(45–77°C).
Two anaerobic consortia, consisting of unidentified
bacterial cocci, could grow on all BTEX compounds assole carbon and energy sources at 45–75°C, 50°C beingthe optimal temperature (Chen and Taylor 1997b);22–40% of an initial concentration of 117 mg totalBTEX l
–1was degraded after 14 days at 50°C. Only a
small fraction of toluene was mineralized to CO2. Bio-
degradation was coupled by both consortia to sulfate re-duction as well as to H
2S generation. No growth or
BTEX metabolism occurred when sulfate was omitted.Thus, sulfate-reducing bacteria are most likely the prin-cipal species that carry out the biodegradation, whileother thermophilic species may use the early water-solu-ble BTEX metabolites.
The above-described aerobic and anaerobic thermo-
philes are used for a patented in situ thermally enhancedremediation strategy (Taylor et al. 1998). The authorspropose the coupling of bioremediation to in situ dynam-ic underground stripping (DUS), a primary decontamina-tion effort for the rapid treatment of contaminated soil atsignificant depths. A targeted subsurface volume is heat-ed (by steam injection and electrical resistance) to vapor-ize the trapped contaminants, these are then removed byvacuum extraction. However, even VOCs such as BTEXare not completely removed during vaporization. Due tothe use of heat, the entire underground environment re-mains at elevated temperatures of 50–70°C for at least60 days after the heat treatment. This enables thermo-philic bacteria to metabolize the residual contaminants.Using the existing injection-withdrawal wells, the pre-grown biodegraders are inoculated to enhance the re-moval of low levels of residual BTEX from fuel leaks,but also to treat chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as TCEand chloroform, from past solvent cleaning practices.The bioremediation process is terminated by loweringthe temperature below 40°C. Such an in situ follow-uptreatment could also be applied to fuel-contaminatedplumes subjected to thermally enhanced vapor strippingas a primary treatment method, or as a stand-alone meth-od, when the initial concentration of VOCs is low andthe subsurface volume to be heated is small. In the lattercase, thermophilic hydrocarbon degraders suspended inhot water are pumped into the subsurface.655Phenol. The phenol hydroxylases of thermophilic bacilli
seem to be different from other phenol hydroxylases de-scribed so far (Müller et al. 1998). A thermophilic Bacil-
lussp., growing above 40°C and below 75°C, degraded
up to 5 mM phenol completely at 55–70°C. Concentra-tions above 10 mM phenol inhibited growth. The strainalso completely degraded all three isomers of 1 mM cre-sol, an active constituent of creosote, within 10 h, where-as toluene or xylene were not utilized as the sole carbonand energy source (Mutzel et al. 1996).
Aerobic thermophilic treatment of sewage sludge,
contaminated with 4-nonylphenol (NP, a mixture ofmonoalkyl phenols, used in the preparation of lubricat-ing oil additives, resins and surface active agents), wasdemonstrated in laboratory-scale batch reactors (Banat etal. 2000). Up to 66% reduction of 50 and 100 mg NP l
–1
was obtained after 10 days at 60°C.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Little is known about degradation of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAHs) by thermophiles. Müller et al.(1998) isolated microorganisms able to convert naphtha-lene, phenanthrene and anthracene under thermophilicconditions. Their studies indicate that metabolites differsignificantly from those formed under mesophilic condi-tions. Also naphthalene degradation by a thermophilicBacillus thermoleovorans at 60°C differs from the path-
ways known for mesophilic bacteria (Annweiler et al.2000). In the latter case, several new metabolites (2,3-di-hydroxynaphthalene, 2-carboxycinnamic acid, phthalicacid, benzoic acid) were found apart from typical metab-olites well known from naphthalene degradation by me-sophils.
Bioavailability of poorly water-soluble hydrocarbons,
such as PAHs, is low. Solvents are frequently used to im-prove the solubility, but they are themselves a furthersource of contamination. A patent is based on the discov-ery that not only bioavailability of such substances in-creases with increasing temperature, but the oxygentransfer coefficient also rises at the same time, therebycompensating for the reduction in oxygen solubility(Markl et al. 1999). Aerobic thermophilic microorgan-isms, e.g. Bacillus oleovorans DSM 10561, can be effi-
ciently cultivated in aqueous medium at 45°C and evenabove 60°C, and used for biodegradation. So far, it hasbeen assumed that aerobic biodegradation at elevatedtemperature is not efficient because oxygen solubility istoo low.
Chlorinated hydrocarbons
Thermophilic transformation of chlorinated hydrocar-
bons (chlorobenzoate, pentachlorophenol, TCE) has re-cently been reviewed by Müller et al. (1998). Thermo-philic bacteria, such as B. subtilis , are used to treat soil
contaminated with PCBs and dioxin; the soil is UV-irra-diated and further treated in a rotary roller with a stirring
paddle (Kanke et al. 1999).
Michel et al. (1995) demonstrated the mineralization
of the widely used herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyaceticacid (2,4-D, 17 mg kg
–1dw) in a laboratory-scale com-
post system. Mineralization of the organic matter tempo-rally paralleled 2,4-D mineralization. After 50 days at60°C, 47% of the 2,4-D-carbon was mineralized in thefinal compost, about 23% was complexed with high-mo-lecular-weight humic acids, and about 20% were not ex-tractable (humin fraction). Volatilization during com-posting was very low; and also the leachate containedonly 1.3% 2,4-D-carbon.
Nitrated aromatic hydrocarbons (explosives)
The handling of explosives, such as 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene
(TNT), has resulted in soil and sediment pollution at mu-nitions factories and military facilities. Incineration ishighly effective, but costly. Hater et al. (2000) have de-veloped and patented a bioremediation strategy, suitablefor treating TNT contaminations up to 3% w/w. The con-taminated soil is mixed with an oxidizable carbon sourceand with substrates rich in microorganisms, such as ma-nure, digester or sewage sludge. The explosives are con-verted in a first step (14–200 days at 21–45°C and highmoisture) under anaerobic conditions into reduced deriv-atives (aromatic amines). Afterwards, the resulting prod-uct is mixed with compostable material and subjected toan aerobic bioremediation process (10–60 days at tem-peratures up to 150°C), in order to obtain a product inwhich the reduced derivatives are incorporated into theorganic fraction of soil during natural humification. Thisbinding of aromatic amines into the organic soil matrixis believed to be irreversible and is facilitated by anaero-bic processes. There is no information about the numberof thermophiles involved in the process. The stable in-corporation of TNT into the humic material of compost-ed soil has also been shown by Bruns-Nagel et al.(2000). After composting, 33% of the N-15 isotope wasincorporated into the humic and fulvic acid, and 23%was present in the humin. However, the long-term stabil-ity of bound TNT residues has yet to be proven.
Williams et al. (1992) investigated the feasibility of
aerated static pile composting as a suitable bioremedia-tion technology for soils and sediments contaminatedwith explosives, such as TNT, HMX (octahydro-1,3,5,7-tetranitro-1,3,5,7-tetraazocine) and RDX (hexahydro-1,3,5-trinitro-1,3,5-triazine). In field studies with chroni-cally contaminated lagoon sediments, total explosiveswere reduced from 17,870 to 74 mg kg
–1over 153 days
under thermophilic conditions (55°C) with NPK fertili-zation. TNT was reduced from 11,840 to 3 mg kg
–1, its
half-life of 12 days was considerably lower than that ob-tained under mesophilic conditions (35°C). The numberof heterotrophic thermophilic microorganisms increasedfrom about 10
7to 1010cfu g–1dry compost. Leachates
contained low levels (µg ml–1) of leachable explosives.656Soil loadings as high as 33% by mass could be incorpo-
rated during composting without affecting the thermo-philic temperature during winter at daily high and lowtemperatures of 0°C and below.
Acidic and alkaline environments
Hydrocarbon mineralization is favored by near neutralpH values. It is common practice to add lime to bioreme-diate acid soils containing harmful organic compounds(Alexander 1999). However, biodegradation was report-ed to proceed well in aquifers at natural pH values of4.5–5 (Norris 1994), and petroleum hydrocarbon utiliz-ers were found in a tropical, acidic forest soil (pH variedfrom 4 to 6) 17 years after an extensive oil spillage(Amadi et al. 1996). Where the pH has been shiftedaway from neutral by manmade changes, biodegradabili-ty is likely to be impaired (Norris 1994).
Acidophilic microorganisms
Acidophiles are metabolically active in highly acidic en-
vironments, and often have a high heavy metal resistance(Norris and Johnson 1998). Heterotrophic acidophilicmicroorganisms are an interesting potential for the biore-mediation of acidic environments that contain bothheavy metals and organic compounds, such as industrialwastewater effluents or oil-polluted acidic drainage wa-ters from metal and coal mining.
Twenty-three heavy-metal-tolerant, acidophilic het-
erotrophic bacteria, isolated from acidic mine effluent,metabolized a range of aliphatic hydrocarbons (such as5 mM propane-1-ol, acetone, acetaldehyde, propanalde-hyde, dodecanoic acid, hexadecanoic acid, dodecane,hexadecane, 1-chlorohexane) as the sole carbon source atpH 3. Remarkably, aliphatic organic acids, which arethought to be toxic to acidophiles (Alexander et al.1987), were utilized as substrates for energy and growth.One isolate, closely related to the genus Acidocella , tol-
erated ethanol in excess of 250 mM (about 1.5% v/v),but could utilize high concentrations of acetic acid onlyif supplied in sequential small (1 mM, about 0.006% v/v)doses (Gemmell and Knowles 2000).
Stapleton et al. (1998) reported the biodegradation of
aromatic hydrocarbons and PAHs in extremely acidic en-vironments. They investigated three soil samples takenfrom a long-term coal pile storage basin; the pH value ofareas greatly impacted by runoff from the storage basinwas 2. The indigenous microorganisms oxidized about50% of the supplied naphthalene and toluene to CO
2and
water within 24 weeks, while the extent of mineralizationof phenanthrene and anthracene was only 10–20%. 16sR-NA sequence analyses suggested the presence of acido-philic bacteria in the soil samples, but a microbial consor-tium, including eukaryotes, rather than individual acido-philes was suggested to be involved in biodegradation inthis acidic environment. Initial fungal attacks on the hy-drocarbons may have produced intermediates that were
available for further degradation by bacteria. Whole-com-munity nucleic acids did not hybridize to gene probes,such asnahA,nahG,nahH,todC1C2,tomA, that encode
common degradative enzymes from neutrophilic bacteria.A mixed culture, including a fungus, a yeast and severalbacteria, successfully metabolized about 27% of suppliednaphthalene after 1 week at pH 3.
Genes that encode enzymes involved in biodegrada-
tion of aromatic hydrocarbons can be acquired and ex-pressed in some heterotrophic acidophilic bacteria(Quentmeier and Friedrich 1994). A phenol-degradationencoding plasmid was successfully transferred by conju-gation from neutrophilic bacteria ( E. coliandPseudomo-
nas putida ) into the extremely acidophilic heterotrophic
bacterium Acidophilium cryptum (most members of this
genus grow at pH 2–3) at high frequencies. The encodedproteins were functional, as transconjugants degradedphenol (2.5 mM). The ability to degrade phenol couldnot be transferred into another heterotroph acidophile(Acidobacterium capsulatum ) or the facultatively auto-
trophicThiobacillus acidophilus .
Alkaliphilic microorganisms
Alkaliphiles are defined as organisms that have their op-
timum growth rate at least 2 pH units above neutrality.Alkalitolerants are able to grow or surve at pH valuesabove 9, but their optimum growth rate is around neu-trality or less (Kroll 1990). These microorganisms havebeen described as producing a variety of industrially in-teresting extracellular enzymes, but information abouttheir capabilities for hydrocarbon degradation is limited.
Phenol biodegradation under alkaline conditions has
been demonstrated. Sarnaik and Kanekar (1995) de-scribed the potential of pseudomonads for the bioremedi-ation of phenol from the waste effluent of the dye indus-try. The initial phenol concentration (244 mg l
–1) was
completely removed within 24 h, with the simultaneousremoval of color (methyl violet), and reduction in COD,TOC and ammoniacal N. Phenol biodegradation was op-timal at the original alkaline pH (7.5–10.6) and 28°C. Inanother study, 14 isolates, able to utilize phenol (500 mgl
–1) at pH 10, were obtained from sediments of a highly
saline and alkaline (average pH 10.5) lake in Lonar (India) (Kanekar et al. 1999). Interestingly, the indige-nous microflora of the lake was never exposed to any contamination. Four of these alkaliphilic bacteria(Arthrobacter sp.,Bacillus cereus ,Citrobacter freundii ,
Micrococcus agilis andPseudomonas putida biovar B)
were used for bioremediation of waste effluents arisingfrom industries that manufacture methyl violet and cum-ene-phenol, using phenol as a major raw material. Thewastewaters had a pH of 10 and a phenol content of370–660 mg l
–1, the organic load in terms of COD was
4.7–6.8 g l–1. After inoculation, phenol was completely
removed within 48 h at 28°C, the COD removal rangedfrom 11 to 56%.657The bioremediation of chlorinated phenols under al-
kaline conditions is of interest. Both sorption and toxici-ty of chlorophenols decrease as pH increases, owing tothe increased conversion of the undissociated (more tox-ic) to the dissociated form (Kishino and Kobayashi1995). An alkaliphilic, halophilic Nocardioides sp. was
isolated from a contaminated site situated near the alka-line (pH 9.5–10) and highly saline (10% salinity) AlkaliLake (Oregon). Optimum growth occurred at pH 9–9.4and 1–2.4% w/v NaCl. The strain had a unique spectrumof chlorophenol degradation. It was able to utilize 2,4-di-chlorophenol and 2,4,5-trichlorophenol (these com-pounds are generated from agricultural biocides), andvery high concentrations (up to 1.6 g l
–1) of the wood
preservative 2,4,6-trichlorophenol as the sole energysource. The organism had a preference for phenols withchlorine substituents in positions 2 and 4 (Maltseva andOriel 1997). Complete mineralization of 2,4-D was ob-tained by using three alkaliphilic, halophilic eubacteria(Halomonadaceae), isolated from a former waste storagearea in the Alkali Lake (Maltseva et al. 1996). Up to 3 g2,4-D l
–1was degraded in 3 days by the most active
strain; optimal growth on 2,4-D was observed at pH8.4–9.4 and 4–6% w/v NaCl. The degradation pathwayis the same as that from most 2,4-D degraders from non-extreme environments.
Saline environments: halophilic microorganisms
Microorganisms requiring salt for growth are referred toas halophiles, whereas microorganisms that are able togrow in the absence as well as in the presence of salt aredesignated halotolerant. Extreme halophiles require gen-erally at least 1 M NaCl (approx. 6% w/v) for growth,and grow optimally at NaCl concentrations above 3 M(Kushner 1978; Grant et al. 1998). A range of organicpollutants has been shown to be mineralized or trans-formed by microorganisms able to grow in the presenceof salt (Oren et al. 1992; Margesin and Schinner 2001).Halophilic archaea maintain an osmotic balance with thehypersaline environment by accumulating high salt con-centrations, which requires salt adaptation of the intra-cellular enzymes. Eubacteria are more promising degrad-ers than archaea as they have a much greater metabolicdiversity. Their intracellular salt concentration is low,and their enzymes involved in biodegradation may beconventional (i.e. not salt-requiring) enzymes similar tothose of non-halophiles (Oren et al. 1992). The use ofmicroorganisms able to degrade organic wastes in thepresence of salt could prevent costly dilution to lowerthe salinity, or the removal of salt by reverse osmosis,ion exchange or electrodialysis before biological treat-ment.
There is an inverse relationship between salinity and
solubility of PAHs (Whitehouse 1984). The increase insorption of aromatic hydrocarbons (i.e. the decrease ofthe aqueous solubility) with an increase in salinity, asstudied with pyrene in various sediment types, is a resultof salting-out effects occurring in both the solution and
solid (sediment organic matter) phases. The organic mat-ter may also be salted out, becoming a better solvent forthe sorbed hydrophobic aromatic molecules (Means1995).
Petroleum hydrocarbons
Ward and Brock (1978) assumed an inverse relationship
between biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbons andsalinity, because enrichment cultures from the Great SaltLake were not able to grow on mineral oil and to miner-alize hexadecane in the presence of salt concentrationsabove 20% w/v. The inhibitory effect of salinity at con-centrations above 2.4% w/v NaCl was found to be great-er for the biodegradation of aromatic and polar fractionsthan of the saturated fraction of petroleum hydrocarbons(Mille et al. 1991). Nonetheless, there are several reportsabout microorganisms able to oxidize petroleum hydro-carbons even in the presence of 30% w/v NaCl. Amongsuch microorganisms are crude oil-degrading Streptomy-
ces albaxialis (Kuznetsov et al. 1992), and an n-alkane
(C
10-C30)-degrading member of the Halobacterium
group (Kulichevskaya et al. 1992).
An approach to extend the capacity of efficient hydro-
carbon degraders for biodegradation in saline environ-ments has been performed by impairing the phenotype ofosmotolerance to a crude oil-degrading consortium, con-sisting of four Pseudomonas strains (Kapley et al. 1999).
TheE. coli pro U (an important osmoregulatory locus)
operon was subcloned and expressed into each memberof the consortium. The transformed organisms couldgrow in the presence of 6% w/v NaCl, and the expres-sion of the salt tolerance phenotype did not hamper hy-drocarbon degradative capability. Biodegradation studieswith a model petroleum mixture (500 ppm) showed thatn-alkanes (C
12, C15, C16) had already diminished within
24 h at pH 7 and 4% w/v NaCl; and only phenanthrene,dibenzothiophene and pristane remained after 120 h.However, the ability of such constructed microorganismsto survive under in situ conditions has yet to be demon-strated.
There is little information about the effect of salinity
on bioremediation of soils. An inhibitory effect of artifi-cial salinity on mineralization of motor oil (50 g kg
–1
soil) has been reported (Rhykerd et al. 1995). Soils werefertilized with inorganic N and P, and amended withNaCl (0.4, 1.2, 2% w/w). After 80 days at 25°C, thehighest salt concentration (the conductivity of the soilwater corresponded to that of an oilfield brine and wasnearly four times that of seawater) had considerably in-hibited oil mineralization (44% inhibition in clay loam,20% inhibition in sandy clay loam). Thus, the removal ofsalt from oil-contaminated soils may reduce the time re-quired for bioremediation. However, different resultsmay be obtained when investigating naturally salt-con-taining soils, since indigenous microorganisms in suchenvironments are expected to be salt-adapted.658The feasibility of oil bioremediation in salt marshes
has been demonstrated in several studies. Salt marshesare occasionally impacted by crude oil spills. Bioremedi-ation may be an effective method in removing oil with-out damage to the physically sensitive ecosystem. Sea-sonal variations of the mineralization potential of crudeoil (520 g kg
–1soil) in soil samples from Lousiana salt
marshes were high (Jackson and Pardue 1997). Mineral-ization of hexadecane (initial concentration 11.5 mg kg
–1
soil) ranged from 0.2 to 2.4% day–1(unfertilized) and
from 0.81 to 3.1% day–1(NP fertilized). Phenanthrene
(initial concentration 1.94 mg kg–1soil) mineralization
rates ranged from 0.5 to 4.5% day–1(unfertilized) and
from 1.9 to 12.1% day–1(fertilized). Nutrients reduced
the lag time of hexadecane mineralization, but had littleeffect on the lag time of phenanthrene mineralization. Inmicrocosm laboratory studies (700 g crude oil kg
–1soil),
PAHs and alkanes degraded simultaneously. Low intrin-sic degradation rates (0–3.9% day
–1) of the alkane com-
ponent (C11-C14), but high degradation rates (8–16%
day–1) of the PAH fraction (naphthalene and phenan-
threne) were observed (Jackson and Pardue 1999). N ad-dition enhanced degradation of total PAHs and alkanes>C
20, while naturally present P was found to be suffi-
cient. Contrary to this result, P significantly increased bi-oremediation of artificially weathered crude oil, appliedat 4,620 kg oil ha
–1in sediments from salt marsh near
Texas (Wright et al. 1997). In this study, an oleophilicfertilizer, containing N, P and a dispersant, increased oildegradation significantly, while N fertilization (urea andammonium), with or without P, had no effect.
In another study, artificially weathered crude oil was
applied to sods of marsh (soil and intact vegetation) at adose of 2 l m
–2(2 mm oil thickness). The effect of three
widely used bioremediation agents, a slow release NPKfertilizer, a microbial inoculation product and a soil oxi-dant, was investigated under controlled greenhouse con-ditions over 4 months (Lin et al. 1999). Inorganic nutri-ent addition was most effective, it significantly enhancedmarsh plant growth, soil microbial populations, and oilbiodegradation rate. Alkanes and aromatic hydrocarbonswere reduced by 81% and 17%, respectively. Fertiliza-tion was more effective in sandy soils than in mineralsoils, indicating that the soil type influenced oil bioreme-diation. Application of the soil oxidant or bioaugmenta-tion had no positive effects.
Dispersants are often used to emulsify the oil slick in
order to improve bioavailability and to enhance oil bio-degradation. An aerobic, upflow submerged biofilter,coupled with a trickling filter, was evaluated as a meansto treat emulsified diesel fuel under saline conditions(2% w/v NaCl) (Yang et al. 2000). The microbial inocu-lum, which tolerated up to 4% w/v NaCl, was immobi-lized on randomly packed plastic media particles. Morethan 90% TOC removal was obtained at a feed concen-tration of 1,000 mg TOC/l and a volumetric loading of1.5 kg TOC m
–3day–1. Less than 7% of the diesel fuel
fed to the biofilter was volatilized, as a result of a betterpartitioning of the diesel fuel in the water phase accom-plished by emulsification. VOCs were captured and ef-
fectively degraded in the trickling filter (68% removal in10 s). The use of a chemical dispersant also enhanced thebioavailability of naphthalene from crude oil by the eu-ryhaline microalga Isochrysis galbana (Wolfe et al.
1998). Changes in naphthalene uptake were inverselycorrelated with salinity, and directly correlated with tem-perature. The tested conditions of salinity (2.2 and 3.4%)and temperature (12 and 20°C) are encountered in Pacif-ic waters.
Aromatic hydrocarbons (phenol)
Halophilic bacteria were employed for the treatment of
hypersaline wastewaters in a periodically operated se-quencing batch biofilm reactor (Woolard and Irvine1994). A biofilm of unidentified halophiles, isolatedfrom the Great Salt Lake, readily developed on the tub-ing surface and could remove more than 99% of phenol(average influent 0.1–0.13 g l
–1, effluent less than 0.1 mg
l–1) from a synthetic waste brine containing 15% w/v
NaCl. A stable high-quality effluent was obtained de-spite fluctuations in influent phenol concentrations. Thebiofilm gave stable performance even when changes insalt concentration (5, 10, and 15%) were imposed; over-all phenol removal rates were 113–130 mg m
–2h–1
(Woolard and Irvine 1995). Hinteregger and Streichsbier(1997) reported the suitability of a moderately halophilicHalomonas sp. for the biotreatment of a model saline
phenolic wastewater (similar to wastewaters in oil indus-try) in a bubble reactor. This strain fully degraded 0.1 gphenol l
–1as the sole carbon and energy source within
13 h in the presence of 1–14% w/v NaCl. Phenol degra-dation at NaCl concentrations at or below 5% w/v wasaccompanied by the accumulation of an intermediate ofthe ortho-cleavage pathway, identified as cis,cis-muconic
acid. The amount of this compound, which is a potential-ly useful raw material for new functional resins, pharma-ceuticals and agrochemicals, could be raised 6-fold byincreasing the phenol concentration from 0.1 to 0.6 g l
–1.
Two phenol-degraders, Candida tropicalis andAlcali-
genes faecalis , were isolated from pristine Amazonian
rain forest soil (Bastos et al. 2000). C. tropicalis tolerat-
ed higher concentrations of phenol and salt and a widerpH range (3–9) than A. faecalis (pH 7–9). The yeast de-
graded 1.6 g phenol l
–1in the presence of 15% salt with-
in 148 h, and the bacterium utilized 1.13 g phenol l–1in
the presence of 5.6% salt within 200 h.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
An unidentified halophilic archaeon degraded PAHs
(acenaphtene, phenanthrene, anthracene; 500 mg l–1) as
well as saturated hydrocarbons (C14, C16, C18, C21, prist-
ane) in a medium prepared with natural hypersaline wa-ter from a salt marsh (21% w/v NaCl). No growth on hy-drocarbons occurred below 11% w/v NaCl (Bertrand et659al. 1990). Four bacterial strains, belonging to the genera
Micrococcus ,Pseudomonas andAlcaligenes and tolerat-
ing 7.5% w/v NaCl, could grow on 0.1% naphthaleneand anthracene (Ashok et al. 1995).
Halogenated hydrocarbons
A halophilic, methane-assimilating Methylomicrobium
sp. is able to oxidize halogenated hydrocarbons, such asTCE, in aqueous medium with 2–6% w/v salt. Such bac-teria have been patented for the inexpensive and efficientbioremediation of contaminated seawater (Fuse 1998).Halophilic archaea, e.g. Halobacterium sp. (DSM
11147), are subjected to a patented selection process thatconsists of microbial adaptation to high concentrations(up to 1 mM) of various halogenated, aliphatic or aro-matic hydrocarbons (Oesterhelt et al. 1998). Biodegrada-tion can be performed in aqueous or organic media at atemperature between 20 and 60°C. A combination ofcells, extracts and enzymes, eventually immobilized, isrecommended for the treatment of contamination con-sisting of mixed halogenated compounds. Halophilic, al-kaliphilic microorganisms, able to utilize chloroaromaticcompounds, are described in the section about alkaliphil-ic microorganisms.
Deep-sea environments: barophilic (piezophilic) 
microorganisms
The deep sea as well as other habitats, such as deep
groundwater, deep sediments or oilfields, are influencedby high pressure. Barophiles (piezophiles) are microor-ganisms that require high pressure for growth, or growbetter at pressures higher than atmospheric pressure (Prieur and Marteinsson 1998). Little is know about theability of deep-sea microorganisms to cope with hydro-carbons.
Pollutants with densities greater than that of marine
waters may sink to the deep benthic zone, where the hy-drostatic pressure is notably high. A combination of highpressure and low temperatures in the deep ocean resultsin low microbial activity (Alexander 1999). The rate ofhydrocarbon utilization by a mixed bacterial culture thatwas isolated from a sediment sample at a depth of4,940 m and consisted of Pseudomonas ,Aeromonas and
Vibriospp., was about tenfold slower under deep-sea
conditions than at ambient pressure (1 bar; 0.103 MPa):93% of supplied hexadecane (0.3% v/v) were utilized af-ter 4 weeks at 1 bar and 4°C, but only after 36 weeks at500 bar (51.5 Mpa) and 4°C. The culture utilized hexa-decane as sole carbon source under in situ conditions(4°C and 500 bar pressure) (Schwarz et al. 1975).
Hydrocarbon-degrading, solvent-tolerant microorgan-
isms were isolated from deep-sea mud. A halotolerantFlavobacterium sp., collected from a depth of 1,945 m,
was tolerant to 5% (v/v) benzene, 10% (v/v) toluene, and10% (v/v) xylene; this strain effectively degraded n-alk-anes in kerosene, but did not degrade PAHs. A Bacillus
sp., tolerant to 10% (v/v) benzene, 20% (v/v) cyclohex-ane, and 20% (v/v) n-hexane, degraded PAHs such asnaphthalene, fluorene, phenanthrene, anthracene, pyrene,chrysene and 1,2-benzopyrene (Aono and Inoue 1998).
Conclusion
A wide range of hydrocarbons that contaminate the envi-ronment, mainly due to accidental release or industrialprocesses, has been shown to be biodegraded (mineral-ized or transformed) in various extreme environmentscharacterized by low or elevated temperatures, acidic oralkaline pH, high salinity or high pressure. This empha-sizes the metabolic capacities of extremophilic microor-ganisms. Those adapted to more than one extreme offer aspecial potential for the biological decontamination ofhabitats where various different extreme conditions pre-vail simultaneously.
Most investigations on hydrocarbon biodegradation
under extreme conditions have concentrated on petrole-um hydrocarbon components. Comparatively little isknown about the metabolism of PAHs, halogenated ornitrated compounds. In general, extreme habitats possesssufficient indigenous hydrocarbon degraders able toadapt and respond rapidly to the contamination. Hydro-carbon biodegradation can be significantly stimulatedunder favorable nutrient conditions.
The increasing number of patents indicates that there
is a growing interest in the commercial application ofextremophilic hydrocarbon degraders for the biological,environmentally friendly treatment of polluted wastewa-ter or soil. Microorganisms useful for bioremediationmust survive and be active under in situ conditions. Thepresence of extremophiles in polluted extreme habitats,which are adapted to the prevailing conditions and ableto metabolize a wide range of hydrocarbons, indicatestheir usefulness for bioremediation. However, their fullpotential has yet to be exploited.
References
Aislabie J, McLeod M, Fraser R (1998) Potential for biodegrada-
tion of hydrocarbons in soil from the Ross Dependency, Ant-arctica. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 49:210–214
Aislabie J, Foght J, Saul D (2000) Aromatic hydrocarbon-degrad-
ing bacteria from soil near Scott base, Antarctica. Polar Biol23:183–188
Al-Daher R, Al-Awadhi N, El-Nawawy A (1998) Bioremediation
of damaged desert environment using the windrow soil pilesystem in Kuwait. Environ Int 24:175–180
Alexander B, Leach S, Ingledew WJ (1987) The relationship be-
tween chemiosmotic parameters and sensitivity to anions andorganic acids in the acidophile Thiobacillus ferrooxidans . 
J Gen Microbiol 133:1171–1179
Alexander M (1999) Biodegradation and bioremediation, 2nd edn.
Academic Press, London
Allard AS, Neilson AH (1997) Bioremediation of organic waste
sites: a critical review of microbiological aspects. Int Biodete-rior Biodegrad 39:253–285660Al-Maghrabi IMA, Bin Aqil AO, Isla, MR, Chaalal O (1999) Use
of thermophilic bacteria for bioremediation of petroleum con-taminants. Energ Sources 21:17–29
Amadi A, Abbey SD, Nma A (1996) Chronic effects of oil spill on
soil properties and microflora of a rainforest ecosystem in Ni-geria. Water Air Soil Pollut 86:1–11
Annweiler E, Richnow HH, Antranikian G, Hebenbrock S, Garms
C, Franke S, Francke W, Michaelis W (2000) Naphthalenedegradation and incorporation of naphthalene-derived carboninto biomass by the thermophilic Bacillus thermoleovorans .
Appl Environ Microbiol 66:518–523
Aono R, Inoue A (1998) Organic solvent tolerance in microorgan-
isms. In: Horikoshi K, Grant WD (eds) Extremophiles: micro-bial life in extreme environments. Wiley-Liss, New York, pp 287–310
Ashok BT, Saxena S, Musarrat J (1995) Isolation and character-
ization of four polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon degradingbacteria from soil near an oil refinery. Lett Appl Microbiol21:246–248
Balba MT, Al-Daher R, Al-Awadhi N, Chino T, Tsuji H (1998) 
Bioremediation of oil-contaminated desert soil: the Kuwaitiexperience. Environ Int 24:163–173
Banat FA, Prechtl SB, Bischof F (2000) Aerobic thermophilic
treatment of sewage sludge contaminated with 4-nonylphenol.Chemosphere 41:297–302
Bastos AER, Moon DH, Rossi A, Trevors JT, Tsai SM (2000)
Salt-tolerant phenol-degrading microorganisms isolated fromAmazonian soil samples. Arch Microbiol 174:346–352
Beaudin N, Caron RF, Legros R, Ramsay J, Ramsay B (1999)
Identification of the key factors affecting composting of aweathered hydrocarbon-contaminated soil. Biodegradation10:127–133
Bej AK, Saul D, Aislabie J (2000) Cold-tolerant alkane-degrading
Rhodococcus species from Antarctica. Polar Biol 23:100–105
Bertrand JC, Almallah M, Acquaviva M, Mille G (1990) Biodeg-
radation of hydrocarbons by an extremely halophilic archae-bacterium. Lett Appl Microbiol 11:260–263
Braddock JF, McCarthy KA (1996) Hydrologic and microbiologi-
cal factors affecting persistence and migration of petroleumhydrocarbons spilled in a continuous-permafrost region. Envi-ron Sci Technol 30:2626–2633
Braddock JF, Lindstrom JE, Yeager TR, Rasley BT, Brown EJ
(1996) Patterns of microbial activity in oiled and unoiled sedi-ments in Prince Williams Sound. Am Fish Soc Symp 18:94–108
Braddock JF, Ruth ML, Walworth JL, McCarthy KA (1997) En-
hancement and inhibition of microbial activity in hydrocar-bon-contaminated arctic soils: implications for nutrient-amended bioremediation. Environ Sci Technol 31:2078–2084
Bradley PM, Chapelle FH (1995) Rapid toluene mineralization by
aquifer microorganisms at Adak, Alaska: implications for in-trinsic bioremediation in cold environments. Environ SciTechnol 29:2778–2781
Bruns-Nagel D, Knicker H, Drzyzga O, Butehorn U, Steinbach K,
Gemsa D, Von Low E (2000) Characterization of N-15-TNTresidues after an anaerobic/aerobic treatment of soil/molassesmixtures by solid state N-15 NMR spectroscopy. 2. Systematicinvestigation of whole soil and different humic fractions. En-viron Sci Technol 34:1549–1556
Chen CI, Taylor RT (1995) Thermophilic biodegradation of BTEX
by twoThermus species. Biotechnol Bioeng 48:614–624
Chen CI, Taylor RT (1997a) Batch and fed-batch bioreactor culti-
vations of a Thermus species with thermophilic BTEX-degrad-
ing activity. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 47:726–733
Chen CI, Taylor RT (1997b) Thermophilic biodegradation of
BTEX by two consortia of anaerobic bacteria. Appl MicrobiolBiotechnol 48:121–128
Chugunov VA, Ermolenko ZM, Martovetskaya II, Mironava RI,
Zhirkova NA, Kholodenko VP, Urakov NN (2000) Develop-ment and application of a liquid preparation with oil-oxidzingbacteria. Appl Biochem Microbiol 36:577–581Chung KH, Lee JH, Ro KS (2000) Composting of kerosene-con-
taminated soil: Fate of kerosene. J Environ Sci Health Part A35:1183–1194
Delille D, Delille B (2000) Field observations on the variability of
crude oil impact in indigenous hydrocarbon-degrading bacteriafrom sub-Antarctic intertidal sediments. Mar Environ Res49:403–417
Delille D, Bassères A, Dessommess A (1998) Effectiveness of bi-
oremediation for oil-polluted Antarctic seawater. Polar Biol19:237–241
Foght J, Semple K, Gauthier C, Westlake DS, Blenkinsopp S,
Sergy G, Wang Z, Fingas M (1999) Effect of nitrogen sourceon biodegradation of crude oil by a defined bacterial consor-tium incubated under cold, marine conditions. Environ Tech-nol 20:839–849
Fuse H (1998) Oxidation of organic compounds by bacteria.
Patent JP10128385, May 19
Gemmell RT, Knowles CJ (2000) Utilisation of aliphatic com-
pounds by acidophilic heterotrophic bacteria: the potential forbioremediation of acidic wastewaters contaminated with toxicorganic compounds and heavy metals. FEMS Microbiol Lett192:185–190
Gieg LM, Kolhatkar RV, McInerney MJ, Tanner RS, Harris SH Jr,
Sublette KL, Suflita JM (1999) Intrinsic bioremediation of pe-troleum hydrocarbons in a gas condensate-contaminated aqui-fer. Environ Sci Technol 33:2550–2560
Grant WD, Gemmell RT, McGenity TJ (1998) Halophiles. In:
Horikoshi K, Grant WD (eds) Extremophiles: microbial life inextreme environments. Wiley-Liss, New York, pp 93–132
Hater GR, Jerger DE, Greem RB, Barnes PW, Woodhull PM (2000)
Treatment of TNT-contaminated soil. Patent US6066772, May 23
Hinteregger C, Streichsbier F (1997) Halomonas sp., a moderately
halophilic strain, for biotreatment of saline phenolic waste-wa-ter. Biotechnol Lett 19:1099–1102
Jackson WA, Pardue JH (1997) Seasonal variability of crude oil
respiration potential in salt and fresh marshes. J Environ Qual26:1140–1146
Jackson WA, Pardue JH (1999) Potential for enhancement of bio-
degradation of crude oil in Louisiana salt marshes using nutri-ent amendments. Water Air Soil Pollut 109:343–355
Järvinen KT, Melin ES, Puhakka JA (1994) High-rate bioremedia-
tion of chlorophenol-contaminated groundwater at low tem-peratures. Environ Sci Technol 28:2387–2392
Kanekar PP, Sarnaik SS, Kelkar AS (1999) Bioremediation of
phenol by alkaliphilic bacteria isolated from alkaline lake ofLonar, India. J Appl Microbiol 85:128S-133S
Kanke M, Kono N, Nagatomi A (1999) Bioremediation apparatus
for dioxins. Patent JP113475332A2, December 21
Kapley A, Purohit HJ, Chhatre S, Shanker R, Chakrabarti T,
Khanna P (1999) Osmotolerance and hydrocarbon degradationby a genetically modified microbial consortium. BioresourTechnol 67:241–245
Khan NY, Al-Ajmi D (1998) Post-war imperatives for the sustain-
able management of the Gulf ecosystem. Environ Int 24:239–248
Kishino T, Kobayashi K (1995) Relation between toxicity and ac-
cumulation of chlorophenols at various pH, and their absorp-tion mechanism in fish. Water Res 29:431–442
Kroll RG (1990) Alkalophiles. In: Edwards C (ed) Microbiology
of extreme environments. Open University Press, Milton Key-nes, UK, pp 55–92
Kulichevskaya IS, Milekhina EI, Borzenkov IA, Zvyagintseva IS,
Belyaev SS (1992) Oxidation of petroleum hydrocarbons byextremely halophilic archaebacteria. Microbiology 60:596–601
Kushner DJ (1978) Life in high salt and solute concentrations. In:
Kushner DJ (ed) Microbial life in extreme environments. Aca-demic Press, London, pp 317–368
Kuznetsov VD, Zaitseva TA, Vakulenko LV, Filippova SN (1992)
Streptomyces albiaxalis sp. nov.: a new petroleum hydrocar-
bon-degrading species of thermo- and halotolerant Streptomy-
ces. Microbiology 61:62–67661Lin Q, Mendelssohn IA, Henry CB, Roberts PO, Walsh MM,
Overton EB, Portier RJ (1999) Effects of bioremediationagents on oil degradation in mineral and sandy salt marsh sed-iments. Environ Technol 20:825–837
Lugowski AJ, Palamteer GA, Boose TR, Merriman JE (1997) Bio-
degradation process for detoxifying liquid streams. PatentUS5656169, August 12
Maltseva O, Oriel P (1997) Monitoring of an alkaline 2,4,6-tri-
chlorophenol-degrading enrichment culture by DNA finger-printing methods and isolation of the responsible organism,haloalkaliphilic Nocardioides sp. strains M6. Appl Environ
Microbiol 63:4145–4149
Maltseva O, McGowan C, Fulthorpe R, Oriel P (1996) Degrada-
tion of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid by haloalkaliphilic bac-teria. Microbiology 142:1115–1122
Margesin R (2000) Potential of cold-adapted microorganisms for
bioremediation of oil-polluted alpine soils. Int Biodeterior Biodegrad 46:3–10
Margesin R, Schinner F (1997a) Efficiency of indigenous and in-
oculated cold-adapted soil microorganisms for biodegradationof diesel oil in alpine soils. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:2660–2664
Margesin R, Schinner F (1997b) Bioremediation of diesel-oil-con-
taminated alpine soils at low temperatures. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 47:462–468
Margesin R, Schinner F (eds) (1999a) Cold-adapted organisms.
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York
Margesin R, Schinner F (1999b) Biological decontamination of oil
spills in cold environments. J Chem Technol Biotechnol 74:381–389
Margesin R, Schinner F (2001) Potential of halotolerant and halo-
philic microorganisms for biotechnology. Extremophiles 5:73–83
Markl H, Antranikian G, Becker P, Markossian S (1999) Aerobic
biodegradation of aromatic compounds having low water solu-bility using Bacillus thermoleovorans strain DSM 10562.
Patent US5965431, October 12
Master ER, Mohn WW (1998) Psychrotolerant bacteria isolated
from Arctic soils that degrade polychlorinated biphenyls atlow temperatures. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:4823–4829
Means JC (1995) Influence of salinity upon sediment-water parti-
tioning of aromatic hydrocarbons. Mar Chem 51:3–16
Michel FC Jr, Adinarayana Reddy C, Forney LJ (1995) Microbial
degradation and humification of the lawn care pesticide 2,4-di-chlorophenoxyacetic acid during the composting of yard trim-mings. Appl Environ Microbiol 61:2566–2571
Mihara C, Yano T, Kozaki S, Imamura T (1999) Microbial strain,
method for biodegrading organic compounds and method forenvironmental remediation. Patent US5962305, October 5
Mille G, Almallah M, Bianchi M, Wambeke F van, Bertrand JC
(1991) Effect of salinity on petroleum biodegradation.Fresenius J Anal Chem 339:788–791
Mohn WW, Stewart GR (2000) Limiting factors for hydrocarbon
biodegradation at low temperature in Arctic soils. Soil BiolBiochem 32:1161–1172
Mohn WW, Westerberg K, Cullen WR, Reimer KJ (1997) Aerobic
biodegradation of biphenyl and polychlorinated biphenyls byArctic soil microorganisms. Appl Environ Microbiol63:3378–3384
Moran BN, Hickey WJ (1997) Trichloroethylene biodegradation
by mesophilic and psychrophilic ammonia oxidizers and me-thanotrophs in groundwater microcosms. Appl Environ Micro-biol 63:3866–3871
Morita RY (1975) Psychrophilic bacteria. Bacteriol Rev 39:
144–167
Müller R, Antranikian G, Maloney S, Sharp R (1998) Thermophil-
ic degradation of environmental pollutants. In: Antranikian G(ed) Biotechnology of extremophiles. (Advances in Biochemi-cal Engineering/Bio-technology, vol 61) Springer, Berlin Hei-delberg New York, pp 155–169
Mutzel A, Reinscheid UM, Antranikian G, Müller R (1996) Isola-
tion and characterization of a thermophilic Bacillusstrain, thatdegrades phenol and cresols as sole carbon source at 70 °C.
Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 46:593–596
Niehaus F, Bertoldo C, Kähler M, Antranikian G (1999) Extremo-
philes as a source of novel enzymes for industrial application.Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 51:711–729
Norris PR, Johnson DB (1998) Acidophilic microorganisms. In:
Horikoshi K, Grant WD (eds) Extremophiles: microbial life inextreme environments. Wiley-Liss, New York, pp 133–153
Norris RD (1994) Handbook of bioremediation. CRC, Boca RatonOesterhelt D, Patzelt H, Kesler B (1998) Decomposition of halogena-
ted hydrocarbons by halophilic bacteria. Patent DE19639894,April 9
Onysko KA, Budman HM, Robinson CW (2000) Effect of temper-
ature on the inhibition kinetics of phenol biodegradation byPseudomonas putida Q5. Biotechnol Bioeng 70:291–299
Oren A, Gurevich P, Azachi M, Hents Y (1992) Microbial degra-
dation of pollutants at high salt concentrations. Biodegradation3:387–398
Pillis LJ, Davis LT (1985) Microorganism capable of degrading
phenolics. Patent US4556638, December 3
Prieur D, Marteinsson VT (1998) Prokaryotes living under elevat-
ed hydrostatic pressure. In: Antranikian G (ed) Biotechnologyof extremophiles. (Advances in Biochemical Engineering/Bio-technology, vol 61) Springer, Berlin Heidelberg New York, pp. 23–35
Quentmeier A, Friedrich CG (1994) Transfer and expression of
degradative and antibiotic resistance plasmids in acidophilicbacteria. Appl Environ Microbiol 60:973–978
Radwan SS, Sorkhoh NA, Fardoun F, Al-Hasan RH (1995) Soil
management enhancing hydrocarbon biodegradation in thepolluted Kuwaiti desert. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 44:265–270
Radwan SS, Al-Awadhi H, Sorkhoh NA, El-Nemr IM (1998)
Rhizospheric hydrocarbon-utilizing microorganisms as poten-tial contributors to phytoremediation for the oily Kuwaiti de-sert. Microbiol Res 153:247–251
Radwan SS, Al-Mailem D, El-Nemr I, Salamah S (2000) En-
hanced remediation of hydrocarbon contaminated desert soilfertilized with organic carbons. Int Biodeterior Biodegrad46:129–132
Rhykerd RL, Weaver RW, McInnes KJ (1995) Influence of salini-
ty on bioremediation of oil in soil. Environ Pollut 90:127–130
Sarnaik S, Kanekar P (1995) Bioremediation of colour of methyl
violet and phenol from a dye-industry waste effluent usingPseudomonas spp. isolated from factory soil. J Appl Bacteriol
79:459–469
Schwarz JR, Walker JD, Colwell RR (1975) Deep-sea bacteria:
growth and utilization of n-hexadecane at in situ temperature
and pressure. Can J Microbiol 21:682–687
Siron R, Pelletier E, Brochu C (1995) Environmental factors influ-
encing the biodegradation of petroleum hydrocarbons in coldseawater. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 28:406–416
Sorkhoh NA, Al-Hasan R, Radwan S, Höpner T (1992) Self-
cleaning of the Gulf. Nature 359:109
Sorkhoh NA, Ibrahim AS, Ghannoum MA, Radwan SS (1993)
High-temperature hydrocarbon degradation by Bacillus stear-
othermophilus from oil-polluted Kuwait desert. Appl Micro-
biol Biotechnol 39:123–126
Sotsky JB, Atlas RM (1994) Frequency of genes in aromatic and
aliphatic hydrocarbon biodegradation pathways within bacteri-al populations from Alaskan sediments. Can J Microbiol40:981–985
Stapleton RD, Savage DC, Sayler GS, Stacey G (1998) Biodegra-
dation of aromatic hydrocarbons in an extremely acidic envi-ronment. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:4180–4184
Stetter KO (1998) Hyperthermophiles: isolation, classification,
and properties. In: Horikoshi K, Grant WD (eds) Extremo-philes: microbial life in extreme environments. Wiley-Liss,New York, pp 1–24
Taylor TR, Jackson KJ, Duba AG, Chen CI (1998) In situ thermal-
ly enhanced biodegradation of petroleum fuel hydrocarbonsand halogenated organic solvents. Patent US5753122, May 19662Wolfe DA, Hameedi MH, Galt JA, Watabayashi G, Shrot J,
O’Claire C, Rice S, Michel J, Payne JR, Braddock J, Hanna S,Sale D (1994) The fate of the oil spilled from the Exxon Val-dez. Environ Sci Technol 28:561A–568A
Wolfe MF, Schwartz GJB, Singaram S, Mielbrecht EE, Tjeerdema
RS, Sowby ML (1998) Effects of salinity and temperature onthe bioavailability of dispersed petroleum hydrocarbons to thegolden-brown algae Isochrysis galbana . Arch Environ Contam
Toxicol 35:268–273
Woolard CR, Irvine RL (1994) Biological treatment of hypersaline
wastewater by a biofilm of halophilic bacteria. Water EnvironRes 66:230–235
Woolard CR, Irvine RL (1995) Response of a periodically operat-
ed halophilic biofilm reactor to changes in salt concentration.Water Sci Technol 31:41–50
Wright AL, Weaver RW, Webb JW (1997) Oil bioremediation in
salt marsh mesocosms as influenced by N and P fertilization,flooding, and season. Water Air Soil Pollut 95:179–191
Yakimov MM, Giuliano L, Bruni V, Scarfi S, Golyshin PN (1999)
Characterization of Antarctic hydrocarbon-degrading bacteriacapable of producing bioemulsifiers. Microbiologica 22:249–256
Yang L, Lai CT, Shieh WK (2000) Biodegradation of dispersed
diesel fuel under high saline conditions. Water Res 34:3303–3314663
Ward DM, Brock TD (1978) Hydrocarbon degradation in hypersa-
line environments. Appl Environ Microbiol 35:353–359
Weiner JM, Lovley DR (1998) Anaerobic benzene degradation in
petroleum-contaminated aquifer sediments after inoculationwith a benzene-degrading enrichment. Appl Environ Micro-biol 64:775–778
Whitehouse BG (1984) The effects of temperature and salinity on
the aqueous solubility of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.Mar Chem 14:319–332
Whyte LG, Bourbonnière L, Greer CW (1997) Biodegradation of
petroleum hydrocarbons by psychrotrophic Pseudomonas
strains possessing both alkane ( alk) and naphthalene ( nah) cat-
abolic pathways. Appl Environ Microbiol 63:3719–3723
Whyte LG, Hawari J, Zhou E, Bourbonnière L, Inniss WE, Greer
CW (1998) Biodegradation of variable-chain-length alkanes atlow temperatures by a psychrotrophic Rhodococcus sp. Appl
Environ Microbiol 64:2578–2584
Whyte LG, Bourbonnière L, Bellerose C, Greer CW (1999) Biore-
mediation assessment of hydrocarbon-contaminated soils fromthe High Arctic. Bioremediation J 3:69–79
Williams TR, Ziegenfuss PS, Sisk WE (1992) Composting of ex-
plosives and propellant contaminated soils under thermophilicand mesophilic conditions. J Ind Microbiol 9:137–144
Williams WA, May RJ (1997) Low-temperature microbial aerobic
degradation of polychlorinated biphenyls in sediment. EnvironSci Technol 31:3491–3496