 
         Saurashtra University 
     Re – Accredited Grade ‘B’ by NAAC 
     (CGPA 2.93) 
 
 
  
Bhimani, Himanshu B., 2011,  “ Bacterial degradation of Azo Dyes and its 
derivatives ”,  thesis PhD, Saurashtra University 
  
http://etheses.saurashtrauniversity.edu/id/805  
  
Copyright and moral rights for this thesis are retained by the author 
 A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commerci al research or study, 
without prior permission or charge. 
 
This thesis cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively from without first 
obtaining permission in writing from the Author. 
 
The content must not be changed in an y way or sold commercially in any 
format or medium w ithout the formal permission of the Author 
 
When referring to this work , full bibliographic detail s including the author, title, 
awarding institution and date of the thesis must be given.
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Saurashtra University Theses Service 
http://etheses.saurashtrauniversity.edu  
repository@sauuni.ernet.in 
 
© The Author 
A THESIS SUBMITTED FOR THE DEGREE OF 
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY  
 
IN 
 
MICROBIOLOGY 
 
 
BACTERIAL DEGRADATION OF AZO DYES 
AND ITS DERIVATIVES 
           
BY 
Himanshu D. Bhimani 
   
SUPERVISED BY 
Prof. S. P. Singh  
 
    
Registration No: 3287          Date of Registration: 12.09.2005 
 
Department of Biosciences 
Saurashtra University 
Rajkot – 360 005,Gujarat (INDIA) 
 
AUGUST 2011 
  
          
DEDICATED 
TO MY 
BE LOVED FAMILY 
 
               
 
        SAURASHTRA UNIVERSITY  
DEPARTMENT OF BIOSCIENCES 
RAJKOT – 360 005 , Gujarat, India 
Phone: Office + 91 281 2586419,  
Fax : + 91 281 2586419 E-mail    satyapsingh@yahoo.com
    
 
 
Satya P. Singh, Ph.D.        Ref: SU/Bio/ 
Professor & Head       Date : 
 
 
CERTIFICATE  
 
I take pleasure in forwarding the thesis entitled “ Bacterial Degradation of azo dyes 
and its derivatives ” of Mr. Himanshu D. Bhimani for the acceptance of the degree 
of Doctor of Philosophy in Microbiology. Thesis presented here embodies a record of 
the results of original invest igations carried out by him. 
 
Date : 
Place :  Rajkot  
 
 
Forwarded through 
 
 
  
Prof. S. P. Singh                   Prof. S. P. Singh 
Supervisor            Professor & Head 
Department of Biosciences       Department of Biosciences 
Saurashtra University                 Saurashtra University 
Rajkot – 360 005 INDIA             Rajkot – 360 005 INDIA 
 
 
          
DECLARATION 
  
 
I, Mr. Himanshu D. Bhimani,  the undersigned hereby solemnly declare that 
the work presented in th is thesis entitled “ Bacterial degradation of azo dyes and 
its derivatives ” is original and indepe ndent. I declare further t hat this work has not 
been submitted for any degree or diploma to any other Universities or institutions. 
 
 
 
Date : 
 
Place : Rajkot          H i m a n s h u  D .  B h i m a n i   
 
                
 
Key words 
 
Anoxic condition 
Aromatic amines 
Bacterial isolate 
Biodegradation 
Bioremediation 
Co-metabolism 
Consortium 
Cytotoxicity 
Decolorization 
Dye mixture 
Ecotoxicity 
Germination 
HPLC 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
Phytotoxicity 
Recalcitrant 
Sequencial static shaking condition 
Textile dyes 
Textile effluent 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviation 
 
Activated sludge   AS 
Black BT    BBT 
Black E     BE 
Benzidine    BZ 
Chemical Oxygen Demand  COD 
Common effluent treatment plant  CETP 
Complete Medium Broth   CMB 
Distilled Water    DW 
Fetal Calf Serum   FSC 
FF Sky Blue    FFSB 
Green B    GB 
Minimal Essential Media   MEM 
Mineral Salt Medium   MSM 
Optical Density    OD 
Reactive Black 5   RB 5 
Reactive Orange M 2R   ROM 2R 
Tripsyn Phosphate Versene Glucose TPVG 
  
Acknowledgements 
 
Life is a journey where every individ ual with their own experiences lays 
milestones. This is a righteous opportuni ty to mention the name of those 
wonderful and caring persons who have shown me the ri ght way to achieve the 
ultimate Milestone. 
It gives me immense pleasure to ex press my profound feeling of 
reverence and heartfe lt gratitude to Dr. S. P. Singh , for his inspiring guidance, 
dynamic initiation, continuous encour agement, thoughtful discussions, and 
untiring supervision throughout the work. He is the figur e without whom it would 
be quite difficult to shape this work in present format starting from conceptualizing the thought to  achieving the dream.  
I express my sincere grat itude and heart-felt thanks to Dr. Ramesh 
Kothari ,Senior Assistant Professor and H ead, Department of Microbiology, 
Christ College, Rajkot, for his immaculate  guidance. His critical discourse during 
the investigation has always inspired me to do the work  with more accuracy and 
sincerity. It was his criticism, view, and attitude that always helped me during my 
work and to flourish my thoughts.  
I am very much thankful to Mr. Mansukhbhai Dhanani  Director, Smt. S. 
H. Gajera Saikshnik Sankul, Amreli, for kind cooperation and giving me 
permission to use all laboratory facilities for my research work.  
I express my gratitude to Prof. V. C. Soni, Prof. A. N. Pandey, Dr. S. J. 
Pathak, Dr. B.R.M. Vyas,  Prof. V. S. Thaker, Dr. R.  Kundu, Dr. S.V. Chanda, 
Dr. B.R.M. Vyas, Dr. N. Panchal  for his guidance and valu able instructions and 
suggestion pertaining to my work.   The tremendous response from Dr. Charmy Kothari,  Mr. Chirantan Rawal and 
Mr. Vikram Rawal,  inspired and encour age me by their co nstructive guidance 
and valuable discussions throughout the work . I express my sincere gratitude to 
my colleagues;  Mr. Sandeep Pandey, Ms. Me gha Purohit, Ms. Sangeeta 
Gohel, Ms. Viral Akabari, Mr. Bhavt osh Kikani, Mr. Rushit Shukla,  for their 
humble support.  
My vocabulary utterly fails in expr essing my accolade to my revered 
parents who brought me to this stage. I deeply express my sincere thanks to my 
family members, Alpa, Tushar, Varsha, Ishwa, Hitanshu and Yashwi whose 
continuous inspiration, encouragement and affecti on, boosted up my morale 
during the period of st udy. I am thankful to Girishbhai, Dean, Faculty of science, 
Saurashtra University, as he became the fo rce for the completion of this chapter 
of my life. 
I express my gratitude to Mr. Dhimant Bhensdadia, Lecturer, 
Microbiology Department, Smt. U. B. Bhagat  Science Mahila College, Amreli. He 
always stood beside whenever I need any hel p or support. His selfless dedication 
and support during the bad and good time led me to believe that I might not be 
able to complete this work without him with me. I would like to thank my entire faculty members at Smt. U. B. Bhagat Science Mahila College, Amreli for their 
cooperation.  
Its great fortune that in vast unive rse, we worked on the omnipotent 
creature of the almighty God.  
 
August, 2011 R A J K O T         H i m a n s h u  B h i m a n i  
 
               
 
Contents  
 
 
 
  Sr. 
No. Details Page No. 
 
1  
Chapter – 1: General Introduction   
01 – 03 
2 Chapter – 2: Review of Literatures 04 – 22 
3 Chapter – 3: Isolation, Sc reening and Identific ation of Dye 
Decolorizing Bacteria 23 – 49 
4 Chapter – 4: Influence of Environmental Parameter on 
Process of Dye Decolorization by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  
JTP-23  50 – 66 
5 Chapter – 5: Influence of Nutritional Parameter on Dye 
Decolorization by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 67 – 82 
6 Chapter – 6: Treatment of Azo Dye Mixtures by Single 
Bacterium/ Consortium and Ev aluation of Phytotoxicity 83 – 99 
7 Chapter – 7: Degradation of Azo Dyes by Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23 Degraded Product Analysis and Evaluation 
of Cytotoxicity  100 – 113 
8 Chapter – 8: Summary  114 – 117 
9 Chapter – 9: Conclusion 118 – 119 
10 Bibliography 120 – 132  1 
    
1 
General Introduction  
 
Since last few decades, there is an expl osive development in the dye and dying 
industries. Within the manuf acturing of various synthetic dyes many potentially 
hazardous organic compounds have been intr oduced into various components of 
the environment. This process is going on till to date with exponential increase. 
 
The continuous dumping of such hazardous compound in the form of waste has 
lead to contaminate soil, groun d water, sediments, surfac e water etc. at alarming 
level. The roots of such waste products found to be an industrial, agriculture, 
energy production industries, textile industr ies, and printing houses that produce 
huge amount of wastes, which ultimate ly find its way in the environment. 
 
The studies of biodegradation of dyes  and its derivates products are of 
environmental interest because of its re calcitrant nature, carcinogenicity, 
mutagenicity and toxic effects. As we know that dyes never die, but some of the 
dyes when degraded bi otically or abiotic ally, produce the end products that are 
more toxic than native dyes as a result  of incomplete degradation. Some azo 
dyes are effectively reduced to their inte rmediate structure, thus destroying the 
apparent color of dye. Many  of these intermediates are aromatic amines with 
constituent side groups. By reducing the dye compounds to their intermediates, 
the problem of visual pollution is solv ed, but a larger and more deleterious 
problem may be created. Hi gher percentage of these intermediates has been 
identified as more mutagenic, carcinoge nic, and toxic (Brown and DeVito, 1993) . 
Because of the toxic potential of many aromatic amines, fu rther degradation of  2the dye compound is necessary  if scientific community is seriously thinking and 
trying to find out some effective way to treat the various sites which are 
contaminated by dues and ot her hazardous components. 
 
A dye may be defined as an organic compound containing both chromophore 
and auxochrome groups linked to benzene ring. Chromophore is responsible for 
imparting color to the compound and aux ochrome imparts the property of 
electrolytic dissociation. The chrom ogen-chromophore structure is often not 
sufficient to impart solubility and c ause adherence of dye to fiber. The 
auxochrome or bonding affinity groups are amine, hydroxyl, carboxyl, and 
sulfonic radicals, or their derivatives. 
 
Azo dyes are characterized by presenc e of nitrogen-nitrogen (N=N) in its 
chemical structure. Many different structures are possible in azo dyes as 
Monoazo dyes have only one N=N double bond, while diazo and triazo dyes contain two and three N=N double bonds, respectively (Zollinger, 1991) . The azo 
groups are generally connect ed to benzene and naphthalen e rings, but can also 
be attached to aromatic heterocycles or enolizable aliphatic groups. These side 
groups are necessary for imparting the co lor of the dye, with many different 
shades and intensities being possible (McCurdy, 1992).  
 
Because of the diversity of dye components available for the synthesis, a large 
number of structurally different azo dy es exist and are used in industry. 
Approximately 80-95 % of all reactive dyes are based on the azo chromogen 
(Zollinger, 1991; Edwards,  2000). Reactive dyes are colored compounds that 
contain one or two functional groups capab le of forming covalent bonds with the 
active sites in fibers. A carbon or phosphorous atom of the dye molecule will bind 
to hydroxyl groups in cellu lose, amino, thiol, and hy droxyl groups in wool, or 
amino groups in polyamides. Most fiber-reactive azo dyes are used for dyeing cellulosic materials, such as cotton, and are a major source of dye waste in 
textile effluents.   
  3Bioremediation is the use of biological systems (m ainly microorganisms and 
plants) for the treatment of polluted ai r, aquatic or terrestrial component of 
environment. The textile industry is ma jor user of water. Reduced water 
resources due to rapid population grow th and industrial development has 
triggered need to reuse of municipal and industrial waste water after proper 
treatment and elimi nation of potential pollutant s. Conventional treatment 
processes have long been estab lished in removing many hazardous chemicals of 
public health and environmental concern. These conventional methods have their 
own disadvantages at large scale  (Keharia and Madamwar, 2003). 
 
Microorganisms can breakdown most comp ounds for their growth and/or energy 
need. In some cases, metabolic pathway s which organisms follow for its own 
normal growth and development may al so be used to beak down pollutant 
molecules.  In this process micr oorganisms do not benefit directly, but 
researchers have taken advantages of this phenomenon and use it for the 
process of bioremediation. Complete degradation of any compound ultimately 
yields water and either carbon dioxide or methane. Incomplete degradation will 
yield breakdown products which may or may not be less toxic than the native 
pollutant (Alleman and Lesson, 1999; Alexander and Lustigman, 1996). 
 
In last few years, several microorgani sms have been reported to decolorize and 
transform to completely mineralize azo dy es. The bacterial de gradation of azo 
dye is initiated by a reductive cleavage of azo bond, which result in the formation 
of amines. The aromatic ami nes that are formed in the course of these reactions 
may be degraded aerobically (Stolz A., 2001).  
 
  
 
 
 
  4 
 
 
  
2 
Review of Literatures 
 
History of Dyestuff and Dying  
Ever since the beginning of  mankind, they have been endeavoring to add color to 
the world around them. They used natural ma tter to stain hides, decorate shells 
and feathers, and paint their st ory on the walls of ancient caves. Scientists have 
been able to date the black, white, yello w and reddish pigment s made from ochre 
used by primitive man in cave paint ings to over 15,000 B.C. With the 
development of fixed settlements and agr iculture around 7,000-2,000 B.C., man 
began to produce and use textil es, and would therefore add color to them as well 
(Grierson, 1989). Organic natur al colorants have a timele ss history of application, 
especially as textile dyes.  
 
The first synthetic dye was discovered by William Henry Perkin , a student at the 
Royal College of Chemistry. He tried to  make the drug quinine from aniline (a 
chemical found in coal). The experiment produced a th ick dark sludge. Instead of 
throwing it away, Perkin tried diluting it with alcohol and found that the solution 
was purple. He discovered that it would dy e silk and that it was a 'fast' dye, 
resistant to washing and to the fading effects of light.  
 
The concept of research and development in variety of dye manufacturing was 
soon followed by others and new dyes began to appear on the market. This 
process was dramatically stimulated by Kekule's discovery of the molecular 
structure of benzene in 1865. In the beginning of the 20th century, synthetic 
dyestuffs had almost completely s upplanted natural dyes (Welham, 2000).   5Textile Dyes  
Synthetic dyes are extens ively used in textile dyei ng, paper printing, color 
photography, pharmaceutical, f ood, cosmetics and other i ndustries (Rafi, Franklin 
and Cerniglia, 1990). Approximately, 10, 000 different dyes and pigments are 
used industrially, and over 7x105 tons of synthetic dy es are produced annually 
worldwide. In 1991, the world production of dyes was estimated 6,68,000 tons of 
which azo dyes contributed 70% (ETAD, 1997). During dying process, a 
substantial amount of azo dye is lo st in wastewater. Zollinger, (1987)  reported 
that about 10-15% of dyes were lost in effluent during dyei ng process. A common 
example of an azo dye, Reactive Black 5 also known as Remazol Black B (RBB) 
that has been taken in this study, is as below. 
 
Figure 1.1: Chemical structure of Reactive Black 5 
 
Major classes of synthetic dyes incl ude azo, anthraquinon and triaryl-methane 
dyes, and many of them ar e toxic or even carcino genic compounds with long 
turnover times. With the increased use of  a wide variety of dyes, pollution by 
dye's wastewater is becomi ng increasingly alarming.  
 
Classification of Dyes  
All aromatic compounds absorb electr omagnetic energy but only those that 
absorb light with wavelengt hs in the visible range (~400-800 nm) are colored. 
Dyes contain chromophores (deloca lized electron systems with conjugated 
double bonds) and auxochromes (electr on-withdrawing or electron-donating 
substituents that intensify the color of the chromophore by altering the overall 
energy of the electron syst em). Usual chromophores ar e -C=C-, -C=N-, -C=O, -
N=N-, -NO 2 and quinoid rings, usual auxochromes are -NH 3, -COOH, -SO 3H and 
–OH (Zee, 2002).   6Based on chemical structure of chrom ophores, 20-30 different groups of dyes 
can be discerned. Azo (monoazo, diazo,  triazo, polyazo), anthraquinone, 
phthalocyanine, and triarylmethane dyes ar e quantitatively the most important 
groups. Most of the commercial available azo dyes are in fact formulations of 
several components in order to improve t he technical properties of the dyeing 
process. The majority of industrial im portant azo dyes belong to the following 
classes: Acid dyes, Basic dyes, Direc t dyes, Disperse dyes, Mordant dyes, 
Reactive dyes and Solvent dyes. The Ac id, Basic, Direct and Reactive azo dyes 
are ionic dyes  (Anliker, Clarke and Moser, 1981).  They can also be classified 
according to chromophore they cont ain. (Wesenberg, 2003) (Table 1.1). 
 
Table 1.1: Classification of synthetic dyes according to Colour index (C.I.) 
Code Chemical Class Code Chemical Class Code Chemical Class 
10000 Nitroso 42000 Triarylmethane 53000 Sulfur 
10300 Nitro 45000 Xanthene 55000 Lactone 
11000 Monoazo 46000 Acridine 56000 Aminoketone 20000 Disazo 47000 Quinoline 57000 Hydroxyketone 30000 Trisazo 48000 Methine 58000 Anthraquinone 35000 Polyazo 49000 Thiazole 73000 Indigoid 37000 Azoic 49400 Indamine/Indophenol 74000 Phthalocyanine 40000 Stilbene 50000 Azine 75000 Natural 40800 Carotenoid 51000 Oxazine 76000 Oxidation Base 41000 Diphenylmethane 52000 Thaizine 77000 Inorganic 
 
Dye Stuff Industries 
Consumption of dyestuff is governed pre dominantly by several factors. The 
primary long term factor is demand for textiles, leather and colored paper. 
Consumption of textiles, t he largest end-use market for dyestuff, in turn depends 
directly on population gr owth and private consumer  spending levels. The most 
important short-term factor is fashion, which dictat es the types of colors used. 
The quantity of dyestuffs consumed per volu me of textile is considerably higher  7when bright or dark colors ar e desired in textile  than when only ligh t colors are in 
demand. 
China
Unites statesOther AsiaIndiaSouth AmericaWestern EuropeJapanCentral/eastern 
EuropeMe x i coCentral AmericaMi d d l e  E a stCanada
Other  
 
Figure 1.2: World consumption of dyes – 2009.  
 
The world market for dyes, pigments and dy e intermediates is estimated at about 
US $ 23 billion consisting of dyes and pi gment market of 1.3 million tones valued 
at US $ 16 billion and dye intermediates market of US $ 7 billion. Though the 
overall growth of dyestuff industry duri ng the last 5 years has slowed down, the 
industry is still expected to maintain a grow th of about 2% per annum in the next 
decade. Globally, reactive dyes account for around 25 percent while disperse 
dyes account for 20 percent of total dyes production. China, Korea and Taiwan 
are strong players in disperse dyes whil e India leads in production of reactive 
dyes on account of easy availability of  intermediates like vinyl suphone in the 
country 
 
The Indian dyestuff industry, which was prim arily started to cater to the needs of 
domestic textile industry, now not only m eets more than 95% requirement of the 
domestic market, but has gradually also made a dent in the global market.  
Today, India exports dyes and dye intermedi ate to the very same countries, on 
which it was dependent for im ports till a decade ago.  All range of dyes such as 
disperse, reactive, vats, pigments and leat her dyes are now being manufactured  8in India. The dyestuffs industry in In dia is concentrated in the states of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat, espec ially around the city of Ahmedabad, which hosts 
about 1200 plant and accounts for one-third of India’s exports. 
 
Textile Effluent 
Textile effluents are highly colored effluent released by textile and dye 
manufacturing industries that contain la rge amount of mixtures of dyes. Two 
major sources of release of dyes into t he environment are the textile and dyestuff 
manufacturing industries (Nigam et al ., 1995). These dyes are difficult to 
degraded and pose hazardous effect  on aquatic life. In addition to dyes, textile 
effluent also contains high ionic strengt h, salt and high pH values as well. 
 
Color Removal Techniques: Physico-chemical Treatments  
Literature reveals conflicting findings c oncerning the ability of textile waste water 
treatment processes, such as physi cal, physico-chemcial, chemical and 
biological. Textile waste water treatment by physica l processes is found to be 
negligible. Various physicoc hemical processes such as  anion-exchange resin, 
flotation, electro floatation,  electro-chemical destructi on, irradiation, ozonation, 
activated carbon, chemical coagulation, chemical oxid ation and adsorption have 
been found to be high cost for treating te xtile dye wastes (Banat and Nigam, 
1996). Most physicochemical dye remova l methods has drawback because they 
are expensive, limited vers atility, greatly interfered  by other waste water 
constituents, and/or generat e waste product that pose addi tional serious disposal 
problem. Different physico-chemical te chniques have been discussed with its 
advantages and disadvantages (Table 1.2). Al ternatively, biological treatments 
by means of microorganisms may present a relatively inexpensive way to remove 
dyes from waste water. 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  9Table 1.2: Different physical and chemical method s for dye removal from textile effluent with its 
advantages and disadvantages. (Robinson et al, 2002b) 
 
Physical/chemical 
method Advantages Disadvantages 
Fentons reagent Effective decolaration of soluble 
and insoluble dyes Sludge generation\ 
Ozonation Applied in gaseous state, no 
alteration of volume Short half life (20 min) 
Photochemical No sludge product ion Formation of by-products 
Sodium hypochlorite Initiates and accelerate azo bond 
cleavage Release of aromatic amines 
Electrochemical 
destruction Break-down compounds are non 
hazardous High electricity consumption 
Activated carbon Good removal of wide variety of 
dyes Very expensive 
Peat Good adsorbent due to cellular 
structure Specific surface area for 
adsorption are lower than 
activated carbon 
Wood chips Good sorption capacity for acidic 
dyes Require long retention time 
Silica gel Effective for basic dye removal Side reactions prevent 
commercial application 
Membrane filtration Removal all types of dyes Concentrated sludge 
production 
Ion-exchange No adsorbent loss due to 
regeneration Not effective for all dyes 
Irradiation Effective oxidation at laboratory 
scale Requires high concentrations 
of dissolved oxygen 
Electrokinetic coagulation Economica lly feasible High sludge production 
 
Bioremediation 
The process of bioremediat ion can be measured by monitoring any of the two 
factors, (1) by measuring the redox potent ial, together with pH  and temperature, 
oxygen content and concentration of el ectron acceptors/donors as well as 
breakdown products such as carbon dioxid e etc. (2) Measurem ent of chemical 
oxygen demand (COD) and biological oxygen demand (BOD). Biol ogical oxygen 
demand represent only the organism ma tter which is being capable of 
degraded/oxidized by microbes where as COD represents all the oxidizable matters including organic matter in any par ticular effluent. In case of colored 
effluents, bioremediation is measured by estimating the decrease in color 
intensity. (Marm agne and Coste, 1996)  
 
 
  10Bacterial Decolorization 
Although it is thought that azo dyes are nearly non-biodegradable or 
untransformable by bacteria un der aerobic condition, effo rts to isolate bacteria 
capable of degrading dye hav e continued (Zimmermann et al, 1984). Hu (1998) 
isolated Pseudomonas  luteola  from waste water treatment plant that decolorize 
reactive azo dyes. Wong and Yuen  (1996) isolated a bacterium Klebsiella  
pneumoniae  from dye contaminated sludge t hat could degrade the methyl red 
upto 100 mg l-1 more efficiently than other isolated bacteria.  
 
The ability of two bacterial  strains, the Gram –negative Alcaligenes  faecalis  and 
the Gram-positive Rhodococcus  erythropolis  to decolorize the monoazo dye Acid 
orange were studied with different init ial dye concentrations by Mutafov et al.  
(2007). The diazo dye Reactive yellow 84A was efficiently degraded by a novel bacterial strain Exiguobacterium  sp. Analytical techniques like HPLC, GCMS, 
and FTIR demonstrated that degradation of dye resu lted with significant 
reduction of phytotoxicity, confirming th e environmentally safe nature of the 
degradation metabolites (Dhanve et al. , 2009) 
 
Anaerobic Decolorization Process 
Anaerobic reduction of azo dyes using mi crobial sludges can be an effective and 
economic treatment process for removi ng color from dye house effluents. 
Previous studies have demonstrated the ability of anaerobic bacteria to 
reductively cleave the azo linkages in reactive dyes (Razo-Flores et al. , 1997; 
Lloyd, 1992, Brown and Laboureur, 1983, Chung et al. , 1978). Although this 
effectively alters the chromogen and des troys the observed color of the dye, 
many aromatic groups are not suscept ible to anaerobic reduction. However, 
there is evidence that some azo dye metabolites may be fully stabilized in 
anaerobic environments (Razo-Flores, 1997).  
 
Chung et al. (1978) conducted a study measuri ng the degradability of seven azo 
dyes using intestinal and other major anaerobes. The studies were carried out 
using isolated strains of bacterium in suspended cell mediums containing 
different azo dyes.  Although the dyes st udied were not fiber-reactive dyes, their  11findings showed that the reduction of azo compounds could be accomplished by 
intestinal and other majo r anaerobes. Furthermore, the presence of aromatic 
intermediates was also detected in meas urable amounts for each dye. Toxicity 
tests were not conducted, but some of  the intermediates had been previously 
determined to be mutagenic. 
 
Brown et al. (1987) studied the degradability of  various azo dyes in both 
anaerobic and aerobic systems. They investi gated the anaerobic deg radability of 
22 commercial azo dyes. Later in 1987,  Brown and Hamburger conducted a 
study on 14 azo dyes subjected to ana erobic sludge digestion followed by 
aerobic treatment. The study focused on both  the reduction of the dye molecules 
as well as the production and subsequent degradation of dye metabolites. Brown 
and Hamburger’s results confirmed cleav age of azo linkages, the production of 
metabolites was also observed, but at  less than theoretical concentrations.  
 
The anaerobic reduction of textile mill e ffluents and the azo dyes Reactive Black 
5 and Navy 106 were investigated by Lloyd (1992) and Ganesh (1992) 
respectively. In both cases, laboratory  scale anaerobic reactors were used for 
dye degradation. The results of Loyd and Ganesh were similar; both observed 
good decolorization with mini mal nutrient removal. Thes e findings concur with 
many studies found in the literature. While  high decolorization of textile effluents 
is often achieved in anaerobic envir onments, poor TOC and nitrogen removals 
are usually observed.  
 
Kothari R. K (2002) and Kot hari C. R (2006) reported t he effect of static and 
shaking conditions on decolorization of various textile dyes. Their results 
suggested that more decolorization is ac hieved under static culture condition 
compared to shake flask condition.   
 
Aerobic Decolorization Process 
Activated sludge treatment of  wastes is effective and highly economic system for 
reducing organic pollutants in wastewater . However, aerobic treatment of azo 
dye wastes has proven ineffective in most  cases, but it is often the typical  12method of treatment used today (Edwards, 2000; Yang et al. , 1998). Because 
aerobic microbes cannot redu ce azo linkages, their ability to destroy dye 
chromogens is less than anaerobic bacte rium. However, aerobic sludges have 
been successfully used to stabilize dye metabolites (Brown and Laboureur, 1983). 
 
 
The aerobic biodegradability of aniline, o-toludine, p- anisidine, p-phen etidine, o-
dianisidine, and 3, 3’- dichlorobenzidi ne, was investigated by Brown and 
Laboureur (1983b). These compounds were al l aromatic amines and possible by-
products of azo dyes degradation. Becaus e many aromatic st ructures are non-
biodegradable in anaerobic environment s and are not hydrophilic, they can 
accumulate in the adipose tissues of organisms. Many aromatics have been 
identified  as possible carcinogens, release of which into the environment is a 
matter of concern. Previous work by Brown and Laboureur ( 1983a) indicated that 
azo dyes may be broken down to their in termediate structures  in a reductive 
environment, but were not amenable to further degradation by anaerobes. 
Recently the aerobic decolorization of azo dyes has been reported by a number 
of investigators (Adedayo et al. , 2004; Mona et al. , 2008).  
 
The degradation of p-aminoazobenzene by Bacillus subtilis  was studied through 
batch experiment in order to investigat e azo dye degradation by Zissi (1997). The 
results proved that B. subtilis  cometabolize p-aminoazobenzene in the presence 
of glucose as carbon source, producing aniline and p-phenylenediamine, as the 
nitrogen-nitrogen double bond is broken. In this study azo dye was found to act 
as inhibitor to microbial growth. Bacillus subtilis  HM was able to decolorize 
aerobically eight different sulfonated azo dy es. Decolorization of Fast Red was 
achieved through microbial degradation rather  than biosorption or adsorption as 
indicated by the uncolored biomass or its methanol extracts (Mona et al. , 2008) 
 
Sequential Anaerobic-Aerobic Process 
Generally, bacterial azo dye biodegradat ion proceeds in two stages. The first 
stage involves reductive cleavage of t he dye’s azo linkage, resulting in the 
formation of generally colorless but potent ially hazardous aromatic amine. The  13second stage involves degradation of the aromatic amines. Azo dye reduction 
usually requires anaerobic conditions, whereas bacterial biodegradation of 
aromatic amines is an almost ex clusively aerobic process (Ghatnekar et al , 
1996). A waste water treatment process in which anaerobic and aerobic conditions are combined is t herefore the most logical concept for removing azo 
dyes from wastewater. 
 
According to the concept of combi ned anaerobic-aerobic treatment, azo dyes 
should be removed from the water phase by anaerobic reduction followed by 
aerobic oxidation of the dyes’ constit uent aromatic amines. The anaerobic-
aerobic reactor studies show that a genera lly high extent of color removal can be 
obtained, and several studies furthermore  provide evidence for removal of 
aromatic amines. Combined anaerobic- aerobic treatment therefore holds 
promise as a method to completely remove azo dyes from wastewater 
(Naimabadi et al. , 2009).  
 
Anaerobic bacteria are often able to r educe the azo linkages, but are generally 
unable to further stabilize the dye metabolit es; it would seem useful to follow 
anaerobic treatment processe s with an aerobic treatm ent step. As mentioned 
previously, aerobic organisms can oxidize aromatic ring compounds to simpler 
molecules. A considerable amount of research has  been conducted on ANA/AER 
sequential step-treatment systems used for degrading textile wastewaters 
(O’Neill et al., 2000; Loyd, 1992; Kothari and Kothari 2002, 2006).  
 
Biodegradation of two azo dyes, 4-phenyl azophenol (4-PAP) and mordant 
yellow 10 resulted in accumulation of ar omatic amines. Furt her, 4-aminophenol 
(a-AP) and aniline are detect ed from the reduction of 4-PAP. Aniline is degraded 
further in the presence of oxygen by t he facultative aerobic bacteria present in 
the anaerobic granular sludg e. Aerobic enrichment cultures developed on 
aromatic amines combined with oxygen-tolerant anaer obic granular sludge can 
be used to completely biodegrade azo dy es under integrated anaerobic-aerobic 
conditions (Loidl et al. , 1990). 
  14Molecular Characterization of Azoreductase Enzyme 
Suzuki et al.  was the first to describe the sequence and subsequent 
characterization of a gene encoding an aerobic azoreductase from the soil 
isolates, Bacillus sp. OY1-2. The protein consists of 178 amino acids and presumably it is a FM N dependent azoreductase.  A similar gene encoding 
azoreductase from Rhodobacter  sphaeroies  AS1.1737 was expressed and 
partially characterized (Suzuki et. al , 2001). 
 
Chen et al.  was able to identify and express a functional azoreductase gene from 
Staphylococcus aureus  in Escherichia coli . The Staphylococcus aureus  
azoreductase was found to be a homotetra mer with a native molecular mass of 
85 kDa containing four noncovalently  bound FMN molecules. The enzyme 
requires NADPH as an electron donor. It was resolve to dimeric apoprotein by 
removing the flavin prosthetic gr oups using hydrophobic-interaction 
chromatography. The dimreic apoprotein wa s reconstituted on column and in free 
stage with FMN resulting in formation of a fu lly functional native-like tetrameric 
enzyme (Figure 1.3). The Staphylococcu s aureus azoreductase was able to 
metabolize methyl red, orange II, Amarnath, and Ponc eau S azo dyes.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.3: Possible mechanism of the dissocia tion and reassociateion of Azo 1 of S. aureus 
expressed in E. coli.  (Chen and Hopper, 2005)  15Application of Genetic Engineering  
Cloning, overexpression and characteri zation has become a basic tool in 
studying genetic engineering for the improvement of any  biological process. For 
the overexpression and characterization of azoreductase, different genetic 
engineered strains (usually Escherichia coli ) strains were constructed. Russ et 
al., (2000), transferred flavin reductase (fre) to Sphingomonas  sp. Strain BN6 
and found 30 fold increase in azo reductase ac tivity in the wild-type strain. On the 
other hand, whole cells of the recombinant Sphingomoas  sp. BN6 showed only 
approximately threefold increas e in the reduction rate for azo dyes Amarnath and 
Mordant Yellow three compared to wild type strain. 
 
It has been reported by Blumel et al.   2002 that E. coli  strain carrying the 
azoreductase gene (azo B) from X. azovorans  KF46F, expressed almost 50 
times higher azoreductase activity in its ce ll extracts than that observed in wild 
type strain. However, the resting recombinant cell suspension showed no detectable azoreductase activity. 
 
Dyes, Environmental Concern  
Wastewater from the textile  industry is a complex mi xture of many  polluting 
substances ranging from organochlorin e-based pesticides to heavy metals 
associated with dyes or the dyeing process (Correia et al.,1994). Many dyes are 
visible in water at concentrations as low as 1 mg l-1. Textile-processing 
wastewaters, typically with dye content in the range 10-200 mg l-1 (O'Neill et al., 
1999) are therefore usually highly color ed and discharge in ope n waters presents 
an aesthetic problem. As dyes designed to be chemically and photolytically 
stable, they are highly persist ent in natural environments.  
 
The majority of dyes pose a potential heal th hazard to all forms of life. These 
dyes may cause allergic responses, ski n dermatoses, eczema (Su and Horton, 
1998), and may affect the liver, the l ungs, the vasco-circulatory system, the 
immune system and the reprodu ctive system (Nikulina and Deveikis, 1995) of 
experimental animals as well as humans.  
  16Textile dyes have found to be toxic, genotoxic and mutagenic in various test 
systems. Dyes with azo bonds nitro-or amino-groups are carcinogenic, causing 
tumors of liver and urinary bladder in  experimental animals (Puvaneshwari et al. , 
2006). However, reduction of azo dyes, i.e.  cleavage of the dye's azo linkage(s), 
leads to formation of aromatic amines and several aromatic amines are known 
mutagens and carcinogens. In mammals, met abolic activation (reduction) of azo 
dyes is mainly due to bacterial activi ty in the anaerobic parts of the lower 
gastrointestinal tract. Various other organs, especially the liver and the kidneys, can, however, also reduce azo dyes (Zee, 2002). 
 
The toxicity of aromatic amines depends  on the nature and location of other 
substituents. As an example the substitution  with nitro, methyl or methoxy groups 
or halogen atoms may increase the toxicity; whereas subs titution with carboxyl or 
sulphonate groups generally lower the toxi city (Chung and Cerniglia, 1992). As 
most soluble commercial azo dyestuffs contain one or more sulphonate groups, insight in the potentials danger of sulpho nated aromatic amines is particularly 
important. Sulphonated arom atic amines, in contrast to some of their 
unsulphonated analogues, have  generally no or very low genotoxic and 
tumorigenic potential (Jung and Steinle, 1992). 
 
Environmental Concerns of Sm all Scale Industries in India 
Small-scale industries (SSIs), having capi tal investment up to Rs.10 millions, 
have a very important role in  overall industrial development  in India and growth of 
SSI units has been actively promoted by Govern ment of India. It is estimated that 
more than 300,000 SSI units ar e spread all over India,  mainly in about 867 
clusters/industrial estates of the country. 
 
It is difficult for each industrial unit to  operate individual wastewater treatment 
plant because of the scale of  operations or lack of space or technical manpower. 
However, the amount of pollu tants emitted by SSIs clusters may be more than an 
equivalent large-scale industry. One possible reason for this may be the 
inefficient production technologies adopted by SSIs. 
  17Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP)`  
Keeping in view the key role played by SSIs and the constraints in complying 
with pollution control norms individually  by these units, The Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (MoEF) initiated an innovative technical and financial 
support scheme of common facilities for treatment of effl uents generated from 
SSIs located in clusters. The financial assistance provided under this Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) scheme was as: Central Government - 25%, 
State Government - 25%, Loans from financial institutions- 30%, and 
Entrepreneurs’ contribution- 20% of the project capital cost. The CETP scheme 
was instituted initially for a period of 10 years with effe ct from the year 1991 but 
MoEF has decided to continue financ ial assistance under the scheme beyond 
this period. Table 1.3 shows number of  CEPT with their treatment capacity of 
selected sates having larger industrial zones. 
         Table 1.3: State wise dist ribution of CETPs and their capacity in MLD.  
State No. of CETP Combined Capacity of 
CETPs, MLD Combined Capacity as 
%of total capacity 
Delhi 11 133.2 24.1 
Gujarat 16 156.3 28.2 
Maharashtra 11 63.25 11.43 Tamilnadu 29 71.15 12.85 
Total (India) 88 559.77 100 
 
Total of 88 CETPS have been constructe d throughout the country under this 
scheme. The Central Pollution Contro l Board had checked performance of 78 
CETPs operating throughout the country and submitted report in October 2005. 
The performance of all the CETPs in terms of general parameters like pH, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Chem ical Oxygen Demand (COD), Total 
Suspended Solids (TSS) and Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) was assessed.  
 
It was observed that out of the total 78 CETPs studied, only  20 (i.e. 25.6%) 
complied with the prescribed limits fo r general parameters pH, BOD, COD and 
TSS but 15 of these were not able to co mply with the prescribed limit for TDS. 
Thus, only 5 (i.e. 6.4%) CETP s were complying all gener al parameters including  18TDS. In the state of Gujarat, only 2 CETP  falls in this category. These two CETP 
are Ankleshwar and Sachin CETP which ha s small capacity up to 0.5 MLD where 
as state’s cumulative is 156.3 MLD. Out of 16 CETPs of Gujarat, none was found 
to meet the prescribed lim its of general parameters pH, BOD, COD, TSS and 
TDS (Figure 1.4). From the data it is observed that Gujarat being the state with 
highest effluent treatment capacity (28.2%  of total capacity throughout country), 
we can conclude it is high ly industrialized and highly  effluent generating state. 
Still, there is no single CETP  that meets the criteria to  release effluent in nature 
after treatment.   
 
Figure 1.4: The Sites of Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) in Gujarat. 
 
 
    19DESCRIPTION OF SAMPLE COLLECTION SITE 
 
JETPUR (CETP in Gujarat) 
Geographically Jetpur lies in the heart of Saurasht ra. Arabian see covers 
Saurashtra from west and south side; w here as Gulf of Kutch is on north and 
Gulf of Khambhat to the s outheast. This rise in popu lation in last decade has 
indicated rapid industrialization of th is town of Rajkot district. The 
industrialization is due to one major in dustry - textiles. There are around 200 
dyeing and printing units in  the town having an aver age annual turnover of 
more than Rs 150 crore. In  addition, there are around 500 ancillary units all of 
which combine to pro duce, on an average, two mill ion meters of printed cloth 
per day which is enough to make 40,000 cotton saris. 
 
Water pollution is the major ecological threat that Jetpur faces. The river 
Bhadar which turned seas onal with the construction of a dam upstream has 
now turned red due to the untreated ef fluents from dyeing  units which are 
emptied into the river (Figure 1.4 to 1.7). The chemicals used for printing 
saris have sunk deep into the soil and has even killed the grass," says a 
leader of town Dh oraji, downstream of Jetp ur, who has been leading an 
agitation for clean water. Water in Jetpur and nearby  villages/towns is highly 
contaminated. 
 
After various court cases and agitations, the high court ordered closure of 
certain units that were polluting the water and the Gujarat Pollution Control 
Board (GPCB) ordered construction of a common effluent treatment plant. 
The plant, however, had only a limited  capacity against a huge daily 
discharge. Few units are willing to spe nd on effluent treatment processes and 
state bodies are reluctant  to order units to shut  down fearing large-scale 
unemployment.  
 
Short falls in design and construction part:  Influent characteristics and 
hydraulic load are not repres entative of actual design cr iteria. For example, in 
Vapi, Gujarat, the design concentration of  influent COD is 1000mg/l but actual  20influent concentration of COD is more than 3000mg/l. Many important 
parameters like NH3 – N, Phenol and other toxicants including heavy metals 
were not included into the design aspe cts of CETP, resulting in improper 
treatment and noncompliance of prescribed norms. Toxi c effluents some time 
destroy whole biomass of CETP. 
 
Short falls in operation and maintenance part: Jetpur CETP plant receives 
70% industrial effluent from member units  and 30% city sewage. At the time of 
inspection of the plant by Gujarat Poll ution Control Board in January 2005, the 
treated effluent was not meeting the standards  in terms of BOD, COD, TSS, TDS 
and NH3-N. CETP does not have laborator y facility. The effluent collection 
system is not fool proof. [Performance stat us of common effluent treatment plant, 
CPCB Report October 2005,] 
 
                            21 
 
 
 
Figure 1.4: The untreated effluent is taken to CE TP located 2 km far from industrial area in 
Jetpur. The bridge is constructed in Bhadar River. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1.5: Blockage of canal with waste and leak age/overflow of untreated effluent directly into 
the Bhadar River. 
 
    22 
 
 
 
Figure 1.6: Untreated, highly colored and polluted effluent finding its way in river. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1.7: Effluent collected and deposited in Bhadar River. 
 
    23 
 
 
  
3 
 
Isolation, Screening and Identif ication of Dye Decolorizing 
Bacteria 
 
INTRODUCTION  
The treatment of textile effluent containing dye has been carried out by various 
physical and chemical methods over the last two decades for the removal of 
color from waste water. These methods  have limited applicability as they are 
expensive and lead to the production of so lid waste. The treatment processes 
are based on the microorgani sms capable of decoloriz ing or degrading these 
recalcitrant compounds. These biological processes are environmental friendly 
and can lead to complete mineraliz ation of xenobiotic compounds. 
 
Over the past decade, many  organisms capable of dye decolorization at lab 
scale have been reported, but t here are few reports avail able on their exploitation 
in treatment processes. The most widely studied white-rot fungus, in this regard 
is Phanerochaete  chrysosporium  (Reddy, 1995). Efforts to isolate bacterial 
culture capable of degrading azo dyes started in  the 1970s with reports of a 
Bacillus  subtilis  (Horitsu et al. , 1977). Bacterial isolates  from soil and sludge 
sample belonging to Bacillus  sp. Alcaligenes  sp. and Aeromonas  sp. were found 
to have high dye decolorization ability (Sharma and Saini, 2004). Cynobacteria like Gloeocapsa pleurocapsoides  and Phormidium ceylanicum  decolorized Acid 
Red 97 and FF sky Blue dye more than 80% after 26 days (Parikh and 
Madamwar, 2005). Decolorization of Direct ye llow and Erio red dy es by bacterial 
and actinomycetes were studied by Wa ffa and Moawad, 2003. Other reports  24suggested that Pseudomonas sp. (Kothari, 2002) Escherichia  coli, sulfate 
reducing bacteria (Yoo, 2002) are efficient  dye decolorizer. The effectiveness of 
these treatment systems depends upon the survival and adaptability of 
microorganisms during the tr eatment processes.  
 
This part of the study was undertak en to isolate microorganisms capable of 
decolorization/degradation various  textile azo dyes used in  industry situated in 
central Saurashtra region.  The use of is olated bacteria either individually or as 
consortium was envisaged to develop efficient biological process for the 
treatment of effluents c ontaining different dyes. 
 
                                25MATERIALS AND METHOD 
 
Sample Collection 
Samples were collected from in and ar ound Jetpur Common Effluent Treatment 
Plant. Samples were collected from differ ent places, such as drainage canal that 
carry textile effluent to CETP located about 2 km far from  dying industries, 
various stages of CETP, and soil samples of agriculture field where treated 
effluent is used for irrigation. Sample s were in the form of liquid untreated 
effluent, treated effluent, sludge, and soil. All the samples were collected in 
sterile glass-screw cap t ubes and preserved at 4oC in refrigerator and samples 
were tested within 24 hrs of collection. 
 
Physico-chemical charact erization of samples 
The effluent samples, mainly before treat ment and after treatment were tested for 
its physico-chemical characteristics like, color, pH, COD, BOD, TSS, TDS, etc. 
 
Dyes  
All azo dyes including Remazol black B, sky blue FF, Green  
B, Black E, Black BT, Reactive Orange H 2R, and Reactive Orange M 2R were 
procured from local dye manufacturing un it GIDC, Ahmedabad. The main dye in 
this study Reactive Black 5 also know n as Remazol Black B has H-acid core 
molecule with two vinylsulphon e groups in its structure (Figure 1.1).  All other 
chemical for preparing various media we re purchased from Hi-media Pvt. Ltd. 
Mumbai, SRL India.  
 
Chemicals 
The Mineral Salt Medium  (MSM) consisted of (g l-1) Na 2HPO 4 . 7H2O 3.6; 
(NH 4)2SO 4 1.0; KH 2PO 4 1.0; MgSO 4 1.0; Fe(NH) 4 citrate 0.01; CaCl 2 . 2H 2O 0.1; 
and 10 ml of trace element  solution per liter. T he trace element solution 
contained (mg l-1): ZnSO 4 . 7H 2O 10; MnCl 2 . 4H 2O 3; CoCl 2 . 6H 2O 1; NiCl 2 . 
6H2O 2; Na 2MoO 4 . 2H 2O 3; H 3BO 3 30; CuCl 2 . 2H 2O 1. The pH of the medium 
was adjusted to 7. 
  26Complete Medium Broth  used for decolorization study contained:(g l-1); 
Peptone 5; Yeast extract 3;  glucose 2; NaCl 5; K 2HPO 4 5; KH 2PO 4 1; MgSO 4 . 
7H2O 0.1. The pH of the medi um was adjusted to 7.0. 
 
Enrichment and isolation of dye decolorizing bacteria 
All samples were used for isolation of dye decolorizing bacterial cultures by 
enrichment culture techniques using MSM supplemented with glucose (0.2 % 
w/v) and yeast extract (0.2 % w/v) contai ning mixture of two azo dyes (RB5 and 
Reactive Orange M2R) with the final  dye concentration of 100 mg l-1. The 
enrichment was carried out in 200 ml MS M medium in 500 ml Erlen-meyer flask 
by adding 10 ml, 1g, and 10 ml of effluents, sludge, and soil suspension, respectively. The culture flasks were inc ubated on orbital shaker with 120 rpm, at 
30
oC. After every 3rd days of incubation (i) a loop-f ull of medium was streaked 
onto sterile nutrient agar plates and incubated at 37oC for 24 to 48 h, and (ii) 1 ml 
of the enriched culture was transferred to fresh medium. Such serial transfers 
were performed till 7 days. At  the end of incubation 1ml of sample was serially 
diluted from each flask and plated on the agar medium with same concentrations 
of ingredients. The pure cultures of indi vidual bacterial strains were maintained 
by streaking on nutrient agar slant and stored at 4oC, as well as in 40% glycerol 
stored at -20oC. 
 
Screening of dye decolorizing bacteria 
The thirty seven morphologically distinct bacterial isolate were tested for their 
ability to decolorize textile azo dyes. Over night grown culture of these 37 isolates 
were use to inoculate with 1ml in 250 ml  Erlenmeyer flask containing 100 ml 
CMB supplemented with Reactive Black 5 and Green B (100 mg l-1) dye. The 
inoculated flasks were incuba ted under static conditions.  2 ml sample was taken 
out aseptically and centri fuged at 6000 rpm for 15 min. The cell free supernatant 
was used to determine the percentage deco lorization of the added dye.  Six 
morphologically distinct bacterial isolat es showing more than 60% decolorization 
of the added dye were selected for further studies. 
 
  27Growth and colony characteristics 
Growth curve pattern for all the 37 ba cterial isolates were carried out by 
inoculating loop full culture into Nutri ent broth medium. Cultures were grown 
overnight in CMB medium and next day a loop-full young culture was transferred 
to CM agar plates and slants. They were incubated at 37oC for 24 h. 
 
Gram reaction and cell morphology 
Gram’s staining of the 24 h ol d cultures of all the isolates was performed to study 
Gram reaction and the cell morphology. 
 
Biochemical tests 
All required media for biochemical tests we re prepared in respective, test tubes, 
flasks, and petri dishes. Reagents required for different biochemical tests were 
prepared and stored at 4oC in refrigerator. Overnight grown cultures of all 37 
isolates were inoculated 10 µl  in media and incubated at 37oC for 24 hrs. 
 
DNA extraction PCR amplification of 16S r RNA gene 
The PCR primers used to amplify 16S rDNA  fragments were the bacteria-specific 
primers (Lane, 1991) a forward prim er F27 (5’-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-
3’); and a reverse primer R1492 (5’-AT AGGYTACCTTGTTACGACT-3’).  A total 
of 25 µl of reaction mixture consisted of 10 pmol of each  primer, 5 ul from colony 
suspension as template DNA, 12.5 µl of Master mix (Fermentas, UK). The PCR 
amplification was performed by Thermal Cycler (ABI, USA) using the following 
program: Denaturing at 95°C for 5 minutes, followed by 30 cycles of 30 seconds 
of denaturing at 95°C, 30 seconds of  annealing at 50°C and 2 minutes of 
elongation at 72°C with a fina l extension at 72°C for 10 minutes for first set. The 
PCR product (1400 bp) was cleaned by usi ng a Qiagen DNA Gel Extraction Kits 
(QIAGEN, CA) in accordance with the directions of the manufacturer.  
 
Sequencing 
Sequencing was performed (purified PCR product) by using above primer  
(above pcr conditions) with an ABI Pr ism 310 Genetic analyzer (Applied  28Biosystems Inc., CA) using BigDye Te rminator (version 3.1) at Animal 
Biotechnology laboratory, AAU, Anand, Gujarat, India. 
 
Phylogenetic analysis and Sequence Analysis 
The 16S rDNA sequences were init ially analyzed at NCBI server 
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.org ) using BLAST tool and corresponding sequences 
were down loaded. Evolutionary history was inferred using th e Neighbor-joining 
method (Patil et al. , 2008). The tree was drawn to the scale, with branch lengths 
in the same units as t hose of the evolutionary di stance used to infer the 
phylogenetic tree (Dhanve et al. , 2009). 
 
Assay of decolorization 
Decolorization activity was expressed in  terms of percentage decolorization and 
was determined by monitoring the decreas e in absorbance at absorption maxima 
(λmax) of respective dyes (i.e. 598 for Reactive Black 5 and 634 for Green B). The 
uninoculated CMB supplemented with respec tive dye was used as reference. 
The culture suspension was centrifuged at  6,000 rpm for 15 mi n for removal of 
the biomass. The degree of dec olorization of the tested  dye was measured at its 
respective maximum absorbance waveleng th using supernatant by UV-visible 
spectrophotometer (1800, Shimadzu, Japa n). The biomass was determined by 
resuspending the biomass palate in 2 ml  sterile distilled water and at λ 660nm. The 
decolorization assay was calculated according to the following formula. 
 
Decolorization activity (%) = (A-B)/A x 100 
Where    A = initial absorbance 
  B = Observed absorbance    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  29RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Physico-chemical characteriz ation of collected samples 
The samples were collected in sterilized co ntainer from respective sites (Figure 
2.1 to 2.4). The color, temperature and pH of the sample were recorded on the 
site and samples were transported to  the laboratory by storage at 4oC. Other 
physico-chemical characteristics like BOD,  COD, TSS, TDS etc. were measured 
on the same day of collection of sample as per table 2.1. The raw sewage was 
dark green in color because of the types of dyes generally used. 
 
As the stages of treatment progressed, the color of effluents changed from dark 
green blue-light green- light yellow and fi nally light brown. The green and bluish 
color of the incoming effluent is due to wide use of green an d blue color dye in 
dyeing and printing industries, thus, it c ontributes more to the effluent’s color 
compared to other dyes. The light brown colo r of the finally released effluent after 
treatment may be due to the dirty wate r condition. The pH of the untreated 
effluent was 9.8, which reduced during treatment to near neutral 7.8.  
 
Table 2.1: Characteristics of samples collected  from different stages of CETP, Jetpur.  
 
SI 
 Sample 
 Nature 
of 
Sample Color 
 pH 
 BOD 
(mg/l)  COD 
(mg/l)  TSS 
(mg/l)  TDS 
(mg/l)
1 Inffluent - 
drainage line Liquid Dark Green 
to Blue 9.8 398 1692 223 2930 
2 Oil and Grease 
separated Liquid Light green 9.5 331 1734 119 2201 
3 
 After PAC & 
PE treatment 
(after chemical 
mixing) Liquid 
 Light 
Yellowish 
 8.2 
 290 
 1324 
 109 
 2016 
 
4 After aeration 
(Effluent) Liquid Light Brown 7.8 80 421 78 1817 
 
 
    30 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Aeration tank for treatment of effluent (CETP, Jetpur, Gujarat) 
 
  
 
 
Figure 2.2: Sample collection from sludge bed (CETP, Jetpur, Gujarat) 
 
   31 
 
Figure 2.3:  Treated effluent storage - used for ag ricultural irrigation (CETP, Jetpur, Gujarat) 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4: Samples collected before and after treatment of textile effluent (CETP, Jetpur, 
Gujarat)  
 
Isolation and screening of bacterial strains 
The selective enrichment of liquid effluent, sludge, and soil sample collected from 
the CETP and waste disposal sites, led to the isolation of  37 morphologically 
different bacterial isolates. Gram strain of  all isolates indicated the presence of 
20 Gram positive and 17 Gram negative organisms (Figure 2.5). The pure 
cultures were preserv ed on N-agar medium at 4oC. All 37 isolates were tested 
individually for their ability to decol orize RBB and Green B separately at the  32concentration of 100 mg l-1 each (Table 2.2). All isolates decolorize both the dyes 
with different capacity ranging fr om lowest 3% to highest 97% in case of Reactive 
Black 5 and 3% to 92% in case of Green B.  
 
Six potential isolates namel y; JTP-5, JTP-13, JTP- 23, JTP-30, JTP-32 and JTP-
37 showed good decolorizatio n efficiency in RB5 and Gr een B, were tested for 
their ability to degrade other dyes namel y FF sky blue, Black BT, Black E, and 
Reactive orange M 2R. The dye concentration in e ffluent from text ile printing 
house is approximately in the range of 50 to 200 mg l-1. This value is typical of 
those used in studies on treatment for azo dye containing effluent (Zhao and 
Hardin, 2007).  However, change in oper ating processes may lead to still high 
concentration of dye in effluent. Keeping in mind the above fact, we used 100 mg 
l-1 dye concentrations to check their ability to decolorize different dyes.  
  
Decolorization of FF sky Blue was ar ound 99% by JTP-13 and JTP-30. JTP-23, 
JTP-37, JTP-32 and JTP-5 decolorized th is dye at, 77%, 54%, 35% and 24%, 
respectively. The dye that has been mainly studied, Reactive Black 5, was decolorize more than 70% by all the isolates whereas this dye was decolorize up 
to 98% by JTP-23, the most studied orga nism in this study.  The lowest and 
highest decolorization of different dyes by  selected organisms were in the range 
of 59% to 92% for Green B, 25% to 86% for Black E, 6% to 69% for Black BT, 
and 23% to 94% for Reactive Orange M
2R (Figure 2.6). The difference in 
decolorization pattern is due to the dissim ilarity in specificities, structure and 
complexity, particularly on the nature and pos ition of substituent in the aromatic 
rings and the interaction with azo bond wit h different dyes as reported by many 
authors (Sani and Benerjee,  1999; Radha and Ra ghupati, 2005; Vijaykumar and 
Vaishampayan, 2007). 
 
The isolation of different microorganisms from the sample indicates the natural 
adaptation of microorganisms to survive in the presence of toxic dyes. The 
difference in their rate of decolorization may be due to the loss of ecological 
interaction, which they might be shari ng with each other under natural conditions. 
(Sharma and Saini, 2004).  33 
43%
8% 3%16%
30%
Gm +ve  rod shaped Gm +ve short rod shaped Gm +ve cocci shaped
Gm -ve rod shaped Gm -ve short rods
 
Figure 2.5: Diversity of bacterial isolates at CETP, Jetpur, Gujarat 
  
Table 2.2:  Decolorization of RB5 and GB by bacterial isolates JTP-1 to JTP-37 (Dye 100 mg l
-1) 
 
RB5 Green B  RB5 Green B Bacterial 
isolates Decolorization 
(%) Decolorization 
(%)  Bacterial 
isolates Decolorization 
(%) Decolorization 
(%) 
JTP-1 64 53  JTP-21 14 17 
JTP-2 24 17  JTP-22 33 21 
JTP-3 12 9  JTP-23 98 92 
JTP-4 11 20  JTP-24 43 38 
JTP-5 85 90  JTP-25 5 3 
JTP-6 56 62  JTP-26 47 45 
JTP-7 23 14  JTP-27 3 5 
JTP-8 3 9  JTP-28 5 3 
JTP-9 23 30  JTP-29 4 3 
JTP-10 16 7  JTP-30 88 73 
JTP-11 7 9  JTP-31 2 2 
JTP-12 7 10  JTP-32 83 59 
JTP-13 73 82  JTP-33 2 5 
JTP-14 51 62  JTP-34 13 21 
JTP-15 9 5  JTP-35 9 17 
JTP-16 35 69  JTP-36 34 12 
JTP-17 28 38  JTP-37 74 80 
JTP-18 12 7     
JTP-19 17 10     
JTP-20 19 9     
  34 
                 
 
         
 
   35Growth and morphological characteristics 
Growth curve was obtained for all the 37  bacterial isolates. Wide variation in 
curve patterns was found indicating diversifi ed bacterial species in  textile effluent. 
JTP-5 and JTP-7 showed rapid biomass synthesis, JTP -13 and JTP-32 had 
moderate biomass synthesis, while JTP- 30 and JTP-37 had co mparatively long 
lag phase as compare to other po tential organisms (Figure 2.7). 
 
The Gram’s staining indicat ed that out of 37, Gm +ve rods - 16, Gm +ve short 
rods - 3, Gm +ve cocci - 1, Gm -ve rod - 11 and Gm -ve short ro d - 6 (Figure 2.6).  
The additional information from  Gram staining was in th e form of cell morphology 
and arrangement. The growth pattern of t hese isolates on nutrient agar slant was 
filiform, echinulate and arboescent wit h moderate or large growth abundance 
(Table 2.3 ). It was found that most of the or ganisms were of rod shaped including 
short and big rods (Figure 2.8). The potent ial dye decolorizers were found in, Gm 
+ve and Gm -ve group. 
 
When organisms were grown on N-agar pl ate, there was characteristics 
pigmentation of colonies like white, dirty white, gray, light yellow and light brown. 
Two isolates JTP-16 and JTP-17 were f ound to produce dark pigmentation of 
yellow and red, respectively (Figure 2.9). Size of coloni es varied from small to 
moderate to large having smooth or rough texture with even, uneven, wavy 
filamentous margins and circular, rhiz oid and irregular forms (Table 2.4). 
           36 
                 
 
             37 
                 
 
             38 
                 
 
           
  39Table 2.4: Colony characteristics of dye decoloriz ing bacterial isolates on Nutrient agar 
 
Colony characteristics 
Isolates 
Size Shape Margin Elevation Surface 
texture Consist
ency Opacity Pigmen-
tation 
JTP-1 M Round Irregular F Rough B TL LC 
JTP-2 M Round Even Low Convex Smooth B TL DW 
JTP-3 L Irregular Uneven Flat Smooth B OP White 
JTP-4 L Round Entire Flat Smooth B OP DW JTP-5 L Round Entire Flat Rough B OP LY JTP-6 S Round Irregular Convex Rough Solid OP LY JTP-7 S Round Even Convex Smooth B OP DW JTP-8 L Uneven Radiating Flat Rough B TL DW 
JTP-9 L Round Uneven Flat Smooth B OP DW 
JTP-10 S Round Entire Flat Smooth B OP DW JTP-11 L Round Even Flat Smooth B TL LC JTP-12 M Round Entire Low Convex Smooth B OP DW JTP-13 L Round Radiating Flat Rough B OP DW JTP-14 M Round Entire Low Convex Smooth B TL DW 
JTP-15 S Round Even Low Convex Smooth B TL DW 
JTP-16 B Round Lobed Convex Rough B OP Red JTP-17 S Round Entire Convex Smooth B OP Yello JTP-18 M Round Entire Convex Smooth Gummy OP DW JTP-19 S Round Entire Flat Smooth B OP White JTP-20 L Irregular Uneven Flat Rough B OP White 
JTP-21 L Irregular Uneven Flat Rough B OP LC 
JTP-22 M Irregular Uneven Flat Smooth B OP DW JTP-23 S Round Even Low Conv ex Smooth Watery TP NP 
JTP-24 M Irregular Lobed Flat Rough B OP LY JTP-25 S Irregular Uneven Flat Rough B OP NP 
  40Table 2.4: Colony characteristics of dye decolorizing (Continued) 
 
Colony characteristics 
Isolates 
Size Shape Margin Elevati-on Surface 
texture Consist
ancy Opacity Pigment-
ation 
JTP-26 M Round Entire Flat Smooth B OP NP 
JTP-27 M Round Raised Flat Rough B OP NP 
JTP-28 M Round Uneven Flat Rough B OP NP JTP-29 L Round Radiating Flat Rough B OP DW 
JTP-30 L Round Uneven Flat Smooth B OP DW 
JTP-31 S Round Entire Convex Smooth B TL NP JTP-32 M Round Even Flat Smooth B OP L.Brown JTP-33 M Round Uneven Convex Smooth B OP DW JTP-34 L Irregular Uneven Flat Rough B OP LC JTP-35 M Regular Even Flat Smooth B OP NP 
JTP-36 S Round Even Flat Smooth B OP LC 
JTP-37 S Round Even Convex Smooth Gummy TL DW 
 
S, small; M, Moderate; L, Large; B, Buterious; G, Gray; DW, Dirty White; LY, Light Yellow; LC, 
Light Cream; NP, No Pigment; TL, Translucent; TP, Transparent; OP, Opaque 
 
 
 
 
          41 
                 
 
             42 
                 
 
             43Biochemical Tests 
Thirty seven bacterial isolates were c onsidered for their characterization, based 
on Gram’s reaction, cell morphology, colony  characteristics, growth patterns in 
nutrient broth and biochemical  tests. Table 2.5 and T able 2.6 show results of 
various characters studied. JTP-8,  JTP-11 and JTP-23 produce gas and H 2S 
while growing on TSI. JTP-2, JTP-4, JT P-9, JTP-10, JTP-16,  JTP-27, JTP-28, 
and JTP-29 produced acid present in TSI which is evidenced b conversion of slants from red to yellow.  From the analyzed characters, the isolates were 
tentatively identified up to generic levels (Table 2.7). The result showed that 
many of them occurred comm only in such environment.   
  
16S rDNA sequencing Phylogenetic analysis  
16S rDNA sequences were determined for three different bacterial isolates 
namely, JTP-07, JTP-23 and JTP-37. Thes e sequences were submitted to NCBI. 
To analyze the phylogenetic position, t he 16S rDNA sequence of the strain JTP-
07 (530 bp, GU137541), JTP-23 (530 bp,  GU172172) and JTP-37 (516 bp, 
GU137542) were determined. Figure 2.10 s howed the phylogenetic relationship 
between the isolated bacterial strains and other related bacteria found in the 
GenBank database. The homology indicate d that the strain JTP-07, JTP-23 and 
JTP-37 were in the phyloge netic branch of the genus Alcaligenes, Lysinibacillus , 
and Pseudomonas , respectively. These isolates were identified as Alcaligenes  
faecalis  JTP-07, Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
JTP-37. 
 
         44 
                 
 
             45 
                 
 
             46 
                 
 
             47 
                 
 
             48 
 HQ113218 (Alcaligenes faecalis strain CL-10.3a)
 HQ238868 (Alcaligenes sp. F1)
 JF264463 (Alcaligenes aquatilis strain Z1B-22)
 HQ692905 (Alcaligenes faecalis strain OCEN2DBT)
 JF698681 (Alcaligenes sp. qdp0501)
 Alcaligenes faecalis JTP-07 
 HQ455035 (Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain MSSRFV258)
 HM598414 (Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain SRM1)
 HQ455021 (Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain MSSRFV66)
 HQ236544 (Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain BHUJY25)
 Pseudomonas auroginosa JTP-37
 AB627905 (Pseudomonas sp. Horo_43)
 HQ259954 (Lysinibacillus fusiformis strain R2) 
 GQ480504 (Lysinibacillus sp. xfqu3)
 Lysinibacillus fusiformis JTP-23
 GQ280035 (Lysinibacillus fusiformis strain BJ-25)
 FJ237498 (Lysinibacillus boronitolerans)10066
100
100
22
14
6416
0.05 
 
 
Figure 2.10: The evolutionary history was infe rred using the Neighbor-Joining method. The 
percentage of replicate trees in  which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap 
test (1000 replicates) are shown next to t he branches. The evoluti onary distances were 
computed using the Maximum Composite Likeli hood method and are in the units of the 
number of base substitutions per site. All positions containing gaps  and missing data were 
eliminated from the dataset (Complete del etion option). Phylogen etic analyses were 
conducted in MEGA4. The scale bar  represents 5% sequence divergence  
 
      49Table: 2.7 Tentative identification of all 37 is olated bacteria on the basis of morphological, 
cultural, and biochemical test. 
 
Isolate Identification Isolate Identification 
JTP-1 Pseudomonas sp. JTP-20  Bacillus sp. 
JTP-2 Acetobacter JTP-21 Pseudomonas sp. 
JTP-3 Bacillus sp. JTP-22 Bacillus sp. 
JTP-4 Bacillus sp. JTP-23 Lysinibacillus sp. 
JTP-5 Lysinibacillus sp. JTP-24 Bacillus sp. 
JTP-6 Bacillus sp. JTP-25 Bacillus sp. 
JTP-7 Alcaligenes sp. JTP-26 Xenthomonas sp. 
JTP-8 Escherichia sp. JTP-27 Bacillus sp. 
JTP-9 Bacillus sp. JTP-28 Agrobacter sp. 
JTP-10 Xenthomonas sp. JTP-29 Lactobacillus sp. 
JTP-11 Staphylococcus sp. JTP-30 Lysinibacillus sp. 
JTP-12 Actinomycetes sp. JTP-31 Pseudomonassp. 
JTP-13 Bacillus sp. JTP-32 Lysinibacillus sp. 
JTP-14 Enterobacter sp. JTP-33 Azatobacter sp. 
JTP-15 Azatobacter sp. JTP-34 Bacillus sp. 
JTP-16 Pseudomonas sp. JTP-35 Escherichia sp. 
JTP-17 Staphylococcus sp. JTP-36 Pseudomonas sp. 
JTP-18 Lysinibacillus sp. JTP-37 Pseudomonas 
JTP-19 Bacillus sp.   
 
CONCLUSION 
Textile effluent and sludge produced by effluent  treatment plant is  rich source of 
dye decolorizing bacterial population. To tal 37 isolates were selected on the 
basis of their Gram reaction, colony c haracteristics, growth curve pattern, and 
cell morphology. Samples contain both the types of organisms, Gm +ve and Gm –ve with dominated Gm +ve species. Initially , all 37 isolates were tested for their 
ability to decolorize two azo dyes, Reactive Black 5 and Green B. Then, six potential isolates were sele cted on the basis of their dy e decolorizing ability and 
further tested with FF sky Blue, Black E, Black BT and Reactive Orange M
2R. 
Differences in structures and complexity of  the dye led to vari able percentage of 
decolorization of different dyes by the same organism.  50 
    
4 
 
Influence of environmental param eters on the process of dye 
decolorization by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Dyes released from the textile processing  and dyestuff industries result in the 
increase of organic load of the natural reservoirs (Dhanve et al. , 2009). The 
effluents from these industries are comple x; contain a wide variety of dyes and 
other products such as disp ersants, acids, bases, salt s, detergents, humectants, 
oxidants etc. A very small amount of dye in water (10 to 50 mg l-1) affects the 
aesthetic value, transparency, and gas solubility of water bodies (Banat and 
Nigam, 1996).  
 
A lot of information is available on t he removal and degradation of Remazol black 
B using pure strains of bacteria,  fungi, algae and yeast  including Shewanella 
strain  J18143, Rhizopus  arrhizus , P. chrysosporium , Chlorella vulgaris , Candida 
tropicalis  and Saccharomyces cerevisiae  (Akshu and Tezer, 2000; Swamy and 
Ramsay, 1999; Akshu and Donmez, 2005). U nder aerobic conditions, most azo 
dyes are not degradable by bacteria. Ho wever, under anaerobic conditions, the 
azo linkage in the dye molecule can be reduced to form colorless aromatic 
amines which are occasionally toxic and carcinogenic (Zimmerman and Kulla, 
1982). The diverse group of anaerobic bact eria contributes to the anaerobic 
decolorization of azo dy es via reduction of azo bonds to produce colorless  51metabolites (kim et al. , 2007). Under anaerobic conditions, azo dyes act as 
terminal electron acceptors during microbial respirations (Ramalho et al. , 2004). 
 
The pH has major effect on the efficien cy of dye decolorizat ion, and the optimal 
pH for color removal is often between 6 to  10 for most of the dyes. However, the 
decolorization rate decreases under extr emely alkaline pH (>pH 12) and under 
acidic pH (<pH 6). Azo dyes inhibit nucle ic acid biosynthesis and cell growth, so 
dye tolerance is also an important consi deration for industrial applications (Chen 
et al., 1999). Kapil kumar et al. (2009) tested various initial concentrations of dye 
ranging from 25 to 300 ppm and found that percentage removal of dye 
decreased with an increase in dye concentration. 
 
Various physical and chemical met hods have been studied for degradation of 
Remazol Black B (Vinodgopal et al. , 1998). In biological pr ocess, to maintain 
purity of culture in large sca le as well as their inabilit y to degrade all different 
dyes present in the actual effluent ar e the major drawbacks for it application. 
 
In the present study, attempt has been made for the degradation of an azo dye 
(Reactive Black 5) using a potential dye decolorizer Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-
23, isolated from effluent contaminated si te. Effect of various parameters, such 
as pH, temperature, initial dye concentration, static and shaking culture condition, 
size of reaction mixture, etc. have bee studied  
 
     
.  
 
      52MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Dyes and Chemicals 
Reactive Black 5, an azo dye was procur ed from local manufacturer located at 
GIDC, Ahmedabad. All chemical used were of highest pur ity or analytical grade, 
obtained from recognized chemical supplie rs. All other chemical for preparing 
various media were purchased from Hi-me dia Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai, and SRL India. 
Complete Medium Broth used for decol orization study consisting of (g l-1); 
Peptone 5; Yeast extract 3;  glucose 2; NaCl 5; K 2HPO 4 5; KH 2PO 4 1; MgSO 4. 
7H2O 0.1. The pH of the medi um was adjusted to 7.0. 
 
Preparation of dye solution 
Reactive black 5 is acidic and soluble in water. A st ock solution of 1000 ppm was 
prepared and autoclaved. Solu tion of the desired concentrations was obtained by 
successive dilution.  
 
Determination of bacterial growth 
(i) Biomass (dry weight, g/l): 2 ml of culture was taken in pre-weighed 
Eppendroff tubes and  centrifuged at 10,000 rp m for 15 min to separate 
biomass. It was washed thrice , supernatant discarded and tube was 
allowed to dry at 60oC.  
(ii) Turbidometric analysis: Biomass was separated by centrifugation at 
6000 rpm for 15 min. pallet was washed (3x), resuspended in equal volume DW and measured for OD at 660nm. 
 
Effect of physico-chemical parame ters on decolorization of azo dyes 
Decolorization of azo dye by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  strain JTP-23  was studied. 
The effect of initial dye concentration (100 – 1000 mg l-1), Inoculums size (2, 5, 8, 
10 and 15 % v/v), pH (4 – 11) and temperatures oC (10, 20, 30, 35, 40, 50) on 
decolorization process was studied.  
 
A working volume of 100 ml CMB medium in 250 ml Erlen-meyer flask was employed through out the study unless ot herwise stated. The culture was grown 
overnight in CMB to obtain optical density of 0.5 at λ
660nm. The reaction medium  53was inoculated with 5% v/v in 100 ml of CMB containing 100 mg l-1 RB5 unless 
otherwise stated. The flasks were kept  in incubator and orbital shaker 
respectively, for static and shaking conditions at 37oC .  I n  c a s e  o f  a n o x i c  
reactions, 33 ml CMB medium was filled in 35 ml glass serum tubes with air tight 
cap containing 100 mg l-1. The pH of the medium was adjusted to 4, 5,6,7,8,9,10, 
and 11 with the help of ster ile 1N HCl and 1N NaOH. In case of temperature 
effect on decolorization, the flasks were incubated at (oC) 10, 20, 30, 35, 40 and 
50 temperatures.  For studying effect of  initial dye concentration, dye aliquots 
were added in the medium so  as to get final concentr ation of 100, 200, 300, 400, 
500, 750, and 1000 mg l-1. Overnight grown culture of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  
JTP-23 was used as an inoculum. Differe nt flasks were inoculated with fixed 
volume in the range of 2, 5, 8, 10 and 15 % v/v. Uninoculated controls were also 
included to check abiotic decolorization of azo dye. The effect of static, shaking, 
and anoxic condition on decolorization we re examined by incubating flasks.  
 
COD analysis 
The culture was observed for the change in  Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) at 
different time interval during decolori zation. COD was determined by standard 
procedures (APHA, 1992). To study the e ffect of aeration on COD reduction, the 
culture medium was subject ed to sequential Static and Shaking culture condition. 
The experiment was carried out in triplicate. 
 
Analytical method 
At different time intervals, the samples were collected from reaction mixture and 
centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 15 min to s eparate biomass. The concentration of 
dye in the supernatant  was determined by abs orbance at 598nm. The 
absorbance was compared with standard curve plotted using different 
concentrations of the dye. The meas urement of absorbance was made by 
Simadzu UV-1800 spectrophotometer. 
 
    54RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Effect of incubation conditions 
As per Xu et al.  2006, 2007, the highest biomass was obtained in aerobic 
condition, while the fastest color removal was observed in anoxic condition. After 
4 hrs incubation, 49 % dye was decolorize d under anoxic condit ion while 3% and 
23% decolorization was observed under aerobic and microaerophilic (static) 
cultural conditions respectively (Figure 4.1). In both micro aerophilic and aerobic 
conditions, the presence of oxygen wo uld normally inhibit the activity of 
decolorization, result ing in less efficien cy of color removal ca pacity by the same 
organisms (Meiying and Guop ing, 2007). Complete removal of dye was observed 
by the organism at 12 hrs and 16 hrs incubation under anox ic and static condition 
respectively, while in aerobic condition on ly 31% decolorization was observed at 
24 hrs incubation. High dye removal ca pacity was observed even with less 
biomass that occurred in anoxic condition indicating the condition most favorable 
for dye decolorization (Figure 4.2).  
 
Change in COD 
Figure 4.3 illustrated dec olorization of dye and reduction in COD during 
sequential static-shaking condition. The results showed that majority of the 
decolorization was obtained during static culture condi tions, while the COD was 
reduced under shaking culture conditions. T he initial COD load of the reaction 
flasks consisting of 100 mg l-1 dye was 2000 mg l-1. After 24 hrs incubation under 
static culture condition 98% dye was decol orized without significant reduction in 
COD.  After 24 hrs, the decolorized samp le was subjected to shaking culture 
conditions and COD reduced to  1493, 1054, 428, 349 mg l-1 at 30, 36, 42, and 48 
hrs, respectively. The COD of medium control was 337 mg l-1. Thus, the COD 
load exhibited due to RB5 was completely removed during shaking flask culture. 
 
    55020406080100
4 8 12 16 20 24
Time (hrs)Decolorization (%)
Shaking Static Anoxic
 
Figure 4.1: Effect of cultural conditions on  the decolorization of Reactive Black 5 by Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  strain JTP-23 
 
  
020406080100
0 4 8 1 21 62 02 4
Time (hrs)Dye concentration (mg/l)
00.511.52
Biomass dry weight (g/l)
Shanking Static Anoxic Shaking Static Anoxic
 
Figure 4.2: Comparison of shaking, static and anoxic conditions on the cell growth and dye 
removal capacity of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  strain JTP-23. Open symbols indicates biomass and 
closed ones dye concentration. 
 
   56020406080100
0 6 12 18 24 30 36 42 48Time (hrs)Dye concentration (mg/l)
05001000150020002500
COD (mg/l)
Dye COD
 
Figure 4.3: Dye decolorization and corresponding COD removal in static (upto 24 hrs) followed by 
shaking condition by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  strain JTP-23  
 
Effect of dye concentration 
In order to study the effect of initia l concentration of Reactive black 5, the 
experiments were carried out at a fixed bi omass (5% inoculums v/v) at different 
dye concentrations (100, 200,  300, 400, 500, 750 and 1000 mg l-1) for different 
time intervals (12 , 24, 36 , and 48 hrs) at 35oC under static cu lture condition. 
Figure 4.4 demonstrate the effe cts of initial dye concentr ation on decolorization. 
The decolorization at the lowest (100 mg l-1) and highest dye concentration (1000 
mg l-1) was 99% and 57%, respectively. 
 
The higher concentration of azo dye inhibits  nucleic acid biosynthesis and cell 
growth (Chen et al. , 2003), so the effect of dye concentration on growth of 
organisms is an important consideration for its field application. The dye 
concentration in effluent from textile printing house is appr oximately 200 mg l-1. 
This value is typical of those used in studies on treatment fo r azo dye containing 
effluent (Zhao and Hardin, 2007). At concentrations up to 200 mg l-1, up to 85% 
decolorization of azo dye within 12 hrs of  incubation was observed. On extended 
incubation, up to 48 hrs, 97% decolorizatio n was observed. In case of 300, 400,  57500, 750 and 1000 mg l-1 dye concentrations, the decolorization achieved was 
87, 85, 82, 78 and 57%, respectively. Khehra et al.  (2005) suggested that the 
decrease in decolorization efficiency might  be due to the toxic effect of dyes. 
Initial concentration provides an important  driving force to overcome all mass 
transfer resistance of the dye between th e aqueous and solid phases (Parshetti 
et al. , 2006) 
 
Effect of pH 
The pH tolerance is an important cons ideration for industrial applications 
because processes using reactive azo dy es are usually performed under alkaline 
conditions (Aksu and Tezer, 2005). The experiment was performed in 150 ml Erlen-meyer flasks containing 50 ml CMB medium. It was observed that the 
percentage of dye decoloriz ation varied with change in pH  of the medium (Figure 
4.5). Although decolorization rate peaked around pH 9 at 6 hrs, the organism 
decolorized more than 85% of the dye by  incubation up to 24 hrs on wide range 
of pH (6-10). However, organism showed very poor decolorization at the pH 4 
and 5 with 1% and 22% level, respectively  (Figure 4.6). No growth was observed 
at pH 4 and only limited growth was ob served at pH 5. These observations 
indicated that the organi sm can treat basic dyeing waste water at normal 
operational pH and decrease the co st of acidification (Ayed et al.,  2009). Figure 
4.7 depicted the effect of various pH  on decolorization process under anoxic 
condition. Under static condition Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 showed 
reduced decolorization of 87 and 48% at pH 10 and pH 11, respectively; while 
under anoxic conditio n the organism showed increas ed decolorization of 100% 
and 93% at pH 10 and pH11. At lower pH values, the H
+ ions compete effectively 
with dye cations, causing a dec rease in color removal e fficiency. Furthermore, at 
high pH, the surface of biomass gets negatively charged, which enhance the 
positively charged dye cations through elec trostatic force of attraction (Lamia et 
al, 2009). 
 
   58Effect of temperatures 
The mesophilic range is traditionally us ed since it is generally thought that 
maintaining high temperature would be uneconomical, while  dye degradation 
within the psychrophilic range  is too slow (Varel et al. , 1980). In order to 
determine the optimum temper ature, decolorization assa y were performed over 
10 - 50oC temperature range. Figure 4.8 show s that the decolorization rate 
increases with increase in temperature from 10oC to 35oC. At 40oC there was not 
much adverse effect on the decolorization. At 50oC, the decolorization ability was 
sharply reduced to 24% (Figure 4.9). Bi omass also increased with increase in 
temperature from 10oC to 35oC. At 10oC and 50oC the percentage decolorization 
was almost similar but biomass was nearly double at 50oC as compared to 10oC. 
The biomass at 20oC and 50oC were 0.5 and 0.6 g l-1, while decolorization was 
66% and 24%. This might have occurre d due to adverse effect of high 
temperature on the enzymatic activities (Cetin and Donmez, 2006).   
    
 
                    59 
 
 
020406080100
0 1 02 03 04 05 0Time (hrs)Decolorization (%)
100 mg/l 200 mg/l 300 mg/l 400 mg/l
500 mg/l 750 mg/l 1000 mg/l
 
 
Figure 4.4: Effect of different concentration of RB 5 on process of decolorization by Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23 
  
020406080100
0 6 12 18 24
Time (hrs)Decolorization (%)
pH 4 pH 5 pH 6 pH 7 pH 8 pH 9 pH 10 pH 11
 
 
Figure 4.5: Effect of various pH  on decolorization of RB 5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
under static culture condition.  
  60 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4.6: Effect of different pH on decolorization of RB 5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
under static culture condition 
  
 
 
020406080100
0 6 12 18 24Time (hrs)Decolorization (%)
pH 4 pH 5 pH 6 pH 7 pH 8 pH 9 pH 10 pH 11
 
Figure 4.7: Effect of different pH on decolorization of RB 5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
under Anoxic culture condition. 
 
  61 
  
020406080100
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (hrs)Decolorization (%)
10 oC 20 oC 30 oC 35 oC 40 oC 50 oC 
 
Figure 4.8: Effect of temperatur es on decolorization of RB 5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
under static culture condition. 
  
 
    
276698 99
87
24
0.30.51.41.6
1.5
0.6
020406080100
10 oC 20 oC 30 oC 35 oC 40 oC 50 oCTemperature oCDecolorization (%)
00.511.52
Biomass (g/l)
 
Figure 4.9: Effect of temperatur es on biomass and decolorization by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-
23. Multicolor bars - Decolorization, Black bars – Biomass. 
 
  62Effect of initial bacterial biomass 
To estimate the optimum initial biomass of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  strain JTP-23, 
for 100 mg l-1 dye concentration, different i noculum sizes were applied. The 
results indicated that, under static cultural condition, the dye removal capacity 
remained unaffected by any of the inoculum  size used. The rate of decolorization 
was almost similar with any size of the inoculum used. Similar pattern was 
observed by Sani and Banerjee (1999)  who reported that there was no 
proportionate increase in decolorization with increase in inoculum size of Kurthia 
sp. for the treatment of t he textile effluent. Under ano xic conditions different 
inoculum gives different rate of decolor ization of RB 5 (Figure 4.10 and 4.11). 
When inoculum size was 2%, decolorizati on was 81% and 99% at 12 hrs and 24 
hrs, respectively. In case of 15% i noculum, decolorization was 44% and 70% at 
12 hrs and 24hrs, respectively. In anoxic condition it was observed that as the 
inoculum was increased, there was decreas e in decolorization rate. So, highest 
decolorization was achieved with the lowest  inoculum size. This observation was 
contradictory to a report where dye removal capacity increased significantly with 
the increase in initial biomass (Lamia et al. , 2009, Kothari, 2006). 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  64Effect of aeration and vo lume of reaction mixture 
The decolorization of Reactive Black 5 in  static and shaking cu lture condition in 
combination with different volume of media (25ml, 50ml, 75 ml, 100ml) was 
studied. Data shown in Tabl e 4.1 proves that lower decolourization was exhibited 
in shacked culture compared to static cult ure conditions. In all volumes studied, it 
was observed that highest decolorization was achieved with static condition. In 
case of 50, 75, and 100 ml, 95% or more  decolorization was achieved in 12h 
incubation in static condition. For 50 rpm in shake flask culture, 20%, 24%, 25%, 
and 25% decolorization was observed fo r 25, 50, 75, and 100 ml volumes, 
respectively. Similar results were obs erved for 100 rpm shake flask culture. 
Figure 4.12, suggests that dec olorization performance of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  
JTP-23 was better in low oxygen content. This could be due to competition of 
abundant oxygen and the az o compounds for the reduced electron carriers under 
aerobic conditions (Mona and H onda, 2008). It is report ed by other authors that 
to achieve an effective color removal ag itation and vigorous  aeration should be 
avoided (Chen and Huang, 1999; Khehra and Saini, 2005).  
 
Table 4.1: Effect of different reaction volume  and cultural condition of  RB5 decolorization by 
Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23. (dye concentration 100 mg l-1)   
 
Decolorization (%) Volume 
(ml) Cultivation condition
4h 8h 12h 16h 20h 24h 
25 ST  42 68 85 90 96 98 
 SH 50 rpm 6 9 12 15 19 20 
 SH 100 rpm 6 8 10 14 18 22 
50 ST  46 79 95 95 97 99 
 SH 50 rpm 5 8 11 14 22 24 
 SH 100 rpm 5 9 11 16 19 25 
75 ST  49 78 95 98 98 100 
 SH 50 rpm 8 8 13 16 24 25 
 SH 100 rpm 8 10 13 17 22 27 
100 ST  52 83 97 99 100 99 
 SH 50 rpm 7 10 12 14 26 25 
 SH 100 rpm 7 11 13 18 25 35 
 
ST, Static condition; SH, Shaking condition 
 
  65 
 
              
Figure 4.12: Effect of reaction volume and cu ltural condition on decolorization of RB5 by 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23. a. static condition, b. shaking condition. 
 
Decolorization of Black E 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 was tested for its ability to decolorize different 
dyes as mentioned ahead. T he organism was added in the flask containing 100 
ml of CMB medium and screw  cap tube containing 33 ml CMB medium with final 
concentration of 100 mg l-1 Black E dye. After 5 hrs incubation, the floccules of 
dye were observed, and the color of t he supernatant turned lighter. As the 
incubation time extended, more floccule s were formed and precipitated at the 
bottom of the container (Figure 4.13).  
 
 
Figure 4.13: Decolorization of Black E by Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23. Dye solution 
(flocculation) after 5 hrs incubation. 
  66CONCLUSION  
Various aspects of environmental and cu ltural parameter were studied for 
decolorization of Reactive Black 5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23. The 
results indicated that the new species had high capacity for rapid decolorization 
of azo dyes. Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 being aerobic organisms produces 
abundant biomass under shak ing condition, but deco lorization capacity was 
sharply reduced under this condition. Anoxic condition produced less biomass with fastest decolorization process. Ma ximum decolorization was observed in 
static condition, while COD was decreas ed in subsequent shaking condition. 
Further, it observed that with increas ing dye concentration, efficiency of 
decolorization decreased. 
 
 
The suitable initial pH for decolorization of  RB 5 was in the range of 6 to 9 under 
static condition and 6 to 10 under anoxic condition. Optimum temperature for 
decolorization process was 30-35oC. Results on the effect of size of inoculum 
indicated that under anoxic condition smalle st of size 2% v/v was ideal for rapid 
decolorization of RB 5 dye.  
 
Textile industries use wide variety of stru cturally different dyes, so effluents are 
extremely variable in dye composition. T herefore, treatment of such effluent and 
decolorization of dye is difficult (K othari, 2006). Wide range of pH, salt 
concentrations and heterogeneous hazardous c hemical substances often add to 
the difficulties in its treatment. 
 
The newly isolated organism  Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 decolorize dye very 
efficiently in different cult ural and environmental condition.  Therefore, this culture 
can be used on large scale application fo r the treatment of  textile effluent. 
  67 
    
5 
 
Influence of Nutritional Parameters on Dye Decolorization by 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23  
 
INTRODUCTION  
The textile industry is major user or wa ter, starting from washing raw wool or 
manmade fiber production up to garment manufacturing. Waste water may be 
defined as utilized water that is l oaded with many dissolved and suspended 
waste from residential, commercial, agric ultural and industrial establishments. 
Sometimes wastewater contains num erous pathogenic organisms including 
organisms from human origin. Numerous organic materials with nutritive value 
can stimulate growth of undesired aquatic organisms. T herefore, effective and 
economical waste water treatment facilit y is required to overcome health and 
environmental hazardous problems (Kothari et al. , 2006; Banat et al., 1996; 
Brown and Laboureur, 1983; Br own and Vito, 1993).  
 
Treatment of effluents c ontaining dye has been conv entionally carried out by 
physical or chemical methods , but these methods are of  limited applicability. The 
treatment system based on microorganisms capable of  decolorizing/degrading 
these recalcitrant compounds are envir onmental friendly an d can lead to 
mineralization of target com pound (Sharma and Saini, 2004). 
 
Bacterial decolorization of azo dyes under aerobic conditions usually results in 
adsorption of dyestuffs on bacteria, ra ther than oxidati on (Pagga and Brown, 
1986). White rot fungi can decolorize and d egrade wide variety of azo dyes with 
the help of extracellular degradative enzymes (Glenn and Gold, 1983). It is  68difficult to keep bacteria in functional form in activated sludge system, because of 
their special nutritional requirement  and environment conditions (Kapdan and 
Kargi, 2000). 
 
In last few years, several organisms have been found to decolorize and degrade 
azo dyes up to mineralization level. T he bacterial metabolism of azo dyes is 
initiated by reductive cleavage of azo bond,  resulting in the formation of amines. 
These reductive processes have been stud ied in some aerobic bacteria, which 
grow on azo compounds. It is effective me thod to add some specific substrate to 
induce bacterial decolorization of azo dyes. Dong et al.,  (2003) found that 
decolorization of Reacti ve brilliant blue by Rhodocyclus  gelatinosus  XL-1 was 
greatly enhanced with increas e in peptone concentration in reaction medium. It 
has been observe that increasing yeast ex tract concentration resulted in higher 
decolorization rates (Chen et al. , 2003). Glucose has been added to enhance the 
decolorization of various dyes in some studies (Haug et al. , 1991; Kapdan et al. ) 
 
Reactive dyes are highly soluble in wa ter due to high degree  of sulfonation and 
non-degradable under typical aerobic condition found in conventional biological 
treatment system. Lot of information about the transformation of azo compound 
is available, while relati vely limited is known about the transformation of complex 
reactive textile azo dyes, despite their applications being increased due to the 
worldwide increase in cotton use.  
 
In the present study, the decolorization of textiles azo dyes was studied in 
presence of various nutrients, such as carbon sources and nitrogen sources. 
Various concentrations of salt and gluc ose were examined fo r their effect on 
decolorization. Different or ganic and inorganic nutritional  factors have remarkable 
effect on decolorization of dye. Plackett-Burman experimental design was 
applied as a tool for optimizing bacterial decolorization proc ess and to test the 
relative importance of various  organic and inorganic variables. 
    69MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Dyes and Chemicals 
Reactive Black 5, an azo dye was procur ed from local manufacturer located at 
GIDC, Ahmedabad. All chemical used were of highest pur ity or analytical grade, 
obtained from recognized chemical supplie rs. All other chemical for preparing 
various media were purchased from Hi-me dia Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai, and SRL India. 
Complete Medium Broth used for cu ltivation of selected bacteria and 
decolorization study consisting of (g l-1); Peptone, 5; Yeast extract, 3; glucose, 2; 
NaCl, 5; K 2HPO 4, 5; KH 2PO 4, 1; MgSO 4. 7H 2O, 0.1. The pH of the medium was 
adjusted to 7.0. 
 
The composition of Mineral Salt Medium was as per chapter 2 and preparation of 
dye solution as described in chapter 4.  
 
Determination of bacterial growth 
(i) Viable count: Standard method of  viable count was performed to 
quantify number of cell to be used as i noculum of the r eaction mixture.  
(ii) Turbidometric analysis: Biomass was separated by centrifugation at 
6000 rpm for 15 min and the pallet was washed with sterile normal 
saline (3x), resuspended in equal volume of DW followed by the  measurement of  absorbance at 660nm. 
 
Effect of Carbon and Nitrogen sources on Decolorization 
Mineral Salt Medium was used along with 200 mg l-1 yeast extract and 100 mg l-1 
RB5 for studying effect of various car bon and nitrogen sources of the process of 
dye decolorization. Carbon sources like lactose, tryptone, starch, glucose, 
dextrin, sucrose and maltose were ster ilized (10 psi 10 min) separately and 
added in the reaction mixtur e with final concentration of 1%. The medium was 
inoculated with 2% v/v 18 hrs old cult ure containing appr oximately 1.3 x 1010 
cells ml-1. In case of nitrogen sources, (NH 4)2SO 4 was replaced by peptone, 
yeast extract, meat extract, ammonium ni trate, sodium nitr ate, pep. nitrate, 
ammonium sulfate with 1% concentration in  final reaction mixture. Experiments  70were carried out in flask containing 100 ml medium and inc ubated in static 
conditions at 35oC.  
 
Effect of Salt and Glucose concentrations on decolorization  
Effect of different salt  concentrations on the gr owth of the organisms and 
decolorization was studied by using differ ent sodium chloride concentrations: 0.2, 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7.5 and 10% in complete me dium broth. The change in color of the 
mediumand growth of bacte rial biomass was observed at 598 nm and 620 nm, 
respectively at different time interval. St udy of such effect has been also reported 
earlier (Salah et al.,  2007; Dhanve and Kalyani, 2009). Anoxic cultural condition 
was also tested by using 35 ml  screw cap glass serum tubes. 
 
Most of the organisms prefer glucos e as a source of carbon. Various 
concentrations of glucose: 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2 and 3% were tested for its effect on the 
process of RB5 dec olorization by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 under both 
static and anoxic conditions.  
 
Influence of HgCl 2 and preadaptation on decolorization 
250-ml EM flasks containing 100 ml CMB devoid of MgSO 4 were autoclaved 
(121oC, 20 min). Appropriate amount of  sterile stock solution of HgCl 2 was added 
to get 0 to 10 mg l-1 concentration in the reaction mixture with Reactive Black 5 
(100 mg l-1). These flasks were inocul ated with 2% inoculum ( ca. 1.3 ×1010 
cells.ml-1) and incubated at 37oC. Inoculated and un-inocul ated controls were 
also included. Samples were harvested at specified time intervals and analyzed.   
 
Reaction mixture flasks were  inoculated with e qual volume of cu ltures grown in 
presence and absence of dye in two diffe rent flasks to check the effect of 
preadaptation of the organisms to dye for its decolorization.  
(i) Pre-adapted cells preparation: Ce lls were harvested after 12 h 
incubation, in CMB medium su pplemented with RB 5 (100 mg l-1), by 
centrifugation and resuspending t hem in sterile normal saline.  71(ii) Non-adapted cells preparation: Cells were harvested after 12 h 
incubation, in CMB m edium without any dye,  by centrifugation and 
resuspending in sterile normal saline. 
 
Media optimization  
In order to approach a near optimal respons e region of the medi um ingredients, a 
fractional factorial Plackett - Burman design was applied (Mona et al. , 2008). In 
this experiment, seven independent variables were screened in eight combinations organized as per Plackett – Burman matrix.  All variables were 
tested in two concentrations, high level (+) and low level (-). Trials were performed in duplicate and results were treated as the responses. The main 
effect of each variable on decolorizati on was determined using the equation: 
E
xi = (Σ M+1 – Σ M -1) / N 
Where, E xi  = Variable main effect 
            M +1 = Calculated decolorization percentage recorded by trail which 
                       contains high level (+). 
            M -1 = Calculated decolorization percentage recorded by trail which 
                       contains low level (-). 
            N    = Number of trails divided by 2. 
 
A main effect figure with a positive sign indicted that the high concentration of 
this variable is close to its optimum c oncentration in media,  while a negative sign 
indicated that the low concentration of this variable is near to the optimum 
concentration.  
 
Analytical method 
At different time intervals, the samples were collected from reaction mixture and 
centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 15 min to s eparate biomass. The concentration of 
dye in the supernatant was determined by reading absorbance at 598 nm by Simadzu UV-1800 UV-visible spectrophotometer. To monitor adsorption of dyes, 
the cell pellets after centrifugation were  resuspended in an equal volume of 
methanol to extract the dye. The su spension was mixe d thoroughly and 
centrifuged at for 15 min at 10000 rpm. The supernatant  was again examined at 
λ
max of respective dye (Khera et al., 2005). Uninoculated control flasks as control 
were kept to record dye removal if any.  72RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
 
Effect of Carbon and Nitrogen sources on decolorization of RB5 
An attempt was made to test  decolorization of RB5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  
JTP-23 under influence of various car bon and nitrogen sources. The importance 
of carbon source to achieve successful decolorization could be inferred from 
Figure 5.1a and 5.1b. The organism was able to grow on all tested carbon 
sources but its decolorization activity was observed to be influenced by the type 
of Carbon sources.  Decolorization activity  at 12 h under static  condition was in 
the range of 19-24 % for starch, sucrose and maltose, while in the range of 52-
72% for lactose, tryptone, glucose and dex trin. At the end of 36 h incubation, 
more than 90% decolorization was achieved  in all tested car bon sources except 
starch and sucrose that could decoloriz e 55% and 63%, respectively. Extended 
incubation up to 48 h resulted in complete removal of dye in lactose, tryptone, 
glucose, dextrin and maltose. 
 
The potential of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 to decolorize RB5 dye with 
glucose as carbon source and various nitr ogen sources is depicted in Figure 5.2a 
and 5.2b. Organism growing on these medi a decolorized 38-86% dye in the first 
12h in the presence of all nitrogen sources. Peptone was the best nitrogen 
source that yielded highest, 86%, decolorizat ion at 12 h, whil e Yeast extract and 
meat extract were better nitrogen s ources with around 75% decolorization. 
Complete removal of dye was observed in  all tested nitrogen source at 48 h 
except ammonium nitrate. 
 
Effect of salt and glucose conc entrations on decolorization of RB5  
Satisfactory growth and decolorization was observed upto maximum of 5% salt 
concentration in CMB medium  under static condition (Table 5.1). At salt 
concentrations higher than 5%, there was sharp reduction in biomass and 
decolorization capacity of Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 (Figure 5.3a, 5.3b). 
Halophilic bacteria have also  been reported to decolorize azo dye under high salt 
conditions (Guo et al. , 2007). Anoxic cultural condition  results were quite similar  73to static condition (data not shown). Exposure of microorganism to high salt 
concentration may cause plasmolysis and/or loss of activity of cells. 
 
Earlier reports on decolorization on dye dec olorization indicated the necessity of 
glucose to enhance the dec olorization process (Swamy and Ramsay, 1999; 
Kapdan and Kargi, 2000). Fi gure 5.4 illustrates t he results of glucose 
concentration on decolorization under stat ic condition. The reaction mixture 
without glucose achieved only 45% decolor ization as compared to 0.2 and 0.5% 
glucose concentrations, with nearly 100% de colorization under static condition, 
indicating glucose being unavoi dable ingredient fo r the effective treatment of dye 
effluent. Similar results were reported by Mona et al., 2008, where removal of 
glucose from the basal medium inhibi ted the decolorization performance of 
Bacillus subtilis  HM by almost 55% compared to c ontrol. As glucose increased to 
1% and above, the decolorization effici ency was reduced to less than 20%.  
 
Decolorization process was enhanced at all glucose concentra tions under anoxic 
conditions. Under this condition, reaction without glucose gave increased decolorization upto 90% as compare to 45%  under static condition. 2% and 3% 
glucose also give good decolorizati on of 75% and 87%. Methanol extract of 
centrifuged biomass was colorless indi cating no adsorption or absorption 
occurred and color removal was due to decolorization of dye. 
 
             74 
                 
 
             75 
                 
 
             76Influence of HgCl 2 and Pre-adaptation of cells on decolorization 
Microbial enzymes can be permanently inactivated by HgCl 2 (Chen et al. , 1999). 
The purpose for this experiment was to study  the effect of various concentrations 
of HgCl 2 on the process of Reactive  Black 5 decolorization by Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23. Decolorization activity was decreased with increased in HgCl 2 
concentration (Figure 5.5). The dye wa s completely decolorized in HgCl 2 
concentration 0, 1, 2 and 3 mg l-1 in 18, 36, 75 and 125 hrs, respectively. 
Concentration of HgCl 2 higher than 4 mg l-1 did not give considerable 
decolorization even on extended incubat ion up to 125 hrs (Figure 5.6).  
 
The properties of enzyme that mediat es dye decolorization are diverse 
(Zimmermann et al. , 1982; Ramalho et al. , 2002). This study aimed at evidences 
regarding the constitutive or inducible  nature of the enzyme involved in 
decolorization. The decolorization rate s by cells pre-adapted to the dye were 
compared with those cells grown in medi um without a dye, but otherwise of 
identical composition. The results in figure 5.7 clarify indicated that decolorization 
of RB 5 was mediated by the constituti ve enzymes and there was no significant 
difference in decolorization pattern with pre-adapted and non-ad apted cells of 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23.  
 
020406080100
0 5 10 15 20 25
Time (hrs)decolorization (%)
Preadapted non-adapted
 
 
Figure 5.7: Effect of pre-adapted cells on the process of RB5 decolorization by Lysinibacillus 
fusiformis  JTP-23 under static culture condition 
 
  77 
                 
 
             78Optimization of media for RB5 decolorization by Plackett – Burman design 
In order to determine the effect of nutri tional factors on dye dec olorization and to 
overcome their negative interactions, a st atistical design was carried out. Plackett 
– Burman design (Plackett and Burman, 1946) was constructed to determine the 
nutritional requirements for color remo val (Table 5.2). Reactive black 5 
concentration was treated as a constant factor (100 mg l-1), that is in the range of 
dye concentration usually found in dye house effluent (Nigam et al. , 2000). 
 
The main effect of variable was calculat ed according to RB5 decolorization by 
Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 under anoxic and static cultural conditions 
(Figure 5.3). Increasing c oncentrations of peptone, KH 2PO 4, MgSO 4 and NaCl 
had positive effect on RB5 decolorization u nder anoxic condition, while, glucose, 
K2HPO 4 and yeast extract had negativ e effect.  Glucose and K 2HPO 4 had 
positive effect on decolorizat ion under static culture c ondition. This trend was in 
agreement with other researchers (Mona et al. , 2008; Radha et al. , 2005). 
 
Table 5.2: Plackett - Burman design for high level and low level of variable in different trials 
Trial G P K2 K Mg Na YE 
1 + + + - + - - 
2 + + - + - - + 
3 + - + - - + + 4 - + - - + + + 5 + - - + + + - 6 - - + + + - + 7 - + + + - + - 8 - - - - - - - 
 
According to data obtained, it can be pred icted that the near optimal medium for 
RB5 decolorization by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 can be formulated by 
taking higher concentrations of the variab les that show positi ve effect and lower 
concentrations of variable that shows negative effects on dye decolorization 
process (Figure 5.8). Thus, optimized medi a for anoxic culture condition could be 
as follow, (g l-1): glucose, ; peptone, ; K 2HPO 4, ; MgSO 4, ; KH 2PO 4, ; NaCl, ; and  79yeast extract, . Optimized media for stat ic culture condition could be formulated 
as follow, (g l-1): glucose, ; peptone, ; K 2HPO 4, ; MgSO 4, ; KH 2PO 4, ; NaCl, ; and 
yeast extract. 
 
Table 5.3: Assigned concentrations of variable at different levels of the Plackett-Burman design 
for seven factors. 
 
Variable Symbol Level (g l-1) Main Effect 
  Low (-) (regular) High (+) Anoxic 
culture Static 
culture 
Glucose G 1 2 3 - 4.75   9.00 
Peptone P 2 5 8   18.75   12.5 
K2HPO 4 K2 1 3 5 - 5.25   3.00 
KH 2PO 4 K 0.5 1.0 1.5   5.25 - 3.50 
MgSO 4.7H 2O Mg 0.05 0.1 0.15   1.25   3.50 
NaCl Na 2 5 8   5.25   8.25 
Yeast Extract YE 1 3 5 - 3.25 - 4.00 
 
A verification experiments was performed to evaluate the unoptimized (CMB) 
versus the optimized medium . The data obtained revealed that the decolorization 
process was fast and almost 100 % decolor ization achieved in 8 hrs incubation 
for optimized media, instead of 12 hrs incubation in unoptimized media under 
anoxic condition. Similar resu lts were observed in static  culture condition with 4 
hrs reduced time required to achieve comp lete decolorization as compared to 
unoptimized media.  
 
  
 
      80 
                 
 
             81CONCLUSION  
Various nutritional parameters were examined for their effect on decolorization of 
RB5 by Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23. Analysis of carb on sources showed that 
lactose, tryptone and glucose were most  suitable. Organic ni trogen sources in 
the form of peptone, yeast extract and meat  extracts were most appropriate as 
compared to other inor ganic nitrogen sources. 
 
Decolorization of dye was almost unaffect ed under different salt concentrations. 
Salt at higher than 5% (w/v) had negativ e effect on the biomass synthesis and 
there was sharp reduct ion in the decolorization. It was observed that glucose was 
unavoidable in small amount for better decol orization. However, the increased 
glucose concentrations retarded the decolorization process. 
 
Metals are commonly found in waste wa ter from dying industry. At high 
concentrations of HgCl 2, microbial enzymes are inactivated (Chen et al. , 1999). It 
was observed that increased concentrati on of metal reduced decolorization 
efficiency. Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 did not display any advantage of 
previous exposure to the dye for decolorizat ion, indicating the constitutive nature 
of the enzymes involved in the process.  
 
Analysis of Plackett-Burman statistical design for the determination of optimum 
nutritional requirement for the decolor ization revealed that peptone favored 
decolorization. Glucose and K 2HPO 4 exhibited negative effect on the 
decolorization under anoxic condition, but both showed positive main effect 
under the static culture condition.  
 
There are few reports on the biological dec olorization and degra dation of textile 
and dyestuff industrial wastes containing azo dyes. The reports so far available 
are on a small scale and no large scale data on biologi cal decolorization and 
degradation is availabl e (Kothari, 2006). Biological tr eatment is the only way for 
ultimately controlling pollution generate by textile and dyes stuff industries. 
However, further research would be r equired to develop a viable alternative 
process for the treatment  of dye wastewaters.  82 
Our isolate Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 decolorized Reactive Black 5 and 
other textile dyes optimally  under employed nutritional  parameters: sources of 
carbon and nitrogen, glucose and salt concentrations  and presence of heavy 
metals. Thus, the isolate displayed potent ial ability to decolor ize various textile 
dyes under varied cultivation conditions.   83 
    
6 
Treatment of Azo Dye Mixtures by Single Bacterium/ 
Consortium and Evaluat ion of Phytotoxicity  
 
INTRODUCTION  
Industrial effluents show a complex compos ition that is extr emely variable even 
within the same factory. Thus decolour ization of real effluents requires an 
appropriate choice, perhaps a consortium of  bacterial strains in conjunction with 
operative conditions. Real textile dye e ffluents contain not only dyes but also 
salts, sometimes at very high ionic st rength and extreme pH values, chelating 
agents, precursors, by-products and surfact ants. Thus, in spite of high efficiency 
of dye decolorization by so me selected strain, decoloriz ation of real industrial 
effluent is quite troublesome (Faraco and Pezzella, 2009). 
 
Biological processes present  eco-friendly and cost com petitive alternatives to 
abiotic treatment. However, the presence of  azo, nitro and sulfo groups make the 
dyes more resistant to microbial degr adation and their residues accumulate in 
nature (Joe et al. , 2008). Nevertheless there hav e been numerous attempts to 
develop biological processes for the treat ment of textile effluents using bacteria, 
fungi and enzymes (Banta et al. , 1996; McMulla et al. , 2001; Wesenberg et al. , 
2003). White rot fungi that produce lignolytic enzymes, su ch as lignin peroxidase, 
manganese peroxides and laccase have been studied extensively because of 
their ability to degrade various organic compounds (Fu and Viraraghvan, 2001). 
 
Decolorization of azo dyes normally begin s with initial reduction cleavage of azo 
bond anaerobically, which result s in colorless but toxic ar omatic amines. This is  84followed by complete degradation of ar omatic amines strictly under aerobic 
conditions (Kothari, 2006). T herefore, anaerobic/aerobic processes are crucial for 
complete mineralization of azo dyes. Ho wever, not all bacteria have both 
anaerobic and aerobic properties . Usually consortia are routinely used for the 
degradation of azo dyes. 
 
Recent research has exposed the survival  of wide variety of organisms in mixed 
culture capable of decolorizing a wide range of dyes. The complexity of the 
microbial consortium enables them to ac t on a variety of po llutants. Microbial 
consortia are usually used without a nalyzing the constituent microbial 
populations for environmental  remediation (Mohorcic et al. , 2004). 
Bioremediation relies on the pollutant degrading capaciti es of naturally occurring 
microbial consortia in which bacteria pl ay central role (Liu and Suffita, 1993; 
O’Neill et al. , 2000). Several bacteria capable of dye decolorization either 
individually or in consor tia, have been reported (Patil et al. , 2008). 
 
Many reports indicate that textile i ndustry effluent have toxic effect on the 
germination rates and biomass concentration of several plant species which play 
important ecological functions such as pr oviding the habitat for wildlife, protecting 
soil from erosion and provid ing huge bulk of organic matter that is significant to 
soil fertility (Wang, 1991). The toxicity of effluent is because of the presence of 
dye or its partially degraded product which are mutagenic or carcinogenic 
(Kalyuzhnyi and Sklyar, 2000). Therefore the treatment of textile industry 
becomes necessary prior to their final discharge to the environment (Kumar and 
Dastidar, 2009). 
 
The present study deals with studies on the Reactive Balck 5, Black E, and Green B decolorization by individual bacte rial strains as well as consortium. 
Assessment of the toxicity of Reactive Black 5, Black BT and Green B dyes as 
well as its degradative metabolites was ca rried out by phytotoxicity studies. 
    85MATERIALS AND METHOD 
 
Dyes 
Five commercially available textile azo dy es Reactive Black 5, Green B, Black 
BT, Black E and FF sky blue we re obtained from local textile dye manufacturing 
unit at GIDC Ahmedabad. The chemical struct ure of dyes used in this study is as 
per Figure 6.1. 
 
Decolorization of mixed azo dyes 
Decolorization of mixture of three azo dy es Reactive Black 5, Green B and Black 
E was investigated. Each of the dye was added with t he concentration of 33 mg l-
1 with 100 mg l-1 of total dye concentration in r eaction mixture. In another set of 
experiment five azo dyes Reactive Bla ck 5, Green B, Black E, Black BT and FF 
Sky Blue was added 20 mg l-1 each dye with final conc entration of 100 mg l-1. 
Individual bacterial isolate or its consortium was o ffered for decolorization of dye 
mixture. Decolorization processes were  monitored according to the method 
reported by Harazono and Nakamura ( 2005) with slight modification. Dye 
concentration was measured at selected diffe rent visible wavelengths (400, 450, 
500, 550, 600, and 650 nm). ΣOD of mixed azo dyes was calculated as the sum of 
absorbance at each wavelength and color re moval (%) was calculated as the 
extent of decrease from  the initial value of ΣOD. The reaction was also monitored 
at the absorbance maximum of each dye (Liu et al.,  2007). 
 
Development of bacterial consortium 
Selected organisms namely; JTP-5, Alcaligenes  faecalis  JTP-07, JTP-13, 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23, and JTP-30 were se lected to develop consortia 
for decolorization. To develop a consor tium, bacterial isolates were grown 
individually overnight and added in equal proportion to get 5% inoculum in 
reaction mixture.  Bacteria l isolates were mixed in different combinations and 
their ability to decolorize Reactive Bl ack 5 and Black BT was studied. Biomass 
was determined as mentioned in chapter 4. 
 
  86Dye decolorization experiments 
Decolorization of azo dyes was studi ed under static and  shaking culture 
conditions at 30oC in 250 ml Erlen-meyer fla sks containing 100 CMB medium. 
Azo dyes either single or mixture were added in the r eaction mixture with final 
concentration of 100 mg l-1. Aliquots (3 ml) from ea ch reaction flasks were 
withdrawn at regular intervals as indicat ed in the legends to respective figures 
and centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 15 min. The cell-free supernatant was analyzed 
for residual dye content. 
 
Decolorization of industrial effluents 
Industrial effluent containing a mixture of various textil e dyes was obtained from 
a drainage line taking effluents to Comm on Effluent Treatment Plant in Jetpur 
(Figure1.5). The effluent was centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min to remove 
insoluble materials (Joe et al.,  2008). This supernatant was used in place of 
water for preparation of CMB. After adjus ting to pH 8 with 1 N HCl, the medium 
was sterilized by passing through 0.45 um membrane filter. 250 ml EM flask containing 100 ml medium was inoculated with 5% overnight grown culture of 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 and incubated at 30
oC under static – shaking 
sequential culture condition.   
 
Analysis of decolorization 
The content of residual dye and perc ent decolorization was determined as 
described in chapter 2. Spectral analysi s of the samples was performed using 
UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (Simadzu UV-Vis 1800, Japan). Samples withdrawn 
at 0 h were used as control. 
 
Phytotoxicity  study  
The effect of original dye and its degr adative metabolite on germination and early 
seedling growth of two plants; Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  mungo  was 
evaluated. The degradation me tabolites of Remazol Bla ck 5, Green B, and Black 
BT were extracted in ethyl acetate were dried and dissolved in water to form the 
final concentration of 1000 ppm. The dy e solutions were also prepared with 
concentration of 1000 ppm fo r phytotoxicity studies.  87  
The seeds were germinated in sterile 10 cm petri dishes, layered with sterile filter 
paper. Seeds were sterilized as describ ed earlier (Somasegaran and Hoben, 
1985) before transferring to the surfac e of the paper in petri dish. The 
phytotoxicity study was carried ou t at room temperature (32 ± 2oC) in relation to 
Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  mungo  seeds (10 seeds per plate) by watering 
separately 5 ml samples of dye and its degradation produ ct per day. Seeds 
germinated in water irrigated petri dish were  used as a control. Length of plumule 
(shoot), radicle (root) and germination (% ) were recorded after every alternate 
day. 
                       88 
        
  Reactive Black 5    Green B 
 
         
    Black E  
 
    
 
  
         Black BT 
 
     
N NN N NaO3S
OHSO3Na
HO
H2N
SO3NaNH2H3CO SH
NaO3S 
Sky Blue FF 
 
Figure 6.1: Chemical structures of  azo dyes used in this study. 
 N N NaO 3S
OH
NNH 2
NaO 3S NSO2CH2CH2SO3Na
SO2CH2CH2SO3NaN N HO3S
OH
NNH2
HO3S NN N
HO
NO2
N N
SO3HOH NH2
HO3SN N
N
N
H2NNH2
N N
N N SO3H
HO
H2NHO 3S
HO 3SOH
NH 2 89RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
 
Decolorization of mixed azo dyes 
As shown in the Figure 6.2, bacteri al isolates JTP- 05, JTP-13, and Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23 were able to degrade mixture of  azo dyes to different extent. It 
is clear from the data that all the thr ee dyes (RB5, GB and BE, each at 33 mg l-1) 
were decolorized simultaneously. Percentage of color removal by JTP-05, JTP-
13, and Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 was 58, 42, and 92% at 24 h incubation 
and on extension of incubati on, it reached up to 78, 49 and 92%, respectively. In 
order to see the combined effect of all three organisms on decolorization of 
mixture of azo dyes, a consortium wa s prepared and it was found to give 
complete removal of dye mixture in 24 h incubation. 
 
As Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 removed more than 90% color within 24 h 
incubation, it was tested wit h mixture of five different  azo dyes (RB5, GB, BE, 
BBT and FFSB, each 20mg l-1). Results indicated that as the complexity of the 
dye mixture increased, there was dec rease (86%) in dye decolorization 
efficiency. Biomass synthesis was also affected in the presence of five dye 
mixture, though the final dye concent ration was the same (Figure 6.3). 
 
Decolorization by bacterial consortium  
Bacterial isolates used to develop c onsortium consisted of both type of 
organisms JTP-05, JT P-13, JTP-30, and Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 (four 
were Gm +ve) and Alcaligenes  faecalis  JTP-7, JTP-30 (two were Gm-ve) and 
was found to degrade the individual and mi xture of azo dye by cometabolism.  
The degradation of in dividual dye Reactive Black 5 and Black BT (concentration 
100 mg l-1) using different mixture of organi sms were carried out under static 
culture and shaking culture condition. 
 
When combination of two bacterial isolat es (JTP-23 and JTP- 5, JTP-23 and JTP-
7, JTP-23 and JTP-13, JTP-23 and JTP- 30) was employed, decolorization 
achieved was more than 99% with no re markable difference in decolorization  90pattern under static condition  (Figure 6.4), while less decolorization was achieved 
65, 11, 84, and 63 % respectively under s haking culture condition (Figure 6.5). 
 
Combination of three bacterial isolat es did not showed any improvement in 
decolorization pattern. Decolorization of R eactive Black 5 in case of consortium 
(JTP-23, JTP-5, and JTP-13) and (JTP- 23, JTP-13 and JTP-30) was more than 
99% under static culture condition, wh ile 83 and 76% under shaking culture 
condition, respectively. 
 
In next set of experiment, Reactive Blac k 5 dye was replaced by Black BT and 
the consortiums used as above. Results of these experiments are depicted in 
Figure 6.6 and 6.7. There are instanc es when the dye decolorization was 
inhibited at certain stage due to the accumulation of products formed upon 
decolorization (Kothari, 2006). Such result s were observed when bacterial isolate 
Alcaligenes  faecalis  JTP-07 was present in consortium. It can be attributed to the 
different mechanisms used by members of consortium leading to the formation of 
products which stop favoring decolorization. This effect becomes nullified if there 
is the presence of a bacterial strain which prevents accumulation of such 
degradation products and thereby  helps the consortium to carry out extensive 
degradation.  
            91 
                 
 
             92020406080100Decolorization (%)
10 20 30 40
Time (hrs)
Control (M+D) J-23 + J-5 J-23 + J-7 J-23 + J-13
J-23 + J-30 J-23 + J-5 + J-13 J-23 + J-13 + J-30
 
Figure 6.4: Decolorization of Reactive Black 5 by different consortiums under static culture 
condition.  
 
 
020406080100Decolorization (%)
10 20 30 40
Time (hrs)
Control (M+D) J-23 + J-5 J-23 + J-7 J-23 + J-13
J-23 + J-30 J-23 + J-5 + J-13 J-23 + J-13 + J-30
 
Figure 6.5.: Decolorization of Reactive Black 5 by different consortiums under shaking culture 
condition.  
  930255075100Decolorization (%)
10 20 30 40
Time (hrs)
Control (M+D) J-23 + J-5 J-23 + J-7 J-23 + J-13
J-23 + J-30 J-23 + J-5 + J-13 J-23 + J-13 + J-30
 
Figure 6.6: Decolorization of Black BT by differ ent consortiums under static culture condition.  
 
 
01020304050Decolorization (%)
10 20 30 40
Time (hrs)
Control (M+D) J-23 + J-5 J-23 + J-7 J-23 + J-13
J-23 + J-30 J-23 + J-5 + J-13 J-23 + J-13 + J-30
 
Figure 6.7: Decolorization of Black BT by differ ent consortiums under shaking culture condition.  
 
 
  94Decolorization of industrial effluent  
We examined the ability of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 to decolorize 
industrial effluent. After 48 hrs of static-s haking sequential treat ment of dye, we 
observed significant decolorization of textile effluent whic h was otherwise dark 
greenish colored (Figure 6.8). Absor bance from 400 to 700 nm was almost 
completely abolished and absorbance was r educed in UV region.  On the other 
hand, a new peak appeared in the UV range at 280 nm. This may be the result of 
the complex mixture of  dyes found in industrial e ffluents; the new peak likely 
represents the by products of other dyes used in the factor. These results 
indicated that Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 can be used in an anaerobic-
aerobic two stage system or as a component of a bact erial consortium for the 
treatment of textile dyes. 
0.00.51.01.52.0
200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650 700 750
Wavelength (nm)Absorbance0 hrs 48 hrs
`
 
Figure 6.8: UV-Visible spectral analysis of textile effluent before and after treatment with 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
 
Phytotoxicity study 
Seed germination and plant growth  bioassay are the most common 
technique used to evaluate the phytoto xicity (Kapanen and Itavaara, 2001). 
Thus, it was of primary aim to assess the phytotoxicity of the dye and its 
metabolites after degradation by bacteri al consortium (JTP-05, JTP-13 and 
Lysinibacillus fusiformis JTP-23) . Germination of both seeds ( Triticum aestivum  
and Phaseolus mungo ) was less with Reactive Bla ck 5 treatment as compared to 
its degradation metabolites and plain water (Figure 6.9). The length of plumule  95and radicle were significantly affected by Reactive Black 5 t han its degradative 
metabolites (Table 6.1), indicating less toxic nature of degradation metabolites as 
compared to dye.  
 
Degradation metabolites, extracted on decolor ization under static condition at   
20 h incubation without agitation treatment were identified as Extracted 
metabolites - 1 . On the other hand, degradati on metabolites extracted after 
static-shaking sequential treat ments were identified as Extracted metabolites - 2 . 
Toxicity in terms of germination and growth of seeds irrigated with Extracted 
metabolites - 1  (color less) was less than nati ve dye compound. This colorless 
compound was still toxic to plant, whic h may be because of the presence of 
aromatic amines generat ed during reductive cleavage of azo bond under oxygen 
limiting condition (Puvneshwari et al. , 2006).  
 
Table 6.2 explains results of Green  B phytotoxicity study. Germination 
percentage of seeds ( Triticum  aestivum ) in plates irrigated with dye and 
extracted metabolites were compared with  water control and found to be 46.67% 
and 96.67%, indicating toxic natu re of the dye (Figure 6.10). Phaseolus  mungo  
also showed similar toxicity of Green B with severely affected plumule and 
radicle growth. Toxici ty of Black BT on Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  mungo  
was per summarized in the table 6.2 (Figure 6.11).  
 
Toxicity study or some textile dyes on germination and early seedling growth of 
four plant; clover, wheat, lettuce and to mato had been studied  by Moawad and 
Wafaa, 2003. Similar results were reporte d about Reactive Blue 59 toxicity on 
Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  mungo  (Patil and Shedbalkar, 2008). So, 
phytotoxicity studies revealed biodegradati on of Reactive Black 5, Green B, and 
Black BT by bacterial consortium re sulted in the detoxification of dye. 
    
  96Table 6.1: Phytotoxicity study of Reactive Black 5 and its degradation metabolites on seed 
germination and growth. a, Triticum aestivum ; b, Phaseolus mungo .  
 
a 
Parameter studied Triticum  aestivum  
 Water Reactive Black 5 Extracted 
metabolites-1 Extracted 
metabolites-2 
Germination (%) 100 36.67 56.67 86.67 
Plumule (cm) 5.55 1.55 2.30 4.98 
Radicle (cm) 8.77 2.36 5.34 8.16 
 
b 
Parameter studied Phaseolus mungo 
 Water Reactive Black 5 Extracted 
metabolites - 1 Extracted 
metabolites – 2 
Germination (%) 100 66.67 ND 100 
Plumule (cm) 4.47 1.19 ND 3.95 
Radicle (cm) 2.26 0.20 ND 2.19 
 
ND, Not determined. Mentioned values in the tabl e are mean of ten germinated seeds of three 
sets. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 6.9: Germination of seed s irrigated with water contro l, RB5 dye control and degraded 
metabolites respectively from left to right. a, Triticum  aestivum ; b, Phaseolus mungo.  b a  97 
 
0255075100
12345678
DaysGermination (%)
Water Dye Extract-1 Extract-2 
Figure 6.10: Germination percentage of Triticum  aestivum  seeds irrigated with different samples. 
 
 
 Table 6.2: Effect of dye an d its degradation metabolites on germination and seedlings of Triticum  
aestivum  and Phaseolus mungo . a, Green B dye; b, Black BT dye 
 
a 
Parameter 
studied Triticum  aestivum  Phaseolus mungo 
 Water Green B Extracted 
metabolites Water Green B Extracted 
metabolites 
Germination(%) 100 46.67 96.67 100 70 100 
Plumule (cm) 5.56 0.24 4.60 4.47 1.01 3.68 
Radicle (cm) 8.77 1.74 8.17 2.26 0.24 2.01 
 
 
b 
Parameter 
studied Triticum  aestivum  Phaseolus mungo 
 Water Black BT Extracted 
metabolites Water Black BT Extracted 
metabolites 
Germination(%) 100 40 96.67 100 66.67 100 
Plumule (cm) 4.81 0.82 4.72 3.51 0.92 3.18 
Radicle (cm) 8.17 1.60 8.31 1.75 0.27 1.39 
 
 
  98
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.11: Germination of seed s irrigated with water control,  Green B dye control and degraded 
metabolites respectively from left to right. a, Triticum  aestivum ; b, Phaseolus mungo.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.12: Germination of s eeds irrigated with water control, Black BT dye control and 
degraded metabolites respectively from left to right. a, Triticum  aestivum ; b, Phaseolus mungo.  
 a 
b 
a 
b  99CONCLUSION  
Bioremediation of environm ental pollutants relies on  the pollutant degrading 
capabilities of naturally occurring microbi al consortia in which bacteria play 
central role. Microbial consortia are used without analyzing the constituent 
microbial populations for environmental remediation and the complexity of 
microbial consortium enables  them to act on a variet y of pollutants (Watanable 
and Baker, 2000).  
 
Under aerobic condition, the azo dyes  are non-degradable by most bacteria. 
However, there are reports on the decol orization of azo dye Fast red by Bacillus  
subtilis  HM under aerobic condition (Mona et al ., 2008). Microbial species of 
bacteria, actinomycetes and fungi are capable of removing azo dyes via biotransformation, biodegradati on or liberalization (Jack et al. , 1992) and the 
effectiveness of microbial treatment depends on the survival, adaptability and 
activity of the selected organisms (Kothari et al. , 2005). 
 
Employing static-shaking sequential treat ment along with designer consortium 
was successful in not only dec olorization of dyes but extensive degradation of 
the dyes was achieved. This result was supported by sharp reduction in toxicity 
of degradation metabolites on the germi nation and early seedling growth in 
Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  mungo , when compared with original dye 
compound.  
  100 
    
7 
 
Degradation of Azo Dyes by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 
Degraded Product Analysis and Evaluation of Cytotoxicity 
 
INTRODUCTION  
A wide variety of azo dyes with antr aquinone, polycyclic and triphenylmethane 
groups are being increasingly used in textile dyeing and  printing processes. They 
are important in biodegradat ion process. They pose toxicity in the form of 
genotoxicity, mutagenicity and carcinogenicity to aquatic organisms, such as fish, 
algae and bacteria as well as humans and plant that come in its contact 
(Puvaneshwari et al. , 2006). 
 
Benzidine (BZ) based dye ar e widely used in dye manufact uring, textile printing, 
color paper printing and leather industr y. BZ has long been recognized as a 
human urinary bladder carcinogen and tumo rogenic in a variety of laboratory 
animals (Haley, 1975). Since, BZ is used as a reactant in dye synthesis; workers 
could be directly exposed to the carcin ogen. Experimental studies with rats, 
dogs, and hamsters have shown that animals administered BZ and BZ based dye excrete potentially carc inogenic amines in their urine (Nony and Bowman, 
1980). Definite/possible carcinogenic s ubstances are as per table 7.1. 
 
Chemical analysis could be insufficient to provide insight into the potential 
ecological risk, since they do not a llow an evaluation of possible combined 
effects of the different contaminant mixed together as well as their bioavailablity. 
Bioassays which can mitigate these constr aints are, therefore, recommended for 
the assessment of ecological risks (Conder et al. , 2001).  101Table 7.1: Substances and mixtures evaluated by  IARC as definite or possible human and animal 
carcinogens (Siemiatycki et al. , 2004) 
 
Substances Occupation or Industry Human 
Evidence Animal 
Evidence Site(s) 
Aromatic amine 
dye (definite)      
4-Aminobiphenyl Production; dyestuff and pigment Sufficient Sufficient Bladder 
Benzidine Production; dyestuff and pigment Sufficient Sufficient Bladder 2-Naphthylamine Production; dyestuff and pigment Sufficient Sufficient Bladder 
Azo dyes 
(possible)      
O-aminoazotolune Production; textiles and leather NA Sufficient - 
CI Acid Red 114 Production; textiles and leather NA Sufficient - CI Direct Blue 15 Production; te xtiles and leather NA Sufficient - 
Oil Orange SS Production; dyes/pigment, 
varnish, oils, fats, and waxes NA Sufficient - 
Ponceau 3R Production; textile NA Sufficient - 
Trypan Blue Production; texteils and printing; 
biological stains NA Sufficient - 
NA: Not available. 
 
In the present study, the efficiency of bacteria to degraded azo dyes was 
analyzed by TLC and HPLC. The toxicity  assessment of the dye and its 
degraded products was examined using the degr ading bacterium itself as well as 
on African green monkey kidney cell line.   
 
   
 
       102MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Toxicity on Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 
Microbial toxicity of Reactive Black 5 and its degradative metabolites (1000 ppm) 
were carried out using the diffusion assay according to Parshetti et al.,  (2006) 
with slight variation. Me lted CMB agar medium was i noculated with overnight 
grown culture of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 in order to get loan growth in 
petri dish. 100 µl sample of dye and its degraded extracts were added in well. 
 
Thin Layer Chromatography 
Dye and its degradative produc ts were analyzed on Thin  Layer Chromatography 
(TLC). Commercially available TLC plat es coated with silica gel 60F 254 on 
aluminum foil having dimensions 1-0 cm  x 5 cm x 0.25 mm (Merk, Germany) 
were used. Reactive Black 5 dye was decolorized by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  
JTP-23 and the cell free s upernatant obtained at 48 hr s were extracted with 
equal volume of ethyl acet ate. The extracts were dried by evaporating ethyl 
acetate at ambient temperat ure. The dried extracts were dissolved in 1 ml 
methanol and 100 µl was l oaded on the TLC plates. Solv ent system consisting of 
n-butanol: acetic acid: water (4: 2: 4) . TLC plates were observed in short 
wavelength UV (254nm) and long UV (365). 
 
Cytotoxicity analysis on VERO cell line 
 
Maintenance of cell line and subculturing Preservation of African green monkey kidn ey cell line was done in repository. 
Subculturing was done by wiping the m outh of the bottle wit h cotton soaked in 
spirit to remove the adhering particles. Then, 4-5 ml of Minimal essential media 
(MEM) without FCS (Fetal calf serum) was added and gently rinsed with tilting. 
The dead cells and excess of FCS wa s washed out and the medium was 
discarded. Tripsyn phosphat e versene glucose (TPVG) was added over the cells 
and incubated at 37oC for 5 min for disaggr egation. The cell becomes individual 
and after addition of 5 ml 10% MEM with FC S by serological pipette it presents  103the suspension of cell line. The cells were sp lited into 1:2, 1:3 etc. for cytotoxicity 
study through plate method. 
 
Seeding of cells 
1 ml of suspension was poured in to 24  well plates. Each well was added with 1 
ml of the suspension and kept  in desiccators in 5% CO 2 atmosphere. At the end 
of 2 days incubation cells were ob served in inverted microscope.  
 
Sample preparation 
The dye (1000 ppm) and extracted metabo lites (1000 ppm) were dissolved in 
media (Minimal essential media) to make up the dilutions. Degradation 
metabolites of RB5 by Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 were extracted after 24 h 
incubation in static culture condition. 500 µl of MEM without FCS was taken in 9 
eppendroff tubes. Then 500 µl of the working conc. was added to the first 
eppendroff tube and mi xed well then 500 µl of this volume was transferred from 
first to last tube by serial dilution to obtain the desired concentration of the 
sample to be tested.  
 
Cytotoxicity assay 
Assay was carried out with 48hr  monolayer culture VERO cells at a concentration 
of one lakhs cells / well seeded in 24 well titer plates. Ea ch dilution of the 
samples was added to the respective wells. The plates were incu bated at 37ºC in 
5% CO 2 environment and observed for cytotoxic ity using inverted microscope.  
 
MTT assay 
After the examination of 24  well titre plates, medium was removed carefully for 
MTT assay. Each well was wash with MEM (w/o) FCS for 2 – 3 times and added with 200 µl of MTT (5mg/ml). Plates were  incubated for 6-7 h in 5% CO
2 followed 
by addition of 1ml of DM SO in each well, mixed and  left for 45 seconds. The 
suspension was transferred in the cuvette and OD was taken at 595 nm by taking 
DMSO as blank. Graph is plotted by taki ng concentration of the drug on X axis 
and relative cell viability on Y axis.  
 
Cell viability (%) = Mean OD/Control OD x 100  104Analysis of degradation products by HPLC 
The decolorized culture medi um was centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min and 
supernatant was collect ed and extracted with ethyl ac etate. The extracts were 
allowed to evaporate till dryness and redissolved in HPLC grade methanol. The 
samples were filtered through 0.2 µm f ilter and then analyze d using column RP 
C18 (250 x 4.6 mm, 5 micron particle si ze, Phenominex). The mobile phase 
consisted of 20mM Amonium acetate (in wa ter) : methanol (60:40) with flow rate 
1 ml/min. The purity was checked by PD A detector, isocratic system and 12 min 
run time.             
 
             105RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Repeated addition of dye aliquots 
This study was carried out to test the ability of Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 to 
decolorize repeated additions of dye RB5 aliquots (100 mg l-1) by individual as 
well as consortium form. Strain JTP- 23 showed 97% decolorization of first dye 
aliquot (Figure 7.1) in 26 h and second aliquot of dy e was added, which was 79% 
decolorized in next 9 h. The culture showed 93% decol orization of third aliquot at 
70 h and only 45% decolorization of 4th aliquot at 105 h. Consortium did not show 
more than 77% decolorization in 3rd aliquot even on extended incubation. The 4th 
aliquot consortium did not show any significant decolorization. 
 
020406080100120
0 2 04 06 08 0 1 0 0 1 2 0
Time (hrs)Dye (mg/l)
Lysnibacillus fusiformis JTP-23 Bacterial consortium 
Figure 7.1: Repeated decolorization of RB5 by Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 and its consortium 
in fed batch process under stat ic culture condition at 35 oC 
 
In both sets of experiments, th e decolorization efficiencies of Lysinibacillus 
fusiformis  JTP-23 and consortium were decreases from 4th aliquot and 3rd aliquot 
respectively. Results indicated that when JTP-23 was used individually, it had 
better ability, while in the presence of other organisms (consortium), the overall 
efficiency decreased. This is attributed to starvation and accumulation of toxic products by other organisms pr esent in the culture. A gr eat amount of dead cells 
were found settled at the bottom of the fla sks in last aliquot oper ation. The hostile 
and stressful environment inhibited t he normal growth and metabolism of  106bacteria (Liu et al. , 2007). The culture exhibited the ability to decolorize repeated 
additions, which is significant for its commercial application. 
 
Toxicity on Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23 
Microbial toxicity study showed the grow th inhibitory zone (0.4 cm) surrounding 
the well containing dye, wh ile degradation products well did not show inhibitory 
zone. It confirmed non toxic nature of t he extracted metabolites. These findings 
suggested non-toxic nature of the products formed. Previous reports showed that 
colorless products were also equally toxic to native dy e compound (Lamia et al.,  
2009). 
 
Thin Layer Chromatography 
Figure 7.2 shows separated spots of dye wh ile complete disappearance of dye in 
treated sample. Any new spot was not f ound in treated samples. This indicated 
decolorization and complete degradat ion of Reactive Black 5 by Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23 and its consortium. 
   
 
             107a 
 
     
 
          
b 
 
      
 
   
   
 
Figure 7.2: Thin Layer Chromatography of dye treated with ( a) Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23, 
where A: Original dye, B: Treated dye and ( b) Consortium, where A: Original dye, B and C: 
Treated dye at 24 h; D and E: Treated dye at 48 h; F: Empty. 
 
Cytotoxicity study 
In order to assess the effect  of xenobiotic compounds on cell, it is important to 
determine the cytotoxicity concentration of the dye or it s degraded compound. 
Cytotoxicity tests define the upper limit of  the extract concentration, which is non-
toxic to the cell line. Bioremediation proc esses must ensure the concentration of 
 108xenobiotic compound in  treated sample which is nontoxic to the cells.  After the 
addition of the samples, cell death and cell viability was esti mated. Table 7.2 
explains the results of cytotoxicity of  control dye and its degradation extracted 
metabolites (Figure 7.4). Results indicated that toxic effect of dye is decreased 
with removal of its color. This means degradation metabolites are less toxic to 
VERO cell line. This is suggestive of  good pattern of breakdown of RB5 by 
Lysinibacillus fusiformis JTP-23, which does  not produce more toxic degradation 
metabolites. The result was confirmed by additional metabolic intervention 
experiment such as MTT assay. 
 
MTT test  
MTT assay is called as (3-(4, 5-dimethyl  thiazol-2yl)-2, 5-diphenyl tetrazolium 
bromide. MTT assay was first proposed by  Mossman in 1982. MTT is cleaved by 
mitochondrial dehydrogenase in viable ce lls, yielding a measurable purple 
product formazan. Formazan production is pr oportionate to viable cell number 
and inversely proportional to the degree of  Cytotoxicity (Mosmann, 1983). Figure 
7.3 shows the result of MTT test. 
 
HPLC analysis 
Figure 7.5 shows the result of  HPLC analysis on the deco lorization metabolites of 
Green B by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 culture. A fter anaerobic incubation 
for 24 h, the intensity of peaks at retention time 3.9 and 6.0 increased 
significantly, which were not present in control Green B chromatogram. It is thus reasonable to suggest that these both peaks represent degradation metabolites. 
When such metabolites were degraded ae robically they formed less aromatic, 
more polar compounds, since the metabo lites peak area decreased and shifted 
towards lower retention time at 3.7 and 5.6, respectively. 
 
Decolorization product analysis of Reactive  Black 5 by HPLC was performed. 
RB5 was treated with bacterial consorti um under static and static-shaking 
sequential incubations. Ne w peaks in chromatogram of sample extracted at static 
incubation 24 h indicated newly synthesized degradat ion metabolites (Figure  1097.6). After shaking, the in tensity of the peak was redu ced and it moved to lower 
retention time, indicating further d egradation of the dy e metabolites.  
 
Table 7.2: Cytotoxicity effect of RB5 and extr acted metabolites on VERO cell line (African Green 
Monkey Kidney Cell Line). 
 
Sr. No. Reactive Black 5 Extracted metabolite 
 Dilution Absorbance Cell viability Dilution Absorbance Cell viability 
1 Neat 0.11 16.92 Neat 0.25 38.46 
2 1:1 0.19 15.38 1:1 0.34 52.30 
3 1:2 0.22 33.84 1:2 0.42 64.61 4 1:4 0.29 44.61 1:4 0.48 73.84 5 1:8 0.36 55.38 1:8 0.52 80.00 6 1:16 0.44 67.69 1:16 0.55 84.61 
7 1:32 0.49 75.38 1:32 0.59 90.76 
8 1:64 0.54 83.07 1:64 0.61 93.84 9 1:128 0.58 89.23 1:128 0.64 96.92 
10 - 0.65 100 - 0.65 100 
 
 
 
020406080100120
Neat 1:1 1:2 1:4 1:8 1:16 1:32 1:64 1:128 Nil
Concentration (mg/ml)Cell viability
Native RB5 Treatd RB5
 
 
Figure 7.3: Cell viability estimated by MTT te st on exposure of nativ e RB5 and treated RB5 to 
VERO cell line.  
 
  
  110 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  111
 
 
 
Figure 7.5: a, control dye Green B; b, static incubation; and c, static-shaking sequential 
incubation respectively by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 growing on complete medium 
containing Green B dye analyzed by HPLC 
 a
b
c 112
 
 
 
Figure 7.6: a, Control dye RB5; b, static incubation; and c, static-shaking sequencial incubation 
respectively by bacterial consortium growing on complete medium containing RB5 dye analyzed 
by HPLC 
 ca
b 113CONCLUSION  
Though benzidine based dye are occupati onal carcinogens, they are also found 
widely among the general population and i ndeed. It’s likely that many more 
people are exposed to these substances outside than inside the occupational 
environment. They are not readily degrada ble under natural co nditions and are 
typically not removed from waste water by conventional waste water treatment 
systems (Puvaneswari et al.,  2006). 
 
Decolorization of repeated dye al iquot suggested the suitability of Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23 for large scale application. Decolorization efficiency was 
decreased from 4th and 3rd aliquot of dye by strain JTP-23 and its consortium 
respectively. The single culture has bette r efficiency but it was reduced in the 
presence of other organisms. This might  be due to starvation and accumulation 
of toxic products by other organisms present in culture. 
 
The degradation pr oduct was less toxic to VERO ce ll line as compared to native 
dye structure. TLC analysis did not show any spot of static-shaking sequentially 
degraded dye. This support ed the dye degradation. HP LC analysis indicated 
structural changes by the organisms during its degradati on. On extended 
incubation with organisms, the newly synthesized metabolites were degraded. 
  114 
    
8 
Summary  
 
Textile effluent and sludge produced by effluent  treatment plant is  rich source of 
dye decolorizing bacterial population. Total of 37 isolates were selected on the 
basis of their Gram reaction, colony c haracteristics, growth pattern and cell 
morphology. Samples contai ned both the types of bacte ria, with the dominance 
of Gm +ve members. Initially, all 37 isolates were tested for their ability to decolorize two azo dyes, Reactive Bla ck 5 and Green B. Six potential isolates 
were then selected on the basis of their dye decolorizing abilit y and were further 
tested with FF sky Blue, Black E, Black BT and Reactive Orange M
2R. 
Differences in structures and complexity of  dye led to the variable percentage of 
decolorization of different dyes by same organisms. 
 
Thirty seven bacterial isolates were c onsidered for their characterization, based 
on Gram’s reaction, cell morphology, colony  characteristics, growth patterns in 
nutrient broth and biochemical  tests. Triple Sugar Iron agar was used to check 
sugar fermentability of individual bacteria.  Three important bacterial species were 
identified as Alcaligenes f aecalis JTP-07, Lysinibacill us fusiformis JTP-23, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa JTP-37 by 16 s rDNA sequencing. Phylogenetic 
analysis was performed for identified cultures. 
 
Various aspects of environmental and cu ltural parameter were studied for 
decolorization of Reactive Black 5 by Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23. The 
results indicated that the new species had high capacit y for rapid decolorization 
of azo dyes. Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 produced abundant biomass under 
shaking condition. However, decolorizat ion capacity was shar ply reduced under  115this condition. On the other hand, anoxic condition s produced less biomass with 
greater decolorization. Maxi mum decolorization was obse rved in static condition, 
while COD was decreased in  subsequent shaking c ondition. Further, with 
increasing dye concentrations, effi ciency of decolorization decreased. 
  
The suitable initial pH for decolorization of RB 5 was in the range of 6-9 under 
static condition and 6-10 under anoxic condition. Optimum temperature for 
decolorization was 30-35oC. The results on the effect  of size of inoculum 
indicated that under anoxic condition 2% v/ v was ideal for rapid decolorization of 
RB 5 dye.  
 
Textile industries use wide variety of st ructurally different dyes; therefore, 
effluents are extremely variable in dye com position. Treatment of such effluent 
and decolorization of dye, therefore, is difficult. Wide range of pH, salt 
concentrations and heterogeneous hazar dous chemicals often add to the 
difficulties for the treatment. 
 
The newly isolated bacteria,  Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23, efficiently 
decolorized dye under varied cultural an d environmental condi tions, highlighting 
the significance of this strain in lar ge scale treatment of textile effluent. 
 
Nutritional parameters were examined for their effect  on decolorization of RB5 by 
Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23. The results showed that lactose, tryptone and 
glucose were most suitable. Organic ni trogen sources in the form of peptone, 
yeast extract and meat extracts were most appropriate as compared to other 
inorganic nitrogen sources. 
 
Decolorization of dye remained unaffected under different salt concentrations. 
However, at higher than 5% (w/v) sal t, the biomass synthesis was adversely 
affected with the sharp reduction in dye decolorization. It was observed that glucose was unavoidable in small amount for better deco lorization. However, the 
increased glucose concentrations reta rded the decolorization process. 
  116Metals are commonly found in waste water from dying industry. It was observed 
that increased concentration of metal r educed decolorization. Prior exposure of 
the organism to the dye did not improve de colorization, indicati ng the constitutive 
nature of the enzymes invo lved in the process.  
 
Analysis of Plackett-Burman statistica l design for the optimum nutritional 
requirement for decolorization revealed that peptone favor ed decolorization, 
while glucose and K 2HPO 4 had negative effect under ano xic condition. However, 
both, glucose and K 2HPO 4, displayed positive effect under the static culture 
condition.  
 
Lysinibacillus  fusiformis  JTP-23 decolorized Reactive  Black 5 and other textile 
dyes optimally under employed nutritional parameters, displaying the ability of 
the isolate to decolorize various textile dy es under varied cultivation conditions.  
 
With the static-shaking sequential treat ment along with desig ner consortium, 
successful decolorization and degradation of the dyes was achieved. This was 
supported by sharp reduction in toxicity  of degradation me tabolites on the 
germination and early seedling growth in Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  
mungo .  
 
Decolorization of repeated dye al iquot suggested the suitability of Lysinibacillus  
fusiformis  JTP-23 for large scale application. Decolorization efficiency decreased 
from 4th and 3rd aliquot of dye, by JTP-23 and consortium, respectively. The 
single culture has better efficiency.  
 
Though benzidine based dye are occupati onal carcinogens, they are also found 
among the general population. The degradation product was less toxic to VERO 
cell line as compared to native dye. TLC ana lysis did not show any spot of static-
shaking sequentially degraded dye, supporting dye degradation. HPLC analysis 
indicated structural changes during d egradation. It was revealed that on 
extended incubation with the organism, the newly synthes ized metabolites were 
degraded. 
  117There are few reports on the biological dec olorization and degra dation of textile 
and dyestuff industrial wastes containing azo dyes. The reports so far available 
are on a small scale and no large scale data on biol ogical decolorization and 
degradation is available Biol ogical treatment is the only way for ultimately 
controlling pollution generate by textile and dyes stuff industries. However, 
further research would be required to devel op a viable alternative process for the 
treatment of dye wastewaters.   118 
    
9 
Conclusion 
 
Continuous dumping of dye stuffs  and dye waste water has created 
environmental pollution as well as medica l and aesthetic pr oblems associated 
with human health and agriculture, thus bior emediation of contaminated site is of 
prime importance. Due to adapt ation of various bacterial  species, an effluent had 
high count of Gm +ve and Gm –ve dye dec olorizing bacteria. The difference in 
decolorization capacity of different azo dyes by individual bacteria was due to 
dissimilarity in specificities, structur e and complexity, and the interaction with azo 
bond with different dyes.   Gm +ve bacteria dominated in different samples collected from CETP. Anoxic 
condition was most suitable for rapid decolo rization of different dyes by potential 
isolate Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23. The major draw back with this cultural 
condition was no reduction in COD of th e reaction mixture. Best growth and 
decolorization was achieved in mesophili c range of temperatur e, while alkaline 
pH (8 to 10) favored decolorization. 
 
Increased concentration of metal had reduc ed the decolorizatio n capacity. Higher 
concentrations of glucose and K 2HPO4 decreased decolorization under anoxic 
condition while increased decolorizati on under static culture condition was 
observed. The decolorization of dye wa s favored by variety of carbon and 
nitrogen sources to different degree. 
  119Use of anaerobic-aerobic sequential treat ment by consortium was successful 
decolorization and degradation of azo dyes . The reduced toxicity of extracted 
metabolites on Triticum  aestivum  and Phaseolus  mungo  indicated the 
degradation of azo dyes. The extracted me tabolites of degraded  dye were safer 
not only for plant germination and seedlings  growth but also for animal cell line 
as it was tested on African green monkey kidney cell line (VERO). 
 
TLC results supported breakdown of the native dye structure. HPLC analysis 
showed dye native structure was degraded to  its intermediate structures that 
were further degraded on extended incubati on of reaction mixture. Degradation 
of aromatic amines was evidenced by r eduction in height and size of peak in 
chromatogram. 
 
The isolated bacteria, Lysinibacillus fusiformis  JTP-23, could effectively be used 
as an alternative to physi cal and chemical process used for textile effluent 
treatment.    120Bibliography 
 
Aksu, Z., Donmez, G. (2005). Combined  effects of molasses sucrose and 
reactive dye on the growth and dye bioaccumulation properties of Candida 
tropicalis. Process Biochemistry . 40: 2443-2454. 
 
Aksu, Z., Tezer, S. (2000). Equilibrium and kinetic modeling of biosorption of 
Remazol Black B by Rhizopus arrhizus in  a batch system: effect  of Temperature. 
Process Biochemistry . 36: 431-439. 
 
Alexander, M., & B. K. Lustigman (1996). Effect of chemical structures on 
microbial degradation of  substituted benzenes. J. Agr. Food Chem . 14: 410-413 
 
Alleman, B. C. & A. Lesson (1999). In  situ bioremediation of petroleum 
hydrocarbons and other or ganic compounds. Battelle Press, Columbus, Ohio. 
 
American Public Health Association (APHA) (1992 ). Standard Methods of 
Amedican Public Health Association or examination of water and wastewater. 
18th ed., A., Pubic Health A ssoci. Washington, DC.  
 
Amit Parikh & Datta Madamwar (2005).  Textile dye decolorization using 
cyanobacteria. Biotechnology Letters . 27: 323-326 
 
Anliker, R., Clarke, E. A. and  Moser. P. (1981). Use of the partition coefficient as 
indicator of bio-accumulation te ndency of dyestuffs in fish. Chemosphere , 10:  
263-274. 
 
Ayed, L., Chaieg, K., C heref, A., Bakhrouf, A.,  (2009). Biodegradation of 
triphenylmethane dye malachite green by Sphingomonas  paucimobilis . World J 
Microbiol Biotechnol . 25: 705-711   
 
Banat, I. M., Nigam, P., Datel & Roger Marchant (1996). Microbial 
decolourizatino of textile dyes c ontaining effluents : A review – Biosource  
technology  58: 217-227 
  121Blumel S, Knackmuss H. J, Stol z A (2002). Molecu lar cloning and 
characterization of the gene coding for the aeroci azoreductase from Xenophilus  
azovorans  KF46F. Appl Environ Microbiol.  68:3948-3955. 
 
Bradford, M. M.  (1978).  A rapid and sensitive meth od for the quantification of 
protein utilizing the principl e of protein-dye binding. Anal. Biochem . 72:248-254 
 
Brown, D, & P. Labour eur (1983a). The aerobic bi odegradability of primary 
aromatic amine. Chemosphere . 12: 405-414 
 
Brown, D, & P. Laboureur  (1986). The degradati on of dyestuffs: Part-II Behavior 
of aerobic biodegradation test. Chemosphere . 15: 479-491. 
 
Brown, D, & P. Laboureur (1983). The degradation of dy estuffs: Part-IPrimary 
biodegradation under anaer obic conditions. Chemosphere . 12: 397-404. 
 
Brown, D. & B. Hambur ger (1987). The degradation of dyestuffs: Part- III-
Investigations of thei r ultimate degradability. Chemosphere . 16: 1539-1553 
 
Brown, M.A. and De Vito, S.C. ( 1993). Predicting azo dye toxicity. Crit. Rev. Env. 
Sci. Tec . 23: 249-324 
 
Cetin, D., Donmez, G. (2006). Decolorization of reactive dyes by mixed cultures 
isolated from text ile effluent under anaer obic condition. Enzyme and Microbial 
technology . 38: 926 – 930 
 
Chen K.C., Haung, W.T, Wu, J.Y., and Houng, J.Y. (1999). Microbial 
decolorization of azo dyes by Proteus mirabilis . Journal of Industrial Microbiology 
& Biotechnology . 23: 686-690 
 
Chen H., Sherryll L., Hopper and Carl E. Cerniglia (2005). Biochemical and 
molecular characterization of an azoreductase from Staphylococcus aureus , a 
tetrameric NADPH-dependent  flavoprotein. Microbiology 151: 1433-1441. 
  
Chen K.C., Wu J.Y., Liou D. J., Hwang S-CJ (2003). Decolorization of the textile 
dyes by newly isolated bacterial strains. J Biotechnol  101: 57-68  122 
Chen, K.C., W.T. Huang, J.Y. Wu  and J.Y. Houng (1999). Microbial 
decolorization of azo dyes by Proteus  mirabilis . J. Indiustrial Microbiol. 
Biotechnol . 23: 686-690 
 
Chung, K. T., Stevens, S.E. , Jr & Cerniglia, C. C.  (1992). The production of azo 
dyes by the intestinal microflora. Crit Rev Microbiol . 18: 175-190 
 
Chung, K.T., Fulk, G.E. & Egan, M.  (1978). Reductgion of azo dyes by intgestinal 
anaerobes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol . 35: 5588-5620  
 
Conder J.M., Lann R.P. & Basta N.T. (2001).  Assessment of metal availability in 
smelter soil using earthwo rms and chemical extractions. J environ Qual . 30: 
1231-7 
 
Correia, V.M., Stephenson, T. and Judd, S. J. (1994). Characterization of textile 
wastewaters: a review. Environ. Technol . 15: 917-919. 
 
Deepak Kumar Sharma, Harvinder Singh  Sainin, Manjinder Singh (2004). 
Isolation and characterization of microor ganisms capable of decolorizing various 
triphenylmethane dyes. J. Basic Microbiol  44: 59-65  
 
Dhanve R.S., Kalyani D.C., Phugare S.S., Jadhav J.P. (2009). Coordinate action 
of exiguobacterial oxidoreductive enzym es in biodegradation of reactive yellow 
84A dye. Biodegradation  20: 245-255 
 
Dong X., Zhou J., Liu Y. (2003). Peptone-i nduced biodecolorization of reactive 
brilliant blue (KN-R) by Rhodocyclus  gelatinosus  XL-1. Process Biochem  39: 89-
94  
 
Edward, R.T., Bilgehan, G., Aydin, A. (200 0) dying and chemic al technology of 
textile fibers. Journal of Supercritical Fluids .12: 25-34  
 
ETAD (1997). German ban of use of cert ain azo compounds in some consumer 
goods. ETAD Information Noti ce No. 6, (Revised). 
  123Fu Y., Viraraghavan T. (2001). Fungal de colorization of dye wastewaters: a 
review, Bioresour  Technol.  79: 251-262 
 
Ganesh R. (1992). Fate of azo dyes in  sludges. Masters thesis, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University . p. 193 . 
 
Ghatnekar, S.D., Kevin, M.F., Ghatnekar , G.S. (1995). Vermifilter-based effluent 
treatment plant in diverse industries. Proceedings  for Biotechnology  Strategy  for 
Development . 167-169 
 
Glenn J.K., Gold M.H. (1983). Decolorizati on of several polymeric dyes by the 
ligning-degrading basidiomycete Phanerochaete  chrysosporium . Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol . 1741-1747 
 
Grierson, Su. (1989). Dyeing and Dyestuffs . Aylesbury, Bucks: Shire Album 229, 
Shire Publications Ltd. 
 
Guo J., Zhou J., Wang D., Tian C., Wang P., Uddin, M.S. (2007). A novel 
moderately halophilic bacterium for dec olorizing azo dye under high salt 
conditions. Biodegradation . 19: 15-19 
 
Haley T.J. (1975). Benzidin e revisited; A review of the literature and its 
congeners. Clin Toxicol , 8: 13  
 
Harazono K. and Nakamura K. (2005). Decolo rization of mixtures of different 
reactive textile dyes by t he the white-rot basidiomycete Phanerochaete  sordida  
and inhibitory effect of polyvinyl alcohol. Chemosphere . 59: 63-68  
 
Haug W, Schmidt A., Nortemann B., Hemp le D.C., Stolz A., Knackmuss H.J. 
(1991). Mineralization of the sulfonated azo dye mordant yellow 3 by a 6-
aminophthalene-2-2sulfonated- degrading bacterial cons ortium. Appl Environ 
Microbiol 57: 3144-3149 
 
Horitsu, H., Takada, M., Idaka,  E., Tomoyeda, M. & Ogawa, T.  (1997). 
Degradation of aminoazobenzenear by Bacillus subtilis . Eur.J. Appl. Microbiol . 4: 
217-224  124 
Hu, T.L. (1998). Degradation of azo dyes RP2B by Pseudomonas Luteola . Water 
Science Technology . 38: 299-306 
 
Ibrahim M. Banat, Poonam Nigam, Da tel Singh & Roger Marchant (1996). 
Microbial decolorization of textile dye containi ng effluents: A review. Bioresource 
Technology  58: 217-227 
 
Joe, M.H., Lim, S.Y., Kim,  D.H., & Lee, I.S. (2008). De colorization of reactive 
dyes by Clostridium  bifermentans  SL186 isolated from contaminated soil. World J 
Mcirobial  Biotechnology . 24: 2221-2226  
 
Jung, R., Steinle, D., and Anliker, R. (1992). A compilation of genotoxicity and 
carcinogenicity data on arom atic aminosulphonic ac ids. Food and Chemical 
Toxicology. 30:635-660. 
 
Kalyuzhnyi, S., Sklyar, V. (2000). Biom ineralization of azo dyes and their 
breakdown products in anaerobic-aer obic hybrid and USAB reactors. Water 
Science Technology.  41: 23-30 
 
Kapanen A, Itavaara M. (2001). Ecotoxic ity tests for compost applications. 
Ecotoxicol Environ Saf.  49: 1-16 
 
Kapdan I.K., Kargi, F., McMullan, G., and Marchant R. (2000). Decolorization of 
textile dyestuffs by a mixed bacterial consortium. Biotechnology  Letters  22: 1179-
1181 
 
Keharia H & Madamwar D.  (2003) Bioremediation concept s for treatment of dye 
containing waste water: A review, Indian J Exp Biol . 41: 1061-1068 
 
Khehra M. S., Harvinder, S. S., Sharma , D. K. (2005). Biod egradtaion of azo dye 
C.I. acid red 88 by an anoxic-aer ovic sequential bioreactor. Dyes Pig.  70: 1-6. 
 
Khehra M.S., Saini H.S., Sharma D.K ., Chadha B.S., Chimni S.S. (2005). 
Comparative studies on potential of cons ortium and constituent pure bacterial 
isolates to decolorize azo dyes. Water Res  39: 5135 – 5141.  125 
Khehra, M.S., H.S. Saini, D.K. Sharma, B.S. Chandha and S.S. Chimni (2005). 
Comparative studies on potential of cons ortium and constituent pure bacterial 
isolates to decolorize azo dyes. Water Res. 39: 5135-5141 
 
Kim, S.Y., An J.Y., Kim B.W. (2007). Im provement of the decolorization of azo 
dye by anaerobic sludge bioaugmented with Desulfov ibrio desulfuricans. 
Biotechnol Bioprocess Eng.  12: 222-227.  
 
Kothari C. R. (2006) Ph. D. thesis. Mi crobial degradation of  organopollutants, 
Saurashtra University , Rajkot. 
 
Kothari, R.K., Kothari, C. R., and Pathak, S.J. (2005). Microbial decolorization and 
degradation of textile dyes  Golden HR and Magenta HB. Asian J. Microbiol. 
Biotehnol. Environ. Sci . 7(2): 1-5.  
 
Kothari R. K.  (2002). Microbial degradation of textile dyes. Ph. D thesis.  
 
Kumar K, Dastidar, M. G., Sreekrishn an, T. R. (2009). Effect of process 
parameters on aerobic decolouriz ation of reactive azo dy e using mixed culture. 
World academy of science, Engineering and Technology.  58:962-965 
 
Lamia Ayed, Kamel Chaieb, Abdelkarim  Cheref, Amina Bakhrouf (2009) 
Biodegradation of triphenylmet hane dye Malachite Green by Spingomonas  
paucimobilis . World J Microbial Biotechnol 25:705-711 
 
Lamia, A., Kamel, C., Abdelkarim, C., Amina, B. (2009). Biodegradation of 
triphenylmethane dye Malachite Gr een by Sphingomonas paucimobilis. World J 
Microbiol Biotechnol . 25: 705 – 711 
 
Liu, G.F., Zhou, J.T., Qu, Y.Y., Ma, X.  (2007) Decolorizati on of sulfonated azo 
dyes wsith two photosynthetic bacteri al strains and genetically engineered 
Escherichia coli  strain. World J Microbiol Biotechnol . 23: 931-937 
 
Liu, S., & L. Suffita. (1993) Ecology and evolution of microbial populations for 
bioremediation. Trends Biotechnol . 11: 344-352  126 
Lloyd, C.K. (1992). Anaerobic/aerobic degradation of a textile dye wastewater. 
Masters Thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. p.184. 
 
Loidl M, Hinteregeer C, Ditzelmuller G, Fe rschl A and Streichsbief F. (1990) 
Degradation of aniline and monochlo rinated anilines by soil-born Pseudomonas  
acidovorans . Arch Microbiol , 155 
 
Marmagne, O. & Coste, C. (1996). Color re moval from textile plant effluents. 
American dyestuff reporter .  
 
McCurdy, M. W., Boardman,  G.D., Michelsen, D.L.  & Woodby, B.M. (1992). 
Chemical reduction and oxi dation combined with biodegr adation for the treatment 
of a textile dye. In 46th Proc. Purdue Industrial wast e Conf-Lewis Publisher, MI, 
pp. 229-234 
 
McMullan, G., Meehan, C., Conneely, A., Kirby, N., Robinson, T., Nigam, P., 
Banat, I.M., Marchant, R., & W.F. Smyt h (2001). Microbial decolorization and 
degradation of textile dyes. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol . 56: 81-87. 
 
Meiying X., Jun G. and Goupig S. (2007) Biodegradation of te xtile azo dye by 
Shewanella  decolorationis  S12 under microaerophi lic conditions. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol . 76: 719-726 
 
Moawad, H., Waffa M., Abd El-Rahim, and Kh alafallah, M. (2003). Evaluation of 
biotoxicity of textile dyes using two bioassays. J. Basic Microbiol . 43: 218-229 
 
Mohorcic, M., Friedrich, J. , Pavko, A. (2004). Decolorization of the diazo dye 
reactive black 5 by immobilized Bjerkandera adusta  in a stirred t ank bioreactor. 
Acta Chim. Slov. 51: 619-628 
 
Mona E. M., Mabrouk and Honda J. Yusef ( 2008). Decolorization of Fast Red by 
Bacillus  subtilis  HM. Journal of Appllied Science Research , 4(3): 262-269 
  127Moosvi S., Haresh K, and Madamwar D. (2005). Decolourization of textile dye 
Reactive Violet 5 by a newly isol ated bacterial consortium RVM 11.1, World 
Journal of Microbiology & Biotechnology . 21: 667-672 
 
Mosmann T (1983). Rapid colorimetric assay for cell ular growth and survival: 
application to proliferati on and cytotoxicity assay. J Immunol Methods . 65: 55-63. 
 
Mutafov, S., Avramova, T., Stefanova, L ., Angelova, B. (2007) . Decolorization of 
acid orange by bacteria of different tinc torial type: a comparative study. World J. 
Microbiol Biotechnol. 23: 417 – 422. 
 
Naimabadi, A., Movahendian Attar, Shahsav ani, A. (2009). Decolorization and 
biological degradation of azo dye reactive red 2 by  anaerobic/aerobic sequential 
process. Iran J. Environ. Health. Sci. Eng ., 6 (2):67 -72 
 
Nigam, P., G. Armour, I.M .Banat, D. Singh and R. Marchant (2000). Physical 
removal of textile dyes from effl uents and solid-state fermentation and dye 
adsorbed agricultural residues. Bioresour. Technol ., 81: 155-157 
 
Nikulina, G.L., Deveikis, D.N., and Pys hnov, G. (1995). Toxicity dynamics of 
anionic dyes in air of the work plac e and long term effects after absorption 
through  skin. Med. Tr. Prom. Ekol . 6: 25-28 
 
Nony C.R. & Bowman M.C. (1980). Trac e analysis of potentially carcinogenic 
metabolites of an azo dye and pigment in hamster and huma urine as determined 
by two chromatrgaaphic procedures. J Chromatorg Sci . 18: 64. 
 
O’Neill, C., Lopez, A., Estevez, S., Hawk es, F.R., Hawkes, D.L., & Wilcox, S. 
(2000). Azo-dye degradation in  an anaerobic-aerobic treat ment system operating 
on simulated textile effluent. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol . 53:249-254. 
 
O’Neill, C., Lopez, A., Estevez, S., Hawk es, F.R., Hawkes, D.L., & S. Wilcox. 
(2000). Azo-dye degradation in  an anaerobic-aerobic treat ment system operating 
on simulated textile effluent. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol . 53: 249-254 
  128O'Neill, C., Hawkes, F.R., Hawkes, D.L., Lourenco, N.D., Pinheiro, H.M. and 
Delee, W. (1999) Colour in  textile effluents-source s, measurement, discharge 
consents and simulation: a review. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol ., 74: 10009-
10018. 
 
P. S. Patil, U. U. Shedbal kar, D. C. Kalyani, J. P.  Jadhav. (2008) Biodegradation 
of Reactive Blue 59 by isolated bacteri al consortium PMB11. J Ind Microbiol 
Biotechnol 35:1181-1190 
 
Pagga U., Brown D. (1986) . The degradation of dy estuffs. II. Behavior of 
dyestuffsin aerobic biodegradation test. Chemosphere . 15: 479-491 
 
Parshetti, G. Kalme, S., Saratale, G. (2006). Biodegr adation of Malachite Green 
by Kocuria rosea  MTCC 1532. Acta Chim Solv  53: 492 – 498. 
 
Performance status of common effluent treatment plant, CPCB Report October 
2005, page 21 
 
Plackett, R. L. and J. P. Bruman. (1946). The design of optimum multifactorial 
experiments. Biometrica . 33: 305 - 325. 
 
Poonam Nigam, Ibrahim M. Banat, Da lel Singh, & Roger Marchant (1995). 
Microbial Process for the Decolorization of  textile effluent containing azo, diazo 
and reactive dyes. Process Biochemistry  31:435-442 
 
Puvaneswari, N., Muthukrishanan J., & Gunasekaran P. (2006). Toxicity 
assessment and microbial de gradation of azo dyes. Indian Journal of 
Experimental Biology . 44: 618-626 
 
Radha, K.V., I. Raghupati, A. Arunagiri and  T. Murugesan (2005). Decolorization 
studies of synthetic dyes using Phanerochaete  chrysosporium  and their kinetics. 
Process  Biochem ., 40: 3337-3345  
 
Rafi, F., Franklin, W. and Cerniglia, C. E. (1990). Azoreductase activity of 
anaerobic bacteria isolated from human intestinal microflora. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol ., 56:2146-2151.  129 
Ramalho, P.A., Cardoso, M.H., Cava co-Paulo, A., Rama lho, M.T. (2004) 
Characterization of azo reduction activity in a novel ascomycete yeast strain. Appl Environ Microbiol  70:2279–2288. 
 
Ramalho, P.A., Scholze, H., Cardoso, M. H., Ramlho, M.T., Oliveiracampos, A.M. 
(2002). Improved conditions for the aerobic reductive decolourization of azo dyes 
by Candida  zeylanoides . Enzyme Microb Technol  31: 848-854 
 
Razo-Flores, E., Luijten, M., D onlon, B., Lettinga, G., & J. Field  (1997). 
Biodegradation of selected azo dy es under methanogenic conditions. Water.  
Sci.  Technol . 36:65-72. 
 
Reddy, C. A. (1995). The potential for wh ite rot fungi in the treatment of 
pollutants. Curr. Opt. Biotechnol . 6, pp 320-328 
 
Robinson, T., Chandran, B., Nigam, P. (2002b). Removal of dyes from an 
artificial textile dye effluent by two agric ultural residue, corn cob and barley husk. 
Environment Int. 
 
Russ R, Rau J, Stolz A (2000) The function of cytoplasmic flavin reductase in the 
reduction of azo dyes by bacteria.  Appl Environ Microbiol . 66:1429-1434. 
 
Salah Uddin M., Zhou J., Qu Y.,Gu o J., Wang P., Zhao L. (2007). 
Biodecolorization of azo dye acid red B under high salinity conditions. Bull 
Environ Contam Toxicol  79: 440-444. 
 
Sani, R.K., and Banerjee, U.C. (1999). Deco lorization of triphenyl methane dyes 
and textile and dye-stuff effluent by Kurthia  sp. Enz Microbial Technol . 24: 433-
437 
 
Sieminatycki, J., Richardson, L., Straif, K .,Latreille B., Lakhani  R., Campbell, S. 
Rousseau, MC, Boffetta P. (2004). Listing occupational carcinogens.  Environmental Health Perspectives . Volume 112:15 
  130Somasegaram, P. and Hoben, H.J. ( 1985). Methods in Legume Rhizobium 
Technology. NifTAL, Paia Mauni , HI. USA. 
 
Stolz A (2001). Basic and applied aspects in the microbial degradation of azo 
dyes. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol  56:69-80 
 
Su, J.C. and Horton, J.J.  (1998). Alergic contact de rmatitis from azo dyes.  
Autralas. J. Dermatol., 39 (1) 48-49 
 
Suzuki, Y., Yoda, T., Ruhul, A., Sugui ra, W. (2001). Molecuarl cloning and 
characterization of the gene coding for az oreductase from Bacillus sp. OY1-2 
isolated from soil. J Biol Chem . 276:9059-9065. 
 
Swamy, J.; Ramsay, J.A. (1999) Effects of glucose and NH4+ concentrations on 
sequential dye decol orization by Trametes  versicolor .  Enz Microbial Technology . 
25: 278–284. 
 
Swamy, J., Ramsay, J.A. (1999) The ev aluation of white rot fungi in the 
decolouration of textile dyes.  Enz Microbial Technology . 24: 130–137. 
 
V. Faraco, C. Pezzella, A. Miele, P.Giardina, G. Sanni a (2009) Bioremediation of 
colored industrial wastewater s by the white-rot fungi Phanerochaete  
chrysosporium  and Pleurotus  ostreatus  and their enzymes. Biodegradation 
20:209-220 
 
Vijaykumar, M.H., P.V. Vaishampayan,  Y.S. Shouche and T.B. Karegoudar 
(2007). Decolorization of naphthalene-c ontaining sulfonated azo dyes by 
Kerstersia  sp. strain VKY1. Enzyme Microb Technol . 40: 204-211 
 
Vinodgopal, K., Peller, J., Makogon, O., Kamat, P.V. (1998) Ultrasonic 
mineralization of a reactive text ile azo dye, Remazol Black B. Water Research.  
32: 3646. 
 
Waffa M. Abd El-Rahim, Hassan Moawad and M. Khalafallah (2003) Microflora 
involved in textile dye waste removal. J. Basic Microbiol  43: 167-174  
  131Wang, W.  (1991) Toxicity assessment of  pretreated industrial effluent using 
higher plant. Research Journal Water Pollution Control Federation . 62: 853– 860. 
 
Watanable, B., and Baker, L. (2000). Envi ronmentally relevant microorganisms. 
J. Biosci. Bioeg . 89: 1-11. 
 
Welham, A. (2000). The theory of dyeing (and the secret of life). J. Soc. Dyers 
Colour ., 116: 140-143. 
 
Wesenberg D., Kyriakides, I., Agathos, S.N. (2003). White rot fungi and their 
enzymes for the treatment of  industrial dye effluents. Biotechnology advances , 
22: 161 – 187 
 
Wong, P.K. and Yuen, P.Y. (1996). Decoilorization and biodegradation of Methyl 
Red by K. pneumonia  RS13. Water research . 30: 1736 – 1744 
 
Yoo, E. S. (2000). Kinetics of chemical decolorization  of the azo dye C. I. 
Reactive Orange 96 by sulfide. Chemosphere . 47 (9): 925-31 
 
Zee, F.P. (2002). Anaerobi c azo dye reduction . Ph .D. thesis. Wageningen 
University, Wageningen - Netherlands. 
 
Zhao X, Hardin IR (2007). HPLC and spectrophotometric analysis of 
biodegradation of azo dyes by Pleurotus  ostreatus . Dyes Pigm  73: 322-325 
 
Zimmerman T., Kulla H. G., and Leisinger. T.  (1982) Properties of purified orange 
II azo reductase, the enzyme initiating azo dye degradation by pseudomonas KF46. J Biochem  129: 197-203 
 
Zimmermann, T., Gasser, F., Kulla, H.G., and Leisinger, T. (1984). Compression 
of two bacterial azoreductases acquired during adaptation to grow on azo dyes. 
Archives of Microbiology . 138: 37 – 43.  
 
Zissi, U., Lyberatos, G. and Pavlou , S. (1997). Biode gradation of p-
aminoazobenzene by bacillus subt ilis under aerobic conditions. Journal of 
Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology . 19:49-55  132 
Zollinger, H. (1987). Color Chemistry-Synthesis, Properti es and Application of 
Organic Dyes and Pigments. VCH New York , PP. 92-102. 
 
Zollinger, H. (1991) Color Ch emistry: Syntheses, Properti es and Applications of 
Organic Dyes and Pigments . VCH Publishers , Weinheim, Germany 
  