Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biotechnology Advances
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biotechadv
Research review paper
Bioremediation 3. 0: Engineering pollutant-removing bacteria in the times of
systemic biology
Pavel Dvo řáka, Pablo I. Nikelb,J iří Damborskýc,d, Víctor de Lorenzoa,⁎
aSystems and Synthetic Biology Program, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), 28049 Madrid, Spain
bThe Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark
cLoschmidt Laboratories, Centre for Toxic Compounds in the Environment RECETOX, Department of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, 62500
Brno, Czech Republic
dInternational Clinical Research Center, St. Anne's University Hospital, Pekarska 53, 656 91 Brno, Czech Republic
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Bioremediation
Biodegradation pathway engineeringEmerging pollutantsEnvironmental biotechnologySystemic biologyMetabolic engineeringSystems biologySynthetic biologyABSTRACT
Elimination or mitigation of the toxic eﬀ ects of chemical waste released to the environment by industrial and
urban activities relies largely on the catalytic activities of microorganisms —speciﬁcally bacteria. Given their
capacity to evolve rapidly, they have the biochemical power to tackle a large number of molecules mobilized
from their geological repositories through human action ( e.g., hydrocarbons, heavy metals) or generated through
chemical synthesis ( e.g., xenobiotic compounds). Whereas naturally occurring microbes already have con-
siderable ability to remove many environmental pollutants with no external intervention, the onset of geneticengineering in the 1980s allowed the possibility of rational design of bacteria to catabolize speci ﬁc compounds,
which could eventually be released into the environment as bioremediation agents. The complexity of this
endeavour and the lack of fundamental knowledge nonetheless led to the virtual abandonment of such a re-combinant DNA-based bioremediation only a decade later. In a twist of events, the last few years have witnessed
the emergence of new systemic ﬁelds (including systems and synthetic biology, and metabolic engineering) that
allow revisiting the same environmental pollution challenges through fresh and far more powerful approaches.
The focus on contaminated sites and chemicals has been broadened by the phenomenal problems of anthro-
pogenic emissions of greenhouse gases and the accumulation of plastic waste on a global scale. In this article, we
analyze how contemporary systemic biology is helping to take the design of bioremediation agents back to thecore of environmental biotechnology. We inspect a number of recent strategies for catabolic pathway con-
struction and optimization and we bring them together by proposing an engineering work ﬂow.
1. Introduction
Increasing pollution of air, soils, ground and surface waters con-
stitutes a major threat to public health both in developing countries as
well as in industrialized countries including EU states, the USA, India
and China. The majority of contaminants that a ﬀect soils and waters are
heavy metals and organic compounds such as mineral oil hydrocarbons,polyaromatic hydrocarbons, benzene derivatives, and halogenated hy-drocarbons. Many of organic polluting compounds for agricultural (the
pesticides dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane, atrazine, and penta-
chlorophenol), industrial (solvents such as dichloroethane or dielectric
ﬂuids such as polychlorinated biphenyls) or military use (explosives
such as 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene) are xenobiotics of anthropogenic origin.There is also a spectrum of so-called emerging contaminants (Table 1 ),
i.e., substances long present in the environment whose presence andnegative e ﬀects have only recently been recognized ( Petrie et al.,
2015 ). The list can be further broadened with petroleum-derived
plastics and some chemicals originally considered to be green , including
certain types of bioplastics or ionic liquids ( Amde et al., 2015 ). Despite
the recalcitrant nature of some of these polluting compounds, many are
more or less susceptible to biodegradation ( Alexander, 1999 ). In addi-
tion to these traditional causes of environmental deterioration, the re-cent decades have witnessed the onset of ramped-up levels of anthro-pogenic emissions of CO
2and other greenhouse gases and their ensuing
impact on climatic change. Whereas the chemicals themselves aresimple (CO
2,C H 4,N2O), the challenge here is less their biodegradation
than their recapture in a non-gaseous form.
The major entity that causes large-scale transformations in the
biosphere are microorganisms and their metabolic pathways. Microbesdegrade toxic chemicals viacomplete mineralization or co-metabolism,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2017.08.001
Received 4 June 2017; Received in revised form 1 August 2017; Accepted 4 August 2017⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail address: vdlorenzo@cnb.csic.es (V. de Lorenzo).Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
Available online 05 August 2017
0734-9750/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
MARKin aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Advantageous properties such as
small genome size, relative simplicity of the cell, short replication
times, rapid evolution and adaptation to the new environmental con-
ditions made microbes, and particularly bacteria, favourable candidates
for bioremediation technologies, that is in situ orex situ removal of
polluting chemicals from the environment using biological agents. Theremoval of environmental pollution caused by the extensive activities of
industrial society is a serious topic that draws the attention of bio-
technologists. This is because beyond the medical and environmental
consequences, the situation signs considerable potential for growth of
eco-industry focused on clean-up technologies and removal of en-
vironmental contaminants. In fact, valorization of waste chemicals ac-cumulating in industry is one of the pillars of the circular economy and
the 4th Industrial Revolution ( Schmidt, 2012; Wigginton et al., 2012 ).
The earliest attempts at directed bioremediation, although not for-
malized as such at the time, dated back to the late 19th century with the
origins of the ﬁrst wastewater treatment plants ( Litchﬁeld, 2005 ).
Bioremediation began in earnest some 45 years ago with the isolation ofculturable bacteria from contaminated sites and studying their de-
gradation pathways. The ﬁrst report on enhanced in situ bioremediation
of soil contaminated with peroleum-derived hydrocarbons was pub-lished in 1975 by Raymond et al. (1975) . Natural microbial degraders
were later applied with success in world-wide and local biotechnolo-gical processes including large-scale wastewater denitri ﬁcation, ur-
anium removal, and degradation of 1,2-dichloroethane from ground-water or the organophosphorus pesticide coumaphos from cattle-dip
waste ( Francis and Mankin, 1977; Lovley et al., 1991; Mulbry et al.,
1998; Stucki and Thueer, 1995 ). The advent of technologies for pollu-
tant removal using naturally emerging microorganisms could be called
the era of Bioremediation 1 .0. Even so, a number of speci ﬁc chemicals,
especially of anthropogenic origin, including persistent organic pollu-tants such as dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), tri-
chloroethylene, 1,2,3-trichloropropane, some polychlorinated biphe-
nyls (PCB) or dioxins continued to be resistant to natural
biodegradation due to lack of e ﬃcient microbial catabolic traits whose
evolution was not su ﬃciently rapid or ended in a deadlock ( Janssen
et al., 2005).
Initial discoveries in molecular biology and progress in biological
engineering disciplines seemed to provide a partial solution for such
challenges through rational interventions in the metabolic networks of
selected microbial hosts. The rise of recombinant DNA technology al-
lowed the transformation of bioremediation from empirical practice
into an excercise in genetic engineering, giving rise to what we might
term Bioremediation 2 .0. The goal of the new ﬁeld was to engineer
whole microbes, their biodegradation pathways, and the corresponding
enzymes towards in situ mineralization of target pollutants. Suchsuperbugs were expected to provide an economically feasible, en-
vironmentally friendly alternative to the costly conventional technol-
ogies for pollutant removal available at the time ( Ramos et al., 2011).
The late 1980s and early 1990s represented the golden era of biode-gradation research, with numerous engineering attempts following the
pioneering work by Chakrabarty and co-workers ( Kellogg et al., 1981).
They described the preparation of recombinant Pseudomonas putida
strains able to break down crude oil by the plasmid -assisted
molecular
breeding , that is, propagation of novel catabolic capabilities through
directed bacterial conjugation and plasmid transfer. The persistence of
many xenobiotics was attributed mainly to the absence of complete
degradative pathways in a single organism ( Brenner et al., 1994;
Reineke and Knackmuss, 1979 ). Recruitment of complementary en-
zyme sequences by conjugative gene transfer and so called patchwork
assembly of several existing natural pathways in a suitable host was
believed to generate functional synthetic routes that would allow forthe complete mineralization of persistent target compounds such as
PCB ( Lehrbach et al., 1984; Ramos et al., 1987; Rojo et al., 1987 ).
Despite some success with the patchwork strategy and engineering of
superbugs with extended substrate scope in laboratory conditions, this
initial and rather naïve approach led to many disappointments as well(Cases and de Lorenzo, 2005; de Lorenzo, 2009 ). A prominent example
was the case of engineered Pseudomonas strains that did not grow on 2-
chlorotoluene as the only carbon source, even though they possessed all
the genetic components presumed necessary for substrate mineraliza-
tion ( Haro and de Lorenzo, 2001 ). From a contemporary perspective,
such failures can be explained by lack of insight into important factorssuch as: (i) thermodynamic feasibility of assembled catabolic networks,
(ii) kinetic characteristics of enzymes and physicochemical properties
of metabolites, (iii) expression levels of pathway modules, (iv) cross-
talk between exogenous and endogenous metabolic routes, and (v)
stress responses and changes in overall host cell physiology after in-
troduction of new metabolic modules and exposure to toxic substrates
and metabolites ( de Lorenzo, 2009; Ramos et al., 2011 ).
Fortunately, the last decade has witnessed the onset of what can be
called systemic biology , which merges di ﬀerent approaches of systems
biology, metabolic engineering, and synthetic biology, for the sake ofunderstanding and reprograming biological systems. Systemic biology
has the potential to remove the unknowns and bottlenecks encountered
in past trials and paves the way towards the era of Bioremediation 3 .0.
The joint power of the systemic biology disciplines can ensure thatbiodegradation and bioremedation using genetically modi ﬁed micro-
organisms will remain a vital concept deserving of the full attention ofnew generations of bioengineers.
In this article we review the applications of novel engineering
strategies to the design and evolution of microbial biodegradationTable 1
Emerging contaminants.Sources: http://toxics.usgs.gov ,http://www.eugris.info (Petrie et al., 2015 ).
Groups of products Classes of chemicals Examples
Human and veterinary
pharmaceuticalsAntibiotics, anti-parasitic agents, ionophores Amoxicillin, erythromycin, metronidazol, tetracycline, lincomycin,
sulfathiazole
Stimulants and drugs including anti-in ﬂammatory, anti-diabetic,
anti-epileptic, anti-hypertensive, or anti-cancer drugs,
anticoagulants, hallucinogens, analgesics, β-blockers, anti-
depressants, lipid regulators, or erectile dysfunction drugsAmphetamine, cocaine, ca ﬀeine, nicotine, propranolol, ibuprofen,
codeine, carbamazepine, beza ﬁbrate, metformin, ﬂuoxetine, warfarine,
valsartan, tramadol, morphine, methandone, diazepam, ephedrine,
tamoxifen
Hormones including natural and synthetic estrogens, androgens Estrone, estriol, testosterone, progesterone, mestranol (ovulation
inhibitor), cholesterol
Industrial and household
wastewater productsInsecticides, plasticizers, detergents, ﬂame retardants, polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, antioxidants, solvents, disinfectants,
fumigants, fragrances, preservativesCarbaryl, chlorpyrifos, diethylphtalate, p-nonylphenol, tri(2-
chloroethyl)phosphate, naphtalene, anthracene, 2,6-di- tert-butylphenol,
1,2,3-trichloropropane, phenol, 1,4-dichlorobenzene, acetophenone
Personal care products Insect repellents, polycyclic musks, sunscreen agents, fragrances,
antisepticsBisphenol A, 1-benzophenone, methylparaben, N,N-diethyltoluamide,
triclosan
Nanomaterials Miscelaneous Nanosilver, alumina nanoparticles, titanium dioxide, fullerenes, carbon
blackP. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
846pathways and whole-cell degraders from the last decade, and propose
an optimal work ﬂow for pathway design, construction and optimiza-
tion. In particular, we discuss the potential of state-of-the-art systemic
technologies not yet fully employed for this purpose including new
ways to genetically engineer superior CO 2scavengers. Lastly, the per-
spectives of microbial cell factories tailored for biodegradation andbioremediation are critically evaluated.
2. Approaches and tools of systems biology and metabolic
engineering for tailoring biodegradation pathways
One key objective of systems biology is to gain comprehensive,
quantitative understanding of living cells by combining high-throughput technologies and computational methods to characterize
and predict cell behaviour ( Dai and Nielsen, 2015). Metabolic en-
gineering, ﬁrst deﬁ ned as a new scienti ﬁc discipline by Bailey (1991) ,i s
now understood as the practice of optimizing genetic and regulatory
processes within the cells to (i) improve the yield and productivity of
native products synthesized by organisms, (ii) establish the synthesis of
products new to the host cell, and, two points especially relevant for
biodegradation, to (iii) extend the range of substrates or improve sub-
strate uptake, and (iv) improve overall cell robustness ( Nielsen et al.,
2014 ). These goals can be achieved by engineering natural metabolic
pathways in the host cell or synthetic routes assembled from enzymes
originating from di ﬀerent organisms. The aims of systems biology co-
incide fully with the objectives of metabolic engineering. These twodisciplines are now inseparable, complement each other, and have even
merged into a ﬁeld of systems metabolic engineering ( Lee et al., 2012 ).
Metabolic engineers use systems biology computational tools and ‘omic ’
techniques to gain deeper insight into the genetic and physiological
background of target organisms, to model enzymatic reactions and todetermine the constraints for e ﬃcient biocatalysis. To overcome these
constraints, computational tools are applied together with establishedexperimental protocols, now frequently strengthened with synthetic
biology standards and ﬁne-tuning adaptive laboratory evolution. The
Design -Build -Test-Analyze (DBTA) cycle is repeated until performance of
the engineered cell factory is optimized and a cost-e ﬀective process can
be established ( Paddon and Keasling, 2014). It is tempting and logical
to use the same intellectual work ﬂow to engineer biodegradation
pathways ( Fig. 1). The portfolio of systems metabolic engineering tools
applicable for such purposes will be discussed in more detail in the
Section 2 of the review.
2.1. Step 1: get to know the contaminant and ﬁnd a suitable catabolic
pathway
The compound to be degraded or removed from the contaminated
environment or industrial waste site is usually the very ﬁrst component
known in a project focused on biodegradation or bioremediation. Thepolluting chemicals show diverse physicochemical properties, can oc-
cupy heterogenous physical niches in the environment, and exist in
concentrations ranging from ng/L to mg/L ( Meckenstock et al., 2015 ).
Industrial waste chemicals, prohibited pesticides, or warfare agentssuch as 1,2,3-trichloropropane, γ-hexachlorocyclohexane, or yperite,
respectively, can be available for degradation as stock piles or mixedwith environmental matrix. When bioremediation is a method of choice
for removal of the target compound, another challenge arises: how to
ﬁnd the most suitable pathway for degradation and, ideally, complete
mineralization of the chemical in the huge amount of genetic, bio-chemical and microbiological data available. As pointed out by Nobel
laureate Sydney Brenner, we are currently “...drowning
 in a sea of data,
thirsting for knowledge... ”. New computational tools and algorithms,
combined with common sense, are the only way to cope with the
complexity of life, ﬁnd the needle in a haystack, and obtain valuable
output –the natural or synthetic pathway or set of pathways most
suitable for a speci ﬁc biodegradation task in a selected microbial host.Computational tools can provide the user with relevant information onphysicochemical properties of the target compound and the basic
building blocks of the catabolic pathway –enzymes and metabolites. A
wide spectrum of databases and prediction systems that provide usefulinformation on a number of chemicals and biodegradative or biosyn-
thetic routes has been developed over the years. Comprehensive re-
views that focus on evaluation of computational tools mainly for bio-
synthetic pathway design have been published in the last few years
(Long et al., 2015; Medema et al., 2012). Chemical and biodegradation
databases as well as pathway and toxicity prediction systems that mightbe useful for evaluating existing biodegradation pathways or en-
gineering new ones were reviewed by Arora and Bae (2014) . To avoid
duplication, here we aim to discuss mainly the updates and applicationsof representative systems for biodegradation pathway design.
2.1.1. Databases
The University of Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation Database
and Pathway Prediction System (UM-BBD/PPS) is a remarkable tool
that has garnered microbial pathways for xenobiotics for over 20 years
and can be considered an advisable ﬁrst-choice search engine ( Gao
et al., 2010 ). In 2014, UM-BBD/PPS rights were assigned to Eawag, the
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology and the da-
tabase got a new name EAWAG-BBD/PPS. EAWAG-BBD ( http://eawag-
bbd.ethz.ch ) can not only search through 543 microorganism entries,
219 metabolic routes, 1503 reactions, 1396 chemicals, and 993 en-
zymes, but also allows prediction of novel biotransformations leading
from target xenobiotic substrate to the molecule that can be metabo-
lized by central catabolic pathways of a host cell. The enviPath tool
(The Environmental Contaminant Biotransformation Pathway Re-
source; https://envipath.org/ ) was recently introduced as a rebuilt
version of EAWAG-BBD/PPS ( Wicker et al., 2016 ). Registered user can
employ enviPath for design of particular biochemical routes and per-sonal databases with biotransformation data as well as for prediction of
new catabolic pathways. In 2017, the same team introduced a new
database implanted in enviPath platform, Eawag-Soil ( Latino et al.,
2017 ). This public database is a unique repository of data collected
during laboratory simulations on aerobic degradation of pesticides in
soil, including biotransformation half-lifes.
Although they provide access to much more data in addition to
biodegradation pathways and related content, MetaCyc and BioCyc
databases by SRI International should be mentioned as well ( Caspi
et al., 2016). With its 2526 experimentally elucidated pathways from2844 di ﬀerent organisms from all domains of life, MetaCyc ( https://
metacyc.org/ ) is one of the largest repositories of metabolism data and
serves primarily as an on-line encyclopedia in which metabolic routes
can be predicted from available sequenced genomes, browsed through,
or mutually compared. The majority of listed compounds and reactions
now also include the Gibbs free energy values ( Caspi et al., 2016).
BioCyc ( https://biocyc.org/ ) is a collection of 9389 organism-speci ﬁc
Pathway/Genome Databases (PGDB; the number tripled in the last
three years!). Each PGDB encompasses the sequenced genome and
predicted metabolic network of single organism. Moreover, information
on individual components such as predicted operons, metabolites, en-
zymes and their reactions, or transport systems is provided ( Caspi et al.,
2016 ). BioCyc also provides several useful tools for navigating, visua-
lizing, and analyzing the PGDB, and for analyzing omics data. Both
MetaCyc
and BioCyc are linked to numerous other databases. UniProt
(www.uniprot.org/ ), a collaboration between the European Bioinfor-
matics Institute, the SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics and the Pro-
tein Information Resource, supplies missing information on function,
sequence, or taxonomy of proteins from metabolic or signalling path-
ways and is further interconnected with more speci ﬁc protein databases
such as RCSB Protein Data Bank or BRENDA, thus completing the pic-ture with structural or kinetic data ( Berman et al., 2000; Chang et al.,
2015; UniProt Consortium, 2015).P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
8472.1.2. Pathway prediction systems and toxicity prediction algorithms
The development of reliable pathway prediction systems is of major
importance for the ﬁeld of biodegradation as for the numerous an-
thropogenic chemicals released into the environment the catabolic
pathways are either completely unknown or poorly understood. These
tools consider many factors including substrate speci ﬁcities, binding
sites or reaction mechanisms of enzymes, structural changes in sub-strate-product pairs and pathway distance from substrate to product
(Medema et al., 2012). The pathway prediction system of EAWAG-
BBD/PPS or enviPath, predicts biodegradation routes based on avail-able biotransformation rules derived from reactions found in the
EAWAG-BBD database or in the literature ( Gao et al., 2010; Wicker
et al., 2016 ). It can highlight initiating reaction types likely to occur in
aerobic environments, which in some cases lead to the complete mi-neralization of the contaminant ( Fig. 2), although, it does not deﬁ ne the
thermodynamic feasibility of the proposed pathways or the speci ﬁc
enzymes that catalyse proposed reactions. This latter information can
be supplemented by the complementary prediction algorithm of a new
public database RAPID ( http://rapid.umn.edu/rapid/ ), currently being
developed by the group of Lawrence P. Wackett at University of Min-nesota. The idea of future utility of combined EAWAG-BBD and RAPID
algorithms was provided recently by Aukema and co-workers who used
these tools to predict initial metabolism of a set of emerging con-
taminants that include recalcitrant pharmaceuticals, alkyl phthalates,
or fragrance compounds previously shown to be degraded by Para-
burkholderia xenovorans LB400 ( Aukema et al., 2016).In case of anthropogenic contaminants with unknown or un-
complete natural catabolic pathways, the Biochemical Network
Integrated Computational Explorer (BNICE.ch) can be recommended as
well ( Hatzimanikatis et al., 2005). The authors from the Vassily Hat-
zimanikatis' group at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology havebeen developing BNICE.ch, one of the ﬁrst tools for uncovering and
describing new enzymatic reactions based on known biochemistry,for > 15 years. In the latest version, the method was coupled with a
manually-curated KEGG database, generally recognized as one of the
most complete repositories of metabolic data ( Kanehisa et al., 2014).
The catalogued biochemistry of the KEGG database was converted into361 bidirectional generalized rules which were applied to explore the
possible space of all metabolic reactions that link the compounds re-ported in the KEGG and are potentially found in nature ( Hadadi et al.,
2016 ). As a result, 6528 KEGG reactions and 137,416 known or com-
pletely new enzymatic reactions between two or more KEGG com-
pounds were organized in a reaction web-based database named ATLAS
of Biochemistry ( http://lcsb-databases.ep ﬂ.ch/atlas/ ). Importantly, the
thermodynamic feasibility of de novo generated reactions was evaluated
and the parameter of Gibbs free energy is a part of the majority of
records in the ATLAS database. To the bene ﬁt of the reaction prediction
system, according to authors, up to 80% of the newly added KEGGreactions in 2015 already existed in ATLAS as novel reactions.
In biodegradation pathway design, BNICE.ch was ﬁrst used by
Finley and co-workers to propose all possible catabolic routes for 4-
chlorobiphenyl, phenanthrene, γ-hexachlorocyclohexane, and 1,2,4-
Fig. 1. Proposed work ﬂow for engineering biodegradation pathways using systemic biology approaches and tools. The Figure sketches the roadmap to contructing superior bacterial
catalysts for environmental bioremediation that capitalize on systems and synthetic biology, as explained in this review.P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
848trichlorobenzene (1,2,4-TCB), compounds that represent various classes
of xenobiotics ( Finley et al., 2009 ). BNICE.ch not only reproduced the
experimentally veri ﬁed pathways, but also found completely novel re-
actions, taking into account the starting compound, the requested
length of the pathway and the broader reaction rules of the Enzyme
Commission classi ﬁcation system. The 15 novel pathways for 1,2,4-TCB
were subsequently probed using thermodynamic analysis and foundenergetically feasible. In the follow-up study, the authors evaluated the
new routes in the context of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 cellular me-
tabolism ( Finley et al., 2010 ). They expanded the available P.putida
metabolic model by including the pathways obtained from BNICE.chand metabolic ﬂux analysis was used to predict the maximum biomass
generated using 1,2,4-TCB as the sole carbon source. In this way, in-teresting alternative pathways were proposed that couple 1,2,4-TCButilisation with biomass formation. Although this work was purely
theoretical, it suggests the way for those who wish to use the increasing
power of computational modelling to design biodegradation routes or
explore the fate of xenobiotics in the environment.
Prediction tools for assisting the design of robust microbial bio-
sensors are highly desirable as well. Such biosensors are often based on
regulatory proteins or riboswitches able to translate the presence of a
given metabolite or small molecule into a readily measurable readout
(Gredell et al., 2012; Schallmey et al., 2014; Cardinale et al., 2017 ). But
what to do when biosensors for a compound of interest do not exist? An
interesting approach to tackle the issue was presented recently by
Delépine et al. (2016) . Their SensiPath algorithm ( http://sensipath.
micalis.fr/ ) stems from the concept of retrosynthesis introduced pre-
viously by the same laboratory ( Carbonell et al., 2014). SensiPath
Fig. 2. Initial aerobic biotransformations of the
emerging contaminant 1,2,3-trichloropropane
(TCP) generated by the EAWAG-BBD Pathway
Prediction System. Reactions are tagged with one
of the 249 biotransformation rules used for the
predictions. Reactions proven experimentally to
be catalysed by haloalkane dehalogenase DhaA,
epoxide hydrolase EchA and halohydrin dehalo-
genase HheC in aerobic conditions are high-lighted with thick arrows ( Bosma et al., 1999 ).
The scheme was adopted and modi ﬁed from
http://eawag-bbd.ethz.ch/predict/ . Aerobic like-
lihood speciﬁ es whether the reaction will occur in
aerobic conditions, exposed to air, in soil (mod-
erate moisture) or water, at neutral pH, 25 °C,with no competing compounds. Abbreviations:
DCP, 2,3-dichloropropane-1-ol; ECH, epi-
chlorohydrin; CPD, 3-chloropropane-1,2-diol;
GDL, glycidol.P. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
849applies more than 9,000 unique reaction rules collected from BRENDA,
Metacyc, and Rhea ( Morgat et al., 2015 ) databases to ﬁnd enzymes
(currently limited to max. two-step reactions) able to convert a targetundetectable organic chemical into a molecule that can be recognized
by a known natural sensing system. In the theoretical part of the follow-
up study the authors applied SensiPath to expand the range of thereby
detectable compounds among chemical structures collected from sev-
eral databases ( Libis et al., 2016 ). The method almost tripled (from 169
to 477) the number of theoretically detectable compounds in theTOX21 database ( Krewski et al., 2009 ). The predictive power of the
method was validated in the experimental part of the study. Metabolicmodules of up to two enzymes proposed by SensiPath were introduced
into E.colibearing a sensing module for the product of enzymatic
conversion at stake. Functional whole-cell biosensors for cocaine, ni-troglycerin, or parathion were constructed in such way. Despite this
remarkable contribution, the number of undetectable organic chemicals
remains at a high > 94% of all compounds in TOX21 database.
Strengthening the computational power of tools such as SensiPath will
hopefully improve the situation in the near future.
The predicted reaction networks can also be pruned using toxicity
estimation algorithms, to prevent the formation of compounds highy
toxic to the host ( Benfenati, 2007). Besides quantitative structure ac-
tivity relationship (QSAR) models, which calculate toxicity based on thephysical characteristics of the chemical structures (molecular de-
scriptors; Eriksson et al., 2003), other models have recently been de-
veloped to predict toxicity based, for example, on chemical-chemicalinteractions ( Chen et al., 2013). QSAR models nonetheless remain the
paradigm in the ﬁeld. An interesting example of a QSAR model-based
computational tool ( https://absynth.issb.genopole.fr/Bioinformatics/ )
is the toxicity prediction web server EcoliTox ( Planson et al., 2012 ).
The dataset obtained from screening a diversi ﬁed chemical library of
166 compounds for toxicity in Escherichia coli was used to develop a
predictor of toxicity of metabolites throughout the metabolome of thispopular bacterial host. Tools similar to the EcoliTox server could be
integrated into a computational framework for improved design of
native or heterologous biodegradation pathways and used to ﬁne-tune
their expression in selected microbial hosts. A powerful virtualscreening approach, currently applied predominantly in drug design
studies ( Buryska et al., 2016), could be used similarly for synthetic
pathway predictions to avoid selection of enzymes whose catalyticmachinery might be inhibited by molecules present in a host cell.
2.1.3. Detection and quanti ﬁcation of pathway building blocks
Once the suitable pathway is selected, another issue arises, that of
how to detect and quantify the pathway building blocks - metabolites
and enzymes. Detection and accurate quanti ﬁcation of metabolites in
complex reaction mixtures and of functional enzymes produced withinthe cell provide valuable information on pathway performance and its
bottlenecks, as well as a background for further optimization of the
route. Here, the experimental tools and approaches come into play for
theﬁrst time in our work ﬂow scheme ( Fig. 1). The best sensitivity and
separation power is currently provided by chromatographic separationof metabolites followed by mass spectrometry analysis ( Büscher et al.,
2009 ). Information on physicochemical properties of compounds
(boiling point, polarity, molecular weight) generated in the pathway is
nonetheless crucial for correct choice of a detection method, be it gas
chromatography, liquid chromatography, or capillary electrophoresis
(Büscher et al., 2009 ). Of the numerous chemical databases, PubChem
(https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ),
created in 2004 by the US Na-
tional Institutes of Health, is the world's largest free chemistry re-pository, into which anyone can deposit data on structures and their
properties ( Kim et al., 2016 ). The database has grown to > 92 million
structures. Bioactivity data of chemical substances, manually with-drawn from the scienti ﬁc literature, are saved in PubChem Substance
and Compound databases. Integration with other databases allows in-cluding pharmacology, toxicology, drug target information, safety orhandling information to the annotation of chemical records. PubChemalso hosts data from important regulatory agencies, including the US
Environmental Protection Agency. In 2007, another free repository,
ChemSpider ( http://www.chemspider.com/ ), was created and later
purchased by the UK Royal Society of Chemistry; it provides access toover 59 million entries from 487 diverse data sources and can be re-
commended as another rich source of knowledge on experimental or
predicted physicochemical properties of compounds.
For pathway enzyme detection and absolute quanti ﬁcation, SDS-
PAGE or better, Western blot analysis, followed by determination of
enzyme activity have been standard protocols in metabolic engineering
for many years ( Kurumbang et al., 2014). When applied to multiple-
enzyme pathways, however, these methods are tedious and time-con-suming. Selected Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry protocols
developed in the past few years seem to provide a promising alternative
for absolute protein quanti ﬁcation in the future, as they allow rapid
simultaneous quanti ﬁcation of many proteins in the cell, with good
selectivity and sensitivity regardless of organism of origin ( Batth et al.,
2012 ).
2.2. Step 2: select and get to know a suitable microbial host
In addition to catabolic pathway choice or design, the selection of a
suitable host is a crucial initial step in any engineering project focusedon the development of a whole-cell degrader. Over the years, several
microbial hosts have been considered for application in biodegradation
processes, but no single, naturally isolated bacterial strain possesses all
the desired characteristics of the optimal degrader. Soil bacteria could
satisfy many of these requirements because of the conditions they face
naturally in the niches in which they thrive, including exposure to
environmental contaminants and to competing and predatory species.
These microorganisms have versatile metabolic lifestyles that allowthem to adapt to changing conditions, sometimes adverse (oxidative
stress, temperature challenges, osmotic perturbations). P.putida is a
ubiquitous rhizosphere colonizer that belongs to the wide (if somewhatfuzzy) group of ﬂuorescent Pseudomonas .P.putida KT2440 is the best-
characterized saprophytic laboratory pseudomonad that has retained itsability to survive and thrive in the environment. Its entire chromosome
sequence is available since 2002 ( Belda et al., 2016; Nelson et al., 2002,
Nikel et al., 2014). This strain derives from P.putida mt-2, a naturally
occurring species able to degrade several aromatic compounds through
the activities encoded in the catabolic TOL plasmid. The physiological
and metabolic properties of pseudomonads argue for their selection as
the starting point for engineering of biodegradation processes. In ad-
dition to rapid growth and low nutrient demand, their extremely ver-
satile metabolism and high capacity to supply redox power, providing
endurance to oxidative stress, are several advantages that render P.
putida an interesting host for degradation applications ( Nikel et al.,
2016a ). Most of these properties arise from a very robust central me-
tabolism ( Fig. 3), in which the combined activity of enzymes from
diﬀerent pathways ( i.e.,
the EDEMP cycle; Nikel et al., 2015) endows
the cells with a large NADPH supply ( Chavarría et al., 2013). The op-
erativity of the EDEMP cycle enables the formation of ATP and NADPH
at diﬀerent rates depending on the amount of trioses phosphate re-
cycled. Assuming that P.putida has (i) a NAD+dependent glycer-
aldehyde-3- Pdehydrogenase and a NADP+dependent glucose-6- Pde-
hydrogenase, (ii) pyruvate as the end product of glycolytic pathways,and (iii) a negligible ﬂux through 2-ketogluconate, the yields of pyr-
uvate, ATP, and NADPH are as indicated in the inset to Fig. 3. The
ability to sustain high NADPH formation rates is a requisite needed in a
bacterial host for the implantation of biodegradation pathways
(Lorenzo and Loza-Tavera, 2011 ). As will be shown in part in following
sections, these bene ﬁcial properties are re ﬂected in the increasing
number of metabolic engineering studies in which P.putida appears as
one major player.P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
8502.2.1. Omics techniques in studies of bacterial degraders
Systems biology, and particularly ‘omic ’techniques, contributed
markedly to rational selection of suitable hosts for metabolic en-
gineering. The enormous amount of genetic information read with ﬁrst-
or next-generation sequencing techniques together with powerful newalgorithms and computational tools to aid with data mining, allowed
considerable progress in our understanding of dynamic interactions
inside and in between cells and the environments they inhabit
(Bouhajja et al., 2016; Vilchez-Vargas et al., 2010 ). Available genomic
data also enabled new insights into the evolution of microbial meta-bolism towards biodegradation of well-recognized xenobiotics such as
1,3,5-triazine ( Shapir et al., 2007 ). 16S rRNA-phylogenetic microarrays
and the functional gene microarrays have been used to monitor mi-crobial community dynamics and to track activities of microbes in the
polluted environments, respectively ( Chakraborty et al., 2012). The
reconstructed genome-scale metabolic models, together with tran-scriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic, and ﬂux analyses in various
growth and stress conditions, completely changed our view of popularbiodegradative bacterial hosts including the paradigmatic P.putida
(Sohn et al., 2010).
For instance, ﬂuxomic analyses applied to P.putida KT2440 helped
to reveal its distinct strategies for dealing with carbon sources, e.g., by
favouring the routes that generate NADPH, which promotes greater
resistance to oxidative stress ( Chavarría et al., 2013; Nikel et al., 2013 ).
Examination of transcriptomic data uncovered the signi ﬁcant portion of
theP.putida genome ( ≥20%) that is di ﬀerentially expressed when the
cells are grown on diverse substrates and emphasized the role of a suite
of global regulators ( J. Kim et al., 2013 ). Recent complete structural re-
annotation of the KT2440 strain genome allowed identi ﬁcation of 1485CDSs associated to 1898 chemical reactions, prediction of catabolicpathways for 92 compounds (carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus
sources) and upgrading of the available genome-scale metabolic model
(Belda et al., 2016; Pucha łka et al., 2008 ).‘Omic ’analyses greatly in-
creased insight into the genetic and physiological background of someother pseudomonads besides KT2440, including P.pseudoalcaligenes
CECT5344, which might be used for biodegradation of industrial cya-nide-containing wastes, or the 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene biotransforming P.
putida JLR11 ( Pascual et al., 2015; Wibberg et al., 2016 ). At the time of
writing this article, there are 3133 drafted and 215 completed Pseu-
domonas genomes
 currently available in the Pseudomonas Genome Da-
tabase ( http://www.pseudomonas.com/ ), perhaps the most compre-
hensive genomic database dedicated to a single bacterial genus ( Winsor
et al., 2016 ).
Complete genomic sequences are currently available for many other
potentially useful degraders such as Cupriavidus necator JMP134, a
bacterium with nearly 300 genes involved in the catabolism of aro-matics, including chloroaromatics ( Lykidis et al., 2010 ). Other ex-
amples include, but are not limited to, the PCBs-degrading Acidovorax
sp. strain KKS102 ( Ohtsubo et al., 2012 ), the cyclic hydrocarbons-de-
grading Alicycliphilus denitri ﬁcans strains BC and K601 ( Oosterkamp
et al., 2013 ), or the oil-degrading bacterium Oleispira antarctica , whose
genome has provided useful information as to how bacteria mitigate oilspills in cold environments ( Kube et al., 2013). Genomic sequences of
these and many other microorganisms with biodegradation capabilitiescan be searched through in comprehensive databases such as NCBI
genome database ( https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/ ) or Micro-
Scope ( http://www.genoscope.cns.fr/agc/microscope/home/ ), a mi-
crobial genome annotation and analysis platform ( Vallenet et al.,
2016 ), developed in the Laboratory of Bioinformatics Analyses for
Genomics and Metabolism at the National Sequencing Centre (Evry,
France); it provides a complete pipeline for annotations and compara-
tive analyses of up to 6000 microbial genomes, of which hundreds weremanually curated for accuracy.
Despite interest in study of individual bacterial species, the fasci-
nating in situ systems biology exercise that followed one of the most
alarming ecological disasters in modern human history, the 2010 BPDeepwater Horizon spill in the Gulf of Mexico, emphasized the irre-
placeable role of bacterial communities in natural bioremediation.
Bacteria that can convert oil-derived alkanes and aromatics into the
biomass were identi ﬁed based on (i) genome reconstructions viame-
tagenome sequencing of the DNA from the stable-isotope-probing ex-periments ( Dombrowski et al., 2016), and (ii) cultivation trials using oil
samples from sea surface and deep sea collected during the out ﬂow
(Gutierrez et al., 2013 ). Only the concerted action of many microbial
species including Cycloclasticus ,Alcanivorax , members of Rhodospir-
illales ,Alteromonas and others, augmented by the speci ﬁc environment
of the oil spill, allowed the degradation of the complex mixture thatconsisted of as many as 1000 compounds. Metagenomic strategies help
to shed light also on the composition and dynamics of microbial con-
sortia that participate in natural biodegradation of chorinated ethenes
in contaminated groundwater ( Adetutu et al., 2015 ) or polycyclic aro-
matic hydrocarbons in soils ( Guazzaroni et al., 2013 ).
2.3. Step 3: build the pathway and optimize its performance in the contextof host metabolism
Optimization of the proposed biochemical pathway in the context of
host cell metabolism is often the most demanding part of the en-gineering
project. This is especially true for de novo synthetic pathways
composed of enzymes from di ﬀerent sources, implanted into a new
bacterial host. Codon composition of introduced genes might not beoptimal for expression in a heterologous host, enzyme activities might
not be well balanced or might cross-talk with the native metabolic
network, pathway intermediates can accumulate and inhibit the growth
of cells, or cofactors, ATP or redox carriers might be lacking. The
Fig. 3. The action of the EDEMP cycle is illustrated with a theoretical example of ﬂux
distribution in glucose-grown P.putida KT2440. Total carbon uptake is considered to be
100 (arbitrary units), and glucose can be split into the phosphorylative (Glk) or oxidative
(x) branches. The net formation rates ( v) of pyruvate (Pyr), ATP, and NADPH are in-
dicated in the inset table, with rrepresenting the amount of triose phosphates recycled to
hexose phosphates through the action of the EDEMP cycle. Note that part of the glucosecan also be oxidized through the action of the so-called peripheral reactions , represented by
the overall ﬂuxxin the scheme, and that two trioses are formed per glucose consumed,
i.e., a glucose uptake ﬂux of 100 (arbitrary units) will result in a pyruvate ﬂux of 200.
Abbreviations: ED pathway, Entner –Doudoro ﬀ pathway; EMP pathway:
Embden –Meyerhof –Parnas pathway; PP pathway, pentose phosphate pathway; G6P,
glucose-6-P; F6P, fructose-6-P; FBP, fructose-1,6-P
2; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone- P; GA3P,
glyceraldehyde-3- P; 6PG, 6-phosphogluconate; KDPG, 2-keto-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluco-
nate; 2KG, 2-ketogluconate; and 2K6PG, 2-keto-6-phosphogluconate. Figure adapted andmodiﬁed from ( Nikel et al., 2016a).P. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
851portfolio of systemic tools that can help overcome these issues is ex-
panding constantly. Here, we will center on the major concepts that
have proven useful in tailoring biodegradation pathways and microbial
degraders. We will discuss the application of several of these modern
tools including the example of engineering the synthetic catabolic route
for 1,2,3-trichloropropane (TCP, Fig. 2), an industrial byproduct of
anthropogenic origin now being recognized as a groundwater con-taminant ( Samin and Janssen, 2012). TCP is representative of di ﬃcult-
to-degrade halogenated aliphatic compounds, a tough case for re-mediation technologists due to its physicochemical properties, toxicity
in living organisms, and absence of e ﬃcient natural catabolic pathway
(Janssen et al., 2005; Samin and Janssen, 2012 ). The enzymes later
used to compose the ﬁrst synthetic pathway that allowed mineraliza-
tion of TCP by an engineered bacterium had already been described inthe late 1980s and early 90s ( Bosma et al., 1999). With a history
spanning > 25 years, the engineering of this biodegradation pathwaythus represents one of the most systematic e ﬀorts of its kind.
2.3.1. Computational tools for pathway and strain optimization
The tremendous increase in the number of sequenced genomes (the
number of complete genomes in the NCBI database has more than
doubled in the last two years) of unicelluar and multicellular organ-
isms, including the microbial degraders mentioned above, led to the
reconstruction of genome-scale metabolic models representing all
(anotated) biochemical reactions that take place in the living cell ( King
et al., 2015 ). Mathematical models of metabolic networks have a cen-
tral role in metabolic engineering, and in pathway and strain optimi-zation. Modelling can be used to analyze the selected pathway ( e.g., to
determine the distribution of metabolic ﬂuxes) and identify reactions
that must be modi ﬁed to improve its performance. Genome-scale me-
tabolic models are built by compiling data on genes related to bio-chemical reactions from databases such as KEGG and BioCyc. The genes
are compared to already ﬁnalized reconstructions of related organisms
toﬁnd homologous reactions; the draft model is then re ﬁned and ver-
iﬁed by simulations. Flux Balance Analysis (FBA) and Metabolic Flux
Analysis (MFA) are two major approaches that use metabolic models topredict intracellular ﬂuxes ( Stephanopoulos, 1999 ). FBA is a theoretical
concept that uses the stoichiometric coe ﬃcients for each reaction in the
system as the set of constraints for optimization. MFA determines in-
tracellular ﬂuxes from measurable rates of metabolite uptake and se-
cretion in growth medium. In a typical experiment, substrates labelledwith the non-radioactive isotope
13C are used in chemostat-grown
cultures to trace ﬂuxes through a cellular network. Computational tools
such as Cobra 2.0 for Matlab, OptKnock, or k-OptForce can implement
constraint-based ﬂux calculations and suggest strategies based on
knock-out, upregulation or downregulation of target genes to optimizemetabolite production without compromising cell growth ( Burgard
et al., 2003; Chowdhury et al., 2014; Schellenberger et al., 2011 ). In a
study by Izallalen and colleagues, OptKnock was used together with the
constraint-based in silico model of Geobacter sulfurreducens to determine
gene deletions which could lead to increased respiration rates ( Izallalen
et al., 2008 ).Geobacter species are well recognized for their ability to
degrade radioactive and toxic metals and have been explored for theirutility in microbial fuel cells ( Shi et al., 2016 ). These processes are
nonetheless limited by electron transfer rates in cells. OptKnock cal-culations followed by genetic constructions by the authors resulted in
recombinant Geobacter cells with decreased ATP levels, slower growth
rates, and predicted higher respiration rates ( Izallalen et al., 2008 ).
Subsequent genome-wide analysis of gene transcript levels also veri ﬁed
thein silico predictions.
Although FBA- and MFA-based approaches can handle genome-scale
metabolic models and require no information on enzyme kinetics, their
output only gives a steady-state approximation of the dynamic reality in
the living cell. Kinetic modelling is an alternative to static ﬂux calcu-
lations when reliable kinetic parameters of pathway enzymes and someother input data are available, e.g., speci ﬁc surface area of the cell,permeability coe ﬃcients for substrates, metabolite concentrations, or
approximate enzyme amount in the cell ( Chowdhury et al., 2015). Ki-
netic constants can be obtained from enzyme databases such asBRENDA or can be determined experimentally. One should keep in
mind that most kinetic constants deposited in databases are not stan-
dardized and also measured in in vitro , which might be a limiting factor
when such data are applied to kinetic modelling in living systems ( Costa
et al., 2011 ). Computational tools such as COPASI or E-Cell are used to
assemble the pathway model in the form of kinetic and di ﬀerential
equations, and to simulate reaction time courses for various conditions
(Mendes et al., 2009; Takahashi et al., 2003 ). Kinetic models of whole
metabolic networks are the holy grail of metabolic engineering buttheir application in strain design is limited by factors such as un-
reliability of parameters, non-universality of rate laws, need to imple-
ment regulatory events, or extremely high demand on computational
power ( Chowdhury et al., 2015 ). In contrast, the use of kinetic mod-
elling to engineer individual metabolic pathways or simpler in vitro -
assembled networks is currently more feasible ( Muschiol et al., 2015 ).
Recent studies by Dvorak, Kurumbang and colleagues are notable
example of kinetic modelling applied in engineering of synthetic bio-
degradation pathways ( Dvorak et al., 2014b; Kurumbang et al., 2014).
As a model, these studies centered on detoxi ﬁcation
of the industrial
waste compound and water pollutant TCP to glycerol - reaction cata-
lysed by the haloalkane dehalogenase DhaA from Rhodococcus rhodo-
chrous NCIMB 13064 and the haloalcohol dehalogenase HheC and the
epoxide hydrolase EchA from Agrobacterium radiobacter AD1 ( Bosma
et al., 1999 ).In vitro steady-state kinetic data obtained for HheC, EchA,
and three variants of DhaA were utilized to develop a kinetic model of
the reaction that proved useful for revealing major bottlenecks in the
pathway, that is (i) low activity of wild-type DhaA on TCP and (ii)
unbalanced enantioselectivity and enantiospeci ﬁcity of the ﬁrst and the
second enzyme in the route, DhaA and HheC, respectively ( Dvorak
et al., 2014b ). Modelling was further applied to predict optimal enzyme
stoichiometry and ﬁne-tuning overall pathway e ﬃciency, both in in
vitro conditions and in the heterologous microbial host E.coli.I nE.coli,
the pathway was established as a modular, tunable system ( Kurumbang
et al., 2014 ). Absolute amounts of pathway enzymes in the cell, copy
numbers of used plasmid vectors, and toxicity levels of pathway sub-
strate and intermediates were included in the mathematical model as
additional parameters. Variants of the pathway, predicted to promote
better host survival in a medium with toxic TCP, were veri ﬁed ex-
perimentally. The observed precise matching between calculated andexperimental data con ﬁrmed the performance of the pathway in E.coli
and stressed the power of kinetic modelling when reliable parametersare available. Finally, the kinetic parameters of an optimal DhaA var-
iant that would ensure su ﬃcient TCP conversion to glycerol as well as
host cell growth on the toxic substrate were both predicted by mathe-matical modelling.
This study shows that, for engineering and implanting heterologous
pathways, complete knowledge of the host cell metabolic background is
not a must, and a reliable strain design can be achieved with a relatively
simple mathematical model ( Dvorak et al., 2014b ). Even so, similar
studies that combine theoretical and experimental approaches in thedesign of pathways and strains for biodegradation are still rare. Most
recent work in the biodegradation ﬁeld is restricted to application of
purely experimental techniques from a repertoire of metabolic en-gineering, discussed in the following section.
2.3.2. Experimental tools for pathway and strain optimization
Once the bottleneck reaction steps are identi ﬁed and a solution is
proposed, experimental techniques are applied to target the appropriate
genes or regulatory mechanisms. Engineering is traditionally conducted
at the level of gene expression, which a ﬀects the quantity of protein.
Genes in native or synthetic pathways are usually overexpressed byintroducing plasmid vectors with extra copies of desired coding se-
quences. One popular approach, also used for modular assembly of theP. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
852TCP biodegradation pathway described above, is to combine Novagen
Duet plasmid vectors (Merck Millipore, Germany) or derivatives such as
ePathBrick vectors, which carry compatible replication origins and
antibiotic markers ( Kurumbang et al., 2014; Tolia and Joshua-Tor,
2006; Xu et al., 2012 ). This system allows e ﬀective propagation and
maintenance of up to four plasmids in a single E.coliBL21 cell with
λDE3 lysogen and modular assembly of multi-gene pathways. SEVA
(Standard European Vector Architecture) plasmids with standardized
architecture and nomenclature are an alternative modular vector
system tailored to allow cloning or expression of heterologous genes in
P.putida ,E.coliand other Gram-negative bacteria, with no speci ﬁc
need for strain pretreatment ( Martínez-García et al., 2015 ). Up to four
plasmids, each with one of the six available antibiotic markers (ampi-
cillin, kanamycin, cloramphenicol, streptomycin, tetracycline, genta-
micin), four independent replication origins (RK2, pBBR1, pRO1600/
ColE1, RSF1010), and diverse cargoes, can be combined in a single host
cell to ful ﬁll the user's needs. A rich collection of constructs is already
freely available ( http://seva.cnb.csic.es/ ).
A set of compatible SEVA plasmids was used, for instance, in a study
ofNikel and de Lorenzo (2013) , who described extrication of P.putida
KT2440 from its strictly aerobic nature, which prevents its use in in-
dustrial anaerobic fermentors and certain bioremediation applications
(Nikel and de Lorenzo, 2013). Two scenarios were considered to ex-
plain the inability of P.putida to grow in anoxic conditions, (i) un-
balanced energy charge due to limited activity of the respiratory chain,
and (ii) lack of appropriate pathways for anoxic NADH re-oxidation.
This two-fold problem was tackled by recruiting the pyruvate dec-
arboxylase ( pdc) and alcohol dehydrogenase II ( adhB ) genes from the
anaerobe Zymomonas mobilis and the acetate kinase ( ackA ) gene from
the facultative aerobe E.coli, to manipulate energy generation and
redox balance in anoxic conditions. To evaluate the potential of therecombinant host for anoxic biotransformations, the authors used it as a
host for the haloalkane dehalogenase genes from P.pavonaceae strain
170. The resulting recombinant, which bore two synthetic operons on
compatible plasmids pSEVA234 and pSEVA428, not only survived in
anoxic conditions, but also degraded the environmental pollutant 1,3-
dichloropropene. These results highlight the possibility of harnessing
the full potential of P.putida KT2440 as a robust biocatalyst by precise
control of its energy and redox metabolism.
Despite the widespread use of recombinant plasmids in proof-of-
concept studies, metabolic engineers must bear in mind that the in-troduction and massive expression of heterologous genes can a ﬀect host
ﬁtness, due either to additional metabolic load or to depletion of es-
sential cofactors in redox reactions ( Dvorak
 et al., 2015; Glick, 1995;
Wu et al., 2016). This is even more important in the design of robustbacterial degraders that must cope with a spectrum of toxic substrates
and/or pathway intermediates, and might need an additional energy
charge and reducing cofators to cope with oxidative stress ( Dvorak
et al., 2015; Nikel et al., 2013 ). By-passing such di ﬃculties is possible
by tuning inducer concentration, applying lower-copy-number plasmids
with weaker promoters, or by enzyme-mediated co-factor recycling
through overexpression of NAD
+kinase, transhydrogenases or dehy-
drogenases ( Dvorak et al., 2015; Nikel et al., 2016b).
As an alternative, expression of heterologous genes directly from the
host chromosome can be bene ﬁcial for greater stability of the desired
genotype/phenotype and improved host viability ( Martínez-García
et al., 2014a; Santos and Yoshikuni, 2014; St-Pierre et al., 2013; Zobelet al., 2015 ). Homologous recombination and site-speci ﬁc or random
transposition-based techniques have been developed to enable chro-mosomal insertion of single genes, gene clusters or whole synthetic
operons, or knockouts of genes that encode competing metabolic
pathways ( Loeschcke et al., 2013; Martínez-García et al., 2014a; Santos
and Yoshikuni, 2014; St-Pierre et al., 2013; Zobel et al., 2015 ).
In a study by Samin and co-workers, a mutant variant of haloalkane
dehalogenase DhaA was introduced into the chromosome of 2,3-di-chloro-1-propanol-degrading P.putida MC4 under the control of astrong constitutive promoter using the Tn5 transposon-based delivery
vector ( Samin et al., 2014 ). Although the complete mineralization
pathway in strain MC4 is not yet fully understood, the recombinantPseudomonas was the ﬁrst microorganism shown to grow aerobically on
TCP, both in shaken ﬂasks and in packed-bed reactor in continuous-
ﬂow conditions. Mini-transposon systems have also been used suc-
cessfully for chromosomal integration of the whole catabolic cluster, asin the study by Wittich and Wolf who transplanted 11 genes from three
distinct bacteria into Cupriavidus necator H850, giving rise to the ﬁrst
designer bacterium to show aerobic growth on a wide range of PCB,including the two commercial pesticides Aroclor 1221 and Aroclor
1232 ( Wittich and Wol ﬀ, 2007 ).
Gene expression balancing is undoubtedly a powerful metabolic en-
gineering concept. In addition to the approaches mentioned above for
rather rough manipulation of gene expression, numerous techniques for
ﬁne-tuning expression have been developed in recent years. Surgical
cuts, including computationally designed ribosome binding sites, re ﬁned
architecture of the whole expression cassette, mutagenesis of promoter
regions, tailored stability of mRNA molecules, or altered gene order in
the operon were proven useful for optimizing bisynthetic pathways
(Boyle and Silver, 2012 ). In several cases, expression adjustment was also
considered in biodegradation pathway design. de la Peña Mattozzi andco-workers achieved more rapid paraoxon hydrolysis in a recombinant
P.putida strain by altering the order of three genes in the operon for
enzymes that convert one of the initial pathway intermediates ( de la
Peña Mattozzi et al., 2006 ). Expression of the dszB gene, which encodes
2-hydroxybiphenyl-2-sul ﬁnate sul ﬁnolyase, the last rate-limiting enzyme
in the dibenzothiophene biodesulfurization pathway, was improved by
rearranging gene order and removing the overlapping structure in the dsz
operon ( Li et al., 2007 ). Nonetheless, especially in cases of synthetic
metabolic pathways composed of biocatalysts from diverse organisms,
the activity, selectivity, stability or inhibition bottlenecks of individual
enzymes can be too far-reaching to be solved by tuning expression of thecorresponding genes. Moreover, overexpression of endogenous or exo-
genous genes often results in a metabolic burden and lower host viability
due to overconsumption of metabolic precursors (amino acids, rRNA,
ATP, reducing cofactors) to fuel the synthesis of non-essential proteins
(Glick, 1995; Wu et al., 2016 ).
 Protein engineering of bottleneck en-
zymes then becomes a more reasonable approach.
2.3.3. Protein engineering to eliminate bottlenecks of biodegradation
pathways
Over the last two decades, three distinct strategies were developed to
allow the construction and identi ﬁcation of mutant enzymes with de-
sirable properties ( Bornscheuer et al., 2012 ). The earliest approach, ra-
tional design , exploits various computational techniques such as, mole-
cular docking, homology modelling and molecular dynamics simulations,together with site-directed mutagenesis protocols to generate targeted
mutations that result in single or several modi ﬁed variants of an enzyme
(Damborsky and Brezovsky, 2014 ). In contrast, directed evolution uses
random mutagenesis methods and is bene ﬁcial especially in cases when
neither the structure nor the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme isavailable ( Brakmann, 2001 ). Random methods of directed evolution are
combined with elements of rational enzyme modi ﬁcation to bypass
certain limitations of both approaches. This focused directed evolution
approach targets several speci ﬁc residues or certain protein regions se-
lected on the basis of prior structural and functional knowledge(Bornscheuer et al., 2012 ). Mutation hot spots are chosen experimentally
and, on a much larger scale, computationally, using powerful new al-gorithms and statistical tools such as HotSpot Wizzard or 3DM tool(Bendl et al., 2016; Damborsky and Brezovsky, 2014; Kuipers et al.,
2010 ). A clear trend in recent years is the introduction of protein en-
gineering into the metabolic engineering work ﬂow.
The activities of many enzymes that act on anthropogenic com-
pounds are derived from promiscuous activities that are generally very
ineﬃ cient ( Khersonsky and Taw ﬁk, 2010). In such cases, proteinP. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
853engineering is the only possible solution. Numerous reports from the
ﬁrst decade of the 2000s describe application of common protein en-
gineering methods such as error-prone PCR, DNA shu ﬄing, site-di-
rected or saturation mutagenesis for engineering activity, or selectivity
of individual catabolic enzymes to halogenated hydrocarbons ( Parales
and Ditty, 2005; Wittich et al., 2010 ). Recently, the new challenge of
accumulating plastic waste has attracted the attention of protein en-
gineers, who try to enhance the activities of certain bacterial or fungal
enzymes such as esterases, lipases or polyster hydrolases to synthetic
polymers, including polyethylene terephthalate (PET) or polyurethanes
(Wierckx et al., 2015 ). For instance, Wei and colleagues applied a
comparison of crystal structures and molecular docking combined withside-directed mutagenesis to improve the activity of cutinase TfCut2
from Thermobi ﬁda fusca KW3 towards PET at elevated temperatures
that promote degradation of this oil-derived plastic ( Wei et al., 2016 ).
Subsequent kinetic and in silico energetic analyses con ﬁrmed that the
improvement in PET hydrolysis was the result of a relief of productinhibition caused by single point mutation in the enzyme's surface-ex-
posed active site. New unique PETase and MHETase, shown to help
bacterium Indonella sakaiensis to depolymerize and utilize PET, are
promissing candidates for protein and metabolic engineering exercisesthat might lead to biotechnological recycling of the polymer
(Bornscheuer, 2016; Yoshida et al., 2016a ). Alas, such a promise is not
devoid of controversy about the very enzymes that could do the job(Yang et al., 2016; Yoshida et al., 2016b )
The studies reporting the implantation of constructed mutants in the
context of the whole biodegradative pathway are nonetheless rather
rare. Iwakiri and co-workers successfully applied Alcaligenes sp . KF711
harbouring engineered monooxygenase P450
CAM for the dehalogena-
tion of pentachloroethane to trichloroethane in anoxic conditions
(Iwakiri et al., 2004 ). In another study, promiscuous toluene ortho -
monooxygenase and epoxide hydrolase were engineered using DNA-shuﬄing and saturation mutagenesis; the use of mutant genes allowed
more rapid aerobic degradation of chlorinated ethenes, with less ac-
cumulation of stress-inducing intermediates in recombinant E.coli
bearing the synthetic pathway ( Lee et al., 2006; Rui et al., 2004 ).
Mutants of DhaA, the enzyme that initiates dehalogenation of TCP,
were used in three of the previously mentioned studies that focused onTCP pathway engineering ( Dvorak et al., 2014b; Kurumbang et al., 2014;
Samin et al., 2014 ). The DhaA31 variant, with 29-fold improved catalytic
eﬃciency towards the chlorinated substrate, was prepared by combining
molecular dynamics simulations of product release from the buried ac-tive site with site-directed and saturation mutagenesis in selected hot
spots ( Pavlova et al., 2009 ). Another promising mutant with the potential
to remove the second serious bottleneck in the synthetic TCPpathway —enantioselectivity of DhaA and high enantiospeci ﬁcity of
HheC —originated from the work of van Leeuwen et al. (2012) .T h e
authors targeted DhaA31 to obtain variants that convert TCP pre-
dominantly into ( R)-DCP, which can be further converted by HheC at a
much higher rate than the ( S)-enantiomer. Five rounds of focused di-
rected evolution using saturation mutagenesis with restricted codon sets
provided mutant DhaA r5-90R with 13 new amino acid substitutions, and
substantially improved ( R)-selectivity. Mutagenesis nevertheless a ﬀected
the activity with TCP, which dropped to wild-type DhaA levels; themutant was later shown in in vitro andin vivo studies to be of no value for
further improvement of TCP pathway e ﬃciency ( Dvorak et al., 2014b;
Kurumbang et al., 2014 ). Additional engineering input is thus needed to
obtain DhaA variants with improved activity and modi ﬁed enantios-
electivity that would promote smooth ﬂux through the synthetic
pathway ( Fig. 4 ) and allow growth of bacterial recombinants in minimal
medium with the toxic substrate ( Kurumbang et al., 2014 ).
It will be necessary to accelerate the processes of laboratory evo-
lution and screening of new enzymes with enhanced properties in
mutant and metagenomic libraries to make protein engineering of
greater value in optimizing natural and synthetic catabolic pathways
(Bouhajja et al., 2016 ). Selection couples an improved enzyme propertywith host survival, which allows even > 10
9clones/enzyme variants to
be tested in a reasonable time. New selection assays based on toxicsubstrate conversions into a harmless utilizable metabolite, coupled
withﬂuorescence-activated sorting of surviving cells could, for ex-
ample, be applied for the enrichment of new dehalogenase variantsfrom libraries prepared by directed evolution or a semi-rational ap-
proach ( Fernández-Álvaro et al., 2011; Fibinger et al., 2015 ). Several
recent studies presented work ﬂows for high-throughput screening and
characterization of improved enzyme variants or novel enzyme activ-
ities. These test schemes are based on: (i) bioinformatic pre-screening
combined with high-throughput experimental characterization of can-
didate proteins ( Bastard et al., 2014 ), (ii) completely automated robotic
platforms manipulating clones growing in microtitre plates ( Dörr et al.,
2016 ), (iii) microcapillary arrays coupled with ﬂuorescent assays and
laser extraction for recovery of live clones ( Chen et al., 2016 ), or (iv)
single-cell sorting based on a ﬂuorescent signal from clones with an
implemented synthetic genetic circuit responding to a speci ﬁc meta-
bolite ( Choi et al., 2014 ).In silico screening of molecules that ﬁt the
active site cavity of an available enzyme structure, or reverse screeningof enzymes that can accommodate target substrate could supplement
experimental methods and reduce the time needed for discovery of new
biocatalysts for recalcitrant chemicals. Indeed, the potential of in silico
screening methods was demonstrated when investigating cytochromeP450-mediated metabolism of xenobiotics ( Raunio et al., 2015 ). In a
recent study by Aukema and colleagues, docking and molecular dy-namics simulations allowed selection of biphenyl dioxygenase from
Paraburkholderia xenovorans LB400 as the best candidate enzyme for
metabolizing carbamazepine, one of the most commonly identi ﬁed re-
calcitrant pharmaceuticals in rivers ( Aukema et al., 2016). The ex-
perimentally veri ﬁed rate of carbamazepine degradation by P.xeno-
vorans cells was 40-times greater than the best reported rates so far.
As shown in the preceding sections, the available toolbox of systems
biology, metabolic engineering and protein engineering applicable forre-factoring microbes and their catabolic pathways towards more e ﬃ-
cient biodegradation of waste chemicals and recalcitrant pollutants isbecoming inordinately large. Even so, the deﬁ ned work ﬂows, standards
and universally applicable principles for strain optimization were longmissing in the ﬁeld of metabolic engineering, despite which, the aim to
engineer living systems on a rational basis remained prevalent in thecommunity. This goal led metabolic engineers to adopt standards and
strategies from another closely related ﬁeld of synthetic biology, that
was established primarily to program living systems with a high pre-dictability.
3. Synthetic biology approaches and tools for biodegradation
pathway engineering
The principal underlying thought in synthetic biology is that any
living system can be considered a set of separate usable componentsthat can be combined by the means of biological engineering in new
arrangements to alter existing features or generate new ones ( de
Lorenzo and Danchin, 2008). Such biological engineering can be sim-pliﬁed by applying principles adopted from electronic engineering and
computer
science to produce predictable, robust systems (genetic con-
trol systems, metabolic pathways, chromosomes and whole cells) with
non-natural functions ( Paddon and Keasling, 2014 ). This would be
achieved through the fabrication of thoroughly characterized, stan-dardized, recyclable parts. From its very beginnings, synthetic biology
has been confronted with the need to de ﬁne its practice precisely and to
develop clear, generally applicable strategies, as this was the only way
to guarantee and implement engineering principles in a ﬁeld as sto-
chastic as biology. With its tools, standards and the DBTA cyclestrategy, synthetic biology has contributed as has no other scienti ﬁc
discipline to rationalize metabolic engineering. Its bottom-up ap-proaches and synthetic devices are being implemented to make more
robust, better controllable microbial cell factories. Synthetic biologyP. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
854can, and to some extent already contributes, the same service with its
new concepts to the ﬁelds of biodegradation and bioremediation. In the
theSection 3, we will discuss examples of bene ﬁcial inclusion of syn-
thetic biology into strategies for engineering pathways and whole cells
for biodegradation of waste and polluting chemicals, and perspectives
for these initiatives.
3.1. Development of robust microbial chassis for biodegradation of toxic
chemicals
Genetic instability and negatively a ﬀected ﬁtness are frequently
encountered drawbacks of the native microbial hosts tailored by me-tabolic engineering for speci ﬁc biodegradation purposes. Synthetic
biology o ﬀers possible solutions for these problems by implementing
DNA synthesis and genome editing strategies. Both curiosity and pro-
spective practical applications drive synthetic biologists to generate
microbial cells with deleted parts of their genomes that encode re-
dundant, cryptic, or even deleterious functions. Such cells, endowed
with a reduced genome as foundation to house and support hetero-
logous genetic parts, are collectively known as chassis (Adams, 2016 ).
An extreme case of a chassis is the so-called minimal cell (Glass et al.,
2006 ). Chassis can be prepared by de novo synthesis of a reduced target
genome and its implantation into a suitable cell envelope, or throughsystematic deletions of non-essential genes in the genomes of an ex-
isting natural host. Microarray-based oligonucleotide synthesis is cur-
rently used to provide a substrate (usually 5 –50 oligos) for construction
of larger (usually 200 –3000 bp) synthetic fragments ( Kosuri and
Church, 2014). Scarless methods including the popular Gibson as-
sembly, uracil assembly, Golden Gate technology, ligase cycling reac-
tion, or yeast recombination are used to combine sequence-veri ﬁed
gene-length fragments in even larger complexes ( Casini et al., 2015 ).
DNA synthesis also allows preparation of standardized genetic parts
(promoters, ribosome binding sites, genes, terminators and so on) withveriﬁed codon-optimized sequences. Despite breakthroughs in gene
synthesis and DNA assembly methods, this last approach for chassis
construction seems far more feasible at the moment, considering the
lesser demand of chromosome editing experiments, the constantly ex-
panding portfolio of genetic tools, and the growing list of micro-
organisms with intentionally reduced genomes ( Martínez-García and deLorenzo, 2016; Si et al., 2015 ).
Discarding non-essential cell functions shows considerable potential
not only for biosynthetic purposes ( Hutchison et al., 2016 ), but also for
designer biodegradation and bioremediation. A recent report on the
systematic deletion of 11 non-adjacent genomic regions in P.putida
KT2440 ( Fig. 5) is a unique example of genome streamlining in a
popular bacterial host with well-deﬁ ned biodegradation capabilities
(Martínez-García et al., 2014b ). In all, 300 genes were eliminated, that
is, 4.3% of the entire KT2440 strain genome, using the scar-less deletion
procedure based on homologous recombination after in vivo DNA
cleavage by the homing Saccharomyces cerevisiae nuclease
 I-SceI
(Martínez-García and de Lorenzo, 2012). A suite of functions was tar-
geted, including the complete ﬂagellar machinery, whose assembly and
function drains ATP from the cells and consumes NAD(P)H. Four pro-
phages, two transposons, and three components of DNA restriction-
modiﬁcation systems were also eliminated to minimize genetic in-
stability. The resulting strains designated P.putida EM42 and EM383
(the latter lacks the recA gene that encodes recombinase A) showed
clearly superior growth properties and improved overall physiologicalvigour compared to wild-type KT2440. Moreover, due to the higher
NADPH/NADP
+ratio, the reduced-genome strains also better tolerated
endogenous oxidative stress, a property that provides a crucial ad-vantage for catalysing harsh biodegradation reactions such as aerobic
dehalogenation of chlorinated pollutants ( Nikel et al., 2013 ).
Despite their reliability and robustness, the procedures based on
these genome editing tools are time- and labour-intensive, and re-stricted to a limited number of model microorganisms. This problem is
now being challenged by new protocols that pro ﬁt from the type II
bacterial Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats(CRISPR) and CRISPR-associated protein (Cas), Multiple Automated
Genome Editing (MAGE), and combinations thereof ( Barrangou and
van Pijkeren, 2016; Wang et al., 2009 ). Nonetheless, these technologies
also su ﬀer from some weaknesses such as generation of numerous o ﬀ-
target mutations. The o ﬀ-target problem of the CRISPR-Cas system was
recently mitigated by engineering high- ﬁdelity Cas9 nucleases
(Kleinstiver et al., 2016). In a similar manner, the number of o ﬀ-target
mutations during MAGE was reduced substantially when temperature-
sensitive control of the endogenous methyl-directed mismatch repair
system was introduced into the E.colihost together with a dominant
Fig. 4. Hypersurface plot describing the e ﬀect of catalytic e ﬃciency ( kcat/Km) and enantioselectivity ( E-value) of haloalkane dehalogenase DhaA on the production of glycerol in the TCP
pathway. The hypersurface was calculated using the mathematical model of the TCP pathway ( Dvorak et al., 2014b ) using the constraints of Kurumbang and co-workers ( Kurumbang
et al., 2014 ). Positions of four DhaA variants, DhaAwt (wild type, kcat/Km=7 0M−1s−1,E-value = 1), DhaA r5-90R ( kcat/Km=2 0M−1s−1,E-value = 10), DhaA31 ( kcat/
Km= 600 M−1s−1,E-value = 1), and hypothetical DhaAXX ( kcat/Km= 700 M−1s−1,E-value = 10), are indicated by red dots. Note that the majority of mutations (orange spheres)
introduced into DhaA r5-90R and DhaA31 are adjacent to the active site (red spheres) and to the access tunnels (in green). Hypothetical enzyme DhaAXX with 10-fold improved catalytic
eﬃciency and 10-fold improved enantioselectivity compared to DhaAwt, would enable production of 1 mM glycerol (red line) from 2 mM TCP in the culture of recombinant E.coli
BL21(DE3) within 24 h time interval. Such glycerol concentration will be su ﬃcient to support the cell growth. Figure was adopted and modi ﬁed from ( Kurumbang et al., 2014 ). (For
interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
855negative mutator allele of the E.colimismatch repair protein MutL
(Nyerges et al., 2016). By placing this highly conserved allele together
with λRed recombinase genes and a temperature-sensitive λrepressor
on a single broad-host range plasmid, Nyerges and co-workers provided
a simpli ﬁed MAGE variant (pORTMAGE) that allowed genome editing
and mutant library generation in several biotechnologically and clini-cally relevant bacterial species, with no need for prior modi ﬁcations of
parental strains. The recent discovery of the Ssr protein from P.putida
DOT-T1E, a functional homologue of the βprotein of the λRed re-
combination system, paved the way for oligonucleotide-mediatedmultiplex genome engineering in pseudomonads, including P.putida
KT2440 and its derived platform strains EM42 and EM383 ( Aparicio
et al., 2016 ). Continuing facilitated reduction of their genomes (dele-
tions of multiple repetitive sequences or certain proteases) and genomesof other relevant bacterial hosts will provide more reliable, robust
chassis for biodegradation pathway engineering.
3.2. Development of synthetic microbial consortia for enhanced
biodegradation and bioremediation of pollutants
An alternative strategy that allows for the emergence of more robust
microbe-based bioprocesses is just the opposite of the systematic de-velopment of bacterial chassis based on individual wild-type strains.
Natural microbial consortia perform complicated biocatalytic taskssuch as lignocellulose degradation, wastewater puri ﬁcation, or in-
testinal food digestion. By dividing the labour and metabolic burden,the consortium members become more ﬂexible when facing complex
environmental conditions. Distribution of catabolic capacity amongcells of a single organism, among di ﬀerent bacterial strains, or even
among species from di ﬀerent kingdoms is pivotal; this is especially true
for biodegradation of complex toxic chemicals, which encompasses
many steps and harmful intermediates with diverse physicochemical
properties. The idea of exploiting consortia for directed biodegradation
of polluting compounds and bioremediation of contaminated sites thus
lies ready to hand.
Application of natural microbial consortia has already shown pro-
mise for bioremediation of sites polluted with anthropogenic pesticides
such as diclofop methyl or atrazine ( Baghapour et al., 2013; Wolfaardt
et al., 1994 ). Together with the new ﬁeld of synthetic biology, attempts
are being made to modify the structure of original natural consortia ordevelop completely new arti ﬁcial organizations of co-operating mi-
croorganisms. For example, co-culture of engineered E.coliSD2 and P.
putida KT2440 was used successfully to mineralize the insecticide
parathion in shaken ﬂasks and in bioﬁ lm culture ( Gilbert et al., 2003 ).
In another study, complete mineralization of 2,4,6-tribromophenol, a
ﬂame-retardant intermediate and pesticide, was achieved using anartiﬁcial
anaerobe consortium of reductive debrominator Dehalobacter
sp. FTH1, a hydrogen supplier Clostridium sp . Ma13, and the 4-chor-
ophenol-degrading strain Desulfatiglans parachlorophenolica DS (Li et al.,
2015 ). Recently, Martínez and co-workers introduced an attractive al-
ternative strategy for engineering the 4S pathway ( Fig. 6A), a para-
digmatic bioprocess for removal of the recalcitrant sulphur from aro-matic heterocycles in fuels ( Martínez et al., 2016 ). The pathway
encoded by dszABCD genes converts the model compound di-
benzothiophene (DBT) into sulphur-free 2-hydroxybiphenyl (2HBP).
The authors initially synthesized and re-arranged the original genes and
optimized transcriptional and translational signals for P.putida KT2440.
By dividing the pathway into three separate modules expressed in-dividually, they were able to deﬁ ne previously unreported bottlenecks
in the pathway; that is, the inhibitory e ﬀect of intermediate 2HBP-
sulﬁnate (HBPS) on DszA and DszC monooxygenases and HBPS leakage
into the culture medium, from which it could not be transported backinto the cells for further processing. To prevent HBPS accumulation,
two P.putida strains bearing dszC1 -D1ordszB1A1 -D1modules were
mixed as a suspension of resting cells. When the strains were combinedat a 1:4 ratio and added with cell-free extract containing extra DszB,
almost 100% of DBT was transformed into 2HBP in assay conditions.
Considerable attention is currently being dedicated to developing
strategies for biodegradation of oil and oil-derived chemicals. Patowaryand co-workers designed a potent microbial consortium for prospective
decontamination of sites exposed to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
from crude oil ( Patowary et al., 2016 ). The authors ﬁrst inspected the
biodegradative capacity for total petroleum hydrocarbons of 23 bac-terial isolates from petroleum-contaminated soils, and subsequently
designed 14 arti ﬁcial consortia based on the ﬁve most e ﬃcient isolates.
The best designer consortium, comprised of two biosurfactant-produ-cing, hydrocarbon-degrading strains of Bacillus pumilus and B.cereus ,
showed up to 84% degradation of total petroleum hydrocarbons afterﬁve weeks, as veri ﬁed by gravimetric, FTIR and GC/MS analyses. Ap-
plication of natural or re-designed bacteria and their consortia alsoholds considerable promise for decomposition of oil-derived plastic
waste ( Skariyachan et al., 2016; Yoshida et al., 2016a, 2016b ).
New tricks for more e ﬃcient biodegradation strategies could be
adopted from inspiring current research on synthetic consortia designed
to decompose and valorize lignocellulosic biomass ( Minty et al., 2013).
Tozakidis and co-workers reported application of an engineered con-sortium
of three P.putida strains displaying thermophilic en-
doglucanase, exoglucanase, or β-glucosidase for concerted hydrolysis of
cellulose at elevated temperatures ( Tozakidis et al., 2016 ). Some studies
describe surface display of whole designer cellulosomes –synthetic
enzymatic nanomachines whose natural counterparts are produced by
certain cellulolytic bacteria that exploit clustered surface-attached
Fig. 5. Engineered Pseudomonas putida KT2440 as a new
robust chassis for biodegradation and bioremediation.
Martínez-García and colleagues used in-house genome
editing tools to streamline the chromosome of Pseudomonas
putida KT2440 ( Martínez-García et al., 2014b ). Deletion of
4.3% of the original genome gave rise to the new platform
strains EM42 and EM383, whose advantageous propertiesmake them useful chassis for engineering biodegradation
pathways and other applications.P. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
856cellulases for e ﬃcient depolymerization of cellulose and hemicellulose
(S. Kim et al., 2013; Moraïs et al., 2014 ). The vast majority of the work
that exploits surface display systems for whole-cell removal of en-
vironmental contaminants has been restricted to individual proteins
such as laccases, methyl parathion hydrolase, or triphenylmethane re-
ductase ( Gao et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2012 ). It is
tempting to expand available surface display technologies with cellu-losome parts for the design of synthetic consortia that would catalyse
more complex biodegradation reactions, including polymeric substrates
or toxic metabolites, outside the cells.
Despite their true biotechnological potential, microbial consortia
remain too complex for directed long-term application, either for bio-
synthesis or for biodegradation. It is still di ﬃcult to engineer home-
ostasis and evolutionary stability in an arti ﬁcial multi-cellular system,
whose behaviour becomes unpredictable with time ( Escalante et al.,
2015 ). Attempts to adopt principles of intercellular communication for
synthetic consortia are just at their beginnings ( Hennig et al., 2015;
Scott and Hasty, 2016). Intensive co-operation of genetic engineers andevolutionary biologists with microbial ecologists and chemists will
obviously be needed to derive a deeper understanding of the processes
that rule the formation and survival of natural microbial consortia.
Lessons learnt from nature can be implemented and combined with
completely anthropogenic orthogonal genetic devices for more reliable
design of stable multicellular systems.
3.3. Development of orthogonal systems in bacteria to enhance pollutant
biodegradation and bioremediation
Orthogonal , or in other words parallel, independent systems
1is a keyconcept in synthetic biology as long as such quality makes live systemsmore amenable to bona ﬁdeengineering. Orthogonalization involves
e.g., use of unnatural genetic codes (for example, quadruplet rather than
triplet), alternative transcription-translation machineries, toggleswitches, and genetic circuits for assembly of novel metabolic and
signalling pathways from proteins containing non-natural amino acids
(An and Chin, 2009; Wang et al., 2012). Such metabolic pathways could
have new functions and would synthesize or catabolize a fresh spectrumof compounds. Ideally, orthogonal pathways/modules interact mini-
mally with their natural counterparts in the host cell. This improves
predictability of the component behaviour and prevents inhibitory
cross-talk following introduction of the pathway or circuit into an ex-
isting metabolic network ( Kim and Copley, 2012; Kurumbang et al.,
2014 ). In an orthogonal module the input and output molecules of
genetic circuits —or enzymes and metabolites of synthetic biochemical
routes —are not degraded or inactivated by side-reactions or physico-
chemical conditions of the host cell. While complete orthogonality is
virtually impossible in biological systems, a practicable level of context-
independence is indeed feasible. Some examples of claimed orthogonal
systems include simple synthetic genetic circuits, switches, or designed
metabolic pathways. These have the potential to improve function of
individual engineered bacteria or synthetic consortia as whole-cell
biosensors and degraders of recalcitrant chemicals.
Sensitivity, robustness and applicability of microbial biosensors for
detecting heavy metals or halogenated hydrocarbons can be greatly
improved by implementing orthogonal genetic devices ( Bereza-
Malcolm et al., 2015). Thus far, simple microbial biosensor designsbased on one input and two-part regulatory systems with promoter and
reporter providing a coloured, ﬂuorescent, bioluminescent, or electric
signal prevail in the literature ( Ravikumar et al., 2017). Reports on
more complex multi-input systems based on Boolean logic gates are still
rare, but give us a clue to future developments in the ﬁeld. As ﬁrst
outlined by the work of Wang et al. (2016) , orthogonally acting multi-
Fig. 6. Examples of synthetic biology approaches applied to
engineering biodegradation pathways and whole-cell de-
graders. (a) Martínez and co-workers divided the 4S
pathway for sulphur removal from aromatic heterocycles
into two modules ( dszC1 -D1and dszB1A1 -D1) that were
expressed individually in two P.putida KT2440 strains to
form a synthetic consortium ( Martínez et al., 2016 ). Com-
bining the strains at a 1:4 ratio and mixing them with cell-free extract from the third strain producing DszB resulted inalmost complete conversion of dibenzothiophene into sul-
phur-free 2-hydroxybiphenyl in assay conditions. (b) Wang
et al. constructed a synthetic bacterial consortium in which
each of the two E.colistrains functioned as a double input
sensor with synthetic AND gates for detecting arsenic,mercury, and copper ions and quorum sensing molecules
(3OC
6HSL; Wang et al., 2013 ). Strain 2 generated red
ﬂuorescence only in the presence of all three metal ions in
culture. (c) Benedetti and colleagues achieved directedtransition between planktonic and bio ﬁlm lifestyles of P.
putida KT2440 by controlling cyclic di-GMP levels with an
orthogonal genetic device composed of the yedQ diguany-
late cyclase gene from E.coliunder the control of the cy-
clohexanone-responsive ChnR/ P
chnB regulatory node from
Acinetobacter johnsonii (Benedetti et al., 2016 ). Designed
cells with a synthetic operon for 1-chlorobutane biode-
gradation formed inducible bio ﬁlms with higher dehalo-
genase activity than free, planktonic bacteria. (d) Dvorak
and co-workers assembled the ﬁrstin vitro synthetic biode-
gradation pathway for 1,2,3-trichloropropane (TCP) bycombining engineered haloalkane dehalogenase DhaA31,halohydrin dehalogenase HheC, and epoxide hydrolaseEchA, immobilized in cross-linked enzyme aggregates
(CLEAS) and polyvinyl alcohol particles (LentiKats) ( Dvorak
et al., 2014a). The immobilized pathway converted high
concentrations of toxic TCP into glycerol in contaminated
water for more than two months of continuous operation in
a bench-top packed bed reactor. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
1The mathematical and geometrical concept of orthogonality has been adopted ﬁrst by
computing science and then by synthetic biology to signify operative independence.
System A is orthogonal to system B if A does not in ﬂuence B— and vice versa.P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
857input/multi-output logic gates will be especially valuable for detecting
mixtures of polluting chemicals (organic, inorganic, or both) by pro-
viding a speci ﬁc signal for each of the constituents ( He et al., 2016;
Wang et al., 2011 ). Developing such biosensors is of practical im-
portance, as polluted environments are usually burdened with nu-
merous contaminants that have diverse physicochemical properties.
The authors engineered a set of two-input E.coli-based biosensors with
synthetic AND gates using signalling sensory modules from native two-component signal transduction pathways, as well as hrpR and hrpS
genes along with their HrpL promoter element from P.syringae . Using
these sensors, they detected arsenic, mercury, copper, and zinc ions, as
well as quorum sensing molecules in aqueous environment ( Wang et al.,
2011 ). The most advanced design resulted in a triple-input AND logic-
gated biosensor that formed a synthetic bacterial consortium in which
each of the two members acted as a double input sensor ( Fig. 6B). In the
presence of arsenic and mercury, the ﬁrst strain formed a quorum
sensing molecule (3OC
6HSL) that di ﬀused freely into the medium and
was sensed together with Cu2+by the second strain, which provided a
redﬂuorescent signal ( Wang et al., 2013). The ﬂuorescent response was
seen only when all three metal ions were present in the culture.
Reliable orthogonal devices will be crucial for engineering arti ﬁcial
cell-cell communication, for instance, taking advantage of bacterialquorum sensing systems ( Hennig et al., 2015; Scott and Hasty, 2016 ).
Programming the dynamics of subpopulations of synthetic consortiathat perform complex tasks will be only possible with parallel genetic
circuits and signalling molecules unknown to the host cells ( Chen et al.,
2015 ). As stressed by Silva-Rocha and de Lorenzo (2014) , catabolic
pathways for recalcitrant and xenobiotic compounds could be a reliable
source of wiring devices and molecules These pathways are frequently
found in speci ﬁc types of organisms, and metabolic crosstalk can thus
be avoided by implementing components of such networks in suitablehosts. For instance, aromatic molecules such as benzoate or phenol can
be used as signal inducers that are recognized by regulatory proteinsthat trigeger expression of target genes. The recent determination of the
crystal structure of the sensory domain in the phenol-responsive tran-
scription activator PoxR ilustrates how aromatics are sensed in bacteria
(Patil et al., 2016 ). This study paves the way for wider application of
rationally engineered transcription regulators responsive to aromaticsin the design of synthetic genetic circuits.
The dynamic behaviour of the whole biodegradation pathway can
also be better studied when the route is transferred into a distant host
chassis where it acts orthogonally. The orthogonal nature of the syn-
thetic pathway for TCP biodegradation in the surrogate host E.coli
BL21 (DE3), described in Section 2.3.1 ., allowed a very good match
between in silico predicted and in vivo metabolite concentrations and
precise description of the bottlenecks ( Kurumbang et al., 2014), as well
as deciphering the contribution of metabolic burden and substrate/
metabolite toxicity to the ﬁtness cost of TCP biotransformation by
whole-cell catalysts ( Dvorak et al., 2015 ). Despite their bene ﬁts for such
mechanistic and proof-of-concept studies, laboratory E.colistrains
might not be optimally suited for the harsh conditions that accompanybiodegradation and bioremediation processes ( Adams, 2016; Nicolaou
et al., 2010). Development of reliable chassis amenable to implantation
of orthogonal genetic devices is therefore desirable. These new cell
platforms should be based on robust environmental strains of Pseudo-
monas ,Rhodococcus ,Deinococcus , and other microorganisms with broad
metabolic versatility and natural resistance to organic solvents or heavy
metals ( Adams, 2016).
One can also take advantage of other speci ﬁc properties of en-
vironmental bacteria including formation of a robust bio ﬁlm. As shown
recently by Benedetti and colleagues, the actual physical forms ofwhole-cell biocatalysts can be mastered using orthogonal genetic parts
(Fig. 6 C) through the so-called synthetic
 morphology approach ( Benedetti
et al., 2016 ).Pseudomonads generate bioﬁ lms with biophysical prop-
erties that depend on the species. Cyclic di-GMP ( c-di-GMP) is the key
signal molecule that rules the complex regulatory network mediatingthe transition between planktonic cells and bio ﬁlm formation. This
feature was exploited to design an orthogonal genetic device for ma-
nipulating the native c-di-GMP biochemistry in P.putida , thereby con-
trolling bioﬁ lm formation ( Benedetti et al., 2016 ). The E.coli yedQ gene
(encoding diguanylate cyclase, the enzyme that synthesizes c-di-GMP
from GTP) was placed under control of a tightly regulated cyclohex-anone-responsive expression system. A synthetic operon, encoding the
enzymes needed for 1-chlorobutane biodegradation, was also in-
troduced in the engineered, bio ﬁlm-forming P.putida strain. Upon ac-
tivation of the corresponding genetic modules with appropriate in-ducers, the resulting P.putida biocatalyst displayed high dehalogenase
activity in robust bioﬁ lms.
The modern approaches of biological engineering accelerate the
development of whole-cell biocatalysts for in situ bioremediation or
biosensing of emerging environmental pollutants. Field applications of
genetically modi ﬁed microorganisms are nonetheless restricted by
current legislation and hindered by the unreliable behaviour of re-combinant microbes in complex, ﬂuctuating environments. Synthetic
biology can help to tackle the major problems through the means de-scribed at the beginning of this chapter, i.e., non-canonical genetic
codes and xenobiochemistry, which can prevent di ﬀusion of undesired
sequences into the environmental gene pool, di ﬀerentiate recombinants
from their natural counterparts, and improve robustness and reliabilityof prepared genetic devices, whole-cell degraders and biosensors. The
examples of such endeavours were recently reviewed extensively
(Schmidt, 2010; Schmidt and de Lorenzo, 2016 ). These systems could
be combined with bioluminiscence, ﬂuorescence, or DNA watermarking
technologies to track the environmental fate of designer degraders, or
with inducible suicide systems for discarding degraders once their
mission is completed ( Liss et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2010; Paul et al.,
2005 ). Yet the path to applied xenobiology is still crooked, and many
ethical questions remain. Another concept from the portfolio of syn-
thetic biology that will be discussed in the following section has thepotential to ﬁll the time gap until we obtain reliable whole-cell catalysts
and alternative solutions also acceptable for GMO critics will be pro-vided.
3.4. Engineering microbial biodegradation pathways in vitro
The
major principle of cell-free synthetic biology is that puri ﬁed
biomolecules or components in crude cell extracts replace intact cellsfor constructing complex biomolecular systems ( Hodgman and Jewett,
2012 ). To date, metabolic networks that encompass > 10 enzymes
have been reconstructed in vitro (Rollin et al., 2015; Schwander et al.,
2016 ). Cell-free metabolic pathways allow easy veri ﬁcation of bioca-
talyst function, determination of kinetic parameters, as well as eva-
luation of the network by kinetic modelling ( Santacoloma et al., 2011).
Note, however, that assemby of degradative pathways in cell-free sys-tems (whether with puriﬁ ed enzymes or cell extracts) is not only to
prototype and parametrize new routes, but also for direct use in theﬁeld (Karig, 2017). Despite the drawbacks that cell-free systems cannot
self-propagate, that certain biomolecules can be sensitive to oxidizingenvironments, and that their encapsulation and large-scale production
might be costly, these systems o ﬀer an appealing means to circumvent
problems associated to GMO release to the environment. Apart fromincreasing safety, they o ﬀer other clear bene ﬁts. For instance, in vitro
systems can operate in the presence of toxins that would inhibit or killlive cells, and metabolites, regulators and enzymes can be produced in
optimized concentrations without interfering with cell components.
Most important for release and predictability, the evolutionary oppor-tunities of such non-live agents are zero, making the emergence of
unexpected properties virtually impossible.
In vitro metabolic networks can su ﬀer from suboptimal e ﬃciency
due to the lower enzyme concentration compared to the extremely
dense cell cytoplasm ( Hodgman and Jewett, 2012 ). This issue can be
mitigated by enzyme immobilization and improved spatial organizationP. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
858viasynthetic protein or DNA sca ﬀolds that reduce di ﬀusion of pathway
intermediates and promote substrate channeling ( Siu et al., 2015 ). Al-
ternatively, biocatalysts can be precipitated and covalently inter-
connected in cross-linked enzyme aggregate particles ( Sheldon, 2011 );
this method was applied successfully to synthesize toxic nucleotideanalogues by an immobilized ﬁve-enzyme synthetic pathway ( Scism
and Bachmann, 2010 ). The biochemical route described was completed
with functional ATP regeneration, which demonstrates that in vitro
technologies can cope with another possible drawback –limited co-
factor recycling.
Thus far, mainly single immobilized enzymes or whole-cell bioca-
talysts have been exploited in biotechnological processes intended to
remove polluting chemicals such as polyethylene terephthalate, 2,4-
dinitrophenol, atrazine, or inorganic nitrates ( Barth et al., 2016;
Dehghanifard et al., 2013; Mutlu et al., 2015; Trögl et al., 2012 ).In vitro
assays with cell-free extracts or puri ﬁed enzymes, respectively, helped
to identify an unknown anaerobic pathway for complete phthalatedegradation to CO
2inThauera chlorobenzoica 3CB-1 or to decipher se-
questration of the highly toxic intermediate tetrachlorobenzoquinone inpentachlorophenol degradation pathway in Sphingobium chlor-
ophenolicum (Ebenau-Jehle et al., 2017; Yadid et al., 2013). Geueke
et al. showed the bene ﬁts of an in vitro engineering approach in the
model of γ-HCH biodegradation pathway ( Geueke et al., 2013). They
used a system of two puriﬁ ed enzymes, the dehydrochlorinase LinA and
the haloalkane dehalogenase LinB, which initiate biotransformation ofγ-HCH, a prohibited insecticide. They separately incubated ﬁve isomers
that form technical HCH (which used to be applied frequently instead ofpure γ-HCH) with various LinA:LinB ratios and determined metabolic
proﬁles of sequential biotransformations. Analyses of these pro ﬁles
helped determine the environmental fate of HCH isomers, and showed
that the original HCH degradation pathway is optimized by evolution
forγ-HCH, but not for other isomers that co-pollute contaminated sites.
Theﬁrst report of in vitro assembly of a fully functional synthetic
biodegradation pathway was published by Dvorak and co-workers(Dvorak et al., 2014a ). The authors adopted the cell-free strategy using
immobilized engineered haloalkane dehalogenase DhaA31, halohydrindehalogenase HheC and epoxide hydrolase EchA for TCP bio-
transformation to harmless, valuable glycerol in contaminated water
(Fig. 6D). The practical utility of bacterial recombinants that mineralize
TCP (desccribed in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2 ) is limited by substrate
toxicity and by legislative barriers on the application of GMO
(Kurumbang et al., 2014; Samin et al., 2014). Probing the function of
the pathway in in vitro conditions therefore lied ready to hand. The
authors successfully immobilized the pathway in the form of puri ﬁed
enzymes or cell-free extracts in cross-linked enzyme aggregates andlens-shaped polyvinyl alcohol particles. The immobilized pathway
showed almost the same e ﬃciency of TCP-to-glycerol conversion as
mixture of free enzymes. Physicochemical properties of polyvinyl al-cohol lentils allowed recovery from the reaction mixture and recycling
of the pathway. In addition, the immobilized enzymes retained > 50%
of their initial activities for over 2 months of continuous operation in a
bench-top packed bed reactor. The study indicated that the im-
mobilized route removes TCP from heavily contaminated water with a
pollutant concentration (~1 g/L) that would be detrimental to the
living degraders. One can anticipate that such conversions of toxic TCP
to useful glycerol could even pave the way for prospective valorization
of this waste chemical.
Although this biotechnology requires further validation and tuning,
the work showed that in vitro assembly of natural or synthetic enzy-
matic pathways with engineered enzymes is a promising concept for thebiodegradation of polluting compounds and toxic industrial waste
products. Transport of such pathways vianon-live carriers is related
conceptually to e ﬀorts to produce and release complex therapeutic
agents for human use. In both cases, their application demands the
development of a sort of environmental Galenic science that enables
supply of the engineered biological remedy when and where needed.4.
Towards planet-wide bioremediation interventions: CO 2
capture as a large-scale challenge
Environmental deterioration due to emissions of recalcitrant che-
micals seems to pale when compared to the problem of global warmingcaused by the release of greenhouse gases that originate in human ac-
tivities. The bulk of these gases comprise four natural molecules, carbon
dioxide (CO
2), methane (CH 4), nitrous oxide (N 2O) and ozone (O 3), as
well as one class of xenobiotics, the chloro ﬂuorocarbons or CFC. Given
the diluted, aereal and global nature of this problem, the strategies
contemplated for tackling these chemical species di ﬀer considerably
from those that centre on site-speci ﬁc pollution issues. Most proposals
thus far focus much more on reducing emissions than on capture and
returning to innocuous chemical or mineral forms. All these compounds
have their own natural biogeochemical cycle and, in theory, simply
reducing their input into the biosphere should restore the original
equilibrium ( Rockström et al., 2017). Recent ecological thought none-
theless postulates that the impact of climate change in many ecosystemsis already irreversible by natural means, and call for large-scale inter-
ventions that could help to resolve this impasse ( de Lorenzo et al.,
2016 ). In this case, what types of options could be considered from a
systemic biology perspective?
Some incipient attempts have appeared recently, mostly in the ﬁeld
of engineering bacteria with a greater capacity for non-photosynthetic
ﬁxing of CO
2(Erb and Zarzycki, 2016 ). One option is to use the six
alternative pathways of autotrophic carbon ﬁxation known in nature
(Fuchs, 2011; Hicks et al., 2017 ) as a starting point to optimize such
natural processes. Another possibilty is the invention of new routes byrewiring or modifying existing enzymes in a new con ﬁguration. A re-
markable example of this solution is the work of Antonovsky et al.
(2016) , who showed that combining metabolic rewiring, recombinant
protein expression, and laboratory evolution enables the production ofsugars and other biomass constituents by a fully functional Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle in E.coli. In the bacteria designed in this
way, carbon is ﬁxed viaa refactored CBB cycle, whereas reducing
power and energy are derived from pyruvate oxidation ( Fig. 7). It is
interesting to note how evolutionary approaches adjust ﬂuxes and
generate connections between the designed CBB cycle and the host
biochemical network, that cannot be predicted or designed.
A separate approach was recently developed by Schwander et al.
(2016) , who developed a synthetic route for continuous CO
2ﬁxation in
vitro by composing a cycle formed of 17 enzymes that convert CO 2into
organic molecules. The cycle was draughted by metabolic retro-
synthesis with enzymes from nine organisms from three domains of life,
further optimized through rounds of protein engineering and metabolic
proofreading. Although this completely designed pathway has not yet
been implemented in vivo (e.g., in a bacterial carrier) it is a question of
time until it is done and propagated throughout an entire microbialcommunity ( de Lorenzo et al., 2016).
Finally, today's systemic approaches enable the invention of en-
zymes from scratch through de novo protein design followed by directed
evolution, which opens perspectives for improving the natural state ofaﬀairs regarding ﬁxation of CO
2(and other greenhouse gases) as well as
valorization of this waste as biotechnological feedstocks ( Huang et al.,
2016; Renata et al., 2015). A separate matter is the large-scale de-
ployment of the microbial agents for CO 2retrieval. Existing technology
allows their implementation in bio ﬁlters and bioreactors that capture
emissions at source. But how can we spread such desirable catalytic
properties at a very large, even at planetary level to make a di ﬀerence?
Such technologies are not yet available —let alone that they raise a large
number of safety questions. But they must necessarily be developed if
we are not just to control greenhouse gas discharges, but also aim at
their eventual reduction to pre-industrial levels ( de Lorenzo et al.,
2016 ).
Unfortunately, greenhouse gases are not the only globally wide-
spread molecules to be concerned about. Much before global warmingP. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
859associated to CO 2emissions became so conspicuous, widespread pol-
lution by endocrine disruptors ( e.g., alkylphenols, bisphenols, DDT,
PCBs, polybrominated diphenyl ethers, phthalates and per-
ﬂuorooctanoic acid) was well documented. Moreover, other silent pol-
lutants originate in the pharmaceutical industry e.g., antibiotics
(Marathe et al., 2017 ) and hormones. They end up in a large variety of
ecosystems in a diluted but still active form. Finally, plastics ( e.g.,
polycarbonate, polystyrene, polyethylene terephthalate, low/high-density polyethylene, polypropylene and polyvinyl chloride) are cur-
rently receiving a considerable focus as a major environmental pro-
blem. A number of microbial strains able to totally or partially act upon
these compounds have been isolated (see above) but in general the
biodegradation process is very slow. The global nature of these types of
pollution thus requires the development of new, e ﬃcient microbial
pathways for their elimination, quite a challenge for contemporarysynthetic biologists and metabolic engineers ( de Lorenzo, 2017 ).
But—as is the case for CO2 capture mentioned above —pathways and
hosts able to deploy them are not enough. E ﬀective strategies for global
dispersion of biodegradative activities of interest are badly nee-ded—perhaps inspired in gene drives or some type of self-propagating,
massive horizontal gene transfer ( de Lorenzo et al., 2016).
5. Conclusions and perspectives
The practical examples described in the preceding sections show
that technologies of systemic biology o ﬀer promise not only for the
renaissance of bioremediation using anthropogenically enhanced mi-
crobial degraders, but also for entry to the new era of Bioremediation
3.0. The bottlenecks described at the beginning of this text are one by
one being released or removed with the help of new computational and
experimental tools. Databases and pathway prediction systems help theuser to select suitable chemically and energetically feasible traits for
desired tasks. Multi-omic analyses provide valuable information that
facilitates choice of a suitable host. Genome-scale and kinetic models
applied hand-in-hand with genetic engineering techniques enable tai-
loring of gene expression, reduction of metabolic burden, and pathway
optimization in the context of host metabolism. The visionary concepts
of synthetic biology and global scale CO
2bioremediation open up new
dimensions for engineering microbial degraders. General work schemes
and standards for design, building, and ﬁne-tuning of selected bio-
chemical routes, networks and whole-cell biocatalysts are simulta-neously becoming better deﬁ ned and accepted by the community.
Despite the clear progress over the last decade of biochemical and
biological engineering, the vast complexity of the living cell remains
the major hurdle for any attempt for fully rational pathway design. In
the case of biosensing and biodegradation pathway design and pro-
spective applications of the genetically-modi ﬁed microbes, this problem
is exacerbated by the complexity of intercellular and interspeci ﬁc in-
teractions and by the still poorly understood interplay between the
biotic and abiotic factors that govern contaminant biodegradation in
polluted ecosystems ( de Lorenzo, 2008; Meckenstock et al., 2015 ). We
assume that, in principle, there are two ways to address this challenge,now and in future.
Theﬁrst admits that complexity of biological systems will not be
resolved anytime soon and thus bets on combining rational designs with
natural evolution at the end of the DBTA cycle, thus expanding it to
DBTAE (Design-Build-Test-Analyze-Evolve). Adaptive laboratory evo-
lution (ALE) is a high calibre tool of this approach. ALE is now frequently
used by academic and industrial laboratories to evolve desired prop-erties in environmental bacteria and for ﬁne-tuning recombinant mi-
croorganisms, but its principles have been well known since the time ofthe very ﬁrst attempts to modify microbial phenotypes ( Kellogg et al.,
Fig. 7. Hemiautotrophic growth of engineered E.colial-
lowed by decoupling energy production and carbon ﬁxa-
tion. The hemiautotrophic growth was observed after per-
forming three distinct steps: (i) Calvin-Benson-Bassham
(CBB) cycle for the biosynthesis of sugars from CO 2was
completed by introducing only two exogenous enzymaticactivities, phosphoribulokinase ( prkA) and RuBisCO, (ii)
phosphoglycerate mutase genes gpmA and gpmM were de-
leted to separate central metabolism into two sub-systems,i.e., a CO
2-ﬁxing part that included PrkA, RuBisCO, upper
glycolysis, and the pentose phosphate pathway, and an en-
ergy-supplying module that employed lower glycolysis and
the TCA cycle, (iii) the engineered strain bearing furthermutations ( ΔpfkA,ΔpfkB, Δzwf) was exposed to the strong
selective pressure towards greater carbon ﬁxation in xylose-
limited chemostat with a surplus pyruvate and CO
2.
Emerged mutations made designed CBB cycle functional
and the hemiautotrophic strain that replaced utilisation of
xylose with CO 2ﬁxation dominated the population.
Figure adapted from Antonovsky et al. (2016) .P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
8601981 ). In biodegradation research, exposing microorganisms with de-
sirable catabolic traits to the target chemical(s) for prolonged intervals
in chemostat or shaken- ﬂask cultures enabled isolation of bacteria able
to use persistent compounds such as 2,4,5-trichlorophenoxyacetic acid(the defoliating Agent Orange), or helped improve atrazine degradation
rates by Pseudomonas sp. ADP or 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic by Ral-
stonia sp. TFD41 ( Devers et al., 2008; Kellogg et al., 1981; Nakatsu
et al., 1998 ). Nonetheless, the potential of ALE in engineering microbial
degraders has yet not been fully exploited. ALE will be an ideal tool forempowering rationally pre-designed recombinants with resistance to
diverse environmental stresses encountered in directed biodegradation
processes or in polluted ecosystems ( Nicolaou et al., 2010; Oide et al.,
2015; Wang et al., 2016). When combined with whole-genome se-quencing and reverse engineering, ALE as an evolutionary “blind” ap-
proach can paradoxically contribute to further rationalizing the ﬁeld by
exposing otherwise unpredictable complex changes in multitrait phe-
notypes.
The second approach bets on technology without compromise, and
will take advantage of continuing technological revolution in biology
and related sciences. We recently witnessed the attempt of synthetic
biologists to implement automation as we know it from electronic en-
gineering in the design of orthogonal genetic circuits that would co-
ordinate the actions of selected microbial chassis ( Nielsen et al., 2016 ).
The genetic “guts” and pathway enzymes of the chassis can be designed
and synthesized de novo or be tailored rapidly, with surgical precision,
using new genome editing and protein engineering tools ( Huang et al.,
2016; Hutchison et al., 2016; Nyerges et al., 2016; Ran et al., 2013;
Renata et al., 2015). Although the circuit design tools still work pre-
dominantly with simple logic gates, the robustness and utility of the
available minimal cells is limited, and de novo -designed enzymes have
low activity, we can assume that the e ﬃciency, reliability and time
demand of such exercises will be further improved by progress in
computer science and arti ﬁcial intelligence development that could
crack the complexity of life. A purely technological approach would
omit any unknowns from the DBTA cycle with help of reliable com-
putational simulations, thus expanding it to DSBTA (Design- Simulate -
Build-Test-Analyze) and providing space for construction of whole-cellcatalysts perfectly tailored for speci ﬁc biodegradation tasks.
The challenges of both approaches applied to directed in situ bior-
emediation encompass the development of test schemes that will ex-
pose engineered organisms to mimicked environmental conditions, in-
cluding limiting carbon sources, lack of oxygen or redox recycling, mass
transfer perturbations, or interspeci ﬁc predation ( Meckenstock et al.,
2015 ). A critical issue will be the choice and establishment of new
chassis organisms better suited to ﬁeld biotransformations than the
currently available laboratory strains in terms of resistance to harshconditions including extreme pH, temperature, osmotic pressure or
ﬂuctuating concentrations of toxic chemicals ( Adams, 2016). These
new strains must simultaneously be reliable, amenable to genetic ma-nipulation, have mapped genomes and, ideally, metabolic models at
hand. The in situ bioremediation quests will be complicated by the
varying nature of polluting compounds, their mixtures and transfor-mation
products, all of which can be present at a single site ( Sarigiannis
and Hansen, 2012 ). Future microbial degraders must therefore be de-
signed to cope with several problem compounds in parallel, and not
only in terms of degradation or mineralization. The succesful conver-
sion of dangerous contaminants into usable molecules that can be fur-
ther valorized by whole-cell or cell-free biocatalysts is a desirable
starting point for the development of new technologies that extend
standard concepts of biodegradation and bioremediation ( Dvorak et al.,
2014a; Wigginton et al., 2012 ). Microbe-driven trash-to-treasure con-
versions are known from established biomass valorization processes,
but this concept can also be implemented in wastewater treatment,
metal and plastic recycling, or in direct valorization of industrial by-
product streams or captured greenhouse gases ( Bornscheuer, 2016;
Koutinas et al., 2014; Nancharaiah et al., 2016; Wierckx et al., 2015 ).Even so, the major challenge to the entire ﬁeld of engineered de-
graders is not related to continued progress in the development of im-
proved technologies, which is inevitable, but rather to the dissemina-
tion and popularization of achievements already attained. Public
environmental concerns and regulatory constraints have not just re-
stricted ﬁeld tests of genetically modi ﬁed microbes, but also a ﬀect the
quality of fundamental research and, by the same token, overall pro-gress in the ﬁeld. The exercises described in this review will only have a
chance to become real enterprises if the general population is inspiredby biotechnology and accepts it as an inseparable part of our daily
routine, as it did for information technology. The new systemic dis-
ciplines that make life less puzzling as well as emerging do-it-yourself
movement in biotechnology can undoubtedly contribute to a general
change of attitude ( de Lorenzo and Schmidt, 2017 ). Such change is
vital, because our ability to minimize production of waste and pollutingchemicals, remove existing waste or use it in bioprocesses to form
value-added compounds will shape the fate of our society on a global
scale.
Acknowledgements
PD is the holder of the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant No. 704410
(FUTURE). The work in Authors' Laboratory was funded by the
CAMBIOS Project of the Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness RTC-2014-1777-3 (MINECO), HELIOS Project of the
Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness BIO 2015-66960-C3-
2-R (MINECO/FEDER) and the ARISYS (ERC-2012-ADG-322797),
EmPowerPutida (EU-H2020-BIOTEC-2014-2015-6335536), and
Raft4Biotech (720776) contracts of the European Union. JD is sup-
ported also by the Czech Ministry of Education (LQ1605, LO1214,
LM2015055), and Czech Grant Agency (GA16-06096S). The ﬁnancial
support of The Novo Nordisk Foundation to PIN is also gratefully ac-knowledged.
References
Adams, B.L., 2016. The next generation of synthetic biology chassis: moving synthetic
biology from the laboratory to the ﬁeld. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 1328 –1330. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00256 .
Adetutu, E.M., Gundry, T.D., Patil, S.S., Golneshin, A., Adigun, J., Bhaskarla, V., Aleer, S.,
Shahsavari, E., Ross, E., Ball, A.S., 2015. Exploiting the intrinsic microbial de-
gradative potential for ﬁeld-based in situ dechlorination of trichloroethene con-
taminated groundwater. J. Hazard. Mater. 300, 48 –57.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2015.06.055 .
Alexander, M., 1999. Biodegradation and Bioremediation. Academic Press .
Amde, M., Liu, J.-F., Pang, L., 2015. Environmental application, fate, e ﬀects, and con-
cerns of ionic liquids: a review. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 12611 –12627. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b03123 .
An, W., Chin, J.W., 2009. Synthesis of orthogonal transcription-translation networks.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 8477 –8482. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
0900267106 .
Antonovsky, N., Gleizer, S., Noor, E., Zohar, Y., Herz, E., Barenholz, U., Zelcbuch, L.,
Amram, S., Wides, A., Tepper, N., Davidi, D., Bar-On, Y., Bareia, T., Wernick, D.G.,Shani, I., Malitsky, S., Jona, G., Bar-Even, A., Milo, R., 2016. Sugar synthesis fromCO
2inEscherichia coli . Cell 166, 115 –125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.
064.
Aparicio, T., Jensen, S.I., Nielsen, A.T., de Lorenzo, V., Martínez-García, E., 2016. The Ssr
protein (T1E_1405) from Pseudomonas putida DOT-T1E enables oligonucleotide-based
recombineering in platform strain P. putida EM42. Biotechnol. J. 11, 1309 –1319.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/biot.201600317 .
Arora, P.K., Bae, H., 2014. Integration of bioinformatics to biodegradation. Biol. Proced.
Online 16, 8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1480-9222-16-8 .
Aukema, K.G., Escalante, D.E., Maltby, M.M., Bera, A.K., Aksan, A., Wackett, L.P., 2016.
In silico identi ﬁcation of bioremediation potential: carbamazepine and other re-
calcitrant personal care products. Environ. Sci. Technol. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
acs.est.6b04345 .
Baghapour, M.A., Nasseri, S., Derakhshan, Z., 2013. Atrazine removal from aqueous so-
lutions using submerged biological aerated ﬁlter. J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 11, 6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/2052-336X-11-6 .
Bailey, J.E., 1991. Toward a science of metabolic engineering. Science 252, 1668 –1675 .
Barrangou, R., van Pijkeren, J.-P., 2016. Exploiting CRISPR-Cas immune systems for
genome editing in bacteria. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 37, 61 –68.http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.copbio.2015.10.003 .
Barth, M., Honak, A., Oeser, T., Wei, R., Belisário-Ferrari, M.R., Then, J., Schmidt, J.,
Zimmermann, W., 2016. A dual enzyme system composed of a polyester hydrolaseP. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
861and a carboxylesterase enhances the biocatalytic degradation of polyethylene ter-
ephthalate ﬁlms. Biotechnol. J. 11, 1082 –1087. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/biot.
201600008 .
Bastard, K., Smith, A.A.T., Vergne-Vaxelaire, C., Perret, A., Zaparucha, A., De Melo-
Minardi, R., Mariage, A., Boutard, M., Debard, A., Lechaplais, C., Pelle, C., Pellouin,
V., Perchat, N., Petit, J.-L., Kreimeyer, A., Medigue, C., Weissenbach, J., Artiguenave,
F., De Berardinis, V., Vallenet, D., Salanoubat, M., 2014. Revealing the hidden
functional diversity of an enzyme family. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 42 –49.http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nchembio.1387 .
Batth, T.S., Keasling, J.D., Petzold, C.J., 2012. Targeted proteomics for metabolic
pathway optimization. Methods Mol. Biol. 944, 237 –249. (Clifton NJ). http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-62703-122-6_17 .
Belda, E., van Heck, R.G.A., José Lopez-Sanchez, M., Cruveiller, S., Barbe, V., Fraser, C.,
Klenk, H.-P., Petersen, J., Morgat, A., Nikel, P.I., Vallenet, D., Rouy, Z., Sekowska, A.,Martins Dos Santos, V.A.P., de Lorenzo, V., Danchin, A., Médigue, C., 2016. The
revisited genome of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 enlightens its value as a robust
metabolic chassis. Environ. Microbiol. 18, 3403 –3424. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
1462-2920.13230 .
Bendl, J., Stourac, J., Sebestova, E., Vavra, O., Musil, M., Brezovsky, J., Damborsky, J.,
2016. HotSpot Wizard 2.0: automated design of site-speci ﬁc mutations and smart
libraries in protein engineering. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W479 –487. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/nar/gkw416 .
Benedetti, I., de Lorenzo, V., Nikel, P.I., 2016. Genetic programming of catalytic
Pseudomonas putida bioﬁlms for boosting biodegradation of haloalkanes. Metab. Eng.
33, 109 –118. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2015.11.004 .
Benfenati, E., 2007. Predicting toxicity through computers: a changing world. Chem.
Cent. J. 1, 32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1752-153X-1-32 .
Bereza-Malcolm, L.T., Mann, G., Franks, A.E., 2015. Environmental sensing of heavy
metals through whole cell microbial biosensors: a synthetic biology approach. ACS
Synth. Biol. 4, 535 –546. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb500286r .
Berman, H.M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T.N., Weissig, H., Shindyalov,
I.N., Bourne, P.E., 2000. The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235 –242.
Bornscheuer, U.T., 2016. Microbiology. Feeding on plastic. Science 351, 1154 –1155.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf2853 .
Bornscheuer, U.T., Huisman, G.W., Kazlauskas, R.J., Lutz, S., Moore, J.C., Robins, K.,
2012. Engineering the third wave of biocatalysis. Nature 485, 185 –194. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/nature11117 .
Bosma, T., Kruizinga, E., de Bruin, E.J., Poelarends, G.J., Janssen, D.B., 1999. Utilization
of trihalogenated propanes by agrobacterium radiobacter AD1 through heterologous
expression of the haloalkane dehalogenase from Rhodococcus sp. strain M15-3. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 65, 4575 –4581 .
Bouhajja, E., Agathos, S.N., George, I.F., 2016. Metagenomics: probing pollutant fate in
natural and engineered ecosystems. Biotechnol. Adv. 34, 1413 –1426. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2016.10.006 .
Boyle, P.M., Silver, P.A., 2012. Parts plus pipes: synthetic biology approaches to meta-
bolic engineering. Metab. Eng. 14, 223 –232. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.
2011.10.003 .
Brakmann,
S., 2001. Discovery of superior enzymes by directed molecular evolution.
Chembiochem Eur. J. Chem. Biol. 2, 865 –871.
Brenner, V., Arensdorf, J.J., Focht, D.D., 1994. Genetic construction of PCB degraders.
Biodegradation 5, 359 –377.
Burgard, A.P., Pharkya, P., Maranas, C.D., 2003. Optknock: a bilevel programming fra-
mework for identifying gene knockout strategies for microbial strain optimization.Biotechnol. Bioeng. 84, 647 –657. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bit.10803 .
Buryska, T., Daniel, L., Kunka, A., Brezovsky, J., Damborsky, J., Prokop, Z., 2016.
Discovery of novel Haloalkane dehalogenase inhibitors. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 82,
1958 –1965. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03916-15 .
Büscher, J.M., Czernik, D., Ewald, J.C., Sauer, U., Zamboni, N., 2009. Cross-platform
comparison of methods for quantitative metabolomics of primary metabolism. Anal.Chem. 81, 2135 –2143. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ac8022857 .
Carbonell, P., Parutto, P., Baudier, C., Junot, C., Faulon, J.-L., 2014. Retropath: auto-
mated pipeline for embedded metabolic circuits. ACS Synth. Biol. 3, 565 –577. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb4001273 .
Cardinale, S., Tueros, F.G., Sommer, M.O.A, 2017. Genetic-metabolic coupling for tar-
geted metabolic engineering. Cell Rep. 20, 1029 –1037. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
celrep.2017.07.015 .
Cases, I., de Lorenzo, V., 2005. Genetically modi ﬁed organisms for the environment:
stories of success and failure and what we have learned from them. Int. Microbiol. 8,213–222.
Casini, A., Storch, M., Baldwin, G.S., Ellis, T., 2015. Bricks and blueprints: methods and
standards for DNA assembly. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 568 –576. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nrm4014 .
Caspi, R., Billington, R., Ferrer, L., Foerster, H., Fulcher, C.A., Keseler, I.M., Kothari, A.,
Krummenacker, M., Latendresse, M., Mueller, L.A., Ong, Q., Paley, S., Subhraveti, P.,
Weaver, D.S., Karp, P.D., 2016. The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and
enzymes and the BioCyc collection of pathway/genome databases. Nucleic Acids Res.
44, D471 –480. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1164 .
Chakraborty, R., Wu, C.H., Hazen, T.C., 2012. Systems biology approach to bior-
emediation. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 23, 483 –490. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
copbio.2012.01.015 .
Chang, A., Schomburg, I., Placzek, S., Jeske, L., Ulbrich, M., Xiao, M., Sensen, C.W.,
Schomburg, D., 2015. BRENDA in 2015: exciting developments in its 25th year ofexistence. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D439 –446. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gku1068 .
Chavarría, M., Nikel, P.I., Pérez-Pantoja, D., de Lorenzo, V., 2013. The Entner-Doudoro ﬀ
pathway empowers Pseudomonas putida KT2440 with a high tolerance to oxidativestress. Environ. Microbiol. 15, 1772 –1785. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.
12069 .
Chen, L., Lu, J., Zhang, J., Feng, K.-R., Zheng, M.-Y., Cai, Y.-D., 2013. Predicting chemical
toxicity e ﬀects based on chemical-chemical interactions. PLoS One 8, e56517. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0056517 .
Chen,
Y., Kim, J.K., Hirning, A.J., Josi ć, K., Bennett, M.R., 2015. Synthetic biology.
Emergent genetic oscillations in a synthetic microbial consortium. Science 349,986–989. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa3794 .
Chen, B., Lim, S., Kannan, A., Alford, S.C., Sunden, F., Herschlag, D., Dimov, I.K., Baer,
T.M., Cochran, J.R., 2016. High-throughput analysis and protein engineering using
microcapillary arrays. Nat. Chem. Biol. 12, 76 –81.http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nchembio.1978 .
Choi, S.-L., Rha, E., Lee, S.J., Kim, H., Kwon, K., Jeong, Y.-S., Rhee, Y.H., Song, J.J., Kim,
H.-S., Lee, S.-G., 2014. Toward a generalized and high-throughput enzyme screening
system based on arti ﬁcial genetic circuits. ACS Synth. Biol. 3, 163 –171. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/sb400112u .
Chowdhury, A., Zomorrodi, A.R., Maranas, C.D., 2014. k-OptForce: integrating kinetics
withﬂux balance analysis for strain design. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10, e1003487. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003487 .
Chowdhury, A., Khodayari, A., Maranas, C.D., 2015. Improving prediction ﬁdelity of
cellular metabolism with kinetic descriptions. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 36, 57 –64.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2015.08.011 .
Costa, R.S., Machado, D., Rocha, I., Ferreira, E.C., 2011. Critical perspective on the
consequences of the limited availability of kinetic data in metabolic dynamic mod-elling. IET Syst. Biol. 5, 157 –163. http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/iet-syb.2009.0058 .
Dai, Z., Nielsen, J., 2015. Advancing metabolic engineering through systems biology of
industrial microorganisms. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 36, 8 –15.http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.copbio.2015.08.006 .
Damborsky, J., Brezovsky, J., 2014. Computational tools for designing and engineering
enzymes. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 19, 8 –16.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2013.
12.003 .
de la Peña Mattozzi, M., Tehara, S.K., Hong, T., Keasling, J.D., 2006. Mineralization of
paraoxon and its use as a sole C and P source by a rationally designed catabolicpathway in Pseudomonas putida . Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 6699 –6706. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00907-06 .
de Lorenzo, V., 2008. Systems biology approaches to bioremediation. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 19, 579 –589. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2008.10.004 .
de Lorenzo, V., 2009. Recombinant bacteria for environmental release: what went wrong
and what we have learnt from it. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 15 (Suppl. 1), 63 –65.http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2008.02683.x .
de Lorenzo, V., 2017. Seven microbial bio-processes to help the planet. Environ.
Microbiol. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1751-7915.12816/full .
de Lorenzo, V., Danchin, A., 2008. Synthetic biology: discovering new worlds and new
words. EMBO Rep. 9, 822 –827. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/embor.2008.159 .
de Lorenzo, V., Schmidt, M., 2017. The do-it-yourself movement as a source of innovation
in biotechnology - and much more. Microb. Biotechnol. 10, 517 –519. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1751-7915.12715 .
de
Lorenzo, V., Marlière, P., Solé, R., 2016. Bioremediation at a global scale: from the test
tube to planet Earth. Microb. Biotechnol. 9, 618 –625. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
1751-7915.12399 .
Dehghanifard, E., Jonidi Jafari, A., Rezaei Kalantary, R., Mahvi, A.H., Faramarzi, M.A.,
Esraﬁli, A., 2013. Biodegradation of 2,4-dinitrophenol with laccase immobilized on
nano-porous silica beads. Iranian J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 10. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/1735-2746-10-25 .
Delépine, B., Libis, V., Carbonell, P., Faulon, J.-L., 2016. SensiPath: computer-aided de-
sign of sensing-enabling metabolic pathways. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W226 –231.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkw305 .
Devers, M., Rouard, N., Martin-Laurent, F., 2008. Fitness drift of an atrazine-degrading
population under atrazine selection pressure. Environ. Microbiol. 10, 676 –684.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2007.01490.x .
Dombrowski, N., Donaho, J.A., Gutierrez, T., Seitz, K.W., Teske, A.P., Baker, B.J., 2016.
Reconstructing metabolic pathways of hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria from theDeepwater Horizon oil spill. Nat. Microbiol. 1, 16057. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nmicrobiol.2016.57 .
Dörr, M., Fibinger, M.P.C., Last, D., Schmidt, S., Santos-Aberturas, J., Böttcher, D.,
Hummel, A., Vickers, C., Voss, M., Bornscheuer, U.T., 2016. Fully automatized high-
throughput enzyme library screening using a robotic platform. Biotechnol. Bioeng.
113, 1421 –1432. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bit.25925 .
Dvorak, P., Bidmanova, S., Damborsky, J., Prokop, Z., 2014a. Immobilized synthetic
pathway for biodegradation of toxic recalcitrant pollutant 1,2,3-trichloropropane.Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 6859 –6866. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es500396r .
Dvorak, P., Kurumbang, N.P., Bendl, J., Brezovsky, J., Prokop, Z., Damborsky, J., 2014b.
Maximizing the e ﬃciency of multienzyme process by stoichiometry optimization.
Chembiochem Eur. J. Chem. Biol. 15, 1891 –1895. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cbic.
201402265 .
Dvorak, P., Chrast, L., Nikel, P.I., Fedr, R., Soucek, K., Sedlackova, M., Chaloupkova, R.,
de Lorenzo, V., Prokop, Z., Damborsky, J., 2015. Exacerbation of substrate toxicity byIPTG in Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) carrying a synthetic metabolic pathway. Microb.
Cell Factories 14, 201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12934-015-0393-3 .
Ebenau-Jehle, C., Mergelsberg, M., Fischer, S., Brüls, T., Jehmlich, N., von Bergen, M.,
Boll, M., 2017. An unusual strategy for the anoxic biodegradation of phthalate. ISMEJ. 11, 224 –236. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2016.91 .
Erb, T.J., Zarzycki, J., 2016. Biochemical and synthetic biology approaches to improve
photosynthetic CO
2-ﬁxation. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 34, 72 –79.http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.cbpa.2016.06.026 .
Eriksson, L., Jaworska, J., Worth, A.P., Cronin, M.T.D., McDowell, R.M., Gramatica, P.,P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
8622003. Methods for reliability and uncertainty assessment and for applicability eva-
luations of classi ﬁcation- and regression-based QSARs. Environ. Health Perspect. 111,
1361 –1375 .
Escalante, A.E., Rebolleda-Gómez, M., Benítez, M., Travisano, M., 2015. Ecological per-
spectives on synthetic biology: insights from microbial population biology. Front.
Microbiol. 6, 143. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2015.00143 .
Fernández-Álvaro, E., Snajdrova, R., Jochens, H., Davids, T., Böttcher, D., Bornscheuer,
U.T., 2011. A combination of in vivo selection and cell sorting for the identi ﬁcation of
enantioselective biocatalysts. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 50, 8584 –8587. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1002/anie.201102360 .
Fibinger, M.P.C., Davids, T., Böttcher, D., Bornscheuer, U.T., 2015. A selection assay for
haloalkane dehalogenase activity based on toxic substrates. Appl. Microbiol.Biotechnol. 99, 8955 –8962. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-6686-y .
Finley, S.D., Broadbelt, L.J., Hatzimanikatis, V., 2009. Computational framework for
predictive biodegradation. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 104, 1086 –1097. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/bit.22489 .
Finley, S.D., Broadbelt, L.J., Hatzimanikatis, V., 2010. In silico feasibility of novel bio-
degradation pathways for 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene. BMC Syst. Biol. 4, 7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1186/1752-0509-4-7 .
Francis, C.W., Mankin, J.B., 1977. High nitrate denitri ﬁcation in continuous ﬂow-stirred
reactors. Water Res. 11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(77)90061-6 .
Fuchs, G., 2011. Alternative pathways of carbon dioxide ﬁxation: insights into the early
evolution of life? Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 65, 631 –658. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-micro-090110-102801 .
Gao, J., Ellis, L.B.M., Wackett, L.P., 2010. The University of Minnesota Biocatalysis/
Biodegradation Database: improving public access. Nucleic Acids Res. 38, D488 –491.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkp771 .
Gao, F., Ding, H., Feng, Z., Liu, D., Zhao, Y., 2014. Functional display of triphenylmethane
reductase for dye removal on the surface of Escherichia coli using N-terminal domain
of ice nucleation protein. Bioresour. Technol. 169, 181 –187. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.biortech.2014.06.093 .
Geueke, B., Garg, N., Ghosh, S., Fleischmann, T., Holliger, C., Lal, R., Kohler, H.-P.E.,
2013. Metabolomics of hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH) transformation: ratio of LinAto LinB determines metabolic fate of HCH isomers. Environ. Microbiol. 15,
1040 –1049. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.12009 .
Gilbert, E.S., Walker, A.W., Keasling, J.D., 2003. A constructed microbial consortium for
biodegradation of the organophosphorus insecticide parathion. Appl. Microbiol.Biotechnol. 61, 77 –81.http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00253-002-1203-5 .
Glass, J.I., Assad-Garcia, N., Alperovich, N., Yooseph, S., Lewis, M.R., Maruf, M.,
Hutchison, C.A., Smith, H.O., Venter, J.C., 2006. Essential genes of a minimal bac-
terium. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103, 425 –430. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
0510013103 .
Glick, B.R., 1995. Metabolic load and heterologous gene expression. Biotechnol. Adv. 13,
247–261.
Guazzaroni, M.-E., Herbst, F.-A., Lores, I., Tamames, J., Peláez, A.I., López-Cortés, N.,
Alcaide,
M., Del Pozo, M.V., Vieites, J.M., von Bergen, M., Gallego, J.L.R., Bargiela,
R., López-López, A., Pieper, D.H., Rosselló-Móra, R., Sánchez, J., Seifert, J., Ferrer,M., 2013. Metaproteogenomic insights beyond bacterial response to naphthaleneexposure and bio-stimulation. ISME J. 7, 122 –136. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ismej.
2012.82 .
Gredell, J.A., Frei, C.S., Cirino, P.C., 2012. Protein and RNA engineering to customize
microbial molecular reporting. Biotechnol. J. 7, 477 –499. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/10.1002/biot.201100266/full .
Gutierrez, T., Singleton, D.R., Berry, D., Yang, T., Aitken, M.D., Teske, A., 2013.
Hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria enriched by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill iden-tiﬁed by cultivation and DNA-SIP. ISME J. 7, 2091 –2104. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ismej.2013.98 .
Hadadi, N., Hafner, J., Shajkofci, A., Zisaki, A., Hatzimanikatis, V., 2016. ATLAS of
biochemistry: a repository of all possible biochemical reactions for synthetic biology
and metabolic engineering studies. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 1155 –1166. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00054 .
Haro, M.A., de Lorenzo, V., 2001. Metabolic engineering of bacteria for environmental
applications: construction of Pseudomonas strains for biodegradation of 2-chlor-otoluene. J. Biotechnol. 85, 103 –113.
Hatzimanikatis, V., Li, C., Ionita, J.A., Henry, C.S., Jankowski, M.D., Broadbelt, L.J.,
2005. Exploring the diversity of complex metabolic networks. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl.21, 1603 –1609. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bti213 .
He, W., Yuan, S., Zhong, W.-H., Siddikee, M.A., Dai, C.-C., 2016. Application of geneti-
cally engineered microbial whole-cell biosensors for combined chemosensing. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100, 1109 –1119. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-
7160-6 .
Hennig, S., Rödel, G., Ostermann, K., 2015. Arti ﬁcial cell-cell communication as an
emerging tool in synthetic biology applications. J. Biol. Eng. 9, 13. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1186/s13036-015-0011-2 .
Hicks, N., Vik, U., Taylor, P., Ladoukakis, E., Park, J., Kolisis, F., Jakobsen, K.S., 2017.
Using prokaryotes for carbon capture storage. Trends Biotechnol. 35, 22 –32.http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.06.011 .
Hodgman, C.E., Jewett, M.C., 2012. Cell-free synthetic biology: thinking outside the cell.
Metab. Eng. 14, 261 –269. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2011.09.002 .
Huang, P.-S., Boyken, S.E., Baker, D., 2016. The coming of age of de novo protein design.
Nature 537, 320 –327. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature19946 .
Hutchison, C.A., Chuang, R.-Y., Noskov, V.N., Assad-Garcia, N., Deerinck, T.J., Ellisman,
M.H., Gill, J., Kannan, K., Karas, B.J., Ma, L., Pelletier, J.F., Qi, Z.-Q., Richter, R.A.,
Strychalski, E.A., Sun, L., Suzuki, Y., Tsvetanova, B., Wise, K.S., Smith, H.O., Glass,
J.I., Merryman, C., Gibson, D.G., Venter, J.C., 2016. Design and synthesis of a
minimal bacterial genome. Science 351, aad6253. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aad6253 .
Iwakiri, R., Yoshihira, K., Ngadiman, Null, Futagami, T., Goto, M., Furukawa, K., 2004.
Total degradation of pentachloroethane by an engineered Alcaligenes strain expres-sing a modi ﬁed camphor monooxygenase and a hybrid dioxygenase. Biosci.
Biotechnol. Biochem. 68, 1353 –1356. http://dx.doi.org/10.1271/bbb.68.1353 .
Izallalen, M., Mahadevan, R., Burgard, A., Postier, B., Didonato, R., Sun, J., Schilling,
C.H., Lovley, D.R., 2008. Geobacter sulfurreducens strain engineered for increased
rates of respiration. Metab. Eng. 10, 267 –275. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.
2008.06.005 .
Janssen,
D.B., Dinkla, I.J.T., Poelarends, G.J., Terpstra, P., 2005. Bacterial degradation of
xenobiotic compounds: evolution and distribution of novel enzyme activities.
Environ. Microbiol. 7, 1868 –1882. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2005.
00966.x .
Kanehisa, M., Goto, S., Sato, Y., Kawashima, M., Furumichi, M., Tanabe, M., 2014. Data,
information, knowledge and principle: back to metabolism in KEGG. Nucleic Acids
Res. 42, D199 –205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkt1076 .
Karig, D.K., 2017. Cell-free synthetic biology for environmental sensing and remediation.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 45, 69 –75.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2017.01.010 .
Kellogg, S.T., Chatterjee, D.K., Chakrabarty, A.M., 1981. Plasmid-assisted molecular
breeding: new technique for enhanced biodegradation of persistent toxic chemicals.Science 214, 1133 –1135 .
Khersonsky, O., Taw ﬁk, D.S., 2010. Enzyme promiscuity: a mechanistic and evolutionary
perspective. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79, 471 –505. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
biochem-030409-143718 .
Kim, J., Copley, S.D., 2012. Inhibitory cross-talk upon introduction of a new metabolic
pathway into an existing metabolic network. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109,
E2856 –2864. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1208509109 .
Kim, S., Baek, S.-H., Lee, K., Hahn, J.-S., 2013a. Cellulosic ethanol production using a
yeast consortium displaying a minicellulosome and β-glucosidase. Microb. Cell
Factories 12, 14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-12-14 .
Kim, J., Oliveros, J.C., Nikel, P.I., de Lorenzo, V., Silva-Rocha, R., 2013b. Transcriptomic
ﬁngerprinting of Pseudomonas putida under alternative physiological regimes.
Environ. Microbiol. Rep. 5, 883 –891. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1758-2229.12090 .
Kim, S., Thiessen, P.A., Bolton, E.E., Chen, J., Fu, G., Gindulyte, A., Han, L., He, J., He, S.,
Shoemaker, B.A., Wang, J., Yu, B., Zhang, J., Bryant, S.H., 2016. PubChem substanceand compound databases. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D1202– 1213. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1093/nar/gkv951 .
King, Z.A., Lloyd, C.J., Feist, A.M., Palsson, B.O., 2015. Next-generation genome-scale
models for metabolic engineering. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 35, 23 –29.http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.copbio.2014.12.016 .
Kleinstiver, B.P., Pattanayak, V., Prew, M.S., Tsai, S.Q., Nguyen, N.T., Zheng, Z., Joung,
J.K., 2016. High-ﬁ delity CRISPR-Cas9 nucleases with no detectable genome-wide o ﬀ-
target e ﬀects. Nature 529, 490 –495. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature16526 .
Kosuri, S., Church, G.M., 2014. Large-scale de novo DNA synthesis: technologies and
applications. Nat. Methods 11, 499 –507. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2918 .
Koutinas, A.A., Vlysidis, A., Pleissner, D., Kopsahelis, N., Lopez Garcia, I., Kookos, I.K.,
Papanikolaou, S., Kwan, T.H., Lin, C.S.K., 2014. Valorization of industrial waste andby-product
streams via fermentation for the production of chemicals and biopoly-
mers. Chem. Soc. Rev. 43, 2587 –2627. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c3cs60293a .
Krewski, D., Andersen, M.E., Mantus, E., Zeise, L., 2009. Toxicity testing in the 21st
century: implications for human health risk assessment. Risk Anal. 29, 474 –479.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.2008.01150.x .
Kube, M., Chernikova, T.N., Al-Ramahi, Y., Beloqui, A., Lopez-Cortez, N., Guazzaroni, M.-
E., Heipieper, H.J., Klages, S., Kotsyurbenko, O.R., Langer, I., Nechitaylo, T.Y.,
Lünsdorf, H., Fernández, M., Juárez, S., Ciordia, S., Singer, A., Kagan, O., Egorova, O.,
Petit, P.A., Stogios, P., Kim, Y., Tchigvintsev, A., Flick, R., Denaro, R., Genovese, M.,
Albar, J.P., Reva, O.N., Martínez-Gomariz, M., Tran, H., Ferrer, M., Savchenko, A.,
Yakunin, A.F., Yakimov, M.M., Golyshina, O.V., Reinhardt, R., Golyshin, P.N., 2013.Genome sequence and functional genomic analysis of the oil-degrading bacterium
Oleispira antarctica. Nat. Commun. 4, 2156. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms3156 .
Kuipers, R.K., Joosten, H.-J., van Berkel, W.J.H., Leferink, N.G.H., Rooijen, E., Ittmann,
E., van Zimmeren, F., Jochens, H., Bornscheuer, U., Vriend, G., dos Santos, V.A.P.M.,Schaap, P.J., 2010. 3DM: systematic analysis of heterogeneous superfamily data to
discover protein functionalities. Proteins 78, 2101 –2113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
prot.22725 .
Kurumbang, N.P., Dvorak, P., Bendl, J., Brezovsky, J., Prokop, Z., Damborsky, J., 2014.
Computer-assisted engineering of the synthetic pathway for biodegradation of a toxic
persistent pollutant. ACS Synth. Biol. 3, 172 –181. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
sb400147n .
Latino, D.A.R.S., Wicker, J., Gütlein, M., Schmid, E., Kramer, S., Fenner, K., 2017. Eawag-
Soil in enviPath: a new resource for exploring regulatory pesticide soil biodegrada-
tion pathways and half-life data. Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts 19, 449 –464.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c6em00697c .
Lee, J., Cao, L., Ow, S.Y., Barrios-Llerena, M.E., Chen, W., Wood, T.K., Wright, P.C., 2006.
Proteome changes after metabolic engineering to enhance aerobic mineralization ofcis‑1,2-dichloroethylene. J. Proteome Res. 5, 1388 –1397. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1021/pr060008t .
Lee, J.W., Na, D., Park, J.M., Lee, J., Choi, S., Lee, S.Y., 2012. Systems metabolic en-
gineering of microorganisms for natural and non-natural chemicals. Nat. Chem. Biol.
8, 536 –546. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.970 .
Lehrbach, P.R., Zeyer, J., Reineke, W., Knackmuss, H.J., Timmis, K.N., 1984. Enzyme
recruitment in vitro: use of cloned genes to extend the range of haloaromatics de-graded by Pseudomonas sp. strain B13. J. Bacteriol. 158, 1025 –1032 .
Li, G.-Q., Ma, T., Li, S.-S., Li, H., Liang, F.-L., Liu, R.-L., 2007. Improvement of di-
benzothiophene desulfurization activity by removing the gene overlap in the dszP. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
863operon. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 71, 849 –854. http://dx.doi.org/10.1271/bbb.
60189 .
Li, Z., Yoshida, N., Wang, A., Nan, J., Liang, B., Zhang, C., Zhang, D., Suzuki, D., Zhou, X.,
Xiao, Z., Katayama, A., 2015. Anaerobic mineralization of 2,4,6-tribromophenol to
CO2by a synthetic microbial community comprising Clostridium ,Dehalobacter , and
Desulfatiglans . Bioresour. Technol. 176, 225 –232. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2014.10.097 .
Libis, V., Delépine, B., Faulon, J.-L., 2016. Expanding biosensing abilities through com-
puter-aided design of metabolic pathways. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 1076 –1085. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00225 .
Liss, M., Daubert, D., Brunner, K., Kliche, K., Hammes, U., Leiherer, A., Wagner, R., 2012.
Embedding permanent watermarks in synthetic genes. PLoS One 7, e42465. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0042465 .
Litchﬁeld, C., 2005. Thirty years and counting: bioremediation in its prime? Bioscience
55, 273 –279. http://dx.doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[0273:TYACBI]2.0.
CO;2 .
Liu, X., Germaine, K.J., Ryan, D., Dowling, D.N., 2010. Genetically modi ﬁed
Pseudomonas biosensing biodegraders to detect PCB and chlorobenzoate bioavail-
ability and biodegradation in contaminated soils. Bioeng. Bugs 1, 198 –206. http://dx.
doi.org/10.4161/bbug.1.3.12443 .
Liu, J., Tan, L., Wang, J., Wang, Z., Ni, H., Li, L., 2016. Complete biodegradation of
chlorpyrifos by engineered Pseudomonas putida cells expressing surface-immobilized
laccases. Chemosphere 157, 200 –207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.
2016.05.031 .
Loeschcke, A., Markert, A., Wilhelm, S., Wirtz, A., Rosenau, F., Jaeger, K.-E., Drepper, T.,
2013. TREX: a universal tool for the transfer and expression of biosynthetic pathways
in bacteria. ACS Synth. Biol. 2, 22 –33.http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb3000657 .
Long, M.R., Ong, W.K., Reed, J.L., 2015. Computational methods in metabolic en-
gineering for strain design. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 34, 135 –141. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.copbio.2014.12.019 .
Lorenzo, V., Loza-Tavera, H., 2011. Microbial bioremediation of chemical pollutants: how
bacteria cope with multi-stress environmental scenarios. In: Storz, G., Hengge, R.
(Eds.), Bacterial Stress Responses, Second edition. ASM Press, Washington, DC, pp.
481–492. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/9781555816841.ch30 .
Lovley, D.R., Phillips, E.J.P., Gorby, Y.A., Landa, E.R., 1991. Microbial reduction of ur-
anium. Nature 350, 413 –416. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/350413a0 .
Lykidis, A., Pérez-Pantoja, D., Ledger, T., Mavromatis, K., Anderson, I.J., Ivanova, N.N.,
Hooper, S.D., Lapidus, A., Lucas, S., González, B., Kyrpides, N.C., 2010. The completemultipartite genome sequence of Cupriavidus necator JMP134, a versatile pollutant
degrader. PLoS One 5, e9729. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0009729 .
Marathe, N.P., Pal, C., Gaikwad, S.S., Jonsson, V., Kristiansson, E., Larsson, D.G.J., 2017.
Untreated urban waste contaminates Indian river sediments with resistance genes tolast resort antibiotics. Water Res. 124, 388 –397. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.
2017.07.060 .
Martínez, I., Mohamed, M.E.-S., Rozas, D., García, J.L., Díaz, E., 2016. Engineering syn-
thetic bacterial consortia for enhanced desulfurization and revalorization of oil sulfurcompounds. Metab. Eng. 35, 46 –54.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2016.01.
005.
Martínez-García,
E., de Lorenzo, V., 2012. Transposon-based and plasmid-based genetic
tools for editing genomes of gram-negative bacteria. Methods Mol. Biol. 813,
267–283. (Clifton NJ). http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-61779-412-4_16 .
Martínez-García, E., de Lorenzo, V., 2016. The quest for the minimal bacterial genome.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 42, 216 –224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2016.09.
001.
Martínez-García, E., Aparicio, T., de Lorenzo, V., Nikel, P.I., 2014a. New transposon tools
tailored for metabolic engineering of gram-negative microbial cell factories. Front.
Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2, 46. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2014.00046 .
Martínez-García, E., Nikel, P.I., Aparicio, T., de Lorenzo, V., 2014b. Pseudomonas 2.0:
genetic upgrading of P.putida KT2440 as an enhanced host for heterologous gene
expression. Microb. Cell Factories 13, 159. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12934-014-
0159-3 .
Martínez-García, E., Aparicio, T., Goñi-Moreno, A., Fraile, S., de Lorenzo, V., 2015. SEVA
2.0: an update of the Standard European Vector Architecture for de-/re-constructionof bacterial functionalities. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D1183 –1189. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/nar/gku1114 .
Meckenstock, R.U., Elsner, M., Griebler, C., Lueders, T., Stumpp, C., Aamand, J., Agathos,
S.N., Albrechtsen, H.-J., Bastiaens, L., Bjerg, P.L., Boon, N., Dejonghe, W., Huang,
W.E., Schmidt, S.I., Smolders, E., Sørensen, S.R., Springael, D., van Breukelen, B.M.,
2015. Biodegradation: updating the concepts of control for microbial cleanup in
contaminated aquifers. Environ. Sci. Technol. 49, 7073 –7081. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1021/acs.est.5b00715 .
Medema, M.H., van Raaphorst, R., Takano, E., Breitling, R., 2012. Computational tools for
the synthetic design of biochemical pathways. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10, 191 –202.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2717 .
Mendes, P., Hoops, S., Sahle, S., Gauges, R., Dada, J., Kummer, U., 2009. Computational
modeling of biochemical networks using COPASI. Methods Mol. Biol. 500, 17 –59.
(Clifton NJ). http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-59745-525-1_2 .
Minty, J.J., Singer, M.E., Scholz, S.A., Bae, C.-H., Ahn, J.-H., Foster, C.E., Liao, J.C., Lin,
X.N., 2013. Design and characterization of synthetic fungal-bacterial consortia fordirect production of isobutanol from cellulosic biomass. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
110, 14592 –14597. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1218447110 .
Moraïs, S., Shterzer, N., Lamed, R., Bayer, E.A., Mizrahi, I., 2014. A combined cell-con-
sortium approach for lignocellulose degradation by specialized Lactobacillus plan-
tarum cells. Biotechnol. Biofuels 7, 112. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1754-6834-7-
112.
Morgat, A., Axelsen, K.B., Lombardot, T., Alcántara, R., Aimo, L., Zerara, M., Niknejad, A.,Belda, E., Hyka-Nouspikel, N., Coudert, E., Redaschi, N., Bougueleret, L., Steinbeck,C., Xenarios, I., Bridge, A., 2015. Updates in Rhea —a manually curated resource of
biochemical reactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D459 –464. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gku961 .
Mulbry, W., Ahrens, E., Karns, J., 1998. Use of a ﬁeld-scale bio ﬁlter for the degradation of
the organophosphate insecticide coumaphos in cattle dip wastes. Pestic. Sci. 52,268–274. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-9063(199803)52:3<268::AID-
PS719>3.0.CO;2-2 .
Muschiol, J., Peters, C., Oberleitner, N., Mihovilovic, M.D., Bornscheuer, U.T., Rudro ﬀ,
 F.,
2015. Cascade catalysis —strategies and challenges en route to preparative synthetic
biology. Chem. Commun. (Camb.) 51, 5798 –5811. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
c4cc08752f .
Mutlu, B.R., Yeom, S., Wackett, L., Aksan, A., 2015. Modelling and optimization of a
bioremediation system utilizing silica gel encapsulated whole-cell biocatalyst. Chem.
Eng. J. 259, 574 –580. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2014.07.130 .
Nakatsu, C.H., Korona, R., Lenski, R.E., de Bruijn, F.J., Marsh, T.L., Forney, L.J., 1998.
Parallel and divergent genotypic evolution in experimental populations of Ralstoniasp. J. Bacteriol. 180, 4325 –4331 .
Nancharaiah, Y.V., Mohan, S.V., Lens, P.N.L., 2016. Biological and bioelectrochemical
recovery of critical and scarce metals. Trends Biotechnol. 34, 137 –155. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.11.003 .
Nelson, K.E., Weinel, C., Paulsen, I.T., Dodson, R.J., Hilbert, H., Martins dos Santos,
V.A.P., Fouts, D.E., Gill, S.R., Pop, M., Holmes, M., Brinkac, L., Beanan, M., DeBoy,R.T., Daugherty, S., Kolonay, J., Madupu, R., Nelson, W., White, O., Peterson, J.,Khouri, H., Hance, I., Chris Lee, P., Holtzapple, E., Scanlan, D., Tran, K., Moazzez, A.,
Utterback, T., Rizzo, M., Lee, K., Kosack, D., Moestl, D., Wedler, H., Lauber, J.,
Stjepandic, D., Hoheisel, J., Straetz, M., Heim, S., Kiewitz, C., Eisen, J.A., Timmis,
K.N., Düsterhöft, A., Tümmler, B., Fraser, C.M., 2002. Complete genome sequence
and comparative analysis of the metabolically versatile Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
Environ. Microbiol. 4, 799 –808.
Nicolaou, S.A., Gaida, S.M., Papoutsakis, E.T., 2010. A comparative view of metabolite
and substrate stress and tolerance in microbial bioprocessing: from biofuels and
chemicals, to biocatalysis and bioremediation. Metab. Eng. 12, 307 –331. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2010.03.004 .
Nielsen, J., Fussenegger, M., Keasling, J., Lee, S.Y., Liao, J.C., Prather, K., Palsson, B.,
2014. Engineering synergy in biotechnology. Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 319 –322. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.1519 .
Nielsen, A.A.K., Der, B.S., Shin, J., Vaidyanathan, P., Paralanov, V., Strychalski, E.A.,
Ross, D., Densmore, D., Voigt, C.A., 2016. Genetic circuit design automation. Science352, aac7341. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aac7341 .
Nikel, P.I., de Lorenzo, V., 2013. Engineering an anaerobic metabolic regime in
Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for the anoxic biodegradation of 1,3-dichloroprop-1-ene.
Metab. Eng. 15, 98 –112. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2012.09.006 .
Nikel, P.I., Pérez-Pantoja, D., de Lorenzo, V., 2013. Why are chlorinated pollutants so
diﬃcult to degrade aerobically? Redox stress limits 1,3-dichloroprop-1-ene metabo-
lism by Pseudomonas pavonaceae. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 368,20120377. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0377 .
Nikel, P.I., Martínez-García, E., de Lorenzo, V., 2014. Biotechnological domestication of
pseudomonads using synthetic biology. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 368 –379. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro3253 .
Nikel, P.I., Chavarría, M., Fuhrer, T., Sauer, U., de Lorenzo, V., 2015. Pseudomonas putida
KT2440 strain metabolizes glucose through a cycle formed by enzymes of the Entner-
Doudoro ﬀ, Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas, and pentose phosphate pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 290, 25920– 25932. http://dx.doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.687749 .
Nikel, P.I., Chavarría, M., Danchin, A., de Lorenzo, V., 2016a. From dirt to industrial
applications: Pseudomonas putida as a synthetic biology chassis for hosting harsh
biochemical
reactions. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 34, 20 –29.http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.cbpa.2016.05.011 .
Nikel, P.I., Pérez-Pantoja, D., de Lorenzo, V., 2016b. Pyridine nucleotide transhy-
drogenases enable redox balance of Pseudomonas putida during biodegradation of
aromatic compounds. Environ. Microbiol. 18, 3565 –3582. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1111/1462-2920.13434 .
Nyerges, Á., Csörg ő, B., Nagy, I., Bálint, B., Bihari, P., Lázár, V., Apjok, G., Umenho ﬀer,
K., Bogos, B., Pósfai, G., Pál, C., 2016. A highly precise and portable genome en-gineering method allows comparison of mutational e ﬀects across bacterial species.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 113, 2502 –2507. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1520040113 .
Ohtsubo, Y., Maruyama, F., Mitsui, H., Nagata, Y., Tsuda, M., 2012. Complete genome
sequence of Acidovorax sp. strain KKS102, a polychlorinated-biphenyl degrader. J.Bacteriol. 194, 6970 –6971. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JB.01848-12 .
Oide, S., Gunji, W., Moteki, Y., Yamamoto, S., Suda, M., Jojima, T., Yukawa, H., Inui, M.,
2015. Thermal and solvent stress cross-tolerance conferred to Corynebacterium glu-
tamicum by adaptive laboratory evolution. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81, 2284 –2298.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/AEM.03973-14 .
Oosterkamp, M.J., Veuskens, T., Talarico Saia, F., Weelink, S.A.B., Goodwin, L.A.,
Daligault, H.E., Bruce, D.C., Detter, J.C., Tapia, R., Han, C.S., Land, M.L., Hauser, L.J.,Langenho ﬀ, A.A.M., Gerritse, J., van Berkel, W.J.H., Pieper, D.H., Junca, H., Smidt,
H., Schraa, G., Davids, M., Schaap, P.J., Plugge, C.M., Stams, A.J.M., 2013. Genome
analysis and physiological comparison of Alicycliphilus denitri ﬁcans strains BC and
K601(T.). PLoS One 8, e66971. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066971 .
Paddon, C.J., Keasling, J.D., 2014. Semi-synthetic artemisinin: a model for the use of
synthetic biology in pharmaceutical development. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 355 –367.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro3240 .
Parales, R.E., Ditty, J.L., 2005. Laboratory evolution of catabolic enzymes and pathways.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 16, 315 –325. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2005.03.
008.P. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
864Pascual, J., Udaondo, Z., Molina, L., Segura, A., Esteve-Núñez, A., Caballero, A., Duque,
E., Ramos, J.L., van Dillewijn, P., 2015. Draft genome sequence of Pseudomonas putida
JLR11, a facultative anaerobic 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene biotransforming bacterium.
Genome Announc. 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/genomeA.00904-15 .
Patil, V.V., Park, K.-H., Lee, S.-G., Woo, E., 2016. Structural analysis of the phenol-re-
sponsive sensory domain of the transcription activator PoxR. Structure 1993 (24),624–630. (Lond. Engl.). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2016.03.006 .
Patowary, K., Patowary, R., Kalita, M.C., Deka, S., 2016. Development of an e ﬃcient
bacterial consortium for the potential remediation of hydrocarbons from con-
taminated sites. Front. Microbiol. 7, 1092. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.
01092 .
Paul, D., Pandey, G., Jain, R.K., 2005. Suicidal genetically engineered microorganisms for
bioremediation: need and perspectives. Bioessays 27, 563 –573. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1002/bies.20220 .
Pavlova, M., Klvana, M., Prokop, Z., Chaloupkova, R., Banas, P., Otyepka, M., Wade, R.C.,
Tsuda, M., Nagata, Y., Damborsky, J., 2009. Redesigning dehalogenase access tunnelsas a strategy for degrading an anthropogenic substrate. Nat. Chem. Biol. 5, 727 –733.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nchembio.205 .
Petrie, B., Barden, R., Kasprzyk-Hordern, B., 2015. A review on emerging contaminants in
wastewaters and the environment: current knowledge, understudied areas and re-
commendations for future monitoring. In: Water Res., Occurrence, Fate, Removal and
Assessment of Emerging Contaminants in Water in the Water Cycle (From
Wastewater to Drinking Water). 72. pp. 3 –27.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.
2014.08.053 .
Planson, A.-G., Carbonell, P., Paillard, E., Pollet, N., Faulon, J.-L., 2012. Compound
toxicity screening and structure-activity relationship modeling in Escherichia coli .
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 109, 846 –850. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bit.24356 .
Pucha łka, J., Oberhardt, M.A., Godinho, M., Bielecka, A., Regenhardt, D., Timmis, K.N.,
Papin, J.A., Martins dos Santos, V.A.P., 2008. Genome-scale reconstruction and
analysis of the Pseudomonas putida KT2440 metabolic network facilitates applications
in biotechnology. PLoS Comput. Biol. 4, e1000210. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pcbi.1000210 .
Ramos, J.L., Wasserfallen, A., Rose, K., Timmis, K.N., 1987. Redesigning metabolic
routes: manipulation of TOL plasmid pathway for catabolism of alkylbenzoates.
Science 235, 593 –596.
Ramos, J.-L., Marqués, S., van Dillewijn, P., Espinosa-Urgel, M., Segura, A., Duque, E.,
Krell, T., Ramos-González, M.-I., Bursakov, S., Roca, A., Solano, J., Fernádez, M.,Niqui, J.L., Pizarro-Tobias, P., Wittich, R.-M., 2011. Laboratory research aimed at
closing the gaps in microbial bioremediation. Trends Biotechnol. 29, 641 –647.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2011.06.007 .
Ran, F.A., Hsu, P.D., Wright, J., Agarwala, V., Scott, D.A., Zhang, F., 2013. Genome en-
gineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat. Protoc. 8, 2281 –2308. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/nprot.2013.143 .
Raunio, H., Kuusisto, M., Juvonen, R.O., Pentikäinen, O.T., 2015. Modeling of interac-
tions between xenobiotics and cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes. Front. Pharmacol. 6,123. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2015.00123 .
Ravikumar, S., Baylon, M.G., Park, S.J., Choi, J.-I., 2017. Engineered microbial biosensors
based on bacterial two-component systems as synthetic biotechnology platforms inbioremediation and biore ﬁnery. Microb. Cell Factories 16, 62. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1186/s12934-017-0675-z .
Raymond, R.L., Jamison, V.W., Hudson, J.O., 1975. Final Report on Bene ﬁcial
Stimulation of Bacterial Activity in Ground Waters Containing Petroleum Products.Sun
Ventures, Incorporated .
Reineke, W., Knackmuss, H.J., 1979. Construction of haloaromatics utilising bacteria.
Nature 277, 385 –386.
Renata, H., Wang, Z.J., Arnold, F.H., 2015. Expanding the enzyme universe: accessing
non-natural reactions by mechanism-guided directed evolution. Angew. Chem. Int.Ed. Eng. 54, 3351 –3367. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/anie.201409470 .
Rockström, J., Ga ﬀney, O., Rogelj, J., Meinshausen, M., Nakicenovic, N., Schellnhuber,
H.J., 2017. A roadmap for rapid decarbonization. Science 355, 1269 –1271. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1126/science.aah3443 .
Rojo, F., Pieper, D.H., Engesser, K.H., Knackmuss, H.J., Timmis, K.N., 1987. Assemblage
of ortho cleavage route for simultaneous degradation of chloro- and methylaromatics.
Science 238, 1395 –1398 .
Rollin, J.A., Martin del Campo, J., Myung, S., Sun, F., You, C., Bakovic, A., Castro, R.,
Chandrayan, S.K., Wu, C.-H., Adams, M.W.W., Senger, R.S., Zhang, Y.-H.P., 2015.High-yield hydrogen production from biomass by in vitro metabolic engineering:
mixed sugars coutilization and kinetic modeling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 112,
4964 –4969. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1417719112 .
Rui, L., Kwon, Y.M., Reardon, K.F., Wood, T.K., 2004. Metabolic pathway engineering to
enhance aerobic degradation of chlorinated ethenes and to reduce their toxicity bycloning a novel glutathione S-transferase, an evolved toluene o-monooxygenase, and
gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase. Environ. Microbiol. 6, 491 –500. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2004.00586.x .
Samin, G., Janssen, D.B., 2012. Transformation and biodegradation of 1,2,3-tri-
chloropropane (TCP). Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 19, 3067 –3078. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11356-012-0859-3 .
Samin, G., Pavlova, M., Arif, M.I., Postema, C.P., Damborsky, J., Janssen, D.B., 2014. A
pseudomonas putida strain genetically engineered for 1,2,3-trichloropropane bior-emediation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80, 5467 –5476. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.01620-14 .
Santacoloma, P.A., Sin, G., Gernaey, K.V., Woodley, J.M., 2011. Multienzyme-catalyzed
processes: next-generation biocatalysis. Org. Process. Res. Dev. 15, 203 –212. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/op1002159 .
Santos, C.N.S., Yoshikuni, Y., 2014. Engineering complex biological systems in bacteria
through recombinase-assisted genome engineering. Nat. Protoc. 9, 1320 –1336.http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2014.084 .
Sarigiannis, D.A., Hansen, U., 2012. Considering the cumulative risk of mixtures of
chemicals - a challenge for policy makers. Environ. Health 11 (Suppl. 1), S18. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-S1-S18 .
Schallmey, M., Frunzke, J., Eggeling, L., Marienhagen, J., 2014. Looking for the pick of
the bunch: high-throughput screening of producing microorganisms with biosensors.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 26, 148 –154. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2014.01.
005.
Schellenberger, J., Que, R., Fleming, R.M.T., Thiele, I., Orth, J.D., Feist, A.M., Zielinski,
D.C., Bordbar, A., Lewis, N.E., Rahmanian, S., Kang, J., Hyduke, D.R., Palsson, B.Ø.,2011. Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-based models:
the COBRA Toolbox v2.0. Nat. Protoc. 6, 1290 –1307. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/
nprot.2011.308 .
Schmidt, M., 2010. Xenobiology: a new form of life as the ultimate biosafety tool.
Bioessays 32, 322 –331. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bies.200900147 .
Schmidt,
M. (Ed.), 2012. Synthetic Biology: Industrial and Environmental Applications,
1st edition. Wiley-Blackwell .
Schmidt, M., de Lorenzo, V., 2016. Synthetic bugs on the loose: containment options for
deeply engineered (micro)organisms. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 38, 90 –96.http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2016.01.006 .
Schwander, T., Schada von Borzyskowski, L., Burgener, S., Cortina, N.S., Erb, T.J., 2016.
A synthetic pathway for the ﬁxation of carbon dioxide in vitro. Science 354, 900 –904.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aah5237 .
Scism, R.A., Bachmann, B.O., 2010. Five-component cascade synthesis of nucleotide
analogues in an engineered self-immobilized enzyme aggregate. Chembiochem Eur.
J. Chem. Biol. 11, 67 –70.http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cbic.200900620 .
Scott, S.R., Hasty, J., 2016. Quorum sensing communication modules for microbial
consortia. ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 969 –977. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.
5b00286 .
Shapir, N., Mongodin, E.F., Sadowsky, M.J., Daugherty, S.C., Nelson, K.E., Wackett, L.P.,
2007. Evolution of catabolic pathways: genomic insights into microbial s-triazine
metabolism. J. Bacteriol. 189, 674 –682. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/JB.01257-06 .
Sheldon, R.A., 2011. Characteristic features and biotechnological applications of cross-
linked enzyme aggregates (CLEAs). Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 92, 467 –477. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011-3554-2 .
Shi, L., Dong, H., Reguera, G., Beyenal, H., Lu, A., Liu, J., Yu, H.-Q., Fredrickson, J.K.,
2016. Extracellular electron transfer mechanisms between microorganisms and mi-
nerals. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 651 –662. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro.
2016.93 .
Si, T., Xiao, H., Zhao, H., 2015. Rapid prototyping of microbial cell factories via genome-
scale engineering. Biotechnol. Adv. 33, 1420 –1432. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
biotechadv.2014.11.007 .
Silva-Rocha, R., de Lorenzo, V., 2014. Engineering multicellular logic in bacteria with
metabolic wires. ACS Synth. Biol. 3, 204 –209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
sb400064y .
Siu, K.-H., Chen, R.P., Sun, Q., Chen, L., Tsai, S.-L., Chen, W., 2015. Synthetic sca ﬀolds for
pathway enhancement. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 36, 98 –106. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.copbio.2015.08.009 .
Skariyachan, S., Manjunatha, V., Sultana, S., Jois, C., Bai, V., Vasist, K.S., 2016. Novel
bacterial consortia isolated from plastic garbage processing areas demonstrated en-
hanced degradation for low density polyethylene. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 23,
18307 –18319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11356-016-7000-y .
Sohn, S.B., Kim, T.Y., Park, J.M., Lee, S.Y., 2010. In silico genome-scale metabolic ana-
lysis of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesis, degradation
of aromatics and anaerobic survival. Biotechnol. J. 5, 739 –750. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1002/biot.201000124 .
Stephanopoulos, G., 1999. Metabolic ﬂuxes and metabolic engineering. Metab. Eng. 1,
1–11.http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/mben.1998.0101 .
St-Pierre,
F., Cui, L., Priest, D.G., Endy, D., Dodd, I.B., Shearwin, K.E., 2013. One-step
cloning and chromosomal integration of DNA. ACS Synth. Biol. 2, 537 –541. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb400021j .
Stucki, G., Thueer, M., 1995. Experiences of a large-scale application of 1,2-di-
chloroethane degrading microorganisms for groundwater treatment. Environ. Sci.Technol. 29, 2339 –2345. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/es00009a028 .
Takahashi, K., Ishikawa, N., Sadamoto, Y., Sasamoto, H., Ohta, S., Shiozawa, A., Miyoshi,
F., Naito, Y., Nakayama, Y., Tomita, M., 2003. E-cell 2: multi-platform E-cell simu-lation system. Bioinforma. Oxf. Engl. 19, 1727 –1729 .
Tolia, N.H., Joshua-Tor, L., 2006. Strategies for protein coexpression in Escherichia coli .
Nat. Methods 3, 55 –64.http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmeth0106-55 .
Tozakidis, I.E.P., Brossette, T., Lenz, F., Maas, R.M., Jose, J., 2016. Proof of concept for
the simpli ﬁed breakdown of cellulose by combining Pseudomonas putida strains with
surface displayed thermophilic endocellulase, exocellulase and β-glucosidase.
Microb. Cell Factories 15, 103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12934-016-0505-8 .
Trögl, J., Krh ůtková, O., Pila řová, V., Dá ňová, P., Holíč ek, R., Kohlová, M., Hejda, S.,
Smr čka, J., Bou šková, A., K řiklavová, L., 2012. Removal of nitrates from high-salinity
wastewaters from desulphurization process with denitrifying bacteria encapsulated in
Lentikats Biocatalyst. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 9, 425 –432. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s13762-012-0048-4 .
UniProt Consortium, 2015. UniProt: a hub for protein information. Nucleic Acids Res. 43,
D204 –212. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gku989 .
Vallenet, D., Calteau, A., Cruveiller, S., Gachet, M., Lajus, A., Josso, A., Mercier, J.,
Renaux, A., Rollin, J., Rouy, Z., Roche, D., Scarpelli, C., Médigue, C., 2016.MicroScope in 2017: an expanding and evolving integrated resource for community
expertise of microbial genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/
gkw1101 .
van Leeuwen, J.G.E., Wijma, H.J., Floor, R.J., van der Laan, J.-M., Janssen, D.B., 2012.P. Dvoř ák et al.
Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
865Directed evolution strategies for enantiocomplementary haloalkane dehalogenases:
from chemical waste to enantiopure building blocks. Chembiochem Eur. J. Chem.
Biol. 13, 137 –148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201100579 .
Vilchez-Vargas, R., Junca, H., Pieper, D.H., 2010. Metabolic networks, microbial ecology
and “omics ”technologies: towards understanding in situ biodegradation processes.
Environ. Microbiol. 12, 3089 –3104. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.
02340.x .
Wang, H.H., Isaacs, F.J., Carr, P.A., Sun, Z.Z., Xu, G., Forest, C.R., Church, G.M., 2009.
Programming cells by multiplex genome engineering and accelerated evolution.Nature 460, 894 –898. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature08187 .
Wang, B., Kitney, R.I., Joly, N., Buck, M., 2011. Engineering modular and orthogonal
genetic logic gates for robust digital-like synthetic biology. Nat. Commun. 2, 508.http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ncomms1516 .
Wang, K., Schmied, W.H., Chin, J.W., 2012. Reprogramming the genetic code: from tri-
plet to quadruplet codes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Eng. 51, 2288 –2297. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1002/anie.201105016 .
Wang, B., Barahona, M., Buck, M., 2013. A modular cell-based biosensor using engineered
genetic logic circuits to detect and integrate multiple environmental signals. Biosens.
Bioelectron. 40, 368 –376. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2012.08.011 .
Wang, L., Xue, C., Wang, L., Zhao, Q., Wei, W., Sun, Y., 2016. Strain improvement of
Chlorella sp. for phenol biodegradation by adaptive laboratory evolution. Bioresour.
Technol. 205, 264 –268. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.01.022 .
Wei, R., Oeser, T., Schmidt, J., Meier, R., Barth, M., Then, J., Zimmermann, W., 2016.
Engineered bacterial polyester hydrolases e ﬃciently degrade polyethylene ter-
ephthalate due to relieved product inhibition. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 113, 1658 –1665.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/bit.25941 .
Wibberg, D., Bremges, A., Dammann-Kalinowski, T., Maus, I., Igeño, M.I., Vogelsang, R.,
König, C., Luque-Almagro, V.M., Roldán, M.D., Sczyrba, A., Moreno-Vivián, C.,
Blasco, R., Pühler, A., Schlüter, A., 2016. Finished genome sequence and methylomeof the cyanide-degrading Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes strain CECT5344 as resolved
by single-molecule real-time sequencing. J. Biotechnol. 232, 61 –68.http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.04.008 .
Wicker, J., Lorsbach, T., Gütlein, M., Schmid, E., Latino, D., Kramer, S., Fenner, K., 2016.
enviPath —the environmental contaminant biotransformation pathway resource.
Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D502 –508. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1229 .
Wierckx, N., Prieto, M.A., Pomposiello, P., de Lorenzo, V., O'Connor, K., Blank, L.M.,
2015. Plastic waste as a novel substrate for industrial biotechnology. Microb.
Biotechnol. 8, 900 –903. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.12312 .
Wigginton, N., Yeston, J., Malako ﬀ, D., 2012. Working with waste. More treasure than
trash. Introduction. Science 337, 662 –663. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.337.
6095.662 .
Winsor, G.L., Gri ﬃths, E.J., Lo, R., Dhillon, B.K., Shay, J.A., Brinkman, F.S.L., 2016.
Enhanced annotations and features for comparing thousands of Pseudomonas gen-
omes in the Pseudomonas genome database. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D646 –653.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkv1227 .
Wittich,
R.-M., Wol ﬀ, P., 2007. Growth of the genetically engineered strain Cupriavidus
necator RW112 with chlorobenzoates and technical chlorobiphenyls. Microbiology
153, 186 –195. http://dx.doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.29096-0 .
Wittich, R.-M., van Dillewijn, P., Ramos*, J.L., 2010. Rational construction of bacterial
strains with new/improved catabolic capabilities for the e ﬃcient breakdown of en-
vironmental pollutants. In: Timmis, K.N. (Ed.), Handbook of Hydrocarbon and Lipid
Microbiology. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 1247 –1254 .
Wolfaardt, G.M., Lawrence, J.R., Robarts, R.D., Caldwell, S.J., Caldwell, D.E., 1994.
Multicellular organization in a degradative bio ﬁlm community. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 60, 434 –446.
Wu, G., Yan, Q., Jones, J.A., Tang, Y.J., Fong, S.S., Ko ﬀas, M.A.G., 2016. Metabolic
burden: cornerstones in synthetic biology and metabolic engineering applications.
Trends Biotechnol. 34, 652 –664. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.02.010 .
Xu, P., Vansiri, A., Bhan, N., Ko ﬀas, M.A.G., 2012. ePathBrick: a synthetic biology plat-
form for engineering metabolic pathways in E.coli. ACS Synth. Biol. 1, 256 –266.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/sb300016b .Yadid, I., Rudolph, J., Hlouchova, K., Copley, S.D., 2013. Sequestration of a highly re-
active intermediate in an evolving pathway for degradation of pentachlorophenol.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, E2182 –2190. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1214052110 .
Yang, J., Liu, R., Jiang, H., Yang, Y., Qiao, C., 2012. Selection of a whole-cell biocatalyst
for methyl parathion biodegradation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 95, 1625 –1632.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011-3792-3 .
Yang, Y., Yang, J., Jiang, L., 2016. Comment on A bacterium that degrades and assim-
ilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 353, 759. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.aaf8305 .
Yoshida, S., Hiraga, K., Takehana, T., Taniguchi, I., Yamaji, H., Maeda, Y., Toyohara, K.,
Miyamoto, K., Kimura, Y., Oda, K., 2016a. A bacterium that degrades and assimilatespoly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 351, 1196 –1199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/
science.aad6359 .
Yoshida, S., Hiraga, K., Takehana, T., Taniguchi, I., Yamaji, H., Maeda, Y., Toyohara, K.,
Miyamoto, K., Kimura, Y., Oda, K., 2016b. Response to comment on A bacterium thatdegrades and assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 353, 759. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1126/science.aaf8625 .
Zobel, S., Benedetti, I., Eisenbach, L., de Lorenzo, V., Wierckx, N., Blank, L.M., 2015. Tn7-
based device for calibrated heterologous gene expression in Pseudomonas putida . ACS
Synth. Biol. 4, 1341 –1351. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00058 .
Web references
http://toxics.usgs.gov , accessed 21.5.2017.
http://www.eugris.info , accessed 21.5.2017.
http://eawag-bbd.ethz.ch , accessed 29.7.2017.
https://envipath.org/ , accessed 29.7.2017.
https://metacyc.org/ , accessed 29.7.2017.
https://biocyc.org/ , accessed 29.7.2017.
www.uniprot.org/ , accessed 22.5.2017.
http://rapid.umn.edu/rapid/ , accessed 22.5.2017.
http://lcsb-databases.ep ﬂ.ch/atlas/ , accessed 22.5.2017.
http://sensipath.micalis.fr/ , accessed 26.7.2017.
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/results/tox21/ , accessed 26.7.17.
https://absynth.issb.genopole.fr/Bioinformatics/ , accessed 22.5.2017.
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ , accessed 29.7.2017.
http://www.chemspider.com/ , accessed 29.7.2017.
http://www.pseudomonas.com/ , accessed 29.7.2017.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/ , accessed 22.5.2017.
www.genoscope.cns.fr/agc/microscope/home/ , accessed 22.5.2017.
http://seva.cnb.csic.es/ , accessed 22.5.2017.P. Dvoř ák et al. Biotechnology Advances 35 (2017) 845–866
866