Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327 
 AENSI Journals  
Advances in Environmental Biology  
 
Journal home page: http://www.aensiweb.com/aeb.html  
 
 
Corresponding Autnor:  Giwa, A.A., Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry, Ladoke Akintola University of Technology, 
P.M.B. 4000, Ogbomoso.  
  E-mail: abdurrahimgiwa@yahoo.com  Sorptive  Removal of Dyes from Aqueous Solution: A Review  
 
Oladipo,  M.A ., Bello,  I.A., Adeoye,  D.O.,  Abdulsalam,  K.A., Giwa,  A.A.  
 
Department of Pure and Applied Chemistry,  Ladoke Akintola University of Technology,  P.M.B. 4000, Ogbomoso.  
 
ARTICLE INFO   ABST RACT  
Article history:  
Received  4 September 2013 
Received in revised form 24 October 2013 
Accepted 5 October 2013   
Available online 14 November 2013  
 
Keywords:  
Activated carbon, Biosorption, Dyes, 
Pollutants, Synthetic polymer.   In this article, adsorptio n as an effective method for removing dyes from wastewater has 
been reviewed. It is clear from the literature survey that adsorption can be achieved through 
different materials such as commercial activated carbon, naturally occurring materials, 
synthetic p olymer, waste material and activated carbon from waste materials. However, 
there is need to study more on the effect of other pollutants on adsorption of dyes  so as 
reduce its environmental and health effects.  
 
 
© 2013 AENSI Publisher All rights reserved.  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 Most industries especially textiles,  paper,  plastics,  leather,  food, cosmetics etc use dyes to colour their final 
product.  Such extensive use of dyes poses pr oblems in form of coloured waste water which require pretreatment for 
colour prior  to dis posal into receiving water bodi es [104] . This is because this dye -bearing wastewater impart 
toxicity to aquatic life and damage the aesthet ic nature of receivi ng water bodies environment  [26]. Dyes are 
synthetic aromatic water soluble , dispersible o rganic colourants,  having potential application in various industries.  
 Dyes , once released into water bodies not only produce toxic amines by the reductive cleavage of azo linkages 
which causes severe effects on human beings through damaging the vital organs such as the brain,  liver,  kidneys and 
reproductive systems but also prevent photosynthetic activity in aquatic life by reducing light penetration [56,71] . 
The removal of colour from effl uent is often more important than the removal of soluble colourles s organics which 
normally contributes to the major BOD load.  Visual pollution is a serious problem in water quality,  it is not easy to 
accept red or brown rivers [12]. Many of the dyes used in industries are stable to light and oxidation and so they are 
considered as non -oxidizable substances because of their complex structure and large molecular size [26]. Due to all 
these reasons , removal of dyes from effluents becomes environmentally important.  As a result of serious efforts of 
researchers all over the w orld, a number of methodologies with varying degrees of su ccess have been developed.  
They are coa gulation,  foam floatation,  filtration,  ion exchange,  sedimentation,  solvent extraction,  electrolysis,  
chemical oxidation,  disinfection,  chemical precipitation and membrane process . All these methods  have 
shortcomings and limitations.  For example,  coagulation requires pH c ontrol and causes further problems of sludge 
disposal and ozonation does not minimize chemical oxygen demand.  
 They are also less effect ive especially for the removal of brightly coloured water-soluble reactive and acid dyes 
because these dyes show resis tance to many chemicals , oxidi zing agents and light  [47]. Adsorption techniques 
appear as successful effi cient alternatives for the removal of dy es in waste water  [30]. Adsorpt ion process has an 
edge over  other methods due to its sludge free operation and complete removal of dyes even from dilute solutions.  
Biosorption process is a type of adsorption which utilize s not only plant materials but also  a wide variety of micro -
organisms in dead,  pretreated and immobilized form as adsorbing agents.  These materials are cheap to produce and 
carry wide range of  binding sites for dye molecules  [104,32,36] . In adsor ption, the chemical properties of surface 
groups influence the adsorption equilibria to a large extent  [12]. 
 The term ‘adsorption’ was proposed by Bois -Reymond and it has been widely used for the removal of solutes 
from solutions a nd gas from air atmosphere.  The extent of adsorption depends on the nature of adsorbent especially 
its porosity and surface areas.  The important char acteristics of a good adsorbent s is its high porosity and 3312                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
consequently  a larger surface area with more specific adsorption sites.  A better adsorbent is the one with large 
surface area and which requires less time for adsorption equilibrium.  Hence , one generally looks to adsorbents with 
high surface area and faster ki netics for the removal of dyes . In this study,  various adsorption /  biosorption methods 
of dye removal has been r eviewed.  The main aim of this review is to provide recent inf ormation concerning the 
sorpti ve remova l of dyes.  
The review;  
i.  presents various adsorbents available for adsorption  
ii. discusses various mechanisms involved in the sorption process  
iii. prese nts adsorption capacities of various sorbents available  
 
2.0. Category of adsorbents used in sorption process : 
2.1   Activated carbon  
2.2   Naturally occuring materials  
2.3   Synthetic polymers  
2.4   Agrowaste materials  
2.5   Industrial waste  
2.6  Activate d carbon from agrowaste materials  
2.7  Biosobents  
 
2.1. Activated Carbon:  
 This is the most popular and widely used adsorbent in effl uent t reatment.  Charcoal is the source of commercial 
activated carbon and has been used to purify water as far back as 2000  B.C. It is produced by a process of raw 
materials dehydration and carbonization  followed by activation.  The material is dehydrated  and carbonized by  
slowly heating in the absence of air.  Activated carb on exists in two forms namely; (i) . powdered activate d 
carbon(PAC) and (ii). granular activated carbon  (GAC).  The granular form is prefer rable since it is more adaptable 
to continuous contraction and there is no need to separate the carbon from the bulk fluid . 
 
2.2    Naturally Occurring Materials : 
 These ar e substances that ha ve not been proce ssed but are available in nature.  They are abundant and cheap.  
Examples are clay,  stone,  soil, chitin,  chitosan,  gypsum,  zeolite,  bentonite etc . 
 
2.3    Synthetic Polymer : 
 These are materials processed to suite the pur pose of adsorption.  For example,  cyclodextrin is a polymer 
produced by crosslinking of starch with a coupling agent  (e.g chitosan)  to form water -insoluble networks  [24]. 
 
2.4.    Agrowaste Materials : 
 These are waste materials from forest and poultry indus tries.  They are available in large quantities and may 
have potential as a sorbent  due to their physico- chemical properties and low cost . They contain various organic 
compounds such as lignin,  cellulose and hemicellulose with polyphenolic groups that might be useful for binding 
dyes through different mechanisms.  Examples are sawdust,  wood,  hen feather,  sheep wool,  corn cob,  rice husk,  coir 
pith, rice bran,  wheat bran etc [24]. 
 
2.5    Industrial Waste : 
 These are materi als collected after a particular product processing.  They are otherwise called spent materials or 
by-products.  Examples are carbon nanotubes,  fly ash, bagasse , ash, sludge etc . 
 
2.6   Activated Carbon From Agrowaste Materials : 
 These are substance s produced by carbonization of lignocellulosic m aterials.  They are produced by placin g the 
wastes in the furnace at a temperature of about 450OC to drive away a ll other component except carbon.  Materials 
that can be used are coconut shell,  rice husk,  sawdust,  coir pith,  date pits,  bamboo,  cassava peel,  nutshells etc  
 
2.7   Biosorbents : 
 These are materials called biomass  (dead or living).  They are mainly micro -organisms which include algae,  
yeasts,  bacteria an d fungi.  Microbial biomass is produced in fermentation process to synthesize valuable products 
such as enzymes but the by -products generated can be used in biosorption.  Examples are Aspergillus nige r, Chlorell  
a vulgaris , Rhizopus arr hizus , Spirodela polyrrhiza  etc. 3313                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
 
 
3.0  Sorptive Removal of Dye by Various Adsorbents : 
3.1   Removal of dye By Commerc ial Activated Carbon : 
 Voudrias et al . (2002)  studied the a dsorption of three dyes namely C ibacron Blau F -R, Reactive blue 21 and 
Cibacron  Rot F -B using commercial activated carbon.  It was found that adsorption isotherm fitted Langmuir bes t 
indicating that  the sorption was localized in a monolayer.  Also,  the equilibrium time w as observed to be 72 hours 
and the  percentage removal was higher at lower pH . Adsorption of basic red 14,  reactive red 24 and acid blue 113 on 
granular activa ted carbon was investigate d by Faria et al . [30]. It was observed that the adsorption data of both the 
reactive red and acid blue fitted both Langmuir and Freundlich models well while that of the basic red fitted 
Langmuir only.  
 Wang et al. [102]  investigated the adsorption of met hylene blue on activated carbon . It was found that higher 
pH of the solution results in higher adsorption capacity and t he kinetic studies follows the pseudo –second order 
model.  Yavuz and Aydin [107]  studied the removal of direct dyes ( direct yellow 50,  direct red 80 and direct blue 71) 
from aqueous solution using commercial activated carbon.  It was found that the equilibrium time w as 40 minutes 
and the isotherm data fitted the Langmuir model.  Powdered Activated Carbon was used for adsorptio n of Reactive 
Black 5 by Eren and Acar  [29]. It was observed that as the initia l dye concentration increased , adsorptioon 
efficiency decreas ed and that  increase in adsor bent dose resulted  in higher percentage removal of dye.  Also,  the 
adsorption data fol lowed Langmuir isot herm with maximum adsorption capacity 58.8 23 mg/g  and the kinetic  data 
followed pseudo -second order model.  
 Decontamination of textile wastewater containing meth ylene blue,  basic yellow and JK 2R by P owdered  
Activated Carbon was investiga ted by Barka et al [14]. It was fou nd that the equilibrium time for   methylene blue , 
basic yellow and JK2R w ere 60,  90, 120 minutes respectively.  Also , adsorption incre ases as the  act ivated carbon 
dosage increases and the isotherm data followed Langmuir model with maximum adsorption capacities of 294.12,  
322.6 and 222.2 mg/g for methylene blue,  basic yellow and JK2R respectively.  The e ffect o f ionic streng th on these 
dyes showed that adsorption of methylene blue and basic yellow increases as the ionic streng th increases whil e that 
of JK2 R decreases as the ionic streng th increases; the effect of pH also followed  the same trend.  
 Dincer et al. [26] investigated the comparison  of activated carbon and bottom ash for removal of reactive dye  
(Vertigo Navy marine) from aqueo us solut ion. The extent of dye re moval increased with decreased initial  
concentration of the dye and also inc reased with increased contact ti me. It was found that the adsorption of the dye 
onto GAC occurred faster and reached higher equilibrium levels as compared to bottom ash.  Also,  the GAC had a 
higher adsorption capacity than  bottom ash at lower and higher dye concentrations . 
 Yamin Yasin et al. [106]  studied the adsorption of methylene blue onto KOH treated and untreated activated 
carbon.  The adsorption experim ent indicated that both adsorbents were effective in removing methylene blue from 
aqueous solution.  The percentage removal increased with incre ase in contact time and attains equi librium at about 
120 minutes for treated activated carbon while the untreated  one was 180 minutes.  Also,  the adsorption increased 
with increase in pH  and incre ase in adsorption dosa ge. The adsorption data f itted Langmuir isotherm well and  the 
treated activat ed carbon was more effective having shown great red uction of colour and les ser conta ct time.  
 Mohd Din and Hame ed [60] invest igated the adsorption o f methyl  violet onto acid modified activated carbon . 
The experiment al data was tested by various 2 -parameter isotherm models and the order of fitness was f ound to be 
Freundlich  > Temk in > Langmuir  > Dubinin -Radushk evich.  The values of the calcul ated standard Gibbs free 
energy , ΔG, enthalpy , ΔHO and entropy,  ΔSO showed that the adsorption was spo ntaneous , entropy -driven and 
endothermic in nature.  It was also found that the mechanism was  not only limited to physical adsorption but 
chemisorption too in the complex a queous phase due to high activation energy.  
 Attia et al. [12] studied the capacity of activated carbon in the removal of acid dyes subsequent  to its thermal 
treatment . It was found that irrespective of the thermal treatment , there is decreasing capacity in the order of acid 
blue >  Acid Red > > Acid yellow.  This was ascribed to the different chemical nature of the three dyes with respect to 
substituent and / or branched side chains that increase bulkiness and reduce diffusion ability.  Suteu and Bilha [93]  
studied the equilibrium and kinetics of the reactive dye (Brilliant Red HE -3B) adsorption by commercial activated 
carbon. The adsorption data was analysed by Freundlich and Langmuir models but the Langmuir model fitted best. The thermodynamic value indicated that the process was endothermic. The kinetic data followed the pseudo- second 
order model which indicated that the intra particle diffusion was the rate limiting factor.  
 
3.2   Removal of Dyes by Naturally Occurring Materials : 
 In 2004,  Khan et al investigated the removal of basic dyes  (methylene blue,  malachite green and rhodamine B) 
onto akash kinari coal.  The adsorption data fitted both Langmuir and Freundlich models but Freu ndlich fitted best.  3314                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
The negative values of Δ GO and ΔHO indicat ed that the adsorption process wa s spontaneous and exothermic.  Juang 
et al. [45] investigated the adsorption of dye  (Amido Naphthol Red G) on  modified montmorillonite and organoclay.  
It was found that adsorption increases slightly at low  and high pH values.  The adsorption data fitted Langmuir best 
and the kinetic data could be well described by pseudo -second order model.  The low value of ΔHO indicated the 
characteristics of physical adsorption.  Alkan et al. [7] studied the removal of Acid Yellow 49 from aqeous solution 
by adsorption on sepiolite (a  clay mineral). It was observed that the adsorption equilibrium was attained in 1 hour. 
Also, the adsorbed amount of the dye increased with increasing ionic strength and temperature but decrease d with 
increasing pH and the isotherm data were reasonably correlated by Freundlich isotherm. The order of heat of 
adsorption corresponds to a physical reaction.  
 Gypsum,  a natural material,  otherwise known as plaster of paris was used by Rauf et al . [79], to remove 
methylene blue from aqueous solution.  The adsorption data was analyzed by Langmuir , Freundlich and Temkin 
isotherm models.  The maximum monolayer adsorption capacity was found to be 36mgg-1. The kinetic data was 
found to obey pseudo- second  order  model.  Shian and Pan studied the adsorption of basic dyes  (Basic Green 5 and 
Basic violet 10 ) from aqueous solution by activated clay and montmorillonite.  The adsorption data could be well 
described by Langmuir -Freundlich equation.  The kinetic data fitted  the pse udo-second order model and Δ H 
indicated that the process is endothermic.  Yavuz and Aydin  [107]  investigated the removal of direct dyes  (direct 
yellow 50,  direct red 80 and direct blue 71) from aqueous solution using raw kaolinite and montmorillonit e. It was 
found that adsorption increased as pH increase and the equilibrium was attained in 40  minutes.  The adsorption data 
was well described by Langmuir model.  Methylene blue was adsorbed from aqueous solution onto clay(Jordarian 
Tripoli) by Al -zaydi en [4]. It was observed that the amount of dye adsorbed varies with initial pH, adsorbent dose, 
adsorbate concentration and contact time. The equilibrium data were found to fit the Langmuir isotherm well 
indicating monolayer adsorption on a homogenous surface . The maximum adsorption capacity was found to be 
16.6mgg-1. The equilibrium time was found to be 120 minutes and the kinetic data followed pseudo -second order 
model. It can also be described by intra particle diffusion. The free energy change indicated the spontaneous nature of the adsorbent and confirmed the affinity of the adsorbents for methylene blue..  
 Chamargore et al. [20] studied the removal of methylene red from aqueous solution by treated and untreated 
kotta powder.  It was found  that the adsorpti on increased as the pH increased and it also  increased as  adsorbent dose  
increase d. Also,  the treated kotta powder showed higher adsorption efficiency than the untreated.  Smaranda et al . 
studied the sorption of congo red from aqueous solution onto soil.  It was found that the amount of congo red 
adsorbed increased  with increasing dye conc entration,  temperature and contact time.  The kinetic data followed 
pseudo- second order kinetic model and the intra particle diffusion studies indicated that the adsorption m echanism 
was not exclusively controlled by the diffusion step.  The adsorption data was best described by Freundlich isotherm 
which indicated the heterogeneity of the sorption sites on the soil particle and thermodynamic analysis indicated that  
the sysytem was spontaneous and  exothermic in nature.  
 
3.3    Removal of Dyes by Biomaterials : 
 Walker and Weatherley  [101]  studied the biosorption of Tectilon Blue(TB4 R)  using three strains of bacteria 
namely;  Bacillus gordonae , Bacillus benzeovorans  and Pseudomonas  putida . Up to 19% of the decolorisation was 
found to be caused by biosorption of the dye onto the biomass.  The reaction rate was found to be intermediate 
between zero and first order at dye concentration of 200- 1000mg/L.  
 Kumar et al. [51] investigated th e adsorption of malachite green onto Pithophora sp. , a fresh water algae.  The 
algae was used raw and some were thermally activated at 300
OC for 50 minutes.  The equilibrium d ata were analyzed 
by Freundlich , Langmuir and Redlich -Peterson isotherm models but was very well repres ented by Redlich -Peterson 
isotherm.  It was found that the thermally activated adsorbent possess a higher sorption capacity of 117.647mg/g than 
the raw one with 64.4mg/g.  The kinetic data followed the pseudo -second order model closely an d the negative value 
of free energy change indicated that the sorption process was spontaneous.  Waranu santigul et al. [104]  investigated 
the kinetics of  methylene blue biosorption by S pirodela polyrrhiza (giant duckweed).  It was found that as the 
amount of  sorbent increased,  the percentage of dye sorption increased and the optimum pH was reached at pH 3.  
The dye removal time was influenced by the initial dye concentration and the process followed the first -order rate 
kinetics.  
 Supaka et al . [92] studied the microbial decolouris ation of reactive azo  dyes (Remazol brilliant orange 3R,  
Remazol black B and  Remazol Brilliant viole t 5R) in a sequential anaerobic –aerobic system.  It was observed that 
the colour removal yield with the more complex diazo dye (R emazol  black B ) was, however,  much lower than that 
obtained with the monoazo dye s (Remazol Brilliant Orange 3R and Remazol Brilliant Violet 5R) . Also,  it was found 
that a longer retention time of anaerobic phase may be therefore required to enhance the rate of elimination of black 
dye, Hence, decolouris ation of Remazol Brilliant Orange 3R,  Remazol Black B and Remazol Brillian t Violet 5R by 3315                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
a mixed bacterial culture are most likely due to complete breakdown of the reactive azo dyes to form aromatic 
amines.  Akkaya and Ozer  [3] investigated the biosorption of Acid Red 274 on Dicranella v aria (a moss).  It was 
observed that the biosorption data  fitted better to Langmuir model.  The monolayer adsorption capacity obtained was 
2000mgg-1. It was observed  that the equilibriu m intake increased with increasing initial dye concentration and the 
optimum dose was 0.5g.  The kinetics was well descibed by pseudo -second order kinetic model.  The values obtained 
in the thermodynam ics indicated that the process was exothermic in nature a nd was a reversible process.  
 El Nemr et al . [27] investigated the removal of chrysophenine  (direct yellow 12) from aq ueous solution using 
Ulva lactuca  (a marine green algae).  It was found that the adsorption data fitted  the F reundlich model best.  Also , the 
kinetic data was consistent with pseudo -second order model.  The maximum adsorption capacity was  80mgg-1. 
Biological decolourisation of dye solution  containing malachite green by C osmarium sp.  (microalga e) was studied 
by Daneshvar et al [25]. It was obser ved that the optimum pH was 9 and that the decolou risation rate increased with 
the temperature rise.  The biosorption of anionic textile  dyes (Reactive Black 8,  Reactive Brown 9,  Reactive Green 
19, Reactive Blue 38,  Reactive Blue  3) by nonviable biomass of fungi and yeast (Aspergillus niger , Aspergillus 
japonica,  Rhizopus nigricans , Rhizopus  arrhizus , Saccharomyces cerevisiae)  was demonstrated by Kumari and 
Abraham [50]. It was obs erved that Rhizopus nigricans  adsorbed at higher percentage of 90 -96% in 15  minutes at 
20OC and pH 6.0.  The adsorption data fitted Langmuir for all the biosorbents.  The maximum uptake capacity for the 
dyes was in the range  of 112- 204 mg/g for all the biomass.  
 The sorption of three basic dyes  (Astrazon Blue,  Astrazon Red and Methyle ne Blue) onto C aulerpa lentillifera  
(green macroalgae) was inve stigated by M arungrueng and Pr asad [58]. The result s obtained revealed that the algae 
exhibited greater sorption capacities than activated carbon for the three dyes.  The isotherms followed Langmuir 
model w hich suggested that the sorptio n was monolayer.  The kinetic data obeyed the pseudo- second order kinetic  
model and the adsorption could more rapidly sequester astrazon red whe n compared with activated carbon . 
Jirasripongpun et al . [43] studied the decolourization and degradation of Reactive red 195 by Enterobacter sp. , 
Serratia sp. , Yersinia sp.  and Erwinia sp.  Enterobacter sp.  was observed to remove dye up to 90% within 2 days of 
incubation.  Aravindhan et al. [10] investigat ed the removal of ba sic yellow dye from aqueou s solution by sorption 
on Caulerpa scalpelliformis  (a green algae).  The sorption equilibrium studies demonstrated that the biosorption 
followed F reundlich isotherm model,  which implied heterogeenous sorption phenomenon.  The sorpti on kinetics 
followed pseudo -second order kinetic model and maximum uptake was  27mg/g.  Also,  the thermodynamic 
parameters suggested that the sorption process wa s exothermic,  spontaneous and shows decreased randomness at the 
solid -liquid interface . 
 Iscen et al. [42] studied the biosorption of Reactive black 5 dye by Penicillium restri ctum  (a filamentous algae).  
It was observed that the maximum biosorption capacity was 142.0 4 mg/g under the optimum conditi ons of pH 1,  
contact time of 75  minutes , biomass dose of 0.02 g at initia l concentration of 200 ppm at 35oC. Furthermore,  the 
biosorption process was found to obey a pseudo -secon d order model and increase in temper ature caused an increase  
on the biosorption capacity of the adsorbent.  Revankar and Lele [81] studied the decolourisation of recalcitrant dyes  
(Amarant h Reactive Orange 1 6, Cibacron Brilliant  Red 3B -1, Acid Red 106,  Orange II , Brilliant Blue R) by an 
indigenous strain of white rot fungus Ganoderma sp.  It was observed that the maximum decolourisation  of (96%)  
amaranth was achieved in 8 hours and rate  of dye decolourisation by the Ganoderma sp.  was very high compared to 
the most widely used strains  (Trametes versicolor  and Phanerrochaetae chrysosporiam ). Corynebacterium 
glutamicum  (a  fermentation  waste) was utilized for biosorption of Reactive Bl ack 5 from aqueous solution by 
Vijayaraghavan and Yun  [98]. The effect of pretreatment on the biosorption capacity of C. glutamicum toward RB5 
was initially studied using several chemical reagents such as HCl , H2SO 4, HNO 3 etc. It was observed that among 
these  reagents  0.1M HNO 3 gave the maximum enhancement of RB5 uptake with capacity of 175  mg/g at pH 1.  The 
isotherm fitted Langmuir  best with maximum uptake of 419 mg/g.  The kinetic data followed pseudo -second order  
models.  The thermodynamic parameters indicated  that the system was a spontaneous and endothermic process.  
0.1M NaOH  solution was used to successful ly  desorb almost all the dye molecules.  
 El-Sersy  [28] investigated the bioremediation of Methylene B lue by Bacillus thuringiensis  4G1.  It was found 
that percentage decolourisation was 98.23%.  Tahir et al . [95] removed a basic dye (methy lene blue)  by two 
biosorbents Ulva lactuca  and Sargassum . It was found that the optimum dose was  0.2 g of the adsorbents and the 
equilibrium time was 25 minutes at an optimum pH of 7.0.  The percentage removal o f dye was 96% and the 
thermodynamic parameter s showed that the process was spontaneous and endothermic.  Remenarova et al . [80] 
studied the sorption of cationic dyes  (Malachite G reen,  Auramine O,  Thioflavine T)  from aqueous solutions by 
moss Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus . The results showed that the equilibrium was reached within 1 -2 hours.  The 
equilibrium data fitted the Freundlich isotherm data well.  Aspergillus niger  (a fungus) and Spirogyra  sp. (a fresh 
algae) was used as a biosorbent for the removal of a reactive dye (Synazol)   from its multicomponent waste water by 
Khalaf  [49].  The biosorbents were subjected to autoclaving and gamma irradiation . It was obse rved that  the 3316                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
percentage removal of dye was higher in the biosorbents pretreated with autoclave than that of gamma -irradiation 
and this was also higher than the raw biosorbents.  The autoclaved biosorbents exhibited maximum dye removal of 
88% and 85% respectively at  pH of 3, temperature of 30OC, dosage of 8g and at a contact time of 18 hours.  
 Li and Jia  [53] investigated the decolourisation and biosorption  of congo red by system rice hull- Schizophyllum 
sp. F17 under solid state condition in a continuous flow packed -bed bioreactor.  It was observed that the r ice hull-
white rot fungi has a maximum decolourisation of 89.71%.  A brown algae , Cystoseira  barbatala was used in the 
biosorption of M ethylene B lue by Caparkaya and C avas [19].  It was observed that the optimum dose  was 0.1g and 
the adsorption increase d as the pH increased . The adsorption data fitted the Langmuir model best with maximum 
adsorption  capacity of 38.610 mg/g and the kinetic data followed pseudo -second order closely.  The energy values 
indicat ed that the adsorption process wa s physical in nature.  Thermodynamic parameters showed that the adsorption 
process was endothermic and spontaneous.  A deuter omycete fungus,  Alternaria  solari  was used to biodecolourised 
Acid V iolet 19 in aqueous solution by Ali and Muha mmad [6]. The results showed that the percentage 
decolorisation was 88.6% at a dye concentration of 30  mg/L within a period of four days . Youssef et al . [108]  
studied the decoulorisation of M alachite Green , Crystal V iolet,  Carbol Fuchson and Methylene B lue  by a 
filamentous fungus ( Acremonium kiliense ). The percentage decolourisation after 48 hours  was 96.0%,  90.7%,  
92.4% and 73.1% for Malachite G reen,  Methylene B lue, Crystal V iolet and  Carbol F uchson respectively . 
 
3.4    Removal of Dyes By Industrial Was te: 
 Albanis et al . [5] investigated the removal of dyes  (Acid O range,  Acid Y ellow 23,  Disperse B lue 79,  Basic 
Yellow 28 and Direct Y ellow 28) from aq ueous solution by adsorption on  mixture of fly ash and soil.  It was 
observed that the removal of dyes decr eased with increase in dye solution concentration from 10 to 50 mg/L.  The 
percentage removal was 33.8%,  59.4%.  84.2%,  98.2%,  60.3% for acid yellow 7,  acid yellow 23,  direct yellow 28, 
basic yellow 28  and disperse blue 79 respectively.  Rach akornkij et al. [75] studied the removal of  reactive dyes 
(Remazol Black B RBB,  Remazol Brilliant Blue R RBBR and Remazol Brilliant Red F 3B RBRF3B) from aqueous 
solution using bagasse fly ash (a waste from the sugar industry).  It was obs erved that the removal efficiencies of 
RBB,  RBBR, and RBRF3B were 58.48 -98.03%,  46.15 -93.47% and 46.30 -94.60% respectively.  Also , the initial pH 
did not affect the removal and the percentage removal decreased with increasing initial concentration of the dye but 
increased with increasing adso rbent dose.  The optimum contact time was 240,  300 and 240 minutes for RBB,  RBBR 
and RBRF3B respectively.  The adsorption dat a can be described by Langm uir isotherm model.  
 Sewage treatment plant biosoli ds was used for the biosor ption of three basic dyes (Ba sic Blue3;  BD-Blue, Basic 
Red 22;  BD-Red and Basic Black 9;  BD-Black)  by Alam.  The results showed that the higher  biosorption capacity  
(22-24 mgg-1) of the three dyes was observed with the variation of process factors such as contact time of 2 hours,  
pH of 8-9, adsorbent dosage of 0.5g,  temperature of 25 -30OC and agitation rate of 150 -200 rpm. Also, it was 
observed that basi c blue 3 was adsorbed well by the adso rbent  compared to the two other dyes and the equilibrium 
data were slightly better fitted b y Freundlich isotherm for BD -Blue and BD -Red while Langmuir fitted better for 
BD-Black.  Bioadsorption of methylene blue dye on sugarcane bagasse was studied by Raghuvanshi et al. [76]. The 
adsorption potential was investigat ed in batch experiment in  two differen t forms of the adsorbent i.e . raw and 
chemical ly activated . It was obser ved that the removal wa s better and more effective with chemically activated form 
in comparison to the raw form.  The equilibrium data fitted the Freundlich isoth erm well.   
 Saiful Azha r et al. [82] studied the removal of dye (methyl red)  from aqueous solution on trea ted sugarcane 
bagasse.  The adsorbent was treated with sulphuric acid  and formaldehyde.  It was observed that the adsorption 
efficiency was higher in sulphuric acid treated th an formaldehyde treated adsorbent.  Also,  the initial pH of 6 -10 
favours the adsorption process . The use of jute p rocessing wastes for treatment of waste water contaminated with 
dye was investigated by Banerjee and Dastidar  [13]. On comparing the adsorption efficiency of the adsorbents with 
powdered activated carbon and granular activated carbon,  it was observed that the maximum percentage  removal of 
methylene blue by the adsorbent was 81.7% compared to that of PAC and GAC which was 61% and 40%  
respectively.  The adsorption data conforme d well to both Langmuir and F reundlich isotherm model.  Liew Abdu llah 
et al. [54] investigated the removal of azo  dyes (methylene red) by sugarcane bagasse  (treated and untreated).  The 
adsorbent was treated with sulphuric acid and formaldehyde.  The results showed that the adsorption of methyl red 
was dependent on the adsorbent dose and the dye concentration.  It also showed that as the amount of the adsorbent 
increased,  the percentage dye removed increased accordingly and higher a dsorption percentages were observed at 
lower concentration of the dye.  Furthermore,  the sulphuric acid  treated adsorbent showed  a better performance 
compared to formaldehyde treated and raw adsorbent.  The removal of composite reactive dye (Procion Brillian t 
Blue M -R, Procion Brilliant Red H -8G, Procion torquoise  Blue M-G) by sewage sludge deri ved act ivated carbon 
was studied by Sreedha r Reddy et al  [94]. The results revealed  that the adsorbed amount of dye increased as the 
adsorbent mass increased  and the decrease in the pH of the solution leads to a significant increase in the adsorption 3317                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
capacities of reactive dyes.  The adsorbed amounts of reactive dye s increased with an increase in contact time and 
reached equilibrium in 120 minutes.  The equilibrium data we re analyzed using Langmuir and F reundlich isotherms 
but fitted Langmuir better.  
 The equilibrium and kinetics studies of adsorption of Reactive black 5 from aqueous  solution using fly ash was 
done by Eren and Acar  [29]. The adsorbent , fly ash,  is a waste   generated from thermal power plant.  The adsorption 
data fitted Freundlich isotherm better,  the kinetic data followed pseudo- second order model more closely and the 
monola yer adsorption capacity  was 7.936 mg/g.  Ju et al. [44] studied the biosorption chara cteristics of a reactive dye 
(Rhodamine B) onto dried activated sludge  (from a municipal sewage treatment plant).  In the experiment, three 
different pretreatment were given to the adsorbents viz sulfuric acid, hydrochloruic acid and sodium hydroxide. It 
was observed that the adsorbent pretreated with sulfuric acid has the highest maximum adsorption capacity. The 
adsorption  data was analyzed by both F reundlich and Langmuir  isotherm m odel with Langmuir model showin g the 
best agreement.  The kinetic data obeyed  pseudo second order kinetic model.  Also , the adsorption capacity of the 
adsorbent  increased with decreasing initial pH and temperature.  
 Bokbunja seed waste (from wine making industry) was utilized in adsorption of Re active Blue 4 by Binupriya 
et al [18]. The waste was used to prepare carbon which was used for the adsorption process.  Part of the carbon  was 
treated with n -hexane.  It was found that the hexane treated adsorbent was more efficient  in removing the dye.  Also,  
optimization of process parameters s howed  that pH 2 and contact time of 120 minutes was fa vourable for maximum 
adsorption . Langmuir isotherm described the equilibrium data well and the kinetic data showed a better fit to 
pseudo- first order model.  The removal of basic (Basic blue 3) and react ive dye  (Reactive orange 16) using 
quarter nised sugarcane bagasse was investigated  by Wong et al [105] . In the experiment,  the natural adsorbent was 
compared with quarternized one in single and binary solution of the dye.  It was observed that the percentag e 
removal of the dye was higher in binary solutions than in single solution for both natural and quarternized adsorbent.  
The optimum pH for t he sorption of the dye solutions  was found to be in the range of 6 -8. The study showed that the 
adsorption of t he dyes fitted the pseudo second order model better.  Furthermore , the sorpt ion isot herm indicated that 
BB3 obeyed F reundlich isotherm in both binary and single system while RO 15 f ollowed Langmuir in single and 
Freundlich in binary system.  Also,  the sorption o f RO16 increased with increasing agitation rate while it has 
minimal effect on BB3 and the sorption of BB3 was  favourable with increasing temperature while the sorption of 
RO16 was favourable at lower temperature . Conclusively,  the optimum sorbent dosage f or the dye sorption was 
0.10g.  
 Shahryari et al. [86] studied the adsorption of methy lene blue from aqueous solution onto carbon nanotubes (a 
waste  product from petroleum industry ). Experimental results showed that the amount of dye adsorbed increased 
with increasing initial concentration  of dye,  adsorbent dosage and temperature.  The removal efficiency  for 
adsorbent dose of 400 mg was more than 90%  and was considered as optimum dosage.  Also,  the kinetic data were 
analyzed and it was found that pseudo -secon d order kinetic model was the most appropriate model describing the 
adsorption kinetics.  The adsorption equilibrium was attained within 120 miminutes.  The equilibrium data was 
analyzed by Langmuir , Freundlich,  Temk in and Sips isotherm models but the data w ere b est described by S ips 
model wit h adsorption capacity of 132 mgg-1. The thermodynamic parameters indicated that the process was 
spontaneous ( ΔG is negative ), endothermic in nature  (ΔH is positive) and showed increased randomness at the 
solid —solution interface  (ΔS is positive) . 
 
3.5   Removal of Dyes By Agrowaste Materials : 
 Kagbu et al. [46] evaluated  the adsorption of dye residues of coloured textile effluent on yankassa sheep wool.  
It was found that increase in temperature of the effluent result in sub stantial increase in adsorption . It was also  
established that increase in pH of the effluent le ads to decrease in the removal efficiency of the adsorbents . The use 
of rice husk  (treated and un treated) for the adsorption of Direct Red 23 from aqueous solution by Abdelwahab et al . 
It was found that the adsorption was highly dependent on t he contact time,  adsorbent  dose and dye concentration. 
The ad sorption isoth erm could well be desc ribed by Langmuir isotherm model with adsorption capacity of 2.415 
mg/g  for untreated and 4.35 mg/g for treated one.  Kinetics for adsorption follows Lagergren first order kinetic 
model with film diffusion being the constitutive rate –controlling step.  
 The removal of acid dyes  (Nylosane Blue,  Erionyl yellow,  Nylomine Red,  Erionyl Red ) from aqueous solutions 
using  orange peel as a sorbent was investigated by Benaissa  [17]. It was observed that the dyes sorption 
performan ce were strongly affected by p arrameters such as contact time,  initial dye concentration and dyes type . 
The amount of dye sorbed by this material  increased with the increase of these parameters at a specific time.  The 
result  also sh owed that the kinetics of these  dyes sorption were well described by a pseudo -second order model.  A 
good fitting of  dyes sorption equilibrium data was obtained with Langmuir model in all the range of dyes 3318                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
concentration  studied.  From the  results,  high maximum dyes sorption capac ities were observed (65.88,  64.14,  62.07  
and 40.72  mg/g for Nylosane Blue , Erionyl yellow , Nylomine Red,  Erionyl Red respectively ) using this material.  
 The adsorption of dyes  (Methylene Blue and Basic  Red 22) on prehydrolysed b eech sawdust was studied by 
Batzias and Si diras  [16].  It was found that the adsorption data fitted the F reundlich isotherm well for both dyes and 
the kinetic data followed the Lagergren model.  The mono layer adsorption capacity were found to be 9.78 and 20.16  
mg/g for methylene blue a nd basic red 22 respectively.  The uptake of cationic dyes (acridine orange,  neutral red,  
methylene blue) from aqueous solution onto granular kohlrabi  peel was investigated by Gong et al [35].  It was found 
that  above the value of init ial pH of 4,  the three  dyes studied could be removed effectively.  The isotherm data fitted 
the Langmuir model in the case of Neutral Red with adsorption capacity of 112.36 mg/g and the Freundlich model 
for all the three dyes sor ption.  The processes followed the pseudo- first  or der closely.  
 Ncibi et al . [66] studied the kinetic s and equilibrium  of methylene blue adsorption by Posidonia oceanica  
fibres.  The results showed that adsorption capacity was optimal u sing 6 -9 solution pH range  and by increasing the  
sorbent d ose to 1g.  The kinetic modelling study has shown that the experiment data were found to follow the 
pseudo- second order model suggesting a chemisorption process.  The equilibrium sorption  phenomena were found 
to be well describe d  by both Langmuir and Redlich– Peterson models.  The monolayer adsorption capacity was 
found to be  5.56mg/g.  The adsorption removal of a reactive  dye (R eactive red 228) using Posidonica oceanica leaf 
sheaths fibres was studied by Nci bi et al [67].  It was observed that the sorption capacity seem s to be enhanced by 
increase in temperature and the maximum colour removal was observed at pH of 5. P re-treating the adsorbent  with  
H3PO 4 and HNO 3 increased the  adsorption efficiency up to 80% . Experimental kinetic data were found to follow 
Lagergren firs t order for r aw adsorbents and pseudo second– order for the pre -treated  ones.  Equilibrium data were 
well represented by the Freu ndlich isotherm model for all t he adsorption systems  (both pre -treated and raw) and the 
thermodynamic study showed that the adsor ption phenomenon was favourable , endothermic and spontaneous.  
 Kumar and Porkodi [50] studied the sorption of methylene blue using P aspalum notatum.  It was observed that 
the amount of dye sorbed increas ed with increasing initial solution pH and the amount of dye  uptake increased with 
increase  in dye concentration and contact time.  Also , the amount of dye sorbed decrease d with increase in adsorbent  
dose and the equilibrium data was found to follow Langmuir isotherm suggesting the monolayer sorption of dye  
ions.  Furthermore,  the overall kinetics of methylene blue uptake by the adsorbe nt was found to followed pseud o-
second order model  and Boyd plot confirms the e xternal  mass transfer as the sl owest step involved in the sorption 
process.  The effect of initial  dye concentration on the external mass transfer was represented in the form of 
dimensionless mass transfer  number  (Sh/Sc0.33). 
 Hen feathers was utilized for the adsorption of Indigo C armine from simulated effluents by M ittal et al [59]. It 
was found tha t as the pH incre ased, adsorption decreased .  The results revealed that  the adsorbent  exhibit ed almost 
100% adsorption at lower concentration of 1x10-4 to 3x10-4M, whereas at a dye concentration of 10x10-4M, removal 
of 96.6,  91.9 and 87.9% of the dye takes  place at 30,  40 and 50OC temperatures respectively.  The equilibri um data 
was well described  by Freundlich, kinetic data followed Lagergren first order model and it was controlled by film 
diffusion mechanisms at all the concentrations.  The thermodynamic parameters indicated that  there was spontaneity 
at higher temperatures , the process was endothermic in  nature and there was good affinity of the dye towards the 
adsorbent mater ial. Hamdao ui and C hiha [37] investigated the removal of methy lene blue from aqu eous solution  by 
wheat bran.  The results  obtained suggested the sorbed amount increased with an increase in initial concentration of 
dye, solution pH and  temperature.  It was found that the dye recovery increased with an increase in sorbent dose and 
an incr ease of dye removal was obtained  by a decrease of particle size and ionic streng th in the aqueous phase.  The 
sorption kinetics could be quite successfully fitted to a pseudo -second order equation with low value of activation 
energy   suggesting that the sor ption wa s an activ ated and physical process.  Also,  the applicability of both  internal 
and external diffusion models showed that liquid- film and particle diffusion were effective sorption mechanisms.  
 The adsorption of dyes (Navy brown 3REL,  direct red,  procion red H8B,  methylene blue,  meta mega chrome 
yellow,  lanasyn green 5GL, Solar violet and procion blue H5G) on sawdust phosphates wa s investigated  by Prakash 
et al [73]. It was reported that percentage dye removal increased with decrease in pH.  The equili brium data fitted the 
Langmuir model best.  The kinetics followed the Lagergren first order equation.  Hash emian et al. [38] studied the 
sorption of acid red 138 from aqueous solution onto rice  bran.  It was observed that the dye sorption onto the 
adsorbent  increased in the presence of inorganic salts and with a mesh  size of 20 activated with saturated sodium 
chloride,  it has higher adsorption capacity.  Also , the optimum reaction time  at a speed of 30  rpm was 60 minutes at 
initial pH of 2 and at room temperat ure, the dye was removed more effectively.  The isotherm data fitted F reundlich 
model better.  The kinetics and equilibr ium studies of the sorption of C oomassie Brilliant Blue by Coir pi th was 
studied by Naveen Prasad  et al [65]. It was reported that the kin etic data followed the pseudo -second order model 
and the equilibrium data fitted F reundlich isotherm model better.  The maximum adsorption capacity was found  to 
be 31.847 mg/g and the results showed that the acid based adsorbent suited better for the removal of the dye.  3319                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
Ofomaja and H o [69] studied the effects  of temperatures and pH on methylviolet biosorption by mansonia wood 
sawdust.  The result  showed  that the sorpti on process was strongly depende nt on solution pH a nd percentage dye 
removal becam e signif icant  above pH 7,  which was slightly  higher than the pH pzc of the adsorbent.  Also,  the 
equilibrium data fitted  both the Langmuir and Redlich- Peterson isotherm model.  The thermodynamic parameters 
result suggested that the process was spontaneous and endothermic.  The removal of basic dye s (methylene blue and 
malachite green) from aqueous solution using agricultural by –prodiucts (wheat bran and rice bran) was investigated 
by Wang et al [103] . It was found  that an increase in solution p H leads to a significant  increase in the adsorption 
capacity.  Also,  the adsorbed amounts of the two dyes increased with an increase in contact time and reached 
equilibrium in 60 -90 minutes and the removal efficiency  and the adsorption capacity decreased with an i ncrease in 
adsor bent dose.  Furthermore,  the adsorption capacity of both adsorbe nt towards the two dyes decrease d with an 
incre ase in ionic streng th and the system was particle -size dependent.  The equilibrium data of metyhlene blue fitted 
better to Langmuir isotherm model while that of malachite green fitted F reundlich model . The kinetic data 
conformed better to pseudo- second orde r equat ion while the external diffusion was the rate controlling step of the 
initial fast adsorption (  < 15minutes) and in the next stage the intr aparticle difussion dominated the mass transfer.  
Moreover,  the thermody namic analysis revealed that th e adsorption behaviours of the two dyes could be considered 
as a spontaneous and physical process.  
 Nagda and Ghole  [63] investigated the biosorption of c ongo red by hydrogen peroxide treated tendu  (Diospyros 
melanoxylon ) waste.  Comparison was done on the extent of biosorption between untreated and treated forms of the 
adsorbents . It was reported that the adsorption occurred very fast initially and attained  equilibrium within 60  minutes 
at pH  = 6.2 and the equilibrium attained faster after modification.  The data fitte d Freundlich isotherm model for 
treated ones while it fitted Langmuir for untreated ones and the maximum adsorption capacity was  46.95 and 134.4  
mg/g for untreated and treated ones respectively.  The kinetic data followed pseudo- second order rate equation.  The 
removal of methylene blue  from aqueous solutions using s awdust and sawdust coated with  polypyrolle was studied 
by Ansari and Mosayebzadeh  [9]. It was observed that comparing the data of  untreated adsorbent with that of treated 
one, the adso rption by the former was not a pH  de pendent process at least  from p H  4-10 and that there was higher 
sorption percentage for  treated adsorbent at alkali ne p H. It was also noted  that the equilibrium isotherms i.e 
Langmuir and freundlich were applicable with maximum monolayer adsorption capacity of 19.41 and 34.36  mg/g 
for untreated and treated adsorben t respectively.  It was also concluded that the sorptio n isotherm using sawdust and 
polypyrrole sawdust followed the Freundlich and Langmuir models respective ly and the dimensionless factor , RL for 
both adsorption system revealed that the process  was very favourable.  
 Annadurai et al . [8] prepared banana and orange peels as an adsorbent and used it to adsorb dyes  (methyl 
orange,  methylene blue,  rhodamine B. congo red,  methyl violet and am ido black 10B).  It was observed that an 
alkaline pH was favourable for the adsorption of dyes.  Also , the Freundlich equation showed a some what better fit 
than does the Langmuir equation for adsorption of dyes using banana pe el but the other way  round for orange peels.  
Further more,  it was found that the amount of dye adsorption increase with time and it remai ns constant after a 
contact time of about 65  minutes.  The kinetic parameters followed Lagergren pseudo -first order equation and intra 
particle diffusion within the particle was identified to be rate limiting.  Ho et al. [40] removed a basic dye (Basic Red 
13) from aqueous solution using tree fern.  It was found that the dye sorption capacity of adsorbent increased as the 
adsorbent particle size decreased . The isotherm data followed Langmuir with adsorption capacity of 408 mg/g.  The 
thermodynamic parameters indicated that the sys tem was spontaneous,  endothermic and there was increase of 
randomness at the solid -liquid interface.  Adsorption of water soluble organic dyes ( Acridine Orange,  Bism arck 
Bown,  Crystal Violet, Malachite Green,  Methyl Green,  Nile Blue, Safranin O a nd Saturn Blue) on ferrofluid-
modified sawdust was studied by Safarik et al  [83]. The isotherm data followed four isotherm model namely 
Langmuir,  Generalized Freundlich,  Generalized Langmuir,  Langmuir -Freundlich.  The maximum adsorption 
capacities for the dyes ranged between 34 and 59 mg/g.  Also,  a change in pH value increased the adsorption of dye.  
Tendu leaves (an agrowaste) was utilized for removal of crystal violet from aqueous solution by Nagda and Ghole  
[62]. The adsorbent was used in raw form (TLR),  dilute acid modified form  (TLR -2N) and sulfuric acid carbonized 
form  (TLR -CM).  It was found that the adsorption data could be well described by Langmuir adsorption isotherm for 
the adsorbents and the kinetic data followed pseudo -second order kinetic.  Interestingly,  milder acid treatment of 
adsorbents  (TLR -2N) enhanced adsorption wher eas drastic acid carbonizattion of  adsorbent  (TLR -CM) resu lted in 
reduced adsorption.  The maximum adsorption capacities f or crystal violet for TLR- 2N, TLR and TLR -CM are 
67.57,  42.92 and 22 .47 mg/g respectively . 
 Tahir et al . [95] investigated the remediation of azo  dyes (malachite green and methylene blue) by using 
household used black tea as an ads orbent.  The adsorbent was used i n raw form and impregnated form.  It was 
observed that the ads orption  of dye  increased as the amount of adsorbent increased up to 0.7g for malachite green 
and 1.0g  for methylene bl ue and the decrease s. The adsorption percentage removal increased with incr ease in time 3320                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
and reaches equilibrium in  10 minutes for malachit e green and 25 minute s for methylene blue , then the values 
decrease d and attains a constant value . Also,  the data showed that there was decrease in the amount of the dyes 
adsorption with increase in temperature.  The thermodynamic parameter showed that the process was exothermic and 
spontaneous.  Furth ermore,  the result  showed that the raw form of the adsorbent showed better adsorption capacity 
compared to its impregnated form.  
 Ong et al . [70] studied the equilibrium and continuous flow studies on the sorpti on of cong o red using 
ethylene diamine modified rice hulls.  It was observed that the equilibrium sorption was achieved in 240 minutes and 
the sorption ki netics obeyed pseudo second –order kinetics.  The isotherm study showed that equilibrium sorption 
data con form to Langmuir isotherm model with maximum sorption capacity of 26.4 mgg-1. The removal  of methyl 
orange from solution using yam leaf fibres was studied by Vinoth et al  [99]. The result  revealed that the optimum 
pH was 3,  equilibrium time was 45 minutes and the dosage of a dsorbent increased as the adsorption increased.  Also , 
as the initial dye concentration increased , adsorption also increased.  The equilibri um data  were best represented by 
Freundlich model and t he kinetic data followed pseudo- second orde r model closely.  An acidic dye  (sunset yellow 
FCF) and a basic dye (malachite green) was removed by adsorption on chemically treated mangrove bark by Seey 
and Kassim  [85]. It was observed that the optimum pH for malachite green and sunset yellow was 8 and 2 
respectively.  Also,  the removal percentage of dye increased as the adsorbent amount increas ed and then becomes 
constant.  The result  from the contact time effect revealed that 4  hours of agitation time is sufficient to reach 
equilibrium when 100  mg/L of dyes concentration was employed and it was found that an increase in the dye 
concentration caused a decrease in the percentage of dye removal.  The isotherm data fitted the Langmuir isotherm 
model best and the kinetic data followed pseudo -second order model  closely.  
 Prasad and Santhi  [74] studied the adsorption of cationic dyes  (crystal violet and rhodamine  B) from aqueous 
solution onto Acacia nilotica  leaves as an eco -friendly adsorbent.  The result showed that the high surface area of t he 
adsorbent can be responsible for its use in  the removal of dyes from aqueous solution.  The equilibrium adsorption 
was practically achieved in 120  minutes.  The highest removal of dyes was obtained at pH 6.  The removal efficiency  
increased with increase in agitation time and  initial dye concentration.  The equilibrium data were best described by 
Langmuir isotherm model with maximum monolayer capacity of 33 and 37 mgg-1 for crystal violet and rhodamine B 
respectively.  The adsorption kinetics can be successfully fitted to pseudo –second order  kinetic model.  The result of 
the intra particle diffusion model suggested that intraparticle diffusion might not be the only rate controlling step.  
Desorption study revealed that the recovery of the dye from adsorption was possible.  
 
3.6 Remo val of Dyes By Synthetic Polymer : 
 Chiou et al. [23] investigated the adsorption behaviour of two anoionic dyes AAVN and RB4 in acid solutions 
on chemically cross -linked chitosan beads.  It was found that the adsorption capacities had very large values of 
3362mgg-1 for AAVN and 3823 mgg-1 for RB4 at pH 3 and 30OC. The equilibrium  data fitted the Langmuir model 
very well .  Also,  the kinetic data agreed very well with the pseudo- second  order  kinetic model.  The removal of 
reactive dye (Blue D -5RN) from b inary mi xtures  (Yellow D -5GN,  Red D -8B, Black DN) using chitin by 
Filipk owska et al [31].  It was observed that the maximum adsorption capacity of the dye in the samples  without pH 
adjustment  accounted for 97  mg/g and in the sample with pH adjustment  (pH = 3) it wa s 205 mg/g.  
 Sanghi et al. used a pol ymer deri ved from Ipomoea dasysperma seed gum and guar gum to decolourized dye 
solutions  (Direct Orange 8, Acid Sandolan Re d and Reactive Procion Brilliant Blue) . It was observed that at 
optimum pH 9.5,  the percentage removal was 95 .61 and 79 % for DO  8, ASR and R PBB respectively . Juang et al. 
[45] studied the ads orption of dye  (Amido Naphthol Red G, AR1) onto hexadecyltr imethyl ammonium chloride 
modified montmorillonite  and basic violet 10 onto MCM -41. It was observed th at the adsorption capacity of AR1  
onto organoclay increases slightly at low  (2-3) and high  (10-11) pH values.  The isotherm data fitted Langmuir 
model very well and the low value of  ΔH of AR 1 / organoclay indicated characteristics of physical adsorption while 
the slightly high Δ H of BV10/MCM 41 confirmed the strong interaction between molecules of BV10 and surface 
hydroxyl groups of MCM- 41. The aggregation of congo red on CPC  (Cetylpy ridinium chloride) was studied by Liu 
et al [53].  The optimum pH was 2.03.  The isotherm data followed Langmuir isotherm.  At higher temperature,  the 
adsorption capacity decreases.  Congo red adsorption from aqueous solutions by using chitosan hydrogel beads 
impregnated with non anionic or ani onic surfactant was studied by Chatterjee et al  [21]. It was found that the 
adsorption capacity of chitosan h ydrogel beads impregnated with Triton X -100 (TX-100) was enhanced at all 
concentrations  of TX -100 while the incr ease in the concentration of SDS above  0.01% in the CS/SDS beads 
gradually reduced the adsorption capacity of the beads.  Equilibrium adsorption isotherm da ta indicated a good fit to 
the Sips isotherm model and a heterogenous adsorption process.  The Sips maximum adsorption capacity of CS/TX -
100 was 378.79 mg/g and 318.47 mg/g for CS/SDS beads , higher than the 223.25 mg/g of CS beads.  Also, 
Chatterjee et al. [22] investigated the adsorption of congo  red by chitosan hydrogel beads  impregnated with car bon 3321                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
nano tubes.  It was observed that the equilibrium adsorption isotherm data of the adsorbent exhibited better fit to the 
Langm uir isotherm model than to the Freundlich isotherm model with maximum adsorption capacity of 450.4  mg/g.  
 
3.7    Removal of Dyes B y Activ ated Carbon Deri ved From Industrial/  Agricultural Waste : 
 Gimba et al. [33] investigated the adsorption of dye (Indigo dye) by powdered and granulated activated carbon 
from coconut shell.The agrowaste coconut shell was  carbonized and was activated with di fferent activating agents 
such polymethyl methacrylate  (PMMA) , pottasium carbonate,  sodium  hydrogen carbonate and their mixtures.  The 
activated carbon produced by K 2CO 3 and NaHCO 3 and their mixtures gave 100% removal of the dye.  PMMA alone 
and mixture with  K2CO 3 gave lower than 50%  and 55%  respectively.  The mixt ure of the three reagents with 
powdered and granular forms gave 52.4% and 99.8% respectively.  Carbon from cassava peel,  an agricultural waste  
as an adsorbent in the removal of dyes from aqueous sol ution by Rajeshwarivaraj [75].  The carbon was used in raw 
form and phosphoric acid  modi fied form.  It was found that the re was a quanti tative removal of 100% in th e case of 
activated carbon prepared by chemical activation which showe d that it was more effic ient than  the raw form.  
Rahman and Saad  [77] utilized guava seeds as a source of activated carbon for the removal of methylene bl ue from 
aqueous solution.  The  carbon  was activated by pyrolysis at temperature up to 700OC and by using ZnCl 2 as 
activ ating a gent, pyrolysis alone yie lds poor adsorption capability of the adsorbent but the optimum adsorption 
capacity was obtained when the sorbent was subjected to chemical activation , followed by pyrolysis at 700OC. The 
adsorption data showed best fit to the F reundlich model . 
 Decolourization of an acidic dye (acid orange ) by charcoal from coffee ground was  investigated by Nakamura 
et al [64]. The result  obtained revealed that the ratio of dye removal  increased as the weight of sorbents increased 
and the removal ratio by sorbents carbonized at a higher  temperature was also increased . Also , the intraparticle 
diffusion of the dye onto the adsorption wa s identified as the rate –limiting step in the adsorption process . Abechi et 
al. [2] investigated the the comparision of adsorption of methylene blue by sawdust and walnuts shells carbon 
coated with ZnO.  It was found that the percentage of dye removed decrease d as the initial concentration of dye 
adsorbed increased  but the amount of dye adsorbed increased with increase in the concentration of the dye.  Also , 
there was an increase in the percentage of dye adsorbed as the dose of the carbon increased.  The equilibrium data 
fitted better into the Langmuir  model than the F reundlich model for both adsorbent.  The adsorbent capac ities of both 
adsorbents showed that sawdust carbon  (10,000) was more efficient than walnut shell carbon  (2,500) . 
 The comparative study on the adsorption kinetics and thermodynamics of dyes  (congo red,malachite 
grreen,rhodamine B) onto a ctivated carbon fr om leaves of P andanus was studied by Hema and Ar ivoli [39]. The 
data obtained correlated reasonably  well with both Langmuir and F reundlich isotherm model.  It also revealed t hat 
the amount of dyes adsorbed increased with increase in  pH of the medium and the  amount of the adsorbed dye 
slightly decrea se with increasing ionic streng th and increased with increase in te mperature.  The thermodynamic 
parameters gave values that showed spontaneity,  feasibility and physical nature of the adsorption process.  Sumanjit 
et al. [90] investigated the removal of health hazard causing acidic dyes  (acid violet 17,  acid violet 49,  acid violet 
54, acid blue 15 and acid red 119) from  aqueous solution by adsorption.  Carbon from bagasse , cow dung, groundnut 
shells,  pea shells,  used tea leaves , wheat straw and ash from brick ki ln and cement ki ln we re used as adsorbent.  The 
result  obtained revealed that the optimum pH for the f ive dyes was 8.0.  Also,  the rate o f dye removal increased with 
increasing contact time before equilibrium was established and the isoth erm followed both Langmuir and F reundlich 
model for the adsorbents an d dyes.  Furthermore,  the percentage of dyes sorbed increased as the sorbent dose was 
increased  and  on increasing the ionic streng th of the solution there was de crease in adsorption percentage  of dyes.  
Barley straw was utilized as a source of  activated carbon for removal of methylene b lue from aqueous soluti on by 
Husseien et al [41]. The result  showed that as the amount of adsorbent  increased the percentage of dye removal 
increased a nd higher adsorption percentage a re observed at lower concentrations of dye.  Also,  the optimum pH 
value for the adsorption was 7 and the equilibrium time was 90 minutes.  
 Kavitha and Namasivayam  [48] studied the e xperiment and kinetic s tudies of  methylene  blue adsorption by coir 
pith c arbon.  It was observed that greater percentage of dye was removed with decrease in initial concentration of dye 
and increase in amount of adsorbent  used.  The kinetic data followed the pse udo-second order m odel indicating that  
the process was a chemisorption.  The isotherm data fitted Langmuir and Tempkin isotherm best.  The maximum 
removal of 97% was obtained at natural pH of 6.9 for an adsorbent dose of 100mg of 50ml of dye and 100% 
removal was obtained for an  adsorbent dose of 600mg in 50ml of 10mg/L dye concentration.  ΔG value obtained 
indicated the fea sibility and spontaneity of adsorption process.  Arivoli and Thenkuzali  [11] studied the kinetics , 
mechanistic and thermodynamics of  the adsorption of rhodam ine B by acid activated low cost  carbon  (phoenix 
sylvestric leave s). The result  showed that the adsorption kinetics followed the pseudo- first order reaction and the 
rate is mainly controlled by intra particle diffusion.  The isotherm data followed  Langmuir and Freundlich.  The 
temperature variation  study showed that the a dsorption process was endothermic and spontaneous with increased 3322                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
randomness at the solid solution interface.  Almost 90% removal of rhodamine B was observed at 60OC. 
Orthophosphoric acid actvated Babul seed carbon was used as an adsorbent for the removal of  methylene blue by 
Sujatha et al [89].  The result revealed that the percentage of dye adsorbed increased with increase in pH . The kinetic 
data  followed the pseudo second order model.  The isotherm data fitted the Langmuir model and incre ase in 
temperature increased the adsorption capacity.  The enthalpy change value revealed that the process was 
endothermic.    
 Malarvizhi and Sulochana  [57] studied the sorption isotherm and kinetics of methylene blue uptake onto 
activated   carbon prepar ed from wood apple she ll. It was found that increase in pH of the initial concentration of dye 
solution and car bon dose increased  the percentage adsorption.  The equilibrium data were  best fitted to Langmuir 
model and Redlich- Peterson model.  The kinetic data follows pseudo -secon d order rate equation.  Activated carbon 
prepared from Jack fruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus) peel waste was used for methylene blue removal by P rahas et al 
[72]. It was observed that the removal efficiency increased with increased pH.  The equilibrium data f itted the 
Langmuir model and the kinetic data correlated well with pseudo -second order model.  Ho et al. [40] studied the 
adsorption of  methylene blue onto activated carbon prepared from Delonix regia  pods.  It was observed that the 
percentage adsorption increased as adsorbent dosage increased.  The isotherm data fitted the Langmuir model with 
monolayer sorption capacity of 24.0 mg/g.  Gimba et al . [34] used activa ted carbon prepared from Khaya 
senegalensis  fruit to adsorbed methylene blue from aqueous solutio n. It was discovered that out of all the activating 
agents  (NaCl,  KCl,  CaCl 2, MgCl 2.6H 2O, Na2CO 3, K2CO 3, H2SO 4 and ZnCl 2), the NaCl activated carbon has the best 
adsorption characteristic.  Somboon et al. studied the removal of direct dyestuff (Direct Blue 201, Direct Red 23 and 
Direct violet 9) by wood charcoal and activated wood charcoal.  It was observed that the adsorption of the dyes on 
both adsorbents was pH independent over a pH range of 5 -11. Adsorption isotherms were found t o conform to both 
Langmuir  and F reundlich isotherms.  The order of dyes adsorption capacity of WC and AWC are Direct  Red 23 > 
Direct violet 9  > Direct Blue 20  (AWC has a higher adsorption capacity than WC ). The adsorption capacity 
increased with increasing temperature and the adsorp tion process was an endothermic reaction.  
 The equilibrium , kinetics and thermodynamic  studies on adsorption of R emazol black 5  on the palm kernel 
shell activated carbon was done by Za wani et al [110] . It was observed that the optimum pH was 2.  The isoth erm 
data fitted F reundlich model very well.  The kinetic data fitted  the pseudo -second order model better.  The negative 
values of Δ GO and ΔHO obtained indicated that the adsorption process was spontaneous and endothermic.  Nourouzi 
et al. [68] studied the a dsorption of reactive dyes  (Reacive Black 5 and Reactive Red E) onto palm kernel shell -
based activated carbon.  The result  showed that the external co -efficient of mass transf er decreased with increasing 
initial adsorbate   concentration.  Also,  it was found that the adsorption process was better described by using film -
surface diffusion.  Rice husk carbon was used to adsorb dyes  (crystal violet , direct orange and magenta)  by Verma 
and Mishra [97].  It was found that the optimum time was 45 minutes and there was  decrease in adsorption capacity 
in the low pH region.  Also,  the removal of dyes increased with increase in temperature and there  was increase in 
removal of dyes with increasi ng adsorbent  dose.  The removal percentage decreased  with increase in initial 
concentration of dyes.  Santhi et al. [84] investigated the adsorption of methylene blue,  methyl red and malachite 
green onto activated carbon from Annona squ mosa  seed.  The result  revealed that the adsorption  of dyes  on the 
adsorbent showed highest values at a round pH 7.0 and the kinetic data followed the pseudo second order kinetic 
model with intraparticle diffusion as one of the rate determining ste ps. The adsorption– equilibrium was represented 
with Langmuir,  freundlich,  Dubinin- Radush kevich and Tempkin isoth erms.  The adsorption of acid red 18 by 
activated carbon from poplar wood was investigated by Shokoohi et al  [87]. It was observed that the removal 
efficiency  was increased with increasing adsorbent dosage,  contact time and decreasing pH but with increase i n dye 
concentration,  the removal efficiency was decreased.  The adsorption isotherm models showed that Langmuir 
isotherm mode l was best fitted onto  collected data.  In addition,  kinetic models showed that sorption of the dye onto 
activated carbon prepared fr om poplar wood follows the pseudo -first order model.  
 The adsorption of basic dye s (malachite green,  crystal violet and rhodamine B)   from synthetic textile effluent 
by activated carbon prepared from The vetia  peruviana was investigated by Baseri et al  [15]. It was found that the 
amount of dye adsorbed increased with increasing initial dye concentration.  The dye adsorption increased with 
increase in temperature indicating that the adsorption was endothermic in nature.  Kinetic studies showed that the 
adsorpti on of these dyes followed pseudo- second order model model with multi -step intraparticle diffusion model.  
The data obtained from adsorption isotherms are well fitted with Langmuir model , the negative ΔGO value obtained 
suggested the process was spontaneous in nature . 
 
4.0 Conclusion:  
 This paper has attempted to give insight into a wide range of adsorption of dyes. This ranges from the materials 
used for adsorption, the dyes that were adsorbed and the method used in the adsorption. Certainly, the effectiveness 3323                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
of adsorption onto commercial activated carbon was high but the cost is also a barrier compared to using any other 
materials. In particular, the alternative adsorbents such as natural and syntheti c polymers, activated carbon from 
natural materials/natural materials shows a good replacement for commercial activated carbon on adsorption of dyes. 
 However, there is a strong need to investigate extensively on the following points;  
i. To improve on the report of competitive adsorption of dyes on various adsorbents.  
ii. To increase the studies on comparison of various adsorbents with commercial activated carbon in adsorption of 
dyes to ascertain the cost reduction  
iii. To study the effect of any other mat erials in the aqueous solution on the adsorption of dyes 
 With the above points been put into consideration, there will be little or no injury due to discharge of dye 
wastewater and this will contribute to the overall strategy of waste minimization.  
 
REFER ENCES  
 
[1] Abdel Wahab, O., A.  El Nemr, A. El Sikaily and A.  Khaled, 2005. Use of rice husk for adsorption of direct 
dyes from aqueous solution. A case study of Direct F. Scarlet. Egyptian J. Aqua Res., 31(1) : 1-11. 
[2] Abechi, S.E., C.E. Gimba, A. Uziaru and I.G.  Ndukwe, 2006. Comparative studies on adsorption of 
methylene blue (MB) by sawdust and walnut shells carbon coated with ZnO. Sci. World J., 1(1) : 33-35. 
[3] Akkaya, G . and A. Ozer, 2005. Biosorption of acid red 279 (AR 274) on Dicranella varia  determination of  
equilibrium and  kinetic model parameters. Process Biochem., 40:  3559- 3568 .  
[4] Al-zaydien, A.S. , 2009. Adsorption of methylene blue from aqueous solution onto a low cost natural 
Jordanian Tripoli. American J. Env. Sci., 5(3) : 197-208.  
[5] Albanis, T.A., D.G. Hela, T.M.  Sakellaridis and T.G. Danis, 2000.  Removal of dyes from aqueous solutions 
by adsorption on mixtures of fly ash and soil in batch and column techniques. Global Nest : The Int. J., 2(3) : 
237-244.  
[6] Ali, H. and S.K. Muhammad, 2008. Biodecolorization of acid violet 19 by Alternaria solani.  Afr. J. 
Biotech., 7(6) : 831-833.  
[7] Alkan, M., O. Demirbas and M.  Dogan, 2004. Removal of acid yellow 49 from aqueous solution by 
adsorption. Fresenius Environ. Bullet., 13(11a) : 1112- 1121.  
[8] Annadurai, G., R.S. Juang a nd D.J. Lee, 2002. Use of cellulose -based wastes for adsorption of dyes from 
aqueous solution. J. Hazard. Mater., B 92:  263-274. 
[9] Ansari, R. and Z. Mosayebzadeh, 2010. Removal of basic dye methylene blue from aqueous solutions using 
sawdust and sawdust coat ed with polypyrole. J. Iran. Chem. Soc., 7(2) : 339-350. 
[10] Aravindhan, R., J.R.  Rao and B.U.  Nair, 2007. Removal of basic yellow dye from aqueous solution by 
sorption  on green alga Caulerpa scalpelliformis . J. Hazard. Mater, 142 : 68-76. 
[11] Arivoli, S. and M. Thenkuzhali, 2008. Kinetic, Mechanistic, Thermodynamic and Equilibrium studies on the 
adsorption of  rhodamine B by acid activated low cost carbon E -J. Chem., 5(2) : 187-200. 
[12] Attia, A.A ., W.E.  Rashwan and S.A.  Khedr, 2006. Capacity of activated carbon in the removal of acid dyes 
subsequent to its thermal treatment. Dyes and Pigments, 69 : 128-136.  
[13] Banerjee, S. and M.G.  Dastidar, 2005. Use of jute processing wastes for treatment of wastewater 
contaminated with dye and other organics. Biores. Tech., 96(17) : 1919- 1928.  
[14] Barka, N., A. Assabbare, Y. Ait Ichou and A. Nounah, 2006.  Decontamination of textile wastewater by 
powdered activated carbon. J. Appl. Sci., 6(3) : 692-695. 
[15] Baseri, J.R., P.N.  Palanisamy and P.S. Kuma, 2012. Adsorption of basic dyes from synthetic t extile effluent 
by activated carbon prepared from  Thevetia peruviana . Indian  J. Chem. Technol., 19 : 311-312. 
[16] Batzias, F.A. and D.K.  Sidiras, 2007. Dye adsorption by pre -hydrolysed beech sawdust on batch and fixed-
bed systems. Biores. Technol., 98 : 1208 -1217. 
[17] Benaissa, H. , 2005. Removal of azo dyes from aqueous solutions using orange peel as a sorbent material. 
Ninth International Water Technology Conference, 1175- 1187.  
[18] Binupriya, A.R., M.  Sathishkumar, S.H. Jung, S.H. Song and S.I.  Yun, 2009. A Novel Meth od in utilization 
of Bokbunja seed wastes from wineries on liquid phase sequestration of reactive blue 4. Int. J. Environ. Res., 
3(1): 2009.  
[19] Caparkaya, D. and L.  Cavas, 2008. Biosorption of methylene blue by a brown alga Cystoseira barbatula  
Kutzing. Acta Chim. Slov., 55 : 547-553.  
[20] Chamargore, J., J.  Bharad and M.  Ubale, 2011. Removal of methylene red from aqueous solution by 
adsorption on treated and untreated red kotta powder. Elixir Appl. Chem., 39:  4592- 4595.  3324                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
[21] Chatterjee, S., D.S. Lee, M.W.  Lee and S.H.  Woo, 2009. Congo red adsorption from aqueous solution by 
using chitosan hydrogel beads impregnated with non ionic or anionic surfactant. Biores. Technol., 100:  
3862 -3868.  
[22] Chatterjee, S., M.W.  Lee and S.H.  Woo, 2010. Adsorption of congo red by chitosan hy drogel beads 
impregnated with carbon nanotubes. Biores. Technol., 101:  1800- 1806.  
[23] Chiou, M .S., P.Y. Ho and H .Y. Li, 2003. Adsorption behaviour of dye AAVN and RB4 in acid solution on 
chemically cross -linked chitosan beads. J. Chin. Inst. Chem. Engrs., 34( 6): 625-634. 
[24] Crini, G. , 2005. Non conventional low -cost adsorbents for dye removal : A review, Biores. Technol., 97(9) : 
1061 -1065.   
[25] Daneshvar , N., M. Ayazloo, A.R. Khataee and M.  Pourhassan, 2007. Biological decolorization of dye 
solution containing malac hite green by microalgae Cosmarium sp . Biores. Technol., 98 : 1176 -1182.  
[26] Dincer, A.R., Y. Gunes, N. Karakaya and E.  Gunes, 2007. Comparison of activated carbon and bottom ash 
for removal of reactive dye from aqueous solution. Biores. Tech., 98:  834-839. 
[27] El-Nemr, A., O. Abdelwahab, A. Khaled and A.  El-Sikaily , 2005. Removal of chrysophenine dye (DY -12) 
from aqueous solution using dried Ulva lactuca . Egyptian J. Aqua.Res., 31 (special issue), 86 -98. 
[28] El-Sersy, N.A. , 2007. Bioremediation of methylene blue by Bac illus thuringiensis  4G1: Application of 
statistical designs and surface plots for optimization. Biotechnology, 6(1) : 34-39. 
[29] Eren, Z. and F.N.  Acar, 2006. Adsorption of reactive black 5 from an aqueous solution : equilibrium and 
kinetic studies. Desalinatio n, 194:  1-10.  
[30] Faria, P.C.C., J.J.M.  Orfao and M.F.R.  Pereira, 2004. Adsorption of anionic and cationic dyes on activated 
carbons with different surface chemistries. Water Res., 38 : 2043 -2052.  
[31] Filipkowska, U., E. Klimiuk, M. Kuczajowska -zadrozna and S. Kus, 2004. The removal of reactive dyes 
from binary mixtures using Chitin. Polish J. Env. Studies, 13(6) : 653-661. 
[32] Fu, Y. and T.  Viraraghavan, 2002. Removal of congo red from aqueous solution by fungus Aspergillus 
niger . Adv. Environ.  Res., 7 : 239-247.  
[33] Gimb a, C.E ., O. Ocholi, P.A. Egwaikhode, M. Turot i and E.E. Akporhonor , 2009.  New raw material for 
activated carbon I. methylene blue adsorption on activated carbon prepared from Khaya senegalensis  fruits. 
Cien. Inv. Agr., 36(1) : 107-114.  
[34] Gimba, C.E., J.Y. Olayemi, D.O.H.  Ifijeh and J.A.  Kagbu, 2001. Adsorption of dyes by powdered and 
granulated activated carbon from coconut shell. J. Chem. Soc. Nigeria, 26(1) : 23-27. 
[35] Gong, R., X. Zong, H. Liu, Y. Sun and B.  Liu, 2007. Uptake of cationic dyes from aqueous solution by 
biosorption onto granular kohlrabi peel. Biores. Technol., 98, 1319 -1323.  
[36] Goyal, N., S.C. Jain and U.C.  Banerjee, Comparative studies on the microbial adsorption of heavy metals. 
Adv. Environ. Res ., 7: 311-319.  
[37] Hamdaoui, O. and M. Chiha, 2007. Rem oval of methylene blue from aqueous solutions by wheat bran. Acta 
Chim Slov., 54 : 407-418. 
[38] Hashemian, S., S. Dadfarnia, M.R.  Nateghi and F.  Gafoord, 2008. Sorption of acid red 138 from aqueous 
solution onto rice bran.  Afr. J. Biotech., 7(5) : 600-605. 
[39] Hema , M. and S. Arivoli, 2007 . Comparative study on the adsorption kinetics and thermodynamics of dyes 
onto acid activated low cost carbon. Int J. Phys. Sci., 2(1) : 10-17. 
[40] Ho, Y .S., R. Malarvizhi and N. Sulochana, 2009. Equilibrium Isotherm studies of methylene blue adsorption 
onto activated carbon prepared from Delonix regia pods. J Environ. Prot. Sci., 3:  111-116. 
[41] Husseien, M. , A.A.  Amer, A. El-Maghraby and N.A.  Taha, 2007. Utilization of barley straw as a source of 
activated carbon for removal of methylene b lue from aqueous solution. J. Appl. Sci. Res., 3(11) : 1352- 1358.  
[42] Iscen, C.F., I.  Kiran and S. Ilhan, 2007. Biosorption of reactive black 5 dye by Penicillum restrictum . : The 
kinetic study.  J. Hazard. Mater., 143 : 335-340.  
[43] Jirasripongpun, K., R. Nasanit,  J. Niruntasook and B. Chotikasatia, 2007. Decolorization and Degradation of 
C.I Reactive red 195 by Enterobacter sp . Thammasat Int. J. Sci. Tech., 12(4) : 6-11.  
[44] Ju, D.J., I.G. Byun, J.J. Park, C.H.  Lee, G.H.  Ahn and T.J.  Park, 2008. Biosorption of a react ive dye 
(Rhodamine B) from an aqueous solution using dried biomass of activated sludge. Biores. Tech., 98:  7971 -
7975.  
[45] Juang, L .C., C.C. Wang, C.K. Lee and T. C. Hsu, 2007.  Dyes adsorption onto organoclay and MCM -41. 
Environ. Eng.  Manage., 17(1) : 29-38.  
[46] Kagbu, J.A., J.O.  Amupitan, J.O. Oyedeji and P.  Elaigwu, 2001. Evaluation of yankassa sheep wool as an 
adsorptive matrix for bleaching textile effluents. J. Chem. Soc. Nigeria, 26(1) : 14-17. 3325                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
[47] Kargi, F. and S. Ozimhci, 2004. Biosorption performance of powdere d activated sludge for removal of 
different dyestuffs. Enzyme Microbial Technol., 34:  267-271.  
[48] Kavitha, D. and C. Namasivayam, 2007. Experimental and kinetic studies on methylene blue adsorption by 
coir pith carbon. Biores. Technol., 98:  14-21.  
[49] Khalaf, M .A., 2008. Biosorption of reactive dye from textile waste water by non- viable biomass of 
Aspergillus niger  and Spirogyra sp.  Biores. Tech., 99 : 6631 -6636.  
[50] Kumar, K.V. and K. Porkodi, 2007. Mass transfer,  kinetics and equilibrium studies for the biosorpti on of 
methylene blue using Paspalum notatum . J. Hazard. Mater.,  146(1 -2): 214-226. 
[51] Kumar, K.V., S. Sivanesan and N. Ramamurthi, 2005. Adsorption of malachite green onto Pithophora sp. , 
afresh water algae : Equilibrium and kinetic modeling. Process Biochem. , 40: 2865- 2872.  
[52] Kumari, K. and T.E. Abraham, 2007. Biosorption of anionic textile dyes by nonviable biomass of fungi and 
yeast biomass. Biores. Technol., 98 : 1704 -1710.  
[53] Li, X . and R. Jia, 2008 . Decolorization and biosorption for congo red by system rice  hull-Schizophyllum sp. 
F17 under solid- state condition in a continuous flow packed- bed bioreactor. Biores. Tech., 99:  6885 -6892.  
[54] Liew Abdullah, A.G., M.A.  Mohd Salleh, M.K.  Siti Mazlina, M.J.  Megat Mohd Noor, M.R.  Osman, R. 
Wagiran and S.  Sobri, 2005. Az o dye removal by adsorption using waste biomass sugarcane bagasse. Int J. 
Eng and Tech., 2(1) : 8-13.  
[55] Liu, X .H., J.R. Ren and Y.N. Huang, 2008. Langmuir Aggregation of congo red on CPC and its application. 
Turk. J. Chem., 32 : 540-559. 
[56] Mahony, T.O., E.  Guib al and J.M.  Tobin , 2002. Reactive dye biosorption by Rhizopus arrhizus biomass. 
Enzyme Microbial Technol., 3 1: 456-463.  
[57] Malarvizhi, R. and N. Sulochana, 2008. Sorption isotherm and kinetic studies of methylene blue uptake onto 
activated carbon  prepared f rom wood apple shell. J. Environ. Prot. Sci., 2:  40-46. 
[58] Marungrueng, K. and P. Pavasant, 2007. High performance biosorbent ( Caulerpa lentillifera ) for basic dye 
removal. Biores. Technol., 98 : 1567 -1572.  
[59] Mittai, A ., J. Mittal and L.  Kurup, 2007. Utilizatio n of hen feathers for the adsorption of indigo carmine 
from simulated effluents. J. Env. Prot. Sci., 1 : 92-100. 
[60] Mohd Din, A.T. and B.H.  Hameed, 2010. Adsorption of methyl violet dye on acid modified activated  
carbon : isotherm and thermo dynamics. J. Appl . Sci. Environ. Sanit., 151 -160. 
[61] Moura, L.M.A., E.P.R.  Goncalves, M.T.  Amorim, L.A. Teles de vasconeelos and C.G.  Gonzalez Beca, 
2004. Adsorption of yellow lanasol 4g reactive dye in a simulated textile effluent on gallinaceous feathers. 
European Water Man agement Online, 1- 16. 
[62] Nagda, G.K. and V.S.  Ghole, 2008. Utilization of lignocellulosic waste from bidi industry for removal of 
dye from aqueous solution. Int. J. Environ. Res., 2(4) : 385-390. 
[63] Nagda , G.K. and V.S. Ghole, 2009. Biosorption of congo red by hy drogen peroxide treated tendu waste. 
Iran. J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng., 6(3):  195-200. 
[64] Nakamura, T., T. Tokimoto, T. Tamura, N. Kawasako and S . Tanada, 2003. Decolorization of acidic dye by 
charcoal from coffee grounds. J. Health Sci., 4(6) : 520-523.  
[65] Naveen Prasad, R., S. Viswanathan, J. Renuka Devi, J. Rajkumar and N.  Parthasarathy, 2008. Kinetics and 
equilibrium studies on biosorption of CBB by coir pith. American -Eurasian J. Sci. Res., 3(2) : 123-127. 
[66] Ncibi, M.C., B.  Mahjoub and M.  Seffen, 2007. Adsorpt ive removal of textile reactive dye using Posidonica 
oceanica (L) fibrous Biomass. Int.J. Environ. Sci. Tech., 4(4):  433-440. 
[67] Ncibi, M.C., B. Mahjoub and M.  Seffen, 2007. Kinetic and equilibrium studies of methylene blue 
biosorption by Posidonia oceanica (L) fibres. J. Hazard. Mater., B139 : 280-285.  
[68] Nourouszi, M.M., T.G.  Chuah and T.S.Y.  Choong, 2009. Adsorption of reactive dyes by palm kernel shell 
activated carbon : Application of film surface and film pore diffusion models. E -J. Chem., 6(4):  949-954. 
[69] Ofomaja, A.E . and Y.S. Ho, 2008 . Effect of temperatures and pH on methyl violet biosorption by mansonia 
wood sawdust. Biores. Tech., 99 : 5411- 5417.  
[70] Ong, S .T., E.H. Tay, S.T. Ha, W.M. Lee and P .S. Keng, 2009. Equilibrium and continuous flow studies on 
the sor ption of congo red using ethylenediamine modified rice hulls. Int. J. Phys. Sci., 4(11) : 683-690. 
[71] Ozcan, A.S. and A. Ozcan, 2004. Adsorption of acid dyes from aqueous solutions onto acid -activated 
bentonite. J. Colloid Interf. Sci., 276:  39-46.  
[72] Prahas , D., Y. Kartika, N. Indraswati and S. Ismadji, 2008. The use of activated carbon prepared from 
jackfruit ( Artocarpus heterophyllus ) peel waste for methylene blue removal. J. Environ. Prot. Sci ., 2: 1-10. 
[73] Prakash, A., S.  Solanki and Prasada Rao, PTSRK. 2008. Adsorption of dyes on sawdust phosphate kinetics 
and equilibrium studies. Indian J. Chem Technol., 15:  146-154. 3326                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
[74] Prasad, A.L. and T.  Santhi, 2012. Adsorption of hazardous cationic dyes from aqueous solution onto Acacia 
nilotica  leaves as an eco friendly adso rbent. Sustain. Environ. Res., 22(2) : 113-122.  
[75] Rachakornkij , M., S. Ruangchuay and S.  Teachakulwiroj, 2004. Removal of reactive dyes from aqueous 
solution using bagasse fly ash. Songklanakarin J. Sci. Technol., 26(1) : 13-24. 
[76] Raghuvanshi, S.P ., R. Singh and C.P. Kaushik, 2004. Kinetics study of methylene blue dye bioadsorption on 
bagasse. Appl. Eco. & Env. Res., 2(2) : 35-43.  
[77] Rahman, I.A. and B. Saad, 2003. Utilization of guava seeds as a source of activated carbon for removal of 
methylene blue from aqueous  solution. Malays. J. Chem., 5(1) : 8-14.   
[78] Rajeshwarisivaraj, S. Sivakumar, P. Senthilkumar and V. Subburam, 2001. Carbon from cassava peel, an 
agricultural waste, as an adsorbent in the removal of dyes and metal ions from aqueous solution. Biores. 
Technol ., 80: 233-235. 
[79] Rauf, M.A., I.  Shehadeh, A. Ahmed and A. Al-zamly, 2009. Removal of methylene blue from aqueous 
solution  by using gypsum as a low cost adsorbent. World Acad. Sci. Eng. and Technol., 31:  604-609. 
[80] Remenarova, L., M. Pipiska, M. Hornik and J.  Augustin, 2009. Sorption of cationic dyes from aqueous 
solution by moss Rhytidiadelphus squarrosus   : Kinetic and equilibrium studies. Nova Biotech., 9(1) : 53-61.  
[81] Revankar, M.S. and S.S. Lele, 2007. Synthetic dye decolorization by white rot fungus, Ganod erma Sp : WR-
1. Biores. Technol., 98:  775-780. 
[82] Saiful Azhar, S., A.  Ghaniey Liew, D. Suhardy, K. Farizal Hafiz and M.D.  Irfan Halim, 2005. Dye removal 
from aqueous solution by using adsorption on treated sugarcane bagasse. Ame. J. Appl. Sci., 2(11) : 1499-
1503.  
[83] Safarik, I., P. Lunackova, E. Mosiniewz -Szablewska, F. Weyda and M.  Safarikova, 2007. Adsorption of 
water soluble organic dyes on ferrofluid -modified sawdust. Holzforschuny, 61 : 247-253.  
[84] Santhi, T., S . Manon mani and T.  Smitha, 2010. Kinetics and Isot herm studies on cationic dyes adsorption 
onto Annona squmosa seed activated carbon. Int J. Eng. Sci. & Tech., 2(3) : 287-295. 
[85] Seey , J.L. and J.N.  Kassim, 2012. Acidic and Basic dyes removal by adsorption on chemically treated 
mangrove barks. Int J. Appl. Sc i. & Tech., 2(2):  270-276. 
[86] Shahryari, Z, A.S.  Goharrizi and M.  Azadi, 2010. Experimental study of methylene blue adsorption from 
aqueous solutions onto carbon nano tubes. Int J. Wat. Res.  Env. Eng., 2(2) : 16-28.  
[87] Shokoohi, R., V. Vatan poor, M. Zarrabi and  A. Vatani, 2010. Adsorption of Acid Red 18 (AR 18) by 
activated carbon from poplar wood : A kinetic and equilibrium study. E -J. Chem.., 7(1):  65-72. 
[88] Somboon, W., P. Mutitamongkol and P. Tanpaiboonkul, Removal of colored wastewater generated from 
hand –made textile weaving industry,  
[89] Sujatha, M., A.  Geetha, P. Sivakumar and P.N. Palanisamy, 2008. Or thophosphoric acid activated babul 
seed carbon as an adsorbent for the removal of methylene blue. E -J. Chem. , 5(4): 742-753. 
[90] Sumanjit, Walia, T .P.S. and R. Kaur,  2007. Removal of health  hazard causing acidic dyes from aqueous 
solutions by the process of adsorption. Online J. Health Allied Sci., 6(3) : 1-9.  
[91] Sunghi, R., B.  Bhathacharya, A. Dixit and V. Singh, 2006. Ipomoea dasysperma  seed gum. An effective 
natural coagulant for the decolorization of textile dye solution. J. Environ. Manage., 81:  36-41. 
[92] Supaka, N., K. Juntongjin, S. Damronglerd, M. Delia, P. Strehaisano, 2004. Microbial decolorization of 
reactive azo dyes in a sequential anaerobic aerobic system . Ch emical Eng. Jour., 99 : 169-176. 
[93] Suteu, D. and D.  Bilba, 2005. Equilibrium and kinetic study of reactive dye brilliant red HE -3B adsorption 
by activated charcoal.  Acta Chim. Slov., 52 : 73-79.  
[94] Sreedhar Reddy, S., B.  Kotaiah, N. Siva Prasad Reddy and M.  Velu, 2006. The removal of composite 
reactive dye from dyeing unit effluent using sewage sludge derived activated carbon. Turk. J. Eng. Env. Sci., 30: 367-373.  
[95] Tahir, N., M. Sultan and Q. Jahanzeb, 2008. Removal of basic dye methylene blue by using bioabsorbents  
Ulva lactuca and Sargassum . Afr. J. Biotechnol., 7(15):  2649 -2655.  
[96] Tahir, H., M. Sultan and Q. Jahanzeb, 2009. Remediation of azo dyes by using household used black tea as 
an adsorbent. Afr. J. Biotech., 8(15) : 3584- 3589.  
[97] Verma, V.K. and A.K.  Mishra,  2010. Kinetic and isotherm modeling of adsorption of dyes onto rice husk 
carbon. Global Nest J., 12(2):  190-196. 
[98] Vijayaraghavan, K . and Y.S. Yun, 2007. Utilization of fermentation waste ( Corynebacterium glutamicum ) 
for  biosorption of  Reactive Black 5 from aqueous solution.  J. Hazard. Mater, 141:  46-52.  
[99] Vinoth, M., H.Y.  Lim, R. Xaveer, K. Marimuthu, S. Sreeramanan, H.M.H.  Mas Rosemal and S. Kathiresan, 
2010. Removal of methyl orange from solutions using yam leaf  fibers. Int. J. Chem. Tech. Res., 2(4):  1892-
1900.  3327                                                                         Giwa, A.A.  
Advances in Environmental Biology , 7(11) Oct 2013, Pages: 3311- 3327  
[100]  Voudrias, E., K. Fytianos and E.  Bozani, 2002. Sorption -Desorption isotherms of dyes from aqueous 
solutions and wastewaters with different sorbent  materials. Global Nest Int. J., 4(1) : 75-83. 
[101]  Walker, G. M. and L.R.  Weatherley, 2000. Biodegradation and biosorption of acid anthraquinone dye. 
Environ. Pollut., 108:  219-223. 
[102]  Wang, S., Z.H.  Zhu, A. Coomes, F. Haghseresht and G.Q.  Lu, 2005. The physical and surface chemical 
characteristics of activated carbons and the adsorption of methylene blue from wastewater. J. Colloid Interf. 
Sci., 284 : 440-446. 
[103]  Wang, X.S., Y.  Zhou, Y. Jiang and C.  Sun, 2008. The removal of basic dyes from aqueous solutions using 
agricultural by products. J. Hazard. Mater., 157:  374-385. 
[104]  Waranusantigul, P., P. Pokethitiyook, M. Kruatrachue and E.S.  Upatham, 2013. Kinetics of basic dye 
(methylene blue) biosorption by giant duckweed ( Spirodella polyrrhiza ). Environ. Pollut., 125 : 385-392.  
[105]  Wong , S.Y., Y.P. Tan, A.H.  Abdullah and S.T.  Ong, 200 9. The removal of basic and reactive dyes using 
quaternized sugar cane bagasse. J. Phys. Sci., 20(1) : 59-74. 
[106]  YaminYasin, M.Z. Hussein and F.H.J. Ahamd, 2007 Adsorption of methylene blue onto treated activated 
carbon. The Malays. J. Anal. Sci., 11(11) : 400-406. 
[107]  Yavuz, O. and A.H.  Aydin, 2006. Removal of direct dyes from aqueous solution using various adsorbents. 
Polish J. Environ. Studies, 15(1) : 155-161. 
[108]  Youssef, A.S., M.F.  El-Sherif and S.A.  El-Assar, 2008. Studies on the decolorization of malachite green by 
the local isolate Acrenonium killense . Biotechnology, 7(2) : 213-223.  
[109]  Zahangir Alam, Md. , 2004. Biosorption of basic dyes using sewage treatment plant biosolids. 
Biotechnology, 3(2) : 200-204. 
[110]  Zawani, Z., C.A.  Luqman and T.S.Y.  Choong, 2009. Equilibrium,  kinetics and thermodynamic studies: 
Adsorption of remazol black 5 on the palm kernel shell activated carbon (PKS -AC). Euro. J. Sci. Res., 
37(1) : 67-76.  