  
  
 
 
 
Azo dye degrading bacteria and their mechanism: A review
 
 
ARTICLE INFO  ABSTRACT  
Received : 28 October 2022  
Revised   : 27 February 2023 
Accepted : 20 March 2023 
 
Available online: 28 June 2023  
 
Key Words:  
Synthetic dyes 
Idols 
Azo dye 
Toxicity 
Laccase, GMO 
 Major part of the aesthetics and beauty of idols, textiles, paper, paintings 
industries, etc. finds its roots in the use of colours (azo compound). These 
synthetic dyes can not degrade easily by physical and chemical means and are 
toxic for the environment and animals including humans. Even if they get 
degraded, it becomes difficult to get rid of the secondary toxic products.  
Microbes especially bacteria can be used which results cheap, eco friendly and 
complete degradation of azo dye products without production of any secondary 
toxic products (or secondary products with way lesser toxicity). Also, it requires 
no new chemical to be added (in an attempt to degrade azo dye) in an already 
polluted environment, as the bacterial enzymes would do the job without 
requiring any other added chemicals. This review article discusses the use of 
bacteria for azo dye degradation, the bacterial enzymes such as laccase etc. that 
degrade azo dye and how they work to decolourise the dyes, the common 
genetic elements found in the different bacteria that can degrade azo dye. This 
article also includes information on future prospects and some genetically 
modified organism (GMO) that are being/ (can be) brought to use for dye 
degradation and pollution reduction.  
 
Introduction  
The use of dye for the aesthetic enhancement of 
objects is an ancient practice. With the discovery of 
new pigments and dyes the dyeing technology has 
been evolved. Nowadays uses of azo dye are ever 
present & they are  widely used in the textile, paper 
and food, painting industries. Releasing this 
untreated waste into the environment without prior 
treatment can pose significant environmental risks 
as azo dyes and their metabolites are toxic, 
carcinogenic , mutagenic  and highly recalcitrant .  
The synthetic design of these dyes is described by 
the presence of azo bonds (-N = N-), associated 
with naphthalene or benzene rings . These aromatic 
rings can have different substituents, for example, 
sulfonic corrosive (SO 3H), chloro (- Cl), hydroxyl 
(- Gracious), methyl (- CH 3), carboxyl (- COOH) , 
nitro (- NO 2) and amino (NH 2) groups. These 
substituents make azo dyes water-soluble and 
degradation resistant under environmental 
conditions and they cause serious harm to the marine environment. This is not only a threat to the 
marine animals but consumption of such water may 
cause cancer in  humans.So, this is important to 
treat the dye containing effluent before discharging 
them in to water bodies (Ruhela et al., 2021; 
Bhutiani et al., 2021; Bhutiani et al., 2022). The 
chemical, physical methods  to  treat this effluent 
but they are expensive and  produces amine residue 
containing sludge. So, utilization of 
microorganisms for remediation design is 
consequently a potential answer for ecological 
contamination since it incorporates reasonable 
remediation innovations. Under certain conditions 
several microorganisms helps to decolorize and 
mineralize the azo dye. Bacteria have become the 
main tool for the degradation of the azo-dye 
containing waste water as they produce various 
intracellular redox enzymes, can easily be cultured 
and reproduce at a rapid rate (Garg, 2012). Also 
they can survive in high salt concentration and high Journal homepage : https://www.environcj.in/  
 
Environment Conservation Journal  
ISSN 0972-3099 (Print) 2278-5124 (Online) 
 
Manasi Upadhyay  
Department of Microbiology, Bijoy Krishna Girls’ College, Howrah, India 
Ahana Mondal 
Department of Microbiology, Bijoy Krishna Girls’ College, Howrah, India 
Biswajit Saha  
Department of Microbiology, Bijoy Krishna Girls’ College, Howrah, India  
 
  
Corresponding author E-mail: biswajit.saha1402@gmail.com  
Doi:https://doi.org/10.36953/ECJ.15672490  
This work is licensed under Attribution-Non-Commercial 4.0 International (CC BY-NC 4.0)  
© ASEA  
 Environment Conservation Journal 24 (3): 274-282, 2023  
Upadhyay et al.  
 
275 
Environment Conservation Journal 
     
 temperature environment  and they have high 
degradation and decolorization ratios.Studies have 
shown that most azo-dye degrading bacteria are 
commonly mesophilic  ( 20-40 ⁰ C) (Sudha et al., 
2018) in nature. Although most azo-dye waste 
water produces in  the dyeing bath and rinsing 
process with discharge temperatures reaching as 
high as 50 – 70 ⁰C (Boonyakamol, 2009).  So, this 
type of waste water can be treat effectively using 
thermophilic bacteria. Thermophilic bacteria are 
also have some advantages including fast metabolic 
ratios, high processing efficiencies and the capacity 
to effectively kill pathogens when azo dye were 
degraded at high temperatures and enzymes 
secreted by the thermophilic bacteria are stable and 
resistance to chemical degradation. In recent days,  
from the azo-dye containing waste water 
researchers isolate and screen some azodye 
degrading bacteria Bacillus sp., Micrococcus sp., 
Lysinibacillus sphaericus sp., Aeromonas 
hydrophila sp. Anoxybacillus sp. 
 
What are azo dyes ? 
Before we discuss this specific category of dye, the 
azo dye, we should know what is a dye. Dyes are 
synthetic, aromatic compounds used as colouring 
agents. They’re used to colour various substances, 
giving them a new look, a new colour. One other 
substance used for colouring are pigments. Dyes 
are different from pigments in the way that 
pigments are mostly insoluble in substrate and their 
application is mostly in dispersed powder or crystal 
form.Dyes, on the other hand, get dissolved in the 
substrate at the molecular level. They’re better 
colouring agents and find use in all the various 
industries— the textile industry, leather industry, 
cosmetic industry, paper industry, idol making 
industry etc.Dyes, in turn, are of many types of 
which, the azo dyes form the most widely used 
category. Their omnipresence can be credited to 
their characteristic strong colouration. They are 
synthetically made – organic chemical compounds 
with high stability and chemical versatility. The azo 
dyes consist of one or more (–N=N–) bonds which 
are referred to as azo. They also feature amino, 
chloro, nitro, hydroxyl and methyl substituent 
groups (Bell  et al., 2000).Though these dyes are 
used in almost all industries that deal with 
colouring, they cause a major environmental concern. The azo dyes that get dispersed into the 
nature, mostly into water bodies, as a part of 
industrial effluents or via idol dispersing etc. don’t 
get degraded easily. They do break down via 
mineralization and form aryl-amine which are 
highly suspected carcinogens. As we already 
discussed, azo dyes are mostly water soluble and 
thus they can be absorbed directly via skin and 
inhalation, causing risks of cancer and allergic 
reactions. Toxic compounds of azo dyes can get 
absorbed into the aquatic organisms in form of 
water-dye mixture(He et al., 2004; Asad et al., 
2007). When humans consume this water or the 
aquatic organisms from a dye polluted water body, 
the toxic substances reach man and cause various 
diseases like, renal damage, acute tubular necrosis, 
sporadic fever, splenic sarcomas, 
hepatocarcinoma, oedema of the larynx, urinary 
bladder cance r etc. Nuclear anomalies and 
chromosomal aberration in laboratory animals and 
mammalian cells dye to azo dyes has also been 
observed (Bayoumi et al., 2010; Puvaneswari et al., 
2006; Mani and Bhargava 2016 a,b; Houk et al., 
1991; Haley, 1975). Dye effluents may also contain 
suspended solids particulate or heavy metal B 
which again are environmental and life hazard. 
Dyes are also known to absorb sunlight due to the 
presence of chromophoric group. This absorption of 
sunlight by the dye present in water hampers and 
has a detrimental effect on the photosynthetic 
process of water flora, like the phytoplankton, algae 
and water plants (Kagalkar et al., 2010). 
Such a group of compounds, which are toxic and 
detrimental to both flora and fauna including 
humans, should be gotten rid of. But it is not 
possible as we do need them for the aesthetic and 
colouring in various fields. Such is the condition 
that we can neither fully get rid of these dyes nor 
can we leave it as is. So, the best we can do is make 
sure that these dyes are degraded and don’t persist 
in the environment in their own toxic form or even 
as toxic secondary products. The best way to 
achieve this is by biodegradation of the azo dyes 
rather than by chemical degradation. Use of 
chemical or physical means for the breakdown of 
the dyes comes forward as an expensive method 
and on top of that, considerable amount of chemical 
sludge waste is produced whose disposal, once 
again, is no less problematic. Thus biodegradation A Comprehensive Review on Azo Dye Degrading Bacteria  
 
  
Environment Conservation Journal 
 276or microbial decolourisation and degradation forms 
a cost effective method of pollutant-dye removal 
from the environment. Of the microbes, many 
fungal, algal, and bacterial species have been found 
with the capability of degrading azo dyes. This 
study focuses on the use of bacteria and their 
enzymes for biodegradation and decolourisation of 
azo dyes. 
 
Azo dye degradation by bacteria : 
As we have already mentioned earlier, bacteria 
form a very good mean of biodegrading the azo 
dyes. Bacterial enzymes and bioadsorption by 
bacteria form the two major biodegrading pathway 
for dyes.These microorganisms can completely 
degrade the azo dyes. They have developed enzyme 
systems and produce enzymes like azo reductase, 
laccase, hydrogenase, peroxidase and exo-enzymes 
which reduce the azo dyes. The reduced forms are 
then converted to simpler compounds and/or used 
as energy source by the bacteria (Stolz, 2001).The 
complete degradation of azo dyes by bacteria 
mostly occur as a two step process and is carried 
out by bacterial enzymes acting on the dues. The 
reactions involved in these two steps are partially 
aerobic and partially anaerobic. Thus, a coupled 
aerobic-anaerobic process brings about the full 
degradation of azo dyes. The 1st step is the 
reductive cleavage of azo bonds (–N=N–) which 
leads to production of aromatic amines, the toxic 
carcinogens. In the 2nd step, these aromatic amines 
(aryl-amines) are degraded and thus, the 
environment is fully cleared of any toxic dye 
product.One other process by which bacteria clear 
the environment of azo dyes is by biosorption. 
Biosorption by bacteria depends on the composition 
of heteropolysaccharides and lipids in the bacterial 
cell wall. The attraction between the various 
charged groups of the cell wall and the azo dyes 
forms the basis of biosorption. Though biosorption 
is helpful to some extent, it is not a complete 
solution for the problem as the dye does not gets 
destroyed but is only embedded inside the biomass 
matrix. So, bacterial enzymatic processes for dye 
degradation are the most preferred method for 
removal of azo dye compounds from the 
environment. Some bacterial species that have been 
isolated and screened for their dye degrading ability 
are Bacillus sp, Pseudomonas sp, Rhabdobacter sp, 
Enterococcus sp, Staphylococcus sp, Xenophilus sp, Cornebacterium sp, Clostridium sp., Micrococcus 
sp, Dermacoccus sp, Acinetobacter sp, Geobacillus 
sp, Lactobacillus sp, Rhizobium sp, Proteus sp, 
Morganella sp, Aeromonas sp, Alcaligenes sp, and 
Klebsiella sp.( Stolz, 2001; Olukanni et al., 2006; 
Vijaykumar et al., 2007;  Chen et al., 2008; Lin and 
Leu, 2008 ). 
 
Enzymatic degradation of azo dyes : 
Enzymes form a very effective bioremediation tool. 
Decolouration of dyes by bacteria depends fully on 
their capability to produce the various dye 
degrading enzymes. Azo reductases are known for 
their anaerobic dye degrading ability yet, some 
specific azo reductase enzymes have the potential 
to degrade azo dyes under aerobic conditions 
(Stolz, 2001; Naik and Singh , 2012). Laccases are 
known for dye degradation by free radical 
mechanism. Peroxidase enzymes in addition to 
laccases show an extra 25% decolourisation rate 
(Hadibarata et al., 2012). These three enzymes, azo 
reductase, laccase and peroxidase form the most 
studied groups of dye degrading enzymes. 
 
Azo reductase: 
Azo reductases form the largest group of dye 
degrading enzymes. They specifically cleave the 
azo bonds producing aryl-amines. They use 
reducing agents like FADH, NADH and NADPH 
as an electron donor for the degradation reactions 
(Tian et al., 2014; Jadhav et al., 2008). These 
enzymes are mostly oxygen sensitive. As aerobic 
respiration also uses the same reducing agents as 
that of the azo reductase catalysed reaction, 
presence of oxygen impedes the azo bond 
degradation steps by competing for the reducing 
agents. So, Azo reductases are more related to 
anaerobic degradation of dye. Despite of this, there 
have been certain examples of aerobic azo 
reductases found in Pseudomonas sp. (Zimmermann 
et al., 1982,1984). 
 
Laccase: 
Laccases are copper containing oxidases. One of 
their main advantage over other dye degrading 
enzymes is that they function through a free radical 
mechanism and form phenolic compounds rather 
than the toxic aromatic amines (Chivukula and 
Renganathan, 1995). The reduction mechanism of 
laccase entails the removal of a hydrogen ion (H+)  
Upadhyay et al.  
 
277 
Environment Conservation Journal 
     
 from the amino and hydroxyl group of the 
substituted ortho and para position of phenolic 
compounds and aromatic amines.Laccases are non-
specific enzymes and work on a wide variety of azo 
dyes. On top of that, laccases don’t require 
cofactors for their activation. Redox mediators help 
expand the range of azo dyes that a laccase enzyme 
can degrade. Bacterial laccases also have properties 
like wide pH range of function and high thermal 
stability. All these qualities make them an enzyme 
of great industrial interest and they play important 
roles in textile industry, cosmetic industry, 
bioremediation and biodegradation etc. (Tian et 
al.,2014). Peroxidases: 
Peroxidases are exo enzymes mostly present in 
fungi but they do occur in some bacteria as well 
(Kandelbauer and Guebitz, 2005). They are 
hemoprotein and need hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) to 
catalyse reactions. Reduction mechanism of 
peroxidases is very similar to that of azo reductases. 
Only difference is in the electron donor used.Of the 
peroxidases, lignin peroxidase and manganese 
peroxidase are directly involved in biodegradation 
and decolouration of azo dyes (Paszczynski et al., 
1991; Pasti et al., 1992).Some examples of dye 
degrading bacteria and enzymes is given in Table 1. 
 
Table 1: Some examples of dye degrading bacteria and enzymes 
 
Bacterial strains  Dye Enzyme  References  
Lysinibacillus fusiformis Methyl red Enzymatic-Laccase, 
Azoreductase and Lignin 
Peroxidase  Sariand Simarani, 2019 
Pseudomonas extremorientalis  Congo red  Laccase Neifar et al., 2016 
Bacillus subtilis  Acid blue 113   GuruLakshmi  et al., 2008 
Comamonas sp. Direct Red 5B Enzymatic-Laccase and Lignin 
Peroxidase  Jadhav et al., 2008 
EnterococcusFaecalis YZ 66 Reactive Orange II  Sahasrabudhe and patthade, 2011 
Proteus mirabilis Reactive Blue 13 Enzymatic- Laccase, 
azoreductase and 
veratryl alcohol 
oxidase Olukanni et al.,2010 
Aeromonashydrophila, 
Lysinibacillussphaericus  Reactive Red 195 Enzymatic-Laccase 
and Azoreductase  Srinivasan and Sadasivam, 2018 
Aeromonas sp. Methyl orange  laccase, NADH-DCIP reductase, 
and azoreductase  Du et al., 2015 
 
Isolation and screening of azo-dye degrading 
bacteria: 
A large number of azo dye degrading bacteria have 
already been isolated from soil and water from 
industrial area, and effluents from water bodies by 
researchers. Literatures present many examples of 
such various strains that can degrade and 
decolourize the azo dyes. For example, one process 
used for isolating and screening dye degrading 
bacteria was carried out by Khan and Joshi (2020) 
from Rajasthan, India. The authors isolated azo dye 
degrading bacterial strain from water and soil from 
textile industries in Jodhpur province.  Bacillus 
pumilis and Paenibacillus thiaminolyticus  were the 
two bacterial strains which were screened and 
identified by theirbiochemical characteristics.  
Serial dilution and streaking method was used to 
obtain several colonies which were, separately 
inoculated into nutrient broth media. A 10% (v/v)    
inoculum was transferred into 100 mL of mineral 
salt medium (MSM) and incubated at 37 ⁰C at 125 
rpm for 24-48 hrs. 10% (v/v) of the sample was 
sub-cultured into 10 mg/L MSM of the respective 
dyes and further incubated after 24 hrs. Strains 
which were able to utilize the fresh dyes as their 
source of nutrient were plated on Nutrient agar 
plate and incubated at 37 ⁰C. After that pure 
bacterial cultures were transferred into the Nutrient 
broth subsequently (Khadijah et al.,2009). 
Alternatively we can take some carbon free media 
like Bushnell Haas agar media and enrich it with 
respective dyes at different concentrations. After 
the inoculation, we need to check whether the 
growth has appeared or not. If growth appears, we 
can surely say that organism is capable of 
degrading the dyes. This is because Bushnell Haas 
media lacks carbon and here we are using the dye 
in the place of carbon, so if the bacteria are able to A Comprehensive Review on Azo Dye Degrading Bacteria  
 
  
Environment Conservation Journal 
 278utilize the dyes only then they will show growth. 
Many other processes have also been developed by 
other researchers that have been used to isolate and 
screen various other dye degrading bacterial 
species. 
 
Laccase activity assay  : 
Laccase plays an important role in the 
bioremediation of several aromatic compounds. 
Especially they help in dye degradation and  waste 
water detoxification.  The basic reaction 
mechanism of laccase involves the formation of 
two water molecules upon the accompanying 
electron loss of a single oxygen molecule. This 
abstracting electron leads to the oxidation of several 
benzene ring-containing compounds (Solomon et 
al., 1996; Chandra and Chowdhary 2015). With the 
cation generation catalytic activity of the laccase 
plays an important role in the degradation of 
aromatic compounds. As these cations are less 
stable, in the presence of laccase they converted to 
the stable product ( quinine → phenol). Due to the 
presence of four copper atoms that forms the 
central part of this reaction, the redox mechanism 
takes place. The mechanism is given in Figure 
number 1. They are classified into three types –  
type 1 copper (T1Cu), type 2 copper (T2Cu) and 
type 3 copper (T3Cu). Near the T1- copper center ( 
shallower than the oxygen binding center) substrate 
molecules are bound. One-electron abstraction 
occurs from the substrate to T1 copper by an outer-
sphere process. That’s why, substrate molecules are 
converted to free radicals which can undergo 
further oxidation or radical coupling reactions. This 
leads to the formation of polymers or oligomers. 
Via a cysteine–histidine pathway that is highly 
conserved among multi-copper oxidases the 
abstracted electron moves from the T1 center to the 
trinuclear cluster. This so-called super-exchange 
pathway is created by overlapping redox active 
molecular orbitals of the T1 coordinating cysteine, 
the backbone atom, and the T3 copper coordinating 
histidine residue (Solomon et al., 2008). Type 2 and 
type 3 copper make up the trinuclear center. After 
oxygen molecules attach to the trinuclear cluster 
and prevent further entry of any other molecules the 
catalytic process begins. The T2Cu site interacts 
with two histidine molecules and one water 
molecule, whereas the T3Cu interacts with three 
histidines and a hydroxide molecule. In the last step, laccase converts the oxygen molecule to water 
in two steps. In the first step, the first electron is 
reduced by T2Cu and T3Cu, while the reduction of 
the second electron is assisted by a peroxide 
mediator that protects the T2Cu site and T1Cu is 
linked to T3Cu through a Cys-His covalent bonds. 
As we have already mentioned, enzymes like 
azoreductase, Peroxidase degrades the dyes with 
the production of aromatic amines which are toxic 
in nature (carcinogenic). But laccase reduce the azo 
dyes to the phenolic compounds. This property is 
advantageous as well as of industrial interest in dye 
degradation process. Therefore various scientists 
did laccase activity assay. For example, Fatemeh 
Sheikhi et al. (2012) Centrifuged (6000 * g) 
bacterial cultures at 4 ⁰c for 20 min to obtain 
cellular debris precipitate and clear supernatants.  
After that they washed bacterial pellets with 
phosphate buffer( 0.1 M, pH 6.5) containing 10mM 
of  phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). They 
used PMSF because it helps to inhibit the activity 
of protease before sonication. Then they obtained 
the cell extract by centrifugation (14000 * g ) for 20 
min at 4⁰c , which was used as a crude intracellular 
enzyme. To remove the effect of H 2O2 produced by 
bacteria assay solution was incubated with catalase 
( 1,000 U/mL; Sigma-Aldrich ) for 1 h at 37 ⁰c. At 
436 nm spectrophotometrically laccase activity was 
determined as described by Niku-Paavola et al. 
with 2, 2- azino - di- [3- ethylbenzo- thiazolin-
sulphonate] (ABTS) as a substrate.  The amount of 
enzyme that oxidized 1 μmol of ABTS per min at 
25 °C was defined as one activity unit (U) and in 
terms of U/L activities were expressed. Also 
laccase activity was determined at 465 nm 
spectrophotometrically using a substrate (2 mM 
guaiacol ) in a reaction mixture containing 50mM 
phosphate buffer. The amount of enzyme that 
increased the absorbance by 0.001 units per min at 
55 °C was defined as one unit of enzyme activity 
(Bainset al.,2003). Here also activities were 
expressed in U/L. Sondhi et al. (2014) also 
measured the laccase activity by governing the 
oxidation of 2 , 6-Dimethoxyphenol, (2, 6-DMP) 
buffered with 100 mM phosphate buffer for 1 min 
at 450 nm. An absorption coefficient of 
14,800 M/cm was used to calculate the enzyme 
activity. According to Ang et al. (2012)the amount 
of enzyme required to oxidise 1μM of 2, 6-DMP 
per minute is defined as the enzyme activity.   
Upadhyay et al.  
 
279 
Environment Conservation Journal 
     
 GMO for dye degradation : 
Nowadays, dye degradation is becoming more and 
more challenging as they are being produced in 
such a way that they resist degradation.  Dyes 
degradation is either achieved by a single treatment 
method or by an integration of physical, chemical 
and biological methods. Interestingly, 
microbiological treatment methods have found 
acceleration due to environmental friendliness, 
improved performance and low cost nature 
(Moharikar et al., 2005). Under environmental 
conditions improvement of dye degradation can be 
achieved using GMOs. A GMO is obtain by 
modifying their genetic material using genetic 
engineering. Functional genes from several 
bacterial strains such as Sphingomonas desiccabilis , 
Escherichia coli , Bacillus idriensis , Pseudomonas 
putida, Mycobacterium marinum , Ralstoni 
aeutropha  are transferred into other species to 
produce GMO for dye degradation (Saxena  et al., 
2019). For example, Jin et al.(2008) and (2009), 
produced Escherichia coli JM109(pGEX-AZR), a 
GMO that was able to degree the dyes– Acid red 
GR and Direct blue 71. Azo reductase gene from a 
subspecies of Rhodobacter sphaeroides  was 
isolated and inserted in the vector pGEX4T-1 and 
then expressed in Escherichia coli  JM109 under the 
control of lac operon.In another attempt, Dixit and 
Garg (2019) reported Methyl orange degradation by 
a GMO Escherichia coli  BL21. Azok gene from a 
Klebsiella pneumoniae  strain was expressed in 
Escherichia coli  DH5 to produce this GMO.Many 
more such GMOs have been developed which 
degrade a variety of dyes. These GMOs 
demonstrate high dye decolorization and 
degradation rate and are instrumental in effective 
bioremediation. 
 
Future prospects : 
Bioremediation using microbes has emerged as a 
promising approach and an eco friendly technology 
of degrading dyes. Enhancing this technology via 
further research is the need of time. Genetic 
engineering and molecular biology tools are already 
being exploited for potential benefits in the field of 
dye degradation and environmental purification. 
Still, more in-depth study of the genetic aspect of 
dye degradation by bacteria along with the study of 
mechanisms of degradation is very much required to have a more clear understanding on how to take 
help from the bacterial world for more efficient and 
complete degradation of dyes, which still stands as 
a challenge. Future research should focus on 
reducing limiting factors upon dye degrading 
microbial activities and improving and enhancing 
the efficiency of already existing bioremediation 
processes. In future, studies can focus on 
introducing non-indigenous bacteria in sites where 
critical dye degrading microbes are absent. Or,  
novel genetic engineering techniques, i.e. 
CRISPR/Cas9, can be used for modifying 
indigenous bacteria into bacteria with dye 
degrading ability.Use of microbial consortia instead 
of a single bacterial species should also be explored 
in the coming years. It would present higher and 
more complete degradation of dyes in shorter time 
as synergistic effects would come into play. 
Searching out the various bacterial strains whose 
enzymatic activity would positively influence and 
supplement each other in degrading dyes can be an 
open wide field for future research. These bacteria 
will be useful in reclaiming the polluted soils 
around dye-related industries and cleaning the 
water bodies where the effluents are dumped. 
Although, use of microbial consortia or a non-
indigenous bacteria and GMO to assist dye 
degradation is a scope for future research, care 
should be taken as adaptation of microbial 
community to a new environment is not always an 
efficient process. Factors like stress due to different 
environmental condition, competition with the 
indigenous species etc. affect the adaptation/ 
acclimatization process. Apart from that, the 
introduced bacteria may also cause changes in the 
environment that might influence the survival of 
both the introduced bacteria as well as the 
indigenous microbial species either positively or 
negatively. This acclimatization process and it’s 
after effects can be monitored by using diversity 
indexes such as Shannon diversity index (1949), 
which is a way to mathematically measure the 
species diversity in a community. Shannon index 
depends on both, species richness as well as species 
evenness and it’s value for ecological studies 
typically varies between 1.5 to 3.5. It increases with 
the increase in both, the richness as well as the 
evenness.   
 A Comprehensive Review on Azo Dye Degrading Bacteria  
 
  
Environment Conservation Journal 
 280It is calculated as: 
 
𝑯 = −𝜮[𝒑𝒊∗ 𝒍𝒏(𝒑𝒊) 
 
Where, H– Shannon diversity index; Σ– Summation; ln– 
Natural log; pi– proportion of entire community made up 
of species ‘i’. 
 
Conclusion  
Dye, the important component involved in 
colouring and decorating the items used in our daily 
lives, becomes intractable and hazardous colouring 
pollutant, toxic for environment and human, 
animals and plant lives, when it is dumped 
untreated into water bodies as dispersed dyed items 
or industrial effluents. In this review article, the 
problem as well as the solution has been discussed 
and we can conclude that, degradation of dyes is a 
huge problem in today’s world and bacterial 
bioremediation is a good way to get rid of it. It is a 
sustainable and green process but a lot still needs to 
be studied and researched. There are factors to  
consider including the maintenance and 
implementation cost of bioreactor, available space for using bioreactor, availability of nutrients under 
optimal conditions, presence of redox mediator for 
proper functioning of azo-dye reducing enzymes 
etc. Despite the limiting factors, the knowledge of 
the bacterial enzymes and the mechanism of dye 
degradation that has been acquired till date has 
been put to use and it has proved to the most 
economic and eco friendly way to overcome dye 
pollution. In recent times, creation of new GMOs 
and use of extensive genetic engineering tools, 
along with the efforts to produce useful microbial 
consortium has been another successful step and 
has additional benefits to improve degradation 
process efficiency. With the fast, new 
developments happening in this field, we can be 
hopeful of more improved processes and maybe 
even complete dye degradation can be 
accomplished in the near future. 
 
Conflict of interest  
The authors declare that they have no conflict of 
interest.  
 
 
References  
Ang, T. N., Ngoh, G. C., Chua, A. S. M., & Lee, M. G. (2012). 
Elucidation of the effect of ionic liquid pretreatment on rice 
husk via structural analyses. Biotechnology for 
biofuels, 5(1), 1-10. 
 
Asad, S., Amoozegar, M. A., Pourbabaee, A., Sarbolouki, M. 
N., &Dastgheib, S. M. M. (2007). Decolorization of textile 
azo dyes by newly isolated halophilic and halotolerant 
bacteria. Bioresource technology , 98(11), 2082-2088. 
 
Bains, J., Capalash, N., & Sharma, P. (2003). Laccase from a 
non-melanogenic, alkalotolerant γ-proteobacterium JB 
isolated from industrial wastewater drained 
soil. Biotechnology Letters , 25, 1155-1159. 
 
Bayoumi, R. A., Musa, S. M., Bahobil, A. S., Louboudy, S. S., 
& El-Sakawey, T. A. (2010). Biodecolorization and 
biodegradation of azo dyes by some bacterial 
isolates. Journal Of Applied Environmental and Biological 
Science, 1(1), 1-25. 
 
Bhutiani, R., Ahamad, F., & Ruhela, M. (2021). Effect of 
composition and depth of filter-bed on the efficiency of 
Sand-intermittent-filter treating the Industrial wastewater at 
Haridwar, India. Journal of Applied and Natural 
Science, 13(1), 88-94. 
 
Bhutiani, R., Tiwari, R. C., Chauhan, P., Ahamad, F., Sharma, 
V. B., Tyagi, I., & Singh, P. (2022). Potential of Cassia   
 
fistula pod-based absorbent in remediating water 
pollutants: An analytical study. In Sustainable Materials 
for Sensing and Remediation of Noxious Pollutants  (pp. 
261-272). Elsevier. 
 
Bell, J., Plumb, J. J., Buckley, C. A., & Stuckey, D. C. (2000). 
Treatment and decolorization of dyes in an anaerobic 
baffled reactor. Journal of Environmental 
Engineering , 126(11), 1026-1032. 
 
Boonyakamol, A., Imai, T., Chairattanamanokorn, P., Higuchi, 
T., Sekine, M., &Ukita, M. (2009). Reactive Blue 4 
decolorization under mesophilic and thermophilic 
anaerobic treatments. Applied biochemistry and 
biotechnology , 152, 405-417. 
 
Chandra, R., &Chowdhary, P. (2015). Properties of bacterial 
laccases and their application in bioremediation of 
industrial wastes. Environmental Science: Processes & 
Impacts, 17(2), 326-342. 
 
Chen, C. H., Chang, C. F., Ho, C. H., Tsai, T. L., & Liu, S. M. 
(2008). Biodegradation of crystal violet by a Shewanella 
sp. NTOU1. Chemosphere , 72(11), 1712-1720. 
 
Chivukula, M., &Renganathan, V. (1995). Phenolic azo dye 
oxidation by laccase from Pyriculariaoryzae. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology , 61(12), 4374-4377. 
  
Upadhyay et al.  
 
281 
Environment Conservation Journal 
     
 Dixit, S., & Garg, S. (2019). Development of an efficient 
recombinant bacterium and its application in the 
degradation of environmentally hazardous azo 
dyes. International Journal of Environmental Science and 
Technology , 16, 7137-7146. 
 
Du, L. N., Li, G., Zhao, Y. H., Xu, H. K., Wang, Y., Zhou, Y., 
& Wang, L. (2015). Efficient metabolism of the azo dye 
methyl orange by Aeromonas sp. strain DH-6: 
characteristics and partial mechanism. International 
Biodeterioration& Biodegradation , 105, 66-72. 
 
Garg, S. K., Tripathi, M., Singh, S. K., & Tiwari, J. K. (2012). 
Biodecolorization of textile dye effluent by Pseudomonas 
putida SKG-1 (MTCC 10510) under the conditions 
optimized for monoazo dye orange II color removal in 
simulated minimal salt medium. International 
biodeterioration& biodegradation , 74, 24-35. 
 
Gurulakshmi, M., Sudarmani, D. N. P., &Venba, R. (2008). 
Biodegradation of leather acid dye by Bacillus 
subtilis. Advanced  Biotech , 7, 12-19. 
 
Hadibarata, T., Yusoff, A. R. M., Aris, A., Hidayat, T., 
&Kristanti, R. A. (2012). Decolorization of azo, 
triphenylmethane and anthraquinone dyes by laccase of a 
newly isolated Armillaria sp. F022. Water, Air, & Soil 
Pollution, 223, 1045-1054. 
 
Haley, T. J. (1975). Benzidine revisited: a review of the 
literature and problems associated with the use of 
benzidine and its congeners. Clinical toxicology , 8(1), 13-
42. 
He, F., Hu, W., & Li, Y. (2004). Biodegradation mechanisms 
and kinetics of azo dye 4BS by a microbial 
consortium. Chemosphere , 57(4), 293-301. 
 
Houk, J.M., Doa, A., Dezube, M., and Rovinski, J.M. (1991). 
Evaluation of dyes submitted under the toxic substances 
control act new chemical programme. In: Color Chemistry. 
Elsevier Science Publishers Ltd., London , pp. 135 150. 
 
Jadhav, U. U., Dawkar, V. V., Ghodake, G. S., &Govindwar, 
S. P. (2008). Biodegradation of Direct Red 5B, a textile 
dye by newly isolated Comamonas sp. UVS. Journal of 
Hazardous Materials , 158(2-3), 507-516. 
 
Jadhav, S. U., Kalme, S. D., &Govindwar, S. P. (2008). 
Biodegradation of methyl red by Galactomycesgeotrichum 
MTCC 1360. International Biodeterioration& 
Biodegradation , 62(2), 135-142. 
 
Jin, R. F., Zhou, J. T., Zhang, A. L., & Wang, J. (2008). 
Bioaugmentation of the decolorization rate of acid red GR 
by genetically engineered microorganism Escherichia coli 
JM109 (pGEX-AZR). World Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology , 24, 23-29. 
Jin, R., Yang, H., Zhang, A., Wang, J., & Liu, G. (2009). 
Bioaugmentation on decolorization of CI Direct Blue 71 by 
using genetically engineered strain Escherichia coli JM109 (pGEX-AZR). Journal of hazardous materials , 163(2-3), 
1123-1128. 
 
Kagalkar, A. N., Jagtap, U. B., Jadhav, J. P., Govindwar, S. P., 
&Bapat, V. A. (2010). Studies on phytoremediation 
potentiality of Typhoniumflagelliforme for the degradation 
of Brilliant Blue R. Planta, 232, 271-285. 
 
Kandelbauer, A.; Guebitz, G.M. (2005). Bioremediation for the 
Decolorization of Textile Dyes—A Review. In: Lichtfouse, 
E., Schwarzbauer, J., Robert, D. (eds), Environmental 
Chemistry (269–288). Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, 
Germany. (ISBN 978-3-540-22860-8) 
 
Khadijah, O., Lee, K. K., &MohdFaiz, F. A. (2009). Isolation, 
screening and development of local bacterial consortia with 
azo dyes decolourising capability. Malaysian Journal of 
Microbiology, 5, 25-32. 
 
Khan, S., & Joshi, N. (2020). Molecular identification of dye 
degrading bacterial isolates and FT-IR analysis of degraded 
products. Environmental Engineering Research , 25(4), 
561-570. 
 
Lin, Y. H., &Leu, J. Y. (2008). Kinetics of reactive azo-dye 
decolorization by Pseudomonas luteola in a biological 
activated carbon process. Biochemical Engineering 
Journal, 39(3), 457-467. 
 
Mani, S., &Bharagava, R. N. (2016,a). Exposure to crystal 
violet, its toxic, genotoxic and carcinogenic effects on 
environment and its degradation and detoxification for 
environmental safety. Reviews of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology Volume 237 , 71-104. 
 
Mani, S. and Bharagava, R.N. (2016,b). Microbial degradation 
and decolorization of dyes from Textile industry 
wastewater. In: Bharagava, R.N. and Saxena, G. (1stEd) 
Bioremediation Of Industrial Pollutants.  Write & Print 
Publications New Delhi, 110 015. (ISBN: 978-93-84649-
60-9). 
 
Moharikar, A., Purohit, H. J., & Kumar, R. (2005). Microbial 
population dynamics at effluent treatment plants. Journal 
of Environmental Monitoring , 7(6), 552-558. 
 
Naik, C., & Singh, C. R. (2012). Isolation screening and 
development of Bacillus sps with decolorization and 
degradation capabilities towards reactive dyes and textile 
effluents. Recent Research in Science and Technology, 4, 
1–5. 
 
Neifar, M., Chouchane, H., Mahjoubi, M., Jaouani, A., 
&Cherif, A. (2016). Pseudomonas extremorientalis BU118: 
a new salt-tolerant laccase-secreting bacterium with 
biotechnological potential in textile azo dye 
decolourization. 3 Biotech , 6, 1-9. 
 
Olukanni, O. D., Osuntoki, A. A., &Gbenle, G. O. (2006). 
Textile effluent biodegradation potentials of textile A Comprehensive Review on Azo Dye Degrading Bacteria  
 
  
Environment Conservation Journal 
 282effluent-adapted and non-adapted bacteria. African Journal 
of Biotechnology , 5(20), 1980-1984. 
 
Olukanni, O. D., Osuntoki, A. A., Kalyani, D. C., Gbenle, G. 
O., &Govindwar, S. P. (2010). Decolorization and 
biodegradation of Reactive Blue 13 by Proteus mirabilis 
LAG. Journal of Hazardous Materials , 184(1-3), 290-298. 
 
Pasti-Grigsby, M. B., Paszczynski, A., Goszczynski, S., 
Crawford, D. L., & Crawford, R. L. (1992). Influence of 
aromatic substitution patterns on azo dye degradability by 
Streptomyces spp. and Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium . Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology , 58(11), 3605-3613. 
 
Paszczynski, A., Pasti, M. B., Goszczynski, S., Crawford, D. 
L., & Crawford, R. L. (1991). New approach to improve 
degradation of recalcitrant azo dyes by Streptomyces spp. 
and Phanerochaetechrysosporium. Enzyme and Microbial 
Technology , 13(5), 378-384. 
 
Puvaneswari, N., Muthukrishnan, J., &Gunasekaran, P. (2006). 
Toxicity assessment and microbial degradation of azo 
dyes. Indian journal of experimental biology , 44(8), 618–
626. 
 
Ruhela, M., Jena, B. K., Bhardawaj, S., Bhutiani, R., & 
Ahamad, F. (2021). Efficiency of Pistia stratiotes in the 
treatment of municipal solid waste leachate in an upwards 
flow constructed wetland system. Ecology Environment & 
Conservation 27 (February Suppl. Issue): 2021;  pp. (S235-
S244). 
 
Sahasrabudhe, M. M., &Pathade, G. R. (2011). Biodegradation 
of sulphonated azo dye CI reactive orange 16 by 
Enterococcus faecalis strain YZ 66. European Journal of 
Experimental Biology , 1(1), 163-173. 
 
Sari, I. P., &Simarani, K. (2019). Decolorization of selected 
azo dye by Lysinibacillus fusiformis W1B6: 
Biodegradation optimization, isotherm, and kinetic study 
biosorption mechanism. Adsorption Science & 
Technology , 37(5-6), 492-508. 
 
Saxena, G., Kishor, R., Saratale, G.D., Bharagava, R.N., 
(2019). Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs) and their 
Potential in Environmental Management: Constraints 
prospects, and Challenges. In: Bharagava, R., Saxena, G. 
(Eds.). Bioremediation of Industrial Waste for 
Environmental Safety  (1-19). Springer, Singapore. 
 
Shannon, C.E. and Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical 
Theory of Communication . Urbana, IL: The University of 
Illinois Press , 1-117. 
 
Sheikhi, F., RoayaeiArdakani, M., Enayatizamir, N., & 
Rodriguez-Couto, S. (2012). The determination of assay  
 
 
 
 for laccase of Bacillus subtilis WPI with two classes of 
chemical compounds as substrates. Indian journal of 
microbiology , 52, 701-707. 
 
Solomon, E. I., Augustine, A. J., & Yoon, J. (2008). O 2 
Reduction to H2O by the multicopper oxidases. Dalton 
Transactions , (30), 3921-3932. 
 
Solomon, E. I., Sundaram, U. M., &Machonkin, T. E. (1996). 
Multicopper oxidases and oxygenases. Chemical 
reviews, 96(7), 2563-2606. 
 
Sondhi, S., Sharma, P., Saini, S., Puri, N., & Gupta, N. (2014). 
Purification and characterization of an extracellular, 
thermo-alkali-stable, metal tolerant laccase from Bacillus 
tequilensis SN4. PloS one, 9(5), e96951. 
 
Srinivasan, S., &Sadasivam, S. K. (2018). Exploring docking 
and aerobic-microaerophilic biodegradation of textile azo 
dye by bacterial systems. Journal of water process 
engineering , 22, 180-191. 
 
Sudha, M., Bakiyaraj, G., Saranya, A., Sivakumar, N., 
&Selvakumar, G. (2018). Prospective assessment of the 
Enterobacteraerogenes PP002 in decolorization and 
degradation of azo dyes DB 71 and DG 28. Journal of 
environmental chemical engineering , 6(1), 95-109. 
 
Stolz, A. (2001). Basic and applied aspects in the microbial 
degradation of azo dyes. Applied microbiology and 
biotechnology , 56, 69-80. 
 
Tian, Y. S., Xu, H., Peng, R. H., Yao, Q. H., & Wang, R. T. 
(2014). Heterologous expression and characterization of 
laccase 2 from Coprinopsiscinerea capable of 
decolourizing different recalcitrant dyes. Biotechnology & 
Biotechnological Equipment , 28(2), 248-258. 
 
Vijaykumar, M. H., Vaishampayan, P. A., Shouche, Y. S., 
&Karegoudar, T. B. (2007). Decolourization of 
naphthalene-containing sulfonated azo dyes by Kerstersia 
sp. strain VKY1. Enzyme and Microbial 
Technology , 40(2), 204-211. 
 
Zimmermann, T., Gasser, F., Kulla, H. G., &Leisinger, T. 
(1984). Comparison of two bacterial azoreductases 
acquired during adaptation to growth on azo dyes. Archives 
of Microbiology , 138, 37-43. 
 
Zimmermann, T., Kulla, H. G., &Leisinger, T. (1982). 
Properties of purified Orange II azoreductase, the enzyme 
initiating azo dye degradation by Pseudomonas 
KF46. European Journal of Biochemistry , 129(1), 197-203 
 
Publisher's Note : ASEA remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and figures. 