energies
Review
The Environmental Bioreﬁnery: Using Microalgae to
Remediate Wastewater, a Win-Win Paradigm
Florian Delrue1,*, Pablo David Álvarez-Díaz1, Sophie Fon-Sing2, Gatien Fleury1and
Jean-François Sassi1
1CEA Cadarache, Groupe Biomasse 3G, Saint-Paul-lez-Durance F-13108, France;
pablo.alvarez@cea.fr (P .D.A.-D.); Gatien.ﬂeury@cea.fr (G.F.); jean-francois.sassi@cea.fr (J.-F.S.)
2Aix Marseille Université, CNRS, UMR 7281 Laboratoire de Bioénergétique et Ingénierie des Protéines,
31 Chemin Joseph AIguier, Marseille F-13402, France; sophie.fonsing@cea.fr
*Correspondence: ﬂorian.delrue@cea.fr; Tel.: +33-4-42-25-72-22
Academic Editor: Paul L. Chen
Received: 20 December 2015; Accepted: 18 February 2016; Published: 25 February 2016
Abstract: Microalgae have been shown to be a source of multiple bio-based products ranging from
high value molecules to commodities. Along with their potential to produce a large variety of
products, microalgae can also be used for the depollution of wastewaters of different origins (urban,
industrial, and agricultural). This paper is focused on the importance of harnessing the bioremediation
capacity of microalgae to treat wastewaters in order to develop the microalgae industry (especially
the microalgae biofuel industry) and to ﬁnd other alternatives to the classic wastewater treatment
processes. The current research on the potential of microalgae to treat a speciﬁc wastewater or a
targeted pollutant is reviewed and discussed. Then, both strategies of selecting the best microalgae
strain to treat a speciﬁc wastewater or pollutant and using a natural or an artiﬁcial consortium to
perform the treatment will be detailed. The process options for treating wastewaters using microalgae
will be discussed up to the ﬁnal valorization of the biomass. The last part is dedicated to the challenges
which research need to address in order to develop the potential of microalgae to treat wastewaters.
Keywords: wastewater treatment; bioremediation; microalgae; biofuel; water and nutrient recycling
1. Complementarity between the Wastewater Treatment and the Microalgae Industries
Microalgae have multiple potential applications, of which the most promising future objective
on a large-scale is their use as a biofuel feedstock [ 1]. A number of microalgae-based products are
already well established in other high-value markets, for example as a human dietary supplement
(nutraceuticals) and as a component in animal feed [ 2]. Nevertheless, considerable advances in the ﬁeld
of biology and substantial processing improvements are required to achieve economic, environmental,
and energetic sustainability in the production of microalgae biofuels [ 3]. Wastewater constitutes a
great opportunity for microalgae as it can be considered as a medium for growing them at a low-cost
and as a new potential market. Through their various modes of nutrition (phototrophy, heterotrophy,
mixotrophy), microalgae can effectively remove a broad range of chemicals from aqueous matrices.
Amongst the various strategies possible for economical large-scale production of microalgal biomass,
a coupling of wastewater treatment with algal farming is possibly the most sensible due to the similar
scale and production facilities that both industries rely on (as it will be illustrated and discussed in this
article). The additional beneﬁt from such coupling is the promotion of on-site local industries and more
importantly, the elimination of a large negative environmental footprint that would otherwise arise
from the pollution associated with nutrient manufacturing, transportation and change in land use.
Energies 2016 ,9, 132; doi:10.3390/en9030132 www.mdpi.com/journal/energiesEnergies 2016 ,9, 132 2 of 19
1.1. Microalgae Industry: A Need for Wastewater
Several studies have shown that the use of wastewater is a necessity for the development of the
microalgae biofuel production industry [ 4–7]. Microalgae production is done at a very high cost nowadays.
Actual costs are in the order of magnitude of 100  /kg of biomass. For example, The production cost
of a real microalgae production plant of 30 m3of tubular photobioreactors was estimated to be 69  /kg
of dry weight using data collected during two years of continuous operation [ 4]. In France, spirulina,
a well-known easy-to-cultivate cyanobacteria, is usually sold at a price of 150–200  /kg of dry weight.
The two main contributing factors to the high price are the unoptimised processes employed as well as
the small-scale of operations (economies of scale). Future costs of large-scale production are estimated
through techno-economic extrapolations. The results vary greatly between studies depending on the
hypotheses and the value chosen for the key parameters (such as lipid productivity). On average, the
estimated production cost of microalgae biodiesel is around 2.5  /L [8]. Still, these costs are too high to
address the current energy market (0.6  /L for petroleum diesel) and not competitive enough to convince
the petrochemical industry that microalgae could become a valuable feedstock even in the long term.
The major challenge of microalgae biofuel production is to reduce the production cost. Limiting the use
of industrial nutrients could contribute since they have a non-negligible impact on the production cost
(between 1% and 10% depending on the process [3]).
In addition, nutrients and water have to be used rationally due to three major facts: (1) life
cycle analyses have shown that nutrients have a high impact on the environmental efﬁciencies of the
microalgae production [ 9]; (2) water scarcity is a well-known global problem [ 10]; and (3) phosphorus is
a non-renewable resource [ 11]. These economic and environmental drawbacks can be partly overcome
by using wastewater (industrial, agricultural or urban) as growth substrate for microalgal biomass
production. The demand for freshwater and industrial nutrients can be signiﬁcantly reduced, thus
bringing down the production cost and environmental impact of the whole process. Additionally, the
cost of wastewater treatment using conventional processes can be as high as 0.682 $/m3if membrane
bioreactors are used [12]. Part or of this cost can be recuperated in the form of credits for the positive
environmental impact created by wastewater remediation by microalgae.
1.2. Microalgae, an Opportunity for the Wastewater Treatment Industry
In recent years, concern has grown over the presence of Pharmaceutical and Personal Care Products
(PPCPs, Endocrine Disrupting Compounds (EDCs) and heavy metals in water. In Europe, the Water
Framework Directive (Directive 2000/60/EC) does not require wastewater treatment plants to treat
these micropollutants but it has listed a number of substances that need to be monitored by member
states. Additionally , the REACH regulation (2006) has strengthened the EU regulation by requiring the
evaluation of the risks of 30,000 chemical substances. The European Union IPPC (Directive 2008/1/CE) and
then the Industrial Emission Related Directive (Directive 2010/75/UE) have replaced Water Framework
Directive. These directives request the application of the best available techniques (BAT) taking into
account technically and economically preventive measures, pollution control technologies and efficient
resource consumption. Considering the bioremediation capabilities of microalgae, there is therefore a niche
opportunity to develop and implement new microalgae based wastewater bioremediation technologies.
In the US, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has included 12 PPCPs/EDCs substances in a
list in order to evaluate their related occurrence and safety risks. However, no requirement exists on
concentration levels of these pollutants in water (drinking or treated water).
Microalgae are known to be pollutant scavengers for a broad category of chemicals issued from
the domestic, industrial and agricultural sectors. Besides the usual organic and inorganic compounds
present in the wastewater, i.e., nitrates, phosphates, ammonium, microalgal cells can also assimilate
and break down more persisting molecules such as hydrocarbons, antibiotics, PPCPs, EDCs and heavy
metals. While bioremediation of excess nutrients in the water by microalgae has been extensively
documented over many years, in comparison, little is known about their degradation capacity and
efﬁciency for micropollutants (pollutants with toxic effect at very low concentration [13].Energies 2016 ,9, 132 3 of 19
Concerns over micropollutants are rising and regulation is expected to become more stringent
and rigorous over time. Conventional activated sludge processes or chemical processes can be
ineffective for treating some organic pollutants. In the French AMPERES project, 97 substances
were followed and 24 of them showed conventional activated sludge treatment efﬁciency below
30% [ 14]. Therefore, water companies are developing dedicated treatment processes in order to reduce
the level of micropollutants in the efﬂuent water of wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). Using
microalgae can offer an alternative for treating these molecules. In an extensive review on the ability
of microalgae to degrade organic pollutants, the authors have listed the organic pollutants that have
been successfully treated using microalgae [ 15]. The major advantage of using microalgae is that
decreasing concentration of pollutant will not limit their growth as opposed to strictly heterotrophic
microorganisms. Moreover, microalgae can contribute to the sequestration of carbon (CO 2), coming
from the atmosphere or industrial ﬂue gases, thereby contributing to the mitigation of greenhouse
gases (GHG) emissions. In addition, the aquatic ecology in wastewater represents a suitable farming
ground for microalgae. The relation between microalgae and bacteria is indeed very synergetic [ 16].
Microalgae provide oxygen for bacteria while bacteria provide carbon dioxide for microalgae, this
leads to a signiﬁcant decrease in the oxygen needs of the wastewater treatment process. Oxygen
aeration represents more than 50% of the energetic needs of a WWTP [ 17]. Bringing oxygen through
microalgae photosynthesis without any energy consumption can therefore lead to important savings
in terms of energy demand, GHG emission and electricity cost for the WWTP .
2. Current Knowledge on Microalgae to Treat Wastewaters
The potential of microalgae to treat wastewaters has been evaluated through three different
approaches: (1) the efﬁciency of microalgae-based high-rate algal ponds (HRAPs) treating urban
wastewater; (2) the ability of microalgae to treat speciﬁc wastewaters (agricultural or industrial) and;
(3) the ability of microalgae to treat a speciﬁc pollutant (generally a micropollutant or an industrial
pollutant). These three approaches will be reviewed and discussed in this section. Table 1 gathers
typical examples of studies where microalgae have been used to remove a speciﬁc pollutant.
2.1. Urban Wastewater Treatment
The three main pollutants found in urban wastewaters are carbon (C), nitrogen (N) and
phosphorus (P). The ability of microalgae to treat mineral pollution such as mineralized forms of
nitrogen (ammonium, NH 4+or nitrate, NO 3) and phosphorus (phosphate, PO 43) is well known and
documented. Since the 1950’s, extensive studies have been done by Prof. Oswald and his team of the
University of California. For example, they observed very good removal rates for ammonium (NH 4+-N,
85%–90%) and phosphorus (PO 43-P , 95%–99%) in two 1000 m2pilot-scale HRAPs [ 18]. Since then, a
lot of other studies have demonstrated the ability of microalgae to treat urban wastewater and focused
mainly on process intensiﬁcation. For example, urban wastewater treatment has been managed on the
long-term and a mean biomass productivity of 16.7 g/m2/day (maximum of 24.7 g/m2/day) being
obtained in a pilot-scale HRAP working at four days of hydraulic retention time (HRT) [19].
Besides mineral pollutants, microalgae can also reduce the organic loading rate (C). Several
studies have shown this aspect. For example, 70% chemical oxygen demand (COD) reduction (3000
to 400 mgO 2/L) in 13 days was obtained on a centrate from urban WWTP by a PBR inoculated with
Chlorella sp. [ 20]. A mix of Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp. in a pilot-scale 16 m2open pond could
remove 90% of the COD of an urban wastewater (from 180 to less than 20 mgO 2/L, [ 21]). More recently,
microalgae have been shown to grow on different carbon substrates in wastewater open ponds, from
simple molecules (glucose, lactose) up to quite complex ones ( -cyclodextrin, Tween 40 and 80) [22].Energies 2016 ,9, 132 4 of 19
Table 1. Typical examples of studies on the use of microalgae to degrade speciﬁc pollutant.
Reference Microalgae Species Pollutant TemperatureCulture
VolumeAgitation Light Intensity Light Mode Carbon Source Removal Rate
[23]Chlorella vulgaris and
Coenochloris pyrenoidosap-chlorophenol 25C150 mL in
250 mL ﬂasks100 RPM 52.5mol s1m216 h light/8 h dark CO 2 10 mg/L/day
[24] Scenedesmus obliquus 2,3-dichlorophenol 30C 50 mL bottle - 50–60 mol s1m224 h light glucose 9 mol/day
[24] Scenedesmus obliquus 2,4-dichlorophenol 30C 50 mL bottle - 51–60 mol s1m224 h light glucose 10 mol/day
[24] Scenedesmus obliquus 2,5-dichlorophenol 30C 50 mL bottle - 52–60 mol s1m224 h light glucose 9 mol/day
[24] Scenedesmus obliquus 2,6-dichlorophenol 30C 50 mL bottle - 53–60 mol s1m224 h light glucose 13 mol/day
[24] Scenedesmus obliquus 3,4-dichlorophenol 30C 50 mL bottle - 54–60 mol s1m224 h light glucose 6 mol/day
[24] Scenedesmus obliquus 3,5-dichlorophenol 30C 50 mL bottle - 55–60 mol s1m224 h light glucose 0 mol/day
[25] Scenedesmus obliquus progesterone 25C150 mL in
250 mL ﬂasks150 RPM 3000 lux 12 h light/12 h dark carbonate and CO 2 0.3mol/day
[25] Chlorella pyrenoidosa progesterone 25C150 mL in
250 mL ﬂasks150 RPM 3000 lux 12 h light/12 h dark carbonate and CO 2 0.3mol/day
[25] Scenedesmus obliquus norgestrel 25C150 mL in
250 mL ﬂasks150 RPM 3000 lux 12 h light/12 h dark carbonate and CO 2 0.3mol/day
[25] Chlorella pyrenoidosa norgestrel 25C150 mL in
250 mL ﬂasks150 RPM 3000 lux 12 h light/12 h dark carbonate and CO 2 0.2mol/day
[26] Chlorella pyrenoidosa triclosan 22C100 mL in
250 mL ﬂasks120 RPM 4000 lux 16 h light/8 h dark acetate 104 mg/L/h
[27]Consortium with
Chlorella vulgaristetracycline 10.0–17.5C14 L fed-batch
HRAP- 10 W PAR m224h light atmospheric CO 2Not calculated but
continuous degradation
[28] Chlorococcum sp. -endosulfan 22C5 mL glass
test tubes- 2000 lux 24 h light atmospheric CO 2 0.135 mg/L/day
[28] Scenedesmus sp. -endosulfan 22C5 mL glass
test tubes- 2000 lux 24 h light atmospheric CO 2 0.140 mg/L/day
[29] Review of 63 bioremediation cases out of 265 microalgae-heavy metal couples (other cases are adsorption experiments on dead cells with or without pretreatment)—pH from 4 to 9 From 0.02 to 1378 mg/g
[30]Selenastrum
capricornutumPAHs + heavy metals 22C100mL in
250 mL ﬂasks160 RPM 40mol s1m216 h light/8 h dark atmospheric CO 2Positive effect of heavy
metals on PAHs removalEnergies 2016 ,9, 132 5 of 19
This study showed that out of the ﬁve strains of green algae (3 Scenedesmus sp. and 2 Chlorella sp.)
exposed to 31 types of carbon substrates, two of the algae could effectively grow on two thirds
of the substrates, thus highlighting the wide adaptation capacity of microalgae to various organic
compounds. Tertiary wastewater can also be efﬁciently treated using microalgae. Three strains
(Scenedesmus obliquus ,Chlorella vulgaris ,Chlorella kessleri ) and a natural bloom were successfully grown
on a treated wastewater submitted to pretreatment, primary settling, activated sludge and secondary
settling [ 31]. The treated water could then meet the most restrictive currently imposed water regulation
(European Directive 98/15/CE).
Anaerobic digestion is the most frequent process for the treatment of activated sludge produced
during urban wastewater treatment. It produces a biogas and also high loads of nitrogen (in the form
NH 4+) and phosphorus (in the form PO 43) in their liquid efﬂuents. These nitrogen and phosphorus
are a result of protein and organic matter transformation [ 32]. Therefore, wastewater treatment plants
with anaerobic digestion processes have to include speciﬁc processes in order to treat this excess of
nitrogen and phosphorus in their efﬂuents or, otherwise, recirculate these efﬂuents into the process
ﬁnally accounting for about 20% of the total pollutant loading rate [ 33]. These higher nitrogen and
phosphorus loading rates imply additional energy consumption for aeration for nitriﬁcation, and an
extension of the plant size or the addition of chemicals for phosphorus removal [ 34]. Therefore, the
ability of microalgae to treat these anaerobic digestion efﬂuents has been studied. The color can be
problematic for light penetration but after dilution, batch experiments have shown great nitrogen
and phosphorus removal rates (8.5 mgN-NH 4+/L/d for [ 35] and 99% reduction of nitrogen and
phosphorus concentrations after 21 days for [ 36]). These results obtained in batch cultures need to
be conﬁrmed on continuous pilot-scale experiments where dilution can be more easily managed by
adjusting the HRT.
2.2. Industrial or Agricultural Wastewater Treatment
Another research approach for the use of microalgae in wastewater treatment is to evaluate
the ability of some microalgae strains to remove pollution from speciﬁc wastewaters (industrial or
agricultural) which are poorly treated using the conventional activated sludge process.
Industrial wastewaters from molasses-based distilleries are generated in large volumes (15 L
of efﬂuent per liter of alcohol produced) with high Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) and COD
concentrations (average ranges of 40–50 gO 2/L and 80–100 gO 2/L, respectively) [ 37]. The COD of a
pH-adjusted alcohol distillery wastewater (pH = 6.0–7.0) could be decreased from 20 to 1.5 gO 2/L in
3 days in a 50 L PBR using Chlorella sorokiniana (with a 95% decrease in nitrate, 77% in phosphate and
35% in sulfate) [38].
Numerous other industrial wastewaters can be treated using microalgae. For example, microalgae
can also be efﬁcient in treating wastewaters from the pulp and paper industry. A consortium from
a stabilization pond was able to remove up to 58% of COD, 84% of color and 80% of adsorbable
organic halogens (AOX) from a diluted pulp and paper industry wastewater [ 39]. The treatment
of dairy wastewaters by microalgae has also been studied. The level of nitrate could be reduced
by 90%, ammonia by 90%, phosphorus by 70% and COD by 60% in a dairy wastewater using
Chlamydomonas polypyrenoideum in 10 days in 250 mL ﬂasks [ 40]. Using an outdoor 40L PBR, Chlorella
sp. was able to reach removal rates of 41.31, 6.58, and 2.74 mg/L/day for COD, total nitrogen (TN)
and total phosphorus (TP) respectively when grown on a dairy wastewater [ 41]. Microalgae can
also process oil reﬁnery wastewaters: 97% reduction of ammonium, 69% reduction of TN and 90%
reduction in TP have been obtained after three days of batch treatment [ 42]. Carpet wastewaters
have been successfully processed by a consortium of 15 native microalgae isolated from these carpet
wastewaters [ 43]. The process could efﬁciently reduce the pollution in 10 days in four 950 L raceway
ponds, namely the COD (from 1 412 mgO 2/L to 106–183 mgO 2/L), the BOD (from 331–487 mgO 2/L to
2–21 mgO 2/L), the Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen (TKN, from 32.6–45.9 mg/L to 3.97–5.53 mg/L) and PO 43
(from 20.31–35.10 mg/L to 17.59–21.95 mg/L).Energies 2016 ,9, 132 6 of 19
Acid mine drainage (AMD) is another type of wastewater that causes major environmental
pollution in countries having historic or current mining industries. Pilot-scale experiments in
1 m3biological treatment test cells have been performed to treat AMD. A cyanobacterial-microbial
consortium trapped in a substrate (containing powdered goat manure, wood chips, and soil) was used,
forming a microbial mat [ 44]. Promising removal rates were observed for metals: 95% for Fe, 79%–97%
for Cu, 84%–86% for Zn, 88% for Pb, 59%–83% for Co, 22%–62% for Ni, and 28%–45% for Mn.
Microalgae are also effective for treating agricultural wastewaters. For example, 97 strains were
screened for treating 20-fold diluted swine manure wastewater [ 45]. Two of them were selected
(growth rate of 0.536 and 0.433 d1) and validated in a two-step culture (ﬁrst mixotrophic and then
photoautotrophic). Olive mill wastewaters can also been treated using microalgae using Scenedesmus
sp. for example, although phenolic compounds inhibited the depollution [46].
2.3. Speciﬁc Pollutant Degradation: Types and Mechanisms
Many studies have also investigated the potential of microalgae to degrade speciﬁc pollutants
(PPCPS, EDCs, heavy metals, . . . ). Typical examples will be reviewed in this section, and also gathered
in Table 1. For example, a review) has listed a high number of micropollutants (over 25) for which
degradation by microalgae has been studied [ 15]. For example, p-chlorophenol can be degraded at a
rate of 10 mg/L/day by a consortium of two species ( Chlorella vulgaris and Coenochloris pyrenoidosa )
isolated from a water polluted with several aromatic pollutants [ 23]. It has been shown that the
degradation of phenolic compounds is directly related to photosynthesis for Scenedesmus obliquus [24].
This green alga is capable of degrading phenol at a concentration of 1.5 mM (141 mg/L) and in some
cases dichlorophenols when a carbon source and light are provided.
Hormones can also be transformed by microalgae [ 25]. In a 5 days experiment, Scenedesmus
obliquus and Chlorella pyrenoidosa degraded 1.6 M (0.5 mg/L) of progesterone (>95% reduction)
or 1.6 M (0.5 mg/L) of norgestrel (100% for S. obliquus and 60% for C. pyrenoidosa ). Hormones
were transformed by the microalgae via hydroxylation, hydrogenation and dehydrogenation [ 25].
Chlorella pyrenoidosa was also very efﬁcient in degrading triclosan, a commonly used biocide [ 26].
The authors noted that C. pyrenoidosa could remove 50% of triclosan at 800 mg/L in one hour. Also,
77.2% of triclosan at 800 mg/L could be degraded within 4 days. Antibiotics can be processed using
microalgae as well. For example, tetracycline, a veterinary antibiotic, could also be removed in a
HRAP by photodegradation [ 27]. HRAP as compared to the conventional activated sludge process
offers the additional advantage that the water is retained in much shallower ponds, thereby allowing
better light penetration through the water column. Not only does the shallow depth promote better
photon capture by the algal photosynthetic apparatus, it also enhances the photodegradation of
photosensitive molecules.
Endocrine disruptors are another major class of micropollutants. Chlorococcum sp. and Scenedesmus
sp. have been shown to degrade two endocrine disrupting chemicals, -endosulfan (a cyclodiene
insecticide) and to a lesser extent its oxidation product, endosulfan sulfate, through biosorption and
then biotransformation [ 28]. However, at high concentrations, endocrine disruptors can be toxic to
microalgae by impacting their photosynthetic activity. Indeed, the photosystem II energy ﬂuxes of
two green microalgae and two cyanobacteria were affected by 4-octylphenol, 4-nonylphenol and
-estradiol [47].
Heavy-metals are pollutants frequently encountered in industrial wastewater. The mechanism of
heavy metal detoxiﬁcation is mediated by class III metallothioneins (MtIII) in microalgae as detailed in
a review focusing on the biological mechanisms of heavy metal accumulation and detoxiﬁcation by
microalgae [ 48]. They have also listed different examples of successful heavy metal bioremediation by
microalgae, and the genus Scenedesmus (U6+, Cu2+, Cd2+, Zn2+) appears to be one of the most efﬁcient
species for bioremediation purposes. A more recent review proposed a well-documented list of heavy
metal bioremediation by microalgae (Cd2+, Co, Cr3+, Cr 2O72, Cu2+, Fe3+, Hg2+, Ni2+, Pb2+, Zn2+)
through detoxiﬁcation and also biosorption (heavy metal bindings on dead microalgae cells) [29].Energies 2016 ,9, 132 7 of 19
Although there is an extended bibliography on the capabilities of algae to treat pollutants, there
are still a lot of possible algae-pollutant(s) combinations that have to be explored. The great microalgae
diversity needs indeed to be explored but the synergistic or antagonistic effects between pollutants
needs also to be investigated. For example, a positive effect of heavy metals on the biodegradation of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by Selenastrum capricornutum was revealed [30].
The literature on the toxicological effects of pollutants on microalgae is also very abundant since
they are often used in ecotoxicological studies. The toxicity of various pollutant classes towards
microalgae has been investigated: fossil fuels [ 49], PFCAs [ 50], organophosphorus compounds [ 51],
organotin compounds [ 52], Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAHs) [ 53], organochlorinated
compounds [ 54],. . .These studies are crucial to gather information on the biological mechanisms that
are impaired by the pollutant as well as to discover resistant microalgae strains.
3. Seeding Approaches for Efﬁcient Bioconversion of Nutrients and Pollutants in Wastewater
Two strategies have been adopted for the inoculation of the process with microalgae: either select
a well-suited microalgae strain through a screening method or allow a natural, indigenous consortium
to evolve and become established in the water.
Screening methods are means to scan the biodiversity in order to determine the best microalgae
strain for a speciﬁc application. It has been used only quite recently for treating a wastewater or
removing a particular pollutant. The growth of 14 strains (from Chlorella ,Haematococcus ,Scenedesmus ,
Chlamydomonas , and Chloroccum ) was tested on centrate ( i.e., the process water coming from the
dewatering processes in a WWTP) [ 55]. All were able to grow and Chlorella kessleri showed the highest
ﬁnal biomass concentration (2.01 g/L). 100 local strains from Quebec (Canada) have been screened
on 12-well plates using artiﬁcial medium (Bold’s Basal Medium) and a real secondary efﬂuent from
a WWTP at 10 and 22C [56]. The authors used criteria such as biomass productivity, lipid content
and nutrient removal. These techniques, combined with latest molecular biology advances can be
very efﬁcient for characterizing microalgae strains and selecting the ones with the highest potential.
However, the results of these screenings cannot be directly applied on the large-scale. The robustness
of the selected strain has to be tested ﬁrst. Wastewaters are contaminated with various microorganisms
that can be detrimental to the microalgae growth. More importantly, the environmental conditions
are constantly varying (mainly climate and wastewater characteristics) and the microalgae have to
withstand and adapt to sustain these changes.
The use of consortia to enhance the wastewater treatment is well documented. A review on
the use of wastewater to bring the microalgae cultivation to economic viability cited numerous
studies stating beneﬁts of consortia, either bacterial-microalgal consortia or consortia between multiple
microalgae strains [ 57]. The microbial interactions were well described in another review [ 16].
The concomitant release of carbon dioxide through bacterial heterotrophy and of oxygen through
algal photosynthesis ensures a gaseous equilibrium in the water which beneﬁts both the algal and
bacterial ﬂora. The synergistic effects between microalgae and bacteria in consortia on pollutant
removal rates have been demonstrated [ 58]. Indeed, the best removal rates of aromatic pollutants
(>85%) were recorded when both microalgae and bacteria were incubated under continuous lighting.
These consortia are less subject to ﬂuctuations in the environmental conditions and more resistant to
contaminations. Moreover, microalgal-microbial ﬂocs settled more easily than microalgal ﬂocs, thereby
creating a natural bioﬂocculation phenomenon which is very important for efﬁcient harvesting of the
biomass [ 59]. The treatment of aquaculture wastewater was tested using axenic and non-axenic culture
ofChlorella sp.,Scendesmus sp. and an indigenous consortium [ 60]. The authors found that microalgae
were good at removing nitrogen but that bacteria were needed for removing organic pollutants.
Furthermore, microalgae growth can be promoted by bacteria [ 61]. Better chlorophyll acontent
was also obtained in the co-cultures of Chlorella vulgaris and Bacillus licheniformis than in the cultures
ofChlorella vulgaris alone. Additionally, the best removal rates for NH 4+and TP were obtained for
the co-cultures in comparison to single cultures. When treating urban polluted river with NeochlorisEnergies 2016 ,9, 132 8 of 19
oleoabundans , a natural bacterial consortium would develop itself with other native green microalgae
and diatoms [62]. This consortium could more efﬁciently remove nitrogen and phosphate.
Consortia of multiple microalgae strains are also of great interest. The potential for wastewater
treatment of these consortia have been investigated. For example, a microalgal consortium of more
than 20 strains was shown to remove total organic carbon (TOC, 86%), TN (90%), Ammonia (89%),
TP (70%) and Orthophosphates (76%) from sewage wastewater [ 63]. In addition, a natural microalgal
consortium could efﬁciently reduce the nitrogen and phosphorus pollution of a centrate obtained from
dewatering anaerobically digested municipal sludge [ 64]. These studies are showing that natural and
indigenous consortia can be a good start for treating a speciﬁc wastewater.
4. Process Options
4.1. Cultivation
Microalgae can be cultivated either in open systems or closed systems (called PBRs). A focus will
also be made on attached cultivation system (which are often implemented in open systems but can
also be implemented closed systems) due to their potential for wastewater treatment.
4.1.1. Open Ponds and High-Rate Algal Ponds (HRAP)
Stabilization ponds have been used for the treatment of urban wastewater for a long time [ 65]
but they need a lot of land to be efﬁcient. To optimize the wastewater treatment process, high rate
algal ponds (HRAPs) have been developed. HRAPs are shallow raceway-type open ponds of single
or multiple loops where a water velocity of 0.15–0.3 m/s is obtained by the use of a paddlewheel [ 5].
Their depth is generally between 0.2–0.4 m (sometimes up to 1 m). CO 2can be added in a sump
of about 1.5 m depth. Compared to stabilization ponds, HRAPs reduce the surface needed by a
factor of 5 [ 66] and the biomass productivity while achieving a three-fold improvement in yield from
10 ton/year/ha [ 67]. Despite needing 50 times more space land than activated sludge systems (the
most common wastewater treatment technology), HRAPs’ costs are signiﬁcantly reduced compared
to activated sludge systems: by a factor of two for the capital costs and by a factor of ﬁve for the
operational costs [67].
4.1.2. Photobioreactors
PBRs are closed systems where microalgae can be cultivated in axenic and controlled conditions
(good resistance to contaminations). Also, the volumetric productivities are signiﬁcantly higher than in
open systems. For example, better biomass and lipid productivities (+144% and +271% respectively),
as well as N and P removal rates (+38% and +15% respectively) were found in a PBR than in ﬂasks for
the culture of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii on wastewater [ 68]. However, the cost is signiﬁcantly higher
for these closed systems than for open systems (more than 10 times higher for the same production
capacity [69]).
PBRs have been designed in order to increase the volumetric productivity of microalgae cultures.
Their most useful advantage for the microalgae industry is that they keep cultures axenic, allowing
the growth of fragile strains that produces high-value molecules. Since a lot of microorganisms are
naturally present in wastewaters, this precious advantage is lost when cultivating microalgae using
wastewater. The gain in volumetric productivity does not counterbalance the high cost of PBRs in the
case of urban or agricultural wastewater treatment. However, it could be of interest in cases where
a high value molecule produced during the process can counterbalance the high cost of PBRs, or
when the cost of wastewater treatment is not a problem (a wastewater containing highly hazardous
pollutants for example).Energies 2016 ,9, 132 9 of 19
4.1.3. Attached Microalgae Cultivation
In attached cultivation, microalgae are immobilized and ﬁxed onto supporting materials.
The supporting materials are immerged in the nutrients (wastewater in our particular case).
An exhaustive review has been performed recently on the use of attached microalgae cultivation
systems to treat wastewater [ 70]. They noticed that the few available comparisons of wastewater
treatment performance gave comparable results for suspended and attached algal systems. Their main
conclusion is that there is a need for more research studies on this attached cultivation systems on
factors that affect algal growth, nutrient mass transport, species selection, algal–bacterial interactions,
and upscaling of laboratory research. However, attached microalgal cultivation systems have been
applied to a few wastewaters with promising results. For example, the use of benthic microalgae in
an attached cultivation system treating dairy manure could reduce by 26% the land area required for
an equivalent nitrogen uptake rate compared to the conventional corn/rye rotation process (23% for
phosphorus) [71].
Bioﬁlm rotating disks reactors are very promising and efﬁcient attached cultivation systems
for wastewater treatment using microalgae with good biomass productivity (Figure 1). Biomass
productivities between 20–31 g/m2/day and nutrient reduction rates as high as 14.1 g/m2/day for
nitrogen and 2.1 g/m2/day for phosphorus have been reported [ 72]. Similarly, an average biomass
productivity of 20.1 0.7 g/m2/day was obtained in a rotating biological contactor based PBR and
the authors maintained the culture over a period of 21 weeks without re-inoculation [ 73]. These
rotating bioﬁlm disks reactors provide a better surface area to volume ratio as compared to HRAPs.
The rotation through the partially ﬁlled culture vessel allows for an enhanced gas-to-bioﬁlm mass
transfer due to the higher time of exposure to the gaseous phase.
Energies 2016, 9, 132  9 of 19 
 on factors that affect algal growth, nutrient mass transport,  species selection,  algal–bacterial  
interactions,  and upscaling  of laboratory  research.  However,  attached  microalgal  cultivation  systems 
have been applied to a few wastewaters  with promising  results. For example,  the use of benthic 
microalgae  in an attached  cultivation  system treating dairy manure could reduce by 26% the land 
area required  for an equivalent  nitrogen uptake rate compared  to the conventional  corn/rye rotation 
process (23% for phosphorus)  [71]. 
Biofilm rotating disks reactors are very promising  and efficient attached  cultivation  systems for 
wastewater  treatment  using microalgae  with good biomass productivity  (Figure 1). Biomass 
productivities  between 20–31 g/m2/day and nutrient reduction  rates as high as 14.1 g/m2/day for 
nitrogen  and 2.1 g/m2/day for phosphorus  have been reported  [72]. Similarly,  an average biomass 
productivity  of 20.1 ± 0.7 g/m2/day was obtained  in a rotating biological  contactor  based PBR and the 
authors maintained  the culture over a period of 21 weeks without re‐inoculation  [73]. These rotating 
biofilm disks reactors provide a better surface area to volume ratio as compared  to HRAPs. The 
rotation through the partially filled culture vessel allows for an enhanced  gas‐to‐biofilm mass 
transfer due to the higher time of exposure  to the gaseous phase. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic  view of a microalgae  biofilm rotating disks reactor used for wastewater  treatment.  
4.2. Harvesting  the Biomass: Concentration  and Dewatering  
Microalgal  cultures are typically  extremely  diluted, with biomass concentrations  ranging from 
0.3 to 5 g/L at best [74]. The recovery  of essentially  99% of the water from the culture remains a major 
challenge  for solids separation  technology.  Similarly  to the wastewater  treatment  industry,  two steps 
will be needed for harvesting  the biomass.  However  contrary to activated  sludge, microalgae  do not 
form flocs naturally  or settle as easily as activated  sludge (their density is close to 1 [75]), therefore  in 
most cases, the use of a coagulant  or a flocculant  will be needed for this first step. A second step 
called dewatering  is then required  to remove the extracellular  water. The choice between 
centrifugation  and filtration  will be discussed.  
4.2.1. First Step: Harvesting  of the Biomass by Coagulation ‐Flocculation  
Coagulation  is the physico‐chemical  process which neutralizes  the surface charge of particles in 
order to allow them to aggregate  in flocs. To neutralize  the surface charge, two methods  can be 
applied: the use of chemicals  (a coagulant)  or the modification  of the environment  (for example a 
change in pH or application  of an electric current).  Flocculation  is the process which aggregates  
small flocs into larger ones by the use of flocculants  (generally  polymeric  substances).  These 
polymers  agglomerate  the small flocs making bonds between them leading to larger flocs. The whole 
coagulation ‐flocculation  process is often simplified  by the term “flocculation”.  Flocculation  is an 
efficient,  low‐cost harvesting  technique  with low energy requirements  which is particularly  adapted 
to microalgae  culture [76]. Moreover,  this is a method that may be easily scaled up by reproducing  
and adapting  processes  that are currently  used in the treatment  of wastewater.  Various techniques  
are available:  bioflocculation  (use of bacteria to enhance the flocculation  of microalgae,  [59]), 
autoflocculation  (induced  by a pH increase,  [77] or a pH decrease,  [78]) and electroflocculation  (use 
of an electric field, [79]). Although  only a few studies exist on the use of flocculation  to harvest 
microalgal  biomass grown on wastewater  [80,81], the technique  should efficiently  work for 
Figure 1. Schematic view of a microalgae bioﬁlm rotating disks reactor used for wastewater treatment.
4.2. Harvesting the Biomass: Concentration and Dewatering
Microalgal cultures are typically extremely diluted, with biomass concentrations ranging from 0.3
to 5 g/L at best [ 74]. The recovery of essentially 99% of the water from the culture remains a major
challenge for solids separation technology. Similarly to the wastewater treatment industry, two steps
will be needed for harvesting the biomass. However contrary to activated sludge, microalgae do not
form ﬂocs naturally or settle as easily as activated sludge (their density is close to 1 [ 75]), therefore in
most cases, the use of a coagulant or a ﬂocculant will be needed for this ﬁrst step. A second step called
dewatering is then required to remove the extracellular water. The choice between centrifugation and
ﬁltration will be discussed.
4.2.1. First Step: Harvesting of the Biomass by Coagulation-Flocculation
Coagulation is the physico-chemical process which neutralizes the surface charge of particles in
order to allow them to aggregate in ﬂocs. To neutralize the surface charge, two methods can be applied:
the use of chemicals (a coagulant) or the modiﬁcation of the environment (for example a change in pH
or application of an electric current). Flocculation is the process which aggregates small ﬂocs into largerEnergies 2016 ,9, 132 10 of 19
ones by the use of ﬂocculants (generally polymeric substances). These polymers agglomerate the small
ﬂocs making bonds between them leading to larger ﬂocs. The whole coagulation-ﬂocculation process
is often simpliﬁed by the term “ﬂocculation”. Flocculation is an efﬁcient, low-cost harvesting technique
with low energy requirements which is particularly adapted to microalgae culture [ 76]. Moreover, this
is a method that may be easily scaled up by reproducing and adapting processes that are currently used
in the treatment of wastewater. Various techniques are available: bioﬂocculation (use of bacteria to
enhance the ﬂocculation of microalgae, [ 59]), autoﬂocculation (induced by a pH increase, [ 77] or a pH
decrease, [ 78]) and electroﬂocculation (use of an electric ﬁeld, [ 79]). Although only a few studies exist
on the use of ﬂocculation to harvest microalgal biomass grown on wastewater [ 80,81], the technique
should efﬁciently work for harvesting microalgae since it is frequently used in both the wastewater
and microalgae industries. Decantation is commonly used after ﬂocculation. However, ﬂotation can
also be used as an effective alternative depending on the density of the microalgae [82].
4.2.2. Second Step: Dewatering by Centrifugation or Filtration
Centrifugation is the most practical and common technique to harvest and concentrate a
microalgal biomass [ 83]. It can be used directly on the microalgal biomass or after a ﬂocculation
step. However, it is quite expensive and more importantly it consumes a large amount of energy [ 3].
Therefore, its application to the dewatering of microalgal biomass grown on wastewater where large
volumes need to be centrifuged should be dedicated to very speciﬁc applications: when the biomass
(or part of it) can be valorized at a high value or when no other dewatering technique is available.
In this context, the use of ﬁltration and especially dedicated, low-cost and low-energy consuming
belt ﬁlter press could be a good option for dewatering the microalgal biomass grown on wastewater [ 3].
Indeed, belt ﬁlter press has been shown to use around six times less energy than centrifugation for the
same results [ 84]. Investigation and research on this kind of dewatering techniques are still at a very
early stage but should be encouraged considering these promising ﬁrst results.
4.2.3. Biomass Valorization
Once the biomass has been harvested and the extracellular water removed, the dry weight
concentration is generally around 15% to 25% [ 85]. The harvested biomass can be used in the
agricultural sector, either as an animal feed or as a fertilizer. However, for these applications,
microalgae biomass should not contain high concentration of persisting pollutants such as heavy
metals or persisting organic pollutants that could be transferred into the animals or the soil. For
those uses, drying would be required. Two techniques are particularly adapted since they do not
denature the biomass: spray drying or solar drying. Spray-drying is very effective [ 86] but is very
energy-intensive due to the use of a hot gas (nitrogen or air) to dry the biomass. Solar drying is very
efﬁcient and has a very low energy demand but requires a large surface area [ 87]. After drying the
biomass can be used as animal feed [ 88] or as a fertilizer [ 89]. The wet biomass can also be used
as a feedstock for composting. Composting has been successfully performed at the pilot-scale for
macroalgae [ 90] and is envisaged to be as equally successful with microalgal biomass. Indeed green
seaweed compost could effectively increase the growth and water resistance of tomato plants [91].
After drying, the biomass can also be used as feedstock for high-value molecules depending on
the dominant microalgae strains in the wastewater grown biomass. As an example, cyanobacteria are a
good source for pigment such as phycocyanin [ 92]; this water-soluble pigment is easily extracted from
the biomass. Other high-value molecules such as omega 3 [ 93] or carotenoids [ 94] are very interesting
on an economical point of view. However, the productivity of these molecules in wastewater grown
microalgal biomass is likely to be very low since it needs speciﬁc conditions to be optimized (axenic
cultures, optimum temperature and medium, etc...). Furthermore, strict regulations imposed by the
food, pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries would probably impede the entry of wastewater-grown
microalgal extracts on those markets.Energies 2016 ,9, 132 11 of 19
Therefore, the most promising use of this biomass would be the energy market. For energy
applications, drying should be avoided [ 3]. Wet processes have to be used to convert the biomass into
energy. Lipids can be extracted through wet extraction techniques [ 95] and then converted through
transesteriﬁcation [ 74]. Promising results are coming from recent screenings, for example, strains were
found to grow on wastewater and accumulate lipids at the same time (up to 23.7 mg/L/day) [ 56].
However, it is still difﬁcult to adjust the microalgae metabolism to lipid accumulation in a microalgae
culture growing on wastewater. High lipid productivities (at least over 200 mg/L/day) are needed for
economic and energetic viability of microalgae to biofuel processes [3].
Direct wet conversion processes of the whole biomass such as anaerobic digestion or hydrothermal
liquefaction (HTL) are therefore more adapted. Anaerobic digestion is the conversion of a biomass
through dark fermentation into a biogas. It is efﬁcient on microalgae with theoretical yields between 260
and 414 mL of CH 4/g of volatile solids [ 96]. Unfortunately, the economic value of biogas is too low at
present (at most 1.33  /Nm3of CH 4using the highest electricity buy-back rate of Electricité de France).
Nowadays, anaerobic digestion is not an economically proﬁtable solution for microalgae biomass
valorization. HTL is a thermochemical process which converts wet biomass into a biocrude (heavy oil,
yields between 20 and 87% [ 97]), gas (>95% of CO 2that can be recycled to the cultivation step [ 98]),
some residual solids and an aqueous phase that contains large amount of nutrients. The potential to
recycle the aqueous phase has been studied in order to reduce the cultivation costs and increase the
overall sustainability of the process [ 98–100]. Growth can be inhibited at ﬁrst but after an adaptation
period, higher biomass productivities have been observed probably due to mixotrophic growth [ 98,99].
The biocrude can be directly burned in a boiler or upgraded through hydrotreating into a biofuel (a mix
of naphta, gasoline and jetfuel [ 68]). HTL converts the whole biomass, therefore, there is no need for
a monoclonal, monospecies, high l ipid-producing microalgae in comparison to the lipid extraction
and conversion pathway. The HTL biomass conversion process is agnostic to the type of feed and
hence, broadens the range of biomass and mixtures of organic material (including the activated sludge
(bacteria) and algal biomass, as well as zooplankton generated from wastewater treatment) that can
be used. The concept is represented on Figure 2. Additionally, HTL pathways are getting closer to
economic viability with estimated biofuel production cost around 2.5  /L of biofuel [101].
Energies 2016, 9, 132  11 of 19 
 yields between 260 and 414 mL of CH 4/g of volatile solids [96]. Unfortunately,  the economic  value of 
biogas is too low at present (at most 1.33 €/Nm3 of CH 4 using the highest electricity  buy‐back rate of 
Electricité  de France). Nowadays,  anaerobic  digestion  is not an economically  profitable  solution for 
microalgae  biomass valorization.  HTL is a thermochemical  process which converts wet biomass into 
a biocrude  (heavy oil, yields between 20 and 87% [97]), gas (>95% of CO 2 that can be recycled to the 
cultivation  step [98]), some residual solids and an aqueous phase that contains large amount of 
nutrients.  The potential  to recycle the aqueous phase has been studied in order to reduce the 
cultivation  costs and increase the overall sustainability  of the process [98–100].  Growth can be 
inhibited  at first but after an adaptation  period, higher biomass productivities  have been observed  
probably  due to mixotrophic  growth [98,99]. The biocrude  can be directly burned in a boiler or 
upgraded  through hydrotreating  into a biofuel (a mix of naphta, gasoline and jetfuel [68]). HTL 
converts  the whole biomass,  therefore,  there is no need for a monoclonal,  monospecies,  high l 
ipid‐producing  microalgae  in comparison  to the lipid extraction  and conversion  pathway.  The HTL 
biomass conversion  process is agnostic to the type of feed and hence, broadens  the range of biomass 
and mixtures  of organic material (including  the activated  sludge (bacteria)  and algal biomass,  as 
well as zooplankton  generated  from wastewater  treatment)  that can be used. The concept is 
represented  on Figure 2. Additionally,  HTL pathways  are getting closer to economic  viability with 
estimated  biofuel production  cost around 2.5 €/L of biofuel [101]. 
 
Figure 2. Typical pathway  for biofuel generation  using wastewater,  microalgae  and hydrothermal  liquefaction.  
Microalgal  biomass grown on wastewater  may not conform to chemical  and biological  safety 
regulations  to be reused in the raw state, for example,  in instances  when the biochemical  
composition  does not meet the desired criteria, or when there is too much fouling by pathogenic  
organisms  or by toxic pollutants.  In such cases, conversion  of the low‐grade biomass into biochar 
through pyrolysis  becomes  an interesting  value‐adding alternative  option. Depending  on the 
composition  of the biochar, it can then be used as soil amendment  [102] with reduced risk of 
leaching of toxic material such as heavy metals, since the pyrolysis  process aids in capturing  the 
metals in the solid matrix [103]. 
5. Future Research  and Development  Needs 
Further research in the use of microalgae  for performing  wastewater  treatment  is still needed. 
Table 2 lists the actual and validated  knowledge  against the challenges  that the microalgae  
wastewater  treatment  industry  will face. These challenges  are discussed  in this section. 
  
Figure 2. Typical pathway for biofuel generation using wastewater, microalgae and
hydrothermal liquefaction.
Microalgal biomass grown on wastewater may not conform to chemical and biological safety
regulations to be reused in the raw state, for example, in instances when the biochemical composition
does not meet the desired criteria, or when there is too much fouling by pathogenic organisms or by
toxic pollutants. In such cases, conversion of the low-grade biomass into biochar through pyrolysis
becomes an interesting value-adding alternative option. Depending on the composition of the biochar,Energies 2016 ,9, 132 12 of 19
it can then be used as soil amendment [ 102] with reduced risk of leaching of toxic material such as
heavy metals, since the pyrolysis process aids in capturing the metals in the solid matrix [103].
5. Future Research and Development Needs
Further research in the use of microalgae for performing wastewater treatment is still needed.
Table 2 lists the actual and validated knowledge against the challenges that the microalgae wastewater
treatment industry will face. These challenges are discussed in this section.
Table 2. Validated knowledge and future challenges for wastewater treatment using microalgae.
Validated Knowledge Future Challenges
Ability to treat different wastewaters or speciﬁc pollutantsTechnical feasibility at large-scale (HRT and
area needed) Economic feasibility
Screening several microalgae strains for their degradation
of a pollutant or their treatment of a wastewaterHigh-throughput screening methodology
Natural consortium for the treatment of a speciﬁc
wastewater or pollutantArtiﬁcial speciﬁcally designed consortium
HRAPs for the treatment of urban wastewaterOptimized systems with reduced footprint
and HRT
Long-term operation with variation in treatment efﬁciencyContaminations control and
consortium protection
Research studies are dependent on the availability of
real wastewaterDesign a representative and easy-to-make
synthetic wastewater
5.1. High-Throughput Screening Methodology
The biodiversity of microalgae is immense and estimated to be between 200,000 and several
millions compared with about 250,000 for higher plants [ 86]. Only a few of them has been described
(less than 10,000 [ 104,105]). There is thus a huge potential within this broad biodiversity for industrial
applications. High-throughput screening methodologies are needed in order to investigate the
microalgal biodiversity. Screenings of a dozen of microalgae strains are quite common now (13 for [ 106];
14 for [ 107]) and their results are very promising for wastewater treatment using microalgae. But
high-throughput methodology using cultivation on well plates and adapted analytical equipment
are needed for rapid selection of promising strains. A screening methodology based on 12-well
plates was applied on more than 100 strains for wastewater treatment and biodiesel production [ 55].
They found strains with relatively good biomass productivity (around twice less than in an optimized
synthetic medium) and excellent lipid productivity (only 20% less than in the optimized synthetic
medium). The laboratory equipment has also to be adapted for allowing high-throughput screening.
For example, a microplate-based photobioreactor was recently developed for screening and medium
optimization purposes [ 108]. This approach needs to be further developed since the applications
are numerous (speciﬁc wastewater treatment, speciﬁc pollutant reduction, wastewater treatment in
speciﬁc climatic conditions . . . ).
5.2. Artiﬁcial Speciﬁcally Designed Consortium
Results of large high-throughput screening could help in designing efﬁcient microalgae
consortium for speciﬁc wastewater characteristics. These artiﬁcial consortia need to be tested and their
efﬁciency evaluated. Synergistic or antagonistic effects could be observed. Depending on the variation
of the environmental parameters (principally the wastewater characteristics and the meteorological
conditions), the consortium will naturally evolve and adapt to these changes. For example, different
compositions of the microalgae community were found depending on the season [ 44]. The challenge is
to develop a robust consortium with a broad pollutant afﬁnity that is tolerant to subtle and drasticEnergies 2016 ,9, 132 13 of 19
changes in the wastewater composition. However, some pure axenic cultivation of each strain used in
the consortium should also be kept ready in case of a major loss of biomass.
5.3. Process Intensiﬁcation
In wastewater treatment using microalgae, the most important operating parameter is the HRT
which is directly related to the growth rate and pollutants removal rates. It drives the cost and
energy consumption per cubic meter of treated water as well as the footprint of the installation.
Reducing the HRT is crucial for the development of microalgae based WWTPs. This could be done by
process intensiﬁcation and use of innovative systems, such as attached microalgae cultivation systems,
combined with the selection of fast-growing pollution microalgal scavengers.
5.4. Contaminations Control and Consortium Protection
Contaminations are a great threat for microalgae cultivation, especially when microalgae are
grown in raceways or HRAPs [ 5]. Grazing by herbivorous protozoa and zooplankton can reduce
algal concentrations drastically in just a few days. Zooplankton (rotifers and cladocerans) at high
concentrations can destroy 90% of the algal biomass in just two days [ 109]. Daphnia [ 110], viruses [ 111],
bacteria [ 112] and even other microalgae can be a big constraint for mass cultivation of microalgae [ 113].
Physical (ﬁltration), chemical (use of herbicides) methods or change of the operating conditions
(light, temperature, pH) have been investigated as means to control contamination but with few
industrial applications. Further research studies are needed to control these contaminations [ 114].
Possible synergistic effect in consortium should be investigated such as protection by a speciﬁc
species, symbiosis.
5.5. Synthetic Wastewater
Real wastewaters are not always accessible and convenient for scientiﬁc studies. Handling them is
not an easy task because it has to be rapidly used at the risk of having its composition vary. Therefore,
synthetic wastewaters are often used in this kind of studies but they are often not representative of
real wastewaters. Several research teams use classic nutrients to simulate pollutants or even known
medium (like BG11 for [ 115]). But the bioavailability of these commercial nutrients is far less superior
to pollutants found in wastewaters. There is a need for an easy-to-make (from chemicals that are
accessible from common chemicals suppliers for laboratories) and representative synthetic wastewater.
The difﬁculty lies in the chemical complexity of wastewaters where organic and mineral, soluble and
particulate coexist for nearly every pollutant (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus for the principal ones).
6. Conclusions
Growing microalgae on wastewater offers new insights for the microalgae industry as well as
the wastewater treatment industry. The use of wastewaters for cultivating microalgae is necessary
in order to reduce the cost of microalgae production. This is a prerequisite for microalgae to enter
the energy market through biofuels. The wastewater treatment industry is facing challenges (such as
micropollutants fate) that induce the development of other alternatives. Microalgae-related processes
can be an interesting alternative to the conventional activated sludge process. Despite these two
opportunities, many research and development challenges have still to be overcome in order to
beneﬁt from the full potential of the combination of microalgae production and wastewater treatment,
namely in the development of robust, productive wastewater-adapted microalgal species, and in the
improvement and innovation of cultivation and downstream processing systems which will allow for
better growth, harvesting and conversion of the algal biomass.
Acknowledgments: The authors are very grateful to the editor for offering the opportunity to publish a paper in
the special issue “Algae Fuel 2015”. Part of this research was funded by the New Energy Technologies program
of CEA.Energies 2016 ,9, 132 14 of 19
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
AOX Adsorbable Organic Halogen
BOD Biological Oxygen Demand
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
EDC Endocrine Disrupting Compound
HRAP High-rate algal pond
HRT Hydraulic Retention Time
HTL Hydrothermal Liquefaction
PBR Photobioreactor
PAH Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon
PFCA Perﬂuorinated Carboxylic Acid
PPCP Pharmaceutical and Personal Care Product
TKN Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen
TN Total Nitrogen
TOC Total Organic Carbon
TP Total Phosphorus
WWTP Wastewater Treatment Plant
References
1. Wijffels, R.H.; Kruse, O.; Hellingwerf, K.J. Potential of industrial biotechnology with cyanobacteria and
eukaryotic microalgae. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2013 ,24, 405–413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Milledge, J. Commercial application of microalgae other than as biofuels: A brief review. Rev. Environ.
Sci. Biotechnol. 2011 ,10, 31–41. [CrossRef]
3. Delrue, F.; Setier, P .-A.; Sahut, C.; Cournac, L.; Roubaud, A.; Peltier, G. An economic, sustainability, and
energetic model of biodiesel production from microalgae. Bioresour. Technol. 2012 ,111, 191–200. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
4. Acién, F.G.; Fernández, J.M.; Magán, J.J.; Molina, E. Production cost of a real microalgae production plant
and strategies to reduce it. Biotechnol. Adv. 2012 ,30, 1344–1353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Park, J.B.K.; Craggs, R.J.; Shilton, A.N. Wastewater treatment high rate algal ponds for biofuel production.
Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 35–42. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Pittman, J.K.; Dean, A.P .; Osundeko, O. The potential of sustainable algal biofuel production using
wastewater resources. Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 17–25. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Chaput, G.; Charmanski, K.; Farag, I. Sustainable Production of Microalgae Oil Feedstock Using Municipal
Wastewater and CO 2Fertilization. Int. J. Eng. Sci. Technol. 2012 ,4, 3489–3499.
8. Quinn, J.C.; Davis, R. The potentials and challenges of algae based biofuels: A review of the techno-economic,
life cycle, and resource assessment modeling. Bioresour. Technol. 2015 ,184, 444–452. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Collet, P .; Hélias, A.; Lardon, L.; Ras, M.; Goy, R.A.; Steyer, J.P . Life-cycle assessment of microalgae culture
coupled to biogas production. Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 207–214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Gosling, S.N.; Arnell, N.W. A global assessment of the impact of climate change on water scarcity. Clim. Chang.
2013 , 1–15. [CrossRef]
11. Cordell, D.; Drangert, J.; White, S. The story of phosphorus: Global food security and food for thought.
Glob. Environ. Chang. 2009 ,19, 292–305. [CrossRef]
12. Guo, T.; Englehardt, J.; Wu, T. Review of cost versus scale: Water and wastewater treatment and reuse
processes. Water Sci. Technol. 2015 ,69, 223–234. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Schwarzenbach, R.P .; Escher, B.I.; Fenner, K.; Hofstetter, T.B.; Johnson, C.A.; von Gunten, U.; Wehrli, B.
The Challenge of micropollutants in aquatic systems. Science 2006 ,313, 1072–1077. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Energies 2016 ,9, 132 15 of 19
14. Martin Ruel, S.; Choubert, J.M.; Budzinski, H.; Miege, C.; Esperanza, M.; Coquery, M. Occurrence and fate
of relevant substances in wastewater treatment plants regarding Water Framework Directive and future
legislations. Water Sci. Technol. 2012 ,65, 1179–1189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Subashchandrabose, S.R.; Ramakrishnan, B.; Megharaj, M.; Venkateswarlu, K.; Naidu, R. Mixotrophic
cyanobacteria and microalgae as distinctive biological agents for organic pollutant degradation. Environ. Int.
2013 ,51, 59–72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Muñoz, R.; Guieysse, B. Algal–bacterial processes for the treatment of hazardous contaminants: A review.
Water Res. 2006 ,40, 2799–2815. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. EPA Ofﬁce of Water. Wastewater Management Fact Sheet, Energy Conservation ; EPA 832-F-06-024; U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency: Washington, DC, USA, 2006; p. 7.
18. Nurdogan, Y.; Oswald, W.J. Enhanced nutrient removal in high-rate ponds. Water Sci. Technol. 1995 ,31,
33–43. [CrossRef]
19. Park, J.B.K.; Craggs, R.J. Wastewater treatment and algal production in high rate algal ponds with carbon
dioxide addition. Water Sci. Technol. 2010 ,61, 633–639. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Min, M.; Wang, L.; Li, Y.; Moher, M.J.; Hu, B.; Zhou, W.; Chen, P .; Ruan, R. Cultivating Chlorella sp. in a
Pilot-Scale Photobioreactor Using Centrate Wastewater for Microalgae Biomass Production and Wastewater
Nutrient Removal. Appl. Biochem. Biotech. 2011 ,165, 123–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Hammouda, A.; Gaber, A.; Abdelraouf, N. Microalgae and Wastewater Treatment. Ecotox Environ. Safe. 1995 ,
31, 205–210. [CrossRef]
22. Tian-Yuan, Z.; Yin-Hu, W.; Lin-Lan, Z.; Xiao-Xiong, W.; Hong-Ying, H. Screening heterotrophic microalgal
strains by using the Biolog method for biofuel production from organic wastewater. Algal Res. 2014 ,6,
175–179. [CrossRef]
23. Lima, S.A.C.; Raposo, M.F.J.; Castro, P .M.L.; Morais, R.M. Biodegradation of p-chlorophenol by a microalgae
consortium. Wat. Res. 2004 ,38, 97–102. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Papazi, A.; Kotzabasis, K. “Rational” Management of Dichlorophenols Biodegradation by the Microalga
Scenedesmus obliquus .PLoS ONE 2013 ,8. [CrossRef]
25. Peng, F.-Q.; Ying, G.-G.; Yang, B.; Liu, S.; Lai, H.-J.; Liu, Y.-S.; Chen, Z.-F.; Zhou, G.-J. Biotransformation of
progesterone and norgestrel by two freshwater microalgae ( Scenedesmus obliquus and Chlorella pyrenoidosa ):
Transformation kinetics and products identiﬁcation. Chemosphere 2014 ,95, 581–588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Wang, S.; Wang, X.; Poon, K.; Wang, Y.; Li, S.; Liu, H.; Lin, S.; Cai, Z. Removal and reductive dechlorination
of triclosan by Chlorella pyrenoidosa .Chemosphere 2013 ,92, 1498–1505. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. De Godos, I.; Muñoz, R.; Guieysse, B. Tetracycline removal during wastewater treatment in high-rate algal
ponds. J. Hazard. Mater. 2012 ,229–230 , 446–449. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Sethunathan, N.; Megharaj, M.; Chen, Z.L.; Williams, B.D.; Lewis, G.; Naidu, R. Algal Degradation of a
Known Endocrine Disrupting Insecticide, -Endosulfan, and Its Metabolite, Endosulfan Sulfate, in Liquid
Medium and Soil. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2004 ,52, 3030–3035. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Kumar, K.S.; Dahms, H.-U.; Won, E.-J.; Lee, J.-S.; Shin, K.-H. Microalgae—A promising tool for heavy metal
remediation. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safe. 2015 ,113, 329–352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Ke, L.; Luo, L.; Wang, P .; Luan, T.; Tam, N.F.-Y. Effects of metals on biosorption and biodegradation of mixed
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons by a freshwater green alga Selenastrum capricornutum .Bioresour. Technol.
2010 ,101, 6950–6961. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Arbib, Z.; Ruiz, J.; Álvarez-Díaz, P .; Garrido-Pérez, C.; Perales, J.A. Capability of different microalgae species
for phytoremediation processes: Wastewater tertiary treatment, CO 2bio-ﬁxation and low cost biofuels
production. Water Res. 2014 ,49, 465–474. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Demirer, G.N.; Chen, S. Two-phase anaerobic digestion of unscreened dairy manure. Process Biochem. 2005 ,
40, 3542–3549. [CrossRef]
33. Constantine, T.A. North American Experience with Centrate Treatment Technologies for Ammonia and
Nitrogen Removal; Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation; WEFTEC: Dallas, TX, USA, 2006;
pp. 5271–5281. [CrossRef]
34. Maurer, M.; Schwegler, P .; Larsen, T.A. Nutrients in urine: Energetic aspects of removal and recovery.
Water Sci. Technol. 2003 ,48, 37–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Energies 2016 ,9, 132 16 of 19
35. Marcilhac, C.; Sialve, B.; Pourcher, A.-M.; Ziebal, C.; Bernet, N.; Béline, F. Digestate color and light intensity
affect nutrient removal and competition phenomena in a microalgal-bacterial ecosystem. Water Res. 2014 ,64,
278–287. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Franchino, M.; Comino, E.; Bona, F.; Riggio, V .A. Growth of three microalgae strains and nutrient removal
from an agro-zootechnical digestate. Chemosphere 2013 ,92, 738–744. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Sankaran, K.; Premalatha, M.; Vijayasekaran, M.; Somasundaram, V .T. DEPHY project: Distillery wastewater
treatment through anaerobic digestion and phycoremediation—A green industrial approach. Renew. Sustain.
Energy Rev. 2014 ,37, 634–643. [CrossRef]
38. Solovchenko, A.; Pogosyan, S.; Chivkunova, O.; Selyakh, I.; Semenova, L.; Voronova, E.; Scherbakov, P .;
Konyukhov, I.; Chekanov, C.; Kirpichnikov, M.; et al. Phycoremediation of alcohol distillery wastewater
with a novel Chlorella sorokiniana strain cultivated in a photobioreactor monitored on-line via chlorophyll
ﬂuorescence. Algal Res. 2014 ,6, 234–241. [CrossRef]
39. Tarlan, E.; Dilek, F.B.; Yetis, U. Effectiveness of algae in the treatment of a wood-based pulp and paper
industry wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 2002 ,84, 1–5. [CrossRef]
40. Kothari, R.; Prasad, R.; Kumar, V .; Singh, D.P . Production of biodiesel from microalgae Chlamydomonas
polypyrenoideum grown on dairy industry wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 2013 ,144, 499–503. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
41. Lu, W.; Wang, Z.; Wang, X.; Yuan, Z. Cultivation of Chlorella sp. using raw dairy wastewater for nutrient
removal and biodiesel production: Characteristics comparison of indoor bench-scale and outdoor pilot-scale
cultures. Bioresour. Technol. 2015 ,192, 382–388. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Perez, M.; Nolasco, N.A.; Vasavada, A.; Johnson, M.; Kuehnle, A. Algae-Mediated Valorization of Industrial
Waste Streams. Ind. Biotechnol. 2015 ,11, 229–234. [CrossRef]
43. Chinnasamy, S.; Bhatnagar, A.; Hunt, R.W.; Das, K.C. Microalgae cultivation in a wastewater dominated by
carpet mill efﬂuents for biofuel applications. Bioresour. Technol. 2010 ,101, 3097–3105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Sheoran, A.S.; Bhandari, S. Treatment of Mine Water by a Microbial Mat: Bench-scale Experiments.
Mine Water Environ. 2005 ,24, 38–42. [CrossRef]
45. Zhou, W.; Hu, B.; Li, Y.; Min, M.; Mohr, M.; Du, Z.; Chen, P .; Ruan, R. Mass Cultivation of Microalgae
on Animal Wastewater: A Sequential Two-Stage Cultivation Process for Energy Crop and Omega-3-Rich
Animal Feed Production. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2012 ,168, 348–363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Di Caprio, F.; Altimari, P .; Pagnanelli, F. Integrated biomass production and biodegradation of olive mill
wastewater by cultivation of Scenedesmus sp.Algal Res. 2015 ,9, 306–311. [CrossRef]
47. Perron, M.C.; Juneau, P . Effect of endocrine disrupters on photosystem II energy ﬂuxes of green algae and
cyanobacteria. Environ. Res. 2011 ,111, 520–529. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Perales-Vela, H.V .; Peña-Castro, J.M.; Cañizares-Villanueva, R.O. Heavy metal detoxiﬁcation in eukaryotic
microalgae. Chemosphere 2006 ,64, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Perreira, S.A.; Araújo, V .Q.; Reboucas, M.V .; Vieira, F.S.V .; de Almeida, M.V .A.; Chinalia, F.A.; Nascimento, I.A.
Toxicity of biodiesel, diesel and biodiesel/diesel blends: Comparative sub-lethal effects of water-soluble
fractions to microalgae species. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2012 ,88, 234–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Latala, A.; N˛ edzi, M.; Stepnowski, P . Acute toxicity assessment of perﬂuorinated carboxylic acids towards
the Baltic microalgae. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2009 ,28, 167–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Asselborn, V .; Fernández, C.; Zalocar, Y.; Parodi, E.R. Effects of chlorpyrifos on the growth and ultrastructure
of green algae, Ankistrodesmus gracilis .Ecotoxicol. Environ. Safe. 2015 ,120, 334–341. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Xu, J.; Li, M.; Mak, N.K.; Chen, F.; Jiang, Y. Triphenyltin induced growth inhibition and antioxidative
responses in the green microalga Scenedesmus quadricauda .Ecotoxicology 2011 ,20, 73–80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Chung, M.K.; Hu, R.; Wong, M.H.; Cheung, K.C. Comparative toxicity of hydrophobic contaminants to
microalgae and higher plants. Ecotoxicology 2007 ,16, 393–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Pérez-Legaspi, I.A.; Ortega-Clemente, L.A.; Moha-León, J.D.; Ríos-Leal, E.; Curiel-Ramírez Gutiérrez, S.;
Rubio-Franchini, I. Effect of the pesticide lindane on the biomass of the microalgae Nannochloris oculata .
J. Environ. Sci. Health B 2016 ,51, 103–106. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Li, Y.; Zhou, W.; Hu, B.; Min, M.; Chen, P .; Ruan, R.R. Integration of Algae Cultivation as Biodiesel
Production Feedstock with Municipal Wastewater Treatment: Strains Screening and Signiﬁcance Evaluation
of Environmental Factors. Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 10861–10867. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Energies 2016 ,9, 132 17 of 19
56. Abdelaziz, A.E.M.; Leite, G.B.; Belhaj, M.A.; Hallenbeck, P .C. Screening microalgae native to Quebec for
wastewater treatment and biodiesel production. Bioresour. Technol. 2014 ,157, 140–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Pires, J.C.M.; Alvim-Ferraz, M.C.M.; Martins, F.G.; Simões, M. Wastewater treatment to enhance the economic
viability of microalgae culture. Environ. Sci. Pollut. R. 2013 ,20, 5096–5105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Borde, X.; Guieysse, B.; Delgado, O.; Muñoz, R.; Hatti-Kaul, R.; Nugier-Chauvin, C.; Patin, H.;
Mattiasson, B. Synergistic relationships in algal–bacterial microcosms for the treatment of aromatic pollutants.
Bioresour. Technol. 2003 ,86, 293–300. [CrossRef]
59. Van Den Hende, S.; Vervaeren, H.; Desmet, S.; Boon, N. Bioﬂocculation of microalgae and bacteria combined
with ﬂue gas to improve sewage treatment. New Biotechnol. 2011 ,29, 23–31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Halfhide, T.; Åkerstrøm, A.; Lekang, O.I.; Gislerød, H.R.; Ergas, S.J. Production of algal biomass, chlorophyll,
starch and lipids using aquaculture wastewater under axenic and non-axenic conditions. Algal Res. 2014 ,6,
152–159. [CrossRef]
61. Liang, Z.; Liu, Y.; Ge, F.; Xu, Y.; Tao, N.; Peng, F.; Wong, M. Efﬁciency assessment and pH effect in removing
nitrogen and phosphorus by algae-bacteria combined system of Chlorella vulgaris and Bacillus licheniformis .
Chemosphere 2013 ,92, 1383–1389. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Olguín, E.J.; Mendoza, A.; Gonzalez-Portela, R.E.; Novelo, E. Population dynamics in mixed cultures of
Neochloris oleoabundans and native microalgae from water of a polluted river and isolation of a diatom
consortium for the production of lipid rich biomass. New Biotechnol. 2013 ,30, 705–715. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Mahaptra, D.M.; Chanakya, H.N.; Ramachandra, T.V . Bioremediation and lipid synthesis through
mixotrophic algal consortia in municipal wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 2014 ,168, 142–150. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
64. Halfhide, T.; Dalrymple, O.K.; Wilkie, A.C.; Trimmer, J.; Gillie, B.; Udom, I.; Zhang, Q.; Ergas, S.J. Growth of
an Indigenous Algal Consortium on Anaerobically Digested Municipal Sludge Centrate: Photobioreactor
Performance and Modeling. Bioenerg. Res. 2015 ,8, 249–258. [CrossRef]
65. Caldwell, D.H. Sewage oxidation pond performance, operation and design. Sew. Works J. 1946 ,3, 433–458.
Available online: http://www.jstor.org/stable/25030250 (accessed on 12 November 2015).
66. Picot, B.; Bahlaoui, A.; Moersidik, S.; Baleux, B.; Bontoux, J. Comparison of the Purifying Efﬁciency of High
Rate Algal Pond with Stabilization. Pond. Water Sci. Technol. 1992 ,25, 197–206.
67. Craggs, R.J.; Heubeck, S.; Lundquist, T.J.; Benemann, J.R. Algal biofuels from wastewater treatment high
rate algal ponds. Water Sci. Technol. 2011 ,63, 660–665. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Kong, Q.-X.; Li, L.; Martinez, B.; Chen, P .; Ruan, R. Culture of Microalgae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii in
Wastewater for Biomass Feedstock Production. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2010 ,160, 9–18. [CrossRef]
69. Davis, R.; Aden, A.; Pienkos, P .T. Techno-economic analysis of autotrophic microalgae for fuel production.
Appl. Energy 2011 ,88, 3524–3531. [CrossRef]
70. Kesaano, M.; Sims, R.C. Algal bioﬁlm based technology for wastewater treatment. Algal Res. 2014 ,5, 231–240.
[CrossRef]
71. Wilkie, A.C.; Mulbry, W.W. Recovery of dairy manure nutrients by benthic freshwater algae. Bioresour. Technol.
2002 ,84, 81–91. [CrossRef]
72. Christenson, L.B.; Sims, R.C. Rotating algal bioﬁlm reactor and spool harvester for wastewater treatment
with biofuels by-products. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2012 ,109, 1674–1684. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Blanken, W.; Janssen, M.; Cuaresma, M.; Libor, Z.; Bhaiji, T.; Wijffels, R.H. Bioﬁlm growth of Chlorella
sorokiniana in a rotating biological contactor based photobioreactor. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2014 ,111, 2436–2445.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Brennan, L.; Owende, P . Biofuels from microalgae—A review of technologies for production, processing,
and extractions of biofuels and co-products. Renew. Sustain. Energ. Rev. 2010 ,14, 557–577. [CrossRef]
75. Millero, F.J.; Lepple, F.K. The density and expansibility of artiﬁcial seawater solutions from 0 to 40C and
0 to 21‰ chlorinity. Mar. Chem. 1973 ,1, 89–104. [CrossRef]
76. Vandamme, D.; Foubert, I.; Muylaert, K. Flocculation as a low-cost method for harvesting microalgae for
bulk biomass production. Trends Biotechnol. 2013 ,31, 233–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77. Vandamme, D.; Foubert, I.; Fraeye, I. Flocculation of Chlorella vulgaris induced by high pH: Role of magnesium
and calcium and practical implications. Bioresour. Technol. 2012 ,105, 114–119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Liu, J.; Zhu, Y.; Tao, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Li, A. Freshwater microalgae harvested via ﬂocculation induced by pH
decrease. Biotechnol. Biofuels 2013 ,98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Energies 2016 ,9, 132 18 of 19
79. Lee, A.; Lewis, D.; Ashman, P . Harvesting of marine microalgae by electroﬂocculation: The energetics, plant
design, and economics. Appl. Energ. 2013 ,108, 45–53. [CrossRef]
80. Buelna, G.; Bhattarai, K.K.; de la Noue, J.; Taiganides, E.P . Evaluation of various ﬂocculants for the recovery
of algal biomass grown on pig-waste. Biol. Waste. 1990 ,31, 211–222. [CrossRef]
81. de Godos, I.; Guzman, H.O.; Soto, R.; García-Encina, P .A.; Becares, E.; Muñoz, R.; Vargas, V .A.
Coagulation/ﬂocculation-based removal of algal–bacterial biomass from piggery wastewater treatment.
Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 923–927. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Singh, A.; Singh Nigam, P .; Murphy, J.D. Mechanism and challenges in commercialisation of algal biofuels.
Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 26–34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Benemann, J.R.; Kopman, B.L.; Weissman, D.E.; Eisenberg, D.E.; Goebel, R.P . Development of Microalgae
Harvesting and High Rate Pond Technologies in California in Algal Biomass ; Shelef, G., Soeder, C.J., Eds.; Elsevier:
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1980; p. 457.
84. Sturm, B.S.M.; Lamer, S.L. An energy evaluation of coupling nutrient removal from wastewater with algal
biomass production. Appl. Energ. 2011 ,88, 3499–3506. [CrossRef]
85. Uduman, N.; Qi, Y.; Danquah, M.K.; Forde, G.M.; Hoadley, A. Dewatering of microalgal cultures: A major
bottleneck to algae-based fuels. J. Renew. Sustain. Energ. 2010 ,2. [CrossRef]
86. Leach, G.; Oliveira, G.; Morais, R. Spray-drying of Dunaliella salina to produce a -carotene rich powder.
J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1998 ,20, 82–85. [CrossRef]
87. Prakash, J.; Bushparaj, B.; Carlozzi, P .; Torzillo, G.; Montaini, E.; Materassi, R. Microalgal Biomass Drying by
a Simple Solar Device. Int. J. Sol. Energy 1997 ,18, 303–311. [CrossRef]
88. Becker, E.W. Micro-algae as a source of protein. Biotechnol. Adv. 2007 ,25, 207–210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Mulbry, W.; Westhead, E.K.; Pizarro, C.; Sikora, L. Recycling of manure nutrients: Use of algal biomass from
dairy manure treatment as a slow release fertilizer. Bioresour. Technol. 2005 ,96, 451–458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Han, W.; Clarke, W.; Pratt, S. Composting of waste algae: A review. Waste Manag. 2014 ,34, 1148–1155.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Eyras, M.C.; Rostagno, C.M.; Defossé, G.E. Biological Evaluation of Seaweed Composting. Compost Sci. Util.
1998 ,6. [CrossRef]
92. Eriksen, N.T. Production of phycocyanin—A pigment with applications in biology, biotechnology, foods and
medicine. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2008 ,80, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Adarme-Vega, T.C.; Lim, D.K.Y.; Timmins, M.; Vernen, F.; Li, Y.; Schenk, P .M. Microalgal biofactories: A
promising approach towards sustainable omega-3 fatty acid production. Microb. Cell Fact. 2012 ,11, 96–105.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Del Campo, J.A.; García-González, M.; Guerrero, M. Outdoor cultivation of microalgae for carotenoid
production: Current state and perspectives. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2007 ,74, 1163–1174. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
95. Halim, R.; Danquah, M.K.; Webley, P .A. Extraction of oil from microalgae for biodiesel production: A review.
Biotechnol. Adv. 2012 ,30, 709–732. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Ward, A.J.; Lewis, D.M.; Green, F.B. Anaerobic digestion of algae biomass: A review. Algal Res. 2014 ,5,
204–214. [CrossRef]
97. Tian, C.; Li, B.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Lu, H. Hydrothermal liquefaction for algal bioreﬁnery: A critical review.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2014 ,38, 933–950. [CrossRef]
98. Hognon, C.; Delrue, F.; Texier, J.; Grateau, M.; Thiery, S.; Miller, H.; Roubeau, A. Comparison of pyrolysis
and hydrothermal liquefaction of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii . Growth studies on the recovered hydrothermal
aqueous phase. Biomass Bioenerg. 2015 ,73, 23–31. [CrossRef]
99. Biller, P .; Ross, A.B.; Skill, S.C.; Lea-Langton, A.; Balasundaram, B.; Hall, C.; Riley, R.; Llewellyn, C.A.
Nutrient recycling of aqueous phase for microalgae cultivation from the hydrothermal liquefaction process.
Algal Res. 2012 ,1, 70–76. [CrossRef]
100. Garcia Alba, L.; Torri, C.; Fabbri, D.; Kersten, S.R.A.; Wim Brilman, D.W.F. Microalgae growth on the aqueous
phase from hydrothermal liquefaction of the same microalgae. Chem. Eng. J. 2013 ,228, 214–223. [CrossRef]
101. Hognon, C.; Delrue, F.; Boissonnet, G. Energetic and economic evaluation of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
hydrothermal liquefaction and pyrolysis through thermochemical models. Energy 2015 ,93, 31–40. [CrossRef]
102. Bird, M.I.; Wurster, C.M.; De Paula Silva, P .H.; Paul, N.A.; De Nys, R. Algal biochar: Effects and applications.
GCB Bioenergy 2012 ,4, 61–69. [CrossRef]Energies 2016 ,9, 132 19 of 19
103. Agraﬁoti, E.; Bouras, G.; Kalderis, D.; Diamadopoulos, E. Biochar production by sewage sludge pyrolysis.
J. Anal. Appl. Pyrol. 2013 ,101, 72–78. [CrossRef]
104. Norton, T.A.; Melkonian, M.; Andersen, R.A. Algal biodiversity. Phycologia 1996 ,35, 308–326. [CrossRef]
105. Sharma, N.K.; Rai, A.K. Biodiversity and biogeography of microalgae: Progress and pitfalls. Environ. Rev.
2011 ,19, 1–15. [CrossRef]
106. Sydney, E.B.; da Silva, T.E.; Tokarski, A.; Novak, A.C.; de Carvalho, J.C.; Woiciecohwski, A.L.; Larroche, C.;
Soccol, C.R. Screening of microalgae with potential for biodiesel production and nutrient removal from
treated domestic sewage. Appl. Energ. 2011 ,88, 3291–3294. [CrossRef]
107. Li, Y.; Zhou, W.; Hu, B.; Min, M.; Chen, P .; Ruan, R.R. Integration of algae cultivation as biodiesel
production feedstock with municipal wastewater treatment: Strains screening and signiﬁcance evaluation of
environmental factors. Bioresour. Technol. 2011 ,102, 10861–10867. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Heo, J.; Cho, D.-H.; Ramanan, R.; Oh, H.-M.; Kim, H.-S. PhotoBiobox: A tablet sized, low-cost, high
throughput photobioreactor for microalgal screening and culture optimization for growth, lipid content and
CO 2sequestration. Biochem. Eng. J. 2015 ,103, 193–197. [CrossRef]
109. Oswald, W.J. Algal Production—Problems, Achievements and Potential in Algae Biomass ; Shelef, G., Soeder, C.J.,
Eds.; Elsevier North/Holland/Biomedical Press: Amsterdam, The Netherland, 1980; pp. 1–8.
110. Cauchie, H.M.; Hoffmann, L.; Jaspar-Versali, M.F.; Salvia, M.; Thomé, J.P . Daphnia magna Straus living in an
aerated sewage lagoon as a source of chitin: Ecological aspects. J. Zool. 1995 ,125, 67–78.
111. Kagami, M.; de Bruin, A.; Ibelings, B.; Van Donk, E. Parasitic chytrids: Their effects on phytoplankton
communities and food-web dynamics. Hydrobiologia 2007 ,578, 113–129. [CrossRef]
112. Shi, S.Y.; Liu, Y.D.; Shen, Y.W.; Li, G.B.; Li, D.H. Lysis of Aphanizomenon fols-aquae (Cyanobacteria) by a
bacteria Bacilus cereus. Biol. Control 2006 ,39, 345–351. [CrossRef]
113. Wu, Q.X.; Cheng, K.; Yang, J.F.; Chen, J.G.; Zhao, Y.J.; Xu, M. Isolation and characterization of a marine
chaetoceros muelleri virus. Oceanol. Limnol. Sin. 2011 ,42, 455–459.
114. Wang, H.; Zhang, W.; Chen, L.; Wang, J.; Liu, T. The contamination and control of biological pollutants in
mass cultivation of microalgae. Bioresour. Technol. 2013 ,128, 745–750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Aravantinou, A.F.; Theodorakopoulos, M.A.; Manariotis, I.D. Selection of microalgae for wastewater
treatment and potential lipids production. Bioresour. Technol. 2013 ,147, 130–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
©2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons by Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).