Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2009, 10 , 3722-3742; doi:10.3390/ijms10093722  
 
International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences  
ISSN 1422-0067 
www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms 
Review 
Biodegradability of Plastics 
Yutaka Tokiwa 1,*, Buenaventurada P. Calabia 2, Charles U. Ugwu 1 and Seiichi Aiba 2 
1 Okinawa Industrial Technology Center/12-2 Suzaki, Uruma, Okinawa 904-2234, Japan;  
E-Mail: ugutyaru@pref.oki nawa.lg.jp (C.U.U.) 
2 National Institute of Advanced Industrial Sc ience and Technology (AIS T)/Tsukuba Central 6, 
Higashi, Tsukuba Ibaraki 305- 8566, Japan; E-Mails: b.calabia@ais t.go.jp (B.P.C.); 
aiba-seiichi@aist.go.jp (S.A.) 
* Author to whom correspondence should be addre ssed; E-Mail: tokiwayu@pre f.okinawa.lg.jp (Y.T.);  
Tel. +81-98-929-0111; Fax: +81-98-929-0115. 
Received: 5 August 2009; in revised form: 21 August 2009 / Accepted: 25 August 2009 /  
Published: 26 August 2009 
 
Abstract: Plastic is a broad name given to differe nt polymers with high molecular weight, 
which can be degraded by various processes. However, considering their abundance in the environment and their specificity in attackin g plastics, biodegrada tion of plastics by 
microorganisms and enzymes seems to be the most  effective process. When plastics are used 
as substrates for microorganisms, evaluation of their biodegradability should not only be 
based on their chemical structure, but also on their physical propertie s (melting point, glass 
transition temperature, crystallinity, storage modulus etc.). In this  review, microbial and 
enzymatic biodegradation of plas tics and some factors that a ffect their biod egradability  
are discussed. 
Keywords: aliphatic polyesters; bi o-based plastics; biode gradability; enzymatic 
degradation; microbial degradation  
 
1. Introduction  
 
With the advances in technology and the increase in the global popul ation, plastic materials have 
found wide applications in every asp ect of life and industrie s. However, most conventional plastics such 
as polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, poly(vi nyl chloride) and poly(ethylene tere phthalate), are OPEN ACCESSInt. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3723
non biodegradable, and their increasing accumulation in th e environment has been a threat to the planet. 
To overcome all these problems, some steps ha ve been undertaken. The first strategy involved 
production of plastics with high degree of degradability.  
The word ‘bio-plastic’ is used confusingly. In  our understanding, however, bio-plastics consist of 
either biodegradable plastics ( i.e., plastics produced from fossil ma terials) or bio- based plastics (i.e.,  
plastics synthesized from biomass or renewa ble resources). The inter-relationship between 
biodegradable plastics a nd bio-based plastics is shown in Fi gure 1. Polycaprolactone (PCL), and 
poly(butylene succinate) (PBS) are petroleum based, but  they can be degraded by microorganisms. On 
the other hand, poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), poly(lact ide) (PLA) and starch  blends are produced 
from biomass or renewable resources, and are thus  biodegradable. Despite th e fact that polyethylene 
(PE) and Nylon 11 (NY11) can be produced from  biomass or renewable resources, they are 
non-biodegradable. Acetyl cellulose (AcC) is either biodegradable or  non-biodegradable, depending on 
the degree of acetylation. AcC’s with a low acetylat ion can be degraded, while those with high 
substitution ratios ar e non-biodegradable.  
 
Figure 1.  Bio-plastics comprised of  biodegradable plastics and bio-based plastics. 
 
 
Biodegradable plastics are seen by many as a promis ing solution to this problem because they are 
environmentally-friendly. They can be derived from  renewable feedstocks, thereby reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions. For instance, polyhy droxyalkanoates (PHA) and lactic acid (raw materials for PLA) can 
be produced by fermentative biotechnological proce sses using agricultural pr oducts and microorganisms 
[1-3].  Biodegradable plastics offer a lot of advantages such as increased soil fertility, low accumulation 
of bulky plastic materials in the environment (which invariably will minimize injuries to wild animals), 
and reduction in the cost of waste management. Furthermore, biodegradable plastics can be recycled to 
useful metabolites (monomers and oligomers) by microorganisms and enzymes. A second strategy 
involves degradation of some petroleum-derived plastics by biological processes. A typical example can 
be seen in the case of some aliphatic polyesters such  as PCL and PBS that can be degraded with enzymes 
and microorganisms [4-6]. Studies have also shown that polycarbonates (particula rly the aliphatic types) 
possess some degree of biodegradability [7].    
NY11PEBio-plastics
Bio-based plasticsBiodegradable plastics
StarchPHB
PLA
PCL 
PBS 
PES AcCInt. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3724
Thirdly, bold attempts are being made to recycle non-biodegradable pl astics. For instance, 
polystyrene (used in making some disposable spoons, plates, cups and some packaging materials) can be 
recycled and used as filler for other plastics.  
Prior to the widespread applications of biodegrad able plastics, it is important to evaluate and 
understand the mechanisms involved and the microorganisms that are associated with biodegradation. 
Regarding microbial and enzymatic degradation of pl astics, we will discuss them from two sides: one 
aspect is based on microbial (enzyme) characteristics and the other is on characteristics of the plastics. 
Microbial (enzyme) characteristics imply distributi on and kinds of microorgani sms, as well as their 
growth conditions (such as, pH, temperat ure, moisture content, oxygen, nutrients , etc.), and types of 
enzymes (intracellular and extrace llular enzyme, exo- or endo- cl eavage types). An interesting 
question is, ‘what are the characteristics of plastics that can effectively promot e the biodegradability of 
plastics?’ Usually our main focus has been  on the chemical structure of polymers  with respect to the 
biodegradability of water-sol uble polymeric materials. 
When the biodegradability of solid polymers is a ssessed, aside from their chemical properties, we 
should also note their physical prop erties as polymer aggregates. In other words, we should consider 
not only the first order structures bu t also the high-order structures of polymers that play an important 
role in the biodegradation process.  Furthermore, it is worth mention that surface cond itions (surface 
area, hydrophilic, hydrophobic properties) of plastics  also generally influence the biodegradation 
mechanism of plastics. In this review, we will be discuss the biodegradation of plastics by both microbial and enzymatic processes and several factors that govern their biodegradability. 
 
2. Biodiversity and Occurrence of Polymer-Degrading Microorganisms  
Biodiversity and occurrence of polymer-degrading microorganisms vary depending on the 
environment, such as soil, sea, compost, activated  sludge, etc. It is necessary to investigate the 
distribution and population of polyme r-degrading microorganisms in va rious ecosystems. Generally, the 
adherence of microorganisms on th e surface of plastics followed by  the colonization of the exposed 
surface is the major mechanisms involved in the mi crobial degradation of plastics. The enzymatic 
degradation of plastics by hydrolysis is a two-step process: first, the enzyme binds to the polymer 
substrate then subsequently cataly zes a hydrolytic cleavage.  Polymers are degraded into low molecular 
weight oligomers, dimers and monomers and finally mineralized to CO
2 and H 2O.  
The clear zone method with agar plates is a widely used technique  for screening polymer degraders 
and for assessment of the degradat ion potential of differ ent microorganisms towards a polymer. Agar 
plates containing emulsified pol ymers are inoculated with microorganisms and the presence of 
polymer degrading microorganisms can be confirmed by the formation of clear halo zones around the 
colonies. This happens when the polymer-degra ding microorganisms excrete extracellular enzymes 
which diffuse through the agar and degrade the polymer into water soluble materials. Using this 
technique, it was confirmed th at PHB, polypropiolactone (PPL) and PCL degraders are widely 
distributed in different environmen ts [8-10]. Majority of the strains that are able to degrade PHB 
belong to different taxa such as Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, Streptomyces  and fungi [9]. 
It has been reported that 39 b acterial strains of the classes Firmicutes  and Proteobacteria  can degrade 
PHB, PCL, and PBS, but not PLA [10]. Only a few PLA degrading microorganisms have been isolated Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3725
and identified. The population of a liphatic polymer-degrading microorganisms in different ecosystems 
was found to be in the following orde r: PHB = PCL > PBS > PLA [8,11]. 
 
3. Factors Affecting the Biod egradability of Plastics 
 
The properties of plastics are associated with th eir biodegradability. Both the chemical and physical 
properties of plastics influence the mechanism of biodegradation. The surface conditions (surface area, hydrophilic, and hydrophobic properties ), the first order structures (chemical structure, molecular 
weight and molecular weight distri bution) and the high order structur es (glass transition temperature, 
melting temperature, modulus of elasticity, crysta llinity and crystal struct ure) of polymers play 
important roles in the bi odegradation processes.  
In general, polyesters with side chains are less assimilated than those without side chains [4]. The 
molecular weight is also important for the bi odegradability because it determines many physical 
properties of the polymer. Increasing the molecular weight of the polymer d ecreased its degradability.  
PCL with higher molecular weight (M n > 4,000) was degraded slowly by Rhizopus delemar  lipase 
(endo-cleavage type) than  that with low Mn [12]. Moreover, the morphology of polymers greatly affects 
their rates of biodegradati on. The degree of crystallinity is a cruc ial factor affecti ng biodegradability, 
since enzymes mainly attack the amorphous domains  of a polymer. The molecules in the amorphous 
region are loosely packed, and thus make it more susceptible to degrad ation. The crystalline part of the 
polymers is more resistant than th e amorphous region. The rate of degrad ation of PLA decreases with an 
increase in crystallinity of the polymer  [13,14].  As shown in Figure 2, the melting temperature (Tm) of 
polyesters has a strong effect on the enzymatic degr adation of polymers. The higher the Tm, the lower 
the biodegradation of the polymer  [12,15,16]. In general, Tm is repres ented by the following formula:  
Tm = ΔH/ΔS 
where ΔH was the change of enthalpy in melting and ΔS is the change of entropy in melting. It is well 
known that the interactions among pol ymer chains mainly affect the ΔH value and that the internal 
rotation energies correspondi ng to the rigidity (the flexibility) of the polymer molecule remarkably 
affect the ΔS value. 
The chemical structures of aliphatic polyeste r, polycarbonate, polyurethane and polyamides, 
together with their (Tm)s are listed in Table 1. The aliphatic polyesters [e ster bond (-CO-O-)] and 
polycarbonates [carbonate bond (-O-CO- O-)] are two typical plastic pol ymers that show high potential 
for use as biodegradable plastics, owing to the
 ir susceptibilities to  lipolytic enzymes and microbial 
degradation. Compared with alip hatic polyesters and polycarbonates, aliphatic polyurethane and 
polyamides (nylon) have higher Tm values. The high (Tm)s of polyurethane and polyamide (nylon) are 
caused by the large Δ H value due to the presence of hydrog en bonds among polymer chains based on 
the urethane bond (-NH-CO-O-) and the amide bond (-NH-CO-) respectively. 
On the contrary, the high Tm of aromatic polyester is caused by the small ΔS value with increase in 
the rigidity (decrease in flexibility) of the polymer molecule based on an aromatic ring. 
 Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3726
Figure 2. Relationship between Tm and biode gradability of polyesters by R. arrhizus  lipase. 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
PEA: poly(ethylene adipate); PESu: poly(ethylene suberate); PEAz: poly(ethylene azelate); PESE: 
poly(ethylene sebacate); PEDe: poly(ethylene deca methylate); PBS: poly(butylene succinate); 
PBA: poly(butylene adipate); PBSE: poly(bu tylene sebacate); PCL: polycaprolactone; PPL: 
polypropiolactone. 
 
Table 1.  Chemical structures of aliphatic po lyester, polycarbonate, polyurethanes and 
polyamides with their (Tm)s. 
Name Chemical Structure Tm (°C) 
Polyester -O-(CH 2)6-O-CO-(CH 2)4-CO- 60 
Polycarbonate -O-(CH 2)4-O-CO-O-(CH 2)4-O-CO- 65 
Polyurethane -NH-(CH 2)6-NH-CO-O-(CH 2)4-O-CO- 180 
Polyamide -NH-(CH 2)6-NH-CO-(CH 2)6-CO- 240 
Polyamide -NH-(CH 2)6-NH-CO-(CH 2)4-CO- 265 
 
4. Aliphatic Polyesters from Fossil Resources 
 
4.1. Poly(Ethylene Adipate) (PEA) 
 
PEA ([-OCH 2CH 2OOC(CH 2)4CO-]n) is a pre-polymer of polyuret hane. It is often blended with 
other polyesters to get specific  desirable properties such as soft segments. PEA-degrading 
microorganisms were screened and isolated us ing PEA (Mn 3,000) as a sole source of carbon . Among 
the isolated PEA-degrading microorganisms, Penicillium  sp. strain 14-3 exhibite d the strongest activity. 
PEA was degraded in 120 h at high cell concentrations. This strain can degrad e not only PEA but also 
aliphatic polyesters such as poly(ethylene succina te) (PES), PBS and poly(butylene adipate) (PBA) 0246810
40 60 80 100 120 140
Tm (oC)Biodegradability in terms of 
TOC formed ( ×103mg/l)PEA
PEAzPCL
PBSE
PPL
PBSPBA
PESu
PESE
PEDe
0246810
40 60 80 100 120 140
Tm (oC)Biodegradability in terms of 
TOC formed ( ×103mg/l)PEA
PEAzPCL
PBSE
PPL
PBSPBA
PESu
PESE
PEDeInt. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3727
[17]. The enzyme responsible for th e degradation of PEA has been purif ied and is considered to be a 
kind of lipase with broad substrat e specificity. The purified enzyme has a molecular weight of 25 kDa 
and could degrade various kinds of a liphatic polyesters, such as poly( β-propiolactone) (PPL)  and 
poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), but not poly( DL-3-methylpropiolactone) or poly ( DL-3-hydroxybutyrate) 
[5]. This enzyme can also hydrolyze plant oils, trig lycerides and methyl este rs of fatty acids. Given 
that the purified enzyme of  Penicillium  sp. strain 14-3 has properties th at are similar to lipase, some 
commercially available lipases and esterases were used  to confirm if they were capable of degrading 
PEA. Results showed that lipases from R. arrizus, R. delemar , Achromobacter sp. and Candida 
cylindracea and esterase from hog liver showed activities on PEA and PCL [6]. 
 
4.2. Poly( ε-Caprolactone) (PCL) 
 
PCL ([-OCH 2CH 2CH 2CH 2CH 2CO-]n) is a biodegradable synthetic partially-crystalline polyester 
with low melting point (60 °C) and a glass transiti on temperature (Tg) of -60 °C. It is prepared by 
ring-opening polymerization of ε-caprolactone. PCL has been shown to be degraded by the action of 
aerobic and anaerobic microorganisms that are widely distributed in various ecosystems. Furthermore, 
the degradation of high molecular weight PCL was investigated using Penicillium  sp. strain 26-1 
(ATCC 36507) isolated from soil. PCL was almost completely degraded in 12 days.  This strain can 
also assimilate unsaturated aliphatic and alicyc lic polyesters but not aromatic polyesters [4]. A 
thermotolerant PCL-degrading micr oorganism which was identified as Aspergillus  sp. strain ST-01 
was isolated from soil. PCL was completely degraded  by this strain after 6 days incubation at 50 °C 
[18]. PCL and PHB were degrad ed under anaerobic condition by ne w species of microorganisms 
belonging to the genius Clostridium  [19].  
PCL can be degraded by lipases and esterases [6]. The degradation rate of PCL is dependent on its 
molecular weight and degree of crystall inity. Enzymatic degradation of PCL by Aspergillus flavus  and 
Penicillium funiculosum  showed that faster degradation was ob served in the amorphous region [20].  
The biodegradability of PCL can be  increased by copolymerization wi th aliphatic polyesters [21,22]. 
In general, copolymers have lower crystallinity and lower Tm than homopolymers, and are thus more 
susceptible to degradation.  
The susceptibility of PCL films which were prep ared at different quenching temperatures (-78, 0, 
25, 50 °C) by  R. arrhizus lipase was evaluated at 30 °C. Large spherulites were formed on PCL film 
quenched at 50 °C but no spheruli tes were observed on PCL film quenc hed at -78 °C. X-ray diffraction 
diagram of PCL films quenched at 25 °C and 50 °C  indicated the growth of PCL crystal in the 
direction of c-axis (thi ckness of crystal unit), but  crystallinity did not in crease so much (about 40%) 
with the rise in quenching temperature. The suscep tibility of PCL film quenched at -78 °C was the 
highest and the susceptibility decreased with increase in quenching temperature. It was confirmed that 
the size of spherulites is an important factor fo r biodegradation of PCL. In addition, the storage 
modulus of PCL film samples incr eased with increase in quenching te mperature. PCL film quenched at 
50 °C had the highest storage modulus, while low storage modulus was observed on PCL film 
quenched at -195 °C. Storage modulus of PCL film also increased with increase in draw ratio. 
Furthermore, the susceptibility of PCL films to R. arrhizus  lipase decreased with in crease in draw ratio. 
As the storage modulus of polyesters can be determ ined over a wide range (from below Tg up to Tm), Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3728
we could predict the rate of enzymatic degradation of polyesters by us ing the value of storage modulus 
of polyesters at 30 °C (the typical evalua tion temperature of biodegradability) [23]. 
 
4.3. Poly ( β-Propiolactone) PPL 
 
PPL ([-OCH 2CH 2CO-]n) is a chemosynthetic biodegradable aliphatic polyester with good 
mechanical properties. The structural units of this polyester are similar to PHB and PCL, thus, it can be 
degraded both by PHB depolymerase and lipase  [6,24,25]. Many PPL-degradi ng microorganisms are 
widely distributed in various environments a nd majority of these microorganisms belong to Bacillus sp. 
[26]. PPL-degrading microorganisms were isolated from different ec osystems and out of 13 isolates, 
nine of these strains were identified as Acidovorax sp., Variovorax paradoxus, Sphingomonas 
paucimobilis.  PHB was also degraded by these isolates  [27]. R. delemar can also degrade PPL [6]. 
Moreover, a novel PHB depolymerase from a thermophilic Streptomyces sp. was also capable of 
degrading PPL [28].  4.4. Poly(Butylene Succinate) (PBS) and Poly(Ethylene Succinate) (PES) 
 
PBS ([-O(CH
2)4OOC(CH 2)2CO-]n) and PES ([-O(CH 2)2OOC(CH 2)2CO-]n) are aliphatic synthetic 
polyesters with high melting points of 112-114 °C a nd 103-106 °C, respectively. They are synthesized 
from dicarboxylic acids ( e.g., succinic and adipic acid) and glycols ( e.g., ethylene glycol and 
1,4-butanediol) [29]. Their mechanical properties are comparable to polypropylene and low-density 
polyethylene (LDPE).  
PBS degrading microorganisms are widely distributed in the environment, but their ratio to the total 
microorganisms is lower than PCL-de graders. The degradation of PBS by Amycolatopsis  sp. HT-6  was 
investigated and results showed that this strain can degrade not only PBS but also PHB and PCL  [30]. 
Several thermophilic actinomycetes from Japan Culture of Microorganisms (JCM) were screened for their capability of degrading PBS. Microbispora rosea , Excellospora japonica  and E. viridilutea formed 
clear zone on agar plates containing emulsified PBS. M. rosea  was able to degrade 50% (w/v) of PBS 
film after eight days cultivat ion in liquid medium [31]. 
PES is another chemosynthetically aliphatic polyes ter which is prepared either by ring-opening 
polymerization of succinic anhydrid e with ethylene oxide or by pol ycondensation of succinic acid and 
ethylene glycol [32]. In contrast with microbial polyesters which are susceptible to degradation in 
various environments, the degradability of PES wa s found to be strongly dependent on environmental 
factors [33]. Moreover, PES-degrad ing microorganisms have limited dist ribution in the environment in 
comparison with PHB and PCL-degrading microorganisms. A thermophilic Bacillus sp. TT96, a PES 
degrader was isolated from soil. This bacterium can also form clear zones on PCL and PBS plates but not 
on PHB [34]. A number of mesophilic PES-degrading microorganisms were isolated from aquatic and 
soil environments. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the isolates belong to the genera Bacillus and 
Paenibacillus . Among the isolates, strain KT102 which is related to Bacillus pumilus was chosen since it 
could degrade PES film at the fast est rate among the isolates. This strain can degrade PES, PCL and 
olive oil but not PBS, PHB and PLA [35].  In addition, several fungi were isolated from various 
ecosystems and the isolates formed clear zones around the colony on agar plates containing PES. A Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3729
strain NKCM1003 belonging to  Aspergillus clavatus  was selected and it can de grade PES film at a rate 
of 21µg/cm2/h. [36]. Comparative studies on the biodegrad ability of three poly(alkylene succinate)s 
[PES, PBS and poly(propylene succinat e) (PPS)] with the same molecu lar weight were investigated 
using R. delemar lipase.  PPS with low Tm (43-52 °C) had the hi ghest biodegradatio n rate followed by 
PES, owing to the lower crystallinity of PPS compar ed to PES and PBS [37]. 
 
4.5. Aliphatic-Aromatic Copolyesters (AAC) 
 
Due to the limited properties of many biodegradable aliphatic types of polyest er that are important 
for many applications, attempt was made to combine the biodegradability of aliphatic polyesters with 
the good material properties of  aromatic polyesters.  
It has been reported that AAC, which consiste d of PCL and aromatic polyester such as 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET), poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT) and poly(ethylene  isophthalate) 
(PEIP) was hydrolyzed by R. delemar lipase [15]. The susceptibility of these AAC’s to hydrolysis by R. 
delemar lipase decreased rapidly with increase in arom atic polyester content. The susceptibility to 
lipase of AAC (which consisted of PCL and PEIP, and the latter be ing used as a low Tm (103 °C) 
aromatic polyester), was greater th an those of other AAC. It was as sumed that the rigidity of the 
aromatic ring in the AAC chains influenced  their biodegradability with this lipase. 
Another synthetic AAC containing adipic acid and terephthalic acid ca n also be attacked by 
microorganisms [38]. Kleeberg et al . evaluated the biodegradation of AAC synthesized from 
1,4-butanediol, adipic acid, and terephtalic acid. Thermobifida fusca (known previously as 
Thermomonospora fusca) isolated from compost, showed 20-fol d higher degradation rates than usually 
observed in a common compost test [39]. A thermophilic hydrolase from Thermobifida fusca  was 
found to be inducible not only by AAC but also by es ters. This enzyme was classified as a serine 
hydrolase with high si milarity to triacylg lycerol lipase from Streptomyces albus  G and  
triacylglycerol-aclyhydrolase from Streptomyces  sp. M11 [40]. 
 
5. Aliphatic Polyesters from Renewable Resources 
 5.1. Poly(3-Hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) 
 
PHB ([-O(CH
3)CHCH 2CO-]n) is a natural polymer produced by many bacteria as a means to store 
carbon and energy. This polymer has attracted research  and commercial interest  worldwide because it 
can be synthesized from re newable low-cost feedstocks and the pol ymerizations are operated under mild 
process conditions with minimal environmental imp act. Furthermore, it can be biodegraded in both 
aerobic and anaerobic environments, without form ing any toxic products. Chowdhury reported for the 
first time the PHB-degrading microorganisms from Bacillus, Pseudomonas and Streptomyces  
species[41]. From then on, several aerobic and anaer obic PHB-degrading microorganisms have been 
isolated from soil  (Pseudomonas lemoigne , Comamonas  sp. Acidovorax faecalis, Aspergillus fumigatus  
and Variovorax paradoxus ), activated and anerobic sludge ( Alcaligenes faecalis, Pseudomonas, 
Illyobacter delafieldi ), seawater and lakewater ( Comamonas testosterone, Pseudomonas stutzeri ) [42]. 
The percentage of PHB-degrading microorganisms in the environment was estimated to be 0.5-9.6% of Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3730
the total colonies [10]. Majority of the PHB-degr ading microorganisms were isolated at ambient or 
mesophilic temperatures and very few of them were  capable of degrading PHB at higher temperature. 
Tokiwa et al.  emphasized that composting at high temperatur e is one of the most promising technologies 
for recycling biodegradable plasti cs and thermophilic microorganisms that could degrade polymers play 
an important role in the composting process  [43]. Thus, microorganisms that  are capable of degrading 
various kinds of polyesters at high temper atures are of interest. A thermophilic  Streptomyces  sp. isolated 
from soil can degrade not only PHB but al so PES, PBS and poly[oligo(tetramethylene 
succinate)-co-(tetramethylene carbonate)] (PBS/C).  This actinomycete has higher PHB-degrading 
activity than thermotolerant and thermophilic Streptomyces  strains from culture collections  [44]. A 
thermotolerant Aspergillus sp. was able to degrade 90% of PHB film after five days cultivation at 50 °C 
[18]. Furthermore, several thermophilic polyester degrading actinomycetes were isolated from different 
ecosystems. Out of 341 strains, 31 isolates were PH B, PCL and PES degraders and these isolates were 
identified as members of the genus  Actinomadura,  Microbispora, Streptomyces, Thermoactinomyces  
and Saccharomonospora  [45]. 
 
5.2. Poly(Lactic Acid) (PLA)  
 
PLA ([-O(CH 3)CHCO-]n) is a biodegradable and bioc ompatible thermoplastic which can be 
produced by fermentation from renewable resources. It  can also be synthesized  either by condensation 
polymerization of lactic acid or by ring opening polymerization of lactide in the presence of a catalyst. This polymer exists in the form  of three stereoisomers: poly(
L-lactide) ( L-PLA), poly( D-lactide) 
(D-PLA) and poly( DL-lactide) ( DL-PLA). The manufacture of PLA fr om lactic acid was pioneered by 
Carothers in 1932 [46]. 
Ecological studies on the abundance of PLA-degrad ing microorganisms in different environments 
have confirmed that PLA-degraders ar e not widely distributed, and thus it is less susceptible to microbial 
attack compared to other microbial and synthetic aliphatic polyme rs [10,11,34]. The degradation of PLA 
in soil is slow and that takes a long time for degradation to start [47,48]. 
Microbial degradation of PLA using Amycolatopsis  sp. was first reported by Pranamuda et al. [11]. 
Since then, a number of research st udies dealing with microbial and en zymatic degradation of PLA have 
been published [49]. Many strains of genus Amycolatopsis  and Saccharotrix were able to degrade both 
PLA and silk fibroin. The main amino acid constituents of silk fibroin are L-alanine and glycine and 
there is a similarity between the stereo chemical position of the chiral carbon of L-lactic acid unit of PLA 
and L-alanine unit in the silk fibroin. Silk fibroin is one of  the natural analogues of poly( L-lactide), thus, 
the PLA degrading microorganisms may probably identify the L-lactate unit as an analogue of L-alanine 
unit in silk fibroin. Several proteinous materials such as silk fibroin, elasti n, gelatin and some peptides 
and amino acids were found to stimulate th e production of enzymes from PLA-degrading 
microorganisms [50-54].  
Williams [55] investigated the enzymatic degrada tion of PLA using proteinase K, bromelain and 
pronase. Among these enzymes, proteinase K from Tritirachium album  was the most effective for PLA 
degradation. Proteinase K and other serine proteases are capable of degrading L-PLA and  DL-PLA but 
not D-PLA. Furthermore, proteinase K preferentially hydrolyzes th e amorphous part of L-PLA and the 
rate of degradation decreases with an increase in the crystallin e part [56,57]. Fukuzaki et al. reported Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3731
that the degradation of PLA olig omers was accelerated by several esterase-type enzymes, especially 
Rhizopus delemar lipase [58]. The purified PLA depolymerase from Amycolatopsi s sp. was also 
capable of degrading casein, silk fibroin, Suc-(Ala) 3-pNA but not PCL, PHB and Suc-(Gly) 3-pNA [50]. 
Their studies showed that PLA depolymeras e was a kind of protease and not a lipase. 
It was reported that α-chymotrypsin can degrade PLA and PE A with lower activity on poly(butylene 
succinate-co-adipate) (PBS/A). Moreover, several seri ne proteases such as trypsin, elastase, subtilisin 
were able to hydrolyze  L-PLA [59]. 
 
6. Polymer Blends 
 
6.1. Blends of Polyester with Other Polymers 
 
The blending of biodegradable polymers is one appro ach of reducing the overall  cost of the material 
and modifying the desired properties and degrada tion rates. Compared to copolymerization method, 
blending may be a much easier an d faster way to achieve the desi red properties. More importantly, 
through blending, other less e xpensive polymers could be incorporated  with one another. Miscibility of 
the blends is one of the most im portant factors affecting the final polymer properties. Some of the 
advantages of producing miscible blends are: single phase morphology and reproducibility of the 
mechanical properties. However formation of misc ible blends especially with non-biodegradable 
polymers can slow down or even inhibit the de gradation of the biodegradable components. 
Iwamoto et al. developed blend plastics by combining PCL with conventional plastics such as low 
density polyethylene (LDPE), pol ypropylene (PP), polystyrene (P S), nylon 6 (NY), poly(ethylene 
terephthalate) (PET) and PHB, a nd evaluated their enzymatic degrad abilities. The blends of PCL and 
LDPE, PCL and PP retained the high biodegradability of PCL. In contrast, th e degradability of the 
PCL part in the blends of PCL and PS, PCL and PET, PCL and PHB dropped off remarkably. In case 
of blends of PCL and NY or PS, the biodegradability of PCL did not change so much. In general, it 
seems that the higher the miscibility  of PCL and conventional plastics,  the harder the degradation of 
PCL on their blends by R. arrhizus  lipase [60]. Furthermore it was found that degradabilities of 
PCL/LDPE [61] and PCL/ PP [62] blends by the lipase coul d be controlled, depending on their  
phase structure. 
Different blends of PHB have been performed with biodegradable and non-biodegradable polymers 
and polysaccharides. The miscibility, morphology and bi odegradability of PHB bl ends with PCL, PBA, 
and poly(vinyl acetate) (PVAc) were investigated. PHB/PCL and PHB/ PB A blends were immiscible in 
the amorphous state while PHB/ PVAc are miscible. En zymatic degradation of these blends was carried 
out using PHB depolymerase from Alcaligenes feacalis  T1. Results showed that the weight loss of the 
blends decreased linearly with increase in the amount of PBA, PVAc or PCL [63].  
Koyama and Doi  studied the miscibility, morphology and bi odegradability of PHB/PLA blend. The 
spherulites of the blends decreased with an increase in the content of  the PLA and the rate of enzymatic 
surface erosion also decreased with increasing PLA c ontent in the blend. It was evident that polymer 
blends containing PHB usually showed improved properties and biodegradability when compared with 
pure PHB [64]. Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3732
Different blends of L-PLA/ PCL (75/25, 50/50, 25/75) were prep ared and enzymatic degradation was 
observed using proteinase K or Pseudomonas lipase . Proteinase K was able to degrade the amorphous 
domain of PLA but not th e crystalline part of L-PLA or PCL. On the contrary, Pseudomonas lipase can 
degrade both the amorphous and crys talline part of PCL, but not L-PLA [65]. 
 
6.2. Blends of Polyesters and Starch 
 
Blends of synthetic polymers and starch offer cost performance benefits because starch is renewable, 
cheap and available year-round. In this case the starch  blended can be in the form of granules or 
gelatinized starch or even starch which has been modified chemically to a thermoplastic. It is generally 
known that blends of PCL and gr anular starch exhibit a high degree of biodegradation [61]. 
Takagi et al. developed PCL/gelatinized star ch blends using corn starch acetates and evaluated their 
biodegradabilities by an enzyme, α-amylase. Their biodegradabilitie s rapidly decreased with an 
increase in PCL content [66]. 
The feasibility of producing PCL/gra nular starch blends us ing different starch fr om cassava, sago and 
corn was reported by Pranamuda et al.  Both tensile strength and elongati on of the blends decreased as 
the starch content increased. The blends were not good in tensile strength but  were relatively good in 
elongation. Continuous phase dispersion of the starch in the PCL was ob served in the films using SEM. 
Degradation of PCL/starch blends showed that as  the starch content increased, the polymer blends 
became more biodegradable using lipase. This could be attributed to the increase  in the surface area of 
PCL after blending with starch, thereby rende ring it more susceptible to biodegradation  [67].  
Noomhorm et al . developed PCL/tapioca starch (gra nular and gelatinized) blends using 
poly(dioxolane), a poly(ethylene oxide- alt-methylene oxide), as compatibilizer. Their 
biodegradabilities by α-amylase increased as the starch conten t increased, but were independent of the 
dispersion of starch in  the PCL matrix [68]. 
PLA and starch are good candidates for polymer ble nds because both are biodegradable and derivable 
from renewable resources. Starch can improve the biodegradability and lowe r the cost while PLA can 
control the mechanical properties of the blend. However, starch is a hydrophilic material , which does not 
interact well with hydrophobic polyest ers resulting to unfavorable qualities of the blends. In line with 
this, several approaches have been proposed and de veloped to overcome the problem of incompatibility 
of starch and synthetic polymer blends [69,70]. Very good inte rfacial adhesions of PLA/ starch blends 
were achieved by grafting PLA using maleic anhydride (MA) [71]. Jang et al. investigated the interfacial 
adhesion between PLA and starch using MA and maleated ther moplastic starch (MATPS). Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) showed that MA is a good  compatibilizer and PL A/ starch blends had 
increased crystallinity. On the othe r hand, MATPS is not effective for PL A/ starch blends. PLA/ starch 
blends which were compatibilized with MA showed higher biodegradability than ordinary PLA/ starch 
blends at the same PLA ratio  [72]. 
The properties and biodegradability of PBS/A and corn starch (5%-30%  w/w) blends were 
investigated by Ratto et al . Results showed that the tensile streng th decreased with incre ase in starch 
content. Soil burial test showed that the rate of biodegradation increased significantly when the starch 
content was increased to 20%. It wa s confirmed that the molecular weig ht of PBS/A decreased after soil 
burial indicating that biod egradation was enhanced by the presence of starch  [73]. Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3733
7. Polycarbonates 
 
Aliphatic polycarbonates are known to have greater resistance to hydrol ysis than aliphatic polyesters. 
Imai et al. first reported the biodegradation of poly(et hylene carbonate) (PEC) implanted in dog tissue 
and suggested that pronase treatment might be eff ective in diminishing the PEC mass [74]. Kawaguchi 
et al.  reported that PEC was degraded enzymatically in  the peritoneal cavity of rats, but not with 
poly(propylene carbon ate) (PPC) [75]. 
The distribution of PEC (Mn 50,000)-degrading mi croorganisms seems to be limited, although PPC 
(Mn 50,000) appears to be non-biodegradable. The percentage of PEC-degrading microorganisms 
among total colonies ranged from 0.2% to 5.7%  [76]. 
Suyama et al.  isolated poly(hexamethylene carbonate ) (PHC, Mn 2000)-degrading microorganisms 
which were phylogenetically diverse. Roseateles depolymerans 61A formed di(6-hydroxyhexyl) 
carbonate and adipic acid from PHC, and di(4- hydroxybutyl)-carbonate and succinic acid from 
poly(butylene carbonate) (PBC, Mn 2,000) [77]. Pranamuda et al. found that Amycolatopsis sp. HT-6 
degraded high molecular-weight poly(butylene carbonate) (PBC, Mn 37,000). In a liquid culture 
containing 150 mg of PBC film, 83 mg of film was degraded after seven days cu ltivation [78]. 
Suyama and Tokiwa reported that a cholesterol esterase from Candida cylindracea , lipoprotein 
lipase from Pseudomonas  sp., and lipase from C. cylindracea , Chromobacterium viscosus , porcine 
pancreas, Pseudomonas sp., and R. arrhizus degraded PBC (Mn 2000). Lipa se and lipoprotein lipase 
from Pseudomonas  sp. could also degrade high molecu lar-weight PBC (Mn 30,000). Lipoprotein 
lipase from Pseudomonas  sp produced 1,4-butanediol, CO 2 and di(4-hydroxybutyl ) carbonate from 
PBC [79]. 
 
8. Polyurethanes (PU)  
PU have various applications su ch as in the manufacture of plas tic foams, cushions, rubber goods, 
synthetic leathers, adhesives, paints and fibers. Ther e are two types of polyuretha nes, that is, the ester 
type and the ether type. Most comme rcial polyurethane products are composed of soft segments derived 
from the polymer-diol, e.g., PCL-diol, polyethylene glycol, pol y-tetramethylene glycol, and hard 
segments from the diisocyanate, e.g., 1,6-hexamethylene-diisocya nate (HDI), diphenyl- 
methane-4,4’-diisocyanate (MDI), to lylene-2,4-diisocyanate (TDI), a nd diols such as ethylene glycol 
and butanediol. 
Darby and Kaplan reported that polyester-type polyurethanes (ES- PU) were more susceptible to 
fungal attack than polyether-type polyurethanes (ET-PU) [80]. Tokiwa et al . found that R. delemar  
lipase and hog pancreatic lipase  can hydrolyze the ES-PU composed of MDI, PC L-diol (Mn 2,000 ) and 
1,4-tetramethylenediol (molar ratio 2:1:1). The am ount of degradation produc ts obtained from the 
ES-PU film with hog pancreatic lipase was approximately half of that produced by R. delemar lipase 
(53% degradation of the original ES-PU film) after 24 h reaction. Hydrolysis ra tes of ES-PU containing 
either MDI or TDI were lower than that of ES -PU containing HDI. Thus, it was suggested that the 
rigidity of ES-PU molecules based on the aromatic rings, rather than the hydrogen bonds among the ES-PU chains, would influence their biodegradability by R. delemar  lipase [21]. Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3734
Crabbe  et al.  reported on the degradation of an ES-PU and the secretion of an enzyme-like factor with 
esterase properties, by Curvularia senegalensis,  a fungus isolated from soil  [81]. Subsequently, 
Nakajima-Kambe et al. showed that Comamonas acidovorans strain TB-35 was able  to degrade ES-PU 
made from poly(diethylene adip ate) (Mn 2,500 and 2,690) and TDI.  A purified ES-PU-degrading 
enzyme from C. acidovorans TB-35, a type of esterase, hydroly zed the ES-PU and released diethylene 
glycol and adipic acid  [82]. 
Santerre et al. [83] and Wang et al. [84] reported that cholesterol esterase from bovine pancreas 
degraded ES-PU synthesized from TDI, PCL-diol (Mn 1,250) and et hylenediamine, and released the 
hard-segment components. 
However, it seems that no microbe can degrade polyur ethane completely, and therefore, it is difficult 
to clarify the fate of residue s after degradation of  ES-PU by both microorganisms and enzymes. 
Furthermore, it is difficult to determine whethe r ET-PU itself was degraded by microbes to any 
significant extent. 
 
9. Polyamide (Nylon) 
 
9.1. Nylon 6 
 
Polyamide (nylon) has excellent mechanical and thermal properties, good chemical resistance and 
low permeability to gases, but it is known to be resi stant to degradation in the natural environment. 
The poor biodegradability of nylon in comparison w ith aliphatic polyesters is probably due to its 
strong interchain inter actions caused by the hydrogen bonds betw een molecular chains of nylon. Some 
microorganisms such as Flavobacterium  sp. [85] and Pseudomonas  sp. (NK87) [86] have been 
reported to degrade oligomers of nylon 6, but th ey cannot degrade nylon 6 polymers. Moreover, some 
white rot fungal strain s were reported to degrade nylon 66 through oxidation pr ocesses [87].  
 
9.2. Nylon 4 
 
It has been reported that nylon 4 was degraded in th e soil [88] and in the ac tivated sludge [89]. The 
results confirmed that Nylon 4 is readily degradable in the environment. Furthermore, the 
biodegradability of nylon 4 and nylon  6 blends was investigated in compost and activated sludge. The 
nylon 4 in the blend was completely degraded in 4 months while nylon 6 was not degraded [90]. 
Recently, Yamano et al . was able to isolate polyamide 4 degrading microorganisms (ND-10 and 
ND-11) from activated sludge. The strains were identified as Pseudomonas  sp. The supernatant from 
the culture broth of strain ND-11 degraded comp
letely the emulsifi ed nylon 4 in 24 h and produced γ- 
aminobutyric acid (GABA) as degradation product [91]. 
Generally speaking, degradation of polyamides is still unclear. Thus furthe r investigations on the 
pathways of degradation are necessary.  
 
  
 Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3735
9.3. Copolyamide-Esters (CPAE) 
 
In order to improve the properties of biodegradab le aliphatic polyesters for various fields of 
applications and to find the reason why industrialized alipha tic polyamides (nylon) are not 
biodegradable, CPAE were synthe sized by the amide-ester interchange reaction between PCL and 
various nylons. The susceptibil ity of CPEA to hydrolysis by  R. delemar  lipase decreased with 
shortening of the nylon blocks in CPAE chains and with increasing nylon content. The simple blends 
of PCL and nylon retained high bi odegradability of PCL. Thus it was assumed that the amount and 
distribution of hydrogen bonds, based on the amide bonds, in the CPAE chains influenced their 
biodegradability by th is lipase [92].  
Komatsu et al . synthesized CPAE from ε-caprolactam with ε-caprolactone or δ-valerolactone by 
ring-opening copolymerization using Na catalys t under reduced pressure, and examined their 
degradation by R. arrhizus  lipase. Most CPAEs were degraded  by the lipase. The biodegradability 
decreased with an increase in Tm of CPAEs as a resu lt of an increase in the amide bond contents [93].  
It would be very important that various types of interaction among macr omolecular chains, which 
are related to Tm and storage modulus, are taken in to consideration when designing the biodegradable 
solid polymers. 
 
10. Polyethylene (PE) 
 
PE is a stable polymer, and consists of long ch ains of ethylene monomers. PE cannot be easily 
degraded with microorganisms. However, it was re ported that lower molecular weight PE oligomers 
(MW = 600-800) was partially degraded by Acinetobacter  sp. 351 upon dispersion, while high 
molecular weight PE could not be degraded [94].  
Furthermore, the biodegradab ility of low density PE/starc h blends was enhanced with 
compatibilizer [95]. Biodegradability of PE can al so be improved by blending it with biodegradable 
additives, photo-initiators or c opolymerization [96,97]. The initial conc ept of blending PE with starch 
was established in UK to produce paper-like PE bag. A few years later, the idea to blend PE with 
starch and photoinitia tors was conceived in the US as a way of saving petroleum, though its 
biodegradability was al so taken into account. 
Environmental degradation of PE proceeds by s ynergistic action of photo-and thermo-oxidative 
degradation and biol ogical activity ( i.e., microorganisms). When PE is subjected to thermo- and 
photo-oxidization, various products such  as alkanes, alkenes, ketones,  aldehydes, alcohols, carboxylic 
acid, keto-acids, dicarboxylic acids, lactones and esters are released. Blending of PE with additives generally enhances auto-oxidation, reduces the molecular weight of  the polymer and then makes it 
easier for microorganisms to degrade the low molecula r weight materials. It is worthy to note that 
despite all these attempts to enhance the biodegra dation of PE blends, the biodegradability with 
microorganisms on the PE part of the blends is still very low. 
 
  
 Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3736
11. Polypropylene (PP) 
 
PP is a thermoplastic which is commonly used for plastic moldings, stationary folders, packaging 
materials, plastic tubs, non-absorbable sutures, diap ers etc. PP can be degraded when it is exposed to 
ultraviolet radiation from sunlight. Furthermore, at high temperatures, PP is oxidized. The possibility of 
degrading PP with microorganisms has been investigated [98].  
 
12. Polystyrene (PS)  
PS is a synthetic hydrophobic poly mer with high molecular weight. PS is recyclable but not 
biodegradable. Although it was reported that PS film was biodegraded with an Actinomycete strain, the 
degree of biodegradation was very lo w [99]. At room temperature, PS ex ists in solid state. When it is 
heated above its glass transition temperature, it flow s and then turns back to solid upon cooling. PS being 
a transparent hard plastics is commonly used as di sposable cutleries, cups, plastic models, packing and 
insulation materials.  
 
13. Conclusions and Future Prospects  
Biodegradable plastic is an innovative means of solving the plas tic disposal problem from the 
standpoint of development of new materials. In general, plastics ar e water-insoluble, thermo-elastic 
polymeric materials. Biodegradability of plastics is affected by both their chemical and physical 
properties. Beside the covalent forces of polymer molecules, va rious kinds of weak forces ( i.e., 
hydrogen bond forces, van der Waals forces, coulom bic forces, etc.) among macromolecular chains 
affect not only the formation of polymer aggregates , but also the structure and physical properties and 
function (reactivity) of th e polymer aggregates. The biodegradati on mechanisms of plastics as shown 
in this review can be applied to biomass that are composed of polymeric materials ( i.e., cellulose, 
hemicellulose, lignin, chitin, silk fibroin, etc.).  
Furthermore, knowledge about the biodegradation mechanisms of plastics would be useful for 
studies on protein conformational diseases that are associated with aggregation, deposition and 
crystallization of abnormal proteins  such as Alzheimer’s disease and
 bovine spongiform 
encephalopathy (BSE). Proteinase K and L-PLA-degrading enzyme from Amycolatopsis  sp. can 
degrade both L-PLA and silk fibroin. It is well known that proteinase K can degr ade prion protein, of 
which mis-folded form of it is resistant to proteinase  K and is implicated in BSE in cattle. Polyesters 
(i.e., L-PLA, D-PLA, PCL, PHB) can be used as a model fo r abnormal protein, because it is easy to 
change their high order structures  by quenching and elongation, etc. a nd to evaluate their rate of 
enzymatic degradation.  
Lipolytic enzymes such as lipase and esterase can hydrolyze not only fatty acid esters and 
triglycerides, but also aliphatic polyesters. We can understand that lipolytic enzyme has an important 
role in the degradation of natural aliphatic polyesters such as cutin, suberin and esteroid in the natural 
environment and animal digestive tract. However,  it is not certain whether human body produces any 
aliphatic polyesters or not. 
 Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3737
References 
 
1. Wang, F.; Lee, S.J. Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) pr oduction with high productivity and high polymer 
content by a fed-batch culture of Alcaligenes latus  under nitrogen limitation. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 1997, 63, 3703-3706. 
2. Tokiwa, Y.; Ugwu, C.U. Biot echnological production of ( R)-3-hydroxybutyric acid monomer. J. 
Biotechnol . 2007, 132, 264-272. 
3. Tokiwa, Y.; Calabia, B.P. Bi ological production of functiona l chemicals from renewable 
resources. Can. J. Chem.  2008, 86, 548-555. 
4. Tokiwa, Y.; Ando, T.; Suzuki T. Degradation of polycapro lactone by a fungus. J. Ferm. Technol. 
1976, 54, 603-608. 
5. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T. Purification of polye thylene adipate-degrad ing enzyme produced by 
Penicillium  sp. strain 14-3. Agric. Biol. Chem . 1977a, 41, 265-274. 
6. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T. Hydrolysis of polyesters by lipases. Nature 1977b , 270, 76-78. 
7. Tokiwa, Y. Biodegradation of polycarbonates. In Miscellaneous Biopolymers and Biodegradation 
of Polymers ; Matsumura, S., Steinbuchel, A., Eds. ; WILEH-VCH Verlag GmbH: Weinheim, 
Germany, 2002; Volume 9, pp. 417-422. 
8. Nishida, H.; Tokiwa, Y. Distribution of poly( β-hydroxybutyrate) and poly( ε-caprolactone) aerobic 
degrading microorganisms in different environments. J. Environ. Polym. Degrad. 1993a, 1, 
227-233. 
9. Mergaert, J.; Swings, J. Biodive rsity of microorganism
s that degrade bacterial and synthetic 
polyesters. J. Ind. Microbiol . 1996, 17 , 463-469. 
10. Suyama, T.; Tokiwa, Y.; Oichanpagdee, P.; Kanaga wa, T.; Kamagata, Y. Phylogenetic affiliation 
of soil bacteria that degrade aliphatic polyesters available commercially as biodegradable plastics. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  1998a, 64, 5008-5011. 
11. Pranamuda, H.; Tokiwa, Y.; Tanaka, H. Polylactide degradation by an Amycolatopsis  sp. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol . 1997 , 63, 1637-1640. 
12. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T. Hydrolysis of polyesters by Rhizopus delemar  lipase.  Agric.Biol. Chem . 
1978, 42, 1071-1072. 
13. Iwata, T.; Doi, Y. Morphology and enzymatic degradation of poly( L-lactic acid) single crystals. 
Macromolecules  1998, 31 , 2461-2467. 
14. Tsuji, H.; Miyauchi, S. Poly( L-lactide) 6. Effects of crystallin ity on enzymatic hydrolysis of 
poly(l-lactide) without free amorphous region. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2001, 71, 415-424. 
15. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T. Hydrolysis  of copolyesters containing aroma tic and aliphatic ester blocks 
by lipase. J. Appl. Polym . Sci.  1981, 26, 441-448. 
16. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Ando, T. Synthesis of copolyamide-esters and some aspects involved in 
their hydrolysis by lipase. J. Appl. Polym. Sci.  1979, 24, 1701-1711. 
17. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T. Degradation of poly(ethylene glycol) adipate by a fungus.  J. Ferm. Technol. 
1974, 52, 393-398. 
18. Sanchez, J.G.; Tsuchii, A.; Tokiwa, Y. De gradation of polycapro lactone at 50 °C by a 
thermotolerant  Aspergillus sp. Biotechnol. Lett . 2000, 22, 849-853. 
 Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3738
19. Abou-Zeid, D.M.; Muller, R.J.; Deckwer, W.D. De gradation of natural and synthetic polyesters 
under anaerobic conditions. J. Biotechnol . 2001, 86, 113-126. 
20. Cook, W.J.; Cameron, J.A.; Bell, J.P.; Huang, S.J. Scanning electron microscopic visualization of 
biodegradation of polycaprolactones by fungi. J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Lett. Ed. 1981, 19, 159-165. 
21. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Takeda, K. Two type s of lipases in hydrol ysis of polyester. Agric. Biol. 
Chem. 1988, 52, 1937-1943. 
22. Seretoudi, G.; Bikiaris, D.; Panayiotou, C. Synt hesis, characterization and biodegradability of 
poly(ethylene succinate)/poly( ε-caprolactone) block copolymers. Polymer  2002, 43, 5405-5415. 
23. Tokiwa, Y.; Calabia, B.P. Biodegradability and biodegradation of polyesters.  J. Polym. Environ . 
2007, 15, 259-267. 
24. Tanio, T.; Fukui, T.; Shirakura, Y.; Saito, T.; Tomita, K.; Kaiho, T.; Masamune, S. An 
extracellular poly(3-hydroxybut yrate) depolymerase from Alcaligenes faecalis . Eur. J. Biochem . 
1982, 124, 71-77. 
25. Mukai, K.; Doi, Y.; Sema, Y.; Tomita, K. Substrate specificities in hydrolysis of 
polyhydroxyalkanoates by mi crobial esterases. Biotechnol. Lett.  1993, 15, 601-604. 
26. Nishida, H.; Suzuki, S.; Tokiwa, Y. Distribut ion of poly(-propiolactone) aerobic degrading 
microorganisms in different environments. J. Environ. Polym. Degrad. 1998, 6, 43-57. 
27. Kobayashi, T.; Sugiyama, A.; Kawase, Y.; Saito, T.; Mergaert, J.; Swings, J. Biochemi cal and 
genetic characterization of an  extracellular poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase from 
Acidovorax sp. strain TP4. J. Polym. Environ . 1999, 7, 9-18. 
28. Calabia, B.P.; Tokiwa, Y. A novel PHB depolymerase from a thermophilic  Streptomyces sp. 
Biotechnol. Lett.  2006, 28 , 383-388. 
29. Takiyama, E.; Fujimaki, T. Bionolle biodegra dable plastic through chemical synthesis . In 
Biodegradable Plastics and Polymers ; Doi, Y., Fukuda, K., Eds.; Else vier Science: Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, 1994; pp. 150-174. 
30. Pranamuda, H.; Tokiwa, Y.; Tanaka, H. Microbial de gradation of an aliphatic  polyester with a high 
melting point, poly(tetramethylene succinate). Appl. Environ. Microbiol . 1995, 61, 1828-1832. 
31. Jarerat, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Degradation of pol y(tetramethylene succinate) by thermophilic 
actinomycetes. Biotechnol. Lett . 2001a, 23, 647-651. 
32. Maeda, Y.; Nakayama, A.; Iyoda, J.; Hayashi, K.; Yamamoto, N. Synthesis and biodegradation of 
the copolymers of succinic a nhydride with various oxiranes. Kobunshi Ronbunshu . 1993, 50, 
723-729. 
33. Kasuya, K.; Takagi, K.; Ishiwatari, S.; Yoshida, Y. ; Doi, Y. Biodegradabilitie s of various aliphatic 
polyesters in natural waters. Polym. Degrad. Stab . 1997, 59, 327-332. 
34. Tansengco, M.L.; Tokiwa, Y. Thermophilic microbi al degradation of polyethylene succinate. World 
J. Microbiol. Biotechnol . 1998a, 14, 133-138. 
35. Tezuka, Y.; Ishii, N.; Kasuya, K.; Mitomo, H.  Degradation of poly(ethylene succinate) by 
mesophilic bacteria. Polym. Degrad. Stab . 2004, 84, 115-121. 
36. Ishii, N.; Inoue, Y.; Shimada, K.; Tesuka, Y.; Mitomo, H.; Kasuya, K. Fungal degradation of 
poly(ethylene succinate).  Polym. Degrad. Stab
. 2007, 92, 44-52. 
37. Bikiaris, D.N.; Papageorgiou, G.Z.; Achilias, D.S.  Synthesis and comparative biodegradability 
studies of three poly(alkylene succinate)s. Polym. Degrad. Stab . 2006, 91, 31-43. Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3739
38. Witt, U.; Muller, R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Biode gradation of polyester copolymers containing 
aromatic compounds. J. Macromol. Sci. Pure Appl. Chem.  1995, 4, 851-856. 
39. Kleeberg, I.; Hetz, C.; Kroppenstedt, R.-M.; Mulle r, R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Biodegradation of 
aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters by Thermomonospora fusca  and other thermophilic compost 
isolates. Appl. Environ. Microbiol . 1998, 64, 1731-1735. 
40. Kleeberg, I.; Welzel, K.; Vanden Heuvel, J.; Muller,  R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Characterization of a 
new extracellular hydrolase from Thermobifida fusca  degrading aliphatic-a romatic copolyesaters. 
Biomacromolecules 2005 , 6, 262-270. 
41. Chowdhury, A.A. Poly- β-hydroxybuttersaure abbauende Bakterien und exo-enzyme. Arch. 
Microbiol.  1963, 47, 167-200. 
42. Lee, S.Y. Bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates.  Biotechnol. Bioeng . 1996, 49, 1-14. 
43. Tokiwa, Y.; Iwamoto, A.; Koyama, M.; Kataoka, N.; Nishida, H. Biological recycling of plastics 
containing ester bonds. Makromol. Chem., Makromol. Symp . 1992, 57, 273-279. 
44. Calabia, B.P.; Tokiwa, Y. Microbial degradation of poly( D-3-hydroxybutyrate) by a new 
thermophilic streptomyces isolate. Biotechnol. Lett . 2004, 26, 15-19. 
45. Tseng, M.; Hoang, K.C.; Yang, M.K.; Yang, S.F.; Chu, W.S. Polyester-degrading thermophilic 
actinomycetes isolated from different environment in Taiwan. Biodegradation  2007, 18, 579-583. 
46. Carothers, W.H.; Hill, J.W. Studies of polymeriza tion and ring formation. XV.  Artificial fibers from 
synthetic linear condens ation superpolymers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1932, 54, 1579-1596. 
47. Uruyama, H.; Kanamori, T.; Kimura, Y. Properties and biodegradability of  polymer blends of 
poly( L-lactide)s with different optical  purity of the lactate units. Macromol. Mater. Eng . 2002, 287, 
116-121. 
48. Ohkita, T.; Lee, S.H. Thermal degradation and bi odegradability of poly(lac tic acid)/corn starch 
biocomposites. J. App. Polym. Sci . 2006, 100, 3009-3017.  
49. Tokiwa, Y.; Calabia, B.P. Biodegradabil ity and biodegradati on of poly(lactide). Appl. Microbiol. 
2006, 72, 244-251. 
50. Pranamuda, H.; Tsuchii, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Poly( L-lactide degrading enzyme produced by 
Amycolatopsis  sp. Macromol. Biosci . 2001, 1, 25-29. 
51. Jarerat, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Degradation of poly( L-lactide) by fungus. Macromol. Biosci . 2001b , 1, 
136-140. 
52. Jarerat, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Poly( L-lactide) degradation by Saccharotrix waywayandensis . Biotechnol. 
Lett. 2003a, 25, 401-404. 
53. Jarerat, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Poly( L-lactide) degradation by Kibdelosporangium aridum . Biotechnol. 
Lett. 2003b , 25, 2035-2038. 
54. Jarerat, A.; Tokiwa, Y.; Tanaka, H. Microbial poly( L-lactide) degrading enzyme induced by amino 
acids, peptides and poly( L-amino acids).  J. Polym. Environ . 2004, 12, 139-146. 
55. Williams, D.F. Enzymatic hydrolysis of polylactic acid. Eng. Med. 1981, 10, 5-7. 
56. Reeve, M.S.; McCarthy, S.P.; Downey, M.J.; Gross, R.A. Polylactide stereochemistry: Effect on 
enzymatic degradability. Macromolecules  1994, 27, 825-831. 
57. McDonald, R.T.; McCarthy, S.; Gross, R.A. Enzyma tic degradability of poly(lactide): Effects of 
chain stereochemistry and material crystallinity. Macromolecules  1996, 29, 7356-7361. 
 Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3740
58. Fukuzaki, H.; Yoshida, M.; Asano, M. ; Kumakura, M. Synthesis of copoly( D,L-lactic acid) with 
relative low molecular weight and in vitro  degradation.  Eur. Polym. J.  1989, 25, 1019-1026. 
59. Lim, H.A.; Raku, T.; Tokiwa, Y. Hydrolys is of polyesters by serine proteases. Biotechnol. Lett . 
2005, 27, 459-464. 
60. Iwamoto, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Enzymatic degradatio n of plastics contai ning polycaprolactone. Polym. 
Degrad. Stab. 1994, 45, 205-213. 
61. Tokiwa, Y.; Iwamoto, A.; Koyama, M. Developm ent of biodegradable plastics containing 
polycaprolactone and/or starch. Polym. Mats. Sci. Eng.  1990, 63, 742-746. 
62. Iwamoto, A.; Tokiwa, Y. Effect of the phase structure on biodegradability of 
polypropylene/poly( ε-caprolactone) blends. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1994, 52 , 1357-1360. 
63. Kumagai, Y.; Doi, Y. Enzymatic degradation and morphologies of binary  blends of microbial 
poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) with poly( ε-caprolactone), poly(1,4-butyl ene adipate and poly(vinyl 
acetate).  Polym. Degrad. Stab . 1992, 36, 241-248. 
64. Koyama, N.; Doi, Y. Miscibility of binary blends of poly[( R)-3-hydroxybutyric and poly[( S)-lactic 
acid]. Polymer 1997, 38, 1589-1593. 
65. Liu, L.; Li, S.; Garreau, H.; Vert, M. Se lective enzymatic degradations of poly( L-lactide) and 
poly(ε-caprolactone) blend films. Biomacromolecules 2000, 3, 350-359. 
66. Takagi, S.; Koyama, M.; Kameyama, H.; Toki wa, Y. Development of polycaprolactone/ 
gelatinized starch blends and their enzymatic degradation. In  Biodegradable Plastics and 
Polymers;  Doi, Y., Fukuda, K., Eds.; Elsevier Science:  Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1994; pp. 
437-442. 
67. Pranamuda, H.; Tokiwa, Y.; Tanaka, H. Physical  properties and biodegradability of blends 
containing poly(ε-caprolactone) and tropical starches. J. Environ. Polym. Degrad . 1996, 4, 1-7. 
68. Noomhorm, C.; Tokiwa, Y. Effect of poly(dioxalane) as compatibilizer in 
poly(ε-caprolactone)/tapioca starch blends. J. Polym. Environ . 2006, 14, 149-156. 
69. Ramkumar, D.H.S.; Bhattacharya, M. Effect of crystallinity on the mechanical properties of 
starch/synthetic polymer blends. J. Mat. Sci.  1997, 32, 2565-2572.  
70. Chandra, R.; Rustgi, R. Biodegradable polymers. Prog. Polym. Sci . 1998, 23, 1273-1335. 
71. Dubois, P.; Narayan, R. Biodegradable compos itions by reactive processing of aliphatic 
polyester/polysaccharide blends. Macromol. Symp . 2003, 198, 233-243. 
72. Jang, W.J.; Shin, B.Y.; Lee, T.J.; Narayan, R. Th ermal properties and morphology of biodegradable 
PLA/starch compatibilized blends. J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 2007, 13, 457-464. 
73. Ratto, J.A.; Stenhouse, P.J.; Auerbach, M.; Mitche ll, J.; Farrel, R. Proc essing, performance and 
biodegradability of a th ermoplastic aliphatic pol yester /starch system. Polymer 1999, 40, 
6777-6788. 
74. Imai, Y.; Kojima, K.; Masuhara, E. Tissue res ponse by polymeric materials after long-term 
implantation in dog. Jpn. J. Artif. Organs. 1979, 8, 246-249. 
75. Kawaguchi, T.; Nakano, M.; Juni, K.; Inoue, S.; Yosh ida, Y. Examination of  biodegradability of 
poly(ethylene carbonate) an d poly poly(propylene car bonate) in the peritoneal cavity in rats. 
Chem. Pharm. Bull . 1983, 31, 1400-1403. 
76. Nishida, H.; Tokiwa, Y. Confirmation of poly(1,3-dioxolan-2-one)-degrading microorganisms in 
the environment. Chem. Lett . 1994, 3, 421-422. Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3741
77. Suyama, T.; Hosoya, H.; Tokiwa, Y. Bacterial isolates degrading alip hatic polycarbonates. FEMS 
Microbiol. Lett.  1998b , 161 , 255-261. 
78. Pranamuda, H.; Chollakup, R.; Tokiwa, Y. Degrad ation of polycarbonate by a polyester-degrading 
strain, Amycolatopsis sp. strain HT-6. Appl. Environ. Microbiol . 1999, 65 , 4220-4222. 
79. Suyama, T.; Tokiwa, Y. Enzymatic degradation of aliphatic polycarbonate, poly(tetramethylene 
carbonate). Enz. Microb. Technol. 1997, 20, 122-126. 
80. Darby, R.T.; Kaplan, A.M. Fungal susceptibility of polyurethanes. Appl. Microbiol . 1968, 16, 
900-905. 
81. Crabbe, J.R.; Campbell, J.R.; Thompson, L.; Wa lz, S.L.; Schultz, W.W.  Biodegradation of a 
colloidal ester-based polyurethane by soil fungi. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad.  1994, 33, 103-113. 
82. Nakajima-Kambe, T.; Onuma, F.; Kimpara, N.; Na kahara, T. Isolation a nd characterization of a 
bacterium which utilizes polyester polyuret hane as a sole carbon and nitrogen source. FEMS 
Microbiol. Lett.  1995, 129 , 39-42. 
83. Santerre, J.P.; Labow, R.S.; Duguay, D.G.; Erfle, D.; Adams, G.A. Biodegradation evaluation of 
polyether and polyester-urethanes with oxidative and hydrolytic enzymes. J. Biomed. Mater. Res . 
1994, 28, 1187-1199. 
84. Wang, G.B.; Santerre, J.P.; Labow, R.S. High–perf ormance liquid chromatographic separation and 
tandem mass spectrometric identif ication of breakdown products asso ciated with the biological 
hydrolysis of a biomedical polyurethane. J. Chromatogr. B Biomed. Sci. Appl . 1997, 698, 69-80. 
85. Kinoshita, S.; Kageyam
a, S.; Iba, K.; Yamada, Y.; Okada, H. Utilization of a cyclic dimmer and 
linear oligomers of ε-amino caproic acid by Achromobacter guttatus K172. Agric. Boil. Chem . 
1975, 39, 1219-1223. 
86. Kanagawa, K.; Negoro, S.; Takada, N.; Okada, H. Plasmid dependence of Pseudomonas  sp. strain 
NK87 enzymes that degrade 6-aminohexanoaate-cyclic dimer. J. Bacteriol. 1989, 171, 
3181-3186.  
87. Deguchi, T.; Kitaoka, Y.; Kakzawa, M.; Nishida,  T. Purification and characterization of a 
nylon-degrading enzyme. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  1998, 64 , 1366-1371. 
88. Hashimoto, K.; Hamano, T.; Okada, M. De gradation of several polyamides in soil. J. Appl. 
Polymer. Sci. 1994, 54, 1579-1583. 
89. Kawasaki, N.; Atsuyoshi, N.; Naoko, Y.; Takeda , S.; Kawata, Y.; Yamamoto, N.; Aiba, S. 
Synthesis, thermal and mechanical properties and biodegradation of branched polyamide 4. 
Polymer 2005, 46, 9987-9993. 
90. Hashimoto, K.; Sudo, M.; Ohta, K.; Sugimura, T.; Yamada, H. Biodegradation of nylon 4 and its 
blend with nylon 6. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2002, 86, 2307-2311. 
91. Yamano, N.; Nakayama, A.; Kawasaki, N.; Yamamoto, N.; Aiba, S. Mechanism and 
characterization of polyamide 4 degradation by Pseudomonas sp. J. Polym. Environ . 2008, 16, 
141-146. 
92. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Ando, T. Synthesis of c opolyamide-esters and some  aspects involved in 
their hydrolysis of lipase.  J. Appl. Polym. Sci.  1979, 24, 1701-1711. 
93. Komatsu, S.; Tokiwa, Y. Synthesis of coplya mi de-esters and their enzymatic hydrolysis. 
Japanese J. Polym. Sci. Tech. (Koubunshi Ronbunshu) 1993, 50, 785-788. Int. J. Mol. Sci.  2009, 10          
 
 3742
94. Tsuchii, A.; Suzuki, T.; Fukuoka, S. Microbia l degradation of polye thylene oligomers. Rep. 
Ferment. Res. Inst. 1980, 55, 35-40. 
95. Bikiaris, D.; Panayiotou, C. LDPE/starch blen ds compatibilized with PE-g-MA copolymers. J. 
Appl. Polym. Sci.  1998, 70, 1503-1521. 
96. Griffin, G.J.L. Degradation of polyethylene in compost burial. J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Symp. 2007, 
57, 281-286.  
97. Hakkarainen, M.; Albertsson, A.C. Envir onmental degradation of polyethylene.  Adv. Polym. Sci. 
2004, 169, 177-199. 
98. Cacciari, I.; Quatrini, P.; Zirletta, G.; Mincione, E.; Vinciguerra, V.; Lupatelli, P.; Sermanni, G.G. 
Isotactic polypropylene biodegradation by a microbial community: Physico-chemical 
characterization of metabolites produced. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  1993, 59, 3695-3700. 
99. Mor, R.; Silvan, A. Biofilm formation and pa rtial biodegradation of  polystyrene by the 
actinomycete Rhodococcus ruber : Biodegradation of polystyrene. Biodegradation  2008 , 19, 
851-858. 
© 2009 by the authors; licensee Molecular Diversity Pres ervation International, Ba sel, Switzerland. This 
article is an open-access article distributed under the terms a nd conditions of the Creative Commons 
Attribution license (http://creat ivecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/). 