SWS6366  Syllabus Spring 2022  
1 
 SWS 6366  
Biodegradation And Bioremediation o f Organic Contaminants 
3 credit hour s_ Online  
  
ABOUT THE COURSE  
Course Number : SWS  6366  
Class meeting time and location: This class is facilitated 100% online with mandatory weekly 
synchronized chat sessions  Tuesday 6:30 to 7:30 p.m . U.S. Eastern Time   
Weekly Meetings: via Zoom (Link will be sent to all students when semester begins).  
INSTRUCTOR  INFORMATION   
Dr. Kanika Sharma Inglett   
Department of Soil and Water Science s |P.O. Box 110290  
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 -0510  
E-mail: kanika@ufl.edu | Tele:352- 294- 3164| Fax:352- 392-3399  
  
Dr. Patrick Chris topher  Wilson  
Department of Soil and Water Science s |P.O. Box 110290  
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611 -0510  
E-mail: pcwilson@ufl.edu | Tele: 352- 294- 3166| Fax:352- 392- 3399  
 
Office Hours: By Appointment and by email in CANVAS.  
  
COUR SE INFORMATION  
Course Website:  http://elearning.ufl.edu   
Course Communications:  Send messages to your instructor via the Canvas Mail Tool . Expect a 
response within 48 hours . All e -mail correspondence to the course instructor must originate from your 
canvas inbox  account . 
Please use the Do You Have a Course- Related Question?  Forum  in Canvas . It's likely that others have the 
same questions. Feel free to answer questions posted by your classmates . 
Recomme nded Textbooks : There is no required te xt for this course. However, we recommend 
the Alexander text1. This will provide the extra clarification for some topics. Additional 
handouts and reading references for  specific topics will be provided to all students  during the 
semester.  
1Biodegradation and Bioremediation , M. Alexander (1999), Academic Press, New York.    
 SWS6366  Syllabus Spring 2022  
2 
 Materials And Supplies Fees : N/A 
Course Description : This course will present the basic principles of chemical and biological 
degradation of toxic c hemicals and familiarize students with the application of bio remedial  
technologies in natural environments.  Topics covered will include: 1) occurrence and ecological 
significance of toxic organic chemicals, 2) chemistry of contaminants, kinetics and mechanisms 
of degradation (chemical and biological), and 3) current techno logies of bioremediation of 
contaminated soils and water.   
 Prerequisite Knowledge &  Skills :
  Basic knowledge of organic chemistry and microbiology will 
be ‘beneficial,  to follow the material in this course.  Please ask the instructor for extra resource s 
if you need to review the basics.  
Course Outline:  
The following topics will be covered in a total of 13 modules.  
• Introduction to bioremediation  
• Introduction to microorganisms  
• Introduction to contaminants  
• Strategies of microbial degradation and biorem ediation  
• Biotransformation of chemicals  
• Environmental effects on microbial degradation  
• Chemical interaction with the environment  
• Kinetics of biodegradation  
• Molecular Biology of Gene tically modified microorganisms - techniques  
• Bioremediation of organic an d inorganic pollutants   
• Remediation Technologies   
• Project  
INSTRUCTIONAL METHODS and STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Web -based lecture  videos  with interactions are assigned every week. The course material will 
be released at a set schedule and s tudents  will have access to one unit at a time. At the 
beginning of each week, the instructor will assign the topic/slides to be studied over the period 
of that week. For a successful completion of the  course, it is critical  to remai n on schedule  and 
study of assigned  material must be completed with the allocated  week .  Associated to each 
module will be reading material/ activities  that may supplement  the material in the texts or 
slides.  
Zoom  online meeting system is used for chats (synchronous communication): Chat sessions: 
Tuesday 6:30-  7:30 p .m. U.S. Eastern Time. 
Zoom Link : Link will be sent to all students when classes  begin.  
General Student Responsibilities:    SWS6366  Syllabus Spring 2022  
3 
 1. Students are expected to complete the weekly assigned work on time.   
2. Participation in chat sessions and the discussion board is provides a great opportunity to 
engage in discussion with other class fellows. Students are also encouraged to use chats and  
discussion board platforms. Some d iscussions may  be graded. Students need to actively 
contribute to the discussion posts.  
3. Students are expected to complete all assignments/quizzes when offered. The course policy 
does not allow for any make -up quizzes/tests. However, under exceptional circumstances, 
students may discuss their situation with the instructors. Students need to  make sure that the 
instructors are aware of any absences before the event.   
4. Students are expected to demonstrate their mastery of presented material by passing written examinations and successfully completing assigned homework.     
STUDENT ASSESSMENT S 
You are expected to attend and be prepared to participate in all discussion sessions.   
Personal issues with respect to discussion sessions or fulfillment of course requirements will be handled on an individual basis. A portion of the grade is based on meaningful class participation, demonstrated student interest, and overall student dedication.  
 
Assessments (100%) for the course are based on the following.  
  
Quizzes and Assignments   (40%) 
Exam s  (midterm and Final)   (40%) 
Project      (10%) 
Discussio n participation               (10%)  
 
This course follows the following Grading Scale (%)   
A 93% and above  C 73-76.99%  
A- 90-92.99%  C- 70-72.99%  
B+ 87-89.99%  D+ 67-69.99%  
B 83-86.99%  D 63-66.99%  
B- 80-82.99%  D- 60-62.99%  
C+ 77-79.99%  E Below 60  
  
Opportunities for students to p articipat e in class via chats and discussion board activities are 
provided.  
For Project presentations students will use VoiceThread. To access VoiceThread, go to 
https://ufl.voicethread.com  and login with your G atorlink username and password. Further SWS6366  Syllabus Spring 2022  
4 
 directions will be given when the project topics are assigned. To familiarize yourself with this 
software you can click on t he link User guide . 
COURSE  POLICIES  
Attendance Policy :  Requirements for class attendance and make -up exams, assignments, and 
other work in this course are con sistent with university policies that can be found on the 
Attendance Policies page . 
Quiz/Exam Dates/Policies: There will be activities (quizzes/ discussion boards etc)  associated 
with each unit . There are two comprehensive exams in the course. Any work that is illegible will 
be considered as incomplete and graded as such, so make sure you show complete work in a 
neat manner. Additionally, to allow students to demonstrate their learning, students will be 
required to make a presentation online and participate in peer evaluation.  
Make -Up Policy : Ample time has been provided for all assignments and quizzes to be 
completed and students are encouraged not to wait until the last minute to begin their work to 
avoid any last -minute issues that prevent them from completing and submitting their work in a 
timely manner. Make -up allowances for any missed assessments will be considered on a case -
by-case basis and is at the discretion of the instructor.  
Late Work  Policy : Work after due date will be accepted for up  to 24 hours with 10% -points 
deduction  and 50% -point s deduction for up  to a week.  No work will be accepted a week after 
the due date.  
Assignment Policy:   Timely completion and submission of assignments is expected. Lecture 
Videos may include interactions in form of questions and multiple choice. C heck all, and/or fill 
in the blank questions and submissions of answers on the associated discussion boards to 
receive a complete grade.  
Course Technology :  This course is facilitated  100% online thr ough Canvas. You may access 
Canvas from UF’s e -Learning webpage: http://elearning.ufl.edu/ . Please contact the UF Help 
Desk, http://helpdesk.ufl.edu , if you have any technical difficulties with Canvas.  
Technology Checklist : The technology checklist provides recommendations for students 
enrolled in the Distance Education Track in Environmental Science. It is the responsibility of the 
student to have access to a personal comput er (or laptop), the Internet, and maintain the 
functionality of peripherals (e.g. web cam and audio system) to successfully participate in 
distance education courses offered by the Soil and Water Science s Department .  
• Personal computer or laptop with suffi cient hard drive space to store course materials 
and speakers  
• Web camera ( highly encouraged)  
• External microphone (e.g. headset with build -in microphone, voice over IP device)  is 
required.  SWS6366  Syllabus Spring 2022  
5 
 • Review the Student Computing Requirements  for policy, hardware, and software 
information.  
Online Course Evaluation : Students are expected to provide feedback on the quality of 
instruction in this course by completing online evaluations at https://evaluations.ufl.edu .  
Evaluations are typically open during the last two or three  weeks of the semesters, but students 
will be given specific times when they are open.  Summary results of these assessments are 
available to students at https://evaluations.ufl.edu/results .  
UF Policies   
University  Policy on Accommodating Students With Disabilities:  Students with disabilities 
requesting accommodations should first register with the Disability Resource Center (352 -392-
8565, www.dso.ufl.edu/drc  ) by providing appropriate documentation.  Once registered, 
students will receive an accommodation letter which must be presented to the instructor when 
requesting accommodation.  Students with disabilities should follow this procedure as early as 
possible i n the semester.  
University Policy o n Academic Conduct:  UF students are bound by The Honor Pledge which 
states, “We, the members of the University of Florida community, pledge to hold ourselves and 
our peers to the highest standards of honesty and integrit y by abiding by the Honor Code.  On 
all work submitted for credit by students at the University of Florida, the following pledge is either required or implied: "On my honor, I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid in 
doing this assignment."  The  Honor Code (
http://www.dso.ufl.edu/sccr/process/student -
conduct -honor -code/ ) specifies a number of behaviors that are in violation of this code and the 
possible sanctions.  Fu rthermore, you are obligated to report any condition that facilitates 
academic misconduct to appropriate personnel.  If you have any questions or concerns, please consult with the instructor s in this class.  
Class Demeanor or Netiquette: All members of the class are expected to follow rules of 
common courtesy in all email messages, threaded discussions, and chats.  Review the 
Netiquette Guide for Online Cours es for expected student behavior.  
Software Use: All faculty, staff, and students of the university are required and expected to 
obey the laws and legal agreements governing software use.  Failure to do so can lead to 
monetary damages and/or criminal penalt ies for the individual violator.  Because such 
violations are also against University policies and rules, disciplinary action will be taken as 
appropriate.  We, the members of the University of Florida community, pledge to uphold 
ourselves and our peers to  the highest standards of honesty and integrity.  
 
 SWS6366  Syllabus Spring 2022  
6 
 CAMPUS RESOURCES  
UF Health and Wellness Resources   
• U Matter, We Care: If you or a friend is in distress, please contact umatter@ufl.edu  or 352 
392-1575 so that a team member can reach out to the student.  
• Counseling and Wellness Center:  http://www.counseling.ufl.edu/cwc , and 392- 1575; and 
the University Police Department: 392 -1111 or 9- 1-1 for emergencies.  
• Sexual Assault Recovery Services (SARS) : Student Health Care Center, 392 -1161.  
• University Police Department  at 392- 1111 (or 9- 1-1 for emergencies), or 
http://www.police.ufl.edu/ .  
Do not wait until you reach a crisis to come in and talk with us.  We have helped many students 
through stressful situations impacting their aca demic performance.  You are not alone so do not 
be afraid to ask for assistance .    
 
Academic Resources : Any requests for make -ups due to technical issues MUST be accompanied 
by the ticket number received from the Help Desk when the problem was reported to them. 
The ticket number will document the time and date of the problem. You MUST e -mail your 
instructor within 24 hours of the technical difficulty if you wish to request a make -up.  
 
• E-learning technical suppor t, 352- 392- 4357 (select option 2) or e -mail to Learning -
support@ufl.edu. https://lss.at.ufl.edu/help.shtml . 
• Career Resource Center , Reitz Union, 392- 1601.  Career assistance and counseling. 
https://www.crc.ufl.edu/ . 
• Library Support , http://c ms.uflib.ufl.edu/ask . Various ways to receive assistance with 
respect to using the libraries or finding resources.  
• Teaching Center , Broward Hall, 392 -2010 or 392- 6420. General study skills and tutoring. 
http s://teachingcenter.ufl.edu/ . 
• Writing Studio, 302 Tigert Hall , 846- 1138. Help brainstorming, formatting, and writing 
papers. https://writing.ufl.edu/writing -studio/ . 
• Student Complaints Campus : 
https://www.dso.ufl.edu/documents/UF_Complaints_policy.pdf . 
• On-Line Students Complaints : http://www.distance.ufl.edu/student -complaint -process . 