Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210   
199 
   
Original Research Article  
Azo Dye Degrading Bacteria from Textile Effluent  
Gounder Vimala, Preethi Jeyakumar, Anchana Devi. C, Anita Singh and Priya Iyer*  
PG and Research Dept. of Biotechnology, Women s Christian College, Chennai -6000006, India 
*Corresponding author      
                  ABSTRACT                              
Introduction  
The textile industry accounts for the largest 
consumption of dyestuffs, at nearly 80%. 
The textile industry discharge millions of 
liters of effluents directly into public drains 
which ultimately reaches fresh water. These 
effluents contains high amounts of grease, 
dirt, nutrients from dye bath, dye additives, 
residual dyes etc., 50% textile effluent has 
residual azo dye which is very difficult to 
remove by conventional treatments like 
chemical flocculation, adsorption, oxidation, 
filtration, electrochemical method, use of 
activated carbon etc., although some process            like MEE (Multiple Effect Evaporator), 
reverse osmosis, nanofiltration are effective 
but are very expensive due to complex 
structural set up, huge chemical and power 
consumption and most of these  physical-
chemical method used for treating textile 
effluents produce large volume of sludge,  
other toxic byproducts  trouble for safe 
disposal, affecting directly and indirectly 
affecting aquatic flora and fauna and its 
quality. Biochemical characterization was 
done on the isolates degrading various 
mono-azo, di-azo, tri-azo and poly-azo ISSN: 2319 -7706 Volume 4 Number 7 (2015) pp. 199-210 
http://www.ijcmas.com 
Effluent was collected from different industries located at different places like 
Tirupur, Tamil nadu and Mumbai, Maharashtra. The sample was analyse 
physiochemical characteristics like color, smell, pH, COD was noted. Azo dye 
degradation was checked with supply of carbon and nitrogen source to bacteria 
present in effluent which stimulated the growth of azo dye degrading bacteria. 
Those bacteria were isolated. Morphological and biochemical characterization was 
done to identify isolates and was found to be Pseudomonas spp, Citrobacter spp, 
E.coli and Micrococcus spp. Optimum conditions (pH and temperature) were 
determined Plasmid screening was done and plasmid was found in all isolates. 
Extracted plasmids were transformed in E. coli DH5. It was confirmed that E. coli 
was transformed and transformed cells showed good decolorization potential. Azo 
dyes are being degraded and it was confirmed by TLC analysis. Isolates were 
checked for effluent bioremediation for different effluent samples collected from 
different places. It was found that Micrococcus spp. worked well in adapted 
environment and E. coli showed same decolorization potential in adapted and non 
adapted environment. 
Keywords  
Azo dyes, 
Textile 
effluents, 
Microorganisms Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210   
200 
textile dyes used in dyeing and printing 
industries. Th ey observed that P. aeruginosa 
PFK10 secretes a fluorescent yellow-green 
pigment (pyoverdine).Whole genome 
sequencing about the metabolic pathways of 
the strain revealed   that initial ability to 
degrade textile azo dye, which can be used 
for bioremediation of contaminated sites 
(Faldu et al., 2006).  
Materials and Methods  
Sample collection of effluents and its 
physicochemical analysis: Textile waste 
water samples were collected in a clean 
bottle from Tirupur, Tamil Nadu and 
Bhiwandi, Maharashtra. Different types of 
azo dyes were used for decolorization 
studies which are as follows: Napthol dye, 
Acidic dye, Direct dye, Nylon dye, Procine 
dye, Vat dye and Base dye. Out of these 
dyes, procine and direct dyes were used for 
decolorization test. Some Physiochemical 
parameters viz., COD (Chemical Oxygen 
Demand), pH, color and smell of textile 
waste water was measured .   
Isolation and identification of azo dye 
degrading bacteri a: Azo dye degrading 
bacteria were isolated in half strength 
nutrient broth with 1% w/v Azo dye. The 
tubes were then incubated at 370C for 
decolorization.   
The samples which got decolorized were 
separated. Minute volume (0.1 ml) from 
decolourized sample was plated on nutrient 
agar supplemented with azo dye by spread 
plate technique. The plates were then 
incubated at 370C for 24 hrs. Different 
bacterial cells grown on nutrient pate were 
then isolated and streaked on nutrient agar 
plate to get pure culture. The colony 
characteristic and biochemical 
characteristics was used for the 
identification  of the organism. Determination of optimum growth 
condition: Optimum pH and temperature 
was determined.  
Determination of biodegradation activity: 
Biodegradation activity of all 4 bacteria 
along with different combinations of them 
was determined.  
Plasmid screening: Plasmid was isolated 
from the organisms degrading the dyes and 
transformed the competent cells of E. coli 
DH5. 
 
Degraded product analysis: Whether the 
azo dyes are degraded or not was confirmed 
by TLC analysis. Sample was loaded on 
Silica plate, plate was placed in mobile 
phase solvent system - Isopropanol: 
Methanol: Ethyl acetate: Water: Glacial 
acetic acid in the ratio 3:2:2:1:0.5 (modified 
composition).  
Bioremediation of Textile Effluent: 
Textile effluents collected from different 
textile industries were used to check the 
degradation capability of isolated bacteria. 
Effluents from Tirupur textile industry (I), 
Mumbai textile industry (II), Punjab, two 
different textile industries (III and IV).  
Results and Discussion  
Sample collection: Sample was collected 
from Tirupur and Mumbai textile effluent 
outlet. It has been highly polluted with 
different types of dyes, organic matter etc 
making it very harmful for the environment 
it is been exposed. Composition of textile 
effluent with its hazardous effect to the 
surrounding has been reported .   
Estimated COD value is very high and 
shows that large amount organic matter is 
present. According to Indian Standard 
Institute (ISI) - IS:2490 (Part I) general limits Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210   
201 
(2nd revision) permissible limits of COD for 
Industrial effluent is 250 mg/L for 
discharging it into inland surface water but 
both effluent has very high COD value 
hence, they cannot be discharged before 
treatment. Similarly high COD value, 
unpleasant smell and basic pH of effluent 
have been reported by Usman Aftab et al. 
(2011). Olukanni et al. (2006) also worked 
on COD determination which showed very 
high for textile effluent collected from drain.  
Isolation and identification of dye 
degrading bacteria: From effluent I 
sample, two type of bacteria (a and b) was 
isolated from a decolorized media From 
effluent II sample, two type of bacteria (c 
and d) was isolated from a decolorized 
media. Textile effluent harbor large amount 
bacterial load of different types utilizing 
dyes in it as its carbon source. Here, a total 
of four bacterial strains were isolated 
showing decolorization activity similarly,  
Agarry et al. (2011) isolated six bacterial 
species from textile effluent; Hassan et al. 
(2013) reported 11 bacterial isolates 
showing decolorization activity. The colony 
characteristics and biochemical 
characteristics indicated that the organisms 
were Pseudomonas  spp., E. coli, Citrobacter 
spp and Micrococcus spp. Similar results 
were reported by Usman Aftab et al. (2011), 
Olukanni et al. (2006) and Hassan et al. 
(2013) worked on same genus and results 
were confirmed with the help of Bergeys 
Manual of Determinative Micro biology  
Determination of optimum condition  
Optimum pH  
According figure 2, optimum pH for all 
isolates was found to be 7. Similar study 
was done by Tripathi and Srivastava (2011) 
where effect of pH on bacteria survival was 
checked and it was found that pH 7 was 
optimum pH for Pseudomonas and Bacillus species. It was also reported till pH 7.6 the 
decolorization property was not affected for 
Pseudomonas species. Similar results are 
reported by Rashid Mahmood et al. (2015) 
that organisms showed good growth and 
decolorization at pH 7.5 and drastically 
decreased below 6.5 and 8.0. Every 
organism have requirement of particular 
hydrogen ion concentration for their growth.  
Optimum Temperature  
According to figure 3, optimum temperature 
for all isolates was found to be 370C. Similar 
study was done by Tripathi and Srivastava 
(2011) where effect of temperature on 
bacteria survival was checked and it was 
found that 370C was optimum temperature 
for Pseudomonas and Bacillus species. 
Similar results are reported by Usman Aftab 
et al. (2011) that organisms showed good 
growth at temperature 370C. This may be 
due temperature sensitive property of 
bacteria. With temperature change, an 
enzyme starts losing its structural integrity 
and becomes inactive or is degraded 
ultimately affecting bacterias growth.  
Determination of potential 
biodegradation of isolates:  
1. Orange dye:  
a. Static condition  
Figure 4 shows maximum degradation 
within 24 hrs. High potential decolorization 
was shown by d up to 51% followed by 
a, c, and b with potential decolorization 
of 49%, 43% and 34% respectively. In 
combination, bc showed high 
decolorization potential (57%).  
According to figure 4, Micrococcus  spp. (d)  
has shown maximum decolorization activity 
when compared to others. In the previous 
studies, Micrococcus spp. was found to be a Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210   
202 
good decolorizer. Hassan et al. (2013) 
reported that Micrococcus has decolorized 
novacron blue, novacron orange dye to 
almost 80% within 24 hrs but here 
Micrococcus spp. has shown less 
degradation rate because it is strictly aerobic 
bacteria and so with depletion in oxygen 
supply, hence after 24 hrs, decolorization 
rate also decreased and concentration used 
was 0.01% which is very less compared to 
concentration of dye (1%) used in current 
study.  
When organisms are used in combination, 
decolorization rate is increased but for some 
combination decolorization rate is slow 
because when organisms of different sources 
or same source are present together they act 
on different bonds of same compound thus 
enhancing the degradation rate. Some 
organisms produce toxic byproducts or 
inhibitors for other organism which 
ultimately decreases degradation rate of 
compounds. Similar results are reported by 
Rashid Mahmood et al. (2015) where 8 
different genus belonging bacteria was used 
in combination and its degradation potential 
was determined. The report says that as 
compared to individual organism in 
consortium degradation potential increased 
approximately 10% more.  
Shaker condition: Maximum degradation 
was seen within 24 hrs (Fig. 5). High 
potential decolorization was shown by c up 
to 51% followed by d, a, and b with 
potential decolorization of 50%, 40% and 
34% respectively.  In combination, bc 
showed high decolorization potential (51%). 
c (Citrobacter spp.) has shown maximum 
decolorization activity in shaker condition 
within 24 hrs in shaker, since Citrobacter is 
an aerobic organism. Agitation may have 
increased the oxygen and nutrient supply, 
thus enhancing its biodegradation ability. 
Hui Wang et al. (2009) also reported that Citrobacter sp. CK3 has shown maximum 
decolorization rate at pH 7 and 370C with 
dye concentration of 200 mg/l.  
When organisms are used in combination, 
decolorization rate is increased but for some 
combination decolorization rate is slow 
because wh en organisms of different sources 
or same source are present together they act 
on different bonds on same compound thus 
enhancing the degradation rate. Some 
organisms produce toxic byproducts or 
inhibitors for other organism which 
ultimately decreases degradation rate of 
compounds. Similar results are reported by 
Rashid Mahmood et al. (2015) where 8 
different genus belonging bacteria were used 
in combination and their degradation 
potential was determined. The report says 
that as compared to individual organism in 
consortium degradation potential increased 
approximately 10% more.  
Degradation rate decreased in all isolates 
(individual and in combination) except a and 
b. This may be because of depletion of 
nutrients. Thus if supply of nutrients are 
constant biodegradation rate may increase or 
remain constant or this may be due to 
byproducts produced  on degrading dyes 
which can act as inhibitors in degradation 
pathway/pathways  of dye. Inhibitors can be 
removed continuously so as to improve 
degradation rate. German Buitr et al. (2004) 
has reported use of sequential batch reactor 
for improving the degradation rate by 
supplementing nutrients and removing used 
media intermittently. Thus constant supply 
of nutrients is maintained. In case of a and 
b biodegradation rate is approximately 
same even after 24 hrs, this can be due to 
absence in inhibitor production or low 
nutrient consumption rate. Initially 7 
different types of dyes were used for 
decolorization except direct and porcine dye 
others showed very slow decolorization. It Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210   
203 
took almost a week for partial 
decolorization.  Different rate in 
decolorization of different dye may be due 
to; different molecule and bond are present 
and its structure. The similar report being 
reported by Susana Camarero et al. (2005) 
suggesting importance of structure of 
synthetic dyes and intermediate formed 
during decolorization mechanisms effect on 
potential decolorization rate.  
Direct Dye  
Static condition  
Maximum degradation was seen within 48 
hrs. High potential decolourization was 
shown by d up to 24% followed by a, b, 
and c with potential decolorization of 23%, 
22% and 21% respectively. In combination, 
bc showed high decolorization potential 
(80.4%). According to figure 6, 
Micrococcus  spp. (d)  has shown maximum 
biodecolorization activity when compared to 
others . In the previous studies, Micrococcus 
spp.was found to be a good decolorizer . 
Hassan et al. (2013) reported that 
Micrococcus has decolorized Novacron 
blue, novacron orange dye to almost 80% 
within 24 hrs but here Micrococcuss spp. 
has shown less degradation rate because it is 
strictly aerobic bacteria and so with 
depletion in oxygen supply, hence after 24 
hrs, decolorization rate also decreased and 
concentration used was 0.01% which is very 
less compared to concentration of dye (1%) 
used in current study. Agarry et al. (2011) 
has reported that with increase in dye 
concentration bacterial decolorization ability 
decreases . When organisms are used in 
combination, decolorization rate is increased 
but for some combination decolorization 
rate is slow because when organisms of 
different sources or same source are present 
together they act on different bonds on same compound thus enhancing the degradation 
rate. Some organisms produce toxic 
byproducts or inhibitors for other organism 
which ultimately decreases degradation rate 
of compounds. Similar results are reported 
by Rashid Mahmood et al. (2015) where 8 
different genus belonging bacteria w ere used 
in combination and their degradation 
potential was determined. The report says 
that as compared to individual organism in 
consortium degradation potential increased 
approximately 10% more.  
Shaker condition  
Maximum degradation was seen within 48 
hrs. High potential decolourization was 
shown by a up to 74% followed by c, d, 
and a with potential decolorization of 22%, 
22% and 19% respectively. In combination, 
bc showed high decolorization of 30.3%. 
a (Pseudomonas ) as a potent decolorizer of 
azo dye. May be agitation and mixing have 
enhanced nutrient and oxygen supply, thus 
improving a decolorization property. In 
earlier studies, Pseudomonas has been 
isolated and used by many research people 
for dye degradation. Agarry et al. (2011) 
isolated Pseudomonas fluorescens, 
Pseudomonas nigificans, and Pseudomonas 
gellucidium and assayed its dye 
decolorization property. The report 
concludes as Pseudomonas fluorescens as 
potent decolorizer of synthetic dyes. Tripathi 
and Srivastava  (2011) also reported presence 
of Pseudomonas putida in textile effluent. 
Treatment with this bacterium showed large 
reduction in COD and BOD of textile 
effluent.  Use of pseudomonas spp was also 
reported by Zimmermann et al. (1982) 
where enzyme called azoreductase was 
extracted and its high decolorization activity 
was determined.     Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
204  Table.1 Physiochemical characterization   
Color pH COD (Chemical 
Oxygen Demand) Smell 
Sample I Dark Brown 5.6 15,000 Mg/L Pungent 
Sample II Off White 10.6 25,000 Mg/L Ammonia Like  
 
Table.2 Rf value   
control a b c d 
Rf value 0.85 0.71 0.77 0.51 0.55 
Fig.1   
   
Fig.2  
 
  
Tirupur sample (effluent I) 
Mumbai Sample 
(Effluent II) Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
205  Fig.3  
   
Fig.4 Comparison of potential decolorization within 24 72 hrs  
 
  
Fig.5  
 
Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
206  Fig.6  
   
Fig.7  
 
  
Fig.8  
 
 Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
207  Fig.9  
   
Fig.10  
 
  
Fig.11  
 
Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
208  Fig.12  
  
Plasmid screening: Plasmid was present in 
all bacterial isolates. Olukanni et al. (2006) 
screened for plasmid in his isolates by Kado 
and Lio method but no plasmid was 
detected. Hence, only genomic DNA was 
involved in dye degradation but in this case, 
all isolates have shown presence of 
plasmids. This indicates extra chromosomal 
involvement in decolorization process.  
Khaled Elbanna et al. (2010) reported 
presence of plasmid of 3 kb size having azo 
dye degrading gene isolated from lactic acid 
bacterial isolates.   
Biodegradation potential of transformed 
culture  
Transformed  E. coli DH5 with plasmid 
from a and b bacteria showed high 
degradation potential of about 72% each and 
transformed bacteria with plasmid from c 
and d showed  68% degradation potential 
each within 24 hrs. After 24 hrs, degradation 
decreases to negligible rate (as shown in 
figure 8). This may be due to non 
availability of nutrients (especially carbon 
source) necessary for degradation of azo 
dyes.  
Control (non transformed E. coli DH5) 
does not shows decolorization ability whereas cells treated with transformed 
procedure with  plasmid isolated from 
respective isolates have shown 
decolorization  within 24 hrs. Results 
obtained of transformed cells are similar to 
isolates. Indicating same genes can be 
involved in azo dye degradation.  
Degraded product analysis  
A comparison between non treated dye 
sample and treated dye sample with isolates 
with the help of TLC analysis to confirm 
dye degradation. Rf value is different for 
control and test samples  Similar Rf value of 
degraded product treated with c and d 
suggests that azo dyes are been degraded 
and same products are produced. Sheh and 
Dave (2009) have also confirmed the results 
where they did not get any spots on TLC 
chromatogram indicating that the dyes are 
degraded. Usman Aftab et al. (2011) 
confirmed azo dye decolorization by 
Corynebacterium spp. The degraded 
products were tested for confirmation by 
TLC chromatography in which control 
showed only a single band and treated 
samples showed more than a single band 
suggesting that dye is degraded. In this 
study, TLC chromatogram showed single 
point but at different distance confirming Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
209  that azo is is being degraded by isolates. 
This difference may be due to use of 
different extraction method used to extract 
byproducts or different nature of compound 
produced by different bacterial species. 
Usman Aftab et al. (2011) reported non 
toxic nature of degraded product separated 
by TLC using soil bacteria.  
Bioremediation of textile effluent  
Effluent I was decolorized maximum within 
24 hrs and organism b showed maximum 
potential decolorization up to 38%. It is 
followed by a, c and d with potential 
degradation rate of 34%, 24%, 28% 
respectively. Figure 9 shows that, bacteria in 
its adapted environment shows maximum 
biodegradation activity. This result is similar 
to results reported by Olukani et al. (2006), 
where isolates isolated from the effluent 
showed more activity in same effluent if 
supplied with some nutrients as compared to 
when added in different effluent sample.  
Effluent II was decolorized maximally 
within 24 hrs and organism d 
showed 
maximum decolorization rate of up to 63%. 
It is followed by c, a and b with potential 
degradation of 56%, 50%, 50% respectively 
(Fig. 10). This shows that biodegradation 
activity is more in adapted isolates as 
compared to non adapted isolates. When 
potential degradation is noted, adapted 
isolates shows approximately 10% more 
color removing activity is more than non 
adapted isolates. The above result is similar 
to results reported by Olukani et al. (2006).  
Effluent III was decolorized maximally 
within 24 hrs and organism d showed 
maximum decolorization rate of up to77%. 
It is followed by c, a and b with potential 
degradation of 74%, 69%, 68% respectively 
(Fig. 11). This shows that biodegradation 
activity is more in adapted isolates as compared to non adapted isolates. When 
potential degradation is noted, adapted 
isolates shows approximately 10% more 
color removing activity is more than non 
adapted isolates. The above result is similar 
to results reported by Olukani et al. (2006).  
Effluent IV was decolorized maximally 
within 24 hrs and organism d; showed 
maximum decolorization rate of up to 41%. 
It is followed by a, c and b with potential 
degradation of 40%, 32%, 32% respectively 
(Fig. 12). When figure 9, 10, 11 and 12 are 
compared, Bacteria a and b shows 
biodegradation activity more in non-adapted 
environment as compared to adapted 
environment. This is contradictory to the 
results reported by Olukanni et al. (2006). 
This may be due to stimulation of dye 
degrading gene when its environment is 
changed. The stress induction or supply of 
some components in non adapted effluent 
may lead to over expression of dye 
degrading gene leading to more 
decolorizing. Whereas c and d shows higher 
decolorization activity in adapted effluent 
which is similar to the results by Olukanni et 
al. (2006). Hence these organisms are 
adapted to their environment for their 
survival hence degrading azo dyes in 
effluent. Thus bacteria b is showing 
similar degradation potential in adapted as 
well as non adapted environment when 
supplemented with nutrients.  
References  
Camarero, S., Ibarra, D., Martínez, M.J., 
Martínez, A.T. 2005. Ligninderived 
compounds as efficient laccase 
mediators for decolorization of 
different types of recalcitrant dyes. Int.J.Curr.Microbiol.App.Sci (2015) 4(7): 199-210 
210  Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 71: 1775
1784. 
Faldu, P.R., Kothari, V.V., Kothari, C.R., 
Rawal, C.M., Domadia, K.K., Patel, 
P.A., Bhimani, H.D., Raval, 
V.H., Parmar, N.R., Nathani, 
N.M., Koringa, P.G., Joshi, C.G., 
Kothari, R.K. 2006. Draft genome 
sequence of textile azo dye-
decolorizing and degrading 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain 
PFK10, isolated from the common 
effluent treatment plant of the 
Ankleshwar industrial area of Gujarat, 
Indi. Genome Announc.,  2(1): e00019
14. 
German Buitr, Maribel Quezada, Gloria 
Moreno, 2004. Aerobic degradation of 
the azo dye acid red 151 in a 
sequencing batch biofilter. 
Bioresource Technol.,  92: 143 149. 
Hassan, M.M., Alam, M.Z., Anwar, M.N. 
2013. Biodegradation of textile azo 
dyes by bacteria isolated from dyeing 
industry effluent.  Int. Res. J. Biol. 
Sci., 2(8): 27 31. 
Hui wang, Jian Qiang Su, Xiao Wei Zheng, 
et al. 2009. Bacterial decolorization 
and degradation of the reactive dye 
reactive red 180 by Citrobacter sp. 
Ck3. Int. Biodeteriorat. Biodegrad., 
63: 395399. 
Khaled Elbanna., Gamal Hassan., Manal 
Khider, Raafat mondour, 2010. Safe 
biodegradation of textile azo dyes by 
newly isolated lactic acid bacteria and 
detection of plasmids associated with 
degradation. J. Bioremed. Biodegrad., 
1: 110.  
Olukanni, O.D., Osuntoki, A.A., Gbenle, 
G.O. 2006. Textile effluent 
biodegradation potentials of textile 
effluent-adapted and non-adapted 
bacteria.  Afri. J. Biotec., 5(20): 12
19. Rashid Mahmood,  Faiza Sharif, Sikander 
Ali, Muhammad Umar Hayyat, 2015. 
Enhancing the decolorizing and 
degradation ability of bacterial 
consortium isolated from textile 
effluent affected area and its 
application on seed germination. Sci. 
World J., 2015: 628195. 
Samuel E. Agarry, Ayobami O. Ajani, 2011. 
Evaluation of microbial systems for 
biotreatment of textile waste effluents 
in Nigeria: Biodecolourization and 
biodegradation of textile dye. J. Appl. 
Sci. Environ. Manage.,  15(1): 79 86. 
Sheh, N.T., Dave, S.R. 2009. Optimisation 
for enhanced decolorization and 
degradation of Reactive Red BS C.I. 
111 by Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
NGKCTS. Biodegradation, 20: 827
836. 
Tripathi, A., Srivastava, S.K. 2011, 
Ecofriendly treatment of azo dyes: 
biodecolorization using bacterial 
strains. Int. J. Biosci. Biochem. Bioinf ., 
1(1): 3740. 
Usman Aftab, Muhammad Riaz khan, 
Muhammad Mahfooz, Musadiq Ali, 
Salik Hassan Aslam, Rehman, A. 
2011. Decolourization and degradation 
of textile azo dyes by 
Corynebacterium sp. isolated from 
industrial effluent. Pak. J. Zool., 
43(1): 18. 
Zimmermann, Hans G. Kulla, Thomas 
Leisinger, 1982. Properties of purified 
orange i1 azoreductase, the enzyme 
initiating azo dye degradation by 
Pseudumunas KF46.  Eur. J. 
Biochem., 129: 197203.  