 
 
Biofilm and granular systems to improve Anammox biomass 
retention 
 
 
I. Fernández, J.R. Vázquez-Padín, A. Mosquera-Corral, J.L. Campos and R. Méndez 
 
 
Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Santiago de Compostela. School of Engineering,  
Rua Lope Gómez de Marzoa s/n, E-15782. Spain 
(Email: eqanusmc@usc.es ) 
 
 
Abstract 
Appropriate biomass retention in reactor systems is a crucial factor for the accurate operation of 
the Anammox process due to the slow growth rate of this bacterial population. In the present study 
two different approaches were studied and compared to improve Anammox biomass retention 
minimizing wash-out events: 1) formation of granular biomass using influents with high inorganic salts concentrations by production of saline precipitates acting as promoters for biomass aggregation (reactor SBR1); 2) use of zeolite pa rticles as carrier material for Anammox biofilm 
formation (reactor SBRZ). Both alternatives a llowed the reduction of biomass wash-out in the 
effluent to values as low as 18 mg VSS/L (SBR1) and 6 mg VSS/L (SBRZ). As a consequence the biomass concentration increased significantly in side each reactor. In the case of the SBRZ the 
specific Anammox activity (SAA) of the biomass was also enhanced increasing from 0.33 to 0.54 g N/(g VSS·d). Although both approaches allow the improvement of the biomass retention the precipitation option is recommended for waters with high salt content and for the rest the zeolite 
addition gives even better results than the previous one. 
 
Keywords 
Anammox; biofilm; granule; preci pitation; sequencing batch reactor s; solids retention; zeolite. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The removal of the nitrogen present both in muni cipal and industrial wast ewaters (basically as 
ammonium) is carried out conventionally by means of  nitrification and deni trification processes. 
This procedure is suitable  for the treatment of strong nitrogenous  wastewaters rich in biodegradable 
carbon, but it results expensive for the treatment of wastewaters w ith low carbon to nitrogen (C/N) 
ratios, like rejection waters fr om anaerobic sludge digestion. The treatment of these effluents 
involves important amounts of dissolved oxygen for n itrification and addition of an external source 
of organic matter for the denitrification step with  the consequent increase of operational costs. The 
use of a combining system composed by a process of partial nitrification of ammonium to nitrite 
and the Anammox process leads to a reduction of costs. Th e Anammox (ANaerobic AMMonium 
Oxidation) is an autotrophic process which consis ts in a combination of ammonium and nitrite by 
Planctomycete-type bacteria under anoxic c onditions to generate nitrogen gas (Strous et al., 1999). 
 
The application of the Anammox process is limite d by its long start-up periods due to very low 
growth rates and biomass yields of the involved biomass (Jetten et al. , 1997). Minimizing the wash-
out of biomass in the effluent by improving its retention becomes cr itical when biomass with so 
long duplication time (0.003 h-1, Strous et al. , 1998) is used. Systems where the improvement of 
biomass retention is achieved re duce the duration of start up period and provide better  conditions to 
implant the Anammox process at industrial scale. In reactors where biomass grows in form of 
biofilms or granules the formation of compact aggregates increases  the settling velocity of the 
biomass and improves its retention and the amount of biomass growing in suspension is minimized.   
One of the contributing factors to the development of  biofilms from suspended sludge is the 
presence of nuclei or bi o-carriers for microbial attachment. The attachment of cells to these 
particles has been proposed as the initiation step  for biofilm formation. Since the second step was 
the formation of a dense and thick biofilm on the cl uster of the inert carrier s. To enhance sludge 
aggregation the inert materials must have some properties, such as, a high specific surface area, 
good hydrophobicity and spherical shape (Yu et al ., 1999). The addition of  zeolite particles as 
support material in reactors containing suspended bi omass seemed to be effective in promoting the 
formation of anaerobic granules (Hulshoff-Pol, 1989). Besides, natural zeolites (as clinoptilolite) 
are widely used around the world as selective ioni c exchangers capable of removing ammonium ion 
from waste waters. Recently some re searchers (Lahav and Green, 2000; Lee et al ., 2001; Yang, 
1997) have demonstrated that zeolite particles impr ove the operation of nitrification reactors. This 
improvement affects to both the sedimentation pr operties of the biomass and the performance of 
ammonium removal. Considering these facts and the similarities between nitrification and 
Anammox processes regarding the slow growth of both groups of bacteria, it is supposed that using 
clinoptilolite as carrier material for attached gr owth of Anammox biomass could improve the start 
up and operation of an Anammox reactor. 
 
The aggregation of biomass can be promoted also by means of favouri ng the precipitation of 
inorganic salts. According to the DLVO (Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey, and Overbeek) theory when 
the two surfaces carry a charge of  the same sign, there is a free energy barrier between them which 
acts as a repulsive force. This force seriously prevents the approach of one cell to another. The 
increase of the ionic strength of the medium  would decrease the el ectrical repulsion, by 
compressing the double layer, and coul d initiate cell-to-cell interaction. Therefore, an increase of 
the salinity can favour the granulation. Moreover, th e solubility product is also influenced by the 
salinity of the medium and its increase would enhance the precipi tation of the salts less soluble 
which could act as nuclei for granulation. 
 
In the present work two approaches to improve the retention of Anammox biomass in sequencing 
batch reactors were tested to promote the biomass aggregation using: 
a) high inorganic salt concentrations in f eeding medium to provoke precipitation,  
b) zeolite particles as carrier material.  
 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Experimental set-up 
Experiments were carried out in two Sequencing Batch Reactors of 2 L (SBR1) and 5 L (SBRZ) of 
useful volumes, respectively. Temperature was cont rolled at 33 ºC by using a thermostatic jacket 
and pH was not controlled and ranged between 7 a nd 8. The complete mixture inside the reactors 
was achieved using mechanical stirrers with a ro tating speed of 100 rpm. The control of the pumps 
and different periods of the operational cy cles was performed with a PLC system.  
 
Zeolite (10 g/L) was added as support material to SBRZ. The added zeolite was clinoptilolite 
(ZeoCat, Spain) with a 96 % degree of purity a nd initial particle sizes between 0 and 1 mm. A 
separation by size was performed by sieving and particles with sizes between 0.5 and 1.0 mm were 
collected. Smaller sizes are useless due to its slow settling rate.  
 
Feeding media and operational strategy 
Both reactors were fed with a synthetic autotrophic medium described by Dapena-Mora et al . 
(2004a). The ammonium to nitrite molar ra tio in the feeding media was fixed at 1.  
The SBR1 was feed according to the media descri bed in Table 1 in three different operational 
periods. The Nitrogen Loading Rate  (NLR) applied was kept cons tant at 0.4 g N/(L·d) and the 
salinity of the feeding media was increased duri ng the operation (Table 1). The settleable solids 
present in the effluent were returned to the reactor. In the case of SBRZ, the applied NLR was 
constant during periods I and II and in period III it was stepwise incr eased according to the biomass 
removal capacity. No biomass from the e ffluent was returned to the reactor. 
 
Both reactors were operated in cycles of 6 hours distributed in four periods: mixed fill (300 min), 
mix (30 min), settle (15 min) and draw  (15 min) according to Dapena-Mora et al. (2004b). The 
exchange volume was fixed at 12.5 and 25% fo r SBR1 and SBRZ, respectively. The Hydraulic 
Retention Time (HRT) was maintained at 2 days in the SBR1 and 1 day in the SBRZ. 
 
Table 1.  Characteristics of the feeding media used for both reactors in the different operational 
periods. 
 
Reactor Periods Days NaCl 
(g/L) Zeolite NH 4+-N 
(mg/L) NO 2--N 
(mg/L) NLR 
(g N/(L·d)) 
I 0-18 0 --- 400 400 0.4 
II 18-50 5 --- 400 400 0.4 SBR1 
III 50-80 10 --- 400 400 0.4 
 I 0-13 --- No 30 30 0.06 
SBRZ  II 13-50 --- Yes 30 30 0.06 
 III 50-160 --- Yes 30-300 30-300 0.06-0.60 
 
Inocula 
Both reactors were inoculated with enriched Anammox sludge from a laboratory scale SBR 
operated at the University of San tiago of Compostela (Dapena-Mora et al ., 2004a). The initial 
concentrations of biomass were  1.0 and 0.24 g VSS/L for SBR1 and SBRZ, respectively. The initial 
specific Anammox activities were 0.4 g N/(g VSS·d) and 0.35 g N/(g  VSS·d) for the biomass of 
SBR1 and SBRZ, respectively. 
 
Specific Anammox Activity (SAA) tests 
Batch experiments to determine the SAA were performed according to the methodology described 
by Buys et al.  (2000) and the modification made by Dapena-Mora et al . (2004c), based on the 
measurement along time of the overpressure generate d in closed vials by the nitrogen gas produced. 
 
Analytical methods 
Nitrate, nitrite and ammonium concentrations were determined  spectrophotometrically (APHA, 
1985). The concentrations of solids, determined  as Total Suspended Solids (TSS), the fraction 
corresponding to the biomass as Volatile Suspended Solids (VSS), and the sludge volumetric index 
(SVI) of the sludge were determined accord ing to standard methods (APHA, 1989).  
 
The distribution of particle size was measured using an Image Analysis procedure. Images of the 
granules were taken with a digita l camera (Coolsnap, Roper Scientif ic Photometrics) combined with 
a stereomicroscope (ZMZ-2T, Nikon). For the dig ital image analysis the programme Image ProPlus 
was used. Specifically the programme served to calcu late the average feret diameter of the granules. 
The elemental analysis of the su rface of the biomass aggregates was made using a transmission 
electron microscope (TEM) (PHILIPS CM12). 
  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Reactors op eration 
The experim ents in SBR1 were perfor med during 72 days. During the three operational periods the 
nitrite (limiting substr ate) was almost f ully de pleted alon g the cycle and the concentration of 
ammonium  in the effluent was practical ly constant at a value of 100 mg NH 4+-N/L. The nitrogen 
loading rate (NLR) applied during the whole peri od was around 0.4 g N/(L·d). No significant effect 
was observe d in the  effluent com position  due to the presence of tested NaCl conce ntrations  (5 and 
10 g NaCl/L) in the feeding m edia.  
 
The SBRZ was initially operated du ring 13 days (Period I) to obtai n stable operation conditions and 
complete nitrite rem oval. On day 13, zeolite (10 g/ L) was added to the reactor and the applied N LR 
was m aintained constan t at a value o f 0.06 g N/(L ·d) (Period  II). F rom day 50, the applied NLR rate 
was stepwise increased up to  0.6 g N/(L·d) (Period III). 
 
In order to prove that both sy stem s were not overloaded the Sp ecific Nitrog en Loading R ate 
(SNLR) applied to th e reacto r and the Specifi c Anamm ox Activity (SAA) of the biom ass were 
compared following th e sam e procedure as D apena-Mo ra et al . (2004d). The SNLR applied to 
SBR1 during the operational period was always  below the m aximum specif ic activ ity of the 
biom ass which ranged between 0.3 5 and 0.45 g N/(g VSS·d) (Figure 1A). This fact indicates the 
system  was operated close to  be o verload ed only during Period I. In the re st of the operational 
periods not only no biom ass wash- out was observed but also an im portant increase of the biomass 
concentration was m easured. The SAA of the bi omass decreased from 0.4 to 0.35 g N/(g VSS·d) 
when 5 g/L of Na Cl were added but when the con centr ation of  salt was incr eased to 10 g/L the SAA 
increased to 0.45 g N/(g VSS·d) which is slightly higher than the initial va lue (F igure 1A). These 
changes of the SAA values are no t correlated to  the salinity of  the m edium  and could be due to the  
necessity of an adaptation period. 
 
0.00.10.20.30.40.50.6
0 204 0 608 0
Time (d)SNLR and SAA (g N/(g VSS·d)) I II III
A
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.4
0 40 80 120 160
Time (d)SNLR and SAA (g N/(g VSS·d))III II I
B
Figure 1.  Specific Nitro gen Loading  Rate (SNLR) applied ( {) and Specific Anammox Activity of 
the biom ass (SAA) ( S) in reactors S BR1 A) and SBRZ B). 
 
In cas e of SBRZ the SAA m easured  of the biom ass was low er than the  SNLR applied (Figur e 1B) 
which could be an indication of ove rload stages. But this could be attributed to  the difficulty o f 
collection  of hom ogeneous biom ass sam ples due to biomass stratification  inside the reacto r, which  
led to not realistic values of  SNLR. The SAA experienced an increase from  0.33 to 0.54 g N/(g 
VSS·d) with out and  with  zeolite presence in th e reacto r, respectivel y. On day 80, the stirring  speed was increased from  100 to 180 rpm  in order to improve  the fluidization o f zeolite p articles. This fact 
increased the shear forces on biom ass which m ight be related to the decrease of the SAA. 
 
Biomass retention 
The biom ass concentration was constant in reacto r SBR1 (Figure 2A) during Period I which was an 
indica tion of the exis ting balan ce be tween produ ction and w ash-out of biom ass. Once the NaCl was  
added in the feeding (Per iods II and III) the biom ass concen tration  incre ased steadily  in 0.6 g 
VSS/L within 54 days. The productivity of Ana mmox sludge obtained from the stoichiom etry of t he 
process given by Strous was 0.038 g VSS produced/g NH 4+-N consum ed (Strous et al ., 1998). 
Therefore, 0.82 g VSS would have been produced dur ing this interval  of operation of the reactor. 
Assum ing that the decay of the biom ass is neglected  the amount of bi omass re tained in the reactor 
was the 73 % of the stoichiom etrically produced am ount.  
 
0.00.51.01.52.0
0 204 06 08 000.10.20.30.40.50.6
0 40 80 120 160
Time (d)Reactor (g VSS/L)I II III
B
Time (d)Reactor (g VSS/L)II I III
A
Figure 2. A) Concentration of biom ass (g VSS/L) ( {) in SB R1 A) and SBRZ B). 
 
In case of reactor SBRZ the biom ass concentrat ion was m aintained consta nt (around 0.2 g VSS/L) 
during Periods I and II but an increa se of the applied NLR during Peri od III caused an i ncrease up 
to 0.48 g VSS/L (Figure 2B). As it was m entioned befo re these results must be read with care due to 
the difficulty of biom ass sam pling. 
 
0102030405060
0 204 0 608 0
Time (d)mg VSS/L
0102030405060
SRT (d)I II III
A
0369121518
0 40 80 120 160
Time (d) mg VSS/L
020406080100120
SRT (d)I III II
B
Figure 3. Biom ass concentration in th e effluent (mg VSS/L) ( z) and sludge retention tim e (SRT, 
d) (∆) in reactors SBR1 A) and SBRZ B).   
In both cases after NaCl addition in  SBR1 and zeolite add ition in S BRZ the concentration of solids 
in the effluent decreased significantly and as  a consequence SRT values of 50 and 75 days, 
respec tively were obtain ed (Figure s 3A and 3B). The additio n of zeolite caused a de creas e on th e 
biom ass concentration in the effluent from  13 to  3 m g VSS/L which supposed an increase of the  
SRT from 19 to 90 days.  
 
Reasons for the improvement of b iomass reten tion 
In order to estab lish th e different phenom ena invol ved in th e improvement of the biom ass in each 
reactor th e characteristics of the obtai ned biom ass aggregates were analysed. 
 
In the SBR1 the percentage of inorganic fracti on in the biom ass increased from  the 10% in the  
period I until 21% in period III. This inorgan ic fracti on is a ttributed to the  precipitatio n of inorgan ic 
salts due to the NaCl addition. Th e precipitation was achieved increasi ng the salinity of the m edia 
and therefore varying th e equilib rium and the solubi lity of the products . Elem ental analys is of the  
precip itates present in the surface of the gran ules ind icated that they  were m ainly com posed by 
Ca3PO 4 which is chara cterized by its very low sol ubility.  These precip itates could  easily act as 
precursors for the formation of Anammox granul es, being a support m aterial where the biom ass 
could attach, or this precipitati on could also occur directly on the surface of already form ed 
aggregates. Thus the improvem ent of the settlea bility of  the granules can be direc tly rela ted to th is 
inorganic precipitation which caused an increase of the density of the aggregates producing sludge  
with good sludge volumetric index (SVI) values. Alt hough the precipitates play an important role as 
support m aterial, in the conditions described it can al so represent a problem  if it occurs in a large 
extension on the surface of alr eady form ed aggregates. In such a way, if the amount of form ed 
precip itates is too high the whole surface of the aggregates can be covered and the activ ity of the 
biom ass reduced due to the incr ease of diffusional resistance. Concerning the biom ass physical 
characteristics, the feret diam eter increased fr om 0.47 to 0.58 mm (24% of increase) and the Sludge 
Volum e Index (SVI) decreased from 120 to 50 m L/g VSS i ndicating the com pacting of the biom ass 
(Figure 4A).  Therefore, the capac ity of  the syste m to reta in biomass incre ased.  
 
0306090120
0 204 06 08 0
Time (d)SVI (mL/g VSS)
0.20.30.40.50.6
Diameter (mm)I II III
A
020406080100
0 40 80 120 160
Time (d)Coverage (%)I II III
B
Figure 4. A) Sludge volum etric index (SVI) ( {) and averag e feret diam eter (z). B) P ercentages of 
zeolite fully covered , partia lly covered  and no covered . 
 
In the cas e of SBRZ once the par ticles of  zeolite were  added, a biof ilm started to grow th attached to 
their surfaces. Percentages of 30 and 36% for fully and partially covered part icles, resp ectiv ely wer e 
achieved (Figure 4B). Nevertheless, biofilm  formation on the zeolites surfaces was only observed during Period II and the increase of the applied NLR see med to favour the for mation of granules 
without the use of zeolite as nuclei. The form ation of a n incipient biofilm  around the carrier 
particles was observed. 
 
Day 1 1x Day 65 1x Day 72 1x 
 
Figure 5.  Stereom icroscope im ages of biom ass in th e reactor SBR1 in different operational days.  
 
Visual observation of the sam ples of reactor S BR1 indicated that du ring period I the biom ass 
forming s mall flocs and in suspension was predom inant (Figure 5). During periods II and III no 
biom ass in suspension was observed and the s mall flocs becam e aggregates.  This  behaviou r was 
already observed by Campos et al. (2002) working with nitrifying sludge. In the case of SBRZ the  
amount of s uspended biom ass was neglected and the form ation of biofilm  grow th on the surfaces of 
the zeolite p article s was observed (sh own with arrows  in Figure 6). In this reactor SBRZ the particle  
size m easured as average feret diamet er was almost c onstant around 0.6 mm. 
 
Native. 50 x Operation day 175. 10 x 
 
 
Figure 6. Stereom icroscopic observation of a native zeol ite particle and zeo lite particles after 150 
days inside the reactor S BRZ. 
 
Application  of both strategies 
The external addition of salt to enhance granulation of Anammox bi omass m ight not be feasible at 
industrial scale due the cost of  reagents. But the use of wa stewater containing high salt 
concentrations is a possibilit y. In the industry effluents with  high salt content are relatively 
common, as those produced in th e fish canning industry, due to the use of sea water during the  
manufacturing processes . These effluents are firs tly treated in an anaerobic digestion stage and the n 
a trea tment f or nitrogen  removal is necessa ry. Ther efore, th e applicatio n of the Anammox process 
for their treatm ent could be advisable together  with the  use of  the salt con tent to promote  
precipitates and to produce good se ttling aggregates. Although the pr omotion of precipitates must  
be carefully controlled to avoi d the precipitation of extrem ely hi gh am ounts of salts, which could 
diminish the activity of the Ana mmox biom ass as it was previously observed in the case anaerobic  
sludge (Van Langerak et al.,  1998).  
The use of support materials for biomass growth is  relatively common. Zeolit e particles have been 
already used in nitrifying and anaerobic systems as carrier material due to its low cost. Zeolites are 
very suitable for biomass attachment but they must be treated with caution due to their high density. 
When particles are not fully cove red (start-up of the process) the homogene ous distribution of 
biomass, without stratification in height in the reactor, requires the application of strong mixture 
forces. Furthermore this important mixture effort involves the use of high liquid or gas flows or 
high stirring speeds which can cause negative effect s over the biomass attachment, due to the high 
shear stress provoked by the abrasion produced by the impact between bare zeo lite particles, or the 
biomass specific activity. Once the particles ar e fully covered with biomass this problem 
disappeared due to the decrease  of global particle density. 
 
From the results obtained in the present work, th e addition of zeolite particles to an Anammox SBR 
seems to have some advantages compared to the ope ration of a similar SBR with addition of salts to 
promote the formation of inorganic precipitates: 1) The SBRZ allowed a higher enrichment of the 
Anammox biomass (higher SAA) and 2) the averaged estimated SRT was around 80 days while the 
SBR with salt addition achieved  a maximum SRT value of around 50 days. Moreover, the addition 
of zeolite had a clear e ffect on the decrease of biomass concen tration in the effluent which is a 
crucial matter when the start up is  carried out in a reactor inoculat ed with biomass containing a very 
low fraction of Anammox population. 
 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
Improvement of the Anammox biomass reten tion, indicated by an increase of biomass 
concentration inside SBR, was achieved following two alternative paths: via dissolved salt (NaCl) addition for precipitate production and via additio n of an external support material (zeolite). 
 
The increase of biomass retention was correlated to an improvement  of biomass settling properties 
(lower SVI values and bigger average diameters) in SBR1 while in the SBRZ was correlated to 
biomass attachment. In both cases reduction of  biomass growth in suspension was observed. 
 
The SAA of the biomass experienced slight variations  in the presence of Na Cl concentrations but it 
increased due to the addition of zeolite particles. 
 
It is demonstrated that both alternatives are va lid and the choice of one or another depends on the 
characteristics of the water to be treated. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was funded by the Spanish CICY T through the Oxanamon project (PPQ-2002-00771) 
and the Xunta de Galicia (Spain) through th e GRAFAN project (R ef: PGIDT04TAM265008PR). 
J.R. Vázquez-Padín wants to thank the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science for his FPU 
grant. The authors want to tha nk the Company ZeoCat for providing the zeolite used in this study. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
APHA-AWWA-WPCF. (1989). Standard Methods fo r examination of water and wastewater. 17th 
Ed. Washington. Buys B.R., Mosquera-Corral A., Sánchez M. and Méndez R. (2000). Development and application 
of a denitrification test based on gas production. Water Science and Technology , 41(12), 113-
120. 
Campos J.L., Mosquera-Corral A., Sánchez M., Ménd ez R. and Lema J. M. (2002). Nitrification in 
saline wastewater with high ammonia concentration in an activated sludge unit. Water 
Research , 36(10), 2555-2560. 
Dapena-Mora A., Van Hulle S., Campos J.L., Méndez R., Vanrolleghem P.A. and Jetten M.S.M. 
(2004a). Enrichment of Anammox biomass from  municipal activated sludge: experimental 
and modelling results. Journal of Chemical T echnology and Biotechnology , 79, 1421-1428. 
Dapena-Mora A., Arrojo B., Campos J.L., Mosquera-Corral A. and Méndez R. (2004b). 
Improvement of the settling properties of Anammox sludge in an SBR. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology . 79, 1417–1420. 
Dapena-Mora A., Campos J.L., Mosquera-Corra l A. and Méndez R. (2004c). Development and 
application of an Anammox activ ity test based on gas production. European Symposium on 
Environmental Biotechnology, ESEB 2004 , ISBN 90 5809 653 X, 649-652. 
Dapena-Mora A., Campos J.L., Mosquera-Corral A., Jetten M.S.M. and Méndez R. (2004d). 
Stability of the ANAMMOX process in  a gas-lift reactor and a SBR. Journal of Biotechnology 
110, 159-170.  
Hulshoff-Pol LW.(1989). The phenomenon of gra nulation of anaerobic sludge. Ph.D. Thesis, 
Agricultural University of Wageningen, The Netherlands: Wageningen. 
Jetten M.S.M., Horn S.J. and van Loosdrecht M.C.M. (1997). Towards a more sustainable 
municipal wastewater treatment system. Water Science and Technology , 35, 171-180. 
Lahav O. and Green, M. (2000). Ammonium removal from primary and secondary effluents using a 
bioregenerated ion-exchange process. Water Science and Technology , 42(1-2), 179–185. 
Lee J.C., Kim J.S., Kang I.J., Cho M.H., Park P. K. and Lee C.H. (2001). Potential and limitations 
of alum or zeolite addition to improve the pe rformance of a submerge d membrane bioreactor. 
Water Science and Technology , 43(11), 59–66. 
Strous M., Heijnen J.J., Kuenen J.G. and Jetten M. (1998). The sequencing batch reactor as a 
powerful tool for the study  of slowly growing anaer obic ammonium-oxidizing 
microorganisms. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 50, 589-596. 
Strous M., Kuenen J.G. and Jetten M. (19 99). Key physiological parameters of anaerobic 
ammonium oxidation. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 65, 3248-3250. 
van Langerak E.P.A., Gonzalez-Gil G., Van Aelst A., Van Lier J.B., Hamelers H.V.M. and Lettinga 
G. (1998). Effects of high calcium concentra tion on the development of methanogenic sludge 
in upflow anaerobic sludge bed (UASB) reactors. Water Research , 32(4), 1255-1263.  
Yang L. (1997). Investigation of ni trification by co-inmobilized nitrifying bacteria and zeolite in a 
batchwise fluidized bed. Water Science and Technology , 35(8), 169–175. 
Yu H.Q., Tay J.H. and Fang H.H.P. (1999). Eff ects of added powdered and granular activated 
carbons on start-up performance of UASB reactors. Environmental Technology , 20, 1095–
101. 