Isolation and screening of strains 
The textile mills have usually an effluent treatment plant (ETP) where all the effluent 
from the different parts of the mill is collected and treated. In the present case liquid 
samples from the drain carrying effluent to the treatment plant and from the effluent 
treatment plant were collected. Different soil samples were also collected from the 
vicinity of the effluent treatment plant. Soil and liquid effluent samples so collected were 
screened using a suitable media containing different triphenylmethane dyes. The 
organisms were screened by incubating the soil and water samples on dye agar plates 
which contain varying quantities of yeast extract, ammonium sulphate, potassium 
dihydrogen phosphate, di-sodium hydrogen phosphate, agar, and triphenylmethane dyes 
and maintained at a pH ranging from 6.0 to 8.0. Plates containing samples were 
incubated at temperature in the range of 25-50'~ and the organisms growing on them 
were selected on the basis of the clear zone on plates. Out of several organisms isolated 
one very potent organism was picked up on the basis of percent decolorization for 
further studies. This organism was identified as Bacillus sp. and has been deposited in 
the Microbial Type Culture Collection and Gene Bank (h4TCC), a National Facility 
located at the Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh, under the accession NO. 
MTCC B0006, where B denotes a bacterium 
Maintenance andgrowth of strain 
The Bacillus sp. MTCC BOO06 isolated as above was maintained on nutrient agar plates 
(containing nutrient agar and triphenylmethane dye). This organism was grown in liquid , 
Researcher: Wamik Azmi(1998)
                         
Biological Treatment of Textile and Dye-Stuff Effluent with a  Special Emphasis on Triphenylmethane Dyes.
                     SUMMARY
Guide : Banerjee, U.C.(Dr.)
                                  Acc. No. : TH-37medium in shake flasks. Cells at the exponential phase were used as inoculum for the 
large scale cultivation of cellmass in a fermenter using a suitable production medium. 
The cells from the early stationary phase were harvested and the cellmass itself was used 
as catalyst for the decolorization experiments. 
Optimizdon ofculture conditions and medium 
The Bacillus sp. was grown in a medium having suitable ingredients for providing 
carbon and nitrogen sources, vitamins, amino acids, and metal ions in required 
quantity. Different carbon sources like glucose, fructose, maltose, sucrose, glycerol, 
lactose, and inositol were used for the production of cellmass. The carbon source was 
used along with dierent organic nitrogen sources such as peptone, soyapeptone, 
tryptose, tryptone, casamino acid gelatin, biopeptone etc. in combination with growth 
factors such as yeast extract, meat extract, malt extract, beef extract, and brain heart 
infusion. Since the dye decolorizing activity is cell associated, medium producing 
high cell density with good decolorizing activity was used for fixher studies. AU these 
studies were canied out in shake flasks. 
The best carbon sources were glucose and maltose which gave nearly equal cellmass 
with nearly equal decolorization activity. Minimum cell mass and activity were 
obtained when starch was used as carbon source. In order to find out the optimum 
concentration of glucose for growth and decolorization, different concentrations 
(0.25-2.0'?'?, wlv) of glucose were used in the medium containing 1.0% (wlv) 
soyapeptone. Results showed that 1.0% (wlv) glucose was optimum for growth and 
decolorization activity. Among all the nitrogen source used, soyapeptone was found to be most effective in 
terms of cellmass production and dye decolorization activity. Gelatin yielded the 
minimum cellmass with less decolorization activity. In order to find out the optimum 
concentration of soyapeptone for dye decolorization, different concentrations (0.25- 
2.0%, wlv) of soyapeptone was used in the medium containing 1% (w/v) glucose. 
1.25-1.5% (wlv) soyapeptone concentration was found to be optimum in terms of 
cellmass yield and decolorization activity. Therefore, 1.25% (w/v) soyapeptone was 
used for all krther studies. 
Different inorganic nitrogen sources (ammonium sulphate, ammonium acetate, 
ammonium nitrate, ammonium chloride, and urea) were evaluated at a 
concentration of 0.5% (wlv) in a medium containing glucose (1.0%, wlv) and 
soyapeptone (1.25%, w/v). It was found that nitrogen supplied in tern of 
inorganic salts did not improve the cellmass production as weU as dye decolorization 
in comparison to control having no nitrogen source. Urea showed the relatively 
good cellmass in all the inorganic nitrogen sources used but it has negative effect on 
dye decolorization activity. Various ammonium salts showed good decolorization 
activity with low yield of cellmass. 
Optimlllluctructron of pH, iempernhtre, and inoculum size for growth of BaciUus sp. 
The optimum pH for growth was found to be between 7.0-7.25. The optimum 
temperature for growth was 30'~. Growth decreased drastically when temperature 
was increased up to 37%. In order to find out the effect of inoculum size on growth 
and dye decolorization activity 2.5-10% (vlv) inoculum was added in the cultivation 
medium. The age of inoculum used was 24 h. It was observed that with 10% (vlv) inoculum size, ~ood growth was obtained with maximum decolorivltion activity and 
lag time for growth was also found to be minimum, 
Optimization of pH and temperature for &colorization activiQ 
pH and temperature were optimized for dye decolorization activity. Optimum pH 
was 7.0 and optimum temperature was found to be 50'~. The cell activity at high 
temperature suggested that biological activity was quite stable and good for textile 
effluent treatment because the temperature of effluent coming out fiom dye-house is 
sufficiently high (approximately 60'~). 
Decolori~n of triphenylmethane dyes with growing and resting c& of 
Bacillus sp. 
Growing and resting cells of Bacillus sp. were used for decolorization Crystal Violet, 
Malachite Green, Magenta. In the case of growing cells, the dyes were added at the 
time of inoculation. Interestingly it was found that the Bacillus p. could grow and 
decolorize higher amount of dyes (upto 400 ppm) in 120 h. It was also observed that 
Magenta was least toxic to Bacillus sp. (in terms of growth inhibition) however, the 
rate of decolorization was less compared to other triphenylmethane dyes tested. 
Resting cells, harvested at the late exponential phase were found to be very active from 
the decolorization point of view. Only 0.5 g cellmass was needed to decolorize upto 
100 ppm dyes by resting cells. Dec~lori~~on studies in packed column reactor 
Active cells were successhlly immobilized in calcium alginate beads for repetitive use 
in dye decolorization experiments. Bead diameter was 3.0 mm. Two columns of 
different diameters were packed with the cells immobilized in calcium alginate matrix 
and used for the decolorization studies of synthetic dyes. It was found that dye can be 
efficiently decolorized to 1Wh for more than 10 cycles without any significant loss 
in activity. Beads after decolorization were broken in n-butanol and OD of butanol 
fraction was measured at respective wavelengths showing zero OD indicating 
that dyes were not adsorbed on beads and hence completely decolorized. 
Decolorizahzatcon studies in reactor 
Optimization studies for decolorization of triphenylmethane dyes were canied out with 
Crystal Violet, Malachite Green, and Magenta at 100 ppm level in a LKB fernenter 
(working volume 3.0 liter). Dierent parameters like aeration (0.25 to 1.0 win), 
agitation (50 to 300 rpm), decolorization temperature (35 to 55'~), and pH (6 to 8) 
were optimized for the maximum decolorization of dyes. It was found that the 
maximum decolorization in a batch reactor took place at the following conditions- pH 
7.0; temperature 50'~; aeration rate 0.5 wm; agitation 200 rpm. 
Mkrobial assessment of taxicity of untreated and treated dye 
Due to the toxic nature, triphenylmethane dyes present certain hazards and 
environmental problems. Toxicity of dyes varies with the structure. Efforts were made 
to assess the toxicity of Crystal Violet, Malachite Green, and its decolorized product 
by microbiological means. The test organisms used were various strains ofJscherichia col~, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Schirosaccharomyces pombe. Toxicity was 
measured in terms of inhibition of growth of test organisms. Various parameters like 
lag period, maximum cellmass concentration, specific growth rate (p) and inhibitive 
ability (n) were determined for the assessment of toxicity. In the presence of Crystal 
Violet (5 pg/mL), the specific growth rates (p) for E. coli DH54 S. cerevisiae 
BJ5418 and S. pombe ABP20 decreased from 1.25, 0.229, and 0.262 K' to 0.125, 
0.125, and 0.044 h-', respectively. The specific growth rates did not decrease in the 
presence of treated dye. The inhibitive ability of Crystal Violet was maximum (2.188) 
with S. cerevisiae BJ5418 while it was minimum (0.688) for the E. coli DH5a. Based 
on the results of above parameters, it was found that Crystal Violet is toxic to all the 
organisms tested but when decolorized by Bacillus p., it was found to be non toxic. 
For Malachite Green (5 pg/mL,), the specific growth rates decreased from 0.2495 and 
0.262 h-' to 0.15 and 0.185 K' in the case of S. pombe ABP4 and S. pombe ABP20, 
respectively, while with treated dye no change in specific growth rates was observed. 
With Malachite Green, the maximum inhibitive ability was 2.25 for S. cerevisiae 
ABC261 and minimum value (0.714) was for S. cerevisiae BJ5418. The maximum 4 
value was for E. coli JM109 and minimum value was with S. pombe ABP20. In the 
peresence of Crystal Violet with both the E. coli strains, the inhibitive abilities (n) were 
found to be minimum, however, with Malachite Green, minimum inhibitive ability was 
with S. cerevisiae BJ5418 (0.714). This data relate to the earlier reports that Crystal 
Violet and Malachite Green are toxic to the higher eukaryotic system, however, the 
treated Crystal Violet and Malachite Green were found to be non-toxic for all the 
strains of test organisms. 
, Estimation of COD values of untreated and treated dyes 
The COD values of different dyes and its decolorized products were estimated as 
per American Public Health Association (APHA) standard procedure. The COD 
values of the Crystal Violet, Malachite Green, and Magenta (100 ppm each) were 
found to be 248, 225, and 245 ppm, respectively. The decolorized dyes exhibited 
significant decrease in the COD values. Crystal Violet showed a 83% decrease in COD 
value, while for Magenta and Malachite Green percentage reduction of COD was 70 
and 74%, respectively. 
Deco1ori~'on of triphenylmethane by laccase 
Decolorization of Crystal Violet, Malachite Green, and Magenta were carried out with 
extracellular fluid (containing laccase) and with the growing cells of Pleurofus 
ostreatus MTCC1802. Pleurotus ostreafus WCC1802 was grown in potato, 
dextrose, yeast extract medium. After 8 d of growth, dyes were added to each flasks. 
Malachite Green was decolorized more rapidly than other two dyes under static 
condition while Magenta was decolorized at a very slow rate. This decolorization was 
supposed to be carried out by laccase, as no lignin peroxidase and manganese 
peroxidase was detected in culture filtrate. Cell free culture filtrate of 18 d old P. 
ostreatus was filter sterilized and used for the decolorization of various 
triphenylmethane dyes. The decolorization was observed without an external addition 
of Hz02. Furthermore, dye decolorization was found to be carried out by ultrafiltered 
and dialyzed extracellular culture filtrate. In contrast, boiled culture filtrate could not 
decolorize the dyes. The continuing dye decolorization could be because of the 
presence of active laccase in ultrafiltered and dialyzed extracellular @id, whereas, 3 .. , . , . ' . . 
, ...... ~ ....,,, ; .<.,. '. 
laccase was denatured in boiled fluid. P. osfreatus successfully decolorized the dyes in 
a medium without any nitrogen limitation. The ability of P. ostreaius to decolorize 
Crystal Violet, Malachite Green, and Magenta to a higher extent in a relatively simple 
medium without any external supply of H202, and without any nutrient limitation could 
be exploited for dye waste water treatment, however, the longer growth period and 
less dye decolorization are the major disadvantages of P. osfreatus. 