Citation: Patel, H.; Yadav, V .K.;
Yadav, K.K.; Choudhary, N.;
Kalasariya, H.; Alam, M.M.; Gacem,
A.; Amanullah, M.; Ibrahium, H.A.;
Park, J.-W.; et al. A Recent and
Systemic Approach Towards
Microbial Biodegradation of Dyes
from Textile Industries. Water 2022 ,
14, 3163. https://doi.org/10.3390/
w14193163
Academic Editors: Christos S.
Akratos and Efthimia A. Kaprara
Received: 27 August 2022
Accepted: 29 September 2022
Published: 8 October 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
water
Review
A Recent and Systemic Approach Towards Microbial
Biodegradation of Dyes from Textile Industries
Heli Patel1, Virendra Kumar Yadav1,2,*
, Krishna Kumar Yadav3
, Nisha Choudhary4, Haresh Kalasariya5
,
M. Mujahid Alam6
, Amel Gacem7
, Mohammed Amanullah8
, Hala A. Ibrahium9,10, Jae-Woo Park11
,
Sungmin Park11
and Byong-Hun Jeon12,*
1Department of Biotechnology, School of Sciences, P P Savani University, Surat 394125, India
2Department of Biosciences, School of Liberal Arts & Sciences, Mody University of Science and Technology,
Sikar 332311, India
3Faculty of Science and Technology, Madhyanchal Professional University, Ratibad 462044, India
4Department of Environmental Sciences, School of Sciences, P P Savani University, Surat 394125, India
5Centre for Natural Products Discovery, School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences,
Liverpool John Moores University, Byrom Street, Liverpool L3 3AF, UK
6Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia
7Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences, University 20 Août 1955, Skikda 21000, Algeria
8Department of Clinical Biochemistry, College of Medicine, King Khalid University, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia
9Biology Department, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, Abha 61413, Saudi Arabia
10Department of Semi Pilot Plant, Nuclear Materials Authority, El Maadi, P .O. Box 530, Cairo 11381, Egypt
11Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Hanyang University, 222-Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu,
Seoul 04763, Korea
12Department of Earth Resources & Environmental Engineering, Hanyang University, 222-Wangsimni-ro,
Seongdong-gu, Seoul 04763, Korea
*Correspondence: yadava94@gmail.com (V .K.Y.); bhjeon@hanyang.ac.kr (B.-H.J.)
Abstract: The textile industry generated a series of synthetic dyestuffs that threatened environmental
protection. Azo dyes, widely utilized in textile, paper, fruit, leathers, cosmeceuticals and pharmaceuti-
cal ﬁelds, account for most of the dyestuffs made. Since they have colour fastness properties, stability,
and susceptibility to oxidation, existing efﬂuent treatment methods cannot entirely strip different
dyes from efﬂuents. Under certain environmental factors, bacteria decolourize and degrade dyes.
The treatment process is cheap, environmentally safe, and can be used on various dyes. However,
textile plant wastewater can produce many polluting chemicals and dyes. Environmental legislation
is increasingly being enacted to regulate mainly azo-based dyes in the environment. The potential
of the microbes for the decolourization of dyes and metabolizing them is long-known knowledge.
The toxic components of dyes challenge a potential threat to all the living forms of life. Though
both natural and synthetic dyes are used for the colourization of textiles, only synthetic ones are
challenging to decolourize. Microbial-based bioremediation of dyes has been studied and reviewed
primarily to accelerate dye degradation. The various piece of the literature revealed that the majority
of these dye removal microbes belong to mainly white-rot fungi, a consortium of anaerobic bacteria.
In addition to this, there are several (genetically engineered microorganisms) GEMs that remediate
dyes efﬁciently. Here in the current review, the authors have tried to bridge the existing gap in the
bioremediation of dyestuff. Moreover, the authors have also tried to provide the latest trend in this
ﬁeld. This study will surely beneﬁt the industries and researchers related to dyestuffs by maintaining
eco-friendly approaches.
Keywords: bioremediation; bacteria; fungi; microalgae; consortium; laccase; white-rot fungi
1. Introduction
Over the last few decades, the utilization of dyes has increased drastically due to the
rapid industrialization of dye-based industries and the increase in demand for textiles and
Water 2022 ,14, 3163. https://doi.org/10.3390/w14193163 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/waterWater 2022 ,14, 3163 2 of 24
clothes [ 1]. However, due to rapid industrialization, the dyes remained the same synthetic
ones, which are very difﬁcult to degrade from the environment. These textile dyes lead
to pollution of water and some of them are xenobiotic. Prolonged contamination of water
bodies may lead to several diseases among aquatic and other living organisms. Some of
the dyes are carcinogenic which will be very severe. Dyes are mainly used for colouring
textiles, fabrics, etc. [ 2]. The classiﬁcation of dyes could be carried out by various features
such as their source of origin, function and chemical makeup, etc. Generally, based on
the source of origin dyes could be classiﬁed into two categories, i.e., synthetic and natural.
Synthetic dyes are generally manufactured by a chemical process in the industries whereas
natural dyes are derived from natural materials, such as ﬂowers, leaves, the bark of a tree,
etc. [ 3]. Further, dyes could also be categorized based on their solubility in the aqueous
medium for instance acid dyes, basic dyes (cationic), diffuse dyes (non-ionic), and direct
and reactive dyes (anionic) [ 4]. All the dyes are generally soluble in an aqueous medium
except non-ionic dyes. The degree of solubility of such dyes varies in the aqueous medium.
The types of dyes based on their solubility are shown in Figure 1. Based on solubility,
dyes could be broadly categorized into soluble and insoluble dyes. The soluble dyes could
be further categorized into anionic and cationic dyes based on their charges. Cationic
dyes mainly include basic dyes while anionic dyes could be further categorized into acid,
reactive direct, and mordant dyes. Whereas the insoluble dyes can be divided further into
azo dyes, disperse, sulphur, vat and solvent dyes. The members present in all these types
of dyes are shown in detail in Figure 2.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 26 
 
 Keywords: bioremediation; bacteria; fungi; microalg ae; consortium; laccase; white-rot fungi 
 
1. Introduction 
Over the last few decades, the utilization of  dyes has increased drastically due to the 
rapid industrialization of dye- based industries and the increase in demand for textiles and 
clothes [1]. However, due to rapid industrialization, the dyes remained the same synthetic 
ones, which are very difficult to degrade from the environment. These textile dyes lead to 
pollution of water and some of them are xenobiotic. Prolonged contamination of water 
bodies may lead to several diseases among aq uatic and other living organisms. Some of 
the dyes are carcinogenic which will be very severe. Dyes are mainly used for colouring 
textiles, fabrics, etc. [2]. The classification of  dyes could be carried out by various features 
such as their source of origin, function and chemical makeup, etc. Generally, based on the 
source of origin dyes could be classified in to two categories, i.e., synthetic and natural. 
Synthetic dyes are generally manufactured by a chemical process in the industries 
whereas natural dyes are derived from natural ma terials, such as flowers, leaves, the bark 
of a tree, etc., [3]. Further, dyes could also be categorized based on their solubility in the 
aqueous medium for instance acid dyes, basic dyes (cationic), diffuse dyes (non-ionic), and direct and reactive dyes (anionic) [4]. All the dyes are generally soluble in an aqueous 
medium except non-ionic dyes. The degree of solu bility of such dyes varies in the aqueous 
medium. The types of dyes based on their solubility are shown in Figure 1. Based on sol-
ubility, dyes could be broadl y categorized into soluble and insoluble dyes. The soluble 
dyes could be further categorized into anioni c and cationic dyes based on their charges. 
Cationic dyes mainly include basic dyes while  anionic dyes could be further categorized 
into acid, reactive direct, and mordant dyes. Whereas the insoluble dyes can be divided 
further into azo dyes, disperse, sulphur, vat and solvent dyes. The members present in all 
these types of dyes are shown in detail in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 1. Types of dyes based on their  adopted from Shamsani et al ., 2020 [5] with permission. 
Figure 1. Types of dyes based on their adopted from Shamsani et al., 2020 [5] with permission.Water 2022 ,14, 3163 3 of 24
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 26 
 
  
Figure 2. Dyes along with their representative members. 
Dyes commonly contain anthraquinone, indigoid, and azo aromatic structures [6]. 
Dyes are mainly comprised of two parts, i.e., auxochrome and chromophore. The auxo-
chrome is derived from the Greek word, where ‘auxo’ means ‘to increase’ and ‘chrome’ 
means to colour. Auxochrome is a group of atoms which imparts different colour to the material only when it is attached to a chromo phore but when it is present alone it could 
not impart that colour. Auxochromes are also called ‘colour helpers’  or ‘colour intensifi-
ers. Chromophores are mainly a part of a dye that when exposed to visible light then it 
will absorb and reflect a certain colour [7]. 
Dyes are frequently applied to many substrates in edibles, cosmetics, paper, rubber, 
and products of textile industries [4]. Day by  day the demand for dyes is increasing with 
the increasing population and industries. Ther efore, there is more establishment of dye 
and textile industries. Due to the increased es tablishment of the dyes industry, there is a 
large amount of dye effluent production. These effluents are mainly disposed of in rivers 
or other water bodies leading to water pollution. Moreover, most of the dyeing process is inefficient at the time of dying of garments, which leads to the loss of the majority of the 
dyestuff in the water sources [8 ]. Once these dyes enter the water bodies, they are availa-
ble in the environment. The number of dyes lost during a dyeing process totally depends 
on the type of dyes being used. If simple dyes are used, then the loss will be only 2% while 
if reactive dyes are used then the loss of dyes  may reach up to 50% [9]. Therefore, both the 
process, i.e., disposal of dye effluent in th e water bodies and the inefficient dying process 
deteriorates the quality of water in the enviro nment. Due to these re asons the quality of 
water in terms of biological oxygen demand , chemical oxygen demand, total suspended 
Figure 2. Dyes along with their representative members.
Dyes commonly contain anthraquinone, indigoid, and azo aromatic structures [ 6].
Dyes are mainly comprised of two parts, i.e., auxochrome and chromophore. The aux-
ochrome is derived from the Greek word, where ‘auxo’ means ‘to increase’ and ‘chrome’
means to colour. Auxochrome is a group of atoms which imparts different colour to the
material only when it is attached to a chromophore but when it is present alone it could
not impart that colour. Auxochromes are also called ‘colour helpers’ or ‘colour intensiﬁers.
Chromophores are mainly a part of a dye that when exposed to visible light then it will
absorb and reﬂect a certain colour [7].
Dyes are frequently applied to many substrates in edibles, cosmetics, paper, rubber,
and products of textile industries [ 4]. Day by day the demand for dyes is increasing with
the increasing population and industries. Therefore, there is more establishment of dye and
textile industries. Due to the increased establishment of the dyes industry, there is a large
amount of dye efﬂuent production. These efﬂuents are mainly disposed of in rivers or other
water bodies leading to water pollution. Moreover, most of the dyeing process is inefﬁcient
at the time of dying of garments, which leads to the loss of the majority of the dyestuff
in the water sources [ 8]. Once these dyes enter the water bodies, they are available in the
environment. The number of dyes lost during a dyeing process totally depends on the type
of dyes being used. If simple dyes are used, then the loss will be only 2% while if reactive
dyes are used then the loss of dyes may reach up to 50% [ 9]. Therefore, both the process, i.e.,
disposal of dye efﬂuent in the water bodies and the inefﬁcient dying process deteriorates
the quality of water in the environment. Due to these reasons the quality of water in terms
of biological oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, and opticalWater 2022 ,14, 3163 4 of 24
features are affected. Due to the dyes, the light could not penetrate into the water systems
which affects the growth of ﬂora and fauna of the aquatic system [ 10]. Dyes in the efﬂuent
are highly visible even at low concentrations, and oxidation products of these clothing
dyes are often carcinogenic. In addition, these dyes lead to several toxic effects on living
organisms including humans. For instance, there are several dyes which are neurotoxic,
cytotoxic, genotoxic, mutagenic, hypersensitive and mitochondrial toxic [ 11]. Due to all
these activities, various countries have adopted stricter environmental regulations to deal
with the textile industries.
This dye efﬂuent could be treated by various biological, chemical and physical meth-
ods. Biological methods include the utilization of microorganisms as such or their enzymes,
phytoremediation, activated lagoons, trickling ﬁlters etc. [ 12]. The chemical approaches
for dye removal include precipitation, absorption, oxidation, ozonation, electrolysis, re-
duction, advanced oxidation process, ion exchange etc. [ 13]. The physical methods in-
clude techniques such as ultrasonication, drying, sedimentation, reverse osmosis, and
coagulation/ﬂocculation membrane ﬁltration such as microﬁltration, nanoﬁltration, and
ultraﬁltration are very expensive [ 9]. Physical methods such as screening, sedimenta-
tion, and skimming are used to eliminate ﬂoating debris from the wastewater. Figure 3
shows all the biological, physical, and chemical approaches for the decolourization of dyes
from wastewater.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 26 
 
 solids, and optical features are affected. Due to the dyes, the light could not penetrate into 
the water systems which affects the growth of flora and fauna of the aquatic system [10]. 
Dyes in the effluent are highly visible even at low concentrations, and oxidation products of these clothing dyes are often carcinogenic. In addition, these dyes lead to several toxic 
effects on living organisms including humans. For instance, there are several dyes which 
are neurotoxic, cytotoxic, genotoxic, mutage nic, hypersensitive and mitochondrial toxic 
[11]. Due to all these activities, various coun tries have adopted stricter environmental reg-
ulations to deal with the textile industries. 
This dye effluent could be treated by vari ous biological, chemical and physical meth-
ods. Biological methods include the utilizati on of microorganisms as such or their en-
zymes, phytoremediation, activated lagoons, tr ickling filters etc. [12]. The chemical ap-
proaches for dye removal include precipitation,  absorption, oxidation, ozonation, electrol-
ysis, reduction, advanced oxidation process, ion exchange etc., [13]. The physical methods 
include techniques such as ul trasonication, drying, sedimentation, reverse osmosis, and 
coagulation/flocculation membrane filtration such as microfiltration, nanofiltration, and 
ultrafiltration are very expensive [9]. Physical methods such as screening, sedimentation, and skimming are used to eliminate floating debris from the wastewater. Figure 3 shows 
all the biological, physical, and chemical appr oaches for the decolourization of dyes from 
wastewater. 
 
Figure 3. Various methods of treatment of textile dyes. 
Out of the above-mentioned dye effluent tr eatment methods, majority of them are 
inefficient, expensive, energy intensive and le ading to formation of by-products which are 
more harmful. Therefore, in all three types of approaches, biological one is comparatively eco-friendly, with no utilization of chemicals during the process and also no harmful me-
tabolites by-products produced. In addition to all these features, biological materials used 
for dye removal are biodegradable in nature [14]. 
Even among biological approaches, there ar e choices to use plant-based remediation 
or microbial remediation. The selection of th e two depends on the availability of the bio-
logical material, their cost and time consum ption. The remediation by using plants is 
called phytoremediation while microbial remedi ation may be further categorized into my-
coremediation (fungi) [15], phycoremediation (algae) [16], and bacterial remediation. Out 
of phytoremediation and microbia l remediation, the former is time taking as the plant has 
Figure 3. Various methods of treatment of textile dyes.
Out of the above-mentioned dye efﬂuent treatment methods, majority of them are
inefﬁcient, expensive, energy intensive and leading to formation of by-products which are
more harmful. Therefore, in all three types of approaches, biological one is comparatively
eco-friendly, with no utilization of chemicals during the process and also no harmful
metabolites by-products produced. In addition to all these features, biological materials
used for dye removal are biodegradable in nature [14].
Even among biological approaches, there are choices to use plant-based remediation
or microbial remediation. The selection of the two depends on the availability of the
biological material, their cost and time consumption. The remediation by using plants
is called phytoremediation while microbial remediation may be further categorized into
mycoremediation (fungi) [ 15], phycoremediation (algae) [ 16], and bacterial remediation.
Out of phytoremediation and microbial remediation, the former is time taking as the plantWater 2022 ,14, 3163 5 of 24
has to grow ﬁrstly in those areas which will depend on the life span of the plant. Therefore,
phytoremediation becomes a second choice when it comes to the rate of remediation of dye
efﬂuents from the site.
So, due to these beneﬁcial features, developed countries are now switching to microbial-
based techniques for the remediation of dyes. The microbes are used either in the dried
powder form, or their nanosized form. In addition to this microbe could be used directly as
a whole organism or their extracted enzymes/metabolites used for remediation purposes.
The dried or nanosized form mainly acts as a biosorbent whereas the whole microbe or
its enzyme attacks the various bonds present in the dyes. The former two approaches
simply adsorb the dyes (biosorption), whereas the latter two processes mineralize or me-
tabolize the dye molecules and convert them into either mineral or less toxic products
(enzymatic degradation) [ 11]. The microbial-based approaches have been used in either
monoculture or a mixture of cultures called microbial consortiums. There are several
pieces of literature where monoculture has been used for the remediation or decolour-
ization of dyes. Some of the studies are discussed over here. Khadijah (2009) tested the
ability of 1540 bacterial isolates to remove different azo dyes. Kochher and Kumar (2012)
investigated the screening of bacteria that could decolourize textile dyes. The ﬁndings
of this study suggested that bacteria could be used to remediate dye from wastewater.
The bacterial population used over here for the remediation of dyes was isolated from
waste efﬂuent from the textile dye industry. Investigators have shown that bacteria are
naturally adaptable and capable of degrading pollutants. Leena et al., 2008, investigated
the remediation of Reactive Black-B dye (RBBD) from textile efﬂuent using efﬂuent-adapted
bacteria (EAB) and efﬂuent non-adapted bacteria (ENAB). The investigator found a group
of ﬁve bacteria, i.e., Alcaligenes sp.,Pseudomonas aeruginosa ,Bacillus sp.,Eubacterium sp., and
Arthrobacter sp. For decolourization in ten days, investigators have utilized four ENAB,
for say, Kluyvara ascorbate ,Bacillus sp.,Pseudomonas species, and Pasteurella sp. Efﬂuent-
adapted Bacillus sp. reduced colour by 35.68%, while non-adapted isolate of the same genus
removed colour by 30.04%. P . aeruginosa adapted to efﬂuent demonstrated 44.2% decolour-
ization, comparable to non-adapted Pseudomonas sps (41.73%). A team of investigators led
by Mutafov et al., 2007 revealed the potential of two bacterial species, Alcaligenes faecalis and
Rhodococcus erythropolis , to remediate monoazo dye Acid orange (AO) at various initial dye
concentrations. A diazo dye Reactive yellow 84A dye was effectively degraded by using a
novel bacterial strain, Exiguobacterium sp. [ 17]. In addition, analytical techniques such as
Fourier transform-infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy
(GC-MS), and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) showed that dye degra-
dation resulted in a substantial decrease in phytotoxicity. Furthermore, there are several
investigators who have tried to remove malachite green by using Aeromonas hydrophila ,
where the efﬁciency was about 96.8% [ 18],Bacillus pseudomycoides were used by Kumar
et al., 2019 to remove acid black 24/40 mg/L where the efﬁciency was 96% [ 19]. Ayed et al.,
2019 tried to remove brilliant orange 3R/750 mg/L by using Lactobacillus acidophilus with
an efﬁciency of about 99.3% [ 20]. Similarly, a huge amount of work has been carried out by
using monoculture but very less attempts were made by using mixed culture or by using
microbial consortium.
Since the microbial consortium has different microbes which produce a variety of
enzymes and metabolites so there is more effective removal of dyes with them. There are
several reports where dyes remediated were carried out by microbial consortiums. Due
to synergistic metabolic behaviour, it has been documented that these diverse microbial
cultures can achieve effective dye degradation. Poddar et al., 2022 used a microbial
consortium (MC) comprising mainly different Klebsiella sps. The authors have prepared
5 different consortiums from 19 strains. The developed MC was used to remove amaranth,
sunset yellow, tartrazine, indigo carmine, and quinoline yellow dyes. The overall efﬁciency
of about 96.5% was achieved for the most potential MC [21].
Algae, yeast, bacteria, and fungi are among the microorganisms that can mineralize
and decolourize different dyes [ 22]. Microalgae have shown huge potential in the bioreme-Water 2022 ,14, 3163 6 of 24
diation of dyes from wastewater. It has been used in various forms such as dry powder,
live, extracts mostly in lipid-free form and nanoparticles. Mansour et al., 2022 developed
nanoparticles of Arthrospira platensis NIOF17/003 microalgae and utilized them for the
remediation of methylene blue (MB), from the synthetic aqueous solutions. The developed
NPs were analysed by sophisticated instruments for detailed morphological and elemental
properties. Further, the adsorption capacity of the Arthrospira platensis NIOF17/003 NPs
was analysed against pH, temperature, contact time, and initial dose of MB dye. The
authors concluded that the optimum remediation of MB dye was achieved when the NP’s
initial dose was about 0.4 g. Moreover, about 93% removal of MB dye was reached within
5 min at a stirring rpm of 150. Further, the authors have also analysed the recyclability of
the adsorbent and found that it is possible to achieve MB remediation up to 65.5% after
three recycles of the adsorbent [ 23]. Ashour et al., 2021 used the same strain of alga for the
bioremediation of ammonia from aquaculture wastewater efﬂuents. Here the investigators
have used complete dry biomass and lipid-free biomass of the above alga. Further after
acquiring a detailed investigation of both the adsorbents by sophisticated instruments, it
was used to remove ammonium ions from aquaculture wastewater efﬂuents. The inves-
tigators removed the ammonium ions from both the conditions, i.e., from the synthetic
aquaculture solutions and from real aquaculture efﬂuents. The investigators concluded
that the ammonium ions removal percentage was higher in synthetic aquaculture water
than in the real one. The removal percentage of ammonium ions by complete dry-biomass
of alga was 64.24% and 25.7% from synthetic and real aquaculture wastewater, respectively.
While in the case of lipid-free biomass, in synthetic aquaculture wastewater NH4+ ions
were removed up to 98.68% and in real aquaculture wastewater was 37.85 [ 24]. Alprol et al.
2021 used complete dry biomass and lipid-free biomass of the above alga and assessed its
potential for the removal of two organic dyes namely Ismate violet 2R, and IV2R from textile
efﬂuents. Both the adsorbents were thoroughly characterized by sophisticated instruments
for detailed properties. By applying batch adsorption study of the dye removal, it was
found that for complete dry biomass it was 75.7% and for lipid-free biomass, it was 61.1%.
Therefore, it was found that the complete dry biomass of A. platensis was more effective
for the said dye removal at optimized conditions [25].
While there are several enzyme-based dye removals that are found highly reliable for
the removal of dyes. For instance, azo-reductase, laccase, lignin peroxidase, manganese
peroxidase etc. remediate dyes very efﬁciently. Azo reductase is one such enzyme which
speciﬁcally acts on the azo dyes. Azo dyes could be efﬁciently removed by using azo dye
reductases and lactases. Azo-reductases catalyse reactions only in reducing equivalents
such as FADH and NADH. The majority of Azo dyes have sulphate groups and have
heavy molecular weight, making them difﬁcult to move through [ 3]. Figure 4 is showing
various types of dye biodegradation processes based on the types of microorganisms.
The microbial-based dye removal process involves fungi, bacteria as a whole organism,
microalgae, microbial enzymes, microbial consortium (MC), and dried or powdered forms
of these microbes. While Figure 5 is showing types of microbial-based dye degradation
in the presence or absence of oxygen. The oxygen-dependent microbial process generally
depends on the nature of the used microorganism, i.e., whether it is aerobic or anaerobic.
Therefore, the microbial process could be either aerobic, anaerobic or anoxic.
So, microbial-based bioremediation of dyes efﬂuent from wastewater is the most
economical and reliable globally. There are also good numbers of microorganisms that are
easy to manage and need no planning. In addition to this periphyton (complex mixture of
algae, cyanobacteria, heterotrophic microbes+ detritus or periphytic bioﬁlm, methods may
also be utilized for dye remediation. The microbial-based dye remediation has been carried
out by various investigators either in natural conditions or in laboratory conditions either
in aerobic or anaerobic conditions based on the nature of the microorganism [26].Water 2022 ,14, 3163 7 of 24
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 26 
 
  
Figure 4. Various types of microbial methods for remediation of textile dyes. 
  
Figure 4. Various types of microbial methods for remediation of textile dyes.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 26 
 
  
 
Figure 5. Various types of microbial degradation of dyes based on oxygen environment. 
So, microbial-based bioremediation of dyes ef fluent from wastewater is the most eco-
nomical and reliable globally. There are also good numbers of microorganisms that are 
easy to manage and need no planning. In addition to this periphyton (complex mixture of algae, cyanobacteria, heterotrophic microbes+ detritus or periphytic biofilm, methods 
may also be utilized for dye remediation. Th e microbial-based dye remediation has been 
carried out by various investigators either in natural conditions or in laboratory condi-
tions either in aerobic or anaerobic conditio ns based on the nature of the microorganism 
[26]. 
In the present review, the investigators have emphasized the microbial-based reme-
diation of dye effluents from wastewater. The authors have focused on the existing gap in 
this field and try to provide a current state of the art. The authors have focused on the different microorganisms used for dye remediat ion purposes and recent trends. The au-
thors have tried to provide a mechanism of dye removal from wastewater by using a mi-
croorganism. Finally, the authors have also focused on microbial enzymes and their role 
in the remediation of dyes in the environment. In addition to all, one of the aims was to 
focus on the decolourization and oxidation of dyes by both mixed and axenic bacteria and 
fungi cultures. 
2. Microbial Biodegradation and Decolourization of Textile Dyes 
Various microbes can be used to degrade vari ous dyes; they have different structures 
and pathways for dye degradation. Azo dyes are a valuable family of dyes with the most 
significant colour diversity. Microorganisms degrade azo dyes in anaerobic conditions with the assistance of azoreductase, resultin g in colourless aromatic amines as a by-prod-
uct. Benzidine is often utilized in the producti on of direct azo dyes and is reported to be 
associated with cancer. Natural dyes are low-cost and can be used to colour fabrics, leath-
ers, and papers without the need for pre-trea tment. Natural Black 38 (NB-38) is the most 
commonly used benzidine-based azo dye [27]. Enterococcus gallinarum  can be used to de-
grade Direct Black 38 ink (DB 38) [28]. Active sites for azo-reductase are three azo bonds 
in Direct Black 38 ′s structure which were converted to benzidine through metabolic reac-
tions, which are then deaminated to produc e 4-amino phenyl. Investigation revealed that 
those dyes with benzidine as a base are significantly more cancer-causing than dyes with-
out Benzidine [29]. This is due to the contaminants such as 4-amino biphenyl and 2-4, 
diaminoazo-benzene, which have been linked to cancer. Microbial degradation of dyes 
involves a common approach towards a particular  dye, the only thing which varies is their 
enzyme interacting with the dyes, intermediat e and final products. So me of the microbes 
Figure 5. Various types of microbial degradation of dyes based on oxygen environment.
In the present review, the investigators have emphasized the microbial-based reme-
diation of dye efﬂuents from wastewater. The authors have focused on the existing gap
in this ﬁeld and try to provide a current state of the art. The authors have focused on
the different microorganisms used for dye remediation purposes and recent trends. The
authors have tried to provide a mechanism of dye removal from wastewater by using a
microorganism. Finally, the authors have also focused on microbial enzymes and their role
in the remediation of dyes in the environment. In addition to all, one of the aims was to
focus on the decolourization and oxidation of dyes by both mixed and axenic bacteria and
fungi cultures.
2. Microbial Biodegradation and Decolourization of Textile Dyes
Various microbes can be used to degrade various dyes; they have different structures
and pathways for dye degradation. Azo dyes are a valuable family of dyes with the most
signiﬁcant colour diversity. Microorganisms degrade azo dyes in anaerobic conditions withWater 2022 ,14, 3163 8 of 24
the assistance of azoreductase, resulting in colourless aromatic amines as a by-product.
Benzidine is often utilized in the production of direct azo dyes and is reported to be
associated with cancer. Natural dyes are low-cost and can be used to colour fabrics,
leathers, and papers without the need for pre-treatment. Natural Black 38 (NB-38) is the
most commonly used benzidine-based azo dye [ 27].Enterococcus gallinarum can be used
to degrade Direct Black 38 ink (DB 38) [ 28]. Active sites for azo-reductase are three azo
bonds in Direct Black 38’s structure which were converted to benzidine through metabolic
reactions, which are then deaminated to produce 4-amino phenyl. Investigation revealed
that those dyes with benzidine as a base are signiﬁcantly more cancer-causing than dyes
without Benzidine [ 29]. This is due to the contaminants such as 4-amino biphenyl and 2-4,
diaminoazo-benzene, which have been linked to cancer. Microbial degradation of dyes
involves a common approach towards a particular dye, the only thing which varies is their
enzyme interacting with the dyes, intermediate and ﬁnal products. Some of the microbes
perform complete degradation of the dyes while some of them carry out incomplete
degradation of dyes. Broadly, dye-degrading microbes could be classiﬁed as actinomycetes,
bacteria, fungi, and algae. Moreover, based on the nature of microbes and the pathway
followed for degradation it could be again aerobic and anaerobic degraders. Generally,
bacteria could be classiﬁed further as aerobic degraders or anaerobic degraders. Here in
Figure 6 a generalized scheme of degradation of dye is shown.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 26 
 
 perform complete degradation of the dyes while some of them carry out incomplete deg-
radation of dyes. Broadly, dy e-degrading microbes could be classified as actinomycetes, 
bacteria, fungi, and algae. Moreover, based on the nature of microbes and the pathway 
followed for degradation it could be again aerobic and anaerobic degraders. Generally, 
bacteria could be classified further as aerobi c degraders or anaerobic degraders. Here in 
Figure 6 a generalized scheme of degradation of dye is shown. 
 
Figure 6. Basic mechanism for microbial biodegradation of azo dyes [30]. 
2.1. Bioremediation of Dyes by Actinomycetes 
Actinomycetes are fungi-like, filamentous ba cteria with high GC content generally 
present in the soil. Extracellular peroxidases produced by actinomyce tes, especially Strep-
tomyces species, are known to play a role in lignin biodegradation [31]. The initial oxida-
tion of lignin is carried out by the peroxidase released by the Streptomyces, into different water-soluble polymeric compounds. It has al so been observed that the actinomycetes 
catalyse hydroxylation, oxidation, and dealkylation reactions in the presence of xenobiot-
ics [32]. Three groups initially looked into the potential of actinomycetes to decolorize and 
mineralize textile dyes. Ball et al., tested 20 actinomycetes strains from various genera for 
their potential to bleach polymeric dye Poly R in 1989. Streptomyces badius 252 , Thermomon-
ospora fusca MT800 , and Streptomyces sp. strain EC22  were the only three strains that greatly 
decolorized dye [6]. 
Following that, it embarked on a more exte nsive screening procedure that looked at 
the decolorizing ability of 159 actinomycetes. Investigators who utilized real textile efflu-
ents in the screening process were excited abou t this research. Five different effluents were 
used, each having a single dye of known concentration. Structurally each dye was differ-
ent from azo compound RR147 to phthalocyani ne Reactive Blue 116. Positive findings 
were obtained for 83 isolates, demonstrating the extensive potential of actinomycetes to cause dye decolourization. Given compounds’ resistance to mineralization by other bac-
teria under similar conditions, a discovery that actinomycetes can aerobically decolourize 
and degrade azo dyes was important. 
Figure 6. Basic mechanism for microbial biodegradation of azo dyes [30].
2.1. Bioremediation of Dyes by Actinomycetes
Actinomycetes are fungi-like, ﬁlamentous bacteria with high GC content generally
present in the soil. Extracellular peroxidases produced by actinomycetes, especially Strepto-
myces species, are known to play a role in lignin biodegradation [ 31]. The initial oxidation
of lignin is carried out by the peroxidase released by the Streptomyces, into different
water-soluble polymeric compounds. It has also been observed that the actinomycetes
catalyse hydroxylation, oxidation, and dealkylation reactions in the presence of xenobi-
otics [ 32]. Three groups initially looked into the potential of actinomycetes to decolorize
and mineralize textile dyes. Ball et al., tested 20 actinomycetes strains from various gen-Water 2022 ,14, 3163 9 of 24
era for their potential to bleach polymeric dye Poly R in 1989. Streptomyces badius 252 ,
Thermomonospora fusca MT800 , and Streptomyces sp.strain EC22 were the only three strains
that greatly decolorized dye [6].
Following that, it embarked on a more extensive screening procedure that looked at the
decolorizing ability of 159 actinomycetes. Investigators who utilized real textile efﬂuents
in the screening process were excited about this research. Five different efﬂuents were
used, each having a single dye of known concentration. Structurally each dye was different
from azo compound RR147 to phthalocyanine Reactive Blue 116. Positive ﬁndings were
obtained for 83 isolates, demonstrating the extensive potential of actinomycetes to cause
dye decolourization. Given compounds’ resistance to mineralization by other bacteria
under similar conditions, a discovery that actinomycetes can aerobically decolourize and
degrade azo dyes was important.
Finally, but perhaps most importantly, a team led by Don Crawford at the University
of Idaho began investigating the potential of lignin lytic microbes, including white-rot
fungi and Streptomyces, to mineralize and decolourize textile dyes. Initially, the ability of
14 Streptomyces to decolourize two polymeric dyes, Poly B-411 and Poly R-478, as well as
azo dye Remazol Brilliant Blue R, was investigated (RBBR). With two dyes, RBBR and Poly
B-411, nearly similar ﬁndings were reported, indicating a close link between the isolate’s
ability to decolourize dyes and its ligninolytic ability. This investigation and the fact that
extracellular H 2O2synthesis increased when actinomycetes sps, were allowed to grow in
the presence of glucose indicated that peroxidases were involved in the decolourization
process. Extracellular peroxidases were previously discovered in Streptomyces bacteria,
and enzymes were exhibited to have substrate speciﬁcities identical to P . chrysosporium’s Mn
(II)-peroxidase [ 33]. Surprisingly, there was no association between decolorizing activity
and ligninolytic activity with the 3rd pigment, Poly R-478 [ 34]. Enzymatic processes that
take place during the decolourization of this dye are unknown. [ 8]. Recently Blanquez
et al., 2019 reported 6–70% removal of AO-63 by using Stp. Ipomoeae CECT 3341 , from the
textile dyes [ 35]. Actinomycetes-based removal of various dyes is shown in Table 1, where
the removal percentage of dyes varies from 3–100%.
Table 1. Degradation of dyes by using actinomycetes.
Actinomycetes Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
Streptomyces sp. S27 MR 99% [36]
Streptomyces bacillarisTriphenylmethane dyes: MG,
MV , CV , and CBMG (94.7%), MV (91.8%),
CV (86.6%), CB (68.4%)[37]
Streptomyces ipomoeae
CECT 3341AO63 6–70% [38]
Streptomyces sviceus (marine) CR-21 [39]
Streptomyces spsRR 147 (azo)
RR 171
RB 114
RB 209
RB 1163–100% [40]
Streptomyces spsMG,
MV ,
CV
CB(MG 95%, MV 92%, CV 87%,
CB 68%).[41]
2.2. Bioremediation of Dyes by Aerobic Bacteria
It is very difﬁcult to isolate bacteria that could aerobically decolorize and mineralize
dyes, except for actinomycetes. Various studies claim that different azo dyes can be
converted aerobically, out of which one study reveals the development of the green color
of instant chocolate puddings. including one notable study on the greening of instant
chocolate puddings. It has been found that these preadapted aerobic bacteria obtain theirWater 2022 ,14, 3163 10 of 24
energy by utilizing some carboxylated analogues of sulfonated azo compounds as their
sole carbon and energy supply [9].
Orange-I azo-reductase [NAD(P)H:1-(40-sulfophenylazo)-4-naphthol oxidoreductase]
and Orange II azo-reductase [NAD(P)H:1-(40-sulfophenylazo)-2-naphthol oxidoreductase]
is distilled and characterized from Pseudomonas. Both of these enzymes are now categorized
as the same enzyme, which is called azo-benzene reductase (EC 1.6.6.7). Aside from azo
dyes, bacteria’s ability to aerobically metabolize other dye groups has piqued interest, but
with little success. Aerobic mineralization of triphenylmethane pigment, MV , by a strain
ofPseudomonas mendocina MCM B-402 was recently discovered. Isolate’s sole carbon and
energy source was MV , which has several industrial uses in addition to its well-known
utilization as a regular bacteriological and histological stain. According to preliminary
research, Ps. mendocina degraded dye to phenol by a variety of unspeciﬁed metabolites,
which then joined the ketoadipic acid pathway [10].
Karim et al., 2018 and Mustafa et al., 2022 reported the decolourization of reactive
dyes of textiles by using monoculture and consortium.
John et al., 2020 reported the utilization of a halophilic bacterium ( Salinivibrio kushneri
HTSP ) for the biological decolourization of synthetic dyes (CBB G-250 and Congo red
and safranin). Originally this strain was isolated from the saltpan for decolourization
and bioremediation of dyes. The investigators obtained about 80% decolorization within
48 h. The further investigator reported that the rate of decolorization by using a particular
bacterial strain was in the order of CR > CBBG-25 > Safranin [42].
Aktar et al., 2020 isolated Bacillus sp. and Staphylococcus aureus from the textile dye
efﬂuent and applied them for the decolorization and degradation of BY HP-2R, BR-RS, and
BR RS 01 (BB) dyes. The removal efﬁciency of BR and BB reached up to 71% and 83% with
Bacillus sps . While with Staph. aureus efﬁciency of BY dye reached 79% after ﬁve days [43].
Shete et al., 2020 isolated Bacillus sps ,Klebsiella ,and Pseudomonas sps , from textile
efﬂuent and applied them for the decolorization of JR, JF, and JGY dyes. The removal or de-
colorization of dyes was achieved from 45–50% for the following dyes under optimized con-
ditions [ 44]. Khaled et al., 2022, applied Bacillus cereus (B. Cereus ) and Pseudomonas parafulva
(Ps. parafulva ) for the decolorization of textile azo dyes (T-blue, yellow GR, and orange 3R,)
and obtained the removal efﬁciency of up to 91.69 and 89.21% for orange 3R [ 45]. Table 2
shows summarized studies of bacterial-based dye removal from the wastewater. From all
the studies it was found that in some of the studies bacteria was used directly, while in
some cases their dry powder was used while in a few cases a bacterial consortium was
also used. In some of the studies, the dye removal was achieved up to 100% either with
monoculture or with the consortium. Some of the bacterial consortiums reached up to
97–99% dye removal within a short period of time.
Table 2. Microbial remediation of dyes by using aerobic and aerobic bacteria.
Bacteria Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
Aeromonas hydrophila
A. Hydrophila SK16RR141
MG
Acid fast yellow MR70–80%
96.8%
91.25%[18,46,47]
Comamonas sps UVS DB GL, DB5B [48]
Bacillus sp. and
Staph. aureusBY HP-2R, BS-RS, and B. blue RS 01 (BB) 71–83% [43]
Alcaligenes faecalis AZ26,
Bacillus cereus AZ27 and Bacillus sp.NSB-G 90% [49]
Brevibacillus laterosporusDB-MR,
MO, Blue-2B,
Golden yellow (GY)
Brilliant blue100% [50]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 11 of 24
Table 2. Cont.
Bacteria Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
Shewanella oneidensis (MFC) Acid orange (AO 7) 80.4 [51]
Alcaligenes faecalis and
Rhodococcus erythropolisMonoazo dye Acid orange 80–95 [52]
Consortium of
Ps. aeruginosa ,B. pumilis ,B. thuringiensis ,
Enterococcus faecium in different combinationsNR,
N Black,
N Blue dk,
N Navy,
N Yellow82–97% [53]
Neisseria sp.,Vibrio sp.,Bacillus sp.,
Bacillus sp.and Aeromonas spsN Orange FN-R, N Brilliant Blue FN-R, N
Super Black G, BY S8-G, and BR S2-B60–90% [54]
Acinetobacter (ST16.16/164 and
Klebsiella (ST16.16/034)Monoazo dye RO 16 and diazo dye RG-19 More than 80% [55]
Salinivibrio kushneri HTSP CBB G-250 and CR and safranin More than 80% [42]
Pseudomonas sp. (S3, S11 and S12), Klebisiella
sp. (S4). and Aeromonas sp. (S2)JR, JB and JGY 45–50% [44]
Bacillus odyssey SUK3 ,Morganella morganii
SUK5 and Proteus sps SUK 7Red HE3B, Reactive Blue 59 97–99% [56]
B. circulans NPP1 MR and other dyes 98% [57]
Ps. desmolyticum NCIM 2112 DB 6, Red HEB7, and Green HE4B 70, 90% [58]
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus MR, MO 90–98% [59]
Enterobacter sp. CV–S1 CV [60]
B. subtilis (E1),
Exiguobacterium acetylicum (D1),
Klebsiella terrigena (R2),
S. aureus (A22),
Ps. pseudoalcaligenes (A17), and
Ps. plecoglossicida (A14)Whale,
mediblue,
fawn and
mixed dye,97.04%, 80.61%,
94.93% and 81.64%[61]
Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) Orange II 95% [62]
Sterigmatomyces halophilus SSA1 575 RB-5, RB-5 100% [63]
Anoxybacillus ayderensis SK3-4 DG 6 100% [64]
A. hydrophila SK 16 AFY MR More than 70 [46]
Serratia liquifaciens Azure B 90% [65]
Bacillus cereus SKB12 RB-5 88.7% [66]
B. cereus
and
Ps. parafulvaAzo dyes: T-blue, yellow GR, and orange
3R91.69 and 89.21% [45]
B. circulans BWLI 061 MO 99.22% [67]
Bacterial consortium- Bacillus ﬂexus TS8 (BF) ,
Proteus mirabilis PMS (PM) , and
Ps. aeruginosa NCH (P A)Indanthrene Blue RS 99% [68]
Bacillus pseudomycoides MG 96.8% [19]
Citrobacter sp. CR 93% [69]
Bacillus subtilis HAU-KK01 CR 92.8% [70]
Thiosphaera pantotropha RY 100% [71]
Staphylococcus sp.K2204 RBB 100% [72]
Staphylococcus sp. Reactive blue 97% [73]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 12 of 24
2.3. Mechanism of Bioremediation
The use of biological processes to reduce emissions from atmospheric, aquatic, or
terrestrial systems is known as bioremediation. Microorganisms and plants are most often
used as biological structures for this purpose. Microorganism-mediated biodegradation is
one of the most common bioremediation methods. Microbes may simplify many complex
substances to meet their development and energy requirements. Air may or may not be
needed for these biodegradation processes. In certain circumstances, the same metabolic
pathways that cells utilize for growth and supply of energy are often utilized to simplify
the components of pollutants. Microorganisms do not beneﬁt directly in these situations,
known as metabolism, but investigators have taken the beneﬁt of this effect and used it
for bioremediation. Mineralization, or complete oxidation, results in the production of
water and either CO 2or CH 4. Incomplete biodegradation can result in the cleaving of the
product which is less toxic than the initial pollutant. As a result, bioremediation overcomes
the drawbacks of traditional methods by causing physical degradation of speciﬁc organic
chemicals at a lower rate. As a result, bioremediation has evolved from a nearly unknown
technique to one that has been used to clean up a wide variety of toxins over the past two
decades [74].
3. Fungi-Based Bioremediation of Dyes
3.1. White Rot Fungi (WRF)
WRF is the most well and extensively studied dye-decolorizing microbe because of its
potential to mineralize the intricate polymeric composition of lignin (woody), the group of
species that is critical to the global carbon cycle. WRF could mineralize a distinct variety of
persistent organic compounds in addition to their natural substrate, which separates them
from biodegradative bacteria, which are more substrate-speciﬁc. Since their ligninolytic
enzymes, Lip, manganese peroxidase (MnP) (EC 1.11.1.13) laccase, are primarily nonspeciﬁc,
these fungi can mineralize a wide variety of organic compounds. These enzymes and
their catalytic properties are not described over here. Still, in a nutshell, LiP catalyses
the oxidation of non-phenolic aromatic compounds such as veratryl alcohol, while MnP
converts Mn2+to Mn3+, which could oxidize a vast variety of phenolic compounds [ 75].
Laccase (benzenediol: oxygen oxidoreductase, EC 1.10.3.2) is a Cu-containing enzyme that
catalyses phenolic substrate oxidation by combining it with oxygen reduction in water [ 76].
Decolourization of dyes by WRF was ﬁrst documented by researchers who devised a way to
quantify Phanerochaete chrysosporium ’s ligninolytic behaviour based on the decolorization of
a variety of sulfonated polymeric dyes [ 77].Pleurotus ostreatus [78] developed an uncommon
enzyme capable of Remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR) decolorization during solid-state
fermentation of wheat straw. This development was distinct from isolate’s MnP , laccase,
and manganese-independent peroxidase activities, as well as LiP and veratryl alcohol,
oxidize actions, which were not detected in P . ostreatus but are common in other WRF. Since
it had a catalytic metal centre and was inhibited by a variety of proven oxygenase inhibitors,
activity was dubbed RBBR oxygenase [79].
3.2. Remediation by Non-WRF
Although degradation mechanisms used by non-WRF have not been identiﬁed in the
literature, they are likely to be close to those found in the metabolism of other aromatic
hydrocarbons. One such isolate, the strain of Geotrichum candidum Dec1 isolated from soil
and capable of a decolorizing variety of anthraquinone dyes, has been studied in depth. This
isolate’s broad substrate speciﬁcity led to Kim and revealed an extracellular peroxidase-like
enzyme. DSP , glycosylated haeme-based peroxidase isolated from G. candidum with features
different from LiP , MnP , horse-radish peroxidase, and other peroxidases, was obtained [ 80].
The robustness of this isolate in contrast to P . chrysosporium and other WRF makes it
potentially useful for dye decolorization. In contrast with the action of P . chrysosporium
ligninolytic enzymes, DyP is generated continuously and does not become affected by
shear forces in shake ﬂasks or stirred tank reactors. Such characteristics could allow theWater 2022 ,14, 3163 13 of 24
development of a range of G. candidum -Dec1-based biological reactors for treating a variety
of organic contaminants, including dyestuffs. To enable excellent protein development in
the safe host, the recently cloning of a gene that encodes DyP into heterologous expression
host Aspergillus oryzae . According to molecular research, DSP is different from other
peroxidases in the plant peroxidase superfamily because it has a novel haeme-binding
area [ 14]. Table 3 is showing summarized studies of mycoremediation of dyes under
different experimental conditions. From all the myco-based remediation of dyes, it was
found that some of the fungi have removed the dyes up to 100% from the wastewater. This
is so because fungi have a large number of extracellular enzymes. Moreover, the presence
of hyphae and mycelium might have been advantageous for the remediation of dyes.
Table 3. Dye degradation by using white rot and non-white rot fungi.
Fungi Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
P . chrysosporium Rhodamine-B 91% [81]
P . chrysosporium Bromophenol blue 99.3% [82]
Pleurotus ostreatus Acid Blue 129 77% [83]
Trametes polyzona KU-RNW027 RB-B 100% [84]
P . chrysosporium Ranocid Fast Blue 83% [85]
Emmia latemarginata (MAP03, MAP04,
and MAP05) and Mucor circinelloides
(MAP01, MAP02, and MAP06)Azo, indigo, and anthraquinone dyes
(Acetyl yellow G)[86]
Cyberlindnera samutprakarnensis S4 Acid Red 97% [87]
P . chrysosporium Orange-II 85% [88]
Phanerochaete sordida RR-120 90.6 [89]
Schizophyllum sp.F17 Orange IV 76% [90]
Penicillium chrysogenum DB22 [91]
Trichoderma (T. virens ,T. viride) CR and MG 81–99% [92]
Trichoderma tomentosum AR-3R 99.2% [93]
A. fumigatus Direct Violet dye 51.38–93.74% [94]
Trametes hirsuta ,Microporus xanthopus ,
and Ganoderma applanatumturquoise blue textile dye82.17%
78.50 and 85.84%[95]
Aspergillus niger ,and
Phanerochaete chrysosporium ,BF (81.85%),
Nigrosin (77.47%), MG (72.77%)P . chrysosporium maxium with
Nigrosin (90.15%) > BF
(89.8%), MG (83.25%)[96]
Aspergillus niger ,Asp. terreus and
Rhizopus oligosporus .Acid Blue 161 e Procion Red MX-5B 58–68% [97]
Penicillium simplicissimum INCQS 40211(RR198),
R B214 (RB214), RB21, and a mixture of
all three[98]
P . simplicissimum (n-WRF)Triphenylmethane Dyes: CV , MV ,
MG, CB96.1–98.7% [99]
Diutina rugosa Indigo 100% [100]
Asp. lentulusVAT Novatic Grey (100%), RR-Red
(98.47%), RY (91.55%), and Indanthrane
Blue (99.28%)
Reactive S91–100%
55.33%[101]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 14 of 24
Table 3. Cont.
Fungi Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
Aspergillus foetidus Azo reactive dyes, Drimarene dyes >95% [102]
Aspergillus oryzae Reactive dyes PR-HE7B and PV-H3R [103]
Aspergillus sp., Fast Red A 99.5%
Aspergillus ﬂavus Azo textile dye, RR198 84.96% [104]
Aspergillusoryzaedead cells RB, MB, and MO 100% [105]
Trichoderma harzianum AR and anthraquinone (Basic blue) 70% and 51% [106]
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Ramazole Blue 100% [107]
Mucor circinelloides Ramazole Blue 95% [108]
4. Algae-Based Bioremediation of Textile Dyes
There are several reports in the literature where algal systems have been used for the
decolorization or bioremediation of textile dyes. Algae also have numerous enzymes and
other molecules which play a role in the decolorization of dyes from textile wastewater.
Algae are reported to utilize the azo dyes as a source of carbon and energy and degrade
them into aromatic amines, followed by their subsequent conversion into simpler organic
and inorganic compounds [ 109]. To date, Chlorella sps ,Oscillatoria sps ,Synechocystis , and
Phormidium sps have been used widely by various investigators for the decolorization of
dyes from textile samples [ 110] and a detailed one is shown in Table 4. From the various
studies of phycoremediation of dyes, it was found that the highest efﬁciency of dye removal
was achieved up to 99–99.5%. Though all the studies were carried out with different dyes,
different concentrations, and under different reaction conditions, the mixed culture of algae
showed maximum removal, i.e., 99.5%, which shows the effectiveness of MC.
Table 4. Algae-mediated decolourization of textile dyes.
Algae Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
Chlorella vulgaris MB and AO7 83.04 2.94% [111]
C. vulgarisAzo dye: Metanil yellow, FO, FR, DB,
AF Red, Direct Fast Scarlet, CR, and
Acid-Fast N BlueUp to (75.68%) [112]
C. vulgaris UMACC 001 Supranol Red 3BW (SR 3BW) 41.8% to 50.0%. [113]
C. vulgaris
(Immobilised)SB 3BW, Lanaset Red 2GA and Levaﬁx
Navy Blue EBNA44.0–49% [114]
Chlorella vulgarisBlue dye
Green dye
Reactive blackBlue: 63.89% (1 mg/L)
Green: 45.71% (1 mg/L)
80%[115,116]
Sphaerocystis schroeteriBlue dye
Green dyeBlue: 63.87% (1 mg/L)
Green: 60.00% (1 mg/L)[115]
Anabaena ﬂos-aquae UTCC64 ,
Phormidium autumnale UTEX1580
and Synechococcus sp.PCC7942Indigo, RBBR and Sulphur Black) 80–90% [117]
Haematococcus sp.,Chlorella sp.,
Chlorella vulgaris ,Scenedesmus obliquuss ,
S. ofﬁcinalis ,and S. quadricauda
Arthospira maxima (Blue green algae)Up to 98% [118]
Phormidium valderianum , a
marine cyanobacteriumAR, AR-119 and DB-155, (at Ph > 11) >90% [119]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 15 of 24
Table 4. Cont.
Algae Dyes Used Efﬁciency References
Chlorella pyrenoidosaMB
Rhodamine B84% [120]
Gloeocapsa pleurocapsoides and
Phormidium ceylanicumAR 97 and FF Sky Blue dyes 80% after 26 days [121]
Achaetomium strumarium Acid red 99.5% [122]
Anabaena ﬂos aquae ,Nostoc elepsosporum ,
Nostoc linkia ,
Anabaena variabilis and Chlorella vulgarisAzo dyesN. elepsosporum (100%),
C. vulgaris (96.16%),
A. variabilis (88.71%),
N. linkia (88.71) and
A. ﬂos aquae (50.81).[123]
Arthrospira platensis NIOF17/003 Methylene Blue 93% [23]
A. platensis complete drybiomss and
Lipid-Free BiomassIsmate violet 2R, IV2R 75.7% and 61.11% [25]
A. platensis complete drybiomss and
Lipid-Free BiomassAmmonium ions (NH 4+)In synthetic aquaculture:
ACDW (64.24%)
LFB (89.68%)
In real aquaculture:
ACDW (25.7%)
LFB (37.8%)[24]
Oedogonium subplagiostomum MO 97% [124]
Cyanobacterium phormidium Indigo 91% [125]
5. Enzyme-Based Bioremediation of Dyes
To date mainly two types of enzymes are widely used for the remediation of textile
dyes. One is laccase and the other one is hydrogen peroxidases. Both enzymes are efﬁcient
and widely used by several investigators for the removal or decolourization of dyes from
wastewater. The source of enzymes for these purposes are mainly microbial and even
from microbes’ fungi are more widely exploited. Laccase is a type of copper-containing
polyphenol oxidase which is produced by several bacteria and fungi. Its potential has
been exploited for the decolourization of Azo dyes. While peroxidase is an enzyme that
degrades H 2O2and uses oxygen to oxidize other substances. Earlier lignin peroxidase has
been used for the removal of Congo red dye. Furthermore, it has also been used for the
decolorization of Reactive Orange 16 and remazol Brilliant Blue R (RBBR) [110].
Dong et al., 2019 reported the utilization of azoreductases extracted from Streptomyces sps .
for the removal of methyl red from the wastewater [126].
Sherifah et al., 2019 used Kluyveromyces dobzhanskii DW1 and Pichia manshurica DW2
bacterial laccase for the enzymatic degradation of MG and MR [ 127]. Darvishi et al., 2018
used yeast laccase extracted from Yarrowia lipolytica and applied them for the enzymatic
degradation of Bromocresol Purple, Safranin, Bromothymol Blue and Phenol Red [ 128]. In
2017, Afreen et al., reported the remediation of reactive Blue-4, from wastewater by using
algal laccase isolated Spirulina platenis . In another study, a team led by Afreen used algal
laccase from Arthrospira maxima and utilized them for the removal of RB-4, RBBR. A team
led by Othman et al., 2018 reported the extraction of laccase from the edible mushroom
(Agaricus bisporus ) and used them for the enzymatic degradation of Acid Blue [ 129]. Dai
et al., 2021 extracted laccase from a novel bacterium (transformed E. coli BL21(DE3) and
applied it for the decolorization of acid violet 7, bromophenol blue (BpB), and Coomassie
brilliant blue. Investigators obtained a mutant laccase (mut lac 2-9) which was reported to
have enhanced decolorization of dyes [130].Water 2022 ,14, 3163 16 of 24
Furthermore, these investigators have also used lignin and manganese peroxidase for
the enzymatic degradation of dyes. For instance, Zhang et al., 2018 performed enzymatic
degradation of MO and BpB by using fungal MnP [131].
Shaheen et al., 2017 and Bouacem et al., 2018 reported the enzymatic degradation of a
group of dyes by using fungal lignin peroxidase extracted from Ganoderma lucidum IBL 05
and Bjerkandera adusta CX-9 , respectively [132,133].
Here Figure 7 is showing a mechanism of degradation of dyes (indigo dye) by the
laccase enzymes. Here, ﬁrstly the laccase enzyme attacks the indigo dye and removed
the hydrogen. Once the hydrogen is eliminated the indigo dye becomes converted into
dehydrindigo. This dehydroindigo goes under several chemical changes leading to the
formation of different intermediates. The dehydroindigo becomes converted into isatin
which again forms an intermediate structure and ﬁnally becomes converted into anthranilic
acid which is quite stable in the environment and less harmful than the original dye itself.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 26 
 
  
Figure 7. Mechanism of degradation of Indigo dye by  using laccase enzyme adopted from [134]. 
Figure 7. Mechanism of degradation of Indigo dye by using laccase enzyme adopted from [134].Water 2022 ,14, 3163 17 of 24
Figure 8 is showing image where a genetically modiﬁed laccase from
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens have been used for the enhanced enzymatic degradation of
indigo carmine dye. The image shows reduction of colour intensity of the dye after
enzymatic treatment.
Water 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 26 
 
  
Figure 8. Genetically modified laccase from B. amyloliquefaciens  for improving indigo carmine de-
colorization [135]. 
Few of the investigators have also reported the utilization of bacterial polysaccha-
rides, i.e., intra and extra both for the removal of dyes from the wastewater [136]. Mustafa 
et al., 2022, reported the utilization of ba cterial polysaccharides mainly exopolysaccha-
rides for the decolorization of dyes from textile water [53]. 
6. Gaps and Future Prospects and Advantages of Microbial Degradation of Dyes 
In order to acquire good efficiency and ou tcomes in dye biodegradation, further ex-
perimentation is required on (a) responsible microorganisms, (b) experimental factor lim-
itations, (c) bioremediation site, and (d) degradation pathways before using microorgan-
isms in the area. It will be critical to find out the type of degradation materials and deter-
mine their (none) toxicity to marine or plan t species. While dyes have defied many micro-
bial degradation strategies, there is an altern ative approach to degrade dyes using genetic 
engineering, opening up a new domain for investigators working in this area. Advanced 
molecular biology techniques can investigate genes responsible for dye degradation. Dye 
degradation can result in the production of by-products, sources of nutrition, and energy, both of which can be utilized as commodities. However, researchers face a difficult task 
in attaining complete degradation of dye. Various scientific trials must be conducted to 
apply biodegradation of dye wastewater succ essfully. Future dye degradation research 
should focus on reducing factors that inhibi t microbial activity. Recent and early promis-
ing experiments must be re-examined to increa se their effectiveness. The removal of con-
taminants in the biodegradation process depends on the pathways, rate, and mechanisms 
of degradation pathways and environmental conditions. It must be essential to ensure that 
degraded materials do not harm marine organisms or plants. Integration of dye pollution 
treatment systems is desirable for successful in dustrial translation. The exploration of bac-
terial degradation kinetics will benefit from the study of pathways and hypotheses for bacterial degradation of dye wastewater. There are no additives used in this treatment. 
No toxic substances are released into the atmosphere by the consortium. The procedure, 
therefore, reduces the need for chemical refining and vapour. No oil is used, resulting in 
carbon-free operation. Therefore, a carbon credit is also valuable, and no complicated 
plants are needed. 
Figure 8. Genetically modiﬁed laccase from B. amyloliquefaciens for improving indigo carmine
decolorization [135].
Few of the investigators have also reported the utilization of bacterial polysaccharides,
i.e., intra and extra both for the removal of dyes from the wastewater [ 136]. Mustafa et al.,
2022, reported the utilization of bacterial polysaccharides mainly exopolysaccharides for
the decolorization of dyes from textile water [53].
6. Gaps and Future Prospects and Advantages of Microbial Degradation of Dyes
In order to acquire good efﬁciency and outcomes in dye biodegradation, further
experimentation is required on (a) responsible microorganisms, (b) experimental factor limi-
tations, (c) bioremediation site, and (d) degradation pathways before using microorganisms
in the area. It will be critical to ﬁnd out the type of degradation materials and determine
their (none) toxicity to marine or plant species. While dyes have deﬁed many microbial
degradation strategies, there is an alternative approach to degrade dyes using genetic
engineering, opening up a new domain for investigators working in this area. Advanced
molecular biology techniques can investigate genes responsible for dye degradation. Dye
degradation can result in the production of by-products, sources of nutrition, and energy,
both of which can be utilized as commodities. However, researchers face a difﬁcult task
in attaining complete degradation of dye. Various scientiﬁc trials must be conducted to
apply biodegradation of dye wastewater successfully. Future dye degradation research
should focus on reducing factors that inhibit microbial activity. Recent and early promising
experiments must be re-examined to increase their effectiveness. The removal of contami-
nants in the biodegradation process depends on the pathways, rate, and mechanisms of
degradation pathways and environmental conditions. It must be essential to ensure that
degraded materials do not harm marine organisms or plants. Integration of dye pollution
treatment systems is desirable for successful industrial translation. The exploration of
bacterial degradation kinetics will beneﬁt from the study of pathways and hypotheses for
bacterial degradation of dye wastewater. There are no additives used in this treatment.
No toxic substances are released into the atmosphere by the consortium. The procedure,Water 2022 ,14, 3163 18 of 24
therefore, reduces the need for chemical reﬁning and vapour. No oil is used, resulting
in carbon-free operation. Therefore, a carbon credit is also valuable, and no complicated
plants are needed.
7. Conclusions
The remediation of dye efﬂuent is possible with all the three approaches, i.e., chemical,
physical and biological. Biological approaches especially microbial biodegradation of dyes
has shown potential and interest in the recent times. The reliability of microbial-based dye
biodegradation is mainly based on its biodegradable nature, eco-friendly, easy to use and
faster action. The microbes have been used either as a biosorbent when it is used as a dried
powder or has been used for enzymatic degradation as a whole organism. The bacteria,
algae, fungi and actinomycetes have shown huge potential for dye removal in the direct
form. Indirectly the enzymatic degradation of dyes in the soluble form or the immobilized
enzymes has gained a tremendous response. Microorganisms are the warehouse of natural
enzymes which mineralizes dyes effectively in the environment without producing a toxic
product. The utilization of fungi is more economical and efﬁcient as the enzymes produced
by them are extracellular in nature and produce a wide range of enzymes. The mixed
culture has shown more potential for dye removal than the monoculture. Some of the
microbial-based approaches especially enzymatic degradation has shown 100% removal
of dyes. Such approaches for the remediation of dyes from the environment make the
technique environment-friendly, and sustainable.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.P ., J.-W.P ., H.K., M.A. and H.A.I.; data curation, J.-W.P .,
N.C., M.M.A. and H.K.; methodology, J.-W.P . and S.P .; validation, K.K.Y., H.A.I. and B.-H.J.; formal
analysis, A.G., M.M.A. and H.A.I.; resources, K.K.Y., B.-H.J., M.A. and H.A.I.; writing—original draft
preparation, V .K.Y., H.P ., N.C. and H.K.; writing—review and editing, A.G., N.C., V .K.Y., H.A.I.,
M.M.A., J.-W.P ., S.P ., B.-H.J. and H.K.; supervision, V .K.Y., H.P . and B.-H.J.; project administration
V .K.Y., M.A. and K.K.Y.; funding acquisition, H.A.I., M.A. and A.G.; investigation, V .K.Y., B.-H.J., N.C.
and H.P .; software, S.P ., M.A., H.A.I., A.G., M.M.A. and K.K.Y.; visualization, A.G., S.P . and B.-H.J.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research work was funded by the Deanship of Research, King Khalid University,
Saudi Arabia for Small Research Group under the grant number R. G. P . 1/339/1443. This work was
supported by the Korea Environment Industry and Technology Institute (KEITI) through Subsur-
face Environment Management (SEM) Projects, funded by Korea Ministry of Environment (MOE)
(No. 2020002480007).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: All relevant data are included within the article.
Acknowledgments: H.P . and V .K.Y. are thankful to P P Savani University, Surat, for providing
infrastructure and support. V .K.Y. also acknowledges Mody University of Science and Technology,
Sikar, Rajasthan for software and resources.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Manzoor, J.; Sharma, M. Impact of Textile Dyes on Human Health and Environment. In Impact of Textile Dyes on Public Health and
the Environment ; Wani, K.A., Jangid, N.K., Bhat, A.R., Eds.; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2020; pp. 162–169. [CrossRef]
2. Halim, A.F.M.F.; Islam, M.T.; Hoque, M.M.U. Chapter 4—Chemistry of sustainable coloration of textile materials. In Green
Chemistry for Sustainable Textiles ; Ibrahim, N., Hussain, C.M., Eds.; Woodhead Publishing: Sawstone, UK, 2021; pp. 57–67.
[CrossRef]
3. Rudakiya, D.M.; Tripathi, A.; Gupte, S.; Gupte, A. Fungal Bioremediation: A Step Towards Cleaner Environment. In Advancing
Frontiers in Mycology & Mycotechnology: Basic and Applied Aspects of Fungi ; Satyanarayana, T., Deshmukh, S.K., Deshpande, M.V .,
Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2019; pp. 229–249. [CrossRef]
4. Kumar, A.; Singh, K.; Gupta, S.P . Structure and Properties of Dyes and Pigments. In Dyes and Pigments ; Dixit, U., Ed.; IntechOpen:
Rijeka, Croatia, 2021; Chapter 8. [CrossRef]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 19 of 24
5. Samsami, S.; Mohamadi, M.; Sarrafzadeh, M.H.; Rene, E.R.; Firoozbahr, M. Recent advances in the treatment of dye-containing
wastewater from textile industries: Overview and perspectives. Process Saf. Environ. Prot. 2020 ,143, 138–163. [CrossRef]
6. Liu, Y.-Q.; Maulidiany, N.; Zeng, P .; Heo, S. Decolourization of azo, anthraquinone and triphenylmethane dyes using aerobic
granules: Acclimatization and long-term stability. Chemosphere 2021 ,263, 128312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Gürses, A.; Açıkyıldız, M.; Güne¸ s, K.; Gürses, M.S. (Eds.) Dyes and Pigments: Their Structure and Properties. In Dyes and
Pigments ; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 13–29. [CrossRef]
8. Chequer, F.M.D.; Ferraz, E.R.A.; Cardoso, J.C. Textile Dyes: Dyeing Process and Environmental Impact. In Eco-Friendly Textile
Dyeing and Finishing ; de Oliveira, G.A.R., Ed.; IntechOpen: Rijeka, Croatia, 2013; Chapter 6. [CrossRef]
9. Soleimani-Gorgani, A.; Taylor, J.A. Dyeing of nylon with reactive dyes. Part 1. The effect of changes in dye structure on the
dyeing of nylon with reactive dyes. Dye. Pigment. 2006 ,68, 109–117. [CrossRef]
10. Yadav, V .K.; Choudhary, N.; Ali, D.; Kumar, G.; Gnanamoorthy, G.; Khan, A.U.; Kumar, P .; Hari Kumar, S.; Tizazu, B.Z.
Determination of Adsorption of Methylene Blue Dye by Incense Stick Ash Waste and Its Toxicity on RTG-2 Cells. Adsorpt. Sci.
Technol. 2022 ,2022 , 8565151. [CrossRef]
11. Bharathi, D.; Nandagopal, J.G.T.; Ranjithkumar, R.; Gupta, P .K.; Djearamane, S. Microbial approaches for sustainable remediation
of dye-contaminated wastewater: A review. Arch. Microbiol. 2022 ,204, 169. [CrossRef]
12. Yadav, V .K.; Inwati, G.K.; Ali, D.; Gnanamoorthy, G.; Bera, S.P .; Khan, S.H.; Choudhary, N.; Kumar, G.; Chaurasia, T.P .; Basnet, A.
Remediation of Azure A Dye from Aqueous Solution by Using Surface-Modiﬁed Coal Fly Ash Extracted Ferrospheres by Mineral
Acids and Toxicity Assessment. Adsorpt. Sci. Technol. 2022 ,2022 , 7012889. [CrossRef]
13. Wang, L.K.; Wang, M.-H.S.; Shammas, N.K.; Hahn, H.H. Physicochemical Treatment Consisting of Chemical Coagulation,
Precipitation, Sedimentation, and Flotation. In Integrated Natural Resources Research ; Wang, L.K., Wang, M.-H.S., Hung, Y.-T., Eds.;
Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2021; pp. 265–397. [CrossRef]
14. Singh, D.; Yadav, V .K.; Ali, D.; Soni, S.; Kumar, G.; Dawane, V .; Chaurasia, T.P . Isolation and Characterization of Siderophores
Producing Chemolithotrophic Bacteria from the Coal Samples of the Aluminum Industry. Geomicrobiol. J. 2022 , 1–7. [CrossRef]
15. Ekanayake, M.S.; Udayanga, D.; Manage, P .M. Mycoremediation of Synthetic Textile Dyes by Fungi Isolated from Textile
Wastewater Efﬂuent and Soil. In Mycoremediation Protocols ; Udayanga, D., Bhatt, P ., Manamgoda, D., Saez, J.M., Eds.; Springer:
New York, NY, USA, 2022; pp. 31–43. [CrossRef]
16. Bhardwaj, D.; Bharadvaja, N. Phycoremediation of efﬂuents containing dyes and its prospects for value-added products: A
review of opportunities. J. Water Process Eng. 2021 ,41, 102080. [CrossRef]
17. Dhanve, R.S.; Kalyani, D.C.; Phugare, S.S.; Jadhav, J.P . Coordinate action of exiguobacterial oxidoreductive enzymes in biodegra-
dation of reactive yellow 84A dye. Biodegradation 2009 ,20, 245–255. [CrossRef]
18. Ji, J.; Kulshreshtha, S.; Kakade, A.; Majeed, S.; Li, X.; Liu, P . Bioaugmentation of membrane bioreactor with Aeromonas hydrophila
LZ-MG14 for enhanced malachite green and hexavalent chromium removal in textile wastewater. Int. Biodeterior Biodegrad. 2020 ,
150, 104939. [CrossRef]
19. Kumar, N.; Sinha, S.; Mehrotra, T.; Singh, R.; Tandon, S.; Thakur, I.S. Biodecolorization of azo dye Acid Black 24 by
Bacillus pseudomycoides : Process optimization using Box Behnken design model and toxicity assessment. Bioresour. Technol. Rep.
2019 ,8, 100311. [CrossRef]
20. Ayed, L.; Zmantar, T.; Bayar, S.; Cheref, A.; Achour, S.; Mansour, H.B.; Mzoughi, R. Potential use of probiotic consortium isolated
from keﬁr for textile azo dye decolorization. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019 ,29, 1629–1635. [CrossRef]
21. Yadav, V .K.; Yadav, K.K.; Gacem, A.; Gnanamoorthy, G.; Ali, I.H.; Khan, S.H.; Jeon, B.-H.; Kamyab, H.; Inwati, G.K.; Choudhary,
N. A novel approach for the synthesis of vaterite and calcite from incense sticks ash waste and their potential for remediation of
dyes from aqueous solution. Sustain. Chem. Pharm. 2022 ,29, 100756. [CrossRef]
22. Patel, Y.; Chhaya, U.; Rudakiya, D.M.; Joshi, S. Biological Decolorization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes: A Green Step
Toward Sustainable Environment. In Microbial Rejuvenation of Polluted Environment ; Panpatte, D.G., Jhala, Y.K., Eds.; Springer:
Singapore, 2021; Volume 2, pp. 77–110. [CrossRef]
23. Mansour, A.T.; Alprol, A.E.; Abualnaja, K.M.; El-Beltagi, H.S.; Ramadan, K.M.A.; Ashour, M. The Using of Nanoparticles of
Microalgae in Remediation of Toxic Dye from Industrial Wastewater: Kinetic and Isotherm Studies. Materials 2022 ,15, 3922.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Ashour, M.; Alprol, A.E.; Heneash, A.M.; Saleh, H.; Abualnaja, K.M.; Alhashmialameer, D.; Mansour, A.T. Ammonia bioremedia-
tion from aquaculture wastewater efﬂuents using arthrospira platensis niof17/003: Impact of biodiesel residue and potential of
ammonia-loaded biomass as rotifer feed. Materials 2021 ,14, 5460. [CrossRef]
25. Alprol, A.E.; Heneash, A.M.; Ashour, M.; Abualnaja, K.M.; Alhashmialameer, D.; Mansour, A.T.; Sharawy, Z.Z.; Abu-Saied,
M.A.; Abomohra, A.E.F. Potential applications of arthrospira platensis lipid-free biomass in bioremediation of organic dye from
industrial textile efﬂuents and its inﬂuence on marine rotifer ( Brachionus plicatilis ).Materials 2021 ,14, 4446. [CrossRef]
26. Piaskowski, K.; ´Swiderska-D ˛ abrowska, R.; Zarzycki, P .K. Dye removal from water and wastewater using various physical,
chemical, and biological processes. J. AOAC Int. 2018 ,101, 1371–1384. [CrossRef]
27. Bafana, A.; Chakrabarti, T.; Muthal, P .; Kanade, G. Detoxiﬁcation of benzidine-based azo dye by E. gallinarum : Time-course study.
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2009 ,72, 960–964. [CrossRef]
28. Rane, N.R.; Tapase, S.; Kanojia, A.; Watharkar, A.; Salama, E.S.; Jang, M.; Jeon, B.H. Molecular insights into plant–microbe
interactions for sustainable remediation of contaminated environment. Bioresour. Technol. 2022 ,344, 126246. [CrossRef]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 20 of 24
29. Dapson, R.W. Benzidine-based dyes: Effects of industrial practices, regulations, and world trade on the biological stains market.
Biotech. Histochem. 2009 ,84, 95–100. [CrossRef]
30. Arun Prasad, A.S.; Kumar, G.; Mary Thomas, D. Microbial Decolorization of Azo Dyes—A Mini Review. Bull. Chem. Pharma Res.
2017 ,1, 30–39.
31. Yadav, V .K.; Gupta, N.; Kumar, P .; Dashti, M.G.; Tirth, V .; Khan, S.H.; Yadav, K.K.; Islam, S.; Choudhary, N.; Algahtani,
A.; et al. Recent Advances in Synthesis and Degradation of Lignin and Lignin Nanoparticles and Their Emerging Applications in
Nanotechnology. Materials 2022 ,15, 953. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Mason, M.G.; Ball, A.S.; Reeder, B.J.; Silkstone, G.; Nicholls, P .; Wilson, M.T. Extracellular heme peroxidases in actinomycetes: A
case of mistaken identity. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2001 ,67, 4512–4519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Chater, K.F.; Bir ó, S.; Lee, K.J.; Palmer, T.; Schrempf, H. The complex extracellular biology of Streptomyces: Review article. FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. 2010 ,34, 171–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Fodil, D.; Badis, A.; Jaouadi, B.; Zaraî, N.; Ferradji, F.Z.; Boutoumi, H. Puriﬁcation and characterization of two extracellular
peroxidases from Streptomyces sp. strain AM2, a decolorizing actinomycetes responsible for the biodegradation of natural humic
acids. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2011 ,65, 470–478. [CrossRef]
35. Blánquez, A.; Rodr íguez, J.; Brissos, V .; Mendes, S.; Martins, L.O.; Ball, A.S.; Arias, M.E.; Hern ández, M. Decolorization and
detoxiﬁcation of textile dyes using a versatile Streptomyces laccase-natural mediator system. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 2019 ,26, 913–920.
[CrossRef]
36. Dong, H.; Guo, T.; Zhang, W.; Ying, H.; Wang, P .; Wang, Y.; Chen, Y. Biochemical characterization of a novel azoreductase from
Streptomyces sp.: Application in eco-friendly decolorization of azo dye wastewater. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2019 ,140, 1037–1046.
[CrossRef]
37. Adenan, N.H.; Lim, Y.Y.; Ting, A.S.Y. Removal of triphenylmethane dyes by Streptomyces bacillaris : A study on decolorization,
enzymatic reactions and toxicity of treated dye solutions. J. Environ. Manag. 2022 ,318, 115520. [CrossRef]
38. Kumar, P .; Gacem, A.; Ahmad, M.T.; Yadav, V .K.; Singh, S.; Yadav, K.K.; Alam, M.M.; Dawane, V .; Piplode, S.; Maurya, P .; et al.
Environmental and human health implications of metal(loid)s: Source identiﬁcation, contamination, toxicity, and sustainable
clean-up technologies. Front. Environ. Sci. 2022 , 1328. [CrossRef]
39. Chakravarthi, B.; Mathakala, V .; Palempalli, U.M.D. Bioremediation of Textile Azo Dyes by Marine Streptomyces. In Recent Trends
in Waste Water Treatment and Water Resource Management ; Ghosh, S.K., das Saha, P ., Di Francesco, M., Eds.; Springer: Singapore,
2020; pp. 129–142. [CrossRef]
40. Zhou, W.; Zimmermann, W. Decolorization of industrial efﬂuents containing reactive dyes by actinomycetes. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 1993 ,107, 157–161. [CrossRef]
41. Adenan, N.H.; Lim, Y.Y.; Ting, A.S.Y. Identiﬁcation and optimization of triphenylmethane dyes removal by Streptomyces sp. from
forest soil. Sustain. Environ. Res. 2021 ,31, 1–15. [CrossRef]
42. John, J.; Dineshram, R.; Hemalatha, K.R.; Dhassiah, M.P .; Gopal, D.; Kumar, A. Bio-Decolorization of Synthetic Dyes by a
Halophilic Bacterium Salinivibrio sp.Front. Microbiol. 2020 ,11, 594011. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Akter, K.; Zerin, T.; Banik, A. Biodegradation of textile dyes by bacteria isolated from textile industry efﬂuents. Stamford J.
Microbiol. 2020 ,9, 5–8. [CrossRef]
44. Shete, U.R.; Waghmare, V .M.; Dhande, N.M. Isolation and screening of textile dye decolorizing bacteria from textile industrial
efﬂuent. Themat. J. Microbiol. 2019 ,3. [CrossRef]
45. Khaled, J.M.; Alyahya, S.A.; Govindan, R.; Chelliah, C.K.; Maruthupandy, M.; Alharbi, N.S.; Kadaikunnan, S.; Issac, R.; Murugan,
S.; Li, W.J. Laccase producing bacteria inﬂuenced the high decolorization of textile azo dyes with advanced study. Environ. Res.
2022 ,207, 112211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Thanavel, M.; Bankole, P .O.; Kadam, S.; Govindwar, S.P .; Sadasivam, S.K. Desulfonation of the textile azo dye Acid Fast Yellow
MR by newly isolated Aeromonas hydrophila SK16. Water Resour. Ind. 2019 ,22, 100116. [CrossRef]
47. Chen, B.-Y.; Lin, K.-W.; Wang, Y.-M.; Yen, C.-Y. Revealing interactive toxicity of aromatic amines to azo dye decolorizer
Aeromonas hydrophila .J. Hazard. Mater. 2009 ,166, 187–194. [CrossRef]
48. Jadhav, U.U.; Dawkar, V .v.; Ghodake, G.S.; Govindwar, S.P . Biodegradation of Direct Red 5B, a textile dye by newly isolated
Comamonas sp. UVS. J. Hazard. Mater. 2008 ,158, 507–516. [CrossRef]
49. Hossen, M.Z.; Hussain, M.E.; Hakim, A.; Islam, K.; Uddin, M.N.; Azad, A.K. Biodegradation of reactive textile dye Novacron
Super Black G by free cells of newly isolated Alcaligenes faecalis AZ26 and Bacillus spp obtained from textile efﬂuents. Heliyon
2019 ,5, e02068. [CrossRef]
50. Gomare, S.S.; Govindwar, S.P . Brevibacillus laterosporus MTCC 2298: A potential azo dye degrader. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2009 ,
106, 993–1004. [CrossRef]
51. Fernando, E.; Keshavarz, T.; Kyazze, G. Enhanced bio-decolourisation of acid orange 7 by Shewanella oneidensis through co-
metabolism in a microbial fuel cell. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2012 ,72, 1–9. [CrossRef]
52. Angelova, B.; Avramova, T.; Stefanova, L.; Mutafov, S. Temperature effect on bacterial azo bond reduction kinetics: An Arrhenius
plot analysis. Biodegradation 2008 ,19, 387–393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Patil, S.M.; Rane, N.R.; Bankole, P .O.; Krishnaiah, P .; Ahn, Y.; Park, Y.-K.; Yadav, K.K.; Amin, M.A.; Jeon, B.-H. An Assessment of
Micro- and Nanoplastics in the Biosphere: A Review of Detection, Monitoring, and Remediation Technology. Chem. Eng. J. 2022 ,
430, 132913. [CrossRef]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 21 of 24
54. Karim, M.E.; Dhar, K.; Hossain, M.T. Decolorization of Textile Reactive Dyes by Bacterial Monoculture and Consortium Screened
from Textile Dyeing Efﬂuent. J. Genet. Eng. Biotechnol. 2018 ,16, 375–380. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Maurya, P .K.; Ali, S.A.; Alharbi, R.S.; Yadav, K.K.; Alfaisal, F.M.; Ahmad, A.; Ditthakit, P .; Prasad, S.; Jung, Y.-K.; Jeon, B.-H.
Impacts of Land Use Change on Water Quality Index in the Upper Ganges River near Haridwar, Uttarakhand: A GIS-Based
Analysis. Water 2021 ,13, 3572. [CrossRef]
56. Patil, P .S.; Phugare, S.S.; Jadhav, S.B.; Jadhav, J.P . Communal action of microbial cultures for Red HE3B degradation. J. Hazard.
Mater. 2010 ,181, 263–270. [CrossRef]
57. Patil, N.P .; Bholay, A.D.; Kapadnis, B.P .; Gaikwad, V .B. Biodegradation of model azo dye methyl red and other textile dyes by
isolate Bacillus circulans npp1. J. Pure Appl. Microbiol. 2016 ,10, 2793–2800. [CrossRef]
58. Kalme, S.; Jadhav, S.; Jadhav, M.; Govindwar, S. Textile dye degrading laccase from Pseudomonas desmolyticum NCIM 2112. Enzyme
Microb. Technol. 2009 ,44, 65–71. [CrossRef]
59. Ghodake, G.; Jadhav, U.; Tamboli, D.; Kagalkar, A.; Govindwar, S. Decolorization of Textile Dyes and Degradation of Mono-Azo
Dye Amaranth by Acinetobacter calcoaceticus NCIM 2890. Indian J. Microbiol. 2011 ,51, 501–508. [CrossRef]
60. Ahn, H.J.; Ahn, Y.; Kurade, M.B.; Patil, S.M.; Ha, G.S.; Bankole, P .O.; Khan, M.A.; Chang, S.W.; Abdellattif, M.H.; Yadav, K.K.; et al.
The comprehensive effects of aluminum oxide nanoparticles on the physiology of freshwater microalga Scenedesmus obliquus
and it’s phycoremediation performance for the removal of sulfacetamide. Environ. Res. 2022 ,215, 114314. [CrossRef]
61. Buthelezi, S.P .; Olaniran, A.O.; Pillay, B. Textile dye removal from wastewater efﬂuents using bioﬂocculants produced by
indigenous bacterial isolates. Molecules 2012 ,17, 14260–14274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Aloius Togo, C.; Clifford Zvandada Mutambanengwe, C.; George Whiteley, C. Decolourisation and degradation of textile dyes
using a sulphate reducing bacteria (SRB)-biodigester microﬂora co-culture. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2008 ,7, 114–121.
63. Al-Tohamy, R.; Sun, J.; Fareed, M.F.; Kenawy, E.R.; Ali, S.S. Ecofriendly biodegradation of Reactive Black 5 by newly isolated
Sterigmatomyces halophilus SSA1575, valued for textile azo dye wastewater processing and detoxiﬁcation. Sci. Rep. 2020 ,10, 12370.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Choudhary, N.; Yadav, V .K.; Yadav, K.K.; Almohana, A.I.; Almojil, S.F.; Gnanamoorthy, G.; Kim, D.-H.; Islam, S.; Kumar, P .; Jeon,
B.-H. Application of Green Synthesized MMT/Ag Nanocomposite for Removal of Methylene Blue from Aqueous Solution. Water
2021 ,13, 3206. [CrossRef]
65. Haq, I.; Raj, A.; Markandeya. Biodegradation of Azure-B dye by Serratia liquefaciens and its validation by phytotoxicity,
genotoxicity and cytotoxicity studies. Chemosphere 2018 ,196, 58–68. [CrossRef]
66. Sheela, T.; Sadasivam, S.K. Dye degradation potential and its degradative enzymes synthesis of bacillus cereus skb12 isolated
from a textile industrial efﬂuent. J. Appl. Biol. Biotechnol. 2020 ,8, 42–46. [CrossRef]
67. Liu, W.; Liu, C.; Liu, L.; You, Y.; Jiang, J.; Zhou, Z.; Dong, Z. Simultaneous decolorization of sulfonated azo dyes and reduction of
hexavalent chromium under high salt condition by a newly isolated salt-tolerant strain Bacillus circulans BWL1061. Ecotoxicol.
Environ. Saf. 2017 ,141, 9–16. [CrossRef]
68. Mohanty, S.S.; Kumar, A. Enhanced degradation of anthraquinone dyes by microbial monoculture and developed consortium
through the production of speciﬁc enzymes. Sci. Rep. 2021 ,11, 7678. [CrossRef]
69. Schmidt, C.; Berghahn, E.; Ilha, V .; Granada, C.E. Biodegradation potential of Citrobacter cultures for the removal of amaranth
and congo red azo dyes. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019 ,16, 6863–6872. [CrossRef]
70. Sarim, K.M.; Kukreja, K.; Shah, I.; Choudhary, C.K. Biosorption of direct textile dye Congo red by Bacillus subtilis HAU-KK01.
Bioremediat. J. 2019 ,23, 185–195. [CrossRef]
71. Garg, N.; Garg, A.; Mukherji, S. Eco-friendly decolorization and degradation of reactive yellow 145 textile dye by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Thiosphaera pantotropha .J. Environ. Manag. 2020 ,263, 110383. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Velayutham, K.; Madhava, A.K.; Pushparaj, M.; Thanarasu, A.; Devaraj, T.; Periyasamy, K.; Subramanian, S. Biodegradation
of Remazol Brilliant Blue R using isolated bacterial culture ( Staphylococcus sp. K2204). Environ. Technol. 2018 ,39, 2900–2907.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Holkar, C.R.; Arora, H.; Halder, D.; Pinjari, D.V . Biodegradation of reactive blue 19 with simultaneous electricity generation by
the newly isolated electrogenic Klebsiella sp. C NCIM 5546 bacterium in a microbial fuel cell. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 2018 ,
133, 194–201. [CrossRef]
74. Hansda, A.; Kumar, V .; Anshumali. A comparative review towards potential of microbial cells for heavy metal removal with
emphasis on biosorption and bioaccumulation. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2016 ,32, 170. [CrossRef]
75. Singh, G.; Dwivedi, S.K.; Mishra, J. Role of Fungal Enzymes in the Removal of Azo Dyes. In Microbial Enzymes: Roles and
Applications in Industries ; Arora, N.K., Mishra, J., Mishra, V ., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp. 231–257. [CrossRef]
76. Moiseenko, K.V .; Vasina, D.V .; Farukshina, K.T.; Savinova, O.S.; Glazunova, O.A.; Fedorova, T.V .; Tyazhelova, T.V . Orchestration
of the expression of the laccase multigene family in white-rot basidiomycete Trametes hirsuta 072: Evidences of transcription level
subfunctionalization. Fungal Biol. 2018 ,122, 353–362. [CrossRef]
77. Kiran, S.; Huma, T.; Jalal, F.; Farooq, T.; Hameed, A.; Gulzar, T.; Bashir, A.; Rahmat, M.; Rahmat, R.; Raﬁque, M.A. Lignin
degrading system of Phanerochaete chrysosporium and its exploitation for degradation of synthetic dyes wastewater. Pol. J. Environ.
Stud. 2019 ,28, 1749–1757. [CrossRef]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 22 of 24
78. Valliyaparambil, P .T.; Kaliyaperumal, K.A.; Gopakumaran, N. Pleurotus ostreatus laccase decolorization of remazol brilliant
violet 5R dye: Statistical optimization and toxicity studies on microbes and its kinetics. J. Appl. Biotechnol. Rep. 2019 ,6, 88–95.
[CrossRef]
79. Palmieri, G.; Cennamo, G.; Sannia, G. Remazol Brilliant Blue R decolourisation by the fungus Pleurotus ostreatus and its oxidative
enzymatic system. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2005 ,36, 17–24. [CrossRef]
80. Kim, S.J.; Shoda, M. Decolorization of molasses and a dye by a newly isolated strain of the fungus Geotrichum candidum Dec 1.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1999 ,62, 114–119. [CrossRef]
81. Lan, J.; Huang, X.; Hu, M.; Li, Y.; Qu, Y.; Gao, P .; Wu, D. High efﬁcient degradation of dyes with lignin peroxidase coupled with
glucose oxidase. J. Biotechnol. 2006 ,123, 483–490. [CrossRef]
82. Svobodov á, K.; Erbanov á, P .; Sklen áˇ r, J.; Novotn ý,ˇC. The role of Mn-dependent peroxidase in dye decolorization by static and
agitated cultures ofIrpex lacteus. Folia Microbiol. 2006 ,51, 573–578. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Cuamatzi-Flores, J.; Esquivel-Naranjo, E.; Nava-Galicia, S.; L ópez-Mungu ía, A.; Arroyo-Becerra, A.; Villalobos-L ópez, M.A.;
Bibbins-Mart ínez, M. Differential regulation of Pleurotus ostreatus dye peroxidases gene expression in response to dyes and
potential application of recombinant Pleos-DyP1 in decolorization. PLoS ONE 2019 ,14, e0209711. [CrossRef]
84. Lueangjaroenkit, P .; Teerapatsakul, C.; Sakka, K.; Sakka, M.; Kimura, T.; Kunitake, E.; Chitradon, L. Two Manganese Peroxidases
and a Laccase of Trametes polyzona KU-RNW027 with Novel Properties for Dye and Pharmaceutical Product Degradation in
Redox Mediator-Free System. Mycobiology 2019 ,47, 217–229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Verma, P .; Madamwar, D. Production of ligninolytic enzymes for dye decolorization by cocultivation of white-rot fungi
Pleurotus ostreatus and Phanerochaete chrysosporium under solid-state fermentation. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2002 ,102, 109–118.
[CrossRef]
86. Juárez-Hern ández, J.; Castillo-Hern ández, D.; P érez-Parada, C.; Nava-Galicia, S.; Cuervo-Parra, J.A.; Surian-Cruz, E.; D íaz-
Godínez, G.; S ánchez, C.; Bibbins-Mart ínez, M. Isolation of fungi from a textile industry efﬂuent and the screening of their
potential to degrade industrial dyes. J. Fungi 2021 ,7, 805. [CrossRef]
87. Song, Z.; Song, L.; Shao, Y .; Tan, L. Degradation and detoxification of azo dyes by a salt-tolerant yeast Cyberlindnera samutprakarnensis
S4 under high-salt conditions. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2018 ,34, 131. [CrossRef]
88. Sharma, P .; Singh, L.; Dilbaghi, N. Biodegradation of Orange II Dye by Phanerochaete chrysosporium in Simulated Wastewater ; CSIR:
New Delhi, India, 2009; Volume 68.
89. Harazono, K.; Watanabe, Y.; Nakamura, K. Decolorization of azo dye by the white-rot basidiomycete Phanerochaete sordida and by
its manganese peroxidase. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2003 ,95, 455–459. [CrossRef]
90. Yao, J.; Yao, J.; Jia, R.; Zheng, L.; Wang, B. Rapid decolorization of azo dyes by crude manganese peroxidase from Schizophyllum sp.
F17 in solid-state fermentation. Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. 2013 ,18, 868–877. [CrossRef]
91. Lanfranconi, I.; Ceretta, M.B.; Bertola, N.; Wolski, E.A.; Durruty, I. Textile dyeing wastewater treatment by Penicillium chrysogenum :
Design of a sustainable process. Water Sci. Technol. 2022 ,86, 292–301. [CrossRef]
92. Argumedo-Delira, R.; G ómez-Mart ínez, M.J.; Uribe-Kaffure, R. Trichoderma biomass as an alternative for removal of congo red
and malachite green industrial dyes. Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 448. [CrossRef]
93. He, X.L.; Song, C.; Li, Y.Y.; Wang, N.; Xu, L.; Han, X.; Wei, D.S. Efﬁcient degradation of Azo dyes by a newly isolated fungus
Trichoderma tomentosum under non-sterile conditions. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018 ,150, 232–239. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. Abd El-Rahim, W.M.; El-Meleigy, M.A.; Ibrahim, E. Bioremoval of Textile Efﬂuent Dye by Aspergillus fumigates .Int. J. Water Resour.
Arid. Environ. 2018 ,7, 70–78.
95. Sudiana, I.K.; Citrawathi, D.M.; Sastrawidana, I.D.K.; Maryam, S.; Sukarta, I.N.; Wirawan, G.A. Biodegradation of Turquoise Blue
Textile Dye by Wood Degrading Local Fungi Isolated from Plantation Area. J. Ecol. Eng. 2022 ,23, 205–214. [CrossRef]
96. Rani, B.; Kumar, V .; Singh, J.; Bisht, S.; Teotia, P .; Sharma, S.; Kela, R. Bioremediation of dyes by fungi isolated from contaminated
dye efﬂuent sites for bio-usability. Braz. J. Microbiol. 2014 ,45, 1055–1063. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Almeida, E.J.R.; Corso, C.R. Decolorization and removal of toxicity of textile azo dyes using fungal biomass pelletized. Int. J.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019 ,16, 1319–1328. [CrossRef]
98. Bergsten-Torralba, L.R.; Nishikawa, M.M.; Baptista, D.F.; Magalh ães, D.D.P .; Silva, M.D. Decolorization of different textile dyes by
Penicillium simplicissimum and toxicity evaluation after fungal treatment. Braz. J. Microbiol. 2009 ,40, 808–817. [CrossRef]
99. Chen, S.H.; Cheow, Y.L.; Ng, S.L.; Ting, A.S.Y. Biodegradation of Triphenylmethane Dyes by Non-white Rot Fungus
Penicillium simplicissimum : Enzymatic and Toxicity Studies. Int. J. Environ. Res. 2019 ,13, 273–282. [CrossRef]
100. Bankole, P .O.; Adekunle, A.A.; Govindwar, S.P . Biodegradation of a monochlorotriazine dye, cibacron brilliant red 3B-A in solid
state fermentation by wood-rot fungal consortium, Daldinia concentrica and Xylaria polymorpha : Co-biomass decolorization of
cibacron brilliant red 3B-A dye. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2018 ,120, 19–27. [CrossRef]
101. Mathur, M.; Vijayalakshmi, K.S.; Gola, D.; Singh, K.; Chaudhary, S.; Kaushik, P .; Malik, A. Decolourization of Textile Dyes by
Aspergillus lentulus .J. Basic Appl. Eng. Res. 2015 ,2, 1469–1473.
102. Sumathi, S.; Manju, B.S. Uptake of reactive textile dyes by Aspergillus foetidus .Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2000 ,27, 347–355.
[CrossRef]
103. Corso, C.R.; Maganha De Almeida, A.C. Bioremediation of dyes in textile efﬂuents by Aspergillus oryzae .Microb. Ecol. 2009 ,
57, 384–390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 23 of 24
104. Esmaeili, A.; Kalantari, M. Bioremoval of an azo textile dye, Reactive Red 198, by Aspergillus ﬂavus .World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2012 ,28, 1125–1131. [CrossRef]
105. De Castro, K.C.; Leme, V .F.C.; Souza, F.H.M.; Costa, G.O.B.; Santos, G.E.; Litordi, L.R.V .; Andrade, G.S.S. Performance of
inactivated Aspergillus oryzae cells on dye removal in aqueous solutions. Environ. Technol. Innov. 2021 ,24, 101828. [CrossRef]
106. Singh, L. Microbial decolourization of textile dyes by the fungus Trichoderma harzianum Characterization of Dye Degrading Fungi
and Metabolites produced by some Endophytic Fungi View project. J. Pure Appl. Microbiol. 2012 ,6, 1829–1833.
107. Mahmoud, M.S. Decolorization of certain reactive dye from aqueous solution using Baker’s Yeast ( Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) strain.
HBRC J. 2016 ,12, 88–98. [CrossRef]
108. Azin, E.; Moghimi, H. Efﬁcient mycosorption of anionic azo dyes by Mucor circinelloides : Surface functional groups and removal
mechanism study. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 2018 ,6, 4114–4123. [CrossRef]
109. Jamee, R.; Siddique, R. Biodegradation of synthetic dyes of textile efﬂuent by microorganisms: An environmentally and
economically sustainable approach. Eur. J. Microbiol. Immunol. 2019 ,9, 114–118. [CrossRef]
110. Gangola, S.; Bhatt, P .; Chaudhary, P .; Khati, P .; Kumar, N.; Sharma, A. Bioremediation of Industrial Waste Using Microbial
Metabolic Diversity. In Microbial Biotechnology in Environmental Monitoring and Cleanup ; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2018;
pp. 1–27. [CrossRef]
111. Chin, J.Y.; Chng, L.M.; Leong, S.S.; Yeap, S.P .; Yasin, N.H.M.; Toh, P .Y. Removal of Synthetic Dye by Chlorella vulgaris Microalgae
as Natural Adsorbent. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 2020 ,45, 7385–7395. [CrossRef]
112. El-Kassas, H.Y.; Mohamed, L.A. Bioremediation of the textile waste efﬂuent by Chlorella vulgaris .Egypt J. Aquat. Res. 2014 ,
40, 301–308. [CrossRef]
113. Lim, S.-L.; Chu, W.-L.; Phang, S.-M. Use of Chlorella vulgaris for bioremediation of textile wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 2010 ,
101, 7314–7322. [CrossRef]
114. Chu, W.-L.; See, Y.-C.; Phang, S.-M. Use of immobilised Chlorella vulgaris for the removal of colour from textile dyes. J. Appl.
Phycol. 2008 ,21, 641. [CrossRef]
115. Boulkhessaim, S.; Gacem, A.; Khan, S.H.; Amari, A.; Yadav, V .K.; Harharah, H.N.; Elkhaleefa, A.M.; Yadav, K.K.; Rather, S.-u.; Ahn,
H.-J.; et al. Emerging Trends in the Remediation of Persistent Organic Pollutants Using Nanomaterials and Related Processes: A
Review. Nanomaterials 2022 ,12, 2148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Ishchi, T.; Sibi, G. Azo Dye Degradation by Chlorella vulgaris : Optimization and Kinetics. Int. J. Biol. Chem. 2019 ,14, 1–7.
[CrossRef]
117. Dellamatrice, P .M.; Silva-Stenico, M.E.; de Moraes, L.A.B.; Fiore, M.F.; Monteiro, R.T.R. Degradation of textile dyes by cyanobacte-
ria.Braz. J. Microbiol. 2017 ,48, 25–31. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Mahalakshmi, S.; Lakshmi, D.; Menaga, U. Biodegradation of Different Concentration of dye (Congo red dye) by using Green and
Blue Green Algae. Int. J. Environ. Res. 2015 ,9, 735–744.
119. Shah, V .; Garg, N.; Madamwar, D. An integrated process of textile dye removal and hydrogen evolution using cyanobacterium,
Phormidium valderianum .World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2001 ,17, 499–504. [CrossRef]
120. Pathak, V .V .; Kothari, R.; Chopra, A.K.; Singh, D.P . Experimental and kinetic studies for phycoremediation and dye removal by
Chlorella pyrenoidosa from textile wastewater. J. Environ. Manag. 2015 ,163, 270–277. [CrossRef]
121. Parikh, A.; Madamwar, D. Textile dye decolorization using cyanobacteria. Biotechnol. Lett. 2005 ,27, 323–326. [CrossRef]
122. Kalasariya, H.S.; Patel, N.B.; Gacem, A.; Alsufyani, T.; Reece, L.M.; Yadav, V .K.; Awwad, N.S.; Ibrahium, H.A.; Ahn, Y.; Yadav,
K.K.; et al. Marine Alga Ulva fasciata-Derived Molecules for the Potential Treatment of SARS-CoV-2: An In Silico Approach. Mar.
Drugs 2022 ,20, 586. [CrossRef]
123. Ghazal, F.M.; Mahdy, E.S.M.; El-Fattah, M.S.A.; EL-Sadany, A.E.G.Y.; Elg, Y.; Doha, N.M.E. The Use of Microalgae in Bioremedia-
tion of the Textile Wastewater Efﬂuent. Nat. Sci. 2018 ,16, 98–104. [CrossRef]
124. Maruthanayagam, A.; Mani, P .; Kaliappan, K.; Chinnappan, S. In vitro and In silico Studies on the Removal of Methyl Orange
from Aqueous Solution Using Oedogonium subplagiostomum AP1. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2020 ,231, 232. [CrossRef]
125. Bijekar, S.; Padariya, H.D.; Yadav, V .K.; Gacem, A.; Hasan, M.A.; Awwad, N.S.; Yadav, K.K.; Islam, S.; Park, S.; Jeon, B.-H. The
State of the Art and Emerging Trends in the Wastewater Treatment in Developing Nations. Water 2022 ,14, 2537. [CrossRef]
126. Gacem, A.; Modi, S.; Yadav, V .K.; Islam, S.; Patel, A.; Dawane, V .; Jameel, M.; Inwati, G.K.; Piplode, S.; Solanki, V .S.; et al. Recent
Advances in Methods for Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes and Carbon Nanocomposite and their Emerging Applications: A
Descriptive Review. J. Nanomater. 2022 ,2022 , 7238602. [CrossRef]
127. Sherifah, M.W.; Seun, A.E.; Kehinde, O.S.; Abiodun, A.O. Decolourization of synthetic dyes by laccase enzyme produced by
Kluyveromyces dobzhanskii DW1 and Pichia manshurica DW2. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2019 ,18, 1–11. [CrossRef]
128. Darvishi, F.; Moradi, M.; Jolivalt, C.; Madzak, C. Laccase production from sucrose by recombinant Yarrowia lipolytica and its
application to decolorization of environmental pollutant dyes. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2018 ,165, 278–283. [CrossRef]
129. Othman, A.M.; Elsayed, M.A.; Elshafei, A.M.; Hassan, M.M. Puriﬁcation and biochemical characterization of two isolated laccase
isoforms from Agaricus bisporus CU13 and their potency in dye decolorization. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2018 ,113, 1142–1148.
[CrossRef]
130. Dai, S.; Yao, Q.; Yu, G.; Liu, S.; Yun, J.; Xiao, X.; Deng, Z.; Li, H. Biochemical Characterization of a Novel Bacterial Laccase and
Improvement of Its Efﬁciency by Directed Evolution on Dye Degradation. Front. Microbiol. 2021 ,12, 633004. [CrossRef]Water 2022 ,14, 3163 24 of 24
131. Zhang, H.; Zhang, X.; Geng, A. Expression of a novel manganese peroxidase from Cerrena unicolor BBP6 in Pichia pastoris and its
application in dye decolorization and PAH degradation. Biochem. Eng. J. 2020 ,153, 107402. [CrossRef]
132. Bouacem, K.; Rekik, H.; Jaouadi, N.Z.; Zenati, B.; Kourdali, S.; El Hattab, M.; Badis, A.; Annane, R.; Bejar, S.; Hacene, H.; et al.
Puriﬁcation and characterization of two novel peroxidases from the dye-decolorizing fungus Bjerkandera adusta strain CX-9. Int. J.
Biol. Macromol. 2018 ,106, 636–646. [CrossRef]
133. Shaheen, R.; Asgher, M.; Hussain, F.; Bhatti, H.N. Immobilized lignin peroxidase from Ganoderma lucidum IBL-05 with improved
dye decolorization and cytotoxicity reduction properties. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2017 ,103, 57–64. [CrossRef]
134. Campos, R.; Kandelbauer, A.; Robra, K.H.; Cavaco-Paulo, A.; Gübitz, G.M. Indigo degradation with puriﬁed laccases from
Trametes hirsuta and Sclerotium rolfsii. J. Biotechnol. 2001 ,89, 131–139. [CrossRef]
135. Wang, J.; Lu, L.; Feng, F. Improving the indigo carmine decolorization ability of a bacillus amyloliquefaciens laccase by site-
directed mutagenesis. Catalysts 2017 ,7, 275. [CrossRef]
136. Xiong, J.Q.; Cui, P .; Ru, S.; Kurade, M.B.; Patil, S.M.; Yadav, K.K.; Fallatah, A.M.; Cabral-Pinto, M.M.S.; Jeon, B.H. A comprehensive
review on the effects of engineered nanoparticles on microalgal treatment of pollutants from wastewater. J. Clean. Prod. 2022 ,
344, 131121. [CrossRef]