Designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber biological materials
Charlotte A. E. Hauseraand Shuguang Zhangab
Received 22nd October 2009, Accepted 15th March 2010
First published as an Advance Article on the web 3rd June 2010DOI: 10.1039/b921448h
Scientists and bioengineers have dreamed of designing materials from the bottom up with
the ﬁnest detail and ultimate control at the single molecular level. The discovery of a class ofself-assembling peptides that spontaneously undergo self-organization into well-orderedstructures opened a new avenue for molecular fabrication of biological materials. Sincethis discovery, diverse classes of short peptides have been invented with broad applications,
including 3D tissue cell culture, reparative and regenerative medicine, tissue engineering, slow
drug release and medical device development. Molecular design of new materials using shortpeptides is poised to become increasingly important in biomedical research, biomedicaltechnology and medicine, and is covered in this tutorial review .
Introduction
There exists an important a distinction between biomaterials
and biological materials. The term ‘‘biomaterials’’ typically
refers to the materials now commonly used in medical applica-
tions and includes titanium metal, ceramic implants, polymerand biopolymer scaﬀolds as well as a variety of composites.On the other hand, the term ‘‘biological materials’’ refers tothose materials with biological origin, including collagen,ﬁbrin, silk, spider-silk, hair, fur, leather, natural bio-adhesive,shells, cellulose, natural plant oil and a variety of biologicalsurfactants. After decades of ﬁne-tuning, many biological
materials can now be designed and fabricated at the molecularlevel for particular uses. Because of their chemical complexityand structural sophistication, biological materials of naturalorigin have been more diﬃcult to design and fabricate at themolecular level. However, this has changed over the last twodecades.
For a few decades, chemical scientists, chemical engineers,
materials scientists and medical doctors have made great
eﬀorts to develop a wide range of biomaterials for medical
applications. Although most of the materials used in theseapplications were not speciﬁcally designed and made formedical uses, they have nevertheless saved people’s lives,alleviated medical problems, and generally improved patients’quality of life while having a profound impact on medicaltechnology.
Because biomaterials are not speciﬁcally designed for
medical uses, they have shortcomings and sometimes cause
aInstitute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, A*STAR,
31 Biopolis Way, The Nanos, 138669 Singapore.E-mail: chauser@ibn.a-star.edu.sg; Fax: +65-6478-9080;Tel: +65-6824-7108
bCenter for Biomedical Engineering NE47-379, MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge,MA 02139, USA. E-mail: shuguang@mit.edu;Fax: +1-617-258-5239; Tel: +1-617-258-7514
Charlotte A. E. HauserCharlotte Hauser is a
Team Leader and Principal
Research Scientist at the
Institute of Bioengineering and
Nanotechnology (IBN) in
Singapore. She did her PhD
studies at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT),
Cambridge, USA. She was a
Research Fellow at the Insti-
tute National de la Sante ´et
de la Recherche Me ´dicale
(INSERM) in Paris, France,
and led a research group at the
Max-Planck-Institute (MPI)
of Psychiatry in Munich,
Germany. She founded life science company Octagene, Martinsried,
Germany, now with Octapharma AG, and was managing director
and shareholder (1997–2006). She holds numerous scientiﬁc
articles, patents and received many awards and prizes.
Shuguang ZhangZhang Shuguang earned his
PhD in Biochemistry &
Molecular Biology from Univer-
sity of California at Santa
Barbara. He has published
>140 papers in protein
science and nanobiotechnology
from designer self-assembling
peptides, study membrane
proteins to emerging biosolar
energy. He was an American
Cancer Society Postdoctoral
Fellow and a Whitaker Foun-
dation Investigator at MIT.
He is a distinguished Chang
Jiang scholar in China and a
2003 Fellow of Japan Society for Promotion of Science. His
work on designer peptide scaﬀolds won 2004 R&D100 award.
He was a 2006 John Simon Guggenheim Fellow and a winner of
2006 Wilhelm Exner Medal of Austria. He was inducted as a
foreign member of the Austrian Academy of Science in 2010.
2780 |Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2780–2790 This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010TUTORIAL REVIEW www.rsc.org/csr |Chemical Society Reviews
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlineproblems. However, the beneﬁts out-weight the risks and they
continue to be used today.
Since biomaterials are not ideal for all medical applications,
scientists and engineers are turning their attentions to thedevelopment of biological materials, namely, materials of bio-logical origin including collagen, ﬁbrin, silk, spider-silk, hair,
fur, leather, natural bio-adhesive, shells, cellulose, natural
oil and a variety of biological surfactants. The advent ofmolecular biology and biotechnology has accelerated thistrend. Inspired by nature, more and more biological materialshave been developed during the last decade, a trend that isexpected to continue. It should not be surprising if, in thefuture, biological materials eventually supersede biomaterialsfor medical uses.
In order to design biological materials for particular uses, or
‘‘tailor-made biological materials’’, it is absolutely essential tounderstand their ﬁnite, nature-made, individual building
blocks. These building blocks include the twenty natural
L-amino acids, tens of natural lipids, tens of sugars and a
few nucleotides.
We began conducting biological material research in the
early 1990s after serendipitously discovering a self-assemblingpeptide, EAK16, that self-organized into ordered nanoﬁbersand further into scaﬀolds. This discovery was made whileworking on yeast genetics and structural biology in thelaboratory of Alexander Rich at the Massachusetts Instituteof Technology. This unexpected discovery led a new way ofthinking about how to design a variety of biological materials
from the bottom up. This new approach allows exquisite ﬁne-
tuning and the ability to control one amino acid at a time, thuslaying a foundation for the design of a wide spectrum ofbiological materials and medical devices.
This ﬁeld is advancing rapidly as more and more people
from biology, chemistry and various engineering areas enterand new reports come out daily, making it impossible to coverthe entire ﬁeld within a few limited pages. We will thereforeonly focus on our own research highlights in this review andinvite interested readers to consult the original reports andearly reviews in the literature for a more comprehensive view.
Discovery of the ﬁrst self-assembling peptide,
EAK16, in baker’s yeast
In science, it is crucial not only to make careful and repeatable
observations, but also to carry out reproducible experiments.When one observes an unusual phenomenon and cannotinterpret it using conventional theories, one should considerthe alternatives. Many discoveries are made unintentionallyand serendipitously, sometimes referred to as unauthorized
scientiﬁc discoveries, while one works in a speciﬁc area but
accidentally discovers something else in a completely unrelatedarea. The discovery of self-assembling peptides is one suchexample, thus justifying curiosity-driven and broad basicresearch.
We both worked in Alexander Rich’s laboratory from the
late 1980s to early 1990s to gain understanding of the bio-logical function of left-handed Z-DNA binding protein. Whileworking on yeast genetics and protein chemistry in 1989, one ofus, Shuguang Zhang, identiﬁed a protein that he named zuotin(zuo means left in Chinese ,tin refers to protein in this case )f o ri t s
ability to bind to left-handed Z-DNA in the presence of 400-foldexcess of sheared salmon DNA, which contains ubiquitousright-handed B-DNA and other DNA structures.
1Zuotin had
an interesting repetitive 16-residue peptide sequence motif,n-AEAEAKAKAEAEAKAK-c (EAK16-II), among a segment
o fa l t e r n a t i n ga l a n i n e - Xr e p e a t i n g3 4r e s i d u e s .
1,2Out of curio-
sity, Zhang custom-made this peptide to study its biochemicaland structural properties. To our great surprise, the results ofalmost everything we studied were diﬀerent from what wasknown in the literature at the time. This aroused our curiosityfurther, and we persistently pursued this discovery. Since thenthis peptide sequence has been extensively studied to create aclass of simple b-sheet peptides.
3
These peptides are ionic self-complementary as a result of
the presence of both positive and negative side chains on oneside of the b-sheet and hydrophobic side chains on the other
(Fig. 1). These peptides have two distinctive sides, one hydro-
phobic and the other hydrophilic. The hydrophobic side formsa double sheet inside of a ﬁber and the hydrophilic side formsthe outside of the nanoﬁbers that interact with water molecules,forming an extremely high water content hydrogel, which cancontain as high as 99.5% to 99.9% water (1–5 mg peptide perml water, w/v). At least three types of molecules can be made,with/C0,+ ,/C0/+ on the hydrophilic side (Fig. 1).
4
This serendipitous discovery of a self-complementary peptide
inspired us to design many more members of this class of
Fig. 1 The simple and molecular models of the designer amphiphilic
self-assembling peptides that form well-ordered nanoﬁbers. (Upper
Panel) These peptides have two distinctive sides, one hydrophobic and
the other hydrophilic. The hydrophobic side forms a double sheet
inside of the ﬁber and the hydrophilic side forms the outside of the
nanoﬁbers that interact with water molecules, forming an extremely
high water content hydrogel that contains as high as 99.9% water. At
least three types of molecules can be made, with /C0,+ ,/C0/+ on the
hydrophilic side. (Lower Panel) The individual self-assembling peptide
molecules are B5 nm long. The ﬁrst such peptide, EAK16-II, was
discovered from a yeast protein, zuotin.1,2This peptide inspired us to
design a large class of self-assembling peptide construction motifs.
When dissolved in water in the presence of salt, they spontaneously
assemble into well-ordered nanoﬁbers and then further into scaﬀolds
(for more details, see Fig. 2–7).
This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 C h e m .S o c .R e v . , 2010, 39, 2780–2790 |2781
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlinepeptides, which form 3-dimensional (3D) nanoﬁber scaﬀolds
that have been used in 3D cell tissue cultures.5–9The 4 ionic
self-complementary peptides (Fig. 1 - lower panel) RADA16-I,RAD16-II, EAK-I and EAK16-II (the segment from yeastzuotin) form stable b-sheet structures in water and undergo
spontaneous assembly to form nanoﬁber scaﬀolds. The
nanoﬁber scaﬀolds hold large volumes of water since water
molecules can perhaps be organized through surface tension toform clusters divided by nanoﬁbers into compartments. Tissuecells can be embedded in such a 3D nanoﬁber scaﬀold
5–9in
which they can establish molecular gradients that often mimicthein vivo environment.
Other related self-assembling peptide systems have also been
designed, which range from ‘molecular switch’ peptides thatundergo marked conformational changes
10,11to ‘molecular ink’
peptides for surface engineering12to peptide surfactants that
self-assemble into micelles, nanotubes and nanovesicles,13–19all
of which were inspired by the Z-DNA-binding zuotin discovery.
But these ﬁndings will not be covered in this review.
The chemical properties of the self-assembling
peptide systems
The self-assembling peptide scaﬀolds consist of alternating
amino acids that contain 50% charged residues.3–9,20–25These
peptides are characterized by their periodic repeats of alter-
nating ionic hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acids with a
typical b-sheet structure. Thus, these b-sheet peptides have
distinct polar and non-polar surfaces (Fig. 1). The self-assemblyevent that creates the peptide scaﬀold takes place underphysiological conditions of neutral pH and millimolar saltconcentration. They are like gel-sponges in aqueous solution,not only readily transportable to diﬀerent environments butalso injectable through the smallest needles. Individualhydrated ﬁbers are B10 nanometres in diameter. A number
of additional designer self-assembling peptides includingRADA16-I (AcN-RADARADARADARADA-CNH
2) and
RADA16-II (AcN-RARADADARARADADA-CNH 2) have
been designed, in which arginine and aspartate residuesreplace the lysine and glutamate residues of the EAK peptides.The alanines form overlappi ng hydrophobic interactions in
water, making a structure that is found in silk ﬁbroin fromsilkworm and spider silk.
26On the charged sides, both positive
and negative charges are packed together through intermolecularionic interactions in a checkerboard-like manner. In general,these self-assembling peptides form stable b-sheet structures in
water, which are stable at high temperatures, across a wide pHrange, and in the presence of a high concentration of denaturingagents urea and guanidium hydrochloride.
3The nanoﬁber
density correlates with the concentration of peptide solution,
and the nanoﬁbers retain extremely high hydration, >99% inwater (1–10 mg ml
/C01,w / v )( F i g .3 ) .
Commercial peptide synthesis methods use conventional
solid phase or solution peptide synthesis chemistry. Dependingon the length of the motifs, high purity peptides can beproduced at a reasonable cost. The cost of peptide synthesishas steadily decreased in recent years, making it more andmore aﬀordable. However, it is still expensive for widespread use and further cost reduction is necessary. It is nowpossible to produce some peptides as multiple cleavable units
in a bacterial system, which will further reduce the cost ofsynthesis.
Many self-assembling peptides that form scaﬀolds have
been reported and the numbers are still expanding.
4,23The
formation of the scaﬀold and its mechanical properties are
inﬂuenced by several factors, one of which is the level of
hydrophobicity.20,22,24That is, in addition to the ionic
complementary interactions, the content of hydrophobicresidues, Ala, Val, Ile, Leu, Tyr, Phe, Trp (or single lettercode, A, V, I, L, Y, P, W) can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence themechanical properties of the scaﬀolds and the speed of theirself-assembly. The higher the content of hydrophobicity, theeasier it is for nanoﬁber scaﬀold formation and better mecha-nical property strength.
20,22,24,25
Self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds
A hierarchical scaﬀold self-organization starting from a singlemolecule of the ionic self-complementary peptide RADA16-Iis depicted in Fig. 2. Here millions of peptide molecules self-assemble into individual nanoﬁbers, and billions of nanoﬁberfurther self-assemble into the nanoﬁber scaﬀold (Fig. 2). Thenanopores in the scaﬀold range from a few nanometres to afew hundred nanometres. The nanopores are similar in size tomost biomolecules, so that these molecules, either smallmolecule drugs or protein and nucleic acid therapeutics, may
not only defuse slowly but also may establish a molecular
gradient in the nanoporous scaﬀolds.
Peptide samples in aqueous solution were examined using
environmental AFM and showed nanoﬁber results, thussuggesting the nanoﬁber formation is independent of thedrying process (Fig. 2 - lower panel).
It is interesting to observe that at high resolution the
nanoﬁbers appear to have distinct layers, especially in somesegments (Fig. 3). The diﬀerence in height is B1.4 nm, which is
similar to the thickness of a single peptide. Fig. 3e–h shows thepeptide scaﬀold hydrogel at various concentrations, 0.6–3 mM,
(1–5 mg ml
/C01, w/v, or 99.5–99.9% water content).2–9The
scaﬀold hydrogel is completely transparent, which is a veryimportant requirement for accurate image collection in appli-cations using 3-D tissue cell cultures.
Dynamic reassembly of self-assembling peptides
The self-assembling peptides form a stable b-sheet structure
in water (Fig. 4). The interactions between the peptides andb-sheets are (1) non-covalent hydrogen bonds along the back-
bones, (2) the arrays of ionic + and /C0charge interactions, (3)
alanine hydrophobic interactions and van der Waals inter-
actions, and (4) water-mediated hydrogen bond formations.Thus the nanoﬁbers can be disrupted mechanically usingsonication.
25The self-assembling process is reversible and
dynamic (Fig. 5) since these peptides are short and simple.Numerous individual peptides can be readily self-organizedthrough the weak interactions. However, they can undergodynamic reassembly repeatedly (Fig. 4), similar to the materialself-healing process. Since the driving energy of the assemblyin water is not only through hydrophobic van der Waals
2782 |Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2780–2790 This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlineinteractions, but also the arrays of ionic interactions as well as
the peptide backbone hydrogen bonds, this phenomenon can
be further exploited for production and fabrication of manyself-assembling peptide materials.
Unlike processed polymer microﬁbers in which the fragments
of polymers cannot undergo reassembly without addition ofcatalysts or through material processing, the supramolecularself-assembly and reassembly event is likely to be wide spread
in many unrelated ﬁbrous biological materials where numerousweak interactions are involved. Self-assembly and reassemblyare a very important property for fabricating novel materials,and it is necessary to fully understand its detailed process in
order to design and to improve biological materials.
AFM images reveal that the nanoﬁbers range from several
hundred nanometres to a few microns in length before sonica-tion. After sonication, the fragments were broken intoB20–100 nanometres. The kinetics of the nanoﬁber reassembly
is examined closely at 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32 and 64 min as well as 2,4, and 24 h (Fig. 4). The nanoﬁber length reassembly is afunction of time: by 2 h, the peptide nanoﬁbers have essentiallyreassembled to their original length. The CD spectra showedlittle change since the b-sheets at the molecular level remain
unchanged despite the nanoﬁber length change.
This remarkable reassembly is interesting because there may
be a small amount of nucleation for re-growth of the nanoﬁberfrom the addition of monomers that may be produced duringsonication. It is plausible that a large population of thesonicated nanoﬁber fragments contains many overlappingcohesive ends due to the undisrupted alanine hydrophobicside that may quickly ﬁnd each other (Fig. 5). The situation isanalogous and commonly found in sonicated and enzymaticdigested DNA restriction fragments that can ﬁnd each other tore-align the ends as a function of time.
Fig. 2 Self-assembling peptide RADA16-I nanoﬁber scaﬀold hydrogel.
(Upper panel) Amino acid sequence of RADA16-I, molecular model
of a single RADA16-I nanoﬁber, the calculated peptide dimensions
areB6 nm long depending on end capping, 1.3 nm wide and 0.8 nm
thick; tens and hundreds of thousands of individual peptides self-
assemble into a nanoﬁber, SEM images of RADA16-I nanoﬁber
scaﬀold. Note the scale bar, 0.5 mm or 500 nm (SEM image courtesy
of Fabrizio Gelain). (Lower panel) RADA16-I Peptide form
nanoﬁbers in aqueous solution that further form hydrogel withextremely high water content (99.5–99.9% w/v water). Peptide
samples in aqueous solution using environmental AFM examination
showed the same nanoﬁber results (the insert at bottom left) suggesting
that the nanoﬁber formation is independent of the air-drying
process. The nanoﬁber images however are not as sharp as the ones
dried on mica, likely due to the hydration of these nanoﬁbers in
solution.
Fig. 3 Peptide RADA16-I. (a) Amino acid sequence and molecular
model of RADA16-I, the dimensions are B5 nm long, 1.3 nm
wide and 0.8 nm thick. AFM images of RADA16-I nanoﬁber scaﬀold,
(b) 8 mm2, (c) 2 mm2(d) 0.5 mm2. Note the diﬀerent height of
the nanoﬁber, B1.3 nm, in (d) suggesting a double layer structure;
Photographs of RADA16-I hydrogel at various conditions,
(e) 0.5 wt% (pH 7.5), (f) 0.1 wt% (pH 7.5, Tris.HCl), (g) 0.1 wt%
(pH 7.5, PBS) before sonication, (h) re-assembled RADA16-I
hydrogel after 4 times of sonication, respectively (image courtesy of
Hidenori Yokoi).
This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 C h e m .S o c .R e v . , 2010, 39, 2780–2790 |2783
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View OnlineChiral self-assembling peptides made of all D-amino
acids
Numerous self-assembling peptides with various composi-
tions, sequences, and length have been studied, largely usingpeptides composed of
L-amino acids. We also wonder if the
chiral peptides made of all D-amino acids can also undergo
self-assembly and form nanoﬁber, similar to their L-peptide
counterparts. Since D-form peptide bonds resist natural L-enzyme
degradation, D-peptide based materials will likely be more
stable. Thus, a new class of D-form self-assembling peptides
may prove to be more versatile in fabricating novel supra-molecular architecture and have a wide range of applications
in biotechnology, nanobiotechnology and medical technology.
Luo Zhongli and his colleagues found that the
D-peptide
d-EAK16-II forms stable b-sheets with the exact inverted
CD spectrum (Fig. 6) as l-EAK16-II.27,28They also form
well-ordered nanoﬁbers that are structurally indistinguishablefrom the
L-peptide counterpart (Fig. 7).27,28They used a pair
of identical sequences to undertake the study. The chiral
D-form amino acids were used to produce peptides with only
D-amino acids. They showed that the D-peptides have inverted
circular dichroism spectra, mirror images of the L-peptides of
identical sequence.27,28The b-sheet structure of D-peptide is
less stable than the L-peptide’s at high temperature, B801C
and D-peptide can undergo secondary structural transition
from b-sheet to a-helix. This raises the very intriguing question
Fig. 4 Circular dichroism examination of the peptide structures at
various times before and after sonication. Before indicates sample
taken before sonication; sample time points 2, 8, 16, 32, 64 min were
taken after sonication. The typical b-sheet spectra were observed at all
time point experiments indicating the molecular structure and the
integrity of the peptides were unchanged before and after sonication.
Furthermore, the b-sheet contents (216 nm) remain nearly identical at
all time points and slight higher than the sample before sonication
suggesting tight b-sheet packing. However, the degree of b-sheet twist
(195 nm region) before sonication is diﬀerent suggesting diﬀerent
b-sheet packing. It is possible that the sonication and reassembly
process further facilitated packing (image courtesy of Hidenori Yokoi).
Fig. 5 AFM images of RADA16-I nanoﬁber at various time points
after sonication. The observations were made using AFM immediately
after sample preparation. (a) 1 min after sonication; (b) 2 min;
(c) 4 min; (d) 8 min; (e) 16 min; (f) 32 min; (g) 64 min; (h) 2 h;
(i) 4 h; (j) 24 h. Note the elongation and reassembly of the peptide
nanoﬁbers over time. By B1–2 h, these self-assembling peptide
nanoﬁbers have nearly fully re-assembled (image courtesy of Hidenori
Yokoi).
Fig. 6 CD spectra of peptides d-EAK16 (black dots) and l-EAK16
(red dots) in water at 25 1C. The X-axis is wavelength in nm; the Y-axis
is expressed as mole residue ellipticity [ y]. The mirror image of d-EAK16
and l-EAK16 reﬂects the chirality (image courtesy of Zhouli Luo).
2784 |Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2780–2790 This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlineof why nature selected L-amino acids for all living systems on
Earth. However, the nanoﬁbers and scaﬀolds formed from thepeptides with only
D-amino acids are indistinguishable from
their L-counterpart.27,28
Kinetics of nanoﬁber reassembly and a plausible
reassembly process
The reassembly kinetics is a function of time. It may be similar
to DNA reassembly; the re-assembly largely depends on theconcentrations of the short complementary fragments. In thiscase, the fragments are the sonicated peptide nanoﬁbers andpossibly sonicated monomers.
In order to understand the dynamics of reassembly, based on
reproducible observations, we proposed a plausible slidingdiﬀusion molecular model to interpret these observations of
reassembly of the self-assembling RADA16-I peptides (Fig. 8).
Unlike the left-handed super-helical structures observed in adiﬀerent self-assembling peptide KFE8,
24no super-helical struc-
tures were observed for RADA16-I using AFM25and SEM.6,7,21
Molecular modeling of the self-assembly process
For molecular modeling clarity, the RADA16-I b-sheet is
presented as a non-twisted strand. It is known that thesepeptides form stable b-sheet structures in water, thus they
not only show intermolecular hydrogen bonding on the peptidebackbones, but they also have two distinctive sides, onehydrophobic with an array of overlapping alanines (Fig. 8,green color sandwiched inside), similar to what is found insilk ﬁbroin or spider silk assemblies.
26The other side of
the backbones have negatively charged ( /C0) amino acids,
represented as red, and positively charged (+) amino acids,
represented as blue.
The alanines form packed hydrophobic interactions in
water, which can be disrupted mechanically during sonication.However, these hydrophobic cohesive ends can ﬁnd each otherquickly in water since the exposure of hydrophobic alaninearrays to water is energetically unfavorable. Since the hydro-phobic alanines’ interaction is non-speciﬁc, they can slidediﬀuse along the nanoﬁber, like trains sliding along traintracks. The same sliding diﬀusion phenomenon was also observedin early studies of nucleic acids where polyA and polyU form
complementary base pairings that can slide diﬀuse along thedouble helical chains.
29,30If however, the bases are hetero-
geneous, containing G, A, T, C, then the bases cannot undergo
sliding diﬀusion. Likewise, if the hydrophobic side of the peptidesdoes not always contain alanine, containing residues such asvaline and isoleucine, it would become more diﬃcult for slidingdiﬀusion to occur due to thei r structural constraints.
On the charged side, both positive and negative charges are
packed together through intermolecular ionic interactions in acheckerboard-like manner (looking from the top). Likewise, thecollectively complementary + and /C0ionic interactions may also
facilitate reassembly. Similar to restriction-digested DNA frag-ments, these nanoﬁber fragments could form various assemblies
like blunt and protruding ends. The fragments with various
protruding ends as well as blunt ends can reassemble readilythrough hydrophobic and ionic interactions (Fig. 8).
Designer peptides scaﬀold 3-D cell cultures
Although self-assembling peptides are promising scaﬀolds,they show no speciﬁc cell interaction because their sequences
Fig. 7 AFM images of D-chiral peptide d-EAK16 self-assembling
into nanoﬁbers (2 mg/ml or 0.2% w/v). The images were systematically
collected with increasing magniﬁcation. The areas are (A) 4.3 mm2,
(B) 2 mm2, and (C) 1 mm2. The well-ordered nanoﬁbers and their pores
are clearly visible. The diameter of the nanoﬁbers is about B10 nm
perhaps due to hydration and AFM tip measurement. These
images are similar to l-EAK16 reported previously2(image courtesy
of Zhouli Luo).
Fig. 8 A proposed molecular sliding diﬀusion model for dynamic
reassembly of a single peptide nanoﬁber consisting of thousands of
individual peptides. When the peptides self-assemble into stable
b-sheets in water, they form intermolecular hydrogen bonds along
the peptide backbones. The b-sheet structure has two distinctive sides,
one hydrophobic with an array of alanines and the other with
negatively charged and positively charged amino acids. These peptides
form antiparallel b-sheet structures. The alanines form overlap packed
hydrophobic interactions in water, a structure that is found in silk
ﬁbroin from silkworm and spiders. On the charged sides, both positive
and negative charges are packed together through intermolecular ionic
interactions in a checkerboard-like manner. When the fragments of
nanoﬁber ﬁrst meet, the hydrophobic sides may not ﬁt perfectly but
have gaps. However, the non-speciﬁc hydrophobic interactions permit
the nanoﬁber to slide diﬀusion along the ﬁber in either direction that
minimizes the exposure of hydrophobic alanines and eventually ﬁll the
gaps. The sliding diﬀusion phenomenon was also proposed for nucleic
acids of polyA and polyU in 1956.29,30For clarity, these b-sheets are
not presented as twisted strands. Color code: green, alanines; red,
negatively charged amino acids; blue, positively charged amino acids
(image courtesy of Hidenori Yokoi).
This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 C h e m .S o c .R e v . , 2010, 39, 2780–2790 |2785
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlineare not naturally found in living systems. The next logical
step is to directly couple biologically active and functionalpeptide motifs found in the literature. Accordingly, thesecond generation of designer scaﬀolds will have signiﬁcantlyenhanced interactions with cells and tissues.
For over 100 years, since the Petri dish was invented and
used for tissue culture studies, almost all tissue cells have been
studied on the 2D Petri dish and various formats of coated 2Dsurfaces. However, this 2D surface is rather unlike 3D tissueand the body’s microenvironment. Thus it is important todevelop a true 3D microenvironment to mimic the real tissueand body situation. The commonly used biomaterials areinadequate due to their microﬁber and micropore size. Animalderived collagen gel and Matrigel contain other residue materialsthat are not always adequate for ﬁnely-controlled studies. Thus,a designer scaﬀold becomes more desirable.
37,38
The simplest way to incorporate the functional motifs is to
directly synthesize them by extending the motifs on to the self-
assembling peptides themselves (Fig. 9). The functional motifsare coupled to the C-termini since solid phase peptide synthesisstarts from C-termini. This helps avoid deletion during elonga-tion synthesis (the longer the peptide extended from theC-termini, the more likely that there will be deletion errors).Usually a spacer comprising 2-glycine residues is added toguarantee ﬂexible and correct exposure of the motifs to cellsurface receptors. If one combines a few designer peptides withdiﬀerent active motifs, these diﬀerent functional motifs invarious ratios can be incorporated in the same scaﬀold (Fig. 9).
Upon exposure to solution at neutral pH, the functionalized
sequences self-assemble, leaving the added motifs on bothsides of each nanoﬁber (Fig. 9). Nanoﬁbers take part in theoverall scaﬀold, thus providing functionalized microenviron-ments with speciﬁc biological stimuli (Fig. 9).
Self-assembling peptide scaﬀolds with functional motifs can
be commercially produced at a reasonable cost. Thus, thismethod can be readily adopted for widespread uses includingthe study of cell interactions with their local- and micro-environments, cell migrations in 3D, tumor and cancer cells inter-actions with normal cells, cell pro cesses and neurite extensions,
cell based drug screen assays and other diverse applications.
We have produced diﬀerent designer peptides from a variety
of functional motifs with diﬀerent lengths.
6–9We showed that
the addition of motifs in some cases to the self-assemblingpeptide RADA16-I did not signiﬁcantly inhibit self-assemblingproperties. Furthermore, one can combine the RADA16-Inanoﬁber with the active designer self-assembling peptidesby mixing the modiﬁed peptides. Although their nanoﬁberstructures are indistinguishable from the RADA16-I scaﬀold,the appended functional motifs signiﬁcantly inﬂuence cellbehaviors.
Using the designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber system,
every ingredient of the scaﬀold can be deﬁned. Furthermore, itcan be combined with multiple functionalities includingsoluble factors.
33Cells reside in a 3-D environment where
the extracellular matrix receptors on cell membranes can bindto the functional ligands appended to the peptide scaﬀolds. Itis likely that higher tissue architectures with multiple cell types,rather than monolayers, could be constructed using thesedesigner 3-D self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds.Even if only a fraction of functionalized motifs on the 3-D
scaﬀold are available for cell receptor binding, cells may likelyreceive more external stimuli than when in contact with coated2-D Petri dishes or RGD-coated (or other motifs) polymer
microﬁbers, which is substantially larger than the cell surface
receptors and in most cases, larger than the cells themselves.There, cells are not in a real 3-D environment, but rather, theyare on a 2-D surface wrapping around the microﬁber polymerswith a curvature that depends on the diameter of the polymers.It is plausible in a 2-D environment, where only one side of thecell body is in direct contact with the surface, that receptorclustering at the attachment site may be induced; on the otherhand, the receptors for growth factors, cytokines, nutrientsand signals may be on the other sides that are directly exposedto the culture media. Perhaps cells may become partially
polarized. In the 3-D environment, the functional motifs on
the nanoﬁber scaﬀold surround the whole cell body in alldimensions. Thus growth factors may form a gradient in 3-Dnanoporous microenvironments.
In our search for additional functional motifs, we found
that a class of bone marrow homing peptides BMHP
7is one of
the most promising active motifs for stimulating adult mouseneural stem cell (NSC) adhesion and diﬀerentiation.
7This
observation suggests a new class of designer self-assemblingpeptides for 3-D cell biology studies.
Self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds
Most polymer biomaterial ﬁbers are many micrometres indiameter. The cells are attached to the microﬁbers with a
Fig. 9 Molecular and schematic models of the designer peptides and of
the scaﬀolds. Direct extension of the self-assembling peptide sequence by
adding diﬀerent functional motifs. Light turquoise cylinders represent
the self-assembling backbone and the yellow, pink, and tan lines
represent various functional peptide motifs. Molecular model of a self-
assembling peptide nanoﬁber with functional motifs ﬂagging from both
sides of the double b-sheet nanoﬁbers. Either few or more functionalized
and active peptide can be mixed at the same time. The density of these
functionalized peptides can be easily adjusted by simply mixing them in
various ratios, 1 : 1 to 1 :1 000 000 or more before the assembling step.
They then will be part of the self-assembled scaﬀold.
2786 |Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2780–2790 This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlinecurvature. The scales of micro and nano diﬀer by several
orders of magnitude. The importance of nanoscale becomesobvious in 3-D cell cultures. It is clearly visible in the SEMimages that the cells embedded in the self-assembling peptidenanoﬁber biological scaﬀolds are in a true 3-D environment(Fig. 9).
6–9Here, the cells and cell clusters interact intimately
with the extracellular matrix, which cells make on their own
over time during cell growth and diﬀerentiation. Since thescaﬀolds are made mostly of water, B99.0–99.5% water with
0.5%–1% peptide, cells can migrate freely without hindrance,just as ﬁsh swim freely in a seaweed forest.
Likewise, another self-assembling peptide, KLD12
(Ac-KLDLKLDLKLDL-NH
2), was used to culture primary
bovine chondrocytes (Fig. 10).22The chondrocytes not only
maintained their phenotype but also produced abundant type IIcollagen and glycosaminoglycan. Previously, it was knownthat chondrocytes dediﬀerentiate into ﬁbroblast cell types and
no longer produce type II collagen and glycosaminoglycans in
coated 2D cell cultures. This showed the critical importance of3D culture using a simple self-assembling peptide nanoﬁberscaﬀold.
These new self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber biological scaf-
folds have become increasingly important not only in studying3-D spatial behaviors of cells, but also in developingapproaches for a wide range of innovative medical techno-logies including regenerative medicine and controlled drugrelease (Fig. 11). One example is the use of peptide scaﬀoldsto support neurite growth and diﬀerentiation, neural stem cell
diﬀerentiation, cardiac myocytes, and bone and cartilage cell
cultures. The peptide scaﬀolds from RADA16-I andRADA16-II formed nanoﬁber scaﬀolds in physiologicalsolutions that stimulated extensive rat neurite outgrowthand active synapse formation on the peptide scaﬀold.
21The
peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀold has been injected into a hamster’sbrain to reconnect the severed optical track, which restoredanimal vision
31because the peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀold encouraged
abundant neural cell migration and high-density neuronsynapses. This observation stimulated and inspired furtherexperiments to directly repair the brain of animals. It may
perhaps be possible to also repair various forms of human
brain damage, stroke and aging after extensive clinical trialstudies.
In addition, the same peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀold was also
found to be a superb material for stopping bleeding in severaltissues in only 10–20 s.
32These examples are direct applica-
tions of self-assembling peptide materials to medical areas.
Additional experiments using skin cells also showed that the
peptide scaﬀold stimulated keratinocyte and ﬁbroblast migra-tion in an in vitro wound healing model study.
33This study
suggests that the peptide scaﬀold may also be useful not only
for skin wound care, but also useful for cosmetics to stimulate
cell migration onto skin surface.
Designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds
for controlled molecular drug release
When one examines the peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀold under
SEM and AFM, it is apparent that the self-assemblingpeptides form an ordered 3D scaﬀold with pores ranging
from 5–200 nanometres.3,6–9The nanopore sizes are similar
to the size of most small molecular drugs and thera-peutic proteins. This observation suggests that scaﬀolds may
be useful for controlled and sustained molecular release
(Fig. 11).
When some small molecules were encapsulated in the peptide
nanoﬁber scaﬀolds, these small molecules indeed releasedslowly depending on their characteristics.
34These observa-
tions inspired us to directly encapsulate protein moleculessince proteins are increasingly becoming eﬀective therapeutics(for example, insulin and monoclonal antibodies).
35The proteins
showed a sustained release, mostly depending on the protein’smolecular size and shape. The smaller proteins, such as lysozyme(molecular weight = 14 KDa), release faster than antibodies
which are about 10 times larger (molecular weight = 150 KDa)
35
(Fig. 12).
Fig. 10 From designer peptide to scaﬀold to tissues. (a) Active
synapses on the peptide surface. Primary rat hippocampal neurons
form active synapses on peptide scaﬀolds. The confocal images shownbright discrete green dot labeling indicative of synaptically active
membranes after incubation of neurons with the ﬂuorescent lipophilic
probe FM-143. FM-143 can selectively trace synaptic vesicle turnover
during the process of synaptic transmission. The active synapses on the
peptide scaﬀold are fully functional, indicating that the peptide
scaﬀold is a permissible material for neurite outgrowth and active
synapse formation. (b) Adult mouse neural stem cells embedded in 3D
scaﬀold (image courtesy of Fabrizio Gelain). (c) Brain damage repair
in hamster. The peptide scaﬀold was injected into the optical nerve
area of brain that was ﬁrst severed with a knife (image courtesy of
Rutledge Ellis-Behnke). The gap was sealed by the migrating cells after
a few days. A great number of neurons form synapses. (d) Peptide
KLD12 (KLDLKLDLKLDL), chondrocytes in the peptide scaﬀold
and cartilage. The chondrocytes stained with TB showing abundant
GAG production (left panel) and antibody to type II collagen
demonstrating abundant Type II collagen production (right panel).
A piece of pre-molded cartilage with encapsulated chondrocytes in the
peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀold. The cartilage formed over a 3–4 week
period after the initial seeding of the chondrocytes (image courtesy of
John Kisiday). (e) Von Kossa staining showing transverse sections
of primary osteoblast cells on HA-PHP-RADA16-I self-assembling
peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀold. Scale bar = 0.1 mm. The intensely stained
black areas represent bone nodules forming (image courtesy of Maria
Bokhari).
This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 C h e m .S o c .R e v . , 2010, 39, 2780–2790 |2787
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View OnlineFurthermore, the release proﬁles can be ﬁne-tuned since
lower concentrations of peptides form lower density nanoﬁberscaﬀolds, which have larger pores. On the other hand, higher
concentrations of peptide form higher density nanoﬁber scaf-
folds, which have smaller pores (Fig. 13).
In an analogy, the movement of particles through the scaﬀold
can be compared to a rabbit running through grass. If amplifyingthe nanoﬁber ( B5 nanometres in diameter) 10 million times, the
dimension is similar to a single blade of grass (to 5 millimetres). Arabbit in the grassland runs at diﬀerent speeds due to thehindrance of the grass density. The denser the grass, the slowerthe rabbit moves (higher concentration of scaﬀold). The lessdense the grass, the faster the rabbit can run.
Chen Pu and his colleagues also used peptide scaﬀolds to
encapsulate the hydrophobic anticancer drug ellipticine.
36They
showed that the peptides stabilized the drug and increased itseﬃcacy since the non-stabilized ellipticine degraded quickly,thus losing its potency. One of the peptides, EFK16-IIs stabi-lized neutral ellipticine molecules and ellipticine microcrystals.
36
Since many anticancer drugs are either not water-soluble or areunstable in water, their ﬁndings could be further developed for
eﬀective anticancer drug delivery.
Designer peptide scaﬀolds for bone cells and 3-D
migration
The designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds have
been shown to be an excellent bi ological material for 3-D cell
cultures and to be capable of stimulating cell migration into thescaﬀold.
8,9We developed several peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds
designed speciﬁcally for osteoblasts.8We designed one of the pure
self-assembling peptide scaﬀolds, RADA16-I, through direct
coupling to short biologically ac tive motifs. The motifs included
osteogenic growth peptide ALK (ALKRQGRTLYGF) bone-cellsecreted-signal peptide, ost eopontin cell adhesion motif DGR
(DGRGDSVAYG) and 2-unit R GD binding sequence PGR
(PRGDSGYRGDS). The new peptide scaﬀolds are made bymixing the pure RADA16-I and designer peptide solutions, andthe molecular integration of the mixed nanoﬁber scaﬀolds wasexamined using AFM. Compared to pure RADA16-I scaﬀold, itwas found that these designer peptide scaﬀolds signiﬁcantlypromoted mouse pre-osteoblas t MC3T3-E1 cell proliferation.
Moreover, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and osteocalcin
secretion, which are early and late markers for osteoblastic diﬀeren-
tiation, were also signiﬁcantly increased, thus demonstrating
that the designer, self-assemblin g peptide scaﬀolds promoted the
proliferation and osteogenic diﬀerentiation of MC3T3-E1.
Under identical culture medium conditions, confocal images
unequivocally demonstrated that the designer PRG peptidescaﬀold stimulated cell migration into the 3D scaﬀold(Fig. 14).
7,8Without the modiﬁed active motif, cells stayed
in the same scaﬀold. These observations will likely stimulatefurther research studying cell migration in 3D under well-deﬁnedconditions since the designer scaﬀolds can be ﬁne-tuned and
Fig. 11 Schematic illustration of the molecular releases from the
designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁbers scaﬀolds. Stacked thin
lines in the upper left represent the individual peptides. The black
lines represent the peptide nanoﬁbers. The drugs, proteins and
DNA/RNA are represented by various shapes and colors embedded
in the peptide nanoﬁbers scaﬀold.
Fig. 12 Molecular representation of lysozyme, trypsin inhibitor,
BSA, and IgG as well as of the ac-(RADA) 4-CONH 2peptide mono-
mer and of the peptide nanoﬁber. Color scheme for proteins and
peptides: positively charged (blue), negatively charged (red), hydro-
phobic (light blue). Protein models were based on known crystal
structures.
Fig. 13 The release proﬁles for lysozyme and IgG through hydrogels
of diﬀerent peptide nanoﬁber densities. Hydrogels consisted of self-
assembling peptide ac-(RADA) 4-CONH 2with concentrations of 0.5%
w/v (ﬁlled triangles), 1.0% w/v (hollow squares), and 1.5% w/v (ﬁlled
circles). Release experiments were performed in PBS, pH 7.4 at room
temperature. Data points represent the average of 5 samples with
calculated standard deviations less than 12%.
2788 |Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2780–2790 This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlinewell controlled. This is in sharp contrast to current cell culture
conditions using collagens and Matrigel that contain unknowningredients and thus make it diﬃcult to reproduce experi-mental results. Fig. 15
Collagen production without extra addition
of soluble growth factors
Extracellular matrix protein production is crucial for regene-
rative medicine and tissue engineering. If cells are providedwith a hospitable environment, cells typically produce their
own extracellular matrix proteins, including various collagens.
Most current studies have focused on using soluble growthfactors to stimulate extracellular matrix protein (includingcollagen) production. However, we have demonstrated thatdesigner peptide scaﬀolds containing the active motifs of2-unit RGD binding sequence PRG (PRGDSGYRGDS)and laminin cell adhesion motif PDS (PDSGR) can equallystimulate production of collagen without extra addition of solublegrowth factors. RGD and laminin have been previously shownto promote speciﬁc biological activities including periodontalligament ﬁbroblasts adhesion, proliferation and proteinproduction. Compared to the pure RADA16 peptide scaﬀold,
we here show that these designer peptide scaﬀolds signiﬁcantly
promote human periodontal ligament ﬁbroblasts to proliferateand migrate into the scaﬀolds (for B300mm in 2 weeks).
Moreover these peptide scaﬀolds signiﬁcantly stimulatedperiodontal ligament ﬁbroblasts to produce extracellular matrixproteins without using extra a dditional growth factors. Immuno-
ﬂuorescent images clearly demonstrated that the cells embeddedin the peptide scaﬀolds were almost completely covered withtype I and type III collagens (Fig. 16), which are the mainprotein components of periodontal ligaments. These resultssuggest that these designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber
scaﬀolds may be useful for promoting wound healing, especiallyperiodontal ligament tissue regeneration, without the additionof extra growth factors. Beyond accelerating wound healing,
stimulation of various collagen productions without soluble
growth factors may also have implications in the cosmeticﬁeld. If we can design cream and hydrogel materials that can
Fig. 14 A laser confocal scanning microscopy image of human
endothelial cell 3D migration. It shows that the cell migrated several
hundred micrometres into the peptide scaﬀold. The 3D culture system
is more realistic for real body 3D environment, in sharp contrast to the
conventional 2D artiﬁcial culture system (image courtesy of Akihiro
Horii and Xiumei Wang).
Fig. 15 Human endothelial cell unidirectional migration in responding
to functionalized peptide scaﬀolds. (A) Schematic illustrations of cell
directional migration. (a) Clear-boundary-sandwich cell migration
assay. (b) Directional migration induced by functional motifs. (B) Phase
contrast microscopy images of HUVECs seeded on peptide scaﬀolds:
(a) RAD/PRG; (b) RAD/KLT; (c) and (d) RADA16-I, and ﬂuorescent
SYTOX green nuclear staining for (e) RAD/PRG; (f) RAD/KLT;
(g) and (h) RADA16-I. Cells directionally migrated from RADA16-I
to RAD/PRG (c and g) and RAD/KLT (d and h). The scale bar is
100mm for all panels (image courtesy of Xiumei Wang).
Fig. 16 Type I and Type III Collagens production without extra
addition of soluble growth factors from periodontal ligament ﬁbro-
blasts. The ﬂuorescent immunostaining images of periodontal ligament
ﬁbroblasts on the diﬀerent scaﬀolds after a 6 week culture. Fluorescent
immunostaining with Anti-collagen type I and Alexa ﬂuor-488 goat
anti-rabbit IgG for collagen type I (green) in (A1) RADA16, (B1)
PRG and (C1) PDS. PDS, and Anti-collagen type III and Alexa ﬂuor
594 goat anti-mouse IgG for collagen type III (red) in (A2) RADA16,
(B2) PRG and (C2) PDS. The ratio of designer PRG/PDS to RADA16
scaﬀold is 1 : 9. The scale bar represents 100 mm for all images (image
courtesy of Yoshiyuki Kumada).
This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010 C h e m .S o c .R e v . , 2010, 39, 2780–2790 |2789
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Onlinestimulate collagen production, it may facilitate skin to produce
collagens thus regenerating youthful skin texture.
Designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds
for reparative, regenerative medicine and tissue
engineering
Designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaﬀolds have a
wide spectrum of uses in addition to 3D cell culture. Bokhari
and colleagues in the UK produced a peptide hydrogel–polyHIPE polymer hybrid material to enhance osteoblastgrowth and diﬀerentiation.
39Richard Lee and his colleagues
at Harvard Medical School used the scaﬀolds to promoteangiogenesis.
40When they injected the scaﬀold into mouse
heart muscle, the peptide nanoﬁbers created intramyocardialmicroenvironments for endothelial cells.
41Moreover, they
also showed that the local myocardial IGF-1 delivery withbiotinylated peptide nanoﬁbers improved cell therapy for myo-cardial infarction in mice.
42These studies suggest the peptide
scaﬀolds may be useful in the future for healthcare technology.
As time progresses, more and more regenerative medicine
studies and clinical trials using the designer peptide nanoﬁberscaﬀolds will likely become available.
Concluding remarks
Leonardo da Vinci stated over 550 years ago ‘‘When natureﬁnishes to produce its own species, man begins using naturalthings in harmony with this very nature to create an inﬁnity of
species’’. Although we have created many molecular species
using natural amino acids, there is no doubt that inﬁnitelymore will come.
Susan Lindquist of MIT also said eloquently, ‘‘About 10 000
years ago, humans began to domesticate plants and animals.Now it’s time to domesticate molecules’’. Indeed, we are just atthe beginning of domesticating and designing numerous com-pletely new molecules and new biological materials with deﬁnedand desired functionalities.
Human civilizations are usually divided according to the
materials that dominate in the society: the Stone Age, the
Bronze Age, the Iron Age, the Plastic age and the Silicon age.
The new designer materials age is now upon us. The designerbiological materials space is wide open and limited only by ourimaginations.
References
1 S. Zhang, C. Lockshin, A. Herbert, E. Winter and A. Rich,
EMBO. J. , 1992, 11, 3787–3797.
2 S. Zhang, T. Holmes, C. Lockshin and A. Rich, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A. , 1993, 90, 3334–3338.
3 S. Zhang, C. Lockshin, R. Cook and A. Rich, Biopolymers , 1994,
34, 663–672.
4 S. Zhang, Biotechnol. Adv. , 2002, 20, 321–339.
5 S. Zhang, T. Holmes, M. DiPersio, R. O. Hynes, X. Su and
A. Rich, Biomaterials , 1995, 16, 1385–1393.
6 S. Zhang, F. Gelain and X. Zhao, Semin. Cancer Biol. , 2005, 15,
413–420.7 F. Gelain, D. Bottai, A. Vescovi and S. Zhang, PLoS One , 2006, 1,
e119.
8 A. Horii, X. M. Wang, F. Gelain and S. Zhang, PLoS One , 2007, 2,
e190.
9 X. Wang, A. Horii and S. Zhang, Soft Matter , 2008, 4, 2388–2395.
10 S. Zhang and A. Rich, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 1997, 94,
23–27.
11 M. Altman, P. Lee, A. Rich and S. Zhang, Protein Sci. , 2000, 9,
1095–1105.
12 S. Zhang, L. Yan, M. Altman, M. La ¨ssle, H. Nugent, F. Frankel,
D. Lauﬀenburger, G. M. Whitesides and A. Rich, Biomaterials ,
1999, 20, 1213–1220.
13 S. Vauthey, S. Santoso, H. Gong, N. Watson and S. Zhang, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 2002, 99, 5355–5360.
14 S. Santoso, W. Hwang, H. Hartman and S. Zhang, Nano Lett. ,
2002, 2, 687–691.
15 G. von Maltzahn, S. Vauthey, S. Santoso and S. Zhang, Langmuir ,
2003, 19, 4332–4337.
16 S. J. Yang and S. Zhang, Supramol. Chem. , 2006, 18, 389–396.
17 A. Nagai, Y. Nagai, H. Qu and S. Zhang, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. ,
2007, 7, 2246–2252.
18 U. Khoe, Y. L. Yang and S. Zhang, Macromol. Biosci. , 2008, 8,
1060–1067.
19 U. Khoe, Y. L. Yang and S. Zhang, Langmuir , 2009, 25,
4111–4114.
20 M. Caplan, E. Schwartzfarb, S. Zhang, R. D. Kamm and
D. A. Lauﬀenburger, Biomaterials , 2002, 23, 219–227.
21 T. Holmes, S. Delacalle, X. Su, A. Rich and S. Zhang, Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 2000, 97, 6728–6733.
22 J. Kisiday, M. Jin, B. Kurz, H. Hung, C. Semino, S. Zhang and
A. J. Grodzinsky, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 2002, 99,
9996–10001.
23 S. Zhang and M. Altman, React. Funct. Polym. , 1999, 41, 91–102.
24 D. Marini, W. Hwang, D. Lauﬀenburger, S. Zhang and
R. D. Kamm, Nano Lett. , 2002, 2, 295–299.
25 H. Yokoi, T. Kinoshita and S. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. , 2005, 102, 8414–8419.
26 L. Pauling, Nature of the Chemical Bond and the Structure of
Molecules and Crystals: An Introduction to Model StructuralChemistry , Cornell Univ. Press, Ithaca NY, 3rd edn, 1960.
27 Z. Luo, X. Zhao and S. Zhang, PLoS One , 2008, 3, e2364.
28 Z. Luo, X. Zhao and S. Zhang, Macromol. Biosci. , 2008, 8,
785–791.
29 A. Rich and D. R. Davies, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 1956, 78, 3548–3549.
30 G. Felsenfeld and D. R. Davies, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 1957, 79,
2023–2024.
31 R. G. Ellis-Behnke, Y. X. Liang, S. W. You, D. Tay, S. Zhang, K.
-F. So and G. Schneider, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 2006, 103,
5054–5059.
32 R. G. Ellis-Behnke, Y. X. Liang, D. K. C. Tay, P. W. F. Kau,
G. E. Schneider, S. Zhang, W. Wu and K. -F. So, Nanomed.:
Nanotechnol., Biol. Med. , 2006, 2, 207–215.
33 A. Schneider, J. A. Garlick and C. Egles, PLoS One , 2008, 3,
e1410.
34 Y. Nagai, L. D. Unsworth, S. Koutsopoulos and S. Zhang,
J. Controlled Release , 2006, 115, 18–25.
35 S. Koutsopoulos, L. D. Unsworth, Y. Nagai and S. Zhang, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
, 2009, 106, 4623–4628.
36 S. Y. Fung, H. Yang and P. Chen, PLoS One , 2008, 3, e1956.
37 S. Zhang, Nat. Biotechnol. , 2003, 21, 1171–1178.
38 S. Zhang, Nat. Biotechnol. , 2004, 22, 151–152.
39 M. A. Bokhari, G. Akay, S. Zhang and M. A. Birch, Biomaterials ,
2005, 26, 5198–5208.
40 D. A. Narmoneva, O. Oni, A. L. Sieminski, S. Zhang, J. P. Gertler,
R. D. Kamm and R. T. Lee, Biomaterials , 2005, 26, 4837–4846.
41 M. E. Davis, J. P. M. Motion, D. A. Narmoneva, T. Takahashi,
D. Hakuno, R. D. Kamm, S. Zhang and R. T. Lee, Circulation ,
2005, 111, 442–450.
42 M. E. Davis, P. C. H. Hsieh, T. Takahashi, Q. Song, S. Zhang,
R. D. Kamm, A. J. Grodzinsky, P. Anversa and R. T. Lee, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 2006, 103, 8155–8160.
2790 |Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2780–2790 This journal is /C13cThe Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by MIT (BLC) on 11 October 2010
Published on 03 June 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/B921448H
View Online