Polish J. Environ. Stud. Vol. 15, No. 2 (2006), 311-316
Original Research
Estimation of Biomass Amount and Sorption Capacity 
for Technological Control of the Biosorption Process
V . Ra čys1, I. Val ūnas1, M. Dapkie nė2*
1Kaunas University of Technology, Radvil ėnų pl. 19, LT-50254, Kaunas, Lithuania  
2Lithuanian University of Agriculture. Student ų 11, LT-53361, Akademija, Kaunas district, Lithuania
Received: June 6, 2005
Accepted: September 29 , 2005
Abstract
The paper describes two modified methods to determine the main parameters of the biosorption system. 
One of them – biomass amount, is an important technological parameter that is needed for technological 
calculations of the equipment, for the evaluation of oxidation potential and biomass growth in accordance 
with decomposed pollutants, etc. Typically, VSS (volatile suspended solids) are used as a measure of mi -
croorganisms, but accurate evaluation of the organic part of biomass on the sorbent surface is complicated. Thermal investigation methods are based on different sorbent and biomass burning temperatures and the 
obtained results are suitable for biosorption process control. 
Another important parameter is sorption capacity of the sorbent used in the process. The theoretical 
adsorption capacity of the activated carbon is usually estimated for a particular contaminant. The method, 
which in this case involves use of oil products, has been modified for the purpose of evaluation of this pa -
rameter. Quantitative analysis of oil products is quite complicated and time consuming. Therefore a colored and stable organic compound of large molecular size has been chosen. Concentration of this compound in 
spirit solution has been quickly and exactly estimated with a photoelectrocolorimeter . 
Keywords:  biosorption, amount of biomass, sorbent, sorption capacity, technological control
*Corresponding author; e-mail: dmidona@info.lzuu.ltIntroduction
Application of biosorption systems has started to 
meet the rising environmental standards for treated 
wastewater. The term “biosorption” is used here for a short description of the complex of granulated activated carbon and microorganisms (biologically activated sys
-
tem). Sorption, oxidation of pollutants and regeneration of the sorbent take place in such a system. Systems of granulated activated carbon are applied for removal of heavy metals from water [1]. They are distinguished for catalytic characteristics when ozonation removes or
-
ganic carbon [2]. At the same time; biologically activat -
ed carbon has proven to be useful in removal of stable organic compounds of difficult biochemical disintegra -
tion [3, 4], as well as dyeing materials [5, 6, 7], gas [8] and volatile organic compounds [9] from wastewater.  In these systems the sorbent serves as a basis for micro
-
organism culture attachment and a means for concentra -
tion of the dissociated compounds. This complex sys -
tem [10] is more stable and resistant to environmental changes and fluctuations of pollutants. However, due to complex technological control the biosorption systems are not widely spread and their investigation is limited to laboratory conditions. Dynamics of biomass varia
-
tion in the course of technological wastewater treatment processes is one of the main control parameters that strongly influence efficiency of the process [11]. The problem arises due to the absence of proper estimation of biomass amount. Račys V . et al. 312
The agglomerate sorbent – biomass (active sludge) 
makes it impossible to use the common method for the es -
timation of active sludge concentration. The reason is that 
the biofilm cannot be properly separated from the sorbent. Some biomass would remain in the pores of the sorbent. Also, small particles of the sorbent in the sample of active sludge would determine substantial analysis errors. There
-
fore, literature has been reviewed to find other methods of biomass amount determination that are also suitable for es
-
timating biomass amount in biosorption systems. 
The suggested modified method for estimation of bio -
mass amount is one of the alternatives [12, 13]. In this method the amount of biomass is estimated by determin
-
ing its COD value. Nevertheless, this method is not good 
for the biosorption process as even very small amounts of sorbent give high COD values, which strongly influence 
the precision of the analysis.
Zabriskie and Humphrey described the method of bio -
mass amount estimation that is based on the fluorescence of cells [14]. Having lighted the medium with ultraviolet rays (366 nm), the nicotinamide-adenine-dinucleotide and nicotinamide-adenine-dinucleotide phosphate existing in cells fluorescate by radiating 460 nm length waves. How
-
ever, a big number of factors influence the exactitude of the method: temperature, pH, chemical composition of the me
-
dium and biochemical activity of cells. This method does not solve the problem of solid admixtures. At the same time it is very complex and insufficiently accurate. Colorimeter and biocolorimeter methods of biomass estimation also re
-
quire complex measuring equipment [15, 16]. 
A description of modified micro-Kjeldahl and Lawry 
method [17] for determining biomass is also found in scientific literature. This method joins the Kjeldahl and Lowry methods designed for estimating amounts of or
-
ganic nitrogen and proteins in the sample. These two com -
ponents are the main components in living cells, therefore determination of their amounts in the sample provides the possibility to calculate biomass amount. However, this technique has the following limitations: total organic ni
-
trogen is measured, not only that in biomass; in the case of proteins’ estimation the method requires careful standard
-
ization for any particular application; the colour is not strictly proportional to the concentration; incomplete and different degrees of reaction of sucrose, lipides, mono
-
saccharides and hexosamines with the reagent has been proved; the analysis can be impeded by higher concentra
-
tions of ammonium sulphate, sulfohydrylic compounds 
and phosphates. 
The estimation of biomass amount by means of fer -
ment activity tests [18, 19] is not sufficiently accurate as a vital capacity of microorganisms is determined by many factors that seldom remain constant for a long time. Quantitative RNA evaluation can be used for exact esti
-
mation of live biomass [19]; however, this requires com -
plex equipment. 
German scientists are currently occupied with the 
problem of estimation of biomass amount. Muller su -
pervises the project aimed at the creation and character -ization of resistivity sensors [20]. So-called impedance spectroscopy enables determination of biomass amount in the samples containing high amounts of biomass and other suspended particles. The technology is based on the property of the membranes of living cells to polarize and to create certain resistivity. The obtained curves of permittivity, 
εr, enable us to derive the cell concentra -
tion. However, the impedance spectroscopy technology is still in the initial stage and uses unique equipment. Therefore, application of this method in research re
-
mains impossible and other ways to solve this problem must be found. 
Sorption capacity of the sorbent is another important 
parameter for technological control. Usually sorption ca
-
pacity of sorbents is analyzed by using oil products (ISO 9377- 2:2000 (E)). However, quantitative estimation of oil products is quite complicated, the analysis is time consuming, analysis errors are determined by intermedi
-
ates of biochemical petroleum degradation. Therefore, having selected a colored compound that would have molecular size close to that of oil product compounds (Fig. 1) and using common means and equipment quick and accurate estimation of sorption capacity of sorbent is possible. 
Two activated carbons were used in this research: A 
and B. Carbon A is made from anthracite, using special technology for its activation. Carbon B is coco-carbon, which is made using special technology for its activation.
The objective of this research was to develop the 
methodology that enables us to estimate biomass amount in the system of activated carbon by means of application of fairly simple and recognized devices. Also, the ability to use the methodology in practice was checked. This was done with different systems with known quantities of sor
-
bent and known amounts of active sludge. Another objec -
tive was to adopt methodology for estimation of sorption capacity of activated carbon. This methodology is based on photocolorimetry. 
The following tasks were set for estimation of biomass 
amount:1. to determine thermal dissociation dynamics for acti
-
vated carbon A in chosen temperature interval;
2. to determine thermal dissociation dynamics for active 
sludge in the same temperature interval;
3. to determine temperature points/intervals, when the 
amounts of both components are unvarying;
4. to check the ability for practical use.
The object of this research was the amount of biomass 
in agglomerate active sludge-activated carbon (biologi -
cally activated system – BAS).
Fig. 1. Molecular structure of red formazane.Estimation of Biomass Amount... 313
The following tasks were set for investigation of sorp -
tion capacity:
1. to select a stable chromatic organic compound;2. to calibrate a graph of its concentration;3. to use the chosen sorbent in the investigation of sorp
-
tion capacity.The object of this research was sorption capacity of the 
sorbent used in the biosorption process in active sludge-
activated carbon agglomerate.  
Methods
Biomass Amount Estimation
The equipment needed for the experimental estimation 
of biomass amount are a muffle furnace, ceramic melting pots and a desiccator.
Analytical scale is used to weigh 50 g of activated 
carbon, which is dried at 105
0C until stable mass. Af -
ter that the carbon is heated at the following tempera -
tures: 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800 and 9000C. 
The obtained data shows significant mass changes in the temperature intervals 300-400
0C and 400-5000C. 
Therefore, these intervals are divided into smaller in -
tervals and the following sequence of temperatures ap -
pears: 200, 300, 350, 400, 430, 460, 500, 600, 700, 800 and 900
0C. 
At each temperature the carbon is kept until a stable 
weight is reached. After each heating the cooled off car -
bon is weighed and the burnt down part is calculated. 
Samples of active sludge are prepared. They are dried 
at the temperature of 1050C until stable mass and heated 
by using the same methods as that in the case of activated 
carbon samples. 
Theoretical thermograms are shown in Fig. 2. Their 
character was predicted in advance, i.e. the curves were assumed to have three regions. These regions would rep
-
resent temperature intervals when dissociation of both components does not take place, when dissociation takes place for both components and when both components are 
completely dissociated. Sorption Capacity Estimation
The equipment and reagents used for sorption capac -
ity investigation are as follows:
- spirituous solution of red formazane;
- centrifuge;
- centrifuge test tubes of 11ml useful volume 
- photoelectrical colorimeter;
- tube shaker;
- 0,5 cm length cells;
- flask of 250 ml;
- flasks of 50 ml.
Calibration Curve
A calibration curve is developed by using operating 
solution of formazane. 
A series of standard solutions is prepared, in which 
concentrations of red formazane per 1 l of ethyl spirit are 50, 40, 30, 20, 10, 5 and 2 mg. Optical density of the solu
-
tions is measured by using a photoelectrical colorimeter at wavelength of 490 nm (blue filter) and by using cells of 0.5 cm length. Calibration curve of the dependency of optical density of solutions on their concentration mg/l is drawn (Fig. 3). The curve is straightened. Correlation coefficient R
2 = 0.9936 shows strong relation between 
the obtained dependency and the straightened curve, and the possibility to use it for estimation of red formazane concentration mg/l according to optical density of the solution. 
This method was used to determine sorption capaci
-
ties of activated carbons A and B and of biologically activated systems (BAS). Red formazane operating so
-
lution of 50 mg/l concentration was prepared for the in -
vestigation of sorption capacity. Adsorption experiment was done under three different conditions: clean and dried activated carbons A and B, BAS-A and BAS-B, dried at 105
0C, and non-dried BAS-A and BAS-B. Then 
5 ml of operating solution was added to all samples and the tubes were shaken for 30 minutes. After that the op
-
erating solution was poured and centrifuged at 4000 ro -
tations/min and its optical density was measured with Fig. 2. Theoretical thermograms of activated carbon and active 
sludge.  1 – thermogram of activated carbon; 2 – thermogram of 
biomass; 3 – temperature interval for heating of samples.Fig. 3. Calibration curve of red formazane.Račys V . et al. 314
photoelectrical colorimeter. The experiment was repeat -
ed five times. 
Results and Discussion
Biomass Content Investigation
After the experiment the obtained data was plotted 
(Fig. 4).
The comparison shows that theoretical curves (Fig. 
2) and those developed during the experiments are analo -
gous. The obtained results are used to deduce formulae 
for calculation of biomass content.
The equation that describes the first region of activat -
ed carbon curve was selected:
        y1 = 3·10-7 t2 – 0.0002 t + 100 (1)
where: 
y1 - residual of activated carbon % in the temperature in -
terval 100-4000C, t - temperature, 0C.
The correlation coefficient of this equation is 
R12=0.98.
The following equation describes the third region of 
active sludge curve:
        y2 = 2·10-6 t2 – 0.0045 t +31.93 (2)
where: 
y2 - residual of active sludge % in the temperature interval 
350-9000C,  t - temperature 0C.
The correlation coefficient of this equation is 
R22=0.96.
The percentage weight loss at each temperature for 
activated carbon A and biomass has been determined on 
the basis of five repetitions. The difference of obtained meanings is ± 5%. This allows for the presumption that 
the weigh ratio of carbon A after heating at different temperatures is reliable and constant. A similar situation is reported in the case of active sludge. This results in formulae that enable us to calculate organic part of bio
-
mass in the sample.
   (3)
where: 
morg - organic part of biomass, g
 - part of biomass in the mixture, dried at 1050C,  
g
 - residual of biomass (mineral part), having heated 
the mixture at 9000C, g
C - constant
        (4)
       (5)
where:
m105, m350, m900 - sample weight after heating at the tem -
peratures of 105, 350 and 900 0C, respectively, g.
A, B, D, E - constants
Following the accepted presumptions equations (1) 
and (2) can be used to calculate the constants A, B and 
C:
 (6)
 (7)
 (8)
Constant D can be calculated using experimental data 
and following the presumptions mentioned above:
       (9)
Constant E is obtained by deriving the equation (4):
        (10)
It should be indicated that these constants have similar 
values only for the same type of active sludge and acti -
vated carbon. Fig. 4. Experimental thermograms of active sludge and activated 
carbon A.Estimation of Biomass Amount... 315
Sorption Capacity Investigation
Graphical image of the results, received during the ex -
periment, is shown in Fig. 5.
Two biologically activated carbons BAS-A and 
BAS-B were used for the investigations. Weights of 
the samples were 0.05 g. Sorption capacity of clean, uncovered with biomass and unused samples of acti
-
vated carbon equaled 100% (AC-A and AC-B). The experiments established sorption capacity of AC-A to be 4.24*10
-3 g/g of red formazane, and that of AC-B 
– 6.1*10-3 g/g. Initial sorption capacity of AC-B was 
30.5% higher than that of AC-A. Results of biomass covered and dried samples investigation showed that sorption capacity of BAS-A samples stayed almost at the same level as the initial sorption capacity, while that of BAS-B decreased more than five times (BAS-A (1) and BAS-B (1)). During the experiment with the samples that had not been thermally treated, i.e. live biomass on the sorbent, sorption capacity of BAS-A samples increased by two fifths in comparison with initial sorption capacity of clean sorbent. At the same time sorption capacity of BAS-B made only one third of initial sorption capacity (BAS-A (2) and BAS-B (2)). These results show that during the biosorption process activated carbon A was regenerated by the film of microorganisms. During the process sorbent B was not regenerated, the stoppage of pores occurred and only one component – biomass – remained effective in the agglomerate of microorganisms and sorbent, while sorption charasteristics were lost. 
Conclusions
1. The experiments have confirmed that ashless mass of 
active sludge can be estimated by heating the sample at 350
0C, the value of which is used for calculating 
constants. 
2. The final heating temperature is 9000C; at this tem -
perature ash content of the mixture of activated carbon 
and active sludge is estimated.
3. Availability of total weights of the samples, heated at 
105, 350 and 9000C, makes it possible to calculate the organic part of biomass in the sample, ash content in 
the biomass at 6000C and mass of activated carbon. 
4. Examining the samples of clean sorbents distinguished 
sorbent B for higher sorption capacity.
5. Examining the samples of the sorbents, covered with 
live biomass (not dried sample), showed significantly 
higher sorption capacity of BAS-A.
6. During the process sorbent A is able to regenerate, to 
renew its sorption capacity, while sorbent B loses this property, the stoppage of sorbent pores occurs and only one part of the complex – biomass – remains ef
-
fective and useful for the process.
7. BAS-A is suitable for the biosorption process due to 
remaining sorption capacity, its biochemical regenera -
tion and development of the basis for microorganisms’ 
attachment. 
References
1. MOHAMED A. , WAYNE E.M., ABDO A.H, RAMU M.R., 
IPEK G. The use of nuthshell carbons in drinking water 
gilters for removal of trace metals. Water Research, 38 (4),  
1062, Feb 2004 .
2. FARIA P.C.C., ORFAO J.J.M., PEREIRA M.F.R. Miner -
alisation of coloured aqueous solutions by ozonation in the 
presence of activated carbon. Water Research. Article [in 
press].
3. DALMACIJA  B., TAMAS Z., MISKOVIC D. The bio -
sorption of selected pesticides from water by biologically activated carbon. Water Science and Technology, 
26 (9-11),  
1991, 1992 . 
4. TUMBAS I.I, DALMACIJA B., TAMAS Z., KARLOVIC 
E. Reuse of biologically regenerated activated carbon for 
phenol removal. Water Research, 32 (4), 1085, 1998 .
5. KARGI F., OZMIHCI S. Comparison of adsorption perfor -
mances of powdered activated sludge and powdered acti -
vated carbon for removal of turquoise blue dyestuff. Process 
Biochemistry, 40 (7), 2539, 2005 .
6. KARGI F., OZMIHCI S. Biosorption performance of pow -
dered activated sludge for removal of different dyestuffs. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 
35 (2-3), 267, 2004 .
7. WALKER G.M., WEATHERLEY L.R . Biological activated 
carbon treatment of industrial wastewater in stirred tank reac -
tors. Chemical Engineering Journal, 75 (3), 201, 1999 .
8. CHUNG  Y .C., LIN Y .Y ., TSENG C.P. Removal of high con -
centration of NH3 and coexistent H2S by biological activated 
carbon (BAC) biotrickling filter. Bioresource Technology , 
[in press].
9. DWIVEDI P., GAUR V ., SHARMA A., VERMA N. Com -
parative study of removal of volatile organic compounds by cryogenic condensation and adsorption by activated carbon 
fiber. Separation and Purification Technology, 
39 (1-2), 23, 
2004 .
10. ESA  M. Biodegradation and Treatment of Organic Environ -
mental Contaminants by Fluidized-Bed Enrichment Cul -
tures. Thesis for the degree of Doctor of Technology. Tam -
pere, 1997 . Fig. 5. Results of sorption capacity investigation.Račys V . et al. 316
11. MARQUEZ M.C., COSTA C. Biomass concentration in 
PACT process. Water Research, 30 (9), 2079, 1996 .
12. CONTRERAS E.M., BERTOLA N.C., GIANNUZZI L., 
ZARITZKY E. A modified method to determine biomass 
concentration as COD in pure cultures and in activated sludge systems. Water SA, 
28, 463, 2002 .
13. M ÜNCH E.V ., POLLARD P.C. Measuring bacterial bio -
mass-COD in wastewater containing particulate matter. Wa -
ter Research, 31 (10), 2550, 1997 .
14. ZABRISKIE D.W., HUMPHREY A.E. Estimation of Fer -
mentation Biomass Concentration by Measuring Culture 
Fluorescence. App.lied and Environmental Microbiology, 
337, 1978 .
15. AULENTA  F., BASSANI C., LIGTHART J., MAJONE M., 
TILCHE A. Calorimetry: a tool for assessing microbial ac -
tivity under aerobic and anoxic conditions. Water research, 
36 (5), 1297, 2002 .16. T ÜRKER  M. Development of biocalorimetry as a technique 
for process monitoring and control in technical scale fermenta -
tions. Thermochimica Acta, 419 (1-2), 73, 2004 .
17. SAPAN C.V ., LUNDBLAD R.L., PRICE N.C., Colorimet -
ric protein assay techniques. Biotechnology and app.lied biochemistry, 
29, 99, 1999 .
18. OVIEDO  M.D.C., SANCHEZ J.B., ALONSO J.M.Q. Enzy -
matic estimation of biosolids stability in aerobic digestion sys -
tems. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 36 (2-3), 191, 2005 .
19. BIZUKOJE E.L., LEDAKOWICZ S. Estimation of viable 
biomass in aerobic biodegradation processes of organic frac -
tion of municipal solid waste (MSW). Journal of Biotech -
nology, 101 (2), 165, 2003 .
20. Hamburg – Harburg University of Technology (TUHH). 
Micro Systems Technology (former Semiconductor Tech -
nology) Web Site, Germany, http://www.tu-harburg.de/mst/
english/forschung/muel_10.shtml .