J. Algal Biomass Utln.  2015, 6 (1): 1 5-25                       Growth performance of the marine microalgae Pavlova salina  and Dunaliella tertiolecta . 
ISSN: 2229 – 6905   
15 
  
 
 
Growth performance of the marine microalgae Pavlova salina  and Dunaliella tertiolecta  
using different commercially available fertilizers in natural seawater and inland saline 
ground water  
 
Rashad Barakoni,  Sadiqul Awal * Andrew Christie  
 
Primary Indus tries Department, Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE (NMIT) , Corner of Dalton Road and Cooper Street,  
Epping Victoria 3076 Australia. *Corresponding author: sadiqulawal@nmit.edu.au  
 
Abstract  
Pavlova salina  and Dunaliella tertiolecta  were cultivated using batch culture technique s to examine their growth performance 
with commercial agricultural fertilizers compared to the commonly  used but  expensive f/2 algae culture media.  P. salina  
demonstrated significantly  higher growth rates (as measured by determination of average cell densities) when provided with f/2 
media , but no growth when cultured using commercial fertilizers , namely Miracle -gro and Maxicrop. In contrast , the average cell 
density of D. tertiole cta was found to be significantly higher (P < 0.05) when cultured using commercial fertilizers , as opposed to  
f/2 media . Significant differences in lipid content were demonstrated  in the Maxicrop 2.25  ml fertilizer media compared to the 
other treatments (P < 0. 05). Finally, comparison s between natural sea water (NSW) and inland saline ground water (ISGW) have  
resulted in slightly  higher biomass increases  being observed for  the NSW treatments than the ISGW  treatments  (P < 0.05), but 
also demon strated the lucrativ e potential  of ISGW towards aquaculture  applications .    
 
Introduction  
The r ole of microalgae i n the primary productivity and the ecology of the planet and is well studied (Andersen, 2005), and 
consequently their essential roles in the aquaculture industry , where they are used directly for the feeding of molluscs, 
crustaceans and fish is likewise well documented ( Guedes et al.  2010; Brown, 2002; Lavens and Sorgeloos, 1996; and Lananan et 
al. 2013; and Richmond, 2004 ). Further, microalgae can provide several  different t ypes of biofuels (Chisti, 2007), and they are 
also widely cultivated commercially for human nutritional products.  The wide variety of roles that the microalgae can fulfill 
therefore explains why they are produced around the world in small - to medium -scale production systems, producing anywhere 
from tens to several hundreds of tons of biomass annually (Benemann, 2008).  
Valenzuela -Espinoza et al.  (1999) stated that  many culture mediums that contain an adequate concentration of nutrients have 
been developed to attain optimum growth rates of microalgae. These mediums have been investigated and developed as a result 
of many research projects in previous years by Guillard and Ryther (1962), Walne (1970), Provasoli (1971), and Guillard (1975) , 
with the aim of finding a low -cost alternative combination of nutrients that engenders optimum growth characteristics .   
 
Although there have been a variety of different media utilized for the culture of microalgae (including the exploitation of a erobic 
digests of cow and hen excretions, liquid extracts of reagent -grade marine salts and the use of agricultural fertilizers) 
(Valenzuela -Espinoza et al.  1999), by definition chemically defined fertilizers such as the commonly used f/2 solution are 
relatively expensive t o formulate, and therefore are a somewhat limiting factor in the development and maintenance of large scale 
algal production, which is necessary for commercial viability in a variety of contexts. It is therefore clear that less expensive 
nutrient sources a re desperately needed.  Cultivating live feed such as microalgae  and zooplankton such as rotifers and artemia 
comes with high establishment and maintenance costs, and can contribute up to 30% of an aquaculture facility’s total production 
budget, and is the refore considered one of the essential obstacles that mollusc  and crustacean larval production facilities face 
(Coutteau and Sorgeloos, 1992). Live feed costs could  be minimized by administering  a suitable high nutrient commercial 
fertilizer, which can be applied to the culture of various species of marine microalgae. Further, this implementation can enhance 
the growth of microalgae and live feed in aquaculture facilities and reduce the consumption of traditional media such as 
analytical grade inorganic sal ts.   
 
This study analyses the performance of two commercial agricultural -grade  fertilizers that are readily  available and relatively 
cheap  as culture mediums  for microalgae, and compares them  with the f/2 medium. The study also aims to demonstrate the 
relationship between culture conditions, nutrient uptake, lipid content and biomass production of the marine microalgae P. salina  
and D. tertiolecta using different commercial fertilizers. Further, the study will also investigate the growth performance of the  
best performed fertilizer from all microalgae treatments and compare it to the growth performances witnessed with Natural 
Seawater (NSW) and inland saline ground water (ISGW) extracted from a bore.  
 
Materials and Methods  
All cultures were grown under iden tical conditions at the Epping Campus of Northern Melbourne Institute of TAFE’s (NMIT) 
Live Feeds  Production Laboratory  from August to October 2013. Axenic cultures of Pavlova salina  and Dunaliella tertiolecta  
were sourced from the Australian National Alga e Culture Collection (CSIRO), and stock cultures were kept in full strength 
(33.6ppt salinity), non -axenic natural seawater.   
Small -scale batch culture s were maintained throughout the experiment . The investigation included two different  readily available  
comm ercial fertilizers (“Miracle –gro” and  “Maxicrop ”) that were sourced from a hardware store , while  f/2 algal boost was 
supplied by AusAqua in South Australia. The nutritional value of each of the mentioned fertilizers and the alga e boost are 
described in  detail  in Table 1. The best performing algae treatment was further investigated by culturing algae in  two different 
natural water sour ces; Natural Seawater (NSW) collected from  the Hobsons Bay precinct within Port Phillip Bay at  Port 
Melbourne , and inland  saline ground water (ISGW) , which was  sourced from a groundwater bore at Donald , 283 k ilometers 
north west of Victoria.  
Table 1: Composition of each of the products used to enrich the culture.  
Component  Maxicrop 
(mg/ ml) Miracle -gro 
(mg/ ml) Algae Boost f/2  
(mg/ ml) 
Total Nitrogen (N)  18.4 242 75 
Phosphorous (P)  4.8 56 5 
Potassium (K)  12.4 117 0 
Sulfur (S)  0.24 36 0 
Magnesium (Mg)  21.3 8 0 
Iron (Fe)  0.2 1.7 0 
Copper (Cu)  0.2 0.7 0.0098  
Zinc (Zn)  0.12 0.6 0.022  
Manganese (Mn)  0.12 0.5 0.018  
Cobalt (C o) 0 0 0.01 
Boron (B)  0.04 0.2 0 
Molybdenum (Mo)  0.0008  0.005  0.0063  
Sodium meta -silicate  - - 0 
Biuret (Max)  0.16 0 0 
Total Dissolved Solids   210 0 - 
Added Water  790 0 0 
 
Five different treatments were used as part of this experiment, including one concentration  (2.5g-l) of Miracle -gro, two different 
concentrations of Maxicrop (consisting of 5.5 ml.l-1 as described by the manufacturer and a lower concentration of 2.25 ml.l-1  to 
maximize transparency and examine the growth performance at a non -recom mended concentration) , one concentration of f/2 (at 1mL per flask) and a control, in which no additives were provided. All treatments (with the exception of the lower concentrat ion 
of Maxicrop that was utilized) were according to manufacturer’s instruction s. Triplicate culture s of each species for  each 
treatment were grown in 2L  Erlenmeyer flasks using autoclaved natural sea water.  
Cultures were kept indoors continuously under artificial day light supplied by cool -white fluorescent tubes at  an intensity of 4000 
Lux, which is the recommended light intensity for laboratory -based  microalgal  cultivation (FAO, 1996; Andersen, 2005; and 
Lananan et al.  2013). Continuous aeration was provided by an outdoor compressor  (Esam, Australia)  to deliver optimum levels 
of na tural air  for faster algal growth (Coutinho et al.  2006) and to provide  mixing and the elimination of deadspots . All flasks 
were maintained at a pH level of 8 – 8.5 using sodium bicarbonate (as recommended by Coutinho et al. 2006) and checked by 
using a calibrated Hanna Instruments pH 211 Microprocessor/pH meter. Since most  types of algae grow well at temperatures in 
the range of 17-22°C (Laing, 1991) , an electrical air heater and thermometer were used to maintain and monitor temperature 
within the constant  temperature room that the algae were stored in.  
Aeration of receiving water supplies took place for a period of at least two hours before inoculation, after which 40 ml of stock 
culture at a density of approximately 6 × 106 cells  ml-1 was added and allo wed to mix.  
Evaporation was corrected every 48 hours by the addition of diluent water , and salinity levels were maintained at  25ppt using a  
refractometer  (FAO, 1996; Andersen, 2005 ; and Chipchase & Awal, 2012;) and additions of measured amounts of sodium  
chloride (Cheetham Salts, Geelong, Victoria).  
Cultures were assessed every 48 hours by obtaining two counts of each flask, counting the number of cells per ml for each fla sk 
using a Neubauer hematocytometer slide under a compound microscope to obtain the  most accurate average culture biomass, in 
accordance with suggestions from several authors (Fulks & Main 1991; FAO, 1996; Andersen, 2005; and Lananan et al.  
2013).All data were recorded on Microsoft Excel (Seattle, Washington) spreadsheets to be analyzed later using analysis of 
variance (ANOVA).  
The most highly dense replicas of each treatment of algae  were selected to examine the lipid content . Initially, the microalgae 
from each treatment were harvested by centrifugation (FAO, 1996; Prommuak et al.  2012) , and cells deposited on the walls of 
the centrifuge tubes were scraped as paste and placed into a separate tube for weighing . Harvested algae paste was then placed in 
an oven (Thermoline Scientific, Wetherill Park, New South Wales, Australia ) at 60°C for 24 hours to dry. Each dry sample was 
then weighed and mixed at a rate of  5 ml of hexane to each 1g of dry cells. Homogenizer s and ultrasonicator s were also used to 
support the hexane in breaking down the cells before tubes were placed in a  refrigerator. Tu bes were still in the refrigerator to 
allow  the hexane to breakdown the cells and separate the lipid from the dry algae. Lipid content was then calculated using the 
following formula  (Lee at al., 1998) : 
Lipid content (%) = (Extracted lipid weight / Dried a lgal weight) × 100  
The best performed algae from all treatment s were  isolated and a strain was taken and examined for growth performance in 
ISGW and natural seawater in order to test which medium was more applicable for the best algal growth.  
As P. salina  and D. tertiol ecta were kept in culture units to grow, algae cells were counted rando mly for each of the treatment 
replicas. Counts were obtained every 48 hours and mean s were calculated and recorded to be statistically analyzed with one or 
two way ANOVA and graphed using Microsoft Excel 2010  (Seattle, Washington) .  
Results  
Natural seawater ( NSW ) and ISGW (inland saline ground water) ionic composition  
The ionic composition and concentrations of the major chemical compounds for both waters used throughout this study are 
shown in Table 2. There were some sign ificant and potentially very important differences in the samples analysed as part of this 
investigation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Table 2: The ionic composition of NSW sourced from Port Phillip Bay and IGSW sourced from  Donald in Victoria.  
Parameter  NSW concentration (mg/L)  ISGW concentration (mg/L)  
Sodium (Na)  10561  4520  
Calcium (Ca)  400 326 
Potassium (K)  380 28 
Magnesium (Mg)  1272  607 
Total Nitrogen (N)  0.38 0.6 
Ammonium (NH ₄) 0.05 0.09 
Nitrate -Nitrite  0.26 0.41 
Total Phosphorus  0.14 0.08 
Cadmium (Cd)  2.5×10-4 1.9×10-4 
Copper (Cu)  1.7×10-3 9.0×10-4 
Mercury (Hg)  1.3×10-4 8.0×10-5 
Nickel (Ni)  2.28×10-3 1.9×10-3 
Zinc (Zn)  9.13×10-3 8.0×10-3 
 
The mean growth performance o f P. salina  with f/2 media was significant ( P = 0.0001), being considerably higher than Maxicrop 
and Miracle -gro commercial fertilizers, however the fertilizers demonstrated the same growth as the control, which was not 
significantly different ( P = 0.6756) , as shown in Figure 1 . 
 
Figure 1 : Average growth performance of Pavlova salina  with different fertilizers in comparison to f/2 and control (ANOVA at 95% 
confidence P< 0.05 only with f/2 media).  
In the second experiment, the average cell density growth of  D. tertiolecta  with Maxicrop 2.25  ml concentration was 
significantly higher (P = 0.0103)  from day 9 on wards in comparison to other treatments , as demonstrated in Figure 3. In addition,  
growth was significant higher  (P = 0.0002)  for f/2 media , but perhaps  not as much as expected , while  Maxicrop performed 
considerably better after day 9, as shown in Figure 2 .    
Figure 2 : Average growth performance of Dunaliella tertiolecta  with different fertilizers in comparison to f/2 media and control (ANOVA 
at 95% con fidence P< 0.05 for both f/2 and fertilizers).  
The distinct elevation of cell densities of D. tertiolecta  was significant across  all nutrient treatments. This proved the potential 
commercial viability of these fertilizers for algae production on medium to large scales, and provided strong incentive for lipid 
extraction. The h ighest level of lipid content was found to be significant ( P = 0.0395)  in the  Maxicrop 2.25 ml concentration , 
while lowest levels were observed for f/2 media , as illustrated in Figure 3 .  
 
Figure 3 : Lipid content of D. tertiolecta , expressed as a percentage of cell dry weight (ANOVA at 95% confidence P< 0.05).  
 
Enormous biomass growth of D. tertiolecta  was revealed in the second experiment , and  initiated further investigations to 
discov er the viability of ISGW in comparison with NSW, considering each water source s’ ionic composition. However, D. 
tertiolecta  had resulted in significant ( P = 0.0114)  growth in ISGW, but NSW had an average of 20% higher production of cell 
biomass (as present ed in Figure 4 ).   
Figure 4 : Average cell biomass of D. tertiolecta  comparison between NSW, ISGW and control using fertilizer Maxicrop 2.25 ml 
concentration (ANOVA at 95% confidence P< 0.05).  
 
Two-way ANOVA s comparing P. salina  and D. tertiolecta  growth w ith the same enhanced  nutrient levels over 11 days 
demonstrated  highly significant differences ( P = 0.00216) of the various nutrients ’ impact on the growth of both marine 
microalgae species demonstrated in Figure 5 .       
 
Figure 5 : Relationship between P. salina  and D. tertiolecta  growth performance with different nutrients (ANOVA at 95% confidence P< 
0.05).  
Discussion   
The results of this investigation demonstrated significant differences between the growths of P. salina  treatment replicas with f/2 
media  and the commercial agriculture fertilizer media. This indicates that  the ionic composition of fertilizers , as could be 
expected, differ significantly  from the f/2 media , as the marine microalgae P. salina  required specific concentrations of macronutrients  and trace metals. However, most of the media tested during the course of this investigation have not been 
formulated with microalgal culture in mind, and therefore no attempt has been made to balance the relative concentrations of 
macronutrients needed sp ecifically for algal growth (Andersen, 2005). The growth performance of P. salina  with f/2 media was 
significant (P < 0.05), which has proven that a nitrogen:phosphorus (N:P) ratio of 16:1, with low concentrations (as described 
previously in Table 1)  is required for optimum growth. This indicates that agricultural fertilizers with N:P ratios at an average of 
4:1, with lower or higher concentrations of macronutrients m, may have  limited the growth of P. salina , and yield results that 
were not significantly di fferent ( P > 0.05 ) to that of the control treatment (as shown previously in Figure 1).  
Lopez -Ruiz et al.  (1999), Valenzuela -Espinoza et al.  (1999),  and Andersen (2005) have stated that lower nutrient levels have 
been found to enhance the growth of some ma rine microalgae species, but often quantities of major nutrients are reduced in 
medium formula tions . In contrast , Berges et al.  (2001) noted that higher levels of nitrogen and ammonium can be toxic to some 
marine microalgae, and speculated that this could be another reason that P. salina  didn’t grow well in Miracle -gro. On the other 
hand, Maxicrop nitrogen and ammonium levels were much lower than f/2, which also could have limited the growth of P. salina . 
This may be overcome by dilution factor of the conce ntrated fertilizer media. If Miracle -gro nitrogen concentrations were diluted 
(as the level of nitrogen present i s much higher than recommended)  this could be a possible solution. In contrast, Maxicrop, 
which was diluted by 50%, caused reduction s in the le vel of nitrogen far below the physiological requirements of P. salina . This 
revealed that levels of macronutrients, trace metals and salts found in the f/2 media were well within the optimum range for this 
particular algal species, unlike the situation wit h commercial fertilizers.  
Maxicrop 2.25  ml concentration showed the highest population cell count and growth rate in comparison to other cultures 
enriched with Miracle -gro and f/2; and the higher concentration of Maxicrop at 5.5  ml (as recommended by the manufacturer) did 
not perform as expected. However, this could be because the nutrient requirement for D. tertiolecta  is found in the diluted 
Maxicrop 2.25  ml media solution. In contrast to P. salina , this has proved that D. tertiolecta  has no specific req uirements, and it 
can tolerate a wide range of N:P ratios , but maximum cell biomass was obtained with Maxicrop 2.25  ml concentration with an 
N:P ratio at 4:1 ( P < 0.05). On the other hand, growth performance was also significant ( P < 0.05) for Maxicrop 5.5  ml, Miracle -
gro and f/2 mediums (clearly illustrated in Figure 2 ). The reason for this could be the absence of a rigid polysaccharide cell wall 
in Dunaliella , allowing it to tolerate extracellular osmotic pressure and a wide range of salinities (Wang and Lan, 2010).  Further 
investigation s were therefore  conducted by harvesting algal biomass on the 11th day of culture and extracting lipid contents from 
the biomass treatment of each medium. This resulted in various lipid percentages  being elucidated , with t he largest lipid content 
of 8.73% of dry weight (Figure 3 ) being obtained from 6 L Maxicrop 2.25  ml media. Previous studies from Guschina and 
Harwood (2006), Solovchenko et al.  (2008), and Pal et al.  (2011)  have shown that  lipid content of marine microalga e is highly 
influenced by external and internal environmental parameters such as light intensity, nutrient availability (mainly nitrogen) , 
salinity, temperature, pH, and culture age. This indicates that all parameters were at the perfect levels when consid ering the 
harvested biomass; nutrient availability could be considered an exception, though, since there was such variability between 
treatments resulting in different lipid percentages.  
The significant (P < 0.05) lipid content extracted from D. tertiolec ta cultivated in Maxicrop 2.25  ml media is potentially 
beneficial to aquaculture hatcheries, biodiesel manufacturers and the pharmaceutical industry, as it can cut down the cost of  live 
feed production in aquaculture hatchery operations and the other afore mentioned industries.   
Wang and Lan (2010) stated that lipid yields in microalgae cells did not significantly increase with higher phosphorus 
concentrations in the growth media. This statement may justify why the concentration of phosphorus within the Max icrop 2.25  
ml treatment was lowest compared to all other treatments. Wang and Lan (2010) shown that optimal lipid extraction was obtained 
with the following optimal macronutrient concentrations (mg/ ml) in the fertilizer;  sodium nitrate (0.35), potassium ph osphate 
(0.46), magnesium sulfate (0.0823) and iron chloride (0.0068). These figures show very low levels compared to the 
concentrations found in this study, however Maxicrop has been shown to have the lowest levels of macronutrients but the highe st 
levels  of salts . This indicated that lower levels of macronutrients didn’t influence lipid production but higher levels of salts can 
increase lipid yields.  
The significant results for the growth of D. tertiolecta  in experiment 2 and the potential of inland sali ne ground water have 
initiated interest for further examinations. Inland saline ground water (ISGW) and natural seawater (NSW) were comparable in 
terms of  growth performance using the best performed media (Maxicrop fertilizer at 2.25  ml concentration ). How ever, the growth 
pattern of D. tertiolecta  has shown similar or close growth profiles in both waters. There was significant ( P < 0.05) growth in 
both water treatments , with Maxicrop 2.25  ml nutrient comparing favourably  to control treatments without nutrie nt.  
It was expected that NSW will demonstrate better growth than ISGW because of the considerably higher levels of N, P and K 
typically encountered in this water source . Chipchase and Awal (2012) reported that artificial seawater with higher levels of 
macronutrients and lower levels of sulphate than ISGW enhanced the growth performance of marine microalgae. However, the growth of D. tertiolecta  in NSW was 19% higher than ISGW by day 11, as shown in Figure 5, which revealed that the ionic 
composition (such as salts and macronutrients) was the key difference.  
Smith and Barlow (1999) stated that ISGW has a potential advantage over NSW as the quality of seawater often changes 
significantly due to pollution and global warming, which would be a major influence t o the sterility of the microalgae culture 
media. These comparisons determined that D. tertiolecta  can reach maximum cellular densities in ISGW when compared to 
NSW, considering the cultivation period would be longer.  
ISGW has a wide range of potential adva ntages for the aquaculture of true marine microalgae. The fact these sources of ISGW 
are generally found in low rainfall regions, with inherent long sunny periods and warm environments, mean that they easily fu lfill 
most of the requirements for algal growt h. In contrast, the high cost of near shore sites, limited availability and maintenance may 
not be as viable for the microalgae culture facility of the future, which makes ISGW a viable and adequate source for the 
aquaculture industry.   
Valenzuela -Espinoz a et al.  (1999) reported that the production of Isochrysis aff. galbana  biomass and nitrate, phosphate and 
ammonium uptake were determined by using batch culture techniques for 7 days, comparing commercially used fertilizer and f/2 
media. It was found that  the average cellular density of the algae when grown in the agricultural fertilizer showed no significant 
difference from  that produced by  the f/2 media. Another study by Lananan et al.  (2013) investigated the effect of Conway and f/2 
media on the growth of various microalgae genera ( including Chlorella  sp., Dunaliella  sp., Isochrysis  sp., Chaetoceros  sp., 
Pavlova  sp. and Tetraselmis  sp.). It was found that the reproduction of Tetraselmis  sp., Dunaliella  sp. and Pavlova  sp. could be 
sustained longer in the  f/2 medium. Higher cell densities were achieved by the microalgal genera Dunaliella , Chlorella  and 
Isochrysis  in Conway medium. Different genera of microalgae had a preference for different types of cultivation media.   
The current study encountered a neg ative significant difference ( P < 0.05) in the relationship between f/2 and the different 
agricultural fertilizers used in this study for the growth of P. salina , thus resulting in the rejection of the null hypothesis, and a 
clear difference when compared to previous studies that have been conducted on various marine microalgae species. However, 
this has highlighted the highly significant ( P < 0.05) difference between P. salina  and D. tertiolecta . The green pigments of D. 
tertiolecta  have shown their high t olerance to varying levels of nutrients as well as variable levels of lipid production. In contrast, 
the golden brown P. salina  revealed much lower levels of tolerance to various concentrations of macronutrients. This could have 
been due to the lightly sil icified cell wall found in P. salina  (Wang and Lan, 2010), which differentiates it from D. tertiolecta  cell 
structure and biology , as D. tertiolecta  features c rystalline glycoprotein walls and fibrillar cell walls, as described by Domozych 
et al.  (2012). O ther factors that could also have been involved are the chemical composition of the different fertilizers and the 
levels of tolerance of both algae.  
Miracle -gro had higher concentration levels of N, P, K, Fe and S, and lower concentration levels of Cu, Zn,  Mn, Co and Mo 
when compared with the commonly used f/2 media. However, regardless of the differences in macronutrient levels, similar 
amounts of D. tertiolecta  biomass were produced in the same period of time. This has proven similar to previous studies 
undertaken on different marine microalgae species  (Venkatesan, et al., 2013; Arun and Singh, 2013).  
.On the other hand , Maxicrop had higher levels of K, Fe and S; approximately equal concentrations of phosphorous and lower 
concentrations of Cu, Zn, Mn, Co a nd Mo than the f/2 media ; however, D. tertiolecta  was successfully grown at two different 
concentration levels (5.5  ml and 2.25  ml) and had higher cell densities than the f/2 culture media.       
Wang and Lan (2010) stated that Mg, S and Fe have significan t effects on the metabolism and physiology of microalgae. 
Therefore, in the absence of these macronutrients P. salina  can grow exceptionally well along with optimum levels of other 
macro and micro nutrients. This has been proven to be completely different in the case of D. tertiolecta , which can tolerate all of 
the mentioned concentrations except for Maxicrop 2.25  ml concentration, which has been exceptional , as it contained the 
optimum nutritional levels  necessary  for the production of the highest lipid co ntent when compared to the other treatments.  
Marine microalgae culture technologies (which are considered an essential part of the aquaculture and biodiesel industries) 
require further investigation and development to ensure that they become more cost -effective and efficient over time. In line with 
such developments are the requirements to grow commercially significant algal yields in the smallest amount of time possible.  
Similarly, research and development needs to focus in particular on producing the hig hest lipid content possible in algal cells, 
which then can be used for a multitude of purposes and can also help to reduce capital costs.  
 
 Conclusion  
Maxicrop at different concentrations and Miracle -gro were found to have no effect on the growth of P. sa lina, which has led to 
acceptance of  the null hypothesis, but the significant growth that resulted  when cultivated with f/2 media led to rejection of  the 
null hypothesis. In contrast, Maxicrop 2.25  ml concentration was found to have the highest significant  effect on the growth 
biomass of D. tertiolecta and lipid production when compared with f/2 and Miracle -gro. However, treatments of Maxicrop at 5.5  
ml concentration along with Miracle -gro had no significant negative effect when compared to f/2, and produce d similar or even 
higher cell biomass in some replicates. It is the author’s strong suggestion that D. tertiolecta  can readily be  cultivated with the 
use of Maxicrop  as a cost -effective enhancement in the very least, since fertilizers are an economical and  much cheaper method 
for commercial production of algae. Further analysis and manipulations could lead to further increase s in cell biomass  as various 
techniques and formulations are experimented with .  
This study has also investigated the significance of inland saline ground water for the biomass production of the marine 
microalgae D. tertiolecta compared to natural seawater.  This has revealed significant differences in the ionic composition of both 
water sources, but NSW has provided higher levels of bio mass production (in the order of 19%). Since  ISGW has potentially less 
contaminant s introduced and  probably experiences less  quality fluctuation s (certainly when compared to NSW) , it could have 
outstanding potential for the aquaculture industries in countr ies with enormous areas of arid land and highly saline underground 
water bores, as are readily encountered in countries such as Australia.  
Finally, the difference between P. salina  and D. tertiolecta growth performance was determined to be significantly d ifferent, 
giving positive indications for the mass production of D. tertiolecta as opposed  to P. salina  when using different agricultural 
commercial fertilizers. This should lead to an increased research and development focus on the mass production of D. tertiolecta , 
which is a barely studied microalgae species, using ISGW and agricultural commercially available fertilizers, which could hel p to 
ensure the viability of sustainable aquaculture well into the future.  
Due to limited research on the use of comme rcially agricultural fertilizers in the marine microalgae aquaculture  industry , further 
research would be beneficial to support these conclusions. Researchers, government bodies and marine biologists should consid er 
the development and implementation of th ese outcomes to develop economical, sustainable sources of nutrients for the 
production of live feed in aquaculture hatcheries, biodiesel and pha rmaceutical medicine production  
References  
Andersen, R . A. 2005 Algal Culturing Techniques  578 pp.  Elsevi er Aca demic press, London , UK.  
Arun, N and D.P Singh  2013  Differential response of Dunaliella salina and Dunaliella  tertiolecta isolated from brines of 
Sambhar Salt Lake of Rajasthan (India) to salinities: A  study on growth, pigment and glycerol synthesis, J. Mar. 
Biol. Ass. India, 55 (1),65 -70, 
Berges, J . A., D. J. Franklin and P. J. Harrison  2001 Evolution of artificial seawater medium: Im provement in enriched seawater,  
artificial water over the last two decades, Journal Phycol, vol. 37 : 1138 -1145.  
Brown, M . R. 2002 Nutritional Value of Microalgae in Aquaculture, CSIRO Marine Researc h, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.  
Bruton, T ., H. Lyons, Y. Lerat, M. Stanley, & M. B. Rasmssen 2009 A review of the Potential of Marine Algae as a Source of 
Biofuel in Ireland , Sustainable Energ y Ireland, Glasnevin, Ireland.  
Chipchase, T.   and S. Awal  2012 Investigation into the suitabi lity of inland ground saline  water for the growth of marine 
microalgae for industrial purposes . International Journal on Algae, 14 (1) :79-92. 
Coutin ho, P., P. Rema, A. Otero, O. Pereira, and J. Fabrega  2006 Use of biomass of the marine microalgae Isochrysis  galbana in 
the nutrition of goldfish ( Carassius auratus ) larvae as source of protein and vit amins, Aquaculture Research, vol. 37 : 
793-798.   
Coutteau, P . and P.Sorgeloos  1992 The Use of Algal Substitutes and The Requirement for Live Algae in The Hatchery and 
Nursery Rearing of Bivalve Molluscs: an international survey, Shellfish, 11 : 467–476. Dom ozych, D. S., M. Ciancia, J. U. Fangel, M.D. Mikkelsen, P.Ulvskov, and W. G. T. Willats 2012 The cell walls of green 
algae: a journey through evolution and diversity , Frontier, Plant S cience, 3 ( 82): 1-7. 
FAO.  1996  Manual on the Production and Use of Live Food for Aquaculture, Food and  Agricultural Organiz ation, FAO Fisheries 
Technical Paper 361, Rome.  
Fulks, W . and K. L. Main  1991   Rotifer and Microalgae Culture Systems (Proceedings of a U.S. – Asia Workshop, Argent 
Laboratories, Washington, U.S.A.  
Guedes , A. C., L. A. Meireles, H. M. Amaro, & F. X. Malcata 2010 Changes in Lipid Class and Fatty Acid Comp osition of 
Cultures of Pavlova l utheri , in Response to Light Intensity , J Am Oil Chem Soc. 87(10): 791-801. 
Guillard, R . R. L. 1975 Culture of Phytoplankto n for Feeding Marine Invertebrate, pp. 296 –360, In: Valenzuela -Espinoza, E 
Millan -Nunez, R & Nunez -Cebrero, F 1999,  New York, USA.  
 
Guillard, R . R. L. & J. H. Ryther, 1962 Studies of Marine Planktonic Diatoms, In: Valenzuela -Espinoza, E Millan -Nunez, R & 
Nunez -Cebrero, F 1999, New York, USA.  
 
Guschina, I . A. and J. L. Harwood 2006 Lipids and lipid metabolism in eukaryotic algae, Program Lipid Research, 45 : 160–186. 
 
Laing, I . 1991 Cultivation of marine unicellular algae, Ministry of agriculture, fisheries and  food directorate of fisheries research, 
Lowestoft, Crown publishers, vol. 67, pp. 1 -31.   
 
Lananan, F ., A. Jusoh, N. Ali, S. S. Lam  and A. Endut  2013 Effect of Conway medium and f/2 medium on the growth of six 
genera of south China sea marine microalgae, Bioresource Technology, Elsevier, Kuala Terengganu, Malaysia.   
 
Lavens, P and P. Sorgeloos  1996  Manual on the production and use of live food for aquaculture. FAO, Fisheries Technical Paper 
No. 361, Rome, Italy.  
 
Lee , S.J, S-B. Kim, J-E. Kin, G-S. Kwon ,  B-D. Yoon  and  H-M. Oh 1998. Effects of harvesting  method  and growth stage on 
the flocculation of the green alga Botryococcus braunii .. Lett Appl Microbiol 27:14 –18 
 
Lopez -Ruiz, J . L., R. G. Garcia and M. S. F. Almeda  1999 Culture of the microalgae  Chaeto ceros  muelleri with Zecer -56, a 
natural zeolitic product, Aquaculture Research, 30 : 199-202.  
 
Pal, D ., I. K. Goldberg ,  Z. Cohen   and S. Boussiba  2011 The effect of light, salinity, and nitrogen availability on lipid production 
by Nannochloropsis  sp., Appl ied Microbial and Cell P hysiology, 90 : 1429 -1441.   
 
Partridge, G . J.,  A. J. Lymbery  and R. J. George 2008 Finfish Mariculture in Inland Australia: A review of potential water 
sources, species, and production systems, World Aquaculture Society, 33(3):  291-310. 
 
Ponis, E ., I. Probert, B. Veron, J. R. LeCoz, M. Mathieu, & R. Robert  2006 Nutritional Value of Six Pavlovophyceae for 
Crassostrea gigas and Pecten  maximus  Larvae, Aquaculture, 254 :1-16. 
 
Prommuak, C ., P. Pavasant, A. T. Quitain, M. Goto  and A Shotipr uk 2012 Microalgae lipid extraction and evaluation of single 
step biodiesel productions, Engineering Journal, 16  (5):157 – 166.  
 
Provasoli, L . 1971 Media and prospects for the cultivation of marine algae, In: Valenzuela -Espinoza, E Millan -Nunez, R & 
Nunez -Cebrero, F 1999, Rosowsky, University of Nebraska, Lincoln.  
 
Richmond, A . 2004  Handbook of Microalgal Culture : Biotechnology and Applied Phycology  588 pp.  Blackwell, Oxford, UK.  
 
Smith, B . and C. Barlow  1999 Inland Saline Aquaculture Workshop, Proceedings o f a workshop, Western Australia, ACIAR 
Proceedings, vo. 83, pp. 1 -61. Solovchenko, A ., I. Khozin -Goldberg, S. Didi-Cohen, Z. Cohen, and M. Merzlyak  2008 Effects of light intensity and nitrogen 
starvation on growth, total fatty acids and arachidonic acid in  the green microalga  Parietochloris  incise , Journal 
Applied Phycol, 20 : 245– 251. 
 
Valenzuela -Espinoza, E ., R. Millan -Nunez, & F. Nunez -Cebrero  1999 Biomass Production and Nutrient Uptake by Isochrysis aff. 
Galbana  (Clone T -ISO) Cultured with a Low cost Alt ernative to the f/2 Medium, Aquacultural Engineering,  
20:135-147. 
 
Venkatesan, S,  M. S. Swamy, S. Chinnasamy ,  S. Bhaskar, and R. Rengasamy  2013  Culturing marine green microalgae   
Dunaliella salina Teod. and Dunaliella  tertiolecta  Masjuk in Dewalne’s med ium for valuable feeds stock, 
Journal of modern biotechnology,  2(2): 40 -45 
 
Walne, P . R. 1970 Studies on the food value of nineteen genera of algae to juvenile bivalves of the genera  Ostrea , Crassostrea , 
Mercenaria and Mytilus , In: Valenzuela -Espinoza, E Millan -Nunez, R & Nunez -Cebrero, F 1999, Fish Invest, 
London, iss.2, vol.24, no.5, pp.1 –62. 
 
Wang, B . and C. Lan 2010 Microalgae for Biofuel Production and CO2 Sequestration, Energy Science, Engineering and 
Technology Series, Nova Science, New York, USA.  
 
 