www.wjpls.org   
193 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
 
 
 
MICROBIAL TRANSFORMATION OF STEROIDS: A FOCUS ON TYPES AND 
TECHNIQUES  
 
 
Zuri at Jabbar , Hannana  Maryam , Sana Maqsood  and Sikander Ali*  
 
Institute of Industrial Biotechnology (IIB), Government College University, Lahore Pakistan . 
 
 
 
 
 
Article Received on 30/05/2017                          Article Revised on 15/06/2017                         Article Accepted on 30/06/2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Steroids comprise of a broad range of naturally abundant 
compounds with many important physiologica lly active 
derivatives. These chemical compounds  include sterols, 
like ergosterol and cholesterol,  bile acids, as well as a 
variety of  steroid hormones.[1] They are extensively  
found in nature  as thousands of different ster oid 
compounds are known to be pre sent in the living beings . 
About more than  250 sterols and derivatives exist  in 
insects (e.g., ecdysteroids),  plants  (e.g., phytosterols, 
diosgenin ), vertebrates (e.g., cholesterol; corticosteroids: 
glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids; sex hormones: 
androg ens, estrogens; bile acids, vitamin D; 
neurosteroids), and lower eukaryotes: yeasts and fungi 
(e.g.,  ergosterol, ergosteroids).[2]  
 
In some instances  of fermentation,  by using microbial 
cells,  a compound can be catalytically converted into 
another compoun d which is similar to the structure but 
has more profitable and financial value . Fermentation 
processes like these  are called as the processes of 
transformation , biotransformations  or bioconvers ions. 
The catalyzed reactions include  hydroxylation, oxidation , 
dehydration and condensation,  amination and 
deamination, dehydrogenation, decarboxylation  and isomerization .[3] The manufacture of steroid drugs as 
well as  steroid hormones  by the biotransformation  
process present an excellent example  of the  outstanding 
use of microbial technology at an industrially large scale . 
 
Structurally , steroids are  the derivatives of sterane 
(cyclopentanoperhydrophenantrene ) (Figure 1) . The 
efforts in resea rch in this area were started  in about  1950,  
when  the pharmaco logical effec ts of two endogenous 
steroids i.e. progesterone  and cortisol , were discovered, 
and the 11 α-hydroxylation activity of a  species of  
Rhizopus  was identified;[4] this was considered  to be a  
crucial point  in the advancement  of the practical steroid 
synthesis ha ving important  biological activity . Increasing 
numbers of steroid  biotra nsformations using 
microorganisms, chiefly emphasizing on the steroid 
biotransformation types of Δ1-dehydrogenation, 
hydroxylation and side -chain cleavage, have been  
described .[5] Industrialists and researc hers are now able 
to make huge amounts of steroids and derivatives using 
different biotransformat ion reactions and by combining 
these reactions with the chemic al methods of steroid 
synthesis .[6] Because there is no need for isolating,  
purifying and stabilizing the pure enzymes, the cost of 
steroid manufacture can be reduced by using w hole-cell 
for steroid bioconversion .[7] Research Article  ISSN 2454 -2229  
 wjpls, 2017, Vol. 3, Issue 5, 193-203 
 
World Journal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
WJPLS  
 
www.wjpls.org  SJIF Impact Factor: 4.223  
*Correspon ding Author: Sikander Ali  
Institute of Industrial Biotechnology (IIB), Government Colle ge University, Lahore Pakistan.  
ABSTRACT  
 
Steroids are widespread in nature and are important compounds present in living systems. These compounds 
include different sterols , bile salts and steroid hormones like estrogen, androgens, testosterones etc. and have 
numerous therapeutic applications. Microbial biotransformation of steroids is one of the applications of 
microorganisms in the large -scale industries and it also have certain advantages over the chemical processes of 
steroid production. For biotransformation proces s, precursor steroids are required which are transformed in to 
valuable intermediates as well as the final transformed product. Different types of biotransformation reactions are 
used for the process of microbial biotransformation which include hydroxylati on, dehydrogenation, side -chain 
degradation, ring A aromatization and reduction. Biotransformation of steroids can be done by different techniques 
and approaches like biotransformation in aqueous medium, biotransformation using immobilized cells and 
enzyme s, biotransformation using free enzymes and biotransformation in biphasic systems. Different 
biotransformation facilitators are also used for enhancement of product yield.  Alternate Biotransformation systems 
using liposomes and microemulsions are also bein g used for microbial steroid biotransformation.  
 
KEY WORDS: Biotransformation, steroids, biotransformation reactions, biotransformation techniques . 
 www.wjpls.org   
194 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
The manufactured  steroids exhibit a wide variety  of 
therapeutic uses, such  as immunosuppressive, anti-
inflammatory , progestational,  anabolic, diuretic  and 
contraceptive ag ents.[8] They have also been su ccessfu lly 
used for treating a few kinds  of prostate  and breast  
cancer as well as  osteoporosi s, for treating adrenal 
deficiencies by acting as replacement agents , for 
preventing the  coronary heart disease ,[9] and for 
inhibiting HIV integrase, for treatment as well as 
prevention of  HIV infection and for treating the  declared 
AIDS . They have also been used as active ingredients  in 
anti-obesity agents  and anti-fungal agents .[10]For the 
bioconv ersion of exogenous compounds, bacteria and 
fungi  are the most frequently  chosen microorganisms due 
to certain hist orical reasons . Plant cell cultures  have also 
been used for studying  the biotransformation process.[11] Biotransformation  can also be done by micro algae but it 
had not been studied enough  until 1986 .[12] Researchers 
are conti nuously doing efforts to not  only discover  more 
steroids for useful purposes but also to screen and 
identify more different microorganisms that would be  
capable of performing the aimed biotransformations . 
Many different techniques have been used by means of 
which, biotransformation of steroids can be done. Such 
techniques include biotransformation in aqueous 
medium, biotransformation using immobilized cel ls and  
 
by using free and immobilized enzymes, 
biotransformation in bi -phasic systems and cloud -point 
systems, biotransformation using liposomes and 
microemulsion, by using different methods for altering 
cell wall permeability etc . 
 
Figure 1: Sterane,  which is the parent ring structure of steroid compounds withe structures of some 
representative steroids.  
 
Comparison of Chemical Synthesis and Preparation 
Through Biotransformation  
Chemical transformation and synthesis may disturb the 
structural stabili ty of the steroid, as  it requires  many  
steps  and reagents that may result in the degradation of  
one or more of the steroid rings.  These chemicals may 
also be harmful for health and may cause serious  
environmental problems .[13] Compared to the chemical 
transformation, the conversion of precursor steroids 
through microorganisms is cheaper, less time consuming 
and nontoxic and since they are not  using hazard ous 
reagents, they are safer for the environment  and for 
working staff . Enzymes produced by these microorganisms act upon and convert  the compound by 
modifying it  and hence are used for simple catalysis of 
reactions . Microbial conversions  are stereo -specific and 
region -specific, due to which the  steroid compounds can 
be altered  into beneficial product  isomer s by microbial 
enzyme s. Microbial  biotransformations  of steroids are 
carried out  in mild  conditions of  pressure and 
temperature . It can be an effective alternate  to chemical 
synthesis  of steroids, if the  encountered  drawbacks  of 
inadequate productivity and  the level of product purity 
are eliminated .[14] The steroid industry thus combines the 
biological and chemical methods making use of the best  
aspects of each.  www.wjpls.org   
195 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
Precursor Steroids/Raw Material For Steroid 
Biotransformation  
Steroidal compounds that are pharm acologically active 
have natural sources that are rare, economically 
unfeasible  as ster eo-chemical considerations restrict the 
use of com pounds derived from one animal a s drugs in 
another. On the other hand, an immense number of 
naturally occur ring, extrac table steroidal compounds  
cannot be used as drugs owing to their  complex side 
chains. Cholesterol, steroidal alkaloids, steroidal 
sapogenins and phytosterols  are the plentifully available 
steroid precursors . Cholesterol can easily be isolated  
from the wast e blood collected from slaughter houses. 
Plant derived steroids are extracted from parts of plants 
cultivated for the purpose and from press mud generated 
from edible oil extraction units.[13] 
 
For the steroid industry, n atural steroid sapogenin, 
diosgeni n is one of the significant raw materials and it 
can be used for the microbial production of s ome new 
steroids of useful therapeutic action .[15] Natural sterols, 
typically, steroid 3β -alcohols  are the alternative raw 
materials for the industry. Cholesterol is called  as animal 
sterol; stigmasterol, campesterol, sitosterol  and 
brassicosterol are abundantly found in  plant s and hence 
are the ample plant  sterols. The phytosterols are plant 
sterols  mixtures which are  mainly of soya origin, or 
produced from tall oil or  pitch. The important sterol of 
fungi and yeast is the  ergosterol .[5] Sterol -containing 
wastes of food, agricultural  and cellulose manufactur es 
can be used for production of valuable steroid 
compounds without deep purification of phytosterols . 
The production of key  intermediates and then the final 
product from the precursor steroid compound is depicted 
in Figure 2.  
 
Production of key intermedia tes from s terols  
The key intermediates produced microbially are some C -
17 and C -22 steroids. The most notable intermediates are 
AD and ADD required  for the industrial manufacture  of 
compounds like  corticosteroids,  oral contraceptives, and 
other pharmaceuti cal steroids. Sterol -transforming 
actinobacteria were also applied for single -step 
production of testosterone .[16] Boldenone is being 
produced  from phytosterol and has been reported to 
include two steps via intermediate obtaining of AD using 
Mycobacteria  followed by  1-dehydrogenation of AD by 
Fusarium  sp.[17] 
 
A recent study showed  the possibility of single -step 
production of deriv ed androst -5,7-diene -17-one from 3 -
substituted ergosterol .[18] This intermediate is one of 
important precursors for synthesis of  vitamin D 
derivatives . 3β-hydroxyandrosta - 5,7-diene-17β-
carboxylic acid can be used for the purpose of inhibiting 
the division of normal keratinocytes as well as of 
malignant  and normal melanocytes. It ca n be used for 
condition -dependent regulation  of fibroblast proliferation 
and also in leukemia cell differentiation as a 
stimulator .[19] Apart from C -19 steroids, valuable 23,24 -dinorcholane 
derivatives were obtained from sterols microb ially.[20] 
These compounds are the important precursors for 
corticosteroid syntheses.  For ster ol biotranformations, 
various strains  of microorganisms have been defined  as 
biocatalysts, e.g., Arthrobacter  spp. ( Arthrobacter 
oxydans  317 AL, Arthrobacter rubbelus ), 
Brevibacterium  spp., Pseudomonas  spp., and 
Rhodococcus  spp., but their application requ ires addition 
of inhibitors to prevent steroid nucleus degradation .[8] 
Over the recent decade, attempts have been made to 
discover organisms capable of efficient conversion of 
phytosterols to key steroid precursors.  
 
 
Figure  2: General Scheme for the produ ction of key 
intermediates from precursor steroid and finally the 
production of therapeutically active drug.  
 
Types of Steroid Biotransformation  
There are different reactions that are done in order to 
carry out the biotransformation of the steroids . Major 
sites of the biotransformation reactions on a steroid 
molecule is shown in the Figure 3.[14] The schemes of 
different types of biotransformation reactions is shown in 
the Table 1 . 
 
Hydroxylation  
In the steroid  hydroxylation  reaction, the  hydroxyl group 
is substituted directly for the h ydrogen at either the  α or 
β position, resulting in the  retention of configuration  
(Table 1 Scheme 1). Hydroxylations  are probably the www.wjpls.org   
196 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
most common  type of steroid  biotransforma tion. Using 
this reaction, the intermediates can be produced for 
further synthesis by chemical method , by providing  
access to  the otherwise inaccessible sites in the molecule , 
or to  change  the structure of steroid molecule  in such a 
way that it can become therapeutically useful. In th e 
synthesis of corticosteroids,  α-hydroxylation is a 
necessary  step. Presently in the industry, 11α-, 11β-, 15α 
and 16 α-hydroxylations are the developed  processes[21] 
chiefly  to manufacture the adrenal cortex hormones as 
well as their analogues. 11 α -, 11 β- and 16 α-
hydroxylations are generally carried out by the use of  
Rhizopu s spp. or Aspergillus spp., Curvularia spp. or 
Cunninghamella  spp., and Streptomyces spp., 
respectively .[8] Fungi are the most active  microorganisms 
that give hydroxylation reactions . However, some 
bacteria especially  the Bacilli, Streptomyces and 
Nocardia  show fair ly exceptional  activity.  
 
Dehydrogenation  
Derivatives of cortisone and hydrocortisone showing 
improved anti -inflammatory characteristics and reduced 
unwanted side -effects can be produced by introducing 1 -
2 double bonds in their ring A structure.  Fungi and 
Bacteria are able to dehydrogenize  the secondary alcohol 
group of steroids and generate their  correspondin g 
carbon derivatives. Microbial whole cells can generally 
perform ∆1-dehydrogenation.  Because dehydrogenation  
is a co -factor -dependent proc ess, the essential  co-factor 
is constantly regenerated by the active metabolism of the 
cell. An example of dehydrogenation in bacteria is  ∆1-
Dehydrogenation of 6α -methyl -cortisol to 6α -methyl 
prednisolone by  resting cells of  Arthrobacter 
globiformis .[22] Scheme 2 in the table 1 is the 
dehydrogenation r eaction using a fungal species.[14] 
 
Side-chain Degradation  
Using chemical methods, t he removal of side chains in  
saturated sterols, compared to that of the  unsaturated 
sterols, is not easy . Therefore , making  use of the 
microbial method have gained huge consideration  and 
successful production of 17-ketosteroids  at industrial 
scale has been achieved  owing to some of these 
methods .[23] Such reactions are described for different 
bacteria for example in Actinobact eria. In 
Actinobacteria , the basic  step of the side -chain oxidation 
of sterols (and  other C -27 steroids) is hydroxylation at C -
26 (or C -27). Aliphatic side -chain  is degrad ed by an 
array of β -oxidation reactions . The terminal 
hydroxylation of C -27sterol  is catalyzed by an enzyme 
known as cytochrome P450 125 (which is also known as 
steroid 26 -monooxygenase) . Various  actinomycetes such 
as Rhodococcus jostii[24] produce this enzyme from 
where it was purified and characterized . Further cleavage 
of the alkyl ster ol side chain at C -17 was  shown to 
proceed by  the fatty acid β -oxidation process,[25] and the 
genes responsible for this process  in actinobacteria constitute part of the sterol catabolic gene  cluster .[26] 
Side-chain degradation of hydrocortisone is shown in 
scheme 3 in table 1.  
 
Reduction  
This type o f biotransformation includes the reduction of 
ketones and aldehydes to alcohols.  Along with the 
Bacteria and Fungi , algal species quite commonly 
undergo the reduction of exogenous compounds. The 
most agreeable position for reduction is 17 -carbonyl 
among th e other positions . Some important androgens 
can be produced by making use of t hese processes .[27] 
Moreover, 3-carbonyl[28] and 20 -carbonyl[29] reduction  
have been reported . Micro organisms including 
microalgae can also reduce the steroidal double bonds . 
Hydrogenation of Δ,[1] Δ[4] and Δ[16] positions is included 
in the hydrogenation of the ring. Bioc onversion of 
prednisone to cortisone, and prednisone to cortisol with 
Bacillus megaterium is involved in the process.  
 
Ring A Aromatizationn  
Ring A aromatization of su itable substrates by 
microorganisms forms aromatic compounds. For 
example, steroids like estrogens and estrones can be 
produced by ring A Aromatization of steroid precursors 
or intermediates.[30] Estrogen is not only a major 
component in orally administere d contraceptives drugs 
but also plays a vital role in treating the menopause by 
replacement therapy. Estrone can be produced by the 
transformation of 19 -nor-testosterone by cell free 
extracts of Pseudomonas testosteroni and a small amount 
of estradiol -17β is also produced in this reaction.  
 
 
Figure 3: Major sites of biotransformation reactions.
 
 
  
 
 www.wjpls.org   
197 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
Table 1: The table shows the types of transformation reactions of steroids along with the schemes.  
 
Reactions  Structural Example (Scheme)  References  
1. Hydrox ylation  
 [14] 
2. Dehydrogenation  
 [14] 
3. Side -Chain 
Degradation  
 [14] 
4. Reduction  
 [14] 
5. Ring A 
Aromatization  
 [30] www.wjpls.org   
198 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
Tecniques and Methods for the Microbial Steroid 
Transformations  
Different techniques and methods are used for microbial 
steroid transformation . 
 
Biotransformation in aqueous medium  and 
biotransformation f acilitators  
One of the approaches to perform microbial steroid 
biotransformation is the use of aqueous medium and 
biotransformation facilitators to overcome certain 
limitations  that can hinder the transformation process. 
For example, in the steroid biotransformation using 
fungi, the considerable hindrances are poor solubility in 
water , powder aggregation and dispersibility .[31] To 
overcome these limitations, certain approaches h ave been 
considered to increase the permeability of viable cells 
using fed -batch systems, substrate micronization, 
increasing the c ell wall  permeability  using certain 
compounds l ike surfactants, antibiotics,  cyclodextrins 
(which form inclusion complexes fo r solublization), and 
organic solvents .[32] Following are discussed some of the 
approaches used for solublization the steroids and for 
increa sing the cell wall permeability.  
 
Increasing the cell wall p ermeability  
The cell envelope acts a s a permeability ba rrier, which 
can be considered as a disadvantage for the uptake of 
sterol and its bioconversion. Cell wall permeability for 
sterol can be improved by making use of several agents, 
such as m -fluorophenylalanine and D, L -norleucine, 
antibiotics, lecithin, gl ycine. Cell sensitization to agents 
leads to higher quantity of AD(D) formed p er 
biomass .[33] According to Fernandes et al.  (2003), with 
the help of  Mycobacterium  vaccae  or derived strains, the 
sterol penetration across the cell envelope can be 
enhanced wh en compounds like  vancomycin ,[34] 
glycine ,[35] lecithin and polycations, such as protamine, 
polymyxin B nonapepti de, were added to the 
fermentation medium. Regardless of the effect of  added 
chemical compound on the structure of the cell wall, it 
acts on th e cell envelope and disrupts the stability and 
moisture content of the bilayer. The yield of 17 -
ketosteroids produced from  β-sitosterol was enhanced by 
this method .[36] 
 
Substrate Micronization  
Biotransformation in aqueous medium may be done by 
the techniq ue of substrate micronization in which, 
supposed “wet” disintegration of steroid particles based 
on ultrasonic wave together with the detergents can assist 
the contact between whole -cell biocata lyst and the 
substrate .[16,18] 
 
Cyclodextrins (CD)  
Cyclodextri ns are the solubilizing agents which form 
substrate inclusion complexes and increase water -
solubility of lipophilic compounds. Many different 
mechanisms of CD -mediated intensification of 
conversion of steroids include steroid solublization as 
well as incre ase of  cell wall permeability.[37] Formation of the complex between cyclodextrins and steroid drugs  
leads to the  reduction of  the steroid hydrophobicity . 
 
Liquid polymer based systems  
Liquid polymers may be present as components of the 
bioconversion media (polypropylene glycol, silicon oil 
etc.). They can be useful for sterol  solubilization and  for 
speeding up the a ggregation of steroid .[38] 
 
Special a dsorbents  
Different adsorbents, for example amberlite XAD resin, 
are often used for the purpose of increasi ng the yield of 
steroids. These adsorbents work by absorbing toxic 
products .[39] 
 
Biotransformation using immobilized cells  
Bio-transformations can be repeatedly done by making 
use of immobilized cells. Moreover, the same cells can 
be used again and again.  Different biotransformations 
involving single or multistage reactions are actually 
achieved by using immobilized cells e.g. commercial 
manufacture of malic acid and L - alanine. The use of 
immobilized microbial cells have certain  advantages 
which include t he minimization of the deactivation of 
biocatalyst, regulation of the  reactions time, cell recycle  
for various cycles of reaction and reducing the overall  
production cost of cell mediated reactions. Viable 
immobilized cells also have advantages over tradit ional 
methods of fermentation, including volumetric reaction 
rates, advantageous downstream processing, increased 
storage as well as oper ational strengths, recycling  of 
immobilize d biocatalysts, and more  yield gain of 
product .[40] The most conspicuous adva ntage of the 
immobilization approach is its ability of continuous 
cycling due to which, it can be used in continuous 
processing with high biomass maintenance in the reactor 
to attain fast reaction rates. Different immobilization 
techniques, including adhes ion to solid surfaces of 
carriers, entrap ment and microencapsulation, are used for 
whole -cell bioconversi on by algae and bacteria .[41] 
Synthetic polymers such as resins which are photo -
crosslinked , polyurethane foams, silicon -based polymers, 
and calcium -alginate beads  with a  coating of  polyurea 
layer have been used .[42] However, lower productivity of 
immobilized systems and limited mass transfer are the 
chief limitations of this technique. Moreover, due to the 
fact that it requires special equipment and oft en 
complicates the flow of the process, it can barely be 
recommended for scaled processes. Utilization of 
immobilized whole cells together with detergents and 
two-phase aqueous/organic system can facilita te 
bioconv ersion .[43,44, 45] 
 
Biotransformation using  free and immobilized 
enzymes  
Cell-free enzyme systems in the form of immobilized 
enzymes are most commonly used in bio -
transformations, due to the following advantages: (i) no 
degradation of the desired products occur, (ii) 
undesirable side reactions do n ot occur, (iii) no transport www.wjpls.org   
199 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
barrier across the cell membrane is there for the product 
or substrate and (iv) product isolation and recovery is 
easier and simpler. Different immobilized enzyme 
systems have been established for bioconversions such as 
penicil lin acylase and glucose isomerase. While also 
being selective, biotransformation enzymes are safer for 
the environment, are less time consuming and are 
cheaper.  Therefore, it would not be wrong to consider 
them as suitable alternatives for the manufacture of 
pharmaceutically active components .[46] 
 There are six classes of enzymes  and out of these, many 
enzymes  are important in the  biocatalysis. These classes 
of enzymes are oxidoreductases, transferases, hydrolases, 
lyases , isomerases, and ligases . As discu ssed earlier, 
steroids undergo various reactions during 
biotransformation like hydroxylation, isomerization, 
reduction, dehydrogenation etc. so many different 
enzymes from the six classes of enzyme classification 
are used to carry out these  biotransformati on reactions. 
Some of the enzymes used in fungal steroid 
transformation are listed (Table 2).[14] 
 
Table 2. Some of the enzymes that carry out steroid biotransformation along with some of their functions .
 
S No. Enzyme  Activity/Function  Reference s 
1. Hydroxylases  Production of hormones like adrenocortical hormone.  
All carbon atoms present in the steroid molecule with 11α, 11β, and 
16α-hydroxylases  can be hydrolyzed by fungi  giving the great 
economic worth.  [32] 
 
 
[47] 
2. 5a-Reductases  (or 3 -
oxo-5α -steroid 4 -
dehydrogenases)  Reduce the double bond in steroids such as androgens, estrogens, and 
bile acids . [48] 
3. 3β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenases/ Δ5- 
Δ4-isomerases  (3β-HSD) isoenzymes carry out the reactions of oxidation and 
isomerization of Δ5-3β-hydroxys teroid precursors into Δ4- 
ketosteroids.  
Catalyze a crucial step in the formation of all classes of active steroid 
hormones . [49] 
4. 17 β -Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenases (17 β 
-HSD)  Pivotal in controlling  the biological potency of steroid hormones by 
cataly zing oxidation or reduction at C -17. 
Metabolize other substrates like alcohols, bile acids, fatty acids, and 
retinols . [50] 
5. C-17-C-20 Lyase  Biosynthesis of androgens in Nectria haematococca . [51] 
6. Oxidoreductase  Remove estrogenic compounds from dif ferent environmental samples.  [52] 
Enzymes expressed in heterologous hosts  
Some enzymes that are industrially important for steroid 
biotransformation  are now being expressed in 
heterolo gous hosts . E. coli  has been engineered to 
express 17β –HSD which  allows the  usage of  purified 
enzyme or whole cells for specific 17-ketosteroids  
reduction  e.g. in the synthesis of androgenic anabolic 
molecules. Vico et al. , (2002) expressed a mammalian 
hydroxylase in  Saccha romyces cerevisiae  for 
stereospecific hydroxylation of 
dehydroepiandrosterone .[53] 
 
Biotransformation in b i-phasic  systems  
One of the main difficulties in the bioconversion of 
steroids is the weak substrate solubility in aqueous 
medium solution, which rend ers extremely poor 
productivity. Thus, aqueous/organic solvent two -liquid -
phase systems can be used for the improvement of 
substrate solubility, for allowing operation at high 
concentration of substrate and for aiding subsequent 
recovery of product. In bip hasic system,  the organic 
phase contains dissolved steroid and the cells are present 
in the aqueous phase and this is thought to be an ideal set 
up (this is done in aqueous or ganic bi -phasic system) .[13] 
In whole -cell bioconversion, for overcoming the prob lem 
of poor product and substrate solubility in water and also to eliminate their inhibitory effects on the biocatalyst, 
biphasic processes are used. Steroid biotransformation in 
two-phase systems is  more frequent ly employed for 
bacteria as well as the  microalgae, then by fungi .[38] 
There are different types of bi -phasic systems including 
the aqueous organic bi -phasic system, water miscible 
organic co -solvents, Ionic Liquid/Aqueous Biphasic 
Systems as well as some unique bi -phasic systems.  
 
Aqueous organic two-phase (or bi -phasic) systems  
These  systems  are frequently used to enhance the 
fermentation yield  in the presence of lipophil ic products 
and substrate .[54] Substrate as well as the product,  both 
are kept in a water -immiscible organic phase, where  the 
substrate concentration  in the aqu eous phase is kept fixed 
and products  of metabolism  are extracted, making the  
product recovery  easy. Two -phase organic system 
involving organic compounds like butanol, n -hexane, 
benzene etc. increases the yield of biotransfo rmation due 
to solublization of steroid substrate/product and makes 
downstream ing processing easier .[55,56, 57] In the  process  
of enzyme reaction,  which is done in a biphasic system 
water –water -immiscible organic solvent, the  aqueous 
phase contains the conf ined enzyme and this  eradicates 
the conventional difficulty of enzyme  stabilization  
against in activation of biocatalyst in an  organic solvent.  www.wjpls.org   
200 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
Organic solvent should essentially be non -toxic  to the 
biocatalyst during the provision of conditions for high 
water solubility of product and substrate otherwise the 
biocatalyst w ould become inactivated . Organic –aqueous 
two-liquid phase systems have  been employed in multi -
enzyme steroid biotransformations, in which, 
bioconversion of sitosterol to 17 - ketosteroids is  done by 
resting Mycobaterium sp. NRRL B -3805 cells .[58] These  
biotransformations are generally  done in simple agitated 
containers . 
 
Researchers are now designing new solvent systems for 
replacing the conventional ones in order to eliminate 
environmental c oncerns that could be dangerous for both 
the ecosystem and the humans. In such an effort, super 
critical fluid technology is being employed in 
transformation reactions.[59] 
 
Water -miscible organic co -solvents   
One of the traditional techniques involves the  substrates 
fed in water -miscible solvents in the form of saturated 
solutions,  such as methanol ,[60] 1,2-propanediol ,[61] 
dimethylformamide[62] or acetone . These  organic 
solvents are useful in reducing  the weak steroid 
substrate/product solubility and thus  intensify the yield . 
 
Ionic liquid/aqueous biphasic s ystem   
In this system, t he 15α -Hydroxylation of 13 -ethyl -gon-4-
en-3, 17 -Dione by Penicillium raistrickii  has been 
reported .[63] For the reaction of 15α -hydroxylation, ionic 
liquids (ILs) that are available commercially were used 
in a bi -phasic system. After 72 hours, the yield wa s 70% 
in comparison to a yield of 30 %  in a monophonic 
aqueous system .[13] This proposes the promising 
application of biphasic systems based on the ILs  
industrially for steroid bioconversion . 
 
Two phase system based on PEG and MSG  
A unique  aqueous two phas e system involving 
monosodium glutamate  (MSG)  and polyethylene glycol 
(PEG) has been tried  for the 1 -dehydrogenation of 
hydrocor tisone -based substrates .[64] Higher sub strate 
solubility  and degree of biocatalyst -steroid separation 
was achieved  when  this sys tem was compared to the 
other alternate systems . Successful biphasic systems 
using multiple enzymes for complex biotransformations 
have been scarcely reported in the literature.  
Biotransformation in a cloud point system  
Cloud point systems (CPS) were consi dered as unique 
bi-phase partitioning systems which can be applied  for 
steroid solublization and phase separation in whole -cell 
bioconversion. N onionic  surfactants  are used to make 
these systems . This system guarantees the cell viability 
as well as their e nzymatic activity by providing  a micro -
aqueous  environment . Biocatalysts contained in the 
water vesicles are scattered uniformly in the c ontinuous 
phase which is  surfactants -rich and hence,  substrate 
inhibition,  the organic phase and toxicity  are essential ly 
lowered. Bioconversion occurs  inside these water 
vesicles having  biocatalysts,  eliminating the inhibition of substrate and product  and also proh ibiting the product 
degradation .[65] With Mycobacterium spp. NRRL B 
3683,  Wang et al . (2004 ) studied the chol esterol 
bioconversion  to androst -1,4-diene -3,17-dione and 
androst - 4-ene-3,17-dione in a CPS.[66] Studies on 
bioconversions  by fungi in these  systems  are limited.  
 
Alternative biotransformation systems: liposomes 
and m icroemulsion  
In organic media, the via bility of the cell can be lost  and 
interfacial mass transfer area can be low and both of 
these  can restrict the biotransformation.  Microemulsions 
are the alternatives for the biph asic systems to solve the 
problem of interfacial area mass transfer by signif icantly 
increasing it. However, productivity may be lowered due 
to reduced activity of cells owing to long exposure to the 
organic solvent inside the microemulsion. Liposomes can 
be used to remove this detrimental side effect related 
with the organic solve nt and hence, liposomes become a 
good alternative to give high productivity during 
steroidal biotransformations  by encapsulating the 
steroids .[67] 
 
CONCLUSION  
 
Steroids are compounds that are found widely in nature. 
Many steroids are used for different the rapeutic purposes 
like for the manufacture of drugs etc. Steroids can be 
formed as result of the process of biotransformation and 
bioconversion. Industrially, steroids can be formed by 
chemical process as well as by microbial process. 
However, microbial tr ansformation offers certain 
advantages over the chemical transformation. 
Microorganisms like bacteria, fungi and microalgae as 
well are commonly used for microbial steroid 
transformation. Different techniques are used for the 
enhancement of the  microbial b iotransformation process 
and a  lot of work has been done to improve this process . 
 
REFRENCES  
 
1. Faramarzi MA, Adrangi S, Yazdi MT. Microalgal 
biotransformation of steroids. J Phycol, 2008;  44(1): 
27-37. 
2. Fernandes P, Cabral JMS. Phytosterols: applications 
and recovery methods. Biores  Technol, 2007; 98: 
2335 -2350.  
3. Sameera V. Novel Techniques in the Production of 
Industrially Imperative Products. J Microbial 
Biochem Technol, 2011; R1:003. doi:  
10.4172/1948 -5948.  R1-003. 
4. Hogg JA. Steroids, the steroid community, and 
Upjohn in perspective: a profile of innovation. 
Steroids , 1992; 57(12): 593 -616. 
5. Donova MV, Egorova OV. Microbial steroid 
transformations: current state and prospects.  Appl 
Microbiol Biotechnol , 2012;  94(6): 1423 -1447.  
6. Liu HM, Li H, Shan L, Wu J. Synth esis of steroidal 
lactone by Penicillium citreoviride . Steroids, 2006; 
71: 931 -934. www.wjpls.org   
201 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
7. Riva, S. 2001. Biocatalytic modification of natural 
products. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol ., 5: 106 -111. 
8. Mahato SB, Garai S.  Advances in microbial steroid 
biotransformation. Ster oid, 1997; 62: 332 -45. 
9. Walsh G. Biopharmaceuticals: biochemistry and 
biotechnology.  Chichester; Wiley,  1998.  
10. Chung SK, Ryoo CH, Yang HW, Shim J -Y, Kang, 
MG, Lee KW. Synthesis and bioactivities of steroid 
derivatives as antifungal agents. Tetrahedron, 1998;  
54: 15899 -914. 
11. Giri A, Dhingra V, Giri CC, Singh A, Ward OP, 
Narasu ML. Biotransformations using plant cells, 
organ cultures and enzyme systems: current trends 
and future prospects. Biotechnol Adv ., 2001; 19: 
175-199. 
12. Abul -Hajj YJ, Qian X. Transformation of steroids 
by algae. J Nat Prod, 1986; 49:244 -248. 
13. Rao SM, Thakkar K, Pawar K. Microbial 
transformation of steroids: current trends in cortical 
side chain cleavage.  Quest , 2013;  1(2): 16 -20. 
14. Nassiri -Koopaei N, Faramarzi MA. Recent 
developments in the fung al transformation of 
steroids.  Biocatal Biotransfor , 2015; 33(1): 1 -28. 
15. Wang F -Q, Li B, Wang W, Zhang CG, Wei D -Z. 
Biotransformation of diosgenin to nuatigenin -type 
steroid by a newly isolated strain, Streptomyces 
virginiae  IBL-14. Appl. Microbiol Biotechn ol, 2007; 
77: 771 -777. 
16. Egorova OV, Nikolayeva VM, Sukhodolskaya G, 
Donova MV. Transformation of C19 -steroids and 
testosterone production by sterol -transforming 
strains of Mycobacterium  spp. J Mol Cat B: Enzym, 
2009; 5: 198 -203. 
17. Kutney JP, Herrington EJ, Sp assov G. Process for 
fermentation of phytosterols to androstadiendione. 
WO2003064674A2, 2003.  
18. Dovbnya DV, Egorova OV, Donova MV. Microbial 
side-chain degradation of ergosterol and its 3 -
substituted derivatives: a new route for obtaining of 
deltanoids. Ster oids, 2010; 75: 653 -658. 
19. Kim T -K, Chen J, Lib W, Zjawionyc J, Miller D, 
Janjetovic Z, Tuckey RC, Slominski A. A new 
steroidal 5,7 -diene derivative, 3β -hydroxyandrosta -
5,7-diene -17β-carboxylic acid, shows potent anti -
proliferative activity. Steroids, 2010; 75(3): 230 -
239. 
20. Andor A, Jekkel A, Hopwood DA, Jeanplong F, 
Ilkoy E, Konya A, Kurucz I, Ambrus G. Generation 
of useful insertionally blocked sterol degradation 
pathway mutants of fast -growing mycobacteria and 
cloning, characterization, and expression of th e 
terminal oxygenase of the 3 -ketosteroid 9α -
hydroxylase in Mycobacterium smegmatis mc2 155. 
Appl Envir Microbiol, 2006; 72(10): 6554 -6559.  
21. Jekkel A, Ilkoy E, Horvath G, Pallagi I, Suto J, 
Ambrus G. Microbial hydroxylation of 13β -ethyl -4-
gonene -3,17-dione.  J Mol Catal B: Enzym, 1998; 5: 
385-387. 
22. Arinbasarova AYu, Karpov AV, Fokina VV, 
Medentsev AG, Koshcheyenko KA. Kinetic characteristics of 1 -en-dehydrogenation of 6α -
methylhydrocortisone by cells of Arthrobacter 
globiformis  193. Enzyme Microb Technol, 1996 ; 9: 
501-506. 
23. Mahato SB, Mukherjee A. Steroid transformation by 
microorganisms. Phytochemistry, 1984; 23: 231 -54. 
24. Capyk JK, Kalscheuer R, Stewart  GR, Liu J, Kwon 
H, Zhao R, Okamoto S, Jacobs WR, Eltis LD, Mohn 
WW. Mycobacterial cytochrome P450 125 
(Cyp125)  catalyzes the terminal hydroxylation of 
C27-steroids. J Biol Chem, 2009; 284: 35534 -
35542.  
25. Szentirmai A. Microbial physiology of sidechain 
degradation of sterols. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol, 
1990;  6: 101 -115. 
26. Wilbrink MH, Petrusma M, Dijkhuizen L, van der  
Geize R. FadD19 of Rhodococcus rhodochrous  
DSM43269, a steroidcoenzyme a ligase essential for 
degradation of C -24 branched sterol side chains. 
Appl Envir Microbiol, 2011; 77(13): 4455 -4464.  
27. DellaGreca M, Previtera L, Fiorentino A, Pinto G, 
Pollio A. Predn isolone biotransformation by the 
green alga T76 Scenedesmus qudricauda . 
Tetrahedron Lett, 1997; 53: 8273 -80. 
28. Fiorentino A, Pinto G, Pollio A, Previtera L. 
Biotransformation o f 5α -androstane -3,17-dione by 
microalgal cultures. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 1991; 
1: 673 -4. 
29. Ghasemi Y, Tabatabaei Yazdi M, Dehshahri A, 
Niknahad H, Shokravi S, Amini M, Ghasemian A, 
Faramarzi MA. Algal transformation of 
hydrocortisone by the cyanobacterium Nostoc 
ellipsosporum . Chem Nat Comp, 2006; 42: 702 -705. 
30. Yadav MR, Barmade MA, Tamboli RS, Murumkar 
PR. Developing steroidal aromatase inhibitors -an 
effective armament to win the battle against breast 
cancer. Eur J Med Chem, 2015; 105: 1 -38. 
31. Goetschel R, Bar R. Formation of mixed crystals in 
microbial conversion of sterols and 
steroids.  Enzyme Microb Technol , 1992;  14(6): 462 -
469. 
32. Ni Y, Chen RR. Accelerating whole -cell biocatalysis 
by reducing outer membrane permeability 
barrier.  Biotechnol Bioeng , 2004; 87(6): 804 -811. 
33. Zehentgruber D, Dragan C -A, Bureik M, Lutz S. 
Challenges of steroid biotransformation with human 
cytochrome P450 monooxygenase CYP21 using 
resting cells of recombinant Schizosaccharomyces 
pombe . J Biotechnol, 2010; 146(4): 179 -185. 
34. Lisowska K, K orycka M, Hadlaw -Klimaszewska o, 
Ziolkowski  A, Sedlaczek L. Permeability of 
mycobacterial cell envelopes to sterols: 
peptidoglycan as the diffusion barrier. J Basic 
Microbiol, 1996;  36: 407 -19. 
35. Sedlaczek L, Lisowska K, Korycka M, Rumijowska 
A, Ziolkowski A , Dlugonski J. The effect of cell 
wall components on glycine enhanced sterol side 
chain degradation to androstene derivatives by 
mycobacteria. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol, 1999; 52: 
563-71. www.wjpls.org   
202 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
36. Rumijowska A, Lisowska K, Ziotkowski A, 
Sedlaczek L. Transformation of sterols by 
Mycobacterium vaccae : effect of lecithin on the 
permeability of cell envelopes to sterols.  World J 
Microbiol Biotechnol , 1997;  13(1): 89 -95. 
37. Zhang L, Wang M, Shen Y, Ma Y, Luo J. 
Improvement of steroid biotransformation with 
hydroxypropyl -β-cyclodextrin induced 
complexation. Appl Biochem Biotechnol, 2009;  
159: 642 -654. 
38. Carvalho F, Marques MPC, de Carvalho CC, Cabral 
JMS, Fernandes P. Sitosterol bioconversion with 
resting cells in liquid polymer based systems. 
Bioresour Technol,  2009; 100: 4050 -4053.  
39. Lam KS. Application of whole -cell 
biotransformation in the pharmaceutical industry. In: 
Tao J, Lin G -Q and Liese A (eds.). Biocatalysis for 
the pharmaceutical industry: discovery, 
development, and manufacturing , New York; Wiley, 
2010;  213-227. 
40. Mogharabi M, Faramarzi MA. Laccase and laccase 
mediated systems in the synthesis of organic 
compounds. Adv Synth Catal, 2014; 356: 897 -927. 
41. Saab HB, Fouchard S, Boulanger A, Llopiz P, 
Neunlist S. Performance of Luffa cylindrica as an 
immobilization matrix for the biotransformation of 
cholesterol by Mycobacterium  species. Biocatal 
Biotransform, 2010; 28: 387 -394. 
42. Leon R, Fernandes P, Pinheiro H, Cabral J. Whole 
cell biocatalysis in organic media. Enzyme Microb 
Technol, 1998; 23: 483 -500. 
43. Junter G, Jouenne T.  Immobilized viable microbial 
cells: from the process to the proteome or the cart 
before the horse. Biotechnol Adv, 2004; 22: 633 -
658. 
44. Amin HAS, El -Hadi AA, Mohamed SS. 
Immobilization of Mycobacterium  sp. NRRL B -
3805 cells onto radiation crosslinked PVA/PV P 
hydrogels for production of androstenones from 
beta-sitosterol. Austral J Basic Appl Biosci, 2010; 
4(8): 2196 -2205.  
45. Peart PC, Chen ARM, Reynolds WF, Reese PB. 
Entrapment of mycelial fragments in calcium 
alginate: a general technique for the use of 
immobi lized filamentous fungi in biocatalysis. 
Steroids, 2012; 12: 85 -90. 
46. Manosroi J, Saowakhon S, Manosroi A. A novel 
one-step biotransformation of cortexolone -21-
acetate to hydrocortisone acetate using 
Cunninghamella blakesleeana  ATCC 8688a. 
Enzyme Microb. Tec hnol, 2007; 4: 322 -325. 
47. Fernandes P, Cruz A, Angelova B, Pinheiro HM, 
Cabral JMS. Microbial conversion of steroid 
compounds: recent developments.  Enzyme Microb 
Technol , 2003;  32(6): 688 -705. 
48. Cabeza MS, Gutierrez EB, Garcia GA, Avalos AH, 
Hernandez MAH. Mic robial transformations of 
testosterone  to 5α -dihydrotestosterone by two 
species of Penicillium : P. chrysogenum  and P. 
crustosum . Steroids, 1999; 64: 379 -384. 49. Hunter AC, Coyle E, Morse F, Dedi C, Dodd HT, 
Koussoroplis SJ. Transformation of 5 -ene steroids 
by the fungus Aspergillus tamarii  KITA: mixed 
molecular fate in lactonization and hydroxylation 
pathways with identification of a putative 3β -
hydroxy -steroid dehydrogenase/Δ5-Δ4 isomerase 
pathway. Biochem Biophys Acta, 2009; 1791: 110 -
117. 
50. Adamski J, Jakob FJ. A guide to 17β -hydroxysteroid 
dehyd rogenases . Mol Cell Endocrinol,  2001; 171: 1 -
4. 
51. Ahmed F, Williams RAD, Smith KE. Microbial 
transformations of steroids. X. Cytochromes P -450 
11 α -hydroxylase and C17 -C20 lyase and a 1 -ene 
dehydrogenase transform steroids in Nectria 
haematocca . J Steroid B iochem Mol Biol, 1996; 58: 
337-349. 
52. Tamagawa Y, Yamaki R, Hirai H, Kawai S, Nishida 
T . Removal of estrogenic activity of natural 
steroidal hormone estrone by ligninolytic enzymes 
from white rot fungi. Chemosphere, 2006; 65: 97 -
101. 
53. Vico P, Cauet G, Rose K , Lathe R, Degryse E. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) metabolism in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae  expressing mammalian 
steroid hydroxylase CYP7B: ayr1p and  Fox2p 
display 17 β -hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase activity. 
Yeast, 2002; 19: 873 -886. 
54. Arabi H, Yazdi MT, Faramarzi MA. Application of 
organic mono -phase and organic - Aqueous two -
liquid -phase systems in microalgal conversion of 
androst -4-en-3,17-dione by Nostoc muscorum . 
Biocatal Biotransform, 2009; 27: 219 -225. 
55. Heipieper HJ, Neumann G, Cornelissen S, 
Meinhardt F. Solvent -tolerant bacteria for 
biotransformations in two -phase fermentation 
systems. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol, 2007; 74: 961 -
973. 
56. El Refai HA, IS A bd-elslam.  Enhancement of β -
sitosterol bioconversion by Fusarium solani  using 
aqueous -organic solvent system. Aust J Basic Appl 
Sci, 2010; 4(9): 4107 -4112.  
57. He J -Y, Wang P, Yang Y -F, Xie S -L. Enhanced 
whole -cell biodehydrogenation of 11β -hydroxyl 
medroxyprogesterone in a biphasic system 
containing ionic liquid. Biotechnol Bioproc Eng, 
2011; 16: 852 -857. 
58. Cruz A, Fernandes P, Cabral J, Pinheiro H. Whole -
cell biotransformation of β -sitosterol in aqueous -
organic two -phase systems. J Mol Catal B Enzym, 
2001; 11: 579 -585. 
59. Brandenbusch C, Sadowski G. Supercritical phase 
behavior for biotransformation processing. J 
Supercrit Fluids,  2010; 55: 635 -642. 
60. Berrie JR, Williams RAD, Smith KE. Microbial 
transformations of steroids -XI. Progesterone 
transformation by Streptomyces roseoc hromogenes  -
purification and characterisation of the  16α-
hydroxylase system. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol, 
1991; 71: 153 -165. www.wjpls.org   
203 Sikander  et al.                                                                                  World Jour nal of Pharmaceutical and Life Sciences  
61. Wang J, Chen C, Li  B, Zhang J, Yu Y. Production of 
Hydrocortisone from Cortexolone -21-Acetate by 
Immobilized Absidia orchidis in Cosolvent -
Containing Media. Enzyme Microb Technol, 1998 ; 
22: 368 -373. 
62. Znidarsic P, Komel R, Pavko A. Studies of a 
pelleted growth form of Rhizopus nigricans  as a 
biocatalyst for progesterone 11 α -hydroxylation. J 
Biotechnol, 1998; 60: 207 -216. 
63. Mao S, Hu X, Hua B, Wang N, Liu X, Lu F.. 15α -
Hydroxylation of a st eroid (13 -ethyl -gon-4-en-3,17-
dione) by Penicillium raistrickii  in an ionic 
liquid/aqueous biphasic system, Biotechnol Lett, 
2012; 34(11): 2113 -2117.  
64. Santos R, Calideira J, Pinheiro H, Cabral J. Steroid 
bioconversion in a novel aqueous two -phase system, 
Biotechnol Lett, 1991; 13(5): 349 -354. 
65. Wang Z, Xu J -H, Chen D. Whole cell microbial 
transformation in cloud point system. J Ind 
Microbiol Biotechnol, 2008; 35: 645 -656. 
66. Wang Z, Zhao F, Hao X, Chen D, Li D. Model of 
bioconversion of cholesterol in cloud point  system. 
Biochem Eng J, 2004; 19: 9 -13. 
67. Stefan A, Palazzo G, Ceglie A, Panzavolta E, 
Hochkoeppler A. Water -in-Oil microemulsions to 
sustain long term viability of microbial cells in 
organic solvents. Biotechnol Bioeng, 2002; 81: 323 -
328. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 