[Frontiers in Bioscience 15, 73-92, January 1, 2010] 
73 Brain temperature homeostasis: physiological fluctuations and pathological shifts  
 
Eugene A. Kiyatkin 
 
Behavioral Neuroscience Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse–Intramural Rese arch Program, NIH, 333 Cassell Drive, 
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1. Abstract 
2. Introduction 
3. Physiological fluctuations in brai n temperature: causes and mechanisms 
4. Alterations in brain temperature homeostas is due to insufficiencies of heat dissipation 
5. Pathological brain hyperthermia induced by psychom otor stimulants: causes, m echanisms, and consequences 
6. Brain temperature as a factor affec ting neural activity and neural functions, permeability of the blood-brain barrier, and 
morphology of brain cells 
6.1.Temperature modulation of neural activity 
6.2.Temperature modulation of BBB perm eability, and water and ion homeostasis 
6.3.Temperature effects on morphology of brain cells: role of BBB leakage and edema 
7. Summary and perspectives 
8. Acknowledgements 
9. References 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. ABSTRACT 
 
 Brain temperature is a physiological 
parameter, reflecting the balance between metabolism-
related intra-brain heat production and heat loss by 
cerebral circulation to the rest of the body and then to 
the external environment.  First, we present data on 
brain temperature fluctuations occurring under 
physiological and behavioral  conditions and discuss 
their mechanisms.  Since most processes governing 
neural activity are temperature-dependent, we consider 
how naturally occurring temperature fluctuations could 
affect neural activity and neural functions.  We also 
consider psychomotor stimul ants and show that their 
hyperthermic effects are state-dependent and modulated 
by environmental conditions.  Since high temperature could 
irreversibly damage neural  cells and worsen various 
pathological processes, we consider the situations 
associated with pathological  brain hyperthermia and 
evaluate its role in acute perturbations of brain functions, 
neurotoxicity, and neurodegenera tion.  We also discuss the 
limitations in consideration of brain temperature within the 
frameworks of physiological re gulation and homeostasis.  
While different adaptive mechanisms could, within some 
limits, compensate for altered intra-brain heat balance, 
these mechanisms could fail in real-life situations, resulting 
in life-threatening health complications.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION  
  
 Temperature is one of the basic physical 
properties of any material object.  While it could be 
intuitively defined as the degree of hotness or coldness, 
scientific definitions of temperature are quite complex, but 
it usually defines a quality of physical objects that indicates 
both whether heat will flow between them and in which 
direction it will flow.  Temperature is closely related to 
heat, but if temperature is an object’s quality, heat is energy 
to or from the object because of a temperature gradient. 
 
 Although evidence suggests that changes in brain 
temperature could have profound effects on neural activity 
and neural functions, our knowledge of brain temperature, 
its normal and pathological fluctuations, and the 
mechanisms underlying brain thermal homeostasis is 
limited. Therefore, the first goal of this work is to consider 
available data on normal brain temperature, its fluctuations, 
relationships with body temper ature, and mechanisms that 
determine these fluctuations.  Being simultaneously a part 
of the body and the highest center for regulating 
physiological functions and be havior, the brain has some 
degree of autonomy from the rest of the body and differs 
from the body in regulating its basic parameters (i.e., 
metabolism, cerebral blood flow , temperature, water and 
ion content). While the brain plays a crucial role in Brain temperature homeostasis 
74 detecting, via specialized sens ory systems, variations in 
environmental temperatures, integration of this 
information, and adjusting, via effector mechanisms, heat 
production and/or heat loss to maintain a stable body 
temperature (1), it is difficult to apply this logic to brain 
temperature and it is unclear whether or not it could be 
viewed as true homeostatic pa rameter.  In contrast to 
changes in environmental temperatures, which trigger 
thermoregulatory mechanisms of heat production and heat 
loss, we will demonstrate that robust changes in brain 
temperature could occur in a temperature-stable 
environment following exposure to various salient 
somatosensory stimuli and during different types of 
motivated behaviors.  While there are different points of 
view on why these fluctuations occur and what their 
underlying mechanisms are, we  will present evidence that 
alterations in metabolic brain activity are the primary cause 
of intra-brain heat accumulation and a force behind more 
delayed changes in body temperature.  Although brain 
hyperthermia that occurs under specific physiological 
conditions is associated typically with peripheral 
vasoconstriction, which limits heat dissipation to the 
external environment, this change differs from fever, a 
stable increase in body temperat ure usually associated with 
viral and bacterial infections.  In the latter case, the brain 
receives neural and humoral signals from the periphery and 
actively defends a new, increased temperature baseline by 
enhancing heat production and/or  diminishing heat loss.  
 
 The second goal of this study is to consider 
changes in brain temperature induced by various 
pharmacological drugs that affect brain metabolism and 
heat dissipation to the external environment.  In contrast to 
activation of somatosensory pa thways which trigger brain 
activation, thus mediating phy siological fluctuations in 
brain temperature, pharmacological shifts in brain temperature are induced by direct action of drugs on 
specific centrally and peripherally located neural substrates.  
Our special focus will be on psychomotor stimulants (i.e., 
methamphetamine or METH, ecs tasy or MDMA), widely 
abused drugs that induce hyperthermia and could be 
neurotoxic.  We will demonstrate that hyperthermic effects 
of these drugs are state-dependent and strongly modulated 
by the environmental conditions  that limit heat dissipation, 
thus resulting in pathological brain hyperthermia. 
 
 The final topic of this work is pathological brain 
hyperthermia.  We will consider  the situations that could 
result in pathological changes in the brain’s thermal 
homeostasis and discuss the mechanisms responsible for 
this phenomenon.  Although high temperature per se  is a 
powerful factor that could directly damage brain cells, it 
also strongly potentiates negative impacts of other 
factors and triggers a number of pathophysiological 
processes that could result in life-threatening health 
complications and damage of brain cells.  Here, we will 
present our recent data suggesting the role of brain 
temperature in regulating permeability of the blood-
brain barrier (BBB) and the contribution of this 
mechanism to the development of brain edema and 
neurotoxicity induced by ps ychomotor stimulant drugs 
and other hyperthermic challenges. 3. PHYSIOLOGICAL FLUCTUATIONS IN BRAIN 
TEMPERATURE: CAUSES AND MECHANISMS  
     
 In contrast to abundant  information on various 
sides of brain structure and functions, our knowledge of 
brain temperature is limited.  Surprisingly, the first thermal 
recordings from the brain of an awake animal were 
conducted in the late 1860s by German physiologist Moritz 
Schiff (1870; cited by 2; p. 131), long before the first 
recordings of the brain’s electrical activity or even the 
realization that neural cells have electrical activity.  Among 
other important observations, Sc hiff described a ~1°C brain 
temperature elevation in a hungry dog after the presentation 
of meat and showed that this  brain response depends on the 
animal’s motivational state (i.e., hunger).  Based on these 
findings as well as early thermal recordings from the 
human scalp (Lombard, 1879; Amidon, 1880; cited by 2), 
William James concluded that “brain-activity seems 
accompanied by a local disengagement of heat” and 
speculated that cerebral thermometry could be a valuable 
tool in experimental psychology, allowing the correlation 
of brain activity with psychic functions (2; p. 131).    
 
Although this pioneering idea was not reinforced 
experimentally at the time, further thermorecording work in 
animals revealed relatively large brain temperature 
fluctuations ( ±2-3°C) that occur at stable ambient 
temperatures following exposure to various environmental 
challenges, spontaneous changes in activity states, and 
during different behaviors (3-10).  Brain temperature 
fluctuations reported in thes e experiments correlated with 
the biological significance of the environmental challenges, 
spontaneous and stimuli-i nduced changes in EEG and 
motor activity, and had some structural specificity with 
respect to the modality of sensory stimuli.  Although all 
these findings point toward ne ural activity as a primary 
cause of brain temperature fluctuations, temperature 
changes were generally corre lative in different brain 
structures and associated typically with similar changes in 
body core temperature.  Therefore, brain temperature 
fluctuations represent physiological reality, which is 
dependent on metabolic neural ac tivity but is quite different 
from other traditional measures  of neural activity.    
 
Although the brain represents ~2% of the human 
body’s mass, it accounts for ~20% of the organism’s total 
oxygen consumption at rest (1, 11).  Neurons require 
several orders of magnitude more energy than do other 
cells; the power consumption of  a single central neuron is 
about 0.5-4.0 nW, 300-2500 times more than the average 
body cell (1.6 pW) (12).  Biophysical measurements 
suggest that ~10
4 
ATP molecules are used to transmit a bit 
of information at a chemical synapse and 106-107 ATP 
molecules are used for spike coding (13).  Although most energy used for neuronal metabolism is spent restoring 
membrane potentials after electrical discharges (14-17), 
suggesting a basic relations hip between metabolic and 
electrical neural activity, significant energy is also used on 
neural processes not directly related to electrical activity, 
particularly for synthesis of macromolecules and transport 
of protons across mitochondrial membranes.  In addition to 
neurons, the brain contains metabolically active glial andBrain temperature homeostasis 
75 
 
Figure 1 .  Changes in brain (NAcc, dorsal striatum and 
hippocampus) and arterial blood temperature induced by 3-
min tail-pinch in awake, freel y moving male rats.  A shows 
mean (±sem) values of absolute temperatures (°C); B 
shows differentials between re lative temperature changes in 
each brain structure and in arterial blood; C shows rapid-
time course resolution of temperature changes (2 s).  Filled 
symbols in each graph indicate values significantly 
different from baseline. Verti cal hatched lines show onset 
and offset of tail-pinch.  For additional details see 18.  
 
endothelial cells, which numbers greatly exceed those of 
neural cells.  Since all energy used for brain metabolism is 
finally transformed into heat (11), intense heat production 
appears to be an essential feature of brain metabolic 
activity.   
 
Our initial interest in brain temperature was 
motivated by the desire to find a simple, sensitive, and 
integrative index for characterization of alterations in 
neural activity during motivated behavior.  We also knew 
that psychomotor stim ulant drugs induce body hyperthermia, which is believed to be a leading contributor 
to neurotoxic effects of these drugs.  It was unclear, 
however, whether this effect occurs in the brain, why it 
occurs, and its relations to body temperature are.  Before 
addressing these issues, we examined brain temperature 
responses to environmenta l challenges of different 
modalities and determined their specifics in different brain 
structures and other body locations.  Since circulation is the 
primary means of heat exchange between the brain and the 
rest of the body and the temperature differential between 
brain tissue and arterial blood inflow determines the 
direction of heat exchange, it was important to examine the 
relationships between temper ature responses occurring in 
the brain and in its arterial blood supply.    
  
In these experiments (18), male rats were 
chronically implanted with miniature copper-constantan 
thermocouple electrodes in several brain structures (dorsal 
and ventral striatum, cerebellum) and in the abdominal 
aorta assessed via the caudal artery.  While our goal was to 
provide accurate measurement of arterial blood temperature 
that enters the brain and carotid artery seems to be the best 
measurement point, in rats it is quite difficult to record 
temperature in this location without full blocking or 
significantly decreasing blood flow, thus altering the 
recorded temperature.  In contrast, the presence of a 
miniature catheter with a thermocouple electrode in the 
abdominal aorta does not result in an evident decrease in 
blood flow, thus allowing meas urements be made in the 
body core—the area with the high temperature.  In contrast 
to the carotid artery, where th e recorded temperatures could 
be undervalued because of a cooler neck area, temperature 
values in the abdominal aorta could be only overvalued 
because of heat inflow from warmer surroundings.  
Temperature recordings were conducted with high temporal 
resolution (each 200 ms with subsequent averaging for 2 s) in freely moving rats exposed to a number of 
physiologically relevant ar ousing stimuli, ranging from 
simple sensory to clearly aversive (placement in the cage, 
20-s sound, three-min social interaction with either a male 
or female companion, and three-min tail-pinch).  These 
measurements were made at stable ambient temperatures 
(23°C).    
 
This study produced several findings.  First, each 
brain structure had its own basal temperature (ventral 
striatum 37.6°C; dorsal st riatum 37.2°C; cerebellum 
37.3°C), which was significantly (p<0.001) higher than that 
of arterial blood (36.6°C).  These absolute temperatures 
typically decreased in each of four recording locations both 
within each individual session and between sessions, 
reflecting animal habituation to  the recording environment.  
However, the differences between each brain location and 
arterial blood always remained positive and relatively 
similar.  Second, all stimu li induced rapid, unique, and 
relatively long lasting temperature elevations in both brain 
structures and arterial blood, greatly exceeding the duration 
of stimulation (Figure 1).  Cage transfer incited the 
strongest change, social inte raction and tail-pinch elicited 
moderate changes, and sound resulted in the smallest 
change.  Third, temperature changes in each brain structure 
occurred significantly faster and had higher amplitude than Brain temperature homeostasis 
76 those in arterial blood (Figure 1C).  This disparity resulted 
in a significant increase in temperature differentials 
between brain structures and arterial blood (Figure 1B).  
For example, temperature in the dorsal and ventral striatum 
became significantly higher than baseline from 8 s from the 
start of a 60-s tail-pinch, while in arterial blood 
temperature, increase became significant only at 38 s.   
Fourth, despite a generally correlative time-course, 
temperature changes had structural specificity.  Both 
striatal divisions showed quite similar changes, but 
temperature increases in cerebellum were more delayed and 
prolonged following each stimulus.  Finally, brain 
temperature increases induced by environmental challenges 
showed changes within repeated tests. While the elevations 
following tail-pinch, male-male, and male-female 
interactions remained relatively stable over five repeated 
daily sessions, responses to sound showed a clear 
habituation with a complete disappearance of the thermal 
response by the fifth session. The initial temperature 
increase associated with environmental change was 
relatively stable over repeated sessions, but on each 
subsequent day temperatures decreased more quickly to 
lower baselines, enhancing the relative response magnitude.  
Thus, during repeated habituati on to the same experimental 
environment, rats showed a gradual trend of decreasing 
brain temperatures, which paralleled a decrease in general 
motor activity. 
 
Given that the blood supply to the brain is cooler 
than the brain itself, and that brain temperatures rise more 
quickly and to a larger extent than do arterial blood in 
response to all challenges, intra-brain heat production 
appears to be the primary cause of functional brain 
hyperthermia.  While arterial blood temperature also 
gradually increases in respons e to all challenges, brain-
arterial blood temperature differentials grow consistently during behavioral activation, showing an apparent increase 
in intra-brain heat production.   Therefore, it seems that 
increased blood circulation that accompanies functional 
brain activation removes heat from the brain.  Tail-pinch 
similar to that used in our study induced an almost two-fold 
increase in striatal blood flow; as with brain temperature, 
this increase was rapid and greatly exceeded the duration of 
stimulation (19).  Rapid prolonged increases in striatal 
blood flow (80-120%) also occurred during grooming and 
eating (19), activities consistently associated with brain 
temperature increases (3, 4, 20).  Hence, brain circulation is 
a significant factor in the re-dis tribution of locally released 
heat within brain tissue and in its removal from the brain, 
thus contributing to brain temperature fluctuations 
occurring under behavioral conditions.  
 
Our subsequent studies (21, 22) revealed that 
increases in brain temperature induced by various arousing 
stimuli are accompanied by slightly delayed and weaker 
temperature increases in musculus temporalis , a non-
locomotor head muscle that receives the same arterial blood 
supply as the brain from the car otid artery, as well as a 
biphasic temperature fluctuation in the skin (Figure 2A).  
These between-site differences were evident immediately 
after the start of stimulation, resulting in significant 
increase in brain-muscle temperature differentials (see Figure 2B).  This accelerated rise of brain vs. muscle 
temperatures (analyzed as a relative change) appears to be a 
true index of brain activation, correlating more tightly with 
locomotor activation and acute skin hypothermia.  The 
latter response is an obvious consequence of peripheral 
vasoconstriction—a known adap tive organism’s response 
that is triggered by various stressful stimuli (23-25) and 
aimed at heat retention under conditions of potential 
danger.  While changes in br ain and muscle temperatures 
occurred with some latency, skin temperature response was 
quite rapid, typically being seen during the first 10-20 s 
after the start of stimulation, and correlating with the 
locomotor response (C).  Howe ver, skin hypothermia was 
transient and inverted in rebound-like skin warming, 
suggesting enhanced heat dissi pation.  These changes in 
heat retention and loss are evident in skin-muscle 
differentials, which strongly decreased for 10-20 min after 
arousing stimuli but late r increased above baseline.           
 
 Brain temperature responses induced by various 
arousing stimuli depend upon basal brain temperature.  
This correlation was found with a ll tested stimuli, as shown 
in Figure 3 for the procedures of subcutaneous and 
intraperitoneal saline injections, tail-pinch, male-male 
social interaction, and presentation of sexually arousing 
stimuli originated from the receptive but inaccessible 
female partner to sexually experienced male rats.  In each 
case, temperature increase was large when basal 
temperatures were low, and the response became gradually 
weaker when basal temperatures were high.  In each case, 
regression lines crossed the line of no effect within 38-
39°C, suggesting that the res ponse should fully disappear at 
high temperatures.  Such high temperatures, however, are 
well within the range of physiological fluctuations and they 
occur, for example, during the rats’ relocation in novel 
environmental conditions (26) or natural copulatory behavior (22). This correlation appears to be valid for any 
arousing stimuli, reflecting some basic relationships 
between basal activity state (basal arousal) and its changes 
induced by environmental stimuli.  This correlation, 
moreover, is weaker for stimuli that induce smaller 
temperature increases and str onger for powerful stimuli that 
result in larger temperature fluctuations.  These 
observations may be viewed  as examples of the 'law of 
initial values' , which postulates that the magnitude and 
even direction of autonomic response to an «activating» 
stimulus is related to the pr e-stimulus, basal values (27, 
28).  This relationship was evident for a number of 
homeostatic parameters, incl uding arterial blood pressure, 
body temperature, and blood sugar levels.   
 
Although different brain structures show a 
generally similar pattern of temperature fluctuations, their 
basal temperatures differ significantly.  Tested at the same 
conditions, more dorsally located structures were 
consistently cooler (dorsal striatum, 36.6°C; hippocampus, 
35.6°C) than more ventrally located structures (ventral 
tegmental area of midbrain, 37.3°C; medial preoptic area of 
hypothalamus, 37.3°C; nucleus accumbens or NAcc, 
37.3°C).   Importantly, these between-structural differences 
exist in various environmen tal conditions despite large 
fluctuations in absolute temp eratures.   While these data Brain temperature homeostasis 
77 
 
Figure 2 .  Changes in brain (NAcc), muscle ( musculus temporalis ) and skin temperatures induced in male rats by tail-pinch (left 
panel) and social interaction with female  (right panel).  A shows relative temperatur e changes; B shows NAcc-muscle and skin-
muscle temperature differentials, and C shows locomotion.  Verti cal hatched lines in each graph show onset of stimulation and 
filled symbols denote values significantly different from pre-stimulus baseline. For additional details see 21. 
 
support a dorso-ventral temperature gradient described in 
animal (4, 9, 29) and human br ains (30-32), the reasons and 
underlying mechanisms for this gradient remain unclear.  
One point of view suggests that higher temperature in more 
ventrally located structures reflects their further location 
from the colder environment and more heating by, 
presumably, warm blood from the body (33-35).  However, 
this assumption, inferred from rectal or core body 
measurements, is challenged by direct measurements of 
arterial blood temperatures (8, 18, 36), which suggest that 
in awake animals, the brain is always warmer than the 
arterial blood supply and thus ca nnot be warmed by arterial 
blood.  While distance from the external environment could 
not be excluded as a factor, the impact of this factor seems 
low in light of the brain’s heavy insulation and intense 
blood flow.   Another point of view relates dorso-ventral 
temperature gradient to differences in metabolic activity, 
particularly in structure-specific expression of brain 
uncoupling proteins that regulate uncoupling in 
mitochondria and local heat production (29) and in their 
electrical activity.  In the ‘cold’ cortex, for example, a great 
majority of neural cells (>95-98%) are silent at rest, but 
show phasic excitations as a result of either sensory 
stimulation or local glutamate a pplication.  The same is true 
for dorsal striatal cells, most of which (at least 90-95%) in 
freely moving rats maintain electric silence at rest but show 
phasic stimuli- or glutamate- induced and movement-related 
excitations  (37).  In contrast, most neurons of the ‘warm’ 
hypothalamus and VTA are spontaneously active at rest 
(38-40, 39).  Dorso-ventral di fferences in neuronal impulse 
activity also have been reported in our previous work both Brain temperature homeostasis 
78 
 
 
Figure 3 .  Relationships between changes in brain temperature induced in rats by various arousing s timuli [intraperitoneal (ip) 
and subcutaneous (sc) injections of saline (0.2 ml), social interaction with female  rat, 3-min tail-pinch and exposure of sexua lly-
experienced males to females] and basal brain temperature.  Each graph shows dependence of NAcc temperature change induced 
by a stimulus from pre-stimulus basal NAcc temperatures.  In each case, temperature elevation was negatively correlated with 
basal temperature (each graph shows regression lines, regression e quations and coefficients of correlation, r).  Original data were 
previously published (21, 90).   
 
within the diencephalon (38) and forebrain (41).  Finally, 
dorso-ventral temperature differences, especially in small 
animals, may be due partially to technical aspects of 
thermorecording.  When the tip of a temperature-sensitive 
metal probe is not in tight contact with brain tissue or is 
implanted superficially, heat dissipation from the probe to 
the external environment may be greater and measured 
temperatures will be undervalued.  Even greater mistakes 
will occur if temperatures are measured from an open skull.  
  
Numerous data suggest that increased brain 
metabolism is accompanied by increased brain circulation, 
and changes in local cerebral blood flow are widely used as 
a measure of functional brain activation.  However, the 
relationships between brain metabolism and cerebral blood 
flow are complex and are currently poorly understood (see 
42, 43 for review).  While temperature is usually omitted 
from equations relating meta bolism and blood flow or 
viewed as a passive parameter (44, 45), direct relationships 
between temperature and blood flow are well established in 
peripheral tissues.  Strong linear increases in blood flow 
during local temperature increases  were shown in skin (46, 47), muscular tissue (48), the intestine (49), and the liver 
(50).  The same relationships were also observed in the 
brain of monkeys (51), rats (52), and humans (53).  
Increases in local brain temperature resulting from 
enhanced neural metabolism can therefore be understood as 
one of the factors that increase local blood flow.  This 
factor could explain, at least partially, the well-known but 
little-understood phenomenon of a blood flow increase that 
exceeds metabolic activity of brain tissue (42).  Since 
metabolic activation is accompanied by heat production 
and increased local temperature, a greater blood flow 
response could reflect not only an increased metabolism but 
also an increased brain temperature.  Using this 
mechanism, the brain is able  to increase blood flow more 
and in advance of actual metabolic demands, thus 
providing a crucial advantage for successful goal-directed 
behavior and the organism’s adaptation to potential energy 
demands.  By increasing blood flow above the brain’s 
current demand, more oxygen and nutrients are delivered to 
the areas of potential demand and more potentially 
dangerous metabolic heat is  removed from intensively 
working brain tissue.  While  special experiments with Brain temperature homeostasis 
79 parallel measurements of temperature and blood flow 
(which is a quite complex task, especially in small animals) 
are necessary to clarify this issue, it appears that the brain 
could “regulate” its own temperature by temperature-
dependent changing of its blood flow.  
 
4. ALTERATIONS IN BRAIN TEMPERATURE 
HOMEOSTASIS DUE TO INSUFFICIENCIES OF 
HEAT DISSIPATION  
  
Although heat cannot be delivered to the brain 
from the periphery, it could be accumulated in the brain 
when it cannot be properly dissipated to the external 
environment.  In this case, brain hyperthermia results from 
temperature rise in the body core and arterial blood 
temperature, decreasing heat dissipation from brain tissue.  
Such hyperthermia usually occurs from a combination of 
excessive heat production coupled with insufficient heat 
loss.  It is known that intense physical activity is associated 
with robust energy consumption and significant heat 
production.  In humans, oxyge n consumption increases up 
to ten-fold in the transition between quiet resting conditions 
and intense running (1, 54).  This increase corresponds to 
whole-body metabolic heat production, which increases 
from ~ 1 W/kg at rest to ~10 W/kg during heavy exercise 
(55).  Enhanced heat production is compensated by 
enhanced heat loss, which in humans depends on a well-
developed ability to sweat and on a dynamic range of blood 
flow rates in the skin, which are much higher than those in 
other species.  Skin blood flow in humans, for example, can 
increase from ~0.2-0.5 l/min in thermally neutral 
conditions to 7-8 l/min under maximally tolerable heat 
stress (56).  Sweat rates under these conditions may reach 
up to 2.0 l/h, providing a potential evaporative rate of heat 
loss in excess of 1 kW (or ~14 W/kg), i.e., more than 
maximally possible heat production.  These compensatory mechanisms, however, become progressively less effective 
in hot, humid conditions, resulting in progressive heat 
accumulation in the organism.  For example, body 
temperatures measured at the end of a marathon run on a 
warm day were found to be as high as 40°C (57) and cases 
of fatigue during marathon r unning were associated with 
even higher temperatures (58).  While 90-min of intense 
cycling in experienced cyclists at normal environmental 
temperatures increased body temperature less than 1°C, 
2.0-2.5°C increases were found when participants cycled in 
water-impermeable suits that restricted heat loss via skin 
surfaces (53).  
 
Although body hyperthermia associated with 
intense physical activity under conditions that restrict heat 
dissipation is a known phenome non, the impact of these 
conditions on the brain is a matter of speculation and 
controversy (59-62).  Since the direct recording of brain 
temperature in humans is usually impossible, tympanic 
temperature has been used as an indirect measure of brain 
temperature (63, 64).  Using this approach during exercise 
with and without active cooling of the head, it was assumed 
that brain temperatures during intense body heat production 
remain lower than body temperatures, suggesting selective 
brain cooling as a mechanism preventing brain over-
heating during extreme body hyperthermia.  Direct measurements of brain temper ature in neurological patients 
(31, 65, 66, 67) and applica tions of more sophisticated 
physiological recordings (53, 68), however, called the 
existence of a brain cooling mechanism in humans into 
question.  By directly measuring temperatures in the carotid 
artery and internal jugular vein in human volunteers, it was 
shown that at rest, venous blood exiting the brain is ~0.3°C 
warmer than arterial blood entering the brain.  Although 
during 10-min cycling both temperatures increased about 
1°C and the increase was stronger in the carotid artery than 
in the jugular vein, the venous-arterial difference always 
remained positive.  When the cycling was done in water-
impermeable suits, the increases were more dramatic (up to 
39.3 and 39.5°C for arterial and venous blood, 
respectively), but the difference still remained positive.  
After termination of exercise, arterial blood temperature 
dropped rapidly, while venous temperature decreased more 
slowly.  Simultaneous meas urements of tympanic 
temperatures under these cond itions revealed that their 
values are consistently lower than, and independent of, 
arterial and venous temperatur es.  Therefore, human brain 
temperature may also increase during intense physical 
exercise, reaching relatively high levels under conditions 
that restrict heat dissipation to the external environment.  
Although arterial blood always remains cooler than brain 
tissue and removes metabolic  heat from the brain, 
progressive intra-brain heat accumulation occurring during 
intense physical activity reflects a failure of this natural 
cooling mechanism due to an inability to dissipate 
metabolic heat to the external environment and gradual 
warming of arterial blood arriving to the brain.  
 
While diminished heat outflow from the brain 
appears to be the primary cause of intra-brain heat 
accumulation, physical exercise is also associated with 
increased brain metabolism (69, 70) and consequently enhanced intra-brain thermogenesis.  Taking into account 
uptake of oxygen, glucose, and lactate, an almost two-fold 
increase in global brain metabolism was reported during 
10-min intense cycling at normal environmental 
temperatures.  Although cereb ral blood flow increases 
during physical exercise and this increase is in excess of 
enhanced cerebral metabolic activity (53, 68), cerebral 
blood flow decreases gradually during maximal exercise at 
hyperthermic conditions because of a hyperventilation-
induced decrease in CO
2 pressure (68).  In contrast to more 
intense heat removal from the brain by blood flow during 
physical exercise under normal conditions, under 
hyperthermic conditions compromised cerebral blood 
outflow is an additional, powerful factor that diminishes 
heat dissipation from the brain, thus promoting intra-brain 
heat accumulation.  
 
Although robust brain hyperthermia (~39.5°C) 
did occur on human volunteers during intense cycling 
under conditions that restrict heat dissipation (53), this 
activity did not result in clear fatigue.  Hypothalamic 
temperatures associated with forced exercise-induced 
fatigue in rats were higher (40.1-42.1°C; 71) than those 
(40.0-40.7°C for body and deep muscles) found in humans 
during self-motivated exercise (72).  These temperatures 
exceeded the upper limits of physiological increases Brain temperature homeostasis 
80 (~39.5-40.0° for deep brain structures; see section 3) and 
were close to the threshold values associated with 
disturbances in permeability of the brain-blood barrier, 
development of brain edema, and irreversible damage of 
neural cells (see section 5).  Although fatigue during 
intense exercise may protect the brain against further 
overheating, robust brain hyperthe rmia associated with this 
condition is an obvious contributor to serious acute and 
long-term health complications  reported in sportsmen and 
military recruits engaged in extreme physical activity under 
harsh environmental conditions.  
 
Although temperatures of venous blood exiting 
the brain may be viewed as the best indirect measure of 
brain temperature in humans, direct measurements in the 
brain, jugular bulb, and body core (rectum) revealed 
unexpected differences between these areas.  First, 
temperatures in the cortex were found to be 0.2-0.8°C 
higher than in the body core (31, 65, 66, 67).  Second, 
cortical temperatures were ~1.0°C higher than those in the 
jugular vein, which were similar to core body temperature 
(31, 65).  Third, jugular temperatures were found to 
correlate more strongly with rectal than brain temperature 
(65).  Brain temperatures in humans remained higher than 
body temperature not only during normothermic conditions 
but also during fever, suggesting that the human brain has 
no specific protection against thermal impact (65, 67).  
Although these data were obtaine d in neurological patients, 
they suggest that the use of j ugular vein temperatures as an 
index of brain temperature may in fact underestimate real 
brain temperature.  This undere stimation may be related to 
the procedural features of m easurement.   Because venous 
blood flow is slow and the catheter with the thermosensor 
is in tight contact with th e vessel’s walls, the measured 
temperatures are influenced by cooler neighboring tissues 
and thus are lower than true brain temperature.  If jugular venous measurements underestimate brain temperature, the 
real temperature difference between brain and arterial 
blood under resting conditions may be greater than 0.3°C 
(53), as suggested by our m easurements in rats (18).  
 
5. PATHOLOGICAL BRAIN HYPERTHERMIA 
INDUCED BY PSYCHOMOTOR STIMULANTS: 
CAUSES AND MECHANISMS  
     
Most psychoactive drugs have direct effects on 
the brain and organism metabolism.  For example, 
amphetamine-like psychomotor  stimulant drugs (i.e., 
amphetamine, methamphetami ne or METH, MDMA or 
Ecstasy) induce behavioral and sympathetic activation, 
increase brain metabolism (73, 74) and elevate 
temperatures (75-79).  These drugs also have peripheral 
vasoconstrictive effects (80, 81), thus diminishing heat 
dissipation to the external environment.  Finally, these 
drugs are widely abused and often taken under conditions 
of high psychophysiological activation and in warm, humid 
environments, potentiating drug-induced metabolic 
activation and complicating prope r heat dissipation.  This 
combination of drug effects, the activity state, and 
environmental conditions could result in pathological 
hyperthermia, which appears to be tightly related to 
dangerous, and even fatal, acute decompensation of vital functions, and neurotoxicity (82-85), a clinically important 
complication of chronic use of  these addictive drugs.   
   
To examine how these drugs affect brain 
temperature and how their effects are modulated by 
environmental conditions that mimic human use, we 
examined temperature changes in two brain structures 
(NAcc, hippocampus) and temporal muscle induced by 
METH (1-9 mg/kg, sc) in male rats in quiet resting 
conditions at normal laboratory temperatures (23°C), 
during social interaction with a female, and at moderately 
warm ambient temperatures (29°C) (86-88).  
 
Figure 4 shows the effects of METH at the same 
high dose (9 mg/kg, sc) in these three conditions.  As can 
be seen, METH strongly in creased brain (NAcc and 
hippocampus) and temporal muscle temperatures during 
quiet resting conditions at normal ambient temperatures 
(left column; A).  The increase was stronger in both brain 
sites than in the muscle, exceeding that following natural 
arousing stimuli (B; compare with Figure 1).  A stronger 
temperature increase in brain vs. muscle increased brain-
muscle differentials (C); this  effect was also more profound 
and prolonged than that seen  with natural stimuli.  
Therefore, intra-brain heat production associated with 
metabolic brain activation appears to be the primary cause 
of METH-induced brain hyperthermia and a factor behind 
more delayed and weaker body hyperthermia.  This 
temperature increase was about 3.5-4.0°C above normal 
baseline (mean ~40°C) and could be viewed as a 
pathological hyperthermia .  Although some animals 
showed even stronger temperat ure increases (up to 41.0°C), 
they always survived this drug exposure.    
 
Although METH-induced te mperature increases 
were larger in brain locations vs. temporal muscle (~0.4°C), this brain hyperthermia is a part of general 
hyperthermia, which is evident in different body locations.  
While skin temperature transiently decreases after METH 
administration, reflecti ng drug-induced peripheral 
vasoconstriction, it later increases well above baseline 
because of a progressive warming of arterial blood inflow. 
 
When the same drug was injected 30-min after 
the start of social interaction with a female rat and pre-
injection baselines were ~1°C  higher, the hyperthermic 
effect of METH was significantly larger and more 
prolonged than that seen in qui et resting conditions (Figure 
4A and B, middle column).  Importantly, METH 
administered under activated conditions induced stronger 
and more prolonged increases in  brain-muscle differentials 
than those seen in controls (C).  This finding once again 
suggests a role for metabolic brain activation and intra-
brain heat production in the genesis of hyperthermia.  
While the potentiating effect of social interaction was not 
additive, mean brain temperatur es in this case maintained 
above 40°C for more than two hours.   Finally, the effects 
of METH were greatly potentia ted by a slight increase in 
ambient temperature (29°C; Figure 4, right column).  This 
ambient temperature is close to normothermy in rats (89) 
and, as we showed before (90), did not affect animal 
behavior and basal temperatures.  When administered at Brain temperature homeostasis 
81 
 
Figure 4 .   Changes in brain (nucleus accumbens or NAcc and hi ppocampus or Hippo) and temporal muscle temperatures 
induced in male rats by methamphetamine (9 mg/kg) administ ered under different environmenta l conditions.  Left panel shows 
the effects in quiet resting conditions at normal ambient temp eratures (23°C), middle panel shows the effects under conditions of 
physiological activation (interaction with fe male started 30-min before drug injection;  shown as first hatched line), and right  
panel shows the effects in warm environmen tal conditions (29°C).  The moment of drug injection is shown by vertical hatched 
line at 0 min.  Graphs in left and central panels represent ab solute (A) and relative temperature (B) changes as well as brain-
muscle differentials (C).  Filled symbols ma rk values significantly different from baselin e.  Since most rats exposed to METH a t 
29°C died during the experiment, mean temperature data for this  group (right panel) are shown only for the period when all rats  
were alive (A, relative temperature change; B, brain-muscle temper ature.   C in this panel shows temperature dynamics in all 
experimental rats hours 5 hours following drug in jection.  Four rats (2,4,5 and 6) that  showed robust hyperthermia (41-42.5°C) 
died between 2 and 3 hours post-injection.  Another rat (1) that  survived the period of recording died over-night.  For other 
details see 87, 88.  
 
29°C, METH increased temperatures rapidly in all animals, 
resulting in most animals in clearly pathological 
hyperthermia (>41-42°C) and d eath in five of six animals 
(C).  Similar data were also obtained with MDMA 
(ecstasy), another widely  abused amphetamine-like 
psychostimulant drug with psyche delic properties (88).  In 
contrast to METH, MDMA at low doses slightly decreased brain and body temperatures and animal activity in standard 
laboratory conditions and its hyperthermic and stimulant 
effects at equal doses were weaker than those for METH.  
However, the hyperthermic effects of this drug were 
potentiated by social interacti on even stronger, possibly due 
to its stronger and more prol onged vasoconstrictive effects 
(80, 81).  Similar to METH, MDMA at a dose (9 mg/kg) 
about ~1/6 of LD
50 (91) induced pathological hyperthermia 
and lethality in most rats when used at moderately warm 
ambient temperatures (29°C).  Therefore, one (1.5 mg/kg) 
or two tablets of MDMA may be highly toxic in 
predisposed individuals if  consumed in adverse 
environmental conditions. Th is powerful modulation of 
drug-induced toxicity by relatively weak changes in 
environmental conditions may explain exceptionally strong, 
sometimes fatal, responses of some individuals to 
amphetamine-like substances  seen under conditions of 
raves (84).  6. BRAIN TEMPERATURE AS A FACTOR 
AFFECTING NEURAL ACTIVITY AND NEURAL 
FUNCTIONS, BBB PERMEABILITY, AND 
MORPHOLOGY OF BRAIN CELLS  
 
 In establishing the role brain temperature plays in 
normal physiological functions and the development of pathological processes, it is important to realize that it 
could be viewed from two differe nt perspectives.  From one 
perspective, changes in brain temperature could be viewed 
as an index of altered th ermal homeostasis, which is 
determined by metabolic brain activity and heat loss via 
cerebral blood flow.  Therefore, brain temperature 
fluctuations depend on alterations in neural activity, brain 
metabolism, and modulated by thermal influences from the 
body via alterations of cerebral blood flow.  This 
perspective makes brain temperature an important and 
relatively easily recorded physiological parameter, which 
could provide valuable info rmation on basic metabolic 
brain mechanisms involved in  different behaviors.  
Although these mechanisms could be viewed as non-
specific, it does not mean that they are not important or that 
they should be ignored.  While these issues are not within 
the goals of this review article, brain thermorecording has 
been used previously to study sexual behavior (22, 92), Brain temperature homeostasis 
82 feeding behavior (20) as well as heroin (93) and cocaine 
self-administration behavior (94).  
 
 From another perspective, temperature could be 
viewed as a factor that directly affects brain cells, neural 
activity, cerebral blood flow, permeability of the brain-
blood barrier (BBB), and brain wa ter and ion content, thus 
strongly modulating neural func tions.  Literature data and 
our own work to support this role will be discussed below.  
 
6.1. Temperature modulation of neural activity  
Although heat is an obvious “by-product” of 
metabolic activation and is re-distributed continuously 
within the brain via conduction and blood flow, brain 
temperature changes may play important adaptive and 
integrative roles, involving and uniting numerous central 
neurons within the brain.  Although this type of inter-
neuronal communication is obviously not the main, nor the 
most efficient, it may have adaptive significance since most 
physical and chemical processes governing neural activity 
are temperature-dependent.  While it is generally believed 
that most physical and chemical processes are affected by 
temperature with the average Van’t Hoff coefficient 
Q10=2.3 (i.e., doubling with 10°C change [95]), 
experimental evaluations using in vitro  slices revealed 
widely varying effects of temperature on passive 
membrane properties, single spike and spike bursts as 
well as the neuronal responses (i.e., EPSP and IPSP) 
induced by electric stimulation of tissue or its afferents 
(96-99).  While confirming that synaptic transmission is 
more temperature-dependent than the generation of 
action potentials (100), thes e studies showed that 
temperature dependence varies greatly for each 
parameter, the type of cells under study, and the nature 
of afferent input involve d in mediating neuronal 
responses.  
 
Although temperature-sensitive neurons were 
first described in the preop tic/anterior hypothalamus (101-
103) and they were originally  viewed as primary central 
temperature sensors, cells in many other structures (i.e., 
visual, motor and somatosensory cortex, hippocampus, 
medullar brain stem, thalam us) also show dramatic 
modulations of impulse activity by temperature.  Many of 
these cells have a Q 10 similar to classic warm-sensitive 
hypothalamic neurons.  In the medial thalamus, for 
example, 22% of cells show a positive thermal coefficient 
>0.8 imp/s/°C (104), exceeding the number of temperature-
modulated cells found in this study in both anterior (8%) 
and posterior (11.5%) hypot halamus.  About 18% of 
neurons in the superchiasmatic  nucleus are warm-sensitive 
(105), while >70% of these cells  decrease their activity rate 
with cooling below physiological baseline (37-25°C) (106).  
Finally, high temperature sensitivity was found on 
electrophysiologically identified substantia nigra dopamine 
neurons in vitro  (107).  Within the physiological range (34-
39°C), their discharge rate increases with warming 
(Q10=3.7) and dramatically decreases (Q 10=8.5) during 
cooling below physiological range (34-29°C). 
 
Temperature also strongly modulates release of 
various neuroactive substa nces.  For example, Q 10 for K+-induced glutamate release in vitro  was 3.6-5.5, 3.5-6.3 for 
GABA release, and within 11.3-37.7 for K+- and 
capsaicin-induced release of calcitonin gene-related 
peptide (108, 109).  However, in vivo,  these dramatic 
changes in release are compensated by increased 
transmitter uptake.  For example, within the 
physiological range, dopamine uptake almost doubles 
with a 3°C temperature increase (Q 10=3.5-5.9; 110), a 
fluctuation easily achieved in the brain under conditions 
of physiological activation.  
 
The fact that temperature has strong effects on 
various neural parameters, ranging from the activity of 
single ionic channels to such integrative processes as 
transmitter release and uptake has important 
implications.  First, it sugge sts that naturally occurring 
fluctuations in brain temperature affect various 
parameters of neural activity and neural functions.  
While in vitro  experiments permit individual cells to be 
studied and individual compone nts of neural activity and 
synaptic transmission to be  separated, neural cells in 
vivo are interrelated and interdependent.  Therefore, 
their integral changes may be different from those of 
individual com ponents assessed in vitro .  For example, 
increased transmitter uptake should compensate for 
temperature-dependent increase in transmitter release, 
thus limiting fluctuations in synaptic transmission.  By 
increasing both release and uptake, however, brain 
hyperthermia makes neurot ransmission more efficient 
and neural functions more effective at reaching 
behavioral goals.  Therefore, changes in temperature may 
play an important integrative role, involving and uniting 
numerous central neurons within the brain.  
 
6.2. Temperature modulation of BBB permeability and 
brain water and ionic homeostasis   
Along with the influences of temperature 
fluctuations on neural activity , strong temperature increases 
or decreases could adversely affect brain cells and brain 
functions.  While brain cells seems to tolerate well low 
temperatures (111, 112), multiple in vitro  studies suggest 
that high temperature (>40.0°C)  has destructive effects on 
various cells (113, 114), especially profound in 
metabolically active brain cells (115-119), including 
neuronal, glial, endothelial, a nd epithelial cells (120, 121).  
Rapid damage to brain cells  has been also documented in 
vivo during extreme environmental warming (122-124) and 
acute METH intoxication (125, 126), which both result in 
robust brain hyperthermia (see above) as well as increased 
permeability of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and 
vasogenic edema (122, 124, 125, 127).  The integrity of the 
BBB is also compromised during opiate withdrawal (128), 
intense physical exercise in a warm environment (129), and 
during restraint and forced swim stress (130-132)—
conditions associated with brain hyperthermia (53, 133).  
Although all these data implicat e brain hyperthermia as a 
leading factor in BBB leakage and subsequent damage to 
brain cells, these changes may be also affected by many 
other factors (i.e., metabolic brain activation, oxidative 
stress, alterations in cerebral blood flow, hypoxia) (134-
136), which contribute to alterations in BBB permeability 
and subsequent structural brain damage (137-139).   Brain temperature homeostasis 
83  To clarify the role of brain temperature 
in modulating BBB permeability, it is essential to delineate 
this physical factor from othe r possible contributors.  To 
reach this goal, we examined several brain parameters in 
pentobarbital-anesthetized rats, whose bodies were 
passively warmed to produce different levels of brain 
temperature, which was monitored by chronic brain 
thermocouple probes.  As shown in our previous study 
(140), sodium pentobarbital administered at a typical 
anesthetic dose (50 mg/kg, ip) under standard laboratory 
conditions (23°C) induces robust brain and body 
hypothermia (~31-33°C) associated with relative skin 
warming, suggesting loss of va scular tone and increased 
heat loss to the environment.  In addition to metabolic 
inhibition that is a primary cause for brain and body 
hypothermia, anesthetized ra ts became very sensitive to 
environmental temperatures, becoming hypothermic at low 
ambient temperatures and hype rthermic when their bodies 
are warmed.  Therefore, by changing the intensity of body 
warming, we were able to produce a wide range of brain 
temperatures from very low, hypothermic (>32°C) to very 
high, hyperthermic (<42°C).  This paradigm was used to 
evaluate the role of brain temperature in regulating BBB 
permeability and alterations in tissue water and ions as 
well as the development of acute morphological 
abnormalities of brain cells (Kiyatkin and Sharma, 
unpublished observations).  The brains were taken at the 
same time after the start of anesthesia (90 min) and the 
initiation of body warming, but  at different levels of 
brain temperature and analyzed for several brain 
parameters.  Similar to ot her studies, NAcc here was 
chosen as a representative deep brain structure. To 
evaluate the integrity of BBB we used 
immunohistochemistry fo r endogenous albumin, a 
relatively large plasma protein (molecular weight 59 
kDa, molecular diameter 70 nm) that is normally confined to the luminal side of the endothelial cells and 
is not present in the brain.  Thus, the appearance of 
albumin-positive cells and albumin immunoreactivity in 
the neuropil indicates a breakdown of the BBB.  Brains 
were also evaluated for water and ion (Na+, K+, Cl-) 
content and for the presence of morphologically abnormal 
cells, using Nissl staining.  
 
  As shown in Figure 5A (left panel), the number 
of albumin-positive cells is strongly dependent on brain 
temperature, being minimal at  normothermic values (34.2-
38.0°C), slightly higher (2-4-fold) at hypothermic values 
(34.2-32.2°C), and dramatically higher (~26-fold) at 
hyperthermic values (38.0-42.5°C).  The increase was 
evident from ~39°C, progressed at higher temperatures, and 
plateaued at high levels at 41-42°C.  Temperature-
dependence of albumin immunoreactivity was evident in 
each tested brain structure, with some structural differences 
(Figure 5B).  There were also some differences in albumin 
immunoreactivity in different cortical areas, with much 
stronger changes in the piriform cortex (Figure 5C).  
 
 It is well established that albumin entry from the 
peripheral circulation to the brain results in increased tissue 
water content associated with robust alterations in ionic 
brain balance (141, 142).  These alterations result in vasogenic edema—a dangerous and often fatal 
complication of various pathol ogical processes in the brain 
as well as conditions associat ed with brain hyperthermia 
(i.e., heat stress, opiate withdrawal, and METH and 
MDMA intoxication).  As shown in this study, tissue water 
content (evaluated in the cortex and thalamus) was also 
strongly dependent on NAcc temperature (Figure 6).  
Cortical water content was lowest during hypothermia, 
significantly higher during nor mothermia, and maximal 
during hyperthermia. Within the range of recorded 
temperatures, cortical water differed within ~4%.  In the 
thalamus, water content was clearly higher during 
hyperthermia, but values at low and normal 
temperatures were virtually identical.  Cortical water 
content during anesthesia in normothermic conditions 
was virtually identical to that in awake control 
conditions (see hatched lines), but significantly higher 
(edema) in hyperthermia  and significantly lower 
(dehydration) in hypothermia.  A similar trend was seen in 
the thalamus, where water content during anesthesia was 
lower than in awake controls at low and moderate brain 
temperatures and similar to control at high temperatures.  
Moreover, the numbers of albumin-positive cells and tissue 
water were closely interrelated both in the thalamus and 
cortex (r=0.96 and 0.89, respectively; see Figure 7A).  
This correlation was highly linear in the thalamus, but had 
some divergence in the cortex at values that correspond to 
extreme hypothermia (see a circle in Figure 7A).  Despite 
the presence of few albumin-pos itive cells (see also Figure  
5.B), cortical water was rela tively lower, suggesting that 
the tight correlation between brain albumin and water, 
which exists within the entire range of normal and high 
temperatures, could be distorted at very low temperatures.  
Therefore, it appears that extreme hypothermia also 
results in BBB leakage, but “hypothermic” brains appear 
to be dehydrated compared to “normothermic” brains taken from awake and anesthetized animals.  It is 
unclear, however, whether these disturbances in water 
homeostasis are related to hypothermia per se  or to 
pentobarbital’s inhibiting action on metabolism (143, 
144).  Importantly, brain temperatures never drop below 
34-35°C (in deep structures) in any physiological 
conditions and such extreme hypothermia could only be 
seen during general anesthesia, near-lethal 
environmental cooling, and overdose with powerful 
sedative drugs.     
 
 These data indicate that brain hyperthermia, 
independently of its cause, could be a strong factor for 
eliciting breakdown of the BBB.  Importantly, albumin-
positive cells appeared in the brain relatively quickly (20-
80 min) and within the range of physiological hyperthermia 
(38.5-39.5°C), suggesting that increased BBB permeability 
is not solely pathological but also a normal physiological 
phenomenon occurring during various conditions 
associated with hyperthermia. Such hyperthermia, for 
example, occurs during copulatory behavior and heroin 
self-administration (133).  Although temperature 
dependence of BBB permeability was evident in all tested 
brain structures, suggesting its  generalized nature, there 
were also minor but significant differences among 
individual brain areas.   
 Brain temperature homeostasis 
84 
 
 
Figure 5 .  Temperature dependence of albumin imminoreactivity (A, B, C) and cellular brain abnormalities (D, E, F).  Data (the 
cell counts within the same areas within we ll-defined anatomical structures) are shown for the brain as a whole (A and D; open 
circle show original data and closed circle show mean averag es), individual brain structures (B and E), and individual cortical  areas 
(C and F).  For details see the text.  
 
6.3. Temperature effects on morphology of brain cells: 
role of BBB leakage and edema   
Strong temperature dependence has been also 
found with respect to the number of morphologically 
abnormal cells (Figure5, right panel).  Structural 
abnormalities were absent at low and normal temperatures 
but their numbers linearly in creased during hyperthermia. 
This pattern was evident in each of four tested structures 
(Figure 5B), although some areas (i.e., thalamus) or cortical 
sub-areas (i.e. piriform cort ex), which showed robust BBB 
leakage, also showed more profound structural cell 
abnormalities (Figure5B and C).  The numbers of 
morphologically abnormal cells were closely related to 
counts of albumin-immunoreactive cells (Figure 7B).  
Abnormal cells were absent when there were no albumin-
positive cells and both paramete rs increased proportionally.   This study confirms multiple in vitro  
observations, suggesting that brain cells are exceptionally 
sensitive to thermal damage and demonstrates that the 
number of structurally abnormal cells directly and strongly 
depends on brain temperature.  A few abnormal cells were 
found at ~38.5°C, and their num bers gradually increased as 
temperature rose.  While the counts of albumin-positive 
cells plateaued at high temperatures, morphological 
abnormalities linearly increased and peaked at the maximal 
detected temperature (42.4°C).  Similar to other parameters, structural abnormalities occurred relatively 
quickly and were closely related to BBB leakage and 
increased tissue water content (see Figure 7B and C).  
Therefore, even with passive warming, morphological 
damage reflects not only the effect of temperature per se , 
but also BBB leakage and associated edema. Brain temperature homeostasis 
85 
 
Figure 6 .  Temperature dependence of tissue water shown 
separately for cortex and thalam us.  Horizontal hatched lines 
show “normal” values evaluated in brains of awake, drug-free 
rats at normothermia.  Vertical  hatched lines show limits of 
“normal” brain temperature.  In both structure, tissue water 
content was directly and strongly dependent on brain 
temperature  (regression lines , regression equations, and 
coefficients of correlation are shown for the cortex). For 
details see the text. 
 
 Although virtually no abnormal cells were seen 
in the brain in normothermic or hypothermic conditions (see Figure 5A and B), a small but significant effect was 
found in the hypothalamus and especially in the piriform 
cortex during extreme hypothermia.  In contrast to robust 
degeneration of cell nucleus and pyknosis with clearly 
edematous neuropil during hypert hermia, some cells in the 
piriform cortex were shrunke n during hypothermia and the 
neuropil was more compact than in normothermic 
conditions.  Although some evidence of more compact 
neuropil was seen in other structures, these changes were 
within the normal range and not recognized as abnormal. 
Although the reasons behind a higher susceptibility of the 
piriform cortex to hypothermia-induced structural cell 
abnormalities remain unclear, this structure was especially 
prone to structural damage during environmental warming 
(145), temporal lobe epilepsy ( 146) as well as kainate (147) 
and urethane intoxications (148).  
 
7. SUMMARY AND HUMAN HEALTH 
PERSPECTIVES   
 
 In contrast to general beliefs that brain 
temperature is a stable, tightly regulated homeostatic 
parameter, data presented in  this review demonstrate a 
relatively wide range of fluctuations (~3°C) occurring in 
rats following exposure to salient somato-sensory 
stimuli and during various motivated behaviors.  
Although rats and humans have obvious differences in 
temperature regulation (149) and human data are very 
limited, similarity between ra ts and monkeys in general 
patterns of brain temperatur e fluctuations (6) suggests 
applicability of animal data to human conditions.  It is 
true that humans have very efficient mechanisms of heat 
dissipation that allow them to loose more heat than can potentially be released, but under specific real-life 
conditions these mechanisms could be blocked, resulting 
in pathological brain hyperthermia.  While intense 
physical exercise in professional cyclists increased brain temperature to about 1°C or less, the same exercise 
conducted in water-impermeable  cloth, which prevented 
proper heat dissipation, resulte d in about 2.5 or 3°C (up 
to 40°C) increases (53) that clearly exceed ‘normal’ 
physiological limits.  Robust pathological hyperthermia 
and adverse, sometimes fatal, health complications 
could also occur in humans that take psychomotor 
stimulant drugs under the heat-compiling environmental 
conditions at “raves”.  In addition to powerful 
metabolism-related heat pr oduction, these drugs have 
strong and prolonged vasocons trictive effects, which 
prevent proper heat dissipation.  Therefore, dangerous 
intra-brain heat accumulation and acute decompensation 
of physiological functions could occur in this case due 
to a combination of enhanced heat production induced 
by the drug, intense physical and psychoemotional 
activation, and impaired heat dissipation due to drug-
induced peripheral vasocons triction, hot and humid 
environment, and cloth that prevents heat loss.  The 
strength of potentiation of the hyperthermic effects by 
environmental conditions is really surprising.  When 
ambient temperature was set at only ~6°C above 
laboratory standard (29°C), about 80% of rats died after 
exposure to both METH and MDMA at 1/5 of their 
LD50 (87, 88).  While lethality resulting from acute 
intoxication with club drugs is not reported so often, it 
is a significant public health problem world wide 
because of the numbers of recreational drug users.  
According to global survey conduced the UN Office of 
Drugs and Crime, more than 500 tonnes of METH and 
MDMA were consumed in 2003, with more than 40 
million people using them in the last 12 months (150).  
Therefore, the drug that is usually perceived as “safe” 
could be really dangerous.  
 
 Brain cells are exceptionally sensitive to heat, with some irreversible damage starting to occur at 
~40°C, only about 3-4°C a bove normal baseline, and 
progressing exponentially with slight increases above 
these levels (151, 152).  Although heat per se  could 
selectively damage brain cells, hyperthermia also 
increases BBB permeability, thus allowing entry to the 
brain from peripheral circula tion of various potentially 
neurotoxic substances, ions, and water.  Therefore, 
damage of brain cells under conditions of hyperthermia 
reflects the effects of not only temperature, but multiple 
potentially dangerous influen ces.  Robust leakage of the 
BBB under conditions of hyperthermia could be an 
important factor in brain entry of several small viruses 
and neurotoxic products of viral metabolism that are 
retained in the periphery under normal conditions.  This 
effect could explain the unusually high incidence of 
neuro-AIDS in METH users as well as high co-
morbidity of neuro-AIDS with malaria, a disease 
characterized by episodes of robust hyperthermia.  High 
brain temperature could also promote brain entry of 
antibiotics that are usually retained by the BBB under 
normal conditions (153, 154).  Some of these drugs are 
neurotoxic and its entry into brain environment could 
explain neurological complications seen in young 
children treated by these drugs for viral and bacterial 
infections under conditions of severe fever.  Therefore,Brain temperature homeostasis 
86 
 
Figure 7 .  Correlative relationships between individual brain 
parameters assessed in  urethane-anesthetized rats passively 
warmed to different brain temperatures.  A shows the 
relationships between numbers of albumin-positive cells and 
tissue water evaluated separately in the cortex and thalamus.  
B shows the relationships betw een the numbers of albumin-
positive and morphologically abnormal cells evaluated in the 
brain as a whole.  C shows th e relationships between tissue 
water content and amounts of morphologically abnormal cells 
evaluated separately in the cortex and thalamus.  Each graph contains coefficients of correlation and regression lines.  
Hatched line in B shows a line of equality. Each correlation 
coefficient value is highly significant (p<0.001). For 
additional details see the text.  
 
temperature is an extremely important variable in both 
normal brain functioning and development of brain 
pathology.  
 
8.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 This work was supported by the Intramural 
Research Program of the NIH, NI DA.  Data described in this review were obtained in colla boration with Dr. Hari S. 
Sharma, P. Leon Brown, Robe rt Mitchum, David Bae, and 
Michael S. Smirnov, whose valu able contribution is greatly 
appreciated.  I wish to thank Michael S. Smirnov and Mary 
Pfeiffer for editorial assistance, and Dr. Clark Blatteis for 
comments and suggestions made on the early variant of this 
review.   
 
9. REFERENCES  
1. Schmidt-Nielsen K.: Animal Physiology. Adaptation and 
Environment. 5
th Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press , (1997) 
 
2. James W.:  Psychology. Briefer Course. New York: 
Henry Holt  (1892) 
 
3. Abrams R. and H. T. Hammel: Hypothalamic 
temperature in unanesthetized albino rats during feeding 
and sleeping.  Am. J. Physiol.  206, 641-646 (1964) 
 
4. Delgado J.M.R. and T. Hanai:  Intracerebral 
temperatures in free-moving cats.  Am. J. Physiol . 211, 
755-769 (1966) 
 
5. Feitelberg S. and  H. Lampl: Warmetonung der 
Grosshirnrinde bei Erregung und Ruhe Functionshemmung.  
Arch. Exp. Path. Pharmak . 177, 726-736 (1935) (in 
German) 
 
6. Hayward J.N. and M. A. Baker:  Role of cerebral arterial 
blood in the regulation of brain temperature in the monkey.  
Am. J. Physiol . 215, 389-403 (1968) 
 
7. Kovalzon V.M.: Brain temp erature variations during 
natural sleep and arousal in white rats.  Physiol. Beh . 10, 
667-670 (1972) 
 
8. McElligott J.C. and R. Melzack: Localized thermal 
changes evoked in the brain by visual and auditory 
stimulation. Exp. Neurol . 17, 293-312 (1967) 
 
9. Serota H.M.: Temperature changes in the cortex and 
hypothalamus during sleep. J. Neurophysiol . 2: 42-47 
(1939)  
 
10. Serota H.M. and R.W. Gerard: Localized thermal 
changes in cat’s brain. J. Neurophysiol . 1, 115-124 (1938) 
 
11. Siesjo B.:  Brain Energy Metabolism.  New York: 
Wiley  (1978) 
 
12. Gerasimov V.:  Informati on processing in human body,  
http://vadim.www.media.mit. edu/MAS862/Project.html 
(1998) 
 
13. Laughlin S.B., R.R. de Ruyt er van Steveninck and J.C. 
Anderson: The metabolic cost  of neural information. 
Nature Neurosci.  1, 36-41 (1998) 
 
14. Hodgkin A.L.: The Conducti on of the Nervous Impulse. 
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press  (1967) Brain temperature homeostasis 
87 15. Ritchie J.M.:  Energetic aspects of nerve conduction: 
The relationships between heat production, electrical 
activity and metabolism.  Progr. Biophys. Molec. Biol . 26, 
147-187 (1973) 
 
16. Shulman R.G., D.L. Roth man, K.L. Behar and F. 
Hyder:  Energetic basis of brain activity: implications for 
neuroimaging. Trends Neurosci . 27, 489-495 (2004) 
 
17. Sokoloff L.: Energetics of functional activation in 
neural tissues.  Neurochem Re s 24, 321-329 (1999) 
 
18. Kiyatkin E.A., P.L. Br own and R.A. Wise:  Brain 
temperature fluctuation: a reflection of functional neural 
activation.  Eur. J. Neurosci . 16, 164-168 (2002) 
 
19. Fellows L.K., M.G. B outelle and M. Fillenz:  
Physiological stimulation increases nonoxidative glucose 
metabolism in the brain of the freely moving rat.  J. 
Neurochem . 60, 1258-1263 (1993) 
 
20. Smirnov M.S. and E.A. Ki yatkin: Fluctuations in 
central and peripheral temperatures associated with 
feeding behavior in rats. Amer. J. Physiol.  295, R1415-
R1424 (2008) 
 
21. Kiyatkin E.A. and D. Bae:  Behavioral and brain 
temperature responses to sa lient environmental stimuli 
and intravenous cocaine in rats: Effects of diazepam.  
Psychopharmacology  196, 343-356 (2008) 
 
22. Kiyatkin E.A. and R. Mitchum:  Fluctuations in 
brain temperatures during sexua l behavior in male rats: 
An approach for evaluating neural activity underlying 
motivated behavior. Neuroscience  119, 1169-1183 
(2003)  
23. Altschule M.D.: Emo tion and circulation.  
Circulation  3, 444-454 (1951) 
 
24. Baker M., M. Cronin and D. Mountjoy: Variability 
of skin temperature in the waking monkey.  Am. J. 
Physiol . 230, 449-455 (1976) 
 
25. Solomon G.F., R.H. M oos, G.C. Stone and W.J. 
Fessel:  Peripheral vasoc onstriction induced by 
emotional stress in rats. Angiology  15, 362-365 (1964) 
 
26. Kiyatkin R.A. and R.A. Wi se:  Striatal hyperthermia 
associated with arousal: intr acranial thermorecordings in 
behaving rats.  Brain Res.  918, 141-152 (2001) 
 
27. Wilder J.: The law of initial value in neurology and 
psychiatry; facts and problems. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis . 125, 
73-86 (1957) 
 
28. Wilder J.: Modern psychophysiology and the law of 
initial value. Am. J. Psychother . 12, 199-221 (1958) 
 
29. Horvath T.L., C.H. Warden, M. Hajos, A. Lombardi, 
F. Goglia and S. Diano:  Brain uncoupling protein 2: 
Uncoupled neuronal mitochondria predict thermal synapses in homeostatic centers.  J. Neurosci . 19, 10417-
10427 (1999) 
 
30. Mellergard P. and C.H.  Nordstrom: Epidural 
temperatures and possible intracerebral temperature 
gradients in man. Br. J. Neurosurg . 4, 31-38 (1990) 
 
31. Rumana C.S., S.P. Gopina th, M. Uzura, A.B. Valadka 
and C.S. Robertson:  Brain temperatures exceed systemic 
temperatures in head-injured patients. Clin. Care Med . 26, 
562-567 (1998) 
 
32. Schwab S., M. Spranger, A.  Aschoff, T. Steiner and W. 
Hacke:  Brain temperature monitoring and modulation in 
patients with severe  MCA infarction.  Neurology  48, 762-
767 (1997) 
 
33. Andersen P. and E. I. Moser: Brain temperature and 
hippocampal function.  Hippocampus  5, 491-498 (1995) 
 
34. Moltz H.:  Fever: cau ses and consequences.  Neurosci. 
Biobehav. Rev . 17, 237-269 (1993) 
 
35. Moser E.I. and L.I. Mathie sen:  Relationships between 
neuronal activity and brain temperature in rats.  NeuroReport  
7, 1876-1880 (1996) 
 
36. Erikson K. and W. Lani er:  Anesthetic technique 
influences brain temperature, independently of core 
temperature, during craniotomy in cats.  Anesth. Analg . 96, 
1460-1466 (2003) 
 
37. Kiyatkin E.A. and G.V. Re bec:  Modulation of striatal 
neuronal activity by glutamate and GABA: Iontophoresis in 
awake, unrestrained rats.  Brain Res.  822, 88-106 (1999) 
 38. Kiyatkin E.A.:  Statistical analysis of impulse activity of 
diencephalic units during restraint stress.  J. Higher Nerv. Act.  
32, 502-510 (1982) 
 
39. Kiyatkin E.A.:  Functional properties of presumed 
dopamine-containing and other ve ntral tegmental area neurons 
in conscious rats.  Int. J. Neurosci . 42, 21-43 (1988) 
 
40. Kiyatkin E.A. and G.V. Reb ec:  Heterogeneity of ventral 
tegmental area neurons: Single-unit recording and 
iontophoresis in awake,  unrestrained rats.  Neuroscience   85, 
1285-1309 (1998) 
 
41. Kiyatkin E.A. and G.V. Re bec:  Dopaminergic modulation 
of glutamate-induced excitations of neurons in the neostriatum 
and nucleus accumbens of awake, unrestrained rats.  J. 
Neurophysiol . 75, 142-153 (1996) 
 
42. Fox R.T. and M.E. Raic hle:  Focal physiological 
uncoupling of cerebral blood flow and oxidative metabolism 
during somatosensory stimulation in human subjects.  Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci . 83, 1140-1144 (1986) 
 
43. Trubel H.K.F., L.I. Sacolic k and F. Hyder:  Regional 
temperature changes in the brain during somatosensory 
stimulatio.  J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab . 26, 68-78 (2006) Brain temperature homeostasis 
88 44. Sukstanskii A.L. and D. A. Yablonskiy: Theoretical 
model of temperature regulation in the brain during 
changes in functional activity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci . 103, 
12144-12149 (2006). 
 
45. Yablonskiy D.A., J. H. Ac kerman and M.E. Raichle:  
Coupling between changes in human brain temperature and 
oxidative metabolism during prol onged visual stimulation.  
Proc. Nat. Acad. Aci.  97, 7603-7608 (2000)  
 
46. Charkoudian N.:  Skin blood flow in adult human 
thermoregulation: how it works, when it does not, and 
why?  Mayo Clin. Proc . 78, 603-612 (2003) 
 
47. Ryan K.L., W.F. Taylor and V.S. Bishop:  Arterial 
baroreflex modulation of heat-induced vasodilation in the 
rabbit ear.  J. Appl. Physiol . 83, 2091-2097 (1997) 
 
48. Oobu K.: (1993) Experimental  studies on the effect of 
heating on blood flow in the tongue of golden hamsters 
Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi  84, 497-511 (1993) 
 
49. Nagata Y., K. Katayama, C. J. Manivel and C.W. Song:  
Changes in blood flow in locally  heated intestine of rats.  Int. J. 
Hyperthermia  16, 159-170 (2000) 
 
50. Nakajima T., J.C. Rhee, C.W.  Song, Y. Onoyama:  Effect 
of a second heating on rat liver blood flow.  Int. J. 
Hyperthermia  8, 679-687 (1992) 
 
51. Moriyama E.: Cerebral  blood flow changes during 
localized hyperthermia.  Neurol. Med. Chir. (Tokio)  30, 923-
929 (1990) 
 
52. Uda M. and Y. Tanaka:  Ar terial blood flow changes after 
hyperthermia on normal liver, nor mal brain, and normal small 
intestine. Gan No. Rinsho 36 , 2362-2366 (1990)  
 
53. Nybo L., N.H. Secher and B.  Nielson:  Inadequate heat 
release from the human brain during prolonged exercise with 
hyperthermia.  J. Physiol.  545, 697-704 (2002) 
 
54. Margaria R., P. Cretelli, P. Aghemo, G. Sassi:  Energy cost 
of running.  J. Appl. Physiol . 18, 367-370 (1963) 
 
55. Donaldson G.C., W.R. K eatinge and R.D. Saunders:  
Cardiovascular responses to heat stress and their adverse 
consequences in healthy and vulnerable human populations.  
Int. J. Hyperthermia  19, 225-235 (2003) 
 
56. Rowell L.B.:  Cardiovascular aspects of human 
thermoregulation. Circ. Res.  52, 367-376 (1983) 
 
57. Cheuvront S.N. and E.M. Haymes:  Thermoregulation and 
marathon running: biological and environmental influences.  
Sports Med . 31, 743-762 (2001) 
 
58. Schaefer C.F.: Possible te ratogenic hyperthermia and 
marathon running. JAMA  241, 1892 (1979) 
 
59. Brengelmann G.L.:  Specialized brain cooling in 
humans?  FASEB J.  7, 1148-1153 (1993) 60. Cabanac M.: Selective brain cooling in humans: 
“fancy” or fact?  FASEB J.  7, 1143-1147 (1993) 
 
61. Cabanac M. and M. Caputa:  Natural selective cooling 
of the human brain: evidence of its occurrence and 
magnitude.  J. Physiol . 286, 255-264 (1979) 
 
62. Simon E.: Tympanic temperature is not suited to 
indicate selective brain cooling in humans: a re-evaluation 
of the thermohysiological basics.  Eur. J. App. Physiol . 
101, 19-30 (2007) 
 
63. Brinnel H., T. Nagasaka and M. Cabanac:  Enhanced 
brain protection during passive hyperthermia in humans.  
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol . 56, 540-545 (1987) 
 
64. Cabanac M., M. Germain and H. Brinnel: Tympanic 
temperatures during hemiface cooling.  Eur. J. Appl. 
Physiol.  56, 534-539 (1987) 
 
65. Mariak Z., M. Jadeszko, J. Lewko, W. Lebkowski and 
T. Lyson:  No specific brain protection against thermal 
stress in fever.  Acta Neurochir. (Wien)  140, 585-590 
(1998) 
 
66. Mariak Z., W. Lebkowski, T. Lyson, J. Lewko and P. 
Piekarski:  Brain temperature during craniotomy in general 
anesthesia.  Neurol. Neurochir. Pol . 33, 1325-1327 (1999) 
 
67. Mariak Z., T. Lyson, P.  Peikarski, J. Lewko, M. 
Jadeszko and P. Szydlik:  Br ain temperature in patients 
with central nervous system lesions. Neurol. Neurosurg. 
Pol. 34, 509-522 (2000) 
 
68. Nybo L. and N. Nielson:  Middle cerebral artery blood 
velocity is reduced with hyperthermia during prolonged exercise in humans.  J. Physiol. 534,  279-286 (2001) 
 
69. Ide K. and N.H. Secher :  Cerebral blood flow and 
metabolism during exercise. Prog. Neurobiol . 61, 397-414 
(2000) 
 
70. Ide K., I.K. Schmalbruch,  B. Quistorff, A. Horn and 
N.H. Secher:  Lactate, glucose, and oxygen uptake in 
human brain during recovery from maximal exercise.  J. 
Physiol.  522, 159-164 (2000)  
 
71. Walters T.J., K.L. Rynan, L.M. Tate and P.A. Mason:  
Exercise in the heat is limited by a critical internal 
temperature.  J. Appl. Physiol . 89, 799-806 (2000) 
 
72. Nielsen B., T. Hyldig, F.  Bidsrup, J. Gonzalez-Alonso 
and C.R. Christoffersen:  Br ain activity and fatigue during 
prolonged exercise in the heat.  Pflugers Arch . 442, 41-48 
(2001) 
 
73. Estler, C.J.:  Dependen ce on age of metamphetamine-
produced changes in thermore gulation and metabolism.  
Experientia  31, 1436-1437 (1975) 
 
74. Makisumi T., K. Yoshida,  T. Watanabe, N. Tan, N. 
Murakami and A. Morimo to:  Sympatho-adrenal Brain temperature homeostasis 
89 involvement in methampheta mine-induced hyperthermia 
through skeletal muscle hypermethanolism.  Eur. J. 
Pharmacol . 363, 107-112 (1998) 
 
75. Alberts D.S. a nd P.K. Sonsalla:  Methamphetamine-
induced hyperthermia and dopa minergic neurotoxicity in 
mice: Pharmacological profile of protective and 
nonprotective agents.  J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther . 275, 1104-
1114 (1995) 
 
76. Green A.R., A.O. Mechan, J. M. Elliott, E. O’Shea, M.I. 
Colado:  The pharmacology and clinical pharmacology of 
3,4-methylenedioxymeth amphetamine (MDMA, 
“Ecstasy”).  Pharmacol Rev.  55, 463-508 (2003) 
 
77. Mechan A.O., E. O’Shea, J.M. Elliot, M.I. Colado and 
A.R. Green:  A neurotoxic dose of 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA; ecstasy) to 
rats results in a long-term deficit in thermoregulation. 
Psychopharmacology  155, 413-418 (2001) 
 
78. Miller D.B. and J.P. O’Ca llaghan:  Environment-, drug- 
and stress-induced alterations in body temperature affect 
the neurotoxicity of substituted amphetamines in the 
C57BL/6J mouse. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther . 270, 752-760 
(1994) 
 
79. Sandoval V., G.R. Hanson and A.E. Fleckenstein:  
Methamphetamine decreases mouse striatal dopamine 
transporter activity: roles of hyperthermia and dopamine. 
Eur. J. Pharmacol.  409, 265-271 (2000) 
 
80. Gordon C.J., W.O. Watkin son, J.P. O’Callaghan and 
D.B. Miller : Effects of 3,4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine on autonomic 
thermoregulatory responses of the rat.  Pharmacol. 
Biochem. Behav . 38, 339-344 (1991) 
 
81. Pederson N.P. and W.W. Blessi ng:  Cutaneous 
vasoconstriction contributes to  hyperthermia induced by 
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy) on 
conscious rabbits.  J. Neurosci.  21,  8648-8654 (2001) 
 
82. Ali S.F, G.D. New port and W. Slikker:  
Methamphetamine-induced dopamine rgic toxicity in mice: 
role of environmental temperature and pharmacological 
agents.  Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci . 801, 187-98 (1996) 
 
83. Davidson C., A.J. Gow, T. H. Lee and E.H. Ellinwood:  
Methamphetamine neurotoxicity : necrotic and apoptotic 
mechanisms and relevance to human abuse and treatment.  
Brain Res. Rev . 36, 1-22 (2001). 
 
84. Kalant H.: The pharmacology and toxicology of 
“ecstasy” (MDMA) and related drugs. Can. Med. Assoc. J . 
165, 917-928 (2001) 
 
85. Schmued L.C.: Demonstr ation and localization of 
neuronal degeneration in the rat forebrain following a 
single exposure to MDMA.  Brain Res.  974, 127-133 
(2003) 
 86. Brown P.L., R.A. Wise and E.A. Kiyatkin: Brain 
hyperthermia is induced by methamphetamine and 
exacerbated by social interaction.  J. Neurosci . 23, 3924-
3929 (2003) 
 
87. Brown P.L. and E.A. Kiya tkin:  Brain hyperthermia 
induced by MDMA (“ecstasy”): modulation by 
environmental conditions. Eur. J. Neurosci . 20, 51-58 
(2004) 
 
88. Brown P.L. and E.A. Kiyatkin:  Fatal intra-brain heat 
accumulation induced by meth-amphetamine at 
normothermic conditions in rats. Int. J. Neurodegener. 
Neuroregener . 1, 86-90 (2005) 
 
89. Romanovsky A.A., A.I. Iv anov and Y.P. Shimansky: 
Ambient temperature for experi ments in rats: a new method 
for determining the zone of thermal neutrality.  J. Appl. 
Physiol . 92, 2667-2679 (2002) 
 
90. Kiyatkin E.A. and P.L.  Brown:  Modulation of 
physiological brain hyperthermia by environmental 
temperature and impaired blood outflow in rats.  Physiol. 
Behav . 83, 467-474 (2004) 
 
91. Davis W.M., H.T. Hatoum a nd I.W. Walters:  Toxicity of 
MDA (2,4-methylenedioxyamphetamine) considered for 
relevance to hazards of MDMA (Ecstasy) abuse.  Alcohol 
Drug Res . 7, 123-134 (1987) 
 
92. Mitchum R. and E.A. Kiyatk in:  Brain hyperthermia and 
temperature fluctuations during sexual interaction in female 
rats. Brain Res . 1000, 110-122 (2004) 
 
93. Kiyatkin E.A. and R. A. Wise:  Brain and body 
hyperthermia associated with hero in self-administration in rats.  
J. Neurosci . 22, 1072-1080 (2002) 
 
94. Kiyatkin E.A. and P.L. Brow n:  Fluctuations in neural 
activity during cocaine self-admin istration: Clues provided by 
brain thermorecording.  Neuroscience  116, 525-538 (2003) 
 
95. Swan H.:  Thermoregulati on and Bioenergetics.  New 
York: Elsevier  (1974) 
 
96. Lee J.C.F., J.C. Callaway and R.C. Foehring:  The effects 
of temperature on calcium transients and Ca2+-dependent 
afterhyperpolarizations in neocortical pyramidal neurons. J. 
Physiol . 93, 2012-2020 (2005) 
 
97. Thompson S.M., L.M. Mu sakawa and D.A. Rince: 
Temperature dependence of intr insic membrane properties and 
synaptic potentials in hippocampal CA1 neurons in vitro .  J. 
Neurosci . 5, 817-824 (1985) 
 
98. Tryba A.K. and J.-M. Rami rez: Hyperthermia modulates 
respiratory pacemaker bursting properties.  J. Neurophysiol . 
92, 2844-2852 (2004) 
 
99. Volgushev M., T.R. Vidyasagar, M. Chistiakova and 
U.T. Eysel:  Synaptic transm ission in the neocortex during 
reversible cooling.  Neuroscience  98, 9-22 (2000) Brain temperature homeostasis 
90 100. Katz B. and R. Miledi:  The effect of temperature on 
the synaptic delay at the neuromuscular junction.  J. 
Physiol . 181, 656-670 (1965) 
 
101. Berner N.J. and H.C. He ller:  Does the preoptic 
anterior hypothalamus receive thermoafferent information?  
Am. J. Physiol . 274, R9-R18 (1998) 
 
102. Boulant J.A.: Role of the preoptic-anterior 
hypothalamus in thermore gulation and fever.  Clin. Infect. 
Dis.  31, Suppl 5, S157-S161 (2000) 
 
103. Nadel E.: Regulation of body temperature.  In: 
Medical Physiology (Boron WF, Boulpaep EL, eds.). 
Philadelphia: Saunders , 1231-1241, (2003) 
 
104. Travis K.A., H.J. Bockho lt, A.M. Zardetto-Smith and 
A.K. Johnson: In vitro  thermosensitivity of the midline 
thalamus.  Brain Res.  686, 17-22 (1995) 
 
105. Burgoon P.W. and J. A. Boulant: Temperature-
sensitive properties of rat suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons.  
Am. J. Physiol . 281, R706-R715 (2001) 
 
106. Ruby N.F. and H.C. Helle r: Temperature sensitivity of 
the suprachiasmatic nucleus of ground squirrels and rats in 
vitro . J. Biol. Rhythms  11, 126-136 (1996) 
 
107. Guatteo E., K.K. Chung, T.K. Bowala, G. Bernardi, 
N.D. Mercuri, J. Lipski J:  Temperature sensitivity of 
dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars 
compacta: involvement of transient receptor potential 
channels.  J Neurophysiol.  94, 3069-3080 (2005) 
 
108. Nakashima K. and M. M., Todd:  Effects of 
hypothermia on the rate of excitatory amino acid release after ischemic depolarization. Stroke  27, 913-918 (1996) 
 
109. Vizi E.S.: Different temperature dependence of 
carrier-mediated (cytoplas mic) and stimulus-evoked 
(exocytotic) release of transmitter: a simple method to 
separate the two types of release.  Neurochem. Int . 33, 359-
356 (1998) 
 
110. Xie T., U.D. McGann, S.  Kim, J. Yuan and G.A. 
Ricaurte:  Effect of temperature on dopamine transporter 
function and intracellular accumulation of 
methamphetamine: Implicati ons for methamphetamine-
induced dopaminergic neurotoxicity.  J. Neurosci . 20, 
7838-7845 (2000) 
 
111. Arai H., A. Uto, Y. Ogaw a and K. Sato: Effect of low 
temperature on glutamate-induced intracellular calcium 
accumulation and cell death in cultured hippocampal 
neurons.  Neurosci. Lett . 163, 132-134 (1993) 
 
112. Lucas J.H., D.G. Emery,  G. Wang, L.J. Rosenberg-
Schaffer, R.S. Jordan  and G.W. Gross: In vitro  
investigation of the effect of nonfreezing low temperatures 
on injured and uninjured mammalian spinal neurons.  J. 
Neurotrauma   11, 35-61 (1994) 
 113. Iwagami Y.:  Changes in ultrastructure of human cell 
related to certain biological responses under hyperthermic 
culture condition.  Human Cell  9, 353-366 (1996)  
 
114. Willis W.T., M.R. Jackman, M.E. Bizeau, M.J. 
Pagliassotti and J.R. Hazel:  Hyperthermia impairs liver 
mitochondrial functions. Am. J. Physiol . 278, R1240-1246 
(2000) 
 
115. Chen Y.Z., R.X. Xu, Q. J. Huang, Z.J. Xu, X.D. Jiang, 
Y.O. Cai:  Effect of hype rthermia on tight junctions 
between endothelial cells of the blood-brain barrier model 
in vitro .  Di Yi Jun Da Xue Xue Bao  23, 21-24 (2003) 
 
116. Oifa A.I. a nd V.N. Kleshchnov:  Ultrastructural 
analysis of the phenomenon of acute neuronal swelling.  
Zh. Nevropatol. Psikhiatr Im S.S. Korsakova , 85, 1016-
1020 (1985) 
 
117. Lee S.Y., S.H. Lee, K. A kuta, M. Uda and C.W. Song:  
Acute histological effects of  interstitial hyperthermia on 
normal rat brain.  Int. J. Hyperthermia  16, 73-83 (2000) 
 
118. Li Y.-Q., P. Chen, V. Jain, R.M. Reilly and C.S. 
Wong: Early radiation-indu ced endothelial cell loss and 
blood-spinal cord barrier breakdown in the rat spinal cord.  
Radiat. Res.  161, 143-152 (2004) 
 
119. Lin P.S., S. Quamo, K. C. Ho and J. Gladding: 
Hyperthermia enhances the cytotoxic effects of reactive 
oxygen species to Chinese hamster cells and bovine 
endothelial cells in vitro .  Radiat. Med . 126, 43-51 (1991) 
 
120. Bechtold D.A. and I.R.  Brown:  Induction of Hsp27 
and Hsp32 stress proteins and vimentin in glial cells of the 
rat hippocampus following hyperthermia.  Neurochem. Res . 
28, 1163-1173 (2003) 
 
121. Sharma H.S. a nd P.J. Hoopes:  Hy perthermia-induced 
pathophysiology of the central nervous system.  Int. J. 
Hyperthermia  19, 325-354 (2003) 
 
122. Cervos-Navarro J., H. S.  Sharma, J. Westman and E. 
Bongcum-Rudloff:  Glial cell reactions in the central 
nervous system following heat stress.  Progr. Brain Res . 
115, 241-274 (1998) 
 
123. Lin M.-T.: Heatstroke-induced cerebral ischemia and 
neuronal damage. Involveme nt of cytokines and 
monoamines.  Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci . 813, 572-580 (1997) 
 
124. Sharma H.S., C. Zimmer, J. Westman and J. Cervos-
Navarro: Acute systemic heat stress increases glial 
fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity in brain. An 
experimental study in the conscious normotensive young 
rats. Neuroscience  48, 889-901 (1992) 
 
125. Kiyatkin E.A., P.L. Brow n and H.S. Sharma:  Brain 
edema and breakdown of the blood-brain barrier during 
methamphetamine intoxication: Critical role of brain 
temperature.  Eur. J. Neurosci .  26, 1242-1253 (2007) 
 Brain temperature homeostasis 
91 126. Sharma H.S. and E.A. Kiyatkin: Rapid morphological 
brain abnormalities during acute methamphetamine 
intoxication in the rat: An e xperimental study using light 
and electron microscopy. J Chem. Neuroanat . 37, 18-32 
(2009)   
 
127. Bowyer J.F. and S.F. Ali: High doses of 
methamphetamine that cause disruption of the blood-brain 
barrier in limbic regions produce extensive neuronal 
degeneration in mouse hippocampus.  Synapse  60, 521-532 
(2006)  
 
128. Sharma H.S. and S.F. A li: Alterations in blood-brain 
barrier function by morphi ne and methamphetamine.  Ann. 
N.Y. Acad. Sci.  1074, 198-224 (2006) 
 
129. Watson P., S.M. Shirreffs  and R.J. Maughan:  Blood-
brain barrier integrity may be threatened by exercise in a 
warm environment. Am. J. Physiol . 288, R1689-R1694 
(2005) 
 
130. Esposito P., D. Cheorghe , K. Kendere, X. Pang, R. 
Connoly, S. Jaconson and T.C.  Theodorides:  Acute stress 
increases permeability of the blood-brain barrier through 
activation of brain must cells. Brain Res . 888, 117-127 
(2001) 
 
131. Ovadia H., O. Abrams ky, S. Feldman and J. 
Weidenfeld: Evaluation of the effects of stress on the 
blood-brain barrier: critical role of the brain perfusion time. 
Brain Res . 905, 21-25 (2001) 
 
132. Sharma H.S. a nd P.K. Dey:  Influence of long-term 
immobilization stress on regional blood-brain permeability, 
cerebral blood flow and 5-HT levels in conscious 
normotensive young rats .  J. Neurol. Sci . 72, 61-76 (1986) 
 
133. Kiyatkin E.A.: Brain hy perthermia as physiological 
and pathological phenomena. Brain Res. Rev. 50, 27-56 
(2005) 
 
134. Cadet J.L., N. Thiriet and S. Jayanthi:  Involvement of 
free radicals in MDMA-induced neurotoxicity in mice. 
Ann. Med. Intern . 152 Suppl. 3, IS57-59 (2001) 
 
135. Nybo L.:  Hyperthermia and fatigue. J. Appl. Physiol . 
104, 871-877 (2008) 
 
136. Sharma H.S.: Hyperthe rmia-induced brain edema: 
Current status and future perspectives.  Indian J. Med. Res . 
123, 629-652 (2006) 
 
137. Haorah J., S.H. Ramirez,  K. Schall, D. Smith, R. 
Pandya and Y. Persidsky:  Oxidative stress activates 
protein kinase and matrix me talloproteinases leading to 
blood-brain barrier disfunction.  J. Neurochem . 101, 566-
576 (2007) 
 
138. Hom S., R.D. Egleton, J. D. Huber and T.P. Davis:  
Effect of reduced flow on blood-brain barrier transport 
systems.  Brain Res . 890, 38-48 (2001) 
 139. Kaur C. and E. A. Li ng:  Blood brain barrier in 
hypoxic-ischemic conditions.  Curr. Neurovasc. Res . 5, 71-
81 (2008) 
 
140. Kiyatkin E.A. and P.L.  Brown:  Brain and body 
temperature homeostasis dur ing sodium pentobarbital 
anesthesia with and without  body warming in rats.  Physiol. 
Behav . 84, 563-570 (2005) 
 
141. Rapoport S.I.: Blood-brain Barrier in Physiology and 
Medicine.  New York: Raven Press , (1976) 
 
142. Zlokovic B.V.:  The blood-brain barrier in health and 
chronic neurodegenerative disorders.  Neuron  57, 178-201 
(2008) 
 
143. Crane P., L. Braun, E. Cornford, J. Cremer, J. Glass 
and M. Oldendorf:  Dose-dep endent reduction of glucose 
utilization by pentobarbital in rat brain.  Stroke  9, 12-18 
(1978) 
 
144. Penicaud L., P. Ferre, J. Ka nde, A. Leturque, T. Issad and 
J. Girard:  Effect of anesthesia on glucose production and 
utilization in rats.  Am. J. Physiol . 252, E365-E369 (1987) 
 
145. Sharma H.S., J. Cervos-Nav arro and P.K. Dey:  Acute 
heat exposure causes cellular alterations in cerebral cortex of 
young rats. NeuroReport  2, 155-158 (1991) 
 
146. Van Vliet E.A., S. da Cost a Araujo, A. Redeker, C. van 
Schalk, E. Aronica and J.A. Gorter:  Brain-blood leakage may 
lead to progression of temporal lobe epilepsy.  Brain  130, 521-
534 (2007) 
 
147. Candelario-Jalil E., S. M. Al -Dalain, R. Castello , G. 
Martinez and O. S. Fernandez:  Selective vulnerability to kainite-induced oxidative damage in  different rat brain regions.  
J. Appl. Toxicol.  21, 403-407 (2001) 
 
148. Thompson K.W. and C.G.  Wasterlain:  Urethane 
anesthesia produces selective damage in the piriform cortex of 
the developing brain.  Dev. Brain Res.  130, 167-171 (2001) 
 
149.  Gordon C.J., Spencer P.J., Hotchkiss J., Miller DB, 
Hinderliter P.M. and J. Pauluhn:   Thermoregulation and its 
influence on toxicity assessment.  Toxicology  244, 87-97 
 
150.  United Nations Office on Dr ugs and Crime:  Ecstasy and 
amphetamines: Global Survey Vienna: United Nations 
Publications  (2003) 
 
151. Lepock J.R.:  Cellular effect s of hyperthermia: relevance 
to the minimum dose for thermal damage.  Int. J. 
Hyperthermia  19, 252-266 (2003) 
 
152. Lepock J.R.:  How do cells respond to their thermal 
environment?  Int. J. Hyperthermia  21, 681-687 (2005) 
 
153. Kearney B.P. and F.T. Aw eeka:  The penetration of 
anti-infectives into the central nervous system.  Neurol. 
Clin. 17, 883-900 
 Brain temperature homeostasis 
92 154. Lutsar I. and I.R. Frie dland:  Pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of cephalosporins in cerebrospinal 
fluid.  Clin. Pharmacokinet . 39, 335-343 (2000) 
 
Key Words: Metabolism, Cerebral blood flow, Brain 
temperature, Hyperthermia, Hypothermia, Metabolic brain 
activation, Arousal, Behavior , Psychomotor stimulants, 
Neural injury, Blood-brain barrier, Neurotoxicity, Review  
 
Send correspondence to: Eugene A. Kiyatkin, Behavioral 
Neuroscience Branch, National In stitute on Drug Abuse – IRP,  
333 Cassell Drive, Baltimore, Maryland 21224,  Tel: 443-740-
2844, Fax: 443-740-2155, E-mail: ekiyatki@mail.nih.gov 
 
http://www.bioscience.org/current/vol15.htm 
 