tØ.~b ~~ CI ~
~ ,~ f~ 1'1 lJ-.~
WORLD REALTH ORGANIZATION
INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER
IAC MONOGRAHS
ON THE
EVALUATION OF CARCINOGENIC
RISKS TO HUMAS
Occupation al Exposures of Hairdressers and Barbers
and Personal Use of Hair Colourants;
Some Hair Dyes, Cosmetic Colourants,
Industrial Dyestuffs and Aromatic Amines
VOLUME 57
This publication represents the views and expert opinions
of an IARC Working Group on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Rumans,
which met in Lyon,
6-13 October 1992
1993lAe MONOGRAHS
ln 1969, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (lARC) initiated a programme
on the evaluation of the carcinogenic risk of chemIcals to humans involving the production of
critically evaluated monographs on individual chemIcals. ln 1980 and 1986, the programme
was expanded to include the evaluation of the carcinogenic risk associated with exposures to
complex mixtures and other agents.
The objective of the programme is to elaborate and publish in the form of monographs
critical reviews of data on carcinogenicity for agents to which humans are known to be
exposed, and on specific exposure situations; to evaluate these data in terms of human risk
wIth the help of international working groups of experts in chemical carcinogenesis and
related fields; and to indIcate where additional research efforts are needed.
This project is supported by PHS Grant No. 5-UOI CA33193-11 awarded by the US
National Cancer Institute, Department of Health and Human Servces. Additional support
has been provided since 1986 by the Commission of the European Communities.
C9lnternational Agency for Research on Cancer 1993
ISBN 92 832 1257 6
ISSN 0250-9555
Publications of the World Health Organization enjoy copyright protection in accordance
with the provisions of Protocol 2 of the Universal Copyright Convention.
AIl rights reserved. Application for rights of reproduction or translation, in part or In toto,
should be made to the International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Distributed for the International Agency for Research on Cancer
by the Secretariat of the World Health Organization, Geneva
PRINTED lN THE UNITED KINGDOMCONTENTS
NOTE TO THE READER................................................. 5
LIST OF PARTiCiPANTS.................................................. 7
PREAMBLE ........................................................... 13
Background ......................................................... 13
Objective and Scope .................................................. 13
Selection of Topics for Monographs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 14
Data for Monographs ................................................. 15
The Working Group .................................................. 15
Working Procedures .................................................. 15
Exposure Data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 16
Studies of Cancer in Humans ................. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 17
Studies of Cancer in Experimental Animais ............................... 21
Other Relevant Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 23
Summary of Data Reported ............................................ 24
Evaluation .......................................................... 26
References .......................................................... 30
GENERA REMARKS .................................................. 35
THE MONOGRAHS
Occupational exposures of hairdressers and barbers and
personal use of hair colourants ..................................... 43
Hair dyes
CI Acid Orange 3 ............................................... 121
HC Blue No. 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 129
HC Blue No. 2 ........................ ................... ....... 143
HC Red No. 3 .................................................. 153
HC Yellow No. 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . ... 159
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol .......................... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . " 167
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol ........................................... 177
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene (2-Nitro-para-phenylenediamine) . . . . . . . . . .. 185CONTNTS
Cosmetic colourant
D&C Red No. 9 (CI Pigment Red 53:1) 203
Industrial dyestufTs
Magenta and CI Basic Red 9 ...................................... 215
CI Direct Blue 15 ............................................... 235
CI Acid Red 114 ................................................ 247
CI Pigment Red 3 ............................................... 259
Aromatic amines
4,4'-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 271
para-Chloroaniline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 305
2,6-Dimethylaniline (2,6-Xylidine) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 323
N,N-Dimethylaniline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 337
SUMMARY OF FINAL EVALUATIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 351
APPENDIX 1. SUMMARY TABLES OF GENETIC AND RELATED EFFECTS . 355
APPENDIX 2. ACTIVITY PROFILES FOR GENETIC AND RELATED
EFFECTS . ........ .................. . ....... . .. . ....... . ....... . . ... 375
SUPPLEMENTARY CORRIGENDA TO VOLUMES 1-56 ................... 399
CUMULATIV INDEX TO THE MONOGRAPHS SERIES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 401NOTE TO THE READER
The term 'carcinogenic risk' in the lARC Monographs series is taken to mean the proba-
bility that exposure to an agent will lead to cancer in humans.
Inclusion of an agent in the Monographs does not imply that it is a carcinogen, only that
the published data have been examined. Equally, the fact that an agent has not yet been
evaluated in a monograph does not mean that it is not carcinogenic.
The evaluations of carcinogenic risk are made by international working groups of in-
dependent scientists and are qualitative in nature. No recommendation is given for regu-
lation or legislation.
Anyone who is aware of published data that may alter the evaluation of the carcinogenic
risk of an agent to humans is encouraged to make this information available to the Unit of
Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation, International Agency for Research on Cancer,
150 cours AIbert Thomas, 69372 Lyon Cedex 08, France, in order that the agent may be
considered for re-evaluation by a future Working Group.
Although every effort is made to prepare the monographs as accurately as possible,
mistakes may occur. Readers are requested to communicate any errors to the Unit of
Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation, so that corrections can be reported in future
volumes.
-5-lARe WORKING GROUP ON THE EVALUATION OF eARCINOGENIe
RISKS TO HUMAS: oceUPATIONAL EXPOSURES OF
HADRESSERS AND BARERS AND PERSONAL USE OF HAR
eOLOURATS; SOME HAR DYES, COSMETIC eOLOURATS,
INDUSTRIAL DYESTUFFS AND AROMATie AMINES
Lyon, 6-13 October 1992
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Members
M. Boeniger, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Robert A Thft Labo-
ratories, 4676 Columbia Parkway, Cincinnati, OH 45226- 1998, USA
R.D. Combes, LSU College of Higher Education, The Avenue, Southampton, Hants S09
5HB, United Kingdom
T.A. Dragani, Division of Experimental Oncology A, Istituto Nazionale per 10 Studio e la
Cura dei Thmori, via Venezian 1,20133 Milano, Italy
J. Fitzgerald, Public and Environmental Health Division, South Australian Health
Commission, 11-13 Hindmarsh Square, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia
B.D. Hardin, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Hubert H. Humphrey
Building, Room 714-B, 200 Independence Avenue Sw, Washington DC 20201, USA
R.B. Hayes, Division of Cancer Etiology, National Cancer Institute, Executive Plaza North,
Room 418, 6130 Executive Boulevard, North Bethesda, MD 20892, USA
F. Kadlubar, National Center for Toxicological Research, Jefferson, AR 72079-9502, USA
L.J. Kinlen, CRC Cancer Epidemiology Research Group, Department of Public Health &
Primary Care, University of Oxford, The Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford OX2 6HE, United
KIngdom
E. Kriek, Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, Netherlands
E. Lynge, Danish Cancer Registry, Rosenvængets Hovedvej 35, Box 839, 2100 Copenhagen
ø, Denmark
R.R. Maronpot, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, PO Box 12233,
Research ltiangle Park, NC 27709, USA
-7-8 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
H.-G. Neumann, InstItute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Würzburg,
Versbacherstrasse 9, 8700 Würzburg, Germany (Vìce-Chairman)
S. Olin, International Ufe Sciences Institutes, Risk Science Institute, 1126 Sixteenth Street
NW, Washington DC 20036, USA
A Pintér, Department of Morphology, 'Johan Belá' National Institute ofHygiene, Gyáli útca
2-6, 1966 Budapest, Hungary
U. Rannug, Wallenberg Laboratory, Institute of Genetics, University of Stockholm, 10691
Stockholm, Sweden
B. Terracini, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Oncologia Umana, University ofTorino,
Servzio di Epidemiologia dei Tumori, via Santena 7, 10126 Torino, Italy (Chairman)
H. lSuda, Second Department of Pathology, Fujita-Gakuen Health University, School of
Medicine, Toyoake, AIchi 470-11, Japan
V:S. Thrusov, Cancer Research Centre, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Kashirskoye
Shosse 24, 115478 Moscow, Russian Federation
Representatives
National Cancer Institute
P. Wirth, Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Cancer Etiology, National
Cancer Institute, Building 37, Room 3C-1O, Bethesda MD 20892, USA
Ecological and Toxicological Association of Dyes and Organic Pigments Manufacturers
E.A. Clarke, Ecological and Toxicological Association of Dyes and Organic Pigments
Manufacturers, Clarastrasse 4, PO Box, 4005 Basel, Switzerland
R. Jung, Hoechst AG, Pharma Forschung Toxicologie, Gewerbetoxicologie/GS 282,
Postfach 80 03 20, 6230 Frankfurt 80, Germany
The Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association and the Comité de Liaison des Associations
européennes de l'Industrie de la Parfmerie, des Produits cosmétiques et de Toilette
J.F. Corbett, Clairol, 2 Blachley Road, Stamford, CT 06922, USA
Commission of the European Communities
M. De Smedt, Industrial Hygiene and Safety Unit V/E/2, Health and Safety Directorate,
Commission of the European Cominunities, Bâtiment Jean Monnet, 2920 Luxembourg,
Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
IAC Secretariat
P. Boffetta, Unit of Analytical Epidemiology
l.R.P. Cabral, Unit of Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis
E. Cardis, Director's Offce
M. Friesen, Unit of Environmental Carcinogens and Host FactorsPARTICIPANTS 9
M.-J. Ghess, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
E. Heseltne, Lajarthe, 24290 St Léon-sur-Vézère, France
\Z Krutovskikh, Unit of Multistage Carcinogenesis
J. Uttle, Unit of Analytical Epidemiology
D. McGregor, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
D. Mietton, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
H. Møller, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
R. Montesano, Unit of Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis
I. O'Neil, Unit of Environmental Carcinogens and Host Factors
C. Partensky, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
I. Peterschmitt, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation, Geneva
D. Shuker, Unit of Environmental Carcinogens and Host Factors
L. Tomatis, Director
H. Vainio, Chief, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
J. Wilbourn, Unit of Carcinogen Identification and Evaluation
H. Yamasaki, Unit of Multistage Carcinogenesis
Secretarial assistance
M. Lézère
J. Mitchell
S. ReynaudPREAMBLElAe MONOGRAHS PROGRAME ON THE EVALUATION
OF eARelNOGENie RISKS TO HUMASl
PREAMBLE
1. BACKGROUND
ln 1969, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) initiated a pro-
gramme to evaluate the carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans and to produce
monographs on individual chemicals. The Monographs programme has since been expanded
to include consideration of exposures to complex mixtures of chemicals (which occur, for
example, in some occupations and as a result of human habits) and of exposures to other
agents, such as radiation and viruses. With Supplement 6 (IARC, 1987a), the title of the series
was modified from lARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals
to Humans to lARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, in order
to reflect the widened scope of the programme.
The criteria established in 1971 to evaluate carcinogenic risk to hum ans were adopted bythe working groups whose deliberations resulted in the first 16 volumes of the /ARC
Monographs series. Those criteria were subsequently updated by further ad-hoc working
groups (lARC, 1977, 1978, 1979, 1982, 1983, 1987b, 1988, 1991a; Vainio et al., 1992).
2. OBJECTIV AND SCOPE
The objective of the programme is to prepare, with the help of international working
groups of experts, and to publish in the form of monographs, critical reviews and evaluations
of evidence on the carcinogenicity of a wide range ofhuman exposures. The Monographs may
also indicate where additional research efforts are needed.
The Monographs represent the first step in carcinogenic risk assessment, which involves
examination of all relevant information in order to assess the strength of the available
evidence that certain exposures could alter the incidence of cancer in humans. The second
step is quantitative risk estimation. Detailed, quantitative evaluations of epidemiological
data may be made in the Monographs, but without extrapolation beyond the range of the data
lThis project is supported by PHS Grant No. 5-U01 CA33193-11 awarded by the US National Cancer Insti-
tute, Department of Health and Human Servces. Since 1986, the programme has also been supported by the
Commission of the European Communities.
-13-14 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
available. Quantitative extrapolation from experimental data to the human situation is not
undertaken.
The term 'carcinogen' is used in these monographs to denote an exposure that is capable
of increasing the incidence of malignant neoplasms; the induction of benign neoplasms may
in some circumstances (see p. 22) contribute to the judgement that the exposure is carcino-
genic. The terms 'neoplasm' and 'tumour' are used interchangeably.
Sorne epidemiological and experimental studies indicate that different agents may act at
different stages in the carcinogenic process, and several different mechanisms may be
involved. The aim of the Monographs has been,from their inception, to evaluate evidence of
carcinogenicity at any stage in the carcinogenesis process, independently of the underlying
mechanisms. Information on mechanisms may, however, be used in making the overall
evaluation (IARC, 1991a; Vainio et al., 1992; see also pp. 28-30).
The Monographs may assist national and international authorities in making risk
assessments and in formulating decisions concerning any necessary preventive measures.
The evaluations of IARC working groups are scientific, qualitative judgements about the
evidence for or against carcinogenicity provided by the available data. These evaluations
represent only one part of the body of information on which regulatory measures may be
based. Other components of regulatory decisions may vary from one situation to another and
from country to country, responding to different socioeconomic and national priorities.
Therefore, no recommendation is given with regard to regulation or legislation, which are the
responsibilty of individu al governments and/or other international organizations.
The lARC Monographs are recognized as an authoritative source of information on the
carcinogenicity of a wide range of hum an exposures. A users' survey, made in 1988, indicated
that the Monographs are consulted by various agencies in 57 countries. Each volume is
generally printed in 4000 copies for distribution to governments, regulatoiy bodies and
interested scientists. The Monographs are also available via the Distribution and Sales
Servce of the World Health Organization.
3. SELECTION OF TOPICS FOR MONOGRAPHS
Topics are selected on the basis of two main criteria: (a) there is evidence of hum an
exposure, and (b) there is some evidence or suspicion of carcinogenicity. The term 'agent' is
used to include individual chemical compounds, groups of related che mi cal compounds,
physical agents (such as radiation) and biological factors (such as viruses). Exposures to
mixtures of agents may occur in occupational exposures and as a result of personal and
cultural habits (like smoking and dietary practices). Chemical analogues and compounds
with biological or physical characteristics similar to those of suspected carcinogens may also
be considered, even in the absence of data on a possible carcinogenic effect in humans or
experimental animais.
The scientific literature is surveyed for published data relevant to an assessment of
carcinogenicity. The IARC surveys of chemicals being tested for carcinogenicity (IARC,
1973-1992) and directories of on-going research in cancer epidemiology (IARC, 1976-
1992) often indicate those exposures that may be scheduled for future meetings. Ad-hoc
working groups convened by IARC in 1984, 1989 and 1991 gave recommendations as to
which agents should be evaluated in the JAR C Monographs series (lARC, 1984, 1989, 1991 b ).PREAMBLE 15
As significant new data ón subjects on which monographs have already been prepared
become available, re-evaluations are made at subsequent meetings, and revised monographs
are published.
4. DATA FOR MONOGRAPHS
The Monographs do not necessarily cite ail the literature concerning the subject of an
evaluation. Only those data considered by the Working Group to be relevant to making the
evaluation are included.
With regard to biological and epidemiological data, only reports that have been
published or accepted for publication in the openly available scientific literature are
reviewed by the working groups. ln certain instances, government agency reports that have
undergone peer review and are widely available are considered. Exceptions may be made on
an ad-hoc basis to include unpublished reports that are in their final form and publicly
available, if their inclusion is considered pertinent to making a final evaluation (see pp. 26
et seq.). ln the sections on chemical and physical properties, on analysis, on production and
use and on occurrence, unpublished sources of information may be used.
5. THE WORKING GROUP
Reviews and evaluations are formulated by a working group of experts. The tasks of the
group are: (i) to ascertain that all appropriate data have been collected; (ii) to select the data
relevant for the evaluation on the basis of scientific merit; (iii) to prepare accurate summaries
of the data to enable the reader to follow the reasoning of the Working Group; (iv) to
evaluate the results ôf epidemiological and experimental studies on cancer; (v) to evaluate
data relevant to the understanding of mechanism of action; and (vi) to make an overall
evaluation of the carcinogenicity of the exposure to humans.
Working Group participants who contributed to the considerations and evaluations
within a partcular volume are listed, with their addresses, at the beginning of each
publication. Each participant who is a member of a working group serves as an individual
scientist and not as a representative of any organization, government or industiy. ln addition,
nominees of national and international agencies and industrial associations may be invited as
observers.
6. WORKNG PROCEDURES
Approximately one year in advance of a meeting of a working group, the topics of the
monographs are announced and participants are selected by IARC staff in consultation with
other experts. Subsequently, relevant biological and epidemiological data are collected by
IARC from recognized sources-of information on carcinogenesis, including data storage and
retrieval systems such as BIOSIS, Chemical Abstracts, CANCERLll, MEDLINE and
TOXLINE-including EMIC and ETIC for data on genetic and related effects and
reproductive and developmental effects, respectively.
For chemicals and some complex mixtures, the major collection of data and the
preparation of first drafts of the sections on chemical and physical properties, on analysis, on
production and use and on occurrence are carried out under a separate con tract funded by16 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
the US National Cancer Institute. Representatives from industrial associations mayassist in
the preparation of sections on production and use. Information on production and trade is
obtained from governmental and trade publications and, in sorne cases, by direct contact
with industries. Separate production data on some agents may not be available because their
publication could disclose confidential information. Information on uses may be obtained
from published sources but is often complemented by direct contact with manufacturers.
Efforts are made to supplement this information with data from other national and
international sources.
Six months before the meeting, the rnaterial obtained is sent to meeting participants, or
is used by IARC staff, to prepare sections for the first drafts of monographs. The first drafts
are compiled by IARC staff and sent, prior to the meeting, to aH participants of the Working
Group for review.
The Working Group meets in Lyon for seven to eight days to discuss and finalize the texts
of the monographs and to formulate the evaluations. Afer the meeting, the master copy of
each monograph is verified by consulting the original literature, edited and prepared for
publication. The aim is to publish monographs within nine months of the Working Group
meeting.
The available studies are summarized by the Working Group, with particular regard to
the qualitative aspects discussed below. ln general, numerical findings are indicated as they
appear in the original report; units are converted when necessaiy for easier comparison. The
Working Group may conduct additional analyses of the published data and use them in their
assessment of the evidence; the results of such supplementary analyses are given in square
brackets. When an important aspect of a study, directly impinging on its interpretation,
should be brought to the attention of the reader, a comment is given iD square brackets.
7. EXPOSURE DATA
Sections that indicate the extent of past and present human exposure, the sources of
exposure, the people most likely to be exposed and the factors that contribute to the exposure
are included at the beginning of each monograph.
Most monographs on individual chemicals, groups of chemicals or complex mixtures
include sections on chemical and physical data, on analysis, on production and use and on
occurrence. ln monographs on, for example, physical agents, biological factors, occupational
exposures and cultural habits, other sections may be included, su ch as: historicalperspectives, description of an industry or habit, chemistry of the complex mixture or
taxonomy.
For chemical exposures, the Chemical Abstracts Servces Registry Number, the latest
Chemical Abstracts Primary Name and the IUPAC Systematic Name are recorded; other
syonyms are given, but the list is not necessarily comprehensive. For biological agents,
taxonomy and structure are described, and the degree of variability is given, when applicable.
Information on chemical and physical properties and, in particular, data relevant to
identification, occurrence and biological activity are included. For biological agents, mode of
replication, life cycle, target cells, persistence and latency, host response and description of
nonmalignant disease caused by them are given. A description of technical products of
chemicals includes trades names, relevant specifications and available information onPREAMBLE 17
composition and impurities. Some of the trade names given may be those of mixtures in
which the agent being evaluated is only one of the ingredients.
The purpose of the section on analysis is to give the reader an overvew of current
methods, with emphasis on those widely used for regulatory purposes. Methods for
monitoring human exposure are also given, when available. No critical evaluation or
recommendation of any of the methods is meant or implied. The IARC publishes a series of
volumes, Environmental Carcinogens: Methods of Analysis and Exposure Measurement
(IARC, 1978-92), that describe validated methods for analysing a wide variety of chemicals
and mixtures. For biological agents, methods of detection and exposure assessment are
described, including their sensitivity, specificity and reproducibility.
The dates of first synthesis and of first commercial production of a chemical or mixture
are provided; for agents which do not occur naturally, this information may allow a
reasonable estimate to be made of the date before which no human exposure to the agent
could have occurred. The dates of first reported occurrence of an exposure are also provided.
ln addition, methods of synthesis used in past and present commercial production and
different methods of production which may give rise to different impurities are -described.
Data on production, international trade and uses are obtained for representative
regions, which usually include Europe, Japan and the USA. It should not, however, ne
inferred that those areas or nations are necessarily the sole or major sources or users of the
agent. Some identified uses may not be current or major applications, and the coverage is not
necessarily comprehensive. ln the case of drugs, mention of their therapeutic uses does not
necessarily represent current practice nor does it imply judgement as to their therapeutic
efficacy.
Information on the occurrence of an agent or mixture in the environment is obtained
from data derived from the monitoring and surveilance of levels in occupational
environments, air, water, soil, foods and animal and human tissues. When available, data on
the generation, persistence and bioaccumulation of the agent are also included. ln the case of
mixtures, industries, occupations or processes, information is given about all agents present.
For processes, industries and occupations, a historical description is also given, noting
variations in chemical composition, physical properties and levels of occupational exposure
with time and place. For biological agents, the epidemiology of infection is described.
Statements concerning regulations and guidelines (e.g., pesticide registrations, maximal
levels permitted in foods, occupational exposure limits) are included for sorne countries as
indications of potential exposures, but they may not reflect the most recent situation, since
su ch limits are continuously reviewed and modified. The absence of information on
regulatory status for a country should not be tåken to imply that that country does not have
regulations with regard to the exposure. For biological agents, legislation and control,
including vaccines and therapy, are described.
8. STUDIES OF CANCER lN HUMANS
(a) rypes of studies considered
Three tyes of epidemiological studies of cancer contribute to the assessment of
carcinogenicity in humans-cohort studies, case-control studies and correlation (or18 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
ecological) studies. Rarely, results from randomized trials may be available. Case reports of
cancer in humans may also be reviewed.
Cohort and case-control studies relate individual exposures under study to the
occurrence of cancer in individuals and provide an estimate of relative risk (ratio of incidence
in those exposed to incidence in those not exposed) as the main measure of association.
ln correlation studies, the units of investigation are usually whole populations (e.g., in
particular geographical areas or at particular times), and cancer frequency is related to a
summary measure of the exposure of the population to the agent, mixture or exposure
circumstance un der study. Because individual exposure is not documented, however, a causal
relationship is less easy to infer from correlation studies than from cohort and case-control
studies. Case reports generally arise from a suspicion, based on clinical experience, that the
concurrence of two events-that is, a particular exposure and occurrence of a cancer-has
happened rather more frequently than would be expected by chance. Case reports usually
lack complete ascertainment of cases in any population, definition or enumeration of the
population at risk and estimation of the expected number of cases in the absence of exposure.
The uncertainties surrounding interpretation of case reports and correlation studies make
them inadequate, except in rare instances, to form the sole basis for inferring a causal
relationship. When taken together with case-control and cohort studies, however, relevant
case reports or correlation studies may add materially to the judgement that a causal
relationship is present.
Epidemiological studies ofbenign neoplasms, presumed preneoplastic lesions and other
end-points thought to be relevant to cancer are also reviewed by working groups. They may,
in sorne instances, strengthen inferences drawn from studies of cancer itself.
(b) Quality of studies considered
The Monographs are not intended to summarize aIl published studies. Those that are
judged to be inadequate or irrelevant to the evaluation are generally omitted. They may be
mentioned briefly, particularly when the information is considered to be a useful supplement
to that in other reports or when they provide the only data available. Their inclusion does not
imply acceptance of the adequacy of the study design or of the analysis and interpretation of
the results, and limitations are clearly outlined in square brackets at the end of the study
description.
It is necessary to take into account the possible roles of bias, confounding and chance in
the interpretation of epidemiological studies. By 'bias' is meant the operation of factors in
study design or execution that lead erroneously to a stronger or weaker association th an in
fact exists between disease and an agent, mixture or exposure circumstance. By'confounding'
is meant a situation in which the relationship with disease is made to appear stronger or to
appear weaker th an it truly is as a result of an association between the apparent causal factor
and another factor that is associated with either an increase or decrease in the incidence of
the disease. ln evaluating the extent to which these factors have been minimized in an
individual study, working groups consider a number of aspects of design and analysis as
described in the report of the study. Most of these considerations apply equally to
cae-control, cohort and correlation studies. Lack of clarity of any of these aspects in thePREAMBLE19
reporting of a study can decrease its credibility and the weight given to it in the final
evaluation of the exposure.
Firstly, the study population, disease (or diseases) and exposure should have been well
defined by the authors. Cases of disease in the study population should have been identified
in a way that was independent of the exposure of interest, and exposure should have been
assessed in a way that was not related to disease status.
Secondly, the authors should have taken account in the study design and analysis of other
variables that can influence the risk of disease and may have been related to the exposure of
interest. Potential confounding by such variables should have been dealt with either in the
design of the study, su ch as by matching, or in the analysis, by statistical adjustment. ln cohort
studies, comparisons with local rates of disease may be more appropriate than those with
national rates. InternaI comparisons of disease frequency among individuals at different
levels of exposure should also have been made in the study.
Thirdly, the authors should have reported the basic data on which the conclusions are
founded, even if sophisticated statistical analyses were employed. At the very least, they
should have given the numbers of exposed and unexposed cases and controls in a
case-control study and the numbers of cases observed and expected in a cohort study.
Further tabulations by time since exposure began and other temporal factors are also
important. ln a cohort study, data on aIl cancer sites and all causes of death should have been
given, to reveal the possibility of reporting bias. ln a case-control study, the effects of
investigated factors other than the exposure of interest should have been reported.
Finally, the statistical methods used to obtain estima tes of relative risk, absolute rates of
cancer, confidence intervals and significance tests, and to adjust for confounding should have
been clearly stated by the authors. The methods used should preferably have been the
generally accepted techniques that have been refined since the mid- 1970s. These methods
have been reviewed for case-control studies (Breslow & Day, 1980) and for cohort studies
(Breslow & Day, 1987).
(c) Inferences about mechanism of action
Detailed analyses of both relative and absolute risks in relation to temporal variables,
such as age at first exposure, time since first exposure, duration of exposure, cumulative
exposure and time since exposure ceased, are reviewed and summarized when available. The
analysis of temporal relationships can be useful in formulating models of carcinogenesis. ln
particular, such analyses may suggest whether a carcinogen acts early or late in the pro cess ofcarcinogenesis, although at best they allow only indirect inferences about the mechanism of
action. Special attention is given to measurements of biological markers of carcinogen
exposure or action, such as DNA or protein adducts, as well as markers of early steps in the
carcinogenic process, such as proto-oncogene mutation, when these are incorporated into
epidemiological studies focused on cancer incidence or mortality. Such measurements may
allowinferences to be made about putative mechanisms of action (IARC, 1991a; Vainio et al.,
1992).
(d) Criteria for causality
Mer the quality of individual epidemiological studies of cancer has been summarized
and assessed, a judgement is made concerning the strength of evidence that the agent,20 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
mixture or exposure circumstance in question is carcinogenic for humans. ln making their
judgement, the Working Group considers several criteria for causality. A strong association
(Le., a large relative risk) is more likely to indicate causality than a weak association,
although it is recognized that relative risks of small magnitude do not imply lack of causality
and may be important if the disease is common. Asociations that are replicated in several
studies of the same design or using different epidemiological approaches or under different
cIrcumstances of exposure are more likely to represent a causal relationship th an isolated
observations from single studies. If there are inconsistent results among investigations,
possible reasons are sought (such as differences in amount of exposure), and results of studies
judged to be of high quality are given more weight than those from studies judged to be
methodologically less sound. When suspicion of carcinogenicity arises largely from a single
study, these data are not combined with those from later studies in any subsequent
reassessment of the strength of the evidence.
If the risk of the disease in question increases with the amount of exposure, this is
considered to be a strong indication of causality, although absence of a graded response is
not necessarily evidence against a causal relationship. Demonstration of a decline in risk
after cessation of or reduction in exposure in individuals or in whole populations also
supports a causal interpretation of the findings.
AIthough a carcinogen may act upon more than one target, the specificity of an asso-
ciation (Le., an increased occurrence of cancer at one anatomical site or of one morpho-
logical tye) adds plausibility to a causal relationship, particularly when excess cancer
occurrence is lImited to one morphological tye within the same organ.
AIthough rarely available, results from randomized trials showing different rates among
exposed and unexposed individu ais provide particularly strong evidence for causality.
When several epidemiological studies show little or no indication of an association
between an exposure and cancer, the judgement may be made that, in the aggregate, they
show evidence of lack of carcinogenicity. Such a judgement requires first of aIl that the
studies giving rise to it meet, to a suffcient degree, the standards of design and analysis
described above. SpecificaIly, the possibility that bias, confounding or misclassification of
exposure or outcome could explain the observed results should be considered and excluded
with reasonable certainty. ln addition, aIl studies that are judged to be methodologically
sound should be consistent with a relative risk of unity for any observed level of exposure and,
when considered together, should provide a pooled estimate of relative risk which is at or
near unity and has a narrow confidence interval, due to suffcient population size. Moreover,
no individual study nor the pooled results of all the studies should show any consistent
tendency for relative risk of cancer to increase with increasing level of exposure. It is
important to note that evidence of lack of carcinogenicity obtained in this way from several
epidemiological studies can apply only to the tye(s) of cancer studied and to dose levels and
intervals between first exposure and observation of disease that are the same as or less than
those observed in all the studies. Experience with human cancer indicates that, in some cases,
the period from first exposure to the development of clinical cancer is sel dom less than 20
years; latent periods substantially shorter than 30 years cannot provide evidence for lack of
carcinogenicity.PREAMBLE21
9. STUDIES OF CANCER lN EXPERIMENTAL ANIMALS
AIl known human carcinogens that have been studied adequately in experimental
animaIs have produced positive results in one or more animal species (Wilbourn et al., 1986;
Tomatis et al., 1989). For several agents (aflatoxins, 4-aminobiphenyl, azathioprine, betel
quid with tobacco, BCME and CMME (technical grade), chlorambucil, chlornaphazine,
ciclosporin, coal-tar pitches, coal-tars, combined oral contraceptives, cyclophosphamide,
diethylstilboestrol, melphalan, 8-methoxysoralen plus UV A, mustard gas, myleran,
2-naphthylamine, nonsteroidal oestrogens, oestrogçn replacement therapy/steroidal
oestrogens, solar radiation, thiotepa and vinyl chloride), carcinogenicity in experimental
animais was established or highly suspected before epidemiological studies confirmed the
carcinogenicity in humans (Vainio et al., 1993). Although this association cannot establish
that all agents and mixtures that cause cancer in experimental animaIs also cause cancer in
humans, nevertheless, in the absence of adequate data on humans, it is biologically plausible
and prudent to regard agents and mixtures for which there is suffcient evidence (see p. 27) of
carcinogenicity in experimental animaIs as ifthey presented a carcinogenic risk to humans.
The possibility that a given agent may cause cancer through a species-specific mechanism
which does not operate in hum ans, see p. 28, should also be taken into consideration.
The nature and extent of impurities or contaminants present in the chemical or mixture
being evaluated are given when available. Animal strain, sex, numbers per group, age at start
of treatment and survval are reported.
Other tyes of studies summarized include: experiments in which the agent or mixture
was administered in conjunction with known carcinogens or factors that modify carcinogenic
effects; studies in which the end-point was not cancer but a defined precancerous lesion; ànd
experiments on the carcinogenicity of known metabolites and derivatives.
For experimental studies of mixtures, consideration is given to the possibility of changes
in the physicochemical properties of the test substance during collection, storage, extraction,
concentration and delivery. Chemical and toxicological interactions of the components of
mixtures may result in nonlinear dose-response relationships.
An assessment is made as to the relevance to human exposure of samples tested in
experimental animais, which may involve consideration of: (i) physical and chemical charac-
teristics, (ii) constituent substances that indicate the presence of a class of substances, (iii) the
results of tests for genetic and related effects, including genetic activity profiles, DNA adduct
profiles, proto-oncogene mutation and expression and suppressor gene inactivation. The
relevance of results obtained with viral strains analogous to that being evaluated in the
monograph must also be considered.
(a) Qualitative aspects
An assessment of carcinogenicity involves several considerations of qualitative
importance, including (i) the experimental conditions under which the test was performed,
including route and schedule of exposure, species, strain, sex, age, duration of follow-up;
(ii) the consistency of the results, for example, across species and target organes); (iii) the
spectrum of neoplastic response, from preneoplastic lesions and benign tumours to
malignant neoplasms; and (iv) the possible role of modifyng factors.22 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
As mentioned earlier (p. 15), the Monographs are not intended to summarize all
published studies. Those studies in experimental animais that are inadequate (e.g., too short
a duration, too few animais, poor survval; see below) or are judged irrelevant to the
evaluation are generally omitted. Guidelines for conducting adequate long-term
carcinogenicity experiments have been outlined (e.g., Montesano et aL., 1986).
Considerations of importance to the Working Group in the interpretation and
evaluation of a particular study include: (i) how clearly the agent was defined and, in the case
of mixtures, how adequately the sample characterization was reported; (ii) whether the dose
was adequately monitored, particularly in inhalation experiments; (iii) whether the doses and
duration of treatment were appropriate and whether the survval of treated animaIs was
similar to that of controls; (iv) whether there were adequate numbers of animais per group;
(v) whether animais ofboth sexes were used; (vi) whether animaIs were allocated randomly to
groups; (vii) whether the duration of observation was adequate; and (viii) whether the data
were adequately reported. If available, recent data on the incidence of specific tumours in
historical controls, as weil as in concurrent controls, should be taken into account in the
evaluation of tumour response.
When benign tumours occur together with and originate from the same cell tye in an
organ or tissue as malignant tumours in a particular study and appear to represent a stage in
the progression to malignancy, it may be valid to combine them in assessing tumour
incidence (Huff et al., 1989). The occurrence of lesions presumed to be preneoplastic may in
certain instances aid in assessing the biological plausibility of any neoplastic response
observed. If an agent or mixture induces only benign neoplasms that appear to be end-points
that do not readily undergo transition to malignancy, it should nevertheless be suspected of
being a carcinogen and it requires further investigation.
(h) Quantitative aspects
The probability that tumours will occur may depend on the species, sex, strain and age of
the animal, the dose of the carcinogen and the route and length of exposure. Evidence of an
increased incidence of neoplasms with increased level of exposure strengthens the inference
of a causal association between the exposure and the development of neoplasms.
The form of the dose-response relationship can vary widely, depending on the particular
agent under study and the target organ. Both DNA damage and increased cell division are
important aspects of carcinogenesis, and cell proliferation is a strong determinant of dose-
response relationships for some carcinogens (Cohen & Ellwein, 1990). Since many chemicals
require metabolic activation before being converted into their reactive intermediates, both
metabolic and pharmacokinetic aspects are important in determining the dose-response
pattern. Saturation of steps such as absorption, activation, inactivation and elimination may
produce nonlinearity in the dose-response relationship, as could saturation of processes such
as DNA repair (Hoel et al., 1983; Gart et aL., 1986).
(c) Statistical analysis of long-term experiments in animais
Factors considered by the Working Group include the adequacy of the information given
for each treatment group: (i) the number of animais studied and the number examined
histologically, (ii) the number of animais with a given tumour tye and (iii) length of survvaL.
The statistical methods used should be clearly stated and should be the generally acceptedPREAMBLE23
techniques refined for this purpose (Peto et al., 1980; Gart et al., 1986). When there is no
difference in survval between control and treatment groups, the Working Group usually
compares the proportions of animais developing each tumour tye in each of the groups.
Otherwse, consideration is given as to whether or not appropriate adjustments have been
made for differences in survvaL. These adjustments can include: comparisons of the
proportions of tumour-bearing animais among the effective number of animaIs (alive at the
time the first tumour is discovered), in the case where most differences in survval occur
before tumours appear; life-table methods, when tumours are visible or when they may be
considered 'fatal' because mortality rapidly follows tumour development; and the Mantel-
Haenszel test or logistic regression, when occult tumours do not affect the animaIs' risk of
dyng but are 'incidental' findings at autopsy.
ln practice, classifyng tumours as fatal or incidental may be difficult. Several survval-
adjusted methods have been developed that do not require this distinction (Gartet aL., 1986),
although they have not been fully evaluated.
10. OTHER RELEVANT DATA
(a) Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
Concise information is given on absorption, distribution (including placental transfer)
and excretion in both humans and experimental animaIs. KInetic factors that may affect the
dose-response relationship, such as saturation of uptake, protein binding, metabolic
activation, detoxification and DNA repair processes, are mentioned. Studies that indicate
the metabolic fate of the agent in hum ans and in experimental animaIs are summarized
briefly, and comparisons of data from humans and animaIs are made when possible.
Comparative information on the relationship between exposure and the dose that reaches
the target site may be of particular importance for extrapolation between species.
J
(b) Toxic effects
Data are given on acute and chronic toxic effects (other than cancer), such as organ
toxicity, increased cell proliferation, immunotoxicity and endocrine effects. The presence
and toxicological significance of cellular receptors is described.
(c) Reproductive and developmental effects
Effects on reproduction, teratogenicity, fetotoxicity and embryotoxicity are also
summarized briefly.
(d) Genetic and related effects
Tests of genetic and related effects are described in view of the relevance of gene
mutation and chromosomal damage to carcinogenesis (Vainio et al., 1992).
The adequacy of the reporting of sample characterization is considered and, where
necessary, commented upon; with regard to complex mixtures, such comments are similar to
those described for animal carcinogenicity tests on p. 21. The available data are interpreted
critically by phylogenetic group according to the end-points detected, which may include
DNA damage, gene mutation, sister chromatid exchange, micronucleus formation, chromo-
somal aberrations, aneuploidy and cell transformation. The concentrations employed are24 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
given, and mention is made of whether use of an exogenous metabolic system in vitro affected
the test result. These data are given as listings of test systems, data and references; bar graphs
(activity profiles) and corresponding summary tables with detailed information on the
preparation of the profiles (Waters et al., 1987) are given in appendices.
Positive results in tests using prokaryotes, lower eukaryotes, plants, insects and cultured
mammalian cells suggest that genetic and related effects eould oceur in mammals. Results
from su ch tests may also give information about the tyes of genetic effect produced and
about the involvement of metabolic activation. Some end-points described are clearly
genetic in nature (e.g., gene mutations and chromosomal aberrations), while others are to a
greater or lesser degree associated with genetic effects (e.g., unscheduled DNA synthesis).
ln-vitro tests for tumour-promoting activity and for cell transformation may be sensitive to
changes that are not necessarily the result of genetic alterations but that may have specifie
relevance to the process of carcinogenesis. A critical appraisal of these tests has been
published (Montesano et aL., 1986).
Genetic or other activity manifest in experimental mammals and hum ans is regarded as
being of greater relevance than that in other organisms. The demonstration that an agent or
mixture can induce gene and chromosomal mutations in whole mammals indicates that it
may have carcinogenic activity, although this activity may not be detectably expressed in any
or ail species. Relative potency in tests for mutagenicity and related effects is not a reliable
indicator of carcinogenic potency. Negative results in tests for mutagenicIty in selected
tissues from animais treated in vivo provide less weight, partly because they do not exclude
the possibilIty of an effect in tissues other than those examined. Moreover, negative results in
short-term tests with genetic end-points cannot be considered to provide evidence to rule out
carcinogenicity of agents or mixtures that act through other mechanisms (e.g., receptor-
mediated effects, cellular toxicity with regenerative proliferation, peroxisome proliferation)
(Vainio et al., 1992). Factors that may lead to misleading results in short-term tests have been
discussed in detail elsewhere (Montesano et al., 1986).
When available, data relevant to mechanisms of carcinogenesis that do not involve
structural changes at the level of the gene are also described.
The adequacy of epidemiological studies of reproductive outcome and genetic and
related effects in humans is evaluated by the same criteria as are applied to epidemiological
studies of cancer.
(e) Structure-activity considerations
This section describes structure-activity relationships that may be relevant to an
evaluation of the carcinogenicity of an agent.
11. SUMMAY OF DATA REPORTED
ln this section, the relevant epidemiological and experimental data are summarized.
Only report, other than in abstract form, that me et the criteria outlined on p. 15 are
considered for evaluating carcinogenicity. Inadequate studies are generally not summarized:
such studies are usually identified by asquare-bracketed comment in the preceding text.PREAMBLE25
(a) Exposures
Human exposure is summarized on the basis of elements such as production, use,
occurrence in the environ ment and determinations in human tissues and body fluids.
Quantitative data are given when available.
(b) Carcinogenicity in humans
Results of epidemiological studies that are considered to be pertinent to an assessment
of hum an carcinogenicity are summarized. When relevant, case reports and correlation
studies are also summarized.
(c) Carcinogenicity in experimental animais
Data relevant to an evaluation of carcinogenicity in animais are summarized. For each
animal species and route of administration, it is stated whether an increased incidence of
neoplasms or preneoplastic lesions was observed, and the tumour sites are indicated. If the
agent or mixture produced tumours after prenatal exposure or in single-dose experiments,
this is also indicated. Negative findings are also summarized. Dose-response and other
quantitative data may be given when available.
(d) Other data relevant to an evaluation of carcinogenicity and its mechanisms
Data on biological effects in humans that are of particular relevance are summarized.
These may include toxicological, kinetic and metabolic considerations and evidence ofDNA
binding, persistence of DNA lesions or genetic damage in exposed humans. Toxicological
information, such as that on cyotoxicity and regeneration, receptor binding and hormonal
and immunological effects, and data on kinetics and metabolism in experimental animais are
given when considered relevant to the possible mechanism of the carcinogenic action of the
agent. The results of tests for genetic and related effects are summarized for whole mammals,
cUltured mammalian cells and nonmammalian systems.
When available, comparisons of such data for humans and for animais, and particularly
animaIs that have developed cancer, are described.
Structure-activity relationships are mentioned when relevant.
For the agent, mixture or exposure circumstance being evaluated, the available data on
end-points or other phenomena relevant to mechanisms of carcinogenesis from studies in
humans, experimental animais and tissue and cell test systems are summarized within one or
more of the following descriptive dimensions:
(i) Evidence of genotoxicity (Le., structural changes at the level of the gene): for
example, structure-activity considerations, adduct formation, mutagenicity (effect on
specific genes), chromosomal mutation/aneuploidy
(ii) Evidence of effects on the expression of relevant genes (Le., functional changes at
the intracellular level): for example, alterations to the structure or quantity of the product of
a proto-oncogene or tumour suppressor gene, alterations to metabolic activation/-
inactivation/DNA repair
(iii) Evidence of relevant effects on cell behaviour (Le., morphological or behavioural
changes at the cellular or tissue level): for example, induction of mitogenesis, compensatoiy
cell proliferation, preneoplasia and hyperplasia, survval of premalignant or malignant celIs
(immortalization, immunosuppression), effects on metastatic potential26 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(iv) Evidence from dose and time relationships of carcinogenic effects and interactions
between agents: for example, early/late stage, as inferred from epidemiological studies;
initiation/promotion/progression/malignant conversion, as defined in animal carcIno-
genicity experiments; toxicokinetics
These dimensions are not mutually exclusive, and an agent may fall within more than one
of them. Thus, for example, the action of an agent on the expression of relevant genes could
be summarized under both the first and second dimension, even if it were known with
reasonable certainty that those effects resulted from genotoxicity.
12. EVALUATION
Evaluations of the strength of the evidence for carcinogenicity arising from human and
experimental animal data are made, using standard terms.
It is recognized that the criteria for these evaluations, described below, cannot
encompass all of the factors that may be relevant to an evaluation of carcinogenicity. ln
considering all of the relevant data, the Working Group may assign the agent, mixture or
exposure circumstance to a higher or lower category than a strict interpretation of these
criteria would indicate.
(a) Degrees ojevidence for carcinogenicity in humans and in experimental animais and
supporting evidence
These categories refer only to the strength of the evidence that an exposure is
carcinogenic and not to the extent of its carcinogenic activity (potency) nor to the
mechanisms involved. A classification may change as new information becomes available.
An evaluation of degree of evidence, whether for a single agent or a mixture, is limited to
the materials tested, as defined physically, chemically or biologically. When the agents
evaluated are considered by the Working Group to be suffciently closely related, they may
be grouped together for the purpose of a single evaluation of degree of evidence.
(i) Carcinogenicity in humans
The applicability of an evaluation of the carcinogenicity of a mixture, process,
occupation or industry on the basis of evidence from epidemiological studies depends on the
variability over time and place of the mixtures, processes, occupations and industries. The
Working Group seeks to identify the specific exposure, process or activitywhich is considered
most likely to be responsible for any excess risk. The evaluation is focused as narrowly as the
available data on exposure and other aspects permit.
The evidence relevant to carcinogenicity from studies in humans is classified into one of
the following categories:
Suffcient evidence of carcinogenicity: The Working Group considers that a causal
relationship has been established between exposure to the agent, mixture or exposure
circumstance and human cancer. That is, a positive relationship has been observed between
the exposure and cancer in studies in which chance, bias and confounding could be ruled out
with reasonable confidence.
Limited evidence of carcinogenicity: A positive association has been observed between
exposure to the agent, mixture or exposure circumstance and cancer for which a causalPREAMBLE27
interpretation is considered by the Working Group to be credible, but chance, bias or
confounding could not be ruled out with reasonable confidence.
Inadequate evidence of carcinogenicity: The available studies are of insuffcient quality,
consistency or statistical power to permit a conclusion regarding the presence or absence of a
causal association, or no data on cancer in humans are available.
Evidence suggesting lack of carcinogenicity: There are several adequate studies covering
the full range of levels of exposure that human beings are known to encounter, which are
mutually consistent in not showing a positive association between exposure to the agent,
mixture or exposure circumstance and any studied cancer at any observed level of exposure.
A conclusion of 'evidence suggesting lack of carcinogenicity' is inevitably limited to the
cancer sites, conditions and levels of exposure and length of observation covered by the
available studies. ln addition, the possibility of a very small risk at the levels of exposure
studied can never be excluded.
ln sorne instances, the above categories may be used to classify the degree of evidence
related to carcinogenicity in specific organs or tissues.
(ii) Carcinogenicity in experimental animais
The evidence relevant to carcinogenicity in experimental animais is classified into one of
the following categories:
Suffcient evidence of carcinogenicity: The Working Group considers that a causal
relationship has been established between the agent or mixture and an increased incidence of
malignant neoplasms or of an appropria te combination of benign and malignant neoplasms
in (a) two or more species of animais or (b) in two or more independent studies in one species
carried out at different times or in different laboratories or under different protocols.
Exceptionally, a single study in one species might be considered to provide suffcient
evidence of carcinogenicity when malignant neoplasms occur to an unusual degree with
regard to incidence, site, tye of tumour or age at onset.
Limited evidence of carcinogenicity: The data suggest a carcinogenic effect but are limi ted
for making a definitive evaluation because, e.g., (a) the evidence of carcinogenicity is
restricted to a single experiment; or (b) there are unresolved questions regarding the
adequacy of the design, conduct or interpretation of the study; or (c) the agent or mixture
increases the incidence only of benign neoplasms or lesions of uncertain neoplastic potential,
or of certain neoplasms which may occur spontaneously in high incidences in certain strains.
Inadequate evidence of carcinogenicity: The studies cannot be interpreted as showing
either the presence or absence of a carcinogenic effect because of major qualitative or
quantitative limitations, or no data on cancer in experimental animaIs are available.
Evidence suggesting lack of carcinogenicity: Adequate studies involving at least two
species are available which show that, within the limits of the tests used, the agent or mixture
is not carcinogenic. A conclusion of evidence suggesting lack of carcinogenicity is inevitably
limited to the species, tumour sites and levels of exposure studied.
(b) Other data relevant to the evaluation of carcinogenicity
Other evidence judged to be relevant to an evaluation of carcinogenicity and of
suffcient importance to affect the overall evaluation is th en described. This may include data28 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
on preneoplastic lesions, tumour pathology, genetic and related effects, structure-activity
relationships, metabolism and pharmacokinetics, and physicochemical parameters.
Data relevant to mechanisms of the carcinogenic action are also evaluated. The strength
of the evidence that any carcinogenic effect observed is due to a particular mechanism is
assessed, using terms such as weak, moderate or strong. Then, the Working Group assesses if
that particular mechanism is likely to be operative in humans. The strongest indications that
a particular mechanism operates in humans come from data on humans or biological
specimens obtained from exposed humans. The data may be considered to be especially
relevant if they show that the agent in question has caused changes in exposed humans that
are on the causal pathway to carcinogenesis. Such data may, however, never become
available, because it is at least conceivable that certain compounds may be kept from human
use solely on the basis of evidence of their toxicity and/or carcinogenicity in experimental
systems.
For complex exposures, including occupational and industrial exposures, chemical
composition and the potential contribution of carcinogens known to be present are
considered by the Working Group in its ove raIl evaluation of human carcinogenicity. The
Working Group also determines the extent to which the materials tested in experimental
systems are related to those to which humans are exposed.
(c) Overall evaluation
Finally, the body of evidence is considered as a whole, in order to reach an overall
evaluation of the carcinogenicity to humans of an agent, mixture or circumstance of
exposure.
An evaluation may be made for a group of chemical compounds that have been
evaluated by the Working Group. ln addition, when supporting data indicate that other,
related compounds for which there is no direct evidence of capacity to induce cancer in
humans or in animaIs may also be carcinogenic, a statement describing the rationale for this
conclusion is added to the evaluation narrative; an additional evaluation may be made for
this broader group of compounds if the strength of the evidence warrants it.
The agent, mixture or exposure circumstance is described according to the wording of
one of the following categories, and the designated group is given. The categorization of an
agent, mixture or exposure circumstance is a matter of scientific judgement, reflecting the
strength of the evidence derived from studies in humans and in experimental animais and
from other relevant data.
Croup 1 - The agent (mixture) is carcinogenic to humans.
The exposure circumstance entails exposures that are carcinogenic ta humans.
This category is used when there is suffcient evidence of carcinogenicIty in humans.
Exceptionally, an agent (mixture) may be placed in this category when evidence in humans is
less than suffcient but there is suffdent evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animais
and strong evidence in exposed humans that the agent (mixture) acts through a relevant
mechanism of carcinogenicity.PREAMBLE29
Croup 2
This category includes agents, mixtures and exposure circumstances for which, at one
exteme, the degree of evidence of carcinogenicity in humans is almost suffcient, as well as
those for which, at the other extreme, there are no human data but for which there is evidence
of carcinogenicity in experimental animais. Agents, mixtures and exposure circumstances are
assigned to either group 2A (probably carcinogenic to humans) or group 2B (possibly
carcinogenic to humans) on the basis of epidemiological and experimental evidence of
carcinogenicity and other relevant data.
Croup 2A - The agent (mixure) is probably carcinogenic to humans.
The exposure circumstance entails exposures that are probably carcinogenic to humans.
This category is used when there is limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and
suffcient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animaIs. ln some cases, an agent
(mixture) may be classified in this category when there is inadequate evidence of carcino-
genicity in humans and suffcient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental animais and
strong evidence that the carcinogenesis is mediated by a mechanism that also opera tes inhumans. Exceptionally, an agent, mixture or exposure circumstance may be c1assified in this
category solely on the basis of limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans.
Croup 2B - The agent (mixture) is possibly carcinogenic to humans.
The exposure circumstance entails exposures that are possibly carcinogenic to humans.
This category is used for agents, mixtures and exposure circumstances for which there is
limited evidence of carcinogenicity in humans and less th an suffcient evidence of carcino-genicity in experimental animaIs. It may also be used when there is inadequate evidence of
carcinogenicity in humans but there is suffcient evidence of carcinogenicity in experimental
animais. ln some instances, an agent, mixture or exposure circumstance for which there is
inadequate evidence of carcinogenicity in humans but limited evidence of carcinogenicity in
experimental animaIs together with supporting evidence from other relevant data may be
placed in this group.
Croup 3 - The agent (mixture or exposure circumstance) is not classifiable as to ils carcino-
genicity to humans.
This category is used most commonly for agents, mixtures and exposure circumstances
for which the evidence of carcinogenicity is inadequate in humans and inadequate or limited
in experimental animaIs.
Exceptionally, agents (mixtures) for which the evidence of carcinogenicity is inadequate
in humans but suffcient in experimental animais may be placed in this category when there is
strong evidence that the mechanism of carcinogenicity in experimental animais does not
operate in humans.
Agents, mixtures and exposure circumstances that do not fall into any other group are
also placed in this category.
Croup 4-The agent (mixture) is probably not carcinogenic 10 humans.
This category is used for agents or mixtures for which there is evidence suggesting lack of
carcinogenicity in humans and in experimental animaIs. ln sorne instances, agents or mixtures30 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
for which there is inadequate evidence of carcinogenicity in humans but evidence suggesting
lack of carcinogenicity in experimental animaIs, consistently and strongly supported by a
broad range of other relevant data, may be classified in this group.
References
Breslow, N.E. & Day, N.E. (1980) Statistical Methods in Cancer Research, Vol. 1, The Analysis of Case-
control Studies (IARC Scientific Publications No. 32), Lyon, IAC
Breslow, N.E. & Day, N.E. (1987) Statistical Methods in Cancer Research, VoL. 2, The Design and
Analysis of Cohort Studies (IAC Scientific Publications No. 82), Lyon, IAC
Cohen, S.M. & Ellwein, L.B. (199) Cell proliferation in carcinogenesis. Science, 249, 1007-1011
Gart, J.1., Krewski, D., Lee, P.N., Tarone, R.E. & Wahrendorf, J. (1986) Statistical Methods in Cancer
Research, VoL. 3, The Design and Analysis of Long-tenn Animal Experiments (IARC Scientific
PUblications No. 79), Lyon, IAC
Hoel, D.G., Kaplan, N.L. & Anderson, M.\¥ (1983) Implication of nonlinear kinetics on risk
estimation in carcinogenesis. Science, 219, 1032-1037
Huff, J.E., Eustis, S.L. & Haseman, J.K. (1989) Occurrence and relevance of chemically induced
benign neoplasms in long-term carcinogenicity studies. Cancer Metastasis Rev, 8, 1-21
IAC (1973-1992) Infonnation Bulletin on the Survey of Chemicals Being Tested for Carcinogenicity/-
Directory of Agents Being Tested for Carcinogenicity, Numbers 1-15, Lyon
Number 1 (1973) 52 pages
Number 2 (1973) 77 pages
Number 3 (1974) 67 pages
Number 4 (1974) 97 pages
Number 5 (1975) 88 pages
Number 6 (1976) 360 pages
Number 7 (1978) 460 pages
Number 8 (1979) 60 pages
Number 9 (1981) 294 pages
Number 10 (1983) 326 pages
Number 11 (1984) 370 pages
Number 12 (1986) 385 pages
Number 13 (1988) 40 pages
Number 14 (199) 369 pages
Number 15 (1992) 317 pages
IAC (1976-1992)
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1976. Edited by C.S. Muir & G. Wagner,
Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1977 (IAC Scientific Publications
No. 17). Edited by C.S. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1978 (IAC Scientific Publications
No. 26). Edited by C.S. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1979 (IAC Scientific Publications
No. 28). Edited by C.S. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon .
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1980(IAC Scientific Publications
No. 35). Edited by C.S. Muir & G. Wagner, LyonPREAMBLE31
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1981 (IARC Scientific Publications
No. 38). Edited by CS. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1982 (IARC Scientific Publications
No. 46). Edited by CS. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1983 (lAC Scientific Publications
No. 50). Edited by CS. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1984 (lAC Scientific Publications
No. 62). Edited by CS. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1985 (lAC Scientific Publications
No. 69). Edited by CS. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1986 (lAC Scientific Publications
No. 80). Edited by CS. Muir & G. Wagner, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1987 (IARC Scientific Publications
No. 86). Edited by D.M. Parkin & J. Wahrendorf, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1988 (IARC Scientific Publications
No. 93). Edited by M. Coleman & J. Wahrendorf, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1989/90 (IARC Scientific Publications
No. 101). Edited by M. Coleman & J. Wahrendorf, Lyon
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1991 (IARC Scientific PublicationsNo. 110). Edited by M. Coleman & J. Wahrendorf, Lyon .
Directory of On-going Research in Cancer Epidemiology 1992 (lAC Scientific Publications
No. 117). Edited by M. Coleman, J. Wahrendorf & E. Demaret, Lyon
lAC (1977) IARC Monographs Programme on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to
Humans. Preamble (lAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 77/002), Lyon
IAC (1978) Chemicals with Sufficient Evidence of Carcinogenicity in Experimental Animals- IARC
Monographs Volumes 1-17 (IAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 78/003), Lyon
IAC (1978-1993) Environmental Carcinogens. Methods of Analysis and Expsure Measurement:
VoL. 1. Anlysis of Volatile Nitrosamines in Food (lAC Scientific Publications No. 18). Edited by
R. Preussmann, M. Castegnaro, E.A. Walker & A.E. Wasserman (1978)
VoL. 2. Methods for the Measurement of Vinyl Chlorie in Poly(vinyl chlonde), Air, Water and
Foodstuff (IAC Scientific Publications No. 22). Edited by D.C.M. Squirrell & W Thain
(1978)
VoL. 3. Anlysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons in Environmental Sam pies (lAC ScientificPublications No. 29). Edited by M. Castegnaro, P. Bogovski, H. Kunte & E.A. Walker (1979)
VoL. 4. Some Aromatic Amines and Az Dyes in the General and Industrial Environment (lAC
Scientific Publications No. 40). Edited by L. Fishbein, M. Castegnaro, I.K. O'Neil &
H. Bartsch (1981)
VoL. 5. Some Mycotoxins (IAC Scientific Publications No. 44). Edited by L. Stoloff,
M. Castegnaro, P. Scott, I.K. O'Neil & H. Bartsch (1983)
VoL. 6. N-Nitroso Compounds (IARC Scientific Publications No. 45). Edited by R. Preussmann,
I.K. O'Neil, G. Eisenbrand, B. Spiegelhalder & H. Bartsch (1983)
VoL. 7. Some Volatile Halogenated Hydrocarbons (IARC Scientific Publications No. 68). Edited by
L. Fishbein & I.K. O'Neil (1985)
VoL. 8. Some Metals: As, Be, Cd, Cr, Ni, Pb, Se, Zn (lAC Scientific Publications No. 71). Edited
by I.K. O'Neil, P. Schuller & L. Fishbein (1986)32 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Vol. 9. Passive Smoking (IAC Scientific Publications No. 81). Edited by I.K. O'Neil,
K.D. Brunnemann, B. Dodet & D. Hoffmann (1987)
VoL. 10. Benzene and Alkylated Benzenes (IAC Scientific Publications No. 85). Edited by
L. Fishbein & I.K. O'Neil (1988)
VoL. 11. Polychlorinated Dioxins and Dibenzofurans (IAC Scientific Publications No. 108).
Edited by C. Rappe, H.R. Buser, B. Dodet & I.K. O'Neil (1991)
VoL. 12. lndoor Air (IAC Scientific Publications No. 109). Edited by B. Seifert, H. van de WieI,
B. Dodet & I.K. O'Neil (1993)
IAC (1979) Criteri ta Select Chemìcals for IAC Monographs (IAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 79/(03),
Lyon
IAC (1982) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals ta Humans,
Supplement 4, Chemicals, lndustril Processes and Industries Associated with Cancer in Humans
(IARC Monographs, Volumes 1 ta 29), Lyon
IAC (1983) Approaches to Classifyng Chemìcal Carcinogens According ta Mechanism of Action
(IAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 83/(01), Lyon
IAC (1984) Chemicals and Expsures ta Complex Mixures Recommended for Evaluation in IAC
Monographs and Chemicals and Complex Mixures Recommended for Long-tenn Carcinogenicity
Testing (IAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 84/(02), Lyon
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks ta Humans, Supplement 6,
Genetic and Related Effects: An Updating of Selected IAC Monographs from Volumes 1 to 42,
Lyon
IAC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks ta Humans, Supplement 7,
Overall Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating oflAC Monographs Volumes 1 ta 42, Lyon
IAC (1988) Report of an IARC Working Group ta Review the Approaches and Processes Used ta
Evaluate the Carcinogenicity of Mixures and Groups of Chemicals (IAC intern. tech. Rep.
No. 88/(02), Lyon
!AC (1989) Chemicals, Groups of Chemicals, Mixures and Expsure Circumstances to be Evaluated ìn
Future IARC Monographs, Report of an ad hoc Working Group (IAC intern. tech. Rep. No.
89/00), Lyon
IAC (1991a) A Consensus Report of an IAC Monographs Working Group on the Use of Mechanims
of Carcinogenesis in Risk Identification (IAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 91/(02), Lyon
IAC (1991b) Report of an Ad-hoc IAC MonographsAdvisory Group on Virues and Other Biological
Agents Such as Parasites (IAC intern. tech. Rep. No. 91/(01), Lyon
Montesano, R., Bartsch, H., Vainio, H., Wilbourn, J. & Yamasaki, H., eds (1986) Long-term and
Short-tennAssays for Carcinogenesis-A Critical Appraisal (!AC Scientific Publications No. 83),
Lyon, IAC
Peto, R., Pike, M.C., Day, N.E., Gray, R.G., Lee, P.N., Parish, S., Peto, J., Richards, S. & Wahrendorf,J.
(1980) Guidelines for simple, sensitive significance tests for carcinogenic effects in long-term
animal experiments. ln: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of
Chemicals to Humans, Supplement 2, Long-tenn and Short-tenn Screening Assays for
Carcinogens: A Critical Appraisal, Lyon, pp. 311-426
Tomatis, L., Aitio, A, Wilbourn, J. & Shuker, L. (1989) Human carcinogens so far identified. Jpn.l
Cancer Res., 80, 795-807
Vainio, H., Magee, P., McGregor, D. & McMichael, A., eds (1992) Mechanisms of Carcinogenesis in
Risk Identification (IAC Scientific Publications No. 116), Lyon, IACPREAMBLE 33
Vainio, H., Wilbourn, J. & Tomatis, L. (1993) Identification of environmental carcinogens: the first
step in risk assessment. ln: Mehlman, M.A. & Upton, A., eds, The Identification and Control of
Environmental and Occupational Diseases, Princeton, Princeton Scientific Publishing Company
(in press)
Waters, M.D., Stack, H.P., Brady, A.L., Lohman, P.H.M., Haroun, L. & Vainio, H. (1987) Appendix 1.
Activity profies for genetic and related tests. ln: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 6, Genetic and Related Effects: An Updating of Selected
IARC M01wgraphs from Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon, IAC, pp. 687-696
Wilbourn, J., Haroun, L., Heseltine, E., Kaldor, J., Partensky, C. & Vainio, H. (1986) Response of
experimental animais to human carcinogens: an analysis based upon the !AC Monographs
Programme. Carcinogenesis, 7, 1853-1863GENERA REMARS
This fift-seventh volume of lARC Monographs contains 18 monographs in which the
carcinogenicity of 17 chemicals is evaluated. The Working Group prepared a monograph on
occupational exposure of hairdressers and barbers and the exposure of users of hair
colourants. They also considered both nitro aromatic amines used in hair colouring
formulations and benzidine congener-derived azo dyes used as industrial colourants. Four
aromatic amines, three of which are used in dyestuff manufacture and have been found as
pollutants in the general environment, are also included; the fourth is 4,4' -methylene
bis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA), used principally as a curing agent in certain castable poly-
urethane products. Previous monographs on 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (IARC, 1978a),
D&C Red No. 9 (IARC, 1975), magenta (lARC, 1974a, 1987a) and MOCA (IARC, 1974b,
1987b) were updated, because new data had become available. ln 1982, a working group at
IARC surveyed the epidemiological evidence relevant to hair dyes and cancer (IARC, 1982a)
and included studies of hairdressers. Since that time, new epidemiological studies have
become available, and a monograph was prepared.
The Group noted the lack of quantitative and detailed qualitative information on the
potential exposures of hairdressers and barbers and of users of particular hair colouring
products. Those groups are potentially exposed to many chemical products (estimated to be
over 5000), both during hair treatments, such as shampooing, conditioning, styling and
waving, and in the use of skin and nail products. The activities probably include frequent
exposures to volatile solvents, propellants, formaldehyde (see IARC, 1982b), methacrylates
(see IARC, 1979) and traces ofnitrosamines (see IARC, 1978b). The composition ofmany of
the products used by hairdressers has changed gradually with time. For example, sorne
ingredients have been dropped from hair dyes for a variety of reasons, including regulatoiy
activity, technical deficiencies and availability. New materials have been introduced to
maintain the range of colours. Examples of this evolution are the declining use of 2-amino-
4-nitrophenol and 2-amino-5-nitrophenol and the introduction of their 0- and N-hydroxy-
alkyl derivatives and certain isomers of the parent compounds.
As has been noted in previous Monographs, the present Working Group recognized the
importance of data on the purity of the chemicals that were tested in carcinogenicity
experiments in animais and in mutagenicity tests but were faced with the fact that many of the
compounds considered were of technical grades, varyng in purity from relatively high
(:; 95 %) to indeterminate: Magenta, for example, is a mixture of various proportions of
three or more components. The chemical analyses that were reported were often limited to
identification of the major component of a dye mixture; minor contaminants were usually not
addressed. Commercially available chemicals were often used as such, and no attempt was
made to purify the compounds further. That the use of low-purity chemicals may lead to
-35-36 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
erroneous conclusions about the principal component is an obvious problem, which is
commented upon in various parts of this volume.
Studies of experimental animaIs treated with commercially available hair dyes and
laboratory mixtures of hair dyes were also considered. Because of the low levels of individual
dyes in the mixtures, however, the results could not be used to evaluate the individual
components. Furthermore, the lack of toxicity of the doses used in those studies made them
inappropriate for evaluating the systemic toxicity or systemic carcinogenicity of the formu-
lations.
Notes on the metabolism of aromatic amines and azo dyes
ln order to be toxic, genotoxic or carcinogenic, aromatic amines usually require
metabolic activation. The potential risk posed by structurally related compounds depends
largely on their metabolic fate in the test sytem used and on the reactivity of the ultimate
carcinogenic reactants. The Working Group noted the absence of pertinent data on the
metabolism of a number of the compounds considered. Their metabolic activation and the
subsequent formation of reactive metabolites capable of reacting with cellular macro-
molecules (e.g., nucleic acids and proteins) have not yet been adequately investigated.
AIthough specific information was not available on the absorption, distribution, meta-
bolism and excretion of many of the aromatic amines in this volume, absorption may occur
through the respira tory and gastrointestinal tracts and through the skin of humans. Aromatic
amines and amides are readily metabolized enzyatically by oxidation of the ring carbon or
of exocyclic nitrogen atoms in both experimental animaIs and in humans. The C-hydroxy
metabolites are conjugated with glucuronide or sulfate and excreted in the urine. N-Oxi-
dation is a necessary step in the formation of reactive intermediates that can form adducts
with nuc1eic acid bases-mainly guanine and adenine.
Three of the hair dyes were studied within the US National Toxicology Program; these
are HC Blue No. 1 (US National Toxicology Program, 1985a), HC Blue No. 2 (US National
Toxicology Program, 1985b) and HC Red No. 3 (US National Toxicology Program, 1986),
which were chosen because they are ail derivatives of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (2-nitro-
para-phenylenediamine) (US National Cancer Institute, 1979) and structurally closely
related. The N-hydroxyethyl groups on the nitrogens in positions 1 and 4 in HC Blue No. 2
may favour conjugation and urinary excretion, whereas the N-CH3 group in position 4 of HC
Blue No. 1 may favour N-oxidatïon and/or N-demethylation. ln HC Red No. 3, the primary
amino group in position 4 may undergo acetylation. These differences may affect the
toxicological properties of the compounds. Comparisons of the results of experiments with
HC Red No. 3 with those of the blue dyes are imbalanced, however, by the fact that the blue
dyes were given in the diet but HC Red No. 3 was found to be unstable when mixed with feed
and was administered by gavage in corn oïL.
The route of administration of the dyes may have influenced the results of the studies.
When they are administered orally, the dyes are exposed ta the bacterial flora of the
gastrointestinal tract and, since they are ail nitro compounds, could undergo nitroreduction
by the anaerobic flora, resulting in the formatiom of aromatic amines that might be absorbed
and then subjected to N-acetylation and N-oxidation in the liver. HC Blue No. 1, for
example, was not mutagenic in vivo in mice in the micronucleus test, in which compounds areGENERA REMARKS37
administered by intraperitoneal injection. That route of administration limits the amount of
chemical available for reduction to an aromatic amine by the intestinal flora, a process which
may be more effcient than that occurring at other sites, such as the liver.
The industrial dyes CI Acid Red 114 (US National Toxicology Program, 1991), a
3,3' -dimethylbenzidine-derived dye, and CI Direct Blue 15 (US National Toxicology
Program, 1992), which is a 3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine-derived dye, are among the five
chemicals that were selected for studies of toxicity and carcinogenicity as part of the US
National Toxicology Program's Benzidine Dye Initiative, designed to evaluate representative
benzidine congeners, benzidine congener-derived dyes and benzidine-derived dyes. The
compounds were selected for consideration in this volume of Monographs because of the
potential for human exposure during the production of bis-azobiphenyl dyes and because
benzidine (see IARC, 1972a, 1987c), benzidine-based dyes (see IARC, 1987d) and the
benzidine congeners 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine (ortho-tolidine) (see IARC, 1972b) and 3,3' -di-
methoxybenzidine (see IARC, 197 4c, 1987 e) are known carcinogens. CI Direct Blue 218 was
initially considered by the Working Group, but no monograph was included because of lack
of data.
The benzidine congener-based dyes are metabolized to their parent congeners or to
their N-acetyl derivatives and excreted in the urine. Studies with benzidine congener-based
dyes have shown that the ultimate reactive metabolite is an activated form of benzidine
congener produced via azo reduction. Reductive cleavage of the benzidine congener azo
dyes is thought to occur primarily by bacterial action in the intestinal tract (Cerniglia et al.,
1982; Bos et al., 1986). Following reductive cleavage, the less polar metabolites are subject to
intestinal absorption and further metabolism in the liver. After dogs and rats had been
exposed to CI Acid Red 114, 3,3'-dimethylbenzidine was found in their urine (Lynn et al.,
1980). The US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (1981) reported the
presence of 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine in the urine of workers employed in a dye manufacturing
plant, who had been In contact with 3,3'-dimethylbenzidine-based dyes but not with
3,3' -dimethylbenzidine itself.
The sequence of benzidine metabolism proceeds along the general known pathways for
aromatic amines; it begins with N-acetylation, followed by N-oxidation to form N'-hydroxy-
N-acetylbenzidine, which can be further activated by O-esterification, resulting in electro-
philic intermediates that bind to DNA, RNA and proteins (Beland & Kadlubar, 1990).
Postulated association between erythrocytic toxicity and splenic sarcomas in rats
Two aromatic amines and one azo dye considered in this volume were associated with
the induction of splenic sarcomas in rats. For several years, it has been known that splenic
sarcoma, a rare spontaneous neoplasm, occurs in rats treated with aniline and aniline-related
aromatic amines. Since these chemical agents produce haemolytic anaemia with methaemo-
globinaemia, a causal relationship has been proposed between the haematotoxicity and the
ultimate appearance of splenic sarcomas. Inflammatory fibrosis in the red pulp and capsule
occurs prior to the development of sarcomas, and the sarcomas are frequently se en to arisewithin areas of splenic fibrosis. While several morphological variants of sarcomas have been
documented, most of the splenic tumours are well-differentIated fibrosarcomas. A proposed
explanation for the pathogenesis of splenic sarcomas is that enhanced splenic haemo-38 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
siderosis or splenic vascular congestion and haemorrhage promotes a cascade of events
leading to the development of sarcoma. No time-course or mechanistic studies have been
reported formally, and the definitive pathogenesis of these chemically induced splenic
sarcomas remains unknown. The observed non-neoplastic and neoplastic splenic changes
are tyically dose-related, and female rats are more resistant than males, despite a similar
degree of induced methaemoglobinaemia. Fischer 344 rats are more sensitive th an other
strains or stocks, and mice are relatively resistant to the development of splenic sarcomas.
Furthermore, many of the chemicals that have been shown to produce sarcomas in the spleen
of male Fischer 344 rats have also been shown to produce tumours in other organs, probably
by other mechanisms (Ward et al., 1980; Goodman et al., 1984; Weinberger et al., 1985; Bus &
Popp, 1987; Chhabra et al., 1990; Stefanski et al., 1990; Chhabra et al., 1991).
While the induction of splenic sarcomas by aniline and aniline-related aromatic amines
may be a consequence of eryhrocyic toxicity and may depend upon the strain of rat
employed, this end-point is nevertheless considered to be a valid indicator of carcinogenic
potentiaL.
References
Beland, EA. & Kadlubar, EE (1990) Metabolic activation and DNA adducts of aromatic amines. ln:
Cooper, C.S. & Grover, P.L., eds, Chernical Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis l, Berlin, Springer
Verlag, pp. 267-325
Bos, RP., van der Krieken, W, Smeijsters, L., Koopman, J.P., de Jonge, H.R, Theuws, J.L.G. &
Henderson, P.T (1986) Internai exposure of rats to benzidine derived from orally administered
benzidine-based dyes after intestinal azo reduction. Toxicology, 40, 207-213
Bus, J .S. & Popp, J .A. (1987) Perspectives on the mechanism of action of the splenic toxicity of aniline
and structurally-related compounds. Food Chern. Toxicol., 25, 619-626
Cerniglia, C.E., Freeman, J .P., Franklin, W & Pack, L.D. (1982) Metabolism of azo dyes derived from
benzidine, 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine and 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine to potentially carcinogenic
aromatic amines by intestinal bacteria. Carcinogenesis, 3, 1255-126
Chhabra, RS., Thompson, M., Elwell, M.R & Gerken, D.K. (1990) Toxicity of p-chloroanilne in rats
and mice. Food Chern. Toxicol., 28, 717-722
Chhabra, RS., Huff, J.E., Haseman, J.K., Elwell, M.R & Peters, A.C. (1991) Carcinogenicity of
p-chloroaniline in rats and mice. Food Chern. Toxicol., 29, 119-124
Goodman, D.G., Ward, J.M. & Reichardt, WD. (1984) SplenIc fibrosis and sarcomas in F344 rats fed
diets containing aniline hydrochloride, p-chloroaniline, azobenzene, o-toluidine hydrochloride,
4,4' -sulfonyldianiline, or D & C Red No. 9. 1. natl Cancer lnst., 73, 265-273
IAC (1972a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risk ofChernicals to Man, VoL. 1,
Sorne Inorganic Substances, Chlorinated Hydrocarbons, Arornatic Amines, N-Nitroso Compounds
and Natural Products, Lyon, pp. 8086
IARC (1972b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chernicals to Man, VoL. 1,
Sorne lnorganic Substances, Chlorinated Hydrocarbons, Arornatic Amines, N-Nitroso Compounds
and Natural Products, Lyon, pp. 87-91
IAC (1974a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chernicals to Man, VoL. 4,
Sorne Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Cornpounds and Miscella-
neous Alkylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 57-6GENERA REMARKS 39
IARC (1974b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, Vol. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Compounds and Miscella-
neous Alkylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 65-71
IAC (1974c) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Man, VoL. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Compounds and Miscella-
neous Alkylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 41-47
IAC (1975) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, VoL. 8,
Some Aromatic Am Compounds, Lyon, pp. 107-111
IARC (1978a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Man, VoL.
16, Some Aromatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds-Hair Dyes, Colouring Agents and
Miscellaneous lndustrial Chemicals, Lyon, pp. 27-37, 73-82
IARC (1978b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
Vol. 17, Some N-Nitroso Compounds, Lyon
IARC (1979) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 19, Some Monomers, Plastics and Synthetic Elastomers, and Acrolein, Lyon, pp. 187-211
IAC (l982a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
Vol. 27, Some Aromatic Amines, Anthraquinones and Nitroso Compounds, and lnorganic
Fluories Used in Drinking-water and Dental Preparations, Lyon, pp. 307-318
IAC (1982b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
Vol. 29, Some Industrial Chemicals and Dyestuff, Lyon, pp. 345-389
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7,Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 238-239
IARC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7,Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 246247
IAC (1987c) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to H umans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 123-125
IAC (1987d) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 125-126
IAC (1987e) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to H umans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 198-199
Lynn, RK., Donielson, D.\¥, Ilas, AM., Kennish, J.M., Wong, K. & Matthews, H.B. (1980)
Metabolism of bisazobiphenyl dyes derived from benzidine, 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine or 3,3' -di-
methoxybenzidine to carcinogenic aromatIc amines in the dog and rat. Toxicol. appl. Pharmacol.,
56, 248-258
Stefanski, S.A, Elwell, M.R & Stromberg, P.c. (1990) Spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus. ln: Boorman,
G.A., Eustis, S.L., Elwell, M.R, Montgomery, C.A, Jr & MacKenzie, WF., eds, Pathologyofthe
Fischer Rat, Reference and Atlas, New York, Academic Press, pp. 369-393
US National Cancer Institute (1979) Bioassay of 2-Nitro-p-phenylenediamine for Possible Car cino-genicity (CAS No. 5307-14-2) (Tech. Rep. Ser. No. 169; DHEW Publ. No. (NIH) 79-1725),
Washington DC, US Government Printing Office40 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
US National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (1981) Health hazard alert. Benzidine-,
o-toluidine, and o-dianisidine-based dyes. Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. J., 42, A-36-A-60
US National Toxicology Program (1985a) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of H C Blue No. 1 (CAS
No. 2784-94-3) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F¡ Mice (Feed Studies) (NT Technical Report 271; NIH
Publ. No. 85-2527), Research Triangle Park, Ne
US National Toxicology Program (1985b) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of H C Blue No. 2 (CAS
No. 33229-34-4) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F¡ Mice (Feed Studies) (NT Technical Report 293;
NIH PubL. No. 85-2549), Research Triangle Park, NC
US National Toxicology Program (1986) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of HC Red No. 3 (CAS
No. 2871-01-4) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F¡ Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT Technical Report 281;
NIH PubL. No. 86-2537), Research Triangle Park, NC
US National Toxicology Program (1991) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of C. I. Acid Red No. 114
(CAS No. 6459-94-5) in F344/N Rats (Drinking Water Studies) (NT Technical Report 405; NIH
PubL. No. 92-3136), Research Triangle Park, NC
US National Toxicology Program (1992) Toxicologyand Carcinogenesis StudiesofC.I. Direct Blue No.
15 (CAS No. 2429-74-5) in F344/N Rats (Drinking Water StudieE) (NT Technical Report 397;NIH PubL. No. 92-2852), Research Triangle Park, NC .
Ward, J .M., Reznik, G. & Garner, FM. (1980) Proliferative lesions of the spleen in male F344 rats fed
diets containing p-chloroaniline. Vét. Pathol., i 7, 20-205
Weinberger, M.A., Albert, R.H. & Montgomery, S.B. (1985) Splenotoxicity associated with splenic
sarcomas in rats fed high doses of D & C Red No. 9 or aniline hydrochloride. J natl Cancer lnst.,
75, 681-690THE MONOGRAHSoeeUPATIONAL EXPOSURES OF HARDRESSERS AND BARERS
AND PERSONAL USE OF HAR eOLOURATS
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Historical perspective
The history of the development and use of cosmetics has been reviewed (Zviak,
1986a,b). The dyeing of human hair can be traced back at least 4000 years: evidence from
Egytian tombs indicates the use ofhenna, from Lawsonia inermis, for dyeing hair, nails and
skin, and there is evidence in other early eastern Mediterranean cultures of the use ofhenna
and indigo for dyeing hair. During the time of the Roman civilization, a number of methods
were used for colouring hair; one was the use of lead combs dipped in vinegar (presumably
producing lead acetate), and another was the use of walnut stain. Pliny cited more than
100 recipes for colouring hair with vegetable and minerai materials.
ln England, the Elizabethans treated hair with potash alum (aluminium potassium
sulfate) followed by a concoction of rhubarb in order to produce a red tone, which was
popular because of the colour of the Queen's hair. At the time of the French Revolution,
24 milion pounds (11 000 tonnes J of starch were sold each year in France for use in
colouring hair. ln this technique, starch, a binder and, possibly, small amounts of colouring
material were applied to the hair.
Bleaching of hair has also been popular for many centuries. ln order to mimic the
appearance of their Anglo slaves, Roman women devised a method of bleaching their hair
using a mixture of tallow soap and the ashes of burnt beech wood. ln sixteenth-centuiy
Venice, women treated their hair with a caustic soda solution and spent many hours sitting in
the sun to decolorize the melanin. ln 1867, the French chemist, Léon Hugot, and the British
chemist, E.H. Thiellay, demonstrated the use of hydrogen peroxide for bleaching hair at the
Paris Exhibition. Cora Pearl, mistress of Napoleon III, is reputed to have bleached her hair
with hydrogen peroxide.
Of the hair colouring products currently on the market, only henna and lead acetate have
a history of more than 100 years. The modern hair colouring Îndustry was born in the
nineteenth century with the development of organic chemistry. ln 1863, Haussman observed
that a mixture of para-phenylenediamine and an oxidizing agent produced a coloured
materiaL. ln 1883, the first patent for the exploitation of this observation in hair dyeing was
acquired by Monnet, who actually used 2,5-diaminotoluene and hydrogen peroxide. Shortly
thereafter, patents were obtained by H. and E. Erdmann over the period 1888-97 for the use
as hair dyes of a wide variety of para-phenylenediamines and aminophenols with hydrogen
peroxide (Anon., 1966).
-43-44 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.2 Characterization of the exposures of hairdressers, beauticians and users of hair
colourants
Professional hairdressers and beauticians who work in beauty salons (parlours) and
barber shops tyically shampoo, cut and style hair and apply hair colourants, waving and
straightening preparations and conditioners. They may also be manicurists, trimming finger
and toe nails and applying nail care products. The term 'barber' has traditionally been
applied to professionals who cut men's hair; they may also apply hair sprays and other styling
preparations and may shave men's facial hair. The terms 'hairdresser', 'beautician' and
'cosmetologist appear to be used interchangeably. ln the USA, for example, the terms
'hairdresser' and 'beautician' apply to people involved in the care of hair, primarily women's
hair, in beauty salons; they exclude barbers. ln the United Kingdom, the term 'hairdresser' is
more inclusive: it is used to denote ladies' hairdressers, and it may also mean barbers.
ln the USA in 1937, there were about 60 000 to 70 000 salons and close to 200 000
professional hairdressers and beauticians (McDonough, 1937). Today, there are about
150 000 salons and between 500 000 and 750000 professional hairdressers and beauticians,
ofwhom approximately 80-85% are women (Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association,
undated). ln Europe, there are between 350 000 and 400 000 salons in which about
1 200 000 professional personnel work, not including manicurists.
Over 5000 different chemicals are currently used to make beauty products worldwide
(Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association, 1991). Beauty products are manufactured bya few large companies, which make the majority of products used personally and
professionally, and by many small companies which formulate products for professional
trades. The various categories of products used by hairdressers are described in general
terms below. The products are principally hair preparations but also include nail care
products and, occasionally, skin care products. AIthough one of the focuses of this
monograph is hair colourants, an enormous range of chemical substances may be present in
beauty salons. Rather than attempting to list ail of the chemicals that are or have been used in
beauty products, this section gives the general composition of each tye of product and
examples of tyical chemicals or che mi cal classes. Those compounds that have been
evaluated in the /ARC Monographs series are listed in Table 1.
Few actual measurements of the exposures of professional hairdressers are available.
Use patterns provide a qualitative picture of the potential exposures ofboth hairdressers and
clients. Information on skin penetration and inhalation is mentioned (see also section 4.1),
although many hairdressers now use gloves for some operations, to reduce dermal exposure.
ln Finland, however, it was estimated that only about one-third of hairdressers currently use
protective gloves when dyeing hair (Pukkala et al., 1992). The method of dye application may
affect exposures; for example, permanent cream dyes are commonly applied with a brush,
whereas other dyes are more often worked into the hair by hand.
1.2.1 Hair preparations
The term 'hair preparations' covers all compounds used on the scalp and hair. The most
important of these are hair colouring preparations (bleaches, dyes), cleansing and
conditioning products (shampoos, conditioning agents), hair-styling preparations (settingu~;:
Qj.i..
=...
"t
Qj..~
:=-~..~
=
Qj
Qj.Q
Qj..~.i..~.i..
~
Qja
:=CI=oCj
"t=~
CI=~...
Cj.....
:=~
Qj.Qi
Qj
CI
CI
Qji."ti....~.i...Q
'B
CI
:=
CI"t= CI
g 'c
i: Qj
e CIo c.u 1.
~ ~
Qj ~- JI~~HAIRDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AND HAIR COLOURANTS
en..0.
~00oi:o::
U
~..
i:.9.È'
.. u(\ ...~ i:
'e CU '3~OOen
CU 0 i:i: (\=.u S(\ i. ~
~ í3..~
0.. 00..
"0i:~
t8..u:.~
.S..u~
£
"0i:~
8-
Eloui.(\
~~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~N~~~~~~~_~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ 0' 0' 0' ~ ~ ~ ~, ~ ~ 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0' 0'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
cu
El;:
~r- r- \0IF IF _-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~i.i: i: 0 i: i: i: i: i: i: i:~~~NN~~-~N-N~NN~NNN
cu~
~1..i:~ enenen"'~~ "'~~~~(\
0. t,"O"O "0 "0 EVl .g.=.!:.=.~ CU f.
.~ 8 .a .a .a .a 0. ~oo.. O'..~~..r. '"
~ ¡: ~.~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 5 ~ .~eno~i:(\(\(\(\OOO.c
~ 'g"8 r- E E E § ~.~ ëCU - 0. 8 CU CU Q) CU.S ~ ~
i. 00 i: 0. 0. 0. 0. o... 0. (\CU .S:. E.,! .,! .,! .,! ~ ~ i=
..::en(\ElEl El Ecu0.5õ~ t3~~~~¡: ~VlVl~ VlCU Q) CU CU;: ;: ;: ;:"0 "0 "0 "0
.!: .!: .!: .!: '" '" '" en cn(\ (\ (\ (\ CU CU CU CU CU
::..:: :: -s-s-s-s-s~ c s S .!:.!:.!:.!:.!:
i:CU~ en en ~ ~ (\(\(\(\(\(\§(\ent,"t U¡((\ ......::..i= i= i= ~ ;: ~ ~;: ...i:.. i= en è èc i: ci: i: i: .;: "8 "0 (\ "0 i: Q (\ (\ CU CU CUCU CU CU i: i. 0 5.0 i: Q) õ.i. i. i: i: i:
.~ .~ .~.~ 0. a en 5..~ .~ El 8. 8. (\ (\ (\El El E :=i: .i: :: .!: :: a El (\ E E § E §cu Q) cu ~ (\ (\ (\ ~ cu .. cu cu cu cu cuen Vl Vl i: Vl Z :r z i: Vl Vl Fi Fi ~ ~ ~
cuõõõ s¡ ~~~~ ,;:.a _
.. .. .. ~ ã) v,0. 0. 0. OK CO cu cu888 i. o¡:"O .2.. .... "0 ~ i..~ i:
.~ .~ .~ p u 9 0 cu cuooIFN -(\-ECOen
IIi cu "0 ,. ~ .;: i.OOOscu=;-;:"o&~
'ê 'ê 'ê .§ t ~ i .~ .~ â ~
.:.:.: :: ;: (\........ 0NN~~i:UUUUUUcnen cu~.Si. ..0. i:en (I.~ ;:(I 'i::r i:
cui:
cuNi:
cu
-8N(IQ) cu 0
~ ~ ~ cu.ê0' '2 .2 .2 § (IÓ(\22-5~enZOOOcu-5Q)
~ "0 .S .S.S E cu§ §rñ~ElElEl8. ~õ
.: .~.~.~ 0 Cl... i:(\UClClCl:2 1 Cl (\
-8 ~ ~ ~ .) .~ ~ ~ -5UClN~N~N~Cl ~~¡i45
~N~~~~IF~~~~~~T" -- ,. ,. T" ,.~t: ~0' 0'.. -
0' r- r- r- r- \0N IF IF tr 1l ~ tr _..
en
'e
.§i:(\i:_
... (\cu .... i:(\ Q)
~ Elar'i:
"0 Q)~ ~~ i:..CUNN~~~~ ~ ~
r-..u~
"8i.0.::(\i:
en..U~
"8..0.::
Z
cu"0-. .~
cu - N ~ Ó 812öö .ZcuEZ Z 0 ~ 0.cu Z 0 i:
"0 cu Q)'O-cu
'e .2 .2 Q) v 00i: i: i: ~;: 8i:uuuu'R
& :r :r :i :r :rQ)i:o
.S Q)~ ~
8" 0'0 i:
£ .§46 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
vit-~.coo~ '" "3.ci.~;i~C'0000'"0\\0r-V'N N0\'" ci CIr- 00 r- 00r-r-r-r-00r-r-~~0000 r-00
fS~'" '"'" '" ~ '" 0\'"'"'"0\0\'"'"0\'" '"0\
00.. .. ." 1" 1" ,. .. .................. ...... ....0i:0
:EvuS
~::
~V'C''"C'0\r-r-""\0\0'"0\0V"'"""""r-r-'"r- ....N..C'""V"..N........""..V"V"""""..""
§ ;;
'~'ECI...:: i:
c; v ~.. 00 viV 0 i:i: CI
==.0 SfS i. ::Q) ~.c
0..,, 00..
"0i:::..
.cu~~
.5..U::
'8~
.-"t-=Q~--"0i:::
8.
SoU~
Q.
:Q~i:C' N C' .. .. C'i: ~N Ni:C' C' C' ~ N C' C' ~ ~ ~ C' .. ~
..i:vvi i: vÜ CI ~.g § ~o Q)..i. ci i:ci 1 V~ vi'S ê~ E ~ §ëÆCI vCIOO v rJr.VQ) §vQ) 0. VQ).s.s ~.s.s vi vi .s.s.!: .!: b .!:.!: ~ E vi .!: .!:CI CI vi CI CI :: V i: CI CI.c .c Ü ~.c.c vi ~. 9 .c .c
.. :;::';: :; -; ~ ft0 ......i: !;-"O 0.. !;" Q)...- 00 CI i: i:~ ì. e... ì. i:"O v .5 ~ ~ ~
~ 8. ci ~ 8. ~.!: ~ ~ ê' ~ ~
i: S .R i:o S i: jg .c ~ 0. Q)i: Q)i:æ~t-U~æ õ¡: 0.0.
Q)o ..
i: ;:CI Vci uo CIi. "0
~ ~.. ..Q)..
CI
"Eu
CI
-5 viQ)~iiS 0 .... g!~ S ~.c v vQi .S ~
:.:. Zv
.5
S
CI:.vi:
Q)~
Q).cci
~i:oi...
Z1NQ)
.5
S
CI..oi:
CI.c..v
:g .s
~ Qi
i. u.. CI... i:Z v~ s:vii:o'" .-
~ Ce
~ ~ vi
.!: i. Q)CI 0. ;;.c v "0vi ü; ~ .!:i: i: ~ jg.g.g ~ ~o 0 i: i:- .. Q) Q)OOO!êê
'E'E § §Q)vVQ)ez rz 0. 0.'"..u::
-gi.~ ~ 0..s.s~
.!: .!: viCIClü;vi vi.c.c.... ......ggviggßß'8'8e'8
ci i: i: i. i. ci i.SCIClo.civio.CI § §:; ~.!::;.cvvCIClClClezo.o.ZZ::Z
Q) Q)
.ê .5aS ~v Q):. .~ 0.. "0~'2:g~S 9~vvQ)i:Q)uo~p ::s..-o v-, .. CI ;: .~::'-'x "0¡:;;u -.."0 "'~ 0 "1::Q)ß:...Sos:Ö¡;s 0.c .c è 2.8 .§ :: 0 S Q) :f vi: i: ~ .S; ~ i..2 S ::.8 i: i:~ ~ ;; ~ CI 0 Q) .- .- i: ~ ;; v1:~""o""o""oviQ)""Q)"O"OCI 5..~ g,o.iio.i:ez~~~ES~~óC'
obN
cici
aS...0
S
CI
Q)~v
Q)vi
r.i.
Q)......"0 vi
i: Q)CI 'i:
vi Q)i. vi~~S &
ê ~;; C.0 §
'2 ~
.. Q)i: .c~ ..Q) 0i. ..
fr r-i. ..vi i:
ci Q)
:: Se ..00 ci
Q) ci
oS ~
'S .5
~ '2
.9 Ce.t: ::
.5 c;t+ ..
Q) Q)"0 0
i. vi
~~HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS47
lotions, hair sprays), permanent-wave preparations and hair-straightening preparations. ln
recent years, fashion trends have spurred the development of new products, su ch as high-holdhair lacquers and styling gels and dyes that give briliant colours. Toxicological
considerations have also become increasingly important in product formulation (Lang,
1989a,b).
(a) Hair colouring preparations
(i) Bleaching
Bleaching has two objectives: to give hair a lighter look or, more often, to prepare it for
application of a dye preparation, generally yielding a shade lighter than the natural one
(Zviak, 1986a).
The chemistiy of bleaching is described in detail by Zviak (1986a). Ail of the bleaching
methods used currently are oxidation processes. Hydrogen peroxide is the commonest
oxidant and is used usually as a 6 or 9% solution or, rarely, as a 12% solution. Solutions are
normally preserved with phosphoric acid, quinine sulfate, pyrophosphates, acetanilide,
phenacetin, ortho-oxyquinoline sulfate, ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid and certain
stannates. Hydrogen peroxide can be used alone to bleach hair, but in hairdressing salons-It is
mixed with an alkaline solution, tyically ammonia, before use, in order to accelerate the
process.
Persulfates are often used in the formulation of bleaching powders that are mixed with
hydrogen peroxide just before use, particularly as the sodium, potassium and ammonium
salts; sodium percarbonate is used occasionally, diluted in water or hydrogen peroxide just
before use; sodium perborate and magnesium perborate are rarely used; and magnesium
dioxide and barium dioxide are sometimes present in bleaching powders. Bleaching
formulations are available in several forms: hydrogen peroxide solutions and emulsions,
creams, shampoos, powders, pastes and oils (Zviak, 1986a).
ln order to remove permanent and semi-permanent hair colourings, hairdressers use
reducing agents (sodium hydrosulfite or sodium or zinc formaldehyde sulfoxylate dissolved
just before use in acidified water) or high-strength oxidants such as those mentioned above
(Zviak, 1986a).
(ii) Dyeing
The world market for hair colouring products is in excess of US$ 2500 milion in factoiy
sales. About one-third is bought by salon owners and the remainder by retail outlets for
home use. The major markets are North America, Europe and Japan, each having US$
300-900 milion in factory sales. Retail sales represent 50-75% of the total business, being
highest in North America and the United KIngdom and lowest in Italy, Spain and Australia.
The tyes of hair colourants are classified according to the permanence of the effect, i.e.,
temporary, se mi-permanent or permanent, or to the tye of ingredients that they contain.
Only permanent and semi-permanent hair colourants are used to a significant extent in the
hairdressing trade, whereas all three classes are used extensively by consumers.
ln Europe and in North and South America, permanent dyes domina te the market,representing about 70% of the dollar volume of the retail market (Corbett, 1988) and 85 % of
the professional market. ln Japan and parts of Asia, permanent dyes comprise an even48 lARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
greater share of the market. Semi-permanent dyes were introduced into Europe about
40 years ago and into the USA some 35 years ago. Temporary hair colourants are somewhat
older but have rarely represented more than 5% of the market.
Permanent dyes (Zviak, 1 986c): Permanent hair dyes, otherwse known as oxidation dyes,
represent the major segment of the hair dye market. The hair is dyed by oxidation of dye
precursors which penetrate the hair fibre, where they react with hydrogen peroxide to
produce coloured indo dyes. Since hydrogen peroxide is an excellent decolorizing agent for
melanin, the hair's natural colouring matter, manufacturers can balance the amounts of
hydrogen peroxide and of dye precursors in such a way as to produce lightening, darkening or
matching of the natural colour of the hair.
The dye precursors used in the permanent hair colour are of two tyes: 'primary
intermediates', generally para-phenylenediamines or para-aminophenols, which undergo
oxidation to produce highly reactive benzoquinoneimines; and compounds known as
'couplers' which react with these imines to produce a variety of indo dyes. Compounds used
as couplers inc1ude resorcinol, meta-aminophenol, meta-phenylenediamine and certain
other reactive intermediates such as 1 -naphthol and phenylmethylpyrazolone. Permanent
hair colouring preparations may contain as many as 15 different dyes and dye precursors so
that they will produce the desired shade. Dye precursors are formulated in ammoniacal or
detergent solutions. Two tyical formulations of permanent hair colours are presented in
Table 2, and oxidation dye precursors used in the USA and Europe are listed in Table 3.
Table 2. Ingredients of two typical hair colouring products
Iight blond Bronze (reddish)
Water
Cocnut acid diethanolamide
B utoxyethanol
Polyethyleneglycol-2 tallow amide
Ethanol
Polyglyceryl-4 oleyl ether
Oleyl alcohol
Polyglyceryl-2 oleyl ether
Propylene glycol
Oleic acid
Sodium monodiethylaminopropyl
coaspartamide
Ammonium hydroxide
Pentasodium diethylenetriamine-pentaacetic
acid
Ammonium acetate
Sodium bisulfite
Fragrance
Phenylmethylpyrwlone
Hydroquinone
para- Phenylenediamine
ResorcinolWater
Oleic acid
Isopropanol
Nonoxynol-l
Propylene glycol
Ethoxydiglycol
Nonoxynol-4
Ammonium hydroxide
Linoleic acid diethanolamide
Sodium lauryl sulfate
Sulfated castor oil
Ethoxylated cetylalcohol-24
Ethoxylated cholesterol- 24
Fragrance
Sodium sulfite
Ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid
Eryhorbic acid
N,N- Bis(2-hydroxyethyl )-para-phenylenediamine
sulfate
2-Methylresorcinol
4-Amino-2-hydroxyoluene
paa-Aminophenol (4-aminophenol)HARDRESSERS AND BARBER S, AND HAIR COLOURANTS 49
Table 2 (contd)
light blond (contd)
para-Aminophenol (4-aminophenol)
meta-Aminophenol (3-aminophenol)
2,4-Diaminophenoxyethanol HClBronze (reddish) (contd)
para- Phenylenediamine (1,4-diaminobenzene)
Resorcinol
I-Naphthol
From Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (1992)
Table 3. Major oxidation dye precursors
used in the USA and Europe
5-Amino- 2-methylphenol
2-Aminophenol (0I1ho-Aminophenol)
3-Aminophenol (meta-Aminophenol)
4-Aminophenol (para-Aminophenol)
N,N- Bis(2-hydroxyethyl )-para-phenylenediamine
2-Chloro-para-phenylenediamine
4-Chlororesorcinol
1,3- Diaminobenzene (meta- Phenylenediamine)
1,4- Diaminobenzene (para- Phenylenediamine)
2,4-Diaminophenol
2,4- Diaminophenoxyethanol
2,5-Diaminotoluene
N,N- Dimethyl-para-phenylenediamine
3-N- Ethylamino-4-methylphenol
7 -Hydroxybenzomorpholine
5-N-(2- Hydroxyethyl)amino- 2-methylphenol
N-Methyl-4-aminophenol
2-Methylresorcinol
1- Phenyl-3-methylpyrazolone-5
N- Phenyl-para-phenylenediamine
2-Nitro-para-phenylenediamine
Resorcinol
From Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association
(1992)
Most of the more important ingredients in permanent dyes have been in use for over
50 years, although a few new on es were introduced during the last 20 years. The use of sorne
ingredients has been discontinued, usually simultaneously in North America, Europe and
Japan, as a result of findings in assays of carcinogenicity in rodents. For example, use of
2,4-diaminotoluene (4-methyl-meta-phenylenediamine) was discontinued in 1970-71 and
that of 2,4-diaminoanisole (4-methoxy-meta-phenylenediamine) sorne six years later. For
other reasons, para-phenylenediamine was not used in France or Germany from about 1905
to 1980-85, during which time 2,5-diaminotoluene (2-methyl-para-phenylenediamine) was
used in its place.50 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
The usual conditions of use for permanent hair colours involve the mixing of equal
volumes of the hair colouring lotion containing the dye precursors and a hydrogen peroxide
solution with a strength of 3 or 9%. About 100 g of this mixture (containing 0.1-3 g of dye
precursors and 2-4 g hydrogen peroxide) are then applied to the hair and left in contact for
20-40 min. During that time, the colour develops and the natural hair pigment is lightened.
The residual product is then removed from the hair by rinsing.
Permanent colouring materials occur in a number of different forms: liquids, creams,
gels, shampoos and powders. The first oxidation dyes were simple, aqueous solutions, but
they were replaced by aqueous alcoholic dyes (15-20% alcohol), as the added alcohol
enhanced penetration of dye precursors into the hair fibre. Liquid dyes have been replaced
by cream- or gel-based formulae. Cream dyes are emulsions formed from self-emulsifyng
raw mate rials, such as fatty oxyethyleneated alcohols (partially sulfated or not), fatty amides
and oxyethylated vegetable oils. Emollients such as lanolin derivatives, fatty alcohols and
cation-active compounds may be added. Gel dyes (or, more properly, gelling dyes) offer the
advantages of both liquids and creams. A number of formulations exist, but the following are
tyical: (i) soap solutions, generally ammonium oleate; (ii) solutions of low oxyethylated
nonionic surfactants, most often polyoxyethylated alkylphenols; and (iii) anion-cation
complexes in solution. 'Shampoo-in colours' are a simplified form of the usual permanent
dye products, except that the vehicle is, or acts like, a shampoo. These materials col our and
bleach less than other permanent dye products. Shampoo-in col ours are the permanent dyes
intended particularly for home use; they are also used in hairdressing salons, as fast-acting,
permanent dye products, especially for producing dark shades or for 'tone-on- tone' shading.
Powder dyes contain very stable oxidizing agents, su ch as sodium perborate, in powder form,
and only non-lightening shades can be formulated. This tye of product is offered for
domestic use in countries where the people's natural hair colouring is very dark, e.g., for
black Aficans and Japanese (Zviak, 1986c; Clausen, 1989).
Owing to the rate of hair growth (about 1.25 cm per month), regrowth of undyed hair
becomes evident after about four to six weeks. Permanent hair colouring products are
therefore used about six to nine times per year in Europe and North America. More frequent
applications, 'touch-ups' around the hair line and parting, are common in Asian countries.
Potential exposures to para-phenylenediamine by inhalation in sorne hairdressing
parlours in Italy were assessed recently by air sampling; aIl samples contained less than the
detection Ii mi t of 1 ¡.g/m3 (Gagliardi et al., 1992). Measurements of skin penetration of sorne
oxidation dye precursors are discussed in section 4.1 of this monograph.
Semi-pennanent dyes: The term 'se mi-permanent' is used to define hair colouring
products that last through 6- 12 washings and do not involve the use of an oxidizing agent in
colour development. That level of wash fastness is achieved by using low-molecular-weight
dyes capable of penetrating the hair cortex. Se mi-permanent hair colours con tain direct dyes,
which are generally nitro derivatives of phenylenediamines or aminophenols, together with a
selected number of azo dyes and aminoanthraquinone dyes. Because the dyes in semi-
permanent hair colours are preformed and do not require added oxidant, such products
cannot lighten the natural hair colour.HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS51
Some tyical formulations are presented in Thble 4; semi-permanent dyes used in the
USA and Europe are listed in Table 5. Henna, an orange-red hair colouring derived from the
powdered leaves and stems of Lawsonia inermis, a tropical shrub, has been used since
antiquity and is stil used, by both professional hairdressers and consumers (Feinland et al.,
1980). The active colouring matter in henna is 2-hydroxy- 1,4-naphthoquinone (Farris, 1979).
Table 4. Ingredients of tyical semi-permanent hair colouring products
Light blond
Water
Ethoxydiglycol
Polyethyleneglycol-50 tallow amide
Hydroxyethylcellulose
Laurie acid diethanolamide
Aminomethyl propanol
Eiyhorbic acid
Fragrance
Oleic acid
Triethanolammonium dodecylbenzenesulfonate
CI Disperse Black 9
CI Disperse Blue 3
CI Disperse Violet 1
FD&C Yellow No. 6
HC Blue No. 2
HC Orange No. 1
HC Red No. 3
HC Yellow No. 2
HC Yellow No. 4
Red
Water
E thoxydiglycol
Polyethyleneglycol-50 tallow amide
Hydroxyethylcellulose
Laurie acid diethanolamide
Aminomethyl propanol
Eiyhorbic acid
Fragrance
Oleic acid
Triethanolammonium dodecylbenzenesulfonate
CI Disperse Black 9
HC Orange No. 1
HC Red No. 1
HC Red No. 3
HC Yellow No. 2Reddish brown
Water
Butoxyethanol
Cocn ut acid diethanolamide
H ydroxyethylcell ulose
Laurie acid
N- Methylaminoethanol
HC Blue No. 2
2-Nitro-5-glyceryl methylaniline
Fragrance
Butylparaben
Ethylparaben
Methylparaben
Propylparaben
3-Methylamino-4-nitrophenoxyethanol
3- Nitro-para-hydroxyethylaminophenol
HC Yellow No. 6
CI Disperse Violet 1
2-Amino-3-nitrophenol
4-Amino-3-nitrophenol
CI Disperse Blue 1
Dark brown
Water
Butoxyethanol
Polyglyceryl-2 oleyl ether
Cocnut acid diethanolamide
Hydroxyethylcellulose
HC Blue No. 2
Laurie acid
N-Methylaminoethanol
2-Nitro-5-glyceryl methylaniline
Fragrance
HC Violet No. 2
CI Disperse Blue 1
Butylparaben
Ethylparaben
Methylparaben
Propylparaben
HC Yellow No. 752 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 4 (contd)
Dark brown (contd)
3-Methylamino-4-nitrophenoxyethanol
CI Disperse Violet 1
3-Nitro-para-hydroxyethylaminophenol
From Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Assoiation (1992)
Table 5. Semi-permanent dyes used widely
in the USA and Europe
2-Amino-3-nitrophenol
4-Amino-3-nitrophenol
CI Disperse Black 9
CI Disperse Blue 1
CI Disperse Blue 3
CI Disperse Violet 1
HC Blue No. 2
HC Orange No. 1
HC Red No. 1
HC Red No. 3
HC Red No. 7
HC Violet No. 2
HC YeUow No. 2
HC YeUow No. 4
HC YeUow No. 6
HC YeUow No. 7
HC YeUow No. 10
HC YeUow No. 11
2-(N - Hydroxyethylamino)- 5-nitroanisole
4-ß- Hydroxyethylamino-3-nitrophenol
3- Methylamino-4-nitrophenoxyethanol
3- Methylamino-4- nitrophenoxyropan -1 ,2-diol
2- Nitro-para-phenylenediamine
Sodium picramate
From Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Assoiation
(1992)
The dyes used in semi-permanent colourants have been used for 30years or less, which is
shorter th an for permanent dyes, except for a few of the direct dyes that were used as toners in
permanent colourants (the unsubstituted nitrophenylenediamines and nitroaminophenols).
Use of HC Blue No. 1 (see monograph, p. 129) was discontinued in 1985 and that of 4-amino-
2-nitrophenol somewhat earlier. 2-Amino-4-nitrophenol and 2-amino-5-nitrophenol were
prohibited from use in cosmetic products, including hair dyes, in the countries of the
European Economic Community in 1990 (Commission of the European Communities,
1990, 1991).HARDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AND HAR COLOURANTS53
Semi-permanent colouring products come in several forms. Col our rinses are thesimplest means for altering hair colour: The hair is rinsed with a dilute aqueous or aqueous
alcoholic dye solution. The dyes are generally cationic and are adsorbed by the hair surface.
Coloured or tint setting lotions are also used as rinses and usually con tain cationic, disperseand/or nitro dyes. More pronounced colour changes are possible with tints, which are
formulated with direct dyes; intense colours can be obtained, especially with nitro dyes. With
foam tints, a surfactant solution is dispensed as a foam from an aerosoL. Tints can be also
thickened with cellulose derivatives, natural mucilage or synthetic polymers. Concentrated
solutions with intense colouring action can be obtained by using co-solvents (e.g., alcohols
and ethylene glycol ethers) and vehicles (e.g., urea derivatives and benzyl alcohol). ln
emulsion tints, the dye base consists of an emulsion (Clausen, 1989).
Semi-permanent colours are applied at 35-60 g to the hair for 10-30 min, followed by
rinsing. The colouring lotion contains 0.1-5% of dye and generally less than 1% of any
individual dyestuff. Users either apply su ch products at least monthly or use them only onspecial occasions, for example, three to four times a year. Measurements of skin penetration
of some semi-permanent dyes are discussed in section 4. i of this monograph.
Temporary dyes: Temporary hair colouring products, often referred to as 'colour rinses',
are products that produce colour that is removed by a single shampoo. They are normally
formulated with water-soluble acid or basic dyes of the tye used in wool dyeing, which have a
molecular size too great to penetrate the cortex of the hair. As a result, the dye is deposited
on the surface, from which it is easily removed by washing. Temporary colourants may also
comprise systems which produce insoluble complexes of an acid dye as a quaternary
ammonium or metal salt. One of the compounds included in this volume, D&C Red No. 9
(see monograph, p. 203), is used in temporary hair dye formulations as a pigment in the form
of its barium salt (Corbett, 1988). A commercial dye formulation may contain between 0.5
and 2.0% of the permitted colour, together with surface-active agents. Temporary dye formu-
lations may also contain nitro aromatics as colourants, together with anionic detergents and
urea to increase the solubility. Temporary colourants are occasionally used in the hair-
dressing trade but are more commonly used directly by consumers at home. While there are
few data on skin absorption, very little of such materials will pass through the skin owing to
the relatively high molecular weight of the dyes.
Virtually no metal salt (e.g., lead acetate) is used for hair colouring in the hairdressing
trade, as coloration with such products occurs gradually and they must be applied daily.
Furthermore, the selection of col ours available is limited, and the shades look metallic and
unnatural. Metal salts are also incompatible with permanent waving and bleaching of hair
(Clausen, 1989).
(h) Hair cleansing and conditioning preparations
(i) Shampoos
Shampoos are cosme tic products for cleaning the hair and scalp. The word 'shampoo' is
derived from a Hindi word meaning massage. Shampoos are the cosme tic products mostoften applied to the hair. Some of the characteristics considered in formulating modern
shampoos are their abilty to clean, to lather and to make the hair easy to comb, their capacity54 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
to condition the hair, mildness (compatibilitywith skin, eyes and mucosa; no burning on the
scalp or in the eyes), colour, appearance and fragrance (Lang, 1989a).
The principal constituents and most important raw materials of shampoos are sur-
factants, and nearly all modern shampoos are aqueous surfactant preparations. Surfactants
break the bonds between dirt and hair components and suspend the dirt in the aqueous
medium (Lang, 1989a).
Bar soaps were probably used for washing hair from about 1800, when they first became
available, until the 1930s and 1940s, when liquid soaps and cream shampoos were
introduced. The first surfactants used for hair cleansing were fat soaps. ln hard water,
however, soaps create a deposit of calcium and magnesium fatty acid salts on the hair, so their
use must be followed by treatment with an organic acid, su ch as citric or acetic acid. Another
drawback is the alkaline pH of soap, which may increase the swelling ofhair. ln order to meet
the requirements of high cleansing power, good lathering and safety (for the user and for the
environment), modern shampoos are formulated mainly with anionic surfactants.
Amphoteric surfactants are also used, whereas nonionic and cationic surfactants play only
secondary roI es in special-purpose formulations (Lang, 1989a).
The most important anionic surfactants used in shampoos are alkyl sulfates (ammonium
lauryl sulfate), alkyl and alkylaryl sulfonates, olefin sulfonates, secondary alkyl sulfonates,
alkyl ether sulfates, sulfosuccinates (disodium lauryl ether sulfosuccinate) and protein-fatty
acid condensates (potassium coco-hydrolysed animal protein) (Lang, 1989a). Sulfonated
oils, su ch as sulfonated castor, minerai and olive oils, were introduced for use in shampoos in
the 1930s; their use continued into the 1950s, with declining popularity. Sulfated fatty
alcohols were first introduced in Europe in the 1930s and in the USA late in the 1930s in
salon products and some retail products. By 1957, 70% of the shampoos used in the USA
were based on sythetic detergents su ch as sodium lauryl sulfate and triethanolamine lauryl
sulfate, and those two detergents are stil commonly found in salon shampoos (McDonough,
1937; Wall, 1954; Powers, 1972). The trend in the late 1950s was to increase the use of liquid
shampoos over that ofcreams, and there was then a movement to use of ammonium lauryl
sulfate, introduced in the early 1970s, and laurylether sulfates. Laurylether sulfates are the
preferred detergents in Europe.
Amphoteric surfactants used in shampoos can be divided into two classes: betaines
(coco-amidopropylbetaine) and alkyl amphoglycinates and alkyl amphopropionates (coco-
amphocarboxyglycinates and coco-amphocarboxyropionates). Cationic surfactants have a
positive charge and are strongly absorbed by the hair. Only a few special-purpose shampoos,
especially those for the treatment of severely damaged hair, contain these compounds. The
nonionic surfactants in use are polysorbates (Polysorbate 20, Polysorbate 80) and fatty
alcöhol ethoxylates and polyglycerides (Lang, 1989a).
Another important class of constituents of shampoos is foam builders, tyified by the
fatty acid mono- and dialkanolamides (Lang, 1989a) introduced in the late 1930s. By the mid
1950s, virtually all liquid shampoos based on lauryl sulfates contained alkanolamides. Two
tyes of amides are used. Condensation of 1 mol of fatty acid with 1 mol of an alkanolamine
such as diethanolamine gives a water-soluble product; condensation of 1 mol of fatty acid
with 2 mol of diethanolamine gives a more water-soluble product. The 2:1 tyes of
alkanolamides can have appreciable levels of free alkanolamine, fatty acid amide and freeHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS55
fatty acids. Some of the commonest examples of these constituents are the amides derived
from reaction of diethanolamine with lauric acid and with coconut oil fatty acids
(Kritchevsky, 1937; Barker, 1985).
Other constituents of shampoos inc1ude: refatting agents, conditioning additives
(cationic polymers such as quaternary hydroxyalkyl celluloses), thickeners (salts such as
sodium and ammonium chloride in combination with amphoteric surfactants), opacifiers
(fatty acid alkanolamides in mixtures with ethylene glycol monostearate and distearate or
cetyl alcohol and stearyl alcohol), colouring agents, fragrances and buffers (pH stabilizers,
su ch as citric, tartaric, adipic and phosphoric acids and their salts). The preservatives added
to shampoos today include formaldehyde and its donors and isothiazolinones, introduced in
the 1980s. From the 1930s to the mid-1960s, the main preservatives were parabens and
phenylmercuric acetate (Liem, 1977), which was banned in the late 1960s (Feinland et al.,
1980; Lang, 1989a).
Shampoos may be clear, opaque or pearly liquids, gels or aerosols. Shampoos with
special additives include those for frequent use and for babies, conditioning shampoos,
antidandruff preparations, shampoos for oily hair, tinting shampoos and those containing
insecticides. Shampoos for frequent use and for babies contain especially mild surfactants
(e.g., sulfosuccinate esters, magnesium ethyl ether sulfates) or mixtures of anionic,
amphoteric and sometimes nonionic surfactants. Conditioning shampoos are used to make
the hair easy to comb in the wet state and glossy and soft when dry. These effects are provided
chiefly through the addition of cationic polymers; addition of amphoteric surfactants or
refatting agents can improve the conditioning qualities of anionic surfactant formulations.
Antidandruff shampoos contain agents that reduce excessive scalp flaking to a normal leveL.
The most important antidandruff ingredients are zinc pyrithione, Octopirox (l-hydroxy-4-
methyl-6-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)-2( IH)-pyridone) and Climbazole (Baypival; 1-( 4-chloro-
phenoxy)-I-(I-imidazolyl)-3,3-dimethyl-2-butanone) (Lang, 1989a). Coal-tar formulations
(Weinberg, 1980) and selenium disulfide have also been used extensively, but their use is
regulated in some countries.
(ii) Conditioning agents and treatments
Hair can be damaged in a number of ways: by climatic effects such as humidity and
temperature extremes (weathering); by exposure to sunlight; by washing with products
containing surfactants; by cosmetic treatments, such as bleaching, dyeing, permanent waving
and straightening; and by combing and brushing. These processes al ter the physical, chemical
and morphological properties of hair as weIl as its reaction to cosmetic treatments such as
dyeing and permanent waving. They lead to perceptible roughening of the hair surface,
diffculty in combing, tangling, increased static charge, formation of split ends and loss of
natural lustre. Hair conditioning agents prevent, rerard or mask such changes. Their action is
restricted largely to modifyng the surface qualities of the hair and making it glossy. Nearlyall
modern shampoos, permanent wave lotions, setting lotions and dyes contain conditioning
additives that prevent excessive mechanical damage to the hair. This simple tye of condi-
tioning may not be suffcient for severely damaged or long hair, and special conditioning
treatments are available for such cases (Lang, 1989a).56 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
The earliest conditioning treatments were waxes and oils (vegetable and mineraI oils,
petrolatum), which provided lubrication and enhanced lustre, and acid rinses (lemon juice,
vinegar), which counteracted the undesirable effects of soap shampoos. During the 1940s
and 1950s, these ingredients were combined with surfactants in anionic emulsions as
after-shampoo rinses. AIkaline rinses included water-softening ingredients such as borax and
trisodium phosphate (Wall, 1954).
ln the mid- 1940s, the quaternary ammonium compound, stearyl dimethyl benzyl
ammonium chloride, began to be investigated for use as an after-shampoo treatment. By the
early 1960s, almost all after-shampoo conditioners contained quaternary ammonium
compounds as cationic surfactants. Typical quaternary compounds in current use inc1ude
cetyldimethylammonium chloride and cetyltrimethylammonium chloride, sometimes in
formulations with fatty alcohols such as cetylstearyl alcohol or with simethicone (Lang,
1989a).
Cationic polymers can also be used in conditioning treatments, together with special
ingredients su ch as antidandruff additives. The addition of special wax components yields
pearly preparations; if water-insoluble components are omitted and cationic polymers are
added, the formulae obtained are transparent and clear. Conditioning treatments are
generally rinsed out after they have been allowed to work for a defined time; however, sorne
newer products with a lower content of active ingredients can be left on the hair without
rinsing (Lang, 1 989a).
(c) Hair-styling preparations
Styling preparations stabilize a hair-style during or after its creation with comb, brush or
rollers, usually as a temporary set. Styling products may also make hair easier to manage, for
example, by facilitating wet combing and brushing. The products are mainly setting lotions
and hair sprays. Newer products developed in response to fashion changes are 'wet gels' and
'hair waxes', which were developed from the briliantines, pomades and hair creams used
formerly. Styling preparations are generally left on the hair and are not rinsed out. Their
active ingredients are usually dissolved polymers, known as film-forming agents, which are
deposited on the hair after evaporation of a solvent (Lang, 1989b).
(i) Setting lotions
Setting lotions make a hair-style more durable and prevent hair from 'flying' away,
reduce the amount of charge during combing and brushing, improve wet or dry combing and
improve its feel and lustre. They may be applied before hair is wound on rollers and dried
(wave sets) or before use of a hair dryer, brush or comb to style the hair (blow-dry sets) (Lang,
1989b).
The first preparations comparable to modern setting lotions were aqueous or aqueous
alcoholic solutions and gels of natural substances, such as egg white, sugar solutions, plant
mucilage (pectins, alginates, carrageenan, karaya gum, tragacanth) and beer. These products
simply 'glued' the hairs together. They had the drawback of forming opaque, brittle residues
which created dust during combing or brushing and became sticky in the presence of
moisture. Modern setting lotions contain polymers (film-forming agents), solvents, agents toHAIRDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURANTS57
facilitate combing, plasticizers, fragrances, colouring agents, ultra-violet radiation stabil-
izers, preservatives (if necessary) and other special ingredients (Lang, 1 989b).
Film-formers are nonionic, anionic or cationic polymers dissolved in water or water-
alcohol mixtures. Nonionic film-forming polymers include polyvnylpyrrolidone, the first
polymer used for this purpose, and vinylpyrrolidone-vinyl acetate copolymers. Anionic film
formers are vinyl acetate-crotonic acid copolymers or copolymers of methyl vinyl ether and
maleic acid semi-esters. Both tyes of polymer are usually neutralized with organic amines
such as 2-amino-2-methyl- 1,3-propanediol, 3-amino-2-methylpropanol or triisopropanol-
amine. Other anionic polymers are terpolymers of vinyl acetate, crotonic acid and vinyl esters
and graft polymers of vinyl acetate, crotonic acid and poly( ethylene oxide). Cationic
polymers have an affinity for keratin, th us making the hair easier to untangle; they also
prevent the accumulation of static charge during combing and brushing. The most important
cationic film-forming polymers are quaternary vinylpyrrolidone-dimethylaminoethyl
methacrylate copolymers (CTFA Polyquaternium II), vinylpyrrolidone-vinylimidazole
copolymers (CTFA Polyquaternium 16), cationic hydroxyethyl cellulose (CTFA Polyqua-
ternium 10), poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride) (CTFA Polyquaternium 6), poly-
(dimethyl-diallylammonium chloride) copolymers (CTPA Polyquaternium 7) and chitosan
(obtained from chitin by alkali treatment) or its derivatives (Lang, 1 989b).
The solvents used in setting lotions are water, ethanol, 2-propanol and their mixtures.
Agents that facilitate combing include the cationic film-forming polymers listed above and
cationic surfactants such as cetyltrimethylammonium chloride or bromide. Plasticizers
enhance the flexibility of films formed on the hair. They include esters such as diethyl
phthalate, diethyl citrate, adipates, silicones and polyglycols (Lang, 1989b).
Setting lotions are usually marketed as dilute, aqueous alcoholic solutions in single- or
multiple-application packages. Depending on intended use, they contain 0.5-4% of
polymers or polymer mixtures and up to 50% ethanoL. Setting lotions for waving have a
higher polymer content than those for blow-dryng. Gels thickened by the addition of
higher-molecular-mass polymers of the poly(acrylic acid) tye are used far less frequently.
Liquid lotions can also be packaged as aerosol sprays (propellant or pump spray). A novel
form is the aerosol foam (mousse). Addition of adsorptive or penetrating dyes to setting
lotions allows simultaneous hair colouring (Lang, 1989b).
(ii) Hair sprays
Aerosol spray-can products first came into widespread use in about 1948, on the basis of
technology developed for insecticide applications during the Second World War. Hair sprays
did not become practical until 'liquefied' gases with low vapour pressures became available.
By virtue of the propellant liquid-gas equilibrium in the pressurized can, the pressure
remains roughly constant during spraying. Pump sprays ('nonaerosol' sprays) do not use a
propellant gas; the energy needed to swirl and atomize the concentrate is supplied by a
manual pump. The ingredients of 'nonaerosol' hair sprays are generally the sa me as those ofaerosol products, but the propellant content is replaced by additional solvent (Lang, 1989b).
The most important ingredients of hair sprays today are concentrates (film-forming
agents, solvents, plasticizers, agents for lustre and fragrances) and propellants (Lang, 1989b).
Hair spray products can be subdivided into six tyes on the basis of the hair fixative or58 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
film-forming component: polyvnylpyrrolidone, a copolymer of polyvnylpyrrolidone and
polyvnyl acetate, shellac, dimethylhydantoin-formaldehyde resin, modified polyaciylic acid
resin and lanolin (Draize et al., 1959).
The first film-forming agent, shellac, was superseded in the 1950s by polyvnyl-
pyrrolidone. Better results are obtained with vinylpyrrolidone-vinyl acetate copolymers, the
harder, more hydrophobic tyes being used for hair sprays. Stil harder films can be obtained
with vinyl acetate-crotonic acid copolymers. Copolymers of methyl vinyl ether and ethyl or
butyl maleate and polyvnyl methyl ether/maleic anhydride-ethyl half-ester copolymers are
used most often in the USA More recently, acrylate-acrylamide copolymers (such as
tert-butylacrylamide-ethyl acrylate-acrylic acid copolymers and octylacrylamide-acrylate
copolymers), vinyl acetate-crotonic acid-vinyl neodecanate copolymers and vinylcapro-
lactam-vinylpyrrolidone-dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate copolymers have been used.
Ethanol, 2-propanol and acetone are the most important sol vents in hair sprays.
Dichloromethane has been used for many years (1965-89 in the USA) but is no longer used
in sorne countries (including the USA) because of its toxicological properties (Lang, 1989b).
Vinyl chloride was reportedly used to a limited extent as a solvent-propellant (US Consumer
Product Safety Commission, 1974) before it was found to be a carcinogen (see IARC, 1979).
Until recently, the most common propellants in aerosol hair sprays were chlorofluoro-
carbons. Those most frequently used were trichlorofluoromethane (F-l1), trichloro-
trifluoroethane (F-113), dichlorotetrafluoroethane (F- 114) and chlorodifluoromethane
(F-22). By 1979, controversy about the possible action of these compounds on the Earth's
ozone layer led to a ban on their use as propellants in the USA International agreements and
national legislation have led to a graduaI abandonment of chlorofluorocarbons as pro-
pellants in Europe and elsewhere. Alternatives are the hydrocarbons propane, butane, iso-
butane, pentane and their mixtures, although they are highly inflammable and poor solvents
for most polymers (Lang, 1 989b).
Exposures to hair spray components in beauty salons have been estimated on the basis of
both use patterns and direct measurements. The average spray release time per application is
10 sec, and about 10 g of spray are emitted during a spray period (Gerkens et aL., 1989).
About 65% of the unimpinged spray has a particle diameter less than or equal to 10 lLm,
making the aerosol highly respirable. Half of the particle weight is solvent. It was estimated
that 0.03-0.4 mg were inhaled over a 5-min period following 10 sec of spraying (Draize et al.,
1959).
Concentrations of dichloromethane in the air of beauty salons were reported in three
studies: 8-h time-weighted average exposures were in the range of 1-6 ppm (cm3/m3)
(Hoffan, 1973 (USA); Sayad et al., 1976 (USA); Gerkens et al., 1989 (Italy)). Average
exposure to dichloromethane while spraying from an aerosol can during one 219-min period
was 18 ppm in the breathing zone (Sayad et al., 1976). Peak exposure concentrations up to
130 ppm (Hoffan, 1973) and more (.c 400 ppm) were measured (Sayad et aL., 1976). Total
particulate levels in personal samples in beauty salons ranged from 0.3 to 0.6 mg/m3 (Palmer
et al., 1979).
ltace quantities of airborne polyvnylpyrolidone (.c 7 lLg/m3 to 0.07 mg/m3), ethanol
(.c 7 lLg/m3 to 3 mg/m3) and ttichlorofluoromethane (3-41 mg/m3) were found to beHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS59
associated with hair spray use in a beauty salon. Isobutane concentrations ranged from 373 to
1935 mg/m3 (Gunter et al., 1976).
(iii) Other hair-styling preparations
Brilliantine (pomade) is the oldest preparation for stabilizing styled hair. Colourants
added to briliantine in the past were reported to have included N ,N-dimethyl-4-amino-
azobenzene (para-dimethylaminoazobenzene; butter yellow), auramine and chrysoidine
(Clemmesen, 1981; Gubéran et al., 1985). 2-Naphthylamine has been found as an impurity in
yellow AB and yellow OB, which have been used in cosmetics (Conway & Lethco, 1960;
Gubéran et aL., 1985). Briliantines consist mainly of vaseline and paraffn or other oils. The
viscosity of the product and the hydrophobic layer with which it coats the hair are responsible
for stabilization. These and similar formulations have reappeared on the market as hair
waxes.
Setting gels are a new form of hair fixative. Fat-based gels are generally of the mIcro-
emulsion tye; aqueous gels are aqueous solutions thickened with poly(ethylene glycol),
cellulose derivatives or polyacrylates and contain film-forming substances. They allow the
creation of 'wet-Iook' hairstyles (Lang, 1989b).
Changes in fashion have meant that hair creams have lost much of their commercial
importance. These products facilitate combing, add lustre and help to hold hair-styles.
Creams include oil-in-water and water-in-oil tyes. Hair tonics refresh the scalp and serve as
simple styling aids. They may also con tain disinfectants, soothing, cooling or hair
growth-promoting ingredients and anti-oil and antidandruff agents (Lang, 1989b).
(d) Permanent-wave preparations
ln permanent waving, intermolecular and intramolecular bonds in the hair are broken
and then reformed after the hair has been shaped (curled). The strongest bonds that are
broken and reformed are the disulfide bonds of cystine; approximately 25% of the cystine
bridges are reduced to cysteine. Mer the hair has been reshaped, this reaction is reversed
with an oxidant. Hydrogen bonds, salt bridges and hydrophobic and van der Waals inter-
actions between individual amino acids are also involved but are of lesser importance
(Kohler, 1989a).
Modern permanent waving traces its roots to a London hairdresser named Nessler who
in 1906 introduced heat treatment of hair soaked in borax. The treatment required a whole
dayand often resulted in burns and hair loss. During the next 35 years, the use of heat, with
and without alkaline solutions, was perfected. The image from the 1920s and 1930s of a
person sitting under a salon hair dryer represents the classic picture of someone receiving a
salon wave. AIkaline solutions in combination with heat were developed, and special pads
with strong exothermic reactions when moistened were introduced. ln the early 1940s,
sulfides were tried but were discontinued because of toxicity (Winkel, 1936; Wilat, 1939;
Thomssen, 1947; Gershon et al., 1972; Zviak, 1986d).
It was also in the 1940s that thioglycolates were introduced. These preparations were
called cold waves to differentiate them from earlier pro cesses (Gershon et al., 1972). Since
the 1950s, most waving preparations have involved salts of thioglycolic (mercaptoacetic) acid
as the principal reducing agents. Ammonium thioglycolate (concentration, 6- II % ) has been60 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
in constant use in salons since the late 1940s. ln 1972, glyceryl or glycerol monothioglycolate
was introduced in the USA and Canada. It was first used with heat (from a hair dryer), but by
1980 most such waves were processed without heat at a concentration of about 13%,
expressed as thioglycolic acid (about 23% as glyceryl thioglycolate). Today glyceryl
monothioglycolate waves account for about one-half of the 200 milion waves done in salons
in the USA each year. ln Japan, cysteine is used in sorne waves, but the predominant waving
material is stil ammonium thioglycolate (concentrations up to 7%), as it is in Europe and
elsewhere (Kohler, 1989a).
Ammonia and monoethanolamine are most commonly used for pH control
(alkalinization) in waving preparations. Combinations of ammonium hydrogen carbonate
and ammonium carbonate, or urea and the enzye urease, are also used. Other additives
include surfactants, fragrances, agents to facilitate combing (poly( dimethyldiallylammonium
chloride), cetyltrimethylammonium chloride), thickeners (cellulose derivatives, polyacrylate
salts), opacifiers (styene-vinylpyrrolidone copolymers), colouring agents, carriers (urea,
ethanol, 2-propanol) and complexing agents (Kohler, 1989a).
Waves must be 'neutralized' with an oxidizing agent. During 1940-70, potassium and
sodium bromate were the chief agents used, at concentrations of 6-12%. Since then,
hydrogen peroxide (at 0.5-3.0%) has been used in most parts of the world. ln Asia,
bromate-based neutralizers are used mainly, because they do not greatly lighten dark hair.
Percarbamide (urea-hydrogen peroxide), sodium perborate and melamine peroxide hydrate
have been used occasionally (Kohler, 1989a).
The most widely used preparations are those containing hydrogen peroxide, stabilized
with inorganic phosphates, phenacetin, 4-acetaminophenol or æ-bisabolol (a constituent of
chamomile oïl). The 'foam neutralizer' that is applied tocurlers with a sponge and lathered
into a foam is commonest; however, rinse and aerosol foam neutralizers are becoming
increasingly popular (Kohler, 1989a).
A surveyin the United KIngdom in 1992 ofexposures ofhairdressers duringpermanent
waving showed ethanol at 2-30 mg/m3, isopropanol at none detected to 9 mg/m3 and
ammonia at 5-25 mg/m3. Dichloromethane was not detected (Rajan, 1992).
(e) Hair-straightening preparations
Preparations similar to those employed for permanent waving can be used to straighten
naturally wavy or curly hair. Hair-straightening products are usually gels or creams rather
than lotions. They contain strong bases such as alkali hydroxides (1.5-4.0 wt% lithium or
sodium hydroxide) and other active ingredients such as guanidinium hydroxide and tetra-
alkylammonium hydroxides. Lye-based products are so strong that they do not require
oxidative post-treatment; however, improper use can easily make the hair brittle, and skin
burns may even occur. ln order to reduce such hazards, formulations have a high content of
minerai oil (Kohler, 1989b).
1.2.2 Nail products
Nail-care products fall into three categories: coloured products; colourless products that
include base coats, top coats and strengthener/hardener coats; and lacquer/enamel
removers. The main ingredients of coloured and colourless nail-care products are:HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAIR COLOURAS61
nitrocellulose (10- 15%), resins (5- 15%), solvents (30-40%), diluents (20-30%), plasticizers
(1-6%), suspending agents for colourants (0.7-3%) and colourants (3-5%). Nitrocellulose is
used as a film-former In conjunction with a plasticizer to avoid shrinkage and brittleness; it is
usually wetted with isopropanol for safety reasons. The function of resins is to produce
adhesion to the nail and a glossy surface. Those most commonly used are toluene-
sulfonamide/formaldehyde resin, polyester, polyamide (e.g., nylon) and acrylates and
acrylics. The most commonly used solvents are ethyl acetate, butyl acetate, isopropanol and
ethanol. Diluents help stabilize the viscosity of the formula. Those most commonly used are
alcohols (ethyl, isopropyl, butyl), aromatic hydrocarbons (toluene, xylene) and aliphatic
hydrocarbons (heptane). Plasticizers are used to achieve flexibility in the nitrocellulose film;
the commonest are dibutyl phthalate and camphor. Dispersing agents help to keep
colourants suspended; the commonest is stearalkonium hectorite. Colourants may be
organic or inorganic and may include natural or synthetic pearL. The pigments used in nail
lacquer formulations are carbon black, iron oxides, chromium oxides, ultramarines, metallic
powders (gold, bronze, aluminium, copper), aluminium and calcium lakes of FD&C and
D&C blue, red, yeiiOW and orange, and titanium oxide. Transparent systems require the use
of solvent-soluble colourants such as D&C red, green, yellow and violet. A tyical nail
lacquer formulation contains (% by weight): toluene, 30.5; n-butyl acetate, 12.8; n-amyl
acetate, 11.1; ethyl acetate, 11. 1; nitrocellulose, 10.0; aryl sulfonamide-formaldehyde resin,
10.0; isopropanol, 5.0; bentonite, 3.0; camphor, 2.5; dibutyl phthalate, 2.5; and ethanol, 1.5
(Isacoff, 1979). Nail hardeners usually contain an 'active' ingredient to strengthen the nail
plate and include isobutyaldehyde, glutaraldehyde and sometimes formaldehyde.
A tyical nail treatment, at home or in a salon, includes application of a base coat, two
coats oflacquer (coloured product) and then a top coat. For added durability, an addition allayer of each coat might be added. Typical dryng time for a single layer is about 7 min; more
time is needed between successive layers, because barri ers to evaporation are created. Atotal nail treatment takes 1 h or more.
Lacquer/enamel removers may be made from any number of solvents, including any of
those used in the formulation of the enamels. The fastest acting is acetone, but ethyl acetate is
also used. Various oils and emollient compounds added to lacquer removers include castor
oil, lanolins and lanolin derivatives. The formula of a tyical nail polish remover is (% by
weight): ethyl acetate, 40; acetone, 30; carbitol, 19; dibutyl phthalate, 10; sesame oil, 1; and a
small amount of perfume. Cuticle removers and cuticle softeners usually consist of a dilute
solution of al kali in water with some glycerol or other humectant added to keep the water
from evaporating too rapidly. Potassium hydroxide, trisodium phosphate, triethanolamine
and some quaternary ammonium salts have been used (lsacoff, 1979).
A quantitative evaluation of the exposure of manicurists during the production of
synthetic fingernails showed 8-h time-weighted average exposures of 5.3 ppm methyl
methacrylate, 7.3 ppm ethyl methacrylate and 1.6 ppm isobutyl methacrylate. Intermittent
exposure to 9-48 ppm (average, 20 ppm) methyl methacrylate was measured during
application, with peak exposures to up to 137 ppm (average peak, 54 ppm); intermittent
exposure to ethyl methacrylate was 7-18 ppm (average, 13 ppm) and that to isobutyl
methacrylate, 5-8 ppm (average, 6 ppm). The average time to create a full set of artificial62 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
nails was 40 min (Froines & Garabrant, 1986). ln another investigation of artificial nail
application, personal exposures to methyl methacrylate were 15-25 ppm (Kronoveter, 1977).
1.2.3 Skin products
Skin preparations used in beauty salons comprise various lotions, creams, perfmes,
col ours, powders and soaps intended to beautify and improve the complexion of the skin,
including colouring foundation creams, concealers/blemish-covering creams and solids,
eyeliners, eyeshadows, face powders, facial colouring products (blush, powders, liquid
make-up), facial masks and beauty packs, hair removers (depilatories), lipstick, mascara,
moisturizing creams and lotions, skin cleansing creams and lotions and skin fresheners/-
toners.
The tyical chemical content of a clay mask is (%): water, 50-80; filers (bentonite clay,
kaolin, titanium oxide), 10-40; thickeners (algin, potassium alginate, magnesium aluminium
silicate, carbomers), 0-10; humectants (glycerol, propylene glycol, lanolin, polyethylene
glycol, sorbitol), 5-10; astringents and healing agents (zinc oxide, witch hazel extract), 0-5;
emulsifiers (beeswax, magnesium aluminium silicate, polysorbates), 0-5; preservatives
(citric acid, methyl and propyl parabens), 0-1.5; fragrance (essential oils), 0-1; and colou-
rants, 0-0.1. The tyical chemical content of paste and peel-off facial masks is (%): water,
50-75; film formers (hydroxyethylcellulose, polyvnylpyrrolidone-vinyl acetate, gums),
10-25; ethanol, 5-12; humectants and emollients (glyceryl stearate, polyethylene glycol
stearate, glycerol, sorbitol, polysorbates, cetyl alcohol, stearyl alcohol, lanolin, beeswax),
0-5; clay (bentonite, kaolin), 0-5; preservatives (butylated hydroxyanisole, citric acid, methyl
and propyl parabens), 0-0.1; fragrance (essential oils), 0-1; aloe plant gel; and colourants.
1.2.4 Other exposures in beauty salons
Nitrosamines have been found in a wide variety of cosmetic and toiletry products,
including hair dyes, shampoos, rinses, conditioners and fragrance preparations. The use of
2-bromo-2-nitropropane-l,3-diol as an antibacterial and antifungal agent was associated
with the highest concentrations, since it may act as a source of nitrosation of amines or
amides (Fan et al., 1977; US Food and Drug Administration, 1991). The commonest
nitrosamine found is N-nitrosodiethanolamine. Between 1978 and 1980, the US Food and
Drug Administration analysed more than 300 cosmetic samples for this compound and found
concentrations of ~ 30 ppb in 7% of the samples, 30 ppb to 2 ppm in 26% and 2-150 ppm in
7% (US Food and Drug Administration, 1991). ln 1986,40% of samples of cosmetics and
shampoos in Germany were found to be contaminated with N-nitrosodiethanolamine (up to
275 l.g/kg) and N-nitrosobis(2-hydroxy-propyl)amine (20-30 l.g/kg). The introduction of
offciai recommendations by the German Federal Health Offce in 1987 to stop use of
secondary amines in cosmetic products led to a reduction in such contamination; only 15 % of
the products were contaminated in a 1987-88 survey (Eisenbrand et al., 1991). These
nitrosamines may be absorbed appreciably through human skin (US Food and Drug Admi-
nistration, 1979; Marzull et al., 1981).
Formaldehyde is added to many cosmetic products, particularly shampoos, as an
antibacterial agent and preservative. It is also used in processes for hair setting that employHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS63
urea- or melamine-formaldehyde condensation products (Walker, 1975). Formaldehyde
can also form during storage as a degradation product of materials containing polyethylene
glycol (Fregert, 1986). Formaldehyde and formaldehyde donors, such as 1 -hydroxyethyl-
5,5-dimethylhydantoin, were found at levels of up to 0.5% in cosmetics (Liem, 1977).
Concentrations of formaldehyde found in some specific products were: shampoo, up to
0.03%; hair rinse, 0.41%; bubble bath, 0.61%; and nail hardener, 7% (Wilson, 1974).
AIthough formaldehyde is known to penetrate the skin and is volatile, no study was found
that reported levels of exposure during the use of cosmetic products (Lodén, 1 986a,b).
Paraformaldehyde may be used as a fumigant in towel cabinets, equipment drawers and
cosmetic kits in beauty parlours and barber shops. Such use was found at one site to
contribute to general air concentrations of formaldehyde of between 0.01 and 0.03 ppm
(0.012 and 0.037 mg/m3) (AImaguer & Blade, 1990). ln area air samples in a high-school
cosmetology laboratory, levels of 0.01-0.9 ppm (0.012-1.1 mg/m3) formaldehyde were
detected over a 6-h period (Almaguer & Klein, 1991). Short-term exposure to several parts
per milion of formaldehyde may be experienced when opening cabinets containing para-
formaldehyde.
1,4-Dioxane is a common trace component of cosmetic products containing polyethoxy-
lated surfactants, such as some shampoos and conditioners, hair dyes and skin conditioners.
Of the cosmetic products tested, including shampoos, hair and body gels, liquid soaps, balms
and foam preparations, 82% contained 1,4-dioxane in the range of 0.3-96 ppm (mg/kg or 1)
(Rastogi, 1990). ln other evaluations, 48% of commercially available cosmetic products
containing polyethoxylated surfactants contained 7-86 ppm (mg/kg) 1,4-dioxane (Scalia &
Menegatti, 1991), and up to 613 ppm (mg/kg) wasfound in shampoo (Beernaert 
et al., 1987).
1,4-Dioxane penetra tes the skin (Marzulli et al., 1981).
1.3 Consumer use of hair dyes
While permanent hair colours have been in use since the late nineteenth century, they
were first applied only by professionals; retail consumer use became significant in the years
following 1945. Subsequently, total use of hair colourings increased, until by about 1965
35-40% of women in the USA and Europe aged 18-60 were using them, and that prevalence
has remained stable. Permanent hair colouring constituted ;: 90% of use until the intro-
duction of semi-permanent dyes in the late 1950s. ln Europe and the USA, semi-permanent
dyes now represent about 20% of use, permanent dyes about 75% and temporaiy dyes about
5%. ln Japan, mainly permanent colourants are used; the prevalence of use among women is
similar to that in Europe and the USA
ln the USA and Europe, use of hair colourants among men is almost completely for grey
coverage and is mainly among men over 40 years of age. No published data are available, but
it is unlikely that more th an 10% of men aged 35-60 use hair colourants. Progressive
colourants (see below) have been used by about 80% of male users (Zahm et al., 1992). Use
of hair colouring materials is believed to be greater among Japanese men than among US
and European men.
The products used by hairdressers and beauticians are, with few exceptions, similar to
the retail products sold for home use. Thus, consumers are exposed potentially either in64 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
beauty salons or during home use of the products to a similar range of chemical substances as
are hairdressers and beauticians. The frequency and duration of exposure, however, may be
quite different for consumers and professionals.
As noted above, one class of hair colouring products that is not used in beauty salons is
the metal salts used as temporary hair colourants. This practice is as ancient as the use of
vegetable dyes, but metal salts are rarely used today except by people who do 'progressive'
colouring, involving daily applications of the product. Metal salts used as temporary hair
colourants are, for the most part, lead and silver salts; occasionally, copper, nickel, bismuth,
cobalt and manganese salts are added to solutions to vary shades. While there is stil sorne
uncertainty about how these dyes work, it is thought that the hair shaft is coloured by reaction
of the metallic salt with keratin sulfur, depositing a metallic sulfide. ln addition, it is thought
that some of the colour is attributable to slow formation of metallic oxide. Lead salts
commonly used for this purpose are the acetate and the nitrate. Sometimes, finely divided
sul fur is added to formulations. Silver nitrate, used since the beginning of the nineteenth
century, has a dual mode of action, in that the silver salts darken when exposed to light, and
silver combines with protein, yielding a dark-coloured proteinate. A rapid colouring process
has also been used (e.g., on eyelashes and eyebrows) in which a solution of trihydroxybenzene
is applied, followed by ammoniacal silver nitrate (Zviak, 1986b).
1.4 Regulatory aspects
A detailed discussion of the laws and regulations related to toiletry and cosmetic
products is presented by Zviak and Camp (1986). ln order to authorize, restrict or ban the use
of substances in cosmetic products, sorne countries have set up negative and positive lists or
derogatory and restrictive lists. A negative list comprises substances that cannot be part of a
cosmetic composition; a positive list includes only substances authorized for a definite
purpose. When a positive list is adopted, any other substance is banned for the said purpose.
A derogatory and restrictive list covers substances outside the scope of negative lists for
certain tyes of use and/or within certain concentration limits, or a list of substances the use
of which is permitted only under certain conditions (e.g., ingredient warning labellng).
General provisions for cosmetic products, including hair-care products, are compiled in
the Council Directive of the European Economic Community (EEC) of 27 July 1976 on the
Approximation of the Laws of the Member States Relating to Cosme tic Products (Commis-
sion of the European Communities, 1976), which is amended constantly. Hair-care products
include hair tints and bleaches; products for waving, straightening and fixing; setting
products; cleansing products (lotions, powders, shampoos); conditioning products (lotions,
creams, oils); and hairdressing products (lotions, lacquers, briliantines). The Directives
include: lists of substances that must not form part of the composition of cosmetic products;
lists of substances which cosmetic products must not contain except subject to the restrictions
and conditions laid down; lists of colouring agents allowed for use in cosmetic products; lists
of colouring agents provisionally allowed for use in cosmetic products; lists of preservatives
which cosmetic products may contain; and lists of ultraviolet radiation filters which cosmetic
products may contain. Oxalic acid, its esters and alkaline products, hydrogen peroxide, 1,3-
bis(hydroxyethyl)imidazolidine- 2- thione, quinolin-8-01, bis(2- hydroxyquinoli um) sulfateHAIRDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAIR COLOURAS65
and etidronic acid and its salts are permitted in hair-care products with restrictions on
concentrations (Commission of the European Communities, 1990). Some countries of the
EEC, however, such as France, Denmark and Italy, depart from the EEC Directive regarding
restrictions and labellng requirements. ln Greece, cosmetics must be registered. Spain
requires government notification before a product is marketed. ln Germany, hair prepa-
rations are classified as cosmetics and subject to legal provisions (Liebscher & Spengler,
1989). Under the EEC Cosmetics Directive, cosme tics must not be Ii able to endanger humanhealth when applied under normal conditions of use (Commission of the European
Communities, 1990, 1991, 1992). The cosmetic regulations in Norway, Finland and Turkey
are closely modelled on the EEC Directive (Liebscher & Spengler, 1989).
ln the USA, certain cosme tics are subject to registration as over-the-counter drugs. The
list of cosmetic colour additives is very limited, and stringent purity standards must be
observed. ln preparations sold directly to the consumer, all ingredients must currently be
listed on the labeL. Registration is required for cosmetics in Canada and in most countries of
Latin America and Southeast Asia. ln Japan, cosmetics are cIassified as quasi-drugs or
cosmetics. New raw materials must be registered and extensiv~ toxicological data submitted;
human tests from other countries are not recognized (Liebscher & Spengler, 198.9).
1.4.1 Hair dyes
2,4-Diaminoanisole and 2,5-diaminoanisole, 1,2-diaminobenzene (ortho-phenylene-
diamine) and 2,4-diaminotoluene (4-methyl-meta-phenylenediamine) and their salts,
2-amino-4-nitrophenol and 2-amino-5-nitrophenol, are banned in the EEC. Other
diaminobenzenes and diaminotoluenes, as well as their N-substituted derivatives and their
salts, diaminophenols, hydroquinone, O!-naphthol and resorcInol are permitted, with
restrictions on concentrations. With the exception of Q(-naphthol, these substances may be
used for dyeing eyelashes and eyebrows by professionals only. Lead acetate is permitted for
hair dyeing only at a concentration of 0.6% calculated as lead; it is not allowed for dyeing
eyelashes, eyebrows or moustaches. Warning labels are also prescribed (Commission of the
European Communities, 1990, 1992). ln addition to the EEC provisions, 1,4-diamino-
2-nitrobenzene and 1,2-diamino-4-nitrobenzene are banned in Italyand Denmark, and
1,3-diaminobenzene is also banned in Denmark. The USA requires a special warning label;
with the label, any hair dye can be used without restriction. ln Japan, a list of permissible hair
dyes is issued; new dyes must be registered (Liebscher & Spengler, 1989).
1.4.2 Shampoos
The general provisions stated above apply to shampoos in the EEC countries.
Furthermore, phenol and its alkali salts, quinine and its salts and selenium disulfide are
permitted with restriction on concentrations (Commission of the European Communities,
1990). Antidandruff shampoos are c1assified as over-the-counter drugs in the USA and as
quasi-drugs in Japan (Liebscher & Spengler, 1989). Quinine and its salts are permitted in hair
lotions at a concentration of 0.2% calculated as quinine base in the finished product
(Commission of the European Communities, 1990).66 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.4.3 Bleaching preparations
ln the EEC, persulfates can be used without restriction. Argentina and Thailand limit
their concentration, and in Finland a warning label is required for ammonium persulfate.
The USA does not have any specific regulations for this group (Liebscher & Spengler, 1989).
1.4.4 Permanent-wave preparations
The EEC Directive restricts the pH range of permanent-wave preparations and hair
straighteners based on thioglycolic acid, its salts and esters (pH 7-9.5 or 7-12.7 for the acid
and salts, 6-9.5 for esters). The maximal concentration (calculated as thioglycolic acid) is 8 %
by weight for general use, and 11% by weight at pH 7-9.5, 5% at pH 7-12.7 for the acid and
salts and II % at pH 6-9.5 for esters for professional use. A special warning label is required.
Potassium and sodium hydroxide are permitted with a restriction on concentration in hair
straighteners (Commission of the European Communities, 1990). France further restricts
permanent-wave and straightening preparations made from thioglycolic acid, its salts and
esters to professional use only. ln the USA, no legal restriction is known. Because of
self-imposed industry restrictions, however, the thioglycolic acid content does not exceed
14% by weight at a pH of not more th an 9.5. ln Japan, permanent-wave products are
classified as quasi-drugs. Thioglycolic acid and its salts are permitted, as is cysteine, with
restrictions on concentration and pH. Thioglycolate esters are not allowed. Concentration
limits also apply to neutralizers (Liebscher & Spengler, 1989).
1.4.5 Hair sprays
ln the EEC, dichloromethane is allowed as a solvent up to a concentration of 35% by
weight in the finished product. When dichloromethane is mixed with 1,1,1 -trichloroethane, a
total concentration of both is limited to a maximum of 35% by weight (Commission of the
European Communities, 1990). Chlorofluorocarbons are now being phased out in most
parts of the world in accordance with the 'Montreal Protocol', as amended in London in 1990
and in Copenhagen in 1992 (see US Environmental Protection Agency, 1993).
1.4.6 Nail hardeners
Formaldehyde is permitted at a concentration of 5% in the finished product. Potassium
and sodium hydroxide are permitted in nail cuticle solvent at the same concentration
(Commission of the European Communities, 1990).
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
The available studies relate to exposures that occurred at different times over the last
30 years or more, during which period there were changes in both the tyes and quantities of
products used by hairdressers and barbers and by the consumer (Wall, 1972).
2.1 Occupation al exposure
2.1.1 Descriptive studies
Cancer mortality among men and single women in England and Wales was examined for
the period 1949-53 (Registrar General, 1958). For male barbers and hairdressers, the sitesHARDRESSERS AN BARBER S, AN HAR COLOURAS 67
examined were all sites, stomach, lung and leukaemia. Lung cancer occurred in excess
(standardized mortality ratio (SMR), 1. 15; 114 observed, 99 expected); for cancers at ail sites,
there were 257 observed and 273 expected. For single female hairdressers and manicurists,
the numbers of observed deaths exceeded those expected for cancers at ail sites combined
(43 observed, 37 expected) and for cancers of the lung and bronchus (4 and 2), breast (13 and
9) and cervx uteri (4 and 1).
Similar data from the Registrar General (1971) for the period 1959-63 showed no
significant excess mortality from cancers at all sites or from lung or stomach cancers or
leukaemia among male hairdressers and barbers. Among single female hairdressers and
manicurists, there were 21 observed deaths from breast cancer, with 12 expected (p c( 0.05);
for cancers of the cervx uteri and other parts of the uterus the ratios of observed to expected
deaths were 3:2 and 4:2, respectively. A further report from England and Wales (Offce of
Population Censuses and Surveys, 1978), in which occupational mortality for the period
1970- 72 was analysed, did not indicate a significant excess of any of the above cancers in men
or in women in those occupations, inc1uding breast cancer among single female hairdressers
and manicurists (eight observed, seven expected).
ln the latest report in this series (Offce of Population Censuses and Surveys, 1986),
covering the years 1979-80 and 1982-83, male barbers in England and Wales were reported
to have had increased mortality from cancers at all sites at ages 15-64 (45 deaths, 21.6
expected) and from lung cancer (21 deaths, 7.9 expected). N onsignificant increases were seen
for cancers of the lip, oesophagus, stomach, colorectum, prostate and bladder and for
Hodgkin's disease and leukaemia, all based on five cases or fewer. Single female hairdressers
also showed a significant excess of cancers at all sites at ages 15-64 (22 observed, 9.2
expected; p c( 0.01) and of cancer of the breast (7 observed, 1.6 expected; p c( 0.05).
Nonsignificant excesses were seen for cancers of the stomach, colorectum, cervx, ovary and
brain and for malignant melanoma, which were based on few cases.
Clemmesen (1977) studied the incidence of malignant neoplasms in the period 1943-72
among hairdressers in Denmark on the basis of the numbers recorded with this occupation in
successive censuses. Among male hairdressers, 447 malignant neoplasms were observed,
with 517.4 expected (Clemmesen, 1981). There was no excess in anyof 13 groupings of
cancer sites. ln women, there was a large overall excess, with 872 malignant neoplasms
observed and only 475.4 expected, which appeared in each five-year period and for each of
14 site groups. (The Working Group noted that the consistent excess of cancers at markedly
different sites in women in this study suggests use of different criteria for reporting women's
occupation as hairdresser at the census and in hospital records.)
Garfinkel et al. (1977) analysed a series of death certificates with mention of cancer
covering AIameda County, California, USA, in the period 1958-62. Of 3460 such deaths in
females, 24 occurred in beauticians, at the following sites: lung (6), breast (5), cervx (4),
ovary (3), brain (1), bladder (1), stomach (1), synovium (1) and unspecified (2). An expected
number of 21.8 cancers was calculated for beauticians on the basis of 1000 death certificates
for women of similar age and race which had no mention of cancer (24 observed;p = 0.43).
When women who had died from causes other than cancer were matched to those who had
died from lung cancer by age, race, date of death and county of residence, of 176 lung cancer68 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
cases, six were in beauticians, compared with one among the 176 controls. The relative risk
(RR) was 6.0, with a one-tailed p = 0.06.
Menck et al. (1977) used data on 15230 men and 22 792 women, aged 20-64, white and
with non-Spanish names, from the Los Angeles County (USA) Cancer Surveilance Program
in 1972-75 to investigate the association of cancer with occupation reported at hospital
admission. Of 135 cases of cancer found in female beauticians, 20 were of the lung.
Proportionate incidence ratios (PIR) and standardized incidence ratios (SIR) were
computed, the latter being derived from the sex-specific populations at risk by occupation as
ascertained in a 2% sample census of Los Angeles County. Both the PIRs and SIRs for lung
cancer among beauticians were significantly increased (about two-fold;p ~ 0.05). No data
on smoking habits were available. The authors mentioned parenthetically, without giving
details, that a case-control study of 199 lung cancer cases and 187 controls had shown a RR
of 0.94 for beauticians, on the basis of six cases.
ln a study of cancers registered in the Los Angeles (USA) Tumor Registry, in 1972-78,
which partially overlaps with the above study, Guidotti et al. (1982) noted an excess of
multiple myeloma in the category of cosmetologists, hairdressers and manicurists. The PIR
was 4.67 in women, on the basis of eight cases, and 3.47 in men, on the basis of one case.
Milham (1983) studied the occupations of 429926 men in Washington State, USA, who
had died during 1950- 79 and of 25 066 women who had died during 1974-79. Among male
barbers (3014 deaths), the proportionate mortality ratio (PMR) was elevated for multiple
myeloma. Among female hairdressers and cosmetologists (409 deaths), the PMRs were
elevated for stomach cancer, other lymphomas, multiple myeloma, acute leukaemias and
neoplasms at other and unspecified sites. (The Working Group noted that detailed figures
were not given.)
Dubrow and Wegman (1982, 1983, 1984) analysed mortality by occupation among
34 879 white men in Massachusetts, USA, who had died during 1971-73. Overall, there were
179 deaths among barbers. Nonsignificantly elevated odds ratios (ORs) were found for
cancers of the pancreas (1.46) and lung (1.34), on the basis of six and 29 deaths, respectively.
For hairdressers and cosmetologists, an elevated OR was found for bladder cancer (11.56;
four deaths).
Baxter and McDowall (1986) conducted a study of death certificates analysed as a case-
control study ofbladder cancer among men in six boroughs of London (United Kingdom), in
the period 1968- 78, using as controls all other causes of death, including cancer. There were
four deaths in hairdressers, giving a RR of 2.0.
Pearce and Howard (1986) examined male cancer mortality by occupation in New
Zealand in the period 1974-78 in relation to census-based estimates of the relevant
populations. The RR for bladder cancer, adjusted for social class, was 12.94 (95% confidence
interval (CI), 1.45-46.7; two cases). The adjusted RR for 'other urinary' cancers was 12.85
(1.44-46.4; two cases) and that for lung cancer was 2.54, on the basis of fIve cases (0.82-5.93).
Gallagher et al. (1989) analysed the death certificates of 320 423 male residents of
British Columbia, Canada, who had died during 1950-84. There were 1209 deaths among
barbers: cancer mortality was slightly reduced from that expected (PMR, 0.95; 95% CI,
0.82- 1.08; 224 deaths), and PMRs were not elevated for any cancer site. The PMRs were 1.34HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS69
for bladder cancer, 1.33 for all non-Hodgkin's lymphomas and 0.58 for multiple myeloma, on
the basis of 12, 8 and 2 deaths, respectively. ln a similar analysis of mortality among female
cosmetologists and hairdressers in 1950-78 in British Columbia, a significantly increased
PMR was found for multiple myeloma (6.19; 95% CI, 1.27-18.11; three deaths) (Spinell
et al., 1984). A nonsignificant excess of ovarian cancer was also noted (PMR, 2.04; 95% CI,
0.88-4.03; eight deaths), which reached statistical significance (p -c 0.05) in the age group
20-65 years.
Neuberger et al. (1991) examined 375 industries and occupations that were associated
with five or more deaths from brain cancer in Missouri, USA, between January 1983 and
October 1984. Seven deaths were observed in the beauty shop industry against 1.49 expected
(standardized proportionate mortality ratio, 4.7; p -c 0.005). Among hairdressers and
cosmetologists, there were eight deaths with 1.50 expected (5.3; p -c 0.005).
2.1.2 Cohort studies
The studies summarized below are also presented in Table 6, with the results for the sites
at which cancer occurred most commonly. Bias may have been introduced in the case of
certain malignancies (other than bladder and breast cancers), owing to failure to present
relevant results in some of the studies.
AIderson (1980) followed a sample of 1831 male hairdressers identified at the 1961
census of England and Wales until 1978. Mortality from all cancers was similar to that
expected (134 observed, 126.1 expected), and no specific cancer showed a significant excess:
oesophagus,5 observed, 3.4 expected; lung, 52 and 50.8; bladder, 7 and 5.6; and leukaemia, 3
and 2.7.
Kono et aL. (1983) followed the mortality of a cohort of 7736 registered female
beauticians from 1948 to 1960 in Fukuoka Prefecture, Japan, for an average of 22.5 years.
Among the site-specific cancers examined, only stomach cancer occurred in significant excess
(61 observed, 45.59 expected; 95% Ci, 1.02-1.72). They found no case of bladder cancer
(1.01 expected), five cases of breast cancer (8.5 expected) and ni ne cases of lung cancer (7.4expected).
Teta et aL. (1984) examined cancer incidence in 1935-78 in 11845 female and 1805 male
cosmetologists in Connecticut (USA) who had held licences for five years or more and had
begun hairdressing school prior to 1 January 1966. A significant excess of lung cancer (SIR,
1.41) and excesses of brain (SIR, 1.68) and ovarian cancer (SIR, 1.34) of borderline
significance were observed--among women; the SIR for bladder cancer was 1.36 (95% CI,
0.74-2.27), on the basis of 14 cases. No significant cancer risk was evident for female
cosmetologists licensed since 1935, even for those with 35 years or moré of follow-up,
although the SIRs for brain cancer, lymphoma and leukaemia were elevated. Female
cosmetologists who had entered the profession between 1925 and 1934, however,
experienced a significant overall increase in cancer incidence (SIR, 1.29) and significant
excesses of respira tory, breast, corpus uterine and ovarian cancers. Among the men in the
cohort, there was no excess of cancers at all sites (77 observed, 73.4 expected), but cancers of
the brain occurred more frequently than expected (4 observed, 1.9 expected). (The Working
Group noted that no other numbers were given for cancers at specific sites in men.)70 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Gubéran et al. (1985) studied cancer mortality in the period 1942-82 and incidence in
the years 1970-80 in a cohort of 703 male and 677 female hairdressers in Geneva,
Switzerland. Increased mortality from bladder cancer was observed among men (10
observed, 3.9 expected;p .. 0.01) and women (2 observed, 1.0 expected). The corresponding
values for incident cases were 11 and 5.3 for men (p .. 0.01) and 2 and 1.5 for women.
Significant (p .. 0.05) excesses of incident cases of cancer of the buccal cavity and phary
(6 observed, 2.5 expected) and of prostatic cancer (12 observed, 6.1 expected) were seen in
men in the period 1970-80. No case of cancer of the buccal cavity and phary was seen in
women (0.8 expected); for neither of these sites, however, was there an excess in the longer
period covered by the mortality analysis (1942-82). A nested case-control study of 18 cases
of bladder cancer among men in this cohort (10 deceased, six incident cases that occurred
during 1970-80 and two incident cases that occurred in 1981) showed a non-significantly
greater duration of exposure (measured from the start of apprenticeship) among those who
dressed men's hair but not among those who dressed women's hair. Enquiries indicated that
the great majority of male hairdressers in this study never dyed men's hair. ln the period
1900-50, application of briliantines to men's scalps after haircuts was widespread in
Geneva. The authors stated that those preparations may have contained colouring agents
that are bladder carcinogens, such as para-dimethylaminoazobenzene, chrysoidine and
auramine, which have been found in briliantines in other countries. They also mentioned
that 2-naphthylamine has been found as an impurity in Yellow AB and Yellow OB, which
have been used in cosmetics.
ln a study linking 1960 census and 1961-79 cancer incidence in Sweden, II cases of
multiple myeloma were found in people classified as beauticians (SIR, 1.3; p ~ 0.05)
(McLaughlin et al., 1988).
ln a brief note, Shibata et al. (1989) reported three deaths from leukaemia (3.84
expected) and two from lymphoma (3.01 expected) in a cohort of 8316 male and female
barbers surveyed in 1976-87 in AIchi Prefecture, Japan.
An analysis of the incidence of bladder cancer and lung cancer in men and women
employed as hairdressers and beauticians in 1960 in N orway and Sweden and as hairdressers
and barbers in 1970 in Denmark and Finland was reported by Skov et al. (1990). Lynge and
Thygesen (1988) found an increased rIsk for bladder cancer in hairdressers in Denmark: the
RR was 2.05 for men, on the basis of 41 cases (95% Ci, 1.51-2.78), and 1.76 for women, on
the basis of seven cases (95% Ci, 0.71-3.63). No corresponding increase in lung cancer was
observed. ln Finland, Norway and Denmark, the expected numbers of cancer cases were
calculated by multiplying the person-years at risk for each of the five-year birth cohorts of
hairdressers by the sex-specific incidence rate for the equivalent five-year birth cohort of all
people who were economically active at the time of the census. ln Sweden, the expected
number of cancer cases was calculated by multiplying the number of hairdressers in a given
region of Sweden in each five-year birth cohort at the time of the census by the sex-specific
estimated cancer probability for the equivalent five-year birth cohort of aIl people in the
region. National figures were obtained by aggregating the observed and the expected
numbers across the 27 Swedish regions. The pattern of excess bladder cancer incidence
without a corresponding increase in lung cancer incidence was not found in any of the other
Nordic countries (Skov et aL., 1990). ln Sweden (Malker et aL., 1987; Skov et al., 1990), theHAIRDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS71
incidence of lung cancer was increased in male (98 cases; RR, 1.5; 95% CI, 1.2-1.8) and
female (31 cases; 1.6; 1. 1 -2.2) hairdressers, and bladder cancer incidence was increased in
men (54 cases; 1.5; 1.1-1.9) but not in women (six cases; 0.4; 0.2-1.0). The authors noted thata national survey of smoking in Sweden carried out in 1963 had found that 74% of male
barbers and beauticians aged 50-69 were regular smokers, compared to 46% of aIl men aged
50-69 years. ln Norway, the incidences of bladder cancer and lung cancer were increased in
hairdressers (RR, 1.4- 1.6), but the increase was significant only for lung cancer in men. ln the
data from Finland, no case of bladder cancer was recorded among male hairdressers in the
period 1971-80 (expected, 0.3), but three cases occurred in women (1.8 expected). The
incidence of lung cancer was not increased: 3 observed, 2.0 expected in men and 2 observed,
4.4 expected in women (Skov et al., 1990). The incidence of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma was
examined in Denmark (1970-80) by occupational category by Skov and Lynge (1991) using a
similar method. No significant excess was observed in female hairdressers (RR, 1.98; 95%
Ci, 0.24-7.15; two cases); no case was recorded among male hairdressers. When aIl groups of
hairdressers were included (self-employed/barber, work in beauty shops and hairdresser),
the RRs were 1.3 (0.48-2.83; six cases) for men and 2.0 (0.81-4.14; seven cases) for women.
ln a study not entirely independent of the study of Skov et al. (1990), a cohort of 3637
female and 168 male hairdressers, born in or before 1946 and who were members of the
Finnish Hairdressers' Association between 1970 and 1982, were followed up for cancer
incidence through the national cancer registry between 1970 and 1987 (Pukkala et al., 1992).
Expected numbers of cases were calculated by multiplying the number of person-years in
each age group by the corresponding overall cancer incidence in Finland during the period of
observation. Among women, there were 247 cases of cancer and 195.0 expected. Non-
significant excesses were seen for breast cancer (70 cases, 56.3 expected), cervcal cancer
(11 cases, 7.1 expected), lung cancer (13 cases, 7.6 expected) and ovarian cancer (21 cases,
12.8 expected). Risks were not elevated for cancers at other sites, including the bladder
(1 and 2.5), leukaemia (4 and 4.2) and multiple myeloma (1 and 2.4). The risk for aIl cancers
was higher during the period 1970-75 (p ~ 0.05) than during 1976-81 (p ;: 0.05) or 1982-87
(p ;: 0.05). Among men, 25 cases of cancer were observed (17.9 expected; 95 % Ci,
0.90-2.06); nonsignificantly elevated risks were found for cancers of the lung and pancreas,
on the basis of seven and three cases, respectively.
ln a cohort study of 248 046 US male veterans who served during 1917-40 and were
intervewed during 1954 or 1957 on smoking habits and occupations, Hrubec et al. (1992)
analysed the mortalitypattern of 740 barbers through 1980. Smoking-adjusted RRs were 1.2
for all cancers (110 deaths; 95% Ci, 1.06-1.45), 1.6 for respiratory cancers (31; 1.22-2.20),
1.5 for prostatic cancer (20; 1.03-2.15) and 2.5 for multiple myeloma (4; 1.08-5.63). No
excess was found for bladder cancer (3 deaths; OR, 0.7).
2.1.3 Case-control studies (Thble 7)
The Working Group systematicaIly reviewed studies dealing with occupational risk
factors for cancer of the urinary bladder and breast (sites that have been studied extensively),
lymphatic and haematopoietic neoplasms and childhood cancer. No systematic review was
made of studies of other cancer sites. Many of the case-control studies that have been
published did not present results for all of the occupational categories covered in theid
Table 6. Occupational exposure: results or cohort studies on cancers at selected sites
Reference Study population Sex Breast cancer Bladder cancer Lung cancer Ovarian cancer Lymphatic and haema- Notes
topoietic neoplasms
0ERR0ERR0ERR0ERRType0ERR
AIdersn 1831 male hairdressers at M 75.61.55250.81.02 Leu 32.71.
(1980) 1961 census, England and
Wales, follow-up (M),
1961-78
Kono et al. 7736 female beauticians, F 58.46 0.59 01.01 - 97.411.1 53.691.6Leu 64.381.7Excess of stomach:;(1983) Fukuoka, Japan, regis- cancer (RR, 1.4*)
~tered, 1948-, follow-up
(M), 1953-77~'lta et al. in~45 female cosmeto- F204199.59 1.021410.33 1.6 49a 34.83 1.41*4835.831.4Leu 1411.621.20Higher RRs for women
(1984) logists, Connecticut, USA MM 34.330.69licensed durig 1925-34 0
Iicensed, 1925-74, follow- Lym2217.071.29than among those Z
up (1), 1935-78 licensed since 1935. 00Gubéran 677 female and 703 male F712.5(0.6)21.(1.) 31.6(1.9)12.0(0.5)AIl 42.0(2.0) The only excess in a par-
~et al. hairdressers, Geneva, M 115.3(2.1*)810.3(0.78) AIl 02.3-allel analysis of 1942-82
(1985) Switzerland, employed mortlity was bladder
190, follow-up (1), cancer among males ::
1970-80 (10observed (RR, 2.6*)) C/
McLaughlin 3067 male MM cases, M MM 111.6 et al. Swedish Cancer Registry,
(1988) 1961-79, employed at 1968 census as beauticin
Shibata et al. 3701 female and 4615 male F Leu 01.26- ~
(1989) barbers, Aichi Prefecture, Lym 10.731.7 tr
Japan, employed in 1976, M Leu 32.581.6VI..
follow-up (M), 1976-87 Lym 12.29 0.44
Skov et al. 4356 female and 2149 male F 117.21.5 1611. 1.4
(199) hairdressers and beauti. M 2315.11.4729.2 1.6*
cians, Norway, employed
at 196 census, follow-up
(1), 1961-84
Malker et al. 16 942 female and 6522 F 613.50.43120.0 1.6*
(1987); male hairdressers and M 5436.61.5*9867.2 1.5*
Skov et al. beauticians, Sweden,
(199) employed at 196
census, follow-up (1),
1961-79Table 6 (contd)
Reference Study population Sex Breast cancer Bladder cancer Lung cancer Ovarin cancer Lymphatic and haema- Notes~ topoietic neoplasms~0ERR0ERR0ERR0ERRType0ERR Ü~trSkov et al. 9138 female and 428 male F 31.81.7 24.40.5Partially overlapping C/C/(199) hairdressers and barbers, M 00.3-32.01.5with the study of Pukk-trFinland, employed at 1970
la et ai. (1992) ~census, follow-up (1),
C/ 1971-80
~Lynge & 9497 female and 4874 male F74.01.81211.01. NHL 7 2.01For all hairdressers and Thygesen hairdressers and barbers, M 4120.02.1'5650.51. NHL 6 1.30barbers. For hairdressers (1988; Denmark, employed at
only, RR, 1.98 in woment:Skov et al. 1970 census, follow-up (1),
~(199); 1970-80
~Skov &
t:Lynge
tr (1991)~C/Pukkala et al. 3637 female hairdressers, F7056.31.4 12.50.40 137.61.72 2112.81.64'Leu 44.20.96 Higher RRs durig ~(1992) Finland, employed 1970-
MM 12.40.421970-75 than in subse-
~82, follow-up (1), 1970-87
quent periods. Excess
incidence of aH cancers
(1.7'). PartiaHy over-
~lapping with the study of
Skov et ai. (199). Hrubec 740 male barbers, beau ti- M 3(4.3)0.731(19.4)1.6' NHL 4(3.1)1. Smokig-adjusted RRs. ~ et ai. (1992) cins and manicurits,
HD 1(0.7)1.4Excess mortality from aH (" servg in the US Any
MM 4(1.6)2.5" cancers (RR, 1.') 0 durig 1917-4, foHow-up
Leu 5(4.6)1. ~ (M), 1954800C 0, observed cases/deaths; E, expected cases/deaths; RR, relative risk; M, mortlity; l, incidence; Leu, leukaemias; Lym, lymphomas; MM, multiple myeloma; NHL, non-Hodgki's
s:lymphoma; HD, Hodgki's disease. Numbers in square brackets, calculated by the Workig Group.
~"Respir tory and intrathoracic neoplasms
',p -: 0.05
C/
~74 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
analysis, including barbers, hairdressers and cosmetologists. A possible reporting bias
derives from the fact that occupations associated with an elevated cancer risk are more likely
to be reported than those that are not.
(a) Bladder cancer
Wynder et al. (1963) carried out a case-control study of smoking habits and occupations
among 300 male patients with bladder carcinoma and 300 hospital controls in New York
City, USA, during the period 1957-61; 93% of cases and 82% of controls were smokers. Four
of the patients (all smokers) and no ne of the con troIs had worked as hairdressers.
Dunham et al. (1968) compared the most recent occupations of265 white, male patients
with bladder cancer (mostly transitional-cell carcinomas) with those of 272 comparable
controls in New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, during 1958-64. They found four barbers in the
case group, while 1.45 were expected (OR, 2.76).
Anthony and Thomas (1970) intervewed 812 men and 218 women with bladder
papilomas and carcinomas in Leeds, United Kingdom, in the period 1959-67; 47% had
known smoking histories. Of several alternative analyses presented by the authors, the most
reliable appears to be based upon a comparison of the male cases with a control group
comprising cases of non-malignant surgical disease matched by sex, age and number of
cigarettes smoked. Among the cases, four were hairdressers, of whom three had worked
more th an 20 years in the occupation; one control was a hairdresser. The ORs for bladder
cancer among hairdressers were 4.1 (predominant occupation), 4.0 (occupation ever
undertaken) and 3.0 (20 or more years in the occupation). None of the female cases was in a
hairdresser (0.6 expected). None of the differences was significant.
Cole et al. (1972) studied occupation in a systematic sample of patients (356 men, 105
women) aged 20-89 with transitional- or squamous-cell carcinoma of the lower urinary tract
in a defined population in Boston, Massachusetts, USA, during an 18-month period in
1967 -68 (Cole et al., 1971). Con troIs were comparable with respect to age and sex. There was
no increased risk for barbers (men: 4 observed cases, 7.2 expected; women: 1 observed case,
0.9 expected).
A hospital-based study of many tyes of cancer in males was conducted in Buffalo, New
York, in the period 1956-65 (Viadana et al., 1976). ln an unspecified number of cases of
bladder cancer and controls out of a total of II 591 white men, the RR for bladder cancer
associated with occupation as a barber was 1.49 (five cases; p ? 0.05). Restriction to those
with five or more years of exposure (stil five cases) increased the RR to 1.77 (p ? 0.05).
Howe et al. (1980) reported a population-based study of all 480 men and 152 women
with bladder cancer diagnosed in 1974-76 in three Canadian provinces and of individually
matched controls. Among men, three cases but no control were barbers; and among women,
two cases but no control were hairdressers.
Vineis and Magnani (1985) conducted a case-control study of 512 male cases of bladder
cancer in northern Italy in the period 1978-83. An OR of 0.9 was recorded for barbers and
hairdressers on the basis of nine cases (95% Ci, 0.4-2.3).
Morrison et al. (1985) conducted case-control studies in 1976-78 of cancer of the lower
urinary tract among men in Boston, USA, Manchester, United Kingdom, and Nagoya, Japan.HAIRDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURANTS 75
No increased risk was recorded among barbers in Boston (OR, 1.00; 90% CI, 0.4-2.6; seven
cases); only two cases were recorded in Manchester and one in Nagoya.
Jensen et al. (1988) reported a case-control study on incident cases of renal pelvis and
ureter cancer. Cases were identified from hospitals in the eastern part of Denmark in
1979-82, and a total of 97 patients were included, corresponding to some 80% of those
eligible. Three matched hospital controls were selected for each case, excluding patients with
urinary tract and smoking-related diseases. A personal intervew was obtained for 94% of
cases and controls. A total of 36 female cases and 108 controls were intervewed, of whom
two in each group reported occupation as a hairdresser (OR, 3.0; 95% CI, 0.3-33.0). Data
were not reported on occupation as a hairdresser among men.
Risch et al. (1988) carried out a case-control study of 826 male and female cases of
bladder cancer in Canada in 1979-82. The OR among barbers or hairdressers was not
increased (men, 0.66, II cases; women, 1.00, nine cases). No significant trend was noted with
increasing duration of employment.
The US National Bladder Cancer study is a population-based case-control study carried
out in 10 areas of the USA during 1977-78. ln 2100 white male cases and 3874 population
controls, an OR of 1.3 (95% CI, 0.8-2.3; 28 exposed cases) was found for hairdressers
and barbers and an OR of 2.8 (95% Ci, 0.7-11.6; seven exposed cases) was found for
hairdressers alone (Silverman et al., 1989). For 652 whi te female bladder cancer patients and
1266 controls, an OR of 1.4 (95% CI, 0.7-2.9; 17 exposed cases) was found for hairdressers
(Silverman et al., 1990).
(b) Lymphatic and haematopoietic cancers
ln a case-control study in Sweden, Persson et al. (1989) recorded crude ORs in
hairdressers of2.6 (one case) for Hodgkin's disease and 1.3 (one case) for other lymphomas.
The logistic odds ratios were 2.7 and 2.2, respectively. (The Working Group noted that the
two sexes cannot be distinguished.)
A case-control study of 622 white male cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and 1245
controls was carried out in Iowa and Minnesota, USA Case identification was population
based; for living cases, living population-based controls were selected, while for the
deceased, dead con troIs were identified from state vital records. Employment in a barber-
shop was associated with a 2.7-fold risk (95% CI, 0.9-8.7; sixexposed cases). The occupation
ofbarber/cosmetologist showed an OR of2.1 (95% Ci, 0.7-5.9; seven exposed cases) (Blair
et al., 1993).
Four case-control studies on multiple myeloma analysed the risk among hairdressers or
barbers. ln a study from Sweden, cases diagnosed between 1973 and 1983 were collected as
survvors into the period 1981-83; one case and one control were employed as hairdresssers
(OR, 3.3; 95% CI, 0.24-45.7) (Flodin et al., 1987). ln a study nested in a large American
Cancer Society cohort, no case and four con trois were classified as beauticians,
cosmetologists or barbers (Boffetta et al., 1989). ln another study from Sweden, of 256 cases
and 256 population controls, two cases and three controls were employed as hairdressers or
cosmetologists (OR, 0.67; 90% Ci, 0.15-2.71) (Eriksson & Karlsson, 1992). Finally, in a
study on the incidence of multiple melanoma among women in the Danish Cancer Registry,76 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
one case and six controls were classified as hairdressers (OR, 0.7; 95% CI, 0.0-5.8) (Pottern
et al., 1992).
A case-control study conducted in Thsmania, Australia, included 51 female cases of
acute nonlymphoblastic leukaemia, 27 of chronic lymphoblastic leukaemia, 32 of Hodgkin's
disease, 116 of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and 59 of multiple myeloma diagnosed during
1972-80, as well as population controls. Five cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and no
control were employed as hairdressers (p -: 0.05); aIl five cases had been employed for more
than five years. For none of the remaining neoplasms was there a significant difference
between cases and controls for employment as a hairdressr (Giles et aL., 1984).
(c) Cancers at other sites
Viadana et aL. (1976) reported an increase in the incidence of larygeal cancer among
barbers in the study described on p. 74. Barbers had an age-adjusted OR of2.83 for larygeal
cancer (10 cases); this excess persisted in men who had been barbers for five or more years
(OR, 2.49; eight cases). The overall OR after adjustment for tobacco use was 3.39 (p -c 0.05).
Osorio et al. (1986) noted a PIR of 1.44 for lung cancer among female cosmetologists
aged 20-65 in the Los Angeles (USA) Tumor Registry in 1972-82, on the basis of 8 1 cases. ln
a case-control study of 50 cases and 56 non-pulmonary cancer controls, no occupational
exposure factor was identified that could explain the lung cancer excess.
Koenig et al. (1991) carried out a case-control study of 398 women with breast cancer
and 790 controls identified from the records of a multiphasic screening clinic in New York
City, USA They noted a three-fold excess (95% CI, 1.1-7.9) among beauticians with fIve or
more years of exposure, on the basis of 12 cases.
(d) Childhood cancer
Kuijten et al. (1992) carried out a case-control study of astrocyoma diagnosed in
children under 15 in the period 1980-86 in Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware, USA
Controls were recruited by random-digit dialling and pair-matched with cases on age, race
and telephone exchange. Mothers and fathers of cases and con troIs were intervewed
separately by telephone. A total of 217 eligible cases were identified; a maternai occupa-
tional historywas obtained for 163 case-control pairs (75%) and a paternal one for 158 pairs
(73%). Ofthe 163 control s, 115 (71 %) were the first eligible control identified. A complete
occupational history was obtained for each parent. MaternaI employment as a hairdresser in
the period before conception was associated with an OR of 2.5 (95% Ci, 0.4-26.2, seven
discordant pairs), employment during pregnancy with an OR of 1.5 (95% CI, 0.2- 18.0, five
discordant pairs) and employment postnatally with an OR of 3.0 (95% CI, 0.2-157.7, four
discordant pairs). (The Working Group noted that cases and controls could have been
exposed during more th an one period.)Table 7. Occupational exposure: resuIts of case-control studies on cancers at selected sites
Reference Study population ContraIs Expsure ContraI for SexType of Exposed OddsComments
smoking cancer cases ratio
~(when rele-
vant)~
Bladder cancer U~Wynder et aL. 300 male cases, 2 hospitals, Hospital contraIs Ever employed as No M 4 NRNo expsed contraI m(/(1963) New York, USA 1957-61 hairdresser (/Dunham et al. 265 male cases, hospital in 272 hospital Employed as barber No M 4 2.76NS m~(1968) New Orleans, USA, contraIs r:1958-64
~Anthony & 812 male, 218 female cases, Non-malignant Hairdresser as No M 4 4.1Thomas Leeds, UK, 1959-67 surgical diseases predominant ocupa-
(1970) (340 men, 50 tion t:women) ;i~ Cole et aL. 356 male, 105 female cases, 485 population Ever employed as bar- No M 4 0.56 t:(1972) Boston, USA, 1967-68 contraIs ber or hairdresser F 1 0.9 expected cases m~ Viadana et al. Male cases, Buffalo, USA, Non-neoplastic Ever employed as No M 5 1.49RR 1.77 for 2= 5 years ~(/(1976) 1956-65 hospital contraIs barberof employment
~Howe et aL. 480 male, 152 female cases, 480 male, 152 fe- Ever employed as No M 3 No exposed contraI
(1980) 3 Canadian pravinces, male neighbour- barber or hairdresser F 2 of either sex1974-76 hoo contraIs
~Gubéran 18 male cases nested in a 54 cohort members Duration of employ-Nonsignificant asso- - et al. (1985) cohort of hairdressers in ment ciation with men's ~ Geneva, Switzerland,hairdressing, no asso-n 1970-80ciation with women's0hairdressing t"Vineis & 512 male cases, Turin, Italy, 596 hospital con- Ever employed as No M 9 0.9 0C Magnani 1978-83 traIs barber or hairdresser
~( 1985)
Morrson 430 male cases, Boston, 397 population Employed as barber Yes M 7 1.00~et al. (1985) USA 1976-78 contraIs(/Morrson 399 male cases, 493 population Employed as barber No M 2(1.)et al. (1985) Manchester, UK, 1976-78 contrais
Morrson 226 male cases, Nagoya, 443 population Employed as barber No M 1 (1.0)et al. (1985) lapan, 1976-78 contraIs
......
Table 7 (contd)00
Reference Study population Con troIs Expsure Control for SexType of Expsed OddsComments
smoking cancer cases ratio
(when rele-
vant)
Bladder cancer (contd)
Risch et al. 826 male and female cases, 792 population Ever employed as Yes M 11 0.66No trend with dura-
(1988)Canada, 1979-82 controls barber or hairdresser F 9 1.00tion of expsure in
either sex
Silvennan 2100 white male cases, 3874 population Ever employed as Yes M 281.
et al. (1989) 10 US areas, 1977-78 con troIs barber or hairdresser:; Ever employed as M 7 2.8
hairdresser ~
Silvennan 652 white female cases, 1266 population Ever employed as Yes F 17 1.4
et al. (199) 10 US areas, 1977-78 con troIs hairdresser~0
Lymphatic and haematopoietic neoplasmsZ
Persson et al. 54 HD and 106 NHL cases, 275 population Employed as hair- BothHD 1 2.7Logistic odds ratio 0
(1989)hospital in Sweden, con troIs dresser NHL 1 2.2 0
196-86 ~
Blair et al. 622 white male NHL cases, 1245 population Ever employed in MNHL 6 2.7"'
(1993) Iowa and Minnesota, USA controls barbershop::C/
198083 Ever employed as MNHL 7 2.1~
barber/cosmetologist 0
Flodin et al. 131 MM cases, 6 hospitals 431 population Employed as hair- BothMM 1 3.3Survving cases in-t
(1987) in Sweden, 1981-83 con troIs dressercluded
Boffetta et al. 128 MM incident cases, 512 con troIs from Employed as beau ti- BothMM 0 Four exposed con- ~
(1989)American Cancer Society the cohort cian, cosmetologist ortroist'
V'
cohort, 1982-86 barber..
Erisson & 256 MM cases, northem 256 population Employed as ha ir- BothMM 2 0.7
Karlsson Sweden, 1982-86 con troIs dresser or cosmeto-
(1992)logist
Pottem et al. (j7 female MM cases, 2596 population Most recent employ- FMM 1 0.7
(1992)Denmark, 1970-84 controls ment as hairdresser
Giles et al. 116 female NHL cases, Population Employed as hair- FNHL 5*No exposed control
(1984) Thsmania, Australia, con troIs dresser
1972-80
Giles et aL. 32 female HD cases, Population Employed as hair- FHD 2 No exposed control
(1984) Thsmania, Australia, controls dresser
1972-80Table 7 (contd)
Reference Study population Con troIs Exposure Control for SexType of Exposed OddsComments
smoking cancer cases ratio
(when rele-
vant)
Lymphatic and haematopoietic neoplasms (contd)
Giles et al. 51 female ANLL cases, Population Employed as hair- FANLL 1 No exposed control
(1984) Thsmania, Australia, controls dresser
1972-80
Giles et aL. 27 female CLL cases, Population Employed as hair- FCLL 0 No exposed control
(1984) Thsmania, Australia, controls dresser
1972-80
Giles et al. 59 female MM cases, Population Employed as ha ir- FMM a -One exposed control
(1984) Thsmania, Australia, controls dresser
1972-80
NR, not reported; NS, not significant; RR, relative risk; HD, Hodgkin's disease; NHL, non-Hodgkin's Iymphoma; MM, multiple myeloma; ANLL, acute nonlymphoctic
leukaemias; CLL, chronic lymphoctic leukaemias. Numbers in square brackets, ca1culated by the Working Group
*p .: 0.05~~v~mr.r.m~r.
~ti
~ti
m~~r.
~
S
~~nor.o
~
\Z80 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
2.2 Use of hair colourants
2.2.1 Cohort studies (Thble 8)
Hennekens et al. (1979) carried out a cross-sectional postal questionnaire survey in 1976
on 172413 married female nurses, aged 30-55, in II US states whose names appeared in the
1972 register of the American Nurses' Association. Of the 120 557 responders, 38 459
reported some use of permanent hair dyes; of these, 773 had been diagnosed as having a
cancer. The risk ratio for the association of cancers at all sites with hair-dye use (at anytime)
was 1. 10 (p = 0.02). When 16 cancer sites were examined separately, significant associations
with permanent hair-dye use were found for cancer of the cervx uteri (RR, 1.44;p , 0.001)
and for cancer of the vagina and vulva (RR, 2.58;p = 0.02). These associations were reduced
but remained significant after adjustment for smoking habits. There was no consistent trend
of cancer risk with increasing interval from first use of hair dyes, although women who had
used permanent dyes 21 years or more before the onset of cancer had a significant increase in
risk for cancers at all sites combined (RR, 1.38 adjusted for smoking; p = 0.02), largely
because of an excess of breast cancers (RR, 1.48), which, however, was balanced by a
decrease of similar magnitude 16-20 years before the onset of cancer. Analyses of cases of
cancer that had occurred only after 1972 (the year the study population was defined from the
nurses' register) and were reported by survving cases in 1976 yielded essentially the sa me
results, thus indicating that self-selection for the study, early retirement and loss from the
profession al register were not sources of bias in the study. (The Working Group noted the
low response rate and the fact that information on both cancer and exposure to hair dyes was
derived from participants.)
Green et al. (1987) examined hair dye use in relation to breast cancer in a follow-up study
of a subgroup of the population described above, comprising 118 404 nurses who had no
cancer in 1976 and were followed up to 1982. No relationship was detected: the rate ratio for
ever use was 1.1 (95% CI, 0.9-1.2), on the basis of353 cases, compared to 505 for never use.
The risk for breast cancer did not increase with frequency or duration of use.
2.2.2 Case-control studies (Thble 9)
The Working Group systematically reviewed studies dealing with exposures of cases of
cancer of the urinary bladder and breast (sites that have been studied extensively), lymphatic
and haematopoietic neoplasms and childhood cancer. No systematic review was made of
studies of other cancer sites.
(a) Cancers of the urinary bladder and renal pelvis
Lockwood (1961) performed a case-control study of bladder tumours in Copenhagen,
Denmark. AlI patients diagnosed with bladder tumours from 1942 until 1 March 1956 and
able to be intervewed in 1956-57 were eligible for inclusion. Of the 428 patients, 369
(282 men) were intervewed, together with 369 population controls (282 men) selected from
the electoral rolls and matched for sex, age, marital status, occupation and residence and
intervewed in 1956-59. Later in the study, a question on use of briliantine was added, and
this question was answered by 51 % of the male and female patients and by 93 % of male and
80% of female controls. The crude OR for brillantine use, relative to those reporting no use,Table 8. Hair dye users: Results of cohort studies on cancers at selected sites
Reference Bladder cancer CommentsStudy population Sex Breast cancer
0ERR0ERR
Hennekens 120 557 female nurses, F270258.21.06 57.40.62et al. (1979) aged 30-55, 11 US states,
active in 1972, follow-up (1),
1972-76
Green et al.
(1987)1976-82 follow-up (M) of F
118 40 nurses enrolled in the
study above353 1.Lymphatic and haema-
topoietic neoplasms
Type 0 E RR
Lym 10 15.7 0.59 30% non-respondents; similar
results after adjustment for
smoking; excess of breast cancer
for hair dye use ~ 21 years
before cancer; excess for ail can-
cer sites (1.0*), cervIx (1.44 *)
and lower genital tract (2.58*)
No trend with duration of use
M, mortality; 1, cancer incidence; Lym, lymphomas
*,p -: 0.05~~v~trCICItr~CI
~
Stl~~tltr~y.
~
8
~-~
()ot"o
l
00..82 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
was (1.7) for men (51 exposed patients (95% CI, 1.1-2.6)) and (1.1) forwomen (two exposed
patients (95% CI, 0.2-6.6)). (The Working Group noted that the reported data do not allow
control for age or tobacco smoking and that the cases were survving patients.)
ln the study reported on p. 74, Dunham et al. (1968) compared 132 cases of bladder
cancer with 136 controls for history of 'use of tonics, lotions and other preparations for the
hair and scalp'. The percentage of cases who used such preparations (32%) was slightly lower
than that of controls (36%).
Jain et al. (1977) reported (in a letter) data on hair-dye use among 107 patients with
bladder cancer and an equal number of sex- and age-matched controls in Canada. AlI male
con trois had benign prostatic hypertrophy, and aIl female controls had stress incontinence.
The OR for bladder cancer in association with any exposure to hair dyes (based on 19 pairs
discordant for use ofhair dye) was 1.1 (95% CI, 0.41-3.03). (The Working Group noted that
the choice of controls was unusually limited.)
Neutel et al. (1978) reported (in a letter) data on hair-dye use in a subset of 50 case-
control pairs (matched by sex and 10-year age group) re-intervewed after a previous, larger
case-control study of bladder cancer in Canada. Use of hair dyes was reported by 18 cases
and 19 controls. Frequent use of hair dyes and hairdressing as an occupation, however, were
said to show protective effects (the former being significant, p ~ 0.01) against bladder
cancer, although the numbers on which these statements were based are not given in the
report.
ln the study described on p. 74, Howe et al. (1980) found that eight male cases (including
two of the barbers) and no male control had a history of personal use of hair dyes (p = 0.004,
one-tailed test); only one ofthem had used hair dyes for more than sixyears before diagnosis
of bladder cancer. There was no evidence in women of an increased risk for bladder cancer
associated with personal use ofhair dyes (OR, 0.7; 95% CI, 0.3-1.4 for everversus never use).
Hartge et al. (1982) examined hair dye use among participants in the US National
Bladder Cancer Study (see p. 75) in a case-control study of bladder cancer involving
2982 incident cases and 5782 controls, of which 615 cases and 1164 controls had ever dyed
their hair. The overall ORs for hair dye users were 1.1 (95% Ci 0.9-1.4) among men and
0.9 (0.8-1.1) among women. No trend with frequency or duration of use was seen in people of
either sex. Use of black hair dye was associated with elevated ORs in both men and women;
the OR was of borderline significance for the two sexes combined (1.4; 95% CI, 1.0-1.9;
68 exposed cases).
Ohno et al. (1985) conducted a case-control study of 65 female bladder cancer patients
in Nagoya, Japan, in the period 1976-78. Hair dye use was associated with anincreased RR
among those who smoked but not among non-smokers. There was a positive relationship
between smoking and hair dye use more than once a mon th; after adjustment for smoking, no
significant effect of hair dyes remained (RR, 1.7; 95% Ci, 0.82-3.52; 22 exposed cases).
A matched case-control study was carried out by Claude et al. (1986) of340 men and 91
women with bladder cancer in Lower Saxony, Germany, in the period 1977-82. It was stated
that no association with hair dye use was found, but details were not provided.
Nomura et al. (1989) carried out a case-control study among 137 Caucasian and 124
Japanese cases of cancer of the lower urinary.tract in Hawaii (USA) and two population-HARDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AND HAR COLOURAS83
based controls for each case, in the period 1977-86. A weak, nonsignificant association with
hair dye use was found for both men and women, but there was no positive trend with
increasing duration of use.
(h) Breast cancer
Shafer and Shafer (1976) reported that, of 100 consecutive breast cancer patients seen in
a clinical practice in New York, USA, 87% had been long-term users ofhair colouring agents,
compared with 26% of age-comparable controls, who were regular users of permanent hair
dyes over prolonged periods. (The Working Group noted the dissimilarity of the exposure
definitions for the two groups and that no information was provided on the number of
controls nor the manner of eliciting information on use of hair dyes.)
Kinlen et al. (1977) reported a study of 191 breast cancer patients intervewed in hospital
in 1975 and 1976 in Oxford, United Kingdom, and 561 controls without cancer, matched to
the patients byage (within three years), marital status and social class. Seventy-three cases
and 213 controls had used permanent or semi..:permanent hair dyes, giving an OR of LOI.
There was no evidence of an increasing risk for breast cancer with increasing duration of use
of hair dyes or with use beginning more th an four or more than ni ne years before diagnosis.
Stratification by age at first pregnancy showed a deficit of cases in which hair-dye use was
reported among women whose first pregnancy occurred at ages 15-19 (33.3% of cases used
haIr dyes, compared with 64.7% of controls) and an excess of cases with use of hair dyes
among women whose first pregnancy had occurred at 30 years of age or older (38.3 % of cases
and 25.5% of controls). There were two hairdressers among cases (1.0%) and 10 among
controls (1.8%).
Shore et al. (1979) compared the hair-dye use of 129 breast cancer patients and 193
control subjects aged 25 and over identified from the records of a multiphasic screening clinic
in New York City, USA Adjusted ORs for use ofpermanent hair dyes for 0,5, 10 and 15 years
were, respectively, 1.08, 1.31, 1.58 and 1.44 (none significantly different from 1.0). A
significant relationship (p = 0.01) was noted between a measure of cumulative hair-dye use
(number of years times frequency per year) and breast cancer. This relationship also held if
the analysis was limited to cases in which the patient herself had responded to the telephone
intervew. Among women who had used hair dyes 10 years before developing breast cancer,
the relationship held only for women at 'low risk' (as assessed from the distribution of a
multivariate confounder score) and for those 50-79 years old. (The Working Group noted
that use of a multivariate confounder score for the control of confounding may produce
misleading results.)
ln order to follow up these findings, Koenig et al. (1991) carried out a case-control study
of 398 women with breast cancer and 790 controls identified at the same screening centre.
For ever use, the adjusted OR was 0.8 (95% CI, 0.6-1.1), and there was no trend with
increased use.
Stavraky et aL. (1979) compared 50 breast cancer cases at a cancer treatment centre with
100 hospitalized controls in London, Ontario, and 35 breast cancer cases with
70 neighbourhood controls in Toronto, Ontario, with respect to hair-dye use. The ORs for
breast cancer from use of permanent hair dyes (at any time) were 1.3 (95% CI, 0.6-2.5) in
London and 1.1 (0.5-2.4) in Toronto. Further statistical analyses, allowing for smoking84 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
habits, family history of cancer and age at first birth, showed no significant relationship
between hair-dye use and breast cancer incidence.
Nasca et aL. (1980) reported a study of 118 patients with breast cancer and 233 controls
matched to the patients by age and county of residence (115 matched triplets and three
matched pairs) in Upper State New York, USA ln the study overall, there was no significant
association between breast cancer and use of permanent or semi-permanent dyes (OR, 1.11),
nor was an increase in risk seen with increasing numbers of times hair dyes were used or
increasing time since first use. The authors commented that women who dyed their hair to
change its colour, as distinct from those who dyed their hair to mask greyness, had a
significantly increased risk for breast cancer (OR, 3.13; 95% CI, 1.50-6.54). ln this group,
there was a significant trend towards increasing risk with increasing numbers of exposures to
hair dyes. Examination of risk for hair-dye use in subgroups of women defined by other risk
factors for breast cancer showed an OR of 4.5 (95% Ci, 1.20-16.78) for women with a past
history of benign breast disease, an OR of 1.75 (p = 0.03, one-tailed test) for 12 or more
years of schooling and an OR of 3.33 (95% CI, 1. 10-10.85) for women aged 40-49 years; the
OR was near unity for aIl other age groups. These effects appeared to be independent of one
another and were not explained by confounding by past pregnancy, age at first pregnancy,
history of artificial menopause or age at menarche. The authors stressed that the associations
observed in the subgroups should be considered newly generated hypotheses requiring
further testing. ln a larger, subsequent study (Nasca et al., 1990) (reported as an abstract) of
1617 cases ofbreast cancer in New York State and 1617 controls, theyfound no relationship
with hair-dye use (OR, 1.04; 95% Ci, 0.90-1.21), no significant difference in the ORs for
women with a history ofbenign breast disease (1.15; 95% Ci, 0.86-1.53) and those without
(0.98; 95% Ci, 0.83-1.16) and no association with duration of hair-dye use.
Wynder and Goodman (1983) carried out a hospital-based case-control study of 401
cases of breast cancer in N ew York City in 1979-81. No association was found with hair-dye
use (OR, 1.02; 95% Ci, 0.78-1.32) and there was no dose-response relationship.
(c) Lymphatic and haematopoietic cancers
ln a further report of the study of Stavraky et al. (1979) in Canada, p. 83, Stavrakyet al.
(1981) found no significant increase in risk for leukaemia or lymphoma (70 cases). (The
Working Group noted that it was not possible to distinguish different haematopoietic
malignancies.)
ln a hospital-based case-control study (101 matched pairs) of acute non-Iymphocyic
leukaemia in the Baltimore (USA) area, published only as an abstract, Markowitz et al.
(1985) found a significant positive association with hair-dye use (OR, 3.1). There was,
however, no difference between regular use (at least once a year) (OR, 2.7) and less frequent
use (OR, 2.2) (95% confidence intervals not presented).
Cantor et al. (1988) carried out a population-based case-control study of hair-dye use
among 578 men with leukaemia, 622 with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and 1245 population
controls in Iowa and Minnesota, USA, in 1980-83. Significantly raised ORs were found for
leukaemia (1.8; 95% Ci, 1.1-2.7) and for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (2.0; 1.3-3.0) in
association with personal use or other potential exposure to hair tints, any hair colouring
product or hair dyes. The authors stated that the ORs were not substantially changed afterHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AND HAIR COLOURAS85
exclusion of the 10 men with other potential exposure to hair colouring products (e.g.,
occupational exposure), but detailed results were not presented. (The Working Group noted
that, although the authors suggested an increased risk with increasing extent of hair dye use,
an examination of the paper could not verify this.)
A population-based case-control study carried out in eastern Nebraska, USA, during
1983-86 investigated use of hair colouring products among a total of 201 male and 184
female cases of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 35 male and 35 female cases of Hodgkin's
disease, 32 male and 40 female cases of multiple myeloma, 37 male and 19 female cases of
chronic lymphocyic leukaemia and 725 male and 707 female residential con trois who could
be intervewed (Zahm et al., 1992). Telephone intervews were conducted with cases, con troIsor their next of kin; response rates were 81-96% for cases and 84% for controls. Among
women, use of any hair colouring product was associated with an increased risk for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (OR, 1.5; 95% CI, 1.1-2.2), Hodgkin's disease (1.7; 0.7-4.0) and
multiple myeloma (1.8; 0.9-3.7), and women who used permanent hair dyes had high ORs for
aIl three neoplasms (non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 1.7, 1.1-2.8; Hodgkin's disease, 3.0, 1.1-7.9;
and multiple myeloma, 2.8, 1.1-7.1; aIl p .c 0.05). For non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and
multiple myeloma, the risks were highest among women who used dark permanent dyes.
Long duration and early age at first use tended to increase the risk, but the patterns were not
consistent. Among men, use of any hair colouring product was associated with
nonsignificantly increased ORs for Hodgkin's disease (1.7) and multiple myeloma (1.8), on
the basis of three and four exposed cases, respectively; no increase was found for
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (0.8). Use of any hair dye was not associated with chronic
lymphocyic leukaemia in either women or men (1.0).
A population-based case-control study of 173 white men with multiple myeloma and
650 con troIs was carried out in Iowa, USA The risk for multiple myeloma was significantly
elevated (OR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.0-3.6; 14 exposed cases) amongusers ofhairdyes. For men whohad used hair dyes for one year or more at a frequency or one or more times per month, the
OR was 4.3 (95% CI, 0.9-19.7; four exposed cases) (Brown et al., 1992).
(d) Cancers at other sites
Stavraky et al. (1981) (see p. 84) found no significant increase in crude or adjusted risks
for cancer of the cervx(38 cases), cancer of the ovary(58 cases), cancer of the lung (70 cases),cancers of the kidney and bladder (35 cases) or endometrial cancers (36 cases) among ever
users of hair colouring agents in either Toronto or London, Ontario.
Holman and Armstrong (1983) examined hair dye use in a population-based case-
control study of 51 1 patients with malignant melanoma and individually matched controls in
Western Australia in 1980-81. No relationship was found with ever use of permanent hair
dyes. The ORs obtained from a conditional logistic regression analysis with adjustment for
solar exposure, reaction to sunlight and hair col our (Armstrong & Holman, 1985), for 86cases of Hutchinson's melanotic freckle associated with use of semi-permanent and
temporary dyes were: never used, 1.00; used 1-9 times, 1.5 (95% CI, 0.3-6.8); used
:: 10 times, 3.3 (1.0-11.5;p for trend, 0.05). The OR for Hutchinson's melanotic freckle in
relation to use of permanent dyes was not elevated. (The Working Group noted that the
number of exposed subjects was not reported.)86 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
0sterlind et al. (1988a,b) found a negative association with use of permanent or
semi-permanent hair dyes among women with malignant melanoma In Denmark in 1982-85
(OR for hair dye use, 0.6; 95% CI, 0.5-0.9; 136 exposed cases). Cases of Hutchinson's
melanotic freckle were not included in this population-based study'
Ahlbom et al. (1986) carried out a case-control study in Stockholm and Uppsala,
Sweden, of 78 patients with astrocyoma diagnosed in 1980-81, 197 hospital controls (with
meningioma, pituitary adenoma or cerebral aneurysm) and 92 population controls. The ORs
for the 23 astrocyoma patients who had dyed their hair were 0.8 (95 % CI, 0.4-1.8) in relation
to 83 hospital controls and 1.5 (0.6-3.7) when compared with 46 population controls who had
dyed their hair.
Burch et aL. (1987) found that significantly more adults with brain cancer diagnosed in
Canada in 1977-81 than hospital controls reported having used hair dye or hair spray (OR,
1.96; p = 0.013; 43/22 discordant pairs).
Spitz et al. (1990) examined hair-dye use in a case-control study of 37 male and
27 female patients with salivary gland cancer In Texas, USA, in the period 1985-89. Controls
were patients with other malignancies. Among ever users of hair dyes, an increased OR was
found for women (OR, 4.1; 95% CI, 1.5-11.5; 14 cases). There was no difference between
female cases and controls with respect to frequency of use, except that the OR for use for
more than 15 years (OR, 3.5; 95% CI, 0.9-12.8) was higher than that for shorter duration of
use (2.3; 0.9-6.2).
(e) Childhood cancer
Kramer et al. (1987) reported a matched case-control study of maternai exposures
during pregnancy and neuroblastoma diagnosed during the period 1970-79 in the Greater
Delaware Valley, USA Of the 181 cases identified, 139 met the eligibility criteria, and
intervews were completed with 104 case families (75%). Control subjects were selected by
random-digit dialling and were matched with cases on age, race and the first five digits of
their telephone number at the time of diagnosis; the response rate among those eligible was
57% (101 of 177). ln addition, the authors compared 86 patients who had at least one sibling
with a randomly selected sibling. Mothers were asked about six main exposures, specified for
hypothesis testing, and about a variety of other exposures, including the use of hair colouring
products. The OR associated with maternai exposure to hair dye was 3.00 (90% CI,
1.64-5.48; one-sidedp value 0.002; 36 discordant pairs) in comparison with controls selected
by telephone and 2.20 (90% CI, 0.93-5.22; one-sided p value 0.07; 16 discordant pairs) in
comparison with siblings.
Bunin et al. (1987) did a case-control study of Wilms' tumour diagnosed in children
under 15 during the period 1970-83 in the Greater Philadelphia (USA) area in relation to use
of hair dyes by their mothers during pregnancy. Of 152 white cases, 28 were ineligible for a
variety of reasons. Intervews were completed with the parents of 88 (71 %) of the 124 eligible
cases and 88 of 159 (55%) controls, on average 10 years after the relevant pregnancy. For
Wilms' tumour overall, the OR associated with maternaI hair dye use was 3.6 (95% CI,
1.4-10.2, based on 32 discordant pairs). A total of 68 cases could be classified as 'genetic'
(26 caes) (if they were bilateral or had nephroblastomatosis) or 'nongenetic' (42 cases) (if
theywere unilateral without nephroblastomatosis or a Wilms' tumour-associated congenitalHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS87
anomaly). The OR associated with maternai use of hair colouring agents was 5.5 (95% CI,
1.0-71.9; on the basis of 13 discordant 
pairs out of42) for nongenetic cases and 3.3 (0.7-22.1;on the basis of 13 out of 26 discordant pairs) for genetic cases. The ORs associated with
exposure to hair dyes were similar for an interval of2- 10 years and an interval of 11-24 years
between pregnancy and intervew.
Kuijtenetal. (1990), in an earlier report of the studyofKuitjen et al. (1992) (p. 76), foundno association between astrocyoma and maternaI use of hair-colouring products during
pregnancy (OR, 0.9; 95% 0.4-1.8; 37 discordant pairs).
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Skin application
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Swiss Webster mice, six to eight weeks old, received
applications of one of three oxidation (permanent) hair dye formulations, PP-7588, PP-7586
or PP-7585 (all three formulations contained 2,5-toluenediamine sulfate, para-phenylene-
diamine and resorcinol; PP-7586 also contained 2,4-diaminoanisole sulfate, PP- 7585 con-
tained meta-phenylenediamine and PP-7588 contained 2,4-toluenediamine), mixed with an
equal volume of 6% hydrogen peroxide just prior to use; 0.05 ml of the mixture in acetone
was applied to the shaved skin of the mid-scapular region. Controls were given acetone or
were left untreated. For each formulation and for the vehicle control, one group was treated
once weekly and another group once every other week for 18 months. Survval at 18 months
varied from 58 to 80%. No sign of systemic toxicity was found in any of the dye-treated
groups. Average body weights were comparable in all groups throughout the study. The
incidence of lung tumours was not statistically different between treated and control groups.
No skin tumour was observed at the site of application (Burnett et al., 1975).
Groups of 26 male and 22 female DBAf and 26 male and 26 female strain A mice, six to
seven weeks old, received skin applications of 0.4 ml (reduced to 0.2 ml at 24 weeks for DBAf
mice) of a 10% solution of a commercially available semi-permanent hair dye ('GS'),
containing, among other constituents, 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (2-nitro-para-phenylene-
diamine) and 1,2-diamino-4-nitrobenzene (4-nitro-ortho-phenylenediamine), in 50%
aqueous acetone twce a week on the clipped dorsal skin. Groups of 16 male and 16 female
control mice of each strain received applications of acetone al one. When the experiment wasterminated at 80 weeks, four lymphomas and six tumours of the reproductive tract (four
ovarian cystadenomas and two uterine fibrosarcomas) had developed in the 22 treated
female DBAf mice within 37-80 weeks and one lymphoma at week 26 among the 26 treated
males. ln control DBAf mi ce, one lymphoma and one lung adenoma were found in females
and one hepatoma in males. No difference was observed in the incidence of lymphomas or
liver or lung tumours between treated and control strain A mice. No skin tumour at the site of
application was observed in either strain. Of the treated animaIs, 27 DBAf mIce and 32 strain
A mice survved 60-80 weeks without tumours (Searle & Jones, 1977). (The Working Group
noted the small number of animais used in the study.)0000
Table 9. Hair colourant users: results of case-control studies on cancers at selected sites
Reference Study population ContraIs (case: Expsure SexType ofExpsed OddsComments
contraI ratio) cancer cases ratio
Bladder cancer
Lockwoo (1961) 282 male and 87 female Population Use of briliantine M 51 (1.*)
cases, Copenhagen, contraIs (1:1) F 2(1.)
l)enmark, 1942-56
l)unham et al. 132 male cases, hospital in 136 hospital Use of tonies, lotions M 42 (0.9)
S; (1968) New Orleans, USA, contraIs and other preparations
1958-6 for hair and sclp~
Howe et al. (1980) 480 male, 152 female cases, N eighbourhoo Use of hair dye F NR 0.7~3 Canadian pravinces, contraIs (1:1) M 8*No expsed male contrai01974-76Z
Hartge et al. (1982) 2249 male and 733 female 4282 male and Use of hair dye M 1721.No trend with frequency or 0
cases, 10 US areas, 1977-78 150 female popu- F 443 0.9duration in either sex 0
lation contraIs
~ Ohno et al. (1985) 65 female cases, Nagoya, 143 population Use of hair dye F (42) (1.6)RRs higher among smokers
Japan, 1976-78 contraIs Crude ::
10.0* for -( l/month, cr
25.0* for ~ l/monthd Adjusted for smoking
1.3 for -( 1/monthE1. for ~ 1/month~
Claude et aL. (1986) 340 male cases, 91 female Hospital contraIs Use of hair dye Both No association tr
cases, northern Germany, (1: 1)VI
1977-82..
Nomura et al. (1989) 195 male, 66 female cases, Population U se of hair dye M 151.No trend with duration of
Hawaii, USA, 1977-86 contrais (2:1) F 41 1.5expsure for either sex
Breast cancer
Shafer & Shafer 100 cases, New York, USA No inormation Use of hair dye F 87 (19)Lirited reporting
(1976)
Kinlen et al. (1977) 191 cases, Oxord, UK, 561 hospital Use of permanent or F 73 1.01No trend with duration of
1975-76 contraIs semi-permanent hair use
dyeTable 9 (contd)
Reference Study population Controls (case: Expsure Sex Type of Exposed OddsCommentscontrol ratio)cancer cases ratio
Breast cancer (contd)
~Shore et al. (1979) 129 cases, New York, USA 193 clinic controls Use of permanent hair F(43) 1.08Higher RRs for use ~ 5~ screening centre, 196-76dyeyears (1.1), ~ 10 years U
(1.8) or ~ 15 years (1.44) ~
before diagnosis. Signifi- tTr.cant association with cumu- r.lative hair dye exposure tT~Stavraky et al. (1979) 50 cases, London, Canada,
Hospital con troIs Use of permanent hair F 281. r. 1976- -c 1979(2:1) dye
~35 cases, Toronto, Canada, N eighbourhoo Use of permanent hair F 161.1976- -c 1979contmls (2:1) dyeNasc et al. (1980)118 cases, 3 counties in233 random-digit Use of permanent or F NR 1.11No trend with frequency of tt~New York State, USAdialling con troIs semi-permanent hairuse or latency. Excess for~1975-76dyeuse of hair dye to change ttcolour (3.1.). tT~Wynder & 401 cases, New York, USA,625 cancer con troIs Use of hair dye F 267 1.02No dose-response relation-~r. Gooman (1983) 1979-81
ship
~Koenig et al. (1991) 398 cases, New York, USA,790 screening Use of hair dye F 294 0.8No trend with number or screening centre, 1977-81centre controlsuses
Lymphatic and haematopoietic neoplasms
~Stavraky et aL. (1981) 45 female cases, Toronto,N eighbourhood Use of permanent or FAil 0.7 1-~Canada, 1976- -c 1979 controls (2:1) semi-permanent dyen25 female cases, London,Hospital con trois Use of permanent or FAil 1.2 0Canada, 1976- -c 1979(2:1) semi-permanent dye~0Cantor et al. (1988) 578 male cases of leukemia1245 population Use of hair tints, MLeu 43 1.8.Cand 622 male NHL cases, controls colouring products or MNHL 53 2.0.
~Iowa and Minnesota, USA,dyes1980-83
Zahm et aL. (1992) 201 male and 184 female725 male and 707 Use of any hair dye FNHL 106 1.5.ORs higher among women NHL cases, Nebraska,female populationMNHL 11 0.8using permanent dark hair USA 1983-86con troIs Use of permanent hair FNHL 41 1.7.dye. No trend with dura-dyetion or frequency of use of
permanent hair dye
00~8
Table 9 (contd)
Reference Study population Controls (case: Exposure SexType of Exposed OddsComments
control ratio) cancer cases ratio
Lymphatic and haematopoietic neoplasms (contd)
~ Zahm et al. (1992) 35 male and 35 female HO 725 male and 707 Use of any hair dye FHO 16 1.7*Trend with duration and
(contd) cases, Nebraska, USA female population MHO 31.not with frequency of use~1983-86 con trois Use of permanent hair FHO 12 3.0'of permanent hair dye
dye 0Z
32 male and 40 female MM 725 male and 707 Use of any hair dye FMM 24 1.8ORs higher among women 0
cases, Nebraska, USA, female population MMM 4 1.8using permanent dark hair 0
1983-86 controls Use of permanent hair FMM 11 2.8'dye. Trend with duration
~dye and frequency of use of
permanent hair dye :i
37 male and 19 female 725 male and 707 Use of any hair dye FCLL 9 1.0VJ
CLL cases, Nebraska, female population MCLL 3 1.0 ~
USA 1983-86 controls Use of permanent hair FCLL 2 0.8 0
dye S
Brown et al. (1992) 173 white male MM cases, 650 population Use of hair dye MMM 14 1.9Higher OR for high fre- ~
Iowa, USA 1981-84 con trois quency t'
Vl..
NR, not reported; RR, relative risk; Leu, leukaemia; NHL, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma; OR, odds ratio; HO, Hodgkin's disease; MM, multiple myeloma; CLL, chronic
Iymphocic leukaemia. Numbers in square brackets, calculated by the Working Group
'p .: 0.05HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS91
ln the same study, groups of 17 male and 15 female DBAf and 16 male and 16 female
strain A mice, six to seven weeks old, received skin aplications of 0.4 ml (reduced to 0.2 ml at
24 weeks for DBAf mice) of a 10% solution of a commercially available semi-permanent hair
dye ('RB'), containing, among other constituents, 4-amino-2-nitrophenol and Ci Acid Black
107, in 50% aqueous acetone twce a week on the clipped dorsal skin. The experiment was
terminated at 80 weeks. No significant difference was observed in the incidence of tumours at
any site between treated and control animaIs of either strain, and no skin tumour at the site of
application was observed in either strain (Searle & Jones, 1977). (The Working Group noted
the small number of animais used in the study.)
Groups of 60 male and 60 female Swiss Webster mice, eight weeks of age, received
topical applications of a semi-permanent hair dye formulation (7611) containing 0.15%
2-amino-5-nitrophenol, 0.11% 4-amino-2-nitrophenol, 0.85% 2-nitro-para-phenylene-
diamine, 0.30% CI Solvent Blue 6, 0.95% CI Solvent Blue 7, 0.06% CI Solvent Blue 16,
0.45% CI Solvent Blue 18,0.35% CI Solvent Orange 9, 0.15% CI Solvent Red 26, 0.11 % CI
Solvent Green 3,0.76% Ci Basic Orange 1,0.50% CI Basic Blue 3, 0.15% Ci Basic Blue 47,
0.12% CI Basic Red 2, 0.10% CI Basic Violet 1,0.10% CI Basic Violet 2,0.10% Ci Basic
Violet 13,0.15% CI Basic Violet 14,2.76% hydroxyethyl cellulose, 7.78% phenoxyethanol,
5.00% ethoxydiglycol, 4.60% Amphoteric 1, 4.60% Polysorbate 20,4.12% propylene glycol,
2.70% methacrylamide, 0.42% Quarternium 4 and 0.41 % tetrasodium EDTA in water. The
formulation was applied at 0.05 ml/mouse three times a week for 20 months to a 1 -cm2 area
of clipped shaved skin. Control animaIs were shaved only and received no treatment. Body
weights of treated animais were depressed by no more th an 10% of those of controls; ail micesurvved until termination of the experiment. The incidences of liver haemangiomas, lung
adenomas and malignant lymphomas, which occur spontaneously in this strain of mice, were
no greater th an in controls. No skin tumour was observed at the site of application (Jacob
et aL., 1984).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Sprague- Dawley rats, about 14 weeks of age, received
topical applications of 0.5 ml of permanent hair dye mixtures containing either 4% para-
toluenediamine or 3% para-toluenediamine, 0.75% resorcinol and 0.75% meta-diamino-
anisole in vehicle solution (4% Tylose Hf 0.5% sodium sulfite, 8.5-13% ammonia (25%),
3.7% ammonium sulfate or as formed by neutralization and deionized water to 100.0%),
with 6% hydrogen peroxide added, immediately before use, on a 3-cm2 are a of shaved dorsalskin twce a week for two years. The animais were then observed for a further six months.
Control groups of 25 males and 25 females of the same strain and age received topical
applications of 0.5 ml vehicle alone, to which 6% hydrogen peroxide was added immediately
before use. Another group of 50 males and 50 females of the same strain served as untreated
controls. No difference in survval was observed between treated, vehicle and untreated
control groups. Skin at the application site, liver, kidney, lung and gross lesions were studied
histologically. No skin tumour was observed at the site of application, and there was no
significant difference in the incidence of tumours, including those of the skin, between
treated, vehicle control and untreated control groups (Kinkel & Holzmann, 1973). (The
Working Group noted the limited histopathology undertaken in the study.)92 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Groups of 10 male and 10 female Wistar rats, weighing 120-140 g, received topical
applications of 0.5 ml oxidized para-phenylenediamine (1:1 mixture of 5% para-phenylene-
diamine in 2% ammonium hydroxide) and 6% hydrogen peroxide on shaved dorsal skin once
a week for 18 months. Control rats were shaved and treated with the vehicle. Treated and
control groups did not differ significantly in body weight gain or survvaL. AIl survving rats
were kiled after 21 months. lteated rats had a significantly increased incidence of mammary
tumours (5/10;p .c 0.05 (incidental tumour test)) in comparison with female vehicle controls
(0/9). The first mammary tumour observed was a fibrosarcoma, which occurred at week 47;
the others were three adenomas and one fibroadenoma. No skin tumour was observed at the
site of application (Rojanapo et al., 1986). (The Working Group noted the small number of
animaIs used in this study and the fact that only selected organs were examined histo-
logically. )
Groupsof 60 male and 60 female Sprague-Dawley rats, six to eight weeks of age,
received topical applications of an oxidative hair dye formulation (7406) containing 0.5%
2-amino-5-nitrophenol, 4.0% para-phenylenediamine, 0.7% para-aminophenol, 2.0% 4-
chlororesorcinol, 5.0% oleic acid, 15.0% isopropanol, 0.2% sodium sulfite, 6.0% ammonia
and water to 100%. The formulation was diluted in an equal volume of 6% hydrogen
peroxide before application, and 0.5 ml were applied to a shaved area of the back
(approximately 2.5 cm in diameter) twce a week up to week 117. Three separate, similarly
treated, concurrent control groups of 60 rats received applications of vehicle alone. Mean
body weights and survval were similar in treated and control groups. No skin tumour was
observed. The incidence of pituitary adenomas was increased in females in comparison with
all three control groups (45/51 versus 34/50,36/51 and 35/50;p .c 0.05, X2 test) (Burnett &
Goldenthal, 1988).
ln the sa me study, groups of 60 male and female Sprague- Dawley rats, six to eight weeks
of age, received topical applications of an oxidative hair dye formulation (7405) containing
0.4% 2-amino-4-nitrophenol, 6.0% 2,5-diaminoanisole sulfate, 2.0% resorcinol, 0.3%
ortho-aminophenol, 5.0% oleic acid, 3.0% isopropanol, 0.2% sodium sulfite, 6.0% ammonia
(29%) and water to 100%. The formulation was diluted in an equal volume of 6% hydrogen
peroxide, and 0.5 ml were applied to a shaved area of the back (approximately 2.5 cm in
diameter) twce a week up to week 117. Mean body weights and survval were similar in
treated and control groups. No skin tumour was observed, and no increase in the incidence of
tumours at any site was observed in treated as compared with control animaIs (Burnett &
Goldenthal, 1988).
ln the same study, groups of 60 male and female Sprague- Dawley rats, six to eight weeks
of age, received topical applications of an oxidative hair dye formulation (7401) containing
1.1 % 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (2-nitro-para-phenylenediamine), 3.0% para-phenylene-
diamine, 2.0% 2,4-diaminoanisole sulfate, 1.7% resorcinol, 5.0% oleic acid, 3.0% iso-
propanol, 0.2% sodium sulfite, 6.0% ammonia (29%) and water to 100%. The formulation
was diluted in an equal volume of 6% hydrogen peroxide before application, and 0.5 ml were
applied to a shaved are a of the back (approximately 2.5 cm in diameter) twce a week up until
week 117. Mean body weights and survval were similar in treated and control groups. There
was no significant increase in the incidence of tumours at any site, and no skin tumour was
observed (Burnett & GoldenthaI, 1988).HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAIR COLOURANTS93
3.2 Subcutaneous injection
Rat
Groups of 10 male and 10 female rats, weighing 120-140 g, received subcutaneous
injections of 0.5 ml oxidized para-phenylenediamine (5% para-phenylenediamine in 2%
ammonium hydroxide and 1.8% sodium chloride) in an equal volume of 6% hydrogen
peroxide in the hip area every other week for 18 months. Controls were injected similarly
with vehicle only. There was no significant difference between treated and control groups in
body weight gain or survvaL. AIl survvors were kiled after 21 months. The incidence of
mammary lesions (duct ectasia or adenosis) was significantly increased (417; p -c 0.05
incidental tumour test) in females in comparison with vehicle controls (0110). Two uterine
tumours, an adenocarcinoma and an endometrial polyp, were observed in females; no such
tumour was observed in controls. Two sarcomas (not otherwse classified) at the injection site
and two lipomas were also observed in treated animais (Rojanapo et al., 1986). (The Working
Group noted the small number of animais used in this study and the fact that only selected
organs were examined histologically.)
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
Many factors influence skin absorption. The upper layer of the epidermis (stratum
corneum) is the primary barrier, but this protective layer can be affected by changes in
humidity, temperature and pH. Skin damage, irritation and inflammation can also influence
permeabilty. Many hair colouring formulations contain detergents and organic solvents,
which at low concentrations may damage the skin barrier and thus facilitate uptake by the
skin (Malkinson & Gehlmann, 1977). The absorption of different substances varies between
species; generally, the skin of humans is less permeable th an that of experimental animais
(Bartek et al., 1972), although the permeability of the skin of the back of rats is similar to that
of the human scalp (Ammenheuser & Warren, 1979). (The Working Group noted that very
little information was available on absorption by men and women following exposure to hair
dyes. )
4.1.1 Occupational exposure
2,4-Toluenediamine, one possible diamino constituent of permanent hair dyes, was
detected in five of 30 urine samples from professional hairdressers who had been exposed
professionally for four to five years and who reportedly did not usually wear gloves when
applying hair dyes. The range of detectable concentrations was 16-67 Jlg/l (Sardas et al.,
1986).
Differences in the mutagenicity of the urine of cosmetologists exposed to hair dyes and
of those without exposure (Babish et aL., 1991; see pp. 102-103) suggest that the exposed
cosmetologists absorbed hair-dye components systemically.
4.1.2 User exposure
Kiese and Rauscher (1968) studied the absorption of2,5-diaminotoluene (para-toluene-
diamine) through human scalp skin, applying a formulation containing the dye, resorcinol94 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
and hydrogen peroxide for 40 min and then washing. Urinary excretion was followed in
aliquots over the next 48 h. The highest rate of excretion occurred 5-8 h after dyeing, and
traces were found 36 h later. The average total amount of metabolite excreted after
application of 2.5 g of the sulfate was 3.7 mg N,N' -diacetyl-2,5-diaminotoluene (0.09%),
equivalent to 2.17 mg 2,5-diaminotoluene. Other metabolites were not identified.
Scalp penetration of four semi-permanent dyes (HC Blue No. 1, HC Blue No. 2 (see
monographs, pp. 129 and 143), 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (2-nitro-para-phenylenedi-
amine) and 4-amino-2-nitrophenol) and of three ingredients of oxidative dyes (l,4-di-
aminobenzene (pra-phenylenediamine), resorcinol and 4-amino-2-hydroxyoluene), under
conditions similar to those of use of oxidative hair dyes, was studied in hum ans and rhesus
monkeys. The absorption of (ring_14C)-labelled compounds (radiochemical purity not
specified) was quantified in urinary assays. The two species showed a similar pattern of dye
absorption. Slightly more of the semi-permanent dyes penetrated the scalp, but in neither
case did penetration exceed 1 % of the applied dose. Metabolites were not identified in the
urine (Maibach & Wolfram, 1981; Wolfram & Maibach, 1985).
Marzulli et al. (1981) investigated skin penetration of2,4-diaminoanisole in humans and
rhesus monkeys. (Ring-14C)-labelled 2,4-diaminoanisole (radiochemical purity not
specified) in acetone solution was applied to the abdomens of monkeys and to the ventral
forearms of male subjects. The remaining substance was removed after 24 h by washing with
soap and water. Urine was collected over a five-day period and analysed for radiolabeL. Men
absorbed 3.9% and monkeys 4.7% of the applied dose. Metabolites were not identified in the
urine.
Application of a commercial hair colouring formulation containing 2% lead acetate to
the hair of the head of nine men for 90 days led to increasing lead concentrations in axillary,
. pubic and capilary hair, indicating systemic uptake of lead (Marzulli et al., 1978). Two hair
dye formulations containing lead acetate were spiked with lead-203 acetate and applied to
the foreheads of eight men for 12 h. Absorption was estimated by measuring lead-203 activity
in blood, urine and the whole body. Absorption through the skin was low: 0-0.3 % of the dose
(Moore et al., 1980). (The Working Group noted that such small increments cannot be
measured by conventional methods such as those used in other studies.) ln a study of 53 adult
volunteers and 13 controls, the hair of the head was treated 63 times over a six-month period
with preparations containing 0.6 or 1.8% lead acetate. No difference in lead concentration in
whole blood or in urine was found between exposed and control volunteers, nor in a number
of other blood parameters (Ippen et al., 1981).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 General exposures of hairdressers
The principal occupational hazards for hairdressers are irritant and allergic contact
dermatitis. The irritants used include soap, detergents, shampoos, rinse solutions, bleaches
and water. Two predisposing risk factors for the development of irritant contact dermatitis in
hairdressers and beauticians are atopic status (defined as allergies, hay fever, asthma or
atopic eczema) and nickel allergy (Cronin & Kullavanijaya, 1979; Landthaler et aL., 1981;
Lindemayr, 1984; Holness & Nethercott, 1990). The various agents and their uses that induceHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AND HAIR COLOURANTS95
allergic contact dermatitis in hairdressers have been described (Marks, 1986), and a number
of reviews on the chemistry and toxicology of hair dyeing are available (Corbett, 1976; Iyer
et al., 1985; Corbett, 1988). The most important group of sensitizers are sythetic organic
dyes (Lynde & Mitchell, 1982; Stovall et al., 1983; Nethercott et al., 1986; Matsunaga et al.,
1988), which contain dyes, couplers and an oxidizing agent - usually a hydrogen peroxide
solution. Ammonium persulfate, which is used for bleaching, has been reported to cause
asthma (Pepys et al., 1976; Blainey et al., 1986; Schwaiblmair et al., 1990), contact dermatitis
and urticaria (Fisher & Dooms-Goossens, 1976; Kleinhans & Rannederg, 1988).
Application of henna has also been associated with the development of asthma in
hairdressers (Pepys et al., 1976; Starr et al., 1982).
4.2.2 Personal use of hair dyes
(The Working Group noted that very little information was available on toxic effects
associated with the use of hair dyes.)
Hair dyeing was the procedure associated with the highest risk of sensitization in a group
of patients with contact dermatitis who were hairdresser clients. para-Phenylenediamine
dihydrochloride was the most frequent sensitizer (Guerra et al., 1992).
Case reports linking the use of hair dyes with bone-marrow suppression and aplastic
anaemia (which occurs in about four people per million population) have appeared occa-
sionally in the medical literature (Hopkins & Manoharan, 1985). The postulated etiological
agent, a hair dye, contained 2,5-diaminotoluene, which is suspected of causing aplastic
anaemia (Cavignaux, 1962).
A case-control study (Freni-Titulaer et al., 1989) of 44 cases of connective tissue disease,
comprising 23 cases of systemic lupus eryhematosus, 10 of scleroderma, two of polymyositis
and nine cases of undifferentiated disease, and of 88 controls selected by random-digit
diallng, was carried out inGeorgia, USA. Significant associations were found between the
occurrence of connective tissue disease and use of hair dyes (crude OR, 6.5; 95% CI, 2.4-
17.4; 21 exposed cases).
A US study involved 218 cases of systemic lupus eryhematosus; 178 first- and
second-degree relatives and 186 friends were identified by the patients as being close to them
in age, race and sex and served as con troIs. No excess risk was found for hair dye use during
the five years prior to diagnosis (OR compared to friends, 0.92; 95% CI, 0.59-1.45; OR
compared to relatives, 1.33; 95% CI, 0.83-2.12) (Petri & AIlbritton, 1992). (The Working
Group noted that the choice of controls may have biased the frequency of hair dye use. i
4.2.3 Hair lacquers and pulmonary disease
Ameile et al. (1985) reviewed the evidence for possible associations between respiratoiy
lesions of various tyes and inhalation of hair lacquers. The link was first suggested by
Bergmann et aL. (1958), who considered that the pulmonary findings in two cases were
secondary to thesaurosis, which involves storage of nonbiodegradable macromolecules in
the reticuloendothelial system. A further 15 case reports on about 30 individuals showed
simIlar associations, with pulmonary radiological anomalies and associated symptoms
regressing six months on average after cessation of exposure. McLaughlin et al. (1963)% IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
observed that in a case of interstitial pulmonary disease in a hairdresser, clinical and
radiological signs resolved after cessation of exposure to shellac-based hair spray but
reappeared after recommencement of exposure. Valeyre et aL. (1983) reported a case of
diffse interstitial pulmonary disease in a woman aged 66, which regressed after cessation of
use of hair lacquer. The presence of the lacquer was demonstrated in a lung biopsy. No case
of thesaurosis, however, was diagnosed in more than 1500 hairdressers surveyed in a number
of countries (Ameile et al. (1985).
Palmer et al. (1979) compared the prevalence of respiratory disease in 213 licensed,
practising beauticians, 262 student cosmetologists and 569 women who were not exposed to
hair sprays as part of their occupation, in Utah, USA, using a respira tory symptom
questionnaire, chest x ray and forced expiratory spirogram. The prevalences of radiological
abnormality and/or reduced forced vital capacity, which were considered to be signs of
possible thesaurosis or sarcoidosis, were 6.1 % in practising beauticians, 1. 1 % in student
cosmetologists and 2.8% in controls. The prevalences of a third sign, reduced diffsing
capacity of the lung, which was assessed only in every tenth person, were 16.2, 10.5 and
II.4%, respectively. Some 12% of cosmetologists and 8% of controls reported 'abnormal'
respiratory symptoms, the percentages being adjusted for smoking habits and geographical
area. None of the differences was significant, but the authorsreported that the difference was
significant when the two categories of symptoms were combined. Among cosmetologists,
particulate concentrations (as determined by personal samplers) were 0.48 mg/m3 for those
considered to have 'abnormal' symptoms on the basis of a questionnaire and 0.51 mg/m3 for
those with 'borderline' symptoms; each of those levels is significantly higher than the
0.36 mg/m3 for cosmetologists who had 'normal' respiratory function. No difference in the
prevalence of abnormal chest x rays was found between cosmetologists and controls, and
there was no substantial difference between the groups in the frequency of restrictive or
large-airwayobstructive disease. Employees working in small salons, however, which the
investigators found had more limited ventilation than large salons, had significantly reduced
forced expira tory flow rates, suggesting some obstructive effect in the small airways. For aIl
cosmetologists, the forced expiratory flow rate decreased with increasing number of years
worked in cosmetology. ln the subsamples for which lung closing volume measurements
were obtained, a higher prevalence of abnormality was observed among beauticians, but
none of the differences was significant. ln the 40% of subjects from whom sputum samples
were obtained, 42% of the cosmetologists had atyia, which is significantly higher than the
22% in control subjects. The major contribution to the difference was employees working in
small salons. Particulate concentrations were similar in cosmetologists with normal and
ab normal sputum cyology.
The cosmetologists in the study of Palmer et aL. (1979) who were suspected to have
thesaurosis were re-examined two years later (Renzetti et aL., 1980). The radiological ano-
malies and anomalies of pulmonary function had regressed in the majority of subjects (5%
compared to 4 % in controls), aIl but one of whom had continued working as a cosmetologist.
4.2.4 Experimental data
Pulmonary granulomas were found in albino rats after prolonged inhalation of various
tyes of hair lacquers (Vivoli, 1966). Thesaurosis was not induced in rabbits (Draize et al.,HARDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AN HAIR COLOURAS97
1959), rats (Brunner et al., 1963; Lowsma et aL., 1966; Ameille et al., 1984), guinea-pigs
(Calendra & Kay, 1958; Brunner et al., 1963) or dogs (Giovacchini et al., 1965) after repeated
inhalation of hair sprays. Chronic exposure of mice, rats, rabbits and dogs to hair dye
formulations by various routes gave no indication of adverse effects on haematopoiesis or
other systemic effects (Kinkel & Holzmann, 1973; Burnett et al., 1975, 1977, 1980; Burnett &
Goldenthal, 1988).
ln a chronic feeding study, a composite test material containing 0.24% Acid Orange 3,
1.63% HC Blue No. 2, 0.64% Celliton Fast Navy Blue BRA (mixture of Disperse Yellow 1,
Disperse Blue 1, Disperse Violet 4, Disperse Red 17), 0.24% 2-nitro-para-phenylene-
diamine, 0.16% 4-nitro-ortho-phenylenediamine, 0.05% 2-amino-4-nitrophenol, 0.31 % HC
Yellow No. 4,0.4% Disperse Violet 11, 0.61 % Disperse Blue 1,0.13% Disperse Black 9,
1.54% HC Blue No. 1,0.02% HC Red No. 3, 0.65% HC Yellow No. 3, 0.28% HC Yellow No.
2 plus base, representative of commercial semi-permanent hair dyes, was incorporated into
the diets of male and female beagle dogs (Wernick et al., 1975). Groups of six dogs of each sex
were fed the composite at doses of 0, 19.5 or 97.5 mg/kg bw per day for two years. Physical
examinations and clinIcal analyses of blood and urine were performed after 3, 6, 12, 18 and
24 months of the study. One dog of each sex was necropsied at 6, 12 and 18 months, and all
survvors were necropsied at 24 months. AIl dogs fed the composite mate rial excretedblue-brown urine, indicating systemic absorption of the dyes. The weight gain and physical,
clinical and histological indices were normaL.
ln 13-week dermal toxicity studies, ni ne oxidative and three semi-permanent compositetest materials, representative of commercial hair dye formulations, were applied twce
weekly to the shaved dorsolateral skin of six male and six female New Zealand rab bits(Burnett et al., 1976). The semi-permanent formulations were applied without dilution, while
the oxidative formulations were mixed 1:1 with 6% hydrogen peroxide immediately prior to
application. The applied dose in each case was 1 ml/kg bw. Application sites were abraded on
three rabbits of each sex; aIl rab bits were restrained for 1 h after treatment, then were
shampooed, rinsed and dried. Haematological and clinical chemical tests were performed at
weeks 0, 3, 7 and 13: no toxic sign was noted, and there was no meaningful change in
haematological or c1inical parameters. Slight epidermal hyperplasia associated with some of
the oxidative formulations was seen in 25 tissues collected at necroscopy for microscopic
examination.
One commercial non-oxidative colouring formulation, containing 0.3% HC Blue No. 1,
several other colouring agents and 23% of 40% active sodium lauryl sulfate, was applied at
50 i.i to the skin of random-bred Swiss Webster mice of each sex three times a week for
20 months. Survval and me an body weights were similar in dosed and control animais.
Haematological analyses (haemoglobin, haematocrit, red blood ceIls, total or differential
white blood cells) and urinary tests indIcated no toxic effect, but significant increases in the
degree of chronic inflammation of the skin were observed in all treated animais in
comparison with controls (Jacobs et aL., 1984).98 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.3 Reproductive toxicity and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
Vaughan et aL. (1984) noted a small excess of spontaneous abortions among hairdressers
from the 1980-81 birth records of Washington State, USA (RR, 1.4; 95% CI, 1.2-1.7).
ln the 1980 US National Natality and National Fetal Mortality Survey, no difference in
the prevalence of malformations (1. 9%) or of fetal deaths (1.6%) was found among offspring
of women employed in beauty and barber shops from that in the whole sample. A
nonsignificant difference was noted in the prevalence of low-birth-weight infants (2.5%)
(Shiling & Lalich, 1984).
A total of 40 346 congenital malformations routinely notified during 1980-82 in
England and Wales were analysed with regard to parental occupation (McDowall, 1985).
Paternal occupation was reported for 62% and maternaI occupation for 28%: 298 mothers
and 49 fathers were categorized as hairdressers, barbers and hairdressing supervsors,
managers and proprietors. The rates of aIl malformations and of specific malformations were
not significantly different from those in the overall group.
A survey was carried out of spontaneous abortion and maternaI occupation during
pregnancy in Montréal, Canada (McDonald et aL., 1986), in maternity units in which 90% of
births in the city are estimated to occur. Intervews were done with 51 885 hospitalized
women who delivered at term (participation rate, 90%) and 4127 hospitalized women who
were undergoing a spontaneous abortion (participation rate, -: 75%). The intervews
identified 48 608 previous pregnancies, 10 910 of which had terminated spontaneously in
abortion whether in hospital or elsewhere. The expected numbers of abortions were adjusted
for maternaI age, parity, history of previous abortion, smoking habits and educational level
reached. Hairdressers were represented by 458 current pregnancies, of which 34 ended in
spontaneous abortion, and 417 previous pregnancies, of which 102 ended in spontaneous
abortion; the observed:expected ratios were 1.05 and 1.08 (p ? 0.1), respectively. A
subsequent analysis for spontaneous abortion, low birth weight and congenital defects
among women who had worked at least 30 h per week at the beginning of their pregnancies
showed no excess risk among 688 hairdressers (McDonald et al., 1987).
ln another analysis (McDonald et al., 1988a), the 22 613 previous pregnancies in which
the woman had been employed for at least 30 h a week at the time of conception were
evaluated with regard to the period of pregnancy at which fetal death occurred. Of
354 pregnancies among hairdressers, 83 had terminated in fetal death, 76 before the 16th
week, six between the 16th and the 27th week and one after the 27th week; the corresponding
observed: expected ratios were 1.1, 0.6 and 0.3 (none was significant). Similar ORs were
estimated in a separate case..control analysis of the same study (Goulet & Thériault, 1991),
which included 227 fetal deaths of20 weeks' gestation or more without major malformations
and a similar number of live-born controls matched on maternai age and gravidity. The OR
associated with maternai employinent in hairdressing was 0.3 (95% CI, 0.1-1.7;
2/6 discordant pairs) for fetal deaths at 20-27 weeks' gestation and 0.1 (95% CI, 0.0-1.4;
1/6 discordant pairs) for fetal deaths at:; 28 weeks' gestation. The combined OR was 0.1
(95% Ci, 0.0-0.3).HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURANTS99
ln the sa me data base, the association between congenital defects in index and previous
births and maternai occupation for at least 15 h per week at the time of conception was
investigated. Of714 pregnancies among hairdressers, 17 resulted in offspring with congenital
malformations, comprising three chromosomal errors, seven 'developmental defects
probably arising in the first few weeks of gestation' and seven 'musculoskeletal defects and
hernias perhaps related to influences after the first trimester'. The corresponding
observed:expected ratios were, respectively, 2.3, 0.9 and 0.8; none was statistically significant
(McDonald et al., 1988b).
Tikkanen et al. (1988) analysed data on cardiovascular anomalies for the period 1980-81
from the Finnish Register of Congenital Malformations; 160 infants with specific anomalies
confirmed by a paediatric cardiologist were compared with 160 controls. 'Substantial'
exposure to 'hairdresser's chemicals' was reported for no case and six controls. A previous
analysis of the same data base identified 34 children with hypoplastic left ventricle; regular
maternaI use of aerosols (deodorant or hair sprays) was reported for 44.1 % of case mothers
and 23.9% of 752 control mothers (Tikkanen, 1986).
A report on ail 6166 naturally terminated pregnancies in the district of Gottwaldov in
Czechoslovakia in 1981-83 described an increased proportion of reproductive losses, but
not premature births, in an unspecified number of hairdressers (Mareš & Baran, 1989).
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No evidence of teratogenicity was seen when hair dye formulations were applied to the
skin of pregnant rats and rabbits (Wernicketal., 1975; Burnettetal., 1976) orwhen individual
hair dye components were administered by gavage or subcutaneous injection to pregnant
rats and mice (Marks et al., 1981; DiNardo et aL., 1985). Similarly, topical application ofhair
dye formulations produced no adverse reproductive effect in rats in a multigeneration study
(Burnett & Goldenthal, 1988) or in a test for heritable translocation (Burnett et al., 1981; see
p. 104 for a detailed description).
(a) Reproduction
ln a study of fertility and reproductive performance, a composite test material,
representative of commercial semi-permanent hair dye formulations (see p. 97), was
incorporated Into the diets of Sprague-Dawley rats at 0, 1950 or 7800 ppm (Wernick et al.,
1975). Groups of 10 male rats fed the test diet for eight weeks prior to and throughout the
mating period were mated with groups of 20 females fed the basal diet. Groups of 10 male
rats fed the basal diet were mated with groups of 20 females fed the test diet for eight weeks
prior to mating and throughout mating, gestation and lactation. One female made pregnant
by each male was kiled in mid-pregnancy in order to evaluate the status of the uterine
contents. The remaining dams were allowed to deliver litters normally and to maintain pups
until 21 days of age. Systemic absorption of dyes was indicated by the production of
blue-brown urine by all animais receiving the treated diet, but no reduction in food
consumption or body weight gain was associated with exposure. Similarly, there was no
evidence of an adverse effect on fertilty or other reproductive parameters in exposed male or
female rats.100 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Six composite test mate rials, representative of commercial oxidative hair dye formu-
lations, were evaluated in rats in a two-generation study of reproduction (Burnett &
Goldenthal, 1988). Test materials were mixed 1:1 with 6% hydrogen peroxide and then
applied at 0.5 ml twce weekly to the clipped backs of 20 male and 20 female Sprague- Dawley
rats. The Fo rats began treatment at six to eight weeks of age, and rats of the second litter (F1b)
began treatment at weaning. Breeding for both generations began at 100 days of age, and
skin applications continued throughout mating, gestation and lactation periods. Occasional
mild dermatitis was the only adverse effect noted. Body weight gain, food consumption,
survval and reproductive indices (fertility, gestation, live birth and survval, weaningweight)
in FIa, FIb, F2a and F2b litters were unaffected by the treatments.
(b) Teratogenesis
A composite test material, representative of commercial semi-permanent hair dye
formulations (see p. 97), was evaluated for teratogenic potential in rats and rabbits (Wernick
et al., 1975). Groups of20 pregnant CFE-S rats were fed diets containing 0,1950 or 7800 ppm
of the material on gestation days 6-15, and groups of 12 pregnant New Zealand rabbits were
dosed by gavage on gestation days 6-18 with 0,19.5 or 97.5 mg/kg bw. AlI animalsreceiving
the composite produced blue-brown urine, indicating systemic absorption of dyes, but food
consumption and body weight gain were unaffected in both species. Similarly, there was no
evidence in rats or rab bits of an adverse effect on intrauterine growth or development or of
treatment-related gross, visceral or skeletal malformation.
The teratogenicity of nine oxidative and three se mi-permanent composite test materials,
representative of commercial hair dye formulations, was tested by Burnett et al. (1976). The
materials were applied to the shaved dorsoscapular area of pregnant Charles River CD rats
in groups of 20 on every third day of gestation (days 1, 4, 7, 10, 13, 16 and 19). The se mi-
permanent formulations were applied without dilution, while the oxidative formulations
were mixed 1:1 with 6% hydrogen peroxide immediately prior to application. The applied
dose in each case was 2 ml/kg bw per day. No maternaI toxicity was observed, there was no
effect of treatment on implantation or untrauterine growth or survval, and there was no
evidence of external, visceral or skeletal malformation.
Five oxidative dyes (12.5, 25 or 50 mg/kg bw 4,4' -diaminodiphenylene sulfate, 50, 100 or
200 mg/kg bw N' -(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-nitro-ortho-phenylenediamine, 110, 220 or 450 mg/kg
bw 2,3-dihydroxyaphthalene, 50, 100 or 150 mg/kg bw N,N-dimethyl-para-phenylene-
diamine and 125,250 or 500 mg/kg bw resorcinol) used in hair colouring formulations were
evaluated for teratogenicity in Sprague-Dawley rats (DiNardo et al., 1985). Groups of
10-13 pregnant rats were administered the low, intermediate or high doses by gavage on
days 6-15 of gestation. Significant reductions in maternai body weight gain during days 6-16
of gestation were seen in rats treated with the high doses of 4,4' -diaminodiphenylene sulfate,
N' -(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-nitro-ortho-phenylenediamine and 2,3-dihydroxyaphthalene; the
high doses of N ,N-dimethyl-para-phenylenediamine and resorcinol reduced maternai body
weight gain during treatment, but not significantly. There was a significant compensatory
increase in maternaI body weight gain after treatment (on days 16-20) with the high doses of
4,4' -diaminodiphenylene sulfate and N' -(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-nitro-ortho-phenylenediamine.
None of the dyes impaired implantation, intrauterine growth or survval or external, visceralHARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS101
or skeletal malformation. (The Working Group noted the small number of animaIs used in
the study.)
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
Chromosomal aberrations in peripheral lymphocyes were examined in a study of
60 professional hair colourists (28 men, 28.4:: 9.4 years old; 32 women, 23.3 :: 5.1 years old)
and 36 control subjects matched for age and sex (17 men, 28.1 :f 7.3 years old; 19 women,
25.3 :f 6.5 years old) (Kirkland et al., 1978a,b) in the United Kingdom. Information was
recorded on smoking habits, alcohol consumption, use of medicinal drugs and drugs of
abuse, infections, vaccinations and exposure to x rays; details of occupational exposure to
hair dyes were collected: women had done an average of II 000 permanent and 5000 semi-
permanent tinting operations and men, 15 000 permanent and 6000 semi-permanent
operations, over periods ranging from 1 to 15 years. Blood samples were taken at the time of
intervew, but the time since last hair tint application (to themselves or clients) was not
recorded. More gaps were found per cell among female tinters than controls (0.065 versus
0.048;p ~ 0.02) but not among male tinters (0.064 versus 0.063). The number of breaks per
cell (assumed from the observed aberrations) was not altered among women (0.028 versus
0.031) but was lower among men (0.034 versus 0.047; p ~ 0.05). Exclusion of subjects
exposed to high doses of diagnostic x rays or who had recently had viral infections removed
these differences (breaks in tinters versus controls: women, 0.023 versus 0.027; men, 0.036
versus 0.038). Reallocation of this smaller set of subjects according to whether or not their
own hair was dyed revealed that the number of breaks per cell was higher among women who
dyed their hair (dyed versus not dyed, 0.031 versus 0.018;p ~ 0.02) and lower among men
who dyed their hair (0.023 versus 0.044; p ~ 0.01). The women had given themselves an
average of 90 permanent and 10 semi-permanent tints and the men an average of
30 permanent tints (semi-permanent tints not stated) over a period similar to their
occupational exposure. The authors stated that there was no association between
chromosomal damage and the duration and/or frequency of hair dyeing in the women. (The
Working Group noted the absence of data to substantiate this statement.l They record that
20/23 female and 11/18 male tinters wore protective gloves for all applications of permanent
and semi-permanent tints and deduced that most of the subjects would receive greater
exposure to hair-dye components when their own hair was treated. (The Working Group
noted that most aberrations were of the chromatid tye and were, therefore, likely to have
occurred recently; the absence of information on the actual dyes used recently by the subjects
is regrettable, since some components are relatively pote nt clastogens while others are not.)The finding that the number of breaks per cell was lower among men who dyed their hair was
explained by the age difference between the group with tinted hair (22.7 :l 5.1 years, n = 10)
and the group with non-tinted hair (31.8 :: 10.1, n = 17). Kirkland et al. (1978a) based their
argument on the observation of Court Brown et al. (1966) that there was much less
chromosomal damage of all tyes in 48-h blood cultures from men aged 15-24 than from
men aged 25-34, whereas there was no difference among women in these age ranges. (The102 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Working Group noted that the results of subsequent studies, by Hedner et aL. (1982) and
Ivanov et al. (1978), do not confirm the latter observations.)
Hofer et al. (1983) studied chromosomal aberrations in lymphocyes from six women
and four men who volunteered to have their hair dyed and a similar group of 10 controls
matched for age (men: hair-dyed, 35.7 :f 67; controls, 30.8 :f 6.4; women: hair-dyed, 30.3
:f 5.7; controls, 35.0:f 5.8). Records were taken of smoking habits, alcohol consumption and
medical drug use and, during the experiment, exposure to x rays, ilness and vaccinations.
There were more smokers in the test group. None of the volunteers had used hair dyes or
shades for at least one year before entering the study, and the control group did not use hair
colourants during the study. The treated group had their hair dyed 13 times at intervals of
three to six weeks with commercial preparations containing mixtures of aminotoluenes,
aminophenols and hydroxybenzenes and, in some cases, naphthol, as active ingredients; the
colouring product used was chosen according to each subjects hair colour, and the same
material was used throughout the study. The colouring preparations were mixed (1:1) with
3-6% hydrogen peroxide. Nine blood samples were taken: three weeks before the first
treatment, 24 h after a sham dyeing (no dye or hydrogen peroxide) and 24 h after each of the
first three and last four dyeing procedures. No difference was observed between the control
and treated groups in the percentage of cells with one or more structural aberration
(excluding gaps) before treatment, after sham dyeing or after treatment. Subdivision of the
groups according to sex revealed no difference. A significant increase in aberration rate with
age was observed among the male but not the female subjects. Neither smoking nor x-ray
exposure had an effect.
ln conjunction with this study, sister chromatid exchange was examined in peripheral
lymphocyes; no evidence was found of an effect on the frequency (Turanitz et al., 1983).
Sister chromatid exchange was studied inthe peripheral lymphocyes of a small group of
volunteers comprising 13 women and one man immediately before and 6 h and seven days
after one normal application of a four se mi-permanent and 10 permanent hair dyes, all of
which were mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium TA1538 and TA98. There was no
consistent increase in the number of sis ter chromatid exchanges per cell (Kirkland et al.,
1981).
ln a study in the USA involving 30 women aged 45-60 years, mutagenicity was
determined in urine specimens collected prior to and during a 24-h period immediately after
application of dark shades of several hair coloUfing products containing high levels of dyes
and dye intermediates (Burnett et aL., 1979). Many of the women had used hair dyes regularly
for over 20 years. Concentrated (XA-2 resin) urine samples did not increase the number of
reverse mutations in S. typhimurium TA1538 in the presence of an exogenous metabolic
system from rat liver (S9). (The Working Group noted the inadequate reporting of the
results. )
A study was conducted in New York State, USA, on cosmetologists (91 women,7 men)
who were occupationally exposed to a wide range of chemicals, including hair dyes, and who
had reported a prevalence of skin rashes twce that of a control group of 87 female dental
personnel (29% versus 15%) (Babish et al., 1991). The two groups were matched for median
age, smoking status and proportion of subjects (13-16%) who had had their hair
permanent-waved or dyed within seven days of the study. At the end of a normal working day,HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAIR COLOURAS103
subjects from each group provided a urine sample, which was later concentrated and tested
for mutagenicity in S. typhimurium TAI00 in the presence and absence of S9. ln the presence
of S9, there was no difference between the groups, but in tests conducted without S9 the
frequency of mutagenic urine samples was 15% higher among cosmetologists (39%) th andental personnel (24%). Multivariate analysis, with adjustment for age and smoking habits,
revealed an OR of 2.0 (95% Ci, 1.1-3.8) for the presence of urinary mutagens in
cosmetologists compared to dental personneL. (The Working Group noted the inadequate
reporting of the results.)
4.4.2 Experimental systems
Of25 commercial permanent hair dye formulations containingpara-phenylenediamine,
resorcinol and aminophenols incubated with hydrogen peroxide, 12 were mutagenic to
S. typhimurium TA98 only in the presence ofS9. Without the addition ofhydrogen peroxide,
mutagenicity was reduced for three dyes and eliminated for three others. Four of six
formulations, with degrees of mutagenicity varyng from zero to high, administered topically
with 3% hydrogen peroxide to male rats induced urine that was mutagenic to S. typhimurium
TA98 in the presence of S9 (AIbano et al., 1982).
Fort products chosen from among 12 brands of commercially available hair colourants
used in New Zealand were tested for mutagenicity in S. typhimurium TA98 and TAIOO
without S9; activators were added when recommended (Ferguson et al., 1990). 1\enty-three
were mutagenic in one or both strains. When 10 mutagenic hair dye preparations were tested
in the presence of the drug verapamil, used for treating cardiac conditions (Ferguson &
Baguley, 1988), the mutagenic activIty of four was decreased and that of two was increased
(Ferguson et al., 1990).
Two of four commercial hair dye formulations containing phenylenediamines and
aminophenols (two of which also contained 2,5-diaminophenol) and oxidized with 6%
hydrogen peroxide were mutagenic to S. typhimurium TA98 in the presence of Kanechlor
500-induced S9. When toxicity was reduced by adsorbing bactericidal products on blue
rayon, peroxide treatment increased the mutagenicity of aIl preparations to different extents;
in the two preparations with markedly increased mutagenicity, activity was attributed to the
oxidation of meta-phenylenediamine to 2,7-diaminophenazine, itself a potent mutagen
(Watanabe et al., 1990).
Two commercial oxidative hair colouring products were applied at 10-30 ml, both with
(10-30 ml) and without hydrogen peroxide, to the backs of male Sprague-Dawley rats
(number unspecified). Both colourants contained 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (see mono-
graph, p. 185) and 1,2-diamino-4-nitrobenzene (4-nitro-ortho-phenylenediamine). The solu-
tions were left on the hair for 20 min and then removed by shampooing and rinsing. Urine
was collected before and every 24 h after product application for four days and tested in S.
typhimurium TA1538, the volumes of urine applied to each plate varyng from 3.4 to 11.5 % of
the total volume. Urine samples collected during the first 24 h from rats treated with either of
the preparations were mutagenic (two to three times background); no significant muta-
genicity was observed in urine samples collected two to four days after application. Prior
reaction with hydrogen peroxide had little or no effect on the mutagenicity of the urine
(Ammenheuser & Warren, 1979).104 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Henna and its active colouring ingredient, 2-hydroxy- 1,4-naphthoquinone, were tested
for mutagenicity in S. typhimurium TA98, TAI00, TA1535, TA1537 and TA1538. Henna was
not mutagenic to any strain, but 2-hydroxy- 1,4-naphthoquinone was mutagenic to TA98, only
in the absence of S9 (Stamberg et al., 1979).
2-Amino-5-methoxy-2'(or 3')-methylindamine and 2-amino-5-methoxy-2'(or 3')-me-
thylindoaniline were isolated from an oxidative reaction mixture of 2,5-diaminotoluene and
2,4-diarninotoluene. They were highly rnutagenIc to S. typhimurium TA98 in the presence of
an exogenous metabolic system (Matsuki et al., 1981).
ln a study of heritable translocation, groups of 25 male Sprague-Dawley CD rats were
painted twce weekly for 10 weeks on the shaved dorsal skin with 0.5 ml of a semi-perm~nent
dye formulation (comprising base ingredients plus 0.12% CI Disperse Blue 1, 0~04% Ci
Disperse Black 9, 0.01 % HC Red No. 3, 0.21 % HC Yellow No. 3, 0.50% He Blue No. 1,
0.06% Acid Orange No. 3, 0.07% CI Disperse Violet No. II and 0.01 % HC Yellow No. 2) or
to 0.5 ml of an oxidative dye formulation (comprising base ingredients plus 2.2% para-
phenylenediamine, 3.1% N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-para-phenylenediamine sulfate, 1.0%
resorcinol and meta-aminophenol, mixed 1:1 with 6% hydrogen peroxide just prior to use).
AnimaIs were then mated with untreated female rats. Male Fi progeny were subsequently
mated with other untreated females, and the resulting pregnancies were arrested at day 16 of
gestation. No difference in average litter size or frequency of successful matings at the Fi
mating was observed between controls and the two exposed groups. Furthermore, there was
no effect on the number of live fetuses, implantations or resorptions at the F2 mating (total
litters analysed: 275 control s, 261 oxidation dye group and 271 se mi-permanent dye group)
(Burnett et al., 1981).
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
Since the early twentieth century, hairdressers have made use of a wide range of
products, including hair colourants and bleaches, shampoos and conditioners, hair styling
preparations and nail and skin care products. Several thousand chemicals are found in
formulations of these products. Barbers generally cut only men's hair and make limited use
of sorne of the above products, such as hair dyes, in their work.
Hair colourants are c1assified as permanent (primarily aromatic amines and amino-
phenols with hydrogen peroxide), semi-permanent (nitro-substituted aromatic amines,
aminophenols, aminoanthraquinones and azo dyes) and temporary (high-rnolecular-weight
or insoluble complexes and metal salts, such as lead acetate). The numerous individual
chemicals used in hair colourants have varied over time. Only permanent and se mi-
permanent hair colourants are used to a significant extent by hairdressers, white consumers
at home use any of the three tyes.
Hairdressers may also be exposed to volatile solvents, propellants and aerosols (from
hair sprays), formaldehyde (an antibacterial agent), methacrylates (in nail care products) and
trace quantities of nitrosamines, which have been reported in many hair care products.HAIRDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS 105
It is estimated that there are several million hairdressers and barbers worldwide. Few
exposure measurements are available. Approximately 35% of women and 10% of men in
Europe, Japan and the USA use hair colourants.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
There is consistent evidence from five (ail from Europe) of the six large cohort studies of
an excess risk for cancer of the urinary bladder in male hairdressers and barbers. The
increase was significant in three studies, and the overall risk relative to that in the general
population amounted to about 1.6. ln 12 case-control studies, male hairdressers and barbers
had an overall relative risk of about 1.2; smoking was adjusted for in three of these
case-control studies, conducted in North America, and these did not show an overall excess
risk. The risk for cancer of the urinary bladder was less consistently increased in
corresponding studies in women: positive results were obtained in five cohort studies and
negative results in three; none was significant. An overall relative risk for lung cancer of
about 1.3 was seen among male and female hairdressers in cohort studies. One case-control
study from Australia found a significant excess risk for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among
female hairdressers; a nonsignificant excess of this malignancy was noted in one cohort study
from Denmark in men and women and in one case-control study from the USA in men.
One cohort study, from Finland, found a significant excess risk for ovarian cancer; two
other studies, in the USA and Japan, found nonsignificant risks, and a fourth, in Switzerland,
showed no effect. Excess risks were seen among male hairdressers for cancers of the buccal
cavity and phary and prostate in one study from Switzerland; increased risks for cancers at
these sites were not reported in another cohort study, from the United Kingdom.
Personal use of hair colourants has been studied in seven case-control studies of cancer
of the urinary bladder. Overall, these do not indicate an excess risk; however, one study from
Denmark found an association with personal use of briliantine, although it had
methodological limitations. Following a report in 1976 of an excess of breast cancers among
hair dye users in New York, USA, six case-control studies and one cohort study examined this
subject. None found evidence of a significant excess among hair dye users overall. One
case-control study of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma from Iowa and Minnesota showed a signi-
ficantly increased risk among male users of hair colouring products. A second case-control
study, from Nebraska, showed an excess risk for this malignancy among female users of hair
colourants but showed no excess among a smaller number of male users. The case-control
studyfromNebraska also found a significant excess of multiple myeloma among female users
of permanent hair dyes, and another study from Iowa reported a nonsignificant excess of this
malignancy in male users of hair colourants. One cohort study in the USA showed no excess
risk among hair dye users for aIl lymphomas combined. One case-control study of
neuroblastoma and one of Wilms' tumour showed significantly increased risks for the
offspring of mothers who had used hair dyes during pregnancy. Single studies have reported
significant excess risks for Hutchinson's melanotic freckle, Hodgkin's disease, leukaemia,
malignant tumours of the brain and cancers of the sali vary gland, cervx and lower female
genital tract. Other studies showed no such excesses.
The higher prevalence of smokers reported among male hairdressers and barbers in
some studies is consistent with the overall excess oflung cancer but cannot readily explain the106 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
magnitude of the increase in risk for cancer of the urinary bladder in the European cohort
studies. ln particular, studies in Switzerland and Denmark have shown significant excesses of
cancer of the urinary bladder unaccompanied by appreciable excesses of lung cancer, which
further weigh against smoking as the sole explanation for the overall excess. Specific
exposures of hairdressers and barbers have not been evaluated in epidemiological studies.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
Various commercially available hair dye formulations and various laboratory prepa-
rations of hair dyes were tested for carcinogenicity in mice or rats by skin application in many
studies and by subcutaneous injection in a single study in rats. ln one study by skin application
in rats, a particular formulation was associated with an increased incidence of pituitary
adenomas in females. The other studies either showed no increased incidence of tumours at
any site or were inadequate for evaluation.
5.4 Other relevant data
Contact dermatitis is a common clinical dermatological problem in hairdressers.
Because hairdressers use a wide variety of multicomponent chemical products, it is diffcult
to determine the specific etiology of their dermatitis, although cutaneous nickel allergy and
atopic status have been suggested to play a role. Moreover, many of the products used
contain both irritants and sensitizers. Pulmonary toxicity has been associated with the use of
hair lacquer by consumers and hairdressers.
No study has reported a significant excess of congenital malformations, early or late fetal
death or low birth weight among the offspring of male or female barbers or hairdressers.
No increase was observed in chromosomal aberration frequencies in the lymphocyes of
humans exposed to commercial hair colourants which included hydrogen peroxide
application. ln this and another study, no increase in sister chromatid exchange frequency
was found.
A number of different commercial permanent and semi-permanent hair colourants were
tested for their mutagenic activity in vitro. Manywere mutagenic to bacteria. Less than half of
the preparations applied to rats resulted in the excretion of bacterial muta gens in urine.
Application of a semi-permanent and an oxidation dye colourant topically to male rats had
no effect on the reproductive performance of the treated rats and did not induce heritable
translocations, as judged by a mating protocol.
5.5 Evaluation i
There is limIted evidence that occupation as a hairdresser or barber entails exposures
that are carcinogenic.
IPor definition of the italicied terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.HARDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS107
There is inadequate evidence that personal use of hair colourants entails exposures that. .are carcinogenic.
Overall evaluations
Occupation as a hairdresser or barber entails exposures that are probably carcinogenic
(Group 2A).
Personal use of hair colourants cannot be evaluated as to its carcinogenicity (Group 3).
6. References
Ahlbom, A, Navier, I.L., Norell, S., Olin, R. & Spännare, B. (1986) Nonoccupational risk indicators
for astrocytomas in adults. Am. 1. Epidemiol., 124, 334-337
Albano, G., Carere, A., Crebelli, R. & Zito, R. (1982) Mutagenicity of commercial hair dyes in
Salmonella typhimurium TA98. Food Chem. Tonco!., 20, 171-175
Alderson, M. (1980) Cancer mortality in male hairdressers. 1. Epidemiol. Community Health, 34,
182- 185
Almaguer, D.A & Blade, L.M. (199) Health Hazard Evaluation Report. Buckeye Hills Career Center,
Rio Grande, Ohio (HETA Report 88-153-2072), Cincinnati, OH, National Institute for Occu-
pational Safety and Health
Almaguer, D. & Klein, M. (1991) Health Hazard Evaluation Report. Northwest Vocational School,
Cincinnati, Ohio (HETA Report 89-170-21(0), Cincinnati, OH, National Institute for Occu-
pational Safety and Health
Ameille, J., Guilon, E, Pagès, M.G., Proteau, J. & Boudène, C. (1984) Inhalation of capilaiy laquers
and pulmonaiy thesaurosis. Real or false problem? An experimental study in rats (Fr.). Arch.
AfaL prof, 45, 208-210
Ameile, J., Pagès, M.G., Capron, E, Proteau, J. & Rochemaure, J. (1985) Respiratoiy pathology
induced by inhalation of hair lacquer (Fr.). Rev Pneumol. clin., 41, 325-330
Ammenheuser, M. & Warren, M.E. (1979) Detection of mutagens in the urine of rats following topical
application of hair dyes. Afutat. Res., 66, 241-245
Anon. (196) Encyclopaedia Britannica, VoL. 7, London, Willam Benton, p. 816
Anthony, H.M. & Thomas, G.M. (1970) Tumors of the urinary bladder: an analysis oftlieoccupations
of 1,030 patients in Leeds, England. 1. natl Cancer Inst., 45, 879-895
Armstrong, B.K. & Holman, C.D' A.J. (1985) Hutchinson's melanotic freckle melanoma and the use of
non-permanent hair dyes (Letter to the Editor). Br. 1. Cancer, 52, 135
Babish, J.G., Scarlett, J.M., Voekler, S.E., Gutenmann, WH. & Lisk, D.J. (1991) Urinary mutagens in
cosmetologists and dental personneL. 1. Toricol. environ. Realth,34, 197-20
Barker, G. (1985) Surfactants in shampoos. ln: Rieger, M.M., ed., Surfactants in Cosmetics, New York,
Marcel Dekker, pp. 251-292
Bartek, M.J., LaBudde, J.A & Maibach, H.I. (1972) Skin permeability in vivo: comparison in rat,
rabbi t, pig and man. J invest. Dermatol., 58, 114-123
Baxer, P.J. & McDowall, M.E. (1986) Occupation and cancer in London: an investigation into nasal
and bladder cancer using the Cancer Atlas. Br. J ind. Afed., 43, 449
Beernaert, H., Herpol- Borremans, M. & De Cock, E (1987) Determination of 1,4-dioxane in cosmetIc
products by headspace gas chromatography. Belg. J Food Chem. Biotechnol., 42, 131-135108 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Bergmann, M., FIance, I.. & Blumenthal, H.T (1958) Thesaurosis following inhalation of hair spray.
A clinical and experimental study. New Engl. 1 Med., 258, 471-476
Blainey, A.D., Oller, S., Cundell, D., Smith, RE. & Davies, RJ. (1986) Occupation al asthma in a
hairdressing salon. Thrax, 41, 42-50
Blair, A., Linos, A., Stewart, P.A., Burmeister, L.E, Gibson, R, Everett, G., Schuman, L. & Cantor,
K.P. (1993) Evaluation of risks for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma by occupation and industry
exposures from a case-control study. Am. 1 ind. Med., 23, 301-312
Boffetta, P., Stellman, S.D. & Garfinkel, L. (1989) A case-control study of multiple myeloma nested in
the American Cancer Society prospective study. Int. 1 Cancer, 43, 554-559
Brown, L.M., Everett, G.D., Burmeister, L.E & Blair, A (1992) Hair dye use and multiple myeloma in
white men. Am. 1 public Realth, 82,1673-1674
Brunner, M.J., Giovacchini, RP., Wyatt, J.P., Dunlap, EE. & Calendra, J.c. (1963) Pulmonary disease
and hair-spray polymers: a disputed relationship.l Am. med. Assoc., 184,851-857
Bunin, G.R, Kramer, S., Marrero, O. & Meadows, AT (1987) Gestational risk factors for Wilms'
tumor: results of a case-control study. Cancer Res., 47, 2972-2977
Burch, J.D., Craib, K.J.P., Choi, B.C.K., Miler, A.B., Risch, H.A & Howe, G.R. (1987) An exploratory
case-control study of brain tu mors in adults.l natl Cancer Inst., 78,601-6
Burnett, C.M. & Goldenthal, E.I. (1988) Multigeneration reproduction and carcinogenicity studies in
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed topically to oxidative hair-colouring formulations containing
p-phenylenediamine and other aromatic amines. Food Chem. Toxicol., 26, 467-474
Burnett, C.M., Lanman, B.M., Giovacchini, R, Wolcott, R, Scala, R & Keplinger, M. (1975) Long-
term toxicity studies on oxidation hair dyes. Food Cosmet. Toxicol., 13, 353-357
Burnett, C.M., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.B., Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R. & Voelker, R
(1976) Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes.l Toxicol. environ. Realth, 1,
1027-104
Burnett, C.M., Corbett, J.E & Lanman, B.M. (1977) Hair dyes and aplastic anemia. Drug Chem.
Toxicol., 1, 45-61
Burnett, C.M., Fuchs, C.M. & Corbett, J.E (1979) Mutagenicity studies on urine concentrates from
female users of dark hair color products. Drug Chem. Toxicol., 2, 283-293
Burnett, c., Jacobs, M.M., Seppala, A & Shubik, P. (1980) Evaluation of the toxicity and carcino-
genicity of hair dyes.l Toxicol. environ. Realth, 6, 247-257
Burnett, c., Lohr, R & Corbett, J. (1981) Heritable translocation study on two hair dye formulations.
Fundam. appl. Toxicol., 1, 325-328
Calendra, J. & Kay, J.A (1958) The effects of aerosol hair sprays on experimental animais. Proc. Sei
Sect. Toilet Goods Assoc., 30, 41-4
Cantor, K.P., Blair, A., Everett, G., VanLier, S., Burmeister, L., Dick, ER, Gibson, RW & Schuman,
L. (1988) Hair dye use and risk of leukaemia and lymphoma. Am. 1 public Bealth, 78, 570-571
Cavignaux, L. (1%2) Confirmed intoxications (Fr.). Cahiers Med. interprof, 2, 28
Claude, J., Kunze, E., Frentzel-Beyme, R., Paczkowski, K., Schneider, J. & Schubert, H. (1986) Life-
style and occupational risk factors in cancer of the lower urinary tract. Am. 1. Epidemiol., 124,
578-589
Clausen, T (1989) Hair coloring preparations. ln: Elvers, B., Hawkins, S. Ravenscroft, M.,
Rounsaville, J.E & Schulz, G., eds, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 5th ed.,
VoL. Al2, New York, VCH Publishers, pp. 583-588
Clemmesen, J. (1977) Statistical studies in the aetiology of malignant neoplasms. v: Trends and risks,
Denmark 1943-72. Acta pathol. microbiol. scand., Suppl. 261HAIRDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS109
Clemmesen, J. (1981) Epidemiological studies into the possible carcinogenicity of hair dyes. Mulat.
Res., 87,65-79
Cole, P., Monson, RR, Haning, H. & Friedell, G.H. (1971) Smoking and cancer of the lower urinary
tract. New Engl. J Med., 284, 129-134 .
Cole, P., Hoover, R & Friedell, G.H. (1972) Occupation and cancer of the lower urinary tract. Cancer,
29, 1250-1261
Commission of the European Communities (1976) Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 J uly 1976 on
the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off J Eur.
Commun., L262, 169-20
Commission of the European Communities (1990) Proposai for a Council Directive on the approxi-
mation ofthe laws ofthe Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off J Eur. Comm., C322,
29-77
Commission of the European Communities (1991) Thirteenth Commission Directive of 12 March
1991 (91/814/EEC) on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosme ticproducts. Off J Eur. Commun., L91, 59-62
Commission of the European Communities (1992) Fifteenth Commission Directive of 21 October
1992 (92/86/EEC) on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic
products. Off J Eur. Commun., L325, 18-22
Conway, WD. & Lethco, E.J. (1960) Aromatic amine impurities in Yellow AB and Yellow OB food
dyes. Anal. Chem., 32, 838-841
Corbett, J.F. (1976) Hair dyes-their chemistry and toxicology. Cosmet. Toiletries, 91, 21-28
Corbett, J.F. (1988) Hair coloring. Clin. Dennatol., 6, 93-101
Cordle, F. & Thompson, G.E. (1981) An epidemiologic assessment of hair dye use. Regul. Toxical.
Phannacol., 31, 388-400
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (1991) International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary,
Washington DC
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (1992) Theory and Practice of Hair Waving, Washington
DC
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (undated) Hairdressers, Washington DC
Court Brown, WM., Buckton, K.E., Jacobs, P.A., Tough, LM., Kuenssberg, E.V & Knox, J.D.E. (196)
Chromosome Studies on Adults (Eugenics Laboratory Memoirs 42), London, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press
Cronin, E. & Kullavanijaya, P. (1979) Hand dermatitis in hairdressers. Acta dennatovenereol.,59,
47-50
DiNardo, J.c., Picciano, J.c., Schnetzinger, RW, Morris, WE. & Wolf, RA. (1985) Teratological
assessment of five oxidative hair dyes in the rat. Toxicol. appl. Phannacol., 78, 163-166
Draize, J.H., Nelson, A.A., Newburger, S.H. & Kelley, E.A. (1959) Inhalation toxicity studies of six
types of aerosol hair sprays. Proc. sei. Sect. Toi/et Goods Assoc., 31,2832
Dubrow, R & Wegman, D.H. (1982) Occupational Characteritics of White Male Cancer Victims in
Massachusetts, 1971-1973, Cincinnati, OH, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health
Dubrow, R & Wegman, D.H. (1983) Setting priorities for occupational cancer research and control:
synthesis of the results of occupational disease surveilance studies. J natl Cancer Inst., 71,
1123-1142
Dubrow, R & Wegman, D.H. (1984) Cancer and occupation in Massachusetts: a death certificate
study. Am. J ind. Med., 6, 207-230110 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Dunham, L.1., Rabson, AS., Stewart, H.L., Frank, AS. & Young, J.L. (1968) Rates, interview, and
pathology study of cancer of the urinary bladder in New Orleans, Louisiana.l natl Cancer ¡nst.,
41,683-709
Eisenbrand, G., Blankart, M., Sommer, H. & Weber, B. (1991)N-Nitrosoalkanolamines in cosmetics.
ln: O'Neil, I.K., Chen, J. & Bartsch, H., eds, Relevance to Human Cancer of N-Nitroso
Compounds, Tobacco Smoke and Mycotoxins (IARC Scientific Publications No. 105), Lyon,
IAC, pp. 238-241
Eriksson, M. & Karlsson, M. (1992) Occupation al and other environmental factors and multiple
myeloma: a population based case-control study. Br. 1 ind. Med., 49, 95-103
Fan, 1:Y., Goff, D., Song, L., Fine, D.H., Arsenault, G.P. & Biemann, K. (1977) N-Nitrosodiethanol-
amine in cosmetics, lotions and shampoos. Food Cosmet. Toxicol., 15, 423-430
Feinland, R, Platko, EE., White, L., DeMarco, R, Varco, J.1. & Wolfram, L.J. (1980) Hair prepa-
rations. ln: Mark, H.E, Othmer, D.E, Overberger, C.G., Seaborg, G.T. & Grayson, N., eds,
Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 3rd ed., VoL. 12, New York, John Wiley &
Sons, pp. 80117
Ferguson, L.R & Baguley, B.e. (1988) Verapamil as a co-mutagen in the Salmonella/mammalian
microsome mutagenicity test. Mutat. Res., 209, 57-62
Ferguson, L.R, Roberton, AM. & Berriman, J. (1990) Direct-acting mutagenic properties of some
hair dyes used in New Zealand. Mutat. Res., 245, 41-46
Fisher, A.A & Dooms-Goossens, A (1976) Persulfate hair bleach reactions. Cutaneous and respira-
tory manifestations. Arch. Dermatol., 112, 1407-1410
Flodin, U., Redriksson, M. & Persson, B. (1987) Multiple myeloma and engine exhausts, fresh wood,
and creosote: a case-referent study. Am. 1 ind. Med., 12, 519-529
Fregert, S. (1986) Contact allergens and prevention of contact dermatitis.l Allergy clin. lmmunol., 78,
1071-1072
Freni-Titulaer, L.WJ., Kelley, D.B., Grow, A.G., McKinley, T.W, Arnett, Ee. & Hochberg, M.C.
(1989) Connective tissue disease in southeastern Georgia: a case-control study of etiologic
factors. Am. 1 Epidemiol., 130, 40409
Froines, J.R & Garabrant, D.H. (1986) Quantitative evaluation of manicurists exposure to methyl,
ethyl and isobutyl methacrylate during production of synthetic fingernails. Appl. ind. Hyg., l,
70-74
Gagliardi, L., Ambroso, M., Mavro, J., Furno, E & Discalzi, G. (1992) Exposure to paraphenylene-
diamine in hairdressing parlours. Int. 1 cosmet. Sei, 14, 19-31
Gallagher, RP., Threlfall, WJ., Band, P.R & Spinell, J.J. (1989) Occupational Mortality in British
Columbia 1950-1984, Vancouver, BC, Workers' Compensation Board of British Columbia
Garfinkel, J., Selvin, S. & Brown, S.M. (1977) Possible increased risk of lung cancer among
beauticians.l natl Cancer Inst., 58, 141-143
Gerkens, R, Zucchini, G. & Ambroso, M. (1989) Exposure to methylene chloride in hairdressing
salons (GeL). Aerosol Rep., 28, 121-129
Gershon, S.D., Goldberg, M.A. & Rieger, M.M. (1972) Permanent waving. ln: Balsam, M.S. &
Sagarin, E., eds, Cosmetics-Science and Technology, 2nd ed., New York, Wìley-Interscience, pp.
167-250
Giles, G.G., Lickiss, J.N., Baikie, M.1., Lowenthal, RM. & Panton, J. (1984) Myeloproliferative and
lymphoproliferative disorders in Tasmania, 1972-80: occupational and familal aspects. 1. natl
Cancer lnst., 72, 1233-1240HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS111
Giovacchini, RP., Becker, G.R., Brunner, M.J. & Dunlap, EE. (1965) Pulmonary disease and hair-
spray polymers. Effect of long-term exposure of dogs. J Am. med. Assoc., 193, 298-299
Goulet, L. & Thériault, G. (1991) StilIbirth and chemical exposure of pregnant workers. Scand. J Work
Environ. Health, 17,25-31
Green, A., Wilett, WC, Colditz, G.A, Stampfer, M.J., Bain, C, Rosner, B., Hennekens, C.H. &
Speizer, EE. (1987) Use of permanent hair dyes and risk of breast cancer. J natl Cancer Inst., 79,
253-257
Gubéran, E., Raymond, L. & Sweetnam, P.M. (1985) Increased risk for male bladder cancer among a
cohort of male and female hairdressers from Geneva. Int. J Epidemiol., 14,549-554
Guerra, L., Bardazzi, E & Tosti, A. (1992) Contact dermatitis in hairdressers' clients. Contact Derm.,
26, 108-111
Guidotti, S., Wright, WE. & Peters, J.M. (1982) Multiple myeloma in cosmetologists.Am. J ind. Med.,
3, 169-171
Gunter, B.J., Rostand, RA & Philbin, E. (1976) Health Hazard Evaluation Detennination. Radiant
Lady Beauty Salon, ¡nc. (HHE Report 75-128-262), Cincinnati, OH, National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health
Hartge, P., Hoover, R, Altman, R, Austin, D.E, Cantor, KP., Chi Id, M.A., Key, CR., Mason, 1:J.,Marrett, L.D., Myers, M.R., Narayana, A.S., Silverman, D.T., Sullvan, J.\¥, Swanson, G.M.,
Thomas, D.B. & West, D.\¥ (1982) Use of hair dyes and risk ofbladder cancer. Cancer Res., 42,
4784-4787
Hedner, K, Högstedt, B., Kolnig, A.-M., Mark-Vendel, E., Strömbeck, B. & Mitelman, E (1982) Sis terchromatid exchanges and structural chromosome aberrations in relation to age and sex. Hum.
Genet., 62, 305-309
Hennekens, CR., Rosner, B., Belanger, C., Speizer, EE., Bain, c.J. & Peto, R (1979) Use of
permanent hair dyes and cancer among Tegistered nurses. Lancet, i, 13901393
Hofer, H., Bornatowicz, N. & Reindl, E. (1983) Analysis of human chromosomes after repeated hair
dyeing. Food chem. Toxicol., 21, 785-789
Hoffman, CS., Jr (1973) Beauty salon air quality measurements. Cosmet. Toiletries Fragrance Assoc.Cosmet. J, 5, 16-21
Holman, CD'AJ. & Armstrong, B.K (1983) Hutchinson's melanotic freckle melanoma associated
with non-permanent hair dyes. Br. J Cancer, 48, 599-61
Holness, D.L. & Nethercott, J.R (199) Dermatitis in hairdressers. Dermatol. Clin., 8, 119-126
Hopkins, J.E. & Manoharan, A (1985) Severe aplastic anaemia folIowing the use ofhair dye: report of
two cases and review of literature. Postgrad. med. J., 61, 1003-1005
Howe, G.R., Burch, J.D., Miler, A.B., Cook, G.M., Esteve, J., Morrison, B., Gordon, P., Chambers,
L.W, Fodor, G. & Wìnsor, G.M. (1980) Tobacco use, occupation, coffee, various nutrients, and
bladder cancer. J natl Cancer Inst., 64, 701-713
Hrubec, Z., Blair, AE., Rogot, E. & Vaught, J. (1992) Mortality Risks by Occupation Among US
Jiterans of Known Smoking Status 1954-1980, VoL. 1 (NIH Publ. No. 92-3407), Bethesda, MD,
National Institutes of Health
IAC (1979) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemìcals to Humans,
VoL. 19, Some Monomers, Plastics and Synthetic Elastomers, and Acrolein, Lyon, pp. 379-380
Ippen, H., Seubert, S., Seubert, A., Bertram, H.P. & Kemper, EH. (1981) Investigations on the
dermatologie assessment of lead acetate as a hair-dyeing agent (Ger.). Ärlich. Kosmet., 11,
93-98112 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Isacoff, H. (1979) Cosmetics. ln: Mark, H.E, Othmer, D.F., Overberger, C.G., Seaborg, G.i: &
Grayson, N., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 3rd ed., Vol. 7, New York,
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 143-176
Ivanov, B., Praskova, L., Mileva, M., Bulanova, M. & Georgieva, I. (1978) Spontaneous chromosomal
aberration levels in human peripheral lymphocytes. Mutat. Res., 52, 421-426
Iyer, G., Kannan, K & Khan, RR (1985) Toxicology of hairdyes: an oveiview.l Sei ind. Res., 44,
392-42
Jacobs, M.M., Burnett, C.M., Penicnak, Al., Herrera, J.A., Morris, WE., Shubik, P., Apaja, M. &
Grenroth, G. (1984) Evaluation of the toxicity and carcinogenicity of hair dyes in Swiss mice.
Drug. chem. To.ricol., 7, 573-586
Jain, M., Morgan, RW & Elinson, L. (1977) Hairdyes and bladder cancer (Letter to the Editor). Canomed. Assoc. J., 117, 1131, 1133 .
Jensen, O.M., Knudsen, J .B., McLaughlin, J.K & Sørensen, B.L. (1988) The Copenhagen case-control
study of renal pelvis and ureter cancer: role of smoking and occupational exposures. ln!. L
Cancer, 41, 557-561
Kiese, M. & Rauscher, E. (1968) The absorption of p-toluenediamine through human skin in hair
dyeing. Toxico/. appl. Phannacol., 13,325-331
Kinkel, H.J. & Holzmann, S. (1973) Study of long-term percutaneous toxicity and carcinogenicity of
hair dyes (oxidizing dyes) in rats. Food Cosmet. Toxicol., 11,641-68
Kinlen, L.J., Harris, R, Garrod, A & Rodriguez, K (1977) Use of hair dyes by patients with breast
cancer: a case-control study. Br. med. J., ii, 366368
Kirkland, D.J., Lawler, S.D. & Venitt, S. (1978a) Chromosomal damage and hair dyes. Lance!, ii,
124- 128
Kirkland, D.J., Lawler, S.D. & Venitt, S. (1978b) Chromosomal damage and hair dyes (Letter to the
Editor). Lancet, ii, 272
Kirkland, D.J., Honeycombe, J.R, Lawler, S.D., Venitt, S. & Crofton-Sleigh, C. (1981) Sister-
chromatid exchanges before and after hair dyeing. Mutat. Res., 90, 279-28
Kleinhans, D. & Rannederg, KM. (1988) Immediate reactions after ammonium persulfate in
bleaching powders (GeL). Allergologie, 11, 194-195
Koenig, KL., Pasternack, B.S., Shore, RE. & Strax, P. (1991) Hair dye use and breast cancer: a case-
control study among screening participants. Am. L Epidemiol., 133, 985-995
Kohler, J. (1989a) Waving. ln: Elvers, B., Hawkins, S. Ravenscroft, M., Rounsavile, J.E & Schulz, G.,
eds, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of lndustrial Chemistry, 5th ed., VoL. A12, New York, VCH
Publishers, pp. 588-591
Kohler, J. (1989b) Hair straightening preparations. ln: Elvers, B., Hawkins, S. Ravenscroft, M.,
Rounsavile, J.E & Schulz, G., eds, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 5th ed., VoL.
A12, New York, VCH Publishers, p. 591
Kono, S., Tokudome, S., Ikeda, M., Yoshimura, T & Kuratsune, M. (1983) Cancer and other causes of
death among female beauticians.l natl Cancer lnst., 70, 443-4
Kramer, S., Ward, E., Meadows, A.T & Malone, KE. (1987) Medical and drug risk factors associated
with neuroblastoma: a case-control study.l natl Cancer lnst., 78, 797-80
Kritchevsky, W. (1937) Hydrotropic Fatty Material and Method of Making Same (US Patent 2,089,212)
Kronoveter, K (1977) Health Hazard Evaluation Detennination. Hair Zoo, Pen field, New lórk (RHE
Report 76-82-361), Cincinnati, OH, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Kuijten, RR, Bunin, G.R, Nass, C.c. & Meadows AT (199) Gestational and familal risk factors
for childhood astrocytoma: results and a case-control study. Cancer Res., 50, 268-2612HARDRESSERS AN BARBER S, AN HAR COLOURANTS 113
Kuijten, RR, Bunin, G.R, Nass, c.c. & Meadows, AT. (1992) Parental occupation and childhood
astrocytoma: results of a case-control study. Cancer Res., 52, 782-786
Landthaler, M., Burg, G. & Zirbs, S. (1981) Colourant and nickel allergy in hairdressers (GeL).
llautarzt, 32, 281-28
Lang, G. (1989a) Hair cleansing and care preparations. ln: Elvers, B., Hawkins, S. Ravenscroft, M.,
Rounsavile, J.E & Schulz, G., eds, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 5th ed., VoL.
A12, New York, VCH Publishers, pp. 576-580
Lang, G. (1989b) Hairstyling preparations. ln: Elvers, B., Hawkins, S. Ravenscroft, M., Rounsavile,
J.E & Schulz, G., eds, Ullmann 's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 5th ed., Vol. A12, New
York, VCH Publishers, pp. 580583
Liebscher, K.D. & Spengler, J. (1989) Toxicology and legal aspects. ln: Elvers, R, Hawkins, S.
Ravenscroft, M., Rounsavile, J.E & Schulz, G., eds, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial
Chemistry, 5th ed., VoL. A12, New York, VCH Publishers, pp. 593-597
Liem, D.H. (1977) Analysis of antimicrobial compounds in cosmetics. Cosmet. Toiletries, 92, 59-72
Lindemayr, H. (1984) Eczema in hairdressers (Ger.). Dennatosen, 32,5-13
Lokwood, K. (1961) On the etiology of bladder tumors in Københava-Frederiksberg. An enquiry of
369 patients and 369 controls. Acta pathol. microbiol. scand., 51 (Suppl. 145)
Lodén, M. (1986a) The in vitro permeability of human skin to benzene, ethylene glycol, formaldehyde
and n-hexane. Acta pharmacol. toxicol., 58, 382-389
Lodén, M. (1986b) The effect of 4 barrier creams on the absorption of water, benzene, and formal-
dehyde into excised human skin. Contact Denn., 14,292-296
Lowsma, H.R, Jones, R & Pendergast, J.A (1966) Effects of respired polyvinylpyrrolidone aerosol in
rats. Toxicol. appl. Phannacol., 9, 571-582
Lynde, C. W, & Mitchell, J.c. (1982) Patch test results in 66 hairdressers 1973-81. Contact Denn., 8,
302-307
Lynge, E. & Thygesen, L. (1988) Use of surveilance systems for occupational cancer: data from the
Danish national system. Int. 1 Epidemiol., 17, 493-500
Maibach, H.I. & Wolfram, L.J. (1981) Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes.l Soc. cosmet. Chem.,
32, 223-229
Malker, H.S.R, McLaughlin, J.K., Silverman, D.l:, Ericsson, J.L.E., Stone, RJ., Weiner, J.A, Malker,
B.K. & Blot, w'J. (1987) Occupation al risks for bladder cancer among men in Sweden. Cancer
Res., 47, 6763-6766
Malkinson, ED. & Gehlmann, L. (1977) Factors affecting percutaneous absorption. ln: Dril, VA. &
Lazar, P., eds, Cutaneous Toxicity, New York, Academic Press, pp. 63-81
Mareš, P. & Baran, P. (198~ Occupation of pregnant women in relation to the course and outcome of
pregnancy (Czech.). Cs. Gynekol.,54, 1-6
Markowitz, J.A, Szklo, M., Sensenbrenner, L.L. & Warm, S. (1985) Hair dyes and acute nonlympho-
cytic leukaemia (Abstract). Am. 1 Epidemiol., 122,523
Marks, J.G., Jr(1986) Occupational skin disease in hairdressers. StateAr Rev occup. Med., 1,273-28
Marks, T.A, Gupta, RN., Ledoux, l:A & Staples, RE. (1981) TeratogenIc evaluation of 2-nitro-p-
phenylenediamine, 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine, and 2,5-toluenediamine sulfate in the mouse.
Teratology, 24, 253-265
Marzull, EN., Watlington, P.M. & Maibach, H.I. (1978) Exploratory skin penetration findings relating
to the use of lead acetate hair dyes. Curr Probl. Dennatol., 7, 196-20114 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Marzull, EN., Anjo, D.M. & Maibach, H.1. (1981) ln vivo skin penetration studies of 2,4-toluene-
diamine, 2,4-diaminoanisole, 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine, p-dioxane and N-nitrosodiethanol-
amine in cosmetics. Food Cosmet. Torica/., 19, 743-747
Matsuki, Y., Fukuhara, K., Inoue, Y., Yui, 'I & Nambara, T. (1981) Characterization of ami no-
indamines and aminoindoanilines formed by oxidative hair dyeing and their mutagenicity.l
phannca/. Dyn., 4, 269-274
Matsunaga, K., Hosokawa, K., Suzuki, M., Arima, Y. & Hayakawa, R. (1988) Occupational allergie
contact dermatitis in beauticians. Contact Derm., 18,94-96
McDonald, AD., Armstrong, B., Cherry, N.M., Delorme, c., Diodati-Nolin, A., McDonald, J.C. &
Robert, D. (1986) Spontaneous abortion and occupation.l occup. Med., 28, 1232-1238
McDonald, AD., McDonald, J.C., Armstrong, B., Cherry, N.M., Delorme, c., Nolin, AD. & Robert,
D. (1987) Occupation and pregnancy outcome. Br. l ind. Med, 44, 521-526
McDonald, A.D., McDonald, J.c., Armstrong, B., Cherry, N.M., Côté, R, Lavoie, J., Nolin, A.D. &
Robert, D. (1988a) Fetal death and work in pregnancy. Br. l ind. Med., 45, 148-157
McDonald, A.D., McDonald, J.c., Armstrong, B., Cherry, N.M., Côté, R, Lavoie, J., Nolin, A.D. &
Robert D. (1988b) Congenital defects and work in pregnancy. Br. l ind. Med., 45, 581-588
McDonough, E.G. (1937) Truth About Cosmetics, New York, The Drug and Cosmetic Industry
McDowall, M.E. (1985) Occupational Reproductive Epidemiology The Use of Routinely Collected
Statistics in England and Wales 1980-82, Offce of Population Censuses and Survey (Studies on
Medical and Population Subjects No. 50), London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office
McLaughlin, A.I.G., Bidstrup, P.L. & Konstam, M. (1963) The effect of hair lacquer sprays on the
lung. Food Cosmet. Toricol., 1, 171-188
McLaughlin, J.K., Linet, M.S., Stone, B.J., Blot, WJ., Fraumeni, J.E, Jr, Malker, H.S.R, Weiner, J.A
& Ericsson, J .L.E. (1988) Multiple myeloma and occupation in Sweden.Arch. environ. Hea/th,43,
7-10
Menck, H.R, Pike, M.C., Henderson, B.E. & Jing, J.S. (1977) Lung cancer risk among beauticians and
other female workers: brief communication.l nat/ Cancer Inst., 59, 1423-1425
Milham, S. (1983) Occupationa/ Mortality in Washington State, 1950-1979 (NIOSH Research Report),
Washington DC, US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
Moore, M.R, Meredith, P.A, Watson, WS., Sumner, D.J., Taylor, M.K. & Goldberg, A (1980) The
percutaneous absorption of lead-203 in humans from cosmetic preparations containing lead
acetate, as assessed by whole-body counting and other techniques. Food Cosmet. Torico/., 18,
399-45
Morrison, AS., Ahlbom, A, Verhoek, WG., Aoki, K., Leck, 1., Ohno, Y. & Obata, K. (1985) Occu-
pation and bladder cancer in Boston, USA, Manchester, UI( and Nagoya, J apan.l Epidemiol.
Community Realth, 39,294-300
Nasca, P.c., Lawrence, C.E., Greenwald, P., Chorost, S., Arbuckle, J:r & Paulson, A. (1980) Relation-
ship of hair dye use, benign breast disease, and breast cancer. 1 natl Cancer Inst., 64, 23-28
Nasca, P.c., Baptiste, M.S., Field, N.A, Metzger, B.B. & DeMartino, R (199) An epidemiologic
case-control study of breast cancer (Abstract). Am. 1 Epidemiol., 132, 790791
Nethercott, J .R, MacPherson, M., Choi, B.c.K. & Nixon, P. (1986) Contact dermatitis in hairdressers.
Contact Derm., 14, 73-79
Neuberger, J.S., Brownson, RC., Morantz, R.A & Chin, 'ID.Y. (1991) Association of brain cancer
with dental x-rays and occupation in Missouri. Cancer Detect. Prev., 15,31-34
Neutel, C.I., Naîr, RC. & Last, J.M. (1978) Are hair dyes associated with bladder cancer? (Letter to
the Editor). Cano med. Assoc. J., 119, 307-308HARDRESSERS AND BARBERS, AN HAR COLOURAS115
Nomura, A, Kolonel, L.N. & Yoshizawa, C.N. (1989) Smoking, alcohol, occupation, and hair dye use
in cancer of the lower urinary tract. Am. J Epidemiol., 130, 1159-1163
Office of Population Cens uses and Surveys (1978) Occupational Mortality Decennial Supplement,
1970-1972, England and Wales, London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office
Offce of Population Cens uses and Surveys (1986) Occupational Mortality Decennial Supplement,
1979-80, 1982-83, Great Britain, London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office
Ohno, Y., Aoki, K., Obata, K. & Morrison, AS. (1985) Case-control study of urinary bladder cancer
in metropolitan Nagoya. Natl Cancer Inst. Monogr., 69, 229-234
Osorio, A.M., Bernstein, L., Garabrant, D.H. & Peters, J.M. (1986) Investigation of lung cancer
among female cosmetologists. J occup. Med., 28, 291-295
0sterlind, A., Tucker, M.A, Stone, B.J. & Jensen, O.M. (1988a) The Danish case-control study of
cutaneous malignant melanoma. IV No association with nutritional factors, alcohol, smoking or
hair dyes. Int. J Cancer, 42, 825-828
0sterlind, A., Tucker, M.A, Hou-Jensen, K., Stone, B.J., Engholm, G. & Jensen, O.M. (1988b) The
Danish case-control study of cutaneous malignant melanoma. I. Importance of host factors. 1 nt.
J Cancer, 42, 20020
Palmer, A., Renzett, A.D., Jr & Gilam, D. (1979) Respiratory disease prevalence in cosmetologists
and its relationship to aerosol sprays. Environ. Res., 19, 136-153
Pearce, N.E. & Howard, J.K. (1986) Occupation, social class and male cancer mortality in New
Zealand, 1974-78. Int. J Epidemiol., 15, 456-62
Pepys, J., Hutchcroft, B.J. & Breslin, AB.X. (1976) Asthma due to inhaled chemical agents-
persulphate salts and henna in hairdressers. Clin. Ælergy, 6, 399-4
Persson, B., Dahlander, A.-M., Fredriksson, M., Brage, H.N., Ohlson, c.-G. & Axelson, O. (1989)
Malignant lymphomas and occupational exposures. Br. J ind. Med., 46, 516-520
Petri, M. & Allbritton, J. (1992) Hair product use in systemic lupus eryhematosus. A case-control
study. Arhritis Rheum., 38, 625-629
Pottern, L.M., Heineman, E.F., Olsen, J.H., Raffn, E. & Blair, A. (1992) Multiple myeloma among
Danish women: employment history and workplace exposures. Cancer Causes Control, 3,
427-432
Powers, D.H. (1972) Shampoos. ln: Balsam, M.S. & Sagarin, E., eds, Cosmetics-Science and Techno-
logy, 2nd ed., New York, Interscience Publishers, pp. 73-116
Pulcala, E., Nokso-Koivisto, P. & Roponen, P. (1992) Changing cancer risk patterns among Finnish
hairdressers. Int. Arch. occup. environ. Health, 64, 39-42
Rajan, B. (1992) Hairdressing Preparations. A Review Paper for CEC, Bootle, Health and Safety
Executive
Rastogi, S.c. (199) Hèadspace analysis of 1,4-dioxane in products containing polyethoxylated sur-
factants by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Chromatographia, 29,441-45
Registrar General (1958) The Regitrar General's Decennial Supplement, England and Wales, 1951,
Occupational Mortality, Part II, VoL. 2, Tables, London, Her Majesty's Stationery Office
Registrar General (1971) The Regitrar General's Decennial Supplement, England and Wales, 1961,
Occupational Mortality Tables, London, Her Majesty's Stationery Offce
Renzetti, AD., Jr, Conrad, J., Watanabe, S., Palmer, A & Armstrong, J. (1980) Thesaurosis from hair-
spray exposure. A non-disease. Validation studies of an epidemiologic survey of cosmetologists.
Environ. Res., 22, 130-138
Risch, H.A., Burch, J.D., Miler, A.B., Hil, G.B., Steele, R. & Howe, G.R. (1988) Occupational factors
and the incidence of cancer of the bladder in Canada. Br. J ind. Med., 45,361-367116 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Rojanapo, w., Kupradinun, p., Tepsuwan, A., Chutimataewin, S. & Tanyakaset, M. (1986) Carcino-
genicity of an oxidation product of p-phenylenediamine. Carcinogenesis, 7, 1997-202
Sardas, S., Karakaya, AE. & Sener, B. (1986) Determination of 2,4-diaminotoluene in human urine. L
Fac. Phann. Gazi, 3, 89-94
Sayad, RS., Stevenson, M.P., Skory, L.K & Jordan, J.w. (1976) Methylene chloride in hair sprays.
Soap Cosmet. chem. Spec., 52, 87-90, 134-136
Scalia, S. & Menegatti, E. (1991) Assay of 1,4-dioxane in commercial cosmetic products by HPLC.
Fannco, 46, 1365-1370
Schwaiblmair, M., Baur, X. & Fruhmann, G. (199) Bronchial asthma caused by hair bleach in a hair-
dresser (Ger.). Dtsch. med. Wschr., 115,695-697
Searle, C.E. & Jones, EL. (1977) Effects of repeated applications of two semi-permanent hair dyes to
the skin of A and DBAf mice. Br. L Cancer, 36, 467-478
Shafer, N. & Shafer, RW. (1976) Potential of carcinogenic effects of hair dyes. N.Y. State L Med.,76,
394-396
Shibata, A, Sasaki, R, Hamajima, N. & Aoki, K (1989) Mortality of hematopoietic disorders and
hair dye use among bar bers. Acta haematol. jpn., 52, 116-118
Shiling, S. & Lalich, N.R (1984) MaternaI occupation and industry and the pregnancy outcome of US
married women, 1980. Public Realth Rep., 99, 152-161
Shore, RE., Pasternack, B.S., Thiessen, E.U., Sadow, M., Forbes, R & Albert, RE. (1979) A case-
control study of hair dye use and breast cancer. 1 natl Cancer Inst., 62, 277-283
Silverman, D:r., Levin, L.I., Hoover, RN. & Hartge, P. (1989) Occupational risks of bladder cancer in
the United States: I. White men. 1 natl Cancer ¡nst., 81, 1472-1480
Silverman, D:r., Levin, L.I. & Hoover, RN. (1990) Occupational risks of bladder cancer among white
women in the United States. Am. L Epidemiol., 132,453-41
Skov, T. & Lynge, E. (1991) Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and occupation in Denmark. Seand. 1 Soc.
Med., 19, 162-169
Skov, T., Andersen, A, Malker, H., Pukkala, E., Weiner, J. & Lynge, E. (1990) Risk for cancer of the
Ufinary bladder among hairdressers in the Nordic countries. Am. L ind. Med., 17, 217-223
Spinell, J.J., Gallagher, RP., Band, P.R & Threlfall, w.J. (1984) Multiple myeloma, leukaemia, and
cancer of the ovary in cosmetologists and hairdressers. Am. L ind. Med., 6, 97-102
Spitz, M.R, Fueger, J.J., Goepfert, H. & Newell, G.R (1990) Salivary gland cancer. A case-control
investigation of risk factors. Arch. Otolarygol. Head Neck Surg., 116, 1163-1166
Stamberg, J., Werczberger, R & Koltin, Y. (1979) Non-mutagenicity of the hair dye, henna, in the
Ames test. Mutat. Res., 62, 383-387
Starr, J.c., Yunginger, J. & Brahser, G.w. (1982) Immediate type l asthmatic response to henna
following occupational exposure in hairdressers. Ann. Allergy, 48, 98-99
Stavraky, KM., Clarke, E.A. & Donner, A. (1979) Case-control study of hair dye use by patients with
breast cancer and endometrial cancer. L natl Cancer Inst., 63, 941-945
Stavraky, KM., Clarke, E.A. & Donner, A. (1981) A case-control study ofhair-dye use and cancers of
various sites. Br. L Cancer, 43, 236-239
Stovall, G.K, Levin, L. & Oler, J. (1983) Occupational dermatitis among hairdressers. A multifactor
analysis.l occup. Med., 25, 871-878
Teta, M.J., Walrath, J., Wister Meigs, J. & Flannery, J.T. (1984) Cancer incidence among
cosmetologists.l natl Cancer Inst., 72, 1051-1057
Thomssen, E.G. (1947) Modem Cosmetics, New York, Drug and Cosmetic Industry, pp. 337-348,
365-376HARDRESSERS AN BARBERS, AN HAIR COLOURANTS117
Tikkanen, J. (1986)Synnynnäisten Sydänvikojen Riskitekijät (Risk factors for congenital heart disease),
Thesis, Helsinki, Health Services Research, National Board of Health
Tikkanen, J., Kurppa, K., Timonen, H., Holmberg, Pc., Kuosma, E. & Rantala, K. (1988) Cardio-
vascular malformations, work attendance and occupational exposures during pregnancy in
Finland. Am. 1. ind. Med., 14, 197-20
Turanitz, K., Kovac, R., Tuschl, H. & Pavlicek, E. (1983) Investigations on the effect of repeated hair
dyeing on sister chromatid exchanges. Food Chem. Toxico/., 21,791-793
US Consumer Product Safety Commission (1974) Vinyl chloride as an ingredient of drug and
cosmetic aerosol products. Fed. Regit., 39, 30830
US Environmental Protection Agency (1993) Protection of stratospheric ozone. Fed. Regit., 58,
15014-15049
US Food and Drug Administration (1979) Nitrosamine-contaminated cosmetics; caU for industiy
action; request for data. Fed. Regit., 44, 21365-21367
US Food and Drug Administration (1980) Lead acetate; listing as a color additive in cosmetics that
color the hair on the scalp. Fed. Regit., 45,72112-72116
US Food and Drug Administration (1991) Cosmetic Handbook, Washington DC, Department of
Health and Human Services
Valeyre, D., Perret, G., Amouroux, J., Saumon, G., Georges, R, Pre, J. & Battesti, J.-P (1983) Diffuse
interstitial pulmonaiy disease due to prolonged inhalation of hair spray. Lung, 161, 19-26
Vaughan, TL., Daling, J.R & Starzyk, PM. (1984) Fetal death and maternaI occupation. An analysis
of birth records in the State of Washington. J occup. Med., 26, 676-678
Viadana, E., Bross, I.D.J. & Houten, L. (1976) Cancer experience of men exposed to inhalation of
chemicals or to combustion products. J occup. Med., 18, 787-792
Vineis, P & Magnani, C. (1985) Occupation and bladder cancer in males: a case-control study. lnt. J.
Cance~ 35, 599-606
Vivoli, G. (1966) Experimental investigations of pulmonaiy lesions caused by prolonged inhalations
of hair varnishes (Ital.). Ig. Mod., 19,67-88
Walker, J.F. (1975) Forma/dehyde, 3rd ed., New York, Robert E. Krieger
Wall, F.E. (1954) Shampoos and other hair preparations. ln: Kirk, RE. & Othmer, D.F., eds,
Encyc/opedia ofChemica/ Techn%gy, Vol. 12, New York, Interscience, pp. 221-243
Wall, F.E. (1972) Bleaches, hair colorings and dye removers. ln: Balsam, M.S. & Sagarin, E., eds,
Cosmetics Science and Techn%gy, 2nd ed., Vol. 2, New York, Wiley-Interscience, pp. 279-343
Watanabe, T, Hirayama, T & Fukui, S. (1990) Mutagenicity of commercial hair dyes and detection of
2,7-diaminophenazine. Mutat. Res., 244, 303-308
Weinberg, F. (1980) Highlights on hair dyes. Consum. Res. Mag., 63, 19-21
Wernick, T, Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Toxico/. app/. Pharmaco/., 32, 450-460
Wilat, AF. (1939) Permanent Waving of Hair (US Patent 2,180,380)
Wilson, C.H. (1974) Fluorometric determination of formaldehyde in cosmetic products. 1. Soc.
Cosmet. Chem., 25, 67-71
Winkel, F.M. (1936) Hair Waving Unit (US Patent 2,051,063)
Wolfram, LJ. & Maibach, H.I. (1985) Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes. Arch. dermato/. Res.,277, 235-241 .
Wynder, E.L. & Goodman, M. (1983) Epidemiology of breast cancer and hair dyes. 1. nat/ Cancer Inst.,
71,481-488118 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Wynder, E.L., Onderdonk, J. & Mantel, N. (1963) An epidemiological investigation of cancer of the
bladder. Cancer, i 6, 1388-1407
Zahm, S.H., Weisenburger, D.D., Babbitt, P.A., Saal, R.e., Vaught, J.B. & Blair, A. (1992) Use ofhair
coloring products and the risk of lymphoma, multiple myeloma, and chronIc lymphocytic
leukemia. Am. 1. public Health, 82, 99997
Zviak, e. (1986a) Hair bleaching. ln: Zviak, C., ed., The Science of Hair Care, New York, Marcel
Delcer, pp. 213-233
Zviak, C. (1986b) Hair coloring-nonoxidation coloring. ln: Zviak, e., ed., The Science of Haïr Care,
New York, Marcel Dekker, pp. 235-261
Zviak, C. (1986) Oxdation coloring. ln: Zviak, c., ed., The Science of Hair Care, New York, Marcel
Delcer, pp. 263-28
Zviak, e. (1986d) Permanent waving and hair straightening. ln: Zviak, C., ed., The Science of Hair
Care, New York, Marcel Dekker, pp. 183-212
Zviak, C. & Camp, M. (1986) Laws and regulations. ln: Zviak, C., ed., The Science of Hair Care, New
York, Marcel Delcer, pp. 345-385HAR DYESei AelD ORAGE 3
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 6373-74-6; replaces 74968-36-8
Chem. Abstr. Name: 5-((2,4- Dinitrophenyl)amino )-2-(phenylamino )benzene-sulfonic
acid, monosodium salt
Colour Index No.: 10385
Synonyms: 2-Anilino-5-(2,4-dinitroanilino )benzenesulfonic acid, monosodium salt;
sodium 4-(2,4-dinitroanilino )diphenylamine-2-sulfonate
~N-l27~;--H H
(:lSlI13N4()7S.NaMoL. wt: 452.39
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Dark orange-brown microcrystals (US National Toxicology Program,
1988)
(b) Spectroscopy data: Infrared and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral data have been
reported (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
(c) Solubility: Very soluble in water (:; 2% w/w) and ethanol (Society of Dyers and
Colourists, 1971).
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Some trade names are: Acid Fast Yellow AG; Acid Fast Yellow E 5R; Acid Leather Light
Brown G; Acid Orange 3; Acid Yellow E; Airedale Yellow E; Amido Yellow E; Amido
Yellow EA; Amido Yellow EA-CF; Anthralan Yellow RRT; Coranil Brown H EPS; DerIDa
Fur Yellow RT; Derma Yellow P; Dimacide Yellow N-5RL; Duasy Acid Yellow RRT;
Elbenyl Orange A-3RD; Erio Fast Yellow AE; Erio Fast Yellow AEN; Erio Yellow AEN;
Erionyl Yellow E-AEN; Fast Light Yellow E; Fenalan Yellow E; Heliacid light Yellow 4R;
Intranyl Orange T-4R; Kiton Fast Yellow A; Lanaperl Yellow Brown GT; Light Fast Yellow
-121-122 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
ES; Lissamine Fast Yellow AE; Lissamine Fast Yellow AES; Lissamine Yellow AE; Multacid
Yellow 3R; Multicuer Brown MPH; Nailamide Yellow Brown E-L; Nylocrom Yellow 3R;
Nylomine Acid Yellow B-RD; Nylosan Yellow E-3R; Polan Yellow E-3R; Sellacid Yellow
AEN; Solanile Yellow E; Sulfacid Light Yellow 5RL; Superian Yellow R; Tectilon Orange
3GT; Tertracid Light Yellow 2R; Unitertracid Light Yellow RR; Vondacid Fast Yellow AE;
Vondacid Light Yellow AE; Xylene Fast Yellow ES.
A technical product was reported to contain approximately 65-67% CI Acid Orange 3
(US National Toxicology Program, 1988), together with approximately 16% sodium chloride
and 19% sodium sulfate.
1.1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
CI Acid Orange 3 was first synthesized by Schmidlin in 1911 and has been produced
commercially since the 1920s. It is prepared by the condensation of l-chloro-2,4-dinitro-
benzene with 5-amino-2-anilinobenzenesulfonic acid (Society of Dyers and Colourists,
1971).
At present, approximately 900 kg of CI Acid Orange 3 are used annually in the USA
according to industry estimates.
1.2.2 Use
CI Acid Orange 3 has been used as a dye in semi-permanent hair colouring products
since the late 1950s. These products are generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then
allowed to remain in contact with the hair and scalp for 30-45 min. At the concentrations (up
to 0.2%) used in these preparations, CI Acid Orange 3 is in solution (Frenkel & Brody, 1973;
US National Toxicology Program, 1988). It is also used to dye textiles (US Environmental
Protection Agency, 1990).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
CI Acid Orange 3 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupation al exposure
At one site where upholstery fabric was printed and powder acid dyes were used for
dyeing nylon fibres, an industrial hygiene study was conducted to estimate dust exposures
during weighing of the powder dyes. The principal dyes handled were CI Acid Black 107, CI
Acid Brown 298 and CI. Acid Orange 3. Spectrophotometric estimates of the averageCI ACID ORAGE 3123
airborne concentration of active colourant were 10 llg/m3 using personal filters and
~ 0.01 llg/m3 using area filters (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1990).
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 22 238 workers,
including 14728 women, may have been exposed to CI Acid Orange 3 in beauty salons (US
National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
No data were available to the Working Group.
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3F 1 mice, eight to nine weeks of age, were given 0,
125 or 250 (males) or 0,250 or 500 (females) mg/kg bw CI Acid Orange 3 (90% pure, ~ 1 %
impurities other than water and acetone) by gavage in corn oil on five days per week for
103 weeks and were sacrified at 112- 113 weeks of age. Mean body weights of high-dose mice
were 5-11 % lower th an those of vehicle controls after week 74. Survval at the end of the
study was: males-control, 38/50; low-dose, 25/50; and high-dose, 26/50; females-control,
23/50; low-dose, 23/50; and high-dose, 24/50. Treatment-related nephrotoxicity o,ccurred in
animaIs of each sex. Survval of males was reduced after week 100; this was attributed to the
nephrotoxicity. There was no significant increase in the incidence of any tumour. Epithelial
hyperplasia of the urinary bladder was observed in one low-dose and three high-dose
females. One low-dose female had a squamous-cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder (US
National Toxicology Program, 1988).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six to seven weeks of age, were
given 0, 375 or 750 mg/kg bw CI Acid Orange 3 (90% pure, ~ 1 % impurities other th an waterand acetone) by gavage in corn oil on five days per week for 103 weeks and were sacrificed at
110- 112 weeks of age. Survval of high-dose male rats (after week 33) and high-dose female
rats (after week 14) was significantly lower than that of vehicle controls and was attributed to
nephrotoxicity. Final survval rates were: males-control, 36/50; low-dose, 30/50; and
high-dose 0/50 (p ~ 0.001); females-control, 43/50; low-dose, 34/50; and high-dose, 7/50124 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(p -c 0.001). The primary cause of death in treated animaIs was a spectrum ofnon-neoplastic
renal lesions. Renal pelvic epithelial hyperplasia was seen in 0/50 control, 6/50 low-dose and
13/50 high-dose males and 0/50 control, 2/50 low-dose and 13/50 high-dose females.
Transitional-cell carcinomas of the renal pelvis were observed only in high-dose female rats
(6/50;p -c 0.001, life table test) at 87-104 weeks; 18 animais were stil alive at 87 weeks. No
significant increase in the incidence of tumours at any site was reported in male rats, but,
because of a marked reduction in survval, the high-dose group was considered to be
inadequate for an assessment of carcinogenIc activity (US National Toxicology Program,
1988).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2 1loxic effects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
ln 14-day studies, groups of fIve Fischer 344/N rats of each sex received 0, 94, 187,375,
750 or 1500 mg/kg bw CI Acid Orange 3 (purity, 90%) and groups of five B6C3Fi mice of
each sex received 0, 62, 125, 250, 500 or 1000 mg/kg bw CI Acid Orange 3 in corn oil by
gavage for 14 consecutive days. No compound-related toxic effect was observed (US
National Toxicology Program, 1988).
ln 13-week studies, groups of 10 Fischer 344/N rats of each sex received 0, 94, 187,375,
750 or 1500 mg/kg bw Ci Acid Orange 3 and groups of 10 B6C3Fi mIce of each sex received
0,250,500, 1000 or 2000 mg/kg bwin corn oil by gavage on five days per week. Dose-related
kidney lesions were observed in rats and mIce of each sex, including variable degrees of
degeneration and necrosis of epithelial cells in the proximal convoluted tubules, increased
basophila of tubular epithelium and granular casts in the tubules. A marked reduction in
survval was observed in female rats that received the highest dose (US National Toxicology
Pro gram, 1988).
ln the two-year studies in Fischer 344/N rats and B6C3Fi mice described above, the
primary cause of death was dose-related kidney lesions (US National Toxicology Pro gram,
1988).
Acid Orange 3 was present at a low concentration (0.2%) in semi-permanent hair
colouring formulations evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rabbits (Burnett
et al., 1976) and in a two-year feeding study in dogs (Wernick et aL., 1975), described in detail
on p. 97. No treatment-related toxicity was detected in either study. (The Working GroupCI AC ID ORAGE 3125
noted that the dose of each component of the formulation was very low and unlikely to have
been toxic.)
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were avaIlable to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of CI Acid Orange 3 alone. This compound was present at low concentrations in
semi-permanent hair colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertility and
reproductive performance in rats (0.2%) (Wernick et al., 1975; see p. 99), in a study of
heritable translocation in rats (0.06%) (Burnett et aL., 1981; see p. 104) and in studies of
teratogenesis in rats (0.2%) (Wernick et aL., 1975; Burnett et al., 1976) and rabbits (0.2%)
(Wernick et al., 1975) (see p. 100). No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The
Working Group noted that the dose of each component of the formulation was very low and
unlikely to be toxic.)
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
CI Acid Orange 3 was mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium in the presence and absence
of metabolic activation.
Table 1. Genetic and related efTects of CI Acid Orange 3
Test systemResult Dose Reference
(LED/HID)Without With(¡.g/ml)exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse+ + 167.~~ Zeiger et al. mutation
(1988) SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse500.~~ Zeiger et aL. mutation
(1988) SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse+ + 50.~~ Zeiger et al. mutation
(1988) SAS, Salmonella typmmurium TA97, reverse(+ ) (+ ) 167.~~ Zeiger et al. mutation
(1988)
+ , positive; ( +), weakly positive; -, negative126 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
s. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
CI Acid Orange 3 is used to a limited extent as a dye in semi-permanent hair colouring
products and in the dyeing of textiles.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
CI Acid Orange 3 was tested for carcinogenicity by gavage in one study in mice and in
one study in rats. ln mice, there was no significant increase in the incidence of tumours. A
significant increase in the incidence of transitional-cell carcinomas of the renal pelvis was
observed in female rats given the high dose. The data on high-dose male rats could not be
evaluated owing to their poor survval.
5.4 Other relevant data
Ci Acid Orange 3 caused renal toxicity in rats and mice. It was mutagenic to bacteria.
5.5 Evaluation i
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of CI Acid Orange 3.
There is limited evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of CI Acid
Orange 3.
Ove rail evaluation
CI Acid Orange 3 is not classifiable as to its carcinogenicIty to humans (Group 3).
6. References
Burnett, c., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.R, Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R. & Voelker, R. (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes. J Toxica/. environ. Health, i,
1027-104
Burnett, c., Loehr, R. & Corbett, J. (1981) Heritable translocation study on two hair dye formulations.
Fundam. appl. Toxicol., i, 325-328
1 For definition of the italicized tenus, see Preamble, pp. 2630.CI ACID ORAGE 3127
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, F. (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elimination of an aromatic hair dye.
Arch. environ. Hea/th, 27, 401-4
Soiety of Dyers and Colourists (1971) C%ur Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 4, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 407
US Environmental Protection Agency (199) Texi/e Dye Weighing Monitoring Study (EPA Report No.
EPA-560/5-90-00), Washington DC, Offce of Toxic Substances
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS
No. DB50425(0), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1988) Toxic%gy and Carcinogenesis Studies of CI Acid Orange 3
(CAS No. 6373-74-6) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT Technical Report
335; NIH Publ. No. 89-2591), Research Triangle Park, NC
Wernick, T, Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratology and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Toxico/. app/. Pharmaco/., 32, 450-
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T & Mortelmans, K. (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iv Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. Mo/. Mutag., 11 (Suppl. 12), 1-158HC BLUE NO. 1
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1. 1. 1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 2784-94-3
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2,2'-(( 4-(Methylamino )-3-nitrophenyllimino )bis( ethanol)
Synonyms: N4,N4_ Bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-N l-methyl-2-nitro-para-phenylenediamine; HC
Blue 1; HC Blue Number 1; 2,2'-((4-(methylamino)-3-nitrophenyllimino)di(ethanol)
H CH -CH -OH\?-/ 2 2NON/ \H3C CH2- CH2 - OH
N02
CiiH17N304MoL. wt: 255.27
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the substance
From US National Toxicology Program (1985), unless otherwse specified
(a) Description: Dark-blue microcrystals or blue-black amorphous powder
(b) Melting-point: 101.5-104 °C
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported.
(d) Solubilty: Slightly soluble in water (0.38% w/w) (Frenkel & Brody, 1973); soluble in
ethanol, methanol and acetone
(e) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): 17.2
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
HC Blue No. 1 has been available commerciallywith a purity:; 95%, with 2-(( 4-(methyl-
amino)-3-nitrophenyllimino)ethanol (~ 5 %) as a possible impurity.
1. 1.4 Analysis
A thin-Iayer chromatographic method with spectrophotometric analysis has been
reported for determination of HC Blue No. 1 in biological fluids (Prenkel & Brody, 1973).
-129-130 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
HC Blue No. 1 was produced commercially by the reaction of 4-fluoro-3-nitrobenzen-
amine with ethylene oxide (see IARC, 1985, 1987) to form 2,2-((4-fluoro-3-nitrophenyl)-
imino)bis(ethanol); this intermediate was reacted with methylamine to form HC Blue No. 1.
HC Blue No. 1 is not known to be produced or used currently anywhere in the world.
Production and use of HC Blue No. 1 began in the late 1960s and was discontinued in the
mid-1980s. ln the early 1980s, approximately 6-8 tonnes of HC Blue No. 1 were used
annually in the USA, according to industry estimates.
1.2.2 Use
HC Blue No. 1 was used exclusively as a dye in semi-permanent hair colouringproducts.
These products were generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed to remain
in contact with the hair and scalp for 30-45 min. The concentration of HC Blue No. 1 used in
these preparations ranged from 1 to 2% (Frenkel & Brody, 1973; US National Toxicology
Pro gram, 1985).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
HC Blue No. 1 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
The production and use of HC Blue No. 1 were discontinued in the mid-1980s.
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental Animais
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, 53 days of age, were fed 0, 1500 or 3000
mg/kg (ppm) (males) or 0,3000 or 6000 ppm (females) HC Blue No. 1 (,. 97% pure) in theHC BLUE NO. 1 131
diet for 103 weeks and were killed at 112- 115 weeks of age. Final mean body weights were
reduced by 10-12% in treated males and 21-29% in treated females compared with controls.
Survval at the end of the study was: males-control, 33/50; low-dose, 37/50; and high-dose,
30/50; females-control, 36/50; low-dose, 28/50; and high-dose, 24/50 (p = 0.026, life table
test). Survval of female mice was reduced after 91 weeks, and many high-dose females that
died early had hepatocellular carcinomas. ln male and female mice, both doses of HC Blue
No. 1 increased the incidence ofhepatocellular carcinomas (males: control, 11/50; low-dose,
20/50; and high-dose, 30/50 (p .c 0.001, incidental tumour trend test); females: control, 1/50;
low-dose, 24/48; and high-dose, 47/49 (p .c 0.001, incidental tumour trend test)). The
incidence of hepatocellular adenomas was increased in both low-dose groups (males:
control, 4/50; low-dose, 17/50 (p = 0.003, incidental tumour test); and high-dose, 10/50;
females: control, 2/50; low-dose, 11/48 (p = 0.004, incidental tumour test); and high-dose,
4/49). ln male mice, the incidences of thyroid follicular hyperplasia (control, 3/47; low-dose,
7/49; high-dose, 14/50) and thyroid follicular adenomas (control, 0/47; low-dose, 0/49;
high-dose, 5/50 (p = 0.027, incidental tumour test)) were increased. The historical incidence
of thyroid follicular adenomas at the study laboratory was 0-6% (US National Toxicology
Program, 1985; Kari et al., 1989a).
ln a subsequent study, in which only the liver was examined, two groups of 48 female
B6C3F i mice, six weeks of age, were fed 0.3 % (3000 mg/kg of diet J (ppm) highly purified HC
Blue No. 1 or recrystallized, charcoal-filtered commercial HC Blue No. 1 in the diet for
24 months. One group of 48 female mice served as controls. Highly purified HC Blue No. 1
increased the incidences of hepatocellular adenomas (10/46 versus 1/48 controls) and of
hepatocellular carcinoms (41/46 versus 2/48 controls), as did commercial HC Blue No. 1
(hepatocellular adenomas: 10/46 versus 1/48 controls; hepatocellular carcinomas: 44/46versus 2/48 controls). Three additional groups of 24 or 48 females received 0.3%
recrystallized, charcoal-filtered commercial HC Blue No. 1 in the diet for nine months
followed by 15 months without treatment, for 15 months in the diet followed by nine months
without treatment or every other week for 24 months. AIl three treatment regimens resulted
in an increase in the number of mice with benign and malignant hepatocellular tumours.
Data from the five experiments are summarized in Table 1 (Burnett & Corbett, 1987).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, 53 days of age, were fed 0, 1500 or
3000 mg/kg (ppm) of diet HC Blue No. 1 ('" 97% pure) for 103 weeks and were kiled at
112-115 weeks of age. From about week 50, the body weights of high-dose females were
depressed by ? 10% compared with controls. Survval at the end of the study was not
affected by treatment (males-control, 39/50; low-dose, 34/50; and high-dose, 41/50;
females-control, 40/50; low-dose, 38/50; and high-dose, 41/50). HC Blue No. 1 increased
the incidences of pulmonary adenomatous hyperplasia (control, 2/50; low-dose, 5/49;
high-dose, 8/50) and pulmonary adenomas/carcinomas (control, 1/50; low-dose, 3/49;
high-dose, 7/50;p - 0.034, incidental tumour test) in females. The mean historical incidence
of pulmonary adenomas and carcinomas in the laboratory was 2 % (range, 0-3 % ). Male rats
also had an increased incidence of pulmonary adenomatous hyperplasia (control, 3/50;
low-dose, 5/50; high-dose, 7/50). A si gnifi ca nt positive trend was seen in the incidence of132 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 1. Hepatocellular tumour incidences in female B6C3F 1 mice fed various
preparations of He Blue No. 1 in the diet
Treatment regimen Incidence of hepatocellular tumours
Adenomas Carcinomas Combined
HC Blue No. 1 (highly puriied) continuously 10/46 41/46 45/46
for 24 months
HC Blue No. 1 (recrystallized, charcoal filtered) 10/46 44/46 46/46
continuously for 24 months
HC Blue No. 1 (recrystallized, charcoal filtered) for 10/22 13/22 20/22
9 months followed by control diet for 15 months
HC Blue No. 1 (recrystallized, charcoal filtered) for 4/23 19/23 20/23
15 months followed by control diet for 9 months
HC Blue No. 1 (recrystallized, charcoal filtered) 21/46 25/46 40/46
every other week for 24 months
Con troIs 1/48 2/48 3/48
From Bumett & Corbett (1987)
uterine stromal polyps (control, 5/50; low-dose, 9/50; and high-dose, 14/50; p = 0.022,
incidental tumour trend test) and of neoplastic nodules or neoplastic nodules and carcinomas
(combined) in the livers of male rats, although the incidences in the treated groups were not
significantly greater than those in controls (US National Toxicology Program, 1985; Kan
et al., 1989a).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
About 85 g of a commercial semi-permanent hair dye formulation containing 1.48% He
Blue No. 1 enriched with 113.6 ¡-Ci/mg (ring-14C)-labelled HC Blue No. 1 was applied on
two occasions to the hair of human volunteers, worked in gently for 5-8 min and allowed to
remain in contact with the hair and scalp for an additional 30 min. On the first occasion, the
hair was shaven, and radiolabel accounting for 0.09-0.15% of that applied was detected in
the urine over a seven-day period; half was excreted in the urine after 18 h. On the second
occasion, the hair was shaven only after 30 days: cumulative absorption was 0.15% on the
first day and 0.5 % on the 30th day; half of the radiolabel was excreted after 138 h (Maibach &
Wolfram, 1981; Wolfram & Maibach, 1985). (The Working Group noted that in neither study
were urinary metabolites identified, so that the metabolic fate of HC Blue No. 1 in humans
remains unknown.)
4.1.2 Experimental systems
The same commercial hair dye formulation as used above was applied to the scalp hair of
rhesus monkeys and allowed to remain in contact for 30 min. Radiolabel accounting forHC BLUE NO. 1133
0.12-0.13 % of that applied was detected in urine over a seven-day period; half was excreted
in the urine after 40 h (Maibach & Wolfram, 1981; Wolfram & Maibach, 1985).
Following intraperitoneal or subcutaneous injection of 2.5, 3.5,4.0,5.0 or 100 mg/kg bwHC Blue No. 1 (98% pure, containing four minor components) to adult Fischer rats or
rabbits, over 90% was recovered in bile or urine within 6 h of administration. Following
application of about 1 mg/cm2 (250 llg/ml in saline) HC Blue No. 1 to the skin, about 1 % of
the dose was recovered in the bile and slightly more in the urine of rats and an average of
4.5% of the dose in the urine of rabbits after 48 h (Frenkel & Brody, 1973).
(The Working Group noted that urinary metabolites were not identified in the se threestudies J.
Up to 40% of radiolabel was recovered in the urine of B6C3F 1 mice and Fischer 344/N
rats after oral administration by gavage of 100 mg/kg bw (ring_14C)HC Blue No. 1
(29 mCi/mmol (113.6 llCi/mg); 97% pure). HC Blue No. 1 administered orally to B6C3Fi
mIce yielded three metabolites in equal proportions, which were more water soluble than the
parent compound; one was a glucuronide of the parent compound. Metabolism of
(ring_14C)HC Blue No. 1 (200 llM (51 mg)) by hepatocyes isolated from mice and rats
yielded profiles similar to those seen in vivo. High-performance liquid chromatography
separation showed that HC Blue No. 1 is metabolized extensively in mIce to five major
metabolites. Thermospray liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry of these metabolites
provided tentative evidence for nitroreduction, N-demethylation and conjugation
(glucuronidation of a demethylated product and acetylation). ln rats, HC Blue No. 1
produced three metabolites similar to those found in mice (Kari et al., 1988, 1989b, 1990a,b).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
Concentrations of 0, 1500 or 3000 ppm (mg/kg of diet) HC Blue No. 1 (.. 97% pure)
were administered in the diet to Fischer 344/N rats of each sex and to male B6C3F1 mice, and
concentrations of 0,3000 or 6000 ppm (mg/kg of diet) were given to female B6C3F 1 mice, for
103 weeks. The calculated average daily doses were 66 and 38 mg/kg bw for male rats, 74 and
153 mg/kg bw for female rats, 309 and 582 mg/kg bw for male mice, and 778 and 1634 mg/kg
bw for female mIce. No toxicologically significant non-neoplastic lesion was found in rats or
mice of either sex (US National Toxicology Program, 1985; Kari et al., 1989a).
HC Blue No. 1 was present at 1.6% in semi-permanent hair colouring formulations
evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rabbits (Burnett et al., 1976),at 0.3% in a
20-month study of dermal toxicity in mice (Jacobs et aL., 1984) and at 1.54% in a two-year
feeding study in dogs (Wernick et al., 1975), described in detail on p. 97. No treatment-
related toxicity was detected. (The Working Group noted that the dose of each component of
the formulation was very low and unlikely to have been toxic.)134 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were available to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of HC Blue No. 1 alone. The compound was present at low concentrations in semi-
permanent hair colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertilty and reproductive
performance in rats (1.54%) (Wernick et al., 1975; see p. 99), in a study of heritable trans-
location in rats (0.5%) (Burnett et al., 1981; see p. 104) and in studies ofteratogenesis in rats
(Wernick et al., 1975, 1.54%; Burnett et al., 1976, 1.6%) and rabbits (1.54%) (Wernick et al.,
1975) (see p. 100). No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group
noted that the dose of each component of the formulation was very low and unlikely to have
been toxic.)
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Tables 2 and 3 and Appendices 1 and 2)
Both commercial preparations and purified samples ofHC Blue No. 1 have been tested
for genetic and related effects. The results of some tests indicate that the bacterial
mutagenicIty and DNA adducts seen after exposure to commercial HC Blue No. 1 are due to
impurities and not to the main component (Abu-Shakraetal., 1991). Commercial samples of
HC Blue No. 1 induced mutations in Salmonella typhimurium and mutations at both the hprt
locus of cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells and the tk locus of mouse lymphoma L5178Y
cells. ln contrast, purified samples did not induce mutation in S. typhimurium, Escherichia
coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe or Drosophila melanogaster or at
the hprt locus of Chinese hamster V79 cells; a weak response was, however, obtained at the tk
locus of mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells. The negative results in S. typhimurium were
obtained at doses of the purified material up to 50-fold higher th an the effective doses
needed when commercial HC Blue No. 1 samples were tested.
Purified and commercial HC Blue No. 1 preparations induced unscheduled DNA
synthesis in primary cultures of rat hepatocyes. Purified samples were found to induce
unscheduled DNA synthesis in primary cultures of mouse, Syrian hamster, rabbit and rhesus
monkey hepatocyes.
Sister chromatid exchange frequency was increased in cultured Chinese hamster ovary
cells exposed to purified and commercial HC Blue No. 1 and in primary cultures of mouse,
hepatocyes exposed to a commercial preparation. Chromosomal aberrations were induced
in primary mouse but not rat hepatocye cultures by commercial He Blue No. 1. AHC BLUE NO. 1135
commercial HC Blue No. 1 preparation increased the frequency of chromosomal
aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro in the presence of a metabolic activation
system, whereas one study with purified HC Blue No. 1 showed no increase in chromosomal
aberrations; however, in the latter study, it was tested at a lower concentration and only in the
absence of an exogenous metabolIc activation system. A commercial HC Blue No. 1 was
reported not to induce morphological transformation of Syrian hamster embiyo cells.
Purified HC Blue No. 1 induced micronuclei in the bone marrow of female ICR mice
exposed in vivo intraperitoneally but did not increase the frequency in the bone marrow of
male CBA, male or female CD- 1 or male ICR mice. A commercial sample of HC Blue No. 1
(97%) did not induce micronuclei in male or female B6C3Fi mice exposed by oral
administration.
Commercial HC Blue No. 1 inhibited gap-junctional intercellular communication in
Chinese hamster lung V79 cells at non-cyotoxic doses.
It was reported in an abstract that presumably commercial samples (concentration
unspecified) of HC Blue No. 1 induced S-phase synthesis in the livers of male but not female
mIce exposed in vivo. The samples did not induce unscheduled DNA synthesis in the livers of
mIce or rats exposed in vivo but induced unscheduled DNA synthesis in primaiy cultures of
mouse, Syrian hamster and cyomolgus monkey hepatocyes. The samples induced
hepatocye proliferation in mice but not in rats treated in vivo (Mirsalis et al., 1986).
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
HC Blue No. 1 was used as a semi-permanent hair dye until the mid-1980s, when its
production and use were discontinued.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
HC Blue No. 1 was tested for carcinogenicity by administration in the diet in two studies
in mice, one of which was restricted to females, and in one study in male and female rats. ln
one study in male and female mice and in several experiments in the study of females, it
significantly increased the incidence ofhepatocellular adenomas and/or carcinomas in mice
of each sex and increased the incidence of thyroid follicular-cell adenomas in males. An
increase in the combined incidence of pulmonary adenomas and carcinomas was seen in
female but not in male ràts.
5.4 Other relevant data
Commercial samples of HC Blue No. 1 bound to DNA and induced mutation in
bacteria. They induced DNA damage, gene mutation and chromosomal anomalies and
inhibited intercellular communication in cultured mammalian celIs.Table 2. Genetic and related efTects of purified He Blue No. 1..~
Test system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)
Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA 100, reverse mutation - - 2500.~~ Shahin & Bugaut
(1983l
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation- - 2500.~~ Oberly et al. (199)C
~ SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation- - 2500.~~ Shahin & Bugaut (1983)
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 2500.~~ Oberly et al. (199)=:
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation- - 2500.~~ Shahin & Bugaut (1983) 0
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation- - 2500.~~ Oberlyet al. (199) Z
SA8, Salmonella typhimurium TA1538, reverse mutation 2500.~~ Shahin & Bugaut (1983)0- - 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation- - 2500.~~ Shahin & Bugaut (1983)
~SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation- - 250.~~ Oberly et al. (199)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation- 0 100.~~ Abu-Shakra et al. ::
(1991)dí/
~
ECW, Escherichia coli WP2, uvrA-, trp-, reverse mutation - - 250.~~ Oberly et al. (199) 0
SCG, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, ade and trp conversions- - 12700.~~ Loprieno et al. (1983YE
SZF, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, forward mutation, ade and rad- - 12700.~~ Loprieno et al. (1983) =:
DMX, Drosophila melanogaster, sex-linked recessive lethal mutation- 5100.00 injection Darroudi et al. (1983ým!J
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priary hepatoces + 0 0.100 Wiliams et al. (1989)8 -.
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priary hepatoctes + 0 5.~~ Hil et al. (199)
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, mouse priary hepatocyes + 0 5.~~ Hil et al. (199)
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythe sis, Syran hamster priary + 0 5.~~ Hil et al. (199)
hepatoces
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rabbit priary hepatoces + 0 50.~~ Hil et al. (199)
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythe sis, rhesus monkey priary + 0 50.~~ Hil et al. (199)
hepatoces
G9H, Gene mutation, Chinese hamster lung V79 cells, hprt locus- - 25500.~~ Loprieno et al. (1983)
G5T Gene mutation, mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus-(+ ) 25.~~ Oberlyet al. (199)
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary cells- 0 160.~~ x 1 h Darroudi et aL. (1983)
in vitro.~
Table 2 (coDtd)
lèst system Result Dosea
(LED/HID)Reference
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
system
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary cells
in vitro
cie, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary cells
in vitro
DHf Unscheduled DNA sythesis, human HeLa cells
MV, Micronucleus test, male CBA mouse bone marrow
MV, Micronucleus test, female ICR mouse bone marrow
MV, Micronucleus test, male ICR mou se bone marrow
MV, Micronucleus test, male and female CD-l mouse bone
marrow
BID, Binding (covalent) to TA98 DNA in vitro (32P-postlabelling)o 100.~~ X 24 h Darroudi et al. (1983)
40.~~ Darroudi et al. (1983)
760.~~ Loprieno et al. (1983) ::
100.~~ ip x 3 Darroudi et al. (1983)("
o:100.~~ ip x 1 Parton et al. (199)h8 100.~~ ip x 1 Parton et al. (199)htT100.~~ ip x 1 Parton et al. (199)hZP1200.00i Abu-Shakra et al. ..
(1991)d+
o
+
o
+, positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
ain-vitro tests, ¡.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
bSynthesized and puriied industrial sample with one recrystalliztion in ethanol
qndustril sample with one ethanol recrystalliztion, purity ;: 98%
dfigh-pedonnance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-puriied
ei0vided by l'Oréal (ref. MPIp37) as a pure product
!Pure form supplied by l'Oréal
-rriied preparation
h;: 98% pure
il2 00 ¡.g/rnl equivalent; HPLC-puriied sample derived from HPLC fractionation of 240 mg HC Blue 1 added to 20 ml incubation mixure
..w..Table 3. Genetic and related efTects of commercial He Blue No. 1 --VJ00
Test system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation + + 50.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988ji
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 50.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation + + 50.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SA9, Salmonella typmmurium TA98, reverse mutation 0 100.~~ Abu-Shakra et al. -+
~(1991)CSA9, Salmonella tyhimurium TA98, reverse mutation + 0 0.~~ Casciano et al. (1985)d;~ abstr.
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA98NR, reverse mutation + 0 0.~~ Casciano et al. (1985)d;0Zabstr. 0
SAS, Salmonella typmmurium TA9, reverse mutation + + 50.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988) a
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priary hepatoces + 0 50.~~ US National Toxico- ~
logy Program (1985ji 'i
=iVRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priary hepatoces + 0 1.~~ Wiliams et al. (1989Y C/
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, mouse priary hepatoces + 0 0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1986)d; ~
abstr. 0t"VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, Syrn hamster priary + 0 0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1986)d; Chepatoces abstr. ~
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, cyomologus monkey priary + 0 0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1986)d;tr
Uthepatoces abstr. -.
VIH, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, human priary hepatoces + 0 0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1986)d;
abstr.
G5l Gene mutation, mouse lymphoma L5178Y cens, tk locus + 0 20.~~ Myhr & Caspary
(1991jiGCO, Gene mutation, Chinese hamster ovary cens, hprt locus + 0 0.~~ Casciano et al. (1985);
abstr.
SIM, Sister chromatid exchange, mou se hepatoces in vitro (+ ) 0 10.~~ Kari et al. (l99aji
SIC, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary cens in vitro + (+ ) 119.~~ Loveday et al. (l99l
CIC, Chromosomal aberrtions, Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro - + 96.~~ Lovedayet al. (l99)b
CIM, Chromosomal aberrtions, mouse hepatoces in vitro + 0 10.~~ Kari et al. (l99a,b ji
CIR, Chromosomal aberrtions, rat hepatoces in vitro - 0 100.~~ Kari et al. (l99b)Table 3 (contd)
Test systemResult
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
systemDosea
(LED/HID)Reference
Tes, eell transformation, Syrian hamster embryo cells, clonaI assayo 50.~~ Pienta & Kawalek
(1981l0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1986)d;
abstr.
360.~~, 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988);
abstr.
720.~~, 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988);:i abstr.n
360.~~, 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988); to
abstr.5720.~~, 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988); rn
abstr. Z
360.~~, 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988)d; 0
abstr. ..
720.~~, 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988)d;
abstr.
1200.~~ Abu-Shakra et al.
(1991)
50.~~ Kari et al. (199a)UPR, Unscheduled DNA synthesis, rat hepatoces in vivo
UV, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, male B6e3Fi mouse
hepatoces in vivo
UV, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, female B6e3Fi mou sehepatoces in vivo
MV, Micronucleus test, male B6e3F i mouse bone marrow
MV, Micronucleus test, female B6e3F i mouse bone marrow
*, S-Phase sythesis, male B6C3Fi mouse hepatoctes in vivo +
*, S-Phase sythesis, female B6e3Fi mouse hepatoces in vivo
B1D, Binding (covalent) to TA98 DNA in vitro (p32_postlabelling)+ o
1eR, Inhibition of cell-cell communication, ehinese hamster lung
V79 cells+ o
+, positive; (+ ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested; ?, inconclusive (variable response in several experients within an adequate study);
0.~~, dose not given
arn-vitro tests, ¡.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
bCommercial He Blue 1, Lot No. 3670379, approxiately 97% pure
ceommercial HC Blue 1, Lot No. 68379913
dpurity unspecified
eCommercial sample
*Not displayed on profie ..w~140 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Purified samples ofHC Blue No. 1 did not bind to DNAor induce mutation in bacteria.
They did not induce mitotic recombination in yeasts and did not induce mutation in insects.
They induced DNA damage, sister chromatid exchange and, weakly, gene mutation but not
chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian cells. DNA damage was not induced in
cultured human cells (HeLa). Micronuclei were induced in the bone marrow of female mice
of one strain exposed in vivo.
5.5 Evaluation1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of HC Blue No. 1.
There is suffcient evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicIty of He Blue
No. 1.
Overall evaluation
HC Blue No. 1 is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B).
6. References
Abu-Shakra, A., Johnson, L., Earley, K., Jameson, C.W, Kari, F:W, Gupta, R. & Langenbach, R.
(1991) Isolation of the mutagenIc and DNA adduct-inducing components from a commercial
preparation of HC Blue 1 using Salmonella (TA98) bioassay-directed HPLC fractionation.
Mutat. Res., 260, 377-385
Burnett, C.M. & Corbett, J.F: (1987) Failure of short-term in vitro mutagenicity tests to predict animal
carcinogenicity of hair dyes. Food Chem. Toxico/., 25, 703-707
Burnett, C., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.R, Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R. & Voelker, R. (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes.J. Toxicol. environ. Health, 1, 1027-104
Burnett, c., Lohr, R. & Corbett, J. (1981) Heritable translocation study on two hair dye formulations.
Fundam. appl. Toxico/., i, 325-328
Casciano, D.A., Shaddock, J.G., Hass, RS. & Spalding, J.W (1985) N-Methylamino-2-nitro-4-N',N'-
bis(2-hydroxyethyl)aminobenzene (HC-Blue No. 1) is genotoxic as judged by the hepatoce/-
DNA repair, Chinese hamster ovary hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase and
Salmonella assays (Abstract). Environ. Mutag., 7 (SuppL. 3), 19
Darroudi, E, Sobels, EH. & Natarajan, A.i: (1983) Evaluation of the mutagenIc potential of the hair
dye N-methylamino-2-nitro-4-N',N' -bis(2-hydroxyethyl)aminobenzene in a battery consisting of
Drosophila and mammalian cytogenetic assays. Mutat. Res., 1l6, 169-178
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, E (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elimination of an aromatic hair dye.
~ch. envuon. HeaUh, 27, 401-4
Hil, L.E., Parton, J. W, Probst, G .S. & Garriott, M.L. (199) Mutagenicity evaluation ofHC Blue No. 1
and HC Blue No. 2. II. Effect on the in vitro induction of unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat,
mou se, rabbit, hamster and monkey primary hepatocytes. Muta!. Res., 241, 145-150
lFor definition of the italicized tenus, see Preamble, pp. 2630.HC BLUE NO. 1 141
IAC (1985) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals ta Humans,
Vol. 36, Allyl Compounds, Aldehydes, Epoxides and Peroxies, Lyon, pp. 189-226
IAC (1987) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7,Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1-42, Lyon,
pp. 205-207
Jacobs, M.M., Burnett, e.M., Penicnak, AJ., Herrera, J.A., Morris, WE., Shubik, P., Apaja, M. &
Granroth, G. (1984) Evaluation of the toxicity and carcinogenicity of hair dyes in Swiss mice.
Drug Chem. Toxicol., 7, 573-586
Kari, EW, Rudo, K, Volosin, J., Jenkins, W, Driscoll, S. & Langenbach, R (1988) Comparative
metabolism of two structurally similar nitrophenylene-diamine dyes (HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2)
by mouse hepatocytes (Abstract No. 505). Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res., 29,127
Kari, EW, Mennear, J.H., Farnell, D., Thompson, RR & Huff, J.E. (1989a) Comparative carcino-
genicity of two structurally similar phenylenediamine dyes (HC Blue No. 1 and He Blue No. 2) in
F344/N rats and B6C3F 1 mice. Toxicology, 56, 155-165
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S., Parker, e., Rudo, K, Tomer, K & Langenbach, R (1989b) Species
comparisons regarding comparative metabolism of two structurally similar nitrophenylene-
diamines (HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2) (Abstract No. 651). Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res., 30, 164
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S.M., Abu-Shakra, A, Strom, S.e., Jenkins, WL., Volosin, J.S., Rudo, KM. &
Langenbach, R (199a) Comparative metabolism and genotoxicity of the structurally similar
nitrophenylenediamine dyes, HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2, in mouse hepatocytes. Cell. Biol.
Toxicol., 6, 139-155
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S., Parker, e., Rudo, K, Tomer, K & Langenbach, R (199b) Species
comparisons regarding comparative metabolism of two structurally similar phenylenediamines
(HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2). Prog. clin. biol. Res., 340D, 305-314
Loprieno, N., Mariani, L. & Rusciano, D. (1983) Lack of genotoxic properties of the hair-dye
component N-methylamino-2-nitro-4-N' ,N' -bis(2-hydroxyethyl)aminobenzene, in mammalian
cells in vitro, and in yeasts. Mutat. Res., 116, 161-168
Loveday, KS., Anderson, RE., Resnick, M.A & Zeiger, E. (199) Chromosome aberration and sister
chromatid exchange tests in Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro. V: Results with 46 chemIcals.
Environ. mol. Mutag., 16,272-303
Maibach, H.I. & Wolfram, L.J. (1981) Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes.l Soc. Cosmet. Chem.,
32,223-229
Mirsalis, J.e., Steinmetz, KL., Bakke, J.P., Tyson, e.K, Soh, E.KW, Hamilton, C.M., Ramsay, M.J. &
Spalding, J.W (1986) Genotoxicity and tumor promoting capabilities of blue hair dyes in rodent
and primate liver (Abstract No. 147). Environ. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 6), 55-56
Mirsalis, J.e., Steinmetz, KL., Blazak, WE, Bakke, J.P., Hamilton, C.M., Stewart, RE., Deahl, J.T. &
Cunningham, G.D. (1988) Evaluation of genotoxicity and hepatic hyperplasia in mice following
exposure to HC Blue # 1 and HC Blue # 2 via dosed feed (Abstract No. 171). Environ. mol. Mutag.,
II (SuppL 11), 71
Myhr, B.C. & Caspary, WJ. (1991) Chemical mutagenesis at the thymidine kinase locus in L5178Y
mouse lymphoma cells: results for 31 coded compounds in the National Toxicology Program.
Environ. moL. Mutag., 18, 51-83
Oberly, T.J., Kokkno, A.J., Bewsey, RJ. & Richardson, KK (199) Mutagenic evaluation ofHC Blue
No. 1 and HC Blue No. 2. III. Effects in the Salmonella tyhimurium/Escherichia coli revers ionassay and the mouse lymphoma L5178Y TK+/- forward mutation assay. Mutat. Res., 241,
151-159142 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Parton, J.W, Beyers, J.E. & Garriott, M.L. (199) Mutagenicity evaluation of HC Blue No. 1 and HC
Blue No. 2. I. Effect of the induction of micronuclei in mouse bone marrow cells. Mutat Res., 241,
139-144
Pienta, R.J. & Kawalek, J.c. (1981) Transformation of hamster embryo cells by aromatic amines. Natl
Cancer lnst. Monogr, 58, 243-251
Shahin, M.M. & Bugaut, A. (1983) Mutagenic evaluation of the monocyclic aromatIc amine N-methyl-
amino-2-nitro-4-N' ,N' -bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-aminobenzene in the Salmonella tyhimurium/mam-
malian microsome test. Mutat. Res., 116, 155-159
US National Toxicology Program (1985) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of H C Blue No. 1 (CAS
No. 2784-94-3) in F344/ N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Feed Studies) (NT TechnIcal Report 271; NI
PubL. No. 85-2527), Research Triangle Park, NC
Wernick, T., Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Toxicol. appl. Phannacol., 32, 450-
Wiliams, G.M., Mori, H. & McQueen, c.A. (1989) Structure-activity relationships in the rat
hepatoce DNA-repair test for 300 chemicals. Mutat. Res., 221, 263-28
Wolfram, L.J. & Maibach, H.I. (1985) Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes. Arch. dermtol. Res.,
277, 235-241
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T. & Mortelmans, K. (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iv Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 11 (SuppL. 12), 1-158HC BLUE NO. 2
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. SelV Reg. No.: 33229-34-4
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2,2'-((4-((2- Hydroxyethyl )amino)- 3- ni trophenyl )imino )bis( etha-
nol)
Synonyms: HC Blue 2; HC Blue Number 2; 2,2'-((4-((2-hydroxyethyl)amino)-3-nitro-
phenyl )imino )di( ethanol); NI,N4,N4-tris(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-nitro-para-phenylenedia_
mine
H CH - CH - OH\ -VI 2 2NON1 \HO- H2C - H2C CH2- CH2 - OH
N02
C12H19N30SMoL. wt: 285.30
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the substance
From US National Toxicology Program (1985)
(a) Description: Dark-blue microcrystallne (75% pure) or blackish-blue amorphous
powder (98% pure), with a copper cast
(b) Melting-point: 93-98 °C (98% pure)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported.
(d) Solubility: Soluble in water, ethanol, methanol and acetone
(e) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): 1.7
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
HC Blue No. 2 is available commercially with a purity ~ 95% with possible impurities,
inc1uding methylamine (-c 1 %), 1,2-dihydroxyethane (-c 1 %) and water (-c 1 %). It is also
available in a technical grade containing 55-90% dye, 10-30% inorganic salts and 2,2-((4-
amino,.3-nitrophenyl)imino)bis(ethanol) (-c 7%) as a possible impurity.
-143-144 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
The form ofHC Blue No. 2 that is:: 95% pure is produced commercially bythe reaction
of 4-fluoro-3-nitrobenzenamine with ethylene oxide (see IARC, 1985, 1987) to form
2,2-( (4-fluoro-3-nitrophenyl)imino lbis( ethanol); this intermediate is reacted with mono-
ethanolamine to form HC Blue No. 2. The technical grade is produced by reaction of2-nitro-
para-phenylenediamine (see IARC, 1978) with ethylene oxide or 2-chloroethanoL.
Production and use of HC Blue No. 2 began in the late 1950s. Approximately 9-11
tonnes are used annually in the USA, according to industry estimates.
1.2.2 Use
HC Blue No. 2 is used exclusively as a dye in semi-permanent hair colouring products.
These products are generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed to remain
in contact with the hair and scalp for 30-45 min. The concentration ofHC Blue No. 2 used in
these preparations ranges from 1.6 to 2% (Frenkel & Brody, 1973; US National Toxicology
Program, 1985).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
HC Blue No. 2 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupation al exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
No data were available to the Working Group.
2. Studies of Cancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of Cancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, seven weeks of age, were fed 0, 5000 or
10000 mglkg (ppm) (males) or 0, 10000 or 20 000 ppm (females) HC Blue No. 2 (about 98%HC BLUE NO. 2145
pure) in the diet for 104 weeks and were kiled at 112-113 weeks of age. Final mean body
weights of treated males were similar to those of con trois; however, those of treated females
were 15% (low-dose) and 22% (high-dose) lower than those of controls. Survval at the end
of the study was: males-control, 24/50; low-dose, 24/50; and high-dose, 34/50; females-
control, 35/50; low-dose, 28/50; and high-dose, 20/50 (p ~ 0.005, life table test). The
reduced survval of female mice was attributed to infection of the ovaries and uteri with
Klebsiella sp. No significant increase in the incidence in any tumour was observed (US
National Toxicology Program, 1985; Kari et al., 1989a). (The Working Group noted that the
reduced survval of females precluded adequate evaluation of the study.)
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six to seven weeks of age, were fed
0, 5000 or 10 000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) (males) or 0, 10 000 or 20 000 mg/kg ppm (females)
HC Blue No. 2 ("- 98% pure) in the diet for 103 weeks and were kiled at 110-112 weeks of
age. Final me an body weights were depressed by less than 10% in treated males but by 13%
(Iow-dose) and 22% (high-dose) in females. No adverse effect on survval was observed in
males (control, 32/50; low-dose, 38/50; high-dose, 42/50) or females (control, 41/50;
low-dose, 40/50; high-dose, 39/50). The incidence of C-cell adenomas of the thyroid in males
was 7/50 control, 2/50 low-dose and 5/49 high-dose; the incidence of C-cell carcinomas was
0/50 control, 3/50 low-dose and 5/49 high-dose (p = 0.029, incidental tumour trend test).
The trend in combined incidence (7/50, 5/50 and 10/49) was not significant. There was no
excess of thyroid tumours in females. No other significant increase in the incidence of
tumours was reported; however, malignant mixed mesenchymal tumours of the kidneyweredetected in 2/50 high-dose female rats and none of 1863 historical controls. A negative trend
in the incidence of fibroadenomas of the mammary gland was seen in female rats (control,
20/50; low-dose, 10/50; high-dose, 4/50 (p ~ 0.001, Cochran Armitage test for trend)) (US
National Toxicology Program, 1985; Kari et al., 1989a).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
About 85 g of a commercial semi-permanent hair dye formulation containing 1.77% He
Blue No. 2 enriched with 378.6 l.Ci/mg (ring-14C)-labelled HC Blue No. 2 was applied to the
hair of human volunteers, worked in gently for 5-8 min and allowed to remain in contact with
the hair and scalp for an additional 30 min. Mer 30 days, radiolabel accounting for less than
0.1 % of that applied was detected in the urine; half was excreted in urine after 52 h (Wolfram
& Maibach, 1985). (The Working Group noted that urinary metabolites were not identified,
so that the metabolic fate of HC Blue No. 2 in humans remains unknown.)
4.1.2 Experimental systems
Up to 40% ofradiolabel was recovered in the urine ofB6C3F1 mice and Fischer 344/N
rats after oral administration by gavage of 100 mglkg bw (ring_14C)-labelled HC Blue No. 2146 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(0.1 mCi/mmol (35 J.Ci/mg); 98% pure). Metabolism ofHC Blue No. 2 (200 J.M (57 mg)) by
hepatocyes isolated from mice and rats yielded profiles similar to those seen in vivo.
High-performance liquid chromatography separation showed that HC Blue No. 2 is meta-
bolized extensively in mice to one major metabolite, which has not been characterized (Kari
et al., 1988, 1989b, 1990a,b).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
Concentrations of 0, 5000 or 10 000 ppm (mg/kg) HC Blue No. 2 (98% pure) were
administered in the diet to male Fischer 344/N rats for 103 weeks and to male B6C3Fi mice
for 104 weeks and concentrations of 0, 10 000 or 20 000 ppm (mg/kg) to female rats for
103 weeks and to female mice for 104 weeks. The calculated average daily doses were 194
and 391 mg/kg bw for male rats, 465 and 1001 mg/kg bw for female rats, 1321 and
2243 mg/kg bw for male mice, and 2362 and 5609 mg/kg for female mice. A dose-related
increase in the incidence of hyperostosis of the skull was observed in male and female rats
(US National Toxicology Program, 1985; Kari et aL., 1989a).
HC Blue No. 2 was present at low concentrations in semi-permanent hair colouring
forn1Ulations evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rab bits (1. 7%) (Burnett et al.,
1976) and in a two-year feeding study in dogs (1.63%) (Wernick et aL., 1975), described in
detail on p. 97. No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group
noted that the dose of each component of the formulation was very low and unlikely to have
been toxic.)
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were available to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of HC Blue No. 2 alone. The compound was present at low concentrations in semi-
permanent hair colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertility and reproductive
performance in rats (Wernick et aL., 1975, 1.63 %; see p. 99) and in studies of teratogenesis in
rats (Wernick et al., 1975, 1.63%; Burnett et al., 1976, 1.70%) and rabbits (Wernick et al.,
1975, 1.63%) (see p. 100). No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working
Group noted that the dose of each component of the formulations was very low and unlikely
to have been toxic.)
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.HC BLUE NO. 2 147
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
AIthough two different lots of HC Blue No. 2 have been used in most of the short-term
tests (98.5% and 99.8% purity), they appear to induce similar responses when tested in the
same assay system.
HC Blue No. 2 induced mutation in Salmonella typhimurium but did not induce reverse
mutation in Escherichia coli. It induced mutations at the tk locus of mouse lymphoma
L5178Y cells and induced unscheduled DNA synthesis in cultures of primary hepatocyes
from mice, rats, Syrian hamsters and rabbits, but not in those from monkeys. HC Blue No. 2
induced sister chromatid exchange in cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells and, weakly, in
female B6C3F1 mouse primary hepatocyes. Chromosomal aberrations were not induced in
Chinese hamster ovary cells or in primary cultures of rat or mouse hepatocyes.
HC Blue No. 2 did not inhibit gap-junctional communication in Chinese hamster lung
V79 cells, but it elicited a slight, dose-dependent increase in communication at non-cyotoxic
concentrations.
HC Blue No. 2 did not induce micronuclei in mouse bone-marrow in three assays (one of
which was with the lower purity sample).
As reported in two abstracts, HC Blue No. 2 did not increase proliferation of hepa-
tocyes frOID rats and mIce treated in vivo (Mirsalis et al., 1986, 1988), but it enhanced S-phase
DNA synthesis in male (but not female) mouse hepatocyes. It did not induce unscheduled
DNA synthesis in the livers of mice or rats in feeding studies.
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
HC Blue No. 2 is used as a semi-permanent hair dye.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
HC Blue No. 2 was tested for carcinogenicity by administration in the diet in one study in
mice and in one study in rats. No significant increase in tumour incidence was observed in
either species, but the data on female mice could not be adequately evaluated.
5.4 Other relevant data
HC Blue No. 2 induced gene mutation in bacteria. It induced DNA damage, gene
mutation and sister chromatid exchange but not chromosomal aberrations or inhibition of
intercellular communication in cultured mammalian cells. Micronuclei were not induced in
the bone marrow of mice exposed in vivo."'Table 1. Genetic and related efTects of He Blue No. 2 ,t00
lest system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
98-98.5% Purity sampleb
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation - - 500.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 500.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
~SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation(+ ) (+ ) 1667.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation + + 50.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA97, reverse mutation(+ ) (+ ) 3333.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988) ~0G5l Gene mutation, mou se lymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus + 0 30.~~ Myhr & Caspary Z
(1991) 0
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chine se hamster ovary cells in vitro + + 240.~~ Loveday et al. (199) (.
~SIM, Sister chromatid exchange, mouse hepatoces in vitro(+ ) 0 50.~~ Karl et al. (199a)
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro - - 2500.~~ Loveday et al. (199) ::CIM, Chromosomal aberrations, mouse hepatoces in vitro -0 100.~~ Karl et al. (199a,b)CI
CIR, Chromosomal aberrations, rat hepatoces in vitro0 100.~~ Karl et al. (199b)~ -0ICR, Inhibition of cell-cell communication, Chinese hamster lung -0 40.~~ Karl et al. (199b)E V79 cells~
99.8% Purity samplec ti
Ut
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation 2500.~~ Oberly et al. (199).. - -
SAS, Salmonella tyhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 2500.~~ Oberly et al. (199)
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation -(+ ) 2500.~~ Oberly et al. (199)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation + '+ 160.~~ Oberly et al. (199)
EC\Y Escherichia coli WP2, uvrA-, trp-, reverse mutation - - 250.~~ Oberly et al. (199)
VRp, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, male rat priary hepatoces + 0 50.~~ Hil et al. (199)
VIA, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, male ,mouse priary + 0 10.~~ Hil et al. (199)hepatoces
VIA, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, male hamster priary + 0 50.~~ Hil et al. (199)hepatoces
VIA, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, male rabbit priary hepatoces + 0 50.~~ Hil et al. (199)Table 1 (contd)
Thst systemResult Reference
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
systemDosea
(LED/HID)
UIA Unscheduled DNA sythesis, male rhesus monkey priaiy
hepatüces
G5l Gene mutation, mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus
MV, Micronucleus test, CD-1 mouse bone marrow
MV, Micronucleus test, ICR mouse bone marrow
Punty unspecified
URp, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priaiy hepatüces+
+
UPR, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, rat hepatüces in vivo
UV, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, male mouse hepatüces in vivo _
UV, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, female mouse hepatüces
in vivo
MV, Micronucleus test, male B6C3F i mouse bone marrow in vivo _
MV, Micronucleus test, female B6C3Fi mouse bone marrow
in vivo
*, S-Phase sythesis, male B6C3Fi mouse hepatüces in vivo +
*, S-Phase sythesis, female B6C3Fi mouse hepatüces in vivoo
+
o50.~~ Hil et al. (199)
Oberly et al. (199)
Parton et al. (199)
Parton et al. (199)200.~~
100.~~ ip x 1
100.~~ ip x 1
=:0.~~ Mirlis et al. (1986); (j
abstr. ti0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1986); 8abstr. t'
1200.~~ diet 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1986); Z
abstr. 0
240.~~ diet 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988);N
abstr.
1200.~~ diet 7 days Mirsalis et al. (1988);
abstr.
2400.~~ diet 7 days Mirlis et al. (1988);
abstr.
1200.~~ diet Mirsalis et al. (1988);
abstr.
2400.~~ diet Mirsalis et al. (1988);
abstr.
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
a:n-vitro tests, i.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg!kg bw
b Approxiately 98.5% pure
'Lt No. 1-329, Clairol, 99.8% pure
*Not displayed on profie ...¡'o150 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
5.5 Evaluation i
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of HC Blue No. 2.
There is inadequate evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of HC Blue
No. 2.
Overall evaluation
HC Blue No. 2 is not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to hurnans (Group 3).
6. References
Burnett, c., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.B., Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R. & Voelker, R. (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes. 1. Toncol. environ. Health, i, 1027-
104
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, E (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elimination of an aromatic hair dye.
rVch. env~on. HeaUh, 27, 401-404
Hil, L.E., Parton, J .W, Probst, G.S. & Garriott, M.L. (199) Mutagenicity evaluation ofHC Blue No. 1
and HC Blue No. 2. II. Effect on the in vitro induction of unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat,
mouse, rabbit, hamster and monkey primary hepatocytes. Mutat. Res., 241, 145-150
IAC (1978) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, VoL.
16, Some rVomatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds-Hair Dyes, Colouring Agents and
Miscellaneous Industrial Chemicals, Lyon, pp. 73-82
IARC (1985) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 36, Allyl Compounds, Aldehydes, Epoxies and Peroxides, Lyon, pp. 189-226
IAC (1987) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 205-207
Kari, EW, Rudo, K., Volosin, J., Jenkins, W, Driscoll, S. & Langenbach, R (1988) Comparative
metabolism of two structurally similar nitrophenylene-diamine dyes (HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2)
by mouse hepatocytes (Abstract No. 505). Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res., 29, 127
Kari, EW, Mennear, J.H., Farnell, D., Thompson, RB. & Huff, J.E. (1989a) Comparative carcino-
genicity of two structurally similar phenylenediamine dyes (HC Blue No. 1 and HC Blue No. 2) in
F344/N rats and B6C3F i mice. Toxicology, 56, 155-165
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S., Parker, c., Rudo, K., Tomer, K. & Langenbach, R. (1989b) Species compa-
risons regarding comparative metabolism of two structurally similar nitrophenylenediamines
(HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2) (Abstract No. 651). Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res., 30, 164
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S.M., Abu-Shakra, A., Strom, S.C., Jenkins, WL., Volosin, J.S., Rudo, KM. &
Langenbach, R (1990a) Comparative metabolism and genotoxicity of the structurally similar
nitrophenylenediamine dyes, HC Blue 1 and HC Blue 2, in mouse hepatocytes. Cell. Biol.
Toxicol., 6, 139-155
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S., Parker, C., Rudo, K., Tomer, K. & Langenbach, R. (l99b) Species compa-
risons regarding comparative metabolism of two structurally similar phenylenediamines (He
Blue 1 and HC Blue 2). Prog. clin. biol. Res., 3400, 305-314
lPor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.HC BLUE NO. 2151
Kari, EW, Driscoll, S., Parker, c., Rudo, K, Tomer, K & Langenbach, R. (199Ob) Species compa-
risons regarding comparative metabolism of two structurally similar phenylenediamines (HC
Blue 1 and HC Blue 2). Prog. clin. hiol. Res., 340D, 305-314
Loveday, KS., Anderson, B.E., Resnick, M.A. & Zeiger, E. (199) Chromosome aberration and sister
chromatid exchange tests in Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro. V: Results with 46 chemicals.
Environ. nwl. Mutag., 16,272-303
Mirsalis, J.C., Steinmetz, KL., Bakke, J.P., Tyson, C.K, Loh, E.KN., Hamilton, C.M., Ramsey, M.J. &
Spalding, J.W (1986) Genotoxicity and tumor promoting capability of blue hair dyes in rodent
and primate liver (Abstract No. 147). Environ. Mutag., 8 (SuppL. 6), 55-56
Mirsalis, J.C., Steinmetz, KL., Blazak, WE, Bakke, J.P., Hamilton, C.M., Stewart, B.E., Deahl, J.T &
Cunningham, G.D. (1988) Evaluation of genotoxicity and hepatic hyperplasia in mice following
exposure to HC Blue # 1 and HC Blue # 2 via dosed feed (Abstract No. 171). Environ. mol. Mutag.,
11 (SuppL. 11), 71
Myhr, B.C. & Caspary, WJ. (1991) Chemical mutagenesis at the thymidine kinase locus in L5178Y
mouse lymphoma cells: results for 31 coded compounds in the National Toxicology Program.
Environ. nwl. Mutag., 18,51-83
Oberly, TJ., Kokkno, A.J., Bewsey, B.J. & Richardson, KK (199) Mutagenic evaluation ofHC Blue
No. 1 and HC Blue No. 2. III. Effects in the Salnwnella tyhimurium/Escherichia coli reversion
assay and the mouse Iymphoma L5178Y TK+/- forward mutation assay. Mutat. Res., 241,
151-159
Parton, J. W, Beyers, J.E. & Garriott, M.L. (1990) Mutagenicity evaluation of HC Blue No. 1 and He
Blue No. 2. 1. Effect of the induction of micronuclei in mouse bone marrow cells. Mutat. Res., 241,
139-144
US National Toxicology Program (1985) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of HC Blue No. 2 (CAS
No. 33229-34-4) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Feed Studies) (NT Technical Report 293;
NIH Publ. No. 85-2549), Research Triangle Park, NC
Wernick, T, Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Taricol. appl. Pharmacol., 32, 450-0
Wolfram, L.J. & Maibach, H.I. (1985) Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes. Arch. dermatol. Res.,
277, 235-241
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T. & Mortelmans, K (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iv Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., Il (Suppl. 12), 1-158HC RED NO. 3
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 2871-01-4
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2-(( 4-Amino-2-nitrophenyl)amino )ethanol
Synonyms: 2-(4-Amino-2-nitroanilino)ethanol; HC Red 3; HC Red Number 3; 4-(2-hy-
droxyethyl)amino- 3- ni troanilne; N 1_(2_ hydroxyethyl)- 2-ni tro-para -phenylenediamine
H2N~NH-CH2-CH2-0H
N02
CgHiiN303MoL. wt: 197.19
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
From US National Toxicology Program (1986)
(a) Description: Fine, dark-maroon crystals, with a greenish cast
(b) Melting-point: 124-128 °C
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported.
(d) Solubilty: Soluble in water (0.28% w/w), ethanol and acetone
(e) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): 1.9
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
HC Red No. 3 is available commercially at a purity :; 95%, with aminoquinoxaline,
aminonaphthyridine (US National Toxicology Program, 1986) and 2-((4-(4-amino-2-nitro-
phenyl)amino-2-nitrophenyl)amino) ethanol (.c 1%) as possible impurities.
1. 1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
-153-154 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
HC Red No. 3 is produced by the reaction of 4-fluoro-3-nitrobenzenamine with mono-
ethanolamine. Production and use of this dye began in the late 1950s. Approximately 2300 kg
are used annually in the USA, according to industry estimates.
1.2.2 Use
HC Red No. 3 is used exclusively as a dye in semi-permanent hair colour products. These
products are generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed to remain in
contact with the hair and scalp for 30-45 min. The concentration of HC Red No. 3 used in
these preparations ranges from 0.1 to 5% (Frenkel & Brody, 1973; US National Toxicology
Program, 1986).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Natural occurrence
HC Red No. 3 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 42 485 workers,
including 32 059 women, were potentially exposed as beauticians and cosmetologists to HC
Red No. 3 (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
No data were available to the Working Group.
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, eight weeks of age, were administered 0,
125 or 250 mg/kg bw He Red No. 3 (97% pure) by gavage in corn oil on five days a week forHC RED NO. 3 155
104 weeks and were sacrificed at 113 weeks of age. Body weight gain and survval were
reduced in aIl groups of females because of a reproductive tract infection. Survval at the end
of the study was: males-control, 30/50; low-dose, 41/50; and high-dose, 29/50; females-
control, 12/50; low-dose, 8/50; and high-dose, 9/50. The incidence of hepatocellular ade-
'nomas in males was control, 11/50; low-dose, 6/50; high-dose, 16/50; the incidence of
hepatocellular carcinomas was, control, 17/50; low-dose, 9/50; high-dose, 21/50. There was
an increased incidence of hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas combined in high-dose
male mice (control, 25/50; low-dose, 15/50; high-dose, 35/50), which was significant
(p = 0.017, incidental tumour test), but not after pair-wise comparison. The incidence in
historical controls in the testing laboratorywas 109/298 (37:l 12%) (US National Toxicology
Program, 1986). (The Working Group noted the poor survval of females and the unusually .
high incidence of hepatocellular carcinomas in male con trois. i
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, seven to eight weeks of age, were
administered 0, 250 or 500 mg/kg bwHC Red No. 3 (97% pure) by gavage in corn oil on five
days a week for 105 weeks and were sacrificed at 113- 1 l,t weeks of age. The treatment had
no effect on body weight gain throughout the study and did not reduce survval in males or
females. Survval at the end of the experiment was: males-control, 34/50; low-dose, 34/50;
high-dose, 32/50; females-control, 39/50; low-dose, 38/50; high-dose, 34/50. The incidence
of mammary gland fibroadenomas was significantly (p = 0.019, incidental tumour test)
increased in low-dose females (control, 14/50 versus low-dose, 24/50) but not in high-dose
females (11/50) (US National Toxicology Program, 1986). (The Working Group noted the
absence of a dose-response relationship. i
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2 Toxic etTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
ln the studies reported above, no compound-related toxic effect was reported (US
National Toxicology Program, 1986).
HC Red No. 3 was present at low concentrations (0.02%) in semi-permanent hair
colouring formulations evaluated in a two-year feeding study in dogs (Wernick et al., 1975)
and in a 20-month study of dermal toxicity in mice (Jacobs et al., 1984,0.3%), described in156 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
detail on p. 97. No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group
noted that the dose of each component of the formulations was very low and unlikely to have
been toxic. i
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were available to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of HC Red No. 3 alone. The compound was present at low concentrations in
semi-permanent hair colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertility and repro-
ductive performance in rats (Wernick et aL., 1975,0.02%; see p. 99), in a study of heritable
translocation in rats (Burnettetal., 1981,0.01 %; see p. 104), and in studiesofteratogenesisin
rats and rabbits (Wernick et aL., 1975) (see p. 100). No treatment-related adverse effect was
detected. (The Working Group noted that the dose of each component of the formulations
was very low and unlikely to have been toxic. i
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
HC Red No. 3 was mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium.
Table 1. Genetic and related etTects of HC Red No. 3
Test system
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
systemDose Reference
(LED/HID)
(¡.g/ml)Result
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse +
mutation
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse -
mutation
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse +
mutation
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA97, reverse +
mutation+ 50.~~ Zeiger et al.
(1988)
1667.~~ Zeiger et al.
(1988)
1.700 Zeiger et al.
(1988)
1.700 Zeiger et al.
(1988)+
+
+ , positive; -, negativeHC RED NO. 3 157
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
HC Red No. 3 is used as a semi-permanent hair dye.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
HC Red No. 3 was tested for carcinogenicity by gavage in one study in mice and in one
study in rats. There was a significant increase in the incidence of hepatocellular adenomas
and carcinomas combined in male mice administered the high dose; poor survval precluded
evaluation of the females. No increase in the incidence of treatment-related tumours was
seen in rats of either sex.
5.4 Other relevant data
HC Red No. 3 was mutagenic to bacteria.
5.5 Evaluation1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of HC Red No. 3.
There is inadequate evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity ofHC Red
No. 3.
Overall evaluation
HC Red No. 3 is not classifiable as to ils carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3).
6. References
Burnett, c., Lohr, R. & Corbett, J. (1981) Heritable translocation study on two hair dye formulations.
Fundam. appl. Toxicol., i, 325-328
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, F. (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elimination of an aromatic hair dye.
Arch. environ. Health, 27, 401-404
IPor definition of the italicied terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.158 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Taxie Effects of Chemieal Substances (RTECS No.
KJ6500), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1986) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of HC Red No. 3 (CAS
No. 2871-01-4) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT Technical Report 281;
NIH PubL. No. 86-2537), Research Triangle Park, NC
Wernick, T., Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Toxieol. appl. Pharmaeol., 32, 450-
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, 5., Lawlor, T. & Mortelmans, K. (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iv Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 11 (SuppL. 12), 1-158He YELLOW NO. 4
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Confusion has existed over the structure of HC Yellow No. 4. ln the second edition of the
Directory of Cosmetic and Toiletry Ingredients (Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association,
1982), the structure shown for HC Yellow No. 4 had both hydroxyethyl groups on the amine
and an assigned CAS No. of 52551-67-4 (2-(bis(2-hydroxyethyl)amino)-5-nitrophenol; N,N-
bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-amino-5-nitrophenol). ln the third edition of the DirectoryofCosmetic
and Toiletry Ingredients (Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association, 1991), the structure
was corrected on the basis of additional structural analysis, to show one hydroxyethyl group
on the amine and the other at the ortho position on the ring. This structure and its CAS No.
(US National Toxicology Program, 1992) are given below.
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 59820-43-8
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2-((2-(2- Hydroxyethoxy )-4- ni trophenyl)amino )ethanol
Synonyms: N,O-Di(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-amino-5-nitrophenol; HC Yellow 4; 2-(3-nitro-6-
(beta-hydroxyethylamino )phenoxy) ethanol
0- CH2- CH2- OH
02N-l NH - CH2- CH2 - OH
ClOHitl20SMoL. wt: 242.23
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the substance
From US National Toxicology Pro gram (1992)
(a) Description: Fluff, bright-yellow powder
(b) Melting-point: 145-147 °C
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuc1ear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported.
(d) Solubilty: Soluble in water (0.14% w/w), ethanol and acetone
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
HC Yellow No. 4 is commercially available at a purity :: 93%, with N-(2-hydroxy-
ethyl)-2-hydroxy-4-nitroanilne (0.3-7%) (US National Toxicology Program, 1992), 2-
-159-160 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
(2-amino-5-nitrophenoxy)ethanol (.: 5%) and 2,2'-((2-hydroxy-4-nitrophenyl)imino)bis-
(ethanol) (.: 1%) as possible impurities.
1.1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
HC Yellow No. 4 is produced by the reaction of 2-hydroxy-4-nitrobenzenamine with
2-chloroethanol and sodium hydroxide. Production of this dye began in the late 1950s and
was estimated to be 2300 kg in the USA in 1976 (US National Toxicology Program, 1992).
Currently, approximately 900 kg are used annually in the USA, according to industry
estima tes.
1.2.2 Use
HC Yellow No. 4 is used exclusively as a dye in semi-permanent hair colour products.
These products are generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed to remain
in contact with the hair and scalp for 30-45 min. The concentration of He Yellow No. 4 used
in these preparations ranges from 0.1 to 1.0% (Frenkel & Brody, 1973; US National
Toxicology Program, 1992).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
HC Yellow No. 4 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
An estimated 4000 workers in department stores and beauty shops in the USA were
exposed to HC Yellow No. 4 in 1974 (US National Toxicology Program, 1992).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
No data were available to the Working Group.
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of Cancer in Experimental Animais
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, six weeks of age, were fed diets
containing 0, 5000 or 10000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) HC Yellow No. 4 (:; 93% pure; majorHC YELLOW NO. 4161
impurity tentatively identified as N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-hydroxy-4-nitroaniline, "- 7%) for up
to 104 weeks and were kiled at 110-111 weeks of age. The mean body weights of high-dose
mice were 20-30% lower than those of controls during the second year of the study. Survval
at the end of the study was: males-control, 28/50; low-dose, 29/50; and high-dose, 35/50;
females-control, 43/50; low-dose, 38/50; and high-dose, 43/50. No significant increase in
the incidence of tumours was found in treated animaIs as compared with controls (US
National Toxicology Program, 1992).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six weeks of age, were fed diets
containing 0,2500 or 5000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) (males) and 0, 5000 or 10 000 ppm (females)
HC Yellow No. 4 (~ 93% pure; major impurity tentatively identified as N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-
2-hydroxy-4-nitroaniline, ro 7%) for up to 104 weeks and were killed at 110- 111 weeks of
age. The mean body weights of high-dose female rats were significantly lower than those of
controls. Survval at the end of the experiment was: males-control, 21/50; low-dose, 29/50;
and high-dose, 28/50; females-control, 27/50; low-dose, 31/50; and high-dose, 34/50. The
incidence of adenomas of the pituitary gland was increased in male rats (control, 17/45;
low-dose, 20/49; high-dose, 28/49;p = 0.034, logistic regression trend test), but the increase
was barely significant in a pair-wise comparison (p = 0.047, logistic regression trend test).
The incidence in historical controls in all National Toxicology Program feed studies was
29.7:: 11.5% (range, 12-60%). Similarly, the incidence of pituitary gland hyperplasia in
males was dose-dependently increased (control, 8/45; low-dose, 13/49; high-dose, 18/49;
p = 0.026, logistic regression trend test). The incidence of pituitary gland tumours was not
increased in female rats (US National Toxicology Program, 1992).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
During 14-day studies, groups of five Fischer 344/N rats of each sex received 0, 5000,
10000,20000,40000 or 80 000 ppm (mg/kg) and B6C3Fi mice of each sexreceived 0,1250,
2500,5000, 10000 or 20000 ppm HC Yellow No. 4 (purity, ~ 93%) in the feed. AIl animaIs
survved to the end of the studies. No dose-related toxic effect was observed (US National
Toxicology Pro gram, 1992).162 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
ln 13-week studies, groups of 10 Fischer 344/N rats of each sex were fed diets containing
0,2500, 5000, 10000,20000 or 40 000 ppm (mg/kg) and 10 B6C3Fi mice of each sex were
fed diets containing 0, 5000, 10000,20000,40000 or 80000 ppm HC Yellow No. 4. AIl rats
survved to the end of the studies. Compound-related deaths occurred in male and female
mice at the two highest dose levels. Mineralization of the renal papila occurred in all male
rats fed 40 000 ppm. Thyroid pigmentation occurred in rats receiving 40 000 ppm and in
40/46 male mice; a dose-related increase in the incidence of pigmentation was observed in
female mice, except for those at the highest dose, most of which died within the first two
weeks of the study. The nature of the pigment was not determined. Uterine atrophy occurred
in female rats fed 20 000 and 40 000 ppm and in female mIce fed 40 000 and 80 000 ppm.
Lymphoid depletion and atrophy of the spleen occurred in male mice that received 40 000 or
80 000 ppm and in female mice that received 80 000 ppm. Atrophy of the thymus occurred in
male and female mice that received 40 000 or 80000 ppm (US National Toxicology Program,
1992).
ln the two-year studies described above, no compound-related lesion was seen in ex-
posed rats. Male and female mice had a dose-related increase in the incidence of thyroid
gland pigmentation and follcular-cell hyperplasia. The predominant impurity, tentatively
identified as N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-2-hydroxy-4-nitroanilne, was suggested to have contri-
buted to the increased incidence of thyroid follicular-cell hyperplasia (US National Toxico-
logy Program, 1992).
HC Yellow No. 4 was present at a low concentration in se mi-permanent hair colouring
formulations evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rabbits (Burnett et aL., 1976;
0.4%) and in a two-year feeding study in dogs (Wernick et aL., 1975; 0.3%), described in detail
on p. 97. No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group noted that
the dose of each component of the formulations was very low and unlikely to have been
toxic.)
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were available to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of HC Yellow No. 4 alone. The compound was present at low concentrations in se mi-
permanent hair colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertility and reproductive
performance in rats (Wernick et al., 1975,0.3%; see p. 99) and in studies of teratogenesis in
rats (Wernick et al., 1975,0.3%; Burnett et al., 1976,0.4%) and rabbits (Wernicket al., 1975,
0.3%) (see p. 100). No treatment-related adverse effectwas detected. (The Working Group
noted that the dose of each component of the formulations was very low and unlikely to have
been toxic.)HC YELLOW NO. 4 163
4.4 Genetic and related effects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
HC Yellow No. 4 (purity :; 93 %) induced mutation in Salmonella typhimurium. ln one of
the two experiments, in spite of the presence of a precipita te at aIl doses that induced a
significant response, increasing numbers of mutants were observed as increasing amounts of
test material were added to the plates. HC Yellow No. 4 induced sex-linked recessive lethal
mutation in Drosophila melanogaster after injection but not in a feeding experimentin adults.
It did not induce reciprocal translocations when injected into the flies.
HC Yellow No. 4 induced sister chromatid exchange in Chinese hamster ovary cells in
culture, but equivocal results were obtained for chromosomal aberration in the same ceIls.
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
HC Yellow No. 4 is used as a semi-permanent hair dye.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
He Yellow No. 4 was tested for carcinogenicity by administration in the diet in one study
in mice and in one study in rats. No significant increase in tumour incidence was found in
mice. The incidence of adenomas of the pituitary gland was increased in male rats but not in
females.
5.4 Other relevant data
HC Yellow No. 4 induced gene mutation in bacteria and in insects. Chromosomal
aberrations were not induced In insects, and equivocal results for this end-point were
obtained in cultured mammalian cells. Sister chromatid exchange was induced in
mammalian ceIls.
5.5 Evaluationl
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of HC Yellow No. 4.
1 For definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.Table 1. Genetic and related efTects of He Yellow No. 4""~
Test system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)
Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic ..
system system ~~n
+ + 5. () Mortelmans et al. (1986) ~
(+ ) (+ ) 500. () Mortelmans et al. (1986) 0
+ + 50. () Mortelmans et al. (1986)Z0
+ + 50. () Mortelmans et al. (1986) 0
1~~.~~ feeding Woodruff et al. (1985) ~~~
+ 1~~.~~ injection Woodruff et al. (1985)C/
d1~~.~~ injection Wooruff et al. (1985) t"C+ - 167.~~ US National Toxicology ~
Program (1992) m
? 300. ~~ US National ToxicologyVI..
Program (1992)SAD, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation
DMX, Drosophila melanogaster, sex-linked recessive lethal
mutation
DMX, Drosophila melanogaster, sex-linked recessive lethal
mutation
DMH, Drosophila melanogaster, reciprocl transloction
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster oval) cells
in vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster oval) cells
in vitro
+, positive; (+), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested; ?, inconclusive (variable response in several experiments within an adequate study)
ain-vitro tests, ¡.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
bPrecipitate present in platesHC YELLOW NO. 4165
There is inadequate evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of HC
Yellow No. 4.
Overall evaluation
HC Yellow No. 4 is not classifiable as to ils carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3).
6. References
Burnett, e., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.R, Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R & Voelker, R (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes. J Toxicol. environ. Health, i,
1027-1040
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (1982) Directory of Cosmetic and Toiletry Ingredients,
2nd ed., Washington DC
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association (1991) Directory of Cosmetic and Toiletry Ingredients,
3rd ed., Washington DC
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, E (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elimination of an aromatic hair dye.
Arch. env~on. HeaÚh, 27, 401-404
Mortelmans, K., Haworth, S., Lawlor, 1:, Speck, W, Tainer, R & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests: II. Results from the testing of 270 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 8 (SuppL 7),
1-119
US National Toxicology Program (1992) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of HC Yellow No. 4
(CAS No. 59820-43-8) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Feed Studies) (Nl Tech. Rep. No. 419;
NIH PubL No. 92-3150), Research Triangle Park, NC
Wernick, 1:, Lanman, RM. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Toxicol. appl. Pharmacol., 32,450-
Woodruff, Re., Mason, J.M., Valencia, R & Zimmering, S. (1985) Chemical mutagenesis testing in
Drosophila. V Results of 53 coded compounds tested for the National Toxicology Program.
Environ. Mutag., 7, 677-7022-AMIN 0-4- NITROPHENOL
1. Exposure Data
1.1 ChemIcal and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 99-57-0
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2-Amino-4-nitrophenol
Colour Index No.: 76530
Synonyms: 1 - Amino- 2- hydroxy- 5- ni trobenzene; 1 - hydroxy- 2-amino-4- ni trobenzene; 2-
hydroxy- 5- ni troaniline; 4- ni tro- 2-aminop henol; para - ni tro-ortho-aminophenol
NH2
02N~OH
C6H6NZ03 MoL. wt: 154.12
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Yellow-brown to orange prisms (Lide, 1991)
(b) Melting-point: 143-145 °C (anhydrous) (Aldrich Chemical Co., 1992); 80-90 °C
(hydrated) (Lide, 1991)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magne tic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Pouchert, 1981,1983; US National ToxicologyProgram,
1988; Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980, 1991).
(d) Solubility: Soluble in ethanol, acetone, acetic acid and diethyl ether; sparingly
soluble in water (US National Toxicology Program, 1988; Lide, 1991)
(e) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): 13.5 (Bronaugh & Congdon, 1984)
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Trade name: Rodol 42 (Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons, 1991)
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol is available commercially with the following specifications:
purity, 96% (min.); ash, 0.1 % (max.); iron, 100 ppm (mg/kg) (max.); lead (see IARC, 1980a,
1987a), 5 ppm (mg/kg) (max.); and arsenic (see IARC, 1980b, 1987b), 2 ppm (mg/kg)
(max.). It is also available in research quantities at purities ranging from 90 to ). 99%
-167-168 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(Riedel-de-Haen, 1990; Heraeus, 1991; Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons, 1991; Lancaster
Synthesis, 1991; TCI America, 1991; AIdrich Chemical Co., 1992; Fluka Chemie AG, 1993).
1.1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol is produced by the reaction of 2,4-dinitrophenol with sodium
sulfide (Farris, 1978). It was first sythesized by Agfa in 1898 (Society of Dyers and
Colourists, 1971).
At present, approximately 150 kg of 2-amino-4-nitrophenol are used in hair colouring
products in the USA annually, according to industry estimates. It is produced by one
company each in Brazil, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Germany, India and the United
Kingdom and by three companies in Japan (Chemical Information Servces, 1991).
1.2.2 Use
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of CI Mordant
Brown 33 and CI Mordant Brown 1, which are used for dyeing leather, nylon, silk, wool and
fur (US National Toxicology Program, 1988). It is also used in some countries as a dye in
semi-permanent hair colour products to produce gold-blond shades. These products are
generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed to remain in contact with the
hair and scalp for 30-45 min. For this application, 2-amino-4-nitrophenol is mixed at levels
up to 0.5 % with a blend of several other dyes in a shampoo base to produce the final colour or
tint (Frenkel & Brody, 1973; US National Toxicology Program, 1988). Ithas also been used in
permanent hair colouring products.
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Natural occurrence
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 20 256 workers,
including 17 049 women, were potentially exposed to 2-amino-4-nitrophenol in an estimated
2232 beauty shops (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.3.3 Other
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol and 4-amino-2-nitrophenol are reportedly formed byenviron-
mental degradation (reduction) of 2,4-dinitrophenol, which is used as a fungicide on wood
(Mitra & Vaidyanathan, 1982).2-AMINO-4-NITROPHENOL 169
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
The use of 2-amino-4-nitrophenol in cosmetic products is prohibited in the European
Economic Community (Commission of the European Communities, 1976, 1990, 1991).
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, seven to eight weeks of age, were
administered 0, 125 or 250 mg/kg bw 2-amino-4-nitrophenol (98% pure) (impurities
unspecifiedi by gavage in corn oil (10 ml/kg bw) on five days a week for up to 103 weeks. The
mean body weight of low-dose females was up to 17% greater than that of the controls; the
bodyweights of the other treated groups were comparable with those ofvehicle controls. No
significant difference in survval was observed at termination of the study in treated and
control groups of either sex (males: control, 28/50; low-dose, 29/50 and high-dose, 23/50;
females: control, 28/50; low-dose, 31/50; and high-dose, 30/50). The incidence of combined
haemangiomas and haemangiosarcomas at all sites in high-dose male mIce was significantly
higher (5/50) than that in con trois (0/50;p .. 0.05, Fisher exact test); however, these tumours
were not considered to be related to the treatment since their incidence in historical controls
at the study laboratory was 16/149 (11 :: 10%) and that in aIl studies of the National
Toxicology Program was 101/1743 (6:: 5%) (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six weeks of age, were
administered 0, 125 or 250 mg/kg bw 2-amino-4-nitrophenol (98% pure) (impurities
unspecifiedi by gavage in corn oil (5 ml/kg bw) on five days a week for up to 103 weeks. Mean
body weights of low-dose and high-dose males were 6 and 10% lower than those of contrais,
respectively; values for female rats were comparable to those of controls. Survval of
high-dose males was significantly lower than that of controls (p .. 0.001, Cox and Tarone's
method); no significant difference was found for females. Survval at the end of the study was,
in males, control, 32/50; low-dose, 24/50; high-dose, 10/50, and, in females, control, 25/50;
low-dose, 27/50; high-dose, 31/50. Hyperplasia of the renal tubular epithelium was observed
only in male rats (control, 1/50; low-dose, 4/48; high-dose, 5/50); the difference was not
significant. Renal tubular-cell adenomas were also observed in treated males (control, 0/50;
low-dose, 1/48; high-dose, 3/50); among male rats that lived beyond week 100, when the first
renal tubular-cell tumour was observed, the incidence in high-dose animais (3/20) was170 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
significantly higher than that in controls (0/39; p = 0.035, Fisher exact test). Two liver-cell
neoplastic nodules and one hepatocellular carcinoma were observed in high-dose male rats.
The historical incidence of neoplastic nodules or hepatocellular carcinomas at the study
laboratory was 3/149 (2 :f 3%) and that of renal-cell adenomas, 0/149. ln ail studies of the
National Toxicology Program, renal-cell adenomas occurred in 9/1695 (0.5 :f 0.9%) (US
National Toxicology Program, 1988).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and exctretion
4.1.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.1.2 Experimental systems
Percutaneous absorption of 14C-2-amino-4-nitrophenol (specific radioactivity,
10 mCi/mmol (65 JlCi/mg); purity, 98%) was studied in vitro by partitioning between excised
human abdominal skin preparations and water. 2-Amino-4-nitrophenol appeared to bind to
skin components (Bronaugh & Congdon, 1984).
Percutaneous absorption through the skin of Sprague-Dawley rats of each sex was
examined following application of two hair dye formulations: formulation 1 contained 1.54%
14C-2-amino-4-nitrophenol; formulation 2 contained 0.77% 14C-2-amino-4-nitrophenol,
1,4-diaminobenzene (1,4-phenylenediamine), 2,4-diaminoanisole, oleic acid and isopro-
panol and was mixed with equal amounts of a 6% hydrogen peroxide solution. Afer one and
five days, 0.21 and 0.36% of the radiolabel administered in formulation 1 and 1. 12 and 1.67%
of that administered in formulation 2 had been absorbed (calculated as combined radiolabel
in urine, faeces, expired air and carcass, without treated skin are a). Absorbed material was
excreted predominantly in the urine within 24 h after the initial application (Hofer et al.,
1982).
Five days after oral administration by gavage of 2 ml 14C-2-amino-4-nitrophenol (0.2%
in saline), 68.3%:f 9.4 (SD) of the radiolabel had been excreted in the urine and 25.4%:f 6.9
in the faeces. Within 3 h, about 4% of the radiolabel was eliminated in the bile. Following
subcutaneous injection of the same dose, 89% of the dose was eliminated after one day,
predominantly in the urine (Hofer et al., 1982). (The Working Group noted that metabolites
were not identified in the urine, bile or faeces in either study.)
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol was the predominant metabolite formed enzyatically by
nitroreduction following oral administration of 2,4-dinitrophenol (22.5 mg/kg bw) ta ICR
mice. It had an elimination half-time from the plasma of 46 h, while that of the isomer
4-amino-2-nitrophenol was 26 h (Robert & Hagardorn, 1985).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.2-AMINO-4-NIOPHENOL 171
4.2.2 Experimental systems
The LDso of 2-amino-4-nitrophenol in rats has been reported as 246 mg/kg bw after
intraperitoneal injection (US National Toxicology Program, 1988) and 2400 mg/kg bw after
oral administration (Lloyd et al., 1977). The LDso in mice after intraperitoneal injection was
reported to be 143 mg/kg bw (Mikstacki, 1985).
During 15-day studies, groups of five Fischer 344/N rats and B6C3Fi mice of each sex
received 0, 313, 625, 1250, 2500 or 5000 mg/kg bw 2-amino-4-nitrophenol (purity, 98%) in
corn oil by gavage. Reduced survval was observed in ail animais that received 2500 or
5000 mg/kg; diarrhoea was observed in ail treated rats except those receiving the lowest dose
(US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
ln 13-week studies, groups of 10 Fischer 344/N rats and B6C3Fi mice of each sex
received 2-amino-4-nitrophenol at doses of 0, 62.5, 125, 250, 500 or 1000 mg/kg bw by
gavage in corn oit. Survval was reduced by the highest dose in both species. Diarrhoea was
observed in rats that received 500 or 1000 mg/kg. Mild to severe mineralization of the renal
cortex and mild to severe degeneration of the renal tubular epithelium were observed in
male rats that received 500 or 1000 mg/kg and in females that received 1000 mg/kg.
Degeneration and necrosis of the renal tubular epithelium, with sorne indication of regene-
ration, were observed in mice that received 1000 mg/kg (US National Toxicology Program,
1988).
ln the two-year studies described above, nephropathy was present in nearly all exposed
male rats and was presumed to have contributed to the reduced survval of those given
250 mg/kg. The more severe nephropathy was associated with a spectrum of non-neoplastic
lesions characteristic of reduced renal function and renal secondary hyperparathyroidism,
Le., parathyroid hyperplasia, fibrous osteodystrophy, calcification of the heart and other
organs (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol was present at a low concentration in an oxidative hair colou-
ring formulation evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rabbits (Burnett et al.,
1976, 0.4%) and in a semi-permanent formulation evaluated in a two-year feeding study in
dogs (Wernick etal., 1975; 0.05%), described in detail on p. 97. No treatment-relatedadverse
effect was detected. (The Working Group noted that the dose of each component of the
formulations was very low and unlikely to have been toxic. i
4.3 Reproductive and developmental elTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were available to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of2-amino-4-nitrophenol alone. The compound was present at low concentrations in
semi-permanent hair colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertility and
reproductive performance in rats and in studies of teratogenesis in rats and rabbits (Wernick172 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
et al., 1975,0.05%; see p. 99). It was also present (at 0.4%) in oxidative and semi-permanent
formulations evaluated in a study of teratogenesis (Burnett et al., 1976) and in a two-
generation study of reproduction in rats (Burnett & Goldenthal, 1988) (see p. 100). No
treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group noted that the dose of
each component of the formulations was very low and unlikely to have been toxic.)
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol did not induce mutation in bacteriophage but was mutagenIc to
Salmonella typhimurium, to the fungus Sordaria brevicolls and at the tk locus in mouse
lymphoma L5178Y cells. It induced sister chromatid exchange and chromosomal
aberrations in cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells.
Neither micronuclei, chromosomal aberrations nor dominant lethal effects were
induced in rodents exposed in vivo.
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of certain azo
dyes. It is also used in semi-permanent hair colouring products and has been used in
permanent hair colours.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol was tested for carcinogenicity by gavage in one study in mice
and one study in rats. No significant increase in the incidence of tumours was observed in
mice or in female rats. The incidence of renal-cell adenomas was increased in male rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol caused renal toxicity in rats and mice. The effect occurred at a
lower dose in male than in female rats.-or:
Q,..
Q.oi-.....r:.~.or:...
S
ø=.Nc,o
!l~
iêQ,
"5..
ø=-t
"0r:
ø=~.....Q,r:
Q,"..-
Q,-
"Q~CIui:
CIi.
CI..
CI~
,-
Cl..~
os --CI Cl'" p.o ..
Cl '-
¡g .~0..i:.8 S
.. :M (' CI..O~t:
~ ~ S ~
..
;3'"
CI~¡g .~.. 0..;: i:.8 S
,g:M('Cl..O~t:
~ ~ S ~
S
CIl..'"~2-AMINO-4-NlTROPHENOL
,-i:~ ~ ~ 6u i:.. 0 0 0 ~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~o 0 0 ~N i: N i: N i: ,- ~ N N i: OO.~ .~ .~ ('
000000 00 00 00 V) SOOOOOOO\ X-' X-' X-".. ,-,-
Ç) ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .. ~ ~ ~ e- c9 eX c9 eX ¡9 eX .;¿ :2:200 '- '- '- '- '- '-.. ;: '- '- '- . r 00 r 00 00 ~ 0\ 0\~~~~~~~~Z~~~~~~~~~~ ~~'-t:t:t:t:t:t:.. t:t:t: i:..i:..i:..~ '-'--_-_- t:~__ ~o'-o'-o'- ~~'g CU CU CU CU CU ~ ~ CU CU ~ i: '': S ..: S '': S.: u U('Si.Si.Si. ~Si:i.;:('('('('('('u,-('S... CI' CI' CI '" E '.. ..... CI r/ Z i. Z i. Z i. ¡; i: t: '"ã) .. .:: ~ oo.. CO CI CO 1 CO CO 00 '" i: .: .:;; ig CI .. '(j ig 'N(j S (' ig ig'(j ;: C/ ~ r/ ~ C/ ~ 0 0\ ;. ;.~r/Nr/Nr/ ~Cr/r/N~~~~~~~~e-~~
§gg§§gg§§§g§g§v)g~g~g~óv)v)v)ó~ógV)~V)~V)~""NN V)~V).. .. ..
o,- ,- '-
1 + + ¿¿ + 0 a
,-IO+++¿++
i: i: i: i: i: i: i:§ § .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 i: i:
.;= ..; ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .g .9ci C" .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. __ ~.. .. ;: ;: ;: ;: ;: ;: ;: (' ('SSSSSSSSSêê ~CI~~~~~~~~~i:i:
.§ ~ E ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .~ :3E~~~~~~~~~~~;(';: i. i. - - CI CI S SS gg¡; ~ ~~~~r~ ~~ ~,g
"8..................0\0) &S-~~~~~~~~~~~~ '" ~~~~~~~~~~~~~§CI~~~~~~~~~~~('~- .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ ~Cl ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .~ g
~ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ ~ .:CI ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .~ ..
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~.g.. t: t: t: t: t: t: t: t: t: t: t: ~ SQ.:: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :::: t: ::
~ cu cu cu cu cu cu cu cu cu cu cu .~ ~... ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ClCCCCCCCCCCC~CI
Ü .§ .§ .§ .§ ~ ., ., .§ .§ ...§ ts 5~ t: t: t: t: ~ ~ ~ t: t: t: t: ~ r~i:~~~t't'~~~t't'~ _'-
~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Ë.. r/ r/ r/ c/ c/ r/ c/ c/ c/ c/ r/ .. '-'";:
.š~.:
ã)U§i:~..
+
+
~.;:
.S..
ã)Uè(';;oi.
CI..'"
S('..
CI'"
CI
.S..U
aicoi:('..U
~
:g..('
Soi...Ui.
CI..'"
¡;
c5..c/N
X
o0.
§ §~ g.. V)N
+
+
c.t.;:
.S..
ã)Uè(';;oi.
CI..'"
S('..
CI'"
CI
.S..U
uii:.9..('
t:
CI.0('
ëa
S
~o
Soi...U
c5..u.9- .9-
~ ~
C" C".. ..i: i:
c;:.;:
.S..
ã)U
~o
t:('
S1
CIi:o.0
'"..('i.~.;: i.
.s g
.. S"( EU '"
~ ~o 'u
t: '"(' ('S ..1 .~
CI i:
i: ..
.8 p.
CI CI'" '"
;: ;:o 0
S S
~r.u00 cñi: i:.9.9.. ..(' ('
t: t:
CI CI~ ~
(' ëa
S S~ ~ i:o 0 ~
S S &.S
8 8';: S.... ~ 0u u .;; Cl
~ ~~ i:i:,. u..u u Cl.s'"
CI..
'";:
CI
"G;:i:
8u
~
~-173
,-i:i:0\..'--.t:
~....
CI
E;:i:
~N
X
.9-
§
~
'"..('i.'0
CI..'"
CI....oi:
cS'- ~
~ .0
";j Ol(' .:~Ob
i: S
i- ui..v ¡ß
.~ +- en
.-: 0 CI
'" ;; 1::O'~ 00. 1 ..
~ S ~~::- 2CI S ~
~ Ob 0A=i~+ _..'- ~ S
v ¡ß 0;; ...; i.:a 8 ~ ~CI +- -- rJo'~ :: S0. 1 fi_ i: CI ('+S"~tF0\c/i.
CI
:È
ClU..('i....~
¿.9..~..::
S..~fi
CIi.
CI.::..~00
CIi:~....~ ö\c/i.
CI
:È174 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol induced mutation in bacteria, fungi and cultured mammalian
cells and sister chromatid exchange and chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian
cells. It did not induce micronuclei, chromosomal aberrations or dominant lethal mutation in
rodents exposed in vivo.
5.5 Evaluationl
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of 2-amino-4-nitro-
phenoL.
There is limIted evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of 2-amino-4-
nitrophenol.
Overall evaluation
2-Amino-4-nitrophenol is not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Ædrich Catalog/Randbook of Fine Chemicals 1992- 1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 75
Ames, RN., Kammen, H.O. & Yamasaki, E. (1975) Hair dyes are mutagenic: identification of a
variety of mutagenic ingredients. Proc. natl Acad Sei USA, 72, 2423-2427
Bronaugh, RL. & Congdon, E.R (1984) Percutaneous absorption of hair dyes: correlation with
partition coefficients. 1 invest. Dennatol., 83, 124-127
Burnett, C.M. & Goldenthal, E.I. (1988) Multigeneration reproduction and carcinogenicity studies in
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed topically to oxidative hair-coloring formulations containing
p-phenylenediamine and other aromatic amines. Food Chem. Toxicol., 26, 467-474
Burnett, c., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.R, Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R & Voelker, R. (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes.1 Toxicol. environ. Realth, i, 1027-
1040
Burnett, c., Lohr, R & Corbett, J. (1977) Dominant lethal mutagenicity study on hair dyes.1 Toxicol.
env~on. Heahh, 2, 657-62
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers, Dallas, TX, p. 39
Commission ofthe European Communities (1976) Council Directive 761768/EEC of 27 July 1976. Off
1 Eur. Commun., L262, 169-20
Commission of the European Communities (199) Proposai for a Council Directive on the
approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products of 15 November
199. Off 1 Eur. Commun., C322, 29-77
Commission of the European Communitites (1991) Commission Directive 91/184/EEC of 12 March
1991. Off 1 Eur. Commun., L91, 59-ó2
Farris, RE. (1978) Aminophenols. ln: Mark, H.E, Othmer, D.E, Overberger, c.G., Seaborg, G.'f &
Grayson, M., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 3rd ed., VoL. 2, New York,
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 422-4
IFor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.2-AMINO-4-NITROPHENOL 175
Fluka Chemie AG (1993) Fluka Chemik-BioChemika, Buchs, p. 93
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, F. (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elImination of an aromatic hair dye.
Arch. envuon. lIeaUh, 27, 401-404
Garner, RC. & Nutman, C.A (1977) Testing of sorne azo dyes and their reduction products for
mutagenicity using Salmonella tyhimurium TA1538. Mutat. Res., 44, 9-19
Heraeus (1991) Feinchemikalien Forschungsbedarf (Refined chemicals and research supply),
Karlsruhe, p. 70
Hofer, H., Schwach, G. W. & Fenzl, C. (1982) Percutaneous absorption of2-amino-4-nitrophenol in the
rat. Food Chem. Toxicol., 20, 921-923
Hossack, DJ.N. & Richardson, J.c. (1977) Examination of the potential mutagenicity of hair dye
constituents using the micronucleus test. Exerientia, 33, 377-378
IAC (198Oa) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals ta lIumans,
VoL. 23, Some Metals and Metallic Compounds, Lyon, pp. 325--15
IAC (1980b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals ta lIumans,
VoL. 23, Some Metals and Metallc Compounds, Lyon, pp. 39-141
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks ta 11 umans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 230-232
IAC (198Th) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to lIumans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 100106
Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons (1991) Specifications: RodaI 42 (4-Nitro-2-aminophenol Pure), New York
Kvelland, i. (1985) Mutagenicity of five hair dyes in bacteriophage T4D. lIereditas, 102, 151-154
Lancaster Synthesis (1991) MTM Research Chemicals/Lancaster Catalogue 1991/92, Windham, NH,
MTM PIC, p. 69
Lide, D.R, ed. (1991) CRC lIandbook ofChemistry and Physics, 72nd ed., Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
p. 3-377
Lloyd, G.K., Liggett, M.P., Kynoch, S.R & Davies, RE. (1977) Assessment of the acute toxicity and
potential irritancy of hair dye constituents. Food Cosmet. Toxicol., 15, 607-610
Mikstacki, A (1985) Evaluation of mutagenicity of some aromatic amines, used as hair dyes, by
chromosomal aberration tests in vivo. Genet. pol., 26, 109-116
Mitra, D. & Vaidyanathan, C.S. (1982) Comparative phytotoxicity of nitrophenolic soil pollutants and
their microbial metabolites to the growth of cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) seedlings. Plant Soil,
69, 467-471
Pouchert, CJ. (1981) The Aldrich Lihrary of Infrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 823
Pouchert, CJ. (1983) The Aldrich Library of NMR Spectra, 2nd ed., VoL. 1, Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 1166
Riedel-de Haen (1990) Laboratory Chemicals 1990, Seelze, p. 61
Robert, TA. & Hagardorn, AN. (1985) Plasma levels and kinetic disposition of2,4-dinitrophenol and
its metabolites 2-amino-4-nitrophenol and 4-amino-2-nitrophenol in the mouse.l Chromatogr.,
344, 177-186
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra 1980, Philadelphia, PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra 1981-1991, Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA176 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Shahin, M.M., Bugaut, A. & Kalopissis, G. (1982) Mutagenicity of aminonitrophenol compounds in
Salmonella tyhimurium: a study of structural-activity relationships. Int. J cosmet. Sei., 4, 25-35
Soiety of Dyers and Colourists (1971) Colour Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 4, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 467
TCI America (1991) Organic Chemicals 91/92 Catalog, Portland, OR, p. 78
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
SJ6300), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1988) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of 2-Amino-4-nitro-
phenol (CAS No. 99-57-0) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT Tech. Rep.
No. 339; NIH PubL. No. 88-2595), Research Triangle Park, NC
Wernick, T., Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic, and reproduction
studies with hair dyes. Toxicol. appl. Phannacol., 32, 450-
Yu-Sun, C.c., Carter L.A., Sandoval, L. & Thompson, A. (1981) Mutagenicity of 4-nitroquinoline
1-oxide and three hair dye compounds in Sordari brevicollis. Neurospora Newslett., 28, 22
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T., Mortelmans, K & Speck, W. (1987) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests: III. Results from the testing of 255 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 9 (SuppL. 9),
1-1102-AMINO-5- NITROPHEN 0 L
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Se1V Reg. No.: 121-88-0
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2-Amino-5-nitrophenol
Colour Index No.: 76535
Synonyms: 3- Hydroxy-4-aminonitrobenzene; 2-hydroxy-4-nitroaniline; 3-nitro-6-ami-
nophenol; 5-nitro-2-aminophenol
;nH2
f2 OH
02N
C6H6N203MoL. wt: 154.12
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Olive-brown, brown to orange crystalline solid (US National Toxico-
logy Program, 1988; Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons, 1991)
(b) Melting-point: 200°C (decomposes) (Aldrich Chemical Co., 1992); 207-208 °C
(Lide, 1991); 198-202 °C (98% pure) (Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons, 1991)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magne tic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981; US
National Toxicology Program, 1988; Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1991).
(d) Solubility: Slightly soluble in water (US National Toxicology Program, 1988);
soluble in ethanol, acetone and benzene (Lide, 1991)
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Trade names: Ursol Yellow Brown A; Rodol YBA
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is available commercially with the following specifications:
purity, 98% (min.); ash, 0.05% (max.); iron, 40 ppm (mg/kg) (max.); lead (see IARC, 1980a,
1987a), 5 ppm (mg/kg) (max.); and arsenic (see IARC, 1980b, 1987b), 2 ppm (mg/kg) (max.).
- 1 77-178 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
It Is also available in research quantities, at purities ranging from 90 to 99% (Jos. H.
Lowenstein & Sons, 1991; TCI America, 1991; Aldrich Chemical Co., 1992; Fluka Chemie
AG, 1993).
1.1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is produced from 2-aminophenol by reaction with acetic
anhydride to form 2-methylbenzoxazole, which is nitrated and hydrolysed to form 2-amino-
5-nitrophenol (Farris, 1978). It was first sythesized by Kaltwasser and Oehrn In 1920
(Society of Dyers and Colourists, 1971).
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is produced by one company each in France and Germany and
by three companies in Japan (Chemical Information Servces, 1991). It is not produced in
commercial quantities in the USA Between 1973 and 1979, US imports averaged
13.4 tonnes per year (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
1.2.2 Use
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of several azo
dyes, including CI Solvent Red 8, which is used for colouring synthetic resins, lacquers, inks
and wood stains (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is also used in many countries as a dye in semi-permanent hair
colouring products to produce red and gold-blond shades. These products are generally
shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed to remain in contact with the hair and
scalp for 30-45 min. For this application, 2-amino-5-nitrophenol is mixed (at levels up to
0.5 %) with a blend of several other dyes in a shampoo base to produce the final colour or tint
desired (Frenkel & Brody, 1973; US National Toxicology Program, 1988). It has been used
(and still is to a limited extent) in permanent hair colouring products.
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccuffence
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 14 512 workers,
including 11 827 women, were potentially exposed to 2-amino-5-nitrophenol in 1339 beauty
salons (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).2-AMINO-5-NITROPHENOL 179
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
The use of 2-amino-5-nitrophenol in cosme tic products is prohibited in the European
Economic Community (Commission of the European Communities, 1976, 1990, 1991).
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of Cancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, seven to eight weeks of age, were
administered 0, 400 or 800 mg/kg bw 2-amino-5-nitrophenol (98% pure) by gavage in corn
oil (10 ml/kg) on five days a week for up to 103 weeks and were kiled at 112 weeks of age.
The me an body weights of high-dose males were 8- II % lower than those of vehicle controls
from week 29 to week 74, whereas those of low-dose males were greater than those of vehic1e
controls throughout most of the study. The me an body weights of low-dose and high-dose
female mice were 5-9 and 8-13 % lower th an those of vehicle con trois from week 69 to the
end of the study, respectively. Survval of high-dose males after week 20 and of females after
week 22 was reduced compared with that of controls (p .. 0.001, Cox and Throne's test).
Survval at termination of the study was: males-control, 31/50; low-dose, 36/50; and
high-dose, 12/50; females-control, 37/50; low-dose, 36/50; and high-dose, 10/50. No
significant increase in the incidence of tumours was observed in treated groups when
compared with controls (US National Toxicology Program, 1988). (The Working Group
noted the high mortality in the high-dose groups.)
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six to seven weeks of age, were
administered 0,100 or 200 mg/kg bw2-amino-5-nitrophenol (98% pure) by gavage in corn
oil (5 ml/kg) on five days a week for up to 103 weeks and were kiled at 111 weeks of age.
Mean body weights of male and female high-dose rats were 5- 10 and 4-5% lower th an those
of controls after weeks 33 and 93, respectively. Survval ofhigh-dose males and females after
week 75 and that of low-dose males and females after week 99 was significantly lower th an
that of vehicle controls (p .. 0.001, Cox and Tarone's test). Survval at termination was:
males-control, 33/50; low-dose, 16/50; and high-dose, 4/50; females-control, 30/50;
low-dose, 32/50; and high-dose, 29/50. The incidence of pancreatic acinar-cell adenomas
was significantly increased in low-dose (10/50; p = 0.002, incidental tumour test) but not in
high-dose (3/49) males in comparison with controls (1/50). One acinar-cell carcinoma was
also seen in a low-dose male (US National Toxicology Pro gram, 1988). (The Working Group
noted the poor survval of treated males.)180 lARe MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2 Toxic eO'ects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
The LDso of 2-amino-5-nitrophenol in rats has been reported to be greater than
4000 mg/kg bw by oral administration and greater than 800 mg/kg bw by intraperitoneal
injection (Burnett et al., 1977).
During 16-day studies, groups offive Fischer 344/N rats of each sex received 0,156,313,
625, 1250 or 2500 mg/kg bw 2-amino-5-nitrophenol (purity, 98%), and groups of five
B6C3Fi mice of each sex received 0, 313, 625, 1250, 2500 or 5000 mg/kg bw, by gavage in
corn oiL. A reduction in survval in relation to dose was observed in female mice (US National
Toxicology Program, 1988).
ln 13-week studies, groups of 10 Fischer 344/N rats and B6C3Fi mice of each sex
received 0, 100,200,400,800 or 1600 mg/kg bw 2-amino-5-nitrophenol by gavage in corn
oiL. A dose-related reduction in survval was observed in rats. Rats receiving 400- 1600 mg/kg
and mice receiving 1600 mg/kg had acute or chronic perivasculitis of the vessels of the
caecum and colon (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
ln the two-year studies described above, acute and chronic inflammation of the caecum
and colon were observed in low- and high-dose male rats, high-dose female rats and high-
dose male mice; the conditions were associated with the accumulation of an orange, granular
pigment in the submucosa of the intestine. Focal ulceration of the intestinal mucosa was
often present (US National Toxicology Program, 1988).
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol was present at low concentrations in an oxidative hair colouring
formulation evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rabbits (Burnett et aL., 1976,
0.5 %) and in a semi-permanent formulation evaluated in a 20-month study of dermal toxicity
in mice (Jacobs et al., 1984, 0.15%), described in detail on p. 97. No treatment-related
adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group noted that the dose of each component of
the formulations was very low and unlikely to have been toxic.)
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
No data were available to the Working Group on the reproductive and developmental
effects of2-amino-5-nitrophenol alone. The compound was present at low concentrations in2-AMINO-5-NITROPHENOL 181
oxidative hair colouring formulations evaluated in a two-generation study of reproduction in
rats (Burnett & Goldenthal, 1988, 2 %) and in a study of teratogenesis in rats (Burnett et aL. ,
1976,0.5%), described in detail on p. 100. No treatment-related adverse effect was detected.
(The Working Group noted that the dose of each component of the formulations was very
low and unlikely to have been toxic. i
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol induced mutation in bacteriophage, Salmonella typhimurium
and at the tk locus in mouse lymphoma L5 178Y cells. It also induced sister chromatid
exchange and chromosomal aberrations in cultured Chines~ hamster ovary cells.
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol did not induce dominant lethal mutation in rats exposed in vivo.
s. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of certain azo
dyes. It is also used in semi-permanent and permanent hair colouring products.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol was tested for carcinogenicity by gavage in one study in mIce
and one study in rats. ln mice, no significant increase in tumour incidence was observed in the
low-dose groups; data on the high-dose groups could not be evaluated owing to high
mortality rates. An increased incidence of pancreatic acinar-cell tumours was observed in
male rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
Oral treatment with 2-amino-5-nitrophenol was associated with inflammation of the
lower intestinal tract in mice and rats.
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol induced gene mutation in bacteria and gene mutation, sister
chromatid exchange and chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian cells. It did not
induce dominant lethal mutation in rats.182
-=cci.:i:=i...
ï31li1=C.š
~
1~eo=~..
CJ~ci"lci..~-t"lC~
CJ.....ciCcir..~
ci-.&~CIui:
CI~
CI..
CIp:
.-
Cl
::
i: --CI Cl00 rio ..
Cl ..
'":: uo...i:õ '"CI.o ~.s~~~
~ ~ Š ~
..
"3'"
CIp:~.~.. 0-:: i:.8 E
,g ~ ~ CI.. 0....~ ~ Š ~
E
CI..00~..'"~IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
5l ~ ~.9 .9 .9 ~ '-,-"-,.r-,. ,. ~,. 8 8 0 r-N r- N r- N r- .- N N r- U r-.- ~ ~ 00 ~ 00 ~ 00 ~ ~ ~ ~ oo'x 'x 'x ~~ r- _ ~ _ ~ _ ~ ~ _ r- _ ~ ~~~~~.-..00 ~ ~~~~~~~ ~~ ~~roo roo r~ .~ c~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ b~ ~ ~~ ~~ ~~ ~... l:l:l:l:l:l:- l:.. l:l: i:ci:ci:c..~~~~~~~~~~~~~o 0 0 ~.. ~ c: c: c: c: ti .. cu ~ c: 0'; E 0'= e 0'; s .._~ ~ i: ~ '" ~ '" ~ ~ '" ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ..... CI.;: CI .;: CI 00 .;: .;: CI z ~ z ~ z ~ CI"; .S!.. oo.. oo.. 00 CI .. :: .. 00 00 00 00 i:- ~ ... ~.- ~.- E ~ :. ~ .- Cf 0 Cf 0 Cf 0 L.~ Õ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ u ~ ~ o~ o~ o~ ~
~§§§~§§§~~~§~~\Ó ó s; r- g §. s; g in ó r- tr r- in;q¡:~::~ ~~ ~ N~N- ~
.-.- .-
1 .:.:O + 0 + + 0+001..1
,.,.,. ,.~
+ 1 .:.:.: 1 .:.: + + + + + +
i: i: i: i: i: i:i: i: i: .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 i: i: 00.g .g .g ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 .9 .§ ~~ ~ ~ ; ; ; ; ; ; .~ ~ ~. U::::::EEEEEE;;;~EEECICICICICICIEEE~
.§ Ë Ë Ë ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 5~~~~~~~~~~~~~šE ~ ~ ~~~r-r-oôoô ~ i. ~ 0
'0 8 8 8 r; r; r; r; r; r; oô oô oô 'ã
~~~~~~~~~~~~~.&~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~E- .§ .§ .~ .§ .§ .§ .§ .- .§ .§ .§.§ ~CI~~"'~~~~~~~~~ i:~~~~~~~~~~~~~.g
.. l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: ~r::::::::::::::::::::::::: ~o~~~~~~~~~~~~'"'C ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~.§~~~~~~~~~ 5ii tl tl ~ tl tl tl tl tl tl tl tl tl '"
~~~~~~~~~~%%%~.. Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf Cf \.§r-("-~ ~0\ Ó-. N
++
+ +
'"::
.9$;~Uè~~oi.
CI..'"s~..
CI'"
CI
.5..U.$-
CIUè~
6~
CI..'"
E~..
CI00
CI
.5.cU~
¿ci 00 0~ i:o .;:.. ... ~~ .. ....c ~ ::W t: S- CI -c:2 ~ .c~ ëa t)E E ::8 ~ i:.c 0 ~U E .5t 8 S.~ ~ .c ~ 8CI .;: u";: ~
ú.s ù.s ~~ ü CI-.N
X
.9-
'0
CI..'"
CI....oi:
'"..~i.cr
ëi ~.~. .0
.. 00~ .i00 __CI 00
~ E
1ClU00.~ ..CI '"~ CI... ..
'vi ~
&.~.. .:; .S
~ .~CI -
~ -ê~ 00.- ::+ ~.. 00..u 00
CI CI
.2: ...t: 8CI ..
&.~1~ i:+ l:2-AMINO-5-NITROPHENOL183
5.5 Evaluationl
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of 2-amino-5-nitro-
phenoL.
There is limited evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of 2-amino-5-
nitrophenol.
Overall evaluation
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol is not classifiable as to ils carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 75
Ames, RN., Kammen, H.O. & Yamasaki, E. (1975) Hair dyes are mutagenic: identification of a
variety of mutagenic ingredients. Proc. natl Acad Sei USA, 72, 2423-2427
Burnett, C.M. & Goldenthal, E.I. (1988) Multigeneration reproduction and carcinogenicity studies in
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed topically to oxidative hair-coloring formulations containing
p-phenylenediamine and other aromatic amines. Food Chem. Toxico/., 26,467-474
Burnett, c., Goldenthal, E.I., Harris, S.R, Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R. & Voelker, R. (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes. 1. Toxicol. environ. Health, i,
1027-104
Burnett, c., Lohr, R. & Corbett, J. (1977) Dominant lethal mutagenicity study on hair dyes. 1. Toxicol.
environ. HeaUh, 2, 657-62
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers, Dallas, TX, p. 39
Chiu, C.W, Lee, L.H., Wang, C.Y. & Bryan, G.T (1978) Mutagenicity of some commercially avaIlable
nitro compounds for Salmonella tyhimurium. Mutat. Res., 58, 11-22
Commission of the European Communities (1976) Council Directive 761768/EEC of 27 J uly 1976. Off
1. Eur. Commun., L262(27.9), 169-20
Commission of the European Communities (1990) Proposai for a CouncIl Directive on the
approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosme tic products of 15 November199. Off 1. Eur. Commun., C322, 29-77
Commission of the European Communities (1991) Commission Directive 91/184ÆEC of 12 March
1991. Off 1. Eur. Commun., L91, 59-62
Farris, R.E. (1978) Aminophenols. ln: Mark, H.E, Othmer, D.E, Overberger, CG., Seaborg, G.T &
Grayson, M., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 3rd ed., VoL. 2, New York,
John Wiley & Sons, pp. 422-40
Fluka Chemie AG (1993) Fluka Chemika-Biochemika, Buchs, p. 93
Frenkel, E.P. & Brody, E (1973) Percutaneous absorption and elimination of an aromatic hair dye.
Arch. env"on. HeaUh, 27, 401-404
lFor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.184 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
IAC (1980a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
Vol. 23, Some Metals and Metallc Compounds, Lyon, pp. 325-415
IAC (1980b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 23, Some Metals and Metallic Compounds, Lyon, pp. 39-141
IAC(1987a)IARC Monographson the EvaluationofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 230-232
IAC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humons, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 100106
Jacobs, M.M., Burnett, C.M., Penicnak, A.J., Herrera, J.A., Morris, WE., Shubik, P., Apaja, M. &
Granroth, G. (1984) Evaluation of the toxicity and carcinogenicity of hair dyes in Swiss mice.
Drug chem. Toxicol., 7, 573-586
Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons (1991) Specifications: Rodol YBA (5-Nitro-2-aminophenol Pure), New York
Kvelland, I. (1985) Mutagenicity of five hair dyes in bacteriophage T4D. Hereditas, 102, 151-154
Lide, D.R., ed. (1991) CRC Handbook ofChemistry and Physics, 72nd ed., Boca Raton, FL, CRe Press,
p. 3-377
Pouchert, c.J. (1981) The Aldn'ch Library of lnfrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 823
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra. 1980 Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1981-1991 Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA
Shahin, M.M., Bugaut, A. & Kalopissis, G. (1982) Mutagenicity of aminonitrophenol compounds in
Salmonella tyhimun'um: a study of structural activity relationships. lnt. 1 cosmet. Sci., 4, 25-35
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971) Colour Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 4, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 467
TCI America (1991) Organic Chemicals 91/92 Catalog, Portland, OR, p. 78
US National Libraiy of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxìc Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
SJ6302500), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1988) Toxìcology and Carcinogenesis Studies of 2-Amino-5-nitro-
phenol (CAS No. 121-88-0) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fl Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT Tech. Rep.
No. 344; NlH Publ. No. 88-2590), Research Triangle Park, NC
Zeiger, E., Anderson, 8., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T., Mortelmans, K. & Speck, W (1987) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests: III. Results from the testing of 255 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 9 (SuppI.9),
1-1101,4-DIAINO-2-NITROBENZENE
(2- Nitro-para-phenylenediamine)
This substance was considered by a previous Working Group, in 1977 (IARC, 1978a).
Since that time, new data have become available, and these have been incorporated into the
monograph and taken into consideration in the evaluation.
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1. 1. 1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 5307-14-2
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2-Nitro- 1,4-benzenediamine
IUP AC Systematic Name: 2- Nitro-para-phenylenediamine
Colour Index No.: 76070
Synonyms: 4-Amino-2-nitroaniline; CI Oxidation Base 22; 2,5-diaminonitrobenzene;
2-nitro-4-aminoaniline; 2-nitro- 1,4-benzenediamine; 2-nitro- 1,4-diaminobenzene; 2-
nitro- 1,4-phenylenediamine; nitro-para-phenylenediamine; ortho-nitro-para-pheny-
lenediamine; NPD
N02
H2N~NH2
C6H7N30ZMoL. wt: 153.14
1. 1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the substance
(a) Description: Reddish-brown crystalline powder, with a greenish cast (Cosmetic
Ingredient Review Expert Panel, 1985)
(b) Melting-point: 137-140 °C (95-99% pure) (Janssen Chimica, 1990; Aldrich
Chemical Co., 1992); 142-144 °C (97.5-100% pure) (Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons,
1991)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981,
1983; Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1991).
- 185-186 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(d) Solubilty: Slightly soluble in water (0.18% w/w), ethanol, polar organic compounds
and benzene; soluble in acetone and diethyl ether (Marzulli et al., 1981)
(e) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): log P, 3.7 (Cosmetic Ingredient ReviewExpert Panel, 1985) .
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Some trade names are Durafur Brown 2R; Fouramine 2R; Fourrine 36; Fourrine Brown
2R; Ursol Brown RR; Zoba Brown RR.
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene is available commercially in purities ranging from 95 to
100%, with 4-amino-3-nitroacetanilide as a possible impurity (from incomplete hydrolysis of
the acetylated intermediate; Cosme tic Ingredient Review Expert Panel, 1985). It has the
following specifications: ash, 0.1 % (max.); iron, 40 ppm (mg/kg) (max.); lead (see IARC,
1980a, 1987a), 5 ppm (mg/kg) (max.); and arsenic (see IARC, 1980b, 1987b), 2 ppm (mg/kg)
(max.). It is also available in research quantities at purities ranging from 90 to 99% (Janssen
Chimica, 1990; Jos. H. Lowenstein & Sons, 1991; Aldrich Chemical Co., 1992; Fluka
Chemie AG, 1993).
1. 1.4 Analysis
Qualitative and quantitative determinations of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene and its
derivatives are made using paper chromatography, high-performance liquid chromato-
graphy, reverse-phase liquid chromatography and thin-layer chromatography and by
spectrophotometric methods and electrophoresis (Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert
Panel, 1985).
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene was first synthesized in 1907 (Society of Dyers and Colou-
rists, 1971a). It is prepared by the "reaction of 1,4-diaminobenzene (para-phenylenediamine;
see IARC, 1978b) with acetic anhydride to form 1,4-bis(acetylamino)benzene, which is
nitrated and hydrolysed (Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel, 1985).
Approximately 150 kg of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene are used in hair colouringproducts in the USA annually, according to industry estimates. It is produced by one
company each in France and Germany (Chemical Information Servces, 1991).
1.2.2 Use
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene is used as a dye in semi-permanent hair colouring
products. These products are generally shampooed into the hair, lathered and then allowed
to remain in contact with the hair and scalp for 30-45 min. (US National Cancer Institute,
1979; Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel, 1985).
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene is also used as an ingredient in permanent hair dye
formulations, at levels of up to about 1 % (Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel, 1985).1,4-DIAMINO-2-NITROBENZENE 187
The active ingredient in these dyes reacts in an oxidative coupling reaction with hydrogen
peroxide within the hair shafts to produce the permanent colours. 1,4-Diamino-2-nitro-
benzene is used to produce light-brown and reddish shades (US National Cancer Institute,
1979). ln a similar process, it is used in fur dyeing to produce a red-brown colour, or to add
red shading when used in combination with other oxidation bases (Society of Dyers and
Colourists, 1971b; US National Cancer Institute, 1979).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 29 422 workers,
including 23 531 women, may have been exposed to 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene in 3160
facilities (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
The use of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene as a hair dye is not permitted in Italy or
Denmark (Liebscher & Spengler, 1989).
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of Cancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, six weeks of age, were fed diets
containing 2200 or 4400 mg/kg of diet (ppm) 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (commercial
grade; melting-point, 138-139 °C (purity unspecifiedD for 78 weeks, followed bya 12-week
(males and low-dose females) or 13-week (high-dose females) observation period before
sacrifice. Control groups of 20 males and 20 females were maintained on basal diet for up to
90 weeks. Dose-related mean body weight depression (15-20%) was observed in both males
and females throughout the experiment. Survval rates, analysed by Throne's test, did not
differ significantly among males or females. Survval at the end of the study was: males, 18/20
(controls), 46/50 (low-dose), 49/50 (high-dose); females, 20/20 (controls), 45/50 (low-dose),188 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
43/50 (high-dose). ln females, the incidences of hepatocellular adenomas were: control,
1/20; low-dose, 10/49; and high-dose, 14/48 (p = 0.01, Cochran Armitage test for trend);
three hepatocarcinomas occurred in high-dose females. No difference in the incidence of
hepatocellular tumours was observed in males, and there was no increase in the incidence of
other tumours in either sex (US National Cancer Institute, 1979). The histopathological
findings in the livers of female mice in this study were confIrmed by Reznik and Ward (1979).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six weeks of age, were fed diets
containing 550 or 1100 mg/kg of diet (ppm) (males) and 1100 or 2200 ppm (females)
1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (commercial grade (purity unspecified)) for 78 weeks, followed
bya 27-week observation period before all survving animais were killed. Control groups of
20 males and 20 females were maintained on basal di et for up to 105 weeks. A dose-related
me an body weight depression of approximately 10% was apparent in male rats from week 12
until week 87. Female rats had a dose-related mean body weight depression (:: 10%)
throughout the study. Survval rates, analysed by Tarone's test, were not significantly
different between treated and control animaIs of either sex. Survvors at the end of the study
were: males, 16/20 (controls), 46/50 (low-dose), 47/50 (high-dose); females, 18/20 (controls),
45/50 (low-dose), 38/50 (high-dose). No significant increase in the incidence oftumours was
observed (US National Cancer Institute, 1979).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
About 85 g of a commercial semi-permanent hair dye formulation containing 1.36%
1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene enriched with 14C-labelled compound at 0.576 l1Ci/mg was
applied on two occasions to the hair of human volunteers, worked in gently for 5-8 min and
allowed to remain in contact with the hair and scalp for an additional 30 min. On the first
occasion, the hair was clipped, and radiolabel accounting for 0.14% of that applied was
detected in the urine over a seven-day' period; half was excreted in the urine after 24 h. On the
second occasion, the hair was clipped only after 30 days: cumulative absorption was 0.19% on
the first day and 0.75% on the 30th day; half of the radiolabel was excreted after 150 h.
Urinary metabolites were not identified (Wolfram & Maibach, 1985).
4.1.2 Experimental systems
The same commercial hair dye formulation as used above was applied to the scalp hair of
rhesus monkeys and allowed to remain in contact for 30 min. Radiolabel accounting for
0.55% of that applied was detected in urine over a seven-day period; half was excreted in the
urine after 24 h. Urinary Iletabolites were not identified (Wolfram & Maibach, 1985).
14C-l,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene (1.32 mci/mmol (8.6 iiCi/mg)) in acetone was applied
to the forearms of adult rhesus monkeys of each sex and to the backs of immature1,4-DIAMINO-2-NlTROBENZENE 189
Pitman-Moore white swine (4 l.g/cm2). The skin contact area ranged from 3 to 15 cm2. Skin
penetration over the 24-h exposure period was 29.9% of the applied dose in monkeys and
17.7% in swine. The peak rate of excretion of radiolabel in urine occurred between 4 and 8 h
in monkeys and between 8 and 12 h in swine. Urinary metabolites were not identified
(Marzull et al., 1981).
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were injected intraperitoneally or intravenouslywith 14C-1,4-
diamino-2-nitrobenzene (6.2 mCi/mmol (6.5 l.Ci/mg); radiochemical purity, ? 99%) in
isotonic buffer solution (pH 7.4) at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg bw. Mter intraperitoneal injection,
37.4% of the radiolabel was excreted in the urine and 54.3% in the faeces within 24 h; total
excretion over four days amounted to 96% Of the dose. Within 24 h after intravenous
injection to cannulated rats, 42.2% of the radiolabel was excreted in the bile, 34.5% in urine,
8.1% in faeces and 0.65 % in the digestive tract. The highest concentration of radiolabel was
found at 1 h, except in the small and large intestines where it was found after 3 h, followed by
a rapid decrease in concentration. Only small amounts of radiolabel were present in tissues
after 48 h. Afer intraperitoneal injection, the urinary metabolites identified were N1,N4-di-
acetyl- 1,2,4-triaminobenzene (N1,N4-diacetyl-2-amine-p-php.nylenediamine), representing
13.4% of the urinary radiolabel, and N4-acetyl- 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (N4-acetyl-2-
nitro-p-phenylenediamine), representing 5.8%. Evidence was obtained for the prèsence of
conjugates of unstable metabolites (Nakao & Takeda, 1983).
ln an extension of the previous study, the N-acetylation reaction following intraperi~
toneal administration of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene, 1,2,4-triaminobenzene or various
N-acetylated metabolites was examined in male Sprague-Dawley rats given injections of 30
or 100 mg/kg bw in a 2% carboxyethyl cellulose sodium salt solution. 1,4-Diamino-2-nitro-
benzene was metabolized to N4-acetyl- 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene, N4-acetyl- 1,2,4-tri-
aminobenzene and N1,N4-diacetyl- 1,2,4-triaminobenzene by regioselective N4-acetylation
and subsequent nitroreduction, followed by regioselective Nl-acetylation (Nakao et al.,
1987).
1,2,4-Triaminobenzene and its N4-acetyl derivative were shown to be intermediates in
the anaerobic metabolism of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene and N4-acetyl- 1,2-diamino-2-
nitrobenzene in liver microsomes and cyosol from male Sprague-Dawley rats. The cyosolic
nitro-reducing activity was attributed to xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase and, possibly,
other unknown enzyes (Nakao et al., 1991).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
A case of psoriasis-like contact dermatitis was reported following use of a semi-
permanent hair dye containing 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene; a patch test carried out with 1 %
of the compound was positive (Perno & Lisi, 1990).
4.2.2 Experimental systems
ln a study of the transformation of lymphocyes into blastocyes, reduced uptake of
3H-thymidine was observed following incubation of human peripheral blood cultures with190 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (purity, 97%) for 48 or 72 h at concentrations of 25, 50 or
100 ltg/ml water (Smith et al., 1976).
The oral LDso of the compound in oil-in-water suspension was 3080 mg/kg bw in
Charles River CD rats; the intraperitoneal LDso in dimethyl sulfoxide was 348 mg/kg bw in
rats (Burnett et al., 1977). The oral LDso of the compound in water was 2100 mg/kg bw in
male Wistar rats (Gloxhuber et aL., 1972). The intraperitoneal LDso of the compound in CFW
mice was reported to be 214 mg/kg bw (Mikstacki, 1985).
During a 13-week study, groups of 10 Wistar rats of each sex were fed diets containing
500 mg/kg 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene (purity unspecifiedJ to give a calculated daily intake
of30-50 mg/kg bw. No change wasfound in bodyweight, blood or Ufine parameters orin the
histological appearance of a range of tissues in comparison with controls (Gloxhuber et al.,
1972).
ln the chronic feeding study described on pp. 187- 188, no significant compound-related
non-neoplastic lesion or toxic effect was observed in rats or mice when compared with
controls (US National Cancer Institute, 1979).
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene was present at low concentrations in an oxidative hair
colouring formulation evaluated in a 13-week study of dermal toxicity in rabbits (Burnett
et aL., 1976; 1. 1 %), in a semi-permanent formulation tested in a two-year feeding study in
dogs (Wernick et al., 1975, 0.24%) and in a 20-month study of dermal toxicityin mice (Jacobs
et al., 1984,0.85%), described in detail on p. 97. No treatment-related adverse effect was
detected. (The Working Group noted that the dose of each component of the formulations
was very low and unlikely to have been toxic. J
4.3 Reproductive and developmentaI efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene was present at low concentrations in semi-permanent hair
colouring formulations evaluated in a study of fertility and reproductive performance in rats
and in studies of teratogenesis in rats and rabbits (Wernick et al., 1975,0.24%; see p. 99) and
in an oxidative formulation evaluated in a two-generation study of reproduction (Burnett &
Goldenthal, 1988, 1.1 %) and in a study of teratogenesis in rats (Burnett et al., 1976, 1.1 %)
(see p. 100). No treatment-related adverse effect was detected. (The Working Group noted
that the dose of each component of the formulations was very low and unlikely to have been
toxic. J
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene (purity unspecifiedJ in sterile distiled water was injected
subcutaneouslyinto groups of25-69 pregnant CD-l mice on gestation days 6-15 at doses of
0,32,64, 128, 160, 192,224 or 256 mg/kg per day (Marks et al., 1981). Maternai bodyweight
gain during gestation days 1- 10 was significantly reduced in all treated groups, and doses of
128 mg/kg per day and above significantly reduced maternai weight gain throughout
pregnancy. Maternai mortality occurred at doses of224 and 256 mg/kg per day. The average1,4-DIAINO-2-NIOBENZENE 191
number of implants per litter was significantly reduced with 32, 128 and 160 mg/kg per day,
but not at higher doses. The frequency of resorptions was significantly increased at 224 and
256 mg/kg per day, but the average number of live fetuses per litter was significantly reduced
only with 32, 128 and 256 mg/kg per day. Average fetal body weights were significantly
reduced with 128 mg/kg per day and above, and the number of stunted fetuses was
significantly increased with 224 and 256 mg/kg per day. The percentage of malformed fetuses
(clefr palate, fused ribs, bilateral open eye) was significantly increased at doses of 160 mg/kg
per day and above. Under the conditions of this study, 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene was
developmentally toxic to CD-l mice at doses that were also toxic to pregnant dams.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Tables 1 and 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene was mutagenIc to Salmonella typhimurium, to Escherichia
coli and at the tk locus in mouse lymphoma L5 178Y cens. It was neither mutagenic ta
Neurospora crassa nor recombinogenic in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 1,4-Diamino-2-nitro-
benzene induced dominant lethal mutation and chromosomal aberrations in germ cens of
Drosophila melanogaster (abstract).
Unscheduled DNA synthesis was not induced in primary cultures of rat hepatocyes,
whereas an extremely low dose was reported to do so in HeLa cells. Sister chromatid
exchange was induced by 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene in cultured Chinese hamster ovaiy
cells, and it induced structural chromosomal aberrations in vitro in Chinese hamster cens and
in human lymphocyes. It enhanced morphological transformation of primary Syrian hamster
embryo cens, BALB/c 3T3 and C3H/I0Tlh mouse cells and enhanced Moloney mouse
sarcoma-leukaemia virus complex induction of transformation of mouse C3H2K cens.
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene did not induce sister chromatid exchange in bone-marrow
cens of Chinese hamsters treated in vivo orally or intraperitoneany. ln mice dosed
intraperitoneally, it did not induce chromosomal aberrations in bone-marrow cells or in
previously injected Ehrlich ascites tumour cells. The dye was also inactive in inducing
micronuclei in polychromatic eryhrocyes of rat bone marrow after treatment by gavage. Na
dominant lethal mutation was observed in rats following intraperitoneal treatment.
The addition of hydrogen peroxide to 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene had inconsistent
effects upon mutagenic responses in S. typhimurium TA98 (Yoshikawa et al., 1976, 1977).
1,2,4-Triaminobenzene, a metabolite of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene, was mutagenic to
bacteria but did not induce sperm-head abnormality in mice after intraperitoneal injection.
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene is used in permanent and semi-permanent hair dye formu-
lations and for dyeing fur.192
vu=Vi.~Vp:
ô
fi
i: -.V ClCI u.8¿
~.s,0..i: .. S.. v ~ v
.. ~ Q) t;~ ~ S Q
Q,=Q,N=Q,,Qe-
.a.Ml=...
El
ca...
"C.
"l"'
1'
eoQ
~
Cj~
Q,
~-
ca-t
"C=as
Cj...-
Q,=
Q,ø~ .s,.. 0..
.. ;:=..s:3 ,g~~Vr. .. 0 Q) ~~ ~~SQ
Sv..CIQ.1'
Q,-,Q~..CI~IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57~5 ~ ~~ ~~~ ~ ~~~~ - ~ ~ ~~ v ~ ~~ ~ ~~~ ~ ~r- ~~~~ ~~~ i: i: ~Ç).... i: i: ó6 ~r-tr '- i: 00.. 9: 0000 :! 0000 ~ Ç):! :! '- ~S ~O. i: .. 00 '" '- 0 = 0\.. 00r- 0 ..', - 0\ r- ,- ,- "' 0 00 0\ r- .. S 0 ~ 00 0\0\ ~ ~ 0\.. 0\ 0\ 0\ .. 0\ 0\ 0\ V i. Cl ~~, ~ i: § ~ '- ~ ~M ~ ~ ~~ ~ C ~i ~ ~ ~ ~i C ~ ~ ~ ~ _ ~ ~ ~"- ~.~ - .. - .. '- - "''' Z.. _.J .L '- '- ... l -- '- ... - i: .. i: .. ." ." "; .. .. v ;: 'i: .... . ~ r. 'E i: .. ~i: i: = i: i: \; \; .. .. i: i: r. v i: i: ~ ~ ~ _O. i: ~ i:~o~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~~~~~~ v~~
i: ~ .9;: t; =E ~ i: ~.s CI v i: :: Q)e Š ~ .9 ;: t;.S i: ~ ~ .9.. ~ t; :;2 '5 v oo.g i: .~ 2 .~ ~ ~Q) ~ 2'E ¿ r- V 00 .g ~ 2 ~ i: c. Oó :g .g E
~ ~ 'Ov~,.i r'l v ~ Q) .. v ~ ~ r~ ~ V ~ i. .. ~ ~ ~ Q) ~ t3 .i r'l~~ _~uN¡:Nr. ~¡:~u '-'O'-~~~r~'O,-_~u
Šgg ~gggŠŠŠ~;qci~ ir~~;qS¡~SN
101
1 +
i: i: i:
.9.g .sa~ ~ ~.. ;: ..
S S Sv v vCI ~ ~i. V ~V ~ ~~ v Q)~ i. i.
~ 8' ~8.. 8.. ~..~E-~
~ ~ ~::.:: ::.i: i: 'i:
~.§ ~. .. .- :.
~~~
i:.. o:
:: 1S ::~ i: ~§ ~ §.s~.s
c5 c. c5
~ 6 ~~ -o ~~ en ~~ŠŠg g
\Ô ci ir ir citrNN ..N
~O++I~++++++o
~+++~IOO++O++
i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i:i: i: i: .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9.~ .~ .~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
;:;:;:SSSSSSSSSSSSvQ)Q)vvvQ)Q)vvvv~~~~~~~~~~~~vQ)vQ)vvQ)Q)vQ)VQ)~~~~~~~~~~~~VQ)Q)vvVQ)Q)VQ) v V i. i. i. i. i. i. i. i. i.
~ ': ': tr .. r: oô or oó oô oô oô888~c-c-c-~~c-c-~ ~. tr tr tr '" tr tr tr '"1",. ~....,... 1" 'l 'l'' 'l~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: ::'i: .i: .i: .i: 'i: .i: .i: 'i: .i: .i: 'i: 'i:~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:.:.~~~:.:.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~§~§§§§§§§§~§~~~~~~~~~~~~c. tl c. c. c. c. c. c. ~ c. c. c.%%%~~~ttttttr. en en en.~ r. r. en ~ r. r. ~~g~ggŠ ~~Šir ci v) ir ir ci ó ir irtrNN N
+0+++++
+ +0++++
i: i: i:.9 .9.9 i: i: i: i:~ ~ ~ .9 .9 .9 .9.. +J.. ~ .. .. ..;: ;:;: ~ ~ ~ ~S SSE::::::~ ~~SSSS~ ~~~~~~~ ~ ~ i. i. i. i.V Q)vvvVQ)i. i. i. ~ ~ ~ ~00 oooo~~~~~ c-c- ~ ~ ~ ~'" tr tr 00 00 00 00
~ ~~~~~~~ ~~£:~~~:: ::::::::::::'i: .i:.i:.i:'i:'i:'i:~ ~~~~~~:. ~ ~:.:. ~ ~~ ~~~~~~
.. :§:§:§~:§:§
L ~~~~~~~ ~~~~~~c. c. c. c. c. tl t;
t tt~~~~~ r.r.~enenr.00+
+ + +
i: i: i:o 0 0"1" ..- -.... .. .."" ~ ~.. .. ..:: ;: ::
S S S
v v Q)en CI CIi. i. i.v Q) Q)~ ~ ~v v Q)i. i. i.
00 00 00
~~~
£: ~ ~:: :: ::.i: .i: 'i::: :: ::
£: ~ ~:i :. ~~~~
~ ~:§~ ~ ~i: i: i:~ ~l
c. c. c5
~~~en ~ r.Table i (contd)
Test system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation + + 5.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA9, reverse mutation 0 + 50.~~ Shahin et al. (1985)
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA9, reverse mutation + + 17.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SCG, Saccharomyces cerevisiae D4, trp5 conversion0 0.~~ Mayer & Goin (1980) ,. -~SCH, Saccharomyces cerevsiae D3, ade2 mitotic recombination 500.~~ Mayer & Goin (1980)1 - -ÜNCR, Neurospora crassa, reverse mutation -0 400.~~ Ong (1978) :;DMC, Drosophila melanogaser, chromosomal aberrations in + 100.~~, 24 h Laethem & Wu (1985); ~germ censabstr. -ZDML, Drosophila melanogaser, dominant lethal mutation + 100.~~ Laethem & Wu (1985); 01abstr. N1VRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priaiy hepatoces(+ ) 0 100.~~ Wiliams et al. (1982) ~
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythe sis, rat priaiy hepatoces - 0 153.~~ Probst et al. (1981)~G5T Gene mutation, mou se lymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus + 0 25.~~ Palmer et al. (1977) 0G5T Gene mutation, mouse lymphoma L5178Y cens, tk locus + 0 50.~~ Oberlyet al. (1984) t:
tTsic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovaiy cens + 0 15.~~ Perr & Searle (1977) Z
in vitro N
tT CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster prostate cells + 0 25.~~ Kirkland & Venitt (1976)æin vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster lung + 0 0.~~ Ishidate & Odashimafibroblasts in vitro + 0 20.~~ (1977); Ishidate et al.
(1981)CIT Chromosomal aberrations, mouse C3HIlO1Yi fibroblasts + 0 1.5300 Benedict (1976)
in vitro
TBM, Cell transformation, BALB/c 3T3 mou se cells + 0 0.~~ Sivak & Tu (1985)
TCM, Cell transformation, C3H/101Yi mouse cells + 0 1.5300 Benedict (1976)
TCS, Cell transformation, Syrn hamster embiyo cells, clonaI + 0 0.500 Pienta & Kawalek (1981)assay
TE~ Cell transformation, Moloney sarcoma virs in mou se -0 0.~~ Yoshikura et al. (1979)C3H2K cells
""Ull Unscheduled DNA sythesis, Hela cells + 0 0.0150 Martin et al. (1978)\0wTable 1 (contd)..
'f
Test system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)
With
exogenous -
metabolic
~system
0 50.~~ Searle et al. (1975)a:0300.~~ ip Neal & Probst (1983) Z0
50.~~ po Neal & Probst (1983) Ci
~ 100.~~ po x 2 Hossack & Richardson
(1977)i:cz107.~~ ip Mikstacki (1985)d0.~~ Bogajewski & BogajewskaE(1982); abstr.a:107.~~ ip Mikstacki (1985)m
Vl20.~~ ip x 24 Bumett et al. (1977) -i
40.~~ ip x 30 Sheu & Green (1979)Without
exogenous
metabolic
system
CHL, Chromosomal aberrations, human lymphoces in vitro +
SV A Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster bone-marrow -
cens in vivo
SVA Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster bone-marrow -
cells in vivo
MV, Micronucleus test, CFY rats in vivo
CBA Chromosomal aberrations, CFW mouse bone-marrow
cells in vivo
CBA Chromosomal aberrations, mouse Ehrlich ascites tumour
cens in vivo
CVA Chromosomal aberrations, mou se Ehrlich ascites tumour
cens in vivo
DLR, Dominant lethal mutation, CD rats
DLR, Dominant lethal mutation, Holtzman rats
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
a:n-vitro tests, ¡.g/ml; rn-vivo tests, mg/kg bw; 0.~~, not givenTable 2. Genetic and related efTects of 1,2,4-triaminobenzene
Test system Reference Result Dosea
(LED/HID)Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
system
SAO, Salmonella tyhimurium TA100, reverse mutation
SA9, Salmonella tyhImurium TA98, reverse mutation
SA8, Salmonella typhimurium TA1538, reverse mutation
SPM, spenn morphology, (CBA X BALB/c)Fi mou se in vivo+
+o
+
+19.~~
19. ()
25.~~
25 X 5 ipMitchell (1978)
Mitchell (1978)
Garner & Nutman (1977)
Topham (1980)
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
Iln-vitro tests, ¡.g/ml; rn-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
bS9 was detoxig,.".6"'~~"'Zo1N
~
;Joo:
mzNm
~
,.\lVI196 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene was tested for carciiiogenicity byoral administration in the
diet in one study in mice and in one study in rats. An increased incidence of liver-cell tumours
was observed in female mice. No increase in the incidence of tumours was observed in male
mice or in rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene induced gene mutation in bacteria and in cultured mam-
malian cells. It did not induce gene mutation, mitotic crossing over or gene conversion in
yeasts. It induced chromosomal aberrations, sIster chromatid exchange and cell transfor-
mation in cultured mammalian cells and chromosomal aberrations in human lymphocyes
in vitro. Equivocal responses were obtained for DNA da mage induction in cultured rodent
cells.
There was no evidence for induction of sister chromatid exchange, micronuclei, chromo-
somal aberrations or dominant lethal mutation in rodents dosed in vivo.
1,2,4-Triaminobenzene, a metabolite of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene, was mutagenic to
bacteria.
5.5 Evaluation1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of 1,4-diamino-2-nitro-
benzene.
There is limiled evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of 1,4-diamino-
2-nitrobenzene.
Overall evaluation
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene iS not classifiable as to ils carcinogenicity to humans
(Croup 3).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 931
Ames, RN., Kammen, H.O. & Yamasaki, E. (1975) Hair dyes are mutagenic: identification of a
variety of mutagenic ingredients. Proc. natl Acad Sei USA, 72, 2423-2427
lPor definition of the italicized tenus, see Preamble, pp. 2630.1,4-DIAMINO-2-NITROBENZENE 197
Ammenheuser, M.M. & Warren, M.E. (1979) Detection of mutagens in the urine of rats following
topical application of hair dyes. Mutat. Res., 66, 241-245
Benedict, WE (1976) Morphological transformation and chromosome aberrations produced by two
hair dye components. Nature, 260, 368-369
Bogajewski, J. & Bogajewska, G. (1982) Comparison of determinations of chromosomal aberrations
in anaphases and metaphases (Abstract No. 20). Mutat. Res., 97, 173-174
Burnett, C.M. & Goldenthal, E.I. (1988).Multigeneration reproduction and carcinogenicity studies in
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed topically to oxidative hair-coloring formulations containing p-
phenylenediamine and other aromatic amines. Food Chem. Toxicol., 26, 467-474
Burnett, c., Goldenthal, E.L, Harris, S.B., Wazeter, EX., Strausburg, J., Kapp, R. & Voelker, R. (1976)
Teratology and percutaneous toxicity studies on hair dyes. 1 Toxicol. environ. Health, 1,
1027-104
Burnett, c., Loehr, R. & Corbett, 1. (1977) Dominant lethal mutagenicity study on hair dyes.1 Toxicol.
env~on. Heaúh, 2, 657-622
Byeon, WH., Paik, S.G. & Lee, S.Y. (1975) Mutagenicity of phenylenediamines and their derivatives
(1) (Kor.). Kor. 1 Microbiol., 13,51-58
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers, Dallas, TX, p. 43?
Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel (1985) Final report on the safety assessment of 2-nitro-p-
phenylenediamine and 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine.1 Am. Coll. Toxicol.,4, 161-202
Dunkel, Vc. & Simmon, VE (1980) Mutagenic activity of chemicals previously tested for carcIno-
genicity in the National Cancer Institute Bioassay Program. ln: Montesano R., Bartsch, H. &
Tomatis, L., eds, Molecular and Cellular Aspects of Carcinogen Screening Tests (IAC Scientific
Publications No. 27), Lyon, IAC, pp. 283-302
Fluka Chemie AG (1993) Fluka Chemika-BioChemika, Buchs, p. 967
Garner, R.C. & Nutman, C.A. (1977) Testing of some azo dyes and their reduction products for muta-
genicity using Salmonella tyhimurium TA1538. Mutat. Res., 44, 9-19
Gentile, J.M., Gentile, G.J. & Plewa, M.J. (1987) Mutagenicity of selected aniline derivatives to
Salmonella following plant activation and mammalian hepatic activation. Mutat. Res., 188,
185-1%
de Giovanni-Donnelly, R. (1981) The comparative response of Salmonella tyhimurium strains
TA1538, TA98 and TA100 to various hair dye components. Mutat. Res., 91, 21-25
Gloxhuber, c., Potokar, M., Reese, G. & Flemming, P. (1972) Toxicologic examination of direct hair
dyes (GeL). 1 Soc. Cosmet. Chem., 23, 259-269
Hossack, D.J.N. & Richardson, J.c. (1977) Examination of the potential mutagenicity of hair dye
constituents using the micronucleus test. Experientia, 33, 377-378
IARC (1978a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man,
VoL. 16, Some Aromatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds- Hair Dyes, Colouring Agents and
Miscellaneous Industril Chemicals, Lyon, pp. 73-82
IAC (1978b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals ta Man,
VoL. 16, Some Aromatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds- Hair Dyes, Colouring Agents and
Miscellaneous Industril Chemicals, Lyon, pp. 125-142
IAC (1980a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 23, Some Metals and Metallic Compounds, Lyon, pp. 325-415
IAC (1980b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
VoL. 23, Some Metals and Metallic Compounds, Lyon, pp. 39-41198 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 23232
IAC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 100106
Ishidate, M., Jr & Odashima, S. (1977) Chromosome tests with 134 compounds on Chinese hamster
cells in vitro-a screening for chemical carcinogens. Mutat. Res., 48, 337-354
Ishidate, M., Jr, Sofuni, T & Yoshikawa, K. (1981) Chromosomal aberration tests in vitro as a primary
screening tool for environ mental mutagens and/or carcinogens. Gann Monogr Cancer Res., 27,
95-108
Jacobs, M.M., Burnett, C.M., Penicnak, AJ., Herrera, J.A, Morris, WE., Shubik, P., Apaja, M. &
Granroth, G. (1984) Evaluation of the toxicity and carcinogenicity of hair dyes in Swiss mice.
Drug Chem. Toxicol., 7, 573-586
Janssen Chi mica (199) 1991 Catalog Handbook of Fine Chemicals, Beerse, p. 888
Jos H. Lowenstein & Sons (1991) Specifications: Rodol Brown 2R (2-Nitro-1,4~diaminobenzene), New
York
Kirkland, D.J. & Venitt, S. (1976) Cyotoxicity of hair colourant constituents: chromosome damage
induced by two nitrophenylenediamines in cultured Chinese hamster cells. Mutat. Res., 40,47-56
Laethem, RM. & Wu, c.K. (1985) Induced lethality and chromosome damage by 2-nitro-p-
phenylenediamine in Drosophila melanogaster (Abstract No. 4.4). Genetics, HO, S17
Liebscher, K.D. & Spengler, J. (1989) Toxicology and legal aspects. ln: Elvers, R, Hawkins, S.,
Ravenscroft, M., Rounsavile, J.E & Schulz, G., eds, Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial
Chemistry, 5th ed., Vol. A12, New York, VCH Publishers, pp. 593-597
Marks, TA, Gupta, RN., Ledoux, TA & Staples, RE. (1981) Teratogenic evaluation of 2-nitro-p-
phenylenediamine, 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine, and 2,5-toluenediamine sulfate in the mouse.
Teratology, 24, 253-265
Martin, C.N., McDermid, A.C. & Garner, RC. (1978) Testing of known carcinogens and noncarcI-
nogens for their ability to induce unscheduled DNA synthesis in HeLa cells. Cancer Res., 38,
2621-2627
MarzulIi, EN., Anjo, D.M. & Maibach, H.I. (1981) ln vivo skin penetration studies of 2,4-toluene-
diamine, 2,4-diaminoanisole, 2-nitro-p-phenylene-diamine, p-dioxane and N-nitrosodiethanol-
amine in cosmetics. Food Cosmet. Toxicol., 19, 743-747
Mayer, V.W & Goin, C.J. (1980) Induction of mitotic recombination by certain hair-dye chemIcals in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutat. Res., 78,243-252
Mc Mahon, RE., Cline, J.c. & Thompson, C.Z. (1979) Assay of 855 test chemicals in ten tester strains
using a new modification of the Ames test for bacterial mutagens. Cancer Res., 38, 682-693
Mikstacki, A. (1985) Evaluation of mutagenicity of some aromatic amines, used as hair dyes, by
chromosomal aberration tests in vivo. Genet. pol., 26, 109-116
Mitchell, I.diG. (1978) Microbial assays for mutagenicity: a modified liquid culture method compared
with the agar plate system for precision and sensitivity. Mutat. Res., 54, 1-16
Nakao, M. & Takeda, Y. (1983) Distribution, excretion and metabolism of nitro-p-phenylenediamine
in rats. 1 Toxicol. environ. Health, 11,93-100
Nakao, M., Gotoh, Y., Matsuki, Y., Hiratsuka, A & Watabe, 1: (1987) Metabolism of the hair dye
component, nitro-p-phenylenediamine, in the rat. Chem. pharm. Bull., 35, 785-7911,4-DIAMINO-2-NITROBENZENE 199
Nakao, M., Goto, Y., Hiratsuka, A & Watabe, T (1991) Reductive metabolism of nitro-p-phenylene-
diamine by rat liver. Chem. phann. Bull., 39, 177-180
Neal, S.R & Probst, G.S. (1983) Chemically-induced sister-chromatid exchange in vivo in bone
marrow of Chinese hamsters. Mutat. Res., 113, 33-43
Oberly, TJ., Bewsey RJ. & Probst, G.S. (1984) An evluation of the L5178Y TK + /- mouse lymphoma
forward mutation assay using 42 chemicals. Mutat. Res., 125,291-306
Ong, T (1978) Use of the spot, plate and suspension test systems for the detection of the mutagenicity
of environmental agents and chemicals carcinogens in Neurospora crassa. Mutat. Res., 53,
297-308
Palmer, K.A., Denunzio, A & Green, S. (1977) The mutagenic assay of some hair dye components
using the thymidine kinase locus of L5178Y mouse lymphoma cells.l environ. Pathol. Toxicol., 1,
87-91
Perno, P. & Lisi, P. (1990) Psoriasis-like contact dermatitis from a hair nitro dye. Contact Denn., 23,
123-124
Perry, P.E. & Searle, C.E. (1977) Induction of sis ter chromatid exchanges in Chinese hamster cells by
the hair dye constituents 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine and 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine. Mutat.
Res., 56, 207-210
Pienta, R.J. & Kawalek, J.c. (1981) Transformation of hamster embryo cells by aromatic amines. Natl
Cancer Inst. Monogr., 58, 243-251
Pouchert, c.J. (1981) The Aldrich Ubrary of Infrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 827
Pouchert, c.J. (1983) The Aldrich Ubrary of NMR Spectra, 2nd ed., VoL. 1, Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 1172
Probst, G.S., McMahon, R.E., Hil, L.E., Thompson, C.Z., Epp, J.K. & Neal, S.B. (1981)
Chemically-induced unscheduled DNA synthesis in primary rat hepatocyte cultures: a compa-
rison with bacterial mutagenicity using 218 compounds. Environ. Mutag.,3, 11-32
Reznik, G. & Ward, J.M. (1979) Carcinogenicity of the hair-dye component 2-nitro-p-phenylene-
diamine: induction of eosinophilic hepatocellular neoplasms in female B6B3F 1 mice. Food
Cosmet. Toxicol., 17, 493-500
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra 1980, Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra 1981-1991, Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA
Searle, C.E., Harnden D.G., Venitt, S. & Gyde, O.H.B. (1975) Carcinogenicity and mutagenicity tests
of some hair colourants and constituents. Nature, 255, 506507
Shahin, M.M., Chopy, C. & Lequesne, N. (1985) Comparison of mutation induction by six monocyclic
aromatic amines in Salmonella tyhimurium tester strains TA97, TA1537 and TA1538. Environ.
Mutag., 7, 535-546
Sheu, c.-J.W & Green, S. (1979) Dominant lethal assay of sorne hair-dye components in random-bred
male rats. Muta!. Res., 68, 85-98
Sivak, A & Tu, AS. (1985) Use of rodent hepatocytes for metabolic activation in transformation
assays. ln: Kakunaga, T & Yamasaki, H., eds, Transfonnation Assay of Established Cell Unes:
Mechanisms and Application (IAC Scientific Publications No. 67), Lyon, IAC, pp. 121-135
Smith, N.S., Bishun, N.P. & Wiliams, D. (1976) Depression of lymphocyte transformation by two hair
dye constituents. Microbios Leu., 1, 205-208
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971a) Colour Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 4, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 4620 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971b) Colour Index, 3rd ed., Vol. 3, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 326
Topham, J.C. (1980) The detection of carcinogen-induced sperm head abnormalities in mice. Mutat.
Res., 69, 149-155
US National Cancer Institute (1979) Bioassay of 2-Nitro-p-phenylenediamine for Possible Carcino-
genieity (CAS No. 5307-14-2) (NCI-CG-TR-169; NIH Publ. No. 79-1725), Bethesda, MD
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxìc Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
STIOO), Bethesda, MD
Venitt, S. & Searle, C.E. (1976) Mutagenicity and possible carcinogenicity of hair colourants and
constituents. ln: Rosenfeld, C. & Davis, W, eds, Environmental Pollution and Carcinogenic Risks
(IAC Scientific Publications No. 13), Lyon, IAC, pp. 263-271
Wernick, T., Lanman, B.M. & Fraux, J.L. (1975) Chronic toxicity, teratologic and reproduction studies
with hair dyes. Toxìcol. appl. Pharmacol., 32, 450-
Willams, a.M., Laspia, M.F. & Dunkel, VC. (1982) Reliability of the hepatocyte primary
culture/DNA repair test in testing of coded carcinogens and noncarcinogens. Mutat. Res., 97,
359-370
Wolfram, L.J. & Maibach, H.I. (1985) Percutaneous penetration of hair dyes. Arch. dermatol. Res.,
277, 235-241
Yoshikawa, K., Uchino, H. & Kurata, H. (1976) Studies on the mutagenicity of hair dye (Jpn.). Bull.
natllnst Hyg. Sei., 94, 2832
Yoshikawa, K., Uchino, H., Tateno, N. & Kurata, H. (1977) Mutagenic activities of the samples
prepared with raw material of hair dye (Jpn.). Bull. nat/. lnst Hyg. Sei, 95, 15-24
Yoshikura, H., Kuchino, T. & Matsushima, 1: (1979) Carcinogenic chemicals enhance mouse leukemia
virus infection in contact-inhibited culture: a new simple method of screening carcinogens.
Cancer LeU., 7,203-208
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T. & Mortelmans, K. (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iV Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 11 (Suppl. 12), 1-158COSMETIC COLOURAD&e RED NO. 9 (ei Pigment Red 53:1)
This substance was considered bya previous Working Group, in 1974 (IARC, 1975).
Since that time, new data have become available, and these have been incorporated into the
monograph and taken into consideration in the evaluation.
. D&C Red No. 9 is a grade of CI Pigment Red 53:1 (Colour Index No. 15585:1), which is
certified for use in drugs and cosme tics (US Food & Drug Administration, 1974).
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 5160-02-1; replaces 12237-52-4; 12238-39-0; 12238-41-4;
12238-43-6; 24777-23-9; 52627-68-6; 68894-03-1
Chem. Abstr. Name: 5-Chloro-2-( (2-hydroxy- 1 -naphthalenyl)azo )-4-methyl benzene-
sulfonic acid, barium salt (2: 1)
Colour Index No.: 15585:1
Synonyms: CI Pigment Red 53, Ba salt; CI Pigment Red 53, barium salt (2:1); D and C
Red No. 9; Pigment Red 53:1; Lake Red C; Red Lake C
CI~N= N OH
SÛ3-Ba++
2
(C17H12CIN204S)zBa MoL. wt: 888.6
1.1.2 CHemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Red powder (Benemelis, 1973)
(b) Melting-point: 343-345 °c (decomposes) (US National Toxicology Pro gram, 1982)
(c) Density: 1.66 g/cm3 (Benemelis, 1973)
(d) Spectroscopy data: Infrared and ultraviolet spectral data have been reported (US
National Toxicology Program, 1982).
-203-20 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(e) Solubilty: Slightly soluble in water and ethanol; insoluble in acetone and benzene
(Society of Dyers and Colourists, 1982)
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
D&C Red No. 9 is required to contain a minimum of 87% pure colour for sale as a drug
and cosmetic colourant (US Food and Drug Administration, 1974).
Analysis of commercial samples ofD&C Red No. 9 revealed the presence of 1 1 aromatic
azo compounds (subsidiary colours), at levels of up to 27 ppm (mg/kg), derived from
aromatic amine impurities in the Red Lake C Amine (2-amino-4-methyl-5-chlorobenzene-
sulfonic acid) precursor (Naganuma et al., 1983).
1.1.4 Analysis
The amount of pure colourant in colour additives can be determined by a titrimetric
method using titanous chloride as an indicator (Wiliams, 1984).
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
The fIrst commercial production of CI Pigment Red 53:1 was in 1903. The method of
manufacture involves three steps: diazotization, preparation of the coupling intermediate
and coupling. The diazotization step involves reacting 2-amino-4-methyl-5-chlorobenzene-
sulfonic acid with hydrochloric acid and sodium nitrite to form the diazonium chloride
moiety. The coupling step involves mixing the diazonium chloride solution with the coupling
component (ß-naphthol), then adding barium chloride to form CI Pigment Red 53:1
(Benemelis, 1973). To meet specifications for use in drugs and cosmetics, purified starting
materials may be required (US Food and Drug Administration, 1979).
Production of US Food and Drug Administration-certified D&C Red No. 9 was 13
tonnes in 1970,28 tonnes in 1975,38 tonnes in 1980 and 0.5 tonnes in 1987; the last year in
which it was approved as a D&C col our was 1988 (Marmion, 1991). Approximate US
production of CI Pigment Red 53:1 was 430 tonnes in 1950,990 tonnes in 1970, 1240 tonnes
in 1975, 1770 tonnes in 1980,2020 tonnes in 1985 and 1960 tonnes in 1990 (Benemelis, 1973;
US International Trade Commission, 1977, 1981, 1986, 1991). CI Pigment Red 53:1 is
produced byone company each in Belgium, Canada, Denmark, India and Japan and by four
companies in the USA (Chemical Informatic)l Servces, 1991).
1.2.2 Use
D&C Red No. 9 is used in some countries in the cosmetic and drug industry in such
applications as a lipstick colourant, mouthwashes, dentifrices and drugs (Dry Color
Manufacturers Association, 1987).
CI Pigment Red 53:1 (as Red Lake C) is widely used in printing inks. It has been used
extensively in letter press and offset inks and also ingravure inks, in which its transparency is
important. The non-resinated form is used in water- and solvent-based flexographic inks. ItD&C RED NO. 9 205
also finds substantial use in coated papers and crayons. Because of its good heat resistance, it
is used in polystyene and rubber, in tin printing and in baking enamels (Society of Dyers andColourists, 1971; Benemelis, 1973; Dry Color Manufacturers Association, 1987). Resinated
CI Pigment Red 53:1 (as Red Lake C) is also used extensively io flexographic inks, in which it
provides a stronger, cleaner, yellower colour th an the non-resinated grade (Benemelis,
1973).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
D&C Red No. 9 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupation al exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 122 313 workers,
including 23095 women, were potentially exposed occupationally to CI Pigment Red 53:1.
The compound was observed in 43 industries, but the greatest number of potentially exposed
workers were employed in the printing trades (US National library of Medicine, 1992).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
D&C Red No. 9 was provisionally allowed in the European Economic Community for
use in cosmetic products (with a maximum of 3% in products intended to come into contact
with mu cous membranes) except those intended to be appliedin the vicinity of the eyes, in
particular eye make-up and eye make-up remover (Commission of the European
Communities, 1976, 1990, 1991). This application was prohibited in 1992 (Commission of
the European Community, 1992).
D&C Red No. 9 was provisionally listed by the US Food and Drug Administration for
use in internally and externally applied drugs and cosme tics (US Food and Drug
Administration, 1974; Dry Color Manufacturers Association, 1987), including (i) use in
lipsticks and other cosme tics intended to be applied to the lips at not more than 3.0% pure
pigment by weight of each lipstick or other lip cosmetic; (ii) use in a dentifrice at not more
than 0.002 % of the pure pigment by weight of the dentifrice or in a mouthwash at not more
than 0.005% of the pure dye by weight of the mouthwash; and (iii) use in drugs subject to
ingestion, other than mouthwashes and dentifrices at not more than 0.1 mg per day. ln 1988,
these applications were prohibited (US Food and Drug Administration, 1979, 1987, 1988).
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.20 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental Animais
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, six weeks of age, were fed diets
containing 1000 or 2000 mg/kg (ppm) D&C Red No. 9 (89.8% pure; major impurities,
sodium and barium sulfates) for 103 weeks, followed by an observation period of two weeks
before all survvors were kiled. A control group of 50 males and 50 females was fed basal diet
for 104 (males) and 105 (females) weeks. Mean body weights of treated males and control
mice were comparable, although, after week 50, the mean body weights of high-dose females
were slightly lower th an those of controls. No significant difference was observed in survval
in any group: males (control, 42/50; low-dose, 40/50; high-dose, 39/50) and females (control,
40/50; low-dose, 40/50; high-dose, 41/50). The incidence of hepatocellular carcinomas was
significantly increased in treated males (control, 4/50; low-dose, 9/50; high-dose.. 11/50;
p .c 0.038, Cochran-Armitage trend test). The historical incidence of hepatocellular
carcinomas in male mice at the study laboratory was 65/297 (22%). The incidence of
hepatocellular adenomas in males was 4/50 controls, 4/50 low-dose and 4/50 high-dose. The
combined incidences of hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas were not significantly
different. No significant difference was found in the incidence of tumours of other sites. ln
female mice, no significant increase in tumours was observed at any site (US National
Toxicology Program, 1982). (The Working Group considered that the marginally significant
increase in trend of hepatocellular carcinomas in male mice is neither biologically significant
nor related to treatment.)
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 25 male and 25 female Osborne-Mendel rats, three weeks of age, were fed 0,
100,500,2500 or 10000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) D&C Red No. 9 (purity, ? 86% (impurities
unspecified)) for up to 103- 108 weeks, when aIl survving animaIs were killed. About 80% of
rats in all groups survved 18 months or longer. There was no significant increase in the
incidence of tumours at any site (Davis & Fitzhugh, 1962).
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six weeks of age, were fed 0, 1000
or 3000 mg/kg of di et (ppm) D&C Red No. 9 (89.8% pure; major impurities, sodium and
barium sulfates) for 103 weeks, followed by an observation period of one week before
survving animaIs were kiled. Mean body weights were comparable in treated and control
rats. Survval at the end of the study was males: 35/50 controls, 44/50 low dose, 30/50 high
dose; females: 38/50 controls, 40/50 low dose and 41/50 high dose. The incidence of splenic
sarcomas was significantly increased in high-dose males (26/48 versus 0/50 in low-dose and
0/50 in controls; p .c 0.001, Fisher exact test). 'Neoplastic nodules of the liver' occurred in
males: in 0/50 control s, 6/50 at the low dose and 7/49 at the high dose (p = 0.02, Cochran-
Aritage trend test), and in females: in 1/50 controls, 1/50 at the low dose and 5/50 at the
high dose (p for trend .c 0.05, Cochran-Armitage trend test). The incidence in historicalD&C RED NO. 9207
controls at the study laboratory was 5/140 (3.6%) (US National Toxicology Program, 1982;
Weinberger et al., 1985).
3.2 Skin application
Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female ICR (Swiss Webster-derived) mice (age unspecified)
received topical applications of 1 mg D&C Red No. 9 (90.0% pure (impurities unspecified))
in 0.1 ml water to an area of approximately 6 cm2 of clipped back ski n, twce a week for 18
months. Three groups of 50 male and 50 female controls received applications of water
alone. No difference in survval was observed at 18 months. No skin tumour was found.
Although various tumours developed in the mammary glands and internaI organs, no
treatment-related difference in incidence was found (Carson, 1984).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
D&C Red No. 9 has been associated with contact dermatitis following cosmetic use
(Sugai et al., 1977).
4.2.2 Experimental systems
D&C Red No. 9 was tested for toxicity in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3Fi mice in a
range-finding study for carcinogenicity testing (US National Toxicology Pro gram, 1982).
Groups of five males and five females of each species received feed containing 6000, 12500,
25000,50000 or 100000 ppm (mg/kg) of the pigment for 14 days. None of the rats, but 1/5
male mice receiving 12 500 ppm, 4/5 males and 3/5 females receiving 25 000 ppm and ail
mice treated with higher doses died. The spleens of all dosed rats and mice were dark red and
enlarged, and the livers and kidneys were dark red to reddish tan.
ln a subchronic study, groups of 10 rats of each sex received feed containing 0, 3000,
6000, 12 500 or 50 000 ppm (mg/kg) D&C Red No. 9 for 91 days (US National Toxicology
Program, 1982). The respective doses in mice were 0, 600,1250,2500,5000 and 10000 ppm.
Mean body weight gains were not altered in any of the groups, but spleens were affected in ail
of them. Typically, in rats, congestion and lymphoreticular hyperplasia were seen; in addition,
haemosiderosis of the liver was found in the high-dose male and female rats. AIl except one
male and one female rat survved the treatment. Mice that received 1250 ppm or more had
congestion of the spleen and haemosiderin deposits.208 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
ln Osborne Mendel rats, splenomegaly was a common finding after two years' feeding of
up to 20 000 ppm (mg/kg) D&C Red No. 9 (Davis & Fitzhugh, 1962).
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal efTects
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 llur.ans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experir.ental syster.s (see also Table 1 and Appendices i and 2)
D&C Red No. 9 was not mutagenic to Salr.onella typhir.uriur. in most studies; the two
weakly positive responses that were recorded were obtained at doses well above those at
which precipitation was first observed (100 iig per plate). (The Working Group considered
that the effect was due to a substance other than that which precipitated.) D&C Red No. 9
did not induce mutation at the tk locus in mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells, sister chromatid
exchange or chromosomal damage in Chinese hamster ovary cells or unscheduled DNA
sythesis in rat hepatocyes in vitro.
Afer oral administration to rats, D&C Red No. 9 did not induce unscheduled DNA
sythesis in the liver or micronucleus formation in bone marrow.
s. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
D&C Red No. 9 (a certified grade of CI Pigment Red 53:1) is used in lipsticks,
mouthwashes, dentifrices and drugs in sorne countries. CI Pigment Red 53:1 has been used
extensively since the 1940s as a pigment in printing inks, coated papers, crayons, rubber and
baking enamels.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
D&C Red No. 9 was tested for carcinogenicity by administration in the diet in one study
in mice and in two studies in rats and by skin painting in one study in mice. ln one study, it
produced splenic sarcomas in male rats and increased the incidence of neoplastic liver
nodules in animais of each sex. No treatment-related increase in the incidence of tumours
was observed in mice.0\
ÔZ't
QJ~
U~c:~el
r'..(,~
QJ't
QJ..~-
QJi.'ti:~
(,.-..
QJi:
QJ
C-.~
QJ
:E
~q)ui:q)..q)..q)i:
ôæ
'" --q) Q"'wo ..
Q '-
~ .S!80..q).g~.. ~t) ~~ ~ E ~
..
'5'"q)i:~ .Sd..;: 0-i: 0 E
,g q)o. .g q).. 0....~ ~ Ë ~
E~'"~..'"~D&C RED NO. 9
q) q)'" '";: ;:.. ,. ;:,g,g0: .. .. .. "' l' U (l cui- ~ ~ ~ q);:O\ ~ ti ti0\ 0\ 0\ 0\ i:~, 0\ .. ,'"..~ ~~~ ..~~ ~~~~ ~..~ 00 ~ ~ v 00\ '- 00 0\ '- 00 0\ '- 00 0\ 0\ '- 00 00 ~ 0\ '- ~i-~ooi-~ooi-~ooi-i-~oooo~ Cè~~~ ~ ~0\ 00\0\ 00\0\ 00\0\0\ o~~~ . ~oooo~ '0 _~oc~ o~~ o~~~o~~ ~ ~~~ c ~~u~~u~~u~~.u ~~ ~ ~cc~ ~ ~l:~ l: l:~ l: l:~~~~~~ l: "'u~.. 'i 'i~ ~~-~~ ~~~ ~~Ê Ê~~t5e S ö
~ TI ~ ~ TI ~ ~ TI ,~ ~ ~ TI .~.~ E ~ ~ .s ~ ~ E G) § Ñ' § Ñ'8 :: 'Q3 8 :: 'Q3 8 ;: q) 8 8 ;: el el 0 0\.- -, Q) Q) 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ N ~ ~ N ~ ~ N ~ ~ ~ N N ~ c~ ~ ~ ~ ~ C~ C~ C
~§~§§~§§~§§§~~§gó§gó§gó§ggó§§~
V' V' V' V' V'
la
+ +l '- '- 1
~.;:
,S
'"q)~ i: i: i: i: i: i: i: 0i: i: i: ,9 ,9 .9 .9 .9 ,9 .9 ...9...9.9 -: i: i: i: i: ~~ ~ ~ ~ § § § § § E .g .g .g.g fr......::::::::::::;:~~~ro..::::::EEEEEEE'5'5'5'5èE E E q) q) q) el q) el el E E E E ~~~~~~~~~~~~~(l~E~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 'C;: ;: ;: q) q) el el q) el q) q) el el q) 0.elelel..............;:;:;:;:ti': ': ..~ l£ l£ l£ i- r- r- oô ~ ~ ~ ~ ..
8 8 8 ~ ~ ~.f; ~ f; ~ oô oô oô i- .~,.,-'f1"'f'l""""'I""0\0\0\0' 00~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-5EEEEEEEEEEEEEE~
'ê 'ê 'ê .ê 'ê .ê .ê .ê 'ê .ê 'ê .ê .ê 'ê~~~~~~~~~~~~~~z~EEEEEEEEEEEEEE~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Q~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ã3
l: l: l: l: ~ l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: l: '5~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ã3§§§§§§§§§§§§§§~
.§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ ¡g~~~~~~~~~~~~~~;:
~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~ ~~ ~(/ (/ (/ (/ (/ (/ i:") (/ (/ (/ (/ r/ (/ (/ ;:o0.o0.o0...x X X
§§§§§ § §'~gs;g ~ ~V'NV' ~ C5N N
la c: 1
g g';: .;:
.S ,Sg';:
,S '":: ~ ~~g'i'io~-uu~~ ~ è è ';:
~ .0 ~ ~ .So.'i 0 0 ~~Ut~%
è~ V; '" Õro i- E E 'a
.§ :; ~ ~ fri5"" q) el ..+- (' ~ ~~ E ;: ;: (§l- 0 "_ '_
u5 .. .. .. ,~.;; 0. U U '"q)E ~ ~Q)-5b~¡g5i: i: 0 i:~ ~ ~ ''; ~:: .. ~
i ê ~ jiQ¿:g~Q
ã3 .9 'a e; ã3- ti E E -;::: .. 0 0,o::.."'"R~ E ~ 0,.~el..§~i:~~l:i:;: O'~ U;:(/ ~~¡;ÚÚg:::Cv:U::o;,';:
.S
'"el
~ti0.el..
ti..
u5';;
el....i:~
~ZQ
'0el
'5'0q)..u'"i:::
i:
Po::o;,.;:
'S
~ot:~
E~i:o.0
'a....'"~
'"::q)Ü;:i:o..u
~i:~
:E20
i:el;:
'Õo
Õi:
§ó
~ ¡¡'" .0
~ 2f
o Òìi: E
ci ;1
el '";: ~ ~
'~~ CS
el 'S ~c.. C: ~
1 .~.. ...._ cöq) E ..
'S?n 5';; :ì ~
8. u5 l5~ en (l~ E ~~ 0 '-=~ .. 0.
.,'~ 'n-- 1 (l+ i: d:'- ~..210 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
5.4 Other relevant data
D&C Red No. 9 caused splenic toxicity in rats and mice.
D&C Red No. 9 was inactive in all studies in which it was tested, including assays for gene
mutation in bacteria and in cultured mammalian cells, DNA damage in cultured mammalian
cells and in rodents in vivo, sister chromatid exchange and chromosomal aberrations in
cultured mammalian cells and micronucleus formation in the bone marrow of rats treated
orally.
5.5 Evaluation 1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of D&C Red No. 9.
There is limited evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of D&C Red
No. 9.
Overall evaluation
D&C Red No. 9 is not classifiable as to ils carcinogenicity to humans (Croup 3).
6. References
Benemelis, R. (1973) Red Lake C. ln: Patton, TC., ed., Pigment Handbook, VoL. 1, Properties and
Economics, New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 493-496
Brown, J.P., Dietrich, P.S. & Bakner, C.M. (1979) Mutagenicity testing of sorne drug and cosmetic dye
lakes with the Salmonella/mamrnalian microsome assay. Mutat. Res., 66, 181-185
Carson, S. (1984) Skin painting studies in mice with 14 FD&C and D&C colors: FD&C Blue No. 1,
Red No. 3, and Yellow No. 5, D&C Red No. 7, Red No. 9, Red No. 10, Red No. 19, Red No. 21, Red
No. 27, Red No. 31, Red No. 36, Orange No. 5, Orange No. 10 and Orange No. 17.1. Toxicol.
cutaneous ocular Toxicol., 3, 357-370
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers, Dallas, TX, p. 508
Commission of the European Communities (1976) Council Directive of 27 July 1976 on the approxi-
mation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off 1. EUT: Commun.,
L262, 169-20
Commission of the European Communities (1990) ProposaI for a Council Directive on the approxi-
mation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off 1. EUT: Commun.,
C322, 29-77
Commission of the European Communities (1991) 13th Commission Directive of 12 March 1991
adapting to technical progress Annexes II, III, IV; V; VI and VII of Council Directive 761768/EEC
on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosrnetic products. Off 1. EUT:
Commun., L91, 59-62
Commission of the European Communities (1992) Fifteenth Commission Directive 92/86/EEC of 21
October 1992 adapting to technical progress Annexes II, III, IV; V; VI and VII of Council
Directive 761768/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to
cosmetic products. Off 1. EUT: Commun., 1.25, 18-22
IPor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.D&C RED NO. 9 211
Davis, K.J. & Fitzhugh, O.G. (1%2) Pathological changes noted in rats fed D&C Red No. 9 for two
years. To.rico/. app/. Phannaco/., 4, 20205
Dry Color Manufacturers Association (1987) The future of Red Lake e. Am. Ink Maker, 65,17-18
IAC (1975) IARC Monographs on the Eva/uation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemica/s to Man, VoL. 8,
Some Aromatic Az Compounds, Lyon, pp. 107-111
Ivett, J.L., Brown, RM., Rodgers, e., Anderson, RE., Resnick, M.A. & Zeiger, E. (1989) Chromo-
somal aberrations and sister chromatid exchange tests in Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro. T\Z
Results with 15 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 14, 165-187
Kornbrust, D. & Barfkecht, 1: (1985) Testing of 24 foo, drug, cosmetic and fabric dyes in the in vitro
and the in vivo/in vitro rat hepatocyte primary culture/DNA repair assays. Environ. Mutag., 7,
101-120
Marmion, D.M. (1991) Handbook of us C%rants. Foods, Drugs, Cosmetics and Medica/ Deviees, 3rd
ed., New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 86-89
Miyagoshi, M., Hayakawa, Y. & Nagayama, 1: (1983) Studies on the mutagenicity of cosmetic azo
dyes (Jpn.). Eisei Kagaku (J hyg. Chem.), 29, 212-220
Muzzall, J.M. & Cook, WL. (1979) Mutagenicity test of dyes used in cosmetics with the Sa/mon ella/-
mammalian microsome test. Mutat. Res., 67, 1-8
Myhr, Re. & Caspary, WJ. (1991) Chemical mutagenesis at the thymidine kinase locus in L5178Y
mouse lymphoma cells: results for 31 coded compounds in the National Toxicology Program.
Environ. moL. Mutag., 18, 51-83
Naganuma, M., Ohtsu, Y., Katsumura, Y., Matsuoka, M., Morikawa, Y., Tanaka, M. & Mitsui, 1:
(1983) Analysis of subsidiary colors in D&C Red No. 9 and its purification: development of
non-allergenic D&C Red No. 9. J Soc. cosmet. Chem., 34, 273-28
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971) C%ur Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 3, Bradford, Yorkshire, pp. 3308-
3309
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1982) C%ur Index, 3rd ed., Pigments and So/vent Dyes, Bradford,
Yorkshire, p. 300
Sugai, 1:, Takahashi, Y. & Takagi, 1: (1977) Pigmented cosmetic dermatitis and coal tar dyes. Contact
Denn., 3, 249-256
US Food & Drug Administration (1974) Foods and drugs. US Code Fed. Regul., Title 21, pp. 179, 198
US Food and Drug Administration (1979) General specifications and general restrictions for
provisional color additives for use in foods, drugs, and cosmetics; temporary tolerances. Fed.
Regit, 44, 48968%7
US Food and Drug Administration (1987) D&C Red No. 8 and D&C Red No. 9; permanent listing for
use in ingested drug and cosmetic lip products and externally applied drugs and cosmetics;
confirmation of effective date and further treatment. Fed. Regit., 52, 21302-21306
US Food and Drug Administration (1988) Revocation of regulations; D&C Red No. 8 and D&C Red
1'o. 9. Fed Regit, 53, 26766-26768
US International Trade Commission (1977) Synthetic Organic Chemica/s, US Production and Sa/es,
1975 (USITC Publication 804), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, pp. 52, 79
US International Trade Commission (1981) Synthetic Organic Chemica/s, US Production and Sa/es,
1980 (USITC Publication 1183), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p. 103
US International Trade Commission (1986) Synthetic Organic Chemica/s, US Production and Sa/es,
1985 (USITC Publication 1892), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, p. 87
US International Trade Commission (1991) Synthetic Organic Chemica/s, US Production and Sa/es,
1990 (USITC Publication 2470), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, pp. 5-3212 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxie Effeets of Chemieal Substances (R'fCS No.
DB5500), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1982) Carcinogenesis Bioassay of D&C Red No. 9 (CAS No. 5160-
02-1) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Feed Study) (Nf Tech. Rep. No. 225; NIH Publ. No.
82-1781), Research Triangle Park, NC
Weinberger, M.A., Albert, R.H. & Montgomery, S.B. (1985) Splenotoxicity associated with splenic
sarcomas in rats fed high doses ofD&C Red No. 9 or anilne hydrochloride.l natl Cancer Inst.,
75, 681-690
Westmoreland, C. & Gatehouse, D. (1992) D and C Red No. 9: genotoxic or non-genotoxic carci-
nogen? Mutat. Res., 281, 163-167
Willams, S., ed. (1984) OffciaI Methods of Analysis of the Association of OffciaI Anlytieal Chemists,
14th ed., Arlington, VA, Association of Officiai Analytical Chemists, pp. 641-67
Williams, G.M., Mori, H. & McQueen, c.A. (1989) Structure-activity relationships in the rat
hepatocyte DNA-repair test for 300 chemicals. Mutat. Res., 221, 263-286
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T. & Mortelmans, K. (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iv Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 11 (Suppl. 12), 1-158INDUSTRIAL DYESTUFFSMAGENTA AND ei BAsie RED 9
These substances were considered by a previous Working Group, in 1973 (lARe,
1974a). Since that time, new data have become available, and these have been incorporated
into the monograph and taken into consideration in the evaluation.
Magenta is a mixture of several closely related homologues in varyng proportions, with
zero (CI Basic Red 9), one (magenta 1) and two (magenta II) methyl functions on a 4,4',4"-
triaminotriarylmethane structure in the form of their hydrochloride salts. Small amounts of
magenta III (with three methyl functions) may be present in magenta. The term 'basic
fuchsin' has been used as a synonym for magenta, but also for Ci Basic Red 9 and magenta I.
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Magenta 1
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 632-99-5; replaces 8053-09-6
Chem. Abstr. Name: 4-(( 4-Aminophenyl)( 4-imino-2,5-cyclohexadien- 1 -ylidene )methyl)-
2-methylbenzenamine, monohydrochloride
Colour Index No.: 42510
Synonyms: Basic fuchsin; basic fuchsine; basic magenta; Basic Violet 14; CI Basic Violet
14; Ci Basic Violet 14, monohydrochloride; fuchsin; fuchsine; rosaniline; rosaniline
chloride; rosaniline hydrochloride; rosanilinium chloride
NH
Q .HCIH~-\C~ NH2
CH3
C20H19N3.HCI MoL. wt: 337.85
Magenta II
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 26261-57-4
-215-216 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Chem. Abstr. Name: 4-( (4-Aminophenyl)( 4-imino-3-methyl-2,5-cyclohexadien- 1-
ylidene )methyll-2-methylbenzenamine, monohydrochloride
Synonym: Dimethyl fuchsin
NH~CH3
y/ .HeiH2N~ e-\ NH2
CH3
C2iH2iN3.HCI MoL. wt: 351.9
Magenta III
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 3248-91-7; replaces 100359-07-7
Chem. Abstr. Name: 4-( (4-Amino-3-methylphenyl)( 4-imino-3-methyl-2,5-cyclohexa-
dien- 1 -ylidene )methyll-2-methylbenzenamine, monohydrochloride
Colour Index No.: 42520
Synonyms: Basic Violet 2; CI Basic Violet 2; neofuchsine; new fuchsine; new magenta;
trimethyl fuchsin; isorubine
NH~CH3
y/ .HeiH2N12 e-\ NH2
CH3
CH3
C22H23N3.HCI MoL. wt: 365.9
CI Basic Red 9
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 569-61-9; replaces 70426-60-7; 13 1883-55-1
Chem. Abstr. Name: 4-(( 4-Aminophenyl)( 4-imino-2,5-cyclohexadien- 1 -ylidene )methyll-
benzenamine, monohydrochloride
Colour Index No.: 42500
Synonyms: Basic fuchsin; basic parafuchsine; Basic Red 9; basic rubine; CI Basic Red 9,
monohydrochloride; para-fuchsin; para-fuchsine; parafuchsin; parafuchsine; para-
magenta; pararosaniline; pararosanilne chloride; pararosanilne hydrochloride; para-
rosaniline hydrochlorideMAGENTA AN CI BASIC RED 9217
NH
Q .HCIH2NnCnNH2
C:19ll17N3.llC:I MoL. wt: 323.82
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the substances
Magenta 1 (CI 42510)
(a) Description: Dark-green crystalline powder (Green, 1990)
(b) Melting-point: 250°C (decomposes) (Green, 1990)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared and ultraviolet spectral data have been reported
(Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981, Green, 1990; Sadtler
Research Laboratories, 1991).
(d) Solubilty: Soluble in water (4 mg/ml), ethanol (30 mg/ml), ethylene glycol methyl
ether (30 mg/ml) (Green, 1990) and methanol (Sadtler Research Laboratories,
1980)
(e) Reactivity: Destroyed by strong oxidizing agents; readily reduced to leuco-bases with
a variety of reducing reagents; sensitive to photochemical oxidation (Bannister &
Elliott, 1983)
CI Basic Red 9 (CI 42500)
(a) Description: Dark-green crystalline powder (Green, 1990)
(b) Melting-point: 268-270 °C (de composes) (Green, 1990)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981; US
National Toxicology Program, 1986; Green, 1990; Sadtler Research Laboratories,
1991).
(d) Solubilty: Soluble in water (2-3 mg/ml), ethanol (2-25 mg/ml), ethylene glycol
methyl ether (50-70 mg/ml) (Green, 1990) and methanol (Sadtler Research Labo-
ratories, 1980)
(e) Reactivity: Destroyed by strong oxidizing agents; readily reduced to leuco-bases with
a variety of reducing reagents sensitive to photochemical oxidation (Bannister &
Elliott, 1983)
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Magenta 1
Sorne trade names are: Aizen Magenta; Astra Fuchsine B; Basic Magenta E 200; C-WR
Violet 8; C:alcozine Fuchsine HO; Calcozine Magenta RTN; Calcozine Magenta XX; Cerise218 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
B; Diabasic Magenta; Diamond Fuchsine; Fuchsine A; Fuchsine CS; Fuchsine G; Fuchsine
HO; Fuchsine N; Fuchsine RTN; Fuchsine SBP; Fuchsine Y; Magenta DP; Magenta E;
Magenta G; Magenta PN; Magenta S; Magenta Superfine; Orient Basic Magenta; 12418 Red
Magenta, a cationic triarylmethane dye, is commonly, but not always, a homologous
mixture of dyes; in a given lot, any homologue may be dominant. The Biological Stain Com-
mission has determined, however, that for a lot to perform satisfactorily in aIl the usual
applications embraced by the protocol of the Commission, CI Basic Red 9 (CI 42500) must
comprise not less than 50% of the total dye present; other components that may be found are
magenta 1 (CI 42510), magenta II and magenta III (CI 42520). Both CI Basic Red 9 and
magenta III can be produced directly as pure products; however, to obtain pure magenta 1
and magenta II, free of the other homologue, chromatographic separation must be used
(Green, 1990).
Magenta 1 is commercially available as a biological stain-grade product (Aldrich
Che mi cal Co., 1992).
CI Basic Red 9
Some trade names are: Calcozine Magenta N; Fuchsine DR 001; Fuchsine SP; Fuchsine
SPC; Orient Para Magenta Base
CI Basic Red 9 is available commercially as a certified biological stain at a purity of
approximately 95%; it is also available at a purity of at least 88% (AIdrich Chemical Co.,
1992).
1. 1.4 Analysis
A rapid method for the assay of triarylmethane dyes (Knecht method) is titration with
titanium trichloride to a colourless end-point (Bannister & Elliott, 1983).
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
The first triarylmethane dyes were synthesized in the late 1850s. Their structure was
established by Otto Fischer and Emil Fischer in 1878 after the identification of
pararosanilne (CI Basic Red 9) (Bannister & Elliott, 1983). Magenta was being produced for
sale in England before 1874 (Bannister & Olin, 1965). It has been produced commercially in
the USA since at least 1921 (US Tariff Commission, 1922).
ln the United Kingdom, the process for manufacturing magenta has involved conden-
sation of ortho-toluidine (see IARC, 1982a, 1987a) and formaldehyde (see IARC, 1982b,
1987b) in the presence of nitrotoluene, resulting mainly in the production of magenta ni
(Howe, 1977).
Magenta 1 is prepared by the reaction of a mixture of aniline (see IARC 1982c, 1987c),
ortho- and para-toluidine and their hydrochlorides with nItrobenzene or a mixture of nitro-
benzene and ortho-nitrotoluene in the presence of ferrous chloride, ferrous oxide and zinc
chloride (US National Library of Medicine, 1992a). CI Basic Red 9 is prepared by theMAGENTA AN CI BASIC RED 9 219
reaction of aniline with formaldehyde in the presence of hydrogen chIo ride, forming
4,4'-methylenedianiline (see IARC, 1986), which is then heated with aniline and aniline
hydrochloride in the presence of nitrobenzene and ferric chloride (US National Library of
Medicine, 1992a).
CI Basic Red 9 (CI 42500) is produced by one company in Brazil and by two companies
in the USA, and magenta 1 (CI 42510) is produced by one company each in India and the
United KIngdom (Chemical Information Servces, 1991).
No recent data were available on the production of magenta or CI Basic Red 9. US
production data for magenta 1 were last reported for 1964, when the combined production of
five US producers was reported as 53 tonnes (US Tariff Commission, 1965). US production
of CI Basic Red 9 was estimated as greater than 0.9 tonnes in 1972 and 0.5 tonnes in 1975 (US
National Library of Medicine, 1992a).
1.2.2 Use
The triarylmethane dyes have been used extensively as textile dyes. Magenta and CI
Basic Red 9 are of briliant hue, exhibit high tinctorial strength, are relatively inexpensive and
may be applied to a wide range of substrates. They are not, however, very stable to light and
washing, and the use of triarylmethane dyes on textiles has decreased as dyes of other
chemical classes with superior properties have become available. Interest in this c1ass of dyes
was revived with the introduction of polyacrylonitrile fibres (see IARC, 1979). Triaryl-
methane dyes are readily adsorbed on these fibres and are surprisingly more light- and
wash-fast than when they are used on natural fibres. The most important commercial black
dye for acid-modified fibres is a mixture of the classical triarylmethane dyes, malachite green
and magenta 1 (Bannister & Elliott, 1983).
Current use of triarylmethane dyes is mainly for non textile purposes. Substantial
quantities are used in the preparation of organic pigments for printing inks and in printing, in
which cost and briliance are more important than light fastness. Triarylmethane dyes and
their colourless precursors (carbinols and lactones) are used extensively in high-speed photo-
duplicating and photoimaging systems. They are also used for specialty applications su ch astinting automobile antifreeze solutions and toilet sanitary preparations, in the manufacture
of carbon paper, in ink for tyewriter ribbons and in jet printing for high-speed computer
printers. Triarylmethane dyes may be used to colour other substrates, su ch as leather, fur,
anodized aluminium, glass, waxes, polishes, soaps, plastics, drugs and cosme tics. They arealso used extensively as microbiological stains (Bannister & Elliott, 1983).
CI Basic Red 9 can be N-phenylated with excess aniline and benzoic acid to form
N,N',N"-triphenylaminotriphenylmethane hydrochloride (Spirit Blue; CI Solvent Blue 23)
(Bannister & Elliott, 1983).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
Magenta and CI Basic Red 9 are not known to occur as natural products.
~"-_.~22 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
At one textile plant where socks were dyed, several classes of compounds were used for
dyeing acrylic/modacrylic, wool, nylon, polyester and cotton fibres. Over 200 dyes were
handled during the survey at this facility, comprising acid, disperse, basic (including
magenta 1), reactive and direct dyes. Spectrophotometric estimates of the average airborne
concentration of active colourant were 90 llg/m3 using personal filters and 60 llg/m3 using
area fiters (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1990).
On the basis ofa surveyconducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 12 691 workers,
including 8288 women, were potentially exposed to magenta 1 in six industries and that a total
of 907 workers, including 733 women, may have been exposed to CI Basic Red 9 in four
industries (US National Library of Medicine, 1992b).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
Magenta 1 is allowed for use exclusively in cosme tic products not intended to come into
contact with the mucous membranes (Commission of the European Communities, 1976,
1990, 1991).
2. Studies of Cancer in Humans
2.1 Case report
Rehn (1895) described three cases of bladder cancer among 45 workers employed in the
manufacture of magenta (fuchsin) at a dye factory in Frankfurt, Germany. The cases had
worked in the process for 15-29 years. The author mentioned that the process involved
exposure to anilne, toluidine and nitrobenzene.
2.2 Cohort studies
Case and Pearson (1954) studied men who had been employed for at least six months
between 1910 and 1952 in the manufacture of magenta in the British chemical industry.
Detailed job histories were derived from nominal rolls of employees in factories. Workers
who had been exposed to benzidine or 1- or 2-naphthylamine were excluded. Bladder cancer
occurrence was determined from factory and hospital records. Deaths were identified from
alphabetical lists of death certificates, and the numbers were compared with mortality rates
for England and Wales for the same period (1921(Case et aL., 1954)-52). Results were
analysed for subjects who had worked in magenta manufacture, with and without conco-
mitant exposure to auramine. Among 85 subjects who had been engaged in the manufacture
of magenta and not in the manufacture of auramine, five cases of bladder cancer were
observed, with exposures ranging from one to 19 years, and three deaths from bladder
cancer, with 0.13 expected (standardized mortality ratio (SMR), 23.08;p -c 0.005). One case
of bladder cancer was observed among ni ne subjects who had been exposed to both magentaMAGENTA AN CI BASIC RED 9221
and auramine, but no death was seen from this cause (0.02 expected). (The Working Group
noted that the process for the manufacture of magenta involved exposure to other aromatic
amines used as intermediates.)
Rubino et al. (1982) studied 53 male workers who had been employed for at least one
month in the manufacture of 'new fuchsin' (magenta III) and safranine T between 1922 and
1970 at a factory in the Province of Torino, Italy. Manufacture and use of magenta ni had
been discontinued in 1970-72. These workers were a subset of a cohort of 906 workers.
Subjects engaged in the manufacture and use of 1- or 2-naphthylamine or benzidine were
excluded from the study. Subjects and their work histories were identified from factory
personnel records, and the workers were followed for mortality from 1946 to 1976, as
identified from factory records and from municipal registries of current residence. Working
conditions were reported to have resulted in severe exposure to magenta. Five deaths from
bladder cancer were observed, while 0.08 were expected (SMR, 62.50; p -( 0.001) on the
basis of mortality rates for Italy in 1951-76. The cases had had exposure to magenta in (CI
No. 42520) and safranine T (Basic Red 2, Ci No. 50240) for 12-40 years. The authors noted
that the processes for the manufacture of magenta and safranine T involved exposure to
ortho-toluidine, ortho-aminoazotoluene (see IARC, 1975), 2,5-diaminotoluene (see IARC,
1978), 4,4'-methylenebis(2-methylaniline) (see lARe, 1974b, 1987d) and ortho-nitro-
toluene.
Follow-up to 1981 (Decarli et al., 1985) and 1989 (Piolatto et al., 1991) of the 906
workers included 54 workers employed in the manufacture of magenta in and safranine 1:
No additional death from bladder cancer was reported after 1976.
2.3 Case-ontrol study
Vineis and Magnani (1985) studied 512 prevalent and incident male cases of bladder
cancer and 596 hospital-based controls between 1978 and 1983 in the Province of Torino,
Italy - the same area considered in the cohort study described above. Complete occupational
histories and related information were obtained by hospital intervews. Exposures to specific
chemicals, including magenta, were estimated from ILO occupation and industry titles, using
information on the industrial uses of these chemicals as described in published sources. On
the basis of industrial branches in which magenta exposure could have occurred, 41 cases
were classified as having been exposed prior to the age of 60, to give a relative risk of 1.8
(95% confidence interval, 1.1-2.9). On the basis of job titles in which exposure to magenta
could have occurred, two cases were classified as having been exposed prior to the age of 60,
with an associated relative risk of 3.0 (95% confidence interval, 0.4-20.0). (The Working
Group noted that exposure to other aromatic amines could not be excluded).222 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Magenta 1
Groups of 30 male and 30 female stock mice (strain and age unspecifiedi were treated
intragastrically with 0 or 6 mg magenta 1 (purity unspecifiedi in arachis oil twce weekly for 52
weeks (about 600 mg/kg bw per weeki, to give a total dose of 624 mg per mouse. Controls
were given subcutaneous injections of arachis oiL. The mice were held as long as possible, and
at 90 weeks 21/30 control and 23/30 treated males and 21/30 control and 17/30 treated
females were still alive. Only gross lesions were examined microscopically. No
treatment-related increase in the incidence of tumours was observed in mice of either sex;
one liver-cell tumour was observed in a treated female (Bonser et al., 1956). (The Working
Group noted the inadequate study design. i
CI Basic Red 9
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3F 1 mice, 6-10 weeks of age, were administered 0,
500 or 1000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) CI Basic Red 9 in the di et for 103 weeks and were kiled at
110-115 weeks of age. Two lots of the test chemical were used, with purities of 93 and 99%
(water was the major impurity). Mean body weights of treated mice were lower than those of
controls throughout the study. At the end of the experiment, 42/50 control, 32/50 low-dose
and 36/50 high-dose males and 31/50 control, 12/50 low-dose and 6/50 high-dose females
were alive (p .c 0.001). ln male mice, Ci Basic Red 9 caused a dose-related increase in the
incidence of hepatocellular carcinomas (control, 10/50; low-dose,20/50; high-dose, 27/50;p
.c 0.001, incidental tumour trend test). The incidence ofhepatocellular adenomas was 22/50
(control), 21/50 (low-dose) and 17/50 (high-dose). The combined incidence of liver tumours
was 29/50 (control), 37/50 (low-dose) and 41/50 (high-dose) (p = 0.005, incidental tumour
trend test). ln female mice, the compound caused a dose-related increase in the incidence of
hepatocellular carcinomas (control, 3/49; low-dose, 19/50; high-dose, 37/49; p .: 0.001,
Cochran-Armitage trend test). The incidence of hepatocellular adenomas was 2/49 control,
18/50 low-dose (p .c 0.001, Fischer exact test) and 4/49 high-dose. The combined incidence
ofliver tumours in females was 5/49 control, 35/50 low-dose and 41/49 high-dose (p .: 0.001,
Cochran-Armitage trend test). An increase in the incidence ofbenign and malignant adrenal
phaeochromocyomas (combined) was found in females (control, 1/48; low-dose, 8/47;
high-dose,8/45;p = 0.015, Cochran-Armitage trend test) (US National Toxicology Pro gram,
1986).
3.1.2 Rat
Magenta 1
Groups of 40 male and 40 female Sprague-Dawley rats, 12 weeks old, were treated
intragastrically with 0 or 400 mg/kg bw magenta 1 (CI 42510) (purity unspecifiedi in 0.9%MAGENTA AN CI BASIC RED 9 223
saline solution twce a week. Controls were given saline only. After two weeks, the dose of
400 mg/kg was found to be toxic, and treatment was discontinued for one week; after a
further six weeks, half of the original dose (200 mg/kg bw) was used for the remaining
treatment, for life. Average survval times were 104 weeks for control males, 59 weeks for
treated males, 92 weeks for control females and 49 weeks for treated females. No
treatment-related increase in the incidence of tumours was observed in rats of either sex
(Ketkar & Mohr, 1982). (The Working Group noted the poor survval in the treated groups
and the inadequate reporting of the study.)
CI Basic Red 9
ln the same study, groups of 40 male and 40 female Sprague- Dawley rats, 12 weeks old,
were treated intragastrically twce a week with 0 or 600 mg/kg bw CI Basic Red 9 (purity
unspecified) in 0.9% saline. The dose of 600 mg/kg was found to be toxic and, after 12 weeks,
treatment was discontinued for one week; after a further six weeks, half of the original dose
(300 mg/kg bw) was used for the remaining treatment, for Iife. Average survval times were
104 weeks for control males, 70 weeks for treated males, 92 weeks for control female al1d 69
weeks for treated females. No treatment-related increase in the incidence of tumours was
observed in rats of either sex (Ketkar & Mohr, 1982). (The Working Group noted the poor
survval in the treated groups and the inadequate reporting of the study.)
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six to seven weeks of age, were
administered 0, 1000 or 2000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) (males) and 0, 500 or 1000 ppm (females)
CI Basic Red 9 in the diet for 103 weeks and were kiled at 110- 113 weeks of age. Two lots of
the test che mi cal were used, with purities of 93 and 99% (water was the major impurity).
Increased mortality was seen in high-dose males and females, and, at the end of the
experiment, 36/50 control, 29/50 low-dose and 0/50 high-dose males and 37/50 control,
35/50 low-dose and 14/50 high-dose females were stil alive. Ci Basic Red 9 caused
significant increases in the incidences of benign and malignant tumours at various sites in
both males and females (Table 1) (US National Toxicology Program, 1986).
3.1.3 Hamster
Magenta 1
Groups of 40 male and 40 female outbred Syrian golden hamsters, 12 weeks old, were
treated intragastrically with 0, 400 or 600 mg/kg bw magenta 1 (CI 42510) (purity
unspecified) in 0.9% saline solution twce a week for life. ln the high-dose group, the majority
of animais died within the first 10 weeks of treatment; the lower dose was well tolerated, and
body weight development and average survval times were similar to those of con troIs. Afer
72 weeks of treatment, 17/40 control and 17/40 low-dose males and 3/40 control and 0/40
low-dose females were stil alive; by 88 weeks of treatment, all treated and control animaIs
had died. No treatment-related increase in the incidence of tumours was observed In
hamsters of either sex (Green et al., 1979). (The Working Group noted the high mortality in
the control and treated groups, especially in females.)224 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 1. 'fends in tumour incidences at specifie sites in Fischer 344/N
rats fed diets containing CI Basic Red 9
Thmour site and tye Control Low-dose High-dosep (trend)a
Males
Dose (mg/kg diet) 0 10020
Ski
Squamous-cell carcinoma 0/50 1/50 10/50 0( 0.001
Trichoepithelioma 0/50 0/50 7/50 = 0.001
Sebaceous adenoma 0/50 0/50 5/50 = 0.00
Subcutis
Fibroma 2/50 20/50 16/50 0( 0.001
Zyrbal gland
Carcinoma 1/50 1/50 13/50 0( 0.001
Thyroid gland
Follcular adenoma 0/49 0/46 9/44 0( 0.001
Follcular carcinoma 0/49 5/46 18/44 0( 0.001
Combined 0/49 5/46 25/44 0( 0.001
Liver
Hepatocellular neoplastic nodule 5/50 14/50 6/50 = 0.447
Hepatocellular carcinoma 0/50 2/50 8/50 = 0.001
Combined 5/50 15/50 14/50 = 0.021
Females
Dose (mg/kg diet) 050 100
Subcutis
Fibroma 0/50 15/50 10/50 = 0.005
Zyrbal gland
Carcinoma 0/50 2/50 7/50 = 0.003
Thyroid
Follicular adenoma 0/47 0/48 4/50 = 0.017
Follicular carcinoma 0/47 2/48 2/50 :; 0.05
Combined 0/47 2/48 6/50 = 0.00
From US National Toxicology Program (1986)
aCochran-Anitage trend test
CI Basic Red 9
ln the same study, similar groups of hamsters were treated intragastrically with 0, 300 or
600 mg/kg bw Ci Basic Red 9 (purity unspecifiedi in 0.9% saline solution twce a week for
life. ln the high-dose group, the majority of animaIs diedwithin the first 10 weeks of
treatment; the lower dose was well tolerated, and body weight development and average
survval times were similar to those of controls. Afer 72 weeks of treatment, 17/40 control
and 15/40 low-dose males and 3/40 control and 3/40 low-dose females were stil alive; by 88
weeks of treatment, all treated and control animaIs had died. No treatment-related increase
in the incidence of tumours was observed in hamsters of either sex (Green et al., 1979). (TheMAGENTA AN CI BASIC RED 9 225
Working Group noted the high mortality in control and treated animais, especially in
females.)
3.2 Subcutaneous administration
Rat
ln a study reported in a short communication, a group of 20 BD III rats (sex unspecified)
was treated once a week with 10 mg of an aqueous solution of 1 % CI Basic Red 9 (purity
unspecified) for a maximum of 515 days (total dose, 650 mg). The me an life span was 545 days
in treated rats and 780 days in controls. The first local sarcoma appeared at 300 days, after a
total dose of 370 mg of the dye. Spindle-cell sarcomas were found in 7/12 rats survving after
the appearance of the first tumour, compared to a spontaneous incidence of sarcomas in
these rats of less than 0.5% (Druckrey et al., 1956).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
CI Basic Red 9 (93 % pure) was tested for subchronic toxici ty in groups of 10 male and 10
female Fischer 344/N rats and B6C3Fi mice fed diets containing 0,250,500, 1000,2000 or
4000 ppm (mg/kg) CI Basic Red 9 for 13 weeks (US National Toxicology Program, 1986).
Body weight gain was reduced in female rats at the two highest doses, by 14 and 37%, and in
male rats at the high dose, by 40%. Two females and one male rat in the high-dose group died
before the end of the study. Adenomatous goitre was seen in 9/9 females and 9/10 males in
the high-dose group; diffse hyperplasia of the thyroid gland occurred in 7/10 females given
2000 ppm and in 1/10 males given 4000 ppm. Pituitary basophilic hypertrophy was found in
8/9 female and 5/7 male rats that received 4000 ppm and in 1/10 female and 1/9 male rats
that received 2000 ppm. None of these lesions was found in controls. Fatty changes in the
liver were observed in 1/10 male and 4/10 female rats in the high-dose groups. ln mice, body
weight gain was at least 10% lower th an that in controls in males in the high-dose group and
in females that received 1000 ppm or more. Clinical signs of toxicity were not observed.
A longer study was penormed in rats to observe effects on the thyroid gland (US
National Toxicology Program, 1986). Groups of 10 male Fischer 344/N rats were fed diets
containing 0 or 2000 ppm (mg/kg) and groups of 10 females, 0 or 1000 ppm CI Basic Red 922 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(93 and 99% pure) for 52 weeks. Thyroid glands were palpated regularly; serum thyroxin
levels were determined during the first and second week of quarantine and at weeks 13,26,
39 and 52. The final mean body weights of treated males were 13% lower th an that of
controls and those offemales were 9% lower. Of the male rats, 1/10 had hyperplasia, 1/10 an
adenoma and 1/10 a carcinoma of the follcular epithelium of the thyroid gland at the end of
treatment. Follcular cysts of the thyroid gland were observed in 2/10 females and 1/10 males.
The relative weight of thyroid glands was 1.69 times that of the controls in males and 1.13
times that of con trois in females. The concentration of thyroxin was significantly lower than
that of controls by week 13 in males and by week 52 in females. The ratio of thyroxin level in
dosed groups to that in controls was 0.52 in males and 0.64 in females at 52 weeks. Four of 10
males had fatty changes of the liver, two had focal necrosis of the liver and one, a neoplastic
nodule.
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal etTects
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
No data were available on the genetic and related effects of magenta.
CI Basic Red 9 induced repairable DNAdamage in bacterial differential toxicity assays,
in the absence of activation. It was generally not mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium; some
activity was observed in the presence of exogenous activating systems, especially those
derived from Syrian hamster liver. It induced forward mutation in Escherichia coli in the
absence of exogenous metabolism. It did not induce mitotic recombination in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.
Conflcting reports were obtained for induction of unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat
hepatocyes in vitro: in a single study, it induced unscheduled DNA sythesis in primary
hepatocyes from Syran hamsters but not from rats. The compound gave inconclusive
responses in two tests for mutation at the tk locus in mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells and
positive responses in another. CI Basic Red 9 did not induce chromosomal rearrangement or
sister chromatid exchange in Chinese hamster ovary cells. It induced morphological
transformation of Syrian hamster embryo cells in the presence, but not in the absence, of an
exogenous activating system from hamster liver. It also induced transformation of
BALBc/3T3 mouse cells and enhanced Rauscher leukaemia virus-induced transformation of
Fischer rat embryo cells.
Oral administration of CI Basic Red 9 to mice or rats resulted in urine that was muta-
genic to S. typhimurium. The dye did not induce mitotic recombination in S. cerevisiae or
mutation in S. typhimurium recovered from the peritoneal cavity of mice, and it did not
induce mutation in S. typhimurium after intramuscular administration.(¡ui:(¡..~(¡i:
6'
i:~ --(¡O'" u.o i-0,-MAGENTA AND CI BASIC RED 9227
~00r-0\..'--.1:~0\r-0\..'-..(¡
:5
i£~
Ni:
C1...;i:
(¡'"oi:,.
C10\r-0\..'-~0\r-0\~ ..~ ~~': 0\ .. (¡~ ~ 8 ~ '8~ ~ -. ~ '0'-~;:~ 1:'-~
-. 0\ 00 '- ~ -. ~1:r-0\-.",1:~~Ct:t:~~"- .. c: C'8 i: 8 .. S 8 ..000Q3Q3..¡iS¡i~t:~~QJEcu::O(lCI0c.00~O~~0\r-0\~00\ ..~.. .~"' '- .-00 -. 0~;:~ 1: ~O\oo'-~~r- 0\ -. rn~ 81: i: ~
'- C1 ~ C1 C1i:.. S..ooQ3-.;S¡i';t~S(¡§O(3c. a a ~ i:~\0000\~~__.. 0\ t5~ocCti£-0\-: V"0\ .. 1: i:
.. '- C1~ 8 ~ So..vQjS~~t:S (¡ :: 0ë;OO~.....;u(¡0.rr~0\~ ~ ~.- __ 0\ __ __ ~ Ç) ~~;; 8~;; '-~ ~r-O\-.r-O\_~ r.~Ct:~c~~s:'-~~'- (1~c:i:.. i: 8 S i:ê£~ê£~Q)~êS(¡§S(¡§EOEc.00c.00~~c.
š š ŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠŠ~ŠŠŠ~g. ó ~óó~~ó~óó~g'óó~~~óó~óó~óóoN ~~r-\O.. N~r-\O ~r-\O\ON~r-\O~r-\O ~~~ ..NO.. ..NO..~NO......NO..NO.. N,. ,. 1" ,. ~
~ .~0-i:.ß S
-5~s ~ '-"" ~ ~~o (¡ rn+~+ ~ S ~00 1++1'-1 + ~
Qj
;§ = .~
'2..0-..::i:.ß S~ 0
CI"5-5~l3 ~0rno (¡ '"(¡~i.i:~ S ~ .
EI:~
0\
"0
Qj~
i:
'ri~i:-U~0
CI..i:~
Qj
"0
Qj..~-
Qji.
"0=~
i:.....
Qj=
QjøSÑ(¡..rn
Qj~-.Q..
~rn~++ 101
'".;
C1(¡...D
"0i:
C1t:rnè
'u.~
Æ Ò.. 'üi: ';;~ .9(¡ i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i:~ $ i: ...£1 i: ...£1 i: .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 i: i: i: 1: i: .9"0 ¡:.g .g .g § § § ~ § § § § § § § ~ § .g .9 .9 .9 .9 'c~ ~SSSSS::::::~::::::::::::::~::C1§~~§~"' (¡::::::::::SSSSSSSSSSSSS~::~~::E~ ~ESSSS(¡(¡(¡(¡(¡(¡~(¡(¡ClCl(¡(¡SSSSSCll "OQ)Q)Q)Q)(lVJoocnr:trtICIC/(JcnoocrVJ ~.. 0 -5t;t;t;t;t;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~Clrn .. ~ (¡ (¡ (¡ (¡ (¡ ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; ;; .. .. .. .. .. ;;~ ~ &;~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.. :: ~.......... ~v)v)v)v)l- l-l- 000000 (¡ (¡ (¡ (¡ (¡ '-'8. ~ S2 g g g g ~ r; ¡; ¡; ¡; ¡; ¡; ~ ¡; ¡; ~ ¡; ¡; ¡; ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ r:
O~~& ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~rr e+ ~ E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E: E E §
¿.g ~ ~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~.~ .~ .~ .1:o èS ::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
t ~ .~ ~.- .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§:: 'c èS i: èS ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~-g Q3 "'.9 v ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
.- .. .~ ¡g.~ 1: 1: 1: 1: 1: 1: 1: 1: t: t: 1: t: 1: t: t: t: t: t: t: 1: t: t: t:~6 ~ & ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~
,g ~ l; ~'S ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ § ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ §o.i:~rn~ C) C) C) C) C) C) C) C) C) C) C).. C) '" C) C) C) C) C) C) C) C)o~ "''' ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~ en ~'5 kí t: t: t: t: t: t: t: t: t: 1: t: t: t: t: 1: t: t: t: 1: 1: t: t: t: ~rn ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~ § cl6~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ % % % % % ~~ u. ~ rr rr rr rr rr rr rr rr rr rr rr ~ ~ ~ ~ rr rr ~ ~ ~ ~ rr rr ~~zaTable 2 (contd)
Test system Result Reference Dosea
(LED/HID)
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
system
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA97, reverse mutation
ECF, Escherichia coli exclusive of strain K12, forward mutation +
ECW, Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA, reverse mutation
SCH, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, homozygosis by mitotic recombination -
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primat) hepatoctes in vitro
VRp, Unscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primat) hepatoctes in vitro +
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primat) hepatoctes in vitro
UIA Vnscheduled DNA synthesis, Syrian hamster priat) +
hepatoctes in vitro
Gsy Gene mutation, mouse Iymphoma L5178Y cells tk locus +
Gsy Gene mutation, mouse Iymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus ?
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster cells in vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ce lis in vitro
TBM, Cell transformation, BALB/c 3D mouse cells +
TCS, Cell transformation, Syrian hamster embt)o cells, clonaI assay
TCS, Cell transformation, Syrian hamster embt)o cells, clonaI assay
TRR, Cell transfonnation, RLV/Fischer rat embt)o cells +
BFA Vrine from mou se, mIcrobial mutagenicity +
BFA Urie from mouse and rat, microbial mutagenicity +
HMM, Host-mediated assay, Salmonella typhimurium in mice
HMM, Host-mediated assay, Salmonella typhimurium in mice
HMM, Host-mediated assay, Saccharomyces cerevisiae in mIce(+ )
(+ )
o
o
o
o
+
o
o
+
o
+
+160.~~
500.~~
167.~~
300.~~
1.~~
2.200
3.2400
3.2400
1. ~~
7.500
15.~~
50.~~
0.0400
1.~~
2.~~
1.400
0.~~ x 1 po
120.~~ x 2 po
160.~~ x 1 po
160.~~ x 1 im
160.~~ x 1 poDe Flora et al. (1984b)
Hayes et al. (1984)
Dunkel et al. (1984)
Simmon (1979b)
Williams et al. (1982)
US National Toxicology
Program (1986)
Kombrust & Barfnecht
(1984)
Kombrust & Barfnecht
(1984)
Mitchell et aL. (1988)
Myhr & Caspat) (1988)
Anderson et al. (199)
Anderson et al. (199)
Dunkel et al. (1981)
Pienta et al. (1977)
Pienta & Kawalek (1981)
Dunkel et al. (1981)
Haworth et al. (1981); abstr.
Lawlor et al. (1987)
Sim mon et al. (1979)
Simmon et al. (1979)
Simmon et al. (1979)
+, positive; (+ ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested; ?, inconclusive (variable response in several experiments within an adequate study)
a:n-vitro tests, ¡.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw; 0.~~, not given
bpositive in 2/4 laboratories
CPositivein 1/4 laboratories
dAutomated COBAS Bact apparatus also positivelg
""~
~
~ozoa
~""i.C/
~o
5~
tT
VI..MAGENTA AND CI BASIC RED 9 229
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
Magenta and CI Basic Red 9, a common constituent of magenta, were first produced
commercially in the late nineteenth century in Germany. As the industry developed in the
early twentieth century, it converted in some countries, su ch as Italy and the United
Kingdom, from production of magenta (prepared from a mixture of aniline and ortho-
toluidine) to production of magenta III (prepared from ortho-toluidine without aniline).
Magenta and CI Basic Red 9 have been used to dye textile fibres, in the preparation of
pigments for printing inks and in other specialty applications, su ch as biological stains.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
Two small cohorts of workers engaged in the manufacture of magenta were studied in
the United Kingdom and Italy. Marked excesses of cancer of the urinary bladder were
identified. AIthough efforts were made to exclu de workers exposed to 2-naphthylamine and
benzidine, both cohorts may also have been exposed to aromatic amines present as
intermediates and suspected to be urinary bladder carcinogens, such as ortho-toluidine.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
No adequate studywas available to evaluate the carcinogenicityin experimental animaIs
of magenta or of magenta l, magenta II or magenta III.
CI Basic Red 9 was tested for carcinogenicity in one study in mice and in one study in rats
by oral administration in the diet and in one study in rats by subcutaneous administration.
Mer oral administration, the compound induced hepatocellular carcinomas in male and
female mice and in male rats; adrenal gland phaeochromocyomas in female mice; benign
and malignant skin tumours in male rats; and subcutaneous fibromas, thyroid gland
follcular-cell tumours and Zymbal gland carcinomas in male and female rats. Subcutaneous
administration to rats resulted in a high incidence of local sarcomas.
5.4 Other relevant data
CI Basic Red 9 lowers thyroxin levels and caused hypertrophy of the thyroid in rats and
mice.
CI Basic Red 9 induced DNA damage in bacteria, but conflcting results were obtained
in assays for gene mutation. Mitotic recombination was not induced in yeast. ln cultured
mammalian cells, there was no induction of sister chromatid exchange or chromosomal
aberrations, but DNA damage and cell transformation were induced; assays for gene
mutation gave inconsistent results.230 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
5.5 Evaluations1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of magenta.
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of CI Basic Red 9.
There is suffcient evidence that the manufacture of magenta entails exposures that are. .carcinogenic.
There is suffcient evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of CI Basic
Red 9.
There is inadequate evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of magenta.
OveraU evaluation
The manufacture of magenta entaIls exposures that are carcinogenic (Croup 1).
CI Basic Red 9 is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Group 2B).
Magenta containing CI Basic Red 9 is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Croup 2B).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 115
Anderson, RE., Zeiger, E., Shelby, M.D., Resnick, M.A, Gulati, D.K., Ivett, J.L. & Loveday, K.S.
(199) Chromosome aberration and sister chromatid exchange test results with 42 chemicals.
Environ. Mutag., 16 (SuppL 18),55-137
Ami, P., Dollenmeier, P. & Müller, D. (1985) Automated modification ofthe Ames test with COBAS
Bact. Mutat. Res., 144, 137-140
Bannister, D.W & Ellott, J. (1983) Triphenylmethane and related dyes. ln: Mark, H.P., Othmer, D.P.,
Overberger, c.G., Seaborg, G.T. & Grayson, N., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical
Technology, 3rd ed., VoL. 23, New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 399-412
Bannister, D.W & Olin, AD. (1965) Dyes and dye intermediates. ln: Kirk, RE. & Othmer, D.P., eds,
Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 2nd ed., VoL. 7, New York, John Wiley & Sons, p. 46
Bonser, G.M., Clayson, D.R & Jull, J.W (1956) The induction oftumours ofthe subcutaneous tissues,
liver and intestine in the mouse by certain dye-stuffs and their intermediates. Br. 1 Cancer, 10,653-67
Case, RAM. & Pearson, 1:r. (1954) Tumours of the urinaiy bladder in workmen engaged in the
manufacture and use of certain dyestuff intermediates in the British chemical industiy. Ii.
Further consideration of the role of aniline and of the manufacture of auramine and magenta
(fuchsine) as possible causative agents. Br. 1 ind. Med., 11, 213-216
Case, RAM., Hosker, M.E., McDonald, D.R & Pearson, J.T.(1954) Tumours of the urinary bladder
in workmen engaged in the manufacture and use of certain dyestuff intermediates in the British
chemical industiy. 1. The role of aniline, benzidine, alpha-naphthylamine, and beta-naphthyl-
amine. Br. 1 ind. Med., 1 l, 75-104
IPor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.MAGENTA AND CI BASIC RED 9 231
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory ofWorld Chemical Producers, Dallas, TX, pp. 64, 512
Commission of the European Communities (1976) Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 July 1976 on
the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off 1. Eur.
Commun., L262, 169-20
Commission of the European Communities (1990) Proposai for a Council Directive on the
approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off 1. Eur.
Commun., C322, 29-77
Commission of the European Communities (1991) Thirteen Commission Directive of 12 March 1991
(91/184/EEC). Off 1. Eur. Commun., L91, 59-62
Decadi, A., Peto, J., Piolatto, G. & La Vecchia, C. (1985) Bladder cancer mortality ofworkers exposed
to aromatic amines: analysis of models of carcinogenesis. Br. 1. Cancer, 51, 707-712
De Flora, S. (1981) Study of 106 organic and inorganic compounds in the Salmonella/microsome test.
Carcinogenesis, 2, 283-298
De Flora, S., Zanacchi, p., Camoirano, A, Bennicelli, C. & Badolati, G.S. (1984a) Genotoxic activity
and potency of 135 compounds in the Ames revers ion test and in a bacterial DNA-repair test.
Mutat. Res., 133, 161-198
De Flora, S., Camoirano, A, Zanacchi, P. & Bennicelli, C. (1984b) Mutagenicity testing with TA97 and
TA102 of 30 DNA-damaging compounds, negative with other Salmonella strains. Mutat. Res.,
134, 159-165
Druckrey, H., Nieper, H.A & Lo, H.W (1956) Carcinogenic action of parafuchsin in an injection
study in rats. (Short communication) (Ger.). Naturwissenschaften, 43, 543-544
Dunkel, Yc., Pienta, RJ., Sivak, A. & Traul, K.A. (1981) Comparative neoplastic transformation
responses of Balb/3T3 cells, Syrian hamster embiyo cells, and Rauscher murine leukemia
virus-infected Fischer 344 rat embiyo cells to chemIcal carcinogens. 1. natl Cancer lnst., 67,
1303-1315
Dunkel, Yc., Zeiger, E., Brusick, D., McCoy, E., McGregor, D., Mortelmans, K., Rosenkranz, H.S. &
Simmon, YF. (1984) Reproducibility of microbial mutagenicity assays: I. Tests with Salmonella
tyhimurium and Escherichia coli using a standardized protocol. Environ. Mutag., 6 (Suppl. 2),
1-254
Green, EJ. (199) The Sigma-Aldrich Handbook of Stains, Dyes and Indicators, Milwaukee, WI,
Aldrich Chemical Co., pp. 126129
Green, U., Hoiste, J. & Spikermann, AR (1979) A comparative study of the chronic effects of
magenta, paramagenta, and phenyl-ß-naphthylamine in Syrian golden hamsters. 1. Cancer Res.
clin Oncol., 95, 51-55
Haworth, S.R, Lawlor, TE., Lilja, H.S., Douglas, J.F., Cameron, T & Dunkel, YC. (1981) Muta-
genicity evaluation of urine collected from rodents treated with either 2-acetylaminofluorene
(2AA),p-rosaniline, 8-hydroxyquinoline or aniline HCI (Abstract Ea-5). Environ. Mutag., 3, 379
Hayes, S., Gordon, A, Sadowski, 1. & Hayes, C. (1984) RK bacterial test for independently measuring
chemical toxicity and mutagenicity: short-term forward selection assay. Mutat. Res., 130,97-106
Howe, J.R (1977) Is there a cancer risk in the laboratoiy use of magenta and related dyes? Lab. Pract.,
26, 87-91
IAC (1974a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, VoL. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Compounds and Miscella-
neous Alkylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 57-6232 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
IAC (1974b) lARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, Vol. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Compounds and Miscella-
neous Alkylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 73-77
IAC (1975) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, Vol. 8,
Some Aromatic Az Compounds, Lyon, pp. 61-74
IAC (1978) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, VoL. 16,
Some Aromatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds-Hair Dyes, Colouring Agents and
Miscellaneous Industrial Chemicals, Lyon, pp. 97-109
IAC (1979) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 19, Some Monomers, Plastics and Synthetic Elastomers, and Acrolein, Lyon, pp. 73-113
IAC (1982a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 27, Some Aromatic Amines, Anthraquinones and Nitroso Compounds, and Inorganic
Fluorides Used in Drinking-water and Dental Preparations, Lyon, pp. 155-175
IAC (1982b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to H umans,
VoL. 29, Some lndustrial Chemicals and Dyestuff, Lyon, pp. 345-389
IAC (1982c) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
VoL. 27, Some Aromatic Amines, Anthraquinones and Nitroso Compounds, and Inorganic
Fluorides Used in Drinking-water and Dental Preparations, Lyon, pp. 39-61
IARC (1986) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic RiskofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 39, Some Chemicals Used in Plastics and Elastomers, Lyon, pp. 347-365
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 362-363
IAC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp.211-216
IAC (1987c) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 99-100
IAC (1987d) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating ofIARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon, p. 248
Ketkar, M.R & Mohr, U. (1982) The chronic effects of magenta, paramagenta and phenyl-ß-
naphthylamine in rats after intragastric administration. Cancer LeU., 16,203-20
Kornbrust, DJ. & Barfkecht, TR. (1984) Comparison of rat and hamster hepatocyte primaiy
culture/DNA repair assays. Environ. Mutag., 6, 1-11
Lawlor, TE., Haworth, S.R., Lilja, H.S., Cameron, TP. & Dunkel, ~e. (1987) Detection of mutagenic
activity in the urine of rodents treated with p-rosaniline. Environ. Mutag., 9, 69..78
Mitchell, A.D., Rudd, CJ. & Caspaiy, WJ. (1988) Evaluation of the LS178Y mouse lymphoma cell
mutagenesis assay: intralaboratoiy results for sixt-three coded chemicals tested at SRI Interna-
tionaL. Environ. mol. Mutag., 12 (Suppl. 13),37-101
Mortelmans, K, Haworth, S., Lawlor, 1:, Speck, W, Tainer, R & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests. II. Results from the testing of 270 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 7),
1-119
Myhr, Re. & Caspaiy, WJ. (1988) Evaluation of the LS178Y mouse lymphoma cell mutagenesis
assay: intralaboratoiy results with six-three coded chemicals tested at Litton Bionetics, Inc.
Environ. Mutag., 12 (Suppl. 13), 103-194MAGENTA AND CI BASIC RED 9233
Myhr, Re., McGregor, D., Bowers, L., Riach, e., Brown, AG., Edwards, l, McBride, D., Martin, R &
Caspaiy, WJ. (199) L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell mutation assay results with 41 compounds.
Environ. Mutag., 16 (SuppL. 18), 138-167
Pienta, RJ. & Kawalek, J.e. (1981) Transformation of hamster embryo cells by aromatic amines. Natl
Cancer lnst. Monogr., 58, 243-251
Pienta, RJ., Poiley, J.A. & Lebherz, WR, III (1977) Morphological transformation of early passage
golden Syrian hamster embiyo cells derived from ciyopreserved primaiy cultures as a reliable in
vitro bioassay for identifying diverse carcinogens. lnt. 1 Cancer, 19,642-655
Piolatto, G., Negri, E., La Vecchia, e., Pira, E., Decarli, A & Peto, J. (1991) Bladder cancer mortality
of workers exposed to aromatic amines: an updated analysis. Br. 1 Cancer, 63, 457-459
Pouchert, C.J. (1981) The Ædrich Library of lnfrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., pp. 1448, 1483, 1488
Rehn, L. (1895) Bladder tumour in fuchsin workers (GeL). Arch. klin. Chir., 50, 588-
Rosenkranz, H.S. & Poirier, L.A (1979) Evaluation of the mutagenicity and DNA-modifying activity
of carcinogens and noncarcinogens in microbial systems. 1 natl Cancer lnst., 62, 873-892
Rubino, G.E, Scansetti, G., Piolatto, G. & Pira, E. (1982) The carcinogenic effect of aromatic amines:
an epidemiological study of the role of o-toluidine and 4,4' -methylene bis(2-methylaniline) in
inducing bladder cancer in man. Environ. Res., 27, 241-254
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra. 1980 Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra. 1981-1991 Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA
Simmon, VE (1979a) ln vitro mutagenicity assays of chemical carcinogens and related compounds
with Salmonella tyimurium.1 natl Cancer lnst., 62, 893-899
Simmon, VE (1979b) ln vitro assays for recombinogenic activi ty of chemical carcinogens and related
compounds with Saccharomyces cerevisiae D3.1 natl Cancer Inst., 62,901-909
Simmon, VE, Rosenkranz, H.S., Zeiger, E. & Poirier, L.A. (1979) Mutagenic activity of chemical
carcinogens and related compounds in the intraperitoneal host-mediated assay. 1 natl Cancer
lnst., 62, 911-918
Speck, WT., Santella, RM. & Rosenkranz, H.S. (1978) An evaluation of the prophage lambda
induction (inductest) for the detection of potential carcinogens. Mutat. Res., 54, 101-104
US Environmental Protection Agency (1990) Texile Dye Weighing Monitoring Study(EPA Reports Nos
EPA-560/5-9O-009 and EPA-560/5-9O-010, Main Report, Supplement and Site Visit Reports),
Washington DC, Offce of Toxic Substances
US National Libraiy of Medicine (1992a) Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB Record Nos. 2952
and 6192), Bethesda, MD
US National Libraiy of Medicine (1992b) Regitry of To.xic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS
Nos. CX98500 and CX9850100), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1986) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of CI Basic Red 9
Monohydrochlorie (Pararosaniline) (CAS No. 569-61-9) in Fischer F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi
Mice (Feed Studies) (NT Tech. Rep. No. 285; NlH PubL. No. 86-2541), Research Triangle Park,
NC
US Tariff Commission (1922) Census of Dyes and Other Synthetic Organic Chemicals, 1921 (Tariff
Information Series No. 26), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, p. 66
US Tariff Commission (1%5) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and Sales, 1964
(TC Publication 167), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, pp. 18, 9823 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Vineis, P. & Magnani, C. (1985) Occupation and bladder cancer in males: a case-control study. lnt.l
Cancer, 35, 599-6
Willams, G.M., Laspia, M.R & Dunkel, Vc. (1982) Reliability of the hepatocyte primary
culture/DNA repair test in testing of coded carcinogens and noncarcinogens. Mutat. Res., 97,
359-370
Willams, G.M., Mori, H. & McQueen, c.A. (1989) Structure-activity relationships in the rat
hepatoce DNA-repair test for 30 chemicals. Mutat. Res., 221, 263-28ei DlREeT BLUE 15
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 2429-74-5; replaces 51568-94-6; 95032-75-0
Chem. Abstr. Name: 3,3' -( (3,3' - Dimethoxy( 1, l' -biphenyl)-4,4' -diyl) bise azo) )bis( 5-
amino-4-hydroxy-2,7-naphthalenedisulfonic acid), tetrasodium salt
C%ur Index No.: 24400
Synonym: Direct Blue 15
H2N . OH CH30
Na03s- ~03N~OCH3 HO NH2
:a03:00 S03Na
MoL. wt: 992.85 C34l~6016S4.4Na
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Dark-blue powder (US National Toxicology Pro gram, 1992)
(b) Melting-point: 300 °C (decomposes) (US National Toxicology Program, 1992)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral data have been
reported (US National Toxicology Pro gram, 1992).
(d) Solubility: Soluble in water; insoluble in most organic solvents (Society of Dyers and
Colourists, 1971a)
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Some trade names are: Airedale Blue D; Aizen Direct Sky Blue 5B; Aizen Direct Sky
Blue 5BH; Amanil Sky Blue; Atlantic Sky Blue A; Atul Direct Sky Blue; Azine Sky Blue 5B;
Belamine Sky Blue A; Benzanil Sky Blue; Benzo Sky Blue A-CF; Benzo Sky Blue S; Cartasol
Blue 2GF; Chio rami ne Sky Blue A; Chloramine Sky Blue 4B; Chrome Leather Pure Blue;
Cresotine Pure Blue; Diacotton Sky Blue 5B; Diamine Blue 6B; Diamine Sky Blue;
Diaphtamine Pure Blue; Diazol Pure Blue 4B; Diphenyl Brillant Blue; Diphenyl Sky Blue
6B; Direct Blue 10G; Direct Blue HH; Direct Pure Blue; Direct Pure Blue M; Direct Sky
-235-23 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Blue; Direct Sky Blue A; Direct Sky Blue 5B; Enianil Pure Blue AN; Fenamin Sky Blue;
Hispamin Sky Blue 3B; Kayafect Blue Y; Kayaku Direct Sky Blue 5B; Mitsui Direct Sky Blue
5B; Naphtamine Blue 10G; Niagara Blue 4B; Niagara Sky Blue; Nippon Direct Sky Blue;
Nippon Sky Blue; Nitto Direct Sky Blue 5B; Oxamine Sky Blue 5B; Paper Blue S; Phenamine
Sky Blue A; Pontamine Sky Blue 5BX; Shikiso Direct Sky Blue 5B; Sky Blue 4 B; Sky Blue 5B;
Tertrodirect Blue F; Vondacel Blue HH.
The raw dye contains about 25% sodium chloride; a desalted preparation (containing
.. 3% salt) contained about 50% CI Direct Blue 15 and about 35 impurities, including
3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine dihydrochloride at 836-1310 ppm (mg/kg). Benzidine was not
present at the detection limit of 1 ppm (mg/kg) (US National Toxicology Program, 1992).
CI Direct Blue 15 is available at a purity of 65.5%, containing 15 ppm 3,3'-dimethoxy-
benzidine (ortho-dianisidine; see IARC, 1974, 1987) (Bowman et aL., 1982).
1. 1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
CI Direct Blue 15 was first prepared in 1890 (Society of Dyers and Colourists, 1971a). Itis produced by coupling 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine to 1 -amino-8-naphthol-3,6-disulfonic acid
under alkaline conditions (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1987).
Approximate US production was 108 tonnes in 1972,241 tonnes in 1977,98 tonnes in
1981 and 123 tonnes in 1982 (US International Trade Commission, 1974, 1978, 1982, 1983).
1.2.2 Use
CI Direct Blue 15 is used to dye cellulose, leather, paper, cotton, silk and wool and to
stain biological materials; it is also used to tint cinematographic film (Society of Dyers and
Colourists, 1971b). The use pattern for CI Direct Blue 15 in the USAis 65% in textile dyeing,
30% as a paper colourant and 5% for other uses.
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
CI Direct Blue 15 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
The US Environmental Protection Agency, the American Textile Manufacturers
Institute and the Ecological and Toxicological Association of the Dyestuffs Manufacturing
Industry conducted a joint survey in 1986-87 to estimate airborne concentrations of dye dustCI DIRECT BLUE 15237
in dye weighing rooms of plants where powder dyes are used in the dyeing and printing of
textiles. The survey was based on a sample of 24 sites chosen at random from among textile
plants where powder dyes are weighed. Although CI Direct Blue 15 was not inc1uded in the
survey, the results were considered to be representative of dye dust levels during weighing of
this tye of powder dye. The mean airborne concentration of total active colourant in the
plants monitored was estimated to be 0.085 mg/m3 (US Environmental Protection Agency,
1990).
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 4527 workers, inclu-
ding 201 women, may have been exposed to CI Direct Blue 15 in seven industries (US
National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.3.3 Other
Anaerobic biodegradation of CI Direct Blue 15 gives rise to the amine metabolite,
3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine. Following incubation of 100 mg/l of dyestuff at 35°C in the
presence of anaerobic sludge inoculum, primary degradation was complete within seven days
(Brown & Hamburger, 1987).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
ln Germany, derived azo dyes must be handled like the corresponding hypothetical
reduction products. CI Direct Blue 15 must therefore be handled like 3,3' -dimethoxy-
benzidine, which is classified as an A2 compound. Those materials are considered to have
been proven to be carcinogenic only in animal experimentation but under conditions
comparable to those of possible human exposure at the workplace (Deutsche Forschungs-
gemeinschaft, 1992).
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of Cancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
Rat
Groups of 50,35,65 and 50 male and 50, 35, 65 and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, 40-47
days old, were administered 0, 630, 1250 or 2500 mg/I (ppm) CI Direct Blue 15 (purity,
,. 50%; with,. 35 impurities, inc1uding 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine) in distiled drinking-water
for 96 weeks and were necropsied at 103-104 weeks of age. Survval at 22 months was 37/50,
8/35, 11/65 and 2/50 for male rats and 40/50, 13/35, 22/65 and 4/50 for females in the238 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
control, low-, mid- and high-dose groups, respectively (p .. 0.001 for both males and
females). The decreased survval in the treated groups was due to development of treatment-
related neoplasms. As shown in Table 1, there were increased incidences of benign and
malignant tumours of the skin, Zymbal gland, liver, oral cavity and small intestines and of
mononuclear-cell leukaemia in male and female rats, of benign and malignant tumours of
the large intestine and preputial gland in males and of the clitoral gland and uterus in females
(US National Toxicology Program, 1992).
Table 1. Survival and tumour incidences in male and female Fischer 344/N rats
administered CI Direct Blue 15 in the drinking-water for 96 weeks
Survval and tumour tyesaDose (mg/l (ppm D p Valueh
0 630 1250250
Males
Survvalc 37/50 8/35 11/652/50
Ski
Basal-cell adenoma or carcinoma 2/50 9/3527/65 28/50 0: 0.001Sebaceous gland adenoma 0/50 1/35 7/653/50 = 0.002
Squamous-cell papiloma or carcinoma 2/50 4/35 11/65 19/50 0: 0.001Zymbal gland: adenoma or carcinoma1/50 5/35 10/65 20/50 0: 0.001
Preputial gland: adenoma or carcinoma 8/49 5/3523/64 9/480: 0.001d
Hepatocllular neoplasmsf 0/50 6/35 9/6511/50 0: 0.001
Oral cavity: squamous-cell papiloma or carcinoma 1/50 10/35 24/65 17/50 0: 0.001
Small intestine: adenocrcinoma 0/50 0/35 0/65 2/50 = 0.078Large intestine: polyps or adenocrcinoma 0/50 1/35 6/65 8/500: 0.001Mononuclear-cell leukaemia17/50 19/35 28/65 20/50 0: 0.001d
Females
Survval40/50 13/35 22/65 4/50
Squamous-cell papiloma or carcinoma of the ski0/50 2/35 6/65 5/50 = 0.001Zymbal gland: adenoma or carcinoma0/50 4/35 11/65 17/50 0: 0.001Clitoral gland: adenoma or carcinoma7/50 11/31 24/64 27/50 0: 0.001
Hepatocllular neoplastic nodule or carcinoma0/50 0/35 2/65 5/500: 0.001
Oral cavity: squamous-cell papiloma or carcinoma 2/50 4/35 19/65 15/50 0: 0.001Small intestine: adenocrcinoma0/50 0/35 1/653/50 = 0.032
Uterie adenoma or adenocrcinoma1/50 0/35 1/654/50 = 0.00Mononuclear-cell leukaemia7/50 13/35 27/65 15/50 0: 0.001d
From US National Toxicology Program (1992)
UJerms used by authors
bLogistic regression trend test
c At 22 months; reduced survval in expsed groups due to neoplasia
dJìfe-table testCI DIRECT BLUE 15 239
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.1.2 Experimental systems
Anaerobie biodegradation of CI Direct Blue 15 gives rise to the amine metabolite,
3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine (Brown & Hamburger, 1987). The dye was cleaved bypure cultures
of anaerobic bacteria and by suspensions derived from the intestinal content of rats, with
subsequent formation of the amine (Cerniglia et al., 1982).
CI Direct Blue 15 (100 mg/kg) containing 46 ppm (mg/kg) 3,3'-dimethoxybeniidine as
an impurity was administered once in the diet to two female mongrel dogs weighing 15 kg,
and 48-h urine was analysed for 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine, the potential metabolic product
(Lynn et al., 1980). Excretion was found to be 0.03% of the dose of dye administered, which
cannot be attributed to the level of impurity. The same dose was also administered once to
four male Sprague-Dawley rats by intragastric intubation; after 72 h, 0.17 :: 0.18% of the
theoretical maximum was excreted as 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine and the monoacetyl
derivative, the latter constituting a substantial fraction.
When (14C-biphenyllCI Direct Blue 15 was given as a single dose of 12 mg/kg to
six-week-old male Fischer 344 rats by gavage, 74.4% of the dose was excreted in the faeces
and 18.8% in urine within 192 h. Only 12% of the dose appeared as intact dye in the faeces
within 48 h, the remainder being unidentified metabolic products. Excretion of the free
diamine, 3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine, and of its mono- and diacetyl derivatives in urine was
determined to be 0.22, 0.27 and 0.22% of the dose, respectively. An equivalent dose of
14C-Iabelled 3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine was administered for comparison: 52% of the dose
appeared in the faeces and 35% in the urine, indicating that the free amine is metabolized to
a greater extent than the dye. Only 1.5% of the dose in faeces could be attributed to the free
amine fraction, including the acetylated metabolites; in urine, 1.18% of the dose was
excreted as the parent compound, 0.35% as the monoacetyl derivative and 0.93% as the
diacetyl derivative. Radiolabel was found in all tissues examined from rats dosed with 14C-CI
Direct Blue 15. The levels peaked at 4 and 8 h and were highest in the gastrointestinal tract,
liver, kidney and lung (Bowman et al., 1982).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.240 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.2.2 Experimental animais
CI Direct Blue 15 binds to albumin, ~i-lipoprotein, ß-lipoprotein, haemopexin, pre-
albumin and ~l-antichymotrysin, to alter their mobility in crossed immunoelectrophoresis
and to degrade C3 globulin (Emmet et al., 1985). The importance of these findings in vivo
remains to be established, as it is not known how much unchanged dye is absorbed and
transported within the body.
CI Direct Blue 15 was tested for subchronic toxicity in male and female Fischer 344 rats
(Morgan et al., 1989; US National Toxicology Program, 1992). Groups of 10 animais of each
sex received the dye in drinking-water for 13 weeks at concentrations of 0,0.063,0.125,0.25,
0.50 and 1.0% for females and 0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.50, 1.0 and 3.0% for males. Seven male rats
died in the highest-dose group; the first death occurred after three weeks and the last after
13 weeks. Groups given 1 % CI Direct Blue 15 gained 17% less body weight than control s,
and males treated with 3% of the dye gained 43% less weight than controls. Absolute and
relative kidney weights increased in a dose-related manner in males and females. Changes in
haematology and clinical chemistry were not observed. Histopathology showed renal and
hepatic toxicity in high-dose males that died before termination of the study. ln addition to
necrosis of hepatocyes and fatty metamorphosis, blue pigment was observed in Kupffer
cells. Focal necrosis occurred in proximal tubular epithelial cells. Mild chronic nephropathy
was observed in male and female rats given 1 % of dye.
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal etTects
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
Technical-grade CI Direct Blue 15 was not mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium in
standard protocols, but it was mutagenic under conditions favouring azo reduction, which
would generate 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine, a known mutagen. CI Direct Blue 15 was reported
in an abstract to be mutagenic at the tk locus in mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells. It did not
induce unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat hepatocyes (abstract) or sister chromatid
exchange or chromosomal aberrations in Chinese hamster ovaiy cells in vitro.
Activated ras genes were found in 21/34 tumours induced in rats by CI Direct Blue 15
(US National Toxicology Program, 1992) and in 1/38 spontaneous tumours tested (Reynolds
et al., 1990; Table 3).Table 2. Genetic and related efTects of CI Direct Blue 15
Test system Result
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
systemDosea Reference
(LED/HID)
SAF, Salmonella typhimurium, forward mutation (arabinose resistance) 0
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation 0
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation 0
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation 0
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation 0
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100,reverse mutation
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation
SA8, Salmonella typhimurium TA1538, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation
VRp, Vnscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primary hepatoctes in vitro
G5l Gene mutation, mouse Iymphoma L5178Y cells in vitro
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro+b,c
_d
+e
+1
(+f
+d
+1
(+ )d
+ e
+1
(+f+h
+b
o
+100.~~
250.~~
62.500
150.~~
150.~~
500.~~
500.~~
500.~~
125.~~
0.~~
500.~~
62.50
150.~~
150.~~
50.~~
100.~~
500.~~
0.~~
0.~~
2500.~~
2500.~~Krishna et al. (1986)
Elliott & Gregory (1980)
Elliott & Gregory (1980)
Brown & Dietrich (1983)
Brown & Dietrich (1983)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Reid et al. (1984)
Sugimura et al. (1977)
Elliott & Gregory (1980)
Elliot & Gregory (1980)
Brown & Dietrich (1983)
Brown & Dietrich (1983)
Prvai et al. (1984)
Krishna et al. (1986)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Mirsalis et al. (1983); abstr.
Rudd et al. (1983); abstr.
Gallowayet al. 1987)
Galloway et al. 1987)
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not testeda ¡.g/ml; 0.~~, not given
b Preincubation with hamster or rat liver S9 and flavin mononucleotide supplementation
c Rat liver S9 more effective
d Anaerobie preincubation or riboflavin supplementation
e Plate incorporation and reduction using soium dithionite
1 Aerobic preincubation with riboflavi
g Anaerobie preincubation with rat caecal bacterial extract, flavin mononucleotide and liver S9
h Preíncubatíon wíth no shaking and hamster liver 59 wíth flavín mononucleotíden-u-~trn""
to
Etr..VI
~..242 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 3. Activating ras mutations iD tumours iDduced in Fischer 344 rats by CI Direct Blue
15 and iD untreated animaIs
Thmour tye Frequency N- H-ras
ras
Total Codon 12 Codon 13 Codon 61
GAA AGA CGC GTC AM CfA CGA
'lated
Preputial gland adenoma 1/1 11Preputial gland carcinoma 1/3 1 1Clitoral gland carcioma 8/10 17 1 4 2Basal-cell carcinoma 5/6 14 1 1 1 1
Squamous-cell carcinoma 6/7 6 2 4(ski )
Mammaiy fibroadenoma 0/2
Mammaiy adenocrcinoma 0/3
Duodenal adenocrcinoma 0/1
Subcutaneous fibroma 0/1
Untreated
Clitoral gland adenoma 1/2 11Preputial gland carcinoma 0/1
Mammaiy gland fibro- 0/11adenoma or adenoma
Mammaiy adenocrcinoma 0/2
Subcutaneous fibroma or 0/5fibroadenoma
Lipoma 0/1
Testicular interstitial-cell 0/5adenoma
Fibrosarcoma 0/2
Mononuclear-cell leukaemia 0/3
Adrenal phaeochromocoma 0/1
Pancreatic acinar adenoma 0/1
Pancreatic islet-cell adenoma 0/1
Pituitaiy adenoma 0/1
Splenic haemangiosarcoma 0/1
Prostatic adenocrcinoma 0/1
Adapted from Reynolds et al. (199)CI DIRECT BLUE 15 243
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
CI Direct Blue 15, a bis-azo dye derived from 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine, is used mainly
for dyeing textiles and paper. The technical grade contains about 50% of pure dye, in
addition to inorganic salts and a mixture of about 35 organic compounds, including
3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
Technical-grade CI Direct Blue 15 was tested for carcinogenicity in one study in rats by
administration in the drinking-water. It produced benign and malignant tumours of the skin,
Zymbal gland, liver, small intestine and oral cavity as well as leukaemia in animaIs of each
sex, of the large intestine and preputial gland in males and of the uterus and clitoral gland in
females.
5.4 Other relevant data
CI Direct Blue 15 caused renal and hepatic toxicity in rats. Reductive cleavage of the azo
bonds to yield 3,3'-dimethoxybenzidine was demonstrated in vivo.
CI Direct Blue 15 induced mutation in bacteria under conditions that favour reduction.
Neither sister chromatid exchange nor chromosomal aberrations were induced in cultured
mammalian cells.
5.5 Evaluationl
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of CI Direct Blue 15.
There is suffcient evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of technical-
grade CI Direct Blue 15.
Overall evaluation
CI Direct Blue 15 is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Croup 2B).
6. References
Bowman, M.C., Olier, WL., Nony, c.R., Rowland, K.L., Biledeau, S.M. & Lowr, L.K. (1982)
Metabolism and distribution of two 14C-benzidine-congener-based dyes in rats as determined by
GC, HPLC, and radioassays. 1. anal. Toxicol., 6, 164174
lFor definition of the italicized terrs, see Preamble, pp. 2630.24 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Brown, J.P. & Dietrich, P.S. (1983) Mutagenicity of selected sulfonated azo dyes in the Salmonella/-
microsome assay: use of aerobic and anaerobic activation procedures. Mutat. Res., 116,305-315
Brown, D. & Hamburger, B. (1987) The degradation of dyestuffs: Part III. Investigations of their
ultimate degradability. Chemosphere, 16, 1539-1553
Cerniglia, C.A., Freeman, J.P., Franklin, W & Pack, L.D. (1982) Metabolism of azo dyes derived from
benzidine, 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine and 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine to potentially carcinogenic aro-
matic amines by intestinal bacteria. Carcinogenesis, 3, 1255-126
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (1992) MA and BAT-Values List 1992. Maxmum Concentrations
at the Workplace (MA) and Biological Tolerance Values (BAT) for Working Materils (Report No.
28), Weinheim, VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, pp. 8081, 87
Ellott, J. & Gregory, AR. (1980) Mutagenicity of a series ofbenzidine congener based dyes. Vét. hum.
Toxicol., 22, 413-417
Emmet, M., Cerniglia, C.E. & Crowle, AJ. (1985) DifferentiaI serum protein binding ofbenzidine and
benzidine-congener based dyes and their derivatives. Arch. Toxicol., 57, 130-135
Galloway, S.M., Armstrong, M.J., Reuben, c., Colman, S., Brown, B., Cannon, c., Bloom, A.D.,
Nakamura, F., Ahmed, M., Duk, S., Rimpo, J., Margolin, B.H., Resnick, M., Anderson, B. &
Zeiger, E. (1987) Chromosome aberrations and sister chromatid exchanges in Chinese hamster
ovary cells. Evaluations of 108 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 10 (Suppl. 10), 1-175
IAC (1974) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, Vol. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Compounds and Miscella-
neous Ækylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 41-47
IARC (1987) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 198-199
Krishna, G., Xu, J. & Nath, J. (1986) Comparative mutagenicity studies of azo dyes and their
reduction products in Salmonella tyhimurium.l Toxicol. environ. Health, 18, 111-120
Lynn, R.K., Donielson, D.W, Ilas, AM., Kennish, J.M., Wong, K. & Matthews, H.B. (1980)
Metabolism of bisazobiphenyl dyes derived from benzidine, 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine or
3,3' -dimethylbenzidine to carcinogenic aromatic amines in the dog and rat. Toxicol. appl.
Pharmacol., 56, 248-258
Mirsalis, J., Tyson, K., Beck, J., Loh, F., Steinmetz, K., Contreras, C., Austere, L., Martin, S. &
Spalding, J. (1983) Induction of unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) in hepatocytes following in
vitro and in vivo treatment (Abstract No. Ef-5). Environ. Mutag., 5, 482
Morgan, D.L., Jameson, C.W, Mennear, J.H., Ulland, B.M. & Lemen, J.K. (1989) Thirteen-week
toxicity studies of 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine and CI Direct Blue 15 in the Fischer 34 rat.
Toxicology, 59, 297-309
Mortelmans, K., Haworth, S., Lawlor,1:, Speck, W, Tainer, B. & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella muta-
genicity tests. II. Results from the testing of 270 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 7), 1-119
Privai, M.J., Bell, SJ., Mitchell, VD., Peiperl, M.D. & Vaughan, VL. (1984) Mutagenicity ofbenzidine
and benzidine-congener dyes and selected monoazo dyes in a modified Salmonella assay. Mutat.
Res., 136, 33-47
Reid, TM., Morton, K.c., Wang, c.Y. & King, C.M. (1984) Mutagenicity of azo dyes following meta-
bolism by different reductive/oxidative systems. Environ. Mutag., 6, 705-717
Reynolds, S.H., Patterson, R.M., Mennear, J.H., Maronpot, R.R. & Anderson, M.W. (199) ras Gene
activation in rat tu mors induced by benzidine congeners and derived dyes. Cancer Res., 50,2h272CI DIRECT BLUE 15 245
Rudd, C.J., Mitchell, A.D. & Spalding, J. (1983) L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell mutagenesis assay of
coded chemieals incorporating analyses of the colony size distributions (Abstract No. Cd-19).
Environ. Mutag., 5, 419
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971a) Colour Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 4, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 4208
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971b) Colour Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 2, Bradford, Yorkshire, p. 2226
Sugimura, 1:, Nagao, M., Kawachi, 1:, Honda, M., Yahagi, 1:, Sei no, Y., Sato, S., Matsukura, N.,
Matsushima, 1:, Shirai, A., Sawamura, M. & Matsumoto, H. (1977) Mutagen-carcinogens in
food, with special reference to highly mutagenic pyrolytie products in broiled foods. ln: Hiatt,
H.H., Watson, J.D. & Winsten, J.A., eds, Origins of Human Cancer, Book C, Human Risk
Assessment, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, CSH Press, pp. 1561-1577
US Environmental Protection Agency (1987) Health and Environmental Effects Profile for Niagara
Blue 4B (Report No. EPA-60/X-87/389/US NIS PB89-120273), Cincinnati, OH, Environ-
mental Criteria and Assessment Office
US Environmental Protection Agency (199) Texile Dye Weighing Monitoring Study(EPA Reports Nos
EPA-56O/5-90-009 and EPA-560/5-90-010; Main Report, Supplement and Site Visit Reports),
Washington DC, Offce of Toxie Substances
US International Trade Commission (1974) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and
Sales, 1972 (USITC Publication No. 681), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p. 61
US International Trade Commission (1978)Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and
Sales, 1977 (USITC Publication No. 920), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p. 97
US International Trade Commission (1982) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and
Sales, 1981 (USITC Publication No. 1292), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce,
p.59
US International Trade Commission (1983) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and
Sales, 1982 (USITC Publication No. 1422), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office,
p.6O
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
QJ6420), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1992) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of CI Direct Blue 15
(CAS No. 2429-74-5) in F344/N Rats (Drinking Water Studies) (NT TR 397; NIH Publ. No.
92-2852), Research Triangle Park, NCCI AelD RED 114
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1. 1. 1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 6459-94-5
Chem. Abstr. Name: 8-((3,3'-Dimethyl-4'-((4-(((4-methylphenYIJsulfonyl)oxyJphenyl)-
azoJ(l,1 '-biphenylJ-4-yl)azoJ-7-hydroxy- 1,3-naphthalenedisulfonic acid, disodium salt
Colour Index No.: 23635
Synonyms: Acid Red 114; CI Acid Red 114, disodium salt
OHCH3 0~IIN=N-&-O-S=O
c$N=N
S03Na
S03Na
C37H28N40ioS3.2NaCH3
MoL. wt: 830.84
1. 1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Deep-maroon powder (Green, 1990); red powder (US National Toxi-
col ogy Program, 1991)
(b) Melting-point: 250-300 °C (decomposes) (US National Toxicology Program, 1991)
(c) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Pouchert, 1981; Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1988;
Green, 1990; US National Toxicology Program, 1991).
(d) Solubilty: Soluble in water (80 g/l at 80 °C) (International Dyestuffs Corp., 1990);
very slightly soluble in ethanol (Green, 1990)
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Some trade names are: Acid Leather Red BG; Amacid Miling Red PRS; Benzyl Fast
Red BG; Benzyl Red BR; Elcacid Miling Fast Red RS; Erionyl Red RS; Fenafor Red PB;
Folan Red B; Intrazone Red BR; Kayanol Miling Red RS; Leather Fast Red B; Levanol Red
-247-248 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
GG; Midlon Red PRS; Milling Fast Red B; Milling Red B; Miling Red BB; Milling Red SWB;
Polar Red RS; Sandolan Red N-RS; Sella Fast Red RS; Sulphonol Red R; Suminol Miling
Red RS; Supranol Fast Red 3G; Supranol Fast Red GG; Supranol Red PBX-CF; Supranol
Red R; Telon Fast Red GG; Tertracid Milling Red B; Vondamol Fast Red RS.
Technical-grade CI Acid Red 114 is available in commercial mixtures containing
25-85% pure dye. Other tyical ingredients include sodium chloride and mineraI oil (see
IARC, 1984, 1987) (Crompton & Knowles Corp., 1990; International Dyestuffs Corp., 1990;
US National Toxicology Program, 1991; AIdrich Chemical Co., 1992).
1.1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
CI Acid Red 114, a bright red anionic bisazo dye, is manufactured by çonverting
3,3' -dimethylbenzidine (ortho-tolidine; see IARC, 1972) to the tetraazonium salt, which is
then coupled successively to G acid (2-naphthol-6,8-disulfonic acid) and phenoL. The phenol
hydroxy function is then esterified with para-tolylsulfonyl chloride (Green, 1990).
CI Acid Red 114 has been produced commercially since the early 1900s. ln the USA,
there were six manufacturers and two importers of CI Acid Red 114 in 1977 (US
Environmental Protection Agency, 1988). Annual production volume by five manufacturers
in 1990 was estimatedto be 10-100 tonnes, whereas it was 170 tonnes in 1979 (US
International Trade Commission, 1980). ln 1980, the USA imported about 7 tonnes of CI
Acid Red 114 (US International Trade Commission, 1981).
1.2.2 Use
CI Acid Red 114 is used to dye wool (from a weak acid bath), silk (from either a neutral
or acetic acid bath), jute and leather. Wool and silk are also printed directly (Green, 1990).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
CI Acid Red 114 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
The US Environmental Protection Agency, the American Textile Manufacturers
Institute and the Ecological and Toxicological Association of the Dyestuffs Manufacturing
Industry conducted a joint survey in 1986-87 to estimate airborne concentrations of dye dust
in dye weighing rooms of plants where powder dyes are used in the dyeing and printing ofCI ACID RED 114249
textiles. The survey was based on a sample of 24 sites chosen at random from among textile
plants where powder dyes are weighed. AIthough CI Acid Red 114 was not among the dyes
included in the survey, the results are considered to be representative of dye dust levels
during weighing of this tye of powder dye. The mean airborne concentration of total active
colourant in the plants monitored was estimated to be 0.085 mg/m3 (US Environmental
Protection Agency, 1990).
On the basis ofa survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 18 511 workers,
including 352 women, may have been exposed to CI Acid Red 114 at 300 textile and leather
goods manufacturing plants (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.3.3 Other
Anaerobic biodegradation of CI Acid Red 114 gives rise to the amine metabolites, 3,3'-
dimethylbenzidine and 4-methylbenzenesulfonic acid (4'-aminophenyl) ester. Following
incubation of 100 mg/lof dyestuff at 35°C in the presence of anaerobic sludge inoculum,
primary degradation was complete within seven days (Brown & Hamburger, 1987).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
ln Germany, CI Acid Red 114 must be handled like the corresponding hypothetical
reduction amine, 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine, which is classified as an A2 compound. Su chmaterials are considered to have been proven to be carcinogenic only in animal experi-
mentation but under conditions comparable to those of possible human exposure at the
workplace (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, 1992).
2. Studies of eancer in Rumans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
Rat
Groups of 50, 35, 65 and 50 male and 50, 35, 65 and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, five
weeks old, were administered 0, 70, 150 or 300 mg/l (ppm) (males) and 0, 150, 300 or
600ppm (females) CI Acid Red 114 (purity, 85%; with about 15 organicchemicals ofsimilar
structure, including approximately 5 ppm 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine and ~ 1 ppm benzidine in
distiled drinking-water for 104 weeks. Survval at 105 weeks was 24/50, 15/35, 26/65 and
1/50 for male rats and 36/50, 13/35, 6/64 and 0/50 for females in the control, low-, mid- and
high-dose groups, respectively (p ~ 0.001 for both males and females). AIl female rats
receiving 600 ppm died by week 89. The decreased survval in the treated groups was due to
development of treatment-related neoplasms. As shown in Table 1, there were increased250 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
incidences of benign and malignant tumours of the ski n, Zymbal gland and liver in male and
female rats, and of the c1itoral gland, oral cavity, small and large intestine and lung in female
rats (US National Toxicology Program, 1991).
Table 1. Survval and tumour incidences in male and female Fischer 344/N rats
administered CI Acid Red 114 in the drinking-water for 104 weeks
Survval and tumour tyesa Dose (mg/l (ppm)) p Valueb
Males 0 70150300
Females 0 15030060
Males
Survvalc 24/50 15/3526/65 1/50
Ski
Basal-cell adenoma or carcinoma 1/505/3528/6532/50 -c 0.001
Sebaceous-cell adenoma or carcinoma 1/501/35 5/656/50 = 0.007
Squamous-cell papiloma or carcínoma 1/502/3511/659/50 = 0.001
Keratoacanthoma 1/501/354/657/50-c 0.001
Zymbal gland adenoma or carcinoma 0/500/35 8/657/50 = 0.005
Liver neoplasms 2/502/3515/6520/50 -c 0.001
Females
Survival 36/50 13/35 6/640/50
Basal-cell adenoma or carcinoma of the ski 0/504/357/655/50 = 0.012
Zymbal gland adenoma or carcinoma 0/503/3518/6519/50 -c 0.001
Clitoral gland adenoma or carcinoma 11/4817/3228/6223/50 -c 0.001
Liver neoplasms 0/500/3519/648/50-c 0.001
Lung adenoma or carcinoma 1/502/359/654/50 = 0.007
Oral cavity squamous-cell papiloma or carcinoma 0/503/359/656/50 = 0.017
Small intestine polyps or adenocrcinoma 0/500/35 1/632/50 :: 0.05
Large intestine polyps or adenocrcínoma 0/501/350/643/50 :: 0.05
From US National Toxicology Program (1991)
Ufenns used byauthors
bLogistic regression test for trend
c At 22 months; reduced survival in expsed groups due to tumour development
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.1.2 Experimental systems
CI Acid Red 114 (100 mg/kg) containing less than 1% 3,3'-dimethylbenzidine as an
impurity was administered once in the diet to two female mongrel dogs weighing 15 kg, andCI ACID RED 114251
48-h urine was analysed for 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine, the potential metabolic product (Lynn
et al., 1980). Excretion was found to be 0.04% of the dose of dye administered, which is in
excess of what would be expected from the level of impurity; para-aminophenyl-para-
toluenesulfonate was also identified as a urinary metabolite. The same dose of CI Acid Red
114 was also administered once to four male Sprague- Dawley rats by intragastric intubation;
after 72 h, only 0.01 % of the dose could be identified as 3,3'-dimethylbenzidine.
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental animais
CI Acid Red 114 was tested for toxicity in male and female Fischer 344/N rats in a
range-finding study for carcinogenicity testing (US National Toxicology Program, 1991). The
purity of the test compound was estimated to be 82-85%; impurities consisted of about 15
organic chemicals of similar structure, with benzidine at less than 1 ppm and
3,3' -dimethylbenzidine at about 5 ppm. ln a 13-day study, groups of five rats were dosed with
0, 10 000,20000 or 30 000 ppm (mg/l) in drinking-water. Except for one accidental death,
aIl rats survved to the end of the study. Final me an body weights were significantly lower for
males in the mid- and high-dose groups (83 and 77%, respectively) and for females in aIl dose
groups (92, 88 and 80%, respectively). Hypocellularity of sternal bone marrow was found in
three males and in all females given 20 000 ppm. The marrow was depleted of eryhroid and
myeloid cells. Lymphocyic depletion of the thymus was observed in four males and one
female of the same dose group.
ln the 13-week study, groups of 10 rats received 0, 600, 1200,2500,5000 or 10000 ppm
(mg/l) CI Acid Red 114 in the drinking-water for 94 days (males) or 95 days (females) (US
National Toxicology Pro gram, 1991). Ali rats survved. Body weights were lower than those in
controls in aIl groups that received 1200 ppm and above (94-85%). Relative liver weights
were increased in all dosed males and females; absolute and relative kidney weights were
increased in females receiving doses of 1200 ppm and above. Haematocrit, haemoglobin and
eryhrocye counts were decreased in dosedfemales, and the eryhrocye count was reduced
at 1500 ppm and above in males, Some enzye levels were elevated, consistent with mild
hepatocellular damage, and minimal-to-mild lesions in liver were seen upon histopatho-
logical examination. Kupffer cells in the livers of most treated females contained brown
pigment. An increased prevalence of reticulum-cell hyperplasiaof the mesenteric lymph
node was observed in treated males and females. Tubular regeneration and chronic
inflammation of the kidneys occurred more frequently in treated females than in controls.
Minimal amounts of broWlish pigment were also seen in the tubular epithelial cells of the
kidneys.
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal efTects
No data were available to the Working Group.252 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
CI Acid Red 114 was mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium strains TA1538 and TA98
under reducing conditions. It did not induce sex-linked recessive lethal mutation in
Drosophila melanogaster and did not induce unscheduled DNA synthesis in primary cultures
of rat hepatocyes (abstract) or sister çhromatid exchange or chromosomal aberrations in
cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells. It did not induce unscheduled DNA synthesis in the
hepatocyes of rats dosed orally (abstract).
Activated ras genes were found in 13/16 tumours induced in rats by CI Acid Red 114 (US
National Toxicology Program, 1991) and in 1/38 spontaneous tumours tested (a CGA in
codon 61 in a clitoral gland adenoma) (Reynolds et al., 1990; Table 3).
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
CI Acid Red 114, a bis-azo dye derived from 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine, is used to dye wool,
silk, jute and leather.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
CI Acid Red 114 was tested for carcinogenicity in one study in rats by administration in
the drinking-water. It increased the incidences of benign and malignant tumours of the skin,
Zymbal gland and liver in male and female rats, and of the clitoral gland, lung, oral cavity and
small and large intestine in female rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
Reductive cleavage of the azo bonds to yield 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine was demonstrated
zn vivo.
CI Acid Red 114 induced gene mutation in bacteria under reducing conditions. It did not
induce gene mutation in insects or sister chromatid exchange or chromosomal aberrations in
cultured mammalian cells.Table 2. Genetic and related efTects of CI Acid Red 114
Test systemResult Dose Reference
(LED/HID)aWithout With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation - - 500.~~ Venturini & Thmaro (1979)SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation0 _b200.~~ Elliot & Gregory (1980)SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation0 +c62.500 Elliot & Gregory (1980)SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Mortelmans et al. (1986) n- SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 500.~~ Venturii & Thmaro (1979);i SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Morteimans et al. (1986) n- SA7, Salmonella tyhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Morteimans et al. (1986) 0SA8, Salmonella typhimurium TA1538, reverse mutation - - 50.~~ Venturii & Thmaro (1979) i'trSA8, Salmonella typhimurium TA1538, reverse mutation - +d100.~~ Reid et al. (1984) 0 SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation - - 500.~~ Venturini & Thmaro (1979) .... SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation0 _b,e50.~~ Elliot & Gregory (1980) ~
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation0 +c62.500 Elliot & Gregory (1980)SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation0 +1 40.~~ PrivaI et al. (1984)SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation -(+1 500.~~ Mortelmans et al. (1986)SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation0 +e125.~~ Dellarco & PrvaI (1989)DMX, Drosophila melanogaser, sex-linked recessive lethal -1500.~~ Wooruff et al. (1985)mutations
DMX, Drosophila melanogaster, sex-linked recessive lethal - 5~~.~~ feed Wooruff et al. (1985)mutations
URp, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priary hepatoces -0 0.~~ Mirsalis et al. (1983); abstr.in vitro
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster oyary cells - - 50.~~ US National Toxicologyin vitroProgram (1991)
txwTable 2 (contd)
Test system Result Reference Dose
(LED/HID)a
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
system
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary cells
in vitro
UPR, Unscheduled DNA sythesis, rat hepatoces in vivo50.~~
0.~~ poUS National Toxicology
Program (1991)
Mirsalis et al. (1983); abstr.
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
orn-vitro tests, i.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
b Anaerobie preincubation or with nboflavi supplementation
'Plate incorpration, with reduction using soium dithionate
dßacteril caecal reduction
€Plate incorpration with or without nboflavi
fPreincubation with hamster or rat liver S9 and flavi mononucleotide supplementation, no aeration
8lamster liver S9D:.t
~
s:ozoa
~"'::C/..o
E
s:
tT
Ul..CI ACID RED 114255
Table 3. Activating ras mutations in tumours induced in Fischer 344 rats by CI Acid
Red 114 and in untreated animaIs
Thmour tye Frequency N- H-ras
ras
Total Codon 12 Codon 13 Codon 61
GAA AGA CGC GTC AA CTA CGA
Treated
Clitoral gland adenoma
Basal-cell adenoma (ski)
Basal-cell carcinoma (skin)
Squamous-cell carcinoma
(ski)
Trichoepithelioma (skin)
Fibrosarcoma
Mammaiy fibroadenoma4/4
4/5
1/1
3/314
3
1
31 1 1 1
2 1
1
2 1
1/1
0/1
0/11 1
Untreated
Clitoral gland adenoma 1/2
Preputial gland carcioma 0/1
Mammaiy gland fibroadenoma 0/11
or adenoma
Mammaiy adenocrcinoma 0/2
Subcutaneous fibroma or 0/5
fibroadenomaLipoma 0/1
Testicular interstitial-cell 0/5
adenomaFibrosarcoma 0/2
Mononuclear-cellieukaemia 0/3
Adrenal phaeochromocoma 0/1
Pancreatic acinar adenoma 0/1
Pancreatic islet-cell adenoma 0/1Pituitaiy adenoma 0/1
Splenic haemangiosarcoma 0/1
Prostatic adenocrcinoma 0/111
Adapted from Reynolds et al. (199)
5.5 Evaluation 1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of CI Acid Red 114.
There is suffcient evIdence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of CI Acid
Red 114.
lFor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.256 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
Overall evaluation
CI Acid Red 114 is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Croup 2B).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldnch Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 25
Brown, D. & Hamburger, B. (1987) The degradation of dyestuffs: Part III. Investigations of their
ultimate degradability. Chemosphere, i 6, 1539-1553
Crompton & Knowles Carp. (1990) Matenal Safety Data Sheet: lntrazone Red BR (CI Acid Red 114),
Reading, PA
Dellarco, VL. & Privai, MJ. (1989) Mutagenicity of nitro compounds in Salmonella tyhimurium in
the presence of flavin mononucleotide in a preincubation asssay. Environ. Mutag., 13, 116-127
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (1992) MA- and BAT-Values List 1992. Maxmum Concentrations
at the Workplace (MA) and Biological Tolerance Válues (BAT) for Working Matenals (Report No.
28), Weinheim, YCH Verlagsgesellschaft, pp. 64, 80-81
Ellot, J. & Gregory, AR. (1980) Mutagenicity of a series of benzidine congener based dyes. Vét. hum.
ToxicoL, 22, 413-417
Green, FJ. (199) The Sigma-Aldrich Handbook of Stains, Dyes and lndicators, Milwaukee, WI,
Aldrich Chemical Co., p. 38
IAC (1972) lARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, VoL. 1,
Some Inorganic Substances, Chlonnated Hydrocarbons, Aromatic Amines, N-Nitroso Com-
pounds, and Natural Products, Lyon, pp. 87-91
IARC (1984) lARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risks of Chemicals to H umans,
VoL. 33, Polynuclear Aromatic Compounds, Part 2: Carbon Blacks, Mineral Oils and Sorne Nitro-
arenes, Lyon, pp. 87-168
IAC (1987) lARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 252-254
International Dyestuffs Carp. (1990) Matenal Safety Data Sheet: Elcacid Milling Fast Red RS (Acid Red
114), Clifton, NJ
Lynn, R.K., Donielson, D.W, Ilias, AM., Kennish, J.M., Wong, K. & Matthews, H.B. (1980)
Metabolism of bisazobiphenyl dyes derived from benzidine, 3,3' -dimethylbenzidine or
3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine to carcinogenic aromatic amines in the dog and rat. Toxicol. appl.
Phannacol., 56, 248-258
Mirsalis, J., Tyson, K., Beck, J., Loh, F., Steinmetz, K., Contreras, c., Austere, L., Martin, S. &
Spalding, J. (1983) Induction of unscheduled DNA synthesis (UDS) in hepatocytes following in
vitro and in vivo treatment (Abstract No. Ef-5). Environ. Mutag., 5, 482
Martelmans, K., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T, Speck, W, Tainer, B. & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests. II. Results from the testing of 270 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 7),
1-119
Pouchert, C.J., ed. (1981) The Aldnch Library of lnfrared Spectra, 3rd Ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 1465
Privai, M.J., Bell, S.J., Mitchell, VD., Pei peri, M.D. & Vaughan, VL. (1984) Mutagenicity ofbenzidine
and benzidine-congener dyes and selected monoazo dyes in a modified Salmonella assay. Mutat.
Res., 136, 33-47CI ACID RED 114257
Reid, TM., Morton, K.C., Wang, CY & King, CM. (1984) Mutagenicity of azo dyes following
metabolism by different reductive/oxidative systems. Environ. Mutag., 6, 705-717
Reynolds, S.H., Patterson, RM., Mennear, J.H., Maronpot, R.R. & Anderson, M.\¥ (199) ras Gene
activation in rat tu mors induced by benzidine congeners and derived dyes. Cancer Res., 50,21272
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1988) Sadtler Standard Spectra, Philadelphia, PA
US Environmental Protection Agency (1988) Computer Printout (CIS): 1977 Production Statistics for
Chemicals in the Non-confidential Initial TSCA Chemical Substances Inventory, Washington De,
Offce of Pesticides and Toxic Substances
US Environmental Protection Agency (1990) Texile Dye Weighing Monitoring Study (EPA Report No.
EPA-560/5-90-00, Main Report and Site Visit Reports), Washington DC, Offce of Toxic
Substances
US International Trade Commission (1980) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and
Sales, 1979 (USITC Publication No. 1099), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p.
65
US International Trade Commission (1981) Imports of Benzenoid Chemicals and Products, 1980
(USITC Publication No. 1163), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p. 47
US National Libraiy of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxíc Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
QJ 64 755(0), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1991) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of CI Acid Red 114
(CAS No. 6459-94-5) in F344/N Rats (Drinking Water Studies) (NT TR 405; NIR Publ. No.
92-3136), Research Triangle Park, NC, US Department of Health and Ruman Services
Venturini, S. & Tamaro, M. (1979) Mutagenicity of anthraquinone and azo dyes in Ames' Salmonella
tyhimurium test. Mutat. Res., 68,307-312
Woodruff, RC, Mason, J.M., Valencia, R & Zimmering, S. (1985) Chemical mutagenesis testing in
Drosophila. V Results of 53 coded compounds tested for the National Toxicology Program.
Environ. Mutag., 7, 677-702ei PIGMENT RED 3
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 2425-85-6
Replaces CAS Reg. No.: 12238-48-1; 12240-01-6; 12240-02-7; 39310-30-0
Chem. Abstr. Name: 1-((4- Methyl-2-nitrophenyl)azo )-2-naphthalenol
Colour Index No.: 12120
Synonyms: D&C Red No. 35; D and C Red No. 35; 1-(4-methyl-2-nitrophenylazo)-2-
naphthol; 1-( (2-nitro-4-methylphenyl)azo )-2-naphthol; 1 -(ortho-nitro-para-tolylazo )-2-
naphthol; toluidine red
OH N02
N=N~CH3
C17H13N303 MoL. wt: 307.31
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Dark-red powder (Stubbs, 1973; Green, 1990)
(b) Melting-point: 270-272 °C (Green, 1990)
(c) Density: 1.37-1.50 g/cm3 (Stubbs, 1973)
(d) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Pouchert, 1981; Green, 1990; Sadtler Research Labo-
ratories, 1980, 1991; US National Toxicology Program, 1992).
(e) SolubÜity: Slightly soluble in water (0.8 g/l), ethanol (0.7 g/l), ethylene glycol methyl
ether (0.9 g/l), acetone and benzene; very soluble in mineraI spirits, aromatIc
hydrocarbons and plasticizers (Stubbs, 1973; Green, 1990)
L 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Some trade names are: Accosperse Toluidine Red XL; ADC Toluidine Red B; AtIasoI
Spirit Red 3; CP Toluidine Toner A 2989; CP Toluidine Toner A 2990; CP Toluidine Toner
-259-26 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Dark RS 3340; CP Toluidine Toner Deep X 1865; CP Toluidine Toner Light RS 3140; CP
Toluidine Toner RT 6101; CP Toluidine Toner RT 6104; Calcotone Toluidine Red YP;
Carnelio Helio Red; Chromatex Red J; Dainichi Permanent Red 4R; Deep Fastona Red;
Duplex Toluidine Red L20-3140; Eljon Fast Scarlet PV Extra; Eljon Fast Scarlet RN; Enialit
Light Red RL; Fast Red A; Fast Red AB; Fast Red J; Fast Red JE; Fast Red R; Fastona Red B;
Fastona Scarlet RL; Fastona Scarlet YS; Graphtol Red A 4RL; Hansa Red B; Hansa Red G;
Hansa Scarlet RB; Hansa Scarlet RN; Hansa Scarlet RNC; Helio Fast Red BN; Helio Fast
Red RL; Helio Fast Red RN; Helio Red RL; Helio Red Toner; Hispalit Fast Scarlet RN;
Independence Red; Irgalite Fast Red P 4R; Irgalite Fast Scarlet RND; Irgalite Red PV 2;
Irgalite Red RNPX; Irgalite Scarlet RB; Isol Fast Red HB; Isol Fast Red RN 2B; Isol Fast Red
RN 2G; Isol Fast Red RNB; Isol Fast Red RNG; Isol Toluidine Red HB; Isol Toluidine Red
RN 2B; Isol Toluidine Red RN 20; Isol Toluidine Red RNB; Isol Toluidine Red RNG; Japan
Red 221; Japan Red No. 221; Kromon Helio Fast Red; Kromon Helio Fast Red YS; Lake Red
4R; Lake Red 4RII; Lithol Fast Scarlet RN; Lutetia Fast Red 3R; Lutetia Fast Scarlet RF;
Lutetia Fast Scarlet RJN; Monolite Fast Scarlet CA; Monolite Fast Scarlet GSA; Monolite
Fast Scarlet RB; Monolite Fast Scarlet RBA; Monolite Fast Scarlet RN; Monolite Fast
Scarlet RNA; Monolite Fast Scarlet RNV; Monolite Fast Scarlet RT; No. 2 Forthfast Scarlet;
Oralith Red P 4R; Permanent Red 4R; Pigment Red 3; Pigment Red RL; Pigment Scarlet;
Pigment Scarlet B; Pigment Scarlet N; Pigment Scarlet R; Polymo Red FGN; Recolite Fast
Red RBL; Recolite Fast Red RL; Recolite Fast Red RYL; Sanyo Scarlet Pure; Sanyo Scarlet
Pure No. 1000; Scarlet Pigment RN; Segnale Light Red 2B; Segnale Light Red B; Segnale
Light Red BR; Segnale Light Red C 4R; Segnale Light Red RL; Seikafast Red 4R4016; Siegle
Red 1; Siegle Red B; Siegle Red BB; Silogomma Red RLL; Silosol Red RBN; Silosol Red
RN; Siloton Red BRLL; Siloton Red RLL; Symuler Fast Red 4RlOO; Symuler Fast Scarlet
4R; Syton Fast Scarlet RB; Syton Fast Scarlet RD; Syton Fast Scarlet RN; Tertropigment Red
HAB; Tertropigment Scarlet LRN; Toluidine Red 10451; Toluidine Red 3B; Toluidine Red
4R; Toluidine Red BFB; Toluidine Red BFGG; Toluidine Red D 28-3930; Toluidine Red
Light; Toluidine Red M 20-3785; Toluidine Red R; Toluidine Red RT 115; Toluidine Red
Toner; Toluidine Red XL 20-3050; Toluidine Toner; Toluidine Toner Dark 5040; Toluidine
Toner HR-X 2700; Toluidine Toner HR-X 2741; Toluidine Toner Keep HR-X 2742; Toluidine
Toner L 20-3300; Toluidine Toner RT 252; VersaI Scarlet PRNL; VersaI Scarlet RNL;
Vulcafor Scarlet A
Technical grades of CI Pigment Red 3 are available commercially with purities ranging
up to ? 97%. One impurity that has been reported is 1-((4-methoxy-2-nitrophenyl)azo)-2-
naphthalenol (BASF Corp., 1991; AIdrich Chemical Co., 1992; US National Toxicology
Program, 1992).
1. 1.4 Analysis
No data were available to the Working Group.CI PIGMENT RED 3 261
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
CI Pigment Red 3 was first prepared in 1905. It is manufactured by diazotization of
2-nitro-para-toluidine and coupling the resultant diazonium salt with 2-naphthol (Stubbs,
1973; Society of Dyers and Colourists, 1982; Green, 1990).
Approximate US production of CI Pigment Red 3 was 1430 tonnes in 1950,930 tonnes in
1960, 780 tonnes in 1970, 754 tonnes in 1975,460 tonnes in 1980,380 tonnes in 1985 and
350 tonnes in 1990 (Stubbs, 1973; US International Trade Commission, 1977, 1981, 1986,
1991).
1.2.2 Use
CI Pigment Red 3 is one of the most widely used of all red pigments because of its bright
scarlet hue, high tinctorial strength and good stability to acids, alkalis and light. Sorne
limitation is imposed by its relatively poor fastness to organic sol vents. It is widely used inpaints and printing inks. Other uses have included synthetic resin lacquers and leather
finishes, inks for foil and tinplate printing, paper coating and dyeing, wallpaper, linoleum,
carbon papers, tyewriter ribbons, artists' materials and textile printing. It has been used in
rubber, plastics and cement (Society of Dyers and Colourists, 1971; Stubbs, 1973; Green,
1990).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
CI Pigment Red 3 is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
The US Environmental Protection Agency, the American Textile Manufacturers Ins-
titute and the Ecological and Toxicological Association of the Dyestuffs Manufacturing
Industry conducted a joint survey in 1986-87 to estimate airborne concentrations of dye dust
in dye weighing rooms of industrial plants where powder dyes are used in the dyeing and
printing of textiles. The survey was based on a sample of 24 sites chosen at random from
among textile plants where powder dyes are weighed. Although CI Pigment Red 3 was not
among the dyes included in the survey, the results are considered to be representative of dye
dust levels during weighing of this tye of powder dye. The mean airborne concentration of
active colourant in the plants monitored was estimated to be 0.085 mg/m3 (US Environ-
mental Protection Agency, 1990).
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 51 931 workers,
including II 615 women, were potentially exposed to CI Pigment Red 3 in 57 industries (US
National Library of Medicine, 1992).262 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
CI Pigment Red 3 is allowed for use exc1usively in cosme tic products intended to come
into contact only briefly with the skin (Commission of the European Communities, 1976,
1986, 1990).
CI Pigment Red 3 (D&C Red No. 35) was cancelled for use in foods, drugs or cosme ticsin the USA in 1966 (US Food and Drug Administration, 1992).
2. Studies of Cancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of Cancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3 F 1 mice, six weeks old, were fed 0, 12 500, 25 000
or 50 000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) CI Pigment Red 3 (purity ? 97%) in the diet for 103 weeks. At
the end of the experiment (110 weeks), 33/50 control, 28/50 low-dose, 31/50 mid-dose and
33/50 high-dose males, and 39/50 control, 37/50 low-dose, 31/50 mid-dose and 25/50
high-dose females (p .. 0.001) were stil alive. Renal-cell adenomas occurred at a signi-
ficantly higher incidence in high-dose male mice than in con trois (control, 0/50; low-dose,
0/50; mid-dose, 0/50; high-dose, 6/50;p = 0.017, logistic regression test); and follicular-cell
adenoma of the thyroid gland occUfred with a positive trend in male mice (control, 0/50;
low-dose, 0/49; mid-dose, 1/50; high-dose, 5/50; p = 0.001, logistic regression trend test)
(US National Toxicology Program 1992).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344/N rats, six weeks old, were fed 0, 6000,
12 500 or 25000 ppm (mg/kg) CI Pigment Red 3 (purity ? 97%) in the di et for 103 weeks. At
the end of the experiment (110 weeks), 28/50 control, 40/50 low-dose, 28/50 mid-dose and
20/50 high-dose males, and 32/50 control, 41/50 low-dose, 39/50 mid-dose and 40/50 high-
dose females were stil alive. ln male rats, the incidence of benign adrenal phaeochromo-
cyomas was significantly increased in the mid- and high-dose groups compared to con troIs
(control, 22/50; low-dose, 29/50; mid-dose, 35/50; high-dose, 34/50; p = 0.004, logistic
regression trend test). ln female rats, hepatocellular adenomas occurred with a positive
trend, with a significantly greater incidence in the high-dose group than in the control group
(control, 0/50; low-dose, 0/50; mid-dose, 1/50; high-dose, 10/50; p = 0.001, logistic
regression test) (US National Toxicology Program, 1992).CI PIGMENT RED 3263
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.1.2 Experimental systems
The absorption of CI Pigment Red 3 (purity, 94.7 %) was studied in male Fischer 344
rats, seven to eight weeks of age, given the compound once at 11.8 mg/kg bw suspended in
corn oil by gavage. Gut contents, faeces and various tissues were extracted 1, 4, 24 and 48 h
after dosing and the amount of parent compound present was determined. None was found in
blood, liver or kidneys, and it was concluded that the compound is not absorbed from the
intestinal tract. Recovery after 48 h was 72.4% of the dose, suggesting that the compound
may be partly degraded by intestinal bacteria. (The Working Group noted that absorption of
cleavage products or metabolites was not analysed.)
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
CI Pigment Red 3 has been associated with contact dermatitis following cosmetic use
(Sugai et al., 1977).
4.2.2 Experimental systems
CI Pigment Red 3 (purity greater than 97%) was tested for toxicity in groups of five
(14-day study) and 10 male and 10 female Fischer 344 rats and B6C3Fi mice in a range-
finding study for carcinogenicity testing (Morgan et al., 1989; US National Toxicology
Program, 1992). The compound was mixed Into the feed at concentrations of 0,6000, 12500,
25 000, 50 000 or 100 000 ppm (mg/kg) and administered for 14 days, or at concentrations of
0,3000,6000, 12500,25000 or 50 000 ppm (mg/kg) and administered for 90 days. Female
rats gained less weight than controls with all doses in both studies. The liver weightbody
weight ratio increased significantly in male and female rats with all doses in both studies, and
the kidney weight:body weight ratio in all males except the 6000 ppm group in the 90-day
study. Body weight gains of mice treated for 90 days did not differ from those of con troIs. Thehaematocrit and haemoglobin concentrations were decreased in a dose-related manner in
rats after 14 and 90 days, and reticulocyosis occurred at dose levels of 25 000 and 100 000
after 14 days and at all dose levels after 90 days in both males and females. These changes
were observed to a lesser extent in mice. Histological lesions were seen in both species, which
consisted ofhaematopoietic cell proliferation in the bone marrow, spleen, liver and kidney in
the 90-day study.
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal efTects
No data were available to the Working Group.26 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 1 and Appendices 1 and 2)
CI Pigment Red 3 was not mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium, except in the presence
of an exogenous metabolic system from hamster (but not rat) liver, when it was weakly
mutagenic at precipitating doses. It did not induce sister chromatid exchange or chromo-
somal aberrations in cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells.
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
CI Pigment Red 3, one of the most widely used red pigments, is found in paints, inks,
plastics, rubber and textiles.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
CI Pigment Red 3 was tested for carcinogenicity by administration in the diet in one
study in mice and in one study in rats. ln male mice, it induced follcular-cell adenomas of the
thyroid and renal-cell adenomas. There was an increased incidence of adrenal phaeochro-
mocyomas in male rats and of hepatocellular adenomas in female rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
CI Pigment Red 3 did not induce gene mutation in bacteria or sister chromatid exchange
or chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian cells.
5.5 Evaluationl
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of Ci Pigment Red 3.
There is limited evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of CI Pigment
Red 3.
lFor definition of the italicized tenns, see Preamble, pp. 2630.Table 1. Genetic and related efTects of CI Pigment Red 3
Test systemResul t
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWith
exogenous
metabolic
systemDosea Reference
(LED/HID)
SAD, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation
SAD, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster oval) cells in vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary ceiiS in vitro_b
b500.~~
167.00c
167.00c
167.OOc
500.~~
167.OOc
160. ()
160,~~Miyagoshi et al. (1983)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
Miyagoshi et al. (1983)
Mortelmans et al. (1986)
US National Toxicology
Program (1992)
US National Toxicology
Program (1992)
-, negative
a:n-vitro tests, jJg/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
bNegative with rat liver S9, weakly positive with hamster liver S9 at precipitating doses
Cfigher doses contained precipitate(J-
"i-o
a:
m
~::
m
U
w
~VI26 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Overall evaluation
CI Pigment Red 3 cannot be classified as to ils carcinogenicity to humans (Group 3).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 1203
BASF Corp. (1991) Material Safety Data Sheet: SICO Red NB L 3740 (Pigment Red 3), Parsippany, NJ
Commission of the European Communities (1976) Council Directive 76/768/EEC of27 July 1976. Off
lEur. Commun., L262, 169-20
Commission of the European Communities (1986) Commission Directive 861179/EEC of 28 February
1986 (Seventh Adaptation to Technical Progress of Council Directive 761768/EEC of 27 July
1976). Off 1. Eur. Commun., L138, 40
Commission of the European Communities (1990) ProposaI for a Council Directive on the approxi-
mation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products. Off 1. Eur. Commun.,
C322, 29-77
El Dareer, S.M, Tilery, K.E & Hil, D.L. (1984) Investigations on the disposition of oral doses of sorne
water-insoluble pigments. Bull. environ. Contam. Toxicol.,32, 171-174
Green, EJ. (199) The Sigma-Aldrich Handbook of Stains, Dyes and Indicators, Milwaukee, WI,
Aldrich Chemical Co., p. 716
Miyagoshi, M., Hayakawa, Y. & Nagayama, T. (1983) Studies on the mutagenicity of cosmetic azo-
dyes. Eisei Kagaku (1. hyg. Chem.), 29, 212-220
Morgan, D.L., Jameson, C.W, Mennear, J.H. & Pre jean, J.D. (1989) 14-Day and 9O-day toxicity
studies of CI Pigment Red 3 in Fischer 344 rats and B6C3F 1 mice. Food Chem. Toxicol., 27,
793-80
Mortelmans, K., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T., Speck, W, Tainer, B. & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests II. Results from the testing of 270 chemicals. Environ. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 7),
1-119
Pouchert, C.J. (1981) The Aldrich Library of Infrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 1456
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1980 Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1981-1991 Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1971) Colour Index, 3rd ed., VoL. 3, Bradford, Yorkshire, pp. 3298-
3299
Society of Dyers and Colourists (1982) Colour Index, 3rd ed., Pigments and Solvent Dyes, Bradford,
Yorkshire, p. 28
Stubbs, D.H. (1973) Toluidine, para and chlornitraniline reds. ln: Patton, T.c., ed., Pigment Hand-
book, VoL. 1, Properties and Economies, New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 461-472
Sugai, T., Takahashi, Y. & Takagi, T. (1977) Pigmented cosmetic dermatitis and coal tar dyes. Contact
Derm., 3, 249-256
US Environmental Protection Agency (1990) Texile Dye Weighing Monitoring Study (EPA Report No.
EPA-560/5-90-00, Main Report and Site Visit Reports), Washington DC, Offce of Toxic
SubstancesCI PIGMENT RED 3 2J7
US Food and Drug Administration (1992) Cancellation of certificates. US Code fed. Regul., 21, part
81.30, pp. 36369
US International Trade Commission (1977) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, US Production and Sales,
1975 (USITC Publication 80), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, p. 79
US International Trade Commission (1981) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, US Production and Sales,
1980 (USITC Publication 1183), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, p. 103
US International Trade Commission (1986) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, US Production and Sales,
1985 (USITC Publication 1892), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p. 87
US International Trade Commission (1991) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, US Production and Sales,
1990 (USITC Publication 2470), Washington DC, US Government Printing Office, p. 5-2
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Taxie Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
QK4247(0), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1992) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of CI Pigment Red 3
(CAS No. 2425-85-6) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Feed Studies) (Nf TR 407; NIH PubL.
No. 92-3138), Research Triangle Park, NC, US Department of Health and Human SeivIcesAROMATIC AMINES4,4'-METHYENEBIS(2-eHLOROANILINE) (MOeA)
This substance was evaluated by previous working groups, in 1973 (IARC, 1974) and
1987 (lARC, 1987a). Since that time, new data have become available, and these have been
incorporated Into the monograph and taken into consideration in the evaluation.
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 101-14-4; replaces 29371-14-0; 51065-07-7; 78642-65-6
Chem. Abstr. Name: 4,4'- Methylenebis(2-chlorobenzenamine)
IUPAC Systematic Name: 4,4'-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)
Synonyms: Bis( 4-amino-3-chlorophenyl)methane; bis(3-chloro-4-aminophenyl)me-
thane; 3,3' -dichloro-4,4' -diaminodiphenylmethane; MBOCA; methylenebis(3-chloro-
4-aminobenzene); 4,4' -methylenebis(ortho-chloroaniline)CI CI
H2N~CH2-1 NH,
C13Hi2CI2N2 MoL. wt: 267.16
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties
From American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (1990a), unless
otherwse noted
(a) Description: Light-brown (technical material) to colourless crystallne (pure
compound) (Anon., 1985) solid with a faint amine-like odour
(b) Melting-point: 100-109 °C
(c) Specific gravity: 1.44 at 4 °C
(d) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuc1ear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981;
Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1991).
(e) Solubility: Slightly soluble in water (13.9 mg/l) (Voorman & Penner, 1986); very
soluble in benzene, diethyl ether and ethanoL. It is also soluble in (g/100 ml): tri-
chloroethylene, 4.2; toluene, 7.5; ethoxyethyl acetate, 34.4; methyl ethyl ketone,
43.0; tetrahydrofuran, 55.5; dimethylformamide, 61.7; and dimethyl sulfoxide, 75.0
-271-272 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(j Vapour pressure: 1.3 x 10-5 mm Hg (1.7 mPa) at 60°C
(g) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): log P, 3.94 (US National Library of Medicine,1992)
(h) Conversion factor: mg/m3 = 10.9 x ppm1
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
Some trade names of MOCA are Bisamine S; Bisamine A, Cuamine M; Cuamine MT;
Curalin M, Curalon M; Curene 442; Diamet Kh; LD 813; Millionate M; Quodorole
Commercial-grade MOCA was originally offered in flake form, for a short period in the
1960s; it is currently available as granules (prill), pellets (pastilles) and as a liquid mixture
premixed with polyhydric alcohols (polyols). It is available at a purity of 99.7-99.8%, with
2-chloroaniline as a tyical impurity (0.1-0.3% by weight) (PEDCo Environmental, 1984;
Anon, 1985; Palmer Davis Seika, 1992; US National Library of Medicine, 1992; Ihara
Chemical Industry Co., undated).
1. 1.4 Analysis
Several methods for the analysis of MOCA in various matrices are presented in Table 1.
The method of the US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (1990) for 4,4'-
methylenedianiline can also be used for the analysis of MOCA in air.
MOCA is excreted primarily as a heat-Iabile glucuronide metabolite; very little is elimi-
nated as acetylated metabolites. The latter can be hydrolysed to the parent compound by
heating under acidic conditions (Linch et al., 1971; Ward et al., 1986; Cocker et al., 1988,
1990). ln order to detect unmetabolized MOCA and the glucuronide conjugate in urine
samples, heat hydrolysis should be performed before analysis (Cocker et aL., 1990; Lowr &
Clapp, 1992). MOCA detected without hydrolysis is referred to as 'free' MOCA.
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
The manufacture of MOCA is based on the reaction of formaldehyde (see IARC, 1982a,
1987b) and 2-chloroaniline (Anon., 1985).
MOCA was developed and marketed in the mid-1950s and was first reported to the US
Tariff Commission in 1956 (US Tariff Commission, 1957). It was manufactured by two
companies in the USA, both of which had ceased production by 1980. US production started
at approximately 500 tonnes per year and was estimated to have reached 1500 tonnes by
1970. Since 1980, aIl MOCA used in the USA has been imported from Japan (Ward et al.,
1987) and Thiwan. There are currently approximately 100 industrial users of MOCA in the
USA.
lCalculated from: mg/m3 = (molecular weight/24.45) x ppm, assuming normal temperature (25°C) and
pressure (760 mm Hg (101.3 kPDMOCA 273
Table 1. Methods for the analysis of MOCA
Sample Sample preparationAssay Limit of Referencematriprocedure detection
Ai Adsorb on silica gel; desorb with HPLC/UV 3 i.g/m3 Thylor (1977)methanol
Collect on glass fibre filter; extract with HPLC/ECD 100 ng/m3 Pumell & Warwickmethanol(1981)Collect on acid-treated glass, extract with GC/ECD 440 ng/m3 US Occupationaltoluene; derivatize with heptafuoro-Safety and Health
butyc anhydrideAdministration
(1988)Prepolymer Dissolve in a solution of tetrahydrofuran HPLC/UV NR Becker et al. (1974)saturated with ammonia or of dioxane
Polymer Extract with toluene; concentrate and GC NR Becker et aL. (1974)react with triuoroacetic anhydride
Extract with toluene HPLC/UV NR Becker et al. (1974)
Soil Filter aqueous extract; preconcentrate on HPLC/ECD :; 1 i.g/kg Rice & Kissingerreverse-phase chromatography column(1981)Urie Adjust pH to ? 12; extract with diethyl GC/ECD li.g/i ElIer (1985)ether:hexane solution; convert to hepta-
fluorobutyryl derivative with heptafluoro-
butyric anhydride
Adjust pH to 9.5; extract with diethyl GCIFID li.g/i Van Roosmalen et aL.ether; wash, dry, concentrate and puri(1981)by TLC; extract and convert to triuoro-
acetyl derivative
Clean up sample, extract with dichloro- HPLC/PCD li.g/i Ducos et al. (1985);methaneLowiy & Clapp
(1992)Extract with acetonitrile; precolumn HPLC/UV 20 ng Trippel-Schulte et al.enrichment HPLC/ECD 2.2 ng(1986)Alkaline hydrolysis at 95°C; extract with HPLC/UV 1 ng McKerrell et al.hexane(10 i.g/1) (1987)Hydrolyse at 80 cC; extract with diethyl GC/MS NR Cocker et al. (199)ether; derivatize with heptafluorobutyiyl
chloride
Preserve sample with citric acid; alkalize GC/ECD 1i.g/1 US Nationalsample to pH 12; extract with diethylInstitute forether:hexane; derivatize with penta-Occupational Safetyfluoropropionic anhydrideand Health (1984)
Water Filter sample; preconcentrate on reverse- LC/ECD :; 1 J.g/i Rice & Kisingerphase chromatography column(1981)
Abbrevitions: HPLC/uv high-performance liquid chromatography/ultraviolet detection; HPLC/ECD,
high-performance liquid chromatography/electrochemical detection; GC/ECD, gas chromatography/elec-
tron capture detection; NR, not reported; GCIFID, gas chromatography/fame ioniztion detection; TLC,
thin-Iayer chromatography; HPLC/PCD, high-performance liquid chromatography/photocnductivity detec-
tion; GC/MS, gas chromatography/mass spectrometiy; LC/ECD, liquid chromatography/elctrochemical
detection274 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Only one firm in the United Kingdom has manufactured MOCA ln 1979, about
100 tonnes of MOCA were used in about 70 factories; by 1983, only 36 industrial users of
MOCA had been identified, and the number of workers exposed was about 200 (Locke,
1986). MOCA is no longer manufactured in the United Kingdom.
ln 1972, world production was about 3300 tonnes (Wil et aL., 1981). Currently, there are
three major producers in the world: two in Japan and one in Thiwan. ln the early 1980s, Japan
produced approximately 2000 tonnes of MOCA per year; in the mid-1980s, the level was
3000 tonnes; and by the early 1990s, the level was approximately 3600 tonnes. Japan exports
40-60% of its production, approximately 900-1000 tonnes going to the USA, 450 to Europe
and 450 to Southeast Asia, Canada, Brazil, South Afica and Australia. Taiwan currently
produces 1000 tonnes per year, with 450 tonnes exported to Japan and 45-90 tonnes to the
USA. Small quantities may also be produced in the Republic of Korea and France (Chemical
Information Servces, 1991).
1.2.2 Use
MOCA is used principally as a curing agent for polyurethane prepolymers in the
manufacturing of high-performance, specialized, castable urethane rubber products (see
IARC, 1982b, 1987c). Mouldings such as industrial tyes and roll ers, shock absorption pads
and conveyor belting are among the wide variety of uses (Anon., 1985; American Conference
of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 1990a). A use of MOCA that is specific to Japan and
the Far East is as a curing agent in roofing and wood sealing.
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccu"ence
MOCA is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
Occupational exposure to MOCA may occur through inhalation, ingestion and skin
absorption: because of its low vapour, it can be inhaled as a dust when processed in a dry
form; poor personal hygiene can allow contamination of the hands and ingestion while eating
or smoking; however, the most likely route of exposure is thought to be by skin absorption
after contact with contaminated surfaces (Linch et al., 1971; Clapp et al., 1991; Lowr &
Clapp, 1992). Evaluations of sources of exposure have included sampling of air, work
surfaces (e.g., wipe) and urine of potentially exposed workers.
Urinary levels as high as 25000 ¡.g/l were reported when MOCA was first produced in a
full-scale commercial manufacturing plant in the USA in 1962; however, the analytical
methods used were non-specific. By 1970, more specific analytical methods had been
developed that involved acid hydrolysis of initial urine samples, and better work practices
and engineering con troIs had been implemented. The average urinary level in four workers
involved in pelletizing and packaging MOCA at the sa me plant was found by gas
chromatography to be 695 ¡.g/l (range, 70-1500 ¡.g/l); personal air levels were generally
below the detection limit of 10 ¡.g/m3, and the workers wore respirators. Average urinaryMOCA 275
concentrations in workers in MOCA production were 620 J.g/I in 1969 and 250 J.g/I in 1970,
when local ventilation, fresh daily clothing, wash-down of the operating area twce daily and
use of butyl rubber gloves were introduced. The authors conc1uded that inhalation was not
the primary route of exposure (Linch et al., 1971).
The extent of exposure to MOCA was determined in 19 factories in France during the
early 1980s (Ducos et aL., 1985). ln more than 340 analyses of urine from 150 workers,
MOCA was present at below the detection limit of 0.5 J.g/I up to levels of 1600 J.g/l. The
levels of 'free' MOCA, determined by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in
urine samples in specific factories are presented in Table 2, which shows dramatic decreases
in urinary levels after modifications in the handling of MOCA were instituted.
Table 2. Occupational exposure to MOCA in France
Process Year Before No. of U rinary
surveyed or after samples/ concentration
improvements workers (ltg/l)
MeanRange
Production of crystal MOCA 1982 Before 12 workers 60
(1 plant) 1983 After 53 samples 46202
Blending of solid MOCA with polyol 1982 Before 4 workers 318 75-940
(1 plant) 1983 After 3 workers 51-9
Production of urethane elastomers 1982 Before 22 workers 10043-156from solid pellets of MOCA or in 1984 After 25 workers 2618-34
solution (2 plants)
From Ducos et al. (1985)
ln a plastics manufacturing and processing plant in Germany, 49 urine samples collected
randomly from workers were found (using reversed-phase HPLC with ultraviolet detection)
to contain between 15 (limit of detection) and 100 J.g/l of 'free' MOCA. Concentrations in
work place air were not determined (Will et al., 1981).
ln the United Kingdom, urine samples were taken from workers in a polyurethane
plastics manufacturing company every month during 1978-82 (Thomas & Wilson, 1984). The
process involved melting of pelletized MOCA before blending it with liquid polymer. Afer
improvements designed to prevent exposures, urinary concentrations of 50 nmol/mmol crea-
tinine (about 1300 J.g/l) of 'free' MOCA were gradually reduced to less than 5 nmol/mmol
creatinine (130 J.g/I) by 1982.
ln Japan, airborne levels and urinary concentrations of MOCA were determined (by
HPLC with electrochemical detection) for five workers making polyurethane elastomer
products (Ichikawa et aL., 1990). Average airborne concentrations of 0.2-0.5 J.g/m3 were
measured over one week for four workers who transferred dry MOCA into a mixing vessel
and processed elastomer tubes; a worker who poured hot elastomer mix was exposed to an
average air concentration of 8.9 J.g/m3. The mean urinary concentrations at the end of each
working day were 2.4-64.0 J.g/g creatinine (about 4-120 J.g/l) for the four workers and
96.6 J.g/g creatinine (200 J.g/I) for the worker who poured the mix (not specified whether276 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
'free' or hydrolysed). There was no significant difference between preshift and postshift
urinary concentrations. It was estimated that only 0.5-5% of the total exposure was due to
inhalation.
Monitoring of 'free' MOCA concentrations in urine, using non-specific thin-layer chro-
matography, was performed on a voluntary basis by several companies in the USA after 1978
(Lowr & Clapp, 1992); in 1984, the analysis was made more specific by introducIng HPLC.
Between 1980 and 1983,3323 urinary samples were analysed from 54 companies: the MOCA
levels exceeded 50 l1g/1 in 16.9% of all samples and exceeded 100 l1g/1 in 9.2% (Ward et al.,
1987). ln 1985, the urinary concentration exceeded 50 l1gll in 12% of ail samples tested; in
1990, 8% of all samples exceeded that level (Lowr & Clapp, 1992).
ln Western Australia, urinary levels of 'free' MOCA were determined by gas chromato-
graphy in workers in five of seven companies where MOCA was used in the manufacture of
polyurethane polymers from 1984 onwards (Wan et al., 1989). The initial levels were at a
geometric mean of 30 l1g/l; after a training programme on the safe use of MOCA, the level
was reduced to 10 l1g/L.
Urinary levels of MOCA were reported at a plant in the USA which made cast poly-
urethane products (Clapp et al., 1991). Of 77 samples collected and analysed by HPLC, five
contained more than 50 l1g/l; ail were from workers who mixed pelletized MOCA (Table 3).
The level of MOCA in 40 samples of personal air was below the limit of detection
(.. 0.02 l1g/m3) in 88%; in the remainder, the level was less than 1 l1g/m3.
Table 3. Distribution of urinary levels of MOCA in workers
in a cast polyurethane products plant iD the USA
Job No. of No. of samples with mean concentration of
workers MOCA (¡.g/l urie)U
ND -c 55-5050100 :; 100Total
Mixer 2 00 53 2 10
Moulder 16 103220 035
Clean-up man 1 10 30 0 4Trimer 3 40 00 0 4
Supervisor 2 50 00 0 5
Offce employee 7 140 00 0 14
From Clapp et al. (1991); ND, not detected
ONormalized to specifie gravity of 1.019; limit of detection, 5 ¡.g/l
ln an accidental exposure in the USA, a 30-year old male polyurethane moulder accI-
dentally sprayed molten MOCA (approximately 3 gallons (l 1.4 ID over his upper body and
extremities, where it remained for several seconds. He was wearing trousers, a shirt with
rolled-up sleeves, asbestos gloves, safety glasses and a respirator. He did not ingest any
MOCA, and the duration of exposure was limited by removing his clothing, showering and
washing gently within approximately 45 min of the initial exposure. Analysis of his urine 4 h
after the exposure showed a peak concentration of 1700 l.g/l; the urinary level remained
above 100 l.g/l for four days (Osorio et al., 1990). ln a separate accident, a worker wasMOCA277
sprayed in the face with hot liquid MOCA, some of which entered his mouth. His eyes and
face were washed immediately. The urinary concentration was 3600 l.g/l (1400 l.g/g crea-
tinine) 5 h after exposure (Hosein & Van Roosmalen, 1978).
A survey of the concentrations of MOCA on work surfaces during various operations in
39 plants representing 10-20% of aIl the polyurethane plants using MOCA in the USA is
summarized in Thble 4 (PEDCo Environmental, 1984).
Table 4. Surface contaminations du ring some processes involving MOCA
in the USA
Process No. of No. of Mean sudace
facilities samples concentration
(i.Lg/100 cm2)
Storage and manual transfer of solid MOCA 18 37 847to melting operations
Manual transfer of molten MOCA to mixng8 9 1650operation and mixg
Storage and manual transfer of liquid MOCA 8 25 30
to mixg with other compounds
Manual mixg of liquid MOCA with other3 4 15 00compounds
From PEDCo Environmental (1984)
1.3.3Uiter, sediments and soil
Extensive environmental contamination with MOCA on several hundred hectares of
land surrûunding a MOCA plant was found in 1979 in Adrian, MI, USA Levels up to several
miligrams per kilogram were found in gardens and community recreation areas. MOCA was
also found in the urine of factory workers and of young children living in the contaminated
area (Keeslar, 1986). The concentrations in sediment samples collected from the lagoon used
by the plant ranged from 1600 to 3800 ppm (mg/kg dry weight). Effuent water from the
lagoon had a concentration of 250 ppb (l.g/l), deep well-water from under the plant had a
concentration of 1.5 ppb, and surface run-off water had a concentration of 1 ppb. Activated
sludge from the sewage-treatment plant contained an estimated 18 ppm (mg/kg). MOCA
was not detected in sewage-treatment plant influent or effuent water (detection limit, 0.5
ppb (j.g/I)) or in the water of a river located near the plant (detection limit, 0.1 ppb) (Parris
et al., 1980; Verschueren, 1983; Fishbein, 1984).
MOCA is rapidly bound to the soil matrix and probably exists largely as covalent
adducts. Some MOCA was metabolized by oxidation of the methylene bridge to a benzo-
phenone derivative, 4,4' -diamino-3,3' -dichlorobenzophenone, presumably by microbial
activity (Voorman & Penner, 1986).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
Occupational exposure limits and guidelines for MOCAin sorne countries are presented
in Thble 5.278 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 5. Occupational exposure limits and guidelines for MOCA
Country Year Concentration Interpretation Classification
(mg/m3) as carcinogen
0.22 (s) 1WA
0.22 (s) 1WA
Yes
0.2 (s) 1WA
0.6 (s) STEL
0.22 1WA
Yes
0.22 (s) 1WA
0.22 (s) 1WA
0.22 (s) 1WA
Yes
0.02 (s) 1WA
0.D05 (s) 1WA(MEL)
0.11 (s)a 1W A (TV)
0.D03 1W A (REL)
0.22 (s) 1W A (pEL)
0.22 (s) 1WAAustralia
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
France
GermanyItaly 1978Mexico 1983
Netherlands 1989
Sweden
Switzerland 1992
United Kingdom
USAACGIH 1992NIOSH 199OSHA 199
Venezuela 1978
From National Swedish Board of Occupational Safety and Health (1984); Health
and Safety Executive (1985); Cook (1987); American Conference of Governmental
Industril Hygienists (ACGIH) (199b, 1992); ILO (1991); Caisse Nationale Assu-
rance (1992)
Abbrevitions: 1W A time-weighted average; STEL, short-term expsure limit;
MEL, maxum expsure level; TLV; threshold limit value; NIOSH, National In-
stitute of Occupational Safety and Health; OSHA Occupational Safety and
Health Administration; REL, recommended expsure level; PEL, permissible ex-
posure level; (s), ski notation
llntended change to 0.11 mg/m3 for 1992-93, with notation Ai, suspected human
carcinogen (American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists, 1992)
ln the European Economic Community, MOCA is classified as a category 2 carcinogen,
substances that should be regarded as if theywere carcinogenic to man, and is labelled as R45
(may cause cancer) (Commission ofthe European Communities, 1967, 1991). Since MOCA
may cause cancer, the Council Directive on protection of workers from risks related to
exposure to carcinogens at work applies (Commission of the European Communities, 1990),
which requires employers to replace carcinogenic agents or to take measures to prevent or
reduce exposure.
ln Germany, MOCA is classified with Ai compounds, which are considered to have been
proven to be carcinogenic only in animal experimentation but under conditions comparable
to those of possible human exposure at the workplace (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft,
1992). MOCA has been cJassified as a carcinogen in Denmark since 1976 (Arbejdstilsyet,
1977) and in the Netherlands since 1989.MOCA 279
The recommended maximum exposure level for MOCA in the United Kingdom was
200 iig/m3 over 8 h, until 1979, when a control limit of 50 iig/m3 was recommended. ln 1984,
after consideration of studies on MOCA, the control limit was lowered to 5 iig/m3 (Locke,
1986). ln Switzerland, the limit value for occupational exposure to MOCA was recently
lowered from 0.22 mg/m3 to 0.02 mg/m3 (Caisse Nationale Assurance, 1992).
ln the USA, the only biological exposure limit for MOCA is that of the State of Cali-
fornia, of 100 iig/l in urine (State of California, 1992). The American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (1992) announced an intended change of the present
time-weighted threshold limit value of 0.22 mg/m3 to 0.11 mg/m3 in 1992-93.
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
2.1 Descriptive studies
Up to 1971, a total of 209 employees had had potential contact with MOCA in the
Chambers Works, New Jersey, USA, where manufacture began in 1954 (Linch et al., 1971).
No case of cancer of the bladder was mentioned in the medical records of the company.
ln a review, Cartwight (1983) reported that a cohort study was un der way in a plantwhere MOCA was manufactured and where 13 new cases of bladder cancer had occurred
within a period of a few years. The number was stated as being far larger than that which
would be expected.
A study was undertaken in a small plant in Michigan, USA, where MOCA had been
produced between 1968 and 1979. Ali 532 workers employed in 1968-79 and an addition al20 workers first employed in 1980 and 1981 who had had possible exposure owing to
contamination of the plant site were included (Ward et al., 1988, 1990). The median duration
of employment was 3.2 months. The workers mâY have been heavily exposed, since urinary
levels of MOCA several months after production had ceased were reported to have ranged
up to 50 000 iig/L. The workers had not been exposed to benzidine or ß-naphthylamine. Of
the 552 predominantly white (89.5%) workers, 452 participated in a telephone intervew in
1981 and 385 participated in a urine screening examination. Three asymptomatic bladder
tumours were identified. After a 28-year-old worker was diagnosed with a noninvasive
papilary transitional-cell tumour, the screening procedure was supplemented for sorne
workers with cystoscopy. A second worker, aged 29 years, was diagnosed with a papilary
bladder neoplasm, and, in a subsequent round of screening, a third, 44-year-old worker was
diagnosed with a papilary transitional-cell carcinoma of the bladder. The expected number
of bladder tumours could not be calculated, as no valid comparison rates of asymptomatic
bladder tumours were available.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental Animais
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 25 male and 25 female HaM/ICR mice, six to eight weeks old, were fed diets
containing 0, 1000 or 2000 mg/kg of di et (ppm) MOCA as the hydrochloride (97% pure) for28 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
18 months. Survving animais were kiled 24 months after the start of the study; about 55% of
the control and treated mice were still alive at 20-22 months. The effective numbers of
animaIs at the end of the study were: males-control, 18; low-dose, 13; high-dose, 20;
females-control, 20; low-dose, 21; high-dose, 14. Haemangiomas or haemangiosarcomas
(mainlysubcutaneous) combined occurred in 0/18 control, 3/13 low-dose and 8/20 high-dose
male mIce. 'Hepatomas' occurred in 0/20 control, 9/21 low-dose and 7/14 high-dose female
mice (p -c 0.01, Fisher exact test). The incidence of lymphosarcomas and reticulum-cell
sarcomas was decreased in treated females. The authors stated that the incidence ofvascular
tumours in the high-dose animaIs was comparable to that in historical controls of the same
strain (Russfield et al., 1975).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 25 male and 25 female Wistar rats, 100 days (14 weeks) of age, were fed 0 or
1000 mg/kg of diet (ppm) MOCA (purity unspecified) in a protein-deficient diet (not
otherwse specified) for 500 days (71 weeks) (total dose, 27 g/kg bw), followed by an obser-
vation period on protein-deficient diet. Animais were kiled when moribund; mean survval
oftreated males and females was 565 days (81 weeks) and 535 days (76 weeks), respectively,
and mean survval of male and female controls on a similar diet was 730 days (104 weeks). Of
the 25 treated males, 23 died with tumours; 'hepatomas' occurred in 22/25 (p -c 0.001, Fisher
exact test), and lung tumours (mainly carcinomas) in 8/25 (p = 0.002, Fisher exact test).
Among the treated females, 20 rats died with tumours; 'hepatomas' occurred in 18/25
(p -c 0.001 Fisher exact test), and lung tumours were observed in 5/25 fp = 0.025, Fisher
exact test). No 'hepatoma' or lung tumour was observed among control animaIs (Grundmann
& Steinhoff, 1970).
Groups of 25 male Charles River CD- 1 rats, six to eight weeks old, were administered
diets containing 0,500 or 1000 mg/kg of di et (ppm) MOCA as the hydrochloride (97% pure)
for 18 months. AlI survving animaIs were kiled 24 months after the start of the study; about
55% of the control and treated animaIs were stil alive at 20-22 months. The effective
numbers were: 22 control, 22 low-dose and 19 high-dose animaIs. 'Hepatomas' occurred in
0/22 control, 1/22 low-dose and 4/19 high-dose rats (p -c 0.05, Cochran-Armitage trend test)
(Russfield et al., 1975). (The Working Group noted the small number of animaIs used in the
study. )
Groups of 50 males and 50 female Charles River CD rats, 36 days (5 weeks) of age were
administered 0 (control) or 1000 mglkg of diet (ppm) MOCA (~ 95 % pure) in a standard diet
(23% protein) for life. The average duration of the experiment was 560 days (80 weeks) for
treated males, 548 days (78 weeks) for treated females, 564 days (80 weeks) for male controls
and 628 days (89 weeks) for female controls. Six animaIs from each group were sacrificed at
one year for interim evaluation. Lung adenocarcinomas occurred in 21/44 (p -c 0.05, X2 test)
treated males and 27/44 (p -c 0.05, X2 test) treated females. An additional squamous-cell
carcinoma of the lung was observed in one treated male and one treated female. No lung
tumour was observed among control animaIs. Lung adenomatosis, considered to be a
preneoplastic lesion, developed in 14/44 treated males and 11/44 treated females and in
1/44 male controls and 1/44 female controls (p .c 0.05). Pleural mesotheliomas occurred in
4/44 treated males and 2/44 treated females; no such tumour was observed among controls.MOCA 281
Hepatocellular adenomas and hepatocellular carcinomas occurred in 3/44 and 3/44 treated
males and in 2/44 and 3/44 treated females, respectively, but not in controls. Ingestion of
MOCA resulted in a lower incidence of pituitary tumours in treated females than in controls
(1/44 versus 12/44) (Stula et al., 1975).
ln the same study, another 25 males and 25 females were administered 0 (control) or
1000 ppm MOCA ('" 95% pure) in a low-protein diet (7%) for 16 months. Six animaIs from
each group were sacrificed at one year for interim evaluation. The average duration of the
experiment was 400 days (57 weeks) for treated males, 423 days (60 weeks) for treated
females, 384 days (55 weeks) for control males and 466 days (66 weeks) for control females.
Lung adenocarcinomas occurred in 5/21 treated males (p oe 0.05, X2 test) and 6/21 females
(p oe 0.05, X2 test); no such tumour developed in 21 untreated male or female controls.
Hepatocellular adenomas occurred in 5/21 treated males (p oe 0.05, X2 test) and 2/21 treated
females; hepatocellular carcinomas were observed in 11/21 treated males (p ~ 0.05, X2 test)
and 1/21 treated females; no hepatocellular tumour was observed among 21 untreated males
or females. Fibroadenomas of the mammary gland occurred in 1/21 treated and 7/21 control
female rats (p oe 0.05). Mammary gland adenocarcinomas developed in 6/21 treated female
rats and in 0/21 untreated females (p oe 0.05, X2 test) (Stula et al., 1975).
Groups of 100, 100, 75 and 50 male Charles River CD rats, 35 days (5 weeks) of age,
were fed either a 'protein-adequate' (27%) diet containing 0,250,500 or 1000 mg/kg of diet
(ppm) MOCA (industrial grade (purity unspecified)) or a 'protein-deficient' (8%) dietcontaining 0, 125, 250 and 500 ppm MOCA for 18 months followed by a 32-week
observation period. AnimaIs were sacrificed at 104 weeks. Administration of MOCA was
assocÍated with decreased survval in both groups: me an survval time (weeks) was:
'protein-adequate' diet: control, 89; low-dose, 87; mid-dose, 80 (p ~ 0.01); high-dose, 65
(p oe 0.001); 'protein-deficient' di et: control, 87; low-dose, 81; mid-dose, 79; high-dose, 77
(p oe 0.05). The numbers of rats on the 'protein-adequate' diet still alive at week 104 were:
control, 20/100; low-dose, 14/100; mid-dose, 10/75; and high-dose, 0/50 (at 84 weeks, there
were six survving rats). The numbers of animaIs on the 'protein-deficient' diet stil al ive at
week 104 were: control, 34/100; low-dose, 22/100; mid-dose, 14/75; and high-dose, 5/50.
MOCA induced several tumour tyes in both groups; the incidences of the predominant
tumours are shown in Table 6. Dose-related increases Ín the incidences of lung tumours,
mammary adenocarcinomas, Zymbal gland carcinomas and hepatocellular carcinomas were
observed in both experiments. The highest tumour incidence was observed in the lung. An
increased incidence of haemangiosarcomas was observed only in the group on the
'protein-deficient' diet. ln groups given 500 ppm MOCA, tumour incidence was generally
lower in those fed 'protein-deficient' diet, but hepatocellular carcinomas and Zymbal gland
carcinomas occurred at a higher incidence in this group (18 and 12%) than in the 'protein-
adequate' group (4 and 7%). The incidence ofpituitary adenomas decreased with increasing
concentration of MOCA in the 'protein-adequate' die t, perhaps because of decreased
survval in the treated groups (Kommineni et al., 1978).~N
Table 6. Percentages of male rats with tumours at specifie sites after feeding of MOCA in diets with difTerent protein con-
tents -~;; Dietaiy MOCA No. of rats Lung adeno- Alllung Mammaiy Zyrbal gland Hepatocellular Haemangio- Pituitaiy (jprotein (ppm) autopsied carcinomas tumours adenocrcinomas carcinomas carcinomas sarcomas adenomasa a:0Z Adequate 0100 0 1 1 1 0 2 42 0(27% ) 250 100 14*** 23*** 5 8* 3 4 36 a500 75 27*** 37*** 11 ** 7 4 4 25*~ 100 50 62*** 70*** 28*** 22*** 36 ** * 0 4*** '":: Deficient 0100 0 0 0 0 0 1 23cr
~(8%) 125 100 3 6** 1 0 0 2 16 0 250 75 9** 15*** 4 5* 0 5 12* t" 50 50 16*** 26*** 6* 12*** 18*** 8* 20 C
a:
From Komminenietal. (1978); *,p.: 0.05; **,p.: 0.01; ***,p.: 0.001 trli Ilnc1udes pituitary adenocrcinomas (0-2 per group) ..MOCA 283
3.1.3 Dog
A group of six female beagle dogs, approximately one year old, were administered a
daily dose of 100 mg MOCA (~ 90%, ~ 10% polyamines with a three-ring structure and
~ 0.9% ortho-chloroaniline) by capsule on three days a week for six weeks, then on five days .
a week for up to nine years. A further group of six females served as untreated controls. One
treated dog died early, at 3.4 years of age, because of intercurrent infection; the other
animais were kiled between 8.3 and ni ne years. Transitional-cell carcinomas of the urinary
bladder occurred in four of five treated dogs, and a composite tumour (transitional-cell
carcinoma/adenocarcinoma) of the urethra developed in one dog. No such tumour was
observed among six untreated controls (p .: 0.025, Fisher exact test) (Stula et al., 1977).
3.2 Subcutaneous administration
Rat
ln a study reported as a short communication, groups of 17 male and 17 female Wistar
rats (age unspecifiedi were injected subcutaneouslywith 500 or 1000 mg/kg bwMOCA(94%
pure) as a suspension in saline either once a week or at longer time intervals for 620 days
(88 weeks ) (total dose, 25 g/kg bw). The rats were fed a laboratory diet with a normal protein
content. The mean observation period was 778 days (111 weeks). A total of22 animaIs deve-
loped 29 malignant tumours. Hepatocellular carcinomas occurred in 9/34 (p .: 0.0042,
Fisher exact test), and malignant lung tumours (six adenocarcinomas, one carcinoma) were
observed in 7/34 (p .: 0.016, Fisher exact test). A malignant subcutaneous tumour
(unspecified) was found in one rat (sex unspecified). Among 25 male and 25 female untreated
controls (mean observation period, 1040 days (148 weeks)), a total of 13 malignant tumours,
including one lung tumour, developed; no hepatocellular carcinoma was observed (Steinhoff
& Grundmann, 1971). (The Working Group noted the inadequate reporting of the
experiment. )
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
Biological monitoring of workers exposed to MOCA in factories where polyurethane
plastics were manufactured showed levels of MOCA in urine that ranged from 1 to
1000 nmollmmol creatinine (0.1 - 110 llM; 27-27000 llg/l), with averages ranging from 5 to
50 nmol MOCA/mmol creatinine at different sampling periods (Thomas & Wilson, 1984;
Cocker et aL., 1988; Edwards & Priestly, 1992). Exposure appeared to occur via both
inhalation and skin absorption (Linch et al., 1971; Ward et aL., 1986) (see also section 1.3.2).
Assuming that MOCA levels in urine represent about 1 % of the total absorbed and that spot
urine sampling is indicative of 24-h urine collection (1.3 1 urine per day), the calculated
internaI dose corresponding to 100 llg/l urine is 13 mg per day (Ward et aL., 1986); the internai28 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
doses of workers therefore range from 3.5 to 3500 mg per day (calculated by the Working
Group from the data given above). Studies on percutaneous absorption of MOCA through
cultured neonatal foreskin showed rapid, time-dependent absorption (Chin et al., 1983).
ln the individual who was sprayed accidentally with molten MOCA (see p. 276), pharma-
cokinetic analyses (one-compartment model) indicated a biological half-time of 23 h, with
94% elimination from the body in four days; 35% of the parent MOCA present in the urine
was excreted as conjugates (Osorio et al., 1990). High levels of MOCA (3.6 mgll (13 J.MD
were also found in the urine of another worker accidentally sprayed with MOCA (Hosein &
Van Roosmalen, 1978; see pp. 276-277) 4 and II h after exposure. By 17 and 20 h, the levels
had decreased to 0.03-0.06 mg/l (0.1-0.2 J.M).
Urinary metabolites of MOCA detected in humans (Cocker et al., 1990) include its
N-acetyl derivative (1-9% of urinary MOCA in 10/23 individuals ) (Cocker et aL., 1988) and
its N-glucuronide (levels two- to three-fold higher than those of MOCA) (Cocker et aL.,
1990). Urinary thioethers were not detected (Edwards & Priestly, 1992).
4.1.2 Experimental systems
Oxidative metabolism of(methylene-14C)- and (anilne-14C)MOCA (58 and 10.9 mCi/-
mmol, respectively (radiochemical purity unspecifiedD, by hum an liver microsomes has been
demonstrated in vitro, resulting in the formation of its N-hydroxy(4-amino-4'-hydroxyl-
amino-3,3 1 -dichlorodiphenylmethane), 6-hydroxy(5-hydroxy-4,4' -diamino-3,3' -dichlorodi-
phenyl methane) and (methylene or C4,4')hydroxy( 4,4' -diamino-3,3' -dichlorobenzhydrol)
derivatives (see Fig. 1) (Morton et al., 1988). ln a survey of liver microsomes from 22 indivi-
duals, the rate of N-oxidation of (methylene-14C)MOCA (57 mCi/mmol; radiochemical
purity, ). 95%) varied by eight fold; N-hydroxy-MOCA was al ways the major metabolite,
accounting for 81-94% of aIl the oxidation products (Butler et al., 1989). Using antibodies
and other inhibitors, substrate-activity correlations and purified or recombinant enzyes,
cyochrome P450 3A4 was identified as the major enzye that catalyses MOCAN-oxidation
in human liver; a minor role for cyochrome P450 2A6 was shown (Yun et aL., 1992). It has
been suggested that human and dog urinary bladder expIant cultures metabolize MOCA, on
the basis of the apparent covalent binding of3H-MOCA(30 Ci/mmol; radiochemical purity,
97%) to DNA (Shivapurkar et al., 1987).
ln male beagle-tye mongrel dogs, 14C-MOCA (58 mCi/mmol (radiochemÍcal purity
unspecifiedD was applied to 25 cm2 of shaved skin in 0.5 ml acetone or was injected
intravenously in 0.5 ml propylene glycol at total doses of 10 mg per dog. By 24 h, urine
collected through surgically implanted catheters contained 1.3% of the administered
percutaneous dose (0.4% of which was unchanged MOCA) and 45% of the intravenous dose
(0.54% of which was unchanged MOCA). Following intravenous injection, the time-course
of disappearance of MOCA from the blood was rapid, with an apparent volume of distri-
bution of 244 1 and biphasic half-times of 0.09 and 0.70 h. Afer skin application, no
radiolabel was measured in blood up to 24 h later. Biliary excretion was 0.62% of the dose
after percutaneous administration and 32 % after intravenous injection; none was unchanged
MOCA Tissue distribution was 10-20 times greater after intravenous dosing and was
highest in liver, kidney, fat and lung tissues (Manis et aL., 1984). As with other carcinogenic
aromaticamines, the major urinarymetabolite of MOCA in dogs, accounting for 75% of theMOCA 285
Fig. 1. Oxidative metabolIsm of MOCA by liver microsomes
N-Hydroxy MOCA k~~CI OHH2N\Qy\QN(H
H
6-Hydroxy MOCACi Ci
H2N~ ~-\ NH2
OH
Methylene hydroxy MOCA H2Nb-r~ NH2
H
From Chen et al. (1989)
urinary radiolabel, was the sulfate conjugate of the ortho-hydroxy metabolite, 6-
hydroxy-MOCA (5-hydroxy-3,3' -dichloro-4,4' -diaminodiphenyl methane-5-sulfate) (Manis
& Braselton, 1984). The same major metabolite was detected in dog liver and kidney slices
incubated with 14C-MOCA (58 mCi/mmol, methylene-labelled; 10.9 mCi/mmol, aniline-
labelled; radiochemical purity, ? 99% J. An unknown glucoside and three glucuronide
metabolites were also observed; and apparent covalent binding to DNA was measured,
which was greater in liver than kidney (Manis & Braselton, 1986).
ln female LAC:Porton rats, (methylene-14C)MOCA (8.3 mCi/mmol (radiochemical
purity unspecifiedD was mixed with unlabelled MOCA in solutions of glycerol formol-
arachis oil and given by intraperitoneal (1, 13 or 100 mg/kg bw) or oral administration
(10 mg/kg bw). The urine contained 23-41 % of the radiolabel after 48 h, ofwhich 1-2%was
unchanged MOCA, while faeces contained 60-69% of the administered dose. At least nine
metabolites were observed in the urine. Tissue distribution of radiolabel after 48 h was
highest in the liver, then fat? kidney, small intestine (Farmer et al., 1981).
14C-MOCA (58 mCi/mmol; radiochemical purity, ? 98%) was injected intravenously to
female Sprague- Dawley rats at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg bw in ethanol:Tween 80:water. Afer 48 h,
21 and 73 % of the dose was excreted in urine and faeces, respectively. The levels of
radiolabel were highest in liver, then in lung, kidney, fat and adrenal gland (Tobes et al.,
1983 ).
Male Sprague- Dawley rats given (methylene-14C)MOCA (58 mCi/mmol; radiochemical
purity, 96%) by gavage (11-12 mg/kg bw in propyle ne glycol) excreted 16.5% of the dose in28 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
the urine (0.25% as unchanged MOCA) and 70% in faeces after 72 h. Up to 2.54% was
excreted in urine (0.008% as unchanged MOCA) and 2.11 % in faeces after application of
2.5 mg MOCA in acetone to shaved skin (Groth et al., 1984). ln 30-day old male Charles
River CD rats, administration of (methylene-14C)MOCA (4-7 mCi/mmol; radiochemical
purity, ~ 93%) by gavage in dimethyl sulfoxide:water (60:40) at a dose of 5.5-5.6 mg per rat
resulted in 16-27% of the label being excreted into urine (-: 0.2 % as unchanged MOCA) and
32-50% in faeces after 24 h. The major biliary metabolite was identified as MOCAN-glucu-
ronide (Morton et al., 1988). Male Wistar rats given unlabelled recrystallzed MOCA at a
dose of 125 or 250 mg/kg intraperitoneally in peanut oil daily for five days excreted 'free'
MOCA at a level of 1-6.5 llmol/mmol creatinine in urine 24 h after the last dose (Edwards &
Priestly, 1992).
The half-times of MOCA in whole blood, lymphocyes, urinary bladder and liver of male
Sprague-Dawley rats ranged from 4 to 17 days after a single oral dose (281 llmol (75 mg/kg
bw)) of (rnethylene-14C)MOCA (42.4 llCi/ml; radiochemical purity, ;: 99.5%) in corn oiL.
The order of covalent binding to DNA was liver ? bladder ? lymphocyes. Similar results
were obtained after dermal application, except that adduct formation was approximately
100-fold less (Cheever et al., 1988, 1990). Multiple oral doses of 7.5 mg/kg bw for up to
28 days induced a linear increase in globin binding and half-times that were comparable to
those seen after a single oral dose of 75 mg/kg; tissue levels of MOCA were highest in the
liver, kidney and lung. Induction of cyochromes P450 by phenobarbital resulted in a three-
fold increase in globin binding but a slight decrease in binding to liver. Intraperitoneal
treatment resulted in three-fold higher binding levels in liver, globin and whole blood
(Cheever et al., 1991). ln a similar study with male Sprague-Dawley rats and English
guinea-pigs, intraperitoneal injection of 14C-MOCA (58 rnCi/mmol (radiochemical purity
unspecified)) in propylene glycol:dimethyl sulfoxide:saline (4:4:2) at 0.5-50 mg/kg to rats and
subcutaneous injection of 5-500 mg/kg to rats and 4-100 mg/kg to guinea-pigs resulted in a
nearly linear, dose-related increase in haemoglobin binding. ß-Naphthoflavone but not
phenobarbital pretreatment of rats was found to increase MOCA-haemoglobin adduct
formationin vivo (Chenet aL., 1991). ln female Wistarrats dosed orallywith 1,3.8,4.3, 66 and
134 mg/kg (aniline-14C)MOCA(58 mCi/mmol; radiochemical purity, ? 95%) or unlabelled
MOCA in ethanol:propylene glycol (1:4), MOCA was bound in decreasing amounts to DN A,
RNA and protein oflung, liver and kidney; 0.19% ofthe dose was bound to haemoglobin and
0.026% to serum albumin after 24 h. Alkaline hydrolysis of MOCA-bound haemoglobin
released free MOCA (Sabbioni & Neumann, 1990), indicating the presence of a sulfinamide
adduct derived from N-hydroxy-MOCA in the circulation and its oxidative conversion to a
nitroso derivative in the eryhrocyes. This assumption was confirmed by reactions of
haemoglobin with either N-hydroxy-MOCA or its nitroso derivative in vitro and by the obser-
vation of high levels of haemoglobin binding after intravenous administration of N-hydroxy-
MOCA (Chen et al., 1991).
Oxidative metabolisrn of (methylene-14C)- and (aniline-14C)MOCA (58 and 10.9 mCi/-
mmol; radiochemical purity, ? 99% (Chen et al., 1989) (or radiochemical purity unspecified
(Morton et aL., 1988) D by rat, dog and guinea-pig liver microsomes has been demonstrated in
vitro, resulting in formation of the N-hydroxy and 6-hydroxy derivatives. ln rat and guinea-pig
liver microsomes, N-hydroxy-MOCA appeared to be the major metabolite, whereas 6-MOCA 287
hydroxy-MOCA was predominant in dog liver microsomes. ln rats, a methylene-hydroxy
derivative was also found.
Using inducers, specific inhibitors and purified enzyes, cyochromes P450 2Bl
(P450PB_B) and P450 2B2 (P450PB_D) were identified as the major enzyes that catalyse
MOCA N-oxidation in rat liver; a minor role for cyochromes P450 lA2 (P450ISF_G), P450
2C11 (P450UT_A) and P450 lAl (P450BNF_B) was shown (Butler et al., 1989).
N-Glucuronidation of MOCA has been demonstrated in vitro with uridine diphos-
phoglucuronic acid-fortified liver microsomes from polychlorinated biphenyl-induced rats
(Cocker et aL., 1990). MOCA was metabolized rapidly by Bacillus megaterium and a Nocar-
diopsis species to N-acetyl, N,N' -diacetyl, N-hydroxy-N-acetyl and N-hydroxy-N,N' -diacetyl
metabolites (Yoneyama & Matsumura, 1984) (see Fig. 2).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
Medical surveillance of workers with known exposure to MOCA revealed no acute toxi-
city; the methaemoglobinaemia syndrome, seen with exposures to other aromatIc amines,
was not observed (Linch et al., 1971). The individual who was sprayed with three gallons of
molten MOCA (see p. 276) had an initial 'mild sunburn' sensation on the arms, but nofurthersymptom was found in a two-week follow-up period. Renal and liver function tests were
normal, and methaemoglobinemia, haematuria and proteinuria were not observed (Osorio
et al., 1990). The initial responses in the worker sprayed in the face with MOCA (see pp. 276-
277) were conjunctivitis, a burning sensation in the eyes and face and nausea (Hosein & Van
Roosmalen, 1978).
4.2.2 Experimental systems
ln a nine-year chronic study in dogs (Stula et al., 1977; see p. 283), elevated levels of
plasma glutamic-pyruvic transaminase were noted during the first and last two years of
treatment, accompanied by urinary changes indicative of genitourinary cancer after seven
years.
MOCA also induces enzyes involved in drug metabolism and cell proliferation. Single
intraperitoneal injections of technical-grade MOCA (purity, 90-100%) to male Sprague-
Dawley rats at doses of 0.4- 100 mg/kg bw in dimethyl sulfoxide resulted in dose-dependent
increases in the levels of microsomal epoxide hydratase, ethoxyesorufin O-deethylase,
ethoxycoumarin O-deethylase and glutathione S-transferase, but a decrease in aldrin epoxi-
dase activity (Wu et aL., 1989a). Ornithine decarboxylase, which regulates polyamine
sythesis and cell division and is increased by tumour promoters, was strongly induced in
male Sprague-Dawley rats 12 h after intraperitoneal injection of75 mg/kg bw MOCAin corn
oil; the level returned to control values after 42 h (Savage et al., 1992).
ln primary cultures of rat hepatocyes, MOCA induced dose-dependent leakage of two
intracellular enzyes, lactate dehydrogenase and glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase
(McQueen & Wiliams, 1982).28 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Fig. 2. Microbial metabolIsm of MOCACi Ci
H2N~CH2~ NH2
MOCA
Ci l Ci
~ ~ /COCH3H2N CH N "-
H
Monoacetyl-MOCA/"\
H2N ~ 0 J- CH2-- 0 ~ N( ::CH,Ci Ci
H3COC, ~ ~ /COCH3/ N CH2 N "-H H
Diacetyl-MOCA Monoacetyl N-hydroxy-MOCA
"\/Ci Ci
HCOC ~ ~ /COCH33 , N CH N/ 2 "-HO OH
Diacetyl N-hydroxy-MOCA
From Yoneyama and Matsumura (1984)
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal efTects
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
Exfoliated urothelial cells recovered from urine samples (Osorio et aL., 1990) provided
by the worker accidentally sprayed with molten MOCA (see p. 276) at different timesMOCA 289
following exposure (up to 430 h) had a single, major DNA adduct, shown by 32p-post_
labellng and thin-layer chromatography to co-chromatograph with the known major N-
hydroxy- M OCA- D N A adduct, N-( deoxyadenosine-8-yl)-4-amino- 3-chlorobenzyl alcohoL.
The adduct was detected in cells from urine collected up to 98 h after ini tial exposure, but not
thereafter (Kaderlik et al., 1993). This finding is in agreement with the calculated biological
half-time for MOCA in urine, 23 h, and the prediction that 94% of an initial dose will be
eliminated within 96 h (Osorio et al., 1990).
An increased frequency of sister chromatid exchange was seen in peripheral lym-
phocyes from a small number of workers exposed to MOCA in polyurethane manufacture
(Edwards & Priestly, 1992).
4.4.2 Expen'mental systems (see also Table 7 and Appendices 1 and 2)
MOCAcaused prophage induction inEschen'chia coli and differential toxicity 
in Bacillussubtilis rec-deficient strains. It was mutagenic to Salmonella typhimun'um, Eschen'chia coli
and at the tk locus in mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells, but not to Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
MOCA caused aneuploidy in S. cerevisiae but gave equivocal results with regard to gene
conversion and did not induce mitotic crossing over in the same organism. It induced
mutation in Drosophila melanogaster and unscheduled DNA synthesis in primary cultures of
hepatocyes from mice, rats and Syrian hamsters. Sister chromatid exchange but not
chromosomal aberration was induced in Chinese hamster ovary cells; and neither sister
chromatid exchange nor chromosomal aberration was induced in human cells (abstract).
MOCA induced cell transformation in mammalian cells and inhibited gap-junctional
intercellular communication in cultured rat liver cells.
MOCA induced sister chromatid exchange in lymphocyes of rats treated in vivo. It
formed adducts with DNA in cultured canine and human bladder cells, in the livers of rats
treated topically or by intraperitoneal administration in vivo and in lung, liver and kidney
following oral administration to rats. One of three HPLC peaks of an enzyatic digest of
DNA derived from rats treated in vivo was identified tentatively as N-(deoxyadenosin-8-yl)-
4-amino-3-chlorobenzyl alcohol (Silk et aL., 1989). Reaction of N-hydroxy(methylene-
14C)MOCA with DNA in vitro resulted in the formation of two major adducts, which were
identified by mass spectroscopy as N-( deoxyadenosin-8-yl)-4-amino- 3-chlorobenzyl alcohol
and N-(deoxyadenosin-8-yl)-4-amino-3-chlorotoluene. The same adducts were formed in
vivo: ln rats given a single dose of 95 I-mol/kg bw (methylene-14C)MOCA by gavage, DNA
adducts were found after 24 h at 7 pmol/mg DNAin liver, 2 pmollmg in lung and 0.5 pmollmg
in kidney (Segerbäck & Kadlubar, 1992). MOCA also binds to RNA and proteins, including
haemoglobin, in rats treated in vivo.
N-Hydroxy-MOCA was mutagenic to S. typhimun'um TA98 and TA100 in the absence of
an exogenous metabolic activation system but did not inhibit intercellular communication in
cultured WB-F344 rat liver epithelial cells. Other MOCA metabolites, ortho-hydroxy-
MOCA, 4-amino-3,3' -dichloro-4' -nitrosodiphenylmethane (mononitroso derivative) and
di(3-chloro-4-nitrosophenyl)methane (dinitroso derivative), were not mutagenic to S. typhi-
mun'um TA98 or TAI00. The mutagenic activity of the mononitroso derivative towards
TAI00, however, appeared to be masked by its toxicity (Kuslikis et aL., 1991).290
Go¿c.~
rJ..~~
Q"
"0
Q"..~-
Q"i.
"0i:~
~.-..
Q"i:
Q"~
l-
Q"-~
~0)ui:0)..0)4-0)
ex
Ô
53
'" --0) Q
'" u.o ..
Q '-
~.~gõ
0).. S-to.(l~
~ § ~ ~
..
;5'"
0)
ex~.~'5 0-o ßE s-50.(l~
~ § ~ ~
s0)-'"~-'"~IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
~..~oo
-- ~ ~ tn.. ~ 'f 'l '- ._.- ~ 00 .- ~ '- "0 ~~~~~~ooC~~:a ~~~~8'-~~-:óÕ~ ~-§i:~ ..'-Si:..'-(JO\....O).800 '- 4' CÖ,-. ..--'-('.,4-0\ .~ i: 0) .~ Ou'--:.oGI 0 ~8~~..OQ~ O'Q(JFS u"' ..oo..oui: ..õ;..c;õ; o: Oui:O\Oui:ciciOu135li: o:i:ci..Sl8¡(i: ",.. ..00) 0 t:S 0. (i .. .0 0) E 0 Q .:: g c := ~ 0o .g '0 U ~ 8 E .. .5 ~ S 0. ;: ï:: 00 ~
,i (i 'C u - .. (i :: .. 'v W (i i: 0) 0\ (ir- ~ i: ~ ò: i: 0 :: ~ ~ ~ Z Vi ? 8::--0\000\..'---..~ ~OO.. .. 0\.. 00 .. 00 l-T"0\ ..--~O\'-~_C'_~ ~C oooo~C~OO"~"'.. ..E O\O\..EO)O\tnoo~O) '- ....--.... ~ 0\ 0\ .- -- '" 0) '- '- en 0) 0.'-.. O)..O);"--i:i:Q);"O)--
:: '- 8 S ~ i: 0) óÕ .- (i i: Q).. óÕ
-: tj -: .~ 0\ S; GI 0\ i: 0) 0 GI GI 0\(J (JO).. ~..oQ..o: .... õ; .. .. '- o: '- i: _" o: ci '-Out:Ou'1-.'O'Oi:ci'" 'Oi:i:
""0)""..(J_i:~ ",:gi:o~~..~~õ; o.: i: ~.o8 o.: s i:v"'vo. ..~O).o ..~cO)o 0) 0 :: ~.~ 0 2 (i .. .~ 0 i: 2u::U~?-exexFi:i:exeiü3Fè5
ggggg~gggg~ggg ~g~~~~g~ggggggg§'§'ÒÒ~NÒÒÒ~N~~~ ~~N~~NÒ~òò§'8'§'òÓtntn.... .. N..NNN ..N.. ..0 tn tn l- l- ~ ~
++++++++++++++
0+ 00 1
i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i:
.9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9
'B § § § § § § § § § § §'x i: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: ::.8 .9 S S S S S S S S S S E~~~&~~~~~~~&~~8 .~ 5 ~ ~ ~ t ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~(JßS;";";";";"~;";";";";,~""'O~~~~~~~~~~~j~ ~§§§§§§§§§§§~ ~t0 t; t; t; t; tS tS t; t; t; tS t;kl._ ~¿~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~~~~~~~~~~~~
.9 '" .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~g~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ '_ '_ '_ '_ '_ "_ '_ '_ '_ '_ '_ o-s:1 .. .. .. .... .. .. .. .... .. ..~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~0) a.. (J-S (J (J (J (J (J (J (J (J (JOJ ..:: -. :: :: :: :: :: :: :: :: ::(i ~ Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou Ou..~~~~~~~~~~~~~0.:: cee cee cee ceeo .~ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§~ ""rs: (J (J (J (J i: (J (J (J (J i: (J.. -.l V) V) V) V) V) V) V) V) V) V) V)
~~ g :i~~~~~ ~~~~~ ~i: i: GI GI GI CI GI en CI CI GI GI en CI+ + + + + + 1 + c-. 1 1 +
100 1 101 10
i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i:
,9 .0_ .9 ,0_ .o_c .9 .9 ,9 0.9.9.9 .9 .9 .9~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .~. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~..'" "\, ~ _ci ~ ~ ~ ~ (' +" +- .. .. .. -l~~5::~~---::::::::::::SSSSEEEEE~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.. .. .. .. 1- 1- .. .. .. 0) 0) Q) Q) 0) 0)0) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) 0) Q) 0) ;, ;, ~ ~ ;, ;,
;, ;, ;, ;, ;, ;, ;, ~ ;, 0) 0) Q) Q) 0) 0)0)0) 0) 0) 0)0)0) Q) 0)"' 1-i- i-....
'- '- '- '- '- '- '- i- ..~ ir ir ir v) ir or888888888~~~f;~~l-T"~l-l-l"'l~'ll-M,.--1"l-
t; tS tS tS ~ t; ~ tS tS ~ ~ tS ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~ .~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:.~~~~~~~~:¡:.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
(J (J i: i: (J (J (J i: i: (J (J i: i: (J (J:::::::: =::::::::::::::::::: ~0u0u0u0u0u0u0u~0u0u~~~0u~§§§§§§§§§§§§~§§
.§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .§ .. .§ .§ .§ .§ .. .§ .§
~ ~ i3 ~ ~ ~ i3 i3 i3 i3 ~ i3 i3 i3 ~
~~~~%~~~~~~~~~~GI CI en CI GI CI CI en en GI GI CI CI GI GI,-"'..=0c,
El'-t-(1..CIci~-....
~CI~(1ui:(1l-(1"'(1ei
Q
æ
tl --(1 ClCI p.o ..
Cl '-
~ .S!0-
i: 0 El
.i ?k.g (1
~ ~ ~ ~
..
"3CI(1ei~ .~"5 0-052 El5elt'~
~ ~ ~ ~MOCA 291
-- -- --,. ,. ,.~ ~OO 00 ~ ~OO~~ ~~ ~ß ß~~~ ~~ ~ ~~~ß ~~ ~ ~ 00 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 00 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ v00 ~~~~~ ~ oo~ ~ _1 _,_~_~~~~:.~ooev ~g;~c g;~~ocCl-~:a8e~ '1O\,.~oo '-0\ .i .i,.,- --"",-000\ .,.OOrn .i i:,.'-'-O\~rn,.(1~ ~~ rn ,.~ O\,.-ooO\t'Cl(l~ 0'-i: i:,..i (i~~ (I~(i i: i: (1--00 i: i:,.'-~O\,..i (1 ~ (1---: .- t' '- t' i:o -. ,~ .i 00 .i .;: t' i: ;X 0\ .- t' '- . .. ,. '- t' i: (1 .i ;X 4:
~ ~ Q ~ ~ ~ ~ v, (/ 0\ (/ Õ Q ~ 0\ 0 § Q -: ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ (/ (/ 0\ 8~_ ~~~~~0~~ ~0~~ ~~2~~F~~~0U.i~~~~ .i"O i: ~~ i:~~~~"O~i: ~ "Oi:i:~~ l- ~ .~ g ~ ~ ~ ~ g ~ l- ~ ~ g ~ l- ~ (lel- ~ E 8 .~ 0 ~ ~ ~ g ~ ~
~ ~ 0 t: el.i ~ ~ c: (1 c: ~ 0 t (1 ~ ~ g .. .5 u t: §b t ~ c: (1 '2 00t' t' l- t' t' .S: t' 0 i: C i: t' l- ._ C t' t' l- t' ~ .i t' t' t' ._ 0 i: C (1 0\~ ~ ~ ~ z ei ~ ei ~ F ~ ~ ~ ei F 0 ~ ~ 0 ~ ~ ~ ~ z ~ ei ~ F ~0
g§ggg gg§§§ §§§ § §§gg §§§gg§ ggg§ §~ 0 §" 0 0 g ~ §" 0 ~ 0 ó §. g ~ ~ ó ó ó 0 Ó ~ Ó Ó g §. ó ó ~,. ~,. N ~N ~'l .. ~ l" -- 'l
1 . 1 + + + + 1 + + + 1 + + +
1 0 1 0 1 0
i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:i:.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9.9 ....§§....ro§..rorororo§....;:t';:t' t' C'C' .. ................; ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
EElEElEEEEEEEEEEEEl
(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1CICICICICICICICICICICICICICIrnCI l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~;;~(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1(1 l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i: i:
.9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9 .9EE§§§EEE§i: i: i:.9.9.9
§ § ETable 7 (contd)
~IVTest system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)Without Wirh
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0 + 0.~~ Rao et al. (1982)
SA9. Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation - + 50. () Haworth et al. (1983)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98. reverse mutation 0 + 167. () Kugler-Steigmeier et al. (1989)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0 + 25. () Wu et aL. (1989b)
EC2, Escherichia coli WP2, reverse mutation 0 -O. () Matsushima et al. (1981) ;;
ECW, Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA reverse mutation - - 250. () Matsushima et aL. (1981) ~ECR, Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA (PKM101), reverse mutation - + 10. () Matsushima et aL. (1981) ~ECW, Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA reverse mutation - - O. () Gatehouse (1981) 0
ECW, Escherichia coli WP2 uvrA reverse mutation + 25. () Venitt & Crofton-Sleigh Z -0
(1981) ciSCG, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, gene conversion - - 167. () Jagannath et al. (1981)
~ SCG, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, gene conversion + 0 100. () Sharp & Parr (1981)
SCH, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, homozygosis - -100. () Kassinova et al. (1981) :ií/SCR, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, reverse mutation - -889. () Mehta & von Borstel (1981)d SCN, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, aneuploidy + 0 50. () Parr & Sharp (1981)
DMM, Drosophila melanogaster, soma tic mutation (+ ) 13 3 5. () Kugler-Steigmeier et al. (1989) S
URp, Unscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primary hepatocytes + 0 2.6700 McQueen et aL. (1981) ~tIURp, Unscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primary hepatocytes + 0 100. () Williams et al. (1982)ViURp, Unscheduled DNA synthesis, rat primary hepatocytes + 0 2.6700 Mori et al. (1988) ..
UIA Unscheduled DNA synthesis, mouse primary hepatocytes + 0 13.3500 McQueen et al. (1981)
UIA Unscheduled DNA synthesis, Syrian hamster primary + 0 2.6700 McQueen et al. (1981)hepatoctes
G5l Gene mutation, mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells in vitro - + 42.~~ Mitchell et al. (1988)
G5l Gene mutation, mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells in vitro - + 5. () Myhr & Caspary (1988)
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary cells - -10. () Perr & Thomson (1981)
in vitro
sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary cells +c(+Y 50. () Gallowayet al. (1985)
in vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary cells -d -d300. () Galloway et aL. (1985)
in vitroTable 7 (contd)
Test system Result Dosea
(LED/HIO)Reference
Without
exogenous
metabolic
systemWirh
exogenous
metabolic
system
SHL, Sister chromatid exchanges, human leukoctes
CHL, Chromosomal aberrations, human leukoctes
TCS, Cell transformation in Syrian hamster kidney BHK cells +
TCS, Cell transformation in Syrian hamster kidney BHK cells 0
TRR, Cell transformation, RLV /Fischer rat embryo cells +
TBM, Cell transformation in BALB/c 3T3 mouse cells +
SVA Sister chromatid exchange, rat lymphocytes in vivo ++
+
o
o0.~~ Ho et al. (1979); abstr.
0.~~ Ho et aL. (1979); abstr.
13.700 Daniel & Dehnel (1981)
2.500 Styles (1981)
1. ~~ Dunkel et aL. (1981)
0.200 Dunkel et al. (1981)
125.~~ X Edwards & Priestly (1992)
6 mg/kg, ip
32.~~ x 2 ip Salamone et al. (1981)
0.0300 Stoner et al. (1988) ~0
0.0300 Stoner et al. (1988) n~
24.~~ x 1 ip Silk et al. (1989)
25.~~ x 1 po Segerbäck & Kadlubar (1992)
75.~~ x 1 po Cheever et aL. (199)
75.~~ skin Cheever et al. (199)
1.4300 X po Kugler-Steigmeier et aL. (1989)
1.4300 X po Kugler-Steigmeier et aL. (1989)
75.~~ X 1 po Cheever et al. (199)
1.~~ X 1 po Sabbioni & Neumann (199)
2.~~ Kuslikis et aL. (1991)MVM, Micronucleus test, mouse bone marrow in vivo +
BIO, Binding (covalent) to DNA in human bladder cells in vitro +
(32p post-labelling)
BID, Binding (covalent) to DNA in dog bladder cells in vitro +
(32p post-labelling)
BVD, Binding (covalent) ta rat liver DNA in vivo (tritium label) +
BVD, Binding (covalent) to rat lung, liver and kidney DNA +
in vivo (l4C-Iabel)
BVD, Binding (covalent) to rat liver DNA in vivo (l4C-Iabel) +
BVD, Binding (covalent) ta rat liver DNA in vivo (l4C-Iabel) +
BVD, Binding (covalent) to rat liver DNA in vivo +
BVD, Binding (covalent) to rat lung DNA in vivo +
BVp, Binding (covalent) to rat globin in vivo (l4C-label) +
BVp, Binding (covalent) to rat lung, liver and kidney RNA +
and protein in vivo
ICR, Inhibition of cell-cell communication in WB-F344 rat +
liver epithelial cells in vitroo
o
o
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
I1n-vitro tests, j.g/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw; 0.~~, not given
bpositive in two laboratories; in a third laboratory, negative with rat S9, weakly positive with hamster S9
CPositive in one laboratory; negative in another
dyested in two laboratoriesN1.t#294 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
4,4'-Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA) was introduced in the mid-1950s in the
production of high-performance polyurethane mouldings. It is used in many countries, with a
total worldwide production of several thousand tonnes per year; it is used as a curing agent
for roofing and wood sealing in Japan and the Far East. There was considerable occupational
exposure by cutaneous absorption in the early years of use of MOCA, as revealed by urine
analysis, but exposure has decreased with the implementation of control measures. Extensive
environmental contamination is known to have occurred in a large area surrounding at least
one factory, prior to the introduction of con trois.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
Three asymptomatic cases of cancer of the urinary bladder (two in men under the age of
30 among 552 workers) were identified in a factory where MOCA was produced and where
screening for this cancer was undertaken in a subgroup. AIthough this finding suggests an
excess, expected numbers could not be calculated.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
MOCA was tested for carcinogenicity byoral administration in the diet in mice in one
study, in rats of each sex in two studies, in male rats in a further two studies using normal and
low-protein diets and in capsules in female dogs. It was also tested by subcutaneous
administration to rats in one study. Oral administration of MOCA increased the incidence of
liver tumours in female mice. ln a series of experiments in which rats were fed either standard
or low-protein diets, it induced liver-cell tumours and malignant lung tumours in males and
females in one study, a few liver-cell tumours in male rats in another, lung adenocarcinomas
and hepatocellular tumours in males and females in a third and malignant lung tumours,
mammary gland adenocarcinomas, Zymbal gland carcinomas and hepatocellular carcI-
nomas in a fourth. Oral administration of MOCA to female beagle dogs produced transi-
tional-cell carcinomas of the urinary bladder and urethra. Subcutaneous administration to
rats produced hepatocellular carcinomas and malignant Jung tumours.
5.4 Other relevant data
MOCAformsadducts with DNA, bothin vitro andin vivo. One of the twomajor adducts,
N-( deoxyadenosin-8-yl)-4-amino-3-chlorobenzyl alcohol, was found in rat tissues; it also co-
chromatographed with a DNA adduct from urothelial cells recovered from the urine of a
worker in the polyurethane industrywho was accidentallyexposed to a high dose of MOCA
An increased frequency of sister chromatid exchange was seen in a small number of workers
exposed to MOCA .MOCA 295
MOCA induced DNA damage in prokaryotes, cultured mammalian and human cells
and in animaIs treated in vivo. Gene mutation was induced in bacteria and cultured
mammalian cells, but not in yeast. Equivocal results for mitotic recombination were
obtained in yeasts. Aneuploidy was induced in yeast and sister chromatid exchange, transfor-
mation and inhibition of intercellular communication in cultured mammalian cells.
Micronuclei were induced in the bone marrow of mice treated in vivo, and sister chromatid
exchange was induced in the bone marrow of rats treated in vivo.
MOCA is comprehensively genotoxic. Furthermore, (i) rats, dogs and humans meta-
bolize MOCA to N-hydroxy-MOCA by hepatic cyochromes P450; (ii) DNA adducts are
formed by reaction with N-hydroxy-MOCA, and MOCA is genotoxic in bacteria and
mammalian cells; (ii) the same major MOCA-DNA adduct is formed in the target tissues for
carcinogenicIty in animais (rat liver and lung; dog urinary bladder) as that found in urothelial
cells from a man with known occupational exposure to MOCA.
5.5 Evaluation i
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-
chloroanilne) (MOCA).
There is suffcient evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of 4,4'-
methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA).
Overall evaluation2
4,4' -Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA) is probably carcinogenic to humans (Croup
2A).
6. References
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (199a) Notice of intended changes-
4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloroanilne), perfluoroiso-butylene, and triethanolamine. Appl. occup.
env~on. lly~, 5, 798-80
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (199Gb) Guide to Occupational
Exsure Values-1990, Cincinnati, OH, p. 12
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (1992) Annual Reports of the Com-
mittees on Threshold Limit Values and Biological Exposure Indices, Cincinnati, OH, p. 1
Anon. (1985) International toxicity update. Dangerous Prop. ind. Mater. Rep., 5, 30-36
Arbejdstilsynet (Labor Inspection) (1977) Liste over llygiejniske Graensevaerdier 1977 (List of limit
values 1977), Copenhagen
Baker, R.S.U. & Bonin, A.M. (1981) Study of 42 coded compounds with the Salmonellalmammalian
microsome assay. Prog. Mutat. Res., i, 249-26
lPor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.
20veraU evaluation 2A and not 2B on the basis of supporting evidence froID other relevant data29 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Becker,J.W, Blackwell, J., Caruso, P.P., Pugh, 'IL. & Yeager, EW (1974) Determination ofunreacted
'MOCA' in polyether-based polyurethane systems. Rubber Wor/d, 170,57-62,80
Bridges, B.A., MacGregor, D., Zeiger, E., Bonin, A., Dean, B.J., Lorenzo, E, Garner, RC.,
Gatehouse, D., Hubbard, S., Ichinotsubo, D., MacDonald, D., Martire, G., Matsushima, 1:,
Mohn, G., Nagao, M., Richold, M., Rowland, 1., Simmon, v., Skopek, 'I, Truman, R & Venitt, S.
(1981) Summary report on the performance of bacterial mutation assays. Prog. Mutat. Res., l,49~7
Brooks, 'IM. & Dean, BJ. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 coded compounds in the Sa/nwnella/-
microsome assay with preincubation. Prog. Mutat. Res., l, 261-270
Butler, M.A., Guengerich, EP. & Kadlubar, EE (1989) Metabolic oxidation of the carcinogens 4-
aminobiphenyl and 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline) by human hepatic microsomes and by
purified rat hepatic cytochrome P-450 monooxygenases. Cancer Res., 49, 25-31
Caisse Nationale Assurance (1992) Va/eurs Limites d'Expsition aux postes de travai/1992, Lucerne,
Division Médecine du Travail
Cartwright, RA. (1983) Historical and modern epidemiological studies on populations exposed to
N-substituted aryl compounds. Environ. Hea/th Perspectives, 49, 13-19
Cheever, KL., Richards, D.E., Weigel, WW, Begley, KB., Savage, R.E., Jr & Daniel, ER (1988)
Macromolecular adduct formation by 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline) in adult male rat.
Scand. 1. Work Environ. Hea/th, 14 (SuppL. 1), 57-59
Cheever, KL., Richards, D.E., Weigel, WW, Begley, KB., De Bord, D.G., Swearengin, 'IE & Savage,
RE., Jr (1990) 4,4'-Methylene-bis(2-chloroanilineXMOCA): comparison of macromolecular
adduct formation after oral or dermal administration in the rat. Fundam. app/. Toxico/., 14,
273-283
Cheever, KL., DeBord, D.G. & Swearengin, LE (1991) 4,4' -Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA):
the effect of multiple oral administration, route, and phenobarbital induction on macro-
molecular adduct formation in the rat. Fundam. app/. Toxico/., 16, 71-80
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory of Wor/d Chemica/ Producers 1992/93, Dallas, lX,
p.79
Chen, 'IH., Kuslikis, RI. & Braselton, WE., Jr (1989) Hydroxylation of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloro-
aniline) by canine, guinea pig, and rat liver microsomes. Drug Metab. Disposition, 17,4013
Chen, 'IH., Kuslikis, RI. & Braselton, WE., Jr (1991) Unlabeled hemoglobin adducts of 4,4'-
methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) in rats and guinea pigs. Arch. Toxico/., 65, 177-185
Chin, B., Tobes, M.C. & Han, S.S. (1983) Absorption of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) by human
skin. Environ. Res., 32, 167-178
Clapp, D.E., Piacitell, G.M., Zaebst, D.D. & Ward, E. (1991) Assessing exposure to 4,4' -methylene
bis(2-chloroaniline) (MBOCA) in the workplace App/. occup. environ. Hyg., 6, 125-130
Cocker, J., Bobis, AR, Gibson, J.E & Davies, D.S. (1985) The metabolic activation of 4,4'-
methylenebis(2-chlorobenzeneamine) to a bacterial mutagenic by hepatic postmitochondrial
supernatant from human and other species. Environ: Mutag., 7, 501-509
Cocker, J., Boobis, A.R & Davies, D.S. (1986) Routes of activation of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloro-
anilne) and 4,4'-methylenedianiline to bacterial mutagens. Food chem. Toxico/., 24, 755-756
Cocker, J., Boobis, A.R & Davies, D.S. (1988) Determination of the N-acetyl metabolites of 4,4'-
methylene dianilne and 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroanilne) in urine. Biomed. environ. Mass
Spectrom., 17, 161-167MOCA 297
Cocker, J., Boobis, A.R, Wilson, H.K & Gompertz, D. (199) Evidence that a ß-N-glucuronide of
4,4' -methylenebis (2-chloroaniline) (MbOCA) is a major urinary metabolite in man: impli-
cations for biological monitoring. Br. J ind. Med., 47, 154-161
Commission of the European Communities (1967) Council Directive of 16 August 1%7 on the appro-
ximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification,
packaging and labellng of dangerous substances. Off J Eur. Commun., Ll96, 1
Commission of the European Communities (1990) Council Directive of 28 June 199 on the protection
of workers from the risks related to exposure to carcinogens at work (6th individual Directive
within the meaning of Article 16 of Directive 89/391/EEC). Off J Eur. Commun., L196, 1-7
Commission of the European Communities (1991) Twelfth Adaptation to Technical Progress of
Council Directive 67/548/EEC of 16 August 1967. Off J Eur. Commun., Ll80A, 918
Cook, WA. (1987) Occupational Exposure Limits-Worldwide, Akron, OH, American Industrial
Hygiene Association, pp. 146, 199
Daniel, M.R & Dehnel, J.M. (1981) Cell transformation test with baby hamster kidney cells. Prog.
Mutat. Res., 1, 62637
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (1992) MA- and BAT-Values List 1992. Maxmum Concentrations
at the Workplace (MA) and Biological Tolerance Values (BAT) for Working Materils (Report
No. 28), Weinheim, VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, p. 49
Ducos, P., Maire, C. & Gaudin, R (1985) Assessment of occupational exposure to 4,4' -methylene-
bis(2-chloroanilione) 'MOC~ bya new sensitive method for biological monitoring. Int. Arch.
occup. env~on. lfeaùh, 55, 159-167
Dunkel, YC., Pienta, RJ., Sivak, A. & Traul, K.A. (1981) Comparative neoplastic transformation
responses of BALB/3D cells, Syrian hamster embryo cells, and Rauscher murine leukemia
virus-infected Fischer 344 rat embryo cells to che mi cal carcinogens. J natl Cancer lnst., 67,
1303-1315
Edwards, J.W & Priestly, B.G. (1992) Biological and biological-effect monitoring ofworkers exposed
to 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline). lfum. ex. Toxicol., 11, 229-236
Eller, P.M., ed. (1985) NIOSlf Manual of Analytical Methods, 3rd ed., Suppl. 1 (DHHS (NIOSH) Publ.
No. 84-100), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, pp. 8302-1-8302-4
Farmer, P.B., Rickard, J. & Robertson, S. (1981) The metabolism and distribution of 4,4' -methylene-
bis(2-chloroaniline) (MBOCA) in rats. J appl. Toxicol., 1,317-322
Fishbein, L. (1984) Aromatic amines'. ln: Hutzinger, O., ed., The lfandbook of Environmental
Chemistry, VoL. 3, Part C, Berlin, Springer-Verlag, pp. 1-40
Galloway, S.M., Bloom, A.D., Resnick, M., Margolin, B.H., Nakamura, F., Archer, P. & Zeiger, E.
(1985) Development of a standard protocol for in vitro cytogenetic testing with Chinese hamster
ovary cells: comparison of results for 22 compounds in two laboratories. Environ. Mutag., 7,1-51
Garner, Re., Welch, A. & Pickering, e. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 coded compounds in the
Salmonella/microsome assay. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,2828
Gatehouse, D. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 coded compounds in the 'microtiter' fluctuation test.
Prog. Mutat. Res., 1, 376-386
Groth, D.H., Weigel, WW, Tolos, WP., Brewer, D.E., Cheever, K.L. & Burg, J.R (1984)
4,4' -Methylene-bis-onho-chloro-anilne (MBOCA): absorption and excretion after skin
application and gavage. Environ. Res., 34,38-54
Grundmann, E. & Steinhoff, D. (1970) Liver and lung tumours after administration of 3,3' -dichloro-
4,4' -diaminodiphenylmethane to rats (Ger.). Z. Krebsforsch., 74, 2839298 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Haworth, S., Lawlor, T., Mortelmans, K., Speck, W. & Zeiger, E. (1983) Salmonella mutagenicity test
results for 250 chemIcals. Environ. Mutag., 1,3-142
Health and Safety Executive (1985) Occupational Exsure Limits 1987, London, Her Majesty's
Stationery Offce
Hesbert, A., Bottin, M.C. & De Ceaurriz, J. (1985) Mutagenicity of 4,4'-methylene-bis(2-chloro-
anilne) 'MOCA' and its N-acetyl derivatives in S. tyhimurium. lnt. Arch. occup. environ. Health,
55, 169-174
Ho, T., Hardigree, A.A, Larimer, EW., Nix, C.E., Rao, T.K., Tipton, S.c. & EpIer, J.L. (1979)
Comparative mutagenicity study of potentially carcinogenic industrial compounds (Abstract
Ea-10). Environ. Mutag., 1, 167-168
Hosein, H.R. & Van Roosmalen, P.R (1978) Acute exposure to methylene-bis-ortho chloroanilne
(MOCA). Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. J., 39, 49697
Hubbard, S.A., Green, M.H.L., Bridges, RA., Wain, A.J. & Bridges, J.W (1981) Fluctuation test with
S9 and hepatocyte activation. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,361-370
IAC (1974) lARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
VoL. 4, Some Aromatic Amines, Hydrazine and Related Substances, N-Nitroso Compounds and
Miscellaneous Ækylating Agents, Lyon, pp. 65-71
IAC (1982a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 29, Some Industrial Chemicals and Dyestuff, Lyon, pp. 345-389
IAC (1982b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals ta Humans,
VoL. 28, The Rubber Industry, Lyon
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks ta Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 ta 42, Lyon,
pp. 246247
IAC (1987b )IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenie Risks ta Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 ta 42, Lyon,
pp.211-216
IAC (1987c) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks ta Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp.332-334
Ichikawa, Y., Yoshida, M., Okayama, A., Hara, 1. & Morimoto, K. (1990) Biological monitoring for
workers exposed to 4,4'-methylenebis (2-chloroanilne). Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. J., 51, 5-7
Ichinotsubo, D., Mower, H. & Mandel, M. (1981) Mutagen testing of a series of paired compounds
with the Ames Salmonella testing system. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,298-301
Ihara ChemIcal Industry Co. (undated) Data Sheet: Cuamine-M (4,4'-Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline)),
Tokyo
ILO (1991) Oceupational Exsure Limits for Airbome Taxie Substances, 3rd ed. (Occupational Safety
and Health Series No. 37), Geneva, International Labour Office, pp. 128129
Jagannath, D.R., Vultaggio, D.M. & Brusick, D.J. (1981) Genetic activity of 42 coded compounds in
the mitotic gene conversion assay using Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain D4. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,456-7
Kada, 1: (1981) The DNA-damaging activity of 42 coded compounds in the rec-assay. Prog. Mutat.
Res., 1, 175-182
Kaderlik, K.R., Talaska, G., DeBord, D.G., Osorio, A.M. & Kadlubar, EE (1993) 4,4' -Methylene-
bis(2-chloroanilne)-DNA adduct analysis in human ex:oliated urothelial cells by
32P-postlabellng. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev, 2, 63-69MOCA 299
Kassinova, G.V, Kovaltsova, S.V, Marfin, S.V & Zakharov, I.A. (1981) Activity of 40 coded
compounds in differential inhibition and mitotic crossing-over assays in yeast. Prog. Mutat. Res.,
1, 434-55
Keeslar, F.L. (1986) The removal and control of methylene bis orthochloroanilne in residential and
industrial areas of Adrian, Michigan. ln: 1986 Hazardous Material Spills-Conference Pro-
ceedings. Preparedness, Prevention, Control and Cleanup of Releases, May 5-8, 1986, St Louis,
Missouri (NIOSH-00165082), Cincinatti, OH, National Institute for Occupational Safety and
Health
Kommineni, C., Groth, D.H., Frockt, 1.., Voelker, R.W & Stanovick, RP. (1978) Determination of the
tumorigenic potential of methylene-bis-orthochloroaniline. 1. environ. Pathol. Toxicol.,2, 149-171
Kugler-Steigmeier, M.E., Friederich, U., Graf, U., Lutz, WK, Maier, P. & Schlatter, C. (1989) Geno-
toxicity of aniline derivatives in various short-term tests. Mutat. Res., 211, 279-289
Kuslikis, RI., Trosko, J.E. & Braselton, WE., Jr (1991) Mutagenicity and effect on gap-junctional
intercellular communication of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) and Its oxidized metabolites.
Mutagenesis,6, 19-24
Linch, A.L., O'Connor, G.R, Barnes, J.R., Killan, AS., Jr & Neeld, WE., Jr (1971) Methylene-
bis-ortho-chloroaniline (MOCA): evaluation of hazards and exposure control. Am. ind. Hyg.
Assac. 1.,32, 802-819
Loke, J. (1986) Fixing exposure limits for toxic chemicals in the UK-some case studies. Sei. total
Environ., 51, 237-260
Lowry, L.K & Clapp, D.E. (1992) Urinary 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) (MBOCA): a case
study for biological monitoring. AppL. occup. environ. Hyg., 7, 1-6
MacDonald, DJ. (1981) Salmonella/microsome tests on 42coded chemicals. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,
285-297
Manis, M.O. & Braselton, WE., Jr (1984) Structure elucidation and in vitro reactivity of the major
metabolite of 4,4'-methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) (MBOCA) in canine urine. Fundam. appL.
Toxicol., 4, 1001008
Manis, M.O. & Braselton, WE., J r (1986) Metabolism of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) by canine
liver and kidney slices. Drug Metab. Disposition, 14, 166-174
Manis, M.O., Wiliams, D.E., McCormack, KM., Schock, RJ., Lepper, L.F., Ng, Y.-C. & Braselton,
WE. (1984) Percutaneous absorption, disposition, and excretion of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloro-
anilne) in dogs. Environ. Res., 33, 234-245
Martire, G., Vricella, G., Perfumo, A.M. & De Lorenzo, F. (1981) Evaluation of the mutagenic activity
of coded compounds in the Salmonella test. Prog. Mutal. Res., 1, 271-279
Matsushima, T., Takamoto, Y., Shirai, A, Sawamura, M. & Sugimura, T (1981) Reverse mutation test
on 42 coded compounds with the E. coli WP2 system. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,387-395
McCann, J., Choi, E., Yamasaki, E. & Ames, RN. (1975) Detection of carcinogens as mutagens in the
Salmonella/microsome test: assay of 300 chemicals. Proc. natl Acad. Sei. USA, 72,5135-5139
McKerrell, P.J., Saunders, G.A. & Geyer, R (1987) Determination of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloro-
aniline) in urine by high-performance liquid chromatography. 1 Chromatogr, 408, 399-41
McQueen, C.A & Williams, G.M. (1982) Cyotoxicity of xenobiotics in adult rat hepatocytes in
primary culture. Fundam. appl. Toxicol.,2, 139-144
McQueen, C.A, Maslansky, CJ., Crescenzi, S.B. & Wiliams, G.M. (1981) The genotoxicity of 4,4'-
methylenebis-2-chloroanilne in rat, mouse and hamster hepatocytes. Toxicol. appL. Pharmacol.,
58,231-235300 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Mehta, RD. & von Borstel, Re. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 encoded compounds in the haploid
yeast reversion assay, strain XV185-14e. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,414-23
Mitchell, AD., Rudd, CJ. & Caspary, WJ. (1988) Evaluation of the L5178Y mouse lymphoma cell
mutagenesis assay: intralaboratory results for sixt-three coded chemicals tested at SRI Inter-
nationaL. Environ. mol. Mutag., 12 (Suppl. 13),37-101
Mori, H., Yoshimi, N., Sugie, S., Iwata, H., Kawai, K., Mashizu, N. & Shimizu, H. (1988) Genotoxicity
of epoxy resin hardeners in the hepatocyte primary culture/DNA repair test. Mutat. Res., 204,
683-688
Morton, K.C., Lee, M.-S., Siedlik, P. & Chapman, R (1988) Metabolism of 4,4' -methylenebis-2-
chloroaniline (MOCA) by rats in vivo and formation of N-hydroxy MOCA by rat and human
liver microsomes. Carcinogenesis, 9, 131-139
Myhr, RC. & Caspary, WJ. (1988) Evaluation of the L5178Y mou se lymphoma cell mutagenesis
system: intralaboratory results for 63 coded chemicals tested at Litton Bionetics, Inc. Environ.
mol. Mutag., 12 (Suppl. 13), 103-194
Nagao, M. & Takahashi, Y. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 coded compounds in the Salmonella/-
microsome assay. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,302-313
National Swedish Board of Occupational Safety and Health (1984) Hygieniska Gränsärden (Hygiene
limit values), Stockholm, p. 32
Osorio, AM., Clapp, D., Ward, E., Wilson, H.K. & Cocker, J. (1990) Biological monitoring of a worker
acutely exposed to MBOCA Am. 1. ind. Med., 18, 577-589
Palmer Davis Seika (1992) Material Safety Data Sheet: Bis Amine A (4,4' -Methylene-bis(2-chloro-
aniline)), Fort Washington, NY
Parris, G.E., Diachenko, G.W, Entz, RC., Poppiti, J.A., Lombardo, P., Rohrer, TK. & Hesse, J.L.
(1980) Waterborne methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) and 2-chloroaniline contamination around
Adrian, Michigan. Bull. environ. Contam. Toncol., 24, 497-503
Parry, J.M. & Sharp, D. (1981) Induction of mitotic aneuploidy in the yeast strain D6 by 42 coded
compounds. Prog. Mutat. Res., L, 468-80
PEDCo Environmental (1984) Analysis of Workplace Monitoring Data for MOCA (Contract No.
68-02-3935), Washington DC, US Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Pesticides and
Toxic Substances
Perry, P.E. & Thomson, EJ. (1981) Evaluation of the sister chromatid exchange method in mam-
malian cells as a screening system for carcinogens. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,560569
Pouchert, e.J. (1981) The Aldrich Library of Infrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 730
Purnell, e.J. & Warwick, C.J. (1981) Method 3-Analysis of 3,3' -dichloro- 4,4' -diaminodiphenyl-
methane (MOCA) and 2-chloroaniline (OCA) in air. ln: Egan, H., Fishbein, L., Castegnaro, M.,
O'Neil, I.K. & Bartsch, H., eds, Environmental Carcinogens: Selected Methods of Analysis, VoL. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines and Aw Dyes in the General and Industrial Environment (IARC Scientific
Publications No. 40), Lyon, IARC, pp. 133-140
Rao, TK., Dorsey, G.F., Allen, RE. & Epier, J.L. (1982) Mutagenicity of 4,4'-methylenedianilne
derivatives in the Salmonella histidine revers ion assay. Arch. Toxicol., 49, 185-190MOCA 301
Rice, J.R. & Kissinger, P.T. (1981) Method 4-Determination ofbenzidine, 3,3' -dimethoxybenzidine,
4-aminobiphenyl, 3,3' -dichlorobenzidine and 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA l in
soil sam pIes, surface water and groundwater by liquid chromatography with electrochemical
detection. ln: Egan, H., Fishbein, L., Castegnaro, M., O'Neil, I.K. & Bartsch, H., eds, Envi-
ronmental Carcinogens Selected Methods of Anlysis, VoL. 4, Some Aromatic Amines and Az Dyes
in the General and Industril Environment (IAC Scientific Publications No. 40), Lyon, IAC,
pp. 141-151
Richold, M. & Jones, E. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 coded compounds in the Salmonella/-
microsome assay. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,314-322
Rowland, I. & Severn, B. (1981) Mutagenicity of carcinogens and noncarcinogens in the Salmonella/-
microsome test. Prog. Mutat. Res., L, 323-332
Russfield, AB., Homburger, F., Boger, E., Van Dongen, c.G., Weisburger, E.K. & Weisburger, J.H.
(1975) The carcinogenic effect of 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline) in mice and rats. Toxicol.
appl. Pharmacol., 31, 47-54
Sabbioni, G. & Neumann, H.-G. (1990) Quantification of haemoglobin binding of 4,4' -methylenebis-
(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA) in rats. Arch. Toxicol., 64, 451-458
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1980 Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1981-1991 Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA
Salamone, M.F., HeddIe, J.A & Katz, M. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 41 compounds in the in vivo
micronucleus assay. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,68697
Savage, R.E., Jr, Wei gel, WW & Krieg, E.F., Jr (1992) Induction of ornithine decarboxylase activity by
4,4' -methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) in the rat. Cancer Lett., 62, 63-68
Segerbäck, D. & KadIubar, F.F. (1992) Characterization of 4,4'-methylenebis(2-chloroaniline)-DNA
adducts formed in vivo and in vitro. Carcinogenesis, 13, 1587-1592
Sharp, D.C. & Pany, J.M. (1981) Induction of mitotic gene conversion by 41 coded compounds using
the yeast culture JD1. Prog. Mutat. Res., L, 491-501
Shivapurkar, N., Lehman, T.A, Schut, H.AJ. & Stoner, G.D. (1987) DNA binding of 4,4' -methylene-
bis(2-chIoroaniIine) (MOCA) in expIant cultures of human and dog bladdeL Cancer Lett., 38,
41-48
SiIk, N.A., Lay, J.O., Jr & Martin, C.N. (1989) Covalent binding of 4,4' -methylenebis(2-chloroanilne)
to rat liver DNA in vivo and of its N-hydroxylated derivative to DNA in vitro. Biochem.
PhanncoL, 38, 279-287
Simmon, \ZF. & Shepherd, G.F. (1981) Mutagenic activity of 42 coded compounds in the Salmonella/-
microsome assay. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,333-342
State of California (1992) General Industry Safety Orders, Title 8, No. 5215, 4,4' - Methylenebis(2-chloro-
aniline), Sacramento, CA, pp. 886890
Steinhoff, D. & Grundmann, E. (971) Carcinogenic effect of 3,3' -dichloro-4,4' -diaminodiphenyl-
methane in rats (GeL). Naturwissenschaften, 58,578
Stoner, G.D., Shivapurkar, N.M., Schut, H.A.J. & Lehman, 'tA. (1988) DNA binding and adduct
formation of 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroanilne) (MOCA) in expIant cultures of human and dog
bladder. ln: King, C.M., Romano, L.J. & Schuetzle, D., eds, Carcinogenic and Mutagenic
Respanses to Aromatic Amines and Nitroarenes, Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 237-240302 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Stula, E.F., Sherman, H., Zapp, J .A., J r & Clayton, J. w., J r (1975) Experimental neoplasia in rats from
oral administration of 3,3' -dichlorobenzidine, 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroanilne), and 4,4'-
methylene-bis(2-methylanilne). Toxicol. appl. Pharmcol., 31, 159-176
Stula, E.F., Barnes, J.R., Sherman, H., Reinhardt, c.F. & Zapp, Z.A., Jr (1977) Urinary bladder
tumors in dogs from 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroaniline)(MOCA~).1. environ. Pathol. Toxicol., l,
31-50
Styles, J.A. (1981) Activity of 42 coded compounds in the BHK-21 cell transformation test. Prog.
Mutat. Res., 1,638-
Taylor, D.G. (1977) NIOSH Manua of Analytical Methods, 2nd ed., VoL. 1, Cincinnati, OH, National
Institute for Occupation al Safety and Health, pp. 236-1-236-9
Thomas, J.D. & Wilson, H.K. (1984) Biological monitoring ofworkers exposed to 4,4'-methylenebis
(2-chloroaniline) (MOCA). Br. 1. ind. Med., 41, 547-551
Thomson, J .A. (1981) MutagenIc activity of 42 coded compounds in the lambda induction assay. Prog.
Mutat. Res., 1, 224-235
Tobes, M.C., Brown, L.E., Chin, B. & Marsh, D.D. (1983) Kinetics of tissue distribution and
elimination of 4,4' -methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) in rats. Toxicol. Lett., 17, 69-75
Trippel-Schulte, P., Zeiske, J. & Kettrup, A. (1986) Track analysis of selected benzidine and diamino-
diphenylmethane derivatives in urine by means of liquid chromatography using precolumn
sample preconcentration, UV and electrochemical detection. Chromatographia, 22, 138-146
Trueman, R.w. (1981) Activity of 42 coded compounds in the Salmonella reverse mutation test. Prog.
Mutat. Res., 1,343-350
US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (1984) Manual of Analytical Methods, 3rd
ed., Method 8302 (NIOSH (HEW) Pub. No. 84- 1(0), Cincinatt, OH, pp. 8302-1-8302-4
US National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (199) Manual of Analytical Methods, 4th
ed., Method 5029 (NIOSH (HEW) Pub. No. 90-1(0), Cincinatti, OH, pp. 5029-1-5029-5
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB No. 2629),
Bethesda, MD
US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (1988) 0- Dianisidine; 4,4' - Methylenebis(2-chloro-
aniline) (MOCA); o-Tolidine (Method No. 71) Salt LakeCity, UT
US Tariff Commission (1957) Synthetic Organic Chemicals, United States Production and Sales, 1956
(Report No. 20, Second Series), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, p. 74
Van Roosmalen, P.B., Klein, A.L. & Drummond, 1. (1981) Method 8-Determination of3,3' -dichloro-
4,4' -diaminodiphenylmethane (MOCA) in urine. ln: Egan, H., Fishbein, L., Castegnaro, M.,
O'Neil, I.K. & Bartsch, H., eds, Environmental Carcinogens Selected Methods of Analysis, VoL. 4,
Some Aromatic Amines and Aw Dyes in the General and Industril Environment (IAC Scientific
Publications No. 40), Lyon, IARC, pp. 183-191
Venitt, S. & Crofton-Sleigh, C. (1981) Mutagenicity of 42 coded compounds in a bacterial assay using
Escherichia coli and Salmonella tyhimurium. Prog. Mutat. Res., 1,351-360
Verschueren, K. (1983) Handbook of Environmental Data on Organic Chemicals, 2nd ed., New York,
Van Nostrand Reinhold, p. 846
Voorman, R. & Penner, D. (1986) Fate of MBOCA (4,4'-methylene-bis(2-chloro- anilne)) in soiL
Arch. environ. Contam. Toxicol., 15, 595-62
Wan, K.c., Dare, B.R. & Street, N.R. (1989) Biomedical surveilance of workers exposed to 4,4'-
methylene-bis(2-chloroanilne) (MBOCA) in Perth, Western Australia. 1. R. Soc. Health, 5,
159-167MOCA 303
Ward, E., Clapp, D., Tolos, W. & Groth, D. (1986) Effcacy of urinary monitoring for 4,4' -methylene-
bis(2-chloroaniline). J. occup. Med., 28, 637-62
Ward, E., Smith, A.B. & Halperin, W. (1987) 4,4'-Methylenebis (2-chloroaniline): an unregulated
carcinogen. Am. J. ind. Med., 12,537-549
Ward, E., Halperin, w., Thun, M., Grossman, H.B., Fink, B., Koss, L., Osorio, A.M. & Schulte, P.
(1988) Bladder tumors in two young males occupationally exposed to MBOCA. Am. J. ineL. Med.,
14, '27-272
Ward, E., Halperin, w., Thun, M., Grossman, H.B., Fink, B., Koss, L., Osorio, A.M. & Schulte, P.
(199) Screening workers exposed to 4,4' -methylene bis(2-chloroaniline) for bladder cancer by
cystoscopy. J. occup. Med., 32, 865-868
Will, w., Gossler, K, Raithel, H.J. & Schaller, KR. (1981) Quantitative determination of 4,4'-
methylene-bis(2-chloranilne) (MOCA~) in the urine by high-pressure liquid chromatography.
Arbeitsmed. Sozialmed. Praventivmed., 16,201-203
Wiliams, G.M., Laspia, M.E & Dunkel, YC. (1982) Reliability of the hepatocyte primary
culture/DNA repair test in testing of coded carcinogens and noncarcinogens. Mutat. Res., 97,
359-370
Wu, K, Leslie, c.L. & Stacey, N.H. (1989a) Effects of mutagenic and non-mutagenic anilne deri-
vatives on rat liver drug-metabolizing enzymes. Xenobiotica, 19, 1275-1283
Wu, K, Bonin, AM., Leslie, c.L., Baker, R.S.U. & Stacey, N.H. (1989b) Genotoxicity and effects on
rat liver drug-metabolizing enzymes by possible substitutes for 4,4' -methylene bis(2-chloro-
aniline). Carcinogenesis, 10, 2119-2122
Yoneyama, K & Matsumura, E (1984) Microbial metabolism of 4,4' -methylene- bis(2-chloroaniline).
Arch. environ. Contam. Toxicol., 13, 501-507
Yun, C.-H., Shimada, T & Guengerich, EP. (1992) Contributions of human liver cytochrome P450
enzymes to the N-oxidation of 4,4' -methylene-bis(2-chloroanilne). Carcinogenesis, 13, 217-222para-CHLOROANILINE
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1. 1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Serv Reg. No.: 106-47-8
Chem. Abstr. Name: 4-Chlorobenzenamine
IUPAC Systematic Name: para-Chloroaniline
Synonyms: 4-Aminochlorobenzene; para-aminochlorobenzene; 1 -amino-4-chloroben-
zene; 4-amino- 1 -chlorobenzene; 4-chloro- 1 -aminobenzene; 4-chloroanilne; 4-chloro-
phenylamine; para-chlorophenylamine
CInNH2
C6H6CINMoL. wt: 127.57
1. 1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the pure substance
(a) Description: Rhombic prisms (Lide, 1991); technical material: crystalline, colourless
to light-amber; flakes, light-yellow to tan (DuPont Co., 1991a,b)
(b) Boiling-point: 232°C (lide, 1991)
(c) Me/ting-point: 72.5 °C (Lide, 1991)
(d) Density: 1.429 at 19 °C/4 °C (Lide, 1991)
(e) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet, nuclear magnetic resonance and mass
spectral data have been reported (Pouchert, 1981, 1983; Sadtler Research Labora-
tories, 1980, 1991; Weast & Astle, 1985).
(j Solubility: Slightly soluble in water (0.237 wt%), acetone, ethanol and diethyl ether
(Lide, 1991; DuPont Co., 1991a,b)
(g) Volatility: Vapour pressure, 0.15 mm Hg (20 Pa) at 25°C (technical material);
relative vapour density (air = 1),4.4 (DuPont Co., 1991a,b)
(h) Octanol/water partiton coeffcient (P): log p, 1.83 (Hansch & Leo, 1979)
(i) Conversion factor: mg/m3 = 5.22 x ppm1
lCalculated from: mg/m3 = (molecular weight/24.45) x ppm, assuming normal temperature (25°C) and.
pressure (760 mm Hg (101.3 kPJ)
-305-306 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
para-Chloroaniline is commercially available as a technical-grade product with the
following specifications: purity, 98.5-99.0% min.; water, 0.10% max.; aniline (see IARC,
1982a, 1987a), 0.1 % max.; and isomeric chloroanilnes, 0.5% max. (DuPont Co., 1991a;
Hoechst Celanese Corp., 1989). It is also available in research quantities at purities ranging
from 98 to :; 99% (Janssen Chimica, 1990; Riedel-de-Haen, 1990; Heraeus, 1991;
Lancaster Synthesis, 1991; TCI America, 1991; AIdrich Chemical Co., 1992; Fluka Chemie
AG, 1993).
1.1.4 Analysis
A simple gas chromatographie method was developed which provides sensitivity and
specificity for the analysis of complex mixtures of common herbicide metabolites, including
para-chloroaniline, in aqueous solution. The anilnes were converted to N-acetyl,N-tri-
fluoroacetyl derivatives and analysed by gas chromatography with electron capture detection
(Hargesheimer et al., 1981).
A thin-layer chromatographic method was reported for the analysis of primary aromatic
amines, including para-chloroanilne, in mixtures with a low-nanogram detection leveL.
Thin-layer chromatograms are developed by diazotization of the amines with nitrogen oxide
vapour, followed by coupling with N-(I-naphthyl)ethylenediamine dihydrochloride to
produce sharp spots with distinctly different colours (Narang et al., 1982).
ln order to assess the applieability of methods developed by the US Environmental
Protection Agency and similar survey methods for the determination of a broad range of
principal organic hazardous constituents, James et al. (1983) evaluated gas chromatography
with flame ionization detection and with mass spectrometry for the analysis of complex
mixtures containingpara-chloroaniline. The limit of detection for this compound was 0.20 ng
by the first method and 1.9 ng by the second.
A macroporous cation exchanger in the hydrogen form was developed to retain organic
bases, including para-chloroaniline, as cations from aqueous samples. Neutral organic
compounds are removed by washing with methanol and ethyl ether, and the protonated bases
are converted to their free base forms with ammonia. Afer evaporation, the individual bases
are separated by gas chromatography with flame ionization detection (Kaczvnsky et al.,
1983).
Different adsorption-desorption techniques were compared, including capilary gas
chromatography with flame ionization and/or electrochemical detection and a reverse-
osmosis technique using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, for the
analysis of selected organic pollutants, includingpara-chloroaniline (Malaiyandi et al., 1987).
Polar aniline derivatives, including para-chloroaniline, were determined in aqueous
environmental samples by on-line liquid chromatographic preconcentration techniques. The
limit of detection using ultraviolet absorption at 235 nm or electrochemical detection was
10 ppt (Hennion et al., 1991).
Fourier transform-infrared techniques were applied to environmental samples to allow
identification of trace components at a nanogram leveL. The precision of the techniques waspara-CHLOROANLINE 307
shown to be comparable to that obtainable by gas chromatography-mass spectrometiy
(Gurka et al., 1991).
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
para-Chloroaniline is prepared primarily by the reduction of para-nitrochlorobenzene
(Dunlap, 1981). It has also been produced by the reaction of 1,4-dichlorobenzene (para-
dichlorobenzene; see IARC, 1982b, 1987b) with ammonia (US National Library of Medi-
cine, 1992).
Production of para-chloroanilne in the USA has been estimated to be 45-450 tonnes
peryear. The compound (or its hydrochloride salt) is produced byone company each in India,
Japan, the United Kingdom and the USA and by two companies in Germany (Chemical
Information Servces, 1991).
1.2.2 Use
para-Chloroaniline is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of dyes (Vat Red 32;
Azoic Coupling Agents 5 and 10) and pigments (Pigment Green 10) and as an intermediate in
the production of some pharmaceuticals and agricultural chemIcals (urea herbicides, e.g.,
monuron; see IARC, 1976) (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
para-Chloroaniline is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
1.3.3 Uiter and sediments
Aniline and chlorinated anilines enter the estuarine environment by various routes,
since they are formed during the microbial degradation ofphenylcarbamate, phenylurea and
acylanilde herbicides and nitroaniline fungicides. They can also enter as waste effuents
from dye manufacturing plants. ln laboratory studies, photolysis was shown to be an
important degradation route for para-chloroanilne in estuarine water. There was no micro-
bial degradation of chloroanilines during short-term (up to three days) incubations; however,
there was rapid microbial degradation of chloroanilne and aniline photoproducts (Schaefer
et al., 1980; Sakagami et aL., 1986; Huang et al., 1987; Mutanen et aL., 1988).
During 1976-78, the water of the Rhine River contained about 0.1 J.g/l para-chloro-
anilne. Following bank or dune filtration of the water, the levels were 0.03-0.1 J.g/l or
.c 0.01 J.g/l para-chloroanilne, respectively. The half-life of the compound in water was308 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
estimated to be 0.3-3 days in river water and 30-300 days in groundwater (Zoeteman et al.,
1980).
ln 1979, the mean concentration ofpara-chloroaniline in the Rhine River at Lobith, the
Netherlands, was 0.22 J,g/l (max., 0.74). Mean concentrations in the Rhine tributaries, Boven
Merwede and Ijssel, were 0.14 (max., 0.24) and 0.13 (max., 0.29) J,g/l, respectively. para-
Chloroaniline was frequently detected in the Meuse River at Eijsden and Lith, but the mean
concentrations were only 0.02 (max., 0.08) and 0.03 (max., 0.12) J,g/l, respectively (Wegman
& De Korte, 1981).
para-Chloroaniline was not detected in two tap-water samples from municipal sources in
the Lake Ontario region (Kingston and Trenton), Canada; the estimated detection threshold
was 20-30 pg (Malaiyandi et al., 1987).
1.3.4 Soil
ln soil, para-chloroaniline binds to humic materials and is slowly degraded by aerobic
and anaerobic processes (Hargesheimer et al., 1981; Freitag et al., 1984; Dao et al., 1986).
Residues of para-chloroaniline were detected in soil up to 12 years after application of the
herbicide buturon (Reiml et al., 1989).
1.3.5 Other
Levels of para-chloroaniline were determined in goldfish (Carassius auratus) after
experimental pond water had been treated to maintain a para-chloroaniline concentration of
50 ppb (J,g/l) for four to six weeks. The highest levels after 10 weeks were found in fat (about
7 mg/kg) (Gebefuegi et al., 1988).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
Occupational exposure limits have been set in several countries: Bulgaria, 0.3 mg/m3
(time-weighted average, TWA) with a notation that the compound may irritate skin;
Romania, 5 mg/m3 (average), 10 mg/m3 (max.), with skin irritation notation; the former
USSR, 0.3 mg/m3 (maximal acceptable concentration) with a skin irritation notation; and the
former Yugoslavia, 0.05 mg/m3 (TWA) (Cook, 1987).
DuPont Co. (1991b) proposed an acceptable exposure limit of 0.5 mg/m3 for an 8-h
TWA and 0.3 mg/m3 for a 12-h TWA, with a skin irritation notation.
2. Studies of Cancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, six weeks of age, were fed a diet
containing 2500 or 5000 mg/kg (ppm) para-chloroaniline (technical grade (puritypara-CHLOROANLlNE 30
unspecified), melting-point, 68-71 cC) for 78 weeks, followed by a 13-week observation
period. A group of 20 male and 20 female con trois received the diet alone. Decreased body
weight gain was observed in both treated males and females relative to that of controls. The
numbers of survving animaIs at 91 weeks were: males-control, 18/20; low-dose, 44/50;
high-dose, 44/50; females-control, 20/20; low-dose, 41/50; high-dose, 39/50. Haemangio-
sarcomas occurred in different organs (subcutaneous tissue, spleen, liver, kidney) in 2/20
control, 9/50 low-dose and 14/50 high dose males; one haemangioma was observed in the
low-dose group. The increased incidence otall vascular tumours was significant ip .: 0.025,
Cochran-Armitage trend test). Among females, haemangiosarcomas occurred at aIl of the
sites in 0/18 control, 3/49 low-dose and 7/42 high-dose animaIs; one haemangioma was
observed in the high-dose group. The increased incidence of combined vascular tumours in
females was significant (p = 0.012, Cochran-Armitage trend test) (US National Cancer
Institute, 1979).
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, seven to eight weeks old, were admi-
nistered 3, 10 or 30 mg/kg bw para-chloroaniline (99.1 % pure) in aqueous hydrochloric acid
(molar equivalents) by gavage on five days a week for 103 weeks. Controls received
deionized water at a volume of 5 ml/kg. Survval at 104 weeks was: males-controls, 43/50;
low-dose, 36/50; mid-dose, 29/50 (p = 0.005); high-dose 35/50; females-controls, 39/50;
low-dose, 42/50, mid-dose; 44/50, high-dose, 41/50. Hepatocellular adenomas were
observed in male mice: controls, 9/50; low-dose, 15/49; mid-dose, 10/50; high-dose, 4/50;
and hepatocellular carcinomas occurred with a significantly positive trend: controls, 3/50;
low-dose, 7/49; mid-dose, 11/50; high-dose, 17/50 (p .: 0.001, logistic regression trend test).
The incidence in males ofhepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas combined was: controls,
11/50; low-dose, 21/49 (p = 0.019, logistic regression test); mid-dose, 20/50 (p = 0.045,
logistic regression test); high-dose, 21/50 (p = 0.027, logistic regression test). The incidence
of haemangiosarcomas of liver and spleen combined was 4/50 controls, 4/49 low-dose, 1/50
mid-dose and 10/50 high-dose male mice (p = 0.014, logistic regression trend test). No
significant increase in the incidence of such tumours occurred in females (US National
Toxicology Program, 1989; Chhabra et al., 1991).
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344 rats, six weeks of age, were fed diets
containing 250 or 500 ppm (mg/kg) para-chloroaniline (technical grade (purity unspecifiedD
for 78 weeks. A group of 20 male and 20 female con trois received the diet alone. Following a
24-week observation period, the survving animais were sacrificed. There was no difference
in body weight gain in the treated animais compared to the controls. Survval at week 102
was: males-controls, 18/20; low-dose, 46/50; high-dose, 38/50; females-controls, 18/20;
low-dose, 49/50; high-dose, 45/50. Mesenchymal tumours (fibroma, fibrosarcoma, haeman-
giosarcoma, osteosarcoma, sarcoma not otherwse specified) of the spleen or splenic capsule
occurred in 0120 control, 0/49 low-dose and 10/49 high-dose male rats (p = 0.001, Cochran-
Aritage trend test) and in 0/18 control, 2/49 low-dose and 5/42 high-dose females (US
National Cancer Institute, 1979; Goodman et al., 1984).
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344 rats, eight to ni ne weeks old, were
administered 2,6 or 18 mg/kg bw para-chloroaniline (99.1 % pure) in aqueous hydrochloric310 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
acid (molar equivalents) by gavage on five days per week for 103 weeks. A group of 50 male
and 50 female con trois received deionized water at 5 ml/kg. Survval at 105 weeks in
low-dose and mid-dose males was significantly greater th an that in the control group:
controls, 18/50; low-dose, 32/50 (p = 0.007); mid-dose, 32/50 (p = 0.005); high-dose 21/50;
as was that of high-dose females: control s, 27/50; low-dose, 39/50; mid-dose, 36/50;
high-dose, 37/50 (p = 0.043). The incidences of proliferative mesenchymal lesions and fatty
metamorphosis of the spleen were increased in high-dose males and females. The incidences
of fibromas and sarcomas in males are shown in Thble 1. Adrenal phaeochromocyomas,
including a few malignant phaeochromocyomas, were observed in 13/49 control s, 14/48
low-dose, 15/48 mid-dose and 26/49 high-dose male rats (p = 0.001, logistic regression trend
test). The incidence of mononuclear cell leukaemias was decreased in all treated groups:
males-controls, 21/49; low-dose, 3/50; mid-dose, 2/50; high-dose, 3/50; females-controls,
10/50; low-dose, 2/50; mid-dose, 1/50; high-dose, 1/50 (US National Toxicology Program,
1989; Chhabra et al., 1991).
Table 1. Incidences of tumours of the spleen in male rats
treated with para-chloroanilne
Thmour Control Low-dose Mid-dose High-dose
Fibroma 0/49 0/50 0/50 2/50
Fibrosarcoma 0/49 1/50 2/50 17/50**
Osteosarcoma 0/49 0/50 1/50 19/50**
Haemangiosarcoma 0/49 0/50 0/50 4/50*
Sarcomas,combined 0/49 1/50 3/50 38/50**
From US National Toxicology Program (1989); *, p = 0.07, logistic
regression pair-wise comparison; **, p .c 0.001, logistic regression
trend test
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolIsm and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
ln a patient suffering from acute poisoning by para-chloroaniline, conjugates of the
parent compound and 2-hydroxy-4-chloroanilne (2-amino-5-chlorophenol) were detected
as major urinary metabolites (Yoshida et aL. 1992).
Other evidence for the metabolism of para-chloroanilne in humans is indirect and is
derived from studies on the anticancer drug, sulofenur (N-(5-indanesulfonyl)-N'-(4-chloro-
phenyl)urea). 4-Chloroaniline-2-sulfate (2-amino-5-chlorophenyl sulfate) and para-chloro-
oxanilic acid, which are major and minor metabolites, respectively, of para-chloroaniline in
experimental animais, were identified together with free para-chloroanilne as minor urinary
metabolites of sulofenur after administration of an oral dose of p4C-para-chlorophenyl)-
sulofenur (31 mg/kg bw; 91.7 J.Ci; radiochemical purity, :; 99%) to a patient who had
previously received the same dose of unlabelled drug daily for six days (Ehlhardt, 1991).para-CHLOROANLlNE311
4.1.2 Experimental systems
Metabolism of para-chloroaniline in vitro by human granulocye myeloperoxidase has
been reported, resulting in at least 10 unknown peroxidation products (Bakkenist et al.,
1981).
The pharmacokinetics and metabolIsm of para-chloroaniline have been studied exten-
sively in Fischer 344 rats. ln male rats administered 14C-labelled compound (5 mCi/mmol
(0.04 mCi/mg) (radiochemical purity unspecifiedD at 0.3-30 mg/kg bw by gavage in 0.01 N
hydrochloric acid, 75-85% of the dose was excreted in urine and 8- 12% in faeces by 24 h;
only 4% was excreted as unchanged amine in urine, 2.5% in bile and 1 % in faeces. At seven
days, appreciable radiolabel was stil present in blood cells, accounting for 1-2 % of the dose.
Afer an intravenous dose of3.0 mg/kg bw in ethanol:propylene glycol:water (1:1:8), 60% of
the dose was excreted in urine after 4 h, 25 % was excreted in bile after 6 h, and 90% was
eliminated in urine and faeces by 8 h. Initial levels in tissues were highest in muscle :; fat :;
skin :; liver :; blood; and the kinetics of elimination was biphasic, with an initial half-time of
8 min and terminal half-times of 3-4 h in most tissues, except small intestine and fat (23-
29 h). para-Chloroacetanilide was detected as a metabolite in bile and in blood, but not in
urine or faeces, indicating further metabolism prior to excretion (US National Toxicology
Program, 1989).
Additional studies of the metabolism of 14C-para-chloroaniline (133 ¡.Ci/mg (17 mCi/-
mmol); radiochemical purity, :; 98%) were carried out in male Fischer 344 rats, female C3H
mice and male rhesus monkeys. The compound was given by oral intubation at a dose of 20
mg/kg bw in an aqueous solution adjusted to pH 5 with hydrochloric acid. ln rats, mice and
monkeys, respectively, the urine contained 90,82 and 67-74%, and the faeces contained 8, 5
and 1 % of the dose after 48 h. The major urinary metabolite in all three species was
4-chloroaniline-2-sulfate; in rats and monkeys, its N-acetyl derivative was also detected as a
minor urinary metabolite. ln rats and to a lesser extent in mice, two additional metabolites,
para-chloro-oxanilic acid and para-chloroglycolanilide, were observed as major and minor
urinary metabolites, respectively. ln monkeys, para-chloroacetanilide, which was not
detected in urine or faeces, and 4-chloroaniline-2-sulfate were the major metabolites found
in plasma (Ehlhardt & Howbert, 1991).
Afer oral dosing of female Wistar rats with para-chloroaniline (purity unspecified) in
propylene glycol at 0.6 mmol (77 mg)/kg bw by gavage, higher levels of haemoglobin binding
(569 mmol bound/mol haemoglobin per (mmol compound/kg bw)) were observed than with
12 other monocyclic aromatic amines. The release of free para-chloroaniline after alkaline
hydrolysis is consistent with the presence of a circulating N-hydroxy-para-chloroanilne
metabolite that enters eryhrocyes, is oxidized to para-chloronitrosobenzene and forms a
sulfinamide adduct with haemoglobin (Birner & Neumann, 1988). These data are also
consistent with the observation that at seven days radiolabel persisted in blood cells of
Fischer 344 rats treated with radiolabelled para-chloroaniline (US National Toxicology
Program, 1989).
N-Hydroxylation of para-chloroaniline has been demonstrated in vitro and shown to be
catalysed by hepatic microsomal cyochromes P450 in a wide variety of species, including
rats, mice, hamsters, guinea-pigs, rabbits, rainbow trout and red-winged blackbirds. ln312 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
mammals, multiple isozyes appear to be involved in the catalysis, since enzyes are
induced by both phenobarbital- and 3-methylcholanthrene-tye inducers (for reviews, see
Golly & Hlavica, 1987; Dady et al., 1991). Peroxidative metabolism of para-chloroaniline has
also been shown to be mediated by horseradish peroxidase, fungal chloroperoxidases, ram
seminal vesicle prostaglandin synthase, rabbit liver mIcrosomal lipid peroxides and by rabbit
haemoglobin in the presence of eryhrocye reductases. These results indicate that the
N-hydroxy derivative may be the initial product but that it is further oxidized enzyatically or
non-enzyatically to para-chloronitrosobenzene. Several dimerIc or halogen-containing
oxidation products have also been detected (Kaufman et al., 1973; Corbett et aL., 1978, 1980;
Golly & Hlavica, 1983; GoUy et al., 1984; GoUy & Hlavica, 1985; Doerge & Corbett, 1991).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
Methaemoglobinaemia, which is also consistent with the presence of a circulating N-
hydroxy-para-chloroaniline metabolite, has been reported in workers exposed to para-
chloroanilne and in neonates inadvertantly exposed in incubators to chlorhexidine gluco-
nate, which is known to decompose spontaneously to para-chloroaniline (Faivre et aL., 1971;
Linch, 1974; van der Vorst et al., 1990). Methaemoglobinaemia and haemolytic anaemia
have also been observed (Hainsworth et al., 1989; Taylor et al., 1989) in phase 1 clinical trials
after high doses of sulofenur (Ehlhardt, 1991).
4.2.2 Experimental systems
High levels of methaemoglobinaemia have been demonstrated after oral treatment of
female Wistar rats with para-chloroaniline (purity unspecified) in propylene glycol at
0.6 mmol (77 mg)/kg bw; of male and female Fischer 344 rats with para-chloroaniline hydro-
chIo ride (purity, ). 99%) in water at 5-80 mg/kg, five days per week for 13 weeks; of male
and female B6C3Fi mice withpara-chloroaniline hydrochloride (purity, ). 99%) in water at
7.5- 120 mg/kg, five days per week for 13 weeks; and of cats with para-chloroaniline (purity
and vehicle unspecified) at 0.0625 mmol (8 mg)/kg bw (McLean et al., 1969; Birner &
Neumann, 1988; Chhabra et al., 1990). Fischer rats given 80 mg/kg for a further 13 weeks had
lowered body weights; and both rats and mIce showed dose-related decreases in eryhrocye
haemoglobin and increases in spleen weight. Numerous lesions indicative of haemolytIc
anaemia and methaemoglobinaemia were observed, including haemosiderosis in the kidney,
liver and spleen and increased haematopoiesis in the liver and spleen in mice and rats;
bone-marrow hyperplasia was seen only in rats (Chhabra et aL., 1990). Nephrotoxicity was
also reported in male Fischer 344 rats given a single intraperitoneal dose of para-chloro-
aniline (purity unspecified) at 1.5 mmol (191 mg)/kg bw in saline, which induced decreased
urine volume, haematuria, elevated blood urea nitrogen and decreased renal cortical uptake
of para-aminohippurate (Rankin et al., 1986).
LDso values for para-chloroaniline (purity and vehicle unspecified) were estimated to be
200-480 mg/kg bw after single gavage doses to male Carworth-Wistar rats and 360 mg/kg bw
after dermal administration to male New Zealand rabbits (Smyth et al., 1962).para-CHLOROANLlNE313
ln the 103-week carcinogenicity study described on p. 309, several treatment-related
non-neoplastic lesions were observe d, inc1uding haemolytic anaemia, methaemoglobi-
naemia and fibrosis and fatty metaplasia of the spleen (US National Toxicology Program,
1989; Chhabra et al., 1991).
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
ln a study conducted in Germany, zebrafish (Brachydanio rerio) were kept in tap-water to
which 0, 0.04, 0.2 or 1.0 mg/l para-chloroaniline (technical grade; purity, ). 99%) had been
added (Bresch et al., 1990). The concentrations in the aquaria were analysed weekly by
high-performance liquid chromatography. No adverse effect was noted in the Fo fish or on
the numbers and viability of eggs produced. Eggs collected during the 22nd week of exposure
were allowed to develop with 'continuing exposure to 4-chloroaniline. Mortality was not
increased, but, at sexual maturity, over 90% of the Fi fish raised in 1.0 mg/l had spinal
abnormalities and ab normal abdominal swellings. Significantly fewer eggs were produced by
Fi fish in ail three exposed groups, and the viability of eggs was reduced in the 1.0 mg/l group.
An F2 generation exhibited the same effects: morphological abnormalities, reduced egg
counts and reduced viability of eggs at 1.0 mg/l, and reduced egg counts at 0.04 and 0.2 mg/L.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
para-Chloroaniline preferentially kiled the pol A - strain in the Escherichia coli pol
A - Ipol A + assay, both in the presence and absence of an exogenous metabolic system. It was
not mutagenic to Salmonella typhimurium, except to strain TA98, for which conflicting data
were obtained. It induced mutations inAspergillus nidulans and in mouse lymphoma 15178Y
cells at the tk locus. it did not induce mitotic recombination in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
para-Chloroaniline transformed primary cultures of Syrian hamster embryo cells, only in the
later of two studies from the same laboratory. It induced sister chromatid exchange and
chromosomal aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells in vitro.
s. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
para-Chloroaniline is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of dyes, pigments,
agricultural chemicals and pharmaceuticals. It is a persistent environmental degradation
product of sorne herbicides and fungicides.314
el(ji:eli.el..el
lX..o..::
l: -.
el 0vi ~o i-0,-
~.~0-i:.8 S
.. ~~ el.. ....~ ~ el vi~ el S ~
~ .~..0-..::i:.8 S0:i..el ~ el
vi..01.. ..
~~~ el '"el S ~
Q,=...-...=~eQ--=~.
~~~CoQ
(/-~~Q,
"i-~-
~
"C=~~...-
Q,=Q,e,SÑel..
Q,~-,...
~'"~IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57.. .. ..0' 0' 0'~ ~ ~..- ~- ~ ~ - ~ ~ ..': 00 ': 0' 00 ': ~ 00 ~el .. O'el _ ~..el '- 0'.. ~.r... 0"' -'r. .. '- .. - o.r... .. - a 00 0'.:: V) 00 V) '- .:: V) V) '- 00 .:: V) i: V) '- 00 00 c000 ~oo~ 0 oo~ oo~~ 0 00 OOO~~ 0'~~~c~ ~~~~~~~ ~C~~~~S~ ~c~ c~~'-~ .'-ti~O\'-elO''-'t .~O''-~ §'-ti .~..~ ~N~~~~ "'i: N~~ "'i:~~ ~~ N~~~~~ ~~~g ~ ~i: -~ i:- - ~i:- - ~-O''tu~ ~'-~ ~ ~ ~'-ti ~'-ti ~ ~ ~'-ti'-~ ti ~ ~'--i.~ i: i.~ Sl; i:_ S i:_ S i.l; i:_ i:__ S i. i:'-=~~ el 0 š el~ i: 0 el~ 0 el~ Š i: 0 el 0 el el~ š o~~~el~S ~~elS~~S~~§elS~S~~t§S~(j~'" :: § § :: 0 '" § :: 0 § :: 0 ~ S :: § :: :: 0 § ~ .-: ~~ 0 ~ N 0 ~ ~ ~ 0 ~ ~ 0 ~ N lX ~ 0 ~ 0 0 ~ N ~ ~ ~ ~
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ g ò ~ g ~ ~ ~ ~ Q ~ g ò ~ g ~ ~ ~ g ~ ò~. g ~ ~~V) ~V)_~~~~~V) _V)~~~V)~ N,. 1" ,. ,.,. ..
+ 1"' ..
1 + + + 1~1 o~+
+ 1 LA 1..
LA 1 + +~ 101
~'u.~
o..tl '"
:: ::
g g- -i: ~~
i: i: i: i: i:o oi: i:o oi: i: i:o i:o.2 i:o i:o i:o 0 0 o... .;: .;: .;: .2 ... ... .. ... ... .2 i: i: i: i: i: i: .! ,;i~~~~~~~~~~~~S~~~ooooo~ --E~SSSS~~~EEE~êEE~~~~~~~ 88
~ ~ :: :: :: :: S S SElS El S ~ S S El ~ ~ ~ E ~ .S ~ ~-~SSSSelelelelelelel~elelel~~~~~~ 0000
~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 8~ i:~~~~~ el el ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ el~~~~ 'u ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ i. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ i. Š ~ ~
C'.~ i. i. i. i. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ r- ~ ~ ~ el el el ~ ~ .3 :: El S~ Sôôôô~~~~~~~~~~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 0 S 00o _ a a a 0 V) V) V) V) V) V) V) ~ V) V) V) 00 00 00 00 00 ~ el ~ ~- $-----------~---~~~~~ S ~--c; 'E ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ E- ~ ~ ~ Ë5 Ë5 t5 ES Ë5 ~ ~ lŠ
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ § ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ .~ ~ ~ ~
8. ~ -1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 :~ .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1 .1.1 .~ ~ ~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~ § §\. ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ \. 1:: .~ .;:.~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~;g ~ ~ .. .. ~ ~ ~ ~ f ~ .5 S~ .(. 13 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 15 ~ ~ ì: ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 1j ~ ~ ~ ~:: e s
jj § § § § § § § § § § § ~ § § § § § § § §~ ~el el~ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ~~ 55
~ ~~ ~ ~ c; c; ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ tl ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ c; c; tl tl:d 0
~~ ~~~~~~~~~~~1~~~%%%%%~1 ~~- - ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~~ ~ ~ ~ ~Table 2 (contd)
Test systemResult Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)With
'B exogenous
i: metabolic1
system (":i
+ 25.~~ Myhr et al. (199) S~0 0.0100 Pienta & Kawalek (1981)~ 0 100.~~ Pienta et al. (1977)~+c500.~~ Anderson et al. (199)t:
~Without
exogenous
metabolic
system
G5l Gene mutation, mouse Iymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus +
TCS, Cell transformation, Syrn hamster embryo cells, clonaI assay +
TCS, Cell transformation, Syran hamster embryo cells, clonaI assay _
CIC, Chromosomai aberrations, CHO cells in vitro + c
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
DJn-vitro tests, J.g/mI; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
bpositive in three of four Iaboratories
CPositive in one of two Iaboratories
w..VI316 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
para-Chloroaniline was tested for carcinogenicity in mice and rats by administration in
the diet and by gavage. It produced haemangiosarcomas in male and female mice in different
organs after administration in the diet. It induced haemangiosarcomas of the spleen and liver
and hepatocellular adenomas and carcinomas in male mice after administration by gavage. It
induced sarcomas of the spleen and splenic capsule in male rats in both studies.
5.4 Other relevant data
para-Chloroaniline causes methaemoglobinaemia and is metabolized similarly in
humans and experimental animaIs.
para-Chloroaniline induced DNA damage in bacteria, but conficting results were
obtained for gene mutation. Gene mutation but not mitotic recombination was induced in
fungi. Gene mutation, sister chromatid exchange and chromosomal aberrations were
induced in cultured mammalian cells, while conflcting data were obtained for cell transfor-
mation.
5.5 Evaluation1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of para-chloroaniline.
There is suffcient evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of para-
chloroaniline.
Overall evaluation
para-Chloroaniline is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Croup 2B).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 269
Anderson, RE., Zeiger, E., Shelby, M.D., Resnick, M.A., Gulati, D.K., Ivett, J.L. & Loveday, K.S.
(199) Chromosome aberration and sister chromatid exchange test results with 42 chemIcals.
Environ. Mol. Mutag., 16 (SuppL. 18),55-137
Bakkenist, A.R.J., Plat, H. & Wever, R. (1981) Oxidation of 4-chloro-anilne catalyzed by human
myeloperoxidase. Bioorg. Chem., 10,324-328
IPor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.para-CHLOROANLlNE317
Bimer, G. & Neumann, H.-G. (1988) Biomonitoring of aromatic amines. II: Hemoglobin binding of
some monocyclic aromatic amines. Arch. Toxicol.,62, 110-115
Bresch, H., Beck, H., Ehlermanmn, D., Schlaszus, H. & Urbanek, M. (199) A long-term toxicity test
comprising reproduction and growth of zebrafish with 4-chloroaniline. Arch. environ. Contam.
Toxicol., 19,419-427
Chhabra, RS., Thompson, M., Elwell, M.R & Gerken, D.K (199) Toxicity of p-chloroaniline in rats
and mIce. Food chem. Toxicol., 28, 717-722
Chhabra, RS., Huff, J.E., Haseman, J.K, Elwell, M.R & Peters, AC. (1991) Carcinogenicity of
p-chloroanilne in rats and mice. Food chem. Taricol., 29, 119-124
Chemical Information Services (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers 1992/1993 Edition,
Dallas, TX, p. 135
Cook, WA. (1987) Occupational Expsure Limits-Worldwide, Akron, OH, American Industrial
Hygiene Association, pp. 132, 171
Corbett, M.D., Chipko, B.R & Baden, D.G. (1978) Chloroperoxidase-catalysed oxidation of 4-chloro-
aniline to 4-chloronitrosobenzene. Biochem. J., 175, 353-360
Corbett, M.D., Chipko, B.R & Batchelor, AO. (1980) The action of chloride peroxidase on 4-chloro-
aniline. Biochem. J., 187, 893-903
Dady, J.M., Bradbury, S.P., Hoffman, AD., Voit, M.M. & OIson, D.L. (1991) Hepatic microsomal
N-hydroxylation of aniline and 4-chloroaniline by rainbow trout (Onchorhyncus mykis). Xeno-
biotica, 21, 1605-1620
Dao, T.H., Bouchard, D., Mattice, J. & Lavy, T.L. (1986) Soil sorption of aniline and chloroanilines:
direct and indirect concentration measurements of the adsorbed phase. Soil Sei, 141,2630
Doerge, D.R & Corbett, M.D. (1991) Peroxygenation mechanisms for chloroperoxidase-catalyzd
N-oxidation of arylamines. Chem. Res. Toxicol., 4, 556-560
Dunkel, YC. & Simmon, YE (1980) Mutagenic activity of chemicals previously tested for carcino-
genicity in the National Cancer Institute Bioassay Program. ln: Montesano, R, Bartsch, H. &
Tomatis, L., eds, Molecular and Cellular Aspects of Carcinogen Screening Tests (!AC Scientific
Publications No. 27), Lyon, !ARC, pp. 283-302
Dunkel, YC., Zeiger, E., Brusick, D., McCoy, E., McGregor, D., Mortelmans, K, Rosenkranz, H.S. &
Simmon, YE (1985) Reproducibilty of microbial mutagenicity assays: Ii. Testing of carcinogens
and noncarcinogens in Salmonella typhimurium and Escherichia coli. Environ. Mutag., 7
(Suppl. 5), 1-248
Dunlap, KL. (1981) Nitrobenzene and nitrotoluenes. ln: Mark, H.E, Othmer, D.E, Overberger, C.G.,
Seaborg, G.T. & Grayson, N., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia ofChemical Technology, 3rd ed.,
VoL. 15, New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 916-932
DuPont Co. (1991a) Material Safety Data Sheet: p-Chloroaniline, Wilmington, DE
DuPont Co. (1991b) Product Specification Sheet: p-Chloroaniline Tech, Wilmington, DE
Ehlhardt, WJ. (1991) Metabolism and disposition of the anticancer agent sulofenur in mouse, rat,
monkey, and human. Drug Metab. Disposition, 19, 370-375
Ehlhardt, WJ. & Howbert, J.J. (1991) Metabolism and disposition of p-chloroanilne in rat, mouse,
and monkey. Drug Metab. Disposition, 19,366369
Faivre, M., Armand, J., Évreux, J.-c., Duvemeuil, G. & Colin, C. (1971) Toxic methaemoglobinaemia
due to anilne derivatives: para-chloroanilne and para-toluidine (Fr.). Arch. Mal. prof, 32,
575-577
Fluka Chemie AG (1993) Fluka Chemika-BioChemika, Buchs, p. 304318 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Freitag, D., Scheunert, 1., Klein, W. & Korte, F. (1984) Long-term fate of 4-chloroanilne-14( in soil and
plants under outdoor conditions. A contribution to terrestrial ecotoxicology of chemicals.
1 agrc. Food Chem., 32, 203-207
Gebefuegi, 1., Lay, J.-P. & Korte, F. (1988) Influence of Environmental Chemicals in the Aquatic
Environment (NBS Special Publication 740), Washington DC, National Bureau of Standards,
Program for Environmental Specimen Banking, pp. 31-39
GoUy, J. & Hlavica, P. (1983) The role of hemoglobin in the N-oxidation of 4-chloroanilne. Biochim.
biophys. Acta, 760, 69-76
GoUy, 1. & Hlavica, P. (1985) N-Oxdation of 4-chloroanilne by prostaglandin synthase. Redox cycling
of radical intermediates. Biochem. J., 260, 803-80
GoUy, J. & Hlavica, P. (1987) Regulative mechanisms in NADH- and NADPH-supportedN-oxidation
of 4-chloroaniline catalyzd by cyochrome bs-enriched rabbit liver microsomal fractions.
Biochim. biophys. Acta, 913, 219-227
GoUy, 1., Hlavica, P. & Wolf, J. (1984) The role of lipid peroxidation in the N-oxidation of 4-chloro-
anilne. Biochem. 1, 224, 415-421
Goodman, D.G., Ward, J.M. & Reiehardt, W.D. (1984) Splenic fibrosis and sarcomas in F34 rats fed
diets containing anilne hydrochloride, p-chloroaniline, azbenzene, o-toluidine hydrochloride,
4,4' -sulfonyldianilne, or D & R Red No. 9. 1 natl Cancer lnst., 73, 256-273
Gurka, D.F., Pyle, S.M., Farnham, 1. & Titus, R (1991) Application of hyphenated Fourier
transform-infrared techniques to environmental analysis. 1 chromatogr Sei., 29, 339-344
Hainsworth, J.D., Hande, KR, Satterlee, w.G., Kuttesch, J., Johnson, D.H., Grindey, G., Jackson,
L.E. & Greco, F.A. (1989) Phase 1 clinical study of N-(( 4-chlorophenyl)aminolcarbonyl-2,3-
dihydro-1H-indene-5-sulfonamide (LY1861). Cancer Res., 49, 5217-5220
Hansch, C. & Leo, A. (1979) Substituent Constants for Correlation Analysis in Chemistry and Biology,
New York, John Wiley & Sons, p. 201
Hargesheimer, E.E., Coutts, RT. & Pasutto, F.M. (1981) Gas-liquid chromatographie determination
of anilne metabolites of substituted urea and carbamate herbicides in aqueous solution. 1
Assoc. off anal. Chem., 64, 833-840
Hennion, M.-C., Subra, P., Coquart, V & Rosset, R (1991) Determination of polar anilne derivatives
in aqueous environmental sam pies using on-line liquid chromatographie preconcentration
techniques. Fresenius 1 anal. Chem., 339, 488-93
Heraeus (1991) Feinchemikalien und Forschun~bedarf Karlsruhe, p. 166
Hoechst Celanese Corp. (1989) Hoechst Chemicals-Product Infonnation-Sales Department Fine
Chemicals, Charlotte, NC
Huang, H.-M., Hodson, RE. & Lee, RF: (1987) Degradation of anilne and chloroanilnes by sunlight
and microbes in estuarine water. Water Res., 21, 309316
IAC (1976) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Careinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, VoL. 12,
Some Carbamates, Thiocarbamates and Carbazies, Lyon, pp. 167-176
IAC (1982a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
VoL. 27, Some Aromatic Amines, Anthraquinones and Nitroso Compounds, and lnorganic
Fluories Used in Drinkng-water and Dental Preparations, Lyon, pp. 39-61
IAC (1982b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
VoL. 29, Some Industril Chemicals and Dyestujf, Lyon, pp. 213-238
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCareinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 10 42, Lyon,
pp. 99-100para-CHLOROANLlNE319
lAC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCareinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Careinogenieity: An Updating of lAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 192-193
James, RH., Dilon, H.K & Miler, H.e. (1983) Survey methods for the determination of principal
organic hazardous constituents (POHCs). 1. Methods for laboratory analysis. ln: Proceedings of
the 8th Annual Research Symposium on Ineineration Treatment and Hazardous Waste (Report No.
EPA-6/9-83-003; US NTS PB83-210450), Washington DC, US Environmental Protection
Agency, Office of Research and Development, pp. 159-173
Janssen Chimica (199) 1991 Catalog Handbook of Fine Chemicals, Beerse, p. 251
Kaczvinsky, J.R, Jr, Saitoh, K & Fritz, J.S. (1983) Cation-exchange concentration of basic organic
compounds from aqueous solution. Anl. Chem., 55, 1210-1215
Kaufman, D.D., Plimmer, J.R & Klingebiel, U.I. (1973) Microbial oxidation of 4-chloroanilne.
1. agrc. Food Chem., 21, 127-132
Lancaster Synthesis (1991) MTM Research Chemicals/Lancaster Catalogue 1991/92, Windham, NH,
MTM Pic, p. 275
Lide, D.R, ed. (1991) CRC Handbook ofChemistryand Physics, 72nd ed., Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
p. C-68
Linch, AL. (1974) Biological monitoring for industrial exposure to cyanogenic aromatic nitro and
amino compounds. Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. 1., 7, 42632
Malaiyandi, M., Wightman, RH. & LaFerriere, C. (1987) Concentration of selected organic pollu-
tants: comparison of adsorption and reverse-osmosis techniques.Adv. Chem. Ser., 214, 163-179
MeLe an, S., Starmer, G.A & Thomas, J. (1969) Methaemoglobin formation by aromatic amines. 1.
Pharm. Pharmacol., 21, 441-450
Mitchell, A.D., Rudd, e.J. & Caspary, WL. (1988) Evaluation of the L5178Y mouse Iymphoma cell
mutagenesis assay: intralaboratory results for six-three coded chemicals tested at SRI Interna-
tionaL. Environ. mol. Mutag., 12 (Suppl. 13), 37-101
Mortelmans, K, Haworth, S., Lawlor, T, Speck, W, Tainer, B. & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella
mutagenicity tests: Il. Results from the testing of 270 chemIcals. Environ. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 7),
1-119
Mutanen, RM., Siltanen, H.T, Kuukka, 'YP., Annila, E.A & Varama, M.M.O. (1988) Residues of
diflubenzuron and two of its metabolites in a forest ecosystem after control of the pi ne loopermoth, Bupalus piniarius L. Pestic. Sei., 23, 131-140
Myhr, B.e. & Caspary, WJ. (1988) Evaluation of the L5178Y mouse Iymphoma cell mutagenesis
assay: intralaboratory results for 63 coded chemIcals tested within Litton Bionetics, Inc. Environ.
mol. Mutag., 12 (Suppl. 13), 103-194
Myhr, B., McGregor, D., Bowers, L., Riach, C., Brown, AG., Edwards, 1., McBride, D., Martin, R &
Caspary, WL. (199) L5178Y Mouse lymphoma cell mutation assay results with 41 compounds.
Environ. mol. Mutag., 16 (SuppL. 18), 138-167
Narang, A.S., Choudhury, D.R & Richards, A. (1982) Separation of aromatic amines by thin-Iayer
and high-performance liquid chromatography. 1. chromatogr Sei., 20, 235-237
Pienta, RJ. & Kawalek, J. C. (1981) Transformation of hamster embryo cells by aromatic amines. Natl
Cancer Inst. Monogr., 58, 243-251
Pienta, RJ., Poiley, J.A. & Lebherz, WB., III (1977) Morphological transformation of early passage
golden Syrian hamster e:mbryo cells derived from cryopreserved primary cultures as a reliable in
vitro bioassay for identifying diverse carcinogens. Int. 1. Cancer, 19, 642-655320 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Pouchert, CJ. (1981) The Aldrich Library of lnfrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 7'23
Pouchert, C.J. (1983) The Aldrich Library of NMR Spectra, 2nd ed., Vol. 1, Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 1010
Pras ad, 1. (1970) Mutagenic effects of the herbicide 3' ,4' -dichloropropionanilide and its degradation
products. Can. 1 Microbiol., 16, 369-372
Rankin, G.O., Yang, D.J., Cressey-Veneziano, K., Casto, S., Wang, RT. & Brown, P.1. (1986) ln vivo
and in vitro nephrotoxicity of aniline and its monochlorophenyl derivatives in the Fischer 344 rat.
Toxicology, 38, 269-283
Reiml, D., Scheunert, 1. & Korte, E (1989) Leaching of conversion products of rl4Clbuturon from soil
during 12 years after application. 1 agrc. Food Chem., 37, 244248
Riedel-de-Haen (199) Laboratory Chemicals 1990, Seelze, p. 299
Rosenkranz, H.S. & Poirier, L.A. (1979) Evaluation of the mutagenicity and DNA-modifying activity
of carcinogens and noncarcinogens in microbial systems. 1 natl Cancer lnst., 62, 873-892
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1980, Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra, 1981-1991, Philadelphia, PA
Sakagami, Y., Yokoyama, H. & Ose, Y. (1986) Degradation of disinfectants by Pseudomona aeru-
ginosa isolated from activated sludge- identification of degradation products.1 Hyg. Chem., 32,
427-432
Schaefer, e.H., Colwell, A.E. & Dupras, E.E, Jr (1980) The occurrence of p-chloroanilne and
p-chlorophenylurea from the degradation of diflubenzuron in water and fish. ln: Grant, e.D. &
Washino, RK., eds, Proceedings and Papers of the 48th Annual Conference of the Califomia
Mosquito and Véctor Control Association (CMVCA), Inc., Visalia, CA, CMVCA Press, pp. 8489
Simmon, VE (1979a) ln vitro mutagenicity assays of chemical carcinogens and related compounds
with Salmonella tyhimurium.1 natl Cancer Inst., 62, 893-899
Simmon, VE (1979b) ln vitro assays for recombinogenic activity of chemical carcinogens and related
compounds with Saccharomyces cerevisiae D3.1 natl Cancer lnst., 62, 901-909
Smyth, H.E, Jr, Carpenter, C.P., Weil, e.S., Pozzani, U.e. & Striegel, J.A. (1962) Range-finding toxI-
city data: list VI. Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. 1,23,95-107
Taylor, e.W, Alberts, D.S., Ketcham, M.A., Satterlee, WG., Holdsworth, MT, Plezia, P.M., Peng,
Y-M., McCloskey, T.M., Roe, D.J., Hamilton, M. & Salmon, S.E. (1989) Clinical pharmacology
of a novel diarylsulfonylurea anticancer agent. 1 clin. Oncol., 7, 1733-1740
TCI America (1991) Organic Chemicals 91/92 Catalog, Portland, OR, p. 270
US National Cancer Institute (1979) Bioassay of p-Chloroaniline for Possible Carcinogenicity (CAS No.
106-47-8) (NCI-CG-TR-189; DHEW Publ. No. (NIH) 79-1745), Bethesda, MD
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB No, 207),
Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1989) Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies ofpara-Chloroaniline
Hydrochloride (CAS No. 20265-96-7) in F344/N Rats and B6C3Fi Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT
Technical Report 351; NIH Publication No. 89-2806), Research Triangle Park, NC
van der Vorst, M.M.J., Tamminga, P., Wijburg, EA. & Schutgens, RB.H. (199) Severe methaemo-
globinaemina due to para-chloroaniline intoxication in premature neonates. Eur. 1 Pediatr., 150,
72-73
Weast, Re. & Astle, M.J., eds (1985) CRC Handbook of Data on Organic Compounds, VoL. 2, Boca
Raton, FL, CRC Press, Inc., p. 463para-CHLOROANLINE 321
Wegman, R.e.e. & De Korte, G.A.L. (1981) Aromatic amines in surface waters of the Netherlands.
Water Res., 15,391-394
Yoshida, 1:, Mamoru, H., Takeo, T., Keiko, M. & Katashi, A. (1992) Amounts of urinary metabolites of
p-chIoroaniIine and their half lives in a patient with acute poisoning (Jpn.). Sangy Igak, 34,
12130
Zimmer, D., Mazrek, J., Petzold, G. & Bhuyan, B.K. (1980) Bacterial mutagenicity and mammalian
cell DNA damage by several substituted anilines. Mutat. Res., 77, 317-326
Zoteman, B.eJ., Harmsen, K., Linders, J.B.H.J., Morra, e.F.H. & Slooff, W (1980) Persistent
organic pollutants in river water and ground water of the Netherlands. Chemosphere, 9,231-249
~~-2,6-DIMETHYANILINE (2,6-XYIDINE)
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1.1.1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. SelV Reg. No.: 87-62-7
Chem. Abstr. Name: 2,6-Dimethylbenzenamine
IUPAC Systematic Name: 2,6-Xylidine
Synonyms: 1 -Ami no- 2,6-dimethylbenzene; 2-amino- 1,3-dimethylbenzene; 2-amino-
1,3-xylene; 2-amino-meta-xylene; 2,6-dimethylphenylamine; ortho-xylidine; 2,6-meta-
xylidine; 2,6-xylylamine
~3NH'
CHs
CgHiiNMoL. wt: 121.18
1.1.2 Chemical and physical properties of the pure substance
(a) Description: Clear liquid (Ethyl Corp., 1990); pungent odour (Ethyl Corp., 1991)
(b) Boiling-point: 1'14 °c at 739 mm Hg (98.5 kPa) (Lide, 1991)
(c) Melting-point: 11.2 °c (Lide, 1991)
(d) Density: 0.9842 at 20°C (Lide, 1991)
(e) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nucIear magnetic resonance speGtral
data have been reported (Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981,
1983; Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1991).
if Solubility: Slightly soluble in water (7.5 g/l at 20°C); soluble in ethanol and diethyl
ether (Hoechst Celanese Corp., 1989; lide, 1991)
(g) Volatility: Vapour pressure, 0.125 mm Hg (17 Pa) at 25 ° C; 1 mm Hg (133 Pa i at
44°C (Chao et aL., 1983; lide, 1991)
(h) Stabilty: Sensitive to air oxidation and light; inflammable (Hoechst Celanese Corp.,
1989)
-323-324 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(i) Conversion factor: mg/m3 = 5.0 x ppm1
1. 1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
2,6-Dimethylaniline is available commercially at purities ranging from 98 to 99.6%, with
xylenol as a tyical impurity (Hoechst Celanese Corp., 1989; Ethyl Corp., 1991). It is also
available in research quantities at purities in the sa me order of magnitude (Janssen Chimica,
1990; Riedel-de Haen, 1990; Heraeus, 1991; Lancaster Synthesis, 1991; Tei America, 1991;
AIdrich Chemical Co., 1992; Fluka Chemie AG, 1993).
1. 1.4 Analysis
Amines can be liberated during the manufacture of rubber, especially by vulcanization
and other other thermal degradations. A method was described for the determination of free
aromatic amines, including 2,6-dimethylaniline, using high-temperature glass-capilary gas
chromatography and nitrogen-selective detection (thermionic specific detector), with detec-
tion limits of 10-20 pg (Dalene & Skarping, 1985).
Combined gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and -Fourier transform-infrared
spectrometry have been used for the identification of a large number of aromatic com-
pounds, including 2,6-dimethylaniline. Use of infrared spectrometry often allowed unambi-
guous differentiation of isomers (Chiu et al., 1984).
An isocratic on-line liquid chromatographic preconcentration system with ultraviolet
absorbance detection at 230 nm has been developed for the determination in tap-water of
polar pollutants, including 2,6-dimethylaniline, with widely varyng characteristics. The
detection limit for 2,6-dimethylaniline was 0.4 l1g/1 (Brouwer et aL., 1991).
A procedure has been described for the detection of2,6-disubstituted anilines, including
2,6-dimethylaniline, in the low-nanogram range in blood. The aromatic anilnes were
extracted from blood with ethyl acetate, converted to the corresponding N-heptafluoro-
butyamides and analysed by gas chromatography with electron capture detection; identities
were confirmed by gas chromatrography-mass spectrometry (DeLeon et aL., 1983).
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
2,6-Dimethylaninile is prepared by nitration of xylene and reduction, followed by
removal of the 2,4-isomer by formation of the acetate salt, removal of the 2,5-isomer by
formation of the hydrochloride salt, and recovery of the 2,6-isomer by sublimation (US
National Library of Medicine, 1992a).
2,6-Dimethylaniline is produced by one company each in Japan, Switzerland and the
USA and by three companies in Germany (Chemical Information Servces, 1991).
lCalculated from: mg/m3 = (molecular weight/24.45) X ppm, assuming normal temperature (25°C) and
pressure (760 mm Hg (101.3 kP J)2,6-DIMETIYLANLlNE 325
1.2.2 Use
2,6- Dimethylanilne is used as a chemical intermediate in the manufacture of pesticides,
dyestuffs, antioxidants, pharmaceuticals, synthetic resins, fragrances and other products
(Ethyl Corp., 1990; Kuney, 1991).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
2,6- Dimethylaniline is one of many ami no compounds occurring naturally in Latakia
tobacco leaves (lrvne & Saxby, 1969).
1.3.2 Occupational exposure
No data were available to the Working Group.
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 4354 workers,
including 729 women, may have been exposed to 2,6-dimethylaniline in five occupations (US
National Library of Medicine, 1992b).
1.3.3 J#ter and sediments
2,6-Dimethylaniline was identified in a sample from a shallow aquifer contaminated by
coal-tar wastes. The site, in St Louis Park, MN, USA, had been used as a waste disposai site
bya coal-tar distilation (see IARC, 1984, 1985, 1987a) and wood-preservng facility from
1918 through 1972 (Pereira et al., 1983).
1.3.4 Other
Xylidine metabolites are released from drugs, and particularly the xylidine group of
local anaesthetics. 2,6-Dimethylanilne was identified as a metabolite in the urine of rats,
guinea-pigs, dogs and humans administered lidocaine orally (Keenaghan & Boyes, 1972).
2,6-Dimethylaniline may also enter the environment through the degradation of certain
pesticides (US National Toxicology Program, 1990). It was detected in stack effuents from an
incinerator burning hazardous wastes (James et al., 1985) and has been detected in tobacco
smoke (Irvne & Saxby, 1969; Patrianakos & Hoffan, 1979; Florin et al., 1980; Pettersson et
al., 1980; Thelestam et al., 1980; see IARC, 1986, 1987b).
1.4 Regulatory status and guidelines
Occupational exposure limits and guidelines for all isomers of xylidine, including
2,6-dimethylanilne, in some countries are presented in Thble 1.
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.326 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 1. Occupational exposure IImits and guidelines for xylidine
(ail isomers)
Country YearConcentration Ski irtant Interpretation
(mg/m3) notation
Australia 10 Yes 1WA
Austria 25 Yes 1WA
Belgium 10 Yes 1WA
ex-Czechoslovakia 5 No 1WA
Denmark 1988 10 Yes 1WA
Finland 25 Yes 1WA
50 No STEL
France 10 Yes 1WA
Germany 199225 Yes 1WA
Hungary 5 Yes 1WA
10 No STEL
Indonesia 197825 Yes 1WA
Italy 1978 10 Yes 1WA
Mexico 198325 Yes 1WA
Netherlands 198925 Yes 1WA
Poland 1984 5 No TWA
Romania 1975 1 Yes 1WA
2 Yes STEL
Switzerland 10 Yes 1WA
United Kingdom 199 10 Yes 1WA
50 No STEL
USA
ACGIH 1992 2.5 Yesa 1WA
üSHA 1989 10 Yes 1WA
ex-USSR 3 Yes STEL
Venezuela 197825 Yes 1WA
25 Yes Ceiling
ex- Yugoslavia 1971 3 No 1WA
From Cook (1987); ACGIH (1991); ILÜ (1991); Deutsche Forschungsgemeins-
chaft (1992); 1W A time-weighted average; STE L, short-term expsure limita Ai, suspected human carcinogen
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
Pre- and postnatal administration in the diet
Rat
Groups of 28 male and 56 female Charles River CD rats, five weeks of age, were
administered 0, 300, 1000 or 3000 ppm (mg/kg) of di et 2,6-dimethylaniline (99.06% pure).
At 16 weeks of age, they were mated, and the pregnant females were allowed to deliver
naturally over a two-week period (Fo generation). Fo females continued to receive treatment2,6-DIMETHYLALINE327
or control diet during pregnancy and lactation. Progeny (Fi) were weaned at 21 days of age,
and groups of 56 males and 56 females received the same diet as their parents for 102 weeks.
Mean body weight gains relative to those of controls were reduced for high-dose male and
mid-dose and high-dose female rats (by ~ 10%). Survval at 105 weeks was: males-control,
43/56; low-dose 40/56; mid-dose 33/56; high-dose, 14/56 (p -c 0.001); females-control,
33/56; low-dose 25/56; mid-dose, 32/56; high-dose, 24/56. ln males, papilaiy adenomas of
the nasal cavity occurred in 0/56 control, 0/56 low-dose, 2/56 mid-dose and 10/56 high-dose
rats (p = 0.001, incidental tumour test). Carcinomas (not otherwse specifiedi of the nasal
cavity were observed only in high-dose males (26/56; p -c 0.001, life table test); two
adenocarcinomas were also observed in high-dose male rats. ln females, nasal adenomas
occurred in 0/56 control, 0/56 low-dose, 1/56 mid-dose and 6/56 high-dose rats (p = 0.02,
incidental tumour test). Carcinomas of the nasal cavity occurred in 0/56 control, 0/56
low-dose, 1/56 mid-dose and 24/56 high-dose females (p -c 0.001, life table test). Unusual
tumours of the nasal cavity also occurred among high-dose males and females: one
undifferentiated sarcoma was present in a female, rhabomyosarcomas occurred in two males
and two females, and malignant mixed tumours (features of adenocarcinomas and rhabdo-
myosarcomas) were observed in one male and one female rat. Subcutaneous fibromas and
fibrosarcomas combined occurred in 0/56 control, 2/56 low-dose, 2/56 mid-dose and 5/56
high-dose male rats (p = 0.001, life table test; p -c 0.001 life table trend test); and in 1/56
control, 2/56 low-dose, 2/56 mid-dose and 6/56 high-dose female rats (p = 0.01, life table
trend test). Neoplastic nodules of the liver occurred in female rats with a significant positive
trend: control, 0/56; low-dose, 1/56; mid-dose, 2/56; high-dose, 4/55 (p = 0.03, incidental
test; p = 0.012, incidental trend test). Hepatocellular carcinomas occurred in 1/56 control,
0/56 low-dose, 1/56 mid-dose and 1/55 high-dose female rats (US National Toxicology
Program, 1990). (The Working Group noted that no data were provided on the parent
generation. i
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, iietabolism and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
Evidence for the metabolism of 2,6-dimethylaniline in hum ans is derived from studies
on cigarette smokers and nonsmokers and on patients receiving the anaesthetic and cardiac
drug, lidocaine, which is known to be metabolized principally to 2,6-dimethylaniline. Using
capilary gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, haemoglobin adducts of 2,6-dimethyl-
anilne were found to be present at high levels in nonsmokers with no known exposure to this
compound; moreover, adduct levels were appreciably lower in cigarette smokers. ln contrast,
2,6-dimethylaniline-haemoglobin adduct levels were elevated substantially in patients
receiving lidocaine treatment. These results are indicative of environmental and iatrogenic
exposure to 2,6-dimethylaniline, and of its biotransformation to a circulating N-hydroxy-2,6-
dimethylaniline metabolite in humans, which enters eryhrocyes, is oxidized to 2,6-dimethyl-
nitrosobenzene and forms a sulfinamide adduct with haemoglobin (Biyant et al., 1988, 1992
(abstract)).
b..__328 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
On the basis of the haemoglobin binding index determined in rats, the levels of 2,6-di-
methylanilne-haemoglobin adducts found in nonsmokers correspond to an estimated daily
exposure of 23 iig (Sabbioni, 1992).2,6- Dimethylaniline has also been found as a human uri-
nary metabolite of two other drugs, etidocaine and lidamidine hydrochloride (US National
Toxicology Program, 1990).
4.1.2 Experimental systems
Since free 2,6-dimethylaniline may be formed by intestinal metabolism of2,6-dimethyl-
aniline-based azo dyes, its absorption into the circulation from the small intestine was
studied. Male Wistar rats were instiled with 10 mg 2,6-dimethylanilne ('pure') in 10 ml
phosphate-buffered saline pH 6 into the intestine. Since the absorption half-time was rapid
(14.4 min), metabolism of azo dyes by intestinal microflora would be expected to result in
complete absorption of the resulting 2,6-dimethylaniline by the body (Plá-Delfina et al.,
1972).
The metabolism of 2,6-dimethylaniline was examined qualitatively in male Osborne-
Mendel rats given the hydrochloride salt (purity unspecifiedi by gavage in water at 200 mg/kg
bw. 4-Hydroxy-2,6-dimethylanilne and 3-methyl-2-aminobenzoic acid were identified as
major and minor urinary metabolites, respectively. The unchanged amine could be detected
chromatographically, but only after acidic urine hydrolysis, suggesting the presence of
urinary N-conjugates (Lindstrom et al., 1963). These data were confirmed byenzyatic
hydrolysis in male Fischer 344 rats given 2,6-dimethylaniline (~ 99% pure) by gavage in corn
oil at a daily dose of 262.5 mg/kg bw for 10 days. Levels of the 4-hydroxy metabolite were
further increased by pretreatment with 3-methylcholanthrene, but not by pretreatment with
phenobarbitaL. Oral administration to male beagle dogs (25 mg/kg bw per day for 10 days)
resulted in the same major metabolite; 3-methyl-2-aminobenzoic acid and its glycine
conjugate were minor components in the urine. Evidence was also provided for the presence
of two potentially reactive metabolites, 2,6-dimethyl-4-nitrosobenzene, which may arise
from N-hydroxy-2,6-dimethylaniline, and 2,6- or 3,5-dimethyl-4-iminoquinone, neither of
which was detectable in rats (Short et al., 1989a).
Haemoglobin adduct levels were determined in female Wistar rats given 0.5 mmol
(61 mg)/kg bw 2,6-dimethylaniline (purity, ~ 98%) by gavage in propylene glycol and found
to be significant but relatively low (haemoglobin binding index = 1.1 mmol compound/mol
haemoglobin per (mmol compound/kg bw)), in comparison with levels of adducts of other
aromatic amines (Sabbioni, 1992).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
Methaemoglobinaemia has been reported following lidocaine treatment of human
subjects (Burne & Doughty, 1964; Weiss et al., 1987). Like haemoglobin adduct formation, it
can be attributed to a circulating N-hydroxy metabolite.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
Methaemoglobinaemia has been reported in cats but not dogs following an intravenous
dose of 30 mg/kg bw 2,6-dimethylanilne (purity unspecifiedi in a pH 5.5 saline vehicle. lido-2,6-DIMETHYLALlNE 329
caine also caused methaemoglobinaemia in cats after intravenous treatment at 47 mg/kg bw
(McLean et al., 1967, 1969).
LDso values have been determined in several rodent strains. ln male Osborne-Mendel
rats given the hydrochloride (purity unspecifiedi in water by gavage, the LDso was
2042 mg/kg bw (Lindstrom et al., 1969). The LDso of 2,6-dimethylaniline (purity and vehicle
unspecifiedi administered by gavage was estimated as 840 mg/kg bw (Jacobson, 1972) and
1230 mglkg for male Sprague-Dawley rats and 710 mg/kg for male CFi mice (Vernot et al.,
1977). An LDso of 630 mg/kg was reported (Short et al., 1983) for male Fischer 344 rats
administered 2,6-dimethylaniline (purity unspecifiedi by gavage without a vehicle. The LDso
for female Fischer 344 rats given the compound (? 99% pure) by gavage in corn oit was
calculated to be 1160 mg/kg; and LDso values of 1270-13 10 mg/kg were estimated for male
and female Charles River CD rats after a single gavage dose (purity, ? 99%) in corn oit (US
National Toxicology Program, 1990).
ln rats, only splenic haemosiderosis was observed in male Fischer 344 animaIs
administered 2,6-dimethylanilne (purity unspecifiedi by gavage without a vehicle at daity
doses of 157.5 mg/kg bw for 5-20 days (Short et al., 1983). ln male and female Sprague-
Dawley rats given 400-700 mg/kg by gavage (purity not specifiedi daily for four weeks,
however, decreased weight gain, lowered haemoglobin values and liver enlargement were
observed, with increases in the levels of microsomal glucuronyltransferase in males and
females and of aniline hydroxylase in females (Magnusson et al., 1971, 1979). Similarly, in
male and female Fischer 344 rats given the compound (? 99% pure) by gavage in corn oit at
doses up to 310 mg/kg for five days a week for 13 weeks, increased liver weight, decreased
body weight and decreases in eryhrocye, haemoglobin and haematocrit levels were
observed (US National Toxicology Program, 1990). ln male Osborne-Mendel rats given up
to 10 000 ppm 2,6-dimethylaniline in the diet for three to six months, 25% weight retar-
dation, anaemia, liver enlargement (no microscopic change), splenic congestion and kidney
damage that included depressed scar formation, tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, chronic
inflammation, papilary oedema and necrosis, and cystic dilation of tubular segments were
observed, predominantly at the high dose (Lindstrom et al., 1963). ln the 104-week carcino-
genicity study described on pp. 326-327, male and female Charles River CD rats developed
non-neoplastic changes including dose-related decreases in body weight gain and inflam-
mation, hyperplasia and squamous metaplasia of the nasal mucosa (US National Toxicology
Program, 1990).
Chronic dosing of male and female beagle dogs wi th oral doses (in capsules) of 50 mg/kg
bw 2,6-dimethylaniline for four weeks resulted in decreased body weight, hyperbili-
rubinaemia, hypoproteinaemia and, in contrast to rats, marked fatty degenerative changes in
the liver (Magnusson et al., 1971).
4.3 Reproductive and prenatal efTects
No data were available to the Working Group.
:i',-"....330 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Thble 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
Reports on the mutagenicIty of 2,6-dimethylanilne in Salmonella typhimurium are con-
flicting. ln the most detailed report, two of three participating laboratories reproducibly
demonstrated weak activity in the presence of an exogenous metabolic system from hamster,
but not rat, liver. 2,6-Dimethylaniline was reported to induce mutation in mouse lymphoma
cells at the tk locus (abstract), and it induced both sister chromatid exchange and chromo-
somal aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells.
It did not induce micronuclei in the bone marrow of mice treated in vivo by oral admi-
nistration. Unlabelled 2,6-dimethylanilne bound covalently to the DNA of the ethmoid
turbinates and lIver of rats after oral pretreatment.
s. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
2,6-Dimethylaniline is used as a chemical intermediate in the manufacture of pesticides,dyestuffs, antioxidants, pharmaceuticals and other products. It is a metabolite of the :xlidine
group of anaesthetics, including, for example, lidocaine, and is produced by the reduction of
certàin azo dyes by intestinal microflora. It may also enter the environment through degra-
dation of certain pesticides.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
2,6-Dimethylaniline was tested for carcinogenicity in one study in rats by pre- and
postnatal administration in the diet. It induced adenomas and carcinomas as weIl as several
sarcomas in the nasal cavity. It also produced subcutaneous fibromas and fibrosarcomas in
both males and females and increased the incidence of neoplastic nodules in, the livers of
female rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
Methaemoglobinaemia has been observed in humans and animais exposed to
2,6-dimethylaniline. The metabolism of 2,6-dimethylaniline in humans and rats appears to
be similar and gives rise to a characteristic haemoglobin adduct in both species.Table 2. Genetic and related etTects of 2,6-dimethylanilne
Test system Result Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)
Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SAü, Salmonella typhimurium TAl00, reverse mutation_b _b 363.~~ Florin et al. (1980)
SAü, Salmonella typhimurium TAl00, reverse mutation 0 - 0.~~ Zimmer et al.
(1980)
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TAl00, reverse mutation-(+)C 167.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TAl00, reverse mutation 0 - 200.~~ Kugler-Steigmeier
et al. (1989) N
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation- - 1815.~~ Flori et al. (1980)C11
SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation- - 1667.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988) Ü'"
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation- - 1815.~~ Florin et al. (1980) ~
tT
SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation- - 1667.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988)~SA7, Salmonella typhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation 0 - 0.~~ Zimmer et aL.~(1980)
~SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation_b _b 363.~~ Florin et al. (1980)
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation - - 1667.~~ Zeiger et al. (1988) r
SA9, Salmonella typhimurium TA98, reverse mutation 0 - 0.~~ Zimmer et aL. '"
(1980) æ
GSf Gene mutation, mou se lymphoma L5178Y cells, tk locus + + 0.~~ Rudd et al. (1983);
abstr.
SIC, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells in vitro + + 301.~~ Galloway et al.
(1987)
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells in vitro + + 1200.~~ Galloway et al.
(1987)
MV, Micronucleus test, ICR mou se bone marrow in vivo - 35ü mg/kg po X 1 Parton et al. (1988)
MV, Micronucleus test, ICR mou se bone marrow in vivo - 375 mg/kg po X 3 Parton et al. (199)
BVD, Binding (covalent) to DNA rats in vivo + 4 mg/kg ipd X 1 Short et al. (1989b)
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
lln-YÎtro tests, flg/ml; in-YÎvo tests, mg/kg bw
bSpot tests only
CWeakly positive in two of three laboratories, negative in the other oneww
aJetreatment with unlabelled 262.5mg/kg 2,6-dimethylaniline daily for nine days..332 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
2,6-Dimethylaniline gave conflicting results for gene mutation in bacteria. Sister chro-
matid exchange and chromosomal aberrations were induced in cultured mammalian cells.
The compound bound covalently to DNA in rat tissues but did not induce mIcronuclei in the
bone marrow of mice treated in vivo.
5.5 Evaluation 1
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of 2,6-dimethylaniline.
There is suffdent evidence in experimental animaIs for the carcinogenicity of 2,6-
dimethylaniline.
Overall evaluation
2,6-Dimethylaniline is possibly carcinogenic to humans (Croup 2B).
6. References
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 491
American Conference of Govemmental Industrial Hygienists (1991) 1991-1992 Threshold Limit
Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and Biological Expsure Indices, Cincinnati,
OH, p. 38
Brouwer, E.R, Liska, 1., Geerdink, RB., Frintrop, P.C.M., Mulder, WH., Lingeman, H. & Brinkman,
V.AT. (1991) Determination of polar pollutants in water using an on-line liquid chromato-
graphic preconcentration system. Chromatographia, 32, 445-452
Bryant, M.S., Vineis, P., Skipper, P.L. & Tannenbaum, S.R (1988) Hemoglobin adducts of aromatic
amines: associations with smoking status and type of tobacco. Proc. natl Acad. Sei. USA, 85,9788-9791
Bryant, M.S., Simmons, H.E, HaTTell, RE. & Hinson, J.A (1992) Hemoglobin adducts of
2,6-dimethylaniline in cardiac patients administered lidocaine (Abstract No. 878). Proc. Am.
Assoc. Cancer Res., 33, 146
Bume, D. & Doughty, A. (196) Methaemoglobinaemia following lignocaine (Letter to the Editor).
Lancet, H, 971
Chao, J., Lin, c.T. & Chung, T.H. (1983) Vapor pressure of coal chemicals.J. phys. chem. ReJ. Data, 12,
1033- 1063
Chemical Information Services Ltd (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers 1992/93 Edition,
Dallas, TX, p. 598
Chiu, KS., Biemann, K, Krishnan, K & Hil, S.L. (1984) Structural characterization of polycyclic
aromatic compounds by combined gas chromatography/mass spectrometiy and gas chromato-
graphylFourier transform infrared spectrometry. Anl. Chem.,56, 1610-1615
Cook, WA (1987) Occupational Exsure Limits-Wor/dwide, Akon, OH, American Industrial
Hygiene Association, pp. 126, 157, 224
lFor definition of the italicized tenus, see Preamble, pp. 2630.2,6-DIMETHYLANLlNE 333
Dalene, M. & Skarping, G. (1985) Trace analysis of amines and isocyanates using glass capilary gas
chromatography and selection detection. iv Determination of free aromatic amines using
nitrogen-selective detection. 1 Chromatogr., 331, 321-330
DeLeon, I.R, Brown, N.J., Cocchiara, J.P., Cruz, S.G. & Laseter, J.L. (1983) Trace analysis of
2,6-disubstituted anilines in blood by capilary gas chromatography.1 anal. Toxicol., 7, 185-187
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (1992) MA and BAT-Values List 1992. Maxmum Concentrations
at the Workplace (MA) and Biological Tolerance Values (BAT) for Working Materials (Report No.
28), Weinheim, VCH Verlagsgesellschaft, p. 68
Ethyl Corp. (199) Orthoalkylated Anilines-2,6-Dimethylaniline (DMA), Baton Rouge, LA
Ethyl Corp. (1991) Matenal Safety Data Sheet: DMA (2,6-Dimethylaniline), Baton Rouge, LA
Florin, L, Rutberg, L., Curvall, M. & Enzell, C.R (1980) Screening of tobacco smoke constituents for
mutagenicity using the Ames' test. Toxicology, 15, 219-232
Fluka Chemie AG (1993) Fluka Chemika-BioChemika, Buchs, p. 514
Galloway, S.M., Armstrong, M.J,. Reuben, c., Colman, S., Brown, B., Cannon, C., Bloom, A.D.,
Nakamura, F., Ahmed, N., Duk, S., Rimpo, J., Margolin, B.H., Resnick, MA., Anderson, B. &
Zeiger, E. (1987) Chromosome aberrations and sister chromatid exchanges in Chinese hamster
ovary cells: evaluations of 108 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 10 (Suppl. 10), 1~175
Heraeus (1991) Feinchemikalien und Forschungsbedarf Karlsruhe, p. 280
Hoechst Celanese Corp. (1989) Hoechst Chemicals-Product Infonnation-Sales Department Fine
Chemicals, Charlotte, NC
IARC (1984) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 34, Polynuclear Aromatic Compounds, Part 3: Industrial Exposures in Aluminium Production,
Coal Gasification, Coke Production, and Iron and Steel Founding, Lyon, pp. 65-69, 101-131
IARC (1985) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 35, Polynuclear Aromatic Compounds, Part 4: Bitumens, Coal-tars and Derived Products,
Shale-oils and Soots, Lyon, pp. 83-159
!AC (1986) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 38, Tobacco Smoking, Lyon
!AC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7, Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of !AC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon, pp.
175-176
!AC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7,Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of !AC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon,
pp. 359-362
ILO (1991) Occupational Expsure LimÎts for Airbome Toxic Substances, 3rd ed. (Occupational Safety
and Health Series 37), Geneva, International Labour Offce, pp. 42023
Irvine, WJ. & Saxby, M.J. (1969) Steam volatile amines of Latakia tobacco leaf. Phytochemistry, 8,
473-476
Jacobson, K.H. (1972) Acute oral toxicity of mono- and di-alkyl ring-substituted derivatives of aniline.
Toxicol. appl. Phannacol., 22, 153-154
James, RH., Adams, RE., Finkel, J.M., Miler, H.C. & Johnson, L.D. (1985) Evaluation of analytical
methods for the determination of POHC (principal organIc hazardous constituents) in combus-
tion products.1 Air Pollut. Control Assoc., 35, 959-969
Janssen Chimica (199) 1991 Catalog Handbook of Fine Chemicals, Beerse, p. 477
Keenaghan, J.B. & Boyes, RN. (1972) The tissue distribution, metabolism and excretion oflidocaine
in rats, guinea pigs, dogs and man. 1 Phannacol. ex. Ther., 180, 454-3334 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Kugler-Steigmeier, M.E., Friederich, U., Graf, U., Lutz, WK, Maier, P. & Schlatter, C. (1989)
Genotoxicity of anilne derivatives in various short-term tests. Mutat. Res., 211, 279-289
Kuney, J.H., ed. (1991) Chemcyclopedia 92-The Manual of Commercially Available Chemicals,
Washington De, American Chemical Society, p. 64
Lancaster Synthesis (1991) M'M Research Chemicals/Lancaster Catalogue 1991/92, Windham, NH,
MT PIC, p. 535
Lide, D.R, ed. (1991)CRC HandbookofChemistryand Physics, 72nded., Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
pp. 3-41, 6-76
Lindstrom, H.V, Hansen, WH., Nelson, A.A & Fitzhugh, O.G. (1963) The metabolism ofFD&C Red
No. 1. II. The fate of 2,5-para-xylidine and 2,6-meta-xylidine in rats and observations of the
toxicity of xylidine isomers.l Pharmcol. ex. Ther., 142,257-26
Lindstrom, H. V, Bowie, Wc., Wallace, Wc., Nelson, A.A & Fitzhugh, O.G. (1969) The toxicity and
metabolism of mesidine and pseudocumidine in rats. J Phannacol. ex. Ther., 167, 22-234
Magnusson, G., Bodin, N.-O. & Hansson, E. (1971) Hepatic changes in dogs and rats induced by
xylidine isomers. Acta pathol. microbiol. scand., 79, 639-68
Magnusson, G., Majeed, S.K, Down, WH., Sacharin, RM. & Jorgeson, W (1979) Hepatic effects of
xylidine isomers in rats. Toxicology, 12, 63-74
McLean, S., Murphy, B.P., Starmer, G.A. & Thomas, J. (1967) Methaemoglobin formation induced by
aromatic amines and amides. 1 Phann. Phannacol., 19, 146154
McLean, S., Starmer, G.A. & Thomas, J. (1969) Methaemoglobin formation by aromatic amines.
1 Phann. Pharmcol., 21, 441-450
Parton, J.W, Probst, G.S. & Garriott, M.L. (1988) The in vivo effect of 2,6-xylidine on induction of
micronuclei in mou se bone marrow cells. Mutat. Res., 206, 281-283
Parton, J.W, Beyers, J.E., Garriott, M.L. & Tamura, RN. (1990) The evaluation of multiple dosing
protocol for the mouse bone-marrow micronucleus assay using benzidine and 2,6-xylidine.
Mutat. Res., 234, 165-168
Patrianakos, C. & Hoffman, D. (1979) Chemical studies of tobacco smoke. LXIV On the analysis of
aromatic amines in cigarette smoke. J anal. Toxicol., 3, 150-154
Pereira, WE., Rostad, C.E., Garbarino, J.R. & HuIt, M.F. (1983) Groundwater contamination by
organic bases derived from coal-tar wastes. Environ. Toxicol. Chem., 2, 283-294
Pettersson, B., Curvall, M. & Enzell, C.R (1980) Effects of tobaccosmoke compounds on the
noradrenaline induced oxidative metabolism in isolated brown fat cells. Toxicology, 18, 1-15
Plá-Delfina, J.M., deI Poso, A, Martín, A. & Alvarez, J.L. (1972) Absorption, distributiol1 and
elimination of aromatic amines: application of these pharmacokinetic parameters to chronic
toxicity studies (Span.) Cienc. ind. fann., 4, 47-53
Pouchert, CJ. (1981) The Aldrich Library of Infrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 727
Pouchert, c.J. (1983) The Aldrich Library of NMR Spectra, 2nd ed., VoL. 1, Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 1018
Riedel-de Haen (199) Laboratory Chemicals 1990, Seelze, p. 494
Rudd, c.J., Mitchell, A.D. & Spalding, J. (1983) L5178Y Mouse lymphoma cell mutagenesis assayof
coed chemicals incorporating analyses of the colony size distributions (Abstract No. Cd-19).
Envùon. Muta~, 5, 419
Sabbioni, G. (1992) Hemoglobin binding of monocyclic aromatic amines: molecular dosimetry and
quantitative structure activity relationships for the N-oxidation. Chem. -biol. Interactions, 81,
91-1172,6-DIMETIYLALINE 335
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sad.t/er Standard Spectra. 1980 Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadt/er Standard Spectra. 1981-1991 Supp/ementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA
Short, c.R., King, c., Sistrunk, P.\v & Kerr, KM. (1983) Subacute toxicity of several ring-substituted
dialkylanilines in the rat. Fundam. app/. To.rico/., 3, 285-292
Short, c.R., Hardy, M.L. & Barker, S.A. (1989a) The in vivo oxidative metabolism of 2,4- and
2,6-dimethylanilne in the dog and rat. Toxic%gy, 57, 45-58
Short, c.R., Joseph, M. & Hardy, M.L. (1989b) Covalent binding of (14c)-2,6-dimethylaniline to DNA
of rat liver and ethmoid turbinate.l Toxico/. environ. Hea/th, 27, 85-94
TCI America (1991) Organic Chemias 91/92 Catalog, Portland, OR, p. 1279
Thelestam, M., CuivalI, M. & EnzelI, C.R (1980) Effects of tobacco smoke compounds on the plasma
membranes of cultured human lung fibroblasts. Toxic%gy, 15, 203-217
US National Library of Medicine (1992a) Hazardous Substances Data Bank (HSDB No. 204),
Bethesda, MD
US National Library of Medicine (1992b) Regitry ofToxic Effects ofChemica/ Substances (RTECS No.
ZE927500), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1990) Toxic%gy and Carcinogenesis Studies of 2,6-Xy/idine
(2,6-Dimethy/ani/ine) (CAS No. 87-62-7) in Char/es River CD Rats (Feed Studies) (NT Technical
Report 278; NIH Publication No. 90-2534), Resear~h Triangle Park
Vernot, E.H., MacEwen, J.D., Haun, c.c. & Kinkead, E.R (1977) Acute toxicity and skin corrosion
data for sorne organIc and inorganic compounds and aqueous solutions. Toxico/. app/. Phar-
maco/., 42, 417-423
Weiss, L.D., Generalovich, T., HelIer, M.R, Paris, P.M., Stewart, RD., Kaplan, RM. & Thompson,
D.R (1987) Methemoglobin levels following intravenous lidocaine administration. Ann. Emerg.
Med., 16,323-325
Zeiger, E., Anderson, R, Haworth, S., Lawlor, 1: & Mortelmans, K (1988) Salmonella mutagenicity
tests: iv Results from the testing of 300 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 11 (SuppL. 12), 1-158
Zimmer, D., Mazrek, J., Petzold, G. & Bhuyan, RK (1980) Bacterial mutagenicity and mammalian
cell DNA damage by several substituted anilines. Mutat. Res., 77, 317-326N,N- DIMETHYILINE
1. Exposure Data
1.1 Chemical and physical data
1. 1. 1 Synonyms, structural and molecular data
Chem. Abstr. Sem Reg. No.: 121-69-7
Chem. Abstr. Name: N,N- Dimethylbenzenamine
IUPAC Systematic Name: N,N-Dimethylaniline
Synonyms: (Dimethylamino )benzene; N,N-dimethylaminobenzene; dimethylanilne;
dimethylphenylamine; N,N-dimethylphenylamine
/CHs
(Q N,
CHs
CgH uNMoL. wt: 121.18
1. 1.2 Chemical and physical properties
(a) Description: Yellowish to brownish oily liquid (Sax & Lewis, 1987)
(b) Boilng-point: 192-194 °C (ElIer, 1985; Lide, 1991)
(c) Melting-point: 2-2.45 °C (ElIer, 1985; Lide, 1991)
(d) Density: 0.956 g/ml at 20°C (Eller, 1985)
(e) Spectroscopy data: Infrared, ultraviolet and nuclear magnetic resonance spectral
data have been reported (Sadtler Research Laboratories, 1980; Pouchert, 1981,
1983; US National Toxicology Pro gram, 1989; Sadtler Research Laboratories,1991). .
if Solubilty: Insoluble in water (2-14 g/l at 25°C). Since N,N-dimethylanilne is a
basic compound, its solubility is dependent on the pH of the aqueous medium: its
solubility in water at pH ). 7 is lower than that in water of pH .: 5. The data on
aqueous solubility reported in the literature th us vary widely (US Environmental
Protection Agency, 1986). Soluble in acetone, benzene, chloroform, diethyl ether
and ethanol (Amoore & Hautala, 1983; Dragun & Hellng, 1985; Sax & Lewis,
1987; Lide, 1991)
(g) Volatilty: Vapour pressure, 1 mm Hg (133 Pal at 29.5 °C (Lide, 1991)
-337-338 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(h) Stabilty: Slowly oxidizes and darkens in air; can react with nitrous acid to form
ring-substituted nitroso compounds (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1986)
(i) Octanol/water partition coeffcient (P): 2.31 (Hansch & Leo, 1979)
(i) Conversion factor: mg/m3 = 4.95 x ppm1
1.1.3 Trade names, technical products and impurities
N,N-Dimethylaniline is available commercially at a minimum purity of 99.7%, with
aniline (see IARC, 1982a, 1987a) (0.05% max.) and N-methylaniline (0.3% max.) as impu-
rities (Buffalo Color Corp., 1987, 1992). It is also available in research quantities at purities
in the same order of magnitude (Janssen Chimica, 1990; Riedel-de Haen, 1990; Heraeus,
1991; Lancaster Synthesis, 1991; AIdrich Chemical Co., 1992; Fluka Che mie AG, 1993).
1.1.4 Analysis
N,N-Dimethylaniline can be detected in air by adsorption on silica gel, desorption with
ethanol and analysis by gas chromatography and flame ionization detection. The limit of
detection is 10 l1g/sample (Campbell et aL., 1981; ElIer, 1985).
Amines can be liberated during the manufacture of rubber, especially by vulcanization
and by other thermal degradations. A method was described for the determination of free
aromatic amines, including N,N-dimethylaniline, using high-temperature glass-capilary gas
chromatography and nitrogen-selective detection (thermionic specific detector), with
detection limits of 10-20 pg (Dalene & Skarping, 1985).
Agas chromatographic procedure for the determination of residual N,N-dimethyl-
aniline as a contaminant in commercial antibiotics has been described, which involves
dissolution of the sample in aqueous alkali, extraction of N,N-dimethylaniline with cyclo-
hexane and analysis by gas chromatrography-flame ionization detection (Margosis, 1977).
1.2 Production and use
1.2.1 Production
N,N-Dimethylaniline is produced commercially by heating aniline at 300°C with
methanol in the presence of a catalyst at high pressure; sulfuric acid, phosphoric acid or
alumina can be used as the catalyst (Northcott, 1978; Rosenwald, 1978; Budavari, 1989).
N,N- Dimethylanilne is produced by one company each in France, Germany, Hungaiy,
Mexico, Poland, the Republic of Korea, Spain and the USA, by two companies in Japan and
the United Kingdom and byfour companies in India (Chemical Information Servces, 1991).
US production was estimated to be 6000 tonnes in 1976 (US Environmental Protection
Agency, 1986) and between 1000 and 10 000 tonnes in 1988 (US National Toxicology
Program, 1989). ln 1987, approximately 500 tonnes were imported into the USA (US Inter-
national Trade Commission, 1988).
lCalculated from: mg/m3 = (molecular weight/24.45) x ppm, assuming normal temperature (25°C) and
pressure (760 mII Hg (101.3 kPDN,N-DIMETHYLALINE 339
1.2.2 Use
N,N-Dimethylaniline is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of dyes, Michler's
ketone and vanilin. It is also used as a specialty industrial solvent, a rubber vulcanizing agent
(see IARC, 1982b, 1987b), a stabilizer and an acid scavenger (Northcott, 1978; Sax & Lewis,
1987; Budavari, 1989; US National Toxicology Program, 1989).
1.3 Occurrence
1.3.1 Naturaloccurrence
N,N- Dimethylaniline is not known to occur as a natural product.
1.3.2 Occupation al exposure
N,N- Dimethylaniline was reported in the air of coal liquefaction plants (Harris et al. ,
1980) and in the air of a plant for the manufacture of fibre glass-reinforced plastic pipes
(Markel & Wilcox, 1981), at levels below the standard of the US Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (see below) (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1986). Concen-
trations of N ,N-dimethylaniline in 23 workplace air samples from two pilot co al liquefaction
plants in Canada were consistently below the analytical detection limit of 0.05 mg/m3 (Leach
et al., 1987).
On the basis of a survey conducted in the USA between 1981 and 1983, the US National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health estimated that a total of 30480 workers, inc1u-
ding 7448 women, were potentially exposed to N,N-dimethylaniline in 15 industries at
1428 sites (US National Library of Medicine, 1992).
1.3.3 Uiter and soils
N,N-Dimethylaniline has been detected in Lake Ontario (US Environmental Protection
Agency, 1986) and in river water in Spain (Rivera et al., 1987). River water near effuent
sources of industrial dyestuff wastes in the Netherlands showed concentrations of up to
3.6 l1g/1 (Meijers & van der Leer, 1976; Zoeteman et al., 1980). N,N-Dimethylanilne was
found in soil samples near a dye manufacturing plant in the USA at a concentration of up to
40 mg/kg (Nelson & Hites, 1980).
1.3.4 Other
N,N- Dimethylaniline is used as an acid scavenger in the sythesis of penicillns and
cephalosporins and has been reported as a contaminant of commercial preparations of those
antibiotics at levels of up to 1500 ppm (Margosis, 1977; Quercia et aL., 1980).
1.4 Regulations and guidelines
Occupational exposure limits and guidelines for N ,N-dimethylaniline in sorne countries
are presented in Table 1.340 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Table 1. Occupational exposure limits and guidelines for
N ,N-dimethylanilne
Country Year
Australia
Austria
Belgium1982
China
Denmark
Finland1979
1988
France
Germany
Hungary1992
Indonesia
Mexico
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Romania1978
1983
1989
1984
1975
Switzerland
United Kingdom 199
USA
ACGIH 1992
NIOSH 199
OSHA 1989
Venezuela 1978Concentration
(mg/m3)Interpretation
25
50
25
25
50
5
25
25
50
25
25
5
10
25
25
25
25
5
10
20
25
50
25
50TWA
STEL
TWA
TWA
STEL
TWA
TWA
TWA
STEL
TWA
TWA
TWA
STEL
TWA
TWA
TWA
TWA
TWA
TWA
STEL
TWA
STEL
TWA
STEL
25
50
10
50
25
50
25
60TWA
STEL
TWA
STEL
TWA
STEL
TWA
STEL
From Cook (1987); US Occupational Safety and Health Adminis-
tration (üSHA) (1989); American Conference of Govemmental
Industril Hygienists (ACGIH) (199, 1992); ILü (1991); Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (1992); TW A time-weighted average;
STEL, short-term expsure limit
AlI countries have a notation that the compound may be a ski
irtant.N,N-DIMETHYLANILINE341
2. Studies of eancer in Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
3. Studies of eancer in Experimental AnimaIs
3.1 Oral administration
3.1.1 Mouse
Groups of 50 male and 50 female B6C3Fi mice, eight weeks old, were administered 0
(controls), 15 or 30 mg/kg bw N,N-dimethylaniline (? 98% pure) in 10 ml/kg bw corn oil by
gavage on five days a week for 103 weeks. Survval at week 104 was: males-controls, 34/50;
low-dose, 30/50; high-dose, 34/50; females-controls, 35/50; low-dose, 39/50; high-dose,
33/50. ln females, epithelial hyperplasia of forestomach occUfred in 8/50 controls, 11/19
low-dose and 13/50 high-dose; and squamous-cell papilomas of the forestomach were found
in 2/50 controls, 2/19 low-dose and 8/50 high-dose animais (p = 0.042, incidental tumour
test) (US National Toxicology Program, 1989). (The Working Group noted that only 19
forestomachs from females in the low-dose group were examined microscopically and that
the high dose used may not have reached the maximal tolerable dose J.
3.1.2 Rat
Groups of 50 male and 50 female Fischer 344 rats, seven weeks old, were administered 0
(controls),3 or 30 mg/kg bw N,N-dimethylaniline (? 98% pure) in 5 ml/kg bw corn oil by
gavage on five days a week for 103 weeks. Survval at 104 weeks was: males-controls, 29/50;
low-dose, 32/50; high-dose, 28/50; females-controls, 21/50; low-dose, 32/50; high-dose,
36/50. Sarcomas of the spleen occurred in 0/49 controls, 0/49 low-dose and 3/50 high-dose
male rats; one osteosarcoma of the spleen was observed in a high-dose male. Although the
proportion of high-dose male rats with splenic sarcomas or osteosarcomas (4/50, 8%) was
not significantly greater than that in controls (0/50), it exceeded the historical control
incidence (study laboratory, 1/148 (0.7:1 1 %); all National Toxicology Program laboratories,
3/2081 (0.1 :: 0.5%)). The severity of haematopoiesis and haemosiderosis of the spleen was
increased in high-dose rats of each sex, and an increased incidence of fibrosis and fatty
metamorphosis of the spleen occurred in high-dose males. The incidence of mononuclear
cell leukaemias was significantly decreased in high-dose rats: males-controls, 13/50; low-
dose, 4/50; high-dose, 3/50 (p = 0.017, incidental tumour test); females-controls, 11/50;
low-dose, 7/50; high-dose, 0/50 (p = 0.005, incidental tumour test) (Abdo et aL., 1989
(abstract); US National Toxicology Program, 1989).
4. Other Relevant Data
4.1 Absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion
4.1.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.342 !AC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
4.1.2 Experimental systems
The metabolism of N,N-dimethylaniline has been studied in adult and fetal hum an
tissues in vitro. ln adult liver microsomes, both N-oxidation and oxidative N-demethylation
were shown to occur, resulting in the formation of N,N-dimethylaniline N-oxide and of
N-methylaniline and formaldehyde, respectively. The N-oxide was found to be metabolized
further to formaldehyde and N-methylaniline (Kitada et al., 1974). N-Oxidation has also
been demonstrated in fetal liver microsomes, adult kidney microsomes and adult liver
homogenates (Ziegler & Gold, 1971; Rane, 1974; Lemoine et al., 1990). ln experiments with
enzye inhibitors, antibodies and enzye thermal stability, it was concluded that the
flavin-containing mono-oxygenases are primarily responsible for N-oxidation (McManus
et aL., 1987), while cyochrome(s) P450 appears to catalyse the N-demethylation reactions
(Lemoine et al., 1990).
The metabolism of N,N-dimethylaniline was studied in mongrel dogs given a dose of
40 mg/kg (purity unspecifiedi by intravenous injection; blood samples were collected over
4 h and urine samples over 48 h. Aniline was detected in blood but not in urine, white
N-methylaniline, 2- and 4-aminophenol, N-methyl-4-aminophenol, N,N-dimethyl.2-amino-
phenol and N ,N-dimethyl-4-aminophenol were isolated from urine after enzyatiè
deconjugation with glucuronidase/sulfatase and were characterized by spectral and chroma-
tographic criteria; N,N-dimethylanilne N-oxide was not detected. N,N- Dimethyl-4-amino-
phenol and N-methyl-4-aminophenol were recovered as urinary metabolites in rab bits; and
rats were found to excrete N,N-dimethyl-4-aminophenyl sulfate and 4-aminophenyl sulfate
(reviewed by Kiese & Renner, 1974). Incubation of isolated rat hepatocyes with N,N-di-
methylanilne resulted in the formation of N-methylaniline, aniline, N,N-dimethylanilne
N-oxide and N-methylaniline N-glucuronide (Sherratt & Damani, 1989).
The metabolism of N,N -dimethylaniline has been studied in a wide variety of tissues and
species in vitro, including the livers of rats, mice, hamsters, rabbits, guinea-pigs, cats, cows,
pigs, squirrels, bats, armadilos, opossums, raccoons and several avian, fish, amphibian and
reptile species; extrahepatic tissues (notably lung, kidney, nasal mucosa, adrenals and
intestine) of rats, pigs and rabbits; and even in a protozoan (Machinist et al., 1968; Pan et al.,
1975; Hlavica & Kehl, 1976; Gorrod & Gooderham, 1981; McNulty et al., 1983; Ohmiya &
Mehendale, 1983; Agosin & Ankley, 1987). The major reactions are N-oxidation of N,N-di-
methylaniline to form N,N-dimethylaniline N-oxide and oxidative N-demethylation of
N,N-dimethylaniline and its N-oxide to form N-methylaniline and formaldehyde. Arl ring-
hydroxylation is a minor reaction and results in the formation of N ,N-dimethyl-4-amino-
phenol and its non-enzyatic decomposition product, N-methyl-4-aminophenoL. The latter
reaction is of interest as it appears to proceed through a reactive quinoneimine intermediate
(Gooderham & Gorrod, 1981). Further N-demethylation of N-methylanilne to anilne and
ring- and N-hydroxylation to 4-aminophenol and phenylhydroxylamine (Holzer & KIese,
1960) have also been reported in vitro. On the basis of several studies using inhibitors, anti-
bodies, inducers and purified enzyes, N,N-dimethylanilne N-oxidation has been shown to
be catalysed selectively by the flavin-containing mono-oxygenases, while N-demethylation
and ring-hydroxylation are catalysed primarity by cyochromes P450 (principally the PB,
BNF and ISF families) (Devereux & Fouts, 1974; Ziegler & Pettit, 1964; Hlavica &N,N-DlMETHYLANLlNE343
Hülsmann, 1979; Gorrod & Gooderham, 1981; Akhremetal., 1982; Hamil & Cooper, 1984;
MacDonald et al., 1989; Pandey et al., 1989). The demethylation of N ,N-dimethylanilne can
also be catalysed by peroxidative mechanisms involving ram seminal vesicle prostaglandin
sythase (Sivarajah et al., 1982) and fungal chloroperoxidase (Kedderis & Hollenberg, 1984).
4.2 Toxic efTects
4.2.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.2.2 Experimental systems
The LDso values for N ,N-dimethylaniline (purity and vehicle unspecifiedi were esti-
mated to be 1350 mg/kg bw after single gavage doses to male Carworth-Wistar rats and
1690 mg/kg bw after dermal administration to male New Zealand rabbits (Smyth et al.,
1962).
Exposure of rats to N ,N-dimethylanilne by inhalation (0.0055 and 0.3 mg/m3 conti-
nuously for 100 days) resulted in methaemoglobinaemia, lowered eryhrocye haemoglobin,
leukopenia and reticulocyosis, and reduced muscle chronaxy. Exposure to N-methylaniline
(0.03 and 0.04 mg/m3 only) under the sa me conditions resulted in lesser toxicity but included
methaemoglobinaemia (Markosyan, 1969). Intravenous injection of 25 mg/kg bw N ,N-di-
methylaniline to cats increased the levels of haemoglobulin (Holzer & Kiese, (1960).
ln chronic studies in which male and female Fischer 344 rats and B6C3Fi mice were
given the compound (98.2% pure) by gavage in corn oil at doses of up to 500 mg/kg for five
days per week for 13 weeks, dose-related decreases in body weight gain were observed in
male rats and cyanosis and decreased motor activity in both species of each sex, as well as
splenomegaly and haemosiderosis in the spleen, liver, kidney and testes. Bone marrow
hyperplasia was seen in rats and increased haematopoiesis in the liver in mice and in the
spleen in mice and rats (Abdo et al., 1990). Rats were generally more sensitive than mice to
these toxic effects, all of which could be attributed to chronic methaemoglobinaemia,
eryhrocye destruction and eryhrophagocyosis.
ln the 103-week carcinogenicity study described on p. 341, dose-related, non-neoplastic
changes observed in rats involved fibrosis, haemosiderosis, fatty metamorphosis of the
spleen and chronIc focal inflammation of the liver (US National Toxicology Program,.1989).
Afer oral dosing of female Wistar rats with N ,N-dimethylaniline (purity unspecifiedi in
propylene glycol at 73 mg/kg bw, II.4 mmol (1.4 g) compound/kg bw was bound to haemo-
globin (Birner & Neumann, 1988).
4.3 Reproductive and developmental efTects
4.3.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.3.2 Experimental systems
Pregnant CD-l mice were administered N ,N-dimethylanilne ¡n corn oil at 365 mg/kg
bw per day by gavage on gestation days 6-13 and allowed to deliver litters (Hardin et al.,344 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
1987). Live pups were counted and weighed within one-half day after birth and again on the
third day after birth. The dose kiled 6% of treated females but did not significantly affect
maternai body weight gain, number of viable litters (at least one live pup) produced, body
weight or number of liveborn pups per litter, or body weight gain or survval of pups up to
three days of age.
4.4 Genetic and related efTects
4.4.1 Humans
No data were available to the Working Group.
4.4.2 Experimental systems (see also Table 2 and Appendices 1 and 2)
N,N-Dimethylaniline did not induce mutation in Salmonella typhimurium but was muta-
genic at the tk locus of mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells. It induced both sister chromatid
exchange and chromosomal aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells but did not induce
unscheduled DNA synthesis in rat primary hepatocye cultures.
5. Summary of Data Reported and Evaluation
5.1 Exposure data
N,N- Dimethylaniline is used as an intermediate in the manufacture of dyes and other
products and as a solvent for special purposes, a rubber vulcanizing agent and a stabilizer. It
has been detected in ambient water and soil in the vicinity of industrial facilities.
5.2 Human carcinogenicity data
No data were available to the Working Group.
5.3 Animal carcinogenicity data
N,N- Dimethylaniline was tested for carcinogenicity in one study in mice and in one study
in rats by gavage. It increased the incidence of forestomach papilomas in female mice. A few
splenic sarcomas were observed in treated male rats.
5.4 Other relevant data
The metabolism of N,N-dimethylaniline has been studied in many species and in human
tissues. It involves enzyatIc N-demethylation, N-oxidation and ring hydroxylation. Anilne
is.a major metabolite. Chronic methaemoglobinaemia and eryhrocye haemolysis, with
concomitant splenomegaly and other pathological lesions characteristic of anilne, were
observed in mice and rats treated with N ,N-dimethylanilne.""~'/~ """"'""'~'''''''''''''''''''''''0'''''=N'''''~-'
''!
Table 2. Genetic and related efTects of N,N-dimethylanilne
lest systemResult Dosea Reference
(LED/HID)Without With
exogenous exogenous
metabolic metabolic
system system
SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation - - 60.~~ Mori et al. (1980) ~~~ SAO, Salmonella typhimurium TA100, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Mortelmans et al. (1986)Û SAS, Salmonella typhimurium TA1535, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Mortelmans et al. (1986) -
a: SA7, Salmonella tyhimurium TA1537, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Mortelmans et al. (1986)
~SA9, Salmonella tyhimurium TA98, reverse mutation - - 60.~~ Mori et al. (1980)
SA9' Salmonella tyhimurium TA98, reverse mutation0 - 25.~~ Ho et al. (1981) ~SA9, Salmonella tyhimurium TA98, reverse mutation - - 167.~~ Mortelmans et al. (1986)s:VRp, Vnscheduled DNA sythesis, rat priary hepatoces -0 121.200 Yoshimi et al. (1988)~G5l Gene mutation, mou se lymphoma L5178Y celIs, tk locus + + 19.~~ VS National Toxicology r-Program (1989)
êí sic, Sister chromatid exchange, Chinese hamster. (CHO) ovary cells - + 30.~~ Lovedayet al. (1989)
in vitro
CIC, Chromosomal aberrations, Chinese hamster (CHO) ovary ce Ils (+ ) + 83.~~ Loveday et al. (1989)
in vitro
+ , positive; ( + ), weakly positive; -, negative; 0, not tested
tln-vitro tests, iig/ml; in-vivo tests, mg/kg bw
\;~346 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
N,N-Dimethylaniline did not induce gene mutation in bacteria or DNA damage in
cultured mammalian cells. It induced gene mutation, sister chromatid exchange and
chromosomal aberrations in cultured mammalian cells.
5.5 Evaluation i
There is inadequate evidence in humans for the carcinogenicity of N ,N-dimethylanilne.
There is limited evidence in experimental animais for the carcinogenicity of N ,N-di-
methylanilne.
Overall evaluation
N,N-Dimethylaniline is not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans (Croup 3).
6. References
Abdo, KM., Bucher, J., Haseman, J.K, Eustis, S.L. & Huff, J.E. (1989) Induction of splenic sarcomas
in F344/N rats given N,N-dimethylaniline (Abstract No. 703). Proc. Am. Assoc. Cancer Res., 30,
177
Abdo, KM., Jokinen, M.P. & Hiles, R. (1990) Subchronic (13-week) toxicity studies of N,N-dimethyl-
anilne administered to Fischer 344 rats and B6C3Fi mice.l Toxicol. environ. Health, 29, 77-88
Agosin, M. & Ankley, G. T. (1987) Conversion of N,N-dimethylanilne to N,N-dimethylanilne-N-oxide
by a cytosolic flavin-containing enzyme from Tryanosoma cruzi. Drug Metab. Disposition, 15,
20203
Akrem, A.A., Khatyleva, S.Y., Shkumatov, \ZM., Chashchin, \ZL. & Kiselev, P.A. (1982) Cumene
hydroperoxide supported demethylation of N,N-dimethylanilne by cytochrome P-4S0 from
adrenal cortex mitochondria. Acta biol. med. germ., 1 L, 1019-1028
Aldrich Chemical Co. (1992) Aldrich Catalog/Handbook of Fine Chemicals 1992-1993, Milwaukee,
WI, p. 490
American Conference of GovernÍnental Industrial Hygienists (1990) Guide to Occupational Exsure
Vilues-1990, Cincinnati, OH, p. 42
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (1992) 1992-1993 Threshold Limit
Vilues for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and Biological Expsure Indices, Cincinnati,
OH, p. 19
Amoore, J.E. & Hautala, E. (1983) Odor as an aid to chemical safety: odor thresholds compared with
threshold limit values and volatilties for 214 industrial chemicals in air and water dilution.
1 appl. Toxicol., 3, 272-290
Birner, G. & Neumann, H.-G. (1988) Biomonitoring of aromatic amines. II. Hemoglobin binding of
some monocyclic aromatic amines. Arch. Toxicol., 62, 110-115
Budavari, S., ed. (1989) The Merck Index, 1lth ed., Rahway, NJ, Merck & Co., p.510
Buffalo Color Corp. (1987) Specification Sheet: N,N-dimethylaniline, Parsippany, NJ
lFor definition of the italicized terms, see Preamble, pp. 2630.N,N-DIMETHYLALlNE347
Buffalo Color Corp. (1992) Materi Safety Data Sheet: Dimethylaniline, Parsippany, NJ
Campbell, RE., Wood, G.O. & Anderson, RG. (1981) Method 1-Gas chromatographic analysis of
aromatic amines in air. ln: Egan, H., Fishbein, L., Castegnaro, M., O'Neil, I.K & Bartsch, H.,
eds, Environmental Carcinogens: Selected Methods of Analysis, VoL. 4, Some Aromatic Amines and
Az Dyes in the General and Industrial Environment (IAC Scientific Publications No. 40), Lyon,
IAC, pp. 109-118
Chemical Information Servces Ltd (1991) Directory of World Chemical Producers 1992/93 Edition,
Dallas, TX, p. 234
Cook, WA. (1987) Occupational Exsure Limits-Worldwide, Akon, OH, American Industrial
Hygiene Association, pp. 120, 137, 183
Dalene, M. & Skarping, G. (1985) Trace analysis of amines and isocyanates using glass capilaiy gas
chromatography and selective detection. iV: Determination of free aromatic amines using
nitrogen-selective detection.l Chromatogr., 331, 321-330
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (1992)MA- and BAT-Values List 1992. Maxmum Concentrations
at the Workplace (MA) and Biological Tolerance Values (BAT) for Working Materials (Report No.
28), Weinheim, VeH Verlagsgesellschaft, p. 36
Devereux, 1:R. & Fouts, J.R (1974) N-Oxidation and demethylation ofN,N-dimethylaniline by rabbit
liver and lung microsomes. Effects of age and metals. Chem.-biol. Interactions, 8, 91-105
Dragun, J. & Hellng, C.S. (1985) Physicochemical and structural relationships of organic chemicals
undergoing soil- and clay-catalyzed free-radical oxidation. Soil Sei, 139, 100111
Elier, P.M., ed. (1985) NIOSH Manual of Analytical Methods, 3rd ed., Suppl. 1, (DHHS (NIOSH) PubL
No. 84-1(0), Washington DC, US Government Printing Offce, pp. 202-1-202-6
Fluka Che mie AG (1993) Flula Chemila-BioChemila, Buchs, p. 513
Gooerham, NJ. & Gorrod, J.W (1981) Routes to the formation ofN-methyl-4-aminophenol, a meta-
bolite of N,N-dimethylaniline. Adv. ex. Med. BioL., 1368, 1109-1120
Gorrod, J.W & Gooderham, N.J. (1981) The in vitro metabolism ofN,N-dimethylaniline by guinea pig
and rabbit tissue preparations. Eur. 1 Drug Metab. Pharmacol., 6, 195-20
Hamil, S. & Cooper, D.Y. (1984) The role of cytochrome P-4S0 in the dual pathways of N-demethy-
lation of N,N-dimethylaniline by hepatic mIcrosomes. Xenobiotica, 14, 139-149
Hansch, C. & Leo, A. (1979) Substituent Constants for Correlation Anlysis in Chemistry and Biology,
New York, John Wiley & Sons, p. 235
Hardin, B.D., Schuler, RL., Burg, J.R., Booth, G.M., Hazelden, KP., MacKenzie, KM., Piccirilo, V:J.
& Smith, KN. (1987) Evaluation of 60 chemicals in a preliminaiy developmental toxicity test.
Teratog. Carcinog. Mutag., 7, 29-48
Harris, L.R., Gideon, J.A., Berardinell, S., Reed, L.D. & Dobbin, RD. (1980) Coal Liquefaction:
Recent Findings in Occupational Safety and Realth (NIOSH-8O-122S NTS PB81-22422),
Cincinnati, OH, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
Heraeus (1991) Feinchemilalien und Forschungsbedarf Karlsruhe, p. 28
Hlavica, P. & Hülsmann, S. (1979) Studies on the mechanism of hepatic microsomal N-oxide
formation. Biochem. J., 182, 109-116
Hlavica, P. & Kehl, M. (1976) Comparative studies on the N-oxidation of aniline and N,N-dimethyl-
anilne by rab bit liver microsomes. Xenobiotica, 11, 679-689
Ho, C.-H., Clark, B.R., Guerin, M.R., Barkenbus, ED., Rao, 1:K & Epier, J.L. (1981) Analytical and
biological analyses of test materials from the synthetic fuel technologies. IV: Studies of chemical
structure-mutagenic activity relationships of aromatic nitrogen compounds relevant to synfuels.
Mutat. Res., 85, 335-345348 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Holzer, N. & Kiese, M. (196) Formation of nitrosobenzene, anilne and haemoglobin in cats and dogs
after intravenous injection of N-alkylanilines (GeL). Naunyn-Schmiedeberg's Arch. ex. Pathol.
PhannkoL, 238, 546556
IAC (1982a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans,
VoL. 27, Some Aromatic Amines, Anthraquinones, and Nitroso Compounds, and lnorganic
Fluories Used in Drinkng-water and Dental Preparations, Lyon, pp. 39-61
IAC (1982b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk ofChemicals to Humans,
VoL. 28, The Rubber Industry, Lyon
IAC (1987a) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7,Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IAC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon, pp.
99-100
IAC (1987b) IARC Monographs on the Evaluation ofCarcinogenic Risks to Humans, Suppl. 7,Overall
Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of IARC Monographs Volumes 1 to 42, Lyon, pp.
332-334
ILO (1991) Occupational Exsure Limits for Airbome Toxic Substances, 3rd ed. (Occupational Safety
and Health Series No. 37), Geneva, International Labour Office, pp. 164167
Janssen Chi mica (199) 1991 Catalog Handbook of Fine Chemicals, Beerse, p. 477
Kedderis, G.L. & Hollenberg, P.F. (1984) pH Kinetic studies of the N-demethylation of N ,N-dimethyl-
aniline catalyzed by chloroperoxidase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 233, 315-321
Kiese, M. & Renner, G. (1974) Urinary metabolites of N,N-dimethylaniline produced by dogs. Arch.
Pharmacol., 283, 143-150
Kitada, M., Kamataki, T. & Kitagawa, H. (1974) Comparison of N-oxidation and N-demethylation of
dimethylamine in human liver. Jpn. 1. Pharmacol., 24, 647
Lancaster Synthesis (1991) MTM Research Chemicals/Lancaster Catalogue 1991/92, Windham, NH,
MTM PIC, pp. 534-535
Leach, J.M., Otson, R & Armstrong, \Z (1987) Airborne contaminants in two small Canadian coal
liquefaction pilot plants. Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. J., 48, 693-697
Lemoine, A., Johann, M. & Cresteil, T. (199) Evidence for the presence of distinct flavin-containing
monooxygenases in human tissues. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 276, 336-342
Lide, D.R, ed. (1991) CRC Handbook ofChemistry and Physics, 72nd ed., Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
pp. 3-4, 6-76
Loveday, K.S., Lugo, M.H., Resnick, M.A., Anderson, B.E. & Zeiger, E. (1989) Chromosome
aberration and sister chromatid exchange tests in Chinese hamster ovary ce Ils in vitro: IL Results
with 20 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 13, 6094
MacDonald, T.L., Gutheim, WG., Martin, RB. & Guengerich, EP. (1989) Oxidation of substituted
N,N-dimethylanilnes by cytochrome P-450: estimation of the effective oxidation-reduction
potential of cytochrome P-450. Biochemistry, 28, 2071-2077
Machinist, J.M., Dehner, E.W & Ziegler, D.M. (1%8) Microsomal oxidases. III. Comparison of
species and organ distribution of dialkylarylamine N-oxide and dealkylase and dialkylarylamine
N-oxidase. Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 125,858-86
Markel, H., Jr & WiIcox, T (1981) Health Hazard Evaluation Report No. HHE- 79-104-838. AO.
Smith-Inland, Inc., Little Rock, AR (US NTS PB82-182429), Cincinnati, OH, National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health
Margosis, M. (1977) GLC determination of N,N-dimethylanilne in penicilins. 1. pharmacol. Sei, 66,
1634-1636N,N-DIMETHYLALINE 349
Markosyan, TM. (1969) Comparative toxicity of monomethylanilne and dimethylaniline in chronic
test (Russ.). Gig. Sanit., 34, 7-11
McManus, M.E., Stupans, 1., Burgess, W, Koenig, J.A, Hall, P.delaM. & Birkett, D.J. (1987) Flavin-
containing monooxygenase activity in human liver microsomes. Drug Metab. Disposition, 15,
256-261
McNulty, M.J., Casanova-Schmitz, M. & Heck, H.dA (1983) Metabolism of dimethylamine in the
nasal mucosa of the Fischer 344 rat. Drug Metab. Disposition, ll, 421-425
Meijers, A.P. & van der Leer, Re. (1976) The occurrence of organic micropollutants in the River
Rhine and the River Maas in 1974. Water Res., 10,597-6
Mori, Y., Niwa, T, Hori, T. & Toyoshi, K. (1980) Mutagenicity of 3'-methyl-N,N-dimethyl-4-amino
azobenzene metabolites and related compounds. Carcinogenesis, 1, 121-127
Mortelmans, K., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T., Speck, W, Tainer, B. & Zeiger, E. (1986) Salmonella muta-
genicity tests: II. Results from the testing of 270 chemicals. Environ. mol. Mutag., 8 (Suppl. 7),
1-119
Nelson, e.R & Hites, RA (1980) Aromatic amines in and near Buffalo River. Environ. Sei Technol.,
14, 1147-1149
Northcott, J. (1978) Anilne and its derivatives. ln: Mark, H.F., Othmer, D.F., Overberger, C.G.,
Seaborg, G.T. & Grayson, N., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia ofChemical Technology, 3rd ed.,
Vol. 2, New York, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 309-321
Ohmiya, Y. & Mehendale, H.M. (1983) N-Oxidation of N,N-dimethylanilne in the rabbit and rat lung.
Biochem. Phannacol.,32, 1281-1285
Pan, H.P., Fouts, J.R & Devereux, 'IR (1975) Hepatic microsomal N-oxidation and N-demethylation
of N,N-dimethylaniline in red-winged blackbird compared with rat and other birds. Life Sei., 17,
819-826
Pandey, RN., Armstrong, AP. & Hollenberg, P.F. (1989) Oxdative N-demethylation of N,N-dimethyl-
anilne by purified isozymes of cytochrome P-450. Biochem. Phannacol., 38, 2181-2185
Pouchert, C.J. (1981) The Aldrich Library of Infrared Spectra, 3rd ed., Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 715
Pouchert, C.J. (1983) The Aldrich Library of NMR Spectra, 2nd ed., Vol. 1, Milwaukee, WI, Aldrich
Chemical Co., p. 99
Quercia, V, De Sena, C., lela, G., Pagnozz, G. & Pierini, N. (1980) Determination of the content of
N,N-dimethylaniline in some antibiotics (Hal.). Boil. chim. farm., 119,619-622
Rane, A. (1974) N-Oxdation of a tertiary amine (N,N-dimethylanilne) by human fetal liver micro-
somes. Clin. Phannacol. Ther., 15, 32-38
Riedel-de Haen (199) Laboratory Chemicals 1990, Seelze, p. 493
Rivera, J., Ventura, F., Caixach, J., De Torres, M. & Figueras, A. (1987) GC/MS, HPLC and FAB mass
spectrometric analysis of organic micropollutants in Barcelona's water supply. Int. 1 environ.
anal. Chem., 29, 15-35
Rosenwald, RH. (1978) Alkylation. ln: Mark, H.F., Othmer, D.F., Overberger, c.G., Seaborg, G.T. &
Grayson, N., eds, Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology, 3rd ed., Vol. 2, New York,
John Wiley & Sons, p. 67
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1980) Sadtler Standard Spectra. 1980 Cumulative Index, Philadelphia,
PA
Sadtler Research Laboratories (1991) Sadtler Standard Spectra. 1981-1991 Supplementary Index,
Philadelphia, PA350 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Sax, N.I. & Lewis, R.J. (1987) Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary, l1th ed., New York, Van
Nostrand Reinhold Co., p. 411
Sherratt, A.J. & Damani, L.A. (1989) The metabolism of N,N-dimethylaniline by isolated rat hepa-
toces: identification of a novel N-conjugate. Xenobiotica, 19,379-388
Sivarajah, K, Lasker, J.M., Eling, TE. & Abou-Donia, M.B. (1982) Metabolism of N-àlkyl com-
pounds during the biosynthesis of prostaglandins. N- Dealkylation during prostaglandin
biosynthesis. Mol. Phannacol., 21, 133-141
Smyth, H.E, Jr, Carpenter, c.P., Weil, C.S., Pozzani, U.c. & Striegel, J.A. (1962) Range-finding toxi-
city data: list VI. Am. ind. Hyg. Assoc. 1., 23, 95-107
US Environmental Protection Agency (1986) Health and Environmental Effects Profile for N,N-Di-
methylaniline (Report No. EPA-60/X-87-052/US NTS PB89-123038), Cincinnati, OH,
Environmental.Criteria and Assessment Office
US International Trade Commission (1988) US Imports for Consumption and General Imports (Ff
246/ Annual 1987), Washington DC, US Department of Commerce
US National Library of Medicine (1992) Regitry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances (RTECS No.
BX4725(0), Bethesda, MD
US National Toxicology Program (1989) Toxicologyand Carcinogenesis Studies ofN,N~Dimethylaniline
(CAS No. 121-69-7) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F¡ Mice (Gavage Studies) (NT TR 360; NIH PubL.
No. 90-2815), Research Triangle Park, NC, US Department of Health and Human Services
US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (1989) Air contaminants-permissible exposure
limits. US Code fed. Regul., Part 1910.100, Title 29, p. 602
Yoshimi, N., Sugie, S., Iwata, H., Niwa, K, Mori, H., Hashida, C. & Shimizu, H. (1988) The geno-
toxicity of a variety of anilne derivatives in a DNA repair test with primary cultured rat
hepatocytes. Mutat. Res., 206, 183-191
Ziegler, D.M. & Gold, M.S. (1971) Oxidative met aboli sm of tertiary amine drugs by human liver
tissue. Xenobiotica, 1, 325-326
Ziegler, D.M. & Pettit, EH. (1964) Formation of an intermediate N-oxide in the oxidative demethy-
lation of N,N-dimethylaniline catalyzed by liver microsomes. Biochem. biophys. Res. Commun.,
15, 188-193
Zoteman, B.C.J., Harmsen, K, Linders, J.B.H.J., Morra, C.F.H. & Slooff, W (1980) Persistent
organic pollutants in river water and groundwater of the Netherlands. Chemosphere, 9, 231-249SUMMARY OF FINAL EVALUATIONS
Agent Degree of evidence Overall evaluation
of earcinogenicity of carcinogenicity
to humans
Human Animal
2- Amino-4-nitrophenol Inadequatea Limited 3
2- Amino-5-nitrophenol Inadequatea Liited 3
paa-Chloroaniline Inadequatea Sufficient 2B
CI Acid Orange 3 Inadequatea Limited 3
CI Acid Red 114 Inadequatea Sufficient 2B
CI Direct Blue 15 Inadequatea Sufficient 2B
(technical-
grade)
CI Pigment Red 3 Inadequatea Limited 3
D&C Red No. 9 (CI Pigment Red 53:1) Inadequatea Limited 3
1,4- Diamino-2-nitrobenzene (2- Nitro- Inadequatea Limited 3
paa-phenylenediamine)
2,6-Dimethylaniline (2,6-Xylidine) Inadequatea Sufièient 2B
N ,N-Dimethylaniline Inadequatea Limited 3
Hair colourants, personal use of Inadequate 3
Hairdresser or barber, ocupational Limited 2Aexpsures as
HC Blue No. 1 Inadequatea Sufficient 2B
HC Blue No. 2 Inadequatea Inadequate 3
HC Red No. 3 Inadequatea Inadequate 3
HC Yellow No. 4 Inadequatea Inadequate 3
Magenta (containing CI Basic Red 9) Inadequate 2B
Magenta Inadequate
CI Basic Red 9 Inadequate Sufficient 2B
Manufacture of magenta Sufficient 1
4,4' -Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) Inadequate Sufficient 2Ab
(MOCA)
a No data
b Overall evaluation 2A and not 2B on the basis of supporting evidence from other relevant
data
-351-APPENDIX 1
SUMMAY TABLES OF
GENETIC AND RELATED EFFECTSSummary table of genetic and related efTects of CI Acid Orange 3
Nonmammalian systemsMammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Insects ln vitroln vivoryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells Animais Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+1
A, aneuploidy; C, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL. dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sis ter chromatid exchange; T, cell transfonnation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Group with regard to the results for each end point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study was available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocal)~"'tr
Š..~,.
VJ~Summary table of genetic and related efTects of He Blue No. 1 (punfied samples)
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka-
ryotesLower
eukaryotesPlants Insects ln vitro ln vivo
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
D IG ID IR IG lA ID IG le IR IG le lA ID
-' _1 _1 + +1 +1 _1 _1 +1 _1
A, aneuploidy; e, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNA damage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition of intercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; T, cel! transformation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Croup with regard ta the results for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specific endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ i considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocl)wVI0'
As:
~
~ozoo
~~en
dt"C~t'
VI-iSummary table of genetic and related effects of He Blue No. 1 (commercial samples)
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka. Lower Plants Inseets ln vitroln vivo¡yoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+1 + + + + _1 + _1 +1
A aneuploidy; C, chromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; T, cell transformation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worling Croup with regard ta the reults for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoînt and level of biological complexity
+ i considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocl or înconclusîve (e.g., there were contradicto¡y results from dîfferent laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocal)?;'"m
S-~"'
t;V'..Summary table of genetic and related efTects of He Blue No. 2
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Insects ln vitro ln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCAD A
+ + + + -'
A aneuploidy; C, chromosomal aberrations; D, DNA damage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; J, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; 5, sister chromatid exchange; 1; cell transfonnation
ln compleiing the lables, the fol/owing :;mbols indicate the consensus of ihe Working Croup wiih regard 10 ihe resulis for each end-poini:
+ considered to be positive for the specific endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study was available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocal or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)V.Vt00
-~
~
~ozoo
~"'::en
d
S~tr
Vt-.Summary table of genetic and related effects of He Red No. 3
Nonmiimmalian systemsMammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants 1 nsects J n vitroJ n vivoryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+'
A, aneuploidy; C, chromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; T, cell transfonnation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worling Croup with regard ta the reults for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one vaUd study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equIvocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results fram differentlaboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)~~t'Zt;-~"'
wVi10Summary table of genetic and related efTects of He Yellow No. 4
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plan ts Insets ln vitroln vivoryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+' +1 _1 +1 ?I
A aneuploidy; C, ehromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercelluJar communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; 5, sister ehromatid exehange; T, cell transformation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Croup with regard to the feults for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)_1
?v.
g;
..~
fS
~ozoo
~'"::en
ârc:~t'
Vi-.Summary table of genetic and related efTects of 2-amino-4-nitrophenol
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Prka- Lower Plan ts Insets ln vitro ln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells Animais Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCAD A
+ +1_1+1 +1 +1 _1
A aneuploidy; C, ehromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, mieronuclei; R, mitotie recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister ehromatid exehange; T, cell transfonnation
ln completing the tables, the following .smbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Group with regard ta the results for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie end point and level of biological complexity
+ i considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study was available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)~I-I-
tT
S-~..
~..Summary table of genetic and related efTects of 2-amino-5-nitrophenol
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Insects ln vitro ln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGeRGeAD A
+ +1 +'+' -,
A aneuploidy; e, chromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; L, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; T, cell transformation
ln completing the tables, the fo/lowing symbols indicate the consensus of the Wonâng Group with regard to the results for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study was available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocal or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)v.0'N
-~
fS
~ozoo
~:iC/
~o
8~
tT
VI..Summary table of genetic and related efTects of 1,4-diamino-2-nitrobenzene
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka-
ryotesLower
eukarotesPlants Insts ln vitro ln vivo
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DIO ID IR 10 lA ID 10 le IR 10 le lA ID
+ _1 _1 + +' +' + +' -' +
A aneuploidy; e, chromosomal aberrtions; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; 0, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; 1; cell transformation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worldng Croup with regard to the reults for elUh end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specific endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocal or ¡nconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocal)A~'itr
Š-~
""
(,CJ(,Summary table of genetic and related efTects of D&C Red No. 9
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plan ts Inseets ln viiroln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
_1 _1 _1 _1
A aneuploidy; C, ehromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellularcommunication; M, mieronuclei; R, mitotie recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; 1; cell transfonnation
ln compleiing ihe iables, the following symbols indicaie ihe consensus of ihe Working Group wiih regard 10 ihe resulis for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoînt and level of bîological complexity
+ i considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from dîfferent laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equÌvocal)~
$=
f5
~ozoc:
~:it:
d
E~m
VI..Summary table of genetic and related efTects of CI Basic Red 9
NonmammalIan systems MammalIan systems
Proka- Lower Plants Inscts ln vitro a 
ln vivob
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+_1_1 + +
A aneuploidy; C, chromosmal aberrtions; D, DNA damage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; J, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotie recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exehange; 1; cell transformation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worldng Croup !Vith regard to the reults for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivol or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocal)
a Mutagenic in a boy f1uid asay
b Host-mediated asays in mouse?;i-tI
S'"X..
W0'VISummary table of genetic and related effects of CI Direct Blue 15
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Jnsects ln vitro ln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCAD A
+a
A aneuploidy; C, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNA damage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutatÎon; J, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; 1; cell transfonnation
ln completÎng the tables, the fol/owing .imbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Croup with regard ta the reults for eaih end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
? considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)
a Positive with reduetion, negative withoutv.~
;;
~
~ozoel
~:ivi
~o
G~tr
VI..Summary table of genetic and related etTects of CI Acid Red 114
Nonmammalian systemsMammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Inseets ln vitroln vivoryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+a
A aneuploidy; C, ehromosomal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, mieronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister ehromatid exehange; 1; cell Iransfonnaiion
ln completing the tables, the fo//owing symbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Croup with regard to the results for each end-point:
+ considered 10 be poitive for ihe specifie endpoini and level of biological complexiiy
+ i considered 10 be poitive, bul only one valid study wa available 10 ihe Working Group
considered 10 be negative
considered 10 be negaiive, bul only one valid study wa available 10 the Working Group
? considered 10 be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., Ihere were coniradictory resulis from different Jaboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocal)
a Positive wiih reduetion, negaiive wiihoui?d"'tI
ã-~..
W0\..Summary table of genetic and related effects of CI Pigment Red No. 3
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka-
ryotesLower
eukarotesPlants Insects ln vitro ln vivo
Animal cells Human cells Animais Humans
D IG ID IR IG lA ID IG le IR IG le lA ID
_L _1
A aneuploidy; e, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; T, cell transfonnation
ln completing the tables, the fo//owing symbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Group with regard to the results for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie end point and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available 10 the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)tH0"00
A;;
~
~ozoo
~"t:iC/
d
5~
tT
VI-.Summary table of genetic and related efTects of 4,4' -methylene bis(2-chloroanilne) (MOCA)
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Prka- Lower Plants Insets ln vitro ln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCAD A
+ + _1 +1+ + + +1 + +1 +1 + +1 +1 _1 +1 +1
A aneuploidy; C, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNA damage; DL, dominant le th al mutation; G. gene mutation; J, inhibition of intercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conversion; 5, sister chromatid exchange; 1; cell transfonnation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worldng Group with regard to the reults for each end.point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specific endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive. but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
consideree to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradìctory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocl)_1
?~"'
m
S-~,.
W0'v;Summary table of genetic and related efTects of para-chloroanilne
Nonmammalian systemsMammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Insects ln vitroln vivoryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
+' _1 +1++ +'
A aneuploidy; C, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitotic recombination
and gene conve~ion; 5, sis ter chromatid exchange; 1; cell transfonnation
ln completing the tables, the fol/owing symbols indicate the consensus of the Worling Croup with regard to the results for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
_1 considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocal or ¡nconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different labüratories; there were confounding expsures; the results were equivocal)w
èŠ
;;
~
~ozoo
~:iCI
d
8~
tT
Vi... Summary table of genetic and related effects of 2,6-dimethylanilne
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Proka- Lower Plants Jnsects ln vitro ln vivo
ryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCAD A
+1 +1 +1
A, aneuploidy; C, chromosmal aberrations; D, DNA damage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; J, inhibition of intercellular communication; M, micronuclei; R, mitOlic recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister chromatid exchange; 1; cell transformation
ln completing the tables, the following symbols indicate the consensus of the Worlâng Group with regard ta the reults for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specific endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ i considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradictory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocl);i"'"'tI
8-
:x,.
w..,.Summary table of genetic and related efTects of N~.dimethyianilne
Nonmammalian systems Mammalian systems
Prka- Lower Plants Insets ln vitroln vivoryoteseukarotes
Animal cells Human cells AnimaIs Humans
DGDRGADGCRGCADA
_1 +' +1 +'
A aneuploidy; C, ehromosmal aberrtions; D, DNAdamage; DL, dominant lethal mutation; G, gene mutation; l, inhibition ofintercellularcommunication; M, mieronuclei; R, mitotÎC recombination
and gene conversion; S, sister ehromatid exehange; 1; cell transformation
ln comp/et;ng the tables, the fo//ow;ng symbo/s ;nd;cate the consensus of the Worldng Group w;ih regard to the reu/ts for each end-point:
+ considered to be poitive for the specifie endpoint and level of biological complexity
+ 1 considered to be poitive, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be negative
considered to be negative, but only one valid study wa available to the Working Group
considered to be equivocl or inconclusive (e.g., there were contradietory results from different laboratories; there were confounding expures; the results were equivocal)_1
?wtj
:;
~
a:ozoo
~::cr
d
E~ti
VI..APPENDIX 2
ACTIVITY PROFILES FOR
GENETIC AND RELATED EFFECTSAPPENDIX 2
AeTIVTY PROFILES FOR
GENETie AND RELATED EFFECTS
Methods
The x-axis of the activity profile (Waters et al., 1987, 1988) represents the bioassays in
phylogenetic sequence byendpoint, and the values on the y-axis represent the logarithmically
transformed lowest effective doses (LED) and highest ineffective doses (HID) tested. The
term 'dose', as used in this report, does not take into consideration length of treatment or
exposure and may therefore be considered synonymous with concentration. ln practice, the
concentrations used in all the in-vitro tests were converted to l1g/ml, and those for in-vivo
tests were expressed as mglkg bw. Because dose units are plotted on a log scale, differences
in rnolecular weights of compounds do not, in most cases, greatly influence comparisons of
their activity profiles. Conventions for dose conversions are given below.
Profile-line height (the magnitude of each bar) is a function of the LED or HID, which
is associated with the characteristics of each individual test system-such as population size,
cell-cycle kinetics and metabolic competence. Thus, the detection limit of each test system
is different, and, across a given activity profile, responses will vary substantially. No attempt
is made to adjust or relate responses in one test system to those of another.
Line heights are derived as follows: for negative test results, the highest dose tested
without appreciable toxicity is defined as the HID. If there was evidence of extreme toxicity,
the next highest dose is used. A single dose tested with a negative result is considered to be
equivalent to the HID. Similarly, for positive results, the LED is recorded. If the original
data were analysed statistically by the author, the dose recorded is that at which the response
was significant (p .( 0.05). If the available data were not analysed statistically, the dose
required to produce an effect is estimated as follows: when a dose-related positive response
is observed with two or more doses, the lower of the doses is taken as the LED; a single dose
resulting in a positive response is considered to be equivalent to the LED.
ln order to accommodate both the wide range of doses encountered and positive and
negative responses on a continuous scale, doses are transformed logarithmically, so that
effective (LED) and ineffective (mD) doses are represented by positive and negative
-375-376 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
numbers, respectively. The response, or logarithmic dose unit (LDU¡j), for a given test system
i and che mi cal j is represented by the expressions
LDUij = -loglO (dose), for HID values; LDU -=0and (1)
LDUij = -loglO (dose x 10-5), for LED values; LDU ;:0.
These simple relationships define a dose range of 0 to -5 logarithmic units for ineffective
doses (1-100 000 ¡.g/ml or mg/kg bw) and 0 to + 8 logarithmic units for effective doses
(100000-0.001 ¡.g/ml or mg/kg bw). A scale ilustrating the LDU values is shown in Figure
1. Negative responses at doses less than 1 ¡.g/ml (mg/kg bw) are set equal to 1. Effectively,
an LED value ;:100 000 or an HID value -=1 produces an LDU = 0; no quantitative
information is gained from such extreme values. The dotted lines at the levels of log dose
units 1 and - 1 defIne a 'zone of uncertainty' in which positive results are reported at such
high doses (between 10000 and 100000 ¡.g/ml or mg/kg bw) or negative results are reported
at such low dose levels (1 to 10 ¡.g/ml or mg/kg bw) as to call into question the adequacy
of the test.
Fig. 1. Scale of log dose units used on the y-axis of activity profies
Positive
(J.g/ml or mg/kg bw)Log dose
units
0.001
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
100
10 00
100 00 ... '.............. 1
................ 10
............... 100
.............. 100
. . . . . . . . . . .. 10 00
. .. .. .. . ... 100 008
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
o
-1
-2
-3
-4
-5
Negative
(J.g/ml or mg/kg bw)
LED and HID are expressed as J.g/ml or mg/kg bw.
ln practice, an activity profile is computer generated. A data entry programme is used
to store abstracted data from published reports. A sequential file (in ASCII) is created for
each compound, and a record within that file consists of the name and Chemical Abstracts
Servce number of the compound, a three-Ietter code for the test system (see below), the
qualitative test result (with and without an exogenous metabolic system), dose (æD or
HID), citation number and additional source information. An abbreviated citation for each
publication is stored in a segment of a record accessing both the test data file and the citationAPPENDIX 2 377
file. During processing of the data file, an average of the logarithmic values of the data subset
is calculated, and the length of the profile line represents this average value. AIl dose values
are plotted for each profile line, regardless of whether results are positive or negative.
Results obtained in the absence of an exogenous metabolic system are indicated by a bar
(-), and results obtained in the presence of an exogenous metabolic system are indicated by
an upward-directed arrow Cf). When ail results for a given assay are either positive or
negative, the mean of the LDU values is plotted as a solid line; when conflcting data are
reported for the same assay (Le., both positive and negative results), the majority data are
shown by a solid line and the minority data bya dashed line (drawn to the extreme conflicting
response). ln the few cases in which the numbers of positive and negative results are equal,
the solid line is drawn in the positive direction and the maximal negative response is indicated
with a dashed line.
Profie lines are identified by three-letter code words representing the commonly used
tests. Code words for most of the test systems in current use in genetic toxicology were
defined for the US Environmental Protection Agency's GENE-TOX Program (Waters, 1979;
Waters & Auletta, 1981). For IARC Monographs Supplement 6, Volume 44 and sub-
sequent volumes, including this publication, codes were redefined in a manner that should
facilitate inclusion of additional tests. Naming conventions are described below.
Data listings are presented in the text and include endpoint and test codes, a short test
code definition, results (either with (M) or without (NM) an exogenous activation system),
the associated LED or HID value and a short citation. Test codes are organized phylo-
genetically and by endpoint from left to right across each activity profile and from top to
bottom of the corresponding data listing. Endpoints are defined as follows: A, aneuploidy;
C, chromosomal aberrations; D, DNA damage; F, assays of body fluids; G, gene mutation;
H, host-mediated assays; l, inhibition of intercellular communication; M, micronuclei;
P, sperm morphology; R, mitotic recombination or gene conversion; S, sister chromatid
exchange; and 1; cell transformation.
Dose conversions for activity profiles
Doses are converted to l1g/ml for in-vitro tests and to mg/kg bw per day for in-vIvo
experiments.
L ln-vitro test systems
(a) Weight/volume converts directly to l1g/mL.
(b) Molar (M) concentration x molecular weight = mg/ml = 103 l.g/ml; mM concen-
tration x molecular weight = l1g/mL.
(c) Soluble solids expressed as % concentration are assumed to be in units of mass per
volume (Le., 1% = 0.01 g/ml = 10 000 l1g/ml; also, 1 ppm = 1 l1g/ml).
(d) Liquids and gases expressed as % concentration are assumed to be given in units
of volume per volume. Liquids are converted to weight per volume using the density
(D) of the solution (D = g/ml). Gases are converted from volume to mass using
the ideal gas law, PV = nRl: For exposure at 20-37°C at standard atmospheric
pressure, 1 % (v/v) = 0.4 l1g/ml x molecular weight of the gas. Also, 1 ppm (v/v)
= 4 x 10-5 l1g/ml x molecular weight.378 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
(e) ln microbial plate tests, it is usual for the doses to be reported as weight/plate,
whereas concentrations are required to enter data on the activity profile chart.
While remaining cognisant of the errors involved in the process, it is assumed that
a 2-ml volume of top agar is delivered to each plate and that the test substance
remains in solution within it; concentrations are derived from the reported weight/-
plate values by dividing by this arbitrary volume. For spot tests, a I-ml volume is
used in the calculation.
(j Conversion ofparticulate concentrations given in ¡.g/cm2 are based on the are a (A)
of the dish and the volume of medium per dish; i.e., for a 100-mm dish: A = 'lR2
= 'l x (5 cm)2 = 78.5 cm2. If the volume of medium is 10 ml, then 78.5 cm2 = 10
ml and 1 cm2 = 0.13 mL.
2. ln-vitro systems using in-vivo activation
For the body fluid-urine (BF-) test, the concentration used is the dose (in mg/kg bw)
of the compound administered to test animais or patients.
3. ln-vivo test systems
(a) Doses are converted to mg/kg bw per day of exposure, assuming 100% absorption.
Standard values are used for each sex and species of rodent, inc1uding body weight
and average intake per day, as reported by Gold et al. (1984). For example, in a test
using male mice fed 50 ppm of the agent in the diet, the standard food intake per
day is 12 % of body weight, and the conversion is dose = 50 ppm x 12 % = 6 mg/kg
bw per day.
Standard values used for humans are: weight-males, 70 kg; females, 55 kg; surface
area, 1.7 m2; inhalation rate, 20 l/min for light work, 30 l/min for mild exercise.
(b) When reported, the dose at the target site is used. For example, doses given instudies of lymphocyes of humans exposed in vivo are the measured blood
concentrations in ¡.g/ml.
Codes for test systems
For specific nonmammalian test systems, the first two letters of the three-sybol code
word defIne the test organism (e.g., SA- for Salmonella typhimurium, EC- for Escherichia
coli). If the species is not known, the convention used is -S-. The third symbol may be used
to define the tester strain (e.g., SA8 for S. typhimurium TA1538, ECW for E. coli WP2uvrA).
When strain designation is not indicated, the third letter is used to define the specific genetic
endpoint under investigation (e.g., --D for differential toxicity, --F for forward mutation,
--G for gene conversion or genetic crossing-over, --N for aneuploidy, --R for reverse
mutation, --U for unscheduled DNA synthesis). The third letter may also be used to define
the general endpoint under investigation when a more complete definitioû" is not possible
or relevant (e.g., --M for mutation, --C for chromosomal aberration).
For mammalian test systems, the first letter of the three-letter code word defines the
genetic endpoint under investigation: A-- for aneuploidy, B-- for binding, C-- for
chromosomal aberration, D-- for DNA strand breaks, G-- for gene mutation, 1-- for
inhibition of intercellular communication, M-- for micronucleus formation, R-- for DNAAPPENDIX 2379
repair, S-- for sister chromatid exchange, T - for cell transformation and U-- for
unscheduled DNA sythesis.
For animal (i.e., non-human) test systems in vitro, when the cell tye is not specified, the
code letters -lA are used. For such assays in vivo, when the animal species is not specified,
the code letters - VA are used. Commonly used animal species are identified by the third
letter (e.g., --C for Chinese hamster, --M for mouse, -R for rat, --S for Syran hamster).
For test systems using human cells in vitro, when the cell tye is not specified, the code
letters -IH are used. For assays on humans in vivo, when the cell tye is not specified, the
code letters - VH are used. Otherwse, the second letter specifies the cell tye under
investigation (e.g., -BH for bone marrow, -LH for lymphocyes).
Some other specifie coding conventions used for mammalian systems are as follows: BF-
for body fluids, HM- for host-mediated, --L for leukocyes or lymphocyes in vitro (-AL,
animaIs; -HL, humans), -L- for leukocyes in vivo (-LA animaIs; -LH, hum ans), --T for
transformed cells.
Note that these are examples of major conventions used to define the assay code words.
The alphabetized listing of codes must be examined to confirm a specific code word. As
might be expected from the limitation to three symbols, some codes do not fit the naming
conventions precisely. ln a few cases, test systems are defined by first-Ietter code words, for
example: MST, mouse spot test; SLP, mouse specific locus test, postspermatogonia; SLO,
mouse specific locus test, other stages; DLM, dominant lethal test in mice; DLR, dominant
lethal test in rats; MH'l mouse heritable translocation test.
The genetic activity profiles and listings were prepared in collaboration with Environ-
mental Health Research and Testing Inc. (EHRT) under con tract to the US EnvironmentalProtection Agency; EHRT also determined the doses used. The references cited in each
genetic activity profile listing can be found in the list of references in the appropriate
monograph.
References
Garrett, N.E., Stack, H.P., Gross, M.R. & Waters, M.D. (1984) An analysis of the spectra of genetic
activity produced by known or suspected human carcinogens. Mutat. Res., 134, 89-111
Gold, L.S., Sawyer, C.R, Magaw, R., Backman, G.M., de Veciana, M., Levinson, R., Hooper, N.K.,
Havender, WR., Bernstein, L., Peto, R., Pike, M.C. & Ames, RN. (1984) A carcinogenic potency
database of the standardized results of animal bioassays. Environ. Health Perspect., 58, 9-319
Waters, M.D. (1979) The GENE-TOXprogram. ln: Hsie, A.w., O'Neil, J.P. & McElheny, VK., eds,
Mammalian Cell Mutagenesis: The Maturation of Test Systems (Banbury Report 2), Cold Spring
Harbor, NY, CSH Press, pp. 449-467
Waters, M.D. & Auletta, A. (1981) The GENE-TOX program: genetic activity evaluation. L chem.
ln! comput. Sei., 21, 35-38
Waters, M.D., Stack, H.P., Brady, A.L., Lohman, P.H.M., Haroun, L. & Vainio, H. (1987) Appendix
1: Activity profies for genetic and related tests. ln: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the
Careinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Humans, Suppl. 6, Genetic and Related Effects: An Updating
of Selected lAC Monographs from Volumes 1 ta 42, Lyon, lAC, pp. 687-6%380 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
Waters, M.D., Stack, H.E, Brady, A.L., Lohman, P.H.M., Haroun, L. & Vainio, H. (1988) Use of
computerized data listings and activity profiles of genetic and related effects in the reviewof
195 compounds. Mutat. Res., 205, 295-312B
6
4
Lnf-
Z::
w
Lnoo2
L'o-1o
-2
-4CI RCro ORRNGE 3
s ç;A ffa ff6373-74-6
- - -- - - ~- - ~ ~ - - - - - - - - - --- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - -- - - - - - - - -- - --
- - - - - - - - ~ - -- - - -- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --- - - -- - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - --
S
A
5
PROKARYOTES LO'wER EUKAR. MAMMALS lN VITRO HUMANS
lN VITROF ¡HI MAMMALS lN ViVO~....
tT
S..~N
w00..4
Lnf-
Z::2
w
Ln00
LJ00-i
-2
-4He BLUE NO. 1 (PURIFIEoi 2784-94-3(Pl
W
RI
fl
8
6
¡ ,1
1_____1 __________________-------- r- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - --- ------------------------- 1
1
1ì 1
1
1
- ---- - -- - --- - - - - --1- - -- - ---- -- - - -- -- - - -- ------- __J____----------- -----------------1 ------ --- - -------
1
1
1
1
1
1l1- 1
1.
'f \
\
~
~
s CJ
R ff
a 5ío
H
XH
V
H
PROKARYOTES HUMANS 1 F /HI MAMMALS lN vivo
lN VITROLOWER EUKAR. MAMMALS lN VITROw~
-~
fS
~ozoo
~'":ien
~o
S~tI
Vl..4
U1f-~Z::2
w
U100
LJ00-1
-28
6
-4HC BLUE NO. 1 (COMMERCIRl)
S !tA FIo ff2784-94-3(Ci
U
R
P55 a:Il Il
lJ lJ
. - - - - - - ~ - - ~ ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -_ - _ __ _ w __ _ ~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
--- -- -- -~--- ---- - -- - - - -- - - - - -- - - -- ---- - -- ---- - -- - - - -- -- -- - - --- -- - - --- - -- - - -- - - ---- - --- - - - - - ~ - --- - -- - - -- - - - - - - _.
S
A
5
PROKARYOTES LOI,ER EUKAR.C
1
R
MAMMALS lN VITRO HUMANS
lN VITROF ¡HI MAMMALS lN ViVOu
y
MM
Y
M;i'"'"
tT
~-~N
v.æ384 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
(JaZ~cr~:L::~:i
a~
~
~
(Jx:,. x: -lcr
:L
:Lcr
=,. x: :L
:i"-
LL
(Jaz0:
crf-
:L:;::
'T:iz
1
'Tl'
1 0
oi0:f-
ru :;
ru zl' El:: 2;l'1
1 lJ
1 -l
tR=i51 cr
1 :L
1 :L
1 cr
1 :L
1
3õ2E£ ---~-------~
1 f-I
1U
1W
1lJ
1 ~
1
1
1 lJ
1 f-
I Z
1 cr
1 -l
1 CL
1
1
1
10:cry:::w
0:w
ru30-l0Z lJ
tR E£ l:w
Wf-a:= -: )---0:
m-:u-== cry:0
U0:a.l
co LO 'T ruo ru
1'T
1
51INn 3500 ::OiAPPENDIX 2 385
lJ0Z:0cr:0L::z:r
a;:
;:
~
lJ--crLL
CIL
:r"-..
lJ0
Z0:
CIf-
L:0:::r~'J
1
0 0cr 1f-
;:("
~ a:
rulJ--
CILL
CIL
f-U
WlJZ
lJf-Z
CI--
D-
a'cr~::w
0:
W~a n--
0
lJ Z
W CR EE Klf-a 0)-Wcr '-==
CI 0:~acr UD- L
a: LÜ 'J ruo ru
1'J
1
51INn 3500 ~OLUlf-
Z::
W
Uloo
LJo~
-2
-4He YELLol, NO. 4
S Çì S
A Aì A
o 57 9
8
6
4
252551-67-4
o- - - - - - ~ - ~ ~ ~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,
i
i
i
i
.- -- -- -- --- ----- -- -- - -- -- - - --- - - -- - - --- - -ï-
1
1
i
1
1
1
1
1
i
i
i
1
1
PROKRRYOTE5 LOW'ER EUKAR.o
H
H
MRMMRL5 lN VITRO HUMAN5 1 F /HI MRMMRL5 lN ViVO
lN VITROVJ~
,.~~n
~ozoo
~'i::C/
~o
S~
tT
Vi-.APPENDIX 2 387
ui 0Z?cr ~L?:: z:r ~
0
= -- D.?'-". =?
2'
x:". = ui1 -l1 cr1 L1 L1 cr1 L1
1
, :r1 "-1 u-1
1
1
1ui 0 1
1 Z Ir
1 cr !:1 L?
1 ::1 :r2' 1
1
1
101
1
1 1 01Ir l" 10-1:;Ln1
1 1
12' 01 1011
1 ui1 -l1 cr1 ::
1 L1 cr1 L
1
1
1
10- 1U 1W 1ui 1
2'1
1
1
1ui1 0-1 Z1 cr1 -l 11 0.ru1
1
1
1
0:1 --1cr 0 1 :,1 :: Z1W W 1
1Ir ::1w D- i:3 01 01-l 0: 1
1 f-i
1 Z 1 ui
1 1 W
f: EE ¡; 1 0-o;~ f: EE ~0)-11 Ir 0F,'-== cr:, Z 0IrL: 0.cr
co lD o; ruo ru
1o;
1
51INn 3500 ~OL4
ln1--Z::2
wln00
LJ00-l
-28
6
-4RMINO-5-NITROPHENOL, 2-
8 S ff
P A ff
F 0 5í121-88-0
G
5
T
-- - - ~- ~ - ~~- - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~- ~ - - - ~- - - - - - - - -- - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---
1 11 1l l
------1-1- -- ------ --- --- - ----: : --------- -----l 1 ----- --, , -------, ' --------~ , -------, -------: ------------A ----
pROKARYOTE5 Lm/ER EUKAR. MAMMAL5 lN VITRO HUMAN5
lN VITROF ¡HI MAMMAL5 lN ViVOw0000
-;i:;()
a=ozo
ci
?;'i::C/
dt"c:
a=t'
Vi-.4
Lnf-
Z::2
w
Ln00
LJ00--
-2B
6
-4DIAMINO-2-NlTR08ENZENE, 1,4- 5307-14-2
Cfff5700 U
H H R
eL PTT
rI
i'C
H
L
--=-
_! --
-------- --- -- --- ---- ---- --- - -- -- -- - -- -- - --- ---------- -------------- -- -- --- - -- - - - - ----- --- --- --- - - - -_.
1111111 -------1- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -:- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -- -------------. - - - - - -~ - - - - - - - - --
11
~1 -1
1~
-
s
(
HN
C
RS H ( (0
v V B VL
A R A AR
PROKARYOTES LOIJER EUKAR. MAMMALS lN VITRO HUMANS
lN VITROF /HI MAMMALS lN ViVO:i"'"'ti
S-~
N
w00~390 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
1
l
U10lZ:; l
l cr:;:L l:: l2' l l
l
l
l 0
l :;l:; l
lZ ,
l
l::=-= U1l ..lcr1:Ll:L1cr1:L1="-= 1
, l 1"-,LL,
,
l
,
lln0
lZIX
lcr1-
,:L:;l ::l l2' 1
l
1
11
1ru 1010 l
IX1ll- I0 1 ;;
lD1
1 Zl
,LI 1ln1 ..1cr1 L1:L1crl:L
1-UwlnZ
U11-Zcr..0.
ricr:o::
WoiIXw30 0..Z
0ln
L.iJ wcrl: EE Hl -l- l-
L:!:~~0rUIX-:Ln== cr:o001IX0.0
co lD "T ruo ru
1"T
1
51INn 3500 ~OLAPPENDIX 2391
QJ LO~ ruo ru
¡~
1
51INn 3500 ~OLU1i-~z::
w
U1oo
Llo-lB
6
4
2
o
-2
-4CI DIRECT BLUE 15
1
1
1
1
1
1
1_ _ _ _ _ _ .,l_ _ _
1
1
1
1!b
ff
ff
Â2429-74-5
1
1
1
1T - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1- - - -
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
AÅ
~
ff
57
PROKARYOTE5 im/ER EUKRR. MAMMAl5 lN VITRO HUMAN5
lN VITROF /HI MAMMAl5 lN ViVOw\CN
-~~n
~ozoo
~"':iC/
~o
8~tr
Vi--APPENDIX 2
i
iuiai Z :;1 a: -i L :;i:: z i l _i
l
i a i:; i
1 :;i
i~ 1
lui i
i -i
1 a:
i L
, L
, cr
l L
,
,l ,
l "
, u.
,
,
l
,uia,0:, z!: 1 a:
1 L:;
1 ::
l lZ1Ln 1
11
l'q 1
1oi l 0
11 0:1 .-oi l:; 1 i. 1z 'q1
l
LO 1ui 1
l -i
1 a:
1 L
1 L
1 a:
1 L
1
1
1
1.- 1U 1W ,ui 1 ==""~ 1 1, 1, 11 , ui1 1 .-1 1 Z1 1 a:1 1 -i1 1 D-I ,1 i1 11 ,0:1 11 , a:1 1 ~1 1 ::1 l W'q1 11 1 0:1 1 W1 1 :31 , 01 i -i1 1 0 , 1W1 1
1 10: 1 1 ui1 1 WtA e: ff , -. .-0 0tA e: ~r0: U , '-== a:a: ~00:
D-U
co LOn ruo ru
1n
1
51 INn 3500 ~OL393394 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
uiaz:;cr:;i:::~:i
a:;
:;
~
ui..cri:i:cri:
:i'-u.
uiazcr
cr0-i::;:::i~
lD
1
LI
Cl acr
1 0-
LI :;
ru~ nru ui..cri:i:cri:
0-uWui~
ui0-Zcr..
D-
eicr~::wM0:
W0 :;W a..0:
1-uiZ wW -c0-aL I: EE E? )-
L)0:-c Ul== crQ~acr
D-U
Cl lDn ruo ru
1n
1
51INn 3500 :iOi4
uil--Z::2
wui00
L:00-i
-2
-4MOCR 101-14-4
S
R
oE E
cc
W Rs
C
Gs
C
No
H
HW
RI
ffTT
Be
H 5S H
V V
AH8
6
-
IrIlIl
1
-------------- ----- -- ----- ------ ---------- - --
111- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --
1111
1111
- - - - - - -:--11
T - + - - - - -: --1
1---- ---- ----- - --- - - - -- -- - ---1
11 11
1 1 1
11 1 11
11 1 1- Ã- - --- - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -- - - - - - - --
11 1 1
1: Il1
Il
Çj 5ff C!Y H
PROKARYOTES LO'wER EUKAR. MAMMALS lN VITRO HUMANS
lN VITROF /HI MAMMALS lN ViVO~'i'i
tT
Š-~N
w
6;U'1--Z::
W
U'oo
LJo-lB
6CHLORORNILINE, PRRR-
E SC AL 9
It106-47-8
~ - -~ - - - _ _ _ ~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _1_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _~ _~ _ _ _. _ _ _ _ _~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ ~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
1
1
1
1- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -1- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
1
1
1
1
Lm/ER EUKAR. MAMMAL5 lN VITRO HUMAN5
lN VITROF /HI MAMMAL5 lN ViVO4
2
o
-2
-41
1
1
_______I__I$I.!_,
1
1
1
1
1
Il l'
s g:
A ff
o 9B
PROKARYOTE5W\00'
~.("
~ozoo
~"'::en
6
B~tr
VI~B
6
4
Ulf-
Z::
w
Uloo
LJo-lo2
-2
-4OIMETHYLRNILlNE, 2,6-
~
1
1
1
1
1
1- - - - - - r - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ~- - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
1
1
187-62-7
- - - ~- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --
- - - - - - ~ - M~~ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ M _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __
Il rM
s g; S
A ff A
o 57 9
PROKARYOTES Lm/ER EUKRR. MAMMALS lN VITRO HUMANS
lN VITROH
V
H
F /HI MAMMALS lN ViVO~""t'
8-~N
t;\0--398 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
lJaz~
cr~L::
2':r
a~
~
2'
lJ-lcrLLcrL
:r"'u.
lJaza:
crl-
L~:::r2'
f"
I
01 0a: LOl-
I~
ru 2'
lJ-lcri:LcrL
==0.
1-UwlJ
2'
lJ1-Zcr-l
Q.
1cr zcr ,~:: Zw
a:W w:: Z a ~-l --~Z
lJ 0:w --.c ui== 1-a ?-!:HE f? :r la:.c Ul== cr f-~ W aL a:
Q. ~0
co LO 'q ruo ru
1'q
1
51INn 3500 :iOiSUPPLEMENTARY eORRIGENDA TO VOLUMES 1-56
Corrigenda to Volumes 1-41 are listed in Volume 42, pp. 251-264; additional corri-
genda are given in Volume 43, p. 261, in Volume 45, p. 283, in Volume 46, p. 419, in
Volume 47, p. 505, in Volume 50, p. 385, in Volume 51, p. 483 and in Volume 52, p. 513.
Volume 49 p.640 Delete 100-00-2
p.642. Delete 100-00-1
p.644 Delete 100-00-5
p.646 Delete 100-00-4
p.648 Delete 100-00-3
Volume 51 p.472 Delete 58-00-1
p.473 Delete 58-00-0B
p.474 Delete 58-00- D
p.476 ¡jelete 58-00- IB
p.477 Delete 58-00- 1 G
p.478 Delete 58-00- 1 U
Volume 56 p.554 Add 105650-23-5
p.565 Replace 999-99-9 by 116355-83-0
p.566 Add 116355-84-1
-399-eUMULATIV eROSS INDEX TO IARC MONOGRAPHS ON
THE EVALUATION OF CARCINOGENIC RISKS TO HUMANS
The volume, page and year are given. References to corrigenda are given in parentheses.
A
A-o:-C
Acetaldehyde40, 245 (1986); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
36, 101 (1985) (corr 42, 263);
Suppl. 7, 77 (1987)
7, 197 (1974); Suppl. 7, 389 (1987)
16, 145 (1978); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
13, 31 (1977); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
19, 479 (1979); 36,133 (1985);
Suppl. 7, 78 (1987)
39,41 (1986); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
19,47 (1979); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
19,86 (1979); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
19, 73 (1979); Suppl. 7, 79 (1987)
19,91 (1979); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
JO, 29 (1976) (corr 42, 255);
Suppl. 7, 80 (1987)
JO, 43 (1976); Suppl. 7, 82 (1987)
31,47 (1983); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
1, 145 (1972) (corr 42, 251);
JO, 51 (1976); Suppl. 7, 83 (1987);
56, 245 (1993)Acetaldehyde formylmethylhydrazone (see Oyromitrin)
Acetamide
Acetaminophen (see Paracetamol)
Acridine orange
Acriavinium chloride
Acrolein
Aciylamide
Acrylic acid
Aciylic fibres
Acrylonitrie
Aciylonitrie-butadiene-styene copolymers
Actinolite (see Asbestos)
Actinomycins
Adriamycin
AF-2
Afatoxis
Afatoxi Bi (see Afatoxis)
Afatoxi B2 (see Afatoxis)
Afatoxi 01 (see Afatoxis)
Afatoxi 02 (see Afatoxis)
Afatoxi Mi (see Afatoxis)
Agaritine
Alcohol drikig
Aldicarb
Aldri
Allyl chloride
Allyl isthiocanate
Allyl isvalerate
Aluminium production
Amaranth31,63 (1983); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
44 (1988)
53, 93 (1991)
5, 25 (1974); Suppl. 7, 88(1987)
36, 39 (1985); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
36, 55 (1985); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
36, 69 (1985); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
34, 37 (1984); Suppl. 7, 89 (1987)
8, 41 (1975); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
-401-402 lARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
39, 239 (1986); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
7,31 (1974); 41, 293 (1986) (con:
52,513; Suppl. 7,92 (1987)
Ammonium potassium selenide (see Selenium and selenium compounds)
Amorphous silica (see also Silica) 42, 39 (1987); Suppl. 7,341 (1987)
Amosite (see Asbestos)
Ampieilin
Anabolie steroids (see Androgenic (anabolie) steroids)
Anaestheties, volatile
Analgesie mixures eontaining phenaeetin (see also Phenaeetin)
Androgenie (anabolie) steroids
Angelicin and sorne synthetic derivatives (see also Angelieins)
Angeliein plus ultraviolet radiation (see also Angelicin and sorne
sythetic derivatives)
Angelicins
Aniline5-Aminoacenaphthene
2-Aminoanthraquinone
para-Aminoazobenzene
ortho-Aminoazotoluene
paa-Aminobenzoic acid
4-Aminobiphenyl
2-Amino-3,4-dimethylimidazo( 4,5-J)quinoline (see MeIQ)
2-Amino-3,8-dimethylimidazo( 4,5-J)quinoxaline (see MeIQx)
3-Amino-1,4-dimethyl-5H-pyrdo( 4,3-b )indole (see Trp-P-1)
2-Aminodipyrdo(1,2-a:3' ,2' -d)imidazole (see Glu-P-2)
1-Amino-2-methylanthraquinone
2-Amino-3-methylimidazo( 4,5-J)quinoline (see IQ)
2-Amino-6-methyldipyrdo(1,2-a:3' ,2' -d)imidazole (see Glu-P-1)
2-Amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo( 4,5-b )pyridine (see PhIP)
2-Amino-3-methyl-9H-pyrdo(2,3-b )indole (see MeA-a-C)
3-Amino-1-methyl-5H-pyrido( 4,3-b )indole (see Trp-P-2)
2-Amino-5-( 5-nitro-2-fuiyl )-1,3,4- thiadiazole
4-Amino-2-nitrophenol
2- Amino-4-nitrophenol
2-Amino-5-nitrophenol
2-Amino- 5-nitrothiazole
2-Amino-9H-pyrdo(2,3-b )indole (see A-a-C)
11-Aminoundecanoic acid
Amitrole
ortho-Anisidine
para-Anisidine
Anthanthrene
Anthophyllite (see Asbestos)
Anthracene
Anthranilic acid
Antimony trioxide
Antimony trisulfde
AN (see 1-Naphthylthiourea)
ApholateArmite~16,243 (1978); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
27, 191 (1982); Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
8, 53 (1975); Suppl. 7, 390 (1987)
8. 61 (1975) (corr 42, 254);
Suppl. 7, 56 (1987)
16,249 (1978); Suppl. 7,56(1987)
1, 74 (1972) (corr 42, 251);
Suppl. 7, 91 (1987)
27, 199 (1982); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
7, 143 (1974); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
16,43 (1978); Suppl. 7,57 (1987)
57, 167 (1993)
57, 177 (1993)
31, 71 (1983); Suppl. 7,57 (1987)
50, 153 (199)
Il, 285 (1976); Suppl. 7, 93 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 310 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 96 (1987)
40, 291 (1986)
Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
4, 27 (1974) (corr 42, 252);
27, 39 (1982); Suppl. 7, 99 (1987)
27, 63 (1982); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
27, 65 (1982); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
32, 95 (1983); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
32, 105 (1983); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
16, 265 (1978); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
47, 291 (1989)
47, 291 (1989)
9,31 (1975); Suppl. 7,57 (1987)
5, 39 (1974); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
Areca nut (see Betel quid)
Arsanilc acid (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Arsenic and arsenic compounds
Arsenic pentoxide (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Arsenic sulfide (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Arsenic trioxide (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Arsine (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Asbestos
Atraine
Attapulgite
Auramine (technical-grade)
Auramine, manufacture of (see also Auramine, technical-grade)
Aurothioglucose
Azcitidine
5-Azcyidine (see Azcitidine)
Azserie
Azthioprie
Azirdine
2-(1-Azirdinyl)ethanol
Azirdyl benzoquinone
Azobenzene
B
Barium chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Basic chromic sulfate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
BCNU (see Bischloroethyl nitrosourea)
Benz( a )acridine
Benz(c )acridine
Benzal chloride (see a/so a-Chloriated toluenes)
Benz( a )anthracene
Benzene
Benzidine
Benzidine-based dyes
Benw(b )fluoranthene
Benw(¡ lfluoranthene
Benw(k)fluoranthene
Benw(g)fluoranthene
Benw(a )fluorene
Benw(b )fluorene403
1,41 (1972); 2,48 (1973);
23, 39 (1980); Suppl. 7, 100 (1987)
2, 17 (1973) (corr 42, 252);
14 (1977) (con: 42, 256); Suppl. 7,
106 (1987) (con: 45, 283)
53, 441 (1991)
42, 159 (1987); Suppl. 7, 117 (1987)
1, 69 (1972) (corr 42, 251); Suppl. 7,
118 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 118 (1987)
13, 39 (1977); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
26, 37 (1981); Suppl. 7, 57 (1987);
50, 47 (199)
JO, 73 (1976) (corr 42, 255);
Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
26,47 (1981); Suppl. 7, 119 (1987)
9, 37 (1975); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
9, 47 (1975); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
9, 51 (1975); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
8, 75 (1975); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
32, 123 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
3,241 (1973); 32, 129 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
29,65 (1982); Suppl. 7, 148 (1987)
3, 45 (1973); 32, 135 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
7, 203 (1974) (corr 42, 254); 29, 93,
391 (1982); Suppl. 7, 120 (1987)
1,80 (1972); 29, 149,391 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 123 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 125 (1987)
3, 69 (1973); 32, 147 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
3, 82 (1973); 32, 155 (1983); Suppl. 7,
58 (1987)
32, 163 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
32, 171 (1983); Suppl. 7,58 (1987)
32, 177 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
32, 183 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)40 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Benzo( c )fluorene
Benzo(glperylene
Benzo( c )phenanthrene
Benzo(alpyrene32, 189 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
32, 195 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
32, 205 (1983); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
3, 91 (1973); 32, 211 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
3, 137 (1973); 32, 225 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
29, 185 (1982); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
29, 73 (1982); Suppl. 7, 148 (1987)
29, 83 (1982) (corr 42,261); Suppl. 7,
126 (1987)
36, 267 (1985); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
40, 109 (1986); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
11, 217 (1976) (corr 42,256); 29,
49 (1982); Suppl. 7, 148 (1987)
16, 153 (1978); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
l, 17 (1972); 23, 143 (1980)(corr 42,
26); Suppl. 7, 127 (1987)Benzo(elpyrene
paa-Benzouinone dioxie
Benzotrichloride (see also o:-Chloriated toluenes)
Benzoyl chloride
Benzoyl peroxide
Benzyl acetate
Benzyl chloride (see also o:-Chloriated toluenes)
Benzyl violet 4B
Bertrandite (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum and beryllum compounds
Beryllum acetate (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum acetate, basic (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum-aluminium alloy (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum carbnate (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum chloride (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum-cpper alloy (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum-cpper-calt alloy (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum fluoride (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum hydroxide (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum-nickel alloy (see Beryllum and beryllium compounds)
Beryllum oxide (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum phosphate (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum silcate (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryllum sulfate (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Beryl ore (see Beryllum and beryllum compounds)
Betel quid
Betel-quid chewig (see Betel quid)
BHA (see Butylated hydroxyanisole)
BlI (see Butylated hydroxyoluene)
B is(l-aziridinyl )morpholinophosphine sulfide
B is(2-chloroethyl )ether
N,N- Bis(2-chloroethyl)- 2- naphthylamine37, 141 (1985); Suppl. 7, 128 (1987)
Bischloroethyl nitrosourea (see also Chloroethyl nitrosoureas)
1,2-Bis( chloromethoxy)ethane
1,4- Bis( chloromethoxyethyl)benzene
B is( chloromethyl )ether9, 55 (1975); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
9, 117 (1975); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
4, 119 (1974) (corr 42, 253);
Suppl. 7, 130 (1987)
26, 79 (1981); Suppl. 7, 150 (1987)
15, 31 (1977); Suppl. 7, 58 (1987)
15,37 (1977); Suppl. 7,58 (1987)
4, 231 (1974) (corr 42, 253);
Suppl. 7, 131 (1987)
41, 149 (1986); Suppl. 7,59 (1987)
47,231 (1989)Bis(2-chloro-1-methylethyl)ether
B is(2,3-epoxycyclopentyl )ether
Bishenol A diglycidyl ether (see Glycidyl ethers)
Bisulfites (see Sulfur dioxide and sorne sulftes, bisulftes and metabisulfites)Bitumens 35, 39 (1985); Suppl. 7, 133 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
Bleomycins
Blue VRS
Boot and shoe manufacture and repair
Bracken rem
Briliant Blue FCF, disodium salt
Bromochloroacetonitrie (see Halogenated acetonitries)
Bromodichloromethane
Bromoethane
Bromoform
1,3-Butadiene
1,4-Butanediol dimethanesulfonate
n-Butyl aciylate
Butylated hydroxyanisole
Butylated hydroxyoluene
Butyl benzyl phthalate
ß-Butyolactone
'Y-Butyolactone
c
Cabinet-makig (see Fumiture and cabinet-making)
Cadmium acetate (see Cadmium and cadmium compounds)
Cadmium and cadmium compounds
Cadmium chloride (see Cadmium and cadmium compounds)
Cadmium oxide (see Cadmium and cadmium compounds)
Cadmium sulfate (see Cadmium and cadmium compounds)
Cadmium sulfide (see Cadmium and cadmium compounds)
Caffeic acid
Caffeine
Calcium arsenate (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Calcium chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Calcium cyclamate (see Cyclamates)
Calcium saccharin (see Sacchari)
Cantharidin
Caprolactam
Captaol
Captan
Carbaiyl
Carbazle
3-Carbethoxysoralen
Carbn blacks
Carbn tetrachloride
Carmoisine
Carpentiy and joineiy405
26, 97 (1981); Suppl. 7, 134 (1987)
16, 163 (1978); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
25, 249 (1981); Suppl. 7, 232 (1987)
40, 47 (1986); Suppl. 7, 135 (1987)
16, 171 (1978) (corr 42,257);
Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
52, 179 (1991)
52, 299 (1991)
52, 213 (1991)
39, 155 (1986) (corr 42, 26);
Suppl. 7, 136 (1987); 54, 237 (1992)
4, 247 (1974); Suppl. 7, 137 (1987)
39, 67 (1986); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
40, 123 (1986); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
40, 161 (1986); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
29, 193 (1982) (corr 42, 261);
Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
Il, 225 (1976); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
11,231 (1976); Suppl. 7,59 (1987)
2, 74 (1973); Il, 39 (1976) (corr 42,
255); Suppl. 7, 139 (1987)
56, 115 (1993)
51,291 (1991)
JO, 79 (1976); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
19, 115 (1979) (corr 42, 258);
39, 247 (1986) (corr 42, 26);
Suppl. 7,390 (1987)
53, 353 (1991)
30, 295 (1983); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
12,37 (1976); Suppl. 7,59 (1987)
32, 239 (1983); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
40,317 (1986); Suppl. 7,59 (1987)
3, 22 (1973); 33, 35 (1984); Suppl. 7,
142 (1987)
l,53 (1972); 20,371 (1979);
Suppl. 7, 143 (1987)
8, 83 (1975); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
25, 139 (1981); Suppl. 7, 378 (1987)40 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Carrageenan
Catechol
CCNU (see 1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea)
Ceramic fibres (see Man-made mineraI fibres)
Chemotherapy, combined, including alkylating agents (see MOPP and
other combined chemotherapy including alkylating agents)
Chlorambucil
Chloramphenicol
Chlordane (see alo Chlordane/Heptachlor)
Chlordane/Heptachlor
Chlordecone
Chlordimeform
Chlorendic acid
Chloriated dibenzodioxins (other than TCDD)
Chloriated drikig-water
Chloriated paraffins
a-Chloriated toluenes
Chlormadinone acetate (see also Progestins; Combined oral
contraceptives)
Chlomaphazine (see .NN-Bis(2-chloroethyl)-2-naphthylamine)
Chloroacetonitrile (see Halogenated acetonitriles)
para-Chloroaniline
Chlorobenzilate
Chlorodibromomethane
Chlorodifuoromethane
Chloroethane
1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-cyclohexyl-1-nitrosourea (see also Chloroethyl
nitrosoureas)
1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-( 4-methylcyclohexyl)-1-nitrosourea (see also
Chloroethyl nitrosoureas)
Chloroethyl nitrosoureas
Chlorofluoromethane
Chloroform
Chloromethyl methyl ether (technical-grade) (see also
Bis( chloromethyl )ether)
(4-Chloro-2-methylphenoxy)acetic acid (see MCPA)
Chlorophenols
Chlorophenols (ocupational exposures to)
Chlorophenoxy herbicides
Chlòrophenoxy herbicides (ocupational exposures to)
4-Chloro-ortho-phenylenediamine
4-Chloro-meta-phenylenediamine
Chloroprene
Chloropropham
Chloroquine
ChlorothalonilJO, 181 (1976) (corr 42, 255); 31,
79 (1983); Suppl. 7,59 (1987)
15, 155 (1977); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
9, 125 (1975); 26, 115 (1981);
Suppl. 7, 144 (1987)
JO, 85 (1976); Suppl. 7, 145 (1987);
50, 169 (199)
20, 45 (1979) (corr 42, 258)
Suppl. 7, 146 (1987); 53, 115 (1991)
20, 67 (1979); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
30, 61 (1983); Suppl. 7, 59 (1987)
48, 45 (199)
15,41 (1977); Suppl. 7,59 (1987)
52, 45 (1991)
48, 55 (199)
Suppl. 7, 148 (1987)
6, 149 (1974); 21, 365 (1979)
57, 305 (1993)
5, 75 (1974); 30, 73 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
52, 243 (1991)
41,237 (1986) (corr 51,483);
Suppl. 7, 149 (1987)
52, 315 (1991)
26, 137 (1981) (corr 42, 26);
Suppl. 7, 150 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 150 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 150 (1987)
41,229 (1986); Suppl. 7,60(1987)
1, 61 (1972); 20, 401 (1979);
Suppl. 7, 152 (1987)
4,239 (1974); Suppl. 71 131 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 154 (1987)
41,319 (1986)
Suppl. 7, 156 (1987)
41, 357 (1986)
27, 81 (1982); Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
27, 82 (1982); Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
19, 131 (1979); Suppl. 7, 160 (1987)
12, 55 (1976); Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
13, 47 (1977); Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
30, 319 (1983); Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
paa-Chloro-ortho-toluidine and its strong acid salts
(see a/sa Chlordimeform)
Chlorotnanisene (see also Nonsteroidal oestrogens)
2-Chloro-1, 1, 1-triuoroethane
Chlorozotoc
Cholesterol
Chromic acetate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromic chloride (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromic oxide (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromic phosphate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromite ore (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromium and chromium compounds
Chromium carbnyl (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromium potassium sulfate (see Chromium and chromium
compounds)
Chromium sulfate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chromium trioxide (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Chrysain (see Dantron)
Chrysene
Chrysoidine
Chrysotile (see Asbestos)
CI Acid Orange 3
CI Acid Red 114
CI Basic Red 9
Ciclospori
CI Direct Blue 15
CI Disperse Yellow 3 (see Disperse Yellow 3)
Cimetidine
Cinnamyl anthranilate
CI Pigment Red 3
CI Pigment Red 53:1 (see D&C Red No. 9)
Cisplatin
Citriin
Citrus Red No. 2407
16, 277 (1978); 30, 65 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 60 (1987); 48, 123 (199)
21, 139 (1979)
41,253 (1986); Suppl. 7,60(1987)
50, 65 (199)
JO, 99 (1976); 31,95 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 161 (1987)
2, 100 (1973); 23, 205 (1980);
Suppl. 7, 165 (1987); 49, 49 (199)
(COrT 51,483)
3, 159 (1973); 32, 247 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
8, 91 (1975); Suppl. 7, 169 (1987)
57, 121 (1993)
57, 247 (1993)
57, 215 (1993)
50, 77 (199)
57, 235 (1993)
50, 235 (199)
16,287 (1978); 31, 133 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
57, 259 (1993)
26, 151 (1981); Suppl. 7, 170 (1987)
40, 67 (1986); Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
8, 101 (1975) (COrT 42, 254);
Suppl. 7, 60 (1987)
24,39 (1980); Suppl. 7, 171 (1987)
21,551 (1979); Suppl. 7, 172 (1987)
34,65 (1984); Suppl. 7, 173 (1987)
35, 83 (1985); Suppl. 7, 174 (1987)
35, 83 (1985); Suppl. 7, 175 (1987)Clofibrate
Clomiphene citrate
Coal gasification
Coal-tar pitches (seealso Coal-tars)
Coal-tars
Cobalt(IIJ acetate (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Cobalt-aluminium-chromium spinel (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)Cobalt and coalt compounds 52, 363 (1991)
Cobalt(IIJ chloride (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Cobalt-chromium alloy (see Chromium and chromium
compounds)
Cobalt-chromium-molybdenum alloys (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)408 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Cobalt metal powder (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Cobalt naphthenate (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Cobalt(II) oxide (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Cobalt(II,II) oxide (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Cobalt(II) sulfide (see Cobalt and cobalt compounds)
Coffee
Coke production
Combined oral contraceptives (see also Oestrogens, progestins
and combinations)
Conjugated oestrogens (see also Steroidal oestrogens)
Contraceptives, oral (see Combined oral contraceptives;
Sequential oral contraceptives)
Copper 8-hydroxyquinoline
Coronene
Cou marin
Creosotes (see also Coal-tars)
meta-Cresidine
para-Cresidine
Crocidolite (see Asbestos)
Crude oil
Ciystalline silica (see also Silica)
Cycasin
Cydamates
Cyclamic acid (see Cyclamates)
Cyclochlorotine
Cydohexanone
Cydohexylamine (see Cydamates)
Cyclopenta( cd)pyrene
Cyclopropane (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Cyclophosphamide
D
2,4-D (see a/so Chlorophenoxy herbicides; Chlorophenoxy
herbicides, ocupational expsures to)
Dacarbazine
Dantron
D&C Red No. 9
Dapsone
Daunomycin
DDD (see DDT)
DDE (see DDT)
DDT
Decabromodiphenyl oxide
Deltamethri
Deoxyvalenol (see Toxis derived from Fusarum gramnearm,
E culmorum and E crookwellense)
Diacetylaminoawtoluene51,41 (1991) (corr 52,513)
34, 101 (1984); Suppl. 7, 176 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 297 (1987)
21, 147 (1979)
15, 103 (1977); Suppl. 7,61 (1987)
32, 263 (1983); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
JO, 113 (1976); SuPPI. 7, 61 (1987)
35, 83 (1985); SuPPI. 7, 177 (1987)
27, 91 (1982); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
27, 92 (1982); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
45, 119 (1989)
42, 39 (1987); Suppl. 7, 341 (1987)
1, 157 (1972) (corr 42, 251); 10,
121 (1976); SuppI. 7, 61 (1987)
22,55 (1980); Suppl. 7, 178 (1987)
10, 139 (1976); Suppl. 7,61 (1987)
47, 157 (1989)
32, 269 (1983); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
9, 135 (1975); 26, 165 (1981);
Suppl. 7, 182 (1987)
15, 111 (1977)
26,203 (1981); Suppl. 7, 184 (1987)
50, 265 (199)
8, 107 (1975); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987);
57, 203 (1993)
24, 59 (1980); Suppl. 7, 185 (1987)
JO, 145 (1976); Suppl. 7,61 (1987)
5, 83 (1974) (corr 42, 253);
Suppl. 7, 186 (1987); 53, 179 (1991)
48, 73 (199)
53, 251 (1991)
8, 113 (1975); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX 40
N,N' -Diacetylbenzidine
Diallate
1,2-Diamino-4-nitrobenzene
1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene16,293 (1978); Suppl. 7,61 (1987)
12,69 (1976); 30,235 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
16, 51 (1978); 27, 103 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
16,301 (1978); 29, 203 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
16,63 (1978); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
16, 73 (1978); Suppl. 7,61 (1987);
57, 185 (1993)2,4- Diaminoanisole
4,4' -Diaminodiphenyl ether
2,6-Diamino-3-(phenylazo )pyridine (see Phenazopyridine
hydrochloride)
2,4-Diaminotoluene (see also Toluene diisoanates)
2,5-Diaminotoluene (see also Toluene diisocanates)
ortho-Dianisidine (see 3,3' -Dimethoxybenzidine)
Diazepam
Diazomethane
Dibenz( a,h )acridine
Dibenz(a,¡lacridine16,83 (1978); Suppl. 7,61 (1987)
16,97 (1978); Suppl. 7,61 (1987)
13, 57 (1977); Suppl. 7, 189 (1987)
7, 223 (1974); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
3, 247 (1973); 32, 277 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
3, 254 (1973); 32, 283 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
32, 289 (1983) (corr 42, 262);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
3, 178 (1973) (corr 43, 261);
32, 299 (1983); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
32, 309 (1983); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
3, 26 (1973); 32, 315 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)Dibenz( a,c )anthracene
Dibenz( a,h )anthracene
Dibenz( a,¡ lan thracene
7 H- Dibenzo( c,g)carbazole
Dibenzodioxis, chlorinated (other than TCDD)
(see Chloriated dibenzodioxins (other than TCDD))
Dibenzo(a,e )fluoranthene
Dibenzo(h,rst)pentaphene
Dibenzo( a,e )pyrene32, 321 (1983); Suppl. 7, 61 (1987)
3, 197 (1973); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
3, 201 (1973); 32, 327 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
3, 207 (1973); 32, 331 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
3, 215 (1973); 32, 337 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
3, 224 (1973); 32, 343 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)Dibenzo( a,h )pyrene
Dibenzo( a,i)pyrene
Dibenzo( a,l)pyrene
Dibromoacetonitrile (see Halogenated acetonitries)
1,2-Dibromo-3-chloropropane15, 139 (1977); 20, 83 (1979);
Suppl. 7, 191 (1987)
Dichloroacetonitrie (see Halogenated acetonitriles)
Dichloroacetylene
ortho- Dichlorobenzene39, 369 (1986); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
7, 231 (1974); 29, 213 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 192 (1987)
7, 231 (1974); 29, 215 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 192 (1987)
4, 49 (1974); 29, 239 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 193 (1987)
15, 149 (1977); Suppl. 7,62 (1987)para- Dichlorobenzene
3,3' -Dichlorobenzidine
tran-l,4-Dichlorobutene410 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
3,3' -Dichloro-4,4' -diaminodiphenyl ether
1,2-Dichloroethane
Dichloromethane16, 309 (1978); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
20, 429 (1979); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
20,449 (1979); 41,43 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 194 (1987)
2,4-Dichlorophenol (see Chlorophenols; Chlorophenols,
ocupational expsures to)
(2,4-Dichlorophenoxy)acetic acid (see 2,4-0)
2,6- Dichloro-para-phenylenediamine
1,2- Dichloropropane
1,3- Dichloropropene (technical-grade)
Dichlorvos
Dihydrosafrole39, 325 (1986); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
41, 131 (1986); Suppl. 7,62 (1987)
41, 113 (1986); Suppl. 7, 195 (1987)
20, 97 (1979); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987);
53, 267 (1991)
30, 87 (1983); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
5, 125 (1974); Suppl. 7, 1% (1987)
21, 161 (1979)
IL, 115 (1976) (corr 42,255); Suppl. 7,
62 (1987)
46, 41 (1989)
45, 219 (1989) (corr 47, 505)
29, 257 (1982); Suppl. 7,62 (1987)
29,269 (1982) (corr 42,261); Suppl. 7,
62 (1987)
4, 153 (1974); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
6, 55 (1974); 21, 173 (1979)
(corr 42, 259); Suppl. 7,273 (1987)
4, 277 (1974); Suppl. 7, 198 (1987);
54, 213 (1992)
11, 125 (1976); 36, 181 (1985);
Suppl. 7,62 (1987)
l, 170 (1972); JO, 233 (1976);
Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)Dicofol
Dicyclohexylamine (see Cyclamates)
Dieldrin
Dienoestrol (see also Nonsteroidal oestrogens)
Diepoxybutane
Diesel and gasoline engine exhausts
Diesel fuels
Diethyl ether (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Di(2-ethylhexyl )adipate
Di(2-ethylhexyl )ph thala te
1,2-Diethylhydrazine
Diethylstilboestrol
Diethylstilboestrol dipropionate (see Diethylstilboestrol)
Diethyl sulfate
Diglycidyl resorcinol ether
1,8-Dihydroxyanthraquinone (see Dantron)
Dihydroxybenzenes (see Catechol; Hydroquinone; Resorcinol)
Dihydroxyethylfuratriine
Düsopropyl sulfate
Dimethisterone (see also Progestins; Sequential oral
con traceptives )
Dimethoxane
3,3' - Dimethoxyenzidine
3,3' -Dimethoxybenzidine-4,4' -diisocanate
para- Dimethylaminoazobenzene
para- Dimethylaminoazobenzenediazo sodium sulfonate
trans- 2-( (Dimethylamino )methylimino)- 5-(2-( 5-nitro- 2-furyl)-
vinyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole
4,4' -Dimethylangelicin plus ultraviolet radiation (see also
Angelicin and sorne synthetic derivatives)
4,5' -Dimethylangelicin plus ultraviolet radiation (see a/so
Angelicin and sorne sythetic derivatives)
2,6- Dimethylaniline24, 77 (1980); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
54, 229 (1992)
6, 167 (1974); 21, 377 (1979)
15, 177 (1977); Suppl. 7,62 (1987)
4,41 (1974); SuPPI. 7, 198 (1987)
39, 279 (1986); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
8, 125 (1975); Suppz. 7, 62 (1987)
8, 147 (1975); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
7, 147 (1974) (corr 42,253); Suppl. 7,
62 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
57, 323 (1993)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX411
N,N- Dimethylaniline
Dimethylarsinic acid (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
3,3' -Dimethylbenzidine
Dimethylcarbamoyl chloride
Dimethylfonnamide
1,1-Dimethylhydrazine
1,2- Dimethylhydrazine57, 337 (1993)
1, 87 (1972); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
12, 77 (1976); Suppl. 7, 199 (1987)
47, 171 (1989)
4, 137 (1974); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
4, 145 (1974) (corr 42, 253); Suppl. 7,
62 (1987)
48, 85 (199)
32, 349 (1983); Suppl. 7, 62 (1987)
4, 271 (1974); Suppl. 7, 20 (1987)
46, 189 (1989)
46, 195 (1989)
46, 201 (1989)
46, 215 (1989)
33, 171 (1984); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987);
46, 231 (1989)
11,241 (1976); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
Il, 247 (1976); Suppl. 7, 201 (1987)
16,313 (1978); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
29, 295 (1982) (corr 42, 261)
29,311 (1982)
29, 321 (1982)
48, 139 (199)
8,97 (1975); Suppl. 7,60(1987);
48, 149 (199)
12,85 (1976); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
13, 75 (1977); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
12, 97 (1976); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)Dimethyl hydrogen phosphite
1,4- Dimethylphenanthrene
Dimethyl sulfate
3,7- Dinitrofluoranthene
3,9- Dinitrofluoran then e
1,3- Dinitropyrene
1,6- Dinitropyrene
1,8-Dinitropyrene
Dinitrosopentamethylenetetramine
1,4-Dioxane
2,4' -Diphenyldiamine
Direct Black 38 (see also Benzidine-based dyes)
Direct Blue 6 (see a/so Benzidine-based dyes)
Direct Brown 95 (see also Benzidine-based dyes)
Disperse Blue 1
Disperse Yellow 3
Disulfiram
Dithranol
Diviyl ether (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Dulcin
E
Endri
Enfurane (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Eosin
Epichlorohydri5, 157 (1974); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
1,2-Epoxyutane
1-Epoxyethyl-3,4-epoxycyclohexane
3,4- Epoxy-6-methylcyclohexylmethyl- 3, 4-epoxy-6-methyl-
cyclohexane carbxylate
cis-9,10-Epoxystearic acid
Erionite
Ethinyloestradiol (see a/so Steroidal oestrogens)
Ethionamide
Ethyl acilate15, 183 (1977); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
11, 131 (1976) (corr 42,256);
Suppl. 7, 202 (1987)~
11, 141 (1976); Suppl. 7, 63 (19~7)
11, 147 (1976); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
Il, 153 (1976); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
42, 225 (1987); Suppl. 7, 203 (1987)
6,77 (1974); 21, 233 (1979)
13,83 (1977); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
19, 57 (1979); 39, 81 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
19, 157 (1979); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
15, 195 (1977); Suppl. 7, 20 (1987)
Il, 157 (1976); 36, 189 (1985)
(corr 42, 263); Suppl. 7, 205 (1987)Ethylene
Ethylene dibromide
Ethylene oxide412 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Ethylene sulfide
Ethylene thiourea
Ethyl methanesulfonate
N-Ethyl-N-nitrosourea
Ethyl selenac (see alo Selenium and selenium compounds)
Ethyl tellurac
Ethynodiol diacetate (see alo Progestins; Combined oral
contraceptives)
Eugenol
Evans blue
F
Fast Green FCF
Fenvalerate
Ferbam
Ferrc oxide
Ferrochromium (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Fluometuron
Fluoranthene
Fluorene
Fluorescent lighting (expsure to) (see Ultraviolet radiation)
Fluorides (inorganic, used in drinking-water)
5- Fl uorouracil
Fluorspar (see Fluorides)
Fluosilicic acid (see Fluorides)
Fluroxene (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Fonnaldehyde
2-(2- Fonnylhydrazino )-4-( 5- nitro- 2-fuiyl )thiazole
Frusemide (see Furosemide)
Fuel oils (heating oils)
Fumonisin Bi (see Toxis derived from Fusarum monilforme)
Fumonisin Bi (see Toxis derived from Fusarum moniliforme)
Furazolidone
Furniture and cabinet-making
Furosemide
2-(2-Fuiyl)-3-(5-nitro-2-fuiyl)aciylamide (see AF-2)
Fusarenon-X (see Toxis derived from Fusarum graminearm,
E culmorum and E crookwellense)
Fusarenone-X (see Toxis derived from Fusarum gramnearum,
E culmoru and E crookwellense)
Fusari C (see Toxins derived from Fusarum moniliforme)
G
Gasoline
Gasoline engine exhaust (see Diesel and gasoline engine exhausts)
Glass fibres (see Man-made mineraI fibres)
Glasswool (see Man-made mineraI fibres)11, 257 (1976); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
7, 45 (1974); Suppl. 7, W7 (1987)
7, 245 (1974); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
1, 135 (1972); 17, 191 (1978);
Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
12, 107 (1976); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
12, 115 (1976); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
6, 173 (1974); 21, 387 (1979)
36, 75 (1985); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
8, 151 (1975); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
16, 187 (1978); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
53, 309 (1991)
12, 121 (1976) (corr 42,256);
Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
1, 29 (1972); Suppl. 7, 216 (1987)
30, 245 (1983); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
32, 355 (1983); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
32, 365 (1983); Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
27,237 (1982); Suppl. 7, W8 (1987)
26,217 (1981); Suppl. 7,210 (1987)
29, 345 (1982); Suppl. 7, 211 (1987)
7, 151 (1974) (corr 42, 253);
Suppl. 7, 63 (1987)
45, 239 (1989) (corr 47, 505)
31, 141 (1983); Suppl. 7,63 (1987)
25,99 (1981); Suppl. 7,380 (1987)
50, 277 (199)
45, 159 (1989) (corr 47, 505)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX 413
Glass fiaments (see Man-made mineraI fibres)
Glu-P-l
Glu-P-2
L-Glutamic acid, 5-(2-( 4-hydroxyethyl)phenylhydraide J
(see Agantine)
Glycidaldehyde
Glycidyl ethers
Glycidyl oleate
Glycidyl stearate
Gnseofulvi
Guinea Green B
Gyromitnn40, 223 (1986); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
40, 235 (1986); Suppl. 7, 64 (1987)
11, 175 (1976); Suppl. 7, 64 (1987)
47,237 (1989)
11, 183 (1976); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
Il, 187 (1976); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
JO, 153 (1976); Suppi. 7, 391 (1987)
16, 199 (1978); Suppi. 7,64(1987)
31, 163 (1983); Suppi. 7,391 (1987)
H
Haematite
Haematite and fernc oxide
Haematite mining, underground, with expsure to radon
Hairdressers and barbers (ocupational exposure as)
Hair dyes, epidemiology of
Halogenated acetonitnles
Halothane (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
HC Blue No. 1
HC Blue No. 2
o:-HCH (see Hexachlorocclohexanes)
ß-HCH (see Hexachlorocclohexanes)
)'-HCH (see Hexachlorocclohexanes)
HC Red No. 3
HC Yellow No. 4
Heating oils (see Fuel oils)
Heptachlor (see a/so Chlordane/Heptachlor)
Hexachlorobenzene
Hexachlorobutadiene
Hexachlorocclohexanes1, 29 (1972); Suppi. 7, 216 (1987)
Suppi. 7, 216 (1987)
1, 29 (1972); Suppi. 7, 216 (1987)
57, 43 (1993)
16, 29 (1978); 27, 307 (1982);
52, 269 (1991)
57, 129 (1993)
57, 143 (1993)
Hexachlorocclohexane, technical-grade (see Hexachloro-
cyclohexanes)
Hexachloroethane
Hexachlorophene
Hexamethylphosphoramide
Hexoestrol (see Nonsteroidal oestrogens)
Hycanthone mesylate
Hydralazine
Hydrazine
Hydrochlonc acid
Hydrochlorothiazide
Hydrogen peroxide
Hydroquinone
4- Hydroxyazobenzene
17o:-Hydroxyrogesterone caproate (see also Progestins)
8- Hydroxyquinoline
8- Hydroxysenkikine57, 153 (1993)
57, 159 (1993)
5, 173 (1974); 20, 129 (1979)
20, 155 (1979); Suppi. 7, 219 (1987)
20, 179 (1979); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
5, 47 (1974); 20, 195 (1979) (con: 42,
258); Suppi. 7,220 (1987)
20, 467 (1979); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
20,241 (1979); Suppi. 7,64(1987)
15, 211 (1977); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
13, 91 (1977); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
24, 85 (1980); Suppi. 7, 222 (1987)
4, 127 (1974); Suppi. 7, 223 (1987)
54, 189 (1992)
50, 293 (199)
36, 285 (1985); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
15, 155 (1977); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
8, 157 (1975); Suppi. 7, 64 (1987)
21, 399 (1979) (con: 42, 259)
13, 101 (1977); Suppi. 7,64(1987)
10,265 (1976); Suppi. 7,64(1987)414 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Hyphlorite salts
1
Indeno( 1,2,3-cd)pyrene
Inorganic acids (see Sulfuric acid and other strong inorganic acids,
ocupational expsures to mists and vapours from)
Insecticides, ocupational expsures in sprayig and application of
IQ
Iron and steel founding
Iron-dextran complex
Iron-dextri complex
Iron oxide (see Ferrc oxide)
Iron oxide, saccharated (see Saccharated iron oxide)
Iron sorbitol-citric acid complex
Isatidine
IsofIurane (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Isoniazid (see Isonicotinic acid hydrazide)
Isonicotinic acid hydrazide
Isophosphamide
Isopropyl alcohol
Isopropyl alcohol manufacture (strong-acid process)
(see also Isopropyl alcohol; Sulfuric acid and other strong inorganic
acids, ocupational exposures to mists and vapours from)
Isopropyl oils
Isosafrole
J
Jacobine
Jet fuel
Joinery (see Carpentry and joinery)
K
Kaempferol
Kepone (see Chlordecone)
L
Lasiocrpine
Lauroyl peroxide
Lead acetate (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead and lead compounds52, 159 (1991)
3, 229 (1973); 32, 373 (1983);
Suppl ~ 64 (1987)
53, 45 (1991)
40, 261 (1986); Suppl. 7,64(1987);
56, 165 (1993)
34, 133 (1984); Suppl. 7, 224 (1987)
2, 161 (1973); Suppl. 7,226 (1987)
2, 161 (1973) (corr 42, 252);
Suppl. 7, 64 (1987)
2, 161 (1973); Suppl. 7,64(1987)
JO, 269 (1976); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
4, 159 (1974); Suppl. 7, 227 (1987)
26, 237 (1981); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
15, 223 (1977); Suppl. 7, 229 (1987)
Suppl. 7,229 (1987)
15, 223 (1977); Suppl. 7,229 (1987)
1, 169 (1972); 10, 232 (1976);
Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
JO, 275 (1976); Suppl. 7,65 (1987)
45, 203 (1989)
31, 171 (1983); Suppl 7,65 (1987)
JO, 281 (1976); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
36, 315 (1985); Suppl. 7,65 (1987)
1,40 (1972) (corr 42,251); 2, 52,
150 (1973); 12, 131 (1976);
23, 40, 208, 20, 325 (1980);
SuPPI. 7,230 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
Lead arsenate (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Lead carbnate (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead chloride (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Lead chromate oxide (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Lead naphthenate (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead nitrate (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead oxide (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead phosphate (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead subacetate (see Lead and lead compounds)
Lead tetroxide (see Lead and lead compounds)
Leather goos manufacture
Leather industries
Leather tanning and processing
Ledate (see also Lead and lead compounds)
Light Green SF
d-Limonene
Lindane (see Hexachlorocclohexanes)
The lumber and sawmil industries (including logging)
Luteosky
Lynoestrenol (see also Progestins; Combined oral contraceptives)
M
Magenta
Magenta, manufacture of (see also Magenta)
Malathion '
Maleic hydrazide
Malonaldehyde
Maneb
Man-made mineraI fibres
Mannomustine
Mate
MCPA (see also Chlorophenoxy herbicides; Chlorophenoxy
herbicides, ocupational exposures to)
MeA-a-C
Medphalan
Medroxyrogesterone acetate
Megestrol acetate (see also Progestins; Combined oral
con traceptives)
MeIQ
MeIQx
Melamine
Melphalan
6-Mercaptopurie
Merphalan415
25,279 (1981); Suppl. 7,235 (1987)
25, 199 (1981); Suppl. 7, 232 (1987)
25, 201 (1981); Suppl. 7, 236 (1987)
12, 131 (1976)
16, 209 (1978); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
56, 135 (1993)
25, 49 (1981); Suppl. 7, 383 (1987)
JO, 163 (1976); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
21, 407 (1979)
4, 57 (1974) (corr 42, 252);
SuPPI. 7,238 (1987); 57, 215 (1993)
SuppL ~ 238 (1987)
30, 103 (1983); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
4, 173 (1974) (corr 42, 253);
Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
36, 163 (1985); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
12, 137 (1976); Suppl. 7,65 (1987)
43, 39 (1988)
9, 157 (1975); Suppl. 7,65 (1987)
51, 273 (1991)
30, 255 (1983)
40, 253 (1986); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
9, 168 (1975); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
6, 157 (1974); 21, 417 (1979) (corr 42,
259); Suppl. 7, 289 (1987)
40, 275 (1986); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987);
56, 197 (1993)
40, 283 (1986); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
56, 211 (1993)
39, 333 (1986); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)
9, 167 (1975); Suppl. 7, 239 (1987)
26, 249 (1981); Suppl. 7, 240 (1987)
9, 169 (1975); Suppl. 7, 65 (1987)416 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Mestranol (see also Steroidal oestrogens)
Metabisulftes (see Sulfur dioxide and sorne sulfites, bisulfites
and rnetabisulftes)
Methanearsnic acid, disiurn salt (see Arsenic and arsenic
cornpounds)
Methanearsnic acid, rnonosoiurn salt (see Arenic and arsenic
cornpounds
Methotrexate
Methoxslen (see 8-Methoxysoralen)
Methoxychlor
Methoxyurane (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
5-Methoxysoralen
8-Methoxysoralen (see aiso 8-Methoxysoralen plus ultraviolet
radiation)
8-Methoxysoralen plus ultraviolet radiation
Methyl acrylate
5-Methylangelicin plus ultraviolet radiation (see aiso Angelicin
and sorne sythetic derivatives)
2-Methylazirdine
Methylazoxyrnethanol acetate
Methyl brornide
Methyl carbarnate
Methyl-CCNU (see 1-(2-Chloroethyl)-3-( 4-rnethylcyclohexyl)-
1- nitrosourea J
Methyl chloride
1-, 2-, 3-, 4-, 5- and 6-Methylchrysenes
N- Methyl- N,4-dinitrosoaniline
4,4' -Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline)
4,4' -Methylene bis(.NN-dimethyl)benzenarnine
4,4' -Methylene bis(2-rnethylaniline)
4,4' -Methylenedianiline
4,4' -Methylenediphenyl düsocanate
2-MethyIfuoranthene
3-MethyIfuoranthene
Methylglyoxal
Methyl iodide
Methyl rnethacrylate
Methyl rnethanesulfonate
2-Methyl-l-nitroanthraquinone
N-Methyl-N' -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine
3-Methylnitrosarninopropionaldehyde (see 3-(N-Nitrosornethylarnino)-
propionaldehyde J
3-Methylnitrosarninopropionitrile (see 3-(N-Nitrosornethylarnino)-
propionitrie J6, 87 (1974); 21, 257 (1979) (corr 42,
259)
26,267 (1981); Suppi. 7,241 (1987)
5, 193 (1974); 20, 259 (1979);
Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
40, 327 (1986); Suppi. 7, 242 (1987)
24, 101 (1980)
Suppi. 7, 243 (1987)
19, 52 (1979); 39, 99 (1986);
Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
Suppi. 7,57 (1987)
9, 61 (1975); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
1, 164 (1972); JO, 131 (1976);
Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
41, 187 (1986) (corr 45, 283);
Suppi. 7, 245 (1987)
12, 151 (1976); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
41, 161 (1986); Suppi. 7,246 (1987)
32, 379 (1983); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
1, 141 (1972); Suppi. 7,66(1987)
4, 65 (1974) (corr 42, 252); Suppi. 7,
246 (1987); 57, 271 (1993)
27, 119 (1982); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
4, 73 (1974); Suppi. 7, 248 (1987)
4, 79 (1974) (corr 42, 252);
39, 347 (1986); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
19,314 (1979); Suppi. 7,66(1987)
32, 399 (1983); Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
32, 399 (1983); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
51, 443 (1991)
15,245 (1977); 41,213 (1986);
Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
19, 187 (1979); Suppi. 7,66(1987)
7, 253 (1974); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
27, 205 (1982); Suppi. 7, 66 (1987)
4, 183 (1974); Suppi. 7, 248 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX 417
4-(Methylnitrosamino )-4-(3-pyridyl)-I-butanal (see 4-(N-Nitrosomethyl-
amino )-4-(3-pyrdyl )-I-butanal)
4-(Methylnitrosamino )-I-(3-pyridyl)-I-butanone (see 4-(N-Nitrosomethyl-
amino )-I-(3-pyrdyl)-I-butanone)
N-Methyl-N-nitrosourea
Mirex1, 125 (1972); 17, 227 (1978);
Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
4, 211 (1974); Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
30, 131 (1983); Suppl. 7,392 (1987)
32, 405 (1983); Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
40,349 (1986); Suppl. 7,71(1987)
8, 161 (1975); Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
12, 161 (1976); Suppl. 7,66(1987)
7, 53 (1974); Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
13, 113 (1977); Suppl. 7, 250 (1987)
3, 30 (1973); 33, 87 (1984) (corr 42,
262); Suppl. 7, 252 (1987)
5,203 (1974); 20, 283 (1979) (corr 42,
258); Suppl. 7, 66 (1987)
JO, 171 (1976); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)N-Methyl-N-nitrosourethane
Methyl parathion
1- Methylphenanthrene
7 -Methylpyrdo(3,4-c )psoralen
Methyl red
Methyl selenac (see also Selenium and selenium compounds)
Methylthiouracil
Metronidazole
Mineral oils
Mitomycin C
MNNG (see N-Methyl-N' -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine)
MOCA (see 4,4' -Methylene bis(2-chloroaniline))
Modaciylic fibres
Monocrotaline
Monuron19, 86 (1979); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
JO, 291 (1976); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
12, 167 (1976); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987);
53, 467 (1991)
Suppl. 7,254 (1987) MOPP and other combined chemotherapy including
alkylating agents
Morpholine
5-(Morpholinomethyl)-3-( (5-nitrofurfuiylidene )amino )-2-
oxazolidinone
Mustard gas47, 199 (1989)
7, 161 (1974); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
9, 181 (1975) (corr 42, 254);
Suppl. 7,259 (1987)
Myleran (see 1,4-Butanediol dimethanesulfonate)
N
Nafenopin
1,5-Naphthalenediamine
1,5-Naphthalene diisoanate
I-Naphthylamine24, 125 (1980); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
27, 127 (1982); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
19,311 (1979); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
4, 87 (1974) (corr 42, 253);
Suppl. 7, 26 (1987)
4, 97 (1974); Suppl. 7, 261 (1987)
30, 347 (1983); Suppl. 7, 263 (1987)2-Naphthylamine
I-Naphthylthiourea
Nickel acetate (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel ammonium sulfate (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel and nickel compounds 2, 126 (1973) (corr 42, 252); 11, 75
(1976); Suppl. 7, 26 (1987)
(corr 45, 283); 49, 257 (199)
Nickel carbnate (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel carbnyl (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel chloride (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel-gallum aUoy (see Nickel and nickel compounds)418 IARC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
Nickel hydroxide (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickelocene (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel oxide (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel subsulfide (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nickel sulfate (see Nickel and nickel compounds)
Nirdawle
Nithiazide
Nitriotriacetic acid and its salts
5-Nitroacenaphthene
5- N itro-ortho-anisidine
9-Nitroanthracene
7- Nitrobenz( a Janthracene
6- Nitrobenw( a Jpyrene
4-Nitrobiphenyl
6-Nitrochiysene
Nitrofen (technical-grade)
3-Nitrofluoranthene
2-Nitrofluorene
Nitrofural
5-Nitro-2-furaldehyde semicarbawne (see Nitrofural)
Nitrofurantoin
Nitrofurazone (see Nitrofural)
1-( (5- Nitrofuduiylidene )amino )-2-imidazolidinone
N-( 4-( 5-Nitro-2-fuiyl)-2-thiazolyl Jacetamide
Nitrogen mustard
Nitrogen mustard N-oxide
1-Nitronaphthalene
2-Nitronaphthalene
3-Nitropeiylene
2-Nitro-para-phenylenediamine (see 1,4-Diamino-2-nitrobenzene)
2-Nitropropane
1-Nitropyrene
2-Nitropyrene
4-Nitropyrene
N-Nitrosatable drugs
N-Nitrosatable pesticides
N' -Nitrosoanabasine
N' -Nitrosoanatabine
N- Nitrosodi-n-butylamine
N-Nitrosoiethanolamine
N-Nitrosodiethylamine
N-Nitrosodimethylamine
N-Nitrosoiphenylamine13, 123 (1977); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
31, 179 (1983); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
48, 181 (199)
16,319 (1978); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
27, 133 (1982); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
33, 179 (1984); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
46, 247 (1989)
33, 187 (1984); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987);
46, 255 (1989)
4, 113 (1974); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
33, 195 (1984); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987);
46, 267 (1989)
30, 271 (1983); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
33, 201 (1984); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
46,277 (1989)
7, 171 (1974); Suppl. 7,67 (1987);
50, 195 (199)
50, 211 (199)
7, 181 (1974); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
1, 181 (1972); 7, 185 (1974);
Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
9, 193 (1975); Suppl. 7, 269 (1987)
9, 209 (1975); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
46, 291 (1989)
46, 303 (1989)
46, 313 (1989)
29,331 (1982); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
33, 209 (1984); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987);
46, 321 (1989)
46, 359 (1989)
46, 367 (1989)
24, 297 (1980) (corr 42, 26)
30, 359 (1983)
37, 225 (1985); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
37, 233 (1985); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
4, 197 (1974); 17, 51 (1978);
Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
17, 77 (1978); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
1, 107 (1972) (corr 42, 251);
17, 83 (1978) (corr 42, 257);
Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)
1, 95 (1972); 17, 125 (1978)
(corr 42,257); Suppl. 7,67 (1987)
27, 213 (1982); Suppl. 7, 67 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
paa- Nitrosoiphenylamine
N- Nitrosodi-n-propylamine
N-Nitroso-N-ethylurea (see N-Ethyl-N-nitrosourea)
N-Nitrosofolic acid
N-Nitrosoguvacine
N-Nitrosoguvacoline
N-Nitrosohydroxyroline
3-(N-Nitrosomethylamino )propionaldehyde
3-(N- Nitrosomethylamino )propionitrie
4-(N- Nitrosomethylamino )-4-(3-pyrdyl)-1-butanal
4-(N-Nitrosomethylamino )-1-(3-pyrdyl)-1-butanone
N-Nitrosomethylethylamine
N-Nitroso-N-methylurea (see N-Methyl-N-nitrosourea)
N-Nitroso-N-methylurethane (see N-Methyl-N-methylurethane)
N- Nitrosomethylviylamine
N- Nitrosomorpholine
N -Nitrosonomicotine
N- Nitrosopiperidine
N-Nitrosoproline
N- Nitrosopyrolidine
N-Nitrososarcosine
Nitrosoureas, chloroethyl (see Chloroethyl nitrosoureas)
5- Nitro-ortho-tol uidine
Nitrous oxide (see Anaesthetics, volatile)
Nitrovi
Nivalenol (see Toxis derived from Fusanum graminearum,
E culmorum and E crookwellense)
NNA (see 4-(N-Nitrosomethylamino )-4-(3-pyrdyl)-1-butanal)
NNK (see 4-(N-Nitrosomethylamino )-1-(3-pyrdyl)-1-butanone)
Nonsteroidal oestrogens (see also Oestrogens, progestins and
combinat ions )
Norethisterone (see a/so Progestins; Combined oral
contraceptives)
Norethynodrel (see a/so Progestins; Combined oral
contraceptives
Norgestrel (see also Progestins, Combined oral contraceptives)
Nylon 6
o
Ochratoxi A
Oestradiol-17ß (see also Steroidal oestrogens)
Oestradiol 3-benwate (see Oestradiol-17ß)
Oestradiol dipropionate (see Oestradiol-17ß)
Oestradiol mustard
Oestradiol-17ß-valerate (see Oestradiol-17ß)
Oestriol (see a/so Steroidal oestrogens)419
27, 227 (1982) (corr 42, 261);
Suppl. 7,68 (1987)
17, 177 (1978); Suppl. 7,68 (1987)
17, 217 (1978); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
37,263 (1985); Suppl. 7,68 (1987)
37, 263 (1985); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
17, 304 (1978); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
37,263 (1985); Suppl. 7,68(1987)
37,263 (1985); Suppl. 7,68(1987)
37,205 (1985); Suppl. 7,68(1987)
37, 20 (1985); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
17,221 (1978); Suppl. 7,68(1987)
17, 257 (1978); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
17, 263 (1978); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
17,281 (1978); 37,241 (1985);
Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
17,287 (1978); Suppl. 7,68 (1987)
17, 303 (1978); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
17,313 (1978); Suppl. 7,68 (1987)
17, 327 (1978); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
48, 169 (199)
31, 185 (1983); Suppl. 7, 68 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 272 (1987)
6, 179 (1974); 21, 461 (1979)
6, 191 (1974); 21, 461 (1979)
(corr 42, 259)
6,201 (1974); 21,479 (1979)
19, 120 (1979); Suppl. 7,68 (1987)
JO, 191 (1976); 31, 191 (1983)
(corr 42, 262); Suppl. 7, 271 (1987);
56, 489 (1993)
6, 99 (1974); 21, 279 (1979)
9, 217 (1975)
6, 117 (1974); 21, 327 (1979)420 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Oestrogen-progestin combinations (see Oestrogens, progestins
and combinations)
Oestrogen-progestin replacement therapy (see also Oestrogens,
progestins and combinations)
Oestrogen replacement therapy (see also Oestrogens, progestins
and combinations)
Oestrogens (see Oestrogens, progestins and combinat ions)
Oestrogens, conjugated (see Conjugated oestrogens)
Oestrogens, nonsteroidal (sêe Nonsteroidal oestrogens)
Oestrogens, progestins and combinations
Oestrogens, steroidal (see Steroidal oestrogens)
Oestrone (see also Steroidal oestrogens)
Oestrone benwate (see Oestrone)
Oil Orange SS
Oral contraceptives, combined (see Combined oral contraceptives)
Oral contraceptives, investigational (seê Combined oral
contraceptives)
Oral contraceptives, sequential (see Sequential oral contraceptives)
Orange 1
Orange G
Organolead compounds (see also Lead and lead compounds)
Oxepam
Oxetholone (see also Androgenic (anabolic) steroidsJ
Oxhenbutazone
p
Paint manufacture and painting (ocupational expsures in)
Panfuran S (see also Dihydroxyethylfuratriine)
Paper manufacture (see Pulp and paper manufacture)
Paracetamol
Parasorbic acid
Parathion
Patulin
Penicilic acid
Pentachloroethane
Pentachloronitrobenzene (see Quintozene)
Pentachlorophenol (see also Chlorophenols; Chlorophenols,
ocupational expsures to)
Permethri
Perylene
Petasitenine
Petastes japonicus (see Pyolizidine alkaloids)
Petroleum refining (ocupational expsures in)
Sorne petroleum solvents
Phenacetin
PhenanthreneSuppl. 7, 308 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 28 (1987)
6 (1974); 21 (1979);
Suppl. 7, 272 (1987)
6, 123 (1974); 21, 343 (1979)
(corr 42, 259)
8, 165 (1975); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
8, 173 (1975); Suppl. 7,69 (1987)
8, 181 (1975); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 230 (1987)
13, 58 (1977); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
13, 131 (1977)
13, 185 (1977); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
47, 329 (1989)
24, 77 (1980); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
50, 307 (199)
10, 199 (1976) (corr 42,255);
Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
30, 153 (1983); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
JO, 205 (1976); 40, 83 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
JO, 211 (1976); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
41, 99 (1986); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
20, 303 (1979); 53, 371 (1991)
53, 329 (1991)
32, 411 (1983); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
31, 207 (1983); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)
45, 39 (1989)
47, 43 (1989)
13, 141 (1977); 24, 135 (1980);
Suppl. 7,310 (1987)
32, 419 (1983); Suppl. 7, 69 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
Phenazpyrdine hydrochloride
Phenelzine sulfate
Phenicarbazide
Phenobarbital
Phenol
Phenoxyacetic acid herbicides (see Chlorophenoxy herbicides)
Phenoxyenzamine hydrochloride
Phenylbutane
meta-Phenylenediamine
paa-Phenylenediamine
Phenyl glycidyl ether (see Glycidyl ethers)
N-Phenyl-2-naphthylamine
orlho-Phenylphenol
Phenytoin
PhIP
Pickled vegetables
Picloram
Piperazine oestrone sulfate (see Conjugated oestrogens)
Piperonyl butoxide
Pitches, coal-tar (see Coal-tar pitches)
Polyaciylic acid
Polybrominated biphenyls
Polychloriated biphenyls
Polychlorinated camphenes (see Toxaphene)
Polychloroprene
Polyethylene
Polymethylene polyphenyl isocanate
Polymethyl methaciylate
Polyoestradiol phosphate (see Oestradiol-17ß)
Polypropylene
Polystyene
Polytetrauoroethylene
Polyurethane foams
Polyvyl acetate
Polyvyl alcohol
Polyvyl chloride
Polyvyl pyrolinone
Ponceau MX
Ponceau 3R
Ponceau SX
Potassium arsenate (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Potassium arsenite (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Potassium bis(2-hydroxyethyl)dithiocrbamate
Potassium bromate
Potassium chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Potassium dichromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)421
8, 117 (1975); 24, 163 (1980) (corr 42,
26); Suppl. 7,312 (1987)
24, 175 (1980); Suppl. 7,312 (1987)
12, 177 (1976); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
13, 157 (1977); Suppl. 7,313 (1987)
47, 263 (1989) (corr 50, 385)
9, 223 (1975); 24, 185 (1980);
Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
13, 183 (1977); Suppl. 7, 316 (1987)
16, 111 (1978); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
16, 125 (1978); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
16, 325 (1978) (corr 42,257);
Suppl. 7, 318 (1987)
30, 329 (1983); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
13, 201 (1977); Suppl. 7, 319 (1987)
56, 229 (1993)
56, 83 (1993)
53, 481 (1991)
30, 183 (1983); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19,62 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
18, 107 (1978); 41,261 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 321 (1987)
7, 261 (1974); 18, 43 (1978) (corr 42,
258); Suppl. 7, 322 (1987)
19, 141 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19, 164 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19, 314 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19, 195 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19,218 (1979); Suppl. 7,70 (1987)
19,245 (1979); Suppl. 7,70 (1987)
19, 288 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19,320 (1979); Suppl. 7,70 (1987)
19,346 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19,351 (1979); Suppl. 7,70 (1987)
7,306 (1974); 19, 402 (1979); Suppl. 7,
70 (1987)
19,463 (1979); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
8, 189 (1975); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
8, 199 (1975); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
8, 207 (1975); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
12, 183 (1976); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
40, 207 (1986); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)422 IAC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Prednimustine
Prednisne
Procrbazine hydrochloride
Proflavie salts
Progesterone (see a/so Progestins; Combined oral contraceptives)
Progestins (see a/so Oestrogens, progestins and combinations)
Pronetalol hydrochloride
1,3-Propane sultone
Propham
ß-Propiolactone
n-Propyl carbamate
Propylene
Propylene oxide
Propylthiouracil
Ptaquiloside (see also Bracken fem)
Pulp and paper manufacture
Pyrene
Pydo(3,4-c Jpsoralen
Pyethamine
Pyolizidine alkaloids (see Hydroxysenkirkine; lsatidine; Jacobine;
Lasiocrpine; Monocrotaline; Retrorsine; Riddelliine; Seneciphyllne;
Senkikie)
Q
Quercetin (see also Bracken fem)
paa-Quinone
Quintozene
R
Radon
Reserpine
Resorcinol
Retrorsine
Rhodamine B
Rhodamine 6G
Riddellüoe
Rifampicin
Rock:ool (see Man-made mineraI fibres)
The rubber industiy
Rugulosin
s
Saccharated iron oxide50, 115 (199)
26,293 (1981); Suppl. 7,326 (1987)
26,311 (1981); Suppl. 7,327 (1987)
24, 195 (1980); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
6, 135 (1974); 21, 491 (1979) (corr 42,
259)
Suppl. 7, 289 (1987)
13,227 (1977) (corr 42,256); Suppl. 7,
70 (1987)
4, 253 (1974) (corr 42,253); Suppl. 7,
70 (1987)
12, 189 (1976); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
4, 259 (1974) (corr 42,253); Suppl. 7,
70 (1987)
12, 201 (1976); Suppl. 7, 70 (1987)
19, 213 (1979); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
IL, 191 (1976); 36, 227 (1985)
(corr 42, 263); Suppl. 7, 328 (1987)
7, 67 (1974); Suppl. 7, 329 (1987)
40, 55 (1986); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
25, 157 (1981); Suppl. 7, 385 (1987)
32,431 (1983); Suppl. 7,71(1987)
40, 349 (1986); SuPPI. 7, 71 (1987)
13,233 (1977); Suppl. 7,71(1987)
31, 213 (1983); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
15,255 (1977); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
5, 211 (1974); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
43, 173 (1988) (corr 45,283)
JO, 217 (1976); 24, 211 (1980)
(corr 42, 26); Suppl. 7, 330 (1987)
15, 155 (1977); Suppl. 7,71(1987)
10, 303 (1976); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
16,221 (1978); Suppl. 7,71(1987)
16, 233 (1978); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
JO, 313 (1976); Suppl. 7,71(1987)
24, 243 (1980); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
28 (1982) (corr 42, 261); Suppl. 7,
332 (1987)
40, 99 (1986); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
2, 161 (1973); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
Sacchari
Safrole
Salted fish
The sawmil industry (including logging) (see The lumber and
sawmil industry (including logging))
Scarlet Red
Selenium and selenium compounds
Selenium dioxide (see Selenium and selenium compounds)
Selenium oxide (see Selenium and selenium compounds)
Semicarbazide hydrochloride
Senecio jacobaea L. (see Pyrrolizidine alkaloids)
Senecio longilobus (see Pyolizidine alkaloids)
Seneciphylline
Senkirkine
Sepiolite
Sequential oral contraceptives (see also Oestrogens, progestins
and combinations)
Shale-oils
Shikimic acid (see also Bracken fem)
Shoe manufacture and repair (see Boot and shoe manufacture
and repair)
Silica (see also Amorphous silica; Crystalline silica)
Simazine
Slagwool (see Man-made mineraI fibres)
Sodium arsenate (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Sodium arsenite (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Sodium cacoylate (see Arsenic and arsenic compounds)
Sodium chlorite
Sodium chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Sodium cyclamate (see Cyclamates)
Sodium dichromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Sodium diethyldithiocrbamate
Sodium equilin sulfate (see Conjugated oestrogens)
Sodium fluoride (see Fluorides)
Sodium monofluorophosphate (see Fluorides)
Sodium oestrone sulfate (see Conjugated oestrogens)
Sodium ortho-phenylphenate (see also ortho-Phenylphenol)
Sodium sacchari (see Saccharin)
Sodium selenate (see Selenium and selenium compounds)
Sodium selenite (see Selenium and selenium compounds)
Sodium silicofluoride (see Fluorides)
Solar radiation
Soots
Spironolactone
Stannous fluoride (see Fluorides)423
22, 111 (1980) (corr 42,259);
Suppl. 7, 334 (1987)
1, 169 (1972); JO, 231 (1976);
Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
56, 41 (1993)
8, 217 (1975); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
9, 245 (1975) (corr 42, 255);
Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
12, 20 (1976) (corr 42, 256);
Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
10, 319, 335 (1976); Suppl. 7, 71
(1987)
10,327 (1976); 31,231 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
42, 175 (1987); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
Suppl. 7, 296 (1987)
35, 161 (1985); Suppl. 7, 339 (1987)
40, 55 (1986); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
42, 39 (1987)
53, 495 (1991)
52. 145 (1991)
12, 217 (1976); Suppl. 7, 71 (1987)
30, 329 (1983); Suppl. 7, 392 (1987)
55 (1992)
3, 22 (1973); 35, 219 (1985); Suppl. 7,
343 (1987)
24, 259 (1980); Suppl. 7, 344 (1987)424 IARC MONOGRAHS VOLUME 57
Steel founding (see Iron and steel founding)
Sterigmatocstin1, 175 (1972); 10, 245 (1976); Suppl. 7,
72 (1987)
Suppl. 7,280 (1987) Steroidal oestrogens (see also Oestrogens, progestins and
combinations)
Streptozotocin4, 221 (1974); 17, 337 (1978);
Suppl. 7,72(1987)Strobane~ (see Terpene polychloriates)
Strontium chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Styene19, 231 (1979) (corr 42, 258);
Suppl. 7, 345 (1987)
19,97 (1979); Suppl. 7,72(1987)
19,252 (1979); Suppl. 7,72(1987)
Il, 201 (1976); 19, 275 (1979); 36,245
(1985); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)Succinic anhydride 15,265 (1977); Suppl. 7,72(1987)Sudan 1 8, 225 (1975); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)Sudan II 8, 233 (1975); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)Sudan II 8,241 (1975); Suppl. 7,72(1987)Sudan Brown RR 8, 249 (1975); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)Sudan Red 7B 8, 253 (1975); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)Sulfafurazole 24, 275 (1980); Suppl. 7, 347 (1987)Sulfallate 30, 283 (1983); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)Sulfamethoxazole 24, 285 (1980); Suppl. 7, 348 (1987)
Sulfites (see Sulfur dioxide and sorne sulfites, bisulfites and metabisulfites)
Sulfur dioxide and sorne sulfites, bisulfites and metabisulfites 54, 131 (1992)
Sulfur mustard (see Mustard gas)
Sulfuric acid and other strong inorganic acids, ocupational expsures 54, 41 (1992)
to mists and vapours from
Sulfur trioxide
Sulphisoxazole (see Sulfafurazole)
Sunset Yellow FCF
SymphytineStyrene-aciylonitrile copolymers
Styene-butadiene copolymers
Styrene oxide
54, 121 (1992)
8, 257 (1975); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
31,239 (1983); Suppl. 7,72(1987)
T
2,4,5-T (see also Chlorophenoxy herbicides; Chlorophenoxy
herbicides, ocupational exposures to)
Thlc
Thnnic acid15, 273 (1977)
Thnnins (see also Thnnic acid)
TCDD (see 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin)
IDE (see DDT)
Tea
Terpene polychlorinates
Testosterone (see also Androgenic (anabolic) steroids)
Testosterone oenanthate (see Testosterone)
Testosterone propionate (see Testosterone)
2,2' ,S,S' -Tetrachlorobenzidine
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-para-dioxin
1, 1, 1,2-Tetrachloroethane42, 185 (1987); Suppl. 7, 349 (1987)
JO, 253 (1976) (corr 42,255); Suppl. 7,
72 (1987)
JO, 254 (1976); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
51,207 (1991)
5, 219 (1974); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
6, 20 (1974); 21, 519 (1979)
27, 141 (1982); Suppl. 7,72(1987)
15,41 (1977); Suppl. 7,350 (1987)
41, 87 (1986); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX 425
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane
Tetrachloroethylene
2,3,4,6-Tetrachlorophenol (see Chlorophenols; Chlorophenols,
ocupational expsures to)
Tetrachlorvinphos
Tetraethyllead (see Lead and lead compounds)
Tetrafuoroethylene
Tetrakis(hydroxymethyl) phosphonium salts
Tetramethyllead (see Lead and lead compounds)
Textile manufacturing industiy, expsures in
Theobromine
Theophyllne
Thioacetamide
4,4' -Thiodianiline20, 477 (1979); Suppl. 7, 354 (1987)
20, 491 (1979); Suppl. 7, 355 (1987)
30, 197 (1983); Suppl. 7,72(1987)
19, 285 (1979); Suppl. 7,72(1987)
48, 95 (1990)
Thiotepa48,215 (199) (con: 51,483)
51,421 (1991)
51, 391 (1991)
7, 77 (1974); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
16, 343 (1978); 27, 147 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
9, 85 (1975); Suppl. 7, 368 (1987);
50, 123 (199)
7, 85 (1974); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
7, 95 (1974); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
12, 225 (1976); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987);
53, 403 (1991)
47, 307 (1989)Thiouracil
Thiourea
Thiram
Titanium dioxide
Tobacc habits other than smoking (see Tobacc products,
smokeless)
Tobacc products, smokeless 37 (1985) (con: 42, 263; 52, 513);
Suppl. 7,357 (1987)
38 (1986) (con: 42, 263); Suppl. 7,
357 (1987)Tobacco smoke
Tobacc smoking (see Tobacco smoke)
ortho-Tolidine (see 3,3' - Dimethylbenzidine)
2,4-Toluene diisocanate (see a/so Toluene diisocyanates)
2,6-Toluene diisocanate (see also Toluene diisocanates)
Toluene
Toluene diisoanates19, 303 (1979); 39, 287 (1986)
19, 303 (1979); 39, 289 (1986)
47, 79 (1989)
39, 287 (1986) (con: 42, 26);
Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
Toluenes, a-chlorinated (see a-Chlorinated toluenes)
ortho-Toluenesulfonamide (see Saccharin)
ortho-Toluidine 16, 349 (1978); 27, 155 (1982);
Suppl. 7, 362 (1987)
20, 327 (1979); Suppl. 7, 72 (1987)
11, 169 (1976); 31, 153,279 (1983);
Suppl. 7, 64, 74 (1987); 56, 397 (1993)
56, 445 (1993)
31,265 (1983); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987);
56, 467 (1993)
26,341 (1981); Suppl. 7,363 (1987)
30, 207 (1983); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
9, 229 (1975); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987);
50, 143 (199)Toxaphene
T-2 Toxi (see Toxins derived from Fusarium sporotrichioides)
Toxis derived from Fusarium grarinearum, F. culmorum and
E crookwellense
Toxis derived from Fusarium moniliforme
Toxins derived from Fusarium sporotrichioides
Tremolite (see Asbestos)
Treosulfan
Triaziquone (see Tri(azirdinyl)-para-benzoquinone L
Trichlodon
Trichlornethine426 IAC MONOGRAPHS VOLUME 57
Trichloroacetonitrie (see Halogenated acetonitries)
1, 1, 1-Trichloroethane
1,1,2-Trichloroethane
Trichloroethylene
2,4,5-Trichlorophenol (see also Chlorophenols; Chlorophenols
ocupational expsures to)
2,4,6-Trichlorophenol (see also Chlorophenols; Chlorophenols,
ocupational expsures to)
(2,4,5-Trichlorophenoxy)acetic acid (see 2,4,5-T)
Trichlorotriethylamine hydrochloride (see Trichlormethine)
Ti-Trichothecene (see Toxis derived from Fusarum sporotrichioides)
Triethylene glycol diglycidyl ether
Triuralin
4,4' ,6-Triethylangelicin plus ultraviolet radiation (see also
Angelicin and sorne sythe tic derivatives)
2,4,5-Triethylaniline
2,4,6-Triethylaniline
4,5' ,8-Triethylpsoralen
Triustine hydrochloride (see Trichlormethine)
Triphenylene
Tri( azirdinyl )-para-benzoquinone
Tris(l-aziridinyl)phosphine oxide
Tris(l-azirdinyl)phosphine sulphide (see Thiotepa)
2, 4,6-Tris(1-aziridinyl )-s- triazine
Tris(2-chloroethyl) phosphate
1,2,3-Tris( chloromethoxy)propane
Tris(2,3-dibromopropyl)phosphate
Tris(2-methyl-1-aziridinyl )phosphine oxide
Trp~P-1
1t-P-2Tryan blue
Tussilago farfara L. (see Pyolizidine alkaloids)
u
Ultraviolet radiation
Underground haematite mining with exposure to radon
Uracil mustard
Urethane
v
Vat Yellow 4
Vinblastine sulfate
Vincristine sulfate
Vinyl acetate
Vinyl bromide20, 515 (1979); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
20, 533 (1979); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987);
52, 337 (1991)
Il, 263 (1976); 20, 545 (1979);
Suppl. 7, 364 (1987)
20, 349 (1979)
20, 349 (1979)
Il, 20 (1976); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
53, 515 (1991)
Suppl. 7, 57 (1987)
27, 177 (1982); Suppl. 7,73 (1987)
27, 178 (1982); Suppl. 7,73 (1987)
40, 357 (1986); Suppl. 7, 366 (1987)
32, 447 (1983); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
9, 67 (1975); Suppl. 7, 367 (1987)
9, 75 (1975); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
9, 95 (1975); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
48, 109 (199)
15, 301 (1977); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
20, 575 (1979); Suppl. 7, 369 (1987)
9, 107 (1975); Suppl. 7,73 (1987)
31, 247 (1983); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
31,255 (1983); Suppl. 7,73 (1987)
8, 267 (1975); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
40, 379 (1986); 55 (1992)
1, 29 (1972); Suppl. 7, 216 (1987)
9, 235 (1975); Suppl. 7, 370 (1987)
7, 111 (1974); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
48, 161 (199)
26, 349 (1981) (corr 42, 261);
Suppl. 7, 371 (1987)
26,365 (1981); Suppl. 7,372 (1987)
19, 341 (1979); 39, 113 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
19,367 (1979); 39, 133 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)CUMULATIVE CROSS INDEX
Vinyl chloride
Vinyl chloride-viyl acetate copolymers
4-Vinylcyclohexene
Vinyl fluoride
Vinylidene chloride
Vinylidene chloride-vinyl chloride copolymers
Vinylidene fluoride
N-Vinyl-2-pyrrolidone
w
Welding
Wollastonite
Woo industries
x
Xylene
2,4-Xylidine
2,5-Xylidine
2,6-Xylidine (see 2,6-Dimethylaniline)
y
Yellow AB
Yellow OB
z
Zearalenone (see Toxis derived from Fusarium graminearum,
E culmorum and E crookwellense)
Zectran
Zinc beryllum silicate (see Beryllum and beryllium compounds)
Zinc chromate (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Zinc chromate hydroxide (see Chromium and chromium
compounds)
Zinc potassium chromate (see Chromium and chromium
compounds)
Zinc yellow (see Chromium and chromium compounds)
Zineb
Zirm427
7,291 (1974); 19, 377 (1979) (corr 42,
258); Suppl. 7, 373 (1987)
7, 311 (1976); 19, 412 (1979) (corr
42, 258); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
11, 277 (1976); 39, 181 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
39, 147 (1986); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
19, 439 (1979); 39, 195 (1986);
Suppl. 7, 376 (1987)
19, 448 (1979) (corr 42, 258);
Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
39, 227 (1986); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
19,461 (1979); Suppl. 7, 73 (1987)
49, 447 (199) (corr 52, 513)
42, 145 (1987); Suppl. 7, 377 (1987)
25 (1981); Suppl. 7, 378 (1987)
47, 125 (1989)
16,367 (1978); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987)
16, 377 (1978); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987)
8, 279 (1975); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987)
8,287 (1975); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987)
12, 237 (1976); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987)
12, 245 (1976); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987)
12, 259 (1976); Suppl. 7, 74 (1987);
53, 423 (1991)PUBLICATIONS OF THE
INTRNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER
Scientific Publications Series
(Available from Oxord University Press through locl bokshops)
No. 1 Liver Cancer
1971; 176 pages (out ofprint)
No. 2 Oncognesis and
Herpviruse
Edited by P.M. Biggs, G. de-Thé and
LN. Payne
1972; 515 pages (out of print)
No. 3 N-Nitr Compounds:
Analysis and Formation
Edited by P. Bogovski,
R. Preusman and E.A. Walker
1972; 140 pages (out ofprint)
No. 4 Transplacental Carcinogenesis
Edited by L Tomatis and U. Mohr
1973; 181 pages (out of print)
No. 5/6 Patholog of Thmours in
Laboratory Animais, Volume L,
Thmours of the Rat
Edited by V.S. Thrusov
1973/1976; 533 pages (out ofprint)
No. 7 Host Environment
Interactions in the Etiology of
Cancer in Man
Edited by R. DolI and I. Vodopija
1973; 464 pages (out of prit)
No. 8 Biological EfTects of Asbetos
Edited by P. Bogovski, J.c. Gilson,
V. TImbrelI and J.c. Wagner
1973; 346 pages (out ofprint)
No. 9 N-Nitro Compounds in the
Environment
Edited by P. Bogovski and
E.A. Walker
1974; 243 pages (out ofprint)
No. 10 Chemical Carcinogenesis
Esys
Edited by R. Montesano and
L lbmatis
1974; 230 pages (out of print)No. Il Oncogenesis and
Herpviruse II
Edited by G. de-Thé, M.A. Epstein
and H. zur Hausen
1975; Part 1: 511 pages
Part II: 403 pages (out of prit)
No. 12 Screening Tests in Chemical
Carcinogenesis
Edited by R. Montesano,
H. Bartsch and L Thmatis
1976; 666 pages (out ofprint)
No. 13 Environmental Pollution and
Carcinogenic Risks
Edited by C. RosnfeId and
W. Davis
1975; 441 pages (out ofprint)
No. 14 Environmental N-Nitro
Compounds. Analysis and Formation
Edited by E.A. Walker, P. Bogovski
and L Gnciute
1976; 512 pages (out ofprint)
No. 15 Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents Volume III
Edited by J.A.H. Waterhouse,
C. Muir, P. Correa and J. PowelI
1976; 584 pages (out of print)
No. 16 Air Pollution and Cancer iD
Man
Edited by U. Mohr, D. Schmãhl and
L Tomatis
1977; 328 pages (out ofprint)
No. 17 Directory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1977
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1977; 599 pages (out ofprint)No. 18 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selecte Methods of Analysis.
Volume 1: Analysis of Volatile
Nitroamines in Foo
Editor-in-Chief: H. Egan
1978; 212 pages (out of print)
No. 19 Environmental Aspets of
N-Nitroso Compounds
Edited by E.A. Walker,
M. Castegnaro, L Gnciute and R.E.
Lyle
1978; 561 pages (out ofprint)
No. 20 Naspharygeal Carcinoma:
Etiology and Control
Edited by G. de-Thé and Y. Ho
1978; 606 pages (out of print)
No. 21 Cancer Registration and its
Techniques
Edited by R. MacLennan, C. Muir,
R. Steinitz and A. Winkler
1978; 235 pages (out ofprint)
No. 22 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selecte Methods of Analysis.
Volume 2: Methods for the
Measurement of Vinyl Chloride in
Poly(vinyl chloride), Air, Water and
FoostufTs
Editor-in-Chief: H. Egan
1978; 142 pages (out of print)
No. 23 Pathology of Thmours in
Laboratory Animais. Volume II:
Thmours of the Mouse
Editor-in-Chief: 'VS. Thrusov
1979; 669 pages (out ofprit)
No. 24 Oncogenesis and
Herpviruses III
Edited by G. de-Thé, W. Henle and
F. Rapp
1978; Part 1: 580 pages, Part II: 512
pages (out ofprint)
Pree, vaUd for March 1993, are subject to change without noticeNo. 25 Carcinogenic Risk. Strategies
for Intervention
Edited by W. Davis and
C. Rosnfeld
1979; 280 pages (out of print)
No. 26 Diretory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1978
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1978; 550 pages (out ofprint)
No. 27 Molecular and Cellular
Aspets of Carcinogen Screning
Tests
Edited by R. Montesano,
H. Bartsch and L Tomatis
1980; 372 pages £30.00
No. 28 Directory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1979
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1979; 672 pages (out ofprint)
No. 29 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selecte Methods of Analysis.
Volume 3: Analysis of Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons in
Environmental Sam pies
Editor-in-Chief: H. Egan
1979; 240 pages (out of print)
No. 30 Biological Effects of Mineral
Fibres
Editor-in-Chief: J.c. Wagner
1980; Volume 1: 494 pages Volume
2: 513 pages (out ofprint)
No. 31 N-Nitros Compounds:
Analysis, Fonnation and Occurrence
Edited by E.A. Walker, L Griciute,
M. Castegnaro and M. BöfZnyi
1980; 835 pages (out ofprint)
No. 32 Statistical Methods in
Cancer Rearch. Volume 1. The
Analysis of Caseontrol Studies
By N.E. Breslow and N.E. Day
1980; 338 pages £18.00
No. 33 Handling Chemical
Carcinogens in the Laboratory
Edited by R. Montesano et aL.
1979; 32 pages (out ofprint)List of lAC Publications
No. 34 Pathology of Thmours in
Laboratory Animais. Volume III.
Tumours of the Hamster
Editor-in-Chief: V.S. Thruv
1982; 461 pages (out ofprint)
No. 35 Diretory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1980
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1980; 660 pages (out ofprint)
No. 36 Cancer Mortlity by
Occupation and Soial Class
1851-1971
Edited by W.P.D. Lûgan
1982; 253 pages (out of print)
No. 37 Laboratory Deontamination
and Destruction of Afatoxins B" B~
G" G2 in Laboratory Waste
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1980; 56 pages (out of print)
No. 38 Directory of On-going
Research in Cancer Epidemiology
1981
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1981; 696 pages (out of print)
No. 39 Host Factors in Human
Carcinogenesis
Edited by H. Bartsch and
B. Arstrong
1982; 583 pages (out ofprint)
No. 40 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selected Methods of Analysis.
Volume 4: Some Aromatic Amines
and Az Oyes in the General and
Industrial Environment
Edited by L Fishbein,
M. Castegnaro, I.K O'Neil and
H. Bartsch
1981; 347 pages (outofprint)
No. 41 N-Nitroso Compounds:
Occurrnce and Biological Effects
Edited by H. Bartsch, I.K O'Neil,
M. Castegnaro and M. Okada
1982; 755 pages £50.00
No. 42 Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents Volume IV
Edited by J. Waterhouse, C. Muir,
K Shanmugaratnam and J. Powell
1982; 811 pages (outofprìt)No. 43 Laboratory Decontamination
and Destruction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Waste: Some
N-Nitrosamines
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1982; 73 pages £7.50
No. 44 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selecte Methods of Analysis.
Volume 5: Some Mycotoxins
Edited by L Stoloff, M. Castegnaro,
P. Scott, I.K O'Neil and H. Bartsch
1983; 455 pages £32.50
No. 45 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selected Methods of Analysis.
Volume 6: N-Nitros Compounds
Edited by R. Preussmann, I.K
O'Neil, G. Eisenbrand, B.
Spiegelhalder and H. Bartsch
1983; 508 pages £32.50
No. 46 Directory of On-going
Research in Cancer Epidemiology
1982
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1982; 722 pages (out of print)
No. 47 Cancer Incidence in
Singapore 196-1977
Edited by K Shanmugaratnam,
H.P. Lee and N.E. Day
1983; 171 pages (out of print)
No. 48 Cancer Incidence in the
USSR (2nd Revised Edition)
Edited by N.P. Napalkov,
G.F. 'Trkovny, V.M. Merabishvili,
D.M. Parkin, M. Smans and
C.S. Muir
1983; 75 pages (out ofprint)
No. 49 Laboratory Decontamination
and Detruction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Waste: Some Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1983; 87 pages (out ofprìt)
No. 50 Diretory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1983
Edited by C.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1983; 731 pages (out of print)
No. 51 Modulators of Expenmental
Carcinogenesis
Edited by V. Thrusov and R.
Montesno
1983; 307 pages (out of print)No. 52 Seond Cancers in Relation
to Radiation Tratment for Cervcal
Cancer: ResuUs of a Cancer Registry
Collaboration
Edited by N.E. Day and J.e. Boice,
Jr
1984; 207 pages (out ofprint)
No. 53 Nickel in the Human
Environment
Editor-in-Chief: EW Sundennan, Jr
1984; 529 pages (out ofprint)
No. 54 Laboratory Deontamination
and Detrction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Waste: Sorne
Hydrazines
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1983; 87 pages (outofprint)
No. 55 Laboratory Decontamination
and Destruction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Wastes: Sorne
N-Nitrosamides
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1984; 66 pages (out ofprint)
No. 56 Models, Mechanisms and
Etiology of Thmour Promotion
Edited by M. Börzönyi, N.E. Day,
K Lapis and H. Yamasaki
1984; 532 pages (out ofprint)
No. 57 N-Nitros Compounds:
Occurrence, Biological Effects and
Relevance to Human Cancer
Edited by I.K O'Neil, Re. von
Borstel, c:r. Miler, J. Long and
H. Bartsch
1984; 1013 pages (out of print)
No. 58 Age-relate Factors in
Carcinogenesis
Edited by A Likhachev,
V. Anisimov and R Montesano
1985; 288 pages (out of print)
No. 59 Monitoring Human
Expoure to Carcinogenic and
Mutagenic Agents
Edited by A Berlin, M. Draper,
K Hemminki and H. Vainio
1984; 457 pages (out of print)
No. 60 Burktts Lymphoma: A
Human Cancer Model
Edited by G. Lenoir, G. O'Conor
and e.LM. Olweny
1985; 484 pages (out ofprit)List of /AC Publications
No. 61 Laboratory Deontamination
and Destruction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Waste: Sorne
Haloethers
Edited by M. Castegnaro et aL.
1985; 55 pages (out of print)
No. 62 Directory of On-going
Rearch in Cancer Epidemiology
1984
Edited by e.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1984; 717 pages (out ofprit)
No. 63 Virus-assoiated Cancers in
Mrica
Edited by AD. Willams,
G.T. O'Conor, G.B. de-Thé and e.A
Johnson
1984; 773 pages (out ofprint)
No. 64 Laboratory Decontamination
and Destruction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Wastes: Sorne Aromatic
Amines and 4-Nitrobiphenyl
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1985; 84 pages (out ofprint)
No. 65 Interpretation of Negative
Epidemiological Evidence for
Carcinogenicity
Edited by N.J. Wald and R DolI
1985; 232 pages (out of print)
No. 66 The Role of the Registry in
Cancer Control
Edited by D.M. Parkin, G. Wagner
and e.S. Muir
1985; 152 pages £10.00
No. 67 Transformation Asay of
Established Cell Unes: Mechanisms
and Application
Edited by T. Kakunaga and
H. Yamasaki
1985; 225 pages (out of print)
No. 68 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selected Methods of Analysis.
Volume 7. Sorne Volatile
Halogenated Hydrocarbons
Edited by L Fishbein and
I.K O'Neil
1985; 479 pages (out ofprint)
No. 69 Directory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1985
Edited by e.S. Muir and G. Wagner
1985; 745 pages (out ororit)No. 70 The Role of Cyclic Nucleic
Acid Adducts in Carcinoge:iesis and
Mutagenesis
Edited by B. Singer and H. Bartsch
1986; 467 pages (out of prit)
No. 71 Environmental Carcinogens.
Selected Methods of Analysis.
Volume 8: Sorne Metals: As Be, Cd,
Cr, Ni, Pb, Se Zn
Edited by LK O'Neil, P. Schuller
and L Fishbein
1986; 485 pages (out ofprint)
No. 72 Atlas of Cancer in Scotland,
1975-1980. Incidence and
Epidemiological Perspective
Edited by i. Kemp, P. Boyle,
M. Smans and e.S. Muir
1985; 285 pages (out of print)
No. 73 Laboratory Deontamination
and Destruction of Carcinogens in
Laboratory Wastes: Sorne
Antineoplastic Agents
Edited by M. Castegnaro et al.
1985; 163 pages £12.50
No. 74 Tobacco: A Major
International Health Hazard
Edited by D. Zaridze and R Peto
1986; 324 pages £22.50
No. 75 Cancer Occurrence in
Developing Countries
Edited by D.M. Parkin
1986; 339 pages £22.50
No. 76 Screening for Cancer of the
Uterine Cerv
Edited by M. Hakama, AB. Miler
and N.E. Day
1986; 315 pages £30.00
No. 77 Hexachlorobenzene:
Proceedings of an International
Symposium
Edited by e.R. Morris and
J.R.P. Cabral
1986; 668 pages (out ofprint)
No. 78 Carcinogenicity of Alkylating
Cyostatic Drugs
Edited by D. Schrnãhl and
J.M. Kaldor
1986; 337 pages (out of print)
No. 79 Statistical Methods in
Cancer Resarch. Volume III: The
Deign and Analysis of Long-term
Animal Experiments
By J.J. Gart, D. Krewski, P.N. Lee,
RE. Throne and J. Wahrendorf
1986: 213 DalleS £22.00No. 80 Direory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1986
Edited by CS. Muir and G. Wagner
1986; 805 pages (out of print)
No. 81 Environmental Carcinogns:
Methods of Analysis and Expoure
Measurement. Volume 9: Passive
Smoking
Edited by I.K O'Neil,
KD. Brunnemann, B. Dodet and D.
Hoffmann
1987; 383 pages £35.00
No. 82 Statistical Methods in
Cancer Research. Volume II: The
Deign and Analysis of Cohort
Studies
By N.E. Breslow and N.E. Day
1987; 404 pages £35.00
No. 83 Long-tenn and Short-tenn
Asys for Carcinogens: A Critical
Appraisal
Edited by R. Montesano,
H. Bartsch, H. Vainio, J. Wilboum
and H. Yamasaki
1986; 575 pages £35.00
No. 84 The Relevance of N-Nitros
Compounds to Human Cancer:
Expoure and Mechanisms
Edited by H. Bartsch, I.K O'Neill
and R. SchuIte-Hermann
1987; 671 pages (out ofprint)
No. 85 Environmental Carcinogens:
Methods of Analysis and Expoure
Measurement. Volume 10: Benzene
and Alkylate Benzenes
Edited by L Fishbein and
I.K O'Neil
1988; 327 pages £40.00
No. 86 Directory of On-going
Rearch in Cancer Epidemiology
1987
Edited by D.M. Parkin and
J. Wahrendorf
1987; 676 pages (out ofprít)
No. 87 International Incidence of
Childho Cancer
Edited by D.M. Parkin, CA Stiller,
CA Bieber, G.J. Draper,
B. TerrcIni and J.L Young
1988; 401 pages £35.00List of /AC Publications
No. 88 Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents Volume V
Edited by C. Muir, J. Waterhous, T.
Mack, J. Powell and S. Whelan
1987; 1004 pages £55.00
No. 89 Method for Deteng DNA
Damaging Agents in Humans:
Applications in Cancer Epidemiolog
and Prevention
Edited by H. Barth, K Hemminki
and I.K O'Neil
1988; 518 pages £50.00
No. 90 Non-ocupational Expoure
to Mineral Fibres
Edited by J. Bignon, J. Peto and
R. Saracci
1989; 500 pages £50.00
No. 91 Trends in Cancer Incidence
in Singapore 196- 1 982
Edited by H.P. Lee, N.E. Day and
K Shanmugaratnam
1988; 160 pages (out of print)
No. 92 Cell DilTerentiation, Genes
and Cancer
Edited by T. Kakunaga,
T. Sugimura, L Tomatis and
H. Yamasaki
1988; 204 pages £27.50
No. 93 Directory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1988
Edited by M. Coleman and
J. Wahrendorf
1988; 662 pages (out of print)
No. 94 Human Papilomavirus and
Cervical Cancer
Edited by N. Muñoz, EX. Boh and
O.M. Jensen
1989; 154 pages £22.50
No. 95 Cancer Registration:
Principles and Method
Edited by D.M. Jensen,
D.M. Parkin, R. MacLennan,
CS. Muir and R. Skeet
1991; 288 pages £28.00
No. 96 Perinatal and
Multigeneration Carcinogenesis
Edited by N.P. Napalkov,
J.M. Rice, L Tomatis and
H. Yamasaki
1989; 436 pages £50.00No. 97 Occupational Expure to
Silca and Cancer Risk
Edited by L Simonato,
AC Fletcher, R. Saracci and
T. Thomas
1990; 124 pages £22.50
No. 98 Cancer Incidence in Jewish
Migrants to Israel, 1961-1981
Edited by R. Steinitz, D.M. Parkin,
J.L Young, C.A Bieber and
L Katz
1989; 320 pages £35.00
No. 99 Pathology of Thmours in
Laboratory Animais, Second
Edition, Volume 1, Thmours of the
Rat
Edited by V.S. Thrusov and
U. Mohr
740 pages £85.00
No. 100 Cancer: Cause,
Occurrence and Control
Editor-in-Chief L Tomatis
1990; 352 pages £24.00
No. 101 Directory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1989/90
Edited by M. Coleman and
J. Wahrendorf
1989; 818 pages £36.00
No. 102 Patterns of Cancer in Five
Continents
Edited by S.L Whelan, D.M. Parkin
& E. Masuyer
1990; 162 pages £25.00
No. 103 Evaluating Etectivenes of
Primary Prevention of Cancer
Edited by M. llakama, V. Beral, J.W:
Cullen and D.M. Parkin
1990; 250 pages £32.00
No. 104 Complex Mixtures and.
Cancer Risk
Edited by H. Vainio, M. Sors and
Al. McMichael
1990; 442 pages £38.00
No. 105 Relevance to Human
Cancer of N-Nitr Compounds,
Tobacco Smoke and Mycotoxins
Edited by I.K O'Neil, J. Chen and
H. Barth
1991; 614 pages £70.00
No. 106 Atlas of Cancer Incidence
in the Fonner Gennan Democratie
Republic
Edited by WH. Mehnert, M. Smans,
CS. Muir, M. Möhner & D. Schön
1992; 384 pages £55.00No. 107 Atlas of Cancer Mortlity
in th European Economie
Community
Edited by M. Smans, C.S. Muir and
P. Boyle
1992; 280 pages £35.00
No. 108 Environmental
Carcinogns: Methods of Analysis
and Exure Measurement. Volume
II: Polychlorinate Dioxins and
Dibenzofurans
Edited by C. Rappe, H.R Buser,
B. Dodet and I.K O'Neill
1991; 426 pages £45.00
No. 109 Environmental
Carcinogens: Methods of Analysis
and Expoure Measurement. Volume
12: Indoor Air Contaminants
Edited by B. Seifert, H. van de Wiel,
B. Dodet and I.K O'Neil
1993; 384 pages £45.00
No. 110 Directory of On-going
Resarch in Cancer Epidemiology
1991
Edited by M. Coleman and
J. Wahrendorf
1991; 753 pages £38.00
No. 111 Pathology of Thmours in
Laboratory Animais, Seond
Edition, Volume 2, Thmours of the
Mouse
Edited by V.S. Thrusov and
U. Mol)r
Publ. due 1993; approx. 700 pages
No. 112 Autopsy in Epidemiology
and Medical Research
Edited by E. Riboli and M. Delendi
1991; 288 pages £25.00
No. 113 Laboratory
Deontamination and Destruction of
Carcinogens in Laboratory Wastes:
Some Mycotoxins
Edited by M. Castegnaro, J. Barek,
J.-M. Frémy, M. Lafontaine,
M. Miraglia, E.B. Sansone and
G.M. Telling
1991; 64 pages £11.00List of /AC Publications
No. 114 Laboratory
Deontamination and Destrction of
Carcinogens in Laboratory Waste:
Some Polycyclic Heterocclic
Hydroarbons
Edited by M. Categnaro, J. Barek,
J. Jacob, U. Kirs, M. Lafontaine,
E.B. Sansone, G.M. Tellng and
T. Vu Duc
1991; 50 pages £8.00
No. 115 Mycotoxins, Endemie
Nephropathy and Urinary Tract
Th mou rs
Edited by M. Castegnaro, R
Plestina, G. Dirheimer, LN.
Chernozemsky and H Barth
1991; 340 pages £45.00
No. 116 Mechanisms of
Carcinogenesis in Risk Identification
Edited by H. Vainio, P.N. Magee,
D.B. McGregor & A.J. McMichael
1992; 616 pages £65.00
No. 117 Directory of On-going
Research in Cancer Epidemiology
1992
Edited by M. Coleman,
J. Wahrendorf & E. Démaret
1992; 773 pages £42.00
No. 118 Cadmium in the Human
Environment: Toxicity and
Carcinogenicity
Edited by G.E Nordberg, REM.
Herber & L. Alessio
1992; 470 pages £60.00
No. 119 The Epidemiology of
Cervical Cancer and Human
Papilomavirus
Edited by N. Muñoz, EX. Bosch,
K V. Shah & A. Meheus
1992; 288 pages £28.00
No. 120 Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents, Volume VI
Edited by D.M. Parkin, C.S. Muir,
S.L Whelan, Y.T. Gao, J. Ferlay &
J.Powell
1992; 1080 pages £120.00No. 121 Trnds in Cancer Incidence
and Mortlity
Edited by M. Coleman, J. Estève
and P. Damiecki
1993; approx. 800 pages,
approx £95.00
No. 122 International Classification
of Rodent Thmours. Part 1. The Rat
Editor-in-Chief: U. Möhr
1992/93; 10 fascicles of 60- 100
pages, £120.00
No. 123 Cancer in Italian Migrant
Populations
Edited by M. Geddes, D.M. Parkin,
M. Khlat, D. Balzi and E. Buiatti
1993; 292 pages, £40.00
No. 124 Postlabellng Methods for
Detection of DNA Adducts
Edited by D.H. Phillps, M.
Castegnaro and H. Bartsch
1993; 392 pages; £46.00List of lARe Publications
IARC MONOGRAHS ON THE EVALUATION OF
CARCINOGENIC RISKS TO HUMANS
(Available from boksellers through the network of WHO Sales Agents)
Volume 1 Sorne Inorganic
Su bsnces Chlonnate
Hydroarbons, Armatic Amines
N-Nitr Compounds, and Natural
Proucts
1972; 184 pages (out ofprint)
Volume 2 Sorne Inorganic and
Organometallc Compounds
1973; 181 pages (out of print)
Volume 3 Certin Polycyclic
Aromatic Hydrocarbons and
Heteroclic Compounds
1973; 271 pages (out of print)
Volume 4 Sorne Aromatic Amines,
Hydrazine and Related Substances,
N-Nitros Compounds and
Miscellaneous Alkylating Agents
1974; 286 pages Sw. fr. 18.-
Volume 5 Sorne Organochlonne
Pesticides
1974; 241 pages (out ofprint)
Volume 6 Sex Hormones
1974; 243 pages (out of print)
Volume 7 Sorne Anti- Thyroid and
Relate Substances, Nitrofurans and
Industnal Chemicals
1974; 326 pages (out ofprint)
Volume 8 Sorne Aromatic Aw
Corn pou nds
1975; 357 pages Sw. fr. 36.-
Volume 9 Sorne Azindines N-, s-
and O-Mustards and Selenium
1975; 268 pages Sw.fr. 27.-
Volume 10 Sorne Naturally
Occurrng Substances
1976; 353 pages (out ofprint)
Volume Il Cadmium, Nickel, Sorne
Epoxides Miscellaneous Industnal
Chemicals and General
Considerations on Volatile
Anaesthetics
1976; 306 pages (out ofprint)Volume 12 Sorne Carbamate
Thiocarbamate and Carbazides
1976; 282 pages Sw. ff. 34.-
Volume 13 Sorne Miscellaneous
Phannaceutical Substances
1977; 255 pages Sw. ff. 30.-
Volume 14 Asbestos
1977; 106 páges (out of print)
Volume 15 Sorne Fumigants The
Herbicides 2,4-D and 2,4,S-T,
Chlonnate Dibenzoioxins and
Miscellaneous Industrial Chemicals
1977; 3'54 pages Sw. fr. 50.-
Volume 16 Sorne Armatic Amines
and Relate Nitro Cornpounds -
Hair Dyes, Colounng Agents and
Miscellaneous Industrial Chemicals
1978; 400 pages Sw. fr. 50.-
Volume 17 Sorne N-Nitros
Compounds
1978; 365 pages Sw. fr. 50.-
Volume 18 Polychlonnated
Biphenyls and Polybrorninated
Biphenyls
1978; 140 pages Sw. fr. 20.-
Volume 19 Sorne Monomers
Plastics and Synthetic Elastomers
and Acrolein
1979; 513 pages (out of print)
Volume 20 Sorne Halogenated
Hydrocarbons
1979; 609 pages (out of print)
Volume 21 Sex Hormones (II)
1979; 583 pages Sw. ff. 60.-
Volume 22 Sorne Non-Nutntive
Sweetening Agents
1980; 208 pages Sw. ff. 25.-
Volume 23 Sorne Metals and
Metallc Cornpounds
1980; 438 pages (out ofprint)
Volume 24 Sorne Phannaceutical
Drugs
1980; 337 pages Sw. ff. 40.-Volume 25 Woo l.ather and Sorne
Asiate Industnes
1981; 412 pages Sw. fr. 60.-
Volume 26 Sorne Antineoplastic and
Irnmunosuppresive Agents
1981; 411 pages Sw. fr. 62.-
Volume 27 Sorne Aromatic Amines,
Anthraquinones and Nitroso
Compounds, and Inorganic
Fluorides Used in Drinking Water
and Dental Preparations
1982; 341 pages Sw. fr. 40.-
Volume 28 The Rubber Industr
1982; 486 pages Sw. fr. 70.-
Volume 29 Sorne Industrial
Chemicals and Dyestuffs
1982; 416 pages Sw. fr. 60.-
Volume 30 Miscellaneous Pesticides
1983; 424 pages Sw. fr. 60.-
Volume 31 Sorne Food Additives,
Feed Additives and Naturally
Occurrng Substances
1983; 314 pages Sw. fr. 60.-
Volume 32 Polynuclear Arornatic
Compounds, Part 1: Chernical,
Environmental and Experimental
Data
1983; 477 pages Sw. fr. 60.-
Volume 33 Polynuclear Aromatic
Compounds, Part 2: Carbon Blacks,
Mineral Oils and Sorne Nitroarenes
1984; 245 pages Sw. fr. 50.-
Volume 34 Polynuclear Arornatic
Compounds, Part 3: Industrial
Exposures in Aluminium
Production, Coal Gasification, Coke
Production, and Iron and Stel
Founding
1984; 219 pages Sw. fr. 48.-
Volume 35 Polynuclear Aromatic
Compounds, Part 4: Biturnens,
Coal-tars and Derived Products,
Shale-oils and Sots
1985; 271 pages Sw. fr. 70.-Volume 36 Allyl Compounds,
Aldehydes Epoxides and Peroxides
1985; 369 pages Sw. if. 70.-
Volume 37 Tobacco Habits Other
than Smoking: Betel-quid and
Ara-nut Chewingj and sorne
Relate Nitrmines
1985; 291 pages Sw. ir. 70.-
Volume 38 Tobacco Smoking
1986; 421 pages Sw. ir. 75.-
Volume 39 Sorne Chemicals Use in
Plastics and Elastomers
1986; 403 pages Sw. if. 60.-
Volume 40 Sorne Naturally
Occurrng and Synthetic Foo
Components, Furocoumarins and
Ultraviolet Radiation
1986; 444 pages Sw. if. 65.-
Volume 41 Sorne Halogenated
Hydrocarbons and Pesticide
Expoures
1986; 434 pages Sw. ir. 65.-
Volume 42 Silica and Sorne Silcates
1987; 289 pages Sw. ir. 65.
Volume 43 Man-Made Mineral
Fibres and Radon
1988; 300 pages Sw. ir. 65.-
Volume 44 Alcohol Drinking
1988; 416 pages Sw. ir. 65.
Volume 45 Occupational Exposures
in Petroleum Refiningj Crude Oil
and Major Petroleum Fuels
1989; 322 pages Sw. if. 65.-
Volume 46 Diesel and Gasoline
Engine Exhausts and Sorne
Nitroarenes
1989; 458 pages Sw. ir. 65.-
Volume 47 Sorne Organic Solvents,
Resin Monomers and Related
Compounds, Pigments and
Occupational Exposures in Paint
Manufacture and Painting
1989; 536 pages Sw. if. 85.-
Volume 48 Sorne Flame Retardants
and Textile Chemicals, and
Expoures in the Textile
Manufacturing Industry
1990; 345 pages Sw. if. 65.-List of /AC Publications
Volume 49 Chromium, Nickel and
Welding .
1990; 677 pages Sw. ir. 95.-
Volume 50 Phannaceutical Drugs
1990; 415 pages Sw. if. 65.-
Volume 51 Coffee, Tea, Mate,
Methylxanthines and Methylglyoxal
1991; 513 pages Sw. if. 80.-
Volume 52 Chlorinate
Drinking-waterj Chlorination
By-productsj Sorne Other
Halogenate Compoundsj Cobalt
and Cobalt Compounds
1991; 544 pages Sw. fr 80.-
Volume 53 Occupational Expoure
in Inseticide Application and sorne
Pesticides
1991; 612 pages Sw. ir. 95.-
Volume 54 Occupational Expoures
to Mists and Vapours from Strong
Inorganic Acidsj and Other
Industrial Chemicals
1992; 336 pages Sw. ir. 65.-
Volume 55 Solar and Ultraviolet
Radiation
1992; 316 pages Sw. ir. 65.-
Volume 56 Sorne Natufally
Ocurrng Substances: Foo Items
and Constituents, Hetefocclic
Aromatic Amines and Mycotoxins
1993; 600 pages Sw. if. 95.-
Volume 56 Sorne Natufally
Occurrng Substances: Foo Items
and Constituents, Hetefocclic
Aromatic Amines and Mycotoxins
1993; 600 pages Sw. if. 95.-
Volume 57 Occupational Exposures
of Hairdresrs and Barbers and
Persnal Use of Hair Colourants;
Sorne Hair Dyes Cosmetic
Colourants Industrial Dyestuffs and
Aromatic Amines
1993; 428 pages Sw. if. 75.-Supplement No. 1
Chemicals and Industral Proes
Asiated with Cancer in Humans
(IARC Monographs, Volumes 1 to
20)
1979; 71 pages (out ofprint)
Supplement No. 2
Long-term and Short-term Screning
Asays for Carcinogens: A Critical
Appraisal
1980; 426 pages Sw. fr 40.-
Supplement No. 3
Cro Index of Synonyms and Trade
Names in Volumes 1 to 26
1982; 199 pages (out ofprint)
Supplement No. 4
Chemicals, Industrial Processs and
Industries Asociate with Cancer in
Humans (IARC Monographs,
Volumes 1 to 29)
1982; 292 pages (out ofprint)
Supplement No. 5
Cros Index of Synonyms and Trade
Names in Volumes 1 to 36
1985; 259 pages (out of print)
Supplement No. 6
Genetic and Related Effects: An
Updating of Selected IARC
Monographs from Volumes 1 to 42
1987; 729 pages.Sw. if. 80.-
Supplement No. 7
Overall Evaluations of
Carcinogenicity An Updating of
IARC Monographs Volumes 1-42
1987; 440 pages Sw. if. 65.-
Supplement No. 8
Cros Index of Synonyms and Trade
Names in Volumes 1 to 46
1990; 346 pages Sw. if. 60.-IARC TECHNICAL
REPORTS *
No. 1 Cancer in Costa Rica
Edited by R Sierra,
R Barrantes, G. Muñoz Leiva, D.M.
Parkin, C.A Bieber and
N. Muñoz Calero
1988; 124 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 2 SEARCH: A Computer
Package to Asist th Statistical
Analysis of Casontrol Studie
Edited by G.J. Macfarlane,
P. Boyle and P. Maisonneuve
1991; 80 pages (out of print)
No. 3 Cancer Registration in the
European Economie Community
Edited by M.P. Coleman and
E. Démaret
1988; 188 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 4 Diet, Honnones and Cancer:
Methodological Issues for
Propetive Studies
Edited by E. Riboli and
R. Saracci
1988; 156 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 5 Cancer in the Philippines
Edited by AV Laudico,
D. Esteban and D.M. Parkin
1989; 186 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 6 La genèse du Centre
International de Recherche sur le
Cancer
Par R Sohier et AG.B. Sutherland
1990; 104 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 7 Epidémiologie du cancer dans
les pays de langue latine
1990; 310 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 8 Comparative Study of Anti-
smoking Leslation in Countries of
the European Economie Community
Edited by A Sasco, P. Dalla Vorgia
and P. Van der Elst
1992; 82 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 9 Epidemiologie du cancer dans
les pays de langue latine
1991; 346 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. Il Nitroo Compounds:
Biological Mechanisms, Expoures
and Cancer Etiology
Edited by I.K O'Neil & H. Bartsch
1992; 149 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
No. 12 Epidémiologie du cancer
dans les pays de langue latine
1992; 375 pages Sw. fr. 30.-List of lAC Publications
No. 13 Health, Solar UV Radiation
and Environmental Change
Edited by A Krcker, B.K
Armstrong, M.E. Jones and Re.
Burton
1993; 216 pages Sw.fr. 30.-
No. 14
Epidémiologie du cancer dans les
pays de langue latine
1993; 385 pages Sw. fr. 30.-
DIRECTORY OF AGENTS
BEING TESTED FOR
CARCINOGENICITY (Dnti
Vol. 13 Infonnation Bulletin on
the Survey of Chemicals Being
Tested for Carcinogenicity)*
No. 8 Edited by MA. Ghess,
H. Bartsch and L Tomatis
1979; 604 pages Sw. fr. 40.-
No. 9 Edited by M.-J. Ghess,
J.O. Wilboum, H. Bartsch and
L Tomatis
1981; 294 pages Sw. fr. 41.-
No. 10 Edited by M.-J. Ghess,
J.O. Wilboum and H. Bartsch
1982; 362 pages Sw. fr. 42.-
No. Il Edited by MA. Ghess,
J.O. Wilboum, H. Vainio and
H. Bartsch
1984; 362 pages Sw. fr. 50.-
No. 12 Edited by MA. Ghess,
J.O. Wilboum, A Tosvainen and
H. Vainio
1986; 385 pages Sw. fr. 50.-
No. 13 Edited by MA. Ghes,
J.O. Wilboum and A Aitio 1988;
404 pages Sw. fr. 43.-
No. 14 Edited by M.-J. Ghess,
J.O. Wilboum and H. Vainio
1990; 370 pages Sw. fr. 45.-
No. 15 Edited by MA. Ghess, J.O.
Wilboum and H. Vainio
1992; 318 pages Sw. fr. 45.-
· Available from boksellers through the network of WHO Sales agents.
t Available directly from lARNON.SERIL
PUBLICATIONS t
Alcool et Cancer
By A Thyns (in French only)
1978; 42 pages Fr. fr. 35.-
Cancer Morbidity and Cause of
Death Among Danish Brewery
Workers
By O.M. Jensen
1980; 143 pages Fr. fr. 75.-
Directory of Computer Systems Used
in Cancer Registries
By H.R. Menck and D.M. Parkin
1986; 236 pages Fr. fr. 50.-