On Bringing Case-Based Reasoning
Methodology to Deep Learning
David Leake and David Crandall
Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering, Indiana University
Bloomington IN 47408, USA
leake@indiana.edu, djcran@indiana.edu
Abstract. The case-based reasoning community is successfully pursu-
ing multiple approaches for applying deep learning methods to advance
case-based reasoning. This \Challenges and Promises" paper argues for
a complementary endeavor: pursuing ways that the case-based reason-
ing methodology can advance deep learning. Starting from challenges in
deep learning and proposed neural-symbolic integrations based on spe-
cic technologies, it proposes studying how CBR ideas can inform choices
of components for a new reasoning pipeline.
Key words: Automated Machine Learning, Case-Based Reasoning Method-
ology, Challenge Problems, Deep Learning, Integrations, Pipelines
1 Introduction
Recent years have seen great accomplishments in deep learning. These have led
to enthusiasm in the case-based reasoning (CBR) [9] community for studying
how to apply deep learning methods in service of case-based reasoning. For
example, the Call for Papers for the 2019 Workshop on Case-based Reasoning
and Deep Learning states that the \successes of DL call for novel methods and
techniques that exploit DL for the benet of CBR systems."1Research presented
at that workshop and other venues supports the promise of this approach for
advancing case-based reasoning. This \Challenges and Promises" paper proposes
that the CBR community consider the reverse perspective: How application of
case-based reasoning can shape the design of deep learning systems and help to
address challenges for deep learning and machine learning as a whole.
As background to the challenges, the paper begins by highlighting two views
on questions to address to advance deep learning and AI as a whole, presented in
invited talks by Yann LeCun and Henry Kautz at the AAAI 2020 Conference on
Articial Intelligence in New York, NY. These focus, respectively, on challenges
for deep learning and architectures for integrating neural and symbolic methods.
The proposed integrations of neural and symbolic methods view each as a
dierent technology, with particular strengths for particular types of tasks. We
propose that the CBR community develop integrations shaped by a dierent
1https://iccbr2019.com/workshops/case-based-reasoning-and-deep-learning/perspective, that of Ian Watson's treatment of CBR as a methodology [16]. In
that view, case-based reasoning is seen as a general high-level process that denes
a set of tasks, but for which the needed functionality can be implemented using
various technologies, both neurally inspired and symbolic.
This perspective suggests an opportunity for the CBR methodology to shape
the high-level design of component-based deep learning systems, with collections
of subparts corresponding to components of the CBR process|retrieve, reuse, re-
vise, and retain [1]|and encoding the CBR knowledge containers|vocabulary,
case knowledge, similarity knowledge, and adaptation knowledge [12]. It also
raises questions of how such components can be implemented and integrated.
Especially interesting is the addition of forms of case adaptation in deep learn-
ing frameworks, to enable the transformation of solutions for novel contexts.
CBR can also play an important role in automated machine learning (AutoML),
by helping to exploit experiences with AutoML systems. The paper closes by
discussing the potential impact of the proposed initiatives.
2 Addressing Deep Learning Challenges through
Integrations
Challenges for deep learning: Deep learning has achieved remarkable success
in many task domains. In fact, at least under some conditions, deep learning
can match or exceed human-level performance in face recognition [15], language
translation [4], and game playing [14]. However, important challenges remain.
LeCun pointed to three key challenges for deep learning:2
1. Learning with fewer labeled samples and/or fewer trials
2. Learning to reason
3. Learning to plan complex action sequences
Each of these is well-trodden ground for case-based reasoning. This suggests
opportunities for integrations with case-based reasoning.
Models for Integrating Deep Learning with Symbolic Approaches: In his AAAI
2020 Engelmore lecture, Henry Kautz pointed to specic strengths of deep learn-
ing, such as learning hierarchically and that deep learning representations \di-
rectly support similarity." On the other hand, various other processes, such as
combinatorial search, are natural for symbolic methods. In response to the diver-
gent strengths, he advocated bringing together neural and symbolic traditions
and proposed six possible combinations, including using the dierent technolo-
gies for specialized subroutines and a NeuroSymbolic approach in which symbolic
rules are used to structure a neural system.3This paper proposes integrations
at a more abstract level, in which the design of deep learning architectures is
structured by the high-level CBR methodology.
2Quoted from
https://drive.google.com/le/d/1r-mDL4IX hzZLDBKp8 e8VZqD7fOzBkF/view
3https://www.cs.rochester.edu/u/kautz/talks/Kautz%20Engelmore%20Lecture.pdf3 Implementing CBR with Deep Network Components
In the early days of case-based reasoning, CBR was often presented as an alterna-
tive technology to rule-based systems, associated with particular representation
and implementation methods. In an inuential paper, Ian Watson made a key
observation: CBR can be implemented in many dierent ways using a range of
methods. For example, CBR retrieval can be done using database technology
[5]. Thus CBR is not a technology, but instead a methodology: a set of principles
for a process of problem solving, interpretation, and learning that can be im-
plemented using various technologies [16]. He frames the principles in terms of
the classic four "REs" of the Aamodt and Plaza CBR cycle [1]: Retrieve similar
cases, Reuse a similar case, Revise the solution to t if necessary, and learn by
Retaining. Each of these steps can be applied using multiple technologies.
Following this view, we can see CBR as a set of principles that could guide,
for example, integrating multiple deep learning approaches to provide a CBR
process for an end-to-end solution to a deep learning challenge problem. This
shares aspects with multiple items in Kautz's categorization, but diers in that
the dening aspect is not the specic technology, but rather the need for a
particular functional sequence of processing steps.
The challenge for the CBR community is then to dene the requisite tasks and
integration. Various steps have been taken to bring deep learning components
into CBR systems (e.g., [3, 8, 10, 13]). This challenge calls for an end-to-end eort
to achieve CBR capabilities with a collection of deep learning-based components.
This would have multiple benets:
{ Providing CBR benets while minimizing knowledge burdens: CBR
is no longer an alternative approach that loses the benets of the knowledge-
light processing of deep networks. When CBR is a unifying principle for
guiding the design of deep learning systems, it can be implemented with the
same technology.
{ Providing a framework for exible technology integrations: Even
applying end-to-end CBR, the CBR process can still be implemented with
whatever technology is most appropriate; the use of deep learning for some
components does not preclude dierent technologies for others.
{ Providing increased exibility through adaptation: The reasoning
part of CBR follows from case adaptation, the ability to transform solutions
to new contexts. Explicitly integrating adaptation into deep learning systems
could provide a new means for transfer.
{ Providing a new basis for learning from few examples: Implementing
a \true" case-based reasoning process able to reason and learn from single
cases could help address the challenge of learning from limited data.
{ Providing a model for generating structured solutions: Similarly, im-
plementing a \true" case-based reasoning process able to manipulate struc-
tured cases could enable processing structured data such as action plans.
{ Reducing storage requirements : Cases can capture knowledge compactly,
in contrast to the potentially enormous requirements of networks.If it is not possible to fully develop such a process within a deep learning archi-
tecture, hybrid solutions can still provide powerful processing capabilities.
4 Questions for a CBR-Based Pipeline
As discussed, the CBR methodology is agnostic to technology. However, applying
that methodology in a neural network context requires addressing several key
questions:
{ Case representation : How can the rich structured cases of CBR be repre-
sented in a network context?
{ The role of cases : What are the tradeos of explicit case retrieval rather
than direct solution generation, and what are their respective roles? We
consider this further below.
{ Case adaptation : How and where should adaptation be applied? Can case
adaptation be learned and applied within other processes of the CBR cycle,
such as via adaptation at interior points of the network, rather than only to
the retrieved solution? This might be seen as related to the question trans-
formation of early CBR [6] and eorts at supporting analogical reasoning
directly with embedded representations [11]. Neural networks have previ-
ously been applied to case adaptation [2], and recent eorts have applied
deep learning to case adaptation using the case dierence heuristic [8].
{ The meaning of the Retain step : A fundamental principle of CBR is
that results are retained as new cases. However, when learning is achieved
by gradient-based training methods, the cost of learning by retraining after
every case is prohibitive. Consequently, a core question is how to achieve
lazy learning in a neural network context, or whether the case store must
necessarily be implemented with another technology.
Developing a CBR-based pipeline raises the question of the role of explicit
case representation and manipulation. Deep learning systems are eager learners;
they receive (large quantities of) training data and learn weights that encode
generalizations from that data. Case-based reasoners are lazy learners, retaining
raw cases (or cases with limited processing) to re-use them. When using CBR to
shape a deep learning pipeline, a natural question is the role of cases. There are
three possibilities: To include an explicit case retrieval phase for "pre-packaged"
cases; to "assemble" or generate cases by a reconstructive process without literal
case storage (cf. [7]), or to dispense with explicit case retrieval/generation, solely
adding an adaptation phase after solution generation, in the absence of cases.
Adding adaptation to deep learning pipelines is an interesting | and potentially
highly impactful | challenge for the CBR community. However, the full benets
of CBR, such as single-example lazy learning and explainability, require the use
of cases.5 CBR for AutoML
CBR can also be brought to deep learning|and other machine learning methods|
in the context of automated machine learning (AutoML). AutoML focuses on
methods to take as input a dataset, a challenge problem, and a library of prim-
itives including machine learning algorithms, to automatically develop an end-
to-end machine learning pipeline. It is being pursued by the DARPA Data-
Driven Discovery of Models (D3M) program.4Most D3M teams focus on al-
gorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization. However, some apply a
\meta-learning" approach exploiting a database of prior solutions generated by
the former \rst principles" methods. This can be seen as a case base, and the
CBR methodology, and specic lessons and methods for indexing, similarity,
and adaptation, could play an important role in exploiting it. However, to our
knowledge, this opportunity for synergy has not yet been pursued.
6 Conclusion: Future Paths
This challenge paper has proposed that beyond focusing on applying deep learn-
ing methods for CBR, the CBR community should focus on how the CBR
methodology can help address the next generation of deep learning challenges.
This may be especially benecial for a CBR perspective on how to view problems
and design architectures.
Bringing CBR to deep learning has the potential for great impact on future
AI systems and to increase the reach of CBR. As a coarse-grained measure of
the degree of attention to deep learning, a search of the Semantic Scholar archive
of scholarly articles on May 6, 2020 yielded 11,500 results for \case-based rea-
soning" in the last ve years, versus approximately 284,000 for \deep learning."
Bringing case-based reasoning methodology to deep learning could also provide
components for a new generation of knowledge-light CBR applications. Bring-
ing CBR to AutoML provides an opportunity to harness strengths of CBR for
eective use of multiple machine learning methods.
Acknowledgment: This material is based upon work supported in part by the
Department of the Navy, Oce of Naval Research under award number N00014-
19-1-2655. We thank the reviewers and Swaroop Vattam for helpful comments.
References
1. Aamodt, A., Plaza, E.: Case-based reasoning: Foundational issues, methodological
variations, and system approaches. AI Communications 7(1), 39{52 (1994)
2. Corchado, J.M., Lees, B.: Adaptation of cases for case based forecasting with neu-
ral network support. In: Soft Computing in Case Based Reasoning, pp. 293{319.
Springer (2001)
4https://www.darpa.mil/program/data-driven-discovery-of-models3. Grace, K., Maher, M.L., Wilson, D.C., Najjar, N.: Combining CBR and deep learn-
ing to generate surprising recipe designs. In: Case-Based Reasoning Research and
Development, ICCBR 2016. Springer, Berlin (2016)
4. Hassan, H., Aue, A., Chen, C., Chowdhary, V., Clark, J., Federmann, C., Huang,
X., Junczys-Dowmunt, M., Lewis, W., Li, M., Liu, S., Liu, T.Y., Luo, R., Menezes,
A., Qin, T., Seide, F., Tan, X., Tian, F., Wu, L., Wu, S., Xia, Y., Zhang, D.,
Zhang, Z., Zhou, M.: Achieving human parity on automatic chinese to english
news translation (2018)
5. Kitano, H., Shimazu, H.: The experience sharing architecture: A case study in
corporate-wide case-based software quality control. In: Leake, D. (ed.) Case-Based
Reasoning: Experiences, Lessons, and Future Directions, pp. 235{268. AAAI Press,
Menlo Park, CA (1996)
6. Kolodner, J.: Retrieval and Organizational Strategies in Conceptual Memory.
Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ (1984)
7. Leake, D.: Assembling latent cases from the web: A challenge problem for cogni-
tive CBR. In: Proceedings of the ICCBR-11 Workshop on Human-Centered and
Cognitive Approaches to CBR (2011)
8. Liao, C., Liu, A., Chao, Y.: A machine learning approach to case adaptation. In:
2018 IEEE First International Conference on Articial Intelligence and Knowledge
Engineering (AIKE). pp. 106{109 (2018)
9. L opez de M antaras, R., McSherry, D., Bridge, D., Leake, D., Smyth, B., Craw, S.,
Faltings, B., Maher, M., Cox, M., Forbus, K., Keane, M., Aamodt, A., Watson, I.:
Retrieval, reuse, revision, and retention in CBR. Knowledge Engineering Review
20(3) (2005)
10. Mathisen, B.M., Aamodt, A., Bach, K., Langse ~th, H.: Learning similarity measures
from data. Progress in Articial Intelligence (10 2019)
11. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Ecient estimation of word repre-
sentations in vector space. CoRR abs/1301.3781 (2013), http://arxiv.org/abs/
1301.3781
12. Richter, M.: Introduction. In: Lenz, M., Bartsch-Sp orl, B., Burkhard, H.D., Wess,
S. (eds.) CBR Technology: From Foundations to Applications, chap. 1, pp. 1{15.
Springer, Berlin (1998)
13. Sani, S., Wiratunga, N., Massie, S.: Learning deep features for knn-based human
activity recognition. In: Proceedings of ICCBR 2017 Workshops (CAW, CBRDL,
PO-CBR), Doctoral Consortium, and Competitions co-located with the 25th Inter-
national Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (ICCBR 2017), Trondheim, Norway,
June 26-28, 2017. CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2028, pp. 95{103. CEUR-
WS.org (2017), http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2028/paper9.pdf
14. Silver, D., Schrittwieser, J., Simonyan, K., Antonoglou, I., Huang, A., Guez, A.,
Hubert, T., Baker, L., atthew Lai, M., Bolton, A., Chen, Y., Lillicrap, T., Hui, F.,
Sifre, L., van den Driessche, G., Graepel, T., sabis, D.H.: Mastering the game of
Go without human knowledge. Nature 550, 354{359 (19 October 2017)
15. Taigman, Y., Yang, M., Ranzato, M.A., Wolf, L.: Deepface: Closing the gap to
human-level performance in face verication. In: IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (2014)
16. Watson, I.: Case-based reasoning is a methodology not a technology. Knowledge-
Based Systems 12(303-308) (1996)