332 21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–15 Edition) § 60.36 
not affect the maximum patent exten-
sion the applicant sought in the appli-cation. 
§ 60.36 Standard of due diligence. 
(a) In determining the due diligence 
of an applicant, FDA will examine the facts and circumstances of the appli-cant’s actions during the regulatory re-view period to determine whether the applicant exhibited that degree of at-tention, continuous directed effort, and timeliness as may reasonably be ex-pected from, and are ordinarily exer-cised by, a person during a regulatory review period. FDA will take into con-sideration all relevant factors, such as the amount of time between the ap-proval of an investigational exemption or research permit and the commence-ment of a clinical investigation and the amount of time required to conduct a clinical investigation. 
(b) For purposes of this part, the ac-
tions of the marketing applicant shall be imputed to the applicant for patent term restoration. The actions of an agent, attorney, contractor, employee, licensee, or predecessor in interest of the marketing applicant or applicant for patent term restoration shall be imputed to the applicant for patent term restoration. 
Subpart E—Due Diligence 
Hearings 
§ 60.40 Request for hearing. 
(a) Any person may request, not later 
than 60 days after the publication under §60.34(a) of FDA’s due diligence determination, that FDA conduct an informal hearing on the due diligence determination. 
(b) The request for a hearing under 
this section shall: 
(1) Be sent by mail, personal delivery, 
or any other mode of written commu-nication to the Division of Dockets Management and filed under the rel-evant product file; 
(2) Specify the facts and the action 
that are the subject of the hearing; 
(3) Provide the name and address of 
the person requesting the hearing; and 
(4) Certify that the requesting party 
has served a true and complete copy of the request upon the petitioner and the applicant by certified or registered mail (return receipt requested) or by 
personal delivery. 
(c) The request shall state whether 
the requesting party seeks a hearing within 30 days or 60 days of FDA’s re-ceipt of the request. 
[53 FR 7305, Mar. 7, 1988, as amended at 67 FR 
9585, Mar. 4, 2002] 
§ 60.42 Notice of hearing. 
Ten days before the hearing, FDA 
will notify the requesting party, the applicant, and the petitioner, orally or in writing, of the date, time, and loca-tion of the hearing. The agency will provide the requesting party, the appli-cant, and the petitioner with an oppor-tunity to participate as a party in the hearing. 
§ 60.44 Hearing procedures. 
The due diligence hearing shall be 
conducted in accordance with this part, supplemented by the nonconflicting procedures in part 16. During the due diligence hearing, the applicant and the petitioner shall enjoy all the rights and privileges accorded a person re-questing a hearing under part 16. The standard of due diligence set forth in §60.36 will apply in the due diligence hearing. The party requesting the due diligence hearing shall have the burden of proof at the hearing. 
§ 60.46 Administrative decision. 
Within 30 days after the completion 
of the due diligence hearing, the Com-missioner will affirm or revise the de-termination made under §60.34(a) and will publish the due diligence redeter-mination in the F
EDERAL REGISTER , no-
tify PTO of the redetermination, and send copies of the notice to PTO and to the requesting party, the applicant, and the petitioner. 
PART 70—COLOR ADDITIVES 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
Sec. 
70.3 Definitions. 70.5 General restrictions on use of color ad-
ditives. 
70.10 Color additives in standardized foods 
and new drugs. 
70.11 Related substances. 70.19 Fees for listing. 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00342 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB333 Food and Drug Administration, HHS § 70.3 
Subpart B—Packaging and Labeling 
70.20 Packaging requirements for straight 
colors (other than hair dyes). 
70.25 Labeling requirements for color addi-
tives (other than hair dyes). 
Subpart C—Safety Evaluation 
70.40 Safety factors to be considered. 
70.42 Criteria for evaluating the safety of 
color additives. 
70.45 Allocation of color additives. 70.50 Application of the cancer clause of 
section 721 of the act. 
70.51 Advisory committee on the applica-
tion of the anticancer clause. 
70.55 Request for scientific studies. 
A
UTHORITY : 21 U.S.C. 321, 341, 342, 343, 348, 
351, 360b, 361, 371, 379e. 
SOURCE : 42 FR 15636, Mar. 22, 1977, unless 
otherwise noted. 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
§ 70.3 Definitions. 
(a) Secretary means the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services. 
(b) Department means the Department 
of Health and Human Services. 
(c) Commissioner means the Commis-
sioner of Food and Drugs. 
(d) Act means the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act as amended. 
(e) Color Certification Branch means 
the unit established within the Food and Drug Administration located in the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, charged with the responsi-bility for the mechanics of the certifi-cation procedure hereinafter described, and including the examination of sam-ples of color additives subject to cer-tification. 
(f) A color additive is any material, 
not exempted under section 201(t) of the act, that is a dye, pigment, or other substance made by a process of synthesis or similar artifice, or ex-tracted, isolated, or otherwise derived, with or without intermediate or final change of identity, from a vegetable, animal, mineral, or other source and that, when added or applied to a food, drug, or cosmetic or to the human body or any part thereof, is capable (alone or through reaction with another sub-stance) of imparting a color thereto. Substances capable of imparting a color to a container for foods, drugs, or cosmetics are not color additives un-less the customary or reasonably fore-
seeable handling or use of the con-tainer may reasonably be expected to result in the transmittal of the color to the contents of the package or any part thereof. Food ingredients such as cher-ries, green or red peppers, chocolate, and orange juice which contribute their own natural color when mixed with other foods are not regarded as color additives ; but where a food sub-
stance such as beet juice is delib-erately used as a color, as in pink lem-onade, it is a color additive. Food ingre-
dients as authorized by a definitions and standard of identity prescribed by regulations pursuant to section 401 of the act are color additives, where the in-
gredients are specifically designated in the definitions and standards of iden-tity as permitted for use for coloring purposes. An ingredient of an animal feed whose intended function is to im-part, through the biological processes of the animal, a color to the meat, milk, or eggs of the animal is a color additive and is not exempt from the re-quirements of the statute. This defini-tion shall apply whether or not such ingredient has nutritive or other func-tions in addition to the property of im-parting color. An ingested drug the in-tended function of which is to impart color to the human body is a color addi-
tive. For the purposes of this part, the 
term color includes black, white, and 
intermediate grays, but substances in-cluding migrants from packaging ma-terials which do not contribute any color apparent to the naked eye are not color additives. 
(g) For a material otherwise meeting 
the definition of color additive to be ex-
empt from section 721 of the act, on the basis that it is used (or intended to be used) solely for a purpose or purposes other than coloring, the material must be used in a way that any color im-parted is clearly unimportant insofar as the appearance, value, market-ability, or consumer acceptability is concerned. (It is not enough to warrant exemption if conditions are such that the primary purpose of the material is other than to impart color.) 
(h) The exemption that applies to a 
pesticide chemical, soil or plant nutri-ent, or other agricultural chemical, where its coloring effect results solely 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00343 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB334 21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–15 Edition) § 70.3 
from its aiding, retarding, or otherwise 
affecting directly or indirectly, the growth or other natural physiological processes of produce of the soil, applies only to color developed in such product through natural physiological proc-esses such as enzymatic action. If the pesticide chemical, soil or plant nutri-ent, or other agricultural chemical itself acts as a color or carries as an in-gredient a color, and because of this property colors the produce of the soil, it is a color additive and is not exempt. 
(i) Safe means that there is con-
vincing evidence that establishes with reasonable certainty that no harm will result from the intended use of the color additive. 
(j) The term straight color means a 
color additive listed in parts 73, 74, and 81 of this chapter, and includes lakes and such substances as are permitted by the specifications for such color. 
(k) The term mixture means a color 
additive made by mixing two or more straight colors, or one or more straight colors and one or more diluents. 
(l) The term lake means a straight 
color extended on a substratum by ad-sorption, coprecipitation, or chemical combination that does not include any combination of ingredients made by simple mixing process. 
(m) The term diluent means any com-
ponent of a color additive mixture that is not of itself a color additive and has been intentionally mixed therein to fa-cilitate the use of the mixture in color-ing foods, drugs, or cosmetics or in coloring the human body. The diluent may serve another functional purpose in the foods, drugs, or cosmetics, as for example sweetening, flavoring, emulsifying, or stabilizing, or may be a functional component of an article in-tended for coloring the human body. 
(n) The term substratum means the 
substance on which the pure color in a lake is extended. 
(o) The term pure color means the 
color contained in a color additive, ex-clusive of any intermediate or other component, or of any diluent or sub-stratum contained therein. 
(p) The term batch means a homo-
geneous lot of color additive or color additive mixture produced by an iden-tified production operation, which is set apart and held as a unit for the pur-pose of obtaining certification of such 
quantity. 
(q) The term batch number means the 
number assigned to a batch by the per-son who requests certification thereof. 
(r) The term lot number means an 
identifying number or symbol assigned to a batch by the Food and Drug Ad-ministration. 
(s) The term area of the eye means the 
area enclosed with in the circum-ference of the supra-orbital ridge and the infra-orbital ridge, including the eyebrow, the skin below the eyebrow, the eyelids and the eyelashes, and con-junctival sac of the eye, the eyeball, and the soft areolar tissue that lies within the perimeter of the infra-or-bital ridge. 
(t) The term package means the im-
mediate container in which a color ad-ditive or color additive mixture has been packed for shipment or delivery. If the package is then packed in a ship-ping carton or other protective con-tainer, such container shall not be con-sidered to be the immediate container. In the case of color additive mixtures for household use containing less than 15 percent pure color, when two or more containers of 3 ounces each or less, each containing a different color, are distributed as a unit, the imme-diate container for such unit shall be considered to be the package as defined in this section. 
(u) The hair dye exemption in section 
601(a) of the act applies to coal tar hair dyes intended for use in altering the color of the hair and which are, or which bear or contain, color additives derived from coal tar with the sen-sitization potential of causing skin ir-ritation in certain individuals and pos-
sible blindness when used for dyeing the eyelashes or eyebrows. The exemp-tion is permitted with the condition that the label of any such article bear conspicuously the statutory caution and adequate directions for prelimi-nary patch-testing. The exemption does not apply to coloring ingredients in hair dyes not derived from coal tar, and it does not extend to poisonous or deleterious diluents that may be intro-duced as wetting agents, hair condi-tions, emulsifiers, or other components 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00344 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB335 Food and Drug Administration, HHS § 70.10 
in a color shampoo, rinse, tint, or simi-
lar dual-purpose cosmetic that alter the color of the hair. 
(v) The terms externally applied drugs 
and externally applied cosmetics mean 
drugs or cosmetics applied only to ex-ternal parts of the body and not to the lips or any body surface covered by mu-cous membrane. 
[42 FR 15636, Mar. 22, 1977, as amended at 61 
FR 14478, Apr. 2, 1996] 
§ 70.5 General restrictions on use of 
color additives. 
(a) Color additives for use in the area of 
the eye. No listing or certification of a 
color additive shall be considered to authorize the use of any such color ad-ditive in any article intended for use in the area of the eye unless such listing or certification of such color additive specifically provides for such use. Any color additive used in or on any article intended for use in the area of the eye, 
the listing or certification of which color additive does not provide for such use, shall be considered to be a color additive not listed under parts 73, 74, and 81 of this chapter, even though such color additive is certified and/or listed for other uses. 
(b) Color additives for use in injections. 
No listing or certification of a color ad-ditive shall be considered to authorize the use of any such color additive in any article intended for use in injec-tions unless such listing or certifi-cation of such color additive specifi-cally provides for such use. Any color additive used in or on any article in-tended for use in injections, the listing or certification of which color additive does not provide for such use, shall be considered to be a color additive not listed under parts 73, 74, and 81 of this chapter, even though such color addi-tive is certified and/or listed for other uses. 
(c) Color additives for use in surgical 
sutures. No listing or certification of a 
color additive shall be considered to authorize the use of any such color ad-ditive in any article intended for use as a surgical suture unless such listing or certification of such color additive spe-cifically provides for such use. Any color additive used in or on any article intended for use as a surgical suture, the listing or certification of which color additive does not provide for such 
use, shall be considered to be a color additive not listed under parts 73, 74, and 81 of this chapter, even though such color additive is certified and/or listed for other uses. 
§ 70.10 Color additives in standardized 
foods and new drugs. 
(a) Standardized foods. (1) Where a pe-
tition is received for issuance or amendment of a regulation estab-lishing a definition and standard of identity for a food under section 401 of the act, which proposes the inclusion of a color additive in the standardized food, the provisions of the regulations in part 71 of this chapter shall apply with respect to the information that must be submitted with respect to the safety of the color additive (if such in-formation has not previously been sub-mitted and safety of the color additive for the intended use has not been al-ready established), and the petition must show also that the use of the color additive in the standardized food would be in conformance with section 401 of the act or with the terms of a temporary permit issued under §130.17 of this chapter. 
(2) If a petition for a definition and 
standard of identity contains a pro-posal for a color additive regulation, and the petitioner fails to designate it as such, the Commissioner, upon deter-mining that the petition includes a proposal for a color additive regula-tion, shall so notify the petitioner and shall thereafter proceed in accordance with the regulations in part 71 of this chapter. 
(3) A regulation will not be issued al-
lowing the use of a color additive in a food for which a definition and stand-ard of identity is established, unless its issuance is in conformance with sec-tion 401 of the act or with the terms of a temporary permit issued under §130.17 of this chapter. When the con-templated use of such additive com-plies with the terms of a temporary permit, the color additive regulation will be conditioned on such compliance and will expire with the expiration of the temporary permit. 
(b) New drugs. (1) Where an applica-
tion for a new drug is received and this 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00345 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB336 21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–15 Edition) § 70.11 
application proposes, for coloring pur-
poses only, the inclusion of a color ad-ditive, the provisions of the regulations in part 71 of this chapter shall apply with respect to the information that must be submitted about the safety of the color additive, if such information has not previously been submitted and safety of the color additive for the in-tended use has not already been estab-lished. 
(2) If an application for a new drug 
inferentially contains a proposal for a color additive regulation, and the ap-plicant fails to designate it as such, the Commissioner, upon determining that the application includes a proposal for a color additive regulation, shall so no-tify the applicant and shall thereafter proceed in accordance with the regula-tions in part 71 of this chapter. 
(3) Where a petition for a color addi-
tive must be filed in accordance with paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the date of filing of the color additive peti-tion shall be considered as the date of filing of the new-drug application. 
[42 FR 15636, Mar. 22, 1977, as amended at 64 
FR 400, Jan. 5, 1999] 
§ 70.11 Related substances. 
(a) Different color additives may 
cause similar or related pharma-cological or biological effects, and, in the absence of evidence to the con-trary, those that do so will be consid-ered to have additive toxic effects. 
(b) Food additives may also cause 
pharmacological or biological effects similar or related to such effects caused by color additives, and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, those that do so will be considered as having additive toxic effects. 
(c) Pesticide chemicals may also 
cause pharmacological or biological ef-fects similar or related to such effects caused by color additives, and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, those that do so will be considered to have additive toxic effects. 
(d) In establishing tolerances for 
color additives, the Commissioner will take into consideration, among other things, the amount of any common component permitted in other color ad-ditives, in food additives, and in pes-ticide chemical residues as well as the similar biological activity (such as cholinesterase inhibition) produced by 
such substance. 
§ 70.19 Fees for listing. 
(a) Each petition for the listing of a 
color additive shall be accompanied by a deposit of $3,000.00 if the proposal is for listing the color additive for use generally in or on foods, in or on drugs, and in or on cosmetics. 
(b) If the petition for the listing is for 
use in or on foods only, the deposit shall be $3,000.00. 
(c) If the petition for the listing is for 
use in or on drugs and/or cosmetics only, the deposit shall be $2,600.00. 
(d) The provisions of paragraphs (a), 
(b), and (c) of this section shall be ap-plicable, whether or not the proposal contemplates any tolerances, limita-tions, or other restrictions placed upon the use of the color additive. 
(e) If a petition proposing the 
issuance of a regulation is withdrawn before it is finally accepted for filing, the deposit, less a $600.00 fee for cler-ical handling and administrative and technical review, shall be returned to the petitioner. 
(f) If a petition proposing the 
issuance of a regulation is withdrawn within 30 days after filing, the deposit, less $1,800.00 if the petition is covered by paragraph (a) or (b) of this section, and less $1,600.00, if the petition is cov-ered by paragraph (c) of this section, shall be returned to the petitioner. 
(g) When a petition is withdrawn 
after filing and resubmitted within 6 months, it shall be accompanied by a deposit of $1,800.00 for a petition filed under paragraph (a) or (b) of this sec-tion, and $1,600.00 for a petition filed under paragraph (c) of this section. If a petition is resubmitted after 6 months, it shall be accompanied by the deposit that would be required if it were being submitted for the first time. 
(h) When the resubmission pertains 
to a petition that had been withdrawn before acceptance for filing, a new ad-vance deposit shall be made in full as prescribed in paragraph (a), (b), or (c) of this section. 
(i) After a color additive has been 
listed, any request for an amendment or additional tolerance shall be accom-panied by a deposit of $1,800.00 for use in the items specified in paragraphs (a) 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00346 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB337 Food and Drug Administration, HHS § 70.25 
and (b) of this section, or $1,600.00 for 
use in items specified in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(j) The fee for services in listing a 
diluent under §80.35 for use in color ad-ditive mixtures shall be $250.00. 
(k) Objections and request for public 
hearing under section 721(d) of the act or section 203(d)(2)(C) of Pub. L. 86–618 (74 Stat. 404; 21 U.S.C. 379e, note) shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $250.00. 
(l) In the event of a referral of a peti-
tion under this section to an advisory committee, all costs related thereto (including personal compensation of committee members, travel materials, and other costs) shall be borne by the person or organization requesting the referral, such costs to be assessed on the basis of actual cost to the Govern-ment: Provided, That the compensation 
of such costs shall include personal compensation of advisory committee members at a rate not to exceed $75.00 per member per day. 
(m) In the case of requests of refer-
rals to advisory committees, a special advance deposit shall be made in the amount of $2,500.00. Where required, further advance in increments of $2,500.00 each shall be made upon re-quest of the Commissioner of Food and Drugs. All deposits for referrals to ad-visory committees in excess of actual expenses shall be refunded to the de-positor. 
(n) All requests for pharmacological 
or other scientific studies shall be ac-companied by an advance deposit of $5,000.00. Further advance deposits shall be made upon request of the Com-missioner of Food and Drugs when nec-essary to prevent arrears in such cost. Any deposits in excess of actual ex-penses will be refunded to the deposi-tor. If a request is denied the advance deposit will be refunded less such costs as are incurred for review of the re-quest. 
(o) The person who files a petition for 
judicial review of an order under sec-tion 721(d) of the act shall pay the costs of preparing a transcript of the record on which the order is based. 
(p) All deposits and fees required by 
the regulations in this section shall be paid by money order, bank draft or cer-tified check drawn to the order of the Food and Drug Administration, collect-
ible at par at Washington, DC All de-posits and fees shall be forwarded to the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (HFS–200), Food and Drug Administration, 5100 Paint Branch Pkwy., College Park, MD 20740, where-upon after making appropriate record thereof they will be transmitted to the Treasurer of the United States for de-posit in the special account ‘‘Salaries and Expenses, Certification, Inspec-tion, and Other Services, Food and Drug Administration.’’ 
(q) The Commissioner of Food and 
Drugs may waive or refund such fees in 
whole or in part when in his judgment such action will promote the public in-terest. 
(r) Any person who believes that pay-
ment of these fees will work a hardship on him may petition the Commissioner of Food and Drugs to waive or refund the fees. 
[42 FR 15636, Mar. 22, 1977, as amended at 54 
FR 24890, June 12, 1989; 61 FR 14478, Apr. 2, 1996; 66 FR 56035, Nov. 6, 2001] 
Subpart B—Packaging and 
Labeling 
§ 70.20 Packaging requirements for 
straight colors (other than hair dyes). 
Straight colors shall be packaged in 
containers which prevent changes in composition. Packages shall be sealed so that they cannot be opened without breaking the seal. An unavoidable change in moisture content caused by the ordinary and customary exposure that occurs in good storage, packing, and distribution practice is not consid-ered a change in composition. If the packaging material is a food additive it shall be authorized by an appropriate regulation in parts 170 through 189 of this chapter. 
§ 70.25 Labeling requirements for 
color additives (other than hair dyes). 
(a) General labeling requirements. All 
color additives shall be labeled with sufficient information to assure their safe use and to allow a determination of compliance with any limitations im-posed by this part and parts 71, 73, 74, 80, and 81 of this chapter. In addition to 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00347 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB338 21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–15 Edition) § 70.40 
all other information required by the 
act, labels for color additives, except those in a form suitable for coloring the human body, shall state: 
(1) The name of the straight color or 
the name of each ingredient com-prising the color additive, if it is a mixture. 
(2) A statement indicating general 
limitations for the use of the color ad-ditive, such as ‘‘for food use only’’; ‘‘for food, drug, and cosmetic use’’; ‘‘for use in drugs for external application only.’’ 
(3) Where regulations issued impose 
quantitative limitations for a general or specific use of a straight color, the amount of each such straight color in terms of weight per unit/volume or per-cent by weight. 
(4) An expiration date if stability 
data require it. 
(b) Special labeling for color additives 
with tolerances. Where tolerances are 
imposed for a general or specific use of a color additive, the label shall in addi-tion provide directions for use of the color additive which if followed will preclude the food, drug, or cosmetic to which it is added from containing an amount of the color additive in excess of the tolerance. 
(c) Special labeling for color additives 
with other limitations. If use of the color 
additive is subject to other limitations prescribed in this part, such limita-tions shall be stated on the label of the color additive by a plain and con-spicuous statement. Examples of such limitation statements are: ‘‘Do not use in products used in the area of the eye’’; ‘‘Do not use for coloring drugs for injection.’’ 
(d) Special labeling for color additives 
not exempt from certification. Color addi-
tives not exempt from the certification procedures shall in addition include in the labeling the lot number assigned by the Color Certification Branch, except that in the case of any mixture for household use which contains not more than 15 percent of pure color and which is in packages containing not more than 3 ounces there appears on the label, a code number which the manu-facturer has identified with the lot number by giving to the Food and Drug Administration written notice that such code number will be used in lieu of the lot number. Subpart C—Safety Evaluation 
§ 70.40 Safety factors to be considered. 
In accordance with section 
721(b)(5)(A)(iii) of the act, the following safety factor will be applied in deter-mining whether the proposed use of a color additive will be safe: Except where evidence is submitted which jus-tifies use of a different safety factor, a safety factor of 100 to 1 will be used in applying animal experimentation data to man; that is, a color additive for use by man will not be granted a tolerance that will exceed 1/100th of the max-imum no-effect level for the most sus-ceptible experimental animals tested. The various species of experimental animals used in the tests shall conform to good pharmacological practice. 
§ 70.42 Criteria for evaluating the safe-
ty of color additives. 
(a) In deciding whether a petition is 
complete and suitable for filing and in reaching a decision on any petition filed, the Commissioner will apply the 
‘‘safe-for-use’’ principle. This will re-quire the presentation of all needed scientific data in support of a proposed listing to assure that each listed color additive will be safe for its intended use or uses in or on food, drugs, or cos-metics. The Commissioner may list a color additive for use generally in or on food, in or on drugs, or in or on cos-metics when he finds from the data presented that such additive is suitable and may safely be employed for such general use; he may list an additive only for more limited use or uses for which it is proven suitable and may safely be employed; and he is author-ized to prescribe broadly the conditions under which the additive may be safely employed for such use or uses. This may allow the use of a particular dye, pigment, or other substance with cer-tain diluents, but not with others, or at a higher concentration with some than with others. 
(b) The safety for external color addi-
tives will normally be determined by tests for acute oral toxicity, primary irritation, sensitization, subacute der-mal toxicity on intact and abraded skin, and carcinogenicity by skin ap-plication. The Commissioner may waive any of such tests if data before 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00348 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB339 Food and Drug Administration, HHS § 70.50 
him otherwise establish that such test 
is not required to determine safety for the use proposed. 
(c) Upon written request describing 
the proposed use of a color additive and the proposed experiments to determine its safety, the Commissioner will ad-vise a person who wishes to establish the safety of a color additive whether he believes the experiments planned will yield data adequate for an evalua-tion of the safety of the additive. 
§ 70.45 Allocation of color additives. 
Whenever, in the consideration of a 
petition or a proposal to list a color ad-ditive or to alter an existing listing, the data before the Commissioner fail to show that it would be safe to list the color additive for all the uses proposed or at the levels proposed, the Commis-sioner will notify the petitioner and other interested persons by publication in the F
EDERAL REGISTER that it is nec-
essary to allocate the safe tolerance for the straight color in the color additive among the competing needs. This no-tice shall call for the presentation of data by all interested persons on which the allocation can be made in accord-ance with section 721(b)(8) of the act. The time for acting upon the petition shall be stayed until such data are pre-sented, whereupon the time limits shall begin to run anew. As promptly as possible after presentation of the data, the Commissioner will, by order, announce the allocation and the toler-ance limitations. 
§ 70.50 Application of the cancer 
clause of section 721 of the act. 
(a) Color additives that may be ingested. 
Whenever (1) the scientific data before the Commissioner (either the reports from the scientific literature or the re-sults of biological testing) suggest the possibility that the color additive in-cluding its components or impurities has induced cancer when ingested by man or animal; or (2) tests which are appropriate for the evaluation of the safety of additives in food suggest that the color additive, including its compo-nents or impurities, induces cancer in man or animal, the Commissioner shall determine whether, based on the judg-ment of appropriately qualified sci-entists, cancer has been induced and whether the color additive, including 
its components or impurities, was the causative substance. If it is his judg-
ment that the data do not establish these facts, the cancer clause is not ap-plicable; and if the data considered as a whole establish that the color additive will be safe under the conditions that can be specified in the applicable regu-lation, it may be listed for such use. But if in the judgment of the Commis-sioner, based on information from qualified scientists, cancer has been in-duced, no regulation may issue which permits its use. 
(b) Color additives that will not be in-
gested. Whenever the scientific data be-
fore the Commissioner suggest the pos-sibility that the color additive, includ-ing its components or impurities, has induced cancer in man or animals by routes other than ingestion, the Com-missioner shall determine whether, based on the judgment of appropriately qualified scientists, the test suggesting the possibility of carcinogenesis is ap-propriate for the evaluation of the color additive for a use which does not involve ingestion, cancer has been in-duced, and the color additive, including its components or impurities, was the causative substance. If it is his judg-ment that the data do not establish these facts, the cancer clause is not ap-plicable to preclude external drug and cosmetic uses, and if the data as a whole establish that the color additive will be safe under conditions that can be specified in the regulations, it may be listed for such use. But if, in the judgment of the Commissioner, based on information from qualified sci-entists, the test is an appropriate one for the consideration of safety for the proposed external use, and cancer has been induced by the color additive, in-cluding its components or impurities, no regulation may issue which permits its use in external drugs and cosmetics. 
(c) Color additives for use as an ingre-
dient of feed for animals that are raised for food production. Color additives that 
are an ingredient of the feed for ani-mals raised for food production and that have the potential to contaminate human food with residues whose con-sumption could present a risk of cancer 
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00349 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB340 21 CFR Ch. I (4–1–15 Edition) § 70.51 
to people must satisfy the require-
ments of subpart E of part 500 of this chapter. 
[42 FR 15636, Mar. 22, 1977, as amended at 43 
FR 22675, May 26, 1978; 52 FR 49586, Dec. 31, 1987] 
§ 70.51 Advisory committee on the ap-
plicability of the anticancer clause. 
All requests for and procedures gov-
erning any advisory committee on the anticancer clause shall be subject to the provisions of part 14 of this chap-ter, and particularly subpart H of that part. 
§ 70.55 Request for scientific studies. 
The Commissioner will consider re-
quests by any interested person who desires the Food and Drug Administra-tion to conduct scientific studies to support a petition for a regulation for a color additive. If favorably acted upon, such studies will be limited to pharmacological investigations, stud-ies of the chemical and physical struc-ture of the color additive, and methods of analysis of the pure color additive (including impurities) and its identi-fication and determination in foods, drugs, or cosmetics, as the case may be. All requests for such studies shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in §70.19. 
PART 71—COLOR ADDITIVE 
PETITIONS 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
Sec. 
71.1 Petitions. 71.2 Notice of filing of petition. 
71.4 Samples; additional information. 71.6 Extension of time for studying peti-
tions; substantive amendments; with-drawal of petitions without prejudice. 
71.15 Confidentiality of data and informa-
tion in color additive petitions. 
71.18 Petition for exemption from certifi-
cation. 
Subpart B—Administrative Action on 
Petitions 
71.20 Publication of regulation. 
71.22 Deception as a basis for refusing to 
issue regulations; deceptive use of a color additive for which a regulation has issued. 
71.25 Condition for certification. 71.26 Revocation of exemption from certifi-
cation. 
71.27 Listing and exemption from certifi-
cation on the Commissioner’s initiative. 
71.30 Procedure for filing objections to regu-
lations. 
71.37 Exemption of color additives for inves-
tigational use. 
A
UTHORITY : 21 U.S.C. 321, 342, 348, 351, 355, 
360, 360b–360f, 360h–360j, 361, 371, 379e, 381; 42 U.S.C. 216, 262. 
S
OURCE : 42 FR 15639, Mar. 22, 1977, unless 
otherwise noted. 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
§ 71.1 Petitions. 
(a) Any interested person may pro-
pose the listing of a color additive for use in or on any food, drug, or cosmetic or for coloring the human body. Such proposal shall be made in a petition in the form prescribed in paragraph (c) of this section. The petition shall be sub-mitted in triplicate (quadruplicate, if 
intended uses include uses in meat, meat food product, or poultry product). If any part of the material submitted is in a foreign language, it shall be ac-companied by an accurate and com-plete English translation. The peti-tioner shall state the post-office ad-dress in the United States to which published notices or orders issued or objections filed pursuant to section 721 of the act may be sent. 
(b) Pertinent information may be in-
corporated in, and will be considered as part of, a petition on the basis of spe-cific reference to such information sub-mitted to and retained in the files of the Food and Drug Administration. However, any reference to unpublished information furnished by a person other than the applicant will not be considered unless use of such informa-tion is authorized in a written state-ment signed by the person who sub-mitted the information. Any reference to published information offered in support of a color additive petition should be accompanied by reprints or photostatic copies of such references. 
(c) Petitions shall include the fol-
lowing data and be submitted in the following form: 
lllllllll (Date) 
Name of petitioner lllllllllllll
Post-office address lllllllllllll
VerDate Sep<11>2014 10:16 Apr 22, 2015 Jkt 235070 PO 00000 Frm 00350 Fmt 8010 Sfmt 8010 Q:\21\21V1.TXT 31lpowell on DSK54DXVN1OFR with $$_JOB