W o u n dH e a l i n gP r i m e r
Stephanie R. Goldberg, MDa, Robert F. Diegelmann, PhDb,*
Surgeons often care for patients with conditions of abnormal wound healing, which
include conditions of excessive wound healing, such as fibrosis, adhesions, andcontractures, as well as conditions of inadequate wound healing, such as chronic non-
healing ulcers, recurrent hernias, and wound dehiscences. Despite many recent
advances in the field, which have highlighted the importance of adjunct therapies inmaximizing the healing potential, such as optimization of nutrition, growth factor
therapy, advanced wound dressing materials, and bioengineered skin substitutes,
conditions of abnormal wound healing continue to cause significant cost, morbidity,and mortality. To understand how conditions of abnormal wound healing can be cor-
rected, it is important to first understand the basic principles of wound healing.
PHASES OF WOUND HEALING
Wound healing consists of a complex but very orderly array of overlapping phases in
which highly specialized cells interact with an extracellular matrix to lay down a new
framework for tissue growth and repair.1There are 4 distinct but overlapping phases
of wound healing, which include hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, and remod-
eling ( Fig. 1 ). These phases are influenced by the various cellular interactions and are
regulated by the local release of chemical signals such as cytokines, chemokines,
growth factors, and inhibitors.2,3
HEMOSTASIS PHASE
Immediately after tissue injury, hemostasis occurs to minimize hemorrhage. While the
blood vessels constrict, platelets are activated by binding to the exposed collagen in
the extracellular matrix. The platelets then release fibronectin, thrombospondin, sphin-
gosine 1 phosphate, and von Willebrand factor, which promote further platelet
aDepartment of Surgery, Virginia Commonwealth University Medical Center, West Hospital,
16th Floor, West Wing, 1200 East Broad Street, Richmond, VA 23298-0645, USA
bDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Virginia Commonwealth University
Medical Center, 1101 East Marshall Street, Sanger Hall, Room 2-007, Richmond, VA
23298-0614, USA* Corresponding author.E-mail address: rdiegelm@vcu.eduKEYWORDS
/C15Acute wound /C15Phases of healing /C15Healing mechanisms
/C15Guidelines for healing
Surg Clin N Am 90 (2010) 1133–1146
doi:10.1016/j.suc.2010.08.003 surgical.theclinics.com
0039-6109/10/$ – see front matter /C2112010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.activation and aggregation.4As these activation and other clotting factors are
released, a fibrin matrix is deposited in the wound, which functions as a provisional
matrix to stabilize the wound site. The aggregated platelets then become trapped in
the fibrin matrix, thus forming a stable clot within the provisional matrix (Fig. 2 ).5
Several important mediators that are released by platelets are responsible for the
initiation and progression of wounds through the subsequent phases of wound heal-ing. These mediators include platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and transforminggrowth factor b(TGF- b). TGF-b and PDGF recruit additional cells, such as neutrophils
and macrophages, to enter the wound. PDGF also recruits fibroblasts to the wound
Fig. 1. Phases of normal wound healing. Cellular and molecular events during normal
wound healing progress through 4 major integrated phases: hemostasis, inflammation,
proliferation, and remodeling. ( From Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF, Lindblad WJ, editors.
Wound healing: biochemical and clinical aspects. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1993; withpermission.)
Fig. 2. Hemostasis phase. At the time of injury, the fibrin clot forms the provisional wound
matrix and platelets release multiple growth factors that initiate the repair process. ( From
Greenfield, LJ, editor. Surgery: scientific principles and practice. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott,
1993; with permission.)Goldberg & Diegelmann 1134and activates the production of collagen and glycosaminoglycans by fibroblasts,
which are important for the repair of the extracellular matrix.2,3,6Excessive levels of
these growth factors have been indicated in conditions of abnormal wound healing;
TGF-b is also present in many fibrotic conditions such as pulmonary fibrosis and
cirrhosis.7,8
INFLAMMATORY PHASE
The next phase of wound healing is inflammation, which begins within the first 24
hours after an injury. The stage can last up to 2 weeks in patients whose wounds
are healing appropriately but can last longer in those patients with chronic nonhealing
wounds. From a clinical standpoint, this stage is characterized by rubor (redness),calor (heat), tumor (swelling), and dolor (pain), which results from the release of vaso-
active amines and histamine-rich granules from the mast cells. These mast cell medi-
ators cause surrounding vessels to become leaky and thus allow the efficientmovement of neutrophils from the vasculature to the site of injury. Because the vesselsbecome leaky, fluid also escapes into the area and thus causes the swelling (tumor)
and pressure-causing pain (dolor).
In addition to mast cells, neutrophils and macrophages play key roles in the inflam-
matory phase ( Fig. 3 ). Neutrophils serve as a first line of defense against infection by
phagocytosing bacteria, damaged extracellular components, and foreign materials.
As various chemical signals are released from the wound site, the endothelial cellsin the nearby vessels are activated and begin to express specialized cell adhesion
molecules (CAMs) called selectins. These CAMs function as molecular hooks to
grab circulating neutrophils to bind to the endothelial cell surface by a process calledpavementing. The adherent neutrophils begin to roll along the endothelial cell liningand then by a process called diapedesis, they squeeze through the cell junctions
that have been made leaky by the mast cell mediators.
9,10
Fig. 3. Inflammatory phase. Within a day after injury, the inflammatory phase is initiated by
neutrophils that attach to endothelial cells in the vessel walls surrounding the wound (margin-
ation), change shape and move through the cell junctions (diapedesis), and migrate to thewound site (chemotaxis). ( From Greenfield, LJ, editor. Surgery: scientific principles and
practice. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott, 1993; with permission.)Wound Healing Primer 1135The neutrophils are attracted to the site of injury by a process called chemotaxis and
are drawn there by soluble mediators, such as a breakdown product of a complement
called C5a, a tripeptide f-Met-Leu-Phe (N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine) that
is a waste product produced by bacteria that may be present in the wound, and the
potent chemokine interleukin (IL)-8.11–13To move through the extracellular matrix,
the neutrophils release matrix-degrading enzymes, such as elastase and matrix metal-
loproteinase (MMP)-8, a collagenase. During a normal acute wound healing response,
these enzymes are released in physiologic amounts and do not cause excessive tissuedamage. In contrast, in many nonhealing chronic wounds, there is an overabundance
of neutrophils, releasing massive amounts of these matrix-destroying enzymes that
cause excessive damage to the extracellular matrix as well as the destruction of crit-ical growth factors such as PDGF and TGF-b .
14–16These ulcers are locked into
a continuous inflammatory phase, resulting in extensive loss of tissue.17
On their arrival at the wound site, the neutrophils begin to aggressively phagocytize
any foreign materials and kill bacteria by the powerful battery of enzymes and reactiveoxygen species, which they can generate. The neutrophils actually initiate the first
stages of the proliferative phase by releasing IL-1 and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)- ato begin the activation of fibroblasts and epithelial cells.
During the inflammatory phase, activated wound macrophages also play a key role
in the regulation and progression of wound healing. Wound macrophages are derivedfrom fixed tissue monocytes that originate from circulating monocytes (see Fig. 3 ). The
wound macrophages are activated by chemokines, cytokines, growth factors, and
soluble fragments of extracellular matrix components produced by proteolytic degra-
dation of collagen and fibronectin.
18The wound macrophages function to remove any
residual bacteria, foreign bodies, and remaining necrotic tissue. The function of thesemacrophages is therefore similar to that of neutrophils, but macrophages better regu-
late proteolytic destruction of wound tissue by secreting protease inhibitors. In addi-
tion, macrophages ingest the bacteria-laden neutrophils and mediate progression ofthe wound from the inflammatory to the proliferative phase. Macrophages also secrete
a multitude of growth factors and cytokines, such as PDGF, TGF- b, TNF- a, fibroblast
growth factor (FGF), insulinlike growth factor 1, and IL-6, which then recruit fibroblasts
and endothelial cells to the wound site for matrix deposition and neovascularization.
PROLIFERATIVE PHASE
The proliferative phase is characterized by fibroblast proliferation and collagen depo-
sition to replace the provisional fibrin matrix and to provide a stable extracellular matrix
at the wound site. The new matrix consists of collagen, proteoglycans, and fibronec-tins. In addition, angiogenesis occurs such that new blood vessels replace the previ-
ously damaged capillaries and provide nourishment for the matrix. Granulation tissue
formation and the process of epithelization also occur.
Fibroblasts migrate into the wound in response to mediators released from the
platelets and macrophages and move through the extracellular matrix by binding
fibronectin, vitronectin, and fibrin via their RGD or arginine-glycine-aspartic acid
amino acid sequence recognized by their integrin receptors (Fig. 4 ). The fibroblasts
also secrete MMPs, which facilitate their movement through the matrix and help
with the removal of damaged matrix components. Once the fibroblasts have entered
the wound, they produce collagen, proteoglycans, and other components. Fibroblastactivity is predominately regulated by PDGF and TGF- b. PDGF, secreted by platelets
and macrophages, stimulates fibroblast proliferation, chemotaxis, and collagenaseexpression.Goldberg & Diegelmann 1136TGF-b has a central role in wound healing. There are 3 isoforms of TGF- b, which
include TGF- b1, TGF- b2, and TGF- b3. TGF- b1 has been found to be present in excess
amounts in conditions of fibrosis, such as pulmonary fibrosis and cirrhosis.7,8Although
little is known about TGF-b 2, TGF- b3 is associated with a reduction in fibrosis and
scarring.19Despite their opposite effects on fibrosis, TGF- b2 and TGF-b 3 bind the
same TGF- btype 2 seronine/threonine kinase receptor, which then joins together
with a TGF- breceptor (TBR) type 1 to activate the Smad cell signaling pathways.20
Thus, activation of signaling cascades by the various TGF- bisoforms may account
for the presence or lack of fibrosis within the wounds.
The most convincing studies that suggest a role for TGF- bin wound healing have
been done in fetal animal models. Fetal mouse incisional wounds are known to heal
without scarring and with a negligible amount of TGF- bpresent.21,22Lanning and
colleagues23report that midgestational fetal wounds in the rabbit can be stimulated
to contract in the presence of TGF-b 1 and TGF-b 3. In a study on the fetal mouse, rapid
midgestational wound closure was associated with an increase in TGF- b1 and TBR-2
expressions compared with surrounding normal skin.24
Endothelial cells are activated by TNF- aand basic FGF (bFGF) to initiate angiogen-
esis such that new blood vessels are initiated to promote blood flow to support thehigh metabolic activity in the newly deposited tissue. Angiogenesis is regulated by
a combination of local stimulatory factors, such as vascular endothelial cell growthfactor (VEGF), and antiangiogenic factors, such as angiostatin, endostatin, thrombo-
spondin, and pigment epithelium-derived growth factor. Local factors that stimulate
angiogenesis include low oxygen tension, low pH, and high lactate levels.
25
Oxygen-sensing proteins regulate the transcription of angiogenic and antiangiogenic
genes. Soluble mediators, such as bFGF, TGF- b, and VEGF, also stimulate endothelial
cells to produce blood vessels. Tissue oxygen levels directly regulate angiogenesis
Fig. 4. Proliferation phase. Fixed tissue monocytes become activated, move into the site of
injury, transform into activated wound macrophages that kill bacteria, release proteases
that remove denatured extracellular matrix, and secrete growth factors that stimulate fibro-blast, epidermal cells, and endothelial cells to proliferate and produce scar tissue. ( From
Greenfield, LJ, editor. Surgery: scientific principles and practice. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott,
1993; with permission.)Wound Healing Primer 1137through hypoxia inducible factor (HIF), which binds oxygen.26When there is
a decrease in oxygen levels surrounding capillary endothelial cells, HIF-1 levels
increase inside the cells and HIF-1 binds to specific DNA sequences to stimulate
VEGF transcription to promote angiogenesis.
As the wound continues to heal, the granulation tissue forms to provide the transi-
tional replacement for normal dermis and ultimately evolves into a scar. Granulation
tissue consists of a dense network of blood vessels and capillaries, elevated cellular
density of fibroblasts and macrophages, and randomly organized collagen fibers.The metabolic rate is also higher for this tissue compared with normal dermis, which
reflects the activity required for cellular migration, division, and protein synthesis and
thus, the importance of adequate nutrition and oxygen to properly heal the wound.
REMODELING PHASE
The last phase of wound healing is the remodeling phase in which granulation tissuematures into a scar ( Fig. 5 ). Small capillaries aggregate into larger blood vessels and
there is an overall decrease in the water content of the wound. Similarly, cell density
and overall metabolic activity of the wound decrease. Perhaps the most dramatic
change occurs in the overall type, amount, and organization of collagen fibers, result-ing in increased tensile strength of the wound. Initially, there is increased deposition of
type III collagen, also referred to as reticular collagen, that is gradually replaced by
type I collagen, the dominant fibrillar collagen in skin.
27Collagen fibers are cross-
linked by the enzyme lysyl oxidase, which is secreted by fibroblasts in the extracellularmatrix. As the wound continues to remodel, changes in collagen organization
increases the tensile strength to a maximum of about 80% of normal tissue.
Extracellular zinc-dependent endopeptidases called MMPs have recently emerged
as an exciting area in wound healing, which may have promising therapeutic potential.MMPs control the degradation of extracellular matrix components to facilitate epithe-
lial cell migration into the wound, angiogenesis, and overall tissue remodeling. MMPs
Fig. 5. Remodeling phase. The initial disorganized scar tissue is slowly replaced by a matrix
that more closely resembles the organized extracellular matrix of normal skin. ( From
Greenfield, LJ, editor. Surgery: scientific principles and practice. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott,
1993; with permission.)Goldberg & Diegelmann 1138are secreted by epidermal cells and modulate tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases
(TIMPs) as well as degrade other growth factors.28–31Low levels of MMPs are found
in normal tissue but increased levels of MMP-1 and MMP-2 are present in keloids,
a condition of excess collagen deposition after cutaneous injury.32Similarly, a disrup-
tion in the balance between MMPs and their inhibitors has been reported in diabetic
and venous stasis ulcers.33,34In addition, MMPs can be found in increased levels in
chronic wounds.35–38Yager and colleagues39report that there are more than 10-
fold higher levels of MMP-2 and 25-fold higher levels of MMP-9 in fluid from pressureulcers compared with surgical wounds.
MMP expression is regulated by TGF-b . In normal fibroblasts and keratinocytes,
abrogation of TGF-b 1 is associated with decreased levels of MMPs and increased
angiogenesis.
40–42Tissue samples from keloids have demonstrated increased levels
of MMP-2 and MMP-9 compared with healthy skin. Abrogation of TGF- b1 in keloid-
derived fibroblasts results in a downregulation of MMP-9, further demonstrating theimportant relationship between TGF-b and MMPs.
43
Treatment strategies targeted at the control of excess MMPs in chronic wounds
have included the use of protease inhibitors to decrease MMP levels in the woundsand surrounding tissue. Oral and topical doxycycline, a potent MMP inhibitor, hasbeen shown to decrease inflammation and matrix destruction.
44Further studies are
necessary to determine the clinical efficacy of doxycycline and other MMP inhibitorson chronic wounds.
45TGF-b also minimizes matrix degradation by downregulating
protease secretion and stimulating synthesis of TIMP.
As the extracellular matrix continues to remodel, collagen synthesis and degrada-
tion are ongoing as the matrix strives to achieve the original highly organized structurethat was present before the wound injury. The scar tissue is always weaker than thenormal surrounding matrix and can only achieve about 80% of the tensile strength
that was present initially. If degradation maintains an equilibrium, then a fine line
scar forms. If matrix synthesis is greater than degradation, then a hypertrophic scarmay form. Conversely, if matrix degradation is greater than synthesis or if synthesis
is inhibited by pharmacologic agents, such as steroids or cancer chemotherapeutic
agents, or perhaps by malnutrition, the scar becomes too weak and wound dehis-cence can occur.
MECHANISMS OF WOUND HEALING
Dermal wounds heal by 3 main mechanisms: connective tissue deposition, contrac-tion, and epithelialization. Depending on the type of wound, these 3 distinct processescome into play to varying degrees. For example, an acute linear wound, such as
a surgical incision that is closed by the surgeon using sutures, staples, tapes, or
perhaps dermal glue, heals by what is termed primary intention. The major mechanismneeded to heal wounds by primary intention is the process of connective tissue depo-sition. No contraction is needed because the surgeon has closed the incision by
mechanical means. There is only minimal epithelization, which occurs along the
wound line on the surface.
Open wounds, in which there is a loss of tissue, such as seen when a fingertip is
injured, heal by a process termed secondary intention. These open wounds healmainly by tissue contraction in which a centripetal force is generated by an interactionbetween fibroblasts and the matrix to advance the edges toward the center of the
wound. There maybe some matrix deposition, and what is not achieved by those 2
processes is then covered by epithelization. Some chronic wounds, such as pressureWound Healing Primer 1139ulcers, also heal by secondary intention once the chronic inflammation is controlled
and granulation tissue is allowed to form.
If an open wound is suspected to be contaminated with foreign debris or bacteria,
then the wound must be kept open and treated with gentle irrigation until the foreignmaterials and infectious agents are removed. As a general guide, the total bacterialburden should be lower than 10
5organisms/g of tissue, as determined by biopsy
and culturing.46Surface swabs are generally thought to be inaccurate. The wound
should be gently irrigated with saline or lactated Ringer, and pressures greater than15 psi should be avoided because they can force materials deeper into the wound
bed and also damage newly forming granulation tissue.
47Once these goals are
achieved and if the wound can be closed, then the wound heals by a mechanism
termed delayed primary intention.
Epithelialization is the process whereby epithelial cells surrounding the wound
margin or in residual skin appendages, such as rete pegs, hair follicles, and sebaceousglands, migrate into the wound because of the loss of contact inhibition of cuboidalbasal keratinocytes.
48This type of healing is termed partial thickness healing and is
observed in minor abrasions and skin graft donor sites when an approximately0.015 in thick piece of skin is removed for coverage elsewhere on the patient. Afteran extensive multistep process, these basal epithelial cells proliferate near the wound
margin, producing a monolayer that moves over the wound surface.
DEFINITION OF WOUNDS
For many years, lack of uniform definitions in the generalized description of wounds
served as an impediment in setting forth guidelines for the treatment of wounds. In1994, the Wound Healing Society sought to standardize the definitions of wounds
and the evaluation of wound healing. A wound is defined as a disruption in the normal
anatomic structure and function. Wounds can be classified as acute or chronic basedon whether or not they progress through an orderly and timely healing process so as torestore anatomic continuity and function. Wounds are further differentiated based
according to whether they are ideally healed, minimally healed, or acceptably healed
based on various degrees of restoration of normal anatomy, function, structure, andappearance.
49The problems associated with diabetic venous stasis and other
complex and difficult wounds are addressed elsewhere in this issue.
GUIDELINES FOR THE HEALING OF ACUTE WOUNDS
The Wound Healing Society identified 11 categories of impediment to wound healingto formulate guidelines to promote the healing of acute wounds.
50These include local
impediments such as wound perfusion, tissue viability, hematoma and/or seroma,
infection, and mechanical factors as well as systemic impediments that include immu-
nologic factors, oncologic factors, miscellaneous systemic conditions, thermalinjuries, external agents, and excessive scarring. The following summarizes themain clinical recommendations of the published guidelines.
Adequate blood supply must exist to provide oxygenation and nourishment to heal-
ing wounds, which can be maximized for elective surgical wounds by ruling out clin-ically significant arterial disease by the presence of palpable pulses or ankle-brachial
indexes greater than 0.9, calculated as the ratio of the resting systolic pressure in the
arteries of the ankle to that of the brachial artery. The lack of sufficient blood supplymay lead to tissue ischemia and an increased risk of infection. Similarly, hypotension
in the setting of acute wounds should be minimized. Patients should be advised to
avoid smoking, blood glucose levels should be controlled, and hypothermia shouldGoldberg & Diegelmann 1140be avoided, so to further maximize blood flow to the wounds.51The use of supple-
mental hyperbaric oxygen has long been thought to augment wound healing by
increasing tissue oxygen levels; however, it has varied usage in the clinical setting.
The Wound Healing Society guidelines suggest that more clinical data are necessary
to support its use in acute wounds; however, a recent study demonstrated improvedwound tissue oxygen tension in obese patients with supplemental oxygen
administration.
52
Wounds must be debrided of devitalized and infected tissue by one of the following
methods, including preferably sharp surgical debridement and also enzymatic,
mechanical, biologic or autolytic therapies. The formation of fluid collections, including
hematomas, should be minimized by meticulous control of intraoperative hemostasisand correction of preoperative coagulopathies. Heparin prophylaxis against venousthromboembolism is indicated but may increase bleeding complications. There is
no evidence according to the Wound Healing Society guidelines that antiplatelet
agents increase the risk of hematomas. Similarly, the formation of seromas in patientswith large skin flaps (mastectomy or component separation) should be minimized by
closure of dead space and placement of surgical drains. The accumulation of fluid and
blood may lead to local ischemia, necrosis, and an infected wound. Thus, postoper-ative fluid collections should be drained either surgically or percutaneously when
possible.
Wounds should not be primarily closed if there is more than 10
5bacteria/g of tissue
or any amount of b-hemolytic streptococci because of an increased risk of wound
infection.46A single dose of preoperative antibiotics is an indication in clean-contam-
inated or contaminated cases. Preoperative antibiotics are only recommended in
clean cases if prosthetic materials, such as mesh, are implanted. Prophylactic antibi-otics are not indicated in superficial nonbite injuries but should be used in bite injuries
from animals and humans because they result in wound contamination. The risk of
surgical site infections can further be decreased with normothermia and avoidanceof hypoxia. Preoperative shaving of hair or scrubbing of the skin is not necessary to
decrease the risk of infection because the bacterial load of normal skin flora is in
the range of 10
3organisms/g of tissue.
Wounds heal faster when closed primarily than those left to heal by secondary inten-
tion. Wounds should, however, be closed in a tension-free manner. Laparotomy inci-sions should be closed in a continuous manner using a suture length to wound lengthratio of 4:1. The suture material used should be present until adequate tensile strengthis obtained. The specific type of suture material used is irrelevant; however, perma-
nent sutures are associated with an increased risk of fistulization. In patients with
open abdomens, distractive forces that minimize subsequent fascial closure may beminimized through the use of negative pressure therapy. Retention sutures, long
thought to be useful in preventing fascial dehiscence, do not prevent breakdown of
the abdominal wall incisions.
Systemic immune defenses in patients with immune deficiencies should be maxi-
mized with the use of prophylaxis antibiotics, especially in patients with conditionssuch as AIDS. When possible, patients on immunosuppressants or steroid drugsshould be weaned to the lowest possible dose preoperatively. Blood transfusions
should be used with caution because they may result in transient immunosuppres-
sion.
53Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating growth factor may be used to
correct leukopenia preoperatively so as to further maximize wound healing, butdefinitive studies have not been done to date.
54In patients with cancer, operation
performed through nonradiated tissue planes is associated with improved outcomesin wound healing. In addition, good nutrition is essential for optimal wound healingWound Healing Primer 1141and can be augmented using preferably enteral means. Good nutrition is especially
important in elderly patients and in those with cancer. Nutrition has traditionallybeen assessed by the measurement of prealbumin; however, this marker has
proved to be unreliable in conditions of inflammation, acute renal failure, and corti-
costeroid use,
55There are also insufficient data to support exogenous use of vita-
mins unless there is clear documentation of specific nutrient deficiencies such as
those of vitamin C.
Burn injuries can be characterized as complex wounds consisting of shallow-partial
thickness wounds, deep wounds, donor-site wounds resulting from skin graft harvest,
or interstitial wounds from skin grafts. Each type of wound requires a different type of
treatment. Partial-thickness wounds typically epithelialize within 21 days, whereasdeeper wounds may require debridement of necrotic tissue with subsequent skingrafting for tissue coverage. Early debridement of deep burns has been advocated
to minimize infection risk from necrotic tissue and promote normal healing, which
has been associated with improved survivals. Permanent skin substitutes or tempo-rary biologic or biosynthetic dressings may be used as an alternative to skin grafting
should the excited burn total body surface area be too large to allow for donor grating.
Deep wounds that cannot undergo early debridement may benefit from topical anti-bacterial agents; however, these agents have not been shown to be beneficial on
shallow wounds, donor sites, or meshed skin grafts. There is no role for systemically
administered antibiotics in the absence of systemic infection. The role of various vita-mins and cofactors to augment wound healing is controversial. Zinc therapy may
improve wound healing in zinc-deficient patients, yet routine use of zinc is not indi-
cated. There are insufficient data to support the definitive use of vitamin C, vitaminE, and arginine. Pressure garments or compression dressings may be used todecrease fibrosis and scarring in burn injuries requiring more than 21 days to heal.
Proliferative scars may benefit from silicone sheeting to decrease fibroblast activity
and downregulate TGF- b. Direct injection of corticosteroids, including triamcinolone
acetonide (Kenalog), may also improve proliferative scars. Postoperative radiation
for benign conditions must be used with extreme caution; however, laser therapy
may be useful.
Improved healing has not been seen in children or elderly with scald burns as well as
in those with either inhalation injury or burns to the face and hands.
NORMAL AND PATHOLOGIC RESPONSES TO WOUND HEALING
Acute wounds progress through the phases in an orderly fashion for normal healing tooccur. Chronic wounds begin the healing process in a similar fashion; however, theyhave prolonged inflammatory phase in which there is significant destruction of the
matrix elements caused by the release of proteolytic enzymes from the neutro-
phils.
14–17Once the excessive inflammation is controlled by aggressive wound care,
then the proliferative and remodeling phases begin; however, the resulting scar isoften excessive and fibrotic.
56These chronic nonhealing ulcers are examples of
severely deficient healing and are addressed in detail elsewhere in this issue. Despiteextensive research into the mechanisms underlying wound healing, patients continueto be plagued by such pathologic conditions of abnormal wound healing in other
tissues and organs, including recurrent and incisional hernias, anastomotic leaks,
and wound dehiscence.
In conditions of fibrosis, the equilibrium between scar deposition and remodeling is
such that an excessive amount of collagen deposition and organization occurs. Thiscondition leads to a loss of both structure and function. Fibrosis, strictures, adhesions,Goldberg & Diegelmann 1142keloids, hypertrophic scars, and contractures are examples of excessive pathologic
healing.
Clinical differences between chronic and acute healing wounds are thought to be, in
part, explained by alterations in the local biochemical environment. Acute wounds areassociated with a greater mitogenic activity than chronic wounds.
57–59Chronic
wounds are associated with a higher level of proinflammatory cytokines than acute
wounds. As chronic wounds begin to heal, they progress to a less proinflammatory
state. Chronic wounds have elevated levels of MMPs compared with acutewounds.
16,39,56,60Elevated protease activities in some chronic wounds may directly
contribute to poor healing by degrading proteins necessary for normal wound healing,such as extracellular matrix proteins, growth factors, and protease inhibitors. Steedand colleagues
61reported that extensive debridement of diabetic ulcers resulted in
improved healing in patients treated with placebo or with recombinant human
PDGF. Frequent debridement may therefore allow a chronic wound to heal in a similar
fashion to an acute wound. In addition to the local wound environment, there are datato suggest that cells of chronic wounds may have an altered capacity by which to
respond to various cytokines and growth factors and are in a senescent state.
62
SUMMARY
The healing of surgical, acute, and chronic wounds requires the complex interaction of
a multitude of cells, growth factors, and other proteins to allow the return of structureand function. Wound healing research only continues to evolve. With the creation of
the Wound Healing Society guidelines as well as the significant contributions from
researchers studying wound healing, the ability to modulate nonhealing wounds andfacilitate wound closure continues to improve (http://www.woundheal.org ).
REFERENCES
1. Diegelmann RF, Evans MC. Wound healing: an overview of acute, fibrotic and de-
layed healing. Front Biosci 2004;9:283–9.
2. Bennett NT, Schultz GS. Growth factors and wound healing: part II. Role in normal
and chronic wound healing. Am J Surg 1993;166(1):74–81.
3. Bennett NT, Schultz GS. Growth factors and wound healing: biochemical proper-
ties of growth factors and their receptors. Am J Surg 1993;165(6):728–37.
4. Cho J, Mosher DF. Role of fibronectin assembly in platelet thrombus formation.
J Thromb Haemost 2006;4(7):1461–9.
5. Gailit J, Clark RA. Wound repair in the context of extracellular matrix. Curr Opin
Cell Biol 1994;6(5):717–25.
6. Rumalla VK, Borah GL. Cytokines, growth factors, and plastic surgery. Plast Re-
constr Surg 2001;108(3):719–33.
7. Broekelmann TJ, Limper AH, Colby TV, et al. Transforming growth factor beta 1 is
present at sites of extracellular matrix gene expression in human pulmonaryfibrosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991;88(15):6642–6.
8. Gressner AM, Weiskirchen R, Breitkopf K, et al. Roles of TGF-beta in hepatic
fibrosis. Front Biosci 2002;7:d793–807.
9. Frenette PS, Wagner DD. Adhesion molecules—part 1. N Engl J Med 1996;
334(23):1526–9.
10. Frenette PS, Wagner DD. Adhesion molecules—part II: blood vessels and blood
cells. N Engl J Med 1996;335(1):43–5.
11. Guo RF, Ward PA. Role of C5a in inflammatory responses. Annu Rev Immunol
2005;23:821–52.Wound Healing Primer 114312. Tschaikowsky K, Sittl R, Braun GG, et al. Increased fMet-Leu-Phe receptor
expression and altered superoxide production of neutrophil granulocytes in
septic and posttraumatic patients. Clin Investig 1993;72(1):18–25.
13. Roupe KM, Nybo M, Sjobring U, et al. Injury is a major inducer of epidermal
innate immune responses during wound healing. J Invest Dermatol 2010;130(4):1167–77.
14. Nwomeh BC, Liang HX, Cohen IK, et al. MMP-8 is the predominant collagenase in
healing wounds and nonhealing ulcers. J Surg Res 1999;81(2):189–95.
15. Nwomeh BC, Liang HX, Diegelmann RF, et al. Dynamics of the matrix metallopro-
teinases MMP-1 and MMP-8 in acute open human dermal wounds. Wound RepairRegen 1998;6(2):127–34.
16. Yager DR, Chen SM, Ward S, et al. The ability of chronic wound fluids to degrade
peptide growth factors is associated with increased levels of elastase activity and
diminished levels of proteinase inhibitors. Wound Repair Regen 1997;5:23–32.
17. Diegelmann RF. Excessive neutrophils characterize chronic pressure ulcers.
Wound Repair Regen 2003;11(6):490–5.
18. Diegelmann RF, Cohen IK, Kaplan AM. The role of macrophages in wound repair:
a review. Plast Reconstr Surg 1981;68(1):107–13.
19. Shah M, Foreman DM, Ferguson MW. Neutralisation of TGF-beta 1 and TGF-beta
2 or exogenous addition of TGF-beta 3 to cutaneous rat wounds reduces scar-
ring. J Cell Sci 1995;108(Pt 3):985–1002.
20. ten Dijke P, Hill CS. New insights into TGF-beta-Smad signaling. Trends Biochem
Sci 2004;29(5):265–73.
21. Stelnicki EJ, Bullard KM, Harrison MR, et al. A new in vivo model for the study of
fetal wound healing. Ann Plast Surg 1997;39(4):374–80.
22. Whitby DJ, Ferguson MW. Immunohistochemical localization of growth factors in
fetal wound healing. Dev Biol 1991;147(1):207–15.
23. Lanning DA, Nwomeh BC, Montante SJ, et al. TGF-beta1 alters the healing of
cutaneous fetal excisional wounds. J Pediatr Surg 1999;34(5):695–700.
24. Goldberg SR, McKinstry RP, Sykes V, et al. Rapid closure of midgestational exci-
sional wounds in a fetal mouse model is associated with altered transforminggrowth factor-beta isoform and receptor expression. J Pediatr Surg 2007;42(6):
966–71 [discussion: 971–3].
25. Bhushan M, Young HS, Brenchley PE, et al. Recent advances in cutaneous angio-
genesis. Br J Dermatol 2002;147(3):418–25.
26. Semenza GL. HIF-1 and tumor progression: pathophysiology and therapeutics.
Trends Mol Med 2002;8(4 Suppl):S62–7.
27. Clore JN, Cohen IK, Diegelmann RF. Quantitation of collagen types I and III
during wound healing in rat skin. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1979;161(3):337–40.
28. Chen WY, Rogers AA, Lydon MJ. Characterization of biologic properties of wound
fluid collected during early stages of wound healing. J Invest Dermatol 1992;
99(5):559–64.
29. Vaalamo M, Leivo T, Saarialho-Kere U. Differential expression of tissue inhibitors
of metalloproteinases (TIMP-1, -2, -3, and -4) in normal and aberrant wound heal-ing. Hum Pathol 1999;30(7):795–802.
30. Trengove NJ, Stacey MC, MacAuley S, et al. Analysis of the acute and chronic
wound environments: the role of proteases and their inhibitors. Wound Repair Re-gen 1999;7(6):442–52.
31. Singer AJ, Clark RA. Cutaneous wound healing. N Engl J Med 1999;341(10):
738–46.Goldberg & Diegelmann 114432. Thielitz A, Vetter RW, Schultze B, et al. Inhibitors of dipeptidyl peptidase IV-like
activity mediate antifibrotic effects in normal and keloid-derived skin fibroblasts.
J Invest Dermatol 2008;128(4):855–66.
33. Cowin AJ, Hatzirodos N, Holding CA, et al. Effect of healing on the expression of
transforming growth factor beta(s) and their receptors in chronic venous legulcers. J Invest Dermatol 2001;117(5):1282–9.
34. Galkowska H, Wojewodzka U, Olszewski WL. Chemokines, cytokines, and growth
factors in keratinocytes and dermal endothelial cells in the margin of chronic dia-betic foot ulcers. Wound Repair Regen 2006;14(5):558–65.
35. Wysocki AB. Fibronectin in acute and chronic wounds. J ET Nurs 1992;19(5):
166–70.
36. Wysocki AB, Staiano-Coico L, Grinnell F. Wound fluid from chronic leg ulcers
contains elevated levels of metalloproteinases MMP-2 and MMP-9. J Invest Der-
matol 1993;101(1):64–8.
37. Seah CC, Phillips TJ, Howard CE, et al. Chronic wound fluid suppresses prolifer-
ation of dermal fibroblasts through a Ras-mediated signaling pathway. J InvestDermatol 2005;124(2):466–74.
38. Wysocki AB, Grinnell F. Fibronectin profiles in normal and chronic wound fluid.
Lab Invest 1990;63(6):825–31.
39. Yager DR, Zhang LY, Liang HX, et al. Wound fluids from human pressure ulcers
contain elevated matrix metalloproteinase levels and activity compared to
surgical wound fluids. J Invest Dermatol 1996;107(5):743–8.
40. Philipp K, Riedel F, Germann G, et al. TGF-beta antisense oligonucleotides
reduce mRNA expression of matrix metalloproteinases in cultured wound-heal-ing-related cells. Int J Mol Med 2005;15(2):299–303.
41. Philipp K, Riedel F, Sauerbier M, et al. Targeting TGF-beta in human keratinocytes
and its potential role in wound healing. Int J Mol Med 2004;14(4):589–93.
42. Riedel K, Riedel F, Goessler UR, et al. TGF-beta antisense therapy increases angio-
genic potential in human keratinocytes in vitro. Arch Med Res 2007;38(1):45–51.
43. Sadick H, Herberger A, Riedel K, et al. TGF-beta1 antisense therapy modulates
expression of matrix metalloproteinases in keloid-derived fibroblasts. Int J MolMed 2008;22(1):55–60.
44. Golub LM, McNamara TF, Ryan ME, et al. Adjunctive treatment with subantimicro-
bial doses of doxycycline: effects on gingival fluid collagenase activity andattachment loss in adult periodontitis. J Clin Periodontol 2001;28(2):146–56.
45. Stechmiller J, Cowan L, Schultz G. The role of doxycycline as a matrix metallopro-
teinase inhibitor for the treatment of chronic wounds. Biol Res Nurs 2010;11(4):336–44.
46. Robson MC, Mannari RJ, Smith PD, et al. Maintenance of wound bacterial
balance. Am J Surg 1999;178(5):399–402.
47. Rodeheaver GT. Pressure ulcer debridement and cleansing: a review of current
literature. Ostomy Wound Manage 1999;45(1A Suppl):80S–5S [quiz: 86S–7S].
48. O’Toole EA. Extracellular matrix and keratinocyte migration. Clin Exp Dermatol
2001;26(6):525–30.
49. Lazarus GS, Cooper DM, Knighton DR, et al. Definitions and guidelines for
assessment of wounds and evaluation of healing. Wound Repair Regen 1994;2(3):165–70.
50. Franz MG, Robson MC, Steed DL, et al. Guidelines to aid healing of acute
wounds by decreasing impediments of healing. Wound Repair Regen 2008;
16(6):723–48.Wound Healing Primer 114551. Ueno C, Hunt TK, Hopf HW. Using physiology to improve surgical wound
outcomes. Plast Reconstr Surg 2006;117(7 Suppl):59S–71S.
52. Kabon B, Rozum R, Marschalek C, et al. Supplemental postoperative oxygen and
tissue oxygen tension in morbidly obese patients. Obes Surg 2010;20(7):885–94.
53. O’Mara MS, Hayetian F, Slater H, et al. Results of a protocol of transfusion
threshold and surgical technique on transfusion requirements in burn patients.
Burns 2005;31(5):558–61.
54. De Ugarte DA, Roberts RL, Lerdluedeeporn P, et al. Treatment of chronic wounds
by local delivery of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor in patients
with neutrophil dysfunction. Pediatr Surg Int 2002;18(5–6):517–20.
55. Dennis RA, Johnson LE, Roberson PK, et al. Changes in prealbumin, nutrient
intake, and systemic inflammation in elderly recuperative care patients. J Am
Geriatr Soc 2008;56(7):1270–5.
56. Mast BA, Schultz GS. Interactions of cytokines, growth factors, and proteases in
acute and chronic wounds. Wound Repair Regen 1996;4(4):411–20.
57. Bucalo B, Eaglstein WH, Falanga V. Inhibition of cell proliferation by chronic
wound fluid. Wound Repair Regen 1993;1(3):181–6.
58. Katz MH, Alvarez AF, Kirsner RS, et al. Human wound fluid from acute wounds
stimulates fibroblast and endothelial cell growth. J Am Acad Dermatol 1991;
25(6 Pt 1):1054–8.
59. Harris IR, Yee KC, Walters CE, et al. Cytokine and protease levels in healing and
non-healing chronic venous leg ulcers. Exp Dermatol 1995;4(6):342–9.
60. Yager DR, Nwomeh BC. The proteolytic environment of chronic wounds. Wound
Repair Regen 1999;7(6):433–41.
61. Steed DL, Donohoe D, Webster MW, et al. Effect of extensive debridement and
treatment on the healing of diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetic Ulcer Study Group.J Am Coll Surg 1996;183(1):61–4.
62. Harding KG, Moore K, Phillips TJ. Wound chronicity and fibroblast senescence—
implications for treatment. Int Wound J 2005;2(4):364–8.Goldberg & Diegelmann 1146