1
POZNAN UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
EUROPEAN CREDIT TRANSFER AND ACCUMULATION SYSTEM (ECTS)
COURSE DESCRIPTION CARD - SYLLABUS
Course name
Management of industrial sewage [S1TOZ1>GŚP]
Course
Field of study
Circular System TechnologiesYear/Semester
4/7
Area of study (specialization)
–Profile of study
general academic
Level of study
first-cycleCourse offered in
polish
Form of study
full-timeRequirements
compulsory
Number of hours
Lecture
15Laboratory classes
0Other (e.g. online)
0
Tutorials
0Projects/seminars
0
Number of credit points
1,00
Coordinators
dr hab. Małgorzata Osińska 
malgorzata.osinska@put.poznan.plLecturers
Prerequisites
Knows the basic methods, techniques, tools and materials used in solving simple engineering tasks. He 
knows the rules for the protection of the environment associated with chemical production. Has knowledge 
of raw materials, products and processes used in the chemical industry.
Course objective
Gaining knowledge of the treatment of industrial wastewater with particular reference to recycling and 
recovery of materials. Getting familiar with the technology used to liquidation or disposal of pollutants 
contained in the wastewater. Knowledge of methods of waste disposal and emissions produced during 
wastewater treatment processes.
Course-related learning outcomes
Knowledge: 
has basic knowledge of the processes of neutralization and recovery of industrial and municipal waste 
[k_w07] 
has knowledge of the negative impact of manufacturing and processing technologies on the natural 
environment [k_w08] 2has knowledge of the physical and chemical basis of unit operations of closed-cycle technology [k-w22] 
Skills: 
has the ability to self-educate, is able to use source information in polish and a foreign language in 
accordance with the principles of ethics, reads with understanding, conducts analyzes, syntheses, 
summaries, critical assessments and correct conclusions [k_u04] 
can assess the usefulness and select tools and methods to solve problems in the field of closed-cycle 
technology [k_u12] 
Social competences: 
supports the idea of a harmonious, global civilization-economic development, promoting the principles 
of closed-cycle technology, sustainable development and rational management of natural environment 
resources on a local and global scale [k_k09] 
is aware of the negative impact of human activity on the state of the environment and actively prevents 
its degradation [k_k10] 
understands the need to convey to society - incl. through the mass media - full information about the 
benefits and challenges related to the implementation of the closed-cycle technology concept [k_k11] 
Methods for verifying learning outcomes and assessment criteria
Learning outcomes presented above are verified as follows:
Learning outcomes presented above are verified as follows: 
The knowledge acquired during the lecture is verified by a written final test in the subject consisting of 
3-5 questions. Passing threshold: 51% of the maximum number of points. 
In the case of on-line classes, the final test of knowledge will take the form of a test consisting of 10 - 20 
test questions and/or a few open questions. Passing threshold: 51% of the maximum number of points.
Programme content
Methods of neutralization and utilization of pollutants at source and methods of reducing the amount of 
generated sewage. 
Factors influencing the effectiveness of sewage neutralization processes. 
Wastewater neutralization methods (coagulation and flocculation, adsorption, ion exchange, oxidation 
and reduction, flotation). 
Technologies for the neutralization of selected types of industrial wastewater: mine, glassworks, pickling 
processes, textile industry, tanneries, food industry (dairies, slaughterhouses and meat processing 
plants) and others.
Teaching methods
Lecture, explanation
Bibliography
Basic 
1. A. Anielak, Chemiczne i fizykochemiczne oczyszczanie ścieków, Wyd. Naukowe PWN, Warszawa 2002. 
2. B. Bartkiewicz, Oczyszczanie ścieków przemysłowych, Wyd. Naukowe PWN, Warszawa 2007. 
3. J. Łomotowski, A. Szpindor, Nowoczesne systemy oczyszczania ścieków, Arkady, Warszawa 2008. 
Additional 
1. L.K Wang, N.K. Shammas, Y.-T. Hung (eds) Advances in Hazardous Industrial Waste Treatment CRC 
Press, Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton Fl. USA 2009. 
2. J. Coca-Prados, G. Gutiérrez-Cervelló (eds), Water Purification and Management, Springer, 2011. 
3. N.P.Cheremisinoff, Handbook of Water and Wastewater Treatment Technologies, Butterworth- 
Heinemann, U.S.A. 2002.
Breakdown of average student's workload3Hours ECTS
Total workload 25 1,00
Classes requiring direct contact with the teacher 16 0,50
Student's own work (literature studies, preparation for laboratory classes/
tutorials, preparation for tests/exam, project preparation)9 0,50