MethyleneBlue & SSRI’s: A Risky 
Life-Threatening Drug Interaction 
Hurley AW -Capital High School, Olympia WA
Hurley WT -Washington Poison Center
& Harborview Medical Center, Seattle WA
The Washington Poison Center recently 
identified a potentially life -threatening drug 
interaction between antidepressants 
(SSRI’s) & Methylene Blue. Reports of 
serotonin syndrome with Methylene Blue 
began to appear in the medical literature in 
2006. The interaction does not appear in 
drug interaction screening programs .
Methylene Blue, like many drugs , is used 
in time-sensitive environments like the 
Operating Room, Critical Care Unit, and Emergency Department without involvement of a Pharmacist and without screening for potential drug interactions. 
We surveyed hospitals in Washington with Cardiothoracic Surgery programs to:
Examine knowledge about this drug 
interaction, search for screening methods 
to prevent the interaction, & increase 
knowledge about the interaction 
None of the 16 hospitals we contacted were 
aware of the interaction between Methylene
Blue and serotonergic agents. None used 
screening methods to identify the use of 
serotonergic agents prior to administration 
of Methylene Blue. Methylene Blue is used as a dying agent to 
localize parathyroid tissue & identify the ureter , 
and as an antidote for methemoglobinemia . 
It has recently been used to decrease 
hypotension with cardiac surgery, sepsis, burns, 
overdose, & hepatic failure due to blockade of 
Nitric Oxide production. 
Addition / increased dose of serotonergic agent with:
Neuromuscular dysfunction - Myoclonus , tremors, chills, 
rigidity, hyper -reflexia, ataxia, akathisia
Mental status changes -Agitation, hypomania, anxiety , 
confusion, obtundation, coma
Autonomic dysfunction -Hyperthermia, tachycardia, 
diaphoresis, flushing, mydriasis
Symptoms not due to a psychiatric disorder, infectious, toxic- metabolic, endocrine or neuroleptic cause.
Multiple scoring systems & continuum of severity from mild to moderate to severe toxicity. Severe serotonin syndrome or serotonin toxicity may 
require multiple agents acting at multiple sites.Serotonin Syndrome / Serotonin Toxicity
Ng BK, Cameron AJ. The role of methylene blue in 
serotonin syndrome: a systemic review. Psychosomatics 
2010 May;51(3):194- 200.
Gillman PK. CNS toxicity involving methylene blue: the 
exemplar for understanding and predicting drug interactions that precipitate serotonin toxicity. J Psychopharmacol . 2010 Feb 8. [ Epubahead of print]
Juffermans NP, et al. A dose -finding study of methylene
blue to inhibit nitric oxide actions in the hemodynamics of 
human septic shock. Nitric Oxide 22 (2010) 275– 280.
Pollack G, Pollack A, Delfiner J, Fernandez J. Parathyroid 
surgery and methylene blue: a review with guidelines for 
safe intraoperative use. Laryngoscope 2009 
Oct;119(10):1941- 6. 
Ramsay RR, Dunford C, Gillman PK. Methylene blue and 
serotonin toxicity: inhibition of monoamine oxidase A 
(MAO A) confirms a theoretical prediction. Br J Pharmacol . 
2007 Nov;152(6):946- 51. 
Ibister GK, Buckley NA, Whyte IM. Serotonin toxicity: a 
practical approach to diagnosis and treatment. Med J Aust. 2007 Sep 17;187(6):361- 5.
Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N EnglJ
Med. 2005 Mar 17;352(11):1112- 20.References
Contact Information
William Hurley, MD FACEPMedical Director, Washington Poison Centerhurley@wapc.org(206) 517- 2351Pharmacists, Emergency Physicians, 
Cardiologists, Surgeons, Anesthesiologists, 
& nurses should incorporate screening for 
serotonergic drugs in patients before 
administering Methylene Blue.
Background
WA State Study
Recommendations
