       
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1318  
Impact of textile dyeing effluent on 
environment; a study based on Bangladesh  
 
Lablu Miah  
Assistant Professor, Department of Apparel Manufacturing Management and Technology, Shanto -Mariam 
University of Creative Technology, P lot-6, Avenue -6, Sector -17/H -1, Uttara Residential Model Town, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh  
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------  
Date of Submission: 15 -10-2022                                                                           Date of Acceptance: 31 -10-2022  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------  
 
ABSTRACT :In textile processing, about 200,000 
tons of these dyes are lost to effluents every year 
during the dyeing and finishing operations, due to 
the inefficiency of the dyeing process. 
Unfortunately, most of these dyes discharge 
conventional wastewater treatment methods and 
persevere in the atmosphere as a result of their high 
stability to light, temperature, water, detergents, 
chemicals, soap and othe r parameters such as 
bleach. In addition, anti -microbial agents’ resistant 
to biological degradation are frequently used in the 
manufacture of textiles, particularly for natural 
fibers such as cotton. The synthetic origin and 
complex aromatic structure of these agents make 
them unrulier to biodegradation. The textile industry 
consumes a substantial amount of water in its 
manufacturing processes used mainly in the dyeing 
and finishing operations of the plants. The 
wastewater from textile plants is classified  as the 
most polluting of all the industrial sectors, 
considering the volume generated as well as the 
effluent composition. In addition, the increased 
demand for textile products and the proportional 
increase in their production, and the use of synthetic 
dyes have together contributed to dye wastewater 
becoming one of the substantial sources of 
unadorned pollution problems in present periods.  
 
KEYWORDS: Textile Dyeing, Effluent water, 
Pollution, Environment, Contamination  
 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Dyes is a constituent with substantial 
coloring capacity are broadly engaged in the textile, 
food, cosmetics, plastics, photographic and paper 
industries. The dyes can observe to compatible 
surfaces by solution, by forming covalent bond or 
developments with salts or metals, by physical 
adsorption or mechanical retention [ 1,2]. Dyes are 
classified according to their application and chemical structure, and are composed of a group of 
atoms known as chromophores, responsible for the 
dye color. These chromophore containing centers 
are based on varied functional groups, such as azo, 
anthraquinone, nitro, carbonyl etc. It is projected 
that over 10,000 different dyes and pigments are 
used industrially and over 7 x 105 tons of synthetic 
dyes are annually produced worldwide [ 3,4]. Textil e 
materials can be dyed using batch, continuous or 
semi -continuous processes. The kind of process 
used depends on many characteristics including type 
of material as such fiber, yarn, fabric, fabric 
construction and garment, as also the generic type of 
fiber, size of dye lots and quality requirements in the 
dyed fabric.  
Textile waste waters are characterized by 
extreme fluctuations in many parameters such as 
chemical oxygen demand (COD), biochemical 
oxygen demand (BOD), pH, colour  and salinity. The 
composit ion of the waste water will depend on the 
different organic based compounds, chemicals and 
dyes used in the dry and wet -processing steps. 
Unruly organic, coloured , toxicant, surfactant, 
chlorinated compounds and salts are the main 
pollutants in textile eff luents [ 10]. 
In addition, the effects caused by other 
pollutants in textile waste water, and the presence of 
very small amounts of dyes (<1 mg/l for some dyes) 
in the water, which are nevertheless highly visible, 
seriously affects the aesthetic quality and  
transparency of water bodies such as lakes, rivers 
and others, leading to damage to the aquatic 
environment [ 11]. 
During the dyeing process it has been 
estimated that the losses of colorants to the 
environment can reach 10 –50%. It is noteworthy 
that some dyes are highly toxic and mutagenic, and 
also decrease light penetration and photosynthetic 
activity, causing oxygen deficiency and limiting        
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1319  
downstream beneficial uses such as recreation, 
drinking water and irrigation [ 14] 
With respect to the number and pr oduction 
volumes, azo dyes are the largest group of colorants, 
constituting 60 -70% of all organic dyes produced in 
the world. The success of azo dyes is due to their 
ease and cost effectiveness for synthesis as 
compared to natural dyes, and also their grea t 
structural diversity, high molar extinction 
coefficient, and medium -to-high fastness properties 
in relation to light as well as to wetness [ 15]. They 
have a wide range of applications in the textile, 
pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries, and are also 
used in food, paper, leather and paints [ 16]. 
However, some azo dyes can show toxic effects, 
especially carcinogenic and mutagenic events [ 17]. 
One of the most difficult tasks confronted by the 
wastewater treatment plants of textile industries is 
the remova l of the colour  of these compounds, 
mainly because dyes and pigments are designed to 
resist biodegradation, such that they remain in the 
environment for a long period of time. For example, 
the half -life of the hydrolysed  dye Reactive Blue 19 
is about 46 ye ars at pH 7 and 25°C.  
 
II. DIFFERENT STAGES OF DYEING 
PROCESS  
Dyeing is one of the key aspects in the 
successful trading of textile products like yarn, 
fabric or any apparel. In addition, the consumer 
usually looks for some basic product characteristics, 
such as good fixation with respect to rubbing, light, 
perspirat ion, saliva and washing. To confirm these 
properties, the materials that give colour  to the fibre  
must show high affinity, uniform colour , resistance 
to fading, can be economically feasible. Dyeing 
methods have not changed much with time. 
Basically water i s used to clean, dye and apply 
auxiliary chemicals to the fabrics, and also to rinse 
the treated fibres  or fabrics [ 18]. The dyeing process 
involves three steps: preparation, dyeing and 
finishing, as follows:  
Preparation  is the step in which undesirable 
impurities are removed from the fabrics before 
dyeing. This can be carried out by cleaning with 
aqueous alkaline substances and detergents or by 
applying enzymes. Many fabrics are bleached with 
hydrogen peroxide or chlorine -containing 
compounds in order to r emove their natural colour , 
and if the fabric is to be sold white and not dyed, 
optical brightening agents are added.  
Dyeing  is the aqueous application of colour  
to the textile substrates, mainly using synthetic 
organic dyes and frequently at elevated temperatures 
and pressures in some of the steps. It is significant to 
point out that there is no dye which dyes all existing fibres  and no fibre  which can be dyed by  all known 
dyes. During this step, the dyes and chemical aids 
such as surfactants, acids, alkali/bases, electrolytes, 
carriers, levelling  agents, promoting agents, 
chelating agents, emulsifying oils, softening agents 
etc are applied to the textile to get a  uniform depth 
of colour  with the colour  fastness properties suitable 
for the end use of the fabric. This process includes 
diffusion of the dye into the liquid phase followed 
by adsorption onto the outer surface of the fibres , 
and finally diffusion and ads orption on the inner 
surface of the fibres . Depending on the expected end 
use of the fabrics, different fastness properties may 
be required. For instance, swimsuits must not bleed 
in water and automotive fabrics should not fade 
after prolonged exposure to sunlight. Different types 
of dye and chemical additives are used to obtain 
these properties, which is carried out during the 
finishing step. Dyeing can also be accomplished by 
applying pigments (pigments differ from dyes by 
not showing chemical or physical  affinity for the 
fibers) together with binders (polymers which fix 
the pigment to the fibres ). 
 
 
Figure 1: Textile effluent from used chemicals  
 
Finishing  involves treatments with 
chemical compounds aimed at improving the quality 
of the fabric. Permanent  press treatments, water 
proofing, softening, antistatic protection, soil 
resistance, stain release and microbial/fungal 
protection are all examples of fabric treatments 
applied in the finishing process.  
 
III. WASTE WATER  
The pollution of natural water has beco me 
one of the major problems in current civilization, 
and the economical use of this natural resource in 
production processes has gained special attention, 
since in forecasts for the coming years, the amount 
of water required per capita is of concern. This  
environmental disruptive is related not only to its 
       
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1320  
waste through misappropriation, but also to the 
release of industrial and domestic effluents [ 20]. 
The industries with high polluting power, the textile 
dyeing industry, responsible for dyeing various 
types of fiber, stands out. Independent of the 
characteristics of the dyes chosen, the final 
operation of all dyeing process involves washing in 
baths to remove excesses of the original or 
hydrolysed  dyes not fixed to the fibre  in the 
previous steps. In thes e baths, it is estimated that 
approximately 10 -50% of the dyes used in the 
dyeing process are lost, and end up in the effluent 
[13], polluting the environment with about one 
million tons of these compounds. The dyes end up 
in the water bodies due mainly to  the use of the 
activated sludge treatment in the effluent treatment 
plants, which has been shown to be ineffective in 
removing the poisonousness and colouring  of some 
types of dye. Moreover, the reduction of azo dyes by 
sodium hydrosulphite  and the following chlorination 
steps w ith hypochlorous acid, can form 2-
benzotriazoles fenilbenzotriazol (PBTA) derivatives 
and highly mutagenic aromatic amines, often more 
mutagenic than the original dye [ 22].  
In an aquatic environment, this dye 
reducti on can occur in two phases: 1) The 
application of reducing agents to the newly -dyed 
fibers to remove the excess unbound dye, which 
could lead to "bleeding" of the fabrics during 
washing, and 2) The use of reducing agents in the 
bleaching process, in order to make the effluent 
colourless  and conform with the legislation. This 
reduced colourless  waste containing dyes is sent to 
the municipal sewage treatment plant, where they 
chlorinate the effluents before releasing them into 
water bodies where they may gene rate PBTAs. 
Several different PBTAs are already described in the 
literature, and their chemical structures vary 
depending on the dyes that originated them.  
 
 
Figure 2: Sources of waste in water  
 
In addition to the problem caused by the 
loss of dye during the dyeing process, within the context of environmental pollution, the textile 
industry is also focused due to the large volumes of 
water used by its industrial park, subsequently 
generating large volumes of effluent. It has been 
calculated that approximat ely 200 litters  of water are 
needed for each kilogram of cotton dyeing 
produced. These effluents are complex mixtures of 
many contaminants, ranging from original colours  
lost during the dyeing process, to associated 
pesticides and heavy metals, and when no t properly 
treated, can cause serious contamination of the 
water sources. So the materials that end up in the 
water bodies are effluents containing a high organic 
load and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), low 
dissolved oxygen concentrations, strong color a nd 
low biodegradability. In addition to visual pollution, 
the pollution of water bodies with these compounds 
causes changes in the biological cycles of the 
aquatic biota, predominantly affecting the 
photosynthesis and oxygenation processes of the 
water bod y, for instance by hindering the passage of 
sunlight through the water.  
Moreover, studies have shown that some 
classes of dye, especially azo dyes and their by -
products, may be carcinogenic and / or mutagenic, 
endangering human health, since the wastewater  
treatment systems and water treatment plants (WTP) 
are ineffective in removing the colour  and the 
mutagenic properties of some dyes. The difficulty in 
removing them from the environment can be 
attributed to the high stability of these compounds, 
since the y are designed to resist biodegradation to 
meet the demands of the consumer market with 
respect to durability of the colours  in the fibres , 
consequently implying that they also remain in the 
environment for a long time. Based on all the 
difficulties cited above regarding the discharge of 
effluents into the environment, it is obvious there is 
a need to find alternative treatments that are 
effective in eliminating dyes from wastes.  
 
IV. OPTIMIZATION OF THE DYEING 
PROCESSES TO DIMINISH THE 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT  
The progress of new methods to promote 
the treatment of effluents from the textile industry 
with a maximum of efficiency of the process of de -
colorization and / or removal of these complexes 
present in the medium can trigger further damage 
human health and  the environment is fundamental 
importance. The thoughtful of the composition of 
waste generated is extremely significant to develop 
these methods of treatment due to the high 
complexity by virtue of huge number of compounds 
which are added at different ph ases of the dyeing 
fabrics. Environmental problems with used dye 
       
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1321  
baths are related to the wide variety of different 
components added to the dye bath, often in 
relatively high concentrations. In the future, many of 
textile factories will face the requiremen t of reusing 
a significant part of all incoming freshwater because 
traditionally used methods are insufficient for 
obtaining the required water quality.  
However, due to dwindling supply and 
increasing demand of water in the textile industries, 
a better alt ernative is to attempt to further elevate 
the water quality of wastewater effluent from a 
secondary wastewater treatment plant to a higher 
standard for reuse. Thus far very little attention has 
been paid to this aspect. Therefore, the investment 
in the sea rch for methodologies to more effective 
treatment of these effluents can be much smaller 
than that spent in tertiary treatment to remove these 
products in low level of concentrations and in the 
presence of much other interference. This requires 
action that  the cost / benefits is studied and the 
development of new techniques for waste water 
treatment accomplished of effective removal of 
these dyes is strengthened and made economically 
feasible. An alternative to minimize the problems 
related to the treatment  of textile effluents would be 
the development of more effective dye that can be 
fixed fibre  with higher efficiency decreasing losses 
on tailings waters and reducing the amount of dye 
required in the dyeing process, reducing certainly 
improve the cost and quality of the effluent.  
 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
Environmental effluence can certainly be 
observed as one of the main problems both for 
developed and developing countries. This is due, not 
just to one, but to a number of factors, such as the 
misuse of natu ral assets, unproductive legislation 
and a lack of environmental consciousness. 
Auspiciously, in recent years there has been a trend 
for change and a series of scientific studies are being 
used as an important tool in the development of new 
treatment techn ologies and even in the 
implementation of processes and environmentally 
friendly actions.  
  
Figure 3: Waste water treatment plant  
 
Each manufacturing process is 
characterized by the use of inputs (raw materials, 
water, energy, etc.) that undergo transform ation 
giving rise to products, byproducts and waste. The 
wastes produced at all stages of the various types of 
human activity, both in terms of composition and 
volume, vary according to the consumption 
practices and production methods. The main 
concerns ar e focused on the impact these can have 
on human health and the environment. Hazardous 
waste, produced mainly by industry, is particularly 
worrying, because when incorrectly managed, it 
becomes a serious threat to the environment and 
therefore to human heal th.  
Amongst that of several other industries, 
the textile sector waste has received considerable 
attention in recent years, since it can generate large 
volumes of effluents that, if not correctly treated 
before being disposed into water resources, can be a 
problem, as previously mentioned. Effluents from 
the textile industry are extremely complex, since 
they contain a large variety of dyes, additives and 
derivatives that change seasonally, increasing the 
challenge to find effective, feasible treatments. 
Currently, the processes developed and available for 
these industries are based on methods that were 
designed for other waste, and have limitations when 
applied to textile effluents. As a consequence, these 
industries produce coloured  waste water with a high  
organic load, which can contribute enormously to 
the environmental pollution of surface water and 
treatment plants if not properly treated before 
disposal into the water resources. The digestion of 
water polluted with textile dyes can cause serious 
damage  to the health of humans and of other living 
organisms, due to the toxicity, highlighting 
mutagenicity of its components. Therefore, 
treatments that are more efficient and economical 
than those currently available are required.  
       
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1322  
There are several techniques  for the 
treatment of effluents, such as incineration, 
biological treatment, absorption onto solid matrices, 
etc. However, these techniques have their 
drawbacks, such as the formation of dioxins and 
furans, caused by incomplete burning during 
incineration;  long periods for biological treatment to 
have an effect, as also the adsorptive process, that is 
based on the phase transfer of contaminants without 
actually destroying them. The problem is further 
aggravated in the textile industry effluents, due to 
the complexity of their make -up. Thus it can be seen 
that processes are being used that are not entirely 
appropriate for the treatment of textile effluents, 
thereby creating a major challenge for the industry 
and laundries that need to adapt to current 
regulat ions for the control of the colour  of effluents 
with a high organic load.  
The use of filtration membranes and/or 
separation and biological methods, in addition to 
incineration processes involving adsorption onto 
solid matrices, has also being adopted by th e textile 
industry and is receiving considerable attention. 
However, all these processes only involve phase 
transfer, generating large amounts of sludge 
deposited at the end of the tanks and low efficiency 
in colour  removal and reduction of the organic loa d. 
According to this scenario, many studies have been 
carried out with the aim of developing new 
technologies capable of minimizing the volume and 
toxicity of industrial effluents. Unfortunately, the 
applicability of these types of system is subject to 
the development of modified procedures and the 
establishment of effluent recycling systems, 
activities that imply evolutionary technologies and 
which are not yet universally available. Thus the 
study of new alternatives for the treatment of many 
industrial ef fluents currently produced is still one of 
the main weapons to combat the phenomenon of 
anthropogenic contamination.  
In the studies carried out using a source of 
hydroxyl radicals with oxidizing agents, the photo 
Fenton system developed by Fukushima et al. , 2000 
to promote the degradation of aniline stands out. 
This method has shown promise for the 
mineralization of aromatic amines, obtaining a 
reduction of approximately 85%. However, high 
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) 
identified a number of inte rmediate species formed 
during the degradation of the aniline, such as p -
aminophenol, p -hydroquinone, maleic and fumaric 
acids and NH 4+. 
Low et al. (1991) monitored the inorganic 
products resulting from the degradation of several 
organic nitrogenated, sulphured  and halogenated 
compounds. Degradation was carried out using TiO 2 as the semiconductor and artificially 
illuminated UV radiation. Ammonium ions were 
found to be present in higher concentrations than 
nitrate ions, which can be explained by the fact th at 
compounds having a nitrogen element in their 
structure pass through a complex degradation step 
where the generation of ammonium ions is more 
favourable  than the generation of nitrate ions. In 
turn, compounds with nitro groups in their 
structures, showed  higher concentrations of nitrate 
ions. Under ideal conditions, all the elements were 
converted into their respective inorganic forms. 
Organic carbon was converted to CO 2, the halogens 
to their corresponding halide, sulphur  compounds to 
sulphate , the phosphate to phosphorus and nitrogen 
to ammonium and nitrate [ 100]. However, all these 
studies used a photocatalytic titanium suspension, 
requiring a subsequent step to remove the 
semiconduc tor. 
Augugliaro et al. (2000), confirmed that 
heterogeneous photocatalysis using TiO 2 as a 
semiconductor may be a suitable method for the 
complete photodegradation of aniline, 4 -ethylaniline 
and 4 -chloroaniline in an aqueous medium. The 
kinetic parameters for the Langmuir -Hinshelwood 
model were used to describe the importance of the 
adsorption results, which proved to be independent 
of the pH of the solution and of the type of 
substituent on the aromatic ring of the amine.  
Chu et al. (2007) observed the eff ects of 
pH variation and the addition of hydrogen peroxide 
on the degradation of 2 -chloroaniline using TiO 2 as 
a semiconductor, with and without the application of 
UV radiation. The results showed that the addition 
of low concentrations of H 2O2 to the 
UV/T iO2system provided a significant increase in 
degradation of the aromatic amine. The addition of 
an excess of H 2O2 promoted no increase in 
degradation, as expected; to the contrary, a 
reduction in the reaction rate was observed. The 
variation in pH was eval uated in both systems, and 
the condition leading to the highest percentages of 
mineralization was obtained in an alkaline medium 
using H 2O2/UV/TiO 2. 
The results of this process were very 
promising because of the relatively short treatment 
time but with gre at efficiency, both in the removal 
of color and in the reduction of the organic load. 
However, the limitations of this technique are 
related mainly to the choice of the ideal catalyst for 
promoting the generation of these oxidizing species. 
Catalysts that promote the generation of radicals 
absorbing radiation in the visible spectral region are 
the most desirable for this type of reaction, due to 
the large percentage emitted in the solar spectrum 
(approximately 45%).         
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1323  
Thus, the development of an ideal process  
that promotes colour  removal and a reduction in the 
organic load of wastewater from the textile industry 
with great efficiency is a major challenge in all 
fields of science, since the synthesis of the best 
catalyst to take advantage of solar radiation, th us 
reducing the operating costs, and at the same time 
solve the problems involved in the hydrodynamics 
of the reactors, is of importance in the development 
of the treatment.  
 
VI. CONCLUSION  
It has been concluded that the synthetic 
textile dyes represent a larg e group of organic 
compounds that could have undesirable effects on 
the environment, and in addition, some of them can 
stance dangers to humans. The increasing 
complexity and difficulty in treating textile wastes 
has led to a constant search for new method s that are 
effective and economically viable. Though, up to the 
present moment, no efficient method capable of 
removing both the color and the toxic properties of 
the dyes released into the environment has been 
established.  
 
REFERENCES  
[1]. Bafana A, Devi SS, Chakrabarti T. Azo 
dyes: past, present and the future. 
Environmental Reviews 2011; 19 350 –370. 
[2]. Zollinger, H. Synthesis, Properties of 
Organic Dyes and Pigments. In: Color 
Chemistry. New York, USA: VCH 
Publishers; 1987. p. 92 -102. 
[3]. Arun Prasad AS, Bhaskara R ao KV. 
Physico chemical characterization of textile 
effluent and screening for dye decolorizing 
bacteria. Global Journal of Biotechnology 
and Biochemistry 2010; 5(2) 80 -86. 
[4]. Robinson T, McMullan G, Marchant R, 
Nigam P. Remediation of dyes in textile 
effluen t: a critical review on current 
treatment technologies with a proposed 
alternative. Bio resource Technology 2001; 
77 (12) 247 -255. 
[5]. Ogugbue CJ, Sawidis T. Bioremediation 
and Detoxification of Synthetic Wastewater 
Containing Triarylmethane Dyes by 
Aeromonas hydrophila Isolated from 
Industrial Effluent. Biotechnology 
Research International 2011; DOI 
10.4061/2011/967925.  
[6]. Couto SR. Dye removal by immobilized 
fungi. Biotechnology Advances 2009; 
27(3) 227 -235. 
[7]. O’Neill C, Hawkes FR, Hawkes DL, 
Lourenço ND, Pinheiro  HM, Delée W. Color in textile effluents – sources, 
measurement, discharge consents and 
simulation: a review. Journal of Chemical 
Technology and Biotechnology 1999; 74 
(11) 1009 -1018.  
[8]. Forgacs E, Cserháti T, Oros G. Removal of 
synthetic dyes from wastewater s: a review. 
Environment International 2004; 30 (7) 
953- 971 
[9]. Przystaś W, Zabłocka -Godlewska E, 
Grabińska -Sota E. Biological Removal of 
Azo and Triphenylmethane Dyes and 
Toxicity of Process By -Products. Water 
Air Soil Pollut 2012; 223 (4) 1581 -1592.  
[10]. Ben Man sour H, Houas I, Montassar F, 
Ghedira K, Barillier D, Mosrati R, Chekir -
Ghedira L. Alteration of in vitro and acute 
in vivo toxicity of textile dyeing 
wastewater after chemical and biological 
remediation. Environmental science and 
pollution research intern ational 2012; DOI 
10.1007/s11356 -012-0802 -7. 
[11]. Ibrahim MB, Poonam N, Datel S, Roger M. 
Microbial de -colorization of textile dye -
containing effluents: a review, Bio resource 
Technology 1996; 58(3) 217 -227. 
[12]. Wijetunga S, Li XF, Jian C. Effect of 
organic load on  de-colorization of textile 
wastewater containing acid dyes in up flow 
anaerobic sludge blanket reactor. Journal of 
Hazardous Materials 2010; 177 (1 -3) 792 -
798. 
[13]. Rajaguru P, Fairbairn LJ, Ashby J, 
Willington MA, Turner S, Woolford LA, 
Chinnasamy N, Rafferty  JA. Geno toxicity 
studies on the azo dye Direct Red 2 using 
the in vivo mouse bone marrow 
micronucleus test. Mutation Research 
1999; 444(1) 175 -180. 
[14]. Hubbe MA, Beck KR, O’Neal WG, 
Sharma YC. Cellulosic substrates for 
removal of pollutants from aqueous 
systems: a review. 2. Dyes. Dye bio 
sorption: Review. BioResources 2012; 7 
(2), 2592 -2687.  
[15]. Seesuriyachan P, Takenaka S, Kuntiya A, 
Klayraung S, Murakami S, Aoki K. 
Metabolism of azo dyes by Lactobacillus 
casei TISTR 1500 and effects of various 
factors on decol orization. Water Research 
2007; 41(5) 985 -992. 
[16]. Chung KT, Cerniglia CE. Mutagenicity of 
azo dyes: Structure -activity relationships. 
Mutation Research, 1992; 277 (3) 201 -220. 
[17]. Pinheiro HM, Touraud E, Thomas O. 
Aromatic amines from azo dye reduction:        
International Journal of Advances in Engineering and Management (IJAEM)  
Volume 4, Issue 10 Oct. 2022,   pp: 1318 -1324  www.ijaem.net  ISSN: 2395 -5252  
  
 
 
DOI: 10.35629/5252 -0410 13181324   Impact Factor value 7.429  | ISO 9001: 2008 Certified Journal  Page 1324  
status re view with emphasis on direct UV 
spectrophotometric detection in textile 
industry wastewaters. Dyes and Pigments 
2004; 61 (2) 121 -139. 
[18]. Moore SB, Ausley LW. Systems thinking 
and green chemistry in the textile industry: 
concepts, technologies and benefits. 
Journal of Cleaner Production 2004;12 
585–601. DOI: 10.1016/S0959 -
6526(03)00058 -1 
[19]. Reddy SS, Kotaiah B, Reddy NSP. Color 
pollution control in textile dyeing industry 
effluents using tannery sludge derived 
activated carbon. Bulletin of the Chemical 
Society of Ethiopia 2008;22 (3): 369 -378.  
[20]. Kunz A, Zamora PP, Moraes SG, Durán N. 
New tendencies on the textile effluent 
treatment. Quimica Nova 2002;25(1): 78 -
82 
[21]. Umbuzeiro GA, Freeman HS, Warren SH, 
Oliveira DP, Terao Y, Watanabe T, 
Claxton LD. The contribution of a zo dyes 
to the mutagenic activity of the Cristais 
river. Chemosphere 2005; 60 (1) 55 -64. 
DOI:10.1016/j. chemosphere.2004.11.100  
[22]. Shiozawa T, Suyama K, Nakano K, 
Nukaya H, Sawanishi H, Oguri A, 
Wakabayashi K, Terao Y. Mutagenic 
activity of 2 phenylbenzotriaz ole 
derivatives related to a mutagen, PBTA -1, 
in river water. Mutation Research 1999; 
442 (2) 105 -111. 