 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 Colour Index : 
Fourth Edition Online   
www.colour -index.org  
  
Colour Index:  
• Promotes a universally accepted nomenclature for dyes and pigments  
• Contains over 34,500 dyes and pigments listed under 11,570 Colour Index Generic Names  
• Is the world’s most authoritative method of dye and pigment classification  
• Offers instant web access and easy navigation and search facilities  
 
First published in 1924, Colour In dex is the definitive and internationally recognised 
reference for anyone wanting to find information on CI Generic names, chemical 
structures, companies offering  these dyes and pigments, and the technical 
application details of many colorants.  
Published b y the Society of Dyers and Colourists (SDC) and the American 
Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists (AATCC), it is an online user -friendly 
database with great search facilities.  
 
Who uses Colour Index?  
Colour Index is used by a wide range of organisations and individuals including:  
• Colorant users, manufacturers and suppliers  
• Textile manufacturers and suppliers  
• Paint manufacturers and suppliers  
• Plastic manufacturers and suppliers  
• Printing ink manufacturers and suppliers  
• Cosmetic manufacturers and suppliers  
• Test houses  
• Libraries, regulatory authorities and academic institutions  
• Museums and art galleries  
• Anyone with a professional interest in dyes and pigments  
 
Features  
• 34 500 individual products under 11 570 Colour Index Generic Names  
• Unique ‘fi ngerprint’ gives information including Colour Index Generic Name, Colour Index 
Constitution Number, chemical structure, chemical type, first known maker, Hue, CAS Registry 
numbers, EU numbers  
 
Colorants are listed in the Colour Index according to the widely acclaimed system of Colour Index Generic 
Names and Colour Index Constitution Numbers.  A detailed record of products available on the market is 
presented under each Colour Index reference.  Against each product name is listed the manufacturer, 
physical f orm, principal uses and comments supplied by the manufacturer to guide prospective customers.   
 
     
 
Who registers products in the Colour Index?  
• Dye and pigment manufacturers  
Registration of Products  
• Registration of products is free using the necessary application forms to all manufacturers of dyes 
and pigments  
• The structure of a product can be registered confidentially if that structure has not previously been 
disclosed  
• Our team will search the database of structures and will assign a new C.I. Generic Name (CIGN) 
and C.I. Constitution Number (CICN) if that structure does not already exist in the database.  
 
Why register your product with the Colour Index?  
• It is the world’s most authoritative method of dye and pigment classification  
• It is the definitive a nd internationally recognised reference guide for dyes and 
pigments  
• It is subscribed to by companies involved in the use of dyes and pigments 
around the world  
• Only products listed in the Colour Index have authorisation to use the 
system  
 
What are the subsc ription options?  
Colour Index is published in two parts, as follows:  
Part 1 covers pigments and solvent dyes, widely used in the paint, plastics, ink and other coloration industries  
Part 2 covers dyes and related products.  The main dye classes are: acid, basic, direct, disperse, food, 
fluorescent brightener, mordant, reactive, sulphur and vat, plus several other classes of minor or historical 
importance.   
You can subscribe to Part 1, Part 2 or the Full Edition (Parts 1 and 2).  
Subscription gives you full unlimited access to the Colour Index for 12 months  
 
What do I do next?  
Costs are available on the website, with special prices for additional users and multi -user licences.  
Subscribe online at www.sdc.org.uk , or email colour.index@sdc.org.uk  for further information.  
 
Colour Index Heritage DVD  
In response to many requests for historical information about colorants and their classification, the Society has published the Colour Index Heritage Edition, a DVD that brings together all the material published in 
the Colour Index between 1924 and 2000, prior to the publication of the Fourth Edition Online.  
  
 
With over 17,500 pages of information presented as scanned page images, the 
Heritage Edition is navigated by a series of hyperlinked ‘bookmarks’.  A basic 
search facility is included by scanning the pages with an optical character 
recognition package which has proved very effective.  
Invaluable archive material for any library or li terature collection run by organisations 
with an interest in colour.  
 
Colour Index Heritage Edition  
A demonstration of the heritage edition is available online  
For prices and to buy online, visit www.sdc.org.uk    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Society of Dyers and Colourists  
Perkin House  
82 Grattan Road  
Bradford  
West Yorkshire  
BD1 2LU  
United Kingdom  
Tel: +44 (0)1274 725138  
Email:  colour.index@sdc.org.uk    
Charity Registration No: 212331 
