141 The Journal of Cotton Science 11:141–153 (2007)  
http://journal.cotton.org, © The Cotton Foundation 2007
TEXTILE TECHNOLOGY
Cotton Textile Processing: Waste Generation and Effluent Treatment
B. Ramesh Babu*, A.K. Parande, S. Raghu, and T. Prem Kumar
B. R. Babu*, A.K. Parande, S. Raghu, and T. P. Kumar, 
Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi 630006, 
Tamil Nadu, India. 
*Corresponding author: akbabu_2001@yahoo.comABSTRACT
This review discusses cotton textile process-
ing and methods of treating effluent in the textile 
industry. Several countries, including India, have introduced strict ecological standards for textile industries. With more stringent controls expected in the future, it is essential that control measures 
be implemented to minimize effluent problems. 
Industrial textile processing comprises pretreat-
ment, dyeing, printing, and finishing operations. 
These production processes not only consume 
large amounts of energy and water, but they 
also produce substantial waste products. This 
manuscript combines a discussion of waste pro-
duction from textile processes, such as desizing, 
mercerizing, bleaching, dyeing, finishing, and 
printing, with a discussion of advanced methods 
of effluent treatment, such as electro-oxidation, 
bio-treatment, photochemical, and membrane 
processes.
The textile dyeing industry consumes large 
quantities of water and produces large volumes 
of wastewater from different steps in the dyeing 
and finishing processes. Wastewater from printing and dyeing units is often rich in color, containing 
residues of reactive dyes and chemicals, and requires 
proper treatment before being released into the 
environment. The toxic effects of dyestuffs and other 
organic compounds, as well as acidic and alkaline 
contaminants, from industrial establishments on 
the general public are widely accepted. Increasing 
public concern about environmental issues has led 
to closure of several small-scale industries.
Interest in ecologically friendly, wet-process-
ing textile techniques has increased in recent years 
because of increased awareness of environmental 
issues throughout the world. Consumers in developed countries are demanding biodegradable and ecologi-cally friendly textiles (Chavan, 2001). Cotton provides 
an ecologically friendly textile, but more than 50% 
of its production volume is dyed with reactive dyes. 
Unfortunately, dyes are unfavorable from an ecologi-
cal point of view, because the effluents generated are 
heavily colored, contain high concentrations of salts, 
and exhibit high biological oxygen demand/chemical 
oxygen demand (BOD/COD) values.
In dyeing textiles, ecological standards are strictly 
applied throughout processing from raw material 
selection to the final product. This has become more 
critical since the German environmental standards 
regarding dye effluents became effective (Robinson et 
al., 1997). The main challenge for the textile industry 
today is to modify production methods, so they are 
more ecologically friendly at a competitive price, by 
using safer dyes and chemicals and by reducing cost 
of effluent treatment/disposal. Recycling has become 
a necessary element, not because of the shortage of any item, but because of the need to control pollution. 
There are three ways to reduce pollution: (1) use of 
new, less polluting technologies; (2) effective treat-
ment of effluent so that it conforms to specified dis-
charge requirements; and (3) recycling waste several 
times over before discharge (Sule and Bardhan, 1999), 
which is considered the most practical solution.
The objective of this review is to discuss the 
various processing stages in the textile industry and 
the methodologies adopted for treating textile waste-
water. A variety of water treatment techniques (Table 
1) are discussed from an environmental point of 
view. Conventional and novel techniques discussed 
include electro-oxidation, biological treatment, pho-
tochemical processing, ion-exchange, and a variety 
of membrane techniques.
TEXTILE OPERATIONS
The textile industry comprises a diverse and 
fragmented group of establishments that produce 
and/or process textile-related products (fiber, yarn, and fabric) for further processing into apparel, home 
furnishings, and industrial goods. Textile establish-
ments receive and prepare fibers; transform fibers 142 BABU ET  Al.: TExTIlE PROCESSING AND EFFlUENT  TREATmENT
into yarn, thread, or webbing; convert the yarn into 
fabric or related products; and dye and finish these 
materials at various stages of production (Ghosh and 
Gangopadhyay, 2000).
The process of converting raw fibers into fin-
ished apparel and non-apparel textile products is 
complex, so most textile mills specialize. There is 
little difference between knitting and weaving in the 
production of man-made cotton and wool fabrics 
(Hashem et al., 2005). Textiles generally go through 
three or four stages of production that may include 
yarn formation, fabric formation, wet processing, and 
textile fabrication. Some of the steps in processing 
fibers into textile goods are shown in Figure 1. A list 
of some wastes that may be generated at each level 
of textile processing are provided in Table 2.
Desizing. The presence of sizing ingredients in 
the fabric hinders processes, such as dyeing, printing, 
and finishing. For example, the presence of starch can 
hinder the penetration of the dye into the fiber, which 
necessitates removal of starch prior to dyeing or print-
ing. Starch is removed or converted into simple water-
soluble products either by hydrolysis (by enzymatic 
preparations or dilute mineral acids) or by oxidation (by 
sodium bromide, sodium chlorite, etc.) (Batra, 1985).
In general, about 50% of the water pollution is 
due to waste water from desizing, which has a high 
BOD that renders it unusable. The problem can be 
mitigated by using enzymes that degrade starch into 
ethanol rather to anhydroglucose. The ethanol can be recovered by distillation for use as a solvent or 
fuel, thereby reducing the BOD load. Alternatively, 
an oxidative system like H 2O2 can be used to fully 
degrade starch to CO 2 and H 2O.Man-m ade 
filam ent fibersMan-made 
staple fibers Raw wool, 
cotton 
Texturizing Fiber preparation 
Yarn
formation 
Warping Spinning
Slashing
Knitting Knitting
Weaving
Preparation
De-sizing
Bleaching Merce rizing Wet
processing
Dyeing,
printing
FinishingTable 1. Possible treatments for cotton textile wastes and their associated advantages and disadvantages
Processes Advantages Disadvantages References
Biodegradation Rates of elimination by oxidizable 
substances about 90%Low biodegradability of dyesPala and Tokat, 2002; Ledakowicz et al., 2001.
Coagulation–flocculationElimination of insoluble dyes Production of sludge 
blocking filterGaehr et al., 1994.
Adsorption on activated carbonSuspended solids and organic substances well reducedCost of activated carbon Arslan et al., 2000.
Ozone treatment Good decolorization No reduction of the COD Adams et al., 1995; Scott and 
Ollis, 1995.
Electrochemical processesCapacity of adaptation to different volumes and pollution loadsIron hydroxide sludge Lin and Peng, 1994; Lin and 
Chen, 1997.
Reverse osmosis Removal of all mineral salts, 
hydrolyzes reactive dyes and chemical auxiliariesHigh pressure Ghayeni et al., 1998.
Nanofiltration Separation of organic compounds of 
low molecular weight and divalent ions from monovalent salts.Treatment of high concentrations-----Erswell et al., 1998; Xu et al., 1999; Akbari et al., 2002; Tang and Chen, 2002.
Ultrafiltration–microfiltrationLow pressure Insufficient quality of thetreated wastewaterWatters et al., 1991; Rott and Mike, 1999; Ciardelli and Ranieri, 2001; Ghayeni et al., 1998.
Figure 1. A flow diagram for various steps involved in pro-
cessing textile in a cotton mill.143 JOURNAl  OF COTTON SCIENCE, V olume 11, Issue 3, 2007
Electro-oxidation on RuO 2/Ti or PbO 2/Ti elec-
trodes is an effective method for the treatment of 
starch effluent. An anaerobic plate-column reactor 
capable of retaining high concentrations of biomass 
was studied using a synthetic wastewater that con-
tained starch. The total organic carbon (TOC)-load-
ing rate, hydraulic retention time (HRT), and tem-
perature were kept constant. The initial conditions were a biomass concentration of approximately 0.5 
mg/ml N (5 mg/ml volatile suspended solids), 20 
°C, an HRT of 30 h, and a TOC-loading rate of 0.8 
g/l/day. A removal efficiency of dissolved organic 
carbon exceeding 90% was realized. At the end 
of the treatment, the removal efficiency reached 
a steady-state value of 98%, at which the biomass 
concentration in the reactor was 2.3 mg/ml N.
Table 2. List of some of the waste materials generated at each level of cotton textile processing 
Process Air emissions Wastewater Residual wastes
Fiber 
preparationLittle or no air emissions generatedLittle or no wastewater generatedFiber waste; packaging waste; hard waste.
Yarn spinning Little or no air emissions 
generatedLittle or no wastewater generatedPackaging waste; sized yarn; fiber waste; cleaning and processing waste.
Slashing/sizing Volatile organic compounds BOD; COD; metals; cleaning 
waste, sizeFiber lint; yarn waste; packaging waste; unused starch-based sizes.
Weaving Little or no air emissions generatedLittle or no wastewater generatedPackaging waste; yarn and fabric scraps; off-spec fabric; used oil.
Knitting Little or no air emissions generatedLittle or no wastewater generatedPackaging waste; yarn and fabric scraps; off-spec fabric.
Tufting Little or no air emissions 
generatedLittle or no wastewater generatedPackaging waste; yarn and fabric scraps; off-spec fabric.
Desizing Volatile organic compounds 
from glycol ethersBOD from water-soluble sizes; synthetic size; lubricants; biocides; anti-static compoundsPackaging waste; fiber lint; yarn waste; cleaning materials, such as wipes, rags and filters; cleaning and maintenance wastes containing solvents.
Scouring Volatile organic compounds 
from glycol ethers and scouring solventsDisinfectants and insecticide residues; NaOH; detergents; fats; oils; pectin; wax; knitting lubricants; spin finishes; spent solventsLittle or no residual waste generated.
Bleaching Little or no air emissions generatedHydrogen peroxide, sodium silicate or organic stabilizer; high pHLittle or no residual waste generated.
Singeing Small amounts of exhaust gasses from the burners.Little or no wastewater generated.Little or no residual waste generated.
Mercerizing Little or no air emissions 
generated.High pH; NaOH. Little or no residual waste generated.
Heat setting Volatilization of spin finish agents applied during synthetic fiber manufacture.Little or no wastewater generated.Little or no residual waste generated.
Dyeing Volatile organic compounds Metals; salt; surfactants; 
toxics; organic processing assistance; cationic materials; color; BOD; sulfide; acidity/alkalinity; spent solvents.Little or no residual waste generated.
Printing Solvents, acetic acid from dyeing and curing oven emissions; combustion gasses; particulate matter.Suspended solids; urea; solvents; color; metals; heat; BOD; foam.Little or no residual waste generated.
Finishing Volatile organic compounds; contaminants in purchased chemicals; formaldehyde vapor; combustion gasses; particulate matter.BOD; COD; suspended solids; toxics; spent solvents.Fabric scraps and trimmings; packaging waste.
Product fabricationLittle or no air emissions generated.Little or no wastewater generated.Fabric scraps.144 BABU ET  Al.: TExTIlE PROCESSING AND EFFlUENT  TREATmENT
Cornstarch waste is easily degraded by treatment 
in a mixed activated sludge system. The bio-kinetic 
coefficients were calculated from the two-level ac-
tivated sludge operational processes using influent 
COD concentrations and four values of solid reten-
tion time. The results indicate that the effluent COD 
is related to the influent COD concentration. It is also 
proportional to the product of the influent COD and 
the specific growth rate. A multiple-substrate model 
was developed to predict the effluent COD under 
variable influent COD concentrations (Bortone et 
al., 1995). There was no sludge-bulking problem 
apparently because of high dissolved oxygen (DO) 
concentrations, a buffered system, and a balanced 
C:N:P ratio; however, the critical DO concentration 
at which the sludge volume index began to rise in-
creased as the food for microorganism (F/m) ratio 
increased. A cost analysis was provided for a hypo-
thetical wastewater plant with a flow rate of 300m3/
day (Vanndevivera and Bianchi, 1998). Synthetic 
sizing formulations based on polyvinyl acrylic (PV A) 
and acrylic resins, instead of starch, are expensive. 
Considering the cost of effluent treatment, the cost 
of synthetic sizing formulations is negligible. Today, 
advances in nano-filtration and ultra-filtration tech -
niques allow recovery and reuse of PV A (meier et 
al., 2002; Yu et al., 2001).
Compared with reverse osmosis, nanofiltra -
tion is less energy intensive and can be used for the treatment of various industrial effluents (Meier et 
al., 2002). moreover, a higher retention of dyes and 
other low molecular weight organic compounds (MW: 
200–1000) is achievable by nanofiltration. The salt-
rich permeate can be reused in the preparation of dye 
baths, which minimizes the amount of wastewater that 
needs to be processed. The basic problems involved 
in any membrane-based process are a drop in flux and 
membrane fouling. To overcome this problem and 
to achieve a high quality separation, combinations 
of various separation methods have been adopted in 
recent years (Pigmon et al., 2003; Abdessemed and 
Nezzal, 2002; Dhale et al., 2000; xu et al., 1999).
Mercerization. In order to impart luster, increase 
strength, and improve dye uptake, cotton fiber and 
fabric are mercerized in the gray state after bleaching. 
Essentially, mercerization is carried out by treating cot-
ton material with a strong solution of sodium hydroxide 
(about 18–24%) and washing-off the caustic after 1 to 
3 min, while holding the material under tension. Cot-
ton is known to undergo a longitudinal shrinkage upon 
impregnation with this solution. This can be prevented by stretching it or holding it under tension. The mate-
rial acquires the desired properties of luster, increased 
strength, dye uptake, and increased absorbency. The 
large concentrations of NaOH in the wash water can be 
recovered by membrane techniques. Use of ZnCl
2 as an 
alternative method leads to an increase in the weight of 
fabric and in dye uptake, and allows easy recovery of 
NaOH. moreover, the process is ecologically friendly 
and does not require neutralization by acetic or formic acid (Karim et al., 2006).
Bleaching. Natural color matter in the yarn 
imparts a creamy appearance to the fabric. In order 
to obtain white yarn that facilitates producing pale 
and bright shades, it is necessary to decolorize the 
yarn by bleaching. Hypochlorite is one of the oldest 
industrial bleaching agents. The formation of highly 
toxic chlorinated organic by-products during the 
bleaching process is reduced by adsorbable organi-
cally bound halogen (AOx).
Over the last few years, hypochlorite is being 
replaced by other bleaching agents (Rott and m inke, 
1999). An environmentally safe alternative to hypo-
chlorite is peracetic acid. It decomposes to oxygen and 
acetic acid, which is completely biodegradable. One of 
the advantages of peracetic acid is higher brightness 
values with less fiber damage (Rott and Minke, 1999). 
Recently, a one-step preparatory process for desizing, 
scouring, and bleaching has helped to reduce the 
volume of water. The feasibility of a one-step process 
for desizing, scouring, bleaching, and mercerizing of 
cotton fabric followed by dyeing with direct dyes has 
been discussed by Slokar and majcen (1997).
Cooper (1989) suggested an economical and 
pollution-free process for electrochemical mercer -
ization (scouring) and bleaching of textiles. The 
process does not require conventional caustic soda, 
acids, and bleaching agents. The treatment is carried 
out in a low-voltage electrochemical cell. The base 
required for mercerization (scouring) is produced in 
the cathode chamber, while an equivalent amount 
of acid is produced in the anode chamber, which is 
used for neutralizing the fabric. Gas diffusion elec-
trodes simultaneously generate hydrogen peroxide 
for bleaching. With a bipolar stack of electrodes, 
diffusion electrodes can be used as anode or cathode or both. The process does not produce hydrogen 
bubbles at the cathode, thereby avoiding hazards 
involving the gas (lin and Peng, 1994).
An electrochemical treatment was developed for 
the treatment of cotton in aqueous solution contain-
ing sodium sulphate. In this technique, the current 145 JOURNAl  OF COTTON SCIENCE, V olume 11, Issue 3, 2007
density was controlled between two electrodes. At 
the cathode, water is reduced to hydrogen and base, 
while at the anode it is oxidized to oxygen and acid. 
Favorable results on mercerization (scouring) and 
electrochemical sanitation of unmercerized (grey) 
cotton have been reported (Naumczyk et al., 1996).
Neutralization. According to Bradbury et al. 
(2000), replacement of acetic acid by formic acid for 
neutralization of fabric after scouring, mercerizing, 
bleaching, and reduction processes is effective, eco-
nomical, and environment-friendly. The procedure 
also allows a sufficient level of neutralization in a 
short period of time, needs low volumes of water, 
and results in low levels of BOD.
Dyeing. Treatment of fiber or fabric with chemi -
cal pigments to impart color is called dyeing. The 
color arises from chromophore and auxochrome 
groups in the dyes, which also cause pollution 
(Azymezyk et al., 2007). In the dyeing process, water 
is used to transfer dyes and in the form of steam to 
heat the treatment baths. Cotton, which is the world’s 
most widely used fiber, is a substrate that requires a 
large amount of water for processing. For example, 
to dye 1 kg of cotton with reactive dyes, 0.6–0.8 
kg of NaCl, 30–60 g of dyestuff, and 70–150 l of 
water are required (Chakraborty et al., 2005). more 
than 80,000 tonnes of reactive dyes are produced 
and consumed each year. Once the dyeing opera -
tion is over, the various treatment baths are drained, 
including the highly colored dye bath, which has 
high concentrations of salt and organic substances. 
The wastewater must be treated before reuse. Co-
agulation and membrane processes (nanofiltration or 
reverse osmosis) are among processes suggested for 
treatment of this water; however, these treatments 
are effective only with very dilute dye baths. Dye 
baths are generally heavily polluted. For example, 
wastewater produced by reactive dyeing contains 
hydrolyzed reactive dyes not fixed on the substrate 
(representing 20 to 30% of the reactive dyes applied 
on an average of 2 g/ l). This residual amount is 
responsible for the coloration of the effluents, and 
cannot be recycled. Dyeing auxiliaries or organic 
substances are non-recyclable and contribute to the 
high BOD/COD of the effluents.
membrane technologies are increasingly being 
used in the treatment of textile wastewater for the 
recovery of valuable components from the waste 
stream, as well as for reusing the aqueous stream. A 
number of studies deal with application of various 
pressure-driven membrane filtration processes in the treatment wastewater from the dyeing and finishing 
process (Chen et al., 2005).
measures adopted for the abatement of pollution 
by different dyes are 1) use of low material-to-liquor 
ratios, 2) use of trisodiumcitrate (Fiebig et al., 1992), 
3) replacement of reducing agent (sodium hydro -
sulphite) with a reducing sugar or electrochemical 
reduction (maier et al., 2004), and 4) use of suitable 
dye-fixing agents to reduce water pollution loads.
Padma et al. (2006) first reported the concept 
of totally ecologically friendly mordents or natural 
mordents during dyeing with natural dyes. Deo and 
Desai (1999) were the first to point out that natural 
dye shades could be built-up by a multiple dip 
method that renders natural dyeing more economical. 
Dyeing of natural and synthetic fibers with natural 
dyes has been the subject of several studies. Devel-opment of ecologically friendly non-formaldehyde dye fixative agents for reactive dyes was recently 
reported (Bechtold et al., 2005; Sekar, 1995).
Printing. Printing is a branch of dyeing. It is 
generally defined as ‘localized dyeing,’ i.e. dyeing 
that is confirmed to a certain portion of the fabric that 
constitutes the design. It is really a form of dyeing in 
which the essential reactions involved are the same as 
those in dyeing. In dyeing, color is applied in the form 
of a solution, whereas in printing color is applied in 
the form of a thick paste of the dye. Table 3 shows the 
pollution loads for a printing and finishing operation 
(50 polyester/50 cotton). The fixation of the color in 
printing is brought about by a suitable after-treatment of 
the printed material (El-molla and Schneider, 2006).
Table 3. Pollution loads for printing and finishing operations 
for 50% polyester/50% cotton blend fabric
ProcesspHBiological 
oxygen 
demandTotal 
dissolvable 
solids
per 1000 kg of product
Printing
Pigment  
(woven goods)6–8 1.26 5.0 0.13 2.5
Pigment  (knot goods)6–8 1.26 5.0 0.13 2.5
Vat dye  (woven goods)10.0 21.5 86 25 34
Vat dye  (knit goods)10.0 21.5 86 25 35
Resin finishing  
(woven goods)6–8 - - - 22
Resin finishing flat  
curing (woven goods)6–8 6.32 25 12 17.3146 BABU ET  Al.: TExTIlE PROCESSING AND EFFlUENT  TREATmENT
Textile fabric printing produces hydrocarbon 
effluents that must be removed before they reach 
the atmosphere. limits on emissions will become 
more restrictive in the future, which makes cleaning 
exhausts an environmental necessity. In India, a ma-
jority of textile printing units prefer to use kerosene 
in printing because of the brilliant prints and ease of 
application. In India alone, about 122 million liters 
of kerosene is released into the atmosphere annually 
during printing, drying, and curing. The resulting 
pollution of the atmosphere and wastage of hydro-
carbon products is colossal. Air-laden kerosene is 
harmful to human beings, as well as to the flora and 
fauna, in the neighborhood. Therefore, it is impera-
tive that as much kerosene as possible is recovered 
from the exhaust pipes of the printing industry.
Zachariah (1995) developed a process for the 
recovery of thin kerosene vapor. In this process, the 
percentage of recovery of kerosene from the printing 
drier was 78.5%, and the total percentage of recovery of kerosene consumed for the preparation of print 
paste was 58.8%.
The most common chemical in reactive dye 
printing is urea, which leads to a high pollution load. 
A number of attempts have been made to limit or 
eliminate the use of urea in the print paste to reduce effluent load. Geeta et al. (2004) developed a urea-free 
process in which caprolactam, PEG-400, and PEG-
600 partially or completely replaced urea in the dyeing 
and printing of reactive dyes on cotton fabrics. Cap-
rolactam in many reactive dyes can fully replace urea, 
while PEG-400 and PEG-600 replaced approximately 
50% of the dyes required for fixation. Other substitutes 
for urea include glycerin, cellosolve, sorbitol, polycar -
boxylic acid, PEG-200, and PEG-4000.
Printing is mainly done by a flat or rotary screen, 
and after every lot of printing some residual paste is 
left in the wastewater. This can be reused for printing of 
similar shades by adding new stock. Recently, screen-
free printing methods, such as ink-jet printing and 
electrostatic printing, have been developed that make 
use of an electronic control of color distribution on 
fabric. Screen-free printing methods are attractive for 
pollution mitigation (lukanova and Ganchev, 2005).
Finishing. Both natural and synthetic textiles are 
subjected to a variety of finishing processes. This is 
done to improve specific properties in the finished 
fabric and involves the use of a large number of 
finishing agents for softening, cross-linking, and wa-
terproofing. All of the finishing processes contribute to water pollution.Among the products that are used in textile finish-
ing, the most ecologically friendly ones are formalde-
hyde-based cross-linking agents that bestow desired 
properties, such as softness and stiffness that impart 
bulk and drape properties, smoothness, and handle, 
to cellulosic textiles. It can also lead to enhanced 
dimensional stability. A free surface characteristic of 
the fabric shows the evolution of un-reacted form -
aldehyde. This obviates the use of formaldehyde in 
the product and liberation of chemical products, and 
results in considerable reduction in the amount of 
formaldehyde during the cross-linking reaction that 
leads to toxicity and stream pollution. Generation of 
formaldehyde during vacuum extraction has been used 
in the storage of resin-finished fabrics and garments. 
The formaldehyde resin used as a cross-linking agent 
is a pollutant and a known carcinogen. much effort 
has been expended in the search for a substitute for 
formaldehyde (Hashem et al., 2005).
Since the late 1980s, there has been an increase in 
the demand for easy-care, wrinkle-resistant (durable 
press), 100% cotton apparel. Formaldehyde-based 
chemical finishes, such as dimethylol dihydroxyeth-
ylene urea and its etherified derivative with lower 
formaldehyde concentrations, are used to impart ease-
of-care characteristics and durable-press properties to 
cotton apparel. They are cost-effective and efficient 
(Hashem et al., 2005). The free formaldehyde on the 
finished fabric is a major drawback given the adverse 
effects of formaldehyde, which ranges from a strong 
irritant to carcinogenic. In addition, washing the ap-
parel pollutes the washing liquor. Because of its carci-
nogenic properties, the concentration of formaldehyde 
allowed in the workplace air space is limited to 0.1 
ppm. Furthermore, worker health must be monitored 
in the textile industry when formaldehyde is used. 
This is strictly stated in recent actions by federal 
regulatory agencies in most industrialized countries. 
The restrictions have sprouted renewed interest in non-
formaldehyde textile finishing substances in the cotton 
textile industry (El-Tahlawya et al., 2005). moreover, 
formaldehyde-based finishing is energy-intensive. A 
variety of cellulose cross-linking agents, such as poly-
carboxylic acids, have been investigated to provide 
non-formaldehyde easy-care finishing.
Natural polymeric substances, such as natural oil 
and wax, have been used for water-proofing; however, 
textiles made from natural fibers are generally more 
susceptible to biodeterioration compared with those 
made from synthetic fibers. Products, such as starch, 
protein derivatives, fats, and oils, used in the finishing 147 JOURNAl  OF COTTON SCIENCE, V olume 11, Issue 3, 2007
neutralization step BOD: 290 mg/l; neutralization 
COD: 830  mg/l; dyeing step BOD: 500  mg/l; dyeing 
step COD: 1440  mg/l; soaping step BOD: 310  mg/l; 
soaping step COD: 960 mg/l). Because aquatic or-
ganisms need light in order to develop, any deficit 
in the light reaching the aquatic life due to water 
coloration results in an imbalance in the ecosystem. 
moreover, river water meant for human consumption 
that is colored will increase treatment costs. Obvi-
ously, when legal limits are specified (although not 
in all countries), they are justified.
Figure 2. A flow diagram for treatment of cotton textile mill 
waste.Table 4. Composition of cotton textile mill waste
Characteristics Values
pH 9.8–11.8
Total alkalinity 17–22 mg/l as CaCO 3
BOD 760–900 mg/l
COD 1400–1700 mg/l
Total solids 6000–7000 mg/l
Total chromium 10–13 mg/lor sizing bath can also promote microbial growth. An 
ideal anti-bacterial finish should 1) not support growth 
of bacteria or fungi on the cloth, 2) be effective over 
the lifetime of the treated sample, 3) be durable against 
wash and bleaching, 4) pose no risk of adverse dermal 
or systemic effects, 5) have no detrimental influence 
on fabric properties, such as yellowing, handle, and 
strength, 6) be compatible with colorants and other 
finishes, such as softeners and resins, and 7) have low 
environmental impact of heavy metals, formaldehyde, 
phenols, and organic halogens.
There are few anti-bacterial fibers. There are a 
number of antibacterial chemicals are available (Son et 
al., 2006; Singh et al., 2005; El-Tahlawya et al., 2005), 
but they are man-made. There are many natural plant 
products that are known to slow down bacterial growth. 
Anti-bacterial properties have been detected in chemi-
cals extracted from the root, stem, leaves, flowers, fruits, 
and seeds of diverse species of plants (Kannan and 
Geethamalini, 2005). Sachan and Kapoor (2004) used 
natural herbal extracts for developing bacteria-resistant 
finishes for cotton fabric and wool felting. Years ago, 
wool was treated with chlorine, hypochlorite, and sul-
furyl chloride. Bio-polishing using cellulose enzymes 
is an environmentally friendly method to improve soft 
handling of cellulose fibers with reduced piling, less 
fuzz, and improved drape (Thilagavathi et al., 2005).
EFFLUENT TREATMENTS
Dyes in wastewater can be eliminated by vari-
ous methods. The wastewater from the dye house is 
generally multi-colored. The dye effluent disposed 
into the land and river water reduces the depth of 
penetration of sunlight into the water environment, 
which in turn decreases photosynthetic activity and 
dissolved oxygen (DO) (Table 4). The adverse ef-
fects can spell disaster for aquatic life and the soil. 
Figure 2 shows a flow diagram for treatment of 
cotton textiles, and the water and COD balance are 
depicted in Figure 3. many dyes contain organic 
compounds with functional groups, such as carbox-
ylic (–COOH), amine (–NH 2), and azo (–N=N–) 
groups, so treatment methods must be tailored to the 
chemistry of the dyes. Wastewaters resulting from 
dyeing cotton with reactive dyes are highly polluted 
and have high BOD/COD, coloration, and salt load. 
For example, this ratio for Drimaren HF (a cellulosic 
product from Clariant Chemicals, India) is constant 
and around 0.35 for each dyeing step (bleaching step 
BOD: 1850 mg/l; bleaching step COD: 5700 mg/l; Coagulation 
tank     H2SO4
Na3Po4Raw waste
Equalization 
BasinNeutral-
ization 
tankPrimary Settling 
tank
Secondary settling 
tankEffluent High rate trickling 
filter
Sand drying bed
Softened water
To laminating
To finishingEqualization dischargeDyes + axillaries
Softened waterYarn preparation
Knitting oilKnittingDyeing
WashingWashing
agents
Figure 3. Activites involving water in textile processing.148 BABU ET  Al.: TExTIlE PROCESSING AND EFFlUENT  TREATmENT
marrot and Roche (2002) have given more than 
100 references in a bibliographical review of textile 
wastewater treatment. Treatment operation and deci-
sion structure are shown in Figure 4. The physical 
methods include precipitation (coagulation, floccula-
tion, sedimentation) ( lin and Peng, 1996; Solozhenko 
et al., 1995; lin and liu, 1994; mcKay et al., 1987), 
adsorption (on activated carbon, biological sludges) 
(Pala and Tokat, 2002), filtration, or reverse osmosis 
membrane processes (Ghayeni et al., 1998; Treffry-
Goatley et al., 1983, Tinghui et al., 1983).Biological treatments. Biological treatments 
reproduce, artificially or otherwise, the phenomena 
of self-purification that exists in nature. Self-purifica-
tion is the process by which an aquatic environment 
achieves the re-establishment of its original quality 
after pollution. Biological treatments are different 
depending on the presence or absence of oxygen 
(Bl’anquez et al., 2006). ‘Activated sludge’ is a 
common process by which rates of elimination by 
oxidizable substances of the order of 90% can be 
realized (Pala and Tokat, 2002). Because of the low 
biodegradability of most of the dyes and chemicals 
used in the textile industry, their biological treatment 
by the activated sludge process does not always 
achieve great success. It is remarkable that most of 
these dyes resist aerobic biological treatment, so ad-
sorbents, such as bentonite clay or activated carbon, 
are added to biological treatment systems in order to 
eliminate non-biodegradable or microorganism-toxic 
organic substances produced by the textile industry 
(Pala and Tokat, 2002; marquez and Costa, 1996; 
Speccia and Gianetto, 1984).
Oxidative chemical treatment, or sometimes the 
use of organic flocculants (Pala and Tokat, 2002), 
is often resorted to after the biological treatment 
(ledakowic et al., 2001). These methods, which 
only release effluents into the environment per legal 
requirements, are expensive (around €2.5/kg for 
polyamide coagulant: a factor 10 compared with 
mineral coagulants).
Biological aerated filters (BAF) involve the 
growth of an organism on media that are held station-
ary during normal operation and exposed to aeration. 
In recent years, several BAF-based technologies 
have been developed to treat wastewater. Effluents 
from textile industry are among wastewaters that 
are hard to treat satisfactorily, because their com-
positions are highly variable. The strong color is 
most striking characteristic of textile wastewater. If 
unchecked, colored wastewater can cause a signifi-
cantly negative impact on the aquatic environment 
primarily arising from increased turbidity and pol-
lutant concentrations.
Coagulation–flocculation treatments. Coagu-
lation–flocculation treatments are generally used to 
eliminate organic substances, but the chemicals 
normally used in this process have no effect on the 
elimination of soluble dyestuffs. Although this pro-
cess effectively eliminates insoluble dyes (Gaehr et 
al., 1994), its value is doubtful because of the cost Figure 4. Electrochemical treatment and recovery of chemi-
cals from the textile effluent.Desizing Ultrafiltration
Reusable waterEvaporatorResinDyeingBleachingMercerizationReuse
Electrochemical treatment & 
recovery of process chemicalsActivated 
carbonElectrolysis (recovery of NaOH)
Azo dyes constitute the largest and the most 
important class of commercial dyes used in textile, 
printing, tannery, paper manufacture, and photogra-
phy industries. These dyes are inevitably discharged 
in industrial effluents. Azo dyes have a serious 
environmental impact, because their precursors and 
degradation products (such as aromatic amines) are 
highly carcinogenic (Szymczyk et al., 2007). Numer -
ous biodegradability studies on dyes have shown 
that azo dyes are not prone to biodegradation under 
aerobic conditions (O’Neill et al., 2000; Basibuyuk and Forster, 1997). These dyes are either adsorbed or 
trapped in bioflocs, which affects the ecosystem of 
streams, so they need to be removed from wastewater 
before discharge. Removal of dyes from wastewater 
can be effected by chemical coagulation, air flotation, 
and adsorption methods (malik and Sanyal, 2004; Se-
shadri et al., 1994). These traditional methods mainly 
transfer the contaminants from one phase to another 
phase without effecting any reduction in toxicity. 
Therefore, advance oxidation is a potential alternative 
to degrade azo dyes into harmless species.149 JOURNAl  OF COTTON SCIENCE, V olume 11, Issue 3, 2007
of treating the sludge and the increasing number of 
restrictions concerning the disposal of sludge.
Adsorption on powdered activated carbon.  
The adsorption on activated carbon without pretreat-
ment is impossible because the suspended solids 
rapidly clog the filter (Matsui et al., 2005). This 
procedure is therefore only feasible in combination 
with flocculation–decantation treatment or a biologi-
cal treatment. The combination permits a reduction 
of suspended solids and organic substances, as well 
as a slight reduction in the color (Rozzi et al., 1999), 
but the cost of activated carbon is high.
Electrochemical processes. Electrochemical 
techniques for the treatment of dye waste are more 
efficient than other treatments (Naumczyk et al., 
1996). Electrochemical technology has been applied 
to effectively remove acids, as well as dispersed 
and metal complex dyes. The removal of dyes from 
aqueous solutions results from adsorption and deg-
radation of the dye-stuff following interaction with 
iron electrodes. If metal complex dyes are present, 
dye solubility and charge are important factors that determine the successful removal of heavy metals. 
In order to maximize dye insolubility, pH control 
is crucial (Chakarborty et al., 2003; Vedavyasam, 
2000; Nowak et al., 1996; Calabro et al., 1990). Con-
ventional methods involve generation of secondary 
pollutants (sludge), but sludge formation is absent 
in the electrochemical method (Ganesh et al., 1994). 
Electrochemical treatment and recovery of chemicals 
from the effluent are shown in Fig. 4. In this process, 
the recovery of metals or chemicals is easily carried 
out. At the same time, the following environmental 
advantages are realized; emission of gases, solid 
waste, and liquid effluent are minimized.
The use of an electrolytic cell in which the dye 
house wastewater is recirculated has been described 
(lin and Chen, 1997; lin and Peng, 1994). The ad-
vantage of this process seems to be its capacity for 
adaptation to different volumes and pollution loads. 
Its main disadvantage is that it generates iron hy-
droxide sludge (from the iron electrodes in the cell), 
which limits its use. Electro-coagulation has been 
successfully used to treat textile industrial wastewa-
ters. The goal is to form flocs of metal hydroxides 
within the effluent to be cleaned by electro-dissolu-
tion of soluble anodes. Three main processes occur 
during electro-coagulation; electrolytic reactions at 
the electrodes; formation of coagulants in the aque-
ous phase and adsorption of soluble or colloidal pol-
lutants on coagulants; and removal by sedimentation and floatation. Electro-coagulation is an efficient 
process, even at high pH, for the removal of color 
and total organic carbon. The efficiency of the pro-
cess is strongly influenced by the current density and 
duration of the reaction. Under optimal conditions, decolorization yields between 90 and 95%, and COD 
removal between 30 and 36% can be achieved.
Ozone treatment. Widely used in water treat -
ment, ozone (either singly or in combinations, such 
as O
3-UV or O 3-H2O2) is now used in the treatment 
of industrial effluents (Langlais et al., 2001). Ozone 
especially attacks the double bonds that bestow 
color. For this reason, decolorization of wastewater 
by ozone alone does not lead to a significant reduc-
tion in COD (Coste et al., 1996; Adams et al., 1995). 
moreover, installation of ozonation plants can entail 
additional costs (Scott and Ollis, 1995).
MEMBRANE PROCESSES
Increasing cost of water and its profligate con-
sumption necessitate a treatment process that is 
integrated with in-plant water circuits rather than as 
a subsequent treatment (machenbach, 1998). From 
this standpoint, membrane filtration offers potential 
applications. Processes using membranes provide 
very interesting possibilities for the separation of 
hydrolyzed dye-stuffs and dyeing auxiliaries that 
simultaneously reduce coloration and BOD/COD 
of the wastewater. The choice of the membrane 
process, whether it is reverse osmosis, nanofiltration, 
ultrafiltration or microfiltration, must be guided by 
the quality of the final product.
Reverse osmosis. Reverse osmosis membranes 
have a retention rate of 90% or more for most types 
of ionic compounds and produce a high quality of 
permeate (Ghayeni et al., 1998; Treffry-Goatley et 
al., 1983; Tinghui et al., 1983). Decoloration and 
elimination of chemical auxiliaries in dye house 
wastewater can be carried out in a single step by re-
verse osmosis. Reverse osmosis permits the removal 
of all mineral salts, hydrolyzed reactive dyes, and 
chemical auxiliaries. It must be noted that higher the concentration of dissolved salt, the more important 
the osmotic pressure becomes; therefore, the greater the energy required for the separation process.
Nanofiltration. Nanofiltration has been ap-
plied for the treatment of colored effluents from the 
textile industry. A combination of adsorption and 
nanofiltration can be adopted for the treatment of 
textile dye effluents. The adsorption step precedes 150 BABU ET  Al.: TExTIlE PROCESSING AND EFFlUENT  TREATmENT
nanofiltration, because this sequence decreases con-
centration polarization during the filtration process, 
which increases the process output (Chakraborty et 
al., 2003). Nanofiltration membranes retain low-
molecular weight organic compounds, divalent 
ions, large monovalent ions, hydrolyzed reactive 
dyes, and dyeing auxiliaries. Harmful effects of 
high concentrations of dye and salts in dye house 
effluents have frequently been reported (Tang and 
Chen, 2002; Koyuncu, 2002; Bruggen et al., 2001; 
Jiraratananon et al., 2000; xu et al., 1999; Erswell 
et al., 1988). In most published studies concerning 
dye house effluents, the concentration of mineral 
salts does not exceed 20 g/l, and the concentration 
of dyestuff does not exceed 1.5 g/l  (Tang and Chen, 
2002). Generally, the effluents are reconstituted with 
only one dye (Tang and Chen, 2002; Koyuncu, 2002; 
Akbari et al., 2002), and the volume studied is also 
low (Akbari et al., 2002). The treatment of dyeing 
wastewater by nanofiltration represents one of the 
rare applications possible for the treatment of solu-
tions with highly concentrated and complex solutions 
(Rossignol et al., 2000; Freger et al., 2000; Knauf et 
al., 1998; Peuchot, 1997; Kelly and Kelly, 1995).
A major problem is the accumulation of dis-
solved solids, which makes discharging the treated 
effluents into water streams impossible. Various 
research groups have tried to develop economically 
feasible technologies for effective treatment of dye 
effluents (Karim et al., 2006; Cairne et al., 2004; 
Rott and Mike, 1999). Nanofiltration treatment as an 
alternative has been found to be fairly satisfactory. 
The technique is also favorable in terms of environ-
mental regulation.
Ultrafiltration. Ultrafiltration enables elimi -
nation of macromolecules and particles, but the 
elimination of polluting substances, such as dyes, is 
never complete (it is only between 31% and 76%) 
(Watters et al., 1991). Even in the best of cases, the 
quality of the treated wastewater does not permit 
its reuse for sensitive processes, such as dyeing 
of textile. Rott and minke (1999) emphasize that 
40% of the water treated by ultrafiltration can be 
recycled to feed processes termed “minor” in the 
textile industry (rinsing, washing) in which salinity 
is not a problem. Ultrafiltration can only be used as 
a pretreatment for reverse osmosis (Ciardelli and 
Ranieri, 2001) or in combination with a biological 
reactor (mignani et al., 1999).
Microfiltration. microfiltration is suitable 
for treating dye baths containing pigment dyes (Al-malack and Anderson, 1997), as well as for 
subsequent rinsing baths. The chemicals used in 
dye bath, which are not filtered by microfiltration, 
will remain in the bath. Microfiltration can also be 
used as a pretreatment for nanofiltration or reverse 
osmosis (Ghayeni et al., 1998).
CONCLUSIONS
Waste minimization is of great importance in 
decreasing pollution load and production costs. This 
review has shown that various methods can be ap-
plied to treat cotton textile effluents and to minimize 
pollution load. Traditional technologies to treat 
textile wastewater include various combinations 
of biological, physical, and chemical methods, but 
these methods require high capital and operating 
costs. Technologies based on membrane systems 
are among the best alternative methods that can be adopted for large-scale ecologically friendly treat-
ment processes. A combination methods involving 
adsorption followed by nanofiltration has also been advocated, although a major drawback in direct 
nanofiltration is a substantial reduction in pollutants, 
which causes permeation through flux.
It appears that an ideal treatment process for 
satisfactory recycling and reuse of textile effluent 
water should involve the following steps. Initially, 
refractory organic compounds and dyes may be elec-
trochemically oxidized to biodegradable constituents 
before the wastewater is subjected to biological 
treatment under aerobic conditions. Color and odor 
removal may be accomplished by a second electro-
oxidation process. microbial life, if any, may be 
destroyed by a photochemical treatment. The treated 
water at this stage may be used for rinsing and wash-
ing purposes; however, an ion-exchange step may 
be introduced if the water is desired to be used for 
industrial processing.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The support of the Director of the Central Elec-
trochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi- 630 006, 
India, is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
Abdessemed, D. and G. Nezzal. 2002. Treatment of primary 
effluent by coagulation adsorption-ultrafiltration for 
reuse. Desalination 152:367-373.151 JOURNAl  OF COTTON SCIENCE, V olume 11, Issue 3, 2007
Adams, C.D., W. Fusco, and T. Kanzelmeyer. 1995. Ozone, 
hydrogen peroxide/ozone and UV/ozone treatment of 
chromium and copper complex dyes: decolorization and 
metal release. Ozone Sci. Eng. 17:149-161.
Akbari, A., Remigy, J.C. and P. Aptel. 2002. Treatment of 
textile dye effluent using a polyamide-based nanofiltra -
tion membrane. Chem. Eng. Proc. 41:601-609.
Al-malack, m.H. and G.K. Anderson. 1997. Use of cross-
flow microfiltration in wastewater treatment. Water Res. 
31:3064-3072.
Arslan, I., I.A. Balcioglu, and D.W. Bahnemann. 2000. Ad-
vanced chemical oxidation of reactive dyes in simulated 
dyehouse effluents by ferrioxalate-Fenton/UV-A and 
TiO 2/UV-A processes. Dyes Pigments 47:207-218.
Azymezyk, m., A. El-Shafei, and H.S. Freeman. 2007. Design, 
synthesis and characterization of new iron complexed 
azo dyes. Dyes Pigments 72:8-15.
Basibuyuk m. and C.F. Forster. 1997. The use of sequential 
anaerobic/aerobic processes for the bio-treatment of a simu-
lated dyeing wastewater. Environ. Technol. 18:843-848.
Batra, S.H. 1985. Other long vegetable fibers: abaca, banana, 
sisal, henequen, flax, ramie, hemp, sunn, and coir. p. 
15-22. In m. lewin and E.m. Pearce (ed.). Handbook of 
fiber science and technology. V ol. IV , Fiber Chemistry. 
marcel Dekker, New York.
Bechtold, T., R. mussak, A. mahmud-Ali, E. Ganglberger, 
and S. Geissler. 2005. Extraction of natural dyes for 
textile dyeing from coloured plant wastes released 
from the food and beverage industry. J. Sci. Food Agric. 
86:233-242.
Bl´anquez, P., m. Sarr`a, and m.T. Vicent. 2006. Study of the 
cellular retention time and the partial biomass renovation 
in a fungal decolourisation continuous process. Water 
Res. 40:1650-1656.
Bortone, G., J.S. Cech, R. Bianchi, and A. Tilche. 1995. 
Effects of an anaerobic zone in a textile wastewater treat-
ment plant. Water Sci. Technol. 32:133-140.
Bradbury, m.J., P.S. Collishaw, and S. moorhouse. 2000. 
Controlled rinsing: A stepchange in reactive dye applica-
tion technology. Colourage Annu. 5:73-80.
Bruggen, V .B., B. Daems, D. Wilms, nd C. Vandecasteele. 
2001. Mechanisms of retention and flux decline for the 
nanofiltration of dye baths from the textile industry. Sep. 
Purif. Technol. 22:519-528.
Calabro, V ., G. Pantano, m. Kang, R. molinar, and E. Drioli. 
1990. Experimental study on integrated membrane 
processes in the treatment of solutions simulating textile 
effluents. Energy and energy analysis. Desalination 
78:257-277.Carine A., P. moulin, m. maisseu, and F. Charbit. 2004. Sav-
ings and re-use of salts and water present in dye house 
effluents. Desalination 162:13-22.
Chakraborty, S.S., S. De, J.K. Basu, and S. DasGupta. 2005. 
Treatment of a textile effluent: application of a combi -
nation method involving adsorption and nanofiltration. 
Desalination 174:73-85.
Chakraborty, S., m.K. Purkait, S. DasGupta, S. De, and J.K. 
Basu. 2003. Nanofiltration of textile plant effluent for 
color removal and reduction in COD. Sep. Purif. Technol. 
31:141-151.
Chavan, R.B. 2001. Environment-friendly dyeing processes 
for cotton. Ind. J. Fibre Textile Res. 4:239-242.
Chen, X., Z. Shen, X. Zhu, Y . Fan, and W. Wang. 2005. 
Advanced treatment of textile wastewater for reuse us-
ing electrochemical oxidation and membrane filtration. 
Water South Africa 31:127-132.
Ciardelli, G. and N. Ranieri. 2001. The treatment and reuse of 
wastewater in the textile industry by means of ozonation 
and electroflocculation. Water Res. 35:567-572.
Cooper, P. 1989. Are textiles finishing the environment? Int. 
Wool Secretariat Development Center Monogr. Int. Wool 
Secretariat, West Yorkshire, England.
Coste, C., O. Marmagne and J.-C. Jacquart. 1996. Effluents 
decoloration. l ’Industrie Textile 1278:46-51.
Deo, H.T. and B.K. Desai. 1999. Dyeing of cotton and jute 
with tea as a natural dye. Coloration Tech. 115:224-227.
Dhale A.D and V .V . mahajani. 2000. Studies on treatment of 
disperse dye waste: membrane-wet oxidation process. 
Waste Manage. 20:85-92.
El-molla, m.m. and R. Schneider. 2006. Development of 
eco-friendly binders for pigment printing of all types of 
textile fabrics. Dyes Pigments 71:130-137.
El-Tahlawya, K.F., K.A. El-bendaryb, A.G. Elhendawyc, and 
S.m. Hudson, S.m. 2005. The antimicrobial activity of 
cotton fabrics treated with different cross linking agents 
and chitosan carbohydrate. Polymers 60:421-430.
Erswell, A., C.J. Brouchaert, and C.A. Buckley. 1988. The 
reuse of reactive dye liquors using charged ultrafiltration 
membrane technology. Desalination 70:157-167.
Fiebig, H., J. Herlinger, J. Reichert, and T. Weller. 1992. The 
role of non-ionic auxiliaries for exhaust dyeing with 
reactive dyestuffs. Textile Praxis Int. (Foreign edition with 
English supplement) 5:11-23
Freger, V ., T.C. Arnot, and J.A. Howell. 2000. Separation of 
concentrated organic/inorganic salt mixtures by nanofil -
tration. J. membrane Sci. 178:185-193.152 BABU ET  Al.: TExTIlE PROCESSING AND EFFlUENT  TREATmENT
Gaehr, F., F. Hermanutz, and W. Oppermann. 1994. Ozo-
nation—an important technique to comply with new 
German laws for textile wastewater treatment. Water Sci. 
Technol. 30: 255-263.
Ganesh, R, D.B. Gregory, and D. michelsen. 1994. Fate of 
azo dyes in sludges. Water Res. 28:1367-1376.
Geeta Sheth, N.and A.A. Musale. 2004. Studies in fluores-
cence and photo degradation of stilbene-based fluores -
cent brighteners during interaction with polymers: theory 
applied to practice. Colourage 51:23-30.
Ghayeni, S.B., Beatson, P.J., Schneider, R.P. and Fane, A.G. 
1998. Water reclamation from municipal wastewater 
using combined microfiltration-reverse osmosis (ME-
RO): Preliminary performance data and microbiological 
aspects of system operation. Desalination 116:65-80.
Ghosh, P., and R. Gangopadhyay. 2000. Photofunctionaliza-
tion of cellulose and lignocellulose fibres using photoac -
tive organic acids. Eur. Polymer J. 3: 625-634.
Hashem, m., R. Refaie, and A. Hebeish. 2005. Cross-linking 
of partially carboxymethylated cotton fabric via cation-
ization. J. Clean. Prod. 13:947-954.
Jiraratananon, R., A. Sungpet, and P. luangsowan. 2000. 
Performance evaluation of nanofiltration membranes for 
treatment of effluents containing reactive dye and salt. 
Desalination 130:177-183.
Kannan, m.S.S., and R. Geethamalini, 2005. Natural dyes, a 
brief glimpse. Textile Asia 48:104-112.
Karim, m.m., A.K. Dasa, and S.H. lee. 2006. Treatment of 
colored effluent of the textile industry in Bangladesh 
using zinc chloride treated indigenous activated carbons. 
Anal. Chim. Acta 576:37-42.
Kelly, J. and P. Kelly. 1995. Nanofiltration of whey: qual -
ity, environmental and economic aspects. J. Soc. Dairy 
Technol. 48:20-25.
Knauf, R., U. meyer-Blumenroth, and J. Semel. 1998. Einsatz 
von embrnatrennverfahren in der chemischen industrie. 
Chem. Eng. Technol. 70:1265-1270.
Koyuncu, I. 2002. Reactive dye removal in dye/salt mixtures 
by nanofiltration membranes containing vinylsulphone 
dyes: effects of feed concentration and cross flow veloc -
ity. Desalination 143: 243-253.
langlais, B., Reckhow, D.A. and. Brink, D.R., 1991. Ozone 
in water treatment: application and engineering. lewis 
Publishers, Chelsea, london.
ledakowicz, S., m. Solecka, and R. Zylla. 2001. Biodeg-
radation, decolourisation and detoxification of textile 
wastewater enhanced by advanced oxidation processes. J. 
Biotechnol. 89:175-184.lin, S.H. and m.l  Chen. 1997. Treatment of textile wastewa-
ter by chemical methods for reuse. Water Res. 31:868-
876.
Lin. S.H. and W.Y . Liu. 1994. Continuous treatment of textile 
waster by ozonation and coagulation. J. Environ. Eng. 
ASlE 120:437-446.
lin, S.H. and F.C. Peng. 1994. Treatment of textile wastewa-
ter by electrochemical method. Water Res. 28: 277-282.
lin S.H. and F.C. Peng. 1996. Continuous treatment of textile 
wastewater by combined coagulation, electrochemical 
oxidation and activated sludge. Water Res. 30:587-592.
lukanova, V ., and.V .A. Ganchev. 2005. Possiblity for shrink-
age decrease of textile fabics made from cotton and 
viscose fibers. Fibre Textile East. Eur. 13:51-53.
machenbach, I., 1998. membrane technology for dyehouse 
effluent treatment. Membrane Technol. 58:7-10.
mcKay, G., G. Ramprasad, and P. mowli. 1987. Desorption 
and regeneration of dye colors from low-cost materials. 
Water Res. 21:375-377.
Maier, R., W. Schrott, T. Bechtold, and C.R. Melliand. 2004. 
Electrochemical bleaching in the finishing of jeans (Ger -
many) (Elektochemiwhes Bleichen in der Veredlung von 
Jeans). Tdberichte 85:11-12.
malik, P.K., and S.K. Sanyal. 2004. Kinetics of discolourisa-
tion of azo dyes in wastewater by UV/H2O2 process. 
Sep. Purif. Technol. 36:167-175.
marquez, m.C., and C. Costa. 1996. Biomass concentration in 
pact process. Water Res. 30:207-2085.
Marrot, B., and N. Roche. 2002. Wastewater treatment and 
reuse in textile industries, a review. Res. Adv. Water. Res. 
3:41–53.
matsui, Y ., R. murase, T. Sanogawa, N. Aoki, S. mima, T. In-
oue, and T. matsushita. 2005. Rapid adsorption pretreat-
ment with submicrometre powdered activated carbon 
particles before microfiltration. Water Sci. Technol. 
51:249-256.
Meier, J., T. Melin, and L.H. Eilers. 2002. Nanofiltration and 
adsorption on powdered adsorbent as process combina-
tion for the treatment of severely contaminated waste 
water. Desalination 146:361-366.
mignani, m., G. Nosenzo, and A. Gualdi. 1999. Innova-
tive ultrafiltration for wastewater reuse. Desalination 
124:287-292.
Naumczyk, J., I. Szpyrkowicz, and F.Z. Grandi. 1996. Elec-
trochemical treatment of textile wastewater. Water Sci. 
Technol. 33:17-24.
Nowak, K.M., M.K. Korbutowicza, and J. Winnicki.1996. 
Capillary membranes for separation of dye particles. 
Desalination 105:91.153 JOURNAl  OF COTTON SCIENCE, V olume 11, Issue 3, 2007
O’Neill, C., F.R. Hawkes, D.l. Hawkes, m.S. Esteves, and 
S.J. Wilcox. 2000. Anaerobic-aerobic bio-treatment of 
simulated textile effluent containing varied ratios of 
starch and azo dye. Water Res. 34: 2355-2361.
Padma, S.V ., S. Rakhi, D. mahanta, and S.C. Tiwari. 2006. Eco-
friendly sonicator dyeing of cotton with Rubia cordifolia  
linn. using biomordant. Dyes and Pigments11:1-6.
Pala, A., and E. Tokat. 2002. Color removal from cotton 
textile industry wastewater in an activated sludge system 
with various additives. Water Res. 36:2920-2925.
Peuchot, M. 1997. Nanofiltration d’effluents industriels. 
l’eau, l’industrie, les nuisances 201:26-30.
Pigmon, H.m., C.F. Brasquet, and P.l. Cloiree. 2003. Adsorp-
tion of dyes onto activated carbon cloths: approach 
of adsorption mechanisms and coupling of ACC with 
ultrafiltration to treat coloured wastewaters. Sep. Purif. 
Technol. 31:3-11.
Robinson, T., G. mcmullan, R. marchant, and P. Nigam. 
1997. Remediation of dyes in textile effluent: a critical 
review on current treatment technologies with a pro-
posed alternative. Colorage 44:247-255.
Rossignol, N.J., P. Jaouen, J.m. Robert, and F. Quéméneur. 
2000. Production of exocellular pigment by the marine 
diatom Haslea ostrearia Simonsen in a photobioreac-
tor equipped with immersed ultrafiltration membranes. 
Biotechnol. 73: 197-200.
Rott, U., and R. minke, 1999. Overview of wastewater treat-
ment and recycling in the textile processing industry. 
Water Sci. Technol. 40:37-144.
Rozzi, A., F. malpei, l. Bonomo, and R. Bianchi. 1999. Tex-
tile wastewater reuse in northern Italy (COMO). Water 
Sci. Technol. 39:121-128.
Sachan, K., and V .P. Kapoor. 2004. Eucalyptus bark dye: 
Standardization of extraction and eco-friendly dyeing 
profiles. Colourage 5:41-44.
Scott, J. P., and D. Ollis. 1995. Integrated chemical and bio-
logical oxidation processes for water treatment, review 
and recommendations. Environ. Prog. 14:88-103.
Sekar, N. 1995. Direct dyes: a brief review. Colorage 42:45-
52.
Seshadri, S., P.l. Bishop, and A.m. Agha.1994. Anaerobic/
aerobic treatment of selected azo dyes in wastewater. 
Waste Manage. 14:127-137.
Singh R., A. Jain, and S. Panwa. 2005. Antimicrobial activity 
of some natural dyes. Dyes and Pigments 66: 99-102.
Slokar, Y .m., and m.A. majcen. 1997. methods of decoloriza-
tion of textile wastewater. Dyes and Pigments 37:335-
356.Solozhenko, E.G., N.m. Soboleva, and V . Goncharuk. 1995. 
Decolorization of azo dye solutions by fenton oxidation. 
Water Res. 29:2-7.
Son, Y .A., B.S. Kim, K. Ravikumar, and S.G. lee. 2006. Im-
parting durable antimicrobial properties to cotton fabrics 
using quaternary ammonium salts through 4-aminoben-
zenesulfonic acid–chloro–triazine adduct. Eur. Polymer 
J. 42:3059-3067.
Speccia, V ., and A. Gianetto.1984. Powdered activated carbon 
in an activated sludge treatment. Water Res. 18:133-137.
Sule, A.D., and m.K. Bardhan. 1999. Objective evaluation of 
feel and handle, appearance and tailorability of fabrics. 
Part-II: The KES-FB system of Kawabata. Colourage 
46:23-28.
Szymczyk, m., A. El-Shafei, and H.S. Freeman. 2007. Design, 
synthesis, and characterization of new iron-complexed 
azo dyes. Dyes and Pigments 72:8-15.
Tang, C., and V . Chen. 2002. Nanofiltration of textile waste -
water for water reuse. Desalination 143:11-20.
Thilagavathi G., K. Rajendrakumar, T. Jeevarekha, and R. 
Rajendran. 2005. Cellulase enzyme softening. Textile 
Asia 36:1-32.
Tinghui, l., T. matsuura, and S. Sourirajan. 1983. Effect of 
membrane materials and average pore sizes on reverse 
osmosis separation of dyes. Ind. Eng. Chem. Prod. Res. Dev. 22:77-85.
Treffry-Goatley, K., C.A. Buckley, and G.R. Groves. 1983. 
Reverse osmosis treatment and reuse of textile dye house 
effluents. Desalination 47:313-320.
Vanndevivera, P.C., and R.W. Bianchi. 1998. Treatment and 
reuse of wastewater from the textile wet-processing 
industry: review of emerging technologies. J. Chem. 
Technol. Biotechnol. 72: 289-302.
Vedavyasan, C.V . 2000. Combating water shortages with in-
novative uses of membranes.  Desalination 132: 345-347.
Watters, J.C., E. Biagtan, and O. Sener. 1991. Ultrafiltration 
of textile plant effluent. Sep. Sci. Technol. 26:1295-1313.
xu, Y ., R. lebrun, P.J. Gallo, and P. Blond. 1999. Treatment 
of textile dye plant effluent by nanofiltration membrane. 
Sep. Sci. Technol. 34:2501-2519.
Yu, S., C. Gao, H. Su, and M. Liu. 2001. Nanofiltration used 
for desalination and concentration in dye production. 
Desalination 140:97-100.
Zachariah, J. 1995. Kerosene recovery in textile printing. The 
Bombay Textile Research Association (BTRA), Bombay, 
India.