Colour Chemistry
2nd edition
Robert M Christie
School of Textiles & Design, Heriot-Watt University, UK and
Department of Chemistry, King Abdulaziz University, Saudi ArabiaEmail: r.m.christie@hw.ac.uk
Print ISBN: 978-1-84973-328-1
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
rR M Christie 2015
All rights reservedApart from fair dealing for the purposes of research for non-commercial purposes or for
private study, criticism or review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and PatentsAct 1988 and the Copyright and Related Rights Regulations 2003, this publication may notbe reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior
permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry or the copyright owner, or in the
case of reproduction in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the CopyrightLicensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the terms of the licences issued by the
appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization outside the UK. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the terms stated here should be sent to The Royal Society ofChemistry at the address printed on this page.
The RSC is not responsible for individual opinions expressed in this work.
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry,
Thomas Graham House, Science Park, Milton Road,Cambridge CB4 0WF, UK
Registered Charity Number 207890
Visit our website at www.rsc.org/booksPreface
I was pleased to receive the invitation from the RSC to write this
second edition of Colour Chemistry following the success of the first
edition published in 2001. I am also appreciative of the broadly
positive reviews that the first edition received and of the favourable
comments that I have received from a wide range of individuals.
The initial approach to compiling this second edition involved tak-
ing stock of the original content, while also assessing the extensive
range of developments in colour chemistry that have taken place in
the intervening years. While the chemistry of the traditional classes
and applications of dyes and pigments is well-established, there
have been significant developments in other areas, especially in
topics related to functional dyes. The industry associated with the
manufacture and application of dyes and pigments has continuedto transfer substantially away from Europe and the USA towards the
emerging economies in Asia, especially to China and India, and
consequently many new developments are emerging from research
undertaken in that region. Two important textbooks have been pub-
lished in the last decade or so. I am honoured to pay a special tri-
bute to the late Heinrich Zollinger, whose third edition of Color
Chemistry appeared in 2003, and maintained the standard of detail,
originality and excellence for which this eminent author was re-
nowned. I also acknowledge the importance of Chromic Phenomena:
Technological Applications of Colour Chemistry, by Peter Bamfield
and Michael Hutchings, the second edition of which appeared in
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
v
2010. This excellent textbook, also published by the RSC, adopts an
original approach to the subject, organising the topics according to
the phenomena giving rise to colour. The experience and know-
ledge of these authors from an industrial perspective is evident
throughout their book.
This second edition of Colour Chemistry adopts broadly the original
philosophy and structure, retaining a relatively traditional approachto the subject. The content has been significantly revised and ex-
panded throughout, especially to reflect newer developments. The
book thus remains aimed at providing an insight into the chemistry
of colour, with a particular focus on the most important colorants
produced industrially. It is aimed at students or graduates who have
knowledge of the principles of chemistry, to provide an illustration of
how these principles are applied in producing the range of colours
that are all around us. In addition, it is anticipated that professionals
who are specialists in colour science, or have some involvement withthe diverse range of coloured materials in an industrial or academic
environment, will benefit from the overview of the subject that is
provided.
The opening chapter provides a historical perspective on how our
understanding of colour chemistry has evolved, leading to the de-
velopment of an innovative global industry. The second chapter
provides a general introduction to the physical, chemical and, to a
certain extent, biological principles which allow us to perceive col-
ours. This chapter has been expanded in particular to provide a dis-
cussion of the recent developments that have taken place in the use of
computational methods used to model and predict the properties ofcolorants by calculation. Chapters 3–6 encompass the essential
principles of the structural and synthetic chemistry associated with
the most important chemical classes of industrial dyes and pigments.
Chapters 7–11 deal with the applications of dyes and pigments, and in
particular the chemical principles underlying their technical per-
formance, not only in traditional applications such as textiles, print-
ing inks, coatings and plastics but also in an expanding range of high
technology or functional applications. The chapter on functional dyes
has been significantly re-written to reflect recent and current devel-opments in, for example, display technologies, solar energy con-
version and biomedical applications. A new chapter introduces the
chemistry of colour in cosmetics, with particular emphasis on hair
dyes, which reflects the continuing growth of a sector of the colour
industry that has thus far largely resisted the move from West to East.
I express my gratitude to my co-author of this chapter, Olivier Morel,vi Prefacefor his contribution. The final chapter provides an account of the
most important environmental issues associated with the manu-
facture and use of colour, which the industry is increasingly required
to acknowledge and address.
R. M. Christievii PrefaceContents
Chapter 1 Colour: A Historical Perspective 1
1.1 Introduction 1
1.2 The Early History of Dyes and Pigments 2
1.3 The Era of the Synthetic Dye 6
1.4 Colour Chemistry in the Twentieth Century 13
1.5 Recent and Current Trends in
Colour Chemistry 15
References 19
Chapter 2 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colour 21
2.1 Introduction 21
2.2 Visible Light 22
2.3 The Eye 25
2.4 The Causes of Colour 27
2.5 The Interaction of Light with Objects 28
2.6 Fluorescence and Phosphorescence 33
2.7 Dyes and Pigments 35
2.8 Classification of Colorants 36
2.9 Colour and Molecular Structure 38
2.9.1 Valence-Bond Approach to Colour/Structure
Relationships 40
2.9.2 Molecular Orbital Approach to
Colour/Structure Relationships 50
2.9.3 Molecular Mechanics 62
2.9.4 QSAR and QSPR 64
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M Christie
rR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
ix
2.10 Colour in Inorganic Compounds 66
2.10.1 Colour in Metal Complexes (Coordination
Compounds) 66
2.10.2 Colour from Charge Transfer Transitions
in Inorganic Materials 67
2.10.3 Colour in Inorganic Semiconductors 67
References 68
Chapter 3 Azo Dyes and Pigments 72
3.1 Introduction 72
3.2 Isomerism in Azo Dyes and Pigments 73
3.3 Synthesis of Azo Dyes and Pigments 78
3.3.1 Diazotisation 79
3.3.2 Azo Coupling 84
3.4 Strategies for Azo Dye and Pigment Synthesis 87
3.4.1 Synthesis of Monoazo Dyes and Pigments 88
3.4.2 Synthesis of Disazo Dyes and Pigments 88
3.4.3 Synthesis of Dyes and Pigments containing
more than two Azo Groups 92
3.5 Metal Complex Azo Dyes and Pigments 93
References 97
Chapter 4 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigments 99
4.1 Introduction 99
4.2 Anthraquinones 100
4.3 Indigoid Dyes and Pigments 105
4.4 Benzodifuranones 110
4.5 Fluorescent Carbonyl Dyes 111
4.6 Carbonyl Pigments 112
4.7 The Quinone–Hydroquinone Redox System 118
4.8 Synthesis of Carbonyl Colorants 119
4.8.1 Synthesis of Anthraquinones 119
4.8.2 Synthesis of Indigoid Colorants 125
4.8.3 Synthesis of Benzodifuranones and
Coumarin Dyes 126
4.8.4 Synthesis of Carbonyl Pigments 126
References 131
Chapter 5 Phthalocyanines 133
5.1 Introduction 133
5.2 Structure and Properties of Phthalocyanines 134
5.3 Synthesis of Phthalocyanines 140
References 145x ContentsChapter 6 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and
Pigments 147
6.1 Introduction 147
6.2 Polyene and Polymethine Dyes 147
6.3 Arylcarbonium Ion Colorants 155
6.4 Dioxazines 161
6.5 Sulfur Dyes 162
6.6 Nitro Dyes 164
References 166
Chapter 7 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes) 168
7.1 Introduction 168
7.2 Dyes for Protein Fibres 172
7.3 Dyes for Cellulosic Fibres 178
7.4 Dyes for Synthetic Fibres 184
References 191
Chapter 8 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibres 194
8.1 Introduction 194
8.2 Fibre-Reactive Groups 197
8.2.1 Fibre-Reactive Groups Reacting
by Nucleophilic Substitution 197
8.2.2 Fibre-Reactive Groups Reacting
by Nucleophilic Addition 203
8.3 Polyfunctional Reactive Dyes 206
8.4 Chromogenic Groups 207
8.5 Synthesis of Reactive Dyes 209
References 211
Chapter 9 Pigments 212
9.1 Introduction 212
9.2 Inorganic Pigments 217
9.2.1 Titanium Dioxide and other White
Pigments 218
9.2.2 Coloured Oxides and Oxide-hydroxides 221
9.2.3 Cadmium Sulfides, Lead Chromates and
Related Pigments 223
9.2.4 Ultramarines 226
9.2.5 Prussian Blue 227
9.2.6 Carbon Black 227xi Contents9.3 Organic Pigments 229
9.3.1 Azo Pigments 230
9.3.2 Copper Phthalocyanines 234
9.3.3 High performance Organic Pigments 235
9.4 Molecular and Crystal Modelling of Pigments 238
9.5 Pigments for Special Effects 244
9.5.1 Metallic Pigments 244
9.5.2 Pearlescent Pigments 245
9.5.3 Optically-Variable Pigments 246
9.5.4 Fluorescent Pigments 246
References 247
Chapter 10 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair
Coloration 250
10.1 Introduction 250
10.2 Colorants for Decorative Cosmetics 251
10.3 Hair Coloration 254
10.3.1 Oxidative Hair Coloration 259
10.3.2 Non-oxidative Hair Dyeing 262
References 265
Chapter 11 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and
Pigments 267
11.1 Introduction 267
11.2 Electronic Applications of Dyes and
Pigments 269
11.2.1 Colour in Electronic Displays 269
11.2.2 Laser Dyes 280
11.2.3 Dyes in Solar Energy Conversion 282
11.2.4 Dyes in Optical Data Storage 288
11.3 Reprographics Applications of Dyes and
Pigments 291
11.3.1 Electrophotography 291
11.3.2 Inkjet Printing 294
11.3.3 Dye Diffusion Thermal Transfer (D2T2)
Printing 298
11.4 Biomedical Applications of Dyes 299
11.4.1 Biological Stains and Probes 299
11.4.2 Photodynamic Therapy 300
11.5 Chromic Materials 303
11.5.1 Ionochromism 304
11.5.2 Thermochromism 305
11.5.3 Photochromism 309xii Contents11.5.4 Electrochromism 312
11.5.5 Miscellaneous Colour Change Phenomena 313
References 314
Chapter 12 Colour and the Environment 318
References 331
Subject Index 333xiii ContentsCHAPTER 1
Colour: A Historical Perspective
1.1 INTRODUCTION
We only have to open our eyes and look around to observe how im-
portant a part colour plays in our everyday lives. Colour pervades all
aspects of our lives, influencing our moods and emotions and gen-
erally enhancing the way in which we enjoy our environment. In
addition to its literal meaning, we often use the term colour in more
abstract ways, for example to describe aspects of music, language and
personality. We surround ourselves with the colours we like and
which make us feel good. Our experience of colour emanates from a
rich diversity of sources, both natural and synthetic. Natural colours
are all around us, in the earth, the sky, the sea, animals and birds and
in the vegetation, for example in the trees, leaves, grass and flowers.These colours can play important roles in the natural world, for ex-
ample as sources of attraction and in defence mechanisms associated
with camouflage. Plant pigments, especially chlorophyll, the domin-
ant natural green pigment, play a vital role in photosynthesis in
plants, and thus may be considered as vital to our existence! Colour is
an important aspect in our enjoyment of food. We frequently judge
the quality of meat products, fruit and vegetables by the richness of
their colour. There is also convincing evidence that colorants present
naturally in foods may bring us positive health benefits, for exampleas anti-oxidants, which are suggested to play a role in protection
against cancer. In addition, there is a myriad of examples of synthetic
colours, products of the chemical manufacturing industry, which we
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
1
tend to take so much for granted these days. Synthetic colours often
serve a purely decorative or aesthetic purpose in the clothes we wear,
in paints, plastic articles, in a wide range of multicoloured printed
materials such as posters, magazines and newspapers, in photo-
graphy, cosmetics, toiletries, ceramics, and on television and film.
There are many examples of colours playing pivotal roles in society. In
clothing, the desire for fashion sets colour trends, and the symbolismof colours is important in corporate wear and uniforms. Individual
nations adopt specific national colours that are reflected, for example,
in national flags and as displayed by sports teams. In some cases,
colours may be used to convey vital information associated with
safety, for example in traﬃc lights and colour-coded electrical cables.
Colour is introduced into these materials and applications using
substances known as dyes and pigments , or collectively as colorants .
The essential diﬀerence between these two colorant types is that dyesare soluble coloured compounds which are applied mainly to textilematerials from solution in water, whereas pigments are insoluble
compounds incorporated by a dispersion process into products
such as paints, printing inks and plastics. The reader is directed to
Chapter 2 of this book for a more detailed discussion of the distinc-
tion between dyes and pigments as colouring materials.
1.2 THE EARLY HISTORY OF DYES AND PIGMENTS
The human race has made use of colour since prehistoric times, for
example in decorating the body, in colouring the furs and skins worn
as clothing and in the paintings that adorned cave dwellings.
1Of
course, in those days the colours used were derived from natural re-sources. The dyes used to colour clothing were commonly extracted
either from botanical sources, including plants, trees, roots, seeds,
nuts, fruit skins, berries and lichens, or from animal sources such ascrushed insects and molluscs. Pigments for paints were obtained
from coloured minerals, such as ochre and haematite which are
mostly based on iron oxides, giving yellows, reds and browns, dug
from the earth, ground to a fine powder and mixed into a crude
binder. Charcoal from burnt wood provided the early forerunners of
carbon black pigments. The durability of these natural inorganic
pigments, which contrasts with the more fugitive nature of natural
dyes, is demonstrated in the remarkably well-preserved Palaeolithic
cave paintings found, for example, in Lascaux in France and Altamira
in Spain.2 Chapter 1Synthetic colorants may also be described as having an ancient
history, although this statement applies only to a range of pigments
produced from rudimentary applications of inorganic chemistry.
These very early synthetic inorganic pigments have been manu-
factured and used in paints for thousands of years.2,3The ancient
Egyptians were responsible for the development of probably theearliest synthetic pigment, Egyptian Blue later known as Alexandriablue, a mixed silicate of copper and calcium, which has been iden-
tified in murals dating from around 1000 BC. This development
added bright blue, a colour not readily available from natural min-
erals, to the artists’ palette. Arguably the oldest synthetic colorant still
used significantly today is Prussian blue, the structure of which has
been established as iron(
III) hexacyanoferrate( II). The manufacture of
this blue inorganic pigment is much less ancient, dating originallyfrom the middle of the seventeenth century. However, it is noteworthy
that this product pre-dates the origin of synthetic organic dyes andpigments by more than a century.
Synthetic textile dyes are exclusively organic compounds and, in
relative historical terms, their origin is much more recent. Textile
materials were coloured exclusively with natural dyes until the mid-
nineteenth century.
4–9Since most of nature’s dyes are rather unstable,
the dyeings produced in the very early days tended to be quite fugitive,for example to washing and light. Over the centuries, however, dyeing
procedures, generally quite complex, using a selected range of natural
dyes were developed that were capable of giving reasonable quality
dyeing on textile fabrics. Since natural dyes generally have little direct
aﬃnity for textile materials, they were usually applied together withcompounds known as mordants , which were eﬀectively ‘fixing-agents’.
Metal salts, for example of aluminium, iron, tin, chromium or copper,were the most commonly used mordants. They functioned by forming
metal complexes of the dyes within the fibre. These complexes were
insoluble and hence more resistant to washing processes. These
agents not only improved the fastness properties of the dyeings, but
also in many instances were essential to develop the intensity and
brightness of the colours produced by the natural dyes. Some natural
organic materials, such as tannic and tartaric acids, may also be usedas mordants. The most important natural blue dye, and arguably the
most important natural dye, is indigo, 1.1a, obtained from certain
plants, for example Indigofera tinctoria found in India and in other
regions of Asia, and woad, Isatis tinctoria , a flowering plant that grows
in Europe and the USA.
10,11Natural indigo dyeing – still practised
quite widely as a traditional craft process in Asia and North Africa for3 Colour: A Historical Perspectivetextiles and clothing, often to provide textile garments with tradi-
tional symbolic status – commonly starts with the fermentation of
extracts of the leaves harvested from the plants to release the indigo
precursors. Dyeing may be carried out directly from a vat where the
fermentation of composted leaves takes place in the presence of alkali
from wood ash or limestone to produce precursors that are oxidised
in air on the fibre to give indigo. Alternatively, the blue pigment maybe isolated and applied by a reduction/oxidation process, in a
‘natural’ version of vat dyeing (Chapter 7). In these ways, indigo
produces attractive deep blue dyeings of good quality without the
need for a mordant. A chemically-related product is Tyrian purple, the
principal constituent of which is 6,6
0-dibromoindigo (1.1b ). This
colouring material was for many years a fashionable, aristocraticpurple dye extracted from the glands of Murex brandaris , a shellfish
found on the Mediterranean and Atlantic coasts.
12,13It is said to have
required the use of 10 000 shellfish to provide one gram of dye, whichno doubt explains why the luxurious, bright purple fabrics were
available only to the ruling class elite in Mediterranean and Middle
Eastern societies, and also the consequent association of the colour
purple with wealth and nobility. Natural red dyes were derived from
vegetable (madder) or animal (cochineal, kermes and lac insect)
sources. Madder is extracted from the roots of shrubs of the Rubia
species, such as Rubia tinctorum . The main constituent is alizarin, 1,2-
dihydroxyanthraquinone, 1.2. Alizarin provides a relevant example of
the use of the mordanting process, since it readily forms metalcomplexes within fibres, notably with aluminium. These complexes
show more intense colours and an enhanced set of fastness propertiescompared with the uncomplexed dyestuﬀ. The main constituent of
cochineal, obtained from dried parasitic insect species, is carminic
acid, 1.3, a rather more complex anthraquinone derivative. There is a
wide range of natural yellow dyes of plant origin, one of the best-known being weld, obtained from flowering plant species such as
Reseda luteola. The main constituents of the dye obtained from these
plants, which also requires mordanting for application to textiles, are
the flavononoids, leuteolin, 1.4a, and apigenin, 1.4b. Natural green
textile dyes proved elusive, because pigments such as chlorophyll, 1.5,
could not be made to fix to natural fibres and also faded rapidly.Lincoln Green was commonly obtained from weld over-dyed with
indigo. Over the centuries, natural dyes and pigments have also
been used for their medicinal qualities. Logwood is a flowering tree
(Haematoxylum campechianum ) used as a natural dye source; it still
remains an importance source of haematoxylin, 1.6, which generates4 Chapter 1the chromophoric species by oxidation. Logwood has also been used
in histology as a staining agent and extracts also have medical ap-
plications. On textiles, the colour developed from logwood varies
(black, grey, blue, purple) depending on the mordant used as well as
the application pH.
N
N
OO H
HRR
(a):  R = H;  ( b)  R = Br.1.1
O
OOH
OH
1.2
O
OCH3
HO2COH
H O O H
OHOHOH 2C
OHOH
HO
1.3
O
OHHOOH
R
O
1.4 (a) R=OH; (b) R=H5 Colour: A Historical PerspectiveN N
NNH3C C2H5R
CH3 H3CMg
O CO2CH3
C20H39O2C
R = CH 3: chlorophyll a
R = CHO: chlorophyll b1.5O HOOH
OH
OHHO
1.6
1.3 THE ERA OF THE SYNTHETIC DYE
It may be argued that the first synthetic dye was picric acid, 1.7, which
was first prepared in the laboratory in 1771 by treating indigo with
nitric acid. Much later, a more eﬃcient synthetic route to picric acid
from phenol as the starting material was developed. Picric acid was
found to dye silk a bright greenish-yellow colour but it did not attain
any real significance as a practical dye mainly because the dyeings
obtained were of poor quality, especially in terms of lightfastness.
However, it did find limited use at the time to shade indigo dyeings togive bright greens.
OH
NO2
NO2O2N
1.7
The foundation of the synthetic dye industry is universally attributed
to Sir William Henry Perkin on account of his discovery in 1856 of a
purple dye that he originally gave the name Aniline Purple, but which
was later to become known as Mauveine.14–18Perkin was a young en-
thusiastic British organic chemist who was carrying out research not6 Chapter 1aimed initially at dyes but rather at developing a synthetic route to
quinine, the antimalarial drug. Malaria was a devastating condition at
the time and natural quinine, a product often in short supply and ex-
pensive, was the most eﬀective treatment. His objective in one par-ticular set of experiments was to attempt to prepare synthetic quinine
from the oxidation of allyltoluidine, but his attempts to this end proved
singularly unsuccessful. With hinds ight, this is not too surprising in
view of our current knowledge o f the complex heteroalicyclic structure
of quinine. As an extension of this r esearch, he turned his attention to
the reaction of the simplest aromatic amine, aniline, with the oxidizing
agent, potassium dichromate. This reaction gave a black product which
might have seemed rather unpromising to many chemists, but from
w h i c hP e r k i nd i s c o v e r e dt h a tal o wyield of a purple dye could be ex-
tracted with organic solvents. An evaluation of the new dye in a silk
dyeworks in Perth, Scotland, establishe d that it could be used to dye silk
a rich purple colour and that the resulting textile dyeings gave reason-
able fastness properties. The positive response and also the technical
assistance from an application perspective provided to Perkin by Roger
Pullar, the dyer, was probably a decisive feature in what was to follow,
since other traditional dyers prov ed more sceptical towards this revo-
lutionary concept. The particular colour of the dye was significant to itsultimate success. It oﬀered a poten tially low cost means to reproduce
the rich purple colour that was formerly obtainable from Tyrian purple,the use of which had been more or less discontinued centuries before.
The colour was certainly superior to the ‘false shellfish purples’ of the
time, which were extractable from lichens and to the dull purples as-
sociated with mixtures of red and blue natural dyes, such as madder
and indigo. Perkin showed remarkabl e foresight in recognising the
potential of his discovery. He too k out a patent on the product and had
the boldness to instigate the deve lopment of a large-scale manu-
facturing process, using his father’s life savings, to build a factory atGreenford Green, near London, to manufacture the dye. Since the
manufacture required the development of large-scale industrial pro-cedures for the manufacture of aniline fr om benzene via reduction of
nitrobenzene, the real significance of Perkin’s venture was as the originof the organic chemicals industry. This industry has evolved from such
a humble beginning to become a dominant feature of the industrial
base of many economies worldwide and to influence fundamentally the
development of a wide range of indispensible modern products such as
pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, plastics, syn thetic fibres, explosives,
perfumes and photography. For many years, the structure of Mauveinewas reported erroneously as 1.8. It has been demonstrated from an7 Colour: A Historical Perspectiveanalytical investigation of an original sample that the dye is a mixture,
and that the structures of the principal constituents are in fact com-
pounds 1.9and1.10, with other minor constituents also identified.19,20
T h ep r e s e n c eo ft h em e t h y lg r o u p s ,which are an essential feature of theproduct, demonstrate that it was fortuitous that Perkin’s crude aniline
contained significant quantities of the toluidines. Compound 1.9,t h e
major component of the dye, is derived from two molecules of aniline,
one of p-toluidine and one of o-toluidine, while compound 1.10 is
formed from one molecu le of aniline, one of p-toluidine and two mol-
ecules of o-toluidine. It is likely, as the manufacturing process de-
veloped, that individual batches of the dye were variable in composition.
Mauveine was launched on the market in 1857 and enjoyed rapid
commercial success. Through its unique colour, it became highly de-
sirable in the fashion houses of London and Paris. As an example im-
portant to the marketing of the product, Queen Victoria wore a mauve
dress to her daughter’s wedding. Indeed, the introduction of Mauveine,in association with other concurrent deve lopments such as the emer-
gence of department stores, the sewing machine and fashion maga-zines, arguably initiated the democra tisation of fashion that had
previously been available only to th e wealthy upper classes of society.
NN H3C
H2NCH3
N
CH3H+
1.8
NN H3C
H2 N NCH3
H+
1.98 Chapter 1NN H3C
H2 N NCH3
HCH3
+
1.10
During the several years following the discovery of Mauveine, re-
search activity in dye chemistry intensified especially in Britain,
Germany and France.21For the most part, chemists concentrated on
aniline as the starting material, adopting a largely empirical approachto its conversion into coloured compounds, and this resulted in the
discovery, within a very short period of time, of several other synthetictextile dyes with commercial potential. In fact the term ‘Aniline Dyes’
was for many decades synonymous with synthetic dyes.
22The most
notable among the initial discoveries were in the chemical class nowknown as the arylcarbonium ion or triphenylmethine dyes (Chapter 6).
An important commercially successful product that rapidly fol-
lowed Mauveine was Fuschine, a rich red dye, also to become known
as Magenta, which was introduced in 1859.
23,24Magenta was first
prepared by the oxidation of crude aniline (containing variablequantities of the toluidines) with tin(
IV) chloride. The dye contains
two principal constituents, rosaniline, 1.11 and homorosaniline, 1.12,
the central carbon atom being derived from the methyl group ofp-toluidine. A structurally-related dye, rosolic acid, had been prepared
H2N NH2
NH2
1.11+H2N NH2
NH2CH3+
1.129 Colour: A Historical Perspectivein the laboratory in 1834 by the oxidation of crude phenol, and
therefore may also be considered as one of the earliest synthetic dyes,
although its commercial manufacture was not attempted until the
1860s. Structure 1.13 has been suggested for rosolic acid, although it
seems likely that other components were present. A range of newdyes, providing a wide range of bright fashion colours, yellows, reds,
blues, violets and greens, as well as browns and blacks, soon emergedand these proved ultimately to be superior in properties and more
economic compared with Mauveine, the production of which ceased
after about ten years.
O OH
OHCH3
1.13
Undoubtedly the most significant discovery in colour chemistry in
the ‘post-Mauveine’ period was due to the work of the Germanchemist Peter Griess, which provided the foundation for the devel-
opment of the chemistry of azo dyes and pigments (Chapter 3). In
1858, Griess demonstrated that the treatment of a primary aromaticamine with nitrous acid gave rise to an unstable salt (a diazonium
salt), which could be used to prepare highly coloured compounds.
The earliest azo dyes were prepared by treatment of primary aromatic
amines with a half equivalent of nitrous acid, so that half of the amine
was diazotised and the remainder acted as the coupling component in
the formation of the azo compound. The first commercial azo dye was
4-aminoazobenzene, 1.14, Aniline Yellow, prepared in this way from
aniline, although it proved to have quite poor dyeing properties. Amuch more successful commercial product was Bismarck Brown(originally named Manchester Brown), which was actually a mixture
of compounds, the principal constituent being compound 1.15. This
dye was obtained directly from m-phenylenediamine as the starting
material and was introduced commercially in 1861. The true value of
azo dyes emerged eventually when it was demonstrated that diﬀerent
diazo and coupling components could be used, thus extending10 Chapter 1dramatically the range of coloured compounds that could be
prepared. The first commercial azo dye of this type was chrysoidine,
which was derived from reaction of diazotized aniline with m-
phenylenediamine and was introduced to the market in 1876. This wasfollowed soon after by a series of orange dyes (Orange I, II, III and IV),
which were prepared by reacting diazotized sulfanilic acid (4-amino-
benzene-1-sulfonic acid) with, respectively, 1-naphthol, 2-naphthol,N,N-dimethylaniline and diphenylamine. In 1879, Biebrich Scarlet,
1.16, the first commercial disazo dye to be prepared from separate
diazo and coupling components, was introduced. From this historical
beginning, azo colorants have emerged as by far the most important
chemical class of dyes and pigments, dominating most applications
(Chapter 3). It was becoming apparent that the synthetic textile dyes
that were being developed were less expensive, easier to produce on
an industrial scale, easier to apply, more versatile, and capable of
providing better colour and technical performance than the range ofnatural dyes applied by traditional methods. As a consequence,
within 50 years of Perkin’s initial discovery, around 90% of textile
dyes were synthetic rather than natural, and azo dyes had emerged as
the dominant chemical type.
N
H N N 2
1.14
H2NNH2
N
NNNNH2
NH2
1.15
N
N NNaO 3SSO3Na
NHO
1.1611 Colour: A Historical PerspectiveTowards the end of the nineteenth century, a range of organic
pigments was also being developed commercially, particularly for
paint applications. Inorganic pigments had been in use for many
years, providing excellent durability, but generally rather dull colours.
It was well-known that brighter, more intense colours could be pro-
vided by products commonly referred to as lakes , which were obtained
from dyes by precipitation on to inert white powders. The name is
derived from the lac insect from which a red colorant related to car-
minic acid, 1.3, was derived. An early pigment lake was prepared by
precipitation of this colorant on to an inorganic mineral substrate.25
This technology proved to be readily applicable to the range of es-
tablished water-soluble synthetic textile dyes, whereby anionic dyes
were rendered insoluble by precipitation on to inert colourless in-
organic substrates such as alumina and barium sulfate while cationic
dyes were treated with tannin or antimony potassium tartrate to give
insoluble pigments. Their introduction was followed soon after by thedevelopment of a group of yellow and red azo pigments, such as the
Hansa Yellows and b-naphthol reds, which did not contain sub-
stituents capable of salt formation. Many of these products are still ofconsiderable importance today, and are referred to commonly as the
classical azo pigments (Chapter 9).
It is of interest, and in a sense quite remarkable, that at the time of
Perkin’s discovery of Mauveine chemists had very little understanding
of the principles of organic chemistry. As an example, even the
structure of benzene, the simplest aromatic compound, was an un-
known quantity. Kekule ´’s proposal concerning the cyclic structure of
benzene in 1865 without doubt made one of the most significant
contributions to the development of organic chemistry. It is certain
that the commercial developments in synthetic colour chemistry
which took place from that time onwards owed much to the coming of
age of organic chemistry as a science. For example, the structures of
some of the more important natural dyes, including indigo, 1.1a, and
alizarin, 2, were elucidated. In this period, well before the advent of
the modern range of instrumental analytical techniques that are now
used routinely for structural analysis, these deductions usually arose
from painstaking investigations of the chemistry of the dyes, com-monly involving a planned series of degradation experiments from
which identifiable products could be isolated. Following the eluci-
dation of the chemical structures of these natural dyes, a considerable
amount of research eﬀort was devoted to devising eﬃcient synthetic
routes to these products. The synthetic routes that were developed for
the manufacture of these dyes ultimately proved to be significantly12 Chapter 1more cost-eﬀective than the traditional methods, which involved ex-
tracting the dyes from natural sources, and in addition gave the
products more consistently and with better purity. At the same time,
by exploring the chemistry of these natural dye systems, chemists
were discovering a wide range of structurally-related dyes that could
be produced synthetically and had excellent colour properties and
technical performance. As a consequence, the field of carbonyl dyechemistry, and the anthraquinones in particular, had opened up. This
group of dyes remains for many textile applications the second most
important chemical class, after azo dyes, in use today (Chapter 4).
1.4 COLOUR CHEMISTRY IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY
In the first half of the twentieth century, new chemical classes of
organic dyes and pigments continued to be discovered. Probably the
most significant discovery was of the phthalocyanines, which have
become established as the most important group of blue and green
organic pigments.
26As with virtually every other new type of chro-
mophore developed over the years, the discovery of the phthalocya-nines was fortuitous. In 1928, chemists at Scottish Dyes,Grangemouth (later to become part of ICI), observed the presence of a
blue impurity in certain batches of phthalimide produced from the
reaction of phthalic anhydride with ammonia. They were able to
isolate the blue impurity and subsequently its structure was estab-
lished as iron(
II) phthalocyanine. The source of the iron proved to be
the reactor vessel wall, which had become exposed to the reactants asa result of a damaged glass lining. As it turned out, the formation of
phthalocyanines had almost certainly been observed previously, al-
though the compounds were not characterised and the significance of
the observations was not recognised. Following their industrial dis-
covery in Scotland, the chemistry of formation of phthalocyanines,together with its relationship with their chemical structure and
properties, was investigated extensively by Linstead of Imperial Col-
lege, London.
27The elucidation of the structure of the phthalocyanine
system by Robertson was historically important as one of the firstsuccessful applications of X-ray crystallography in the structure de-
termination of organic molecules.
28Copper phthalocyanine, 1.17, has
emerged as by far the most important product, a blue pigment that iscapable of providing a brilliant intense blue colour and excellent
technical performance, yet at the same time can be manufactured atlow cost in high yield from commodity starting materials (Chapter 5).
The discovery of this unique product set new standards for13 Colour: A Historical Perspectivesubsequent developments in dye and pigment chemistry. Although
copper derivatives provide the most important colorants, complexes
of phthalocyanines with an extensive range of other metals are well-
established and have other industrial applications, for example as
photosensitisers, semiconductors and catalysts.29
NN
N
N
N
NNNCu
1.17
As time progressed, the strategies adopted in dye and pigment re-
search evolved from the early approaches based largely on empiricismand involving the synthesis and evaluation of large numbers of
products, to a more structured approach involving more fundamental
studies of chemical principles. For example, attention turned to
the reaction mechanisms involved in the synthesis of dyes and pig-
ments and to the interactions between dye molecules and textile
fibres. Probably the most notable advance in textile dyeing in the
twentieth century, which arguably emerged from such fundamentalinvestigations, is the process of reactive dyeing. Reactive dyes contain
functional groups that, after application of the dyes to certain fibres,
can be linked covalently to the polymer molecules that make up the
fibres, and this gives rise to dyeings with superior washfastness
compared with the more traditional dyeing processes. Dyes that
contain the 1,3,5-triazinyl group, discovered by ICI in 1954, were the
first successful group of fibre-reactive dyes. The introduction of these
products to the market as Procion dyes by ICI in 1956, initially for
application to cellulosic fibres such as cotton, proved to be a rapidcommercial success.
30,31The chemistry involved when Procion dyes
react with the hydroxyl groups present on cellulosic fibres under al-kaline conditions involves the aromatic nucleophilic substitution
process outlined in Scheme 1.1, in which the cellulosate anion is the
eﬀective nucleophile. The range of industrial reactive dyes developed
significantly in the second half of the twentieth century, with the14 Chapter 1introduction of alternative types of reactive groups and with the aim
to address the enhancement of fixation together with a series of re-
lated environmental issues. Reactive dyes have become the most
popular application class of dyes for cellulosic fibres, and their use
has been extended to a certain extent to other types of fibres, notably
wool, silk and nylon (Chapter 8).
1.5 RECENT AND CURRENT TRENDS IN COLOUR CHEMISTRY
In the latter part of the twentieth century, new types of dyes and
pigments for the traditional applications of textiles, leather, plastics,
paints and printing inks continued to be developed and introduced
commercially but at a declining rate. Clearly, the colour manu-
facturing industries considered that a mature range of products
existed for these conventional applications. The cost of introducingnew products to the market, not only in terms of R&D eﬀort but also
in addressing the increasing demands of toxicological evaluation, was
becoming increasingly prohibitive. Emphasis transferred towards
process and product development and optimisation, and the con-
solidation of existing product ranges. At the same time, during this
period, research in organic colour chemistry developed new dir-
ections, as a result of the opportunities presented by the emergence of
a range of applications in new technologies, demanding new types of
colorant. These colorants have commonly been termed functional dyes
because the applications require the dyes to perform certain func-tions beyond simply providing colour.
32,33The concept of functional
dyes was, of course, not new. The role of dyes found in nature almost
always extends beyond the need to provide colour, familiar examples
of which include solar energy harvesting in photosynthesis and the
mechanism of visual perception.34Qualitative and quantitativeNNNCl
XNNNO
XCell
DYEDYE
covalently-bonded dye Procion (1,3,5-triazinyl) reactive dyeCell-O–
Scheme 1.1 Reaction of Procion dyes with cellulosic fibres.15 Colour: A Historical Perspectiveanalytical applications have traditionally relied extensively on the use
of specific dyes or colour-forming reactions, although modern in-
strumental analytical techniques have commonly superseded these
approaches. Biological applications of dyes, such as staining techni-
ques are also long-established. The applications of the modern range
of functional dyes, which have also been referred to as p-functional
materials, include reprographic techniques, such as electro-
photography and digital inkjet printing, electronic applications in-
cluding optical data storage, display technologies, lasers and solar
energy conversion, and a range of medical uses (Chapter 11). In
addition, dyes and pigments that change colour when exposed to an
external stimulus, especially when that change is controllable and
reversible, for example thermochromic and photochromic dyes, have
attracted renewed interest in view of their potential applications as
‘smart’ colouring materials.
For these new applications, but also for traditional uses, the con-
cepts of computer-aided molecular design of dyes for specific prop-erties have become increasingly important. Of particular significance
in this respect is the fact that a range of molecular and quantum
mechanical calculation methods has developed from their origin and
perception as complex academic theoretical exercises into accessible,
routine tools that can be applied to the calculation of properties of
dyes, facilitated by the dramatic advances in computing technology
that have taken place. The Pariser–Pople–Parr (PPP) molecular orbital
method initially proved of particular value, largely because of its
versatility and modest computing demands, although subsequently a
range of more sophisticated methods has become increasingly avail-able. Indeed, methods involving density functional theory (DFT) have
become the current methods of choice. From knowledge of the mo-
lecular structure of a dye, these methods may be used with a rea-
sonable degree of confidence to predict its colour properties by
calculation, including the hue of the dye from its absorption max-
imum, and its intensity as indicated by its molar extinction co-
eﬃcient. The availability of these methods allows the potential
properties of large numbers of dye mo lecules to be screened as an
aid to the selection of syntheti c targets (Chapter 2). These methods
also apply to the calculation of the molecular properties of pigments.However, to address further the calculation of the properties of
pigments, which commonly exist as discrete nanocrystalline par-
ticles, the principles of crystal engineering have been developed.
Crystal engineering may be defined as an understanding of inter-
molecular interactions in the context of crystal packing and the16 Chapter 1utilisation of such understanding in the design of new materials
with desired chemical and physical properties. Structural infor-
mation obtained from X-ray crystallographic studies of pigments
may be used to predict, for exampl e, the morphology of the particles
and the eﬀect of additive incorporation at the particle surfaces(Chapter 9).
The diketopyrrolopyrroles (DPP), exemplified by compound 1.18,
represent probably the most successful new chromophoric systemintroduced in more modern times. These have provided high per-
formance brilliant red pigments that exhibit properties similar to the
phthalocyanines. The formation of a DPP molecule was first reported
in 1974 as a minor product obtained in low yield from the reaction of
benzonitrile with ethyl bromoacetate and zinc.
35A study by research
chemists at Ciba Geigy into the mechanistic pathways involved in theformation of the molecules led to the development of an eﬃcient
‘one-pot’ synthetic procedure for the manufacture of DPP pigmentsfrom readily available starting materials (Chapter 4). The develop-
ment of DPP pigments has emerged as an outstanding example of the
way in which an application of the fundamental principles of syn-
thetic and mechanistic organic chemistry can lead to an important
commercial outcome. These products are now manufactured on a
large commercial scale with purpose-built facilities in Switzerland
and the USA. There are potential lessons for colour chemists. It
demonstrates that, well over a century after Perkin’s discovery of
Mauveine, there may well be unrealised scope for the development
of new improved colorants for traditional colour applications.
HNNH
OOCl
Cl1.1817 Colour: A Historical PerspectiveIn addition, while powerful sophisticated molecular modelling
methods are now available to assist in the design of new coloured
molecules, the foresight to follow-up and exploit the fortuitous dis-
covery of a coloured compound, perhaps as a trace impurity in a re-
action, will remain a vital complementary element in the search for
new dyes and pigments.
The increasing public sensitivity towards the environment has had
a major impact on the chemical industry in recent years. There is nodoubt that one of the most important challenges to industry currently
is the requirement to satisfy increasingly demanding toxicological
and environmental constraints not only as a consequence of legisla-
tion but also of the growing public concern surrounding issues as-
sociated with the ecology of the planet. Since the products of the
colour industry are designed to enhance our living environment, it
may be argued that this industry has a special responsibility to ensure
that its products and processes do not have an adverse impact on theenvironment in its wider sense.
36,37Recent decades have seen major
progressive changes in the colour industry. The structure of the tra-ditional colorant manufacturing industry in Europe changed dra-
matically as a result of a series of mergers, acquisitions and the
development of toll manufacturing arrangements. Long-established
entities such as ICI in the UK, Hoechst in Germany and Ciba in
Switzerland either disappeared or had little remaining association
with colour. Manufacturing capacity declined substantially in the
traditional heartlands where the original discoveries and inventions
were made and the products and processes were developed, in Europe
and in the USA. This has been accompanied by rapid growth of theindustry in Asia, mainly in China and India. As well as the influence
on the national economies and industrial cultures which is accom-
panying this trend, there is a consequent transfer of responsibility for
dealing with the environmental issues towards those countries who
are progressively manufacturing, supplying and applying most of the
world’s colour. Some of the most important environmental issues
associated with colour manufacture and application are discussed in
Chapter 12. However, Western Europe and the USA currently retain
some dominance in industries dealing with the manufacture of dyesand pigments for cosmetics applications, including hair dyes. This
feature may be attributed, to a certain extent, to the cultural associ-
ation of products branded as cosmetics with the Western fashion and
design industry, often linked with specific brand names. The im-
portant topic of the chemistry of colour as applied in cosmetics is
covered in Chapter 10.18 Chapter 1REFERENCES
1. M. V. Orna, The Chemical History of Color , Springer, Heidelberg,
2013.
2. H. Skelton, Rev. Prog. Coloration , 1999, 29, 43.
3. F. Brunello, The Art of Dyeing in the History of Mankind , Neri Pozza,
Vicenza, 1973.
4. E. Knecht, C. Rawson and R. Loewenthal, A Manual of Dyeing ,
Charles Griﬃths and Co. Ltd., London, 4th edn, 1917, vol. 1.
5. J. H. Hofenk de Graaﬀ, The Colourful Past, Origins, Chemistry and
Identification of Natural Dyestuﬀs , Archetype Publications Ltd.,
Riggisberg, Switzerland, 2004.
6. D. Cardon, Natural Dyes: Sources, Tradition, Technology and
Science , Archetype Publications, London, 2007.
7. H. Schweppe, Handbuch der Naturfarbstoﬀe: Vorkommen,
Verwendung, Nachweis, Nikol, Hamburg, 1993.
8. A. S. B. Ferreira, A. H. Hulme, H. McNab and A. Quye, Chem. Soc.
Rev., 2004, 33, 329.
9. T. Bechtold and R. Mussak, Handbook of Natural Colorants , John
Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, 2009.
10. J. Balfour-Paul, Indigo, British Museum Press, London, 1998.
11. C. J. Cooksey, Biotech Histotech. , 2007, 82, 105.
12. I. I. Ziderman, Rev. Prog. Coloration , 1986, 16, 46.
13. C. J. Cooksey, Dyes History Archaeol. , 1994, 12, 57.
14. W. H. Perkin, J. Chem. Soc. Trans. , 1896, 596.
15. W. H. Perkin, J. Chem. Soc. Trans. , 1879, 717.
16. J. Boulton, J. Soc. Dyers Colour. , 1957, 73, 81.
17. S. Garfield, Mauve: How One Man Invented a Colour that Changed
the World, WW Norton, New York, 2001.
18. I. Holme, Color. Technol. , 2006, 122, 235.
19. O. Methcohn and M. Smith, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I , 1994, 5.
20. J. Seixas de Melo, S. Takato, M. Sousa, M. J. Melo and A. J. Parola,
Chem. Commun. , 2007, 2624.
21. M. R. Fox, Dye-Makers of Great Britain 1856–1976. A History of
Chemists, Companies, Products and Changes , Imperial Chemical
Industries plc, Manchester, 1987.
22. W. T. Johnston, Biotech Histotech. , 2008, 83, 83.
23. M. Chastrette, Actualite Chim. , 2009, 48.
24. C. Cooksey and A. Dronsfield, Biotech Histotech. , 2009, 84,179.
25. R. M. Christie and J. L. Mackay, Color. Technol. , 2008, 24, 133.
26. C. C. Leznoﬀ and A. B. P. Lever, Phthalocyanines: Properties and
Applications , VCH, Weinheim, 1983.19 Colour: A Historical Perspective27. R. P. Linstead, J. Chem. Soc. , 1934, 1035.
28. J. Robertson, J. Chem. Soc. , 1935, 613.
29. N. B. McKeown, Phthalocyanine Materials: Synthesis, Structure and
Function , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1998.
30. I. D. Rattee, Rev. Prog. Color , 1984, 14, 50.
31. A. H. M. Renfrew and J. A. Taylor, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1990, 20,1 .
32. P. Gregory, High Technology Applications of Organic Colorants,
Plenum Press, New York, 1991.
33. S-H. Kim (ed.), Functional Dyes , Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.
34. N. Hampp and A. Silber, Pure Appl. Chem. , 1996, 68, 1361.
35. D. G. Farnum, G. Mehta, G. G. I. Moore and F. P. Siegal,
Tetrahedron Lett. , 1974, 29, 2549.
36. A. Reife and H. S. Freeman, Environmental Chemistry of Dyes and
Pigments , John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1996.
37. R. M. Christie (ed.), Environmental Aspects of Textile Dyeing ,
Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2007.20 Chapter 1CHAPTER 2
The Physical and Chemical Basis
of Colour
2.1 INTRODUCTION
It has been said that the presence of colour requires three things: a
source of illumination, an object to interact with the light that em-
anates from this source and a human eye to observe the eﬀect whichresults. In the absence of any one of these, it may be argued that
colour does not exist. Indeed, colour is a perceptual phenomenon
rather than a property of an object. A treatment of the basic principles
underlying the origin of colour thus requires consideration of each of
these three aspects, which brings together concepts arising from
three natural science disciplines: chemistry, physics and biology. Al-
though the principal aim of this textbook is to deal with the chemistry
of dyes and pigments, a complete appreciation of the science of
colour cannot be achieved without some knowledge of the funda-mental principles of the physical and biological processes that ul-
timately give rise to our ability to observe colours. This chapter
therefore presents an introduction to the physics of visible light and
the way it interacts with materials, together with a brief description
of the physiology of the eye and how it responds to stimulation by light,
thus giving rise to the sensation of colour. In addition, the chapter
contains a discussion of some of the fundamental chemical principles
associated with coloured compounds, including a description of how
dyes and pigments may be classified, followed by an overview of the
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
21
ways in which the chemical structure of a molecule influences its
colour properties. This section places special emphasis on the prin-
ciples as applied to azo colorants because of their particular import-
ance in the colour industry. These topics are presented as a prelude to
the more detailed discussion of the chemistry of dyes and pigments
contained in later chapters of this book.
2.2 VISIBLE LIGHT
Visible light refers to the region of the electromagnetic spectrum to
which our eyes are sensitive and corresponds to radiation within the
very narrow wavelength range 360–780 nm. Since the sensitivity of
the eye to radiation is very low at each of these extremes, in practice
the visual spectrum is commonly taken as 380–720 nm. Beyond the
extremes of this range are the ultraviolet (UV) region of the spectrum
(below 360 nm) and the infrared (IR) region (above 780 nm). Normalwhite light contains this entire wavelength range, although not ne-
cessarily in equal intensities. There are numerous sources of white
light, some natural and some artificial in origin. The most familiar
natural illumination is daylight, originating from the sun. The visible
light from the sun not only allows us to see objects, but it is in fact
essential for life since it is the source of energy responsible for
photosynthesis, the vital process that allows plants to grow and thus
provides us with an essential food source. Normal daylight en-
compasses the complete visible wavelength range although its exact
composition is extremely variable and dependent on various factors
such as the geographical location, the prevailing weather conditions,the time of day and the season. Artificial illuminants, such as the
tungsten lamps, fluorescent lights and light emitting diodes (LEDs)
which are used for interior lighting, are also sources nominally of
white light, although the composition of the light from these sources
varies markedly depending on the type of lamp in question. For ex-
ample, tungsten lights appear yellowish as the light they emit is de-
ficient in the blue region of the spectrum. Colours do appear diﬀerent
under diﬀerent illumination sources, although when the human vis-
ual system assesses colours it is capable of making some allowancefor the nature of the light source, for example by compensating for
some of the deficiencies of particular artificial light sources.
The splitting of white light into its various component colours is a
familiar phenomenon. It may be achieved in the laboratory, for ex-
ample, by passing a beam of white light through a glass prism, or
naturally, as in a rainbow where the colours are produced by the22 Chapter 2interaction of sunlight with raindrops. The visible spectrum is made
up of specific wavelength regions that are recognised by the eye in
terms of their characteristic colours. The approximate wavelength
ranges of light corresponding to these observed colours are given in
the first column of Table 2.1. Fundamental to the specification of
colours is an understanding of the laws of colour mixing, the pro-
cesses by which two or more colours are combined to ‘synthesise’ new
colours. There are two fundamentally diﬀerent ways in which this
may be achieved: additive and subtractive colour mixing. Additive
colour mixing, as the name implies, refers to the mixing of coloured
lights, so that the source of illumination is observed directly by the
eye. Subtractive colour mixing is involved when colours are observed
as a result of reflection from or transmission through an object after it
interacts with incident white light. The colours red,green and blue are
referred to as the additive primary colours. Their particular signifi-
cance is that they are colours that cannot be obtained by the mixing of
lights of other colours, but they may be combined additively in ap-
propriate proportions to produce the other colours. As illustrated in
Figure 2.1(a), additive mixing of red and blue produces magenta, blue
and green gives cyan, while combining red and green additively givesyellow. When all three primaries are mixed in this way, white light is
created since the entire visible spectral range is present. An everyday
situation in which additive colour mixing is encountered is in dis-
plays, such as those used in colour television and computer monitors.
To create multicolour eﬀects, separate red, green and blue (RGB)
emitting phosphors are used in the case of traditional cathode-ray
tubes, which are rapidly declining in popularity. The flat-screen de-
vices that have largely replaced cathode-ray tubes include plasma,
liquid crystal and electroluminescent displays. These use varioustechnologies to create the multicolour eﬀect, for example with emit-
ting phosphors or using coloured microfilters, although in each caseTable 2.1 Complementary colour relationships.
Wavelength range (nm) Colour Complementary colour
400–435 Violet Greenish-yellow
435–480 Blue Yellow
480–490 Greenish-blue Orange
490–500 Bluish-green Red
500–560 Green Purple
560–580 Yellowish-Green Violet
580–595 Yellow Blue
595–605 Orange Greenish-blue
605–750 Red Bluish-green23 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colouremploying the principles of additive RGB mixing (Chapter 11). When
an object absorbs light of a given colour corresponding to its par-
ticular wavelength range, it is the complementary colour that is ob-
served. The complementary colour corresponds to the remaining
wavelengths of incident light, which are either transmitted or re-
flected, depending on whether the object is transparent or opaque,
and are then detected by the eye. These complementary colour rela-
tionships are also given in Table 2.1. For example, an object thatabsorbs blue light (i.e. , in the range 435–480 nm) will appear yellow,
because the red and green components are reflected or transmitted.This forms the basis of subtractive colour mixing . This type of colour
mixing, which is involved when dyes and pigments are mixed in ap-plication, is the more familiar of the two processes. The subtractive
primary colours are yellow ,magenta and cyan. These are the colours,
for example, of the three printing inks used commonly to produce thevast quantities of multicolour printed material we encounter in our
daily lives, such as magazines, posters, newspapers, etc., and also in
the inkjet printers that are linked to computers as used in home and
oﬃce printing. The principles of subtractive colour mixing are illus-
trated in Figure 2.1(b).
The colours described in Table 2.1 that are observed as a result of
the selective light absorption process are referred to as chromatic . If all
wavelengths of light are reflected from an object, it appears to the eyeas white. If no light is reflected, we recognise it as black. When dyes or
pigments of the three subtractive primaries, yellow, magenta and
cyan, are mixed together, black is produced as all wavelengths of light
are absorbed. If the object absorbs a constant fraction of the incident
Figure 2.1 (a) Additive colour mixing; (b) subtractive colour mixing.
rShutterstock.24 Chapter 2light throughout the visible region, it appears grey. White, black and
grey are therefore referred to as achromatic since in those cases there
is no selective absorption of light involved.
2.3 THE EYE
Colour is a perception rather than a property of an object. The sen-
sation of colour that we experience arises from the interpretation by
the brain of the signals that it receives viathe optic nerve from the eye
in response to stimulation by light. Indeed, we can never knowwhether the sensation of colour that we experience matches with thatof another observer. This section contains a brief description of the
components of the eye and an outline of how each of these contrib-
utes to the mechanism by which we observe colours. Figure 2.2 shows
a cross-section diagram of the eye, indicating some of the more im-
portant components.
The eye is enclosed in a white casing known as the sclera , or col-
loquially as the ‘white of the eye’. The retina is the photosensitive
component and is located at the rear of the eye. It is here that the
image is formed by the focusing system. Light enters the eye through
thecornea , a transparent section of the sclera, which is kept moist and
free from dust by the tear ducts and by blinking of the eyelids. The
light passes through a transparent flexible lens, the shape of which is
determined by muscular control, and which acts to form an inverted
image on the retina. The light control mechanism involves the iris,a n
annular shaped opaque layer, the inner diameter of which is
Figure 2.2 Components of the eye.
rShutterstock.25 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourcontrolled by the contraction and expansion of a set of circular and
radial muscles. The aperture formed by the iris is termed the pupil .
Light passes into the eye through the pupil, which normally appearsblack since little of the light entering the eye is reflected back. The
diameter of the pupil is small under high illumination, but expands
when illumination is low in order to allow more light to enter.
The retina owes its photosensitivity to a mosaic of light sensitive
cells known as rods and cones , which derive their names from their
physical shape. There are about 6 million cone cells, 120 million rod
cells and 1 million nerve fibres distributed across the retina. It is the
rods and cones that translate the optical image into a pattern of nerve
activity that is transmitted to the brain by the fibres in the optic nerve.
At low levels of illumination only the rod cells are active and a type of
vision known as scotopic vision operates, while at medium and high
illumination levels only the cone cells are active, and this is gives risetophotopic vision. There is only one type of rod-shaped cell present in
the eye. The rods provide essentially a monochromatic view, allowing
perception only of lightness and darkness. The sensitivity of rods to
light depends on the presence of a photosensitive pigment known as
rhodopsin , which consists chemically of the carotenoid, retinal, bon-
ded to the protein, opsin. Rhodopsin is continuously generated in theeye and is also destroyed by bleaching on exposure to light. At low
levels of illumination (night or dark-adapted vision), this rate of
bleaching is low and thus there is suﬃcient rhodopsin present for the
rods to be sensitive to the small amount of light available. At high
levels of illumination, however, the rate of bleaching is high so that
only a small amount of rhodopsin is present and the rods con-sequently have low sensitivity to light. At these higher levels of illu-
mination, it is only the cone cells that are sensitive. The cones provide
us with full colour vision as well as the ability to perceive lightness
and darkness. The sensitivity of cones to light depends on the pres-
ence of the photosensitive pigment iodopsin , which is retained up to
high levels of illumination. Thus, in normal daylight when the rodsare inactive, vision is provided virtually entirely by the response of the
cone cells. Under ideal conditions, a normal observer can distinguish
about 10 million separate colours. Three separate types of cone cellshave been identified in the eye and our ability to distinguish colours
is associated with the fact that each of the three types is sensitive to
light of a particular range of wavelengths. The three types of cone cell
have been classified as long, medium and short corresponding to the
wavelength of maximum response of each type. Short cones are most
sensitive to blue light, the maximum response being at a wavelength26 Chapter 2of about 440 nm. Medium cones are most sensitive to green light, the
maximum response being at a wavelength of about 545 nm. Long
cones are most sensitive to red light, the maximum response being at
a wavelength of about 585 nm. Colour vision is thus trichromatic and
we see colours based on the principles of colour mixing. The specific
colour sensation perceived by the eye is governed by the response of
the three types of cone cells to the particular wavelength profile withwhich they are interacting.
1
We do not all perceive colours in the same way. Colour vision de-
ficiency (a term that is preferable to ‘colour blindness’) is relatively
common. Its prevalence may be as high as 8% in males although only
around 0.5% in females. The reasons for the gender diﬀerences are
associated with the fact the most important genes governing colour
vision are located in the X chromosome, of which males have only
one, while females have two. Colour vision deficiencies are not con-
sidered as seriously debilitating conditions, but the individuals con-cerned are at a distinct disadvantage when performing tasks that
require colour discrimination. There are a number of diﬀerent types
of colour vision deficiency which vary in the degree of severity.
1The
mildest and most common form of colour vision deficiency isanomalous trichromacy . In the individuals concerned, there is a defect
in the colour mixing mechanism so that they accept colour matchesthat an individual with normal colour vision will not. Dichromacy is a
more severe form of colour vision deficiency in which one set of conesis not functional. Monochromacy is the most severe form of congenital
colour vision deficiency in which colour discrimination is absentbecause at least two sets of cones are dysfunctional and vision isdominated by the rods.
2.4 THE CAUSES OF COLOUR
It is commonly stated that there are 15 specific causes of colour,
arising from various physical and chemical mechanisms.
2These
mechanisms may be collected into five broad groupings:
(a) colour from simple excitations: from gas excitation ( e.g., vapour
lamps, neon signs), and from vibrations and rotations ( e.g., ice,
halogens);
(b) colour from ligand field eﬀects: from transition metal com-
pounds and from transition metal impurities;
(c) colour from molecular orbitals: from organic compounds and
from charge transfer;27 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colour(d) colour from band theory: in metals, in semiconductors, in
doped semiconductors and from colour centres;
(e) colour from geometrical and physical optics: colour from dis-
persion, scattering, interference and diﬀraction.
This book is focussed on the industrially important organic dyes
and pigments and, to a certain extent, inorganic pigments and thus
deals mostly with colour generated by the mechanisms described by
group (c), although the reader will find examples of the other mech-
anisms on occasions also.
2.5 THE INTERACTION OF LIGHT WITH OBJECTS
The most obvious requirement of a dye or pigment to be useful in its
applications is that it must have an appropriate colour. Of the manyways in which light can interact with objects, the two most important
from the point of view of their influence on colour are absorption and
scattering . Absorption is the process by which radiant energy is util-
ised to raise molecules in the object to higher energy states. Scattering
is the interaction by which light is re-directed as a result of multiple
refractions and reflections. In general, if only absorption is involved
when light interacts with an object, then the object will appear
transparent as the light that is not absorbed is transmitted through
the object. If there are scattering centres present, the object will ap-pear either translucent or opaque, depending on the degree of scat-
tering, as light is reflected back to the observer.
Electronic spectroscopy, often referred to as UV/visible spec-
troscopy, is a useful instrumental technique for characterising the
colours of dyes and pigments.
3These spectra are obtained from ap-
propriate samples using a spectrophotometer operating either intransmission (absorption) or reflection mode. UV/visible absorption
spectra of dyes in solution, such as that illustrated in Figure 2.3, are
useful analytically, qualitatively to assist the characterisation of the
dyes and as a sensitive method of quantitative analysis. They also
provide important information to enable relationships between thecolour and the molecular structure of the dyes to be developed.
A dye in solution owes its colour to the selective absorption by dye
molecules of certain wavelengths of visible light. The remaining
wavelengths of light are transmitted, thus giving rise to the observed
colour. The absorption of visible light energy by the molecule promotes
electrons in the molecule from a low energy state, or ground state ,t oa
higher energy state, or excited state . The dye molecule is therefore said28 Chapter 2to undergo an electronic transition during this excitation process. The
energy diﬀerence, DE, between the electronic ground state and the
electronic excited state is given by Planck’s relationship:
DE¼hv
where his a constant (Planck’s constant) and nis the frequency of
light absorbed. Alternatively, the relationship may be expressed as:
DE¼hc/l
where cis the velocity of light (also a constant) and lis the wavelength
of light absorbed. Thus, there is an inverse relationship between theenergy diﬀerence between the ground and excited states of the dyeand the wavelength of light that it absorbs. As a consequence, for
example, a yellow dye, which absorbs short wavelength (blue) light,
requires a higher excitation energy than, say, a red dye which absorbs
longer wavelength (bluish-green) light (Table 2.1).
There are several ways of describing in scientific terms the char-
acteristics of a particular colour. One method that is especially useful
for the purposes of relating the colour of a dye to its UV/visible
spectrum in solution is to define the colour in terms of three attri-
butes: hue (or shade), strength (or intensity) and brightness. The hueof a dye is determined essentially by the absorbed wavelengths of
light, and so it may be characterised to a reasonable approximation by
the wavelength of maximum absorbance (the l
maxvalue) obtained
from the UV/visible spectrum, at least in those cases where there is asingle visible absorption band. A shift of the absorption band towards
longer wavelengths, (i.e. , a change of hue in the direction yellow -
orange-red-violet-blue-green), for example as a result of aAbsorbance
wavelength (nm)200 300 400 500 600 700λmax
Figure 2.3 UV/visible absorption spectrum of a typical red dye in solution.29 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourstructural change in a dye molecule, is referred to as a bathochromic
shift. The reverse eﬀect, a shift towards shorter absorbed wave-
lengths, is described as a hypsochromic shift.
A useful measure of the strength or intensity of the colour of a dye is
given by the molar extinction coeﬃcient (e)a ti t sl maxvalue. This
quantity may be obtained from the UV/visible absorption spectrum ofthe dye using the Beer–Lambert Law, i.e.:
A¼ecl
where Ais the absorbance of the dye at a particular wavelength, eis
the molar extinction coeﬃcient at that wavelength, cis the concen-
tration of the dye and lis the path length of the cell (commonly 1 cm)
used for measurement of the spectrum. The Beer–Lambert law isobeyed by most dyes in solution at low concentrations, although when
dyes show molecular aggregation eﬀects in solution, deviations from
the law may be encountered. However, since the colour strength of adye is more correctly related to the area under the absorption band, it
is important to treat its relationship with the molar extinction co-
eﬃcient as qualitative and dependent to a certain extent on the shape
of the absorption curve.
A third attribute of colour is brightness, although this property may
be described in various other ways, for example as brilliance, vibrance
or vividness. This characteristic of the colour depends on the absence
of wavelengths of transmitted light other than those of the hue con-
cerned. Electronic absorption bands of molecular compounds are not
infinitely narrow because they are broadened by the superimposition
of numerous vibrational energy levels on both the ground and excitedelectronic states. Brightness of colour is characterised, in terms of the
UV/visible spectrum, by the shape of the absorption band. Dyes that
exhibit bright colours show narrow absorption bands, whereas broad
absorption bands are characteristic of dull colours, such as browns,
navy blues and olive greens.
Visible reflectance spectroscopy is used routinely to measure the
colour of opaque objects such as textile fabrics, paint films and
plastics for purposes such as colour matching and dye and pigment
recipe prediction. There is now a wide range of commercially-available reflectance spectrophotometers used industrially as colour
measurement devices for such purposes. In many ways, this techni-
que may be considered as complementary to the use of visible ab-
sorption spectroscopy for the measurement of transparent dye
solutions. Reflectance spectra of typical red, green and blue surfaces30 Chapter 2are shown in Figure 2.4. The spectrum of the red surface, for example,
shows low reflectance (high absorption) in the 400–500 nm (blue) and
500–600 nm (green) ranges, and high reflectance of the red wave-
lengths (600–700 nm).
When colour is assessed on the basis of reflectance measurements,
it is common to consider the three relevant attributes of perception of
colour as hue, chroma (or saturation) which is the ‘colourfulness’ orrichness of the colour, and lightness, which refers to the amount of
reflected light. These three attributes may be described using the
concept of colour space, which shows the relationships of colours to
one another and which illustrates the three-dimensional nature of
colour, as shown in Figure 2.5(a). The hue of a particular colour is
represented in a colour circle. The three additive primaries, red, green
and blue, are equally spaced around the colour circle. The three
subtractive primaries, yellow, magenta and cyan, are located between
the pairs of additive primaries from which they are obtained bymixing. The second attribute, chroma, increases with distance from
the centre of the circle. The third attribute, lightness, requires a third
dimension that is at right angles to the plane of the colour circle. The
achromatic colours, white and black, are located at either extreme of
the lightness scale.
Mathematical approaches that make use of concepts associated
with colour space for colour measurement and specification based on
reflectance spectroscopy have become well-established.
4,5Indeed the
calculations involved are normally implemented in the software thatis provided within an instrument used for colour measurement. The
basis of all colour measurement systems is the CIE system of colourspecification, which was agreed in 1931. The Commission Inter-
nationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) is an international organisation pro-
moting cooperation and information exchange on matters relating to
the science and art of lighting. An important approach used for the
Figure 2.4 Visible reflectance spectra of (a) red, (b) green and (c) blue surfaces.31 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourspecification of colour involves CIELAB colour space, which makes
use of the L*,a*,b* parameters, as illustrated in Figure 2.5(b).
Lightness, L*, and chroma, C*, are quantified as illustrated on the
diagram. The hue is described by the coordinates a* (redness/green-
ness) and b* (yellowness/blueness), and by the hue angle, h1. Any
specific single colour may be represented as a point in colour space.
An important use of CIELAB colour space is in the calculation of thediﬀerence between two colours. In this approach, colour diﬀerences
are calculated as DEvalues, potentially confusingly since this same
term is used to describe energy diﬀerences, as the reader willfind elsewhere in this chapter. Colour diﬀerence equations are gen-
erally based on the principle of calculating the distance in three-
dimensional colour space between two colours, for example between a
sample and a standard. Most commonly, this is achieved by appli-
cation of the Pythagoras theorem. These DEvalues have particular
significance in instrumental colour matching, which has become avital feature of those industries, such as textiles, paint, plastics,
printing inks, cosmetics, etc., where there is a requirement to produce
articles to strict colour specifications and reproducibly over a period
of time. For a perfect colour match, the DEvalue should be as low as
possible. Historically, a DEvalue of less than 1 has been regarded as
an acceptable commercial match, although currently more de-
manding matching criteria often set smaller tolerance values (0.5–
0.75). Colour measurement, and its mathematical basis, generally
referred to as colour physics, is a well-developed and well-
documented science and is not considered in further detail here.
4–7WHITE
BLACKYELLOWGREEN CYAN
MAGENTABLUE
REDWHITE
BLACKYELLOW
GREEN
BLUEREDL*
+a*+b*
-a*
-b*C* h°
(a) (b)
Figure 2.5 (a) Concept of colour space; (b) LAB colour space.32 Chapter 22.6 FLUORESCENCE AND PHOSPHORESCENCE
Most dyes and pigments owe their colour to the selective absorption
of incident light. In some compounds, colour can also be observed as
a result of the emission of visible light of specific wavelengths. Thesecompounds are referred to as luminescent . The most commonly en-
countered luminescent eﬀects are fluorescence and phosphor-escence.
8–11The energy transitions that occur in a molecule
exhibiting fluorescence are illustrated in Figure 2.6.
When a molecule absorbs light, it does so in discrete amounts of
energy, termed quanta. It is thus excited from the lowest vibrational
level in its ground state (S 0) to a range of vibrational levels in the first
excited singlet state (S 1*). In the case of fluorescent dyes, this is
generally a p-p* electronic transition which occurs very rapidly, in
about 10/C015s (femtoseconds). During the time the molecule spends in
the excited state, energy is dissipated from the higher vibrationallevels ( vibrational relaxation orinternal conversion ) until the lowest
vibrational level is attained, typically within a timeframe of 10
/C010to
10/C012s (picoseconds). Fluorescence occurs if the molecule then emits
light as it reverts from this level to various vibrational levels in theground state (S
1*-S0), which occurs within a timeframe of 10/C07to
10/C09s (nanoseconds). Non-radiative processes also cause dissipation
of energy from the excited state, either as heat or by transfer of energy
in collision with other molecules, the latter eﬀect giving rise to the
phenomenon of quenching . The extent to which these processes
S0S1*
T1*
absorptionfluorescenceintersystem crossing
phosphoresencenon-radiative
decay  processes
Figure 2.6 Energy transitions in fluorescent and phosphorescent molecules.33 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourcompete with fluorescence determines its intensity. Because vibra-
tional energy is lost in the excited state before fluorescence occurs,
and in accordance with the inverse relationship between electronic
transition energy (D E) and wavelength (l ) as described by Planck’s
relationship (D E¼hc/l), emission inevitably occurs at longer wave-
lengths than absorption. The diﬀerence between the emission and
absorption wavelength maxima is referred to as the Stokes shift .I n
reality, most dyes do not exhibit significant fluorescence. The
quenching phenomenon means that that the fluorescence intensity
exhibited by a dye is influenced profoundly by its environment. Fac-
tors that influence fluorescence quenching include the chemical na-
ture of the solvent or matrix into which the dye is incorporated, its
concentration and purity, and the presence of other species. For ex-
ample, molecular oxygen and certain ions can cause significant
fluorescence quenching. The intensity of light emission from a
fluorescent dye is characterised by its quantum yield (Z), which is
defined as the ratio of the emitted quanta to the absorbed quanta of
light. Thus, a non-fluorescent material has a quantum yield of 0,
while a perfect fluorescer would give a quantum yield of 1. With some
fluorescent dyes, and in ideal circumstances, the quantum yield may
approach unity. Another process that may occur in this photoinitiated
process is intersystem crossing from the singlet excited state (S 1*) to an
excited triplet state (T 1*). Subsequent emission of light from the tri-
plet state (T 1*-S0) is termed phosphorescence , and is a much longer
lasting (glow in the dark) light emission phenomenon (10/C01–102s).
The visual eﬀect provided by a fluorescent dye, whether in solution or
incorporated into a textile fabric, plastic material or surface coating,is due to a combination of two eﬀects: the base colour due to the
wavelengths of light transmitted or reflected as a result of selective
light absorption, supplemented by the colour due to the wavelengths
of emitted light by fluorescence.
10The traditional applications of
fluorescent colorants are associated with their ability to attract at-tention, because of the remarkable vivid brilliance of the colours that
results from the extra glow of emitted fluorescent light.
12Fluorescent
dyes may be used on textiles for specific aesthetic and fashion pur-poses, the eye-catching bright colours providing unique creative op-portunities for the textile and garment designer. Wearing garments
with fluorescent colours is also desirable when safety is paramount,
for example as used by police, fire-fighters and construction workers
who require visibility in their work surroundings. Daylight fluorescent
pigments consist of fluorescent dyes dissolved in a transparent,
colourless solid polymer in a fine particle size form.
13They are used34 Chapter 2for their high visual impact, in printing inks for advertising, posters,
magazines and supermarket packaging, coatings especially where
safety is an important feature such as emergency and security vehicles
and in a range of plastic products such as toys and bottles. Fluor-
escent dyes are also used in a range of applications that specifically
exploit their intense light emission properties. These functional uses
of the dyes include chemical and biochemical analytical techniques,non-destructive flaw detection, dye lasers, solar collectors and elec-
tronic display technologies (Chapter 11). Another type of compound
that makes use of light-emitting properties is fluorescent brightening
agents (FBAs).
14,15These are compounds, structurally closely related
to fluorescent dyes, that absorb light in the UV region of the spectrumand re-emit the energy at the lower (blue) end of the visible spectrum.
When incorporated into a white substrate, such as a textile fabric or a
plastic article, FBAs provide a particularly appealing bluish cast. One
of the most important uses of FBAs is in washing powders to impart abluish whiteness to washed fabrics.
2.7 DYES AND PIGMENTS
Colour may be introduced into manufactured articles, for example
textiles and plastics, or into a range of other application media, for
example paints and printing inks, for various reasons, but most
commonly the purpose is to enhance the appearance and attractive-
ness of a product and improve its market appeal. Indeed it is often the
colour that first attracts us to a particular article. The desired colour is
generally achieved by the incorporation into the product of colouredcompounds referred to as dyes and pigments. The term colorant is
frequently used to encompass both types of colouring materials. Foran appreciation of the chemistry of colour application, it is of fun-
damental importance that the distinction between dyes and pigments
as quite diﬀerent types of colouring materials is made. Dyes and
pigments are both commonly supplied by the manufacturers as
coloured powders. Indeed, as the discussion of their molecular
structures contained in subsequent chapters of this book will illus-
trate, the two groups of colouring materials may often be quite similarchemically. However, they are distinctly diﬀerent in their properties
and especially in the way they are used. Dyes and pigments are dis-
tinguished on the basis of their solubility characteristics: essentially,
dyes are soluble, pigments are insoluble.
The traditional use of dyes is in the coloration of textiles, a topic
covered in considerable depth in Chapters 7 and 8. Dyes are almost35 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourinvariably applied to the textile materials from an aqueous medium,
so that they are generally required to dissolve in water.16–18Fre-
quently, as is the case for example with acid dyes, direct dyes, cationicdyes and reactive dyes, they dissolve completely and very readily in
water. This is not true, however, of every application class of textile
dye. Disperse dyes for polyester fibres, for example, are only sparingly
soluble in water and are applied as a fine aqueous dispersion. Vatdyes, an important application class of dyes for cellulosic fibres, are
completely insoluble materials but they are converted by a chemical
reduction process into a water-soluble form that may then be applied
to the fibre. There is also a wide range of non-textile applications of
dyes, many of which have emerged in recent years as a result of de-
velopments in the electronic and reprographic industries (Chapter
11). For many of these applications, solubility in specific organic
solvents rather than in water may be of importance.
In contrast, pigments are colouring materials that are required to
be completely insoluble in the medium into which they are in-corporated. The principal traditional applications of pigments are in
paints, printing inks and plastics, although they are also used more
widely, for example, in the coloration of building materials, such as
concrete and cement, and in ceramics and glass. The chemistry of
pigments and their application is discussed in more detail in Chapter
9. Pigments are applied into a medium by a dispersion process, which
reduces the clusters of solid particles into a more finely-divided form,
but they do not dissolve in the medium. They remain as solid particles
held in place mechanically, usually in a matrix of a solid polymer. A
further distinction between dyes and pigments is that while dyemolecules are designed to be attracted strongly to the polymer mol-
ecules which make up the textile fibre, pigment molecules are not
required to exhibit such aﬃnity for their medium. Pigment molecules
are, however, attracted strongly to one another in their solid crystal
lattice structure in order to resist dissolving in solvents.
19–21
2.8 CLASSIFICATION OF COLORANTS
Colorants may be classified usefully in two separate ways, either ac-
cording to their chemical structure or according to the method of ap-
plication. The most important reference work dealing with the
classification of dyes and pigments is the Colour Index , a publication
produced by the Society of Dyers and Colourists, Bradford, England,which provides a comprehensive listing of the known commercial dyes
and pigments and is up-dated on a regular basis. The first two editions36 Chapter 2of the Index were published as hard copies in several volumes, the
third edition was produced on a CD-ROM, and the current edition is
now web-based.22In the Index, each colorant is given a CI Generic
Name, which incorporates its application class, its hue, and a numberthat simply reflects the chronological order in which the colorants were
introduced commercially. It is extremely useful that this system of
nomenclature for dyes and pigments is more or less universally ac-cepted by all those involved in their manufacture and application, and
so it is frequently used throughout this book as a means of identifying
specific dyes and pigments. The Colour Index provides useful infor-
mation for each dye and pigment on the methods of application andon the range of fastness properties that may be expected. The Index
also lists the companies that manufacture each of the products, toge-
ther with trade names, and gives the appropriate chemical consti-
tutions where these have been disclosed by the manufacturer.
In the chemical classification, colorants are grouped according
to certain common chemical structural features. The most im-portant organic dyes and pigments, in roughly decreasing order of
importance, belong to the azo (–N ¼N–), carbonyl (C¼O) (including
anthraquinones), phthalocyanine, arylcarbonium ion (including tri-phenylmethines), sulfur, polymethine and nitro chemical classes. A
discussion of the principal structural characteristics of each of these
chemical classes, together with a discussion of the major synthetic
strategies used in the manufacture of these chemical groups of organic
colorants, is found in Chapters 3–6 of this book. Added to this, Chapter
9 contains a discussion of the most important inorganic pigments, a
group of colorants that has no counterpart in dye chemistry
To the textile dyer whose role it is to apply colour to a particular
textile fibre, the classification of dyes according to the method ofapplication is arguably of greater interest than the chemical classifi-
cation. Dye and pigment molecules are carefully designed to ensure
that they have a set of properties, which are appropriate to their
particular application. Obvious requirements for both types of col-
orant are that they must possess the desired colours, in terms of hue,
strength and brightness, and an appropriate range of fastness prop-
erties. Fastness properties refer to the ability of a dye or pigment toresist colour change when exposed to certain conditions, such as to
light, weathering, heat, washing, solvents or to chemical agencies
such as acids and alkalis. For textile applications, dye molecules are
designed so that they are attracted strongly to the molecules of the
fibre to which they are applied. The chemical and physical nature of
the diﬀerent types of textile fibres, both natural and synthetic, require37 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourthat the dyes used, in each case, have an appropriate set of chemical
features to promote aﬃnity for the particular fibre concerned. The
chemical principles of the most important application classes of
textile dyes are described in Chapters 7 and 8. The application classes
discussed include acid dyes, mordant dyes and premetallised dyes for
protein fibres, direct dyes, reactive dyes and vat dyes for cellulosic
fibres, disperse dyes for polyester and basic (cationic) dyes for acrylicfibres. In contrast to textile dyes, pigments tend to be versatile
colouring materials requiring less tailoring to individual applications.
With pigments therefore, classification according to application is
relatively unimportant. Pigments are simply designed to resist dis-
solving in solvents with which they may come into contact in paint,
printing ink or plastics applications.
There is a third method proposed for classifying colorants which is
in terms of the mechanism of the electronic excitation process.
23
According to this method, organic colorants may be classified as
donor/acceptor, polyene, cyanine or n- p* chromogens. While this
method of classification is undoubtedly of importance theoretically, itis arguably of lesser practical importance. Most commercial organic
dyes and pigments for traditional applications belong to the donor/
acceptor category. The mechanism of the electronic excitation pro-
cess, an understanding of which is fundamental in establishing re-
lationships between the colour and the molecular constitution of
dyes, is discussed in the following sections of this chapter.
2.9 COLOUR AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Ever since the discovery of the first synthetic dyes in the mid-
nineteenth century, chemists have been intrigued by the relationship
between the colour of a dye and its molecular structure, a topic often
referred to as colour and constitution .
23,24Since these early days, the
subject has been of special academic interest to those fascinated by the
origin of colour in organic molecules. In addition, an understanding of
colour/structure relationships has always been of critical importance
in the design of new dyes. In the early days of synthetic colour
chemistry little was known about the structures of organic molecules.
However, following Kekule ´’s proposal concerning the structure of
benzene in 1865, organic chemistry made significant and rapid pro-gress as a science and, almost immediately, theories concerning the
influence of organic structures on the colour of the molecules began to
appear in the literature. One of the earliest observations of relevance
was due to Graebe and Liebermann who, in 1867, noted that treatment38 Chapter 2of the dyes known at the time with reducing agents caused a rapid
destruction of their colour. They concluded, with some justification,
that the dyes were unsaturated compounds and that this unsaturation
was destroyed by reduction.25
Perhaps the most notable early contribution to the science of
colour/structure relationships was due to Witt who, in 1876, proposed
that dyes contain two types of group that are responsible for theircolour.
26The first of these is referred to as the chromophore , which
is defined as a group of atoms that is principally responsible forthe colour of the dye. Secondly, there are the auxochromes , which
he suggested were ‘salt-forming’ groups of atoms whose role, rathermore loosely defined, was to provide an essential ‘enhancement’ of
the colour. This terminology is still used to a certain extent today to
provide a simple explanation of colour, although Witt’s original sug-
gestion that auxochromes were also essential for dyeing properties
was quickly recognised as having less validity. A further notable con-tribution was made by Hewitt and Mitchell, who first proposed in 1907
that conjugation is essential for the colour of a dye molecule.
27In
1928, this concept was incorporated by Dilthey and Wizinger in theirrefinement of Witt’s theory of chromophores and auxochromes.
28
They recognised that the chromophore is commonly an electron-withdrawing group, that auxochromes are usually electron-releasing
groups and that they are linked to one another through a conjugated
system. In essence, the concept of the donor/acceptor chromogen was
born. Furthermore, it was observed that a bathochromic shift of the
colour, i.e., a shift of the absorption band to longer wavelength, might
be obtained by increasing the electron-withdrawing power of the
chromophore, by increasing the electron-releasing power of the
auxochromes and by extending the length of the conjugation.
The chromophore and auxochrome theory, which was first pro-
posed more than 100 years ago, still retains some merit today as a
simple method for explaining the origin of colour in dye molecules,
although it lacks rigorous theoretical justification. The most import-
ant chromophores as defined in this way are the azo (–N ¼N–),
carbonyl (C¼O), methine (–CH ¼) and nitro (NO
2) groups. Commonly-
encountered auxochromes, groups that normally increase the inten-sity of the colour and shift the absorption to longer wavelengths of
light, include hydroxyl (OH) and amino (NR
2) groups. The numerous
examples of chemical structures that follow in later sections of thisbook will illustrate the many ways in which chromophores, auxo-
chromes and conjugated aromatic systems, together with other
structural features designed to confer particular application39 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourproperties, are incorporated into dye and pigment molecules. The
concept may be applied to most chemical classes of dye, including
azo, carbonyl, methine and nitro dyes, but for some classes which are
not of the donor/acceptor type, for example the phthalocyanines, it is
less appropriate. Nowadays, modern theories of chemical bonding,
based on either the valence bond or the molecular orbital approaches,
are capable of providing a much more sophisticated account ofcolour/structure relationships.
2.9.1 Valence-Bond Approach to Colour/Structure Relationships
The valence-bond (or resonance) approach to bonding in organic
molecules is a particularly useful traditional approach to explaining
the molecular structure and properties of aromatic compounds. The
approach involves postulating a series of organic structures repre-
senting a particular compound in each of which the electrons are
localised in bonds between atoms. These structures are referred to as
canonical, or resonance forms. The individual structures do not have
a separate existence, but rather each makes a contribution to the
overall structure of the molecule, which is considered to be a reson-
ance hybrid of the contributing forms. Arguably the simplest example
of resonance is benzene, which, to a first approximation, may beconsidered as a resonance hybrid of the two Kekule ´structures as
shown in Figure 2.7. It was Bury who, in 1935, first highlighted therelationship between resonance and the colour of a dye, noting that
the more resonance structures of comparable energy that could be
drawn for a particular dye, the more bathochromic were the dyes.
29
The valence bond approach may be used to provide a qualitative
account of the lmaxvalues, and hence the hues, of many dyes, par-
ticularly those of the donor–acceptor chromogen type. The use of thisapproach to rationalise diﬀerences in colour is illustrated in thissection with reference to a series of dyes which may be envisaged as
being derived from azobenzene, although in principle the method
may be used to account for the colours of a much wider range of
chemical classes of dye including anthraquinones (Chapter 4), poly-
methines and nitro dyes.
30
Figure 2.7 Valence-bond (resonance) approach to the structure of benzene.40 Chapter 2The valence-bond approach to colour/structure relationships re-
quires that certain assumptions be made concerning the structures of
the electronic ground state and of the electronic first excited state of
the dye molecules. Invariably, a dye molecule may be represented as a
resonance hybrid of a large number of resonance forms, some of
which are ‘neutral’ or normal Kekule ´-type structures, and some of
which involve charge separation, particularly involving electron re-
lease from the donor through to the acceptor groups. For the purpose
of explaining the colour of dyes, a first assumption is made that the
ground electronic state of the dye most closely resembles the most
stable resonance forms, the normal Kekule ´-type structures. A second
assumption is that the first excited state of the dye more closely re-sembles the less stable, charge-separated forms. The nature of these
assumptions will be clarified in the consideration of the examples
that follow. As a consequence of Planck’s relationship ( DE¼hc/l),
the wavelength at which the dye absorbs increases (a bathochromic
shift) as the diﬀerence in energy between the ground state and the
first excited state decreases. Essentially, in its interpretation of colour/
structure relationships in dye molecules, the valence bond approach
is used to account for these energy diﬀerences. Structural factors,
both electronic and steric, which either stabilise or destabilise the
first excited state relative to the ground state, are analysed to provide a
qualitative explanation of colour. The assumptions that the approach
makes concerning the structures of the ground and the first excited
states are clearly approximations and cannot be rigorously justified.
Nevertheless, evidence that the approximations are reasonable is
provided by the fact that the method works well, at least in qualitativeterms, in such a large number of cases. There are, however, numerous
examples where the approach fails, no doubt due to the inadequacy of
the assumptions for those cases.
Table 2.2 shows the l
maxvalues obtained from the UV/visible
spectra, recorded in ethanol as the common solvent, of a series of
substituted azobenzenes, which may be considered as the basis of the
Table 2.2 The lmaxvalues for a series of substituted azobenzenes, 2.1a–f .
Compound X Y lmax(nm) in C 2H5OH
2.1a H H 320
2.1b NO 2 H 332
2.1c HN H2 385
2.1d H NMe 2 407
2.1e H NEt 2 415
2.1f NO 2 NEt 2 48641 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Coloursimplest azo dyes. Several observations may be made from the data
given in Table 2.2. Azobenzene, 2.1a, the simplest aromatic azo
compound, gives a lmaxvalue of 320 nm. This compound is only
weakly coloured because its principal absorption is in the UV region.
An electron-withdrawing group, such as the nitro group, on its own
produces only a weakly bathochromic shift, so that nitroazobenzene,
2.1b (lmax332 nm) is still only weakly coloured. In contrast, an elec-
tron-releasing group, such as the amino group, in the p-position leads
to a pronounced bathochromic shift, the magnitude of which in-creases with increasing electron-releasing power of the group in
question. The absorption bands of compounds 2.1c–e are thus shifted
into the visible region (l
max385, 407 and 415 nm, respectively) and the
compounds are reasonably intense yellows. Even larger bathochromic
shifts are provided when there is an electron-releasing group in one
aromatic ring and an electron-withdrawing group in the other, i.e.,a
typical donor–acceptor chromogen, as in the case of compound 2.1f,
which is orange-red (l max486 nm).
NN
XY
2.1
Valence bond representations consisting of the most relevant ca-
nonical forms contributing towards the structures of compounds2.1a–f are illustrated in Figure 2.8. The arguments that follow illus-
trate how the valence bond approach may be used to explain colour byrationalising the trends in l
maxvalues for the compounds given in
Table 2.2. Using the approach, it is assumed that the ground state ofazobenzene, 2.1a, the parent compound, most closely resembles the
more stable traditional Kekule ´resonance forms, such as structure I.
Further, it is assumed that charge-separated resonance forms, such as
structure II, make a major contribution to the first excited state ofazobenzene. In structure II, the negative charge is accommodated on
the electronegative nitrogen atom of the azo group, a reasonably
stable situation, but the structure also contains a carbocationic
centre, a source of instability. The first excited state of azobenzene is
therefore rather unstable, i.e., of high energy. In the case of 4-
nitroazobenzene, 2.1b, the carbocationic centre is still present as a
destabilising feature in the first excited state (structures IV and V).
There is, however, a marginal stabilisation of the first excited state in
compound 2.1b as a result of the additional contribution to the first42 Chapter 2excited state from canonical forms such as structure V, in which
charge is delocalised on to the nitro group. Consequently, the energy
diﬀerence between the ground and first excited states in compound2.1b becomes smaller than in azobenzene, 2.1a, and a small bath-
ochromic shift is observed as a result of the inverse relationship be-tween energy diﬀerence and the absorbed wavelength.
The situation is significantly diﬀerent with the 4-aminoazo-
benzenes 2.1c–e . In the charge-separated structures that make the
major contribution to the first excited states of these compounds(structure VII), donation of the lone pair from the amino nitrogen
atom removes the carbocationic centre, which has a sextet of elec-
trons in its valence shell, and the positive charge becomes accom-modated on the nitrogen atom, deriving much higher stability from
its full octet of electrons. There is thus a marked stabilisation of the
first excited state, lowering its energy and leading to a pronounced
bathochromic shift. The electron-releasing inductive eﬀect of theNN
NNN-N
N
-OO
NN
N
-O-O
N-N
N
-OO
NNN R2
N-NN R2
NNN R2
N
-O-O
NNN R2
N
-OO
N-NN R2
N
-OO
(IX) (X)+
+
2.1f++
++
+
++
+ +(I) (II)
2.1a
+(III) (IV) (V)
2.1b
(VI) (VII)
2.1c-e
(VIII)
Figure 2.8 Valence-bond (resonance) approach to the structure of azobenzenes
2.1a–f .43 The Physical and Chemical Basis of ColourN-alkyl groups in compounds 2.1d and 2.1e serves to increase the
electron-donor power of the lone pair on the amino nitrogen atom
compared with compound 2.1c, thus further stabilising the first ex-
cited state and causing a more pronounced bathochromic shift, the
magnitude of which increases with increasing electron-releasing
power of the alkyl groups. In the case of compound 2.1f, typical of
most aminoazobenzene dyes in which one aromatic ring containselectron-donor groups and the other electron-acceptor groups, the
strong bathochromicity is explained by a first excited state in which
there is further stabilisation by charge delocalisation on to the nitro
group, as a result of a contribution from structure X.
The spectral data for a further group of donor–acceptor aminoa-
zobenzenes are given in Table 2.3. The valence bond approach may beused to provide a good qualitative account of the data in the table.
Some relevant resonance structures, which may be used to explain the
l
maxvalues for cyano compounds 2.2a– d, are shown in Figure 2.9.
NN NEt 2A
2.2
Inspection of the spectral data for the isomeric cyano compounds
2.2a–c demonstrates that the bathochromicity is most pronounced
when the donor and acceptor groups are conjugated with one an-other, i.e.,ortho -o rpara- to the azo group allowing the full mesomeric
interaction between the amino and cyano groups in the first excitedstates to operate, as illustrated for compounds 2.2a and 2.2c in
structures XI and XII respectively. In contrast, the presence of acyano group in the meta position gives rise to a less pronounced
bathochromic eﬀect (compound 2.2b) as only the inductive eﬀect
of the cyano group is in operation. Increasing the number ofTable 2.3 The lmaxvalues for a series of donor–acceptor substituted azobenzenes,
2.2a–f .
Compound Acceptor substituents (A) lmax(nm) in C 2H5OH
2.2a o-CN 462
2.2b m-CN 446
2.2c p-CN 466
2.2d o-,o0-,p-tricyano 562
2.2e o-NO 2 462
2.2f p-NO 2 48644 Chapter 2electron-withdrawing groups in the acceptor ring increases the
bathochromicity, as illustrated by the tricyano compound 2.2d. The
bathochromicity of this dye ( lmax562 nm) is explained by the exten-
sive stabilisation of the first excited state as a result of resonance
involving structures XIII–XV in which the negative charge is accom-
modated on the nitrogen atoms of each of the three cyano groups
in turn.
The colour of dyes may be aﬀected by steric as well as electronic
eﬀects. For example, a comparison of isomers 2.2e and 2.2f shows
that an o-nitro group produces a significantly smaller bathochromic
shift than a p-nitro group. On the basis of an argument based purely
on electronic eﬀects, delocalisation of charge on to the oxygen atom
of the o-nitro group, as illustrated by the valence bond representation
of the structure of compound 2.2e given in Figure 2.10, might be
expected to give rise to a bathochromic shift similar to that given by a
p-nitro group. The reason for the diﬀerences arises from the fact that
while compound 2.2f is a planar molecule, steric congestion forcesNN NEt 2
NN NEt 2CN-
NN NEt 2CN-C -N
NN NEt 2
C -N
NN NEt 2CN-C
CN
NC N
C
N
CN
C
NXIII++
XIV
++
XI XII
+
XV
Figure 2.9 Resonance forms that make a major contribution to the first excited state
of azobenzenes 2.2a,2.2c and 2.2d.45 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourcompound 2.2e to adopt a non-planar conformation. This happens
because the o-nitro group clashes sterically with the lone pair of
electrons on one of the azo nitrogen atoms and is thus forced to rotate
out of a planar conformation. It may be envisaged that this rotation
takes place about the bond between the carbon atom of the aromatic
ring and the nitrogen atom of the NO 2group. As Figure 2.10 shows,
the C–N bond in question is of higher bond order in the first excited
state (represented approximately by structure XVII), but of lower bond
order in the ground state (similarly represented by structure XVI).
Since rotation about a double bond requires more energy than ro-
tation about a single bond, the first excited state of compound 2.2e is
destabilised relative to its ground state, with a consequent reductionin the bathochromic eﬀect. When it is desirable to have electron-
withdrawing substituents in the positions ortho to the azo group to
maximise the bathochromicity, cyano groups are commonly pre-ferred. Their linear, rod-like shape minimises the steric clash with the
lone pair on the azo nitrogen atoms and allows a more planar con-
formation to be adopted.
The absorption band of aminoazobenzenes may be shifted to very
long wavelengths to produce blue dyes by incorporating a number ofelectron-withdrawing groups into the acceptor ring and a number of
electron-releasing groups into the donor ring. An example of such a
dye is compound 2.3, which gives a l
maxof 608 nm in ethanol as a
result of the three electron-withdrawing groups (two nitro, onebromo) in one ring and the three electron-releasing groups (dialky-
lamino, acylamino and methoxy) in the other. Alternatively, particu-
larly bathochromic azo dyes, which are structurally analogous to theaminoazobenzenes, may be obtained by replacement of the carbo-
cyclic acceptor ring with a five-membered aromatic heterocyclic ring.
Examples of such dyes are provided by CI Disperse Blue 339, 2.4,a
bright blue dye that contains a thiazole ring and gives a l
maxof
590 nm and thiophene derivative 2.5which gives a lmaxof 614 nm.NN NEt 2NO -O
NN NEt 2NO --O
XVII+
XVI+
+
Figure 2.10 Valence-bond (resonance) approach to the structure of compound 2.2e.46 Chapter 2NN NEt 2NO2
O2N
BrOCH 3
H3COCHN
2.3
NN NEt 2 N
S
O2N2.4
NN N(CH 2CH2OCOCH 3)2
S
O2NNO2
2.5
Several reasons for the particular bathochromicity of heterocyclic
azo dyes of this type may be postulated from the valence bond ap-
proach. Some important resonance forms which may contribute tothe structure of the first electronic excited state of dye 2.4are illus-
trated in Figure 2.11. The first reason involves a consideration ofaromatic character. Evidently, when the structures that are con-
sidered to make a major contribution to the first excited states of azo
dyes are compared with those of the respective ground states, elec-
tronic excitation causes a loss of aromatic character, i.e., a loss of
resonance stabilisation energy. It is generally accepted that five-membered ring heterocyclic systems of this type are less aromatic
than benzene derivatives. The loss of resonance stabilisation energyon electronic excitation of dyes such as 2.4is therefore less than in the
corresponding carbocyclic systems and, as a consequence, the dif-ference in energy between the ground and excited states is less.
Steric eﬀects also play a part in the explanation. For example, the
contribution to the first excited state from structure XX (Figure 2.11)
illustrates that the heterocyclic nitrogen atom can eﬀectively act as an
electron-withdrawing o-substituent with no associated steric eﬀect
that might otherwise tend to reduce the bathochromicity. In addition,47 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourin the case of five-membered heterocyclic rings that contain o-
substituents, such as the o-nitro group in compound 2.5, the steric
interaction between the substituent and the lone pair on the azo ni-
trogen atoms is less than in the case of six-membered rings, as in dye
2.2e, allowing the group to adopt a more coplanar arrangement and
hence maximise the bathochromic eﬀect. This may be explained by a
comparison of the geometrical arrangements. As illustrated in Figure
2.12, the azo group makes an angle of 126 1with a five-membered ring,
compared with a corresponding angle of 120 1in the case of a six-
membered ring, thus reducing the steric congestion between theoxygen atom of the nitro group and the lone pair on the azo nitrogen
atom. A further explanation has been put forward to explain why
sulfur heterocycles, in particular, appear in general to provide a
pronounced bathochromic eﬀect. It has been argued, although it has
to be said that there is incomplete consensus on the argument, that
there is a contribution to the first excited state from structures such as
XXI (Figure 2.11) in which there is valence shell expansion at sulfur.
This is possible in principle as a consequence of the availability ofvacant 3d-orbitals into which valence electrons may be donated, a
situation that is not available in the case of nitrogen and oxygen
heterocycles.
Compound 2.6is noteworthy in that it was the first azo dye reported
whose absorption band is shifted beyond the visible region into the
near-infrared region of the spectrum, showing a l
maxof 778 nm in
dichloromethane.31The extreme bathochromicity of this dye may be
explained by a combination of the eﬀects discussed throughout thisN-N NEt 2 N
SNO
O-
NN NEt 2-N
SNO
O-NN NEt 2 N
SN-O
O-
NN NEt 2 N
SNO
O-++
XIX
XXI-+
+
XVIII
++
++
XX
Figure 2.11 Resonance forms making a major contribution to the first excited state
of heterocyclic azo dye 2.4.48 Chapter 2section, including the extended conjugation, the influence of the
thiazole ring and the maximising of both the electron donor (dia-
lkylamino, acylamino, methoxy) and electron accepting (cyano, sul-
fone, chloro) eﬀects in appropriate parts of the molecule.
NS
N
NN(C 2H5)2OCH 3
H3COCHNClSO2CN
NC
2.6
It can be seen that the valence-bond (resonance) approach may be
used to provide a reasonable qualitative explanation of the lmaxvalues
of a wide variety of azo dyes. While the use of the approach has beenexemplified in this chapter for a series of azo dyes, the argument may
be extended successfully to a range of donor–acceptor type chromo-
gens such as carbonyl (see Chapter 4 for an illustration of its appli-
cation to some anthraquinone dyes, for example), nitro and methine
dyes. Nevertheless, the approach does have deficiencies. There are
several examples where wrong predictions are made. For example, the
order of bathochromicities of the o-, m- and p-aminoazobenzenes is
wrongly predicted (see next section for a further discussion of thisobservation). Secondly, the approach cannot readily be used to ac-
count, even qualitatively, for the intensity of colour by addressingtrends in molar extinction coeﬃcients. Finally, and arguably most
importantly, the method cannot at the present time be used quanti-
tatively.Quantitativetreatmentofthelightabsorptionpropertiesof
dyes has, however, been made possible by developments in molecular
orbital methods, as discussed in the next section.N
NN
NO O120° angles126° angles
Figure 2.12 Reduced steric congestion with substituents ortho to the azo group in
the case of a five-membered ring compared with a six-membered ring.49 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colour2.9.2 Molecular Orbital Approach to Colour/Structure
Relationships
For several decades, there has been intense interest in the ability to
predict the colour of dyes based on theoretical calculations. An earlyapproach towards this aim involved the use of tables of empirical data
representing the eﬀects of auxochromes on l
maxvalues in particular,
established based on experimental spectral data for dyes from theimportant chemical classes. However, an inherent limitation in this
approach is the inability to take into account new auxochromes and
chromophoric systems. Subsequently, the application of quantitative
molecular orbital methods has contributed immensely to develop-
ments in colour chemistry, providing a more rigorous theoretical
understanding of the light absorption properties of colorants in re-
lation to their molecular structure, and enabling the calculation of
many of the physical properties of dyes, including colour properties,from a knowledge of their chemical structure, with the aid of a
computer. Thus, the characteristics of the colour of a dye whose
structure may be drawn on paper and visualised on a computer screen
may be predicted, with some expectation of accuracy, without the
need to resort to devising a method for the synthesis of the dye in the
laboratory. The value to the chemist whose aim is the synthesis of new
dyes with specific properties, perhaps for new applications, is obvi-
ous. The properties of a large number of structures may be predicted
in a short period of time using computational methods, and specificcompounds for which interesting properties are predicted may be
selected for synthesis and an evaluation of application performance.
In the last half century or more, the major advances in computer
technology that have taken place and which will no doubt continue
into the future, in terms of both software and hardware, have meant
that increasingly sophisticated methods have become accessible as
routine tools for the colour chemist. The concepts and mathematical
basis of molecular theory, commonly referred to as quantum mech-
anics, are well documented, and this particular text makes little at-
tempt to address the detail of these.
32–34The section that follows
provides an outline of the basis of the molecular orbital approach to
bonding in organic molecules, an overview of the methods that have
historically proved valuable to the colour chemist, and those aspects
of colour properties that the methods can address.
In molecular orbital theory, electrons are considered as a form of
electromagnetic radiation, i.e., in terms of their wave nature rather
than their particulate nature. Electrons, rather than being treated as50 Chapter 2localised in individual bonds between atoms, are considered to be
moving under the influence of all of the nuclei in the molecule. Of
fundamental importance to the theory is the quantum principle , which
states that the electron can only exist in a fixed series of discreteenergy states. An essential concept in quantum theory that is of
relevance to colour chemistry is that electrons are contained in re-
gions of high probability referred to as orbitals. The mathematics
underlying molecular orbital theory was first formulated in 1925 by
Schro¨dinger, the solution of whose equation gives a fixed number of
values of E, the energy states available to the electrons in a particular
atom or molecule. The complexity of the mathematics means that,
even with the computing power currently available, the equation may
not be solved exactly for the complex molecular frameworks of
coloured organic molecules. However, numerous quantum mechan-
ical approaches have been devised using various approximations to
provide solutions to the equation. These methods range from thesimplest approaches based on empirically or semi-empirically derived
parameters, which were formerly the methods of choice for the colour
chemist, through to the ab initio approaches, such as those based on
time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) which now pre-dominate, and the discussion in this section reflects these historical
developments.
Molecular orbitals are considered to be generated by overlap of
atomic orbitals. There are two types of overlap. Direct or ‘end-on’
overlap gives rise to s-orbitals, either bonding, the low energy orbitals
that are occupied by two electrons in the ground state of a molecule,and the high energy antibonding (s *) orbitals that remain un-
occupied, while p-molecular orbitals are obtained by indirect or
‘sideways’ overlap, for example, from overlap of two singly occupied2p
zatomic orbitals. Dyes are invariably organic molecules with ex-
tended conjugation containing a framework of s-bonds and an as-
sociated p-system. The lowest energy electronic transition occurs
when an electron is promoted from the highest occupied molecularp-orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied p* molecular orbital
(LUMO). It is these p–p* transitions (rather than s–s*, which are of
much higher energy) that give rise to the absorption of most organicdyes and pigments in the UV and visible regions of the spectrum.
TheHu¨ckel molecular orbital (HMO) method is one of the earliest and
simplest molecular orbital methods that proved to be appropriate for
calculations on conjugated molecules in the pioneering years of
quantum chemistry, before computers became routinely available.
35–37
In the HMO method it is assumed that the set of molecular orbitals51 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colour(described by the molecular orbital wave function, j) of a particular
structure may be expressed as a linear combination (or weighted sum)
of the atomic orbitals (described by the atomic orbital wave function,
w) in the molecular system (the LCAO approximation). Essentially
this represents a mathematical expression of the assumption thatmolecular orbitals are derived from overlap of atomic orbitals. The
HMO method also assumes that, in conjugated systems, only thep-electrons are involved in the electronic transitions that take place
when light is absorbed and that these transitions are unaﬀected bythe framework of s-bonds in the molecule (the s–pseparation prin-
ciple). This would at first sight appear to be a reasonable first ap-proximation as in conjugated molecules it is generally assumed that
the low energy p–p* transitions are principally responsible for UV and
visible light absorption. By calculating the energies of each molecularorbital, the HMO method may be used to provide electronic transition
energies for the promotion of an electron from an occupied molecularorbital to a higher energy unoccupied orbital. These energies are
obtained in terms of b, the bond resonance integral, which is treated
as an empirical parameter and given a value by comparison of thecalculated values with the experimental values obtained from UV/
visible spectra. Two other sets of molecular parameters that may be
calculated using the HMO method are the p-electron charge densities,
Q, the measure of the p-electron charge localisation on each atom in
the molecule, and the p-bond orders ( P), the measure of the degree of
p-overlap of atomic orbitals between each pair of atoms in the mol-
ecule. While the HMO method is simple and useful qualitatively,
quantitative correlation with spectral data is reasonable only in a fewspecial cases. The method has been shown to give an acceptable
correlation between experimental and calculated electronic transition
energies with series of aromatic hydrocarbons, and also with the
set of linear polyenes, in the latter case provided that diﬀerent bond
b-values are used for the formal single and double bonds. In general,
while the method gives reasonable predictions for hydrocarbons, itworks much less well with molecules containing heteroatoms, such as
O and N, and this means that it was never a useful tool for calculating
the colour of dye molecules.
In view of the inadequacy of the HMO method, attention turned in
time to rather more elaborate MO approaches that remained relianton semi-empiricism. A particular molecular orbital approach that was
extensively applied to the calculation of the colour properties of dye
molecules in the later decades of the twentieth century is the Pariser–
Pople–Parr (PPP) method.
38Although the use of the PPP-MO method52 Chapter 2has now been essentially superseded by the wide range of more so-
phisticated computational chemistry methodologies that have
emerged for calculation of the physical properties of organic mol-
ecules, as discussed later in this section, it is considered here in a
level of detail that reflects its importance during that period, leading
to a significant body of published data on organic colorants, and also
because it provides a useful and relatively straightforward illustrationof the principles involved in semi-empirical MO methodology. Like
the HMO method, the PPP-MO method uses the LCAO approximation
in combining atomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals as its basic
mathematical premise. In addition, it retains the s–pseparation
principle, essentially neglecting the influence of s-electrons on the
colour. The main way in which the PPP-MO method provides a re-
finement over the HMO method is by taking account of inter-
electronic interaction energies, and in doing so specifically includes
molecular geometry; both of these features are ignored by the HMOmethod.
The sequence of operations involved in a PPP-MO calculation is
illustrated in the flow diagram shown in Figure 2.13. The method is
illustrated for the case of 4-aminoazobenzene, 2.1c. In this molecule,
there are 15 relevant atoms and 16 p-electrons, each atom contrib-
uting a single electron to the p-system except for the amino nitrogen
atom, which donates its lone pair. The molecular geometry may be
Figure 2.13 Sequence of stages in a PPP-MO calculation for compound 2.1c.53 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourspecified in terms of all the relevant interatomic distances and bond
angles. This stage of the process may be refined by including a mo-
lecular geometry optimisation in the calculation, for example using
molecular mechanics (Section 2.9.3). Energy parameters, specifically
valence state ionisation potentials (VSIP) and electron aﬃnities ( Ea)
assigned to the relevant atoms and bond resonance integrals values(b) assigned to each pair of bonded atoms are treated as a set of semi-
empirical parameters that are available from various literature sour-
ces and that may be modified to suit a particular type of molecule.
Finally, to enable the calculations to be carried out, the p-electron
densities ( Q) for all relevant atoms and the p-bond orders ( P) for all
bonded atoms are required. This feature of the PPP-MO method rai-
ses the issue that the values of Qand Pfor specific molecules are not
known initially, although they may be obtained after the calculationshave been performed. The solution to this ‘chicken and egg’ issue is
achieved by carrying out a preliminary HMO calculation, which givesan approximate set of Qand Pvalues. These values are in turn used to
set up and carry out the PPP-MO calculation and as a result a new,improved set of values is obtained. The process is then repeated until
two successive calculations give a consistent result. This iterative
process is referred to as a self-consistent field (SCF) method. The
procedure leads to a set of molecular orbital energies from which, in
principle, electronic transition energies may be calculated. However,
since the PPP-MO method uses a set of data based on the ground state
structure of the molecule, it predicts ground state energies rather
better than excited state energies. To correct for the fact that mo-
lecular orbital energies may change after excitation by promotion ofan electron from a lower energy occupied molecular orbital to a
higher energy unoccupied molecular orbital, and hence to give im-
proved excited state data, a procedure known as configuration inter-
action (CI) is carried out as the final stage of the calculation.
The PPP-MO method proved to be suitable for the treatment of
large molecular structures and presented modest computing de-
mands. As time progressed, commercial programs became available
with user-friendly interfaces that were appropriate to the personal
computing systems that were developing rapidly. The method wasused successfully in calculating l
maxvalues for a wide range of dyes
from virtually all of the chemical classes, the success probably owingmuch to the careful optimisation of the semi-empirical parameters
carried out over several series of studies. As an example, Figure 2.14
illustrates the correlation of l
maxvalues measured experimentally in
the same solvent and the values calculated by the PPP-MO approach54 Chapter 2for a series of nitroarylamine semi-permanent hair dyes (Chapter 10).
As a further example, the method provides a reasonable account of
substituent eﬀects in the range of aminoazobenzene dyes, including
compounds 2.1a–f and2.2a–f , which have been discussed in terms of
the valence-bond approach in Section 2.9.1.
Table 2.4 shows a comparison of experimental and PPP-MO cal-
culated electronic spectral data for azobenzene and the three isomericmonoamino derivatives. Notably, the ortho isomer is observed to be
most bathochromic, while the para isomer is least bathochromic.
From a consideration of the principles of the application of the va-lence bond approach to the relationship between colour and mo-
lecular structure described in the previous section of this chapter, it
might have been expected that the ortho and para isomers would be
most bathochromic with the meta isomer least bathochromic. In
contrast, the data contained in the table demonstrate that the PPP
Figure 2.14 Correlation between calculated and experimental lmaxvalues for a
series of nitroarylamine semi-permanent hair dyes.
Table 2.4 Experimental and PPP-MO calculated electronic spectral data for azo-
benzene and the isomeric amino derivatives.
Compoundlmax(nm)
(experimental.)lmax(nm)
(PPP calcd)e/C210/C03
(l mol/C01cm/C01)fosc(PPP
calcd.)
Azobenzene, 2.1a 320 344 21.0 1.21
2-Aminoazobenzene 414 424 6.5 0.67
3-Aminoazobenzene 412 415 1.3 0.17
4-Aminoazobenzene 387 392 24.5 1.3155 The Physical and Chemical Basis of ColourMO method is capable of correctly accounting for the relative bath-
ochromicities of the amino isomers. An explanation for the failure
of the valence bond method to predict the order of bathochromicitiesof the o-, m- and p-aminoazobenzenes emerges from consideration of
the changes in p-electron charge densities on excitation calculated
by the PPP-MO method as illustrated in Figure 2.15.
The valence bond representation of the ground and first excited
states of dye 2.1c, illustrated in Figure 2.8, would suggest that a de-
crease in charge density on the amino nitrogen atom and an increasein charge density on the b-nitrogen of the azo group would be ob-
served on excitation. The changes in calculated charge densities(Figure 2.15) indeed predict these eﬀects, but suggest that there is
also a significant increase on the charge density of the a-nitrogen
atom of the azo group, an eﬀect that may not be easily accounted for
using the valence bond approach. The results demonstrate that the
valence bond assumptions, particularly concerning the structure of
the first excited state, are not wholly accurate and as a result it is
perhaps not surprising that erroneous predictions sometimes arise.
Because molecular orbital methods are capable of calculating p-
electron charge densities both in the electronic ground states and
excited states of dye molecules, they are helpful in providing infor-
mation on the nature of the electronic excitation process, by identi-
fying the donor and acceptor groups and quantifying the extent of theelectron transfer. One application of this principle is that it allows the
dipole moments of the ground and first excited state to be calculated,
and this may be used to account for the influence of the nature of the
solvent on the l
maxvalue of a dye, an eﬀect referred to as solvato-
chromism . For example, if the dipole moment of a dye molecule is
larger in the first excited state than in the ground state, then the eﬀect
of a more polar solvent will be to stabilise the first excited state more
than the ground state. The consequence will be a bathochromic shift
of the absorption maximum as the solvent polarity is increased, in
accordance with the inverse relationship between the energy of the
electronic transition ( DE) and the lmaxvalue, an eﬀect known asNN NH2
+0.15
–0.12α β–0.25
Figure 2.15 Some p-electron charge density diﬀerences between the ground and
first excited states calculated by the PPP-MO method for 4-aminoazo-
benzene, 2.1c.56 Chapter 2positive solvatochromism. As the numerous examples given in the
previous section on the application of the valence bond approach to
colour/structure relationships demonstrate, the first excited state in
donor–acceptor chromogens is almost invariably more polar than the
ground state, and thus such dyes as a rule exhibit positive solvato-
chromism. The reverse eﬀect in which increasing solvent polarity
causes a hypsochromic shift, referred to as negative solvatochromism,is less common.
Molecular orbital methods are capable of calculating not only the
magnitude of the dipole moment change on excitation, but can also
predict the direction of the electron transfer within the molecule. The
vector quantity, which expresses the magnitude and direction of the
electronic transition, is referred to as the transition dipole moment . For
example, the calculated direction of the transition dipole moment ofazo dye 2.1fis illustrated in Figure 2.16.
The direction of the transition moment is of practical consequence
in dyes developed for liquid crystal display systems. It is important forsuch applications that the direction of the transition moment is
aligned with the molecular axis of the dye. Since this is the case with
azo dye 2.1f, the dye would appear to be a reasonable candidate as a
liquid crystal display dye (see Chapter 11 for further discussion of thisapplication of dyes).
The intensity of colour of a dye is dependent on the probability of
the electronic transition. A familiar example of this principle is pro-
vided by the colours due to transition metal ions in solution, which
are normally weak because the d–d transitions involved are ‘forbid-
den’, i.e., of low probability. In contrast the p–p* transitions due to
organic dyes, which involve considerable charge transfer in donor/
acceptor chromogens, are highly probable and thus give rise to much
more intense colours. While most of the research published on the
application of molecular orbital methods to dyes centres on their
application to the calculation of l
maxvalues, the ability to predict the
tinctorial strength of a dye is arguably of greater practical value sinceit is directly related to the economic viability of the dye. If, for ex-
ample, a new dye has twice the colour strength of an existing dye, then
N N
-OO N NEt 2
+
Figure 2.16 Direction of the transition moment in azo dye 2.1f.57 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourthe dyer need only use half the quantity of that dye to obtain a given
colour. Provided that the new dye costs less than double that of the
existing dye, it will therefore be more cost-eﬀective. The PPP-MO
method is capable of providing a quantitative account of colour
strength by calculating a quantity, fosc, known as the oscillator
strength. This parameter is given by the following equation:
fosc¼4.703/C21029/C2M2/lM
where Mis the transition dipole moment and lMis the mean wave-
length of the absorption band.
In general, it has been observed that a reasonable correlation be-
tween foscand efor broad classes of dyes may be achieved, although
within specific classes the correlation is less good. It has been sug-gested that this may be because PPP parameterisation has been op-
timised for correlation with l
maxvalues rather than molar extinction
coeﬃcients. The correlation between foscand molar extinction co-
eﬃcient ( e) values for a series of structurally related yellow azo pig-
ments is illustrated in Figure 2.17.39The method correctly predicts
the significantly higher tinctorial strength of the disazo comparedwith the monoazo pigments, although the correlation for individual
species is less strong. Similarly, the data given in Table 2.4 demon-
strate only a reasonable qualitative correlation between the calculated
oscillator strengths and the experimental molar extinction
Figure 2.17 Correlation between calculated oscillator strength values and experi-
mental molar extinction coeﬃcient values for a series of monoazo and
disazo pigments.58 Chapter 2coeﬃcients for the series of azo dyes in question. Nevertheless, the
ability to predict broad trends in colour properties is a useful tool in
the design of new coloured molecules. It may be argued that the os-
cillator strength gives a better measure of colour intensity than the
molar extinction coeﬃcient ( e) as it expresses the area under the ab-
sorption curve, whereas eis profoundly dependent on the shape of the
curve. It is thus only valid to relate the evalues to the intensity of
colour for a series of dyes if the curves are of similar shape.
Brightness of colour is expressed by the width of the visible ab-
sorption band. This bandwidth is determined by the distribution of
vibrational energy levels superimposed on the electronic ground and
excited state energy levels. Broadening of the absorption bands may
be caused in several ways. For example, an increase in the number
and spread of energies of bond vibrations will generally lead to
broader absorption bands. This argument may be used to provide an
explanation as to why the relatively simple structure of heterocyclicazo dyes such as compounds 2.4and 2.5give brighter blue colours
than the multi-substituted carbocyclic analogues, such as compound2.3with its increased number of vibrational levels. Some of the
brightest colours are provided by the phthalocyanine chemical class(Chapter 5). The colour of these dyes and pigments owe their
brightness in part to their rigid molecular structure both in the
ground and excited states, with both states showing similar geometry
and little vibrational fine structure. Because it is related to the vi-
brational characteristics of the molecules rather than their electronic
structure, it is at first sight diﬃcult to envisage how the PPP-MO
might be useful in calculating bandwidth. An interesting approach tothis problem has been provided by the application of an empirical
extension of the method to the calculation of the Stokes shifts of
fluorescent molecules.
40–42Initially, a conventional calculation, using
standard ground state molecular geometries and resonance integrals,is used to calculate an absorption l
maxvalue. From the calculated first
excited state p-bond orders, excited state geometries and resonance
integrals are derived. Subsequent calculations are carried out using
these new parameters, iteratively, until convergence is achieved. The
resulting lmaxvalue is equated to the fluorescence maximum and
hence the Stokes shift is obtained as the diﬀerence between this value
and the original result. Using the assumption that there is a simple
relationship between absorption bandwidths and Stokes shifts – both
parameters being dependent on vibrational energy levels in the two
electronic states – the method has been adapted, with some success,
to the calculation of bandwidths. While the method lacks rigorous59 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourtheoretical justification, good correlations have been reported for a
range of dye chemical classes.
The PPP-MO method clearly has deficiencies. The method assumes
that the molecules are planar. While this is an important theoretical
shortcoming, it is worth noting that the vast majority of commercial
dyes and pigments have a molecular geometry that is more or less
coplanar. Calculations are carried out based on p-electrons only and
therefore cannot, except in a rather empirical way, account for some
of the subtle eﬀects of s-electrons on colour. Among such eﬀects that
are commonly encountered are hydrogen bonding, steric interactionsand the influence of substituents that do not contribute towards the
p-system. As time progressed and more powerful computing facilities
became accessible, attention inevitably turned towards the use ofsemi-empirical molecular orbital techniques that take into account all
valence electrons, thus specifically including s-electrons in the cal-
culations, including CNDO, MNDO, MINDO, INDO and ZINDO, re-
ferring, respectively, to complete, modified, modified intermediate,
intermediate and Zerner’s intermediate neglect of diﬀerential Over-
lap, AM1 (Austin model 1) and PM3 (parameterised model 3). These
methods diﬀer from each other in the classes of integrals neglected in
the calculations, and the type of parameterisation used. Programs
providing these methods are now widely available, and they oﬀer
certain inherent advantages particularly in their applicability to a
wider range of compounds, for example metal complexes, and also in
cases where the dye molecules deviate significantly from planarity.
All-valence electron methods also oﬀer versatility in the range of
physical properties that may be calculated, including thermodynamicproperties such as heats of formation. Intuitively, it would seem
reasonable to anticipate that such methods would lead to similar,
conceivably better, correlations with experimental visible spectral
data compared with those based on methods using p-electrons only. It
is of interest, therefore, to note reports of comparisons of the diﬀerentmethods, some of which demonstrate that this is not necessarily the
case.
43–45Indeed, it has been reported that calculations based on
methods such as CNDO, INDO and ZINDO may significantly under-estimate the absorption maxima values for a range of typical organicdye structures.
43,44The apparent superiority of the PPP-MO approach
in terms of the correlation with experimental data that has been ob-served in these cases, especially in view of its lower level of sophisti-
cation, may well be due to the carefully optimised parameterisation
that has been developed for the method, mainly on the basis of
calibration against spectral data. Indeed, there is evidence that60 Chapter 2modification of the parameters within methods such as ZINDO can
lead to improved correlations.46
Ab initio (meaning from the beginning) quantum mechanics cal-
culations are the most rigorous and powerful theoretically, in that
they attempt to solve Schrodinger’s equation using minimal ap-
proximations. However, the methods have traditionally placed major
demands on computing power, especially for the polyatomic systemsthat are typical of dye structures. An approach to ab initio calculations
that has emerged as the most popular and versatile method for in-vestigation of the electronic structure of atoms and molecules is re-
ferred to as density functional theory (DFT).
47,48Using DFT methods,
the properties of a many-electron system may be determined usingfunctionals , a term that refers to functions of another function. In
particular, DFT uses functionals of the spatially-dependent electrondensity in a system in order to simplify the problem of nelectrons
with 3 nspatial coordinates. The fundamental principle utilised in the
approach is that the ground state properties of a many-electron sys-tem are determined uniquely by an electron density that depends on
only three spatial coordinates. This principle is refined further by
extension into a time-dependent domain, referred to as time-
dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT), which may be used to
address the properties of excited states, a feature that is of obvious
importance in the calculation of colour properties. Although DFT
methods have been available since the 1970s, they were not con-
sidered suﬃciently accurate for quantum chemistry calculations until
into the 1990s when certain of the necessary approximations were
refined to provide, for example, enhanced modelling of the exchangeand correlation interactions. Consequently, DFT/TD-DFT methods for
the calculation of electronic excitation energies and oscillator
strengths, which do not present major computing demands, were
introduced into computational chemistry packages. On the basis of
their rapid growth in the early years of the twenty-first century, DFT/
TD-DFT methods have been described as ‘shooting stars’ among
quantum chemical techniques, with their excellent ‘price/performance’
ratio stimulating an ever-growing range of applications in almost
all fields of chemistry.
47
These methods, TD-DFT in particular, are reported to provide good
correlations between calculated and experimental absorption maximaand oscillator strengths over a wide range of chemical types of dye, at
least comparable to the predictions provided by the use of semi-
empirical methods.
46,49–53However, in view of their higher level of
sophistication and enhanced theoretical rigour, the methods oﬀer61 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colournotable advantages especially in terms of their versatility, essentially
allowing the determination of the wider range of energy parameters
that are important in the interactions between molecules and light.53
For example, the methods have been investigated for their ability tosimulate vibrationally-resolved band shapes, thus providing the po-
tential for more accurate correlation with experimental absorption
spectra. Of particular note is the potential for calculation of thefluorescence properties of dyes, especially the emission properties on
which technological applications of the dyes are commonly
dependent. Indeed, the application of TD-DFT to the calculation of
excited state profiles provides eﬀectively the only reliable theoretical
tool currently available for such studies. TD-DFT methods have been
used to account for both absorption and emission wavelengths of the
dyes, and thus the Stokes shift, which is a critical parameter for many
functional fluorescent dye applications, for example in lasers and
solar collectors (Chapter 11). In addition, progress has been madetowards the calculation of fluorescence quantum yields, by estimating
the extent of competing deactivation processes, notably vibrational
relaxation. A further intrinsic advantage of TD-DFT methods is that
they are capable of being coupled with models that take account of
the often complex environment in which the dye molecule is located,
for example the solvent or a polymeric or biological system. In this
way, the method oﬀers the potential to simulate the performance of a
dye in a ‘real’ environment, which is of clear interest not only for
traditional colour applications but also for specialist functional ap-
plications, especially for the use of dyes in biological systems. TD-DFT
methods have also been used to probe the mechanisms underlyingthe electronic reorganisations that are triggered in photochromic
colour change processes, which are growing in technological im-
portance (see Chapter 11 for a discussion of photochromism).
2.9.3 Molecular Mechanics
Molecular modelling encompasses the range of theoretical methods
and the associated computational techniques used to model or mimic
molecular behaviour. These techniques, which include the quantum
mechanical methods described in the previous section, are used
widely in many areas of computational chemistry, materials science
and biology to study molecular systems ranging in complexity from
small molecules through to large biomolecules and material as-
semblies. The traditional methods used over many decades by
chemists to assist their understanding of the structure of molecules62 Chapter 2by visual inspection commonly involved the construction of physical
models of molecules based on sets of balls, representing atoms, and
sticks or springs, representing bonds. Such methods have given way
to the use of computational approaches that calculate energies and
other physical properties of molecules and allow optimisation of
molecular geometry, so that 3D projections of the molecular structure
may be visualised on the computer monitor screen.54
Molecular mechanics uses classical Newtonian mechanics to model
molecular systems. Essentially, the molecule is considered as if con-structed from sets of balls and springs. Atoms are considered as
spheres which are assigned a radius (usually the van der Waals’ ra-
dius), polarisability and net charge, while bonds between atoms are
simulated as springs with an equilibrium bond length. The equations
of classical mechanics are used to calculate the interactions and
corresponding energies. The set of equations and associated atomic
and bond-related parameters used in the approach is referred to as aforce field . There are many force fields available. There is no ‘best’
force field for all problems, and the selection must be determinedbased on the particular system of interest. However, MM2 is a widely
used force field that appears to be suitable for application to dye
molecules. The molecular mechanics energy, E
MM, is derived from
several components that are combined additively. The essentialcomponents are terms representing the energy in bonds, in angles,
from all van der Waals’ interactions, in torsion angles and electro-
static interactions. Most force fields also include various miscel-
laneous energies, commonly referred to as cross terms . Molecular
mechanics modelling, which does not present major computing de-
mands, is most often used to calculate molecular energies and to
assess the optimum molecular geometry using an energy minimisa-
tion process.
A deficiency of the molecular mechanics approach when used
alone, however, is that it does not specifically include electrons in the
calculations. This is especially relevant in the case of dye molecules,
whose extensive delocalised p-systems mean that stereoelectronic
eﬀects may play an important role in determining molecular geom-etries. Thus, geometries may be refined further using molecularmechanics calculations in association with quantum mechanics cal-
culations. The quantum mechanical approaches used for this purpose
are generally parameterised all valence electron semi-empirical
methods, commonly either AM1 (Austin model 1) or PM3 (para-
meterized model 3). These methods, in addition to calculating mo-
lecular geometries, bond lengths and bond angles, are capable of63 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourcalculating a range of physical properties including heats of for-
mation, ionisation potentials and dipole moments. The molecular
geometries of two isomeric azo dyes calculated using MM2/AM1 by
energy minimisation are shown in Figure 2.18. Clearly, the p-nitro
isomer, as shown in Figure 2.18(b), adopts an essentially planarconfiguration, while stereoelectronic eﬀects operating in the o-isomer,
Figure 2.18(a), cause the molecule to deviate significantly from
planarity, in agreement with the reasoning presented previously in
this chapter for dyes 2.2e and 2.2f, the diethylamino homologues of
these two dyes.
2.9.4 QSAR and QSPR
An alternative approach towards understanding the properties of
molecules involves the development of QSAR (quantitative structure–activity relationships) and QSPR (quantitative structure–property re-
lationships).
55These are mathematical models that attempt to relate
the structure-derived features of a molecule to its activity, common inbiological systems, or physical properties. QSAR and QSPR ap-
proaches operate on the assumption that structurally similar com-
pounds have similar activities or properties. They may be used in the
analysis of structural characteristics that give rise to certain prop-
erties, thereby providing the potential to predict properties. As illus-
trated in the flow-chart in Figure 2.19, the development of a QSAR/QSPR model for a series of molecules starts with experimental data
collection for a particular property. Subsequently, a representation of
the molecules is developed using molecular descriptors which are
judged to be useful for the particular modelling task. For validation of
the model, the data set is divided into a training set and a testing set.
In the learning phase, various modelling methods, such as multiple
linear regression, logistic regression and neural networks, are used to
construct models that describe the empirical relationship between
the molecular structure and the property of interest. A final model
based on optimised parameters is then subjected to a validation
Figure 2.18 Molecular geometries of 2-nitrodimethylaminoazobenzene (a) and 4-
nitrodimethylaminoazobenzene (b) calculated using MM2/AM1.64 Chapter 2process with the testing set to ensure that the model is appropriate
and useful. In recent years, growing numbers of reports have ap-
peared on the use of these approaches applied to various features of
the properties of dye molecules.56The approach has been used in
some studies of dye–fibre interactions, for example to model the ad-sorption of anionic dyes, including direct dyes, on cellulosic fibres, in
attempts to establish the relative importance of factors such as steric
eﬀects and electronic interactions in the binding between dye andfibre molecules.
57As an example of the application in the use of the
QSPR approach towards the development of relationships betweenmolecular structure and colour properties of dyes, a series of nearly
200 azobenzene derivatives was investigated. A reasonable linearDATA
COLLECTION
MOLECULAR
DESCRIPTORS
TRAINING
SET
LEARNING
MODELTESTING
SET
VALIDATION
Figure 2.19 Flowchart for the development of a QSAR/QSPR model.65 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colourrelationship was established between the N–N bond length and the lmax
values, while nonlinear relationships provided an even closer correl-
ation.58Some studies have been reported on the development of QSAR
models aimed at understanding the structure/toxicity relationships, anapplication for which the techniques appear to be well-suited. Some
moderate success has been achieved in understanding the mutageni-
city of series of azobenzene-based dyes and of aromatic amines.
59,60
Computer-aided modelling approaches of various types, which were
originally developed and refined in the search for new drug molecules,are thus now well established for the calculation of colour and other
physical properties of individual dye and pigment molecules. However,
the ability to predict the properties of pigments by calculation is sig-
nificantly more complex because these colorants are applied as discrete
crystalline particles, consisting of large numbers of molecules that are
highly aggregated through strong intermolecular interactions. A mod-
elling approach has been developed for pigments involving the prin-ciples of crystal engineering , as discussed further in Chapter 9.
2.10 COLOUR IN INORGANIC COMPOUNDS
The colours of inorganic compounds, as with organic molecules, are
due to transitions between electronic energy levels as a result of the
absorption of visible light. Several diﬀerent mechanisms may be in-
volved, as discussed in this section.
2.10.1 Colour in Metal Complexes (Coordination Compounds)
Complexes of the transition (d -block) metals with simple ligands are
frequently coloured. These colours cannot be explained on the basis
of the traditional valence bond (resonance) approach, in the way that
has been discussed earlier in this chapter as applied to organic
molecules. The explanation in this case is based on crystal field theory .
This theory considers the eﬀect of the surrounding ligands on the
orbitals occupied by the d-electrons on the central transition metal
ion. The three most common geometrical arrangements of the lig-
ands in these metal complexes are octahedral (coordination number
6), tetrahedral and square planar (both coordination number 4). In
each of these arrangements, the spherical field due to the five d-
orbitals is distorted in such a way that they are no longer degenerate
in terms of their energies. The eﬀect of the spacial arrangement of the
ligands is to split the orbitals into two (or more) levels with diﬀerent
energies. As a consequence, the transition metal complex may show66 Chapter 2colour if there is at least one electron in the lower level that may be
promoted to the upper level, provided that there is a vacancy in the
upper level. A simple example is the Ti(H 2O)631ion. This complex
cation contains a single d-electron (d1configuration), and as a result
of a d–d (or crystal field) transition it appears red because of an ab-
sorption at 490 nm. In contrast, complexes of scandium, which has no
d-electrons (d0configuration), and of zinc with its full complement of
ten d -electrons (d10configuration), are colourless, because no d–d
electronic transitions are possible. The colours of many minerals andgemstones may be attributed to crystal field eﬀects. Colours due to
crystal field electronic transitions alone tend to be rather weak. Many
chelated transition metal complexes, i.e., coordination compounds
involving ligands that possess more than one coordination site, areintensely coloured. This may be due to the p–p* transitions within
coloured organic ligands, as exemplified by metal complex azo dyes(Chapter 3), phthalocyanines (Chapters 5 and 9) and the range ofpremetallised textile dyes (Chapter 7), or to ligand to metal charge
transfer, as discussed in the next section.
2.10.2 Colour from Charge Transfer Transitions in Inorganic
Materials
In contrast to the weak colours due to crystal field transitions, ligand
to metal (L -M) charge transfer transitions give rise to extremely
intense colours. These are transitions that take place in metal com-pounds whereby an electron in an orbital principally associated withthe ligand is transferred, as a result of the energy provided by ab-
sorption of visible light, to an orbital that is mainly associated with
the metal. Examples of inorganic species giving rise to charge transfer
transitions include the deep purple permanganate ion (MnO
4/C0) and
the intense yellow chromate ion (CrO 42/C0), the latter being responsible
for the colour of lead chromate pigments (Chapter 9). The deep red
colour of complexes of iron with the thiocyanate ion (SCN/C0) is also
due ligand to metal charge transfer. Prussian blue is an example ofmixed oxidation state transition metal compound, the colour ofwhich is due to metal–metal electron transfer, in the case of this blue
pigment from an Fe(
II) atom to an adjacent Fe( III) atom (Chapter 9).
2.10.3 Colour in Inorganic Semiconductors
Cadmium sulfide is a yellow pigment of some commercial import-
ance (Chapter 9). Since cadmium has a d10electronic configuration,67 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colouri.e., a full shell of d electrons, the colour cannot be explained on the
basis of crystal field eﬀects. This is a prime example of an inorganic
compound that owes its colour to its semiconductor behaviour.61In
the ground state of these materials, an electron that undergoes thetransition to a higher energy state, rather than occupying a discrete
energy level, is part of a delocalised electron population that occupies
a series of closely-spaced energy levels, referred to as the valence band .
Absorption of light causes the electron to be promoted to an excited
state, which consists of the electron population of the conductance
band . In this case, the exciting photons of light need only the min-
imum energy that is required to overcome the gap between the va-
lence and conductance bands. Consequently, photons of all energies
above this minimum value will be absorbed. The electronic transition
energy for cadmium sulfide is around 2.4 eV, corresponding to a
wavelength of light of 517 nm, so that it absorbs all photons with
energies of 2.4 eV or higher. Thus, it absorbs the entire blue–violetregion of the spectrum, as well as green, and appears yellow. This type
of electronic transition gives rise to steep reflectance curves, ac-
counting for the bright colours of the pigments.
REFERENCES
1. M. P. Simunovic, Eye, 2010, 24, 747.
2. K. Nassau (ed.), Color in Science, Art and Technology, Elsevier,
Amsterdam, 1998.
3. D. A. Skoog, F. J. Holler and S. R. Crouch, Principles of
Instrumental Analysis , Thomson Brooks/Cole, Pacific Grove, USA,
6th edn., 2007, pp. 169–173.
4. R. M. Christie, R. R. Mather and R. H. Wardman, The Chemistry of
Colour Application , Blackwell Science, Oxford, 2000, ch. 8.
5. R. McDonald, Colour Physics for Industry , Society of Dyers and
Colourists, Bradford, UK, 1997.
6. R. W. G. Hunt and M. R. Pointer, Measuring Colour , John Wiley &
Sons Ltd., Chichester, 2011.
7. M. L. Gulrajani (ed.), Colour Measurement: Principles, Advances and
Industrial Applications , Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2010.
8. G. G. Guilbault, Practical Fluorescence , Marcell Dekker, New York,
1990.
9. J. R. Lakovicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy , Springer,
New York, 2006.
10. R. M. Christie, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1993, 23,1 .68 Chapter 211. R. M. Christie, Fluorescent dyes, in Handbook of Textile and
Industrial Dyeing: Principles, Processes and Types of Dyes , ed. M.
Clark, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2011, vol 1, ch.17.
12. S. D. Higgins and A. D. Towns, Chim. Oggi (Chem. Today) , 2003, 21, 13.
13. C. E. Moore, Luminescent organic pigments, in The Pigment
Handbook , ed. P. A. Lewis, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2nd
edn, vol. 1, 1983, p. 859.
14. D. Barton and H. Davidson, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1974, 5,3 .
15. A. E. Siegrist, H. Hefti, H. R. Meyer and E. Schmidt, Rev. Prog.
Color. , 1987, 17, 39.
16. M. Clark (ed.), Handbook of Textile and Industrial Dyeing:
Principles, Processes and Types of Dyes , Woodhead Publishing,
Cambridge, 2011, vols 1 and 2.
17. J. R. Aspland, Textile Dyeing and Coloration , American Association
of Textile Chemists and Colourists, Raleigh, NC, 1997.
18. K. Hunger (ed.), Industrial Dyes: Chemistry, Properties and
Applications , Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 2nd edn, 2003.
19. W. Herbst and K. Hunger, Industrial organic Pigments , Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 4th edn, 2006.
20. G. Buxbaum, Industrial Inorganic Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 2nd edn, 2008.
21. R. M. Christie, The Organic and Inorganic Chemistry of Pigments ,
Oil & Colour Chemsists Association, London, 2002.
22.Colour Index International , Society of Dyers and Colourists,
Bradford, UK, 4th edn online. http://www.colour-index.com.
23. J. Griﬃths, Colour and Constitution of Organic Molecules , Academic
Press, London, 1976.
24. J. Griﬃths, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1981, 11,7 .
25. C. Graebe and C. Liebermann, Ber., 1867, 1, 106.
26. O. N. Witt, Ber, 1876, 9, 522; 1888, 21, 321.
27. J. T. Hewitt and H. V. Mitchell, J. Chem. Soc. Trans. , 1907, 91, 1251.
28. W. Dilthey and R. Wizinger, J. Prakt. Chem. , 1928, 118, 321.
29. C. R. Bury, J. Am. Chem. Soc. , 1935, 57, 2115.
30. P. F. Gordon and P. Gregory, Organic Chemistry in Colour,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983.
31. K. A. Bello and J. Griﬃths, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. , 1986, 1639.
32. D. O. Hayward, Quantum Mechanics for Chemists , Royal Society of
Chemistry, London, 2002.
33.J. J. Sakurai and J. J. Napolitano, Modern Quantum Mechanics ,
Addison-Wesley, London, 2010.
34. D. J. Griﬃths, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics , Pearson
Prentice Hall, London, 2005.69 The Physical and Chemical Basis of Colour35. C. A. Coulson, B. O’Leary and R. B. Mallion, Hu¨ckel Theory for
Organic Chemists , Academic Press, London, 1978.
36. K. Yates, Hu¨ckel Molecular Orbital Theory , Academic Press,
New York, 1978.
37. M. Peric, I. Gutman and J. Radic-Peric, J. Serb. Chem. Soc. , 2006,
71, 771.
38. J. Griﬃths, Dyes Pigments , 1982, 3, 211.
39. R. M. Christie and P. N. Standring, Dyes Pigments , 1989, 11, 109.
40. W. Fabian, Dyes Pigments , 1985, 6, 341.
41. Q. Xuhong, Z. Zhenghua and C. Kongchang, Dyes and Pigments ,
1989, 11, 13.
42. C. Lubai, C. Xing, H. Yufen and J. Griﬃths, Dyes and Pigments ,
1989, 10, 123.
43. M. Adachi and S. Nakamura, Dyes and Pigments , 1991, 17, 287.
44. A. El-Shafei, D. Hinks, H. S. Freeman and J. Lye, AATCC Review,
2001, 1, 23.
45. G. Z. Li, J. Yang, H. F. Song, S. S. Yang, W. C. Lu and N. Y. Chen,
J. Chem. Information and Computer Sciences, 2004, 44, 2047.
46. J. Liu, Z. Chen and S. Yuan, J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci. B , 2005, 6, 584.
47. W. Koch and M. C. Holthausan, A Chemist’s Guide to Density
Functional Theory , Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2000.
48. D. Stoll and J. A. Steckel, Density Functional Theory: A Practical
Introduction , Wiley, 2009.
49. D. Guillaumont and S. Nakamura, Dyes and Pigments , 2000, 46, 85.
50. D. Jacquemin, X. Assfeld, J. Preat and E. A. Perpete, Mol. Phys.,
2007, 105, 325.
51. D. Jacquemin, E. Bremond, A. Planchat, I. Ciafini and C. Adamo,
J.Chem. Theory Comp. , 2011, 42, 1470.
52. A. El-Shafei, D. Hinks and H. S. Freeman, Molecular modelling
and predicting dye properties, in Handbook of Textile and
Industrial Dyeing: Principles, Processes and Types of Dyes , ed. M.
Clark, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2011, vol. 1, ch. 7.
53. A. D. Laurent, C. Adamo and D. Jacquemin, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. , 2014, DOI: 10.1039/C3CP55336A.
54. P. Bladon, J. Gorton and R. B. Hammond, Molecular Modelling:
Computational Chemistry Demystified, Royal Society of Chemistry,
Cambridge, 2011.
55. F. Luan and M. N. Cordero, Overview of QSAR modelling in ra-
tional drug design’, in Recent Trends on QSAR in the
Pharmaceutical Perceptions , ed. M. T. H. Khan, Bentham Science
Publishers, 2012, pp. 194–241.70 Chapter 256. F. Luan, X. Xu, H. Liu and M. N. Cordeiro, Coloration Technol. ,
2013, 129, 173
57. S. Timofei, W. Schmidt, L. Kurunkzi and Z. Simon, Dyes Pigments ,
2000, 47,5 .
58. B. Buttingsrud, B. K. Alsberg and P. O. Astrand, Phys. Chem. Chem.
Phys. , 2007, 9, 2226.
59. A. Garg, K. L. Bhat and C. W. Bock, Dyes Pigments , 2002, 55, 35.
60. K. L. Bhat, S. Hayick, L. Sztandera and C. W. Bock, QSAR Comb.
Sci., 2005, 24, 831.
61. J. Turley, The Essential Guide to Semiconductors , Prentice Hall,
New York, 2002.71 The Physical and Chemical Basis of ColourCHAPTER 3
Azo Dyes and Pigments
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Azo dyes and pigments constitute by far the most important chemical
class of commercial organic colorant.1–4They account for around
60–70% of the dyes used in traditional textile applications (Chapters 7and 8) and they occupy a similarly prominent position in the range of
classical organic pigments (Chapter 9). Azo colorants, as the name
implies, contain as their common structural feature the azo (–N ¼N–)
linkage, which is attached at either side to two sp
2carbon atoms.
Usually, although not exclusively, the azo group links two aromatic
ring systems. Most of the commercially important azo colorants
contain a single azo group and are therefore referred to as monoazo
dyes or pigments, but there are many that contain two (disazo), three(trisazo) or more such groups. In terms of their colour properties, azo
colorants are capable of providing a virtually complete range of hues.
There is no doubt though that they are significantly more important
commercially in yellow, orange and red colours ( i.e., absorbing at
shorter wavelengths), than in blues and greens. However, in morerecent times the range of longer wavelength absorbing azo dyes has
been extended, leading to the emergence of significant numbers of
commercially important blue azo dyes as disperse dyes for application
to polyester.
5Indeed, there are even a few specifically-designed azo
compounds that absorb beyond the visible in the near-infrared region
of the spectrum.6The reader is directed to Chapter 2 for a discussion
of colour/structure relationships in azo dyes. Azo dyes are capable of
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
72
providing high intensity of colour, about twice that of the anthra-
quinones for example (Chapter 4), and reasonably bright colours.
They are capable of providing reasonable to very good technical
properties, for example fastness to light, heat, water and other solv-
ents, although in this respect they are often inferior to other chemical
classes, for example carbonyl and phthalocyanine colorants, espe-
cially in terms of lightfastness.
Perhaps the prime reason for the commercial importance of azo
colorants is that they are the most cost-eﬀective of all the chemicalclasses of organic dyes and pigments. The reasons for this may be
found in the nature of the processes used in their manufacture.
The synthesis of azo colorants, which is discussed in some detail
later in this chapter, brings together two organic components, a diazo
component and a coupling component, in a two-stage sequence of
reactions known as diazotisation and azo coupling . The versatility of the
chemistry involved in this synthetic sequence means that an immense
number of azo colorants may be prepared and this accounts for the fact
that they have been adapted structurally to meet the requirements of
most colour applications. On an industrial scale, the processes are
straightforward, making use of simple multipurpose chemical plant.
They are usually capable of production in high, often virtually quan-
titative, yields and the processes are carried out at or below ambient
temperatures, thus presenting low energy requirements. The syntheses
generally involve low cost, readily available commodity organic starting
materials such as aromatic amines and phenols. The solvent in which
the reactions are carried out is water, which oﬀers obvious economic
and environmental advantages over all other solvents. In fact, it isconceivable that azo dyes may assume even greater importance in the
future as some of the other chemical types for which the synthetic
routes do not oﬀer such features, notably anthraquinones, become
progressively less economic.
5This chapter contains a discussion of
the fundamental structural chemistry of azo colorants, including adescription of the types of isomerism that they can exhibit, and the
principles of their synthesis. In the final section, the ability of azo dyes
to form metal complexes is discussed. Because of their prominence
in most applications, numerous further examples of azo dyes andpigments will be encountered throughout this book.
3.2 ISOMERISM IN AZO DYES AND PIGMENTS
The structural chemistry of azo compounds is complicated by the
possibilities of isomerism. Two types of isomerism are commonly73 Azo Dyes and Pigmentsencountered with certain azo compounds: geometrical isomerism
and tautomerism.
Some simple azo compounds, because of restricted rotation about
the (–N¼N–) double bond, are capable of exhibiting geometrical
isomerism. The geometrical isomerism of azobenzene, the simplest
aromatic azo compound, which may be considered as the parent
system on which the structures of most azo colorants are based, is
illustrated in Figure 3.1. The compound is only weakly coloured
because it absorbs mainly in the UV region with a lmaxvalue of 320 nm
in solution in ethanol, a feature that may be attributed to the absenceof substituents that can act as auxochromes (Chapter 2). The com-
pound exists normally as the trans, or ( E), isomer, 3.1a.T h i sm o l e c u l e
is essentially planar in the solid state and probably also in solution andin the gas phase, a feature that is supported by calculations based on
time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT).
7When irradiated
with UV light, the ( E)-isomer undergoes conversion substantially into
the cis or (Z )-isomer, 3.1b, which may be isolated as a pure compound.
In the dark, the (Z )-isomer reverts thermally to the ( E)-isomer, which is
thermodynamically more stable because of reduced steric congestion.8
Some early disperse dyes, which were relatively simple azobenzene
derivatives introduced commercially initially for application to cellu-
lose acetate fibres, were found to be prone to photochromism (formerly
referred to as phototropy ), a reversible light-induced colour change. CI
Disperse Red 1, 3.2, is an example of a dye that has been observed
under certain circumstances to give rise to this phenomenon.9When
this dye is applied to cellulose acetate substrates, the colour weakensand changes in hue on exposure to direct sunlight. The original colour
is restored when the material is kept in the dark.
N
NO2N
N
CH2CH3CH2CH2OH
3.2N
N
N N
3.1a 3.1bhν
Figure 3.1 Photo-induced geometrical isomerism of azobenzene.74 Chapter 3The phenomenon is explained by the colour changes associated
with the ( E/Z) isomerisation process, which may be initiated by
exposure to light; the two geometrical isomers of the azo dyes have
noticeably diﬀerent colours. The eﬀect, which is considered as a
defect in traditional dyeing, is no longer encountered to any signifi-
cant extent in the modern range of azo disperse dyes as the oﬀending
dyes have been progressively replaced by more stable products.Interestingly, however, there has been a significant revival of interest
in dyes that can exhibit photochromism, especially when it is
controllable and reversible, mainly for ophthalmic sun-screening
applications such as the familiar spectacles that darken to become
sunglasses on exposure to sunlight. The most important industrial
photochromic dyes of this type are the spirooxazines and naphtho-
pyrans (see Chapter 11 for further discussion on these and other
chromic materials).
Many commercial azo colorants contain a hydroxyl group ortho to
the azo group. As illustrated in Figure 3.2, this gives rise to intra-molecular hydrogen-bonding, which further stabilizes the ( E)-isomer
and eﬀectively prevents its conversion into the ( Z)-form.
Another important feature of azo compounds in which there is a
hydroxyl group conjugated with ( i.e.,ortho orpara to) the azo group,
and a large number of commercial azo dyes and pigments show this
structural feature, is that they can exhibit tautomerism. The classical
experimental evidence for hydroxyazo/ketohydrazone tautomerism in
dyes of this type was provided by Zincke.
10In 1884, he reported the
reactions of benzenediazonium chloride with 1-naphthol and ofphenylhydrazine with naphtho-1,4-quinone. It might have beenexpected that the former reaction would give hydroxyazo compound
3.3a, and the latter would give the ketohydrazone tautomer 3.3b.I n
the event, it was found that both reactions gave the same product, atautomeric mixture of 3.3a and 3.3b (Scheme 3.1). Such tautomeric
forms may nowadays be readily identified by their distinctive UV/visible, infrared and
1H,13C and15N NMR spectral characteristics in
solution,11and by X-ray crystallography in the solid state. In terms of
N
NO H
Figure 3.2 Intramolecular hydrogen bonding in o-hydroxyazo compounds.75 Azo Dyes and Pigmentscolour properties, the ketohydrazone isomers are usually bath-
ochromic compared with the hydroxyazo forms, and give higher
molar extinction coeﬃcients.
Figure 3.3 shows the tautomeric forms of a further range of
hydroxyazo dyes. In solution, the tautomers exist in rapid equilibrium
although commonly one or other of the tautomers is found topredominate to an extent dependent on their relative thermodynamic
stabilities.
12,13In the case of 2-phenylazophenol, the azo isomer 3.4a
predominates over the hydrazone isomer 3.4b. On the basis of a
consideration solely of the summation of all of the theoretical bond
energies in the molecule, it has been suggested that the hydrazone
isomer would be expected to be more stable. However, this is
outweighed by the reduced resonance stabilization energy in the
hydrazone form, due to the loss of the aromatic character of one ring.
In the case of hydroxyazonaphthalenes, 4-phenylazo-1-naphthol, 3.3,
and 1-phenylazo-2-naphthol, 3.5, the reduction in the resonance
stabilization energy in the ketohydrazone forms is due to the loss ofN2Cl NHNH 2O OH
O
O
N
NO
N
NHH+
3.3b+
3.3a
Scheme 3.1 Reaction scheme that provides evidence for tautomerism in some
hydroxyazo dyes.76 Chapter 3aromaticity in only one of the naphthalene rings. In relative terms, the
reduction in energy is less than in the benzene series, so that the two
tautomers become much closer in stability. The position of the
equilibrium, particularly in the case of compound 3.3, then becomes
heavily dependent on the environment in which the dye finds
itself, most importantly on the nature of the solvent. Interestingly, 3-
phenylazo-2-naphthol, 3.6, exists exclusively in the azo form 3.6a,
because of the instability of hydrazone form 3.6b in which there is
complete loss of aromatic character of the naphthalene system. In the
case of azo dyes derived from heterocyclic coupling components,
such as the azopyrazolones, 3.7, and the azopyridones, 3.8, and from
b-ketoacid-derived coupling components, such as the azoacetoaceta-
nilides, 3.9, the compounds exist exclusively in the hydrazone forms,
3.7b,3.8b and 3.9b, respectively. X-Ray crystallographic structureO
NNH
O
NNH
N
N
ON
N
OH H
O
NNHO
NNH
N
NOC H3
CN
ON
H
RN
NOC H3
CN
ON
RN
O H3C
ArN
H N
NN NNO H3C
ArN
H
NN
HCC
C
ONHOCH3
NN
CC
C
ONHOCH3
H
H3.4a 3.4b
3.5a 3.5b
3.6a 3.6b
3.7a 3.7b
3.8b 3.8a 3.9b 3.9a
Figure 3.3 Tautomeric forms of azo dyes 3.4–3.9 .77 Azo Dyes and Pigmentsdeterminations have been carried out on a wide range of industrial
azo pigments, and these compounds have been shown invariably to
exist exclusively in the ketohydrazone form in the solid state (for a
more detailed discussion of this feature see Chapter 9).
Ino-hydroxyazo compounds, but not in p-hydroxyazo compounds,
there is strong intramolecular hydrogen bonding both in the hydro-
xyazo and ketohydrazone forms, as illustrated for compounds 3.4–3.9
(Figure 3.3). A factor that contributes to the explanation for the pre-
dominance of the ketohydrazone isomer in many cases is that in this
form the intramolecular hydrogen-bonding is significantly stronger
than in the hydroxyazo form, because of the higher bond polarities in
the ketohydrazone system. This may provide an explanation for the
observations that in the case of 1-phenylazo-2-naphthol, 3.5, the
hydrazone form 3.5b predominates while in the case of the isomeric
4-phenylazo-1-naphthol, 3.3, in which there is no intramolecular
hydrogen bonding, the two tautomers are of comparable stability.
Intramolecular hydrogen-bonding is a commonly encountered sta-
bilizing feature in a wide range of dyes and pigments of most
chemical types, enhancing many useful technical properties. For ex-
ample, lightfastness is usually improved. This has been explained by a
reduction in the electron density at the azo group due to hydrogen
bonding, which decreases its sensitivity towards photochemical oxi-
dation. An additional positive feature of intramolecular hydrogen
bonding is that it reduces the acidity of the hydroxyl group involved,
and this consequently provides the dye with enhanced stability
towards treatments with aqueous alkali such as used, for example, in
the laundering of textiles.
3.3 SYNTHESIS OF AZO DYES AND PIGMENTS
Textbooks in general organic chemistry will illustrate that there are
many ways of synthesizing azo compounds. However, almost without
exception, azo dyes and pigments are made on an industrial scale by
the same two-stage reaction sequence: diazotisation and azo coup-
ling, as illustrated in Scheme 3.2.1–4,14
The first stage, diazotisation, involves the treatment of a primary
aromatic amine, referred to as the diazo component, with sodium
nitrite under conditions of controlled acidity and at relatively low
Ar-NH 2Ar-N=N+HNO 2Ar'-H
Ar-N=N-Ar'
diazotisation azo coupling
Scheme 3.2 Synthesis of azo colorants.78 Chapter 3temperatures to form a diazonium salt. In the second stage of the
sequence, azo coupling, the relatively unstable diazonium salt thus
formed is reacted with a coupling component, which may be a phenol,
an aromatic amine or a b-ketoacid derivative, to form the azo dye or
pigment. The next two sections of this chapter deal separately with
these two reactions, with emphasis on the practical conditions used
for the reactions and on the reaction mechanisms. This sequence ofreactions provides an interesting illustration for students of organic
chemistry of the ways in which the selection of the optimum practical
conditions for the reactions is heavily influenced by consideration of
the reaction mechanisms that are operating.
3.3.1 Diazotisation
Diazotisation, the first stage of azo dye and pigment synthesis, in-
volves the treatment of a primary aromatic amine (ArNH
2), which may
be carbocyclic or heterocyclic, with nitrous acid to form a diazoniumsalt (ArN
21Cl/C0).14Nitrous acid, HNO 2, is a rather unstable substance
decomposing relatively easily by dissociation into oxides of nitrogen.It is therefore usually generated in the reaction mixture as required by
treating sodium nitrite, a stable species, with a strong acid. The
mineral acid of choice for many diazotisations is hydrochloric acid.This is because the presence of the chloride ion can exert a catalytic
eﬀect on the reaction under appropriate conditions, thus enhancing
the reaction rate. Most primary aromatic amines undergo diazotisa-
tion with little interference from the presence of other substituents,
although these may influence the reaction conditions required. When
the reaction conditions are carefully controlled, diazotisation usually
proceeds smoothly and in virtually quantitative yield. It is of con-
siderable industrial importance that the reaction may be carried out
in water, the reaction solvent of choice for obvious economic andenvironmental reasons.
Diazotisation is always carried out under strongly acidic conditions,
but control of the degree of acidity is of particular importance in
ensuring smooth reaction. The overall reaction equation for the dia-
zotisation reaction using sodium nitrite and hydrochloric acid may be
given as:
ArNH 2þNaNO 2þ2HCl-ArN 21Cl/C0þH2O
Reaction stoichiometry therefore requires the use of two moles of
acid per mole of amine. However, for several reasons, a somewhat
greater excess of acid is generally used. One reason is that highly79 Azo Dyes and Pigmentsacidic conditions favour the generation from nitrous acid of the
reactive nitrosating species that are responsible for the reaction, a
feature which will emerge from the discussion of the reaction mech-
anism later in this chapter. A second reason is that acidic conditions
suppress the formation of triazines as side-products, which may be
formed as a result of N-coupling reactions between the diazonium salts
and the aromatic amines from which they are formed. A practicalreason for the use of acidic conditions is to convert the insoluble free
amine (ArNH
2) into its water-soluble protonated form (ArNH 31Cl/C0).
However, too strongly acidic conditions are avoided so that the positionof the equilibrium is not too far in favour of the protonated amine and
allows a reasonable equilibrium concentration of the free amine, which
under most conditions is the reactive species, as discussion of the re-
action mechanism will demonstrate. There is therefore an optimum
level of acidity for the diazotisation of a particular aromatic amine,
which depends on the basicity of the amine in question. In the case ofaniline derivatives, electron-withdrawing groups, such as the nitro
group, reduce the basicity of the amino group. As a consequence, for
example, the diazotisation of 4-nitroaniline requires much more acidic
conditions than aniline itself. Very weakly basic amines, such as 2,4-
dinitroaniline, require extremely acidic conditions. They are usually
diazotised using a solution of sodium nitrite in concentrated sulfuric
acid, which forms nitrosyl sulfuric acid (NO
1HSO 4/C0). Heterocyclic
aromatic amines, such as aminothiophenes, aminothiazoles andaminobenzothiazoles, are of importance as diazo components par-
ticularly in the synthesis of azo disperse dyes. Diazotisation of these
amines can prove problematic. Generally, the use of concentrated acidsis required due to the reduction in basicity of the amine by the
heterocyclic system and as a result of protonation of heterocyclic
nitrogen atoms, and also because the diazonium salts are sensitive to
hydrolysis in dilute acids.
It is especially important to control the acidity when aromatic
diamines are treated with nitrous acid to form either the mono- or
bis-diazonium salts, a process of some importance in the synthesis of
disazo dyes and pigments (see later). p-Phenylenediamine is an
example of a diamine in which either one or both of the amino
groups may be diazotised by careful selection of reaction conditions.
The use of dilute hydrochloric acid can result in smooth formation of
the monodiazonium salt. The use of nitrosyl sulfuric acid is
required to diazotise the second amino group, since the strong electron-
withdrawing eﬀect of the diazo group in the monodiazonium saltreduces the basicity of the amino group which remains.80 Chapter 3It is critically important in diazotisation reactions to maintain
careful control of the temperature of the reaction medium. The
reactions are generally carried out in the temperature range 0–5 1C,
necessitating the use of ice-cooling. In certain cases, for example withsome heterocyclic amines, even lower temperatures are desirable, al-
though temperatures that are too low can cause the reactions to be-
come impracticably slow. Eﬃcient cooling is therefore essential, notleast because the reactions are invariably strongly exothermic. One
reason for the need for low temperatures is that higher temperatures
promote the decomposition of nitrous acid, giving rise to the formation
of oxides of nitrogen. In the industrial manufacture of azo dyes and
pigments, the presence of these strongly oxidising species in the ex-
haust gases is highly undesirable as they can cause combustible ma-
terials with which they may come into contact to catch fire, with
potentially disastrous consequences! The main reason for maintaining
low temperatures, however, is the instability of diazonium salts. Thediazonium cation, although stabilised by resonance, decomposes
readily with the evolution of nitrogen, the principal decomposition
product being the phenol, from reaction with water (Scheme 3.3).
Normally, amines are diazotised using a direct method that involves
the addition of sodium nitrite solution to an acidic aqueous solution
of the amine. Aromatic amines that also contain sulfonic acid groups,
for example, sulfanilic acid (4-aminobenzene-1-sulfonic acid), are
widely used in the synthesis of water-soluble azo dyes and of metal
salt azo pigments. Because these amines often dissolve with diﬃculty
in aqueous acid, they are commonly diazotised using an indirect
method, which involves dissolving the compound in aqueous alkali as
the sodium salt of the sulfonic acid, introducing the appropriate
quantity of sodium nitrite and then adding this combined solution
with stirring to the dilute acid, ensuring that a low temperature is
maintained by ice cooling.
NN
NN+
phenols,  chloro compounds, etc.++
- N2
Scheme 3.3 Thermal decomposition of diazonium salts.81 Azo Dyes and PigmentsThe quantity of sodium nitrite used in diazotisation is usually the
equimolar amount required by reaction stoichiometry or a very slight
excess. A large excess of nitrite is avoided because of the instability of
nitrous acid and since high concentrations can promote diazonium
salt decomposition. When direct diazotisation is used, the sodium
nitrite is usually added at a controlled rate such that a slight excess is
maintained throughout the course of the reaction. In practice, this ismonitored easily by the characteristic blue colour nitrous acid gives
with starch/potassium iodide paper. When diazotisation is judged to
be complete, any remaining nitrous acid excess is usually destroyed
prior to azo coupling to avoid side-products due to C-nitrosation of
the coupling components. This is commonly achieved by addition of
sulfamic acid, which reacts as follows:
15
NH 2SO3HþHNO 2-N2þH2SO4þH2O
Because diazonium salts are relatively unstable species, they are
almost always prepared in solution as required and used immediatelyto synthesise an azo dye or pigment. It is generally inadvisable to
attempt to isolate diazonium chlorides as they may decompose ex-
plosively in the solid state. It is, however, possible to prepare stabil-
ised diazonium salts, which may be handled reasonably safely in the
solid state. This is achieved by the use of alternative counteranions,
which are much larger in size and less nucleophilic than the chloride
anion. The most commonly used stabilised diazonium salts are de-
rived from tetrafluoroborates (BF
4/C0), tetrachlorozincates (ZnCl 42/C0)
and salts obtained from the di-anion of naphthalene-1,5-disulfonicacid. One use of stabilised diazonium salts is in the azoic dyeing of
cotton. This process involves the impregnation of cotton fibres with a
solution of a coupling component and subsequent treatment with a
solution of the stabilised diazonium salt to form an azo pigment,
which is trapped mechanically within the cotton fibres. Azoic dyeing,
which many years ago was an important method for producing
washfast dyeings on cotton, is of relatively limited importance today
having largely been superseded by processes such as vat dyeing and
reactive dyeing (Chapter 7).
An outline general mechanism for the diazotisation of an aromatic
amine is given in Scheme 3.4.
16The first stage in the reaction is N-
nitrosation of the amine, the nitrosating species being represented in
the scheme as Y–N¼ O. It has been shown that various species may be
responsible for nitrosation, depending on the nature of the aromaticamine in question and on the conditions employed for the reaction.
The nitrosating species may be the nitroso-acidium ion (H
2O1-NO),82 Chapter 3nitrosyl chloride (NOCl), dinitrogen trioxide (N 2O3) or the nitrosonium
cation (NO1). The formation of each of these species from nitrous acid
is illustrated in the series of equilibria shown in Scheme 3.5.
The diazotisation reaction provides a classical example of the
application of physical chemistry in the elucidation of the detail of
organic reaction mechanisms. In particular, the results of studies of
the kinetics of diazotisation have proved especially informative
in establishing the nature of the nitrosating species and the rate-
determining step for particular cases. For diazotisation in dilute acids
such as sulfuric and perchloric, where the anion is relatively weakly
nucleophilic, the nitrosating species has been shown to be dinitrogen
trioxide under conditions of low acidity, and the nitroso-acidium ion
at higher acidities. In hydrochloric acid, the rate of diazotisation
shows a marked increase as a result of catalysis by the chloride anion.The kinetics of the reaction in this last case is consistent with a
mechanism involving nitrosation of the free amine by reaction with
nitrosyl chloride.
In most of the cases discussed so far, the rate-determining step of
the reaction is nitrosation of the free amine. When diazotisation isAr-NH 2+ Y-N=O Ar-NH 2-N=O+ - H+
Ar-NH-N=O
tautomerism
Ar-N=N-OH Ar-N=N-OH 2+ H+
Ar-N=N+- H2O
Scheme 3.4 Mechanism of diazotisation.
HO-N=OO-N=O
H2O-N=O-
+O-N=O-
Y-
Cl-O=N-O-N=O
Cl-N=O
N=O+increasing
acidity
Y-N=Onitrite anion
nitrous acid
dinitrogen trioxide
nitrosyl chloride
nitrosonium cationnitrosoacidium ion
Scheme 3.5 Equilibria involved in the formation of nitrosating species from nitrous
acid.83 Azo Dyes and Pigmentscarried out in concentrated acids, the nitrosonium cation, NO1,i st h e
nitrosating species. In this case, an exchange mechanism has been
proposed, as illustrated in Scheme 3.6, in which the initial step is
reaction of the nitrosonium cation with the protonated amine to form
ap-complex. The deprotonation step that follows the exchange
becomes rate-determining.
3.3.2 Azo Coupling
Azo coupling is an example of aromatic electrophilic substitution in
which the electrophile is the diazonium cation, ArN 21.10,17–19Elec-
trophilic substitution reactions, of which nitration, sulfonation andhalogenation are arguably the best-known examples, are the most
commonly encountered group of reactions of aromatic systems.
However, the diazonium cation is a relatively weak electrophile and
will therefore only react with aromatic systems that are highlyactivated to electrophilic attack by the presence of strongly electron-
releasing groups. The most commonly encountered strongly electron-
releasing groups are the hydroxyl and amino groups, and this in turn
means that the most common compounds that are capable of
undergoing azo coupling, referred to as coupling components , are ei-
ther phenols or aromatic amines (primary, secondary or tertiary).There is a third type of coupling component, commonly a b-ketoacid
derivative, in which coupling takes place at a reactive methylenegroup. The azo coupling reaction between benzenediazoniumchloride and phenol is illustrated in Scheme 3.7.
To ensure that the azo dyes and pigments are obtained in high yield
and purity, careful control of experimental conditions is essential to
minimise the formation of side products. It is a useful feature of both
diazotisation and azo coupling reactions that they may be carried out
in water as the reaction solvent. Temperature control, which is so
critical in diazotisation reactions, is generally less important in the
case of azo coupling. The reactions are normally carried out at or just
below ambient temperatures. There is usually little advantage inNH3
NN
HH
HO
NN H
HO
Z
ZZ+2+
N=O
π-complex+- H++
etc
Scheme 3.6 Mechanism of nitrosation in concentrated acids.84 Chapter 3raising the temperature, other than in a few special cases, since this
tends to increase the rate of diazonium salt decomposition more than
the rate of coupling.
The experimental factor that requires most careful control in azo
coupling is pH. There is usually an optimum pH range for a specific
azo coupling reaction, which is principally dependent on theparticular coupling component used. Phenols are usually coupled
under alkaline conditions, in which case the phenol (ArOH) is
converted predominantly into the phenolate anion (Ar–O
/C0). There are
two reasons why this facilitates the reaction. This first is a practicalreason in that the anionic species is more water-soluble than the
phenol itself. A second and arguably more important reason is that
the –O
/C0group is more powerfully electron-releasing than the –OH
group itself and hence much more strongly activates the systemtowards electrophilic substitution. Strongly alkaline conditions are
generally avoided, however, as they promote diazonium salt
decomposition. In addition, these conditions can cause conversion ofthe diazonium cation (ArN
21) into the diazotate anion (Ar–N ¼N–O/C0),
a species that is significantly less reactive than the diazonium cationin azo coupling. Generally, it is desirable to carry out the reaction at
the lowest pH at which coupling takes place at a reasonable rate. In
the case of aromatic amines as coupling components, weakly acidic to
neutral conditions are commonly used. The pH is selected such that
the amine is converted substantially into the more water-soluble
protonated form (ArNH
31), but at which there is a significant
equilibrium concentration of the free amine (ArNH 2), which is more
reactive to towards azo coupling. Reactive methylene-based couplingNN + O-
NN
HO
NN OHH+
Scheme 3.7 Azo coupling reaction between benzenediazonium chloride and phenol.85 Azo Dyes and Pigmentscomponents undergo azo coupling viathe enolate anion, the con-
centration of which increases with increasing pH. These compounds
are also frequently coupled at weakly acidic to neutral pH values,
under which conditions a suﬃciently high concentration of enolate
anion exists for the reaction to proceed at a reasonable rate and side-
reactions due to diazonium salt decomposition are minimised.
Commonly, the rate of addition of the diazonium salt solution to thecoupling component is controlled carefully to ensure that an excess of
diazonium salt is never allowed to build up in the coupling medium,
in order to minimise side-reactions due to diazonium salt
decomposition, especially when higher pH conditions are required.
This is especially important in the synthesis of azo pigments, in-
soluble compounds from which the removal of impurities is diﬃcult.
Figure 3.4 illustrates the structures of a selected range of coupling
components commonly used in the synthesis of azo dyes and pig-
ments. In the figure, the position(s) at which azo coupling normallytakes place is also indicated. The coupling position is governed by the
normal substituent directing eﬀects, both electronic and steric, that
N NH3C
ArO
NOXCH3
HONH
OH3C
O
ROH
HO3 O S S 3HR N H O 2
OH
OH
HO3 H N S 2OH
NH2
HO3SNH23.12
(3.13, H-Acid) (3.14, J-Acid)) (3.15, γ-Acid)
3.16 3.17 3.18coupling position
(alkaline)(alkaline)(alkaline)(acid)(acid)(acid)3.10 3.11
Figure 3.4 Structures of some commonly-used coupling components.86 Chapter 3are encountered for aromatic electrophilic substitution. These eﬀects,
together with other aspects of the reaction mechanisms involved in
electrophilic aromatic substitution, are dealt with at length in most
organic chemistry textbooks, and so are not considered further here.
The coupling components include the relatively simple benzene de-
rivatives, phenol, 3.10, and aniline, 3.11, naphthalene derivatives
3.12–3.15 , some heterocyclic compounds such as the pyrazolones 3.16
and pyridones 3.17, while the b-keto acid derivatives are exemplified
by acetoacetanilide 3.18. Many coupling components, such as com-
pounds 3.10–3.12 and 3.16–3.18, are capable of a single azo coupling
reaction to give a monoazo colorant. Several coupling components,
for example naphthalene derivatives 3.13–3.15 , contain both an
amino and a hydroxyl group in separate rings. These compounds areuseful because they are capable of reacting twice with diazonium
salts, thus providing a route to disazo colorants. As an example, 1-
amino-8-hydroxynaphthalene-3,6-disulfonic acid, 3.13, referred to
trivially as H-Acid, is used in the synthesis of a number of important
azo dyes. The position of azo coupling with this coupling component
may be controlled by careful choice of pH. Under alkaline conditions,
the hydroxyl group is converted into the phenolate anion (–O
/C0), which
is more electron releasing than the amino group. In contrast, underweakly acidic conditions it exists un-ionised as the –OH group, which
is less electron-releasing than the amino group.
20A feature of naph-
thalene chemistry is that a substituent exerts its maximum electroniceﬀect in the ring to which it is attached, so that under alkaline con-
ditions azo coupling is directed into the ring containing the hydroxyl
group, while under weakly acidic conditions reaction takes place inthe ring containing the amino group. This selectivity of the coupling
position, also shown by coupling components such as J-acid, 3.14,
andg-acid, 3.15, allows the preparation of a range of unsymmetrical
disazo dyes by a controlled sequential procedure involving two sep-
arate azo coupling reactions.
3.4 STRATEGIES FOR AZO DYE AND PIGMENT SYNTHESIS
In the case of monoazo dyes and pigments, the strategy for synthesis
is straightforward, involving appropriate selection of diazo and
coupling components, and choice of reaction conditions in accord-
ance with the chemical principles presented in the previous two
sections of this chapter. For azo colorants containing more than one
azo group, the situation is more complex and it becomes even more
critical that the synthetic strategy and reaction conditions are selected
carefully to ensure that a pure product is obtained in high yield.87 Azo Dyes and PigmentsA system, in common use as a systematic treatment of the possible
synthetic strategies leading to polyazo compounds, has been pro-
posed by the Society of Dyers and Colourists (SDC).21The system has
undoubted merit as a method of classification, although rigorousjustification of some of the symbolism used may be questioned. To
describe the strategies, it is appropriate at this stage to define the
nature of the various reacting species as follows:
A: primary aromatic Amine: i.e., a normal diazo component;
D: primary aromatic Diamine: i.e., a tetrazo component;
E: coupling component capable of reaction with one diazonium ion:
anEnd component;
Z: coupling component capable of reaction with more than one
diazonium ion;
M: coupling component containing a primary aromatic amino group
that, after an azo coupling reaction, may be diazotised and used in
a second azo coupling: a Middle component.
3.4.1 Synthesis of Monoazo Dyes and Pigments
The synthesis of monoazo dyes and pigments is represented by the
symbolism:
A-E
In using this terminology, it should be emphasised that the arrow has
the meaning ‘diazotised and then coupled with’ rather than its usual
meaning in organic reaction sequences. Thus, for example, the first
stage in the synthesis of CI Disperse Orange 25, 3.19, is the diazotisation
of 4-nitroaniline, using sodium nitrite and aqueous hydrochloric acid at
temperatures less than 5 1C. The diazonium salt thus formed is reacted
with N-ethyl- N-b-cyanoethylaniline, under weakly acidic conditions
since the coupling component is a tertiary aromatic amine.
N
NO2N
N
CH2CH3CH2CH2CN
3.19
3.4.2 Synthesis of Disazo Dyes and Pigments
The situation becomes more complex when two separate diazotisa-
tions and azo couplings are required. Four separate strategies leading88 Chapter 3to disazo colorants may be identified, using the SDC terminology and
symbolism, exemplified as follows as strategies (a)–(d).
(a) A1-Z’A2
In this the first strategy, two primary aromatic amines (A1and A2)
are diazotised and reacted separately under appropriate pH
conditions and in an appropriate sequence with a coupling com-
ponent that has two available coupling positions. As an example, the
synthesis of CI Acid Black 1, 3.20, a bluish-black dye commonly used
to in the dyeing of wool, is as follows. 4-Nitroaniline is diazotisedunder the usual conditions and the diazonium salt reacted in the
first coupling reaction under weakly acidic conditions with H-Acid,
3.13, under which conditions azo coupling is directed into the
ring containing the amino group. Secondly, aniline is diazotisedand the resulting diazonium salt reacted with the monoazo inter-mediate to form the disazo dye. For the second coupling, alkaline
conditions are used since a phenolic coupling component is involved.
In general, reactions of this type are carried out in this sequence
because of the good solubility of the monoazo intermediate in alkali
and the improved selectivity of the process when carried out in
this way.
N NOH NH 2
SO3Na NaO 3SN NNO2
3.20
(b) E1’D-E2
In this strategy, a primary aromatic diamine is diazotised twice
(tetrazotised) and coupled separately with two coupling components(E
1and E2). In the case of CI Pigment Yellow 12, 3.21, which is an
important bright yellow pigment used extensively in printing inks, theproduct is symmetrical (a bis-ketohydrazone). This greatly simplifies
the synthetic procedure since the two coupling reactions may be
carried out simultaneously. 3,3
0-Dichlorobenzidine (1 mole) is tetra-
zotised (bis-diazotised) and coupled under weakly acidic toneutral conditions with acetoacetanilide, 3.18, (2 moles) to give the89 Azo Dyes and Pigmentsproduct directly. When an unsymmetrical product is required, a
much more careful approach to the synthesis is essential to ensure that
the unsymmetrical product is not contaminated by quantities of the
two possible symmetrical products. One approach that may be used
involves the diazotisation, by careful choice of conditions, of one
amino group of the diamine D followed by coupling with the first
component E1. The monoazo intermediate formed contains the second
amino group, which may be diazotised followed by coupling with
component E2. Alternatively, the synthesis may be achieved by tetra-
zotisation of the diamine followed by two sequential azo coupling re-actions with careful selection of pH conditions to control the outcome
of the reactions. In the case of CI Direct Blue 2, 3.22, for example, the
synthesis could start, in principle, with the tetrazotisation of benzidine(4,4
0-diaminobiphenyl). The resulting tetrazonium salt is first coupled
with g-Acid, 3.15, under acidic conditions and then the monoazo
intermediate is reacted with H-Acid, 3.13, under alkaline conditions.
This particular example, by way of illustration, uses benzidine as
the tetrazo component. Formerly, benzidine was an important
tetrazo component, particularly for the manufacture of direct dyes
for the dyeing of cotton. However, this compound has for many years
now been recognised as a potent human carcinogen and its use in
colour manufacture has long since ceased in the developed world
(Chapter 12).
NH HNCl
ClN
NC
C
CC
OO
NHOH3C
O
CH3N
H
3.21
NN NNOHNH2
NaO 3S
SO3Na
H2NHOSO3Na
3.2290 Chapter 3(c) A-M-E
This third strategy in azo colorant synthesis makes use of the fea-
ture that a primary aromatic amine has the potential to be used both
as a coupling component and as a diazo component. As an example,
in the synthesis of CI Disperse Yellow 23, 3.23, aniline, as the diazo
component, is first diazotised and the resulting diazonium saltreacted under weakly acidic conditions with aniline, as the couplingcomponent, to give 4-aminoazobenzene. A practical complication
with this stage is the ineﬃciency of the coupling reaction with aniline,
and the formation of side-products due to an N-coupling reaction. In
an improved method, aniline is first reacted with formaldehyde and
sodium bisulfite to form the methyl- o-sulfonate derivative
(ArNHCH
2SO3Na), which couples readily. After coupling, the labile
methyl- o-sulfonate group may be removed easily by acid hydrolysis to
give 4-aminoazobenzene. This amine is then diazotised and the re-sulting diazonium salt is reacted with phenol under alkaline con-
ditions to give the disazo dye 3.23.
NN
NN
OH
3.23
(d) A1-Z–X–Z’A2
The products from the fourth strategy are structurally not dis-
similar from those obtained by the strategy given in strategy (b).
However, in this strategy the disazo colorant is synthesised by linking
together two molecules of a monoazo derivative by some chemical
means. As an example, the synthesis of CI Pigment Red 166, 3.24,a
disazo condensation pigment that exists structurally as a bis-ketohy-drazone, is shown in Scheme 3.8. The monoazo compound 3.26
containing a carboxylic acid group is prepared by an azo couplingreaction with 3-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid, 3.25, as the coupling com-
ponent. The acid 3.26 is then converted into the acid chloride, 3.27,
followed by a condensation reaction between the acid chloride(2 moles) and p-phenylenediamine (1 mole), a reaction that requires
elevated temperatures in a high boiling organic solvent, to formpigment 3.24. In principle, a simpler and more cost-eﬀective route
using strategy (b), involving azo coupling of the diazonium salt(2 moles) with the appropriate bifunctional coupling component91 Azo Dyes and Pigments(1 mole), might be proposed. In practice, this route fails because the
monoazo derivative formed from the first azo coupling reaction is so
insoluble that the second coupling reaction cannot take place.
3.4.3 Synthesis of Dyes and Pigments containing more than two
Azo Groups
The strategies leading to dyes with several azo groups are in essence
extensions of the methods leading to disazo colorants. As the numberof separate diazotisations and azo coupling reactions required for the
synthesis of a polyazo dye increases, so does the number of potential
strategies. There are a number of commercial trisazo dyes, most being
brown or black direct dyes for application to cotton. There are five
strategies leading to trisazo colorants, which may be illustrated using
the accepted symbolism as:
(a) E’D-Z’A
(b) E1’D-M-E2NNH
O
H
N
NHO
NHNCl
Cl
OClCL
ON
2Cl
OH
CO2H
OH
CO2HNNCl
Cl
OH
COClNNCl
Cl
NH2
NH2Cl
Cl
(condensation, x2)3.25+
3.26SOCl2
3.24azo coupling
3.27
Scheme 3.8 Synthesis of a disazo condensation pigment.92 Chapter 3(c) A-M1-M2-E
(d) A1-M-Z’A2
(e) A1!Z
"
A3 A2
As an example of strategy (a), as listed above, the synthesis of CI
Direct Black 38, 3.28, may be represented as follows:
NN
NN N
N
NaO 3SNH2 OH
SO3NaNH2 H2N
3.28
m-phenylenediamine ’benzidine -H-Acid (3.13 )’aniline
A few azo dyes containing four, five and six azo groups, referred to
respectively as tetrakisazo, pentakisazo and hexakisazo dyes, are
known although they are progressively less important commercially
and, naturally, the synthetic strategies are more complex. In addition,
because of the increased likelihood of side-reactions, the products are
increasingly less likely to be pure species.
3.5 METAL COMPLEX AZO DYES AND PIGMENTS
Metal complex formation has been a prominent feature of textile
dyeing from very early times, since it was recognised that the tech-
nical performance, including fastness to washing and light, of many
natural dyes could be enhanced by treatment with certain metal ions,
a process known as mordanting (Chapter 1). Mordant dyeing is only
used to a certain extent today, although it is restricted mainly to
the complexing of certain azo dyes on wool with chromium( III)
(Chapter 7). However, because of increasing sensitivity towards thetoxicological and environmental issues associated with the use of
heavy metals in particular, processes of this type continue to decline
in importance (Chapter 12). There are basically two types of metal93 Azo Dyes and Pigmentscomplex azo dyes: those in which the azo group is coordinated to the
metal (medially metallised) and those in which it is not (terminally
metallised). The discussion in this section is restricted to the former
type, which is by far the most important commercially.22
The most important metal complex azo dyes are formed from the
reaction of transition metal ions with ligands in which the ortho
positions adjacent to the azo group contain groups capable of
coordinating with the metal ion. The most important group in this
respect is the hydroxyl (–OH) group, although carboxy (–CO 2H) and
amino (–NH 2) groups can also be used. The most important transition
metals used commercially to form metal complex azo dyes are
copper( II), cobalt( III) and, especially, chromium( III). The reaction of an
o,o0-dihydroxyazo compound, which acts as a tridentate ligand, with
chromium( III) is illustrated in Figure 3.5. The azo group is capable of
coordination to the metal ion through only one of the two azonitrogen atoms, utilising its lone pair in bonding. While transitionmetal complex azo chemistry has proved to be of considerable
industrial importance in textile dyes, curiously, and perhaps rather
surprisingly, it has provided very limited success in commercial
organic pigments, although other types of metal complexes, notably
phthalocyanines, are of immense significance in this respect
(Chapters 5 and 9).
1 : 1 Copper complexes of azo dyes are used widely in both reactive
dyes (Chapter 8) and direct dyes (Chapter 7) for cellulosic fibres. In
these dyes, the copper complexes adopt four-coordinate square planar
geometry, with the three coordinating sites of the dye occupying
corners of the square and the fourth occupied by a monodentateligand, commonly water (Figure 3.6). The most important cobalt and
chromium complexes of azo dyes adopt six-coordinate octahedral
geometry, with the six positions occupied by coordination with two
N
NOH
HO
N
NO
OCr
Cr3+
- 2H+
Figure 3.5 Complex formation between an o,o0-dihydroxyazo compound and
chromium( III).94 Chapter 3tridentate azo dye ligands. These products are referred to as 2 : 1
premetallised dyes and they are of considerable importance in thedyeing of protein fibres such as wool (Chapter 7). The importance of
the octahedral complexes of these particular transition metals may be
attributed to the high kinetic stability of the complexes, which results
from the d
3electronic configuration of Cr( III) and the low-spin d6
electronic configuration of Co( III).
The 2 : 1 octahedral complexes present many opportunities for
isomerism. The isomerism in a number of metal complex azo dyeshas been characterised using various techniques, including
1H and
15N NMR spectroscopy23,24and X-ray crystallography,25and in some
cases isomers have been separated chromatographically.26The
geometrical isomerism of some metal complex azo dyes is illustrated
schematically in Figure 3.7. Several geometrical isomers are possible:
one meridional ( mer) isomer (I), in which the two dye molecules
are mutually perpendicular, and five facial (fac) (II–VI) isomers inwhich the molecules are parallel. The meridional arrangement is
favoured by complexes of o,o
0-dihydroxyazo systems that contain a
5 : 6 chelate ring system, while the facial arrangement is favoured ino-carboxy- o
0-hydroxyazo systems in which there is a 6 : 6 chelate
ring system (Figure 3.8). Because of their asymmetry, the geometricalisomers, apart from (VI) which is centrosymmetric, also give riseto pairs of optically-active enantiomers. Other types of isomerism in
azo metal complexes that have been identified include positional
isomerism as a result of the possibility of coordination to either
(but not both) of the azo nitrogen atoms, and isomerism as a result
of diﬀerent states of hybridisation (sp
2or sp3) of the azo nitrogen
atoms.
There are several particular technical advantages associated
with the formation of coloured metal complexes. Commonly, thetransition metal complexes of a coloured organic ligand exhibitlightfastness that is significantly better than that of the free ligand. An
explanation that has been oﬀered for this eﬀect is that coordinationN
NO O Cu
Figure 3.6 Square-planar azo copper complex.95 Azo Dyes and PigmentsAC
AC
BBCB
CA
AB
CA
CA
BBBC
AC
AB
CB
AC
AB
BC
CA
AB
AC
AC
BB
CA
CA
BB
BA
AC
CB
AB
CA
CB
CA
AC
BBC AB(I)(II)
(III)
(IV)
(V)meridial isomer
facial
isomerstridentate azo dye ligand
(VI)
Figure 3.7 Isomerism in 2 : 1 octahedral metal complex azo dyes.
NNO
O
NNO OO M6-membered ring
5-membered ring
M6-membered ring6-membered ring
Figure 3.8 Chelate ring formation in metal complex azo dyes.96 Chapter 3with a transition metal ion reduces the electron density at the
chromophore, which in turn leads to improved resistance to photo-
chemical oxidation. Other eﬀects that may have a part to play in the
enhanced lightfastness of transition metal complexes are steric
protection of the chromophore towards degrading influences and the
ability of transition metal ions to quench excited states that otherwise
might undergo photochemical decomposition. In addition, the largersize of the metal complex molecules compared with the free ligand
generally gives rise to improved washfastness properties in textile
dyes as a result of stronger interactions with the fibre. On the other
hand, the colours of the metal complexes are almost invariably duller
than those of the azo dye ligand, a feature that limits their usefulness.
The reduction in the brightness of the colour which accompanies
metal complex formation is due to a broadening of the visible
absorption band. There are several possible reasons for this eﬀect.
Broadening may due to the presence of a number of isomers, eachwith a slightly diﬀerent absorption band. Alternatively, it may be due
to overlap of the absorption band associated with the p–p* transitions
of the ligand with those arising from metal ion d–d transitions orfrom ligand–metal charge transfer transitions.
REFERENCES
1. C. V. Stead, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1967–69, 1, 23.
2. P. F. Gordon and P. Gregory, Organic Chemistry in Colour ,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983, ch. 3.
3. C. V. Stead, Chemistry of azo colorants, in Colorants and Auxiliaries:
Organic Chemistry and Application Properties , ed. J. Shore, Society of
Dyers and Colourists, Bradford, 1990, vol. 1, ch. 4.
4. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch. 7.
5. O. Annen, R. Egli, R. Hasler, B. Henzi, H. Jacob and P. Matzinger,
Rev. Prog. Color. , 1987, 17, 72.
6. K. A. Bello and J. Griﬃths, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986,
1639.
7. L. Briquet, D. P. Vercauteren, E. A. Perpete and D. Jacquemin,
Chem. Phys. Lett. , 2006, 417, 190.
8. C. Ciminelli., G. Granucci and M. Persico, Chem.–Eur. J. , 2004, 10,
2327.
9. W. R. Brode, J. H. Gould and G. M. Wyman, J. Am. Chem. Soc ,
1953, 75, 1856.97 Azo Dyes and Pigments10. T. Zincke and H. Bindewald, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. , 1884, 17,
3026.
11. V. Machacek, A. Lycka, P. Simunek and T. Weidlich, Magn. Reson.
Chem. , 2000, 38, 293.
12. S. Stoyanov and L. Antonov, Dyes Pigments , 1988, 10, 33.
13. S. Stoyanov and L. Antonov, Dyes Pigments , 1995, 28, 31.
14. H. Zollinger, Diazo Chemistry I: Aromatic and Heteroaromatic
Compounds , VCH, Weinheim, 1994.
15. J. Fitzpatrick, T. A. Meyer, M. E. O’Neill and D. L. H. Williams,
J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. , 1984, 2, 927.
16. J. H. Ridd, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists , 1965, 81, 355.
17. H. R. Schwander, Dyes Pigments , 1982, 3, 133.
18. H. Zollinger, Helv. Chim. Acta , 1955, 38, 1597, 1617 and 1623.
19. I. Szele and H. Zollinger, Top. Curr. Chem. , 1983, 112,1 .
20. R. Kaminski, U. Lauk, P. Skrabal and H. Zollinger, Helv. Chim.
Acta, 1983, 66, 2002.
21. E. N. Abrahart, Dyes and their Intermediates , Edward Arnold,
London, 1977.
22. F. Beﬀa and G. Back, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1984, 14, 33.
23. G. Schetty and W. Kuster, Helv. Chim. Acta , 1974, 57, 2149.
24. A. Lycka, J. Jirman and A. Cee, Magn. Reson. Chem. , 1990, 28, 408.
25. R. Grieb and A. Niggli, Helv. Chim. Acta , 1965, 48, 317.
26. G. Schetty and W. Kuster, Helv. Chim. Acta , 1961, 44, 219.98 Chapter 3CHAPTER 4
Carbonyl Dyes and Pigments
4.1 INTRODUCTION
The chemical class of colorants that is second in importance to azo
dyes and pigments is characterized by the presence of a carbonyl (C ¼O)
group, which may be regarded as the essential chromophoric unit. Thevast majority of carbonyl dyes and pigments contain two or more car-
bonyl groups that, as illustrated in Figure 4.1, are linked to one another
through a conjugated system, frequently an aromatic ring system.
1,2
Carbonyl colorants are found in a much wider diversity of structural
arrangements than is the case with azo dyes and pigments. The most
important group of carbonyl dyes and pigments are the anthraqui-
nones, to which a substantial part of this chapter is devoted. Other
types that are of commercial importance in particular applicationclasses include indigoids, benzodifuranones, coumarins, naphthali-
mides, quinacridones, perylenes, perinones and diketopyrrolo-
pyrroles. In contrast to azo dyes, carbonyl dyes are found in nature
and, for example, dyes such as indigo and alizarin, an anthraquinone
derivative, are amongst the most important natural dyes for textiles
(Chapter 1). Synthetic carbonyl dyes and pigments are capable of
providing a wide range of colours, essentially covering the entire
visible spectrum. However, a major reason underlying the industrial
importance of carbonyl colorants is that they are capable of givinglong wavelength absorption with relatively short conjugated systems.
This feature applies especially to some anthraquinone and indigoid
derivatives, which are thus of particular importance in the blue shade
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
99
area. In terms of fastness properties, carbonyl dyes and pigments are
often superior to their azo counterparts. They are thus frequently thecolorants of choice when high technical performance is demanded by
a particular application. In many textile dye application classes, car-
bonyl dyes (especially anthraquinones) rank second in significance to
azo dyes. A particular textile application class dominated by carbonyl
dyes is the vat dye class, a group of dyes applied to cellulosic fibres,
such as cotton (Chapter 7). In the vat dyeing of cotton, the ability of
the carbonyl groups to undergo reduction to a water-soluble form that
is capable of transferring to the fibre and subsequently re-oxidised to
its original system is utilized. Azo dyes are inappropriate as vat dyes
because reduction of the azo group is irreversible. A range of carbonyl
pigments, including the quinacridones, perylenes, perinones anddiketopyrrolopyrroles, impart extremely high performance in their
application. These products owe their high fastness to light, heat and
solvents principally to the ability of the carbonyl group to participate
in intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding (Chapter 9).
The chemistry involved in the manufacture of carbonyl colorants is
generally more elaborate and much less versatile than is the case with
azo dyes. Often the synthetic sequence involves multiple stages and
the use of specialist intermediates. Consequently, the number of
commercial products is more restricted and they tend to be rathermore expensive. Indeed, certain carbonyl dyes, notably some
anthraquinones, are becoming progressively less important com-
mercially, particularly for traditional textile applications, as a wider
range of azo dyes absorbing at longer wavelengths has emerged and
as the cost diﬀerential between azo dyes and carbonyl dyes increases.
In the following sections of this chapter, the characteristic structural
features of the most important types of carbonyl colorants are re-
viewed and an overview of some of the more important synthetic
routes is presented.
4.2 ANTHRAQUINONES
A common arrangement of the carbonyl groups in coloured molecules
gives rise to a group of compounds known as quinones . These may beO
O
n
Figure 4.1 General structural arrangement in most carbonyl colorants.100 Chapter 4defined as cyclohexadienediones, i.e., compounds containing two ke-
tone carbonyl groups and two double bonds in a six-membered ring.
The simplest quinones are o-a n d p-benzoquinones, 4.1and 4.2,
respectively. Derivatives of the benzoquinones and of the naphtho-1,4-quinone system 4.3are of relatively limited interest as colouring ma-
terials. This is probably due, at least in part, to the instability resultingfrom the presence of an alkene-type double bond. By far the mostimportant quinone colorants are the anthraquinones, or more correctly
anthrax-9,10-quinones. Anthraquinones, as demonstrated by the par-
ent compound 4.4, contain a characteristic system of three linear fused
six-membered rings in which the carbonyl groups are located in thecentral ring and the two outer rings are fully aromatic. Anthraquinone
colorants can give rise to the complete range of hues. However, within
any particular application class, they are often more important as
violets, blues and greens, thus complementing the azo chemical class,
which generally provides the most important yellows, oranges andreds. They frequently give brighter colours than azo dyes, but the
colours are often weaker, one reason why they are, in general, less cost-
eﬀective than azo dyes. Anthraquinone dyes are capable of providing
excellent lightfastness properties, generally superior to azo dyes.
O
O
4.1O
O
4.2O
O
4.3O
O
4.4
There is a wide diversity of chemical structures of anthraquinone
colorants.1–3Many anthraquinone dyes are found in nature, perhaps
the best known being alizarin, 1,2-dihydroxyanthraquinone, the
principal constituent of madder (Chapter 1).4Naturally-based anthra-
quinone dyes are of limited current commercial importance, althoughsynthetic alizarin, as CI Mordant Red 11, is used to an extent in the
dyeing and printing of natural fibres. Many of the current commercial
range of synthetic anthraquinone dyes are simply substituted deriva-
tives of the anthraquinone system. For example, a number of the most
important red and blue disperse dyes for application to polyester fibres
are simple non-ionic anthraquinone molecules, containing substitu-
ents such as amino, hydroxyl and methoxy, and several sulfonated
derivatives are commonly used as acid dyes for wool.101 Carbonyl Dyes and PigmentsThere are a large number of anthraquinones that are structurally
more complex and polycyclic in nature. In this book, provided that
the anthraquinone nucleus is recognisable somewhere in the struc-
ture, the colorant is classed as a member of the anthraquinone class,
although some texts consider these annellated derivatives separately.
These polycyclic anthraquinones belong largely to the vat dye textile
application class where their large extended planar structure is animportant feature for their application (Chapter 7). There are around
200 diﬀerent anthraquinonoid vat dyes in use commercially, of widely
diﬀerent structural types, and covering the entire spectrum from
yellow through blue to black. Figure 4.2 shows a selection of these
compounds, including both carbocyclic and heterocyclic types. The
examples presented include indanthrone, 4.5a (CI Vat Blue 4), vio-
lanthrone, 4.5b (CI Vat Blue 20), pyranthrone, 4.6a (CI Vat Orange 9),
NNO
OH
HO
O
XO
X
OO O
N N
N NH H
H H
O
OO
OO
OO
O
O O
4.74.5a
4.6a, X=CH
4.6b, X=N4.5b
Figure 4.2 Some polycyclic anthraquinone vat dyes and pigments.102 Chapter 4flavanthrone, 4.6b (CI Vat Yellow 1) and CI Vat Green 8, 4.7, a de-
rivative containing 19 fused rings. While the anthraquinone chro-
mophoric grouping is second only in importance to the azo
chromophore in the chemistry of textile dyes, it is of considerably less
importance in pigments. This is probably because the traditional role
of anthraquinones in many dye application classes, which is to pro-
vide lightfast blues and greens, is more successfully adopted by thephthalocyanines (Chapter 5) in the case of pigments. However, the
insolubility and generally good fastness properties of vat dyes
stimulated considerable eﬀort into the selection of suitable examples
of the colorants for use, after conversion into the appropriate physical
form, as pigments (in fact, commonly referred to as vat pigments) for
paint, printing ink and plastics applications. Of the known vat dyes,
only about 25 have been fully converted into pigment use, and less
than this number are of real commercial significance. The range of
anthraquinone pigments includes some of the longest-established vatdyes, notably indanthrone, 4.5a (CI Pigment Blue 60), together with
some of its halogenated derivatives, and flavanthrone, 4.6b (CI Pig-
ment Yellow 24).
The parent compound, anthraquinone, 4.4, is only weakly coloured,
its strongest absorption being in the UV region ( l
max325 nm). The UV/
visible spectral data for a series of substituted anthraquinones 4.4a–h
are given in Table 4.1, and these illustrate the eﬀect of the substituent
pattern on the colour. The introduction of simple electron-releasing
groups, commonly amino or hydroxyl, into the anthraquinone nu-
cleus gives rise to a bathochromic shift that is dependent on the
number and position of the electron-releasing group(s) and theirrelative strengths (OH oNH
2oNHAr). They are thus typical donor–
acceptor systems, with the carbonyl groups as the acceptors and theelectron-releasing auxochromes as the donors.
3By choice of appro-
priate substitution patterns, dyes are obtained which may absorb in
Table 4.1 Absorption maxima for some substituted anthraquinones.
Compound Substituent lmax(nm) in MeOH
4.4a 1-OH 402
4.4b 2-OH 368
4.4c 1-NH 2 475
4.4d 2-NH 2 440
4.4e 1-NHPh 500
4.4f 1,4-diNH 2 590
4.4g 1,4,5,8-TetraNH 2 610
4.4h 1,4-DiNHPh 620103 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentsany desired region of the visible spectrum. From the data, it is clear
that the electron-releasing groups exert their maximum bathochromic
eﬀect in the a-positions (1-, 4-, 5-, 8-) rather than the b-positions (2-, 3-,
6-, 7-). This is one reason why substitution in a-positions is preferred
in anthraquinone dyes. In addition, a-substituents give dyes with
higher molar extinction coeﬃcients and, very importantly, they en-hance technical performance, especially lightfastness, by virtue oftheir participation in intramolecular hydrogen bonding with the
carbonyl groups. The 1,4-substitution pattern is particularly signifi-
cant in providing blue dyes of commercial importance in various
textile dye application classes (Chapter 7).
The eﬀect of substituents on colour in substituted anthraquinones
may be rationalised using the valence-bond (resonance) approach, in
a similar way as has been presented previously for a series of azo dyes
(see Chapter 2 for details). For the purpose of explaining the colour of
the dyes, it is assumed that the ground electronic state of the dyemost closely resembles the most stable resonance forms, the normal
Kekule ´-type structures, while that the first excited state of the dye
more closely resembles the less stable, charge-separated forms. Somerelevant resonance forms for anthraquinones 4.4,4.4c,4.4d and 4.4f
are illustrated in Figure 4.3. The ground state of the parent com-pound, 4.4, is assumed to resemble closely structures such as I, while
charge-separated forms, such as structure II are assumed to make amajor contribution to the first excited state. Structure II is clearly
unstable due to the carbocationic centre. In the case of aminoan-
thraquinones 4.4c and4.4d, donation of the lone pair from the amino
nitrogen atom markedly stabilises the first excited states, represented
respectively by structures III and IV, lowering their energy and lead-
ing, as a consequence of the inverse relationship between the diﬀer-
ence in energy and the absorption wavelength, to a pronounced
bathochromic shift. Two reasons may be proposed for the enhanced
bathochromicity of the 1-isomer, 4.4c, compared with the 2-isomer,
4.4d. Firstly the proximity of positive and negative charges in space inthe first excited state structure III gives rise to a degree of electrostatic
stabilisation. Secondly, the intramolecular hydrogen bonding in
structure III, which is not present in structure IV, serves to increasethe electron-releasing power of the lone-pair on the nitrogen atom and
to increase the electron-withdrawing eﬀect of the carbonyl group; both
eﬀects stabilise the excited state relative to the ground state and lead to
a more pronounced bathochromic eﬀect. The 1,4-diamino compound,
4.4f, is particularly bathochromic because of an extensively resonance-
stabilised first excited state, involving structures V and VI.104 Chapter 44.3 INDIGOID DYES AND PIGMENTS
Indigo, 4.8, the parent system of this group of colorants, is one of the
oldest known natural dyes (Chapter 1) obtained from plant sources
such as Indigofera tinctoria in Asia and from dyers’ woad ( Isatis tinc-
toria) in Europe. Natural indigo dyeing is still practised quite widely as
a traditional craft process in Asia for textiles and clothing, often withsymbolic status, and generally starts with the fermentation of extracts
of the leaves harvested from the plants.
5The naturally-occurring
material that generates indigo is usually indican, the colourless glu-coside of indoxyl. During fermentation, enzymatic processes generate
indoxyl, 4.9, or other related precursors, which undergo oxidation in airO
OO-
O
-O
OO
O-N
N
HHHH
-O
ONHH
-OO
N
HHN
H HNH H+
+
+
+(I)+
(II)
(III) (IV)
(V) (VI)
Figure 4.3 Some relevant resonance forms for anthraquinones 4.4(I, II), 4.4c (III),
4.4d (IV) and 4.4f(V, VI) (see also Table 4.1).105 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentsleading to indigo within the fibre. Nowadays, most indigo for industrial
use is produced synthetically, and the dye is referred to as CI Vat Blue 1.
The synthetic routes are outlined later in this chapter.
NNO
O HH
4.84
' 4 75'6'7'
5
6
NO
H
4.9
The structure of indigo was first proposed by von Baeyer, although
he initially suggested that it had the ( Z)- (or cis) configuration 4.10.6
X-Ray crystal structure determination carried out rather later con-firmed that the molecule in fact exists as the ( E)- (or trans ) isomer 4.8.
7
Although hundreds of indigoid derivatives have been synthesised andevaluated as dyes over the years, relatively few of these have achieved
commercial importance and indeed the parent compound remains
by far the most important member of the class. Indigo may be
applied to cellulosic fabrics as a vat dye imparting an attractive blue
colour and providing reasonably good fastness to washing and
light. However, because its technical properties were inferior to those
provided by higher performing blue vat dyes, such as indanthrone,
4.5a, indigo came close to being phased out as a commercial dye in
the first half of the twentieth century. The revival in its popularitycame about in the ‘flower power’ era of the 1960s as denim, especially
blue jeans, became fashionable. This particular application makes
positive use of ‘defects’ of indigo as a textile dye. The typical ring
dyeing of cross-sections of the fibres leads to an unevenly dyed
appearance, while low abrasion resistance provides the fashionable
‘washed-out’ look. The ‘stonewashed’ appearance is produced by a
physical abrasion process in which the fabric is rotated with
pumice stones, or alternatively using enzymes to degrade the indigo.
Indeed, the lasting success of indigo as a commercial dye is heavily106 Chapter 4dependent on the continuing popularity of blue denim as a fashion
trend.
NNO
H HO
4.10
A question which has intrigued colour chemists for years is why
indigo, as a relatively small molecule, absorbs at such long wave-
lengths. The colour of indigo depends crucially on its environment.2,8
In the gas phase, the only situation in which a dye will eﬀectively oweits colour to single molecules, indigo is red ( l
max¼540 nm). In
solution, indigo exhibits pronounced positive solvatochromism; innonpolar solvents, it is violet ( e.g.,i nC C l
4,lmax¼588 nm), while
i np o l a rs o l v e n t si ti sb l u e( e.g.,i nD M S O , lmax¼620 nm). In the solid
state and when applied to fabric as a vat dye, it is blue. Amorphous andcrystalline forms of indigo in the solid state diﬀer significantly in their
absorption maxima ( l
max¼650versus 675 nm). X-Ray structure analysis
of the molecule has demonstrated that, in the solid state, the molecules
are highly aggregated by intermolecular hydrogen bonding, each indigo
molecule being attached to four others. It is clear that the inter-
molecular hydrogen bonding is a major factor in providing the bath-
ochromic shift of colour compared to the monomolecular state.9It also
explains its low solubility and relatively high melting point (390–392 1C).
The indigo molecule has been the subject of numerous studies
using quantum mechanical calculations of varying complexities and
sophistication over many years. A theoretical study using an ab initio
complete active space-self-consistent field (CAS-SCF) calculationprovided an excellent fit with the experimental spectra,
10even cor-
rectly predicting shoulders, while time dependent density functionaltheory (TD-DFT) calculations have even been applied to account for
solvent eﬀects and to provide a simple model to describe the solid
state properties.
8Various concepts have been advanced, supported by
analysis of the quantum mechanics calculations, to explain the longwavelength absorption of indigo in terms of its molecular structure.
11
These approaches have essentially aimed at identifying the particular
feature of the structure of the molecule that is primarily responsible
for the visible absorption. Since the outer benzene rings play a sec-
ondary role in determining the colour of indigo, the concepts107 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentsgenerally focus on the central core of the molecule. The most com-
monly-invoked explanation is that the basic structural unit respon-
sible for the colour of indigo is an arrangement consisting of two
electron donor groups (NH) and two electron acceptor groups (C ¼O)
‘cross-conjugated’ through an ethene bridge as illustrated in Figure4.4.
12–14This so-called H-chromophore arrangement gives rise to a
particularly bathochromic absorption.
UV/visible spectral data for some indigo derivatives, which
illustrate the nature of the substituent eﬀects, are given in Table 4.2.
Indigo is a dye of the donor/acceptor type. The valence-bond (reson-
ance) approach to colour/structure relationships, as described in
Chapter 2 applied to azo dyes, may be used to explain the particular
stability of the first excited state of the indigo molecule, and hence its
bathochromicity, invoking important resonance contributions from
charge separated structures VII–X, in each of which charge is accom-
modated in a stable location, i.e., negative charge on oxygen, positive
charge on quaternary nitrogen, as illustrated in Figure 4.5. Resonance
structures VII and VIII are especially stable due to the retention of
aromatic character of both benzene rings. The molecular symmetry
means that these two forms are identical in energy. Forms IX and X are
also equal in energy, but are less stable due to the loss of aromatic
character in one ring. Form XI, referred to as a quadrupole structure,
NNO
O HH
Figure 4.4 H-chromophore unit of indigo.
Table 4.2 UV/visible spectral data ( lmaxvalues (nm)) for
solutions of some symmetrical di-substituted
indigo derivatives 4.8and 4.8a–d in 1,2-
dichloroethane. The po sitions of substitu-
ents may be identified with reference to thenumbering system given for structure 4.8.
Substituent 5,5
0-Isomer 6,60-Isomer
H 4.8, 620 4.8, 620
NO 2 4.8a, 580 4.8b, 635
OCH 3 4.8c, 645 4.8d, 570108 Chapter 4has a negative charge on both oxygens and a positive charge on both
nitrogens. Compared to many other dyes, this constitutes a very stable
excited state, so that the energy diﬀerence ( DE)c o m p a r e dt ot h eg r o u n d
state is small, and consequently indigo absorbs at long wavelengths.The eﬀect of substituents on the colour of indigo may also be explained
using this approach. For example, an electron-releasing group in the
5- (or 7)-positions, which are ortho orpara respectively to the NH group
stabilises the first excited state by increasing the electron density on the
nitrogen atom and a bathochromic shift results. In contrast, an elec-
tron-withdrawing group at these positions destabilises the first excited
state by increasing the positive charge at an already electron-deficient
nitrogen atom, causing a hypsochromic shift. For substituents at the
4- and 6-positions the situation is reversed.
A range of other indigoid systems, represented by the general
structure 4.11 are known, in which one or both of the NH groups are
replaced by other heteroatoms capable of donating a lone pair ofelectrons into the p-system. These include the yellow oxindigo, 4.11a ,
X¼Y¼O, the red thioindigo, 4.11b ,X¼Y¼S, and the violet sele-
noindigo, 4.11c ,X¼Y¼Se, together with mixed derivatives such asNNO
-O HH
NNO-
O HH
NNO-
O HH
N
N
-OOH
H
(X)+
(VIII)
N
N
-OO- H
H(IX)(VII)
++
+
+
(XI)+
Figure 4.5 Valence bond (resonance) approach to indigo.109 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentscompound 4.11d (X¼NH, Y¼S). In this group, thioindigo is a useful
red vat dye and some of its halogenated derivatives are used as pig-
ments, but the others are of limited commercial significance. Indir-
ubin, 4.12, is an isomer of indigo that is encountered as a minor red
constituent in samples of natural indigo. While indirubin has novalue as a textile dye, some interest in the dye has developed in recent
years because of its biological activity and that of some of its deriva-tives. Quantum mechanical calculations based on a modified PPP-MO
approach predict the bathochromicity of indigo compared with
indirubin, giving calculated l
maxvalues of 605 and 543 nm, respect-
ively, in reasonable qualitative agreement with experimental values(603 and 552 nm). The calculations also demonstrate that, in the case
of indigo, excitation gives rise to symmetrical charge transfer from the
heterocyclic nitrogen donor groups to the carbonyl acceptor groups,
which is consistent with the concept of cross conjugation in the
H-chromophore (Figure 4.4), and with the valence-bond approachillustrated in Figure 4.5. However, with indirubin, 4.12, charge
transfer is demonstrated to be essentially localised in one half of themolecule. The absence of cross-conjugation in this case thus explains
its absorption at shorter wavelengths.
15
XYO
O
4.11
NO
N
OH
H
4.12
4.4 BENZODIFURANONES
The benzodifuranones constitute one of the most recently intro-
duced groups of carbonyl co lorants. They were launched com-
mercially in the late 1980s by ICI a s disperse dyes for application to
polyester.16,17This group of dyes, of which compound 4.13,C I110 Chapter 4Disperse Red 356, is a representat ive example, is capable of pro-
viding a range of colours although the most important products are
red. They provide bright, intense red shades on polyester with good
fastness to light, sublimation and washing. For good build-up of
colour on polyester, it has been found that asymmetric products,
typified by dye 4.13, perform better than when the molecules are
symmetrically substituted.
OO
OO
H3C(H 2C)2O
4.13
4.5 FLUORESCENT CARBONYL DYES
Several carbonyl dyes are characterised by their strong fluorescence.18
Derivatives of coumarin provide the most important industrial
fluorescent dyes. Fluorescent coumarin dyes are known that absorb
and emit in most parts of the visible spectrum, although most com-
mercial products are yellow with a green fluorescence. Fluorescent
brightening agents (FBAs) based on coumarins that absorb in the UV
region and emit in the visible region are also used commercially. The
coumarin fluorescent dyes invariably contain an electron-releasingsubstituent, most commonly the diethylamino group, in the 7-position,
and electron-withdrawing substituents in the 3-position. The cou-
marins are thus typical donor–acceptor dyes.
19The most widely-
used dyes contain a benzimidazolyl (4.14a ), benzoxazolyl ( 4.14b,
4.14d, 4.14e ) or benzothiazolyl (4.14c ) group as the acceptor in the 3-
position. These coumarins provide a series of important industrialdisperse dyes that allow synthetic fibres, especially polyester, to be
dyed in fluorescent yellow shades. CI Disperse Yellow 232, 4.14d , for
example, dyes polyester to give a brilliant fluorescent greenish-yellowhue with good fastness to light, sublimation and washing. Other
important types of fluorescent carbonyl dyes include the amino-naphthalimides, such as CI Disperse Yellow 11, 4.15, and some
sterically hindered perylenes, which are considered in the next111 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentssection of this chapter. Fluorescent carbonyl dyes and pigments find a
wide range of uses in textiles, plastics, paint and printing inks, es-
pecially where high visual impact is desirable, such as in advertising
and safety applications. They are also used in the detection of flaws in
engineered articles, solar collector systems, dye lasers and a host of
analytical and biological applications.
4.14
4.15N O O
NH2CH3
CH3
4.6 CARBONYL PIGMENTS
Carbonyl pigments exist in a wide diversity of structural arrangements
and provide a range of colours essentially covering the entire visible
spectrum.20,21This group of pigments includes quinacridones,
anthraquinones, thioindigos, perylenes, perinones, quinophthalones,isoindolines and diketopyrrolopyrroles. Carbonyl pigments generally
impart extremely high technical performance so that they are often
suitable for applications, such as automotive paints, which place se-
vere demands on performance in terms of colouristics and fastness to112 Chapter 4light, heat and solvents. An important factor in providing this level
of performance is the ability of the carbonyl group to participate in
intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding. The range of carbonyl
pigment chemical types is discussed in this section, with the ex-
ception of those anthraquinones that are used as vat pigments and
thioindigo derivatives, both of which have been discussed in previous
sections of this chapter.
The quinacridones constitute one of the most important chro-
mophoric systems developed for pigment applications following thephthalocyanines (Chapter 5). Linear trans quinacridones were first
discovered in 1935, but their potential as pigments was not realised
until the late 1950s, when they were introduced commercially by Du
Pont. The pigments oﬀer outstanding fastness properties, similar to
those of copper phthalocyanine, in the orange, red and violet shade
areas.
22Structurally, quinacridones consist of a system of five fused
alternate benzene and 4-pyridone rings. Several geometrical
arrangements of such a system are possible, e.g.structures 4.16–
4.18, but the outstanding technical properties are only given bycompounds that possess the linear trans arrangement, 4.16.C o m -
pounds 4.16a–c are the products of most significant commercial
importance.
NNO
O HH
R2
R2
R1R1
4.16a: R1 = H; R2= H
4.16b: R1 = H; R2= CH 3
4.16c: R1 = H; R2= Cl
4.16d: R1 =Cl; R2= H
NNO
H HO
4.17113 Carbonyl Dyes and PigmentsNH
ONH
O
4.18
At first sight, it may seem somewhat surprising that such small
molecules should provide such a high degree of heat, light and chem-
ical stability, and also insolubility. These properties have been explained
by strong two-dimensional molecular association due to hydrogenbonding in the crystal structure between N–H and C ¼Og r o u p s ,a s
illustrated in Figure 4.6.
23,24There is considerable evidence from related
NNO
O HH
NNO
O HH
NNO
O HH
Figure 4.6 Intermolecular association by hydrogen bonding in the crystal lattice of
linear trans quinacridone, 4.16a .114 Chapter 4derivatives for the importance of intermolecular H-bonding in
determining the properties of the quinacridones. For example, the in-
ferior properties of the angular quinacridone 4.18 and the 4,11-dichloro
derivative 4.16d may be attributed to steric and geometric constraints,
which reduce the eﬃciency of the h ydrogen bonding. In addition, the
N,N-dimethyl derivatives, in which no H-bonding is possible, are
reported to be soluble in organic solvents. A further factor that plays apart in the technical performa nce of quinacridone pigments is the
strong dipolar nature of the pyridone rings arising from a majorcontribution from resonance forms such as 4.19, leading to strong
intermolecular dipolar associatio n throughout the crystal structure.
NNO-
O- HH
4.19+
+
The origin of the colour of quinacridone pigments provides a useful
example of the influence of crystal structure eﬀects, which havenot yet been explained fully in fundamental terms. Interestingly, in
solution the quinacridones exhibit only weak yellow to orange col-
ours. The intense red to violet colours of the pigments in the solid
state are therefore presumably determined largely by interactions
between molecules in the crystal lattice structure. The quinacridones
show polymorphism , the ability of a compound to exist in
diﬀerent crystal structural arrangements, and this has a profound
eﬀect on the colour of the pigments. The parent compound, 4.16a ,
exists in three distinct polymorphic modifications each one with itsown characteristic X-ray powder diﬀraction pattern. Two of these
forms, the a- and b- modifications are red, while the g-form is violet.
Thea-form is the least stable to polymorphic change and has not
been commercialised.
There is little doubt that one of the most significant developments
in organic pigments in the late twentieth century was the discovery
and commercialisation of pigments based on the 1,4-diketo-
pyrrolo[3,4- c]pyrrole (DPP) system.
25The essential structural feature
of this group of pigments, of which CI Pigment Red 254 ( 4.20)i s
a representative commercial example, are the two fused five-membered ketopyrrole rings. DPP pigments, by appropriate115 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentssubstituent variation, are capable of providing orange through red to
bluish-violet shades. However, the DPP pigments which have gained
most commercial prominence provide brilliant saturated red shades
of outstanding durability for automotive paint and other high per-
formance applications. In addition, their excellent thermal stability
means that they are of considerable interest for the pigmentation of
plastics. The pigments are, like the quinacridones, remarkable inproducing such an excellent range of fastness properties from such
small molecules. X-Ray structural analysis has demonstrated that this
is due to the strong intermolecular forces, due hydrogen bonding and
dipolar interactions, which exist throughout the crystal structure,
similar to those involved with the quinacridones.
26
HNNH
OOCl
Cl4.20
Several high-grade perylene pigments, mostly reds but also in-
cluding blacks, are of importance. The pigments may be representedby the general structure 4.21, in which the imide nitrogen substitu-
ents, R, may be alkyl or aryl groups. An interesting observation in theperylene series is that small structural changes in the side-chain can
lead to quite profound colour diﬀerences. The N,N
0-dimethyl com-
pound, for example, is red while the corresponding diethyl derivativeis black. X-Ray diﬀraction studies have now been applied to an ex-
tensive range of perylenes in an attempt to characterise the eﬀect of
diﬀerences in the crystal lattice structure on the light absorption
properties of the pigments, a phenomenon that has been described ascrystallochromy .
27–30As an example, the N,N0-dimethyl compound
consists of a parallel arrangement of molecules in stacks, whereas inthe N,N
0-diethyl compound the molecules are in stacks twisted with
respect to one another with considerably more overlapping of the116 Chapter 4perylene ring systems in neighbouring molecules. Some perylenes
with bulky substituents, such as the t-butyl group, on the imide
nitrogens are useful highly eﬃcient and stable fluorescent dyes.Perylene fluorescent dyes are capable of providing the level of stability,
especially to light, required for use in highly demanding applications,
such as in solar energy collectors, and for such applications they are
superior to many of the other chemical classes of fluorescent dyes,including coumarins, aminonaphthalimides and Rhodamines.
18The
strong fluorescence of these dyes has been attributed to the structuralrigidity of the molecules. In a rigid molecule, loss of energy from ex-
cited states by intramolecular thermal motion is minimised, favouring
fluorescent emission over non-radiative energy loss. A group of car-
bonyl pigments, structurally related to the perylenes, are the peri-
nones. Two isomeric perinone pigments are manufactured, CI
Pigment Orange 43, 4.22, the trans isomer, and CI Pigment Red 194,
4.23, the cis isomer, the former being an especially important high
performance product, particularly for plastics applications.
N R
OO O
N
OR
4.21
NN
N NO
O
4.22NN
N OO
N
4.23117 Carbonyl Dyes and PigmentsExamples of other types of carbonyl pigment of industrial import-
ance include the quinophthalone 4.24, CI Pigment Yellow 138, a high
performance greenish-yellow product, and the reddish-yellow iso-
indoline, CI Pigment Yellow 139, 4.25.
N
HO
OO OCl
Cl
Cl Cl
Cl
Cl ClCl
4.24N
NHNN
NNO
O
OOOO
HH
H
H
4.25
4.7 THE QUINONE–HYDROQUINONE REDOX SYSTEM
The quinone–hydroquinone system represents a classical example of
a fast, reversible redox system.31This type of reversible redox reaction
is characteristic of many inorganic systems, such as the interchangebetween oxidation states in transition metal ions, but it is relativelyuncommon in organic chemistry. The reduction of benzoquinone to
hydroquinone formally involves the transfer of two hydrogen atoms.
In practice, the reversible reaction involves the stepwise transfer of
two electrons from the reducing agent as shown in Scheme 4.1.118 Chapter 4Commonly, these redox reactions are carried out in alkaline media, in
which case the unprotonated semi-quinone is first formed and the
dianion is the final reduction product as illustrated in the scheme. In
media where protons are available a series of acid/base equilibria are
also involved. A wide range of dicarbonyl compounds undergo this type
of reaction, including the anthraquinones, indigoid derivatives and
perinones. The reduction/oxidation of carbonyl dyes is used practically
in the chemistry of vat dyeing of cellulosic fibres (Chapter 7). In this
process, the insoluble colorant is treated with a reducing agent in an
alkaline medium to give the reduced or leuco form. After application of
the leuco form of the dye to the fibre, the process is reversed and the
coloured dye is generated by oxidation. The reducing agent most
commonly used is sodium dithionite (Na 2S2O4), while appropriate
oxidising agents include atmospheric oxygen and hydrogen peroxide.
4.8 SYNTHESIS OF CARBONYL COLORANTS
The synthesis of carbonyl colorants uses a wide diversity of chemical
methods, in which each individual product essentially requires its own
characteristic route. This is in complete contrast to the synthesis of azo
dyes and pigments (Chapter 3) where a common reaction sequence is
universally used. The subject is too vast to attempt to be comprehensivein a text of this nature. The following section, therefore, presents an
overview of some of the fundamental synthetic strategies that may be
used to prepare some of the more important types of carbonyl colorant.
4.8.1 Synthesis of Anthraquinones
The synthesis of anthraquinone colorants may eﬀectively be envis-
aged as involving two general stages. The first stage involves the
construction of the anthraquinone ring system and in the second
phase the anthraquinone nucleus is elaborated to produce the de-
sired structure. Frequently, the latter involves substitution reactions,
but group interconversion and further cyclisation reactions may alsoO
OO-
O-O-
O.
e–e–
Scheme 4.1 Benzoquinone/hydroquinone redox system.119 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentsbe employed. Although the chemistry of the synthesis of most
anthraquinone dyes and pigments is long established, some of the
mechanistic details of the individual reactions remain unexplained,
at least in detail.
There are two principal ways of constructing the anthraquinone
system that are successful industrially. The first of these is the oxi-
dation of anthracenes and the second involves a Friedel–Crafts acy-lation route. Anthracene, 4.26, a readily available raw material, may be
oxidised to give anthraquinone, 4.4, in high yield as illustrated in
Scheme 4.2. The most important oxidising agents used in this process
are sodium dichromate and sulfuric acid (chromic acid) or nitric acid.
This route is of considerable importance for the synthesis of the
parent anthraquinone, but it is of much less importance for the direct
synthesis of substituted anthraquinones. The main reasons for this
are that there are few substituted anthracenes readily available as
starting materials and also because many substituents would besusceptible to the strongly oxidising conditions used.
An alternative route to anthraquinone, which involves Friedel–
Crafts acylation, is illustrated in Scheme 4.3. This route uses benzene
and phthalic anhydride as starting materials. In the presence of alu-
minium(III) chloride, a Lewis acid catalyst, these compounds react to
form 2-benzoylbenzene-1-carboxylic acid, 4.27. Intermediate 4.27 is
then heated with concentrated sulfuric acid, under which conditionscyclisation to anthraquinone (4.4 ) takes place. Both stages of this
reaction sequence involve Friedel–Crafts acylation reactions. In thefirst stage the reaction is intermolecular, while the second step, in
which cyclisation takes place, involves an intramolecular reaction. Incontrast to the oxidation route, the Friedel–Crafts route oﬀers con-
siderable versatility. Various substituted benzene derivatives and
phthalic anhydrides may be brought together as starting materials
leading to a wide range of substituted anthraquinones. For
example, the use of toluene rather than benzene leads directly to
OO
4.4[O]
4.26
Scheme 4.2 Oxidation of anthracene.120 Chapter 42-methylanthraquinone. A further industrially important example is
also illustrated in Scheme 4.3. Starting from 4-chlorophenol and
phthalic anhydride, two inexpensive and readily available starting
materials, 1,4-dihydroxyanthraquinone, quinizarin, 4.28, an import-
ant intermediate in the synthesis of several anthraquinone dyes maybe synthesised eﬃciently in a ‘one-pot’ reaction. Boric acid in oleumis used as the catalyst and solvent system in this case. During the
course of the reaction in which the anthraquinone nucleus is formed,
a hydroxyl group replaces the chlorine atom. The detailed mechanism
by which this takes place has not been fully established.
The outer rings of the anthraquinone molecule are aromatic in
nature and as such are capable of undergoing substitution reactions.
The reactivity of the rings towards substitution is determined by the
fact that they are attached to two electron-withdrawing carbonyl
groups. The presence of these groups deactivates the aromatic ringstoward electrophilic substitution. Nevertheless, using reasonably
vigorous conditions, anthraquinone may be induced to undergo
electrophilic substitution reactions, notably nitration and sulfon-
ation. Scheme 4.4 illustrates a series of electrophilic substitution re-
actions of anthraquinone. Nitration of anthraquinone with mixedOOOO
OO
CO2H
OOO H
OHOH
Cl
4.4AlCl3
conc. H2SO4boric acid , oleum4.27
4.28
Scheme 4.3 Friedel–Crafts route to anthraquinones.121 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentsconcentrated nitric and sulfuric acids leads to a mixture of the 1- and
2-nitroanthraquinones, which is diﬃcult to separate and so this
process is of limited use. However, nitration of some substituted
anthraquinones, particularly some hydroxy derivatives, can give more
useful products. Sulfonation of anthraquinone requires the use ofoleum at elevated temperatures, and under these conditions reaction
leads mainly to the 2-sulfonic acid. However, in the presence of a
mercury(
II) salt as catalyst, the 1-isomer, a much more useful dyeOOO
OO
OO
OO
OO
OONO2
NO2
SO3H
SO3H
SO3HSO3HSO3H
SO3H+
    oleum, 
Hg catalyst
oleum, Hg catalyst
+conc HNO3/H2SO4
Ooleum
4.4
Scheme 4.4 Some useful electrophilic substitution reactions of anthraquinone, 4.4.122 Chapter 4intermediate, becomes the principal product. A probable explanation
for these observations is that in the absence of a catalyst the 2-
position is preferred sterically. In the presence of the catalyst, it has
been proposed that mercuration takes place first preferentially at the
1-position, and the mercury is displaced subsequently by the elec-
trophile responsible for sulfonation. Disulfonation of anthraquinone
in the presence of mercury salts leads to a mixture of the 1,5- and 1,8-disulfonic acids, which are easily separated and these are also useful
dye intermediates.
Nucleophilic substitution reactions, in which the aromatic rings are
activated by the presence of the carbonyl groups, are commonly used
in the elaboration of the anthraquinone nucleus, particularly for the
introduction of hydroxyl and amino groups. These substitution re-
actions are often catalysed either by boric acid or transition metal
ions. As an example, amino and hydroxyl groups may be introduced
into the anthraquinone system by nucleophilic displacement ofsulfonic acid groups. Another example of an industrially useful
nucleophilic substitution is the reaction of 1-amino-4-bromoan-
thraquinone-2-sulfonic acid (bromamine acid, 4.29) with aromatic
amines, as shown in Scheme 4.5, to give a series of useful water-soluble blue dyes. The displacement of bromine in these reactions is
catalysed by the presence of copper(
II) ions.
An important route to 1,4-diaminoanthraquinones, represented by
structure 4.31, is illustrated in Scheme 4.6. Quinizarin, 4.28, is first
reduced to leucoquinizarin, which has been shown to exist as thediketo structure 4.30. Condensation of compound 4.30 with two
moles of an amine, followed by oxidation leads to the diaminoan-
thraquinone 4.31. Boric acid is a useful catalyst for this reaction,
particularly when less basic amines are used.
The syntheses of three polycyclic anthraquinones, indanthrone,
4.5a, pyranthrone, 4.6a, and flavanthrone, 4.6b, are illustrated in
Scheme 4.7. Despite the structural complexity of the products, the
OO
OO NH2
BrSO3HNH2
SO3H
NHR
4.29RNH2, Cu2+
Scheme 4.5 Reaction of bromamine acid with aromatic amines.123 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentssyntheses of these types of compound are often quite straightforward
involving, for example, condensation or oxidative cyclisation re-
actions. For example, the blue vat dye indanthrone, 4.5a, is prepared
by fusion of 2-aminoanthraquinone, 4.4d, with either sodium or
potassium hydroxide at around 220 1C. Curiously, the same dye can be
prepared from 1-aminoanthraquinone, 4.4c, in a similar way,
although the 2-isomer is the usual industrial starting material.
Pyranthrone, 4.6a, is also prepared by an alkaline fusion process,
starting in this case from 2,20-dimethyl-1,10-dianthraquinonyl.
The methyl groups in this molecule are suﬃciently acidic as a resultof activation by the carbonyl groups to be ionised and subsequently
give rise to cyclisation by a reaction analogous to an aldol conden-
sation. Flavanthrone, 4.6b, may also be prepared by a condensation
reaction starting from 2-aminoanthraquinone, 4.4d. The yellow vat dyeOO
OHOH
OO OH
OHO
ONHR
NHR
4.31 4.28reduction
4.30(i) 2 x RNH2
(ii) oxidation
Scheme 4.6 Formation of 1,4-diaminoanthraquinones from quinizarin.
OO
NH2
O
OO OH3C
CH3NNO
OH
HO
ONO
N
O
O
OKOH
alkaline
condensationAlCl3
acidcondensation
KOH
alkalinecondensation
4.6a4.6b4.5a
4.4d
Scheme 4.7 Syntheses of the polycyclic anthraquinones indanthrone, 4.5a, pyran-
throne, 4.6a, and flavanthrone, 4.6b.124 Chapter 4is obtained from fusion of compound 4.4d with alkali at temperatures
of around 300 1C or by acid-catalysed condensation, for example using
aluminium( III) chloride. However, its industrial manufacture usually
involves a similar condensation process, either acid or base catalysed,
starting from 1-chloro-2-acetylaminoanthraquinone.
4.8.2 Synthesis of Indigoid Colorants
Indigo, 4.8, was for many centuries obtained from natural sources.
The chemical structure of indigo was first proposed by von Baeyer in
1869, and eleven years later he reported the first successful synthesis,a multistage route starting from o-nitrocinnamic acid. The first suc-
cessful commercial synthesis of indigo, attributed to Heumann in1897, is shown in Scheme 4.8. In this classical synthesis, phenylglycine-
o-carboxylic acid, 4.32, is converted by fusion with sodium
hydroxide at around 200 1C, in the absence of air, into indoxyl-
2-carboxylic acid, 4.33. This material readily decarboxylates and oxi-
dises in air to indigo. A much more eﬃcient synthesis, which formsthe basis of the manufacturing method in use today, is due originally
CO2H
N
HCO2H
NHO
CO
2H
NHCH 2CO2HNNO
O HH
NO
HNaOH, 200°C
-CO2, [O]
NaOH / KOH / NaNH2
4.9 4.34[O]4.33 4.32
4.8
Scheme 4.8 Synthetic routes to indigo, 4.8.125 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentsto Pfleger (1901). In this route, also illustrated in Scheme 4.8, the more
readily available starting material phenylglycine, 4.34, is treated in an
alkaline melt of sodium and potassium hydroxides containing soda-mide. This process leads directly to indoxyl, 4.9, which undergoes
spontaneous oxidative dimerisation in air to indigo. Thioindigo, 4.11b ,
is best prepared from o-carboxybenzene-thioglycolic acid, 4.35,b ya
route analogous to Heumann’s indigo synthesis. The final oxidation
step in this case uses sulfur, rather than oxygen, as the oxidising agent.
CO2H
SCH 2CO2H
4.35
4.8.3 Synthesis of Benzodifuranones and Coumarin Dyes
As has been the case with most new chromogenic systems, the ben-
zodifuranones were discovered in the laboratory by chance. A con-
siderable amount of industrial development was needed
subsequently to establish commercially-viable synthetic routes to the
dyes, and the diﬃculties experienced explain, at least in part, the
significant time gap between the initial discovery and the appearance
of the first commercial dyes. In particular, processes were required to
provide the unsymmetrical molecules, which proved to have superior
dyeing properties as disperse dyes for polyester. A successful
approach, as illustrated in Scheme 4.9, involves the reaction of the
p-hydroquinone, 4.36, with mandelic acid, 4.37a , to give intermediate
4.38, which may subsequently be reacted with the substituted man-
delic acid, 4.37b , to give the benzodifuranone, 4.13.17
The greenish yellow fluorescent coumarin dyes represented by
structure 4.14 may be synthesised in several ways. One important
general route involves the base-catalysed condensation of aldehyde
4.39 with the appropriate cyanomethyl compound, 4.40, followed by
acid hydrolysis of the resulting imine, 4.41, as shown in Scheme 4.10.
4.8.4 Synthesis of Carbonyl Pigments
Several methods of synthesis of the quinacridones are reported. Each
of these involves several stages, accounting at least in part for the
somewhat higher cost of these pigments. The two most important
methods to the parent compound are outlined in Scheme 4.11.
In both routes, the starting material, diethyl succinylsuccinate, 4.42,126 Chapter 4OH
OHCH
HO2COH
OHOO
OO
OO
H3C(H 2C)2O4.37b: R = O(CH2)2CH3
4.13+
4.364.37a: R = HR
4.38
Scheme 4.9 Synthesis of benzodifuranone dye 4.13.
OXN
NHY
Et2NEt2NO HCHO
XY
NCCH 2
OXN
OY
Et2N
4.14+4.39
4.40base, e.g., piperidine
4.41
a: X = NH;  Y = H
b: X = O;  Y = H
c: X = S;  Y = H 
d: X = O;  Y = CH3e: X = O;  Y = Cl H+ / H2O
Scheme 4.10 Synthesis of fluorescent coumarin dyes 4.14a–e.127 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigments(1 mole), which may be prepared by a base-catalysed self-condensation
of a succinic acid diester, is condensed with aniline (2 moles) to
form the 2,5-diphenylamino-3,6-dihydroterephthalic acid diester,4.43. Diester 4.43 undergoes ring closure at an elevated temperature
in a high boiling solvent to give the dihydroquinacridone, 4.44, which
is relatively easily oxidised ( e.g., with sodium 3-nitrobenzene-1-
sulfonate) to the quinacridone, 4.46. Alternatively, compound 4.43
may be oxidised to the 2,5-diarylaminoterephthalate diester, 4.45.
Base hydrolysis of the diester, followed by ring closure by treatment,for example, with polyphosphoric acid gives the quinacridone.
32
The formation of a DPP molecule was first reported in 1974 as a
minor product in low yield from the reaction of benzonitrile with ethylHO CO2Et
OH EtO 2CNH2
N
N EtO 2CCO2Et
N
N
OO
N
N EtO 2CCO2EtH
HH
HHH
N
N
OO H
H4.424.43
4.44
4.45250°C2
[O]
4.46[O]
(i) OH–
(ii) H+
Scheme 4.11 Synthetic routes to linear trans quinacridone 4.46.128 Chapter 4bromoacetate and zinc.33A study by research chemists at Ciba Geigy
into the mechanistic pathways involved in the formation of the mol-
ecules led to the development of an eﬃcient ‘one-pot’ synthetic pro-
cedure to DPP pigments from readily available starting materials
(Scheme 4.12). The reaction involves the treatment of diethyl succinate
(1 mole) with an aromatic cyanide (2 moles) in the presence of a strong
base. The reaction proceeds through the intermediate 4.47,w h i c hm a y
be isolated and used to synthesise unsymmetrical derivatives.25,26
Perylenes 4.21 are diimides of perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid
and may be prepared by reaction of the bis-anhydride of this acid ( 4.48)
(1 mole) with the appropriate amine (2 moles) in a high-boiling solventas illustrated in Scheme 4.13. The synthesis of perinones 4.22 and4.23
involves condensation of naphthalene-1,4,5,8-tetracarboxylic acid with
NAr
OH
CO2EtNArH
O
N
HAr'
4.47Ar-CNEtO 2CCH 2CH2CO 2Et,
baseAr'CN, base
O
Scheme 4.12 Synthesis of DPP (1,4-diketopyrrolo[3,4- c]pyrrole) pigments.
N R
OO O
N
ORO
OO O
O
O
2 RNH2
4.214.48
Scheme 4.13 Synthesis of perylenes 4.21.129 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigmentso-phenylenediamine in refluxing acetic acid. This aﬀords a mixture of
the two isomers, which may be separated by a variety of methods,
generally involving their diﬀerential solubility in acids and alkalis.
Quinophthalone pigment 4.24 may be prepared by the reaction of
8-amino-2-methylquinoline, 4.49, with tetrachlorophthalic anhydride
(4.50) (2 moles) (Scheme 4.14). Isoindoline pigment 4.25 is prepared
from the condensation of 1-amino-3-iminoisoindoline ( 4.51) (1 mole)
with barbituric acid ( 4.52) (2 moles) as illustrated in Scheme 4.15.
N
NHO
OO OCl
Cl
Cl Cl
Cl
Cl ClCl
OO
OCl
Cl
Cl
ClNC H 3
NH2
2
4.244.49
4.50+
Scheme 4.14 Synthesis of quinophthalone pigment 4.24.
NHNN
NNO
O
OOOO
HH
H
HNH
NHNH2HN NH
OO
O
4.252
4.514.52
Scheme 4.15 Synthesis of isoindoline pigment 4.25.130 Chapter 4REFERENCES
1. G. Hallas, in Colorants and Auxiliaries: Organic Chemistry and
Application Properties , ed. J. Shore, Society of Dyers and
Colourists, Bradford, 1990, vol. 1, ch. 6.
2. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch 8.
3. P. F. Gordon and P. Gregory, Organic Chemistry in Colour ,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983, ch. 4.
4. R. Chenciner, Madder Red: A History of Luxury and Trade, Plant
Dyes and Pigments , Curzon, Richmond, UK, 2000.
5. J. Balfour-Paul, Indigo, British Museum Press, London, 1998.
6. A. Baeyer and V. Drewson, Chem. Ber. , 1883, 16, 2205.
7. A. Reis and W. Schneider, Z. Kristallogr., 1828, 184, 269.
8. D. Jacquemin, J. Preat, V. Wathelet and E. A. Perpete, J. Chem.
Phys. , 2006, 124, 074014.
9. H. von Eller, Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr. , 1955, 1438.
10. L. Serrano-Andres and B. O. Roos, Chem.–Eur. J. , 1997, 3, 717.
11. R. M. Christie, Biotechnic Histochem. , 2007, 82, 51.
12. M. Klessinger and W. Luttke, Tetrahedron , 1963, 19, 315.
13. M. Klessinger, Tetrahedron , 1966, 22, 3355.
14. M. Klessinger, Dyes Pigments , 1982, 3, 235.
15. R. M. Christie, in Indirubin the Red Shade of Indigo , ed. L. Meijer,
N. Guyard, L. A. Skaltsounis and G. Eisenbrand, Life in Progress
Editions, Roscoﬀ, France, 2006, ch 10.
16. C. W. Greenhalgh, J. L. Carey and D. F. Newton, Dyes Pigments ,
1980, 1, 103.
17. C. W. Greenhalgh, J. L. Carey, N. Hall and D. F. Newton, J. Soc.
Dyers Colourists , 1994, 110, 178.
18. R. M. Christie, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1993, 23,1 .
19. R. M. Christie and C. H. Lui, Dyes Pigments , 2000, 47, 79.
20. W. Herbst and K. Hunger, Industrial Organic Pigments , Wiley-VCH
Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 4th edn, 2006.
21. R. M. Christie, The Organic and Inorganic Chemistry of Pigments ,
Oil & Colour Chemists Association, London, 2002.
22. E. E. Jaﬀe, J. Oil Colour Chem. Assoc. ,1992, 75, 24.
23. G. Lincke, Dyes Pigments , 2000, 44, 101.
24. G. D. Potts, W. Jones, J. F. Bullock, S. J. Andrews and S. J. Maginn,
J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. , 1994, 2565.
25. A. Iqbal, L. Cassar, A. C. Rochat, J. Pfenninger and O. Wallquist, J.
Coatings Technol. , 1988, 60,1 .131 Carbonyl Dyes and Pigments26. A. Iqbal, M. Jost, R. Kirchmayr, A. C. Rochat, J. Pfenninger and O.
Wallquist, Bull. Soc. Chim. Belg. , 1988, 97, 615.
27. F. Graser and E. Hadicke, Liebigs Ann. Chem. , 1980, 1994.
28. F. Graser and E. Hadicke, Liebigs Ann. Chem. , 1984, 483.
29. F. Graser and E. Hadicke, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C , 1986, 42, 189.
30. P. Zugenmaier, J. Duﬀ and T. L. Bluhm, Cryst. Res. Technol. , 2000,
9, 1095.
31. L. Michaelis and M. Schubert, Chem. Rev. , 1938, 22, 437.
32. S. S. Labana and L. L Labana, Chem. Rev. , 1967, 67,1 .
33. D. G. Farnum, G. Mehta, G. G. I. Moore and F. P. Siegal,
Tetrahedron Lett. , 1974, 29, 2549.132 Chapter 4CHAPTER 5
Phthalocyanines
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The phthalocyanines represent the most important chromophoric
system developed during the twentieth century.1–3Historically, the
most important event was probably their accidental discovery around1928 by a dye manufacturing company in Grangemouth, Scotland.
However, there is little doubt that researchers prior to this had
observed the formation of phthalocyanines, although the significance
of their observations was not fully recognised. In 1907, von Braun and
Tscherniak were engaged in a study of the chemistry of o-cyano-
benzamide, 5.1, and discovered that when this compound was heated
a trace amount of a blue substance was obtained.
4This compound
was almost certainly metal-free phthalocyanine, 5.2. In 1927, de
Diesbach and von der Weid reported that when 1,2-dibromobenzenewas treated with copper(
I) cyanide in boiling quinoline for eight
hours, a blue product was obtained in reasonable yield.5This was
almost certainly the first preparation of copper phthalocyanine
(CuPc), 5.3. They obtained the molecular formula of the compound
from elemental analysis and noted its remarkable stability to alkali,concentrated acids and heat but were unable to propose a structure. In
1928, in the manufacture of phthalimide by Scottish Dyes (later to be-
come part of ICI) from the reactio n of phthalic anhydride with
ammonia in a glass-lined reactor, the formation of a blue impurity was
observed in certain pr oduction batches. Thi s contaminant was isolated
as a dark blue, insoluble crystalline substance. Ultimately, the
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
133
compound proved to be iron phthalocyanine (FePc), the source of the
iron being the wall of the reactor, which became exposed due to a flaw
in the glass lining. An independent synthesis involving passing am-
monia gas through molten phthalic anhydride in the presence of iron
filings confirmed the findings. Following this discovery, the colour
manufacturing industry was quick to recognise the unique properties of
the compounds and to exploit their c ommercial potential. The phtha-
locyanines have subsequently emerged as one of the most extensively
studied classes of compounds, because of their intense, bright colours,their high stability and their unique molecular structure.
6–9
CONH 2
CN
5.1
NHN
N
N
N
NHNN
5.2NN
N
N
N
NNNCu
5.3
5.2 STRUCTURE AND PROPERTIES OF PHTHALOCYANINES
Elucidation of the structure of the phthalocyanines followed some pi-
oneering research into the chemistry of the system by Linstead ofImperial College, University of London.
10–14The structure that we now
recognise was first proposed from the results of analysis of a number ofmetal phthalocyanines, which provided the molecular formulae, and
from an investigation of the products of degradation studies. Finally,
Robertson confirmed the structure as a result of one of the classical
applications of single-crystal X-ray crystallography.
15–17
The phthalocyanine system, which may be considered as the tet-
raaza derivative of tetrabenzoporphin, is planar, consisting of four
isoindole units connected by four nitrogen atoms forming an internal
16-membered ring of alternate carbon and nitrogen atoms. Most134 Chapter 5phthalocyanines contain a central complexed metal atom, derivatives
having been prepared from most of the metals in the periodic table.
The central metal atom is in a square-planar environment. The
phthalocyanines are structurally related to the natural pigments
chlorophyll, 5.4, and haemin, 5.5, which are porphyrin derivatives.
However, unlike these natural colorants, which have limited stability,the phthalocyanines exhibit exceptional stability and they are in factprobably the most stable of all synthetic organic colorants. Copper
phthalocyanine, used here as an example, is usually illustrated as
structure 5.3, which contains three benzenoid and one o-quinonoid
outer rings. However, it has been established that the molecule iscentrosymmetric and this means that structure 5.3should be re-
garded as only one of a large number of resonance forms contributingto the overall molecular structure. The extensive resonance
stabilisation of the phthalocyanines may well account for their high
stability. The phthalocyanines are aromatic molecules, a feature thathas been attributed to the 18 p-electrons in the perimeter of the
molecules. Phthalocyanines, together with porphyrins, are referred toin general as aza[18]annulenes, the term annulene denoting a conju-
gated cyclic system of methine groups.
N N
NNH3C C2H5R
CH3 H3CMg
O CO2CH3
C20H39O2C5.4
R = CH 3: chlorophyll a
R = CHO: chlorophyll bN N
NNH3CCH3
CH3 H3CFeCl
CO2HHO2C
5.5
The metal phthalocyanines in general show brilliant, intense
colours. The UV/visible absorption spectrum of metal-free phthalo-cyanine ( 5.2) in 1-chloronaphthalene shows two absorption bands of
similar intensity at 699 and 664 nm. The corresponding spectra ofmetal phthalocyanines, however, show a single narrow major ab-sorption band, a feature that has been explained by their higher135 Phthalocyaninessymmetry compared with the metal-free compound and it is the
nature of this absorption that gives rise to the brilliance and intensity
of their colour.18The colours of traditional phthalocyanine dyes and
pigments are restricted to blues and greens, although recent yearshave seen the development of several derivatives whose absorption is
extended into the near-infrared region of the spectrum. Phthalo-
cyanines provide an example of the polyene rather than the donor/acceptor chromogenic type, and in this sense there is a contrast with
azo and carbonyl dyes, which are described in the previous two
chapters. As a consequence, the valence bond (resonance) approach
may not be applied so readily to provide an explanation of their colour
(Chapter 2). The phthalocyanines and structurally related systems
have been extensively investigated theoretically by molecular orbital
methods and these approaches, which range from semi-empirical
methods through to ab initio calculations, have provided a successful
account of the molecular structure and light absorption properties of
the system.
18–21
The UV/visible spectra of phthalocyanines in solution show two
strong absorption bands. The longer wavelength band in the visible
region is referred to as the Qband, while the Bband (or Soret band) is
in the UV region. The position of the visible absorption band of metalphthalocyanines is dependent on the nature of the central metal ion,
the substituent pattern on the outer rings and the degree of ring
annelation.
22,23Among the most extensively investigated phthalo-
cyanines are the complexes of the first transition series metals, iron,cobalt, nickel, copper and zinc. Within this series, the colour is
aﬀected little by the nature of the central metal ion, in which casethel
maxvalues are to be found in the range 670–685 nm. The most
hypsochromic of the series of unsubstituted metal phthalocyaninesis PtPc ( l
max 652 nm) while the most bathochromic is PbPc
(lmax714 nm). Neither of these is of particular interest commercially
due either to economic or toxicity considerations, but the bath-
ochromic eﬀect of the vanadyl derivative, VOPc (l max701 nm), is of
interest from the point of view of extending the absorption range ofphthalocyanines. Substituents on the outer aromatic rings almost
invariably shift the absorption band to longer wavelengths. Copperhexadecachlorophthalocyanine, for example, absorbs at 720 nm in 1-
chloronaphthalene, giving rise to its green colour. There is some
considerable interest in phthalocyanines in which the absorption
band is extended into the near-infrared region for applications
such as optical data storage and security printing (Chapter 11).
This may be achieved in a number of ways. For example, the arylthio136 Chapter 5group causes a much more pronounced bathochromic shift than the
halogens and several copper poly(arylthiophthalocyanine) derivatives
have been patented for applications that make use of their intense
absorption in the near-infrared region of the spectrum. Alternatively,
extending the outer ring system by annelation shifts the absorption
band bathochromically. Copper naphthalocyanine, 5.6, for example,
absorbs at 784 nm, while the corresponding vanadyl derivative gives a
lmaxof 817 nm. A bathochromic shift of the absorption may also be
observed when the compound is in the solid state, compared withthe solution phase. For example, titanyl phthalocyanines may
be produced in a number of crystal phases absorbing in the range
780–830 nm.
NN
N
N
N
NNNCu
5.6
While textile dyes based on phthalocyanines are of rather limited
importance, the phthalocyanines provide by far the most important
blue and green organic pigments. In particular, copper phthalo-
cyanine, 5.3, CI Pigment Blue 15, is by far the most important blue
pigment, finding almost universal use as a colorant in a wide range of
paint, printing ink and plastics applications. In fact, there is a con-
vincing argument that it is the most important of all organic pig-
ments. It owes this dominant position to its intense brilliant blue
colour and excellent technical performance. The pigment exhibits
exceptional stability to light, heat, solvents, alkalis, acids and other
chemicals. Among the features which demonstrate this high stability
are the ability of the material to sublime unchanged at temperatures
above 500 1C, and the observation that it dissolves without137 Phthalocyaninesdecomposition in concentrated sulfuric acid, from which solutions it
may be recovered. In addition, copper phthalocyanine is a relatively
low cost product since, despite its structural complexity, its manu-
facture (see next section) is straightforward, giving high yields from
inexpensive, commodity starting materials.
Copper phthalocyanine exhibits polymorphism , which refers to the
ability of a material to adopt diﬀerent crystal structural arrangementsor phases. The most important crystal phases are the a- and
b-forms, and several other forms have been reported. Both the a- and
b-forms are of commercial importance. The two forms exhibit dif-
ferent hues, the a-form being reddish-blue while the b-form is
greenish-blue. The b-form is the more stable form, particularly
towards organic solvents. The a-form has a tendency to convert in the
presence of certain solvents into the b-form with a corresponding
change in shade, unless it is stabilised, for example by the in-corporation of a single chlorine substituent. b-CuPc is of particular
importance as the cyan pigment used most commonly in printing
inks while the a-form is more important in surface coatings and
plastics applications. A simplified structural comparison between thea- and b-phases is shown in Figure 5.1. In both cases, the molecules
are arranged in stacks with the intermolecular interactions definedmainly by p–pinteractions within the stacks. It has been suggested
that in the ‘herring-bone’ arrangement of CuPc molecules in thecrystal structure of the b-form the copper atom at the centre of each
molecule is coordinated to nitrogen atoms in adjacent moleculesforming a distorted octahedron, a coordination geometry that is
particularly favoured in complexes of copper. No such octahedral
planar CuPc moleculesα−form β−form
Figure 5.1 Polymorphism of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc).138 Chapter 5coordination is possible in the parallel arrangement of molecules in
the crystal structure of a-CuPc, a factor which may contribute to the
lower stability of this polymorphic form.24
Several other phthalocyanines are used commercially as pigments.
The most important green organic pigments are the halogenatedcopper phthalocyanines CI Pigment Green 7, in which the 16 ring
hydrogen atoms of the CuPc molecule are replaced virtually completelyby chlorine, and CI Pigment Green 36, a designation that incorporates
a range of bromo- and bromochloro-copper phthalocyanines. The hue
of these pigments becomes progressively yellower with increasing
bromine substitution. The green pigments are complex statistical
mixtures of polyhalogenated products, in contrast to the unsubstituted
blue pigment, which is a pure species, and consequently diﬀerences in
crystal form are not observed. The phthalocyanine greens exhibit the
same outstanding colouristic and technical performance as the blue
pigments from which they are derived and find equally widespread usein the coloration of paints, printing inks and plastics. Although
phthalocyanine complexes have been prepared from virtually every
metallic element in the periodic table, only the copper derivatives are of
any significant commercial importance as pigments, simply because
the copper compounds give the best combination of colour and tech-
nical properties. However, metal-free phthalocyanine, 5.2, finds some
use as a greenish-blue pigment of high stability.
In view of the immense commercial importance of phthalocyanines
as pigments, it is perhaps surprising that only a few are important astextile dyes. This may be primarily due to the size of the molecules,
which is too large to allow penetration into many fibres, especially thesynthetic fibres polyester and polyacrylonitrile. However, there are a
few polysulfonated copper phthalocyanines on which turquoise/cyan
direct dyes for cotton and paper are based. These dyes provide bright
NN
N
N
N
NNNCuNaO 3S
SO3Na
5.7139 Phthalocyaninesshades and have good lightfastness. An example is CI Direct Blue 86,
5.7, which is a disulfonated copper phthalocyanine, although it is
likely to be a mixture of positional isomers. CI Direct Blue 199 is asimilar dye of complex composition containing sulfonate and sul-
fonamide groups. In addition, turquoise reactive dyes for cotton in-
corporate the copper phthalocyanine system as the chromophoric
unit (Chapter 8).
While the industrial importance of phthalocyanines is dominated
by traditional applications as pigments and, to a lesser extent, textiledyes, they have been extensively investigated for a wide range of other
applications because of their unique light absorption, electronic and
chemical properties and their high stability. As functional colorants,
they are of interest in electrochromic systems, electrophotography,
optical data storage, organic solar cells and as photosensitisers for
photodynamic therapy of cancer
25–27(Chapter 11). They are also
important in various chemical sensing systems and as reaction
catalysts.28–30
5.3 SYNTHESIS OF PHTHALOCYANINES
The synthesis of metal phthalocyanines requires essentially the
presence of three components: a phthalic acid derivative, such as
phthalic anhydride, phthalimide, phthalonitrile or o-cyanobenza-
mide, a source of nitrogen (in cases where the phthalic acid derivative
does not itself contain suﬃcient nitrogen) and an appropriate metal
derivative. Commonly the reaction requires high temperatures and
may be carried out in a high boiling solvent or as a ‘dry bake’ process.
In this way, using appropriate starting materials and reaction con-
ditions, virtually the entire range of metal phthalocyanines may be
prepared. Substituted phthalocyanines are prepared either by using
an appropriately substituted phthalic acid derivative as a starting
material, or by substitution reactions carried out on the unsubstituted
derivatives. Metal-free phthalocyanines are conveniently prepared by
subjecting certain labile metal derivatives, such as those of sodium or
lithium, to acidic conditions. The method of synthesis is discussedfurther in this section for the case of copper phthalocyanine, because
of the particular importance of this product. Although the structure of
copper phthalocyanine is rather complex, its synthesis is remarkably
straightforward. It may be prepared in virtually quantitative yield
from readily available, low cost starting materials. Two chemically
related methods, the phthalic anhydride and phthalonitrile routes,
are commonly used for its manufacture. Both involve simultaneous140 Chapter 5synthesis of the ligand and metal complex formation in a template
procedure.
(a) The phthalic anhydride routeIn the most commonly-encountered version of this method, phthalic
anhydride is heated with urea, copper(
I) chloride and a catalytic
amount of ammonium molybdate in a high boiling solvent. An outlineof the process is given in Scheme 5.1. Urea acts as the source of ni-
trogen in the process, the carbonyl group of the urea molecule being
displaced as carbon dioxide. Mechanistic schemes have been proposed
to explain the course of this synthesis but much of the detail remains to
be established unequivocally. In essence, phthalic anhydride reacts
with urea or products of its decomposition or polymerisation, resulting
in progressive replacement of the oxygen atoms by nitrogen and, ul-
timately, the formation of the key intermediate 1-amino-3-imino-
isoindoline, 5.8. The presence of ammonium molybdate is essential to
catalyse this part of the sequence. Subsequently, this intermediate
undergoes a tetramerisation with cyclisation aided by the presence of
the copper ion to form copper phthalocyanine.
(b) The phthalonitrile routeIn this process, phthalonitrile, 5.9, is heated to around 200 1C with
copper metal or a copper salt, with or without a solvent. A mechanismOO
ONHO
ONHNH
O
NNH
2
NHNN
N
N
N
NNNCu
5.8
5.3x 4, Cu2+
Scheme 5.1 Phthalic anhydride route to CuPc.141 Phthalocyaninesfor the phthalonitrile route to copper phthalocyanine has been pro-
posed as illustrated in Scheme 5.2.31It is suggested that reaction is
initiated by attack by a nucleophile (Y/C0), most likely the counteranion
associated with the Cu21ion, at one of the cyano groups of the
phthalonitrile activated by its coordination with the Cu21ion. Cycli-
sation to isoindoline derivative 5.10 then takes place. Attack by
intermediate 5.10 on a further molecule of phthalonitrile then takes
place and, following a series of similar reactions including a cyclisa-
tion step, facilitated by the coordinating role of the Cu21, inter-
mediate 5.11 is formed. When copper metal is the reactant, it isCN
C
NN-Y
C
NNY
N-
CN
C
N
NY
N
C
C
NN-NN
N
N
NNN++
Cu-NY
NN
N
N
N
NNNCu+YCu2+
Cu2+
Cu2+
Cu2+Y-
5.95.10
5.11route (i)
2e-, - Y-
CuPc
route (ii)
 - Y+
CuPc
 Y+, (Y = Cl)
ClCuPc
Scheme 5.2 A mechanism for the phthalonitrile route to CuPcs.142 Chapter 5proposed that two electrons are transferred from the metal, allowing
elimination of Y/C0to form copper phthalocyanine [route (i)]. Con-
sequently, the Cu(0) is oxidised to Cu( II) as required to participate
further in the reaction. When a copper( II) salt is used, it is suggested
that Y1(the chloronium ion in the case of CuCl 2) is eliminated to
form CuPc [route (ii)]. The product in this case, rather than copper
phthalocyanine itself, is a monochloro derivative, formed by electro-philic attack of Cl
1on the copper phthalocyanine initially formed.
Copper monochlorophthalocyanine is important as it exists ex-clusively in the a-crystal form, which, unlike unsubstituted CuPc, is
stable to solvents. It has been suggested that the single chlorine atomsterically prevents conversion into the b-form.
Both the phthalic anhydride and phthalonitrile routes generally
produce a crude blue product, which is of far too large a particle size
to be of use as a pigment. The original method developed for particle
size reduction used acid pasting, which involves dissolving the crudeproduct in concentrated sulfuric acid, followed by reprecipitation
with water. This method gives the a-form of the pigment in a fine
particle size form. Mechanical grinding of the crude blue product inthe presence of inorganic salts, such as sodium chloride or calcium
chloride, produces a mixture of the a- and b-CuPc, which may be
converted into pure pigmentary b-CuPc by careful treatment of this
mixture with certain organic solvents. Alternatively, grinding the
crude material with inorganic salts in the presence of organic solvents
can lead directly to b-CuPc in a fine particle size form.
Scheme 5.3 shows an outline of some important substitution re-
actions of copper phthalocyanine. Synthesis of the phthalocyaninegreen pigments involves the direct exhaustive halogenation of crude
copper phthalocyanine blue with chlorine or bromine or an appropri-
ate mixture of the two halogens, depending on the particular product
required, at elevated temperatures in a suitable solvent, commonly an
AlCl
3/NaCl melt. These reactions are examples of electrophilic substi-
tution, reflecting the aromatic character of the copper phthalocyaninemolecule. The crude green products, 5.12, which are initially formed
under these manufacturing conditions, are of large particle size duemainly to a high degree of aggregation. The crude form may beconverted into an appropriate pigmentary form either by treatment
with suitable organic solvents or by treatment with aqueous surfactant
solutions. These processes eﬀect a deaggregation of the product,
producing a finer particle size, and in addition they increase the crys-
tallinity of the products. Both of these eﬀects provide a dramatic
beneficial eﬀect on their performance as pigments. Treatment of143 Phthalocyaninespolyhalogenated copper phthalocyanines 5.12 with thiophenols in the
presence of alkali at high temperatures in high boiling solvents gives
the near-infrared absorbing polyarylthio CuPc derivatives 5.13 as il-
lustrated in Scheme 5.3. This process provides an example of aromaticnucleophilic substitution in the phthalocyanine system. X-Ray struc-
tural analysis of these arylthio derivatives demonstrates that the sulfur
atoms are located in the plane of the CuPc system while the aryl groups
are twisted to accommodate the steric congestion. The disruption ofplanarity, and hence of the molecular packing, provides these deriva-
tives with solubility in organic solvents.
32NN
N
N
N
NNNCuXX
X
XXX
X
X
X
X
XX X
XX
X
NN
N
N
N
NNNCuSArArS
ArS
ArSArSSAr
SAr
SAr
SAr
SAr
SArArS SAr
ArSArS
ArSNN
N
N
N
NNNCu X2, X = Cl, Br
5.12
ArSNa5.3
5.13
Scheme 5.3 Reactions leading to some substituted CuPc derivatives.144 Chapter 5REFERENCES
1. D. Paterson, in Colorants and Auxiliaries: Organic Chemistry and
Application Properties , ed. J. Shore, Society of Dyers and
Colourists, Bradford, 1990, vol. 1, ch. 2.
2. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch. 5.
3. P. F. Gordon and P. Gregory, Organic Chemistry in Colour ,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983, ch. 5.
4. A. von Braun and J. Tscherniak, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges , 1907, 40,
2709.
5. H. de Diesbach and E. von der Weid, Helv. Chim Acta ,1 9 2 7 ,10 ,8 8 6 .
6. F. H. Moser and A. L. Thomas, Phthalocyanine Compounds ,
Reinhold Publishing Corporation, New York, 1963.
7. F. H. Moser and A. L. Thomas, The Phthalocyanines, CRC Press,
Boca Raton, Florida, 1983, vol. I and II.
8. C. C. Leznoﬀ and A. B. P. Lever, Phthalocyanines: Properties and
Applications , VCH, Weinheim, 1989.
9. N. B. McKeown, Phthalocyanine Materials: Synthesis, Structure and
Function , Cambridge University Press, 1998.
10. G. T. Bourne, R. P. Linstead and A. R. Lowe, J. Chem. Soc. , 1934,
1017.
11. R. P. Linstead and A. R. Lowe, J. Chem. Soc. , 1934, 1022.
12. C. E. Dent and R. P. Linstead, J. Chem. Soc. , 1934, 1027.
13. C. E. Dent, R. P. Linstead and A. R. Lowe, J. Chem. Soc. , 1934,
1033.
14. P. A. Barrett, C. E. Dent, R. P. Linstead and A. R. Lowe, J. Chem.
Soc., 1936, 1719.
15. J. M. Robertson, J. Chem. Soc. , 1935, 613.
16. J. M. Robertson, J. Chem. Soc. , 1936, 1195.
17. J. M. Robertson and I. Woodward, J. Chem. Soc. , 1937, 219.
18. R. M. Christie and B. G. Freer, Dyes Pigments , 1994, 24, 113.
19. N. V. Tverdova, G. V. Girichev and N. I. Giricheva, Struct. Chem. ,
2011, 22, 319.
20. F. Li, Q. Zheng, G. Yang, N. Da and L. Peixiang, Phys. B-Condensed
Matter , 2008, 403, 1704.
21. V. G. Maslov, Opt. Spectrosc. , 2006, 101, 853.
22. R. M. Christie and B. G. Freer, Dyes Pigments , 1994, 24, 259.
23. R. M. Christie, Dyes Pigments , 1995, 27, 35.
24. J. R. Fryer, R. B. McKay, R. R. Mather and K. S. W. Sing, J.Chem.
Technol. Biotechnol. , 1981, 31, 371.145 Phthalocyanines25. J. W. Owens and M. Robins, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2001, 5,
460.
26. H. Ali and J. E. van Lier, Chem. Rev. , 1999, 99, 2379.
27. S. B. Brown and T. G. Truscott, Chem. Soc. Rev. , 1995, 29,
955.
28. G. Guillard, J. Simon and J. P. Germain, Coord. Chem. Rev. , 1998,
180, 1433.
29. D. Woehrle, G. Schnurpfeil, S. Makarov and O. Suvorova, Chem. Z. ,
2012, 46, 12.
30. A. M. Paoletti, G. Pennesi, G. Rossi, A. Generosi, B. Paci and V. R.
Albertini, Sensors , 2009, 9, 5277.
31. R. M. Christie and D. D. Deans, J Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. II ,
1989, 193.
32. P. Gregory in Colour Chemistry: The Design and Synthesis of Organic
Dyes and Pigments, ed. A. T. Peters and H. S. Freeman, Elsevier
Applied Science, London and New York, 1991, ch. 9.146 Chapter 5CHAPTER 6
Miscellaneous Chemical Classes
of Organic Dyes and Pigments
6.1 INTRODUCTION
The chemistry of the three chemical classes of organic colorants that
are industrially most important, the azo, carbonyl and phthalocya-
nine classes, has been dealt with individually in Chapters 3–5, re-spectively. In this chapter, the chemistry of some further chemical
classes that are of importance for specific applications is discussed.
The classes discussed are the polymethines, arylcarbonium ion col-
orants, dioxazines, sulfur dyes and nitro dyes. A section of this
chapter is devoted to each of these, the individual sections containing
a description of the principal structural features that characterise the
particular colorant type, together with an outline of the chemistry of
the main synthetic routes. There are several other chemical com-
pound types that are capable of providing colour but that do not fallinto the categories previously mentioned, but which are neglected in
this text either because they are commercially of little importance or
because they have been less extensively investigated.
6.2 POLYENE AND POLYMETHINE DYES
Polyene and polymethine dyes are two structurally related groups of
dyes that contain as their essential structural feature one or more
methine (–CH¼) groups.
1–3Polyene dyes contain a series of conju-
gated double bonds, usually in an s-trans -orientation and terminating
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
147
in aliphatic or alicyclic groups. They owe their colour therefore simply
to the presence of the conjugated system. In the case of polymethine
dyes, electron donor and electron acceptor groups terminate either
end of the polymethine chain, so that they may be considered as
typical donor–acceptor dyes.
The best-known group of polyene dyes is the carotenoids, which are
widely encountered as natural colorants. b-Carotene, 6.1, is given here
as an important example. This dye is a hydrocarbon containing eleven
conjugated double bonds, which illustrates the length of chain that
is necessary to shift the absorption from the UV into the visible range.
b-Carotene shows absorption maxima at 450 and 478 nm. Naturally
occurring carotenoids not only provide the attractive yellow, orangeand red colours that are encountered in many fruit and vegetables,
including carrots, sweet potato, mangoes and papayas, but also serve
important biochemical functions. For example, they may protect cells
and organisms against some of the harmful eﬀects of exposure tolight as a result of their action as eﬃcient deactivators of singlet
oxygen, and they are also important in certain biological energy
transfer processes. The advice from nutritionists encouraging us to
include fresh fruit and vegetables in our diet has been emphasized
further as evidence has emerged for the potential therapeutic benefits
of carotenoids and other related natural colorants, including the
possibility that they may provide protection against cancer on the
basis, at least in part, of their antioxidant activity by a mechanism
that involves the ability to quench singlet oxygen.
4,5They are also
thought to decrease the risk of certain eye diseases. However, it isthought that while there are benefits obtained from diets high in fruitand vegetables containing these nutrients, issues associated with the
eﬃcacy and safety of supplements containing the materials have not
been addressed fully.
6,7Another carotenoid that is of some con-
siderable functional biological importance is retinal, which is thechromogenic part of the molecules of rhodopsin and iodopsin, the
pigments in the eye that are responsible for colour vision (Chapter 2).
There are no true synthetic polyene dyes of any real commercial im-
portance. However, the phthalocyanines (Chapter 5) may, in a sense,
be considered structurally as aza analogues of a cyclic polyene system.
6.1148 Chapter 6In polymethine dyes, electron donor (D) and acceptor (A) groups
terminate the polymethine chain as illustrated by the general struc-
ture given in Figure 6.1. They embrace a wide variety of structural
types, which may be subdivided into three broad categories as cat-
ionic ( z¼þ 1), anionic (z¼/C0 1) or neutral ( z¼0) types, depending on
the precise nature of A and D. Dyes of a similar structure in which oneor more of the methine carbon atoms are replaced by aza nitrogenatoms are also conveniently considered as polymethines. The pres-
ence of the donor–acceptor system means that polymethine dyes can
provide strong visible absorption with a much shorter conjugated
system than is required with polyenes. Polymethine dyes are capable
of providing a wide range of bright, intense colours but, in general,
they have tended to show rather inferior fastness properties compared
with other chemical classes. This feature has limited their use on
textiles, where they are restricted mainly to some disperse dyes for
polyester and cationic dyes for acrylic fibres. They are essentially of noindustrial consequence as organic pigments. Polymethine dyes have
enjoyed commercial importance in traditional film-based colour
photographic processes, although this colour application has de-
clined dramatically as digital photography has gained universal ac-
ceptance. The dyes have, however, been extensively studied on the
grounds both of fundamental theoretical interest and for functional
applications, for example in optical recording, dye lasers and solar
cells (Chapter 11). The dyes are sometimes referred to as styryl dyes
where they are derivatives of styrene (C
6H5–CH¼CH 2).8
The most important group of cationic polymethine dyes contains
nitrogen atoms in both the donor (D) and acceptor (A) groups. These
are further classified as cyanines, 6.2, hemicyanines, 6.3, or strepto-
cyanines, 6.4, depending on whether both, one or neither of the ni-
trogen atoms is contained in a heterocyclic ring as illustrated in
Figure 6.2. The history of this type of dye dates from 1856, the same
A D -A D+
n = 0, 1, 2, etc.
z = –1, 0, +1nz
nz
Figure 6.1 General structure of polymethine dyes.149 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and Pigmentsyear in which Perkin discovered Mauveine (Chapter 1). In that year,
Williams discovered that the reaction of crude quinoline, which for-
tuitously contained substantial quantities of 4-methylquinoline, with
iso-pentyl iodide in the presence of alkali gave a blue dye, which he
named Cyanine . This dye was eventually identified as having the
structure 6.5. A range of cyanine dyes was subsequently prepared, but
these early products proved to be of little use for textiles because of
their poor lightfastness. However, considerable interest in their
chemistry led ultimately to the discovery that certain of the dyes had
photosensitising properties and this gave rise to their application in
colour photography. A new era for cationic polymethine dyes was
heralded by the introduction in the 1950s of textile fibres based on
polyacrylonitrile.9It was found that such dyes when applied to acrylic
fibres containing anionic sites were capable of giving bright, strongN N + +N NN N
NN
C5H11C5H11
N
NCH3H3CCH3
CH3H3CCH3N
H3CH3CCH3
N
CH2CH2ClC2H5S
N
CH3N
NN
CH2CH2OHC2H5H3CO
N
CH3H3CCH3
NHOCH 3
OCH 3N
CH3H3CCH3
NNCH3
OCH 36.3 6.4+
6.2n
+
I-
6.5
+
6.7+6.6
6.8
+
6.10n-1
6.9+
+n-1
Figure 6.2 Structures of some cationic polymethine dyes.150 Chapter 6shades with good fastness properties (Chapter 7). Examples of dyes of
this type are the cyanine CI Basic Red 12, 6.6, the hemicyanine CI
Basic Violet 7, 6.7, the diazahemicyanine CI Basic Blue 41, 6.8(which
may also be considered as a member of the azo dye class), the aza-
cyanine CI Basic Yellow 11, 6.9, and the diazacyanine CI Basic Yellow
28,6.10. In this series, the cyanines and their aza analogues generally
give yellow through to red dyes, while the corresponding hemi-cyanines are more bathochromic, giving reds, violets and blues.
The structures of several neutral and anionic polymethine dyes are
illustrated in Figure 6.3. There are many types of neutral polymethines
utilising a wide range of electron donor and acceptor groups. For ex-
ample, CI Disperse Yellow 99, 6.11, and CI Disperse Blue 354, 6.12,a r e
important dyes for polyester (Chapter 7). Merocyanines in which theamino group is the donor and the carbonyl group is the acceptor, as
represented by the general structure 6.13, are well known. Because of
their generally inferior lightfastness properties, they are not used on
textiles, but have found wider use in colour photography. Mer-
ocyanines are also formed when certain colourless photochromic
compounds, notably the spirooxazines, are irradiated with light.
10The
reversible colour change given by these compounds may be used in arange of applications, for example in ophthalmics, security printing
and optical data storage (Chapter 11). Anionic polymethines, such as
N
CH2CH3CH2CH2CO2CH2CH2
HCC NCCN
H3CN
C6H13C6H13
HC
H3CSO2
CNNC
N O
N
SO
SN R
SO-
R
S6.11 6.12
n
6.13 6.142
Figure 6.3 Structures of some neutral and anionic polymethine dyes.151 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and Pigmentsthe oxonol 6.14, are usually rather unstable components and so they
have not been so extensively investigated.
Symmetrical cyanine dyes, because of the resonance shown in
Figure 6.4, in which the two contributing structures are exactly
equivalent, are symmetrical molecules.11,12X-Ray crystal structure
determinations and NMR spectroscopic analysis have demonstratedthat the dyes are essentially planar and that the carbon–carbon bondlengths in the polymethine chain are uniform. The colour of cyanine
dyes depends mainly on the nature of the terminal groups and on the
length of the polymethine chain. The bathochromicity of the dyes is
found to increase with the electron-releasing power of the terminal
donor group. More bathochromic dyes are also obtained by in-
corporating the terminal group into a heterocyclic ring system and by
extending the conjugation. Cyanine dyes display a highly allowed
HOMO-LUMO transition, and hence they show high molar ex-
tinction coeﬃcients, i.e., high colour strength. Another important
feature of cyanine dyes is the narrowness of the absorption bands,
which means that they are capable of providing exceptionally bright
colours. One factor that influences the absorption bandwidth of a dye
is how closely the geometry of the first excited state of the molecule
resembles that of the ground state. In the case of cyanine dyes these
two states exhibit very similar geometry and hence the absorption
bands are narrow. The results of molecular orbital calculations are
generally in good agreement with the experimental spectral data for a
wide range of cyanine dyes. In addition, the calculations confirm that
there is no major redistribution of p-electron charge densities or
p-bond orders on excitation.
13
There has been some interest in extending the absorption range of
cyanine dyes to longer wavelengths into the near-infrared region of
the spectrum. A consideration of the spectral data for thiazole de-
rivatives 6.15–6.17 is of some interest in this respect. Cyanine dye 6.15
shows the characteristic visible absorption spectrum for a dye of thistype, giving a narrow band with a l
maxvalue of 651 nm in acetonitrile.
As the length of the conjugated polymethine chain of cyaninedye 6.15 is extended further, the absorption band is shifted
R2N NR2 R2N NR2
n+ +
n
Figure 6.4 Valence-bond (resonance) approach to cyanine dyes.152 Chapter 6bathochromically by about 100 nm for each additional –CH ¼CH–
group. However, the absorption curves become increasingly broad as
the chain is extended and there is a consequent reduction in the
molar extinction coeﬃcient. It has been suggested that this may be
due to trans–cis isomerism, which becomes more facile as the length
of the chain increases, and also to an increase in the participation of
higher vibrational states of the first excited state as the molecularflexibility is increased. As an alternative to simple extension of the
conjugation to provide bathochromicity some structurally related
systems have been investigated. For example, the squarylium dye
6.16 absorbs at 663 nm and gives a considerably narrower bandwidth
than compound 6.15, while the croconium derivative 6.17 gives a
narrow absorption band at 771 nm, spectral data which are consist-
ent with the results of PPP molecular orbital calculations.
14Dyes of
these structural types are of some interest on the basis of theirpotential to provide intense narrow absorption bands in the near-infrared region (NIR) with low absorption in the visible region (see
Chapter 11 for a discussion of their application in optical data
storage ).
15
NS
EtNS
Et
6.15+
NS
EtNSO
-O
Et+
6.16
NS
NSO
O
Et-O
Et+
6.17153 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and PigmentsThe strategies used in the synthesis of polymethine dyes are illus-
trated for a series of indoline derivatives in Scheme 6.1. There is an
even wider range of synthetic routes to polymethine dyes than is de-
scribed here, but they are based for the most part on a similar set of
principles. The starting material for the synthesis of this group of
polymethine dyes is invariably 2-methylene-1,3,3-trimethylindole-
nine, 6.18, known universally as Fischer’s base. As illustrated in the
scheme, compound 6.18 may be converted by formylation using
phosphoryl chloride and dimethylformamide into compound 6.19,
referred to as Fischer’s aldehyde, which is also a useful starting ma-
terial for this series of polymethine dyes. When compound 6.18
(2 moles) is heated with triethylorthoformate (1 mole) in the presenceof a base such as pyridine, the symmetrical cyanine dye, CI Basic Red
12,6.6, is formed. The synthesis of some hemicyanines may be
achieved by heating Fischer’s base with an aldehyde, as illustrated forthe case of CI Basic Violet 7, 6.7. The azacyanine, CI Basic Yellow 11,
NCH3 H3C
CH2
CH3NCH3 H3C
CH
CHO
CH3N
CH3H3CCH3
N
H3CH3CCH3
N
CH3H3CCH3
N
CH2CH2ClC2H5OHC NCH2CH3
CH2CH2ClNH2
OCH 3
OCH 3
N
CH3H3CCH3
NH OCH 3
OCH 3N2+
OCH 3
N
CH3H3CCH3
NNCH3
OCH 3N
CH3H3CCH3
NN
OCH 3(x2) , HC(OEt) 3,
pyridine+
6.196.6
POCl 3 , DMF
+
+ 6.7
6.10(CH 3)2SO4
++
6.20 6.96.18
Scheme 6.1 Synthetic approach to some indolenine-based polymethine dyes.154 Chapter 66.9, is synthesised by the condensation reaction of Fischer’s aldehyde,
6.19, with 2,4-dimethoxyaniline. In the synthesis of diazacyanine dye,
CI Basic Yellow 28, 6.10, an important golden yellow dye for appli-
cation to acrylic fibres, Fischer’s base, 6.18, is treated with 4-metho-
xybenzenediazonium chloride and undergoes an azo coupling
reaction at the reactive methylene group to give the azo dye 6.20.
Methylation of this dye with dimethyl sulfate gives the diazacyanine
dye6.10.
6.3 ARYLCARBONIUM ION COLORANTS
Arylcarbonium ion colorants were historically the first group of syn-
thetic dyes developed for textile applications. In fact, Mauveine, the
first commercial synthetic dye, belonged to this group (Chapter 1).16
Most of the arylcarbonium ion colorants still in use today were dis-covered in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. As agroup they are used considerably less than in former times, but many
are still of some importance, particularly for use as basic (cationic)
dyes for the coloration of acrylic fibres and paper, and as pigments.
9
Structurally, they are closely related to the polymethine dyes, espe-cially the cyanine types, and they tend to show similar properties. For
example, they provide extremely intense, bright colours covering vir-
tually the complete shade range, but they are generally inferior in
technical properties compared with the azo, carbonyl and phthalo-
cyanine chemical classes and as a result their importance has de-
clined over the years.
Arylcarbonium ion dyes encompass a diversity of structural types.
Most of the dyes are cationic but there are some neutral and anionicderivatives. The best-known arylcarbonium ion dyes are the dia-
rylmethines, such as Auramine O, CI Basic Yellow 2, 6.21, and the
triarylmethines, the simplest of which is Malachite Green, CI BasicGreen 4, 6.22. The essential structural feature of these two groups is a
central carbon atom attached to either two or three aromatic rings. Ofthese two groups, the triarylmethines are generally the most stable
and thus the most useful. Commonly, they are referred to as triaryl
methanes (or triphenylmethanes), but the name triaryl methines more
correctly indicates that the carbon atom to which the aromatic rings
are attached is sp
2, rather than sp3hybridised. Aza analogues of these
dyes in which the central carbon is replaced by a nitrogen atom arealso conveniently included in this class. There are also a number of
derivatives obtained by bridging the di- and triarylmethines and their
aza analogues across the ortho-ortho
0positions of two of the aromatic155 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and Pigmentsrings with a heteroatom. Examples of these types of heterocyclic
systems, which may be represented by the general structure 6.23, are
illustrated in Table 1.
H2N(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2+
6.21
(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2+
6.22
XR2N NR2 Y+
6.23
Mauveine, the original synthetic dye, was of the azine type, its
principal component being compound 6.24.15This particular group
of dyes is now essentially only of historic interest. Xanthene dyes,
such as Rhodamine B, CI Basic Violet 10, 6.25, Rhodamine 6G, CI
Table 6.1 Heterocyclic arylcarbonium ion dyes
and their aza analogues ( 6.23).
X Y Type
–C(Ar)¼ –O– Xanthene
–C(Ar)¼ –S– Thioxanthene
–C(Ar)¼ –NR– Acridine
–N¼ –O– Oxazine
–N¼ –S– Thiazine
–N¼ –NR– Azine156 Chapter 6Basic Red 1, 6.26, and Fluorescein, 6.27, are relatively inexpensive
fluorescent dyes. Arylcarbonium dyes are not as a rule highly fluor-
escent, but the xanthenes exhibit strong fluorescence that is associ-
ated with the enhanced molecular rigidity due to the oxygen bridge.
Fluorescein is no longer significant as a textile dye but is used in the
tracing of water currents and in analytical and biological applications.
However, the Rhodamines are of major commercial importance asintensely fluorescing red to violet materials used in a wide variety of
traditional and functional applications. Rhodamine 6G is an im-
portant red dye for daylight fluorescent pigments and was one of the
first to be used in dye lasers
17(Chapter 11).
NN H3C
H2 N NCH3
H
6.24+
(C2H5)2N N(C 2H5)2 O
CO2H
6.25+
O NHC 2H5
CH3C2H5HN
H3C
CO2C2H5+Cl-
6.26157 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and PigmentsHO O O
CO2H
6.27
The valence bond (resonance) description of the triphenylmethine
dye, Malachite Green, 6.22, is illustrated in Figure 6.5. A comparison
with Figure 6.4 reveals their structural similarity compared with cya-
nine dyes. Formally, the dye contains a carbonium ion centre, as aresult of a contribution from resonance form II. The molecule is
stabilised by resonance involving delocalisation of the positive charge
on to the p-amino nitrogen atoms as illustrated by forms I and III.
Because of the steric constraints imposed by the presence of the threerings, triarylmethine dyes cannot adopt a planar conformation. The
three rings are twisted out of the molecular plane, adopting a shape
like a three-bladed propeller.
18Malachite Green shows two ab-
sorption bands in the visible region with lmaxvalues of 621 and
428 nm. Hence, its observed green colour is due to the addition of
blue and yellow components. The long wavelength band is polarised
along the x-axis and the short wavelength band along the y-axis.
The synthesis of arylcarbonium ion dyes and pigments generally
follow a similar set of principles. A few selected examples are shownin Scheme 6.2 to illustrate these principles. Essentially, the molecules
are constructed from aromatic substitution reactions. In general, a C
1
electrophile, for example phosgene (COCl 2), formaldehyde, chloro-
form or carbon tetrachloride reacts with an aromatic system, which is
activated to electrophilic attack by the presence of a strongly electron-
releasing group such as the amino (primary, secondary or tertiary) or
hydroxyl group. Symmetrical diarylmethines and triarylmethines maybe synthesised in one operation, for example by reaction of one mole
of phosgene with either two or three moles of the appropriate aro-
matic compound. Depending on the particular electrophile used, an
oxidation may be required at some point in the reaction sequence to
generate the final product. Two methods of synthesis of the dia-
rylmethine, Auramine O, 6.21, are shown in Scheme 6.2. Formerly,
this yellow dye was prepared from Mischler’s ketone, 6.28, which may
be obtained from the reaction of dimethylaniline (2 moles) with158 Chapter 6phosgene (1 mole). In the currently preferred method, dimethylani-
line (2 moles) is reacted with formaldehyde (1 mole) to give the diaryl
compound 6.29. This compound is then heated with sulfur and am-
monium chloride in a stream of ammonia at 200 1C. The dye 6.21 is
formed via the thiobenzophenone 6.30 as an intermediate. The syn-
thesis of Malachite Green, 6.22, is given in Scheme 6.2 to illustrate
how an unsymmetrically substituted triarylmethine derivative may be
prepared. Dimethylaniline is reacted with benzaldehyde under acidic
conditions to give the alcohol 6.31. This compound is then treated
with a further equivalent of dimethylaniline to give the leuco base
6.32, which is subsequently oxidised to the carbinol base 6.33. Acid-
ification of this compound leads to Malachite Green, 6.22. For many
years, lead dioxide (PbO 2) was the agent of choice for oxidation re-
actions of this type. Lead-free processes, for example using air or
chloranil in the presence of various transition metal catalysts, are now
preferred for toxicological and environmental reasons. By using dif-
ferent aromatic aldehydes and aromatic amines as starting materials,
this method may be adapted to produce a wide range of triaryl-
methine dyes.
As an example of a heterocyclic arylcarbonium ion dye, the method
of synthesis of Rhodamine B, 6.25, is shown in Scheme 6.3. The
starting materials in this case are phthalic anhydride and 3- N,
N-diethylaminophenol.
Each of the products whose synthesis is illustrated in Schemes 6.2
and 6.3 is a coloured cationic species. When the counteranion ischloride, the products are water-soluble and useful as basic (cationic)
dyes for the coloration of acrylic fibres. Precipitation of cationic dyes
of these types from aqueous solution using large polymeric counter-
anions, notably phosphomolybdates, phosphotungstates and phos-
phomolybdotungstates, leads to a range of highly insoluble red,(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2 (H3C)2N N(CH 3)2
+(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2+ +
I II IIIy
x
Figure 6.5 Valence-bond (resonance) approach to Malachite Green, 6.22.159 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and Pigmentsviolet, blue and green pigments. These pigments exhibit high bril-
liance and intensity of colour and high transparency, and are thus
well suited to some printing ink applications (Chapter 9).19–21N(CH 3)2(H3C)2N
ON(CH 3)2
(H3C)2N
C
H2N(CH 3)2 (H3C)2N
SN(CH 3)2H2N(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2
(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2CHO
(H3C)2N
CH
OH
(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2
HN(CH 3)2
(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2
OHx2, CH 2=Ox 2, COCl 2
S6.21
+
6.226.28+
6.296.30NH4Cl / ZnCl 2
NH3/ NH 4Cl
6.31
6.32 6.33[O] H+
Scheme 6.2 Synthetic approach to some arylcarbonium ion dyes.
OO
ON(C 2H5)2
OHO OH
N(C 2H5)2 CO2HN(C 2H5)2
OH(C2H5)2N N(C 2H5)2 O
CO2H+
6.25+
Scheme 6.3 Synthesis of Rhodamine B, 6.25.160 Chapter 66.4 DIOXAZINES
Dioxazine colorants, as the name implies, contain two oxazine ring
systems as the chromophoric grouping. They are relatively few in
number and generally restricted to violet to blue shades. Probably themost important dioxazine colorant is CI Pigment Violet 23, 6.34.
20,21
This product is usually referred to as Carbazole Violet and is themost significant violet pigment for high performance applications
(Chapter 9). Compound 6.34 has been shown to have an angular
structure as illustrated in Scheme 6.4 rather than the linear structurethat is shown in most older texts.
22The pigment is characterised by a
brilliant intense reddish-violet colour, very good lightfastness and re-sistance to heat and solvents. Its synthesis is illustrated in Scheme 6.4.
In the synthetic scheme, 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole, 6.36 (2 moles),
is condensed with chloranil, 6.35 (1 mole), to form the intermediate
6.37. This intermediate is then converted into the dioxazine pigment
6.34 by oxidative cyclisation at around 180 1C in an aromatic solvent
and in the presence of a catalyst such as aluminium(
III) chloride or
NO
OCl
Cl
ClCl
C2H5
N C2H5NH2
NH
N
HN C2H5
NC2H5 O
NN
ONC2H5Cl
ClO
OCl
Cl
oxidative ring
closure2+
6.35 6.36
6.37
6.34
Scheme 6.4 Synthesis of Carbazole Violet, 6.34.161 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and Pigmentsbenzenesulfonyl chloride. Sulfonation of this pigment gives rise to
water-soluble dyes that may be used as direct dyes for cotton. An ex-
ample is CI Direct Blue 108 which contains 3–4 sulfonic acid groups.
The dioxazine system is also used as the chromophoric group in some
reactive dyes (Chapter 8).23
6.5 SULFUR DYES
Sulfur dyes are a group of low cost dyes used in the coloration of
cellulosic fibres.24,25The dyes currently available commercially are
fairly small in number although some of the individual products are
manufactured in very large quantities. They are capable of providing a
wide range of hues although they tend to give rise to rather dull
colours, and thus they are of particular importance as blacks, navy
blues, browns and olive greens. Sulfur dyes are treated here as a
chemical class of dye, although they may equally be considered as a
separate textile application class (Chapter 7). Despite the fact that
these products have been known for many years, the chemical
structures of sulfur dyes are by no means completely established, but
this is completely understandable because the structures are so
complex. They are generally known to be complex mixtures of mo-
lecular species containing a large proportion of sulfur in the form ofsulfide (–S–), disulfide (–S–S–) and polysulfide (–S
n–) links and in
heterocyclic rings, especially the benzothiazole, thiazone and thian-threne ring systems. It has been proposed that some sulfur dyes are
based structurally on the phenothiazonethioanthrone chromophoric
system shown in Figure 6.6.
SNSSNS
SOOS
RR
Figure 6.6 Phenothiazonethioanthrone chromophoric system proposed as a con-
stituent of some sulfur dyes.162 Chapter 6Traditional sulfur dyes are products of high insolubility in water.
They are applied to cellulosic fibres after conversion into a water-
soluble leuco form by treatment with an aqueous alkaline solution of
sodium sulfide. The chemistry of this process, which shows certain
similarities to vat dyeing (Chapter 7), is thought to involve mainly
reductive cleavage, by the sulfide anion, of disulfide (–S–S–) and
polysulfide linkages, leading to monomeric leuco species containing
alkali-soluble thiol (–SH) groups. After application of the leuco form,
which is absorbed into the fibre, the insoluble structure of the dye isregenerated by oxidation in air or with an agent such as potassium
dichromate in the presence of acetic acid, and aggregates become
trapped within the fibre. A second group of sulfur dyes are pre-
formed leuco dyes which are ‘ready-to-use’ in concentrated aqueous
solutions. A third group conta ins thiosulfate (–S–SO
3/C0Na1) water-
solubilising groups. These dyes, referred to as Bunte salts ,a r e
applied to the fibres together with sodium sulfide. During theirapplication the thiosulfate groups are reduced to form insoluble
dimeric and polymeric species as a result of disulfide bond for-
mation. The particular advantage of sulfur dyes as a class of dyes for
cellulosic fibres is that they provide reasonable technical perform-
ance at low cost. However, traditional sulfur dyes present significant
environmental problems, largely associated with residues of sulfideand other sulfur-containing species, electrolytes and unfixed dye,
which contaminate the dyehouse eﬄuent and it is conceivable that
this feature may cause their use to decline in years to come. How-
ever, there has been considerable eﬀor t in recent years to develop
more ecologically-friendly processing conditions for the application
of sulfur dyes, for example using re ducing sugars or other sulfur-free
reducing agents, with the aim also to maximise dye exhaustion on tothe fibres, thus minimising the eﬄuent load. There has also been
some experimentation with their app lication using electrochemical
reduction processes.
26
The manufacture of sulfur dyes involves sulfurization processes, the
chemistry of which remains rather mysterious and may arguably beconsidered still to be in the realms of alchemy! The processes involve
heating elemental sulfur or sodium polysulfide, or both, with aro-matic amines, phenols or aminophenols. These reactions may be
carried out either as a dry bake process at temperatures between 180
and 350 1C or in solvents such as water or aliphatic alcohols at reflux
or at even higher temperatures under pressure. CI Sulfur Black 1, forexample, is prepared by heating 2,4-dinitrophenol with sodium
polysulfide. CI Sulfur Black 1 is by far the most important product in163 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and Pigmentsthe series. In fact, it may well be the individual dye of all chemical
types that has the largest production volume worldwide.
6.6 NITRO DYES
The nitro group is commonly encountered as a substituent in dyes
and pigments of most chemical classes, but it acts as the essential
chromophore in only a few dyes.27Nitro dyes constitute a small group
of dyes of some importance as disperse dyes for polyester (Chapter 7)and as semi-permanent hair dyes (Chapter 10). Picric acid, 6.38, was
historically probably the first nitro dye, although it was never really
commercially important due to its poor dyeing properties, its toxicity
and its potential explosive properties (Chapter 1). The nitro dyes used
today have relatively simple aromatic structures, some examples of
which are shown in Figure 6.7. They contain at least one nitro (NO
2)
group as the chromophore and electron acceptor, and one or moreelectron-releasing amino groups complete the donor–acceptor sys-
tem. Nitro dyes are capable of providing bright yellow, orange and
red shades, but the colours are amongst the weakest provided by
the common commercial chromophores. Nitrodiphenylamines are
nevertheless of some importance as yellow disperse dyes, such as CI
OH
NO2
NO2O2N
NN
SO2NHO O
HNN
NO2O O
H
NN
NR2O O
H
HOH 2CH2C-++6.38
6.406.39+-
6.41a: R = H
6.41b: R = CH 2CH2OH-
Figure 6.7 Structures of some nitro dyes.164 Chapter 6Disperse Yellows 14 and 42, 6.39 and 6.40, respectively, because of
their low cost and their good lightfastness. The good lightfastness of
these dyes is attributed to the intramolecular hydrogen bonding be-
tween the o-nitro group and the amino group while the electron
withdrawing (nitro or sulfonamide) group in the para- position is also
important as it gives rise to an increase in tinctorial strength. A wider
range of hues is provided by some nitro semi-permanent hair dyes,such as compounds 6.41a , which is red, and 6.41b , which is violet
(Chapter 10).
28The bathochromicity of dye 6.41b may be explained on
the basis of the stronger electron-donating power in the donor–
acceptor system.
The synthesis of nitro dyes is relatively simple, a feature that ac-
counts to a certain extent for their low cost. The synthesis, illustrated in
Scheme 6.5 for compounds 6.39 and 6.40, generally involves a
nucleophilic substitution reaction between an aromatic amine and achloronitroaromatic compound. The synthesis of CI Disperse Yellow14,6.39, involves the reaction of aniline with 1-chloro-2,4-dinitroani-
line while compound 6.40 is prepared by reacting aniline (2 moles)
with the chlorosulfonyl derivative 6.42 (1 mole).
NN
SO2NHO O
HNN
NO2O O
HCl
NO2
NO2
Cl
NO2
SO2ClNH2
6.40+-6.39+-
x 2,
6.42
Scheme 6.5 Synthesis of nitro dyes 6.39 and 6.40.165 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and PigmentsREFERENCES
1. G. Hallas, in Colorants and Auxiliaries: Organic Chemistry and
Application Properties , ed. J. Shore, Society of Dyers and
Colourists, Bradford, 1990, vol. 1, ch. 6.
2. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch. 3.
3. P. F. Gordon and P. Gregory, Organic Chemistry in Colour ,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983, ch. 5.
4. H. Li, R. Tsao and Z. Deng, Can. J. Plant. Sci. , 2012, 92, 1101.
5. H. Nishino, M. Murakosh, T. Li, M. Takemura, M. Kuchide,
M. Kanazawa, X. Y. Mou, M. Masuda, Y. Ohsaka, S. Yogosawa,
Y. Satomi and K. Jinno, Cancer Metastasis Rev. , 2002, 21, 257.
6. C. L. Rock, Pure Appl. Chem. , 2002, 74, 1451.
7. E. J. Johnson, Nutr. Clin. Care , 2002, 5, 56.
8. T. Deligeorgiev, A. Vasilev, S. Kaloyanova and J. J. Vaquero, Color
Technol. , 2010, 126, 55.
9. R. Raue, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1984, 14, 187.
10. R. M. Christie, L. J. Chi, R. A. Spark, K. M. Morgan, A. S. F. Boyd
and A. Lycka, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chem. , 2005, 169, 37.
11. F. M. Hamer, The Cyanines and Related Compounds , Interscience,
New York, 1964.
12. A. Mishra, R. K. Behera, P. K. Behera, B. K. Mishra and G. B.
Behera, Chem. Rev. , 2000, 100, 1973.
13. A. D. Kachkovski and M. L. Dekhtyar, Dyes Pigments, 1996, 30, 43.
14. S. Yasui, M. Matsuoka and T. Kitao, Dyes Pigments , 1988, 10, 13.
15. J. Fabian, H. Nakazumi and M. Matsuoka, Chem. Rev. , 1992, 92,
1197.
16. O. Methcohn and M. Smith, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I , 1994, 5.
17. R. M. Christie, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1993, 23,1 .
18. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch. 4.
19. A. Daviddson and B. Norden, Chem. Scr. , 1977, 11, 68.
20. W. Herbst and K. Hunger, Industrial Organic Pigments. Production,
Properties, Applications , Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd
edn, 2004.
21. R. M. Christie, The Organic and Inorganic Chemistry of Pigments ,
Oil & Colour Chemists Association, London, 2002.
22. E. Dietz, Chimia , 1991, 45, 13.
23. A. H. M. Renfrew, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1985, 15, 15.166 Chapter 624. J. N. Chakraborty, Sulphur dyes, in Handbook of Textile and
Industrial Dyeing: Principles, Processes and Types of Dyes , ed. M.
Clark, Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, 2011, vol. 1, ch. 14.
25. W. E. Wood, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1971–75, 7, 80.
26. M. Bozic and V. Kokol, Dyes Pigments , 2008, 76, 299.
27. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and Applications
of Organic Dyes and Pigments, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim,
3rd edn, 2003, ch. 6.
28. R. M. Christie and O. J. X. Morel, The coloration of human hair, in
The Coloration of Wool and other Keratin Fibres, ed. D. M. Lewis
and J. A. Rippon, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, 2013, ch. 11.167 Miscellaneous Chemical Classes of Organic Dyes and PigmentsCHAPTER 7
Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)
7.1 INTRODUCTION
In Chapters 3–6, the commercially important chemical classes of dyes
and pigments are discussed in terms of their essential structural
features and the principles of their synthesis. The reader will en-
counter further examples of these individual chemical classes of
colorants throughout Chapters 7–11 which, as a complement to the
content of the earlier chapters, deal with the chemistry of their ap-
plication. Chapters 7 and 8 are concerned essentially with the appli-
cation of dyes to textiles, whereas Chapter 9 is devoted to pigments
and their applications. The distinction between these two types of
colorants has been made previously in Chapter 2. In contrast to the
mechanism of action of pigments in their application, which involvesmechanical anchoring as discrete solid particles in a polymeric mat-
rix, dyeing relies on equilibrium processes involving diﬀusion or
sorption of dye molecules or ions within the substrate. Dyes are used
in the coloration of a wide range of substrates, including paper, lea-
ther and plastics, but by far their most important outlet is on textiles.
Textiles are ubiquitous materials that are used in a wide variety of
products, including clothing of all types, soft furnishings, such as
curtains, upholstery and carpets, as well as towels and bedding.
1,2
Textiles are also used in a range of arguably less familiar technical
applications, for example as used in transport, healthcare and con-
struction.3This chapter deals with the chemical principles underlying
the main application classes of dyes that may be applied to textile
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
168
fibres, with the exception of the reactive dye class, which is dealt with
exclusively in Chapter 8.
Textile fibres may be classified into three broad groups: natural,
semi-synthetic and synthetic.1,2Unlike the commercial range of dyes
and pigments, which are now almost entirely synthetic in origin,natural fibres continue to play a prominent part in textile appli-
cations. The most important natural fibres are either of animal origin,for example the protein fibres, wool and silk, or of vegetable origin,
such as cotton, which is a cellulosic fibre.
4,5Semi-synthetic fibres are
derived from natural sources although their production involveschemical processing. The most significant semi-synthetic fibres used
today are derived from cellulose as the starting material. Viscose,
modal and lyocell are regenerated cellulosic fibres.
6Viscose is a long-
established textile fibre that is manufactured by reacting cellulose,e.g., from wood pulp, with carbon disulfide in alkali to give its water-
soluble xanthate derivative. This is followed by regeneration of the
cellulose in fibrous form using sulfuric acid. Lyocell is a more recent
development, introduced in 1994 as a regenerated cellulosic fibre
with strong environmental credentials, commercialized under the
trade name Tencel.
7,8Lyocell is manufactured from wood pulp, from
sustainably-farmed eucalyptus, dissolved in an organic solvent, N-
methylmorpholine N-oxide (NMMO), which is reported to be non-
toxic. The fibres are prepared from the concentrated solution byspinning into a water bath, which regenerates the cellulose. The
manufacture involves a closed loop process from which the solvent is
virtually completely recovered and recycled. Cellulose acetate is a
chemically modified cellulose derivative, manufactured by acetylationand partial hydrolysis of cotton. The most important completely
synthetic fibres are polyester, polyamides (nylon), acrylic fibres and
polypropylene.
9Textile fibres share the common feature that they are
made up of polymeric organic molecules. However, the physical andchemical natures of the polymers involved vary widely and this ex-
plains why each type of fibre essentially requires its own ‘tailor-made’
application classes of dyes. Textile fibres are characterised by extreme
fineness. Most natural fibres exist as staple fibres, roughly 2–50 cm
long and 10–40 mm in diameter, and are converted by a spinning
process into yarns. In contrast, synthetic fibres are produced ascontinuous filament yarn, as is silk (by the silkworm).
Dye molecules are designed to ensure that they have a set of
properties that are appropriate to their particular applications.
10,11
The most obvious requirement for a dye is that it must possess thedesired colour, in terms of hue, strength and brightness. The169 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)relationships between colour and molecular constitution of dyes
have been discussed principally in Chapter 2, although the reader will
find specific aspects relating to particular chemical classes in Chap-
ters 3–6. A further feature of dye molecules, which is of some practical
importance, is their ability to dissolve in water. Since textile dyes are
almost always applied from an aqueous dyebath solution, they are
required to be soluble in water, or, alternatively, to be capable ofconversion into a water-soluble form suitable for application. Many
dye application classes, including acid, mordant, premetallised, dir-
ect, reactive and cationic dyes, are readily water-soluble. Disperse dyes
for polyester are, in contrast, only sparingly soluble in water, but they
have suﬃcient solubility for their application at the high tempera-
tures employed in their application. A few groups of dyes, including
vat and sulfur dyes for cellulosic fibres, are initially insoluble in water
and are thus essentially pigments. However, they may be converted
chemically into a water-soluble form and in this form they can beapplied to the fibre, after which the process is reversed and the in-
soluble form is regenerated in the fibre.
Dyes must be firmly attached to the textile fibres to which they are
applied in order to resist removal, for example by washing.
12–14This
may be achieved in several ways. The molecules of many dye appli-cation classes are designed to provide forces of attraction for the
polymer molecules that constitute the fibre.
15In the case of reactive
dyeing, the dye molecules combine chemically with the polymermolecules, forming covalent bonds (Chapter 8). In further cases, for
example vat, sulfur and azoic dyes for cellulosic fibres, an insoluble
pigment is generated within the fibres and is retained by mechanicalentrapment. In other cases, a set of dye–fibre intermolecular forces
operate, varying according to the particular dye–fibre system. These
interactions commonly involve a combination of ionic, dipolar, van
der Waals forces and hydrogen bonding. An additional feature of
textile dyeing is that the dye must distribute itself evenly throughout
the material to give a uniform colour, referred to as a level dyeing.
Finally, the dye must provide an appropriate range of fastness prop-erties, for example to light, washing, heat, rubbing, etc.This chapter
provides an overview of the most important application classes of
dyes for textiles, with a range of selected examples that illustrate how
the dye molecules are designed to suit their particular application.
The discussion is organised according to fibre type in three sections:
dyes for protein fibres, dyes for cellulosic fibres and dyes for synthetic
fibres. In each case there is a description of the structure of the
polymer, followed by a discussion of the structural features of the170 Chapter 7dyes that determine their suitability for application to the particular
type of fibre. The subject of reactive dyes is considered to be of suf-
ficient interest and importance to warrant separate treatment in
Chapter 8.
Large quantities of textile fabrics are also coloured by printing to
produce multicolour patterns and images.16,17The most important
technique used industrially in the manufacture of printed textiles is
screen printing, mostly by continuous rotary screen printing, which is
an especially economic method for long print runs. Screen printing
is in eﬀect a stencilling process in which the image is produced on top
of a woven polyester mesh using a photopolymerisation process. The
polymer forms the non-image areas which block the passage of ink
while the image is contained in the open areas. This image is trans-
ferred on to the fabric by pressing the ink through the open areas.
Textile printing may be considered essentially as localized dyeing.
This feature means that the dye classes appropriate to the fibre inquestion are used and that the principles of the dye application and
its interactions with the fibre are the same as in dyeing. In screen
printing, the dye is incorporated into a highly concentrated printing
paste containing a range of auxiliary ingredients. The most important
ingredient is a thickening agent whose role is to hold the design in
place while the print is subjected to fixation conditions after it has
been transferred to the fabric. Urea (NH
2CONH 2) is another common
ingredient in printing pastes. Its function is to swell and open up thefibre structure, due mainly to its ability to participate in hydrogen
bonding, thus facilitating penetration of the dye. The paste also
contains ingredients which ensure that the pH is maintained as ap-propriate for dye fixation, for example, acidic conditions for acid
dyeing of protein fibres and alkaline conditions for reactive dyeing of
cellulosic fibres (Chapter 8). Generally, the fixation process involves
treating the printed fabric at a high temperature, using either steam
or dry heat, under which conditions the dyes diﬀuse into the fibres
and the dye/fibre intermolecular forces are formed. In addition to
selection from the appropriate application classes, dyes for printing
should have high water solubility, because of the relatively low vol-
umes of water used in the print pastes, and any unfixed dye should berelatively easily removed in the final washing process so that there is
no staining of non-image areas of the fabric. Pigments may also be
used in screen printing on to textiles. Their use requires the use of a
binder to contain the colorant and to ensure that the design adheres
to the fabric. The use of pigments in screen printing oﬀers certain
advantages over dyes. The use of a binder means that they can be171 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)applied to any fabric, whereas dyes are fibre-specific, and also the
process requires minimal wash oﬀ after printing. A disadvantage in
the use of a binder in pigment printing, however, is that the handle or
feel of the fabric may be adversely aﬀected. While rotary screen
printing remains the dominant process used industrially for textile
printing, the use of inkjet printing, in which the digital image is
transferred directly from the computer on to the fabric, is growingin importance.
18The principles of inkjet printing are dealt with in
Chapter 11.
7.2 DYES FOR PROTEIN FIBRES
Protein fibres are natural fibres derived from animal hair sources. The
most important protein fibre used commercially is wool (from sheep),
although luxury fibres such as silk (from the silkworm), cashmere and
mohair (both from goats) are important high value products. Human
hair is also a protein fibre. The chemical principles of hair coloration
are considered in Chapter 10. Both the physical and chemical struc-
tures of protein fibres are highly complex and there is considerable
variation depending on the source. The principal component of the
fibres is the protein keratin, the molecular structure of which is il-
lustrated in outline in Figure 7.1. The protein molecules consist of along polypeptide chain constructed from the eighteen commonly
encountered amino acids that are found in most naturally-occurring
proteins. The structures of these amino acids are well documented in
general chemical and biochemical textbooks and so they are not re-
produced here. As a result of the diverse chemical nature of these
amino acids, the protein side-chains (R
1,R2,etc.in Figure 7.1) are of
widely varying character, containing functionality that includes, forexample, amino and imino, hydroxy, carboxylic acid, thiol and alkyl
groups and heterocyclic functionality. At intervals, the polypeptidechains are linked together by disulfide (-S-S-) bridges derived from the
amino acid cystine. There are also ionic links between the protonated
amino (–NH
31) and carboxylate (–CO 2/C0) groups, which are located on
H
N CH
NHCHHN CH
NH
OR
1 O
O R2O R3
Figure 7.1 Structure of the protein keratin.172 Chapter 7the amino acid side-groups and at the end of the polypeptide chains.
Many of the functional groups on the wool fibre play some part in the
forces of attraction involved when dyes are applied to the fibres.
Protein fibres may be dyed using a number of application classes of
dyes, the most important of which are acid, mordant and pre-
metallised dyes, the structural features of which are discussed in the
rest of this section, and reactive dyes which are considered separatelyin Chapter 8. Protein fibres may be degraded chemically under
aqueous alkaline conditions, but they are relatively stable to acidic
conditions. Thus, most protein dyeing processes are carried out by
applying the dyes under mildly acidic to neutral aqueous conditions,
usually at elevated temperatures.
19,20
Acid dyes derive their name historically from the fact that they are
applied to protein fibres such as wool under acidic conditions.13,14
They are also used to a certain extent to dye polyamide fibres such asnylon. Acid dyes may be conveniently classified as either acid levellingor acid milling types. Acid-levelling dyes are a group of dyes that show
only moderate aﬃnity for the wool fibres. Because the intermolecular
forces between the dye and the fibre molecules are not strong, these
dyes are capable of migrating through the fibre and thus produce a
level dyeing, as the name implies. Acid milling dyes are a group of
dyes that show much stronger aﬃnity for the wool fibres. Because of
the superior strength of the intermolecular forces between the dye
and the fibre molecules, the dyes are less capable of migration
through the fibre and appropriate processing conditions have to be
adopted to ensure that level dyeing is achieved. However, they give
superior fastness to washing. Indeed, their name is derived historic-ally from their ability to provide superior resistance to the wet treat-
ments, such as milling, a mechanical wet process used traditionally to
introduce bulk and a degree of dimensional stability to wool fabrics.
There is also a group of acid dyes referred to as acid supermilling
because they are capable of producing superior washfastness prop-
erties, while at the same time presenting diﬃculties in achieving
levelness.
A characteristic feature of acid dyes for protein and polyamide
fibres is the presence of one or more sulfonate (–SO
3/C0) groups, usually
present as the sodium (Na1) salt. These groups have a dual role.
Firstly, they provide solubility in water, the medium from which thedyes are applied to the fibre. Secondly, they ensure that the dyes carry
a negative charge (i.e. , they are anionic). When acid conditions are
used in the dyeing process, the protein molecules acquire a positivecharge. This is due mainly to the fact that, under acidic conditions,173 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)the amino (-NH 2) and imino (¼ NH) groups on the amino acid side-
chains are protonated as -NH 31and¼NH 21groups, respectively,
while ionisation of the carboxylic acid groups is suppressed. The
positive charge on the polymer attracts the acid dye anions by ionic
forces, and these displace the counteranions within the fibre by an
ion exchange process. As well as these ionic forces of attraction, van
der Waals forces, dipolar forces and hydrogen-bonding between ap-propriate functionality of the dye and fibre molecules also play a part
in the aﬃnity of acid dyes for protein fibres. The molecular size and
shape is very commonly a critical feature in the design of dyes for
application to specific substrates. In this context, acid levelling dyes
may be described as a small to medium-sized planar molecules. These
features allow the dyes to penetrate easily into the fibre and also
permit a degree of movement or migration within the fibre as the
ionic bonds between the dye and the fibre are capable of breaking and
then re-forming, thus producing a level or uniform colour. However,as the dye is not very strongly bonded to the fibre, it may show only
moderate fastness towards wet-treatments such as washing. Acid-
milling dyes are significantly larger molecules than acid levelling dyes
and they show enhanced aﬃnity for the fibre, and hence improved
fastness to washing, as a result of a more extensive set of van der
Waals forces, dipolar forces and hydrogen bonding. Molecular pla-
narity is important in maximizing the eﬃciency of the intermolecular
interactions. Acid milling dyes, because of their higher aﬃnity for the
protein fibres, do not require as strongly acidic application conditions
as acid levelling dyes for complete dye absorption.
Most acid dyes, especially yellow, oranges and reds, belong to the
azo chemical class while blues and greens are often provided bycarbonyl dyes, especially anthraquinones, and to a certain extent by
arylcarbonium ion types. Figure 7.2 illustrates some typical acid dye
structures. A notable aspect of the structure of dyes 7.2–7.5 is the
strong intramolecular hydrogen-bonding that exists contained in six-membered rings, a feature that enhances the stability of the com-
pounds and, in particular, confers good lightfastness properties. One
explanation that has been proposed is that the hydrogen bonding
leads to a reduction in electron density at the chromophore, and thatthis in turn reduces the sensitivity of the dye towards photo-
chemically-induced oxidation. It has also been suggested that intra-
molecular proton transfer within the excited state of the dye
molecules can lead to enhanced photostability.
21Whatever the exact
mechanism might be, intramolecular hydrogen-bonding is ubiqui-tously encountered in the structures of a wide range of dyes and174 Chapter 7pigments because of its ability to enhance stability. Intramolecular
hydrogen-bonding also reduces the acidity of the hydroxyl group
which is commonly encountered in dye molecules and thus can lead
to improved resistance towards alkaline conditions, such as those
commonly used in domestic laundering. A comparison between thetwo isomeric monoazo acid dyes CI Acid Orange 20, 7.1and CI Acid
Orange 7, 7.2, illustrates the eﬀect of intramolecular hydrogen
bonding. Dye 7.2shows significantly improved fastness to alkaline
washing and lightfastness compared with dye 7.1in which intra-
molecular hydrogen bonding is not possible. A comparison of the
structurally-related monoazo dyes 7.3a (CI Acid Red 1) and 7.3b (CI
Acid Red 138), and of the anthraquinone acid dyes 7.5a (CI Acid Blue
25) and 7.5b (CI Acid Blue 138), illustrates the distinction between
acid levelling and acid milling dyes. Dyes 7.3b and7.5b show excellent
resistance to washing as a result of the presence of the long alkylchain substituent (C
12H25), which is attracted to hydrophobic or non-
polar parts of the protein fibre molecules by van der Waals forces.Because of the extremely strong dye/fibre aﬃnity, dyes of this type are
of the acid supermilling type. Dyes 7.3a, 7.5a, CI Acid Black 1, 7.4,a
typical disazo acid dye, and CI Acid Blue 1, 7.6, an example of a tri-
phenylmethine acid dye, are acid-levelling dyes. In the case of dye 7.6,NN
OHSO3Na
N
N
SO3NaOH
NON
SO3Na NaO 3SNR
HH COCH 3
NON
SO3Na NaO 3SNHH H
NNNO2O
ONHH
S
N
H
RXO
ONa
O(C2H5)2N N(C 2H5)2
SO3-
SO3Na7.2 7.1
7.47.3a : R = H; 7.3b : R = C 12H25
7.6+
7.5a: R = H, X = H;
7.5b: R = C 12H25, X = SO 3Na
Figure 7.2 Structures of some typical acid dyes for protein fibres.175 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)it is important to note that while the nitrogen atoms carry a formal
single delocalised positive charge, the presence of two sulfonate
groups ensures that the dye is overall anionic.
The ability of transition metal ions, and especially chromium (as
Cr31), to form highly stable metal complexes may be used to produce
dyeings on protein fibres with superior fastness properties, espe-cially towards washing and light. The chemistry of transition metalcomplex formation with azo dyes is discussed in some detail in
Chapter 3. There are two application classes of dyes in which this
feature is utilised, mordant dyes and premetallised dyes, diﬀering
significantly in application technology but involving similarchemistry.
13,14,22
Chrome mordant dyes generally have the characteristics of acid
dyes but with the ability in addition to form a stable complex with
chromium in its Cr( III) oxidation state. Most commonly, this feature
takes the form of two hydroxyl groups on either side of ( ortho, ortho0
to) the azo group of a monoazo dye, as illustrated for the case of CIMordant Black 1, 7.7. In the most important method for application
of mordant dyes, the so-called afterchrome process, the dye is appliedto the fibre as an acid dye and then the dyed fibres are treated with a
source of chromium, most frequently sodium dichromate (Na
2Cr2O7)
in which the chromium exists in oxidation state Cr( VI). During the
process, the chromium( VI) undergoes reduction by functional groups
(which are consequently oxidized) on the wool fibre, for example thecysteine thiol groups, and a chromium(
III) complex of the dye is
formed within the fibre by a process such as that illustrated in Figure7.3. A dye of this type acts as a tridentate ligand, the chromiumbonding with two oxygen atoms derived from the hydroxyl groups and
with one nitrogen atom of the azo group. Complexes of Cr(
III) are
invariably six-coordinate with octahedral geometry. It has not beenestablished with certainty how the remaining three valencies of the
chromium are satisfied in the mordant dyeing of protein fibres. There
are several possibilities, which include bonding with water molecules,
with coordinating groups (-OH, -SH, -NH
2, -CO 2H,etc.) on the amino
acid side chains on the fibre, or with another dye molecule. Chromemordanting has been traditionally of particular importance in thedyeing of loose wool in very dark (especially black) shades to provide
very high levels of fastness. However, there are serious ecological
problems associated with the use of chrome mordant dyes, associated
with the severe toxicity of Cr(
VI) and its presence in dyehouse eﬄuent.
Consequently, the process is little used nowadays and continues todecrease in importance.176 Chapter 7NaO 3S
O2NNNOH HO
7.7
Premetallised dyes, as the name implies, are pre-formed metal
complex dyes.22,23They are usually six-coordinate complexes of
chromium( III) with octahedral geometry, as exemplified for example
by CI Acid Violet 78, 7.8, although some complexes of cobalt( III) are
also used. Most premetallised dyes are azo dyes, with one nitrogen
atom of the azo group playing a part in complexing with the central
metal ion. Since in this case there are two azo dye molecules co-ordinated with one chromium atom, compound 7.8is referred to as a
2 : 1 complex. 1 : 1 Complexes are also used commercially, but to alesser extent as they have generally inferior properties. Premetallised
dyes of this type, like traditional acid dyes, are anionic in nature even
though, as is the case with complex 7.8, they may not contain sul-
fonate groups. Indeed, the presence of sulfonate groups can cause thedye anions to be too strongly attracted to the fibre, which leads in turn
to levelness problems. The purpose of the sulfone group in dye 7.8is
to enhance the hydrophilic character of the molecule and hence its
water solubility, without increasing the charge on the dye anion.
Premetallised dyes are designated in the Colour Index as acid dyes,
and they are applied to protein fibres in a similar way as traditional
acid dyes. Because of the special stability of chromium(
III) complexes,
which is attributed to the d3transition metal configuration,
premetallised dyes provide dyeings with excellent lightfastness.N
NOH
HO
N
NO
OCr
Cr3+
- 2H+Cr2O72-
reduction
Figure 7.3 Chemistry of chrome mordanting.177 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)Protein fibres may also be dyed with certain chemical types of reactive
dye, as discussed in Chapter 8.
NN
OOH3CO2S
N
NO
O
SO2CH3Cr–Na+
7.8
7.3 DYES FOR CELLULOSIC FIBRES
Cellulosic fibres provide the most important natural fibres and are
derived from plant sources. The most important cellulosic fibre usedin textiles is cotton, but there are many others, including linen, jute,
hemp and flax, and there is also interest in cellulosic fibres derived
from bamboo and nettles. The pr incipal component of the cotton
fibre is cellulose, the structure of which is shown in Figure 7.4.Cotton is in fact almost pure cellulose (up to 95%). Cellulose is a
polysaccharide. It is a high molecular weight polymer consisting of
long chains of repeating glucose units, with up to around 1300 suchunits in each molecule. Cellulose has a fairly open structure, which
allows large dye molecules to penet rate relatively easily into the
fibre. Each glucose unit contains three hydroxyl groups, two ofwhich are secondary and one primary, and these give the cellulosemolecule a considerable degree of polar character. The presence of
the hydroxyl groups is of considerable importance in the dyeing of
cotton. The hydrophilicity that they confer means that the fibre is
O
OCH2OH
OHO
OHO
CH2OHOH
O HO
Figure 7.4 Structure of cellulose.178 Chapter 7capable of absorbing sig nificant quantities of water, the medium
from which the dyes are applied. For example, the ability of the
hydroxyl groups to form intermolecu lar hydrogen bonds is thought
to be of some importance in direct dyeing, while reactive dyeing(Chapter 8) involves a chemical reac tion of the hydroxyl groups with
the dye to form dye–fibre covalent bonds. The tendency of the hy-droxyl groups to ionise to a certain extent (to –O
/C0) means that the
fibres may carry a small negative charge. There are a larger number
of application classes of dyes that may be used to dye cellulosic
fibres such as cotton than for any other fibre. These dye application
classes include direct, vat, sulf ur, azoic and reactive dyes. The
chemical principles and structural features of direct, vat and azoicdyes are considered in this section while the discussion of reactive
dyes is continued separately in Chapter 8. An outline of the chem-
istry of sulfur dyes, which is not well-established, is presented in
Chapter 6. Viscose, modal and lyocel l are regenerated cellulosic
fibres that may be dyed in essentially the same way, and with the
same dye classes, as natural cellulo sic fibres. Paper is also derived
from cellulose.
Cellulosic materials are generally sensitive to degradation under
acidic conditions but are quite resistant to alkaline conditions. Thiscontrasts with the behaviour of protein fibres where the opposite is
the case. Cellulosic fibres are thus commonly wet-processed under
alkaline conditions and this includes dyeing.
13,14,24It is vital that
cotton, in particular, is subject to a series of preparatory processesprior to dyeing in order to ensure satisfactory performance. The most
important of these processes is scouring , using a surfactant often in
the presence of alkali, which is essentially a cleaning process to re-
move impurities such as fats, oils, waxes and particulate materials that
would otherwise inhibit dye uptake, and it also improves the wettability
of the fibres. Desizing is an enzymatic process used to remove sizes,
which are starch-like materials applied to cotton yarns to provide adegree of mechanical protection during the process of weaving into
fabrics. Mercerisation involves the treatment of cotton with hot aqueous
sodium hydroxide, applied commonly to enhance a range of propertiesof the cotton fabrics. In particular, mercerisation leads to significantlyimproved dye uptake as a result of swelling of the fibres and also
reducing the degree of crystallinity within the cellulose.
Direct dyes are a long-established class of dyes for cellulosic
fibres.
25They derive their name historically from the fact that they
were the first application class to be developed that could be applied179 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)directly to these fibres without the need for a fixation process such as
mordanting. For this reason, they are also commonly referred to as
substantive dyes. In some ways, direct dye molecules are structurally
similar to acid dye molecules used for protein fibres. For example,they are anionic dyes as a result of the presence of sulfonate (–SO
3/C0)
groups. However, the role of the sulfonate groups in the case of directdyes is simply to provide water-solubility. In contrast to the aciddyeing of protein fibres, ionic attraction to the fibre is not involved in
the direct dyeing of cellulosic fibres. In fact, the anionic nature of the
dyes can reduce aﬃnity for the fibres because cellulosic fibres may
carry a small negative charge. For this reason, usually only as many
sulfonate groups as are required to give adequate solubility in water
are present in direct dyes and, in addition, the groups are distributed
evenly throughout the molecules. Direct dyes are usually applied close
to the boiling point of water and in the presence of an electrolyte,
sodium chloride or sulfate, which, by a ‘salting-out’ eﬀect, enhancesdye exhaustion on to the fibre and is also suggested to promote a
degree of dye aggregation within the fibre.
Arguably the most important feat ures of direct dye molecules that
influence their application properties are associated with their size
and shape. They are, in general, large molecules and in shape they
are long, narrow and planar. Direct dyes show aﬃnity for cellulose
by a combination of van der Waals, dipolar and hydrogen-bonding
intermolecular forces. Individually, these forces are rather weak. The
long, thin and flat molecular geometry allows the dye molecules to
align with the long polymeric cellulose fibre molecules and hence
maximise the overall eﬀect of the combined set of intermolecularforces. Chemically, direct dyes, of which compound 7.9(CI Direct
Orange 25) is a typical example, are almost invariably azo dyes,commonly containing two or more az o groups. The long, flat, linear
shape of compound 7.9allows groups such as the -OH, -NHCO
(amide), and –N¼N– groups in principle to form hydrogen bonds
with OH groups on cellulose as it lines up with the cellulose mol-ecule. There are only two sulfonate groups in compound 7.9and
these are well separated from one another. This is suﬃcient to giveadequate water-solubility for their application. In addition, it may beargued that the sulfonate groups are on the opposite side of
the molecule from groups that may be participating in hydrogen-
bonding with the fibre and this means that they will be oriented
away from the cellulose molecule, thus minimising any negative
charge repulsion eﬀects.180 Chapter 7NN
N NN
NNHCOCH 3
NaO 3SOH
OOH
SO3Na
HH
7.9
Direct dyes provide a full range of hues although frequently not
with a high level of brightness, and in comparison with other dye
classes for cellulosic fibres, particularly vat and reactive dyes, provideonly moderate washfastness. They are, however, inexpensive and are
therefore commonly the dyes of choice for applications, for example
in the coloration of paper, where cost is of prime concern and fastness
to wet treatments is of lesser importance. For textile applications, the
washfastness may in certain cases be improved by specific chemical
aftertreatments. For example, a group of products referred to as direct
and developed dyes contain free aromatic amino (-NH
2) groups.
Treatment of the dyed fabric with aqueous sodium nitrite under
acidic conditions results in diazotisation of these groups and the
resulting diazonium salts may be reacted with a variety of coupling
components, such as 2-naphthol. The larger azo dye molecule, whichis thus formed (see Chapter 3 for a discussion of the chemistry in-
volved in azo dye formation), is more strongly attracted to the fibre
and less soluble in water, both features leading to improved wash-
fastness. However, the process is complex, requiring careful control,
and has thus suﬀered a decline in commercial importance.
Alternatively, in a process referred to as after-coppering, some o,o
0-
dihydroxyazo direct dyes may be treated with copper( II) salts to form
square-planar metal complexes that show improved washfastness
properties and may also enhance lightfastness. Fastness to wet-treatments may also be achieved by aftertreatment with organic cat-
ionic auxiliary materials, such as quaternary ammonium salts. The
large organic cations replace the sodium ions associated with the dye
anions, forming much less soluble salts that are more resistant to
removal from the fibre.
Vat dyes are a group of totally water-insoluble dyes, and in this
respect they are essentially pigments.
26In fact, some vat dyes, after
conversion into a suitable physical form, may be used as pigments(Chapters 4 and 9). For application to cellulosic fibres, vat dyes are
initially converted into a water-soluble leuco form by an alkaline181 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)reduction process. Generally, this conversion is carried out using a
reducing agent such as sodium dithionite (Na 2S2O4), also referred to
as hydrosulfite, in the presence of sodium hydroxide. In the leucoform, the dyes have aﬃnity for the cellulosic fibre and are con-
sequently taken up by the fibre. Subsequently, they are converted back
into the insoluble pigment by an oxidation reaction. Hydrogen per-
oxide is frequently used as the oxidising agent for this process, al-though atmospheric oxygen can also eﬀect the oxidation under
appropriate conditions. The pigment or molecular aggregate thus
produced becomes trapped mechanically within the fibre and its in-
solubility gives rise to the excellent washfastness properties which are
characteristic of vat dyes. The lightfastness of cellulosic fibres dyed
with vat dyes is also excellent, typical of the levels given by some of the
higher performing pigments. The vat dyeing process is usually com-
pleted with a high temperature aqueous surfactant treatment, or
‘soaping’, which enhances molecular aggregation and develops crys-tallinity within the entrapped particles, in addition to removing par-
ticles that are only loosely held at the fibre surface. The chemistry
of the reversible reduction/oxidation process involved in vat
dyeing, which is illustrated in Figure 7.5, requires the presence in the
vat dye of two carbonyl groups linked viaa conjugated system. The
carbonyl (C¼ O) groups are reduced under alkaline conditions to
enolate (–O
/C0Na1) groups which give the leuco form water-solubility.
Investigations have been carried out into vat dyeing with alternativereducing agents, such as hydroxyacetone, a biodegradable organic
material, or glucose, with a view to avoiding issues associated with
residual sulfur-containing species in textile dyeing eﬄuent whensodium dithionite is used.
27These explorations have demonstrated
OO
NaOONan
nalkaline  reduction
e.g. Na 2S2O4 / NaOHoxidatione.g. H
2O2coloured form (insoluble)
leuco form (water-soluble)
Figure 7.5 Chemistry of vat dyeing.182 Chapter 7some success on a laboratory scale although it is not clear that there
has as yet been significant commercial exploitation.
Vat dyes are exclusively of the carbonyl chemical class (Chapter 4).
Dyes of other chemical classes, including azo dyes, are generally in-
appropriate as vat dyes because they undergo a reduction that cannot
be reversed. Vat dyes, illustrated with selected examples in Figure 7.6,are generally large planar molecules, often containing multiple ring
systems, to provide the leuco form of the dyes with some aﬃnity for the
cellulosic fibre as a result of van der Waals and dipolar forces. There is
usually a notable absence of other functional groups in the molecules,
because such groups can be sensitive to the reduction and oxidation
reactions. However, halogen substituents (Cl, Br) are encountered on
occasions. Pyranthrone, 7.10a (CI Vat Orange 9) and flavanthrone,
7.10b (CI Vat Yellow 1) provide examples, respectively, of carbocyclic
and heterocyclic anthraquinone vat dyes. Indigo, 7.11, is a further
notable example of a vat dye. Natural indigo dyeing (Chapter 1) is
carried out directly in a vat where the fermentation of composted leaves
from the Indigofera tinctoria plant is performed in the presence of alkali
from wood ash or limestone to produce precursors that are oxidised inair on the fibre to give indigo. Synthetic indigo is long-established as
the vat dye used in the dyeing of denim fabric.
Solubilised vat dyes (Figure 7.7) are a group of water-soluble, pre-
reduced forms of vat dyes, stabilised as the sodium salts of sulfate
esters, which are prepared viathe leuco form by chlorosulfonation.
These dyes may be applied directly to the cellulosic fibres and sub-sequently generate the vat dye within the fibres by acid hydrolysis andoxidation with hydrogen peroxide.
Azoic dyeing of cellulosic fibres is a long-established process al-
though it is used only to a limited extent currently. The synthesis ofNNO
O HH
XO
X
O7.11
7.10a: X=CH
7.10b: X=N
Figure 7.6 Structures of some typical vat dyes.183 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)azo dyes and pigments, the most important chemical class of
organic colorants, by the two-stage reaction sequence involving
diazotization and azo coupling has been dealt with in detail in
Chapter 3. In the azoic dyeing process, an azo pigment is formed by
this sequence of chemical reactions within the fibre. The cotton
fibres are first impregnated wit h an appropriate coupling com-
ponent such as the anilide of 3-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid, 7.12,
under aqueous alkaline conditions. The fibre prepared in this way is
then treated with a solution of a diazonium salt, either prepareddirectly by diazotization of the appropriate aromatic amine or
in a stabilised form in which th e counteranion is, for example,
tetrafluoroborate (BF
4/C0) or tetrachlorozincate (ZnCl 42/C0). As a
consequence of the azo coupling re action which ensues, insoluble
azo pigment aggregates are fo rmed and these become trapped
mechanically within the fibres. Azoic dyeing provides good fastness
properties, althoug h the range of colours is restricted to those
typical of azo pigments, namely yellow, orange, red, Bordeaux andbrowns. The main disadvantages of azoic dyeing are that theprocesses are complex and lack the v ersatility provided by other dye
classes, notably reactive dyes.
OH
H
N
O
7.12
7.4 DYES FOR SYNTHETIC FIBRES
The three most important types of synthetic fibres used commonly as
textiles are polyester, polyamides (nylon) and acrylic fibres.28Poly-
ester and the semi-synthetic fibre cellulose acetate are dyed almostexclusively using disperse dyes. Polyamide fibres may be coloured
using either acid dyes, the principles of which have been discussed inNaO 3SOOSO 3Na
n
Figure 7.7 Generalised structure of a solubilised vat dye.184 Chapter 7the section on protein fibres in this chapter, or with disperse dyes.
Acrylic fibres are dyed mainly with basic (cationic) dyes.
Polyesters are polymers whose monomeric units are joined through
ester (-COO-) linkages. The most important polyester fibre by far is
poly(ethylene terephthalate), PET, whose production far outstrips that
of any other synthetic fibre. PET, commonly referred to simply as
polyester, has the chemical structure shown in Figure 7.8. Polyester is
relatively hydrophobic (non-polar) in character, certainly in com-parison to the natural protein and cellulosic fibres, largely as a result
of the prominence of the benzene rings and the –CH
2CH 2- groups.
However, the ester groups do confer a degree of polarity on themolecule, so that the fibres are not as hydrophobic as, for example,
hydrocarbon polymers such as polyethylene and polypropylene.
Nevertheless, it is not surprising that relatively hydrophobic fibres
such as polyester and cellulose acetate show little aﬃnity for dyes
that are ionic in character. This feature means that dye application
classes containing ionic water-solubilising groups such as the sul-
fonate (–SO
3/C0) group, for example acid and direct dyes, are in-
appropriate for application to polyester. The inevitable consequence
is that dyes for polyester and cellulose acetate cannot be expected to
have substantial water-solubility. A further feature of polyester is that
its physical structure is highly crystalline, consisting of tightly packed,
highly-ordered polymer molecules, and the polymer is below its glass
transition temperature at normal textile dyeing temperatures. As a
result, it is relatively inaccessible even to small molecules. Further, its
hydrophobic nature means that it has little aﬃnity for water, which is
the usual dyeing medium. Polyester is thus a diﬃcult fibre to dye.
Disperse dyes are an application class of dyes with non-ionic mo-lecular structures providing relatively low water-solubility. They may
be applied to these relatively hydrophobic synthetic fibres as a fine
dispersion of solid particles in water, prepared with the assistance of
specific dispersing agents. Disperse dyes were originally developed for
application to cellulose acetate, but they have assumed much greaterOC H 2CH2 OO
OO CH2CH2 O
n
Figure 7.8 Structure of polyester (PET, poly(ethylene terephthalate)).185 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)importance for application to polyester, and to a lesser extent to
polyamides.
Disperse dyes are required to be relatively small, planar molecules
to allow the dyes to penetrate between the polymer chains and into
the bulk of the fibre.29–33These dyes are commonly applied to the
fibre as a fine aqueous dispersion at temperatures of around 130 1C
under pressure. They may also be applied by padding the dispersionon to the fabric followed by thermofixation , which involves treatment
at around 210 1C for a short time. At elevated temperatures, the tight
physical structure of the polymer is loosened by thermal agitation,
which reduces the strength of the intermolecular interactions, thus
enhancing segmental mobility of the chains and facilitating entry of
the dye molecules. After dyeing with disperse dyes, especially when
applied at higher concentrations, small dye aggregates that have not
penetrated into the polyester often remain on the fibre surface. These
aggregates are removed by a washing process known as reduction
clearing , generally involving treatment with aqueous alkaline sodium
dithionite which destroys the surface dye chemically by reduction.
34
Disperse dyes are non-ionic molecules that eﬀectively dissolve in the
polyester. In the solid solutions formed, the dye–fibre aﬃnity is
generally considered to involve a combination of van der Waals and
dipolar forces and hydrogen-bonding, while p–pinteractions between
aromatic groups on the dye and polyester molecules may also be in-volved. A general feature of disperse dye molecules is that they pos-
sess several polar, though not ionic, groups. Frequently encountered
polar groups include the nitro (NO
2) cyano (CN), hydroxyl, amino,
ester, amide (NHCO) and sulfone (SO 2) groups. These polar groups
can be considered as making a number of contributions to the ap-plication properties of disperse dyes. One of their roles is to provide
an adequate degree of water-solubility at the high temperatures at
which the dyes are applied from the aqueous dyebath. A second
function of the polar groups is to enhance aﬃnity as a result of di-
polar intermolecular forces with the ester groups of the polyester
molecule. Disperse dyes can therefore be considered as compromise
molecules possessing a balanced degree of polar (hydrophobic) and
non-polar (hydrophilic) character, similar to that of the polyestermolecule. The polar groups also have an important influence on the
colour of the dye molecules according to the principles discussed in
Chapter 2.
A consequence of the fact that disperse dyes are relatively small,
non-polar molecules is that they may have a tendency to be volatile,
and hence prone to sublimation out of the fibre at high temperatures.186 Chapter 7This can lead to a loss of colour and the possibility of staining of
adjacent fabrics when dyed polyester is subjected to high tempera-
tures, e.g., in heat setting and ironing. Increasing the size and/or the
polarity of the dye molecules enhances fastness to sublimation.However, as a consequence, the compromise arises that these larger,
more polar dye molecules will require more forcing conditions, such
as higher temperatures and pressures, to enable the dyes to penetrateinto the fibre.
Figure 7.9 illustrates the chemical structures of some typical dis-
perse dyes and demonstrates that a wider range of chemical types are
encountered in the range of commercial disperse dyes than is the case
with any other dye application class.
29,30Numerically, azo dyes form
by far the most important chemical class of disperse dyes. Azo dis-perse dyes may be classified into four broad groupings. The most
numerous of these are the aminoazobenzenes, which provide im-
portant orange, red, violet and blue disperse dyes. They are ex-emplified by CI Disperse Orange 25, 7.13, CI Disperse Red 90, 7.14,
and CI Disperse Blue 165, 7.15. A comparison of these three ami-
noazobenzene dyes provides an illustration of the bathochromic shift
provided by increasing the number of electron-accepting and elec-
tron-donating groups in appropriate parts of the molecules, in ac-
cordance with the principles of the relationship between colour and
molecular structure as discussed in Chapter 2. There are two further
groups of disperse dyes that are heterocyclic analogues of the ami-
noazobenzenes. Derivatives based on heterocyclic diazo components
provide bright intense colours and are bathochromically shifted so
that they serve the purpose of extending the range of blue azo dispersedyes available. An example of such a product is CI Disperse Blue 339,
7.16. Derivatives based on heterocyclic coupling components are
useful for their ability to provide bright intense yellow azo dispersedyes. An example is CI Disperse Yellow 119, 7.17, which, as illustrated
in Figure 7.9, exists as the ketohydrazone tautomer. The fourth groupare disazo dyes of relatively simple structures, for example CI Disperse
Yellow 23, 7.18. Carbonyl disperse dyes, especially anthraquinones,
are next in importance to the azo dyes and there are also a fewproducts belonging to the nitro and polymethine chemical classes. CIDisperse Red 60, 7.19,and CI Disperse Green 5, 7.20 are examples of
typical anthraquinone disperse dyes, while compound 7.21 is an ex-
ample of the more recently-introduced benzodifuranone carbonyl
type. CI Disperse Yellow 42, 7.22 and CI Disperse Blue 354, 7.23, re-
spectively, provide commercially relevant examples of the nitro andpolymethine chemical classes.187 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)Polylactic acid (PLA), the structure of which is shown in Figure 7.10,
is a polyester fibre in which there has been recent interest because of
its environmental credentials. PLA may be derived from renewableresources, such as cornstarch, and it is biodegradable. PLA may be
coloured using certain disperse dyes, although the dyes do not ex-
haust as well as on PET, mainly because of its aliphatic character.
35,36
Acrylic fibres are synthetic fibres based essentially on the addition
polymer polyacrylonitrile, the essential structure of which is illus-
trated in Figure 7.11. However, most acrylic fibres are rather more
complex and contain within their structure anionic groups, most
commonly sulfonate (–SO 3/C0), but also carboxylate (–CO 2/C0) groups
either as a result of the incorporation of co-polymerised monomers inN
NO2N
N
CH2CH3CH2CH2CN
N
NO2N
NCN
CH2CH2CO2CH3CH2CH2CN
N
NO2N
CNNCN
CH2CH3CH2CH3N
N
N OCH3
CN
ON
C2H5NN NEt 2 N
SO2N N
NNNNOHO
ON
NO
OO
ON
O
O
O
OO
OH
3C(H 2C)2O
NN
SO2NHO O
H
N
C6H13C6H13
HC
H3CSO2
CNNCCOCH 3
H
H
HH
HHH
H H-O O7.13
7.14
7.15 7.167.17
7.18
7.19
7.20
7.217.22+ -
7.23+
Figure 7.9 Some examples of chemical structures of disperse dyes.188 Chapter 7which these groups are present or due to the presence of residual
amounts of anionic polymerisation inhibitors. Co-polymerisation
with appropriate monomers is also used to reduce the glass transition
temperature and crystallinity of the acrylic fibres in order to enhance
the accessibility of dye molecules. The anionic character of these
acrylic fibres provides the explanation as to why cationic dyes providethe principal application class used for their coloration.
37,38These
dyes are classified by the Colour Index as basic dyes, a term thatoriginated from their use, now largely obsolete, to dye protein fibres,
such as wool, from a basic or alkaline dyebath under which con-
ditions the protein molecules acquired a negative charge. Cationic
dyes are generally found to exhibit rather poor fastness properties,
especially lightfastness, when applied to natural fibres but they are
observed to give much better performance on acrylic fibres.
Some examples of the structures of cationic dyes used to dye acrylic
fibres are shown in Figure 7.12. These include the azo dye, CI BasicRed 18, 7.24, the arylcarbonium ion (triphenylmethine) dye, CI Basic
Green 4, 7.25, and the methine derivative, CI Basic Yellow 11 , 7.26 .A s
the name implies, the dyes are coloured cationic species, generally as
a result of the presence of positively-charged quaternary nitrogen
atoms (as -NR
31,o r¼NR21). In the case of dyes 7.24 and 7.26, the
positive charge is localised on the nitrogen atom, whereas in dye 7.25
it is delocalised by resonance. These groups serve two purposes.
Firstly, they provide the water-solubility necessary for the application
of the dyes, due to their ionic character. Secondly, they provide aﬃnity
for the acrylic fibres as a result of ionic attraction between the dyeOH CH3
O
n
Figure 7.10 Structure of polylactic acid (PLA).
CN
n
Figure 7.11 Structure of polyacrylonitrile.189 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)cations and the anionic groups (–SO 3/C0and –CO 2/C0) that are present in
the acrylic fibre polymer molecules. In a sense, the means of attach-
ment of cationic dyes to acrylic fibres may be considered as the
converse of that involved in the acid dyeing of protein fibres, dis-
cussed previously in this chapter, which involves the attraction of dye
anions to cationic sites on the fibre.
Polyamides are polymers whose monomeric units are joined
through secondary amide (-NHCO-) linkages. The two most im-
portant polyamide fibres are based on nylon 6.6, 7.27,a n dn y l o n6 ,
7.28, whose structures, both completely aliphatic in character, are
illustrated in Figure 7.13. A comp arison with Figure 7.1 will reveal
the structural analogy between natural protein fibres such as wool
and polyamide fibres, and thus they may be dyed by some of the
application classes suitable f or protein fibres. P olyamides are com-
monly dyed using acid dyes. These are attracted to the fibres by amechanism similar to the acid dyeing of wool, involving attraction of
the dye anions to amino groups, which are present for example at
the end of the polyamide chains, and which are protonated under
acidic conditions. Alternatively, becau se the molecular structures of
polyamide fibres are relatively hydrophob ic, similar in this respect
to polyester, they may be dyed using the range of disperse dyes by amechanism analogous to the dyeing of polyester discussed earlier in
this chapter.
Fibres based on polyolefins (polyalkenes), such as polyethylene and
polypropylene, find some applications in textiles. As hydrocarbons,N
NO2NCl
N
CH2CH3CH2CH2N(CH 3)3(H3C)2N N(CH 3)2
N
CH3H3CCH3
N
CH2CH2ClC2H5Cl-+
7.25Cl-
7.24
+
7.26+
Figure 7.12 Some examples of chemical structures of cationic dyes for acrylic fibres.190 Chapter 7these fibres are highly hydrophobic. They also commonly exist in a
highly crystalline form and are consequently extremely diﬃcult to
dye. Colour is generally introduced into synthetic fibres of this type
using pigments by mass coloration in which the pigment is dispersed
intimately into the molten polymer before it is extruded into a fibrousform (Chapter 9). Other synthetic fibres, including polyester, may also
be coloured by mass pigmentation in this way. Coloration at such an
early stage of the textile manufacturing process oﬀers the advantage
that it ensures levelness, as further processing can average out dif-
ferences. However, it requires careful planning of the amounts of
coloured fabrics required commercially, whereas dyeing at later
stages of the production process provides a much more versatile ap-proach to the production of the appropriate range of colours.
REFERENCES
1. R. R. Mather and R. H. Wardman, The Chemistry of Textile Fibres ,
Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, 2011.
2. W. E. Morton and J. W. S. Hearle, Physical Properties of Textile
Fibres , Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2008.
3. A. R. Horrocks and S. C. Anand (ed.), Handbook of Technical
Textiles , Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2000.
4. R. Kozlowski (ed.), Handbook of Natural Fibres: Types, Properties
and Factors aﬀecting Breeding and Cultivation , Woodhead
Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2012, vol. 1.
5. R. Kozlowski (ed.), Handbook of Natural Fibres: Processing and
Applications , Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2012, vol. 2.
6. C. Woodings (ed.), Regenerated Cellulose Fibres , Woodhead
Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2001.
7. R. S. Blackburn (ed.), Biodegradable and Sustainable Fibres ,
Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2005, pp. 157–188.
8. C. R. Woodings, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. , 1995, 17, 305.(CH 2)4
OH
N
O(CH 2)6HN
ONH(CH
2)5
OHN
O
7.27:  nylon 6,6n
7.28: nylon 6n
Figure 7.13 Structure of polyamide fibres.191 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)9. J. E. McIntyre (ed.), Biodegradable and Sustainable Fibres ,
Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge, UK, 2004.
10. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch. 11.
11. P. F. Gordon and P. Gregory, Organic Chemistry in Colour,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1983, ch. 6.
12. A. D. Broadbent, Basic Principles of Textile Coloration , Society of
Dyers and Colourists, Bradford, UK, 2001.
13. J. N. Chakraborty, Fundamentals and Practices in Colouration of
Textiles , Woodhead Publishing India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi, 2012.
14. M. Clark (ed.), Handbook of Textile and Industrial Dyeing:
Principles, Processes and types of Dyes , Woodhead Publishing,
Cambridge, 2011, vols 1 and 2.
15. D. M. Lewis, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1998, 28, 12.
16. L. W. C. Miles, Textile Printing , Society of Dyers and Colourists,
Bradford, UK, 2nd edn, 2003.
17. T. L. Dawson and C. J. Hawkyard, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2000, 30,7 .
18. H. Ujiie (ed.), Digital Printing of Textiles , Woodhead Publishing,
Cambridge, UK, 2006.
19. D. M. Lewis and J. A. Rippon (ed.), The Coloration of Wool and
other Keratin Fibres , John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, 2013, in
press.
20. D. M. Lewis (ed.), Wool Dyeing, Society of Dyers and Colourists,
Bradford, UK, 1992.
21. T. P. Smith, K. A. Zaklika, K. Thakur, G. C. Walker, K. Tominaga
and P. F. Barbara, J. Phys. Chem. , 1991, 95, 10465.
22. F. Beﬀa and G. Back, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1984, 14, 33.
23. M. Szymczyk and H. S. Freeman, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2004, 34, 39.
24. J. Shore (ed.), Cellulosics Dyeing , Society of Dyers and Colourists,
Bradford, UK, 1995.
25. J. Shore, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1991, 21, 23.
26. U. Baumgarte, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1987, 17, 29.
27. M. Bozic and V. Kokol, Dyes Pigments , 2008, 76, 299.
28. S. M. Burkinshaw, Chemical Principles of Synthetic Fibre Dyeing ,
Blackie Academic and Professional, Glasgow, 1995.
29. J. F. Dawson, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists , 1991, 107, 395.
30. J. F. Dawson, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists , 1983, 99, 183.
31.P. W. Leadbetter and A. T. Leaver, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1989, 19,
33.
32. O. Annen, R. Egli, R. Hasler, B. Henzi, H. Jakob and P. Matzinger,
Rev. Prog. Color. , 1987, 17, 72.192 Chapter 733. R. Egli, in Colour Chemistry: The Design and Synthesis of Organic
Dyes and Pigments, ed. A. T. Peters and H. S. Freeman, Elsevier
Applied Science, London and New York, 1991, ch. 1.
34. J. R. Aspland, Textile Chem. Colorist. , 1992, 24, 18.
35. D. Karst, D. Nama and Y. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci. , 2007, 310,
106.
36. L. E. Scheyer and A. Chiweshe, AATCC Rev. , 2001, 1, 44.
37. R. Raue, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1984, 14, 187.
38. I. Holme, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1983, 13, 10.193 Textile Dyes (excluding Reactive Dyes)CHAPTER 8
Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibres
8.1 INTRODUCTION
It is probable that history will judge the development of reactive dyes
to have been the most significant innovation in textile dyeing tech-
nology of the twentieth century. As a consequence of their particular
industrial importance, and also because they make use of some
interesting organic chemistry, this chapter is devoted entirely to a
consideration of the chemical principles involved in the application
of reactive dyes, and their synthesis.1–6Reactive dyes, after appli-
cation to the textile fibre, are induced to react chemically to form acovalent bond between the dye and the fibre. This covalent bond is
formed between a carbon atom of the dye molecule and an oxygen,
nitrogen or sulfur atom of a hydroxyl, amino or thiol group on thepolymer that constitutes the fibre. Because of the strength of the
covalent bond, reactive dyes once applied to the textile material resist
removal and as a consequence show outstanding washfastness
properties. Initially, reactive dyes were introduced commercially for
application to cellulosic fibres, and this remains by far their most
important use, although dyes of specific types have also been de-
veloped for application to protein and polyamide fibres. The potential
to apply reactive dyes to other fibre types, including polyester and
polypropylene, has been demonstrated technically although pro-cesses of this type are not as yet a commercial reality.
The concept of linking dye molecules covalently to fibre molecules
in order to produce colours with superior fastness to washing had
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
194
been envisaged long before the 1950s when the major breakthrough
took place. The early studies were mostly directed towards attaching
colour covalently to cellulosic fibres, such as cotton and viscose, be-
cause of the modest wet-fastness properties provided by direct dyes
which were at the time the most commonly used dye class applied to
those fibre types. There was also significant early research into co-
valent attachment of colour to protein fibres such as wool and silk,although there was less commercial urgency because high washfast-
ness was achievable on those fibres using chrome mordant dyes. In
general, the early attempts at dye fixation employed rather vigorous
conditions under which serious fibre degradation occurred. The
landmark discovery was reported in 1954, when Rattee and Stephen
demonstrated that dyes containing the 1,3,5-triazinyl group with
chlorine substituents were capable of reaction with cellulosic fibres
under mildly alkaline conditions, and under these conditions no
significant degradation of the fibre was observed.
7This discovery led,
within two years, to the commercial launch by ICI of the first series of
water-soluble reactive dyes for cellulosic fibres, named Procion MX,
based on this reactive system.8,9The new application class of dyes
proved to be an almost immediate success. The dyes were capable ofproviding superior washfastness compared with direct dyes, a much
wider range of brilliant colours than were available from vat and
azoic dyes, and they were capable of both continuous and batchwise
application.
This initial success provided the impetus for the intense body of
research conducted by most other dye manufacturers that followed
into this promising area, to a large extent involving the developmentof alternative types of fibre-reactive group and of multifunctional dyes
with more than one reactive group. Subsequently, reactive dyes have
grown steadily in importance to become the most significant indus-
trial class of dyes for application to cellulosic fibres. A notable trend
in recent years has been the progressive decline in the percentage of
textiles derived from cotton produced worldwide, which has been
accompanied by a corresponding increase in the share of synthetic
fibres. Indeed, in the first decade of the twenty-first century, the
global production of polyester overtook that of cotton. Nevertheless,the production of reactive dyes for cellulose has continued to in-
crease, largely because they have been gaining market share at the
expense of other dye classes, such as azoic, sulfur and direct dyes,
and this trend has been projected to continue.
3Growth rates for
cellulosic fibres may be limited in the future by the availability ofland suitable for growing cotton, although this may be augmented195 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibresby the development of more intensive agricultural methods and
the increased production of regenerated cellulosic fibres, such as
lyocell.
A general, if rather simplistic, schematic representation of the
structure of a reactive dye is illustrated in Figure 8.1. In the figure,four important structural features of the molecules may be identified
separately: the chromogen, the water-solubilising group, the bridging
group and the fibre-reactive group. The chromogen is that part of the
molecule which essentially gives the molecule its colour and maycontribute to other features of the dye, such as its lightfastness. As
encountered in most other application classes of textile dyes, these
chromogens typically belong to the azo, carbonyl or phthalocyanine
chemical classes. Specific examples are used to illustrate this char-
acteristic later in the chapter. Reactive dyes are required to be water-
soluble for their application to the textile fibres, and they invariablycontain for this purpose one or more ionic groups, most commonly
the sulfonate group as the sodium salt. They are thus anionic in na-
ture and, as such, show many of the chemical features of acid dyes for
protein fibres (Chapter 7). Most commonly, the water-solubilising
group is located in the chromogenic part of the reactive dye molecule,
although it may also be more closely associated with the fibre-reactive
group. The essential structural characteristic of a reactive dye is a
specific functional group that is capable of reacting chemically with
the fibre. This feature is, for obvious reasons, termed the fibre-reactive
group and the organic chemistry underlying the reaction of these
groups with functionality on the fibre forms a substantial part of thischapter. Commonly, the term bridging group is used to identify the
group of atoms that is used to link the chromogenic part of themolecule to the fibre-reactive group. In many dyes, the bridging group
is the amino (–NH–) group, often for reasons of syntheticCHROMOGEN BRIDGING GROUPFIBRE-REACTIVE
GROUP
WATER-SOLUBILISING
GROUP
Figure 8.1 General structure of a reactive dye.196 Chapter 8convenience. There are, however, certain types of reactive dyes in
which no obvious bridging functionality may be clearly identified.
8.2 FIBRE-REACTIVE GROUPS
Cotton fibres are based on cellulose, a polysaccharide, whose struc-
ture is given in Figure 7.4 (Chapter 7). Most reactive dyes for cottonutilise the ability of the many hydroxyl (OH) groups present in the
cellulose molecule to act as nucleophiles. The dyes are commonly
induced to react with the cellulose in aqueous alkali under which
conditions deprotonation of the hydroxyl groups (Cell-OH) takes
place. This produces the more powerfully nucleophilic cellulosate
anions (Cell-O
/C0), which are generally regarded as the active nucleo-
philes in the reactive dyeing of cellulose. In the reactive dyeing ofprotein fibres, such as wool or silk, the nucleophilic group on the
fibre may be the amino (–NH
2), hydroxyl (–OH) or thiol (–SH) groups
present in the amino side-chains of the polypeptide (see Figure 7.1,
Chapter 7). The most common types of fibre-reactive dyes for cellu-
losic fibres react either by aromatic nucleophilic substitution or by
nucleophilic addition to activated alkenes.1,2
8.2.1 Fibre-Reactive Groups Reacting by Nucleophilic Substitution
A characteristic feature of the chemistry of aromatic ring systems is
their tendency to undergo substitution reactions in which the aro-
matic character of the ring is retained. Since most aromatic systems
are electron-rich in nature, by virtue of the system of p-electrons, the
most frequently encountered reactions of aromatic compounds areelectrophilic substitution reactions. Nucleophilic aromatic substi-
tution reactions are less commonly encountered, although they are
not rare. For reaction with nucleophiles under mild conditions to take
place, aromatic systems require the presence of structural featuresthat reduce the electron density of the p-system and thus facilitate
nucleophilic attack. To illustrate this by way of example, chlor-obenzene undergoes nucleophilic substitution ( e.g., of Cl by OH) only
under vigorous conditions. In contrast, 1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzeneundergoes nucleophilic substitution very readily because of the acti-
vating eﬀect of the two powerfully electron-withdrawing nitro groups.
Reactions of this type are used in the synthesis of some nitrodiphe-
nylamine dyes (see Scheme 6.5 in Chapter 6). Another feature of
nucleophilic substitution reactions is the requirement for a good,
stable leaving group, such as the chloride anion.197 Reactive Dyes for Textile FibresBy far the most important fibre-reactive groups that react by
nucleophilic substitution contain six-membered aromatic nitrogen-
containing heterocyclic rings with halogen substituents. The first
group of commercial reactive dyes, the Procion dyes, which remain
among the most important in use today, contain the 1,3,5-triazine (or
s-triazine) ring, a six-membered ring of alternate carbon and nitrogen
atoms, containing at least one chlorine (or fluorine) substituent, and
with the amino (–NH–) group as the bridging group. The reaction of a
chlorotriazinyl dye 8.1with the cellulosate anion, incorporating an
outline mechanism for the reaction which is characteristic of aro-matic nucleophilic substitution, is illustrated in Scheme 8.1. Several
features may be identified as responsible for facilitating the nucleo-
philic substitution reaction. Firstly, the electron-withdrawing nature
of the heterocyclic nitrogen atoms and, to a lesser extent, of the
DYE
NNNCl
X
DYE
NNNO
XDYE
NNNOH
XCELLDYE
NN-NOY
XCl
DYE
-NNNOY
XCl
DYE
NN-NOY
XClHN
HN HNHN
HNHN
8.3CELL-O- or OH -
-Cl-, Y = CELL8.2
8.4-Cl-, Y = H8.1a: X = Cl; b: X = -NHR, OR
Scheme 8.1 Reaction of Procion dyes with cellulose.198 Chapter 8chlorine substituent reduces the electron density in the aromatic ring,
which is thereby activated towards nucleophilic attack. An important
feature is the extensive resonance stabilisation of the anionic inter-
mediate 8.2. In particular, it is of special importance that the de-
localised negative charge is favourably accommodated on theelectronegative heterocyclic nitrogen atoms in each of the three
contributing resonance forms of the intermediate. In the final step ofthe sequence, the chloride ion, a particularly good leaving group, is
eliminated. As a result of the reaction, a dye–fibre covalent (C–O)
bond is formed, as illustrated for structure 8.3, and it is to this bond
that the excellent fastness of the dyed textile fibres to wet treatmentsmay be attributed.
Both dichloro- and monochlorotriazinyl dyes have been com-
mercialised. Dichlorotriazinyl dyes, 8.1a, (marketed as Procion M
dyes), are more reactive than the monochlorotriazinyl (Procion H)types, 8.1b. This feature may be explained by the fact that in the
monochloro dyes 8.1b the group X is electron-releasing, commonly
amino (either primary or secondary) or methoxy, replacing the elec-tron-withdrawing chloro group in the dichloro derivatives 8.1a. There
is therefore an increase in the electron density of the triazine ring inthe monochlorotriazinyl dyes, which reduces their reactivity towards
nucleophilic attack. Procion M dyes are capable therefore of reaction
with cellulosic fibres at lower temperatures than is required for the
Procion H dyes. Procion M dyes are thus applied at around 40–60 1C
whereas Procion H dyes are applied at around 80–90 1C.
A feature of the chemistry of triazinyl reactive dyes, which is in fact
common to all reactive dye systems, is that they undergo, to a certain
extent a hydrolysis reaction, involving reaction of the dye with hy-
droxide (
/C0OH) anions present in the aqueous alkaline dyebath in
competition with the dye–fibre reaction. The hydrolysis reaction isalso illustrated in Scheme 8.1. Reactive dye hydrolysis is a highly
undesirable feature of reactive dyeing for various reasons. In the first
instance, the hydrolysed dye 8.4that is formed is no longer capable of
reacting with the fibre and so must be washed out of the fibre afterdyeing is complete, to ensure the excellent fastness to washing that is
characteristic of this dye application class. A second reason is that adegree of fixation less than 100% and the need for the wash-oﬀ after
treatment considerably reduces the cost-eﬀectiveness of the process.
Finally, the hydrolysed dye inevitably ends up in the dyehouse eﬄu-
ent, and this presents significant environmental concerns to which
society is becoming increasingly sensitive (Chapter 12). In view of the
fact that the dyes are generally applied to the fibres in such a way that199 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibreswater is in vast excess, it might be expected intuitively that hydrolysis
would overwhelmingly predominate over reaction with the fibre.
However, there are several factors that oppose this. Commonly, the
dye is applied to the fibre at around neutral pH in the presence of a
salt, such as sodium sulfate, which induces the dye to exhaust in the
fibre. The dye molecules are initially adsorbed on to the fibre and are
located in an environment that is dominated by the presence of cel-lulose hydroxyl groups, thus favouring dye–fibre reaction. To cause
dye–fibre reaction, the pH is then adjusted to alkaline conditions. The
ionization of cellulose means that the fibre acquires a negatively
charge and this causes hydroxide ions to be expelled from the interior
of the fibres. Factors such as these combine to cause the dye–fibre
reaction to predominate over hydrolysis, giving a level of fixation that
is variable, but typically around 70%. The final stage in the dyeing
process is a very thorough wash-oﬀ, to ensure that any hydrolysed or
unreacted dye is completely removed, thus ensuring excellent wash-fastness properties because only covalently-bound dye remains.
Monochlorotriazinyl dyes are of particular importance for textile
printing, using both screen printing and digital inkjet printing tech-
niques.
10These dyes are relatively inert towards alkali at low tem-
perature, so that reasonably stable screen print pastes may beformulated that incorporate both the dye and the alkali required for
fixation. After printing on to the fabric, the dye–fibre reaction is ini-
tiated by raising the temperature to above 100 1C, normally by
steaming. The relatively low substantivity of these dye molecules forthe fibre is an advantage in this case in that it facilitates the wash-oﬀ
of unreacted or hydrolysed dye at the end of the process and ensuresthat there is no backstaining in white areas of the fabric. In the case of
inkjet inks, however, the alkali (sodium carbonate or bicarbonate) is
applied to the fabric as a pre-treatment as its presence in the ink
would lower the shelf-life to an unacceptable level. Unlike screen print
pastes, which are generally used soon after formulation, commercial
inkjet inks are required to have a shelf-life of several months.
The initial commercial success of the reactive dyes based on the
triazine ring system was immediately followed by intense industrial
research activity into the possibilities oﬀered by other relatedelect ron-deficient nitrogen-containing heterocyclic systems. Numerous
systems have been pa tented as fibre-reactive groups although only a few
of these have enjoyed significant co mmercial success. Some examples
are illustrated in Figure 8.2. They include the trichloropyrimidines, 8.5,
the dichloroquinoxalines, 8.6, the dichloropyridazines, 8.7and the
chlorobenzothiazolyl dyes, 8.8.200 Chapter 8Perhaps the best-known of these related groups of reactive dyes are
those that utilise the 2,4,5-trichloropyrimidinyl (2,4,5-trichloro-1,3-
diazinyl) system, 8.5, the basis of the Drimarene dyes marketed ori-
ginally in the 1960s by Sandoz. These dyes react with cellulosateanions by nucleophilic displacement of either the 2- or 4-chlorineatoms according to a mechanism analogous to that shown in Scheme
8.1 for triazine dyes. In contrast, the chlorine atom at the 5-position is
not readily substituted. The reasons for this are immediately apparent
from examination of the resonance forms of the intermediates de-
rived formally from attack of the nucleophile at the relevant carbon
atom as illustrated in Figure 8.3. There are three contributing res-
onance forms in each case. In the anionic intermediate 8.9, which is
formed by attack at the 4-position, two of the three contributingresonance forms have the negative charge accommodated favourably
on the electronegative nitrogen atoms. The reader might like, as an
exercise, to demonstrate that a similar situation arises from attack atthe 2-position. In contrast, however, attack at the 5-position gives an
intermediate 8.10 in which the negative charge is localised on carbon
atoms in each of the three contributing forms. The instability ofthis intermediate explains the lack of reactivity at the 5-position.
The 5-chloro substituent, although unreactive, is nevertheless of
technological importance. Since the fibre reactive group has only
two activating heterocyclic nitrogen atoms (compared with three in
the Procion dyes), the 5-chloro substituent serves to enhance the
reactivity of the ring towards nucleophilic attack as a result of itselectron-withdrawing nature and ensure that the dyes are capable ofNNCl
ClCl
HN
NNCl
NHCONHSO 2
SN
ClNHCO
NN
Cl
Cl
ClDYE
DYEDYE8.6
8.7 8.88.5DYE
Figure 8.2 Structures of some other heterocyclic reactive dye systems.201 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibresreacting with cellulose at reasonable temperatures. Interestingly, in
the reactive dye systems 8.6–8.8, the bridging group is electron-
withdrawing (carbonyl or sulfonyl) and no doubt plays a decisive partin activating the system to nucleophilic attack, ensuring that dyes
have appropriate reactivity for the fibre.
Another method whereby the reactivity of reactive dyes may be
modified involves the use of alternative leaving groups other than the
chloride ion. Some examples of reactive dyes using this modification
are illustrated in Figure 8.4. One of the earliest ventures in this fieldinvolved the use of quaternary amino groups, as for example in the
triazine derivative, 8.11. Dyes using systems of this type were found to
have enhanced reactivity towards cellulosic fibres, but their com-mercial development was inhibited by a degree of nervousness con-
cerning the liberation of tertiary amines, pyridine in this case, into
the dyebath. Some commercial success has been achieved using
fluorinated heterocycles, such as those found in the mono-
fluorotriazine 8.12 (Cibacron F dyes) and the difluoropyrimidine 8.13
(Levafix EA dyes). Because of the high electronegativity of the fluorineatoms, these dyes show particularly high reactivity and are therefore
capable of fixation to cellulosic fibres under mild conditions, for ex-ample at relatively low temperatures. Another leaving group that has
been utilised to produce highly activated dyes is the methylsulfonylNNOY
ClCl
-NNOY
ClCl
NN-OY
ClCl
R R Rl C l CCl
NN
ClNN
ClNN
ClR R Rl C l CClOYCl OYClOY
Cl-
--
-8.9
8.10
Figure 8.3 Structure of the intermediates formed from the reaction of tri-
chloropyrimidinyl dyes with nucleophiles.202 Chapter 8group (–SO 2CH 3) used in Levafix P dyes (Bayer), which are based on
the pyrimidine structure 8.14.
8.2.2 Fibre-Reactive Groups Reacting by Nucleophilic Addition
Alkenes are generally regarded as relatively reactive compounds, their
reactivity being attributable to the presence of the C ¼C double bond.
Characteristically, alkenes readily undergo addition reactions, mostcommonly of the electrophilic type because of the electron-rich natureof the p-bond. Nucleophilic addition reactions of alkenes are less
commonly encountered but can take place when there are stronglyelectron-withdrawing groups attached to the double bond, thereby
reducing the electron density and thus facilitating nucleophilic attack.
Nucleophilic addition to substituted alkenes of this type is alter-
natively referred to as either conjugate addition or Michael addition.
The most important reactive dyes in commercial use for application
to cellulosic fibres in which the fibre-reactive groups react by
nucleophilic addition are the Remazol reactive dyes. These dyes,based on the vinylsulfone reactive group, were introduced by Hoechst
soon after the launch of the Procion dyes based on the triazine system
by ICI.
1,11The chemistry of the process in which vinylsulfone
dyes react with cellulose under alkaline conditions is illustratedin Scheme 8.2. The dye is supplied by the manufacturers as the b-
sulfatoethylsulfone 8.15, which is not itself fibre-reactive and is com-
monly referred to as the stable storage form. The water-solubilising
sulfonate group, as a sulfate ester, is in the case of these dyes attached
to the latent fibre-reactive group. As illustrated mechanistically in the
scheme, the reaction of compound 8.15 with aqueous alkali causes its
conversion by an elimination reaction into the highly reactive vinyl-
sulfone, 8.16. The presence of the powerfully electron-withdrawing
sulfone group activates the double bond towards nucleophilic attack.Attack by the cellulosate anion on the vinylsulfone initially leads toNNNF
NHRN
HDYE
NNNN
NHRHNNNF
FCl
HN DYE
NNCH
3
SO2CH3Cl
HN DYE
DYE+
8.12 8.11 8.13 8.14
Figure 8.4 Structures of some reactive dye systems using alternative leaving groups.203 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibresthe anionic intermediate 8.17 which is stabilised by resonance, with
important contributions from canonical forms in which the negative
charge is delocalised on to the electronegative oxygen atoms of the
sulfone group. The addition reaction is completed by protonation,and the ultimate outcome is the permanent formation of a covalent
dye–fibre (C–O) bond as illustrated by structure 8.18. In this reactive
dyeing process, as with dyes that react by nucleophilic substitution,hydrolysis also takes place in competition with the dye–fibre reaction.
This reaction, leading to hydrolysed dye 8.19, is also illustrated in
Scheme 8.2.
There are relatively few other reactive groups reacting by nucleo-
philic addition that have achieved significant commercial exploitation.However, some systems are worthy of note in reactive dyes for proteinfibres, such as wool and silk.
12–14The protein that constitutes the fibre
contains amino and thiol groups, both of which are excellent nucleo-philes. Some reactive dyes used for wool are similar chemically to those
used for cellulosic fibres, for example based on nucleophilic substi-
tution with monochlorotriazines and chlorodifluoropyrimidines, butDYESOO
HHOSO 3NaH
H
DYESOO
CH2
DYES
C
HOO
CH2OY
DYES
CHOO -
CH
2OYDYES
C
H-O O
CH2OY
DYES
CH2CH2OOO
Cell DYES
CH2CH2OHOODYE SO 2CH2CH2OSO 3Na
HO-
YO-, Y = Cell, H8.158.16
H+, Y = CellH+, Y = H8.17
8.18 8.19OH-
-
Scheme 8.2 Reaction of vinylsulfone dyes with cellulosic fibres.204 Chapter 8modified to conform with the diﬀerent dyeing requirements of protein
fibres. For example, there are usually fewer sulfonate groups on the dye
molecule as too high a negative charge reduces the ability of the dye to
migrate on the fibre, with a consequent eﬀect on levelness. To allow
migration, reactive groups on a wool dye should ideally be relatively
slow to react. One appropriate group that reacts by nucleophilic add-
ition is the acrylamide group (–NHCO–CH ¼CH 2). The a-bromoacryla-
mide group is amongst the most widely used of the reactive groups
specifically devised for wool, as found for example in the Lanasol dyes.
These dyes are applied to wool initially at pH 4.5–6.5 and 40 1C. The
temperature is then raised to the boil slowly to allow migration. ThepH is then adjusted to around 8.5 at 80 1C for a short period to com-
plete the dyeing process and a final washing process is required toremove hydrolysed and unfixed dye together with dye that may have
reacted with soluble peptide material. Dye fixation is high in the case
of these dyes, at around 85–95%. A proposed mechanism for the re-action of these dyes with the wool fibre, illustrated for the case of
primary amino groups, is shown in Scheme 8.3.
13Reaction with thiol
and imidazole groups on the fibre has also been proposed. The dyesgenerally exist in the a,b-dibromopropionylamide form, 8.20,w h i c h
dehydrobrominates in the presence of primary amino groups to form
N
HO
BrBr
NHO
Br
NHO
NH-WOOLNHO
BrNH-WOOL
NHODYE
NDYE
WOOL-HBr
NHODYEDYE
NH-WOOLNH-WOOL
DYEWOOL-NH 2
DYE8.20 8.21
8.248.22 8.23
8.25
Scheme 8.3 Reaction of a-bromoacrylamide reactive dyes with wool.205 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibresthea-bromoacrylamide 8.21. There remain some incompletely an-
swered issues in the way that the covalent attachment to the fibre takes
place subsequently, although some interesting studies of reactions
with model compounds have shed light on possible mechanisms.15,16
Covalent bond formation may result, in principle, from reactionpathways involving either substitution/addition, i.e.,viaintermediate
8.22, or addition/substitution, i.e.,viaintermediate 8.23.I ti sn o ta b -
solutely certain which of these options operates under practical dyeingconditions, although the latter is regarded as theoretically more likely.
However, there is convincing evidence from the study of model re-
actions that cyclisation takes place to form an aziridine ring, as in
structure 8.24. The possibility of further reaction as shown in Scheme
8.3, leading, in principle, to cross-linking of the fibre as illustrated instructure 8.25, has been suggested but this does not appear to have
been experimentally established with certainty.
8.3 POLYFUNCTIONAL REACTIVE DYES
There is no doubt that the major weakness of the reactive dyeing
process is the competing hydrolysis reaction, which reduces the cost
eﬃciency of the process, and requires a thorough wash-oﬀ process,
with the consequence of significant dye residues being discharged to
eﬄuent. The extent to which dye hydrolysis takes place in com-petition with dye–fibre reaction varies quite markedly within the
range 10–40% depending upon the system in question. A consider-
able amount of research has therefore been devoted to the search for
reactive dyes with improved fixation. The most successful approach to
addressing this issue has involved the development of dyes with more
than one fibre-reactive group in the molecule, which statistically
improves the chances of dye–fibre bond formation. Examples of
products of this type are the Procion H–E range, which contain two
monochlorotriazinyl reactive groups, for example as represented bygeneral structure 8.26 and some dyes of the Remazol range that
contain two b-sulfatoethylsulfone groups. These are examples of
homo-bifunctional dyes . Another approach utilises two diﬀerent types
of reactive groups, the so-called hetero-bifunctional dyes , such as for
example structure 8.27, which contains both a monochlorotriazinyl
and a b-sulfatoethylsulfone group.
17This particular class of reactive
dye, because of the diﬀering reactivities of the two groups, can oﬀer
greater flexibility in performance, for example reducing sensitivity to
temperature and to pH variation. Indeed, most reactive dye manu-
facturers now oﬀer at least one range of heterobifunctional dyes,206 Chapter 8which are characterized by high fixation eﬃciency. It would seem
logical that the fixation eﬃciency might be improved further by
incorporating even more reactive groups into the dye molecules.
Indeed, there are a few commercial examples of trifunctional reactive
dyes, for example in the Cibacron and Remazol ranges. However,
there are opposing eﬀects associated with the increase in molecular
size as more groups are added that can inhibit migration leading toreduced fixation and low colour build up. Thus, although reactive
dyes with multiple functionality now oﬀer a significantly improved
degree of fixation, the development of a practical reactive dye system
that is completely free of the problems associated with hydrolysis or
incomplete dye–fibre reaction remains an important target for dye
chemists and one which so far has proved elusive despite many years
of eﬀort.
N
NNCl
N
HDYE
NHHN
NNN
ClHN
DYE
SO3Na
8.26
N
NNCl
NHDYE
NHSO
2CH2CH2OSO 3Na
8.27
8.4 CHROMOGENIC GROUPS
A selection of representative chemical structures from the vast
range of reactive dyes now available commercially is illustrated in
Figure 8.5. Reactive dyes may be prepared, in principle, from any
of the chemical classes of colorant by attaching a fibre-reactive group
to an appropriate molecule. In common with most application
classes of textile dyes and pigments, most reactive dyes belong to the
azo chemical class, especially in the yellow, orange and red shade
areas. Examples are typified by the structurally related red monoazo
reactive dyes, the dichlorotriazine 8.28a , CI Reactive Red 1, the207 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibresmonochlorotriazine 8.28b , CI Reactive Red 3, and the tri-
chloropyrimidine 8.29, CI Reactive Red 17. Bright blue reactive dyes
are commonly derived from anthraquinones. Examples include the
triazinyl dyes CI Reactive Blue 4, 8.30a , CI Reactive Blue 5, 8.30b , and
the structurally related vinylsulfone dye, CI Reactive Blue 19, 8.31.
Copper or nickel phthalocyanine derivatives are used to achieve blu-
ish to greenish turquoise shades and, in combination with appro-priate yellow dyes, to give bright greens. However, despite the high
tinctorial strength that the phthalocyanine chromophore can provide,
the reactive dyes derived from the system do not build up easily to
deep shades on cellulosic fibres. This feature is probably due, at least
in part, to low fixation levels, which may arise from a tendency of the
dyes to form molecular aggregates. Ruby, violet and navy blue dyes
commonly make use of the square-planar copper complexes of
appropriate azo dyes. Reactive dyes based on the dioxazine system are
growing in importance for violet and blue shades, since they arecapable of providing intense colours, much stronger than those based
on the anthraquinone chromophore.
18
NON
SO3Na NaO 3SNSO3Na
HH
NN NCl
X
NON
SO3Na NaO 3SNSO3Na
HH
NNCl
ClCl
O
ONHH
SO3Na
N
HH
N
NNNC l
XSO3NaO
ONHH
SO3Na
N
HSO2CH2CH2OSO 3Na8.28a:  X = Cl; 8.28b : X = NHPh8.29
8.318.30a: X = Cl; 
8.30b: X = -NH-C 6H4-3-SO 3Na
Figure 8.5 Some typical chemical structures of reactive dyes.208 Chapter 88.5 SYNTHESIS OF REACTIVE DYES
The principles of the synthesis of the important chemical classes of
dyes from which reactive dyes may be prepared have been discussed
in Chapters 3–6 of this book. This section deals specifically withthose aspects of the synthetic sequences that are used to introduce
the fibre-reactive group. The starting material for the synthesis of
chlorotriazinyl reactive dyes is the highly reactive material cyanuric
chloride (2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine), 8.32. The strategy used in the
synthesis of these dyes, as illustrated in Scheme 8.4, involves at ap-propriate stages of the overall reaction scheme sequential nucleo-
philic substitution of the chlorine atoms of compound 8.32 by
reaction with primary amines. As an example, dichlorotriazinyl dye8.28a is synthesised by formation of the monoazo dye 8.33 by reaction
of diazotised aniline-2-sulfonic acid with H-Acid under alkaline con-ditions, followed by its condensation with cyanuric chloride, 8.32.
Treatment of dye 8.28a with aniline under appropriate conditions
gives the monochlorotriazinyl dye 8.28b . Since replacement of
an electron-withdrawing chlorine atom in compound 8.32 by an
N
SO3Na NaO 3SNSO3Na
ONHH
NN NCl
NHPhN
SO3Na NaO 3SNSO3Na
N
SO3Na NaO 3SNSO3Na
ONHH
NN NCl
ClNH2 DYENNNC l Cl
ClDYE
NNNCl
ClHN DYE
NNNCl
NHRHN
HONHHNNNC l Cl
Cl
8.33 8.28a8.32+RNH 2
PhNH 2
8.28b
Scheme 8.4 Synthesis of chlorotriazinyl reactive dyes.209 Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibreselectron-releasing amino group deactivates the product of the re-
action towards further nucleophilic substitution, replacement of a
subsequent chlorine atom requires more vigorous conditions. This is
a useful feature of the chemistry of the process since it facilitates the
selectivity of the reaction sequence leading to mono and dichloro-
triazinyl reactive dyes.
The syntheses of fluorotriazine, trichloropyrimidine and chlorodi-
fluoropyrimidine dyes are completely analogous, using respectivelyas starting materials cyanuric fluoride, 8.34, 2,4,5,6-tetra-
chloropyrimidine, 8.35, and 5-chloro-2,4,6-trifluoropyrimidine, 8.36.
The fluorinated intermediates are prepared from the corresponding
chloro derivatives by an exchange reaction with potassium fluoride.
NNNF F
F
8.34NNCl Cl
ClCl
8.35NNF F
FCl
8.36
The routes most commonly employed for the preparation of
theb-sulfatoethylsulfone group, which is the essential structural
feature of vinylsulfone reactive dyes, are illustrated in Scheme 8.5.
One method of synthesis involves, initially, the reduction of an
aromatic sulfonyl chloride, for example with sodium sulfite, to the
corresponding sulfinic acid. Subsequent condensation with either
2-chloroethanol or ethylene oxide gives the b-hydroxyethylsulfone,
which is converted into its sulfate ester by treatment with concen-trated sulfuric acid at 20–30 1C. An alternative route involves treat-
ment of an aromatic thiol with 2-chloroethanol or ethylene oxide togive the b-hydroxyethylthio compound, which may then be converted
by oxidation into the b-hydroxyethylsulfone. The synthesis of the
ArSO 2ClNa2SO3
ArSO 2HClCH 2CH2OH
ArSO 2CH2CH2OH ArSO 2CH2CH2OSO 3Na
ArSHClCH 2CH2OH
ArSCH 2CH2OHoxidationO
reductionH2SO4or
Oor
Scheme 8.5 Synthesis of vinylsulfone reactive dyes.210 Chapter 8homo- and hetero-bifunctional dyes commonly employs logical
extensions of the chemistry described in this section, often involving
the monofunctional dyes as intermediates.
REFERENCES
1. A. H. M. Renfrew, Reactive Dyes for Textile Fibres , Society of Dyers
and Colourists, Bradford, UK, 1999.
2. W. F. Francis, Fibre-Reactive Dyes , Logos Press, London, 1970.
3. J. A. Taylor, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2000, 30, 93.
4. A. H. M. Renfrew and J. A. Taylor, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1990, 20,1 .
5. P. Rosenthal, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1976, 7, 23.
6. C. V. Stead, Chemistry of reactive dyes, in Colorants and Auxiliaries:
Organic Chemistry and Application Properties , ed. J. Shore, Society of
Dyers and Colourists, Bradford, 1990, vol. 1, ch. 7.
7. I. D. Rattee and W. E. Stephen (ICI), Br. Pat. , 1954, 772030.
8. W. E. Stephen and I. D. Rattee, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists , 1960, 76,6 .
9. W. E. Stephen and I. D. Rattee, Chimia , 1965, 19, 261.
10. S. O. Aston, J. R. Provost and H. Masselink, J. Soc. Dyers
Colourists , 1993, 109,1 4 7 .
11. E. Bohnert, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists , 1959, 75, 581.
12. W. Zuwang, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1998, 28, 32.
13. J. S. Church, A. S. Davie, P. J. Scammells and D. J. Tucker, Rev.
Prog. Color. , 1999, 29, 87.
14. M. L. Gulrajani, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1993, 23, 51.
15. J. S. Church, A. S. Davie, P. J. Scammells and D. J. Tucker, Dyes
Pigments , 1998, 39, 291.
16. J. S. Church, A. S. Davie, P. J. Scammells and D. J. Tucker, Dyes
Pigments , 1998, 39, 313.
17. F. Fujioki and A. Abeta, Dyes Pigments , 1982, 3, 281.
18. A. H. M. Renfrew, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1985, 15, 15.211 Reactive Dyes for Textile FibresCHAPTER 9
Pigments
9.1 INTRODUCTION
The distinction between pigments and dyes, which is based on the
diﬀerences in their solubility characteristics, has been discussed in
detail in Chapter 2. A pigment is a finely divided solid colouring
material, which is essentially insoluble in its application medium.1–9
Pigments are used mostly in the coloration of paints, printing inksand plastics, although they are applied to a certain extent in a much
wider range of substrates, including paper, textiles, rubber, glass,
ceramics, cosmetics, crayons and building materials such as cement
and concrete. In most cases, the application of pigments involves
their incorporation into a liquid medium, for example a wet paint or
ink or a molten thermoplastic material, by a dispersion process inwhich clusters or agglomerates of pigment particles are broken down
into primary particles and small aggregates. The pigmented medium
is then allowed or caused to solidify, by solvent evaporation, physical
solidification or by polymerisation, and the individual pigment par-
ticles become fixed mechanically in the solid polymeric matrix. In
contrast to textile dyes where the individual dye molecules are
strongly attracted to the individual polymer molecules of the fibres to
which they are applied, pigments are considered to have only a weak
aﬃnity for their application medium, and only at surface where thepigment particle is in contact with the medium.
Pigments are incorporated in order to modify the optical properties
of a substrate, the most obvious eﬀect being to provide colour.
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
212
However, this is not their only optical function. The pigment may also
be required to provide opacity. This feature is most important in
paints, which are generally designed to obscure the surface to which
they are applied. Alternatively, and in complete contrast, high trans-
parency may be important. For example, in multicolour printing
processes–which generally use inks of four colours, the three sub-
tractive primaries, yellow, magenta and cyan, together with black,transparency is essential to ensure that subsequently printed colours
do not obscure the optical eﬀect of the first colour printed. A pigment
owes its optical properties to a combination of two eﬀects that result
from the interaction of the pigment particles with visible light: light
absorption and light scattering . The colour provided by a pigment is
determined mainly by the light absorption and, as is the case withdyes, this is primarily dependent on its molecular constitution, as
discussed in Chapter 2. However, there are two further factors that
influence the colour of pigments as a consequence of the fact thatthey are used as solid, crystalline particles. These factors are the
crystal structure, i.e., the way in which the molecules pack in their
crystal lattice, and the particle structure, which includes particle sizeand shape distribution.
10,11Opacity is mainly dependent on the de-
gree of light scattering by the pigment particles, which is in turndependent on the refractive index of the material, with high refractive
index materials giving high opacity. This property is also dependent
on the crystal structure of the pigment and its particle size and shape.
A third optical property that is influenced by pigments is gloss, the
mirror-like reflection, which is a desirable optical eﬀect of many
coatings. The gloss shown by a painted or printed surface depends onseveral factors, including the viewing angle and the nature of the film-
forming polymer, its refractive index and the extent to which it forms
a smooth film. However, the property may also be influenced by the
pigment. In essence, gloss is determined by the degree of smoothness
of the surface of the paint or ink film and will be reduced by the
protrusion of pigment particles through the surface, so that max-
imum gloss is achieved using pigments of small particle size at low
concentrations, very finely dispersed in the coatings formulation.
In addition to providing the appropriate optical properties, pig-
ments must be capable of withstanding the eﬀects of the environmentin which they are placed both during processing and in their antici-
pated useful lifetimes. They are required to be fast to light, wea-
thering (if external exposure is envisaged), heat and chemicals such as
acids and alkalis to a degree dependent on the demands of the par-
ticular application.213 PigmentsFastness to light is determined principally by the chemical struc-
ture of the pigment and the nature of the crystal packing, and also
depends to an extent on the particle size of the pigment, its concen-
tration in the application medium and on the nature of the medium.
Lighter shades, especially in combination with white pigments, tend
to show poorer lightfastness than deeper shades. Heat stability is
critically important in pigments for application in ceramics, whichare processed at temperatures in excess of 8001 C; only certain in-
organic pigments are capable of withstanding such temperatures.Heat stability is also a vital factor in the coloration of thermoplastics,
the level required depending not only on the processing temperature
for the polymer in question, which can range from 150 to 3501 C, but
also on the time of exposure. In addition, pigments are required toshow solvent resistance, which refers to their ability to resist dis-
solving in solvents with which they may into contact in their appli-
cation, in order to minimise problems such as ‘bleeding’ andmigration. A pigment will be selected for a particular application on
the basis of its optical and fastness properties, but with due regard
also to toxicological and environmental considerations and, inevit-
ably, cost.
In chemical terms, pigments are conveniently classified as either
inorganic ororganic .
1,2These two broad groups of pigments are of
roughly comparable importance industrially. In general, inorganicpigments are capable of providing excellent resistance to heat, light,
weathering, solvents and chemicals, and in those respects they can
often oﬀer technical advantages over most organic pigments. In
addition, many inorganic pigments are of significantly lower costthan typical organics. On the other hand, they commonly lack the
intensity and brightness of colour of organic pigments. Organic pig-
ments are characterised by high colour strength and brightness al-
though the fastness properties that they oﬀer are somewhat variable.
There is, however, a range of high performance organic pigments
that oﬀer excellent durability while retaining their superior colour
properties, but these products tend to be rather more expensive.
12
The ability either to provide opacity or to ensure transparency inapplication provides a further contrast between inorganic and organicpigments. In general, inorganic pigments are high refractive index
materials that are capable of providing high opacity, while organic
pigments are of low refractive index and consequently are
transparent.
This chapter provides an overview of the characteristic structural
features of the most important commercial pigments. If it seems to214 Chapter 9the reader that the chapter places considerable emphasis on in-
organic pigments, this is to an extent because the various chemical
classes of organic pigments are dealt with to a certain extent in
Chapters 3–6. In individual cases there is some discussion of struc-
ture–property relationships. Such relationships are rather more
complex with pigments than with dyes, because of the dependence of
the colouristic and technical performance of pigments not only on themolecular structure but also on the crystal structure arrangement and
on the nature of the pigment particles, particularly their size and
shape distribution. The section on inorganic pigments presents an
outline of the synthetic procedures used for their manufacture. Dis-
cussion of the chemistry involved in the synthesis of organic pig-
ments is omitted as this is dealt with in relevant earlier chapters
concerned with the specific chemical classes. The process by which a
pigment is manufactured may be considered as involving a number of
stages. The first of these is the synthesis in which the sequence ofchemical reactions that form the pigment is carried out. However,
simply carrying out this chemistry does not necessarily give the
product in a form that is optimised for a particular application. In a
second phase of the process, commonly referred to as conditioning ,
the product is developed into an appropriate crystalline form, with acontrolled particle size and shape distribution, and the surfaces of the
particles may be altered by suitable treatments. Depending on the
particular pigment, these two phases may be either distinctly separate
or combined into a single process. Finally, the pigment is subjected to
finishing in which it is converted into a form that is acceptable to the
user. The conditions of synthesis of those organic and inorganic
pigments that are prepared by precipitation from reaction in water
may often be controlled to ensure that the pigments are formed dir-
ectly in an appropriate particle size range. Commonly, they will pre-
cipitate from this aqueous medium in a poorly-defined crystal form,
and so they are subsequently treated at elevated temperatures, either
in the presence or absence of solvents (water or organic solvents), to
develop high crystallinity and ensure that the products show opti-
mum optical properties. Many inorganic pigments are subjected to
very high temperatures towards the end of their manufacture in aprocess referred to as calcination (temperatures which organic pig-
ments would not survive), in order to remove tightly bound water andto develop the appropriate crystal form. Some high performance or-
ganic pigments are synthesised at high temperatures by reaction in
organic solvents, and are produced initially in a large particle size
form, which must be reduced to a fine particle size to make them215 Pigmentsuseful pigmentary products. Organic pigments are often prepared in
as fine a particle size as is technically feasible in order to provide
maximum colour strength and transparency. In contrast, the particle
size of many inorganic pigments is controlled carefully (often in the
range 0.2–0.3 mm) to provide maximum opacity.
For the most part, pigments are solid, crystalline materials manu-
factured in a finely divided form. A feature commonly encountered inthe crystalline solid state structures of pigments is polymorphism .
A material exhibits polymorphism if it is capable of existing in formswith identical chemical composition but diﬀerent molecular or ionic
arrangements in the crystal structures. These polymorphic forms may
show significantly diﬀerent colouristic and technical properties, and
often the diﬀerent forms have separate commercial applications.
There are numerous examples of pigments that exhibit this phe-
nomenon, including titanium dioxide, iron oxides, lead chromates,
cadmium sulfides, copper phthalocyanine, quinacridones and severalazo pigments, and reference to this will be found in the discussion of
the individual types which follow. Particle size distribution is a fur-
ther important factor in determining the properties of a pigment.
A reasonable generalisation is that organic pigments are prepared in
as fine a particle size as is technically feasible in order to give max-
imum colour strength and transparency. This is especially important
for printing ink applications where the particle size is commonly
below 0.05 mm. For some applications, notably in industrial surface
coatings, a rather larger particle size is desirable for improved opacityand fastness properties, but this is achieved at the expense of colour
strength. The particle size of many inorganic pigments is controlledcarefully (often in the range 0.2–0.3 mm) to provide maximum opacity.
It is essential that a pigment is well dispersed into its application
medium, for example during its introduction into a paint, printing
ink or plastic article. Pigment powders consist of clusters of aggre-
gated particles which must be subjected to conditions that break
down large aggregates into small aggregates and primary particles to
the degree required to give the optimum optical properties. The term
dispersibility refers to the ease with which the desired level of dis-
persion is achieved. The dispersibility of the pigments produced
commercially is optimised to minimise the energy requirements of
the dispersion process. This is usually achieved by surface treatment.
The nature of the surfaces of pigment particles is of importance in
determining application performance because it is these surfaces that
are in contact with the application medium. The particle surfaces that
form directly in the synthesis of pigments often have highly polar216 Chapter 9character and thus they show poor compatibility with many of the
non-polar, or hydrophobic, media with which they will be required to
interact in use. The pigments are therefore often treated with ma-
terials such as organic surface-active agents or resins, either during or
after the synthesis phase of their manufacture, in order to change the
nature of the surfaces of the particles. When the pigment is treated
with the surface-active agent, which contains separate hydrophilicand hydrophobic regions, hydrophilic groups become attached to the
polar pigment surface, as a result of dipolar or ion–dipole forces of
attraction. As a result, the pigment eﬀectively acquires a new surface
that is hydrophobic and hence more compatible with an organic ap-
plication medium. This surface presents a steric barrier so that the
pigment particles are less susceptible to aggregation and also those
aggregates that are formed are more easily broken down by the dis-
persion process. Another way in which the properties of pigments
may be improved by surface treatment is the coating of inorganicpigments, such as titanium dioxide and lead chromates, with in-
organic oxides such as silica or alumina, in order to stabilise the
particles and lead to a marked improvement in lightfastness and
chemical stability.
9.2 INORGANIC PIGMENTS
Natural inorganic pigments, derived mainly from mineral sources,
have been used as colorants since prehistoric times and a few, notably
iron oxides, remain of some significance today. The origin of the
synthetic inorganic pigment industry may be traced to the rudimen-tary products produced by the ancient Egyptians, pre-dating the
synthetic organic colorant industry by several centuries (Chapter 1).
13
The range of modern inorganic pigments was developed for the mostpart during the twentieth century and encompasses white pigments,
by far the most important of which is titanium dioxide, black pig-
ments, notably carbon black, and coloured pigments of a variety of
chemical types, including oxides ( e.g., of iron chromium and the
mixed metal oxides), cadmium sulfides, lead chromates and thestructurally more complex ultramarine and Prussian blue.
The structural chemistry and properties of the important chemical
types of inorganic pigments are dealt with in the sections that follow,together with an outline of the most important synthetic methods.
The colour of inorganic pigments arises from electronic transitions
that are quite diverse in nature and broadly diﬀerent from those re-
sponsible for the colour of organic colorants. For example, they may217 Pigmentsinvolve charge transfer transitions, either ligand–metal ( e.g.in lead
chromates) or between two metals in diﬀerent oxidation states
(in Prussian blue). The colours of cadmium sulfide and sulfoselenide
pigments have been explained on the basis of semiconductor prop-
erties. In ultramarines, the colour is due to radical anions trapped in
the crystal lattice. Inorganic pigments generally exhibit high inherent
opacity, a property that may be attributed to the high refractive indexresulting from the compact atomic or ionic arrangement in their
crystal structure. A wide variety of synthetic methods are employed in
the manufacture of inorganic pigments. Frequently, the chemistry is
carried out in aqueous solution from which the pigments can pre-
cipitate directly in a suitable physical form. In some cases, high
temperature solid state reactions are used ( e.g., mixed phase oxides,
ultramarines), while gas-phase processes, because of their suitabilityfor continuous large-scale manufacture, are of importance for the
manufacture of the two largest tonnage pigments, viz., titanium di-
oxide and carbon black.
9.2.1 Titanium Dioxide and other White Pigments
White pigments are conveniently classified as either hiding or non-
hiding types, depending on their ability to provide opacity. By far the
most important white opaque pigment is titanium dioxide (TiO
2,C I
Pigment White 6).14–16It finds widespread use in paints, plastics,
printing inks, rubber, paper, synthetic fibres, ceramics, textiles andcosmetics. It owes its dominant industrial position to its ability to
provide a high degree of opacity and whiteness (maximum light
scattering with minimum light absorption) and to its excellent dur-
ability and non-toxicity. The pigment is manufactured in two poly-
morphic forms, the rutile and the anatase forms, the former being far
more important commercially. In the crystal structures of both forms,each Ti
41ion is surrounded octahedrally by six O2/C0ions. The rutile
form has a higher refractive index (2.70) than the anatase form (2.55),
a feature that is attributed to the particularly compact atomic ar-
rangement in its crystal structure, and it is therefore more opaque.
Rutile is also the more stable form thermodynamically. Anatase
converts thermally into rutile at temperatures above around 700 1C,
although for most applications this phase conversion does notpresent a problem. Anatase does oﬀer a few advantages over rutile,
which suits it to certain applications. It shows lower absorption than
rutile at low visible wavelengths (380–420 nm), giving a less yellowish
shade, and it tends to be softer in texture. For these reasons, it is often218 Chapter 9appropriate for paper and synthetic fibre applications. Pigmentary
TiO 2is generally manufactured to give a primary particle size of
around 0.25 mm, at which opacity is maximized. Fine primary particle
size grades ( o0.1mm), often referred to as ‘nano TiO 2’, are trans-
parent and show high UV absorption. They are consequently of littlevalue as traditional pigments but have niche applications, for ex-
ample in sun-screening preparations.
Two processes are used in the manufacture of titanium dioxide
pigments: the sulfate process and the chloride process. Both processes
use as starting materials natural deposits of titanium dioxide, which
vary in composition from the rather crude ilmenite ores to the
much purer, but less abundant and hence more expensive, rutile ores.
Both manufacturing methods use chemical conversion processes
to prepare pigmentary titanium dioxide with carefully controlled
particle characteristics. The chemistry of the sulfate process, the
longer established of the two methods, is illustrated schematically inScheme 9.1. In this process, crude ilmenite ore, which contains tita-
nium dioxide together with substantial quantities of oxides of iron, is
digested with concentrated sulfuric acid, giving a solution containing
the sulfates of Ti(
IV), Fe( III) and Fe( II). Treatment of this solution with
iron metal then eﬀects reduction of the Fe( III) ensuring that the iron
in solution exists exclusively in the Fe( II) oxidation state. The solution
at this stage is then concentrated, thereby depositing crystals ofFeSO
4/C17H2O (copperas), a major by-product of the process that is
removed by filtration. Subsequently, in the critical step, the solutionis boiled, leading to a precipitate of hydrated titanium dioxide as a
result of hydrolysis of the aqueous titanium (
IV) sulfate. The hydrated
oxide formed is finally calcined at 800–1000 1C to remove water and
Ilmenite Ore
(TiO 2/FeO/Fe 2O3) Sulfates of Ti(IV), Fe(II), Fe(III)conc H 2SO4 reduction with Fe metal
Sulfates of Ti(IV) and Fe(II)
FeSO 4.7H2O
separated by evaporation,crystallisation
Ti(IV) sulfate
hydrolysis
TiO
2.nH2O TiO 2800–1000°C
Scheme 9.1 Sulfate process for the manufacture of TiO 2.219 Pigmentsresidual sulfate (as H 2SO4) and this leads to the formation of an-
hydrous titanium dioxide. The sulfate process may be adapted to
prepare either the rutile or anatase form of the pigment, by using a
‘seed’ of the appropriate material at the precipitation stage.
In the chloride process (Scheme 9.2), rutile titanium dioxide ore is
initially treated with chlorine in the presence of carbon as a reducing
agent at 800–1000 1C to form titanium tetrachloride. After purification
by distillation, the tetrachloride is subjected to gas-phase oxidation at15001 C with air or oxygen to yield a high purity, fine particle size rutile
titanium dioxide pigment. Chlorine is generated at this stage and may
be recycled. The two manufacturing processes are of roughly com-
parable importance on a worldwide basis. However, the chloride
process oﬀers certain inherent advantages over the sulfate route.
These include suitability for continuous operation, excellent control
of pigment properties and fewer by-products, which in the case of the
sulfate process can lead to waste disposal issues. Titanium dioxide
pigments are commonly subjected to surface aftertreatments to im-
prove application performance. Inorganic surface treatments, pri-
marily with oxides of silicon, aluminium or zirconium, are used to
enhance weathering properties and to provide a barrier that inhibits
the tendency of TiO
2to catalyse photo-oxidation. Organic surface
treatments may be used to enhance the ease of dispersion into the
application medium.
Zinc sulfide (ZnS, CI Pigment White 7) and antimony( III) oxide
(Sb2O3, CI Pigment White 11) are white hiding pigments that find
some specialist applications but their lower refractive indices meanthat they are less eﬃcient than TiO
2in producing opacity. White lead
(basic lead carbonate, CI Pigment White 1), formerly the traditionalwhite hiding pigment, has become virtually obsolete on the grounds
of both inferior technical performance and toxicity.
Non-hiding white pigments, sometimes referred to as extenders or
fillers , are low cost products used in large quantities particularly by
the plastics industry. They are white powders of relatively lowTiO2 + C + Cl2 TiCl4 + CO2
TiCl4 + CO2TiO2 + Cl2recycle
Scheme 9.2 Chloride process for the manufacture of TiO 2.220 Chapter 9refractive index and thus they are capable of playing only a minor role
in providing opacity. They are, however, used in various other ways.
For example, they may be used to modify the flow properties of paints
and inks and to modify the mechanical properties and lower the cost of
plastics. Commonly-used non-hiding white pigments include calcium
carbonate (CaCO 3), barium sulfate (BaSO 4), talc (hydrated magnesium
silicate), china clay (hydrated aluminium silicate) and silica.
9.2.2 Coloured Oxides and Oxide-hydroxides
By far the most important coloured inorganic pigments are the iron
oxides, which provide colours ranging from yellow and red to brown
and black. They are used extensively in paints, plastics and in
building materials such as cement and concrete. Both natural and
synthetic iron oxide pigments are used commercially. Oxides of iron
are major constituents of some of the most abundant minerals in theearth’s crust. Natural iron oxide pigments are manufactured from
deposits of suitable purity by a milling process. The natural iron
oxides, examples of which include yellow ochre, red hematite and
burnt sienna, are cost-eﬀective materials that meet many of the de-
mands of the colour industry. Micaceous iron oxide is a natural pig-
ment used in metal-protective coatings. Its flake-like particles
laminate in the paint film, forming a reflective surface which reduces
radiation degradation of the film, and provides a barrier to moisture
as an aid to corrosion protection.
Synthetic iron oxide pigments oﬀer the advantages over their nat-
ural counterparts of chemical purity and improved control of physicalform. Several diﬀerent structural types are encountered. Red iron
oxides (CI Pigments Red 101 and 102) consist principally of an-
hydrous iron(
III) oxide (Fe 2O3) in its a-crystal modification. Yellow
iron oxide pigments (CI Pigments Yellow 42 and 43), although oftenformulated as hydrated iron(
III) oxides, are better represented as iro-
n(III) oxide-hydroxides, FeO(OH). The principal constituent of black
iron oxide pigments is a non-stoichiometric mixed Fe( II)/Fe( III) oxide.
It is usually formulated as Fe 3O4, however, as the two oxidation states
are generally present in approximately equal proportions. Brownpigments may be derived from the mixed Fe(
II)/Fe( III) oxide or from
mixtures containing Fe 2O3and FeO(OH). Iron oxide pigments are
characterised, in general, by excellent durability, high opacity, low
toxicity and low cost. However, the yellow pigments show somewhat
lower heat stability because of their tendency to lose water at elevated
temperatures, in the process turning redder due to the formation of221 PigmentsFe2O3. The colour of iron oxide pigments has been attributed prin-
cipally to light absorption as a result of ligand–metal charge transfer,
although probably influenced also by the presence of crystal field d–d
transitions. The main deficiency of iron oxide pigments is that the
colours lack brightness and intensity.
The most important synthetic routes to iron oxide pigments involve
either thermal decomposition or aqueous precipitation processes.A method of major importance for the manufacture of a-Fe
2O3, for
example, involves the thermal decomposition in air of FeSO 4.7H 2O
(copperas) at temperatures between 500 and 750 1C. The principal
method of manufacture of the yellow a-FeO(OH) involves the oxida-
tive hydrolysis of Fe( II) solutions, for example in the process repre-
sented by equation (9.1).
4FeSO 4þ6H2OþO2-4FeO(OH)þ4H2SO4 (9.1)
The reaction is sustained by the addition of iron metal which reactswith the sulfuric acid formed, regenerating Fe(
II) in solution. To en-
sure that the desired crystal form precipitates, a seed of a-FeO(OH) is
added. However, with appropriate choice of conditions, for example
of pH and temperature and by ensuring the presence of appropriate
nucleating particles, the precipitation process may be adapted to
prepare either the orange–brown g-FeO(OH), the red a-Fe2O3or the
black Fe 3O4.
The only other ‘simple’ oxide pigment of major significance is
chromium( III) oxide, Cr 2O3, CI Pigment Green 17. This is a tinctorially
weak, dull green pigment but it shows outstanding durability, in-cluding thermal stability to 1000 1C. The pigment is normally pre-
pared by treatment of chromates or dichromates with reducing agentssuch as sulfur or carbon.
The mixed phase oxides, or mixed metal oxides, are a group of
inorganic pigments that were developed originally for use in ceramics
but which have subsequently found widespread application in plas-
tics because of their outstanding heat stability and weathering char-
acteristics combined with moderate colour strength and brightness.Structurally, the pigments may be considered to be formed from
stable oxide host lattices, e.g., rutile (TiO
2), spinel (MgAl 2O4) and in-
verse spinel, into which are incorporated transition metal ions, e.g.,
Cr31,M n21,F e31,C o21,N i21. This provides a range of colours in
which the excellent durability characteristics of the host crystalstructures are retained. An important commercial example of a mixed
oxide pigment based on the spinel lattice is cobalt aluminate blue
(CI Pigment Blue 28), which is usually represented as CoAl
2O4,222 Chapter 9although in practice it is found to contain slightly less cobalt than this
formula would indicate. While the successful formation of a mixed
metal oxide requires that the ‘foreign’ cation must have a suitable
ionic radius to be incorporated into its lattice position, a similar va-
lency to that of the metal ion replaced is not essential. For example, a
metal ion of lower valency may be incorporated into the lattice pro-
vided that an element in a higher oxidation state is incorporated atthe same time in the amount required to maintain statistical elec-
trical neutrality. As an example, nickel antimony titanium yellow
(CI Pigment Yellow 53), an important member of the series, is derived
from the rutile TiO
2structure by partial replacement of Ti41ions with
Ni21ions, at the same time incorporating antimony( V) atoms such
that the Ni/Sb ratio is 1 : 2.
Mixed metal oxide pigments are manufactured by high tempera-
ture (800–1000 1C) solid state reactions of the individual oxide
components in the appropriate quantities. The preparation of nickel
antimony titanium yellow, for example, involves reaction of TiO 2, NiO
and Sb 2O3carried out in the presence of oxygen or other suitable
oxidising agent to eﬀect the necessary oxidation of Sb( III) to Sb( V)i n
the crystal lattice structure.
9.2.3 Cadmium Sulfides, Lead Chromates and Related Pigments
Cadmium sulfides and sulfoselenides provide a range of moderately
intense colours ranging from yellow through orange and red to ma-
roon. They are of particular importance in the coloration of thermo-
plastics, especially in engineering polymers that are processed at high
temperatures, because of their outstanding heat stability. Cadmium
sulfide, CdS (CI Pigment Yellow 37), is dimorphic, existing in a- and
b-forms. The a-form is more stable and is yellow. The colour range
of the commercial pigments is extended by the formation of solid
solutions. When cadmium ions are partially replaced in the latticeby zinc, greenish-yellow products result, whilst replacement of sulfur
by selenium gives rise progressively to the orange, red and maroon
sulfoselenides (CI Pigment Orange 20) and (CI Pigment Red 108),
depending on the degree of replacement. In all of these products,
however, the a-CdS structure is retained. The colour of cadmium
pigments has been explained on the basis of semiconductor prop-erties and is attributed to electronic transitions between a valence
band and a conductance band.
17,18The gap between the valence and
conductance bands in ZnS is 3.58 eV (347 nm), requiring light in theUV region for electronic excitation, so that the material is colourless.223 PigmentsCdS, with a band gap of 2.4 eV (517 nm), absorbs radiation with an
energy 2.4 eV or greater, i.e., the entire blue region of the spectrum, so
that the reflected colour is yellow. CdSe, with a band gap of 1.8 eV,absorbs all visible light except for the low energy red region and so
appears red. The colours of the solid solutions may then be explained
on the basis of band gaps intermediate in energy between those of the
pure species involved. This type of electronic transition gives rise tosteep reflectance curves, accounting for the relatively bright colours of
the pigments.
There has been considerable interest in recent years in nano-
particles based on the cadmium sulfides and sulfoselenides.
19These
materials, referred to as quantum dots , display unique optical and
electrical properties that are quite diﬀerent from the properties ex-
hibited at pigmentary particle size, and are attributed to their semi-
conductor behaviour. The most apparent of these properties is their
intense fluorescence, the emission wavelength of which may be tunedbased on particle size. Quantum dots have potential for applications
in medicine, displays, lasers and solar energy conversion.
Lead chromate pigments provide a range of colours, from greenish-
yellow through orange to yellowish-red.
20They oﬀer good fastness
properties, a high brightness of colour for inorganic pigments, andhigh opacity, at relatively low cost. Historically, lead chromate pig-
ments were found to exhibit a tendency to darken, either on exposure
to light (due to lead chromite formation) or in areas of high industrial
atmospheric pollution (due to lead sulfide formation). These early
problems have been addressed by the use of surface treatment with
inorganic oxides, notably silica, and the current range of pigmentsnow oﬀers excellent durability. The variation in shade of lead chro-
mate pigments is achieved by the formation of solid solutions. In this
respect they resemble the cadmium sulfides, although structurally the
lead chromate pigments present a more complex situation by ex-
hibiting polymorphism. The mid-shade yellow products are essen-
tially pure PbCrO
4(CI Pigment Yellow 34) in its most stable
monoclinic crystal form. Incorporation of sulfate ions into the latticewhile retaining the monoclinic crystal form gives rise to the somewhat
greener lemon chromes. The greenest shades (primrose chromes)consist similarly of solid solutions of PbCrO
4and PbSO 4, stabilised
chemically in an orthorhombic crystal form. Incorporation ofmolybdate anions into the lattice gives rise to the orange and light red
molybdate chromes (CI Pigment Red 104). Molybdate chromes usu-
ally also contain small amounts of sulfate ions, which play a role in
promoting the formation of the appropriate crystal form.224 Chapter 9Cadmium sulfides are prepared by aqueous precipitation processes
using suitable water-soluble sources of cadmium and sulfide ions.
The zinc-containing pigments are formed when appropriate quan-
tities of soluble zinc salts are incorporated into the process, while the
sulfoselenides are prepared by dissolving elemental selenium in the
sulfide solution prior to the precipitation. Since the pigments usually
precipitate from solution in the less stable b-form, an essential final
step in their manufacture is a controlled calcination at 600 1C, which
eﬀects the conversion into the desired a-form. Lead chromate pig-
ments are manufactured by mixing aqueous solutions of lead nitrate
and sodium chromate or sodium dichromate. The mixed phase pig-
ments result when appropriate quantities of sodium sulfate or
molybdate are incorporated into the preparation.
The use of cadmium sulfide and lead chromate pigments is limited
to a considerable extent on the grounds of the potential toxicity that is
associated with the presence of the heavy metals cadmium, lead andchromium(
VI). Their use is restricted by voluntary codes of practice
reinforced by legislation in certain cases. In the European Community,for example, a Directive restricts the use of the cadmium sulfides in
applications where they are not seen to be essential. The Directive
relevant to lead chromates no longer permits their use by consumers
and they are labelled as ‘only for industrial purposes’. Their use is
prohibited in coatings for toys and other consumer paints, graphic
instruments and plastics for consumer goods, including food contact
applications, and there are restrictions placed on their use in paints for
new vehicles and packaging. However, at present, completely satis-
factory substitutes for cadmium pigments are not available for use incertain high temperature plastics applications, especially in terms of
thermal and chemical stability, while lead chromates remain by far the
most cost-eﬀective durable yellow and orange pigments. It is argued,
particularly by the manufacturers of these products, that as a result of
their extreme insolubility they do not present a major health hazard.
Nevertheless, it seems likely that the trend towards their replacement
by more acceptable inorganic and organic pigments will continue in an
increasing range of applications.
Two types of inorganic pigments of more recent origin, bismuth
vanadates and cerium sulfides, were introduced primarily as potentialreplacements for the so-called ‘heavy metal’-containing products.
12
Bismuth vanadates, designated as CI Pigment Yellow 184, which cancontain variable amounts of bismuth molybdate, are brilliant green-
ish-yellow to reddish-yellow pigments with high opacity and good
durability.
21They are used primarily to provide bright deep yellow225 Pigmentsshades in industrial and automotive paints and have been growing
steadily in importance in the decades since their industrial intro-
duction. The pigments are manufactured by an aqueous precipitation
reaction at a controlled pH involving bismuth nitrate, sodium van-
adate and sodium molybdate. The hydrated products that result are
then calcined at temperatures in the range 300–700 1C to remove water
and develop the appropriate crystalline form. The pigments may also
contain inorganic stabilisers, commonly silicates, for improved ther-
mal stability and to reduce photochromism, a colour change when
exposed to light. An exploration of lanthanide chemistry led to the
development of pigments based on cerium sulfide, products that are
still in their industrial infancy, providing orange through to red and
burgundy shades with excellent durability and reported as being non-
toxic. The colours, however, are tinctorially rather weak.
9.2.4 Ultramarines
Of this small group of pigments, ultramarine blue (CI Pigment Blue 29)
is the best known and by far the most important, although violet and
pink pigments are also produced. Ultramarine blue oﬀers excellent
fastness to light and heat at moderate cost. Although capable of
providing brilliant reddish-blue colours in application, ultramarine
blue suﬀers from poor tinctorial strength. As an example, the pigment
has less than one-tenth of the colour intensity of copper phthalo-
cyanine, the most important organic blue pigment. A further de-
ficiency of the pigment is rather poor resistance towards acids.
Ultramarine blue pigments have a complex sodium aluminosilicatezeolitic structure. In essence, the structure consists of an open three-
dimensional framework of AlO
4and SiO 4tetrahedra and within this
framework there are numerous cavities in which are found smallsulfur-containing anions together with sodium cations maintaining
the overall electrical neutrality. It has been conclusively demonstrated
that the radical anion S
3/C0is the species responsible for the blue
colour ( lmax600 nm) of ultramarine blue pigments. It is an interesting
and somewhat surprising observation that products of such high
durability result when species such as S 3/C0, which are otherwise highly
unstable, are trapped within the ultramarine lattice.22,23
Formerly derived from the natural mineral lapis lazuli, ultramarine
blue pigments have, for more than a century, been manufactured
synthetically. The materials used in the manufacture of ultramarines
are china clay (a hydrated aluminosilicate), sodium carbonate, silica,
sulfur and a carbonaceous reducing material such as coal tar pitch.226 Chapter 9For the manufacture of the blue pigments, the traditional method
involves heating the blend of ingredients to a temperature of
750–800 1C over a period of from 50 to 100 h, and the reaction mixture
is then allowed to cool in an oxidising atmosphere over several days.Newer processes involving continuous production are reported to be
generally more environmentally responsible, providing higher prod-
uct quality with reduced processing time and energy consumption.
9.2.5 Prussian Blue
Prussian blue (CI Pigment Blue 27), known also variously as iron blue
or Milori blue, is probably the longest established of all synthetic
colorants still in use and retains moderate importance as a low cost
blue pigment. On the basis of single-crystal X-ray diﬀraction studies,
it has been concluded that Prussian blue is best represented as
the hydrated iron(
III) hexacyanoferrate( II), Fe 4[Fe(CN) 6]3/C1nH2O.24
However, when precipitated in the fine particle size essential for its
use as a pigment, significant and variable amounts of potassium or
ammonium ions are incorporated into the product by surface ad-
sorption or occlusion. In addition, the commercial products may
contain indefinite amounts of water and they can exhibit variable
stoichiometry and a degree of structural disorder. In the crystal
structure of Prussian blue, the Fe( II) atoms are bonded exclusively to
carbon atoms in FeC 6octahedra and the Fe( III) atoms are bonded
exclusively to the nitrogen atoms. Many of the pigmentary propertiesof Prussian blue have been explained on the basis of its crystal
structure. For example, the extreme insolubility of the material has
been attributed to the fact that the complex is polymeric as a result of
the –Fe(
II)–C–N–Fe( III)– bonding sequence. The colour of the pigment
is due to metal–metal electron transfer from an Fe( II) atom to an
adjacent Fe( III) atom, a phenomenon commonly encountered in
mixed oxidation state transition metal compounds of this type.
The industrial production of Prussian blue is based on the reaction
in aqueous solution of sodium hexacyanoferrate( II), Na 4Fe(CN) 6, with
iron( II) sulfate, FeSO 4/C17H2O in the presence of an ammonium salt,
which results initially in the formation of the colourless insoluble
iron( II) hexacyanoferrate( II) (Berlin white). Prussian blue is generated
by subsequent oxidation with a dichromate or chlorate.
9.2.6 Carbon Black
Carbon blacks (CI Pigments Black 6 and 7) dominate the market
for black pigments, providing an outstanding range of technical227 Pigmentsproperties at low cost and finding use in virtually all pigment ap-
plications, including black co atings, plastics and printing inks of all
types.25One of the most important applications for carbon black
pigments is in rubber, where as well as providing the colour, they
fulfil a vital role as reinforcing agents, especially in motor vehicletyres. Carbon blacks strongly absorb infrared and ultraviolet radi-
ation, and can thus provide UV stabilization of plastics. Arguably,the use of black carbon pigments may be traced back to the use in
prehistoric times of charcoal from burnt wood, and indeed this
source provides the black in many ancient cave paintings. Now-
adays, the term carbon black refers to a group of well-defined in-
dustrial products manufactured to provide a controlled particle sizedistribution which determines their optical quality. Although car-
bon black is virtually always classified as an inorganic pigment,
there would be some justification for classifying the product
amongst the high performance orga nic pigments. For example, the
bonding in carbon black is organic in nature, while many of its
properties, especial ly the high absorption coeﬃcient, are arguably
more closely related to those of organi c than of inorganic pigments.
Carbon blacks have been described as having an imperfect graphite-
like structure consisting of layers of large sheets of carbon atomsin six-membered rings that are parallel but further apart than in
graphite, and arranged irr egularly. Carbon bla cks also may contain
other elements, notably oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur.
Oxygen, in variable amounts up to 15%, and small amounts ofhydrogen, are covalently bonded at the edge of the carbon layers,
and nitrogen is mainly integrated as heteroatoms within the aro-
matic layer system. The surface composition of carbon black pig-
ments is thus complex and can play an important role in their
application. In this respect, the presence of oxygen-containing
functional groups (notably carbo xylic acid, ketone, anhydride, lac-
tone and phenolic OH) is highly significant in certain pigmentgrades. This functionality, which is introduced by oxidative after-
treatments, confers hydrophilicity on the pigment surfaces, a feature
that is of particular importance for water-based applications.
Carbon blacks are manufactured from hydrocarbon feedstocks
by partial combustion or thermal decomposition in the gas phaseat high temperatures. World production is today dominated by
a continuous furnace black process, which involves the treatment
of viscous residual oil hydrocarbons, containing a high proportion
of aromatics, with a restricted amount of air at temperatures of
1400–1600 1C.228 Chapter 99.3 ORGANIC PIGMENTS
The synthetic organic pigment industry developed towards the end of
the nineteenth century out of the synthetic textile dye industry that
had become established. Many of the earliest organic pigments wereprepared from water-soluble dyes rendered insoluble by precipitation
on to colourless inorganic substrates such as alumina and barium
sulfate. These products were commonly referred to as lakes. A further
significant early development was the discovery and commercialintroduction of a range of azo pigments, which provided the basis for
the most important yellow, orange and red organic pigments cur-
rently in use. These so-called classical azo pigments oﬀer bright in-
tense colours although generally only moderate performance in terms
of fastness properties. A critical event in the development of the or-
ganic pigment industry was the discovery, in 1928, of copper phtha-
locyanine. This blue pigment was the first product to oﬀer theoutstanding intensity and brightness of colour that is typical of or-
ganic pigments, combined with an excellent set of fastness properties,
comparable with many inorganic pigments. The discovery stimulated
the quest for other chemical types of organic pigment that could
emulate the properties of copper phthalocyanine in the yellow, or-
ange, red and violet shade areas. This research activity gained further
impetus from the emergence of the automotive paint market and the
growth of the plastics and synthetic fibres industries, applications
that demanded high levels of technical performance. Another factorwhich has influenced this development is the increasing environ-
mental concern over the use of heavy metal containing pigments such
as the lead chromates and cadmium sulfides, and the perceived re-
quirement for ‘safer’ alternatives. The range of high performance
organic pigments which has emerged includes the quinacridones,
isoindolines, dioxazines, perylenes, perinones and diketopyrrolo-
pyrroles, together with several improved performance azo pigments.
Organic pigments generally provide higher intensity and brightness
of colour than inorganic pigments. These colours are due to the p–p*
electronic transitions associated with extensively conjugated aromaticsystems (Chapter 2). Organic pigments are unable to provide the de-gree of opacity that is typical of inorganic pigments, because of the
lower refractive index associated with organic crystals. However, the
combination of high colour strength and brightness with high
transparency means that organic pigments are especially well suited
to printing ink applications. The range of commercial organic pig-
ments exhibit a rather variable set of fastness properties that are229 Pigmentsdependent both on the molecular structure and on the nature of the
intermolecular association in the crystalline solid state. Since organic
molecules commonly exhibit some tendency to dissolve in organic
solvents, organic pigment molecules incorporate structural features
that are designed to enhance the solvent resistance. For example, an
increase in the molecular size of the pigment generally improves
solvent resistance. In addition, the amide (–NHCO–) group features
prominently in the chemical structures of organic pigments, because
its presence enhances fastness not only to solvents, but also to lightand heat, as a result of its ability to participate in strong dipolar
interactions and in hydrogen bonding, both intramolecular and
intermolecular, as illustrated in Figure 9.1. A related structural feature
is found in many heterocyclic pigments (e.g. , quinacridones and
diketopyrrolopyrroles) that contain both N–H and C¼ O groups in ring
systems, and this arrangement gives rise to a similar improvement in
fastness properties as a result of strengthening the intermolecular
association throughout the crystal structure. The incorporation,
where appropriate, of halogen substituents and of metal ions, par-ticularly of the alkaline earths and transition elements, can also have
a beneficial eﬀect on fastness properties. The following sections
provide an overview of the more important chemical types of com-
mercial organic pigments, together with some discussion of the
structural features that determine their suitability for particular
applications.
1,3,5
9.3.1 Azo Pigments
Azo pigments, both numerically and in terms of tonnage produced,
dominate the yellow, orange and red shade areas in the range ofNO
H
NO
HNO
HN-O
H+
(a) (b)
Figure 9.1 Origin of (a) intermolecular hydrogen bonding and (b) dipolar inter-
actions due to the amide group in organic pigments.230 Chapter 9commercial organic pigments (Chapter 3). The chemical structures of
some important classical azo pigments are shown in Figure 9.2. The
structures are illustrated in the ketohydrazone form since structural
studies carried out on a wide range of industrial azo pigments have, in
each case, demonstrated that the pigments exist exclusively in this
form in the solid state.11Many other colour chemistry texts have
followed the commonly-used convention to illustrate them in the azo
tautomeric form. Simple classical monoazo pigments such as Hansa
Yellow G ( 9.1) (CI Pigment Yellow 1)26and Toluidine Red ( 9.2)
(CI Pigment Red 3)27are products that provide bright colours and
good lightfastness, but rather poor solvent resistance. The good
lightfastness of these molecules is attributed to the extensive intra-
molecular hydrogen-bonding in six-membered rings. The inferior
fastness to organic solvents is due to their small molecular size and
the fact that the intermolecular interactions in the crystal structures
involve essentially only van der Waals forces. The use of these pig-ments is largely restricted to decorative paints. The pigments resist
dissolving in the solvents used in these paints (either water or ali-
phatic hydrocarbons) at the low temperatures involved in their ap-
plications, but they have a tendency to dissolve in more powerful
solvents, especially if higher temperatures are involved, a feature that
restricts their use in many industrial paint, printing ink and plastics
applications.
The most important yellow azo pigments, particularly for printing
inks but also for certain coatings applications are the dis-
azoacetoacetanilides (diarylide yellows), which include CI Pigment
Yellow 12, 9.3a, CI Pigment Yellow 13, 9.3b, and the more durable CI
Pigment Yellow 83, 9.3c. These pigments have been shown to exist in
bis-ketohydrazone forms, structurally analogous to Hansa Yellow G,9.1(CI Pigment Yellow 1).
28–30They exhibit higher colour strength
and transparency than the corresponding monoazo pigments, prop-erties that are particularly suitable for printing ink applications, and
improved solvent fastness which is attributable to the larger mo-
lecular size. The pyrazolone oranges, such as CI Pigment Orange 34,
9.4, are similar both in chemical structure and in properties to the
diarylide yellows and are used in a similar range of applications. The
naphthol reds, of which CI Pigment Red 170, 9.5, is an important
industrial example, are structurally related to Toluidine Red ( 9.2,C I
Pigment Red 3). Compound 9.5shows superior solvent resistance as a
result of its larger molecular size and due to the presence of the amidegroups, which provide strong intermolecular forces of attraction in
the crystal lattice structure. Consequently, it is suitable for use in a231 PigmentsNN
O
N
OOCONH 2N
N
ONCH3
N
NNCH3
O
NH3C
O
N
N
O
CO2RCH3
SN NCl
ClN
N OO
NHOCH3
O
H3CN
H
N NCl
ClN
NN
N
NN
OCH3
O
H3CR1
R2R2
R1
CH3
H3CHO-
O
HO-
O
H
HH
C2H5HOOOHH
HH
9.59.3a: R 1 = R 2 = R 3 = H
9.3b: R 1 = R 2 = CH 3; R3 = H
9.3c: R 1 = R 3 = OCH 3; R2 = Cl
M2+9.1+
9.2
9.4
2-R3
R3
9.6a: R = H;  M = Ca
9.6b: R = Cl; M = Ca
9.6c: R = Cl; M = Mn +
Figure 9.2 Chemical structures of some important classical azo pigments.232 Chapter 9wider range of paint and plastics applications. The most important
classical red azo pigments are metal salts, such as compounds 9.6a–c,
which are derived from azo dyes containing SO 3/C0Na1or –CO 2/C0Na1
groups by replacement of the Na1ions with divalent metal ions,
notably Ca21,S r21,B a21and Mn21.31They are products of high
colour strength and brightness, high transparency and good solvent
resistance. They are especially important for printing ink appli-cations. CI Pigment Red 57:1, 9.6a, is the pigment principally used to
provide the magenta inks for multicolour printing. These productsare complex structurally.
32,33The metal atoms bond to oxygen atoms
derived from carboxylate, keto and sulfonate groups in the ligandsand to water molecules with some bridging between the ligands,
which leads to a polymeric ladder structure. Metal salt pigments have
evolved from products referred to as lakes , which were essentially
anionic azo dyestuﬀs precipitated on to inorganic substrates such asalumina and barium sulfate.
Azo pigments are manufactured using the two-stage process of
diazotization followed by azo coupling as detailed in Chapter 3. Toensure that the pigments are obtained in high yield and purity, it is
essential to maintain careful control of experimental conditions in
order to minimise the formation of side products that might adversely
aﬀect the colouristic properties of the pigments. When azo coupling is
complete, the aqueous suspension is generally heated to the boil for a
period of time, often in the presence of surface-active agents, to refine
the pigment particles and develop crystallinity. Most commercial
diarylide yellow and orange pigments, including compounds 9.3a–c
and9.4are derived synthetically from 3,3
0-dichlorobenzidine (DCB), a
suspected carcinogen. The sequence leading to CI Pigment Yellow 12,9.3a, is presented in Chapter 3 as an example of the synthesis of a
symmetrical disazo colorant. Although the pigments themselves are
essentially non-toxic, evidence has been presented that they may
cleave thermally at temperatures above 200 1C to give a monoazo
compound and that prolonged heating above 240 1C causes further
decomposition leading to release of DCB.
34As a result of these ob-
servations, the use of these pigments is no longer recommended forapplications where high temperatures are likely to be encountered,for example in thermoplastics. Metal salt azo pigments, such as
compounds 9.6a–c , are prepared by traditional diazotisation/coupling
processes to form the sodium salt of an azo dyestuﬀ which may showsome solubility in water. This species is then treated with a solution of
an appropriate salt of the divalent metal, which displaces the sodium
to form the insoluble pigment.233 Pigments9.3.2 Copper Phthalocyanines
Copper phthalocyanines provide by far the most important of all blue
and green pigments. The chemistry of the phthalocyanines has been
discussed in some depth in Chapter 5, in terms of the synthesis andstructures, so that only a brief account is presented here. Copper
phthalocyanine, 9.7(CuPc, CI Pigment Blue 15), is arguably the single
most important organic pigment. Copper phthalocyanine findswidespread use in most pigment applications because of its brilliant
blue colour and its excellent resistance towards light, heat, solvents,
acids and alkalis. In addition, despite its structural complexity, cop-
per phthalocyanine is a relatively inexpensive pigment as it is
manufactured in high yield from low cost starting materials (Chapter 5).
Copper phthalocyanine exhibits polymorphism, the most important
crystal phases being the a-a n d b-forms (several other forms have been
reported). Both the a-a n d b-forms are of commercial importance. The
greenish-blue b-form of the pigment is almost always the pigment of
choice for cyan printing inks, and it is suitable also for use in most
paint and plastics applications. The manufacture of copper phthalo-
cyanine blue pigments, including the methods used to provide the
diﬀerent polymorphs and to ensure that they are prepared in a particle
size form suitable for application, has been described in Chapter 5. The
most important green organic pigments are the halogenated copper
phthalocyanines, CI Pigment Green 7, in which the 16 ring hydrogen
atoms of the CuPc molecule are replaced virtually completely bychlorine, and CI Pigment Green 36, a designation that incorporates a
range of bromo- and bromochloro-copper phthalocyanines. The hue of
these pigments becomes progressively yellower with increasing brom-
ine substitution. The phthalocyanine greens exhibit the same out-
standing colouristic and technical performance as the blue pigments
from which they are derived and find equally widespread use in the
coloration of paints, printing inks and plastics.
NN
N
N
N
NNNCu
9.7234 Chapter 99.3.3 High performance Organic Pigments
Copper phthalocyanines, as discussed in the previous section, al-
though generally regarded as classical organic pigments, exhibit
outstanding technical performance and so could equally well be de-scribed as high performance organic pigments. This section contains
a survey of a range of the organic pigments, encompassing a wide
variety of structural types, which have been developed in an attempt
to match the properties of copper phthalocyanines in the yellow, or-
ange, red and violet shades. They include two groups of azo pigments,
a series of carbonyl pigments of various types, and dioxazines. High
performance organic pigments are particularly suited to applications
that require bright, intense colours and at the same time place
stringent demands on the technical performance of pigments, such
as the coatings applied to car bodies, referred to as automotive paints.
They provide excellent durability, combined with good colour prop-erties but they tend to be rather expensive.
12
There are two classes of high performance azo pigments: disazo
condensation pigments and benzimidazolone azo pigments. The
chemical structures of representative examples of these products are
illustrated in Figure 9.3. Disazo condensation pigments constitute a
range of durable yellow, red, violet and brown products, with struc-
tures such as compound 9.8(CI Pigment Red 166). These pigments
derive their name, and also their relatively high cost, from the ratherelaborate synthetic procedures involved in their manufacture, whichinvolves a condensation reaction (Scheme 3.8, Chapter 3). An im-
portant group of high performance azo pigments contain the benzi-
midazolone group, exemplified by CI Pigment Red 183, 9.9, which
range in shades from yellow to bluish-red and brown and exhibitexcellent fastness properties. Their high stability to light and heat and
NN
O
NN
ON
NCl
Cl
O
Cl
ClO
N
N
OCl
O
CN
ONN
O
HHH
HH
HHCH3
H
9.9 9.8
Figure 9.3 Chemical structures of some high performance azo pigments.235 Pigmentstheir insolubility is attributed to extensive intermolecular association
as a result of hydrogen-bonding and dipolar forces in the crystalstructure, as illustrated in Figure 9.4.
35
Carbonyl pigments of various types may also be classed as high
performance products. These include some anthraquinones, quina-
cridones, perylenes, perinones, isoindolines and diketopyrrolo-
pyrroles. The chemistry of these groups of colorant has been
discussed previously in Chapter 4, and so is not considered further in
this section. Some representative examples of the chemical structures
of important high performance carbonyl pigments are illustrated in
Figure 9.5.
Several vat dyes developed originally for textile applications are
suitable, after conversion into an appropriate pigmentary physicalform, for use in many paint and plastics applications.
36Examples
of these so-called vat pigments include the anthraquinones,Indanthrone Blue, 9.10 (CI Pigment Blue 60), and Flavanthrone Yel-
low, 9.11 (CI Pigment Yellow 24), and the perinone, 9.12 (CI Pigment
Orange 43). Other high performance carbonyl pigments include the
quinacridone, 9.13 (CI Pigment Violet 19), diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)
pigments, such as CI Pigment Red 254, 9.14, perylenes, for example CI
Pigment Red 179, 9.15, and isoindolines, such as CI Pigment Yellow
139, 9.16. The excellent lightfastness, solvent resistance and thermal
stability of carbonyl pigments may be explained in many cases byN
NO
HH
NN
OH
H
NN
O
HN
HAZONAPHTHOLONH
HAZONAPHTHOL
O
N
NO
HH
Figure 9.4 Intermolecular association in the crystal structure of a benzimidazolone
azo pigment.236 Chapter 9intermolecular association in the solid state as a result of a combin-
ation of hydr ogen bonding and dipolar forces, similar to that illustrated
for the benzimidazolone azo pigments in Figure 9.4. A diagrammatic
illustration of the intermolecular hydrogen bonding that exists in the
crystal lattice arrangement of all of the polymorphic forms of quina-cridone, 9.13, is given in Figure 4.6, Chapter 4.
37
Other chemical types of high performance organic pigments are
exemplified by the tetrachloroisoindolinone, 9.17 (CI Pigment Yellow
110), and the dioxazine, 9.18 (Carbazole Violet, CI Pigment Violet 23).
There has been a considerable amount of research carried out in an
attempt to exploit the potential of metal complex chemistry to provide
high performance pigments, particularly of yellow and red shades, to
complement the colour range of the copper phthalocyanines, whichcannot be extended outside blues and greens. Several azo, azo-
methine and dioxime transition metal complex pigments have been
obtained that show excellent lightfastness, solvent resistance andNNO
ONNO
OO
O
HHH
HNNO
ONN
N NO
O
N H 3C
OO O
N
OCH3NHNN
NNO
O
OOOO
HH
H
HN N
OOCl
ClHH
9.149.139.10 9.11
9.12
9.15 9.16
Figure 9.5 Chemical structures of a range of high performance carbonyl pigments.237 Pigmentsthermal stability. However, the products have achieved limited com-
mercial success largely because the enhancement of fastness prop-
erties of the organic ligand that results from complex formation is
almost inevitably accompanied by a reduction in the brightness of the
colour. This eﬀect may be explained by a broadening of the ab-
sorption band as a result of overlap of the band due to p–p* transi-
tions of the ligand with those due to transition metal d–d transitions
or ligand–metal charge transfer transitions.
NHN
NHNCl Cl
Cl
Cl
OO
Cl
Cl
Cl Cl
9.17
NON
NON
C2H5Cl
ClC2H5
9.18
9.4 MOLECULAR AND CRYSTAL MODELLING OF PIGMENTS
In dye chemistry, the relationship between the molecular structure
of a dye and its technical performance, including colour and
fastness properties, is now well-established. As discussed at length in
Chapter 2, computational methods have emerged as indispensible
tools in the development of our fundamental understanding of the
properties of coloured molecules and in the design of new products.
Molecular modelling techniques, which include a range of methods
based on quantum mechanics and molecular mechanics, allow themolecular and physical properties of a particular dye to be predicted
by calculation with some confidence, and without the need to resort
to synthesis. The same principles apply to the molecular structures of238 Chapter 9organic pigments. As an example, the correlation between the oscil-
lator strength values, calculated using the PPP molecular orbital ap-
proach, and the experimental molar extinction coeﬃcient values
obtained for solutions of a series of monoazo and disazo pigments is
illustrated in Figure 2.17 (Chapter 2). However, structure–property
relationships are much more complex in the case of pigments be-
cause they are applied as discrete crystalline solid particles, ratherthan as individual molecules as is often the case with dyes. Thus, the
colouristic and technical performance of pigments is dependent not
only on the molecular structure but also on the crystal structure ar-
rangement, the nature of the pigment particles, particularly their size
and shape distribution, and their surface characteristics. In recent
decades, the application of single-crystal X-ray diﬀraction studies, the
significant advances in structure determination from X-ray powder
diﬀraction patterns, and advances in a variety of solid state spectro-
scopic techniques, including NMR and electron diﬀraction, haveprovided detailed information on the solid state structures of most of
the inorganic and organic pigments in current use. As a result, our
understanding of the eﬀect on the properties of pigments of the way
that molecules and ions pack in the crystal lattice structure, and the
nature of the intermolecular interactions, has advanced significantly.
In addition, the information has facilitated the development of
computer-aided methods for the prediction by calculation of aspects
of the performance of pigments in the crystalline solid state. The
principles of crystal design in the context of pigments may be applied
to assist in the development of new products for improved perform-ance based on an understanding of their structural properties. Crystaldesign incorporates aspects of crystal engineering (the design of the
bulk structure within the particles), control of morphology (the design
of particle size and shape) and the engineering of the particle sur-
faces. The methods used in crystal design rely on a range of compu-
tational tools that have seen recent significant advances, due in no
small measure to the dramatic increase in available computing
power.
38
Crystal engineering may be defined as an understanding of inter-
molecular interactions in the context of crystal packing and the util-isation of such understanding in the design of new solid materials
with desired chemical and physical properties.
39Crystal structure
determination is the key feature that provides the information re-quired for the crystal engineering. The molecules in organic pigment
crystal structures and the ions in many inorganic pigment crystal
structures are almost invariably close-packed, a feature that leads to239 Pigmentsdesirable application properties, such as high insolubility and ther-
mal stability. In particular, the crystal structures of organic pigments
that give high performance contain specific molecular features that
maximize the intermolecular interactions within the close-packed
structures. Various intermolecular forces operate, including van der
Waals and dipolar forces and p–pinteractions. However, in this re-
spect, hydrogen bonding commonly assumes special importance.40
The networks of intermolecular bonds that are a feature of manycrystal structures are illustrated schematically for linear trans qui-
nacridone, 9.13, in Figure 4.6 (Chapter 4) and for benzimidazolone
azo pigments in Figure 9.4 in this chapter. Several other chemicaltypes of high performance organic pigment exhibit similar hydrogen
bonding patterns, including diketopyrrolopyrroles and isoindolines.
Most crystal structure determinations that have been carried out on
organic pigments are based on traditional X-ray crystallography ap-
plied to single crystals. However, due to their low solubility, suitablesingle crystals are often diﬃcult to grow and special techniques are
required, including high temperature vacuum sublimation and crys-
tallization from high-boiling solvents with controlled cooling. In re-
cent years, it has become increasingly feasible to determine crystal
structures from X-ray powder diﬀraction patterns.
41Ideally, the
powder samples used should be highly crystalline in order to provideX-ray diﬀraction patterns of suﬃciently high resolution to allow the
indexing of the patterns, so that the unit cell , the small unit that de-
scribes the bulk arrangement of atoms or molecules within the crystalwhen stacked together in three-dimensional space, and the space
group , which provides a description of the symmetry of the crystal,
may be determined. This provides the first step towards a model fromwhich the final structure may be obtained using mathematical re-
finement methods. The results of structural investigations carried out
using this approach are progressively filling in the gaps in our
knowledge of the crystal structures of pigments for which single-
crystal determination has not proved successful, for example of some
metal salt azo pigments.
33
A crystal structure consists of a set of atoms or molecules arranged
in a particular way, and a lattice that exhibits long-range order and
symmetry. A property of crystals that provides a measure of the
strength of the intermolecular interactions in a crystal is the lattice
energy , which is sometimes referred to as packing energy. Lattice
energy may be defined as the energy released when ions or molecules
in the gas phase are condensed into a solid three-dimensional lattice
structure. Since this is an exothermic process, the enthalpy change is240 Chapter 9invariably negative. Owing to the strong intermolecular forces of at-
traction in pigment crystals, they exhibit lattice energies with high
numerical values. Calculation of the strength of these interactions
may be carried out to assist understanding of crystal growth pro-
cesses. In the so-called atom–atom method, the strength of an
intermolecular force is approximated as a sum of the constituent
atom–atom interactions. Thus, the lattice energy ( Ecryst) of a crystal
may be calculated by summing all of the interactions between a
central molecule and all of the surrounding molecules in the crystal.
These calculations commonly use methods based on force fields,
utilising the information made available by crystal structure de-termination. The reader will find explanations of the basis of force
field calculations in the section on molecular mechanics in Chapter 2
(Section 2.9.3). An important feature of the crystal engineering pro-
cess is to verify that the calculated lattice energy values correspond
reasonably closely with experimental sublimation enthalpies, al-though the limited availability of these values for pigments is a
complication.
Crystal morphology, which describes the size and shape (or habit) of
a crystal, is of fundamental importance in determining many of the
application properties of pigments. It is a feature that is of prime im-
portance in ensuring that pigments have optimum optical properties,
such as colour strength and transparency/opacity, and flow properties
in the media into which the pigment is dispersed. Morphology may
also influence fastness properties. The crystal morphologies of a pig-
ment are defined by the nature of the intermolecular forces. In general,
pigments whose intermolecular interactions are defined mainly by p–p
forces within stacks of molecules tend to form needles or rods parallel
to the stacking direction, as typified by copper phthalocyanine, 9.7
(CI Pigment Blue 15) (see Figure 5.1 in Chapter 5). The presence of oneother directional interaction usually leads to plate-like morphology.
Crystal engineering methods that are capable of predicting crystal
morphology thus oﬀer considerable potential for the development of
pigment products.
The morphology of a crystal is determined by the relative rates of
growth of diﬀerent crystal faces as the crystal forms. The surface at-tachment energy (E
att) may be defined for a particular crystal face as
the energy released as a growth slice attaches to the surface of agrowing crystal, and is related to the lattice energy ( E
cryst)b yt h e
relationship:
Ecryst¼EsliceþEatt241 Pigmentswhere Esliceis the slice energy, the energy released by the formation of
a slice of thickness d, the spacing between planes at the crystal face.
A simplified representation of this crystal growth process is illustrated
schematically in Figure 9.6(a). It has been shown that the attachment
energy at a face is inversely proportional to the rate of crystal growth
at the face. This means that the faces with the lowest attachment
energies are the slowest growing, and therefore the most importantfaces with regard to the morphology of the crystal. Methods based on
force fields, using crystal structure data, may be used to calculate the
attachment energies for the various crystal faces and thus allow pre-
diction of crystal morphology.
42
The properties of the surface of pigment particles are commonly
controlled in industrial products by the use of additives that attach to
the surfaces and modify the surface character. The use of ‘tailor-
made’ additives to enhance specific aspects of application perform-
ance, traditionally on the basis of trial and error experimentation, hasbeen extensively investigated and many such additives are now
commonly used. The molecular structures of the additives may be
Eslice
Eatt
Eatt'
Eatt''Eslice'
(a)
(c) (b)
Figure 9.6 Schematic representations of crystal growth: (a) with no additive; (b) with
a disruptor additive; (c) with a blocker additive.242 Chapter 9considered as containing two specific structural features, referred to
as the pigment chromophore and the functional substituent, as il-
lustrated in Figure 9.7. The former contains structural features closely
related to the chemical structure of the pigment for which it is de-
signed, ensuring that the additive attaches strongly to the pigment
surface, on the basis of molecular recognition. The functional sub-
stituent is designed to provide the desired eﬀect at the surface inorder to control the chemical character of the surface, for example
hydrophilic or hydrophobic, anionic or cationic, so that compatibility
with a particular application medium is enhanced and dispersion
properties improved. Notable examples of such additives are a range
of carboxylate, amino, sulfonate, phosphonate and amide derivatives
of copper phthalocyanine that are used to modify the properties of
copper phthalocyanine pigments. A further role of the additives is to
influence the relative rates of growth at crystal faces by attaching to
the surfaces during crystal formation, and thus modify the particlemorphology. Figure 9.6 illustrates two ways in which the additive may
operate, either in disruptor mode, Figure 9.6(b), where the additive is
smaller than the pigment molecule, or in blocker mode, Figure 9.6(c),
where it is larger than the pigment molecule. In either mode, as
shown in Figure 9.6, the additive limits growth at a face by inhibiting
attachment of a crystal slice. The eﬀect of ‘tailor-made’ additives on
crystal morphology may be predicted using crystal engineering prin-
ciples on the basis of the calculation of binding energies from
modified slice energies (E
slice0) and attachment energies (E att0and
Eatt00). Binding energies influence the way in which the additives ad-
sorb selectively on specific faces of pigment crystals, and thus modifytheir growth rates.
The ability to predict crystal structures of molecules by modelling
calculations has been an aim of crystallographers and solid-state
chemists for many years, and considerable eﬀort has been made to
address the challenging issues involved. The approaches used have
involved calculations of crystal packing by modelling the 3D struc-
tural arrangements such that the magnitude of the lattice energy is
Pigment
chromophorefunctional substituent
Figure 9.7 Schematic representations of an additive designed to modify the surface
character of a pigment.243 Pigmentsmaximized on the basis of the strength of intermolecular inter-
actions. However, despite strenuous eﬀorts towards this goal applying
energy minimization techniques using force field or quantum
mechanical methods, there remains no completely successful ana-
lytical mathematical solution. The main problem is that the process
inevitably generates vast numbers of structures, which may be con-
sidered as virtual polymorphs, and this creates immense diﬃcultiesin locating global energy minima within the numerous possible low
energy packing configurations. In general, several hundred unique
crystal packings remain after the optimization, which must be
evaluated either in terms of calculated physical properties such as
density and lattice energy or by means of empirical scoring func-
tions.
43A particular area in which these approaches are beginning to
oﬀer some promise is in the prediction of new polymorphic possi-bilities for existing pigments.
44
9.5 PIGMENTS FOR SPECIAL EFFECTS
There is an interesting and diverse range of pigment types which
have the ability to produce novel and unusual optical eﬀects in
application. These products, which include metallic, pearlescent,
optically-variable an d fluorescent pigments as discussed in this
section, have been experiencing significant growth in popularity andindustrial importance in recent decades, driven by factors such as
the fashion trends in automotive applications, cosmetics and other
consumer markets.
9.5.1 Metallic Pigments
The most important metallic pigment by far is aluminium flake, CI
Pigment Metal 1. Aluminium pigments are used in a wide range of
paint, printing ink and plastics applications to simulate the opticaleﬀect that is characteristic of metallic silver and to provide a range of
coloured metallic eﬀects when used in combination with transparent
grades of traditional coloured pigments. They are best known, how-
ever, for their use in metallic car finish paints.
45The pigments owe
their importance to the highly reflective nature of aluminium metal,which provides attractive bright, sparkling optical eﬀects, and to their
stability, which owes much to the thin, tenacious oxide film on the
surface of the pigment particles. Aluminium pigments are generally
manufactured from aluminium metal by a wet ball-milling process
in the presence of a fatty acid (stearic or oleic) and a mineral oil.244 Chapter 9The presence of the liquid ingredients is essential to improve the
eﬃciency of the process and to eliminate the potential explosion
hazard of dry grinding.
Aluminium pigments consist of small, lamellar particles, or plate-
lets, which facilitates their alignment in the application medium, as
illustrated schematically in Figure 9.8. The shape of the particles is
optimized to maximize the reflective qualities of the pigment surfaces
while minimizing the scattering that takes places mostly from rough
edges. The pigments are categorised according to their ability to ‘leaf’.Leafing grades when incorporated into a film become oriented in a
parallel overlapping fashion at or near to the surface of the film, and
thus provide a continuous metallic sheath and a bright silvery finish.
Non-leafing grades are distributed more evenly throughout the film
producing a sparkling metallic eﬀect. There are also a series of bronze
pigments manufactured from copper or copper/zinc alloy by a dry
milling process. They are used to simulate a gold or copper eﬀect in
application.
9.5.2 Pearlescent Pigments
Pearlescent pigments give rise to a white pearl lustre eﬀect often ac-
companied by a coloured iridescence, similar to that observed in
nature from pearls, shells, fish scales and certain minerals.
46A wide
range of particle compositions are known to produce pearl eﬀects,
although the most important commercial pearlescent pigments con-
sist of thin platelets of mica coated with metal oxides, notably tita-
nium dioxide but also oxides of zirconium, chromium and iron,
which partly reflect and partly transmit incident light. The mica
substrate acts both as a template for the pigment synthesis and as a
support for the deposition of the thin oxide layers. In application,
simultaneous reflection of incident light from oriented platelets cre-
ates the sense of depth that is characteristic of pearlescent lustre. The
optical eﬀects from pearlescent pigments arise from a combination of(a) (b)
Figure 9.8 Schematic representation of the orientation of (a) leafing and (b) non-
leafing aluminium pigment particles in application.245 Pigmentsmultiple transmission, refraction and reflection phenomena as the
incident light interacts with successive layers of materials with dif-
ferent refractive indices (mica is of low refractive index, while tita-
nium dioxide is highly refracting). In products where the layers are of
an appropriate thickness, iridescent colours are produced by inter-
ference phenomena. Pearlescent pigments are used most commonly
in automotive finishes, plastics and cosmetics.
9.5.3 Optically-Variable Pigments
A range of optically variable pigments have been developed, providing
unusual and novelty colour-play eﬀects that are dependent on the
angle of view. These pigments show striking changes in colour and
lightness depending on whether the angle of view is facing or grazing.
The optical variability is based on a combination of reflection,interference and absorption eﬀects in pigments based on multi-
layered systems. These pigments show a striking angle-dependent
colour-play of violet, red, gold and green hues, the nature of the eﬀect
being dependent on the chemical composition and the thickness of
the layers. One type of pigment consists of a core of a plate-like mi-
caceous iron oxide pigment, which provides the inner reflection of
gold, copper or red hues, coated first with a layer of low refractive
index silica, which provides interference colours depending on the
film thickness, and an outer layer of selectively reflecting iron oxide.In a related type of system, the inner core is an aluminium metallic
pigment. These products are suitable for use in coatings, including
automotive finishes, plastics, ceramics and cosmetics.
9.5.4 Fluorescent Pigments
Daylight fluorescent pigments consist of fluorescent dyes dissolved in
a transparent, colourless polymer and ground to a fine particle size.
47
In this way, they are chemically diﬀerent from traditional coloured
pigments. In their application, the pigments give rise to colours with a
remarkable vivid brilliance as a result of the extra glow of fluorescent
light. The applications of fluorescent pigments are mostly associated
with their high visibility and ability to attract attention. They are
used in printing inks, for example in advertising, posters, magazines
and supermarket packaging, coatings applications–especially where
safety is an important feature, such as fire-engines, ambulances,
rescue vehicles and aircraft–and in a range of plastic products such as
toys, bottles and other containers. The fluorescent dyes most246 Chapter 9commonly used are Rhodamines (Chapter 6) in the red to violet shade
range, and aminonaphthalimides and coumarins (Chapter 4) in the
yellow shade range. The polymers in which the dyes form a solid
solution play a critical role. They must act as good solvents for the
dyes as well as providing high solvent resistance and thermal stability.
Traditionally, daylight fluorescent pigments have been based on a
thermoset polymeric toluenesulfonamide-melamine-formaldehyderesin matrix. However, there is an increasing trend towards the use of
‘non-formaldehyde’ thermoplastic polymers based on polyurethane,
polyamide or polyester resins. A significant issue with many fluor-
escent pigments is the quenching of the fluorescence as the con-
centration of the dye in the resin is increased. This is particularly
significant with the Rhodamines, which exhibit considerable con-
centration quenching above about 1%. Yellow dyes, in contrast, may
be used up to 5–10% in certain matrices before an excessive dulling
eﬀect, characteristic of this type of quenching, occurs. In contrast,mixtures of certain dyes may produce more brilliant fluorescence
than a single dye, as a result of transfer of energy from one dye to
another. In the same way certain fluorescent brightening agents
(FBAs) may act as sensitisers by enhancing the fluorescence yield
from yellow dyes. The lightfastness of daylight fluorescent pigments
is generally inferior to that of traditional high performance organic
pigments, and this limits their use in exterior applications. Never-
theless, careful selection of the resin matrix, the use of light stabil-
ising additives, or the use of UV-absorbing overlayers can produce
fluorescent colours with reasonable light stability.
REFERENCES
1. W. Herbst and K. Hunger, Industrial Organic Pigments. Production,
Properties, Applications , Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd
edn, 2004.
2. G. Buxbaum and G. Pfaﬀ (ed.), Industrial Inorganic Pigments,
Production, Properties, Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,
Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2005.
3. R. M. Christie, The Organic and Inorganic Chemistry of Pigments,
Surface Coatings Reviews, Oil and Colour Chemists’ Association,
London, 2002.
4. R. M. Christie, Pigments: Structures and Synthetic Procedures,
Surface Coatings Reviews, Oil and Colour Chemists’ Association,
London, 1993.247 Pigments5. J. Lenoir, Organic pigments, in The Chemistry of Synthetic Dyes , ed.
K. Venkataraman, Academic Press, London, 1971, vol. 5, ch. 6.
6. P. A. Lewis (ed.), Pigment Handbook , John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
New York, 2nd edn, 1988.
7. D. Paterson, in Colorants and Auxiliaries: Organic Chemistry and
Application Properties , ed. J. Shore, Society of Dyers and
Colourists, Bradford, 1990, vol. 1, ch. 2.
8. H. Zollinger, Color Chemistry: Syntheses, Properties and
Applications of Organic Dyes and Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 3rd edn, 2003, ch. 12.
9. W. S. Czajkowski, in Modern Colorants: Synthesis and Structure ,
Blackie Academic and Professional, London, 1995, vol. 3, ch. 3.
10. J. T. Guthrie and L. Lin, Physical-chemical Aspects of Pigment
Applications, Surface Coatings Reviews, Oil and Colour Chemists
Association, London, 1994.
11. K. Hunger, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1999, 29, 71.
12. H. M. Smith (ed.), High Performance Pigments , Wiley-VCH Verlag
GmbH, Weinheim, 2002.
13. H. Skelton, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1999, 29, 43.
14. W. J. Ferguson, Plastic Rubber Int. , 1983, 8, 32.
15. J. H. Braun, A. Baidins and R. E. Marganski, Prog. Org. Coat. , 1992,
20, 105.
16. J. H. Braun, J. Coat. Technol. , 1997, 69, 59.
17. M. V. Orna, J. Chem. Educ. , 1978, 55, 478.
18. W. E. Smith, J. Oil. Col. Chem. Assoc. , 1985, 68, 170.
19. N. V. Hullavarad, S. S. Hullavarad and P. C. Karulkar, J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. , 2008, 8, 3272.
20. A. C. D. Cowley, Rev. Prog. Color , 1986, 16, 16.
21. R. Nayak, A. Suryanarayana and S. B. Rao, J. Sci. Ind. Res. , 2000, 59,
833.
22. S. E. Tarling, P. Barnes and J. Klinowski, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B ,
1988, 44, 128.
23. J. Fabian, N. Komiha, R. Linguern and P. Rosmus, J. Mol. Struct.:
Theochem , 2006, 801, 63.
24. H. J. Buser, D. Schwarzenbach, W. Petter and A. Ludi, Inorg.
Chem. , 1977, 16, 2704.
25. J.-B. Donnet (ed.), Carbon Black Science and Technology , CRC
Press, New York, 2nd edn, 1993.
26. E. F. Paulus, Z. Kristallogr. , 1984, 167, 65.
27. A. Whitaker, Z.Kristallogr. , 1978, 147, 99.
28. M. J. Barrow, R. M. Christie, A. J. Lough, J. E. Monteith and P. N.
Standring, Dyes Pigments , 2000, 45, 153.248 Chapter 929. M. J. Barrow, R. M. Christie and J. E. Monteith, Dyes Pigments ,
2002, 55, 79.
30. M. J. Barrow, R. M. Christie and T. D. Badcock, Dyes Pigments ,
2003, 57, 99.
31. R. M. Christie and J. Mackay, Color. Technol. , 2008, 124, 133.
32. A. R. Kennedy, C. McNair, W. E. Smith, G. Chisholm and S. J. Teat,
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. , 2000, 39, 638.
33. S. L. Beko ¨, S. M. Hammer and M. U. Schmidt, Angew Chem. Int.
Ed., 2012, 51, 4735.
34. R. Az, B. Dewald and D. Schnaitmann, Dyes Pigments , 1991, 15,1 .
35. K. Hunger, E. F. Paulus and D. Weber, Farbe Lack , 1982, 88, 453.
36. D. Thetford and A. P. Chorlton, Dyes Pigments , 2004, 61, 49.
37. E. F. Paulus, F. J. J. Leusen and M. U. Schmidt, Cyst. Eng.
Commun. , 2007, 9, 131.
38. P. Erk, Crystal design of high performance pigments, in High
Performance Pigments , ed. H. M. Smith, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,
Weinheim, 2002, ch. 8.
39. G. R. Desiraju, J. J. Vittal and A. Ramanan, Crystal Engineering ,
World Scientific, Singapore, 2011.
40. D. Thetford, J. Cherryman, A. P. Chorlton and R. Docherty, Dyes
Pigments , 2004, 63, 259.
41. R. Cerny and V. Favre-Nicolin, Z. Kristallogr., 2007, 222, 105.
42. G. Clydesdale, K. J. Roberts and R. Docherty, J. Crystal Growth ,
1996, 166, 78.
43. D. W. M. Hoﬀmann and T. Lengauer, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A ,
1997, 53, 225.
44. N. Panina, R. van de Ven, P. Verwer, H. Meekes, E. Vlieg and
G. Deroover, Dyes Pigments , 2008, 79, 183.
45. I. Wheeler, Metallic Pigments in Polymers , Rapra Technology Ltd.,
Shrewsbury, UK, 1999.
46. G. Pfaﬀ, Special eﬀect pigments, in High Performance Pigments , ed.
H. M. Smith, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Weinheim, 2002, ch. 7.
47. R. M. Christie, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1993, 23,1 .249 PigmentsCHAPTER 10
Colour in Cosmetics, with Special
Emphasis on Hair Coloration
With contributions from Olivier X. J. Morelw
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Cosmetics may be broadly defined as materials that are used to en-
hance the appearance or appeal of the human body. This definition
covers a vast range of substances including facial and eye make-up,
hair colouring and conditioning products, skin-care creams, nail
varnishes, coloured contact lenses, fragrances and perfumes, de-
odorants, cleansing and sanitising products, and a host of other
products.1–3Many manufacturers distinguish between cosmetics that
are used for decorative purposes and those whose purpose is broadly
in the area of care, such as cleansing and skin-care products, in-
cluding those used for protection against the harmful eﬀects of the
sun.4Cosmetics may also be described by the physical composition of
the product. For example, they may be formulated as liquids, lotions,creams or gels (as emulsions or dispersions), sticks (as in lipsticks) or
powders (either in loose or compressed form), or as aerosol sprays.
Colour is of prime importance in the subset of cosmetics generally
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.orgwXennia Technology, Monroe House, Works Road, Letchworth, Hertfordshire, SG6 1LN, UK
E-mail: omorel@xennia.com
250
referred to as make-up , which are coloured products applied to the
human body, mainly to the facial area, to enhance the appearance
and attractiveness of the users, who are mostly female. This chapter
deals with the principles involved in the colorants used in these
decorative cosmetic products, followed by a more detailed discussion
of the chemistry that has been developed specifically for use in the
coloration of human hair.
The manufacture of cosmetics is a multibillion dollar global in-
dustry, currently dominated by a relatively small number of multi-national corporations in the USA, Europe (mainly in Germany,
France, Italy and UK) and Japan. This is an industry sector that has
not thus far experienced the level of competition from emerging
economies, such China and India, which has led to the substantial
transfer of the manufacture and application of traditional textile
dyes and pigments to those parts of the world. This feature may
be attributed, to a certain extent, to the cultural association ofproducts branded as cosmetics with the fashion and design industry
as led by Europe and the USA, often linked with specific Western
brand names.
The formulation of cosmetic products is strictly controlled by
legislation, which varies from country to country. However, most
countries have some formal legislation that either restricts or
prohibits certain ingredients and a regulatory agency that controls
what can be incorporated. In the USA, the regulating body is the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The main directive in the
European Union aﬀecting the manufacture, labelling and supply of
cosmetics and personal care products is the Cosmetics Directive76/768/EEC, applying also to Iceland, Norway and Switzerland. This
Directive was extended in 2009 to include the use of nanoparticles
and stricter rules on animal testing of cosmetics. The Canadian
health authorities operate a Cosmetic Ingredient Hotlist, a regularly-
updated list of substances that are restricted or prohibited in
cosmetics.
10.2 COLORANTS FOR DECORATIVE COSMETICS
Cosmetics have been used since ancient times to impart colour to the
human body. The purpose is to enhance appearance, for example by
hiding skin imperfections or by intensifying or highlighting the eyes,
lips and nails.
5The technology used in the manufacture and use of
coloured decorative cosmetics is broadly similar to that used in thecoatings and printing ink industries, mainly involving dispersions of251 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair Colorationpigments as the colorants of choice (Chapter 9). There are, however,
certain additional features required in cosmetic formulations, for
example that they must be non-toxic and non-irritant in use, and
there is commonly also a requirement to provide an appealing look,
feel and odour. The colorants used are subject to specific government
regulations, mostly modelled on those specified by the US FDA, the
European Commission or the Japanese Ministry of Health and Wel-fare. Dyes and pigments are approved by the FDA for use in food,
drugs and cosmetics (FD&C) or drugs and cosmetics (but not food)
(D&C). In addition to specifying those colorants permitted for use in
cosmetics, the authorities require batch certification in terms of
composition and purity.
The familiar categories of make-up include foundation, blusher,
mascara, eyeliner, eye shadow, lipstick and nail varnishes.
1The
function of foundation is to impart a smooth, appealing finish to theskin, masking minor imperfections and levelling out skin tones. Thewhite pigment, titanium dioxide is most commonly used to provide
the required coverage, on the basis of its high opacity (Chapter 9).
Colour is added to foundation products mainly using combinations
of yellow, red and black iron oxides. Lipsticks are dispersions of
colorants in a base consisting of a blend of oils, fats and waxes,
moulded as sticks. The colour of a commercial lipstick is critical as it
is often its main selling feature. Usually, the colour is based on reds,
although commercial products may range from orange–yellow
through pure reds to purples and browns. Iron oxides may be used for
some russet and brown lipstick shades. However, organic pigments
provide the bright, clean orange, red and violet hues that are themainstay of modern products. The pigments used are mainly lakes,
which are insoluble pigments prepared by the precipitation of awater-soluble dye with a metal ion on to a substrate.
6The dyes used
mainly belong to the azo (Chapter 3) or triarylmethine (Chapter 6)classes. As an example, the calcium lake of D&C Red 7, 10.1, equiva-
lent to CI Pigment Red 57:1, is one of the most important lipstickpigments. Some lipsticks may also contain a small proportion of a
dye. An example is eosin, D&C Red 21, a brominated fluorescein that
is eﬀectively an acid–base indicator. The dye is applied in its insolubleorange acid form, 10.2, which changes colour and stains the lips a
purple–red colour as it is converted into the alkaline form, 10.2a ,b y
neutralisation within the lip tissue (Scheme 10.1). This chemistry
forms the basis of colour-changing ‘mood lipsticks’, the popularity of
which varies with fashion trends. The aluminium lake formed from
the alkaline form, 10.2a , is used as a cosmetics pigment.252 Chapter 10N
N
O
CO2RCH3
S
HOOO
10.12-
Ca2+
The colorants permitted for cosmetic application in the area of the
eye are rather more restricted. This is especially true in the USA,
where only inorganic pigments, such as titanium dioxide and the iron
oxides, and a few selected organic pigments, for example lakes based
on the triarylmethine dye FD&C Blue 1, 10.3, are permitted. For many
years, black pigments for eye preparations were restricted to blackiron oxide in the USA, although carbon black was permitted in other
geographical areas. However, in 2004, the FDA approved one form of
carbon black, a high purity furnace black, D&C Black 2, for use in eye
cosmetic products. Eﬀect pigments, notably pearlescent and metallic
pigments (Chapter 9), have experienced rapid recent growth in
popularity for a range of cosmetic applications, in view of the eye-
catching glitter and sparkle eﬀects that they provide.-O O O
CO2HHO OH O
O
OBrBr Br
BrBr
BrBr
10.2aBr
10.2OH-
Scheme 10.1 Eosin, an acid/base indicator used in mood lipsticks.253 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair ColorationN
N
C
H2C2H5C2H5H2C
SO3Na
10.3SO3Na
-O3S+
10.3 HAIR COLORATION
Human hair has always possessed powerful, symbolic and evocative
properties. Its coloration is o ne of the oldest acts of human adorn-
ment, reflecting our common dissat isfaction with the natural
c o l o u r .I ti su s e dt oc o n c e a lt h eg r e y i n gp r o c e s sa sw eg r o wo l d e r ,a s
a means to express individuality, as a fashion statement or to project
an image. As a result of an increasingl y ageing, and thus greying,
population, demand for hair colouring products has been increasing
rapidly, a trend that seems likely to continue into the future. Indeed,the demand for hair dyes may well a ccelerate due to growing indi-
vidual expectations in developing global economies. Human hair is aprotein fibre with certain physic al and chemical similarities com-
pared with protein-derived textile fibres, such as wool, as discussedin Chapter 7. However, hair colorati on has certain unique features
that distinguish it from textile dyeing, and thus completely diﬀerentdye types and dyeing processes are required. As a process carried out
directly on the human head, hair cannot be dyed above ca.4 0 1C,
with a dyeing time generally not exceeding ca.4 0m i n ,a n du s i n ga
low ratio of dye formulation to hair fibre, a parameter that is referredto as liquor ratio in textile dyeing. The colour on the hair is required
to be stable to agencies such as air, light, friction, perspiration and
chlorinated water, and to other hair treatments. The colouringprocess is required to cause minimum damage to the hair and
to avoid staining the scalp. Critically, the process must be254 Chapter 10toxicologically safe to the individual concerned and to the hair-
dresser who applies the formulation.
Until synthetic dyes appeared around the mid-nineteenth century
(Chapter 1), natural materials were used to colour hair. The best-
known natural hair colouring product is henna , obtained from the
leaves of Lawsonia inermis .7The colouring qualities of henna are due
to lawsone, 10.4, a naphthoquinone derivative. The antiquity of the
use of henna was established by analysis of the hair of Rameses II,
which revealed the presence of lawsone, and, around 5000 years later,
hair coloration with henna is still practised, especially in regions of
Asia. With this exception, modern hair coloration now uses the ex-
tensive range of synthetic hair dyes that have been developed.8–13
These synthetic products may be categorised either according to thechemistry involved or to the degree of permanence of the colour on
the hair. In chemical terms, they may be classed as involving either
oxidative ornon-oxidative processes. Oxidative dyeing products, con-
stituting ca.70% of the hair colorant market, are dominated by per-
manent hair dyes, which owe their popularity to the long lasting eﬀect,
ease of application and versatility in terms of the range of achievable
colours. Human hair grows by ca. 0.3 mm each day, the growth cycle
lasting about 3 years, at which point the hair falls out. Thus, thedesignation as ‘permanent’ requires qualification because further
treatment is required periodically to cover new growth. Non-oxidative
hair dye products are categorised mainly as either semi-permanent or
temporary . In addition to the colouring agent and ingredients used to
assist application, hair dyeing products, especially of the permanent
type, often contain a bleaching agent (hydrogen peroxide) which re-moves some of the natural hair colour.
O
OOH
10.4
Human hair is naturally coloured, the colour commonly reflecting
the individual’s geographic or ethnic origin. Natural hair colours oc-cupy a small segment of CIELAB colour space, corresponding to
dominant absorption wavelengths in the range 586–606 nm, while the
lightness ( L*) varies over a wide range, from 1.8% to 90%. Natural hair255 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair Colorationowes its colour to the pigment melanin , which occurs as granules ca.
1mm long and 0.3 mm in diameter.14Melanin is formed in pigment-
producing cells referred to as melanocytes. A melanocyte produces
essentially two types of melanin: eumelanin and the less prevalent
pheomelanin . The pigments are complex, irregular polymers whose
structures remain incompletely characterised. Generally, hair con-
tains a mixture of the two. The more eumelanin is present, the darkerthe hair. The variety of natural hair colours is determined not only
by the concentrations of the two pigments, but also the size and shape
of the granules, their distribution patterns and their crystal structures.
The biosynthetic routes to the two melanin types are closely related.
The amino acid tyrosine, 10.5, the common starting material, is ini-
tially hydroxylated to form 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, 10.6 (DOPA),
which is oxidised to dopaquinone, 10.7, in enzyme-mediated re-
actions (Scheme 10.2). Thereafter, the pathways diverge.
15
Scheme 10.3 illustrates the route that ultimately generates eume-
lanin. Dopaquinone, 10.7, is converted, vialeucodopachrome, 10.8,
dopachrome, 10.9, 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid, 10.10
(DHICA), and 5,6-dihydroxyindole, 10.11 (DHI), into the reactive
intermediate indolequinone, 10.12 , from which an oxidative poly-
merisation leads to eumelanin.16Scheme 10.4 illustrates the route
towards pheomelanin, whereby dopaquinone, 10.7, reacts with the
amino acid cysteine, 10.13 , to give cysteinyl DOPA derivatives 10.14a/
b, which are converted viaintermediates 10.15a/b and 10.16a/b into
dihydrobenzothiazines 10.17a/b .17Details beyond this stage are
uncertain.
CO2H
NH2
HOCO2H
NH2
HO
CO2H
NH2
OHO
Ooxidationhydroxylation
10.510.6
10.7
Scheme 10.2 Oxidation of tyrosine, 10.5, to dopaquinone, 10.7,viaDOPA, 10.6.256 Chapter 10N
HHO
HOCO2H
N
HO
OCO2H
N
HHO
HOCO2H
N
HHO
HOoxidation
oxidation -CO 210.7
N
HO10.9
O
10.1110.8
10.12 10.10
Scheme 10.3 Biosynthesis of precursors to eumelanin.
CO2H
NH2
HOHO
H2NCO2H
SH
CO2H
H2NS
CO2H
NH2
OO
CO2H
H2NS
N
SO
CO2H
H2N10.14a: 5-S-cysteinyl DOPA
10.14b: 2-S-cysteinyl DOPA
HO2C10.72
510.13
10.15a: 5-S-cysteinyl dopaquinone
10.15b: 2-S-cysteinyl dopaquinone2
HN
SHO
CO2H
H2N8
10.16a: 7-alanyl
10.16b: 8-alanyl75
HO2C-H2Ooxidation
7
8
10.17a: 7-alanyl
10.17b: 8-alanyl
Scheme 10.4 Biosynthesis of precursors to pheomelanin.257 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair ColorationThe molecular size and shape of a dye are critical factors governing
its ability to penetrate into the hair fibre. Computer-aided molecular
modelling studies aimed at predicting the ability of a dye molecule to
penetrate into the fibre have used particular molecular size de-
scriptors devised to take some account of molecular shape, for ex-
ample SLD, defined as ‘the longest diagonal line of the smallest
shadow of the projected figure’,18and LD, ‘the longest dimension of
the smallest cross-section of the optimum parallelepiped enclosingthe molecule’. A size limit of ca. 9.5Å has been proposed for non-ionic
dyes, with slightly larger limits for ionic dyes.
19The diﬀusion of dye
molecules into hair is facilitated by fibre swelling, which is in turn
influenced by the dyeing conditions and the use of swelling agents in
hair dye formulations. Hair dyeing is commonly conducted in the pH
range 9–10. At alkaline pH, hair acquires a negative charge and sig-
nificant swelling is observed, due mainly to ionisation of amino acid
residues containing carboxylic acid groups. Most traditional hair dyesare non-ionic, with a few anionic dyes. However, there has been recent
interest in the development of cationic hair dyes, which have stronger
aﬃnity for the negatively-charged hair fibres.
Concerns about the human safety profile of ingredients in hair
coloration products, especially certain precursors used in oxidative
hair colouring, have been raised over the years. In view of their ex-
tensive use in regular direct contact with humans, the nature of the
chemical structures of some ingredients, especially aromatic amines,
and a few signals in the epidemiological literature, the human safety
profile of hair dye components has been studied intensively, and
some original ingredients are now prohibited.
20In certain indi-
viduals, hair coloration may cause skin irritation or allergic reactions
at various levels of severity. To prevent or limit allergic reactions, a
patch test is commonly conducted on an area of skin before a par-
ticular product is used. International epidemiological studies on the
link between hair coloration and more serious human conditions
have been reported.21,22These studies indicate that hair coloration
may play a role in the risk of certain lymphomas. The increased risk isdescribed as moderate and much more significant among women
who had used the dyes before 1980, when the compositions wouldhave been more likely to include potentially carcinogenic com-
ponents. In parallel, the industry continues to provide reassurances
over the formulation ingredients in current use. Nevertheless, a
change to the situation cannot be excluded in the future as stricter
legislation, regulations and controls on the use of chemicals emerge.
In Europe, the safety of hair dyes is controlled by the Cosmetic258 Chapter 10Directive. In the USA, the legal responsibility rests with the FDA. In
Japan, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare regulates the safety
of hair dyes, considering them as ‘quasi-drugs’, subject to approval
based on evidence of their safety, and there are similar regulations in
other Far Eastern countries.
10.3.1 Oxidative Hair Coloration
The chemistry of permanent hair dyeing is based on the 150 year old
observation by Hofmann that p-phenylenediamine, when exposed to
oxidizing agents, produced brown colours on certain substrates. Inview of advances in chemistry and also concerns around the safetyprofile of some precursors, it is perhaps surprising that this chemistry
still forms the basis of the most common hair coloration method.
23
The process requires three main components. The first is an o-orp-
substituted (hydroxy or amino) aromatic amine, referred to as the
primary intermediate ,oxidation base ,o r developer . Primary inter-
mediates include p-phenylenediamine, p-aminophenol and their de-
rivatives. The second component, the coupler , is commonly an
aromatic compound, either a benzene derivative with electron-donating groups arranged m-to each other, including m-phenylene-
diamines and resorcinol, or certain naphthols. Couplers alone do notproduce significant oxidation colours but rather modify the colourgenerated when used together with the primary intermediates and an
oxidising agent. Couplers are commonly classified into three groups,
according to the colour obtained when used with the primary inter-
mediates: yellow–green (mainly resorcinol and its derivatives), red
(mainly phenols and naphthols) and blue (mainly m-phenylenedia-
mines). The third component is the oxidising agent, almost ex-clusively hydrogen peroxide. The oxidant serves two main purposes:
to oxidize the primary intermediates and to lighten the natural hair
colour by bleaching. The oxidation is promoted by alkaline con-ditions, most commonly using ammonia, which also assists swelling
of the hair fibre, thus facilitating dye penetration. Alternatives to
ammonia, such as monoethanolamine, are also used but generally
provide lower bleaching eﬃciency. Permanent hair colouring prep-
arations are generally marketed as a two component kit, mixed im-
mediately before use. The first component contains the mixture of
dye precursors, often around 5–6 species, in the combinations re-
quired to produce the desired colour, together with ammonia. The
second component is a stabilised hydrogen peroxide solution. The
mixture is applied initially near to the hair roots for a period to allow259 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair Colorationexposure to undyed new growth, followed by application to the rest of
the hair.
The dye precursors are small molecules that penetrate readily and
deeply into the hair fibre. The first stage of colour formation involves
oxidation of the primary intermediate with alkaline hydrogen per-
oxide to form reactive electrophilic species. In the case of p-phenyle-
nediamine, 10.18 , this species is p-benzoquinonediimine, 10.20 ,i n
equilibrium with its conjugate acid, 10.20a , while p-benzoquinoni-
mine, 10.21 , is formed from p-aminophenol, 10.19 (Scheme 10.5).
These species undergo an electrophilic substitution reaction withthe coupler, 10.22 , preferentially at a position para to an electron-
releasing amino or hydroxyl group, forming leuco compounds, 10.23 ,
which oxidize to form dinuclear indo dyes, 10.24 (Scheme 10.6). In the
case where R¼H, reaction of the dinuclear species with a further
molecule of the reactive species may lead to formation of trinuclear
indo dyes, 10.25 . The presence of a blocking group ( e.g.R¼CH
3)i na
p-position prevents this reaction. The coloured molecules formed are
much larger than the precursors, and so become permanently en-trapped within the hair fibre.
In formulated products containing mixtures of primary inter-
mediates and couplers, the colour developed depends on competing
reactions between the various precursors inside the fibre, influenced
by such factors as concentrations, diﬀusion rates, redox potentials
and pH. Countless numbers of alternative dye precursors have been
examined over the years for their ability to fulfil the requirements of
oxidative hair dyeing, addressing issues associated with toxicology,
colouristic performance and fastness properties. For example, in-vestigation of heterocyclic analogues has led to the introduction of
primary intermediates based on derivatives of dihydropyrazolone
10.26 . They undergo oxidation to generate the quinonediimine
NH2
NH2NH
NHNH2+
NHNH2
OHNH
O
10.18 10.20 10.20a 10.19 10.21oxidation oxidationH+
Scheme 10.5 Generation of the reactive species from oxidation of p-phenylenedia-
mine, 10.18 , and p-aminophenol, 10.19 .260 Chapter 10analogue, 10.27 , as the reactive species (Scheme 10.7). However, while
the research intensity has produced a few individual successes, most
of the compounds in current commercial dye formulations remain
those that have been used for decades.
Several processes have been investigated in attempts to provide
alternatives to traditional oxidative hair dyeing aimed broadly at safe
dyeing systems that give intense coloration and good fastness prop-
erties, while avoiding hair damage from the use of oxidizing agents
and strongly alkaline conditions.23Similar to the oxidative process,
these methods mostly also involve chemical reactions that generateNNO
NH2
H2NNNO
NH
HNoxidation
10.26 10.27
Scheme 10.7 Oxidation of dihydropyrazolone 10.26 to the quinonediimine analogue
10.27 .R
ZH HYH
N
HX HY ZH
N
NHX HY Z
HX HY Z10.20 or10.21
HN10.22
ZH10.23
10.24oxidationR
when R = HR(i)10.20 or10.21
(ii) oxidation
10.25
Scheme 10.6 Pathway proposed for the formation of dinuclear, 10.24 , and trinuclear
indo dyes, 10.25 , in the oxidative coupling involved in permanent hair
dyeing. X, Y and Z may be independently O or NH.261 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair Colorationcolour in situ . For example, processes based on the synthesis of insol-
uble azo, methine or azomethine color ants within the hair fibre have
been proposed. Attempts to exploit successful textile dyeing processes
include the use of fibre-reactive dyes that form a covalent bond between
the dye and the hair fibres in the manner of textile fibres (Chapter 8)
and solubilized vat dyes, water-soluble sulfate esters of leuco vat dyes,which, after application to hair, are subjected to acid hydrolysis andoxidation to generate the insoluble vat dye (Chapter 7). Processes gen-
erating indigo in the hair have bee n proposed either from naturally-
occurring or specifically-designed synthetic indigo precursors.
24How-
ever, none of these processes have reached a successful commercial
outcome, probably due to various technical issues and the prohibitive
cost of the requirement to assess the toxicological profile of the agents
used in order to achieve approval and registration as hair dyes.
Processes that attempt to synthetically mimic melanin formation
inside the hair fibre have attracted attention because of perceived
market advantages, notably the potential to provide colours with
natural appearance and the ability to designate the product as ‘nat-
ural’. However, the challenges are immense since natural hair colour
is determined not only by the melanin structure but also by the
granule sizes and their distribution throughout the hair. The experi-
mental approaches have been aimed primarily at synthetic imitation
of the biosynthetic pathways leading to the natural pigments, fo-
cussed mostly on eumelanin, by oxidation of the various intermedi-
ates as identified in Schemes 10.1–10.3. An early process reported the
use of tyrosine, 10.5, or DOPA, 10.6, with a tyrosinase to give a light
brown hair colour, with repeated dyeing necessary to build up colour.
Subsequently, improved processes were described using DOPA in
combination with compounds such as hydroquinones, diamines or
aminophenols and with hydrogen peroxide oxidation replacing the
tyrosinase, and also using DHI, 10.11 , the closest isolable inter-
mediate in melanin biosynthesis. Comparable approaches towardssynthetic pheomelanin generation have been restricted by diﬃculties
in synthesizing the intermediates. It is, however, likely that the syn-
thetic melanins are formed dispersed throughout the fibre, rather
than deposited in granules as in the natural process, so that the nu-ances in colour are not imitated.
10.3.2 Non-oxidative Hair Dyeing
Non-oxidative hair dyeing processes are often referred to as direct
dyeing, since the dyes are applied directly and the molecules remain262 Chapter 10chemically unchanged within the hair after application, thus pro-
viding a contrast with the oxidative dyeing processes. These products
yield non-permanent colour eﬀects on hair in that they resist a few
washings, while slowly and evenly fading. The dyes are classified
according to the duration of the colour on the hair as either semi-
permanent ortemporary .
Semi-permanent products provide hair colour lasting roughly 4–6
washings. They oﬀer the advantages of ease of use, no requirement
for mixing, and a degree of reversibility since an undesirable result
can be removed by repeated shampooing. Semi-permanent dyeing
relies on the diﬀusion of small, coloured non-ionic molecules into the
hair and the principal interactions between the dye and fibre mol-
ecules are relatively weak dipolar and van der Waals’ forces. The N-
hydroxyethyl substituent (occasionally also N-hydroxypropyl) is widely
encountered in the structures of all chemical classes of semi-
permanent hair dyes, some relevant examples of which are illustratedin Figure 10.1. The role of these groups is to promote water-solubility
while also ensuring an appropriate water/lipid partition coeﬃcient, a
property that has an important impact on dye uptake by the hair.
Nitro dyes (Chapter 6) constitute by far the most important chemical
class of semi-permanent hair dyes, providing colours ranging through
yellow, orange and red–brown to violet.
25Simple nitroanilines
NHCH 2CH2OH
NO2 H
NOH
NO2
R
NHR
NHRO
ON
NH2N
N(CH 2CH2OH) 210.28a : R = H
10.28b: R = OH
10.28c : R = NH2
10.28d: R = NHCH2CH2OH10.29
10.30a :  R = H
10.30b:  R = CH2CH(OH)CH2OH10.31
Figure 10.1 Structures of some semi-permanent hair dyes.263 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair Colorationprovide a few yellow semi-permanent hair dyes, for example dye
10.28a . Nitroaminophenols and some related ether derivatives pro-
vide most of the yellow to orange dyes, as exemplified by the orangedye10.28b . Nitrophenylenediamine dyes oﬀer a wide colour range,
providing dominant products from orange through to violet. Thecolour of these dyes depends on the electron-donating power of the
amino substituent. For example, dye 10.28c is red and dye 10.28d
violet. Nitrodiphenylamines provide a few yellow dyes, including
compound 10.29 . Anthraquinone dyes are important to complete the
semi-permanent hair colour palette by contributing violet and bluecolours, since nitro dyes cannot so readily provide compounds ab-
sorbing at long wavelengths. Appropriate dyes are often selected from
the range used for dyeing synthetic textile fibres, for example dye
10.30a (CI Disperse Violet 1), although a few have been specifically
designed for the application, for example the blue dye 10.30b. A few
azo dyes, including the yellow–orange compound 10.31 , are also used
as semi-permanent hair dyes.
Semi-permanent dyes are usually applied to natural, unbleached
hair after shampooing. The formulations use mixtures of dyes,
blended to the desired shade. It is common to use several dyes of
similar colour but with diﬀerent molecular sizes to provide even
coloration. Larger dye molecules tend to be retained by the more
damaged tip of the hair, but do not penetrate so readily into the roots,
while smaller molecules penetrate the entire hair fibre but wash out
of the more porous tip.
Temporary hair coloration generally lasts only from one shampoo
to the next. Originally, temporary hair dyes were aimed mainly atwomen with greying hair and were referred to as colour rinses .A
modern use of temporary hair dyeing is to produce a colour for asingle event, hence referred to as ‘party’ colours. They may also be
used after permanent or semi-permanent hair dyeing, or after
bleaching, to provide an immediate shade correction. The dyes colour
less intensely than permanent or semi-permanent hair dyes, but they
are simple to use and involve minimal commitment or health risk.
Temporary hair colouring products are formulated exclusively with
dyes that have been approved by the US FDA. A typical representativeexample is the triarylmethine dye FD&C Blue 1, 10.3. Temporary hair
colour formulation incorporates some apparently contradictory con-straints. The colour should be removed easily by shampooing, but
should be colour-fast towards rain and perspiration.
While it seems likely that the permanent oxidative process in an
optimised form and the current range of semi-permanent dyes will264 Chapter 10remain dominant for hair coloration into the foreseeable future, there
remains scope for research towards new technologies for hair color-
ation. The rapidly developing science of genetics and an emerging
understanding of the molecular basis of hair pigmentation may be
key elements in the development of systems encouraging natural,
biotechnological or semi-synthetic hair re-pigmentation. While there
has been some preliminary success in this area, delivering colouringagents to hair follicles, further development will be required before
the technology is ready for the consumer. A growing understanding of
the principles of the greying process, and the possibility of its in-
hibition or prevention, may well accelerate this development.
26The
explosive growth in nanotechnologies is certain to continue to attractthe interest of hair colour chemists, for example to exploit the po-
tential of photonics to make use of materials that manipulate light to
create colour without using traditional colorants, as one way of ad-
dressing potential environmental and toxicological concerns.
REFERENCES
1. R. G. Harry and M. M. Rieger, Color cosmetics, in Harry’s
Cosmeticology , 8th edn, Chemical Publishing Co., New York, 2000,
ch. 26.
2. D. F. Williams (ed.), Chemistry and Technology of the Cosmetics and
Toiletries Industry , Springer, New York/Heidelberg, 1996.
3. S. Houlton, Chem. Br. , 1998, 34(11), 33.
4. Z. D. Draelos, Photoprotection in colored cosmetics, in Clinical
Guide to Sunscreens and Photoprotection , Informa Healthcare,
London, 2008, ch. 14.
5. J. A. Graham and A. J. Jouhar, Int. J. Cosmetic Sci. , 1980, 2, 77.
6. R. M. Christie and J. Mackay, Color. Technol. , 2008, 124, 133.
7. C. K. Dweck, Int. J. Cosmetic Sci. , 2002, 24, 287.
8. J. F. Corbett, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1985, 15, 52.
9. K. C. Brown, Hair colouring, Cosmet. Sci. Technol. Ser. , 1997, 17, 191.
10. J. F. Corbett, Hair Colorants - Chemistry and Toxicology ; Micelle
Press, Weymouth, UK, 1998.
11. J. F. Corbett, Synthetic dyes for human hair, in Colorants for Non-
Textile Applications , ed. H. S. Freeman and A. T. Peters, Elsevier
Science B. V., Amsterdam, 2000, p. 456.
12. J. S. Anderson, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists , 2000, 116, 193.
13. R. M. Christie and O. J. X. Morel, The coloration of human hair, in
The Coloration of Wool and other Keratin Fibres, ed. D. M. Lewis265 Colour in Cosmetics, with Special Emphasis on Hair Colorationand J. A. Rippon, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Chichester, UK, 2013,
ch. 11.
14. P. A. Riley, The nature of melanins, in The Physiology and
Pathophysiology of Skin , ed. A. Jarret, Academic Press, London,
1974, vol. 3, p. 1102.
15. I. Castanet and J. P. Ortonne, Hair melanin and hair color, in
Formation and Structure of Human Hair , ed. P. Jolle `s, H. Zahn and
H. Ho ¨cker, Birkha ¨user Verlag, Basel, 1997, p. 209.
16. S. Ito, Biochim. Biophys. Acta , 1986, 883, 155.
17. G. Prota, Melanins and Melanogenesis , Academic Press, San Diego,
1992.
18. M. Sakai, S. Nagase, T. Okada, N. Satoh and K. Tsujii, Bull. Chem.
Soc. Jpn. , 2000, 73, 2169.
19. O. J. X. Morel, R. M. Christie, A. Greaves and K. M. Morgan, Color.
Technol. , 2008, 124, 301.
20. J. F. Corbett, Dyes Pigments , 1999, 41, 127.
21. S. de Sanjose ´, Y. Benavente, A. Nieters, L. Foretova, M. Maynadie `,
P. L. Cocco, A. Staines, M. Vornanen, P. Boﬀetta, N. Becker,
T. Alvaro and P. Brennan, Am. J. Epidemiol. , 2006, 164, 47.
22. Y. Zhang, S. de Sanjose ´, P. M. Bracci, L. M. Morton, R. Wang,
P. Brennan, P. Hartge, P. Boﬀetta, N. Becker, M. Maynadie `,
L. Foretova, P. Cocco, A. Staines, T. Holford, E. A. Holly,A. Nieters, Y. Benavente, L. Bernstein, S. H. Zahm and T. Zheng,
Am. J. Epidemiol. , 2008, 167, 1321.
23. O. J. X. Morel and R. M. Christie, Chem. Rev. , 2011, 111, 2537–
2561.
24. J.-I. Setsune, H. Wakemoti, T. Matsueda, T. Matsuura, H. Tajima
and T. Kitao, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. I, 1984, 2305.
25. R. Raue and J. F. Corbett, Nitro and nitroso dyes, in Ullmann’s
Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry , Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,
Weinheim, 2002.
26. J. M. Wood, H. Decker, H. Hartmann, B. Chavan, H. Rokos,
J. D. Spencer, S. Hasse, M. J. Thornton, M. Shalbaf, R. Paus and
K. U. Schallreuter, FASEB J. , 2009, 23, 2065.266 Chapter 10CHAPTER 11
Functional or ‘High Technology’
Dyes and Pigments
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The chemistry of the most important dyes and pigments used in
the coloration of traditional substrates, including textiles, paints,
printing inks, plastics and cosmetics, has been dealt with extensivelyin the preceding chapters of this book. It is likely that this range of
well-established products will remain for the foreseeable future as the
most important materials manufactured for the purpose of providing
colour. In recent decades, new products for such conventional
applications have appeared with much reduced frequency. The
traditional colour manufacturing industry has been consolidating its
product range and its research eﬀort has been concentrated more on
process and product improvement, and addressing a range of
environmental issues (Chapter 12). However, in the same period,there have been exciting developments in organic colour chemistry as
a result of the opportunities presented by the emergence of a range of
new applications that place significantly diﬀerent demands on dyes
and pigments. Indeed, this remains broadly the most active current
area of colour chemistry research and development, both academic
and industrial, linked to a variety of potential applications. These
colorants have commonly been termed functional because the appli-
cations in question often require the dyes or pigments to performcertain functions beyond the simple provision of colour.
1–5
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
267
Alternatively, they have been referred to as high-technology colorants,
because they are designed for use in applications derived from
advances in fields to which this particular term commonly refers. The
term functional p-electron systems has also been used to describe these
materials, drawing attention to the fact that it is commonly the ex-tensive p-electron system that is the characteristic structural feature
of the molecules giving rise to particular physical properties that are
exploited in their application. Consequently, the fact that the mol-
ecules are coloured may become almost irrelevant. Applications of
functional dyes and pigments continue to appear and to evolve at
such a pace that any text dealing with them is likely to date more
quickly than almost any other area of colour chemistry. Currently, they
encompass a range of electronic applications including flat screen
displays, solar energy conversion, lasers and optical data storage,
reprographic techniques, such as e lectrophotography and inkjet print-
ing, and various biomedical uses. There is also inte nse interest in
chromic materials , which are chemical species that respond to various
external stimuli by exhibiting reversible colour change. While the rangeof functional colorants is unlikely to rival the traditional dyes and pig-
ments in terms of the quantities requi red, they are potentially attractive
to manufacturers due to the possibility of high added value. In thischapter, an overview of the prin ciples of some of the more important of
these applications is presented, necessarily selective in approachbecause of the diversity of the topics, together with a discussion in each
selected case of the chemistry of the colorants that may be used. For
some of these applicatio ns, traditional dyes and pigments may be
suitable, although often the colorants may require special purification
procedures, a feature that is not a common requirement for con-
ventional applications. For others, new colorants tailored to the needsof the particular application have been designed and synthesised.
It may be argued that certain colorants found in nature may be
considered as functional dyes. In animals, they play important func-
tions, for example as sources of attraction and in the defence mech-
anisms that are associated with camouflage. Plant pigments,
especially chlorophyll, play a vital role in the light-harvesting process
involved in photosynthesis. Naturally-occurring colorants may alsoserve important biochemical functions. For example, they may pro-
vide protection for cells and organisms against the harmful eﬀects of
exposure to light, and they are also important in biological energy
transfer processes. In addition, evidence has emerged for the poten-
tial therapeutic benefits of some natural dyes in our diet, including
the possibility that they may provide protection against cancer on the268 Chapter 11basis, at least in part, of their antioxidant activity, by a mechanism
that involves the ability to quench singlet oxygen.
11.2 ELECTRONIC APPLICATIONS OF DYES AND PIGMENTS
The rapid advances in electronics technology that have been a dom-
inant feature of the last few decades have had an immense impact onour lives. The numerous examples of these developments include the
growth in the ownership, sophistication and diversity of personal
computers, mobile telephones, digital cameras, the variety of elec-
tronically-controlled goods that have become commonplace in the
home and in the workplace, including kitchen appliances, televisions,
hi-fi and recording equipment, and the numerous electronic devices
that are increasingly used in cars. The list is virtually endless and
there is little evidence to suggest that the rate of development of new
electronic products will slow down in years to come. It may be acliche ´, but we are indeed living in a mature electronic age. Examples
of applications in electronics, in which dyes and pigments play animportant functional role, especially important in those areas en-
compassed by the term optoelectronics , include display technologies,
lasers, solar energy conversion and optical data storage.
11.2.1 Colour in Electronic Displays
Electronic multicolour displays have become essential, indispensible
components in the devices that we use in our everyday lives. They are
commonplace in an extensive range of applications, including tele-
vision and computer monitor screens, mobile telephones, car dash-
boards and aircraft cockpit instrumentation. For many years, electronic
display systems capable of generating full colour images were more or
less restricted to devices based on cathode ray tube (CRT) technology.
However, we are currently presented with a proliferation of approachestowards development of display technologies, and new systems con-
tinue to appear frequently. In the case of television sets, the evolution
from traditional monochromatic technology towards full colour dis-
plays occurred mainly in the 1960s and early 1970s. Subsequently, the
dramatic advances in computing technology have increased the avail-
ability and popularity of computer-controlled devices, leading to much
more widespread use of colour displays. In addition, technical
advances have provided the level of processing power that is necessary
to generate colour images and to provide the means to digitally control
and manipulate the colours. In recent years, the rapidly-changing269 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentstechnologies used in electronic colour displays, not only in current
commercial use but also those that are under development, have been
well-documented.6–10In this section, an overview of selected important
display technologies is presented, with particular emphasis placed onthe colour science invol ved. Almost invariably, the multicolour images
are produced using the principles of additive colour mixing (Chapter 2),
since the observer is directly viewing the source of the light. Thus, thisrequires the use of colorants that provide the three additive primary
colours–red, green and blue (RGB), commonly organised in matrices.
Display systems may be categorised in various ways, for example ac-
cording to the viewing mode (either projection or direct view) or in
terms of whether the technology either intrinsically generates the
light required for the display (emissive) or modulates light from a
separate external or internal source (non-emissive). Recent advances
in the commercial systems have been focussed on particular features,
such as increasing the size of the display, enhancing the colour andimage quality and reducing cost and, as consumers, we have seen
considerable consequent benefits from the developments that have
taken place. Indeed, this is such a rapidly developing field that it is
likely that the discussion presented, in common with other con-
temporary reviews on the subject, may well quickly become dated.
Cathode ray tubes (CRTs) have traditionally underpinned con-
ventional television. In these displays, an electron beam, generated
from a cathode at one end of a glass vessel under vacuum, scans
across the glass front of the vessel that is coated with inorganic
phosphors.
11When the electron beam impacts this surface, the
phosphors emit visible light, a process known as cathodoluminescence .
The inorganic phosphors that are used are semiconductors, com-monly based on zinc sulfide or on lanthanide compounds. The im-
pact of a high energy electron beam on these materials results in
promotion of electrons from the valence band to the conduction
band, leaving behind a positively charged ‘hole’. When an electron
and a hole recombine, visible light of a particular wavelength may be
emitted. The long-established blue phosphor, which is based on a
combination of ZnS with a small amount of silver, provides a strong
blue glow with a maximum at 450 nm. The green phosphors use ZnSand copper, emitting around 530 nm. Originally, red CRT phosphors
were based on (Zn,Cd)S:Ag, although yttrium oxide/sulfide containing
some europium is now usually used, providing emission around
610 nm. The use of CRT displays has declined significantly, especially
as flat-screen displays have become the norm and as newer technol-
ogies have emerged. Their main drawbacks are their bulk and the270 Chapter 11diﬃculties that are associated with scaling up to the large formats
that are increasingly in demand.
The most important multicolour display technology in current use
involves liquid crystal displays (LCDs), which overtook CRTs in
popularity around the mid-2000s. Liquid crystals (LCs), commonly
referred to as the fourth state of matter, are materials that are inter-
mediate in character between the crystalline solid and liquidstates.
12,13Unlike normal isotropic liquids in which the molecules
essentially adopt a randomised orientation, liquid crystals show sometime-averaged positional orientation of the molecules. In this sense,
they resemble solid crystalline materials, although they retain most of
the properties of liquids, notably the ability to flow. They are formed
most commonly from molecules with rod-like geometry, which are
referred to as calamitic. These molecules may orientate in various
ways to form diﬀerent types of LC phases ( mesophases ). There are
three main mesophase types: smectic ,nematic and chiral nematic .I n
the smectic mesophase, as illustrated in Figure 11.1(a), the molecules
are arranged in ‘raft-like’ layers with their molecular axes parallel.
These layers can pass over each other as the material flows. In the
(a) (b)
(c)pitch length
Figure 11.1 Simplified representations of molecular alignment in (a) smectic,
(b) nematic and (c) chiral nematic liquid crystals.271 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsnematic mesophase (Figure 11.1b), the molecules are also aligned
parallel, but there is no separation into layers. The main feature that
distinguishes a chiral nematic (alternatively referred to as cholesteric )
from a nematic phase is, as the name implies, that the molecularstructure is chiral, i.e., not superimposable on its mirror image. The
chirality causes the molecules in the phase to adopt a twisted struc-ture, resulting in a screw-like, helical arrangement. The structure ofthe chiral nematic phase, illustrated in a somewhat idealised way in
Figure 11.1(c), may be envisaged as composed of nematic LC layers.
The structure of this phase is discussed further in Section 11.5.2, in
the context of its ability to exhibit thermochromism. In recent dec-
ades, liquid crystals have played an increasingly important part in our
lives, their most familiar application being in displays.
14
LCDs have superseded those based on CRT technology in view of
various advantages that they oﬀer, including visual appeal, low power
consumption and their suitability for manufacture on a wide range ofscales, from the displays on miniaturised electronic devices through
to large screen displays. LCDs are non-emissive. They operate by
utilising the ability to control ambient light in order to provide con-
trast, i.e., areas of dark and light, within the display. This is achieved
as a result of a change in orientation of the liquid crystal moleculeswithin certain sections of the display as an electric field is applied. In
most LCDs, the liquid crystal is held in a cell between two closely
spaced glass plates. Transparent electrodes, constructed using in-
dium tin oxide (ITO) coated on the inside of the glass and in contact
with the LC material, are used to apply a voltage that causes the LC
molecules to switch direction, thus providing control of the molecularorientation. The presence of polarising filters on each side of the cell
gives rise to light and dark areas within the display. The light source
may involve either ambient light with a reflective mirror or alter-
natively fluorescent backlighting behind the cell. The most important
LCD technologies are based in twisted nematic (TN) LCs and rely on
the ability of the molecules to twist the plane of polarised light
through 901 . The simplest LCDs, such as those used in calculators or
digital watches operate on the basis of direct driving of segmenteddisplays. Large area multicolour displays utilise the simultaneousaddressing of arrays of pixels, for example using a matrix arrange-
ment of thin-film transistors.
To produce the multicolour eﬀect, microcolour filters are in-
corporated into the display panel, with a construction based on the
RGB primary colours, whereby one-third of the pixels are red, one-
third green and one-third blue.
15Pigments, especially from the high272 Chapter 11performance organic category (Chapter 9), are generally preferred to
dyes for these applications because of their superior durability. The
pigments for colour filter applications require good thermal stability
and lightfastness, and appropriate spectral characteristics. Suitable
red pigments, include the anthraquinone 11.1 (CI Pigment Red 177),
perylene 11.2 (CI Pigment Red 179) and quinacridone 11.3 (CI Pig-
ment Red 122) (Figure 11.2). The blue pigment used is the ubiquitouscopper phthalocyanine, 11.4 (CI Pigment Blue 14), while green is
provided by copper phthalocyanine derivatives, notably the poly-halogenated derivative, CI Pigment Green 36. The microfilters may be
manufactured by a variety of processes, although commonly involving
deposition of pigments of the three colours from a fine dispersion in
a process solvent or a photopolymerisable resin to form a matrix in an
appropriate design.
Through the 1970s and 1980s, there was a considerable research
eﬀort aimed at the development of LCDs based on so-called guest/host
(GH) systems.
16These displays involved the use of dichroic dyes dis-
solved in the LC host, commonly of the chiral nematic type. In theoperation of these devices, the dye molecules align with the LC
molecules and change direction with the application of an electric
field, an eﬀect that causes a change in colour intensity, as illustrated
simplistically in Figure 11.3. It was found that suﬃcient contrast
could be provided by the use of certain specifically-designed dyes, a
NNO
O HHN H 3C
OO O
N
OCH3
11.311.2O
OOONH2
NH2
CH3H3CNN
N
N
N
NNN Cu11.1
11.4
Figure 11.2 Organic pigments used in colour filters for flat-screen displays.273 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsfeature which meant that the use of a polariser to enhance contrast
became unnecessary. The use of these systems is currently restricted
to monochromatic displays, although the development of three layer
multicolour displays based on yellow, magenta and cyan dyes hasbeen proposed,
17as also has their potential for use in erasable elec-
tronic paper. The chemical principles underlying the dyes used ispresented here as an interesting classical example in the development
of functional dyes during the late twentieth century.
To explain the change in colour intensity with the change in
orientation of the dye molecules with respect to the direction of in-
cident light, as indicated in Figure 11.3, it is important to recognise
that electronic excitation caused by light absorption is accompanied
by a change in the polarity of the dye molecule. The electronic tran-
sition that occurs involves charge transfer and may be ascribed a
transition dipole moment , which has not only magnitude but also
direction. The transition moment in aminoazobenzene dye 11.5, for
example, is directed from the electron-releasing amino group throughto the electron-withdrawing nitro group, as illustrated in Figure 11.4
(see Chapter 2 for a justification of this principle based on the ap-
plication of the valence-bond approach to colour and constitution). It
is of particular note that, in the case of dye 11.5, the transition mo-
ment is more or less aligned with the long axis of the molecule. Forlight absorption to occur, the electric vector of the incident light,
which is perpendicular to the direction of propagation of light as il-lustrated in Figure 11.4, must oscillate in the same direction as the
transition moment of the dye. If the transition moment of the dye is
Figure 11.3 Orientation of dyes in on/oﬀ states of a liquid crystal display.274 Chapter 11perpendicular to the direction of the light source, i.e., parallel to the
electric vector, then maximum colour intensity will be achieved. This
situation exists when the electric field is in the ‘oﬀ’ position as illustratedin Figure 11.3. If the molecule then rotates through 90 1, for example
when the electric field is switched on as illustrated in Figure 11.3, then a
change to minimum colour intensity will be observed.
The rod-like organic molecules that give rise to LC behaviour are
commonly relatively hydrophobic aromatic systems, although with a
degree of polarity that is located mainly in the end-substituents. For
application in LCDs, the dyes require good solubility in and com-
patibility with the organic LC host, and thus the dye molecules are
invariably non-ionic, often with substituents that enhance hydro-phobic characteristics and thus solubility in the host. The dyes are
also required to be of high purity and to show good lightfastness.
Most important of all, from the point of view of providing high con-
trast, is the ability of the dye molecule to align, and switch, with the
liquid crystal host. This feature may be quantified in terms of the
order parameter ,S, a quantity that may be measured spectroscopically
(¼0 for non-alignment and ¼1 for perfect alignment). The target
value for a good LCD dye is SD0.8. Simple LCDs of this type are re-
quired to produce black/white contrast. Thus, to ensure that ab-sorption occurs throughout the visible spectrum, a combination of
yellow, red and blue dyes is required. Azo dyes, such as compound11.5, are capable of providing only reasonable order parameters and
also generally suﬀer from inadequate light stability. The dyes thatmost eﬀectively satisfy the requirements for guest–host LCDs belong
to the carbonyl chemical class. Anthraquinone dyes, such as the yel-
low dye 11.6, the red 11.7 and the blue 11.8 (illustrated in Figure 11.5),
are especially suitable for these applications. Intuitively, a rod-likemolecular shape might be expected to provide the requiredN
NO2N NMe2direction of
transition momen tdirection ofoscillation ofelectric vector
11.5direction of propagation of light wave
Figure 11.4 Orientation of an aminoazobenzene dye, 11.5, for maximum light
absorption in a liquid crystal display.275 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsorientational behaviour for LCD dyes. This feature is apparent in the
structure of blue dye 11.8 while, additionally, the extensive intra-
molecular hydrogen-bonding in this dye promotes good lightfastness.However, this particular molecular shape is not so apparent in the
sulfur-containing anthraquinone dyes 11.6 and11.7, yet both provide
suitably high order parameters. These examples demonstrate that thenature of the interactions between the dye and LC molecules in these
displays are probably more complex than those that are presented in
this simplistic approach.
In recent decades, there has been growing interest in the electrical
properties of organic materials. In the context of colour chemistry,special interest has developed in materials that are capable of par-
ticipating in the conversion of electrical energy into emitted light, a
phenomenon referred to as electroluminescence.
18A particular con-
sequence of the intense research activity that has taken place in thisarea is the development of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs),
devices that oﬀer immense potential as sources of illumination
(either of white or coloured light) and as emissive flat screen
displays.
19–21In contrast to LCDs, displays based on OLED technology
oﬀer the advantage that they are self-luminous. The displays mayO
OS
SBut
ButO
OS
SS
S
O
OOO
NNBu
t
ButHH
H HHH11.6, S=0.80 11.7, S=0.80
11.8, S=0.73
Figure 11.5 Anthraquinone dyes used in liquid crystal displays ( Sis the order
parameter).276 Chapter 11consequently be thinner and lighter in construction than LCDs, and
they can achieve higher visual contrast. There are two principal types
of OLED, based either on small organic molecules or on polymers.
Frequently, the term OLED is used to describe the former type, al-
though the more precise acronym SMOLED is often used, while thelatter type may also be referred to as a polymer light-emitting diode
(PLED). OLEDs are multilayer electronic devices that can vary in the
complexity of construction. A relatively simple construction is illus-
trated in Figure 11.6, although in practice additional layers are gen-
erally used to provide improved device eﬃciency. The device
illustrated consists essentially of a sandwich constructed on a glass
substrate, coated with conductive indium tin oxide (ITO), which
forms a transparent anode. Thin layers containing the organic com-
ponents that are required for its operation are coated separately andsuccessively on to this substrate to provide both conductive hole-
transporting and electron-transporting layers. A calcium/aluminium
cathode layer completes the construction. The organic molecules used
in the devices are essentially semiconducting materials that contain
extensive delocalised p-electron systems. In the operation of the device,
a voltage is applied across the OLED such that the anode becomespositively-charged with respect to the cathode. Electric current flows
through the device as electrons (negatively-charged) are injected into
the lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs) in the organic layer
at the cathode, and are withdrawn from highest occupied molecular
orbitals (HOMOs) in the organic layer at the anode. The latter processmay alternatively be described as injection of positively-charged ‘holes’cathode
electron transport layerelectron injection laye r
hole injection layerhole transport layer
anode
glass
Figure 11.6 Construction of a simple organic light-emitting diode (OLED).277 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsat the anode. Electrons and holes come together as a result of elec-
trostatic attraction, and they combine to form an exciton . The decay of
this excited state is accompanied by emission of visible light, which isbelieved to occur closer to the electron-transporting layer since holes
are generally more mobile than electrons.
The hole-transporting layer contains highly electron-rich aromatic
compounds, such as the triphenylamine derivative, m-MDTA, 11.9,
whose role is to provide the required charge transport properties
(Figure 11.7). Fluorescent dyes with high quantum yields are used to
OSN
O NButBut
CH3
CH3CH3 H3C
ONC CN
But
NH3C CH3
H3C
H3C
N
OAlNN
NN
11.11CH3
CH3
H3C
11.1211.10
311.9
11.13
Figure 11.7 Some organic materials used in OLED displays.278 Chapter 11promote light emission at diﬀerent wavelengths, including coumarins
such as dye 11.10 (green) and the pyran derivative 11.11 , DCJTB (red),
while blue emitters are generally polycyclic hydrocarbons such as thedistyrylarylene 11.12 , DPVBI.
22The aluminium complex of 8-hydro-
xyquinoline, 11.13 , is a useful multi-purpose component in OLED
devices, as a green light emitter, an electron transport material and a
host for red-emitting dyes.
The second approach to the production of OLEDs emerged from
the discovery that poly(p -phenylenevinylene), 11.14 (PPV), was capable
of producing a greenish glow when a thin film of the polymer was
subjected to a high voltage.23Since this discovery, a large number of
light-emitting polymers have been prepared and investigated. Mostlythese are based on polymers of the PPV type, containing a variety of
substituents, either as homopolymers or copolymers. However, light-
emitting materials based on other highly-conjugated polymers, such
as polyfluorenes and polythiophenes, have also been investigated inthe search for materials with improved eﬃciency of emission over a
range of wavelengths, and with enhanced stability and ease of
processing.
24The principles of the electroluminescence from the
polymers are based on semiconductor properties that are essentiallyanalogous to those involved in the small molecule systems, with the
p-orbitals arising from their extensively conjugated structure forming
the valence band and the p*-orbitals the conduction band. These
materials oﬀer significant potential for future developments in flat
screen display technology, not least because of the potential for the
relative simplicity and ease of device construction.
n
11.14
Flat-screen plasma displays represent another commonly-
encountered commercial technology. These devices are constructedfrom panels consisting of millions of micro-cells sandwiched between
two glass panels. Pulses of light from each pixel element are created
by a plasma discharge, obtained by applying a voltage to a noble gas
environment, generally a mixture of xenon and neon, contained in
each cell in the display matrix. The plasma emits high energy UV
radiation (140–190 nm) that induces emission of visible light from a
matrix of RGB-emitting inorganic phosphors.279 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and PigmentsThe discussion presented in this section has centred on the prin-
ciples of the most important colour display technologies, and is by no
means exhaustive. There are numerous other technologies, currently
either available or under development. Examples include electro-
chromic, field emission and thin-film electroluminescent displays, the
commercial viability of which will be determined in the years to come.
11.2.2 Laser Dyes
Lasers are devices that provide an intense beam of highly focussed
radiation.25The term laser is an acronym, referring to light amplifi-
cation by stimulated emission of radiation. A laser beam is generated in
a part of the device referred to as the gain medium, which may be a
solid, liquid or gas. Historically, laser technology has utilised variousinorganic materials to produce the required emission. Several diﬀerenttypes of inorganic laser were developed to emit either in the ultraviolet,
visible or infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. These
conventional inorganic lasers are commonly low cost, robust devices.
However, they have the disadvantage that they emit at only a few
selected wavelengths, and in very narrow bands. An example of a
commonly-encountered inorganic laser is the gallium-arsenic diode
laser, which emits in the near-infrared region at around 780 nm. Dye
lasers, in contrast, emit over a broad band of wavelengths, thus oﬀering
the advantage of tunability through a wide wavelength range, and onthis basis they have become well-established in laser technology.
26–28
In addition, by simply changing the dye, emission may be achieved indiﬀerent spectral regions. Conventional dye lasers are based on specific
fluorescent dyes dissolved in an appropriate solvent, and this solution
is used as the liquid gain medium. Dye lasers have been used in a wide
range of applications including communications technology, micro-
surgery, spectroscopy, photochemistry, studies of reaction kinetics,
isotope separation in nuclear fuel enrichment and microanalysis.
The principles of the function of the fluorescent dye in a dye laser
may be explained with reference to the mechanism of fluorescence as
described in Chapter 2 (see Figure 2.6). The gain region of the lasercontains the dye solution and is surrounded by a system of mirrors.
This part of the device, referred to as the resonant cavity, provides the
amplification and controls the beam direction. As a result of ab-
sorption of a quantum of light, the dye molecule is promoted from its
ground state, S
0, to its first excited state, S 1*. Lasing occurs when
incident radiation interacts with the dye molecule in its excited state,thereby causing (stimulating) the molecule to decay to the ground280 Chapter 11state by emission of radiation (fluorescence). For lasing to be achieved,
a situation has to be brought about in which the dye molecules exist
predominantly in the excited state. This so-called population inversion is
obtained by pumping the system with an appropriate source of energy,either continuously or as pulses, using a powerful inorganic laser. In
contrast to spontaneous fluorescence emission, the stimulated emis-
sion of radiation from dye lasers is strictly coherent (same phase andpolarisation) and is of high intensity.
There are a number of general requirements for laser dyes.
29Strong
absorption at the excitation wavelength is clearly required but there
should be minimal absorption at the lasing wavelength, so that there
is as little overlap as possible between absorption and emission
spectra. Additional important requirements are a high quantum yield
(0.5–1.0), a short fluorescence lifetime (5–10 ns), low absorption in
the first excited state at the pumping and lasing wavelengths, low
probability of intersystem crossing to the triplet state and goodphotochemical stability. Laser dyes are required to exhibit high purity,
since traces of impurities can seriously reduce fluorescence intensity
as a result of quenching, thereby causing a significant reduction in
lasing eﬃciency. By appropriate dye selection it is possible to produce
coherent light of any wavelength from 320 to 1200 nm. Examples of
laser dyes are given in Figure 11.8. For shorter wavelengths (up to ca.
470 nm), aromatic hydrocarbons, such as anthracenes and poly-phenyls, and fluorescent brightening agent-type materials such as
stilbenes, oxazoles, coumarins and carbostyrils are most commonly
used. Coumarins, such as the benzothiazolyl derivative 11.15a (Cou-
marin 6) and the benzimidazolyl derivative 11.15b (Coumarin 7), are
suitable for use in the 470–550 nm range, while xanthene derivatives,such as Rhodamine 6G, 11.16 , are of prime importance in the
510–700 nm region of the visible spectrum. Rhodamine 700, 11.17 ,
exhibits highly eﬃcient laser action in the range 700–800 nm, pro-
viding an excellent example of molecular design for this particular
application. The ‘double butterfly’ structure causes the molecule to
become rigid and thus increases the eﬃciency of fluorescent emission,
while the trifluoromethyl (–CF
3) group enhances photostability. For dye
lasers operating at longer wavelengths into the near-infrared region,
oxazines and polymethine dyes are most suitable. For example, poly-
methine dye 11.18 provides a lasing maximum at 950 nm. More re-
cently, difluoroboron complexes of dipyrromethenes (pyrromethenesor BODIPY complexes), exemplified by compound 11.19 (PM 567), have
developed special importance for laser applications in view of theirhigh photostability and their potential to provide enhanced gain.281 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and PigmentsThere are certain inherent technical disadvantages of liquid-phase
lasers, particularly in terms of the need to circulate the dye solution in
order to ensure that dye molecules in the triplet state and also productsof degradation of the dyes are removed. Recent important advances in
solid-state and semiconducting lasers based on inorganic materials
have meant that devices based on these technologies have gradually
displaced liquid-based dye lasers from their previously pre-eminent
position. However, there have been important recent advances aimed
at the development of tunable solid-state dye lasers. The research into
this laser technology has been mainly associated with the development
of organic polymeric materials that act as hosts for the fluorescent
dyes, with the aim to improve the operational performance of the gainmedium and thus enhance the lifetime of practical devices.
30
11.2.3 Dyes in Solar Energy Conversion
One of the main technical challenges facing mankind is to ensure the
security of our future energy supply, especially at a time when global
demand is increasing. Currently, it may be argued that we haveO Et2 O NXN
N ON
CF3
N
EtS S
NEtClNH
2
ClO NHC 2H5
CH3C2H5HN
H3C
CO2C2H5
N
BN
F F+CH3
11.18H3C
C2H5
H3CCH3
C2H5
CH3Cl–
+11.16+
11.17a: X = S; b: X= NH11.15
+–
11.19
Figure 11.8 Examples of laser dyes.282 Chapter 11become over-dependent on energy generation from the combustion of
fossil fuels, which not only contributes towards air pollution and
potential climate change based on carbon dioxide emission, but is
also based on shrinking, finite and non-renewable resources. At the
same time, there is significant opposition in some quarters to power
generation using nuclear fission based on concerns over its safety,
which has been fuelled by certain dramatic events, such as those thatoccurred at Chernobyl and Fukushima. Therefore, the search for
economically-viable alternatives based on renewable energy sources,
including wind, tidal, wave and solar power, has assumed a high
priority, politically and technologically, and is arguably essential for a
globally sustainable society.
31There has thus been intensifying eﬀort
over many years aimed at the development of the means to convertsolar energy into electrical energy, a process that utilises a powerful,
plentiful, non-diminishing energy source and suﬀers little from glo-
bal environmental problems. In a sense, such systems mimic thenatural harvesting of solar energy by plants and bacteria as part of the
process of photosynthesis that is responsible for their growth.
The most important photovoltaic solar cell technology is currently
based on inorganic materials, notably silicon, which can be in single-
crystal, polycrystalline or amorphous form, making use of its semi-
conducting properties.
32–34Other inorganic semiconducting materials,
for example GaAs, InP and GaSb, may be used to produce highly eﬃ-
cient solar cells, although they are expensive. Conventional cells contain
a sandwich of n-type and p-type doped s ilicon layers. Interaction with
light produces a free electron and a p ositive hole. At the junction be-
tween the layers, the electron moves t owards the n-type doped silicon
layer and the hole towards the p -type, providing current flow through an
external circuit. The eﬃciency of inorg anic photovoltaic cells may reach
up to 24% in the most expensive types, although it is more commonly
around 15%, and significantly less in cheaper commercial cells.
Dye-sensitised solar cells (DSCs), which utilise specific dyes for the
purpose of solar energy conversion, have been under intense in-
vestigation, as alternatives to traditional silicon photocell technol-
ogy.35–37Indeed, this technology currently represents one of the most
active areas of research in functional dye chemistry and technology.
One type of construction for such a photocell is shown in Figure 11.9.
The electrodes for the photocell are constructed from coated con-
ductive glass. At one electrode, which serves as the current collector,
there is a semiconducting layer of an inorganic substrate, usually
nanosized, mesoporous titanium dioxide in its anatase polymorphic
form, on to which the dye is adsorbed. Another important component283 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsof the photocell is an electrolyte, containing a redox couple dissolved
in an appropriate organic solvent in the intra-electrode space. The
electrolyte is generally an iodine/tetraalkylammonium iodide mixture.
The mechanism that has been proposed for the operation of this
type of photocell is illustrated in Figure 11.10, in which the dye acts asa sensitiser for the photoelectrochemical process. Light is absorbed
by a monolayer of the dye (D), which is anchored on the semi-
conducting TiO
2surface. Consequently, the dye is raised to its first
excited state (D*). At the electrode, the excited state D* releases anelectron into the conduction band of the TiO
2, at the same time
forming an oxidised species, D1. At the counter-electrode, an electron
is transferred to the electrolyte and, mediated by the I 2/I/C0(I3/C0/3I/C0)
redox equilibrium, the original state of the dye (D) is regenerated by
reduction. The electrical circuit is completed by electron flow through
the external load. For eﬃcient cell operation, the rate of electron in-
jection from the dye excited state (D*) must be faster than its decay
back to the ground state. In addition, the rate of reduction of oxidisedlight
transparent
electrodecounter-electrodeI3-3I-e-
e-
    redox
electrolyte
   TiO 2 particles with 
adsorbed dye monolayercurrent flow
non-porous
buffer layer
Figure 11.9 Design of a dye-sensitised photocell.284 Chapter 11sensitiser (D1) by the electron donor within the electrolyte must be
higher than its reverse reaction with injected electrons, and also
higher than the rate of reaction of the injected electrons with theelectron acceptor within the electrolyte.
An obvious feature required by a dye for application in DSCs is the
ability to absorb solar energy strongly. The dye should be firmly at-
tached to the surface of the semiconductor and inject electrons into
its conduction band with a high quantum yield. Its redox potential
should be suﬃciently high that it can be regenerated rapidly from the
oxidised species. Finally, extremely high stability is of vital import-
ance in this particular application because of the need to withstand
exposure to light and also countless redox conversions over a periodof many years. Of the numerous types of dye that have been investi-
gated, the most successful have been based on octahedral rutheniu-
m(
II) complexes of 2,20-bipyridyl derivatives. Of particular current
importance is dye 11.20 (N719), which has been reported to be cap-
able of providing a conversion eﬃciency in DSCs greater than 11%.
The role of the carboxylate groups in dyes of this type is to enhance
the attachment of the dye to the TiO 2surface. In addition, a wide
range of metal-free organic dyes has been investigated in view of theirhigher extinction coeﬃcients and potentially lower cost, particularly
because the noble metal ruthenium is a limited resource and is ex-
pensive. An example of such a dye specifically-designed for DSC ap-plications is dye 11.21 . Dye molecules of this type are described as
having a donor–conjugated bridge–acceptor architecture. They maybe considered as composed of three parts: (a) an electron-donating
group (in this case the tertiary amino group) to enhance electron in-
jection into the conduction band of the semiconductor; (b) a
Figure 11.10 Proposed mechanism for the operation of a dye-sensitised photocell.285 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsconjugated bridge, a polyene sometimes containing a heterocyclic
ring system, to tune the light absorption characteristics; and (c)
terminal cyanoacrylic acid functionality acting as the electron ac-
cepting group and to provide fixation of the dye on the surface of the
semiconductor film electrode. DSC technology now appears to oﬀer
considerable industrial potential as a means of solar energy con-
version, especially as technological developments are providing eﬃ-ciencies that are beginning to approach those given by traditional
silicon photocells.
NN
N
NHO2C
HO2C
CO2-BuN 4+CO2-BuN 4+
RuNCS
NCS
11.20
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3N
S
CNCO2H
2
11.21286 Chapter 11Another way in which dyes may be useful in solar energy conversion
is in fluorescent solar collectors (FSCs), alternatively referred to as
spectral converters or solar concentrators. These devices, first intro-
duced in the 1970s,38,39consist of thin sheets of clear plastic, gen-
erally poly(methyl methacrylate), doped with fluorescent dyes. Theyutilise the ability of fluorescent dyes to absorb certain wavelengths of
incident sunlight and to re-emit the energy at higher wavelengths.The emitted radiation is trapped by internal reflection at faces and
edges and is channelled towards the edge of the sheet where the
photovoltaic solar cell is located, as illustrated in Figure 11.11. Mul-
tiple layers of polymer containing dyes with diﬀerent absorption and
emission characteristics may be used to maximise the solar energy
collection throughout the spectrum. The requirements of dyes for this
application are broadly similar to those for laser dyes. These include a
high fluorescence quantum yield, compatibility with the plastic ma-
terial, high lightfastness in the polymer matrix, little overlap of theabsorption and emission spectra (generally associated with a large
Stokes shift) and high purity. Dyes from the coumarin and perylene
classes (see Chapter 4 for a discussion of the structure and properties
of carbonyl fluorescent dyes) have most commonly been employed for
these applications. The attraction of FSCs is their potential to assist in
addressing the high cost of solar energy conversion, as compared with
energy generation from other resources, which continues to limits
its exploitation on a large scale. FSCs combine the strong light
absorption characteristics of dyes with the conversion eﬃciency of
traditional solar cells, and significantly reduce the amount of
semiconductor material required. However, their development hasbeen restricted by the limited photostability of the dyes currently
available and by low concentration eﬃciency within the devices.
solar cellssunlight
fluorescent
dye molecule
Figure 11.11 Design of a fluorescent dye-based solar collector.287 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and PigmentsNevertheless, interest in these systems remains high for the future if
these limiting issues can be addressed, for example by advances in
materials science, nano-optics and device design.40,41
11.2.4 Dyes in Optical Data Storage
Optical data storage refers to systems that store data digitally, usually
on a small circular disc, and where the system is addressed using a
highly-focussed beam of laser light.42,43The data are stored ‘bit by bit’
as depressions or ‘pits’ and regions without depressions or ‘lands’.The first commercially successful optical data storage system was the
audio compact disc (CD), introduced in the early 1980s, which oﬀeredcertain advantages over traditional vinyl records, including robust-
ness, ease of handling together with good sound quality.
44The
introduction of the standardised pre-recorded CD-audio, and its rapidpopular acceptance, provided the stimulus for the further technolo-
gical developments of optical storage systems that have taken place at
a remarkable pace. Within a few years, CD-ROM (read only memory)
was introduced for the digital storage of computer application soft-
ware and data. Discs in the CD-audio and CD-ROM format are con-
structed from polycarbonate, already containing the data as pits and
lands, and coated with a reflecting layer of aluminium. They are ad-
dressed by a laser with a wavelength of 780 nm, and provide a memorycapacity of around 700 MB. The demand for higher storage capacity
led to the subsequent introduction of the DVD (digital versatile disc),
which uses a laser wavelength of 650 nm, thus enabling a smaller pit
structure and consequently a higher capacity (17 GB) in its stand-
ardised format. The successor to the DVD is the BluRay disc, which
uses an even shorter laser wavelength (405 nm) and provides signifi-
cantly higher storage capacity. Soon after the introduction of pre-re-
corded CDs, demand developed for storage systems that allowed
information to be recorded by the individual. The first product de-veloped was referred to as the WORM (w riteoncereadmany) system.
This system was based on a dye layer with a strong absorption at thelaser wavelength (780 nm). The absorbed laser radiation is converted
into heat which destroys the dye. The diﬀerences in reflection that
result can be read by a laser of lower intensity. However, the system
was not commercially successful, mainly because it required special
recording and playback apparatus, which was expensive. In 1989, the
recordable CD (CD-R) was introduced, which utilises reflection at a
metal surface, in a similar way to CD, while also incorporating a
weakly absorbing dye layer. During recording, the heat that results288 Chapter 11when the dye layer absorbs the laser radiation destroys the dye mol-
ecules, melts the polymer and deforms the metallic layer, thus
forming a pit. The commercial success of this system was mainly due
to its compatibility with standard CD-audio and CD-ROM drives.
Subsequently, analogous technologies leading to recordable DVD-R
and BluRay-R have been devised. Rewritable systems (CD-RW, DVD/
RW) were also developed, in these cases using materials that undergocrystalline-amorphous phase change induced by local heating for the
purpose of information storage.
44
From the early 1980s, intense research activity developed into
compounds that absorb in the near-infrared (NIR) region of the
electromagnetic spectrum ( i.e., beyond 750 nm), a spectral region that
had previously been regarded mainly as a scientific curiosity ratherthan oﬀering practical application significance.
45,46Interest in this
region emerged particularly as a result of the development of in-expensive and robust inorganic semiconductor lasers and the po-tential that these devices oﬀered for the development of
optoelectronic devices, most notably for optical data storage appli-
cations. An important example was the gallium-arsenide diode laser
emitting in the 780–830 nm range, as used for example in CD-R sys-
tems. Such compounds are commonly referred to as near-infrared
absorbing dyes, even though, in the strict sense, they are not dyes
since their absorption is outside the visible region. Nevertheless,
these compounds were commonly designed and synthesised by an
extension of conventional dye chemistry so that it is convenient to
consider them in this context. In addition, the organic materials
absorb NIR radiation as a result of electronic transitions (generallyp-p*), in the same way as materials that absorb in the UV and
visible region. Important examples of NIR absorbing dyes include arange of phthalocyanine derivatives (Chapter 5) and cyanine dyes
together with structurally-related systems such as croconium dyes
(Chapter 6). However, dyes with NIR absorption characteristics have
been synthesised based on most chromophoric systems, including
azo and carbonyl dyes (Chapters 3 and 4, respectively) by the intro-
duction of appropriate substitution patterns that produce the re-
quired bathochromicity. A range of other applications has emergedfor NIR absorbing dyes, including security printing, for example
in banknotes and ‘invisible’ but laser-readable bar-coding for the
identification of branded products, infrared photography and laser
filters. Appropriately designed compounds also have potential for use
in photodynamic therapy, a cancer treatment that is described in
Section 11.4.2.289 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and PigmentsDyes for optical recording applications require absorption charac-
teristics that are appropriate for the system in question, including
high molar extinction coeﬃcients, decomposition temperatures
above the glass transition temperature of the polycarbonate used to
construct the disc, good solubility in the solvent used to spin-coat the
discs and stability to environmental and processing conditions. Se-
lected examples are given in Figure 11.12. The CD-R system uses dyeswith a l
maxvalue in the range 690–710 nm and with a small but finite
absorbance at the laser wavelength (780 nm). Examples of appropriatedyes include the cyanine 11.22a and phthalocyanine 11.23 . DVD-R
uses dyes absorbing at the lower laser wavelength (650 nm), for ex-ample the cyanine 11.22b and the nickel azo dye complex 11.24 .A n
example of a dye designed for BluRay-R applications (405 nm) is themethine dye 11.25 .
N NH3CCH3 H3CCH3
R R
NN
N
N
N
NNN CuOR
BrBr
OR
Br
RO BrRON
NSN
NN(CH 2CH3)2
N
SO2CF3
NN
SNN
(H3CH2C)2NNF3CO2S
NNN
OO OCH3X-n
CHCH3
CH3H3CR = propyl or butyl
X = ClO 4 or BF 4
H3C
C2H511.22a : n = 2; 11.22b : n = 1
11.23R = branched chain alkylNi
11.24
11.25+
Figure 11.12 Examples of dyes for optical data storage.290 Chapter 1111.3 REPROGRAPHICS APPLICATIONS OF DYES AND PIGMENTS
The term reprography was first used around the 1960s to encompass
the new imaging techniques for document reproduction, including
xerography, electrofax and thermography, which were emerging at thetime. The term is still used to refer to those newer imaging processes
that may be distinguished from conventional printing techniques,
such as lithography, flexography, screen and gravure printing, and
traditional film photography. These processes have experienced re-
markable growth mainly because of the rapid advances in computing
technology and the consequent growth in demand for small oﬃce
and home (SOHO) printing of high-quality, using relatively inexpen-
sive printers. The most important of these techniques currently are
electrophotography and inkjet printing, both of which oﬀer the ad-
vantage of printing on to plain paper.
11.3.1 Electrophotography
The term electrophotography encompasses the familiar techniques of
photocopying (also commonly called xerography) and laser printing. In
both of these printing systems, the ink is a toner, which is generally a
powder consisting mainly of pigment, charge control agent, and a low
melting binder. Toner printing systems use optical or electrical meth-
ods to form an electrostatic latent image to which the toner is attracted
and subsequently transferred to the substrate. Most photocopiers andlaser printers operate on a similar basis, so that it is convenient to
discuss them together, but there are also some key diﬀerences.
The photocopying process, as illustrated in Figure 11.13, may es-
sentially be separated into six stages.
47One of the key aspects of
photocopying is a photoconducting material, which, as the nameimplies, is a conductor of electricity in the presence of light but an
insulator in the dark. In the first stage of the process, the dark
photoconducting surface of a drum is given a uniform electrostatic
charge. In the imaging step, the document to be copied is illuminated
with white light, commonly by sweeping a linear array of photodiodes
across the paper. In colour photocopying, there are separate rows ofphotodiodes, each row covered with either a red, green or blue filter.
Where there is no image, light is reflected on to the photoconducting
surface and this causes the charge to be dissipated. Where there is an
image, light is absorbed and does not reach the photoconductor. In
this way, a latent electrostatic image is formed on the drum. The
drum is then exposed to toner particles that have been given an op-
posite charge to that on the drum. The toner particles are thus291 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsattracted to the image areas of the photoconducting surface. The next
step involves transfer of the image from the drum to the substrate,
usually plain paper, by applying to the back of the paper an electrical
potential of opposite charge to that of the toner particles. The next
step fixes the image to the paper. This is achieved by a heat treatment,
which melts the toner resin and fuses it to the paper. Finally, the
photoconducting surface is cleaned to make it ready for the next
copying cycle.
In a laser printer, the first step also involves giving the photo-
conducting drum a uniform electrostatic charge. However, in the sec-ond step a laser is used to write on the charged drum the information
stored in the memory of the printer. In contrast to the photocopying
process, therefore, the charge is dissipated in the image areas. In this
case, the toner carries a charge that is the same as that on the drum, so
that it is repelled from the non-image areas on to the uncharged image
areas. From this stage onwards, the principles of the laser printing
process are similar to those of the photocopying process.
Organic colorants of various types are key components in the op-
eration of photocopiers and laser printers. The photoconducting
drum contains two surface layers. The first is a thin charge-generating+++++++++++++++++++
++++ +++(a) charge
(b) expose
(c) develop+ve--
--
------
-
carriertoner
(d) transfer
(e) fix
(f) cleanpaper
fused to paper
Figure 11.13 The photocopying process.292 Chapter 11layer, which is on top of a thicker charge-transport layer. The charge-
generating layer contains a charge-generating material that is usually
a highly-purified pigment, commonly of the perylene, polycyclic
anthraquinone or phthalocyanine type, with carefully controlled
crystallinity and particle size. Light interacts with the pigment to form
an ion-pair complex and at the same time releasing an electron that
passes to earth. A positive hole is thus generated that migrates to theinterface with the charge-transport layer. This layer contains highly
electron-rich compounds, such as polyarylamines, not usually
coloured materials, which facilitate transfer of the positive holes to
the outer surface.
The toners used in photocopying and laser printers are powders,
which consist mainly of pigments, charge control agents and resin, a
relatively low melting (60–70 1C) polymer. The most extensively used
pigment is carbon black since most printing remains monochrome.However, the production of multicoloured prints by this method,using pigments of the three subtractive primary colours, yellow, ma-
genta and cyan, is increasing in popularity. The yellows are commonly
provided by disazo pigments, the magenta by quinacridones and the
cyan by copper phthalocyanine (see Chapter 9 for a description of the
chemical structures of these types of pigments). Charge control
agents are materials that, as the name implies, assist in the control of
the electrostatic charge applied during the printing process.
These are ionic materials (either anionic or cationic), which may be
coloured or non-coloured. For example, 2 : 1 chromium complexes of
azo dyes, exemplified by compound 11.26 , which is structurally
similar to those used as anionic premetallised dyes for application to
wool (Chapter 7), are commonly used as the charge control agents in
black toners.
NN
OOCl
N
NO
O
ClCr-M+
11.26293 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigments11.3.2 Inkjet Printing
Digital inkjet printing has experienced tremendous growth in recent
years.48,49The technique provides a non-impact means of generating
images, which involves directing small droplets of ink in rapid suc-
cession, under computer control, on to the substrate. There are several
types of inkjet printing methods. Two of the principal types are the
continuous jet method and the impulse or ‘drop on demand’ method,
although only the latter is considered here as it has assumed the highest
industrial importance. In thi s method, as illustrated in Figure 11.14,
pressure on the ink is applied by firing a droplet when it is needed toform part of the image. The pressure may be generated by either thermal
or mechanical means. The former mechanism is involved in bubble-jet
printers, in which the print-head is heated at the nozzle to a temperature
above 300 1C in rapid pulses, causing the formation of a bubble as the
ink solvent boils, exerting the pressure that fires an ink droplet. The
collapse of the bubble causes ink to refill the nozzle ready for the next
pulse. In the latter mechanism, a pressure wave is generated by a
piezoelectric crystal, which deforms when activated by an electrical im-
pulse. An array of nozzles is used to generate the image, with the print-
head as close as possible to the substrate surface for accuracy of delivery.
Inkjet printing requires the use of inks that meet stringent physical,
chemical and environmental criteria. Inkjet inks are very low viscosity
fluids as is required by the non-impact method of ink delivery. They
have a relatively simple composition, consisting of a solvent, almostinvariably water, and a colorant together with other additives for
specific purposes, for example water-miscible organic solvents in
aqueous inks to assist dye solubility and to minimise crystallisation as
ink dries at the nozzle, viscosity modifiers and surfactants for control
of surface tension. When first introduced, the colorants used were
ink  supplynozzle
pape r
Figure 11.14 ‘Drop-on-demand’ inkjet printing.294 Chapter 11mainly dyes because pigments showed a tendency to block the noz-
zles and to settle from the ink on storage. Initially, the dyes used in
inkjet printing were selected from the range of conventional water-
soluble products used in textile applications, notably from the acid,
direct, or reactive dye application classes, or from food dyes, this last
group oﬀering the particular advantage of clearly-established non-
toxicity. The earliest drop-on-demand printers were designed formonochrome printing and thus only required a black ink. An example
of such a ‘first generation’ inkjet dye is CI Food Black 2 (11.27 in
Figure 11.15). These early inkjet dyes performed reasonably in manyrespects, but the principal problem was inadequate water-fastness
that could, for example, lead to smudging of the print when handled
with moist fingers or when splashed accidentally. In the ‘second
generation’ inkjet dyes, this particular feature was improved by
the design of specific dyes that are soluble at the slightly alkaline pH
(7.5–10) of the ink, but are rendered insoluble by the weakly acidic pHconditions (pH 4.5–6.5) on the paper substrate. One of the simplest
ways in which this was achieved involved the incorporation of carb-
oxylic acid groups, which are ionised (as –CO
2/C0) at the higher pH thus
enhancing water-solubility, but are protonated (as –CO 2H) as the pH
is reduced, thus reducing solubility. An example of such a dye is
compound 11.28 (Figure 11.15), whose molecular structure is closely
related structurally to CI Food Black 2, 11.27 , but with sulfonic acid
groups replaced, to a certain extent, with carboxylic acid groups.
Further improved resistance to wet treatments on paper was provided
by applying the dyes as their ammonium salts, which facilitates free
carboxylic acid formation through loss of ammonia.
NaO 3S NN
SO3NaNH
N
NaO 3SSO3NaNH2
O
NN NH
N
NaO 3SNH2
O
HO2CHO2C11.27
11.28
Figure 11.15 Examples of water-soluble dyes used in ink jet printing.295 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and PigmentsMost simple SOHO inkjet printers now use a CMYK four-colour
system. In printers working to more demanding quality specifications,
additional colours are used, for example light cyan (LC) and light
magenta (LM) in six-colour printers. The dyes are required to provide
high intensity and brightness of colour (chroma), good fastness to
light, water and heat (especially for bubble-jet printers in which high
temperatures are generated), low toxicity and environmental impact,low inorganic salt content, high water-solubility and good storage
stability in the ink. In the early days of inkjet printing, the dyes were
selected from the range commercially available for textile applications.
However, even the best of these generally had inadequate fastness
properties and did not easily provide the ideal colour for the desired
trichromatic system. Consequently, considerable eﬀort was devoted to
investigate new molecules designed specifically for inkjet appli-
cations.
50,51The most important yellow and magenta dyes in current
use are derived from the azo chemical class while the cyans are based
on the copper phthalocyanine system. Originally, the water-soluble
sulfonated copper phthalocyanines CI Direct Blues 87 and 199 were
used since they provided the desired hue with high tinctorial strength.
However, these dyes demonstrated inadequate technical performance,
including poor fastness to the atmospheric ozone contamination that
is prevalent in the SOHO environment. It was demonstrated that this
was due to the susceptibility of the carbon–nitrogen bonds in the in-
ternal macrocyclic ring of the phthalocyanine system to attack by
ozone. A series of interesting molecular design concepts were adopted
to address the technical deficiencies, leading for example to cyan dye
11.29 , which is reported to have high durability in inkjet applications.52
The electron density in the ring system, and hence the susceptibility to
oxidative attack, is lowered by the introduction of electron-withdrawing
functionality into the system. This provides not only improved ozone
resistance but also enhanced lightfastness, a feature that can also in-
volve oxidative degradation processes. The sulfonyl groups in dye 11.29
provide the appropriate electron-withdrawing properties and alsopromote water solubility. A further feature of the molecular design is
aimed at enhancing the molecular aggregation of the dyes in appli-
cation, which improves fastness properties, for example by presenting aphysical barrier to attack from ozone. In the traditional textile dyes
obtained by sulfonation of copper phthalocyanine, the sulfonic acid
group is introduced more or less randomly into a-a n d b-positions,
leading to a complex mixture. To promote aggregation, the uniformityof the dye mixture and the molecular symmetry are enhanced by
control of the position of substituents. In dye 11.29 , this is achieved by
incorporating a single substituent into a b-position in each of the four296 Chapter 11benzene rings. Similarly creative molecular design principles have been
applied to develop the yellow and magenta azo dyes that are currently
used for inkjet applications.52
NN
N
N
N
NNNCuRR
RR11.29R : R1/ R2 = 3/1
R1= -SO 2(CH 2)3SO3M
R2= -SO 2(CH 2)3SO2NHCH(OH)CH 3
Many of the early diﬃculties encountered in using pigments as
colorants for inkjet printing, especially the tendency of the pigment to
settle on storage and to block the jet nozzles, have now been resolved,
and pigment-based inks are now used extensively. The inks are gen-erally aqueous dispersions of appropriate CMYK pigments in a fine
nanocrystalline form, with specific surface treatments applied to the
pigment particles to ensure that the dispersions remain stable for a
reasonable length of time. The pigments are also required to be
bound to the substrate, a feature that may be achieved by micro-
encapsulation of the pigment in a binder, often used in conjunction
with a receptive substrate surface, or by incorporating a resin system
that is polymerised by UV irradiation after printing. Carbon black
pigments are highly eﬀective in inkjet printing and are widely used.Yellows commonly use suitable azo pigments, magenta often employs
quinacridones and cyan utilises copper phthalocyanine (Chapter 9).
As a broad generalisation, SOHO printing uses dye-based inks be-
cause they are capable of producing brighter colours and high storage
stability in the ink, while pigment printing is preferred commercially
when the hard copies require better longevity.
The use of inkjet printing as a means of producing multi-coloured
designs on textiles is growing in importance commercially.
53The dyes
used for particular fabric substrates and the coloration principles areessentially the same as those involved in screen printing on textiles
(Chapters 7 and 8). There are, however, significant diﬀerences betweenthese printing techniques in terms of the liquid formulations and the
way they are used, although the ingredients are broadly similar. The
nature of the ink delivery process in inkjet printing means that it is297 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsinappropriate to incorporate into the ink the auxiliary ingredients ne-
cessary to ensure image quality (thickening agent), dye penetration
(urea) and dye fixation ( e.g., alkali in the printing of cellulosic fibres
with reactive dyes). Instead, the fabrics are pre-treated with these in-gredients. An attractive feature of inkjet printing on textiles is that the
designs produced digitally may be applied directly to the fabric using
the digital computer interface, allowing a fast and flexible response tothe consumer and a consequent lowering of the cost for short runs of
product. For longer runs, however, the technique cannot as yet com-
pete economically with the eﬃciency of traditional rotary screen
printing. Industrial applications of inkjet printing technology continue
to expand beyond traditional paper and textile printing, oﬀering con-
siderable potential in the manufacture, for example, of wall-coverings,
printed electronic circuits, displays and solar panels.
11.3.3 Dye Diﬀusion Thermal Transfer (D2T2) Printing
The D2T2 printing process employs a set of polyester ribbons coated
with dyes that are transferred to a receiver sheet by the application of
heat at discrete points using a thermal head, which can reach a tem-
perature of up to 400 1C. Consequently, the dye sublimes on to and
migrates into the substrate, which is either a polymer film or papercoated with a polymer that is receptive to the incoming dye. Since the
D2T2 process involves dye sublimation, initial attempts were made to
use the range of commercial disperse dyes used for textiles (Chapter 7).
However, it became clear that specifically designed dyes were necessaryto meet the requirements of the application, and an extensive range
has been investigated.
54,55The chemical structures of the dyes in the
CMY trichromatic system used in current printers are broadly
N
CNNCBuOCH 2OCH 3
11.30298 Chapter 11confidential for reasons of commercial sensitivity. Dyes of the methine
type, typified by dye 11.30 , are reported to be suitable. The need for
special paper and the consequent expense has limited the growth ofthe D2T2 technique, but it has an important place in the market for
colour printing of high quality and durability.
11.4 BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF DYES
11.4.1 Biological Stains and Probes
The use of dyes in biological research and medicine is an immense
field, which continues to grow year by year. A commonly-used and long-
established technique is biological staining , in which the selective col-
oration of biological features is used to enhance their visibility underan optical microscope and thus aid characterisation.
56The methods
involve selective binding of the dye molecules to substances, tissue,
cells or microorganisms and their subsequent detection by micro-
scopic techniques. The mechanism of the binding of the dyes com-
monly involves ionic attraction of dye anions or cations to the opposite
charges carried by structural components of tissue. There may also be
contributions from weaker forces of attraction such as hydrogen
bonding, dipolar and van der Waals forces. In many cases, however, the
mechanism of binding is not fully established. A few stains react with
biological species to form covalent bonds. The best-known example is
Schiﬀ’s reagent, 11.32 , which is formed from the reaction of para-
rosaniline, a triarylmethine dye, 11.31 , with sulfurous acid (or an
aqueous solution of sulfur dioxide). The colourless reagent contains aprimary amino group that is capable of reacting with aldehyde func-
tionality to form coloured species, such as 11.33 , as illustrated in
Scheme 11.1. Further reaction of the other primary amino group inspecies 11.33 with aldehyde groups may proceed. Aldehyde groups may
be present or chemically generated at specific sites in biological sys-tems, for example from polysaccharides or by partial hydrolysis of DNA.
There is often advantage in using strongly fluorescent dyes or
brightening agents to colour specific components of living cells,because of their ease and sensitivity of detection, for example by
fluorescence microscopy, and their ability to provide high specificity.
Fluorochromes used in this way are referred to as fluorescent probes .
57
In terms of the dye chemistry, established dyes may be used but, morecommonly, dyes are synthesised in small quantities for specific re-
search purposes and are consequently very expensive. As a molecular
design tool, quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR)299 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsmethods (Chapter 2) are use ful in predicting the location of a probe
molecule in a cell.58Fluorescent probes are capable of detecting,
identifying and quantifying biomolecu les, such as antibodies, proteins,
lipids and polysaccharides in cells. They may also be used to de-code
cell components (DNA, RNA, proteins and enzymes)59and to probe cell
structures and functions, often for diagnostic purposes. Variation in thespectral characteristics of a bound dye are indicative of changes in the
conformation of biomolecules and also the nature of their environment,
thus providing a useful tool in the investigation of biological activity
and the mechanism of biological reactions. This technology has also
been incorporated into practical d evices for biomedical applications,
including optical chemical sensors ( e.g., for oxygen, carbon dioxide, pH
and metal ions), optical biosensors ( e.g., for enzymes, glucose, anti-
bodies, and DNA)
60and optical sensors of cell temperatures.61
11.4.2 Photodynamic Therapy
Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been the subject of an immense
body of research over the last 30 years or more and has emerged asSO3-
NH2H2NH2N
HO
HNNH
NH2H-O3SH2NNH
NH2+
H2SO3
+11.31 11.32
11.33
Scheme 11.1 Biological staining using Schiﬀ’s reagent, 11.32 .300 Chapter 11arguably the most significant development in medical treatment that
involves the use of dyes.62–65PDT is a treatment for certain cancers,
some already established in clinical use and some undergoing trials,as well as for age-related macular degeneration (ARMD, a significant
cause of blindness in the elderly), skin disorders and bacterial and
viral infections. The treatment process, illustrated schematically inFigure 11.16, involves the use of a photosensitising compound (the
dye) interacting with low energy light. The photosensitiser is applied
to the patient, either topically or intravenously, after which some time
is allowed so that it equilibrates within the body. During this time, the
photosensitiser selectively accumulates in the tumour cells (or le-
sion). Irradiation of the cells with laser light, fed viaan optical fibre
for example, is then carried out, initiating their destruction and thusproviding a potential means for destroying the tumour. For skin
treatments, lamps fitted with appropriate filters may be used as the
light source. An important advantage of PDT is that treatment is lo-
calised and thus may give rise to fewer side-eﬀects than conventionalcancer treatments, such as chemotherapy.
There are two main mechanisms by which light may react with the
photosensitiser, ultimately causing damage to the tissue.
65Both
mechanisms involve the generation of a triplet state from which en-ergy is transferred to nearby molecules, with the involvement of
molecular oxygen in oxidative degradation processes. In both cases,
laser light interacts with the photosensitiser and promotes it from its
ground state (
1Sens) into its singlet excited state (1Sens*), which then
undergoes intersystem crossing to a triplet excited state (3Sens*). In
the type I mechanism, this triplet state reacts with adjacent bio-
molecules to form free radicals, for example by electron transfer or
hydrogen abstraction. These radicals undergo further reaction in-
volving molecular oxygen, which exists in a triplet ground state (3O2),
to form various reactive oxygen-containing species, such as hydro-peroxides, hydroxyl radicals and superoxide. In the type II mechanismtreatment with
photosensitisercancer cell destroyed celllow power laser lightfed through optical fibre
Figure 11.16 PDT (photodynamic therapy) cancer treatment.301 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigments(Figure 11.17), which is believed to be prevalent in most PDT pro-
cesses, the photosensitiser triplet state (3Sens*) interacts directly with
triplet oxygen (3O2) to generate singlet oxygen (1O2) and the photo-
sensitiser consequently returns to its ground state (1Sens). In this
case, the photosensitiser is a catalyst for formation of singlet oxygen,which is the eﬀective photodynamic agent, being highly reactive, for
example towards unsaturated centres in the proteins and lipids that
construct the cell membrane.
The most commonly used photosensitiser for PDT is referred to as
Photofrin. To produce Photofrin, haematoporphyrin, obtained from
blood, is first treated with acetic and sulfuric acids followed by an
alkaline work-up to give a derivative, HpD, which is a complex mixtureof porphyrin monomers and oligomers. Photofrin is obtained from
HpD by removal of the non-active monomeric components. Structures
such as 11.34 (Figure 11.18) have been proposed for the active com-
ponents of Photofrin. Although still clinically the most widely usedPDT agent, this first generation photosensitiser has several inherent
deficiencies. It is a complex mixture, presenting issues of reproduci-
bility, exhibits only modest activity and has low absorption at the
red-light wavelength (630 nm) used in traditional PDT light sources.
As a side-eﬀect, it may cause sensitivity of the skin to sunlight for aprolonged period of time after the treatment. Consequently, there
has been a vast amount of research carried out in the search for new
generations of improved photosensitising agents. Among the re-
quirements considered for the second generation agents were that thehν
1Sens
1Sens*3Sens*3O21O2
intersystem crossing
Figure 11.17 Photo-induced mechanisms involved in photodynamic therapy.302 Chapter 11dye should absorb at higher wavelengths for improved absorption of
the laser light. The dyes should provide solubility in the body fluids,
improved specificity for tumour cells, low toxicity until light is ap-
plied, and should clear from the body after treatment. They should
also have a triplet excited state that is suﬃciently long lived to fa-
cilitate the formation of singlet oxygen. For this last purpose, it is
commonly advantageous to include heavy atoms in the molecular
structure of the dyes, such as metals, sulfur, bromine and iodine. Awide range of dyes has been investigated for this purpose, with some
undergoing clinical trials, including a variety of modified porphyrins.
Particular promise has been shown by phthalocyanine derivatives that
absorb bathochromically compared with the porphyrins, for example
the sulfonated aluminium(
III) phthalocyanine 11.35 . Various issues
are addressed in the development of so-called third generation PDTproducts. One of the most significant of these issues centres on the so-
called near-infrared ‘therapeutic’ window (700–950 nm), in which light
absorption by the body is minimised and its depth of penetration into
tissue is increased.
66Human tissue absorbs light below 700 nm due to
skin pigmentation, haemoglobin and some polymeric biomolecules,
while water absorbs above around 950 nm. There is consequently
interest in investigating photosensitisers that absorb at wavelengths in
this region, for example taking advantage of the absorption wavelength
range that is available from the range of cyanine dyes.
11.5 CHROMIC MATERIALS
Chromic materials is a term used increasingly to refer to dyes and
pigments that exhibit a distinct colour change induced by an externalNN
N N
N
NNNAl
ClNaO 3S
SO3Na
SO3Na NaO 3SNHN
NHN
HO2CH2CH2C
H3CH3C
(H2C)2CH3
CH3CH(OH)CH 3
CHO
CH3
n (= 2–7)O
11.34 11.35
Figure 11.18 Photosensitisers used in photodynamic therapy (PDT).303 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsstimulus, for example exposure to light, heat or electric current.
Traditional applications of dyes and pigments, such as those
described in Chapters 7–9, are required to provide a constant,
predictable and reproducible colour and, as far is technically feasible,
a permanent colour in terms of exposure to external eﬀects. Any
variation in the colour, for example when exposed to a change in
temperature or to light, would normally be regarded as highly
undesirable, i.e., a defect. However, it has been recognised in recent
decades that there are potential important commercial niche appli-cations for dyes and pigments that change colour when exposed to anexternal stimulus, especially when that change is controllable and
reversible, providing impetus for extensive research into new ma-
terials and their potential for technical applications.
67
Specific colour change phenomena are named using the suﬃx
chromism and a prefix that describes the stimulus causing the change.
Table 1 provides a list of phenomena and the stimulus involved.Ionochromism, thermochromism, photochromism, and electro-
chromism are the most extensively studied. The others listed are
generally less well-established and have either experienced limited
commercial exploitation or are essentially academic curiosities.
Indeed, the list in the table is probably not exhaustive.
11.5.1 Ionochromism
Ionochromism involves a reversible colour change caused by inter-
action with an ionic species. Dyes exhibiting a wide range of colour
changes are available, either from colourless to coloured or from one
colour to another. The most common ionochromic materials, argu-
ably the longest-established useful group of chromic materials, are
pH-sensitive dyes. These dyes are sensitive to the hydrogen ion (H
1),Table 11.1 Colour change phenomena with the
associated stimulus.
Colour change phenomenon Stimulus
Ionochromism Ions
Thermochromism Heat
Photochromism Light
Electrochromism Electric current flow
Solvatochromism Solvents
Vapochromism Vapours
Mechanochromism Mechanical action
Chronochromism Time
Radiochromism Ionizing radiation
Magnetochromism Magnetic field
Biochromism Biological sources304 Chapter 11and are referred to as halochromic . An immense range of coloured
organic molecules show halochromic behaviour.68The main chem-
ical classes of technical importance are phthalides, triarylmethines
and fluorans. However, many other chromophores can undergo
halochromism, including simple azo dyes, such as methyl orange,
11.36, which changes from orange to red with the formation of the
protonated species 11.36a as the pH is lowered (Scheme 11.2). Halo-
chromic phthalides and fluorans are discussed in the next section in
the context of their use as colour formers in leuco dye thermochromic
systems, in which the colour change is induced by a temperature-
sensitive pH change within a composite system. Another category of
ionochromism is metallochromism , in which the dyes change colour as
they bind, often selectively, to specific m etal ions. The dyes that show
this property commonly consist structurally of chelating ligand func-tionality, notably crown ethers or cryptands, attached to chromophores.
Ionochromic materials have many important technological appli-
cations. Halochromic dyes have been used extensively over the years
in analytical chemistry as reversible pH indicators in detecting the
end-point of acid–base titrations and in spot papers, such as litmus.
Similarly, metallochromic materials have been used in the qualitative
and quantitative analysis of metal ions. The importance of these
traditional applications has diminished significantly as modern in-strumental analytical methodology has developed to supersede their
use. However, new applications have emerged more recently, for ex-
ample in absorbance-based ion-selective optical sensors, which have
applications in chemical process control, medical diagnostics and
environmental monitoring.
69
11.5.2 Thermochromism
Thermochromism is the term used to describe a change of colour as a
result of a temperature change.70Thermochromic dyes and pigments
find application where this colour change indicates a temperaturechange, for example in plastic strip thermometers, medical thermo-
graphy and non-destructive testing of engineered articles andN
NN Me2HO3SN
NN Me2HO3SHH++
11.36a , red 11.36   orange
Scheme 11.2 Colour change in the protonation of methyl orange, 11.36 , an acid–
base indicator.305 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentselectronic circuitry. They may also be used in thermal imaging and for
a variety of decorative or novelty eﬀects. Crystal violet lactone, 11.37 ,
CVL, the most important colour-forming material used in thermo-chromic colorants, is a non-planar molecule and is colourless. In
contact with acid, the lactone ring is opened to give the violet/blue
arylcarbonium ion (triarylmethine) structure, 11.37a , as illustrated in
Scheme 11.3. Similar chemistry is exhibited by xanthene derivatives
(fluorans), represented by structure 11.38 , which extend the colour
range of the ring-opened forms, 11.38a , to orange, red, green and
black. Colour formation reactions of this type are utilised in car-
bonless copy paper, based on colour formation on the copy as a result
of pressure of writing or typing in the master sheet. In such systems,
the underside of the master sheet contains the colour former, encased
in microcapsules, which are tiny spheres with a hard polymer outer
shell. Pressure on the master sheet breaks the microcapsules and
brings the colour former in contact with an acidic reagent coated on
the copy sheet, thus causing an irreversible colour formation reaction.This particular application involves only halochromism. The colour
formers are not inherently thermochromic. However, they may be
used to generate colour thermally when used in combination with
other materials. In thermally-sensitive paper, the colour former and
an acidic developer, usually a phenol, are dispersed as insolubleO
OMe2NNMe2
Me2NMe2N NMe2
NMe2CO2H
O
OO X R1
R2X+11.37
R1+
R211.37a
CO2HH+
OH+
11.38a 11.38X = OR, NR2
Scheme 11.3 Colour formation in the ring-opening of crystal violet lactone and
related compounds.306 Chapter 11particles in a layer of film-forming material. When brought into
contact with a thermal head at around 80–120 1C, the composite
mixture melts as a result of the localised heating. As a result, thecolour former and developer diﬀuse together and react to form a
colour. This process is assisted by the presence of a third component,
a sensitiser, such as dibenzyl terephthalate, which assists diﬀusion by
acting as a solvent. In this case, the thermochromism is irreversibleand a permanent image is formed.
The most widely-used industrial thermochromic system is the re-
ferred to as the leuco dye type. The term leuco describes a dye that can
acquire two forms, one of which is colourless. This micro-encapsulated composite system relies on colour formation from the
interaction of three materials: a colour former (the leuco dye), an
acidic developer and a low-melting, non-volatile hydrophobic solvent,
a set of ingredients similar to those used in thermally-sensitive paper
as described above. However, in the leuco dye thermochromic sys-tems, it is curious that, even though similar chemistry is involved, the
composite material is coloured at low temperatures and decolourises
as the temperature is raised. To explain this eﬀect, a mechanism il-
lustrated in simplified form in Scheme 11.4 has been proposed.
71–73
At temperatures below the melting point of the solvent, the systemis heterogeneous with the colour former existing as the coloured
Scheme 11.4 Schematic representation of the mechanism of colour change in a
microencapsulated leuco dye thermochromic system.307 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsring-opened protonated species ( e.g.,11.37a in the case of CVL). With
the anion derived from the acidic developer, commonly a phenol such
as bisphenol A, this cation forms a complex which is insoluble in the
solvent, and its formation is favoured by a localised polar environment.
As the temperature is raised and the solvent melts, the components
dissolve to form a homogeneous liquid in which the hydrophobic en-
vironment favours formation of the colourless neutral ring-closed form(11.37 in the case of CVL) together with undissociated developer. As the
mixture cools and the solvent solidifies, phase separation occurs andthe coloured dye–developer complex reforms.
Thermochromism is also shown by certain liquid crystalline ma-
terials. As discussed in Section 11.2.1 in the context of displays
(LCDs), the three main sub-divisions of the liquid crystalline state are
smectic ,nematic and chiral nematic . Chiral nematics are capable of
showing a thermochromic eﬀect that is quite diﬀerent to that of leucodye thermochromic types. They provide a continuously changingspectrum of colours over a range of temperatures (referred to as
colour-play ) when observed against a dark (ideally black) background.
The colours arise from changes in the orientational structure of theliquid crystal with temperature and from the way that light interacts
with the liquid crystals to produce coloured reflection by inter-
ference.
74The phase adopts a screw-like, helical arrangement that, as
illustrated in a somewhat idealised way in Figure 11.1(c), may beenvisaged as composed of nematic liquid crystal layers. The director
(representing the average molecular axis direction) of an individual
layer is rotated through a small angle with respect to the director in
adjacent layers until it eventually turns through 360 1. The thickness
between identically-oriented layers is the pitch length ( p) of the helix.
When the magnitude of the pitch length is similar to the wavelengthof visible light, interaction of white light with the liquid crystal causes
selective reflection of a wavelength band, in a manner analogous to
Bragg X-ray reflection. The remaining wavelengths are transmitted,
and when these are absorbed by a black background the colour as-
sociated with the reflected light is observed.
The reflected wavelength is proportional to the pitch length of the
helix. Thermochromism arises because the pitch length varies withtemperature as illustrated in Figure 11.19. The colour changes are
especially pronounced and occur within a particularly narrow tem-
perature band when there is a transition from one liquid crystal phase
to another. For example, as a material passes through a transition
temperature leading from a smectic into a chiral nematic phase, the
helix forms and the rapid decrease in pitch length with increasing308 Chapter 11temperature gives rise to colours changing from red initially through
the spectrum to blue. As illustrated in Figure 11.19, the change in
pitch length with increasing temperature is rapid initially and be-
comes progressively less pronounced as the isotropic phase is ap-
proached. Thus, as the temperature increases steadily, the colours
corresponding to longer wavelengths (reds and yellows) are observedonly fleetingly and the longer lasting visual impression is of greens
and blues.
11.5.3 Photochromism
Photochromism is commonly defined as a process in which a com-
pound undergoes a reversible change between two chemical species
with diﬀerent absorption spectra, i.e., with diﬀerent colours, on ir-
radiation with light.
70Most photochromic dyes convert reversibly
from colourless into coloured when exposed to UV light, as illustratedin Scheme 11.5. The dyes may be categorised into two broad types. In
the case of T-type dyes, the reverse reaction is thermally-driven, i.e.,
occurs when the light source is removed, while with P-type dyes, thereverse reaction is photochemically-induced using light of a diﬀerent
wavelength. Photochromic materials are used most extensively in
ophthalmic sun-screening applications, notably the familiar spec-
tacles which become sunglasses when exposed to UV light, and also
ski-goggles and motorcycle helmet visors. For lens applications, thepitch
length
temperature
Figure 11.19 Variation of pitch length with temperature for a thermochromic chiral
nematic liquid crystal.309 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsdyes are required to react rapidly to UV light to produce a strong
colour from a colourless inactivated state, and to fade back to the
colourless state at a controlled rate, so that the kinetics of colorationand fading are key features, requiring careful matching when mix-
tures are used. The dyes are also required to provide more or less
constant performance over many cycles of photocoloration, a feature
known as fatigue resistance.
While most industrial dyes are of the T-type, there is considerable
interest in P-type photochromics and their potential applications.
75
The most important industrial T-type photochromic dyes are spir-
ooxazines and naphthopyrans (Scheme 11.6). The importance of
spirooxazines is due to their ability to impart intense photocoloration,good photo-fatigue resistance and relative ease of synthesis.
76Spir-
ooxazines, 11.39 , contain a spiro (sp3) carbon atom that separates the
molecule into two, each half containing heterocyclic rings whose p-
systems are orthogonal. The localized p-systems mean that they ab-
sorb only in the UV region. The oxazine C–O bond is ruptured on
exposure to UV radiation to give a coloured photomerocyanine,
11.39a . When the UV source is removed, the molecule reverts to the
more stable colourless ring-closed form as the oxazine bridge is re-established. Merocyanine 11.39a is one of several possible isomers of
the coloured forms. The ring-opening is believed to proceed initiallythrough metastable cisoid isomers that subsequently rearrange to a
more stable transoid isomer, such as 11.39a .
77The simplest spiroox-
azines give blue photocoloration, although dyes giving red and violetthrough to turquoise colours in their activated forms may be pro-
duced by appropriate molecular design. Naphthopyrans, represented
by general structure 11.40 , also undergo light-induced ring-opening to
give a coloured form, 11.40a .
78By appropriate substituent pattern
variation, naphthopyrans provide photochromic colours across the
spectrum from yellows through oranges, reds, violets and blues. In
addition to modifying colour, molecular changes may be used to fine-tune the kinetics of photocoloration and fading, and to enhance
photostability.COLOURLESS COLOUREDhν1
∆ or hν2
Scheme 11.5 General scheme for reversible photochromism.310 Chapter 11The most important two groups of P-type photochromic dyes are
fulgides, such as dye 11.41 , and diarylethenes, exemplified by dye
11.42 . As illustrated in Scheme 11.7, the reaction initiated by UV light
is in both cases an electrocyclic cyclisation in which a colourless or
weakly coloured ring-opened species converts into a coloured ring-
closed species (11.41a or11.42a ). This chemistry contrasts with the
T-type photochromics where the photocoloration is due to ring-opening of a colourless species. A further contrasting feature is that
the coloured species does not readily undergo thermal reversion, but
requires the absorption of certain wavelengths of visible light to
return to its original state. The P-type photochromics are consideredto have considerable potential for application in devices using optical
switching, including data storage.ONNR2R1
RN
N
O
R1R2R
XY
XY
O
R2R
R1O
R2R R111.39a 11.39UV light
11.40 11.40aUV light
Scheme 11.6 Photochromism of T-type dyes: spirooxazine 11.39 and naphthopyran
11.40 .311 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigments11.5.4 Electrochromism
Electrochromism involves a reversible colour change resulting from a
flow of electric current. The colour change is due to electron transfer
reactions at an electrode: oxidation at an anode and reduction at a
cathode.79Many commercially important electrochromic materials
are inorganic. Several transition metal oxides, the most importantbeing tungsten oxide (WO
3), show electrochromism in the solid state.
In the case of WO 3, the pure compound is pale yellow, although ap-
pearing essentially colourless in a thin film. The blue colour gener-
ated electrochemically is due to partial reduction of W( VI)t oW ( V)a ta
cathode, the depth of colour developed being proportional to thecharge injected. Other solid-state electrochromes include the blue
pigment Prussian blue (Chapter 9) and certain metal phthalocya-nines. The best-known example of a compound that exhibits elec-
trochromism in solution is methyl viologen, 11.43 , a bipyridylium
dication, which is colourless and undergoes reduction at a cathodeto give the bright blue radical cation 11.43a as illustrated in
Scheme 11.8. Other organic electrochromes include 1,4-phenylenedia-mines and thiazines. There have also been significant recent develop-
ments in polymeric electrochromic materials, including polyaniline
and polythiophene derivatives.OMe
MeO
MeMeMeO
OOOO
OMe
Me
MeMeMe
SMeMeCF2F2
C
F2C
SMe
MeMe
Me S RMe
SMe
RMe
MeCF2F2
C
F2CUV light
visible light
11.41 11.41a
11.4211.42aUV light
visible light
Scheme 11.7 Photochromism of P-type dyes: fulgide 11.41 and diarylethene 11.42 .312 Chapter 11From the time of the earliest developments, it was envisaged
that reversible electrochromic colour change might be useful in the
production of multicolour flat screen displays. Although there has
been some progress towards certain niche display applications, other
technologies, notably liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and light emitting
diodes (LEDs), as discussed earlier in this chapter, have proved much
more successful commercially in achieving the full colour range overa uniform large area at relatively low cost. The most important ap-
plications of electrochromism are in electrically-switchable, anti-
dazzle rear-view car mirrors and in smart windows for the control of
light and temperature in buildings. The mirrors contain an indium
tin oxide (ITO) coated glass surface with the conductive side facing
inwards as one electrode and a reflecting metal electrode at the back.
The gap between the electrodes consists of an electrolyte solution or
gel containing two soluble electrochromes, one of which is oxidised at
the anode and the other reduced at the cathode as electric currentflows. Smart windows may be constructed from two transparent
sheets of glass with conductive surfaces that act as the electrodes, on
which solid state electrochromic materials are coated, and between
which there is a conducting layer of a polymeric electrolyte. The
windows darken electrochromically according to the level of incident
sunlight. The units generally incorporate a light sensing system, and
may also use integrated solar cells.
11.5.5 Miscellaneous Colour Change Phenomena
Various other chromic materials are known, as listed in Table 1.
Solvatochromism is an extensively-studied phenomenon whereby a dyeNN
H3CH3C
NN
H3CH3C
++
++e-
-e-
11.43a 11.43
Scheme 11.8 Reversible electrochromism of methyl viologen.313 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigmentsdissolved in diﬀerent solvents exhibits diﬀerent colours, mostly as-
sociated with solvent polarity (see Chapter 2 for further discussion of
this topic). Mechanochromism refers to colour change in materials,
usually in the solid state, when they are placed under mechanicalstress. Piezochromism, a form of mechanochromism that occurs as a
result of the application of pressure or compression, is exhibited bycertain organic polymers, such as polydiacetylenes and poly-thiophenes, and by some palladium complexes. Tribochromism is a
form of mechanochromism that is exhibited when certain crystallinecompounds become more highly coloured as they are ground to a fine
powder. Other colour change phenomena include vapochromism (ex-
posure to vapours), chronochromism (time), radiochromism (ionising
radiation), magnetochromism (magnetic fields) and biochromism
(interaction with biological sources).
REFERENCES
1. Z. Yoshida and T. Kitao, Chemistry of Functional Dyes , Mita Press,
Tokyo, 1989.
2. P. Gregory, High Technology Applications of Organic Colourants ,
Plenum Press, New York, 1991.
3. P. Bamfield and M. G. Hutchings, Chromic Phenomena:
Technological Applications of Colour Chemistry , Royal Society of
Chemistry, Cambridge, 2010.
4. S.-H. Kim (ed.), Functional Dyes, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006.
5. R. M. El-Shishtawy, Int. J. Photoenergy , 2009, article ID 434897,
DOI: org/10.1155/2009/434897.
6. S. Matsumoto, Electronic Display Devices , John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, 1990.
7. R. R. Hainich and Oliver Bimber, Displays: Fundamentals and
Applications , CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL,
2011.
8. C. Sergeant, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2002, 32, 58.
9. T. L. Dawson, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2003, 33,1 .
10. L. D. Silverstein, IS&T Rep. , 2006, 21(1), 1.
11. L. Ozawa, Cathodoluminescence and Photoluminescence: Theories
and Practical Applications , CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group,
Boca Raton, FL, 2007.
12. P. J. Collings, Liquid Crystals: Nature’s Delicate Phase of Matter ,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2002.
13. L. M. Blinov, Structure and Properties of Liquid Crystals , Springer,
Heidelberg, 2011.314 Chapter 1114. R. H. Chen, Liquid Crystal Displays: Fundamental Physics and
Technology , John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2011.
15. G. H. Heilmeier and L. A. Zanoni, Appl. Phys. Lett. , 1968, 13, 91.
16. R. A. Sabnis, Displays , 1999, 20, 119.
17. H. Iwanaga, Materials, 2009, 2, 1636.
18. Z. H. Kafafi, Organic Electroluminescence, CRC Press, Taylor &
Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2005.
19. T. Tsujimura, OLED Display Fundamentals and Applications, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, 2012.
20. K. Mu ¨llen and U. Scherf (ed.), Organic Light Emitting Devices,
Synthesis, Properties and Applications, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,
Weinheim, 2006.
21. Z. Li and H. Meng (ed.), Organic Light Emitting Devices, CRC Press,
Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2007.
22. A. A. Shoustikov, Y. You and M. E. Thompson, IEEE J. Selected Top.
Quantum Electron. , 1998, 4(1), 1.
23. R. H. Partridge, US Pat. 3995299, 1976.
24. D. F. Perpichka, I. F. Perpichka, H. Meng and F. Wudl, in Organic
Light Emitting Devices, ed. Z. Li and H. Meng, CRC Press, Taylor &
Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2007, pp. 45–293.
25. K. Thyagarajan and A. K. Ghatak, Lasers: Fundamentals and
Applications , Springer, Berlin, 2nd edn, 2010.
26. F. J. Duarte and L. W. Hillman (ed.), Dye Laser Principles: with
Applications , Elsevier, London, 2012.
27. D. H. Titteron, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2002, 32, 40.
28. C. V. Shank, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1975, 47, 649.
29. G. S. Shankarling and K. J. Jarag, Resonance , 2010, 804.
30. S. Singh, V. R. Kanetkar, G. Sridhar, V. Muthuswamy and K. Raja,
J. Luminescence , 2003, 101, 295.
31. M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Environ. Sci. , 2009, 2, 148.
32. J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells (Properties of Semiconductor
Materials) , Imperial College Press, London, 2003.
33. A. R. Jha, Solar Cell Technology and Applications , CRC Press, Taylor
& Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2009.
34. A. Shah, Thin-Film Silicon Solar Cells , EPFL Press, Lausanne, 2010.
35. K. Kalyanasundaram, Dye-Sensitised Solar Cells , EPFL Press,
Lausanne, 2010.
36. A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Petterson, Chem.
Rev., 2010, 111,6595.
37. M. Gra ¨tzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. Rev. , 2003,
4, 145.
38. W. H. Weber and J. Lambe, Appl. Opt. , 1976, 15, 2299.315 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and Pigments39. A. Goetzberger and W. Greubel, Appl. Phys , 1977, 14, 123.
40. P. F. Scudo, L. Abbondanza, R. Fusco and L. Caccianotti, Solar
Energy Mater. Solar Cells , 2010, 94, 1241.
41. R. Reisfeld, Opt. Mater. , 2010, 32, 850.
42. J.-J. Wane `gue, Opt. Disc Syst. , 2003, 5, 42.
43. J.-J. Wane `gue, Opt. Disc Syst. , 2003, 6, 52.
44. H. Mustroph, M. Stollenwerk and V. Bressau, Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed., 2006, 45, 2016.
45. M. Matsuoka, Infrared Absorbing Dyes , Plenum Press, New York,
1990.
46. J. Fabian, H. Nakazumi and M. Matsuoka, Chem. Rev. , 1992, 92,
1197.
47. R. S. Gairns, in Chemistry and Technology of Printing and Imaging
Systems , ed. P. Gregory, Blackie Academic, London, 1996, pp. 76–112.
48. I. M. Hutchings and G. D. Martin (ed.), Inkjet Technology for
Digital Fabrication , John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, UK, 2013.
49. P. Gregory, Chem. Br. , 2000, 36, 49.
50. K. Carr, in Colorants for Non-Textile Applications, ed. H. S.
Freeman and A. T. Peters, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2000, pp. 1–34.
51. M. Fryberg, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2005, 35,1 .
52. Y. Fujie, N. Hanaki, T. Fujiwara, S. Tanaka, M. Noro, K. Tateishi,
K. Usami, A. Hibino, N. Wachi, T. Taguchi and Y. Yabuki, Fujifilm
Res. Develop. , 2009, 54, 35.
53. H. Ujiie (ed.), Digital Printing of Textiles , Woodhead Publishing,
Cambridge, UK, 2006.
54. R. Bradbury, in Colorants for Non-Textile Applications, ed. H. S.
Freemen and A. T. Peters, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2000, pp. 35–60.
55. R. Bradbury, in Modern Colorants: Synthesis and Structure , ed. H. S.
Freemen and A. T. Peters, Blackie Academic, London, 1995,
pp. 154–175.
56. J. A. Kiernan, Color. Technol. , 2006, 122,1 .
57. R. B. Thomson, Fluorescence Sensors and Biosensors , CRC Press,
Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2006.
58. R. W. Horobin, Color. Technol. , 2014, 130(3), 155.
59.R. T. Ranasinghe and T. Brown, Chem. Commun. , 2005, 5487.
60. S. M. Borisov and O. S. Wolfbeis, Chem. Rev. , 2008, 108, 423.
61. C. Gota, K. Okabe, T. Funatsu, Y. Harada and S. Uchiyama, J. Am.
Chem. Soc. , 2009, 131, 2766.
62. C. J. Gomer (ed.), Photodynamic Therapy: Methods and Protocols ,
Humana Press, New York, 2010.
63. M. P. Goldman (ed.), Photodynamic Therapy , Elsevier Saunders,
Philadelphia, 2005.316 Chapter 1164. R. Bonnet, Chemical Aspects of Photodynamic Therapy , CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, 2000.
65. M. Wainwright, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2004, 34, 95.
66. M. Wainwright, Color. Technol. , 2019, 126, 115.
67. R. W. Sabnis, Handbook of Acid–Base Indicators , CRC Press, Taylor
& Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL, 2007.
68. R. Narayanaswamy and O. S. Wolfbeis (ed.), Optical Sensors:
Industrial, Environmental and Diagnostic Applications , Springer,
Berlin, 2004.
69. R. M. Christie, Chromic materials for technical textile appli-
cations, in Advances in the Dyeing and Finishing of Technical
Textiles , ed. by M. L. Gulrajani, Woodhead Publishing, Oxford,
UK, 2013.
70. J. C. Crano and R. J. Guglielmetti (ed.), Organic Photochromic and
Thermochromic Compounds , Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers,
New York, 1999, vols. 1 and 2.
71. D. Aitken, S. M. Burkinshaw, J. Griﬃths and A. D. Towns, Rev.
Prog. Color. , 1996, 26,1 .
72. S. M. Burkinshaw, J. Griﬃths and A. D. Towns, J. Mater. Chem. ,
1998, 8, 2677.
73. D. C. MacLaren and M. A. White, J. Mater. Chem. , 2003, 13, 1701.
74. R. M. Christie and I. D. Bryant, Color. Technol. , 2005, 121, 187.
75. S. N. Corns, S. M. Partington and A. D. Towns, Color. Technol. ,
2009, 125, 249.
76. V. Lokshin, V. A. Samat and A. V. Metelitsa, Russ. Chem. Rev. ,
2002, 71, 893.
77. R. M. Christie, L. J. Chi, R. A. Spark, K. M. Morgan, A. F. S. Boyd
and A. Lycka, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A , 2004, 169, 37.
78. J. Hepworth and B. M. Heron Photochromic naphthopyrans, in
Functional Dyes , ed. S.-H. Kim, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2006, ch. 3,
pp. 85–135.
79. P. M. S. Monk, R. J. Mortimer and D. R. Rosseinsky,
Electrochromism and Electrochromic Devices , Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2007.317 Functional or ‘High Technology’ Dyes and PigmentsCHAPTER 12
Colour and the Environment
Over recent decades, society has developed an increasing concern
over protection of the environment. There are a whole series of
major global issues that are under constant current debate, in-
cluding the impact of climate change attributed by most to green-
house gas emissions, the destruction of the rainforests and theneed to develop the use of renewable sources of energy and
materials, thus aiming for ‘sustainability’. There are also a large
number and variety of individual environmental issues that are as-
sociated with particular geographical locations and specific indus-
tries. Manufacturing industry is continuously faced with the need to
address its responsibility towards a wide range of health, safety and
environmental concerns, which present many of its most significant
current challenges. In particular, industry is challenged with the re-
quirement to satisfy the demands of increasingly stringent legisla-tion and controls introduced by governments and enforced by
regulatory agencies to ensure compliance with environmental
issues. There is concern worldwide over the potential adverse eﬀects
of the activities of the chemical industry on the environment. The
various industry sectors have been addressing the issues, although
it is an inescapable fact that the response in some parts of the
world has been much faster and more intense than in others. The
industries that are associated with colour represent a relatively
small part of the overall chemical industry. This sector has been de-
scribed, in general, as a small volume, multi-product industry and
it has traditionally been highly innovative, constantly seeking to
Colour Chemistry, 2nd edition
By Robert M ChristierR M Christie 2015
Published by the Royal Society of Chemistry, www.rsc.org
318
introduce new products. This has led to a requirement to address a
wide range of toxicological and ecological issues, both in the manu-
facture of dyes and pigments and in their application. This chapter
seeks to present an overview of some of the more important general
issues facing the colour industry and the ways in which they are
being addressed. However, the coverage is by no means comprehen-
sive. This is due to the extensive range of individual issues, re-flecting the diversity of chemical types of dyes and pigments and
the synthetic procedures involved, together with the wide range of
applications. It also reflects the complexities of the relevant legis-
lative detail throughout the world. However, the reader will find a
discussion of many of these specific issues that are associated with
the colour chemistry topics covered in the preceding chapters of
this book.
A detailed discussion of the legislation and controls, the intro-
duction of which has been a major factor in ensuring compliance withthe most important issues, is outside the scope of this chapter. This is
due to the complexity of the legislative detail, the fact that it varies
substantially from country to country, and because the situations are
constantly evolving so that information presented would quickly be-
come out of date. However, it is worth noting, by way of an example,
the current situation in the European Union, the geographical region
that has arguably led the way in terms of introducing the strictest
environmental legislation. The environmental policy in the EU places
a particular focus on energy, greenhouse gas emissions, ozone-de-
pleting substances, air quality and pollution, waste, water use and
conservation, sustainable consumption and production, chemicals,biodiversity and land use.
1The principal EU policy objectives may be
summarised as:
(a) protecting environmental quality;
(b) protecting human health;
(c) promoting prudent use of natural resources;
(d) promoting international measures to deal with environmental
problems.
The application of these principles has culminated in the intro-
duction of REACH , a European regulation concerning chemicals and
their safe use.2This regulation, the introduction of which was initi-
ated in 2007, although taking more than a decade to be phased incompletely, applies directly in all 28 Member States of the EU, and
also in Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway as member countries of the319 Colour and the EnvironmentEuropean Economic Area. The REACH regulation (R egistration,
Evaluation, Authorisation of Chemicals) is a complex piece of legis-
lation that aims to protect human health and the environment from
the risks arising from the use of chemicals while maintaining the free
movement of goods in the EU. It requires manufacturers and im-
porters to register the chemicals used, and to establish and make
public the hazards posed by each substance, with reference to theirentire life-cycle.
In the USA, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) states its
mission as the protection of human health and the environment. The
agency cites the twelve principles of ‘Green Chemistry’ that industry is
encouraged to apply in its strategies towards product and process
development.
3These principles may be summarised as:
(a) better to prevent waste than to clean up afterwards;
(b) design synthetic methods to maximise incorporation of all
materials used in the process into the final product (atom
economy);
(c) design synthetic methods to use and generate substances that
minimise toxicity to human health and the environment;
(d) design chemical products to provide their desired function
while minimising their toxicity;
(e) minimize the use of auxiliary substances wherever possible, and
make innocuous when used;
(f) minimize energy requirements of chemical processes, con-
ducting syntheses at ambient temperature and pressure whenpossible;
(g) use renewable raw materials whenever practicable;
(h) minimize or avoid unnecessary derivatisation where possible;
(i) recognise that catalytic reagents are superior to stoichiometric
reagents;
(j) design chemical products so that they degrade into innocuous
species that do not persist in the environment;
(k) develop analytical methodologies to provide real-time, in-
process monitoring and control prior to the formation of haz-ardous substances;
(l) select substances and their physical form for use in chemical
processes to minimise the potential for chemical accidents,
including release, explosion and fire.
The colour manufacturer and user has a duty to address environ-
mental and toxicological risks from various points of view, including320 Chapter 12hazards in the workplace, exposure of the general public to the ma-
terials and the general eﬀect on the environment.4,5The level of risk
from exposure to chemicals is clearly of prime concern for thosehandling materials in large quantities in the workplace. This has
required the introduction of modern work practices, enforced by
legislation, to minimise the exposure. The approach towards address-
ing the problems associated with exposure to potentially dangerouschemical substances that has been adopted in most countries generally
involves an evaluation of risk, including an assessment of the hazards
presented by the various chemical species on the basis of the available
toxicological data, and an assessment of exposure levels. From this
evaluation, risk management strategies are developed.
Dyes and pigments are, by definition, highly visible materials.
Thus, even minor releases into the environment may cause the
appearance of colour, for example in open waters, which for obvious
reasons attracts the critical attention of the public and localauthorities. There is thus a requirement on industry to minimise
environmental release of colour, even in cases where a small but
visible release might be considered as toxicologically rather
innocuous. A major potential source of release of colour into the en-
vironment is associated with the incomplete exhaustion of dyes on to
textile fibres from aqueous dyeing processes.
6The need to reduce the
amount of residual dye in eﬄuent from textile wet-processing, togetherwith the wide range of other process-specific auxiliary organic and in-
organic materials that may be used in the processes, has thus become a
major concern in recent years. While this feature applies, in principle,
to all application classes of textile dyes, the particular case of reactivedyeing of cellulosic and protein fibres is of special interest because of
the problems associated with dye hydrolysis, a process that competes
with the dye–fibre reaction, and means that hydrolysed dye inevitably
appears in the eﬄuent. An extensive programme of research to address
these problems over many years has met with some success, leading to
the development of high-fixation fibre-reactive systems and signifi-
cantly improved processing conditions (Chapter 8). However, the
development of a practical reactive dyeing system that is completely
free of the problems associated with hydrolysis and incomplete dyefixation has so far proved elusive.
Several complementary approaches have been adopted to address
the problems associated with the presence of colour and other ma-
terials in aqueous industrial eﬄuent. It is clearly of vital importance
that industrial organisations develop strategies for pollution abate-
ment and waste minimisation, for example in the selection of321 Colour and the Environmentmaterials, process optimisation to reduce the environmental load,
and the practise of recycling, re-use and conservation wherever
practicable. The recycling of water is becoming increasingly import-
ant, especially as the industry migrates to regions of the world where
water may be a scarce resource.7Another complementary approach is
the development of eﬄuent treatment methods to ensure that anyrelease into water courses is safe towards humans and aquatic life,and complies with regulations.
8These methods can be eﬀective but
inevitably add to the cost of the overall process, and some may pre-sent complications associated with the possible toxicity of degrad-
ation products. The methods that are currently in use may be
categorised broadly as chemical, physical or biological. In general,
employing combinations of more than one method provides the most
eﬀective approach. Several chemical treatment methods for colour
removal have been developed, of which the most successful involve
oxidative degradation, for example using chlorine, Fenton’s reagent(hydrogen peroxide with iron(
II) salts) or ozone.9Ozone treatment is
particularly eﬀective but is rather expensive, mainly because of thespecialist equipment required. Electrochemical and photocatalytic
oxidation methods to degrade dyes in eﬄuent have also been in-
vestigated. Physical treatments may also be used to remove colour, for
example by the adsorption of dyes on to inert substrates such as ac-
tivated charcoal, silica, cellulose derivatives or ion-exchange resins.
10
Adsorbents based on biomass, materials derived from dead animaland plant residues, micro-organisms and fungi, have also been ex-
tensively investigated. Biological treatment processes make use of the
ability of living organisms to bind or degrade colour.
11,12Bio-
degradation processes oﬀer the attraction of the potential for the
decoloration of eﬄuent with complete mineralisation of the organic
materials present to carbon dioxide, water and inorganic ions such as
nitrate, sulfate and chloride. However, the principal problem with the
development of such systems is that synthetic dyes are generally
xenobiotic, i.e., are not metabolised by the enzymes in the micro-or-
ganisms present naturally in waters. The solution to this issue mayrequire the development of micro-organisms cultured specifically for
the purpose of metabolising synthetic dyes. The problems associatedwith textile eﬄuent are clearly not restricted to the dyes themselves.
There are also issues associated with the presence of traces of heavy
metals, the high levels of inorganic salts and other auxiliaries re-
quired by certain textile dyeing processes, and the use of reducing
agents in the case of vat and sulfur dyes. Each specific process pre-
sents its own set of environmental issues that are required to be322 Chapter 12addressed by the development of new products, process improve-
ments or eﬄuent treatment methods (Chapter 7). The preceding
discussion in this chapter has focussed on dyes. In the case of pig-
ments, because of their insolubility and the particular way they are
used, the loss into the environment is a much less significant issue
than with textile dyes. In this respect, a convincing case may be made
that pigments oﬀer environmental advantage over dyes in use.
There has been a considerable amount of recent research carried
out on textile dyeing from supercritical fluids, notably carbon dioxide,as an alternative to traditional aqueous dyeing methods, motivated to
a considerable extent by environmental considerations.
13–15We are
familiar with CO 2behaving either as a gas at normal temperatures
and pressures, or as a solid (dry ice) when frozen. However, if the
temperature and pressure are both increased to above the critical
point (critical temperature 31.1 1C and critical pressure 73.8 bar), CO 2
can adopt properties that are intermediate between a gas and a li-
quid, the supercritical fluid state. Specifically, in this state it expands
to fill its container like a gas but with a density more like a liquid. CO 2
is an inert, non-toxic and non-flammable solvent, and in these re-spects it has strong environmental credentials. At first sight, this last
feature might appear surprising in view of its implication as a major
greenhouse gas contaminant of the atmosphere. However, it is ar-
gued that this technology is capable of providing a use for CO
2that
otherwise might be released into the atmosphere, provided that it isrecovered and recycled during the application process. Methods
using supercritical CO
2have been applied most extensively and
successfully in the laboratory to the dyeing of polyester fibres with
disperse dyes (Chapter 7), in a process that fulfils many of the re-
quirements of environmental sustainability. In the dyeing process,
the CO 2medium is recyclable, uses a minimum input of chemicals
(essentially only the dyes and no auxiliaries), presents low energyrequirements and produces minimal waste. The dyed textile materials
also show high technical performance. This process has now been
established with considerable success on a laboratory scale. It is,
however, diﬃcult to speculate on the commercial future of the
technology until a plant has been built and the process has beenvalidated on an industrial scale. The use of supercritical CO
2as a
solvent for dye synthesis has also been established on a small scalefor some azo dyes.
16
The importance of being aware of the potential adverse eﬀects of
exposure to chemicals on our health is self-evident. Toxic eﬀects may
be categorised in a number of ways. Acute toxicity refers to the eﬀects323 Colour and the Environmentof short-term exposure to a substance. It is relatively reassuring that
studies of textile dyes suggest that there is only limited evidence for
acute oral toxicity, and that most show little or no toxicological
eﬀect.17,18However, there is evidence that certain reactive dyes for
cellulosic fibres (Chapter 8) may cause problems associated with skinand respiratory sensitisation, contact dermatitis, rhinitis, occu-
pational asthma and other allergic reactions, especially for workerswho handle the dyes in their manufacture and application. The
problems are reported to be associated with the ability of the fibre-
reactive group in the dyes to react with human serum albumin, the
most abundant protein in blood plasma. After fixation to the textile
fibre, it is reassuring that reactive dyes are considered not to cause
these toxicological problems because the reactive group is no longer
present. A few disperse dyes (Chapter 7) have been implicated in
causing allergic reactions when used in tight-fitting garments made
from certain synthetic fibres. The problem may arise with dyedpolyamide or cellulose acetate, because of the tendency of the dyes
to migrate on to the skin viaperspiration. However, the issue is much
less prevalent with dyed polyester on which disperse dyes show goodfastness towards perspiration. Pigments and vat dyes generally show
low acute toxicity. This is generally attributed to their extremely low
solubility in body fluids, which means that they are capable of
passing through the digestive system without absorption into the
bloodstream.
Chronic toxicity refers to the eﬀect of regular exposure to a chem-
ical over a prolonged period of time. Arguably, the most severe
chronic toxicological eﬀect for humans is the potential to inducecancer. There has been some concern over the potential carcino-
genicity of certain azo dyes, which centres mainly on the possibility of
metabolism by reductive cleavage of the azo group to give two primary
aromatic amines, one of which is the diazo component from which
the dye is derived synthetically (Chapter 3). Several primary aromatic
amines that have been used in colour manufacture are recognised as
carcinogens. In particular, it is well established that benzidine, 12.1a ,
and 2-naphthylamine, 12.2, are potent human carcinogens.
19Epi-
demiological studies carried out in the first half of the twentiethcentury demonstrated a pronounced increase in the incidence of
bladder cancer in workmen employed in the dye manufacturing in-
dustry who had been exposed to these two amines. As a consequence,
responsible manufacturers in the Western world discontinued the
manufacture of dyes from these amines, although the manufacture
continued in certain other parts of the world.324 Chapter 12NH2
H2N NH2X
X
12.2 12.1a: X = H
12.1b: X = Cl
A generally-accepted mechanism that accounts for the potential
carcinogenic activity of certain primary aromatic amines is shown in
Scheme 12.1, although other metabolic pathways may also be in-
volved. The initial step is N-hydroxylation, leading subsequently to the
highly electrophilic nitrenium ion (Ar–NH1), which has the potential
to react with nucleophilic sites on DNA. Based on this mechanism,
the carcinogenic agent is a metabolite rather than the amine itself.
It has emerged subsequently that benzidine-derived azo dyes, such
as Congo Red, CI Direct Red 1, 12.3, may also present a carcinogenic
risk, an eﬀect attributed to the metabolism of the dyes to producebenzidine, 12.1a , by enzymatic reduction. Certain European countries
have examined the cancer-causing potential of azo dyes critically, byfocussing on the amines that would be released if reductive cleavage
of the azo group were to take place. In Germany, for example, the
approach has been to ban the manufacture and importation of all
dyes derived from a list of more than 20 aromatic amines believed tobe animal carcinogens.
20On the other hand, it is by no means true
that all azo dyes should be considered as potential carcinogens.Studies of structure–carcinogenicity relationships in azo dyes have
demonstrated, for example, that when the amine produced by re-
ductive cleavage of the azo group contains a sulfonic acid group there
is little or no toxicological risk.
21An interesting example of this
principle is CI Food Black 2, 12.4, a first generation black dye used
in inkjet printers (Chapter 11). Azo pigments are considered to
present a considerably reduced risk compared with azo dyes, sothat, for example, they are not included in the German legislation.
3.3
0-Dichlorobenzidine (DCB), 12.1b , is on the German list of car-
cinogenic amines, yet it continues to be used in the manufacture of aAr-NH 2Ar-NH-OH Ar-NH-OH 2+ Ar-NH+ Ar-NH-DN AH+-H2O DNA
Scheme 12.1 Mechanism proposed for the carcinogenic activity of certain primary
aromatic amines.325 Colour and the Environmentseries of important commercial disazo pigments (diarylide yellows
and oranges, see Chapter 9), since there does not appear to be strong
experimental evidence that these pigments are metabolised to DCB.
However, there is evidence that the diarylide pigments may cleave
thermally with prolonged heating above 240 1C to give a series of
decomposition products, which include DCB.22Since this evidenced
emerged, there has been a decline in the use of these pigments inapplications where high temperatures are likely to be encountered,
for example in thermoplastics.
N N
NNNH2
NaO 3S
H2NSO3Na
12.3
NaO 3S NN
SO3NaNH
N
NaO 3SSO3NaNH2
O
12.4
Most foods contain natural colouring materials and, in addition, it
is common to add colour to enhance the appeal of some foods to the
consumer.23,24There are several interesting features associated with
the colours present naturally in foods, and their influence on ourhealth. There is growing evidence that certain natural colorants, for
example the carotenoids present in fresh fruit and vegetables
(Chapter 6), are of therapeutic value as a consequence of their anti-
oxidant properties, which, it is suggested, may provide protection
against cancer.
25While there is an increasing tendency to use natural
dyes as food additives, synthetic dyes are more commonly used as
they oﬀer the advantages of higher colour strength and brightness,
and lower cost. Only a few synthetic dyes are permitted for use in food326 Chapter 12coloration, because of the stringent toxicological requirements, en-
forced by legislation that prohibits certain dyes, and regulatory
agencies that impose the control mechanisms. In addition, the lists of
permitted dyes are constantly being updated. In Europe, these are
covered by an EU Directive introduced in the 1990s, together with a
series of subsequent amendments that clarify definitions and limi-
tations in use. In the USA, the regulating body is the Food and DrugAdministration (FDA). Food dyes are also required to satisfy strict
specific purity requirements. An important example of a synthetic
food colorant is tartrazine, CI Food Yellow 23, a monoazo dye, 12.5.
Notably, reductive enzymatic cleavage of the azo group in this dyewould lead to sulfonated aromatic amines, which are considered to
present little toxicological risk. However, there is some public concern
over the possibility that the use in confectionary and drinks of
certain synthetic dyes (usually referred to as ‘artificial’ and classified
by ‘E-numbers’) may cause hyperactivity in some children.
N
NNO HO2CN
H
SO3NaSO3Na
12.5
Another area that experiences strict legislative control in the use
of colour is cosmetics, which is also the domain of the FDA in theUSA. Concerns about the safety of ingredients used in hair coloration
have been raised over the years in view of their extensive use in
regular direct human contact (Chapter 10). In particular, the safetyprofile of certain precursors used in permanent hair dyeing has been
extensively studied, and some original ingredients have been pro-
hibited. In certain individuals, hair coloration may cause skin irrita-
tion or allergic reactions at varying levels of severity. International327 Colour and the Environmentepidemiological studies on the link between hair coloration and more
serious human conditions have indicated that hair coloration may
play a role in the risk of certain lymphomas. The increased risk is
described as only moderate and much more significant among
women who had used the dyes before 1980, when the compositions
would have been more likely to include potentially carcinogenic
components. In parallel, the hair dye industry continues to providereassurances over the components in current use. Nevertheless, a
future change to the current situation cannot be excluded if stricter
legislation, regulations and controls on the use of chemicals emerge.
The extension of the use of natural dyes into a wider range of ap-
plications including textiles, as alternatives to synthetic dyes, would
appear superficially to oﬀer attractive possibilities, in essence turning
the clock back to the pre-Mauveine mid-nineteenth century when only
natural dyes were available (Chapter 1). In the ongoing debate on the
issues involved, the range of opinions expressed is wide. There areobvious environmental arguments that support the use of natural
dyes, as this would be seen to be exploiting renewable resources, thus
making a contribution towards sustainability, while at the same time
presenting minimal risk to human health. There are several counter-
arguments. Natural dyes are generally more expensive and show in-
ferior colours and technical performance in application compared with
synthetic dyes, to an extent that might not be acceptable to the con-
sumer. In addition, the large-scale production and use of natural dyes
might well introduce environmental problems, for example the need to
cultivate large areas of land for which food production is a higher
priority, and there is a likelihood that the coloration processes involvedwould not necessarily be free from pollution problems.
26However,
there is evidence of recent significant renewed interest in natural dyeresearch aimed towards improved production methods, application
processes and product performance, and it may well be that certain
niche markets will emerge that take advantage of the positive en-
vironmental perception that is associated with natural colours.
The issue of the so-called ‘heavy metals’ has caused concern within
the chemical industry for some time. While the term ‘heavy metal’
might have been derived originally on the basis of density, thisproperty alone does not necessarily relate directly to toxicity or en-
vironmental behaviour. In fact, certain metals, for example iron, zinc,
manganese, copper, chromium, molybdenum and cobalt, might
technically be described as ‘heavy’, yet they are essential for life. The
term has come to be used to represent those metals that are regarded
as detrimental to the environment when a certain concentration is328 Chapter 12exceeded. The elements mercury, cadmium and lead occupy a special
position because the concentration at which they begin to become
detrimental to the health of organisms is very low. In addition, when
absorbed in excessive amounts they may accumulate and can cause
chronic health problems. Mercury is not a constituent of any sig-
nificant commercial colorant. However, one important use of mercury
derivatives is as catalysts in the sulfonation of anthraquinone, anessential first step in the synthesis of many anthraquinone dyes
(Chapter 4). Special care is required to ensure that mercury is not
released into the environment in the eﬄuent from such processes.
Inorganic pigments based on lead (lead chromates and molybdates)
and cadmium (cadmium sulfides and sulfoselenides) are still im-
portant commercially (Chapter 9). Their use nowadays is restricted
significantly by a series of voluntary codes of practice, reinforced by
legislation in certain cases, for example in toy finishes, graphic in-
struments and food contact applications where ingestion is a possi-bility. Cadmium pigments are used mainly in the coloration of certain
engineering plastic materials which require very high temperature
processing conditions. At present, completely satisfactory substitutes
for such applications are not available, especially in terms of thermal
and chemical stability. Lead chromates continue to be used, mainly in
coatings, because they remain by far the most cost-eﬀective, high
durability yellow and orange pigments. Furthermore, it is argued by the
manufacturers that lead and cadmium pigments do not present a
major health hazard or environmental risk, because of their extreme
insolubility. Nevertheless, it seems likely that the progressive replace-
ment of these products by more acceptable inorganic and organicpigments will continue in an increasing range of applications. Chro-
mium(
VI) is also considered to be highly toxic. In addition to its pres-
ence in lead chromate pigments, dichromates may be used in thedyeing of wool by the chrome mordanting process (Chapter 7). This
process was formerly of special importance as a cost-eﬀective means of
producing deep colours, which are fast to light and washing, on wool.
Despite process improvements, for example the development of dyeing
auxiliaries and procedures that minimise the level of residual excess
chromium in textile dye eﬄuent, the process is little used nowadaysand continues to decrease in importance. There are toxicological and
environmental issues associated with several other metals used to a
certain extent in colorants, for example, barium, manganese, cobalt,
nickel, copper and zinc, but at present their use remains acceptable.
Certain organic chlorine compounds are of serious toxicological and
environmental concern, most importantly the polychlorobiphenyls329 Colour and the Environment(PCBs).27This group of materials, characterised by structure 12.6 in
which 1–10 chlorines may be attached, consists of 209 possible con-
geners, due to the various numbers of chlorines and substituent pat-
terns. PCBs were formerly used on a large scale as insulating materials
in electrical equipment, hydraulic oils and heat transfer systems. In
addition to their extreme toxicity, their high stability, while a technical
advantage in their former applications, means that they persiststrongly in the environment, and they are thus classified as persistent
organic pollutants (POPs). Although their intentional production has
long been discontinued, quantities remain in the environment. PCBs
constitute problem waste and their disposal is problematic and ex-
pensive. The potential to form PCBs in trace amounts has been noted
in the manufacture of certain colorants, including a few azo pigments
and copper phthalocyanines, when certain aromatic chloro com-
pounds are used either as reactants or solvents. In such situations, the
industry is required to respond by developing processes either toeliminate PCB formation or to ensure that the levels are below the
rigorous limits set by legislation, generally not exceeding 50 ppm.
Some environmental agencies and activist groups have taken a more
extreme view and advocated a ban on all chlorinated organic chem-
icals. Such a ban would have a major eﬀect on the colorant industry
because of the large number of organic dyes and pigments that contain
chlorine substituents. So far, legislation to this eﬀect has not been
introduced. Indeed, any move in such a direction would be an over-
reaction, since there is little evidence that the mere presence of
chlorine in a molecule means that it poses an environmental risk.
ClnCln2 3
4
562' 3'
4'
5' 6'
12.6
Environmental arguments are highly emotive. There are many
reasons why the public has become sensitive to environmental issues
and, to a certain extent, suspicious of industry attitudes. The industry
has made errors in the past, some with severe human and environ-
mental consequences, and has had to examine its conscience on oc-
casions for having paid inadequate regard to health and safety, and
also to broader ecological issues. However, there is a point of view
that the pendulum may have swung to the opposite extreme, so that,
for example, arguments based on perception, rather than solid,330 Chapter 12scientific evidence, often win the day. The need for rigorous ex-
perimentation to address toxicological and environmental concerns,
while absolutely necessary, has acted as a deterrent to innovation, in
view of the considerable expense required in testing before a product
may be introduced into the marketplace. This has had a particular
impact on the colour manufacturing industry and is a major reason
why fewer and fewer new dyes and pigments, especially for traditionalapplications, have been introduced commercially in the last few dec-
ades. We should not lose sight of the fact that the main reason for the
existence of the synthetic colour industry is that dyes and pigments
enhance our environment, influencing our moods by bringing at-
tractive colours into our lives in such a diverse range of applications. In
addition, many of the recent developments towards functional dye
applications, such as their use in harvesting solar energy and in the
treatment of cancers and other ailments using photodynamic therapy,
as described in Chapter 11, have the potential to provide immensebenefit to mankind and our environment. It is indeed significant that a
colour, green, has been adopted as the universal ecological symbol.
Green is, after all, the predominant colour in the natural, fertile world,
due mainly to the chlorophyll in foliage, and has for centuries been
associated with natural forces, growth and regeneration. Green is also
considered as a cool, calm, restful and safe colour.
It would be a dull world if, for example, television, movies, pho-
tography and magazines essentially only provided black and white
images, and if automobiles were available in ‘any colour we like
provided it’s black!’. The days when such a situation existed are really
not so long ago in relative historical terms. Equally, it is vital thatthose industries involved in the manufacture and application of
colour should continue to be increasingly sensitive to any potential
adverse eﬀect on the environment in its wider sense, and respond
accordingly. A balanced approach will ensure protection of the en-
vironment and allow an innovative colour industry to thrive into the
future.
REFERENCES
1. Towards a green economy in Europe: EU environmental policy
targets and objectives 2010–2050, EEA Report No. 8/2013 , Euro-
pean Environmental Agency, Copenhagen, 2013.
2. E. S. Williams, J. Panko and D. J. Paustenbach, Crit. Rev. Toxicol. ,
2009, 39, 553.
3. P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev. , 2010, 39, 301.331 Colour and the Environment4. A. Reife and H. S. Freeman (ed.), Environmental Chemistry of Dyes
and Pigments , John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1996.
5. R. Anliker, Rev. Prog. Color. , 1977, 8, 60.
6. R. M. Christie (ed.), Environmental Aspects of Textile Dyeing ,
Woodhead Publishing in Textiles, Cambridge, UK, 2007.
7. K. Skelly, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2000, 30, 21.
8. M. Joshi and R. Purwar, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2004, 34, 58.
9. I. R. Hardin, in Environmental Aspects of Textile Dyeing , ed. R. M.
Christie, Woodhead Publishing in Textiles, Cambridge, UK, 2007,
ch. 8.
10. R. Sanghi and B. Bhattacharya, Color. Technol. , 2002, 118, 256.
11. A. Kandelbauer, A. Cavaco-Paulo and G. M. Gu ¨bitz, in
Environmental Aspects of Textile Dyeing , ed. R. M. Christie,
Woodhead Publishing in Textiles, Cambridge, UK, 2007, ch. 9.
12. M. A. Rauf and S. S. Ashraf, Chem. Eng. J. , 2012, 209, 520.
13. M. Banchero, Color. Technol. , 2013, 129,2 .
14. E. Bach and E. Schollmeyer, in Environmental Aspects of Textile
Dyeing, ed. R. M. Christie, Woodhead Publishing in Textiles,Cambridge, UK, 2007, ch. 5.
15. E. Bach and E. Schollmeyer, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2002, 32, 88.
16. J. Hooker, D. Hinks, G. Montero and C. Conlee, Color. Technol. ,
2002, 118, 273.
17. P. Gregory in Environmental Aspects of Textile Dyeing , ed. R. M.
Christie, Woodhead Publishing in Textiles, Cambridge, UK, 2007,ch. 3.
18. K. Hunger, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2005, 35, 76.
19. S. Spitz, W. H. Maguigan and K. Dobriner, Cancer , 1950, 3, 789.
20. German ban of the use of certain azo compounds in some con-
sumer goods, revised version, ETAD Information No. 6 , Basel,
Switzerland, 1998.
21. P. Gregory, Dyes Pigments , 1986, 7, 45.
22. R. Az, B. Dewald and D. Schnaitmann, Dyes Pigments , 1991, 15,1 .
23. D. B. MacDougall (ed.), Colour in Food , Woodhead Publishing,
Cambridge, UK, 2002.
24. D. Frick, Rev. Prog. Color. , 2003, 33,15.
25. H. Nishino, M. Murakosh and T. Li, et al., Cancer Metastasis Rev. ,
2002, 21, 275.
26. B. Glover, Textile Chem. Colorist , 1995, 27(4), 17.
27. M. D. Erickson, Analytical Chemistry of PCBs , CRC Press, Boca
Raton, FL, 2nd edn, 1997.332 Chapter 12This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  SUBJECT INDEX 
Index Terms  Links  
A 
ab initio  calculations 61 
absorption of light 28 
acetoacetanilide 87 89–90 
achromatic colours 25 
acid dyes  173–176 190 
acrylic fibres 150–151 188–190 
acute toxicity 323–324 
additive colour mixing 23 270 
additives, ‘tailor-made’ 242–243 
after-coppering 181 
Alexandria blue 3 
alizarin  4 101 
allergic reactions 258 
aluminium pigments 244 
AM1 method 63–64 
aminoanthraquinones 124 aminoazobenzene dyes 10 43–46 53–56
    187 274 
1-amino-4-bromoanthraquinone-2-sulfonic acid 123 
3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole 161 1-amino-8-hydroxynaphthalene-3,6-disulfonic acid 87 
1-amino-3-iminoisoindoline 130 141 
8-amino-2-methylquinoline 130 
Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  aminonaphthalimide dyes 111 
p-aminophenol 261 
aniline   9 87 
Aniline Purple 6–8 
Aniline Yellow 10 
anomalous trichromacy 27 
anthracene 120 
anthraquinone colorants 100–105 
 disperse dyes 187 
 synthesis 119–128 
 use as hair colorants 264 
 use in LCDs 273 275–276 
 vat pigments 236 
anti-dazzle mirrors 313 
antimony( III) oxide 220 
apigenin  4 
arylcarbonium ion colorants 155–160 
Auramine O 155 158 
auxochromes 39 
aza[18]annulenes 135 
azacyanine dyes  151 154–155 
azo colorants 72–73 
 carcinogenicity 324 
 disperse dyes 187 
 history  10–11 
 isomerism 73–78 
 metal complex 93–97 
 pigments 229 230–233 235–236 
 synthesis 78–93 
 use in optical storage media 290 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  azo coupling 84–87 
azoacetoacetanilides 77 
azobenzenes 40–49 55–56 74 
azoic dyeing 82 183–184 
azopyrazolones 77 
azopyridones 77 
B 
barbituric acid 130 
basic lead carbonate 220 
bathochromic shift 29–30 
Beer-Lambert Law 30 
Benzenediazonium chloride 84–85 
benzidine azo dyes 90 324–325 
benzimidazolone azo pigments 235–236 240 
benzimidazolyl coumarin dyes 111 281 
benzoazolyl coumarin dyes 111 
benzodifuranone dyes 110–111 126 127 
p-benzoquinonediimine 261 
benzoquinones 101 p-benzoquinonimine 261 
benzothiazolyl coumarin dyes 111 281 
Biebrich Scarlet 11 
biodegradation of effluent 322 
biological staining 299–300 
2,2'-bipyridyl ruthenium derivatives 285 
Bismarck Brown 10 
bismuth vanadates 225–226 
BluRay discs 288 
BODIPY dyes 281 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  bridging groups 196 
brightness (colour attribute) 29 30 59 
bromamine acid 123 
α-bromoacrylamide dyes 205–206 
Bunte salts 163 
C 
cadmium, toxicity 329 
cadmium selenide 224 
cadmium sulfide pigments 67–68 223–224 225 
calcination 215 
Carbazole Violet 161 237 
carbon blacks 227–228 293 
carbon dioxide, supercritical 323 
carbonless copy paper 306 
carbonyl colorants 99–100 
 disperse dyes 187 
 fluorescent dyes 111–112 
 pigments 112–118 126–130 236–238 
 quinone-hydroquinone redox system 118–119 
 synthesis 119–130 
   see also  anthraquinone colorants; 
   benzodifuranone dyes; coumarin 
   fluorescent dyes; indigoid colorants 
o-carboxybenzene-thioglycolic acid 126 
carcinogenicity 258 324–325 
carminic acid 4 
β-carotene  148 
carotenoids 148 326 
cathode ray tubes (CRTs) 270 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  cathodoluminescence 270 
cationic dyes 189–190 
CDs (compact discs) 288–289 
cellulose  178–179 
cellulose acetate 169 
cellulosic fibres 178–184 
   see also  reactive dyes; sulfur dyes 
cerium sulfides 225–226 
charge control agents 293 
charge transfer transitions 67 
chiral nematic mesophases 271–272 
chloranil  161 
chloride process for TIO 2 220 
chlorobenzothiazolyl dyes 200 chlorodifluoropyrimidine dyes 210 
chlorophyll 4 135 
chlorotriazinyl dyes 198–200 207–210 
5-chloro-2,4,6-trifluoropyrimidine 210 cholesteric mesophases 271–272 
chroma  31 
chromatic colours 24 
chromic materials 268 303–314 
chromium, toxicity 329 
chromium complex azo dyes 94 
chromium mordant dyes 176–178 
chromium(
III) oxide pigments 222 
chromogens 196 207–208 
chromophores 39 
chronic toxicity 324 
chrysoidine 11 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  CI (Colour Index ) 36–37 
CI Acid Black 1 89 175 
CI Acid Blue 1 175 
CI Acid Blue 25 175 
CI Acid Blue 138 175 
CI Acid Orange 7 175 
CI Acid Orange 20 175 
CI Acid Red 1 175 
CI Acid Violet 78 177 
CI Basic Blue 41 151 
CI Basic Green 4 155 189 
CI Basic Red 1 156–157 
CI Basic Red 12 151 154 
CI Basic Red 18 189 
CI Basic Violet 7 151 154 
CI Basic Violet 10 156–157 
CI Basic Yellow 2 155 
CI Basic Yellow 11 151 154–155 189 
CI Basic Yellow 28 151 155 
CI Direct Black 38 93 
CI Direct Blue 2 90 
CI Direct Blue 86 140 
CI Direct Blue 108 162 
CI Direct Blue 199 140 
CI Direct Orange 25 180 
CI Direct Red 1 325 
CI Disperse Blue 165 187 
CI Disperse Blue 339 46 187 
CI Disperse Blue 354 151 187 
CI Disperse Green 5 187 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  CI Disperse Orange 25 88 187 
CI Disperse Red 1 74 
CI Disperse Red 60 187 
CI Disperse Red 90 187 
CI Disperse Red 356 110–111 
CI Disperse Violet 1 264 
CI Disperse Yellow 11 111 
CI Disperse Yellow 14 164–165 
CI Disperse Yellow 23 91 187 
CI Disperse Yellow 42 164–165 187 
CI Disperse Yellow 99 151 
CI Disperse Yellow 119 187 
CI Disperse Yellow 232 111 
CI Food Black 2 295 325 
CI Food Yellow 23 327 
CI Mordant Black 1 176–177 
CI Mordant Red 11 101 
CI Pigment Black 6 227–228 
CI Pigment Black 7 227–228 
CI Pigment Blue 14 273 
CI Pigment Blue 15 137 234 241 
CI Pigment Blue 27 227 
CI Pigment Blue 28 222–223 
CI Pigment Blue 29 226–227 
CI Pigment Blue 60 103 236 
CI Pigment Green 7 139 234 
CI Pigment Green 17 222 
CI Pigment Green 36 139 234 273 
CI Pigment Metal 1 244 
CI Pigment Orange 20 223 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  CI Pigment Orange 34 231 
CI Pigment Orange 43 117 236 
CI Pigment Red 3 231 
CI Pigment Red 57 : 1 233 252 
CI Pigment Red 101 221 
CI Pigment Red 102 221 
CI Pigment Red 104 224 
CI Pigment Red 108 223 
CI Pigment Red 122 273 
CI Pigment Red 166 91 235 
CI Pigment Red 170 231 
CI Pigment Red 177 273 
CI Pigment Red 179 236 273 
CI Pigment Red 183 235 
CI Pigment Red 194 117 
CI Pigment Red 254 115–116 236 
CI Pigment Violet 19 236 
CI Pigment Violet 23 161 237 
CI Pigment White 1 220 
CI Pigment White 6 218–221 
CI Pigment White 7 220 
CI Pigment White 11 220 
CI Pigment Yellow 1 231 
CI Pigment Yellow 12 89–90 231 233 
CI Pigment Yellow 13 231 
CI Pigment Yellow 24 103 236 
CI Pigment Yellow 34 224 
CI Pigment Yellow 37 223–224 
CI Pigment Yellow 42 221 
CI Pigment Yellow 43 221 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  CI Pigment Yellow 53 223 
CI Pigment Yellow 83 231 
CI Pigment Yellow 110 237 
CI Pigment Yellow 138 118 
CI Pigment Yellow 139 118 236 
CI Pigment Yellow 184 225 
CI Reactive Blue 4 208 
CI Reactive Blue 5 208 
CI Reactive Blue 19 208 
CI Reactive Red 1 207–208 
CI Reactive Red 3 208 
CI Reactive Red 17 208 
CI Sulfur Black 1 163–164 
CI Vat Blue 1 106 
CI Vat Blue 4 102 103 
CI Vat Blue 20 102 
CI Vat Green 8 102–103 
CI Vat Orange 9 102 183 
CI Vat Yellow 1 102–103 183 
Cibacron F dyes 202 
CIE (Commission Internationale 
   de l’Eclairage) system of colour  
   specification 31–32 
CIELAB colour space 32 
CMYK four-colour system 296 
cobalt aluminate blue 222–223 
cobalt( III) complex azo dyes 94–95 
cochineal  4 
colorants  36–37 
   see also  dyes; pigments Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  colour and constitution 38–66 
Colour Index   36–37 
colour removal 322 
colour rinses 264 
colour space 31–32 
colour vision deficiency 27 
Commission Internationale de 
   l’Eclairage (CIE) system of  
   colour specification 31–32 
compact discs (CDs) 288–289 
conductance band 67–68 
cone cells  26 
Congo Red 325 
coordination compounds 66–67 
copper complex azo dyes 94–95 
copper naphthalocyanine 137 
copper phthalocyanine(s) 13–14 133–134 
 chromogens 208 
 crystal morphology 241 
 pigments 137–138 229 234 
 structure 135 138–139 
 synthesis 140–144 
 use in LCDs 273 
cornea   25 
cosmetics  250–251 
 decorative 251–254 
 hair colorants 254–265 
 safety of ingredients 327–328 
cotton   82 178–179 197 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  coumarin fluorescent dyes 111 126 279
    2 8 1  
couplers (hair coloration) 259 
coupling components 84 
croconium-based dyes 153 
cross terms 63 
CRTs (cathode ray tubes) 270 
crystal design 239 
crystal engineering 16–17 239–240 
crystal field theory 66–67 
crystal growth 241–242 
crystal morphology 241–243 
crystal violet lactone (CVL) 306 
cyanine dyes 149–153 290 
o-cyanobenzamide 133 
cyanuric chloride 209 
cyanuric fluoride 210 
cysteine  256 
D 
D&C colorants 252–253 
D2T2 (dye diffusion thermal transfer) printing 298–299 
DCB (3.3'-dichlorobenzidine) 325–326 
DCJTB  279 
density functional theory (DFT) 16 61 
desizing  179 
developers (hair coloration) 259 
DHI (5,6-dihydroxyindole) 256 262 
DHICA (5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid) 256 
diaminoanthraquinones 123–124 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  4,4'-diaminobiphenyl (benzidine) 90 324–325 
diarylethene photochromic dyes 311 
diarylide yellows 231 
diazonium salts 79–82 
diazotisation 78–84 
6,6'-dibromoindigo 4 3.3'-dichlorobenzidine (DCB) 325–326 
dichloropyridazine dyes 200 
dichloroquinoxaline dyes 200 
dichlorotriazinyl dyes 199 207 
dichroic dyes 273–274 
dichromacy 27 diethyl succinylsuccinate 126 
difluoropyrimidine dyes 202 
digital versatile discs (DVDs) 288–289 
dihydrobenzothiazines 256 dihydropyrazolones 260–261 
dihydroquinacridones 128 
1,2-dihydroxyanthraquinone (alizarin) 4 101 
1,4-dihydroxyanthraquinone (quinizarin) 121 123 124 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid (DHICA) 256 
5,6-dihydroxyindole (DHI) 256 262 
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) 256 262 
diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP) pigments 17 115–116 128–129
    2 3 6  
dioxazine-based colorants 161–162 208 237 
dipole moments 56 
direct and developed dyes 181 
direct dyes 179–181 
direct (non-oxidative) hair dyes 255 262–265 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  disazo colorants 88–92 235–236 
disazoacetoacetanilides 231 
disperse dyes 185–188 324 
dispersibility 216 DOPA (3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) 256 262 
dopachrome 256 
dopaquinone 256 
DPP (diketopyrrolopyrrole) pigments 17 115–116 128–129
    2 3 6  
DPVBI  279 
Drimarene dyes 201 
drop-on-demand inkjet printing 294 
DSCs (dye-sensitised solar cells) 283–286 
DVDs (digital versatile discs) 288–289 
dye diffusion thermal transfer (D2T2) printing 298–299 
dye-sensitised solar cells (DSCs) 283–286 
dyes  distinction from pigments 35–36 
 history  2–15 
 molecular properties 169–170 
E 
effluent, industrial 321–323 
Egyptian Blue 3 
electrochromism 312–313 electroluminescence 276 
electronic displays 269–280 
electronic spectroscopy 28–30 
electrophotography 291–293 
environmental issues 18 318–331 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  eosin   252–253 
eumelanin  256 257 
European Union, environmental policy 319–320 
excitons  278 
extenders (pigments) 220–221 
eye    25–27 
eye make-up 253 
F 
FBAs (fluorescent brightening agents) 35 111 
FD&C colorants 253 264 
Fenton’s reagent 322 
fibre-reactive gr oups 196 197–206 
fibres, textile 168–172 
   see also  cellulosic fibres; 
   protein fibres; synthetic fibres 
fillers (pigments) 220–221 
finishing, pigment 215 
Fischer’s aldehyde 154–155 
Fischer’s base 154 155  
fixation  171 
flat-screen plasma displays 279 
flavanthrone 102–103 123–125 183 
Flavanthrone Yellow 236 
fluorans  306 
Fluorescein 157 
fluorescence 33–35 280–281 
fluorescent brightening agents (FBAs) 35 111 
fluorescent dyes 111–112 156–157 280–281 
fluorescent pigments 246–247 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  fluorescent probes 299–300 
fluorescent solar collectors (FSCs) 287–288 
fluorotriazine dyes 202 210 
food colourings 326–327 
force fields 63 241 
foundation (cosmetics) 252 
Friedel-Crafts acylation 120–121 
FSCs (fluorescent solar collectors) 287–288 
fulgide photochromic dyes 311 
functional colorants 267–269 
 biomedical applications 299–303 
 chromic materials 303–314 
 electronic applications 269–299 
 history  15–16 
Fuschine  9 
G 
gallium-arsenide diode lasers 289 
GH (guest/host) systems 273–274 
gloss (optical property) 213 
Griess, Peter 10 
guest/host (GH) systems 273–274 
H 
H-Acid  87 
H-chromophores 108 
haematoporphyrin 302 
haematoxylin 4–5 
haemin  135 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  hair colorants 254–265 327–328 
halochromic dyes 304–305 
Hansa Yellows 12 231 
heat stability 214 
heavy metals, toxicity 328–329 
hemicyanines 149–151 
henna   255 
hetero-bifunctional dyes 206 
high-technology colorants 
   see functional colorants 
homo-bifunctional dyes 206 
homorosaniline 9 
Hückel molecular orbital (HMO) method 51–52 
hue   29 31 
hydrogen bonding 174–175 
hydrogen peroxide 259–260 
p-hydroquinone 126 
hydroxyazo dyes 75–80 
hydroxyazonaphthalenes 76–77 
3-hydroxy-2-naphthoic acid 91 
8-hydroxyquinoline aluminium complexes 279 
hypsochromic shift 30 
I 
indanthrone 102 103 123–124 
Indanthrone Blue 236 
Indigo   3–4 5 105–107
    125 183 
indigoid colorants 105–110 125–126 
indirubin  110 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  indium tin oxide 313 
indo dyes  261 
indolenine-based dyes 153 
indolequinone 256 
indoxyl  105–106 125–126 
indoxyl-2-carboxylic acid 125 
industrial effluent 321–323 
inkjet printing 294–298 
inorganic pigments 214 217–228 
inorganic semiconductors 66–68 
intensity (colour attribute) 29 30 
intersystem crossing 34 
iodopsin  26 
ionochromism 304–305 
iris    25–26 
iron oxide pigments 221–222 
iron phthalocyanine 134 
isoindoline pigments 118 130 236 
K 
keratin   172–173 
ketohydrazone isomers 75–78 
L 
lakes   12 229 233 
Lanasol dyes 205–206 
laser dyes  280–282 
laser printing 292 
lattice energy 240–241 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  lawsone  255 
LCDs (liquid crystal displays) 57 271–276 308–309 
lead, toxicity 329 
lead chromate pigments 224 225 329 
LEDs (light-emitting diodes) 276–279 
leuco dyes  119 163 307–308 
leucodopachrome 256 
leucoquinizarin 123 124 
leuteolin  4 
Levafix dyes 202–203 
level dyeing 170 
ligand to metal charge tr ansfer transitions 67 
light   22–25 
light absorption and scattering 213 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) 276–279 
light-emitting polymers 279 
lightfastness 214 
lightness (colour attribute) 31 
Lincoln Green 4 
lipsticks  252–253 
liquid crystal displays (LCDs) 57 271–276 308–309 
liquor ratio 254 
logwood  4–5 
luminescence 33–35 
lymphomas 258 
lyocell   169 
M 
madder  4 
Magenta  9 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  make-up  251–254 
Malachite Green 155 158–159 
mandelic acid 126 
mass coloration 191 
Mauveine  6–8 156 
m-MDTA  278 
mechanochromism 314 
melanin  256 
mercerisation 179 mercury, toxicity 329 
merocyanines 151 310 
metal complexes 66–67 93–97 290 
metal-free phthalocyanines 133 135 140 
metallic pigments 244–245 
metallochromism 305 
methyl orange 305 
methyl viologen 312 
2-methylene-1,3,3-trimethylindolenine 
   (Fischer’s base) 154 155  
mirrors, anti-dazzle 313 
Mischler’s ketone 158 
mixed phase oxide pigments 222–223 
MM2 force field 63–64 
molar extinction coefficient 30 58–59 
molecular mechanics 62–64 
molecular orbital approach 50–62 
molybdate chromes 224 
monoazo colorants 88 207–208 
monochlorotriazinyl dyes 199 200 206
    2 0 8  Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  monochromacy 27 
monofluorotriazine dyes 202 
mordants  3 93 176–177 
N 
N719 dye  285 
nanoparticles 224 naphthalene derivatives 87 
naphthol reds 12 231 
naphthopyran photochromic dyes 310 
naphthoquinones 101 2-naphthylamine 324 
natural dyes 328 
natural fibres 169 
   see also  cellulosic fibres; protein fibres 
nematic mesophases 271–272 
nickel antimony titanium yellow 223 
nickel azo dyes 290 
nickel phthalocyanines 208 
nitro dyes  164–165 263–264 
nitroaminophenol dyes 264 
nitroaniline dyes 54–55 263–264 
nitroazobenzene 42 nitrodimethylamino-azobenzenes 64 
nitrodiphenylamine dyes 164–165 264 
nitrophenylenediamine dyes 264 
nitrosation  82–84 
nitrous acid 79 82–83 
non-oxidative hair dyes 255 262–265 
nylon   190 191 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  O 
opacity  213 229 
optical data storage 288–290 
optically-variable pigments 246 
Orange I, II, III and  IV 11 
orbitals  51 
order parameter 275 
organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) 276–279 
organic pigments 214 229–238 
oscillator strength 58 
oxanols  151–152 
oxidation bases (hair coloration) 259 
oxidative hair dyes 255 259–262 
oxindigo  109–110 
ozone colour removal 322 
P 
pararosaniline 299 
Pariser-Pople-Parr (PPP) 
   molecular orbital method 16 52–56 58–60 
PCBs (polychlorobiphenyls) 329–330 
PDT (photodynamic therapy) 300–303 
pearlescent pigments 245–246 
perinone pigments 117 129–130 236 
Perkin, Sir William Henry 6–8 
permanent hair dyes 255 259 
perylene pigments 116–117 129–130 236
    2 7 3  
PET (poly(ethylene terephthalate)) 185 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  pH-sensitive dyes 304–305 
phenol   84–85 87 
phenothiazonethioanthrone chromophoric system 162 
phenylazonaphthols 76–77 78 
2-phenylazophenol 76–77 p-phenylenediamine 80 260 
phenylglycine 125–126 
phenylglycine- o-carboxylic acid 125 
pheomelanin 256 257 
phosphorescence 33–35 
photochromism 74–75 309–312 
photocopying 291–292 photodynamic therapy (PDT) 300–303 
Photofrin  302 
photomerocyanines 310 
photopic vision 26 
photosensitisers 301–303 photovoltaic solar cells 282–288 
phthalic anhydride 141 
phthalocyanine dyes 133–134 
 chromogens 208 
 history  13 
 structure and properties 59 134–140 
 synthesis 140–144 
 use in optical storage media 290 
   see also  copper phthalocyanine(s) 
phthalonitrile 141–144 
picric acid  6 164 
piezochromism 314  Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  pigments  212–217 
 distinction from dyes 35–36 
 history  2–15 
 inorganic 217–228 
 molecular and crystal modelling 238–244 
 organic 229–238 
 for special effects 244–247 
 surface proper ties 242–243 
 use in inkjet printing 297 
 use in screen printing 171–172 
PLA (polylactic acid) 188 189 
Planck’s relationship 29 
plasma displays 279 
PM3 method 63–64 
pollution abatement 321–323 
polyacrylonitrile 150–151 188–189 
polyamides 190 
polyazo colorants 88 92–93 
polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs) 329–330 
polyene dyes 147–148 
polyesters  185–186 
polyethylene 190–191 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) 185 
polylactic acid (PLA) 188 189 
polymethine dyes 149–155 281 
polymorphism 115 138 216 
poly( p-phenylenevinylene) (PPV) 279 
polypropylene 190–191 
population inversions 281 
 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  PPP (Pariser-Pople-Parr) 
   molecular orbital method 16 52–56 58–60 
PPV (poly( p-phenylenevinylene)) 279 
premetallised dyes 177 
primary intermediates (hair coloration) 259 
printed textiles 171–172 200 297–298 
probes, fluorescent 299–300 
Procion dyes 14–15 195 198
    199 206 
protein fibres 172–178 204–206 
Prussian blue 3 227 
pupil   26 
pyranthrone 102 123–124 183 
pyrazolones 87 231 
pyridones  87 
pyrromethenes 281 
Q 
quanta   33 
quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) 64–66 
quantitative structure-property relationships (QSPR) 64–66 
quantum dots 224 
quantum principle 51 
quantum yield 34 
quenching  33–34 
quinacridone pigments 112–116 126–128 236
    240 273 
quinine  7 
quinizarin  121 123 124 
quinone-hydroquinone redox system 118–119 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  quinonediimines 260–261 
quinones  100–101 
quinophthalone pigments 118 130 
R 
REACH (Registration, Evaluation, 
   Authorisation of Chemicals) 320 
reactive dyes 194–197 
 chromogenic groups 207–208 
 fibre-reactiv e groups 197–206 
 history  14–15 
 hydrolysis 199–200 206 321 
 polyfunctional 206–207 
 synthesis 209–211 
 toxicity 324 
reduction clearing 186 
reflectance spectra 30–32 
Registration, Evaluation,    Authorisation of Chemicals (REACH) 320 
Remazol reactive dyes 203 206 
reprographics 291–299 
retina   25 
retinal   148 
Rhodamine dyes 156–157 159 160
    246–247 281 
rhodopsin  26 
rod cells  26 
rosaniline  9 
rosolic acid 9–10 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  S 
saturation (colour attribute) 31 
scattering of light 28 
Schiff’s reagent 299 
scotopic vision 26 
scouring  179 
screen printing 171–172 
SDC (Society of Dyers and Colourists) 88 
selenoindigo 109–110 
semi-permanent hair dyes 255 263–264 
   see also  nitro dyes 
semi-synthetic fibres 169 
semiconductors, inorganic 67–68 
shade (colour attribute) 29 
sizes (textile sizing agents) 179 
smectic mesophases 271–272 
soaping  182 
Society of Dyers and Colourists (SDC) 88 
solar concentrators 287–288 
solar energy conversion 282–288 
solubilised vat dyes 183 184 
solubility, dye 170 
solvatochromism 56–57 313–314 
space groups 240 
spectral converters 287–288 
spirooxazine photochromic dyes 310 
spirooxazines 151 
squarylium dyes 153 
staining, biological 299–300 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  staple fibres 169 
steric effects 45–46 
Stokes shift 34 59 
strength (colour attribute) 29 30 
streptocyanines 149–151 
styryl dyes 149 
substantive dyes 179–181 
subtractive colour mixing 23 24 
sulfamic acid 82 
sulfate process for TIO 2 219–220 
β-sulfatoethylsulfone dyes 206 210 
sulfoselenide pigments 223–224 
sulfur dyes 162–164 
sulfurization 163–164 supercritical fluids 323 
synthetic fibres 184–191 
T 
‘tailor-made’ additives 242–243  
tartrazine  327 
TD-DFT (time-dependent density functional theory) 61–62 
temporary hair dyes 255 263 264 
Tencel   169 
Tetrachloroisoindolinone pigments 237 
Tetrachlorophthalic anhydride 130 
2,4,5,6-tetrachloropyrimidine 210 
textile dyes 37–38 168–172 
 for cellulosic fibres 178–184 
 history  3–6 
 for protein fibres 172–178 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  textile dyes ( Cont. ) 
 for synthetic fibres 184–191 
   see also  reactive dyes 
textile fibres 168–172 
   see also  cellulosic fibres; 
   protein fibres; synthetic fibres 
textile printing 171–172 200 297–298 
thermochromism 305–309 thermofixation 186 
thiazole-based dyes 152–153 
thiobenzophenones 159 
thioindigo  109–110 126 
time-dependent density 
   functional theory (TD-DFT) 61–62 
titanium dioxide pigments 218–221 252 
Toluidine Red 231 
toner printing systems 291–293 
toxicity  225 323–326 
transition dipole moments 57 274 
transition metal complexes 66–67 
triarylmethine dyes 155 158–159 264 
triazinyl reactive dyes 198–200 208 
tribochromism 314 
trichloropyrimidine dyes 200–202 208 210 
2,4,6-trichloro-1,3,5-triazine 209 triphenylmethine dyes 158–159 
trisazo dyes 92–93 
tungsten oxide 312 
Tyrian purple 4 
tyrosine  256 262 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  U 
ultramarine blue pigments 226–227 
unit cells  240 
United States, environmental policy 320 
urea   171 
UV/visible spectroscopy 28–30 
V 
valence band 67–68 
valence-bond approach 40–49 
 anthraquinone dyes 104–105 
 cyanine dyes 158–159 
 indigo  108–109 
 Malachite Green 158–159 
vat dyes  181–183 236–237 
vat pigments 236–237 
vinylsulfone dyes 203–204 208 210 
violanthrone 102 
viscose  169 
visible light 22–25 
visible reflectance spectroscopy 30–32 
W 
washfastness 194–195 water-solubilising groups 196 
weld   4 
white lead  220 
white pigments 218–221 Index Terms  Links  
 
This page has been reformatted by Knovel to provide easier navigation.  windows, smart 313 
wool fibres 204–206 
write once read many (WORM) data storage 288 
X 
xanthene dyes 156–157 281 
Z 
zinc-containing pigments 223 225 
zinc sulfide 220 