 
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1694   
LACCASE:   PROPERTI ES AND APPLICATIONS  
 
Vernekar Madhavia and S. S. Lele b* 
 
Laccases (benzenediol:oxygen oxidoredu ctase, EC 1.10.3.2) are multi-
copper oxidases that are widely di stributed among plants, insects, and 
fungi. They have been described in different genera of ascomycetes, 
some deuteromycetes, and mainly in basidiomycetes. These enzymes 
catalyze the one-electron oxidation of a wide variety of organic and inorganic substrates, including mono-, di-, and polyphenols, amino-
phenols, methoxyphenols, aromatic amines, and ascorbate, with the 
concomitant four electron reduction of oxygen to water. Laccase is currently the focus of much attentio n because of its diverse applications, 
such as delignification of lignocellulosics, crosslinking of polysaccha-
rides, bioremediation applications, su ch as waste detoxification, and 
textile dye transformation, food technologic uses, personal and medical 
care applications, and biosensor and analytical applications. This review 
helps to understand the properties of this important enzyme for efficient utilization  for its biotechnological and environmental applications. 
 
Keywords:  Laccase; Lignin; Bioremediation; Dye decolorization; White rot fungi 
 
Contact information:  a: Department of Biotechn ology and Bioinformatics, Padmashree Dr. D.Y.Patil 
University, Sector 15, CBD Belapur, Navimumbai, Maharshtra India; b: Food Engineering and Technology Department, University Institute of Chem ical Technology, Matunga, Mumbai *Corresponding 
author: sslele@udct.org
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Laccase (EC 1.10.3.2, p-diphenol oxidase) is one of a few enzymes that have been 
studied since the nineteenth century. Yoshid a first described laccase in 1883 from the 
exudates of the Japanese lacquer tree, Rhus vernicifera  (Thurston 1994; Levine 1965). 
However in 1896, for the first time, both Bertrand and Laborde demonstrated laccase to be a fungal enzyme (Thurston 1994; Levine  1965). Laccases are copper-containing 
enzymes that catalyze the oxidatio n of a wide variety of orga nic and inorganic substrates, 
including mono-, di-, and polyphenols, amino phenols,  methoxy phenols, aromatic 
amines and ascorbate with the concomitant  four electron reduction of oxygen to water 
(Galhaup et al. 2002). Laccase is a member of  the large blue copper proteins or blue 
copper oxidases; other enzymes in this group are the plant ascorbate oxidases and the 
mammalian plasma protein ceruloplasmin (Thur ston 1994). The ability  of laccases to 
oxidize phenolic compounds as well as their ab ility to reduce molecular oxygen to water 
has led to intensive studies of  these enzymes (Thurston 1994). 
 
Occurrence 
Laccase is most widely distributed in a wide range of higher plants and fungi 
(Benfield et al. 1964) as well as in bacteria (Diamantidis et al . 2000). Laccases in plants 
have been identified in trees, cabbages, turnip s, beets, apples, aspa ragus, potatoes, pears,  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1695  and various other vegetables (L evine 1965). It has been detected  in various pl ant species, 
including lacquer, mango, mung bean, peach, pi ne, prune, and sycamore, etc. Laccase is 
also found to be present in a dozen insects of genera that include Bombyx , Calliphora , 
Diploptera, Drosophilia, Lucilia, Manduc a, Musca, Oryctes, Papilio, Phormia, 
Rhodnius, Sarcophaga, Schistocerca , and Tenebrio (Xu 1999). Most of the laccase 
described in literature was isolated from hi gher fungi.  Laccases have been isolated from 
ascomycetes, deuteromycetes, and basidiomycet es fungi (Assavanig et al. 1992). Laccase 
from Monocillium indicum was the first laccase to be characterized from an ascomycete 
showing peroxidative activity  (Thakker et al. 1992). In  fungi, ascomycetes and 
deuteromycetes have not been a focus for lignin degradation studies as much as the white-rot basidiomycetes. Most common l accase producers are the wood rotting fungi 
Trametes versicolor , Trametes hirsuta , Trametes ochracea , Trametes villosa , Trametes 
gallica , Cerena maxima , Coriolposis polyzona , Lentinus tigrinus , Pleurotus eryngii , etc. 
(Morozova et al. 2007).  Although laccase enzyme s are widely distributed in plants and 
fungi, laccase activity has been reported only in few bacteria, including Azospirillum 
lipoferum, Marinomonas mediterranea, Stre ptomyces griseus, and Bacillus subtilis  
(Octavio et al. 2006). 
 
Molecular Properties of Laccase 
  Laccase is a glycosylated monomer or homodimer protein generally having fewer 
saccharide compounds (10-25 %) in fungi and b acteria than in the plant enzymes. The 
carbohydrate compound contains monosaccharides such as hexoamines, glucose, mannose, galactose, fucose, and arabinos e (Rogalski and Leonowicz 2004). On SDS- 
PAGE, most laccases show m obilities corresponding to mol ecular weight of 60-100 kDa, 
of which 10-50% may be attributed to gl ycosylation. Mannose is one of the major 
components of the carbohydrate attached to laccase. Glycosylatio n in laccase is 
responsible for secretion, proteolytic suscep tibility, activity, copper retention, and 
thermal stability (Xu 1999). 
Most laccases studied are extracellular proteins, although intracellular laccases 
have been detected in several fungi and inse cts. Fungal laccases have isoelectric points 
(pI) ranging from 3 to 7, whereas plant laccas e pI values range to 9. The main difference 
between the two enzymes is that fungal enzy mes have their pH optima between pH 3.6 
and 5.2, while laccase from Rhus  vernicifera  have pH optima between 6.8 and 7.4. The 
low pH optima of the fungal enzyme may be b ecause they are well adapted to grow under 
acidic conditions, while the plan t laccase being intracellular have their pH optima nearer 
to the physiological range. Thus the differe nces in pH optima may be because of the 
dissimilarity in physiological functions. In addition to their variation in pH, these 
enzymes also differ in their function. Fungal enzyme is responsible in mechanism for 
removing toxic phenols from the medium in  which these fungi grow under natural 
conditions, while the plant enzymes are invol ved in synthetic process such as lignin 
formation (Benfield et al. 1964).  
Purified laccases exhibit a characteristic  blue appearance from their electronic 
absorption around 600nm. Typical UV- Visible spectra of laccas e (at resting state) show 
two maxima around 280 and 600 nm and one shoulder near 330nm. The ratios of the 
absorbance at 280 nm to that at 600 nm ar e generally 14 to 30, and the ratio of the  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1696  absorbance at 330nm to that at 600 nm is 0.5 to 2 (Xu 1999). In the holoenzyme form, 
most laccases have four copper atoms per monomer (Co ll et al. 1993), although the 
laccase from Phlebia  was reported to have two coppe r and one pyrroloquinoline quinone 
as the prosthetic group. These copper atom s are classified in three groups using 
UV/visible and electron paramagnetic resona nce (EPR) spectroscopy (Leontievsky et al. 
1997). The type I copper (T1) is responsible fo r the intense blue colour of the enzymes 
and has a strong electronic absorption around 600nm and is EPR detectable. The type II 
copper (T2) is colourless, but EPR detectable , and the type 3 copper (T3) consists of a 
pair of copper atoms that give a weak  absorbance near the UV spectrum but no EPR 
signal. The T2 and T3 copper sites are clos e together and form a trinuclear centre 
(Leontievsky et al. 1997) in which binding di oxygen and four-electron reduction to water 
occur.  
Copper of the first type can be acted upon by solvents including water, and 
removed from the enzyme molecule by various  complexes. Copper of the second type is 
easy to eliminate, which can frequently be done during purification procedures. On the other hand, type 2 copper can be reconstructe d both in aerobic and anaerobic conditions. 
The study of laccase derivatives showed that  type 2 copper is bound to three nitrogen 
atoms. A water molecule is the fourth coppe r ligand. Type 2 copper ha s proven to play an 
important role in structural  nonspecific stabilization of anionic bonding in the copper 3 
active site. It has also been  found that a type I copper ce nter, which lacks a liganding 
methionone, is relatively unstable. This is true for all fungal laccases (Rogalski and 
Leonowicz 2004).  
Although most laccases adhere to these descriptions, there are certain highly 
purified laccases that do not s how these typical characteristics . It was demonstrated that 
the laccases isolated from solid state fungal cultures were yellow-brown and did not have 
typical blue oxidase spectra, showing simultaneously atypica l EPR spectra. The 
comparison of N- terminal amino sequences of the Phlebia radiata , Panus tigrinus , 
Coriolus versicolor , and Phlebia tremellosus  laccases showed high homology between 
blue and yellow-brown laccase forms. The ye llow enzyme seems to have an altered 
oxidation state of copper in th e active center, which is probably caused by the integration 
of aromatic lignin-degradation products. Inte restingly, evidence has been provided that 
yellow laccases are capable of oxidizing nonpheno lic lignin models and veratryl alcohol 
directly in presence of O
2 but in the absence of any diffusible mediator (Rogalski and 
Leonowicz 2004). Not all laccases  are reported to possess four  copper atoms (Thurston et 
al. 1994) per monomeric molecule . One of the laccases from Pleurotus ostreatus is said 
to confer no blue colour and was described by the author to be a white laccase (Palmieri 
et al. 1997). It was determined by atomic ab sorption that the lacc ase consisted of 1 
copper atom, 1 zinc atom, and 2 iron atom s instead of the typical four coppers.  
 
Classification According to  Substrate Specificity 
Laccase (EC 1.10.3.2) is a blue copper protein, but it also falls within the broader 
description of polyphenol oxida ses. Polyphenol oxidases are copper proteins with the 
common feature that th ey are able to oxidize aromatic compounds with molecular oxygen 
as the terminal elect ron acceptor (Mayer 1987). 
Polyphenol oxidases are asso ciated with three types of activities (Mayer 1987):  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1697  • Catechol oxidase or o-diphenol: oxygen oxidor eductase (EC 1.10.3.1) 
• Laccase or p-diphenol: oxygen oxidoreductase (EC 1.10.3.2) 
• Cresolase or monophenol monooxygenase (EC 1.18.14.1) 
These different enzymes can therefore be differentiated on the basis of substrate 
specificity (Walker and McCallion 1980). Th ere is, however, difficulty in defining 
laccase according to its substrate specificity, because laccase has an overlapping range of 
substrates with tyrosinase. Catec hol oxidases or tyrosinases have o-diphenol as well as 
cresolase activity (oxidation of L-tyrosine ). Laccases have ortho and paradiphenol 
activity, usually with more affinity toward s the second group. Only  tyrosinases possess 
cresolase activity, and only laccases have the ability to oxidize syringaldazine (Thurston 
1994; Eggert et al . 1996). There has been only one re port of an enzyme exhibiting both 
tyrosinase and laccase activity (Sanchez-Am at and Solano 1997). Secondly, laccases are 
remarkably nonspecific as to the inducing substr ate, and the range of substrates oxidized 
varies from one laccase to another (Wood 1980).  
Thurston (1994) stated in a review th at simple diphenols like hydroquinone and 
catechol are good substrates (for most laccases , but not for all), but that guaiacol and 2,6-
dimethoxyphenol (DMP) are often better. Para -phenylenediamine is a widely used 
substrate, and syringaldazi ne (N,N’-bis 3,5 dimethoxy-4 hydroxybenzylidene hydrazine) 
is a unique substrate for laccase only. Thus, laccase oxidizes polyphenols, methoxy– 
substituted phenols, diamines, and a vast  range of other compounds (Thurston 1994).  
 Another difficulty in defining laccase accord ing to substrate is that the substrate 
range varies from one organism to another. Neurospora crassa laccase (Germann et al. 
1988) only effectively oxidizes para and or tho-diphenols – with the exception of 
phloroglucinol, while laccase from Pyricularia oryzae preferred phlor oglucinol as a 
substrate above other substituted monophenols. Laccases from Cerrena unicolor and 
Trametes versicolor oxidize meta-substituted phenols, but to varying degrees. Laccase 
from Cerrena unicolor oxidizes para-substituted phenols to  the greatest extent (Filazzola 
et al. 1999), while Trametes versicolor laccase oxidises ortho-substituted phenols to the 
greatest extent (Jolivalt et al. 1999). An immobilized comme rcial laccase was able to 
degrade meta, ortho, and para-substituted methoxyphenols, chlorophenols, and cresols, 
but the substituted phenols from these three types of phenols are oxidized in different orders and to different  extents (Lante et al . 2000). Reports suggest that many different 
reactions have been catalyzed by laccases  from different fungi . A comparative study 
concerning properties of fungal laccases indica ted that all the laccases in the study had 
the ability to oxidize methoxyphe nolic acids, but to different degrees, and the oxidation 
efficiencies were also dependant on pH (Bollag and Leonowicz 1984). Phenolic 
compounds that were oxid ized very slowly by la ccase have recently been  used to increase 
the storage stability of laccase activity for Trametes versicolor (Mai et al . 2000). The 
increased stability of laccase c ould have technological import ance, as there are so many 
potential applications for laccase.  
 
Mode of Action of Laccase 
Laccase only attacks the phenolic su bunits of lignin, leading to C α oxidation, C α-
Cβ cleavage, and aryl-alkyl cleavage (Figure 2.2. 1.3a). It is believed th at laccase catalysis 
involves  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1698  1. reduction of the type 1 copper by reducing substrate 
2. internal electron transfer from the t ype1 to the type 2 and type 3 copper 
3. reduction of oxygen to water at the type 2 and type 3 copper site 
 
 
Figure 1. Oxidation of phenolic subunits of lignin by laccase (Archibald et al. 1997) 
 
The oxidation of a reducing substrate by laccase typically invol ves the loss of a 
single electron and the formati on of a free (cation) radical. The radical is in general 
unstable and may undergo further laccase-catal yzed oxidation (e.g., to form quinone from 
phenol) or nonenzymatic reactions (e.g., hydra tion, disproportion or polymerization) (Xu 
1999). The electron transfer from substrate to  type 1 copper is probably controlled by 
redox potential difference. A lower oxidation pot ential of substrate or a higher redox 
potential of laccase (type 1 s ite) often results in a higher rate for substrate oxidation. 
It seems that the binding poc ket of reducing substrate (or the type 1 copper site) is 
quite shallow and has limited stearic effect on simple phenol substrate.  In contrast, the O 2 
binding pocket (or the type 2 and type 3 copper sites) appears to restrict the access of 
oxidizing agents other than O 2. Activation of O 2 likely involves chemical bond formation 
on the trinuclear copper cluster. Solomon et al. (1996) proposed that under turnover 
conditions, the electron transfer from the substrat e to the type 1 site (the initial electron 
acceptor from substrate) is the rate-determining step. 
Laccases are similar to other phenol-oxidizing enzymes, which preferably 
polymerize lignin by coupling of the phenoxy radicals produced from oxidation of lignin 
phenolic groups (Bourbonnais et al. 1995). However, the substrate range of laccase can  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1699  be extended to non-phenolic subunits of lignin by the inclus ion of a mediator such as 
2,2’-azinobis-(3-ethylbenzthiazo line-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS). 
 
Laccase Mediator System 
 Laccases were thought to play a role in  the biodegradation of lignin, but it was 
restricted to phenolic compounds because of the low oxidation potentials of these 
enzymes (Reid and Paice 1994). Application of these enzymes in the presence of 
mediator compounds resulted in a high oxidati on capability, leading to the oxidation of 
nonphenolic lignin model compounds [Fig. 2].  
 
Figure 2.  Oxidation of nonphenolic lignin model co mpounds by a Laccase Mediator System 
(Archibald et al. 1997) 
 
 The laccase mediator system (LMS) was originally developed to solve problems 
in bio-bleaching of wood pul ps and was first described by Bourbonnais and Paice (1990) 
with the use of ABTS as the first mediator . The first attempt at using laccase mediator 
couples for delignification in the pulp i ndustry was the development of Lignozym 
process, which was described by Call and Mu cke (1997). According to Bourbonnais et al. 
(1995), the delignification of kraft pulp by laccase can be supported by a number of 
external synthetic, low molecular mass dyes,  or other aromatic hydrogen donors. ABTS 
[2,2’ azinobis—(3-ethylbenzenthiazoline-6-sulp honic acid)] was the first mediator shown 
to be effective in the delignification of kr aft pulp and lignin transformation by laccase.  
The reaction mechanism mediated by ABTS appears to proceed as follows: 
Oxygen activates laccase, and the mediator is oxidized by the enzyme. The oxidized  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1700  mediator diffuses into pulp and oxidized lig nin, disrupting it into smaller fragments, 
which are easily removed from the pulp by mean s of alkaline extraction. The application 
of the laccase mediator system on hardwood kr aft pulp resulted in a reduction of kappa 
number, demethylation, and depolymeriza tion of kraft lignin (Archibald et al . 1997; Reid 
and Paice 1994). 
The LMS was successfully applied to th e oxidation of aromatic methyl groups, 
benzyl alcohols (Johannes et al . 1998), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (Johannes et al. 
1998; Majcherczyk et al . 1998; Johannes and Majcherczyk 2000) and bleaching of textile 
dyes (Rodriguez et al. 2004a).  
 
Isozymes  
Many laccase-producing fungi s ecrete isoforms of the same enzyme (Leontievsky 
et al. 1997). These isozymes have been found to originate from the same or different 
genes encoding for the laccase enzyme (Archiba ld et al. 1997). The number of isozymes 
present differs between species and also within species depending on whether they are induced or non-induced (Assavani g et al. 1992). Table 1. give s a list of different fungal 
laccase and its isozymes. 
Isozymes can differ markedly in their st ability, optimal pH and temperature, and 
affinity for different substrates (Assava nig et al. 1992; He inzkill et al. 1998). 
Furthermore, these different isozymes can have different roles in the physiology of 
different species or in the same species under different conditi ons (Assavanig et al. 
1992). Various laccase encoding gene sequences  have been reported from a range of 
ligninolytic fungi. These sequences encode for proteins between 515 and 619 amino acid 
residues and close phylogenetic proximity between them is indicated by sequence 
comparisons (Bourbonnais et al. 1995).  
 
Functions of Laccase 
In some fungi, the reactions  of laccase are unrelated to  ligninolysis. Laccase plays 
a role in the morphogenesis and differentiation  of sporulating and resting structures in 
basidiomycetes as well as lignin biodegrad ation of wood in white -rot fungi (Thurston 
1994). Laccase is responsible for pigment formation in mycelia and fruiting bodies, improves cell-to-cell adhesion, assists in the formation of rhizomorphs, and is also 
responsible for the formation of polyphenolic  glue that binds hyphae together. Various 
plant pathogens also produce extracellular l accases that enable the fungus to overcome 
the immune response of the host (Thurston 1994). Laccase also facilitates the detoxification of the plant tissue via the oxida tion of antifungal phenols or deactivation of 
phytoalexins (Assavanig et al. 1992). It has be en postulated that laccase is involved in 
various cellular and microbial activities. R ecent studies on the physiological function of 
laccase include those on plant cell wall bi osynthesis, phytopathogenesis, wood material 
degradation and humification, insect sclerotization, bacter ial melanization, and melanin 
related virulence for humans (Xu 1999).   
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1701  Table 1.  Properties of Purified Fungal Laccase 
Organism Number of 
isozymes Molecular 
mass (kDa) References 
Trametes multicolor  
5  
63 Leitner et al. 2002 
Trametes trogii 2 70 Garzillo et al. 1998 
Ganoderma lucidum 3 65-68 Ko et al. 2001 
Pycnoporus cinnabarinus 1 81 Eggert et al. 1996 
Coriolus hirsutus 1 73 Shin and Lee 2000 
Ceriporiopsis subvermispora 2 71 
68 Fukushima and Kirk 1995 
Trichoderma 1 71 Assavanig et al. 1992 
Trametes sanguinea M85-2 1 62 Nishizawa et al. 1995 
Ganoderma lucidum 2 40 
66 D’Souza et al. 1999 
Chaetomium thermophilium 1 77 Chefetz et al. 1998 
Chalara paradoxa  CH 32 1 67 Robles et al. 2002 
Pleurotus ostreatus 1 59 Sannia et al. 1986 
Coriolus hirsutus 1 55 Koroljova-Skorobogat’ko et 
al. 1998 
Polyporus versicolor 2 60 
~ 65 Mosbach 1963 
Botrytis cinerea 61-34 1 74 Slomczynski et al. 1995 
Monocillium indicum  1 72 Thakker et al. 1992 
Neurospora crassa 1 65 Froehner and Eriksson 
1976  
Podospora anserine 3 70 
80 
390 Thurston 1994 
 
 
 
PURIFICATION OF LACCASE 
 
 In general, plant laccases are purified from sap or tissue extracts, whereas 
extracellular fungal laccases are purified from culture medium (fermentation broth) of the 
selected organism. Various pr otein purification techniques are frequently employed in 
purifying laccase. Typical purification protocol s involve ultrafiltrati on, ion exchange, gel 
filtration, hydrophobic interaction, or ot her electrophoretic and chromatographic 
techniques.   
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1702   Table 2. enlists different methods fo r laccase purification. Affinity chroma-
tography using a phenolic group as ligand can increase purification efficiency. The purity 
of a laccase preparation is often measur ed by SDS-PAGE and by the ratio of the 
absorbance at 280nm to that at 600 nm.  
 
Table 2.  Different Methods fo r Laccase Purification 
Organism Purification step  Yield and 
Purification fold Reference 
Ultrafiltration 100 % - 
Q-Sepharose  39.8 %  Trametes multicolor  
Superdex 75 31.8 %  Leitner et al. 2002 
Ultrafiltration 84 % 3 
DEAE Sepharose 79 % 5 Chaetomium 
thermophilium 
Concanavalin A-
Sepharose 4B 40 % 10 Chefetz et al. 1998 
DEAE Sepharose 74.9 % 2.6 Ganoderma 
lucidum Preparative 
electrophoresis 28.6 % 32.4 Ko et al. 2001 
Ultrafiltration 87 % 7 
DEAE M 75 % 20 
Butyl toyopearl 56 % 32 Pycnoporus 
cinnabarinus 
S-400 47 % 36 Eggert et al. 1996 
DEAE Toyopearl 78 % - Trametes 
sanguinea Phenyl Toyopearl 73 %  Nishizawa et al. 1995 
Hydroxyl apatitie 58 % - Polyporus 
versicolor Zone electrphoresis 65 %  Mosbach 1963 
DEAE cellulose - 17.5 Coriolus hirsutus 
DEAE Toyopearl   167.5 Koroljova-
Skorobogat’ko et al. 1998 
Ultrafiltration   
DEAE Sepharose 18 %  Pleurotus ostreatus 
ConA- Sepharose 12 % 27 Sannia et al. 1986 
DEAE Sepharose 62.1 % 3.3 
Sephacryl S-200 HR 57.2 % 3.7 
Hitrap SP 45.4 % 8.2 Coriolus hirsutus 
Mono S 32.3 % 14.5 Shin and Lee 2000 
Sephadex G-25 95 % 0.91 
Syringyl- CPG 35.9 % 13.11 Trametes versicolor 
Vanillyl- CPG 9.2 % 109.19 Rogalski et al. 1991 
 
Sephadex G-25 92.4 % 0.94 
Syringyl- CPG 41 % 8.12 Fomes fomentarius 
Vanillyl- CPG 15.6 % 41.4 Rogalski et al. 1991 
Acel anion exchange 54 % - 
Mono Q (L1) 34 %  Ceriporiopsis 
subvermispora 
Phenyl Superose 15 %  Fukushima and Kirk 
1995  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1703  CHARACTERIZATION OF LACCASE  
 
Influence of pH on laccase activity  
The pH optima of laccases are highly dependent on the substrate. For phenols, the 
optimal pH can range from 3 to 7 for fungal l accases and up to 9 for plant laccases. When 
using ABTS as substrate, the pH optima are more acidic and are found in the range 
between pH 3 and pH 5 (Heinzkill et al. 1998 ). In general, laccas e activity has a bell-
shaped profile with an optimal pH that varies  considerably. This variation may be due to 
changes to the reaction caused by the substr ate, oxygen, or the enzyme itself (Xu 1997). 
The difference in redox potential between the phenolic substrate a nd the T1 copper could 
increase oxidation of the s ubstrate at high pH values , but the hydroxide anion (OH-) 
binding to the T2/T3 coppers results in an inhibition of the laccase activity due to the disruption of the internal electron transfer between the T1 and T2/T3 centres. These two 
opposing effects can play an important role in determining the optimal pH of the bi-
phasic laccase enzymes (Xu 1997). The role of  the T1 copper in the pH optima of the 
enzyme was confirmed by Palmieri et al. (1997), who found that the T1 copper was 
absent in laccase enzymes exhibiting more ne utral pH optima. Table 3 gives a list of 
optimum pH and kinetic parameters for different laccases. 
 
 Influence of temperatur e on laccase activity  
The optimal temperature of laccase can diffe r greatly from one st rain to another. 
Laccase isolated from Ganoderma lucidum  showed optimum temperature 20-25°C and 
was found to be stable between 10- 50°C fo r 4 hours (Ko et al. 2001). Laccases isolated 
from Marasmius quercophilus (Farnet et al . 2000) were found to be stable for 1 h at 
60°C. Farnet et al. (2000) further found that pre-incubation of enzymes at 40°C and 50°C 
greatly increased laccase activity.   
Influence of inhibitors on laccase activity 
In general, laccases respond similarly to several inhibitors of enzyme activity 
(Bollag and Leonowicz 1984). In a study conduct ed by Bollag and Leonowicz (1984) it 
was found that azide, thioglycolic acid, a nd diethyldithiocarbamic  acid all inhibited 
laccase activity, whereas EDTA affected laccas e activity to a lesser extent. Small anions 
such as halides (excluding iodide), azide, cy anide, and hydroxide bind to the type 2 and 
type 3 copper, resulting in an  interruption of the internal electron transfer and activity 
inhibition. Other inhibitors include metal ions (e.g. Hg
+2), fatty acids, sulfhydryl reagents, 
hydroxylglycine, kojic acid, and cationi c quaternary ammonium detergents. 
  
APPLICATIONS OF LACCASE  
Laccase in the Paper Industry Biological pulping  
Making paper from wood requires separati on of the wood fibres from each other 
and then reforming them into a sheet. In wood, lignin glues the fibres together. These 
fibres can be separated either by degradation and removal of lignin (chemical pulping), or  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1704  by physically tearing the fibres apart (mech anical pulping). Chemical and mechanical 
pulps have different market niches. Many paper products contain both pulp types, in 
variable proportions dependi ng on the required properties. Mechanical pulp is cheaper 
than chemical pulp because of its high yi eld (up to 95 % by weight of the starting 
material, in contrast to the yield from ch emical pulping of wood is  usually less than 
50%), and capital cost. However the high ligni n content of the mechanical pulp fibres 
detracts from the quality of the paper; because the fibres have little flexibility, they do not 
bond together, the paper has lowe r strength, and there is a tend ency of the pulp to yellow 
on exposure to sunlight. In addition, mechan ical pulping requires a lot of electrical 
energy, which in turn increases the cost. 
 
Table 3.  Kinetic Parameters of some laccases 
Species 
 Substrate pH K m Reference 
Armillaria mellea p-phenylenediamine 3.5 1.7 mM Rehman and 
Thurston 1992 
Botrytis cinerea 2,6- Dimethoxyphenol 3.5 0.1 mM Slomczynski  et al. 
1995 
Ceriporiopsis subvermispora Guaiacol 3.5 1.6 mM Fukushima and Kirk 
1995 
Cerrena unicolor 
 Syringaldazine 5.5 - Xu 1999 
Coprinus cinereus ABTS 4 - Schneider et al. 
1999 
Chalara paradoxa 
 Syringaldazine 6.5 3.40 mM Robles et al. 2002 
Coriolus hirsutus Catechol 4.5 145.6 μM Koroljova 
Skorobogat’ko et al. 1998 
Fomes annosus Syringaldazine 4.6 - Bollag and 
Leonowicz 1984 
Ganoderma Lucidum 
 ABTS 3.5 0.0037 mM Ko et al. 2001 
Lentinus edodes Syringaldazine 5.0 - Bollag and 
Leonowicz 1984 
Monocillium indicum 0-dianisidine 3.0 0.025mM Thakker et al. 1992 
Pholiota mutabilis Syringaldazine 5.2 - Bollag and 
Leonowicz 1984 
Pleurotus osteatus Syringaldazine 6.5 - Sannia et al. 1986 
Pycnoporus 
cinnabarinus Guaiacol 4 - Eggert et al. 1996 
Rhizoctonia practicola 2,6 dimethoxyphenol 6.8 0.26 mM Bollag and 
Leonowicz 1984 
Sporotrichum 
pulverulentum Syringaldazine 5.0 - Bollag and 
Leonowicz 1984 
Trametes hirsutus Guaiacol 4 10.9 μM Shin and Lee 2000 
Trametes sanguinea Dimethyl 
phenelyenediamnine 5 - Nishizawa et al. 
1995 
Trametes versicolor Catechol 4.6 0.02 mM Mosbach 1963 
Trametes multicolor ABTS 3.5 14.1μM Leitner et al. 2002 
  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1705  Since wood and the other raw materials fo r pulping are biological in origin, and 
readily degraded in natural environment, biological lignin degradation, for use in the 
pulping process, provides new altern atives. Treating aspen chips with Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium  before kraft pulping (the most widely used chemical pulping method) 
improved the tensile strength, brightness, and yi eld. The effects of biological treatment of 
coarse mechanical pulp after primary defi bration reduced the energy required for 
secondary refining of the pulp. Pretreatment of wood chips with lig ninolytic fungi to 
decrease the energy requirement for conseque nt mechanical pulping and to increase the 
strength of the pulp produced has been th e most successful approach. For example, 
incubating aspen chips for four weeks with Phlebia brevispora  decreased the refining 
energy requirement by 47%. Pretreatment of hard wood with Phlebia tremellosa  
produced an 80% increase in the tensile strength. The first sustained effort towards this goal took place in the laboratory of Karl-E riksson at the Swedish Forest Products 
Laboratory. It was observed that the tensile strength, yield, a nd light scattering coefficiant 
of biomechanical pulps are similar to those of chemithermomechanical pulp (CTMP). Thus biomechanical pulps are likely to comp ete with CTMP for a share in the market 
(Reid 1991).  
Biobleaching by laccase  
Wood fibre has a multilayered structur e consisting primarily of cellulose, 
hemicellulose, and lignin. Lignin is an insoluble complex polymer of phenolic 
compounds. Up to 90% of th e lignin is solubilized a nd removed during the pulping 
process. The remaining lignin is a major cause of residual color in th e pulp and must be 
removed by oxidative degradation or bl eaching. The bleaching process requires 
application of harsh chemicals and conditions  that are energy intensive. Conventional 
methods of delignifying or decolorizing pape r pulp involve either chlorine or oxygen-
based chemical oxidants (e.g. ClO
2 and O 2) (Bajpai and Bajpai 1992). Although very 
effective, these methods have serious draw backs, such as disposal of chlorinated 
byproducts or loss of cellulose fibre streng th. Microbial or enzy matic delignification 
systems that overcome these drawbacks and can be easily adapted to current pulp production line are attractive alternatives. Fi lamentous fungi are ab le to efficiently 
degrade lignin by the action of several secreted  enzyme classes. Of these, laccases have 
attracted considerable interest for app lication in pulp bio-bl eaching. During lignin 
degradation, laccases are thought  to act on small phenolic ligni n fragments that then react 
with the lignin polymer, resulting in its degrad ation. Alternatively, artificial mediator 
compounds can be provided to accelerate the delignification process (Kerovuo et al. 
2008). Laccase could be applied as a bi obleaching agent (as an alternative to 
conventional chemical oxidants) to pulp. The residual lignin in pulp could be degraded by 
laccase, resulting in pulp decolorization. For example, Trametes versicolor  laccase, under 
the mediation of N-hydroxy compounds, delignified Kraft pulp effectively in pilot plant 
scale. 
Laccase in Waste Detoxificat ion and Decontamination  
Laccase has been used to oxidatively de toxify or remove various aromatic 
xenobiotics and pollutants found in industrial waste and contaminated soil or water. 
Laccase catalysis could result in direct de gradation or polymerization/ immobilization.  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1706  Reported examples of direct degradation by laccase include direct dechlorination, 
cleavage of aromatic rings, mineralizati on of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 
decolorization of pulp or cotton mill efflue nt, and bleaching of textile dyes. The 
processes include polymerization among polluta nts themselves or copolymerization with 
other nontoxic substances (such as humic materials). Polymerized pollutants often 
become insoluble or immobilized, thus fa cilitating easy removal by such means as 
adsorption, sedimentation, or filtration (Xu 1999). 
 Laccase in Decolorization of Dyes  
Approximately 10,000 different dyes and pi gments are produced annually world 
wide and used extensively in the dyeing and printing industries. The total world colorant 
production is estimated to be 800,000 tons per y ear, and at least 10 % of the used dyestuff 
enters the environment through wastes (Palmier i et al. 2005). Most of the dyes are very 
stable to light, temperature, and microbial  attack, making them recalcitrant. These 
industrial effluents are toxic and are char acterized by high chemical oxygen demands 
(COD)/ biological oxygen demand (BOD), su spended solids, and intense colour. 
Physical and chemical methods such as  adsorption, coagul ation-flocculation, 
oxidation, filtration, and electr ochemical methods may be used for colour removal from 
wastewater. These methods are quite expens ive and have operational problems. Hence 
there is a need to develop a practical biological method of dy e waste treatment that can be 
used for a wide range of wa stes (Kapdan et al. 2000).  
Bacterial anerobic reduction of  azo dyes (which comprise a large percentage of 
synthetic dyes) generates colo rless, deadend aromatic amines, which are generally more 
toxic than the parent compounds. Bacterial aerobic dye degr adation has been confined to 
chemostat-enriched cultures adapted to a single dye (Swamy and Ramsay 1999a). Since 
effluent contains a range of dyes, succe ssful decolorization of single dye does not 
indicate the suitability of an organism fo r a decolorization system. A biodecolorization 
system should sustain high activity upon rep eated exposure to various dyes. Ligninolytic 
fungi have been shown to possess a remarkable  potential for degrading various types of 
dyes.  
White rot fungi are the most efficient li gninolytic organisms capable of degrading 
various types of dyes such as azo, heterocy clic, reactive, and pol ymeric dyes (Novotny et 
al. 2004a). The decolorization of dyes by white rot fungi was first reported by Glenn and Gold (1983), who developed a method to  measure the lignino lytic activity of P. 
chrysosporium  based upon the decolorization of su lphonated polymeric dyes. White rot 
fungi offers significant advantages for decomposition of recalcitrant compounds. 
Ligninolytic enzymes produced by white ro t fungi are substrat e-nonspecific, and 
therefore they can degrade wide variety of  recalcitrant compounds. Because the enzymes 
are extracellular, the substrate diffusion limitation into the cell, generally observed in bacteria, is not encountered. These organisms do not require precondi tioning to particular 
pollutants, because enzyme secretion depends on nutrient limitation, nitrogen, or carbon 
rather than presence of pollutant. In add ition, extracellular enzymes enable white rot 
fungi to tolerate high concentration of pollu tants (Kapdan et al. 2000). This paved the 
way for a wealth of studies on the decolori zation of dyes under conditions in which white 
rot fungi produce lignin-modifying enzymes. Th e capability of white rot fungi to degrade  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1707  various dyes is due to extr acellular nonspecific and non-ster eoselective enzyme systems 
composed of laccases (EC 1.10.3.2), lignin peroxidases (EC 1.11.10.14), and manganese peroxidases (EC 1.11.1.13) (Heinzkill et al., 1998). Laccases catalyze the oxidation of 
both phenolic and nonphenolic compounds (Bour bonnais and Paice 1997) and thus can 
mineralize a wide range of synthetic dyes (Swamy and Ramsay 1999a). This nonspecific 
mechanism of laccase makes it a versatile bio catalyst suitable for several applications 
such as biopulping, biobleachi ng, and industrial wastewater  treatment. Due to the 
stringent environmental legislation, the text ile industry is seeking to develop effective 
wastewater remediation technologies. The development of processes based on laccase 
enzyme seems an attractive solution due to th e potential of these enzymes in degrading 
dyes of diverse chemical structure. Therefor e considering the importance of laccases in 
removal of dyes from industrial effluent s studies to find the optimal production 
conditions are currently required. 
Laccase in Degradation of Polyaromatic Hydrocarbon 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (P AHs) are organic compounds comprising 
benzene rings arranged linea rly, angularly, or in clus ters. These are ubiquitous 
environmental contaminants found in air, so il, and aquatic envir onments (Han et al. 
2004). Most aromatic hydrocarbons  are toxic to living organism s, and some of them and 
their metabolites are mutagenic and carcino genic to humans. PAHs are resistant to 
biodegradation and therefore tend to accumulate to substantial levels in the environment 
and have been detected in a wide range of soils and sedime nts. There have been many 
studies on the biodegradation of various aromatic hydroc arbons, but their low water 
solubility and subsequent low degradati on rates hamper the bioremediation of PAH-
polluted environments (Levin et al. 2003). Therefore, knowledge  of microorganisms 
having a high PAHs degrading cap ability is essential for effi cient remediation of PAHs 
contamination. To date, most  biodegradation studies have been focused on degrading 
bacteria. However, white rot fungi that can  degrade lignin and various recalcitrant 
aromatic compounds have several poten tial advantages over other degrading 
microorganisms. Compared to most degradi ng enzymes of bacteria which have narrow 
substrate specificity, the ligni nolytic enzymes of these fu ngi are very nonspecific and 
extracellular. Therefore, white  rot fungi can degrade various insoluble organic pollutants. 
The lignin degrading system is induced more in response to nutrient exhaustion than by 
the presence of pollutants. This allows th e fungi to degrade pollu tants to essentially 
nondetectable levels. Under such conditions, white rot fungi produce certain extracellular enzymes lignin peroxidases, manganese per oxidases, and laccases. These ligninolytic 
enzymes of white rot fungi oxidize PAHs to corresponding PAH quinones and subsequently degrade the material further to CO
2. Laccase of T. versicolor  oxidizes most 
of the 16 PAHs listed by the US EPA as priority pollutant chemicals. Benzo[ α]pyrene 
and perylene are partially converted to polymeric products. Small amounts of quinones 
and ketones are the main oxidation products from anthracene, benzo[ α]pyrene, and 
fluorene. Laccase in combination with 1- hydroxybenzotriazole oxidizes acenaphthene 
and acenaphthylene to 1,2-acenaphthenedione an d 1,8-naphthalic acid. Purified Lac from 
Trametes versicolor  has been shown to oxidize a range of 3-5 ring PAH in the presence  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1708  of the chemical mediators HBT and ABTS (Collins et al. 1996; Johannes et al. 1996; 
Majcherczyk et al. 1998).  
 
Laccase in the Textile Industry 
Textile dye transformation by laccase 
Laccase has been reported to prevent back-s taining of dyed or printed textiles. As 
part of the washing solution, laccase could quickly bleach released dyestuff, thus 
resulting in the reduction of  processing time, energy, and water needed to achieve 
satisfactory quality of the textile. Laccase- catalyzed textile dye bleaching may also be 
useful in finishing dyed cotton fabric. Another interesting lac case application in this field 
is oxidative transformation and consequent co upling of dye precursors to the collagen 
matrix in hides. Under laccase catalysis, soluble dye precursors could be adsorbed, oxidized, and polymerized to give the desire d tanning effect. The process could improve 
dyeing efficiency, reduce cost (by using in expensive precursors), or provide improved 
hide characteristics (Xu 1999). 
 
Laccase for denim processing 
Replacing conventional chemical oxidants  (e.g., hypochlorite), a laccase-based 
system has been shown capable of bleaching indigo dye in denim and achieving various 
bleached appearances on the fabric. By themselves, laccases cannot decolorize indigo on denim. However, when combined with an appropriate medi ator compound, rapid 
decolorization takes place. The oxidation re action catalysed by this oxidoreductase 
enzyme involves transfer of electrons from a d onor to an acceptor subs trate. In this case, 
electrons are transferred from  indigo to oxygen, via the enzy me and mediator compound. 
The mediator is a low molecular weight or ganic compound to which the insoluble indigo 
molecule is accessible. The conjugated doubl e bond between the two carbonyl groups in 
indigo is cleaved, and the dye chromophore is destr oyed. The end result  is oxidation of 
indigo to isatin, and further to  anthranilic acid, along with the concomitant reduction of 
oxygen to water. The combined laccase mediator system specifically decolorizes indigo in denim processing applications. Sulfur-bla ck dye (sulfur-bottom denims) and natural 
off white colors of the fill yarns are not oxi dized. The resulting finish is an authentic 
washdown of the denim with a characteristic  gray cast. The laccase mediator reaction 
stops by itself, when the active mediator is depleted by the reaction. Thus, the extent of 
decolorization can easily be targeted and obtained repeatedly by choosing the correct 
dosage and time. In the case of high wash dow n finishes, the risk of  overtreatment with 
enzymatic decolorization is low compared  to hypochlorite bleaching. The benefits 
provided by laccase processing include minima l strength loss, reduced time, reproducible 
performance (i.e. easy process control), reduced water consum ption and a safe alternative 
to hypochlorite and bleaching techno logies (Mueller and Shi 2001). 
The first commercial product was introdu ced in 1996 as a liquid slurry. The 
product exhibited good performance, but handling characteristics were not ideal. A fully 
formulated solid laccase has been commercia lly available for the denim market since 
1999. The newest commercial product contains a laccase enzyme, mediator, buffer, and 
granulate components. Today, customized form ulations of laccase are routinely used to 
target specific garment wet proce ss conditions (Mueller and Shi 2001).  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1709  Medical and Personal Care Applications of Laccase 
Poison ivy dermatitis (resulting from skin contact with poison ivy, poison oak, or 
poison sumac) is caused mainly by urushi ol, which is a catechol-derivative toxin. 
Oxidized urushiol (an o-quinone derivative) , however, is nontoxic. Laccase has been 
shown to oxidize, polymerize, and detoxify ur ushiol, thus reducing the effect of poison 
ivy dermatitis. 
Another potential application of  laccase in the field is laccase-based generation of 
iodine insitu. Laccase can oxidi ze iodide to produce iodine, a reagent widely used as a 
disinfectant. The application of  laccase-iodide salt binary i odine generating system (for 
sterilization) may have severa l advantages over the direct io dine application. First, the 
iodide salt is more stable and much safer than I 2 in terms of storage, transport, and 
handling. Second, the release of iodine from a laccase-iodide system  could be easily 
controlled (by means such as adjusting laccas e concentration). The system may be used 
in various industrial, medical, domestic, and personal care applications, such as 
sterilization of drinking wa ter and swimming pools, as well as disinfections of minor 
wounds.  Current hair dyeing or waving processe s often involve oxid ative or additive 
chemicals that have unpleasant odours, are irr itant (or even harmful) to tissues, or are 
difficult to handle. A laccase-based system  may overcome these drawbacks by replacing 
harsh chemicals and operating at milder c onditions (in terms of pH and solvents). 
Laccase catalyzed oxidation, transformation, and cr oss-linking of various precursors have 
been reported to result in satisfactory hair dyeing or waving. In addition to providing an easier to handle hair care procedure, a la ccase-based system may also improve or 
complement the cosmetic effect achieved by conventional chemical methods (Xu. 1999; 
Kainz et al. 2003). 
Many body, domestic, and industrial odour s are caused by sulfides, thiols, 
ammonia, amines, short chain fatty acids, or other volatile or ganic compounds. Being 
able to oxidize vari ous thiols and other sulphur cont aining compounds, laccases have 
been studied for deodourant a pplication. Rather than just  masking the malodor with 
fragrances as conventional deodorants do, a laccase system would degrade the offensive molecules or even kill the microbes that generate them (Schmi d and Urlacher 2007). 
Laccases are also used as catalysts fo r the manufacture of anticancer drugs and 
even as ingredients in cosmetics (Kunamneni et al. 2008)  
 
Laccase in the Food Industry 
Bioremediation of food industry waste water 
Laccase is a well known enzyme studied in bioremediation because of its ability 
to degrade phenolic compounds (Gianfreda et al. 1999). Aromatic compounds, including 
phenols, aromatic amines, constitute one of  the major classes of pollutants and are 
heavily regulated in many countries (Karam  and Nicell 1997). The presence of these 
compounds in drinking and irriga tion water or in cultivated land represents a significant 
health hazard. Laccase immobili zed on organogel supports remove naturally occurring 
and xenobiotic aromatic compounds from aqueous suspensions (Crecchio et al. 1995). Laccase immobilized by adsorption on polyethersulphone showed chemical and physical  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1710  properties potentially useful for decreasing ph enol concentration in a model wastewater 
solution (Lante et al. 2000).  Beer factory waste water : Some fraction of beer factor y waste water represents an 
important environmental concern due to their high content of  polyphenols and dark 
brown colour. Coriolopsis gallica , a white rot fungus producer of laccase, was able to 
degrade this high tannin containing wastew ater. Pyrolysis /gas chromatography/mass 
spectrometry results showed a decrease in polyphenols pyrolysis products, mainly phenol 
and guaiacol, with the incuba tion time (Yague et al. 2000). 
 Distillery waste water : Distillery waste water is generated during ethanol 
production from fermentation of  sugarcane molasses called vinasses. It produces an 
ecological impact due to high content of so luble organic matter and its intense dark 
brown colour. A laccase- producing white rot fungus Trametes sp ., was tested for 
bioremediation. Maximum effluent decolo rization of 73.3% and chemical oxygen 
demand reduction of 61.7% was achieved af ter 7 days of fungal treatment to 20% 
v/v of 
distillery wastes in culture medium. Under these conditions, a 35-fold increas e in laccase 
production by this fungus was observed (Gonzalez et al. 2000).  Olive mill wastewaters (OMW): OMW are a characteristic by product of olive oil 
production and a major environmental problem in the Mediterranean area. Greco et al. 
(1999), compared the utilization of a polypheno loxidase naturally immobilized in olive 
husk and purified laccase from Trametes versicolor  in the bioremediation of OMW. Both 
enzymatic systems showed relevant activity towards phenol polymerization. Treatment of 
OMW effluent with purified laccase from Pleurotus ostreatus  significantly decreased the 
phenolic content (up to 90%) bu t no reduction of its  toxicity was obser ved (Maritirani et 
al. 1996).  
 
Beverages  Wine stabilization : Wine stabilization is one of the main applications of laccase in 
the food industry. Musts and wines are comp lex mixtures of different chemical 
compounds such as ethanol, organic acids, salts, and phenolic compounds. Alcohol and 
organic acids are responsible for the wine arom a, while the color and the taste depend on 
the phenolic compounds present. The sensoria l properties of fresh wines should remain 
constant until consumption; that is, they shoul d be sufficiently stable at least during the 
first year of storage. Due to a complex se quence of events, where the polyphenols play an 
important role, oxidative reactions in mu sts and wines catalyzed by iron, copper, and 
enzymes which involve aldehydes, amino aci ds, and proteins, cause turbidity, color 
intensification, and aroma and flavor alte rations. This oxidation phenomenon is called 
madeirization.  
Different methods have been used in order to prevent the decolorization and 
flavor alteration in wines, such as  the removal of phe nolic groups with 
polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), and the use of su lfur dioxide to block oxidizers, among 
others. An alternative for the physical and chemical adsorbents could be the use of 
enzymes that selectively target specific polyphenols during the ma deirization process. 
These polyphenolic substances would be oxidized by the enzy mes, polymerized, and then 
removed by clarification. One enzyme studied fo r this purpose is laccase (Minussi et al. 
2002). Laccase presents some important requirements when used for the treatment of  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1711  polyphenol elimination in wines, such as  optimum pH around 2.5-4.0, stability in acid 
medium, and reversible inhibition with sulphite . Polyphenol content, color, haze stability, 
and sensorial quality of Riesling wines prepar ed with and without oxidation of the must, 
or with must oxidation and laccase treatment was compared. The results showed that wines made by laccase treatment were the best , suggesting that a st able and high quality 
wine can be made with little or no added SO
2. 
 
Fruit juice processing 
It is well known that browning, both enzymatic and chemical, is one of the major 
faults in beverages. Various pre and post tr eatments are available to avoid post turbidity 
and discoloration of fruit juices. Stabilizat ion of beverages by gelatin, bentonite, silica 
gel, etc., is a wide-spread conventiona l treatment (Gokmen et al. 1998). Various 
enzymatic treatments have been proposed fo r fruit juice stabilization, and laccase is one 
among them (Piacquadio et al. 1997). The results reported on laccase apple juice 
treatments are contradictory. Gokmen et al. (1998) reported that laccase treatment 
increased the susceptibility of browning duri ng storage. Golden Delicious apple juice was 
treated with conventional method (SO 2 added as meta bisulfite, PVPP, bentonite) and 
laccase free or immobilized on metal chelate regenerable carrier. The enzymatically treated apple juice was less stable than the conventionally trea ted juice. However 
application of laccase in conjunction with cross flow filtration (ultrafiltration) in 
continuous process without the addition of fini ng agents led to a stable and clear apple 
juice. Stutz (1993) proved th at it is possible to produ ce clear and st able juices/ 
concentrates with a light colour by means of ultrafiltration and laccase  with out any large 
additional investment. Treatment with laccas e acting at a compatible pH followed by 
“active” filtration or ultrafiltration improved co lor and flavour stability as compared to 
conventional treatments by addition of  ascorbic acid and sulfites. 
 
Baking  
In the bread making process it is a practice to add bread and/or dough 
improvement additives to the bread dough, th e action of which results in improved 
texture, volume, flavour, and freshness of the bread, as well as improved machinability of the dough. Enzymes (amylases, proteases, cellulase s, etc.) have been used as dough and/ 
or bread improving agents. Si (1994) suggested that when laccase is added to dough used for producing baked products, it may exert an  oxidizing effect on the dough constituents 
and thereby serve to improve the strength of  gluten structures in dough and/or baked 
products. The use of laccase resu lts in an increased volume, an improved crumb structure, 
and softness of the baked product, as well as increased strength, stability and reduced 
stickiness, thereby improving the machinability of  the dough. The effect on the dough has 
been found to be particularly good when poor quality flour has been used.   
Biosensor and Diagnostic Applications of Laccase 
Detection of phenol, aniline, oxygen, and other substances 
Laccase catalysis (coupled with various physic al instruments) could be useful as 
biosensors for detecting O
2 and a wide variety of reducing substrates (especially phenols 
and anilines). Two types of laccase based O 2 sensor are widely used. One type monitors  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1712  visible spectral changes (at 600 nm) of laccase, resulting from  the reoxidation of the type 
1 copper (I) in laccase by O 2. Another type monitors curr ent or voltage changes from a 
modified oxygen electrode on which O 2 reduction is enhanced unde r the electrocatalysis 
of immobilized laccase. 
For detecting phenols, anilines, or other reducing substrates, three types of laccase 
based sensors have been reported. The first type detects the photom etric change resulted 
from the oxidation of a chromogenic susb trate, the second t ype monitors the O 2 
concentration change that is coupled to the substrate oxidation, and the third type uses an 
electrode that replaces O 2 as the acceptor for the electr ons flown from the substrate 
(through laccase). For thes e applications laccase is either  immobilized or free in solution, 
and the coupled physical converter is either optical, amperometric, or piezo effect in 
nature (Xu, 1999). 
Laccase assisted enzymatic and immunochemical assays 
Studies suggest that laccase can be used  as a new enzymatic label for enzyme 
immunoassay (Slorobogat’ko et al. 1994). Laccas e catalysis can be used to assay other 
enzymes. In these assays, either the enzyme  of interest catalyzes the production of a 
compound whose subsequent oxidation by laccase  generates detectable physical change, 
or a product from a laccase catalysis (whose production is accompanied by a detectable 
physical change) is quenched by the activity of the enzyme of  interest. The strategy has 
been applied to assay various hydrolases, transferases, and oxidoreductase (Schmid and 
Urlacher 2007).  
Laccase covalently conjugated to biobinding molecules (antibody, antigen, DNA, 
RNA, biotin, and streptavidin) can be used  as a marker enzyme for immunochemical 
histochemical, cytochemical, or nucleic acid detection assay. In th ese assays, the binding 
moiety binds to the target, and the laccase’ s reaction signals the binding event (Schmid 
and Urlacher 2007). 
 
 CONCLUSIONS  
Laccases are ubiquitious in nature, being produced by wide variety of plants, 
fungi, and also bacteria. The functions of enzyme differ from organism to organism. 
Laccase plays an important role in the carbon cycle and could help in degrading a wide 
range of xenoaromatics. Laccases have become important, industrially relevant enzymes that can be used for a number of divers e applications such delignification of 
lignocellulosics, bioremed iation applications such as wast e detoxification, and textile dye 
transformation, food technologic uses, person al and medical care applications, and 
biosensor and analytical applications. Therefore,  it is not surprising that this enzyme has 
been studied intensively and yet remain s a topic of intense research today. 
 
  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1713  REFERENCES CITED 
 
Archibald, F. S., Bourbonnais, R., Jurasek, L. , Paice, M. G., and Reid, I. D. (1997). 
“Kraft pulp bleaching and delignification by Trametes versicolor ,” Journal of 
Biotechnology  53, 215-336. 
Assavanig, A., Amornkitticharoe n, B., Ekpaisal, N., Meevootis om, V., and Flegel, T. W. 
(1992). “Isolation, characterization and function of laccase from Trichoderma ,” 
Applied Microbiology  Biotechnology  38, 198-202. 
Bajpai, P., and Bajpai, P. K. ( 1992). “Biobleaching of kraft pulp,” Process Biochemistry  
27, 319-325. 
Benfield, G., Bocks, S. M., Bromley, K., and Brown, B. R. (1964). “Studies in fungal and 
plant laccases,” Phytochemistry   3, 79-88. 
Bollag, J. M., and Leonowicz, A. (1984). “Com parative studies of extracellular fungal 
laccases,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology  48(4), 849-854. 
Bollag, J. M., and Leonowicz, A. (1984). “Com parative studies of extracellular fungal 
laccases,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology  48(4), 849-854. 
Bourbonnais, R., Paice, M. G., Reid, I. D., Lanthier, P., and Yaguchi, M. (1995). “Lignin 
oxidation by laccase isozymes from Trametes versicolor and role of the mediator 
2’,2’- azinobis (3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-su lphonate) in kraft pulp depolymerisation,” 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology  61(5), 1876-1880. 
Brown, K. M., Brown, S. H., and Xu, F. (1999). “Characterization of a Coprineus 
cinereus  laccase,” Enzyme and Microbial Tech.  25, 502-508. 
Chefetz, B., Chen, Y., and Hadar, Y. (1998). “Purification and charact erization of laccase 
from Chaemotomium thermophilum  and its role in humification,” Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology  64(9), 3175-3179. 
Coll, P. M., Tabernero, C., Santamaria, R., and Perez, P. (1993). “Characterization and 
structural analysis of the laccase I ge ne from the newly isolated ligninolytic 
basidiomycete PM1 (CECT 2971),”  Appl. Environ. Microbiol  59, 4129-4135.   
Collins, P. J., Kotterman, M. J. J., Field, J.  A., and Dobson, A. D. W. (1996). “Oxidation 
of anthracene and benzo[ α] pyrene by laccases from Trametes versicolor ,” Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology  62(12), 4563-4567. 
Cooper, P. (1995). “Removing colour from dye house waste water,”  Asian Textile 
Journal  3, 52-56. 
Crecchio, C., Ruggiero, P., and Pizzigallo, M. D. R. (1995). “Polyphenoloxidases 
immobilized in organic gels: Properties a nd applications in th e detoxification of 
aromatic compounds,” Biotechnology and Bioengineering  48, 585-591 
D’Souza, T. M., Merritt, C. S., and Reddy, C.  A. (1999). “Lignin modifying enzymes of 
the white rot basidiomycete Ganoderma lucidum ,” Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  65(12), 
5307-5313. 
Diamantidis, G., Effosse, A., Potier, P., and Bally, R. (2000). “Purification and 
characterization of the first bacteria l laccase in rhizospheric bacteria,” Azospirillum 
lipoferum , Soil Biology and Biochemistry  32, 919-927. 
Eggert, C., Temp, U., and Eriksson, K. L. ( 1996). “The ligninolytic system of the white 
rot fungus Pycnoporus cinnabarinus : Purification and characterization of the 
laccase,” Applied and Environm ental Microbiology  62(4),  1151-1158.  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1714  Farnet, A. M., Criquet, S., Tagger, S., Gil, G., and Le Petit, J. (2000). “Purification, 
partial characterization, and r eactivity with aromatic com pounds of two laccases from 
Marasmius quercophillus strain 17,” Can. J. Microbiol .  46, 189-194.  
Filazzola, M. T., Sannino, F., Rao, M. A., a nd Giangreda, L. (1999). “Bioremediation and 
biodegradation: Effect of various polluta nts and soil- like constituents on laccase 
from Cerrena unicolor ,” Journal of Environmental Quality  28, 1929-1938. 
Froehner, S. C., and Eriksson, K. E. (1974). “Purification and properties of Neurospora 
crassa  laccase,” J. Bacteriol . 120, 458-465.  
Fukushima, Y., and Kirk, T. (1995). “Laccase component of the Ceriporiopsis 
subvermispora  lignin degrading system,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology   
61(3), 872-876.  
Galhaup, C., and Haltrich, D. (2001). “Enha nced formation of laccase activity by the 
white-rot fungus Trametes pubescens  in the presence of copper,” Applied 
Microbiology Biotechnology  56, 225-232. 
Galhaup, C., Goller, S., Peterbauer, C. K ., Strauss, J., and Haltrich, D. (2002a). 
“Characterization of the major laccase isoenzyme from Trametes pubescens  and 
regulation of its synthesis by metal ions,” Microbiology  148, 2159-2169. 
Garzillo, A. M. V., Colao, M. C., Carsuo, C ., Caporale, C., Celletti, D., and Buonocore, 
V. (1998). “Laccase from the white rot fungus Trametes trogii ,” Applied 
Microbiology Biotechnology  49, 545-551. 
Germann, U. A., Muller, G., Hunziker, P. E ., and Lerch, K. (1988). “Characterization of 
two allelic forms of Neurospora crassa laccase,” The Journal of Biological Chemistry  
263(2), 885-896. 
Gianfreda, L., Xu, F., and Bollag, J. M. (1999). “Laccases: A useful group of 
oxidoreductive enzymes,” Bioremediation Journal  3, 1-25. 
Glenn, J.K., and Gold, M.H. (1983). “Decolori zation of several po lymeric dyes by the 
lignin degrading basidiomycete Phanerochaete chrysosporium, ” Applied 
Environmental Microbiology, 45, 1741-1747. 
Gokmen, V., Borneman, Z., and Nijhuis, H. H.  (1998). “Improved ultrafiltration for color 
reduction and stabilization of apple juice,” Journal of Food Science  63, 504-507. 
Gonzalez, T., Terron, M. C., Yague, S., Zapico , E., Galletti, G. C., and Gonzalez, A. E. 
(2000). “Pyrolysis/gas chromatography/ mass spectrometry monitoring of fungal 
biotreated distillery waste water using Trametes sp  I-62 (CECT 20197),” Rapid 
Communication in Mass spectrometry  4, 1417-1424. 
Greco, G., Toscano, G., Cioffi, M., Gi anfreda, L., and Sannino, F. (1999). 
“Dephenolisation of olive mill waste waters by olive husk,” Water Research  33, 
3046-3050.  
Han, M. J., Choi, H. T., and Song, H. G.  (2004). “Degradation of phenanthrene by 
Trametes versicolor  and its laccase,” The Journal of Microbiology  42(2), 94-98.  
Heinzkill, M., Bech, L., Halkier, T., Schneider, P., and Anke, T. (1998). 
“Characterization of laccases  and peroxidases from wood rotting fungi (Family   
Coprinacea e),” Applied and Environmental Microbiology  64(5),  1601-1606. 
Johannes, C., Majcherczyk, A., and Hutterma nn, A. (1996). “Degradation of anthracene 
by laccase of Trametes versicolor  in the presence of diff erent mediator compounds,” 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  46, 313-317.  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1715  Jolivalt, C., Raynal, A., Caminade, E., Kokel,  B., Le Goffic, F., and Mougin, C. (1999). 
“Transformation of N’,N’-dimethyl-N-(hydroxyphenyl)ureas by laccase from the white rot fungus Trametes versicolor ,” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 51, 
676-681. 
Kainz, S., Gabler, M., Stehr, R., Naumann, F., and Gabler, J. (2003). International Patent  
WO2003053375A. 
Kapdan, I. K., Kargi, F., McMullan, G., and Marchant, R. (2000). “Effect of 
environmental conditions on biological decolorization of textile dyestuff by C. 
versicolor ,” Enzyme and Microbial Tech . 26, 381-387. 
Kerovuo, J. S., Haremza, S., Koch, O., Habich er, T., Robertson, D., Desantis, G., McCan, 
R., and Luginbuhl, P. (2008). “Laccases for pulp biobleaching,” International Patent 
(WO/2008/027501).  
Ko, E. M., Leem, Y. E., and Choi, H. T. (2001). “Purification a nd characterization of 
laccase isozymes from the white-rot basidiomycete Ganoderma lucidum ,” Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol.  57, 98-102. 
Ko, E. M., Leem, Y. E., and Choi, H. T. (2001). “Purification a nd characterization of 
laccase isozymes from the white-rot basidiomycete Ganoderma lucidum ,” Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol  57, 98-102. 
Koroljova-Skorobogat’ko, O. V., Stepanova, E. V., Gavrilova, V. P., Morozova, O. V., 
Lubimova, N. V., Dzchafarova, A. N., Jaropolov, A. I., and Makower, A. (1998). 
“Purification and characterization of th e constitutive form of laccase from the 
basidiomycete Coriolus hirsutus  and effect of inducer s on laccase synthesis,” 
Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem  28, 47-54. 
Kunamneni, A., Plou Fransico, J., Ballesteros , A., and Alcalde, M. (2008). “Laccases and 
their applications: A patent review,” Recent Patents on Biotechnology  2(1), 10-24. 
Lante, A., Crapisi, A., Krastanov, A., and Sp ettoli, P. (2000). “Biode gradation of phenols 
by laccase immobilized in a membrane reactor,” Process Biochemistry  36, 51-58. 
Leitner, C., Hess, J., Galhaup, C., Ludwig, R ., Nidetzky, B., Kulbe, K.D., and Haltrich, 
D. (2002). “Purification and characteriza tion of laccase from the white-rot fungus 
Trametes multicolor ,” Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol . 98-100, 497-507. 
Leontievsky, A., Myasoedova, N., Pozdnya kova, N., and Golovleva, L. (1997). 
“‘Yellow’ laccase of Panus tigrinus  oxidises non-phenolic substrates without 
electron-transfer mediators,” FEBS Letters  413, 446-448. 
Leontievsky, A. A., Myasoedova, N. M., Basku nov, B. P., Golovleva, L. A., Bucke, C., 
and Evans, C. S. (2001). “Transform ation of 2,4,6-trichlorophenol by free and 
immobilized fungal laccase,” Applied Microbiology  Biotechnology 57, 85-91. 
Levine, W. G. (1965). “Laccase, A review,” In: The Biochemistry of Copper , Academic 
Press Inc., New York, pp. 371-385. 
Lubimova, N. V., Dzchafarova, A. N., Ja ropolov, A. I., and Makower, A. (1998). 
“Purification and characterization of th e constitutive form of laccase from the 
basidiomycete Coriolus hirsutus  and effect of inducer s on laccase synthesis,” 
Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem . 28, 47-54. 
Mai, C., Schormann, W., Milstein, O., and Hu ttermann, A. (2000). “Enhanced stability of 
laccase in presence of phenolic compounds,” Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol . 54, 510-
514.  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1716  Majcherczyk, A., Johannes, C ., and Huttermann, A. (1998) . “Oxidation of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) by laccase of Trametes versicolor ,” Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology  22, 335-341. 
Martirani, L., Giardina, P., Marzulla, L., and Sannia, G. (1996). “Reduction of phenol 
content and toxicity in olive mill wast e waters with the ligninolytic fungus,” Water 
Research  30, 1914-1918. 
Mayer, A. M. (1987). “Polyphenoloxida ses in plants: Re cent progress,” Phytochemistry  
26, 11-20. 
Minussi, R. C., Pastore, G. M., and Duran, N.  (2002). “Potential applications of laccase 
in the food industry,” Trends in Food Science and Technology  3, 205-216. 
Mosbach, R. (1963). “Purification a nd some properties of laccase from Polyporus 
versicolor ,” Biochimica  Biophysica Acta  73, 204-212.  
Mueller, M., and Shi, C. (2001). “Laccase for denim processing,” AATCC Review  2001, 
4-5. 
Nishizawa, Y., Nakabayshi, K., and Sh inagawa, E. (1995). “Purification and 
characterization of laccase  from white rot fungus Trametes sanguinea M85-2,” J. 
Fermentation and Bioengineering  80(1),  91-93. 
Novotny, C., Erbanova, P., Cajthaml, T., Roth schild, N., Dosoretz, C., and Sasek, V. 
(2000a). “ Irpex lacteus , a white rot fungus applicable to water and soil 
bioremediation,” Appl. Microbiol. and Biotech .  54, 850-853. 
Palmieri, G., Cennamo, G., and Sannia, G. (2005). “Remazol Brilliant Blue R 
decolourisation by the fungus Pleurotus ostreatus  and its oxidative enzymatic 
system,” Enzyme and Microbial Tech . 36, 17-24. 
Palmieri, G., Giardina, P., Bianco, C., Scal oni, A., Capasso, A., and Sannia, G. (1997). 
“A novel white laccase from Pleurotus ostreatus ,” The Journal of Biological 
Chemistr y 272(50), 31301-31307. 
Piacquadio, P., De Stefano, G., Sammartino, M., and Sciancalepore, V. (1997). “Phenols 
removal from apple juice by laccase immobilized on Cu+2 chelate regenerable 
carrier,” Biotechnology Techniques  11, 515- 517. 
Pickard, M. A., Roman, R., Tinoco, R., a nd Vasquez-Duhalt, R. (1999). “Polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbon metabolism by wh ite rot fungi and oxidation by Coriolopsis 
gallica  UAMH 8260 laccase,” Appl. Environ. Microbiol  65, 3805-3809. 
Reid, I. D. (1991). “Biological pulping in paper manufacture,” TIBTECH  9, 262-265. 
Robles, A., Lucas, R., Magdalena, M. C., Omar , N. B., Perez, R., and Galvez, A. (2002). 
“Characterization of laccase activity produced by hyphomycete Chalara (syn. 
Thielaviopsis ) paradoxa  CH32,” Enzyme and Microbial Technology 31, 516-522. 
Rogalski, J., and Leonowicz,. “L accase,” In Pandey, A. (ed.), Concise Encyclopedia of 
Bioresource Technology , Food Products Press, Hawort h Reference Press, NewYork, 
pp. 533- 542. 
Rogalski, J., Wojtas-Wasilewaka, M., Apalov it, R., and Leonowicz, A. (1991). “Affinity 
chromatography as a rapid and convenient me thod for purification of fungal laccase,” 
Biotech and Bioengg .  37, 770-777. 
Sanchez-Amat, A., and Solano, F. (1997). “A  pluripotent polyphenol oxidase from the 
melanogenic marine Alteromonas sp.  shares catalytic capabilities of tyrosinases and 
laccases,” Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 240, 787-792.  
PEER-REVIEWED REVIEW ARTICLE                   bioresources. com  
 
 
Madhavi and Lele (2009). “Laccase properties, use,”  BioResources  4(4), 1694-1717.  1717  Sannia, G., Giardina, P., Luna , M., Rossi, M., and Buonocore,  V. (1986). “Laccase from 
Pleurotus ostreatus ,” Biotech. Letters  8(11), 797-800. 
Schneider, P., Caspersen, M. B., Mondorf, K., Halkier, T., Skov, L. K ., Ostergaard, P. R., 
Brown, K. M., Brown, S. H., and Xu, F. (1999). “Characterization of a Coprineus 
cinereus  laccase,” Enzyme and Microbial Tech.  25, 502-508. 
Shin, K. S., and Lee, Y. J. (2000). “Purifica tion and characterization of a new member of 
the laccase family from th e white-rot basidiomycete Coriolus hirsutus ,” Archives of 
Bichemistry and Biophysics  384(1), 109-115. 
Si, J. Q. (1994). “Use of laccase in baking,” PCT Int. Appl.WO 9428728 A1. Skorobogat’ko, O. V., Gindilis, A.  L., Troitskaya, E. N., Shuster, A. M., and Yaropolov, 
A. I. (1994). “Laccase as new enzymatic label for enzyme immunoassay,” Analyical 
Letters  27(15), 2997-3012.  
Slomczynski, D., Nakas, J. P., and Ta nenbaum, S. W. (1995). “Production and 
characterization of laccase from Botrytis cinera  61-34,” Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology  61(3),  907-912. 
Stephen, J. A. (1995). “Electrooxidati on of dyestuffs in waste waters,” Journal of 
Chemical Tech. and Biotech . 62, 111-117.  
Stutz, C. (1993). “The use of  enzymes in ultrafiltration,” Fruit Processing  3, 248-252. 
Swamy, J., and Ramsay, J. A. (1999a). “The  evaluation of white rot fungi in the 
decoloration of textile dyes,” Enzyme and Microbial Tech . 24, 130-137. 
Thakker, G. D., Evans, C. S., and Rao, K. K.  (1992). “Purification a nd characterization of 
laccase from Monocillium indicum ,” Appl. Microbial. Biotechnol  37, 321-323. 
Thurston, C. F. (1994). “The structure and function of fungal laccases,” Microbiology  
140, 19-26. 
Walker, J. W. R., and McCall ion, R. F. (1980). “The selective inhibition of ortho and 
paradiphenol oxidases,” Phytochemistry  19, 373-373. 
Wood, D. A. (1980). “Production,  purification and properties  of extracellular laccase 
during fruiting of Agaricus bisporus ,” J. Gen. Microbiol  117, 339-345. 
Xu, F. (1999). “Laccase,” In Flickinger , M. C. and Drew, S. W. (eds.), Encyclopedia of 
Bioprocess Technology: Fermentati on, Biocatalysis, Bioseparation , John Wiley & 
Sons Inc., New York, pp. 1545-1554. 
Yague, S., Terron, M. C., Gonzalez, T., Zapic o, E., Bocchini, P., Galetti, G. C., and  
Gonzalez, A. E. (2000). “Biotreatment of ta nnin rich beer factory waste water with 
white rot basidiomycete Coriolopsis gallica  monitored by pyrolysis/gas 
chromatography/ mass spectrometry,” Rapid Communication in Mass Spectrometry
 
14, 905-910. 
 Article received: May 21, 2009;  Peer review completed: July 8, 2009; Revised version 
received and accepted: August 3, 2009; Published (without page numbers): August 7, 2009. 
 
 
  