 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 UNIVERSIDADE DO MINHO 
ESCOLA D E CIÊNCIA S 
ESCOLA D E ENGENHARIA 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Degradation of dyes with microorganisms 
Studies with ascomycete yeasts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Patrícia Alexandra d a Costa Fe rreira Ram alho 
Braga, 2005  
 Patrícia Alexandra d a Costa Fe rreira Ram alho 
 
Braga, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Degradation of dyes with microorganisms 
Studies with ascomycete yeasts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thesis presented to University of Minho to obtain 
 the PhD d egree in S ciences 
 
Dissertação apresen tada para ob tenção do grau de Doutor 
 em Ciênci as pela Universidade do Minho 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SUPERVISOR 
 
Prof. Doutora Maria He lena Roberto Car doso 
Biology Department, University of Minho 
 
 
 
CO-SUPERVISOR 
 
Prof. Doutor Artur Cavaco-Pau lo 
Textile Engineering Department, University of Minho 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
É autorizada a r eprodução des ta tese 
 
Patrícia Alexandra d a Costa Fe rreira Ram alho 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ACKNOWLEDGEMEN TS 
 
 More than a personal enrich ment exper iment as a pr ofessional this work brought along a 
big enrichm ent as a person with lots  of new fri ends that I  will never for get. For all  that 
contribute to this period of  my life my deepest gratitude. 
To Profª  Doutora Maria Helena Card oso I would like to demonstrate my deepest  
gratitude for all the suppor t, advices, confidence and friendship in these last y ears.  
To Profº Do utor Artur Cavaco-Paulo for making this work possible and for all th e 
support alo ng the work. 
 To Doutora Teresa Ramalho, m other, friend a nd an excellent rese archer who believed in 
me and without whom  I would never have done this work. 
 To Profª Doutora Margarida Casal for a ll the support, help and friendship a long the 
work. 
 To all m y friends in the Biology Department, especi ally to m y lab mate s, Sandra, Isabel  
João, Sónia, Susana, Raquel, Björn, Gabriela, Rui,  Clara, Júlia, Cecília, Rita. You m ade the l ong 
days in the la b a constant fun. A special thanks to Sandra and Björn for all the help in the work 
and for  believ ing in this project. To L uís, Sofia and  Né for all the  friendship,  you are special. To  
Fátima who while in the Biology  Depart ment alwa ys showed interest and availability to help.  
Also to the gang from  “Arrecadação” Paulo, C onde  and Manu f or all the fun and friendship. 
Especially  to Paulo for all the help with com puters. To all the others Herlander, Cátia, JP, 
Cristovão, Marina, Marisa, Joana, Andreia, S ónia, António , Luís, Hugo A., Hugo F., Martinha 
and all the others for all the friendship. To a ll the  technical st aff of the Biolo gy Depart ment, 
Magda, Am aro, Manela, Carlos, D. Rosa, D. Ana, Liliana e Pau la, for all the help. To all the 
Professors in the Biology Depart ment who were always available and interested in m y work. 
 For all the friendship and fun to Guim arães la b team : Carla Joana, Zille, Filipa, Carlos,  
Alexandre, Carla M., Teresa, Florentina, Tzanko, V eronika. You made me fell a part of  the 
group. 
 To m y best friend Maria José for all th e friendship, support an d patience. You are th e 
best friend anyone can hav e. To Carla, Tita, Olív ia and Raquel a big than ks fo r all the supp ort 
and friendshi p. To all m y other friends for alway s being there. 
 To Drª  Iva Tendais for all t he help and s upport . 
 Last but not least, to my family, specia lly my father, mother, sist er, Sérgio an d all th e 
others for the support and  for putti ng up with me for all this tim e. 
 
 
 
 
 iABSTRACT  
 
The capabilities of several y easts were explored for the degradation of textile a zo dyes.  
Through the initial work with Candida zeylanoides it has been possible to im prove the 
composition of the culture medium to achieve the decolourisation of several m odel azo dy es. 
Total decolo urisation times observed in culture  media supplem ented with 0. 2mM dy e ran ged 
from 40 to 60 h. The initial decolourisation rates were 14–52 µmol.(g dr y cell)−1.h−1, depending 
on dy e structure. In the course of decolourisa tion either metanilic or sulfanilic acids were 
detected in the supernata nt fluid, showing that decolourization by  this yeast strain wa s due to  
azo bond reduction. The azoreductase activit y of the y east cells was not significantly  affected by 
pre-adaptation of the m icroorganism  to the dy es. 
The exploration of the species Issatchenkia occident alis dem onstr ated that the extent of 
decolourisation of the d yes previousl y tested, in liq uid m edia co ntaining 0.2 mM dy e and  2% 
glucose, reached m ore th an 80% in a period of 15 h, essentially  under microaerophilic 
conditions. Under anoxic conditi ons, decolourisation did not occur, even in the presence of  pre-
grown cells. Kinetic assay s of azo reduction activities  with quasi -resting cells d emonstrated t he 
following: (i)  while the optim um pH depended on  dye structur e, the  optim um pH range was 
observed in the acidic range; (ii) the  maxim um decolorizing activity  occurred in the l ate 
exponential growth phase; and (iii) the  temperature profile approaches the ty pical bell-shaped 
curve. These  results  indirectly  suggested the invol vement of an enzy me activit y in azo dy e 
reduction. T he decolourising activity of I. occidentalis was still observed when the cel ls 
switched to aerobic respiration at the  expense of ethanol, after gluc ose exhaustion in the culture 
mediu m, but cea sed whe n all the ethanol  was co nsumed, connecting the d ye reductio n to 
growth.  
The efficienc ies of I. occid entalis  in the decolourisation of  several azo dy es mea sured a s 
the tim e required for colour loss ≥98% was shown to be linearly  related to the reduction peak 
potential of t he dyes. This  contributi on is a part of a paper which also exam ined the oxi dative 
decolourisations b y Trame tes villosa  laccase. 
It was de monstrated that in Sacchar omyce s cer evisiae  the fe rric reductas e system 
participates in the extracellular reduction of azo dyes. The S. cerevi siae mutant st rains ∆fre1 and 
∆fre1∆fre2, but not ∆fre2, showed a m uch reduced decolourisi ng capabilit y, suggesting that, 
under the  conditions tested, Fre1p is a major component of  the azo reductase activit y. FRE1 
gene co mplemented the p henotype of S. cere visiae  ∆fre1 cells recovering the abilit y to grow in 
mediu m with out externall y added iron and to deco lourise the dy e, following a pattern si milar t o 
the one observed in the wild-ty pe strain. 
 iiThe decolourising capabilities of C. zeylanoides , I. occidentali s and S. cerevisia e 
CEN.PK 11 3-7D towards sev eral azo dy es wer e compared. The presenc e of dy es a nd 
degradation products in the  growth m edium  did not  affect nor growth nor viabilit y of cells. The 
specific degradation rates obtained showed that S. cerevi siae is m uch m ore efficient in the 
decolourisation of dyes I, II and amaranth. The relationship of ln(ap parent first order 
decolourisation rate/specific growth rate) vs. the red uction peak potential was r epresented by  a 
second order  polynom ial equation.  This type of relation sugg ests that the decolourisation 
kinetics is energy -dependent. Assim ilation experi ments of the re duction products showed that  
all strains are able to use t he for med amines as carbon and nitrogen sources. T his represents  the 
possibilit y of complete mineralization of the t ested  azo dy es. The use of alt ernative carb on 
sources w as also explored. All the three strains presented the sa me behaviour. Besides glucose  
ethanol was the onl y substrate that allowed both gr owth and deco lourisation. 
A continuous  process was developed to degrade azo dy es with a bacteri al consortiu m 
isolated fro m a textile wast ewater operat ing at pH  9 and 55º C with the objective of com paring  it 
to a si milar  system  with yeasts.  The effects of  hydraulic retention ti me (HRT ), pH, te mperature 
and presence of salts wer e studied. For t he optim al operational conditions (pH 9 and HRT of 24 
h) the efficiencies a chieved were 91.5±1.3%  for colour rem oval and 89. 0±0.4%  for COD 
removal. The sy stem  tolerated, with no significan t decreas e in col our rem oval efficiency  3% of 
Na2SO 4, Na 2CO 3 or NaCl. The later salts, however, produ ced a reduction in COD rem oval of 30  
and 50% respectively . The total suspended solids content in th e outlet of the reactor changed 
widely  during the operation with a mean value of 0.54± 0.22 g.L-1. The sy stem  proved to be very  
effective in t he decolourisation of C.I. Reac tive Black 5 (RB5) u nder alkaline conditions and  
high tem peratures. The si milar sy stem  with yeasts due to lack of time w as not operated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iiiRESUMO  
 
O principal objectivo deste trabalho co nsistiu e m explorar a capa cidade de de gradaçã o 
de corantes azo têxteis de algu mas lev eduras. O trabalho inicial co m uma est irpe da espécie 
Candida zeylanoides  permitiu optim izar a composição do meio de cultura para consegu ir a 
descoloração de alguns cor antes azo modelo. Os tempos totais de descoloração,  observados no 
meio de cultura suplem entado com  0.2mM do co rante, situaram-se entre as 40 e as 60h.  As 
taxas iniciais de degrada ção foram  14−52 µmol.(g peso seco)-1.h-1, depende ndo do corante 
usado. No de correr do processo de descoloração  detectou-se a presença dos ácid os metanílico  e 
sulfanílico nos sobrenadantes dos meios, provan do que a descoloração se deve à redução  da 
ligação azo. A actividade de azo r eductase não é significativamente afectada pela exposição  
prévia das cél ulas ao corante. 
Os estudos levados a cabo com a levedura Issatchenkia occidentali s dem onstraram  que 
a extensão da descoloraç ão dos corantes prev iamente testados , em meio líquido contendo 
0.2m M de corante e 2% de glucose, ati ngiu mais de 80%  num período de 15 horas, 
essenci almente em condições microaerofílicas.  Sob condições anóxicas a descoloração n ão 
ocorreu, mes mo na pres ença de c élulas pré-cre scidas. Ensaios cinéticos da a ctividade de azo  
reductase de monstr aram que: (i) o pH óptim o depe nde da estrutura do corante e situa-s e na 
gama ácida; ( ii) a actividade máxima de descolo ração ocorre durant e a fase exponencial tardia; e 
(iii) a actividade varia co m a tem peratura ap roxim adamente segundo um a curva em  form a de 
sino. Estes resultados sugerem  indirectamente o envolvim ento de u ma actividade enzimática na 
redução dos corantes a zo. A a ctividade de descolora ção de I. occidentalis  manteve-se mesmo 
após a mudança para o metabolism o respiratório  do etanol, após o esgotam ento da glucose do 
meio, mas cessou quando todo o etanol foi cons umido, ligando a redução  dos corantes ao 
cresci mento.  
As efici ências de I. occidentalis  na descoloração de vários corantes azo, medidas pelo  
tempo nece ssário para atin gir um a desc oloração ≥98%, est ão line armente rela cionadas co m o 
potencial do pico de reduç ão do corante . Esta c ontrib uição é parte integrante de um  artigo que 
também examina a descol oração oxidativa pela lacca se de Tramet es villosa . 
Em Saccharomyce s ce revisiae  o sist ema da  ferr i-reductase p articipa na redução  
extracelular d e corantes  azo. Os mutantes ∆fre1 e ∆fre1∆fre2, mas não o ∆fre2, da estirpe d e S. 
cerevisiae  utilizada mostraram uma cap acidade muito reduzida de descoloração , sugerindo que, 
nas condições testadas, Fr e1p é o m aior com pone nte da actividade de azo reductase. O gene 
FRE1  com plementou o fenotipo  do m utante ∆fre1, recuperando a capacidad e de crescer em 
meio se m adição de ferro e de degradar o corant e, seg uindo  um padrão sem elhante ao observado  
na estirpe selvagem . 
 ivAs estirpe s de C. zeylanoides , I. occidentalis  e S. cere visiae  acima referidas fora m 
comparadas quanto à sua  capacidade de descolo ração de vários corantes. A presença dos 
corantes ou dos produtos da sua degr adação no meio de cultura não afectou nem o cr escimento 
nem a viabilidade das cél ulas. As taxas específi cas de degr adação obtidas mostraram  que a 
estirpe de S. cere visiae  testada é mais eficiente na des coloração dos corantes I, II  e Amarante. A 
relação entre ln(constante de descoloraç ão de 1ª  orde m apar ente/ta xa específi ca de cres cimento) 
vs. potencial de pico de redução do c orante é representada por um a equaç ão polinom ial de 
segunda ordem . Este tipo de depe ndência sugere que o factor energético é determ inante n a 
cinética do processo de d escoloração. Experiênci as de assi milaç ão dos produtos de redução  
demonstraram que todas as estirpes utilizam as aminas form adas co mo fonte de carbono e azoto. 
Isto represent a a possibilidade de  miner alização co mpleta dos co rantes. A utili zação de fontes 
de carbono alternativas tam bém foi exp lorada. Todas as três estirp es utilizadas apresentar am um 
comportam ento sem elhante. Para além  da glucose,  o etanol foi  o único substrato que perm itiu o  
cresci mento e  a descoloraç ão. 
Foi desenvol vido um  processo contínuo para degradar corantes azo com u m consórcio  
de bactérias isolado a partir de um  efluente  têxtil para operar a pH 9 e 55º C, tendo sido 
estudados os efeitos do tem po de reten ção hidráulico ( θ), pH, te mperatura e presença  de s ais. 
Para as condições óptimas de operação (pH 9 e θ=24h)  as eficiências alcançadas foram 
91.5± 1.3%  para a rem oção da cor e 89 .0±0.4% para a rem oção da carência química de oxigénio  
(CQO). O sistema tolerou, se m signific ativa redução  da efici ência de re moção de cor, 3% d e 
Na2SO 4, Na 2CO 3 ou NaCl. Os últim os sais provocaram  no entanto uma redução da eficiência de 
remoção de CQO de 30 e 50% respecti vamente. O c onteúdo em  sólidos suspensos totais à sa ída 
do reactor variou bastante durante toda a operação do m esmo, tendo apresentado um  valor  
médio de 0.5 4±0.22 g .L-1. O sistema p rovou ser eficiente para a descoloração  do corante C.I. 
Reactive Black 5 (RB5) em condições alcalinas e a tem peraturas elevadas. Os dados obtid os 
neste estudo servirão fut uramente para co mparação com  um sistema semelhante utilizando 
leveduras. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 vPUBLICATIONS 
 
Papers published in peer-review ed journals 
 
• Ramalho, P. A., Scholze, H., Cardoso, M. H., Ra malho, M. T. & Oliveira-
Campos, A. M. (2002). Im proved c onditions for the aerobic reductive  
decolourisation of azo dyes by Candida zeylanoides . Enzyme and Microbial 
Technology  31, 848-854. 
 
• Ramalho, P. A., Cardoso, M. H., Cavaco-Paulo, A. & Ra malho, M. T. (2004). 
Characterization of azo reduction activity in a n ovel ascom ycete ye ast stra in. 
Appl Environ Microbiol  70, 2279-88. 
 
• Zille,  A., Ram alho, P., Tzanov, T.,  Millwa rd, R., Aires, V., Cardoso, M. H., 
Ramalho, M. T., Gubitz, G. M. & Ca vaco-Paulo, A. (2004). Predicting dye 
biodegradation from  redox potentials. Biotechnol Prog  20, 1588-92. 
 
• Ramalho, P. A., Paiva, S., Cavaco-Paulo, A., Casal, M., Cardoso, M. H. &  
Ramalho, M. T. (2005). Azo reductase activity of intact Saccha romyces 
cerevisiae cells is dependent on the Fre1p co mponent of the plasm a membrane 
ferric redu ctase (accep ted for publication in  Applied and Environm ental 
Microb iolog y). 
 
Papers to be published in peer-review ed journals 
 
• Ramalho, P. A., Cardoso, M. H., Ram alho, M. T., Gubitz, G. M. & Cavaco-
Paulo, A. Decolourisation of reactiv e azo dyes in alkaline textil e effluents with  a 
bacterial consortium  (subm itted to Enzym e and Microb ial Technology 
EMT/patram alho.AT.bi o.um inho.pt/20041006). 
 
• Ramalho, P. A., Cavaco-Paulo, A., Ra malho, M. T. & Cardoso, M. H. 
Com parison of the azoreductase activities and assim ilation of dye reduction 
products by three ascomycete yeas t strains (in preparation). 
 viCONTENTS 
 
ACKNOWLEDMENTS ………………………………………………………………… i 
  
ABSTRACT ………………  ………………………………………………………….. ii 
  
RESUMO ……………..……………………………………………………………….  iv 
  
PUBLICATIONS ……………………………………………………………………… vi 
  
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………  2 
1.1 HISTORY OF DYES ………………………………………………………... 2 
1.2 STRUCTURES AND USES OF DYES ……………………...………………….. 3 
1.3 ECOLOGICAL ASPECTS …………………………………………………… 7 
1.4 TOXICOLOGICAL ASPECTS ……………………………………………….. 8 
1.5 CHARACTERISATION OF TEXTILE WASTEWATERS ……………………........ 8 
1.6 TREATMENT OF TEXTILE WASTEWATERS ……...………………………..... 9 
1.6.1  PHYSICAL TREATMENTS ………………………………………... 11 
1.6.2  CHEMICAL TREATMENTS ……………………………………….. 16 
1.6.3  BIOLOGICAL TREATMENTS ……………………………………... 19 
  
CHAPTER 2. REDUCTIVE DECOLOURISATION OF AZO DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES   26 
  
CHAPTER 3. AZO REDUCTASE ACTIVITY IN I. OCCIDENTALIS …….…………………... 35 
  
CHAPTER 4. PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRADATION FROM REDOX POTENTIALS …......... 46 
  
CHAPTER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZOREDUCTASE ACTIVITY OF SACCHAROMYCES 
CEREVISIAE  …………………………………………………………………………...  
52 
  
CHAPTER 6. COMPARISON OF THE AZOREDUCTASE ACTIVITY OF THREE YEAST 
STRAINS ………………………………………………………………………………   
62 
  
CHAPTER 7. DECOLOURISATION OF REACTIVE AZO DYES BY A BACTERIAL 
CONSORTIUM …………………………………………………………………………   
72 
  
CHAPTER 8. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND  FUTURE PRESPECTIVES …………………… 78 
  
REFERENCES ……………………………………………………………………….. 84 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 1 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 HISTORY OF DYES  
 
Ever since the beginnin g of mankind, p eople have been using col orants for pain ting and  dyeing 
their surroundings, their skins and their clothes.  The first evi dence of the use of colorant  
materials by  man goes as far as 15000-9 000 BC, in th e walls of the Altam ira cave in Spain. The 
drawings wer e perfor med with inorganic pigm ents li ke soot, manganese oxide, hem atite an d 
ochre. Historically  there is a dy e, de rived from  animal sourc es (mollusc s), that is very 
important, although presently has no rel evance and it’ s not commercially  available. It is T yrian 
Purple (see F igure 1) and the pigm ent it self is not in the mollusc; however, when the precursor  
is extracted it can be conve rted to the dye by  air or li ght. The presence of this dye goes as far as 
1400 BC in t he Late Bronze Age as fo und recentl y in Lebanon. It has alway s been rare and  
costly  being used by  Roman e mperors and high ranking ecclesiast ics ( Clark et al. 1993). 
 
A 
 B 
 C 
 
 
Figure 1:  A - Chemical structure of tyrian purp le; B - Sea shells from  which t yrian purple  was extracted; C  - A 
purple-d yed fabric. 
 
Another ancient dy e that i s still in use, although not from  natural origin nowaday s, is indi go. It 
was extra cted from  Indigofera tinctoria  by ferm entation and ha d a characteristic blue colour 
(see Figure 2). It was used as a pigm ent by the Rom ans because it had to be che mically  reduc ed 
to beco me water soluble. It was firstly  synthe tically  produced b y Adolf von Baey er in 188 0, and  
actually  is us ed to d ye denim  (Clark et al. 1993). 
Up to the end of the ninete enth century  natural dy es, obtained m ainly from  plants (roots, stems , 
leaves, flow ers, fruits, se eds and lichens – Ingam ells 1993 ), were the main coloran ts available  for 
textile dy eing procedures. The main disadvantag es of the use of natural dy es are the need for 
several steps in the dy eing process, the diversity  of sources and re lated applicat ion procedures,  
the rapid cha nge in trends  and the demand for good fastness properties on different substrate s 
that would re quire a com plete databa se describing possible applica tions ( Bechtold et al.  2003). 
 
2 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
A 
 B 
 C 
 
 
Figure 2:  A - Chemical structur e of indigo; B –  Indigofera tincto rium; C - D enim. 
 
The pioneering synthesis of mauveine by W. H. Per kins started t he era  of sy nthetic dy es, with  
chemical and phy sical properties better suited to  contemporary  demands, better level of quality 
and m ore rep roducible techniques of  application. It also allowed the development and exten sion 
of the use of particular products. For exam ple, the developm ent of synthetic fibres such as 
polyester and cellulose triacetat e would have been severely  hindered without  the design a nd 
synthesis of d yes with appr opriate prope rties ( Ingam ells 1993). 
Since then thousands of dyes have been sy nthesised, and dye manufacture  has become  a 
significant part of the chemical industry. Nowa days, when care o f the environment is a major 
issue, it i s tem pting to assu me that  the use of  natural colours is an environ mental friendly 
alternative to present-day  practice. The re are sever al groups studying the use of natural dy es in 
modern dy eing industr y (Tsatsar oni and L iakopo ulos-Kyriakides 199 5, Angelini et al.  1997, Ishigami and Suzuki 1 997, 
Angelini et al.  2003,  Berm ejo et al.  2003,  Kim  et al. 2004 b, Paul et al.  2004,  Kam el et al. 2005,  Singh et al.  2005). Som e of 
the advantag es of the use of this t ype o f com pounds are the absence of toxicit y upon humans, 
the use of sustainable sources and the fit into the natural pathwa ys of biodegradation of the 
releas ed dy ebaths. 
 
1.2 STRUCTURES AND US ES OF DYES  
 
Dyes are compoun ds that a bsorb lig ht with wavelengt hs in t he visi ble range, i.e. , 400 to 700 nm 
(de las M arias 1976,  van der Zee 2002 ). The m ajor structure elem ent responsible for light absorption  in 
dye molecules is the chrom ophore group, i.e. a delocalised electron s ystem  with conjuga ted 
double bo nds. The absorption of UV/Vis radiation b y an organic m olecule is associated with 
electronic transitions between molecular orbitals. The energy  of the absorbed radiation is given 
by: 
∆E = E 1 - E0 = hν = hc / λ 
 
where E 0 is the energy  corresponding t o the funda mental state of the m olecule (J), E 1 is the 
excited state energy  (J), h is the Planck’ s constant (6,626*10-34 Js), ν is the electro magnetic  
3 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
radiation frequency  (Hz), c is the light velocity  (3*108 m.s-1) and λ is the wavelength (nm ). The 
more extended the electronic delocalisati on, the lo wer is the transition energy and the higher is  
the wavelength. To  allow delocalizatio n of t he electrons do uble bonds m ust alternate with single 
bonds. In t he case of sy nthetic dy es, delocalization is also prom oted by  benzene or naphthalene  
rings ( Rocha Go mes 2001 ). Ch romophores frequentl y contain heteroatoms as N, O and S, with non-
bondi ng electrons. B y incorporating these electrons in to the delocalised sy stem  in the ar yl rings, 
the energy  of the electron cloud is m odified, the wavelength of the absorbed radiation will shi ft 
towards the visible range, and  the  com pound will  be  coloured.   In  many   cases  dy es  contain 
 
Table 1:  Classification and examples of d yes according to the chromophore present 
CLASS  CHROM OPHORE EXAMPLE  
Nitro dyes N
OO
 OH
NO2
NO2  
C.I. Acid  Yell ow 24 
Nitroso dyes NO OHNO
ON
NO 
Fast Green O 
Azo dyes NN  
NN NCH3
CH3NaO3S
 
Methyl Orange 
Triphenyl me thyl d yes C
 NMe2
Me2N NMe2 
C.I. Basic Violet 3 
Phth alein d yes C
CO
OO
 C
CO
O
OH OH 
Phenolphtaleine 
Indigoid d yes 
N
HO
NH
O NaO3S
N
HO
NH
OSO3Na
 
C.I. Aci d Blue 71 
Anthraquin one dyes 
OO
 O
ONH2
SO2OH
NH
SO2CH2CH2OSO2OH 
C.I. Reactiv e Blue 19 
4 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
additional gr oups called auxochr omes, which are electron withdrawing or electron donati ng 
substituents t hat cause or intensify the c olour of the c hromophore by  altering the overall energy  
of the electro n system . The most important auxochro me groups are: hy droxyl and derivates, -
OH, -OR; amino and derivates, -NH 2, -NHR, -NHR 2; sulpho nic, -SO 3H; car boxy lic, -COOH;  
and sulphide,  -SR ( de las Mar ias 1976,  van  der Zee 2002 ). Some auxochromes also increase the dy e 
affinity for the fibre (natural or s ynthetic).  Natural  fibres are based on cellulose (poly meric 
linear chains of glucose) – cotton and linen - or pro teins – wool an d silk. S ynthe tic fibres are for 
instance visc ose, cellulose ac etate, poly amide, poly ester and acry lic ( Guar atini and  Zanoni 2000). 
Common classes of dy es, based on the chro mophore present, are shown in Tabl e 1. 
According to the Colour Index dy es ca n be classi fied on the basis of colour and application 
method. Various attractive forces have the poten tial of bindi ng dy es to fibres, and often more 
than one typ e of chemical bondin g can operate  with the same dye-fibre com bination. Th e 
dominant force depends o n the chem ical character  of the fibre an d the chem ical groups  in the 
dye molecule. The ty pes of bonds established be tween the dy e and the fib re, by  increasing 
relative strength of the bo nd, can be: Van der Waals, hydrogen,  ionic or covalent ( Ingam els 1993,  
Guar atini and Z anoni 2000, Roch a Go mes 2001 ). According to the application categories dy es can be 
classifi ed as s een in Table 2. 
Dyes are used in textile i ndustr y, leather tanni ng industr y, paper production,  food technol ogy, 
agricultural resear ch, light-harvesting array s, photoe lectroche mical cells, hair  colouring and 
cosm etics. M oreover these com pounds have been em ployed for the control of the efficacy  of 
sewag e and waste water treatment, for the deter mination of spec ific surfac e area of activat ed 
sludge and fo r groun d water tracing ( Forgacs et al.  2004). Due to the large am ounts used, the m ost 
significant industrial use is in textile dy eing.  
Azo dy es are the m ost wid ely use am ong synthetic dyes, representing alm ost 70% of the textile 
dyestuffs produced ( Knack muss 1996 ). The y are easy to synthesize, ha ve low cost, a re stable, can be 
used to colour several materials (textile, leathe r, plastic, food) and allow a great variety  of 
colours and shades. They  have in their molecule one or more az o groups. They  are obtained  
from  the coupling  of diazonium  salts with arom atic am ines, phenols, napht hols or alip hatic 
enols. Coupling usually ta kes place in the para  posi tion i n respect to the am ino or  hydrox yl 
group  or in  the orto position if the latter is occupied. The diazonium  salts are obtained from  the 
reaction of sodium  nitrite with an am ine solution with a mineral acid, preferably  HCl ( de las M arias 
1976, Zollin ger et al.  199 1) – Figure 3. The s tructural clas s of a zo dyes includes dy es from different 
application classe s, namely, acid, basic, metal co mplex, reactive and m ordant ( de las M arias 1976 ).  
 
 
5 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
Table 2:  Appl ication  categor ies of dyes (adapted  from O’Neill et al. 1999  and Rocha Go mes 2001 ) 
TYPE OF  
DYE CHARACTERIS TICS  S UBSTRATES   
Acid When in s olution are negatively charged ; bind  to the cationic 
NH 3+-groups present in  fibres Nylon, wool, poly amide, silk, 
modified acr yl, paper, inks and 
leather 
Reactive Form covalent b onds with OH-, NH- or SH- groups Cotton, wool, silk and n ylon 
Metal 
complex Strong complexes of one metal io n (usually  chrom ium, copp er, 
cobalt or  nick el) and one or two d ye molecu les (acid or 
reactive) Silk, wool  and polyamide 
Direct Large molecu les bound b y Van der Waals forces to the fibr e Cellulose fibr es, cotton , viscos e, 
paper, leath er and nylon 
Basic Cationic compounds that bind  to the acid grou ps of the fibr e Synthetic fibr es, paper and inks 
Mordant Require  the addition of  a chem ical that com bines with th e dye 
and th e fibre, lik e tannic acid , alum, chrome alum, and o ther 
salts of aluminiu m, chromium, c opper, iron, potassium, and tin  Wool, leath er, silk, p aper, 
modified cellu lose fibres  and 
anodised alumin ium 
Disperse Scarcely  soluble d yes that penetrate the fibr e through fibres 
swelling Polyester, poly amide, acetate, 
acrylic and plastics 
Pigment Insoluble, non-i onic compounds or insolub le salts that retain  
their crystallin e or part iculate structure througho ut their 
application Paints, inks, plastics and textiles 
Vat Insoluble colour ed dyes which o n reduction  give soluble 
colourless forms (leu co form) with affin ity for th e fibre; on  
exposure to  air are reox idised Cellulose  fibres, cotton , viscos e 
and wool 
Azoic and 
Ingrain Insoluble produ cts of a reacti on between  a couplin g component 
and a  diazotised arom atic amine that occurs  in the fibre Cotton, viscose, cellulose acetate 
and poly ester 
Sulphur Complex poly meric aromatics with heterocyclic S-containing  
rings Cellulose  fibres, cotton  and 
viscose 
Solvent Non ionic  dyes that dissolve th e substrate to whi ch the y bind Plastics,  gasolin e, varnish,  
lacqu er, stains , inks, oils, waxes  
and fats 
Fluores cence 
brightners Mask the yellowish tint  of natur al fibr es Soaps and d etergents, all fibres, 
oils, p aints and p lastics 
Food Non-toxic and n ot used as textile d yes Food 
Natural Obtained  mainly from plan ts  Food, cotton, wool, silk, 
polyester, polyamide and  
polyacrylonitr ile 
 
 
6 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
NN NNNH2 NaNO2N+NCl
OH
N(Me)2
N(Me)2OHR2R2
R1+ -
pH>7
0-8ºC
2-naphtolpH<7
Room temperature
N,N-dimethylanilineR1R2
R1R2
R1HCl
0-5ºCDiazotation
Coupling
 
Figure 3:  Synthesis of azo d yes. 
 
1.3 ECOLOGICAL ASPECT S 
 
The m ost problematic industries in term s of dy e release to the environm ent in the form  of 
wastewater are the production of dy es and the dy eing industr y.  The uncontr olled release of 
these co mpounds in the e nvironm ent causes sever e problem s. Si nce they are designed to be 
chemically and photolytically  stable they  are highly persistent in natural en vironm ents. For 
instance, the half-life of h ydrolised Reactive Blue 19  is about 4 6 years at pH 7  and 25 ºC ( Hao et 
al. 2000) In fact the y are xenobiotic com pounds becau se they  do not exist as natural products and 
therefore contain structural elements that cannot be synthesized biochem ically  (Stolz 200 1, Rieger  et 
al. 2002). During evoluti on of catabolic enzy mes and pathway s microorganism s were not exp osed 
to these struct ures and have not develope d the capability  to use those co mpounds as sole sources 
of carbon and  energy.   
Dyes, by decreasing light absorption, m ay significantly affect phot osynthetic activit y of aquat ic 
life and may be toxic due to the presenc e of aro matics or heavy  metals ( Banat et al.  1996,  Slokar and Le 
Marechal 1998,  Zanoni and  Carneiro 2001,  Kunz et al.  2002,  Carneiro et al.  2004). The possibility  of bioaccu mulation 
in fish was considered but  the few studies on the subject di d not confirm  this hypothesis ( Anliker 
and M oser 1987,  Anliker  et al.  1988 , Law 1995,  van der  Zee 2002 ). 
In the case of azo dy es, their degradation unde r anaerobic condi tions in sediments causes the  
release of pot entially carcinogenic and  mutageni c aromatic am ines, whose carcinogenicit y and 
mutagenicity  is further discussed in the next section.  
 
7 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
 
1.4 TOXICOLOGICAL ASPECTS  
 
The acute toxicity  of azo dy es, as defined by  the EU criteria for th e clas sificatio n of dangerous 
substances, is  rather low ( Øllgaard et al.  1998,  van der  Zee 2002 ). Only a few azo dy es showed LD50 
(lethal dose t hat kills half  of the tested populati on) values below 250 m g / kg body  weight  (in van 
der Zee 2002 ). However, occupational sensitisation to azo  dyes has been seen in the textile indust ry 
since 1930  (Foussereau et al.  1982). Especially som e disperse dy es with m onoazo or anthraquinone  
structures have been found to cause allergic reaction s, i.e. eczema or contact der matitis ( Hatch and 
Maibach 1995 ). Nevertheless attributing an allergy to a particular azo dye is a com plex and diffic ult 
process due t o the large num ber of azo dy es that exist ( c.a. 200 0), the different nam es th at 
different fabricants attribute to the same az o dy e and im purities that usually  azo dy es carry  
along.  
Following or al exposure azo dy es are metabolised to aromatic amines by  intesti nal microflora o r 
liver azoreductases. The soluble am inosulphonat es are usually  quickly  excreted, whereas th ose 
derived from  aniline, tolue ne, benzidine  and na phtale ne have been shown to ha ve carcinogenic 
properties. However these properties are attri buted to further metabolism (oxidatio n to N-
hydroxy-compoun ds) b y mammalian cy tochrome P-450 enzy mes. For inst ance, 
methem oglobinem ia result s from  the oxidation of  iron(II) to iron(III) in haemoglobin, which 
prevents ox ygen bin ding (Lin and W u 1973). 
The biologic ally active d yes were mainly  lim ited to those co mpounds containing  p-
phen ylenedia mine and b enzidine m oieties. It was found  that  for the phenylenediam ine 
component methy lation or substitution of a n itro group f or an am ino group did not de crease 
mutagenicity . However sulphonati on, c arboxylation or diam inatio n lead to a decrease in the 
mutagenicity  (Chung an d Cer niglia 1992 ).   
 
1.5 CHARACTERIS ATION OF TEX TILE WASTEWATE RS 
 
Wet processi ng in textile i ndustr y gener ates larg e amounts of a wastewat er whose pollution l oad 
arises not only from  the rem oval of i mpurities from  the raw materials them selves but also f rom 
the residual chemical re agents used for pro cessing (Table 3). The extre me diversity  of ra w 
materi als and producti on schemes employed poses problems in assessing effluent characteristics 
and subsequentl y definin g polluti on con trol technolo gies ( Correia et al.  1994). Colo ur is one of the 
major problems of these ty pes of  wastewaters.  During textile pr ocessing, inefficiencies in  
dyeing result  in large am ounts of dy estuff bein g directly  lost to the wastewater, which  
8 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
ultim ately  finds its way  into the environment. The amount of dye lost is dependent upon t he dye 
application class, vary ing from  only  2% loss when  using basic dy es to a 50% loss when c ertain 
reactive dy es are used ( O’Ne ill et al.  1999,  McMullan et al.  2001,  Pear ce et al. 2003). 
 
Table 3:  Major pollutan t types in textile wast ewater , chem ical types and p rocess of origin  (adapted from  Delée et al. 
1998). 
POLLUTANTS  CHEMICAL TY PES PROCESS  OF ORIGIN  
Orga nic loa d Starches , enzymes, fats, greases, waxes , surfactants a nd acetic 
acid Ds, S, W,  Dy 
Colour Dyes, scou red wool impurities Dy, S 
Nutrients (N, P) Ammonium salts, urea , phosphate-based  buffers and 
sequestran ts Dy 
pH and salts NaOH, m ineral/organic acids, sod ium chloride, silicate, 
sulphate, ca rbonate S, Ds, B , M, Dy, N 
Sulphur Sulphate, sulphite and  hydrosu lphite salts, su lphuric acid  Dy 
Toxic 
compounds Heavy metals, r educing agents (sulphide), ox idising  agents 
(chlorite, peroxide, dichromate, persulphate), biocides, 
quaternary ammonium salts Ds, B , Dy, F 
Refractor y 
organics Surfactants , dyes, re sins, synt hetic sizes (PVA), c hlorinated 
organic com pounds, carri er organic sol vents S, Ds, B, Dy, W, F  
Ds – desizing; S – sco uring; W – washing; Dy – dy eing; B – bleaching; M – m ercerising; N – 
neutralisation; F - finishing 
 
1.6 TREATMENT OF TE XTILE WASTEW ATERS  
 
Colour is the first contam inant to be recognized  in wastewater and has to be rem oved before 
discharging i nto water bodies. The presence of ver y small am ounts of dy es in water (less than 1 
ppm for so me dyes) is highly visible and affect s the aesthetic quality  water transparency  and gas 
solubilit y in l akes, rivers and other water bodies. The removal of colour is often m ore im portant 
than the re moval of the soluble colourless or ganic substances, which usually  contribute the 
major fractio n of the bi ochem ical oxy gen demand (BOD). Meth ods for the r emoval of BOD 
from most effluents are fairly  well establishe d. D yes, however, are  more difficult to tre at 
because of their sy nthetic origin and com plex aro matic molecular structures ( Banat et al.  1996). 
The electron-withdrawal character of the azo-g roup generates electron deficiency . This m akes 
the co mpounds less susceptible to oxi dative cat abolism  and as a consequence many of these 
chem icals tend to persist under aer obic environm ental conditions ( Knack muss 1996 ). Dyes m ust 
have a high degree of chem ical and photol ytic stabilit y in or der to be useful, due to the 
9 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
harshness of the conditions to which t hey are submitted during and af ter the dy eing process 
(light, bases, peroxides, a nd others  (Rocha Go mes 2001 ). Therefore they  will, in general, give 
negative results in short-t erm tests for aerobic biodegradability ( in Øllgaar d et al. 1998 ). Stability 
against microbial attack is also a r equired feature of a zo dyes ( Pagga  and Br own 1986), because it will 
prolon g the li fetim e of the products in w hich azo d yes are applied. 
When designing the soluti on for a part icular wa stewater there are several conditionings t hat 
should be considered in t his choice. Due to the high variabilit y of com position of  this t ype of 
wastewater, not onl y in quantit y but mainly in qu ality, usuall y there is the need of m ore than  
one type of treat ment to achieve the necessary  quality  of treat ment. There ar e two possible 
locations for any  technol ogy that coul d be used to rem ove the colour that is  present in the 
wastewater. The first possibilit y is in the dyehou se, allowing t he partial or full r e-use of water. 
This possibility  deals with a considerable smalle r amount of wastewater than th e next possibilit y 
which is the treatment on a municipal (or particul ar) waste water treatment plant, usually  with a  
biological step. In this case, the coloured wast ewater is m ixed w ith dom estic waste water to 
provide organic load for t he biolo gical treatm ent. And in  this h ypothesis it can be used bef ore 
the current biological or c hemical tre atment or as a final polishing step ( Pearce et al. 2003). A w ide 
range of methods has been developed  for the removal of s ynthetic dy es fr om waters and  
waste waters to decrease t heir im pact on the envi ronm ent. The y are divide d in three major 
categories: phy sical, chemical or biological. Th ey are described  and discussed in detail in the  
next sections. Biological and chem ical methods involve the destruction of th e dye molecule, 
whilst phy sical methods usually transfer the poll utant to another phase. Destruction of azo dyes 
can be acco mplished b y reduction or b y oxidation.  The reduction of azo dy es generates aro matic 
amines (s ee Figure 4).  
 
R NN R'
R NH2 NH2R' ++4H+
+4e-
 
Figure 4:  Reduction of an azo dy e. 
 
The oxidative  mechanis ms are difficult to establish du e to the high reactivity  of the free radica ls 
usually involved in the process. The oxidation of  phenolic azo dy es by laccas e was des cribed by 
the following mechanis m: 
10 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
O3S NNR
OH
RCu(II)
Cu(I)
O3S NNR
O  
RCu(II)
Cu(I)
O3S NNR
O
R.
O3S NNR
O
RO
H:OH2
N O3S NHO
RR
O
N O3S N  O2
O2-  
N2
O3S .
O3S O
OHO2,H  
-+-
-
---
--
 
 
Figure 5:  Oxidation of a phenolic azo dy e by laccase (adapted from  Chivukula and Renganathan 19 95). 
 
1.6.1  PHYSICAL TREATMENTS  
 
Sorption.  Adsorption techniques have recently  gaine d a considera ble importance due to their  
efficiency  in the rem oval of pollu tants t oo stable for conventional methods ( Robi nson et al.  2001, Aksu  
2005). Rem ediation based on sorption phenom ena i nvolves binding of solubl e or suspended 
pollutants to  a solid organic or inorganic matrix. Binding to the matrix, depending o n its 
11 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
composition and on pollu tant structure, may  be due to several  types of interactions, e. g. 
electrostati c, ionic exchange, van der Waals, co mplexation or  chelation. Decolourisation  of 
waste water by this process is influenced by m any factors such as sorbent surface area, parti cle 
size, contact time, te mperature, pH and presence of salts, surfact ants and metals (in Robinson  et al. 
2001). It m ust be e mphasiz ed, however, that sorp tion processe s merely transfers pollutants fro m 
one phase to  another and therefore in variably  gene rate sludge that must be disposed off, or  
regenerated, by  som e other process. Most adsorb ents are not equally effective towards differe nt 
types of dy es ( van der  Zee 20 02). The efficiency  of one sorben t it is frequently  assessed using t he 
Freundlich e mpirical equation: 
X/M = KC1/n
where: 
 X = am ount of im purity  adsorbed 
 M = mass of adsorbent 
 C = equilibri um concentration of im purity in sol ution 
 K, n = constants 
 
From  a logarithm ic plot of data it is poss ible to  determine the adsorbent capacity of the m aterial 
at specifi ed equilibri um concentrations of particular impurities ( Reife and Free man in Reif e and Freem an 
1996).  
Adsorption methods have so me drawbacks. Si nce adsorption pr ocesses are not selective, the 
other com ponents of the waste water can co mpete for the adsorbing sites reducing the  dye 
binding capacity  of the adsorbent. Moreover, an adsorption process re moves the sy nthetic dy es 
from the w astewater  by concentrating the m on th e surface retain ing their structure practic ally 
unchanged. When the support is to be regenerated, the fate of the resulting concentrated sludge  
of dy es presents a problem of correct disposal ( Forgacs et al.  2004). 
Sorbents can be inorganic or organic materials, or bi omass (living or dead). Inorganic sorbents  
have the advantage of good mechanical and chem ical stability, high speci fic surface area and  
resistanc e to microbiological degradati on ( Forgacs et al.  2004). 
Activated carbon is a ve rsatile adsor bent becau se its superficial chem ical groups can be 
modified according t o the physical-chemical treatment to which it is subm itted, e.g. HNO 3, 
H2O2, NH 3 or therm al treatm ents under H 2 or N 2 (Pereira et al.  2003,  Faria et al.  2004). It is one of the 
most widely  used adsorbent for the re moval of  different cla sses of dy es but, because it  is 
expensive and the cost of i ts regeneration is also  high, it is usuall y applied as a tertiary /polishi ng 
treatment ( Golob and Ojstr šek 2005 ). Recent works describe attem pts to produce activated carbons 
from che ap and readily  available sourc es, like sawd ust and rice- husk ( Malik 20 03, Malik 2004 ). It is 
12 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
highly effective for adsorbing cationic, m ordant and acid dy es and, to slightly lesser extent, 
disperse, direct, vat, reacti ve and pigm ent dyes ( in Robinson et al.  2001).  
In the last y ears there ha s been an effort towards the applicati on of cheaper adso rbing m aterials 
for colour rem oval in wastewater s. There ar e studies describing the adsorbing capacities of peat  
(Ram akrisha and Viraraghavan 1997,  Ho and M cKay 1998,  Ho and McKay 2003,  Sun and Yang 2003 ) and of several  
agricultural by -products, as wood chips ( Niga m et al.  2000), corn cobs ( Niga m et al.  2000,  Robinso n et al.  
2002), rice hulls ( Nawar  and  Doma 1989 ), peanut hulls ( Gong et al.  2005 ), and also aquatic plants  
(Waranusantigul et al. 2003). These materials are so cheap that regeneration is not necess ary and the  
potential exists for dy e-adsorbed materials to be used as substrates in solid-stat e fermentatio ns 
for protein enrichment ( Robinso n et al.  200 1). There are  also cheap materials  that c an be used li ke 
modified st arch ( Delval et al.  2002,  Riauka et al.  2004), fly  ash and coal ( Gupta et al.  1990, Woolard et al.  2002, Janos 
et al.  2003), clay ( Shawabkeh an d Tutunji 20 03, Alkan et al.  2004,  Wibulswas 2004 ) and silica ge l (Ueno et al.  1986, 
Parida and M ishra 1996,  Wu et al.  2004) – Fi gure 6 .A.  
 
A 
 
 B 
 
 
Figure 6.  Structures of silica (A)  and cucurb ituril (B). 
 
Cucurbituril,  a cy clic pol ymer of g lycoluril and  form aldehyde ( Karch er et al.  1999) with a 
hydrophobic cavity  and low solubilit y in aqueous sol utions ( Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998 ) – see Figure  
6.B - has also been used for colour  rem oval. It form s inso luble com plexes with the dy e 
molecules an d can be used as an aqueous soluti on or in the solid st ate. Al most complet e 
decolourization can be achieved with all dy e classes . Solid cucurbituril can be  regenerated with 
ozone and pe racetic acid ( Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998 ). One advantage of its use is that the presence  
of other organic substances in the water does not  interfere with the form ation  of com plexes, 
since it forms co mplexes with various organic compoun ds ( Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998,  Kar cher et al. 
1999). Cost is its major disa dvantage ( Robinson et al.  2001). 
The ter m biosorption refers to metabolis m-independent processes  taking place essentially  in the 
cell wall of non-growin g or non-li ving microbial mass. The main advantages of biosorpt ion are 
high selectivity and efficiency , cost effectiv eness and good rem oval perform ance; raw materials 
which are either abundant  or wastes from  industr ial operations (f ermentation wastes, activated  
sludge proce ss wast es) can be used as biosor bents presenting pe rformances often com parable 
13 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
with those of ion exchange resins ( Aksu 200 5). Both l iving and de ath (heat killed, dried, aci d 
and/or other wise chem ically treated) biomass can  be used to remove hazardous organics and is 
effective when conditi ons are not favou rable for the growth and  maintenance of the m icrobial 
populati on ( Robinso n et al.  2001). Bacteria (Tai-Lee 1996,  Walker and W eather ley 2000,  Mahdavi T alarposhti et al. 
2001), fungi ( Mittal and Gupta 1996, Tatar ko and Bumpus 1998, Fu and Viraraghavan 2001, Fu and Viraraghavan 200 2, Zhang  
et al.  2003), yeasts (Bustard et al. 1998,  Meehan et al.  2000,  Don mez 2002,  Aksu and D onmez 2003,  Aksu  and Don mez 2004 ) 
and algae ( Aksu and Tezer 2005 ) have been  described as good adsorb ents, with biosorption capaciti es 
up to 640m g dye/g biomass ( Aksu 20 05). Neverthele ss sinc e texti le dy es vary greatly  in their 
chem istries, their interacti on with the microor ganisms will depend on the chemical  structu re of 
the dy e, the specific che mistry of the  microbi al biomass and the charact eristics of the dye 
solution or wastew ater ( Aksu 2005).  
 
Membrane f iltration.  This technology has em erged  as a feasible alternative to conventi onal 
treatment processe s of dy e wastewat er and has proven to save operation costs and water  
consum ptions b y water recy cling (Sójka-Ledakowicz et al.  1998,  Koy unco et al.  2001,  Kim  et al.  2004a,  Koy unco et 
al. 2004). Usual ly this techni que is applied  as a ter tiary/final treatm ent after biologi cal and/or  
 
 
 
Figure 7: Filtration processes an d char acteristics (adapted from Madaeni 1999  and Elliott in Reife and Fr eeman 1996 ). 
 Reverse  Osm osis  
(30 to 150 at m)Pore size 
(nm) Molecular 
weight (Da) 
1 200 
Micro filtration 
(1 to 3 at m) 
Ultrafiltratio n  
(2 to 7 atm )Nanofiltratio n  
(5to 20 at m)2000 20000Colloidal 
200000 Ionic 
10 100 1000 Macrom olecules Small orga nics 
Types of 
contaminants  
Separation  
process 
(applied 
pressure s) 
14 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
physical-chemical tr eatments ( Ciardelli et al.  2000,  Marcucci et al.  200 1). It has als o been used to  
concentrate and purif y dyes in the m anufacture of these co mpounds ( Crossley  2002,  Kim  et al . 2004a,  
Koyuncu et al  2004). These techniques allow, when not applied as end-of-pipe solutions, the  
recovery  and reuse of some reagents ( Sójka- Ledakowicz et al. 1998,  Koy uncu et al.  2001,  Marcucci et al.  2001,  van 
der Zee 2002 ). The existing t ypes of filtration are shown and characterized in Figure  7. 
 
Ion exchange.  Standard i on exchange sy stems have  not been wid ely used for treat ment of d ye-
containing ef fluents, m ainly due t o the opinion that ion exchangers cannot acco mmodate a wide 
range of dy es and dy eing conditions, and that their perfor mance was gre atly affect ed by  the 
presence of additives in the wast ewat er (Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998 ). In this technique wast ewat er is 
passed over t he ion exchanger resin until all avail able exchange sites ar e saturated. Both anioni c 
and cationic d yes are efficientl y removed b y this method. A disad vantage of th is method is the 
high cost of o rganic solvents to regenerate the ion-exchanger ( Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998,  Robinso n et al. 
2001). 
 
Coagulation /Floculation.  This method is often appli ed in th e tre atment of different types of 
wastewaters and it is used to enhance  the degr ee of rem oval of total suspended solids (TSS), 
biochem ical ox ygen dem and (BOD), chem ical oxyg en demand (COD) and colour ( Semerjian and 
Ayoub 200 3, Allegr e et al.  2004,  Peres et al.  2004,  Aguilar et al.  2005). The first st ep, coagulation, consists in th e 
addition of a coagulant to the wast ewater and mixing. This coagulant destabilizes the colloidal  
particles that  exist in the suspension, allowi ng particle agglomerati on. Flocculation is the 
physical proc ess of bringing the destabilized partic les in contact to form  larger fl ocs that can be  
more easily  removed from the solution (van der  Zee 2002 , Sem erjian and Ay oub 200 3, Golob  and Ojstr šek 200 5). 
This is usually achieved b y a slow  mixing step. The m ost commonly  used inorgan ic 
coagulants/flocculants are : trivalent sal ts of iron [Fe Cl3, Fe 2(SO 4)3] and alu minium [Al(SO 4)3]; 
ferrous sulphate Fe(SO 4); and calciu m hydroxide/lime [C a(OH)2]. Thes e are often used with  
various coagulant aids, such as sy nthetic pol yelectroly tes (an ionic, cationi c or non-io nic 
polymers), fl y ash and clay  (Tchobanogl ous and Bur ton 1 991, van der  Zee 2002,  Sem erjian and Ay oub 200 3). 
Inorganic co mpounds are, however, generally  not very suitable  to rem ove highl y soluble 
(sulphonated)  dyes from  solution unless large quant ities ar e dosed ( Hao et al.  2000). The major 
disadvantage of the use of t his process is the amount of useless and even toxic sl udge that needs  
to be correctl y disposed ( Motamedi 1975,  Jew orski and Heinzle 2000,  Chu 2001, Aguilar  et al.  2002, van der  Zee 20 02, 
Papić et al.  2004 ) and t he possibilit y of a secondary  polluti on problem  (due to excess use of 
chemicals). Recently  some organic p olymers have been developed with good dy e coagulant  
properties and a relatively  low sludge pr oduction  (van der Zee 2002 ). 
15 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
1.6.2  CHEMI CAL TREATM ENTS  
 
Fenton’s rea gent.  H2O2-Fe(II) salts ar e used when the wastew ater is resist ant to biological  
treatment or i s toxic to  the biom ass ( Slokar  and L e Marechal  1998 ). The reaction, that occurs at acidi c 
pH, results in  the form ation of  a strong  oxidative h ydrox yl radical (HO·) and f erric iron (fr om 
the oxidation  of ferrous iron). Both f orms of iron are coagulants thus conf erring the du al 
function of oxidation and coagulation to this process  (Kang et al.  2002). Therefore the mechanis m of 
colour rem oval involves also sorption or  bondi ng of  the dissolved d yes to flocs that are formed. 
The form ation of  large am ounts of  sludge co ncentrated in d yes and i ron is the main 
disadvantage of this process, ca rrying disposal proble ms (Slokar  and L e Mar echal 1998,  Robi nson et al . 
2001). As far as colour rem oval is con cerned, th e method is suitable for diff erent dy e cla sses. 
Reactive, direct, metal-co mplex, pigment, di sperse and vat d yes have good decolouration rat es 
(Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998 ). 
 
Ozone. This is a very  good oxi dizing agent due to its high instabilit y (reduction pote ntial 
2.07V) when co mpared to  chlorine (1.36V) and H 2O2 (1.78V). I t degrades a high n umber of 
pollutants lik e phenols, p esticides and aro matic hydrocarbons and it is used since the early  
1970s in wastewater treatment ( Robinson  et al.  2001, Özb elge et al.  2002,  Pera-Titus et al.  2004). The major 
drawback of the use of t his method i s ozone  shor t half-life – it decom poses in 20 m in – 
requiring co ntinuous  ozon ation and  making this m ethod ex pensiv e to appl y (Matsu i in Reif e and  
Freeman 1996,  Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998,  Robins on et al.  2001). Ozone stability  is affect ed by  the presence of 
dyes and salt s, by pH and by  temperature ( Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998 , Robinso n et al.  2001). Alth ough 
therm odynamics for ozone-induced oxi dation may  be favourable (due to ozone ’s high reducti on 
potential), ki netic factors will most oft en dict ate whether ozone will oxidize a pollutant i n a 
reasonable time frame ( Gogate and Pandit 2 004a). It is most useful a s a tertiary  treatment sinc e the 
presence of reducing agents and foam ing substa nces, am ong others, reduces colour rem oval. 
Ozone can also be used as a hydrogen p eroxide activator ( Slokar  and Le Marechal 1998 ). Advantages of 
its use over the ones referred above are: no resi due or  sludge form ation and no toxic metabolites 
are for med, a nd the application in gaseous st ate not increasing the volum e of the wastew ater 
(Robinso n et al.  2001). 
 
Photochemic al. Processes like UV/H 2O2, UV/TiO 2, UV/Fenton’ s reagent, UV/O 3 and others are 
photochem ical methods based on the for mation of free rad icals due to UV irradiat ion. 
Degradation is caused by  the productio n of high co ncentrations of h ydroxyl radi cals and the dy e 
molecule is degraded to CO 2 and H 2O (Peralta–Z amora et al.  1999,  Robinso n et al.  2001,  Gogat e and Pandit 20 04a). 
16 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
The rate of dy e rem oval is influenced by the in tensit y of t he UV radiation, pH, dye structure and 
the dye bath co mposition ( Slokar  and L e Mar echal 1998 ). When H2O2 is used as oxidizing agent, the 
UV light activates the decom position of H 2O2 into two hydrox yl radicals (H 2O2+hν→2OH·). 
This method does not produce sludge and greatly  reduces foul odours ( Robinson  et al. 2001). There is  
also the possibilit y of effe ctively  using sunlight  or near UV light for irradiation, which would 
result in considerable eco nomic savings, especially  for large-scal e operations (Gogate and Pandit 
2004a). Faster, cheaper and m ore effecti ve photo cataly tic processes are based on cataly sis by  
solid sem iconductor m aterials, mostly TiO 2 particles ( van der  Zee 2002, Konstantino u and Alba nis 2 004). 
With TiO 2 catalysed UV treat ment a wi de range of dy es can be mineralised ( Gonçalves et al. 1999, 
Peralta -Zamora et al. 1999, de Moraes et al.  2000, Bauer et al.  200 1, Augugliar o et al.  2002,  da Silva an d Far ia 200 3). The 
photo degradation of d yes by this method depends c onsiderably  on the chem ical structure of the 
dye (Forgacs et al.  2004). 
 
Sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl).  Coloured wast ewaters can be chemically  oxidized by  chlorine  
compounds although, for environm ental reas ons (release o f toxic organochlorinated 
compounds),  its use is beco ming less frequent ( Slokar  and L e Marechal 1998,  Pizzolato et al.  2002 ). 
Electrophilic attack at the amino group by  Cl+ initiates and acceler ates the subsequent azo  
boun d cleavage. The decol ourisation is affect ed by pH and b y NaOCl concentration ( Slokar  and Le 
Marechal 1998,  Robinso n et al.  2001). This m ethod is n ot efficient for th e decolourisation of disperse 
dyes, and longer times ar e required to decolourise re active and metal-co mplex dyes ( Slokar  and L e 
Marechal 1998 ). 
 
Electrolysis.  Electroly sis (see Figure 8) is based on applying an electric curren t through to the  
wastewater by  using electrodes. Organic co mpounds like d yes react through a  combination of 
electroche mical oxidation, electroche mical reduc tion, electrocoagulation and electroflotation 
reactions. For instance, when iron is t he sacrifi cial anode, Fe(II)-ions are released to the bulk 
solution, and acid dy es are sorbed on the  precipitated Fe(OH) 2. Moreover Fe(II) can reduce azo 
dyes to ary lamines ( Vandeviver e et al.  1998, Wilcock et al. in  Reife and  Freeman 1996 ). Moreover, water can al so 
be oxidized resulting in th e form ation of O 2 and O 3 and, if chloride is pres ent, there is  also 
formation of Cl 2 and ox ychloride anion s. In the cathode occurs reduction of wa ter to H 2 and OH-
. In order to  improve the perform ance of the s ystem different mat erials have been tested in the 
electrodes lik e carbon-fibre, Ti/Pt and a luminium (Vlyssides et al.  1999, Shen et al.  2001, Koby a et al.  2003,  
Cerón-River a et a l. 2004,  Fernandes et al.  2004). The main disadvantage of t hese ty pes of  methods is t he 
cost, both initial capital cos ts, energy and of electrode replace ment ( Vandeviver e et al. 1998,  van der  Zee 
2002,  Kobya et al.  2003,  Cerón-River a et al.  2004). The form ation of unwant ed breakdown prod ucts and  
17 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
foam  are also drawbacks of this method ( Vandeviver e et al.  1998,  van der  Zee 2002 ). The main advanta ges 
are co mpact size of equipment, si mplicity in operation, fast ra te of pollutant re moval a nd 
decrease am ount of  sludge  generated ( Gürses et al.  2002,  Daneshvar  et al.  2004). The method is efficient 
for colour, BOD (biochemical oxy gen d emand), COD (chemical oxygen dem and), TOC (total 
organic carbon), TDS (t otal dissolved solids), TSS (total suspended solids) a nd heavy m etals 
removal ( Wilcock et al. in Reife and Fr eeman 1996 , Koby a et al.  2003,  Daneshvar  et al. 2004,  Fernandes et al.  2004). 
+ -
H2
+ -
- + +- +-
 
 
 
Figure 8:  Illustration of and e lectrochem ical cell (adapt ed from  Wilcock et al. in Reife and Fr eeman 1996 ). 
 
Wet air oxidation (WAO).  In this process the primary  oxidant species is oxyg en and it is used 
to produce OH-radicals which actuall y react w ith organic and inorganic species under sub -
critical conditions, i.e. te mperature between 175 and 320º C and pressure bet ween 60 and 200 
bar ( Heimbuch and W ilhelm i 1985,  Jewor ski and Heinzle 2000,  Arslan- Alaton and Fer ry 2002,  Gogate and Pandit 20 04b). 
These operation conditions result in high capita l inve stments and high m aintenance costs ( Arslan-
Alaton and Fer ry 2002). Economic operation of WAO process es requires wast ewaters with C OD 
contents abov e 20g.L-1 to allow autother mic operation ( Jewor ski and Heinzle 2000 ). 
 
Ultrasound.  This technol ogie can also be used in t extile dy e remediation but is still a ve ry 
recent technology  in phase of developm ent ( Gogate and Pandit 2004a,  Vajn handl and L e Marechal 2005 ). 
 OH- 
OH-OH-
OH-Fe2+Fe2+
Fe2+Fe2+Effluent 
(contaminants ads orbed-
coprecip itated  with in iron 
matrix ) 
Influent 
18 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
1.6.3  BIOLOGICAL TREAT MENTS  
 
The fate  of environm ent pollutants is largel y deter mined b y abiotic processe s, suc h as 
photooxidati on, and by the metabolic activities of  microorganism s. Since catabolic enzy mes are 
more or less specific, they can act on more than their natural substrate. This explains why the  
majority  of xenobiotics ar e subject to f ortuitous  metabolism  (cometabolism ) (Knack muss 1996 ) and 
several groups explore these microbial capacities for t he bioremediation of dy es. 
The lim itatio ns of biological processes are mainly caused by  limited biodegradability of 
primarily  xenobiotic com pounds like d yes, b y toxic or inhibitor y effects of p ollutants for the 
microbial po pulation  and by the slow r ate of bio degradation of  particular poll utants ( Jeworski and 
Heinzle 2000 ). 
 
Bacteria.  Actinom ycetes, particularly  Streptomyce s species (Figure 9), are kn own to produce 
extracellular peroxidases that have a role in th e degradation of lignin and were also found  
effective in t he degradation of dy es ( Paszczynski et al.  1991, Zhou an d Zimmerman 1993,  Cao et al. 1993, McMullan 
et al.  2001,  Bhaskar  et al.  2003). 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Micro scope photogr aphy of Strep tomyces spp. 
 
In these studies wer e used azo dy es with exception for Zhou and Z immerman that tried reacti ve 
dyes (anthraquinone, p hthalocyanine, azo and metal com plex dy es) ( Zhou and  Zimmerman 1993 ). Wit h 
the notable exception of actino mycetes,  the i solation of bacteria  cap able of a erobic 
decolourisation and m ineralization of d yes, sp ecially sulfonated azo dy es, has proven diffic ult 
(McMu llan et al.  2001). For aerobic bacteria to be significan t in the reductive process they m ust be  
specifically  adapted ( Pearce  et al. 2003). Using this m ethodol ogy, an d testing so me analogues of  
sulfonated azo d yes as sole source of carbon and energy, several groups m anage to isolate and  
purify  “azoreductases ” from Pseudomonas  strains KF46 ( Zimmermann et al.  1982 ) and  K24 
(Zimmermann et al.  198 4) and from  Xenophi lus azovoran s KF46F ( Blüm el et al.  2002). The ability  of 
bacteria to ae robically m etabolise other dy e classe s was described f or Kurthia  sp. ( Sani and Baner jee 
1999) and for Pseudomonas  mendocina  MCM B-402  (Sarnaik and Kanekar  1999).  
Some possible models for the anaerobic azo dy e reduc tion are shown in Fi gure 1 0. 
19 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
 
Direct enzy matic 
 ED                    azo dy e 
 
 
ED ox                 aromatic  
                        amines Indirect (mediated) biological 
ED                     RM ox                 azo dy e  
 
 
ED ox                  RM red                arom atic  
                                                  am ines Direct chemi cal 
H2S                azo dy e  
 
 
‘S0’                aromatic     
                       amines 
B B 
 
Figure 10 . Mechanisms of anaerobic azo d ye reduction b y bacteria (RM ox = o xidised redox m ediator; RM red = 
reduced r edox mediator; ED = electron donor; ED ox = oxidised electron donor; B = bacteria (enzy me system )) 
(adapted from van der  Zee 2002 ). 
 
The initial step in bacterial azo dy e meta bolism under anaerobic conditions involves the 
reductive cleavage of the azo linkage. This proc ess is cat alysed by  a variety  of soluble  
cytoplasm ic enzy mes with low-substr ate specificit y, which ar e know as “azoreductases” 
(Robinso n et al.  2001,  Stolz 2 001). Under anoxic conditions, these en zymes facilitate the transfer of 
electrons via  soluble flavins to the azo dy e, which is then r educed. The role that s uch 
cytoplas mic enzy mes have in vivo  is, h owever, uncertain ( McMullan et al.  2001). The work of Ru ss 
and co-workers show ed however that t he cytoplasmic “a zoreductases ” are pre sumably flavin  
reductases  and that they  have insignificant im portance  in the in vivo  reduction of sulfonated azo 
compounds ( Russ et al.  2000). The possibility of non-c ytoplas mic azoreductases i s then reinforce d 
since it is highl y improbable that highl y charge d sulfonated azo dy es or poly meric azo dy es pa ss 
through the bacterial  cell wall ( Keck et al.  1997). A mem brane bound “azoreductase” was found b y 
Kudlich and co-workers in the cell  wall of a  Sphingomon as sp. This strain  posses sed b oth 
cytoplasm ic and membrane-bound azoreductase activities ( Kudlich et al.  1997). A different model 
for the unspecific r eduction of azo dy es by  bacteria wa s proposed based on studies with 
Sphin gomon as xenophaga  BN6 (Keck et al.  1997). They observed the increase in th e reduction rate 
when quino nes, like anthraquinone-2-s ulfonate or  2-hydroxy-1,4-naphtoq uinone, were added to  
the culture mediu m. It was suggeste d then th at quino nes added to the mediu m or some 
deco mposition products re leased by the  cells to  the mediu m, acte d as redox mediators which  
were enzimatically  reduced b y the bacteria ce lls and  that the hydroquin ones formed reduced the 
azo dy e in a purel y che mical redox reaction. Rafii suggests an extracellular azoreduct ase 
activity  in stu dies done with bacteria iso lated fro m human intestine, mainly Eubacterium  sp. and 
Clostridium  sp. ( Rafii et al.  1990, Rafii et al.  1995). Another possibilit y for the extracellular reduction of 
azo co mpounds under anaerobic conditi ons is the act ion of reduced inorganic c ompounds (e. g. 
Fe2+, H 2S), that are formed as end products of certa in strictly  anaerobic bacterial metab olic 
reactions ( Stolz 2001,  van der  Zee et al.  2001,  Yoo 2002,  van der  Zee et al.  2003). The  further m ineralization of th e 
20 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
formed am ines is not poss ible under an aerobic condi tions ( Brown an d Ham burger 1987). This is w hy 
there are several studies t hat propose a co mbined anaerobic-aerob ic sy stem for the re moval of 
dyes fro m wastewaters with a consortium /sludge ( Haug et al.  1991, Seshadr i et al.  1994, O’Neill et al.  2000, 
Lourenço et al. 2001, Fu et al.  2002,  Shaw et al.  2002,  Sponza and I sik 2002,  Isik and Spon za 2004,  Libra et al. 2004,  Supaka et al.  
2004,  Sponza and  Isik 200 5). The utilization of consortia offers c onsiderab le advantages over the use of 
pure cultures in t he degradation of  synthetic d yes. The individual strains may attack the dye 
molecule at different positions or may use th e decom position products prod uced by  another 
strain for further deco mposition. How ever, the com position of mixed cultures may change 
during the deco mposition process inte rfering with the control of the sy stem . The most used 
consortium  is activated sludge s ystem , mainly  cons tituted b y bacteria, but also with the usu al 
presence of f ungi and prot ozoa. 
 
Fungi.  The most widely  studied dy e-decolourisi ng microorganisms ar e the w hite-rot fungi like  
Phanerochae te chrysospor ium (Figure 11) ( Glenn and Gold 1983,  Bumpus and Br ock 198 8, Pasti- Grigsby  et al. 
1992,  Cha o and L ee 1994,  Con neely et al.  1999,  Chag as and Dur rant 20 01, Kunz et al.  2001, Martins et al.  2002,  Mielgo et al.  
2002), Trametes v ersicolor  (Field et al.  1992, Borchert and L ibra 2001,  Tekere et al.  2001), Coriolus versicol or 
(Kapdan et al.  2000, Kapdan and Kar gi 2002 ) and Bjerkandera adusta  (Field et al.  1992,  Heinfling- Weidtmann et al. 
2001).  
 
 
Figure 11:  White-rot fung i Phan erochaete chrysosporium  in its n atural env ironm ent, wood . 
 
Several other non-white-rot fungi  can al so successfully d ecolorize dy es like Aspergillus niger  
(Abd E l-Rahim  and M oawad 2003 ), Geotrichum candidum  (Kim et al.  1995,  Kim  and Shoda 1999 ), Pleurotus  
ostreatus  (Martins et al.  2003,  Palmieri et al.  2005) and Cunninghamella ele gans  (Cha et al.  2001,  Ambrósio and 
Cam pos-T akaki 2004 ) am ong others ( Fu and  Vir araghavan 20 01). White-ro t fungi const itute a diverse 
ecoph ysiolog ical group com prising mostly  basidio mycetous fu ngi capable of aerobic lignin 
depol ymerization and m ineralization, play ing a central role in the global C-c ycle ( McMullan et al.  
2001,  Wesenber g et al.  2003). This ability  is correlated to the cap acity  of these organisms to synthesise 
lignin-degrading extracellular enzy mes such as lignin peroxidases (LiP) a nd m angane se 
peroxidases ( MnP), or lacc ases (Lac ) (Robinson  et al.  2001, Stolz 200 1, Forgacs et al.  2004) which, thanks to 
21 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
their lack of substrate specificity , are also cap able o f degrading a wide range of xenobi otics 
(Reddy  1995,  McMullan et al.  2001,  van der  Zee 20 02, Wesenber g et al.  2003,  Novot ný et al.  2004). Am ong these are 
dioxins,  polychlorinated b iphen yls (PC Bs), chloro phenols, p olycyclic arom atic h ydrocarbo ns 
(PAHs) and nitroarom atics, includin g dyes ( Reddy  1995, Robinson et al.  2001,  Wesenber g et al. 2003,  Forgacs et 
al. 2004 ). LiP cataly ses the oxidation of non- phenolic aro matic co mpounds  such as ver atryl 
alcohol. MnP oxi dizes preferably  Mn2+ to Mn3+ which is abl e to oxidise m any phenolic  
compounds. Laccase i s a copper-containing enzyme that catal yses the oxidation of phe nolic 
substrates by  coupling  it to the reduction  of ox ygen t o water ( McMullan et al.  2001,  Wesenber g et al.  2003). 
Whilst it is c lear that the se enzy mes pl ay a signi ficant role in dy e metabolism , care must be 
taken not to e xclude the possibility  of the existence o f other degradative mechanism  (McMullan et 
al. 2001). Recentl y a third group of peroxi dases, ver satile peroxidase (VP), has been recognized in 
species of Pleurotus  and Bjerkandera , (Heinfling et al.  1998 a,  Heinfling et al.  1998 b ). A num ber of other 
enzy mes ar e produced in parallel including H 2O2-producing  enzy mes req uired b y other 
peroxidases (gly oxal oxidase and superoxide dism utase), and enzy mes linked to lignocellulose  
degradation pathway s (glucose oxidase and ary l alcohol oxidase) ( Wesenber g et al.  2003,  Nov otný et al.  
2004). Although these fungi have been shown to  decolourise dy es in liquid fer mentati ons, 
enzy me production has also shown to be unr eliable mainly due the unfam iliar water 
environm ent ( Robinso n et al.  2001 ). Their perfor mance is al so clos ely related to the operation 
conditions (concentration of dy e, pH and tem perature), which is a serious drawback for this t ype 
of wastew aters (Fu and Vir araghavan 20 01). Nevertheless th ey have the potential to oxidise substrate s 
that have low solubilit y which is an advantage for the treatment of non-soluble dy es (like vat for 
instance). Another advantage of these sy stem s is that the constitutive nature of the enzy mes 
obviates the need for the adaptation ( Reddy  199 5). In process desig n and optim ization of funga l 
treatment there are so me features that should  be considered. As the decolouriz ation of  dyes by 
P. chrysosporium  and ot her white-rot fungi  occur s in seconda ry m etabolic conditi ons, the 
important enzy me system is released by the funga l cells under  either carbo n or nitroge n 
limitation ( Glenn and Gold 198 3, Spadar o et al.  1992,  Wesenber g et al. 2003). Production  of LiP and MnP  is 
generally  opti mal at high oxy gen tens ion but  is repressed by  agitation in s ubmerged liq uid 
culture, while laccase production is often enhanced  by agitatio n. Usually  more than one isofor m 
of the enz yme sy stem  is expressed by  different taxa and culture conditions ( Wesenber g et al.  2003). 
Due to the c omplexity  of these sy stems, both dye structures a nd enzy matic transfor mations 
involved, ther e is a gap in t he knowledge of the degra dation and m ineralization of dy es by these 
microorganisms. 
 
22 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
Yeasts.  In lit erature the ability  to degrade azo dyes by  yeasts was only  described in a few 
reports. The first two reports use the asco mycete yeast Candi da zeylanoide s isolated fro m 
conta minated  soil to reduce model azo dy es ( Martins et al . 1999,  Ram alho et al. 2002 ). The 
characte risation of an enzy matic activity is described in further studies with the y east 
Issatchenkia occidentalis  (Ram alho et al.  2004), and the enzy matic sy stem  involved is presented in  a 
work with Saccharomyc es cere visiae  (Ram alho et al.  2005).  
 
Algae.  The use of algae f or the degradation of dy es is mentioned in onl y few reports and is 
achieved by  Chlorella  (Jinqi and Houtian 19 92, Acuner  and Dilek 2004 ), Oscillateria  (Jinqi an d Houtian 1992 ) and 
Spirogyra  (Mohan et al.  2002) species (Fi gure 12). All these reports used azo dy es. Jinqi and 
Houtian  (Jinqi and Houtian 199 2) and Acuner and Dilek ( Acuner  and Dilek 2 004) mention the reduction of 
the azo bond as the decolourising mechanis m. Mohan ( Mohan et al.  2002 ) attributes the 
decolourisation to biosorp tion foll owed b y bioconve rtion and bio coagulation. Furtherm ore they 
all state that t he formed a mines can be  totally  minerali zed. Jinqi and Houtian  (Jinqi  and H outian 1992) 
also state that so me of the tested azo com pounds  could be used as sole sources of carbon and 
nitrogen by the algae. This could m ean that alg ae can pla y an im portant role i n the rem oval of 
azo dy es and aromatic a mines in stabilization ponds ( Banat et al.  1996). 
 
 
Figure 12:  Microscope im ages of Chlorel la vulgaris and Spirogyra spp. 
 
Plants.  There are two re cent studies that describe th e use of plants (phy torem ediation – Figure  
13) for t he dye rem oval from  wastewaters. The first one m entions a good  rem oval capacity  of 
sulphonated anthraquino nes with Rheum rabarbaru m (Auber t and Schwitzguébel 200 4), altho ugh only 
shows preli minary  results that need to be furt her investigated. This plant possess es enzy mes that 
accept anthraquinones as substrates and in cell cultu re were able to remove up to 700-800m g.L-1 
of anthraquinones with sulphonate groups in different positions. Also Mbuligwe describes a 
reduction in colour of 72-7 7% in wetlands  vegetated with coco y am plants ( Mbuligwe 2005 ). These 
systems have the serious disadvantage of requiring big areas to i mplant the treat ment. 
 
23 CHAPT ER 1. INTRODUC TION 
 
Figure 13:  Process of ph ytoremediation. 
 
Enzymes.  In the studies of bi ological degradation of dyes an  effort as been made in orde r to 
identif y, isol ate and test  the enzy mes respons ible for the decolourisation. In the case of 
extracellular fungal enzy mes, like manganese a nd lignin peroxi dases and laccases (Figure 14),  
or cy tosolic azoreductase s from  bacteria , this  has been achieved by  several groups ( Dass and Redd y 
1990,  Gos h et al.  1992,  Spadar o and Renganathan 1994, Heinfling et al.  1998a,  Rafii a nd Colem an 1999,  Schliephake et al.  2000, 
Cam pos et al.  2001,  Suzuki et al.  2001,  Nyanhongo et al.  2002,  Blümel and Stolz 2003,  Ryan et al.  2003,  Maier et al.  2004).  
 
 
 
Figure 14:  Laccase from Tramet es versicolor. 
 
The applicat ion of enzyme pr eparati ons show s considerable benefits o ver the use  of 
microorganisms. Co mmer cial preparati ons can be easily  standardized, facilitating accurate 
dosage. The application is sim ple and can be ra pidly modified according t o the character of the 
dye or d yes to be rem oved ( Forgacs et al.  200 4). Nevertheless the  use of whole c ells rather  than  
isolated enzy mes is advant ageous, beca use cost s of purification are extre mely high and the cell  
offers protect ion from  the harsh process  environm ent to the enzy mes. Also, d egrading is often 
carried out by a nu mber of enzy mes working sequenti ally and no t by one single enzy me (Pearce et 
al. 2003). 
 
24  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 2 
 
REDUCTIVE DECOLOURISATION OF AZO DYES BY  
CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES  
 
 
 
 CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
Improved conditions for the aer obic reductive decolourisation 
of azo dyes by Candida z eylanoides 
Patricia A. Ramalhoa,∗, H. Scholze b, M. Helena Cardoso a, 
M. Teresa Ramalhob, A.M. Oliveira-Campos b 
 
a 
Department of Biology,  Univers ity of Minho,  Braga, Portugal 
b 
Department of C hemistry,  University of Minho,  Braga, Portugal  
 
 
Abstract 
A number of an aerobic and  aero bic b acteria l species are known to deco lourise azo d yes through the redu ction  of the azo 
bonds, form ing the correspondin g amines. In thi s work, we de scribe im proved d ecolour isation conditions for m odel azo 
dyes by the ascomycete yeast Candida zeylan oides . The dyes were deriv ed from the diazoniu m salts of m etanilic and 
sulfanili c acids and N,N-dimeth ylaniline or 2-naphthol as coupling components. Total d ecolour isation times observed in  
cultur e media supplemented with  0.2mM dy e ran ged from 40 to 60 h. The initial d ecolour isation r ates were 14–52 µmol (g 
dry cell)−1 h−1, depending on d ye structure. In th e course of decolour isation either m etanilic acid or sulfanili c acid were  
detected in the s upernatant flui d, showing that decolourization by this y east strain  is due to azo b ond reduction . None of  
those aminobenzenesulfonates s upported microor ganism growth as carbon and energy source but b oth could b e used, to a  
limited exten t, as nitrogen  sources . The azo  reductase activity is not significantly  affected b y pre-ad aptation of the  
microorganism to the d yes. 
 
Keywords:  Azo dyes; M ethyl orange; Or ange  II; Y easts;  Decolourisation  
 
1. Introduction 
 
    Among the synthetic dyes, w hich are  widely 
used for textile d yeing and other industrial 
applications, those containing an az o chromopho re 
constitu te th e larg est class [1 ]. Si nce dyes are 
designed to be resistan t to microb ial an d physico -
chem ical a ttack, m ost of them  are not  easily 
destroyed by conventional processes  of wastewat er 
treatm ent, including biological treatment by  
activated sludge [2,3]. The perce ntage of  
unchanged dye after such treatments is estimated to 
range between 50 and 90%  [4,5], a fact which 
raises e nvironmental pro blems, not  only for 
obvious aesthe tic reasons but also beca use the dyes 
themselves, or  their biotransformation pr oducts, 
can have  deleterious effects on living organisms. 
Both the structural diversity of dyes and the wide 
variability in  co mposition o f dye-contain ing 
efflue nts are proba bly decisive factors acc ounting 
for the obs erved recalcitrance of colouri ng 
substan ces [6 ]. 
    As re viewed by Chung et al. [7], earlier studies  
on the decolourisation of azo dyes m ainly involved 
anaerobic bac terial speci es isolated from the  
intestin al m icroflora, which cleave the  molecules 
by reduction of th e azo  bond(s).  A  closely  related  
 
∗ Correspondin g author.  
Tel.: +351-253-604-386; 
Fax: +351-253-678-983. 
E-mail address:  tramalho@ quim ica.uminho. pt (P.A. Ramalho).  
research  field deals with th e investigations on the 
toxic, m utagenic, or carcinogenic properties of 
several  aromatic amines ge nerated by biological 
reduction [8,9] . The azo re ductase activity detected 
in bacter ia displaying  azo  bon d reduction 
capabilities h as also  deserv ed con siderable 
attention. Az o reductases  we re isolat ed from 
several  bact erial sourc es and som e of their 
molecular p roperties and  substrate sp ecificities  
were determined [10,11]. Some authors have al so 
succee ded in isolating ge nomic DNA fra gments 
from  azo-re ducing bacterial s pecies a nd expressing 
them in non-decolourising species [12-14]. The 
available evi dence indicates  that azo reductase 
activ ity is associated  with d ifferen t typ es of g enes 
[12]. In other wo rds, azo reductase activity can be 
associated with m ore than one re ductase, 
depe nding on the part icular microor ganism and,  
eventually, on  the cultivation  conditions.  
    The most generally accept ed mechanism of az o 
reduction  involves th e particip ation of red ox 
mediators, acti ng as electron sh uttles b etween the 
extracellu lar dye an d the intracellu lar redu ctase. 
The azo  bond reduction step  thus o ccurs 
extracellu larly. An thrahydroquinone s ulfonates 
[15,16], riboflavin and be nzylviologen [17] are 
exam ples of red ox mediators whi ch hav e been 
shown  to  acc elerate  azo  bond reduction by intact 
cells. Th is mech anism also accoun ts for th e 
reduction of highly polar azo dyes, which can not 
usually cro ss cell membranes.     
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 26CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
    Bacterial azo bond reduction also occurs unde r 
aerobic conditions , as demonst rated, a bout two 
decade s ago [18,19]. Si nce then va rious re ports on 
anaerob ic, aero bic or an aerob ic–aerobic seq uential 
treatm ents for  deg radation of coloured effluents 
have a ppeare d, as rece ntly revi ewed by Robinson 
et al. [20] and Stolz [21]. 
    In an earlier report [22], we  have  provided 
prelim inary evide nce on t he aerobic a zo dye 
decol ourisation by a n ascomycete yeast, identified 
as Candida zeylanoides. In the prese nt work, we  
have used modified cultivation conditions in order 
to improve the decolourisation  process b y the sa me 
microor ganism, and i nvest igated som e feat ures o f 
the azo reduc tase activity whic h m ediates dye  
decolourisation . Th e utilizatio n of th e stab le 
reduction pr oducts of the tested dy es by  the 
microor ganism was also studied. 
 
2. Materials and me thods 
 
2.1. Chemicals and culture media components 
 
    The structures of the azo dyes u sed in th is work 
are re prese nted in Ta ble 1. Dyes I–III were  
synthesized a nd c haracterized by  conventional 
methods . Dy e IV was pu rchased from Sigma-
Aldrich and used without further purification. 
Inorganic m edia com ponents, D-glucose, 3 ,5-
dinitrosalicylic aci d (DNS) and m ethanol, of 
analytical gra de, were obtained from Merck. 
Tetrabutylammonium phos phate ( TBAP), 
sulfanilic acid  and  metanilic acid  were fro m 
Sigma–Al drich. Complex media com ponent s 
(yeast extract, yeast carbonba se (YCB), yeast 
nitrogen base (YNB ) and peptone) were  obtained  
from Difco. 
 2.2. Microo rganism and maintenance conditions 
 
    The ascomycete yeast C. zeyl anoides (strain  
UM2), was i solated as described in a previous 
publication [ 22]. T he st rain was routinely 
main tained on slants of a m edium containing (w/v, 
%): glucose (2), peptone (1), yeast extrac t (0.5), 
and aga r (2). 
 
2.3. An alytical methods 
 
    Bi omass was measured by turbidim etry readings  
of appropriately diluted cul ture sam ples at 640 nm, 
against a blank pre pared with the same dilution of 
the sup ernatant in  distilled  water. Th e correlatio n 
between OD (640 nm) and c ell dry weight (w, gl−1) 
was O D = 1. 40 w − 0.14 (r2 = 0 .996), as 
expe rimentally det ermined by  the st anda rd 
gravimetric method. Dye conce ntration was  
estim ated by abs orbance m easure ments of 
supernatant sam ples, d iluted as requ ired, in a 
buffer of pH 4.0, at d ye λmax, read agai nst a blank  
containing the sam e dilution o f buffer in wat er. 
Glucose co ncentration  was d etermined with the 
DNS reage nt [23]. HPLC analyses for detection of 
dye m etabolites were performed in a liq uid 
chromatograp h consi sting of a pum p (model PU-
980) and a UV/VIS detector (model UV- 975), both 
from Jasco, and a C hromatopac C-R 6A recorder, 
from  Shim adzu. T he col umn (Lichrocart 250-4) 
was packed with Lichrospher-100 RP-18, 5 µm, 
from Merck. S ample injection was performed with 
a 20 µl Rhe odyne injector. T he eluent com position 
was 30:70 (v/v) methanol–water, containing 5mM 
TBAP. Th e flow rate was adju sted to 0.6 ml min−1 
and the separated compounds were detected at 220 
 
Table 1.   
Structures and λmax of dyes 
 
Paren t structure Dye λmax (nm) 
I: R = m-SO 3Naa  
461 
 II: R = p-SO3Nab 470 
 
 
III: R = m-SO3Nac 
 
481 
 IV: R = p-SO3Nad 484 
a m-[(4-Dimethylamino)pheny lazo] benzen esulfo nic acid,  sodiu m salt.  
b p-[(4-Dimethylamino)pheny lazo] benzenesulfo nic acid,  sodium salt (M ethyl Orange/Or ange 52,  C.I. 13025) . 
c m-[(2-Hydroxy-1-napthyl)azo ]benzenesulfonic acid , sodium salt. 
d p-[(2-Hydroxy-1-napthy l)azo]benzenesulf onic acid,  sodium salt (Or ange II/Acid Orange 7,  C.I. 15510) . 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 27CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
nm. Under these conditions  the m arkers  for az o 
bond reduction of Dyes I/ III and  II/IV, metan ilic 
acid and sulfanilic acid , respectiv ely, h ad reten tion 
times of 12 .8 ± 0.3 an d 10.3±0.3 m in. T he 
prese nce of these com pounds in the supernatant  
fluids was c onfirmed by using authentic samples as 
internal sta ndards. Gluc ose, e thanol and acet ic acid 
conce ntrations were occasi onally determined in t he 
growth media by HPLC , using a M erck P olyspher  
OA KC co lumn, with  refractiv e index detectio n, 
and ara binose as internal standard [24]. 
 
2.4. Gr owth and decol ourisation assays 
 
Typical decol ourisation experiments were ro utinely 
performed in 250 ml coni cal flasks wi th 100 ml 
volumes of a st erile medium (normal 
decol orization medium, NDM ) co ntaining ( w/v, 
%): (NH 4)2SO4 (0.25), yeast ex tract (0.25), 
KH 2PO4 (0.5), MgSO4·7H2O (0 .05), CaCl 2·2H2O 
(0.013) an d glucose ( 2). Conce ntrated azo dy e 
solutions (4 mM) were sep arately p repared and 
filter sterilized  (Filtrop ur 0.2µm) and ase ptically 
adde d to the medium to a final conce ntration of 0.2 
mM. The flasks we re inoculated with a cell 
suspension obtain ed from a freshly gr own slan t, 
and i ncubated at 25 ºC, under orbital shaki ng (120 
rpm). Triplicate exp eriments were run throughout. 
In orde r to elucidate if pre-a daptation of the 
microor ganism to the dy es had a ny effect on 
decol orization rates, cultures were sta rted at  a high 
initial cel l density (ca. 1 .3OD un its; 1 .0 g dry cell 
l−1). The inoc ula were pre pared from  cells in the 
exponential gro wth phase, obtained after ca. 14  h 
incubation, in th e presence or in t he absence of 
dye, in 100 ml volumes of NDM . Adapted and 
non-ad apted cells were h arvested  by centrifugation 
and was hed twice be fore resuspension in 100 m l 
volumes of fresh NDM , containing 0.2mM dye. 
 
2.5. Assimila tion experimen ts 
 
Minim al media (YNB , and YCB) we re prepare d 
according t o the manufact urer’s i nstructions a nd 
supplemented with 5mM metan ilic o r sulfanilic 
acid for testing the se compounds as  carbon and 
energy sources or nitrogen so urces f or the 
microor ganism. C ontrol expe riments were  
performed with 2.5mM ammoni um sulfate as sol e 
nitrogen sour ce, in  YCB, or with 5mM glucose as 
sole carbon and e nergy s ource, in YNB. 
 
 
 
 3. Resul ts and  discussion 
 
3.1. Dye effects on  the micro organism specific 
grow th rates 
 
In order t o detect possi ble dye inhibitory effect s, 
separat e growth experiments in NDM, containing 
each one of the Dyes I–IV , and a c ontrol without 
dye, we re ru n. As sh own in Fig. 1, very similar 
growth curves we re obtained. The observed 
duplication times ran ged between 4.8 and 5.6 h, 
and t he biomass, in the stationa ry phase, reached 
similar v alues (5–6 OD units) at 4 0 h incubation. 
These results indicate that, at the concent rations  
used none of the tested d yes had a si gnificant 
inhibitory effect o n the microorganism growth . 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Growth cur ves of  C. zeyla noides in NDM  containing  
0.2mM Dyes I–IV and contr ol growth cur ve in the sam e 
medium without dye. 
 
3.2. Dec olourisation experiments 
 
    As described in a previous report [22], between 
10 and 50% of Dyes I–IV (formerly Dyes 2b , 2a, 
1b and 1a) per sisted in the supernatants of shaking 
cultures of C. zeyl anoides, after  7 days (168  h) of 
incubation. By using t he new c ulture medium 
(NDM) it co uld consisten tly be observed that, after 
40 h incubation, the conce ntration of Dyes I and II 
was undetectable, and that of Dyes III and IV w as 
reduce d to ca. 15% (Fig. 2). The incubation p eriod 
required for complete d ecolourisatio n of the latter 
dyes w as 60 h (results no t shown). In any case,  
when decolourisatio n was com plete, th e yeast cells  
were al so colourless, indicating the absence of any  
adsorption phenom enon. T hese results re flect a  
considera ble decrease in t he peri od required for 
complete d ecolourisation  of th ese dyes b y C. 
zeylanoides, under conditions that, except for the 
 
 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 28CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Time-course of the decolour isation of Dy es I–IV (●), evolution of pH (▲) and cell g rowth (■) in batch  aerated cultures of  C. 
zeylanoides . 
 
medium composition, were otherwise sim ilar.  
    From Fi g. 2, i t is also ap parent that 
decolourisation  is faster during the expo nential 
growth phase of t he microor ganism, slowing down 
in the statio nary ph ase. This is no t unexpected , 
since the process m ust be depe ndent on cell 
biom ass and on actively growing cells.  
    The monitoring of pH re vealed a progressive  
acidification of the  culture medium , starting at the  
onset of the exponential g rowth  phase, wh ich is 
due to glucose metabolism. Under the conditons 
descri bed, the prese nce of ethanol and acetic acid 
was detected in sam ples of  supernatant fluid 
collected afte r ca. 20 and 25 h inc ubation, 
respectiv ely (results no t shown). The observed pH 
variation can, eventually, affect d ecolourisatio n 
rate, as is usually the case for bacterial 
decol ourisation processe s [17,25], and also for t he 
chem ical azo dye reduction by NADH [26]. 
Howev er, furt her experimental ev idence will b e 
required in order to draw any conclusion  regarding 
the op timum p H rang e fo r the decolorization 
process  by this yeast strain. 
 
3.3. Det ection of dye reduction pro ducts 
 HPLC analys es of s upernatant sa mples of dye 
decolourisation  cultures re vealed the pres ence of 
metan ilic acid  (for Dyes I and III), or sulfanilic 
acid (for Dyes II and  IV), as illu strated  in Fig. 3. 
These am inobenze nesulfonates are t he st able 
reduction products of the tested dyes and were 
therefore used as m arkers for azo bond reduction. 
The ot her expected red uction products, 1-am ino-2-
naphthol and N,N-dimethyl-p-pheny lenediamine, 
are quite unstable in aer ated solutions. Th is 
beha viour has already  been descri bed by Kudlich 
et al. [27] for 1-amino-2-naphthol. The resul ts 
descri bed a bove dem onstrate that the yeast strain 
used in the present work c leaves azo bonds by 
reduction , formin g the co rresponding am ines, as  
observed wi th decol ourising anae robic or  
facultative ae robic bacteria. 
 
3.4. Assimila tion experimen ts 
 
    Metan ilic and sulfanilic acids were separately 
tested as carbon a nd e nergy sources or nitroge n 
sources by determining spe cific growth rates of th e 
yeast cells in  min imal media (YNB  or YCB) 
supplemented wi th those compounds, at 5m M 
conce ntrations. Appropriate cont rols, as described 
 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 29CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Chromatogram s of super natant sam ples taken fr om growing cultur es in media containing Dy es II and II I (a and c) ; chromatograms 
of the sa me samples with added sulfanilic and m etanili c acids, respectivel y (b and d). 
 
 in Section  2, were sim ultaneously ru n. Th e resu lts 
displayed in Fi g. 4 show that the two 
aminobe nzenesulfonic aci ds beha ve si milarly as 
nitrog en sources, with  duplication times of 17 h, 
much higher than t he observed with  equimolar 
inorganic am monium (6.7 h). The l imited growth 
observed in YCB can be due to a restricted uptake 
of the nitrogen  sources by th e yeast c ells o r, 
altern atively, to  the formation of so me inhibitory 
product. Th is asp ect is cu rrently being inv estigated. 
    In contrast, none of those substrates supported 
microor ganism growth, as carb on a nd ener gy 
source. Th e sulfon ic group occu rs rarely in n ature 
and, the refore, de gradation m echanisms for 
sulfonates are not frequent in the microbi al world 
[28]. There a re, however, some exam ples des cribed 
in the literatu re relatin g the m ineralizat ion of 
naphthalenesulfonated by a bact erial consortium 
[29] and  of sulfanilic acid  by a sing le bacterial  
strain , ob tained  fro m a mixed culture after 
extended preadaptation  [30]. A sim ilar cap ability 
has not been described, so far, in yeast species. 
 
3.5. Ef fect of  cel l pre- adaptation o n 
decolourisa tion rates 
 
    In order to obtain some evidence re garding the 
constitu tive or in ducible nature of the azo  
reductase activity, th e decolourisation  rates by cells 
pre-adapted to th e dyes were com pared with those  
observed in cultu res ino culated with cells grown in  a medium without dye but, otherwise, of i dentical 
composition. The resul ts displayed in Fig. 5 clearly 
show that azo bond reduction is mediated by  som e 
constitu tive red uctase since, in  every case, th e 
decol orization progress i s virtually indepe ndent on 
cell pre-ada ptation. The observed differences in the 
half decolourisation times, whi ch range from 1.5 t o 
4.5 h, are therefore related to dye structure. 
 
3.6. Structural effects on dec olourisation rates 
 
    Azo dye reduction in the  presence of intact cells, 
by a redox s hutle mechanis m, is expected to be an 
appa rent zero-orde r reaction, while cells are  
actively growing, and reduced cofactors are  
abundant. Th is see ms to be the case with t he yeast 
strain  used in  this wo rk. In fact, fo llowing  a sho rt 
laten cy ph ase, ob served with Dy es I, III and  IV, 
dye concent ration decrease s linearly with  time, at 
least in  the first h alf of the decolorization  process 
(Fig. 5). The appa rent dec olourisation rates for  
Dyes I–IV, esti mated in the lin ear p ortion of the 
decolourisation  curves, and refered  to initial d ry 
cell weight, are shown in Table 2. 
  
Table 2.  Appar ent decolor ization r ates 
 
Dye Rate (µm ol g−1 h−1) 
I 23 
II 52 
III 18 
IV 14 
 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 30CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Growth cu rves obtained in YCB and YNB containing  
5mM metanilic acid (▲) or 5m M sulfanilic acid ( ■); co ntrols 
(♦) were done in the pr esence of 2. 5mM ammonium sulfate ( in 
YCB)  or 5mM glucose ( in YNB ). 
 
    Interesting ly Dyes I, III and IV have very similar 
appa rent zer o-order dec olorization rat es, b ut 
significan tly lo wer th an the observed with  Dye II. 
These res ults are, so far, intrigui ng, eve n taking 
into accou nt some o f the factors which are li kely to 
affect d ecolourisation  rates, as th e steric an d 
electronic c haracteristics of t he substrate, the redox 
potential o f the mediator in relatio n to that of the 
azo c ompound, or the s pecificity of the re ductase  
towards the mediator. Indee d, in Dyes III and IV, 
which share th e sam e coupling co mponen t (2-
naphthol), the position of the sulfonic sub stituent in 
the diazo c ompone nt doe s not significa ntly affect 
the decolorizatio n rate. In contrast, in  Dyes I and  
II, where the only struct ural diffe rence is also the 
position of th e sulfonic sub stituent, those rates are 
rather different. One hypothesis which could 
account for the (so fa r) unexplained differe nces in 
decolourisation  rates is th e occurren ce of d istinct 
reduction mechani sms, depending on the particular 
dye su bstrate. Two possible m echanisms for 
complete azo reduction a re a NAD(P)H-like 
reduction , invo lving two step s of hydrid e transfer, 
each prece ded (or followed) by protonation or, 
altern atively, a flav in-like reduction, where fou r 
steps of H++e− addition would take place. Qu ite 
likely th e limit ing rates i n each  mechanism wo uld 
be diffe rently affected  by structural feat ures of the  
substrates. T his hypothes is might also account for 
other unexplained observations as  those of Semdé et al. [17] who reporte d that a NADPH generat or 
syste m, wh ile b eing able to  redu ce th e dye 
amarant h, did not reduce methyl orange or orange 
II (Dyes  II and IV in t his study), am ong other dyes . 
Also Nam  and R enganathan [26], in their study of 
the non-enzymatic reduct ion of a zo dyes by  
NADH, were n ot able to estab lish a si mple 
correlation between t he electronic properties of the 
substitu ents in  4 -(4’-sulfophenylazo)phenol 
derivatives, or their po sition relativ ely to  the azo  
bond, a nd the decol ourisa tion extent, after a fix ed 
time. It th us appears th at a su itable basis for 
correlating az o reduction rates and dye structures  
has not yet b een found. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The p resent work desc ribed improved conditions 
for th e decolourisatio n of sev eral structu rally-
related azo dyes by a strain of the y east C. 
zeylanoides. Ap parently, th e m ajor factor 
determining the sho rter decolourisatio n tim es now 
descri bed is the composition of the incubation 
medium. Decolourisation  is due to azo  bond 
reduction , as sh own by the detectio n of the 
corresponding a mines in  the superna tants of 
cultures where dye decol orization wa s taking 
place, a nd occurs at a n acidic pH. T he sulfonate d 
amines pro duced by  reduction of t he tested dyes 
could be used as nitrogen sources, but not as 
carbon and e nergy s ources by the yeast strain. T he 
azo reductase activity towards each dye does not 
depend on pre-adaptation of th e cells to  that dye 
and is therefore due to an unidentified reductase 
which is con stitutive to the yeast strain  under the 
cultivation con ditions repo rted in this wo rk. The 
available e vidence s uggests  that dye st ructure 
affects d ecolourisation  rates b ut the basis fo r 
estab lishing a co rrelation  between  those two  
param eters re mains, so  far, unknown. 
 
Ackn owledgm ents 
 
    This work was partially funded by JNICT/ Praxis 
XXI/2/2.2/QUI/44/94 (P ortugal) and by the 
University of Minho. H.S . was a student from  the 
Graz Un iversity o f Tech nology (Au stria) do ing an 
individual project at the Chemistry Depart ment, 
University of  Minho, supported by the Er asmus 
programme. 
  
 
 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 31CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
 
Fig. 5. Time-course of the decolour isation of  Dyes I–IV by pre-adapted (■) and non- adapted  (♦) cells of C. zeylanoides (for detail s, see 
text). 
 
Refere nces 
 
[1] Zollinger  H. Colour  chem istry: synthesis,  properties and  
applications of or ganic dy es and pig ments. New  Yor k: VCH;  
1987,  p. 92–102. 
[2] Pagga U,  Brown D.  The degr adation of dy estuffs II. 
Behaviour  of dyestuffs in  aer obic biode gradation tests.  
Chem ospher e 1986;15:4 79– 9 1. 
[3] Shaul GM, Ho ldsworth TJ, Dempsey CR, Dostal KA. Fat e 
of water  soluble azo dy es in the activated sludge pr ocess.  
Chem ospher e 1991;22:1 07–9. 
[4] Chung K-T, Stevens Jr  SE. Degr adation o f azo  dyes by 
envir onmental microorganis ms and h elminths.  Environ T oxicol 
Chem  1993;12:2 121–3 2. 
[5] Pierce J. Col our in textile  effl uents—the origins  of the  
problem . J Soc Dyer s Colour ists 199 4;110: 131–4. 
[6] Dubrow SF, B oardman GD, M ichelsen DL. Che mical pre-
treatment and ae robic–anaerobic degradation of textile dye  
wastewate r. In: R eife A, F reeman HS, editors.  Envir onmental  
chem istry of dy es and pig ments. New Yor k: Wiley; 1996,  p. 
75–1 04. 
[7] Chung K- T, Stevens Jr  SE, Cerniglia CE . The reduction o f 
azo dyes by the  intestinal microflor a. Crit Rev Microbiol 
1992; 18:175–90. 
[8] Chung K-T. The signi ficance of azo- reductio n in t he 
mutagenesis and car cinogenesis of azo dy es. Mut Res  
1982; 114:269–81. 
[9] Hu T L. Kinetics of  azor eductase and assessm ent of to xicity  
of metabolic pr oducts fr om azo dy es by  Pseudomonas  luteola . 
Water Sci T echnol 2001;4 3:261–9. 
[10] Zimmermann T, Kulla HG,  Leisinger  T. Properties of  
purified Orange II azoreductase, the enzym e initiating azo dye  degradation by  Pseudomon as KF46.  Eur J Bioche m 
1982; 129:197–203. 
[11] Zimmermann T, Gasser F, Ku lla HG, Leisin ger T.  
Comparison of two bacter ial azoreductases acquir ed dur ing 
adaptation to gr owth on azo dy es. Arch M icrobiol 1984;138:7 –
43. 
[12] Rafii F,  Cole man T. Cloning an d expr essio n in Escherichia 
coli of an azoreductase gene f rom Clostridium perfri ngens and 
comparison with azoreductase ge nes fr om other bacter ia. J 
Basic M icrobiol 1999;3 9:29–35. 
[13] Chan g JS,  Kuo T S, Chao YP, Ho JY,  Lin PJ.  Azo dy e 
decolorization with a mutant Esche richia coli strain. Biotech  
Lett 2000;22:8 07–12. 
[14] Suzuki Y,  Yoda T , Ruhul A, Sugiur a W. Molecular  cloning 
and char acter ization of the gene co ding f or azor eductase fr om 
Bacillus sp. OY1- 2 isolated  from soil.  J Biol C hem 2001;2 76: 
9059 –65. 
[15] Keck A, Kle in J, Kudlich M,  Stolz A, Knackm uss HJ, 
Mattes R.  Reduction o f azo dy es by  redox mediator s originating 
in the naphthale nesulf onic acid degr adation path way of 
Sphin gomon as sp. strain BN6. Appl E nviron M icrobiol 
1997; 63:3684–90. 
[16] Kudlich M , Keck A,  Klein J,  Stolz A. Localiz ation of  the 
enzym e system involved i n anaer obic reduction of  azo dyes by 
Sphin gomon as sp. strain BN6 and  effect o f artifici al redox 
mediator s on the r ate of azo dy e reduction.  Appl E nviron 
Microbiol 1997;63 :3691 –4. 
[17] Sem dé R, Pierre D, Geuskens G,  Devleeschouwer  M, Moës 
AJ. Study of so me important fact ors involved in azo de rivative 
reduction by  Clostridium perfri ngens . Int J Pharm  1998; 161:4 5–
54. 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 32CHAPT ER 2. REDUCTI VE DECO LOURIS ATION OF AZ O DYES BY CANDIDA ZEYLANOIDES 
 
[18] Ogawa T , Yato me C, Idaka E . Biodegr adation of p-
aminoazobenzene by  continuous c ultivation o f Pseudomona s 
pseudomallei 13NA. J Soc Dyer s Colourists 1981; 97:435–8.  
[19] Idaka E, Ogawa T, Hor itsu H . Reductive metabolism of 
aminoazobenzenes by  Pseudomon as cepacia . Bull Environ 
Contam  Toxicol 1987;3 9:100–7. 
[20] Robi nson T , McMullan G, M archant R,  Nigam  P. 
Remediation of dyes in textile effluent: a critical review on 
current tr eatment technologies wit h a pr oposed alt ernative. 
Bioresour  Technol 2001;7 7:247–55. 
[21] Stolz A. Basic and applied aspects in the microbial  
degradation o f azo dy es. Appl M icrobiol Biotechnol 
2001; 56:69–80. 
[22] Martin s MA,  Card oso MH, Q ueiroz MJ, Ra malho MT,  
Campos AM . Biodegradation o f azo dyes by  the y east Candid a 
zeylanoides in batch aerated cultures. Che mosphere  
1999; 38:2455–60. 
[23] Miller GL.  Use of di nitrosalicylic a cid rea gent for  
determ ination of r educing su gar. Anal Chem  1959;31:42 6–8. 
[24] Lages F,  Lucas C.  Contr ibution to the phy siological 
characteri zation of  glycerol a ctive uptake in Sacccharomyces 
cerevisiae . Biochim  Biophy s Acta 1 997;1 322:8–18. [25] Chang JS,  Chou C,  Lin Y-U,  Lin P-J, Ho J-Y,  Hu T L. 
Kinetic charact eristics of  bact erial azo-dye decoloriz ation by 
Pseudomonas  luteola. Wat Res 2001 ;35:28 41–50. 
[26] Nam  S, Renganathan V.  Non- enzym atic reduction of azo 
dyes by  NADH.  Chemospher e 2000; 40:35 1–7. 
[27] Kudlich  M, Hether idge M J, Knack muss HJ, Stolz A. 
Autoxidation  r eactions of  differ ent ar omatic o-
aminohy droxynaphthalenes that a re form ed the anaer obic 
reduction of azo d yes. Environ Sci Technol 199 9;33: 896–90 1. 
[28] Gottschalk G,  Knack muss HJ. B acteri a and the 
biodegr adation  of c hemicals achieved natur ally, by 
combination,  or by constr uction. Angew Chem  Int Ed Engl 
1993; 32:1398–408. 
[29] Nör temann B, Bau mgarten J, Rast G, Knack muss HJ. 
Bacterial communities degrading a mino and 
hydroxynaphthalene- 2-sulfonate s. Appl Environ M icrobiol 
1986; 52:1195–202. 
[30] Blüm mel S, Contzen M , Lutz M, Stolz A,  Knack muss HJ. 
Isolation of a bacterial st rain with  the ability to utilize the  
sulfo nated azo co mpound 4- carboxy -4_-sulfoazobenz ene as the 
sole sour ce of  carbon and ener gy. Appl E nviron Microbiol 
1998; 64:2315–7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enz Mi crobial Tech nol 2002, 31(6): 848-854 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 3 
 
AZO REDUCTASE ACTIVITY IN ISSATCHENKIA 
OCCIDENTALIS  
 
 
 
 CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
Characterization of Azo Reduction Activity in a Novel Ascomycete 
Yeast Strain 
Patrícia A. Ram alho,1 M. Helena Cardoso,1* A. Cava co-Paulo,2 and M. Teresa Ra malho3
Department of Biol ogy,1
 Department of T extile Engi neering,2
 and De partment of Che mistry,3
 University o f 
Minh o, Braga, Portuga l 
 
 
Abstract 
Several m odel azo d yes are reductiv ely cleaved by grow ing c ultures  of an a scomycete yeast species , Issatchenkia  
occid entalis . In liquid media con taining  0.2 mM d ye and 2%  glucose in a mineral salts base , more than  80% of the d yes 
are removed in  15 h, essentially  under micr oaerophilic condi tions. Under anoxic conditions,  decolor ization d oes not  
occur, even in  the pres ence of pregrown ce lls. Kinet ic as says of a zo red uction a ctivities in quasi-restin g cells  
demonstrated th e following: ( i) while the optimum pH depends on dye stru cture, the  optimum pH range was observed in 
the acid ic rang e; (ii) the m aximum decolorizing  activi ty occurs  in the lat e expo nenti al phase; a nd (iii) the tem peratur e 
profile appro aches the ty pical bell-shaped curve. These results  indirectly  suggest the involveme nt of an enzy me activity  in 
azo d ye redu ction. The deco lorizing activity  of I. occid entalis is still observ ed, although at a lower level, when t he cells 
switch to aerob ic respira tion a t the expense of ethano l after glu cose exhausti on in the cu lture medium . Decolo rization 
ceased when all the ethanol was consumed; th is observation,  along with oth er lines of eviden ce, suggests th at azo d ye 
reduction depen ds on cell growth. Anthraquinon e-2-sulfonate, a redox medi ator, enhances the r eduction r ates of the N,N-
dimethylani line-based dyes and r educes  those of the 2-naph thol-b ased dyes, an effect which  seems to be compatible with 
a thermod ynamic factor. The d ye reducti on produ cts were tested as carbon and ni trogen sources. 1- Amino-2-naphthol was 
used as a carb on and nitrog en source, and N,N-dim ethyl-p-phenylenediamine wa s used only as a nitrogen source. 
Sulfanilic and m etanilic acids d id not support gro wth either  as a carbon or  nitrog en source.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
   
  Over the las t two decades , considerabl e work has  been 
done with the goal of using microorganisms as 
biorem ediation agents  in the tr eatm ent of was tewat er 
containing textile d yes. Thes e cont aminants contribute a 
minor fraction to the usually  high load of d issolved 
organic matter in textile effluents (35), but they are 
highly  visible and must be re moved in order to  comply  
with th e regulations concer ning effluent discharge.  
    Azo aromatic d yes ar e the major group of textile 
dyestuffs. Thes e structures  can be reduct ively cleaved 
into color less a mines b y sever al bac terial spe cies (for 
reviews , see references 2, 9, 41 , and  43); never theless, 
azo d ye reduction occurr ing in the presen ce of living 
matter can b e an abioti c proces s. An exam ple of this  is 
the r eduction o f acid or ange 7  (called  dye IV  in the 
present stud y) and reactiv e red 2 in anaerobic sludge, 
where sulfid e, produced  b y sulfate-reducing 
microorganisms, can r educe azo  bonds (45). In most of  
the reported pro cesses of azo d ye bioreduction , however, 
the par ticipation of an enz ymatic activity is as sumed. 
Since th e prod ucts of azo d ye reduction , with few 
excep tions (4, 11, 26), canno t be used by  bacteria as 
carbon and ener gy sources, th e cleavage of azo bonds is 
a gratuitous  process which can occur when the 
microorganisms use a reduced carbon compoun d as th e 
growth substrate.  
     
 
* Correspondin g author. Mailing  address: Depart ment of 
Biology , Univer sity of M inho, Cam pus de Gualtar , 4710- 057 
Braga, Portugal. 
Phone: ( 351) 253  60404 3. Fax: ( 351) 253 67 8983. E-mail: 
mhc@bio.uminho.pt.      Azo d ye reduction  occurr ing in the pres ence of living  
matter poses additional problem s. Sulfonic azo dyes ar e 
impermeant to the cell membranes.  NAD(P)H  is also 
imperm eant to the cell membranes and is b elieved to be  
the prim ary source of electrons . This is wh y redu ction of  
highly  polar azo  dyes is usua lly postulated  to tak e place 
outside the cell (43). This fact would be compatible 
either with an abiot ic reduction m ediated b y some 
extra cellular re ductan t spec ies (45) or wit h the  
involvement of an externally  directed reduc tase activity 
in the plas ma mem brane that wa s capable of tran sferring  
reducing  equiv alents to a cceptor spe cies in th e 
extra cellular medium . S o far,  several bact erial 
cytoplasmic azoreductases have been isolated and  
characterized (1 8, 33, 37 , 38). However, as sh own b y 
two recen t studies (5, 42) , the  putativ e azoreductas es 
had, in fact, insignificant in vivo  activity. 
    Independently of the intracellular location of the 
azoredu ctase, theoreticall y, a redox mediator could 
facilitate th e transfer of redu cing equiv alents from 
intracellular N AD(P)H to the substrate d ye. Th is 
hypothesis was proposed as ear ly as 1975 in a stud y 
describing  the decolor ization of azo  food d yes b y 
Proteus vulgaris  (15). The participation of  redox 
mediators in the  decolori zation of azo d yes by bacterial 
species is now g enerally  accepted, and s everal mediators 
(usually  quinon oid compounds)  have been d escribed as 
effectively  enhancing deco lorization  processes (7, 22, 
23, 40). The redox mediator s studied  are us ually 
exogenous comp ounds added to  the culture mediu m, but 
in a r ecent study (22) , Keck an d co-workers  observed 
that aerobic preincubation of a Sphingomonas  sp. strain 
with 2-naphthalenesulfon ate st rongly  stimulated the   
subsequent anaerobic  reduction of azo d yes by the same  
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 35CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
NN NCH3
CH3
NaO3SNN NCH3
CH3NaO3S
NN
NaO3SOH
NNOH
NaO3SDye I Dye II (Methyl Orange)
Dye IIIDye IV (Orange II) 
 
FIG. 1.  Structures of the azo dyes used in this work: m-[(4-dimethylamino)pheny lazo] benzenesulfo nic acid ( dye I), p-[(4- 
dimethyla mino)phenylazo] benzenesulfonic acid ( CI 13025 m ethyl orange or orange 52) (dy e II), m-[(2-hydroxy-1-
napthy l)azo]benzenesulf onic acid ( dye III), and p-[(2-hydroxy-1-napthy l) azo]benzenesulfo nic acid ( CI 15510 orange I I or acid or ange 7)  
(dye IV) . 
 
 
strain. In a later study (23), K eck e t al. identified 4-
amino-1,2-naphthoquinone  and 4-eth anolam ino-1,2-
naphthoquinon e, formed b y spontaneous oxid ation of  
1,2-dih ydroxynaphthalene ( an intermediate of  the 2-
naphthalenesulf onate degr adation), as  putativ e redox  
mediators in  the deco lorization  reaction. Another  stud y, 
observing an autoc atalytic ef fect in th e anaerobi c 
reduction of acid  orange 7, de monstrated that 1-amino-2-
naphthol, one of  the d ye reduction products, stimulated 
decolor ization (46). Th e presence of  redox  mediators  in 
humic substances naturally  foun d in soils h as also been  
reported to en hance decolor ization and oth er redox 
processes (10, 1 6, 23).  
    Azo dye reduction occurs pr eferentially  under  anoxic 
or ox ygen-limited conditions (6, 20, 24 , 28, 32, 34, 40, 
48). Under thes e circum stances , azo d yes act as  terminal 
electron ac cepto rs during microbial respira tion. Aerobic  
azo d ye redu ction processes in the presence of additional 
carbon sources were recen tly questioned b y Stolz (43) , 
since the experimental conditi ons of decolor ization have 
not unequivo cally  shown the presence of ox ygen in th e 
cultur e medium, being more consistent, in fa ct, with  
oxygen-limited conditions.  
    The few repor ts on bioremed iation of color ed effluents  
by yeasts usually  mention bi osorption as  the m ajor caus e 
for decolorization (14, 31). Martins et al ., however, 
isolated a strain of Candida zeylanoid es, w hich 
efficiently decolorizes several azo d yes (30) . Further 
work dem onstrated th at a redu ctive c leavage o f the a zo 
bond was involved in this pr ocess and describ ed some 
characteristics of the corresponding d ye redu cing activity 
(39). In this work, we exam ined the deco lorizing act ivity 
of a novel yeast strain , Issatch enkia occid entalis . This  
species  is even  more effi cient than C. zeylan oides  in 
decolor izing the previous ly tested d yes. Therefore, we  
decid ed to inv estigate , in m ore deta il, the effects of 
several p arameters on the perfo rmance of I. occidentalis  
as an azo  dye reducer. The evidence ob tained fr om this 
study is expected to provide a sound basis for the development of  a biotr eatment process for azo d ye-
containing wastewaters. 
 
MATERI ALS AND METHODS 
 
    Che micals and culture medium  component s. Peptone, y east e xtract, 
yeast nitr ogen base (YNB), and y east carb on base (YCB) were ob tained 
from  Difco. Other c hemicals wer e commercially  availa ble, analytical 
grade reagents. 
    Dy es. The s tructur es of the dyes tes ted in the present work are depicted 
in Fig. 1. Dye II (m ethyl orange, CI 13025) and dye IV  (ora nge II, CI 
15510), both ca. 85% dye conte nt, were purc hased from Sigm a-Aldrich 
and used without further purification. The other two dyes (m inimum 90%  
dye content) were synthesized by the conv entional method of coupling 
the di azon ium salt of metanilic acid wi th either N,N-di methyl-p-
phenylenediamine o r 1-am ino-2-naphthol (17 ). The structures of the 
isolated dyes, as sodium salts, were confirmed by  1H nuc lear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy in dimethyl sulfoxide. 
    M icroorganism and maintenance conditions. The a scomycete y east 
I. occidenta lis (PYCC 57 70) (deposited in the Portuguese Yeas t Culture 
Collection) was isolated on the basis of its capacity to decolorize YEPD  
(yeast extract-peptone-d extrose) ag ar plates containing 0.5% [wt /vol] 
yeast extr act, 1% [wt/vol] pept one, 2% [wt/vol] glucose a nd the azo dy e 
orange II, as  described  in aprevio us publicati on (30). The identification 
of the yeast strain followed the usual met hods described for yeast 
taxonomy (44) : testing of defined carbon compounds as fermentation 
substrates or as the sole carbon  and energy s ources, assimilation tests of 
nitrogen c ompounds, tem perature tolerance for gr owth (30, 35, and 
40°C), grow th in the presence of 0. 01 and 0.1% (wt/vol) cycloheximide, 
grow th in the pre sence of 50 an d 60%  (wt/vol) D-glucose, and hydroly sis 
of urea. M orphologic al c haracteristics were al so considered, i.e., 
vegetative repr oduction only by bud ding, form ation of p seudohyphae, 
and formation of persistent asci con taining roun d ascospores on  yeast 
malt agar. A com mercial softwar e (3) was used a s an a id for spec ies 
identification. The strain was routinely maintained on slants o f YEPD 
agar. 
    Analytical methods. Cell growth in liquid medium was monitored by 
attenua nce m easure ments (47) at 640 nm (D640). B lanks for these 
readin gs were prepared from aliquots of centrifuged medium. At high 
cell densities, both sa mple and bla nk were diluted with distilled water by 
the sam e factor. A linear correlatio n between attenuance readings (D640) 
and cell weight (dry weight) was established by the standard gravim etric 
method (cell  weight  [dry  wei ght] in grams.liter-1) = 1 .1289(D640 - 
0.0487); r2 = 0.996]. Dye conce ntration was monitored by absorbance 
readin gs of ali quots of centrifuged medium at  the dye λmax. The assay 
cuvette contained 0.3 ml of 1 M acetate buffer (pH 4.0), sample, and 
water to a volume of 3.0 ml; the blank was prepared with the same 
dilution of buffer in distilled water. Dissolved oxygen was measured as 
partial oxy gen pressure us ing a Clar k-type po larographic electrode and 
an ATI RUSSEL model RL 400  instrument according  to the  
 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 36CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
 
 
FIG. 2. Typical gr owth (□), pH (◊), and decol orization curves (∆) (A) and concentr ations of glucose (■), ethanol ( ●) and oxy gen (▲) (B) 
during incubatio n of I. occidentalis  on NDM containing 0.2 mM dye II. The initial cell  density ( D640) was 0. 09. 
 
manufacturer’s instructions (detection level, 0.1 mg.liter-1). Metan ilic and 
sulfanilic acids, formed by  reduction of dye I or II I and dye II or IV, 
respectively, were det ected and quantified by high-pressure li quid 
chromatogra phy (HPLC) an alysis, using a reversed-phase column (RP-
18) and an eluent containing the ion-pair reag ent tetrabutylammonium  
phosphate (TBAP), as  previously describ ed (39). Und er these conditions, 
metanilic and  sulfanilic acid s had ret ention times of 10.0 ± 0.5 and 12.4 ± 
0.5 min, respectively. Glucose and ethanol concentrations in the growth 
media w ere also determined by HPLC (retention times of 1 1.1 ± 0.2 and 
24.5 ± 0.2 min, respectively), using a Polyspher OAKC (Merck) colu mn, 
refract ive index detection, and  arab inose as the internal standard (27). 
    Decolo rization in liquid media. Decolor ization exper iments by  
grow ing cultures of I. occidentalis were typically perform ed in 250-m l 
cotton-plugged Erlenmeyer flasks with 100 ml of sterile medium (normal 
decolorization medium [NDM ]) co ntaining 2% glucose as a carbo n and 
energy sourc e and the test dye (0.2 mmol.liter-1) in a m ineral s alts base, 
as pr eviously desc ribed (39). The cultures were in oculated at a low cell 
density with a ce ll suspension prepared from a fresh ly grow n slant. The 
flasks were incubated und er orbital shaking (120 rpm) at 26°C, ex cept 
where stated otherwise. B iomass a nd concent rations of dye, sulfanilic or 
metanilic acid, glucose, and  ethanol were m easured as  described abov e, 
in samples of the inc ubation mixture col lected at defined times. 
Dissolved oxygen was measured directly in the incubation media. W hen 
testing the effect  of ad aptation of the strain to the dyes o n the 
decolorization process, the cel ls were pregrown in  NDM wit h or wit hout 
dye, until the mid-exponential growth phase was reached. The cells were 
then harvested by centrifugation at 5,000 rpm in an E ppendorf Centrifuge 
584OR, wash ed twice in cold sterile distilled water, and used to inoculate 
fresh sterile NDM containing 0.2 mmol of dy e . liter-1. The culture s were 
started at high cell densities (1.4 D units; 1.6 g [dry wt] of ce lls . liter-1). 
In control experiments, the ino cula consisted of un adapted cells. 
    Assim ilation of azo dye redu ction products.  Minimal media with all 
essential nutrients and vitamins except a carb on source (Y NB) or a 
nitrogen source (YCB) were pre pared according to the m anufacturer’ s 
instructions and supplemented with 0.5 mM metanilic or sulfanilic acid. 
Appropriate volumes of the se media (1 00 ml) in 2 50-ml Erlenm eyer 
flasks were inoculated with freshly grow n cells and incubated at 26°C 
and 120 rpm. Cell g rowth was monitored as described above. Con trol 
experiments w ere performed with 0.5 mM ammonium  sulfate as the sole 
nitrogen source in YCB or w ith 0.5 mM glucose as the sole carbon and 
energy source in  YNB. Us ing the same method, 1-amino-2-naph thol and 
N,N-d imethyl-p-phenylened iamine, both 0.5 mM, were test ed as nitrogen 
sources. The initial pH was  adjusted to 5.2 ± 0 .2. 
    Activity assays with resting cells. The dec olorization ac tivities of 
nongrowing ce lls were de termined a t various pH  values, with cells 
harvested in differen t growth stages and with or without redo x by using 
the redox  mediator anthraquinone- 2-sulfonic acid  (AQS). To  investigate 
the effec t of pH or temperature on de colorization activ ity, the cel ls were 
grown for ca. 11 h on NDM, harvested by centrifugation, wash ed, and 
resuspended in 0.05 M phosphate buffer so lution of the requ ired pH. The 
assay mixture contained, in a total volume o f 20 ml, 10.4 mM gl ucose 
and 0.047 mM dye; 0.1 mM AQS was included in activity assays of dyes 
I and II a nd om itted in the assays of dyes III an d IV. The assay mixture s typically contained 7.1 ± 0.3 g of ce lls (dry wt) . liter-1. The as says were  
performed in 2 h i n 50-m l cotton-plugged Erlenmeyer flask s shaken at 
120 rpm  and at 2 6°C. Within this period, the dye conc entration decre ased 
linear ly with tim e. The sam e procedur e was  followed with cells  harvested 
in dif ferent growth phases. 
 
RESULT S 
 
    Dye removal by  growing cultures. In decolorization  
assay s performed with d yes I to IV, the exp onential 
growth phase was observed b etween 5  and 12 h of 
incubation, fo llowing a lag phas e of ca. 4 h. Th e fastest 
decre ase in d ye concentr ation occurred during  the lat e 
exponential gro wth phase. Afte r 20 h of incubation, the 
percen tages of d ye removal w ere >95% for d yes I and II 
and ca. 85% fo r dyes III and I V. Figure 2A s hows a 
typical growth curve, as well as the evolu tion of the 
medium pH and d ye II con centr ation v ersus time, 
whereas Fig. 2 B display s the variation in glucose, 
ethano l, and d issolved ox ygen concentr ations within the 
same period .  
    HPLC analysis of supernatant samples f or the 
presence of d ye reduction produc ts revealed the presence 
of m etanili c acid or sulfan ilic acid during decolorization 
of dyes I (or III) and II (or IV ), respectively . These acids 
are stab le und er the exp erimental conditions, and as 
shown below, th ey are not us ed by this yeast as a carbon 
and energ y source or as a n itrogen source within the 
experiment p eriod. The ma ximum concentrations of 
these sulfonates in de color ized media approac hed th e 
stoichiom etric levels (0.17  ± 0.02 mM).  
    Ethanol s tarts to accum ulate in the culture medium  at 
the onset of the exponential gr owth phase, indicating that 
I. occiden talis is a ferm entative yeast. Since th e 
maximum y ield of ethano l is 0 .51 g . g of g lucose-1, the 
observed con centration  of ethano l in th e culture medium 
(Fig. 2B) approaches the expe cted value. 
    Effects of oxygen. In the  standard decolo rization 
experiments des cribed abov e, the incubation mixtures 
were con tained in cotton-p lugged Erlenmey er flasks and  
subject ed to agi tation (120 rpm ). Under these con ditions,  
 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 37CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
B
2,533,5
05 10 15
Time (h)pHA
110
05 10 15
Time (h)D640C
0246
0 5 10 15
Time (h)A470
 
 
FIG. 3. Var iation of cell density  measured as D640 (A), pH (B), and dy e concentr ation measured as A470 (C) in NDM  preadjusted to pH 3. 2 
containing 0.2 mM dye II under diff erent conditio ns: anoxic con ditions (∆), air-flushe d cultures (□), and nor mal incubation at 120 r pm 
(◊) (see text for det ails). The initial c ell density was  ≈3 D units. 
 
oxygen (from air) is admitt ed in the s ystem, b ut CO 2 
evolution , resulting from glucose f ermentation , 
contributes to decrease its concentration in the medium. 
In fact, analy sis of Fig. 2B shows that, after  6 h of  
incubation, diss olved ox ygen concentr ation is 0.2 mg . 
liter-1 or lower. Decolori zation, which is faster d uring the 
late expon ential phase, i.e., b etween 8  and 1 1 h of  
incubation (Fig . 2A), ther efore o ccurs under low oxygen 
concen trations.  
    In an attem pt to furth er elucidate the effect of  
dissolved ox ygen in the decolor ization proces s, 
addition al d ecolorization experim ents wit h cel l 
suspensions inoculat ed at  high d ensities (c a. 3.0 D units) 
were performed. Cells were gro wn for 10 h under the  
usual conditions and then harv ested b y centrifugation  
and was hed. The com bined p ellets were  resuspended in 
fresh NDM with 0.2 mM dy e II, and 100-ml volumes o f 
the resulting suspension wer e placed in separate 
Erlenm eyer flasks. The aer ation conditions  were as  
follows: one flask was continuo usly flush ed with sterile 
air and  incub ated while be ing stirred magnetically , and a 
second flask was flushed with  nitrog en for  15 min, 
tightly  plugged with a rubber stopper, and p laced in the 
orbital in cubator . A control experiment, in our standard  
conditions , was simultaneously  run. In the subsequent 12  
h of incubation , a ver y slight increase in grow th was 
detected (Fig. 3 A), but in  the flasks incubated u nder th e 
standard conditions or with oxygen flushing , a slight 
decrease in th e pH was observed (Fig. 3B). Th is was 
taken as eviden ce of meta bolic activity , which supported  
a deco lorization of ca. 70% , in b oth cas es (Fig. 3C). The  
dissolved ox ygen concentrations  were 3 .9 ± 0 .4 mg . 
liter-1 in the ae rated cultur e and <0.2 m g . liter-1 in the 
control cultur e. Under anoxic conditions, the color loss 
was only  ca. 20%, as seen in Fig. 3 , and oxygen 
concen tration remained be low th e detection  level. 
    The absence of metabolic activ ity in th e anoxic  
conditions , obtained as desc ribed above, was  further 
confirmed throu gh the observation that a cultur e started 
at a low c ell density and in cubated for 24 h failed to 
grow (results no t shown). 
    Effects  of dye. Possible toxic eff ects of  xenobiotic 
compounds on a microorgan ism can be pr eliminarily 
assessed by com paring its  growth curves  in the pres ence 
and absence of the tested compo unds. For d yes I to IV, it  has been obs erved that n either the specific gro wth rate  
(0.32 ± 0.03 h-1) nor the biomass y ield (0.16 ± 0.02 g 
[dry weight] . g of glucose-1) were significantly  affected 
by the pres ence of the  dyes. 
    Having excluded the poss ibility  that th e dyes 
them selves wer e toxi c, we also tes ted a possible 
enhanc ement of  the d ecolor ization process b y using cell 
suspensions which had  been gr own overnight in NDM 
containing 0.2 mM dy e as pr einocula. The vo lume of  
each preino culum was  20% of the f inal volum e of the 
incubation mixture. Preino cula grown in the absence of 
dye wer e used in control exper iments. For all the d yes 
tested, the decolorization curves  obtain ed with  adapt ed 
and nonadapted  cells did not present an y significant 
differen ces (Fig. 4), as observed earlier with C. 
zeylanoid es (39) . 
    Standar d dye reduction assay  with resting c ells. 
The appar ent rates of d ye remov al by growing yeast cells 
are aff ected by increas ing biom ass and, pres umably, by 
pH. A stud y of the p arameters affecting th e kinetics of  
decolor ization therefore requ ires buffered media and  a 
fixed amount of cells. Th is condition was appro ached b y 
establishing  the glucose conc entration  that allowed the  
best compromise between minimum cell growth and 
measurable d ye r eduction  activ ity. Glucose 
concen trations o f up to  20 mM in  0.05  M phosphate 
 
 
110
0 102 03 0
Time (h)D640
020406080100
% Dye III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 4. Growth of I. occidentalis  (triangles)  and decolo rization 
curves ( diamonds)  of dy e III by pr eadapted cells ( open  
symbols)  and nonadapted cells ( closed sym bols)  on NDM . 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 38CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIG. 5. Effect of gl ucose concentr ation on  specific  
decolorization rates, rdye (◊) and cell gr owth ( final D640/initial  
D640 ratio) (□). rdye is given  in m icromoles . hour-1 . gram of cells 
(dry wt [DW])-1. 
 
buffer (pH 4 .0) produced a final D640 /initial D640 ratio of 
≤1.1 in th e course of 2 h , the maximum time for the 
assay s (Fig. 5). For a glucose concentr ation of 1 0.4 mM 
in assay  mixtures, as used henceforth , the final 
D640/initial D640 ratio was <1.05 and th e measured  
specific activities therefore appr oached thos e of resting 
cells.  
    The d ye con centr ation  used  (0.047 mM) allowed  
direc t abs orbance r eadings, thus minimizing errors 
related to s ample di lution . The optim um biom ass 
concen tration was  determ ined by performing ass ays with  
various cell con centr ations from 0 to ca. 14 D units (0 to  
15.8 g of cells [dr y wt]  . liter-1). The  initia l 
decolor ization rates, as d etermined from  plots  of d ye 
absorbance v ersus time, in each assay mixture , displayed 
saturat ion lik e kineti cs, due to substrate lim itation a t 
higher b iomass concentr ations. In terms of specific 
decolor ization r ates, the op timum cell con centration  
ranged b etween 4 and 6  D units ( 4.5 to 6.7 g of cells [dr y 
wt] . liter-1), decreasing for D values above 6, as seen in  
Fig. 6A.  
    The effect of the redox  mediator AQS on the specific 
decolor ization r ate of d ye II was  also anal yzed. Th e 
assay  mixtur es containe d optimum cell and  glucose 
concen trations, as defined  above, an d AQS 
concen trations ranging from 0 to 0.445 mM. The 
decolor ization rate incr eased line arly, reaching a 
maximum threefold incr ease with an AQS  conc entration  
of 0.1 mM. The effect of fu rther concentration increase  
was negligib le (Fig. 6B). For su bsequent d ye reduction  
assays with thi s dye, and also with d ye I, which 
display ed th e same ty pe of  response, a 0.1 mM 
concen tration of  AQS was therefore adopted. H owever, 
in deco lorizatio n assay s of d yes III and IV, A QS wa s 
omitted be cause of its nega tive eff ect (r esults not 
shown). 
    Kinetic assays. The assays for assessing the effects  of 
dye concen tration, pH, tem peratu re, and growth p hase on 
the deco lorization rate wer e performed under the 
optimized conditions of glu cose concentration and cell 
density , as described abov e, with added AQS in  assay s 
with d yes I and II onl y. Ex cept when s tudying the effe ct 
of pH, cells wer e suspended in 0.05 M phosphate buffer, pH 4.0. Th e cells used in the assay s had prev iously  been  
grown for 10 to 11 h as d escribed in  Materials and  
Methods. However, in  the assay s inv estigating d ye 
reduction activities in diff erent growth phases, the cells 
were harv ested  at the spec ified times. The d ata from dye 
reduction assay s performed with  various con centrations 
of dye II as  the s ubstrate cou ld be fitt ed adequa tely to th e 
Michaelis-Menten equ ation, rdye = rdye,max [dye]/(Km + 
[dye]), where rdye and rdye,max are the initial and maximum  
decolor ization r ates, respe ctively, Km is th e Michaelis 
constant (millimolar) and [d ye] is the con centr ation of 
the d ye (millimolar).  The kin etic parameters obtained 
with the  Hanes  line arization o f the exper imental d ata 
were as follows: 036912
0102030405060
[Glucose] mMrdye
  (µmol*h-1*gDW-1)
11,11,2
Dfinal/Dinitial
rdye,max = 3.2 µmol . h-1 . g-1 and Km = 0.034 mM (r2 = 
0.995). 
    The effect o f pH on the decolor ization ra te was 
studied b y using  cell suspensions in phosphate bu ffers of 
pH ranging fro m 3 to 7. Ty pically , for d yes I and II, the 
decolor ization r ate was virt ually constant between pH  
values of  3 to 5, showing a fast d ecrease in the range 6 to 
7. In contrast, f or dyes III and IV, the decolo rization  
rates  decr eased with pH increas e in the rang e 3 to 6. 
Within the  pH range t ested, the maximum decoloriza tion 
rate was observ ed, in both ca ses, at pH 3. Figure 7A 
illustra tes this b ehavior for  dyes II and III. 
 
A
01234
0369 121518
Biomass concentration (g*L-1) rdye
 (µmol*h-1*gDW-1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B
01234
0,0 0,2 0,4 0,6
[AQS] mMrdye
 (µmol*h-1*gDW- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
FIG. 6. Effects of  biomass (A) and AQS concentr ation (B) on 
specif ic decoloriz ation rates ( rdye) of dye II. rdye is given in  
micromoles . hour-1 . gram of cells (d ry wt [DW])-1. CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
 
 
FIG. 7. Effects of  pH ( A), tem peratur e (B), and gr owth phas e 
(C) on specif ic decolorization rates ( rdye) (see tex t for details). 
(A) Effects of pH on dy e II (◊) and dye III (□) rdye; (B) effect of 
temperatur e on dy e II (◊) rdye; (C) effect of growth p hase on dye 
II (□) rdye and a typical gr owth cur ve (▲) for I. occidentalis  in 
the presence of dye II. rdye is given in  micromoles . hour-1 . gram 
of cells (d ry wt [DW])-1. 
 
The effect of temperature on  the decolori zation rate was 
tested  in the 18  to 60°C  temperature rang e. As  can be 
seen from Fig. 7B, th e temperatur e profile of the 
decolor ization r eaction approaches the expected bell-
shaped form  charac teristic of  enz yme activity. The 
decolor ization r ates varied fro m 2.0 (at 18°C) to 17.7 
µmol . h-1 . g-1 (at 50°C) , indicating tha t with in the assa y period (2 h) and at temperatur es up to 50°C, there was no 
apparen t reduction in the decolorizing activ ity of the 
cells. Com plete loss of activ ity was observed at  60°C. 
Azo reduction assay s were als o performed with yeast 
cells harves ted by centrifuga tion at dif ferent times, while  
growing in NDM. The cells were washed and then  
resuspe nded in the standard assay mixture.  As seen in 
Fig. 7C, a sharp  activity  maxim um is observed for cells 
in the late exponential phase, with the specific 
decolor ization rate for d ye II reaching the value 6.3 µmol 
. h-1 . g-1 at 10.5 h of incubation . During the early 
stationar y phas e, the rate r emained approx imately 
constant (2.8  µmol . h-1 . g-1), decreasing to 1.9 µmol . h-1 
. g-1 after  35 h . 
    Assimilation of dy e reduction pr oduc ts. The 
persistenc e of m etanilic or su lfanilic acids in de colorized 
supernatan ts of cultur es incub ated for  a long period  
suggested that none of these compounds could be 
assim ilated b y the yeast stra in (results not shown). This 
was confirmed b y incubation  of I. occiden talis in 
minimal mediu m (YCB or YNB) supplemented with a 
0.5 mM concentration of the app ropriate source. As seen 
in Table 1, none of the aminobenzen esulfonates 
supported y east growth as a source of carbon and  energ y 
or nitrogen. When N,N-dimeth yl-p-phenylenediamine 
was added to YCB minima l medium as a nitrogen  
source, yeast gr owth was observed. Th e other amine, 1 -
amino-2-naphth ol, was used  as a source of  carbon and 
energ y and o f nitrogen b y this yeast. Whenever  
assim ilation o ccurred, an ac idification of th e medium 
was observed (f inal pH of  3.5 ± 0.5). 
    Sequential batc h de coloriz ation of dy e II. Standard 
decolor ization experiments we re usually  monitor ed over 
a per iod up to 24 h. B y this time, glu cose was exhausted 
from the mediu m and d yes I and II had  been completely 
removed; for d yes III and IV, a residual amount of 15 to 
20% was still present. To exa mine the deco lorization 
activity of the yeast cells after glu cose dep letion , a 
decolor ized cu lture (300 ml), which had been incubated  
for 24 h under the standard con ditions, was subjected to  
five successive additions of  the required amounts of dy e 
II stock solution  to restore the initial dye con centration . 
Each d ye ad dition was done after co mplete 
decolor ization of the medium . As seen in Fig. 8, 
decolor ization w as com plete dur ing the firs t five cycles. 
During this  proc ess, ethanol con centr ation first increas ed 
to a maximum of 10 g . liter-1 in the course of the first  
cycle and then g radual ly decreased, dis appearing  at 160 
h of incub ation. By this time, decolori zation a lso ceas ed. 
In the cours e of s uccessive cycles, the conc entration of  
sulfanili c acid gradual ly incr eased, as  expe cted. Cel l 
growth also con tinued , with an increas e from 2.7 to 6.1  
D640 units, sho wing that th e ye ast switched  from  a 
ferm entat ive m etabolism, with glucose, to aerobic 
respiration, with eth anol. The dissolved oxygen 
concen tration co nsistentl y rem ained below the d etection  
level until the end of th e experiment. Th e decolorizing  
activity of the yeast cells, measured b y the standard  
assay , slowly  decreased with  the decolorization-d ye 
addition  cycles but was still  present in th e last sample of 
cells, collected after 200  h of incubation .  
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 40CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
TABLE 1. Biom ass y ields of I. occidentalis  on sulfanilic and m etanilic acids a nd 1-amino-2-naphtol a nd N,N-di methyl-p-
pheny lenediam ine as car bon or  nitrogen sour ces. 
 
Biomass y ield, g.mmol-1 (lag phase, h)  
Minimal 
medium Glucose  (NH4)2SO 4 Sulfanilic Acid  Metanilic  Acid 1-amino-2-naphtol N,N-di methyl-p-phenylene 
diam ine 
YCB   2.77 (-) NG NG 0.89 (12) 0.89 (2) 
YNB 0.09 (2)  NG NG 0.43 (-) NG 
NG, no gr owth 
 
DISC USSION 
 
Decolori zation o f azo dyes by yeasts is much less studied  
than the homologous process mediated b y bacterial 
species . In this  work, an attem pt was  made to elucid ate 
some basic physiologic aspects  associated with azo d ye 
destruction b y I. occidenta lis. This yeast , like a  
previously  described ascom ycete yeast strain (39), is 
capab le of  red ucing s everal monoazo d yes to th e 
corresponding amines and, th erefore, promotes their 
decolor ization  through the cleav age of the azo bo nd. 
    The decolor izing activity of I. occiden talis was first 
studied in actively  growing cultur es in a glucose-
containing cultu re medium w ith m oderate shaki ng (Fig.  
2). Under th ese conditions , ethanol was detected in the 
cultur e supernatant, showing that the microorgan ism wa s 
fermenting g lucose.  
    The sim ilariti es of the  decolorization prof iles by dye-
adapted and  nonadapted cells (Fig. 4) indic ate that  the azo d ye redu ction ac tivity in yeast cultur es is a  
constitut ive pro perty of the c ells, independ ent of their  
previous exposu re to th e dye. So far, we have not been 
able to de tect an y decolori zing a ctivity in ce ll extracts or 
in the supernatant broth, even when high [NADH]/[dy e] 
ratios wer e used . It thus appears  that azo  dye reduction 
activities are dependent on inta ct, active cells. Thus far, 
even in bacteria, the major enzy me responsible for  
azoredu ctase ac tivity in vi vo has not been po sitivel y 
identif ied. A recent report (42) d escribed a high in vitro 
azoredu ctase activity of a cytoplasmic flav in reductase, 
part of the r ibonucleotid e reductase comp lex in  
Escherichia c oli, bu t its overexpr ession in a  
Sphingomonas  sp. strain failed to significantly increase 
the in vivo red ucing ac tivity of the bac terium . Earli er, 
Kudlich and coworkers (24) had also detected an 
azoredu ctase act ivity in a m embrane fra ction of t he same 
Sphingomonas  sp. strain. Accord ing to thes e researchers , 
the   NADH:ubiquinone   oxidoreducta se   was   a   likely   
B
0,010,1110
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Time (h)D640
05101520
A470 / [Glucose] (g*L-1) / [Eth anol] 
(g*L-1)A
024[O 2](mg*L-1) / 
[Sulf.Acid] 
(mM)
036
pH
 
FIG. 8. M onitor ing of sever al parameters during succe ssive cy cles of addition of dy e to a cultur e of I. occidentalis  on NDM , incub ated at 
120 rp m, without a ny further nutrient addition. W ide wh ite arrows  indicate the ti mes of dy e addition (see text for details). (A ) pH (∆) and 
concentr ations of o xygen (♦) and sulfanilic acid [Sulf.Acid] ( ○); (B) cell growth (◊) and concentr ations of gluco se (●), ethanol (▲), and 
dye II (□). 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 41CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
ON
N HSO3H
N
NSO3H
OH
 
FIG. 9. Azo- hydrazone tauto mers of dye IV. 
 
 
candid ate for the azor eductase act ivity. Dissolved 
oxygen is repeatedly cons idered an inhib itor of the dye 
bioreduction pr ocess (36), since both molecules act as 
electron acceptors and ox ygen is a much stronger  
oxidant. Th is is, apparen tly, the reason wh y azo d yes are 
more readi ly reduced und er an aerobios is. The  effec t of 
oxygen was p articularly addressed in  this work  with I. 
occid entalis , because in the preliminar y exper iments of 
the d ecolor izing poten tial of the yeast str ains that we 
have studied so far, no atte mpt was m ade to pre vent the  
access of ox ygen to  the d ye-containing  incubation 
medium . The decolor izing experiments were usually  
performed in co tton-plugged f lasks, shaken at 120 rpm.  
Under these standard condition s, faster deco lorization 
rates were indeed observed at  low ox ygen con centrations  
(<0.2 mg . liter-1), which can be considered  
microaerophilic (21). However, our results indicate th at 
oxygen does no t significantly  interfere  with color  loss, as 
seen in air-flush ed cultur es (Fig. 3). A likely  explanation  
for this f act is the high k inetic barrier  involv ed in th e 
reduction of the trip let grou nd-state d ioxygen. In  
contrast, under  anoxic conditi ons, i.e., in a nitrogen 
flushed culture incubated in rubber-stoppered  flasks, the 
exten t of deco lorization was  rather low (ca. 20% ). Sinc e 
pH (as well as cell densi ty) esse ntially remained constant  
in the cours e of the exp eriment, a lack of m etaboli c 
activity was  suspected. In  a separate exper iment that was  
also conduct ed under anoxic conditions in which the 
cultur e was ino culated at a low cell d ensity, the yeast 
failed to grow. Thes e obser vations show that I. 
occid entalis  has an abs olute requ irement for ox ygen, i.e., 
places it in the c ategor y of the a erobic-ferm enting yeasts 
(1). Th erefor e, even  pregrow n cells were  unable of 
performing azo dye reduction in  the absence of oxygen. 
As far as we know, there is no previous repo rt of a 
similar situa tion in deco lorization processes m ediated b y 
facul tative an aerobic ba cteria. The effe cts of pH,  
temperatur e, dye and r edox mediator concentratio ns, and  
growth phase on decolor ization rates sugg est the 
participation (dir ect or indirect ) of an enz yme activity in 
azo d ye reductio n, because (i) th e temperature pr ofile of  
the azo redu ction activi ty canno t easil y be interpreted on 
the grounds of  a purely  abiotic process and  (ii) th e decline of activity at the ons et of the s tationary phase is 
more com patible  with a reduced metaboli c activity of the  
cells. Additionally , azo  dye reduction rate, like the 
intracellular for mation of NAD(P)H, is a growth-
dependen t process, since it do es not occur without a 
carbon and ener gy source. In fact, deco lorization of d yes 
III and IV cease d upon glucose exhaustion in the cultur e 
medium, and decolorization of  dye II, after the  diauxi c 
shift (Fig. 8) , was linked to the  presence o f ethanol. Th e 
assay s involv ing a redox mediator , AQS, produced 
opposing effects  in the decolor ization rates of the N,N-
dimeth ylanilin e- based d yes and 2-naphthol-based d yes: 
reduct ion ra tes increas ed for d yes I and II but d ecreas ed 
for d yes III and IV in the presence of A QS. The 
explan ation  for t hese app arently contrad ictory findings is 
likely  to be pu rely thermod ynamic, dep ending on the 
relative r eductio n potentials of dyes and mediator. The 
role of redox mediators in th e process of azo d ye 
reduction b y yeasts ther efore requ ires further 
investiga tion, but its effective usefulness in th is yeast  
process is doubtful consid ering that only high 
[AQS] /[dye] ratios (>20) pro duce signif icant rate 
enhancements. Concerning the effect of pH  on the 
decolor ization rates , there is als o a considerab le 
differen ce betw een N,N-d imethylaniline- bas ed dyes 
(dyes I and II) and 2-naphthol-b ased d yes (d yes III and  
IV). D yes with a hydroxyl grou p ortho  to the azo bond, 
becaus e they exist in th e tau tomeric a zo-hydrazone  
forms (Fig. 9), have an abnormally  high pK a2; for d ye IV 
(and presumably  for d ye III), pK a2 is 11.4 (49). This 
means that the  dye molecul es will have an  overall 
negative charg e in the pH range  3 to 6. This f act alone is 
probably  one factor making these d yes less susceptible to 
reduction than d yes I or II. Additionally , since th e global 
reaction for d ye reduction cons umes four H+ ions from 
the medium plus the two hydrogen atom s fro m 
NAD(P) H (reaction 1), a decrease in [H+] will have the  
effect of shiftin g the equilibriu m in the direction of the 
reagen ts, thus  making the fr ee energ y for the reac tion 
less negativ e. The observed tr end of an appar ent dye 
reduct ion ra te with in creasing p H is consistent with the  
observation th at the kine tics of re dox react ions is usuall y 
determ ined by thermodynamics.  
 
Ar-N=N-Ar ’ + 4H+ + 2NAD(P)H  ↔ Ar-NH 3+
 
+ Ar’-NH 3+ + 2 NAD(P)+    (1)  
 
    Dyes I and II , in contr ast, have a pK a2 of ≈3.5, and 
protonation  occurs in an  azo  nitrogen  (Fig. 1 0). Th is 
means that, up to pH ≈5, a still considerab le fra ction of  
the m olecules will be pro tonated in one azo nitrogen , 
apparen tly in an  amount a llowing a f ast decolo rization  
rate.  
 
 
 
 Ar NN NCH3
CH3Ar NHN NCH3
CH3..
+   H++
 
 
FIG. 10. Protonization of N,N-dimethylamino-based dyes at an azo nitr ogen.  
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 42CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
The abov e con clusions show th at, in th is respe ct also, 
the r eduction b y a yeast is considerably  differ ent from 
the r eduction b y bacteria, which has an op timum pH 
range close to  neutrality  (8, 33). 
    The decolo rizing activity of I. occid entalis  is not 
strictly related to a ferm entative proces s, since it  
continu ed even after g lucose ex haustion. Under  these 
conditions , the yeast switch es to aerobi c respir ation , at 
the expense of  ethanol, which  is the major carb on and 
energ y source in  the medium. Ethanol depletion , at 160  
h of incub ation, coincided with the disapp earan ce of th e 
decolor izing activity. Because the shake flas ks were 
moderately  agitated (120  rpm), the concen tration of  
dissolved ox ygen rem ained belo w the detec tion level . 
Therefor e, the ethano l-depend ent azo d ye reduction 
equal ly occurred under m icroaerophi lic cond itions, 
although at a lower rate. The assimilation assays with  
sulfanili c and m etanilic acids re vealed their in ability to 
be used as car bon and energ y sources and  also as 
nitrogen s ources. This  fact is not surprising, b ecaus e 
excep t for a few works  describing th e bacterial 
degradation o f sulfanilic acid (12 , 13 ), 6-
aminonaphthalene-2-sulf onate (19, 25), and 2-
aminobenzen esulfonate (29), arenesulfon ates are 
usually  describ ed as x enobio tic compounds. The 
persistence of  the oth er two amines expe cted from dye 
reduction, N ,N-dimeth yl-p-phen ylened iamine ( dyes I 
and II) and 1-amino- 2-naphthol (d yes III and IV),  
could not be detected b y HPLC anal ysis, since they are 
quickly  oxidized  in aerated aqueous solutions, fo rming  
colored  products, and their elution profiles change 
considerab ly within a short per iod of time. However, 
the colors associated with the oxidation prod ucts of 
either N,N-dim ethyl-p-phen ylenediamine (deep pink) or 
1-amino-2-naphthol (dark  yellow to brown) w ere no t 
seen in decolo rized m edia. The as similation  tests 
revealed that N,N-dimeth yl-p-phen ylenediamine was 
used as nitrog en source whereas 1-amino-2-naphthol 
was both a source of  nitrog en and a source of  carbon 
and energ y, thu s accounting fo r the absen ce of their  
oxidation  produ cts in the d ecolorized  supernat ants. This 
work s hows  that the ascomycete yeast I. occidentalis  
displays an effective azo d ye redu ction  capacity, 
comparativ ely unspecifi c but , neverth eless, structure  
dependen t in su ch aspects as  glucose requ irements for 
complete d ecolorization, pH- activity profil es, and effec t 
of the tested red ox mediator . All of th ese factors  must  
be taken into account when co nsidering the p ossible 
application of the yeast to a bior emediation process fo r 
azo text ile dyes. Equall y im portant is the ef fect of  
dissolved ox ygen in th e de colorization pro cess.  This 
particular s train, becaus e it is  an aerobic-f ermentative 
yeast, has an absolute requir ement of ox ygen for  growth  
and henc e, for d ecolor ization. While ox ygen traces are 
sufficien t for g rowth and allo w dye reductio n, our 
results also poin t to a non inhibitor y effect of moderate 
levels of ox ygen in the process. The  decolori zation 
process is also g rowth dependent,  pointing to NAD(P)H  
availability as a crucial factor. This con clusion  opens 
further p erspectives in the search for more efficient 
yeast str ains in azo dye decolori zation. 
 
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
P.A.R. gratefully  acknowledges a P h.D. scholar ship f rom the 
European Project BIOEF TEX . 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1. Alexander, M. A. , and T.  W. Jeffr ies. 1990. Re spiratory  effic iency 
and metabolite partitioning as regu latory phenomena in yeasts. Enzyme  
Micr ob. Technol. 12:2–19. 
2. Banat, I. M., P. Ni gam, D. Singh,  and R. March ant. 1996. 
Microbial decolorization of textile dye-containing efflu ents: a rev iew. 
Bioresou r. Techno l. 58:217–227 . 
3. Barnett, J . A., R. W. Pay ne, and D. Y. Ya rrow . 1990. Yeast 
identification program, vers ion 2. Cambridge University Press,  
Cam bridge, United Kingdom. 
4. Blu¨mel, S., M. Co ntzen, M. Lut z, A. Stol z, and H.-J. Knackmuss. 
1998. Isolation of a b acterial strain with the ab ility to utilize the 
sulfonated azo compound 4-carboxy-4-sulfoazobenzene as the sole 
source of ca rbon and energy. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64:2315–2317. 
5. Blu¨mel, S., H.-J. Knackmu ss, and A.  Stolz. 2002. Molecular 
cloning and charact erization of the gen e cod ing for the aerob ic 
azore ductase from Xenophilus azovorans KF46F. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol. 68:3948–3955. 
6. Bragger, J. L., A. W. Lloyd, S. H. Soozandeh far, S. F. Bloomfield, 
C. Marriott, and G. P. Martin. 1997. Inv estigations into th e azo  
reducing activity of a com mon colonic microorga nism. Int. J. Pharm . 
157:61–71 . 
7. Cervantes, F. J., F. P. van der  Zee, G. Letti nga, and J. A. Field. 
2001. Enh anced decolourisation of Aci d Orang e 7 in a con tinuous 
UASB reactor with quinone s as redox mediator s. W ater Sci. Technol. 
44:123–12 8. 
8. Chang, J.-S., C. Chou, Y.-C. Li n, J.-Y. Ho , and T. L. Hu. 2001. 
Kinetic ch aracteristics of bacterial azo-dye deco lourisation by 
Pseudo monas luteola. Water Res . 35:2841–2850. 
9. Chun g, K.-T., and S. E. St evens, Jr. 1993. Degradatio n of azo d yes 
by env ironmental microorganisms an d helminths. Environ. Toxicol. 
Chem . 12: 2121–2132 . 
10. Coates, J. D., K. A. Cole, R. Chakrabort y, S. M. O’C onnor, and 
L. A. Achenb ach. 2002. Diversity and ubiquity of bacteria capable of 
utilizing humic substances as e lectron donors for anaer obic respiration. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68:2445–2452. 
11. Coughlin, M. F., B. K. Kink le, and P. L. Bish op. 1999. 
Degradation of azo  dyes cont aining aminonaphthol by Sphingomonas 
sp. strain 1CX. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechno l. 23:341–346. 
12. Coughlin, M. F., B. K. Kink le, and P. L. Bish op. 2002. 
Degradation of A cid Orange 7 in an aerobic biofilm. Chem osphere 
46:11–19. 
13. Coughlin, M. F., B. K. Ki nkle, and P. L. Bi shop. 2003. High  
performance de gradation of az o dye Acid Orange 7 and sulfanilic ac id 
in a labora tory scale r eactor af ter seeding with culture d bacterial strains. 
Water Res. 37: 2757– 2763. 
14. Donm ez, G. 2002. Bio accumulation of the reactiv e textile dyes by 
C. tropicalis grow ing in molasses medium. Enzyme Micro b. Technol. 
30:363–36 6. 
15. Dubin, P., and K. L. Wright. 1975. Reduction of az o food dyes in 
cultures of Proteus vulgaris. Xen obiotica 5:563–571 . 
16. Field, J. A. 2002. Limits of anaerobi c biodegrad ation. Water Sci . 
Technol. 45:9–18. 
17. Furniss, B. S., A. J. Hann aford, P. W. G. Sm ith, and A. R.  
Tatch ell. 1989. Vogel ’s textb ook of pract ical o rganic chemistry, 5th 
ed., p. 951. Longman Group UK, Ltd., Harlow, Essex, United Kingdom. 
18. Ghosh, D. K., A. Mandal, and J. Chaudhur i. 1992. Puri ficatio n 
and par tial characterization of two azoreductases from Shigella 
dysenteriae type 1.  FEMS Micr obiol. Lett. 98:229–233. 
19. Haug , W., A. Schm idt, B. No¨ rtmann, D. C. Hem pel, A. Stol z, 
and H.- J. Knack muss. 1991. Min eralization of th e sul fonated azo dye 
Mordant Ye llow 3 by a 6-am ino-naphthalene-2-sulfonate-degrading 
bacterial co nsortium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 57:3144–3149. 
20. Hayase, N., K . Koun o, and K. Ushio. 2000. Isolation and 
chara cterization of Aeromonas sp. B-5  capable of decolo rizing v arious 
dyes. J. Biosci. Bio eng. 90:570– 573. 
21. Isik, M., and D. T. Sponza. 2003 . Effect  of oxygen o n the 
decolorization of azo dy es by  Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas sp. 
and fate of ar omatic a mines. Proce ss Biochem. 38:1183–1192. 
22. Keck, A., J . Klein, M. Kudl ich, A. St olz, H.- J. Knackmuss, and 
R. Mattes. 1997. Reduction of az o dyes by redox m ediators originating 
in the naphthalenesulfo nic acid  degradation pathway of Sphingomonas 
sp. strain BN6. Appl . Environ. Microbiol. 63:3684–36 90. 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 43CHAPT ER 3. AZO RED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY IN I. OCCIDENT ALLIS  
 
23. Keck, A., J. Rau,  T. Reemtsma, R. Mattes, A. Stolz, and J.  
Klein. 2002. Ident ificati on of quinoide redox m ediator s that ar e form ed 
during the degradation of na phthalene-2-sulfonate by Sphingomonas 
xeno phaga BN6 . App l. Envi ron. Microbiol. 68:4341–4349. 
24. Kudlich, M., A. Keck , J. Klein, and A. Stolz. 1997. Localization 
of the enzyme system  invo lved in a naerobic reduction of azo dyes by  
Sphingomona s sp. strain BN6 and effec t of ar tificial redox mediators 
on the rate of azo dye reduction. Appl. Environ. Microbi ol. 63:3691–
3694. 
25. Kuhm, A. E., A. Stolz, K. L. Nga i, and H.-J . Kn ackmuss. 1991. 
Purification a nd chara cterization o f 1, 2-dihydroxynaphthalene 
dioxy genase from a bacterium that degrades na phthalenesulfonic acids. 
J. Bacteriol. 173:3795 –3802. 
26. Kulla, H. G., R. Krie g, T. Z immermann, an d T. Leisinge r. 1984. 
Experimental evolution of azo dye-degrading bacteria, p. 663–667. In 
M. J. Klug and C. A. Red dy (ed. ), Current perspectives in microbia l 
ecology. American Society for Microbi ology, Washington, D.C.  
27. Lages, F., and C. Lucas.  1997. Con tribution to the physiological 
chara cterization of gly cerol active upta ke in Sacc haromyce s cer evisiae . 
Biochem . Biophys. Acta 1322:8–18. 
28. Lasz lo, J.  A. 2000. Regen eration of azo -dye-saturated cellulosic 
anion exchange resin b y Burkholderia cep acia anaerobic dy e reduction. 
Environ. Sci. Technol . 34:167–172. 
29. Mampel, J., J. Ruff, F. Junk er, and A . M. Cook. 1999.  The 
oxygenase compone nt of the 2-am inobenze nesulfonate dioxy genase 
system  from Alcaligenes sp. strain O-1. Microb iology 145:3255–3264. 
30. Martins, M. A., M. H. Cardoso, M. J. Queiroz, M. T. Ramalho, 
and A. M. O liveira-Campos. 1999. Biodeg radation of azo dyes by the 
yeast Candida zeylanoides in batch a erated cu ltures. Chemosphere 
38:2455–2 460. 
31. Meeh an, C., I . M. Ba nat, G. McMu llan, P. Ni gam, F. Smyth, and 
R. Marchan t. 2000. Deco lorization of Rem azol Black-B using a 
thermotolerant yeast, K. ma rxianus IMB 3. Environ. Int. 26:75–79. 
32. Moir, D., S. Masson, and I. Chu. 2001. Structure-acti vity 
relationship study on t he bioreduction of az o dy es by  Clostridium 
paraputrificum. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 20:479–48 4. 
33. Moutaouakkil, A.,Y. Zeroual,  F. Z. Dzayri, M. Talbi, K. Lee,  
and M. Blaghen. 2003. Purification and  partial charact erization of 
azore ductase from  Enterobacter ag glomerans. Arc h. Biochem . 
Biophys. 413:139–146. 
34. Nigam, P., I. M. Ban at, D. Singh, and R. M archant. 1996. 
Microbial process for t he decolorization of textile effl uent containing 
azo, diaz o and reac tive dy es. Proce ss Biochem. 31:435–442. 
35. Park, J., and J. Shore. 1984. Water for the dyehouse—su pply, 
consumption, recovery and d isposal. J. Soc. Dyers Col ourists 100:383–
399. 36. Pearce, C. I., J. R. Lloyd, and  J. T. Guthri e. 2003. The removal 
of co lour fr om texti le wastewater using whole bacterial ce lls: a review.  
Dyes Pigm ents 58:179–196. 
37. Rafii, F., and C . E. Cernig lia. 1990. An anaerobi c non denaturing 
gel a ssay for the detection of azor eductase from  anaerobic ba cteria. J. 
Microbiol. Meth ods 12:139–148 . 
38. Rafii, F., and T.  Coleman. 1999. Cloning an d ex pression in 
Escheri chia coli of an azoreduc tase gene  from  Clostridium perfringens 
and com parison with  azore ductase ge nes from  other bac teria. J. Basic 
Microbiol. 39:29–35. 
39. Ramalho, P. A., H. Scholze, M. H. Cardoso, M. T. Ramalho, and 
A. M. Oliveira-Camp os. 2002. Improved conditions for the aerobi c 
reductive decolorisatio n of az o dyes by  Candida zeylano ides. Enzyme 
Micr ob. Technol.  31:848–854. 
40. Rau, J., H. J. K nackmuss, and A. Stolz. 2002. Effec ts of different 
quinoid redox  mediators on the anaerobic reduction of azo dyes by 
bacteria. Environ. Sci. Techn ol. 36:1497–15 04. 
41. Robinson, T., G.  McMull an, R. Marcha nt, and P. Nigam . 2001. 
Rem ediation of dyes in t extile e ffluent: a critic al review on cu rrent 
treatment technologies with a proposed altern ative. Bi oresour. Techn ol. 
77:247–25 5. 
42. Russ , R., J . Rau, and A. Sto lz. 2000. The function of cy toplasmic 
flavin red uctases in the re duction of a zo dy es by  bacter ia. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 66:1429–14 34. 
43. Stolz, A. 2001. Bas ic and  applied asp ects in the microbial 
degradation of az o dyes. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 56:69–80. 
44. van der W alt, J. P.,  and D. Y.  Yarrow . 1984. Metho ds fo r the 
isolation, maintenance, classification and identification of yeasts, p. 45–
104. In N. J. Kreg er-van Rij (ed.), Yeasts—a ta xonomic study. Elsevier, 
Amsterdam , The Nether lands. 
45. van der Z ee, F. P., I. A. E. Bis schops, V. G. Blanch ard, R. H. M. 
Bouwman, G. Lettinga, and J. A. Field. 2003. The con tribution of 
biotic and  abio tic processes during azo d ye red uction in anaerob ic 
sludge. Water Re s. 37:3098–31 09. 
46. van der Z ee, F . P., G. Lettinga, and J. A. Field. 2000. The role of 
(auto)catal ysis in the mechanism of an anaerobi c azo  redu ction . Water 
Sci. Technol. 42:301– 308. 
47. Verhoven,  J. W. 1996. Internatio nal Un ion of Pure an d Applied 
Chemistry, Org anic Ch emistry Di vision Co mmission on  
Photochemistry: glossary of term s used  in p hotochemistry (IUPAC 
recommendations 1996). Pure Appl. Chem. 68:2223–2286. 
48. Yu, J ., X. Wa ng, and P. L. Yue. 2001. Optimal decolo rization and 
kinetic modeling of synthet ic dyes by  Pseudomona s strains. Water Re s. 
35:3579– 3586. 
49. Zollinger, H. 1991. Color chem istry. Syntheses, properties and 
applications of organic dyes and pigments, 2nd ed. VCH, Weinheim, 
Germany. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2004 , 70(4): 2279-2288 44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 4 
 
PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRADATION FROM REDOX 
POTENTIALS  
 
 CHAPT ER 4. PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRAD ATION FR OM REDOX POTENT IALS 
 
Predicting Dye Biodegradatio n from Redox P otential s 
Andrea Zille,† Patricia Ramalho,‡ Tzanko Tzanov, † Roy Millward,† Veronika Aires,† 
Maria Helena Cardoso,‡ M aria Teresa Ram alho,§ Georg M. Güebi tz,| and 
Artur Cavaco -Paulo*,† 
Department o f Textile Engineer ing, University  of Minho, 4800 -058 Guimarães, Portugal, Dep artments of 
Biolog y and Chemistr y, University  of Minho , 471 0-057 Braga, Po rtugal, and Dep artment of  Enviro nmental 
Biotechno logy, Graz Univ ersity  of Technolog y, 8010 Graz, Austria  
 
 
Abstract 
Two biological approaches for decol orization of azo sulfonated dy es have been  com pared:  reductive 
decol orization with the ascomycete  yeast Issat chenkia occidentalis and enzymatic o xidative decolorizatio n 
with Trametes villo sa laccase alone or in the presence of the mediator 1-hydroxyben zotriazole. The redox 
potential difference betwee n the biological c ofactor involved in th e reductive activ ity of growing  cells and  the 
azo dye is a reliab le indicatio n for th e decolorizatio n ability o f the biocatalyst. A lin ear relation ship exists 
between the redox potential of the azo dyes and t he decolorization e fficiency of enzy me, enzym e/mediator, 
and yeast. The less po sitive the anod ic peak of the dye, th e more easily it is d egraded  oxidatevely wit h 
laccase. The m ore positive the cathodic pea k of the dye, the m ore rapidl y the dye molecule is reduce d with 
yeast. 
 
 
Introduc tion 
 
    Azo dy es ar e the larg est group of sy ntheti c dyes, 
applied to all fi ber ty pes. How ever, during the  dyeing 
process not all  of the dy e is fixed on the textile  
material and u p to 50% may be lost in the  wast e 
strea ms, de pending on the dy e type, depth of shade,  
and dy eing process. Co nventional treat ments of 
textile mill effluents do n ot rem ove efficientl y most 
of these dy es ( 1). Biodegradability  of the azo  
chromophore s is base d on oxidation and/or reductio n 
reactions with enzy mes, bact eria, or fungi ( 2). Under  
aerobic, an aerobic, or sequen tial ana erobic- aerobic  
treatments many bacteria redu ce the a zo bon ds in dy e 
molecules to  aromatic a mines, by  the activity  of low  
specificity  azo -reductase s (3-5). However, the az o 
dyes and their reductive biot ransfor mation products 
(aromatic amines) have b een shown to be toxi c and in  
some cases mutagenic ( 6). Therefore, accu mula tion of  
these co mpounds should be avoided by  using 
alternative dy e decolorizatio n approache s. 
    Laccase (EC 1.10.3.2) is a multicopper o xidase,  
which reduce s oxy gen to water and si multaneously  
perfor ms on e-electron oxi dation of many aromatic 
substrates such as phenol s and aromatic a mines (7, 8). 
This enzy me decolorize s so me azo dy es without  
direct cleava ge of the azo bond through a  highly  
nonsp ecific free radical mechanism, thereby  avoidin g 
the for mation o f toxic aro matic amines (9). However,  
the sub strate sp ecificity  of laccase li mits the n umber  
 
* To who m corresponde nce should b e addr essed.  Fax: +351 25 3 
5102 93. Em ail: artur@det.u minho.pt. 
† Depart ment of Te xtile Engineer ing, University of Min ho. 
‡ Depar tment of Biology , Univer sity of M inho. 
§ Depar tment of C hemistry, Univer sity of M inho. 
| Graz Univer sity of Technology .      
proble m laccase/mediator sy stems are nor mally used 
to broaden t he range of az o dyes and to i ncrease the 
decolorizatio n rates ( 10-12). 
    The ability  of the bio agents to degrade azo dy es 
depend s on the structural  char acteristic s of the dy e, 
the te mperature  and p H of trea tment, the pre sence of  
intermediate s, and the differe nce bet ween th e redo x 
potential s of th e biocataly st and the dy e. This stu dy 
discu sses the  biodegradatio n under aerobi c conditions 
of azo dy es with y easts with re ducing activity  and an  
oxidative e nzyme laccase with or without mediator. 
These two a pproaches h ave b een co mpared on the  
basis of the el ectroche mical properties of d yes and  
bioagent s (13-15). The questio n targeted by  this paper  
is wheth er the redox potential i s a preli minary  tool to 
predict the decolorization cap acity  of oxidative and  
reductive biocat alysts. 
 
Materials an d Methods 
 
    Dyes and Reagents. The structures of the dyes and 
the mediator te sted in the pre sent work are dep icted in  
Chart 1. Dyes  I and III ( minimum  90% dye content)  
were sy nthesi zed by  the conventional method of 
coupling t he diazoniu m salt of methanilic  acid wit h 
either N,Ndimethyl-p-pheny lenediamine or 1- amino-
2-naphthol ( 16). The structures of the isol ated dyes, 
as sodiu m salts, were  confirmed by  1H NM R 
spectro scopy  in dymethylsulfoxide (DMS O). All 
other reage nts and dy es were  purchased fro m Sig ma-
Aldrich and use d without further purification. 
    Enzyme. Laccase (EC 1.10.3.2) from  Tramete s 
villosa (5.3 mg protein/ mL, 600 U/mL, suppli ed fro m 
Novo Nordi sk, Den mark) was u sed fo r dy e 
Biotechn ol Prog   2004, 20: 1588-1592 46CHAPT ER 4. PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRAD ATION FR OM REDOX POTENT IALS 
 
Chart 1. D ye and Med iator  Structures 
 
NN NCH3
CH3
NaO3S 
I) 3-(4-dim ethylamino-phen ylazo)-benzen e sulfonic acid 
sodium salt NN NCH3
CH3NaO3S
 
 
II) Acid Orange 52 
NN
NaO3SOH
 
III) 3-(2-h ydroxy-naph thalene-1 -phen ylazo)-ben zene 
sulfonic  acid sodium sa lt NNOH
NaO3S
 
 
IV) Acid Orange 7 
NOH SO3Na
SO3NaNaO3S N
 
V) Acid R ed 27 SO3Na
SO3NaNN NN NNOH
NH2NaO3S
SO3Na 
VI) Direct Blue 71 
HO
H2NSO3Na
SO3NaS
SN
NO
O
O
ONaO 3SOH2CH2C
NaO 3SOH2CH2C NN
 
VII) Reactiv e Black 5 NN
N
OH 
 
HBT  – 1-H ydroxyBenzoTriazole 
 
decolorizatio n at pH 5 (0.1 M Na acetat e buffer) as 
previously  desc ribed  (17). 
    Microorgani sm. The asco mycete y east 
Issatc henkia  occidentali s (Port uguese Y east Culture  
Collectio n 577 0) was i solate d on the ba sis of its 
capacity  to de colorize agar plates containing yeast 
extract/pepto ne/glucose 0.5:1:2 (% w/v) and t he azo  
dye Orange II, as de scribe d in a previou s publ ication  
(18). 
    Decolori zation with Lacca se and 
Lacca se/Media tor System. Dye solutions (0. 1 mM; 
2.5 m L) buffered  with 0.1 M Na acetate buffer , pH 5, 
were incubat ed with  20 µL of laccase (5.3 mg  
protein/ mL, 600 U/mL) and 0. 5 mL of distille d wate r 
in a stand ard stirred c uvett e at 25 °C. T he dy e 
absorba nce wa s measured at different ti mes during 
the experi ment and the pe rcentage of e ffluent  
decolorizatio n thereof wa s cal culated. In the case of 
experi ments wit h mediator the water volu me (0.5 mL) 
was repla ced by 0.1 m M aqueou s solutio n of 1-
hydroxy benzotriazole  (HBT).  
    Dye Decol orization with Microorg anism.  
Decolorizati on experi ments by growing cultur es of I. 
occidentali s were ty pically p erformed in 2 50 mL 
cotton-plugge d Erlen meyer flask s with 100  mL of 
sterile medium (nor mal decolorization medium, 
NDM) c ontaini ng 2% gluco se, as carbo n and energy  
source, and 0.2 mM tested dye, in  a m ineral salts 
base, a s previously describ ed (19). The flas ks were incubated un der orbital shakin g (120 rp m) at 26 °C. 
Dye concentra tion was monitored by  absorbance  
readings of c entrifuged medium aliquot s at the dy e 
λmax. The assa y cuvette contained 0.3 mL of 1 M 
acetate buffer (pH 4.0), sa mple, and water to 3.0 mL; 
the blan k was prepared  with  the same dilu tion o f 
buffer in distilled water. 
    Electrochem ical Measurements.  Cyclic 
volta mmetry of the a zo dy es was perfor med using  a 
Voltalab 30 potentio stat (Radiometer Analytical, 
France), cont rolled by  the Volta master 4  
electroche mical software, at 10 0 mV s-1 scan r ate. The 
working, counter, and refer ence electrodes  were, 
respectiv ely, a glassy  carbon  electrode (0.0 7 cm2), 
coiled pl atinu m wire (23  cm), an d an  Ag/Ag Cl 
electrode filled  with 3 M NaCl, all purchased fro m 
BAS, US A. The gla ssy carbon ele ctrode wa s 
successively  polished with 5 , 1, 0.3, and 0.05 ím 
alumina p olish (Buehler Ltd, USA) and  then  rinse d 
with 8 M nitri c acid and di stilled water bef ore use. 
The experi ments were performe d in 0.1 M acetat e 
buffer pH 5 at dye concentratio n of 0.1% w/v. Prior to  
analy sis all sol utions were pu rged with nitro gen for 
15 min. The redox pote ntials recorded v s Ag/Ag Cl 
reference el ectrode w ere corre cted by  0.206 V to th e 
standard hy drogen electrode ( SHE). Redox potential s 
of T. villosa  laccase, 1-hy droxy benzotriazol e, and  
nicotina mide      adenine     dinucleotide      ph osphat e  
Biotechn ol Prog   2004, 20: 1588-1592 47CHAPT ER 4. PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRAD ATION FR OM REDOX POTENT IALS 
 
 
Figure 1 . Cyclic voltammogram of dye I: (thin line) 
positive to negative,  (thick line)  negative to positive; 6 
cycles at 100  mVs-1 scan rate. 
 
(NADH) w ere provided fro m the literature and are a s 
follows: lacc ase +780, HBT +1.084, and NADH -320 
mV vs NHE ( 20-22). 
 
Results  and Discussion 
 
    Cyclic Volta mmetry of A zo Dye s. The a zo dyes 
tested in thi s study  presented si milar  cy clic 
voltamm ograms illustrated by  the voltam mogram  of 
dye I (Figure 1 ), in both positive and negativ e scan s. 
In the firs t pos itive scan of dye I an irrev ersible 
anodic p eak (II a) in the pote ntial range of +0.9 to +1.3 
V vs N HE w as ob served. All dy es displ ayed an 
irreversible red uction pea k in the range of -0.13 to -
0.48 V vs N HE (II r). In t he following scans  an 
apparently  semireversible  red ox cou ple (I a,Ir) was 
detected. The reductive w ave Ir of the se mireversible  
redox cou ple did not a ppear in  the first n egativ e scan. 
These redox c ouple peak s appear to be associat ed 
with the for mation of unstabl e amine product s, which 
were oxidized in the range of +0.15 to +0.58 V vs 
NHE and redu ced in the pot ential range of -0.1 to  
+0.3 V vs NHE . 
    The redox peaks IIa and II r can be a ssociat ed wit h 
irreversible red ox reactio ns lea ding to cleav age of th e 
azo bond s. In the volta mmograms of dy es VI  (triazo) 
and VII (biazo ) the nu mber of oxidation pea ks wa s 
higher than tha t observed for m onoazo dy es. These 
peaks resulted  from the o xidation of t he amine 
products ge nerated during the d isruption of more than 
one az o bond  in these dy e molecule s. To conf irm this 
theory  the cy clic volt agrams of th e pure am ine 
product solutio ns w ere perfo rmed separatel y. The  
results peak s could be o verlaid, respectiv ely, to th e 
peaks I an d II in the azo dy e volta mmo grams (dat a 
not shown). 
    Decolori zation with Lacca se. It has be en reported 
that the  che mical structures of the  dyes largely  
influence their decolorizatio n rates with la ccase an d 
that its d ecolorization effici ency  was li mited to  
several az o dy e structures ( 9, 23). A correlation  
between the en zyme redox pote ntial and its acti vity  Table 1. Percent  Decolorization with Laccase or Laccase + 
HBT  and Oxidation Peak Potentia ls (v s NH E) of Tested Azo  
Dyes 
% decolour ization ( ± SD) Dye 
Laccase Laccase+HBT Oxidation  
peaka (V) 
I 71 ± 3 95 ± 6 + 0.961 
II 76 ± 6 93 ± 5 + 0.965 
III 90 ± 5 89 ± 7 + 0.952 
IV 91 ± 5 94 ± 7 + 0.996 
V 15 ± 3 66 ± 4 + 1.260 
VI 50 ± 4 87 ± 5 + 1.091 
VII 0,6 ± 0. 2 65 ± 4 + 1.305 
aPotentials (vs Ag/AgCl (3MNaCl ) and corrected to N HE) were  
recorded in both laccase and lac case/mediator s ystem without 
signif icative change in potential. 
 
0,90 0,95 1,00 1,05 1,10 1,15 1,20 1,25 1,30 1,35-20020406080100D - Dec olourizati on (%)
Ea - Anodic peak potential (V vs. SHE)
Figure 2 . Correlation between  anodic peak  potent ial (Ea) 
and decolorization % of azo dyes after 1 h with ( ■) laccase 
and (○) laccase/HBT mediator system. Correlation: D (■) = 
(308.6 ± 28.9) - (234.6  ± 26.6)  Ea, r2 = 0.97, SD = ± 9.7; D 
(O) = (176.1  ± 10.8) - (85.4 ± 9.9) Ea, r2 = 0.97, SD = ±3.6. 
 
toward the sub strates h as also been de scrib ed (24, 
25). The drivin g force for a redox reacti on is expecte d 
to be proportio nal to the difference bet ween t he redox  
potential s of oxidant an d reductant. For lacca se-
mediated oxidations, an i ncrease in the substrate  
redox potenti al should th erefore decrea se th e 
efficiency  of the reaction. This hy pothesis was test ed 
by measuring  the perc entage  of decolorizati on of eac h 
dye in the pre sence of la ccase alone or la ccase + HBT  
after 1 h of i ncubation. The  observed resu lts are 
summariz ed in Table 1, togeth er with the re spective  
anodic pe ak pot ential ( 26). The potential of the anodi c 
peak give s the “ degradation potential” wh ere the  
degradation oc curs in an irreversible redox reaction.  
As seen in F igure 2, a re markably good  linear 
correlation wa s found, in both  systems, betw een the  
percentag e decolorization of each  dye and th e 
respectiv e an odic peak p otential. The linear 
relationship was preserved for up to 2 h, during the  
initial period of decolorization . When the m aximum 
of decolorizat ion was re ached, the li nearity 
disapp eared. A n important observatio n is t hat the  
anodic peak pot entials of all the  dyes are higher than  
Biotechn ol Prog   2004, 20: 1588-1592 48CHAPT ER 4. PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRAD ATION FR OM REDOX POTENT IALS 
 
Table 2. Times of Maxi mum Decol orization (≥98%)  by Yeas t 
Strain I. occidentalis and Reduction Peak Potentials (vs NHE) 
of Tested Azo Dy es 
 
dye time (h) for max 
decolour ization ≥98% (± SD ) Reduction 
peaka (V) 
I 8 ± 1 - 0.191 
II 8 ± 1 - 0.131 
III 24 ± 3 - 0.315 
IV 30 ± 4 - 0.354 
V 15 ± 2 - 0.270 
VIb382 ± 5 - 0.408 
VIIc453 ± 5 - 0.478 
aPotentials were  recorded vs Ag/AgCl (3M NaCl) and corrected  
to NHE.  bConcentr ation 0. 97 mM. cConcentr ation 1. 01 mM. 
 
-0,50 -0,45 -0,40 -0,35 -0,30 -0,25 -0,20 -0,15 -0,105101520253035404550T - Time  of max decolourization (h)
Ec - Catho dic pea k potential (V vs. SHE)
Figure 3 . Correl ation between cat hodic peak poten tial ( Ec) 
and time of max  % decolorizatio n of dyes.  Correlation: T 
(■) = (12.1 ± 3.7) + (-117.6 ± 11.3) Ec, r2 = 0.97, SD = ± 
3.3. 
 
the reported  redox pote ntial f or T. villosa laccase 
(+0.780 V vs NHE) and, even so, most of the m were 
extensi vely decolorized by  laccase. The exception s 
were dy es V and VII, for w hich were found high  
oxidation pot entials (Table 1 ). These facts can be  
understoo d in t he light of  the Nernst  equation. Any  
redox reaction  is depend ent on the for mal redox  
potential and o n the concentrat ions of the redu ced and  
oxidized speci es. The lacca se dye ratio in our sy stem 
is about 1:1000 or more to the dy e. These  
concentratio n differences c an explain why  laccase c an 
oxidize su ch dy es high degrad ation potential. 
    Concerning the positi ve ef fect of HBT on the  
decolorizatio n degree, this can be rationalized  
consid ering tha t the lacc ase/H BT sy stem, which i s 
also effectiv e through the for mation of a fre e radical, 
is a stronger ox idant than lacca se itself ( +1.084 V vs 
NHE) ( 26). Thus in t he oxi dative dy e decol orization 
approach u sing lacca se or la ccase/mediator, the  redox  
potential differ ence b etween the bioc ataly st and the  
dye is a relevan t indicator whet her the enzy me is abl e 
to decolorize th e dye. 
    Decolori zation by I. occi dentalis. Ionizable a zo 
dyes are i mpermeant to cell membran es and their  
transfor mation by  living m icrobial cells must thus 
occur in the ext racellular medi um (27). Azo dyes can be reduced by  two or four electrons to produce  
usually  colorle ss hydrazo co mpounds or a mines, 
respectiv ely (28). In the case of bisaz o dyes the 
reduction of th e azo bo nds occ urs con secutive ly (29). 
The sub stituents next to t he azo bond  affect th e rate of  
azo dy es redu ction (30). The process i s also fac ilitated 
by redox mediators ( 31). Previous work with yeas ts 
has show n that  azo dy es are r educed t o amines (19). 
In this w ork w e investigated t he possibility  of using  
data obt ained  by cyclic v oltammetry to predic t 
relative decol orization rates of azo dy es by  I. 
occidentali s. Our approac h was to measure the times 
required for ≥98% decoloriz ation of the  dyes (Table 
2). As seen i n Figure 3, a n approxi mately linear 
correlation wa s observ ed bet ween the decolor ization  
times and the cathodic p eak potential s of the teste d 
dyes. Conc erning cell- mediate d reductio ns, NAD(P)H  
is generally  assu med to be th e primary electro n donor. 
The driving force for the reduction re action s 
promoted by  NAD(P)H will therefore be proportional  
to the differenc e betwe en the reduction pot entials of  
the donor and  acceptor species: the le ss neg ative the 
redox potenti al of the az o dy e, the more fa vorable  
(and faster) will be its reduction ( 32, 33). W e 
confir med these  principles in our observation s. 
 
Conclusion s 
 
    We found a linear relationship during th e initial  
period of de colorization with lacc ase and a  
lacca se/mediator sy stem between the percentage  
decolorizatio n of each dy e and the respectiv e anodi c 
peak potential.  
    Contrarily  to the lacca se sy stem, I. occidentali s 
decolorize s azo dyes throug h a reductive  mechanism,  
but al so in  this sy stem a lin ear relationshi p betwee n 
the cathodic pe ak potential s and the ti me of maximum 
decolorizatio n of the azo co mpounds wa s observed. 
    The redox  potential differences bet ween the  
biocataly sts an d the dy es is a relev ant in dicato r 
whether the enz yme is able to d ecolorize the dy e. 
 
Ackn owledgm ents 
 
    We would like to tha nk the European PRAXIS  
XXI SFRH/ BD/4720/2001 pro ject for providi ng th e 
grant to A.Z. a nd the Europea n BIOEFTEX proj ect 
for providing a grant to P.R. 
 
Refere nces and Note s 
 
(1) Kimura, M . Prospects for the treatment and recy cling of 
dyeing wastewat ers. J. Soc. Fiber  Sci. Technol . Jpn. 1980, 
36, 69-73. 
(2) Robinson, T.; McMullan, G. ; Marchant, R.; Ni gam, P . 
Remediation of dyes in textile effluent: a critical review on 
current treatment technologies with a proposed alte rnative. 
Bioresour. Techn ol. 2001, 77, 247-255. 
(3) Ogawa, T.; Yatome, C.; Idaka, E. Biodegrad ation of 
paminoazobenzen e by continuous cultivatio n of 
Biotechn ol Prog   2004, 20: 1588-1592 49CHAPT ER 4. PREDICTING DYE BIODEGRAD ATION FR OM REDOX POTENT IALS 
 
Pseudo monas  pseudomallei 13NA. J. Soc. Dyers Co lourists  
1981 , 97, 435-438. (20) Xu, F . Effects of redox potential and h ydroxide 
inhibition on the pH activity profile of fungal lac cases. J. 
Biol. Che m. 1997 , 272, 109 24-928. (4) Idaka,  E.; Ogawa, T.; Horitsu,  H. Reductive metabolism  
of aminoazobenzenes by Pseu domon as cepacia . Bull. 
Environ.  Contam. Toxicol. 1987, 39, 100-107. (21) Bourbonna is, R.; Leech , D.; Paice, M. G. 
Electrochemical analysis of the interactions  of laccase 
mediators with lignin model comp ounds. Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 1998, 1379, 381- 390. (5) Stolz, A. Ba sic and applied aspects in the m icrobial 
degradation of azo dyes. Appl. Mic robiol. Biotechno l. 2001 , 
56, 69-80. (22) Clark, W. M. Oxidation -Reduction Potentials o f 
Organic Systems ; Williams  & Wil kins C o.: Baltimore,  MD,  
1960; pp  471-514 (6) Chung, K. T.;  Cerniglia, C. E. Mutagenicity of a zo dyes: 
structure activ ity relationship.  Mutat. Res.  1992 , 277, 201 -
220. (23) Pasti-Grigsby, M . B.; Paszc zynski, A.; Goszc zynski, 
S.; Craw ford,  D. L.; Craw ford,  R. L. Influence of aromatic  
substitut ion patterns on azo dye degradability by  
Streptomyces spp. and Phanerocha ete chrysosporium . Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 1992, 58, 360 5-3613. (7) Robles, A.; Lucas, R.; De Cienfuegos, A. G.; Ga lvez, A. 
Phenol-oxidase  (laccase) activity in strain  of the 
hyphomycete Chalara paradoxa isolated from  olive mill  
wastewater disposal ponds. Enzyme Microb. Techno l. 2000 , 
26, 484-490. (24) C all, H. P.; Mucke,  I. History, overvie w and  
applications of mediated li gnolytic systems, e specially 
laccase-mediators ystems (Lignozym process). J. Biotechnol. 
1997 , 53, 163- 202. (8) Bourbonnais, R.; Paice , M. G.; Freiermuth, B.; Bodie, 
E.; Borneman,  S. Reactivities of various mediators and 
laccases with kraft pulp and lignin  model compounds. Appl. 
Environ.  Microbiol. 1997, 12, 462 7-4632. (25) X u, F.; Shin,  W.; Brown, S. H.; Wahleithner,  J. A.; 
Sundaram, U. M .; Solomon, E.  L. A study of a s eries of 
fungal laccases and bilirubin oxidase that exhibits  
significant diffe rences in redox potential, substrate  
specificity,  and stabili ty. Biochim. Biophys. Act a 1996 , 
1292 , 303-311. (9) Chivukula, M.; Rengan athan, V. Phe nolic azo dye 
oxidation by la ccase from Pyricularia oryzae . Appl.  
Environ. Microbiol.  1995, 61, 437 4-4377. 
(10) Srebotnik, E.; Hammel,  K. E. Degra dation of 
nonphenolic lign in by the laccas e/1-hydroxybenz otriazole  
system.  J. Biotec hnol.  2000, 81, 179-188. (26) Johannes , C.; Majcherc zyk, A. Natural mediator s in the 
oxidation of poly cyclic aromatic h ydrocarbons by la ccase 
mediator systems.  Appl . Environ. Microbiol. 2000 , 66, 524- 
528. (11) Fabbrini, M.; Galli,  C.; Gentili, P. Comparing the 
catalytic eff iciency of some mediators of laccase. J. Mol. 
Catal. B: Enzy m. 2002 , 16, 231-240. 
(27) Pearce, C. I .; Lloyd , J. R.; Guthrie, J. T. Th e removal of 
colour from textile wastewater using w hole bacterial cells: a  
review . Dyes Pigments 2003, 58, 179-196. (12) Bourbonnais , R.; Paice, M . G.; Freiermuth, B.;  Bodie, 
E.; Borneman,  S. Reactivities of various medi ator and 
laccase with kraft pulp and lignin model compound s. Appl. 
Environ.  Microbiol. 1997, 63, 462 7-4632. (28) Hu, T . L. Decolourisation of reactive azo dyes by  
transformation w ith Pseudomo nas luteola . Bioresour. 
Technol. 1994 , 49, 47-51. (13) X u, F. Oxidation of phenols,  anilines,  and 
benzenethiols b y fungal laccas es: Correlation between  
activity and redo x potentials as  well as halide in hibition.  
Biochemistry 1996, 35, 760 8-7614 . (29) Goyal, R. N.; Minocha, A. E lectrochemical behaviour 
of the bisazo dy e Direct Red 81. J. Electroanal. Chem. 
1985 , 193, 231-240 (14) X u, F.; Deussen H . J. W.; Lopez,  B.; Lam,  L.; Li, K. 
Enzymatic and electrochemical oxidation of N-hydroxy  
compounds. Eur. J. Bioche m. 2001, 268, 4169-4176 . (30) Suzuki , T.; Timofei,  S.; Kurunczi,  L.; Dietze, U.; 
Schuurmann , G. Correlation of aerobic biodegrada bility o f 
sulfonated azo  dye with t he chemical structure.  
Chemosphere  2001, 45, 1-9. (15) Goyal , R. N.; Verma , M. S .; Singhal  N. K. 
Voltammetric in vestigations of the reduction of direct 
Orange-31  a bisa zo dye . Croat. Chem. A cta 1998, 71, 715-
726. (31) K eck, A.; Klein, J.; Kudlich,  M.; Stolz,  A.; Knackmuss 
H. J.; Mattes R. Reduction of azo dyes by redox mediators  
originating in the naphthalenes ulfonic acid degradation  
pathway of Sphingomo nas sp. strain BN6.  Appl. Environ.  
Microbiol. 1997 , 63, 3684 -3690. (16) Furniss,  B. S.; Hannaford,  A. J.; Smith,  P. W.  G.; 
Tatchell,  A. R. Vogel’s Textbook of Practical Organic 
Chemistry, 5th ed.; Longman  Grou p UK, Ltd.: Essex, 1 989; 
p 951 . (32) Bragger, J. L.; Lloyd , A. W.; Soozand ehfar, S. H.; 
Bloomfield,  S. F.; Marriot t, C.; Martin, G. P. Inves tigation s 
into the azo re ducing activity of a common colonic 
microorganism. Int. J. Phar m. 1997, 157, 61-71. (17) Zille,  A.; Tzanov,  T.; Gu¨ bitz, G. M.; Cavaco -Paulo, 
A. Immobilized laccase for decolourisation of  Reactive 
Black 5 dyeing effluent. Biotechol. Lett. 2003 , 25, 1473 -
1477. (33) Semde, R.; Pierre, D.; Geusk ens, G.; Devleeschouwer , 
M.; Moes, A. J . Study of some imp ortant factors involved in 
azo derivative reduction by Clostridium perfringens . Int. J. 
Pharm . 1998 , 161, 45-54. (18) Martins,  M. A.; Cardoso , M. H.; Queiroz , M. J.; 
Ramalho,  M. T.; Oliveira-C ampos, A. M. Biodegrad ation of 
azo dyes by the yeast Candida zeylanoides in batc h aerated 
cultures.  Chemos phere 1999, 38, 2455-2460 .  
 (19) Ramalho, P. A.; Schol ze, H.; Card oso, M. H.; 
Ramalho,  M. T.; Oliveira -Campos, A. M. Improved 
conditions for th e aerobic reductive decolourisation of azo 
dyes by Cândid a zeylanoides . Enzyme Microb. Technol. 
2002 , 31, 848-854. 
 
Biotechn ol Prog   2004, 20: 1588-1592 50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 5 
 
FRE1P AND THE AZOREDUCTASE ACTIVITY OF 
SACCHAROMYCES  CEREVISIAE   CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
Azo reductase activity of intact Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells is 
dependent on the Fre1p component of the plasma membrane ferric 
reductase 
Patrícia A. Ram alho(1), Sandra Paiva(1), A. Cava co-Paulo(2), Margarida C asal(1), M. Helena 
Cardoso(1)* and M. Teresa Ram alho(3) 
 
(1)Department of Biology, University of  Minh o, Cam pus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portu gal 
(2)Department of Textile En gineering, University o f Min ho, Cam pus de Azurém, 4800-058 Guimarães, 
Portugal 
(3)Depa rtment of Chemistry, University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal Portugal 
 
 
Abstract 
Unspecific bacterial reduct ion of az o dyes is a wi dely studied process in correlation wi th the biological 
treatment of coloured waste waters bu t the enzyme syste m asso ciated  to this bacterial cap ability h as never 
been positively id entified . Sev eral asco mycete yeast stra ins display similar d ecolourisin g behaviour. Th e 
yeast- mediated proces s requi res an alternat ive carbon a nd energy s ource an d is independent on previous 
expos ure to the dyes. Whe n substrat e dyes are po lar th eir reduction  is extracellu lar, stro ngly sug gesting the 
involvement of an externally-d irected  plasma membrane redox system. The prese nt work dem onstrat es that, 
in Sacc haromy ces cerevisiae , the ferric re ductase system  participat es in the extracellular redu ction of azo 
dyes. T he S. cerevisiae  mutant strain s ∆fre1 and ∆fre1∆fre2, but  not ∆fre2, showed a m uch re duced  
decolourising  capability. FRE1 gene complemented the phenotype of S. cerevisiae  ∆fre1 cells recove ring the  
ability to  grow in  medium without externally ad ded iron and to decolourise th e dye, fo llowing  a pattern 
similar to  the one observed in the wild-type strain . These resu lts sugg est th at un der the con ditions tested , 
Fre1p is a m ajor component of the azo  reductase activ ity. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Research  work on biodegr adativ e processes of azo 
dyes usually exploits bact erial species, eith er isolated or 
in consortia ( 4,36). B acteria, under appropriate  
conditions (ox ygen limitation , presence of s ubstrates  
utilized as carbo n and energ y sources) frequent ly reduce  
azo d yes, prod ucing colourless amines. Nevertheless 
many dyes are reca lcitrant to co nvention al was tewater  
treatment processes b y activat ed sludge (4). The overall 
impression on this  research area is that many azo dyes 
can be r educed (and deco louri sed) b y a cons iderabl e 
number of bacterial species but , as far as we know, the  
enzy me responsible for the unspecific primar y reduction 
step has  nev er been pos itively identified. What is 
currently  postu lated is that redu ctive decolour isation of 
sulfonated azo  dyes b y living cells must occur  
extra cellularly due to the im permeant natur e of those 
compounds, and that the pr imary redu ctant is a 
cytoplasmic electron donor, pres umably  NAD(P) H (36).  
Our own studies (30,31) have demonstrated th at 
some non-conventional ascom ycete yeasts are ef ficient 
azo d ye de colourisers actin g, as many bac teria, b y 
reducing  the azo  bond. D ye decolourisation  by yeasts is  
comparativ ely unspecific, but is  affec ted by the medium   
 
*To whom correspondence sho uld be addressed. Tel.: 
(351) 253 604043. Fax: (351)  253 678980. E-mail: 
mhc@bio.uminho.pt  composition, b y the us ed yeast strain, an d b y 
parameters as pH and dissolved oxygen. It also d epends 
on activ ely growing cells, b eing faster dur ing the 
exponential gro wth phase, and  display s an enzyme-like 
temperatur e pr ofile, strongl y suggesting its biotic 
nature. However , further information is requir ed for a  
successful app lication of yeasts in a was tewater  
treatment proc ess. The pres ent work was developed to 
demonstrate the  particip ation of  an external ly directed 
plasma membrane redox  system (PMRS) in a zo dye 
reduction, link ing an intracellular r eductant to an 
extra cellular electron acceptor . As a requir ed first step, 
it was necessar y to find a model yeast strain cap able of 
decolour ising polar azo d yes. Among the screen ed 
strains, Saccharomyces  cer evisiae CEN.PK113-7D 
proved to  fulfil those conditions.  
In S . cerev isiae the m ost extensively explor ed 
PMRS (plasma membrane  redox sy stem) is the 
ferric /cupri c reductase system which par ticipates in th e 
high-affin ity uptake of iron. This activity  can be 
assay ed through the redu ction of impermeant substrates 
like f erricy anide, iron(III)- citrate, iron(III)- EDTA, and 
a vari ety of o ther ferric  chelates. In this  com plex system 
the best studied  components are the metallor eductases 
encoded b y the genes FRE1  (7) and FRE2  (15), the 
FET3/FT R1 enc oding the oxid ase-perm ease complex 
(reviewed in 9 ), the iron-dep endent transcriptional 
regulators Aft1p (39,41) and  Aft2p  (3,40) and the 
copper-dep endent tr anscriptio nal r egulator  Mac1p 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 52CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
(16,40). A potential Fe3+/Cu2+ reductase subunit is the 
cytoplasmic cof actor Utr1p  (1).   
FRE1  and FRE2 encod e plas ma membrane 
proteins (7,15) and are both transcription ally activated 
by Aft1p , whose intr acellular location is depend ent on  
iron (III) lev el (42). FRE1 activation is also con trolled  
by Aft2p (33) and Mac1p (40). Transcrip tion of  FRE2  
depends only  on iron levels (1 4) through Aft1 p (33). 
The protein encoded b y FRE1 contains  several 
trans membrane dom ains (7),  and s hares a 62%  
sequence similarity  with th e gp91phox sub unit of 
cytochrome  b558 (32). The protein motifs in gp91phox 
responsible for  binding FAD and NADPH are 
conserved in Fre1p (12,23,3 5). Fre1p and  Fre2p  
togeth er accoun t for virtually all of the Fe3+/Cu2+ 
reductase activ ity of yeast cells but in varying 
proportions, depending both on iron and(or) copper 
availability  and on th e grow th phase of  the cells  
(14,15,16) . Typically  FRE2 is induced at a later stage. 
Fre1p and (or) Fre2p reduce external Fe3+ (or Cu2+) 
prior to th eir u ptake, mediated by Fet3p/Ftr1p , where  
Fet3p is a multicopper ox idase and Ftr1p the permease 
component (10) . The cy toplasmic cof actor Utr1p  in S. 
cerevisiae has recently  been shown to be a NAD kinase 
(21) which is regarded as th e only enzy me cataly sing 
the synthesis of NADP.   
The genom e sequence of S . cerevisiae revealed the 
presence of fiv e addition al metalloregu lated genes,  
FRE3 -FRE6  and FRE7 , with sequenc e sim ilarities to 
FRE1  and FRE2. The firs t four are trans criptionall y 
regulated by the iron-responsive Aftp1p element and the 
fifth b y the cop per-depend ent Mac1p (27). Fre3p and 
Fre4p are potential siderophor e-iron reductases ( 43), but 
the function of the remaining  genes is unknown. Given 
their r egulation  patt ern th ey may participate in iron  
homeostasis (FRE5, FRE6) and copper  homeostasis 
(FRE7 ), possibly  as internal metallor eductases (2 7).  
The pres ent wor k shows that the  azoredu ctase and 
ferric  redu ctase activities of yeast cells assayed in 
differen t growth phases are closely  parallel, b eing at the 
highest lev el during the late  exponential growth phase. 
This proper ty of ferric redu ctase has been descr ibed in 
early  studies (6 ,15). Also, d eletion of th e FRE1 gene 
eliminates a major frac tion of  the azoredu ctase activity 
in int act cells of S. c erevisiae harvest ed in the late 
exponential gro wth phase, wher eas th e deletion  of th e 
FRE2  gene has  a minor effect  on tha t activity. We 
believe that our results w ill b e relevant for 
biotechnological applications of this activ ity and also 
for a bro ader understanding  of the unspecif ic redox 
activities associated to the yeast plasma membrane. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
Chemicals . The azo d ye used in the exper iments was m-
[(4-dimeth ylamino)phen ylazo]  benzen esulfonic acid , 
sodium salt, and was sy nthesized as describ ed for 
meth yl orang e (13).  
Yeast strains a nd plasmids.  The yeast strains  and the 
plasmids used i n this work  are listed respec tively in 
tables 1 and 2 . The cu ltures were m aintained o n slants 
of YPD -  yeast extract (1% w/v), pepton e (1% w/v), glucose (2% w/v) and ag ar (2%  w/v). Growth o n solid 
media was  carried out at 30ºC.  
 
TABLE 1 
Sacchar omyces  cerevisiae strains used in  this work 
Strain Genot ype of interest  
 Referen ce 
CEN.PK 
113-7D  wt ( MATa, MAL2-8c 
SUC2 ) 11 
Y04163 BY4741; Mat a; his3;  
leu2; met15;  ura3; 
YLR214W::Kan MX4  Euroscarf 
Y07039 BY4741; Mat a; his3;  
leu2; met15;  ura3; 
YKL220C::KanMX4  Euroscarf 
SP1 ∆fre1 (C EN.PK 
YLR214W::Kan MX4 ) This work 
SP2 ∆fre2 (C EN.PK 
YKL220C::KanMX4 ) This work 
SP3 BY4741; 
YKL220C::HphMX4  This work 
SP4 ∆fre1∆fre2 
(CEN.PK 
YLR214W::Kan MX4  
YKL220C::HphMX4 ) This work 
SPcmp-
FRE1 ∆fre1(pSP3) (CEN.PK 
YLR214W::Kan MX4 + 
plasmid pSP3) This work 
 
TABLE 2 
Plasmids used in  this work 
Plasmids Reference 
pSP1 ( FRE1  in pGEM) This stud y 
pSP2 ( FRE2 in pGEM) This stud y 
pAG32 19 
pSH65 20 
pSP3 ( FRE1 in pSH65) This stud y 
 
Cell growth in liquid  med ium. The attenuance of  
appropriately  diluted cell su spensions (as described in  
30) was measured at 640  nm in a Spectronic 21 B ausch 
& Lom b using  a 1 cm  path length  cell. 
Decolourisation in liquid media.  De colour isation  
experiments b y growing cultures of S. c erevisiae 
CEN.PK113-7D (also reported as wt strain alo ng this 
work) were typically  performed in 250  mL cotton-
plugged Erlenm eyer flasks with 100 mL of sterile 
medium (normal decolour isation medium, here r eferred 
to as NDM) containing  yeast extract (0 .25% , w/v), 
glucose (2% , w/v) and 0.2  mmol.L-1 of the t ested dye in 
a mine ral salts ba se of the composition previously  
described (31)  incubated at 26 ºC and 1 20 rpm. 
Whenever required, iron (III) w as added to med ium as 
the EDTA chelate, from a 100  mM stock solution in  
FeCl3 and EDTA. For the mutant strains, which show 
impaired growth in our  standard medium, cells were 
grown for 137 h on NDM supplemented with  2 mM 
iron (III) as th e EDTA ch elate. For contro l wild-ty pe 
cells were grown in sim ilar conditions. Th e cells were 
then harvested b y cen trifug ation at 16.1xg, washed  
several  tim es with st erile distil led wat er, and 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 53CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
resuspended on NDM to produc e cell suspensions with  
3.8±0.2 attenuan ce units (4.2±0.2  g.L-1 cell dr y weight) . 
Throughout this  work, decolour ising activity  refers to 
the d ecolour isation cap ability of growing y east cultures. 
Cell counting.  Cell suspens ions (dilut ed to an 
attenuance of c.a. 0.5 units) were diluted 1:250 00 and  
1:250000. From each dilut ion 100 µL wa s spread in 
YPD agar plat es. The  plates were incub ated at 37ºC for 
2 day s and af ter that time th e number of isolated  
colonies was co unted. All p lates with more than 300 
colonies or less  than 30 wer e not consider ed. All the 
dilutions w ere prepared  in triplicate. 
Ferric reductase assay . Cells were grown for  c.a. 6 
hours in NDM, harvested b y centr ifugation, washed 
twice wi th sterile dis tilled wat er and r esuspended in  
assay  buff er, consisting of 0. 05 M sodium citrate pH 6.5 
with 5% glu cose, at a d ensity  of c.a. 1.3±0.1  attenuance 
units  (1.4± 0.1 g.L-1 cell dr y weight). The assays were 
perform ed in triplic ate at two differen t cell densities 
obtain ed with either 780 µL of suspension or 390 µL of 
suspension plus 390 µL of as say buffer. Th e cell  
suspensions were pre- incub ated for 10 min  at room 
temperatur e. Th e final as say mixtures contained, in a 
total vo lume of 1 mL, 2 mM fe rrozine ([3-(2-p yridyl)-
5,6-bis-(4-phen ylsulfonic acid)-1 ,2,4-tr iazine] ) and 0.2 
mM iron(III) as ferric chlor ide. Th e mixtures were  
allowed to r eact at room temperature (20±2 ºC) for 5 or  
10 min. Cells w ere then h arvested b y centrifug ation and 
the optical d ensity  at 562 nm  was measured against a 
blank pr epared similarly  but without cells. Th e ferrous 
iron concentr ation was estim ated b y using a molar 
absorbance of 2 7900 M-1cm-1 for the iron(II)-fer rozine 
complex (17) . 
Azoreductase assays.  Thes e assays were perfor med as  
the ferric reducta se assays but using acetate buff er 0.05 
M pH 4.0 and 5 % glucose. Th e assay  mixture co ntain ed 
a cell suspension of 1 or 2 att enuance un its (1.1 ±0.1 or 
2.2±0.1 g.L-1 cell dr y weight) and 0.05 mM dy e, and  
was allowed to react for 15 to 20 min. W ithin this  
period th e decrease in absorb ance was line ar wit h time. 
The opti cal d ensity of the fin al supernat ants was read at  
dye λmáx (461 nm). The amou nt of d ye reduced was 
determined from  a molar absorbance of 21440 M-1cm-1, 
obtain ed from a calibr ation curve. Througho ut this 
work, azo  redu ctase spec ific activity refers to  the results  
of activ ity assa ys within a short period of time, being 
expressed as µmol.(g ce ll dry we ight.m in)-1. 
Transformation of S. c erevisia e cells. Transfor mation 
of S. cere visiae cells was done b y the LiAc/SS-
DNA/PEG method (18). When required tr ansformants 
were recov ered at 30 °C in YPD medium for 4 hour s 
before plating o n YPD solid medium containing  either  
200 mg.L-1 geneticin  (G418 from Life Technolo gies) or  
30 µg.mL-1 phleom ycin (CAYLA, Tou louse, France).  
Transformants were obtain ed after 2-3 d ays of 
incubation at 30°C. To purif y transformants from 
background each large colon y was re-streaked on fresh  
YPD-geneticin or YPD-phleo mycin plates. Only  those 
clones that grew  after the double selection wer e further  
analysed as  potentially corre ct trans formants, by 
analytical PCR a s described  by Kruckeberg  (22).  Cloning of the FRE1 and FRE2 genes.  FRE1 gene 
was am plified b y PCR with the Pfu Turbo DNA 
polymerase (Stratagene), using the prim ers Fre1forw 
and Fre1rev  and genomic D NA isolated f rom S. 
cerevisiae CEN .PK. The P CR fragm ent was  clon ed into 
the plasmid pGEM®-T Eas y vector (PROMEGA),  
originating th e plasmid pSP1 (table 2). The p rimers 
Fre2forw and F re2rev wer e used to am plify FRE2 gene,  
following th e same procedur e as describ ed for  FRE1  
gene. Th e PCR product was cloned in  pGEM®-T Eas y 
vector originating the pl asmid pSP2 (table 2).  DNA 
cloning and manipulation wer e performed accor ding to 
standard pro tocols (34).  
FRE1  knock-o ut. The S. cer evisiae Y04163 strain 
deleted in the gene FRE1 (YLR214W ) was obtain ed 
from  the Euros carf coll ection. Two prim ers, A-
YLR214W and D-YLR214W (table 3) w ere used to  
amplify by PCR the YLR214W:: KanMX4  allele of the S. 
cerevisiae strain Y04163. The PCR product was u sed to 
transform  wt cells . Cells were plated on YPD solid 
medium contain ing 200 mg.L-1 geneticin . Successful 
integr ation of  the YLR214W:: KanMX4  cas sette was  
scored b y pres ence of the YLR214W::KanMX4  band  
(2352bp) and ab sence of the YLR214W  wild-ty pe band  
(2796bp) following analy tical PCR on whole cells  using 
the sam e prim ers. Interna l primers to the kan amicine 
cassette (K2 an d K3, s ee table 3) were  also used to  
reconfirm th e disruption. This str ain was n amed S P1. 
FRE2 knock-out.  The procedu re followed to disr upt the 
gene FRE2 (YKL220C ) was si milar to the one d escribed  
above. Primers, A-YKL220C and D-YKL220C  (table 
3) were us ed to  amplif y b y PC R the 
YKL220C::KanMX4  allele in the S. cerevisiae stra in 
Y07039. The PC R product was used to transform the S. 
cerevisiae CEN.PK strain and correct integration of the 
cassette was  scored b y pres ence of the 
YKL220C::KanMX4  band (232 3bp) and absence of the 
YKL220C wild-ty pe band  (2842bp) f ollowing 
analytical PCR on whole ce lls using the s ame prim ers. 
This stra in was n amed SP2.  
FRE1/FRE2 double knock-out.  The v ector pAG32, 
containing the hygrom ycin resistance gene HphMX4 , 
was diges ted w ith the r estriction enz ymes BglII and 
EcoRV. The digested DNA w as used to switch the 
selective m arker of the gene replac ement cas ette in S. 
cerevisiae Y070 39 from KanMX4  to HphMX4 , resulting 
in strain S P3. The repl acem ent of the KanMX  for the 
HphMX4  was confi rmed wi th PCR.  SP3 c hromosoma l 
DNA was used  to amplify  the YKL220C::HphMX4  
casette, whi ch was  used to trans form the SP 1 (already 
carrying the YLR214W::KanMX4 ) result ing i n the  
double mutan t, SP4.  
RNA analysis.  Total cellular mRNA was prepare d from  
yeast cells grow n for 6 hours in NDM, electroph oresed  
on 1.5% (w/v)  agarose MOPS-formaldeh yde gels (29) 
and blotted to nylon membra nes by vacuum transfer. 
Hybridisation w as carr ied ou t using a fr agment of 718 
bp Pst I from pSP1 as a probe f or FRE1 or a fragment 
of 682 bp Hind III from p SP2 as a probe for FRE2. The 
probes were labelled according  to standard  procedures 
(34). Densiometer scanning was performed usi ng the 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 54CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
Integra ted Den sity An alysis program  from  the  
EagleSight® Software, version  3.2 (Stratagen e, CA). Transformation of ∆fre1 with the plasmid pSP3 
(pSH65-FRE1) . Cells of  the stra in SP1 were  
transformed with the plasmid pSP3 and plated on YPD 
solid medium c ontaining 30 µg.mL-1 phleom ycin. Ten  
coloni es were checked  by analytical PCR us ing the 
primers GAL1 p_c and CMPfre1rev . The method 
described  by the “The Si xPack Guide lines”  of th e 
EUROFAN proj ect was used. The GAL1p_c an d the 
CMPfre1rev for ms a 2.1 kb P CR product only  if the 
FRE1  ORF is present in the c orrect ori entation with 
respect to the GAL1,10 promoter in pSH65. One of the 
positive stra ins was nam ed SPc mp-FRE1  (tab le 1) and 
was used in  further studies.  
TABLE 3 
Oligonucleotid es used for cloning, gen e deletion and  
verification by  PCR 
Name Sequence 
A-YLR214W  AAAAATGTATTTAGGTTGC TTGACG 
D-YLR214W  TATGAATTAAGGTTAGTGA CGAGGC 
A-YKL220C  ACAGGAAAACAAGTAAATTTTGACG 
D-YKL220C  CAATTAACGT TTCATAAAATTTGCC 
Fre1forw ATGGTTAGAACCCGTGTATTATTC 
Fre1rev TTACCATGTAAAACTTTCTTC 
Fre2forw ATGCATTGGACGTCCATCTTG 
Fre2rev TCACCAGCATTGATACTCTTC 
K2 CGATAGATTGTCGCACCTG  
K3 CCATCCTATGGAACTGCCTC 
CMPfre1forw CATGGATCCAAAATG GTTAGAACCC 
GTG 
CMP fre1rev CATGTCGACTTACCATGTAAAACTTT 
CTTC 
GAL1p_c ATTGTTAATATACCTCTATACTTTAAC 
 
RESULT S 
 
Decolourization by gr owing y east culture s. Growing 
cultur es of S. cerevisiae com pletely decolouris ed the 
tested azo dye in c.a. 8.5 h. Figure 1A i llustrates the 
yeast cells grow th curve, and the pH variation and d ye 
absorbance  in the superna tant medium .  A d iauxic 
growth was observed, with a specif ic growth rate of  
0.175 h-1, when growing in glucose, and of 0.013 h-1 
after switch ing to ethan ol utili zation. The 
decolour isation progress was u naffected b y previous 
exposure of the cells to the d ye (results not shown).  
Similar observations have b een described earlier for 
Candida zeylano ides (31) and  Issatchen kia occidentalis  
(30). Th e confir mation th at colour loss was due to the 
reduct ive cl eavage of the azo bo nd in the d ye molecules 
was provided by  the detection of the related ar omatic 
amines by HPLC analysis, as shown in a  prev ious work 
(31).   
Construction of the pSH65-FR E1 vec tor. The ORF  of 
FRE1  was am plified  by PC R with th e primers 
CMPfre1forw and CMPfre1rev . CMPfre1forw contains 
one BamHI site and th e CM Pfre1rev con tains one SalI 
site which wer e used for cloning  the FRE1 ORF in th e 
vector pSH65 (2 0) using the same restriction sites.  The 
FRE1  ORF was direction ally cloned  between the  
GAL1,10 promoter and th e CYC1 terminator  in th e 
vector pSH65, which is a CEN6/ARSH4 low-cop y 
number vector carr ying th e bler phleom ycin res istance 
gene for se lection in yeast. Corr ect clones wer e verified 
by sequen cing. A clone na med pSP3  (table 2) was 
selected for fur ther studies.  
 
 
0.010.1110D640
0246
A461 / pH
010203040
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Time (h)FR specific activity 
(µmol/(gDW*min))
00,30,60,91,2
AR specific activity 
(µmol/(gDW*min))B
A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figur e 1. Decolourisat ion progress and ef fect of grow th stage on ferric reduc tase and az o reduc tase spe cific activiti es. (A) Time 
course of cell gr owth,  measured as attenuance at 640nm  (D640; ♦), pH var iation ( pH; □) and pr ogress of decolour isation,  measured as dy e 
absor bance at 461 nm (A461;▲). S. ce revisiae  was gr own at 26 ºC and 1 20 rpm, in norm al decolour isation m edium  containing 0. 2mM dye. 
(B) Va riatio n of ferric reductase (FR;  ■) and azo r eductase ( AR; ▲) speci fic activities in cel ls of S. cerevisiae  harvested at the specif ied 
times, expressed a s µmol.(g cell dry  weight)-1.min-1. The cells wer e grown in norm al decol ourisation medium at 26ºC and 1 20 rpm. 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 55CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
The effect of th e growth phase on specific fer ric and 
azo r eductase activities w as de termined b y assaying 
cells harvested  from growing cultur es at different 
incubation times. The r esults ar e shown in figure 1B, 
and despite th e differ ence in the absolute values, th e 
two curves  are closely par allel at all times. Both h ave an 
activity pe ak in the late exp onenti al growth phase,  
which is  als o when the fa stest decr ease of d ye 
concen tration in the incuba tion medium is observ ed.  
Effect of ir on concentration  on specific f erric and azo 
reductase act ivities. The progr ess of decolour isation b y 
growing cultures was measured in incubation  media 
with differ ent iron (III) con centrations, supplied  as the 
EDTA che late. Increas ing iron concen trations resulted 
in a m uch d elayed decolouris ation. As seen  in figure 
2A, total de colourisation required over 50 h in the 
presence of 1.0 mM iron  (III), in contrast with th e 8.5 h  
required in NDM without iron addition . In media 
containing 2.5m M iron(III) d ye concen tration decreased  
only c.a. 20% in 50h. For con centrations  above 2.5mM  
iron(III) we observed precipit ation of the iron in the 
medium. The reduced decolour ising act ivity of the cells 
grown at high er iron concen trations was not due to 
impaired growt h or loss of cell vi ability sin ce c ell 
counting in aliquots of the diff erent cu ltures , collected 
after 28 h o f growth, produc ed identical numbers of  
viabl e cells. Az o and ferr ic reductase activities were 
also measured in cells  harves ted from  growth media 
with diff erent iron concentrations, after 6 ho urs of 
growth. Ce lls were collected at this point b ecaus e of th e 
peak activity  of both en zymes around this time. Th e 
results in  Figure 2B show that the production o f both  
activities was  repres sed by iron, in a conc entration-
dependen t manner: azo redu ctase activities are r educed  
to c.a. 20% at 1 mM iron and to 2% at 2.5 m M iron, 
despite the growth stimulation at higher Fe concen trations (data no t shown). These observ ations 
point to  an additional link b etween these  two activities.  
Effect of deletions of FRE1 and FRE2 genes on the 
activities of f erric and azo reductases.  The mutant 
strains of S. cerevisiae ∆fre1, ∆fre2 and ∆fre1∆fre2 
have impaired g rowth in iron-deficient media. In  order 
to overcome this problem, d ecolourisation assays with 
the m utant stra ins were perfo rmed at high density 
suspensions of  pre-grown cells, as des cribed in  
Materi als and Methods. Under these conditions b oth the 
wt strain and the ∆fre2 mutant ach ieved co mplete 
decolour isation  in c.a. 5 hours. Therefore deletion  of th e 
FRE2  gene has a  negligib le eff ect in the deco louri sation 
process in our  experimental con ditions. In con trast, the 
∆fre1 and ∆fre1∆fre2 strains showed a m uch reduced  
decolour ising activity , requir ing more than 45 hours to  
completely  remove the co lour fr om the medium (figure 
3A). The azo reductase activity assay s with the diffe rent 
strains allowed similar conc lusions. As seen in  figure 
3B, th e spec ific activity in the ∆fre2 mutant r eached th e 
same order of magnitude (as compared to the wild 
type), where as those in ∆fre1 and ∆fre1∆fre2 stra ins 
were neglig ible. The ferric redu ctase assays produced  
very similar results, as seen  in figure 3B . These results 
demonstrate the importance of  the FRE1 gene product 
in the decolour ising a ctivity of the yeast cells. 
FRE1 expression in S. cerevisiae.  The expr ession of 
FRE1  was follo wed b y Norther n-blot ana lysis (figure 
4). In ce lls of wild-t ype str ain S. cere visiae CEN.PK, 
grown in the ab sence of added  iron, a strong mRNA 
signal against a FRE1  prob e was revealed, prov ing the 
expression of th is gene. W ild-type ce lls, grown in the  
presence of added iron showed  decreased FRE1  mRNA 
levels with incr easing  iron  concentra tion  in  the  range 
 
 
 
012345
0 204 06 0
Time (h)A461
00.20.40.60.81
1 mM 2.5 mMRelative specific activity A B
012345
0 204 06 0
Time (h)A461
00.20.40.60.81
1 mM 2.5 mMRelative specific activity A B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figur e 2. Iron(III)-depen dent  dec olourisation and activi ties of  ferric reduct ase and az o reduct ase. (A) Time cour se of dy e 
decolour isation in the pr esence of 1. 0mM (♦) and 2. 5mM (▲) iron (III). Cells were gr own at 26º C and 120 r pm in nor mal decolour isation  
medium with 0. 2mM d ye and ir on was supplied as the E DTA chelat e to the specif ied concentrations. Control experi ments wer e 
perform ed without  iron ad dition  to the medium (□) and in media supplem ented with E DTA, either  at 1mM (◊) or 2.5mM (U). The  effect 
was followed by measuring dy e absor bance at 46 1 nm (A461). (B)  Specific activity assays of ferric reductase ( grey bars ) and azo 
reductase ( white b ars) were performed with cells har vested after  6 hour s growth on norm al decolour isation medium at 26ºC and 120 r pm. 
Growth media contained either 1.0 mM or 2.5mM iron(III). Specific activ ities were cal culated relative to  cells  grown without add itional 
iron(III). A ctivitie s were cal culated relative to cells grown without addit ional iron(III) . Error bars are the sta ndard deviati on fr om three 
independent deter minations.  
 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 56CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
 
110
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Time (h) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figur e 3. Delet ion of  FRE1  and FRE2 genes affect s decolourisation progress and f erric reduc tase and az o reduc tase activities .   
(A) Cells  were gr own at 26ºC and 1 20 rpm on norm al decolour isation medium with 0. 2mM dye. Cell gr owth was measur ed as attenuanc e 
at 640n m (D 640; open symbols ) and decolour isation pr ogress was assessed by  dye absor bance at 461 n m (A461; closed symbols ): wild typ e 
(◊, ♦), ∆fre1 (U, ▲), ∆fre2 (□, ■) and ∆fre1∆fre2 (○, ●). (B) Activities of the ferric reduct ase (FR; grey bars ) and azo reductase ( AR; 
white bars ) of FRE mutant strains w ere calculated rel ative to cells of the reference str ain,  all gr own on NDM  at 26ºC a nd 120 rpm and 
harvested after  6 hour s growth.  (A) Cells  were gr own at 26ºC and 1 20 rpm on norm al decolour isation medium with 0. 2mM dye. Cell gr owth was measur ed as attenuanc e 
at 640n m (D
  
between  1.0 and 2.5 mM. Th erefore, iron seems to  
regulate the exp ression of FRE1 gene. As expected, in 
cells of S. cerevisiae ∆fre1 and ∆fre1∆fre2 deletion 
strains, no FRE1 mRNA was detected.  between  1.0 and 2.5 mM. Th erefore, iron seems to  
regulate the exp ression of FRE1 gene. As expected, in 
cells of S. cerevisiae ∆fre1 and ∆fre1∆fre2 deletion 
strains, no FRE1 mRNA was detected.  
  640; open symbols ) and decolour isation pr ogress was assessed by  dye absor bance at 461 n m (A461; closed symbols ): wild typ e 
(◊, ♦), ∆fre1 (U, ▲), ∆fre2 (□, ■) and ∆fre1∆fre2 (○, ●). (B) Activities of the ferric reduct ase (FR; grey bars ) and azo reductase ( AR; 
white bars ) of FRE mutant strains w ere calculated rel ative to cells of the reference str ain,  all gr own on NDM  at 26ºC a nd 120 rpm and 
harvested after  6 hour s growth.  
 
Figur e 4. Nort hern blot  analysis of  FRE1 transcriptional  
level.  Cells used for RNA extractio n were harvested after 6h 
growth on norm al decolour isation medium at 26ºC and 12 0 
rpm, with or  without ir on add ition.  Each lane contained 20 µg 
of total RNA and PDA1  (38) served as inter nal standar d. Lane 
1-wt; lane 2- wt  with 1 mM iron(III) added to the gr owth 
medium; lane 3- wt with  2.5mM iron(III) added to the g rowth 
medium; lane 4-  ∆fre1; lane 5- ∆fre1∆fre2 . The per centage of  
FRE1  expr ession ( average of two independent e xperiments) is 
relative to wt str ain, grown in norm al decolour isation m edium 
without exter nally added ir on. 
 
Recovery of the FRE1 activity . To confirm th at in our  
experimental conditions  the recov ery of the 
azoredu ctase activity is mainly associated with  FRE1 , 
the progress of decolour isation w as followed in cultures  
of the  strains wt,  ∆fre1 and ∆fre1 transform ed with the  
plasmid pSP3 containing FRE1 under the promoter 
GAL1,10. Th e cells were grown  in media with 20g.L-1 
galactose as carbon source, for activ ation of the 
GAL1,10 promoter. As seen in figure 5 , FRE1 gene 
complemented the phenoty pe of S. cere visiae  ∆fre1 
cells recov ering the ability  to gr ow in medium without 
extern ally added  iron, fo llowi ng a pattern similar  to the 
one observed in the wt str ain. In this assay  the wt and 
∆fre1 strains behaved as expect ed reg arding th e ability 
of deco lourisat ion, with  a total removal in the wt and a  
negligib le rem oval in the  mutant strain. The 
transformed strain ∆fre1(pSP3), although  with a small 
delay in the star ting of the d ecolourisation , was able to  fully decolour ise the dye. This small diff erence could be 
due to distinct regulator y properties of the two 
promoters.  Thes e exp eriments provide th e eviden ce that 
FRE1  is responsible for the azo r eductase activity of the  
intact yeast cells  in our  oper ational conditions. 
 
0,010,1110
01 0 20 30
Time (h)D640
012345
A461
 
Figur e 5. Reco nstitutio n of the FRE1 activity.  Cells were 
grown at 26ºC and  120 r pm on norm al decolour isation m edium 
with 0. 2mM dye and with  20g.L-1 galactose as carbon source 
for activation of the GAL 1,10 pr omoter. Cell gr owth was  
measured as  atten uance at 640n m (D 640; open symbols ) and 
decolour isation progress was a ssess ed by dye absorbance at  
461 n m (A461; closed symbols ): wild type (◊, ♦), ∆fre1 (U, ▲) 
and SPcm p-FRE1  (□, ■). 
 
DISC USSION 
 
Plasma membra ne redox s ystems are ubiquito us, 
being expr essed in all living cells including b acter ia and  
cyanobacteria, y easts, alga e and also in  plant and 
anim al ce lls (8,2 6). Thes e systems are linked to s everal 
vital cellular functions, in cluding growth contr ol, iron  
uptake, apoptos is, bioen ergetics, transformatio n and 
hormone responses (2,5,28). Some of these roles may  
be linked to  the mainten ance of appr opriate 
NAD(P)+/NAD( P)H cy toplasmic ra tios. In fact,  an 
incre ase in th e gl ycolytic f lux, le ading t o an 
accumulation of  NADH in the cytoplasm, indu ces an  
increase of PMRS activity  (28 ). A number o f such D640
012345
A461
00.20.40.60.811.2Relative specific activity
∆fre1 ∆fre2 ∆fre1∆fre2AB
110
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Time (h)640
012345
A461
00.20.40.60.811.2Relative specific activity
∆fre1 ∆fre2 ∆fre1∆fre2ABD
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 57CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
systems has been described, such as NADH:ascorbate 
free r adical oxidoredu ctase, NADH:ubiquinone 
oxidoreductase and ferric reductase, among  others 
(26,28). However it is not clear whether different  
phenomenological en zyme activities correspo nd to 
differen t PMR S. On the contrar y, it is generally  
accepted  tha t several  PMRS are m ultifunction al 
(5,8,28) . 
The FRE1-depe ndent ferri c red uctase activity of intac t 
yeast cells is  inversel y regulated b y iron(III)  
concen tration, through the transcription al activators 
Aft1p and Aft2p (33,42). Our decolourisation  
experiments in  media c ontaining additional iron 
revea led a considerabl e increase in the tim e requ ired for 
complete d ye removal, and a negativ e effect of iron(III) 
in the azor eductase activity of yeast cel ls. Ferric 
reduct ase activities also decreas e, as  expected, but the  
effec t of in creased iron concentr ation is more 
pronounced in the azoredu ctase activities .  
Both ferric r eductase (23) and yeast azor eductase 
display  an activity  peak in the exponential growth  
phase. Th is is not an unexpected observation  since 
many enzymes involved in cell growth h ave peak 
activities in this phase,  when con centr ations of 
intracellular reductants are also high. 
The use of th e strains defectiv e in the g enes en coding 
for structural co mponents of  the transmembrane ferric 
reductase, FRE1 and  FRE2 , unequ ivocally  
demonstrated th at Fre1p is  a major component of the 
azoredu ctase system. In contras t Fre2p had a reduced  
importance in azo redu ction , at least under  our assay  
conditions . Our observation is in agreem ent with  works 
reporting th at the FRE1  gene accounts 80 to 98% of the 
ferric reductase activity  (6,7). Nevertheless, growing 
cultur es of the ∆fre1 strain and  of the double deleted 
mutant still sho wed a low deco lourising cap ability. A  
residual ferric r eductase activ ity has been  explained b y 
postulating th e existenc e of an excre ted re ductase  
activity  (15) which, howev er, has never been described.  
An alternative explanation h as been provided b y 
Lesuisse and co lleagu es (25), wh o have shown th at the 
excre tion of ant hranili c and 3-h ydroxyanthranilic acids  
was correla ted with the extr acellular ferr ic re ductase  
activity. Wheter thos e or other extra cellular red uctants 
participate in azo d ye redu ction requ ires f urther 
investiga tion. The insignifi cant p articipation of Fre2p in 
the fe rric and azo reduct ase activities m easur ed in this 
work (cells harvested after 6 hours growth) is p robably 
due to the fac t that the FRE2 gene is expressed 
primarily  after 8-10 hours o f growth, wher eas th e 
expression of  FRE1 is highest in cells grown fo r up to  6 
hours (14). Th erefore the eff ect of  FRE2 was not 
inves tigated at the pres ent stage of our work. 
It must be taken into accoun t that th e fer ric reductase 
activity of in tact yeast ce lls does not depend ex clusively  
on one or  more tr ansmembrane proteins en coded b y 
FRE genes. The in vi vo association of th e Fre1p 
component to  the NAD phosphor ylating  kinase Utr1p  
(21) is now gen erally acce pted, since incr eased ferri c 
reductase activ ity is observed on ly when both FRE1 and 
UTR1  are ov erexpressed together (23). I t has therefore 
been suggested  that Utr1p is the supplier  of NADP to  the ferr ic reductase system  (26).  This is also co nsistent  
with the existence of the NADPH binding motif in 
Fre1p (12,23,3 5), suggesting  that NADPH  is the 
electron dono r for iron r eduction . 
In conclusion , this work strongly  indicates that the 
Fre1p-dependen t reductase s ystem of the yeast plasma 
membrane is an importan t component of the 
azoredu ctase activity in int act cells of S. cerevisiae 
harvested b etween mid and late exponen tial g rowth 
phase. Furth er information on the azoredu ctase s ystem 
will be provid ed by exam ining  the effect of  known  
inhibitors of th e ferri c redu ctase, by estab lishing the  
nature of th e electron donor and b y sear ching other 
components aff ecting th e in vivo  full y functional 
system. For exam ple, it has  been dem onstrated that the  
ferric  redu ctase activity in isolated plas ma membranes  
is due to  a NADPH deh ydrogen ase (diaphor ase) activity 
and that Fre1p, per se, has no h as no reductase activity 
(23). Addition ally it has been s hown that ac tivation of 
the in vivo ferric reductase s ystem requires the integrit y 
of the ras /cAM P pathwa y (24). Interestingly , among  
several labor atory strains of S. cerevisiae the only strain  
with deco lourisi ng act ivity was  the CEN.PK-1 13.7D, 
which has a m utation  on the  CYR1 gene encod ing the 
enzyme aden ylate cyclase (37) .  
 
Acknow ledgments  – P. R. gratefully  acknowledges a 
scholars hip from  the Europ ean B IOEF TEX P roject. The 
authors thank th e techn ical help of Sónia Barbosa in the 
Northern-blot experiments and the exp ert help of Dr. 
Björn Johansson  in all stages of this work. P. R. would 
like to th ank Professor André Gouffeau for a fruitful 
discussion and critical reading o f the manuscript . 
 
REFERENCE S 
 
1. Anderson,  G. J., A. Dancis,  D. G. Roman,  
and R.  D. Klausne r. 1994. Ferric iron r eduction and 
iron uptak e in  euc aryotes: studies  with the yeasts 
Saccharom yces cerevis iae and Schizos accharomyces 
pombe. Adv Exp  Med Bio l 356:81-9. 
2. Bake r, M. A., and A.  Law en. 2000. Plasma 
membrane NA DH-oxi doreduct ase system: a criti cal 
review of  the structural and fun ctional data. Antioxid  
Redox Signal 2:197-212. 
3. Blais eau, P. L., E. Lesuisse , and J.  M. 
Camadro.  2001. Aft2p, a novel iron-r egulated 
transcrip tion activator that m odulates, with  Aft1p,  
intracellular iron use and r esistance to oxid ative stress 
in yeast. J Biol  Chem  276:34221-6. 
4. Chung, K. T., and S.  E. Stevens Jr. 1993. 
Degradat ion o f azo d yes by environ mental 
microorganisms and h elminths. Env ironmental  
Toxicolog y and Chem istry 12:2121-2132. 
5. Crane, F. L., I. L. Sun,  M. G. Clar k, C. 
Grebing, and H. Lo w. 1985. Transplasma-membrane 
redox s ystems in growth a nd development. Biochim 
Bioph ys Acta 811:233-64. 
6. Dancis,  A. , R. D.  Klausner,  A. G.  
Hinne busc h, and J.  G. Bar riocanal. 1990 . Genetic 
eviden ce th at fer ric redu ctase is required for iron uptake  
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 58CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
in Saccharom yces cerevis iae. Mol Cell Biol 10:2294-
301. 
7. Dancis,  A., D. G. Roman,  G. J. Anderson,  
A. G. Hinne busch, and R.  D. Klausne r. 1992. Ferric 
reduct ase of S accharom yces cerevis iae: m olecular 
chara cterization, role in iron upt ake, and transcr iptional  
control b y iron. Proc Natl Acad  Sci U S A 89:3869-73. 
8. del Castillo-Ol ivares, A. , I. Nune z de 
Castro, an d M. A. Med ina. 2000. Dual role of plasma  
membrane electron transport systems in defense. Crit 
Rev Bio chem Mol Biol 35:197-2 20. 
9. Eide, D. J.  2000. Metal ion transport in 
eukar yotic microorga nisms: insights from 
Saccharom yces cerev isiae. Adv M icrob P hysiol 43:1-
38. 
10. Eide, D. J.  199 8. The molecular biolog y of 
metal ion transp ort in Sacch aromyces cer evisia e. Annu 
Rev Nutr 18:441-69. 
11. Entian, K. , an d P. Koett er. 1998. Yeast 
mutant and p lasmid collection s, p. 431-449 . In A. 
Brown and M. Tuite (ed .), Methods in Microbiolog y, 
vol. 26 . Academ ic Press, San Diego. 
12. Finegold,  A. A., K. P. Shatw ell, A. W.  
Segal, R. D. Klausne r, and A.  Da ncis. 1996. 
Intram embrane  bis -heme motif for tr ansmembrane 
electron tr ansport conserved in a yeast iron r eductase 
and the hum an NADP H oxidas e. J  Biol  Chem 
271:31021-4. 
13. Furniss, B. S., A. J. Hannaford, W. G. 
Smith,  and A.  R. Tatc hell. 1989. Vogel' s Textbook of  
Practical Org anic Chemistr y, 5th Edition ed . Longman  
Group. 
14. Georgatsou, E., a nd D.  Alexandr aki. 1999. 
Regulat ed expr ession of the S accharom yces cerevisiae 
Fre1p/Fre2p Fe/Cu redu ctase rela ted genes. Yeast  
15:573-84. 
15. Georgatsou, E., a nd D.  Alexandr aki. 1994. 
Two distinctly  regulated genes are requir ed for  ferric 
reduction, the fir st step of  iron uptake in Sacch aromyces 
cerev isiae. Mol  Cell Biol  14:3065-73. 
16. Georgatsou, E., L. A. Mavrogiannis, G. S. 
Fragiadakis, a nd D. Alexandraki.  1997 . Th e yeast 
Fre1p/Fre2p cup ric reductase s facilitate copp er uptake  
and are r egulated b y the cop per-modulated Mac1p 
activator . J Biol Chem  272:13786-92. 
17. Gibbs,  C. R. 1976. Characterisation and 
application of ferrozin e iron re agent as  a ferrous iron 
indic ator. Anal ytical Chem istry 48:1197-1201. 
18. Gietz , R. D., and R. A. Woods.  2002.  
Transform ation of yeast b y lithium  acetate/single -
stranded carrier  DNA/poly ethylene g lycol method. 
Methods Enzy mol 350:87-96. 
19. Goldste in, A. L.,  and J.  H. M cCuske r. 1999. 
Three n ew dominant drug resistance cassettes for  gene 
disruption in Saccharom yces cerevisiae. Yeast 15:1541-
53. 
20. Gueldener , U., J. He inisch, G . J. Koehl er, 
D. Voss,  and J. H. Hegemann.  2002. A second set of 
loxP m arker c assettes for  Cre-m ediated m ultiple gene  
knockouts in  budding yeast. Nucleic Acids  Res 30:e23. 
21. Kaw ai, S., S. Su zuki, S. Mori, and K. 
Murata.  2001. Molecular clon ing and identification of  UTR1 of a yeast Saccharom yces cerevis iae as  a gene 
encoding an NAD kinase.  FEMS Microbiol Lett 
200:181-4. 
22. Kruckeberg, A. L., L. Y e, J. A. Berd en, and 
K. van Dam.  1999. F unction al exp ression, 
quantifi cation and ce llular localization of  the Hxt2 
hexose tr ansporter of Sacch aromyces cerev isiae tagged 
with the gr een f luorescen t protein. Bioch em J 339 ( Pt 
2):299-307. 
23. Lesuisse , E., M. Caste ras-Simon,  and P.  
Labbe . 1996. Eviden ce fo r the Sacchar omyces 
cerev isiae fe rrireduc tase system be ing a 
multicom ponent  electron transp ort chain . J Biol Chem 
271:13578-83. 
24. Lesuisse, E., B.  Horion , P. La bbe, and F. 
Hilge r. 1991. The p lasma membrane f errireductase 
activity of S accharom yces cerevis iae is  partially 
controll ed by cyclic AMP. Biochem J 280 ( Pt 2): 545-
8. 
25. Lesuisse, E., M. S imon , R. Klein , and P. 
Labbe . 1992. Excretion of  anthran ilate and 3-
hydroxyanthranilate b y Saccharom yces cer evisiae: 
relationship to iron meta bolism. J Gen Microbiol 138 (  
Pt 1): 85-9. 
26. Ly, J. D.,  and A. Law en. 2003 . Transplasma 
membrane electron transpor t: enzymes invo lved and 
biological function. Redox  Rep 8:3-21. 
27. Martins, L. J ., L. T. Je nsen, J. R. Simon,  G. 
L. Ke ller, and D. R. Winge.  1998. Metallor egulation 
of F RE1 and F RE2 hom ologs in S accha romyces 
cerev isiae. J Biol Chem  273:23716-21. 
28. Medina, M. A ., A. del Castillo-Ol ivares, 
and I.  Nunez de Castr o. 1997. Multifunct ional plasm a 
membrane redox  systems. Bioessay s 19:977-84. 
29. New man, A. 1994. Analy sis of pre-mRNA 
splicing  in yeast. IRL Press. 
30. Ramalho, P. A., M. H.  Cardoso, A. Cavaco-
Paulo, and M . T. Ramalho.  2004. Characterization of 
azo redu ction activity in a no vel as comycete yeast 
strain. Appl Environ Microb iol 70:2279-88. 
31. Ramalho,  P. A., H. Scho lze, M. H. Card oso, 
M. T. Ramalh o, and A. M. Ol iveira-Camp os. 2002.  
Improved conditions for the aerobic r eductive 
decolour isation of azo d yes by Candida zey lanoides. 
Enzyme and Microbia l Techno logy:848-854 . 
32. Rotrosen, D., C . L. Yeung, T. L. Leto, H. L. 
Malech, and C.  H. Kw ong. 1992. C ytochrome b558:  
the flavin-b indin g component of  the ph agocy te NADPH 
oxidase. Science 256:1459-62. 
33. Rutherford, J. C., S. Jaron, and D. R. 
Winge.  2003. A ft1p and Aft2p mediate iron-res ponsive  
gene expr ession in yeast thr ough related p romoter 
elem ents. J Biol Chem  278:27636-43. 
34. Sambr ook, J., E. F. Fritsch, and T.  
Maniatis.  1989 . Molecular  Cloning: A Labo rator y 
Manual, 2nd  Edition ed. Co ld Spring Harbor, New 
York.  
35. Shatw ell, K.  P., A. Dancis,  A. R. Cross,  R. 
D. Klausne r, and A.  W. Segal. 1996. Th e FRE1 ferric 
reductase of Saccharom yces cerevisiae is a cytochrome  
b similar to that of NADP H oxidase.  J Biol Chem 
271:14240-4. 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 59CHAPT ER 5. FRE1P AND THE AZORED UCTAS E ACTIV ITY OF SACCHAR OMY CES CERE VISIAE 
36. Stolz, A. 2001. Basic and  applied aspects in  
the microb ial degradation of  azo dyes. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechno l 56:69-80. 
37. Vanhalewyn , M., F. Dumorti er, G. D ebast, 
S. Colombo,  P. Ma, J. Winder ickx, P. Van Dijc k, 
and J. M. Thevelein . 1999. A mutation in 
Saccharom yces cerev isiae aden ylate c yclase, 
Cyr1K1876M, specifically affects glucose- and 
acidification- induced cAMP signalling and not th e basal 
cAMP level . Mol Microb iol 33:363-76. 
38. Wenzel, T. J., A. W. Teunisse n, and H.  Y. 
de Ste ensma.  1995. PDA1 mRNA: a standard for  
quantit ation  of mRNA in S accharom yces cerevis iae 
superior to  ACT1 mR NA. Nucleic Acids Res 23:883-4. 
39. Yamaguchi-Iw ai, Y., A. Dancis,  and R.  D. 
Klausner.  1995 . AFT1: a mediator of iron reg ulated 
transcrip tiona l control in Sa ccharom yces cer evisia e. 
Embo J 14:1231-9. 
40. Yamagu chi-Iwai, Y., M. S erpe, D. Hail e, 
W. Yang,  D. J. Kosman,  R. D. Klausner,  and A.  Dancis.  1997. Homeostatic regu lation  of copper uptake 
in yeast via direct binding of MAC1 protein to upstream 
regulator y sequences of FRE1 and CTR1. J Biol Chem 
272:17711-8. 
41. Yamaguchi-Iw ai, Y.,  R.  Stearman,  A. 
Danc is, and R . D. Klausne r. 1996. Iron-reg ulated 
DNA binding b y the AFT1 protein controls the iron 
regulon in y east. Embo J 15:3377-84. 
42. Yamagu chi-Iwai, Y ., R . U eta, A . 
Fukuna ka, and R.  Sasaki.  2002. Subcellular  
localization of A ft1 transcr iption factor r esponds to iron 
status in S accharom yces cer evisiae. J Biol  Chem 
277:18914-8. 
43. Yun, C. W., M. Bauler, R. E. Moore, P. E. 
Klebba, and C.  C. Philpott.  2001. Th e role of the FRE 
family of pla sma membra ne reductases in the up take of 
siderophore-iron  in Saccharo myces cerevisiae. J Biol 
Chem 276:10218-23. 
 
Appl Environ  Micro biol 2005 , accepted 60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 6 
 
COMPARISON OF THE AZOREDUCTASE ACTIVITY OF 
THREE ASCOMYCETE YEAST STRAINS  
 
 CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
Comparison of the azoreductase activities and assimilation of 
dye reduction products by three ascomycete yeast str ains 
 
Patrícia A. Ram alho(1), A. Cavaco-Paul o(2), M. Teresa Ra malho(3) and M. Helena Cardoso(1) * 
 
(1)Depar tment of Biology , (2)Depart ment of Textile Engineering and (3)Depar tment of Chem istry, Univer sity of M inho, Portugal 
 
 
Abstract 
The deco louris ing capabi lities of Candida zeylanoides UM2, Issatchenkia occid entalis  PYCC5770 and Sacchar omyces  
cerevisiae CEN .PK 113-7D towards several azo  dyes were com pared. The pr esence of d yes and degradation pro ducts in 
the growth medium did not aff ect nor grow th nor  viabi lity of cells. The spec ific degradat ion ra tes o btained showed t hat S. 
cerevisiae is much m ore efficient in the decolour isation  of d yes I, II and amarant h. When comparing th e ln (app arent 1st 
order deco louris ation rate c onstant/specific grow th rate) vs. the r eduction peak p otential (measured agains t the A g/AgCl  
referen ce electro de), it was found that for all thr ee strains th at this relation was represente d by a second order poly nomial 
equation. Assimilation expe rimen ts of the reduction products sho wed that all strains are able to use the formed amines as  
carbon and  nitrogen sources. This represents  the possibilit y of complete m ineralization of th e tested azo d yes. To our  
knowledge this is the on ly repor t describ ing th is featur e in a sing le org anism under th e same  operation al condition s. The 
use of altern ative carbon sources was al so explored. All th e three str ains presented th e same b ehaviour . Along  with  
glucose, ethanol was the on ly substrate that  allow ed both  growth and deco lourisation. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Xenob iotic are co mpounds that do  not exist as natural products a nd the refore  contain structural elem ents that 
cann ot be sy nthesized biochemically. Duri ng evolution of catabolic enzymes and pat hways microorganisms 
were not exp osed to these st ructures and  have not developed the cap ability to use tho se compounds as so le 
sources of carbon and ene rgy. For example sul fo and azo groups are practically unknown amongst natural 
products and can be consi dered as real xenophores  (35). The az o group, -N=N-, is th e most co mmo n 
chromophore in textile d yes an d it is p resent in 60-70% of the tex tile d yestuffs produ ced (25). A larg e fractio n 
of the dyes belonging to this class is so luble and  therefore resid ual dyebaths are still h eavily co loured.  
Because dyes are desi gned to be resistant to oxidativ e transform ations, whic h would result in colour fading, 
they are usually recalcitrant to conve ntional wastew ater treatm ent processes (3,27,40). The electron-
withdrawing properties of  the azo  group explain  the resistance of arom atic azo dyes to t he action of oxidative 
enzymes (1,25) ou r removal in textile efflu ents can  be ach ieved by physical or chemical methods as 
adsorption, precip itatio n, coag ulation, filtratio n or oxidation (for rev iews on  the subject see 1,29 ,36,41). 
However the operational costs of these processes are  high and, additionally, they may generat e high amounts 
of sl udge and secondary pollution, due to the used chemicals (42). A promising an d environment friendly 
altern ative is t he biological deco lourisation of these type  of wastewaters .  
The dec olourisation o f dyes by microor ganisms is commonly done wi th bact eria or w hite-rot fungi. In 
bacteria the  mechanism s of decol ourisation can be: non-specific redu ction by electron transporters from the 
cellu lar m etabolic p athways (flav ins, quinones), dye-specific re duction by azo  reductase enzymes and 
chem ical redu ction by  sulphide ge nerat ed in sulphate reduction (30,44). In white-rot fungi the degradation 
processes  is c onnected to the lig nin m odifying e xoenz ymes: laccase, manganese  peroxidase  and ligni n 
peroxidase ( 8,18,21,24,38). Although t hese microor ganisms are abl e to decol ourise dy es in liquid 
ferm entations, enzy me production has al so been s hown to be unreliable (36). 
Independently on  the microorganism used there are several parameters affecting th e co lour removal 
efficiency : medium com position, oxygen, temperature, pH, dye conce ntration, dye structure , electron donor, 
redox potential, redox m ediators an d the presence of inhibitory substances  (for re views on the subject see 
18,29). For instance oxygen, due to its high redox potential, can compete with the dye for the electrons during 
the redu ction stag e and, during cell growth, will affect the ph ysiological characteristics of t he cells (1 7,29). 
Neve rtheless there a re reports of m icroorganisms capabl e of decolourising dyes in aerobic conditions 
(7,12 ,28,45). Temperatu re and pH will affect mainly th e physiological state o f the cells. Dyes with simple 
structures and  low molecular weigh ts exhibit higher rate s of colour rem oval, whereas  colour removal is more 
difficu lt with  highly sub stituted, high molecular wei ght dyes (37 ). Inh ibitory sub stances can  be the resu lting 
To submit 62CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
amines or addi tives used in te xtile indust ry like salts, de tergents and othe r substances  (11,14). T he am ines that 
result from  the reductive cleavage of the azo bond are ca rcinogenic and/or m utagenic and ca n be t oxic to the 
decol ourising microor ganism (1,3,9,10,47). Salts are us ually prese nt in t his type  of wastewater because they 
are use d to ensure m aximum fixation of the dye to the fiber ( 11,22). When prese nt in high conce ntrations 
(>1% salt) th ey cau se plasmolysis an d/or loss of cell activ ity (23 ). 
In literatu re the ab ility to degrade azo  dyes by yeasts was o nly described in a few repo rts (26 ,31,32,33) 
although several others ex ist th at describe bi osorption of the dyes by  these orga nisms (2,6,15). With this work 
we intend to characte rise and c ompare the azore ductas e activ ity in  tree yeast strain s: two  isolated from 
contam inated s oil, Issatchenki a occi dentalis PYCC577 0 (31 ) and Candida zeylanoides UM2 (26,33) , and one 
laboratorial st rain, Sacc haromyces cerevisi ae CEN .PK 113-7D (32 ). 
 
MATE RIAL S AND METHODS 
 
Chemicals and culture me dia components. Dye I I (Methyl Orange, CI 13025), Dye IV (Orange II, CI 15510), 
both c.a. 85% dye content,  and Amarant h (Acid Red 27) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used 
witho ut further purificatio n. Dyes I ( m-[(4-dimethylamino)phenylazo]benzenesulfonic aci d) and III (m-[(2-
hydroxy-1-naphtyl)azo]benzenesulfonic acid), with a minimum 90% dy e content, were synthesized by the 
conventional method as described previously (31). Inorganic media com ponent s, D-glucose , ethanol, sodium 
acetate, piruva te, lactic ac id and glycerol, of analytical g rade, were obtained from  Merck. Sulfa nilic acid, 
metan ilic acid , 1-am ino-2-naphtol and N,N-d imethyl-p-phenylene diamin e were fro m Ald rich. Complex 
media com ponents (yeast extract, yeast carbo n base, y east nitrogen base and pe ptone) were obtained from 
Difco. The chemical structure s of the  dyes  used in this work a re depicted in Fi gure 1. 
 
NN NCH3
CH3
NaO3S
Dye INN NCH3
CH3NaO3S
Dye II (Methyl Orange)
NN
NaO3SOH
Dye IIINNOH
NaO3S
Dye IV (Orange II)
NOH SO3Na
SO3NaNaO3S N
Amaranth (Acid Red 2 7) 
 
Figure 1.  Structures of the  azo dyes used in this work. 
 
Microorganism a nd maintenance c onditions. The asc omycete yeasts Candida ze ylanoides UM 2 and 
Issat chenkia occidentalis PYCC5770 (Portuguese Yeast Cu lture Co llection ), we re isolated as descri bed in a 
previous publicatio n (33). The strain  Saccharomyces cere visiaes  CEN.PK 113-7D ( 32) was ki ndly provided 
by Dr. P. Kotter. T he strains were r outinely maintained on slants of a medium cont aining (% w/v): glucose 
(2), peptone (1), yeast e xtract (0.5), and agar (2). 
Analytica l meth ods. Biom ass was m easured by turbi dimetry readin gs of a ppropriately diluted cul ture sam ples 
at 640nm, against a blank prepared with the same dilution of the sup ernatant in distilled  water. The correlatio n 
To submit 63CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
between OD (640nm) and ce ll dry weight (DW, g .L-1) is depi cted in table 1, as e xperimentally determined by  
the standard gra vimetric method. Dye conce ntratio n was estim ated by a bsorbance m easure ments of 
supernatant samples, diluted as req uired, in a buffer of pH 4.0, at dye λmax, read agai nst a blank containing the 
same dilution of buffer in  water (3 3). 
 
 
Table 1.  Relation between optical densi ty read at  640 nm (OD 640 n m) and cell d ry weight ( DW) of the yeast  
strains use d. 
 
Strain Relatio n betw een OD  and cell dry  weig ht (DW) 
I.occidentalis PYCC577 0 DW(g.L-1)= 1,1592*OD 640 n m - 0,0106, r2=0,9971 
C.zeylanoides UM2 DW(g.L-1) = 1,1067*OD 640 n m - 0,0207, r2=0,9955 
S.cerevisiae  CEN.PK 113-7D  DW(g.L-1) = 1,1013*OD 640 n m - 0,013, r2=0,9959 
  
 
Grow th and decol ourisation ass ays. Decolourisation expe riments by growing cultures were  typically 
performed in 250 m L cot ton-plugged Erlenmeyer fl asks wi th 100 m L of st erile medium (normal 
decol ourisation medium, here referred to as NDM ) containing yeast extract (0.25%, w/v), glucose (2%, w/ v) 
and 0. 2 mmol.L-1 of t he tested dy e in a m ineral  salts base o f the composition pre viously descri bed (33) 
incubated at 26 ºC and  120 rpm. To test al ternative carbon sources NDM was prepared without glucose and at 
a double concentration. Sol utions (%w/ v) of sodium  acetate (13), starch (1), glucose (20), piruvat e (5), 
glycero l pH 5.5 (10) and lactate pH 5.5 (1) were prepared, filter steri lised  and  aseptically ad ded to the 
medium to the desi red final conce ntrations (0.5%). Concentrated az o dye solutions (4mM) were se parately 
prepared and filter st erilized  (Filtro pur 0.2µm) and ase ptically added to t he medium  to a final c oncent ration of 
0.2 mM. The flasks were inoculated with a cell susp ension obtained from a freshly grown slant, and incubated 
at 26oC, und er orbital sh aking (1 20 rpm). Trip licate exp eriments were run  throughout.  
Assimilation e xperime nts. Minimal media (yeast nitrogen base, YNB , and y east carbon base, YCB) were 
prepared acco rding to the manufactor's in structions and supplemented with 0.5mM metanilic acid , sulfanilic 
acid, 1-amino-2-naphtol or N,N-dimethyl-p-pheny lene diamine for t esting these com pounds as car bon and 
energy or nitrogen sources . Control experiments were performed wi th 0.5mM ammonium sulphate as sol e 
nitrogen source, in YCB, or with 0.5mM glucose a s sole carbon and energy source, i n YNB. These 
expe riments were performed in liquid and in solid (2% agar w/v) media. 
Cyclic voltammetry expe riments. All voltammetric measurem ents were performed usi ng a Voltalab 30 
potentiostat (Rad iometer An alytical , France) controlle d by a personal computer running Voltamaster 4  
electrochem ical software .  The workin g electrode was a gla ssy carbon elect rode with a geom etric area of 0.07 
cm2 (BAS, USA).  T he count er electrode  electrode was a coi led platinum wire electrode wi th a length of 23 
cm (BAS) and  the referen ce electrod e a silver/silv er chloride electrode filled  with  3 M so dium chlorid e 
(Ag|AgCl (3M  NaCl)) (BAS).The glassy  carbon electrode was succes sively polished with 5, 1, 0.3 a nd 0.05 
µm alumina polish (Buehler Lt d, US A) o n a microcl oth polishing cloth (Buehler) and then ri nsed with 8 M 
nitric acid (Aldrich) and dist illed water before use. All experim ents were perform ed in 0.1 M acetate  buffer 
adjusted to pH 5 with sodium hydrox ide (Sigma) and  all solutions were p repared with  distilled  water.  Prior to 
analysis all solu tions were pu rged with  nitrogen for 15 minutes. All potentials were record ed versus the 
Ag|AgCl (3M  NaCl) refe rence electro de and corrected for t he norm al hy drogen electrode (NHE). 
 
RESULTS  AND DISCUSSION 
 
For all th e tested  dyes and  strains were obtained typical growth  and decolourisation  curv es (31,33) with an 
acidification of the medium alon g the decol ourisation process (res ults not shown). The fastest decrease i n dye 
concentration  in the medium was always observ ed in the late ex ponential g rowth phase as it was state d in an 
earlier publication by our group (31). The presence of dye in the medium did not  affect the speci fic growth 
rates o f the strains tested  as it can  be seen  in figure 2A. The re is also no t oxic effect of these dyes and 
resulting degradation products sin ce th e re-ino culation  of cells gro wn in the presence o f dye results in  a 
normal grow (results no t show).  Although specific growth  rates are n ot significan tly d ifferen t (Figure 1 A), 
the rate of dye degraded per gram  of cel l dry weight formed is considerably different (Figure 2B) as well as 
To submit 64CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
the decolourisatio n times (Tab le 2). In Figure 2B and Table 2 it is also sh own that the strain  of S. cer evisiae  
tested  is m uch more efficien t in term s of decolourisation  capability th an the o ther two strain s. Th e differen ces 
may b e related to  the mutation in the CYR1  gene  encoding the enzym e adenyl ate cyclase, but its relation wit h 
the azo re ductase activity nee ds to be further explored (32). 
 
 
00.20.40.6Specific growth rate (h-1) 
W/o dyeDye I Dye IIDye III Dye IV Amaranth0100200300
Saccharomyces cerevisiaeIssatchenk ia occidentalis Candida zeylanoidesDye degrad ed/Formed ** 
biomass (µmol/gDW)A
B
 
 
Figure 2. (A) Specific gr owth rates an d (B) rate of d ye degra ded for biomass form ed of t he strains S. 
cerevisiae  CEN.PK113-7D, I. occi dentalis PYCC577 0 and C. zeylanoi des UM 2 in t he prese nce of dy es I, II, 
III, IV  and Am arant h grown in NDM  with 0.2mM of dye at 26ºC and 120 rpm .  
 
 
Table 2. Deco lourisation  times in  hours (fo r decolourisatio n ≥98%) for strains C.zeylanoides UM2, I. 
occidentalis PYCC5770 and S. ce revisiae  CEN.PK 113-7D for all th e tested  dyes. 
 
Dye C. zeylanoides UM 2 I.occi dentalis PYCC5 770 S.cerevisiae C EN.PK 113-7D 
I 11 15 8.5 
II 25 14 12 
III 48 26 48 
IV 24 30 78 
Amarant h 12 15 8.5 
 
 
To find  an explanation  for the differen ces o bserved in deco lourisation  abilities to ward s differen t dyes, th e 
reduction  potentials vs. Ag/AgCl of all tested  dyes were d etermin ed. The resu lts are d epicted in Table 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
To submit 65CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
Table 3.  Redu ction potential vs Ag /AgCl of t he tested d yes. 
 
Dye Reduction po tentia l vs. Ag/AgCl (V) 
I -0,397 
II -0,337 
III -0,521 
IV -0,560 
Amaranth -0,476 
 
The prim ary data re veale d a period of the grow th phase in which decolourisation  followed a 1st order 
equat ion. Since this constant is depe ndent on biomass growth, we have used a “ normalized” param eter, k app/µ, 
where k app stands for the apparent 1st order decolourisatio n rate constant and µ for specific growth rate. 
Represe nting ln (kapp/µ) vs. the dye redu ction peak po tential it was ob tained fo r the tree strai ns a si milar 
beha viour as it is shown in figure 3. This variation is represe nted by a seco nd order polynomial equat ion. 
Dubin and Wright (16) and Bragger et al.  (5) in stud ies w ith colonic bacter ia fo und a lin ear relationship 
between  the logarithm of the reduction  rate and the redox  potential o f the tested  dyes: the more po sitive the 
redox  potential th e more readily it is red uced. These ob servations are expected sin ce the redo x potential is a  
measure of the ease at which a m olecule will accept elect rons a nd be reduce d. Sem dé et al.  (39) in studies 
with Clostridium perf ringens found out that the degradation rate was i ndependent of both the redox potential 
and the  structure of the a zo dye unles s the  dyes where introduced sim ultaneously. In this case th e redu ction 
would occur sequentially as a fu nction of the substrate redox  potential. Howev er our resu lts po int to an 
energy-dependent decolourisation ki netics, although other factors as  the charge of the dye m olecule and the  
size of substituents m ay also affect th e overall proc ess. These results are not necessa rily in disa greement with 
our previous findings (46) since we a re studying different param eters. 
-1.5-1-0.500.511.5
-0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3
Reduction peak potencial vs.Ag/AgCl (V)ln (kapp/µ)
S.cerevisiae I.occidentalisC.zeylanoides
 
 
Figure 3.  Effect of the reduction peak potential of the tested dyes on the ln (rate constant of apparent 1st order 
decolourisation  (kapp) / specific gr owth rate (µ)). Th e resu lts fit in to the equations ln(k app/µ)=-101.99*Epc2-
86.34*Epc-17.13 (r2=0.9878), ln(kapp/µ)=-79.39*Epc2-65.82*Epc-13.28 (r2=0.9777), ln(k app/µ)=-69.59*Epc2-
60.79*Epc-12.73 (r2=0.8998) respectiv ely for S. cerevisiae  CEN .PK 113-7D, I. occi dentalis PYCC577 0 and 
C. zeylanoides UM 2 (where r2 stands fo r standa rd devi ation err or and E pc stands f or reduction peak potential 
of the dye).   
 
The fat e of the resul ting am ines was st udied by  assi milation ex periments of t hese c ompounds in minimal 
media. The results are de picted in Ta ble 4. In some cases the assimilatio n was  precede d by a long la g phase 
(resu lts no t sho wn). This cou ld represen t the adaptation  of the strai n to the sou rce. In  term s of indu strial  
To submit 66CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
application  of th is process it is v ery im portant and significan t that the yeast strain s are ab le to use the resulting 
amines as carbon a nd nitroge n sources . These com pounds are known to be carci nogenic and/or mutagenic (9). 
Therefo re this ab ility o f yeasts wou ld allow to  detoxify completely an  wastewater co ntaminated with  azo 
dyes. It  is not descri bed in literature one s ole organism that  is capa ble of both reducing the azo bond and 
mineralize th e resu lting amines under the same operation al cond itions. Fro m the existing reports it can  be 
seen that th ere are sev eral limita tions to the app licati on of bact eria for the biodegradation of the aromatic 
amines form ed from  the re ductive cleava ge of the  azo bond:  
- the need for specific adapted strains (4,34) and in some cases co -cultures of several strain s 
(12,20,43); 
- chemical oxidation of som e metabolites into m ore recalci trant products (13); 
- the lack of knowle dge on the bio-reacti vity of these c ompounds (30). 
 
 
Table 4. Assi milation of the amines su lfanilic acid  (SA), metan ilic ac id (MA), 1-am ino-2-naphtol (1A2N) and  
N,N-dimethyl-p-pheny lene diamine (NNDPFD) as sole source of carbon and e nergy (C) or nitrogen (N) by 
the yeast strain s Candida zeyl anoides UM2 , Issatchenkia occi dentalis PYCC5770 an d Saccharomyce s 
cerevisiae  CEN .PK 113-7D. 
 
SA MA 1A2N NNDPFD Strain 
C N C N C N C N 
C. zeylanoides UM2 + + + + + + + + 
I. occi dentalis PYCC5770 + + + + + + + + 
S. ce revisiae  CEN.PK 113-7D + + + + + + + + 
(+) growth 
  
 
In terms of i ndustrial appl ication is also im portant to test alternative and economic carbo n sources. To a chieve 
this an d to further understand th e process it was tested  ethanol, sta rch, ac etate, lactat e, py ruvate and glycerol 
as carb on and energy sources  in terms of gr owth and dec olourisation ef fect. The resul ts obtained are depicted 
in table 5. 
 
 
Table 5 . Effect of et hanol, s tarch, acetate, lactate, pyruva te and glycerol as carbo n and energy s ources in 
growth and decolourisation of dye I by  the strains S. cerevisia e CEN .PK113-7D, I. occidentalis PYCC5 770 
and C. zeyl anoides  UM2. 
 
 S. cerevisiae  CEN.PK  113-7D I. occident alis PYCC5 770 C. zeylanoides UM 2  
C source Growth Decol ourisation Growth Decol ourisation Growth Decol ourisation 
Gluc ose + + + + + + 
Ethanol + + + + + + 
Starch - - - - - - 
Acetate + - + - + - 
Lactate + - + - + - 
Pyruvate + - + - + - 
Glycerol + - + - + - 
 
As it can be seen, only glucose a nd ethanol allowed both growth and decol ourisation. The explanation for 
these observations can be that both glucose and ethanol metabol ism have a  higher yield in NADH (19), which 
is probably the in tracellu lar electro n donor for th e dye red uction. We assu me that the redu ction  of th e azo  
To submit 67CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
dyes by yeast cells is achi eved by a reductase pl aced in the outer side of the plasma membrane of cells (32). 
This re ductase trans fers elec trons between th e intracellu lar don or (NAD(P )H) a nd the azo bound. It is so 
expected  that the concentration /availab ility of  the electron  donor affects the red uction rate. 
 
CONCL USIONS 
 
This wo rk prov ides ev idence th at yeasts ar e good biore mediation age nts for azo dyes. Their growth and 
viability is n ot affected  by th e presen ce o f dyes and their redu ction products, which are po tentially  
carcinoge nic a nd mutagenic. Also t hey are able to use the produce d amines as ca rbon and nitrogen s ources, 
being abl e to achieve t he desired c omplete mineral ization of t he azo compounds. The strain of Sacc haromyces 
cerevisae  tested proved to be the most effi cient dec olouriser towards dyes I, II and Am arant h. Whe n 
comparing the ln (kapp/µ) vs. the dye reduction peak potential, it was fo und that for all th ree strain s that this 
relation was re prese nted by a seco nd order p olynomial equa tion, sugg estin g that the decolourisation  process is 
significa ntly affected by the reaction driving force. 
 
 
ACKNOWLE DGMENTS 
 
P. R. gr atefu lly acknowledg es a scholarsh ip from  the European B IOEFTEX Project. The authors would like 
to thank Dr. Roy Millward for th e cyclic vo ltammetry measu rements and  to Prof. Narim antas Cen as by 
critical read ing of th is manuscript. 
 
REFERE NCES 
 
1. Aksu , Z. 2005. Application of biosorption for the rem oval of o rganic pollutants: a revi ew. P rocess 
Biochem istry 40:997-1026. 
2. Aksu , Z., and G. Donmez . 2003. A comparative stud y on the biosorption cha racterist ics of som e 
yeasts for Remazol Blue react ive dye. Chem osphe re 50:1075-83. 
3. Bana t, I. M.,  P. Nigam, D.  Singh , and R. Marc hant.  1996. Micro bial decolorization  of textile-d ye-
containing effluents: a review. Bioresour Technol 58:217-227. 
4. Blumel, S., M. Contz en, M.  Lutz , A. Stolz , and H. J. Knac kmuss . 1998. Isolation of a bact erial 
strain  with  the ability to  utilize the sulfonated azo compound 4-carbox y-4'-sulfoazobenzen e as th e sole source 
of carbon and energy. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:2315-7. 
5. Bragger, J . L., A. W. L loyd, S. H. S oozande hfar, S. F. Bloom field, C. Marriott,  and G. P.  
Mar tin. 1997. In vestigation s into the azo redu cing activ ity o f a co mmon colonic m icroorganism. 
International J ournal of Pha rmaceutics 157:61-71. 
6. Bustar d, M., G. McMulla n, and A. P. McH ale. 199 8. Bio sorption of textile d yes by biomass 
derived from Kluveromyces marxianus IMB3. Biop rocess Eng 19:427-430. 
7. Cao, W ., B. Mahadevan, D. L. Cr awford, an d R. L.  Craw ford. 1993. C haracterization of a n 
extracellular azo dy e-oxidizing peroxidase from Flavobac terium sp. AT CC 397 23. Enzyme and M icrobial 
Tech nology 15:810-817. 
8. Chivukul a, M., J. T. Spadaro, and V. Re ngan athan. 1995. Lignin peroxidase-cataly zed oxidati on 
of sulfonated azo dyes gene rates novel sulfophenyl hydroperoxides. Biochemistry 34:7765-72. 
9. Chung, K. T. 1983. T he significance of az o-reduction i n the mutagenesi s and carci nogenesis of az o 
dyes. M utat Res 114:269-81. 
10. Com bes, R.  D., and R.  B. Haveland-Smi th. 1982. A review o f the genotoxicity of food, drug and 
cosm etic colours and other azo, tripheny lmethane  and xanthene dyes. M utat Res 98:101-248. 
11. Correi a, V. M., T. Stephe nson, and S. J. Judd.  1994. Characterisati on of textile wastewaters - a 
review. Environmental Techn ology 15:917-929. 
12. Coughlin, M. F., B. K. Kink le, and P. L. Bishop.  2002. Degradation of a cid orange 7 i n an aero bic 
biofilm. Chemosphere 46:11-9. 
13. Coughlin, M.  F., B. K. Kinkle, and P . L. Bishop . 1999. De gradati on of azo dye s containing 
aminona phthol by Sphingomonas s p strain 1CX. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol 23:341-346. 
14. Delée, W., C. O'Neill, F. R.  Hawkes, and H. M. Pinheiro . 1998. Anaerob ic treatmen t of tex tile 
effluents: a review. J ournal of Chemical Techn ology and Biotechn ology 73:323-335. 
To submit 68CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
15. Donmez , G. 2002. Bio accum ulation of the reactiv e tex tile d yes by Candida tropicalis growing in 
molasses medium. Enzyme and Microb ial Tech nology 30:363-366. 
16. Dubin , P., and K. L. Wright.  1975. Redu ction of azo food dyes in cultures of Proteus v ulgaris. 
Xenob iotica 5:563-71. 
17. Forgacs, E., T. Cserh ati, and G . Oros. 2004. Removal of sy nthetic dyes fr om wastewat ers: a 
review. Environ Int 30:953-71. 
18. Fu, Y ., and T.  Virar aghavan.  2001. Fung al decolorization  of dye waste waters: a re view. Biore sour 
Technol 79:251-62. 
19. Gance do, C., and R. Serr ano. 1987. Energy-yielding M etabolism, p. 205-259. In A. H. Rose and J. 
S. Harrison  (ed.), Th e Yeasts: Me tabolism and Physiology of Yeasts, 2nd ed, vol. 3. Academic Press. 
20. Haug, W., A. Schmidt, B. Nor temann, D. C. Hempel , A. Stolz , and H. J. Kn ackmuss.  1991. 
Mineralizatio n of the sulfonated azo dye Mordant Yellow 3 by  a 6-am inonaphthalene-2-sulfonate-degrading 
bacterial con sortiu m. App l Environ Microb iol 57:3144-9. 
21. Heinfling, A., M. J. Ma rtinez, A. T. Mar tinez, M. Bergbauer, and U. Sz ewzyk. 1998. 
Tran sformation of industrial dyes by  manganese peroxidases from Bjerkande ra adusta and Pleurotus eryngii 
in a mangan ese-independent react ion. Appl Environ Microbiol 64:2788-93. 
22. Isik, M., and D. T. Sponz a. 2004. Decol orization of azo dyes under batch anae robic and sequential 
anaerobic/aerobic conditions . J Environ Sci Health Pa rt A Tox Hazard Subst E nviron E ng 39:1107-27. 
23. Kargi, F., a nd A. R. Dince r. 1996. Effect of sal t conce ntration on biological treatment of sal ine 
wastewat er by fed-batch ope ration. Enzy me and Microbial Tech nology:529-537. 
24. Kim, S. J., and M. Shoda. 1999. Dec olorization of molasses and a dye by a newly isolated strain of 
the fungus Geotrich um candidum Dec 1. Bio technol Bio eng 62:114-9. 
25. Knac kmuss , H. J.  1996. Basic knowledge and pers pectives of bi oelimination of xe nobiotic 
compounds. Journal of Biotechn ology 51:287-295. 
26. Martins, M.  A., M. H. Cardo so, M. J. Queiro z, M. T. Ramalho, and A.  M. Campo s. 199 9. 
Biodegradation of az o dyes by the yeast Candida zeyl anoides in ba tch aerate d cultures. C hemosphere  
38:2455-60. 
27. Pagga, U., an d D. Brown. 1986. The degradation of dyestuffs: part  II beha viour of dyestuffs in 
aerobic biodegradat ion tests. Chemosphe re 15:479-491. 
28. Pasz czynski, A., M. B. P asti, S. Gosz czynski, D. L. Crawford, and R. L. Craw ford. 1991. New 
approach  to improve degradation of recalcitrant azo  dyes by Streptomyces  spp. and Phanerochaete 
chrys ospori um. Enzyme and Microbi al Technology 13:378-384. 
29. Pearce, C. I., J. R. Ll oyd, and J. T. Guthrie.  2003. The  removal of co lor from textile wast ewat er 
using whole bacterial cells: a review. Dyes  and Pi gments 58:179-196. 
30. Pinheiro, H. M., E. Tour aud, and O. Thomas. 2004. Aromatic amines f rom azo dy e reduction: 
statu s review with  emphasis on direct UV sp ectro photometric detectio n in textile in dustry wastewaters. Dyes 
and Pigm ents 61:121-139. 
31. Ram alho, P. A., M. H . Cardoso, A. C avaco-P aulo, and M. T . Ram alho. 2004. Character izatio n of 
azo reduction  activ ity in  a novel asco mycete yeast str ain. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:2279-88. 
32. Ram alho, P. A., S. Paiva, A. Ca vaco-Paulo, M.  Casal, M. H. Cardoso, and M. T. Ramalho. 
2005. Az o reductase activity of intact Sacc haromyces cer evisiae  cells is depe ndent on the Fre 1p component 
of the plasm a membrane ferric reductase. A pplied and Environm ental Technology (accepted). 
33. Ramalho, P. A., H. Scholze, M. H. Cardoso, M. T. Ramalho, and A. M. Oliveira-Campos. 2002. 
Improve d conditions for the aerobic reductive dec olourisation of azo dyes by  Candida zeyl anoides. Enzym e 
and Microbial Technol ogy:848-854. 
34. Razo-Flores , E., B. Donlon, G. Lettinga, and J. A. Field.  1997. Biotransformation an d 
biodegrad ation of N-su bstitu ted aromatics in  methanogenic granular sludge. FEMS Micro biol Rev 20:525-38. 
35. Rieger, P. G., H. M. Meier, M. Gerle, U. V ogt, T. Groth, an d H. J. Knackmuss. 2002. 
Xenob iotics in th e environment: present and future strateg ies to obviate th e problem of biological p ersisten ce. 
J Biotechnol 94:101-23. 
36. Robinson, T. , G. Mc Mull an, R. March ant, and P. Nigam.  2001. Remediation of dyes in  textile 
efflue nt: a critical review on curre nt treatment technologi es with a propo sed alternative. Biores our T echnol 
77:247-55. 
37. Sani, R. K., and U. C. Banerjee.  1999. Deco lorizatio n of triph enylmethane dyes and textile and 
dye-stuff effluent by Kurthia sp. Enzym e and Microbial Te chnology 24:433-437. 
To submit 69CHAPT ER 6. COMPAR ISON  OF THE  AZOREDUC TASE  ACT IVITY OF THRE E YEAST STRAIN S 
 
38. Schliephake, K., D. E. Mainwaring,  G. T. Lone rgan,  I. K. Jones , and W. L . Baker.  200 0. 
Tran sformation an d degradation of the disazo dy e Chicago Sky Blue by a purified laccase fr om Pycnoporus  
cinnabarinus. Enzy me Microb Tec hnol 27:100-107. 
39. Semdé, R., D. Pierre, G. Geuskens , M. Devleesc houwer, and A. J. Moë s. 1998. Study of s ome 
important fact ors i nvolved in azo derivative reduction by Clostridium perfring ens. Intern ation al Journ al of 
Pharmaceutics 161:45-54. 
40. Shaul, G. M., T. J. H oldsw orth, C. R. Dempsey, and K . A. Dostal. 1991. Fate of  water soluble azo  
dyes in the acti vated sludge process.  Chemosphe re 22:107-119. 
41. Slokar, Y. M., and A. M. Le Marechal.  1998. Meth ods o f Deco loratio n of Tex tile Wastewaters. 
Dyes a nd Pigm ents 37:335-356. 
42. Supaka, N., K. J untongjin, S. Damronglerd, M .-L. Delia, and P. Strehaiano. 200 4. Micr obial 
decol orization of reacti ve azo dyes in a sequential anaerobic -aerobic syste m. Che mical Engi neeri ng Journal 
99:169-176. 
43. Tan, N. C., F. X . Pren afeta-Boldu, J. L. Opstee g, G. Lettinga, and J. A. Fi eld. 1999. 
Biodegradation of az o dyes in cocultures of anaer obic granular sludge with aerobic aromatic amine degrading 
enrichment cultures. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 51:865-71. 
44. Yoo, E. S.  200 2. Kinetics of  chemical decolorization of the azo dye C.I. Reactive Orange 96 by 
sulfide . Chemosphere 47:925-31. 
45. Zhou, W., and W. Z immermann.  1993. Decol orization of industrial effluents containing reactive 
dyes by actinomycetes. FEMS Microbiol Lett 107:157-61. 
46. Zille, A., P. Ra malho, T. Tza nov, R. Millwa rd, V. Aires, M. H. Ca rdoso, M. T. Rama lho, G. M. 
Gubitz , and A. Cavac o-Paulo.  2004. Predicting dy e biodegradation from redox p otentials. Biotechnol  Prog 
20:1588-92. 
47. Zimmermann, T., H. G. Kulla, and T . Leisinger.  1982. Properties o f pur ified O range II 
azore ductase, t he enzyme initiating az o dye degra dation by  Pseudo monas KF46. Eur J Biochem  129:197-203. 
To submit 70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 7 
 
DECOLOURISATION OF REACTIVE AZO DYES BY A 
BACTERIAL CONSORTIUM  
 
 CHAPT ER 7. DECOLOUR ISAT ION OF R EACT IVE AZO  DYES BY  A BACT ERIA L CONSORT IUM 
 
Decolourisation of reactive azo dy es in alkaline textile effluents 
with a bacterial consortium 
 
Patrícia A. Ramalho(1), M. Helena Cardoso(1), M. Teresa Ramalho(2) Geor g M. 
Gübitz(3) and A. Ca vaco-Pa ulo(4)*
 
(1)Depar tment of Biology , (2)Depar tment of Chem istry and (4)Depart ment of Textile Engineeri ng, University  of Minho, Portugal 
(3)Depar tment of Envir onmental Biotechnology , Graz Univer sity of T echnology , Austr ia 
 
 
Abstract 
The main goal o f this work was to develop a con tinuous proce ss to degrade azo d yes with  a bacterial consortium isolated 
from  a textil e wastewat er oper ating at pH 9 and 5 5ºC. To assess the viabi lity of the application of this treatmen t system to  
an industrial s ystem several par ameters  were studied and  related with th e colour and COD remova l efficien cies. Th e 
effec ts of h ydraulic retention t ime (HRT ), pH, temperature and p resence of s alts were s tudied . For the optim al operational  
conditions (pH 9 and HRT of 24 h) the e fficiencies achiev ed were 91.5±1.3% for colour removal and 89.0±0.4% for COD 
removal. The s ystem  toler ated, with no signif icant decr ease in colour rem oval efficiency 3% of  Na 2SO 4, Na2CO 3 or NaCl. 
The later salts , however, produced a reduction in COD re mova l of 30 and 50% respectively . The total suspended solids 
conten t in the o utlet of th e reactor chang ed widely  during th e operation. The mean valu e was 0.5 4±0.22 g/L. Th e system  
proved to b e very effectiv e in the de colourisation of C.I . React ive Black 5  (RB5) under alka line conditions and high  
temperatur es. 
 
Short title:  Bacterial decolour isation of  reactive azo d ye 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Textile p rocessin g employs a v ariety o f chemicals,  
depe nding on the nat ure of the raw m aterial and 
products. The wast ewater generat ed by differe nt 
production steps has high pH and temperature. It 
also contains high conce ntration of or ganic matter, 
non-biodegradable m atter, t oxic s ubstances,  
detergents and soaps, oil and grea se, sulphide and 
alkalinity (1, 2, 3, 4). In addition, the high salt 
conditions of reactive dyeb aths result in high-salt  
wastewater, which furthe r exacerbates both their 
treatm ent and disposal. 
Portuguese leg islatio n establish es the limits fo r 
discha rge of efflue nts from  textile indus try as 
follows: pH between 5.5 an d 9 (Sorensen scal e), 
BOD 5 < 100 mgO2/L, COD < 250 m gO2/L, co lour 
not visible at a dilution of 1:40 (5). Thes e limits 
prevail o ver gene ral re gulations (6) for the  
discharge of residual waters. 
Azo co mpounds constitute the larg est and m ost 
diverse group of dyes an d pigments used i n 
commercial ap plicatio ns (7). During  the production 
and use o f these com pounds a l arge am ount is 
released to the environm ent, m ainly to 
wastewaters. For i nstance  in current cotton dyeing 
processes  with reactive dyes as much as 50% of  the  
 
*To who m corr espondence shoul d be addr essed.  Tel.: (351)  253 
5102 80. Fax: (351 ) 253 5102 93. E-m ail: artur@ det.uminho. pt 
  
dye are lo st in th e wastewater (8 ). Th eir stab ility 
and xenobiotic nature make them very  persistent in 
conve ntional treatm ent sys tems (9) and their 
prese nce in natural water courses above t he natural 
depuration l imit causes seri ous en vironmental 
problems. The reduction  of the lig ht absorption and 
the produ ction of amines in an aerob ic con ditions 
are two of the problem s that arise from the  
uncontrolled discharge of these com pounds i n 
water courses (9 ,10,11) .  
The m ajor methods used for colour removal 
involve ph ysical and/or chemical proces ses like 
oxidation, adsorption wi th different materials or 
microorganisms, m embrane tech nology o r 
coagulation/flocculation (f or reviews on the sub ject 
see 12 , 13, 14). T hese methods ar e hi ghly 
expe nsive to apply and generat e a concentrated 
sludge that creates disp osal problem s. They can 
also be the ca use of a sec ondary poll ution problem 
due to e xcessive chem ical use (8). The 
conventional biological treat ment syste ms like 
activated sludge are  not cap able of degrading the 
dyes, being mainly removed by physical adsorption 
(13, 15), because und er aerob ic con ditions azo 
dyes are not read ily metabolised  (12). Also in  these 
conve ntional s ystems, there are se veral s ubstances  
like nitrate an d nitrite, u sually p resent in high 
levels in m unicipal wastewater, that c ompete with 
azo dyes as ele ctron accept ors (16). T his is why in 
EMT/ patramalho.AT.bio.uminho.pt/20041006 72CHAPT ER 7. DECOLOUR ISAT ION OF R EACT IVE AZO  DYES BY  A BACT ERIA L CONSORT IUM 
 
the last fe w ye ars a l ot of re search as been done i n 
the azo dye  biode gradati on a rea m ainly with  
bacteria, eit her isolated or in consortia, (8, 17, 10, 
9, 12) and  with  white-ro t fungi (18 , 19). With 
yeasts there  are only few reports  that mention 
degradation rather than adsorption (20 , 21, 22). 
To devel op a biological treatment system for these 
wastewaters there are se veral  consi derations to be 
made. It is k nown that th e operation al parameters  
of a bi ological treatm ent system  great ly influence  
its efficien cy. Param eters lik e hydrau lic reten tion 
time (HRT), lev el of aeration, tem peratu re and pH 
must be opt imized t o produce  the maximum rate of 
dye red uction (8). Also the cap ability o f using 
nutrients like  acetate prese nt in the  efflue nts could 
help to re duce the co st and increa se the 
applicab ility of a system  in industry. Befo re being 
able to apply a treatm ent syst em to an i ndust rial 
wastewater  all the referred param eters sh ould be 
studied and optimized.  
The main goal of this study w as to assess th e 
influence of several operational p arameters o n the 
colour a nd c hemical oxy gen dem and ( COD) 
removal efficiencies of a bacterial biorea ctor to  
treat alkaline and col oured wastewaters a t high 
temperatu re. Th e term o-alkalophilic b acterial strain 
Bacillus sp. KF was selected b ased on the potential 
of its az oreduc tase to degrade azo dyes which we  
have  reported earlier (23). T he react or wa s 
operated at pH 9 and 55ºC  because reactive dyes 
are use d under al kaline con ditions at high 
temperatures . The chose n dye was C.I. Reactive 
Black 5 (RB5), one of the most widely used i n 
cotton dyeing processes . After som e acclimation 
time it was fo und that th ere was a co nsortium 
prese nt in the reactor, m ainly constituted by  
Bacillus sp. KF, the in itially in oculated strain. The 
use o f consortia has several  advantages for the use  
in an industrial treat ment plant. Firstly th ere is n o 
need for st erile co nditions thu s decreasing  
enormously the costs. The se m ixed p opulation 
syste ms are also m ore st able to changes in pH, 
temperatu re an d feed ing composition when 
compared to pure c ultures (13). Als o there are  
more chances of a c omplete mineralization of t he 
dye sin ce in literatu re few strain s are found that 
can alon e m etabolise co mpletely th is typ e of 
compounds (8). 
 
2. Materials and me thods 
 
Microorganisms . The bacterial strain  Bacillus sp. 
KF was isolat ed from  a wastewater drai n of a 
textile fin ishing company (Têx til Alb erto de Sousa, 
Guimarães, Po rtugal) based on  its cap abilit y of 
degrading various dyestuffs at pH 9 a nd 60ºC as descri bed by Maier et al. (23). After a p eriod of 
acclim ation it was  found that the re was a  
consortium  of bacteria in side the react or, mainly 
constitu ted by the Bacillus sp. strain (23). 
Chemica ls. Reactive Black 5 (RB 5, min. dye 
content ~55%) was pu rchased from Aldrich and 
used wi thout furt her purification (fi gure 1). 
Inorganic media com pone nts as wel l as glucose 
where from  Merck. Pe ptone from  casein and yeast 
extract whe re purc hased from  Difco. 
 
HO
H2NSO3Na
SO3NaS
SN
NO
O
O
ONaO 3SOH2CH2C
NaO 3SOH2CH2C NN
 
 
Figure 1:  Structur e of CI Reactive B lack 5. 
 
Medium fo r dye d egrada tion. Composition o f the 
stock m edium 10 t imes concent rated 
(concentrations in g/L) KH2PO 4 3,5;  Na2HPO4.7 
H2O 7,5; yeas t extract 10,0; peptone from casein 
20,0; NH 4SO 4 2,5; MgSO4.7 H 2O 4,5; MnSO4.H2O 
0,2 and iron citrate.5H 2O 0,7; and 2,5 %( v/v) of a 
SL-6 trace ele ment solutio n according to  Pfennig 
(24). SL-6 contained (mg/L): ZnSO 4.7H 2O 10 0,0; 
MnCl2.4H 2O 30 ,0; H 3BO 3 300,0; CuCl2.2H 2O 
10,0; NiCl2.6H 2O 2 0,0; Na2MoO4.2H 2O 30,0 ; 
CoCl2.6H 2O 200,0. To avoid precipitation of salts 
during au toclave sterilisatio n, MnSO 4.H2O, 
MgSO 4.7H 2O and iron cit rate were a utoclave d 
separately and  aseptically co mbined with  the other 
compone nts. Medium pH was a djusted, exce pt 
where stated otherwise, to 9.0±0.2 with NaOH. To 
prepare 1L of medium  for t he bioreactor, 100m L of 
this sto ck solution was d iluted with 500mL of 
water and 400 mL of 1g/L RB5 solution.  
Bioreact or. A schem e of the reactor used in this  
study is shown in figure 2. T he vessel  was 9 cm  in 
diameter an d 15 cm high (up to the conical top), 
and had an ov erall vo lume of 1.1 L. Th e volume of 
the fillin g supp ort (Leca® Balls –  air fille d clay 
balls) was 0.65 L. The op eration conditions, except 
where stated otherwise, were :  a fl ux of 37.5 m L/h 
(corresponding to  an HRT of 12 h), an aer ation 
flux of 300 mL/min, and a temperature  of c.a. 
55ºC. The syst em also included an aeration pum p 
Tagu s 3000, a feed pump Gilson model Min ipuls2 
and a heating bath at 60ºC . 
Analytica l meth ods. The dy e content in s amples 
was calculated by abs orbance m easurements at 
560nm against water. Sam ples were filtered  with 
0.20µm membranes  and diluted as required. Total  
EMT/ patramalho.AT.bio.uminho.pt/20041006 73CHAPT ER 7. DECOLOUR ISAT ION OF R EACT IVE AZO  DYES BY  A BACT ERIA L CONSORT IUM 
 
Erro ! Ligação invá lida. 
Figure 2:  Sche me of  the lab scale reactor f or co ntinuous  
decolour isation.  
 
suspended solids (TSS), to tal so lids (TS) and  total 
volatile so lids (TVS) were d etermin ed by stan dard 
gravimetric methods. Chemical oxy gen demand 
(COD) was  m easured usi ng a  HACH 
spectro photometer m odel DR/20 00, after 
incubation o n a HAC H re actor, fol lowing the 
manufact urer’s instructions fo r the HAC H hi gh 
range COD test (0  to 1500 ppm). Samples fro m the 
outlet were filt ered with 0.20µm membranes prior 
to analysis to qu antify only the d issolved COD. 
 
3. Resul ts and  discussion 
 
Oper ation of the reactor. The reactor was ope rated 
for 380  days. Each  time the operation  cond itions 
were c hange d, the reactor was allowed to stabilize  
for four cycles (4 tim es the HRT) before the  
collection of sa mples. Sam ples were collected 
daily in the  outlet of t he reactor.  
The total su spended solids content in the outlet o f 
the react or change d widely during the  operation. 
The m ean val ue was 0. 54±0.22 g/L. This coul d be 
due to oscillat ions in the aeratio n flux because of 
frequent clogging problems and where mainly 
biom ass leaving the react or. For t he application of 
this syste m in industry it woul d be neces sary to 
apply a se dimentation process in the outlet of t he 
reactor since  the am ount of solids is very hi gh (for 
discharge i n aquatic environmen t, in Portug al, th e 
maximum amount allowed  is 60 mg/L, 6). Th is 
amount of solids in the out let is not  totally 
unexpected si nce the degradation achi eved i s high, 
meaning that the production of bi omass is al so 
high.  
The bi omass present insi de the reactor as volatile 
solids (VS) was d etermined and a m ean value of 
16±3.3gVS was achi eved. The support carried an 
average of 20.6±4.3 mgVS/g support.  
For this wo rk the support cho sen was Leca® balls 
due to its lo w co st, wi despread availab ility, high 
porosity, m echanical resistance and resistance to 
high pH. 
Effect o f the hydraulic residen ce time (HRT) . To 
study the effect of the HRT on the  reactor 
performance thi s param eter was cha nged between 
6 and 24h. The resul ts on the perce ntage of colour 
removal are depicted i n figure 3. Between 6 and 
12h there is a sign ifican t increase in the  colour 
removal effi ciency , but above 12h there is no 
furthe r inc rease. T he efficiency of the  COD 
removal is d isplayed  against the HRT in  the same  
figure. C OD re moval rem ained alm ost constant at HRT of 6-10h bu t increased al most 20% at 12h 
HRT. T he low CO D removal f or low HRT is 
expect ed due t o the incomplete cons umption of the 
nutrients in the  medium  which will account for the  
total COD amount. 
80859095100
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Hydraulic retention time(h)Colour removal (%)777
60708090100
COD removal (%)77
Colour COD 
Figure 3:  Effect of the hydraulic r etention tim e on the colour  
and COD re moval ef ficiencies for the  operation of  the r eactor a t 
pH 9 and 55ºC.  
 
Effect of the pH.  As t he isolated ba cteria were  
alkalophilic th e effect o f pH was stud ied between  8 
and 11 for a h ydraulic retention time of 1 2 h. The  
results are d epicted  in figure 4. With in th e tested  
range dy e rem oval did not significantly change d, 
but for COD removal a maximum was obse rved at 
pH 9.  
 
7580859095100
8 9 10 11
pHColour removal (%) /
020406080100
COD removal (%) 7
Colour COD 
Figure 4:  Effect of pH o n the colour  and COD r emoval 
efficiencies f or the operation of  the reactor at  12 h of  hydrauli c 
retention tim e and 55ºC.  
 
Effect of temperature. The effect of tem perature 
was on ly tested  at two  values: roo m temperatu re, 
20ºC, a nd at 55ºC. The differences  observed were  
not significant. At 20ºC the percent age of colour 
removal was 8 8.2±1.2 whereas for 55ºC it was o f 
87.9±2.0. The effect  on COD removal was n ot 
determined. In m any syste ms, th e rate of colour 
removal increases with increasing tem perature , 
within a defined range that depe nds on the system 
(8). The temperat ure required to produce the 
maximum rate of colour remo val tend s to correlate 
to the optimum cell cu lture growth  tem peratu re. 
The declin e in colour removal activ ity at h igher 
temperatu res can  be attribu ted to the loss of cell 
viability o r to th e denaturation  of the azo  reductase 
enzyme(s). Howev er the immo bilisatio n of t he cell 
EMT/ patramalho.AT.bio.uminho.pt/20041006 74CHAPT ER 7. DECOLOUR ISAT ION OF R EACT IVE AZO  DYES BY  A BACT ERIA L CONSORT IUM 
 
culture in  a su pport medium usually resu lts in  a 
shift in  the optimum co lour rem oval temperatu re 
towards high values be cause  the microen vironment 
inside the supp ort o ffers protectio n for the cells. 
This cou ld be, along  with the th ermo philic 
characte r of t he strain, the  reason for the s mall 
difference observed in the removal efficiency. 
Effect of the pr esence of salts.  The salts tested  were 
NaCl, Na 2SO 4 and Na 2CO 3 at 3% (w/v). These 
salts are used mainly in  dyeing processes as 
auxiliaries to  ensure m aximum fixation of d ye to 
the fiber (3,25). The res ults are depicted in figure  
5. From the resul ts obtained for colour removal we 
can say t hat appare ntly there i s no e ffect of salts on 
colour removal. On t he other hand, the effect on 
COD removal is n egative particu larly for NaCl. 
Isik (25) observed the sam e type of be haviour in an 
upflow anae robic sludge blanket react or. High salt 
conce ntrations  (>1% salt) are known t o cause  
plasmolysis an d/or lo ss of cell act ivity (2 6). This 
would explain the dec rease in COD removal 
efficiency. Howe ver since  efficie ncy in colour 
removal is n ot significan tly decreased it is po ssible 
that unde r these conditions the cells are not 
growing bu t still cap able o f work ing as 
biocatalysts. This m eans th at th is b acterial 
consortiu m   presents   a   high   toleran ce   to   salt  
 
020406080100
Control NaCl 4Removal (%
Na2SO Na2CO3)
ColourCOD
 
 
Figure 5:  Effect of the presence of  3% of NaCl, Na 2SO 4 or 
Na2CO 3 on colo ur and COD r emoval efficiencies for  the  
operation of  the reactor at  12 h of  hydraulic retention ti me, pH 9 
and 55º C. 
conce ntration, which represents an advantage of 
this syste m for th e treat ment of high-salt 
conce ntration wastewaters. 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
The resu lts obtain ed in this study allowed u s to 
estab lish the optimal operational con ditions for a 
continuo us reacto r degrading tex tile d yes based  on 
a con sortium of alkalothermophilic Bacillus sp. 
being: pH 9 and HRT of 24 h. For  these cond itions 
the efficiencies  achieve d were 91.5±1.3% of col our removal and 89.0±0.4% o f COD rem oval. Thi s 
bacterial system p roved to be salt to lerant b eing 
affected to a  bigger extent by NaCl. Also it was  
shown that oscillatio ns in temperatu re between 20 
and 55ºC did not affect  its performance i n terms of 
colour rem oval. The fate  of the produced amines 
was not explored si nce th e objectiv e was main ly 
the reduction of colour and there a re conventional  
aerobic system s that are able to  fully mineralize 
these typ es of compounds. TSS in  the outlet v aried 
considerably in  the ou tlet, an d the m ean value 
obtaine d during the whol e reactor ope ration was  
0.54±0.22 g/L.  
 
Ackn owledge ments 
 
P.R. gratefully  acknowl edges a PhD scholarship 
from  the European Project B IOEFT EX. 
 
1. Rodrigu ez M, Sarria V, Esplugas S, Pul garin C. 
Photo-Fe nton treatm ent of a biorec alcitrant 
wastewater generated in tex tile activ ities:  
biodegrad ability o f the photo-treated  solution." J. 
Photochem.  Photobiol. A. 2002, 151, 129 -135. 
2. Fon gsatitkul P, Elefsin iotis P, Yam asmit A,  
Yam asmit N. Use of se quencing batch reactors a nd 
Fenton's reag ent to treat a wastewater from a tex tile 
industry. Biochem. Eng. J. 2004, 21, 213-220. 
3. C orreia VM, St ephenson T, J udd SJ.  
Characterisation  of tex tile wastewaters - a rev iew. 
Environ. Technol. 1994, 15, 917-929. 
4. Delée W, O'Neill C, Hawk es RF, Pinheiro HM. 
Anae robic trea tment of textile efflue nts: a review. 
J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 1998, 73, 323-335. 
5. Po rtaria nº423/97 of 25th of June. 
6. Dec reto Lei nº236/98 of 1st of August. 
7. Zo llinger H. C olor Chemistry. Syn theses, 
Properties and Applications of Organic Dy es an d 
Pigments, VC H Weinheim, 199 1. 
8. Pearce CI, Lloyd JR, Gu thrie JT. The removal of 
colour fro m tex tile wastewater u sing who le 
bacterial cells: a review. Dyes and Pigments 2003, 
58, 179-196. 
9. Chung K-T, Stev ens Jr. SE. D egradation o f azo 
dyes by  en vironmental microor ganisms and  
helminths. Environ. Toxicol. Che mistry 199 3, 12, 
2121-2132. 
10. Banat IM, Nigam P, Si ngh D, M archant R. 
Micro bial decolorizatio n of textile-d ye-co ntaining 
efflue nts: a re view. Biores ource Technol.  1996, 58, 
217-227. 
11. Sloka r YM, LeMarec hal AM. Methods  for 
decoloration  of tex tile wastewaters. Dyes and 
Pigme nts. 1998, 37, 335-356.  
12. Robinson T, M cMullan G, M archant R, Nigam 
P. Rem ediation of d yes in textile efflu ent: a critical Na2SO 4 Contr ol NaCl Na2CO 3
EMT/ patramalho.AT.bio.uminho.pt/20041006 75CHAPT ER 7. DECOLOUR ISAT ION OF R EACT IVE AZO  DYES BY  A BACT ERIA L CONSORT IUM 
 
review on current treatment technol ogies with a 
proposed altern ative. Bioresource Tech nol. 2001, 
77, 247-55. 
13. Forgacs E , Cserhat i T, Oros G. R emoval of 
synthetic dy es from wast ewat ers: a r eview. 
Environ. Int.  2004, 30, 7, 953-71. 
14. Aksu Z. Application of biosorption for the 
removal of organic pollutants: a revi ew. Process  
Bioche m. 2004 (in press). 
15. Ganesh, R, Boardman GD, M ichelsen D. Fate 
of azo dyes in sludges. Wat. Res. 1994, 28, 6, 
1367-1376.   
16. Coughlin MF, Ki nkle B K, Bishop, PL. High 
performance d egradation of azo dye Acid Orange 7 
and sulfa nilic acid in a laboratory scale reactor  
after seed ing with cultured  bacterial strains. Water  
Res. 2003, 37, 11, 2757-63. 
17. Stolz A. Basic and a pplied as pects in the 
microbi al de gradation of  azo dy es. Appl . 
Microbi ol. Bi otechnol.  2001, 56, 69-80.  
18. Fu Y, Viraraghavan T. Fungal decol orization of 
dye wastewate rs: a review. Biores ource Technol . 
2001, 79, 3, 251-62. 
19. Wese nberg D, Kyriakides I,  Agathos SN . 
White-ro t fung i and  their en zymes for th e 
treatm ent of i ndustrial dye effluents. Biotechnol. 
Adv. 200 3, 22, 161-87. 
20. Mar tins MA, Card oso MH , Qu eiroz MJ, 
Ramalho MT, Campos AM . Biodegradation of azo dyes by  the yeast Candida zeylanoides i n batch 
aerated c ultures. Chemosphere 1999, 38, 245 5-60. 
21. Ramalho PA , Sc holze H,  Cardoso M H, 
Ramalho M T, Oliveira-Campos AM . Improve d 
conditions fo r the aero bic reductive decolourisatio n 
of az o dyes by Candida zey lanoides. Enzy me 
Microb. Tec hnol.   2002, 31, 848-854.  
22. Ramalho PA, Cardoso MH, Cavaco -Paulo A, 
Ramalho MT. Characterization of azo re ductio n 
activity in a novel  ascomycete yeast strain. Appl 
Environ Microbiol  2004, 70, 2279-88. 
23. Maier J, Kandel bauer A, Erlache r A, Cavaco-
Paulo A, Gu bitz GM. A new alkali-thermo stable 
azore ductase from  Bacillus sp. strai n SF. Appl . 
Environ. Microbiol. 2004, 70, 837 -44. 
24. Pfennig N. Rhodopseudomonas gl obiformis sp. 
n., a new s pecies of Rhodos pirillaceae. Arch. 
Microbi ol. 1974, 100, 197-206. 
25. Isi k M. Efficien cy of sim ulated  tex tile 
wastewater de colorizati on p rocess based  on the 
meth anogenic activ ity o f an upflow an aerob ic 
sludge blanket reactor in salt inhi bition c ondition. 
Enzy me Micr ob. Technol.  2004, 35, 399-404. 
26. Ka rgi F, Dince r AR. Ef fect of salt 
conce ntration on biological treatment of sal ine 
wastewater by f ed-batch op eration ." Enzy me 
Microb. Tec hnol.  1996, 19, 529-537. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EMT/ patramalho.AT.bio.uminho.pt/20041006 76 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  CHAPTER 8 
 
GENERAL DISCUSSION & FUTURE PRESPECTIVES  
 
  CHAP TER 8. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PR ESPEC TIVES 
 
GENERAL DISCUSSION  
 
  
 Over the las t years beca use of stringent legislation aim ing the protection of the  
environm ent, several systems for azo dy e rem oval h ave been devel oped and explored. Among 
the biol ogical methods, the  ones using  bacteria and white-rot fun gi are the m ost widely  studied. 
The use of yeasts to achi eve this obje ctive has never been subject of investigation, probably 
because  the f ew studies  on the subject  mention biosorption as re moval mech anism. When  we 
isolated fro m conta minate d soil several  asco mycete strains we  decided to explore their potential 
on azo dy e bioremediation. We start ed with as comycete yeasts Candida zeylanoides  and 
Issatchenkia occidentalis . Later, to study  the enzy matic sy stem  involved , a laboratorial strain 
was sele cted, Saccharomyces cer evisia e CEN.PK 113-7D. In most studies the dy es m-[(4-
dimethy lamino)pheny lazo]benzenesulfonic acid, p-[(4-
dimethy lamino)pheny lazo]benzenesu lfonic acid (Methy l Orange), m-[(2-hydroxy-1-
naphthy l)azo]benzenesulfonic acid, p-[(2-hydroxy-1-naphth yl)azo] benzenesulfonic acid 
(Orange II) and Amaranth were used. 
The optim um growth and decolourisation conditi ons (incubation at 26ºC and 120 rp m 
with 0.2m M of azo d ye and 2%  of gluc ose as carbon and energ y source) were established for C. 
zeylanoides  (chapter 2) and later used with I. occidentalis  and S. cere visiae . None of the tested  
azo d yes sup ported gr owth as sole sour ce of carbon and nitro gen (chapters 2 and 6).  This m eans 
that external C and N sources must be p resent in the mediu m to ac hieve decolourisation and that 
azo dy es are subject to cometabolis m (fortuitous m etabolism ) by yeasts ( Knack muss 1996). 
The presence of dy es did not significantly  affect y east growth and exposure of the cell s 
to the dy e reduction products (aro matic amines) di d not decreas e their viabili ty (chapters 2, 3 
and 6). This fact is important for the applicability  of the system to the treatment of an industri al 
waste water. 
 Colour rem oval was achieved betw een 11 and 48 h of incubati on b y C. zeylanoides , 
between 14 and 30 h by I. occidentalis  and between 8.5 and 78 h by S. cere visiae  (chapter 6). The 
decolourisation progress was affect ed by  dye structure including the different position of 
identical substituents (chapter 2, 3 and 6). These are fast rem oval r ates consideri ng for instance 
the 15  days reported for P. chrysosporium  by Pasti-Grigsby and co-workers for Orange II (Pasti-
Grigsby et al. 1992).  
The mechanism  of colour rem oval was found to be the reductive cleavage of the azo  
boun d with formation of aro matic amines (cha pters 2, 3 and  5).  The first study  with C. 
zeylanoides  carried out with the resulting am ines sh owed that the two aminobenzenesulfonic 
acids (metanilic and sulfanilic acids) were used as nitrogen but not  as carbon and energy  sources 
(chapter 2). Subsequent studies with I.occidental is showed that these two am inobenzene 
 78 CHAP TER 8. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PR ESPEC TIVES 
 
sulfonic acids where not used but N,N-di methyl-p-phen ylene d iamine was used as nitrogen 
source and t hat 1-am ino-2-naphtol  was used as nit rogen and  carbon an d ene rgy (chapter 3). 
Later studies, with longer exposure ti mes, prove d that all the f ormed am ines (m etanilic and 
sulfanilic acids, 1-am ino-2-naphtol  and N,N-dy methyl-p-phenylene diam ine) could be used as 
carbon and nitrogen sources (chapter  6). These result s are very  important in terms of industr ial 
application of  this s ystem  because it achi eves th e complete minerali zation of the dyes under t he 
same operat ional conditions. There is no si ngle microorganis m des cribed with these 
characte ristics. To achieve the com plete minera lization of the form ed am ines probabl y hydraulic 
retention tim es longer than the ones to ach ieve decolourisation will be required. 
All the teste d strains fer mented glucose, as confirmed by  dete ction of ethanol in the 
supernatants (chapter 2 an d 3). When using methyl orange the decolourisation capability  was 
not exhauste d after one decolourisation c ycle (ch apter 3). In  fact, d ye was decolourised  
completely  over 5 dy e addition c ycles and the 6th addition was not com pletely decolourised  
because after  c.a. 160h eth anol was exh austed fro m the medium. This experiment dem onstrates 
that ethanol can be used as carbon and energ y source for d ye decol ourisation. 
 Several other  carbon sources were tested (lik e acet ate and star ch) to reduce the cost of 
nutrients in th e system , but onl y ethanol allowed both growth and d ecolourisation (chapter 3 and  
6).  
The decolour ising abilit y was not affected by  previ ous exposure  of the  cells to dy e, 
strongl y suggesting that it is a constitutive activity  (chapter 2 and 3). There was no detectable 
reductase  activity in the supernatants or in cell ex tracts (chapter 3). Also the d ecolourisation i n 
the presence of glucose was al ways connected with the late exponential growth phase (chap ters 
2, 3 and 6). The suspicion that we were dealing with an enzy matic sy stem  was confirm ed by the  
results and by  the knowl edge that polar dy es are impermeant to cell membranes and their 
transfor mation by living microbial cells m ust occur in the extracell ular mediu m (Pearce  et al.  2003).  
An enzy matic ass ay was developed in order to study  the “azoreductase” activity (chapter 3). 
The specific decolourisation rate obeyed to the Michaelis-Ment en equation with a maxim um 
specific deco lourisation rate of 3.2m mol.h-1.g-1 and a K m of 0.0 34mM for m ethyl orange 
(chapter 3). The bell-shaped form , characteristic  of an enzy matic sy stem , was found to describe 
the dependen cy of the decolourisation  rate on tem perature. The m aximum activity was obtain ed 
at 50º C, but for 60º C it was observe d a co mplete loss of activit y (chapter 3). pH affected  
differently the decolourisation rates of N,N-dimety laniline-based dy es and β-naphthol-based  
dyes: the first were practi cally  independent on pH b etween 3 and  6, showing a rapid decrease 
between 6 and 7; the second showed a linear d ecrease between 3  and 6, being undetectable at 
the latter value (chapter 3).  
Dissolved oxygen is repeatedly  conside red an  inhibit or of the azo dye reduction  process 
(Pearce  et al.  2003), since both m olecules a ct as ele ctron acceptors an d oxygen is a m uch stronger  
 79 CHAP TER 8. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PR ESPEC TIVES 
 
oxidant. T his is apparently the reason wh y azo dyes are more readil y reduced under anaerobic 
conditions. We decided  to check  the oxy gen concentration in the  medium during 
decolourisation (chapter 3). In our conditions,  i.e., c otton plugged 250 m L flasks with 100 mL 
of medium shaken at 120 rp m, oxygen accesses th e medium . Nevertheless,  after only  6h of 
growth the  dissolved ox ygen concentration is kept under the detection level ( 0.2mg.L-1) until the 
end of the ex perim ent. Therefore decolourisati on oc curs under very  low ox ygen concentrations. 
To explore t his aspect assay s where performed  under: our standard conditi ons – 12 0 rpm 
(microaerophilic), forced aeration (aerobic) and N 2 flushed (anaerobic). It was co ncluded that:  
 oxygen is needed for the respiration of ethanol when glucose is extinguished from 
the growth mediu m although in ver y small concentrations (under anaerobic 
conditions yeasts failed to growth); 
 under force d aeration conditions and under m icroaerophilic conditi ons the 
decolourisation progress i s similar showing that in this sy stem  oxygen does not 
compete with  the dy e for electrons. 
These results are i mportan t since if forced aeration is not needed the industrial i mplem entati on 
of this s ystem is easier ( energy costs due to forced aera tion are usually very  high). 
In an attem pt to rationalize the different deco lourisation rates of the tested dy es, further  
electroche mical studies showed a linear relation between the ti me to ac hieve decolourisa tion 
above 98%  and the cathodic peak potential ( vs. SHE) of the a zo dy e. The less negative  the 
reduction pot ential of the azo dy e, the m ore favour able will be its reduction (cha pter 4). Our l ast 
studies found  that the relationship of ln( apparent first order decolo urisation rate/specific growth 
rate) vs. the r eduction peak potential was r epresented by  a second order polynomial equation for  
the three str ains and the five dy es tested. This ty pe of relation suggests that  the decolourisation 
kinetics is energy -dependent (chapter 6) . 
Since we were sear ching for a plasma mem brane redox s ystem  and in yeast the m ore 
studied is the ferric reductase system it was deci ded to investigate if this activity  could be  
connected to the “azoreductase” activity  (chapter 5). The results showed that these two activities 
are the sa me and are achieved by the Fre1p of the plas ma membrane in our operational  
conditions. T he results that pointed out to this conclus ion were: 
 both activitie s had closely parallel curves along growth although with significant 
differences in  absolute values; 
 iron inhibited both activitie s; 
 the deletion of FRE1  abolis hed alm ost completely both activities;  
 the azoreductase activity  was r ecovered wh en the gene was r eintroduced in the 
yeast. 
 This knowledge allow us to control better the azoreductase activity and in a  near future to 
improve strains for better perform ances. Also gives a contrib ution for t he elucidation of 
 80 CHAP TER 8. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PR ESPEC TIVES 
 
multifunctional plasma mem brane redox sy stems in  yeasts that are scarcely  explored and are 
involved  in al most all functions in all t ypes of cells. 
 
We can point the m ajor advantages of the use  of these microorganisms for the  
bioremediation of azo dy es: 
 low cost of the sy stem : aeration is not neces sary: 
 non patogeni city of the m icroorganisms used; 
 the capability  of degradation and mineralization of the dy es under the same 
conditions; 
 the know genome opens possibilities of gene tic manipulations i n order to i ncrease 
the sy stem  performance; 
 low sludge ge neration (low growth rates) with no disposal problem ; 
Some of the major disadvantages are: 
 low growth rates of  yeasts  that makes  the sy stem vulnerable to c ontam inations by  
microorganisms with higher growth rates, like bacter ia; 
 the incapacity  of degradi ng dyes above pH 5 (usually  the pH of this wastewaters is 
very alkali ne); 
This sy stem  is efficient for the decolouri sation of acid azo dy e containing wast ewater s 
although furt her studies are needed to  access the effect of some parameters in a continu ous 
system  (like salts and other com pone nts typical in the se wastewaters). 
 
In the last part (chapter 7) of t his thesi s there is a study  of a therm ophilic bacterial  
consortium  in a continuous rea ctor to decolourize a  simulated wastew ater with Reactive  Black 
5. The bacter ia Bacillus  sp. KF w as isolated fro m contaminated w astew ater and the re actor w as 
designed in Austria by  the group of Prof. Georg G übitz. The idea was to build a sim ilar reactor 
with y easts and com pare the efficien cies of both sy stems, one alkalophili c and the ot her 
acidofilic. Unfortunatel y due to lack of time the yeast reactor was not buil d. Nevertheless the 
operation wit h bacterial consortiu m allowed several conclusions: 
 a high degradation rate is achieved (92%  of colour rem oval and 89%  of COD 
removal for the optim um operation con ditions , i.e., pH 9 and HRT of 24h) with the 
concom itant high slu dge p roduction; 
 the sy stem  tolerates high salts concen trations (up to 3% of NaCl, Na 2SO 4 and 
Na2CO 3) with no significant reduction in colour re moval efficiency , but wit h the 
same negative effect in C OD re moval, especially  in the presence o f NaCl; 
 the sy stem tolerated with no significant decrea se in the colour rem oval effici ency 
temperatures between 20 and 55º C, probabl y due to the therm ophilic character of 
 81 CHAP TER 8. GENERAL DISCUSSION AND FUTURE PR ESPEC TIVES 
 
the Bacillus  sp. KF strain  and to the protective environm ent inside the support 
materi al; 
 This sy stem  can efficiently  degrade Reactiv e Black 5 dy e under alka lophilic condi tions.  
 
 
FUTURE PRESPECTIVES  
 
 
We believe that this work provides a starti ng point for m ore intensive study  to better 
understand t he broader non-specific activities asso ciated with this plasma mem brane redox 
mechanism, as well as future clues for the biotechnol ogical optim ization and exploitation of t he 
activity . 
We have est ablished that the “azoreduct ase” activity  of Saccharomyce s cerevisiae cells 
is dependent on Fre1p. However ferric reductase  activity is a co mplex sy stem r equiring othe r 
components and subject to fine regulation. Ther efore it would be particularly  interesting  to 
investigate further aspects of the s ystem: 
1) the effect of known inhibit ors of fe rric reductase on the azoreductase activity ; 
2) the nature of t he electron donor; 
3) participation of other components in the in vivo  “azo reductase” activity ; 
4) effect of the ras/cAMP pat hway on the regulation of the “azoreduct ase” activity ;  
5) since there a re other redox s ystems in the plasm a membrane of S. cerevisiae  it 
would be  interesting to investigate their possible participation in the “azoreducta se” 
activity  in different conditi ons from  those studied in t his work.  
This would be i mportant not only in the  use of yeasts as biore mediation agents but also 
in hum an health and dr ug development. 
Additionally  the biodegra dation of azo dy es is  a process rel evant to the treatment of  
wastewaters from textile industries which are fr equentl y heavily  coloured and resistant to 
conventional wastewater tr eatment processes. Th e design and oper ation of a continuous reactor 
with y easts t o study  the e ffect of sever al para meters in its operati on, namely  pH, te mperatu re 
and presence of salts and other textile additives would undoubtly  reveal m ore aspects of t his 
system . This would allow the development of a pilot treat ment plant to appl y in a textile 
industr y. 
Another poss ible development of this work would be to go on exploring the capability 
of other y easts as biorem ediation agents of textile dy es, particularly the basidio mycetes isolated 
from contam inated soil in the beginning of th ese studies. Also those with oxidative capabilities 
can be explored and be eve ntually  useful for the degradation of  othe r types of dyes. We can also 
explore som e term ophilic strains for the treat ment at higher temperatures and strains with a 
wider operational pH. 
 82 
 
                                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                         
 
REFERENCES  REFER ENCES  
Abd El-Rahim  WM, and Moawad H. 2003.  Enhancing biorem oval of textile dy es by  eight  
fungal strains from  media supplemented with gelatine wastes and  sucrose. J Basic Mic robiol  
43: 367-75. 
 
Acuner E, and Dilek FB. 2004 . Treatm ent of tectilon yellow 2G b y Chlorella vulgar is. 
Process Bioc hemistry  39: 623-6 31. 
 
Aguilar MI, Saez  J, Llorens M, Soler A, and  Ortuno JF.  2002. Nutrient removal and  slud ge 
production in the coagulation-flocculation process. Water Res  36: 2910- 9. 
 
Aguilar MI, Saez  J, Llorens M, Soler A, Ortuno JF, Meseguer V, and Fuentes A. 20 05. 
Improve ment of coagulation-flocculation pro cess using anionic polyacrylamide as coagulant 
aid. Chemosphere  58: 47-5 6. 
 
Aksu Z . 2005.  Applicatio n of bi osorpt ion for t he rem oval of organic polluta nts: a review. 
Process Bioc hemistry  40: 997-1 026. 
 
Aksu Z , and Donm ez G. 2003.  A co mparative study  on the biosorption characteristics  of so me 
yeasts for Remazol Blue r eactive dy e. Chemosphere  50: 1075-83. 
 
Aksu Z , and Donm ez G. 2004 . Com bined effects of  molasses suc rose and reac tive dy e on the 
growth and dy e bioaccum ulation properties of Candid a tropicalis  (in press ). Process  
Biochemistry . 
 
Aksu Z, and Tez er S. 2005.  Biosorption of reactive dy es on the green alga Chlorella vulgaris . 
Process Bioc hemistry  40: 1347- 1361. 
 
Alkan M, Dem irbas O, Celikcapa S, and Dogan M. 2004.  Sorption of acid red 57 fro m 
aqueous solut ion onto sepi olite. J Hazard Mater  116:  135-4 5. 
 
Allegre C, Maisseu M, Charbit F, and Moulin P. 2004.  Coagulation-flocculation-decantation 
of dy e house effluents: concentrated effl uents. J Hazard Mater  116:  57-64 . 
 
Ambrósio ST, and Cam pos-Takaki GM. 2004.  Decolorizat ion of reactive azo dy es by  
Cunning hamella elegans  UCP 542 under co-metab olic conditi ons. Bioresour Technol  91: 69-
75. 
 
Angelini LG, Bertoli A, Rolandelli S, and Pistelli  L. 2003.  Agronom ic potential of Reseda  
luteola  L. as new crop for natural dy es in textile production. Industrial Crops and Products  17: 
199-2 07. 
 
 84REFER ENCES  
Angelini LG, Pistelli L, Belloni P, Bertoli A, and Panconesi S. 1997.  Rubia tinctoru m a 
source of nat ural dy es: agronom ic eval uation, quant itative analy sis of alazarin and i ndustri al 
assay s. Indust rial Crops an d Products  6: 303-3 11. 
 
Anliker R, a nd Moser P.  1987.  The limits of bioaccu mulation o f organic pig ments in fish : 
their relation to the partition coefficient and the solubilit y in water and octanol. Ecotox icol 
Environ Saf  13: 43-5 2. 
 
Anliker R, Moser P, a nd Poppinger D. 1988.  Bioaccu mulation of dy estuffs and organi c 
pigm ents in fish. Relationships to hydropho bicity and steric factors. Chemos phere  17: 1631-
1644 . 
 
Arslan-Alaton I, and Ferry JL. 2002.  Applicatio n of po lyoxotungstates as environm ental 
cataly sts: wet air oxidation  of Acid Orange II. Dyes a nd Pigments  54: 25-36. 
 
Aubert S, a nd Schwitz guebel JP. 2004.  Screening of plant species for the phytotreatm ent of 
wastewater containin g sulphonated ant hraquino nes. Water Re s 38: 3569- 75. 
 
Augugliaro V, Baiocchi C, Prevot A B, Garci a-Lopez E, Lod do V, Malato S, Marci G,  
Palm isano L, Pazzi M, and Pram auro E. 2002 . Azo-dy es photocatal ytic degradation in  
aqueous suspension of TiO 2 under solar irradiation. Chemosphere  49: 1223- 30. 
 
Banat IM, Nigam P, Singh D, and Marchant R. 1996.  Microbial decolor ization of textile-
dye-containing effluents: a review. Bioresour Technol  58: 217-227. 
 
Bauer C, Jacques P, and Kalt A. 200 1. Phot ooxidation of an azo d ye ind uced b y visib le light 
incident on the surface of TiO 2. Journ al of Ph otochemistry and Ph otobiol ogy A: Chemistry  140: 
87-92. 
 
Bechtold T, Turcanu A, Ganglb erger E, and  Geissler S. 2003 . Natural dy es in modern textile  
dyehouses - how to com bine experienc es of two centuries to me et the de mands of the future? 
Journal of Cl eaner Production  11: 499-509. 
 
Berm ejo R, Acien FG, Ibanez MJ, Fernandez  JM, Molina E, and Alvarez -Pez JM. 2003 . 
Preparative purification of  B-ph ycoerythrin from  the microalga Porph yridium  cruentum  by 
expanded-bed adsorptio n chromatograph y. J Chro matogr B An alyt Technol  Biomed Life Sci  
790: 317-25. 
 
Bhaskar M, Gnanam ani A, Ganeshjeevan RJ, Chandrasekar R, Sa dulla S, and 
Radhakrishnan G. 2003 . Analy ses of carcinogenic aro matic amines released f rom harmful azo 
colorants by  Streptomyces SP. SS07.  J Chromatogr A 1018: 117-23. 
 
 85REFER ENCES  
Blüm el S, Knackm uss HJ, and Stolz  A. 2002.  Molecular cloning and characterization of the  
gene coding for the aerobic azoreductase fro m Xenophilus azov orans  KF46F . Appl Envir on 
Microbiol  68: 3948-55. 
 
Blüm el S, and Stolz  A. 2003.  Cloning and characterization of th e gene codin g for t he aerobic 
azoreductase from  Pigmentiphag a kullae  K24. Appl Microbiol Biote chnol 62: 186-90. 
 
Borchert M, and Libra JA. 2001 . Decolorization of reactive dyes by  the white rot fungus 
Trametes ver sicolor  in sequencing batch reactors. Biotechnol Bioen g 75: 313- 21. 
 
Brown D, and Ham burger B. 1987.  The degradation of dy estuffs: Part III -  Investigations  of 
their ultim ate degradabilit y. Chemosphere  16: 1539-1553. 
 
Bum pus J A, and Brock BJ. 1988.  Biodegradation  of cry stal violet b y the white rot fungus 
Phanerochae te chrysospor ium. Appl E nviron M icrobiol  54: 1143-50. 
 
Bustard M, McMullan G, and McHale AP. 1998.  Biosorpti on of textile dy es by  biomas s 
derived from  Kluveromyces marxianus IMB3. Bioprocess Eng  19: 427-4 30. 
 
Cam pos R, Kandelbauer A, Robra KH, Cavaco-Paulo A, a nd Gubitz  GM. 2001.  Indigo  
degradation with purified lacca ses from Tramet es hirsuta  and Sclerotium rol fsii. J Biotechnol  
89: 131-9. 
 
Cao W, Ma hadevan B, Crawford DL, and Crawford RL. 1993 . Characterization of an 
extracellular azo dy e-oxidizing peroxida se fro m Flavobacterium  sp. ATCC 397 23. Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology  15: 810-8 17. 
 
Carneiro PA, Osugi ME, Fugivara  CS, Boralle N, Furlan M, and Zanoni MVB. 2004.  
Evaluation of  different electrochem ical methods  on t he oxidation and degradation of Reactive 
Blue 4 in aqueous solution (in press). Chemosphere . 
 
Cerón-Rivera M, Davila-Jimenez  MM, and Eliz alde-Gon zalez MP. 2004.  Degradation of 
the textile dy es Basic yellow 28 and Reactive black 5 using diam ond and m etal all oys 
electrodes. Chemosphere  55: 1-10 . 
 
Cha CJ, Do erge DR, and Cerniglia CE. 2001.  Biotransformation of  malachite green b y the 
fungus Cunninghamella el egans . Appl  Environ M icrobiol  67: 4358-60. 
 
Chagas EP, and Durrant LR. 20 01. Decolorization of azo dy es by Phanerochaet e 
chrysosporium  and Pleurotus sajorcaju . Enzyme and M icrobial Technology  29: 473-4 77. 
 
Chao WL, and Lee SL. 1994.  Decoloration of azo dyes by  three white-rot fungi: infll uence of 
carbon source. World Journal of M icrobiology &  Biotechnology  10: 556-5 59. 
 
 86REFER ENCES  
Chivukula M, and Ren ganathan  V. 1995.  Phenolic Azo Dye Oxidation by Laccase f rom 
Pyricularia oryzae . Applied an d Enviro nmental M icrobiolo gy 61: 4374- 4377. 
 
Chu W. 2001.  Dye rem oval fro m textile dy e wastewater using recy cled alum  sludge. Water Res  
35: 3147-52. 
 
Chung KT, and Cerniglia CE. 1992.  Muta genicity  of azo dy es: structure-ac tivity  
relationships. Mutat Res  277: 201- 20. 
 
Ciardelli G, Corsi L, and Marcucci M. 2000.  Mem brane separation fo r was tewater  reus e in 
the textile industry. Resources, Conservation and Recycling  31: 189-197. 
 
Clark RJH, Cooksey CJ, Daniel s MAM, and Wit hnall R. 1993.  Indigo,  woad, and T yrian 
Purple: im portant vat dy es from  antiquit y to the present. Endeavo ur 17: 191-199. 
 
Conneely A, Sm yth WF, and McMullan G. 1999.  Metabolism of the phthalocy anine textile 
dye rem azol turquoise bl ue by Phanerochaete chrysos porium . FEM S Microbiol L ett 179:  333-7. 
 
Correia VM, Stephenson  T, and Jud d SJ. 1994.  Characteri sation of textile wastewaters - a 
review. Environmental Technolo gy 15: 917-92 9. 
 
Crossley C. 2002 . How the Dy e Industr y is Benefi cting from  Membrane Technolog y. Filtrat ion 
& Separatio  39: 36-38. 
 
da Silva CG, and Faria J L. 2003.  Photochem ical and phot ocatalytic degradation of an azo dy e 
in aqueous so lution by UV irradiation. J Photochem Photobi ol A: C hemistry  155:  133-1 43. 
 
Daneshvar N, Sorkhabi HA, and Kasiri MB. 2004.  Decolorization of dy e solution containing  
Acid Red 14 by  electrocoagulation w ith a com parative investigation of different electro de 
connections. J Hazard Mater  112:  55-62. 
 
Dass SB, and Reddy CA. 1990 . Characterization of extracellular peroxida ses produced by  
acetat e-buffer ed cultures of the lignin-degrading basidiom ycete Phanerochaete chrysosporium . 
FEM S Microbiol Lett  57: 221-4. 
 
de las Marías PM. 1976.  Química y física de las fibras textiles . Editorial Alham bra SA, 
Madrid. 
 
de Moraes SG, Freire RS, and Dura n N. 2000 . Degradation and toxicit y reduction of text ile 
effluent by  com bined photocat alytic and ozonation processes. Chemosphere  40: 369-73. 
 
Delée W, O'Neill C, Ha wkes FR, and Pinheiro HM. 1998.  Anaerobic treat ment of textile 
effluents: a re view. Journal  of Chemical Technology a nd Biotechn ology 73: 323- 335. 
 
 87REFER ENCES  
Delval F, Crini G, Morin N, Vebrel J, Bertini S, and Torri G. 2002 . The sorption of severa l 
types of dy e on crosslinke d poly saccharides derivatives. Dyes and Pigments  53: 79-92. 
 
Donm ez G. 2002.  Bioaccum ulation of the reactive textile dy es by  Candida tropicalis growing i n 
molasses medium . Enzyme and M icrobia l Technology  30: 363-366. 
 
Elliott J. 1996.  Mem brane filtration techniques in dyest uff recovery . In: Reife A and Freeman  
HS, eds. Environmental Ch emistry of Dyes and Pigments . New York: John Wi ley & Sons, In c. 
215-2 37. 
 
Faria PC, Orfao JJ, and Pereira MF. 2004.  Adsorption of anionic and cationic dyes on  
activated carb ons with diffe rent surface c hemistrie s. Water Res  38: 2043- 52. 
 
Fernandes A, Morão A, Magrinho M, Lopes A, and Gonçalves I. 2004.  Electroche mical 
degradation o f C. I. Acid Orange 7. Dyes and Pi gments  61: 287-296. 
 
Field JA, de Jong E, Feijoo Costa G, and de Bont JA. 1992.  Biodegradation of pol ycyclic 
aromatic hy drocarbons b y new isolates of white rot f ungi. Appl E nviron M icrobiol  58: 2219-26. 
 
Forgacs E, Cserhati T, and Oros G. 2004.  Rem oval of s ynthetic dy es from waste waters: a 
review. Environ Int  30: 953-71. 
 
Foussereau  J, Herve- Bazin B, M eynadier J, Reuter G, and  Cavelier C.  1982.  Allergic 
contact dermatitis to plastic ta ble cloth and pheny l indole. Contact Dermatitis  8: 73. 
 
Fu L, Wen X, Xu L, and Qian Y. 2002.  Removal of co pper-phthaloc yanine d ye fro m 
wastewater by accli mated sludge under anaerobic or aerobic condi tions. Process Biochemistr y 
37: 1151-1156. 
 
Fu Y, and  Viraraghava n T. 2 001. Fungal decolorization of  dye wastewaters: a review. 
Bioresour Technol  79: 251-62. 
 
Fu Y, and Viraraghava n T. 2002.  Dye biosorpt ion sites in Aspergillus niger . Bioreso ur 
Technol  82: 139-45. 
 
Ghosh DK, Mandal A, and Chaudhuri J. 1992.  Purification and partial char acteriz ation of  
two azoreductases fro m Shigella dysenteriae type 1. FEMS Microbiol Lett  77: 229-33. 
 
Glenn J, and Gold MH. 1983.  Decolorization of several  poly meric dy es by  the lignin-
degrading basidio mycete Phanerochaete chryso sporium . Applied a nd Environmental 
Technology  45: 1741-1747. 
 
 88REFER ENCES  
Gogate PR, and Pandit AB. 2004a.  A review o f imperative technologies for wastewater 
treatment I: o xidation technologies at am bient conditions. Advances in Environ mental Resea rch 
8: 501- 551. 
 
Gogate PR, and Pandit AB. 2004b.  A review of im perative technologies for wastewater 
treatment II: hy brid m ethods. Advances in Environmental Research  8: 553-597. 
 
Golob V, and Ojst ršek A. 2005.  Rem oval of vat an d disperse dyes fro m resid ual pad liquo rs. 
Dyes and Pigments  64: 57-61. 
 
Gonçalves MST, Oliveira-Campos AMF, Pi nto EMMS, Plasência PMS, and Queir oz 
MJRP. 1999.  Photochem ical treatment of solutions o f azo dy es co ntaining TiO 2. Chemosphere  
39: 781-786. 
 
Gong R, Ding Y, Li M, Yang C, Liu H, and Sun Y. 2005.  Utilization of powde red peanut hull 
as biosorbent for rem oval of anionic d yes fro m aqueous solutions.  Dyes and Pigments  64: 187-
192. 
 
Guaratini CCI, and Zanoni MVB. 20 00. Corantes Têxteis. Química Nova  23: 71-78 . 
 
Gupta GS, Prasad G, and Singh VN. 1990.  Rem oval of chrome dy e from  aqueous soluti ons 
by mixed adsorbents: Fl y ash and coal. Water Re s 24: 45-50 . 
 
Gürses A, Yalcin M, a nd Dogar C . 2002. Elec trocoagulatio n of som e reactive dy es: a 
statistical investigation of some electrochemical varia bles. Waste M anag  22: 491-9. 
 
Hao OJ, Kim  H, and Chiang P-C. 2000.  Decolorization of wa stewat er. Critical Reviews in 
Environmental Science an d Technolo gy 30: 449-505. 
 
Hatch KL, a nd Maibach HI. 1995.  Textile dy e der matitis. J Am Acad Dermatol  32: 631- 9. 
 
Haug W, Schm idt A, Nortem ann B, Hem pel DC, Stolz  A, and Knackm uss HJ. 1991.  
Mineralizatio n of the sul fonated azo d ye Mordant  Yellow 3 b y a 6-am inonaphthalene -2-
sulfonate-degrading bacterial consortium. Appl E nviron M icrobiol  57: 3144-9. 
 
Heim buch JA, and Wilhelm i AR. 1985.  Wet air oxidation - a treat ment means for aqueous  
hazardous waste stream s. J Hazard Mater  12: 187-200. 
 
Heinfling A, Martinez MJ, Martine z AT, B ergbauer M, and Sz ewzyk U. 1998a.  
Purification and characteri zation of per oxidases from  the dy e-decolorizing fungus Bjerkandera 
adusta . FEM S Microbiol L ett 165:  43-50. 
 
 89REFER ENCES  
Heinfling A, Ruiz-Duenas FJ, Martinez  MJ, Bergb auer M, S zewzyk U, and Martinez  AT.  
1998b . A study  on reducing substrates of manganese-oxidizing peroxidases fro m Pleurotus  
eryngii  and Bjerkandera adusta . FEBS Lett  428:  141-6. 
 
Heinfling-Weidtm ann A, Reem tsma T, Storm  T, and Sz ewzyk U. 2001.  Sulf ophthalim ide as 
major metab olite formed from sulfonated pht halocyanine dyes by  the white-rot fungus 
Bjerkandera adusta . FEM S Microbiol L ett 203:  179-83. 
 
Ho YS, and McKay G. 1998.  Sorption of d ye from aqueous solution b y peat. Chemi cal 
Engineering Journal  70: 115-12 4. 
 
Ho YS, and McKay G. 2003 . Sorpti on of d yes and copper io ns onto bios orbents. Process 
Biochemistry  38: 1047-1061. 
 
Ingam ells W. 199 3. Colour for textiles A user's handbook . Soci ety of D yers and Colouri st, 
West Yorkshire. 
 
Ishigam i Y, and Suz uki S. 1997 . Develop ment of biochemicals - functionalization of  
biosurfactants and natural d yes. Progress in Organic Coatings  31: 51-61. 
 
Isik M, and Sponz a DT. 2004 . Monito ring of toxicit y and interm ediates of C.I. Direct Black 38 
azo dy e thr ough decolori zation in an anaerobic/aer obic sequential reactor system . J Haza rd 
Mater 114:  29-39. 
 
Janos P, Buchtova H, and  Ryz narova M. 2003 . Sorption of dyes from  aqueous solutions on to 
fly ash. Water Res  37: 4938-44. 
 
Jeworski M, and Heinz le E. 2000.  Combined che mical-biological treat ment of wastew ater 
containing ref ractory  pollutants. Biotechnol An nu Rev  6: 163-96. 
 
Jinqi L, and Houtian L. 1 992. Degradation of azo dyes by  algae. Environ Pollut  75: 273-8. 
 
Kamel MM,  El-Shishtawy RM, Yussef BM, an d Mashaly H. 2005.  Ultrasonic assi sted 
dyeing III. D yeing of wool with lac as natural dy e. Dyes and Pigments  65: 103-110. 
 
Kang SF, Liao CH, and Chen MC. 2 002. Pre-oxi dation and coagulati on of te xtile wastewater 
by the Fenton process. Chemosphere  46: 923-8 . 
 
Kapdan IK, and Kargi F. 2002.  Bilogical decolorization of  textile dy estuff containi ng 
waste water by Coriolus versicolor  in a rotating biological cont actor. Enzyme and M icrobial 
Technology  30: 195- 199. 
 
 90REFER ENCES  
Kapdan IK, Kargia F, McMullan G, and Marchant R. 2000.  Effect of environm ental 
conditions on biological decolorization of textile dyestuff by  C. ve rsicolor . Enzyme  Microb 
Technol  26: 381-38 7. 
 
Karcher S, Kornm üller A, and Jekel M. 1999.  Rem oval of React ive Dy es by  
Sorption/Com plexation with Cucurbituril. Water Science and Technolo gy 40: 425-43 3. 
 
Keck A, Klein J, Kudlich M, Stolz  A, Knackm uss HJ, and Mat tes R. 1997.  Reduction of azo 
dyes by redo x mediators originatin g in the naphthal enesulfonic acid degradation pathwa y of 
Sphin gomon as sp. strain BN6. Appl E nviron M icrobiol  63: 3684-90. 
 
Kim  SJ, Ishikawa K, Hirai M, and Shoda M. 1 995. Characteristics of a  newly  isolated 
fungus, Geot richum candidum  Dec 1, which decolorizes various dyes. Journal  of Fermentation 
and Bi oengineering  79: 601-607. 
 
Kim  SJ, and Shoda M. 1 999. Decolorization of m olasses and a dy e by a newly  isolated strain  
of the fun gus Geotrichum candid um Dec 1. Biotechn ol Bioeng  62: 114-9. 
 
Kim T-H, Park C, and Kim S. 2004 a. Water recy cling from  desalination and purification 
process of r eactive dy e manufacturing industr y by combined mem brane filtration ( in press ). 
Journal of Cl eaner Production . 
 
Kim T-K, Yoon S-H, and Son Y-A. 2004b.  Effect of r eactive anionic agent on dyeing 
cellulosic fibers with a Ber berine colorant. Dyes and Pigments  60: 121-1 27. 
 
Knackm uss HJ. 199 6. Basic knowledge and pers pectives of bioelim inatio n of xenobi otic 
compounds. Journal of Biotechnology  51: 287- 295. 
 
Kobya M, Can OT, and Bayramoglu M. 20 03. Treat ment of textile wastewaters by  
electrocoagulation using  iron and alum inum  electrodes. J Hazard Mater  100:  163-78. 
 
Konstantinou IK, and Albanis TA. 2004.  TiO 2-assisted photocat alytic degradation of azo dy es 
in aqueous  solutio n: ki netic and m echanistic investigations A r eview. Appli ed Catalysis B: 
Environmental  49: 1-14. 
 
Koyuncu I, Kural E, and Topacik D. 2001.  Pilot scale nanofiltr ation mem brane separation  for 
waste manag ement in textile industr y. Water Sci Technol  43: 233-40. 
 
Koyuncu I, Topacik D, and Wiesner MR. 2004.  Factors influencing flux  decline during  
nanofiltration of solutions containing dyes and salts. Water Re s 38: 432-4 0. 
 
Kudlich M, Keck A, Klein J, and Stolz A. 1997.  Localization of the Enzy me System  Involved  
in Anaerobic Reduction of Azo Dy es by Sphin gomon as sp. Strain BN6 and Effect of Artificial 
 91REFER ENCES  
Redox Mediators on the Rate of Azo Dye Reduction . Applied an d Environmental M icrobiology  
63: 3691-3694. 
 
Kunz  A, Peralta-Z amora P, de Mo raes SG, and Duran N. 2002.  Nova s tendências n o 
tratamento de efluentes têxteis. Química Nova  25: 78-82. 
 
Kunz  A, Reginatto V, a nd Duran N. 2001.  Com bined treat ment of textile effluent using t he 
sequence Phanerochaete c hrysosporium -ozone. Chemosphere  44: 281-7. 
 
Law RJ. 1 995. 3,3'-dichlorobenzidi ne: a candidate for inclusion in marine monitoring 
programmes?  Chemosphere  30: 1791-1797. 
 
Libra JA, Borchert M, Vigelahn L, and Storm  T. 200 4. Two stage biologi cal treatment of a 
diazo reactive textile dy e and the fate of the dy e metabolites. Chemosphere  56: 167-80. 
 
Lin JK, and Wu YH. 1973.  Studies on the mechanism of methemoglobi n formation induced  by 
aminoazo com pounds. Biochem Pharmacol  22: 1883-91. 
 
Lourenco ND, Novais JM, and Pinheiro HM. 20 01. Effect of so me operational param eters o n 
textile dy e biodegradation in a sequential batch reactor. J Biotechno l 89: 163-74. 
 
Madaeni SS.  1999.  The application of  membrane t echnolog y for water desinfection. Water 
Research  33: 301-3 08. 
 
Mahdavi Talarposhti A, Donnelly T, and Anderson GK. 2001.  Colo ur removal fro m a 
simulated dy e wastewater using a two-phase anaerobic packed bed  reactor. Water Res 35: 425-
32. 
 
Maier J, Kandelbauer A, Erlacher A, Cavaco-Paulo A, and  Gubitz  GM. 200 4. A ne w 
alkali-ther mostable a zoreductase fro m Bacillus  sp. strain SF. Appl Environ M icrobiol  70: 837-
44. 
 
Malik PK. 2 003. Use of a ctivated carb ons prepared from  sawdust and rice-husk for adsorpti on 
of acid-dy es: a cas e study  of Acid Yellow 36. Dyes and Pigments  56: 239-249. 
 
Malik PK. 2004 . Dye removal fro m wastewaters using activated carbon developed fro m 
sawdust: adsorption  equili brium  and kinetics. J Haz ard Mater  113:  81-8 8. 
 
Marcucci M , Nosen zo G, Capannelli  G, Ciab atti I, Corrieri D, and Ciardelli G. 2001.  
Treat ment an d reuse of t extile effluen ts based on new ultrafiltr ation and other membran e 
technologies. Desalination  138:  75-82. 
 
 92REFER ENCES  
Martins MA, Cardoso MH, Queiroz  MJ, Ram alho MT, and Cam pos AM. 1 999. 
Biodegradation of azo dy es by  the y east Candi da zeylanoides  in batch aerated cultures.  
Chemosphere  38: 2455-60. 
 
Martins MA, Lim a N, Si lvestre AJ, and Queiro z MJ. 2 003. Com parative studies of funga l 
degradation of single or m ixed bioaccess ible reactive azo dy es. Chemosphere  52: 967-7 3. 
 
Martins MA, Queiro z MJ, Silvestre AJ, and Lim a N. 2002.  Relationship of chemical 
structures of textile dy es on the pre-adaptation medium  and the potent ialities of thei r 
biodegradatio n by Phanerochaete chryso sporium . Res Microbiol  153: 361- 8. 
 
Matsui M. 1996.  Ozonati on. In: Reife A and Freeman HS, eds. Environmental Chemistry of  
Dyes and Pigments . New York: John Wiley  & So ns, Inc. 43-6 0. 
 
Mbuligwe SE. 200 5. Com parative tre atment of dye-rich  waste water in engineered wetla nd 
systems (EWSs) vegetated  with different plants. Water Res  39: 271-80. 
 
McMullan G, Me ehan C, Conne ely A, Ki rby N, Robins on T, Nigam P, Banat IM , 
Marchant R, and Sm yth WF. 2001.  Microbial decolourisation and degradation of textile dy es. 
Appl M icrobiol Biotechnol  56: 81-7. 
 
Meehan C, Banat IM,  McMullan  G, Nigam  P, Sm yth F, and M archant R. 2 000. 
Decolorizatio n of Rem azol Black-B using a therm otolerant yeast, Kluyveromy ces marxianu s 
IMB3. Environ Int  26: 75-9. 
 
Mielgo I, Moreira MT, Feijoo G, and Lem a JM. 2002 . Biodeg radation of a polymeric dye in  
a pulsed bed bioreactor by imm obilized Phanerochaete chrysos porium . Water Res  36: 1896-
1901 . 
 
Mittal AK, and Gupta SK. 1996.  Biosorption of cationic dyes by  dead macro fungus 
Fomitopsis carnea : batch studies. Water Science and Technology  34: 81-87. 
 
Mohan SV, Rao NC, Srinivas S, Prasad KK, and Karthikeyan J. 200 2. Treatm ent of 
simulated Reactive Yellow 22 (azo) dy e effluents using Spirogyra species. Waste M anag  22: 
575-8 2. 
 
Motam edi M. 197 5. Dewatering of ferri c chloride coagulation slu dge. Water Res  9: 861-8 64. 
 
Nawar SS, and Doma HS. 1989.  Rem oval of dy es fro m effluents using low -cost agricultural 
by-products. The Science of the Total Environment  79: 271-2 79. 
 
 93REFER ENCES  
Nigam  P, Arm our G, Banat IM, Sing h D, and Marchant R. 2000.  Physical rem oval of textile 
dyes from  effluents and solid-state fer mentati on of dy e-adsorbed agricultural residues.  
Bioresour Technol  72: 219-226. 
 
Novotný C, Svobodo vá K, Erbanová P, Cajtham l T, Kasinath A, Lang E, and Sasek V. 
2004 . Ligni nolytic fungi i n biorem ediation: ex tracellular enzy me production and degradation  
rate. Soil Biol ogy &  Biochemistry  36: 1545-15 51. 
 
Nyanhongo GS, Gomes J, Gubitz GM, Zvauya R, Read J, and St einer W. 2 002. 
Decolorizatio n of textile dy es by  laccas es fro m a newly  isolated strain of Trametes modest a. 
Water Re s 36: 1449- 56. 
 
Øllgaard H, Frost L, Galster J, and Hansen OC. 1998 . Survey of azo-color ants in Denmark : 
Consum ption, use, health and enviro nmental asp ects. Den mark: Ministr y of Environm ent and 
Energy . 
 
O'Neill C, Hawkes FR,  Hawkes DL, Esteves S , and Wilcox S. 2000.  Anaerobic-ae robic  
biotreat ment of simulated textile effluent cont aining varied ratios of starch an d azo dy e. Water 
Res 34: 2355-2361. 
 
O'Neill C, Hawkes FR, Hawkes DL, Lourenco  ND, Pinheiro HM, and Delée W. 1999.  
Colour in textile effluents - sources,  measurement , discharge consents and si mulation: a review. 
Journal of C hemical Techn ology a nd Bi otechnology  74: 1009-1018. 
 
Özbelge TA, Oz belge OH, and Baskaya SZ . 2002.  Rem oval of phenolic com pounds fro m 
rubber-textile wastewaters by  physico-chem ical m ethods. Chemical Engineering and 
Processing  41: 719- 730. 
 
Pagga U, a nd Brown D. 1986 . The degradation of dyestuffs : part II behaviou r of d yestuffs in 
aerobic biodegradation tests. Chemosphere  15: 479- 491. 
 
Palm ieri G, Cennam o G, and Sannia G. 2005.  Remazol Brilliant Blue R decolourization by  
the fungus Pleurotus ostr eatus  and its  oxidative enzy matic system. Enzyme and M icrobial  
Technology  36: 17-2 4. 
 
Papić S, Koprivanac N, Boz ic AL, a nd Metes A. 2004 . Removal of some re active dy es from 
synthetic wastewat er by combined Al(III) coagulation/carbon a dsorption pr ocess. Dyes and 
Pigments  62: 291-2 98. 
 
Parida SK, and Mishra BK. 1996.  Adsorption of st yryl pyridinium dyes on silica gel. Journal 
of Colloi d and Interface Science  182:  473-477. 
 
 94REFER ENCES  
Pasti-Grigsby MB, Pasz czynski A, Go szczynski S, Crawford DL, and Crawford RL. 199 2. 
Influence of aro matic substitution patte rns on azo dy e degradabil ity by Streptomyce s spp. and 
Phanerochae te chrysospor ium. Appl E nviron M icrobiol  58: 3605-13. 
 
Paszcz ynski A, Pasti MB, Gosz czynski S, Crawford DL, and Crawford RL. 1991.  New  
approach to im prove degradation of recalcitrant  azo dy es by Streptomyces  spp. and 
Phanerochae te chrysospor ium. Enzyme and M icrobia l Technology  13: 378-384. 
 
Paul R, Sol ans C, and  Erra P. 2 004. Stud y of a natural  dye solu bilisation in o/w 
microe mulsions and its dyeing behaviour (in press). Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem En g 
Aspects . 
 
Pearce C I, Lloyd JR, and Guthrie JT. 2003.  The rem oval of color from  textile wastewater 
using whole bacterial cells: a review. Dyes and Pigments  58: 179-196. 
 
Peralta- Zamora P, Kunz  A, Gomes de  Morae S,  Pelegrini R, de Campos Moleiro P, Reyes 
J, and  Duran N. 19 99. Degradation of reactive dy es I. A com parative st udy of ozonation, 
enzy matic an d photochem ical process es. Chemosphere  38: 835-52.  
 
Pera-Titus M, García-Molina V, Banos MA, Gim énez J, and Esplugas S. 2004.  Degradation 
of chlorophe nols by m eans of advanced  oxidation processes:  a general review. Appli ed 
Catalysis B: Environmental  47: 219- 256. 
 
Pereira MF R, Soares S F, Órfão JJM, and Figueiredo JL. 2003.  Adsorption of d yes on 
activated carb ons: influenc e of surface chem ical groups. Carbon  41: 811- 821. 
 
Peres JA, Beltran de Heredia J, an d Dominguez JR. 2004.  Integrated Fe nton's re agent-
coagulation/flocculation process for the  treatment of cork processing wastew aters. J Hazar d 
Mater 107:  115-21. 
 
Pizzolato TM, Carissimi E, Machado EL, and S chneider IAH. 2002.  Colour rem oval with 
NaClO of dye waste water from  an agate-pro cessing plant in Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil. Int J 
Miner Proc ess 65: 203-211. 
 
Rafii F, and  Cerniglia CE. 1995.  Reduction of azo d yes and  nitroaromatic compounds b y 
bacterial enzy mes fro m the human intesti nal tract. Environ Health Perspect  103 Suppl 5:  17-9. 
 
Rafii F, and Colem an T. 1999 . Cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of an azoreducta se 
gene from  Clostridium perfringens and com parison with azoreductase genes fro m other 
bacteria. J Basic Mic robiol  39: 29-35. 
 
Rafii F, Fra nklin W, an d Cerniglia CE. 1990.  Azoreductase a ctivity  of ana erobic bacter ia 
isolated from  human intesti nal microflora. Appl Envir on M icrobiol  56: 2146-51. 
 95REFER ENCES  
 
Ram akrishna KR, and Viraraghavan T. 1997.  Dye removal usin g low cost ad sorbents. Water 
Science and Technology  36: 189- 196. 
 
Ram alho PA, Cardoso M H, Cavaco-P aulo A,  and Ram alho MT. 200 4. Cha racteriz ation of 
azo reduction activity in a novel ascom ycete y east str ain. Appl E nviron M icrobiol  70: 2279-88. 
 
Ram alho PA, Paiv a S, Cavaco-Paul o A, Casal M, Cardoso MH, and Ram alho MT.  2005. 
Azo reductase activity  of intact Sacch aromyce s cerevisiae  cells is dependen t on the Fre1 p 
component of  the plasm a mem brane ferri c reductase. Applied a nd Environmental Technology . 
 
Ram alho PA, Scholze H, Cardoso MH, Ram alho MT, and  Oliveira-Cam pos AM. 2002.  
Improved conditions for  the aerobic reductive decolourisation of azo dy es by Candida 
zeylanoides . Enzyme and M icrobial Technology : 848-854. 
 
Reddy CA. 1995 . The potential for white-rot fungi in the treat ment of pollutants. Curren t 
Opinion i n Biotechnology  6: 320- 328. 
 
Reife A, and Freeman HS. 1996.  Carbon adsor ption of  dyes and selected interm ediates. In : 
Reife A and Freeman HS,  eds. Enviro nmental Chemistry of Dyes and Pigments . New York:  
John Wile y & Sons, Inc. 3-31. 
 
Riauka A, Maz oniene E, Klim aviciute R, Zemaitaitis A, and Ram alho PA. 2004.  Textile 
wastewater decolorisation by adsorpti on and bi ochemical methods. In: D32  WC A, ed. Póv oa de 
Varzi m. 
 
Rieger PG, Meier HM, Gerle M, Vo gt U, Groth T, and Knackm uss HJ. 2 002. Xenobi otics 
in the envir onment: present and future strate gies to obviate  the proble m of biolog ical 
persistence. J Biotechnol  94: 101- 23. 
 
Robinson T, Chandran B, and Nigam  P. 200 2. Removal of dy es from  an artificial textile dye 
effluent by  two agricultural wast e resid ues, corncob and barley husk. Environ Int  28: 29-3 3. 
 
Robinson T, McMullan G, Marchant R, and Nig am P. 2001.  Remediation of dy es in textile 
effluent: a critical review on current treatme nt technologies with a proposed alternative. 
Bioresour Technol  77: 247-55. 
 
Rocha Gom es J. 20 01. Estrutura e prop riedades dos corantes , Braga. 
 
Russ R, Ra u J, and  Stolz A. 2000.  The function of c ytoplas mic flavin r eductases in the 
reduction of a zo dyes by bacteria. Appl Environ M icrobiol  66: 1429-34. 
 
 96REFER ENCES  
Ryan S, Schnitz hofer W, Tz anov T, Cavaco-Paul o A, and Gubitz  GM. 2003.  An acid-stable 
lacca se fro m Sclerotium rolfsii  with potential for  wool dy e decolourization. Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology  33: 766-7 74. 
 
Sani RK, and Banerjee UC. 1999.  Decolorization of triphenyl methane dy es and textile and 
dye-stuff effluent by  Kurthia  sp. Enzyme and M icrobi al Technolo gy 24: 433-437. 
 
Sarnaik S, and Kanekar P. 1999.  Biodegradation of methyl violet b y Pseudomonas 
mendocina  MCM B-402. Appl M icrobiol  Biotechnol  52: 251- 4. 
 
Schliephake K, Mainwaring DE, Lonergan GT, Jones IK, and Baker WL. 2000.  
Transfor mation and degradation of the disazo dy e Chicago Sky  Blue by  a purified lacc ase from 
Pycnoporus cinnab arinus . Enzyme M icrob Technol  27: 100- 107. 
 
Semerjian L, and Ayoub GM. 2003.  High- pH-magnesiu m coagulation-flocculation in  
waste water treat ment. Advances in Environmental Research  7: 389-403. 
 
Seshadri S, Bishop PL, and Agha AM. 1994.  Anaerobic/aerobic treat ment of select ed azo 
dyes in waste water. Waste M anag  14: 127-13 7. 
 
Shaw CB, Carliell CM, and Wheatley AD. 2002.  Anaerobic/a erobic treat ment of coloured  
textile effluents using sequencing batch reactors. Water Res  36: 1993-20 01. 
 
Shawabkeh RA, and Tutunji MF. 2003.  Experimental study and m odeling of basic d ye 
sorption by diato maceous c lay. Appl Cla y Sci 24: 111-120. 
 
Shen Z, Wang W, Ji a J, Ye J, Feng X, an d Peng A. 2001 . Degradation of dye solution by an 
activated carb on fiber electrode electrolysis sy stem. J Hazard Mate r 84: 107-16.  
 
Singh R, J ain A, Panwar  S, Gupta D,  and Khare SK. 2005 . Antimicrobial activity of some 
natural dy es (in press ). Dyes and Pigmen ts. 
 
Slokar YM, and Le Marechal AM. 1998.  Methods of Decoloration of Textile Wastewat ers. 
Dyes and Pigments  37: 335-356. 
 
Sójka-Ledakowicz  J, Koprowski T, Machnowski W, and Knudsen HH. 1998.  Mem brane 
filtration of te xtile dy ehouse wastewat er for technological water reuse. Desalination  119: 1-10. 
 
Spadaro JT,  Gold MH, and Rengan athan V. 1992.  Degradation of azo dyes by  the lignin-
degrading fu ngus Phanerochaete chrysos porium . Appl  Environ Microbiol  58: 2397-401. 
 
Spadaro JT, and Reng anathan V. 1994.  Peroxidase-cataly zed oxidation of azo d yes: 
mechanis m of disperse Yel low 3 degradation. Arch Bi ochem Bioph ys 312:  301-7. 
 
 97REFER ENCES  
Sponz a DT, and Isik M. 2002 . Decolorization and azo dy e degradation by  anaerobic/aerobic  
sequential process. Enzyme and M icrobial Technolo gy 31: 102-110. 
 
Sponz a DT, and Isik M. 2005 . Reactor performances and fate of aro matic am ines thro ugh 
decolorization of Direct Black  38 dy e under  anaerobic/aerobic sequ entials. Process 
Biochemistry  40: 35-44. 
 
Stolz  A. 2001.  Basic and applied as pects in the microbial degradation of azo dy es. Appl 
Microbiol Biotechnol  56: 69-80. 
 
Sun Q, and Yang L. 2003.  The adsorption of basic dy es fro m aqueous solution on m odified 
peat-resin par ticle. Water R es 37: 1535-44. 
 
Supaka N, Juntongjin K,  Damronglerd S, Delia M-L, and St rehaiano P. 2004.  Microbial 
decolorization of reactive azo dy es in a seque ntial anaerobic-aerobic sy stem . Chemica l 
Engineering Journal  99: 169-17 6. 
 
Suzuki Y, Yoda T,  Ruhul A, and  Sugi ura W. 2001.  Molecular cloning and characte rization of 
the gene coding for azoreductase fro m Bacillus  sp. OY1-2 isolated from  soil. J Biol Chem  276:  
9059- 65. 
 
Tai-Lee H. 1996. Rem oval of reactive d yes from aqueous so lution b y different bacterial  gener a. 
Water Science and Techno logy 34: 89-9 5. 
 
Tatarko M,  and Bumpus JA. 1998.  Biodegrad ation of  congo red  by Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium . Water Re s 32: 1713-1717. 
 
Tchobanoglo us G, and Burton FL. 19 91. Wastewater Engineering Treatment Disposal Reuse . 
McGraw-Hill . 
 
Tekere M, Mswaka AY, Zvauya R, and Read JS. 20 01. Growth, d ye degradation and  
ligninol ytic activity studie s on Zim babwean white rot fungi. Enzyme M icrob Technol  28: 420-
426. 
 
Tsatsaroni E, and Liak opoulou-Kyr iakides M. 1 995. Effect of enzy matic treatment on the 
dyeing of cott on and wo ol fibres with natural d yes. Dyes and Pigments  29: 203-209. 
 
Ueno Y, Yoshio H, Ohyanagi  M, Ik eda K, and Sekine Y. 1986.  Synthesis of silica gels  
containing imidazole group s and their binding affinity for methy l orange in wat er. Polymer  27: 
627-6 30. 
 
Vajnhandl S, and Le Marechal  AM. 2005.  Ultrasound in textile dyeing and the  
decolouration/ mineralization of textile dyes. Dyes and Pigments  65: 89-10 1. 
 
 98REFER ENCES  
van der Zee FP. 200 2. Anaerobic azo dy e reductio n: Wageningen University . 
 
van der Zee FP, Bisschops IA, Blanc hard VG, B ouwman RH, Lettinga G, and Field JA. 
2003 . The contribution of biotic and abiotic process es during azo dy e reduction in anaerobic 
sludge. Water Res  37: 3098-109. 
 
van der Zee FP, Lettinga G, and Fi eld JA. 200 1. Azo dy e decolourisation by anaerobic 
granular slud ge. Chemosphere  44: 1169-76. 
 
Vandevivere PC, Bianchi R, and Verstraete W. 1 998. Treatme nt and Reuse  of Waste water 
from  the Tex tile Wet-Processing Industry : Review of E merging Technologies. J Chem T echnol 
Biotechnol  72: 289-3 02. 
 
Vlyssides AG, Loiz idou M, Karlis PK , Zorpas AA, and Papaioan nou D. 1999.  
Electrochem ical oxidation of a textile dy e wastewater using Pt/Ti electrode. J Hazard Mater  70: 
41-52. 
 
Walker GM, and Weatherley LR. 2000.  Biodegradation  and bioso rption of a cid 
anthraquino ne dye. Environ Pollut  108: 219-2 3. 
 
Waranusantigul P, Pokethitiyook P, Kruatrachue M, and Upatham  ES. 2003.  Kinetics of 
basic dy e (methy lene bl ue) biosorptio n by giant duckweed ( Spirodela polyrrhiza ). Environ 
Pollut  125: 385-92. 
 
Wesenb erg D, Kyriakid es I, and Ag athos SN. 2003.  White-rot  fungi and their enzy mes for 
the treat ment of industrial dy e effluents. Biotechnol A dv 22: 161-87. 
 
Wibulswas R. 2004.  Batch and fixed bed sorption of methylene blue on percursor and QACs 
modified m ontmorillonite. Separation and Pur ificati on Technol ogy 39: 3-12. 
 
Wilcock AE, Brewster M, and Peck G. 1996.  Use of electr ochemical tecbology  to rem ove 
color and other contam inants fro m textile mill effluents. In: Reife A and F reeman HS, eds. 
Environmental chemistry of dyes and pigments . New York: John Wiley  & So ns. 61-74. 
 
Woolard CD, Strong J, a nd Erasm us CR. 2002.  Evaluation of th e use of modified coal ash as 
potential sorbent for organic wast e stre ams. Appl Geochemistry  17: 1159-116 4. 
 
Wu Z, Joo H, Ahn I-S, Haam  S, Kim  J-H, and Lee K. 2004.  Organic dy e adsorption on  
mesoporous h ybrid gels. Chemical Engineering Journal  102: 277-282. 
 
Yoo ES. 20 02. Kinetics of che mical de colorization of the azo dye C.I. Reacti ve Orange 96 by  
sulfide. Chemosphere  47: 925-31.  
 
Zanoni MVB, and Carneiro PA. 2001.  O descarte dos corantes têxteis. Ciênci a Hoje : 61-6 4. 
 99REFER ENCES  
 
Zhang SJ, Yang M, Yan g QX, Z hang Y, Xin  BP, and Pan  F. 2003 . Biosor ption of reactive 
dyes by  the myceliu m pellets of a new isolate of Penicillium oxalicum . Biotechnol Lett  25: 
1479- 82. 
 
Zhou W, and Zimmermann W. 1 993. Decolorization of industrial effluents containing  
reactive dy es by  actinom ycetes. FEM S Microbiol Lett 107:  157- 61. 
 
Zimmermann T, Gasser F, Kulla HG, and Leisinger T. 1984.  Comparison of two bacterial 
azoreductases acquired duri ng adaptation  to growth  on azo d yes. Arch Microbiol  138:  37-43. 
 
Zimmermann T, Kulla  HG, and Leisinger T. 1982.  Prop erties of purified Orange II  
azoreductase, the enzy me initiating azo dye degradation by  Pseudom onas KF46. Eur J Bioche m 
129: 197-203. 
 
Zolinger H. 1991 . Color Chemistry: Synthesis, Proper ties and Applicatio ns of Organic Dyes 
and Pi gments . VCH, Weinheim . 
 100