Performance of constructed wetlands with different
substrates for the treated ef ﬂuent from municipal
sewage plants
Cao Shiwei, Jing Zhaoqian, Yuan Peng, Wang Yue and Wang Yin
ABSTRACT
Constructed wetlands (CWs) are effective as an advanced treatment process for the treated ef ﬂuent
of municipal wastewater plants. An appropriate substrate, suitable macrophytes, and properoperation are crucial for pollutant abatement. In this research, three subsurface ﬂow CWs with
various substrates were investigated. Pollutants abatement ef ﬁciency under various operational
schemes were analyzed. The results showed that the satisfactory hydraulic loading rate was0.25 m
3/(m2·d). When the C/N ratio of in ﬂuent was adjusted to 5.87 by adding a carbon source, the
denitri ﬁcation and dephosphorization ef ﬁciency would be improved, with 7 –8 mg/L for total nitrogen
(TN) and 0.4 mg/L for total phosphorus (TP) in the ef ﬂuent, which can achieve the Class 1A Discharge
Standard for discharge to natural waterways in China. A greater depth of submersion for thesubstrate layer resulted in a more conducive environment for the abatement of nitrogen substances.However, a 40-cm depth of submersion in CWs results in better removal ef ﬁciency of TN and TP.
A plastic ring substrate (PRS) contains biological enzyme promoter formula, which was conducive tonitrifying and denitrifying bacteria. The bio ﬁlm af ﬁnity and coordination with plants made the PRS
more effective than the other two substrates, especially for NO
3–-N and TN abatement ef ﬁciency.Cao Shiwei (corresponding author)
Jing ZhaoqianYuan Peng
Wang Yue
Wang YinCollege of Civil Engineering,Nanjing Forestry University,Nanjing 210037,ChinaE-mail: cswxy@njfu.edu.cn
Key words |advanced treatment for treated ef ﬂuent, C/N ratio, hydraulic loading rate, submerged
depth, substrates, subsurface ﬂow CWs
INTRODUCTION
The treated ef ﬂuent from a municipal sewage plant may
contain pollutants that contribute to eutrophication ofwaterbodies when the ef ﬂuent is directly discharged. Differ-
ent countries have different requirements for treated ef ﬂuent
discharged into natural rivers, as shown in Table 1 (American
Water Works Association ;Smith & Guo ).
The Pollutant Discharge Standard for municipal sewage
treatment plants was further restricted to Class 1A in China,which may require advanced wastewater treatment to meetthe standard ( Discharge Standard of Water Pollutants DB /
-  ). Because of de ﬁcits of carbon sources in the
treated ef ﬂuent, denitri ﬁcation may not be fully carried
out. The main excess-standard pollutants in the treated ef ﬂu-
ent were ammonia nitrogen (NH
4þ-N), nitrate nitrogen
(NO 3–-N), total nitrogen (TN), and total phosphorus (TP)
(Leverenz et al. ;Liang et al. ). Therefore, the deni-
triﬁcation and dephosphorization performance were the key
factors for the advanced treatment process ( Wang et al.
). Compared with many other wastewater treatment
technologies, constructed wetlands (CWs) can be easily con-
structed, which provides an advantage in denitri ﬁcation and
dephosphorization performance. CWs are widely applied toThis is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Licence (CC BY 4.0), which permits copying,adaptation and redistribution, provided the original work is properly cited(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).452 © 2019 The Authors Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
doi: 10.2166/wrd.2019.032
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020multiple treatments, including sewage, leather wastewater,
wastewaters containing hormones, milk factory wastewater,landscape water, and rainwater ( Zhaoqian et al. ;
Toro-Vélez et al. ;Carvalho et al. ).
The pollutant abatement ef ﬁciency of CWs depended on
the function of substrates, macrophytes, and microbeswithin the CW ( Huang et al. ;Ilyas & Masih ).
Appropriate substrate, suitable macrophytes, and properoperations are crucial for CWs treatment ef ﬁciency. In this
study, three planted CWs with various substrates wereevaluated under different operational conditions. Thecorresponding pollutant abatement ef ﬁciencies were moni-
tored and analyzed, aiming to optimize the process for the
treated ef ﬂuent of municipal plants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Experimental apparatus
Three planted subsurface ﬂow CWs were evaluated, with
each CW being 1.1 m long, 0.25 m wide, and 0.9 m high(including 0.2 m safe height). A hydrolysis acidi ﬁcation
unit was set before the CWs to enhance the biodegradability
of the water ( Ayaz et al. ). Treated ef ﬂuent ﬂowed into
the CW at the upper surface and in ﬁltrated through the
system before discharging at the bottom and then drainedout through the pipe set outside of the CW. The ﬂowrate
of feed into the CWs was controlled by a ﬂowmeter located
on the inlet pipe. Different height drainage pipe could resultin different submergence depth of the substrate inside the
CWs. Water hyacinths were planted on the surface of theCW with a density of 100 plants/m
2to strengthen the pollu-
tant abatement ef ﬁciency (experimental apparatus shown in
Figure 1 ).
Substrate selection
The substrate was an important part of CWs, which could
abate pollutants by physical ﬁltration, chemical reaction,
and biodegradation. Substrates had a great impact on thetreatment effect because of its features ( Herrera-Melián
et al. ). Three substrates were selected to explore the
inﬂuence for the pollutant abatement ef ﬁciency in CWs,
including a combinatorial substrate.
(1) Plastic ring substrate (PRS) in CW No.1: PRS is a kind of
bioﬁlm carrier that is widely applied in biologicalTable 1 |Pollutant Discharge Standard for treated ef ﬂuent of several countries
ParameterChina
Germany
(mg/L)United States
(mg/L)Japan
(mg/L)European
(mg/L)Russia
(mg/L)Class 1A
(mg/L)Class 1B
(mg/L)
Chemical oxygen demand
(COD)50 60 75 n/a 120 125 125
Biological oxygen demand
(BOD 5)10 20 15 30 120 25 30
Suspended solids (SS) 10 20 n/a 30 150 35 50
Ammonium-nitrogen (NH 4-N) 5 8 10 n/a n/a n/a n/a
Total nitrogen (TN) 15 20 13 n/a 60 15 10Total phosphorus (TP) 0.5 1 1 n/a 8 2 2
Figure 1 |Experimental apparatus.453 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020contact oxidation processes for wastewater ( Zhao et al.
). PRS is made of polymer materials with stable
properties, large speci ﬁc surface area, and excellent
hydrophilicity, which was bene ﬁcial for colonization of
a bio ﬁlm. As shown in Figure 2(a) , the single size of
the unit was 11 mm ×7 mm (diameter ×height) with an
845 m2/m3speci ﬁc surface area and a speci ﬁc gravity
of 130 kg/m3. The nitrophobic microbial enzyme was
added in the PRS during the production process toimprove the af ﬁnity between the substrate, nitrifying
and denitrifying bacteria, for a substantial increase indenitri ﬁcation performance. The PRS used in this
research was purchased from Yixing Dieal TechnologyCo., Ltd, Jiangsu Province, China, which is often appliedas a suspended ﬁller in a Moving Bed Bio ﬁlm Reactor
(MBBR) to treat sewage.
(2) Combinatorial substrate in CW No. 2: A combinatorial
layer (Fly ash and zeolite substrate (FLAZS)) was
applied in the second CW. In addition to the 300 mmhigh ﬂy ash ceramsite and 200 mm high zeolite, a
100 mm high gravel layer was set at the bottom as a sup-port and a drainage layer, and a 100 mm ﬁne sand layer
was set at the top to ﬁx the plants. Fly ash, a waste gen-
erated by coal- ﬁred power plants, was used to make
ceramsite by combining with clay and admixture athigh temperature. The ceramsite had many activepoints of Si and Al, and a large speci ﬁc surface area
and a high adsorption capacity ( Zhulai et al. ). Fly
ash from different sources had a variety of chemicalcompositions and dissimilar internal structures. So, theceramsite made from different sources of ﬂy ash will sub-
sequently have different adsorption capacities andreactions with chemical substances in CWs. The ﬂyash ceramsite had an average pore diameter of
20.4 nm and a pore area of 23.325 m
2/g. The ﬂy ash cer-
amsite in this CW had a slightly higher calcium content,as shown in Figure 2(b) . The total calcium content was
23.16%, which was proven to improve the abatementof phosphorus from the water ( Andreo-Martínez et al.
;Shiwei et al. ). The substrate with good adsorp-
tion capacity can also effectively improve the ef ﬁciency
of CWs ( Zheng et al. ). Zeolite, a porous silicate
mineral shown in Figure 2(b) ,i sa ‘giant molecule ’com-
posed of silicon oxygen tetrahedrons and aluminumoxygen tetrahedrons that share the oxygen atoms atthe tetrahedron vertices. In alumina tetrahedron, triva-lent aluminum could not balance the oxygen atomvalence electrons, so alkali metal or alkaline earthmetal cations were needed. The K
þin the zeolite com-
bined with silicon aluminate is weak and might be
easily exchanged with other cations, while the replace-
ment does not destroy the structure of zeolite so thezeolite has a high ion exchange capacity. There werepores and channels inside the zeolite because of the differ-ent connection modes of silicon oxytetrahedron andaluminum oxytetrahedron so the speci ﬁc surface area of
zeolite was very large ( Mery et al. ) ,w h i c hi si nt h e
range of 500 –1,000 m
2/g. In this research, zeolite and
ceramsite were the main bio ﬁlm carriers in CW No. 2.
(3) Fly ash ceramsite substrate (FACS) in CW No. 3: The sub-
strate of the third CW device was like the second one, amultiple layer with a gravel layer at the bottom and ﬁne
sand layer at the top. The difference was that anotherﬂy ash ceramsite with a slightly higher carbon content
was set in the middle, as shown in Figure 2(c) . This ﬂy
ash ceramsite ’s pore area reached 79.605 m
2/g because
Figure 2 |Selected substrates: (a) Plastic ring substrate (PRS), (b) Combinatorial substrate including zeolite substrate and ﬂy ash ceramsite with more calcium element, (c) Fly ash
ceramsite with more carbon element.454 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020of 8.67% carbon elements that remained after ﬁring and
had an internal aperture of 22.0 nm. Zeolite was nolonger used as an auxiliary because of its huge pore area.
Pollutant index of in ﬂuent
An arti ﬁcial in ﬂuent was made to emulate the treated ef ﬂu-
ent of the municipal sewage plant. Activated sludge from thesecondary sedimentation tank of Nanjing Qiaobei Munici-pal Sewage Treatment Plant, Jiangsu Province was used as
the inoculation ﬂuid for the in ﬂuent. NH
4Cl, NaNO 3,
KH 2PO4, and low molecular organic carbohydrates were
applied to simulate the pollutants of the water. The pollu-tants index is shown in Table 2 .
The abatement of nitrogen and phosphorus nutrient
pollutants was the goal of the treated ef ﬂuent. So, TN,
TP, NH
4þ-N, and NO 3–-N were the indexes that were moni-
tored and compared to the ‘Water and Wastewater
Monitoring and Analysis Methods ’(the Fourth Edition)
(State Environmental Protection Administration ).
According to the ef ﬂuent discharge standard, the CW
with a proper substrate and corresponding operationalprocedures will be demonstrated.
Research methods
According to the factors that may in ﬂuence the pollutant
abatement ef ﬁciency, the parameters investigated in the
research were as follows:
Hydraulic loading rate
Hydraulic loading rate (HLR) was an important parameter
to characterize the unit area treatment ef ﬁciency of CW
(Çakir et al. ). When CW was ﬁlled with different sub-
strates, there were various physical and chemical reactionsand biodegradation inside the CW which resulted in differ-ent pollutant abatement ef ﬁciencies.Carbon –nitrogen ratio of in ﬂuent
Insuf ﬁcient carbon source inhibited denitri ﬁcation because
of low concentrations of biodegradable organic matter inthe treated ef ﬂuent from sewage plants ( Jiang et al. ).
Thus, it was necessary to test the carbon –nitrogen (C/N)
ratio of the in ﬂuent and assess whether it could satisfy the
denitri ﬁcation and dephosphorization process before
further treatment through the CWs. If C/N was too low, acarbon source was usually added to improve the C/N ratioand ensure denitri ﬁcation and dephosphorization ef ﬁciency.
However, the appropriate C/N ratio adjusted is crucial forthe ef ﬁciency of the removal process.
Submerged depth of substrate
The design of the submerged layer followed the non-
submerged layer along the height of CWs, ensuring theanaerobic condition followed the aerobic conditionsequence ( Payne et al. ), and thus the requirements of
biological nitrogen removal could be satis ﬁed. However,
anaerobic conditions that followed the aerobic conditionwere not conducive to biological dephosphorization. There-fore, the appropriate proportion of non-submerged withsubmerged layers should be determined to not only enhancethe biological nitrogen removal effect but also ensure certainbiological dephosphorization removal ef ﬁciency.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Pollutant abatement ef ﬁciency in CWs under different
HLR
Inﬂuent with the same pollutant concentrations was fed
into three devices. Four HLR levels with 0.1 m3/(m2·d),
0.15 m3/(m2·d), 0.25 m3/(m2·d), and 0.4 m3/(m2·d) were
controlled by the ﬂowmeter. The TN concentration of in ﬂu-
ent was about 15 mg/L, while its nitrogen ratio (C/N) was
7. The submergence depth of the substrate layer was main-tained at 40 cm high. The pollutants abatement ef ﬁciency
of each device was monitored and compared after the run-ning was stable. The optimal HLR corresponding to eachsystem was determined.Table 2 |Pollutant index of in ﬂuent
Pollutants index COD NH 4þ-N NO 3–-N TN TP
Concentration (mg/L) 50 –100 8 –10 8 –10 16 –25 1455 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020The HLR should match with the capacity of the sub-
strate. Overload hydraulic would result in insuf ﬁcient
retention times, which might inhibit the denitri ﬁcation.
However, because lower HLR corresponded to enoughretention time for the bacteria, the dissolved oxygen in thesystem would be reduced. The de ﬁcit of dissolved oxygen
was not conducive to the biodegradation of ammonia nitro-gen ( Zheng et al. ;Bonner et al. ).
Among the four-level HLR, the removal rate ( Figure 3 )
was highest when the HLR was 0.25 m
3/(m2·d). Under this
condition, the concentration of NH 4þ-N, NO 3—N, TN, TP,
and COD in the ef ﬂuent was 1 –4, 2 –3, 5 –7, 0.2 –0.4, and
3–12.1 mg/L, respectively. All the indexes could reach the
Class 1A Discharge Standard for waterways in China.
In this study, three substrates were carriers of microor-
ganisms and resulted in COD abatement ef ﬁciency of 95%.The ef ﬁciency of the third device with ﬂy ash substrate
(FLAS) was slightly higher than that of the other two forthe abatement of NH
4þ-N, NO 3–-N, and TN. For the nitrogen
in the water, the removal process was relatively complex.The organic nitrogen in the water must be transformedinto NH
4þ-N in the aerobic condition by ammoniating bac-
teria, and then NH 4þ-N could be oxidized into NO 2–-N by
nitrous acid bacteria, followed by further oxidation toNO
3–-N by nitrobacteria. Finally, the NO 3–-N was trans-
formed into N 2by denitrifying bacteria in an anoxic
environment ( Chyan et al. ;Uggetti et al. ), so
the removal rate of TN depends on the removal rate ofNH
4þ-N and NO 3–-N. Although the CW with FACZS was
better than the other two in terms of NH 4þ-N abatement,
the CW with PRS was superior in the NO 3–-N, so the ﬁnal
TN removal was greatly determined by NO 3–-N. Therefore,
Figure 3 |Efﬁciency of pollutant abatement of each device under different HLR.456 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020the TN removal in the CW with PRS was optimal with
5.03 mg/L in the ef ﬂuent. Compared with other inorganic
substrates, the PRS had biological enzyme promoter formulain its ingredient, which might improve the performance ofthe biological carrier and result in a more ef ﬁcient bio-
denitri ﬁcation, especially NO
3–N abatement ( Luet al. ).
The results suggest that the substrate with nitrogen andmicrobial enzyme promoter formula could enhance thebio-denitri ﬁcation process.
There were four functions during the phosphorus abate-
ment of the water including physical adsorption, chemicalreaction, biological dephosphorization, and assimilation bymacrophytes ( Bus & Karczmarczyk ). Physical adsorp-
tion and chemical reaction were relatively simple, mainlydetermined by the features of the substrates. The biologicaldephosphorization process was rather complicated, whichrequired the assimilation and release of polyphosphoric
accumulating bacteria (PAOs) surviving in different dis-
solved oxygen environments inside the CWs. In thisresearch, the zeolite and ﬂy ash ceramsite applied into the
CW had developed pores inside and calcium content. How-ever, because of its single ingredient, there was no chemicalreaction and the physical adsorption was also weak so bio-logical dephosphorization was the main function.However, the CW with PRS had a better TP removal abilitythan the other two, as shown in Figure 3(d) . The TP concen-
tration in the ef ﬂuent reached 0.2 mg/L with a 72.17%
removal rate, which was higher than the other two inorganicsubstrates. Although the second CW was ﬁlled with ﬂy ash
ceramsite that had a measurable calcium content and wassupposed to assume a promising phosphorus adsorptioncapacity. Results fell short of expectations, possibly becauseof limited adsorption capacity or coordination ofmacrophytes with the ceramsite. Plants transfer oxygenfrom the air to the inside of CW by means of its roots
system to achieve an aerobic environment around its
roots, which was different from the anaerobic or anoxiclow dissolved oxygen environment far from the roots.Various environments with differing dissolved oxygenconcentrations facilitated biological dephosphorization inCWs ( Abou-Elela & Hellal ). Pollutant abatement ef ﬁ-
ciency was affected by the growth of plants and therobustness of the system to secrete oxygen from the roots.Water hyacinth was the macrophyte selected for this studybecause of the oxygen-secreting capacity of the zeolite þcer-
amsite substrate, even though they had a larger area for themicrobial growth. PRS made of organic polymer mightprompt the macrophytes with good coordination. Theenvironment inside the CW was suitable for PAOs underdual action of the substrate with a huge speci ﬁc area and
plants with robust roots oxygen-secreting capacity, whichresulted in better phosphorus abatement.
The CW with PRS had better biological denitri ﬁcation
and dephosphorization performance than that with FLASandﬂy ash. Their optimal HLR was 0.25 m
3/(m2·d).
Pollutant abatement ef ﬁciency in CWs with different
C/N ratio of the in ﬂuent
The C/N ratio of the treated ef ﬂuent from municipal waste-
water plants ranged from 1 to 3 if no additional carbonsource was added. So, the experiments were carried onwith eight C/N ratios: in the range of 1.53 –6.83, which
were adjusted by changing COD concentration while TN
concentration was maintained stable at 15 mg/L. An appro-
priate C/N ratio with good pollutant abatement ef ﬁciency
would be determined for each CW.
The C/N ratio of in ﬂuent mainly affected the dominant
species of microorganisms that play a key role in the treat-ment process. An appropriate C/N ratio could maintainthe presence of aerobic microorganisms, nitrifying and deni-trifying bacteria, phosphorus removal, and accumulatingbacteria in different parts of the CWs ( Liu et al. ).
Because the CWs performed well with the HLR of 0.2m
3/(m2·d) as previously discussed, the research about the
C/N ratio was carried on with this hydraulic load ( Figure 4 ).
According to Figure 4(a) /C04(c), with a relatively low
C/N ratio without extra carbon source, the TN of ef ﬂuent
remained around 10 mg/L, which could not meet thedischarge standard. Therefore, it was necessary to add acarbon source in the in ﬂuent. But the NH
4þ-N concen-
tration of ef ﬂuent increased as the C/N ratio increased.
This may result from the carbon source which can con-
sume dissolved oxygen in CWs and inhibit the nitrationprocess. The NO
3–-N and TN concentration decreases
with the increase of C/N, resulting in an inverse corre-lation with the C/N ratio. The additional carbon sourceenhanced the reproduction of denitrifying bacteria and457 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020improved NO 3–-N abatement. TN was mainly constituted of
NH 4þ-N and NO 3–-N, and the removal ef ﬁciency of TN
gradually increased with the changes of NO 3–-N. The
proper C/N ratio should not only ensure the NO 3–-N
removal but also the NH 4þ-N removal. An excessively
high C/N ratio could not increase the abatement ef ﬁciency
because the consumption of carbon source and the in ﬂu-
ence of NH 4þ-N abatement would be adversely affected.
So, based on the nature of the denitri ﬁcation and ef ﬂuent
requirements for TN, a C/N ratio of in ﬂuent was better
controlled at 5.87, resulting in 55% TN removal, and theefﬂuent concentration was 7 –8 mg/L.
According to Figure 4(d) , the TP concentration of ef ﬂu-
ent and the removal rate of TP were relatively stable at alower C/N ratio without adding carbon source, but withthe increase of C/N ratio by the additional carbon source,
the TP abatement increased and its concentration of ef ﬂuent
decreased to less than 0.4 mg/L. The growth of PAOs alsorequired an appropriate carbon source ( de Rozari et al.
). The increase of the carbon source was conducive
to the growth of PAO and had a positive impact on theremoval of TP.
CW with PRS for the treatment of NH
4þ-N was slightly
worse than the other two treatments in terms of nitrogen
abatement, but for the treatment effect of NO 3–-N it was
slightly better than the other two and overall advantageousfor TN abatement. More denitrifying bacteria producedhigher removal ef ﬁciency for TN.
The CW with FLAS performed the worst for pollutant
abatement ef ﬁciency. Even when the C/N ratio was adjusted
Figure 4 |Pollutants abatement with various C/N ratio in ﬂuents.458 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020to 8, the TN removal rate could only reach around 55%. For
the indicator TP removal, the trend of the three with thechange of C/N ratio was similar, but the actual removalrate showed a larger difference. CW with PRS performedbest, followed by the FLAS. The CW with FLAZS had theworst performance because the phosphorus adsorptioncapacity was quickly exhausted during the initial period.The result was consistent with previous research on HLR.The pollutant abatement of wastewater depended on thephysical, chemical, and biological processes. Althoughthere was only a biological dephosphorization process inthe CW with PRS, the ef ﬁciency was best, indicating that
biological dephosphorization was the most sustainable andreliable. Biological dephosphorization ef ﬁciency of the CW
with FLAZS and FLAS was weaker than that of PRS andmight be because of the feather of the substrate itself, orthe in ﬂuence of macrophytes and the coordination between
them, which needs to be studied by changing plant species
in subsequent studies.
Pollutant abatement ef ﬁciency in CWs with different
depth of substrate submergence
The height of the discharge pipe outside the CWs could be
adjusted in the range of 20 –60 cm and resulted in corre-
sponding submerged depths of the substrates. A lab testwas carried out under the same conditions, with a HLR of0.2 m
3/(m2·d) and an in ﬂuent C/N ratio of 5, with results
shown in Figure 5 .
Removal rates of NH 4þ-N and TN of the three CWs gradu-
ally increased with an increased depth of submergence.Compared with a 20-cm depth, the removal rate of NH
4þ-N
was 10% greater than removal with a 60-cm depth. TheNH
4þ-N concentration of the ef ﬂuent was also stable at
about 4 mg/L. NH 4þ-N substance was transformed in an
aerobic environment. Although the submerged depth wouldresult in an anaerobic or anoxic environment inside theCW, which was not conducive to the survival of ammonia
nitrogen bacteria, the NH
4þ-N abatement ef ﬁciency increased
(Nakamura et al. ). There was still enough oxygen for the
ammonia nitrogen bacteria existing in the upper part of theCWs because of an increase in contact time and the plantroot-secreting oxygen. A greater depth of submergenceresulted in a more anaerobic and anoxic environment at
Figure 5 |Removal rate of pollutants in CWs at different depths.459 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020the bottom layer inside the CWs, which might promote the
denitri ﬁcation process with the TN removal rate of 53.69%
and 8.914 mg/L TN remaining in the ef ﬂuent.
TP, however, had the opposite results. In general,
removal ef ﬁciency decreased with an increase in depth of
submergence. When the depth of submergence was 20 cm,the TP removal rate could reach 58.81% and correspondingconcentration in the ef ﬂuent was 0.367 mg/L, while the
removal rate decreased to 49% when the submergencedepth was 60 cm. Due to the change in the condition aggra-vating the release of the phosphorus, anaerobic conditionsfollowing aerobic conditions were unfavorable for micro-bially facilitated dephosphorization ( Bus & Karczmarczyk
). Although the substrate had phosphorus adsorption
capacity, it would not be helpful when the substrate reachedsaturation.
The CW with FLAZS was superior to the other two
approaches for NH
4þ-N abatement. When the depth of sub-
mergence was 60 cm, the removal rate was 56.32%, and theNH
4þ-N concentration of the ef ﬂuent water was 3.986 mg/L.
Aerobic ammoniation process and adsorption by zeolite inthe CW were contributing factors ( Wua et al. ). The
CW with PRS were superior to the other two in terms ofTN removal including NH
4þ-N and NO 3–-N. Though the
NH 4þ-N abatement of the CW with PRS was inferior to
the other two, it performed well for NO 3–-N abatement.
The biological enzyme promoter formula of the PRS stillfunctioned and contributed to the survival of denitrifyingbacteria when the substrate was submerged and enhancedthe NO
3–-N abatement process. The CW with FLAS per-
formed worst for nitrogen removal, with the highestremoval rates of NH
4þ-N reaching 47.5% with the ef ﬂuent
concentration of 4.791 mg/L. The CW with FLAZS alsoperformed worst for the TP abatement. The removal ratewas up to 51.63% with a corresponding ef ﬂuent concen-
tration of 4.791 mg/L when the submerged depth of
substrate was 20 cm. Maybe the main reason was the satur-ation of the adsorption capacity of ceramsite ( Liet al.
).
In conclusion, the denitrogen ef ﬁciency trend and the
dephosphorization ef ﬁciency contradicted each other in
terms of the submerged depth of substrate in CWs. In prac-tice, a submerged depth of 40 cm in height ensured highremoval ef ﬁciency for both nitrogen and phosphorus.CONCLUSIONS
Three CWs with PRS, FLAZS and FLAS as substrates were
investigated separately to explore the performance of thetreating ef ﬂuent from municipal plants. The pollutants
abatement ef ﬁciency under different HLR and various
C/N ratios of the in ﬂuent and diverse submerged depth of
substrate were discussed to determine the optimal substrateand corresponding operational conditions. The resultsshowed that
(1) Three CWs achieved a better pollutant ef ﬁciency when
the HLR was 0.25 m
3/(m2·d).
(2) When the C/N ratio of in ﬂuent was adjusted to 5.87 by
additional carbon source, the denitri ﬁcation and depho-
sphorization ef ﬁciency would improve, with 7 –8 mg/L
for TN and 0.4 mg/L for TP in the ef ﬂuent, which can
satisfy the Class 1A Discharge Standard for naturalwaterways in China.
(3) A greater depth of submergence for a substrate layer in
CWs resulted in the greater abatement of nitrogen sub-stances. However, removal ef ﬁciency of phosphorus
was optimal with submerging depth of 40 cm.
(4) Because of the biological enzyme promoter formula con-
tained in PRS, it was the substrate that better promotedhabitats for bacteria that participated in the pollutantabatement processes. Bio ﬁlm af ﬁnity of PRS and
coordination with plants was better than the other twosubstrates, especially for the abatement ef ﬁciency of
NO
3–N and TN.
The results of this research are useful for designing CWs
for the abatement of nitrogen substances and phosphorus
from waste streams. More studies for the PRS in CWs andthe corresponding running model are expected.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by grants from the National Scienceand Technology support program (2015BAL02B04); theScience and Technology project of Ministry of Housing andUrban-Rural Development (2015-k7-012); A scholarshipfrom the Priority Academic Program Development ofJiangsu Higher Education Institutions Fund.460 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020REFERENCES
Abou-Elela, S. I. & Hellal, M. S. Municipal wastewater treatment
using vertical ﬂow constructed wetlands planted with Canna,
Phragmites and Cyprus .Ecological Engineering 47, 209 –213.
American Water Works Association  Water Audits and Loss
Control Programs. AWWA Manual M36 , 3rd edn. American
Water Works Association, Denver, CO.
Andreo-Martínez, P., García-Martínez, N., Quesada-Medina, J. &
Almel, L. Domestic wastewaters reuse reclaimed by an
improved horizontal subsurface- ﬂow constructed wetland: a
case study in the southeast of Spain .Bioresource Technology
233, 236 –246.
Ayaz, S. Ç., Aktas, O., Akç, L. & F ınd ık, N. Efﬂuent quality
and reuse potential of domestic wastewater treated in a pilot-scale hybrid constructed wetland system .Journal of
Environmental Management 156, 115 –120.
Bonner, R., Aylward, L., Kappelmeyer, U. & Sheridan, C. 
A comparison of three different residence time distributionmodelling methodologies for horizontal subsurface ﬂow
constructed wetlands .Ecological Engineering 99,9 9 –113.
Bus, A. & Karczmarczyk, A. Supporting constructed wetlands
in P removal ef ﬁciency from surface water .Water Science
and Technology 75(11), 2554 –2561.
Çakir, R., Gidirislioglu, A. & Çebi, U. A study on the effects of
different hydraulic loading rates (HLR) on pollutant removalefﬁciency of subsurface horizontal- ﬂow constructed wetlands
used for treatment of domestic wastewaters .Journal of
Environmental Management 164, 121 –128.
Carvalho, P. N., Arias, C. A. & Brix, H. Constructed wetlands
for water treatment: new developments .Water 9, 397.
Chyan, J. M., Lu, C. C., Shiu, R. F. & Bellotin, L. M. 
Puriﬁcation of landscape water by using an innovative
application of subsurface ﬂow constructed wetland .
Environment Science Pollution Research 23, 535 –545.
de Rozari, P., Greenway, M. & El Hanandehc, A. Phosphorus
removal from secondary sewage and septage using sand mediaamended with biochar in constructed wetland mesocosms .
Science of the Total Environment 569–570,1 2 3 –133.
Discharge Standard of Water Pollutants DB11/307-2005 
Beijing Municipal Environmental Protection Bureau andBeijing Municipal Administration of Quality and TechnologySupervision .
Herrera-Melián, J. A., Borreguero-Fabelo, A., Araña, J., Peñate-
Castellano, N. & Ortega-Méndez, J. A. Effect of substrate,
feeding mode and number of stages on the performance ofhybrid constructed wetland systems .Water 10(1), 39.
Huang, Z., Zhang, X., Cui, L. & Yu, G.  Optimization of
operating parameters of hybrid vertical down- ﬂow constructed
wetland systems for domestic sewerage treatment .Journal of
Environmental Management 180,3 8 4 –389.
Ilyas, H. & Masih, I. Intensi ﬁcation of constructed wetlands
for land area reduction: a review .Environment Science
Pollution Research 24, 12081 –12091.Jiang, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, Y. & Zhang, X. Effects of HRT on the
efﬁciency of denitri ﬁcation and carbon source release in
constructed wetland ﬁlled with bark .Water Science and
Technology 75(12), 2908 –2914.
Leverenz, H. L., Haunschild, K., Hopes, G., Tchobanoglousa, G.
& Darby, J. L.  Anoxic treatment wetlands for
denitri ﬁcation .Ecological Engineering 36, 544 –551.
Li, J., Wen, Y., Zhou, Q., Xingjie, Z., Li, X., Yang, S. & Lin, T. 
Inﬂuence of vegetation and substrate on the removal and
transformation of dissolved organic matter in horizontal
subsurface- ﬂow constructed wetlands .Bioresource
Technology 99, 4990 –4996.
Liang, K., Dai, Y., Wang, F. & Liang, W. Seasonal variation of
microbial community for the treatment of tail water inconstructed wetland .Water Science and Technology 75(10),
2434 –2442.
Liu, M., Li, B., Xue, Y., Wang, H. & Yang, K. Constructed
wetland using corncob charcoal substrate:pollutants removaland intensi ﬁcation .Water Science and Technology 76(6),
1300 –1307.
Lu, Y., Zhang, X., Feng, L., Yang, G., Zheng, Z., Liu, J. & Mu, J.
Optimization of continuous- ﬂow solid-phase
denitri ﬁcation via coupling carriers in enhancing
simultaneous removal of nitrogen and organics foragricultural runoff puri ﬁcation .Biodegradation 28(4),
275 –285.
Mery, C., Guerrero, L., Alonso-Gutiérrez, J., Figueroa, M., Lema,
J., Montalvo, S. & Borja, R. Evaluation of natural zeolite
as microorganism support medium in nitrifying batchreactors: in ﬂuence of zeolite particle size. Journal of
Environmental Science and Health. Part A, Toxic/Hazardous Substances & Environmental Engineering47(3), 420.
Nakamura, K., Hatakeyama, R., Tanaka, N., Takisaw, K., Tada, C.
& Nakano, K. A novel design for a compact constructed
wetland introducing multi- ﬁltration layers coupled with
subsurface super ﬁcial space .Ecological Engineering 100,
99–106.
Payne, E. G. I., Pham, T., Cook, P. L. M., Fletcher, T. D., Hatt, B. E.
& Deletic, A.  Bioﬁlter design for effective nitrogen
removal from stormwater –inﬂuence of plant species, in ﬂow
hydrology and use of a saturated zone .Water Science and
Technology 69(6), 1312 –1319.
Shiwei, C., Zhaoqian, J., Zhulai, W. & Xin, H.

Decontamination mechanism research of different ﬂy ash
ceramsite in sewage treatment. Forest Engineering 35(4),
97–104.
Smith, K. & Guo, S.  An evaluation of the environmental
beneﬁt and energy footprint of China ’s stricter wastewater
standards: can bene ﬁt be increased? Journal of Cleaner
Production 219, 723 –733.
State Environmental Protection Administration (eds) 
Methods of Water and Wastewater Monitoring and Analysis ,
4th edn. China Environmental Science Press, Beijing,December 01.461 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020Toro-Vélez, A. F., Madera-Parra, C. A., Peña-Varón, M. R., Lee, W. Y.
&B e z a r e s - C ,J .C . BPA and NP removal from municipal
wastewater by tropical horizontal subsurface constructedwetlands .Science of the Total Environment 542,9 3 –101.
Uggetti, E., Hughes-Riley, T., Morris, R. H., Newton, M. I., Trabi,
C. L., Hawes, P., Puigagut, J. & García, J.  Intermittent
aeration to improve wastewater treatment ef ﬁciency in pilot-
scale constructed wetland .Science of the Total Environment
559, 212 –217.
Wang, W., Ding, Y., Ullman, J. L., Ambrose, R. F., Wang, Y., Song,
X. & Zhao, Z. Nitrogen removal performance in planted
and unplanted horizontal subsurface ﬂow constructed
wetlands treating different in ﬂuent COD/N ratios .
Environment Science Pollution Research 23, 9012 –9018.
W u a ,H . ,F a n ,J . ,Z h a n g ,J . ,N g o ,H .H . ,G u o ,W . ,H u ,Z .&L i a n g ,S .
Decentralized domestic wastewater treatment using
intermittently aerated vertical ﬂow constructed wetlands: impact
of inﬂuent strengths .Bioresource Technology 176, 163 –168.
Zhao, J., Feng, L., Dai, J., Yang, G. & Mu, J. Characteristics of
nitrogen removal and microbial community in bio ﬁlm systemvia combination of pretreated lignocellulosic carriers and
various conventional ﬁllers.Biodegradation 28(5–6),
337 –349.
Zhaoqian, J., Rui, H., Hu, Y., Niu, Q., Cao, S. & Li, Y-Y. 
Practice of integrated system of bio ﬁlter and constructed
wetland in highly polluted surface water treatment .
Ecological Engineering 75, 462 –469.
Zheng, W., Mi gui, Z., Feng, W. J., Guang jing, X. & Yu, L. 
Development of attapulgite composite ceramsite/quartz sanddouble-layer bio ﬁlter for micropolluted drinking source water
puriﬁcation .International Journal of Environmental Science
and Technology 13, 825 –
834.
Zheng, W., Jie, W. Z., Lei, C., Zeng, L. Z., Li, L. Y. & Yu, L.
 Using an attapulgite-activated carbon composite
ceramisite bio ﬁlter to remove dibutyl phthalate from source
water .Polish Journal of Environmental Studies 27(2),
897 –903.
Zhulai, W., Ting, W., Zuhui, F. & Zizeng, L. Study on
adsorption of ﬂy ash ceramisite treating rainwater in the early
stage. Applied Chemical Industry 46(11), 2158 –2161.
First received 22 April 2019; accepted in revised form 14 July 2019. Available online 11 September 2019462 C. Shiwei et al. |Treated ef ﬂuent treatment process in CWs with different substrates Journal of Water Reuse and Desalination |09.4|2019
Downloaded from https://iwaponline.com/jwrd/article-pdf/9/4/452/628800/jwrd0090452.pdf
by guest
on 02 March 2020