A modular toolkit for environmental Rhodococcus, Gordonia,  and Nocardia enables 
complex metabolic manipulation. 
 
Zachary Jansen1, Abdulaziz Alameri2, Qiyao Wei3, Devon L. Kulhanek2, Andrew R. Gilmour1, 
Sean Halper4, Nathan D. Schwalm  III4, and Ross Thyer2* 
 
1 Systems, Synthetic, and Physical Biology, Rice University, Houston, TX  
2 Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX   
3 Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX 
4 DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD  
  
*Corresponding Author  
 
Contact: ross.thyer@rice.edu 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Soil-dwelling Actinomycetes  are a diverse and ubiquitous component of the global microbiome, 
but largely lack genetic tools comparable to those available in model species such as  E. coli  or 
Pseudomonas  putida, posing a fundamental barrier to their characterization and utilization as 
hosts for biotechnology . To address this, we have developed a modular plasmid assembly 
framework along with a series of genetic control elements  for the previously genetically 
intractable Gram-positive environmental isolate Rhodococcus ruber  C208 and demonstrate 
conserved functionality in diverse environmental isolates of Rhodococcus , Nocardia and 
Gordonia. This toolkit encompasses Mycobacteriale origins of replication, broad- host range 
antibiotic resistance markers, transcriptional and translational control elements, fluorescent 
reporters, a tetracycline- inducible system, and a counter -selectable marker. We use this toolkit 
to interrogate the carotenoid biosynthesis  pathway in R hodococcus erythropolis  N9T-4, a 
weakly carotenogenic environmental isolate and engineer higher pathway flux towards the keto-
carotenoid canthaxanthin. This work  establishes several  new genetic tools for environmental 
Mycobacteriales  and provides a synthetic biology framework to support the design of complex 
genetic circuits in these species .  
 IMPORTANCE  
 
Soil-dwelling Actinomycetes, particularly the Mycobacteriales, include both diverse new h osts 
for sustainable biomanufacturing  and emerging opportunistic  pathogens. Rhodococcus, 
Gordonia and Nocardia are three abundant genera with particul arly flexible metabolisms and 
untapped potential for  natural product discovery. Among these, Rhodococcus ruber  C208 was 
shown to degrade polyethylene, Gordonia paraffinivorans  can assimilate carbon from solid 
hydrocarbons , and Nocardia neocaledoniensis  (and many other Nocardia) possesses dual 
isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways . Many  species  accumulate high levels of carotenoid 
pigments, indicative of  highly active isoprenoid biosynthesis pathways which may be harnessed 
for fermentation of terpenes and other commodi ty isoprenoids. Modular genetic toolkits have 
proven valuable for both fundamental and applied research in model organisms, but such tools 
are lacking for most Actinomycetes . Our suite of genetic tools and DNA assembly framework 
were  developed for  broad functional ity and to facilitate rapid prototyping of genetic constructs in 
these organisms .  
 INTRODUCTION  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint Actinomycetota are a large phylum  of Gram-positive bacteria characterized by  a high GC 
content(1). While some genera are relatively well -studied , such as  Streptomyces  for antibiotic 
and natural product discovery , Corynebacterium  as an established fermentation host, and 
Mycobacterium  as a human and livestock pathogen(2– 5), most are poorly characterized (6– 8). 
Among these, Rhodococcus , Nocardia, and Gordonia are three genera that contain numerous 
species  with industrially relevant traits including natural product production, degradation of 
anthropogenic pollutants , and diverse carbon and nitrogen assimilation pathways that enable 
oligotrophic growth (8– 15). Members  of the genus Rhodococcus , the best characterized of the 
three, display an especially broad range of phenotypes. R. ruber C208 and R. erythropolis  
DCL14  can degrade solid polyolefins and paraffin wax , respectively (16–18). R. opacus  MR11 
encodes  a functional C alvin-Benson-Bassham  cycle and a hydrogenase cluster  that  enables  
fully autotrophic growth(19) , and several plant-associated R. qingshengii  isolates  either produc e 
plant growth regulators or fix inorganic nitrogen(20, 21) . Importantly , these genera are easily 
maintained in the laboratory under aerobic and mesophilic conditions , and they do not require 
specialized growth media nor handling precautions. 
 A significant barrier to investigating the fundamental biology of these species and their 
application as potential industrial hosts is a lack of dedicated genetic tools . Molecular biology in  
model prokaryotes  employ s standardized genetic tools , which recently have been adapted for 
efficient, modular assembly  to enable rapid construction of plasmids  and gene circuits (22, 23). 
Commonly, this is accomplished by using  Golden Gate assembly , which relies on Type IIs 
restriction enzymes  to generate a series of user -specified cloning overhangs. Individual genetic 
elements are flanked by different overhangs that set the assembly order  and form the basis of a 
Modular Cloning (MoClo)  system . In MoClo systems , different parts with identical cloning 
overhangs are seamlessly interchangeable. The development of these toolkits for non-model 
microorganisms  can s ignificantly ‘close the gap’ in terms of genetic tractability and accessibility  
for researchers (24–28). While sets of genetic parts have been characterized in some  
Rhodococcus  species (29, 30), the development of genetic tools for Nocardia and Gordonia is 
lacking. Furthermore, within the genus Rhodococcus , work  largely has  been restricted to a small 
number of genetically tractable s pecies, most often Rhodococcus  erythropolis and R. opacus . 
Less genetically tractable species, commonly  R. ruber or R. rhodochrous , are sometimes 
compared as ‘outgroup’ Rhodococcus  and generally exhibit poor  transformation efficiency  (31–
33). Furthermore, efforts to standardize plasmid and circuit construction in these species are in 
their infancy , and they typically rely on ad hoc  DNA assembly methods (34–36). 
 
S
everal bacterial and eukaryotic toolkits  are now available to researchers  with varying  assembly 
architecture but offering a shared set of advantages. Chief among these are the abilities  to 
rapidly construct plasmids  and to prototype new genetic designs  in parallel . Plasmids are 
constructed with reusable, modular DNA fragments that do not rely on bespoke primers for each 
unique connection, phenotypic dropout markers that facilitate identification of correct plasmid 
constructs, and a simplified quality assurance workflow that reduces the need fo r DNA 
sequencing. Transcriptional units  with variable expression strengths  easily  can be prototyped in 
parallel using libraries of predictable and modular transcriptional and translational control 
elements. Additional advantages include the use of standardized assembly protocols , genetic  
elements to reduce variability between different experiments or users , and a large body of 
documentation and introductory resources  for new users (37).   
 MoClo systems  are typically built around a framework of origins  of replication and selectable  
markers previously demonstrated to function in the target species. These are used to assemble  
the plasmid backbones which can accommodate new transcriptional units or other DNA parts for evaluation. For Gram-negative bacteria, there are several broad  host range (BHR) plasmid . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint origins  of replication  that function in a wide range of species. In contrast, the host range of most  
origins of replication for Gram positive bacteria remains poorly defined. This presents a 
significant challenge when designing MoClo systems  for poorly studied Gram-positive bacteria, 
and it necessitates additional investment to characterize and reformat potentially large numbers 
of genetic elements . To maintain the advantages inherent to modular cloning for  evaluation  of 
core elements of plasmid backbones, such as origins  of replication and selectable  markers, we 
propose that a simplified plasmid assembly hierarchy has utility.  
 
In this work , we describe the development of RhoClo, a modular DNA assembly framework 
consisting of two complementary and interconnected assembly hierarchies that enable the 
construction of simplified plasmid backbones  and genetic circuits  built from transcriptional units , 
respectively,  in non-model Mycobacteriales. Plasmids can be constructed using combinations of 
five different Mycobacteriale origins of replication and five broad-host-range antibiotic resistance 
markers, which we have evaluated in 17 species of Rhodococcus , Nocardia, and Gordonia. 
Plasmids support the construction of multi -component genetic circuits , and a range of new, 
cross-species transcriptional and translational control elements  afford fine control  of gene 
expression.  We anticipate this design framework will facilitate the characterization and 
development of new genetic components for non-model Mycobacteriales and show proof-of-principle experiments including the construction of novel counter -selectable markers and 
genetic circuits to perturb carotenoid pigment production in the environmental isolate R. 
erythropolis  N9T-4.  
 RESULTS  
 
Shuttle plasmid construction 
 The RhoClo genetic  toolkit features  two complementary and interconnected assembly 
hierarchies : plasmid backbone assembly and genetic circuit assembly  (Figure 1). In both 
hierarchies , individual genetic elements are deconstructed into minimal units termed ‘parts’ , 
which are flanked by type IIs restriction sites  and archived  on a simple plasmid for storage or 
propagation  in E. coli . In the construction of a shuttle plasmid backbone, five different parts 
flanked by AarI re striction sites are used (Figure 1a-b ). Those parts are a cargo site containing 
a fluorescent dropout reporter  (i-ii), a Mycobacteriale origin of replication (denoted AC, ii-iii) , a 
broad host range selectable marker  (iii-iv) , an accessory transcriptional unit or vacant spacer 
sequence (iv-v), and an E. coli  origin of replication (denoted EC, v-vi), part overhangs are 
indicated in parentheses . This initial plasmid construction step provides a streamlined system 
for rapid assembly  of shuttle plasmids using the minimum number of parts to aid in 
characterizing new origins of replication or selection markers. The restriction enzyme AarI was 
selected for this system due to its extended recognition sequence, which reduces the need to 
domesticate large DNA sequences upfront. Only once functional replicons or markers have 
been identified do researchers need to invest in removal of the more abundant BsaI and Esp3I 
restriction sites , which are used in the second assembly hierarchy. A fluorescent cloning marker 
was selected to facilitate plasmid assembly and subsequent cargo insertion in non -typical E. coli  
hosts, such as methylation deficient or λ pir+ strains (37).  
 Characterization of Mycobacteriale origins of replication 
 
We hypothesized that using a Rhodococcus  strain with low genetic tractability ( R. ruber  C208) 
as the host for toolkit development would increase the chance of compatibility in additional 
Rhodococcus  species with varying degrees of genetic tractability and other closely related 
genera such as Nocardia and Gordonia. Twenty  Actinomycete origins of replication were . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint evaluated, nineteen of which were originally isolated from Mycobacteriales and one from 
Arthrobacter rhombi  (Micrococcales)  (Table A 1). Template DNA was obtained from either public 
plasmid repositories or via direct synthesis. Synthesis of most DNA sequences was challenging 
due to the high GC content and presence of complex secondary structure, and minor sequence 
optimization was required in some cases. DNA sequence cha nges were restricted to 
synonymous codons within open reading frames to minimize the disruption of cryptic regulatory 
elements . All DNA sequences are provided in Table A 2. DNA fragments encoding the origins  of 
replication were assembled with a GFP cassette under the control of a constitutive E. coli  
promoter, an E. coli  pUC origin of replication,  and the APH(3')-IIa kanamycin marker previously 
reported to work in several Nocardia  and Rhodococcus  species (38, 39) .  
 For each plasmid, R. ruber  cells were transformed by electroporation and kanamycin resistant 
transformants were recovered. Three transformants were inoculated in TSB medium 
supplemented with kanamycin and cultured three times to confluence. Plasmid DNA was then 
isolated from R. ruber  and transformed back into E. coli  to confirm recovery of GFP+ 
transformants. Six origins met this threshold: pNC903, pRET1100, pNG2, pSOX, pNC500, and 
pYS1, with a s eventh (pXT107) yielding a mix of GFP+ and GFP negative E. coli  transformants. 
Analysis of GFP - pXT107 transformants revealed a truncation of the plasmid which largely  
preserved the p XT107 origin of replication, kanamycin  marker, and an E. coli  pUC ori gin of 
replication, but eliminated the entirety of the GFP dropout. For all origins of replication, 
remaining type IIs restriction sites were removed from the origin fragments, and in all but one 
case (pSOX), the sites were located within open reading frames , which allowed for synonymous 
codon replacements . The pSOX origin contained  a BsaI site within a conserved structural region 
and a small 6 nt library spanning the site was screened to identify clones capable of replication. 
Despite several attempts  we were unable to fully domesticate the pYS1 origin. pXT107 and 
pYS1 were not evaluated further , but they are promising candidate s for further engineering 
efforts in Mycobacteriales.   Mycobacteriale selectable markers 
 
While many Mycobacteriales are sensitive to kanamycin, Nocardia species are commonly  
resistant to this antibiotic (40). To broaden the utility of our cloning framework, the pNC903 
origin, which has been reported to work in diverse Mycobacteriales , was reassembled with a 
Rhodococcus -compatible E2-Crimson expression cassette, and either the kanamycin resistance 
marker or one of four additional selectable markers; apramycin ( Apr, aac(3) -IVa), spectinomycin 
(Spec, aadA1), zeocin ( Zeo, Sh ble ), or nourseothricin ( Ntc, nat1). The four additional  markers 
were expressed using  the strong constitutive P-45 promoter from the Actinomycete 
Corynebacterium glutamicum, and the Sh ble  and nat1 genes were codon optimized to increase 
their GC content. To evaluate performance of the new markers, plasmids were transformed into 
R. ruber , G. paraffinivorans , and N. jiangsuensis  (Figure 2 a, Table A 3). All markers conferred 
resistance in the three strains tested.  To further establish the broad compatibility  of the shuttle plasmids, all five domesticated origins 
were assembled individually with the selection markers for the two most broadly effective 
antibiotics (Apr and Ntc)  and the E2-Crimson expression cassette and transformed into an 
additional 16 species spanning the genera Rhodococcus , Nocardia, Gordonia, and Dietzia  
(Table A4-5 ). The pNC903 origin had the broadest observed host range, yielding E2-Crimson 
positive  transformants in ten different species  (Figure 2b ). As expected, all five origins 
supported replication in R. erythropolis , the most genetically tractable Rhodococcus  species. No 
transformants were recovered for any of the Dietzia species except for  D. dagingensis , which 
yielded a small number (<5) of confirmed transformants with pNC903. These results are largely  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint consistent with previous efforts to evaluate the host range of pNC903 and pRET1100, although 
it should be noted that a different transformation protocol was used than in previous efforts , and 
no efforts were made to optimize the transformation protocol  for different species(41, 42).  
 
Transcriptional unit  assembly  
 A second assembly hierarchy is used for construction and concatenation of individual 
transcriptional units. Transcriptional units are assembled from five basic genetic elements: 
promoters, operators, translational control elements, coding sequences, and transcriptional 
terminators. Each genetic element is first constructed as a discrete genetic part of a high copy number plasmid with flanking BsaI restriction sites that generate the corresponding assembly 
overhangs ( Figure 1c-d ). A schematic for the construction of Part plasmids is provided in the 
Appendix ( Figure A1). Additional subparts with unique assembly overhangs can be added as 
required. To assembl e a single transcriptional unit, these five parts are combined with a 
Transcriptional Unit (TU) plasmid ( TU-X-DO ) containing a fluorescent cloning marker  using a 
Golden Gate reaction mediated by BsaI. Individual TU  plasmids set the position of the 
transcriptional unit in any further assemblies  denoted by X. To preserve compatibility with the 
widely used Yeast Toolkit (YTK), the three genetic elements which comprise the 5′ -UTR are 
collectively flanked by AACG and TATG assembly overhangs which correspond to a Type 2 part(22). Similarly, the coding sequence and transcriptional terminator parts use the same assembly overhangs as YTK Type 3 and Type 4 parts respectively. Colonies with the correct phenotype can easily be identified by loss of the fluorescent cloning marker and following 
recovery of plasmid DNA  may be digested with restriction enzymes to confirm the correct 
product size. All TU plasmids contain two EcoRI sites outside of the fluorescent cloning marker 
which can be used to quickly validate assemblies.  Single transcriptional units can be concatenated in a similar process where a series of TU  
plasmids now take the place of individual genetic parts, and a Multi -Transcriptional Unit (MTU) 
plasmid serves as the assembly scaffold. This reaction is mediated by a second Golden Gate 
reaction using the enzyme Esp3I. These plasmids are suited to the construction of larger 
genetic circuits, for example, allowing for more complex regulation using transcription factors or assembling multi -enzyme biosynthetic pathways. The unique assembly overhangs and a 
schematic of this process are shown in F igure 1c-d . 
 Modular genetic control elements 
 
Synthetic  transcriptional and translational control elements that result in predictable levels of 
protein expression are essential genetic elements of a modular toolkit and enable the 
construction of finely tuned genetic circuits (43). To build a series of transcriptional control 
elements , we selected the PamiM promoter as our starting point, a strong constitutive promoter 
previously engineered from the Rhodococcus ruber  Pami  promoter(44). This promoter was 
initially adapted to our modular cloning framework by converting the last four bases of the -10 region from AAAT to  CAAT (Figure 3a). T his mutation was well -tolerated and the new ly 
designated PamiM T2A promoter maintained strong transcriptional activity. This design allows 
similarly modular operator sites for transcription factors to be appended directly adjacent to the -10 region of the promoter and enables any constitutive promoter to function as an inducible 
promoter if desired. To generate a genetic reporter  suitable for testing a library of promoter 
variants , the  PamiM T2A promoter was  assembled with a modular TetO operator  and a pre -
existing bicistronic translational control element upstream of the coding sequence for  E2-
Crimson  (Figure 3b). Inclusion of a TetO operator paired with assembly of plasmids in the E. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint coli strain Marionette-Clo DH10B , which encodes the TetR repressor , silences the reporter to 
prevent any toxicity during cloning(45) . 
 
A library of the P amiM  T2A promoter was generated by randomizing eight nucleotides spanning  
the entire six  bp -35 region and two bp in the -10 region  using degenerate oligonucleotide 
primers (Figure 3a). The library was transformed into R. ruber, and individual colonies spanning 
a range of E2-Crimson  expression levels were selected. Plasmids encoding promoter variants 
were isolated and sequenced, followed by reconstruction of chosen promoter variants and re-
phenotyping  in R. ruber . Variants  spanning nearly two orders of magnitude of transcriptional 
activity were identified, then validated in G. paraffinivorans and  Nocardia neocaledoniensis , and 
found to maintain their relative rank order across the three genera (F igure 3c, Table A 6). 
 We previously published two  series of Bi-C istronic Design translational control elements 
(BCDs) , one designed for E. coli  and one designed for Rhodococcus (46). We also observed  
that the series of 12 BCD s designed for E. coli  are functional  in R. ruber  C208, although they  do 
not maintain the same rank order . The series of BCDs developed  for Rhodococcus was 
evaluated in G. paraffinivorans and  N. neocaledoniensis  and found to maintain the same 
relative expression strength across all three genera. Absolute fluorescence varied greatly 
between the strains with much lower fluorescence observed in N. neocaledoniensis . A curated 
set of five BCDs from the series previously designed for E. coli  evenly spaced across the range 
of translational activity in  R. ruber was also evaluated in G. paraffinivorans , and N. 
neocaledoniensis  and found to maintain their relative strength s. To ex tend the range of the BCD 
series , an additional BCD was designed by transferring the strongest 9 nt Shine Dalgarno (SD) 
site from the BCD context developed for Rhodococcus  (AGAAGGAGA) into the BCD context 
developed for E. coli  in the corresponding SD 2 position. This BCD was  designated 40k  and 
was observed to have the highest strength of any of the translational control elements tested 
among the three species. Conversely, the sequence of the weakest SD site from the series 
developed in E. coli  (BCD 0.2k, TCACGTCCC) was transferred into the BCD context developed 
for Rhodococcus  to expand the series and was designated RhBCD 1 (Figure 3d, Tables A7-8 ). 
Data that is not normalized across strains is provided in Figure A2. 
 
Inducing transcription via protein regulators in response to small molecules or other stimuli  are 
key biological  strategies  that facilitate dynamic control over the amount of protein in a cell (47). 
Ideal inducible systems should have minimal interplay with the native function of the cell, activate transcription over a wide range of inducer concentrations (dynamic range), and lead to 
a significant change in gene expression (fold -induction) . To achieve these latter functions , 
inducible systems  should be optimized to result in low transcription when fully repressed (or 
otherwise inactive) and achieve maximal expression when fully induced(48) . To construct a 
model inducible system, we assembled a plasmid containing  two transcriptional units that place 
E2-Crimson under the control of a modular promoter and TetO operator, and constitutively express TetR, the standard tetracycline-responsive transcriptional repressor  (Figure 4a). The 
performance of this  circuit  in R. ruber was evaluated by measuring E2-Crimson induction in 
response to a gradient of anhydrous tetracycline (aTc) concentrations, a potent inducer of TetR  
(Figure 4b). The results  show near zero signal when the plasmid is fully repressed, and a 
maximum induction of 55-fold at 2000 ng mL
-1 aTc. The induction curve for this simple circuit  
spans  a large range of aTc  concentrations, providing the opportunity for precise control over the 
level of induction. Several iterative designs were used to optimize the performance of this 
circuit, making use of the different translational and transcriptional control elements, and a 
detailed discussion is provided in the Appendix  (Supplementary Results, Figure A3).  
 Fluor
escent and counter-selectable markers . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
Fluorescent proteins are essential tools for modern molecular biology that enable a variety of 
quantitative measurements in living cells. We evaluated several different fluorescent proteins in 
R. ruber and identified four that express well using strong constitutive promoters, resulting in a 
visible color change ( Figure A 4). Three of these fluorescent proteins, E2-Crimson, mScarlet-I, 
and mCherry have emission maxima in the red region between 600 nm and 650 nm (49–51). 
This is a desirable phenotype because the background fluorescence of most bacterial cells in this region is close to zero resulting in a high signal to noise ratio. Additionally, E2-Crimson is a 
native tetramer reported to have low cellular toxicity, while mScarlet-I and mCherry are 
monomeric and useful for applications such as tethering or protein fragment complementation assays. A fourth fluorescent protein, BFP-Blueb onnet, with an emission maximum of 464 nm  
also proved effective in R. ruber  and possesses excitation and emission spectra orthogonal to 
the three red fluorescent proteins enabling multi -channel fluorescence imaging(52). 
Interestingly, derivatives of Av GFP (GFP+, sfGFP, mClover3, and sfTq2ox) and two genetically 
distinct green fluorescent proteins, ZsGreen and mNeonGreen, performed poorly and yielded few fluorescent transformants, possibly indicating toxicity during folding or maturation in R. ruber  
(Table A 9).  
 
Counter -selectable markers are powerful genetic tools that are commonly used to cure plasmids 
from living cells and perform scarless genomic integrations. Previously, a counter -selectable 
marker utilizing the codA::upp gene fusion was developed for use in Rhodococcus equi . 
Cytosine deaminase (CD), encoded by codA , converts the cytosine analog 5-fluorocytosine (5-
FC) into the toxic pyrimidine nucleoside analog 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), which is further converted 
by uracil phosphoribosyltransferase (UPRT, encoded by upp) into 5-fluoro-dUMP, a potent 
inhibitor of DNA and RNA synthesis ( Figure 5a). Previous work suggests that Rhodococcus  and 
many other genera of Mycobacteriales, with the notable exception of Nocardia, are broadly 
resistant to 5-FC and highly sensitive to 5-FU , and that most Actinomycetes  encode a upp 
gene(53) .  
 To improve the utility of this reporter, we designed a new series of translational fusions which 
link the codA gene to one of the Sh ble, aac(3) -IVa, or aadA1 genes , which encode resistance 
to zeocin , apramycin , and s pectinomycin  respectively, via a short G4SA  linker. The upp gene 
can optionally be linked to the 3’ end of this  fusion when needed without impairing function of 
the resistance markers.  Plasmids were assembled containing the pNC903 origin, an E2 -
Crimson expression cassette, and all three of these gene fusions in place of a standalone 
resistance marker ( Figure 5b) and transformed into R. ruber  and G. paraffinivorans . Each gene 
fusion confer red the expected antibiotic resistance and sensitivity to 5-FC in both species. Flow 
cytometry of R. ruber  cell populations initially containing the codA::Sh ble:upp gene fusion 
indicated complete loss of the plasmid following growth for two days  in the presence of 50 μg 
mL
-1 5-FC and absence of antibiotic selection (Figure 5c). Selection and counter -selection with 
each of the three markers were  evaluated in both strains , and all  showed complete plasmid loss 
after one 5-FC  treatment (Figure 5d, Figure A5).  
 Probing the isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway in Rhodococcus  Many Rhodococcus, Gordonia, and Nocardia species natively biosynthesize high levels of 
carotenoid pigments, even under mild, mesophilic conditions(54). While carotenoids are 
valuable specialty  chemicals, their biosynthetic precursors are common to all isoprenoids, a 
diverse family of secondary metabolites with many commercial applications. Interestingly, members of these genera include some of the few bacteria that encode both known pathways 
for biosynthesizing the isoprenoid precursors, the methylerythritol phosphate (MEP) pathway . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint and the mevalonate (MVA) pathway, making them promising new hosts for isoprenoid 
biosynthesis at scale.  As a proof- of-principle experiment to show control over isoprenoid 
biosynthesis, we selected  three key steps  to control the flux through the carotenoid biosynthesis  
pathway: dxs, which catalyzes  the first step of the MEP pathway and has been shown to have a 
strong impact on overall isoprenoid biosynthesis , the crtEYIB operon, which converts farnesyl 
pyrophosphate (FPP), the last universal isoprenoid precursor, into the orange colored 
carotenoid β-carotene in four steps, and crtO, which encodes β-carotene ketolase and converts 
β-carotene stepwise into echinenone and finally canthaxanthin, a red ketocarotenoid (F igure 
6a).   We constructed plasmids with different combinations of these genes  and transformed them into  
R. erythropolis N9T-4. This strain was selected for  these experiments for two reasons . First, 
under laboratory conditions it accumulates very low levels of colored carotenoids enabling us to 
easily evaluate the effect of single genes, and second, it is an industrial ly relevant strain with the 
ability to replicate under extremely nutrient limiting conditions (55). Initial designs using strong 
transcriptional and translational control elements resulted in high cellular burdens and genetic 
instability as determined by colonies with varying color formation and size when transformed 
with the same construct. Further iterations  with progressively  weaker transcriptional and 
translational control elements were constructed resulting in colonies which maintained a 
consistent color and size, indicating a tolerable metabolic  burden (Figure 6c). Total carotenoids  
were extracted using methanol from R. erythropolis  cell pellets and visualized using UV-Vis 
spectroscopy  (Figure 6b, 6d). We observed  dxs expression alone had a strong er effect on 
carotenoid pigment production than expressing the crtEYIB cassette. The combination of dxs 
and crtEYIB expression shifted the absorbance spectrum of the carotenoid pigments towards a 
peak of 460 nm, the absorbance maxima  of β-carotene. When dxs is combined with crtO, no 
absorbance shift is observed, suggesting no change in the carotenoid profile. This is consistent with the fact that Rhodococcus erythropolis N9T-4 natively encodes a crtO  gene for synthesi s of 
4-keto-γ -carotene. When crtEYIB  is expressed in combination with dxs and crtO, the 
absorbance shifts towards a maximum  at 475 nm due to expected production of the non-native 
ketocarotenoid canthaxanthin.  
 DISCUSSION  Due to their high concentration of biosynthetic gene clusters for natural products and extreme 
metabolic flexibility, Mycobacteriales  are emerging hosts for bioproduction (1, 10, 14, 56). Tight 
and tunable control of multiple genes and gene clusters will be essential to fully developing these capabilities and making use of synthetic biology tools in these organisms. In recent years, numerous modular genetic toolkits have been developed that provide fine control of gene 
expression but have largely been optimized around individual model microorganisms (24–27). 
These can supplant ad hoc  DNA assembly methods and collectively represent valuable 
initiatives that serve to reduce variation between experiments and different research environments. Here, we introduce a modular DNA assembly toolkit that enables the rapid 
assembly of complex plasmids for use in several different Mycobacteriales. This toolkit contains 
several new genetic  elements that were  thoroughly validated in three different genera, 
Rhodococcus, Nocardia, and Gordonia and that enable the implementation of synthetic biology 
methods in a range of environmental isolates and non-model species.  
 The separation of plasmid backbone assembly and genetic circuit assembly  into two hierarchies  
in this work significantly simplified evaluation of many of the poorly characterized genetic 
elements . Large DNA fragments  such as origins of replication, particularly from high GC-content 
bacteria, often contain multiple restriction sites for common type IIs restriction enzymes, . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint including BsaI and Es p3I. R emoval of individual restriction sites or direct synthesis  of new 
sequences , both of which involve amplification of structured, repetitive, and high GC -content 
DNA  can be time consuming. Additionally, restriction sites that occur within conserved non-
coding regions may require complete sequence randomization to isolate  new functional 
sequences . Here, only  when functional origins of replication or markers have been identified do 
researchers need to invest in these  process es to bring genetic elements into compliance with 
the more complex cloning scheme used in the second assembly hierarchy. For future toolkit 
expansion, additional  origins of replication or selectable markers can be evaluated within this 
framework and interchanged with the parts reported as necessary to enable the rapid 
development of new shuttle plasmids.  
 
Transcriptional and translational control elements that give predictable expression a cross 
different genes and genera are highly enabling for synthetic biology in non-model bacteria. The 
series of promoters and BCDs  described here allow for rapid and reproducible tuning of gene 
expression across three genera of Mycobacteriales. Furthermore, the architecture of the BCD 
translational control elements results in predictable translation rates  agnostic to the gene in 
question, which is a major challenge for translational control elements  in general . Although we 
used the highly active PamiM promoter from R. ruber  as the template for our series of 
promoters, gene expression in Nocardia species  was much lower than in Rhodococcus  or 
Gordonia. This result was surprising given the close evolutionary relationship between  
Rhodococcus  and Nocardia. The reasons for this are unclear and suggest a need to develop 
Nocardia specific promoters in the future.  
 We identified and fully domesticated five origins of replication that functioned in R. ruber, a 
Rhodococcus  species with comparatively low genetic tractability, however, we were unable 
effectively transform  seven out of the 17 species tested, including all four Dietzia. We attribute 
this to three possible factors : (1) the use of a generic transformation protocol with no 
optimization for the different genera, (2) the use of minimal origins  which may have resulted in 
the removal of regions important for stable plasmid maintenance, and (3) the presence of strong 
restriction-modification  barriers in some species. In support of this latter hypothesis, during the 
course of this work we identified three genes whose presence on a plasmid greatly reduced 
transformation efficiency; the gene encoding the CymR transcriptional regulator and the codA  
component of the codA::X::upp fusion  in R. ruber , and the aac(3) -IVa gene encoding the 
apramycin resistance marker in R. rhodochrous . Using  the counter-selectable marker  developed 
in this work , the plasmids were cured from successful transformants  and re-transformation of 
these isolates  resulted in a significant increase in transformation efficiency. T his observation 
may be the result of inactivation of a native restriction-modification system , and further 
characterization of these  more genetically tractable strains is underway .  
 Collectively, these results highlight the need for both methylome analysis and improved 
annotation of Mycobacteriale origins of replication, which can guide future efforts to determine 
minimal origins of replication and to eliminate unwanted restriction sites . For this toolkit, most of 
the origins of replication were previously defined by deletion studies to identify the smallest 
contiguous fragment capable of autonomous replication. While effective and easily accomplished using traditional molecular biology methods, this approach does not preserve adjacent cryptic features that may promote plasmid maintenance or segregation but are not 
strictly necessary for independent replication. Future engineering efforts which can make use of 
new techniques for synthesizing native, high GC -content DNA to characterize these features in  
plasmids  from Mycobacteriales would be broadly useful.  Although we focused on evaluating  
genetic components in three genera, the complete host range of these origins remains to be 
determined. We anticipate further characterization and development of this system enabling . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint complex yet reproducible molecular biology in several related Mycobacterial es, including  
Mycobacterium, Corynebacterium, and Tsukamurella.  
  
MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 Bacterial strains and growth conditions  
Rhodococcus ruber  C208 (DSM 45332) , Rhodococcus erythropolis  N9T-4 (NBRC 110906) and 
Rhodococcus imtechensis  (DSM 45091)  (syn. R. opacus) (57) were cultured at 28 °C in Tryptic 
Soy Broth (TSB) supplemented with antibiotics at an appropriate concentration for each strain.  
Apramycin was added at a concentration of 100 µg mL-1 for R. ruber , 20 µg mL-1 for N. 
neocaledoniensis , and 50 µg  mL-1 for all other Actinomycetota strains . Kanamycin was added at 
a concentration of 100 µg mL-1 for R. ruber, and 50 µg mL-1for all other Actinomycetota strains. 
Spectinomycin was used at a concentration of 100 µg mL-1 for all Actinomycetota strains. 
Nourseothricin and zeocin were used at a concentration of 50 µg mL-1 for all Actinomycetota  
strains  unless otherwise specified . E. coli  strain DH10B was used for plasmid construction and 
was cultured at 37 °C in Terrific Broth supplemented with antibiotics  at a concentration of 33 µg 
mL-1 for chloramphenicol or zeocin, and 50 µg mL-1 for all other antibiotics used for plasmid 
maintenance.  
 Plasmid construction and molecular biology 
 All plasmids were constructed using the hierarchical Golden Gate assembly system  reported 
here with the parts reported for each experiment. Golden Gate assembly reactions were 
performed with T4 DNA ligase, T4 DNA ligase buffer, and the appropriate restriction enzyme. 
Reactions were incubated using a thermal  cycler at 37 ° C for one minute and 16 °C for two 
minutes, repeated for 25 cycles, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 30 minutes and enzyme 
inactivation at 85 °C for 15 minutes. Assemblies were transformed into E. coli  and a plasmid 
miniprep was recovered to provide supercoiled  DNA for  electroporation into Mycobacteriales. 
For plasmid recovery from Rhodococcus  cells, pellets of R. ruber  cells were resuspended in 2 
mL of 15 mg mL
-1 lysozyme and incubated at 37 °C for one hour at 200 rpm. Plasmids were 
then isolated using a standard alkaline lysis plasmid miniprep protocol.  
 Promoter and BCD library construction  
Construction of the libraries of promoters was performed by PCR using oligonucleotide primers 
containing degenerative bases. PCR amplicons  were circularized using Gibson Assembly  for 16 
hr. Assembled libraries were desalted and transformed into E. coli to generate supercoiled 
plasmid DNA which was transformed into R. ruber  as previously described. 
 Multispecies Mycobacteriale electroporation protocol 
 
Electrocompetent Rhodococcus , Nocardia, and Gordonia cells were prepared by culturing the 
bacteria in 200 mL TSB containing 1.5% w/v glycine and 1.5% w/v sucrose. Cells were cultured at 28 ºC for 16 h and then washed three times with 20 mL sterile 10% glycerol, split into 200 µL aliquots and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell aliquots were stored at -80 ºC until use.  
 
100 µL aliquots of electrocompetent Rhodococcus , Nocardia, or Gordonia cells were mixed with 
100 ng of plasmid DNA, transferred to 0.2 mm cuvettes, and electroporated at 2.5 kV with a capacitance of 25 µF. Cells were recovered in 2 mL TSB at 28 °C for three hours with 250 rpm agitation, harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 150 µL TSB, and transferred to petri . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint plates containing solid tryptic soy agar medium supplemented with an antibiotic . Plates were 
incubated at 28 °C for several days until colonies were observed. 
 
Fluorescence assays  For Rhodococcus , Nocardia and Gordonia species, transformants were selected and cultured in 
24-well deep-well plates agitated at 500 rpm  in TSB supplemented with apramycin at 28 °C. 
Cultures were incubated for two to three days with constant agitation until reaching stationary 
phase. Subcultures were started using 50 μL of confluent culture to inoculate 2 mL of fresh 
medium in 24-well deep-well plates. These cultures were incubated at 28 °C for two days. 500 μL aliquots from each well were centrifuged, and the cell pellets were resuspended in an equal volume of PBS pH 7.4. 100 μL of cell suspension was transferred to a 96-well microtiter plate and assayed by measuring absorbance at 600 nm and fluorescence using an λ
ex 595 nm and 
λem 650 nm. 
 Plasmid curing  R. ruber  and G. paraffinivorans  were electroporated with a plasmid encoding an E2 -Crimson  
expression cassette and one of the three modular counter -selectable markers. Single E2-
Crimson positive transformants  were selected and cultured in TSB to confluence. 10 µL aliquots 
of bacterial culture were then passaged into on e of three different media conditions : TSB with 
no additives, TSB with the 50 µg mL
-1 of 5-FC, or TSB with the antibiotic matching the counter-
selectable marker at concentrations of 100 µg mL-1 apramycin, 100 µg mL-1 spectinomycin, and 
33 µg mL-1 zeocin for R. ruber , and 50 µg mL-1 apramycin, 100 µg mL-1 spectinomycin and 33  
µg mL-1 zeocin for G. paraffinivorans . Cultures were grown to confluence after which 5 µL of 
medium  was struck out onto TSB agar plates for imaging or the cell population was evaluated 
using cytometry . 
 Isoprenoid measurements 
 
Rhodococcus erythropolis  transformants were  cultured in 24-well deep-well plates in TSB 
supplemented with apramycin at 28 °C. Cultures were incubated for two to three days with constant agitation until reaching stationary phase. 1 mL  of culture was transferred to a new 
deep well plate and centrifuged, after which the cell pellet was resuspended in 500 μL of 100% 
methanol. The pellet was allowed to settle for three hours in the fridge, then 100 μL of methanol 
extraction was transferred to a 96-well microtiter plate and assayed by measuring the absorbance spectrum from 350 nm to 600 nm.  Statistical analysis and data visualization  
Unless otherwise indicated, all data was collected from a minimum of three biological replicates 
and two technical replicates . Error bars represent the standard deviation of the biological 
replicates.  
 Data availability  
Plasmids which comprise the RhoClo  toolkit are available as a complete set from the Genome 
Design and Engineering Center (GDEC) at Rice University. All DNA sequences for relevant 
plasmids and modular parts are provided in the Appendix.  
 
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
Z.J., N.D.S., S.H., and R.T. conceived the study, designed the experiments, and coordinated 
the experimental work. Z.J., A.A., and Q.W.  performed the experiments. Z.J., A.A., Q.W., 
A.R.G., D.L.K and R.T. analyzed the data and contributed to the experimental troubleshooting. 
All authors contributed to  writing and editing the manuscript.   
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
Note: The authors declare no competing financial interests.  
 
This work was supported by funding  from the National Institute of Standards and Technology  to 
R.T. (70NANB21H102). This research was conducted utilizing the DEVCOM Army Research 
Laboratory Cooperative Research and Development Agreement CRADA -18-046-J004. 
   . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint REFERENCES 
 1.  Barka EA, Vatsa P, Sanchez L, Gaveau-Vaillant N, Jacquard C, Klenk H -P, Clément C, 
Ouhdouch Y, van Wezel GP. 2015. Taxonomy, Physiology, and Natural Products of 
Actinobacteria. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 80:1– 43. 
2.  Alam K, Mazumder A, Sikdar S, Zhao Y -M, Hao J, Song C, Wang Y, Sarkar R, Islam S, 
Zhang Y, Li A. 2022. Streptomyces: The biofactory of secondary metabolites. Frontiers in Microbiology 13.  
3.  Smith KM, Cho K -M, Liao JC. 2010. Engineering Corynebacterium glutamicum for 
isobutanol production. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 87:1045– 1055. 
4.  Bashir S, Bashir R, Pervaiz M, Adnan A, Al -Qahtani WH, Sillanpaa M. 2022. RSM -Based 
Optimization of Fermentation Conditions and Kinetic Studies of Glutamic Acid and Lysine Production by Corynebacterium glutamicum . Journal of Nanomaterials 2022:e3713456. 
5.  Sia JK, Rengarajan J. 2019. Immunology of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Infections. 
Microbiology Spectrum 7:10.1128/microbiolspec.gpp3-0022– 2018. 
6.  Gao B, Gupta RS. 2012. Phylogenetic Framework and Molecular Signatures for the Main Clades of the Phylum Actinobacteria. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 76:66– 112. 
7.  Zhi X -Y, Li W-J, Stackebrandt E. 2009. An update of the structure and 16S rRNA gene 
sequence-based definition of higher ranks of the class Actinobacteria, with the proposal of two new suborders and four new families and emended descriptions of the existing higher 
taxa. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 59:589– 608. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 8.  Parra J, Beaton A, Seipke RF, Wilkinson B, Hutchings MI, Duncan KR. 2023. Antibiotics 
from rare actinomycetes, beyond the genus Streptomyces. Current Opinion in Microbiology 
76:102385. 
9.  Engelbrecht A, Saad H, Gross H, Kaysser L. 2021. Natural Products from Nocardia and 
Their Role in Pathogenicity. Microbial Physiology 31:217– 232. 
10.  Cappelletti M, Presentato A, Piacenza E, Firrincieli A, Turner RJ, Zannoni D. 2020. Biotechnology of Rhodococcus for the production of valuable compounds. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol 104:8567– 8594. 
11.  Kalita M, Chutia M, Jha DK, Subrahmanyam G. 2022. Mechanistic Understanding of 
Gordonia sp. in Biodesulfurization of Organosulfur Compounds. Curr Microbiol 79:82.  
12.  Andler R. 2020. Bacterial and enzymatic degradation of poly(cis -1,4-isoprene) rubber: Novel 
biotechnological applications. Biotechnology Advances 44:107606. 
13.  Petrovski S, Batinovic S, Rose JJA, Seviour RJ. 2022. Biological control of problematic 
bacterial populations causing foaming in activated sludge wastewater treatment plants —
phage therapy and beyond. Letters in Applied Microbiology 75:776– 784. 
14.  Traxler RM, Bell ME, Lasker B, Headd B, Shieh W-J, McQuiston JR. 2022. Updated Review 
on Nocardia Species: 2006– 2021. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 35:e00027-21. 
15.  Nazari MT, Simon V, Machado BS, Crestani L, Marchezi G, Concolato G, Ferrari V, Colla 
LM, Piccin JS. 2022. Rhodococcus: A promising genus of actinomycetes for the 
bioremediation of organic and inorganic contaminants. Journal of Environmental Management 323:116220. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 16.  (Orr) IG, Hadar Y, Sivan A. 2004. Colonization, biofilm formation and biodegradation of 
polyethylene by a strain of Rhodococcus ruber. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 65:97– 104. 
17.  Goudriaan M, Morales VH, van der Meer MTJ, Mets A, Ndhlovu RT, van Heerwaarden J, Simon S, Heuer VB, Hinrichs K -U, Niemann H. 2023. A stable isotope assay with 13C -
labeled polyethylene to investigate plastic mineralization mediated by Rhodococcus ruber. 
Marine Pollution Bulletin 186:114369. 
18.  Rodrigues CJC, de Carvalho CCCR. 2019. Phenotypic Adaptations Help Rhodococcus erythropolis Cells during the Degradation of Paraffin Wax. Biotechnology Journal 
14:1800598.  
19.  Salusjärvi L, Ojala L, Peddinti G, Lienemann M, Jouhten P, Pitkänen J -P, Toivari M. 2022. 
Production of biopolymer precursors beta-alanine and L-lactic acid from CO2 with metabolically versatile Rhodococcus opacus DSM 43205. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 10:989481. 
20.  Kuhl T, Chowdhury SP, Uhl J, Rothballer M. 2021. Genome- Based Characterization of 
Plant-Associated Rhodococcus qingshengii RL1 Reveals Stress Tolerance and Plant –
Microbe Interaction Traits. Front Microbiol 12:708605. 
21.  Joshi D, Chandra R, Suyal DC, Kumar S, Goel R. 2019. Impacts of Bioinoculants Pseudomonas jesenii MP1 and Rhodococcus qingshengii S10107 on Chickpea (Cicer 
arietinum L.) Yield and Soil Nitrogen Status. Pedosphere 29:388– 399. 
22.  Lee ME, DeLoache WC, Cervantes B, Dueber JE. 2015. A Highly Characterized Yeast 
Toolkit for Modular, Multipart Assembly. ACS Synth Biol 4:975– 986. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 23.  Iverson SV, Haddock TL, Beal J, Densmore DM. 2016. CIDAR MoClo: Improved MoClo 
Assembly Standard and New E. coli Part Library Enable Rapid Combinatorial Design for 
Synthetic and Traditional Biology. ACS Synth Biol 5:99– 103. 
24.  Larroude M, Park Y-K, Soudier P, Kubiak M, Nicaud J -M, Rossignol T. 2019. A modular 
Golden Gate toolkit for Yarrowia lipolytica synthetic biology. Microbial Biotechnology 12:1249– 1259. 
25.  Radeck J, Meyer D, Lautenschläger N, Mascher T. 2017. Bacillus SEVA siblings: A Golden Gate-based toolbox to create personalized integrative vectors for Bacillus subtilis. 1. Sci 
Rep 7:14134. 
26.  Stukenberg D, Hensel T, Hoff J, Daniel B, Inckemann R, Tedeschi JN, Nousch F, Fritz G. 
2021. The Marburg Collection: A Golden Gate DNA Assembly Framework for Synthetic 
Biology Applications in Vibrio natriegens. ACS Synth Biol 10:1904– 1919. 
27.  Wu D, Schandry N, Lahaye T. 2018. A modular toolbox for Golden-Gate-based plasmid 
assembly streamlines the generation of Ralstonia solanacearum species complex knockout 
strains and multi -cassette complementation constructs. Molecular Plant Pathology 19:1511–
1522. 
28.  Alker AT, Farrell MV, Aspiras AE, Dunbar TL, Fedoriouk A, Jones JE, Mikhail SR, Salcedo GY, Moore BS, Shikuma NJ. 2023. A modular plasmid toolkit applied in marine bacteria 
reveals functional insights during bacteria-stimulated metamorphosis. mBio 14:e01502 -23. 
29.  DeLorenzo DM, Rottinghaus AG, Henson WR, Moon TS. 2018. Molecular Toolkit for Gene 
Expression Control and Genome Modification in Rhodococcus opacus PD630. ACS Synth 
Biol 7:727– 738. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 30.  Round JW, Robeck LD, Eltis LD. 2021. An Integrative Toolbox for Synthetic Biology in 
Rhodococcus. ACS Synth Biol 10:2383– 2395. 
31.  Nakashima N, Tamura T. 2004. Isolation and Characterization of a Rolling-Circle -Type 
Plasmid from Rhodococcus erythropolis and Application of the Plasmid to Multiple-Recombinant-Protein Expression. Appl Environ Microbiol 70:5557– 5568.  
32.  Bröker D, Arenskötter M, Legatzki A, Nies DH, Steinbüchel A. 2004. Characterization of the 101-Kilobase-Pair Megaplasmid pKB1, Isolated from the Rubber -Degrading Bacterium 
Gordonia westfalica Kb1. J Bacteriol 186:212– 225. 
33.  De Mot R, Nagy I, De Schrijver A, Pattanapipitpaisal P, Schoofs G, Vanderleyden J. 1997. Structural analysis of the 6 kb cryptic plasmid pFAJ2600 from Rhodococcus erythropolis 
NI86/21 and construction of Escherichia coli -Rhodococcus shuttle vectors. Microbiology 
143:3137– 3147. 
34.  Grechishnikova EG, Shemyakina AO, Novikov AD, Lavrov KV, Yanenko AS. 2022. Rhodococcus: sequences of genetic parts, analysis of their functionality, and development 
prospects as a molecular biology platform. Critical Reviews in Biotechnology 0:1– 16. 
35.  Jaishankar J, Bhatoa L, Patil N, Srivastava P. 2021. Microarray profiling and identification of core promoter sequence in Gordonia. Genomics 113:4327– 4336. 
36.  Ellinger J, Schmidt-Dannert C. 2017. Construction of a BioBrick
TM compatible vector system 
for Rhodococcus. Plasmid 90:1– 4. 
37.  Bird JE, Marles -Wright J, Giachino A. 2022. A User’s Guide to Golden Gate Cloning 
Methods and Standards. ACS Synth Biol 11:3551– 3563. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 38.  Chiba K, Hoshino Y, Ishino K, Kogure T, Mikami Y, Uehara Y, Ishikawa J. 2007. 
Construction of a pair of practical Nocardia-Escherichia coli shuttle vectors. Jpn J Infect Dis 
60:45– 47. 
39.  García-Hidalgo J, Hormigo D, Prieto MA, Arroyo M, de la Mata I. 2012. Extracellular 
production of Streptomyces exfoliatus poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase in 
Rhodococcus sp. T104: determination of optimal biocatalyst conditions. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol 93:1975– 1988. 
40.  Zhao P, Zhang X, Du P, Li G, Li L, Li Z. 2017. Susceptibility profiles of Nocardia spp. to antimicrobial and antituberculotic agents detected by a microplate Alamar Blue assay. Sci Rep 7:43660. 
41.  Arenskötter M, Baumeister D, Kalscheuer R, Steinbüchel A. 2003. Identification and application of plasmids suitable for transfer of foreign DNA to members of the genus Gordonia. Appl Environ Microbiol 69:4971– 4974.  
42.  Yamamura E-T. 2018. Construction of Rhodococcus expression vectors and expression of the aminoalcohol dehydrogenase gene in Rhodococcus erythropolis. Biosci Biotechnol 
Biochem 82:1396– 1403. 
43.  Brophy JAN, Voigt CA. 2014. Principles of genetic circuit design. 5. Nat Methods 11:508–
520. 
44.  Jiao S, Yu H, Shen Z. 2018. Core element characterization of Rhodococcus promoters and development of a promoter -RBS mini -pool with different activity levels for efficient gene 
expression. New Biotechnology 44:41– 49. . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 45.  Meyer AJ, Segall -Shapiro TH, Glassey E, Zhang J, Voigt CA. 2019. Escherichia coli 
“Marionette” strains with 12 highly optimized small -molecule sensors. 2. Nat Chem Biol 
15:196– 204. 
46.  Jansen Z, Reilly SR, Lieber -Kotz M, Li AZ, Wei Q, Kulhanek DL, Gilmour AR, Thyer R. 
2023. Interrogating the Function of Bicistronic Translational Control Elements to Improve 
Consistency of Gene Expression. ACS Synth Biol 12:1608– 1615. 
47.  Kim NM, Sinnott RW, Sandoval NR. 2020. Transcription factor -based biosensors and 
inducible systems in non-model bacteria: current progress and future directions. Current 
Opinion in Biotechnology 64:39– 46. 
48.  Hicks M, Bachmann TT, Wang B. 2020. Synthetic Biology Enables Programmable Cell -
Based Biosensors. ChemPhysChem 21:132– 144. 
49.  Bindels DS, Haarbosch L, van Weeren L, Postma M, Wiese KE, Mastop M, Aumonier S, Gotthard G, Royant A, Hink MA, Gadella TWJ. 2017. mScarlet: a bright monomeric red 
fluorescent protein for cellular imaging. 1. Nat Methods 14:53– 56. 
50.  Strack RL, Hein B, Bhattacharyya D, Hell SW, Keenan RJ, Glick BS. 2009. A Rapidly Maturing Far -Red Derivative of DsRed-Express2 for Whole- Cell Labeling. Biochemistry 
48:8279– 8281. 
51.  Shaner NC, Campbell RE, Steinbach PA, Giepmans BNG, Palmer AE, Tsien RY. 2004. Improved monomeric red, orange and yellow fluorescent proteins derived from Discosoma 
sp. red fluorescent protein. 12. Nat Biotechnol 22:1567– 1572.  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 52.  Shroff R, Cole AW, Diaz DJ, Morrow BR, Donnell I, Annapareddy A, Gollihar J, Ellington 
AD, Thyer R. 2020. Discovery of Novel Gain-of-Function Mutations Guided by Structure-
Based Deep Learning. ACS Synth Biol 9:2927– 2935. 
53.  van der Geize R, de Jong W, Hessels GI, Grommen AWF, Jacobs AAC, Dijkhuizen L. 2008. 
A novel method to generate unmarked gene deletions in the intracellular pathogen 
Rhodococcus equi using 5-fluorocytosine conditional lethality. Nucleic Acids Research 
36:e151. 
54.  Sandmann G. 2021. Carotenoid Biosynthesis in the Phylum Actinobacteria, p. 175– 181. In 
Misawa, N (ed.), Carotenoids: Biosynthetic and Biofunctional Approaches. Springer, Singapore. 
55.  Ohhata N, Yoshida N, Egami H, Katsuragi T, Tani Y, Takagi H. 2007. An extremely oligotrophic bacterium, Rhodococcus erythropolis N9T-4, isolated from crude oil. J Bacteriol 189:6824– 6831. 
56.  Drzyzga O. 2012. The strengths and weaknesses of Gordonia: A review of an emerging genus with increasing biotechnological potential. Critical Reviews in Microbiology 38:300–
316. 
57.  Lee SD, Kim IS. 2021. Rhodococcus spelaei sp. nov., isolated from a cave, and proposals 
that Rhodococcus biphenylivorans is a later synonym of Rhodococcus pyridinivorans, 
Rhodococcus qingshengii and Rhodococcus baikonurensis are later synonyms of 
Rhodococcus erythropolis, and Rhodococcus percolatus and Rhodococcus imtechensis are later synonyms of Rhodococcus opacus. International Journal of Systematic and 
Evolutionary Microbiology 71:004890. 
  . CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
 
 
Figure 1: Overview and cartoon schematic of the RhoClo modular cloning architecture. (a) SBOL symbols used to 
represent each of the genetic elements. (b) Genetic elements of plasmids are broken down into single parts and 
separated onto part vectors  in hierarchy one for shuttle vector assembly.  These part plasmids can be assembled into 
modular backbone plasmids in a standard G olden Gate reaction using the type IIs restriction enzyme AarI. 
Assembled plasmids containing a fluorescent dropout reporter  are then used as backbones for assembly of 
transcriptional units . (c) Assembly of transcriptional unit and multiple transcriptional unit plasmids starting from 
individual  Part plasmids . Part plasmids can be combined with other P art plasmids spanning all necessary elements of 
a transcriptional unit and assembled into a backbone plasmid in a single G olden Gate reaction using the type IIs 
restriction enzyme BsaI. Multiple transcriptional unit plasmids can be concatenated in a second reaction using the 
type IIs restriction enzyme Esp3I. (d) The recognition and cut sites of each restriction enzyme used and four bp 
cloning overhangs used set the assembly order of the individual DNA parts . 
 
  
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
Figure 2: Screening selectable markers and plasmid origins of replication  (a) The five different resistance markers 
confer  resistance to at least  100 µg mL-1 of each antibiotic  in the three strains tested: R. ruber , G. paraffinivorans , and 
N. jiangsuensis . Three strains, each with and without a plasmid encoding  the different selectable marker s and an 
expression cassette for E2 -Crimson were plated on each of the five antibiotics . (1) R. ruber  + plasmid, (2) R. ruber  
cells only, (3) G. paraffinivorans  + plasmid, (4)  G. paraffinivorans  cells only , (5) N. jiangsuensis  + plasmid, and (6) N. 
jiangsuensis  cells only . (b) A phylogenetic tree of the species tested showing compatibility with the different plasmid 
origins of replication. Red squares indicate pNC903, orange squares indicate pRET1100 , yellow squares indicate 
pNG2, blue squares indicate pNC500, and purple squares indicate pSOX.  
 
  
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
Figure 3: Modular series of promoters and BCD translational control elements. (a) The sequence of the -35 and -10 
sites in the P amiM  promoter and the immediately surrounding context as it was adapted for the modular cloning 
toolkit. (b) The transcriptional units used to select the libraries for promoters and BCDs respectively.  The third 
schematic  shows the four base pair overhangs used in between each genetic part.  (c) The relative strength of the six 
promoter s normalized across the three species such that the strongest promoter has a relative activity of 100. (d) The 
relative strength of 11 BCD translational control elements. The relative strength of the two BCD series  is normalized 
across three species such that the strongest BCD has a relative activity of 100.  
 
   
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
Figure 4: A TetR inducible system  in R. ruber  C208. (a) The selected plasmid design for the tetracycline inducible 
system with the chosen promoters and BCDs labeled. (b) The fluorescent signal from R. ruber  cultures  induced with a 
gradient of different concentrations of anhydrous tetracycline (aTc).   
 
  
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
Figure 5:  A modular counter -selectable marker  can be used to rapidly cure plasmids in Mycobacteriales . (a) The 
pathway by which 5-FC is converted into the toxic compound 5-fluoro- dUMP. (b) The layout of plasmid variants used 
for counter -selection with the promoters and BCDs labeled. (c) Cytometry  data showing the red fluorescence 
detected in three different cell populations . Cells are either non-transformed R. ruber  cells (top), cells transformed 
with the codA: :zeo::upp  reporter  but not treated with 5-FC  (middle) , and the transformed cells treated with 50 µg mL-1 
5-FC.  (d) Agar plates showing successful  R. ruber  and G. paraffinivorans  plasmid curing using the codA:: apr or 
codA:: spec reporter s. (1) n o plasmid, (2) transformants under selection with antibiotic , (3) transformant following  
counter -selection with 50 µg mL-1  5-FC, and (4) t ransformant passaged in TSB without antibiotic selection.   
 
 
  
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint  
 
Figure 6: Carotenoid production and quantification in R. erythropolis . (a) The carotenoid production pathway for 
canthaxanthin starting via the MEP pathway. (b) Cell pellets of R. erythropolis  carrying plasmids expressing different 
combinations of dxs , crtEYIB , and crtO . (c) The design of the final transcriptional units used to express each of the 
genes . (d) The absorbance spectrum of carotenoid pigments extracted from cell pellets of R. erythropolis  carrying 
plasmids expressing the different combinations of genes. Shading around the lines represents ± one standard 
deviation.   
. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted February 22, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.21.581484doi: bioRxiv preprint 