plasma
Article
Hydrogen Peroxide Interference in Chemical Oxygen
Demand Assessments of Plasma Treated Waters
Joseph Groele1,* and John Foster2
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
2Department of Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
MI 48109, USA
*Correspondence: jrgroele@umich.edu; Tel.: +1-716-307-5651
Received: 16 May 2019; Accepted: 2 July 2019; Published: 5 July 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Plasma-driven advanced oxidation represents a potential technology to safely re-use waters
polluted with recalcitrant contaminants by mineralizing organics via reactions with hydroxyl radicals,
thus relieving freshwater stress. The process results in some residual hydrogen peroxide, which can
interfere with the standard method for assessing contaminant removal. In this work, methylene blue
is used as a model contaminant to present a case in which this interference can impact the measured
chemical oxygen demand of samples. Next, the magnitude of this interference is investigated by
dosing de-ionized water with hydrogen peroxide via dielectric barrier discharge plasma jet and by
solution. The chemical oxygen demand increases with increasing concentration of residual hydrogen
peroxide. The interference factor should be considered when assessing the e ectiveness of plasma to
treat various wastewaters.
Keywords: non-equilibrium plasma applications; water treatment; advanced oxidation
1. Introduction
Demand for freshwater is rapidly rising due to expanding agriculture and industrialization;
meanwhile, population growth, changing climate, accidental spills, and deteriorating infrastructure
further exacerbates the problem of freshwater scarcity [ 1]. One possible approach to managing this
impeding crisis is to re-use wastewater by removing contaminants; however, wastewaters contain
contaminants of emerging concern (CECs) which are not readily removed by traditional water treatment
processes. These CECs include pharmaceuticals, industrial chemicals such as per- and polyﬂuoroalkyl
substances (PFAS), pesticides for agriculture, and microcystins [ 2–6]. Fortunately, these CECs can be
removed from wastewaters using advanced oxidation processes [7].
Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are a category of chemical treatment methods for removing
persistent organic pollutants from waters and wastewaters via reactions with highly reactive oxidizing
agents, namely hydroxyl radicals. Traditional AOPs typically leverage combinations of ozone,
hydrogen peroxide, and ultraviolet light to facilitate in-situ generation of hydroxyl radicals for
non-selective decomposition of organic contaminants [ 8,9]. Through a series of chain reactions known
as mineralization, hydroxyl radicals react with organics to ultimately form carbon dioxide, water,
and mineral ions, with aldehydes and carboxylic acids often serving as intermediate breakdown
products [10].
Plasma-liquid interaction can generate hydrogen peroxide, ozone, and other reactive species
along with ultraviolet radiation and short-lived highly reactive hydroxyl radicals, thus representing a
novel AOP for the removal of recalcitrant organic compounds from waters and wastewaters [ 11–13].
The formation of these reactive species is initiated primarily through energetic electrons from the
plasma region colliding with atoms or molecules, either in the gas phase or at the liquid surface.
Plasma 2019 ,2, 294–302; doi:10.3390 /plasma2030021 www.mdpi.com /journal /plasmaPlasma 2019 ,2 295
Subsequent production of reactive species can also be facilitated by recombination of radicals and
de-excitation of metastables [14].
Plasma discharges in contact with water can generate multitudes of reactive oxygen species,
including superoxide, hydroperoxyl, and atomic oxygen. If the discharge is in air, then reactive nitrogen
species will also form, including nitric oxide, nitrite, nitrate, and peroxynitrate [ 15]. While all of these
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species may contribute to degradation of contaminants in wastewaters,
the most important species for advanced oxidation are hydroxyl radicals, hydrogen peroxide, and ozone.
In particular, hydroxyl radicals react non-selectively with organics, including contaminant intermediate
products such as short chain carboxylic acids, to allow for complete mineralization of most organic
pollutants [16].
The production of hydroxyl radicals in plasmas in or in contact with water can occur through
a number of di erent pathways, with the relative importance of these pathways depending on the
plasma parameters and the gas composition [ 17]. Some of these hydroxyl radicals produced in the
discharge di use to the liquid surface and are transported across the gas-water interface to either react
with pollutants in the water or scavenge themselves to form longer lived hydrogen peroxide [12,18].
In the bulk liquid, hydrogen peroxide can react with any dissolved ozone from the discharge to
produce more hydroxyl radicals (i.e., peroxone process [ 19]) for in-situ oxidation of organics, even after
the plasma has been turned o . However, not all of the hydrogen peroxide is consumed through
reactions with ozone, and a portion of the post-discharge hydroxyl radicals produced by the peroxone
process will dimerize back into hydrogen peroxide. In this way, plasma-driven advanced oxidation
can leave residual hydrogen peroxide in treated waters that may persist for days, as can also happen
with traditional AOPs [20].
The goal of plasma-driven advanced oxidation, and AOPs in general, is to chemically remove
contaminants from waters. The ﬁve most prominent methods for assessing contaminant removal
are liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS), spectrophotometry, total organic
carbon (TOC), biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), and chemical oxygen demand (COD) [ 21–24].
Spectrophotometry and LC-MS allow for the determination of speciﬁc species concentrations, whereas
TOC, BOD, and COD are non-speciﬁc water quality parameters that provide a measurement of the
overall pollution potential of a water sample. When initially investigating the performance of AOPs
for removal of contaminants from wastewaters, LC-MS should be used to validate results from other
methods; however, for general monitoring of e uent quality in water and wastewater treatment
processes, TOC, BOD, and COD are more commonly used due to the simplicity of the test procedure
and easily interpreted results.
As the name suggests, TOC is a measure of the total organic carbon contained in a water sample.
This measurement involves two stages: total carbon (TC) and inorganic carbon (IC) measurements,
with the di erence providing the TOC of the sample. First, combustion catalytic oxidation of the
sample converts the organic carbon to carbon dioxide, which is then cooled and humidiﬁed before
being detected by an infrared gas analyzer to measure the TC content of the sample. The second step
involves acidifying the sample to pH <4, making bicarbonate and carbonate unstable [ 21,25]. Thus,
the IC in the sample is converted to carbon dioxide, either free CO 2(aq) or in the form of carbonic acid,
that can be purged with a CO 2-free gas to isolate the carbon dioxide, which is subsequently cooled,
humidiﬁed, and detected by the gas analyzer as the IC measurement.
While TOC measurements focus on the carbon content of a sample directly, BOD and COD are
measurements of the amount of oxygen consumed in the complete oxidation of organics to carbon
dioxide, water, and mineral salts. As such, BOD and COD are particularly well suited for monitoring
water treatment processes involving oxidation of organics and for informing the design of the water
treatment process (e.g., how much oxidant must be used to remove the contaminants present in the
waste stream).
More speciﬁcally, BOD is a measure of the oxygen consumed by bacteria in the oxidation of
organics and is representative of contaminant decomposition in the natural environment, making thisPlasma 2019 ,2 296
method most suitable for predicting the e ects of the organic contaminants on the dissolved oxygen
levels of receiving waters. In contrast, COD is a measure of the oxygen consumed in the chemical
oxidation of organics [ 23]. The BOD test typically takes ﬁve days to get results, meanwhile the COD
test can provide results in less than three hours.
Due to the short analysis time and ability to correlate with BOD, the COD test has become
the industry standard for rapid and frequent monitoring of water treatment process e ciency and
euent quality. The most common method is the closed reﬂux, colorimetric method with potassium
dichromate oxidizing agent [ 22]. Pre-formulated commercial reagent mixtures are available for rapid
COD analysis and provide consistent results between di erent laboratories. The problem with COD
assessments of plasma treated wastewaters is that residual peroxide interferes with the measurement.
Indeed, this interference is an issue for any AOP involving residual peroxide [ 20]. This paper ﬁrst
discusses a case in which this interference can lead to misinterpretation of plasma treatment results,
and then investigates the magnitude of the interference in COD assessments of waters containing
residual hydrogen peroxide.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Underwater Dielectric Barrier Discharge Plasma Jet
The discharge conﬁguration used to bring non-equilibrium plasma in contact with water in this
investigation is an underwater dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) plasma jet. The set-up is shown in
Figure 1 and is based on the design by Foster et al. [ 26]. The plasma applicator consists of an 18 gauge
tin-plated copper high-voltage wire centered coaxially within a quartz tube with 4 mm ID, 6.35 mm
OD, and 150 mm length, and a tin-plated copper wire coil wrapped around the outside of the quartz
tube to serve as the grounded electrode. In this case, the quartz acts as the dielectric barrier preventing
a thermal arc from forming.
Plasma 2019 , 2 FOR PEER REVIEW  3 
 chemical oxidation of organics [23]. The BOD test typically takes five days to get results, meanwhile 
the COD test can provide results in less than three hours.  
Due to the short analysis time and ability to correlate with BOD, the COD test has become the 
industry standard for rapid and frequent monito ring of water treatment process efficiency and 
effluent quality. The most common method is the cl osed reflux, colorimetric method with potassium 
dichromate oxidizing agent [22]. Pre-formulated co mmercial reagent mixtures are available for rapid 
COD analysis and provide consistent results betw een different laboratories . The problem with COD 
assessments of plasma treated wastewaters is that re sidual peroxide interferes with the measurement. 
Indeed, this interference is an issue for any AOP involving residual peroxide [20]. This paper first 
discusses a case in which this interference can lead  to misinterpretation of plasma treatment results, 
and then investigates the magnitude of the interf erence in COD assessments of waters containing 
residual hydrogen peroxide.  
2. Materials and Methods 2.1. Underwater Dielectric Barrier Discharge Plasma Jet 
The discharge configuration used to bring non-equi librium plasma in contact with water in this 
investigation is an underwater dielectric barrier di scharge (DBD) plasma jet. The set-up is shown in 
Figure 1 and is based on the design by Foster et al. [26]. The plasma applicator consists of an 18 gauge 
tin-plated copper high-voltage wire centered coaxially within a quartz tube with 4 mm ID, 6.35 mm OD, and 150 mm length, and a tin-plated copper wire coil wrapped around the outside of the quartz tube to serve as the grounded electr ode. In this case, the quartz acts as the dielectric barrier preventing 
a thermal arc from forming.  
 
Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the DBD plasma jet experi mental set-up used in this work. (b) Schematic 
and image of the DBD plasma jet apparatus operatin g in steam-mode discharge in de-ionized water. 
The central high-voltage electrode is excite d with a 5 kHz sinusoidal voltage at 4 kV p-p, provided 
by an Elgar model 501SL power supply (AMETEK,  Inc., Berwyn, PA, USA) with a 50:1 step-up 
transformer (SP-225 Plasma Technics, Inc., Racine, WI, USA). Voltage was measured using a high-voltage probe (P6015A, Tektronix,  Beaverton, OR, USA), and the discharge current was measured 
with a Pearson coil current monitor (6585, Pearson Electronics, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA). Current 
and voltage waveforms were recorded using a 2 GHz oscilloscope (Wavepro 7200a, Teledyne LeCroy, 
Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the DBD plasma jet experimental set-up used in this work. ( b) Schematic
and image of the DBD plasma jet apparatus operating in steam-mode discharge in de-ionized water.
The central high-voltage electrode is excited with a 5 kHz sinusoidal voltage at 4 kV p-p, provided by
an Elgar model 501SL power supply (AMETEK, Inc., Berwyn, PA, USA) with a 50:1 step-up transformer
(SP-225 Plasma Technics, Inc., Racine, WI, USA). Voltage was measured using a high-voltage probe
(P6015A, Tektronix, Beaverton, OR, USA), and the discharge current was measured with a Pearson coilPlasma 2019 ,2 297
current monitor (6585, Pearson Electronics, Inc., Palo Alto, CA, USA). Current and voltage waveforms
were recorded using a 2 GHz oscilloscope (Wavepro 7200a, Teledyne LeCroy, Chestnut Ridge, NY,
USA). Typical current-voltage data is shown in Figure 2. Data from previous Lissajous experiments
by Garcia et al. with the DBD plasma jet operating in steam-mode at these power supply conditions
indicate that about 56 W of power are deposited in the discharge, with peak steam temperatures around
2800 K, as determined from comparing theoretical simulation of OH(A-X) spectra with experimental
optical emission spectra [27].
Plasma 2019 , 2 FOR PEER REVIEW  4 
 Chestnut Ridge, NY, USA). Typical current-voltage data is shown in Figure 2. Data from previous 
Lissajous experiments by Garcia et al. with the DBD plasma jet operating in steam-mode at these 
power supply conditions indicate that about 56 W of  power are deposited in the discharge, with peak 
steam temperatures around 2800 K, as determined from comparing theoretica l simulation of OH(A-X) 
spectra with experimental op tical emission spectra [27].  
 
Figure 2. Discharge voltage and current signals measured  during operation of the underwater DBD 
plasma jet operating in steam-mode at 5 kHz. 
This DBD plasma jet can be operated with or without gas flow. In this work, the plasma jet 
operates without any input gas. This so-called “steam mode” discharge relies on local evaporation near the tip of the high-voltage electrode to form a vapor bubble that acts as  the low-density region 
for plasma formation. Although a portion of the deposited power goes into heating and evaporating water, operating in steam-mode requires no consumables and minimizes the production of NO
x, as 
evidenced from optical emission spectroscopy [28,29], which can interfere with the iodometric 
titration method for quantifying hydrogen peroxide concentration, discussed in Section 2.3.  
2.2. Sample Preparation 
Samples of de-ionized water (Milli-Q EMD Mi llipore, Burlington, MA, USA, electrical 
conductivity ≈ 3 μS/cm) are dosed with hydrogen peroxide either by solution (30%, Fisher Chemical, 
Hampton, NH, USA) using a variable volume sampler pipette (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, resolution: 1 μL) or by underwater DBD plasma jet.  When dosing with the DBD plasma 
jet, the opening of the quartz tube is placed approxim ately in the center of a 50 mL sample of de-ionized 
water and power is provided to the central high-v oltage electrode. Approximately one second is 
required for the vapor bubble to form at the electr ode tip in which the plasma discharge subsequently 
develops.  
Plasma is applied to the sample via the DBD plasma jet for 30 s at a time, and the increase in 
sample temperature throughout the treatment dura tion is measured using a Fluke 87V true RMS 
multimeter with a type-K thermocouple (Fluke Co rporation, Everett, WA, USA, resolution: 0.1 °C, 
accuracy: 0.05%). After 30 s of treatment, the sample is placed in an ice bath to cool down to room 
temperature before further treatment. The objective was to keep the bulk liquid sample below 60 °C. 
After treatment, the samples are stored in a dark cabinet for approximately 20 h before the hydrogen peroxide concentration and COD are measured to a llow post-discharge reacti ons to take place while 
mitigating hydrogen pero xide photo-dissociation.  
Samples of methylene blue (MB) are prepared by  dissolving solid MB powder (M291-25 Fisher 
Chemical) in de-ionized water (Milli-Q EMD Millip ore). A low concentration sample of 5 mg/L and 
a high concentration sample of 1000 mg/L are prepared and treated with the underwater DBD plasma 
jet to demonstrate the hydrogen peroxide interfer ence problem, discussed in Section 3. Plasma 
treatment of the MB samples follows the same proc edure as described for dosing de-ionized water 
Figure 2. Discharge voltage and current signals measured during operation of the underwater DBD
plasma jet operating in steam-mode at 5 kHz.
This DBD plasma jet can be operated with or without gas ﬂow. In this work, the plasma jet
operates without any input gas. This so-called “steam mode” discharge relies on local evaporation
near the tip of the high-voltage electrode to form a vapor bubble that acts as the low-density region for
plasma formation. Although a portion of the deposited power goes into heating and evaporating water,
operating in steam-mode requires no consumables and minimizes the production of NO x, as evidenced
from optical emission spectroscopy [ 28,29], which can interfere with the iodometric titration method
for quantifying hydrogen peroxide concentration, discussed in Section 2.3.
2.2. Sample Preparation
Samples of de-ionized water (Milli-Q EMD Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA, electrical conductivity
3S/cm) are dosed with hydrogen peroxide either by solution (30%, Fisher Chemical, Hampton,
NH, USA) using a variable volume sampler pipette (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA,
resolution: 1 L) or by underwater DBD plasma jet. When dosing with the DBD plasma jet, the opening
of the quartz tube is placed approximately in the center of a 50 mL sample of de-ionized water and
power is provided to the central high-voltage electrode. Approximately one second is required for the
vapor bubble to form at the electrode tip in which the plasma discharge subsequently develops.
Plasma is applied to the sample via the DBD plasma jet for 30 s at a time, and the increase in
sample temperature throughout the treatment duration is measured using a Fluke 87V true RMS
multimeter with a type-K thermocouple (Fluke Corporation, Everett, WA, USA, resolution: 0.1C,
accuracy: 0.05%). After 30 s of treatment, the sample is placed in an ice bath to cool down to room
temperature before further treatment. The objective was to keep the bulk liquid sample below 60C.
After treatment, the samples are stored in a dark cabinet for approximately 20 h before the hydrogen
peroxide concentration and COD are measured to allow post-discharge reactions to take place while
mitigating hydrogen peroxide photo-dissociation.
Samples of methylene blue (MB) are prepared by dissolving solid MB powder (M291-25 Fisher
Chemical) in de-ionized water (Milli-Q EMD Millipore). A low concentration sample of 5 mg /L and a
high concentration sample of 1000 mg /L are prepared and treated with the underwater DBD plasma jetPlasma 2019 ,2 298
to demonstrate the hydrogen peroxide interference problem, discussed in Section 3. Plasma treatment
of the MB samples follows the same procedure as described for dosing de-ionized water samples with
hydrogen peroxide by DBD plasma jet, including monitoring the temperature to keep the sample below
60C. Again, treated MB samples were stored in a dark cabinet for 20 h before assessing the COD.
2.3. Hydrogen Peroxide Measurement
The hydrogen peroxide concentration in the sample is quantiﬁed using the iodometric titration
method (Hach test kit model HYP-1, Hach Company, Loveland, CO, USA, resolution: 1 mg /L H 2O2)
immediately prior to COD assessment. The titration method involves the oxidation of iodide to iodine
(Equation (1)) in the presence of a molybdate catalyst and a starch indicator. The starch indicator
forms a dark blue complex with iodine. Subsequent titration with thiosulfate under acidic conditions
(approximate pH of 4) converts the iodine back to iodide (Equation (2)), and the color change from
blue to transparent indicates the titration endpoint.
H2O2+2KI+H2SO4!I2+K2SO4+2H2O (1)
I2+2Na 2S2O3!Na2S4O6+2NaI (2)
2I +2NO 
2+4H+!I2+2NO +2H2O (3)
This iodometric titration method is subject to interference from nitrite ions (Equation (3)); thus,
nitrogen species from air plasma discharges will interfere with this measurement. To mitigate the
generation of reactive nitrogen species that could result in aqueous nitrite, the DBD plasma jet
is operated in steam mode, as discussed in Section 2.1. For future studies, colorimetric assay by
titanyl sulfate reagent with azide for elimination of nitrite interference is a preferred method of
hydrogen peroxide quantiﬁcation due to superior selectivity, making it suitable for hydrogen peroxide
concentration measurements in waters treated with air plasmas [15,30].
2.4. Chemical Oxygen Demand Measurement
The assessment of COD in this work was performed using the USEPA 4.10.4 approved method,
which is the closed reﬂux, colorimetric method with potassium dichromate oxidizer. Pre-formulated
reagent was purchased from Hanna Instruments (HI9375A-25 COD reagent low range: 0 to 150 mg /L as
O2, accuracy:5 mg/L or4% of reading at 25C, resolution: 1 mg /L) along with a Hanna Instruments
photometer (HI83399, Hanna Instruments, Woonsocket, RI, USA) for measuring sample absorbance
using an LED light source with narrow band interference ﬁlter at 420 nm.
3. Results and Discussion
To illustrate a picture of the problem, a 100 mL sample of 5 mg /L MB is prepared and the COD is
assessed before and after treatment. The results are shown in Table 1. In general, the COD is expected
to decrease with plasma treatment time as the MB molecules are mineralized. Indeed, the color of the
dye disappears after 15 min of treatment indicating the destruction of MB, as seen in Figure 3a; yet,
the measured COD actually increases with treatment time. No additional organics are being added to
the solution by the plasma; thus, one of the plasma-derived species being transported to the liquid
during treatment must be contributing to the measured COD of the sample.Plasma 2019 ,2 299
Table 1. Measured COD values for untreated and treated samples of MB. MB-A samples (left) contain
initial MB concentration of 5 mg /L while MB-B samples (right) start with 1000 mg /L MB.
MB-A Sample COD (mg /L) MB-B Sample COD (mg /L)
Untreated (5 mg /L) 65 Untreated (1000 mg /L) 168075
Treated for 7 min 16 5 Treated for 40 min 99 5
Treated for 15 min 30 5 Treated for 120 min 62 5
Plasma 2019 , 2 FOR PEER REVIEW  6 
  
Figure 3. (a) Images of samples starting with 5 mg/L MB showing decrease in color indicating 
destruction of the MB dye. ( b) Image of untreated sample with 1000 mg/L MB and sample after 40 
minutes of plasma treatment showing MB pr ecipitates and mostly clear supernatant. 
The two primary long-lived plasma-derived specie s that could be present in the sample after 
plasma treatment are hydrogen peroxide and ozon e, since nitrates and nitrites should not be 
generated under steam-mode operation. Of these, hydrogen peroxide has been found to interfere 
with the standard COD assessment by reducing th e potassium dichromate oxidizing agent according 
to the overall oxidation reaction given in Equati on (4) [31]. From this equation, the theoretical 
hydrogen peroxide interference is calculated to be 470.6 mg of COD as O 2 per 1000 mg H 2O2. 
KଶCrଶO଻+3 H ଶOଶ+4 H ଶSOସ →KଶSOସ+C r ଶሺSOସሻଷ+7 H ଶO+3 O ଶ (4)
Researchers investigating plasma treatment of wa stewaters must be particularly careful when 
interpreting COD results because the interference  from residual hydrogen peroxide may not be 
evident. For example, two 100 mL samples of 10 00 mg/L MB were prepared and treated with the 
underwater DBD plasma jet. After treatment, the CO D decreased from the initial value of 1680 ± 75 mg/L, 
as shown in Table 1, and the supernatant becomes transparent as oxidized MB precipitates out of the solution, as shown in Figure 3b. This case of high initial COD relative to the residual peroxide concentration masks the peroxide interference effect. Still, any residual peroxide left in the sample 
after treatment will contribute to the COD. Hence,  the COD contribution from organics should be 
less than the 99 mg/L after 40 min of treatment indi cated in Table 1, since there is some contribution 
from residual peroxide. 
In this case of high initial dye concentration (MB-B Sample, Table 1), the residual peroxide 
contribution to the COD may have been up 99 mg /L, but since the COD decreases from 1680 mg/L to 
99 mg/L, it appears that the process is working as intended (COD decreases as MB is oxidized). In 
this case, the COD of the residual peroxide is at least 17 times less than the COD of the organics present in the sample before treatment, thus the in terference effect is not immediately apparent. In 
reality, the treatment process is likely working better (faster organic removal rate) than would be 
indicated by the COD test because of the interference from residual peroxide. However, in the case 
of low initial dye concentration (MB-A Sample, Ta ble 1), the measured COD increases with plasma 
treatment time because the COD contribution from re sidual peroxide after treatment is greater than 
the COD of the organics present in the sample befo re treatment. By simply looking at the measured 
COD before and after treatment, it would appear as  if the process did not work (i.e., organics were 
not removed), because the peroxide interference has not been corrected for.  
To investigate the magnitude of hydrogen peroxide interference in COD assessments, de-ionized 
water was dosed with hydrogen peroxide both by solution and by DBD plasma jet according to the 
procedure described in Section 2. 2. The hydrogen peroxide concentration is measured immediately 
before COD assessment. In both cases, the COD increases with increasing hydrogen peroxide 
Figure 3. (a) Images of samples starting with 5 mg /L MB showing decrease in color indicating
destruction of the MB dye. ( b) Image of untreated sample with 1000 mg /L MB and sample after 40 min
of plasma treatment showing MB precipitates and mostly clear supernatant.
The two primary long-lived plasma-derived species that could be present in the sample after
plasma treatment are hydrogen peroxide and ozone, since nitrates and nitrites should not be generated
under steam-mode operation. Of these, hydrogen peroxide has been found to interfere with the
standard COD assessment by reducing the potassium dichromate oxidizing agent according to the
overall oxidation reaction given in Equation (4) [ 31]. From this equation, the theoretical hydrogen
peroxide interference is calculated to be 470.6 mg of COD as O 2per 1000 mg H 2O2.
K2Cr2O7+3H2O2+4H2SO4!K2SO4+Cr2(SO4)3+7H2O+3O2 (4)
Researchers investigating plasma treatment of wastewaters must be particularly careful when
interpreting COD results because the interference from residual hydrogen peroxide may not be evident.
For example, two 100 mL samples of 1000 mg /L MB were prepared and treated with the underwater
DBD plasma jet. After treatment, the COD decreased from the initial value of 1680 75 mg /L, as shown
in Table 1, and the supernatant becomes transparent as oxidized MB precipitates out of the solution,
as shown in Figure 3b. This case of high initial COD relative to the residual peroxide concentration
masks the peroxide interference e ect. Still, any residual peroxide left in the sample after treatment
will contribute to the COD. Hence, the COD contribution from organics should be less than the 99 mg /L
after 40 min of treatment indicated in Table 1, since there is some contribution from residual peroxide.
In this case of high initial dye concentration (MB-B Sample, Table 1), the residual peroxide
contribution to the COD may have been up 99 mg /L, but since the COD decreases from 1680 mg /L to
99 mg /L, it appears that the process is working as intended (COD decreases as MB is oxidized). In this
case, the COD of the residual peroxide is at least 17 times less than the COD of the organics present
in the sample before treatment, thus the interference e ect is not immediately apparent. In reality,
the treatment process is likely working better (faster organic removal rate) than would be indicated by
the COD test because of the interference from residual peroxide. However, in the case of low initial
dye concentration (MB-A Sample, Table 1), the measured COD increases with plasma treatment timePlasma 2019 ,2 300
because the COD contribution from residual peroxide after treatment is greater than the COD of the
organics present in the sample before treatment. By simply looking at the measured COD before
and after treatment, it would appear as if the process did not work (i.e., organics were not removed),
because the peroxide interference has not been corrected for.
To investigate the magnitude of hydrogen peroxide interference in COD assessments, de-ionized
water was dosed with hydrogen peroxide both by solution and by DBD plasma jet according to the
procedure described in Section 2.2. The hydrogen peroxide concentration is measured immediately
before COD assessment. In both cases, the COD increases with increasing hydrogen peroxide
concentration, as shown in Figure 4, even though there were no organics present in the samples.
This proportional relationship was also found by Lee et al. for conventional advanced oxidation
processes, although the interference magnitude varied depending on the water quality and treatment
process [20].
Plasma 2019 , 2 FOR PEER REVIEW  7 
 concentration, as shown in Figure 4, even though th ere were no organics present in the samples. This 
proportional relationship was also found by Lee et al. for conventional advanced oxidation processes, 
although the interference magnitude varied depending on the water quality and treatment process [20]. 
 
Figure 4. (a) COD vs. H 2O2 concentration, where H 2O2 is added to samples by a solution of 30% H 2O2. 
(b) COD vs. H 2O2 concentration, where H 2O2 is added to samples by exposure to the underwater DBD 
plasma jet. 
These results seem to confirm that the measured  COD results from residual peroxide reacting 
with the potassium dichromate oxidizing agent du ring the COD assessment. The magnitude of the 
interference found in this experiment is approximatel y equal to the theoretical value from Equation (4), 
but this value can vary in practice by up to 16% percent depending on the specific organic compounds 
and oxidizing species that are present in the sample be ing assessed, particularly in real wastewaters [20]. 
When AOPs are used to remove trace levels of co ntaminants from relatively low COD waters, as can 
occur at final disinfection stages  of drinking water treatment plants, the uncertainty in the actual 
interference magnitude can lead to misinterpretat ion of results. While reagents may be used to 
quench residual hydrogen peroxide in attempt to  remove this interference, these reagents often 
introduce their own interferences with the COD assessment [31]. More research is needed to 
investigate how the residual oxidants and other long -lived species from plasma treatment affect the 
COD measurement in various synthetic and real wa stewaters in order to develop correction methods 
for appropriate interpre tation of results. 
4. Conclusions 
Wastewater treatment plants use COD to measur e treatment process efficiency and quality of 
treated water. Plasma-water intera ction produces residual peroxide which interferes with the COD 
measurement. As a result, COD assessments of plasma treated waters will show incomplete removal of oxygen demand and may be viewed as a disadvantage of plasma-based advanced oxidation for municipal wastewater treatment plants and compan ies looking to treat their wastewater streams. 
Indeed, when researching new wastewater treatment technologies, LC-MS should be used to 
determine residual organic content before applying  standard water quality diagnostics. This paper 
therefore describes precautions necessary for plasma pr actitioners to take into account so as to yield 
credible contaminant decomposition measurements. Pl asma in contact with water produces a host of 
reactive oxygen species, and so caution is  necessary when interpreting the results. 
Author Contributions: Investigation, analysis, and wr iting, J.G.; conceptualization, resources, and supervision, 
J.F. 
Figure 4. (a) COD vs. H 2O2concentration, where H 2O2is added to samples by a solution of 30% H 2O2.
(b) COD vs. H 2O2concentration, where H 2O2is added to samples by exposure to the underwater DBD
plasma jet.
These results seem to conﬁrm that the measured COD results from residual peroxide reacting
with the potassium dichromate oxidizing agent during the COD assessment. The magnitude of the
interference found in this experiment is approximately equal to the theoretical value from Equation (4),
but this value can vary in practice by up to 16% percent depending on the speciﬁc organic compounds
and oxidizing species that are present in the sample being assessed, particularly in real wastewaters [ 20].
When AOPs are used to remove trace levels of contaminants from relatively low COD waters, as can
occur at ﬁnal disinfection stages of drinking water treatment plants, the uncertainty in the actual
interference magnitude can lead to misinterpretation of results. While reagents may be used to quench
residual hydrogen peroxide in attempt to remove this interference, these reagents often introduce their
own interferences with the COD assessment [ 31]. More research is needed to investigate how the
residual oxidants and other long-lived species from plasma treatment a ect the COD measurement
in various synthetic and real wastewaters in order to develop correction methods for appropriate
interpretation of results.
4. Conclusions
Wastewater treatment plants use COD to measure treatment process e ciency and quality of
treated water. Plasma-water interaction produces residual peroxide which interferes with the COD
measurement. As a result, COD assessments of plasma treated waters will show incomplete removalPlasma 2019 ,2 301
of oxygen demand and may be viewed as a disadvantage of plasma-based advanced oxidation for
municipal wastewater treatment plants and companies looking to treat their wastewater streams.
Indeed, when researching new wastewater treatment technologies, LC-MS should be used to determine
residual organic content before applying standard water quality diagnostics. This paper therefore
describes precautions necessary for plasma practitioners to take into account so as to yield credible
contaminant decomposition measurements. Plasma in contact with water produces a host of reactive
oxygen species, and so caution is necessary when interpreting the results.
Author Contributions: Investigation, analysis, and writing, J.G.; conceptualization, resources, and supervision, J.F.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF 1700848) and the U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE DE-SC0001939).
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
References
1. Mekonnen, M.M.; Hoekstra, A.Y. Four billion people facing severe water scarcity. Sci. Adv. 2016 ,2, e1500323.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Suarez, S.; Carballa, M.; Omil, F.; Lema, J.M. How are pharmaceutical and personal care products (PPCPs)
removed from urban wastewaters. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 2008 ,7, 125–128. [CrossRef]
3. Vandeivere, P .C.; Bianchi, R.; Verstraete, W. Treatment and reuse of wasatewater from the textile wet-processing
industry: Review of emerging technologies. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 1998 ,72, 289–302. [CrossRef]
4. Buck, R.C. Perﬂuoroalkyl and polyﬂuoroalkyl substances in the environment: Terminology, classiﬁcation,
and origins. Integr. Environ. Assess. Manag. 2011 ,7, 513–514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Jiang, X.; Lee, S.; Mok, C.; Lee, J. Sustainable methods for decontamination of microcystin in water using cold
plasma and uv with reusable TiO 2nanoparticle coating. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2017 ,14, 480–491.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Zhang, H.; Huang, Q.; Ke, Z.; Yang, L.; Wang, X.; Yu, Z. Degradation of microcystin-LR in water by glow
discharge plasma oxidation at the gas-solution interface and its safety evaluation. Water Res. 2012 ,46,
6554–6562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Crook, J.; Surampalli, R.U. Water reclamation and reuse criteria in the U.S. Water Sci. Tech. 1996 ,33, 451–462.
[CrossRef]
8. Oturan, M.A.; Aaron, J. Advanced oxidation processes in water /wastewater treatment: Principles and
applications. A review. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014 ,44, 2577–2641. [CrossRef]
9. Glaze, W.H.; Kang, J.; Chapin, D.H. The chemistry of water treatment processes involving ozone, hydrogen
peroxide, and ultraviolet radiation. Ozone Sci. Eng. 1987 ,9, 335–352. [CrossRef]
10. Santos, L.C.; Poli, A.L.; Cavalheiro, C.C.S.; Neumann, M.G. The UV /H2O2-photodegradation of
poly(ethyleneglycol) and model compounds. J. Braz. Chem. Soc. 2009 ,20, 1467–1472. [CrossRef]
11. Bruggeman, P .; Leys, C. Non-thermal plasmas in and in contact with liquids. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 2009 ,42, 053001.
[CrossRef]
12. Liu, Z.C.; Liu, D.X.; Chen, C.; Li, D.; Yang, A.J.; Rong, M.Z.; Chen, H.L.; Kong, M.G. Physicochemical
processes in the indirect inderaction between surface air plasma and deionized water. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys.
2015 ,48, 495201. [CrossRef]
13. Tian, W.; Tachibana, K.; Kushner, M.J. Plasmas sustained in bubbles in water: Optical emission and excitation
mechanisms. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 2014 ,47, 055202. [CrossRef]
14. Magureanu, M.; Bradu, C.; Parvulescu, V .I. Plasma processes for the treatment of water contaminated with
harmful organic compounds. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 2018 ,51, 313002. [CrossRef]
15. Lukes, P .; Dolezalova, E.; Sisrova, I.; Clupek, M. Aqueous-phase chemistry and bactericidal effects from
an air discharge plasma in contact with water: Evidence for the formation of peroxynitrite through a
pseudo-second-order post-discharge reaction of H 2O2and HNO 2.Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 2014 ,23, 015019.
[CrossRef]
16. Lukes, P .; Locke, B.R. Plasmachemical oxidation processes in a hybrid gas-liquid electrical discharge reactor.
J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 2005 ,38, 4074–4081. [CrossRef]Plasma 2019 ,2 302
17. Bruggeman, P .; Schram, D.C. On OH production in water containing atmospheric pressure plasmas.
Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 2010 ,19, 45025. [CrossRef]
18. Anderson, C.E.; Cha, N.R.; Linday, A.D.; Clark, D.S.; Graves, D.B. The role of interfacial reactions in
determining plasma-liquid chemistry. Plasma Chem. Plasma Processes. 2016 ,36, 1393–1415. [CrossRef]
19. Fischbacher, A.; Sonntag, J.; Sonntag, C.; Schmidt, T.C. The OH radical yield in the H 2O2+O3(peroxone)
reaction. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013 ,47, 9959–9964. [CrossRef]
20. Lee, E.; Lee, H.; Kim, Y.K.; Sohn, K.; Lee, K. Hydrogen peroxide interference in chemical oxygen demand
during ozone based oxidation of anaerobically digested livestock wastewater. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Tech.
2011 ,8, 381–388. [CrossRef]
21. Volk, C.; Wood, L.; Johnson, B.; Robinson, J.; Zhu, H.W.; Kaplan, L. Monitoring dissolved organic carbon in
surface and drinking waters. J. Environ. Monit. 2002 ,4, 43–47. [CrossRef]
22. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater , 15th ed.; American Public Health Association,
American Water Works Association, Water Environment Federation: Washington, DC, USA, 1999.
23. Sawyer, C.N.; McCarty, P .L.; Parkin, G.F. Chemistry for Environmental Engineering and Science , 5th ed.;
McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
24. Norton, J.F. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage , 9th ed.; American Public Health
Association: Washington, DC, USA, 1946.
25. Sharp, J.H. Total organic carbon in seawater—Comparison of measurements using persulfate oxidation and
high temperature combustion. Mar. Chem. 1973 ,1, 211–229. [CrossRef]
26. Foster, J.E.; Weatherford, B.; Gillman, E.; Yee, B. Underwater operation of a DBD plasma jet. Plasma Sources
Sci. Technol. 2010 ,19, 025001. [CrossRef]
27. Garcia, M.C.; Gucker, S.N.; Foster, J.E. Understanding the plasma and power characteristics of a self-generated
steam bubble discharge. J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 2015 ,48, 355203. [CrossRef]
28. Gucker, S.N.; Foster, J.E.; Garcia, M.C. An investigation of an underwater steam plasma discharge as
alternative to air plasmas for water puriﬁcation. Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. 2015 ,24, 055005. [CrossRef]
29. Ni, G.; Zhao, G.; Jiang, Y.; Li, J.; Meng, Y.; Wang, X. Steam plasma jet treatment of phenol in aqueous solution
at atmospheric pressure. Plasma Process. Polym. 2013 ,10, 353–363. [CrossRef]
30. Eisenberg, G. Colorimetric determination of hydrogen peroxide. Ind. Eng. Chem. Anal. Ed. 1943 ,15, 327–328.
[CrossRef]
31. Talini, I.; Anderson, G.K. Interference of hydrogen peroxide on the standard COD test. Wat. Res. 1992 ,26,
107–110. [CrossRef]
©2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).