New Cross-Validation Methods in Pr incipal Component Analysis    
 
Cross-validation has become one  of the most used methods  to identify the number of 
significant principal components (PCs) in  Principal Components Analysis (PCA) 
models. This is, to a large ex tent, thanks to the contribut ion of two notorious papers, 
namely (Wold, 1978) and (Eastment and Krzanowski, 1982). The approaches presented in both papers are based on the definition of a cross-validato ry algorithm to compute the 
sum of squares of prediction e rror (PRESS) together with the definition of a statistical 
index. The number of significant PCs is dete cted when this index exceeds or falls below 
a certain threshold value.  An alternative approach was also suggested by Wold (1978). This approach presents an 
attractive feature: the number of significant PCs is detected when the PRESS reaches its 
minimum value. Therefore, no additional statis tical index needs to be defined. This is, 
in principle, a more intuitive behavior for the prediction error: decrease as the addition of PCs improves the predicti on performance of the model, and increase when this 
addition is noisy. Nonetheless, this a pproach has one drawback: PCs modelling 
independent variables do not reduce the PRESS. Therefore, these PCs are not 
recognized as significant,  a lthough they are -if these PCs ar e not included in the PCA 
model,  the independent variab les are simply not modelled-. 
 In this poster, two novel cross-validation algorithms , named fast corrected-leave-n-
samples-out (fast-CLnSO) and corrected-l eave-n-samples-out (CLnSO) (Camacho et 
al., 2007) are presented. These algorithms are based on the alternative approach of 
Wold (1978), overcoming its limitation to de tect significant PCs modelling independent 
variables. These novel algo rithms outperform the other well-known approaches, 
yielding a 100% of effectiveness in determining the correct number of significative PCs in all the simulated data sets studied, fo r measurement noise levels up to a 30% and 
40%. The algorithms are also tested with a real data set used  in (Wold, 1978) and 
(Eastment and Krzanowski, 1982).   References:  1. Wold, S. (1978), "Cross-Validatory Estima tion of the Number of Components in 
Factor and Principal Components," Technometrics, 20, 397-405 . 
 
2. Eastment, H.T. and Krzanowski,  W.J. (1982), "Cross-Validatory  Choice of the 
Number of Components from a Principal Component Analysis," Technometrics, 24, 
73-77. 
 
3. Camacho, J., Picó, J. and Ferrer A. (2007), “Cross-validatory Identification of the Number of Components in Principal Components Analysis”, submitted to 
Technometrics. 