Phytoplankton consists of one-celled marine and 
freshwater microalgae and other plant-like organisms. 
They are used in the production of pharmaceuticals, diet 
supplements, pigments, and biofuels, and also used as 
feeds in aquaculture. Phytoplankton are cultured to feed 
bivalve molluscs (all life stages), the early larval stages of 
crustaceans, and the zooplankton (e.g., rotifers, cope -
pods) that are used as live food in fish hatcheries. 
Flagellates and diatoms are two important types of 
phytoplankton at the base of the food chain. They manu -
facture cellular components through the process of pho -
tosynthesis, taking up carbon dioxide and nutrients from 
the water and using light as an energy source. 
The microalgae used as feed in hatcheries vary in size, 
environmental requirements, growth rate, and nutrition -
al value (Fig. 1, Tables 1 and 2) (Helm et al., 2004). When 
selecting a species for culture, it is important to take all 
of these parameters into consideration. Most hatcher -
ies grow a variety of species that serve different needs 
throughout the production cycle with respect to size, 
1University of Florida Sea GrantLeRoy Creswell1SRAC Publication No. 5004
September 2010
Phytoplankton Culture for Aquaculture FeedVIPRSouthern  regional  
aquaculture  center
Table 1:  Cell volume, organic weight, and gross lipid content of 
some commonly cultured phytoplankton species used in bivalve 
mollusc and fish hatcheries (Helm et al., 2004).
Species Median cell 
volume  
(μm3) Organic 
weight  
(pg)Lipid 
content (%)
FLAGELLATES
Tetraselmis suecica 300 200 6
Dunaliella tertiolecta* 170 85 21
Isochrysis galbana (T-ISO) 40 – 50 19 – 24 20 - 24
DIATOMS
Chaetoceros calcitrans 35 7 17
Chaetoceros gracilis 80 30 19
Thalassiosira pseudonana 45 22 24
Skeletonema costatum 85 29 12
Phaeodactylum tricornutum* 40 23 12
 * Species considered to be of poor nutritional value.
Table 2: Temperature, light, and salinity ranges for culturing 
selected microalgae species (Hoff and Snell, 2008).
Species Temperature 
(°C)Light
(Lux)Salinity
(ppt – ‰)
Chaetoceros muelleri 25 – 30 8,000 – 10,000 20 - 35
Phaeodactylum tricornutum 18 – 22 3,000 – 5,000 25 – 32
Dicrateria sp. 25 – 32 3,000 – 10,000 15 – 30
Isochrysis galbana 25 – 30 2,500 – 10,000 10 – 30
Skeletonema costatum 10 – 27 2,500 – 5,000 15 – 30
Nannochloropsis oculata 20 – 30 2,500 – 8,000 0 - 36
Pavlova viridis 15 – 30 4,000 – 8,000 10 – 40
Tetraselmis tetrathele 5 – 33 5,000 – 10,000 6 – 53
Tetraselmis subcordiformis 20 – 28 5,000 – 10,000 20 - 40
Chlorella ellipsoidea 10 – 28 2,500 – 5,000 26 - 30
Figure 1. Photomicrographs of two popular species of microalgae 
commonly cultured in bivalve hatcheries. A) Isochrysis  sp. (4–6 μm x 3–5 
μm, and B) Tetraselmis sp. (14–20 μm x 8–12 μm) (Helm et al., 2004).digestibility, culture characteristics, and nutritional value 
(Muller-Feuga et al., 2003).2 
Culture conditions can vary widely—from outdoor 
ponds or raceways with nutrients added to promote a 
bloom of the natural microalgae, to monocultures reared 
indoors under controlled environmental conditions. This 
paper focuses on the monoculture of microalgae under 
clearly defined environmental conditions and production 
protocols. 
Microalgal culture facilities typically use seawater 
enriched with nutrients—primarily nitrates, phosphates, 
essential trace elements, vitamins, and, in the case of dia -
toms, silicates. Water used to culture microalgae should 
have similar chemical composition to that used to culture 
the animals, and it should be pretreated. Some laborato -
ries use synthetic seawater for small-scale cultures, but 
it is prohibitively expensive for large-scale production in 
commercial hatcheries.
Population dynamics
Algal cells from a starter culture are inoculated into a 
larger volume of treated, enriched water to reach an initial 
low density of about 30 to 100 cells/μL. For the first 2 to 
3 days the cells become acclimated to the new medium, 
grow, and begin cell division. This phase, termed the 
lag phase, varies in length depending on the amount of 
inoculum used (initial cell density), alga species (inher -
ent division rate), irradiance, and temperature (Fig. 2). 
Once acclimated, the algal cells divide at an accelerating 
rate, and the population increases logarithmically; this 
exponential growth phase  lasts 4 or more days. The cells 
are usually harvested for feeding during this phase. The 
exponential growth phase  is followed by the stationary 
phase,  when cell division declines and there is no further 
increase in cell density. This decreased growth is the result 
of changes in the concentration of nutrients, self-shading 
(high cell density reduces the amount of light available to 
algal cells), and changes in the culture medium, such as 
increasing pH and the build-up of metabolic waste prod -
ucts or substances called autoinhibitors that are secreted 
by some species (mostly diatoms). As the culture ages, the stationary phase  is followed by a  senescent phase  in which 
the density of the culture will decline. 
Stationary phase algae should not be used for lar -
viculture because although the algae may be nutritious, 
as they die the cells rupture and bacteria can proliferate 
(including some pathogenic bacteria such as Vibrio  spp.). 
The wise culturist knows that the line between feeding 
larvae and poisoning them can become blurry as algal 
cultures age.
The culture environment
When designing a microalgal production system, 
consider which species is most appropriate for the in -
tended use (e.g., size and nutritional characteristics). Also 
consider yield, operating costs, and reliability. Microalgal 
culture is the most expensive and technically challeng -
ing aspect of all hatchery operations. The cost of produc -
ing microalgal feed ranges from $100 to $400 per dry 
kilogram ($45 to $180 per pound) of microalgal biomass 
(Wikfors, 2000). Algal culture accounts for about 40 per -
cent of the cost of rearing bivalve seed to a shell length of 
5 mm in a land-based hatchery (Ukeles, 1980).  
Hatcheries use either intensive indoor culture with 
artificial lighting or extensive outdoor culture in large 
tanks, raceways, or ponds with natural lighting. Some 
hatcheries use a combination of the two. Intensive in -
door systems are expensive and labor intensive, but they 
are more reliable and more productive (relative to space 
requirements) than outdoor systems. Open ponds and 
raceways are also more prone to biological contamination 
or other water quality problems. As one might imagine, 
the potential for “culture crashes” increases as the degree 
of control over environmental factors such as tempera -
ture, illumination, nutrient availability, pH, and potential 
contamination decreases.  
The nutritional value of algae is affected by culture 
age and growth phase, light characteristics and intensity, 
nutrient limitation and source, and cell density (Depauw 
and Persoone, 1988). Whether intensive or extensive, 
microalgal culture requires filtered and treated water, nu -
trients, a light source, aeration and mixing, temperature/
salinity control, pH control, and a high-quality inoculum 
to ensure a satisfactory yield (Fig. 3).
Filtered and treated water
Pretreatment of water, whether saltwater or freshwater, 
is one of the most important steps in successful microalgal 
culture. Culture water should be free of suspended solids, 
plankton (e.g., protozoans, ciliates and other algae species), 
bacteria, unacceptably high concentrations of dissolved or -
ganic compounds (DOC), dissolved metals, and pesticides. Figure 2. Phases in the growth of algal cultures.Cell densit y
Culture ti me in daysExpone ntial
phas eStationa ry phas e
Senesc ent phas e
Culture  “crash ” Lag phas e 3
Pretreatment typically includes mechanical and chemi -
cal filtration, sterilization or disinfection, and nutrient 
enrichment. The choice of treatment should be based upon 
species cultured, volume requirements, and cost.
Mechanical filtration. Mechanical filtration removes 
suspended solids, plankton and bacteria and is usually 
used with the other forms of treatment described below. 
The type of mechanical filtration used depends on the 
condition of the incoming water and the volume of water 
to be treated. A mechanical filter usually consists of a 
series of filters that remove in -
creasingly smaller particles—sand 
filters or polyester filter bags (20- 
to 35-μm), followed by cartridge 
filters (10-, 5-, 1-μm) or diatoma -
ceous earth (DE) filters. Small 
volumes of seawater can be filtered 
to remove bacteria using 0.22- or 
0.45-μm membrane cartridge 
filters.  
Chemical filtration. Dissolved 
inorganic and organic compounds 
(DOC), metals, pesticides, and 
other contaminants can prevent 
or retard microalgal growth, al -though detecting them can be complicated and costly. Ac -
tivated carbon (charcoal) filtration is helpful in reducing 
DOC, while deionization resins are effective in removing 
metals and hydrocarbons.  
Heat sterilization.  Pre-filtered seawater can be steril -
ized by autoclaving at 1.06 kg/cm2 for 20 minutes. Auto -
claving is most suitable for small volumes, while batch or 
continuous pasteurization at 65 to 70 °C is used for large 
volumes. Pasteurization at 50 °C for 8 to 10 hours is also 
effective; a glass-lined water heater or 500- to 1,000-W 
submersion heater can be used. Microwave sterilization 
is useful for small volumes of pre-filtered seawater (1 to 5 
μm for 8 to 10 minutes per 1 to 1.5 L using a 700-W unit). 
Nutrients can be added before microwaving since the 
temperature will not exceed 84 °C (181 °F) (Hoff, 1996). 
Bellows and Guillard showed that using a 1.2-ft3, 700-W 
microwave on high power would effectively kill microal -
gae in 5 minutes, bacteria in 8 minutes, and fungi in 10 
minutes in a volume of 1.5 L of filtered (and unfiltered) 
seawater (Table 3).
Chemical sterilization.  Chlorination is the simplest 
and most common method of chemical sterilization for 
culture volumes of at least 4 L. Pre-filtered seawater can 
be sterilized with sodium hypochlorite solution at 2.5 
mg/L free chlorine by adding 1 to 5 mL of household 
bleach (5% sodium hypochlorite) per liter of seawater. 
Granular swimming pool chlorine is also effective; a 
dosage of 1 ounce (28 g) to 500 gallons (1,875 L) yields a 
similar concentration of chlorine as liquid bleach. Steril -
ization occurs in a short period of time, usually 10 to 30 
minutes, although many culturists suggest a longer time 
(12 hours or overnight) for a margin of safety. Before use, 
neutralize the residual chlorine by adding an excess of 
sodium thiosulphate solution (Na 2S2O3 · 5H 2O). If 250 g 
of sodium thiosulfate is dissolved in 1 liter of water, then 
1 mL of the sodium thiosulfate solution added for every 
4 mL of bleach used is sufficient to eliminate residual CULTUREseawater
nutrien ts
harvesttemperature control
(18 to 22 °C)inoculum
(starter culture )
light ener gy
(15 to 25 Klx)carbon di oxide
(pH 7.5 to 8. 2)/f_iltration
(< 2 /uni03BCm )
auto claving or
past eurization or
chemical sterilization
(optional sec ondar y treatm ents)
Figure 3. Input requirements and environmental criteria for microalgal 
cultures. Optimal temperature, salinity, and light intensity may vary with 
species (e.g., tropical vs. temperate microalgae). Although tropical species 
grow more rapidly at warmer temperatures (25 to 30 °C), stock cultures 
are kept cooler to inhibit bacterial growth (Helm et al., 2004).
Table 3:  Summary of heat sterilization types, effective methods, application, and limitations 
(Kawachi and Noël, 2005)
Sterilization 
methodEffective method Application Limitation
Autoclaving 121°C at 29.4 psi (2 atm)
@ 10 minutes for test tubes  
@ 1 hour for 10 liters liquidLiquids and agar, glass 
and metal vesselsAvoid non-heat-
resistant materials; 
pH change, metal 
contamination
Pasteurization 65−80 °C followed by quick  
     cooling (4−10 ° cooling)
50 °C for 8–10 hours using glass-  
     lined water heater, 500-  to  
     1000-W immersion heaterLiquids with heat labile 
componentsNot complete 
sterilization
Microwave 10 minutes/L of liquid with 700-W  
     microwave; 20 minutes at 600-W,  
     45 minutes for dry goodsSmall volume liquids 
(including media), dry 
goods, and vesselsLimited volume 
capability4 
chlorine (dechlorination). Common swimming pool 
chlorine test kits can be used to determine the presence of 
residual chlorine, but they do not give a precise measure 
of chlorine concentration; as a general practice, additional 
sodium thiosulfate solution should be added if there is 
any indication of residual chlorine. 
Ultraviolet irradiation (UV) and ozone (O 3) dis-
infection.  Either UV or ozone can be used to disinfect 
culture water, although both are most effective after 
mechanical filtration has removed suspended particulates. 
It should be noted that “sterilization” is defined as the 
absolute destruction of all microbial organisms (including 
bacterial spores), while “disinfection” does not eliminate 
all microbes but reduces their numbers to a level where 
the risk of infection is small enough to be acceptable.  
UV is the more common of the two, largely because it 
does not leave concentrations of hazardous by-products. 
Ozone at high levels can produce chloramines, which are 
toxic to marine animals. Ozone released into the air can 
be a safety hazard (if you can smell a faint chlorine smell, 
residual ozone is present and may be hazardous to your 
health). 
Ozone is a strong oxidizing agent that is particularly 
effective in removing dissolved organics, pesticides, color 
and nitrates. It is highly unstable and quickly reverts to 
O2, but it is also highly corrosive and must be handled 
with special materials. In-line ozone generators are the 
most common and usually have monitors/controls to 
provide an adequate level of ozone yet avoid residual 
build-up. However, because there is a risk of introducing 
ozonated water into the culture system, as well as safety 
concerns for hatchery staff, ozone is not recommended for 
operators who lack experience and the monitoring equip -
ment to properly manage ozone levels.   
Ultraviolet radiation (germicidal energy) is an ef -
ficient, simple and reliable way to kill microorganisms 
in culture water. With proper exposure in clear water, 
ultraviolet light kills a microorganism by penetrating its 
cell wall and destroying its nuclear material. Low-pressure 
mercury vapor UV bulbs are best suited for disinfection 
because their spectral wavelength (254 nm) is close to the 
most efficient germicidal wavelength (265 nm). However, 
the killing power of UV is affected by turbidity/coloration 
of the incoming water, distance from the source, exposure 
time (flow rate), species, and age of the bulb (some lights 
age rapidly, losing as much as 40 percent of their wattage 
after 6 months). Minimum dosages vary widely for differ -
ent microorganisms: 15,000 μwatt-sec/cm2 for most bac -
teria, 22,000 μwatt-sec/cm2 for water-borne algae, 35,000 
μwatt-sec/cm2 for bacteria/viruses, 100,000 μwatt-sec/cm2 
for protozoans, and as much as 330,000 μwatt-sec/cm2 for 
Aspergillus niger (mold) (Depauw and Persoone, 1988).  Wattage and flow rate are the most important factors 
in achieving UV sterilization; the slower the flow rate, the 
higher the kill rate for a given bulb wattage (Escobal, 1993). 
For example, a 40-watt mercury vapor bulb with a flow 
rate of 500 gallons per hour in a 2-inch-diameter pipe will 
deliver approximately 11,530 μwatt-sec/cm2. Increasing the 
pipe diameter to 3 inches (thereby reducing flow rate) will 
increase the dosage to 17,530 μwatt-sec/cm2; cutting the 
flow rate in half in that 3-inch pipe further increases the 
dosage to 34,340 μwatt-sec/cm2 (Hoff et al., 2008).
Nutrient enrichment
The objective of culturing microalgae is to obtain the 
highest cell densities in the shortest period of time, and 
natural concentrations of nutrients in freshwater and sea -
water are usually insufficient to support high algal yields. 
Although trace elements are usually found in sufficient 
quantities, macronutrients are in short supply (usually 
phosphorus in freshwater and nitrate in saltwater). Several 
nutrient enrichment media containing soil extract, nitrates, 
phosphorus, trace elements, and vitamins have been de -
scribed for freshwater and saltwater (Creswell, 1993). Of the 
nutrient media formulations used to culture marine micro -
algae in laboratories and hatcheries, Guillard and Ryther’s 
F/2 media is the most widely used, and a pre-mixed solu -
Table 4:  Guillard’s F/2 media used to culture marine microalgae 
(Guillard, 1975).
Major nutrient Chemical formula Concentration  
(gram/liter)
# 1.  Nitrate NaNO 3 75.0 g/L
# 2.  Phosphate NaH 2PO 4.H2O 5.0 g/L
# 3.  Silicate Na 2SiO 3.9H 2O 30.0 g/L
# 4.  Trace Metals
FeCl 3.6H 2O 3.5 g
Na 2EDTA 4.36 g
Dissolve in 900 ml of distilled H 2O.
Add 1 ml of each of the following trace metal solutions.
CuSO 4.5H 2O 0.98 g/100 ml
ZnSO 4.7H 2O 2.20 g/100 ml
CoCl 2.6H 2O 1.00 g/100 ml
MnCl 2.4H 2O 18.00 g/100 ml
Na 2MoO 4.2H 2O 0.63 g/100 ml
Make up the volume to 1 liter with distilled H 2O.
Add 1 ml per liter of seawater of the above solutions # 1−4.
# 5.  Vitamins
Biotin 1.0 mg
B12 1.0 mg
Thiamin HCl 20.0 mg
Dissolve vitamins in 1 liter of distilled H 2O. Store frozen.
Add 0.5 ml of vitamin solution for every 1 liter of seawater. 5
tion is available from a variety of vendors (Table 4). There 
are dozens of culture media recipes, many of which were 
formulated specifically for certain types/species of microal -
gae and cyanobacteria. A good reference is Algal Culturing 
Techniques,  edited by R. A. Anderson. Table 5 lists services 
that have culture medium recipes on their websites.mounted lights typically produce as much as cultures 
with three times the volume.
Metal halide lamps (750 to 1,000 W) are usually used to 
illuminate larger cultures (1,800 liters or more), and since 
they generate considerable heat, they should be placed at 
least 12 inches above the surface in open, well-ventilated 
greenhouses. If natural light is being used for large-volume 
cultures in greenhouses, it is best to use the morning sun, 
with 40 percent shade cloth on the west side of the building 
and 60 percent shade cloth down the middle of a north-
south oriented building, especially in summer.  
Although most commercial light meters measure 
“lux,” many references in the literature related to light 
requirements for phytoplankton culture prefer to express 
optimum irradiance in terms of “Photosynthetically Ac -
tive Radiation” (PAR), which is expressed as μmol pho -
tons · s-1 · m-2, radiation within wavelengths of 400 to 700 
nm. Converting lux values to PAR depends on the type of 
lamp and its spectral characteristics. Multiply lux by the 
following conversions for PAR:
 ■incandescent = 0.019
 ■metal halide = 0.014
 ■cool white flourescent = 0.013
 ■daylight flourescent = 0.014
 ■GRO flourescent = 0.029
 ■clear day sunlight = 0.018
(source: http://www.egc.com ) 
Artificial light is usually preferred over sunlight. With 
sunlight, the duration and intensity are not easily con -
trolled, which may cause overheating, insufficient irradi -
ance, or photoinhibition if the light is too intense for too 
long (Escobal, 1993). Artificial lighting can be controlled 
with a simple timer or light monitor and should be set for 
a minimum of 16:8 hours light/dark per day (minimum) 
to 24-hour illumination (maximum) for indoor cultures. 
Although artificial lighting can be precisely controlled 
in terms of quality and quantity, it is costly and accounts 
for almost 95 percent of the cost to culture microalgae 
(Muller-Feuga et al., 2003).  
Temperature control 
Because most of the microalgae species preferred 
by culturists are tropical/subtropical, most strains grow 
best at temperatures ranging from 16 to 27 °C (60 to 80 
°F). The optimum is about 24 °C (75 °F). Ukeles (1976) 
compared the growth response of several microalgae spe -
cies to temperature (Table 6). The optimum temperature 
for growth will vary with species, and to some extent is 
a complex factor that depends on other environmental 
conditions. Cultures should be maintained at the lowest 
temperature that is consistent with good yield to avoid 
encouraging bacterial growth. When considering tem -Table 5:  Major service culture collections with culture medium 
recipes on their websites (Anderson, 2005).
Culture collection Website URL
CCAP www.ife.ac.uk/ccap
CCMP ccm.bigelow.org
NIES www.nies.go.jp/biology/mcc/home.htm
PCC www.pasteur.fr/recherche/banques/PCC
SAG www.epsag.uni-goettingen.de/html/sag.html
UTCC www.botany.utoronto.ca/utcc
UTEX www.bio.utexas.edu/research/utex
For additional culture 
collectionshttp://wdcm.nig.ac.jp/hpcc.html
Light source
Light is the energy source that drives photosynthesis 
to convert nutrients into algal biomass. Maximum culture 
depth and cell density are the primary variables regulat -
ing the efficient use of light (Richmond et al., 1980). Light 
intensity, spectral characteristics, and photoperiod are the 
components of an illumination regime. Indoor microalgal 
facilities usually use fluorescent “cool white” bulbs (2,500 
lux), while outdoor systems and greenhouses use ambient 
sunlight in combination with fluorescent or metal halide 
bulbs to provide evening illumination. The spectral char -
acteristics of “cool white” bulbs are not ideal for intensive 
microalgae production; bulbs with enhanced red and blue 
wavelengths (Gro-LuxTM) support higher yields. The age of 
the bulb is also important, as the spectral characteristics 
and luminosity change over time; bulbs should be re -
placed at least annually.
Irradiation of 2,500 to 5,000 lux (250 to 500 foot -
candles) is optimal for microalgae photosynthesis, with a 
maximum of 10,000 lux (Escobal, 1993). Guillard (1975) 
recommended 3,500 and 4,500 lux for stock culture of 
Thalassiosira pseudonana  under continuous and 14 hours 
per day illumination, respectively. In indoor facilities, 
bulbs should be 6 to 10 inches from stock cultures; if pos -
sible, the ballasts should be outside the culture room to 
help maintain temperature control.  
Internally illuminated culture vessels are costly to 
construct but inexpensive to operate. Mounting the 
lamps inside a glass or clear plastic cylinder within the 
culture vessel reduces the distance the light must travel 
to penetrate the culture. Culture cylinders with internally 6 
perature characteristics for an enclosed culture room, one 
should consider: 1) the size of the room, 2) heat sources 
(such as lights and ballasts), and 3) the volume and tem -
perature of air pumped into the culture vessels. 
Aeration and mixing
Aeration is important for microalgal culture because: 
1) air is a source of carbon (from CO 2) for photosynthesis; 
2) CO 2 provides essential pH stabilization; and 3) physi -
cally mixing the culture keeps nutrients and cells evenly 
distributed, reduces self-shading and/or photoinhibition 
(a decrease in photosynthesis due to excess light), and 
avoids thermal stratification in outdoor systems. Air dif -
fusers (airstones) create small bubbles that maximize oxy -
gen/CO 2 transfer, and they are frequently used for small-
volume cultures. In larger culture containers, fine bubbles 
from air diffusers create spray and foam that can promote 
bacterial growth; larger bubbles (no airstones) actually do 
a better job of mixing the culture with minimal foaming. 
Common alternatives for mixing larger volume cultures 
include jet pumps, paddle wheels, continuous recircula -
tion, and air-lift pumps (Persoone et al., 1980).
Carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) source and pH control
Carbon dioxide plays a dual role in microalgal cul -
ture. It provides a source of carbon to support photosyn -
thesis, and it helps maintain pH at optimum levels (7.5 to 
8.2 for marine species). As culture density increases, more 
carbon is consumed through photosynthesis, reducing 
CO 2 concentration and causing the pH to rise. At about 
pH 10 some nutrients will precipitate, algal growth will be 
retarded, and the culture could completely collapse. This 
can be prevented if the pH is maintained by introducing 
CO 2 into the air delivery system. This can be done manu -ally (while the cultures are illuminated), pulsed intermit -
tently using a timer and solenoid valve, or, most effective -
ly, by using a pH monitor/controller.  
Inoculum
Most hatcheries will culture several species of micro-
algae to provide live feeds with different sizes and nutri-
tional characteristics, depending on the animal being 
cultured and its life stage. The culture protocol for each 
species will be dictated by the characteristics of the micro -
algae (e.g., growth rate and environmental requirements), 
harvest yields, and use requirements. 
Maintaining and transferring  
stock and starter cultures 
Stocks of monospecific (uni-algal) cultures can be ob -
tained by collecting local species, separating them by size 
(filtration) or density (centrifugation), and inoculating agar 
plates containing enrichment media. From these multi-spe -
cies algal cultures, individual colonies are selected through 
agar streaks, micropipette isolation, liquid dilution, or flow 
cytometer cell sorters (Fulks and Main, 1991). Culturing 
algae in highly filtered, autoclaved, enriched seawater in 
the presence of antibiotics allows bacteria- and protozoan-
free pure cultures  (axenic) to be isolated. However, the 
isolation and screening of local species is laborious and 
mono-specific cultures of most microalgae species used for 
aquaculture are readily available from research laborato -
ries, commercial hatcheries, and vendors.
Stock cultures are kept in specialized maintenance 
media, which may be enriched seawater or nutrient-
enriched agar plates or slants, under closely controlled 
conditions of temperature and illumination. A special 
temperature-controlled area or room adjacent to the algal 
culture room is usually allocated for this purpose. 
Stock cultures serve as inocula for the large-volume 
production of phytoplankton used for harvest or feed -
ing. Stock cultures containing sterile, autoclaved media 
are kept in small, transparent, autoclavable containers 
such as 25-mL test tubes or 250- to 500-mL borosilicate 
glass, flat-bottomed, conical flasks fitted with cotton wool 
plugs at the necks (or polyethylene beakers can serve as 
caps). They also are maintained in seawater agar medium 
impregnated with suitable nutrients in petri dishes or on 
slants in test tubes. Every effort should be made not to 
contaminate the stock and starter cultures with compet -
ing microorganisms. To minimize potential contamina -
tion, an enclosed culture transfer hood outfitted with a 
Bunsen burner and UV lights should be used (a laminar-
flow hood is preferred if available) (Fig. 4). Table 6: Growth response of different microalgal species 
to various temperatures (°C). Growth rates are relative to 
performance of a control cultured at 20.5 °C (Ukeles, 1976).
Species No 
growthGrowth 
less than 
controlGrowth 
equal to 
control at 
20.5 °CGrowth 
less 
than 
controlNo 
growth
Monochrysis lutheri 8–9 12 14–25 27 29−5
Isochrysis galbana 8–9 12 14–22 24–25 27−35
Phaeodactylum 
tricornutum– – 8–24 27 29−35
Dunaliella euchlora 8–9 – 12–35 – 39
Platymonus  
( Tetraselmis sp.)– 8–9 12–32 – 35
Chlorella  sp. 
(isolate # 580)8–9 12 14–35 – –
Chlorella sp. 
(UHMC isolate)8–9 12 14–29 – 32−35 7
8) Empty test tubes, flasks, stoppers and/or caps 
should be removed, thoroughly washed, and ster -
ilized or discarded.
9) Remove all materials from the working area and 
wipe the surface with 70 percent ethanol.
If you are transferring liquid cultures using glass Pas -
teur pipettes, follow these steps (Kawachi and Noel, 2005):
1) Bring the pipette canister (used to sterilize the pi -
pettes) close to the Bunsen burner, the cap removed, 
and gently shake it so that one pipette is extruded a 
few centimeters from the canister opening.
2) Remove the pipette from the canister carefully 
so that its tip does not come in contact with the 
canister opening.
3) Replace the canister lid. Place the pipette bulb ad -
jacent to the Bunsen burner and clean the inside 
with 70 percent ethanol.
4) Place the bulb on the pipette, pick up the cell 
culture vessel, and flame at an angle of at least 45 
degrees.  
5) Remove the vessel from the flame, insert the tip 
of the pipette into the liquid, being careful not 
to touch the sides of the vessel, and collect the 
desired amount of inoculum by controlling the 
pressure of the bulb.
6) Remove the pipette, orienting it in an almost hori -
zontal position; reflame the mouth of the vessel, 
and replace the cap or plug.
7) Using the same procedure, open the new vessel, 
flame the opening, and insert the pipette into the 
new vessel without touching the mouth.
8) Slowly discharge the cell suspension, remove the 
pipette, flame the mouth of the vessel, and replace 
the cap.
9) Remove the pipette bulb and place the used pi -
pette into a discard container to be discarded or 
reused. Clean the bulb with 70 percent ethanol for 
reuse.
10) Once all transfers are completed, turn off the Bun -
sen burner, remove all materials from the working 
area, and wipe the surface with 70 percent ethanol.
Progressive batch culture
The quantities of algae cells required for feeding mol -
lusc larvae and other zooplankton are produced through 
a process called  progressive batch culture  (transferring 
small-volume cultures of concentrated inoculum into 
larger volumes of treated, enriched water). Starting with 
cells taken from an axenic stock culture (test tubes), mi -
croalgae are cultured in an enriched medium through a 
series of culture vessels of increasing volume (Fig. 5). The 
hinged window frontpiec e
uv lamps
plexiglass windo w
plywood bo x
/f_lask
Bunsen burner
to propane suppl y
hinged door
Figure 4. A schematic diagram of a stock culture transfer chamber (Helm 
et al., 2004).
The sterile procedures described below should be fol -
lowed.
1) Wipe all inner surfaces of the inoculating hood 
and working surfaces with 70 percent ethanol.
2) Place all flasks that will be used in the hood, in -
cluding flasks to be transferred from (the transfer 
flask) and flasks containing sterilized media that 
will be inoculated under the culture transfer hood.
3) Irradiate flasks to be inoculated with an ultravio -
let lamp for at least 20 minutes. Be sure the hood 
has a dark cover over the viewing glass (UV radia -
tion can be damaging to the eyes).
4) Switch off the UV lamp; ignite a small Bunsen 
burner; remove caps from one transfer and one 
new flask; and flame the neck of each flask by 
slowly rotating the neck through the flame.
5) Tilt the neck of the transfer flask toward the new 
flask. In one motion, remove both stoppers and 
pour an inoculum into the new flask. Transfer 
approximately 50 mL for diatom species and 100 
mL for flagellates. Avoid touching the necks of the 
two flasks. Never touch the portion of the stopper 
that is inserted into the flask. Once the inoculum 
is added, replace the stopper in the transfer flask. 
Slowly flame the neck of the new flask before 
replacing its stopper.
6) Replace the cap over the neck of the new flask and 
use a waterproof marker pen to label the new flask 
with the algal species inoculated and the date of 
transfer.
7) After all inoculations are completed, turn off the 
burner and transfer all new flasks to an algal incu -
bator or a well-lit area in the algal culture facility. 
The remaining inoculum in the transfer flasks can 
be used to inoculate larger cultures such as 4-L 
flasks or carboys. 8 
algae grown in each culture vessel serves as the inocu -
lum for the next larger vessel, until the quantity of cells 
required for feeding is reached. This is a typical series for 
large-scale production:
1) 25-mL test tubes (10-mL stock culture) inocu -
lates….
2) 500-mL flasks (250-mL starter culture) inocu -
lates….
3) 2.8- to 4-liter flasks (1,000-mL culture) inocu -
lates….
4) 20-liter carboys (16-liter culture) inoculates….
5) 250-liter cylinders (180-liter culture) inoculates….
6) 12,000-liter tanks (10,000-liter culture) inocu -
lates….
for 2-L flasks and larger volumes, and in-line filters on 
the delivery tubing are necessary to prevent contaminants 
that can be introduced through aeration. Starter cultures 
are generally aerated with an air/CO 2 mixture to main -
tain a satisfactory pH and provide addi-tional carbon 
for photosynthesis. When CO 2 is used, the pH is usually 
maintained between 7.5 and 8.5.
Stock cultures are grown for varying periods before 
inoculation in 500-mL flasks. For diatom species this 
period is 3 to 5 days; for the majority of flagellates it is 7 
to 14 days. When ready for use, 20 to 50 mL of the starter 
culture (depending on species and cell density) is trans -
ferred to a fresh 250-mL culture to maintain the starter 
culture line. The remainder is used as inoculum for larger 
cultures (usually 1,000 mL in 2.8- to 4-L flasks) to be 
grown for feeding or as an intermediate step in large-scale 
culture, where they are used as inocula for 20- to 40-L 
cultures. To maintain high-quality cultures, transfers 
should be made during the exponential growth phase, 
with an inoculum of at least 10 to 20 percent of the total 
volume or an initial concentration of about 105 cells/mL, 
to promote rapid population growth.
Throughout the scale-up process, contamination is a 
constant threat and cleanliness and attention to detail are 
Test 
tube
250-mL
/f_lask
2-liter
/f_lask20-liter
carbo y200-liter 
cylinderStock 
cultures4 days
4 days5 days5 days5 days
Figure 5. Serial dilution of microalgae from stock culture (test tubes) to 
200-L fiberglass cylinders with the approximate duration between each 
transfer (courtesy P . van Wyk, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute).Figure 6. Starter cultures in 500-ml flasks and 2-L and 4-L 
polycarbonate containers.  Note that the flasks are not aerated, but 
the larger containers are aerated (with CO 2 added) and contain an 
in-line air filter (J. Scarpa, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute).
Starter cultures are used to inoculate “intermediate 
cultures” (2 to 25 L), which are used to inoculate even 
larger volume cultures for final production before harvest 
and feeding. Similar to stock cultures, starter cultures 
can be grown in 500-mL flasks with 250 mL of sterile 
medium; about 50 mL of the starter culture is transferred 
to similar volume flasks to maintain the line, while the 
remaining 200 mL are used to inoculate intermediate cul -
ture containers (typically from 4-L flasks to 20-L carboys) 
(Fig. 6).
Procedures for maintaining starter cultures are al -
most identical to those described above for stock cultures. 
A line of starter cultures is originally established from the 
stock culture of the required species. They are grown at 
18 to 22 °C at a distance of 15 to 20 cm from 65- or 80-W 
fluorescent lamps, giving a level of illumination at the cul -
ture surface of 4,750 to 5,250 1ux. Small-volume cultures 
(test tubes to 1-L flasks) are usually manually shaken daily 
to facilitate gas exchange and mixing. Aeration is required  9
critical. Contaminants may be chemical or biological and 
they can originate from one or several sources. A com -
mon chemical contaminant is residual chlorine from the 
sterilization process, while biological contaminants might 
include: 1) excessive levels of bacteria (indicated by cloudy 
water), 2) protozoans or rotifers (culture water turns off 
color and clears), 3) competing microalgae (color change 
or crust attached to culture vessel walls), and 4) macroal -
gae (green or brown strands attached to culture vessel 
walls). Identifying bacterial and microalgal contaminants 
usually requires 100X to 400X magnification, while pro -
tozoan contamination can be observed under 15X to 40X 
magnification (Hoff and Snell, 2008). Possible sources of 
contamination are shown in Figure 7.
counted. With the coverslip in position, one or two drops 
of the algal sample are introduced by means of a Pasteur 
pipette to fill both chambers.
The central grid of each chamber is subdivided into 
25 squares, each measuring 0.2 x 0.2 mm; these are fur -
ther subdivided into 16 squares (0.05 x 0.05 mm). There -
fore, the volume of each grid is 0.2 x 0.2 x 0.1 mm = 0.004 
mm3. To determine cell density:
 ■Count the number of cells in ten randomly selected 
0.2 x 0.2 mm grids and calculate the average (as an 
example, an average of 42.5 cells/grid).  
 ■Multiply the average (42.5 cells) by 250 to get 
10,625 cells/mm3 (0.004 mm3 x 250 = 1 mm3). 
 ■Since there are 1,000 mm3 in 1 mL, multiply the 
value in the second step by 1,000 to get cells/mL. 
42.5 x 250 x 1,000 = 10,625,000 cells/mL, 10.625 
million cells/mL (10.62 x 106).
The Coulter Counter, now called a “multisizer,” was 
originally developed to count blood cells. Algal cells pass 
through a small aperture (2 to 10 μm) and a slight electri -
cal current travelling between two electrodes. Each time a 
cell passes between the electrodes, the current is impeded 
and the cell is counted. The advantages of the Coulter 
Counter are its accuracy and efficiency; the disadvantages 
are that it does not discriminate between algal cells and 
other particles, dense culture needs to be diluted to get an 
accurate count, and they are expensive.  
For larger cultures, a spectrophotometer or fluorom -
eter that measures the chlorophyll α content in an algal 
culture can be used to obtain a quick approximation of 
cell density. Graphs comparing cell density and readings 
on either instrument must be prepared for each algal spe -
cies. However, the chlorophyll α content in an algal cell is 
not constant and varies with the nutritional state of the 
Figure 8. A hemacytometer used to count microalgae 
cells (Helm et al., 2004).
Insec ts
Sources of ContaminationAir or air supply system Water source or water
supply system
Inoculum (star ter culture)
or nutrient media
AirstoneGlassware or culture tan k
Culturist (dir ty hands
or mouth)
Figure 7. Possible sources of contamination (adapted from Hoff and Snell, 
2008).
Estimating algal density
Estimating algal density is an inherent part of any 
algal production system. Algal biomass is the criterion 
used to determine when to transfer inoculum through 
serial dilution to larger volume cultures and to determine 
harvest volumes of cultures in production. For stock and 
starter cultures, the most accurate measurement of cell 
density can be made using a Palmer-Maloney slide or a 
hemacytometer. 
The chamber of the Palmer-Maloney slide is without 
rulings and is circular. It is 17.9 mm in diameter, 400 μm 
deep, and has an area of 250 mm2, for a total volume of 
0.1 mL. Even very small microalgae at low concentrations 
(10 per mL) can be detected. Hemacytometers are thick 
glass slides with two chambers on the upper surface, each 
measuring 1.0 x 1.0 mm. A special coverslip is placed 
over these two chambers, giving a depth of 0.1 mm and 
a total volume in each chamber of 0.1 mm3. The base of 
each chamber is marked with a grid to aid in counting 
cells within the area (Fig. 8). Before counting motile algal 
species, one or two drops of 10 percent formalin should 
be added to a 10- to 20-mL sample of the culture to be 10 
ral light (adequate illumination from fluorescent bulbs 
is usually cost prohibitive). The vessels are filled with 
filtered, UV-irradiated, and usually chlorinated/dechlo -
rinated seawater, enriched and inoculated. Each cylinder 
is carefully labeled to document the date of the steriliza -
tion process, the enrichment, and the species inoculated. 
Under optimal environmental conditions, the culture will 
be harvested in 4 days or used to inoculate large-scale cul -
tures in tanks or outdoor ponds. (Fig. 10).
Figure 10. Translucent fiberglass cylinders (200-L) are commonly used for 
production  of microalgae up to harvest and feeding. For large-scale algae 
production, they can be used to inoculate 2,000- to 5,000-L mass culture 
tanks.
Figure 9. Carboys (20-L) are “intermediate” cultures that will be used to 
inoculate 200-L fiberglass cylinders or fed directly to bivalve larviculture 
tanks (courtesy J. Scarpa, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute).cell. This will affect the accuracy of cell density estimates 
derived with these instruments.
An inexpensive way to estimate algal density in large 
cultures is to use a “Secchi disk,” a technique that has 
been used by field biologists for decades. Once calibrated 
to the microalga species in culture, Secchi disks can 
provide a reasonably accurate estimate of algal cell density 
(Hoff and Snell, 2008).
Intermediate culture
Intermediate culture volumes, typically 4-L flasks to 
20-L carboys, are used to inoculate larger vessels, typically 
100- to 200-L translucent fiberglass cylinders or polyeth -
ylene bags, or even larger fiberglass tanks and raceways. 
The complexity of the culture operation depends on the 
requirement for algae and cost constraints. The simplest 
culture system may be just a scaled-up version of the 
starter cultures using 4-L flasks or 20-L carboys. Sterile, 
nutrient-enriched seawater with an inoculum should be 
aerated with a mixture of 2 percent CO 2 carried in com -
pressed air. Illumination for culture growth is provided 
by fluorescent lamps, usually mounted externally to the 
culture flasks. The number of lamps used is determined 
by the height and diameter of the culture vessels, with the 
object of providing 15,000 to 25,000 lux measured at the 
center of the empty culture container. Two 65- or 80-W 
lamps are sufficient to illuminate 3-L glass flasks, which 
are about 18 cm in diameter, whereas five lamps of the 
same light output are necessary for 20-L carboys (Fig. 9).
Cultures 4 to 8 days old from carboys (20-L) are used 
to inoculate 200-L translucent fiberglass cylinders or 
polyethylene culture bags. In most cases, these larger vol -
ume cultures are housed in greenhouses and receive natu -Batch, semi-continuous,  
and continuous culture systems
Because microalgal culture produces high concen -
trations of cells, most laboratories require only small 
volumes of algae for food. These can be cultured in 4-L 
containers or 20-L carboys using “batch” culture proto -
cols. Commercial hatcheries, which require much larger 
volumes of algae, often use semi-continuous or continu -
ous culture systems.  
Batch cultures are inoculated with the desired species 
that will grow rapidly under optimal conditions until the 
rate of cell division begins to decline, indicating the transi -
tion from the exponential phase to the stationary phase. 
At that point, the culture is completely harvested and the 
container is washed, refilled (with sterilized, enriched me -
dium), and inoculated to begin a new culture. Batch culture 
is generally used for delicate species or for rapidly growing 
diatoms. Although batch culture is considered the least 
efficient method of production, it is predictable, and con -
tamination is less likely than in semi-continuous cultures  11
that stay in production through several harvests. Because 
the entire culture is harvested, yield per tank is less than in 
semi-continuous systems; therefore, more tanks are required 
for the same level of production (Fulks and Main, 1991).
Semi-continuous cultures begin much the same way 
as the batch cultures, but instead of harvesting the entire 
volume, 25 to 50 percent of the volume is harvested at 
the point when light has become a limiting factor (late 
exponential phase). The harvested volume is then replaced 
with freshly prepared culture medium and the remaining 
algal cells serve as inoculum. Semi-continuous cultures 
grow rapidly and can be harvested every 2 or 3 days. In 
this way, the life of a culture can be extended; cultures of 
some hardier species, such as Tetraselmis suecica,  will last 
for 3 months or more with harvests of 25 to 50 percent of 
the culture volume three times each week. Semi-continu -
ous culture is mainly used with hardier species of flagel -
lates. Semi-continuous cultures may be grown indoors 
or outdoors. Their longevity is unpredictable, especially 
outdoors, because competitors, predators, bacteria and/or 
other contaminants and metabolites build up and render 
the culture unsuitable (Guillard and Morton, 2003).
Droop (1975) defines continuous culture as “steady-
state continuous flow cultures in which the rate of growth 
is governed by the rate of supply of the limiting nutrient.”  
Continuous culture systems are delicately balanced so 
that culture organisms are harvested continually and the 
nutrient-enriched media is replenished continually, consis -
tent with the growth rate (sustainable yield) of the culture.
In order to harvest algae continuously at a level ad -
justed to the maximum specific growth rate (exponential 
phase) of the culture species, two monitoring and control 
devices can be used—chemostats and turbidostats. In 
both cases, fresh, sterile media enters the culture vessel, 
displacing old media and algal cells that are harvested 
through an overflow port. Chemostats act on the prin -
ciple of limited nutrients, so if the concentration of the 
limiting nutrient (e.g., nitrate) falls below a certain level, a 
fixed quantity of nutrient solution is added; algal growth 
rate is regulated by the limiting nutrient, not cell density, 
and flow is continuous (James et al., 1988). Turbidostats 
have photoelectric monitors connected to solenoid valves 
that control the withdrawal of algal suspension and the 
addition of fresh medium as a function of cell density (by 
measuring turbidity); the flow is not continuous. A variety 
of mathematical models have been developed that, theo -
retically, can maximize production from continuously 
harvested systems (based on algae growth rate, optimum 
dilution rate, and nutrient concentration), but in practice 
the culture manipulations are determined empirically 
after a series of several trials (Sorgeloos et al., 1976; Laing 
and Jones, 1988; Landau, 1992).Culture in polyethylene bags
Heavy-gauge polyethylene tubing can be cut to a suit -
able length and one end heat-sealed to form a sterile, flex -
ible culture container that is either a cylinder or an oblong 
bag (Baynes et al., 1979; Trotta, 1981). The culture vessel 
design is based on that used by SeaSalter Shellfish Com -
pany Ltd. (Farrar, 1975). Containers formed in this way 
can be strengthened by supporting them within a plastic-
coated, steel-mesh frame (Fig. 11). Or, the cylinders can 
be suspended, with or without lateral support mesh, if the 
diameter of the bag is less than 30 cm and the height less 
than 200 cm. 
Figure 11. Polyethylene bags used for continuous culture of microalgae. 
Bags are sealed top and bottom; one port in the bag introduces sterile 
medium and the other is used to harvest microalgae. The bags are 
supported by a cylindrical, steel mesh frame coated with vinyl (courtesy Bay 
Shellfish, Tampa, FL).
Continuous microalgal culture in polyethylene bags 
has several advantages: 1) a sealed container is less likely 
to become contaminated than a rigid container with an 
open top or lid; 2) bags do not require daily maintenance 
and cleaning; and 3) they cost less to install and use space 
more efficiently. Bags are the least expensive way of con -
structing large-scale culture vessels. Such containers can 
be used indoors with artificial illumination or outdoors 
in natural light. Polyethylene bags have a relatively short 
lifespan because the internal surface attracts culture 
debris and bacteria that reduce light penetration and are a 
source of contamination. At the end of a culture run, it is 
necessary to replace the bag. 
Large-scale outdoor bag cultures are often positioned 
horizontally to maximize sunlight penetration (Fig. 
12). Such large-volume systems are often used to induce 12 
multi-species 
blooms that are 
best suited for 
feeding juve -
nile shellfish in 
nursery systems 
or adult shellfish 
in broodstock 
systems, rather 
than for hatch -
ery production. 
The rate at which 
a bloom devel -
ops is related to 
the species composition; the volume and cell density of 
the inoculum; the quantity, quality and duration of light; 
nutrient levels; and temperature. 
Concentrating algal biomass
In most hatcheries, microalgae are fed in liquid form 
directly to the animal culture tanks. Recently, though, 
there has been an interest in concentrating algae to reduce 
the volume of microalgal culture water (and possible 
contaminants) introduced into culture tanks. The use 
of “algal paste” or concentrate has gained popularity 
because during periods of excess production, the con -
centrate greatly reduces the physical space required, can 
be refrigerated until needed, and can be diluted when 
used. However, the nutritional quality of the microalgae 
may be a concern if the concentrate is stored for extended 
periods. Although this concept is not new to aquaculture 
(Barnabe, 1990), algal paste in preserved or fresh forms 
recently has become commercially available
For small-scale harvests, filter screens or cartridge 
filters (1 to 5 μm) are effective. The concentrated cells are 
washed off with limited water and then used, refrigerated 
or preserved (Hoff and Snell, 2008). Chemical flocculation 
using natural organic agents such as gelatin, chitosan, and 
sodium alginate can be used to concentrate microalgae to 
feed benthic detritus feeders and crustaceans. Centrifuga -
tion is used to concentrate large-volume cultures. Contin -
uous-flow centrifuges (e.g., Sharples PenwaltTM) are used to 
concentrate microalgal cultures into paste. Both chemical 
flocculation and centrifugation have proven suitable in 
terms of efficiency and cell density when preparing con -
centrations for aquaculture feeds (Heasmann et al., 2000).Advanced algal production systems
There are several new microalgal production sys -
tems on the market; they are collectively termed “AAPs” 
(Advanced Algal Production Systems) or photobioreac -
tors. Photobioreactor systems can provide higher algal 
densities, more efficient space usage (a smaller footprint), 
continuous or semi-continuous production, longer pro -
duction cycles with less contamination, and lower labor 
requirements (Ellis and Laidley, 2006). In general, three 
types of systems are under production: 1) tubular pho -
tobioreactors, 2) column or cylinder photobioreactors, 
and 3) flat-panel or plate photobioreactors (Tredici et al., 
2009). 
Closed photobioreactor systems have several advan -
tages over conventional tank-based or pond microalgal 
productions systems. Still, they have limitations, such as 
overheating, oxygen accumulation, biofouling, and shear 
stress (Ellis and Laidley, 2006). Many of these designs are 
still under evaluation, so the reader is advised to review 
the specifications of these systems, including purchase 
and construction costs, operational efficiency, practical 
application to your production needs, etc. (Anderson, 
2005; Tredici, et al., 2009).
Conclusion
Phytoplankton culture is a multi-faceted activity, and 
the task of designing a large-scale microalgal production 
system can be complex. The size, location, and engineer -
ing specifications should depend on the type of culture 
to be practiced (e.g., batch, semi-continuous, continu -
ous), the site characteristics (such as water quality and 
temperature), illumination, the requirements of the target 
species, and production goals. These considerations are 
interdependent, and each should be treated as a part of 
the whole. The principles and methods described here 
represent only a few of many approaches to growing phy -
toplankton. The reader is advised to modify these guide -
lines as needed to suit specific hatchery conditions.
References and additional reading
Anderson, R.A. (ed.). 2005. Algal Culturing Techniques.  
Elsevier Academic Press, Burlington, Massachusetts. 
578 pp.
Barnabe, G. 1990. Harvesting micro-algae. pp. 207−212 in: 
G. Barnabe (ed.), Aquaculture, Volume 1.  Ellis Hor -
wood, New York, New York.
Baynes, S.M., L. Emerson, and A.P. Scott. 1979. Produc -
tion of algae for use in the rearing of fish. Fisheries 
Research Technical Report 53:13−18.
Figure 12. Outdoor culture of microalgae using 
polyethylene bags horizontally oriented to 
maximize illumination (courtesy Bay Shellfish, 
Tampa, FL). 13
Bellows, W.K. and R.C. Guillard. 1988. Microwave steril -
ization. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and 
Ecology.  117:279−283.
Creswell, R.L. 1993. Aquaculture Desk Reference. Van 
Nostrand Rheinhold, New York, New York. 273 pp.
Depauw N. and G. Persoone. 1988. Micro-algae for 
aquaculture. pp. 197−221 in: M.A. Borowitzka and L.J. 
Borowitzka (eds.), Micro-algal Biotechnology.  Cam -
bridge University Press, New York, New York.
Droop, M.R. 1975. The chemostat in mariculture. 10th 
European Symposium on Marine Biology.  1:71−93.
Ellis, A.A. and C.W. Laidley. 2006. Microalgae produc -
tion for aquaculture in Hawaii and the U.S.- affili -
ated Pacific Islands. Regional Notes 17(4):3,6. Center 
for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture, Honolulu, 
Hawaii.
Escobal, P. 1993. Inside ultraviolet sterilizers. Aquarium 
Fish Magazine,  January 1993:52−63.
Farrar, S. 1975. Low risk oyster culture in Spain. Fish 
Farming International 2:29−39.
Fulks, W. and K.L. Main. (eds.). 1991. Rotifer and Micro -
algal Production Systems: Proceedings of a U.S.–Asia 
Workshop.  The Oceanic Institute, Honolulu, Hawaii. 
364 pp.
Guillard, R.R.L. 1975. Culture of phytoplankton for feed -
ing marine invertebrates. pp. 29−60 in: W.L. Smith 
and H.H. Chanley (eds.). Culture of Marine Inverte -
brate Animals.  Plenum Press, New York, New York.
Guillard, R.R.L. and S.L. Morton. 2003. Culture methods. 
pp. 77−07 in: G.M. Hallegraeff, D.M. Anderson, and 
A.D. Cembella (eds.), Manual on Harmful Marine 
Microalgae.  UNESCO, Paris, France.
Heasmann, M.P., J. Diemar, W. O’Connor, T. Sushames, 
and L. Foulkes. 2000. Development of extended shelf-
life microalgae concentrate diets harvested by cen -
trifugation for bivalve molluscs—a summary. Aquatic 
Research 31(8/9):637−659.
Helm, M.M., N. Bourne, and A. Lovatelli. 2004. Hatchery 
Culture of Bivalves: A Practical Manual. FAO Fisher -
ies Technical Paper Number 471. Rome, Italy. 200 pp.  
Hoff, F.H. 1996. Fish Culture with Emphasis on Tropical 
Marine Clownfish. Aquaculture Consultants, Inc., 
Dade City, Florida. 203 pp.
Hoff, F.H. and T.W. Snell. 2008. Plankton Culture Manual. 
Florida Aquafarms, Inc., Dade City, Florida. 186 pp.
James, C.M., A.M. Al-Hkars, and P. Chorbani. 1988. pH 
dependent growth of Chlorella  in a continuous culture 
system. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society 
19(2):27−35.
Kawachi, M. and M.H. Noël. 2005. Sterilization and 
Sterile Technique. pp. 65–82 in: R.A. Anderson (ed.), Algal Culturing Techniques. Elsevier Academic Press, 
Burlington, Massachusetts.
Laing, I. and E. Jones. 988. A turbidostat vessel for the 
continuous culture of marine microalgae. Aquaculture 
Engineering 7:89−96.
Landau, M. 1992.  Introduction to Aquaculture. John 
Wiley & Sons, New York, New York. 440 pp.
Muller-Feuga, A., J. Moal, and R. Kaas. 2003. The Micro -
algae of Aquaculture. pp. 206–252 in: J.G. Stǿttrup and 
L.A. McEvoy (eds.), Live Feeds in Marine Aquaculture. 
Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, UK.
Persoone, G., J. Morales, H. Verlet, and N. De Pauw. 1980. 
Air-lift pumps and the effects of mixing on algal 
growth. pp. 504−522 in: G. Shelef and C. G. Soeder 
(eds.), Algae Biomass.  Elsevier/North Holland Bio -
medical Press, New York, New York.
Richmond, A., A. Vonshak, and S. Arad. 1980. Environ -
mental limitations in outdoor production of algal bio -
mass. pp. 65−72 in: G. Shelef and C. G. Soeder (eds.), 
Algae Biomass. Elsevier/North Holland Biomedical 
Press, New York, New York.
Sorgeloos, P., E. Van Outryve, G. Persoone, and A. 
Cattoir-Reynaerts. 1976. New type of turbidostat with 
intermittent determination of cell density outside the 
culture vessel. Applied and Environmental Microbiol -
ogy 31(3):327−331.
Taub, F.B. 1970. Algal culture as a source of feed. Proceed -
ings of the World Mariculture Society  1:101−117.
Tredici, M.R., N. Biondi, E. Ponis, L. Rodolfi, and G. 
Chini Zittelli. 2009. Advances in microalgal culture 
for aquaculture feed and other uses. pp. 610–676 in: 
G. Burnell and G. Allan (eds.), New Technologies in 
Aquaculture: Improving Production Efficiency, Qual -
ity and Environmental Management.  CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, Florida.
Trotta, P. 1981. A simple and inexpensive system for con -
tinuous monoxenic mass culture of marine microal -
gae. Aquaculture 22:383−387.
Ukeles, R. 1976. Cultivation of plants, unicellular plants. 
pp. 367−466 in: O. Kinne (ed.), Marine Ecology III, 
Part 1. John Wiley and Sons, New York, New York.
Ukeles, R. 1980. American experience in the mass culture 
of micro-algae for feeding of the American oyster, 
Crassostrea virginica.  pp. 287−306 in: G. Shelef and 
C.J. Soeder (eds.), Algae Biomass.  Elsevier/North Hol -
land Biomedical Press, New York, New York.
Wikfors, G.H. 2000. Microalgal Culture. pp. 520−528 in: 
R.R. Stickney (ed.), Encyclopedia of Aquaculture.  John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, New York.16 
SRAC fact sheets are reviewed annually by the Publications, Videos and Computer Software Steering Committee. Fact sheets are revised 
as new knowledge becomes available. Fact sheets that have not been revised are considered to reflect the current state of knowledge.
The work reported in this publication was supported in part by the Southern Regional 
Aquaculture Center through Grant No. 2008-38500-19251 from the United States 
Department of Agriculture, National Institute of Food and Agriculture.