  
               ToxTidbits: Antidote Facts  
   1-800-222-1222  
 Cyproheptadine  
 
Serotonin syndrome is a potentially fatal adverse drug reaction resulting from excessive central 
or peripheral serotonergic activity. Drug interaction between multi ple serotonergic drugs  at 
therapeutic doses , and less frequently , overdoses of single serotonergic agents cause  this 
syndrome. The syndrome encompasses a wide range of clinical findings, which usually  occur 
within six hours  of the ingestion of multiple proserotonergic drugs . Clinical features of serotonin 
syndrome include a triad of altered  mental status, autonomic dysfunction, and neuromuscular 
changes. Symptoms may range from agitation, diarrhea, tachycardia, diaphoresis, mydriasis, 
tremor, myoclonus, and hyperreflexia in mild to moderate cases to delirium, coma, 
hyperthermia, muscle rigid ity, hypertonicity and in severe cases.  
  
Mechanism/Indications:  Cyproheptadine is a histamine -1 receptor antagonist with nonspecific 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5 -HT)-1A and 5 -HT2A antagonistic properties. It is the recommended 
antidote for the treatment of sero tonin syndrome in the setting of incomplete response to 
supportive therapy including aggressive cooling and benzodiazepines. While it exerts weak 
anticholinergic actions, cyproheptadine's antidotal properties are attributed to the blockade and 
competition at 5-HT (serotonin) receptors. A dose of 12 –32 mg will bind 85% –95% of serotonin 
receptors . 
  
Dosing:  The adult dose is 12 mg orally initially, then 2 mg given every 2 hours if patient 
remains symptomatic. The adult maximum dose is 32 mg in 24 hours. Child ren should receive 
0.25 mg/kg/day divided every 6 hours with a maximum of 12 mg/day. It is available as a 2 
mg/5 oral syrup and a 4 mg tablet, which may be crushed and administered via a nasogastric 
tube. Cyproheptadine is not available for IV use. For bot h children and adults, the dose should 
be titrated up until the maximum recommended daily dosage is achieved or the patient becomes 
asymptomatic.   
  
Adverse Effects /Contraindications : Cyproheptadine may lead to sedation, but this side effect 
is consistent with the goals of management and should not deter clinicians from its use. It may 
also produce transient hypotension due to the reversal of serotonin -mediated increases in 
vascular tone. Common side effects of cyproheptadine may include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
abdominal discomfort and anticholinergic effects such as dry mouth.  
 
Cyproheptadine should be avoided in patients with hypersensitivity to cyproheptatidine.  
Cyproheptadine has anticholinergic properties and, therefore, relative contraindications to its use 
include asthma, narrow angle glaucoma , urinary tract obstruction and GI obstruction . 
Information regarding safety is lacking in children under 2 years of age.  
 
 
 
 
 (cont. on page 2)   
    
 Page 2  
  
Cyproheptadine  (continued)      
 
For more on cyproheptadine : 
 
• Boyer E, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med 2005;352: 1112 -1120.  
• Dunkley E, Isbister G, Sibbritt D, Dawson A, Whyte I. The Hunter serotonin toxicity criteria: simple 
and accurate diagnostic decision rules for serotonin toxicity. QJM 2003;96:635 -42. 
• Graudins A, Stearman A, Chan B. Treatment of the serotonin syndrome with cyproheptadine. J 
Emerg Med 1998;16: 615 -9.  
• Kapur S, Zipursky RB, Jones C, Wilson AA, DaSilva JD, Houle  S. Cyproheptadine: a potent in vivo 
serotonin antagonist. Am J Psychiatry 1997;154(6):884.  
• Manini AF. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors. In: Hoffman RS, Howland MA, Lewin NA Nelson LS, 
Goldfrank LR, editors : Goldfrank’s Toxicologic Emergencies. 10th ed. New York NY, 201 5;993-1001. 
 
 
 
 February 2012  (revised February 2013, July 2018)        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 