International Journal of Chemical Engineering Research. 
ISSN 0975-6442 Volume 9, Number 1 (2017), pp. 121-136 
© Research India Publications 
http://www.ripublication.com 
 
 
Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and 
Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water 
 
Rummi Devi Saini 
Chemistry Department 
SMDRSD College, Pathankot, 145001,India 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Colour imparts attraction to the fabric but its use for dying has become a big 
environmental hazard .Art of applying colour to the fabric is known to 
mankind since 3500BC. In 1856 W.H. Perkins discovered the use of synthetic 
dyes which provide a wide range of fast and bright colors. Use of synthetic 
dyes has an adverse effect on all forms of life. The harmful chemicals present 
in textile effluents react with many disinfectants especially chlorine and form 
bi products that are often carcinogens. Colloidal matter presents along with 
color increases the turbidity, gives bad appearance, foul smell and prevents the 
penetration of sunlight into water bodies required for the photosynthesis which 
interfere with the oxygen transfer mechanism and hence marine life. If textile 
dyes effluents are allowed to flow in drains and rivers it affects the quality of 
drinking water making unfit for human consumption. So it is important to 
remove these pollutants from the waste water before its final disposal into 
water bodies. Here in this paper the textile organic dyes, the ir polluting effects 
and various remediation’s  using physical, chemical and biological methods 
has been reviewed. 
 
INTRODUCTION: 
The residual dyes from different sources such as textile, pulp, paper, pharmaceutical, 
tannery; industries are wide variety of organic pollutants introduced into our natural 
water resources or waste water treatment units. One of the main sources with sever e 
polluting problem worldwide is the textile industry and its waste waters containing 
dyes, 10 – 25%of the textile dyes are lost. During dying process and 2-20% are 
directly discharged as aqueous effluents in different environmental components (1). 
The discharge of effluents containing dyes into water is undesirable due to its colour, 122 Rummi Devi Saini  
dyes released and the breakdown products of dyes which are toxic, carcinogenic to 
life mainly  because of the presence  of carcinogens present such as naphthalene , 
benzam ine and other aromatic compounds . If not treated these dyes remain in the 
environment for a long period of time  (2,3) . Another big issue is, the textile  industry 
consumes large  amount of  water. So recycling of treated waste  water should be done 
due to the high levels of contamination in dyeing  and finishing process.  Due to the 
toxic nature and adverse  effect of synthetic dyes on environment the move to natural 
dyes started worldwide . But due to the use of mordents  e.g. chromium to fix color on 
to the fabric they may be very toxic and render waste water poisonous. Natural dyes 
also require comparatively large quantity of water. Also about 80% of the dye stuff 
only stays  on the cloth rest drain out even natural dyes high i mpact on the 
environment  (4). 
 
Classification of organic textile dyes  
The natural textile dyes we re mainly used in textile coloring until 1856 using  dyes 
extracted from vegetable a nd animal resources.  The synthetic dyes  were  discovered in 
1856. These dyes are aromatic compounds  having aromatic rings that contain 
delocalized  electrons and al so different functional groups.  The color of the dye is due 
to the chromogene -chromophore  i.e. acceptor of el ectrons, in the molecule of d ye, and 
the dyeing capacity  of the dye is due to  the presence of auxochrome groups i.e. donor 
of electrons . Th e chromogene is  an arom atic structure which normally contains  
benzene , naphthalene  or anthracene  rings  carry ing binding chromophores  that contain 
doub le conjugated links with delocalized  electrons  forming  conjugated systems . The  
groups which mainly act as chromophores   are  the azo group ( -N=N -), methine group 
(-CH=),  ethylene group (=C=C=), carbonyl group (=C=O), carbon -sulphur  (=C=S; 
≡CS-S-C≡), nitro ( -NO2; -NO-OH), nitrozo ( -N=O; =N -OH), carbon -nitrogen 
(=C=NH; -CH=N -),  or chinoid groups. The auxochrome groups ar e ionizable groups, 
which are responsible for  the binding capacity  of the dyes  molecules  onto the textile 
material.  The common  auxochrome groups are: -COOH (carboxyl),  -NH2 (amin o), -
SO3H (sulphonate) and -OH (hydroxyl) (5,21 ).  
 
Structure of  some of the common dyes  
 
 
Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  123 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The textile dyes are ma inly classified in two ways:  
(1) based on its appl ication characteristics  such as acid, basic,  mordant, reactive,  
direct, disperse, sulphur dy e, pigment, vat, azo insoluble .   
124 Rummi Devi Saini  
(2) based on its chemical structure  such as nitro, azo, carotenoid, , acridine, quinoline, 
indamine,  diphenyl methane , xanthene  sulphur, anthraquinone, indigoid, amino - and 
hydroxy ketone,  phthalocyanine, inorganic  pigment, etc . 
The tex tile dyes are also classified as  anionic, nonionic and cationic dyes  on the basis 
of the general structure . The major anionic dyes are the direct, acid and reacti ve dyes 
(45). The  most problematic ones are the brightly coloured, water soluble reactive and 
acid d yes because they cannot be eliminated from textile industry effluents by 
conventional treatment systems . The major nonionic dyes  (which do no t  get ionized  
in the aqueous medium)  are disperse dyes, and the major cationic dyes are the azo 
basic, anthraquinone disperse  dyes.   
 
Textile processing technology  
The common textile processing technology consists of desizing, scouring, bleaching,  
mercerizing and dyeing processes (EPA, 1997) (6): 
 Sizing is the first preparation step,  which involves addition of sizing agents such as 
starch, polyvinyl  alcohol (PVA) and carboxymethyl  cellulose  to provide strength to 
the fibres  so as to  minimize breakag e. 
Desizing  is the process used to remove sizing agents  prior to weaving.  
Scouring  is the process  in which  impurities  are removed from the fibres by treating 
them with alkali solution usually  sodium  hydroxide  to breakdown natural oils, fats, 
waxe s and surfactants.  
Bleaching  is the step in which  unwanted colour is removed from the fibers by treating 
with chemicals such as sodium hypochlorite and hydrogen peroxide.  
Mercerising is a step in which a concentrated alkaline solution is applied to the fabric 
that is then washed using an acid solution fibres prior to the dyeing step.  Mercerising 
increases the dye -ability, lustre and appearance of  the fibre.   
Dyeing  is the process which in volves the addition of  colour to the fibres. It  usually  
needs  large  
volumes of water  in the dye bath as well as during the rinsing step . Depending on 
the  nature of the fabric, many chemicals like metals, salts, surfactants, organic 
processing aids, sulphide and formaldehyde, may be added to improve dye adsorption 
onto the fibres  in the dyeing process . 
Dye fixation on textile fibres  
In gen eral, textile fibres can catch  dyes in their structur es as a result of physical 
adsorption which involves van der Waals forces, hydrogen bond s and hydrophobic 
interactions between the fibre and dye . The binding  of the dye in fibres d epends on 
nature and  chemical constitution of the dye . The strongest dye-fibre attachment  occurs 
due to chemisorption  which involves the formation of a covalent bond along with an 
additional electrostatic interaction when the dye ion and fibre carry  opposite charges . Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  125 
In alkaline conditions i.e.  pH 9 -12 , at 30-70ºC temperatures w ith 40 -100 g/L salt 
concentration, reactive dyes form a reactive vinyl sulfone (─ SO 3─CH═ CH 2) group, 
which forms  a bond with the fibres. But, the vinyl sulfone group undergoes hydrolysis 
in the presence of water and the products  formed do not have any affinity with the 
fibres thus they do not form a covalent bond  with the fibres  (43). Consequently, a 
large  amount of the dye is washed away  in the wastewater. The fixation efficiency 
varies with the class of azo dye used,  and it is about 98% for basi c dyes and 50% for 
reactive dyes  (7). Large amounts of salts such as sodium nitrate, sodium s ulphate and 
sodium chloride are used in the dyebath.  Sodium hydroxide is extensively applied to 
increase the pH to the alkaline range.  
 
Fixation degree of different dye classes on textile support (EWA, 2005) (8). 
Dye class  Fibre type  Fixation degree, %  Loss in effluent, %  
Basic                                Acrilic  95-100 0-5 
Acid  Polyamide  80-95 5-20 
Disperse  Polyester  90-100 0-10 
Direct  Cellulose  70-95 5-30 
Reactive  Cellulose  50-90 10-50 
Sulphur  Cellulose  60-90 10-40 
Metal complex  Wool 90-98 2-10 
 
The prob lem of large  dye-containing effluent has  been identified mainly  with the 
dyeing of cellulose fibres particular ly with the use of reactive  dyes (10 -50% loss  in 
effluent), sulphur dyes (10 -40% loss in effluent), direct dyes (5 -30% loss in effluent),  
and vat dye s (5-20% loss in effluent). The research is required to focus the attention 
of the textile colorat ion industry  production techniques t hat minimise  dye wastes , 
reduce colour loads in the effluent by  optimisation of proce sses, and c ontrol 
automatically the dyeing and printing operation.  
 
Characterisation of Textile Organic Dyes  
Colour in wastewater  is classified in terms of true or real colour i.e. colour  water 
sample without turbidity , or apparent colour i.e. col our of un treated water sample . The 
common methods used to measure the colour of dye solution or dispersion or waste 
water are visual comparison and spectrophotometry . By visual c omparison  method 
intensity of the  colour is  measured or predicted by comparing the colour of sample  
(textile waste water ) with either known concentrations of coloured  standard solutions 
generally  a platinum -cobalt solution , or accurately calibrated colour disks.  This 
method is not much  applicable for highly coloured industrial wastewaters. Another 126 Rummi Devi Saini  
technique applied is  the spectrophotometric method , in which colour -measuring 
procedures  vary between the methods and of  the most co mmonly  used are Tristimulus 
Filter Method, American Dye Manufacturer Institute (ADMI)  Tristimulus Filter 
Metho d, and Spectra record . 
Tristimulus Filter: In tristimulus Filter three tristimulus light filters are placed  
between the  light source such as  tungsten lamp and a photoelectric cell inside a filter  
photometer. The  transmittance is converted to trichromatic  coefficient and value  
characteristic of colour . 
ADMI Tristimulus : The ADMI colour value offers  a true watercolour measu re, which 
can be distinguished in 3 (WL) ADMI,  the transmittance  is determined  at 590, 540 
and 438 nm or 31 (WL) ADMI,  the transmittance  is recorded at  each 1 0 nm in the 
range of 400 -700 nm . 
Spectra record : In this method a complete spectrum of the sample textile waste water 
is recorded  and the entire spectrum, or a  part of spectrum is compared . In the 
modified method the  areas under an extinction curve gives the colour intensity.  
 
Textile organic dyes environmental hazards:  
High concentration of dyes in water bodies stop the oxygenation capacity of the 
receiving water and cut of sun light thus upsetting the biological activity of aquatic 
life and photosynthesis process of aquatic plants such as algae, The blue, green or 
brown  colours of water c ourses is accepted by public but the red and purpide colors in 
water bodies make people concern. Polluting effects of these dyes is also due to their 
non-biodegradability, they keep on accumulating in the sediments, in fishes or other 
aquatic life forms. Decomposition of dyes into pollutants in carcinogenic or 
mutagenic compounds causing allergies, skin irritation, or different tissue changes  
(10). Azodyes which are aromatic compounds cause high potential health risk by 
adsorption of azod yes and their breakdown products like toxic amines through the 
gastrointestinal tract, skin, and lungs and also formation of hemoglobin adducts. 
Several Azodyes cause damage of DNA which leads to malignant tumors. 
Carcinogenic potential of the dye increase  when electrodonoting substituents are 
present in ortho and para position. Toxicity can be reduced with protonation of amino 
groups. The azodyes such as direct black 38, azodisalecylate and their breakdown 
derivatives like bezidine, its derivatives, a larg e number of anilines nitro semis, 
dimethyl amines etc. are known to induce cancer in human and animals  (11). Some 
azodyeds have been linked to bladder cancer in humans, splenic aromas, hepato 
carcinomas and nuclear anomalies like chrosomal aberration in ma mmalian cells  (12). 
The dyes which are made from known carcinogens such as benzidine and other 
aromatic compounds are reported as the most problematic dyes.  Anthroquinone -
based dyes because of their fused aromatic ring structure are resistant to degradati on. 
There is evidence that malachite dye has adverse effect on immune and reproductive 
systems. It is also a geno toxic and carcinogenic agent. CI dispose of blue dye has 
genotoxic and cytotoxic effects on human cells. It  also causes DNA fragmentation.  Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  127 
Separation  and elimination procedure to remove textile organic dyes from water:  
The o rganic dyes must be separated  and eliminated from water by effective and viable 
treatments at sewage treatments works or on site by trying to remove, degrade 
neutralize th e harmful pollutants so as to neutralize the harmful  effects  of industrial 
effluents.  They have detergent, surfactants, weakly biodegradable  substances 
suspended so lids along with unused dyes. Du e to diverse chemical nature of textile 
effluents, they are d ifficult to treat by conventional purification procedures. 
Treatments like chlorination cannot  be used as it release mutagenic products even 
from less harmful dyes.  
 
Physical methods for removal of organic dye pollutants from waste water:  
Adsorption:  Adsorption has been found to be one of the most effective and 
established treatment of wastewater in textile  industry as it is an economically 
achievable  process for dyes re moval and/or decolourization of textile effluents.   The 
process involves the transf er of soluble organic dyes from wastewater to the surface 
of th e adsorbent which is solid and highly porous material. The adsorbent adsorbs 
each compound to be removed to its capacity and when it is ‘spent’ should be 
replaced by fresh material. The spent a dsorbent may be either regenerated or 
incinerated.  The main factors  which influence   dye adsorption are: interaction 
between dye & adsorbent, surface area and  particle size  of adsorbent , pH ,  
temperature  and time  duration of contact . The most commonly used adsorbent is 
activated carbon.  Activated carbon has  been engineered for optimum adsorption of 
large, negatively charged or  polar molecules of dyes. Powdered or granular activated 
carbon with specific surface area of  500-1500 m2/g; pore volume of 0.3 -1 cm3/g; 
bulk density of 300 -550 g/L  has been observed to have  a practically good colour 
removal capacity if it is us ed in a separate filtration step. The cationic mordant  and 
acid dyes  are removed with high removal rates  (13), whereas dispersed,  vat, direct, 
pigment and reactive dyes  are removed with  moderate removal rates (1,14).  
Bio sorption  has been studied using various  less expensive adsorbents  of agricultural 
wastes like rice husk,  sugarcane, bagasse, and corncobs etc. or industrial wastes such 
as coal ashes,  peat,  clay,  bentonite , red soil, bauxite,   rice husk,  leaf powder, wood 
chips, ground nut shell powder, rice  husk s, bagasse pith, wood sawdust,   other ligno -
cellulosic  wastes, e tc. which can adsorb and accumulate dyes  and other organic 
compo unds  from textile  effluents  with  a removal  capacity  of 40 -90% basic dyes and 
40% direct dyes  (13-22). The  advantage of using these materials is mainly due to their 
widespread availability and  low cos t, also  their regeneration is not required.  
The ‘spent’ material is  usually  burnt though  there is potential  to use it for protein  
enrichment by its solid state fermentation.  Though the  use of ‘low cost’ adsorbents for 
textile dye removal is lucrative  but a vast amount  of adsorbents are required as these  
are less  efficient than activated carbon.  
 128 Rummi Devi Saini  
Irradiation: The irradiation  treatment involves the use of radiations usually obtained 
from a monochromatic UV lamps working under 253.7 nm. It is a simple and 
effective technique for removing a wide variety of organic contaminants, and 
disinfecting harmful microorganism. This method needs a constant and adequate 
supply of oxygen because a large amount of dissolved oxygen is required for 
effectively breaking down of an organic dye by irradiation. Irradiation treatment of a 
secondary effluent from sewage treatment plant has been observed to reduce COD, 
TOC and colou r up to 64%, 34% and 88% respectively using a dose of 15 K Gy 
gamma -rays (23 ). The efficiency of irradiation treatment can be increased by using 
catalyst titanium d ioxide (24 ).  
 
Filtration Processes : These are new procedures, which may be used to  check  organic 
contaminants and  microorganisms present  in wastewater . The common membrane 
filtration  types are:  
Micro -filtration : It is mostly employ ed for treatment of dye baths  containing pigment 
dyes and  for following  rinsing  baths (25 ).  Suspended solids, colloids from effluents 
or macromolecules with particle size of 0.1 to 1 micron get removed by 
microfiltration so m icrofilt ration may  be used as a  pre-treatment  for nano filtration  or 
reverse  osmosis (26 ). MF is effective in removing abo ut 90% of turbidity or silt .  
Microfiltration  membranes are made from  polymers such as Poly (Ether Sulfone),  
Poly Tetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),  Poly (Vinylidiene  Fluoride), Poly (Vinylidene 
Difluoride), Poly (Sulfone), Polypropylene, Polycarbonate, etc. When  extraordinary 
chemical resistance or high temperature  is required in the  operatio n, ceramic, glass, 
carbon, zirconia coated carbon, alumina and sintered metal membranes are used . 
Usually MF and UF operate at 20 to 100 psi  transmembrane pressures (Ptm) and  
velocities of 20 to  100 cm/s (27 ). 
Ultra -filtration : This technique can remove  polluting substances such as dyes only 31 -
76% but can be used to eliminate  macromolecules and pa rticles. The treate d 
wastewater cannot be  reuse d for sensitive pr ocesses, such as textile dyeing (25) but  
can be used for  rinsing, washing, etc. Ultrafiltration is used as a pre-treatment  for 
rever se osmosis (28 ) or to remove metal  hydroxides  (27). UF membranes are made 
from polymers such as nylon -6, polytetrafluoroethy lene (PTFE), polyvinyl chlorides 
(PVC),  polysulfone, polypropylene,  acrylic copolymer etc.  
Nano -Filtration : It is employ ed for the treatment of coloured efflu ents from the textile 
industry, mostly  in a combination of adsorption and Nano -filtration as NF modules 
are very sensitive to fouling by  colloi dal material and macromolecules . NF 
membranes are normally made from cellulose acetate and aromatic polyamides.  
Inorganic materials, such as carbon based membranes,  ceramics, zirconia can also be 
used in making NF and RO membranes.  These can remove  low-mole cular weight 
organic compounds, large monovalent ions, divalent ions, hydrolysed  reacti ve dyes, 
and dyeing auxiliaries.  About  70% colour removal has been reported for a NF plant  
working at 8 bar/18°C, wit h four pol yethersulphonate membranes with molecular 
weight cut offs of 40, 10, 5 and 3 kda for three different effluents from dyeing cycle Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  129 
of textile industry (29 ). NF treatment can be reasonably  used as an alternative  for 
decolourization of textile effluent.  
Reverse Osmosis : This technique  is used to eliminate  hydrolysed  reactive dyes,  most 
types of  ionic compounds, chemical auxiliaries  in a single step  (25). The influent has 
to be very carefully pre-treated  because RO is very sensitive to fouling like NF . RO  
membranes are usually made from cellulose acetate and aromatic polyamides and of 
some  inorganic materials.  
The choice of the membrane process depends upon the nature of the final effluent.  
The membrane process es in combination with physio -chemical treatment  has benefits  
over the other co nventional treatments, such as their  ability to recover dye materials 
along with valued recyclable water, to reduce  fresh w ater consumption and 
wastewater treatment cos ts, small disposal volumes as a result  minimizes waste 
disposal costs  etc. The main problem with physical method is like excess sludge 
production. So disposal of solid adsorbent itself becomes a big headache. However 
physical methods are useful when effluent s volume is small.  
 
CHEMICAL METHODS OF REMOVING DYE FROM WASTE WATER  
Oxidative processes  
Chemical oxidation is  the conversion  of pollutants by chemical  oxidising  agents  (such 
as chlorines, ozone, Fenton reagents, UV/peroxide, UV/ozone etc. ) other than 
oxygen/air or bacteria to simil ar but less harmful compounds and to  easily 
biodegradable organic compounds . 
Oxidation  with sodium hypochlorite:  In this treatment azo-bond cleavage is 
initiated and accelerated by  the attack  of the dye molecule by Cl+ at the  amino group . 
The increase in chlorine concentration accelerates  the dye removal and 
decolourization process,  and also results in the decrease  of pH. The  chlorine 
decolourization is most effective on  dyes containing amino or substituted amino 
groups on the naphthalene ring i.e. dyes derived from amino -naphtol - and 
naphtylamino -sulphonic  acids  (Omura, 1994). This treatment is  not suitable for 
disperse dyes . Due to negative effects of aroma tic amines or other  toxic molecules  on 
releasing  these into water resources , this method is less frequently  used. 
Oxidation  with hydrogen peroxide:  The oxidation processes with hydrogen  
peroxide (H 2O2) can be  used as w astewater treatment  in tw o systems: (1)  
Homogenous systems  based on using  visible or ultrav iolet light, soluble catalysts such 
as Fenton reagents ( hydrogen peroxide activated by some iron salts  without UV 
irradiation  to form hydroxyl radicals (HO .) which are strong  oxidants than H 2O2 and 
other  chemical activators such as ozone, peroxidase etc.  The Fenton oxidation 
treatm ent efficiency depends mainly on  effluent characteristics, and operating 
parameters e.g., colour removal of 31.5 % of has been reported for effluents 
containing Remazol Arancio 3R, Remazol Rose RB textile dye, by Fenton oxidation 
at a pH of 4.00, using  0.18 -0.35 M H 2O2 and 1.45 mM Fe2+, after 30 min.  of 
oxidation  (22). 130 Rummi Devi Saini  
 (2) H eterogenous systems based on using  semiconductors, zeolites, clays with or 
without ultraviolet light, e.g. TiO2, modified zeolites w ith iron and aluminium lead to 
colour removal of 53 -83%,  COD removal of 68 -76% and  TOC removal of 32 -37% 
have been reported  in the dye -containing effluents by heterogenous catalytic 
oxidation using 20 mM  H2O2  and FeY11.5 (1 g/L) of Procion Marine HEXL at 
pH=3 -5, after 10 min . (31). 
Advantages of this oxidative treatment  comprise  reduction of effluent COD, colour 
and to xicity, and   can be used to  remove bo th soluble and insoluble dyes e.g. disperse 
dyes. Complete decolourization was  obtained generally after , the complete Fenton 
reagent stage  i.e. 24 hours . The main difficulty come across is in the separation of the 
solid photo catalysts  at the end of the process (31,3 2). 
Oxidation by Ozonation : Ozone is a powerful oxidisi ng agent and is capable of  
oxidising aromatic rings  causing their cleavage in some textile dyes and 
decomposition of other  organic pollutants in industrial e ffluents. Ozone causes the 
cleavage of conjugated double bonds of  chromophore  in organic dye s resulting in 
decolorisation but this process is accompanied by the formation of toxic products. 
Thus ozonisa tion may be used along with  a physi cal method to prevent this. Even  
prolonged ozonation can remove these toxic products.  Ozone may  react directly or 
indirectly  with dye molecules. In the direct method, the ozone molecule acts as  the 
electron acceptor,  and hydroxide ion ( high pH) catalys e the auto decomposition of 
ozone to form hydroxyl  free radicals (·O H) in aqueous effluents  which  react  with 
organic and inorganic pollutants .  At low pH ozone reacts  efficiently  with unsaturated  
chromophoric bonds of a dye molecule by direct reactions (33 ). 
The main advantage  of ozone oxidation is that ozone can be applied  even  in its 
gaseous state and therefore does not  cause increase  in the vo lume of wastewater and 
sludge. The  disadvantage s of ozonation are its short halflife i.e. 20 min, its  
destabilisation by the presence of salts, pH, and temperature,  
and the added  costs for the installation of ozon isation plant. The  efficiency of 
ozon isation  can be improved by using it in combination with ir radiation (32 ) or with a 
membrane filtrati on technique (34 ). 
Photochemical oxidation:  The UV treatment of dye -containing wastewater in the 
presence of  H2O2  can  breakdown the dye molecules to smaller  organic molecules, or 
even to  ultimate products such as  CO 2& H2O, other  inorganic oxides  etc. (35 ). The 
dye decompositi on is initiated by the generation of  hydroxyl radicals . This process 
may be completed  in a batc h or continuous column unit. The efficiency of this  
treatment depends on  the intensity of the UV radiation, pH, dye structure and the dye 
bath composition (36 ).  The presence of hydrogen peroxide i ncreases the efficiency  of 
photo oxidation treatment. For example the colour removal of more than  60 -90% of 
Red M5B, H -acid and Blue MR dye -containing effluents , has been observed on  
working with 400 -500 mg/L  H2O2 at pH  3-7 (37). 
 
 Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  131 
Coagulatio n and precipitation  
Coagulation : Coagulation of dyes and other auxiliaries in textile effluents has been 
successfully done by Aluminum, Iron slats , organic polymer,  Flocculants etc.  The 
coloured colloid particles from textile effluents cannot be  separated b y simple 
gravitational methods so these are precipitated by some chemicals such as lime,  
ferrous sulphate, ferric  sulphate, ferric chloride,  aluminium sulphate, aluminium  
chloride, cationic organic polymers, etc.  which  are added  to settle  down the ruminant 
dyes and other auxiliaries in textile effluents . These chemicals cause  destabilisation of  
small suspended particles  and emulsions mainly by neutralising their charge as a 
result the particles come together forming cluster of these partic les large  enough to 
settle (coag ulate) under gravity or become filterable  (40). The main disadvantages of 
this treatment are the process control , impurities  such as non -ionic detergents 
remaining in the eff luent, and the sludge produced  which has  to be  separated and 
dried  for later landfilling .  
Electrocoagulation :  Electrocoagulation  is an advanced electrochemical treatment for 
dye and colour removal. It involves  processes  such as electrolytic reactions at 
electrodes, coagulation  in aqueous effluent and  adsorption of soluble  pollutants on 
coagulants, and  finally their  removal by sedimentation . This treatment is efficient 
even at high  pH for colour and COD removals and the efficiency further depends on  
the current density and duration of reaction. The  colour removal of more than98% has 
been reported for textile Orange II and Acid red 14 dye -containing effluents  in EC 
treatment (43). In general, decolourisation efficiency in EC treatment has been found 
to be   90-95%, and COD removal  30-36% under  optimum  cond itions (25 ).The main 
drawback of chemical methods is the high cost which prevents it from being 
extensively used in industry.  
 
BIOLOGICAL METHODS:  
It involves  microorganisms like fungi and Bacteria and is no cost effective to 
becoming popular . Biological treatment may involve aerobic and anaerobic  
degradation by microorganism’s  combination.  
Aerobic biological treatment : Biological treatment of activated  sludge  was the most 
used in large scale textile  effluent treatment.  The main mi croorganisms responsible 
for biodegradation of organic  compounds are bacteria  such as  Aeromonas 
Hydrophilia , Acetobacter liquefaciens ,  Bacillus cetreus , Bacillus subtilis ,  Klebsiella 
pneunomoniae , Pseudomonas species, Sphingomonas , etc. ;  fungi such as  white -rot 
fungi: Hirschioporus  larincinus , Inonotus hispidus , Phanerochaete chrysosporium , 
Phlebia tremellosa , Coriolus versicolor , etc. ;  algae such as  Chlorella  and oscillotoria 
species  etc. Furthermore , some bacteria, white -rot fungi, mixed microbial  cultures  
have been  found to be able to degrade dyes using  enzy mes, such as manganese 
dependent peroxidases (MnP),  lignin peroxidases (LiP),  H 2O2-producing enzime such 
as glucose -1-oxidase and glucose -2-oxidase, along with  laccase, and a phenoloxidase. 
In biological aer ated filters the organism s are grown on inert media that are held 
stationary during normal operation and exposed to aeration.  In case of  azo dyes, their 132 Rummi Devi Saini  
nitro and sulfonic groups are quite  intractable  to aerobic bacterial degr adation (44 ). 
However, in the  presence of azo reductases ( oxygen -catalysed enzymes ), some 
aerobic  bacteria  reduce azo compounds to  aromatic amines (46 ). About 80%  colour 
removal  by  degradation of azo dyes (i.e. Acid Red 151; Basic Blue 41; Basic Red 46, 
16; Basic Yellow 28, 19) in an  aerobic biofilm system  has been  indicated , which can 
be improved to more than 90% by adding activated carbon (PAC) or bentonite in 
aeration tank. (37).  
 
Anaerobic Biological Treatment : Anaerobic biodegradation of water -soluble dyes  
including azo dyes  is mainly reported  to take place by a  redox reaction with hydrogen 
leading to the  formation of methane,  carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulphide,  other 
gaseous compounds  and releasing electrons. The se electrons reduce  the azo bonds  in 
azo dye , causing decolourization of the effluent  with the formation of toxic amines 
(47). An additional carbon organic source  such as glucose is necessary.  A major 
advantage of anaerobic system in addition to decolourization of textile effluent is the 
production of biogas,  usable for heat and power generation w hich will reduce energy 
costs. The main advantage of biological treatment as compared to certain physico -
chemical treatments is that over 70% of organic matter expressed by COD may be 
converted to bi osolids (37 ). The disadvantage is that the biological treatment process 
require long  time period, hence the effluents has to be stored in large tanks for the 
process.  
A combination of physical and biological processes has been proposed by Robinsons 
et. al (2001) (45) which involve s adsorption of dye on agricultural  waste in a 
continuous process followed by dye degradation using solid state fermentation by 
micro -organisms like white ret fungi. Here the solid waste left is non -toxic and can be 
used as fertilizer.  
 
CONCL USION  
The natural and synthetic dyes which make our life colorful also cause a lot of 
pollution of our water bodies. Effluents  from dying industry  contain very harmful 
chemicals. The easiest way to access their impact is to study toxicity of water on 
aquatic plants and animals. The organic dyes should be discharge d up to  only certain 
strict limits in final effluents discharged untre ated in natural w ater resources. Removal 
of Dye from textile effluents is an environmental issue which can be solved by use of 
adequate mechano -physic -chemical and biological treatment of textile effluents.  
 
REFERENCES   
1. Cooper P. (1995). Color in dyehouse effluent , Society  of Dyers and Colourists, 
ISBN 0 901956694, West Yorkshire BDI 2JB, England  
2. Forgacs, E Crestile, T., Oros, G., (2004), Removal of synthetic dyes from 
waste water. A review environmental international, 30, pp. 953 -971 Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  133 
3. Hao, O.J., H. Kim, O.J, Chiag P.C. (200 0), decolourisation of waste water 
critical review in environmental Science and Technology 30,pp 449 -505 
4. Biosorption Processes From Wastewater Treatment (chapter 7). In: Lignin: 
Properties  and Applications in Biotechnology and Bioenergy, Ryan  J. Paterson 
(Ed.), Nova Science Publishers, 27 pp., ISBN 978 -1-61122 -907-3, New York, 
U.S.A.  
5. Welham, A. (2000). The theory of dyeing (and the secret of life). Journal of 
the Society of Dyers and Colourists, Vol.116, pp.140 -143 Suteu, D.; Zaharia, 
C. & Mal utan, T. (2011a). Biosorbents Based On Lignin Used In  
6. EPA. (1997). Profile of the textile industry . Environmental Protection Agency, 
Washington, USA  
7. Bertea, A. & Bertea, A.P. (2008). Decolorisation and recycling of textile 
wastewater (in  Romanian), Performantica Ed, ISBN 978 -973-730-465-0, Iasi, 
Romania  
8. EWA. (2005). Efficient use of water in the textile finishing industry , Official 
Publication of the European Water Association (EWA), Brussels, Belgium  
9. Bisschops, I.A.E. & Spanjers, H. (2003). Literatu re review on textile 
wastewater  characterisation. Environmental Technology, Vol.24, pp. 1399 -
1411   
10. F.M.D Chequer, D.J. Dorta, D. Palma de Oliveira (2011). Azo Dyes and Their 
Metabolites: Does the Discharge of the Azo Dye into Water Bodies Represent 
Human a nd Ecological Risks? Advances in Treating Textile Effluent, Prof. 
Peter Hauser (Ed.), ISBN: 978 -953-307-704-8, InTech.  
11. Puvaneswari, N., et al. (2006) Toxicity assessment and microbial degradation 
of azo dyes. Indian journal of experimental biology 44(8): 618.  
12. Lima et al. (2007) Mutagenic and carcinogenic potential of a textile azo dye 
processing plant effluent that impacts a drinking water source. Gen Tox and 
Environ Mutagenesis. Vol 626:1 –2 
13. Anjaneyulu, Y.; Sreedhara Chary, N. & Suman  Raj, D.S. (2005). 
Decolourization of industrial effluents – available methods and emerging 
technologies – a review. Reviews in Environmental Science and 
Bio/Technology , Vol.4, pp. 245 -273, DOI 10.1007/s11157 -005-1246 -z 
14. Nigam, P.; Armou, G.; Banat, I.M.; S ingh, D. & Marchant, R. (2000). Physical 
removal of textile dyes and solid -state fermentation of dye -adsorbed 
agricultural residues.  Biores. Technol., Vol.72, pp.219 -226 
15. Bhattacharya, K.G & Sarma, A. (2003) Adsorption characteristic of the dye. 
Dyes pigmen ts, Vol.52, PP 211 -222  
16. Gupta, G.S.; Singh, A.K.; Tayagi, B.S.; Prasad, G. & Singh, V.N. (1992). 
Treatment of carpet and metallic effluent by China clay. 
J.Chem.Technol.Biotechnol., Vol.55, pp. 227 -283 
17. Ozcan, A.S.; Erdem, B. & Ozcan, A. (2004). Adsorption of Acid Blue 193 
from aqueous  solutions onto Na -bentonite and DTMA -bentonite. 
J.Coll.Interf.Sci., Vol.280, No.1,  pp.44 -54 134 Rummi Devi Saini  
18. Robinson, T.; McMullan, G.; Marchant, R. & Nigam, P. (2001). Remediation 
of dyes in textile effluent: a critical review on current treatment technologies 
with a proposed  alternative. Bioresource Technology, vol.77, pp.247 -255 
19. Suteu, D. & Zaharia, C. (2008). Removal of textile reactive dye Brilliant Red 
HE-3B onto materials based on lime and coal ash, ITC&DC, Book of 
Proceedings of 4th International Textile, Clothing & Design Conference – 
Magic World of Textiles , pp.1118 -1123, ISBN 978 -953-7105 -26-6, 
Dubrovnik, Croatia, October 5 -8, 2008  
20. Suteu, D.; Zaharia, C.; Bilba, D.; Muresan, A.; Muresan, R. & Popescu, A. 
(2009a).  Decolorization  wastewaters from the textile indus try – physical 
methods, chemical methods. Industria Textila, Vol.60, No.5, pp.254 -263 
21. Suteu, D.; Zaharia, C. & Malutan, T. (2011a). Biosorbents Based On Lignin 
Used In  Biosorption Processes From Wastewater Treatment (chap ter 7). In: 
Lignin: Properties  and Applications in Biotechnology and Bioenergy , Ryan J. 
Paterson (Ed.), Nova Science  Publishers, 27 pp., ISBN 978 -1-61122 -907-3, 
New York, U.S.A.  www.intechopen.  
22. Zaharia, C.; Suteu, C. & Muresan, A. (2011). Options and solutions of textile 
effluent  decolourization using some specific physico -chemical treatment steps. 
Proceedings  of 6th International Conference on Environmental Engineering 
and Management  ICEEM’06 , pp. 121 -122, Balaton Lake, Hungary, September 
1-4, 2011  
23. Borrely, S.I.; Cruz, A.C.; Del Mastro, N.L.; Sampa, M.H.O. & Somssari, E.S. 
(1998). Radiation process of sewage and sludge – A review. 
Prog.Nucl.Energy, Vol.33, No.1/2, pp. 3 -21  
24. Krapfenbauer, K.F.; Robinson, M.R. & Getoff, N. (1999). Development of 
and te sting of TiO2 - Catalysts for EDTA -radiolysis using γ -rays (1st part). 
J.Adv.Oxid.Technol ., Vol.4,No.2, pp.213 -217 
25. Ramesh Babu, B.; Parande, A.K.; Raghu, S. & Prem Kumar, T. (2007). 
Textile technology. Cotton Textile Processing: Waste Generation and Effluen t 
Treatment. The Journal of Cotton Science, Vol.11, pp.141 -153 
26. Ghayeni, S.B.; Beatson, P.J.; Schneider, R.P. & Fane, A.G. (1998). Water 
reclamation from municipal wastewater using combined microfiltration -
reverse osmosis (ME -RO):  Preliminaryperformance  data and microbiological 
aspects of system operation. Desalination, Vol.116, pp. 65 -80 
27. Naveed, S.; Bhatti, I. & Ali, K. (2006). Membrane technology and its 
suitability for treatment of textile waste water in Pakistan. Journal of Research 
(Science) , Bahaud din Zakariya University, Multan, Pakistan, Vol. 17, No. 3, 
pp.155 -164 
28. Ciardelli, G. & & Ranieri, N. (2001). The treatment and reuse of wastewater in 
the textile  industry by means of ozonation and electroflocculation. Water Res., 
Vol.35, pp. 567 -572 
29. Alves, B.M.A. & Pinho, D.N.M. (2000). Ultrafiltration for colour removal of 
tannery dyeing  wastewaters., Desalination , Vol.1303, pp. 147 -154 Textile Organic Dyes: Polluting effects and Elimination Methods from Textile Waste Water  135 
30. Omura, T. (1994). Design of chlorine – fast reactive dyes – part 4; degradation 
of amino  containing azo dyes by sodium hydrochlorite. Dyes Pigments, 
Vol.26, pp.33 -38 
31. Neamtu, M.; Zaharia, C.; Catrinescu, C.; Yediler, A.; Kettrup, A. & 
Macoveanu, M. (2004). Fe -exchanged Y zeolite as catalyst for wet peroxide 
oxidation of reactive azo dye  Procion Marine H -EXL. Applied Catalys is B: 
Environmental, Vol.78, No.2, pp.287 -294 
32. Zaharia, C.; Suteu, D.; Muresan, A.; Muresan, R. & Popescu, A. (2009). 
Textile wastewater treatment by homogenous oxidation with hydrogen 
peroxide. Environmental Engineering and Management Journal, Vol.8, No.6,  
pp.1359 -1369  
33. Adams, C.D. & Gorg, S. (2002). Effect of pH and gas -phase ozone 
concentration on the  decolourization of common textile dyes. J.Environ.Eng., 
Vol.128, No.3, pp. 293 -298 
34. Lopez, A.; Ricco, G.; Ciannarella, R.; Rozzi, A., Di Pinto, A.C. & Possino , R. 
(1999). Textile wastewater reuse: ozonation of membrane concentrated 
secondary effluent. Water  Sci. Technol., Vol.40, pp. 99 -105 
35. Yang, Y.; Wyatt II, D.T & Bahorsky, M. (1998). Decolorisation of dyes using 
UV/H2O2  photochemical oxidation. Text.Chem.Color ., Vol.30, pp.27 -35 
36. Slokar, Y.M. & Le Marechal, A.M. (1997). Methods of decoloration of textile 
wastewaters.  Dyes Pigments, Vol.37, pp.335 -356 
37. Anjaneyulu, Y.; Sreedhara Chary, N. & Suman Raj, D.S. (2005). 
Decolourization of industrial efflue nts – available methods and emerging 
technologies – a review. Reviews in Environmental Science and 
Bio/Technology, Vol.4, pp. 245 -273, DOI 10.1007/s11157 -005-1246 -z 
38. Kim, T.H.; Park, C.; Lee, J.; Shin, E.B. & Kim, S. (2002). Pilot scale 
treatment of textile  wastewater by combined processes (fluidized biofilm 
process – chemical coagulation – electrochemical oxidation). J.Hazar.Mat. B, 
Vol.112, pp.95 -103 
39. Vlyssides, A.G.; Papaioannou, D.; Loizidoy, M.; Karlis, P.K. & Zorpas, A.A. 
(2000). Testing an electrochemic al method fortreatment of textile dye 
wastewater. Waste Manag.,Vol.20, pp.569 -574 
40. Zaharia, C.; Diaconescu, R. & Surpăţeanu, M. (2007). Study of flocculation 
with Ponilit GT -2anionic polyelectrolyte applied into a chemical wastewater 
treatment. Central  European Journal of Chemistry, Vol.5, No.1, pp.239 -256 
41. Lin, S.H. & Chen, L.M. (1997). Treatment of textile waste waters by chemical 
methods for reuse. Water Res., Vol.31, No.4, pp.868 -876 
42. Venkat Mohan, s.; Srimurli, M.; Sailaja, P. & Karthikeyan, J. (1999). A study 
of acid dye  colour removal using adsorption and coagulation. 
Environ.Eng.Poly., vol.1, pp.149 -154 
43. Daneshvar, N.; Sorkhabi, H.A. & Tizpar, A. (2003). Decolorization of orange 
II by  electrocoagulation method. Sep.Purifi.Technol., Vol.31, pp.1 53-162 
44. Dos Santos, A.B.; Cervantes, F.J. & Van Lier, J.B. (2004). Azo dye reduction 
by thermophilic anaerobic granular sludge, and the impact of the redox 136 Rummi Devi Saini  
mediator AQDS on the reductive biochemical transformation. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, Vo l.64, pp.62 -69 
45. Robinson, T.; McMullan, G.; Marchant, R. & Nigam, P. (2001). Remediation 
of dyes in textile effluent: a critical review on current treatment technologies 
with a proposed  alternative. Bioresource Technology, vol.77, pp.247 -255 
46. Stolz , A. (2001). Basic and applied aspects in the microbial degradation of azo 
dyes.  Appl.Microbiol.Biotechnol., Vol.56, pp.69 -80 
47. Banat, M.E.; Nigam, P.; Singh, D. & Marchant, R. (1996) Microbial 
decolourization of textile dye containing effluents, a review. Biores. Technol ., 
Vol.58, pp. 217 -227 