BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS ISSN 1982-0593 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  122  ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATION IN 
THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVIEW  
 
1A. L. N. Mota *, 1L. F. Albuquerque, 1L. T. C. Beltrame, 
1O. ChiavoneGFilho, 2A. Machulek Jr., 3C. A. O. Nascimento 
 
1 Departamento de Engenharia Química G Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), 
   Campus Universitário, UFRN, Lagoa Nova, Natal/RN , Brazil, CEP 59072G970 
2 Faculdade de Ciências Exatas e Tecnologia G Univer sidade Federal da Grande Dourados (UFGD), 
   Rodovia Dourados G Itahum, km 12, Dourados/MS, B razil, CEP 79804G970 
3 Departamento de Engenharia Química – Escola Polité cnica, Universidade de São Paulo (USP), 
   Cidade Universitária, São Paulo/SP, Brazil, CEP 05508G900 
 
* To whom all correspondence should be addressed. 
Address:  Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte, Depar tamento de Engenharia Química, 
              Av. Sen. Salgado Filho 3000, Campus Universitário, UFRN, Lagoa Nova, CEP 59072G970, 
              Natal/RN – Brazil. 
Telephone / fax numbers:  + 55 84 3215G3773 
E-mail:  andremota@eq.ufrn.br  
 
Abstract. Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) are technologies  based on the 
generation of highly reactive species, the hydroxyl  radicals, used in oxidative 
degradation procedures for organic compounds dissol ved or dispersed in aquatic media. 
These processes are promising alternatives for deco ntamination of media containing 
dissolved recalcitrant organic substances, which wo uld not be efficiently removed by 
conventional methods. The present paper describes a  series of AOP, analyzing the 
aspects related to each type of process, such as th e interference of external agents and 
the ideal operating conditions, based on the analys is and comparison of different studies 
in the area. In addition, several applied AOP studi es on treatment of oil wastewater and 
on remediation of soil contaminated with oil or its  derivatives are presented. 
 
Keywords : advanced oxidation processes; petrochemical wastew ater; oil wastewater; 
hydrocarbons degradation; photocatalysis; Fenton’s reagent; photoGFenton; ozonation; 
wet air oxidation; electroGoxidation; wastewater tr eatment 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Despite the importance of oil in the world 
economy, the environmental question that 
surrounds its production must always be well 
assessed, owing to the composition of its 
residues and of the oil itself, which consists 
mainly of aromatic and aliphatic compounds 
(Mariano, 2005). 
The toxicity of the aromatic fraction is 
higher than that of the aliphatic fraction. 
Aromatic compounds are known to be more 
recalcitrant, among which are benzene, toluene, 
ethylbenzene, xylene isomers (the soGcalled 
BTEX), and phenols (Stepnowski, 2002). 
Contaminations from oil components can 
occur during the extraction process in sedimentary basins and as a result of storage 
tank leaks, including gasoline stations and 
during marine transport (oil tankers) (Watts et 
al. , 2000). Moreover, during its processing a 
large volume of hydrocarbonGrich wastewater is 
generated, which, if left untreated, causes 
serious environmental impacts (Durell et al. , 
2006). A large part of this wastewater is 
produced along with oil during gas and oil 
extraction processes in oil wells. The amount of 
wastewater produced can be 95% higher than 
the oil extracted in certain production wells. 
The liquid wastes generated in refineries 
vary considerably in terms of amount and 
quality, as a function of the type of oil 
processed, the processing units of the refinery, 
BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  123  and the operation mode of these units. 
Refineries generally produce an amount of 
liquid waste that is relatively proportional to 
the amount of oil refined. Table 1 shows the 
general physicalGchemical characteristics of 
refinery wastewaters (Mariano, 2005). 
The conventional techniques applied in the 
treatment of these wastewaters are physicalG
chemical and mechanical, generally associated 
with biological treatment. The conventional 
treatments include gravitational separation, 
centrifugation, application of coagulants, 
flotation, filtration, and adsorption with 
activated coal, among others (Yavuz and 
Koparal, 2006; Saien and Nejati, 2007). These 
conventional techniques manage to remove free 
and emulsioned oil and solids in suspension 
from the wastewater, in addition to reducing 
BOD when associated with biological 
treatment. However, applying the biological 
process is inadequate when the wastewater 
contains highly toxic recalcitrant compounds, 
such as the aromatic fraction from the dissolved 
organic compounds. In this case, more 
advanced techniques must be used to degrade 
these compounds (Yavuz and Koparal, 2006; Saien and Nejati, 2007). 
One of the processes for treating water 
containing toxic organic pollutants that has 
been increasingly used in recent years is the 
advanced oxidation process (AOP), a powerful 
tool applied to degrade these pollutants (Bolton 
et al. , 2001; SafarzadehGAmiri et al. , 1997; 
Ghaly et al. , 2001; PeraGTitus et al. , 2004; 
PérezGMoya et al. , 2007; Durán et al. , 2008). 
 
 
2. ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES 
Advanced oxidation processes (AOP) are 
technologies characterized by the generation of 
hydroxyl radicals, which are highly reactive 
and nonGselective substances used to degrade 
toxic organic compounds present in a medium 
(such as wastewater and soil). 
The hydroxyl radical has a high oxidation 
potential (E 0 = 2.8 V), as shown in Table 2 
(PeraGTitus et al. , 2004), and is able to react 
with practically all classes of organic 
compounds, resulting in complete 
mineralization of these compounds, that is, the 
formation of carbon dioxide, water and 
inorganic salts, or their conversion into less Table 1.  Physical-chemical characteristics of oil refinery wastewaters. 
Parameter Limits  
Minimum  Maximum  
Temperature (ºC) 22 41 
pH 6.2 10.6 
BOD (mg/L) 17 280 
COD (mg/L) 140 3340 
Sulfides (mg/L) 0 38 
Hardness as CaCO 3 (mg/L) 139 510 
Alkalinity as CaCO 3 (mg/L) 77 356 
Oil (mg/L) 23 200 
Phosphorus (mg/L) 0 97 
NH 3 (mg/L, as N) 0 120 
Chlorides (mg/L) 19 1080 
Sulfates (mg/L) 0 182 
 
 
Table 2.  Standard reduction potentials of some oxidants in volts (V) compared with the normal hydrogen 
electrode (NHE, E 0 = 0 V). Adapted from Legrini and coworkers (1993).  
Oxidant  Standard reduction potential / V  
Fluorine (F 2) 3.03 
Hydroxyl radical ( •OH) 2.80 
Ozone (O 3) 2.07 
Hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) 1.77 
Potassium permanganate (KMnO 4) 1.67 
Chlorine dioxide (ClO 2) 1.50 
Chlorine (Cl 2) 1.36 
Bromine (Br 2) 1.09 
 BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
124 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  aggressive products (Andreozzi et al. , 1999; 
Bolton et al. , 2001; Pignatello, 1992). Pollutant 
destruction and consequent inhibition of 
generation of toxic residues are some of the 
main advantages of AOP, given that 
conventional water treatment methods such as 
flotation, filtration and adsorption with active 
coal are nonGdestructive physical separation 
processes, that is, they only remove the 
pollutants, transferring them to other phases, 
thereby generating concentrated deposits, as 
reported by Crittenden and coworkers (1997a). 
The possible reaction pathways involving 
the attack of hydroxyl radicals onto organic 
compounds are: the electrophylic addition of a 
hydroxyl radical to organic compounds 
(unsaturated or aromatic) that contain a π bond 
leading to the formation of organic radicals 
(Equation 1), the hydrogen abstraction by 
reacting the hydroxyl radical with a saturated 
aliphatic compound (Equation 2) and electron 
transfer with reduction of the hydroxyl radical 
into a hydroxyl anion by an organic substrate 
(Equation 3) (Bossmann et al. , 1998; Tang, 
2004). 
 
 (1) 
HO • + R −H → R • + H 2O  (2) 
HO • + R −X → [R −X] + • + HO −  (3) 
 
The hydroxyl radical attack on organic 
substrates may be influenced by the presence of 
a number of chemical species in water (or 
originating in the mineralization process), such 
as carbonate and bicarbonate ions (Andreozzi et al. , 1999). These ions can react with the 
hydroxyl radicals (Equations 4 and 5), hence 
competing with the organic substrates through 
the hydroxyl radicals. 
 
HO • + HCO 3– → CO 3•– + H 2O  (4) 
HO • + CO 32– → CO 3•– + HO –  (5) 
 
Hydroxyl radicals can be generated from 
several AOP, enabling the application of a 
better process for each specific treatment 
condition. According to Huang and coworkers 
(1993), the AOP can be classified as 
homogeneous and heterogeneous. Domènech 
and coworkers (2001) presented this 
classification in terms of whether light is used 
in the process. Table 3 shows a classification of 
AOP according to these authors. 
The AOP are expensive processes owing to 
the high cost of reagents such as H 2O2 and O 3 
and electric energy when UV radiation is 
applied. For this reason they are considered in 
alternative treatment of wastewater that cannot 
be biologically treated. 
Another significant aspect is the load of 
pollutants present in the wastewater, regularly 
expressed in terms of chemical oxygen demand 
(COD). The use of these processes is indicated 
only for wastewaters with COD below 5 g LG1, 
given that a higher COD index would require 
very high consumption of reagents, precluding 
the treatment (Andreozzi et al. , 1999).   
For wastewaters with high organic load, 
pretreatment operations, like dilution, 
coagulation and flocculation, are required in 
order to reduce the initial load (Rivas et al. , 
 
Table 3.  Types and classification of advanced oxidation pro cesses. 
Non-photochemical Photochemical 
Homogeneous processes 
• Ozonation in alkaline media (O 3/HO −) 
• Ozonation with hydrogen peroxide 
(O 3/H 2O2) 
• Fenton (Fe 2+  or Fe 3+ /H 2O2) 
• Electro-oxidation  
• Electrohydraulic discharge - ultrassound 
• Wet air oxidation (WAO) 
• Supercritical water oxidation (SCWO) 
 • Photolysis of water in vacuum ultraviolet 
(VUV) 
• UV/H 2O2 
• UV/O 3 
• UV/O 3/H 2O2 
• Photo-Fenton (Fe 2+ or Fe 3+ /H 2O2/UV) 
Heterogeneous processes 
• Catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO) • Heterogeneous photocatalysis: ZnO/UV, 
SnO 2/UV, TiO 2/UV,  TiO 2/H 2O2/ UV 
 • or  or  HO  HO •  + OH BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  125  2004). In contrast, AOP can be applied in the 
treatment of contaminated waters with very low 
organic loads (in ppb) and which contain 
dissolved organic compounds which are 
difficult to remove. 
One way of reducing the costs of AOP is to 
use them as preliminary treatment operations to 
reduce toxicity, followed by biological 
treatment. This option has proven  to be quite 
interesting from an economic point of view and 
has been studied by several authors (Martín et 
al. , 2008; Chamarro et al. , 2001; GarcíaG
Montaño et al. , 2008; Lucas et al. , 2007; 
Malato et al. , 2007; PérezGMoya et al. , 2007). 
 
2.1. H 2O2/UV 
Hydrogen peroxide (H 2O2) is a strong 
oxidant (see Table 2) applied, among other 
purposes, to reduce the low levels of pollutants 
present in wastewaters, as reported by Neyens 
and Baeyens (2003). However, the individual 
use of H 2O2 is not efficient in oxidizing more 
complex and recalcitrant materials with a low 
reaction rate. The use of H 2O2 becomes more 
effective when it acts in conjunction with other 
reagents or energy sources capable of 
dissociating it to generate hydroxyl radicals, 
which will act as oxidizing agents. With UV 
irradiation in wavelengths shorter than 300 nm, 
H2O2 can decompose and generate hydroxyl 
radicals, as shown in Equation 6. 
 
H2O2  2HO • (6) 
 
Hydrogen peroxide can also react with 
hydroxyl radicals and the intermediary products 
formed thereby, according to the reaction 
mechanism described in a simplified way by 
Equations 7 to 11 (Alfano et al ., 2001). 
 
H2O2 + HO • → HO 2• + H 2O (7) 
H2O2 + HO 2• → HO • + H 2O + O 2 (8) 
2HO • → H 2O2 (9) 
2HO 2• → H 2O2 + O 2 (10) 
HO • + HO 2• → H 2O2 + O 2 (11) 
 
The attack on organic compounds occur due 
to the hydroxyl (HO •) and hydroperoxyl (HO 2•) 
radicals formed. However, the hydroperoxyl 
radicals have a lower reduction potential (1.7 V) than that of hydroxyl radicals (2.8 V); 
therefore, their generation is not interesting to 
the process. Several studies have shown that 
the rise in the initial concentration of H 2O2 
increases the degradation rate of contaminants 
up to a maximum value, after which they begin 
to decline when they reach very high H 2O2 
levels (López et al ., 2000; Cisneros et al ., 
2002; Lunar et al ., 2000; Tang and Chen, 1996; 
Zhao et al ., 2004). López and coworkers (2000) 
attribute this decrease in the H 2O2/UV process 
yield to hydroxyl radicals reacting with excess 
H2O2 (Equation 7), instead of reacting with the 
organic substrates, leading to the formation of 
the hydroperoxyl radical HO •. 
The photolysis of H 2O2 is normally obtained 
with low or medium pressure mercury vapor 
lamps, both with high intensity, in order to 
reduce the amount of H 2O2 needed. Nearly 
50% of the energy consumed is lost in the form 
of heat or in emissions of wavelengths shorter 
than 185 nm, which are observed by the quartz 
jacket (Litter, 2005). The germicide lamp is a 
widely used cheaper alternative; however, the 
efficiency is lower because it emits in the 210 
to 240 nm range and H 2O2 absorption reaches a 
maximum of 220 nm. 
The advantages of using the H 2O2/UV 
process can be attributed to the fact that the 
reagent (H 2O2) is totally soluble in water, there 
is no mass transfer limitation, it is an effective 
source of HO •, and there is no need for a 
separation process after treatment (Gogate and 
Pandit, 2004b; Litter, 2005). 
The operational pH must be low (pH < 4) to 
nullify the effect of sequestering radical 
species, specifically ionic species such as 
carbonate and bicarbonate ions, leading to a 
better degradation rate. 
 
2.1.1. Application 
Stepnowski and coworkers (2002) assessed 
the use of H 2O2 in the presence and in the 
absence of UV radiation, in degrading an oil 
refinery wastewater pretreated with flotation 
and coagulation, analyzing total petroleum 
hydrocarbons (TPH), dichloromethane (DCM), 
1,2Gdichloroethane (DCE) and methyl tert Gbutyl 
ether (MTBE). It was observed that UV 
radiation did not significantly influence BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
126 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  compound degradation, with the exception of 
DCM, which was the most stable of all. In total 
83% was removed with 11.76 nM of H 2O2 in 
the presence of UV radiation. The authors 
observed slow degradation of the TPH, which 
removed 69% of the total initial concentration 
in 8 days of the experiment. The MTBE 
degradation was similar to that of DCE and 
after 24 hours there was total degradation. 
The application of the H 2O2/UV process to 
purify oily wastewater from a lubricantG
producing unit belonging to an oil company 
was studied by Philippopoulos and 
Poulopoulos (2003). Chromatographic analyses 
show that most of the compounds identified in 
the wastewater were removed by the end of the 
treatment, using a high concentration of H 2O2. 
Nevertheless, a reduction of only 40% of the 
initial COD of the wastewater was obtained 
(around 9000 mg/L G1). The authors attribute this 
to the formation of organic acids, resulting 
from the decomposition of organic compounds 
present in the wastewater, which are more 
resistant to photoGdegradation with H 2O2. The 
effect of pH on the process was also analyzed 
and it was found that in acid pH (3.5), there 
was enhanced reduction in the COD of the 
wastewater, when compared to neutral and 
basic pH’s. 
Hu and coworkers (2008) studied the 
degradation of MTBE, a gasoline additive and 
one of the most common contaminants in 
contaminated underground waters in the USA, 
owing to leakages in gasoline station storage 
tanks. The H 2O2/UV process was assessed, 
which, under specific conditions, removed up 
to 98% of the MTBE. An increase in the 
removal percentage was found with a rise in 
H2O2 concentration, but up to a maximum 
value, after which this percentage started to 
fall. The authors attribute this effect to the 
competitive reactions of H 2O2 and hydroxyl 
radicals shown in Equations 7 to 11. 
 
2.2. Fenton and photo-Fenton 
Fenton’s reagent is a solution of hydrogen 
peroxide and ferrous ions and was discovered 
by the chemical engineer Henry John Horstman 
Fenton (1854G1929), reporting in 1894 that this 
solution in acid medium had high oxidizing power (Machulek Jr., 2007; Fenton, H. J. H., 
1894). However, Huang and coworkers (1993), 
cited by Neyens and Baeyens (2003), 
mentioned that the application of Fenton’s 
reagent in oxidation processes to destroy toxic 
organic compounds was only attempted in the 
1960s. There is considerable controversy about 
the reaction mechanism involving Fenton’s 
reaction. The classic Fenton reaction 
interpreted by Haber and Weiss (1934), as cited 
by Bossmann and coworkers (1998), consists 
of an aqueous combination of hydrogen 
peroxide (H 2O2) and ferrous ions (Fe 2+ ), in acid 
medium, leading to the decomposition of H 2O2 
into a hydroxyl ion and a hydroxyl radical, and 
the oxidation of Fe 2+  to Fe 3+ , as represented by 
Equation 12. 
 
Fe 2+  + H 2O2 → Fe 3+  + HO • + HO −  (12) 
 
The Fe 2+  and Fe 3+  species, shown in a 
simplified form, correspond to the 
[Fe(OH)(H 2O) 5]+ aqueous complexes, which, 
together with H 2O2, form the 
[Fe(OH)(H 2O2)(H 2O) 4]+ and [Fe(OH)(H 2O) 5]2+  
complexes, respectively, as reported by 
Bossmann and coworkers (1998). 
As shown by Walling and Weill (1974), the 
Fe 3+  formed in Equation 12 can react with the 
H2O2 present in the medium and be reduced to  
Fe 2+  again, forming the hydroperoxyl radical, 
according to Equation 13. This reaction, 
referred to by Neyens and Baeyens (2003) as 
FentonGlike, occurs more slowly than reaction 
12, as reported by Pignatello (1992). The Fe 3+  
ions also react with the HO 2• and are reduced to 
Fe +2 , as shown by Equation 14. 
 
Fe 3+  + H 2O2  [Fe ⋅⋅⋅OOH] 2+  + H + → Fe 2+  + HO 2• (13)  
Fe 3+  + HO 2• → Fe 2+  + O 2 + H + (14) 
 
The initial degradation rate using Fe +3  is 
much lower than that using Fe +2 , as pointed out 
by SafarzadehGAmiri and coworkers (1997) and 
shown by Wang (2008). 
The ideal pH in Fenton’s reaction found in a 
number of studies is 3 (Benitez et al ., 2001; 
Gallard et al ., 1998; Guedes et al ., 2003; Lin 
and Lo, 1997; Pignatello, 1992), considered 
therefore to be the operating pH. At very low BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  127  pH (< 2.5), the formation of complexes, such as 
[Fe(H 2O) 6]2+ , occurs. These react more slowly 
with H 2O2 than does [Fe(OH)(H 2O) 5]+, 
producing a lower amount of hydroxyl radicals, 
thus decreasing the system efficiency (Gallard 
et al ., 1998). At basic pH, iron reacts with the 
hydroxide ions (HO −), precipitating the iron 
hydroxide (Fe(OH) 2 or Fe(OH) 3), which does 
not react with H 2O2, consequently precluding 
the Fenton reaction. Therefore, an adjustment 
in pH is required in the wastewater to be treated 
before adding the Fenton reagents. 
It is important to previously establish the 
optimal relationship between ferrous and 
hydrogen peroxide ions. When higher 
concentrations of ferrous ions than hydrogen 
peroxide ions are used, the hydroxyl radicals 
generated by Equation 12 may react with 
excess ferrous ions, according to Equation 15, 
decreasing the attack of hydroxyl radicals on 
organic substrates (Neyens and Baeyens, 2003). 
 
Fe 2+  + HO • → Fe 3+  + HO − (15) 
 
Guedes and coworkers (2003) observed that, 
although a [Fe 2+ ]/[H 2O2] ratio of 1:2 has a 
higher degradation rate, it is usually 
recommended to use the 1:5 ratio, which yields 
similar results and requires fewer reagents. 
In most cases, the Fenton’s reaction alone is 
not capable of degrading organic compounds 
and mineralizing them efficiently. The Fenton’s 
reaction is effective up to the moment at which 
all the Fe 2+  present in the medium is oxidized 
to Fe 3+ , thus interrupting the generation of 
hydroxyl radicals and, consequently, the 
degradation of organic compounds. According 
to Balanosky and coworkers (2000), cited by 
Maciel and corworkers (2004), one of the 
factors that contribute to the interruption of the 
Fenton’s reaction is that Fe 3+  ions can form 
stable organic compounds (under normal 
conditions) with the degradation products 
(mainly the organic acids) present in the 
medium, as shown by Equation 16, impairing 
the regeneration of Fe 2+ . 
 
Fe 3+  + (RCO 2)2+  → Fe 3+ (RCO 2)2+  (16) 
 Although it has been widely studied and 
provided good wastewater treatment results, the 
Fenton’s reaction was recognized as a powerful 
tool to degrade organic compounds when 
ultraviolet radiation is added to the system. 
This was achieved when Pignatello (1992) 
applied it in the treatment of wastewaters 
containing toxic organic pollutants in the early 
1990s. It has served as a starting point for a 
number of studies related to the application of 
the photoGFenton process (Bolton et al ., 2001; 
Celin et al ., 2003; Derbalah et al ., 2004; Durán 
et al ., 2008; Emilio et al ., 2002; Fallmann et 
al ., 1999; Gernjak et al ., 2003; Kavitha e 
Palanivelu, 2004; Maletzky and Bauer, 1998; 
Moraes et al ., 2004; Oliveros et al ., 1997;  
PérezGMoya et al ., 2007; Rodríguez et al ., 
2005; Sýkora et al ., 1997; Xu et al ., 2007).  
According to Pignatello (1992), UV 
irradiation strongly accelerates the degradation 
rate of organic pollutants from Fenton’s 
reagent, which has the advantage of being 
sensitive to UVGVis radiation for wavelengths 
above 300 nm. Under these conditions, the 
photolysis of Fe 3+  complexes enables 
regeneration of Fe 2+  and the occurrence of 
Fenton’s reaction, if H 2O2 is available. Faust 
and Hoigné (1990) reported that the dominant 
species (between pH 2.5G5) in the photoGFenton 
process is the ferric complex Fe(OH) 2+ , a 
simplified form of representing the aqueous 
complex Fe(OH)(H 2O) 52+ , and the photolysis of 
this complex (wavelengths < 410 nm) is the 
largest source of hydroxyl radicals (Equation 
17). Other photoreactive species are also 
present in the reaction medium, such as 
Fe 2(OH) 24+  and Fe(OH) 2+, possibly leading to 
the formation of hydroxyl radicals (Faust and 
Hoigné, 1990). 
 
Fe(OH) 2+   Fe 2+  + HO • (17) 
 
SafarzadehGAmiri and coworkers (1997) 
reported that Fe 2+  regeneration can also occur 
with the photolysis of the complexes formed 
(Equation 16) from Fe 3+  and the organic 
products generated in the degradation process, 
as shown by Equation 18. 
 BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
128 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  Fe 3+ (RCO 2)2+    Fe 2+  + CO 2 + R • (18) 
 
Thus, the ferrous ions regenerated by 
Equations 17 and 18 can react again with the 
H2O2 in solution (Equation 12) to generate 
more hydroxyl radicals, creating a 
photocatalytic cycle in the Fe 2+ /Fe 3+  system. 
The use of radiation reduces significantly the 
concentration of ferrous ions required, 
compared with the dark Fenton reaction (in the 
absence of light). The concentration of ferrous 
ions must not be very high, as in the Fenton’s 
reaction, in order to achieve good efficiency, 
since the addition of ferrous ions increases 
solution opacity, hindering radiation 
penetration and compromising Fe 2+  
regeneration when oxidized to Fe 3+ , As a 
consequence, the degradation rate is 
diminished, as reported by Bhatkhande and 
coworkers (2004). 
Malato and coworkers (2002) also cite the 
high depth of light penetration and the intense 
contact between the pollutant and the oxidizing 
agent as advantages of the photoGFenton 
process, since it is a homogeneous process. 
The disadvantages of the photoGFenton 
process are associated with the low pH values 
required (normally below 4) and the need to 
remove iron after the reaction. However, as 
reported by Mota (2005), iron removal may not 
be needed if is used at concentrations below the 
discard limit established by law. It is important 
to have prior knowledge of the physicalG
chemical characteristics of the wastewater to be 
treated by this process because some 
substances or inorganic ions, such as Cl −, 
SO 42−, H 2PO 4− /HPO 42− present in the 
wastewater or added as reagents (FeSO 4, FeCl 3, 
HCl, H 2SO 4) may interfere in the reaction 
mechanism of the Fenton and photoGFenton 
system, inhibiting the degradation process, as 
reported by De Laat and coworkers (2004) and 
Nadtochenko and Kiwi (1998). De Laat and 
coworkers (2004) suggest that the possible 
causes of these effects are the complexation 
reactions of the inorganic ion with Fe 2+  or Fe 3+  
ions and the reactions with hydroxyl radicals 
that lead to the formation of less reactive 
inorganic radicals (Cl • −, Cl 2• − and SO 4• −). Machulek Jr and coworkers (2007) found 
that the formation of Cl 2• − radical anions, due 
to the presence of chloride ions in the reaction 
medium, can be avoided by controlling pH at 3 
during the reaction period, given that the 
degradation process of an organic substrate by 
the photoGFenton process leads to the formation 
of acids and thus pH reduction. It occurs due to 
pH decrease lower than 2.5 in the presence of 
chlorides ions, leading to more intense 
formation of ferric chloride complexes (FeCl 2+  
and FeCl 2+). These complexes also undergo 
photolysis, thereby decreasing the amount of 
Fe(OH) +2 , which is the main source of 
hydroxyl radicals in the photoGFenton process, 
in addition to the formation of the Cl 2• − radical 
anion, which can react with  Fe 2+  (oxidizing to 
Fe 3+  without the formation of hydroxyl 
radicals) and the organic substrate.  
One of the main advantages of using the 
photoGFenton process compared with the other 
oxidation processes consists on using solar 
radiation in its reaction process. In this case, 
according to Machulek Jr. (2007), in the 
presence of oxalate ions (C 2O42−), the Fe 3+  
present in the aqueous medium may form the 
[Fe(C 2O4)] + complex (Equation 19), which 
absorbs light at wavelengths below 570 nm (the 
larger part of the visible UV solar spectrum). 
 
2[Fe(C 2O4)] +   2Fe 2+  + C 2O42− + 2CO 2 (19) 
 
The possibility of using solar radiation 
represents an enormous saving from the 
energetic point of view, given that there will be 
no need to use lamps. The development of pilot 
wastewater treatment plants that use solar 
reactors applied to the advanced oxidation 
processes has been one of the main focuses of 
research in the area (Blanco et al ., 1999; Dillert 
et al ., 1999; Gernjak et al ., 2006; Kositzi et al ., 
2004; Malato et al ., 2002; Malato et al ., 2003; 
Momani et al ., 2007; Xu et al ., 2007). 
 
2.2.1. Application 
SafarzadehGAmiri and coworkers (1997) 
used ferrioxalate as a source of iron in 
degrading different wastewaters containing 
BTEX, 1,4Gdioxane and methyl tert Gbutyl ether, BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  129  using the photoGFenton process and compared 
it with other photodegradation processes. Based 
on the use of energy, the results showed that, in 
some cases, the process was up to 30 times 
more efficient than the UV/H 2O2 and UVG
Vis/Fe 2+ /H 2O2 processes. Thus, the authors 
concluded that the process using ferrioxalate 
requires less electric energy than the UV/H 2O2 
process, resulting in lower treatment costs. 
Moraes and coworkers (2004) used the 
photoGFenton process to degrade the 
hydrocarbons present in saline synthetic 
wastewater prepared with gasoline to simulate 
the water produced in oil production fields that 
contain high concentrations of dissolved salts. 
It was found that, in the presence of salt 
(NaCl), total pollutant degradation did not 
occur. This was achieved in tests without 
adding salt to the synthetic wastewater. The 
authors attributed this effect to Fe 3+  ions that 
reacted with Cl − ions, forming FeCl 2+  
complexes, which, in the presence of UV 
radiation, may give rise to Cl 2• − radicals (lower 
oxidation potential than the HO • radicals), 
hence reducing the efficiency of the process. 
Tiburtius and coworkers (2005) investigated 
the oxidation potential of the Fenton and photoG
Fenton processes to degrade a solution 
containing benzene, toluene and xylenes (BTX) 
and water contaminated with gasoline 
(containing 25% ethanol). Rapid degradation of 
the BTX compounds was observed as well as 
the formation of intermediate phenolic 
compounds in the initial reaction periods that 
were completely degraded after 30 minutes of 
reaction. A level of 75% in degradation of total 
hydrocarbons present in gasolineGcontaminated 
water was achieved, and the BTX compounds 
were removed in the first minutes of the 
reaction (when phenolic compounds were 
formed), after which they degraded slowly. 
Mota and coworkers (2005) studied the 
photoGFenton process in degrading phenol, a 
very common pollutant in the petrochemical 
industry, using black light fluorescent lamps as 
an UVGA radiation source. These are much 
cheaper and more economical (from the energy 
consumption point of view) compared with 
medium pressure mercury vapor lamps. The 
efficiency of black light fluorescent lamps was confirmed when the dark Fenton and photoG
Fenton processes to degrade phenol were 
compared. Degradation was twice as high when 
the photoGFenton process was applied. The 
phenol degradation rate increased with the rise 
in intensity of the radiation emission source, 
owing to increased Fe 2+  ion regeneration 
(Equation 17), and consequent elevation in the 
hydroxyl radicals generated. The authors report 
that the study of this variable is important 
because it enables the construction of reactors 
that use lamps as the UV emission source, 
which are important in companies that require 
continuous treatment of their wastewater. This 
cannot be done with solar reactors alone, given 
that they only operate in periods in which there 
is sunlight. 
The photoGFenton process for treating waterG
containing diesel oil was studied by Galvão and 
coworkers (2006). They conducted a study to 
optimize the amount of reagents used, in order 
to achieve high levels of degradation with a 
smaller amount of reagents. With Fe 2+  ion 
concentrations of 0.1 mM, an amount below the 
maximum discard limit permitted by Brazilian 
law (0.27 mM), there was 99% degradation of 
the organic compounds originally present in the 
wastewater, expressed as total organic carbon 
(TOC). It is important for the photoGFenton 
process to be effective, from the economic 
point of view, under these operational 
conditions, since it does not require subsequent 
treatment to remove residual iron. 
Coelho and coworkers (2006) assessed the 
degradation of acid water effluents from oil 
refineries, which contained emulsified oil and a 
series of lowGbiodegradability micropollutants 
(such as phenols, sulphides, mercaptanes, 
ammonias, cyanides), through the application 
of different AOP. Among the processes 
analyzed, the Fenton and photoGFenton 
obtained the best results. The dark Fenton 
reaction was used until reaction stagnation 
(with the removal of only 27% of initial 
dissolved organic carbon – DOC), followed by 
the photoGFenton process, with the use of UV 
radiation. The combination of these two 
processes, applied continuously, reduced the 
initial DOC by 94%. The BTEX pollutants 
present in the original wastewater were BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
130 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  removed to nonGdetectable levels. The authors 
report that the Fenton and photoGFenton 
processes were efficient in removing pollutants 
from the wastewater; however, high 
concentrations of reagents were used. They 
assert that an optimization study is needed to 
reduce the amount of reagents, making the 
process more effective. 
Mater and coworkers (2007) investigated the 
efficiency of Fenton’s reagent in the 
mineralization of organic compounds present in 
water contaminated with crude petroleum. The 
process was assessed by monitoring the H 2O2 
(with spectrophotometric measurements) and 
by the titrimetric quantification of CO 2, which 
enabled the authors to calculate the rate of 
mineralized total organic carbon (TOC). These 
analyses showed a 75% reduction in the initial 
TOC of water contaminated with crude oil. 
 
2.2.2. Soil treatment application 
In addition to contaminating water, oil and 
its derivatives can also contaminate the soil, 
requiring an effective remediation process. 
Soil remediation is one of the greatest 
challenges to technicians and researchers. 
Studies applying advanced oxidation processes 
have proven to be effective in treating and 
recovering soil, mainly because they are faster 
than the biological processes and are able to 
degrade toxic recalcitrant matter. 
Fenton’s reaction has been the most widely 
used process in the remediation of soils 
contaminated with toxic organic pollutants. In 
the reaction, the sources of iron are varied, and 
include the minerals found naturally in the soil. 
Watts and Dilly (1996) analyzed different 
species of iron used as catalyst in the FentonG
like reaction to remediate dieselGcontaminated 
soil. It was shown that the reaction of H 2O2 
catalyzed by iron (III) ions (FentonGlike) was 
more effective than that catalyzed by iron (II) 
ions (Fenton). Among the iron salts analyzed, 
iron (III) perchlorate and iron (III) nitrate were 
those that yielded the best percentages of diesel 
oxidation. However, the authors underscore 
that the largeGscale use of iron (III) perchlorate 
is limited, since this reagent is not 
commercially available. The remediation of dieselGcontaminated soil 
was also studied by Kong and coworkers 
(1998). They used iron species in their mineral 
form (geotite and magnetite) and in their 
soluble salt form (FeSO 4) as catalyst and 
reagent for the Fenton’s reaction. It was found 
that, although the use of mineral iron takes 
more time to reach the indices of diesel 
degradation (around 50%) obtained with the 
FeSO 4 solution, it requires a lower 
concentration of H 2O2, which makes its 
application more economically effective than 
that using FeSO 4. 
Watts and coworkers (2000) studied the 
decontamination of soil containing gasoline, 
using Fenton’s reagent, individually analyzing 
the degradation of aliphatic and aromatic 
compounds present therein. It was observed 
that, despite being more recalcitrant and toxic, 
the aromatics need fewer reagents (iron and 
hydrogen peroxide) for oxidation than do the 
aliphatic components. The authors emphasize 
the rapid action of the Fenton’s reagent, which 
can effectively treat oilGcontaminated soils in 
hours or days, whereas the bioremediation or 
natural attenuation of soil can take months or 
years. 
Mater and coworkers (2007), in addition to 
assessing the efficiency of Fenton’s reagent in 
mineralizing the organic compounds in oilG
contaminated water, investigated the 
mineralization of organic pollutants in soils 
contaminated with crude oil, calculating the 
rate of mineralized TOC by monitoring CO 2 
and H 2O2. Under certain operational conditions, 
a 70% reduction in the initial TOC was 
obtained in soil contaminated with crude oil. 
 
2.3. Ozone (O 3) 
One of the uses of ozonation that has grown 
considerably in recent years is the treatment of 
drinking water, given that its action mechanism 
does not produce chlorinated compounds that 
may originate in the chlorine disinfection 
process (Augugliaro et al ., 2006). In addition, 
the ozone itself has the advantage of not being 
harmful to most organisms. However, its use in 
wastewater treatment is limited, owing to the 
high demand of energy to generate ozone 
(PeraGTitus et al ., 2004). Furthermore, the BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  131  efficiency of ozone is extremely dependent on 
gasGliquid mass transfer, which is impeded by 
the low solubility of ozone in aqueous solution, 
as reported by Gogate and Pandit (2004a). 
Ozone has a high reduction potential 
(2.07V), and can react slowly and directly with 
an organic substrate (Augugliaro et al ., 2006). 
However, the use of ozone is only 
characterized as an AOP when it decomposes 
to generate hydroxyl radicals (Equation 20), 
and can be catalyzed by hydroxyl ions (HO −) in 
alkaline medium or by transition metal cations 
(Augugliaro et al ., 2006; PeraGTitus et al ., 
2004; Straehelin and Hoigné, 1985). 
 
2O 3 + 2H 2O → 2HO • + O 2 + 2HO 2•  (20) 
 
The efficiency of ozone in degrading 
organic compounds is improved when 
combined with H 2O2, UV radiation or 
ultrasound. 
According to Huang and coworkers (1993), 
cited by Augugliaro and coworkers (2006), 
H2O2 induces the decomposition of O 3 by 
electron transfer through a reaction that can be 
understood as H 2O2 activation by O 3 (Equation 
21), by means of a mechanism shown in a 
simplified form in the following equations (22 
through 29). 
 
O3 + H 2O2 → HO • + O 2 + HO 2• (21) 
H2O2  HO 2− + H + (22) 
HO 2− + O 3 → O 3• − + HO 2•  (23) 
HO 2•  O2• − + H +  (24) 
O2• − + O 3 → O 3− + O 2  (25) 
O3• − + H + → HO 3• (26) 
HO 3• → HO • + O 2 (27) 
O3 + HO • → O 2 + HO 2• (28) 
O3 + HO 2• → 2 O 2 + HO • (29) 
 
Wang and coworkers (2002) reported that 
hydrogen peroxide can simultaneously react 
with the superoxide radical anion (O 2•−) to 
produce another hydroxyl radical, as shown by 
Equation 30. 
 
H2O2 + O 2• − → HO • + OH − + O 2  (30) 
 The O 3/UV process consists in UV 
irradiation (254 nm) on an aqueous system 
saturated with ozone producing H 2O2 (Equation 
31), which will also be exposed to the action of 
UV light, producing hydroxyl radicals 
(Andreozzi et al ., 1999), as shown by Equation 
6. In this process, with the formation of 
hydrogen peroxide, there is a new reaction 
pathway to generate other hydroxyl radicals 
(Equations 21G29), creating a synergistic effect 
that comprises direct ozonation, direct 
photolysis and the decomposition of hydroxyl 
radicals (Agustina et al ., 2005; Wang et al ., 
2002). 
 
O3 + H 2O  H2O2 + O 2 (31) 
 
Combined with other techniques, the use of 
ultrasound and ozone may also strengthen the 
generation of hydroxyl radicals, since the 
turbulence created by the acoustic current 
induced by ultrasound reduces the limitations 
of mass transfer (Gogate and Pandit, 2004a). 
 
2.3.1. Application 
Garoma and coworkers (2008) studied the 
use of the ozone/UV process in removing 
components from gasoline, such as BTX, 
MTBE, tert Gbutyl alcohol and total petroleum 
hydrocarbons such as gasoline, present in 
contaminated groundwater samples. After 
treatment under previously established 
experimental conditions, removal indices 
higher than 99% of pollutants initially present 
in all contaminated water samples were 
obtained. In natural samples containing iron, 
lower degradation rates were obtained than in 
ironGfree samples or in those with lower 
concentrations. The authors report that, 
although iron can act by degrading organic 
pollutants from the ferrous ion reactions with 
the ozone itself to generate hydroxyl radicals 
(reactions 17, 32G33), the presence of iron 
renders all samples progressively more turbid, 
reducing radiation absorption by the solution. 
 
Fe 2+  + O 3 → FeO 2+ + O 2 (32) 
FeO 2+  + H 2O → Fe 3+  + HO • + OH − (33) 
 BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
132 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  2.4. Heterogeneous photocatalysis 
The first studies developed on the use of 
photocatalysis in the presence of a 
semiconductor to degrade an organic pollutant 
were conducted in the early 1980s by Pruden 
and Ollis (1983), among others, as cited by 
Alfano and coworkers (2000). Since then this 
process has been one of the main study focuses 
among the advanced oxidation processes 
(Alfano et al. , 1997; Bhatkhande et al. , 2003; 
Bockelmann et al. , 1995; Crittenden et al. , 
1997b; Curcó et al. , 1996; Fujishima et al. , 
2000; Fujishima et al. , 2007; Goslich et al. , 
1997; Kositzi et al. , 2004; Ljubas, 2005; 
McLoughlin et al. , 2004; Malato et al. , 2002; 
Rodríguez et al. , 1996; Romero et al. , 1999; 
Salah et al.,  2004; Serpone, 1997; Sichel et al. , 
2007). 
The principle of heterogeneous 
photocatalysis is based on the activation of a 
semiconductor particulate material (CdS, TiO 2, 
ZnO, WO 3 etc. ) by the action of radiation with 
an appropriate wavelength. This activation is 
achieved with the absorption of photons by the 
semiconductor particle possessing enough 
energy to promote the conduction of an 
electron (e−) from its valence band (VB) to the 
conduction band (CB) (a transition called 
bandgap energy), creating holes in the valence 
band (h +) that will act as oxidizing sites 
(Serpone, 1997). According to Alfano and 
coworkers (1997), titanium dioxide (TiO 2) in 
the anatase form is the most indicated material 
for use in photocatalytic water treatment 
processes, considering toxicity, resistance to 
photocorrosion, availability, catalytic efficiency 
and cost. TiO 2 absorbs radiation at wavelengths 
below 400 nm (which enables the use of 
sunlight), capable of forming e−−h+ pairs 
(Equation 34) that can recombine (Goslich et 
al. , 1997). 
 
TiO 2  TiO 2 (e−
BC  + h +
BV ) (34) 
 
After the formation of these e−−h+ pairs, a 
recombination occurs in the catalyst, generating 
heat and adsorbing water molecules and 
hydroxyl ions present in the medium. These 
will act as electron donors, generating hydroxyl radicals in the hole (h +) of the catalyst (Minero 
et al. , 1996; Alfano et al. , 1997), as shown by 
Equations 35 and 36. 
 
h+ + H 2O → HO • + H +  (35) 
h+ + HO − → HO •  (36) 
The dissolved oxygen present or added to 
the medium, can act as an electron acceptor, 
generating the superoxide radical (Equation 37) 
and triggering a series of reactions that may 
lead to the formation of hydroxyl radicals 
(Quina et al. , 2004; Valente et al. , 2005). 
According to Bockelmann and coworkers 
(1995), the addition of hydrogen peroxide may 
also favor the process, given that, like oxygen, 
it may act as the acceptor of electrons available 
in the system, generating hydroxyl radicals, 
according to Equation 38. 
 
O2 + e– → O 2• –  (37) 
H2O2 + e– → HO • + HO –  (38) 
 
Figure 1 shows the reaction mechanism 
involving the electrons and holes produced by 
UV light that can migrate to the surface of the 
anatase particle, where they react with adsorbed 
oxygen, water, hydroxide ions or organic 
species via electron transfer reactions (Quina et 
al. , 2004). 
 
2.4.1. Application 
Bessa and coworkers (2001) studied the 
treatment of water produced from oil fields via 
a photocatalytic process using TiO 2/UV, with 
 
 
 
 
 hν 
h+ e− O2   
H2O O2• 
HO • + H + −− −− 
TiO2 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic representation of the basic 
mechanism of TiO 2 photocatalysis. Adapted from 
Quina and co workers (2004) . BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  133  the addition of H 2O2. Chromatographic 
analyses showed the complexity of the 
wastewater, and most of the compounds present 
in the medium, remained unidentified. 
However, a considerable reduction in 
chromatogram peaks can be observed, showing 
pollutant degradation and the presence of a 
number of alkanes (considered nonGtoxic) in 
the treated wastewater. The addition of H 2O2 in 
the photocatalytic process was unnecessary and 
even undesirable, owing to the corrosive and 
damaging effects of this substance on the 
catalysts (TiO 2). 
As previously mentioned, Hu and coworkers 
(2008) studied the degradation of a gasoline 
additive (methyl tertGbutyl ether – MTBE). In 
addition to the use of the H 2O2/UV process, the 
use of TiO 2/UV was compared with a modified 
catalyst (Ag/TiO 2/UV). The use of 
Ag/TiO 2/UV achieved a higher degradation rate 
than that obtained with TiO 2/UV, reaching 
higher MTBE removal indices (around 80%) 
more rapidly. The authors suggested that this 
difference was due to the formation of microG
batteries on the surface of TiO 2, where Ag acts 
as an electrode in coupling with TiO 2, receiving 
the electron from the activation reaction of 
TiO 2 (Equation 34) and reducing the compound 
to its oxidized state. 
Saien and Nejati (2007) used the TiO 2/UV 
process to degrade the organic pollutants of a 
refinery wastewater pretreated by physicalG
chemical processes. They studied the effect of 
TiO 2 concentration, finding an optimal 
condition (of maximum degradation, reaching 
90%), in which  increased TiO 2 concentration 
caused a decrease in the degradation rate, 
probably due to the increase in solution 
turbidity and consequent reduced light 
transmission in the medium. An assessment of 
pH obtained an optimal pH of around 3. The 
authors reported that this was due to the fact 
that the formation of e−−h+ pairs (Equation 34) 
is favored under conditions of lower pH than 
the point of zero charge of TiO 2 (pH = 6.25), 
and for pH values below 3, the absorption of 
anions formed from the dissociation of added 
sulfuric acid reduces the possibility of organic 
matter absorption on the surface of the catalyst, 
decreasing the degradation rate. The same study also verified the influence of temperature 
and found that its increase leads to increased 
pollutant degradation, relating this effect to 
electron transfers in valence band to higher 
energy levels and, therefore, facilitating the 
production of e−−h+ pairs. 
 
2.5. Electrochemical oxidation 
According to Brillas and coworkers (1998), 
electrochemical processes can produce 
hydroxyl radicals by two means: anodic 
oxidation (direct form) and mediated electroG
oxidation (indirect form). In anodic oxidation, 
the hydroxyl radical is generated in the anode 
(Pt, PbO 2, doped with SnO 2 etc. ) of an 
electrochemical cell from water oxidation 
(Equation 39). In mediated electroGoxidation, 
chemical species, such as H 2O2, are 
continuously generated in the cathode by the 
reduction of two electrons of dissolved oxygen, 
as shown by Equation 40 (Brillas and Casado, 
2002). 
 
H2O → HO • + H + + e− (39) 
O2 + 2H + + 2 e− → H 2O2  (40) 
 
The hydrogen peroxide generated can act as 
a reagent for Fenton’s system, with the addition 
of iron, leading to the formation of hydroxyl 
radicals (Equation 12). This process, whereby 
the hydrogen peroxide from Fenton’s reaction 
is electrochemically generated, is called the 
electroGFenton process (Brillas and Casado, 
2002). Oturan and Brillas (2007) reported that 
the Fe 3+  obtained with Fenton’s reaction 
(Equation 12) or added to the solution can be 
continuously reduced to Fe 2+ , creating an 
electrochemical catalysis process, as shown by 
Equation 41. 
 
Fe 3+  + e− → Fe 2+  (41) 
 
The oxidation power of the system can also 
be increased with the introduction of ultraviolet 
radiation to help reduce Fe 3+  to Fe 2+ , as shown 
by Wang and coworkers (2008), consisting of a 
combination of techniques known as the 
photoelectronGFenton process. 
According to Saltmiras and Lemley (2002), 
the Fenton’s electrochemical treatment can also BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
134 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  be used by means of an electrochemical cell 
with iron electrodes (cathode and anode), in 
which the anode has the function of transferring 
iron to the solution and the cathode functions as 
an inert electrode for water reduction, as shown 
in Equations 42 and 43. The Fe 2+  transferred by 
the cathode acts in the Fenton’s reaction 
(Equation 12), with the addition of hydrogen 
peroxide to the system. 
 
Fe → Fe 2+  + 2 e− (42) 
2H 2O + 2 e− → H 2(g)  + 2OH − (43) 
 
One of the disadvantages of this process is 
that, owing to the formation of hydroxide ions 
in the cathode, the medium in which this 
process is applied is close to neutral pH, which 
is not suitable for Fenton’s reaction. In 
addition, solids are formed in the solution, 
owing to iron hydroxide precipitation 
(Saltmiras and Lemley, 2002). 
 
2.5.1. Application 
Yavuz and Koparal (2006) studied the 
degradation of phenol present in a refinery 
wastewater via electrochemical oxidation, 
using a titanium electrode coated with titanium 
oxide and ruthenium oxide. The initial phenol 
concentration was 192.2 mg/L and the chemical 
oxygen demand (COD) was 590 mg/L. After 
treatment, a 94.5% removal of phenol and 
70.1% of chemical oxygen demand (COD) was 
obtained, the latter because the wastewater still 
contained other organic and inorganic 
contaminants. 
Santos and coworkers (2006) used 
dimensionally stable anodes (or DSA, a 
metallic base of titanium coated with titanium 
and ruthenium oxides) in the electroG
remediation of oily wastewater produced 
during petroleum extraction and refining. The 
authors managed to remove up to 57% of initial 
COD from the wastewater and attributed this 
reduction to the consequence of the electroG
degradation of organic compounds, through the 
anodic oxidation of components in the DSA 
electrode and the electroGflotation of oil 
droplets in suspension that aggregate on the 
surface owing to the gas formed in the cathode (H 2) and in the anode (O 2 and Cl 2). The authors 
also found that the increased temperature 
favors the removal of COD by the 
electrochemical process. 
 
2.6. Wet air oxidation and supercritical 
water oxidation 
Wet air oxidation (WAO) is an ecologically 
safe technology for treating water containing 
organic pollutants (Zerva et al. , 2003). This 
technique enables the oxidation of pollutants 
from oxygen dissolved in water, under high 
pressure conditions (10G220 bar) and high 
temperatures (150G370°C), leading to the 
formation of hydroxyl radicals (Domènech et 
al. , 2001; Rivas et al. , 1998). Supercritical 
water oxidation (SCWO) consists of submitting 
water to higher temperature and pressure 
conditions than their critical point (above 
374°C and 221 bar, respectively). This 
technique obtains rapid results, but requires 
high energetic demand and, consequently, high 
operational costs. 
Wet air oxidation may have its efficiency 
improved with the presence of homogeneous 
catalysts (such as Cu 2+  salts) and heterogeneous 
catalysts (MnO 2, CuO, Fe 2O3 etc. ) in the 
reaction, as cited by Domènech and coworkers 
(2001), and known as catalytic wet air 
oxidation (CWAO). 
 
2.6.1. Application 
Sun and coworkers (2008) applied 
microwave assisted catalytic wet air oxidation 
in the treatment of petrochemical wastewater. It 
was observed that the use of microwaves helps 
in heating and heat conduction, accelerating the 
pollutant degradation rate. A positive effect on 
the pollutant degradation rate was also found 
with an increase in temperature and dissolved 
oxygen in the medium, as well as with a rise in 
microwave power levels. The authors 
concluded that microwave assisted catalytic 
wet air oxidation was efficient in removing 
nonGbiodegradable organic pollutants and 
demonstrated that this method, as a 
pretreatment process, made the wastewater 
adequate (with the increased biochemical 
demand of oxygen) for biological treatment. 
 BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  135  3. CONCLUSIONS 
Advanced oxidation processes provide an 
efficient alternative for treating wastewater 
contaminated with toxic organic compounds. 
With high oxidation power, the hydroxyl 
radicals are capable of totally or partially 
degrading practically all classes of organic 
compounds present in aqueous medium or in 
soils, resulting in the complete mineralization 
of these compounds or in their conversion to 
more biodegradable products. 
The studies conducted in the petrochemical 
area presented in this study showed promising 
results, reducing the organic pollution load of 
wastewaters, in many of the investigations, to 
negligible levels. Even when not completely 
degraded, there is a large reduction in 
wastewater toxicity, which enables subsequent 
biological treatment. This capacity of AOP to 
completely degrade the organic load or to 
convert it into products that enable biological 
treatment is extremely important in the oil 
industry, since they allow the reuse of water for 
more productive purposes, such as irrigation, or 
in the production process itself, reducing the 
environmental impact caused by discarding or 
lowering the water consumption costs present 
in practically all oil production stages. 
Reagent concentrations can be optimized by 
prior experimental studies with the wastewater 
to be treated, since each one has its 
peculiarities. The variables and the interference 
of external agents in the system are 
innumerable, varying from case to case. This 
optimization is fundamental to minimize the 
costs of reagents used in the AOP, which are 
the most costly elements of the process. 
Another possibility for reducing operational 
costs, in the case of photochemical processes, is 
the use of processes that enable the 
employment of solar radiation, such as 
TiO 2/UV and photoGFenton processes. 
The use of Fenton’s reagent in the 
remediation of soils contaminated with oil and 
its derivatives yielded excellent results, with a 
significant reduction in the organic load present 
in the medium. These results are important for 
substituting the conventional techniques used to 
remediation of soils contaminated with oil and 
derivatives, when a bioGremediation is unfeasible. These conventional techniques 
consists of simply removing the contaminated 
area, a process that has an environmental and 
physical impact on the affected site, followed 
by the storage or extraction of contaminants, 
which is a costly method that does not resolve 
the pollutant problem, but rather transfers the 
polluting load from one location to another. 
One of the requirements to ensure the good 
use of AOP is to conduct large scale studies 
and scaleGenlargement projects that more 
faithfully represent industrial applications 
(which have large flows), given that most 
studies in the area are still carried out at 
laboratory scale. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge 
financial support from the following Brazilian 
agencies: CNPq ( Conselho Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico ), 
CAPES ( Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de 
Pessoal de Nível Superior ) and ANP ( Agência 
Nacional do Petróleo, Gás Natural e 
Biocombustíveis ). 
 
 
REFERENCES  
AGUSTINA, T. E., ANG, H. M., VAREEK, V. 
K. A review of synergistic effect of 
photocatalysis and ozonation on wastewater 
treatment. Journal of Photochemistry and 
Photobiology C: Photochemistry Reviews, 
v. 6, p. 264–273, 2005. 
ALFANO, O. M., BAHNEMANN, D., 
CASSANO, A. E., DILLERT, R., 
GOSLICH, R. Photocatalysis in water 
environments using artificial and solar light. 
Catalysis Today, v. 58, p. 199–230, 2000. 
ALFANO, O. M., BRANDI, R. J., CASSANO, 
A. E. Degradation kinetics of 2,4GD in water 
employing hydrogen peroxide and UV 
radiation. Chemical Engineering Journal, v. 
82, p. 209–218, 2001. 
ALFANO, O. M., CABRERA, M. I., 
CASSANO, A. E. Photocatalytic reactions 
Iivolving hydroxyl radical attack. Journal of 
Catalysis, v. 172, p. 370–379, 1997. BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
136 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  ANDREOZZI, R., CAPRIO, V., INSOLA, A., 
MAROTTA, R. Advanced oxidation 
processes (AOP) for water purification and 
recovery. Catalysis Today, v. 53, p. 51–59, 
1999. 
AUGUGLIARO, V., LITTER, M., 
PALMISANO , L., SORIA, J. The 
combination of heterogeneous 
photocatalysis with chemical and physical 
operations: A tool for improving the 
photoprocess performance. Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology C: 
Photochemistry Reviews, v. 7, p. 127–144, 
2006. 
BALANOSKY, E., HERRERA, F., LOPEZ, 
A., KIWI, J. Oxidative degradation of textile 
waste water. Modeling reactor performance. 
Water Res., v. 34 (2), p. 582–596, 2000. 
BENITEZ, F. J., ACERO, J. L., REAL, F. J., 
RUBIO, F. J., LEAL, A. I. The role of 
hydroxyl radicals for the decomposition of 
pGhydroxy phenylacetic acid in aqueous 
solutions. Wat. Res., v. 35, n. 5, p. 1338G
1343, 2001. 
BESSA, E., SANT’ANNA JR., G. L., 
DEZOTTI, M. Photocatalytic/H 2O2 
treatment of oil field produced waters. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, v. 29, 
p. 125–134, 2001. 
BHATKHANDE, D. S., KAMBLE, S. P., 
SAWANT, S. B., PANGARKAR, V. G. 
Photocatalytic and photochemical 
degradation of nitrobenzene using artificial 
ultraviolet light. Chemical Engineering 
Journal, vol. 102, p. 283–290, 2004. 
BHATKHANDE, D. S., PANGARKAR, V. G.,  
BEENACKERS, A. A. C. M. Photocatalytic 
degradation of nitrobenzene using titanium 
dioxide and concentrated solar radiation: 
chemical effects and scaleup. Water 
Research, v. 37, p. 1223–1230, 2003. 
BLANCO, J., MALATO, S., FERNÁNDEZ, 
P., VIDAL, A., MORALES, A., 
TRINCADO, P. OLIVEIRA, J. C., 
MINERO, C. MUSCI, M., CASALLE, C., 
BRUNOTTE, M., TRATZKY, S., 
DISCHINGER, N., FUNKEN, K. H., 
SATTLER, C., VINCENT, M., 
COLLARESGPEREIRA, M., MENDES, J. 
F., RANGEL, C. M. Compound parabolic concentrator technology development to 
commercial solar detoxification 
applications. Solar Energy, v. 67, n. 4–6, p. 
317–330, 1999. 
BOCKELMANN, D., WEICHGREBE, D., 
GOSLICH, R., BAHNEMANN, D. 
Concentrating versus nonGconcentrating 
reactors for solar water detoxication. Solar 
Energy Materials and Solar Cells, v. 38, p. 
441G251, 1995. 
BOLTON, J. R., BIRCHER, K. G., TUMAS, 
W., TOLMAN, C. A. FiguresGofGmerit for 
the technical development and application of 
advanced oxidation processes. Pure Appl. 
Chem., v. 73, n. 4, p. 627–637, 2001. 
BOSSMANN, S. H., OLIVEROS, E., GÖB, S., 
SIEGWART, S., DAHLEN, E. P., 
PAYAWAN JR., L., STRAUB, M., 
WÖRNER, M., BRAUN, A. M., New 
Evidence against Hydroxyl Radicals as 
Reactive Intermediates in the Thermal and 
Photochemically Enhanced Fenton 
Reactions. J. Phys. Chem. A, v. 102, p. 
5542G5550, 1998. 
BRILLAS, E., CASADO, J. Aniline 
degradation by ElectroGFenton and peroxiG
coagulation processes using a flow reactor 
for wastewater treatment. Chemosphere, v. 
47, p. 241–248, 2002. 
BRILLAS, E., MUR, E., SAULEDA, R., 
SÀNCHEZ, L., PERAL, J., DOMÈNECH, 
X., CASADO, J. Aniline mineralization by 
AOP’s: anodic oxidation, photocatalysis, 
ElectroGFenton and PhotoelectroGFenton 
processes. Appl. Catal. B: Environ., v. 16, p. 
31–42, 1998. 
CELIN, PANDIT, M., KAPOOR, J. C., 
SHARMA, R. K., Studies on photoG
degradation of 2,4Gdinitro toluene in 
aqueous phase. Chemosphere, n. 53, p. 63–
69, 2003. 
CHAMARRO, E., MARCO, A., ESPLUGAS, 
S. Use of fenton reagent to improve organic 
chemical biodegradability. Water Research 
4, v. 35, p. 1047G1051, 2001. 
CISNEROS, R. L., ESPINOZA, A. G., 
LITTER, M. I. Photodegradation of an azo 
dye of the textile industry. Chemosphere, n. 
48, p. 393–399, 2002. BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  137  COELHO, A., CASTRO, A. V., DEZOTTI, 
M., SANT’ANNA JR., G. L. Treatment of 
petroleum refinery sourwater by advanced 
oxidation processes. Journal of Hazardous 
Materials B, n. 137, p. 178–184, 2006. 
CRITTENDEN J. C., SURI, R. P. S., 
PERRAM, D. L., HAND, D. W. 
Decontamination of water using adsorption 
and photocatalysis. Water Research ,v. 31, 
n. 3, p. 411G418, 1997a. 
CRITTENDEN, J. C., LIU, J., HAND, D. W., 
PERRAM, D. L. Photocatalytic oxidation of 
chlorinated hydrocarbons in water. Water 
Research, v. 31, n. 3, p. 429G438, 1997b. 
CURCÓ, D., MALATO, S., BLANCO, J., 
GIMÉNEZ, J. Photocatalysis and radiation 
absorption in a solar plant. Solar Energy 
Materials and Solar Cells, v. 44, p. 199G217, 
1996. 
DE LAAT, J., LE, G. T., LEGUBE, B. A 
comparative study of the effects of chloride, 
sulfate and nitrate ions on the rates of 
decomposition of H 2O2 and organic 
compounds by Fe(II)/H 2O2 and 
Fe(III)/H 2O2. Chemosphere, v. 55, p. 715–
723, 2004. 
DERBALAH, A. S, NAKATANI, N., 
SAKUGAWA, H. Photocatalytic removal of 
fenitrothion in pure and natural waters by 
photoGFenton reaction. Chemosphere, vol. 
57, p. 635–644, 2004. 
DILLERT, R., CASSANO, A. E., GOSLICH, 
R., BAHNEMANN, D. Large scale studies 
in solar catalytic wastewater treatment. 
Catalysis Today, v. 54, p. 267–282, 1999. 
DOMÈNECH, X., JARDIM, W. F., LITTER, 
M. I. Procesos Avanzados De Oxidación 
Para La Eliminación De Contaminantes. cap 
01 do livro Eliminación de Contaminantes 
por Fotocatálisis Heterogénea, editado por 
Miguel A. Blesa (para CYTED), 2001 (in 
Spanish) 
DURÁN, A., MONTEAGUDO, J.M., 
AMORES, E. Solar photoGFenton 
degradation of Reactive Blue 4 in a CPC 
reactor. Applied Catalysis B: Environmental 
80, 42–50, 2008. 
DURELL, G., UTVIK, T. R., JOHNSEN, S., 
FROST, T., NEFF, J. Oil well produced 
water discharges to the North Sea. Part I: Comparison of deployed mussels ( Mytilus 
edulis ), semiGpermeable membrane devices, 
and the DREAM model predictions to 
estimate the dispersion of polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbons. Marine 
Environmental Research, v. 62, p. 194–223, 
2006. 
EMILIO, C. A., JARDIM, W. F., LITTER, M. 
I., MANSILLA, H. D., EDTA destruction 
using the solar ferrioxalate advanced 
oxidation technology (AOT) Comparison 
with solar photoGFenton treatment. Journal 
of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: 
Chemistry, n. 151, p. 121–127, 2002. 
FALLMANN, H., KRUTZLER, T., BAUER, 
R., MALATO, S., BLANCO, J. 
Applicability of the photoGFenton method 
for treating water containing pesticides. 
Catalysis Today 54, p. 309–319, 1999. 
FAUST, B. C., HOIGNÉ, J. Photolysis of 
Fe(III)Ghydroxy complexes as sources of OH 
radicals in clouds, fog and rain. Atmospheric 
Enviroment, v. 24A, n. 1, p. 79G89, 1990. 
FENTON, H. J. H. Oxidation of tartaric acid in 
presence of iron. J. Chem. Soc., v. 65, p. 
899G910, 1894. 
FUJISHIMA, A., RAO, T. N., TRYK, D. A. 
Titanium dioxide photocatalysis. Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology C: 
Photochemistry Reviews, v. 1, p. 1–21, 
2000. 
FUJISHIMA, A., ZHANGA, X., TRYK, D. A. 
Heterogeneous photocatalysis: Fromwater 
photolysis to applications in environmental 
cleanup. International Journal of Hydrogen 
Energy, v. 32, p. 2664 – 2672, 2007. 
GALLARD, H., DE LAAT, J., LEGUBE, B. 
Influence du pH sur la vitesse d’oxydation 
de composes organiques par Fe(II)/H2O2, 
Mécanismes réactionnels et modélisation. 
New J. Chem., p. 263G268, 1998. 
GALVÃO, S. A. O., MOTA, A. L. N., SILVA, 
D. N., MORAES, J. E. F., NASCIMENTO, 
C. A. O., CHIAVONEGFILHO, O. 
Application of the photoGFenton process to 
the treatment of wastewaters contaminated 
with diesel. Science of The Total 
Environment, v. 367, n. 1, p. 42G49, 2006. 
GARCÍAGMONTAÑO, J., PÉREZGESTRADA, 
L., OLLER, I., MALDONADO, M. I., BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
138 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  TORRADES, F., PERAL, J. Pilot plant 
scale reactive dyes degradation by solar 
photoGFenton and biological processes. 
Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology 
A: Chemistry, v. 195, p. 205–214, 2008. 
GAROMA, T., GUROL, M. D., OSIBODU, 
O., THOTAKURA, L. Treatment of 
groundwater contaminated with gasoline 
components by an ozone/UV process. 
Chemosphere, v. 73, p. 825–831, 2008. 
GERNJAK, W., FUERHACKER, M., 
FERNÁNDEZGIBAÑEZ, P., BLANCO, J., 
MALATO, S. Solar photoGFenton 
treatment—Process parameters and process 
control. Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental, v. 64, p. 121–130, 2006. 
GERNJAK, W., KRUTZLER, T., GLASER, 
A., MALATO, S., CACERES, J., BAUER, 
R., FERNÁNDEZGALBA, A. R. PhotoG
Fenton treatment of water containing natural 
phenolic pollutants. Chemosphere, n. 50, p. 
71–78, 2003. 
GHALY, M. Y., HÄRTEL, G., MAYER, R., 
HASENEDER, R. Photochemical oxidation 
of pGchlorophenol by UV/H 2O2 and photoG
Fenton process. A comparative study, Waste 
Management, v. 21, p. 41G47, 2001. 
GOGATE, P. R., PANDIT, A. B. A review of 
imperative technologies for wastewater 
treatment I: oxidation technologies at 
ambient conditions. Advances in 
Environmental Research, v. 8, n. 3G4, p. 
501G551, 2004a. 
GOGATE, P. R., PANDIT, A. B. A review of 
imperative technologies for wastewater 
treatment II: hybrid methods. Advances in 
Environmental Research, v. 8, p. 553–597, 
2004b. 
GOSLICH, R., DILLERT, R., BAHNEMANN, 
D. Solar water treatment: principles and 
reactors. Wat. Sci. Tech, n. 4, p. 137G148, 
1997. 
GUEDES, A. M. F. M., MADEIRA, L. M. P., 
BOAVENTURA, R. A. R., COSTA, C. A. 
V. Fenton oxidation of cork cooking 
wastewater—overall kinetic analysis. Water 
Research, v. 37 p. 3061–3069, 2003. 
HABER, F., WEISS, J. J. The catalytic 
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide by iron salts. Proc Royal Soc London, Ser. A, n. 
147, p. 332G345, 1934. 
HU, Q., ZHANG, C., WANG, Z., CHEN, Y., 
MAO, K., ZHANG, X., XIONG, Y., ZHU, 
M. Photodegradation of methyl tert Gbutyl 
ether (MTBE) by UV/H 2O2 and UV/TiO 2. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials, v. 154, p. 
795–803, 2008. 
HUANG, C. P., DONG, C., TANG, Z., 
Advanced chemical oxidation: Its present 
role and potential future in hazardous waste 
treatment. Waste Management, v. 13, p. 
361G377, 1993. 
KAVITHA, V., PALANIVELU, K. The role of 
ferrous ion in Fenton and photoGFenton 
processes for the degradation of phenol. 
Chemosphere, vol. 55, p. 1235–1243, 2004. 
KONG, S., WATTS, R. J., CHOI, J. Treatment 
of petroleumGcontaminated soils using iron 
mineral catalyzed hydrogen peroxide. 
Chemosphere, v. 37, n. 8, pp. 1473G1482, 
1998. 
KOSITZI, M., POULIOS, I., MALATO, S., 
CACERES, J., CAMPOS, A. Solar 
photocatalytic treatment of synthetic 
municipal wastewater. Water Research, v. 
38, p. 1147–1154, 2004. 
LEGRINI, O., OLIVEROS, E. AND BRAUN, 
A. M. Photochemical Processes for Water 
Treatment, Chemical Reviews, v. 93, p. 671G
698, 1993. 
LIN, S. H., LO, C. C. Fenton process for 
treatment of desizing wastewater. Water 
Research, v. 31, n. 8, p. 2050G2056, 1997. 
LITTER, M. Introduction to Photochemical 
Advanced Oxidation Processes for Water 
Treatment. Hdb Env. Chem., v. 2, part M, p. 
325–366, 2005. 
LJUBAS, D. Solar photocatalysis G a possible 
step in drinking water treatment. Energy, v. 
30, p. 1699–1710, 2005. 
LÓPEZ, J. L., EINSCHLAG F. S. G., 
GONZÁLEZ, M. C., CAPPARELLI, A. L., 
OLIVEROS, E., HASHEM, T. M., 
BRAUN, A. M. Hydroxyl radical initiated 
photodegradation of 4GchloroG3,5G
dinitrobenzoic acid in aqueous solution. 
Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology 
A: Chemistry, v. 137, n. 2G3, p. 177G184, 
2000. BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  139  LUCAS, M. S., DIAS, A. A., SAMPAIO, A., 
AMARAL, C., PERES, J. A. Degradation of 
a textile reactive Azo dye by a combined 
chemical–biological process: Fenton’s 
reagentGyeast. Water Research, v. 41, p. 
1103G1109, 2007. 
LUNAR, L., SICILIA1, D., RUBIO, S., 
PÉREZGBENDITO, D., NICKEL, U. 
Degradation of photographic developers by 
Fenton's reagent: condition optimization and 
kinetics for metol oxidation. Water 
Research, v. 34, n. 6, p. 1791G1802, 2000. 
MACHULEK JR., A., MORAES, J. E. F., 
VAUTIERGGIONGO, C., SILVERIO, C. 
A., FRIEDRICH, L. C. F., NASCIMENTO, 
C. A. O., GONZALEZ, M. C., QUINA, F. 
H. Abatement of the Inhibitory Effect of 
Chloride Anions on the PhotoGFenton 
Process. Environ. Sci. Technol., 41 (24), p. 
8459–8463, 2007. 
MACHULEK JR., A. Estudos mecanísticos da 
origem da inibição da reação fotoGfenton por 
íons cloreto, 105f. Tese de doutorado. 
Instituto de Química. Universidade de São 
Paulo, São Paulo, 2007. (in Portuguese) 
MACIEL, R., SANT’ANNA JR., G. L., 
DEZOTTI, M. Phenol removal from high 
salinity effluents using Fenton’s reagent and 
photoGFenton reactions. Chemosphere, v. 57, 
p. 711–719, 2004. 
MALATO, S., BLANCO, J., CAMPOSA, A., 
CÁCERES, J., GUILLARD, C. 
HERRMANN, J. M., FERNÁNDEZGALBA, 
A. R. Effect of operating parameters on the 
testing of new industrial titania catalysts at 
solar pilot plant scale. Applied Catalysis B: 
Environmental, v. 42, p. 349–357, 2003. 
MALATO, S., BLANCO, J., MALDONADO, 
M. I., OLLER, I. Coupling solar photoG
Fenton and biotreatment at industrial scale: 
Main results of a demonstration plant. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials, v. 146, p. 
440–446, 2007. 
MALATO, S., BLANCO, J., VIDAL, A., 
RICHTER, C. Photocatalysis with solar 
energy at a pilotGplant scale: an overview. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, v. 37, 
p. 1–15, 2002. 
MALETZKY, P., BAUER, R. The photoG
Fenton method G degradation of nitrogen containing organic compounds. 
Chemosphere, vol. 37, n. 5, p. 899G909, 
1998. 
MARIANO, J. B. Impactos ambientais do 
refino do petróleo. Rio de Janeiro: 
Interciência, 2005. (in Portuguese) 
MARTÍN, M. M. B., PÉREZ, J. A. S., 
SÁNCHEZ, J. L. G., OCA, L. M., LÓPEZ, 
J. L. C., OLLER, I., RODRÍGUEZ, S. M. 
Degradation of alachlor and pyrimethanil by 
combined photoGFenton and biological 
oxidation. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 
v. 155, p. 342–349, 2008. 
MATER, L., ROSA, E. V. C., BERTO, J., 
CORRÊA, A. X. R., SCHWINGEL, P. R., 
RADETSKI, C. M. A simple methodology 
to evaluate influence of H 2O2 and Fe 2+  
concentrations on the mineralization and 
biodegradability of organic compounds in 
water and soil contaminated with crude 
petroleum. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 
v. 149, p. 379–386, 2007. 
MCLOUGHLIN, O. A., KEHOE, S. C., 
MCGUIGAN, K. G., DUFFY, E. F., AL 
TOUATI, F., GERNJAK, W., ALBEROLA, 
I. O., RODRÍGUEZ, S. M., GILL, L. W. 
Solar disinfection of contaminated water: a 
comparison of three smallGscale reactors. 
Solar Energy, v. 77, p. 657–664, 2004. 
MINERO, C., PELIZZETTI, E., MALATO, S., 
BLANCO, J. Large solar plant 
photocatalytic water decontamination: effect 
of operational parameters. Solar Energy, v. 
56, n. 5, p. 421 428, 1996. 
MOMANI, F. A. A., SHAWAQFEH, A. T., 
SHAWAQFEH, M. S. Solar wastewater 
treatment plant for aqueous solution of 
pesticide. Solar Energy, v. 81, n. 10, p. 
1213G1218, 2007. 
MORAES, J. E. F., QUINA, F., 
NASCIMENTO, C. A. O., SILVA, D. N., 
CHIAVONEGFILHO, O., Treatment of 
Saline Wastewater Contaminated with 
Hydrocarbons by the PhotoGFenton Process. 
Environ. Sci. Technol., v. 38, p. 1183G1187, 
2004. 
MOTA, A. L. N. Desenvolvimento de um 
reator fotoquímico aplicável no tratamento 
de efluentes fenólicos presentes na indústria 
do petróleo, 99f. Dissertação de Mestrado. BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
140 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  Programa de PósGgraduação em Engenharia 
Química da Universidade Federal do Rio 
Grande do Norte, Natal, 2005. (in 
Portuguese) 
MOTA, A. L. N. M., MURANAKA, C. T., 
MORAES, J. E. F., NASCIMENTO, C. A. 
O., CHIAVONEGFILHO, O. Estudo do 
tratamento de efluentes de indústrias 
petroquímicas, contendo compostos 
fenólicos, pelo processo fotoGFenton. Petro 
& Química, n. 278, 2005. (in Portuguese) 
NADTOCHENKO, V., KIWI, J. Photo induced 
mineralization of xylidine by the Fenton 
reagent. 2. Implications of the precursors 
formed in the dark. Environ. Sci. Technol., 
v. 32, n. 21, p. 3282–3285, 1998. 
NEYENS, E., BAEYENS, J. A review of 
classic Fenton’s peroxidation as an 
advanced oxidation technique. Journal of 
Hazardous Materials B, v. 98, p. 33–50, 
2003. 
OLIVEROS, E., LEGRINI, O., HOHL, M., 
MÜLLER, T., BRAUN, A. Industrial wate 
water treatment: large scale development of 
a lightGenhanced Fenton reaction. Chemical 
Engineering and Processing, n. 36, p. 397G
405, 1997. 
OTURAN, M. A., BRILLAS, E. 
Electrochemical Advanced Oxidation 
Processes (EAOPs) for Environmental 
Applications. Portugaliae Electrochimica 
Acta, v. 25, p. 1G18, 2007. 
PERAGTITUS, M., GARCÍAGMOLINA, V., 
BAÑOS, M. A., GIMÉNEZ, J., 
ESPLUGAS, S. Degradation of 
chlorophenols by means of advanced 
oxidation processes: a general review. 
Applied Catalysis B: Environmental, v. 47, 
p. 219–256, 2004. 
PÉREZGMOYA, M., GRAELLS, M., DEL 
VALLE, L. J., CENTELLES, E., 
MANSILLA, H. D. Fenton and photoG
Fenton degradation of 2Gchlorophenol: 
Multivariate analysis and toxicity 
monitoring. Catalysis Today, v. 124, p. 163–
171, 2007. 
PHILIPPOPOULOS, C. J., POULOPOULOS, 
S. G. PhotoGassisted oxidation of an oily 
wastewater using hydrogen peroxide. Journal of Hazardous Materials B, v. 98, p. 
201–210, 2003. 
PIGNATELLO, J. J. Dark and photoassisted 
Fe 3+  catalyzed degradation of 
chlorophenoxy herbicides by hydrogen 
peroxide. Environ. Sci. Technol., v. 26, p. 
944G951, 1992. 
PRUDEN, A. L., OLLIS, D. F. Photoassisted 
heterogeneous catalysis: the degradation of 
trichloroethylene in water. Journal of 
Catalysis, v. 82, n. 2, p. 404–417, 1983. 
QUINA, F. H.; NASCIMENTO, C. A. O.; 
TEIXEIRA, A. C. S. C.; GUARDANI, R.; 
LOPEZGGEJO, J. Degradación Fotoquímica 
de Compuestos Orgánicos de Origen 
Industrial. In: N. Nudelman. (Org.). Química 
Sustentable. Santa Fe, Argentina: 
Universidad Nacional del Litoral, p. 205G
220, 2004. (in Spanish) 
RIVAS, F. J., BELTRÁN, F., CARVALHO, 
F., ACEDO, B., GIMENO, B. Stabilized 
leachates: sequential coagulation–
flocculation + chemical oxidation process. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials B, v. 116, p. 
95–102, 2004. 
RIVAS, F. J., KOLACZKOWSKI, S. T., 
BELTRÁN, F. J.,. MCLURGH, D. B. 
Development of a model for the wet air 
oxidation of phenol based on a free radical 
mechanism. Chemical Engineering Science, 
v. 53, n. 14, p. 2575G2586, 1998. 
RODRÍGUEZ, M., MALATO, S., 
PULGARIN, C., CONTRERAS, S., 
Optimizing the solar photoGFenton process 
in the treatment of contaminated water. 
Determination of intrinsic. Solar Energy, v. 
79, p. 360–368, 2005. 
RODRÍGUEZ, S. M., RICHTER, C., 
GÁLVEZ, J. B., VINCENT, M., 
Photocatalytic degradation of industrial 
residual waters. Solar Energy, vol. 56, n. 5, 
p. 401G410, 1996. 
ROMERO, M., BLANCO, J., SÁNCHEZ, B., 
VIDAL, A., MALATO, S., CARDONA, A. 
I., GARCIA, E. Solar photocatalytic 
degradation of water and air pollutants: 
challenges and perspectives. Solar Energy, 
v. 66, n. 2, p. 169–182, 1999. 
SAFARZADEHGAMIRI, A., BOLTON, J. R., 
CATER, S. R. FerrioxalateGmediated BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  141  photodegradation of organic pollutants in 
contaminated water. Water Research, v. 31, 
n. 4, p. 787G798, 1997. 
SAIEN, J., NEJATI, H. Enhanced 
photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in 
petroleum refinery wastewater under mild 
conditions. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 
v. 148, p. 491–495, 2007. 
SALAH, N. H., BOUHELASSA, M., 
BEKKOUCHE, S., BOULTIF, A. Study of 
photocatalytic degradation of phenol. 
Desalination, v. 166, p. 347G354, 2004. 
SALTMIRAS, D. A., LEMLEY, A. T. 
Atrazine degradation by anodic Fenton 
treatment. Water Research, v. 36, p. 5113–
5119, 2002. 
SANTOS, M. R. G., GOULART, M. O. F., 
TONHOLO, J., ZANTA, C. L. P. S. The 
application of electrochemical technology to 
the remediation of oily wastewater. 
Chemosphere, v. 64, p. 393–399, 2006. 
SERPONE, N. Relative photonic efficiencies 
and quantum yields in heterogeneous 
photocatalysis. Journal of Photochemistry 
and Photobiology A: Chemistry, v. 104, p. 
1G12, 1997. 
SICHEL, C., BLANCO, J., MALATO, S., 
FERNÁNDEZGIBÁÑEZ, P. Effects of 
experimental conditions on E. coli survival 
during solar photocatalytic water 
disinfection. Journal of Photochemistry and 
Photobiology A: Chemistry, v. 189, p. 239–
246, 2007. 
STEPNOWSKI, P., SIEDLECKA, E. M. , 
BEHREND, P., JASTORFF, B. Enhanced 
photoGdegradation of contaminants in 
petroleum refinery wastewater. Water 
Research, v. 36, p. 2167–2172, 2002. 
STRAEHELIN, S., HOIGNÉ, J. 
Decomposition of ozone in water in the 
presence of organic solutes acting as 
promoters and inhibitors of radical chain 
reactions. Environ. Sci. Technol., v. 19, p. 
1209–1212, 1985. 
SUN, Y., ZHANG, Y., QUAN, X. Treatment 
of petroleum refinery wastewater by 
microwaveGassisted catalytic wet air 
oxidation under low temperature and low 
pressure. Separation and Purification 
Technology, v. 62, p. 565–570, 2008. SÝKORA, J., PADO, M., TATARKO, M., 
IZAKOVIC, M. Homogeneous photoG
oxidation of phenols: influence of metals. J. 
Photochem. Photobiol. A.: Chem., v.110, 
p.167G175, 1997. 
TANG, W. Z., CHEN, R. Z. Decolorization 
kinetics and mechanisms of commercial 
dyes by H 2O2/lron powder system. 
Chemosphere, v. 32, n. 5, p. 947G958, 1996. 
TANG, W. Z., Physicochemical Treatment of 
Hazardous Wastes. CRC Press, 2004 
TIBURTIUS, E. R. L., PERALTAGZAMORA, 
P., EMMEL, A. Treatment of gasolineG
contaminated waters by advanced oxidation 
processes. Journal of Hazardous Materials 
B, v. 126, p. 86–90, 2005 
VALENTE, J. P. S., ARAÚJO, A. B., 
BOZANO, D. F., PADILHA, P. M., 
FLORENTINO, A. O. Síntese e 
caracterização textural do catalisador 
CeO 2/TiO 2 obtido via solGgel: fotocatálise 
do composto modelo hidrogenoftalato de 
potássio. Eclética, v. 30, n. 4, 2005. (in 
Portuguese) 
WALLING, C., WEIL, T. The ferric ion 
catalyzed decomposition of hydrogen 
peroxide in perchloric acid solution. 
International Journal of Chemical Kinetcs, 
v. VI, p. 507G516, 1974. 
WANG, A., QU, J., LIU, H., RU, J. 
Mineralization of an azo dye Acid Red 14 
by photoelectroGFenton process using an 
activated carbon fiber cathode. Applied 
Catalysis B: Environmental, v. 84, p. 393–
399, 2008. 
WANG, S. A Comparative study of Fenton and 
FentonGlike reaction kinetics in 
decolourisation of wastewater. Dyes and 
Pigments, v. 76, n. 3, p. 714G720, 2008 
WANG, S., SHIRAISHI, F., NAKANO, K. A 
synergistic effect of photocatalysis and 
ozonation on decomposition of formic acid 
in an aqueous solution. Chemical 
Engineering Journal, v. 87, p. 261–271, 
2002. 
WATTS, R. J., DILLY, S. E. Evaluation of 
iron catalysts for the FentonGlike 
remediation of dieselGcontaminated soils. 
Journal of Hazardous Materials, v. 51, p. 
209G224, 1996. BRAZILIAN JOURNAL OF PETROLEUM AND GAS 
MOTA, A. L. N.; ALBUQUERQUE, L. F.; BELTRAME, L. T.  C.; CHIAVONE-FILHO, O.; MACHULEK JR., A.; NASCIMEN TO, C. A. O. “ADVANCED OXIDATION PROCESSES AND 
THEIR APPLICATION IN THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY: A REVI EW”. Brazilian Journal of Petroleum and Gas . v. 2, n. 3, p. 122-142, 2008. 
142 Downloaded from World Wide Web http://www.portalabp g.org.br/bjpg  WATTS, R. J., HALLER, D. R., JONES, A. P., 
TEEL, A. L. A foundation for the riskGbased 
treatment of gasolineGcontaminated soils 
using modified Fenton’s reactions. Journal 
of Hazardous Materials B, v. 76, p. 73–89, 
2000. 
XU, M., WANG, Q., HAO, Y., Removal of 
organic carbon from wastepaper pulp 
effluent by labGscale solar photoGFenton 
process. Journal of Hazardous Materials, v. 
148, n. 1G2, p. 103G109, 2007. 
YAVUZ, Y., KOPARAL, A. S. 
Electrochemical oxidation of phenol in a parallel plate reactor using ruthenium mixed 
metal oxide electrode. Journal of Hazardous 
Materials B, v. 136, p. 296–302, 2006. 
ZERVA, C., PESCHOS, Z., POULOPOULOS, 
S. G., PHILIPPOPOULOS, C. J. Treatment 
of industrial oily wastewaters by wet 
oxidation. Journal of Hazardous Materials 
B, v. 97, p. 257–265, 2003. 
ZHAO, X. K., YANG, G. P., WANG, Y. J., 
GAO, X. C., Photochemical degradation of 
dimethyl phthalate by Fenton reagent. 
Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology 
A: Chemistry, v. 161, p. 215–220, 2004. 
 