The University of Western Ontario  
Faculty of Engineering Science  
 
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL AND BIOCHEMICAL ENGINEERING  
 
CBE 95 52 – Industrial Three -Phase Reactor  Systems  
 
Course Outline 20 20-2021 
 
 
Objective 
This course intends to prepare graduate students w ith advanced knowledge and concepts on industrial 
multi phase  reactor  systems analysis,  design and modeling. Current and potential applications of these reactor 
systems in chemical, biochemical , clean  and renewable fuels  and environmental  processes will be discussed .  
 
Delivery Mode  
Online using OWL -  university’s online learning platform  
4 lecture hours + 1 tutorial per week using virtual classroom tool  
 
Prerequisites  
Graduate Student Status  
 
Instructor  
Dr. A. Prakash (TEB 441) Tel: 661- 2111, ext. 88528; Em ail: aprakas2@uwo.ca  
Graduate Coordinator: TEB 480  
 
General Learning Objectives  
Key knowledge, skills and dispositions to be gained from the course:  
1. Key knowledge: Multiphase Reactor Types: structure and components of r eactor type, 
hydrodynamics, heat and mass transfer, e ngineering and design aspects  of reactors , applications of 
these reactors  
2. Skills: Analyze multiphase reactors and describe physical process , quantitative analysis of the 
reactor,  implement  fundamental  models in mass, energy and momentum balances  for the system . 
3. Dispositions: Generate an analytical mindset towards various reactor types, study scientific literature 
for reactor design, ability to perform a quantitative design of a reactor  
 
Specified Learning  Objectives  
Following reactor types and  their variants will be covered  and differences will be discussed . Their industrial 
applications with examples will be presented  in details : 
•  Two and Three -phase Bubble Column Reactors   
•  Liquid -Solid (L-S) and Ga s-Liquid -Solid (G-L-S) Fluidized Bed Reactors  
•  Gas-Liquid -Solid Agitated Reactors   
• Three -phase Trickle Bed Reactors  
• Airlift and Jet Loop Reactors  
The theory and concepts will be discussed under following main topics:  
• Hydrodynamics  
 •  Flow Regimes  
 •  Phase Holdups  
 •  Pressure Drop and Fluctuations  
 •  Measurement Techniques  
 •  Bubble Size Distribution and Bubble Dynamics  CBE 9452  Course outline   2 
 
 •  Fluid Dynamics  and CFD  
 
• Heat and Mass Transfer  
• Reactor Design, Modeling and Scale -Up  
• Industrial Applications in Chemical, Biochemical and Environmental Processes  
 
Required Text  
None  
 
Reference Texts  
Pangarkar, V.G, Design of Multiphase Reactors, Wiley, 2015 
Nigam, K.D.P., A. Schumpe, Three -Phase Sparged Reactors, Gordon and Breach Publishers, 1996  
Deckwer, W.D.,  Bubble Colu mn Reactors,  John Wiley and Sons, 1985. 
Fan, L.S., Gas -Liquid -Solid Fluidization Engineering,  Butterworths 1989.  
 
Course Notes  
Power point l ecture slides and c ondensed course notes  in word will be available under Resources tool  in 
OWL .  
 
Lab Notes  
None  
 
Units  
SI, British and US Engineering units will be used.  
 
 
Basis of Final Grade  
 
The final mark will be calculated as follows based on online submissions and assessments : 
 
 Design Assignment s 20% 
 Reading Assignment s 15% 
 Tests & Quizzes  25% 
 Project  Report  40%   
 
Evaluation  
The performance of each student will be judged on the basis of assignments , tests  and a project report. 
 
Use of English  
In accordance with Senate and Faculty Policy, students may be penalized up to 10% of the marks on all 
assignments, tests, and examinations for the improper use of English.  Additionally, poorly written work 
with the exception of the final examination may be returned without grading.  If resubmission of the work 
is permitted, it may be graded with marks deducted for poor English and/or late submission.  
Attendance  
Any student who, in the opinion of the instructor, is absent too frequently from class or laboratory periods 
in any course, will be reported to the Associate Chair (Graduate), after due warning has been given.  On 
the recommendation of the Department concerned, and with permission of the Associate Chair, 
appropriate action will be taken, with the possibility of course failure.  CBE 9452  Course outline   3 
 
Cheating  
University policy states that cheating is a scholastic offense.  The commissio n of a scholastic offense is 
attended by academic penalties, which might include expulsion from the program.  If you are caught 
cheating, there will be no second warning. 
Plagiarism  
University policy states that plagiarism is a scholastic offense.  Plagiar ism is defined as appropriating and 
passing off writings or ideas of another person’s as one’s own.  Penalties may include failure or automatic 
withdrawal from the course. 
Students must write their essays and assignments in their own words.  Whenever stude nts take an idea, or 
a passage of text from another author, they must acknowledge their debt both by using quotation marks 
where appropriate and by proper referencing such as footnotes or citations.  Plagiarism is a major 
academic offence.  
The University of Western Ontario has software for plagiarism checking.  Students may be required to 
submit their work in electronic form for plagiarism checking.  
For further information on plagiarism, consult the Scholastic Offence Policy in the Western Academic 
Calendar.  
 
Sickness and Other Problems  
Students should immediately consult with the instructor or Associate Chair (Graduate) if they have any 
problems that could affect their performance in the course.  The student should seek advice from the 
Instructor or Associate Chair (Graduate) regarding how best to deal with the problem.  Failure to notify 
the Instructor or Associate Chair (Graduate) immediately (or as soon as possible thereafter) will have a 
negative effect on any appeal.  
 
Notice 
Students are responsible f or regularly checking their email and notices posted on Instructors' doors.  
 
Consultation  
Office hours will be posted.  Individual consultation may be arranged by appointment with the instructor.  
 
 
Accreditation Units  
Science = 25% 
Design  = 60%  
Technical R eport Writing  = 15% 
Total AU’s   (26) = 100%  
 
April 8, 2020  
 
 
 