INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd22Response Modified Smart Co-Polymeric Oxaliplatin Nanoparticles 
for Tumor Targeted Drug Delivery
Archana Patil, Anand. P . Gadad, Panchaxari. M. Dandagi.
Department of Pharmaceutics, KLE College of Pharmacy, KLE Academy of Higher Education and 
Research (Deemed-to-be-University), India.
The objective of the research study was to develop and characterize a biodegradable, thermo and pH dual responsive Oxaliplatin-
loaded chitosan-g-poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-vinyl pyrrolidone) [CS-g-P(NIPAAm-co-NVP)] co-polymeric nanoparticles 
for tumor targeted delivery of drug. CS-g-P(NIPAAm-co-NVP co-polymer was synthesized by free radical polymerization 
method. Base structure of synthesized co-polymer was determined and it is characterized for the determination of its grafting 
ratio, particle size, PDI and LCST. Oxaliplatin was loaded in to the co-polymer by self assembly method and nanoparticles were 
evaluated for their particle size, polydispersity index (PDI), zeta potential, loading efficiency and in vitro drug release study. The 
particle size of co-polymer was 146nm with a PDI of 0.249 which indicates the homodispersity of co-polymer particles. The 
grafting ratio and LCST of co-polymer were 43.33% and 38.270C respectively. Drug loaded nanoparticles shows particle size 
of 237 nm and Zeta potential of about 58 ±12 mV that indicates good stability of nanoparticles. The drug release was very low 
at physiological pH and temperature conditions while the drug release rate was drastically increased at the pH and temperature 
conditions of tumor microenvironment. MTT assay and fluorescence microscopic study demonstrated that synthesized co-
polymer was biocompatible as well as drug release and cell uptake were significantly enhanced in tumor microenvironment pH 
and temperature. In conclusion, the obtained nanoparticles appeared to be of great promise in tumor targeted drug delivery of 
oxaliplatin.
Oxaliplatin, thermo and pH responsive nanoparticles, chitosan-graft-poly-N-isopropylacrylamide co-polymer, tumor 
targeting.Abstract:
Keywords: Email:  archupharma@gmail.com ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd23
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Design, synthesis and their biological evaluation of (E)-N-(2-
(benzo[d]thiazol-2-ylamino)-5-phenylpyridin-3-yl)-4-phenylbut-3-
enamide derivetives
Vantikommu Jyothi, Palle Sadanandam and Anireddy Jayashree 
Centre for Chemical Sciences & Technology, Institute of Science & Technology, Jawaharlal Nehru 
Technological University, India
A series of (E)-N-(2-(benzo[d]thiazol-2-ylamino)-5-phenylpyridin-3-yl)-4-phenylbut-3-enamide derivetives were synthesized 13 
derivetives and evaluated for their cytotoxicity, among all the derivetives. Most of the conjugates exhibited significant anticancer 
activity against some representative human cancer cell lines cytotoxicity with IC50 values of 0.96 mM and 12.4 mM against 
A549 human lung cancer respectively, and were comparable to E7010 as control drug. 
E7010, Anticancer, phenylbut-3-enamide derivetives, multi step.Abstract:
Keywords: Email:  Jyothi.vantikommu@gmail.com
Acetic acid
ethanol, Reflux, 2-3h                82-91%H
N
OO
N
HNH
OO
OHN
NNH2
HN
N
HN
HNHOON HN
O
1 2 3 4
1. Kamal, A.; M. N. A. Khan, M. N. A.; K. S. Reddy, K. S.; K. Rohini. K. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2007, 15, 1004.
2. Kamal, A.; Srikanth, Y . V . V .; Khan, M. N. A.; Ashraf, M.; Reddy, M. K; Sultana, F.; Kaur, T.; Chashoo, G.; Suri, N.; 
Sehar, I.; Wani, Z. A.; Saxena, A.; Sharma, P.R.; Bhushan, S.; Mondhe, D. M.; Saxena. A. K.; Bioorg. Med. Chem. 2011, 
11, 7136.References:INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd24Comparative Study Of Different Capsular Systems For
Pulsatile Drug Release Of A Pain Relieving Drug
Nikunja B. Pati
Pulla Reddy Institute Of Pharmacy, India
Sustained and controlled drug delivery system release the drug at a substantially steady rate of release per unit of time. However, 
there are instances where maintaining a constant blood level of a drug is not desirable. In such cases a pulsatile drug delivery 
may be more advantageous. Pulsatile drug delivery systems (PDDS) are gaining importance as these systems deliver the drug at 
specific time as per the pathophysiological need of the disease resulting in improved patient therapeutic efficacy and compliance. 
It will be very much beneficial for opioid drugs intended to be used mainly in the therapy of pain symptoms which depend on 
circadian rhythms. So that, this drug delivery system will be designed to deliver the drug at such a time when it could be most 
needful to patient of rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia
The aim of the present work was to develop a pulsatile drug delivery system based on different capsular systems with osmosis 
mechanism, plug systems etc. here different modifications with carried out in capsular system to achieve drug release lag time 
and the quality control study results were then compared. The factors influencing on lag time such as type of polymeric shell and 
outer coating weight will be also investigated. 
Differential scanning calorimeter and Fourier transformed infrared spectroscopy study showed compatibility between drug and 
coating material. The surface morphology of the capsular pulsatile drug delivery system was examined by a scanning electron 
microscopy. 
Sustained; Controlled; Pulsatile; Capsular; Plugs; Osmosis; Lag time.Abstract:
Keywords: Email:  nikunjapatipharmacy@gmail.comISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd25
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Formulation And Evaluation Of Transdermal Patches Of Active Phyto 
Constituent From Terminalia Arjuna  Bark For Anti-Diabetic Activity
K.Sivaiah, S.Md.Haneef, M.Sreedhar, D.Mabu Subhan
 Department of Pharmacology, Santhiram college of Pharmacy, India
Conventional drug delivery system has many problems so bulk of research has now shifted from synthetic drugs to herbal drugs. 
This is possible because of the vast variety of bioactive molecules in the plants and their higher safety margin. This present study 
focused on the use of tannins and chief constituent obtained from Terminallia arjuna , and belonging to family combretaceae as an 
antioxidant agent and anti diabetic activity. The main objective of present work was to develop the trans-dermal patch of tannins 
using polymer blends so that minimize the side effects and maximize the therapeutic efficacy. The formulations characterized for 
weight variation, moisture uptake, thickness, moisture content, and folding endurance. We also evaluated anti-diabetic activity 
of formulations, all parameters show significant satisfactory results. 
Tannins, Poly Vinayl Pyrollidone, Ethyl Cellulose, Transdermal Patch.Abstract:
Keywords: INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd26Formulation And Evaluation Of Lamivudine Nanospheres
Swapna Velivela
Pulla Reddy Institute of Pharmacy, India
In the present research work, an attempt is being made to formulate, optimize and evaluate Lamivudine Nanospheres drug delivery 
system for enhancing its oral bioavailability and efficacy. Lamivudine Nanospheres were prepared with Glyceryl monostearate, 
HPMC K4M and Ethylcellulose for designing of nanoparticles by using Emulsion solvent evaporation technique. The prepared 
Nanoparticle formulations were evaluated for their Particle size distribution, Modified, Assay,  zeta potential and in-vitro drug 
release properties.  The formulation LF9 containing Lamivudine nanoparticles using combination of polymer was selected as 
Optimize formulation which release more than 98.9% drug in 20hrs. IR spectroscopic and DSC studies indicated that there are 
no drug-excipient interactions in the optimized formulation. The optimized formulation LF9 can be considered as a promising 
Sustained drug delivery system of Lamivudine nanoparticles providing nearly zero order drug release over a period of 20 hrs.
Nanospheres, Eudragit, Ethylcellulose, zeta potential, Sustained drug delivery systemAbstract:
Keywords: ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd27
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Proteome-wide docking-based identification of biomolecular  
targets of small chemical compounds
Jung-Hsin Lin,1,2,3 Pei-Ying Chu1, Boris Touzeau1
1 Research Center for Applied Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan 
2 Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
3 School of Pharmacy, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
Identification of possible biomolecular targets of small chemical compounds is an important step for unravelling their underlying 
action mechanisums at the molecular level. We constructed a web server, idTarget, which can predict possible binding targets of 
a given small chemical molecule via a divide-and-conquer docking approach, in combination with our scoring functions based on 
robust regress analysis and quantum chemical models, and several other scoring functions based on machine learning and deep 
learning approaches.  Affinity profiles of the protien targets are used to provide the confidence levels of prediction. The divide and 
conquer docking approach uses adatively constructed small overlapping grids to constrain the searching space, thereby achieving 
better docking efficiency.  Unlike previous approaches that screen against only a specific class of targets or a limited number of 
targets, id Target screens against nearly all protein structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), and the identified protein 
targets can be displayed on pathway maps curated by KEGG.  We show that idTarget is able to reproduce known off target effects 
of drugs or drug like compounds, and the suggested new targets could be prioritiezed for further investigation. 
Drug target, drug-like, docking, pathway analysis, machine learning, deep learning, quantum chemical calculations, 
structre-based drug design, druggable proteome.
1. Lin, J.H. (2019) The increasing role of dynamics for structure-based drug design, in  Molecular Docking and Molecular Dynamics, 
InTech Open., In Press.
2. Chen, Y .H. and Lin, J.H. (2017), Can ligands of different functional types induce distinct dynamics in G protein-coupled receptors, 
Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 17, 2370-2380.
3. Lin, J.H. (2016), Structure and dynamics based computational design of anti-cancer drugs, Biopolymers., 105, 2-9.
4. Wang, J.C. and Lin, J.H, (2015), Scoring function for fragment based drug discovery. Chap. 9 of “Methods in Mo-lecular 
Biology”, Anthony Klon (Editor), Springer Verlag. 
5. Wang, J.C. and Lin, J.H. (2013), Scoring function for prediction of protein-ligand interactions. Curr. Pharm. Des. 19, 2174-2182. 
6. Lin, J.H.. (2012), Target prediction of small molecules with information of key molecular interactions.  Curr. Top. Med. Chem. 
12, 1903-1910. 
7. Wang, J.C., Chu, P.Y ., Chen, C.M., and Lin, J.H.  (2012) id Target: a web server for identifying protein targets of small chemical 
molecules with robust scoring functions and a divide and conquer docking approach. Nucl. Acids. Res. 40: W393-W399.   Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: The submission web page of the idTarget web server (http://idtarget.rcas.sinica. 
edu.tw). The structure of the small chemical molecule can be either drawn directly with the 
molecular editor of this web server, or uploaded with the 3D molecular structure file.  
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd28Natural Products for Sustainable Conservation of Agriculture
Shrikaant Kulkarni 
Department of Chemical Engineering, Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune (M.S.), India 
There has been a paradigm shift in the mind-set over the time of using more environmentally benign products like sustainable 
agro-chemicals over synthetically derived ones given the nature of later one as hazardous and obnoxious, non biodegradable, 
and persistent chemicals which has posed a threat to ecology bringing about substantial degradation of soil and consequently its 
productivity. It demands substituting chemical-based conventional agrochemicals with more greener, eco-friendly but compatible 
alternatives which control pests with a great degree of efficiency, effectiveness, and efficacy, and therefore it is sustainable in 
action. The chemical-based agrochemicals have already brought about a lot much of ecological imbalance by substantially 
polluting water bodies, reducing fertility of the soil, making their way into the food cycle as bioaccumulators. Further because of 
their nonbiodegradability and persistent nature,  and thereby subse-quently posing a threat to biodiversity. Thus, the use of natural 
products will continue to provide clues to new modes of action, new chemistries for the sake of conservation of agriculture and 
in enhancing productivity without compromising ecological balance for the generations to come.
1. Christine B, Feller URS (2014) Impacts of drought stress on water relations and carbon assimilation in grassland species at 
different altitudes. Agr Ecosyst Environ 188(15):212–220.
2. Victor DG (2011) Global warming grid-lock: creating more effective strategies for protecting the planet. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK.
3. FAO (2015) Statistical pocketbook. World Food and Agriculture, Rome, pp 44–122Abstract:
References:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd29
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Heterotrimeric complex of p38 MAPK, PKCδ, and TIRAP is required 
for AP1 mediated inflammatory response.
Baig M S
Centre for Biosciences and Biomedical Engineering (BSBE), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) ,India
Inflammation could be described as a physiological response of the body to tissue injury, pathogen invasion, and irritants. During 
the inflammatory phase, cells of both the innate as well as adaptive immune system are activated and recruited to the site of 
inflammation. These mediators are downstream targets for the transcription factors; activator protein-1 (AP1), nuclear factor 
kappa light hain enhancer (NF-κB), signal transducers and activators of transcription factors (STAT1), as well as interferon 
regulatory factors (IRFs), which control the expression of most immunomodulatory genes. There is a significant increase in 
active p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAK) immediately after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation, which results 
in the activation of AP-1 transcription factor and expression of proinflammatory cytokines, IL-12 and IL-23. We studied the 
novel mechanism of p38 MAPK activation through the formation of a heterotrimeric complex of Protein kinase C delta type 
(PKCδ), Toll-Interleukin 1 Receptor (TIR) Domain Containing Adaptor Protein (TIRAP), and p38 proteins. TIRAP serves as 
an adaptor molecule which brings PKCδ and p38 in close proximity. The complex facilitates the activation of p38MAPK by 
PKCδ. Therefore, we propose that disruption of the heterotrimeric complex may be a good strategy to dampen the inflammatory 
response. 
Inflammation, heterotrimeric complex, AP1, NF-κB, STAT1, LPS 
1. Leonard et al. Crystal Structure and Allosteric Activation of Protein Kinase C βII. January 2011Cell 144(1):55-66
2.Loegering et al .Protein Kinase C and Toll-Like Receptor Signaling. August 2011Enzyme research 2011(1):537821Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: Heterotrimer complex of PKCδ-TIRAP-p38 mediated inflammatory response in macro-
phages. (1) LPS from Gram-negative bacteria stimulates TLR4 receptor in macrophages; (2) This 
induces the activation of the AP1 signaling pathway via heterotrimer complex of PKCδ-TIRAP-p38; 
(3) LPS stimulation activates PKCδ, which in result phosphory-lates p38 MAPK (4, 5) p38 MAPK 
activation induces AP1 transcriptional activity and ex-pression of inflammatory cytokines such as 
IL-12, IL-23.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd30Drug repositioning as an effective therapy for Protease-Activated 
Receptor-2 inhibition
Saqib U
Discipline of Chemistry, School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), India
Proteinase-activated receptor-2 (PAR-2) is a GPCR activated by both trypsin and a specific agonist peptide, SLIGKV-NH2. 
It has been linked to various pathologies, including pain and inflammation. Several peptide and peptidomimetic agonists for 
PAR-2 have been developed exhibiting high potency and efficacy. However, the number of PAR-2 antagonists is smaller. We 
screened the FDA library of approved compounds to retrieve novel antagonists for repositioning in the PAR-2 structure. The most 
efficacious compound Bicalutamide bound to the PAR-2 binding groove near the extracellular domain as observed in the insilico 
studies.  Further, it showed reduced Ca2+ release in trypsin activated cells in a dose-dependent manner. Hence, Bicalutamide is 
a novel and potent PAR-2 antagonist which could be therapeutically useful in blocking multiple pathways diverging from PAR-2 
signaling. Further, the novel scaffold of Bicalutamide represents a new molecular structure for PAR-2 antagonism and can serve 
as a basis for further drug development. 
Drug Repositioning, inflammation, PAR-2, antagonist
1. Bohm, S.K., Kong, W., Bromme, D., Smeekens, S.P., Anderson, D.C., Connolly, A., Kahn, M., Nelken, N.A., Coughlin, S.R., 
Payan, D.G., Bunnett, N.W., 1996. Molecular cloning, expression and potential functions of the human proteinase-activated 
receptor-2. Biochem. J. 314 ( Pt 3), 1009–16.
2. Vergnolle, N., Hollenberg, M.D., Sharkey, K.A., Wallace, J.L., 1999. Characterization of the inflammatory response to proteinase-
activated receptor-2 (PAR 2 )-activating peptides in the rat paw. Br. J. Pharmacol. 127, 1083–1090. Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: Comparison of docked poses of AZ8838 (magenta atom color sticks) and Bicalutam ide (green atom 
color sticks) in the PAR-2 binding site (grey ribbons).The small red-colored spheres are the water molecules.
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd31
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )CONGENITAL DIVERGENCES: GLOBAL PANORAMA
A.Narendra Babu,N.Rama Rao
Chalapathi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Department of Pharmacology, India
Email:  narendraankem@rediffmail.com
Congenital anomalies (birth defects) are structural or functional anomalies (e.g. metabolic disorders) that occur during intrauterine 
life and can be identified prenatally, at birth or later in life. Congenital anomalies are the major cause of new born deaths within 
four weeks of birth and can result in long term disability with a significant impact on individuals, families, societies and health 
care systems.
According to the WHO an estimated 303000 newborns die within 4 weeks of birth every year, worldwide, due to congenital 
anomalies. Though approximately 50% of all congenital anomalies cannot be due to a specific cause, but some known genetic, 
environmental and other causes or risk factors may play akey role. Consanguinity also increases the prevalence of rare genetic 
congenital anomalies and nearly doubles the risk for neonatal and childhood death, intellectual disability and other anomalies.
It is estimated that about 94% of severe congenital anomalies occur in low and middle income countries. An indirect determinant, 
this higher risk relates to a possible lack of access to sufficient, nutritious foods by pregnant women, an increased exposure to 
agents or factors such as infection and alcohol, or poorer access to healthcare and screening.
Preventive public health measures work to decrease the frequency of certain congenital anomalies through the removal of risk 
factors or the reinforcement of protective factors ensuring an adequate dietary intake of vitamins and minerals, and particularly 
folic acid in adolescent girls and mothers.
Screening includes obtaining family histories and carrier screening may include screening for young or advanced maternal 
age, as well as screening for use of alcohol, tobacco or other risks. Maternal blood can be screened for placental markers 
to aid in prediction of risk of chromosomal abnormalities or neural tube defects, or for free fetal DNA to screen for many 
chromosomal abnormalities. Many structural congenital anomalies can be corrected with paediatric surgery and early treatment 
can be administered to children with functional problems such as thalassaemia (inherited recessive blood disorders), sickle cell 
disorders, and congenital hypothyroidism. 
Congenital anomalies, Consanguinity, chromosomal abnormalities, Down syndrome, neural tube defects, thalassaemia
1. Amar Taksande, Krishna Vilhekar, Pushpa Chaturvedi and Manish Jain.(2010),Congenital malformations at birth in Central India: 
A rural medical college hospital based data, Indian J Hum Genet, 16(3): 159–163.
2. Prajkta Bhide and Anita Kar. (2018). A national estimate of the birth prevalence of congenital anomalies in India: systematic 
review and meta-analysis, BMC Pediatr. 18: 175.
3. http://www.who.int/newsroom/fact-sheets/detail/congenital-anomaliesAbstract:
Keywords: 
References:INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd32Heteronuclear Coordination Compounds With Ligands Of 
Carboxylic Acids And Their Biological Properties
A.S. Mametova, M. Rahimova, M.R. Mirzaeva, Sh. Emomadova, G.B. Eshova
Osh State University of the Ministry of Education and Science, Kyrgyz Republic
Tajik National University, Dushanbe, Republic of Tajikistan
Heteronuclear complex compounds have their own peculiarity, they can contain two or more types of metals in the internal 
coordination sphere and different composition and structure of the ligand, so the conditions for their formation are special. The 
processes of formation of heterovalent, heteronuclear complexes of iron, zinc and cobalt in the redox system Fe (II)-Fe (III)-
aqueous solutions of acetic acid were studied by the method of oxidative potential. Analysis of the experimental dependences 
of the oxidative potential of the system (or electromotive force) on the concentration parameters: рН, рС0, рСr, рСГА, рСL - 
indicators of the concentration of H+, oxidized, reduced forms of the Central metal-complexing agent, metal heteroatom and 
ligand, respectively, at a temperature of 298 K and the ionic strength of the solution of 0.5 mol/l (NaClO4).
The compiled mathematical and chemical models have allowed using the General equations of the oxidation potential and the 
oxidation function of Yusupov to determine the composition of the emerging coordination compounds and the stability constant. 
It was found that, for example, in the presence of zinc heteroatom in the system, complexes of composition are formed: [FeL 
(H2O) 5]2+; [Fe2L2Zn (H2O) 14]6+; [FeIIIFeIIZnII L2 (H2O)14]5+;
[FeIIIL2(H2O)4] +; [FeIIZnIIL (H2O)9]3+ and [FeIIIFeIIL2 (H2O)10]3+. As can be seen from the structures of complexes 
of iron (II) iron (III) and zinc (II) in the formed coordination compounds of unique structure, i.e. a net heteronuclear complex 
([Fe2IIIL2Zn (H2O)14]6+; [FeIIZnIIL (H2O)9]3+), and heterofullerenes connection [FeIIIFeIIZnIIL2(H2O)14]5+. The first two 
complexes contain two trivalent iron atoms and one zinc atom, but two ligands. The second complex contains one bivalent iron atom 
and one zinc atom, as well as one ligand in the internal coordination sphere. The third complex has a very interesting composition 
in terms of practical application, as in the internal coordination area are just trivalent and bivalent iron with two ligands. As you 
can see, this compound contains biologically active Fe (II) acetate and a ligand.   With the use of modern computer programs, the 
maximum degree of accumulation of complexes is calculated. Based on the obtained data, their distribution diagrams on the pH 
scale are constructed, based on which optimal conditions for obtaining heteronuclear complexes are developed.
The complex compound [Fe III Fe II Zn II L2 (H2) 14]5+ was obtained in the form of a powder, the corresponding analyses and 
tests on wheat seeds of the "Vatan"variety were carried out. It was found that this complex increases the energy of germination 
and germination of wheat seeds, increases the growth and weight of roots and seedlings.Abstract:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd33
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Stimulated production of oxidatively-truncated phospholipids 
defines a new pathway of cytokine-induced cell death 
Latchoumycandane Calivarathan1,2 and Thomas M. McIntyre1,
1Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, USA
2Department of Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu, India 
Email:   latchoumycandane@cutn.ac.in 
TNF-α is an inflammatory cytokine, known to modulate cell survival and proliferationby the activation of NF-kB-dependent 
pathwaywhereassimultaneous activation of caspase regulates apoptosis.TNFα generates reactive oxygen species (ROS) required 
in cell death, but their molecular identity and mode of action remain undefined. We demonstrate that oxidatively truncated 
phospholipids connect TNFα to apoptosis. In the present study we showed that TNF-α stimulated ROS production by Nox4 in 
Jurkat cells that oxidized cellular polyunsaturated phospholipids. Glutathione peroxidase-4 (GPx4), which uniquely metabolizes 
these to non-reactive lipid alcohols, fell in TNF-α stimulated cells prior to death. Overexpression of GPx4 ameliorated, while 
GPx4 siRNA knockdown enhanced, apoptosis. Phospholipid hydroperoxides are unstable with fragmentation of the esterified 
oxidized fatty acyl chain, forming truncated phospholipds. The truncated product azelaoyl phosphatidylcholine (Az-PC)-a 
mitotoxic and pro-apoptotic phospholipid— accumulated after TNFα stimulation. Over-expression of GPx4 or PAFAH2 that 
specifically hydrolyzes oxidized phospholipids suppressed Az-PC accumulation, and each enzyme prevented TNF-α stimulated 
cell death. Accordingly, exogenous Az-PC bypassed the protection afforded by GPx4 over-expression. Truncated phospholipid 
are common effectors of stimulated apoptosis required for TNF-α cytotoxicity in HepG2 cells, and FasL induced death of Jurkat 
cells. Thus, cytokines stimulate ROS production that oxidizes cellular polyunsaturated phospholipids, which then fragment to 
mitotoxic truncated phospholipids that are required components of stimulated apoptosis.Abstract:INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd34Anti-proliferative effect of potential LSD1/CoREST inhibitors based 
on molecular dynamics model derived from its interaction with 
tetrahydrofolate cofactor.
Hiba Zalloum1, Waleed A. Zalloum2, Malek Zihlif 3
1 Hamdi Mango Research Center for Scientific Research, The University of Jordan, Jordan
2 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Science, American University of Madaba, Jordan
3 Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Jordan, Jordan
Targeting cancer through epigenetics is a recent era, where a specific gene is manipulated without destroying it. Lysine-specific 
demethylase 1 (LSD1) is one of the enzymes that are associated with chromatin for post-translational modifications, where it 
demethylates lysine amino acid in the chromatin H3 tail. LSD1 is associated with its corepressor protein CoREST, and utilises 
tetrahydrofolate as a cofactor to accept CH2 from the demethylation process. Many studies showed that inhibiting LSD1 could 
potentially be used to treat cancer epigenetically.
The fact that the cofactor is best bound to the active site inspired us to explore its interactions to LSD1/CoREST enzyme complex 
utilizing molecular dynamics simulation, which aids designing novel and potent inhibitors. Also, the conformational existence of 
the enzyme complex bound to the cofactor has been investigated. According to the molecular dynamics simulation study, LSD1/
CoREST complex is present in open and closed conformations. Furthermore, tetrahydrofolate was found to bind to two binding 
subsites with different binding modes.
The model derived from the molecular dynamics simulation study and the key contacts to the active site were used in the 
subsequent structure based drug design and in-silico  screening, which revealed a number of new chemical entities with a potential 
inhibitory effect of LSD1/CoREST complex. In-silico  mining on National Cancer Institute (NCI) database identified 60 promising 
and structurally diverse inhibitors.The cytotoxic activities of these compounds were tested against different cancer cell lines with 
different expression modes of LSD1/CoREST complex such as leukaemia K562, prostate cancer PC3 and neuroblastoma SH-
SY5Y . All compounds were also tested against normal fibroblast cells to study their selectivity against cancer cells.
Applying the abovementioned molecular modeling procedure yielded array of LSD1/CoREST inhibitors with IC50 < 5µM, when 
tested against different cancer cell lines. Three compounds inhibited the growth of PC3 prostate cells with IC50 = (2.68, 2.08 and 
2.95µM), Four of them inhibited the growth of K562 leukaemia cells with IC50 = (1.20, 1.92, 2.70, and 1.20µM) and three of 
them inhibited the growth of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells with IC50 = (0.27, 0.83 and 4.28µM). These compounds are excellent 
candidates for further optimization.Abstract:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd35
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Chemical composition and oral toxicity assessment of 
Anisophyllea boehmii  kernel oil: Potential source of new edible oil 
with high tocopherol content
J. Nkengurutsea 1, F. Mansouri 2,3 , Tatien Masharabu 1, Hana Caid Serghinic 2
 1 Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Burundi, Bujumbura, Burundi
2 Laboratory of Biology of Plants and Microorganisms, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, 
University Mohammed First, Oujda, Morocco 
3 Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Agency of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Taounate, Morocco
Anisophyllea boehmii  is an indigenous and wild species in Burundi. Its fruits are edible and commercialized in local markets. 
This study investigates chemical quality, composition and toxicity test of A.boehmii kernel oil from two sites in eastern Burundi. 
Results of the present study reveal A. boehmii kernels to be an oil-rich source, yielding up to 29% of oil. Fatty acid composition 
analysis classifies these oils as palmitic. In fact, the main fatty acids are palmitic acid (36.47–39.55%) and oleic acid (18.83–
22.21%). The analysis of minor compounds shows high tocopherols (485–657 mg kg−1), phenols (82–135 mg kg−1) and 
β-carotene (144–234 mg kg−1) content. The physicochemical parameters analyzed make A.boehmii kernel a source of good 
quality oil. Furthermore, acute oral toxicity test reveals no toxicity of A. boehmii kernel oil. Results of the present study are 
decisive in adoption of A.boehmii kernel oil as an alternative source of edible oil. The nutritionnal and medicianal potential of 
indigenous species of African Great Lake region will be discussed and challenges and opportunities in related research addressed.  
Anisophyllea boehmii , Burundi, Fatty acids, Kernel oil, Oxidative stability, Tocopherols. 
1. J. Nkengurutse, F. Mansouri, G. Gahun-gu, O. Bekkouch, A. Ben Moumen, T. Masharabu, M. Sindic, H. Caid Serghini, A. Khalid. 
Chemical composition and oral toxicity assessment of Anisophyllea boehmii kernel oil: Potential source of new edible oil with high 
tocopherol con-tent. Food Chemistry, 278 (2019) 795–804
2. Abdul  Bari  NA,Ferdosh  S, Islam Sarker M, Yunus K, Shahari R , & Hamzah, N. N. (2017). Phytochemical composition,biological 
activities and processing method of genus Anisophyllea: A review. The Natural Products Journal, 7(3), 176–185. Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: Anisophyllea boehmii fresh (A) and dried (B) fruits; kernels (C & D) and kernel oil (E).
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd36Development of Lignocellulosic Biomass Derived Nanomaterials
for Applications in Nanomedicine
Jayeeta Bhaumik, Y . Nikhileshwar Reddy, Neeraj S. Thakur, Ravneet Kaur,
Sanjam Chandna and Shatabdi Paul 
Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing Department of Biotechnology ,India
Agricultural biomass serves as a potential source for aromatic renewable materials. However, the biomass being generated in 
enormous amounts, ends up creating environment pollution due to stubble burning initiated by the farmers. Through developing 
biocompatible nanomaterials from such agribiomass, the agricultural waste generated every year can be reduced significantly, 
which will be beneficial to the environment. Lignin is present in large quantities in the agricultural biomass and is an important 
source of polyphenols. Moreover, lignin is known for its commendable photoprotective and antimicrobial properties. Additionally, 
due to the biocompatible nature and antioxidant properties of lignin, nanomaterials derived from it can be employed in various 
applications including biomedicine. Lignin (obtained from agricultural waste) derived nanocapsules, metallic, bimetallic and 
metal oxide nanomaterials were therefore developed via applying low cost and green techniques. Lignin based nanomaterials 
were further characterized by UV-visible spectroscopy, dynamic light scattering, transmission electron microscopy and other 
other analytical tools. The surface engineering of the newly derived nanomaterials was performed through functionalization with 
various diagnostic, therapeutic or enzyme moieties via encapsulation or conjugation chemistry. Lignin derived nanomaterials 
were further examined for potential antioxidant and antioxidant properties for possible biomedical applications. These lignin 
derived nanocomplexes is expected to reduce environmental pollution and simultaneously being applicable in versatile sectors 
including nanomedicine.
Agri-biomass, nanomaterials, Surface functionalization, antioxidant and antimicrobial potential
1. Bhaumik, J. Chandna S, Sangwan R. S. An improvised, sustainable and economical process for the synthesis of biomass derived 
lignin coated metal nanocomplexes and development of nanotherapeutic and nanodiagnostic conjugates there of  Indian
patent application no: R20171038321, filed on 29th December, 2017.
2. Bhaumik J. Thakur, N. S, Aili P. K, Ghanghoriya A. Mittal, A. K. Banerjee, U. C. Bioinspired Nanotheranostic Agents: Synthesis, 
Surface Functionalization and Antioxidant Potential ACS Biomat. Sc. and Engg. 2015, 1, 382-392.
3. Bhaumik J, Gogia G, Kirar S, Vijay L, Thakur N. S, Banerjee U. C, Laha JK, Bioinspired nanophotosensitizers: synthesis and 
characterization of porphyrin–noble metal nanoparticle conjugates, New J. Chem. 2016, 40, 724-731. 
4. Thakur NS, Bhaumik J, Kirar S, and Banerjee U.C, Development of goldbased phototheranostic nanoagents through bioinspired 
route and their applications in photodynamic therapy , ACS Sus. Chem. Eng, 2017, 5, 7950-7960. Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: The schematic diagram explains thevalorization of lignocellulosic biomass via the
formations of metallic, metal oxide and lignin nanoscaffolds. 
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd37
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Synthesis Of Azomethines Of Anthrones And 10- Arylidene 
Anthrones And Testing For Anticancer And Antiaids Activity.
Dr. Mahesh N. Sanzgiri
Nadkarni- Sacasa research laboratory, St. Xavier’s college, India
A new series of azomethines of anthrones have been prepared by condensing anthrone with different primary amines, 
o-aminophenol and p-aminobenzoic acid.
Similarly 10-Arylidene anthrones with different functional groups were synthesized using Acetic Anhydrite as well as ethanol 
as solvent.
It is found that Azomethines of anthrones prepared by condensing primary amines with nitro group in p-position of aromatic ring 
indicate intense anticancer activity in situ as compared to other azomethines of anthrones.It is also proved that azomethin group 
stabilized by aromatic ring shows anti-cancer activity,but Nitro group in p-position of aromatic ring can be considered for further 
investigation for development of anticancer drug, after doing detailed toxici-ty studies. Similarly 10-Arylidene anthrones with 
Nitro group in  p-position of aromatic ring shows antiaids activity in situ . However detailed studies of toxicity should be done 
before considering for further development of antiaids drugs. 
This study also includes structure activity relationship and new reaction mechanism which involves bending of functional group.
Azomethines, 10-Arylidene, structure activity, reaction mechanism.
1. V .V . Nadkarny and M.N. Sanzgiri , J. Indian Chem. Soc. V ol. LX, March 1983, pp. 306-307.
2. V .V . Nadkarny and M.N. Sanzgiri , J. Indian Chem. Soc. V ol. 67, June 1990.Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd38Overcoming the Blood-Brain Barrier (BBB)
with peptide-conjugates
M. Cavaco1,2, D.Gaspar1, S. Frutos3, M. Vila-Perelló3, D. Andreu2 ,M. Castanho1,V . Neves1
1 Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Av Prof Ega, Portugal
2 Proteomics and Protein Chemistry Unit, Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Pompeu 
Fabra University, Barcelona, Biomedical Research Park, Spain
3 ProteoDesign S.L., B, Spain
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) restricts the de-livery of therapeutic proteins into the brain. To increase their brain accumulation, 
therapeutic proteins have been conjugated to trans-BBB peptides. Most trans-BBB peptides target natural receptors on the 
surface of BBB cells, leading to receptor saturation or competition with natural ligands. The outcome might be the hamper of 
brain homeostasis. Therefore, we intented to take advantage of the adsorptive-mediated transport to get access into the brain. We 
have previously reported on the PepH3 peptide that is able to cross the BBB in vitro and in vivo un-conjugated and conjugated 
to GFP or antibody fragments. In this work, we have evaluated in vitro the capacity of PepH3 to increase the BBB translocation 
of an Fc domain of an IgG. To do so, we chemical conjugated PepH3 to the Fc domain via streamlined expressed protein liga-
tion (SEPL) (Figure 1 A) to obtain a chemically well-defined Fc-PepH3 conjugate (Figure 1 B). While the Fc alone does not 
translocate the in vitro  BBB model, the conjugation to PepH3 results in a translocation comparable to the well-stablished Fc5 
single antibody.
Trans-BBB peptides, peptide-conjugates, PepH3, adsorptive-mediated transport, blood-brain barrier, therapeutic pro-
teins, translocation, antibodies
1. Neves V , et al. (2017), Novel peptides de- rived from Dengue virus capsid protein translocate reversibly the blood brain barrier 
through a receptor-free mechanism. ACS Chem Biol, 12(5):1257-8.
2. Côrte-Real S, et al. (2016), Antibody mole- cules and peptide delivery systems for use in alzheimer´s disease and related disor- 
ders. WO2016120843A1
3. Neves-Coelho S, et al. (2017). A New Noncanonical Anionic Peptide That Trans- locates a Cellular Blood–Brain Barrier Model. 
Molecules;22(10).WAbstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: Figure illustrating the strategy debeloped to conjugate PepH3 to the Fc domain of an IgG. A) Scheme of the 
Streamlined Ex- pressed Protein Ligation (SEPL) applied in the conjugation. B) The final product obtained after the SEPL 
reaction with two PepH3 conjugated to the Fc domain.
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd39
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Molecular Epidemiology and Drug Sensitivity Pattern of 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Strains Isolated from Pulmonary 
Tuberculosis Patients in and around Ambo Town, Central Ethiopia.
Melaku Tilahun1, 2, Gobena Ameni3, KassuDesta1, Aboma Zewde2, Lawrence Y amuah2, 
Markos Abebe2, Abraham Aseffa2
1Department of Medical Laboratory Science, Addis Ababa University , 
2Armauer Hansen Research Institute, 
3Aklilu Lemma Institute of Pathobiology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Email:  melatila@yahoo.com
Introduction: Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by M. tuberculosis complex and remains a major global public health problem. The 
epidemic remains a threat to sub-Saharan Africa, including Ethiopia, with further emergence of drug resistant TB.  
Methods:  A cross-sectional study was conducted involving 105 consecutive new smear positive pulmonary TB patients diagnosed 
at Ambo Hospital and surrounding Health Centers between May 2014 and March 2015. Sputum samples were cultured on 
Löwenstein-Jensen (LJ) media using standard techniques to isolate mycobacteria. Region of difference 9 (RD9)-based polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and spoligotyping was employed for the identification of the isolates at species and strain levels. The 
spoligotype patterns were entered into the SITVIT database to determine Octal and SIT (Spoligotyping International Typing) 
numbers for each strain. The sensitivity of the isolates to isoniazid (INH), rifampicin (RIF), ethambutol (ETB) and streptomycin 
(STM) was evaluated on LJ-medium with the indirect proportion method. 
Results:  Cultures were positive in 86/105 (82 %) of newly diagnosed smear positive pulmonary TB cases. All of the 86 isolates 
were confirmed as M. tuberculosis. The majority (76.7%) of them were clustered into seven groups while the rest (23.3%) 
appeared unique. The most predominant Spoligotypes were SIT53 and SIT149, consisting of 24.4% and 20.9% of the isolates, 
respectively. The majority (76.7%) of the M. tuberculosis isolates were susceptible to all the four drugs. Any resistance to any one 
of the four drugs was detected in 23.3% of the isolates. The highest proportion of any resistance was observed against isoniazid 
(9.3%) and ethambutol (7%). There was only a single case (1.2%) of multidrug resistant/rifampicin resistant (MDR/RR) TB.  
Conclusion : The majority of the isolates were clustered suggesting on-going active transmission in the study area. Mono 
resistance is relatively prevalent while the magnitude of MDR/RR-TB was found to be lower than in previous studies
Tuberculosis, Multi drug resistance 
1. World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report 2016.
2. www.who.int/tb/publications/global_report/en/. Accessed 1 May 2017.
3. Minstry of Health, Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia. Guidelines on Programmatic Management of Drug Resistant 
Tuberculosis in Ethiopia. 2nd Edition, October 2014, Addis Ababa.
4. Sougakoff W. Molecular epidemiology of multidrugresistant strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Clinical Microbiology and 
Infection. 2011; 17(6):800±5Infection. 2011; 17(6):800±5. Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: Spoligotype pattern of M. tuberculosis strains isolated from pulmonary tuberculosis patients in and around 
Ambo Town, Central Ethiopia, 2015.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd40Free radicals and natural antioxidants in the cellular environment
G. J. Sharma
Department of Life Sciences, Manipur University,India
Email:  gjs1951@rediffmail.com 
The broad field of free radicals and antioxidants covers an emerging area known as redox biology, and has been perceived as 
focussing around the use of antioxidant supplements to prevent a variety of human diseases. During the events of evolution, the 
emergence of photosynthetic system in aerobic organisms, plants in particular, generates reactive oxygen species and has opened 
up a paradoxical situation compelling life confront hostile environment and to be able to adapt, the redox processes have become 
increasingly significant. Antioxidants/free radicals permeate the entire living systems in the cellular milieu . Life is a balance 
between the two like a tug-of-war: antioxidants serve to decrease the levels of free radicals permitting them to perform useful 
biological functions without causing much damage. However, some damages are inevitable requiring repair systems to maintain 
cellular integrity and viability.
Reactive oxygen species are all over the cellular environment in aerobic microbes, plants and animals. These species protect 
life from various types of infections and involve in critical signaling pathways. Eventually, these species also often kill cells, 
tissues and organs in the end. The continual damages by these species, failing repair pathways, can cause age-related tumor 
development, neurodenerative diseases and several human disorders. It would have been wonderful if life had evolved entirely in 
the anaerobic environment, in which case, the life-spans would have been much longer and diseases would have rarely occurred.
Interestingly, several medicinal plants possess ‘bio-active molecules’ which can prevent several human diseases. These molecules 
having diversified chemical structures possess strong antioxidant profiles and encounter damaging radical species very efficiently 
at time scales of micro-, nano-, pico- or femto- seconds in cellular environment thereby preventing molecular damages done to 
the DNA and membranes. In this presentation, some of these issues shall be discussed with reference to a few medicinal plants 
such as turmeric and tropical ginger.Abstract:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd41
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Development of Activity-based Reporter Gene Technology (AbRGT) 
for Imaging of Enzyme Activity with Exquisite Specificity in a 
Single Live Cell
Puneeta Bathla1 and Britto S Sandanaraj1,2
Department of Biology1 and Department of Chemistry2
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Pune
Fluorescence microscopy coupled with sub-strate-based reporter assays (both genetic and synthetic substrate) is being extensively 
used to monitor the function of "active en-zymes" in (patho) physiological processes. Currently available methods for imaging 
enzyme activity comprise substrate-based reporters and activity based fluorescent probes (ABFP). However, both the methods 
lack target specificity in the native cellular conditions. To overcome this limitation, we disclose the design and development of a 
new technology called "Activity-based Reporter Gene Technology" (AbRGT). As a proof of concept, we show that the activation 
of the caspase-3 enzyme in both intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis signaling pathways can be followed with unprecedented 
specificity using this technology.  AbRGT has further been validated using targets including another initiator (caspase-8 and -9), 
effector (caspase-3 and -7) caspases and cathepsin B cysteine enzymes. The same method is adopted for profiling of compounds 
which can inhibit caspases and cathepsin B activity. Altogether, this technology holds immense potential for applications in the 
area of diagnostic, screening of drugs and other therapeutic interventions.
Substrate-based reporter assay, ABFP, FRET, active enzyme, AbRGT, caspase, apoptosis pathway and inhibitor screening
1. Matrisian, L. M., and Hogan, B. L. (1990) 8 Growth Factor-Regulated Enzymes and Extracellular Matrix Remodeling during 
Mammalian Development, In Curr. Top. Dev. Biol., pp 219-259, Elsevier.
2. Riewald, M., and Ruf, W. (2001) Mechanistic coupling of enzyme signaling and initiation of coagulation by tissue factor, Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. 98, 7742-7747.
3. Alnemri, E. S. (1997) Mammalian cell death enzymes: a family of highly conserved aspartate specific cysteine enzymes, J. Cell. 
Biochem.  64, 33-42.Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: The concept of our technology is diagrammatically depicted in (Figure 1.) Here, the plasmid encoding enzyme-
of-interest (EoI) tagged to a reporter protein (RP; FRET do-nor) (Figure 1a.) is expressed in the cell line of interest (Figure 
1b.). An appropriate stimulus is given to cells for the activation of EoI (Figure 1c.) followed by incubation of cells with a 
cell-permeable ABFP carrying an appropriate fluorophore (FRET acceptor). Labeling of EoI by an ABFP instantaneously 
creates a FRET pair in-situ  (Figure 1d.).  Upon RP excitation, its fluorescence emission is absorbed by fluorophore of 
ABFP, resulting in quenching of RP fluorescence and simultaneous excitation and emission of ABFP at longer wave-
length resulting in FRET effect (case a).  Since the FRET effect extensively depends on the distance between donor and 
acceptor, the labeling of other enzymes by ABFP will not contribute to the FRET signal..
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd42Identification of novel targets and their associated pathways for 
Rheumatoid Arthritis using next generation sequence data analysis
Nikhil Vitthal Ghorpade1, Snijesh.V .P1, Monica Steffi Matchado1, Atul Kumar1,2 and
Sachidanand Singh1,3
1Bioinformatics, Department of Biosciences and Technology, Karunya Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu
2Institute for Genomics and System Biology, University of Chicago, United States
3Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Shri Ramswaroop Memorial University,India
Background: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease which affects different parts of the body but primarily 
affects synovial joint. The abnormal activities of inflammatory and immune cells are the basic hallmark of RA. The dysregulated 
activities of the immune related cells lead to abnormal immune response in the synovial membrane that ultimately results in 
cartilage destruction and bone erosion. The cells in the synovium, i.e. synovial macrophages (SM) and synovial fibroblast (SF) 
have been mainly focused to identify and elucidate the role of dysregulated genes in the pathophysiology of RA. 
Results: We have adopted an integrated approach of transcript expression and network biology, based on theoretical graph 
parameters to identify significant biomarkers or targets in the pathogenesis of RA. Next Generation Sequence Data analysis 
using RNA-Seq technique has been implemented to identify significant Differentially Expressed  Genes (DEGs) at whole genome 
level. Comparative analysis of the significant DEGs was performed on two different experimental conditions, i.e Rheumatoid 
Arthritis-Synovial Fibroblast (RA-SF) and Rheumatoid ArthritisTumor Necrosis Factor (RA-TNF) drug treatment data to find the 
deviation of transcripts expression levels. All the possible associations of significant DEGs were established using GeneMania to 
build the Rheumatoid Arthritis Gene Interactome Map (RA-GIM). Biological annotation of the interactome map gave an insight 
about the involvement of prominent pathways closely related to pathogenesis of RA. The downstream analysis of aforesaid 
integrated approaches depicted the indispensable role of TINGAL1 in the implication of arachidonic acid metabolism associated 
with RA.
Conclusion: TINGAL1 and c11orf48, two signature molecules were identified based on comparative genome analysis of high 
throughput data. The result anticipates the potential properties of identified genes as a possible target or biomarker for RA. 
Further validation using trials in the wet-lab, in vitro  and in vivo  settings, are proposed to delineate the major impact of these 
potential genes in the etiopathogenesis of RAAbstract:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd43
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Sustainable synthesis of lignin-metallic/bimetallic nanocomplexes 
and their application as nano-antimicrobial agents
Sanjam Chandna, Ravneet Kaur, Neeraj Singh Thakur, Y . Nikhileshwar Reddy and Jayeeta 
Bhaumik
Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing, Department of Biotechnology, India
Antibiotic resistance crisis is one of the most persistent issues in global public health, which is associated with lack of new antimi-
crobials. Therefore, the development of new and highly effective antimicrobial agents is of great interest. Lignin, which is found 
to be non-toxic group of complex phenolic polymers, is a major underutilized and abundant component of lignocellulosic bio-
mass possessing antibacterial and antioxidant properties. Herein, we have synthesized a synergistic antimicrobial nanocom-plex 
by growing both silver and gold nano-particles in lignin matrix, which acts as a reducing, stabilizing and capping agent for the 
synthesis of lignin-metallic/bimetallic nano-complexes. The developed nanocomplexes were characterized using UV-visible spec-
troscopy, dynamic light scattering (DLS), X-Ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM), electron dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), Line EDS, EDS mapping and scanning tunneling electron 
microscopy (STEM). The nanocomplexes were found to possess a substantial amount of phenolic and flavonoid contents, which 
imparted them high antioxidant properties. Lignin-metallic/bimetallic nanocomplexes were then tested for their antimicrobial 
activities against Gram-positive bacteria, Gram-negative bacteria and fungi. When compared with silver-lignin nanocomplexes, 
it was found that the lignin-bimetallic (Ag-Au) nanocomplexes possessed higher anti-oxidant and antibacterial properties. The 
mild preparation conditions, no use of harmful solvents and low cost of the lignin Au-Ag nanocomplexes established in this work 
may contribute as useful antimicrobial agents in fight against antibiotic resistance.
Biomass, lignin, silver, gold, bimetallic, nanocomplexes, antioxidant, antimicrobial, antibiotic resistance
1. J.Bhaumik, A. K. Mittal, A.Banerjee,Y .Chisti and U. C. Banerjee. Applications of photo theranostic nano agents in photodynamic 
therapy Nano Research.,2014,12274-014-0628-3
2. N. S. Thakur, J.Bhaumik, S.Kirar and U. C. Banerjee. Development of GoldBased Phototheranostic Nanoagents through a 
Bioinspired Route and Their Applications in Photodynamic Therapy ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5 (9), pp 7950–7960
3. J. Bhaumik, N. S. Thakur, P. K. Aili, A. Ghanghoriya, A. K. Mittaland U. C. Banerjee. Bioinspired Nanotheranostic Agents: 
Synthesis, Surface Functionalization, and Antioxidant Potential, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2015, 1, 382−392.Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd44In-Vitro  Anti-inflammatory activity of  Solanum xanthocarpum  by HRBC 
Membrane Stabilization
  Chandra shekhar Singh1, Shailesh Gupta2, Alok Pal Jain1
1SRK University,India 
2Millennium College of Pharmacy,India 
Email:  shailgpharma@gmail.com 
Solanum xanthocarpum  herb is highly used by the rural and tribal people in curing various disorders. Natural remedies are more 
acceptable in the belief that they are safer with fewer side effects than the synthetic ones. Herbal formulations have growing 
demand in the world market. HRBC membrane stabilising assay is alternative test for determination of Anti-inflammatory active.  
The principal of this assay is based on osmotic presser on human RBC cell. Human erythrocyte cell suspension (10%w/w) was 
prepared by centrifuged RBC packed cell with normal saline (0.85%NaCl solution).When this HRBC suspension cell place in 
hypotonic solution lyses of erythrocyte membrane occur. Herbal extract or drug which have anti-inflammatory activity may 
reduce lyses process. 
The aim of current research work is to evaluation of anti inflammatory activity of Solanum xanthocarpum   by HRBC membrane 
stabilization method. Ethanolic acetate extract at concentration 6mg/ml showed maximum anti-inflammatory activity among 
all extract and concentrations, 69 % protection of HRBC in hypotonic solution. All the results were compared with standard 
indomethacin which showed 70 % protection. The activity may be due to the presence of one or more phytochemical constituents 
present in the extract. The result obtained have been supported by Photomicrographical pictures of the HRBC.
Anti-inflammatory, Erythrocyte cell, Hypotonicity, Membrane stabilization.
1. Gupta Shailesh Kohli Seema and Dwivedi Sumeet (2011),  In-Vitro  Anti-inflammatory activity of Sarcostemma acidum  by HRBC 
Membrane Stabilization, International Journal of Pharmacy Teaching &amp  Practices,2(4),184-188Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd45
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Biosynthesis Of Silver Nanoparticles Using Chamomilla Officinalis 
Leaf Extract
Shermatova I.B , Ismailova M.G 
Tashkent Pharmaceutical institute, Department of Biotechnology, Tashkent, Republic of Uzbekistan.
Nanotechnology is manipulation of matter on an atomic, molecular, and supramolecular scale. This review focuses on the 
possibilities of synthesizing metallic nanoparticles using plant extracts. This approach is being actively developed in recent years 
as an alternative, efficient, cheap and environmentally friendly method for producing nanoparticles with the given properties.
Purpose of the study. Biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles using Chamomilla officinalis  leaf extract   and AFM study of obtained 
nanoparticles.
Materials and Methods: The method of  Green synthesis  was used to obtain silver nanoparticles. For this,  extract of the train was 
previously obtained, after filtration, a 0.01 M solution of silver nitrate was added to it. Then they were thoroughly mixed, left for 
a certain time at room temperature, after which the suspension was centrifuged.
A detailed picture was visualized by a microscopic method - atomic force microscopy (AFM).
Results and discussions: Presents the results of a microscopic study of silver nanoparticles obtained using extract. It can be seen 
from the presented figure that silver nanoparticles with a size of 4-24 nm were predominantly obtained using the green synthesis 
method using the Chamomile extract. A significant amount of nanoparticles had a size of 24.5 - 30 nm.
Given that the most effective for the destruction of pathogens is a 9-15 nm silver particle having an extremely large specific 
surface area that increases the area of contact of silver with bacteria or viruses, significantly improving its bactericidal actions, it 
can be concluded that the resulting nanoparticles both with the use of Chamomilla officinalis  extract are satisfactory.
Conclusions: From the conducted studies it can be concluded that silver nanoparticles obtained using Chamomilla officinalis  
extract have dimensions (4-24 nm) that most effectively provide bactericidal properties.
Nanotechnology, silver nanoparticles, AFM, extract, Green synthesis.
1. Nanoparticles and nanostructured films: Preparation, characterization and applications / Ed. Fendler J.H. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons, 1998. 463 
2. R.Geethalakshmi and D.V .L. Sarada Synthesis of plant-mediated silver nanoparticles using Trianthema decandra  extract and 
evaluation of their anti microbial activities. International Journal of Engineering Science and Technology. 2010. V . 2(5). P.970-975.
3. M.Dubey, S.Bhadauria, B.S.Kushwah Green synthesis of nanosilver particles from extract of Eucalyptus hybrida  (safeda) leaf. // 
Digest J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 2009.V .4. P.537–543.Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:Figure 1: Microscopic examination of silver nanoparticles obtained using extract Chamomilla officinalis  by atomic force 
microscopy.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd46Novel Indole-fused benzo-oxazepines (IFBOs) obliterate 
hepatocellular carcinoma through IL-6/JAK2/STAT3 oncogenic 
signaling blockade
Sudipta Saha 1, Ashok K Singh 1, Umesh Kumar 2, Pranesh Kumar 1, Dinesh Kumar 2
 Biswanath Maity 2
1Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, India
2Centre of Biomedical Research, SGPGIMS Campus, India
Inspired by the well-documented tumor protecting ability of paullones, recently, we synthesized novel paullone-like scaffolds, 
indole-fused benzo-oxazepines (IFBOs), and screened them against hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) specific Hep-G2 cells. Three 
of the synthesized compounds significantly attenuated the progression of HCC in vitro. By computational studies, we further 
discovered that IFBOs exhibited a stable binding complex with the IL-6 receptor. In this context, we investigated in vivo  study 
using the nitrosodiethyl amine (NDEA)-induced HCC model, which strengthened our previous findings by showing the blockade 
of the IL-6 mediated JAK2/STAT3 oncogenic signaling pathway. Treatment with IFBOs showed remarkable attenuation of cellular 
proliferation, as evidenced through a decrease in the number of nodules, restoration of body weight, oxidative stress parameters, 
liver marker enzymes and histological architecture. Interestingly, using a metabolomic approach we further discovered that 
IFBOs can restore the perturbed metabolic profile associated with the HCC condition to normalcy. Particularly, the efficacy of 
T1 for an anti-HCC response was significantly better than the marketed chemotherapeutic drug, 5-fluorouracil. Altogether, these 
remarkable findings open up possibilities of developing IFBOs as novel future candidate molecules for plausible alternatives for 
HCC treatment.
Indole-fused benzo-oxazepines, Hepatocellular carcinoma, IL-6/JAK2/STAT3, 1H-NMR based metabolomics, drug 
interactionAbstract:
Keywords: ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd47
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Molecular Detection of Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) 
in MDR-TB Patients’ Attendant in North-Western Pakistan
Taif Shah1, Zahir Shah2
1 Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and Technology, China
2 Department of Animal Health, The University of Agriculture Peshawar, Pakistan
Objective: To determine the drugs susceptibility pattern of Mycobacterium tuberculosis  (M.TB) in multi-drug resistant 
tuberculosis (MDR-TB) patients’ attendants in North Western, Pakistan. This study was conducted at Peshawar Tuberculosis 
Research Laboratory (PTRL), Provincial TB Control Program Hayatabad Medical Complex Peshawar, (KP) from August 2013 
to March 2014. A cross-sectional study in which four hundred and eighty sputum samples from MDR-TB patients’ attendants 
were processed for the detection of M.TB through Ziehl-Neelsen staining, Lowenstein-Jensen, BACTEC MGIT-960 culture, and 
line probe assay. Out of 480 samples, 06 (2.1%) were found positive for M.TB through Ziehl-Neelsen staining while 10 (2.8%) 
were positive through LJ and BACTEC MGIT-960 culture. The 10 positive samples were further subjected to drugs susceptibility 
testing and line probes assay test to find out rifampicin, isoniazid, streptomycin, and ethambutol resistant and it was found that 06 
M.TB isolates were resistant while 4 were sensitive to rifampicin and isoniazid. Among the 6 resistant M.TB strains, 04 showed 
a mutation in the rpoB gene at 531, 516 and 526 codons. Majority of MDR-TB patients attendants had drug-resistant tuberculosis 
and the rate of drug-susceptible TB was low.
Assay, Multi-drug resistant tuberculosis, Sputum, Tuberculosis.Abstract:
Keywords: 
Figure 1: Representative DNA patterns of M. tuberculosis showing resistant and sensitive pattern through LPA.
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd48Synthesis and In-vitro Evaluation of Novel Quinozolines as
 Potent EGFR Inhibitor
K. Vinaya,1,2, C. Mani,2 K. Palle2 
1 Government First Grade College, Department of Chemistry, India 
2 Department of Oncological Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, USA Mitchell Cancer 
Institute, USA.
Non small cell-lung cancer (NSCLC) cells have increased expression of EGFR, which makes them a potential target for cancer 
therapy. Based on molecular docking and previous reports, we designed and synthesized quinazoline derivatives as potent EGFR 
inhibitors. Among the derivatives, three compounds showed good antiproliferative activity against A-549 and H-1299 cells. 
Further more, these compounds inhibited EGFR sig-naling exhibiting diminishing p-EGFR and its downstream proteins like 
p-Akt, p-Erk1/2 and p-mTOR however, it did not alter the levels of EGFR, Akt, Erk1/2 and mTOR proteins. Flow cytometric 
analysis indicated the accumulation of cells at G1 phase suggesting induction of apoptosis, which was further confirmed by 
annexin V/propidium iodide staining. Our study suggested that quinazoline scaffold can be developed as novel EGFR kinase 
inhibitors for cancer therapy. 
Apoptosis, Non small cell-lung cancer cells, EGFR, Quinazoline.
1. Gschwind, A., Fischer, O. M., Ullrich, A. (2004)  The discovery of receptor tyrosine kinases: targets for cancer therapy. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer. 4, 361-370.
2. Yong, J., Cai-Hong, Y ., Eunyoung, P. et al  (2016) Overcoming EGFR(T790M) and EGFR(C797S) resistance with mutant-
selective allosteric inhibitors. Nature 534, 129–132.Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd49
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )Determination of optimal composition of “Ambrol”  tablets
 Z. Kh. Abdijalilova, Kh. M. Yunusova
Chair of Industrial Technology of Medicines,
Tashkent Pharmaceuticals Institute, Uzbekistan
One of the promising areas of pharmacy development is the expansion of the range of highly effective generic drugs. In order to 
achieve these goals, peripheral cough preparations are also promising objects. Development and improvement of the compositions 
of existing dosage forms of the most popular drugs, replacement of imported substances by representatives of local raw materials, 
respectively, reducing the cost of products is one of the main tasks of domestic pharmaceutical technology 
We used a number of auxiliary substances that are used in the pharmaceutical industry as fillers, binders, loosening agents. 
More than 25 tablet formulations have been studied, differing in nature and amount of excipients. Compositions No. 1 and No. 
2 contained MCC in an amount from 5% to 10%. Composition No. 3 contained 0.08% of aerosil. Compositions No. 4-6 differed 
in the ratio of lactose and starch, respectively). The remaining mixtures had the same composition, but differed in preparation 
technology. To obtain a granulate under laboratory conditions, the powder mixture was moistened with a solution of a binder, 
and then rubbed through a sieve with a hole diameter of 3 mm. Dried in an oven at a temperature not higher than 50 ° C to a 
residual moisture content of 3.5–4.5%, then rubbed through a sieve with a hole diameter of 1.5 mm. Powdered in a mortar with 
a plastic scoop. In industrial conditions, the tablet mass was prepared as follows: excipients and pharmaceutical substances were 
loaded into a granulator mixer, a solution of a binder was added and granulated for 15 minutes. The granulate was dried at a 
temperature of 40-50 ° C for 30 minutes, rubbed through a sieve with a hole diameter of 1.5 mm. The dusting was performed on 
a two conical mixer at a rotation speed of 22 revolutions per minute. Technological characteristics of the tablet mass (flowability, 
bulk density with compaction and without compaction) were determined by the methods of GF XII. It has been established that 
tablet blends with microcrystalline cellulose have the best tabletting properties. It is established that the substance of abroxol has 
unsatisfactory flowability, has a low bulk density. Therefore, it is impossible to produce tablets by direct compression
The technological properties of tablet blends and granules were determined in accordance with the XI State Pharmacopoeia: 
flowability was studied by the fixed funnel method, disintegration of the tablets was investigated using a laboratory identifier 
of the rotary basket in the decaying material, determination of the abrasion of the tablets was carried out in a drum-type eraser, 
compressive strength of the tablets was examined with a spring dynamometer, the compressive strength of the tablets was 
examined using a spring dynamometer, and the compressive strength of the tablets was determined using a spring dynamometer. 
the device with the basket, the height and diameter of the tablets were studied using calipers 
 It is shown that the tablets have satisfactory performance: disintegration (10.1 ± 0.32) min., Abrasion (99.22%) and compressive 
strength (75.9 ± 3.45) N.
Technological properties, fractional composition, bulk density, flowability, compressibility, compactibility.
1. Pestrikova N.V ., Karpova E.M., MaJ Zina N.K. Modern aspects of the creation of dosage forms as a prerequisite for the 
development of new pharmacotherapeutic technologies (literature review). Vyatka Medical Herald 2009; 2–4: 26–30.
2. Studies of various samples of microcrystalline cellulose in the preparation of tablets by direct compression L. I. Kucherenko, 
A. V . Trigubchak, M. B. Demchuk [and others]. Scientific and technological progress and optimization of technological processes 
for the creation of drugs: mater. 3rd scientific and practical. Conf., October 1-2, 2009, Ternopil. - M .: Ukrmedkniga, 2009. - p. 59.
3. Abdijalilova Z. Kh. and Yunusova Kh. M. The substantion of the tablet mass Ambrol composition choice for tabletizing World 
Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences.-2019.-V ol.8, Issue 1, -P.- 260-266.Abstract:
Keywords: 
References:INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )
ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd50Formulation and Evaluation of Lovastatin Nanoparticles for Enhancing 
the Oral Bioavailability
Riya Hegade, Archana S Patil, Anand. P . Gadad, Panchaxari. M. Dandagi.
Department of Pharmaceutics, KLE College of Pharmacy, KLE Academy of Higher Education and 
Research (Deemed-to-be-University), India.
Lovastatin nanosuspension was formulated using solvent/anti-solvent method using probe sonication technique. Lovastatin is 
an anti-lipidemic drug which belongs to class of statins. It has poor oral bioavailability because of low solubility and variable 
dissolution rate. The main aim of this study was to enhance the solubility and dissolution rate of the drug and in turn the 
oral bioavailability. Nanosuspension was prepared by using HPMC K15M and Pluronic F68 as stabilizers. The formulated 
nanosuspension was characterized for particle size, PDI, zeta potential, surface morphology and In vitro release rate. Further, in 
vivo bioavailability study and stability study was also carried out. FT-IR and DSC study showed no interaction between the drug 
and the excipients which were used in the formulation. Optimized formulation showed particle size of 127± 0.01nm and PDI of 
0.492±0.001 and zeta potential of -37.9mV which showed a good stability. Morphological study showed that the particles were 
in nano range. The drug content was found to be in the range of 73% - 87%. In vitro release study showed much faster release in 
one hour compared to the pure drug and marketed formulation. In vivo bioavailability study was carried out in wistar rats which 
showed improvement in bioavailability of approximately 2.5 folds compared to marketed formulation. Stability study was carried 
out for optimized formulation F2 which showed that formulation was more stable at 4°±2°C. 
Lovastatin, oral bioavailability, Solubility, Nano suspension.Abstract:
Keywords: Email:  riyahegde7@gmail.com ISBN: 978-93-82829-66-9 Larix International Pte. Ltd51
INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON CHEMICAL BIOLOGY AND DRUG DISCOVERY( CHEMICAL BIOLOGY 2019 )A Prospective Study On Detection Of Drug Interactions, Improving 
The Drug Safety Access And Therapeutic Outcome In A Tertiary Care 
Teaching Hospital.
K.Sivaiah,  S.Krupa, T.Sailaja, V .Jagadeesh Naik
Department of Pharmacy Practice, Santhiram college of Pharmacy, India
An interaction is alleged to occur once the consequences of one drug are changed by the presence of another drug, herbal 
medicine, food, drink or by some environmental chemical agents. [1] As per APA drug interaction is defined aschemical or 
physiological reaction that can occur when two different drugs are taken together. This prospective study aimed to determine the 
prevalence of adverse DI’s events associated polypharmacy. To categorize and classify the potential DI’s as the major, moderate 
and minor. A Prospective observational study was conducted in Santhiram medical college and general hospital, Nandyal from 
July 2017 to December 2017, to detect the drug interactions, improving the drug safety access and therapeutic outcome in a 
tertiary care teaching hospital. Clinical data collected by using case sheets to detect drug interactions in patients who are admitted 
in inpatient wards. A total of 108 patients were evaluated for their drug interactions, out of which four patients showed positive 
drug interactions. A chi-square test was used to asses, the significance levels between drug interactions and age, severity. We 
found the incidence of potential DDIs was higher in the age group of 61-80 years age group. Among all those 108 patients 
collected for the study, the incidence of interactions were observed more in male patients (58.3%) compared to female patients 
(41.7%).The study found the associations of potential DIs with age, sex, number of drugs per prescription. There was a direct 
link between polypharmacy and occurrence of DIs. To lower the frequency of potential interactions it could be necessary to make 
a careful selection of therapeutic alternatives, and in cases without other options, patients should be continuously monitored to 
identify adverse events. The study concluded that educational interventions can minimize the incidence of DIs.
Drug interactions, poly pharmacy, drug safety, therapeutic outcome.Abstract:
Keywords: 