 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF IMPROVED CLONING 
VECTORS FOR BACILLUS  AND 
STAPHYLOCOCCUS SPECIES   
 
MSc DISSERTATION 
 
 
BY 
 
 
DUDUZILE EDITH NDWANDWE 
 
 
 
Submitted in fulfillment of the requirements for th e Degree Master of Science in the 
Faculty of Science, School of Molecular and Cell Bi ology at the University of the 
Witwatersrand 
 
 
 
 
 I DECLARATION 
 
 
I hereby declare that this research report is my ow n, unaided work. It is being submitted 
in fulfillment of the Degree of Masters of Science in the University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg. It has not been submitted before for any degree or examination in any 
other University. 
 
 
Signature ……………………….. 
Date……………………………... 
 
 
 
 
 
  II  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I like to give my deepest gratitude to the followin g people: 
 
Prof E. R. Dabbs for the opportunity to come and wo rk with him and for his guidance and 
supervision in this work. I would like to also than k him for his financial assistance. I have 
learnt a lot under his supervision.    
 
My parents for their encouragement in everything th at I have done in my life and 
knowledge that they are always there for me. My you nger brother Thabani who always 
brought a smile when I am down.  
    
My boyfriend Sandisile for his presence in my life.  
 
Melissa and Youtaro, this work was accomplished bec ause you taught me everything 
there is to know about the techniques I have used. You would stop doing your work and 
focus on helping me out. 
 
Josias, for assistance in using the electroporator.   
All the GH700 students, Chris, the 2007 Honours gro up, Bayo, Tammy, Sofia and 
Tatenda for making me feel at home. 
 
Dr Dandara for the discussions we had about the PCR  part of my work. 
 
Charlotte, Pinky and Sonto for always being my moth ers at Wits and for making sure that 
I was provided with clean glassware in order to com plete this work.  
 
Not forget the Lord Almighty for keeping me safe an d giving the strength to go on when 
times were tough.  III  DEDICATIONS 
 
This work is dedicated to my family at large but mo st importantly to my late brother 
Sibusiso Ndwandwe, my mother Lettie Mhlanga, my fat her Derrick Ndwandwe, my 
grandmother Ellen Mhlanga, and my younger brother T habani Ndwandwe.   IV  ABSTRACT 
 
A shuttle vector was constructed which was stably m aintained in Escherichia coli , 
Bacillus subtilis  and Staphylococcus aureus . It was made by ligating E. coli  positive 
selection plasmid pEcoR251 and S. aureus  resistance plasmid pC194 via their respective 
Bam HI  and Xho II sites. Designated pNDW1, it was shown to be effe ctive in genomic 
library construction. The number of restriction sit es in the EcoR I (“suicide”) gene was 
increased by successive addition of Xba I and Xho I using siteAdirected mutagenesis. Spe I, 
Nhe I and Avr II generate DNA fragments with compatible cohesive ends to Xba I while 
Sal I digestion gives rise to ends compatible with Xho I.  Therefore the number of different 
genomic libraries which can be made using this syst em is augmented by six. A principal 
impediment to full exploitation of these shuttle ve ctors is apparently the severe restriction 
by B. subtilis  and S. aureus of DNA coming from E. coli .   V TABLE OF CONTENTS       page 
 
Declarations           I 
Acknowledgements         II 
Dedications          III 
Abstract          IV 
List of Tables          X 
List of Figures          XI 
Abbreviations          XIII 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1        The genus Bacillus         1 
1.2        Staphylococcus  spp        2 
1.3        Plasmids         4 
1.4         Staphylococcus aureus  plasmids       4 
1.5         Plasmid pC194        5  
1.6         Restriction modification system      5 
1.7         Types of restriction modification systems     8 
1.8         Positive selection vectors       10 
1.8.1     Plasmid pEcoR251        11 
1.9         Regulatory element from lambda phage     12 
1.10  Justification and Aim        13 
 
2. Materials and methods 
 
2.1       Bacterial strains and plasmids used in th is work    14 
2.2       Media and growth conditions       16 
2.3       Determination of minimum inhibitory conce ntration (MIC)   16 
2.4       DNA preparation        16  VI  2.4.1     E. coli bulk plasmid preparation      16 
2.4.2      B. subtilis  bulk genomic DNA preparation     17 
2.4.3     E. coli mini plasmid preparations      18 
2.4.4     B. subtilis  mini plasmid preparation      18 
2.5        DNA manipulations and cloning techniques      19  
2.5.1     DNA precipitation        19  
2.5.1.1  Salt and ethanol precipitation       19 
2.5.1.2  Isopropanol DNA precipitation      19 
2.5.1.3  DNA precipitation from CsCl gradient     1 9 
2.5.1.4  PhenolAchloroform extraction      20 
2.5.2     Restriction enzyme digestion          20 
2.5.3     Ligation of DNA           21 
2.5.4    Alkaline phosphatase treatment       21 
2.6       Gel electrophoresis        21 
2.6.1    Agarose gel electrophoresis       21 
2.6.2    The freezeAsqueeze method of extracting DN A from agarose gels  22 
2.7       Transformations        22 
2.7.1    E. coli  standard CaCl 2 transformation     22 
2.7.2    B. subtilis  electroporation       23 
2.7.3    Protoplast transformation of B. subtilis  and S. aureus   24 
2.7.4    Electroporation of S. aureus       24 
2.8        Preparation of DNA for sequencing      25 
2.9        Mutagenesis         25 
2.9.1    NTG mutagenesis        25 
2.9.2    SiteAdirected mutagenesis       26 
2.10     CounterAselection for auxotrophic mutants     26 
2.11     Rifampicin inactivation test       26 
2.12     Plasmid curing        27 
 
 
  VII  3. Results 
 
3.1       Bacillus6Staphylococcus6E. coli  shuttle vector construction    28 
3.1.1    Transformation of B. subtilis  with pNDW1     29 
3.1.2    Transformation of S. aureus  with pNDW1      31 
3.2       New sites into EcoR I       32 
3.2.1    Xba I restriction site in pNDW1      35 
3.2.2    More new sites        42 
3.2.3    Xba I restriction site into pDA71      54 
3.2.4    Xho I site into plasmid pEcoR251      58 
3.3       Inactivation of rifampicin by Bacillus  species    61 
3.4       Genomic library construction       61 
3.4.1    Vector calibration         62 
3.4.2    Genomic DNA calibration       62 
3.4.3    Construction of the genomic library in E. coli    63 
 
4. Discussion         65  
 
5. References         70 
 
6. Appendices  
         
Appendix A: Media         76 
Appendix B: Solutions        78 
Appendix C: Plasmids and Molecular weight markers    87 
 
 
  VIII  LIST OF TABLES 
 
Table 2.1  Internet Sources used 
Table 3.1  Candidate restriction sites 
Table 3.2  Mutagenic reaction mixture for Xba I site 
Table 3.3  Cycling conditions for mutagenic reactio n of Xba I site  
Table 3.4  Mutagenic reaction mixture for Xho I site 
Table 3.5  Cycling conditions for mutagenic reactio n of Xho I site  
Table A6.1  Antimicrobial agents 
Table A6.2  List of chemicals used 
 
 
  IX  LIST OF FIGURES 
          
1.1         Representation of the action of the Restrict ion modification gene complex 
1.2         Regulation of the expression of the EcoR I endonuclease gene 
3.1         Plasmid map of pNDW1 
3.2         Restriction digestion pattern of pNDW1 
3.3        Restriction digestions of plasmids pNDW2 and pNDW3 
3.4        Plasmid maps of pNDW2 and pNDW3 
3.5        Digestion of transformants to determine the s ize of pNDW1 from S. aureus   
3.6        Restriction digestion pattern of pNDW1 from S. aureus  
3.7        Digestion of Bacillus polymyxa  genomic DNA  
3.8        Digestion of pEcoR251 and pC194 with Xba I  
3.9        PCR product after siteAdirected mutagenesis 
3.10  Digestion of transformants with Xba I 
3.11  Digestion of pNDW1 that has acquired the Xba I site  
3.12  Behavior of pNDW5 in a lysogen and a nonAlysogen 
3.13  Plasmid map of pNDW5 
3.14  Transformants carrying pNDW5 digested with Xba I  
3.15  Digestion of pNDW5 and pNDW1 with Xba I 
3.16  Sequence alignments of the Bgl IIAPst I fragments from the mutated and nonA  
  mutated EcoR I gene  
3.17  pNDW5 clones digested with Xba I 
3.18  Digestion of pC194 and pEcoR251 with Cla I and Xho I 
3.19  PCR product run on 0.4% agarose gel 
3.20  DNA preparations digested with Xho I to screen for pNDW5 with an Xho I site 
3.21  DNA preparations 1A16 digested with Xho I 
3.22  Restriction digestion of pNDW7 and pNDW8 
3.23  Behavior of pNDW7 in a lysogen and a nonAlysogen 
3.24  Digestion of pNDW5 and pNDW7 with Xho I 
3.25  Plasmid map of pNDW7 
3.26  Streptomyces pseudogriseolus   genomic DNA digestion  X 3.27   pNDW7 clones digested with Xho I 
3.28  Sequence alignment of the Hind IIIABgl II sequences of the EcoR I endonuclease  
gene 
3.29  Sequence alignment of the Hind IIIABgl II fragment from pEcoR251 
3.30  Predictions of the restriction sites in the mutant EcoRI sequence 
3.31  Digestion of DNA to screen for pDA71 with Xba I site 
3.32  Digestion of pDA71A1 to confirm the plasmid 
3.33  Behavior of pDA71A1 in a lysogen and nonAlysogen 
3.34  pDA71A1 clones digested with Xba I 
3.35  Plasmid map of pDA71A1 
3.36  Digestion of DNA to screen for pEcoR251 with the Xho I site 
3.37  Digestion of pEcoR251A1 to confirm the plasmid 
3.38  Behavior of pEcoR251A1 in a lysogen and a non lysog en 
3.39  Bacillus polymyxa  genomic DNA digestion 
3.40  Library construction 
A6.1 Plasmid map of pC194 
A6.2 Plasmid map of pDA71 
A6.3 Plasmid map of pUC18/19 
A6.4 Multiple cloning site of pUC18 
A6.5 Plasmid map of pEcoR251 
A6.6 Molecular weight marker    
 
 
   XI  ABBREVIATIONS 
 
   
˚C     Degrees Celsius 
µg     Microgram 
µl     Microliter 
bp     Basepair 
DNA     Deoxyribonucleic acid 
dNTPs     Deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates   
EDTA     Ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid  
g      Gram 
K2HPO 4    Dipotassium hydrogen Phosphate 
kb     Kilobase 
KH 2PO 4    Potassium dihydrogen phosphate 
M     Molar 
mg     milligram 
MgCl 2     Magnesium chloride 
ml     Milliliter 
mM     Millimolar 
ng     Nanogram 
PCR     Polymerase Chain Reaction 
PEG     Polyethylene glycol 
RNA     Ribonucleic acid 
rpm     Revolutions per minutes 
SDS     Sodium dodecyl sulphate  
TBE     Tris, Boric Acid, EDTA 
TE     Tris, EDTA 
λ     Lambda 
 
 
  1 1. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 The genus Bacillus   
 
Bacillus subtilis  is a rodAshaped, sporeAforming, nonApathogenic Gra mApositive bacterium 
found in soil and vegetation. They can contaminate food, however, seldom result in food 
poisoning. They are used on vegetable and soybean s eeds as fungicide. Some strains 
cause rots on potatoes and ropiness in bread. Bacillus thuringiensis  is a bacterium in the 
same genus known to be used in insect control. Bacillus cereus  and Bacillus licheniformis  
can cause food poisoning. Bacillus anthracis causes anthrax, an acute and sometimes 
lethal disease of humans and animals. It has been i dentified as a potential bioterrorism 
attack agent (Hughes and Gerberding, 2002).  
 
Bacillus  species produce a wide range of hydrolytic enzymes  that breakdown complex 
polymers such as polysaccharides, nucleic acids and  lipids, permitting the organism to 
use these products as carbon sources and electron d onors. Many  Bacillus  species produce 
antibiotics, of which bacitracin, polymyxin, tyroci dine, gramicidin and circulin are 
examples. Strains of Bacillus polymyxa  biosynthesize a number of useful and potentially 
useful compound, including peptide antibiotics, pro teases, and a wide variety of 
carbohydratesAutilizing enzymes, such as βAamylase,  βADAxylanases, pullulanase, glucose 
isomerase and polygalacturonate lyase (Malloonee an d Speckman, 1989). Frequently 
these enzymes are secreted making them easier to pu rify. B. subtilis  has proven highly 
amenable to genetic manipulation, and has therefore  become widely adopted as a model 
organism for laboratory studies, especially of spor ulation, which is a simplified example 
of cellular differentiation In terms of popularity as a laboratory model organism B. 
subtilis  is often used as the GramApositive equivalent of Escherichia coli , an extensively 
studied GramAnegative rod. 
 
 
  2 1.2 Staphylococcus  Spp. 
 
Taxonomically, the genus Staphylococcus  is in the bacterial family Staphylococcaceae,  
which includes three lesser known genera, Gamella,  Macrococcus  and Salinicoccus.  The 
Listeriaceae  are also a closely related family. Staphylococcus aureus  forms a fairly large 
yellow colony on rich medium. S. epidermidis  has a relatively small white colony. S. 
aureus  is often hemolytic on blood agar; S. epidermidis  is non hemolytic. Staphylococci 
are facultative anaerobes that grow by aerobic resp iration or by fermentation that yields 
principally lactic acid. The bacteria are catalaseA positive and oxidaseAnegative. S. aureus  
can grow at a temperature range of 15 to 45 degrees  and at sodium chloride 
concentrations as high as 15 percent. Nearly all st rains of S. aureus  produce the enzyme 
coagulase: nearly all strains of S. epidermidis  lack this enzyme. S. aureus  should always 
be considered a potential pathogen; most strains of  S. epidermidis  are nonpathogenic and 
may even play a protective role in their host as no rmal flora. Staphylococcus epidermidis  
may be a pathogen in the hospital environment (Madi gan et al., 2003). Staphylococci are 
perfectly spherical cells about 1 micrometer in dia meter. They grow in clusters because 
staphylococci divide in two planes. The configurati on of the cocci helps to distinguish 
staphylococci from streptococci, which are slightly  oblong cells that usually grow in 
chains (because they divide in one plane only). The  catalase test is important in 
distinguishing streptococci (catalaseAnegative) fro m staphylococci, which are vigorous 
catalaseAproducers. The test is performed by adding  3% hydrogen peroxide to a colony on 
an agar plate or slant. CatalaseApositive cultures produce O 2 and bubble at once. The test 
should not be done on blood agar because blood itse lf contains catalase (Todar, 2005). 
 
Staphylococcus aureus  causes a variety of suppurative (pusAforming) infe ctions and 
toxicoses in humans. It causes superficial skin les ions such as boils, styes and 
furunculosis; more serious infections such as pneum onia, mastitis, phlebitis, meningitis, 
and urinary tract infections; and deepAseated infec tions, such as osteomyelitis and 
endocarditis (Madigan et al ., 2003). S. aureus  is a major cause of hospital acquired 
(nosocomial) infection of surgical wounds and infec tions associated with indwelling 
medical devices. S. aureus  causes food poisoning by releasing enterotoxins in to food, and  3 toxic shock syndrome by release of super antigens i nto the blood stream. S. aureus  
expresses many potential virulence factors: (1) sur face proteins that promote colonization 
of host tissues; (2) invasins that promote bacteria l spread in tissues (leukocidin, kinases, 
hyaluronidase); (3) surface factors that inhibit ph agocytic engulfment (capsule, Protein 
A); (4) biochemical properties that enhance their s urvival in phagocytes (carotenoids, 
catalase production); (5) immunological disguises ( Protein A, coagulase, clotting factor); 
and (6) membraneAdamaging toxins that lyse eukaryot ic cell membranes (hemolysins, 
leukotoxin, leukocidin; (7) exotoxins that damage h ost tissues or otherwise provoke 
symptoms of disease; (8) inherent and acquired resi stance to antimicrobial  agents. 
 
For the majority of diseases caused by S. aureus , pathogenesis is multifactorial, so it is 
difficult to determine precisely the role of any gi ven factor. However, there are 
correlations between strains isolated from particul ar diseases and expression of particular 
virulence determinants, which suggests their role i n a particular disease. The application 
of molecular biology has led to advances in unravel ing the pathogenesis of 
staphylococcal diseases. Genes encoding potential v irulence factors have been cloned and 
sequenced, and many protein toxins have been purifi ed. With some staphylococcal 
toxins, symptoms of a human disease can be reproduc ed in animals with the purified 
protein toxins, lending an understanding of their m echanism of action (Todar, 2005).  
 
Hospital strains of S. aureus  are usually resistant to a variety of different an tibiotics. A 
few strains are resistant to all clinically useful antibiotics except vancomycin, and 
vancomycinAresistant strains are increasinglyArepor ted. The term MRSA refers to 
Methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus . Methicillin resistance is widespread and 
most methicillinAresistant strains are also multipl e resistant. In addition, S. aureus  
exhibits resistance to antiseptics and disinfectant s, such as quaternary ammonium 
compounds, which may aid its survival in the hospit al environment. S. aureus  responded 
to the introduction of antibiotics by the usual bac terial means to develop drug resistance: 
(1) mutation in chromosomal genes followed by selec tion of resistant strains and (2) 
acquisition of resistance genes as extraAchromosoma l plasmids, transducing particles,  4 transposons, or other types of DNA inserts. S. aureus  expresses its resistance to drugs and 
antibiotics through a variety of mechanisms.   
 
1.3 Plasmids 
 
Plasmids represent an important factor in bacterial  evolution. They enable rapid shortA
term adaptation of the bacterial host to changing e nvironmental conditions and allow 
amplification of gene by transferring them within o ne or between many species. 
Normally, plasmids are nonessential to their hosts,  conferring only an energy burden that 
can slow cell growth. They can, however, be stably maintained in a bacterial population 
even under non selective conditions. Copy number of  a plasmid is maintained by 
regulation of replication. Low copy number plasmid requires a tighter regulation of 
regulation and segregation than the high copy numbe r (Kües and Stahl, 1989).  
 
 
1.4 Staphylococcus aureus  plasmids 
 
Many small plasmids conferring resistance to differ ent antibiotics have been isolated 
from Staphylococcus aureus  (te Riele et al ., 1986). Since the discovery of staphylococcal 
plasmids in the early 1960s, three general classes have been identified and characterized. 
The first S. aureus plasmids discovered were of class II. These are of intermediate size 
and copy number; they encode a combination of βAlac tamase and inorganic ion 
resistances, and they occur in S. aureus plus various other species such as Staphylococcus 
xylosus  and Staphylococcus simulans . Plasmids of class I were discovered shortly 
afterward. These are of small size (1A5 kb) and hig h copy number (15A50 copies per cell); 
they usually encode a single antibiotic resistance,  and they occur in many staphylococcal 
species. Most recently, a number of larger (30A60 k b) plasmids carrying multiple 
antibiotic resistances have been identified (Novick , 1989). 
 
Class II plasmids are larger (15A30Kb), have a lowe r copy numbers and carry some 
combination of resistance to βAlactam antibiotics ( βAlactamase), macrolides and a variety  5 of heavy metal ions  such as arsenic, cadmium, lead  and mercury (Novick and Roth, 
1968). Some of these plasmids are reported to be tr ansposable. Class III consists of a 
considerably larger (30A60Kb) plasmids that carry a  determinant of conjugative transfer, 
tra , plus some combination of resistance markers inclu ding gentamycin and penicillin 
Qa, some are transposable and contain a number of i nsertion sequence like elements 
(Gray, 1983). Staphylococcal plasmids are of partic ular importance in the study of 
antibiotic resistance of S. aureus  because using plasmids isolated from this organism  
might help understand the how these resistant deter minants are being transferred to other 
species and to other genera.  
 
1.5 Plasmid pC194 
 
Plasmid pC194 is one of the several small (2.9kb in  size) found in S. aureus  reported by 
Iordanescu et al . (1978). Plasmid pC194 specifies chloramphenicolAi nduced resistance to 
chloramphenicol mediated by the enzyme chlorampheni col acetylAtransferase (CAT), an 
enzyme that inactivates chloramphenicol by converti ng it successively to the inactive 3A
acetyl and 1, 3Adiacetyl derivatives. It has served  as a useful vector for analytical cloning 
of determinants of inducible resistance and replica tion in conjugation studies of another 
small plasmid, pE194 (Horinouchi and Weisblum, 1982 ). It can also serve as a useful 
system for studies of gene expression control mecha nism since the synthesis of CAT 
appears to be under autogenous control. Plasmid pC1 94 is of interest because it can 
replicate in a wide variety of bacterial hosts (Goz e and Ehrlich, 1980) . It was also found 
to be maintained in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Goursot et al ., 1982) . This 
maintenance of these plasmids in different bacteria l species might be attributed to 
horizontal gene transfer as a normal phenomenon. 
 
1.6 Restriction modification system 
 
The restriction modification system (RM system) is used by bacteria, and perhaps other 
prokaryotic organisms to protect themselves from fo reign DNA, such as bacteriophages. 
This phenomenon was first noticed in the 1950s. Cer tain bacteria strains were found to  6 inhibit (restrict) the growth of viruses grown in o ther strains. This effect was attributed to 
sequenceAspecific restriction enzymes. Bacteria hav e restriction enzymes, also called 
restriction endonucleases, which cleave double stra nded DNA at specific points into 
fragments, which are then degraded further by other  endonucleases. This prevents 
infection by effectively destroying the foreign DNA  introduced by an infectious agent 
such as a bacteriophage ( Figure 1.1 B ). Approximately one quarter of known bacteria 
possess RM systems and of those about one half has more than one type of system 
(Wilson, 1991a; Wilson, 1991b). 
 
Restriction enzymes only cleave at specific sequenc es of DNA which are usually 4A6 
base pairs long, and often palindromic. Given that the sequences that the restriction 
enzymes recognize are very short, the bacterium its elf will almost certainly have many of 
these sequences present in its own DNA. Therefore, in order to prevent destruction of its 
own DNA by the restriction enzymes, the bacterium m arks its own DNA by adding 
methyl groups to it. This modification must not int erfere with the DNA baseApairing, and 
therefore, usually only a few specific bases are mo dified on each strand (Wilson, 1991b). 
 
A restriction endonuclease recognizes a specific DN A sequence and introduce doubleA
stranded break and the modification enzyme recogniz es the same sequence and protects  
it from the restriction enzyme by methylation  Figure 1.1 A . It has been hypothesized that 
several restrictionAmodification gene complexes in bacteria are not easily replaced by 
competitor genetic elements because their loss lead s to cell death (Naito et al ., 1995; 
Handa et al ., 2001; Figure. 1C ). This finding led to the proposal that these comp lexes 
may actually represent one of the simplest forms of  life, similar to viruses, transposons, 
and homing endonucleases. This selfish gene hypothe sis  (Naito et al ., 1995; Kusano et 
al.,  1995; Kobayashi, 2001) is now supported by many li nes of evidence from genome 
analysis and experimentation. After loss of the res trictionAmodification gene complex, the 
restriction enzyme and modification enzyme will bec ome increasingly diluted through 
cell division. Finally, too few modification enzyme  molecules remain to defend all the 
recognition sites present on the newly replicated c hromosomes. Any one of the remaining 
molecules of the restriction enzyme can attack thes e exposed sites. The chromosome  7 breakage then leads to extensive chromosome degrada tion, and the cell dies unless the 
breakage is somehow repaired. The chromosome breaka ge may stimulate recombination 
and generate a variety of rearranged genomes, some of which might survive. The 
principle of postAsegregational killing  once established in a cell, the addiction gene 
complex is difficult to eliminate because its loss,  or some sort of threat to its persistence, 
leads to cell death. Intact copies of the gene comp lex survive in the other cells of the 
clone.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1  Represents the action of a restrictionAmodificatio n gene complex (Adapted 
from Kobayashi, 2004). A Restriction enzyme (Endonuclease) cleaves unmethyla ted 
DNA and modification methyltransferase protects the  DNA from cleavage.  B Attack on 
incoming DNA. An attack on invading DNA that is not  appropriately methylated is likely 
to be beneficial to the restrictionAmodification ge ne complex and to its host. C A simple 
dilution model for postAsegregational killing. 
 
 
 8 1.7 Types of Restriction Modification Systems 
 
There are three kinds of restriction modification s ystems: type I, type II and type III, all 
with restriction enzyme activity and a methylase ac tivity. They were named in the order 
of discovery, although the type II system is the mo st common. Type I systems are the 
most complex, consisting of three polypeptides: R ( restriction), M (modification), and S 
(specificity). The resulting complex can both cleav e and methylate DNA. Both reactions 
require ATP, and cleavage often occurs a considerab le distance from the recognition site. 
The S subunit determines the specificity of both re striction and methylation. Cleavage 
occurs at variable distances from the recognition s equence, so discrete bands are not 
easily visualized by gel electrophoresis (Wilson an d Murray, 1991). Type II systems are 
the simplest and the most prevalent. Instead of wor king as a complex, the 
methyltransferase and endonuclease are encoded as t wo separate proteins and act 
independently (there is no specificity protein). Bo th proteins recognize the same 
recognition site, and therefore compete for activit y. The methyltransferase acts as a 
monomer, methylating the duplex one strand at a tim e. The endonuclease acts as a 
homodimer, which facilitates the cleavage of both s trands. Cleavage occurs at a defined 
position close to or within the recognition sequenc e, thus producing discrete fragments 
during gel electrophoresis. For this reason, Type I I systems are used in labs for DNA 
analysis and gene cloning. Type III systems have R and M proteins that form a complex 
of modification and cleavage. The M protein, howeve r, can methylate on its own. 
Methylation also only occurs on one strand of the D NA unlike most other known 
mechanisms. The heterodimer formed by the R and M p roteins competes with itself by 
modifying and restricting the same reaction. This r esults in incomplete digestion (Wilson 
and Murray, 1991). 
 
A hypothesis was proposed that the certain type II RM systems may represent selfish 
genetic elements in the sense that they can maintai n and increase their copy number even 
when they do not confer any advantageous phenotype on their host cells (Kobayashi, 
2001; Naito et al ., 1995). This hypothesis was based on the observat ion that certain type 
II RM systems on a plasmid can increase stability o f a plasmid by selectively killing cells  9 that failed to retain the plasmid, thereby causing an increase in their relative frequency in 
the viable bacterial population. Analysis of bacter ial genomes provided evidence that RM 
systems can move between bacterial genomes, which s eems to be consistent with the 
behavior as selfish DNA elements (Kobayashi, 2001; Naderer et al ., 2002; Nobusato et 
al. , 2000). The selfish hypothesis was given strong su pport when the RM system on a 
chromosome was found to multiply in tandem in a man ner dependent on a functional 
restriction gene (Sadykov et al ., 2003). This was reminiscent of the induction of the 
replication of prophage genomes. Type II RM systems  show similarities to viruses in 
their regulation of gene expression (Kobayashi, 200 4). When they enter a new host, they 
have to establish themselves in the host without ex cessive killing the host cells, just like a 
temperate bacteriophage establish themselves in the  host cells as prophages. It is 
postulated that the RM gene system express the modi fication activity before restriction 
activity to protect the host chromosome by methylat ion. The methylAtransferases of type 
II RM systems were shown to function as transcripti onal regulators required for 
coordinated expression of the restriction and the m odification enzyme (Som and 
Friedman, 1993). 
 
 In some type II RM systems, a third regulatory pro tein, called C protein, plays the role of 
delaying expression of their restriction enzymes (N akayama and Kobayashi, 1998; Tao et 
al ., 1991). After establishment, the type II RM syste m are expected to tight regulate their 
gene expression to maintain constant cellular level s of restriction enzyme and 
modification enzyme to prevent attack on the host, just as a prophages do until critical 
events such as gene loss happens to trigger the att ack. Type II RM systems are of 
particular importance because the plasmid used in t his study has an EcoR I endonuclease 
gene of the EcoRI RM system. The EcoRI system is co mposed of the ecoRIR  (R) and 
ecoRIM  (M) genes, which encode EcoRI R and M proteins, re spectively (Liu et al ., 
2007). The R gene is located upstream of the M gene . It has been proposed that the R and 
M genes constitutes an operon, in which expression of the two genes is coordinately 
controlled by a promoter located immediately upstre am of the R gene (Liu et al ., 2007). 
In addition, a specific promoter for the M gene has  been proposed to be present within 
the R. gene. This postulated M geneAspecific promot er, which should allow expression of  10  the M gene in the absence of the R gene, might play  a role for sequential expression of 
the modification activity and restriction activity when the EcoR I gene system enters a 
new host cell (Liu et al ., 2007). 
 
1.8 Positive selection vectors  
 
NonArecombinant transformants in DNA cloning experi ments are a problem that is 
especially troublesome when the relative amount of target DNA is low or when the 
percentage of recombinants must be maximized, as wh en constructing a genomic library. 
Several approaches have been taken to resolve this problem such as treatment of the 
vector with phosphatase prior ligation and cutting the vector with restriction enzymes that 
produce ends that are nonAcomplementary so that the  inserts will have the complementary 
ends that could easily ligate to the vector. These methods have disadvantages of being 
subjected to the variable efficiencies of the enzym atic reactions and purifications used to 
prepare the vector for cloning. A number of positiv e selection vectors have been 
generated which employ genetic means to eliminate t ransformants carrying religated or 
uncut vector. Such vectors typically rely upon the inactivation of a lethal gene, 
inactivation of a dominant function conferring cell  sensitivity to metabolites, removal of 
a lethal site or the depression of an antibioticAre sistance function. Positive selection 
vectors have the advantages of being simpler to use , more efficient, and more reliable 
than biochemical methods for the selection of recom binants (Kuhn, 1986). 
 
 These plasmids have proven useful for the selectio n and expression of a number of genes 
from a variety of organism. A number of positiveAse lection vectors have been constructed 
for example Cheng and Modrich (1983) have construct ed a plasmid that has a functional 
endonuclease gene and a non functional modification  gene. This plasmid is under the 
control of the P L promoter of the bacteriophage lambda (λ). When thi s plasmid is 
introduced in a host that has a functional methyltr ansferase activity the endonuclease 
activity is inhibited. If it is introduced into a l ambda lysogen the endonuclease gene is 
controlled and insertion of DNA into the unique res triction sites on the endonuclease 
gene abolishes the endonuclease activity (Cheng and  Modrich, 1983).    11  Kuhn et al. (1986) have also constructed a series o f positive selection plasmid vectors. 
The principle of selection in these plasmids is bas ed on the separation of the EcoRI 
restriction and modification functions. The vectors  carry either a wildAtype or mutant 
endonuclease gene, the expression of either of whic h is lethal in the absence of active 
EcoRI methylase. DNA cloned into any of the several  unique restriction sites within the 
endonuclease gene disrupts its lethal function, all owing induced transformed cells 
carrying recombinant plasmids to survive, while cel ls carrying nonArecombinant plasmids 
are killed. These vectors have an advantage over th e other positive selection vectors 
because their expression is induced chemically rath er than thermally (such in the case of 
plasmids employing induction by lambda promoters by  inactivation of a temperature 
sensitive lambda repressor). Expression of this vec tors constructed by Kuhn et al (1986) 
is under the control of the lac  operon.   
 
1.18.1 Plasmid pEcoR251 
 
Plasmid pEcoR251 is about 3.3kb in size. The EcoR I endonuclease gene is placed under 
the control of the P R promoter of phage lambda (λ) and this plasmid can therefore be 
maintained in a λ lysogen of E. coli  since the phage λ infects E. coli . This plasmid has an 
ampicillin resistance gene which can be used to sel ect for transformants containing this 
plasmid. When a piece of DNA is inserted into the o ne of the unique restriction sites in 
the endonuclease gene, the endonuclease gene is dis rupted leading to the endonuclease 
activity being destroyed. This property can be used  to select for transformants in a nonA
lysogen that have incorporated an insert in the end onuclease gene and those that did not 
incorporate an insert will die due to the expressio n of a functional EcoRI endonuclease 
(Dabbs et al ., 1990).  
 
In a λ lysogen the expression of the suicide gene i s under the control of the P R promoter 
and the regulation of the expression of the endonuc lease gene is by a λ repressor protein 
called CI857. In a lysogen the CI repressor silence s the lytic genes (Svenningsen et al ., 
2005).  Plasmid pEcoR251 is constructed by fusing t he 180bp fragment of the phage λ 
chromosome bearing the P R promoter and the first 96bp of the cro  gene. The  12  endonuclease gene is fused in frame with the cro ge ne and the expression of this gene is 
under the control of the P R promoter (Zabeau and Stanley, 1982). In a λ lysoge n the 
prophage expresses a repressor protein that binds t o the cro operator region and thus 
inhibiting the expression of the EcoR I endonuclease gene. Figure 1.2  shows the 
regulation of the expression of the suicide gene by  the repressor protein. In a non lysogen 
there is no repressor protein being expressed to bl ock transcription of the EcoR I suicide 
gene, hence the death of cell containing this plasm id.  
 
 
 
 Repressor protein binds to Operator region 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 1.2 : Regulation of the expression of the suicide gene.  O is the operator region of 
the cro  gene 
 
 
1.9 Regulatory element from lambda phage 
 
PL and P R promoters of the λ phage are widely used as promot ers for the expression 
vectors. This type of vectors can be regulated in c ombination with a λ cI857 repressor 
gene which codes for a temperatureAsensitive repres sor. At 28A30˚C, this repressor is 
active and represses the transcription from the λ p romoters. At 42˚C, the temperatureA
sensitive repressor protein is inactive and transcr iption from the λ promoters is 
derepressed. A λ prophage can be used as a carrier for the cI857 repressor gene only if 
the regulatory unit lacks lytic functions resident on prophages. Otherwise cells would be 
killed after heat induction (Mieschendahl and Mülle rAHill, 1985). With this properties of O      Cro        EcoR  gene  PR promoter  13  the λ lysogen together with the properties of the EcoR I endonuclease gene provide a 
better system for selection of recombinants transfo rmants. When cells carrying a plasmid 
that encodes a suicide gene which is controlled by the P R promoter are grown on a nonA
lysogen only recombinant transformants will be obse rved and when grown in a lysogen 
the expression of the endonuclease gene is represse d by the temperatureAsensitive 
repressor protein 
 
1.10 Justification and Aim  
 
Antimicrobial resistance in pneumococci, enterococc i and staphylococci is a norm. S. 
aureus  is a pathogen of greatest concern because of its i ntrinsic virulence, its ability to 
cause array of lifeAthreatening infections and its capacity to adapt to different 
environmental conditions. The mortality rate of S. aureus  remains approximately 20A40% 
despite the availability of effective antimicrobial s (Mylotte et al ., 1987) and is now the 
leading overall cause of nosocomial infections. As more patients with S. aureus are 
treated outside the hospital setting, it is an incr easing concern in the community. S. 
aureus  isolates from blood samples world wide are increas ingly resistant to a great 
number of antimicrobials. Inevitably this has left fewer effective bactericidal antibiotics 
to treat infection caused by the multidrug resistan t S. aureus . Even when new antibiotics 
are used against S. aureus  it can develop mechanisms to neutralize the antibi otic. This 
simply means that new antibiotics have to be discov ered or that other ways of treating 
infection have to be used. The use of bacteriophage s as therapeutic agents is probably the 
way to go. The bacteriophage expresses some protein s that inhibit the growth of the 
pathogen. So genes responsible for the inhibition o f the growth of the bacteria have to be 
screened. This can be accomplished by having a vect or that can be used to construct a 
genomic library in which the screening can be done.  Therefore the aim of this work was 
to construct a shuttle vector for E. coli , B. subtilis  and S. aureus  that will facilitate the 
construction of genomic library in E. coli  and screening these in S. aureus  or B. subtilis . 
Also to increase the versatility of the shuttle vec tor by introducing unique restriction 
sites.    14   2.  MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 
2.1 Bacterial strains and plasmids used in this wor k  
 
Strains   Characteristics   Source 
Escherichia coli 
 MM294A4  endA1, hsd R17, gyr A   E. Dabbs 
 λ MM294A4  λ lysogen of MM294A4  E. Dabbs 
 MJ109   recA 1, endA 1, gyrA 96, thi , hsdR 17,  
                                   supE 44, relA 1, ∆( lac6proAB )/F' 
                                              [ traD 36, proAB +, lacI q, lacZ ∆M15] Y. Shibayama 
 
B. subtilis 
 IA3   cysE 14, purA 26, trpC 2  E. Dabbs 
 168                              (pC194) Cm trpC2                              Bacillus  Genetic 
                                                                                                 Genet ic Stock Centre 
                                                                                                  (BGS C) 
 QB944 KITA1            cysE14 purA26 trpC2     BGSC 
 QB934 KITA3            glyB133 metC3 tre612 trpC2              BGSC 
 QB922 KITA5           gltA292 trpC2                                         BGSC 
 QB917 KITA8           hisA1 thrC5 trpC2   BGSC    
  
ND1   iri A mutant of IA3 which is 
    Rifampicin resistant   This work 
 ND3   Mutant of IA3 which is 
    Streptomycin resistant   This work 
 
 
B. polymyxa  
ATCC 842   Wild type isolates    BGSC  15  ___________________________________________________ ____________________  
S. aureus                   Microbiology   
                            Department (Wits) 
Streptomyces pseudogriseolus  M. Chengalroyen 
 
           
___________________________________________________ _____________________ 
Plasmids  Characteristics    Source  
 
pDA71   E. coli6Rhodococcus  shuttle vector  Quan and Dabbs  
(1993) 
pDA71*  E. coli6Rhodococcus  shuttle vector 
   with the EcoR I suicide gene interrupted E. Dabbs 
pUC19   E. coli  cloning vector with lac Z´ gene Fermentas 
pC194   S. aureus  original isolate with Cm R   BGSC  
pEcoR251  E. coli  suicide vector with Amp R  
   resistance gene    E. Dabbs 
pNDW1  E. coli6B. subtilis  shuttle vector  This work 
pNDW4  pNDW1 with a 1.8Kb Pst I fragment  This work 
pNDW2  E.coli6B. subtilis  shuttle vector joined  
   in different restriction sites   This work 
pNDW3  E.coli6B. subtilis  shuttle vector joined  
   in different restriction sites   This work 
pNDW5  pNDW1::  Xba I restriction site  This work 
pDA71 A1  pDA71:: XbaI restriction site   This work  
pNDW6  pNDW5:: fragment of genomic DNA This work 
pNDW7  pNDW5:: XhoI site    This work 
pEcoR251A1  pEcoR251::XhoI site    This work 
 
 
  16  2.2 Media and growth conditions  
 
LuriaABertani (LB) (Appendix) media was used for gr owing E. coli  and Bacillus  strains 
and Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) (Appendix) media was  used to grow  S. aureus . Liquid 
cultures were achieved by inoculating a single bact erial colony into 5ml LB medium and 
incubated at 37 °C overnight. For shortAterm storage, E. coli  strains were kept on LBAagar 
plates at 4ºC and Bacillus  strains were kept on LBAagar at room temperature. S. aureus  
was kept on BHI agar plates at room temperature. 
 
2.3 Determination of minimum inhibitory concentrati on (MIC) 
 
The minimum inhibitory concentration of antibiotics  was determined on LBAagar plates 
for E. coli and B. subtilis  by agar dilution method. Freshly grown colonies we re 
inoculated into 200µl of sterile distilled water pe r well of the replicator plate. This was 
then transferred to the antibiotics plates with a m ultipoint inoculator. AntibioticAfree 
plates were used as positive controls. The spot tes t results were analyzed after incubation 
at 37°C for 24 hours.  
 
2.4 DNA preparation 
 
2.4.1 E. coli bulk plasmid preparation 
 
A single colony was used to inoculate 100 ml of LB with appropriate selective agent for 
the maintenance of the plasmid. The culture was gro wn with gentle agitation at 37°C for 
overnight. Cells were harvested by spinning in a JA A10 rotor (Beckman) at 6 000 
revolutions per minutes (rpm) for 10 minutes (min) and then resuspended in 5 ml of 
solution I (Appendix). A 10 ml of solution II (Appe ndix) was then added to the cell 
suspension and mixed gently by inversion. The mixtu re was left to stand at room 
temperature for 15 min. Then 7.5 ml of solution III  (Appendix) was added and shaken 
vigorously and then left on ice for 15 min.   17  The cell debris were removed by spinning in a preAc hilled (4°C) JAA20 rotor at 15 000 
rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a sterile JAA20 centrifuge tube and the 
DNA was precipitated with 12ml of isopropanol. The precipitation process was allowed 
to continue at room temperature for 15minutes. This  was followed by centrifugation of 15 
000 rpm for 15 min at room temperature. The superna tant was decanted off and the DNA 
pellet washed with 2ml of ethanol. The ethanol was gently poured off and the DNA pellet 
was vacuumAdried for 20 min. The DNA was then reAsu spended in 4ml TE buffer 
(Appendix) for 2 hours with gently agitation. There after, 4.1 g of cesium chloride (CsCl) 
was added and dissolved by gently mixing and then 6 00µl of 1% ethidium bromide 
(EtBr) solution was added. The refractive index was  adjusted to between 1.387 and 1.389 
(0.001 units =100mg CsCl if the index was below or 0.001 units= 100µl TE if the index 
was above). The mixture was loaded into a Beckman Q uickAseal tube using a Pasteur 
pipette. The tube was sealed, balanced and ultraAce ntrifuged overnight at 45 000rpm in a 
Beckman vertical VTi 65.2 rotor. The plasmid DNA wa s extracted from the tube using a 
needle attached to a hypodermic syringe. DNA was pu rified in section 2.5.1.3  
 
2.4.2 B. subtilis  bulk genomic DNA preparation 
 
A B. polymyxa  culture was grown for 8 hours in 200ml LB at 37°C.  Cells were harvested 
by centrifugation in a Beckman JAA10 rotor at 6 000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature. 
The cells were resuspended in 5 ml of TE buffer to which 5mg/ml of lysozyme was 
added and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. The cells w ere centrifuged at 8 000rpm for 5 min 
in a Beckman JAA20 rotor and resuspended in 4 ml TE  buffer to which minute quantity of 
proteinase K was added. A 1/10 volume of Solution B  (Appendix) was added to the cells 
and the tube incubated at 45°C for 30 min. The visc ous solution was transferred to a 50Ti 
tube and spun at 40 000rpm for 30 minutes in a Beck man L5A50 ultracentrifuge. The 
supernatant was transferred to a clean JAA20 centri fuge tube and 4.4 g of CsCl was 
added. The contents of the tube were mixed by inver sion of the tube for several times. 
The solution was centrifuged at 15 000 rpm in a Bec kman JAA20 rotor for 15 min. The 
liquid was decanted, 600µl of 1% EtBr solution was added to it and the refractive index 
adjusted to between 1.391 and 1.392. The solution w as loaded into a Beckman Quick seal  18  tube and centrifuged for overnight at 45 000 rpm in  a VTi65.2 rotor in a Beckman L5A50 
ultracentrifuge. The genomic DNA was extracted from  the tube using a needle attached to 
a hypodermic syringe. DNA was purified in section 2.5.1.3 .  
 
2.4.3 E. coli mini plasmid preparations 
 
Individual bacterial colony was inoculated into 1ml  of LB containing the appropriate 
selective agent. This was incubated at 37°C with ag itation for overnight. The culture was 
transferred into sterile Eppendorf tube and the cel ls harvested by microfuging for 1 min. 
The supernatant was decanted off and the pellet res uspended in 80µl of solution I by 
vortexing. Then 160µl of solution II was added to t he cell suspension and mixed by 
gently inversion of the tube. The tube was left to stand at room temperature for 15 min. 
Thereafter, 120µl of solution III was added and the  mixture shaken vigorously and kept 
on ice for 5 min. Cellular debris was removed by mi crofuging in the cold room (4°C) for 
10 min. The supernatant was collected into a new st erile Eppendorf tube and placed in a 
water bath (42°C) for 2 min to warm the supernatant . Isopropanol (220µl) was added and 
the precipitation process allowed continuing at roo m temperature for 5 min followed by 
centrifuging at room temperature for 5 min. The pel let was washed with 150µl ethanol 
and vacuumAdried for 20 min. The DNA was then resus pended in 100A150µl of sterile 
distilled water containing freshly boiled ribonucle ase (RNaseA) (1µl of 10mg/ml). A 
small aliquot was analyzed on an agarose gel.  
 
2.4.4 B. subtilis  mini plasmid preparation 
 
Single colonies were inoculated in 1ml LB containin g appropriate selective agent and 
grown for overnight at 37ºC. The culture was transf erred into sterile Eppendorf tube and 
the cells harvested by microfuging for 1 min at roo m temperature. The pellet was reA
suspended in 200µl of TE buffer to which lysozyme ( 5mg/ml) were added. The 
suspension was incubated for 1 hour in a 37ºC water  bath with inversion of the tube in 10 
min intervals. Thereafter, 40µl of TEASDS (10%) was  added and the tube mixed by 
inversion and left to stand at room temperature for  10 minutes. A volume of 40µl of 5 M  19  KAc (pH 6.0) was then added and the mixture was sha ken vigorously and left on ice for 5 
min. The mixture was microfuged for 5 min in the co ld room (4ºC) and the supernatant 
was transferred into a fresh Eppendorf tube. DNA wa s purified by phenolAchloroform 
extraction in 2.5.1.4  and precipitated by salt and ethanol precipitation  in 2.5.1.1.  
 
2.5 DNA manipulations and cloning techniques 
 
2.5.1 DNA precipitation 
 
2.5.1.1 Salt and ethanol precipitation 
 
DNA was precipitated from aqueous solution with 1/3  volume of 1M NaCl and 2 
volumes of ethanol. The mixture was microfuged at 4 °C for 20 min. The supernatant was 
decanted and the remaining liquid removed by blotti ng on a paper towel. The DNA pellet 
was vacuumAdried for 10A20 min and resuspended in t he appropriate volume of sterile 
distilled water. RNaseA (10mg/ml) was used to remov e contaminating RNA. 
 
2.5.1.2 Isopropanol DNA precipitation 
 
After the addition of isopropanol (220µl), the solu tion was mixed by inversion and left to 
stand at room temperature for 5 min. The solution w as then centrifuged at room 
temperature for further 5 min. The pellet was washe d with 150µl of 96% ethanol and 
vacuumAdried for 20 min. The plasmid was resuspende d in an appropriate volume of 
sterile distilled water containing RNaseA.  
 
 2.5.1.3 DNA precipitation from CsCl gradient 
 
Ethidium Bromide (EtBr) was removed from the DNA by  thorough mixing with 0.1 
volume of butanol. EtBr suspended in butanol forms a top layer in the tube, which is 
removed. This procedure was repeated at least 3 tim es until there were no traces of EtBr. 
This left the DNA in CsCl solution. The DNA was sto red at A20°C until required. The salt  20  was removed by adding 2 volumes of sterile distille d water and 2.5 volumes of 96% 
ethanol and precipitated by centrifugation at 4°C f or 20 min. The pellet was vacuumA
dried and resuspended in appropriate volume of ster ile distilled water. 
 
2.5.1.4 Phenol5chloroform extraction 
 
The DNA solution in water was extracted by addition  of 1/3 volume TEAsaturated phenol 
(Appendix), mixed by inversion and microfuged at ro om temperature for 5 min to 
separate the organic and aqueous phases. The upper aqueous layer was transferred into a 
new sterile Eppendorf tube and where necessary, as in the case of extracting DNA from 
agarose gels, a further phenol step was performed. Then 1/3 volumes of chloroform was 
then added to the aqueous layer and mixed gently by  inversion. The organic and aqueous 
layers were separated by microfuging at room temper ature for 2 min. The upper aqueous 
layer was transferred into a sterile Eppendorf tube  and the DNA was precipitated by the 
addition of 1/3 volume of NaCl (Appendix) as descri bed in  2.5.1.1.  
 
2.5.2 Restriction enzyme digestion     
 
Enzymes were obtained from Fermentas, Boehringer Ma nnheim, New England Biolabs, 
Amersham or Promega and used according to manufactu rer’s instructions. The total 
volume of digestion was 15µl (13.5µl DNA and 1.5µl 10× buffer). The mixture was 
tapped briefly to ensure even buffer distribution a nd spun down for a couple of seconds. 
0.3A1µl of restriction endonuclease was added and t he contents mixed and reAspun 
briefly. Digestions were incubated at the appropria te temperature for maximal enzyme 
activity for at least 4 hours. For double digestion s an appropriate buffer in which both 
enzymes showed suitable activity was selected, othe rwise the digestions were performed 
sequentially starting with the enzyme that require a lower incubation temperature.  
 
 
 
  21  2.5.3 Ligation of DNA    
 
T4 DNA ligase (Fermentas) was used for all ligation s procedures. The total volume for 
ligation was kept minimal at 20µl. Ligation buffer and the appropriate volume of  sterile 
distilled water were added to the DNA sample, mixed  by tapping and microfuged for a 
couple of seconds. Subsequently, 1µl of ligase was added, remixed and reAspun. Ligation 
was performed in a water bath at 22°C for 16A22 hou rs. 
 
2.5.4 Alkaline phosphatase treatment  
 
Calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase (Boehringer Ma nnheim)  was used to prevent the 
vector from reAligating to itself. The alkaline pho sphatase removes the 5´Aphosphate that 
is necessary for the ligation by DNA ligase. Follow ing the digestion of vector DNA, 1µl 
of calf intestinal alkaline phosphatase was added t o the reaction mixture. Addition of 10× 
dephosphorylation buffer was added (1/10 volume). T he reaction mixture was incubated 
at 37°C for overnight. Immediately after incubation , the enzyme was removed by a 
phenolAchloroform DNA extraction as previously desc ribed in 2.5.1.1 . 
 
2.6 Gel electrophoresis 
  
2.6.1 Agarose gel electrophoresis 
 
Agarose solutions stock solutions were prepared in 0.5× TBE buffer (Appendix) at 
concentrations of 0.4%, 0.8% or 1.2% depending on a  fragment size to be separated. The 
solutions were sterilized by autoclaving (121°C, 20  minutes). Fragment sizes ≥10kb  were 
analyzed on 0.4% agarose gels, 2A10kb on 0.8% agaro se gel and ≤3kb on 1.2% agarose 
gel. Gels were prepared by melting the agarose stoc k solution in a microwave oven. A 
volume of 25ml of the melted agarose was mixed with  2.5µl of a 1% EtBr solution 
(Appendix). The mixture was poured in a gel tray wi th a 12Atooth well comb and allowed 
to polymerize at 4°C for 20 min. Combs were removed  when the gel had completely set. 
  22  The electrophoresis buffer was 0.5× TBE mixed with 1% EtBr solution. DNA samples 
were loaded with 2µl of bromophenol blue tracking d ye. GeneRuler TM  DNA 1KB ladder 
Plus mix (Fermentas) was used in all electrophoreti c runs using a Hoefer PS 500xdc 
power supply. The process was carried out at room t emperature, 80V and a current of 21A
28mA, until the dye front reached the bottom of the  gel. DNA sizes were quantified from 
standard curve generated from migrations distances of known molecular weight marker 
sizes run on the same gel. The concentrations were estimated by comparing the intensity 
of the bands to bands of similar intensity and know n concentration. The DNA was 
visualized and captured using the UVP BioDocAIt TM system.  
 
2.6.2 The freeze5squeeze method of extracting DNA f rom agarose gels 
 
DNA was digested with appropriate restriction endon uclease and fragments were 
separated on agarose gel. The fragment of interest was excised from the gel with a scalpel 
while viewing under long wavelength UV light (366nm ).  The gel slice was transferred 
into a sterile Eppendorf tube where it was crushed with a sterile spatula. The crushed 
slice of gel was kept at A70ºC for 30 min and it wa s thawed at room temperature. 
Following thawing it was microfuged for 6 min and t he supernatant collected into a 
sterile tube. A second round of crushing, freezing,  thawing and centrifuging was done. 
The DNA which was suspended in the collected supern atant was purified by phenolA
chloroform extraction in 2.5.1.4 . The DNA was reAsuspended in appropriate volume of  
sterile distilled water.    
 
2.7 Transformations 
 
2.7.1 E. coli  standard CaCl 2 transformation 
 
A flask containing 20 ml of preAwarmed LB supplemen ted with 0.5% glucose (Appendix) 
was inoculated with 200µl of an overnight culture o f E. coli MM294A4. The culture was 
incubated with vigorous shaking at 37ºC until the O D 600  of 0.2A0.4 had been reached. 
That OD was generally obtained by incubating for a minimum of 1hour 45 min A 2 hours.  23  The flask was chilled in an iceAwater slurry for 5 min and the cells were harvested in a 
preAchilled Beckman JAA20 rotor at 10 000 rpm for 5  min at 4ºC. The supernatant was 
discarded and the cells reAsuspended in 10 ml of ic e cold transformation buffer (CaCl 2 
transformation buffer) (Appendix). The cell suspens ion was placed on ice for 15 min and 
reAcentrifuged at 10 000 rpm for 5 min. The superna tant was decanted and the cells reA
suspended in 1.3 ml of transformation buffer. The c ells were left on ice for 2A24 hours in 
the cold room (4ºC). 
 
 Aliquots 100µl of the cell suspension were placed into preAchilled sterile Eppendorf 
tubes and about 3µl of plasmid DNA was added and mi xed with the cells by bubbling air 
through. The DNA plus cell suspension was left on i ce for 15 min to allow for diffusion. 
The cells were then heatAshocked at 42ºC for 90 sec onds. A volume of 1ml of preA
warmed LB was added to the cells after heat shockin g and incubated for 60A 90 min at 
37ºC to allow phenotypic expression of the resistan ce genes. The cells were then spread 
onto LBAagar containing an appropriate selective ag ent and further incubated for 
overnight at 37ºC. Colonies were visible after the overnight incubation for E. coli strains. 
 
2.7.2 B. subtilis  electroporation 
 
A preAculture of B. subtilis  IA3 grown on LB was inoculated into 5ml of LB 
supplemented with 10.3% sucrose and grown for 4 hou rs at 37ºC. After incubation 1ml of 
the culture was microfuged for 1 minutes and the su pernatant was decanted. The cells 
were reAsuspended in iceAcold SHMG buffer (Appendix ). The cells were washed twice in 
SHMG buffer and reAsuspended in 500µl of the same b uffer. A volume of 100µl of the 
cell suspension was transferred into a preAchilled sterile Eppendorf tube and 5µl of the 
DNA was added, mixed by bubbling air through. The m ixture was placed on ice for 15 
min to allow diffusion. The mixture was then transf erred into preAchilled BioARad 
electroporation cuvette and electroporated using ca pacitance of 25µFD, voltage of 2.0kV 
and resistance of 200Ω and the time constant was re corded. After the electroporation 1ml 
of warm LB was added to the cells immediately and t ransferred into Bjorn bottles and 
incubated at 37ºC with shaking for overnight to all ow phenotypic expression. After  24  incubation the cells were spread on selective media  and further incubated for 2 days for 
growth to be observed.   
 
2.7.3 Protoplast transformation of B. subtilis  and S. aureus   
 
This is a method described by Cohen and Cheng (1979 ) with modification by Zhang et al. 
(2005). MidAlog phase culture, freshly grown in LB at 37ºC to OD 600 of 0.6 were 
harvested and resuspended in 500µl volume of SMMP b uffer (Appendix). Lysozyme was 
added to a final concentration of 10mg/ml and incub ated for 2 hours at 37ºC with gently 
agitation. The treated cells were then harvested an d washed once by resuspending them 
gently in 500µl SMMP buffer and pelleted the second  time. The washed protoplast was 
brought to 500µl volume with SMMP buffer. An amount  of 1pg to 5µg of DNA in 7.75µl 
of TE buffer was mixed with equal volume of 2X SMM buffer (Appendix) in a sterile 
Eppendorf tube. 77.5µl of the protoplast suspension  was added to the DNA, followed by 
the addition of 232µl of 40% PEG (w/v) solution (Ap pendix) and the contents of the tube 
gently mixed. After 2 min of exposure to PEG, 775µl  of SMMP buffer was added to the 
mixture to dilute the PEG. Protoplast was recovered  by centrifugation for 10 min and the 
resuspended in 200µl of SMMP buffer. The resuspende d protoplast was incubated for 2 
hours at 30ºC to allow phenotypic expression carrie d by the plasmid. After incubation the 
suspension was spread on DM3 regeneration plates (A ppendix) which were 
supplemented with 15µg/ml of chloramphenicol and in cubated overnight at 37ºC.  
 
 
2.7.4 Electroporation of S. aureus 
 
S. aureus  cells were prepared for electroporation by inocula ting a fresh colony into 5ml 
of BHI broth and incubated overnight at 37ºC. The o vernight culture was then diluted 
100X on BHI broth and grown at 37ºC until the OD 600  was <0.5. The cells were washed 
twice in electroporation buffer (Appendix) at 4ºC. An aliquot of 100µl of the S. aureus  
cells was transferred into an Eppendorf tube and 5A 10µl of DNA was added. This was 
mixed by bubbling air through and left to stand on ice for 10 min to allow diffusion. The  25  mixture was then transferred into a preAchilled ele ctroporation cuvette and electroporated 
(25µF, 2.0kV and 200Ω). BHI broth was added immedia tely to the electroporated cells 
and incubated for 1 hour at 37ºC for the expression  of the antibiotic resistance markers. 
After incubation the cells were plated on BHI agar plates supplemented with an 
appropriate selectable marker and incubated for ove rnight. 
 
2.8  Preparation of DNA for sequencing 
 
DNA was prepared using the E. coli  mini plasmid preparation method in 2.4.3 . There 
were modifications done on this procedure. After th e cell debris was precipitated and the 
supernatant collected into a new tube, the DNA was extracted by the phenolAchloroform 
extraction method in 2.5.1.4  to remove any protein and other cellular component s that 
might be in the supernatant. The DNA was then preci pitated with isopropanol as in 
2.5.1.2 . After DNA had been prepared the concentration and  purity of the DNA was 
analyzed on agarose gel. Sequencing performed by In qaba Biotechnology Industries (Pty) 
Ltd 
 
2.9 Mutagenesis 
 
2.9.1  N5methyl5N´5nitro5N5nitrosoguanidine (NTG) mutagenesis 
 
A volume of 300µl of an overnight bacterial culture  was microfuged for 30 seconds and 
the supernatant was discarded. The pellet was reAsu spended in 1ml of TrisAMaleate buffer 
(pH 9) and washed twice in the same buffer. After w ashing, the pellet was reAsuspended 
in 1ml of TrisAMaleate buffer where 50µl of NTG sto ck solution (1mg/ml) was added. 
Immediately after the addition of NTG solution the cells were microfuged for 30 seconds 
and the supernatant discarded. The cells were washe d twice in Phosphate buffer (pH 7) 
because neutral pH completely inhibits the NTG reac tion. The cells were inoculated into 
5ml of LB and grown overnight at 37ºC. A volume of 100µl of the grown culture was 
spread on selective media and further incubated for  overnight at 37ºC. 
  26  2.9.2  Site5directed mutagenesis 
 
Numerous methods have been developed or exploited t o mutate DNA. Initially all 
approaches focused on the generation of random muta tions in chromosomal DNA such as 
those induced by XArays and chemicals. While these methods of random mutagenesis 
provided a valuable tool for classical gene studies , they were limited by their inability to 
target the mutation to a specific gene or genetic e lement. SiteAdirected mutagenesis is 
widely used in the study of gene and protein functi ons. A Phusion TM  SiteADirected 
Mutagenesis Kit was used in this study. This is a P CRAbase siteAdirected mutagenesis 
which uses two primers, one which is a mutagenic pr imer directed to the target site and 
the other one is nonAmutagenic which aligns anywher e in the plasmid. 
 
2.10 Counter5selection for auxotrophic mutants 
 
A mutated culture from 2.9.1  grown overnight was washed 3× with 10× stock III b uffer 
or sterile distilled water to remove traces of rich  media. The washed cells were then 
resuspended in 1 ml of stock III buffer. It was the n diluted 50× in Stock III buffer and 
grown until midAlog phase. Ampicillin was added to a concentration such that it does not 
kill the latent cell which should be the auxotrophs . After the addition of ampicillin the 
culture was grown overnight followed by diluting th e culture to 10 A5 and 100µl of the 
diluted culture was spread on LB agar plates. The p lates were incubated overnight at 
37˚C. After incubation the developed colonies were patched on minimal media and rich 
media and grown incubated overnight. The colonies t hat grow on rich media but not on 
minimal media were identified as auxotrophic mutant s. Their nutritional requirements 
were determined by patching the auxotrophic mutants  in minimal media supplemented 
with different auxotrophic requirement.  
 
2.11 Rifampicin inactivation test 
 
A mutated culture from 2.9.1  which was rifampicin resistant was dilutes 100X in  fresh 
LB and grown for 2 hours at 37ºC. After the 2 hours  of growth rifampicin was added to a  27  final concentration of 20µg/ml and further incubate d for overnight. Uninoculated LB was 
used as a control. LB agar plates with half the con centration of agar were used and were 
supplemented with 200µg/ml of streptomycin. ND3 (st reptomycin resistant mutant) was 
used as an overlay organism by spreading it on the ½ LB agar plates supplemented with 
streptomycin. Once the overlay organism had dissolv ed properly in the plates wells were 
made by using the back of a Pasteur pipette. A volu me of 80µl of the overnight culture 
was inoculated into the well made. The plates were kept at 4ºC for 4A6 hours to allow 
diffusion of the inoculated culture followed by inc ubation at 37ºC for overnight. After 
incubation the zones of inhibitions are measured.  
 
2.12 Plasmid curing 
 
B. subtilis  168 (pC194) was cured of its plasmid using EtBr. C ells were inoculated into 
5ml of LB and grown overnight without antibiotic. T he overnight culture was diluted 
100× in fresh LB and different concentrations of Et Br were used (0.01, 0.02 and 0.03%). 
A no EtBr control was used. The cells were allowed to grow overnight followed by 
another 100× dilution in LB without a selective age nt and grown overnight. The 
overnight culture was diluted to the 10 A5 spread on LA plate with no selective agent and 
incubated for overnight. The colonies were observed  and they were patched on LA plate 
supplemented with 15µg/ml of chloramphenicol (Cm) a nd also on LA plate with no 
antibiotic. The plates were incubated at 37˚C for o vernight and the colonies that could not 
grow on the LA plate with Cm were successfully cure d of the plasmid. 
 
Table 2.1: Internet sequence analysis programs used  
Program Web address 
BLAST http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/bl2seq/wbla st2.cgi 
NEBcutter http://tools.neb.com/BEBcutter2/index.php  
FASTA http://fasta.bioch.virginia.edu/fasta_www2/fa sta_www.cgi  
NEBcutter (silent 
 mutagenesis) http://tools.neb.com/NEBcutter2/silmutlist.php 
  28  3. RESULTS  
 
3.1 Bacillus-Staphylococcus-E. coli  shuttle vector construction  
 
Plasmid pEcoR251 has a Bam HI site downstream of the EcoR I endonuclease gene 
(figure A6.5 ) and this site does not fall within any known impo rtant regions of the 
plasmid. Plasmid pC194 has an Xho II site which is just after the chloramphenicol 
resistance determinant ( figure A6.1 ) and does not interfere with the expression of thi s 
gene. Plasmid pC194 was digested with Xho II and pEcoR251 was digested with Bam HI 
and these were ligated together using the complemen tary single stranded ends to give 
pNDW1 ( Figure 3.2) . This construct should be maintained in B. subtilis and E. coli  since 
it had the origin of replication for Gram positives  and Gram negatives. It was transformed 
into E. coli  λ lysogen and a nonAlysogen to determine the funct ioning of the suicide gene. 
Plasmid pEcoR251 was used as a control because it w as desired that the construct 
function in a similar manner due to the suicide gen e. Transformants were obtained in the 
lysogen but not nonAlysogen confirming that EcoR I was functional. Plasmid DNA from 
these transformants was digested with informative r estriction enzymes and the size 
expected was confirmed and the plasmid orientation determined ( Figure 3.1 ).   
 
         1    2    3    4    5   6   7   8   9   10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.1:  Restriction digests of pNDW1. Lane 1 and 10 are DNA  markers, 2 is 
undigested, 3 is  Pst I, 4  Swa I, 5 Stu I, 6 Hind III, 7 Bgl II, 8 EcoR I and 9 Sfu I. 
 29   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.2:  Restriction map of  plasmid  pNDW1. 
 
3.1.1 Transformation of B. subtilis  with pNDW1 
 
Attempts were made to transform pNDW1 into B. subtilis IA3 but these were 
unsuccessful. To investigate why, two new construct s were made by joining pC194 
(Xho II) with pEcoR251 ( Bgl II): pNDW2 and the other one by joining pC194 ( Hind III) 
with pEcoR251 ( Hind III): pNDW3. Both constructs had the suicide gene i nterrupted and 
in contrast to pNDW1 transformed a nonAlysogen and a lysogen of E. coli with similar 
frequency, behaving in the same manner as pDA71* us ed as a control. Digestions of 
miniprep DNA of these constructs were done to confi rm their sizes and their orientations 
(Figure 3.3 (B) ). Plasmid pNDW1 was used to clone a Pst I 1.8Kb fragment isolated from 
a Norcadioform brasiliensis  Pst I library, encodes the glucoslytransferase responsi ble for 
rifampicin resistance in Norcadioforms, into the Pst I site on the suicide gene. This 
construct was named pNDW4 and mini DNA preparations  of this construct were done to 
confirm the presence of an insert ( Figure 3.3 (A) ). Plasmids pNDW2, pNDW3 and 
pNDW4 were successfully transformed into B. subtilis  confirming that the failure with 
pNDW1 was not because the construct was unable to r eplicate but because the suicide 
 30  gene was expressed in that organism. Restriction ma ps of pNDW2 and pNDW3 are 
shown in Figure 3.4. 
 
                      A                              B 
     1      2      3    4      5      6    7      8                         1    2   3   4   5   6    7     8   9  10  11 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.3 : (A)  Lanes 2A7: pNDW4 digested with Pst  I to release the inserts which are 
the lower bands. Lanes 1 and 8 are DNA markers. (B) :  Lanes 2A5: pNDW2, lane 2 is 
undigested, lane 3 is Hind III digest, lane 4 Pst I digest and lane 5 is Stu I digest. Lanes 8A
10 is pNDW3, lane 8 is undigested, lane 9 is Hind III digest, lane 10 is Pst I digest and 
lane 10 is Stu I digest. Lanes 1 and 7 are DNA markers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31                    A        B  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
Figure 3.4 : Plasmid map of constructs indicating the way in w hich the suicide gene was 
disrupted, (A)  Restriction map of plasmid pNDW2, (B) Restriction map of plasmid 
pNDW3.   
 
3.1.2 Transformation of S. aureus  with pNDW1  
 
Transformation of S. aureus  by pNDW1 using electroporation was successful usin g the 
conditions of Wada and Watanabe (1998). pC194 was u sed as a control since this 
plasmid was originally isolated from S. aureus . Transformants were observed with both 
but for pNDW1 the efficiency was very low. Transfor mants were not expected for 
pNDW1 if the suicide gene was expressed in this org anism. DNA preparation of S. 
aureus  transformants was reAtransformed back into E. coli λ lysogen and nonAlysogen to 
check the status of the suicide gene. Transformants  were only observed on the λ lysogen 
showing that the suicide gene is functional. DNA pr eparation from 20 transformants was 
done and digested with Pst I to check the size of the plasmid ( Figure 3.5)   
 
 
 
 32                           A                                                                 B 
   1    2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12                                     1   2   3   4  5  6    7   8   9  10 11 12 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.5 : Plasmid preparation of pNDW1 from λ lysogen. ( A) 10 of the 20 
transformants. Lane 1 and 12 are molecular weight m arkers. Lanes 2A11 pNDW1 from 
different transformants digested with Pst I. ( B) The other 10 transformants. Lanes 1 and 
12 are molecular weight markers. Lanes 2A11 pNDW1 f rom transformants digested with 
Pst I. 
                                                     1     2     3   4     5     6    7    8    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.6 :  pNDW1 from S. aureus . Lane 1 is molecular weight marker. Lane 2 is 
undigested, lane 3 is Eco RI, lane 4 is Stu I, lane 5 is Hind III, lane 6 is Swa I, lane 7 is Spe I 
and lane 8 is Pst I. 
 33  DNA from the clone  of  Figure 3.5 (B)  lane 11 was further digested to compare this 
pNDW1 to the pNDW1 used to transform S. aureus (figure 3.6 ). Since the two are 
indistinguishable I concluded that EcoR I is not expressed in S. aureus , in contrast to B. 
subtilis .  
 
3.2 Introduction of new sites into EcoR I 
 
Introduction of additional restriction sites in the  suicide gene of pNDW1 would increase 
its versatility in genomic library construction and  subcloning. Candidate restriction sites 
were chosen using the following criteria:  
1) The enzyme has a 6 bp palindromic recognition se quence.  
2) The restriction site should be unique in the vec tor. 
3) The site should towards the 5 ′ end of EcoR I (first 600bp). 
4) The enzyme should generate cohesive rather than blunt ends for better ligation.  
The Silent Mutagenesis Program on NEBcutter website  was used to determine which 
restriction sites can be introduced and where mutat ion should be made on the suicide 
gene sequence. This program gives possible mutation s that can be introduced into the 
sequence without changing the amino acid sequence o f the protein. All possible 
mutations were analyzed and 11 candidates identifie d. Table 3.1  lists these. The bases 
that are coloured and underlined red are the mutate d bases.  
 
TABLE 3.1: Candidate Additional Restriction Sites i n EcoR I 
 
Enzyme  Specificity Position Mutated bases underlined 
 
Avr II C CTAG G 228 211  AAAAAAATTGACCCTGA CCT AGG 
CGGTACTTTATTTGTTTCA  252  
Bcl I T GATC A 396 379  TTAGTTGGGAAAAGAGG TGATCA 
AGATTTAATGGCTGCTGGT  420  
Cla I AT CG AT 23 40 TCTAATAAAAAACAGTCAAAT CGAT  
TAACTGAACAACATAAG   45   34  Cla I AT CG AT 217 199  AATGAAGCTTTAAAAAAAAT CGA T 
CCTGATCTTGGCGGTACT  240  
Cla I AT CG AT 258 241  TTATTTGTTTCAAATTC ATCG AT 
CAAACCTGATGGTGGAATT  282  
Spe I A CTAG T 120 103  GTTGGTGAGGTTTCAAAA CTAGT 
AAAGAAAGCTCTTAGCAAC  144  
Spe I A CTAG T 321 304  GGTGAATGGAGAGTTGTACT AGT 
TGCTGAAGCCAAACACCAA  345  
Xba I T CTAG A 504 487  TTTCCTTACGTCCTTTT TC TAGA 
GGGGTCTAACTTTTTAACA  528  
Xho I C TCGA G 255 238 ACTTTATTTGTTTCAAA CTC GAG 
CATCAAACCTGATGGTGGA  279  
Xho I C TCGA G 505 487 TTTCCTTACGTCCTTTTC CTCGAG 
GGGTCTAACTTTTTAACA  528 
 
Spe I is present in pC194 so was excluded. Genomic DNA of B. polymyxa  was digested 
with these restriction enzymes to see which might b e suitable in cloning Bacillus  
genomic DNA. Figure 3.7  shows the gel image of this.  
 
             1      2       3      4      5       6     7      8  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.7 : B. polymyxa  genomic DNA, lane: 2 undigested; 3A8 digested with : 3 Cla I, 4 
Xho I, 5 Avr II, 6 Sal I, 7 Pst I, and 8 Xba I. 
 35  These results (figure 3.7) were useful in narrowing  down which restriction site should be 
introduced into pNDW1 suicide gene. Cla I digested the genomic DNA very frequently 
and so was unlikely to be useful when creating a ge nomic library because it is preferable 
to have the entire open reading frame of a particul ar gene rather than having pieces of the 
gene scattered all over the library. Also Cla I partial digestions of Bacillus  genomic DNA 
might be inserted into the Sfu I site already present in the suicide gene. Avr II, Sal I and 
Xho I were possible candidates as they digested the gen omic DNA generating large 
fragments. Pst I was used as a control because it has been observe d that Pst I would be a 
suitable enzyme to create a genomic library of B. polymyxa genomic DNA ( figure 3.37 ).  
Xba I seemed to digest genomic DNA comparably to Pst I so I decided this would be the 
best choice.  
 
3.2.1 Introduction of an Xba I site in pNDW1 
 
To empirically confirm that Xba I sites were absent in pC194 and pEcoR251 (as predi cted 
from published sequences) they were digested with t his enzyme. As shown in Figure 3.8 . 
Xba I did not cut either plasmid.  
 
         A      B 
                     1           2            3          4                        1        2         3       4        5 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.8 :( A) Lane 1 is the molecular weight markers, lane 2 is  pC194 undigested, lane 
3 is pC194 digested with  Spe I and lane 4 is pC194 digested with Xba I. ( B) Lanes 1 and 5 
 36  are molecular weight markers, lane 2 pEcoR251 undig ested, lane 3 Pst I digest and lane 4 
is Xba I digest. 
 
Having concluded that Xba I was the best restriction site to introduce into t he pNDW1 
suicide gene a siteAdirected mutagenesis kit was us ed to introduce the mutation required. 
The following primers were used  
 
5´ATACGTCCTTTT TC TAGAGGGGTCTAA3´ and a reverse primer  
5´AAGGAAAGTGGGCTCTCAGAGAGCAA3´.  
 
 
TABLE 3.2 Mutagenic reaction mixture for Xba I site 
___________________________________________________ ____________________ 
Components   Volume/50µl reaction  Final concentrat ion 
Sterile dH 2O    36.7µl 
5X Phusion HF buffer   10µl     1X 
10mM dNTPs    1µl     200µM each 
Mutagenic primer   0.25µl     0.5µM 
Reverse primer   0.25µl     0.5µM 
DNA template (0.4ng/µl)  1.25µl     10pg 
Phusion hot start DNA 
 Polymerase (2U/µl)   0.5µl     0.02U/µl 
 
 
TABLE 3.3 Cycling conditions for mutagenic reaction  for Xba I site 
___________________________________________________ _____________________ 
Cycle step  Temperature  Time  Number of cycles 
Initial  
Denaturation  98ºC   30 Sec   1 
 
Denaturation  98ºC   10 sec  37  Annealing  67ºC   30 sec   25 
Extension  72ºC   4 min 
Final  
Extension  72ºC   5 min 
 
 
The PCR reaction was successful because a band of a mplification was observed 
corresponding to the template size (pNDW1) ( Figure 3.9 ). A no template control was 
used. 
 
    1         2        3 
 
                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.9 : 5µl of the PCR product ran on 0.6% agarose gel. L ane 1 is Molecular weight 
marker, Lane 2 is the PCR product and lane 3 is the  control reaction. 
 
The PCR product was a linear plasmid molecule there fore it was circularized with Quick 
T4 DNA ligase provided in the kit. The circularized  plasmid was then transformed into E. 
coli  MM294A4 λ lysogen. DNA mini preparation of 10 tran sformants was done and 
digested with Xba I to screen for plasmid which had acquired the Xba I site. A single clone 
had the Xba I site ( Figure 3.10  lane 3). To confirm that the plasmid was pNDW1 wit h a 
new restriction site Xba I, restriction digestions were done on the DNA in l ane 3 Figure 
 38  3.10 . Figure 3.11  presents the gel image of the digestions and confi rmed that the Xba I 
restriction site was introduced on pNDW1.  
 
                                         1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8  9  10 11 12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.10 :  Lanes 1and 12 are molecular weight markers, lane s 2A11 are the DNA 
preparations digested with Xba I. 
 
                                           1       2     3       4      5      6       7  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.11 :  Lane 1 is the molecular weight marker, lane 2 is  the undigested DNA, lane 
3 is Spe I digest, lane 4 is Pst I digest, lane 5 is Hind III digest, lane 6 is Eco RI digest and 
lane 7 is Xba I digest. 
 39  All of the enzymes used to digest the DNA preparati on linearized the plasmid except for 
Hind III which should give two fragments. Figure 3.11  confirmed that the Xba I restriction 
site was introduced in plasmid pNDW1 which was name d pNDW5. The other restriction 
enzymes used indicated that Xba I linearized the plasmid as did the other enzymes. To 
check if the suicide gene was still functional afte r the introduction of the new site, 
pNDW5 was transformed into E. coli MM294A4 λ lysogen and E. coli  MM294A4 nonA
lysogen. pDA71* and pNDW1 were controls.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.12 : E. coli  transformed with pNDW1, pNDW5 and pDA71* showing t he 
behavior of pNDW5 in relation to pNDW1 and pDA71*. 
 40  The function of the suicide gene was maintained, as  shown by the transformants on plate 
C but not A ( Figure 3.12) . DNA preparations of pNDW5 on plate C ( Figure 3.12 ) were 
done and the DNA was digested with  Xba I to check if the transformants have plasmid 
pNDW5 ( Figure 3.14 ). Figure 3.13 is a map of pNDW5 showing the new Xba I site 
between restriction sites Bgl II and Pst I on the EcoR I endonuclease gene.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.13 : Restriction map of plasmid pNDW5. 
 
          1  2    3   4   5   6    7   8  9  10  11  12     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.14 : Plasmid DNA of randomly picked transformants dige sted with Xba I. Lanes 
1 and 12 are molecular weight markers. Lanes 2A11 a re DNA digests. 
 41  DNA of clones from plate C Figure 3.12  was digested with Xba I and was also digested 
with Xba I. Figure 3.15 shows the gel image of the digestions. This confirm ed that the 
site was present in pNDW5 but not its parent pNDW1.   
 
                1   2    3   4    5    6    7   8    9   10  11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.15 : pNDW1 and pNDW5 digested with Xba I.  Lane 1and 11 are molecular 
weight markers. Lanes 2 and 4 is undigested pNDW1 a nd pNDW5, respectively. Lanes 3, 
6 and 8 are pNDW1 digested with Xba I. Lanes 5, 7 and 9 are pNDW5 digested with  
Xba I. 
 
pNDW5 was double digested with Bgl II and Pst I to cut out the 175bp fragment that had 
incorporated the Xba I restriction site which was cloned into pUC19 preA incubated with 
calf intestinal phosphatase via the Bam HI and Pst I restriction sites. pUC19 was used 
because the multiple cloning sites is flanked with sequencing primers. This construct was 
sent to Inqaba Biotechnical industries (Pty) Ltd fo r sequencing to confirm the presence of 
the Xba I site. Aligning the mutated and unmutated sequence s using the Basic local 
alignment search tool (BLAST) showed the predicted CT→ TC base change (red and 
underlined)  
 
 
 
 42  AGAATATATCAGAGATAGCGAATTTTATGCTCTCTGAGAGCCACTTTCCTT ACGTCCTTT  60                         
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||| 
       AGAATATATCAGAGATAGCGAATTTTATGCTCTCTGAGAGCCAC TTTCCTTACGTCCTTT  62 
  
 
       T TC TAGAGGGGTCTAACTTTTTAACAGAAAATATCTCAATAACAAGACCAGATG GAAGGG  120            
|  |||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||| 
       T CT TAGAGGGGTCTAACTTTTTAACAGAAAATATCTCAATAACAAGACCAGATG GAAGGG  122 
 
      TTGTTAATCTTGAGTATAATTCTGGTATATTAAATAGGTTAGATC GACTAA  171 
      ||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| |||||| 
      TTGTTAATCTTGAGTATAATTCTGGTATATTAAATAGGTTAGATC GACTAA  173 
 
Figure 3.16:  The sequence alignments of the Bgl IIAPst I fragment of both the mutant 
pNDW5 (top sequence) and its parent pNDW1 (bottom s equence). 
 
Genomic DNA of B. polymyxa  digested with Xba I was ligated to Xba IAdigested pNDW5 
and transformed into E. coli  MM294A4. Minipreps of 10 randomly chosen transform ants 
were digested with Xba I to determine if they contain the recombinant pNDW 5 plasmid. 
Figure 3.17  shows the presence of inserts of various sizes as one would expect. 
 
 1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11  12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.17: pNDW5 clones digested with Xba I to release inserts from the plasmid. 
Lanes 1 and 12 are molecular weight markers. Lanes 2A11 are plasmid DNA (pNDW5 
clones) from transformants randomly chosen and dige sted with Xba I.  
 43  Different clones of pNDW5 ( figure 3.17) did not transform S. aureus  or B. subtilis  but 
when a pool of clones was used transformants were o bserved in both hosts. This suggests 
that the individual clones that were used to transf orm S. aureus and  B. subtilis  had big 
fragment sizes (more than 1.5Kb) that could have re sulted in low transformation 
efficiency and these host strains might have a rest riction modification system resulting in 
no transformants.   
 
3.2.2 Introduction of more new sites  
 
Cla I, Avr II and Xho I were other candidate restriction sites to be intr oduced as described 
in section 3.2 . However digesting parent plasmids pC194 and pEcoR 251 with Cla I 
indicated that pC194 had two sites for this enzyme ( Figure 3.18 ). Avr II, Xba I and Spe I 
are isocaudomers (i.e. generate identical singleAst rand ends). Xho I was selected as it cut 
B. polymyxa  genomic DNA generating mainly large fragments ( Figure 3.7 ) and digestion 
of pC194 and pEcoR251 confirmed absence of the Xho I site in both ( Figure 3.18 ).   
                                             
      1     2      3       4     5     6     7     8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.18 : pEcoR251 and pC194 digestions. Lanes 1 and 5 are molecular weight 
markers. Lane 2 is undigested pEcoR251, lane 3 is Cla I digested pEcoR251 and lane 4 is 
Xho I digested pEcoR251. Lane 6 is undigested pC194, la ne 7 is Cla I digested pC194 and 
lane 7 is Xho I digested pC194. 
 44   
Introduction of the Xho I site was done by siteAdirected mutagenesis using the following 
primers: Mutagenic primer 5′ATTGTTTCAAA CTC GAGCATCAAACCTA3′ and reverse 
primer 5′AATAAAGTACCGCCAAGATCAGGGTCAA3′.  
 
TABLE 3.4 Mutagenic reaction mixture for Xho I site 
___________________________________________________ ____________________ 
Components   Volume/50µl reaction  Final concentrat ion 
Sterile dH 2O    37.3µl 
5X Phusion HF buffer   10µl     1X 
10mM dNTPs    1µl     200µM each 
Mutagenic primer   0.25µl     0.5µM 
Reverse primer   0.25µl     0.5µM 
DNA template (0.7ng/µl)  0.7µl     10pg 
Phusion hot start DNA 
 Polymerase (2U/µl)   0.5µl     0.02U/µl 
 
TABLE 3.5 Cycling conditions for mutagenic reaction  for Xho I site 
___________________________________________________ _____________________ 
Cycle step  Temperature  Time  Number of cycles 
Initial  
Denaturation  98ºC   30 Sec   1 
 
Denaturation  98ºC   10 sec 
Annealing  67ºC   30 sec   25 
Extension  72ºC   4 min 
Final  
Extension  72ºC   5 min 
  45  A PCR reaction was performed using the reaction and  cycling conditions in tables 3.4 
and 3.5  above. Five micro liters of the PCR product was ra n on a 0.4% agarose gel to 
check if amplification of the template had occurred  ( Figure 3.19) . 
                                                 1        2        3      4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.19: PCR product ran on 0.4% agarose gel. Lane 1 is the molecular weight 
marker, lane 2 is the 5µl of the DNA template diges ted with Xba I, lane 3 is 5µl of the 
PCR product and lane 4 is the PCR control with no D NA template. 
 
The PCR product was ligated with T4 DNA ligase (Fer mentas) and introduced into E. 
coli  λ lysogen. Ten transformants were chosen and DNA d igested with Xho I ( Figure 
3.20) .                      
                                1   2   3   4    5   6    7   8   9  10 11  12  
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.20: DNA preparations digested with Xho I. Lanes 1 and 12 are molecular weight 
markers. Lanes 2A11 is the DNA preparation digested  with Xho I.  
 46   
Each of these DNAs was introduced into E. coli  λ lysogen and E. coli  nonAlysogen to 
check the function of the suicide gene. Only DNAs f rom lanes 2, 3 and 11 indicated that 
the suicide gene was still functional as indicated by the presence of transformants on E. 
coli λ lysogen. DNA preparations for 16 transformants of  the DNAs 2, 3 and 11 were 
selected from each plate and labeled 1A16. The DNA preparations were digested with 
Xho I and run on 0.6% agarose gel. 
                                 A                                                                 B 
 
         1    2     3    4    5     6    7    8    9                              1   2     3    4    5    6     7    8    9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.21: DNA preparations 1A16 digested with Xho I. ( A) lane 1 is molecular weight 
marker and lanes 2A9 is DNA 1A8, respectively. ( B) Lane 1 is molecular weight marker 
and lanes 2A9 are DNA 9A16, respectively. 
 
DNA of the clone in lane 8 ( Figure 3.21 A ), named pNDW7, and from lane 2 ( Figure 
3.21 B ), named pNDW8 were digested with selected restrict ion enzymes. Plasmid 
pNDW7 had similar restriction pattern to pNDW5 in figure 3.11  but pNDW8 had 
different restriction digestion pattern because whe n digested with Hind III it indicating a 
partial digest.  
 
 47                                A                                                         B 
 
                  1    2      3    4     5     6     7                                1     2     3     4     5     6     7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.22 : Restriction digestions of pNDW7 and pNDW8.  (A) I s pNDW7. Lane 1 is 
molecular weight marker. Lane 2 is undigested DNA, lane 3 is Xho I digest, lane 4 is Stu I 
digest, lane 5 is Hind III digest, lane 6 is Xba I digest and lane 7 is Eco RI digest. (B) Is 
pNDW8.  Lane 1 is molecular weight marker. Lane 2 i s undigested DNA, lane 3 is Xho I 
digest, lane 4 is Stu I digest, lane 5 is Hind III digest, lane 6 is Xba I digest and lane 7 is 
Eco RI digest. 
 
To check if pNDW7 has a functional suicide gene, it  was transformed into E. coli  λ 
lysogen and E. coli nonAlysogen. Controls used were pDA71* and pNDW5. Figure 3.23  
indicated that transformants were observed on lambd a lysogen ( image B ) not on a nonA
lysogen ( image C ) confirming this was so.  Figure 3.25  is the plasmid map of pNDW7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 48   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.23 : Transformation plates indicating the behavior of pNDW7 on a lysogen and 
a nonAlysogen. Image A and B is pDA71* in nonAlysog en (A) and in λ lysogen (B). 
Image C and D is pNDW7 on a nonAlysogen (D) and on a lysogen (C). Image E and F is 
pNDW5 on lysogen (E) and on a nonAlysogen (F).  
 
To confirm the Xho I site was specific to pNDW7, DNA preparations from  plate C figure 
3.23  were digested with Xho I and pNDW5 was also digested with Xho I ( Figure 3.24) . 
A B 
C D 
E F  49                                                1    2     3     4      5     6     7     8     9         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.24 : Digestions of pNDW5 and pNDW7. Lane 1 is the mole cular weight marker. 
Lane 2 is pNDW5 undigested, lane 3 is pNDW7 undiges ted, lane 4 is pNDW5 digested 
with Xho I, lane 5 is pNDW7 digested with Xho I. Lane 6 is pNDW5 digested with Xho I, 
lane 7 is pNDW7 digested with Xho I, lane 8 is pNDW5 digested with Xho I and lane 9 is 
pNDW7 is digested with Xho I.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.25 : Restriction map of plasmid pNDW7. 
 
B. polymyxa  genomic DNA was digested with Xho I and ligated into pNDW7 digested 
with the same enzyme and transformed into E. coli MM294A4: surprisingly, no colonies 
 50  were observed. Genomic DNA of Streptomyces pseudogriseolus was then used and was 
digested with Xho I ( Figure 3.26 ). This genomic DNA was cloned into Xho I pNDW7 
digests and transformed into E. coli  MM294A4. Colonies were observed and their 
plasmids screened for inserts and indicated that ge nomic DNA digested with Xho I can be 
cloned into the Xho I site of pNDW7 ( Figure 3.27 ). 
 
 
                                                           1                2                 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.26 : Streptomyces pseudogriseolus  genomic DNA. Lane 1 is molecular weight 
marker, lane 2 is genomic DNA undigested and lane 3  is genomic DNA digested with 
Xho I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 51   
 1    2    3     4    5     6     7     8    9   10   11   12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.27 : DNA preparations of transformants digested with Xho I. Lane 1 and 12 are 
molecular weight markers. Lanes 2A10 is pNDW7 clone s digested with Xho I. 
 
The Hind IIIABgl II fragment from pNDW7 was cloned into pUC19 treate d with alkaline 
phosphatase via the Hind III and Bam HI sites. Sequencing confirmed the presence of an 
Xho I site at the expected position but in addition the re was a three base deletion ( figure 
3.28) . This is inAframe and predicted to result in a val ine residue deletion. However the 
endonuclease activity of the EcoR I endonuclease gene was intact.  
 
AAAAATTGACCCTGATCTTGGCGGTACTTTATTT---TCAAA CTC GAGCATCAAACCTGA  57 
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||   ||||| || ||||| ||||||||| 
AAAAATTGACCCTGATCTTGGCGGTACTTTATTTGTTTCAAA TTC CAGCATCAAACCTGA  63 
 
TGGTGGAATTGTAGAGGTCAAAGATGATTATGGTGAATGGAGAGTTGTACT TGTTGCTGA  117 
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||| 
TGGTGGAATTGTAGAGGTCAAAGATGATTATGGTGAATGGAGAGTTGTACT TGTTGCTGA  123 
 
Figure 3.28 : Sequence alignment of the Hind IIIABgl II fragments of the mutated and a 
non mutated sequence of the suicide gene. The top s equence is the mutated sequence and 
the bottom sequence is the nonAmutated sequence. 
 52   
The Hind IIIABgl II fragment of the original EcoR I endonuclease gene from plasmid 
pEcoR251 was sent for sequencing to check if the de letion was present prior to the 
mutagenesis or not.  
 
AAAAAATTGACCCTGATCTTGGCGGTACTTTATTTGTTTCAAATTCCAGCA TCAAACCTG  67           
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||| 
AAAAAATTGACCCTGATCTTGGCGGTACTTTATTTGTTTCAAATTCCAGCA TCAAACCTG  69 
 
ATGGTGGAATTGTAGAGGTCAAAGATGATTATGGTGAATGGAGAGTTGTAC TTGTTGCTG  127            
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||| 
ATGGTGGAATTGTAGAGGTCAAAGATGATTATGGTGAATGGAGAGTTGTAC TTGTTGCTG  129 
 
AAGCCAAACACCAAGGTAAAGATATTATAAATATAAGGAATGGTTTGTTAG TTGGGAAAA  187            
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| ||||||||| 
AAGCCAAACACCAAGGTAAAGATATTATAAATATAAGGAATGGTTTGTTAG TTGGGAAAA  189 
 
GAGGAGATCAAGATTTAATGGCTGCTGGTAATGCTATCGAA  228 
||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||| 
GAGGAGATCAAGATTTAATGGCTGCTGGTAATGCTATCGAA  230 
 
 
Figure 3.29 : Sequence alignment of the original EcoR I Hind IIIABgl II fragment aligned to 
the known sequence of EcoR I endonuclease gene. Top sequence (from pEcoR251) a nd 
bottom sequence (known sequence). 
 
A deletion was not present in the EcoR I gene from pEcoR251 ( Figure 3.29 ). The deletion 
apparently arose during the mutagenesis procedure. The mutated EcoR I gene sequence 
was put on the NEBcutter website to confirm the pre sence of newly introduced sites. The 
output from the website indicated that the new site s were ( figure 3.30) .                      
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  53                                                                          A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
        B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.30 : Predictions of restriction sites on original and mutated EcoR I endonuclease 
gene. (A) Is the original EcoR I sequence. (B) Is the mutated EcoR I sequence, the blue 
box indicates the new restriction sites predicted b y NEBcutter program.  
 54  3.2.3 Introduction of the Xba I restriction site into pDA71  
 
Plasmid pDA71 is an 8.8Kb E. coli6Rhodococcus  shuttle vector which has an ampicillin 
resistant determinant expressed in GramAnegatives a nd a chloramphenicol resistant 
determinant expressed  in GramApositives; it has been successfully used to  clone more 
than thirty genes of medical or bioremediative inte rest (Dabbs et al ., 1995). Introduction 
of Xba I restriction sites in pDA71 allows the use of Spe I, Nhe I and Avr II  restriction sites 
to construct genomic libraries.  To introduce the Xba I restriction site into it the 175 bp 
Bgl IIAPst I fragment from pNDW5 was used to substituted with the same fragment from 
pDA71. Plasmid pDA71 was double digested with Bgl II and Pst I and phosphatased. 
Ligations were transformed into E. coli λ  lysogen. DNA minipreps were done of 10 
transformants were digested with Xba I. Figure 3.31  shows the gel image of the 
transformants. 
 
                                         1    2    3   4    5    6    7    8    9  10  11  1 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.31 : DNA preparations digested with Xba I to screen for the presence of Xba I site 
in pDA71. Lane 1 and 12 are molecular weight marker s. Lanes 2A11 are DNA 
preparations digested with Xba I. 
 
 55  The DNA preparation on lane 3 Figure 3.31  was further digested with a couple of 
restriction enzymes in order to determine whether i t is a correct plasmid ( Figure 3.32 ) 
and was named pDA71A1. Stu I digestion result indicated that it is a correct p lasmid 
because of the presence of two Stu I site giving one smaller fragment and one large 
fragment. 
 
                                              1     2       3    4    5    6     7     8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.32 : Digestion of the pDA71A1 that contains Xba I. Lanes 1 and 8 are molecular 
weight markers; lane 2 is undigested pDA71A1, lane 3 is Hind III digest, lane 4 is Bgl II 
digest, lane 5 is Sfu I digest, lane 6 is Xba I digest and lane 7 is Stu I digest. 
 
pDA71A1 was transformed into E. coli  λ lysogen and nonAlysogen together with pNDW5, 
pDA71* to determine if the suicide gene was functio nal ( Figure 3.33 ).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 56  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.33 : Transformation plates indicating the behavior of pDA71A1. 
 
The plates in figure 3.33  indicates that the suicide gene is functional henc e the 
transformants on a lysogen. DNA was inserted into t he Xba I site of pDA71A1 to 
determine if this site is useful in cloning DNA and  can be released from the plasmid by 
digestion with Xba I. Plasmid map of pDA71A1 is presented in  Figure 3.35 . Genomic 
DNA of B. polymyxa  was digested with Xba I and ligated into Xba I digested pDA71A1. 
 57  This was transformed into E. coli  MM294, selected for ampicillin resistance, and 
transformants screened for the presence of the plas mid that has an insert ( Figure 3.34 ).  
                                               1         2       3        4      5       6 
                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.34:  plasmid DNA of pDA71A1 clones digested with Xba I to release cloned 
DNA. Lane 1 is the molecular weight marker and lane s 2A6 are plasmid DNA with inserts 
released. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.35 : Restriction map of plasmid pDA71A1. 
 
 58  3.2.4 Introduction of Xho I site into plasmid pEcoR251  
 
Plasmid pEcoR251 is 3.3 kb in size and is useful in  the construction of E. coli  positive 
selection shuttle vectors. It can provide a GramAne gative replicon for the shuttle vector 
and a positive selection gene. The Hind IIIABgl II fragment of the plasmid pNDW7 
(Figure 3.25 ) was used as a source of the Xho I site. Plasmid pEcoR251 was digested 
with the same enzymes and phosphatased. The Hind IIIABgl II fragment from pNDW7 was 
used to substitute a Hind IIIABgl II fragment of pEcoR251. Transformants minipreps we re 
screened for the presence of an Xho I site. Eight transformants were tested and all of them 
were digested with Xho I indicating that the site was present ( figure 3.36 ). Four of the 
DNA preparations of the 8 transformants were transf ormed into E. coli λ lysogen and a 
non lysogen to check which of these preparations ha d a functional suicide gene.   
 
 1   2   3    4    5    6    7    8    9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.36 : DNA preparation of transformants digested with Xho I. Lane 1 is molecular 
weight marker. Lanes 2A9 is Xho I digests. 
 
Only DNA from lane 2 ( Figure 3.36 ) had a functional suicide gene and was further 
digested with restriction enzymes to confirm if it is pEcoR251 with a new site. Figure 
3.37  presents the gel image of the digestions. 
 
 59                       1     2       3       4       5       6       7      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.37 : pEcoR251 with the new restriction site. Lanes 1 a nd 8 are molecular weight 
markers. Lane 2 is undigested, lane 3 is Hind III digest, lane 4 is Bgl II digest, lane 5 is 
Bam HIAEco RI digest, lane 6 is Sfu I digest and lane 7 is Xho I digest. 
 
This plasmid was then transformed into E. coli  λ lysogen and a nonAlysogen to check the 
function of the suicide gene. Plasmids pDA71* and p EcoR251 (original) were used as 
controls. Figure 3.38  represents the behavior of the modified pEcoR251 w hich was 
named pEcoR251A1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 60   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.38 : Transformants indicating the behavior of the modi fied pEcoR251. Image A 
and B is pEcoR251 on a nonAlysogen and a lysogen, r espectively. Image C and D is 
pDA71* on a nonAlysogen and a lysogen, respectively . Image E and F is pEcoR251A1 on 
a nonAlysogen and a lysogen, respectively.  
 
 
A B 
C D 
E 
F  61  3.3 Inactivation of rifampicin by Bacillus  species 
 
Preliminary experiments were done to confirm that o ne of the shuttle vectors I had made 
could be used to clone Bacillus genes. Members of this genus were shown by Dabbs et  al. 
(1995) to have the ability to inactivate rifampicin . B. polymyxa  was a species that can 
inactivate rifampicin by glycosylation. Initially t his strain was going to be used to screen 
for this inactivation gene then the focus of work c hanged and it was used for cloning by 
complementation in an auxotrophic mutants of B. subtilis .  
 
3.4 Genomic library construction 
   
A genomic library was constructed using plasmid pND W1. This was done to check if this 
pNDW1 can be useful in the construction  of a genomic library. The library was going to 
be used to check if there was any fragment of B. polymyxa  genomic DNA that can 
complement the auxotrophic mutants, the KIT strains , in section 2.1 . Genomic DNA of 
B. polymyxa  was digested with restriction endonucleases to det ermine which restriction 
endonuclease will be used to construct a genomic li brary.  
 
       1    2    3     4    5    6    7    8    9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.39:  Genomic DNA digestions. Lane 1 is molecular weight marker, lane 2 is 
undigested DNA, lane 3 is Bgl II digest, lane 4 is Hind III digest, lane 5 is Pst I digest, lane 
6 is Nar I digest, lane 7 is Cla I digest, lane 8 is Sfu I digest and lane 9 is Bcl I digest.  
 62  The restriction endonuclease chose was the one that  does not digest the genomic DNA 
too frequently as that could lead to pieces of gene  scattered all over a genomic library. It 
is desirable to have a restriction endonuclease tha t does not cut genomic DNA frequently 
because the possibility of getting the entire gene in a plasmid is high. Figure 3.39  
indicates that Bgl II does not cut the genomic DNA as there is no diff erence between the 
Bgl II digest and the undigested genomic DNA. Hind III, Cla I, Sfu I and Bcl I cut the 
genomic DNA too frequently with that they were not used for the library construction. 
Pst I and Nar I were found chosen as they do not digest the genom ic DNA too frequently. 
Pst I was of best choice because a Pst I site is present in pNDW1 and it would be easy to 
excise the fragment cloned into that site by simple  digestion with Pst I. 
 
3.4.1 Vector calibration  
 
The amount of vector to be used for library constru ction was determined. This was to 
determine the minimum amount required to produce th e least amount of transformants 
caused by mutation and plasmid reAligating to itsel f. An aliquot of 200µl was digested 
with Pst I and after digestion the DNA was purified by pheno lAchloroform extraction. 
Ligation reaction were set up with different amount  of plasmid, 2µl of T4 DNA ligase 
buffer and 1µl of T4 DNA ligase was added. The volu me was adjusted to 20µl and was 
incubated at 22ºC for 16A22 hours. The E. coli  MM294A4 was then transformed with the 
ligation mixture. The amount of vector which gave t he least amount transformants was 
chosen. 
 
3.4.2 Genomic DNA calibration 
 
The amount of genomic DNA to be used with the plasm id amount determined above, was 
also determined by first digesting the genomic DNA with Pst I and setting up ligations 
reaction to 20µl using 2µl of T4 DNA ligase buffer and 1µl of T4 DNA ligase. The only 
difference in this part was that the amount of vect or determined above was kept constant 
and different amounts of the genomic DNA were used.  The ligation mixtures in an  63  vector: insert ratio of 1:3 were transformed into E. coli  MM294A4. The amount of 
genomic DNA that gave the most amounts of transform ants was chosen. 
 
3.4.3 Construction of the genomic library in E. coli  
 
The library was constructed in a highly transformab le  E. coli strain MM294A4 using the 
B. subtilis6E. coli  shuttle vector constructed in this study (pNDW1). The Pst I library gave 
inserts that were ≥1Kb ( figure 3.40 ). The average number of transformants obtained per  
ligation reaction was desirable, 586 transformants were obtained. The statistical 
calculation of the probability (P) that any fragmen t of the genome would be represented 
in the library was done using the formula of Clarke  and Carbon, 1976:  
      
    
       N = In (15P) ⁄ In [15(a ⁄ b)]      where N=number of clones  
       P= probability (95%) 
        a= average insert size 
        b= genome size (assumed to be 4.5x 10 6) 
 
Using the formula above the number of clones requir ed to represent the library was 
determined to be 6 608 clones.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  64                                     1   2    3    4    5   6    7   8    9  10  11  12 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure3.40 : Independent clone digested with  Pst I from library construction. Lane 1 and 
12 are molecular weight markers. Lanes 2A11 are clo nes digested with Pst I to determine 
the insert sizes. 
 
 65  4. DISCUSSION 
    
Plasmids isolated from Staphylococcus aureus also replicate in Bacillus subtilis . That led 
to development of gene cloning technology in B. subtilis  aided by the construction of 
vectors that are maintained in both B. subtilis  and Escherichia coli . Gene cloning directly 
in B. subtilis  as a primary host is relatively inefficient so it is preferable to conduct 
cloning steps with a shuttle plasmid in E. coli  then transfer the recombinant plasmids into 
B. subtilis  (Bruckner, 1992; Sullivan et al ., 1984). Vectors of this type allow the use of 
wellAdeveloped techniques for the isolation and man ipulation of DNA in E. coli . The 
resulting hybrid molecules can then be introduced i nto B. subtilis  by transformation. 
Gryzan et al . (1980) have also shown that biAfunctional plasmid s are of great importance 
because the generation of hybrid plasmids by direct  transformation of ligation mixtures 
into B. subtilis  is very inefficient probably due to the inability of plasmid monomers to 
transform competent B. subtilis  (Canosi et al ., 1978). Most plasmids functioning in both 
B. subtilis  and E. coli  are based on the use of the rolling cycle plasmid isolated from S . 
aureus . In this study I have also adopted the same approa ch, using plasmid pC194.  
 
This was joined to plasmid pEcoR251 which carries a n EcoR I endonuclease gene, giving 
a positive selection shuttle vector. The positive s election is due to insertional inactivation 
of the EcoR I endonuclease gene providing a simple method for s electing recombinant 
plasmids. E. coli6B. subtilis shuttle vectors have been previously constructed, a nd 
selection in these plasmids is by insertional inact ivation of a resistant marker (Gryczan et 
al ., 1980; Sullivan et al ,. 1984)). This selection procedure can be time con suming as 
transformants have to be screened for loss of a res istant marker as an indication that 
foreign DNA has been inserted.  Vieira and Messing (1982) constructed shuttle plasmids 
that contain a fragment of the lacZ  gene which is functional in αAcomplementation. 
Upstream of this is an array of unique restriction sites and insertion of DNA into any of 
these blocks expression, causing a loss of αAcomple mentation and resulting in a Lac A 
phenotype. Transformants containing inserts are rea dily detected directly by blue/white 
screening on medium supplemented with the chromogen ic substrate XAGal. With 
pNDW1 one has the advantage of only getting recombi nant transformants because those  66  that do not contain an insert will be killed by the  endonuclease activity of the suicide 
gene. 
  
Shuttle vectors based on plasmids such as pUB110, p C194 and pE194 replicate stably in 
B. subtilis , but addition of recombinant DNA may confer struct ural instability and 
sometimes segregational stability. The molecular ba sis for this is the mode of replication. 
These plasmids replicate by a rolling circle mechan ism producing singleAstranded DNA 
as an intermediate, and short direct repeats within  this singleAstranded DNA may lead to 
the deletion of one of the repeats (Bron et al ., 1987; Nguyen et al ., 2005). Instability is 
also observed when a relatively small foreign DNA f ragment results in structural and/or 
segregational stability (Grkovic et al ., 2003). However, I found that plasmid pNDW1 and 
others I made did not show any evident structural i nstability. With pNDW1 the Bacillus 
subtilis  and Staphylococcus aureus  cells carrying the plasmid or clones of the plasmi d 
were selected for chloramphenicol resistance, but t his phenotype was only observed when 
the cells were incubated overnight. This suggested that the enzyme chloramphenicol 
acetyltransferase was expressed at low levels such that when allowed to grow overnight 
the level of expression would be enough to cause th e aforementioned phenotype.  
 
Plasmid pNDW1 without any insert was able to replic ate in S. aureus  suggesting that the 
suicide gene was not expressed in this species. Tha t is in contrast to B. subtilis  and E. 
coli . When pNDW4 and the same plasmid carrying a Pst I B. polymyxa  genomic library 
were used to transform S. aureus , transformants were observed at a high efficiency 
indicating that disruption of the suicide gene give s rise to more transformants. This 
means that this plasmid can be used in S. aureus  and selection of recombinant 
transformants would be challenging because the suic ide gene is not expressed in this host. 
  
A previous limitation of the EcoRAbased system was that there were only four useful 
unique restriction sites: Hin dIII, Bgl II, Pst I, and Sfu I. I improved the shuttle vector I 
made by introducing two new restriction sites for c loning and subcloning purposes, Xba I 
and Xho I. The former generates the same singleAstranded en ds as Avr II, Spe I, and Nhe I.  
The latter produces the same singleAstranded ends a s Sal I. The Xba I site was introduced  67  into the suicide gene between the Bgl II and Pst I sites and the Xho I was introduced 
between Hind III and Bgl II site. These are both relatively early in the gen e, desirable since 
studies have shown that positive selection by inser tion of DNA towards the 3′ end is 
relatively inefficient (E. Dabbs, personal communic ation). This may be because such a 
fusion protein still possesses endonuclease activit y. Bacillus  genomic DNA was 
successfully cloned into pNDW5 at the Xba I site with pNDW7 and Xho I transformants 
were not obtained, probably because of the large si ze of inserts. Streptomyces 
pseudogriseolus  genomic DNA digested with Xho I was used and transformants were 
obtained. It should be borne in mind that the B. subtilis  and S. aureus recipients used in 
this work have fully functional restriction systems  (Seeber et al ., 1990; Waldron, 2006). 
B. subtilis  has the BsuM  restriction modification system. This system recog nizes the 
sequence CTCGAG the same as that of Xho I (Jentsch, 1983). The DNA cloned into 
plasmid pNDW7 has the Xho I site flanking the insert and nucleic was coming f rom E. 
coli  which lacks the appropriate modification system me ans that the DNA is likely to be 
attacked by the BsuM  restriction endonuclease. There are other restrict ion modification 
systems in B. subtilis  such as the BsuF  (isoschizomer of Hpa II), BsuR  (isoschizomer of 
Hae III) and the BsuB  ( Pst I isoschizomer) (Jentsch, 1983). There are sites fo r all these in 
the plasmid pNDW1 in S. aureus  there is the Sau 1 type I restriction modification system 
as well as the Sau 3AI type II restriction modification system which r ecognizes the GATC 
sequence (Seeber et al ., 1990; Waldron, 2006). Future work could producti vely address 
elimination of these activities by gene disruption.   
 
Introduction of these sites was confirmed by sequen cing and with Xba I the expected base 
change was observed. When sequencing was done for t he Xho I site, the Hin dIIIABgl II 
fragment of the suicide gene of pNDW7 had inAframe deletion of a codon, predicted to 
remove a valine. The corresponding sequence from pE coR251 revealed that the deletion 
was not present. Therefore it has arisen during the  mutagenesis procedure. Removal of 
this valine did not affect the protein as the pheno type was observed when the behavior of 
pNDW7 was determined on a lysogen and a nonAlysogen . This was consistent with the 
studies done by Wolfers and coAworkers (1986) that the Glu111, Glu 144 and Arg 145 are 
essential for the nucleolytic activity of the EcoRI . They made mutants in which the Glu  68  111 is replaced by Gln, Glu 144 replaced by Gln and  Arg 145 replaced by Lys which lost 
most of their endonucleolytic activity. This deleti on arose concomitantly with the 
mutation introduced to the EcoR I sequence though usually with Taq  polymerase it is a 
one nucleotide deletion not a codon.  
 
Predictions of restriction sites on the double muta nt EcoR I gene indicated that there were 
additional restriction sites in addition to those i ntroduced ( Figure 3.30 ). However, these 
are for enzymes that are not useful for cloning as they do not have a definite recognition 
sequence. The restriction enzymes Ava I, Psp XI, Bso BI do not have unique recognition 
sequences: 5´ACYCGRGA3´, 5´AVCTCGAGBA3´, and 5´ACYC GRGA3´, respectively.  
 
I used my mutant plasmids to increase the versatili ty of related vectors. The Bgl IIAPst I 
fragment of pNDW5 was used to introduce Xba I into pDA71 (giving pDA71A1) to 
increase the number of restriction sites to use for  cloning. The Hind IIIABgl II fragment of 
pNDW7 was used to introduce the Xho I site into pEcoR251. The Xba I site in pDA71A1 
was shown to function effectively in cloning of gen omic DNA. 
 
Preliminary experiments were undertaken to check if  pNDW1 can be used in library 
construction and that a Bacillus gene can be cloned using this system. Auxotrophic 
mutants I made using NTG and counterAselection meth od did not show specific 
auxotrophic requirement. The Pst I genomic library was electroporated into QB917 KIT A8 
strain to complement the histidine and threonine au xotrophy but transformants were not 
observed. Protoplast transformation was successful but the efficiency was low. This 
emphasized again the desirability of generating res trictionAdeficient mutants of B. 
subtilis . 
 
In conclusion, I constructed a shuttle vector with a positive selection (suicide) function 
replicating in E. coli , B. subtilis  and S. aureus  and showed cloning of DNA can be done 
by insertional inactivation allowing positive selec tion of recombinant transformants. I 
improved it by introducing two unique restriction s ites allowing cloning of DNA digested 
by any of six additional restriction enzymes. These  were used to introduce new restriction  69  sites into pEcoR251 and pDA71 Future work might pro ductively focus on constructing 
nonArestricting strains of S. aureus  and B. subtilis.  
 
 
  70  5. REFERENCES  
 
1.  Ambulos, N. P., Chow, J. H., Mongkolsuk, S., Preis,  L. H., Vollmar, W. R. 
and Lovett, P. S.  1984.  Constitutive variants of the pC194 cat  gene exhibit DNA 
alterations in the vicinity of the ribosome binding  site sequence. Gene. 28: 171A
176. 
2.  Bron, S., Bosma,P, van Velkum, M. and Luxen, E.  1987. Stability function in 
the Bacillus subtilis  plasmid pTA1060. Plasmids. 14: 185A194. 
3.  Bruckner, R . 1992. A series of shuttle vector for B. subtilis  and E. coli . Gene. 
122:187A192. 
4.  Byeone, W . and Weisblum, B.  1984. PostAtranscriptional regulation of 
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. Journal of Bacte riology. 158(2): 543A550. 
5.  Cadwell, R . and Joyce, G. 1991. Randomization of genes by PCR  mutagenesis. 
PCR Methods and Applications. 2:28A33.  
6.  Canosi, U., Morelli, G. and Trautner, T.A.  1978. The relationship between 
molecular structure and transformation efficiency o f some Staphylococcus aureus  
plasmids isolated from Bacillus subtilis . Molecular and General Genetics. 
166:259A267. 
7.  Chang, S. and Cohen, N . 1979. High frequency transformation of Bacillus 
subtilis  protoplast by plasmid DNA. Molecular General Genet ics. 168:111A115. 
8.  Cheng, S. and Modrich, P . 1983. PositiveAselection cloning vehicles useful for 
overproduction of hybrid proteins. Journal of Bacte riology. 154(2): 1005A1008. 
9.  Clarke, I . and Carbon, J . 1976. A colony bank containing a synthetic ColEI 
hybrid representative of the entire Escherichia coli  genome. Cell. 9: 91A99.  
10.  Dabbs, E . R., Gowan, B., Quan, S. and Andersen, S. J.  1995. Development of 
improved Rhodococcus  plasmid vectors and their use in cloning genes of potential 
commercial and medical importance. Biotechnologia. 7(8):129A135. 
11.  Dabbs, E.R., Gowan, B. and Andersen, S. J.  1990. Nocardioform arsenic 
resistance plasmids and construction of Rhodococcus  cloning vectors. Plasmid. 
23:242A247.   71  12.  Dabbs, E .R., Yazawa, K. and Tanaka, Y.  1995. Rifampicin inactivation by 
Bacillus  species. Journal of Antibiotics. 48(8):815A819. 
13.  Duval, E . J., Williams, D. M., Lovett, P. S., Rudolf, C., Va santha, N. and 
Guyer, M. 1983. Chloramphenicol inducible expression in Bacillus subtilis . 
Gene. 24:170A177. 
14.  El AHelow, E. R., Sabry, S. A. and Khattab, A. A . 1997. Production of βA
mannanase by B. subtilis  from agroAindustrial byAproducts: screening and 
optimization. Antonie van Leeuwenhoek. 71:189A193 
15.  Goursot, R., Goze, A., Niaudet, B. and Erhlich, S. D . 1982. Plasmids for 
Staphylococcus aureus  replicate in yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Nature. 
298:488A490.     
16.  Goze, A. and Erhlich, S. D.  1980.  Replication of plasmids from Staphylococcus 
aureus  in Escherichia coli . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. 
USA. 77:7333A7337.  
17.  Gray, G .S.  1983. Evolution of antibiotic resistance genes: th e DNA sequence of a 
kanamycin resistance gene from Staphylococcus aureus . Molecular Biology and 
Evolution 1(1):57A66. 
18.  Greene, P. J., Gupta, M., Boyer, H. W., Brown, W.E.  and Rosenberg, J. M . 
1981. Sequence analysis of the DNA encoding the Eco RI endonuclease and 
methylase.  Journal of Biological Chemistry. 256:2143A2153. 
19.  Grkovic, S ., Brown, M. H., Hardie, K. M., Firth, N. and Skurray,  R. A.  2003. 
Stable lowAcopyAnumber Staphylococcus aureus shuttle vectors. Microbiology. 
149:785A794. 
20.  Gryczan, T ., Shivakumar, A. G. and Dubnau, D.   1980. Characterization of 
chimeric plasmid cloning vehicles in Bacillus subtilis . Journal of Bacteriology. 
141(1): 246A253. 
21.  Handa, N., Nakayama, Y., Sadykov, M. and Kobayashi,  I . 2001. Experimental 
genome evolution: largeAscale genome rearrangement associated with resistance 
to replacement of a chromosomal restrictionAmodific ation gene complex. 
Molecular Microbiology. 40:932A940.  72  22.  Horinouchi, S. and Weisblum, B . 1982. Nucleotide sequence and functional 
map of pC194, a plasmid that specifies inducible ch loramphenicol resistance. 
Journal of Bacteriology. 150(2): 815A825. 
23.  Hughes, J. M. and Gerberding, J. L . 2002. Anthrax Bioterrorism: Lessons 
learned and future directions. Emerging Infectioous  Diseases. 8(10):1013A1014. 
24.  Iordanescu, S., Surdeanu, P. D. L. and Norvick, R. 1978. Incompatibility and 
molecular relationship between small Staphylococcus  plasmids carrying the same 
resistance marker. Plasmid. 1:468A479.  
25.  Jentsch, S.  1983. Restriction and modification in Bacillus subtilis : Sequence 
specificities of restriction/modification system BsuM , BsuE , and BsuF . Journal of 
Bacteriology. 156(2): 800A808. 
26.   Kobayashi, I . 2001. Behavior of restrictionAmodification system s as selfish 
mobile elements and their impact on genome evolutio n. Nucleic Acids Research.  
29; 3742A3756.   
27.  Kobayashi, I . 2004. RestrictionAmodification systems as minimal  forms of life. 
Nucleic Acids and Molecular Biology. 14:19A62 
28.  Kües, U. and Stahl, U.  1989. Replication of plasmids in GramAnegative bact eria. 
Microbiological Reviews. 53:491A514 . 
29.  Kuhn, I., Stephenson, F. H., Boyer, H. W. and Green e, P. J.  1986. PositiveA
selection vectors utilizing lethality of the EcoRI endonuclease. Gene: 253A263. 
30.  Kusano, K., Naito, T., Handa, N. and Kobayashi, I.  1995. RestrictionA
modification systems as genomic parasites in compet ition for specific sequence. 
Proceedings of National Academy of Science. USA. 92 :11095A11099. 
31.  Liu, Y., Ichige, A and Kobayashi, I . 2007. Regulation of the EcoRI restrictionA
modification system: Identification of ecoRIM  gene promoters and their upstream 
negative regulators in the ecoRIR  gene. Gene 400:140A149. 
32.  Madigan, M.  T., Martinko, J. M. and Parker, J. 2003. Brock biology of 
microorganisms. International edition. Pearson Educ ation, Inc. Upper Saddle 
River, New Jersey. Pp 893.  73  33.  Mallonee, D. H. and Speckman, R. A . 1989. Transformation of Bacillus 
polymyxa  with plasmid DNA. Applied and Environmental Microb iology. 
55(10):2517A2521.  
34.  Mieschendahl, M . and Müller5Hill, B.  1985. F´Acoded, temperatureAsensitive λ 
cI857 repressor gene for easy construction and regu lation of λ promoterA
dependent expression system. Journal of Bacteriolog y. 164(3): 1366A1369. 
35.  Naderer, M., Brust, J. R., Knowle, D. and Blumentha l, R. M. 2002. Mobility 
of a restrictionAmodification system revealed by it s genetic contexts in three hosts. 
Journal of bacteriology. 184: 2411A2419. 
36.  Naderer, M., Brust, J. R., Knowle, D. and Blumentha l, R. M . 2002. Mobility 
of a restrictionAmodification system revealed by it s genetic contexts in three hosts. 
Journal of Bacteriology. 184:2411A2419. 
37.  Naito, T., Kusano, K. and Kobayashi, I . 1995. Selfish behavior of restrictionA
modification system. Science. 267: 897A899. 
38.  Nakayama, Y. and Kobayashi, I.  1998. RestrictionAmodification gene 
complexes as selfish gene entities: roles of regula tory systems in their 
establishment, maintenance, and apoptotic mutual ex clusion. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science. USA. 95:6442A6447. 
39.  Newman, A. K., Rubin, R. A., Kim, S. H. and Modrich , P . 1981. DNA 
sequence of the structural genes for EcoRI DNA rest riction and modification 
enzymes. Journal of Biological Chemistry. 256:2131A 2139. 
40.  Nguyen, H . D., Nguyen, Q. A., Ferreira, R. C., Ferreira, L. C . S., Tran, L. T. 
and Schumann, W . 2005. Construction of plasmidAbased expression ve ctors for 
Bacillus subtilis  exhibiting full structural stability. Plasmids. 54 :241A248. 
41.  Nobusato, A., Uchiyama, I., Ohashi, S. and Kobayash i, I . 2000. Insertion with 
long target duplication: a mechanism for gene mobil ity suggested from 
comparison of two related bacterial genomes. Gene. 259:99A108. 
42.  Novick, R.  P. and Roth , C. 1968. PlasmidAlinked resistance to inorganic salt s in 
Staphylococcus aureus . Journal of Bacteriology. 95: 1335A1342. 
43.  Novick, R.P. 1989.  Staphylococcal plasmids and their replication. Ann ual 
Reviews of Microbiology .  43: 537A565.   74  44.  Quan, S. and Dabbs, E. R. 1993. Nocardioform arsenic resistance plasmid 
characterization and improved Rhodococcus  cloning vectors. Plasmids. 29: 74A79.  
45.  Sadykov, M., Asami, Y., Niki, H., Handa, N., Itaya,  M., Tanokura, M. and 
Kobayashi, I . 2003. Multiplication of a restrictionAmodificatio n gene complex. 
Molecular Microbiology. 48:417A427. 
46.  Seeber, S., Kessler, C. and Gotz, F.  1990. Cloning, expression and 
characterization of the Sau 3AI restriction and modification genes in 
Staphylococcus carnosus  TM300. Gene. 94:37A43. 
47.  Som, S. and Friedman, S.  1993. Autogenous regulation of the EcoR II methylase 
gene at the transcriptional level: effect of 5Aazac ytidine. EMBO Journal. 12:4297A
4303. 
48.  Sullivan, M.  A., Yasbin, R. E. and Young, F. E. 1984. New shuttle vectors for 
Bacillus subtilis  and Escherichia coli  which allow rapid detection of inserted 
fragments. Gene. 29: 21A26.  
49.  Svenningsen, S . L., Costantino, N., Court, D. L. and Adhya, S . 2005. On the 
role of Cro in λ prophage induction. Proceedings of  the National Academy of 
Science. USA. 102(12): 4465A4469. 
50.  Tao, T., Bourne, J. C. and Blumenthal, R. M . 1991. A family of regulatory 
genes associated with type II restrictionAmodificat ion systems. Journal of 
Bacteriology. 173:1367A1375. 
51.  te Riele, H., Michel, B., and Ehrlich, S.D. 1986.  Evidence for rollingAcircle 
replication of SingleAstranded plasmid DNA in  Bacillus  subtilis and 
Staphylococcus aureus . Proceedings of the National Academy of Science . USA . 
83: 2541A2545. 
52.  Todar, K . 2005 Todar’s online Textbook of Bacteriology, Sta phylococcus. 
University of WisconsinAMadison, Department of Bact eriology [Web: 
http://www.textbookofbacteriology.net/staph.html] D ate Accessed: 05 December 
2007. 
53.  Vieira, J . and Messing, J . The pUC plasmids, an M13mp7Aderived system for 
insertion mutagenesis and sequencing with synthetic  universal primers. Gene 19: 
259A268.  75  54.  Wada, A. and Watanabe, H . 1998. PenicillinAbinding protein1 of 
Staphylococcus aureus  is essential for growth. Journal of Bacteriology.1 80 (10): 
2759A2756. 
55.  Waldron, D . E. and Lindsay, J. A . 2006. Sau1: a novel lineageAspecific TypeI 
restrictionAmodification system that blocks horizon tal gene transfer into 
Staphylococcus aureus  and between isolates of different lineages. Journa l of 
Bacteriology. 188 (15): 5578A5585. 
56.  Wilson, G.  1991a. Organization of restrictionAmodification sy stems. Nucleic 
Acids Research.  19:2539A2566. 
57.   Wilson, G . 1991b. Restriction and modification systems. Annu al Review of 
Genetics . 25:585A627. 
58.  Wilson, G. G. and Murray, N. E . 1991. Restriction and modification systems. 
Annual Reviews of Genetics. 25:585A627. 
59.  Wolfers, H ., Alves, J., Fliess, A., Gerger, R and Pingoud, A . 1986. Site 
directed mutagenesis experiments suggest that Glu 1 11, Glu 144 and Arg 145 are 
essential for endonucleolytic activity of EcoRI. Nu cleic Acid Research. 14 (22): 
9063A9080. 
60.  Zabeau, M. and Stanley, K.  1982. Enhanced expression of croAßAgalactosidase 
fusion proteins under the control of the P R promoter of bacteriophage λ. The 
EMBO Journal. 1(10): 1217A1224. 
61.  Zhang, X., Zhang, B., Zhang, Z.,Shen, W., Yang, C. Yu, J. and Zhao, Y . 
2005. Survival of biocontrol agents Brevibacillus brevis  ZJYA1 and Bacillus 
subtilis  ZJ116 on the spikes of barley in the field. Journa l of Zhejiang University 
SCIENCE. 6B (8):770A777.  76  6. APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX A: MEDIA  
 
 
Luria Bertani (LB) broth 
Tryptone  3g 
Yeast extract   1.5g 
NaCl   1.5g 
dH 2O   300ml 
 
LB5 agar 
Tryptone  3g 
Yeast extract   1.5g 
NaCl   1.5g 
Agar   4.5g 
dH 2O   300ml 
 
Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) Broth 
BHI    3.7g 
dH 2O   100ml 
 
BHI agar  
BHI    3.7g 
Agar   1.5%  77  dH 2O   100ml  
 
Spizizen’s medium (Minimal medium for B. subtilis ) 
(NH 4)2SO 4   2g 
K2HPO 4   14g 
KH 2PO 4   6g 
Na 2H (C 3H5O (COO)  3  1g 
dH 2O    1000ml 
Glucose to final concentration 0.5% and auxotrophic  requirement added after autoclaving 
Minimal agar prepared by autoclaving 1.5% agar sepa rately, then adding the salts 
prepared separately and glucose. 
 
10X Stock III buffer 
K2HPO 4.3H 2O  91.7g 
KH 2PO 4  26.8g 
MgSO 4  1.0g 
dH 2O   1L 
Store at room temperature with chloroform added 
 
LBS (LB plus 10.3% sucrose) 
Tryptone  1g 
Yeast extract   0.5g 
NaCl   0.5g  78  Sucrose  10.3g 
dH 2O   100ml  
 
DM3 regeneration medium 
4% Agar     200ml 
1M Sodium succinate (pH 7.3)  500ml  
5% Casamino acids    100ml 
10% Yeast extract    50ml 
3.5% K 2HPO 4 and 1.5% KH 2PO 4   100ml  
20% Glucose      25ml 
1M MgCl 2      20ml   
Filter sterilized 2% Bovine Serum Albumin 5ml 
All the components add up to a liter  
 
APPENDIX B: SOLUTIONS  
A6.1 Solutions used for plasmid preparations from E. coli 
Solution I 
Glucose  50mM 
TrisAHCl  25mM 
EDTA   10mM 
pH 8.0 
 
  79  Solution II 
NaOH   0.2M 
SDS   1.0% 
 
Solution III 
Potassium acetate 5M, pH 4.8 
Glacial acetic acid 11.5ml 
dH 2O   88.5ml 
 
Ribonuclease 
10mg/ml solution in sdH 2O, boiled at 95ºC before use 
 
A6.2 Solutions for plasmid preparations from Gram p ositives 
TE buffer 
0.5M EDTA  0.2ml, pH 8.0 
1M TrisAHCl  1.0ml, pH 8.0 
dH 2O   100ml 
 
TE5SDS (10%) 
SDS   10g 
TE buffer  100ml 
 
  80  A6.3 Solutions used for transformations 
CaCl 2 Transformation buffer 
TrisAHCl  20mM 
CaCl 2    100mM 
pH 7.6A8.0 
 
20% Glucose 
Glucose  4g 
dH 2O   20ml 
 
Sucrose, HEPES, MgCl 2 and Glycerol (SHMG) buffer 
Sucrose    85.56g   
HEPES    0.24g  
MgCl 2    0.20g  
Glycerol    10% v/v  
dH 2O    1 liter 
pH 7.0 
 
A6.4 Solutions for protoplast transformation of B. subtilis and S. aureus 
 
2× Sucrose, maleate, MgCl 2 (SMM) 
Sucrose   17.12g 
Maleic acid   0.232g    81  Magnesium chloride   0.40g 
dH 2O    50ml 
pH adjusted to 6.5 with NaOH 
 
4× Pennassay Broth (adapted from El5Helow et al., 1997) 
Glucose   0.08g 
Beef extract   0.12g 
Yeast extract   0.12g 
Peptone   0.40g 
NaCl    0.28g 
K2HPO 4   0.29g 
KH 2PO 4   0.11g 
dH 2O    20ml 
 
SMM plus Penassay broth buffer (SMMP) 
Equal volumes of 4× Penassay broth and 2× SMM buffe r 
 
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) 40% w/v 
PEG    40g 
2× SMM buffer  50ml 
dH 2O    100ml 
 
  82  A6.5 Solution for DNA analysis 
Agarose gels 
Agarose  0.8g (0.4%), 1.6g (0.8%) or 2.4g (1.2%) 
5X TBE  20ml 
sdH 2O   180ml 
 
5X TBE buffer 
Tris base  54.0g 
Boric acid  27.5g 
0.5M EDTA  20ml, pH 8.0 
dH 2O   1000ml 
 
Bromophenol blue tracking dye 
30% glycerol (w/v) in TE and 0.0025% bromophenol bl ue  
 
Running buffer (0.5x TBE) 
5X TBE   50ml 
dH 2O   450ml 
 
0.5M EDTA pH 8.0 
EDTA    18.6g 
dH 2O   1L 
Adjust pH to 8.0 with NaOH  83  1M Tris5HCl pH 8.0 
TrisAHCl  15.8g 
dH 2O   100ml 
 
TE5saturated Phenol 
Phenol   14g 
TE buffer  10ml 
 
1M NaCl 
NaCl   5.8g 
dH 2O   100ml 
 
A6.6 Solutions for mutagenesis 
10X A5N buffer 
K2HPO 4   70.0g 
KH 2PO 4   26.8g 
Na 3C6H5O7 (triAsodium citrate) 5.0g 
MgSO 4      1.0g 
dH 2O        1L 
Tris5maleic acid buffer 
200mM Tris 
50mM Maleic acid 
Titrate until desired pH obtained  84  Nitrosoguanidine (NTG) 1mg/ml stock solution 
NTG     0.01g 
TrisAmaleate buffer (pH4.3)  1ml 
Microwave for 30 Sec until it has dissolved and do not allow to boil 
Use within three days 
 
Table A6.1 Antimicrobial agents 
Agent   Stock concentration  Solvent  Supplier 
  (mg/ml) 
Ampicillin  100   30%sdH 2O  Sigma 
      70% ethanol 
Chloramphenicol 20   ethanol   Boehringer 
Kanamycin  10   sdH 2O    
Nalidixic Acid  10   30% sdH 2O  SigmaAAldrich 
      70% ethanol 
Rifampicin  10   methanol  Sigma  
Streptomycin  20   ethanol   Boehringer 
 
 
 
 
 
  85  Table A6.2 List of Chemicals  
Name of the Chemical     Supplier 
 
Agarose       BioARad 
Acetic acid       Merck 
BHI        Oxoid 
Boric acid       Saarchem 
Bromophenol blue      Sigma 
Butanol       uniLAB 
Chloroform       Saarchem 
Calcium chloride      Saarchem 
Casamino acids      Difco 
EDTA        Sigma 
Ethidium bromide      Sigma 
Ethanol       Saarchem  
Glucose       Fluka Biochemika 
Glycerol       Merck    
Glycine       Merck 
Hydrochloric acid      Merck 
HEPES       uniLAB 
Isopropanol       uniLAB 
Magnesium chloride      SigmaAAldrich  86  Maleic acid       BDH analytical reagents  
Potassium acetate      Sigma 
Dipotassium hydrogen Phosphate    Merck 
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate    AnalaRAanalytical  reagents   
Phenol        Saarchem  
Polyethylene glycol      Fluka 
Sodium hydroxide      Saarchem 
SDS        Boehringer Mannheim 
Tryptone       Oxoid 
Tris        Saarchem 
Technical agar       Oxoid 
Yeast extract       Oxoid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  87  APPENDIX C: PLASMIDS AND MOLECULAR WEIGHT MARKER 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6.1 : Plasmid map of pC194. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  88   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6.2 : Plasmid map of pDA71 (adapted from 
http://seq.yeastgenome.org/vectordb/vector.html). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 89   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6.3:  Plasmid map of pU18/19 
(http://www.fermentas.com/techinfo/nucleicacids/map puc1819.htm). 
 
 
 
 
 
Multiple Cloning Sites (MSC) of pU18/19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6.4 : Multiple cloning site of pUC18 and the MCS of pUC 19 is the reverse of 
pUC18. 
 
 90   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6.5 : Plasmid map of pEcoR251. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure A6.6 : 1KB ladder plus, Fermentas 
(http://www.fermentas.com/catalog/electrophoresis/g enerulers.htm).  
