 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF BIOLOGICAL  TREATMENT SYSTEM FOR 
REDUCTION OF COD FROM TEXTILE WASTEWATER 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOR HABIBAH BINTI MOHD ROSLI  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIVERSITI TEKNOLOGI MALAYSIA 
 
 
  iv
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Istiwewa untuk Mak Puteh binti Idris, 
Abah Mohd Rosli bin Dahli, 
dan adik-adik tersayang, 
Nor Hazirah, Mohd Izzul Ihsan, Nur Fatihah, Nur Ain Izati. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  v
 
 
 
ACKNOLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
 
I would like to thank Associate Profe ssor Dr. Wan Azlina Ahmad for being my 
supervisor for this postgraduate project.  Thank you for giving me full support and gives 
all the guidance that I need to complete the project.  
 
  
I would also like to than k all Biotechnology lab members for giving the help and 
co-operation needed to complete the experiment.  
 
 
Besides that, I would like to thank my parents, Mohd Rosli Dahli and Puteh Haji 
Idris, and my siblings for understanding my project and gives me a support. Also to all 
my friends, Eina, Miha and Dura for giving help and supports.   
 
Last but not least for Mohd Fuad Abdul  Majid, thank you for your supports and 
patient. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  vi
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 
 
Wastewater from industrial plants such as te xtile, electroplating and petroleum 
refineries can contain various  substances that tend to increase the chemical oxygen 
demand (COD) of the wastewater.  Various local agencies have placed limits on the 
allowable levels of COD in i ndustrial wastewater effluent.  It is desired to develop a 
process suitable for treating the wastewater to meet the regulator y limits.  Various 
methods are available for COD reduction in indu strial wastewater su ch as precipitation, 
incineration, chemical oxidation and biological oxidation.  This project attempts to solve 
the high concentration of COD in industrial wastewater us ing bacteria.  The organic 
matter that contributed to COD in the wastewat er will be degraded by the bacteria under 
aerobic conditions using batch process.  The wastewater will be supplemented with an 
agricultural liquid waste for bacterial growth  and metabolism.  This will ensure the 
continual presence of bacteria to carry out degradation of organic matter in the 
wastewater. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  vii
 
 
 
ABSTRAK 
 
 
 
Air sisa industri seperti industri teks til, elektroplat, dan penapisan petroleum 
mengandungi pelbagai bahan yang menyumbang kepada peni ngkatkan COD.  Pelbagai 
agensi tempatan telah meletakkan had ke  atas tahap COD yang dibenarkan dalam 
pengaliran keluar air sisa industri.  Oleh itu, wujudnya keperluan untuk membangunkan 
proses yang bersesuaian bagi merawat air sisa  tersebut supaya mencapai tahap pelepasan 
air sisa yang dibenarkan.  Terdapat pe lbagai kaedah yang boleh digunakan bagi 
pengurangan COD dalam air sisa industri se perti pemendakan, pengoksidaan kimia, dan 
pengoksidaan biologi.  Projek ini dibangunka n untuk menyelesaikan masalah kandungan 
COD yang tinggi dalam air sisa industri de ngan menggunakan bakteria.  Bahan organik 
yang menyumbang kepada COD dalam air sisa  akan dikurangkan oleh bakteria ini. 
Sumber nutrien yang dibekalkan ialah air si sa nenas.  Ini adalah untuk memastikan 
perkembangan populasi bakteria yang berterus an bagi menjalankan proses pengurangan 
bahan organik di dalam air sisa. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  viii
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
CHAPTER          TITLE    PAGE 
   
  D E C L A R A T I O N       ii 
  DEDICATION      iv 
  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS     v 
  A B S T R A C T        vi 
  A B S T R A K        vii 
  TABLE OF CONTENTS     viii 
  LIST OF TABLES      xii 
  L I S T  O F  F I G U R E S       xiii 
  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS  xiv 
   
 
I  INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Textile industry     1 
1.2 Biodegradability of textile waste  
1.2.1 Dyes      2 
1.2.2 Surface active agents    3 
1.2.3 Sizes      4 
1.2.4 Finishing agents    4 
1.2.5 Grease and oils    4 
1.2.6 Complexing agents    5 
1.3 Textile Wastewater Treatment     
Current Technologies     5  ix
1.4 COD reduction 
 1.4.1 Definition of COD    6  
1.4.2 COD and BOD    7 
1.5 Methods of COD reduction 
1.5.1 Physical method 
1.5.1.1 Granular activated carbon  8 
1.5.1.2 Membrane filtration   9 
1.5.2 Chemical method 
1.5.2.1 Ozonation    10 
1.5.2.2 Electrochemical treatment  10 
1.5.2.3 Fenton reagent    11 
1.5.3 Biological method    11 
1.5.4 Combined method    12 
1.6 COD reduction by biological treatment 
1.6.1 Biological treatment by fungi   13 
1.6.2 Biological treatment by algae   14 
1.6.3 Biological treatment by bacteria  15 
1.7 Bacteria 
1.7.1 Acinetobacter baumanni and    
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus   16 
1.7.2 Cellulosimicrobium cellulans   17 
1.7.3 Mixed bacterial culture (consortium)  18 
1.8 Objective and scope of studies   19 
 
 
II   EXPERIMENTAL 
2.1 Materials 
2.1.1 Glasswares and apparatus   20 
2.1.2 Textile wastewater    20 
2.1.3  Agricultural waste    21 
  x
2.1.4  Bacteria  
2.1.4.1 Bacteria growth on plates  21 
2.1.4.2 Bacteria liquid cultures  21 
2.1.5  Growth media 
2.1.5.1 Nutrient broth    22 
2.1.5.2 Nutrient agar     22 
2.1.5.3  Pineapple waste   22 
2.2 Method 
2.2.1  Characterization of microorganisms 
2.2.1.1 Growth profile of single cultures 23 
2.2.1.2 Growth profile of consortium  23 
2.2.1.3 pH profile     24 
2.2.2 Bacterial adaptation studies 
2.2.2.1 Screening for bacterial tolerance  
to textile wastewater   25 
2.2.2.2 Bacterial survival in    
textile wastewater   25 
2.2.3 COD reduction using single culture 
2.2.3.1 Liquid cultures   26 
2.2.3.2 Preparation of freeze-dried culture 26 
2.2.3.3 Freeze-dried culture experiment 27 
2.2.4 COD reduction using mixed culture 
 2.2.4.1 Liquid culture    27 
    2.2.4.2 Effect of NB supplementation 28 
2.2.4.3 Effect of pH    28 
2.2.5 COD analysis 
2.2.5.1 Materials    29 
2.2.5.2 Reagents    29 
2.2.5.2 Preparation of samp les for analysis 30 
 
  xi
III  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
3.1 Characterizations of microorganisms 
   3.1.1 Growth profile     31 
    3.1.1.1 Growth profile of single culture 32 
    3.1.1.2 Growth profile of consortium  34 
    3.1.1.3 pH profiles    35 
3.2 Bacterial adaptation studies 
3.2.1  Screening for bacterial tolerance  37 
 To textile wastewater   
3.2.2 Bacterial survival in textile wastewater 39 
  3.3 Characteristics of textile wastewater   43 
3.4 COD reduction using single culture 
 3.4.1 Liquid culture     44 
 3.4.2 Freeze-dried culture    45 
 3.4.3 Cell dry weight determination  45 
 3.4.4 COD reduction using    45 
  freeze-dried culture 
3.5 COD reduction using mixed culture 
 3.5.1 Liquid culture     48 
 3.5.2 Effect of NB supplementation  49 
 3.5.3 Effect of pH     51 
3.6 Comparison with existing COD   52 
reduction methods 
 
 
IV  CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS   54 
 
R E F E R E N C E S         57 
 
 
  xii
 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
 
 
 
TABLE NO.          TITLE          PAGE 
 
 
 1 .1  Textile wastewater characteristics      2  
1.2  Textile wastewater treatmen t current technologies    6  
3.1  Adaptation times for single culture and mixed culture 37 
3.2  Total number of A.baumannii colonies developing on 
nutrient agar plate from samples with different 
 concentrations of textile wastewater    40 
3.3  Total number of A.calcoaceticus colonies developing on 
nutrient agar plate from samples with different 
 concentrations of textile wastewater    40 
3.4  Total number of C.cellulans colonies developing on 
nutrient agar plate from samples with different 
 concentrations of textile wastewater    41 
3.5  Total number of mixed culture  colonies developing on 
nutrient agar plate from samples with different 
 concentrations of textile wastewater    41 
 3.6  Characteristics of textile wastewater    43 
3.7  COD reduction using liq uid single culture   44 
3.8  Types of system using mixed culture    48 
3.9  COD reduction using mixed culture    49 
3.9  Comparison with existing of the COD reduction 
Conventional methods     52  xiii
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
 
FIGURE NO.                               TITLE PAGE 
 
 
3.1 Growth profiles of  single culture 33 
3.2 Growth profiles of ba cterial consortium 35 
3.3 pH profiles of single cult ure and consortium    36 
3.4 Bacterial tolerance level for each  culture upon adaptation     
 to increase concentrations  of textile wastewater  
 based on OD measurement           39 
3.5 Bacteria tolerance level fo r each culture upon adaptation 
 to increase concentrations  of textile wastewater  
 based on viable count            43 
3.6 COD reduction using freeze-dried culture 47 
3.7 The effect of NB supplementation on COD reduction       50 
      3.8   The effect of various pH on COD reduction         51 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  xiv
 
 
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND SYMBOLS 
 
 
 
BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand 
COD   Chemical oxygen demand 
TSS   Total suspended solid 
NB   Nutrient broth 
OD   Optical density 
CFU   Colony forming unit 
L   Liter 
g   Gram 
mg   milligrams 
rpm   Rotation per minute 
oC   Degree Celsius 
mL   Milliliters 
mg/L   Milligrams per liter 
kPa   Kilo Pascal 
ppm   Parts per million 
Cr (IV)   Chromium (IV)  
Cu (II)   Copper (II)  
DDW   Distilled deionized water 
TNTC   Too numerous to count 
IB   Indigenous bacteria 
 
 
 
  xv
AB   Acinetobacter baumannii 
AC   Acinetobacter calcoaceticus genospecies 3 
CC   Cellulosimicrobium cellulans  
M   Mixed culture 
A.baumannii   Acinetobacter baumannii 
A.calcoaceticus  Acinetobacter calcoaceticus genospecies 3 
C.cellulans   Cellulosimicrobium cellulans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  1
 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
1.1 Textile industry 
 
Textile industry can be classified into  three categories, cotton, woolen, and 
synthetic fibers depending upon the raw materials used (Babu et al., 2000).  Textile 
industries consume large volumes of water and chemicals for wet processing of textiles.  
The chemical reagents used are very di verse in chemical composition, ranging from 
inorganic compounds to polymer s and organic products.  In general, the waste water 
from textile industry is characterized by hi gh value of BOD, COD, pH, and colour   
(Robinson et al ., 2001).  
  
Because of the high BOD, the untreated textile waste water can cause rapid 
depletion of dissolved oxygen if it is directly discharged into  the surface water sources.  
Therefore the effluents with high COD leve l are toxic to biological life.  The high 
alkalinity and traces of chromium where it was employed in dyes adversely affect the 
aquatic life and also interfere with the biological treatment process (Babu et al., 2000).  
Table 1.1 shows common characteristics for e ffluent emanated from  textile industries 
(Zaharah et al,. 2004). 
 
 
  2
Table 1.1 : Textile wastewater characteristics. 
 
 Parameter  Unit   Limit allowed for industrial 
discharge (Standard B) 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
  
Temperature  oC     4 0  
 pH   -    5.5 -9.0 
 B O D    m g / L     5 0  
 COD   mg/L    100 
 TSS   mg/L    100 
 N i t r a t e    m g / L     7  
 Phosphate  mg/L    0.2 
 Sulphate  mg/L    - 
 Cr (III)   mg/L    1.0 
 Cu (II)   mg/L    1.0 
* TSS-Total suspended solid Cr(III)-Cromium (III)  Cu(II)-Copper(II) 
 
 
 
1.2 Biodegradability of textile waste 
 
The major sources of waste from textile operations can be contributed to the 
following activities, raw wool sc ouring, yarn and fabric manu facture, wool finishing, 
woven fabric finishing, and knitted fabric fi nishing.  The chemicals normally used in 
textile processing are as follows: 
 
 
 
1.2.1 Dyes  
 
The most studied step in textile processing  regarding the treatment of the effluent 
is the dyeing step.  Dyeing causes an easy r ecognition of pollution via colour.  A very 
small amount of dye is visible in water, decr easing the transparency of the water.  In the 
environment this leads to inhibition of sunlight penetration and therefore of 
photosynthesis.  In addition, industrial te xtile waste water presents the additional  3
complexity of dealing with unknown quantities and varieties of many kinds of dyes, as 
well as low BOD/COD ratios, which may affect the efficiency of the biological 
decolorization (Babu et al., 2000). 
 
 
 
1.2.2 Surface active agent 
 
A series of research studies on biodegradation of surface active agents have been 
reviewed.  For the biodegradation of su rface active agents (surfactants) their 
hydrophobic groups are important.  The hydrophobic ends are less fundamental for biodegradation but fundamental for their water solubility (Bisschops et al ., 2003). 
 
Biodegradation of surfactants are important  because they interfere with effective 
oxygen transfer in biological treatment system s, they are characteri zed by relatively high 
aquatic toxicity and contribute to final BOD or COD of treated effluents (Bisschops et 
al., 2003). 
 
Even though literature indi cates that surfactants are more easily biodegradable 
than ever, they are still very difficult to  degrade.  For example, the surfactant 
alkylphenol ethoxylate is removed in activated sludge  treatment and it was thought to be 
biodegradable.  This su rfactant is resistant to  attack by bacteria found in activated sludge 
but it is effectively adsorbed on the sludge.  The adsorption affected both the 
biodegradability and elimination.  Thus most of the surface active agents used today are 
actually eliminated and not biodegr aded by more than 80% 1 (Timothy et al., 1988). 
 
 
 
 
 
  4
1.2.3 Sizes  
 
The hydrolysis of polyvinyl  acetate (PVA) to yiel d water soluble alcohol 
produces PVA.  PVA resists biodegradation wh en it contains small amounts of acetate 
groups in the polymer.  The number and loca tion of these residual groups may vary from 
batch to batch, causing the biodegradability to  vary considerably.  A portion of PVA is 
removed by sedimentation in the biological sy stems.  Starch is readily biodegradable. 
Polyacrylates and CMC are partially remove d by sedimentation in  activated sludge. 
CMC degrades slowly with acclimatizati on.  Polyacrylic and polyester sizes are 
recalcitrant to bi odegradation (Robinson et al., 2001).  
 
 
 
1.2.4 Finishing agents 
 
Many different chemicals are used in trea ting textile fabric to impart desirable 
properties to final garment.  The resin finishes have extremely low BOD values 
compared to their COD values.  This may be  caused by the presence of toxic chemicals 
or metal catalyst used in finish formulation.  Most finishing agents  are eliminated by 
adsorption or sedimentation in the biologica l treatment plants a nd not by biodegradation 
(Robinson et al ., 2001).  
 
 
 
1.2.5 Grease and oils 
 
Oil and grease may present problems at the waste water treatment plant because 
they adhere to particulate matter, causing it to float.  Not all oils are equally 
troublesome. Vegetable oils and natural greas e tend to be fairly readily degradable.  
 
  5
 The modern trend is towards lubricants  based on petroleum and these materials 
are very much less easily degraded.  Generally pretreatment for removal of these 
substances will not be required unless floati ng oil or grease is obviously present in the 
effluent.  The naphthenic and paraffinic mineral oils  are biodegradable with 
acclimatization.  The silicon oil is not biode gradable.  Waxes degrade slowly and the 
fatty esters are biodegradable (Bisschops et al., 2003). 
 
 
 
1.2.6 Complexing agents 
 
EDTA (ethylene diamene tetraacetate) , which is the most widely used 
complexing agent, is very stable against oxi dation and is not biodegradable.  Due to its 
low molecular weight it is not adsorbed on activated sludge and escapes with effluent of the treatment plant (Timothy et al., 1988). 
 
 
 
1.3 Textile Wastewater Treatment Current Technologies 
 
There are many different unit operations em ployed for treatment of waste water 
from textile industries.  Pretreatment fo r removal of inorganic solids and floating 
materials, flow equalization a nd neutralization, chemical co agulation, clarif ication, and 
biological treatment are the most common un it operations employed in the textile waste 
water treatment (Babu et al., 2000).  For simplification, the operations treatment can be 
classified into chemical, physical, and biological treatment.  Th ese approaches along 
with their associated pros and c ons are outlined in table 1.1 (Timothy et al ., 1988). 
 
 
 
  6
__ Table 1.2 . Textile Wastewater Treatment Current Technologies. 
_____________________________________________________________________  
Current technologies description  advantages  disadvantages 
 
1. Biological  Activated sludge,  e fficient BOD  long residence times, 
large 
treatment  Aerated lagoons,  reduction  aeration tanks, may  
Land treatment,     require nutrient. 
Extended aeration.      
        
2. Chemical   Percipitation-addition heavy metals,  color removal varies with 
Precipitation  of multivalent cations suspended solid,  dye class, chemical   
  with pH adjustment BOD, COD  handling problems. 
 
3. Activated carbon Passing water  BOD, COD,  expensive, long 
   through a bed of  color   residence times, low 
   carbon (as a     adsorption capacity. 
   p r e t r e a t m e n t  t o       
   f u r t h e r  t r e a t m e n t )       
 
4. Ultra filtration  Permeation of water BOD, COD,  membranes foul easily, 
   under pressure  color   heavy metals not 
   through specialized    removed, need frequent 
   polymeric membranes    cleaning. 
 
5. Ozone  Ozone, generated  BOD, COD,  very expensive, heavy 
by electrical  color   metals and solids 
discharged is used    require separate 
to oxidize organics    treatment. 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
_ 
  
 
1.4 COD reduction 
 
1.4.1 Definition of COD 
 
Bacteria require oxygen to breathe and oxidize organic subs tances; the total 
amount of which is called oxygen demand (Inoue, 2002). The level of COD is a 
critically important factor in evaluating the extent of organic pollution in textile waste 
water.  Substantial sewer surcharges are often imposed when the local permitted limits 
are exceeded.  Depending on the types of fibers, dyes, and additives, various textile 
operations will routinely generate water having high levels of COD (Timothy et al ., 
1988).  7
 In environmental chemistry, the ch emical oxygen demand (COD) test is 
commonly used to indirectly measure th e amount of organic compounds in water, 
making COD a useful measure of water quality.  It is expressed in milligrams per liter 
(mg/L), which indicates the mass of oxygen consumed per liter of solution.  Older references may express the units as parts per million (ppm) (Sawyer et al ., 2003). 
Therefore, COD measures the potential overa ll oxygen requirements of the waste water 
sample including oxidizable components not de termined in the BOD analysis (Timothy 
et al., 1988).  
 
 
 
1.4.2 COD and BOD 
 
The biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) test measures oxygen uptake during the 
oxidation of organic matter.  It has wide a pplications in measuring waste loading of 
treatment plants and in evaluatin g the efficiency of treatment processes.  It is of limited 
use in industrial waste water containing heavy metal ions, cyanide, and other substances 
toxic to microorganisms. 
  
Although COD is comparable to BOD,  it actually measures chemically 
oxidizable matter.  Generally COD is preferre d to BOD in process control applications 
because results are more reproducible and are available in a few minutes or hours rather 
than five days.  In many industrial samples, COD testing may be the only feasible course because of the presence of bacterial inhibito rs or chemicals that will interfere with BOD 
determination (Sawyer et al., 2003). 
 
As dyeing process in textile is particular ly difficult, acid dyes, fixing agents, 
thickeners, finishing agents, are required for successful colorization and cause major 
problems with the plant's effluents disposal in  term of COD.  Lite rature has shown that 
the removal of non-colored agents in textile industry effluent is more problematic, in 
terms of COD than visible dye agents (Walker et al., 2001).  8
1.5 Methods of COD reduction  
 
The main source of organic substances, wh ich contributes to COD in the effluent 
water, comes from the pretreatment of the ra w materials.  There are two ways to reduce 
organic substances in the e ffluent; recovery of organic materials from the effluent 
through ultrafiltration or electro-flocculati on or by leasing using materials with low 
content of soluble organic substances can be found (Prasad Modak, 1998).  Many 
approaches have been reported for COD re moval of textile waste water ranging from 
chemical, physical, biological method and combined method. 
 
 
 
1.5.1 Physical method 
 
The physical treatment generally can be  achieved via adsorption.  The common 
adsorbents used in treating textile effluent are carbon, clay, and resin. 
 
 
 
1.5.1.1 Granular activated carbon 
 
In general granular activated carbon (GAC ) processes have attracted interest for 
municipal waste water treatment for the removal of small concentrations of low 
molecular weight contaminants such as phe nol from solution.  Bu t several researchers 
have since studied textile waste water treatm ent using GAC.  They concluded that GAC 
adsorption was the best method for colour removal (Rozzi et al., 1999).  
 
In many cases GAC adsorption is also coupled with ozonation or bio-ozonation 
in order to improve the removal treatment fo r textile waste.  However there are papers 
which report, that GAC adsorption as sole  treatment technique for COD removal from 
textile effluent.  The adsorbent used was the GAC Filtrasorb 400.  The adsorbent was   9
 
washed in deionised water and sieved into  1000-4000 micrometer particle size range 
before contacting with the adsorbate solutions (Walker et al., 2001). 
 
 
 
1.5.1.2 Membrane filtration 
 
This method has the ability to clarif y, concentrate and to separate dye 
continuously from textile effluent.  But the concentrated residue left after separation 
poses disposal problems, and high capital  cost and the possibi lity of clogging, and 
membrane displacements are disadvantages.  This method of filtration is suitable for 
water recycling within textile dye plant if the effluent contains low concentration of 
dyes, but it is not effective to reduce dissolved solid c ontent and COD content which 
makes water re-use a difficult task (Tim et al., 2001). 
 
 
 
1.5.2 Chemical method 
 
The waste water discharged from a dyeing process in the textile industry exhibits 
low BOD, high COD and high in colour.  Hen ce, the need for chemical treatment is 
necessary in order to produ ce a more readily biodegradabl e compound.  Chemical colour 
removal technique which are re ported in the literature include adsorption by activated 
carbon, electrochemical treatment, ozonatio n, chemical precipitation, membrane 
filtration, hydrogen peroxide, Fenton’s re agent and reverse osmosis (Ghoreishi et al ., 
2003).  
 
 
 
  10
1.5.2.1 Ozonation 
 
Ozone is a powerful oxidizing agent th at may react with organic compounds 
either directly or via radicals formed in a reaction chain as OH-radi cals.  Ozone can be 
used in waste water field to reduce COD, co lour, toxicity, and pathogens and to improve 
waste water biodegradability and the coagulation-floccula tion processes (Ciardelli et al ., 
2001). 
  
Regarding COD removal, ozone treatment with 40 g O 3/m3 at contact times of 15 
min and 30 min causes the COD reductions from 160 to 53 and 203 to 123 mg/L 
respectively.  In ozonation treatment, ozone  generator will be fed with pure oxygen and 
contact with reactor filled up with waste water.  The most important parameter to evaluate process feasibility is the ratio between the generated ozone and the eliminated COD.  According to literature this para meter ranged between 1 and infinity.  Value 
higher than 3 could make the oxidation process for COD elimination economically 
unfeasible (Bes-Pia et al., 2004). 
  
However, ozonation shows effective results in decolorizing textile waste water 
compared to COD and BOD reduction.  In addition, the cost of ozonation needs to be further ascertained to ensure the comp etitiveness of this  method (Bes-Pia et al., 2004). 
 
 
 
1.5.2.2 Electrochemical treatment 
 
In recent years, there has b een increasing interest in the use of electrochemical 
methods for the treatment of  waste waters.  Electrochem ical methods have been 
successfully applied in the pu rification of several industr ial wastewaters as well as 
textile effluent. 
 
  11
The electrolytic cell consisted of cathode and anode.  In the past graphite was 
frequently used as an anode as it is economical and gives satisfactory results.  Recently, 
titanium electrodes covered with very thin la yers of electrodeposited noble metals have 
been used.  Besides titanium, ruthenium, rhodium, and iridium mixture can also be 
applied as electrocatalysts for electro-oxidation of pollutants present in waste waters, making it possible to destroy organic pollu tants which are difficult to eliminate 
biologically, such as phenols and surfactants (Bes-Pia et al., 2004). 
 
 
 
1.5.2.3 Fenton reagent 
 
Fenton’s reagent is a suitable chemical means of treating waste waters which are 
resistant to biological treatment or is pois onous to live biomass.  Chemical separation 
uses the action of sorption or bonding to remove  dissolved dyes from textile effluent and 
has been shown to be effectiv e in colour removal and also COD removal.  But one major 
disadvantage of this method is generation of sludge through the flocculation of the 
reagent and the dye molecules used in dyeing stage (Tim et al., 2001). 
 
The high cost and disposal problems have opened for development of new 
techniques.  Application of c onventional biological processes in the treatment of textile 
waste water has been extensively reported.  
 
 
 
1.5.3 Biological method 
 
Industrial biological waste water treatment systems are designed to remove the 
dissolved organic load from the waters using microorganisms.  The microorganisms 
used are responsible for the degradation of  the organic matter.  Biological treatment 
encompasses basically aerobi c and anaerobic treatment.  12
In most waste waters, the need for additional nutrient seldom appears, but in an 
aerobic operation, oxygen is essential for succe ss operation of the systems.  The most 
common aerobic processes are activated sludge and lagoon, active or trickling filters, 
and rotating contactors.  
  
In contrast, anaerobic treatment proceeds with breakdown of the organic load to 
gaseous products that constitute most of the reaction products and biomass.  Anaerobic 
treatment is the result of several reactions; the organic load present in the waste water is first converted to soluble organic material wh ich in turn is consum ed by acid producing 
bacteria to give volatile fatty acids and carbon dioxide  and hydrogen.  Further more 
anaerobic processes are also sensitive to temperature (Sawyer et al., 2003). 
 
In general, when comparing a conven tional aerobic treatment with anaerobic 
treatment systems the advantages of anaerobic systems are (Lema et al., 2001): 
 
i. Lower treatment costs and production energy 
ii. High flexibility, since it can be applied to very different types of effluents 
iii. High organic loading rate operation 
iv. Smaller volumes of excess sludge 
v. Anaerobic organisms can be preserved for a long time, which make it possible to treat waste water that ar e generated with longer pauses in 
between 
 
 
1.5.4 Combined method 
 
Individual approach in reducing COD level show high tolerance but the 
combination technique would give better pe rformances.  Commonly applied treatment 
methods for COD removal from textile wastew ater consisted of integrated processes 
involving various combinations of biologica l, physical, and chemical methods (.Azbar et 
al., 2004).  13
A rapid combined method of physical-chemical method has been developed for 
the determination of COD.  The met hod involved removal by flocculation and 
precipitation of colloidal matter that no rmally passes through membrane filters. 
 
For example study by Lin et al., 1996, indicated that the combined chemical 
treatment methods are very e ffective and are capa ble of elevating th e water quality of 
the treated waste effluent to the reuse sta ndard of the textile i ndustry.  While study by 
Ghoreishi et al ., 2003 indicated that combined ch emical-biological method showed 
higher efficiency and lower cost for th e new technique of COD reduction.  But 
generally, these integrated treatment methods are efficient but not cost effective (Azbar 
et al., 2004). 
 
 
 
1.6 COD reduction by biological treatment 
 
Treatment of the textile waste water vi a biological methods can be achieved by 
three approaches, involving fungi, algae,  and bacteria.  A lthough the biological 
treatment of waste water is important, it ca nnot completely remove soluble components, 
such as endocrine disrupters and pesticides (Ilyin et al., 2004). 
 
 
 
1.6.1 Biological treatment by fungi 
 
Waste water from textile i ndustries constitutes a threat  to the envi ronment in 
large parts of the world.  The degradation products of textile dye  are often carcinogenic 
(Azbar et al., 2004).  A key feature in the degrada tion processes involves generation of 
activated oxygen forms that can carry out the init ial attack on the stab le structure.  Wood 
rotting fungi have interesting properties in the sense they are capable to degrade lignin 
which is polymeric structure with a lot of aromatic rings (Nilsson et al., 2006).   14
An advantage with these organisms is th at they produce and excrete ligninolytic 
enzymes that are non-specific with regards to ar omatic structure.  This means that they 
are capable of degrading mixtures  of aromatic compounds (Axelsson et al., 2006). The 
application of white-rot fungi in large scale waste treatment , however, has been impeded 
owing to the lack of appropriate reactor sy stems capable of coping with rather slow 
fungal degradation, loss of extra cellular enzy mes and mediators with discharged water, 
and excessive growth of fungi (Faisal et al., 2006).  Also, the fungi need to be supplied 
with an external carbon source in order to be able to degrade polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (Nilsson et al., 2006).  
 
 Besides white-rot fungi, obligate and f acultative marine fungi occurring in 
coastal marine environments can be an important source for use in bioremediation of 
saline soil and waste water.  The decolorizat ion of colored efflue nts by lignin-degrading 
fungus isolated from sea grass detritus have been reported (D’Sauze et al., 2006).  
 
 
 
1.6.2 Biological treatment by algae 
 
The most rapid and extensive degrada tion of lignin caused by certain fungi, 
particularly white-rot fungi occurs in highl y aerobic environments .  However the high 
glucose requirement of the microorganisms a ppears to be the major drawback of fungal 
treatment.  Therefore algae have been suggest ed to replace fungi to remove colour and 
AOX from textile waste (Tarlan et al., 2002).  
 
 Algae are microscopic, photosynthetic or ganisms which typically inhabit aquatic 
environments, soil, and othe r exposed locations (Mohan et al., 2002).  Algal action was 
reported to represent a natura l pathway for the conversion of lignin to other materials 
within the carbon cycle (Tarlan et al., 2002).  
 
  15
The potential of commonly available gree n algae belonging to species Spirogyra 
was investigated as viable biomaterials for biological treatment of  simulated synthetic 
azo dye (reactive Yellow 22) effluents.  The ability of the species in removing colour 
was dependent both on the dye concen tration and algal biomass (Mohan et al., 2002). 
Green algae belonging to Chlo rella and diatom species have  also been reported being 
applied in textile effluent treatment (Tarlan et al., 2002).  
 
 
 
1.6.3 Biological treatment by bacteria 
 
The waste water management strategy for th e future should meet the benefits of 
humanity safety, respect principles of ecol ogy, and compatibility with  other habitability 
systems (Ilyin et al ., 2004).  For these purpose the waste water management 
technologies, relevant to application of the biodegradation properties of bacteria are of 
great interest.  The selection of bacterial species for the biologi cal treatment depends 
upon the chemical composition of the dye and the alkalis and salts used in the dyeing 
methods (Babu et al., 2000). 
 
Escherichia coli  is a common bacteria found in the environment has been used 
for treating textile effluent.  These bacteria grow very fast and double after every 20 
minutes under favorable conditions of pH in th e range of 6 to 8 and optimal temperature 
at 35oC.  COD reduction by these bacteria has achieved more than 60% removal (Babu 
et al., 2000).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  16
1.7 Bacteria 
 
1.7.1 Acinetobacter baumanni and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus  
 
The genus Acinetobacter  has undergone numerous taxonomic changes over the 
years and currently comprises at least 23 geno species of clinical interest, of which only 
nine (Acinetobacter calcoaceticus , Acinetobacter baumannii, A. haemolyticus, A. junii , 
A. lwoffii , A. radioresistens , A. schlinderi , and A. ursingii ) have been given a name 
(Krawczyk et al., 2002).  The bacteria used in this study are Acinetobacter calcoaceticus 
genospecies  3 and Acinetobacter calcoaceticus  have been isolated from textile waste. 
 
Acinetobacter calcoaceticus  genospecies 3 can be found in soil, water, sewage 
and in hospital environments such as resp iratory and urinary drainage equipment, 
disinfectants and body fluids.  It was formerly known as Achromobacter anitratus (Pal 
et al., 1981).  A.cakcoaceticus  is a non-motile, coccobacillary, strictly aerobic and Gram 
negative bacteria.  It  uses a variety of carbon sources for growth and can be cultured 
relatively on simple media including tripti case soya agar and nutrient agar.  The 
optimum temperature for growth is at 30 oC (Bergogni-Berezin, 1995). 
 
A. calcoaceticus  is an opportunistic pathogen th at has been reported to have 
caused serious and sometimes fatal infections .  It can be recovered occasionally from 
human specimens such as urine.  However, th is pathogen appears to have little invasive 
power and depend upon a pre-existing break in  the normal body defenses like a surgical 
wound to cause disease (Ana Isabel et al., 2004). 
 
Clinical isolates associated with nos ocomial outbreaks, particularly from 
respiratory infections, blood cultures,  and wounds, are mostly identified as 
Acinetobacter baumannii.  This genomic species alone is responsible for more than 80% 
of all Acinetobacter infections in the hospital environment.  While the Acinetobacter 
calcoaceticus  is considered mostly as an environmental species (Lagatolla et al., 1998).  
  17
A. baumannii  is the second most common form  of peritonitis caused by Gram 
negative bacteria.  Along with other members of this genus, A. baumannii  is known to 
harbor a variety of plasmid of different sizes , although most of them appear to be rather 
small about less than 23 kb (Dorcey et al., 1998). 
 
 
 
1.7.2 Cellulosimicrobium cellulans 
 
The third bacterium used in this study is Cellulosimicrobium cellulans , also 
known as Cellulomonas cellulans , Oerkoviaxanthineolytica , and Arthrobacter luteus  
(Pau Ferrer, 2005).  
 
The species has undergone several taxonomic  changes since its first description 
in 1923.  It was first known as Brevibacterium fermentans , and two case reports have 
been published describing meningitis and sepsis  due to this bacterium in infants and 
children.  Some years later, B. fermentans was renamed Oerskovia xanthineolytica, and 
a few case reports were published on infections with Oerskovia spp., such as 
endocarditis, pyonephrosis, endophthalmitis, pneumonia, meningitis, parenteral 
nutrition-related septicemia, catheter-related septicemia, and peritonitis.  The genera Oerskovia and Cellulomonas were united into the unique genus Cellulomonas in 1982, 
and O. xanthineolytica became Cellulomonas cellulans.  Finally, in 2001, Cellulomonas 
cellulans was reclassified as Cellulosimicrobium cellulans  (Beate Heym et al., 2005) 
  
C.cellulans  is a Gram positive rod shape bacteria and known as facultative 
anaerobic. It is size ranges from 0.9-5.0 mm.  The optimal temperature for growth is at 
30 oC.  It is a Gram positive bacterium with the rod shape.  After exhaustion of the 
medium, the rods transform into shorte r rods or even spherical cells.  C.cellulans  is a 
non-motile and chemo-organotrophic bacterium (Schumann et al., 2001 ). 
 
  18
1.7.3 Mixed bacterial culture (consortium) 
 
Although pure culture is reported to be eff ective in treating textile waste water, it 
is probable that a mixed culture or consor tium would be more effective in degrading 
toxic compounds in textile wa ste water.  A mixed culture can adapt better to changing 
conditions during growth.  As an example , Cellulosimicrobium cellulans will dominate 
over Acinetobacter calcoaceticus  genospecies 3 and Acinetobacter baumannii due to its 
facultative anaerobic properties.  Since A. baumannii  and A . calcoaceticus  genospecies 3 
are anaerobic bacteria, they require oxygen for growth.  C. cellulans  is a facultative 
anaerobic and it can survive both with and without oxygen supply.  
 
The different conditions of textile waste water after certain times may affect the 
growth of the consortia.  Thus,  Cellulosimicrobium cellulans  will predominate over the 
other two bacteria in a mixed culture when three organisms are used  in treating textile 
waste water.  Also under anaerobic consor tia, reducing equivale nts are formed by 
fermentative bacteria (dos Santos et al., 2006).  Therefore, a c onsortium may be more 
effective in treating textile waste water. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  19
1.8 Objective and scope of studies 
 
The main objective of this research is to reduce the COD level of textile waste 
water using a biological method employing bacteria which was isolated from a local 
textile industry.  The system used is a mixe d culture or consortium consisted of three 
different bacteria, Acinetobacter baumanni , Acinetobacter calcoaceticus genospecies 3,  
and Cellulosimicrobium cellulans.  
 
 Studies on the ability of the individual and consortia adapting to the textile waste 
will be carried out.  This is to obtain the tolerance level of the bacteria to the textile waste.  Subsequently, studies on the ability of the consortium in reducing the COD level will be monitored using liquid cultures and freeze dried cultures.  Finally, developed method will be compared with conventional COD reduction methods.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  57
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
dos Santos, A.B., de Madri d, M.P., Frank A.M., Alfons, J.M., van Lier, J.B., and 
Cervantes, F.J. (2006). The Conytribution Of  Frementative Bacteria And Methanogenic 
Archaea To Azo Dye Reduction By Thermophilic Anaerobic Consortium. Enzymes and 
Microbial Technology . 39. 38-46. 
 
Robinson, T., McMullan, G., Merchant, R., a nd Nigam, P. (2001). Remediation of Dyes 
in Textile Effluent: A Critical Review on Current Treatment Technologies with 
Proposed Alternative. Bioresource Technology. 77. 247-255. 
 
Walker, G.M. and Weatherley, L.R. ( 2001). COD Removal from  Textile Industry 
Effluent: Pilot Plant Studies. Chemical Engineering Journal . 84. 125-131. 
 
Ciardelli, G., Capannelli, G., and Bottino (2001). Ozone Treatment of Textile 
Wastewater for Reuse. Water Science Technology . 44. 61-67. 
 
Babu, B.V., Rana, H.T., Krishna, V.R., and Sharma, M. (2000). COD Reduction of 
Reactive Dyeing Effluent from  Cotton Textile Industry . India: Birla Institute of 
Technology & Science.  
 
Krawczyk, B., Lewandowski, K., and Kur, J. (2002). Comparative Studies of the 
Acinetobacter  Genus and the Species Identifi cation Method Based On The recA 
Sequences. Molecular and Cellular Probes. 16. 1-11. 
  58
Lagatolla, C., Lavenia, A., Tonin, E., Mo nti-Bragadin, and Dolzani, L. (1998). 
Characterization of Oligonucleotide Probes for the Identification of Acinetobacter spp., 
A.baumannii  and Acinetobacter  Genomic Species 3. Res. Microbial . 149. 557-566. 
 
Dorsey, C.W., Tomaras, A.P., and Actis, L.A. (2006). Sequence and Organization of 
pMAC, An Acinetobacter baumannii  Plasmid Harboring Genes Involved in Organic 
Peroxide Resistance. Plasmid. 
 
Timothy, R.D. and Uhrich, K.D. (1998). A New Development for (Textile Mill) 
Wastewater Treatment . New York: The American Dyestuff Reporter. 
 
Ilyin, V.K., Smirnov, I.A., Soldatov, P.E., Korniushenkova, I.N., Grinin, A.S., Lykov, 
I.N., and Safronova, S.A.  (2004). Microbial  Utilization of Natural Organic Wastes. Acta 
Astronautica . 54. 357-361. 
 
Nilsson, I., Moller, A., Mattiasson, B., Rubindamayugi, M.S.T., and Welander, U. 
(2006). Decolorization of Synt hetic and Real Textile Wast ewater by the Use of White-
Rot Fungi. Enzyme and Microbial Technology . 38. 94-100. 
 
D’sauza, D.T., Tiwari, R., Sah, A.K., and Raghukumar, C. (2006). Enhanced Production 
of Laccase by Marine Fungus During Treatmen t of Colored Effluents and Synthetic 
Dyes. Enzyme and Microbial Technology . 38. 504-511. 
 
Faisal, I.H., Yamamoto, K., and Fukushi, K. (2006). Development of A Submerged 
Membrane Fungi Reactor For Te xtile Wastewater Treatment. Desalination . 192. 315-
322. 
 
Axelsson, J., Nilsson, U., Terrazes, E., A liage, T.A., and Welander, U. (2006). 
Decolorization Of The Textile Dyes Reactive Red 2 And Reactive Blue 4 Using 
Bjerkandera  sp. Strain BOL 13 In A Continuous Ro tating Biological C ontactor Reactor. 
Enzyme and Microbial Technology . 39. 32-37.  59
Mohan, S.V., Chandrasekhar, N., Prasad, K.K ., and Karthikeyan, J. (2002). Treatment of 
Simulated Reactive Yellow 22 (Azo) Dye Effluents Using Spirogyra Species. Waste 
Management . 22. 575-582. 
 
Tarlan, E., Dilek, F.B., and Yetis, U. (2002). Ef fectiveness of Algae In The Treatment of 
A Wood-Based Pulp And Paper Industry Wastewater. Bioresource Technology. 84. 1-5. 
 
Chaturvedia, S.,  Chandra, R., And Raib, V. (2006). Isolation and Characterization of 
Phragmites Australis (L.) Rhizosphere Bacteria from Contaminated Site for  
Bioremediation of Colored Distillery Effluent. Ecological Engineering . 27. 202-207. 
 
Kim, S., Park, C., Kim, T.H., Lee, J.W ., and Kim, S.W. ( 2003). COD Reduction and 
Decolorization of Textile Effluent Using Combined Process. Journal of Bioscience and 
Bioengineering . 95. 102-105. 
 
Hodge, J.E. (1953). Dehydrated Foods: Chem istry of Browning Reactions in Model 
Systems. Journal of Agricultural Food Chemistry. 1. 928-934. 
 
Harley, J.P. and Prescott, L.M. (1990). Lab Exercise in Microbiology . USA: Wm. C. 
Brow Publisher. 
 
Madigan, M.T., Martinko, J.M., and Parker, J. (2000). Brock Biology of Microorganism . 
New Jersey: Prentice Hall International, Inc. 
 
Ghoreishi, S.M. and Haghighi, R. (2003). Ch emical Catalytic Reaction and Biological 
Oxidation for Treatment of Non- Biodegradable Textile Effluent. Chemical Engineering 
Journal . 95. 163-169. 
 
Azbar, N., Yonar, T., and Kestioglu, K. (2004). Comparison of Various Advanced 
Oxidation Processes and Chemical Treatme nt Methods for COD and Color Removal 
from a Polyester and Acetate Fiber Dyeing Effluent. Chemosphere. 55. 35-43.  60
Inoue, K. (2002). Textile Dyeing Wastewater Treatm ent Activated Sludge Treatment . 
Japan: Kanebo Spring Corporation. 
 
Sterritt, R.M. and Lester, J.M. (1988). Microbiology for Environmental and Public 
Health Engineers. E. & F.N. SPON. 
 
Sawyer, C.N., McCarty, P.L., and Parkin, G.F. (2003). Chemistry for Environmental 
Engineering and Science, 5th edition, New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 
Nordiana Nordin (2006). Biosorption of Chromium (IV) from Electroplating Wastewater 
Using Acinetobacter Baumannii Calcoaceticus Enospecies 3 Grown in Pineapple Waste . 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia: Bachelor Thesis. 
 
Nur Humaira’ Lau Abdullah (2005). Chromium (IV) Biosorp tion Studies Using Non-
Living Microorganisms . Universiti Teknologi Malaysia: Msc. Thesis 
 
Pal, R.B. and Kale, V.V. (1981). Acinet obacter Calcoaceticus-An Opportunistic 
Pathogen. Journal of Postgraduate Medical . 27. 218-219. 
 
Bergogni-Berezin, E. (1995). The Increasing Si gnificant of Outbreaks of Acinetobacter 
Spp.: The Need for Control and New Agents. Journl of Hospital Infection . 30. 441-452. 
 
Miyamoto-Shinohara, Y., Imaizumi, T., Sukedob e, J., Merakami, Y., Kawamura, S., and 
Komatsu, Y. (2000). Survival of Microbes af ter Freeze-Drying and Long Term Storage. 
Cryobiology . 41. 251-255. 
 
Malek, K.A. (1995). A Miniat urized Method for Freeze-Drying Of Microorganisms In 
Glass Capillary Tubes. Jounal of Micr obiology Methods . 21. 75-82. 
 
Miyamoto-Shinohara, Y., Sukenobe, J., Imaizumi , T., and Nakahara, T. (2006). Survival 
Curves for Microbial Species Stored by Freeze-Drying. Cryobiology . 52. 27-32.  61
Modak, P. (1998). Reduction of COD and Water Consumption in a Textile Plant . 
Mumbai: Environmental Management Centre. 
 
Bes-Pia, A., Iborra-Clar, A., Mendoza-Roca,  J.A., Iborra-Clar, M.I., and Alcaina-
Miranda, M.I. (2004). Nanofiltration of Biologically Treated Textile Effluents Using 
Ozone as A Pre-Treatment . Desalination. 167. 387-392. 
 
Lin, S.H. and Peng, C.F. (1996). Treatment of  Textile Wastewater by Electrochemical 
Method. Water Resource . 28. 277-283. 
 
Ferrer, P. (2005). Revisiting The Crllulosimicrobium Cellulans Yeast-Lytic Β-1,3-
Glucanases Toolbox: A Review . Spain: Biomedical Central Ltd. 
 
Bisschops, I. and Spanjers, H. (2003). Lite rature Review on Textile Wastewater 
Characterizatn . Environmental Technology . 24. 1399-1411. 
 
Lema, J.M. and Omil, F. (2001). Anaer obic Treatment: A ke y Technology for a 
Sustainable Management of Wastes in Europe. Water Science and Technology . 44. 133-
140. 
 
Rozzi, A., Malpie, F., Bonomo, L., and Ianchi, R. (1999). Textile Wastewater Reuse In Northern Italy (Como). Water Science Technology . 39. 121-128. 
 
Ana Isabel, D.D., Perez, M.A.B., Bouza, J.M.E., Ana Almaraz, G., Rodriquez, P.G., Maria, A.M.G., Domingo, A.O., and Rodrigu ez-Torres, A. (2004). Susceptibility of the 
Acinetobacter Calcoaceticus-A.Baumannii  Complex to Imipenem, Meropenem, 
Sulbactam and Colistin . International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents . 23. 487-493. 
 
Georgiou, D., Hatiras, J., and Aivasidis, A. (2005). Microbial Immobilization Intwo 
Stage Fixed-Bed-Reactor Pilot Plant For On  Site Anaerobic Decolorization of Textile 
Wastewater. Enzyme and Microbial Technology . 37. 597-605.  62
Nester, E.W., Anderson, D.G., Robert, C.E., Pearsall, N.N., and Nester, M.T. (2001). 
Microbiology-A Human Perspective. 3th. Ed. Mcgraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
 
Eva, M.T.  and Springaely, D. (2003). Th e role of mobile geneti c elements in bacterial 
adaptation to xenobiotic organic compounds. Current Opinion in Biotechnology . 14. 
262–269. 
 
Khehra, M.S., Saini, H.S., Sharma, D.K ., Chadha, B.S., and Chimni, S.S. (2005). 
Decolorization of Various Azo Dyes by Bacterial Consortium. Dyes and Pigments . 67. 
55-61. 
 
Zaharah Ibrahim, Madihah Md Salleh, Nor Aini Abdul Rashid, Adibah Yahya, Aisyah 
Husin, Maihafizah Mohd Jauhari, Tuty Emily Abdul Rahim, Mohd Azlan Ahmad and Chan Giek Far (2004). Microbial Physiology of Biofilms for Colour and Heavy Metals 
Removal from Textile Wastewater . Bangi: Workshop on Top down Biotechnology 
Project – Development Of Bioremediation Processes For Industrial Wastewater. 
 
 