International Journal of Environmental Bioremediation & Biodegradation, 201 4, Vol. 2 , No. 1,  25-29 
Available online at http://pubs.sciepub.com/ ijebb /2/1/5 
© Science and Education Publishing  
DOI: 10.12691/ijebb-2 -1-5 
Treatment of Dye Waste Water by Bioreactor  
Karthikeyan M. R1, Omprakash Sahu2,* 
1Department of Textile  Engineering, KIOT, Wollo University Ethiopia  
2Department of Chemical  Engineering, KIOT, Wollo University, South Wollo, Ethiopia  
*Corresponding author: ops0121@gmail.com  
Received November  09, 2013 ; Revised January  09, 2014; Accepted January  21, 2014  
Abstract   Waste water treatments are the major problem for the environment issue. Especially when it is related to 
toxic chemical this is used by industry. Diff erent methods are adopted but there low efficiency is found for the 
secondary treatment of waste water. Now day advance technology membrane biotechnologies are introduced to the 
waste water. Highly polluting industrial wastewaters are preferably treated in  an anaerobic reactor due to the high 
level of COD, potential for energy generation and low surplus sludge production. However in practical applications, anaerobic treatment suffers from the low growth rate of the microorganisms, a low settling rate, process instabilities and the need for post treatment of the noxious anaerobic effluent which often contains ammonium ion (NH4+) and hydrogen sulfide (HS−). In most applications, despite the efficiency of the anaerobic process is high, complete stabilization of  the organic matter is impossible anaerobically due to the high organic strength of the wastewater. 
The final effluent produced by the anaerobic treatment contains solubilized organic matter. This is suitable for aerobic treatment, indicating the potential  of using anaerobic –aerobic systems and subsequent post treatment using 
aerobic treatment is required to meet the effluent discharge standard. Phanerochaete chrysosporium immobilized on different support materials, such as polyurethane foam (PUF) and scour ing web (SW), in shake cultures, was able to 
decolourize efficiently the textile industry effluent in a long -term repeated -batch operation.  
Keywords:  dye wastewater, d ecolorization, fungi, microfiltration, membrane bioreactor  
Cite This Article:  Karthikeyan M. R , and Omprakash Sahu,  “Treatment of Dye Waste Water by Bioreactor .” 
International Journal of Environmental Bioremediation & Biodegradation,  vol. 2, no. 1  (2014) : 25-29. doi: 
10.12691/ijebb- 2-1-5. 
1. Introduction  
The dye wastewater is rated as the mos t polluting 
among all industrial sectors considering both volume and 
composition of effluent [1].  It is a complex and highly 
variable mixture of many polluting substances ranging 
from inorganic compounds and elements to poly mers and 
organic products [2]. It induces persistent color coupled 
with organic load leading to disruption of the total 
ecological/symbiotic balance of the receiving water stream.  
Dyes with striking visibility in recipients may significantly affect photosynthetic activity in aquatic environment due to reduced light penetration and may also 
be toxic to some aquatic lives due to metals, chlorides, etc., 
associated with dyes or the dyeing process. It is difficult to 
remove dyes from effluents since dyes are stable to light, 
heat and oxidizing agents and are non- biodegradable [3]. 
Several physico -chemical decolorization techniques have 
been reported (e.g. adsorption, chemical transformation, 
and inc ineration, and photocatalysis, ozonation or 
membrane separation), few, however, have been accepted by the textile industries. Their lack of implementation has been largely due to high cost, low efficiency and 
inapplicability to a wide variety of dyes. Biod egradation is 
an environmental friendly and cost competitive alternative 
but the conventional aerobic treatments are ineffective for textile wastewater [2]. Some anaerobic microorganisms 
can biodegrade dyestuffs by azoreduct ase activity, but 
highly biotoxic aromatic amines can be formed by reductive fission under anaerobic conditions. Besides, upon exposure of the anaerobic degradation product to 
oxygen, reverse colorization may take place. However, 
wood rotting ‘white -rot’ f ungi are able to degrade 
aerobically a wide variety of recalcitrant organic 
pollutants, including various types of dyes through 
extracellular secretion of non -specific oxidative enzymes 
as a secondary metabolic activity in C or N -limited 
medium [4]. 
The application of white -rot fungi in large -scale waste 
treatment has been impeded by the lack of bioreactor 
systems that can sustain steady production of high levels 
of ligninolytic enzymes for a long period together with a 
contr olled growth of fungi.  The widely used systems were 
stirred tank  reactor and air -lift and  bubble column , fixed  
bed bioreactor, rotating  disk reactor and silicone -
membrane reactor . There are few reports specifically  on 
dye decolorization in continuous biore actors. Up to 80% 
decolorization  of a disperse dye (Red -553) in a continuous 
(10-20 days) fixed -film bioreactor [5].  Some researcher 
also investigated continuous decolorization of an azo dye,  
Orange II, in a packed -bed react or, achieving high  
decolorization efficiency 97% [6].  However, a number of 
operational problems such as formation of mycelia 
aggregates, electrode fouling  and clogging emerged after a 26 International Journal of Environmental Bioremediation & Biodegradation   
short time and made necessary the period ical removal of 
fungal  biomass from the reactors.  Recently introduced a 
pulsed flow bioreactor packed with immobilized fungi, 
which treated dye loads of 0.2 g dye/m3 day at over 90% 
efficiency for several months [7]. In vitr o dye 
decolorization by manganese peroxidase in an enzymatic 
membrane reactor in continuous operation has been 
studied the system allowed a very fast decoloration with over 90% efficiency under high dye loading rate of 2.4 g 
dye/m
3.d [8]. Similarly  70% decolorization of heat -
treatment liquor of waste sludge by a bioreactor using polyurethane foam -immobilized white -rot fungus 
equipped with a side stream ultra filtration membrane was achieved [9]. In this regard an effort has been made to 
evaluate the decolorization efficiency of the collected 
white rot fungi strains through agar plate and liquid batch 
studies and, subsequently assess the feasibility of a 
submerged microfiltration membrane bioreactor 
implementing the fungi culture for treatment of textile dye wastewater. According to the authors’ knowledge, no 
attempt has been made until now to use a submerged 
membrane bioreactor with white -rot fungi culture for 
decolorization of dye wastewater.  
2. Methods and Materials 
2.1. Microorganisms  
The white -rot fungi strain s used for this study  were P. 
chrysosporium (ATCC 24725) obtained from the  NITE 
Biological Resource Center (NBRC), Japan. The stock 
culture was grown, as prescribed by ATCC,  on Potato 
Sucrose Agar (PSA) medium at 26.5°C (growth 
temperature range  = 24 -28°C ). The culture  was 
maintained at 4 °C and refreshed every 30 –40 days.  A TCC 
was used in the bioreactor experiment because of its 
superior performance in the batch test. 2.2. Dyes and 
Chemica ls 
Poly R -478 (polyvinyl amine suffocated backbone  with 
anthrapyridone chromophore, violet color) and Poly S -119 
(polyvininylamine backbone with azo chromophore,  
orange color) were purchased from Sigma Chemical Co. 
The peak absorbance in the visible range corresponds to 
the wavelengths 520 nm and 472 nm for Poly R-478 and 
Poly S -119, respectively. Since textile effluent contains a 
range of dyes , successful decoloration of a single dye does 
not adequately indicate the suitability of an organism for a 
decolor ation process. However, these two polymeric dyes 
represent the majority of the synthetic dyes [10] . All other 
chemicals used were of reagent grade.  
2.3. Culture M edium  
Unless otherwise indicated, the basal decolourization 
medium consisted of sugar refinery effluent (adjusted to 
pH 4.5 with HCl) supplemented with (final composition per litre): 5 g glucose; 2.0 g KH
2PO4; 1.06 g 
MgSO 4·7H2O; 0.032 g NH 4Cl; 10 ml mineral solution and 
10 ml thiamine solution (100 mg/l) and was ste rilize d by 
filtration (0.45 μm). The mineral solution composition is 
described elsewhere [11] . The growth medium used in the 
repeated -batch experiments for carrier selection was 
identical to the basal decolourization medium but contained 10 g/l glucose and 0.128 g/l NH 4Cl. Growth 
medium devoid of effluent was used in the experiments for optimization of decolourization medium composition 
and in the continuous treatment with RBC.  
2.4. Repeated -Batch-Decolourization -
Experiments  
The i mmobilization of P. chrysosporium on the support 
particles was carried out in 500 ml serum bottles containing 18 ml support and 24 ml growth medium 
inoculated with 10% (v/v) inoculum, under orbital 
agitation at 100 rpm and 38°C , until the supports were 
completely colonized. After immobilization, the medium 
was withdrawn and replaced with decolourization medium. The medium was changed at specific time intervals under 
the same conditions for repeated -batch decolourization 
tests. The serum bottles were aerated  everyday with pure 
oxygen (2 l/min) for 3 min. Samples were routinely taken 
for analysis. The support materials tested were 
polyurethane foam and scouring web (Scotch -Brite, 3  M 
Company, Spain) cut into approximately cubic pieces ( 5 
mm × 5 mm × 7 mm) . 
2.5. RBC R eactor S tudies  
The closed RBC was constructed from a 
polymethylmethacrylate cylinder, 25 cm in length and 18 
cm in diameter. The main chamber of the reactor was 
divided into three identical stages, each composed of three disks of 14 cm diameter. A l ayer of polyurethane foam 
(PUF) of 2.5  mm thickness was attached on both sides of 
each plastic disk. The disks were mounted on a horizontal steel shaft and rotated at 4 rpm. During operation the disks were 40% submerged.  
The reactor had a working volume of  1.5 l. The 
atmosphere was enriched by introducing a continuous flow (40 ml/min) of pure oxygen. The temperature was 
maintained at 38 °C by means of a heating jacket.  
Experiments were started in batch mode to immobilize 
fungal biomass onto the disks. 1.5 l of growth medium was sterilized and placed in the RBC reactor, inoculated 
with 10% (v/v) inoculum and then operated for 4 days. 
After immobilization, the growth medium was removed 
and the decolourization medium was continuously fed into 
the reactor at a fl ow rate of 0.35 ml/min (hydraulic 
retention time of 3 days).  
2.6. Analytical P rocedures  
Colour was measured at 420 nm after pH adjustment to 
pH 9.0 with 0.012 M borate buffer. Total phenols were 
determined using the Folin and Ciocalteau reagent, based on the method described by Singleton and Rossi [12] . The 
chemical oxygen demand (COD) was determined 
according to the closed reflux colorimetric method [13] . 
An HACH COD digestion system and a 
spectrophotometer HACH -2000 were employed. The 
proportion of the total COD derived from sugar refinery 
effluent was calculated by subtracting the COD of added 
glucose from the total COD. Glucose concentration was measured by using an enzymatic Boehringer -
Mannheim/716251 Kit.  
The system was first inoculated with fungi grown for 
two weeks in 1 liter Erlenmeyer flasks each containing  International Journal of Environmental Bioremediation & Biodegradation  27 
500 ml of the culture media and the reactor was operated 
in batch mode for a week after which the continuous 
operation was starte d with a MLSS concentration less than  
2000 mg/l . Specific amount of sludge was wasted from 
the reactor and membranes were cleaned (off site manual 
cleaning with water) when membrane fouling was so 
severe that the transmembrane pressure exceeded 60 kpa or so. 
 
Figure 1. Setup of reactor for reducing dye waste water [14]  
2.7. Analytical M ethods  
Total organic carbon was measured with a Total organic 
carbon analyzer (TOC -V , Shimadzu). Prior to the 
measurement, the samples for T OC analysis in batch tests 
were homogenized (Branson sonifier 450) for 5 minutes (30% duty cycle, output control of 3). The samples were not filtered because starch, being poorly soluble in water, 
would be retained by a filtering unit of 0.45 µm. Samples 
from the membrane bioreactor were free from suspended 
solid and hence did not require any treatment before TOC 
measurement. Color measurements were carried out  
spectrophoto metrically using a spectrophotometer (U -
2010, Hitachi) to measure the absorbance of the sample at 
the peak wavelength of the dye used. The concentration of 
dyestuff was calculated from a calibration  curve of 
‘absorbance versus concentration ’ and concentration  
values were used for calculations of  decolorization 
efficiency.  The sample from batch test for absorbance 
measurement was filtered through a Dismic  -25 
hydrophilic filtering unit (0.45  µm, mixed cellulose ester). 
The absorbance measurement on the reactor supernatant 
and final effluent was made after centrifuging the sample 
(H-3R centr ifuger, Kokusan) for 10 mins. at 3000 rpm. 
MLSS concentration was measured according to the 
Standard methods (20
th edition, 1998).  
3. Results and Discussion  
3.1. Batch Decolourization Tests  
The longevity of the decolourization activity of P.  
chrysosporium immobilized on two different carriers 
previously selected [15], polyurethane foam (PUF) and 
scouring web (SW), was measured in repeated -batch tests.  
Cultures immobilized on PUF or SW behaved similarly, 
as can be seen in Figure 2 . The time needed to obtain 
significant decolourization was reduced from 8 days (first 
batch) to 3 days (third batch). It should be stressed that fungal growth on the supports was observed during batch operation, and especially on the first one. On the third batch it is likely that the fungus had reached optimum 
growth, thus being more adapted to the effluent 
environment. Because of this adaptation and growth, the 
immobilized mycelia exhibited rapid decolourization , 
thereby  reducing the processing time.  
 
Figure 2. Batch decolourization tests using P. chrysosporium 
immobilized in different carriers materials  
Therefore, further batches were conducted for 3 days 
each. During the 40 days of repeated -batch tests, average 
decolou rization efficiencies of 62 and 60% were achieved 
with PUF and SW, respectively. The fungus maintained a 
relatively stable decolourization for a long period. The 
results demonstrate that P. chrysosporium immobilized on 
PUF or on SW is able to treat the eff luent efficiently in a 
long-term operation. Polyurethane foam was selected for 
further studies because it is cheaper and mechanically more resistant than scouring web.  
Observation from this experiment showed that the 
immobilized mycelia took a long time to  grow in the 
presence of effluent before acclimating to the effluent 
environment.  
This suggested that the fungus should be incubated in 
an appropriate growth medium without effluent before starting the decolourization phase. This would reduce the 
lag time in the decolourization process. Incubation of 
fungus on growth medium without effluent allows the 
immobilization on the support and growth to an optimum level before being used for decolourization. Therefore, in 
the remaining studies P. chrysosporium was p reviously 
grown in growth medium without effluent.  
3.2. Continuous Effluent Treatment in RBC 
Reactor  
A rotating biological contactor (RBC) containing P.  
chrysosporium immobilized on PUF disks was operated 
with optimized decolourization medium (basal medium  
without both thiamine and exogenous nitrogen) in 
continuous mode with a residence time of 3 days. The 
RBC reactor was monitored to determine the active life of 
the biocatalyst ( Figure 3 ). 
During the initial 17 days an average decolourization of 
54% and an average total phenols reduction of 62% were 
observed. From the 17th day of continuous operation, a 
progressive decrease in colour removal was observed while the reduction of total phenols was reasonably stable. 
Minimum values of 27 and 56% were recorded on the 
24th day, for colour and total phenols reduction, 
respectively. During the course of continuous 
decolourization it was observed that the biofilm thickness 28 International Journal of Environmental Bioremediation & Biodegradation   
in the first stage of the reactor increased more than in the 
remai ning stages. The first stage was constantly exposed 
to the nutrient containing decolourization medium. Samples were taken from the three stages of the reactor, on days 9 and 19 of operation, for colour measurement. It 
was observed that, from days 9 to 19, the amount of 
colour removed, decreased by 58% in the first stage and by 23% in the second stage and no significant decrease 
occurred in the third stage. Therefore, the decrease in 
efficiency with the increase in the treatment period 
recorded was probably due to the loss of mycelial activity, 
primarily in the first stage, caused by diffusion limitations.  
 
Figure 3. Colour and total phenols removal performance of continuous 
RBC reactor operated in one way feeding mode. Decolourization 
medium without additio n of both thiamine and nitroge n was used in 
these experiments  
A similar continuous decrease in colour reduction of a 
bleach plant effluent after the 17th day of operation in 
RBC containing P. chrysosporium was observed by Yin et 
al. [16]. Kapdan and Kargi [17]  also reported a decrease in 
the textile dye decolourization efficiency with time, in 
repeated -batch operation of RBC with C. versicolor. In 
both studies the decrease in activity was att ributed to 
diffusion problems caused by excessive mycelial growth. A second attempt was made to avoid the excessive growth 
in the first stage of the reactor. The reactor was operated 
as follows: during the first 17 days the effluent was fed in 
the same way  as previously. After day 17 the feed was 
reversed, i.e. the feed inlet was in the third stage, with the 
outlet being now in what was initially the first stage. In the initial 17 days the results were comparable to the ones 
obtained in the first run ( Figure 4 ). After feed reversal, the 
activity was re -established after 3 days and an average 
decolourization of 53% and an average total phenols 
reduction of 62% were achieved in the following 16 days, 
i.e. until day 36 ( Figure 4 ). 
 
Figure 4. Colour and total phenols removal performance of continuous 
RBC reactor operated in alternated feeding mode. Arrow signs the inversion of reactor feeding. Decolourization medium without addition 
of both thiamine and n itroge n was used in these experiments  
There was a significant decrease in the reactor 
efficiency after that period, probably due to an excessive 
biomass growth in all stages. The excess of mycelia could, 
in principle, be removed by scraping the surface of the 
disks and probably the decolourization ability could be recovered, thus increasing the operation period of the 
reactor. However, this was not performed because it was 
not possible to open the reactor during the operation.  
The reactor with one way feedi ng (first run, Figure 3 ) 
was only able to operate for 17 days without clogging problems, whereas the reactor with alternated feeding 
(second run, Figure 4 ) was operated twice as long, 
maintaining at  least 50% average colour removal.  
Thus, it was possible to double the active fungal 
lifetime, with colour and total phenols being reduced, on average, by 55 and 63%, respectively. At the same time, 
48% of COD in the initial wastewater was metabolized. 
Ohm omo et al. [18]  reported the continuous 
decolourization of molasses wastewater in a bubbling 
column reactor with C. versicolor immobilized within Ca -
alginate gel. With such a system an almost constant 
decolourization yield of 66% and a COD reduction of 
46% were obtained during 16 days operation. In the 
continuous system described here, a slightly lower 
decolourization was obtained but the reduction of COD 
was similar, during 36 days operation. Although the 
alginate immobiliz ed system was adequate for laboratory 
scale studies, it may not be attractive for large -scale 
applications. Drawbacks of the alginate system include (1) 
associated diffusion limitations that result in the 
localization of mycelia to a limited thickness near  the 
outer surface of the alginate bead and (2) the susceptibility of calcium alginate to degradation [19] . 
The system described here seems to be more convenient 
for industrial application due to the special characteristics  
of RBC. Recently, Fujita et al. [20] studied the 
decolourization of melanoidin present in a synthetic 
effluent, using a bioreactor with C. hirsutus immobilized 
onto polyurethane foam cubes combined with an ultra  
membrane f iltration unit. The contribution of the fungal 
bioreactor alone to the decolourization was only 45%, in a 
sequencing batch operation for 10 days. It may be concluded that higher decolourization efficiency was 
obtained in the continuous RBC here described, together 
with a longer operation time (36 days).  
4. Conclusions  
Results of the present investigation reveal that it is 
possible to treat the textile industry effluent continuously 
in a rotating biological contactor with P. chrysosporium 
immobilized on polyu rethane foam disks and that the 
active fungal lifetime can be increased by simply 
reversing the feed inlet of the reactor. This system not 
only removed the colour of the effluent by 55% but also 
reduced total phenols and COD by 63 and 48%, 
respectively, su ggesting its potential use in bioremediation 
of effluents.  
References   International Journal of Environmental Bioremediation & Biodegradation  29 
[1] Vanndevivera P.C., Bianchi R., Verstraete W., (2008) Treatment 
and Reuse of Wastewater from the Textile Wet -Processing  
Industry: Review of Emerging Technologies. Journal of Chemical Tech nology Biotechnology 72, 289 -302. 
[2] Banat I.M., Nigam P., Singh D., Marchant R., (2006) Microbial 
decolorization of textile dye containing effluents: a review. 
Bioresource Technology 58, 217 -227. 
[3] Robinson T., McMullan G., Marchant R., Nigam P., (2001) 
Remedi ation of dyes in textile effluent: a critical review on current 
treatment technologies with a proposed alternative. Bioresource 
Technology . 77, 247 -255. 
[4] Fu, Y., Viraraghavan T., (2010) Fungal decolorization of dye wastewaters: a review. Bioresource Technol ogy. 79, 251 -262, 
2010.  
[5] Yang F.C., Yu J.T., (2003) Development of a bioreactor system using an immobilized white rot fungus for decolorization. 
Bioprocess Engineering.  15, 307 -310. 
[6] Zhang F.M., Knapp J.S., Tapley K., (2009)  Development of 
bioreactor system for decolorization of Orange II using white rot 
fungus. Enzyme Microbiology Technology. 24, 48 -53. 
[7] Mielgo I., Moreira M.T., Feijoo G., Lema J.M., (2001) A packed -
bed fungal bioreactor for the continuous decolourisation of azo -
dyes (Orange II). Journal of B iotechnology . 89, 99 -106. 
[8] Lopez C., Mielgo I., Moreira M.T., Feijoo G., Lema J.M., (2002) Enzymatic membrane reactors for biodegradation of recalcitrant 
compounds. Application to dye decolourisation. Journal of Biotechnology . 99, 249 -257. 
[9] Fujita M., Era A., Ike M., Soda S., Miyata N., Hirao T., (2000) Decolorization of Heat -Treatment Liquor of waste sludge by a 
bioreactor using polyurethane foam -immobilized white rot fungus 
equipped with an ultramembrane filtration unit. Journal of 
Bioscience and bioengineering, 90  (4), 387 -394. 
[10] Zheng Z., Levin R.E. Pinkham J.L. Shetty K., (2005) 
Decolorization of polymeric dyes by a novel Penicilium isolate. 
Process Biochemistry, 34, 31 -37. [11] Guimaraes C., Bento L.S.M., Mota M., (1999) Biodegradation of 
colorants in refinery effluents -potential use of the fungus 
Phanerochaete chrysosporium. International Sugar Journal , 101:  
246-51. 
[12] Singleton V.L., Rossi A., (1965) Colorimetry of total phenolics 
with phosphomolybdic -phosphotungstic acid reagents. American 
Journal of Environment  Vitic,  16: 144-58. 
[13] APHA standard methods for examination of water and wastewater. 
17th ed. Washington, DC: APHA, 1989.  
[14] Hai F.I., Fukushi K., Yamamoto K., (2003)  Treatment of Textile 
Wastewater: Membrane Bioreactor With Special Dye -Degrading 
Microorganism,  Proceeding of the Asian Waterqual, Bangkok, 
Article, 2 (16).  
[15] Guimaraes C., Matos C., Azeredo J., Mota M., Oliveira R., (2002) 
The importance of the morphology and hydrophobicity of 
different carriers on the immobilization and sugar refinery effluent 
degra dation activity of Phanerochaete chrysosporium. 
Biotechnology Letter , 24: 795-800. 
[16] Yin C.F., Joyce T.M., Chang H.M. (1998) Kinetics of bleach 
effluent decolorization by Phanerochaete chrysosporium . Journal 
of Biotechnology; 10:  67-76. 
[17] Kapdan I.K., Kargi F., (2002) Biological decolorization of textile dyestuff containing wastewater by Coriolus versicolor in a 
rotating biological contactor. Enzyme Microbiology Technology, 
30: 195-9. 
[18] Ohmomo S., Itoh N., Watanabe Y., Kaneko, Y., Tozawa, Y., Ueda K., (1985) Cont inuous decolorization of molasses waste water 
with mycelia of Coriolus versicolor Ps  4 a. Agricultural Biological 
Chemistry, 49:  2551 -5. 
[19] Pallerla S., Chambers R.P., (2011) New urethane prepolymer 
immobilized fungal bioreactor for decolorization and 
dechlor ination of Kraft bleach effluents. Tappi Journal 79:  155-61. 
[20] Fujita M., Era A., Ike M., Soda S., Miyata N., Hirao T., (2007) Decolorization of heat -treatment liquor of waste sludge by a 
bioreactor using polyurethane foam -immobilized white rot fungus 
equipp ed with an ultra membrane filtration unit. Journal of 
Bioscience and Bioengineering, 90:  387-94. 
 