USOO8268342B2 
 (12) United States Patent (10) Patent No.: US 8,268,342 B2 
 Panda et al. (45) Date of Patent: Sep. 18, 2012 
 (54) BIODEGRADABLE POLYMER SCAFFOLD (52) U.S. Cl. ........ 424/426; 424/489: 424/490; 424/491; 
 AND PROCESS FOR PREPARATION 424/497; 528/354; 435/395; 435/396 
 THEREOF (58) Field of Classification Search .................. 424/426, 
 (75) Inventors: Amulya Kumar Panda, New Delhi 424/489, 490, 491,497; 528/354; 435/395, 
 (IN); Rajmohan Gopimohan, New 435/396 Delhi (IN); Anish Chakkunkal, New See application file for complete search history. 
 Delhi (IN) (56) References Cited 
 (73) Assignee: National Institute of Immunology (IN) U.S. PATENT DOCUMENTS 
 (*) Notice: Subject to any disclaimer, the term of this 5,520,923 A * 5/1996 Tjia et al. ...................... 424/426 patent is extended or adjusted under 35 U.S.C. 154(b) by 326 days. FOREIGN PATENT DOCUMENTS 
 WO WO-9609078 A1 3, 1996 
 (21) Appl. No.: 12/739,588 OTHER PUBLICATIONS 
 (22) PCT Filed: Oct. 23, 2008 “International Application No. PCT/IN2008/00701, International 
 Search Report mailed Jan. 20, 2010”, 4pgs. (86). PCT No.: PCT/N2008/OOO701 Jiang, Tao, et al., “In vitro evaluation of chitosan/poly(lactic acid 
 S371 (c)(1), glycolic acie) sintered microsphere scaffolds for bone tissue engi 
 (2), (4) Date: Apr. 23, 2010 neering'. Biomaterials, 27(28), (Oct. 2006). s Suciati, Tri, "Zonal release of proteins within tissue engineering 
 (87) PCT Pub. No.: WO2O09/O54006 scaffolds”, J Mater Sci. Mater Med., 17(11), (Nov. 2006), 1049-56. 
 PCT Pub. Date: Apr. 30, 2009 * cited by examiner 
 (65) Prior Publication Data Primary Examiner — Blaine Lankford, Jr. 
 Assistant Examiner — Charles Zoltan Constantine 
 (74) Attorney, Agent, or Firm — Schwegman Lundberg & 
 Woessner, P.A. US 2010/0233277 A1 Sep. 16, 2010 
 (30) Foreign Application Priority Data 
 Oct. 26, 2007 (IN) ........................... 2248/DEL/2007 (7) ABSTRACT 
 The present invention relates to a process for preparation of a (51) Int. Cl. biodegradable polymer scaffold using biodegradable poly 
 A6F 2/00 (2006.01) mer, Surfactant and alcohol. The biodegradable polymer Scaf 
 A6 IK 9/14 (2006.01) fold obtained from the process disclosed is useful for tissue 
 A 6LX 9/50 (2006.01) engineering, therapeutic compound delivery and/or wound 
 C08G 63/08 (2006.01) dressing. 
 CI2N5/00 (2006.01) 
 CI2N 5/02 (2006.01) 24 Claims, 6 Drawing Sheets 
   U.S. Patent Sep. 18, 2012 Sheet 1 of 6 US 8,268,342 B2 
 Figure l   US 8,268,342 B2 Sheet 2 of 6 Sep. 18, 2012 U.S. Patent 
 Figure 2 
 Figure 3   US 8,268,342 B2 Sheet 3 of 6 Sep. 18, 2012 U.S. Patent 
 Figure 4   U.S. Patent Sep. 18, 2012 Sheet 4 of 6 US 8,268,342 B2 
 Figure 5 B   US 8,268,342 B2 Sheet 5 of 6 Sep. 18, 2012 U.S. Patent 
 Figure 6 A 
 Figure 6 B   U.S. Patent Sep. 18, 2012 Sheet 6 of 6 US 8,268,342 B2 
   US 8,268,342 B2 
 1. 
 BODEGRADABLE POLYMER SCAFFOLD 
 AND PROCESS FOR PREPARATION 
 THEREOF 
 PRIORITY CLAIM TO RELATED 
 APPLICATIONS 
 This application is a national stage application under 35 
 U.S.C. S371 of PCT/IN2008/000701, filed Oct. 23, 2008, and published as WO 2009/054006 A2 on Apr. 30, 2009, which 
 claims priority to Indian Application No. 2248/DEL/2007, filed Oct. 26, 2007, which applications and publication are 
 incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof in 
 their entirety, and the benefit of priority is claimed thereto. 
 FIELD OF THE INVENTION 
 The present invention relates to biodegradable polymer 
 membrane and/or scaffold useful for tissue engineering, drug delivery and/or wound dressing. 
 BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION 
 Polylactic acid (PLA) and polylactic-co-glycolic acid 
 (PLGA) are biodegradable polymers being extensively used 
 for various biomedical applications especially as Scaffold in 
 the field of tissue engineering (Middleton J C, Tipton A. J. Synthetic biodegradable polymers as orthopedic devices. 
 Biomaterials 2000: 21: 2335-46: Papkov-Sokolsky M, Agashi K, Laya A, Shakesheff K, Domb A.J. Polymer carrier 
 for drug deliver and tissue engineering. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 
 2007: 59:187-206: Kohane DS, Langer R. Polymeric Bio 
 materials in Tissue Engineering. Pediatric Research 2008; 63: 487-91). Polymeric scaffolds serve as a physical support to 
 provide cells with the appropriate three-dimensional archi 
 tecture for in vitro cell culture as well as in vivo tissue regen eration (Langer R, Vacanti J. P. Tissue Engineering. Science 
 1993; 260:920-6: Griffith LG, Naughton G. Tissue engineer ing-current challenge and expanding opportunities. Science 
 2002; 295:1009-1014). Ideally, tissue engineering scaffolds 
 formulated from biocompatible and bio-resorbable polymers 
 like PLA should possess a well defined macrostructure and 
 microstructure with controlled porous architecture to pro 
 mote cell attachment and proliferation (Ma PX. Scaffold for 
 tissue fabrication. Mater Today 2004; 7: 30-40; Nair LS, Laurencin CT. Polymers as biomaterials for tissue engineer ing and controlled drug delivery. Adv Biochem Eng/Biotech 
 nol 2006; 102: 47-90; Chung H G and Park T G. Surface engineered and drug releasing pre-fabricated Scaffolds for 
 tissue engineering. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2007:59:249-262). Apart from this, release of appropriate growth factors from 
 the scaffold may promote controlled vascularization and tis Sue growth in three dimensions (Tabata Y. Significance of release technology in tissue engineering. Drug Discov Today 
 2005; 10: 1639-46: Biondi M, Ungaro F, Quaglia F. Netti PM. Controlled drug delivery in tissue engineering. Adv Drug 
 Deliv Rev 2008; 60: 2229-42). Various methods like particu late leaching, emulsion freeze drying, phase inversion tech nique, solvent casting, electro spinning and thermal sintering 
 have been employed to formulate scaffolds using PLA and PLGA for tissue engineering applications (Chung H G and 
 Park T G. Surface engineered and drug releasing pre-fabri 
 cated scaffolds for tissue engineering. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 
 2007:59:249-262: Mikos A Get al. Preparation and charac 
 terization of poly (L-lactic acid) foams. Polymer 1994; 35: 
 1068–77; Hutmacher D. W. Scaffold design and fabrication technologies for engineering tissues-state of the art and future 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 2 
 perspectives. JBiomater Sci: Polym Ed 2001: 12: 107-24: Wu L. Jing D, Ding J. A “room-temperature' injection molding/ 
 particulate leaching approach for fabrication of biodegrad 
 able three-dimensional porous scaffolds. Biomaterials 2006; 
 27: 185-91; Ma PX. Biomimetic Materials for Tissue Engi neering. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2008; 60: 184-98: Shin M, Abukawa H. Troulis M. J. Vacanti J P Development of a biodegradable scaffold with interconnected pores by heat fusion and its application to bone tissue engineering. J 
 Biomed Mater Res A 2008: 84(3): 702-9). PLA and PLGA nano fibers have also been used extensively as scaffold (Chen 
 VJ, Ma PX. Nano-fibrous poly (L-lactic acid) scaffolds with interconnected spherical macropores. Biomaterials 2004; 25: 
 2065-73; Liu X, Won Y, Ma PX. Porogen-induced surface 
 modification of nano-fibrous poly(L-lactic acid) scaffolds for tissue engineering. Biomaterials 2006; 27: 3980-7: Guarino 
 V. Causa F. Taddei P. Foggia MD, Ciapetti G. Martini D et al. Polylactic acid fibre-reinforced polycaprolactone scaffolds 
 for bone tissue engineering. Biomaterials 2008:29: 3662-70) and particularly for skin tissue engineering (Kumbar S G, 
 Nukavarapu S P James R. Nair LS, Laurencin CT. Electro spun poly (lactic acid-co-glycolic acid) scaffolds for skin 
 tissue engineering. Biomaterials 2008; 29:4100-07: Zong X, 
 Li S, Chen E. Garlick B. Kim KS, Fang D, et al. Prevention of post-Surgery-induced abdominal adhesions by electrospun 
 bioabsorbable nano-fibrous poly(lactide-co-glycolide)- 
 based membranes. Ann Surg. 2004; 240: 910-5) Particulate leaching method using different porogen is widely used to 
 fabricate scaffolds but have problems of residual salts in the scaffold, irregularly shaped pores and poorly interconnected 
 structures for three dimensional cell cultures (Mikos AG, Bao Y. Cima LG, Ingber DE, Vacanti J P Langer R. Prepa 
 ration of poly(glycolic acid) bonded fiber structures for cell 
 attachment and transplantation. J Biomed Mater Res 1993; 27: 183-9). Wetting of polylactide particles or wafers tran 
 siently with an organic solvent like dichloromethane (DCM) 
 to form scaffolds have also been tied (Mikos AG, Sarakinos G. Leite SM, Vacanti J P Langer R. Laminated three-dimen sional biodegradable foams for use in tissue engineering. 
 Biomaterials 1993; 14:323-30; Jaklenec A, Wan E, Murray 
 ME, Mathiowitz E. Novel scaffolds fabricated from protein loaded microspheres for tissue engineering. Biomaterials. 
 2008:29:185-92). The disadvantage of such processes is that 
 there is no control over the fusion process and prolonged exposure of polylactide particles to DCM results in loss of 
 polymer particle characteristics. Labile biomolecules entrapped in the polymer scaffold also get denatured during 
 interaction with organic solvent used for solubilization of the polymer. 
 Self-assembly is the organization of Smaller units into 
 regular three dimensional higher order structures without 
 human intervention or involvement of external energy (Breen 
 TL, Tien J, Oliver S RJ, Hadzic T. Whitesides G. M. Design and self-assembly of open, regular, 3D mesostructures. Sci 
 ence 1999; 284: 948-51; Whitesides G. M. Grzybowski B. Self-assembly at all scales. Science 2002:295: 2418-21; Cap 
 ito RM, Azevedo H S, Velichko Y S. Mata A, Stupp S I. Self-Assembly of large and small molecules into hierarchi 
 cally ordered sacs and membranes. Science 2008; 319; 1812 16). The classical example is the self-assembly of lipid mol 
 ecules in nature into tubular microstructure (Schnur J. M. Price R. Schoen P. Yager P. Calvert JM, Georger J. Singh A. 
 Lipid-based tubule microstructures. Thin Solid Films 1987: 
 152: 181-206: Richard C, Balavoine F. Schultz, P, EbbesenT W. Mioskowski C. Supramolecular self-assembly of lipid 
 derivatives on carbon nanotubes. Science 2003:300: 775-78). Surfactant mediated self-assembly and synthesis of novel US 8,268,342 B2 
 3 
 materials has been extensively investigated and utilized for various purposes including self assembly of nanoparticles in 
 to higher order structure (Zemb Th, Dubois M. Demé B. Gulik-Krzywicki Th. Self-Assembly of flat nanodiscs in salt 
 free catanionic surfactant solutions. Science 1999; 283: 816 
 19; Inagaki S, Guan S, Ohsuna T, Terasaki O. An ordered mesoporous organosilica hybrid material with a crystal like 
 wall structure. Nature 2002:416:304-07: LiM, Schnablegger H. Mann S. Coupled synthesis and self-assembly of nanopar 
 ticles to give structures with controlled organization. Nature 
 1993: 402:393-95). Self-assembly of structures mediated by 
 surfactant molecules tend to be mild, with little production of 
 heat and friction and thus will be especially suited for bio medical applications. Scaffold made from self assembling 
 peptide nano fiber has been reported to accelerate wound healing (Hartgerink J. D. Beniash E. Stupp S I. Peptide-am 
 phiphile nanofibers: A versatile scaffold for the preparation of 
 self-assembling materials. Proc Nat AcadSci 2002; 99: 5133 
 8; Schneider A, Grlick JA, Egles C. Self-assembling peptide 
 nanofiber scaffolds accelerate wound healing. PloS ONE 
 2008; 3: e1410). However the major limitations of self-as 
 sembly of molecules into scaffolds are their inability to con trol pore size, lack of stable morphology and biodegradability 
 of the scaffold. 
 SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION 
 The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold useful for tissue engineering, therapeutic compound 
 delivery and/or wound dressing. The present invention further 
 provides a process for the biodegradable polymer scaffold. 
 One aspect of the present invention is to provide a process 
 of preparation of a biodegradable polymer scaffold useful for 
 tissue engineering, therapeutic compound delivery and/or 
 wound dressing, wherein the process comprises spreading 
 Surfactant coated polymer particles on a Support; soaking the 
 particles with alcohol; and washing with water to obtain the 
 polymer scaffold. 
 Another aspect of the present invention is provides a pro 
 cess of preparation of a biodegradable polymer scaffold, 
 wherein the process comprises spreading cetyl trimethyl 
 ammonium bromide (CTAB) coated polymer particles of Poly-DL-lactide (PDLLA) on a support; soaking the particles 
 with ethanol or methanol; and washing with water to obtain the polymer scaffold. 
 Yet another aspect of the present invention is to provide a process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer scaffold, wherein the process comprises spreading cetyl trimethyl 
 ammonium bromide (CTAB) coated polymer particles of Poly lactide co-glycolide particle on a Support; soaking the 
 particles with ethanol or methanol; and washing with water to obtain the polymer scaffold. In another aspect, the present invention provides a biode gradable polymer scaffold useful for tissue engineering, therapeutic compound delivery and/or wound dressing, 
 wherein the scaffold is obtained by the process as disclosed in the present invention. 
 BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS 
 FIG. 1 shows microscopy of polymer particles and its 
 fusion process. 
 (A) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of PDLLA CTAB particles prepared by solvent evaporation method 
 before fusion 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 4 
 (B) A digital image of a polymeric membrane after fusion 
 of PDLLA-CTAB particles in presence of ethanol at room 
 temperature 
 (C and D) SEM pictures of PDLLA-CTAB particles after the process of fusion in the presence of ethanol. 
 (E and F) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) show 
 ing surfactant mediated fusion of PDLLA-CTAB nanopar 
 ticles 
 FIG. 2 shows fabrication of polymeric membranes and 
 three dimensional structures using Surfactant mediated fusion of PDLLA-CTAB particles 
 (A) Polymeric membranes of different sizes formed after the fusion of PDLLA-CTAB particles in presence of ethanol 
 at room temperature 
 (B) Polymeric membrane of square dimension fabricated using fusion process 
 (C) PDLLA-CTAB particles were filled in cylindrical 
 moulds (falcon plastic tubes) and wetted with ethanol to 
 obtain the three dimensional structures 
 (D) Particle fused using eppendorf tube as a mould result 
 ing in three D structure. 
 FIG.3 shows microscopy images of surfactant removal and 
 fusion region formation. (A, B and C) Atomic force micros copy (AFM) images of the surface of PDLLA-CTAB par 
 ticles before and after fusion 
 (A) The adsorption of surfactant molecules on the surface of particles can be seen before the process of fusion 
 (B) After the surfactant mediated fusion of particles in presence of ethanol, polylactide Surface with pores can be 
 seen due to removal of the adsorbed surfactant molecules 
 (C) The same particle at lower magnification of the Surface showing multiple pores 
 (D and E) Formation of polymeric bridges between fluo 
 rescent PDLLA-CTAB particles after the process of surfac 
 tant mediated fusion in ethanol. Fine fluorescent bridges can be seen between the particles lying nearby as indicated by the 
 aOWS. 
 FIG. 4 shows fusion of PDLLA-CTAB and PLGA-CTAB 
 particles in presence of ethanol and methanol 
 (A, B) polymer bridges formed between PDLLA-CTAB 
 particles in presence of ethanol as indicated by the arrows 
 (CD) polymer bridges formed between PDLLA-CTAB particles in presence of methanol. The polymer bridges are 
 more prominent in this case as the process of fusion in metha 
 nol is much stronger as compared with ethanol. 
 FIG. 5 shows differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) of 
 PDLLA-CTAB particles 
 (A) DSC of PDLLA-CTAB particles before the process of fusion. The glass transition temperature is around 58°C. The other two peaks are of the excipients used during particle preparation 
 (B) DSC of PDLLA-CTAB scaffold after the process of fusion of the particles which shows no change in the glass transition temperature of the polymer. Since the particles are highly porous most of the encapsulated excipients are washed 
 during ethanol treatment, thus the other two peaks are miss 
 1ng. 
 FIG. 6 shows X-ray powder diffraction of PDLLA-CTAB 
 particles before and after ethanol treatment 
 (A) Diffraction pattern (from 0 to 30) showed character istic amorphous nature of PDLLA polymer 
 (B) There was no change in the amorphous nature after the 
 process of fusion of PDLLA-CTAB particles. US 8,268,342 B2 
 5 
 FIG. 7 shows evaluation of polylactide polymeric mem 
 brane formed by fusion process for wound healing 
 (A) 2x3 cm uninfected open wound, day 5 
 (B) Open wound treated with the polymer membrane, day 
 5 
 (C, D) Rats after 21 days of treatment. (C) Rat with open 
 wound. (D) Rattreated with polymeric membrane, the wound 
 closure was better in the group treated with the polymeric 
 membrane. 
 DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE INVENTION 
 The present invention provides a room temperature process 
 for the fabrication of biodegradable polymer scaffold useful 
 for tissue engineering, therapeutic compound delivery and/or 
 wound dressing. The scaffold disclosed in the present inven tion comprises biodegradable polymer and the higher order 
 structure fabrication take place in presence of surfactant, and 
 alcohol. The present invention further provides a process for the biodegradable polymer scaffold encapsulating growth 
 factors, proteins and/or peptides and or drugs of choice. The present invention particularly provides self-assembly 
 of polylactide polymer particles to scaffolds of the desired 
 size, shape and topology at room temperature Suitable for different bio-medical applications particularly for regenera 
 tive medicine. 
 No report exists till today on surfactant mediated self assembly of biodegradable polymers in to higher order struc 
 ture. As these polymer particles are biodegradable and can be 
 made porous their self assembly provides an ideal method for 
 the fabrication of scaffold having desired pore size, biode gradability and functionality which are the most essential requirements of scaffold design. 
 In the present invention a novel method of PDLLA scaffold 
 fabrication has been described wherein surfactant molecules 
 mediate the fusion and self-assembly of polylactide particles 
 in a controlled manner at room temperature into membrane types structures. Polylactide composite membrane is cur rently used as skin substitute (Suprathel R, www.suprathel 
 .com) for treatment of burn victims (Uhlig C et al. Suprathel—An innovative, resorbable skin substitute for the 
 treatment of burn victims. Burns 2007; 33: 221-29) but has the limitation of not supporting dermal growth or entrapping bioactive growth factors. Polylactide membrane prepared by 
 the surfactant mediated fusion process described in the present invention was tested as an artificial skin Substitute for 
 wound healing. The mechanism involved in Such surfactant mediated fusion of polylactide particles into membrane type 
 structure at room temperature was investigated. The results 
 Suggest that desorption of Surfactant molecules from the Sur face of particles in presence of ethanol created regions where 
 the polymer solubility increases transiently and results in 
 fusion into higher order structures. The surfactant mediated particle fusion process disclosed in the present invention pro 
 vides a better alternative to fabricate higher order polymeric 
 structures for various bio-medical applications. In one embodiment, a biodegradable polymer refers to a 
 material, which is degraded in the biological environment of 
 the cell or subject in which it is found. The biodegradable polymer can be natural biodegradable 
 polymer, modified natural biodegradable polymer, synthetic 
 biodegradable polymer or combinations thereof. 
 The term "PLGA as used herein is intended to refer to a 
 polymer of lactic acid alone, a polymer of glycolic acid alone, a mixture of such polymers, a copolymer of glycolic acid and 
 lactic acid, a mixture of such copolymers, or a mixture of such 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 6 
 polymers and copolymers. Preferably, the biodegradable 
 polymer will be poly lactide-co-glycolide (PLGA). 
 Unless otherwise noted, the term microparticles can be used to encompass microparticles, microspheres, and micro 
 capsules. Active agents to be incorporated into the micropar 
 ticles are synthetic or natural compounds which demonstrate 
 a biological effect when introduced into a living creature. Contemplated active agents include peptides, Small mol 
 ecules, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, lipids, and proteins. Pro 
 teins contemplated for use include potent cytokines, includ 
 ing various hematopoietic factors such as G-CSF, GM-CSF, 
 M-CSF, MGDF, the interferons (alpha, beta, and gamma), 
 interferon consensus, the interleukins (1-12), erythropoietin (EPO), fibroblast growth factor, TNF, TNFbp, IL-lra, stem 
 cell factor, nerve growth factor, GDNF, BDNF, NT3, platelet derived growth factor, and tumor growth factor (alpha, beta), osteoprotegerin (OPG), and OB protein. 
 Biodegradable polymers are well known within the art as 
 carriers for biologically active materials. Such biologically 
 active materials may include therapeutic agents such as 
 drugs, antibiotics, enzymes, and hormones. Further, poly 
 mers which form hydrogels can be used as carriers for cell Suspensions and to increase the functional life of a carried material or agent. Other useful biodegradable polymers or polymer classes include the following: polydioxanones, polycarbonates, polyoxalates, poly(alpha.-esters), polyanhydrides, polyac 
 etates, polycaprolactones, poly(orthoesters), polyamino 
 acids, polyamides and mixtures and copolymers thereof. Additional useful biodegradable polymers include, stere 
 opolymers of L- and D-lactic acid, copolymers of bis(p- 
 carboxyphenoxy) propane acid and sebacic acid, sebacic acid copolymers, copolymers of caprolactone, poly(lactic acid)/ poly(glycolic acid)/polyethyleneglycol copolymers, copoly 
 mers of polyurethane and (poly(lactic acid), copolymers of polyurethane and poly(lactic acid), copolymers of alpha.- 
 amino acids, copolymers of alpha.-amino acids and caproic acid, copolymers of alpha.-benzyl glutamate and polyethyl 
 ene glycol, copolymers of Succinate and poly(glycols), poly phosphaZene, polyhydroxy-alkanoates and mixtures thereof. Binary and ternary systems are contemplated. 
 The process disclosed in the present invention is useful for 
 preparation of stable structures of desired size and shape Such 
 as the polymer membranes and Scaffolds for tissue engineer ing, drug delivery and/or wound dressing. 
 The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold made from fusion of polymer particles entrapping protein/drugs/growth factors. 
 The present invention provides a process for fabrication of higher order structure using polymer particles which are 
 made using solvent evaporation method or spray drying. Both 
 nanoparticles and microparticles of different sizes could be 
 used to fuse in to higher order structure. The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold, wherein the polymer par 
 ticles used are polylactide particles. 
 The present invention relates to the biodegradable polymer particles wherein the particles are prepared by encapsulating 
 the polymer particles by components such as growth factors/ 
 drugs and proteins in the particles. The encapsulated particles 
 are treated with Surfactants such as cetyl trimethyl ammo 
 nium bromide (CTAB), SDS or Tween 20. In accordance with the present invention, there is provided a process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer scaffold 
 useful for tissue engineering, therapeutic compound delivery 
 and/or wound dressing, wherein the process comprises spreading Surfactant coated polymer particles on a Support; US 8,268,342 B2 
 7 
 soaking the particles with alcohol; and washing the above 
 with water to obtain the polymer scaffold. In one embodiment, there is provided a process of prepa 
 ration of a biodegradable polymer scaffold, wherein the pro cess comprises spreading cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide 
 (CTAB) coated polymer particles of Poly-DL-lactide 
 (PDLLA) on a support; soaking the particles with ethanol or 
 methanol; and washing the above with water to obtain the polymer scaffold. 
 In another embodiment, there is provided a process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer scaffold, wherein the process comprises spreading cetyl trimethyl ammonium bro 
 mide (CTAB) coated polymer particles of Poly lactide co glycolide particle on a Support; soaking the particles with 
 ethanol or methanol; and washing the above with water to obtain the polymer scaffold. The process of preparation of the biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold disclosed in the present invention optionally com prises encapsulating the Surfactant coated polymer particles 
 with growth factors, protein or therapeutic compound. 
 In one embodiment, there is provided a solid support for the process of preparation of the biodegradable polymer Scaf 
 fold disclosed in the present invention. The process of preparation of the scaffold as disclosed in 
 the present invention, wherein different design of mould can 
 be used to make polymeric structure of different sizes and shapes of said polymer scaffold. 
 One embodiment of the present invention provides the biodegradable polymer such as Poly-DL-lactide (PDLLA), polylactide-co-glycolide (PLGA), aliphatic polyesters, poly 
 (amino acids), copoly(ether-esters), polyalkylene oxalates, polyamides, poly(iminocarbonates), polyorthoesters, poly 
 oxaesters, polyamidoesters, poly(anhydrides), polyphosp 
 haZenes and biopolymers, poly(amino acids), poly(anhy drides), poly(orthoesters), poly(phosphoesters), 
 polylactones, poly(sebacate), poly(hydroxy acids), copoly 
 mers thereof, single polymer, copolymer, terpolymer, or 
 polymer blend, and is selected from the group consisting of polyglycolide, polylactides, polycaprolactones, polytrimeth ylenecarbonates, polyhydroxybutyrates, polyhydroxyvaler 
 ates, polydioxanones, polyorthoesters, polycarbonates, poly tyrosinecarbonates, polyorthocarbonates, polyalkylene 
 oxalates, polyalkylene Succinates, poly(malic acid), poly (maleic anhydride), polypeptides, polydepsipeptides, polyvi nylalcohol, polyesteramides, polyamides, polyanhydrides, 
 polyurethanes, polyphosphaZenes, polycyanoacrylates, poly 
 fumarates, poly(amino acids), modified polysaccharides, and 
 modified proteins; and combination thereof. Another embodiment of the present invention provides the 
 Surfactant such as cationic, anionic and neutral Surfactant for coating the polymer particles. The examples of surfactant are 
 cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium dodecyl 
 sulphate (SDS), Tween 20. 
 Still another embodiment of the present invention provides 
 alcohol selected from a group consisting of ethanol, methanol and propanol for preparation of the biodegradable polymer 
 membrane scaffold. 
 In one embodiment the process of preparation of the scaf 
 fold as disclosed in the present invention uses ethanol. In another embodiment the process of preparation of the 
 scaffold as disclosed in the present invention uses methanol. In yet another embodiment, the present invention provides the growth factor selected from a group consisting of TGF .beta family, bone morphogenic proteins, fibroblast growth 
 factors-1 and -2, platelet-derived growth factor-AA, and -BB, platelet rich plasma, vascular endothelial cell-derived growth 
 factor and epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet derived 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 8 
 growth factor (PDGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bfGF), bone morphogenic proteins 
 (BMPs) and combinations thereof. 
 One of the preferred embodiments of the present invention provides a biodegradable polymer scaffold useful for tissue 
 engineering, therapeutic compound delivery and/or wound 
 dressing, wherein said scaffold is obtained by the process as 
 disclosed in the present invention. 
 In another embodiment, the present invention provides the biodegradable polymer scaffold for tissue engineering, 
 wherein tissue engineering comprises culturing cells selected 
 from a group consisting of stem cells, embryonic stem cells, 
 pluripotent cells, multipotent cells, chondrocytes, osteo 
 blasts, osteocytes, fibroblasts, bone marrow cells, stromal 
 cells, chondrocyte progenitors, osteoclasts, endothelial cells, macrophages, adipocytes, monocytes, plasma cells, mast 
 cells, umbilical cord cells, leukocytes, epithelial cells, myo 
 blasts, and precursor cells derived from adipose tissue. 
 In another embodiment, the present invention provides the biodegradable polymer scaffold useful for delivery of thera 
 peutic compound such as a peptide, protein, nucleic acid or a drug. 
 In one embodiment, the present invention provides use of 
 the biodegradable polymer scaffold disclosed in the present 
 invention for in vitro three dimensional growth of animal 
 cells. 
 In another embodiment, the present invention provides use 
 of the biodegradable polymer scaffold disclosed in the 
 present invention for controlled drug delivery device. 
 In yet another embodiment, the present invention provides 
 use of the biodegradable polymer scaffold disclosed in the 
 present invention for tissue engineering of artificial skin. 
 In still yet another embodiment, the present invention pro 
 vides use of the biodegradable polymer scaffold disclosed in 
 the present invention for wound healing and skin grafting. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold by transferring the newly 
 formed membrane of the fused polymer particles to water, 
 wherein the fused polymer particles become rigid and can be 
 handled with ease. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold, wherein the fusion of the polymer particles occurs at the contact points between the particles retaining the morphology and structure of the par 
 ticles. The fusion of the particle occurs when the surfactant coated polymer particles at Subjected to alcohol Such as etha nol. This phenomenon of fusion of the polymer particles 
 results from Surfactant mediated fusion of polymer particles 
 which is associated with sudden desorption and collective 
 motion of the Surfactant molecules during alcohol treatment. The fusion of the polymer particles occurs at room tempera 
 ture or at much lower temperature. The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold, where the collective motion 
 of the Surfactant molecules creates a transient local environ 
 ment which is entropically favorable for the surface of the polymer particles to achieve a partly solubilized or molten 
 state when it comes in contact with ethanol. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold where the surfactant used for coating the polymer particles comprises of SDS and Tween 
 20 to mediate fusion of polymer particles. The present invention provides a process for preparation of biodegradable polymer scaffold from polymer particles 
 where the membrane has stable higher order structure. US 8,268,342 B2 
 The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 membrane/scaffold wherein the components such as drugS/ growth factor/proteins are entrapped in the polymer particles. 
 The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold wherein the polymer membrane is used in vitro three 
 dimensional growth of animal cells. The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold wherein the polymer membrane is used as controlled drug delivery device. 
 The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold wherein the polymer membrane is used for tissue engineering of artificial skin. The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold wherein the polymer membrane is used for wound healing and skin grafting. The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold wherein the polymer scaffold is used in various bio medical applications such as tissue engineering, controlled 
 drug delivery implants and as artificial skin for burn treat 
 ment. 
 The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold that forms a stable particle network or scaffold. The present invention provides a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffolds formed by surfactant mediated fusion of polymer particles such as Poly-DL-lactide (PDLLA) and polylactide 
 co-glycolide (PLGA). The polymer scaffold is used in various biomedical applications. The present invention provides the biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold where encapsulated biodegradable polymer particles 
 used are encapsulated with components such as drugs that can 
 be easily stored and fused into scaffolds. The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold by surfactant mediated 
 fusion of polymer particles, wherein the Surfactants such as 
 cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), SDS and Tween 
 20 is used. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffold wherein fusion of polymer 
 particles of the desired size takes place in a controlled and 
 gentle manner that leads to the formation of a stable three dimensional structure of the desired shape and size by pack ing the polymer particles in a mold and wetting with ethanol. The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffolds at room temperature with out changing the bulk properties of the polymer. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffolds wherein the membrane of the scaffold is encapsulated by components such as proteins, drugs or growth factors. The preparation of the biodegradable 
 polymer membrane scaffolds does not alter the properties of the polymer particles. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffolds wherein the surfactant such 
 as CTAB molecules are desorbed during the fusion reaction 
 when the Surfactant coated polymer Surface comes in contact 
 with ethanol. 
 The present invention also provides surfactant free biode gradable polylactide scaffolds. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of 
 biodegradable polymer scaffolds by fusion of CTAB coated polylactide-co-glycolide polymer particles by methanol 
 treatment. 
 The present invention provides a process for preparation of biodegradable polymer scaffolds by wetting the polymer par 
 ticles with ethanol to fuse and sterilizes them effectively. The present invention provides a bioactive three dimen 
 sional scaffold Support that can be used in cell growth and 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 10 
 differentiation, at the same time releasing various growth 
 factors into the tissue microenvironment. The polymer par 
 ticles that arefused to form the scaffold are first formulated by encapsulating various components such as proteins drugs or 
 growth factors. 
 In the present invention, a process is described where the Sudden desorption of the Surfactant molecules during alcohol 
 treatment creates a transient local environment were the Sur 
 face of the polymer achieves a partly solubilized or molten 
 state, so that as the particles come in contact in the evaporat ing alcohol phase, they form fusion regions. The process 
 terminates almost immediately as the CTAB surfactant mol ecules get dispersed into the alcohol phase. This ensures that 
 the fusion occurs at the points of contact between the particles and the particle morphology is maintained. The ease of the 
 process and its occurrence at ambient temperature makes this 
 method of surfactant mediated fusion of biodegradable par 
 ticles attractive for various biomedical applications such as tissue engineering, controlled drug delivery implants and arti 
 ficial wound dressings for burns. Surprisingly it was found that the properties of the polymer 
 Such as the molecular weight, glass transition temperature, Viscosity are not altered during the preparation of the three 
 dimensional structures of the biodegradable polymer. 
 Formulation and Characterization of Polymer Particles Polylactide particles of different sizes were prepared using 
 solvent evaporation method (Kanchan V. Panda AK. Interac tions of antigen loaded polylactide particles with macroph 
 ages and their correlation with immune response. Biomateri 
 als 2007; 28: 5344-57). The PDLLA-CTAB macro particles were made porous by incorporating Sucrose both in internal and external aqueous phases during the particle formulation 
 (Sahoo SK, Panda A. K. Labhasetwar V. Characterization of porous PLGA/PLA microparticles as a scaffold for three 
 dimensional growth of breast cancer cells. Biomacromol 
 ecules 2005; 6: 1132-39). Surfactant coating was achieved by incorporation of CTAB in the external aqueous phase during 
 the secondary emulsion step of Solvent evaporation method. 
 The CTAB coated PDLLA macro particles (PDLLA-CTAB) were free flowing, porous and had an average size of 300 um 
 as measured by the particle size analyzer (FIG. 1A). Particles 
 made from different polymers such as PLLA, PLGA with 
 PVA and other surfactants in the surface have similar mor 
 phology and size range as observed for PDLLA polymer. 
 Both PDLLA-CTAB and PDLLA-PVA macro particles showed a spherical morphology. The PDLLA-CTAB micro 
 particles had an average size of 2-4 um and the PDLLA 
 CTAB nano particles had an average size of 200-400 nm. 
 Fusion of Polymer Particles in to Membrane Like Structures 
 Fusion of PDLLA-CTAB macro particles was observed in presence of ethanol at room temperature. Addition of ethanol to evenly spread PDLLA-CTAB particles on petri dishes 
 formed a stable network of particles resulting in the formation 
 of a membrane (FIG. 1 B). The polymeric membrane at this stage was very plastic in nature and stabilized in a few min utes in presence of ethanol. Removal of ethanol and washing 
 with sterile water resulted in stable polymeric membrane like 
 structures (FIG. 1 B). Polymeric membranes of desired size and thickness can be fabricated using the above fusion pro 
 cess. The fusion regions between the particles were observed using the Scanning electron microscope (FIG. 1 C, D). These essentially consist of polymeric protrusions attaching each 
 other forming a stable network structure (FIG. 1 D). CTAB coated PDLLA nanoparticles also fused as efficiently as the 
 surfactant coated macro particles (FIG. 1 E-F). Fusion of PDLLA-CTAB nanoparticles was also associated with sur 
 face attachment of particle with each other (FIG. 1 F). By US 8,268,342 B2 
 11 
 spreading the polymer particle in different sized petri dishes 
 and wetting with ethanol, different sized membranes were fabricated at room temperature (FIG. 2 A). 10 mg of PDLLA CTAB particles uponfusion yielded around 2 cm polylactide 
 membrane (FIG. 2 A, B). Square type membrane and large 
 size scaffold could also be fabricated from these particles using appropriate mould (FIG. 2 B). For the fabrication of 
 three dimensional structures, the PDLLA-CTAB particles were filled in moulds such as normal eppendorf tube and 25 
 ml falcon tube and wetted with ethanol followed by washing 
 with water. This resulted in fabrication of scaffolds of desired 
 size having stable structure (FIG. 2 C, D). Thus apart from forming membrane type structure, the process can be used to 
 fabricate scaffold of different design and shapes. 
 PDLLA-CTAB particles when wetted with water did not fuse to form higher order structures at room temperature and 
 remain as dispersion. PDLLA particles coated with PVA 
 (PDLLA-PVA) also did not fuse and maintained their dis creteness in both water and ethanol. When PDLLA pellets 
 without any surfactant molecules were wetted with DCM, ethanol and water respectively, PDLLA pellets got solubi 
 lized in DCM, but did not fuse immediately in presence of ethanol and water. Wetting of PDLLA polymer crystals in 
 presence of both CTAB and ethanol did not result infusion of polymer. Fusion in to membrane type structure in presence of ethanol at room temperature only took place using particles 
 that were coated with surfactant. This indicated that the pres ence of Surfactant molecules on the Surface of the polymer particles play an important role in the fusion of particles into 
 higher order structure. 
 Desorption of Surfactant Molecules During Ethanol Treat 
 ment from the Particles 
 As only Surfactant coated polymer particles fused in the 
 presence of ethanol, it was of interest to know the role of 
 surfactant in such fusion process. Presence of CTAB on the polymer particle Surface during ethanol treatment was quan 
 titated by measuring the Surface charges of the particle. Zeta 
 potential measurement of PDLLA-CTAB micro particles 
 before and after ethanol treatment indicated that CTAB mol 
 ecules were desorbed from the surface of the particles during 
 ethanol treatment. Different batches of polylactide particles 
 were prepared with 1%, 0.1%, 0.03%, 0.016%, 0.008%, and 
 0.0016% CTAB in external aqueous phase (EAP). Particles 
 with 1% CTAB showed a positive Zeta potential of +45+10 
 mV, which decreased while using lower concentrations of CTAB during particle formulation. Particles with 0.016% CTAB had a positive Zeta potential value of +16+5 mV, where 
 as particles with 0.008% and 0.0016% CTAB showed a nega tive Zeta potential value of -0.5 and -20.8 mV respectively. 
 This decrease in positive Zeta potential value and the shift 
 towards negative values indicated a decrease in the amounts of positively charged CTAB molecules on the surface of the 
 polylactide particles. After ethanol treatment, the 1% 
 PDLLA-CTAB scaffold was broken down into smaller frag ments and the Zeta potential measured. These fragments 
 showed a negative Zeta potential value of -20.7 mV, which 
 indicated desorption of CTAB molecules from the particles 
 during ethanol treatment. Overnight treatment of the 
 PDLLA-CTAB particles in MQ water did not change the Zeta potential of the particles, indicating that the Surfactant mol 
 ecules are stably adsorbed on the particle surface. Atomic 
 Force Microscopy (AFM) studies of the surface of 1% 
 PDLLA-CTAB particles, both before and after ethanol treat 
 ment, showed that CTAB molecules are removed from the 
 particle surface during ethanol treatment (FIGS. 3, A, B and 
 C). The surface of the particle looked smooth with CTAB 
 coating before ethanol treatment (FIG.3A) whereas it looked 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 12 
 porous after ethanol treatment (FIG. 3 B, C) indicating des 
 orption of the molecule from the surface leaving behind pores. Polylactide particles prepared with 1%, 0.1%, 0.03%, 
 and 0.016% CTAB fused when wetted with ethanol, where as particles prepared with 0.008% and 0.0016% CTAB did not 
 fuse, indicating that the adsorbed Surfactant molecules were not sufficient enough to mediate the process of fusion in the 
 latter two cases. It was observed that the process of fusion was immediately initiated on wetting with ethanol and after the 
 process of fusion, further fusion between two such scaffolds 
 did not occur in presence of ethanol. This indicated that desorption of surfactant molecules from the surface of the particles during ethanol treatment played an important part in 
 particle fusion and the process gets terminated when Surfac 
 tant molecules are completely removed by solvent. Polylactide particles prepared using SDS/Tween 20 in the 
 externalaqueous phase also fused into higher order structures 
 in presence of ethanol. In case of SDS coated PDLLA par 
 ticles, colorimetric estimation of SDS showed that substantial 
 amounts were desorbed from the particle Surface during etha nol treatment. Desorption of SDS from polymer particles was 
 not significant in presence of water (Table 1). PDLLA-PVA 
 particles did not fuse in presence of ethanol and colorimetric 
 estimation of PVA, both before and after ethanol treatment, 
 showed that PVA is stably adsorbed on PDLLA-PVA par 
 ticles during ethanol treatment (Table 1). These observations Suggested that the Surfactant mediated fusion of polylactide 
 particles in ethanol was associated with desorption of Surfac 
 tant molecules in ethanol and was independent of the charge 
 and nature of the Surfactant. 
 Visualization of Fusion Regions. Using Fluorescent Polymer 
 Particles 
 Fusion process was visualized by using fluorescent PDLLA-CTAB particles prepared by incorporating coumarin dye in the organic phase during particle formulation. These 
 fluorescent polymer particles containing CTAB on the Sur 
 face also fused in similar manner as described above to form 
 membrane like structure. Fusion regions were mostly formed at the points of contact between the polymer particles. In 
 addition to fusion regions formed at the points of contact between the particles, fine fluorescent polymer bridges 
 between PDLLA-CTAB particles could be detected during 
 the fusion in presence of ethanol (FIG. 3 C, D). These fine bridges may be indicative of the transient regions formed by 
 the desorbed surfactant molecules between particles, through 
 which the polymer has solubilized and formed connection bridges between particles. The process of membrane forma 
 tion was not due to aggregation of particles but was through fusion of particle during ethanol treatment. Wetting plain 
 PDLLA pellets and PDLLA-PVA particles with ethanol con 
 taining 1% CTAB or even after vortexing did not result in 
 fusion of the polymer. This inferred that the mode of action of 
 the surfactant molecules in the rapid fusion of PDLLA-CTAB particles in ethanol is different from its usual way of solubi 
 lization of sparingly soluble Substances in solvents through 
 formation of micelles. 
 Fusion of Different Polymer Particles Using Other Alcohols 
 To further evaluate whether CTAB molecules can mediate 
 the fusion of other related polymers in ethanol, particles of poly L-lactide (PLLA), poly D. L-lactide-co-glycolide 
 (PLGA) and polystyrene (PS) were prepared with 1% CTAB 
 in external aqueous phase. No fusion of particles was 
 observed with PLLA-CTAB, PLGA-CTAB and PS-CTAB particles in presence of ethanol despite CTAB desorption 
 from the surface of particles in all cases. However in presence 
 ofmethanol, both PDLLA-CTAB and PLGA-CTAB particles 
 fused well. It was observed that the process of fusion was US 8,268,342 B2 
 13 
 much stronger with methanol with formation of more promi nent fusion regions as compared with ethanol (FIG.4A-D). In 
 case of ethanol, the connecting bridges were thin (FIG.4A-B) 
 where as in case of methanol, the connecting bridges covered a large surface area of the polymer particles (FIG. 4 C-D). 
 PLLA-CTAB and PS-CTAB particles did not fuse in presence of these solvents. To assess the solubility profile of the above 
 polymers in ethanol and methanol, equal amounts of PDLLA, PLGA, PLLA and PSpellets were taken and kept in 50 ml of 
 ethanol and methanol and observed overnight. There was no 
 immediate fusion of any of the pellets in ethanol and metha nol. After overnight treatment, it was observed that the 
 PDLLA pellets stuck to each other in ethanol, and almost 
 fused to one mass in methanol. In case of PLGA, there was hardly any sticking of the pellets in ethanol, but with metha 
 nol the pellets stuck to each other. PLLA and PS pellets did 
 not fuse and maintained their discreteness both in ethanol and 
 methanol even after overnight treatment. The comparative solubility profile of the polymers in ethanol and methanol 
 correlated well with the process of fusion of these polymer particles. The solubility of PDLLA is higher in methanol as 
 compared to ethanol, and the process of fusion of PDLLA CTAB particles in presence of methanol was more rapid and 
 stronger than with ethanol. In the case of PLGA, its solubility 
 in ethanol was poor as compared with PDLLA, but showed better solubility in methanol. PLGA-CTAB particles fused 
 well with methanol, but not with ethanol. PLLA and PS have poor solubility in methanol and ethanol and PLLA-CTAB and 
 PS-CTAB particles did not fuse in presence of either of the 
 solvents. The process of fusion in PDLLA-CTAB particles 
 with ethanol and methanol was inhibited by adding PLLA to PDLLA in the ratio of 40:60 respectively during particle 
 formulation. These observations suggested that apart from 
 the desorption of surfactant molecules from the surface of the particles by alcohol, solubility profile of the polymer in the 
 alcohol/surfactant mixture play an important role infusion of polymer particles in to higher order structure. 
 Effect of Temperature in the Surfactant Mediated Fusion of Polymer Particles Temperature play an important role infusion of polylactide 
 particles, since raising the temperature above the glass tran 
 sition temperature (Tg) of PDLLA of about 60° C. can result 
 in fusion of PDLLA material or particles. Residual water present in the polylactide particles prepared by double emul 
 sion solvent evaporation method has been reported to lower the Tg of the polylactide particles (Passerini N. Craig D QM. 
 An invention into the effects of residual water on the glass transition temperature of polylactide microspheres using 
 modulated temperature DSC. Journal of Controlled Release 
 2001; 73: 111-5). Differential scanning calorimetric studies 
 of PDLLA-CTAB particles showed that the glass transition temperature was not much lowered during the formulation of 
 the particles. The particles showed a Tg of 58°C. which is not 
 much less than that of the raw polymer (FIG. 5A). Calori 
 metric studies also showed that there was no change in the polymer characteristics after the fusion of particles into 
 higher order structures (FIG. 5 B). To further check the sta bility of the PDLLA-CTAB particles, one batch of dry par 
 ticles were kept at 37° C. in an incubator overnight and 
 another batch of particles were wetted with water at 37°C. In both the cases, the particles were stable and no fusion took place. To evaluate the effect of temperature during wetting 
 with ethanol, PDLLA-CTAB particles were wetted with 
 chilled ethanol at different temperatures and fusion of 
 PDLLA-CTAB particles was observed in presence of ethanol 
 even at -20°C. These observations suggested that the des orbing Surfactant molecules played a critical role in forming 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 14 
 the fusion regions between polylactide particles in ethanol 
 and was independent of temperature and the effect of the 
 Solvent in mediating the process of fusion. X ray diffraction 
 study of the polymer particles and the scaffold showed similar 
 amorphous nature of the polymer, indicating that the fusion 
 mediated by the Surfactant molecules did not change the intrinsic property of the polymer particles (FIG. 6 A, B). 
 Evaluation of Polymeric Membrane as Artificial Skin Substi 
 tute 
 Polylactide membrane formulated by the above fusion pro 
 cess was evaluated as artificial skin Substitute for wound 
 healing inexperimental animal models. Ethanol treatment not 
 only removed the surfactant molecules from the particles 
 while making the membrane but also sterilized the mem branes for medical application. The membrane (FIG. 1 B) was 
 directly transferred onto the non infected full thickness wounds of Wistar rats. Wound scoring was done in the group 
 of animals treated with the polymeric membrane and com 
 pared with those animals which did not receive any treatment with the membrane. Preliminary evaluation of the polymeric 
 membrane showed good results. The polymeric membrane composed of the fused polylactide particles adhered to the 
 wound bed and did not cause adverse reactions during the entire closure of the wound (FIG. 7 A-D). The porous nature 
 of the polymeric membrane maintained a moist environment needed for proper wound healing, at the same time preventing 
 excessive loss of fluids. It also serves as a temporary artificial skin Substitute till complete healing and regeneration of the 
 wound takes place. In the collagen assay it was found that 
 wound treated with polylactide membrane has more collagen content in the skin as compared to the control. The collagen 
 content in healed skin of the animals treated with polylactide membrane was around 30 ug/ml in comparison to 14 ug/ml of 
 collagen in the skin of the untreated animals. 
 Having generally described the invention, the same will be more readily understood through reference to the following 
 examples which are provided by way of illustration, and are 
 not intended to be limiting of the present invention, unless specified. 
 EXAMPLES 
 It should be understood that the following examples 
 described herein are for illustrative purposes only and that various modifications or changes in light of the specification 
 will be suggestive to person skilled in the art and are to be included within, the spirit and purview of this application and 
 the scope of the appended claims. 
 Example 1 
 Materials 
 PDLLA (45 kDa), and PLGA (45 kDa) were purchased 
 from Durect Corporation (Pelham, USA). The surfactants Cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), Sodiumdode cyl Sulphate (SDS) and Tween 20 were procured from 
 Amresco chemicals, USA. Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and polystyrene were from Sigma Chemicals, USA. 6-Coumarin (8037L) was from Polysciences, Warrington, Pa. Sircol col 
 lagen assay kit was from Biocolor life Science assays, UK. 
 Preparation of Surfactant Coated Polymer Particles PDLLA particles were prepared using w/o/w double emul 
 sion solvent evaporation method (Katare Y K. Muthukuma 
 ran T. Panda AK. Influence of particle size, antigen load, dose and additional adjuvant on the immune response from antigen 
 loaded PLA microparticles. Int J Pharm 2005: 301:149-60). US 8,268,342 B2 
 15 
 For the preparation of the macro particles, initially a primary 
 emulsion between internal aqueous phase consisting of 2 ml 
 MQ water and an organic phase (OP) consisting of the poly 
 mer (200 mg) dissolved in 4 ml dichloromethane was pre pared by sonication (20 W, 40% duty cycle, 20 cycles), (Ban delin, Germany). The primary emulsion was dripped slowly 
 into 300 ml of an external aqueous phase (EAP) containing 
 the surfactant (CTAB, SDS or Tween 20) at a concentration of 1% w/v. The secondary emulsion was continuously stirred slowly overnight using a magnetic stirrer for the dichlo 
 romethane to evaporate. As the polymer particles solidify, the 
 Surfactant molecules get coated on the Surface of polymer particles. Polymer micro and nano particles were prepared by varying the energy input during emulsion preparation and the 
 OP to EAP volume ratio as described earlier (Kanchan V. Panda A. K. Interactions of antigen loaded polylactide par 
 ticles with macrophages and their correlation with immune 
 response. Biomaterials 2007; 28: 5344-57). For the micro particle preparation, secondary emulsion was homogenized 
 (10,000 rpm for 10 min) using a homogenizer (Polytron, 
 Switzerland) and the secondary emulsion was Sonicated for nano particle preparation. The resulting particles were col 
 lected by centrifugation (15,000 rpm, 20 min), and lyo 
 philized to obtain free-flowing Surfactant coated polymer par 
 ticles. Polymer particles prepared with 1% (w/v) polyvinyl 
 alcohol (PVA) in the external aqueous phase were used as 
 control (Sahoo S K, Panda A. K. Labhasetwar V. Character ization of porous PLGA/PLA microparticles as a scaffold for 
 three dimensional growth of breast cancer cells. Biomacro 
 molecules 2005; 6: 1132-39). Surfactant coated PLLA, PLGA and polystyrene particle were prepared using solvent 
 evaporation method as described above. For the preparation 
 of fluorescent particles, 50 ul of 6-coumarin dye (1 mg/ml in 
 dichloromethane) was also added to OP during primary emul 
 sion step (Kanchan V. Panda A. K. Interactions of antigen loaded polylactide particles with macrophages and their cor 
 relation with immune response. Biomaterials 2007:28: 5344 57). Size distribution of the particles was determined using 
 Malvern mastersizer 2000 particle size analyzer (Malvern, 
 UK). Preparation of Polymeric Membranes and Scaffolds by Sur 
 factant Mediated Fusion of Polymer Particles The dry surfactant coated PDLLA particles were spread on 
 plastic petridishes and wetted or soaked with 100% ethanol to immediately form polymeric membrane composed of fused 
 particles. After the formation of the fused membrane, the 
 scaffold was washed with sterile distilled water. This resulted 
 in hardening of the membrane. By evenly spreading the poly 
 mer particles in different sized petri-dishes and fusing with 
 ethanol spherical membrane of different dimension (desired shape, size and thickness) were fabricated. For formulating 
 three dimensional structures, the Surfactant coated particles 
 were filled in a suitable mould (eppendorf tubes and falcon plastic tubes) and wetted with ethanol to form the shape of the 
 mould. After the removal of ethanol and treatment with water, 
 the three dimensional scaffolds were removed from the mold. 
 CTAB coated polylactide particles were spread in a Petri 
 dish and transiently wetted with ethanol. The particles show rapid aggregation and are fused into a stable network of 
 particles. The particle scaffold when transferred to water becomes rigid and easy to handle. The fusion of the particles 
 occurs at room temperature. Some of the CTAB coated poly lactide-co-glycolide particles do not fuse with ethanol treat 
 ment, but does so with methanol. The particles were packed in 
 molds of desired shape and when wetted with ethanol fused in a controlled manner and on drying, stable higher order struc 
 tures are obtained. 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 16 
 Polylactide particles coated with different surfactants like 
 SDS and Tween 20 also showed fusion with ethanol and 
 methanol. Normally, it is not entropically favorable for plain 
 polylactide or polylactide-co-glycolide particles to form 
 fusion regions when transiently wetted with ethanol or 
 methanol. 
 Microscopy Analysis of the Fused Polymer Particles 
 The fusion bridges between the particles were visualized 
 by using a scanning electron microscope (SEM)-model EVO 
 50 (Zeiss). The images were taken after coating the particle 
 Surface with gold over an aluminium stub. The Transmission 
 electron microscopy (TEM) images of the fused micro par 
 ticles were taken using CM10, Philips, Holland after coating 
 the particles with 1% uranyl acetate over a copper grid (Poly 
 Sciences, Warrington, Pa.). Images of the fluorescent 
 PDLLA-CTAB particles were taken using a Nikon ECLIPSE 
 TE 2000 fluorescent microscope fitted with a digital camera 
 (1200 DXM). Plain optical images of the fused particles were 
 also taken under bright light in monochrome mode. 
 Estimation of Surfactant Desorption from the Polymer Par 
 ticles During Ethanol Treatment 
 Concentration of CTAB on the surface of the polymer particle was estimated by measuring the Zeta potential of the 
 particles before and after treatment with ethanol using Nano 
 Z (Malvern Instruments, UK). All the measurements of the different surfactant coated polymer particles before and after 
 treatment with different alcohols were carried out in phos 
 phate buffered saline (PBS). In case of scaffolds, they were broken down into fine fragments and the Zeta potential value 
 measured. The Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) of the sur 
 factant coated particle surface before and after ethanol treat ment were carried out using Nanoscope (Veeco, USA). Par 
 ticles were diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to 
 concentrations in the range of 0.5-2 mg/ml. The diluted solu tion was then deposited onto mica Supports or glass slide. 
 Amplitude-distance curves were used to optimize resolution 
 and contrast in semi-contact mode of atomic force micros 
 copy. A colorimetric method was employed to determine the 
 concentration of PVA adsorbed on the PDLLA particles 
 before and after ethanol treatment (Sahoo S K, Panyam J. Prabha S. Labhasetwar V. Residual polyvinyl alcohol associ ated with poly (D, L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles 
 affects their physical properties and cellular uptake. Journal 
 of Controlled Release 2002: 82: 105-14). PDLLA-PVA par 
 ticles were treated with ethanol and the PVA concentration on 
 the particles compared with untreated particles. Briefly, the 
 particle samples were treated with 2 ml of 0.5MNaOH for 15 
 min at 60° C. Samples were neutralized with 900 ul of 1 N 
 HCL, and the volume was adjusted to 5 ml with distilled 
 water. To each sample 3 ml of 0.65 M solution of boric acid, 
 0.5 ml of a solution of Iodine/Potassium Iodide (0.05 M/0.15 
 M), and 1.5 ml of distilled water were added. The absorbance of the samples was measured at 690 nm following incubation 
 for 15 min at room temperature. Colorimetric estimation of 
 SDS desorbed from PDLLA-SDS particles was carried 
 before and after ethanol treatment (Arand M, Friedberg T. 
 Oesch F. Colorimetric quantitation of trace amounts of Sodium lauryl Sulphate in the presence of nucleic acids and 
 proteins. Anal Biochem 1992: 207: 73-5). The samples were transferred to an eppendorf tube and brought up to a Volume 
 of 0.3 ml by the addition of water or ethanol. An equal volume of the methylene blue reagent was added and the mixture was 
 extracted with 1.2 ml chloroform by thorough vortexing. 
 After centrifugation, the lower organic phase was transferred 
 to an eppendorf tube and the absorbance of the Supernatant 
 was taken at 651 nm with chloroform as reference. US 8,268,342 B2 
 17 
 Differential Scanning Calorimetry and X-Ray Diffraction 
 Differential scanning calorimetry analysis of the free and 
 fused surfactant coated particles were carried out using 
 PYRIS 6 DSC (PerkinElmer). The samples were heated from 
 35° C. to 200° C. at 10°C/min and held for 1 min at 200° C. 
 Then the samples were cooled from 200° C. to 35° C. at 10° C./min. The X-ray diffraction of PDLLA-CTAB particles 
 before and after ethanol treatment was carried out using PAN analytic's XPert X-ray diffraction system. 
 Evaluation of Polymer Membrane as an Artificial Skin Sub 
 stitute in Animal Wound Model 
 Animals were maintained according to the guidelines 
 established by the Institute Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC) of the National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi. Prelimi 
 nary evaluation of the polymeric membrane for wound heal ing was tested on Wistar rats. All Surgical procedures were 
 carried out under anesthesia. For the initial experiments, the 
 polymeric membrane was evaluated for non-infected full skin 
 thickness wounds (2x3 cm) on the dorsum of rats. The ani mals were divided into the treated and untreated groups (n=6) and in the treated group, the polymeric membrane immedi 
 ately formed after the fusion process was directly transferred 
 onto the wounds. Wound scoring was done at different time points till the complete closure of the wounds (Konrad D, 
 Tsunoda M. Weber K, Corney SJ, Ullmann L. Effects of a topical silver Sulfadiazine polyurethane dressing on wound 
 healing in experimentally infected wounds. J Exp Anim Sci 
 2002:42: 31-43). Wound Collagen Assay 
 The wound collagen assays of the rat’s skin were per formed using sircol collagen assay. The sircol collagen assay 
 is a well established direct quantitative method for the analy sis of collagens (Phillips RJ, Burdick MD, Hong K, Lutz M A. Murray LA, et al. Circulating fibrocytes traffic to the lungs 
 in response to CXCL 12 and mediate fibrosis. J. Clin Invest 
 2004; 114: 438-46). It contains the reagent Sirius red which reacts specifically with the side chain groups of the basic amino acid groups of collagen. In brief, after an average 
 healing period of 15 days rats (treated with polylactide mem 
 brane and the control animals) were sacrificed. The healed skin were excised and thoroughly washed with PBS. The skin 
 was sliced into Small bits; equal amounts of skin (70mg) from 
 both types of animals were boiled for 80°C. for 50 minutes to 
 extract the cross-linked insoluble collagen from the healed skin of the wounds. The supernatant was filtered using 0.45 
 micron filters and 100 ul of the solution was added to 1 ml of the Sircol dye. After shaking for 30 minutes, the tubes were centrifuged for 5 minutes for 12,000 rpm. Unbound dye solu 
 tion was drained and 1 ml of alkali reagent was added to 
 release the unbound dye. The absorbances of the solutions were measured at 540 nm using spectrophotometer and the 
 collagen content was calculated using a standard curve. 
 Example 2 
 Preparation of Surfactant Coated PLGA Particles 
 and its Fusion 
 The polymeric particles are prepared by double emulsion 
 solvent evaporation method. 200 mg of Polylactide-co-gly 
 collide is dissolved in 4 ml DCM and a primary emulsion is made by Sonification with an internal aqueous phase. Drugs or growth factors can be incorporated in the aqueous phase to encapsulate them in the polymeric particles. The primary 
 emulsion was slowly dripped into an external aqueous phase 
 (300 ml water) and stirred slowly overnight under slow stir 
 ring. The external aqueous phase contains a Surfactant at a 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 18 
 concentration of one percent. The surfactants used are CTAB, Tween 20 and SDS. The polymeric particles slowly solidify 
 as the DCM evaporates and the surfactant molecules coat the Surface of the particles. After overnight stirring the particles are washed and lyophilized to dry powder. Large porous 
 Surfactant coated polymer particles of average size 300 um 
 are obtained. To make Smaller sized particles, the ratio between organic phase to internal aqueous phase can be var ied, along with providing higher energy during secondary 
 emulsification. CTAB coated polylactide micro and nano par ticles were also made by spray drying. These particles were 
 spread on Petridishes and wetted with methanol. The fusions of particles in to higher order structure were observed. Mem 
 brane and scaffold of different design can be formed using PLGA polymer and wetting it with methanol. 
 Example 3 
 Preparation of Polymeric Membrane in the Form of 
 Films/Sheets 
 CTAB coated poly-DL-lactide particles were spread on 
 plastic Petri dishes and gently wetted with ethanol. They showed rapidaggregation and fused into a polymeric network of particles. On transferring the polymeric membrane to 
 water, it became rigid and was easy to handle as a sheet or 
 membrane. Desired shape, thickness and size of the poly meric membrane can be obtained by laying out the particles as 
 required before wetting with ethanol. The fusion of the par 
 ticles occurs in a single easy step and occurs at ambient temperature. The ethanol step also effectively sterilizes the 
 scaffold for any biomedical uses. The surfactant molecules are removed along with the ethanol, ensuring a Surfactant free 
 polymeric membrane. Presence of Surfactants is detrimental 
 to cell growth and the surfactant free scaffolds are suitable for the purpose of tissue engineering. It is seen that stable fusion 
 regions are formed at the point of contacts between the par ticles, at the same time maintaining particle morphology and 
 structure. The bulk properties of the polymer like glass tran sition temperature and molecular weight of the polymer are 
 not changed during the fusion reaction with ethanol. The encapsulated proteins or growth factors are not damaged dur 
 ing this process. CTAB coated polylactide particles also fuse 
 when wetted with methanol, but the fusion reaction is stron ger than ethanol, with loss of particle morphology and struc 
 ture. Polylactide particles coated with SDS and Tween 20 also 
 showed fusion with ethanol and methanol. CTAB coated 
 polylactide-co-glycolide particles fused when wetted with 
 methanol, but not with ethanol. The phenomenon of surfac tant mediated fusion of polymer particles occurred in a charge 
 independent manner with surfactants which were positively charged (CTAB), negatively charged (SDS) and neutral in 
 nature (Tween 20). Normally, it is not entropically favorable for polylactide to form Such fusion regions in presence of 
 ethanol or methanol, but does so in presence of organic Sol 
 vents like dichloromethane, where it is soluble. It is hypoth 
 esized that it is the sudden desorption of the surfactant mol ecules from the Surface of the polymer particles during 
 alcohol treatment, which creates a transient local environ 
 ment, where it is entropically favorable for the surface of the polymer to partly solubilize in alcohol. The evaporating etha nol phase brings the particles together and fusion regions are 
 formed at the points of contact between the particles. The 
 process is terminated when the Surfactant molecules are dis persed into the liquid phase. This novel process of scaffold 
 preparation is Suited for various biomedical applications, as it 
 is a controlled and gentle process which occurs at ambient US 8,268,342 B2 
 19 
 temperature, thus not damaging any encapsulated factors and 
 not changing any of the properties of the polymer. This Sur 
 factant mediated self assembly is a soft approach as opposed 
 to normal methods of fabrication which involves production 
 of heat and friction, which will affect the particle itself in a detrimental way. The polymeric membranes composed of the fused polylactide particles are being used in wound healing in 
 animal models. 
 Example 4 
 Stable Higher Order Scaffold Structures from Polymer Particles Using Different Moulds 
 CTAB coated porous polylactide particles were filled in 
 molds of different shapes like a cylinder, cube etc and wetted 
 with ethanol. The particles rapidly fused into the shape of the 
 mold. The three dimensional structures were removed from 
 the molds and dried (FIG. 2). They showed good strength and 
 stability, which are desired for scaffolds to be used in tissue engineering applications and as drug delivery implants. The 
 porosity of the structures can be adjusted by using polymer 
 particles of different sizes. This allows proper inflow of 
 growth media and as a scaffold for the growing cells. Growth 
 factors and other factors can be encapsulated in the bio 
 degradable particles which ensure controlled release of these 
 factors into the tissue microenvironment. 
 TABLE 1. 
 Colorimetric Estimation of SDS desorption from the particles 
 during ethanol treatment and estimation of PVA retained by the 
 particles during water and ethanol treatment 
 After Water After Ethanol 
 Treatment (OD) Treatment (OD) 
 PDLLA-SDS O.098 0.955 
 particles 
 PDLLA-PVA O.O82 O.O71 
 particles 
 What is claimed is: 
 1. A process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold useful for tissue engineering, therapeutic compound 
 delivery and/or wound dressing, wherein said process com prises: 
 a. adding Surfactant coated polymer particles to a mold, wherein the polymer comprising said particles is Selected from the group consisting of poly-DL-lactide and polylactide co-glycolide; 
 b. Soaking said particles with alcohol, wherein soaking 
 causes the fusion of said particles to form a scaffold; and c. washing the above with water to obtain the polymer 
 scaffold from the mold. 
 2. The process of preparation of the biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold as claimed in claim 1 optionally comprising encap Sulating within said polymer particles from step (a) growth 
 factors, proteins or therapeutic compounds. 
 3. The process as claimed in claim 2, wherein said growth 
 factor is selected from a group consisting of TGF-beta fam ily, bone morphogenic proteins, fibroblast growth factors-1 
 and -2, platelet-derived growth factor-AA, and -BB, platelet 
 rich plasma, vascular endothelial cell-derived growth factor and epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet derived growth 
 factor (PDGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), basic fibro blast growth factor (bFGF), bone morphogenic proteins 
 (BMPs) and combinations thereof. 10 
 15 
 25 
 30 
 35 
 40 
 45 
 50 
 55 
 60 
 65 20 
 4. The process of preparation of the biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold as claimed in claim 1, wherein said mold is a solid 
 Support. 
 5. The process of preparation of the scaffold as claimed in 
 claim 1, wherein the mold is used to shape the polymer 
 scaffold into the shape of said mold. 
 6. The process as claimed in claim 1, wherein said Surfac 
 tant is selected from the group consisting of cationic, anionic 
 and neutral Surfactant. 
 7. The process as claimed in claim 1, wherein said surfac tant is selected from the group consisting of cetyl trimethyl 
 ammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium dodecyl sulphate 
 (SDS), and Tween 20. 
 8. The process as claimed in claim 1, wherein said alcohol 
 is selected from a group consisting of ethanol, methanol and propanol. 
 9. The process as claimed in claim 1, wherein said alcohol 
 is ethanol. 
 10. The process as claimed in claim 1, wherein said alcohol 
 is methanol. 
 11. A process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold, wherein said process comprises: 
 a. adding cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) 
 coated polymer particles of Poly-DL-lactide (PDLLA) 
 to a mold; 
 b. Soaking said particles with ethanol or methanol, wherein 
 soaking causes the fusion of said particles to form a 
 scaffold; and 
 c. washing the above with water to obtain the polymer 
 scaffold from the mold. 
 12. A process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer 
 scaffold, wherein said process comprises: 
 a. adding cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) coated polymer particles of polylactide co-glycolide 
 particle on to a mold; 
 b. Soaking said particles with methanol, wherein soaking 
 causes the fusion of said particles to form a scaffold; and 
 c. washing the above with water to obtain the polymer 
 scaffold from the mold. 
 13. A process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer 
 membrane useful for tissue engineering, therapeutic com pound delivery and/or wound dressing, wherein said process comprises: 
 a. Spreading Surfactant coated polymer particles on a mold, wherein the polymer comprising said particles is 
 Selected from the group consisting of poly-DL-lactide and polylactide co-glycolide; 
 b. Soaking said particles with alcohol, wherein soaking 
 causes the fusion of said particles to form a membrane; 
 and 
 c. washing the above with water to obtain the polymer 
 membrane from the mold. 
 14. The process of preparation of the biodegradable poly 
 mer membrane as claimed in claim 13 optionally comprising encapsulating within said polymer particles from step (a) growth factors, proteins or therapeutic compounds. 
 15. The process as claimed in claim 14, wherein said growth factor is selected from a group consisting of TGF .beta family, bone morphogenic proteins, fibroblast growth 
 factors-1 and -2, platelet-derived growth factor-AA, and-BB, platelet rich plasma, vascular endothelial cell-derived growth 
 factor and epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet derived 
 growth factor (PDGF), insulin-like growth factor (IGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bfGF), bone morphogenic proteins 
 (BMPs) and combinations thereof. US 8,268,342 B2 
 21 
 16. The process of preparation of the biodegradable poly 
 mer membrane as claimed in claim 13, wherein said mold is a solid Support. 
 17. The process of preparation of the membrane as claimed 
 in claim 13, wherein the mold is used to shape the polymer 
 membrane into the shape of said mold. 
 18. The process as claimed in claim 13, wherein said sur factant is selected from the group consisting of cationic, 
 anionic and neutral Surfactant. 
 19. The process as claimed in claim 13, wherein said sur factant is selected from the group consisting of cetyltrimethyl 
 ammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium dodecyl sulphate 
 (SDS), and Tween 20. 
 20. The process as claimed in claim 13, wherein said alco hol is selected from a group consisting of ethanol, methanol and propanol. 
 21. The process as claimed in claim 13, wherein said alco 
 hol is ethanol. 
 22. The process as claimed in claim 13, wherein said alco 
 hol is methanol. 5 
 10 
 15 22 
 23. A process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer 
 membrane, wherein said process comprises: a. spreading cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) coated polymer particles of Poly-DL-lactide (PDLLA) 
 on a mold; b. Soaking said particles with ethanol or methanol, wherein soaking causes the fusion of said particles to form a 
 membrane; and c. washing the above with water to obtain the polymer 
 membrane from the mold. 
 24. A process of preparation of a biodegradable polymer 
 membrane, wherein said process comprises: 
 a. spreading cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) coated polymer particles of polylactide co-glycolide 
 particle on a mold; 
 b. Soaking said particles with methanol, wherein soaking 
 causes the fusion of said particles to form a membrane; 
 and 
 c. washing the above with water to obtain the polymer 
 membrane from the mold. 
 k k k k k 