Chapter 34 
 
Treatment of non-convuls ive status epilepticus 
 
MATTHEW C. WALKER  
Institute of Neurology, Univers ity College London, National Hos pital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London _______________________________________________________________ _________ 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Seizures of any type can continue unabated and they are then co nsidered as a separate entity, 
status epilepticus. This is of great importance, as in certain circumstances a persistent seizure 
can result in neuronal damage i rrespective of any physiological  compromise. 
 
Among the diagnoses of status epilepticus are a number that can  are considered as non-
convulsive status epilepticus including absence status epilepti cus, atypical absence status 
epilepticus, electrical status epilepticus during slow-wave sle ep (including Landau-Kleffner 
syndrome), complex partial status epilepticus and status epilep ticus in coma. Indirect 
estimates for the incidence of n on-convulsive status epilepticu s have been as high as 14 24 
per 100,000 population per year (the majority of these are non- convulsive status epilepticus 
in the setting of learning difficulties). Although non-convulsi ve status epilepticus includes a 
number of very different conditions, these forms of status epil epticus share two important 
qualities: difficulty in making the diagnosis, and uncertainty about the best mode of 
treatment. 
 
Diagnosis 
 
The diagnosis of non-convulsive status epilepticus can be diffi cult, and is dependent on EEG. 
In patients with a previous diagnosis of epilepsy, any prolonge d change in personality, 
prolonged post-ictal confusion (greater than 20 minutes) or rec ent onset psychosis should be 
investigated with EEG as these can all be presentations of non- convulsive status epilepticus. 
If new onset developmental delay occurs in the setting of epile psy then a sleep EEG should 
be considered to look for status epilepticus during slow-wave s leep (see below). In non-
comatose patients with no history of epilepsy, non-convulsive s tatus epilepticus can present 
as confusion or personality change (almost invariably in the se tting of a metabolic 
derangement, encephalitis or other acute precipitant). Rarely, non-convulsive status 
epilepticus can present as autism and if suspicions are raised (usually a fluctuating course) 
then EEG is indicated.  
Non-convulsive status epilepticus can follow convulsive status epilepticus, and is an 
important treatable cause of persistent coma following convulsi ve status epilepticus. This and 
status epilepticus with subtle m anifestations such as twitching  of the limbs, or facial muscles 
or nystagmoid eye jerking, which can result from hypoxic brain damage, are often 
collectively referred to as subtle motor status epilepticus. Up  to 8% of patients in coma who 
have no outward signs of seizure activity are in non-convulsive  status epilepticus, thus 
emphasising the importance of EEG in the investigation of comat ose patients. Similarly, non-
convulsive status epilepticus i s underdiagnosed in the confused  e l d e r l y  i n  w h o m  t h e  
confusion is frequently  blamed on other causes. 
Although EEG interpretation is usually straightforward, with re gular repetitive discharges 
occurring in some patients in a cyclical fashion, difficulties can occur in differentiating non-
convulsive status epilepticus from an encephalopathy of other c ause. Thus electrographic definitions of non-convulsive status epilepticus should include : unequivocal electrographic 
seizure activity; periodic epileptiform discharges or rhythmic discharge with clinical seizure 
activity; and rhythmic discharge with either clinical or electr ographic response to treatment. 
There is uncertainty about the relevance of periodic lateralise d epileptiform discharges 
(PLEDs). This is most notable following severe encephalitis or hypoxic injury in which 
discharges can occur with such periodicity so as to be confused  with periodic discharges seen 
following prolonged status epilepticus. Some have argued that s uch discharges represent 
ongoing seizure activity, and should be treated thus. The gener al consensus, however, is that 
a multitude of aetiologies can underlie PLEDs, and that they sh ould only be treated as 
epileptic if there is other e vidence of ictal activity. 
 
Neuronal damage and non-conv ulsive status epilepticus 
 
It has long been recognised that ongoing electrographic seizure  activity can result in neuronal 
damage, so-called excitotoxic ne uronal damage. This damage occu rs in animal models of 
non-convulsive status epilepticus. These animal models, however , involve the induction of 
status epilepticus in non-epilep tic animals with either powerfu l chemoconvulsants or 
prolonged high frequency repetitive stimulation. This is very d ifferent from the human 
situation. Furthermore, non-convul sive status epilepticus in hu mans tends to have lower 
frequency discharges, which if reproduced in animal models prod uces substantially less 
neuronal damage.  Another important finding has been that epileptic animals, anim als pretreated with 
antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) and young animals are all resistant to chemoconvulsant induced 
neuronal damage. Thus young age, AEDs and prior history of epil epsy probably all confer 
some degree of neuroprotection. Lastly, in humans non-convulsiv e status epilepticus often 
results from an acute precipitant such as an encephalitis and, in such circumstances, the status 
epilepticus only minimally contributes to any resultant patholo gy. 
 There have been reports of prolonged memory problems, hemipares is and death occurring 
following complex partial status epilepticus although, in most of these cases, the outcome 
relates to the underlying aetiology. Indeed, the degree to whic h non-convulsive status 
epilepticus contributes to neurona l damage in humans is unclear . Since aggressive treatment 
is not entirely benign, and can lead to hypotension and respira tory arrest, then the best 
approach to treatment will only be determined in randomised stu dies of aggressive versus 
more conservative management. 
 
Specific forms of non-convulsive status epilepticus  
 Typical absence status epilepticus 
This entity needs to be distinguished from complex partial stat us epilepticus and atypical 
absences seen in mental retardation. This term should perhaps b e reserved for prolonged 
absence attacks with continuous or discontinuous 3 Hz spike and  wave occurring in patients 
with primary generalised epilepsy. The EEG, however, may also i nclude irregular spike and 
wave, prolonged bursts of spike activity, sharp wave or polyspi ke and wave. 
 Although absence epilepsy has its peak in childhood and commonl y remits in adolescence, 
absence status epilepticus commonly occurs in later life. Absen ce status epilepticus can be 
divided into childhood absence status epilepticus (those usuall y already receiving treatment), 
late-onset absence status epilepticus with a history of primary  generalised seizure (often a 
history of absences in childhood) and late-onset absence status  epilepticus developing de 
novo  (usually following drug or alcohol withdrawal). 
 There is no evidence that absence status induces neuronal damag e, and thus aggressive 
treatment is not warranted. Treatment can either be intravenous  or oral. Absence status 
epilepticus is often precipitate d by the prescription of inappr opriate AEDs in idiopathic 
generalised epilepsy (e.g. carba mazepine). Absence status epile pticus responds rapidly to 
intravenous benzodiazepines, and these are so effective that th e response is diagnostic. 
Lorazepam at 0.05 0.1 mg/kg is the benzodiazepine of choice. The effect may only be 
transient and a longer acting AED may need to be given. If intr avenous treatment is required, 
but either benzodiazepines are ineffective or contraindicated t hen intravenous valproate 
(2040 mg/kg) can be given. In cases of primary generalised epileps y treatment should be 
continued with a suitable AED. If a precipitating factor can be  identified in late-onset de novo  
cases, then long-term therapy is not usually indicated.  Complex partial status epilepticus 
Complex partial status epilep ticus has to be differentiated not  only from other forms of non-
convulsive status epilepticus, but  also from post-ictal states,  and other neurological and 
psychiatric conditions. EEG can b e helpful, but often the scalp  EEG changes are non-specific 
and the diagnosis is very much clinical in nature. The definiti on as ‘a prolonged epileptic 
episode in which focal fluctuating or frequently recurring elec trographic epileptic discharges, 
arising in temporal or extratemporal regions, result in a confu sional state with variable 
clinical symptoms’ is suitably vague and is necessary to emphas ise that complex partial status 
epilepticus can originate in any cortical region and can fluctu ate in a cyclical fashion. A 
further factor is importantly included in this definition, and that is the absence of coma; 
electrographic status epilepticus in coma is considered separat ely, partly because of its poor 
prognosis. 
 How aggressively complex partial status epilepticus should be t reated depends upon: the 
prognosis of the condition; and whether treatment improves the prognosis. As in all epilepsies 
the prognosis relates partly to the prognosis of the underlying  aetiology and any concomitant 
medical conditions. Complex partia l status epilepticus in someo ne with epileps y is probably 
a more benign condition than acute precipitated status epilepti cus, and should perhaps be 
treated thus. The medication used to treat status epilepticus i s not without adverse effects and 
can result in hypotension, respiratory depression and, sometime s, cardio-respiratory arrest. 
This is more so with intravenous administration with its result ant rapid, high serum levels. 
At present, early recognition of the condition and treatment wi th oral or rectal 
benzodiazepines is recommended; oral clobazam has proven to be an effective treatment. In 
patients who have repetitive attacks of complex partial status epilepticus, oral clobazam 
(1020 mg/day) over a period of 2 3 days given early at home can usually abort the status 
epilepticus, and such strategi es should be discussed with patie nt and carers. 
 
Early recognition is a critical goal, as the delay in treatment  comes not from therapeutic 
strategy, but from failure to diagnose the condition in the fir st place. For more persistent or 
resistant complex partial status  epilepticus intravenous therap y should be used, and 
lorazepam followed by phenytoin are the drugs of choice. In con trast to absence status 
epilepticus, the response to b enzodiazepines can be disappointi ng, and often there is a 
resolution of the electrographi c status epilepticus without con
comitant clinical improvement 
(possibly due to post-ictal effects). Whether general anaesthes ia is ever justified remains a 
matter for speculation; since most complex partial status epile pticus is self-terminating often 
without any serious neurological sequelae, then such aggressive  therapy should, in most 
instances, be avoided. Treatment  of the underlying cause (e.g. encephalitis or metabolic 
derangement) is of course param ount, and can often lead to reso lution of the status 
epilepticus.  
Atypical absence status epilepticus 
Atypical absence status epilepticus is associated with the epil eptic encephalopathies such as 
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. This entity can be difficult to diagno se, but should be considered 
if there is change in personality, decrease in cognition or inc reased confusion in a patient with 
one of these epilepsies. The EEG characteristics are usually th at of continuous or frequent 
slow (< 2.5 Hz) spike and wave. This condition is usually poorl y responsive to intravenous 
benzodiazepines, which should, in any case, be given cautiously , as they can induce tonic 
status epilepticus in these patients. Oral rather than intraven ous treatment is usually more 
appropriate, and the drugs of choice are valproate, lamotrigine , topiramate, clonazepam and 
clobazam. Sedating medication, carbamazepine and vigabatrin hav e been reported to worsen 
atypical absences.  
Non-convulsive status epilepticus in coma 
 
Electrographic status epilepticus in coma is not uncommon and i s seen in up to 8% of patients 
in coma with no clinical evidence of seizure activity. The diag nosis is often debatable as in 
many instances burst-suppression patterns, periodic discharges and encephalopathic triphasic 
patterns have been proposed to represent electrographic status epilepticus, while these mostly 
indicate underlying widespread cortical damage or dysfunction. Non-convulsive status 
epilepticus in coma consists of three groups: those who had con vulsive status epilepticus, 
those who have subtle clinical signs of seizure activity and th ose with no clinical signs. 
Convulsive status epilepticus has, as part of its evolution, su btle status epilepticus in which 
there is minimal or no motor activity but ongoing electrical ac tivity. This condition should 
be treated aggressively with deep anaesthesia and concomitant A EDs. The association of 
electrographic status epilepticus with subtle motor activity of ten follows hypoxic brain 
activity and has a poor prognosis, but aggressive therapy with benzodiazepines, phenytoin 
and increased anaesthesia is perhaps justified, since the littl e evidence available indicates that 
such treatment improves prognosis.  
Lastly electrographic status epilepticus with no overt clinical  signs is difficult to interpret – 
does it represent status epilep ticus or widespread cortical dam age? Since these patients have 
a poor prognosis, aggressive treatment is recommended in the ho pe that it may improve 
outcome. Lastly there is a group of patients in whom there are clinical signs of repetitive 
movements, but no electrographic seizure activity, and in these  patients antiepileptic 
treatment and aggressive sed ation is not recommended. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Non-convulsive status epilepticus is an all-encompassing term t hat covers a variety of 
conditions with very different p rognoses from the entirely beni gn to the fatal (although this 
is mainly due to the underlying aetiology). These conditions ar e poorly replicated by available 
animal models, and this togethe r with the lack of randomised tr eatment trials has meant that 
the best treatment options are unknown. It is important to reme mber that aggressive AED 
treatment is not benign especially  when deep anaesthesia is pro posed.  
 
 
Further reading 
AGATHONIKOU A, PANAYIOTOPOULOS CP, GIANNAKODIMOS S et al (1998)  Typical absence status in adults: 
diagnostic and syndromic considerations. Epilepsia 39(12) , 1265-1276. 
CASCINO GD (1993) Nonconvulsive sta tus epilepticus in adults an d children. Epilepsia 34 (Suppl 1) , S21-S28. 
COCKERELL OC, WALKER MC, SANDE R JW et al (1994) Complex partial  status epilepticus: a recurrent problem. 
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 57(7) , 835-837. 
DRISLANE FW (1999) Evidence against permanent neurologic damage  from nonconvulsive status epilepticus. J Clin 
Neurophysiol 16(4) , 323-331. GRANNER MA, LEE SI (1994) Nonconvulsive status epilepticus: EEG  analysis in a large series. Epilepsia 35(1) , 42-
47. 
KAPLAN P (2000) Prognos is in nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Epileptic Disord 2(4) , 185194. 
KAPLAN PW (1999) Assessing the outcomes in patients with noncon vulsive status epilepticus: nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus is underdiagnosed, potentially overtreated, and con founded by comorbidity. J Clin Neurophysiol 16 , 341-
352. LOWENSTEIN DH, AMINOFF MJ (1992) Clinical and EEG features of s tatus epilepticus in comatose patients. 
Neurology 42(1) , 100-104. 
MORRELL F, WHISLER WW, SMITH MC et al (1995) Landau-Kleffner sy ndrome. Treatment with subpial 
intracortical transection. Brain 118 , 1529-1546. 
POHLMANN-EDEN B, HOCH DB, COCHI US JI et al (1996) Periodic late ralized epileptiform discharges  a critical 
review. J Clin Neurophysiol 13(6) , 519-530. 
PORTER RJ, PEN RY JK (1983) Petit mal status. Adv Neurol 34 , 61-67. 
SHORVON SD (1994) Status Epilepticus: Its Clinical Features and Treatment in Children and Adults. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 1994. THOMAS P, VALTON L, GENTON P (2006) Absence and myoclonic statu s epilepticus precipita ted by antiepileptic 
drugs in idiopathic generalized epilepsy. Brain  129, 1281-1292. 
TOWNE AR, WATERHOUSE EJ, BOGGS JG et al (2000) Prevalence of no nconvulsive status epilepticus in comatose 
patients. Neurology 54(2) , 340-345. 
TREIMAN DM, DELGADO EA (1983) Com plex partial status epilepticu s. Adv Neurol 34 , 69-81. 
WALKER MC (2001) Diagnosis and tr eatment of nonconvulsive statu s epilepticus. CNS Drugs 15(12) , 931-939 
YAN LIU, X, WONG V (2000) Spectrum of epileptic syndromes with electrical status epilepticus during sleep in 
children. Pediatr Neurol 22(5),  371-379. 