APMIS 112: 808–14, 2004 Copyright CAPMIS 2004
Printed in Denmark . All rights reserved
ISSN 0903-4641
Diagnostic PCR: validation and sample preparation are
two sides of the same coin
JEFFREY HOORFAR,1PETRA WOLFFS2and PETER RÅDSTRO ¨M3
1Department of Microbiological Food Safety, Danish Institute for Food and Veterinary Research (DFVF),
Copenhagen, Denmark,2Canadian Research Institute for Food Safety, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario,
Canada, and3Department of Applied Microbiology, Lund Institute of T echnology, Lund University, Lund,
Sweden
Hoorfar J, W olffs P , Rådström P . Diagnostic PCR: validation and sample preparation are two sidesof the same coin. APMIS 2004;112:808–14.
Increased use of powerful PCR technology for the routine detection of pathogens has focused atten-
tion on the need for international validation and preparation of ofﬁcial non-commercial guidelines.Bacteria of epidemiological importance should be the prime focus, although a ‘‘validation infrastruc-ture’’ once established could easily be adapted for PCR-based detection of viruses and parasites. Theaim of standardization should be the widespread adoption of diagnostic PCR for routine pathogentesting. European experience provides the impetus for realization of this vision through preparationof quantitative reference DNA material and reagents, production of stringent protocols and tools forthermal cycler performance testing, uncomplicated sample preparation techniques, and extensive ringtrials for assessment of the efﬁcacy of selected matrix/pathogen detection protocols.
Key words: Diagnostic; PCR; standardization; validation; sample preparation.Jeffrey Hoorfar, Danish Institute for Food and Veterinary Research (DFVF), Bülowsvej 27, DK-1790
Copenhagen V , Denmark. e-mail: JHO /DFVF .DK
The strength of diagnostic PCR, as opposed to
investigative PCR, is its ability to rapidly andreproducibly screen for negative samples, whichallows more resources to be directed towardscharacterization and epidemiological trackingof positive isolates. In addition, for slow-grow-ing pathogens, intracellular bacteria, viruses,and viable-but-non-culturable pathogens, PCRhas opened up new detection possibilities (1).
While investigative PCR is mainly used ad hoc
for a limited period by a few technicians andfor a speciﬁc research project, diagnostic PCR
has to perform reliably and consistently dayafter day in the hands of different staff and ondifferent samples. The latter is of particular rel-
Invited Review.
808evance for method validation, since the well-rec-
ognized inhibition of DNA polymerase bymany different constituents of the sample ma-trix is the Achilles’ heal of PCR (2). This is themain reason that – especially for PCR – vali-dation and sample preparation should be seenas two sides of the same coin.
INTEGRATED APPROACH
Each element of diagnostic PCR could be dealt
with separately, but a more integrated approachshould take into consideration the three follow-ing issues: Sample-speciﬁc method developmentand validation, establishment of an internalquality assurance scheme, and, ﬁnally, partici-pation in external proﬁciency testing ring trials,PCR V ALIDATION
also called external quality assurance (EQA)
programs (Fig. 1).
EQA programs for nucleic acid-based dia-
gnostics have not been widely implemented inclinical laboratories (3). This is partly due tothe limited availability and/or difﬁculties in theshipment of clinical material (4), which hashampered the evaluation and standardization oftests. While internal and external quality assur-ance programs apply universally to any diag-nostic test, a samples-speciﬁc approach is cru-cial to PCR. Why is that so? By looking at es-tablished culture-based methods for pathogendetection, it is perceived that the same ‘‘hori-zontal’’ culture protocol is usually recom-mended for all types of samples, regardless ofthe source and matrix, e.g. Salmonella enterica
(5). This has led some workers to follow thesame culture dogma when developing PCR fordiagnostic purposes. It goes without saying thatfecal samples have a very different compositionthan urine samples. But what makes this differ-ence even more pronounced for PCR is the in-hibitory effect speciﬁc for sample type. It is thusnecessary to choose the sample type before
evaluating a primer set for its selectivity.
SAMPLING AND SAMPLE
PREPARATION
The performance of diagnostic PCR is limited
in part by the presence of inhibitory substances,even in very small amounts. For example, PCRassays containing the widely used thermostableDNA polymerase from Thermus aquaticus ,Taq
DNA polymerase, are totally inhibited in thepresence of as little as 0.004% (vol/vol) blood(6). Therefore, efﬁcient sample processing pro-cedures prior to PCR are needed to improve thetest performance. A sample processing step hasseveral aims: it should not only overcome PCRinhibition but also concentrate target nucleicacids/cells (in the case of subclinically infectedsamples) and, furthermore, turn the heterogen-eous biological sample into a homogeneousPCR-compatible sample. The latter is of im-portance since the composition of certain matri-ces can show drastic batch-to-batch variations.This indicates the need for a PCR-compatiblesample of comparable composition, indepen-dent of the variation in the original matrix.
809
Fig. 1. An integrated approach to establishment of
diagnostic PCR.
In order to comply with the aforementioned
requirements, different pre-PCR processingstrategies have been described (7). There are thethree steps in between a sample matrix to betested and the ampliﬁcation reaction: sampling,sample preparation, and preparation of the am-pliﬁcation mixture.
The sampling procedure has an impact on the
downstream work. For example, the type ofswabbing material used inﬂuences the concen-tration of the target microorganism recovered(8, 9). Depending on the sample type and thetarget pathogen, different aspects of samplingmay be emphasized when choosing a suitablesampling method.
DIFFERENT GOALS BUT ONE
PROTOCOL
If the goal is to remove PCR inhibitors only,
other aims such as concentration of target nuc-leic acids/cells, turning heterogeneous biologicalsamples into homogeneous PCR samples, anddetection of viable (and not dead) cells have notyet been achieved. There are two steps left whenthis can be done. The ﬁrst step and the easiestway to work towards these goals is adjustmentof the ampliﬁcation mixture. PCR inhibitioncan be reduced by the choice of an appropriateDNA polymerase and/or ampliﬁcation facilita-tors that may resist PCR inhibitors, and thusHOORFAR et al.
maintain the robustness of diagnostic PCR in
the presence of inhibitory substances (for reviewsee (7)). In fact, the overall performance of di-agnostic PCR, e.g. ampliﬁcation efﬁciency andlinear range of ampliﬁcation, may be improvedby the use of appropriate DNA polymerase andPCR reagents (9). Nonetheless, adjustment ofthe ampliﬁcation mixture alone is rarely suf-ﬁcient, which means that additional sampletreatment prior to preparation of the ampliﬁ-cation mixture is needed. Numerous samplepreparation protocols have been developed (forreviews see (10)) and one or several can be se-lected depending on the sample type, samplingmethod and ampliﬁcation mixture. Finally, de-pending on the choices made, the mentionedgoals – as well as time and costs – are affectedand will determine the overall success of thePCR strategy in detecting a target pathogen ina biological matrix. This can be illustrated by
TABLE 1. Deﬁnition of terms used in validation of PCR testing (proposed by the MicroVal protocol (14))
Validation Results obtained by PCR should be comparable to those obtained by the refer-
ence method.
Qualitative PCR The test response is either the presence or absence of PCR product (amplicon),
detected either by observation or with equipment.
Quantitative PCR The test response can be correlated with the DNA copy number of amplicon,
related to the number of target microorganisms.
Detection limit (DL) The smallest number of culturable target microorganisms necessary to create a
PCR-positive response.
Selectivity Measure of inclusivity of target strains (from a wide range of strains), and ex-
clusivity (the lack of amplicon from a relevant range of closely related non-target strains).
Positive deviation (PD) PCR-positive case when the reference method gives a negative result (false posi-
tive).
Negative deviation (ND) PCR-negative case when the reference method gives a positive result (false nega-
tive).
Positive agreement (PA) Sample positive by both PCR and the reference method.Negative agreement (NA) Sample negative by both PCR and the reference method.Diagnostic accuracy (AC) Degree of correspondence between the response obtained by PCR and the re-
sponse obtained by the reference method on identical samples (AC Ω(PAπNA)/
total number of samples).
Diagnostic sensitivity (SE) Ability of PCR to detect the microorganism when it is detected by the reference
method ((PA/N π)¿100).
Diagnostic speciﬁcity (SP) Ability of PCR to not detect the microorganism when it is not detected by the
reference method ((NA/N ª)¿100).
Robustness Reproducibility by other laboratories using different batches and brands of re-
agents and validated thermal cyclers and equipment.
Nªis the total number of negative results with the reference method.
Nπis the total number of positive results with the reference method.
810the selection of a fast cheap sampling method
and sample treatment procedure, which mightnot recover sufﬁcient target copies and willtherefore demand a more sensitive PCR assay.It is thus important to follow the integrated ap-proach by choosing a sample type, samplingmethod, sample treatment and PCR mixture, incombination with a PCR assay, and validate thewhole system rather than just a part of it (11).
V ALIDATION USING GOLD
STANDARDS
This brings us back to the well-known dilemma
of PCR vstraditional culture-based methods,
where we are actually comparing ‘‘apples’’ with‘‘oranges’’ (12). In PCR, we are amplifying DNA,while culture-based methods isolate live bacteria,in some cases leaving ‘‘stressed’’ infectious targetPCR V ALIDATION
TABLE 2. Paired results of reference and PCR methods (14)
PCR response Reference method positive (R π) Reference method negative (R ª)
Alternative method positive π/πPositive agreement (PA) ª/πPositive deviation (PD) (R ª/Aπ)
(Aπ)
Alternative method negative π/ªNegative deviation (ND) ª/ªNegative agreement (NA)
(Aª)( A ª/Rπ)
bacteria behind. The stress can be due to initial
antibiotic treatment before the sample is sent tothe laboratory for testing. Many workers haveaddressed this issue by spike-in experiments thatdemonstrate a detection limit of one target bac-terium in a 25 g sample, as required for environ-mental samples. However, the extrapolation ofresults from a test in spiked studies using freshcultures of ‘‘healthy’’ inoculates to routine analy-sis can justiﬁably be questioned.
As a result, some confusion exists in the use
of terminology during the course of validation(12). Recent international documents have pro-vided useful guidelines for the correct use ofterms (Table 1), and simple formulas for calcu-lation of agreement between gold standard andPCR (Table 2) (13, 14).
However, the robustness of a test is best chal-
lenged by data produced by diagnostic staffworking in real-life situations on unselectedclinical samples. Such real-life data would bevery helpful for clinical diagnostic laboratoriesassessing PCR tests from the literature. It is theoverall use and clinical performance of the testunder ﬁeld conditions that interests clinicians.
MEASUREMENT OF TEST V ARIATION
T o establish routine diagnostic PCR methods it
is necessary to investigate speciﬁc parameters,e.g. speciﬁcity, detection limit, linearity, pre-cision, etc. Mathematical and statistical modelsprovide an indication of the reproducibility ofPCR testing (15). The advantage of using thesemodels is that interpretation of the results is ob-jectively based. For example, the detection limitfor a method should reﬂect the entire method,including sampling, sample preparation, nucleicacid ampliﬁcation, and ﬁnally detection of PCRproducts. Unfortunately, most articles reportthe detection limit for the PCR assay withoutdealing with the pre-PCR steps. When studyingthe detection limit it should be borne in mind
811that PCR analysis employs only small sample
volumes, e.g. 5 ml. If the detection limit is stated
to be 1 CFU/ml, the probability of the cell beingin the 5 mL PCR sample is very low, i.e. one
positive out of 200 reactions, if no concen-tration step is included in the pre-PCR pro-cessing of the sample. T o improve the reliabilitythis limit should be associated with the prob-ability of detecting the target DNA/cell at a cer-tain concentration. Löfström et al. (16) haveused a logistic regression model to accuratelydetermine the probability of detecting smallnumbers of salmonellae in feed samples, in thepresence of natural background ﬂora (Fig. 2).From this model, the probability of detecting 1CFU per 25 g of feed in soy samples was calcu-lated and found to be 0.81.
Fig. 2. The graph illustrates the detection probability
at various DNA/cell concentrations. Experimentaldata obtained by plotting the concentration of DNA/cells against the observed relative frequencies of posi-tive PCR detection may be used to generate a logisticregression model (15). The model describes the detec-tion probability at various PCR template concen-trations. Löfström et al. (16) have used this principleto accurately determine the PCR detection limit forsalmonellae.HOORFAR et al.
IMPORTANCE OF TEST CONTROLS
As recommended according to international
standards (13), PCR cannot be given diagnosticstatus before it includes, as a minimum, an inter-nal ampliﬁcation control (IAC), a processingpositive-control, a reagent control (blank) and aprocessing negative control (Table 3). The in-clusion of IAC is of particular importance for di-agnostic PCR (17), although careful consider-ation should be given to design of a proper IAC(18).
False negatives are undesirable and can be
damaging. They prevent us from focusing on aspeciﬁc disease, bringing with them the extracosts and complications of continuing with un-necessary drugs and investigations while search-ing for a diagnosis. This damage extends fromall test types, not just PCR. It would be desir-able to include an internal control for culturemethods; however, to the best of our knowledge,this is not technically possible.
In contrast to a positive control (external), an
IAC is a non-target DNA sequence present inthe very same sample tube, which is co-ampli-ﬁed simultaneously with the target sequence. Ina PCR without an IAC, a negative response (noband or signal) could mean that there was notarget sequence present in the reaction, but itcould also mean that the reaction was inhibited.Where a positive control checks for errors, suchas incorrect PCR mixture or poor DNA poly-merase activity, an IAC will provide an appro-priate way to ensure there is no inhibition in theactual tube due to inhibitory substances in thesample matrix or malfunctions of that part of
TABLE 3. Test controls necessary for performance of diagnostic PCR (13)
Internal ampliﬁcation control (IAC) Containing chimeric non-relevant DNA added to master mixture.
Processing positive control (PPC) Negative sample spiked with sufﬁcient pathogen and processed
throughout the entire protocol.
Processing negative control (PNC) Negative sample spiked with sufﬁcient closely related, but non-target,
strain processed throughout the entire protocol.
Reagent control (blank) Containing all reagents, but no nucleic acid apart from the primers.Premises control T ube containing the master mixture left open in the PCR set-up room
to detect possible contaminating DNA in the environment (carried outat regular intervals as part of the quality assurance program).
Standard concentrations 3 to 4 samples containing 10-fold dilution series of known number of
target DNA copies in a range above the detection limit.
812the thermal cycler area (19). Conversely, in a
PCR with an IAC, a control signal should al-ways be produced even though there is no targetsequence present. This can reveal failure of aPCR reaction.
STANDARDIZATION CAN FACILITATE
QUALITY ASSURANCE
As a model for integrated validation and quality
assurance of genetic tools, a European-levelstrategy was established by the FOOD-PCR pro-ject ((20); www.pcr.dk ). Recognizing the need for
standard PCRs in order to avoid excessive ﬁrst-time validation in each end-user laboratory,European activities were initiated with the aim ofvalidating and standardizing the use of diagnos-tic PCR for detection of bacterial pathogens infoods. The work continues to provide an examplefor standardization efforts in the molecular gen-etics ﬁeld ( www.medvetnet.net ).
In addition to sample preparation methods,
production of reference DNA material (21),preparation of a thermal cycler validationguideline and tools (19), and performance ofPCR ring trials were included. Another import-ant area was automated detection, includingsemi-quantitative real-time PCRs (22).
Amongst the important outcomes of the pro-
ject were guidelines and a biochemical kit forvalidation of thermal cyclers (SureCycle fromwww.congen.de ), a simple method for purifying
DNA from bacterial cultures, production of ref-erence DNA material, workshops organized forend users, and preparation of standardizedPCR V ALIDATION
guidelines in collaboration with the European
Committee on Standardization (CEN), W ork-ing Group 6.
CONCLUSIONS
Substantial work on various aspects of PCR test-
ing and microarray detection has accumulated inthe literature. EQA programs are crucial if policymakers are to be provided with insight into thelevel of diagnostic proﬁciency of responsible lab-oratories. In addition, due to the multitude ofampliﬁcation protocols worldwide, reasonablestatistical models for evaluation of various pro-tocols are needed (4). Future efforts respectingdiagnostic genetic tools should focus on vali-dation, simpliﬁed sample treatment, good lab-oratory practice, establishment of permanentproﬁciency testing schemes and standardization.Without these additional steps, it will be difﬁcultto implement the data available for routine use.However, in clinical medicine a test result ismerely one piece of evidence and should alwaysbe interpreted in the light of the clinical assess-ment. The test may be repeated, another methodmay be used to conﬁrm the clinical suspicion, oran alternative diagnosis may be pursued.
The work was supported in part by EC grant no.
QLK1-CT -1999–00226, grant no. 3401–66–03–5 fromthe Directorate for Food, Fisheries and AgriBusiness(DFFE), and grant no. 115 from the Nordic JointCommittee for Agricultural Research (NKJ). W eshould like to thank Stefan Jensen for excellent tech-nical and editorial assistance.
REFERENCES
1. Lübeck PS, Hoorfar J. PCR technology for detec-
tion of food-borne pathogens. In: Sachse K, FreyJ, editors. Methods in Molecular Biology: PCRDetection of Microbial Pathogens: Methods andProtocols. T otowa, NJ: Humana Press Inc. 2002;vol. 216:65–84.
2. Vaneechoutte M, Van Eldere J. The possibilities
and limitations of nucleic acid ampliﬁcationtechnology in diagnostic microbiology. J MedMicrobiol 1997;46:188–94.
3. Raggi CC, Pinzani P , Paradiso A, Pazzagli M,
Orlando C. External quality assurance programfor PCR ampliﬁcation of genomic DNA: an Ital-ian experience. Clin Chem 2003;49:782–91.
8134. Niedrig M, Schmitz H, Becker S, Günter S, Me-
ulen J, Meter H, Ellerbrok H, Nitsche A, Gelder-blom HR, Drosten C. First international qualityassurance study on the rapid detection of viralagents of bioterrorism. J Clin Microbiol 2004;42:1753–5.
5. Anon. Microbiology – General guidance on
methods for the detection of Salmonella. Inter-national Standard Organization, ISO 6579, 3rdedition. Geneva, Switzerland 1997.
6. Abu Al-Soud W , Rådström P . Capacity of nine
thermostable DNA polymerases to mediateDNA ampliﬁcation in the presence of PCR-in-hibiting samples. Appl Environ Microbiol 1998;64:3748–53.
7. Rådström P , Knutsson R, W olffs P , Lövenklev
M, Löfström C. Pre-PCR processing: strategiesto generate PCR-compatible samples. Mol Bi-otechnol 2004;26:133–46.
8. Josefsen MH, Lübeck PS, Hansen F , Hoorfar J.
T oward an international standard for PCR-baseddetection of foodborne thermotolerant campylo-bacters: interaction of enrichment media andpre-PCR treatment on carcass rinse samples. JMicrobiol Methods 2004;58:39–48.
9. W olffs P , Grage H, Hagberg O, Rådström P . Im-
pact of DNA polymerases and their buffer sys-tems on quantitative real-time PCR. J ClinMicrobiol 2004;42:408–11.
10. Lantz PG, Abu Al-Soud W , Knutsson R, Hahn-
Hägerdal B, Rådström P . Biotechnical use ofpolymerase chain reaction for microbiologicalanalysis of biological samples. Biotechnol AnnuRev 2000;5:87–130.
11. Josefsen MH, Cook C, D’Agostino M, Hansen
F , W agner M, Demnerova K, Heuvelink AE, Tas-sios PT , Lindmark H, Kmet V , Barbanera M,Fach P , Loncarevic S, Hoorfar J. Validation of aPCR-based method for detection of foodbornethermotolerant campylobacters in a multi-centercollaborative trial. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004;70:4379–83.
12. Hoorfar J, Cook N. Critical steps in standardiza-
tion of PCR. In: Sachse K, Frey J, editors.Methods in Molecular Biology: PCR Detectionof Microbial Pathogens: Methods and Protocols.T otowa, NJ: Humana Press Inc. 2002; vol. 216:51–64.
13. Anon. General requirement relating to methods
of detecting foodborne pathogens using the poly-merase chain reaction (PCR). CEN/TC 275/WG6/TAG3 N 10. Published by DIN 2001. Ber-lin, Germany.
14. Anon. Microbiology of food and feeding stuffs –
Protocol for the validation of alternative methods.ISO 16140, ﬁrst edition 2003. ISO, Geneva, Switz-erland.
15. Knutsson R, Löftström C, Grage H, Hoorfar J,
Rådström P . Modeling of 5’ nuclease real-timeHOORFAR et al.
responses for optimization of a high-throughput
enrichment PCR procedure for Salmonella en-
terica . J Clin Microbiol 2002;40:52–60.
16. Löfström C, Knutsson R, Engdahl Axelsson C,
Rådström P . Rapid and speciﬁc detection of Sal-
monella spp. in animal feed samples by PCR after
culture enrichment. Appl Environ Microbiol2004;70:69–75.
17. Hoorfar J, Cook C, Malorny B, W agner M, De
Medici D, Abdulmawjood M, Fach P . Makinginternal ampliﬁcation control mandatory for di-agnostic PCR. J Clin Microbiol 2003;41:5835.
18. Hoorfar J, Malorny B, Abdulmawjood A, Cook
N, W agner M, Fach P . Practical considerationsin design of internal ampliﬁcation control for di-agnostic PCR assays. J Clin Microbiol 2004;42:1863–8.
19. Schoder D, Schmallwieser A, Günther S, Kuhn
M, Hoorfar J, W agner M. PCR thermocycler:
814physical evaluation of six new thermocyclers.Clin Chem 2003;49:960–3.
20. Malorny B, Tassios P , Rådström P , Cook N,
W agner M, Hoorfar J. Standardization of diag-nostic PCR for the detection of foodbornepathogens. Int J Food Microbiol 2003;83:39–48.
21. Trapmann S, Catalani P , Hoorfar J, Prokisch J,
Van Iwaarden P , Schimmel H. Development of anovel approach for production of dried genomicDNA standards for quantitative PCR testing offood-borne pathogens. Accreditation and Qual-ity Assurance 2004;9:695–9.
22. Josefsen MH, Jacobsen NR, Hoorfar J. Enrich-
ment followed by quantitative PCR for rapid de-tection and as a tool for quantitative risk assess-ment of foodborne thermotolerant campylo-bacters. Appl Environ Microbiol 2004;70:3588–92.