Chinese Journal of Oceanology and Limnology 
V ol. 28 No. 6, P. 1187-1194, 2010 
DOI: 10.1007/s00343-010-0019-x 
Diatom diet selectivity by  early post-larval abalone Haliotis 
diversicolor supertexta under hatchery conditions*   
ZHANG Yuyu ( 张玉宇 )1, GAO Yahui (高亚辉 )1,**, LIANG Junrong ( 梁君荣 )1,  
CHEN Changping ( 陈长平 )1, ZHAO Donghai ( 赵东海 )1, LI Xuesong ( 李雪松 )1,  
LI Yang ( 李扬 )1, WU Wenzhong ( 吴文忠 )1, 2  
1 Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Coast and Wetland Ecosystems and School of Life Sciences , Xiamen University , 
Xiamen 361005 , China  
2 Dongshan Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau , Fujian Province , Dongshan 363400 , China 
Received Sep. 3,  2009; revision accepted Ma y 28, 2010 
© Chinese Society for Oceanology and Limnology, Science Press, and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010  
Abstract    Benthic diatoms constitute the primary diet of abalone during their early stages of 
development. To evaluate the dietary preferences of early post-larval abalone, Haliotis diversicolor 
supertexta , we analyzed the gut contents of post-larvae that settled on diatom films. We compared the 
abundance and species diversity of diatom assemblages in the gut to  those of the epiphytic diatom 
assemblages on the attachment films, and identified 40 benthic diatom species in the gut contents of post-larvae 12 to 24 d after sett lement. The most abundant taxa  in the gut contents were Navicula spp., 
Amphora copulate , and  Amphora coffeaeformis . Navicula spp. accounted for 64.0% of the cell density. In 
the attachment films, we identified 110 diatom speci es belonging to 38 genera. Pennate diatoms were the 
dominant members including the species Amphiprora alata , Cocconeis placentula  var. euglypta , 
Cylindrotheca closterium , Navicula  sp. 2, and A. coffeaeformis . Nano-diatoms (<20 µm in length) 
accounted for a considerable proportion of the total species number and cell density of the diatom 
assemblages in the gut contents and on the films. This suggests that nano-diatoms are important to the 
efficient production of abalone seed. The difference of the co mposition and abundance of diatoms 
between in the guts and on the biofilms suggests that early post-larval grazing was selective. An early 
post-larval abalone preferred nano-diatoms and the genera Navicula and Amphora during the month after 
settlement.  
Keyword : benthic diatoms; feeding; Haliotis diversicolor supertexta ; post-larval abalone 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Abalones are commercially important in many 
countries. Mass culture of abalone began in the mid 
1980s in China and developed rapidly in the 1990s. 
Haliotis diversicolor supertexta  is the species most 
commonly cultured in south China,  constituting 
around 65% of the total yield of abalone in 2000 (Nie 
et al., 2004). In recent years, nursery rearing has 
become more difficult be cause mortality occurs 
frequently during the first month after settlement. 
Maintaining viable juveniles past settlement is the biggest challenge for abalone seed production. It is 
generally believed that an inappropriate diet is the 
major cause of high mortality in this (Nie et al., 2004; Zhang et al., 2004) and other species of abalone 
(Gordon et al., 2006).  
Benthic diatoms are the primary food choice for 
early post-larval abalone. In abalone seed production hatcheries, diatom films on plastic plates have been 
used as a settlement subs trate and an initial food 
source for post-larvae (Ebert et al., 1984; Kawamura, 
1996; Nie et al., 2004). Successful seeding is closely 
related to the quantity and quality of benthic diatoms. 
 At present, the dietary value of the different 
diatom species is still not well understood. A number 
of studies have examined the relationship between post-larvae growth and feeding behavior using a 
range of diatom species. The dietary value of benthic 
diatoms is influenced by their morphology, attachment strength, frustule strength (Kawamura 
et al., 1995a, 1998a; Kawamura et al., 1995b; 
Roberts et al., 1999), the biochemical composition of 
                                                       
 
* Supported by Special Project on Basic Research of China, Ministry of 
Science and Technology (No. 2006FY120100) and Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No. B0510005; 2005YZ1024) 
∗∗ Corresponding author: gaoyh@xmu.edu.cn   CHIN. J. OCEANOL. LIMNOL., 28(6), 2010 V ol.28 
 1188 
the diatom cell contents (Dunstan et al., 1994; 
Gordon et al., 2006), and digestibility. In addition, post-larval size has a significant effect on their ability 
to consume different sized diatoms (Xing et al., 
2008). However, research into juvenile abalone diets has focused on the use of monocultured species of 
benthic diatoms. Little is known about the use of 
hatchery diets or feeding behavior in newly settled larvae. Most hatcheries rely on a benthic diatom 
community that forms on plastic plates placed in the 
tanks. Thus, the post-larvae ingest a variety of diatoms, rather than a single species. Given this, 
knowledge of post-larval feeding preferences in the 
natural environment is likely to be invaluable for producing diets that allow successful culture of 
post-larval abalone. 
The dietary preferences of post-larval abalone can 
be determined by identifying the algal species that 
are present in the gut. If certain species are preferred, 
they are likely to be over-represented in the gut contents. Spawning and larval rearing of 
H. diversicolor supertexta  occurs between May and 
June in hatcheries in Dongshan, Fujian Province on the southern coast of Ch ina. We analyzed the 
composition and structure of the diatom community 
in the gut of post-larvae during this rearing period in 2003. We also documented the species composition 
and abundance on the surrounding diatom films. We 
then compared the composition and abundance of diatoms in the gut and on the diatom films. 
2 MATERIAL AND METHOD 
2.1 Sampling 
We obtained H. diversicolor supertexta  post- 
larvae in-situ from an ab alone farm in Dongshan 
between May and June, 2003. The larvae were reared at the hatchery in flow-through tanks (30 m
3) filled 
with plastic plates at a temperature of 24.7 ±0.5°C. 
Approximately 6 d after spawning, the larvae had settled on the plastic plates that had been coated with 
a thin film of naturally occurring diatoms. Seawater 
(salinity 29.6) was pumped from Dongshan beach and filtered before it entered the tanks. 
We randomly sampled 10 post-larvae from the 
diatom films 12, 16, 20, and 24 d after settlement. The larvae were dislodged with a fine needle, washed 
with filtered sea water to remove external diatoms, 
then placed into a bottle and preserved in 4% formalin. We measured the shell length (SL) of each 
individual under a microscope with an ocular 
graticule. The mean SLs were 654±111 µm, 832±84 µm, 1 285±192 µm, and 1 570±290 µm on 
days 12, 16, 20, and 24, respectively. 
We used a sterilized blade to collect a sample of 
diatoms from a 10×10 cm
2 area surrounding the 
post-larvae. Each blade was rinsed with 10 mL filtered sea water to flush the diatoms into a 10-mL 
sample bottle, to which a few drops of formalin were 
added.  
2.2 Treatment 
The analysis of gut contents was conducted in 
accordance with the method of Norman-Boudreau et al. (1986). The post-larval ab alones were treated with 
EDTA and sodium hypochlorite to decalcify the shell 
and dissolve the tissue, leaving only the siliceous frustules of the diatoms for counting and 
identification. Frustules were preserved in distilled 
water.  
2.3 Relative abundance  
To determine the cell density of diatoms in the gut 
contents and on the films, we placed 1 mL of the preserved sample into a chamber slide. The number 
of cells was enumerated under a phase contrast 
microscope. In addition, we calculated the size of each cell. We calculated relative abundance using the 
following formula: 
Relative abundance (%) = ( N/N
0) ×100 
where N is the number of cells of one species per mL, 
and N0 is the total number of cells per mL.  
We ignored cell frustules that were too damaged to 
be identified. 
We tentatively identified the diatoms during the 
counting procedure. Identifications were made in more detail by scanning electron microscopy (Philips 
XL30) and transmission electron microscopy 
(JEM2100). Diatom taxonomic determination was based on Jin et al. (1965, 1982, 1992). 
3 RESULT 
3.1 Diatom assemblages in the gut contents of 
post-larval abalone 
We identified 40 diatom species belonging to 13 
genera in the gut contents of the post-larvae (Table 1). 
Among these, pennate diatom species (38 species, representing 11 genera) ac counted for 95.0% of the 
total number. The most common genera were:  
Navicula , Nitzschia , and Amphora . 
The diatom taxa shown in Fig.1 were 
representative of the most common diatoms in the  No.6 ZHANG et al.: Diatom diet of early post-larval abalone under hatchery conditions  
 1189
Table 1 List of diatom species identified from settlement films and also (†) from post-larval abalone guts  
Achnanthes amoena Hustedt * † Gyrosigma sp. † 
A. bremeyeri Lange-Bertalot * Hantzschia amphioxys (Ehr.) Grunow * 
A. brevipes Agardh † Haslea sp. † 
A. brevipes var. angustata (Grev.) Cleve † Licmophora californica Grunow  
A. brevipes var. parvula (Kuetz.) Cleve * † L. flabellata (Carm.) Agardh  
A. campechiana Hustedt Melosira moniliformis (O. F. Muller) Agardh 
A. citronella (Mann) Hustedt  M. juergensi Agardh * 
A. delicatula (Kuetz.) Grunow * Navicula britannica Hustedt et Aleem  
A. javanica var. subcontricta Meister  N. complanata Grunow  
A. punctifera Hustedt  N. duerrenbergiana Hustedt  
Achnanthes sp. 1 * † N. cryptocephala var. veneta (Kuetz.) Rabenhorst* † 
Achnanthes sp. 2 * N. gregaria Donkin * 
Achnanthes sp. 3 * N. johanrossii Giffen  
Actinocyclus ehrenbergi Ralfs  N. mollis (W. Sm.) Cleve * 
Actinoptychus undulates (Bail.) Ralfs  N. perminuta Grunow * † 
Amphipleura rutilans (Trent.) Cleve  N. ramosissima (Ag.) Cleve † 
Amphiprora alata (Ehr.) Kuetzing * N. orthoneoides Hustedt * 
Amphora angusta Gregory † N. retrocurvata J. R. Carter * 
A. coffeaeformis (Ag.) Kuetzing * † N. subminuscula Manguin * † 
A. coffeaeformis var. borealis (Kuetz.) Cleve † N. voigtii Meister * 
A. copulata (Kuetz.) Schoeman & Archibald * † Navicula sp. 1 * † 
A. cymbelloides Grunow * Navicula sp. 2 * † 
A. graeffii (Grun.) Cleve * † Navicula sp.3 † 
A. incrassata Giffen * Nitzschia alexandrina (Chol.) Lange-Bertalot et Simonsen* † 
A. laevis Gregory * N. constricta (Kuetz.) Ralfs * † 
A. laevis var. laevissima Gregory * N. dissipata (Kuetz.) Grunow * † 
A. micrometra Giffen * † N. dubiiformis Hustedt  
A. ostrearia Brebisson  N. constricta (Kuetz.) Ralfs* 
A. proteus var. oculata Peragallo H. et M.  N. frustulum (Kuetz.) Grunow * † 
Amphora sp. * † N. frustulum var. indica Skvortzow * † 
Arcocellulus mammifer Hasle, V on Stosch & Syvertsen * N. frustulum var. symbiotiea Lee et Reimer * † 
Asterionella notata Grunow  N. laevis Hustedt * † 
Bacillaria paradoxa Gmelin  N. longissima (Breb.) Ralfs  
Biddulphia aurita (Lyngbye) Brebisson et Godey  N. obrusa var. scalpelliformis Grunow 
Chaetoceros sp. * N. ovalis Arnott * 
Cocconeis diruptoides Hustedt *  N. paleacea Grunow * † 
C. disculus (Schumann) Cleve * † N. panduriformis Gregory  
C. placentula var. euglypta (Ehr.) Cleve * † N. panduriformis var. minor Grunow * 
C. pseudomarginata Gregory  N. af. pusilla (Kuetz.) Grunow emend. Lange-Bertalot * 
C. scutellum var. parva Grunow * N. sigma (Kuetz.) W. Smith  
C. sublittoralis Hendey † Nitzschia sp. * † 
Coscinodiscus sp.  Pleurosigma aestuarii (Breb.) W. Smith  
Cyclotella atomus Hustedt * P. intermedium var. dongshanense Chin et Liu  
C. striata var. baltica Grunow  Rhizosolenia setigera Brightwell  
Cylindrotheca closterium (Ehr.) Reimann et Lewin † Skeletonema costatum (Grev.) Cleve * † 
Cymbella pusilla Grunow * S. potamos (Weber) Hasle * 
Denticula sp. * Stauroneis sp.  
Diploneis bombus Ehrenberg † Striatella unipunctata (Lyngbye) Agardh  
D. incurvata (Greg.) Cleve  Synedra laevigata Grunow 
D. smithii (Breb.) Cleve * † S. investiens W. Smith 
Extubocellulus cribriger Hasle, von Stosch & Syvertsen * S. af. tabulata var. parva (Kuetz.) Hustedt 
E. spinifer (Hargr. & Guill.) Hasle, von Stosch & Syvertsen * S. ulna var. danica (Kuetz.) Grunow  
Gomphonema pseudexiguum Simonsen * † Synedra sp. † 
Grammatophora marina (Lyngbye) Kuetzing  Thalassiosira minima Gaarder * † 
G. oceanica var. macilenta (W. Sm.) Grunow  Tropidoneis sp.  
* nano-diatoms  CHIN. J. OCEANOL. LIMNOL., 28(6), 2010 V ol.28 
 1190 
 
diet of the abalone we examined. The most abundant 
taxa in the gut contents were Navicula spp., Amphora 
copulate  and A. coffeaeformis . 
Navicula was always the most common genus 
(Fig.2), and accounted for 64.0% of the average total 
cell density (range: 43.2%–91.5%). The relative 
abundance of A. copulate  was 15.5% on day 12, 2.0% 
on day 16, and 38.2% on day 24. The relative 
abundance of  A. coffeaeformis  varied between 2.3% 
and 8.5% during the experiment.  
We often observed aggregations of diatom cells in 
the gut contents (Fig.3a). Many diatom frustules 
were broken in the position of girdle bands (Fig.3a, b, c). Among these, some diatom valves were also broken (Fig.3c, d). 3.2 Diatom assemblages in the settlement films 
available for post-larval abalone 
We identified 110 diatom species (including 
varieties) belonging to 38 genera from the diatom 
films (Table 1). The diversity of diatom species taken 
from the settlement plates was 2.5 times greater than that in the abalone gut contents (Table 1). The 
diatoms were primarily pennate diatoms (85.5 % of 
the total number of species) from six genera: Nitzschia , Navicula , Achnanthes , Amphora , 
Cocconeis , and Synedra .  
The dominant diatom species were Amphiprora 
alata , Navicula  spp.,  Cylindrotheca closterium , 
Cocconeis placentula  var. euglypta , and A. coffeaeform . 
 
Fig.1 Predominant species from H. diversicolor supertexta post-larval guts 
a. Navicula sp. 1; b. Navicula sp. 2; c. Navicula sp. 3; d. Amphora copulate (Kuetz.) Schoeman & Archibald; e. Amphora coffeaeformis (Ag.) Kuetzing  No.6 ZHANG et al.: Diatom diet of early post-larval abalone under hatchery conditions  
 1191
 
Fig.2 Relative abundance of the principal groups of diatoms 
in early post-larval abalone guts 
Np: Navicula spp.; Af: Amphora coffeaeformis ; Ap: A. copulate . N=10 for 
each sampling time point A. alata  was the most dominant species and 
accounted for 31.6% of the total cell density on average. Navicula spp. and  C. closterium  accounted 
for 30.2% and 14.0%, respectively. 
Navicula  spp. and A. coffeaeformis  were abundant 
both in the guts and on the films, while A. copulate  
was abundant only in the guts (Fig.4). The other 
dominant species found in the diatom films were seldom observed in the guts. 
3.3 Nano-diatoms found in the guts and diatom 
films 
Nano-diatoms (<20 µm in length) were dominant 
 
Fig.3 Broken diatom frustules in the gut contents of H. diversicolor supertexta  
↑ girdle band broken; ↑↑ valve broken 
 
Fig.4 The mean relative abundance of dominant species from 
post-larval guts and attachment films during the investigation 
Np: Navicula  spp.; Af: Amphora coffeaeformis ; Ap: A. copulate ; Aa: 
Amphiprora alata ; Cp: Cocconeis placentula  var. euglypta ; Cc: 
Cylindrotheca closterium . N=10 for each sampling time point. both in the gut contents and on the diatom films, 
accounting for 70.0 % and 52.7%, respectively, of the 
total number of species (Table 1). The average relative abundance was >90% in the gut contents and >60% on the biofilms (Fig.5). Nano-diatom species consisted primarily of Navicula  and Amphora  in the 
gut contents and Amphiprora and Navicula  on the 
biofilms.  
4 DISCUSSION 
Our results represent a significant advance in our 
understanding of the diat om preferences of post- 
larval abalone. The abalones were sampled in-situ from an abalone farm which has successfully reared 
seed abalone, not from an array of cultured microalgae.    CHIN. J. OCEANOL. LIMNOL., 28(6), 2010 V ol.28 
 1192 
 
Fig.5 Relative abundance of nano -diatoms in the guts and the 
films during the investigation 
 
Therefore, our findings are more representative of 
dietary preferences in the hatchery environment. 
Kawamura et al. (1998b) suggested that 
post-larval abalone that ar e less than 600–800 µm SL 
gain adequate nutrition from yolk reserves, dissolved 
organic matter, or the components of biofilms. 
Post-larvae that are larger  than 600–800 µm SL are 
able to digest diatoms, and therefore grow more 
rapidly. Martinez-Ponce et al. (1998) noted that the 
grazing rates of post-larval abalone feeding on Navicula incerta  increased abruptly above a SL of 
470 µm. The post-larvae in our study were all larger 
than 600 µm SL so were large enough to digest diatoms. The presence of large amounts of diatoms in 
the post-larval guts suggested that the yolk reserves 
and biofilm components no longer provided adequate nutrition for H. diversicolor supertexta  post-larvae, 
and that diatoms had become an important food 
source.  
The post-larval abalones are unable to digest the 
siliceous frustules of diatoms. By analyzing the 
composition of diatoms in the gut contents, we can estimate the composition of the diatom diet of 
post-larvae and determine their dietary preferences. 
During the fixation process, all organic materials in the post-larvae, except the siliceous diatom frustules, 
were oxidized by sodium hypochlorite. 
Many of the diatom frustules in the gut contents 
were damaged, particularly at the position of the 
girdle bands (Fig.3). Girdle band silica is one of most 
delicate parts of the valve silica (Dusan et al., 2007). Thus, girdle bands can be easily broken by the 
post-larval radula when post-larvae ingest diatoms. 
Post-larvae are often able to  extract the cell contents 
without totally crushing the frustules. 
The composition and abundance of diatom species 
differed between the gut contents and the settlement films. The species diversity of diatoms taken from 
diatom films was 2.5 times greater than that in the 
abalone guts. The dominant species from the diatom films and the abalone guts were not the same. 
A. copulate was common in the gut contents but was 
uncommon in the diatom films. Likewise, most of the 
major species in the biofilms were seldom observed 
in the guts (Fig.4). This suggests that the diatoms were grazed selectively  by H. diversicolor supertexta 
post-larvae. 
There were no significant changes in the 
composition of diatom species in the gut contents 
during the investigation period. Navicula and 
Amphora  were the dominant genera at all sampling 
times. Their average relative abundance was 64.0% 
and 26.0%, respectively, which was higher than their 
abundance on the biofilms (30.2% and 2.2%) (Fig.4). Thus, we hypothesize that  H. diversicolor supertexta 
early post-larvae prefer th ese two species. Moreover, 
the success of larval rearing at the abalone farm  
suggests that  Navicula  and Amphora are beneficial to 
early post-larval growth . There is evidence that  
Navicula  and Amphora support high post-larval 
growth and survival rate when supplied in 
combination (Gordon et al., 2004, 2006; Daume, 
2000). The biochemical composition of diatom cell contents can affect post-larval abalone growth. 
Gordon et al. (2006) conclude that the suitability of  
Amphora luciae  and Navicula cf. lenzii  for enhancing 
growth and survival of post-larvae can be attributed 
to their complementary and balanced nutritional 
properties.  
Navicula spp. occurred frequently in the gut 
contents as clumps containing numerous individuals, 
similar to those seen in Fig.3a. The ingestion of large numbers of Navicula spp. cells may be explained by 
the low adhesive strength of this species and their 
ability to form clumps, thus facilitating their ingestion by the abalone. Siqueiros-Beltrones et al. 
(2000) noted that H. rufescens post-larvae  exhibited 
grazing selectivity. The guts of this species contained a high proportion of Navidula incerta , which are rare 
or absent from samples of the surrounding flora. 
Laboratory experiments suggest that Navicula  is both 
a good food source for early post-larval abalone and a 
suitable substratum for settlement and 
metamorphosis of larval abalone (Martínez-ponce et al., 1998; Daume et al., 1999, 2000; Gallardo et al., 
2003; Gordon et al., 2004; Xing et al., 2008). Besides 
the contents of Navicula  cells, their extracellular 
mucus is also beneficial to the growth and survival of 
early abalone post-larvae (Daume et al., 2000).  
Amphiprora alata , which accounted for a high 
percentage of the biomass in the diatom films, was 
seldom found in the guts. This may be due to their No.6 ZHANG et al.: Diatom diet of early post-larval abalone under hatchery conditions  
 1193
morphology whereby solitary cells are twisted about 
the apical axis and the raphe is raised in a keel. Thus, they cannot be easily inge sted by the post-larvae. 
C. placentula var. euglypta  was also commonly 
observed in the diatom films but is seldom seen in the guts. Kawamura et al.  (1995b) report that Cocconeis  
spp., although a suitable substratum for settlement 
and metamorphosis of larval abalone, is not a good food source for early post-larval abalone. This 
species exudes relatively small quantities of 
extracellular substances that  serve as a food source 
for the post-larvae.
 In addition, early post-larvae do 
not ingest any  Cocconeis  spp. cells due to the high 
adhesive strength of these diatom species 
(Kawamura et al., 1995 a; 1998a). However, 
Cocconeis species support good growth once 
post-larvae reach a size where they can efficiently ingest the diatom (Kawamura et al., 1998b). 
In this study, C. closterium was also common in 
the diatom films. However, cell fragments were observed only occasionally in the guts. We suspect 
that this is because C. closterium  cells are too large to 
be entirely ingested by po st-larvae. In addition, 
C. closterium  cell walls are weakly silicified, and 
their cells are relatively easily broken by the abalone 
radula, which may contribute to their rare occurrence in the gut.  
Nano-diatoms accounted for a considerable 
portion of the total species number and the cell density of diatoms in the gut contents of post-larval 
abalone. Our observations suggested that early 
post-larvae abalone exhibit size selectivity for diatoms. Thus, the size of diatom cells is a critical 
factor determining their diet ary value, especially for 
small post-larvae. Given this, the value of nano-diatoms in abalone seed production cannot be 
ignored. Diatom cell size a ffects how efficiently the 
radula passes food into the mouth (Kawamura et al., 1998b). Early post-larvae are not able to ingest the 
larger celled/longer stalked diatoms. Nano-diatoms 
were generally handled more efficiently, so their cell 
contents and extracellular secretions may be an 
important source of food for H. diversicolor 
supertexta  early post-larvae. Seki et al. (1981) report 
that early post-larval H. discus hannai  only ingest 
diatoms that are <10 μm in length. Likewise, 
Norman-Boudreau et al. (1986) noted that diatoms ingested by 6 d-old  H. rufescens post-larvae were 
30 μm in length and 10 μm in width.  
Understanding abalone feeding ecology in early 
life stages is important for the improvement of 
rearing techniques in abalone hatcheries. In this study, we examined the diatom species composition 
in the guts of early post-larval  H. diversicolor 
supertexta  during the month after settlement. The 
post-larvae exhibited a preference for nano-diatoms 
and the genera Navicula and Amphora . The dietary 
value of different species of benthic diatoms is likely 
to change with the growth of the abalone. Therefore, 
further experiments are re quired to gain a better 
understanding of the dietary preferences for each 
developmental stage of the abalone. 
References  
Daume S, Brand-Gardner S,  Woelkerling W J. 1999. 
Preferential settlement of abalone larvae: diatom films vs. non-geniculate coralline algae. Aquaculture , 174: 
243-254. 
Daume S, Krsinich A, Farrell S, Gervis M. 2000. Settlement, 
early growth and survival of Haliotis rubra  in response 
to different algal species. J. Appl . Phycol ., 12: 479-488. 
Dusan L, Ken S, Ja mes G M, Ratnesh L, Nicolas H V . 2007. 
AFM Nanoindentations of Diatom Biosilica Surfaces. Langmuir , 5 014-5 021. 
Dustan G A, V olkman J K, Barrett S M, Leroi J M, Jeffrey S W. 
1994. Essential polyunsaturat ed fatty acids from 14 
species of diatom (Bacillariophyceae).  Phytochemistry , 
35: 155-161. 
Ebert E, Houk J. 1984. Elemen ts and innovations in the 
cultivation of red abalone Haliotis rufescens . 
Aquaculture , 39: 375-392. 
Gallardo W G, Buen S M A. 2003. Evaluation of mucus, 
Navicula , and mixed diatoms as  larval settlement 
inducers for the tropical abalone Haliotis asinina . 
Aquaculture , 221: 357-364. 
Gordon N, Neori A, Shpigel M, L ee J, Harpaz S. 2006. Effect 
of diatom diets on growth and survival of the abalone Haliotis discus hannai post-larval. Aquaculture , 252: 
225-233. 
Gordon N, Shpigel M, Harpaz S,  Lee J J, Neori A. 2004. The 
settlement of abalone ( Haliotis discus  hannai  Ino) larvae 
on culture layers of different diatoms. J. Shellfish Res ., 
23: 561-568. 
Jin D X, Chen J H, Huang K G. 1965. Marine Phytoplank 
Diatoms of China.  Shangha i Scientific & Technical 
Publishers, Shanghai, China. 230p. (in Chinese) 
Jin D X, Cheng Z D, Lin J M, Liu S C. 1982. The Marine 
Benthic Diatoms in China, V ol. 1. Ocean Press, Beijing, 
China. 323p. (in Chinese) 
Jin D X, Cheng Z D, Liu S C, Ma J H. 1992. The Marine 
Benthic Diatoms in China vol. 2. Ocean Press, Beijing, 
China. 437p. (in Chinese) 
Kawamura T. 1996. The role of benthic diatoms in the early 
life stages of the Japanese abalone  Haliotis discus hannai . 
In: Watanabe Y , Yamashita Y , Oozeki Y eds. Survival 
strategies in early life stages of marine resources.  CHIN. J. OCEANOL. LIMNOL., 28(6), 2010 V ol.28 
 1194 
Balkema, Rotterdam. p. 355-367.  
Kawamura T, Roberts D R, Ni cholson M C. 1998a. Factors 
affecting the food value of diatom strains for post-larval abalone Haliotis iris . Aquaculture , 160: 81-88. 
Kawamura T, Roberts D R, Taka mi H. 1998b. A review of the 
feeding and growth of post-larval abalone.  J. Shellfish 
Res., 17: 615-625. 
Kawamura T, Saido T, Taka mi H, Yamashita Y . 1995a. 
Dietary value of benthic diatoms for the growth of post-larval Haliotis discus hannai . J. Exp . Mar . Biol . 
Ecol., 194: 189-199. 
Kawamura T, Takami H. 1995b. Analysis of feeding and 
growth rate of newly metamorphosed abalone  Haliotis 
discus hannai  fed on four species of benthic diatom.  Fish . 
Sci., 61: 357-358. 
Martínez-Ponce D R, Searcy-Bernal R. 1998. Grazing rates of 
red abalone ( Haliotis rufescens ) postlarvae feeding on 
the benthic diatom Navicula incerta . J. Shellfish Res ., 17: 
627-630.  
Nie Z Q, Wang S P. 2004. The status of abalone culture in 
China. J. Shellfish Res ., 23: 941-945. Norman-Boudreau K, Burns D, Cooke C A, Austin A. 1986. A 
simple technique for detect ion of feeding in newly 
metamorphosed abalone. Aquaculture , 51: 313-317. 
Roberts R D, Kawamura T, Nicholson C M. 1999. Growth and 
survival of post-larval abalone ( Haliotis iris ) in relation 
to development and diatom diet. J. Shellfish Res ., 18: 
243-250. 
Seki T, Kan-no H. 1981. Observ ations on the settlement and 
metamorphosis of the veliger of the Japanese abalone  
Haliotis discus hannai  Ino, Haliotidae, Gastropoda. Bull. 
Tohoku Reg . Fish . Res. Lab., 42: 31-39. 
Siqueiros-Beltrones David A, Domenico V oltolina. 2000. 
Grazing selectivity of red abalone Haliotis rufescens  
postlarvae on benthic diatom films under culture conditions. J. World Aquacult . Soc., 32: 239-246. 
Xing R L, Wang C H, Cao X B. 2008. Settlement, growth and 
survival of abalone, Haliotis discus hannai , in response 
to eight monospecific benthic diatoms.  J. Appl . Phycol ., 
20: 47-53. 
Zhang G F, Que H Y , Liu X, Xu H S. 2004. Abalone 
mariculture in China. J. Shellfish Res ., 23: 947-950.  