UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   NANOTECHNOLOGY FOR WASTEW ATER TREATMENT: IN 
BRIEF 
 
I.J. El Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy and S. Vigneswaran 
School of Civil and Environmental Engi neering, Faculty of Engineering and 
Information Technology, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia 
 
Keywords: Nanotechnology, water treatment, wastew ater treatment, photocatalysts, 
membrane filtration, zeolites, carbon nanocompounds, metallic nanoparticles 
 
1. Introduction 
2. Benefits of Nanotechnology in Water and Wastewater Treatment 2.1 Wastewater Treatment  2.2 Water Treatment  3. Application of Nanotechnology in Water and Wastewater Treatment 
3.1 Nanomaterials and membrane filtration  3.2 Metals, bimetallic nanoparticles and mixed oxides  3.3 Naturally occurring material: the case of zeolites 
3.4 Carbon nanocompounds 3.5 Modified photocatalysts 4. Nanotechnology and human health  Glossary Bibliography Biographical Sketches 
 
Summary 
 
This chapter briefly deals with recent adva nces and applications of nanotechnology for 
wastewater treatment. Under the nanotechnology  umbrella, a number of new procedures 
for producing nanomaterials ultimately used  for the treatment of wastewater are 
presented. These technique s extend from the fabrication of membranes from 
nanomaterials to the use of catalysts fo r the decomposition of noxious compounds in 
water. Research advances for the use of me tals, bimetallic nanoparticles, mixed oxides, 
zeolites and carbon compounds in wastewater treatment are also re viewed. Finally, the 
impact of nanotechnology on human health and the environment is briefly discussed.    
 
1. Introduction 
 
“Nano” is derived from the Greek word for dwarf. A nanometer is one billionth of a 
meter (10
-9) and might be represente d by the length of ten h ydrogen atoms lined up in a 
row. In nature, nanotechnology first emerged billions of years ago at the point where 
molecules began to arrange in complex form s and structures that  launched life on earth. 
Through evolution, mutations and adaptation;  plants were able to convert carbon 
dioxide using the energy from the visible range of sunlight to oxygen through a process 
known as “photosynthesis” (Roc o, 1999). This transformation is still taking place in 
tiny structures called “chlor oplasts” composed of several nanoscale “thylakoid disks” 
that contain a green pigment (chlorophy ll). Another example of a natural 
nanotechnology is “chemical catalysis” through “catalysts” or in bioscience called UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   “enzymes”. Enzymes are biomolecules that cata lyse chemical reactions (Smith et al., 
1997) and sometimes they are considered as indispensable for the completion of 
specific reactions.   
 
In 1867, James Clerk Maxwell was the first to  mention some of the nano concepts in 
nanotechnology through a proposed experiment on a tiny entity known as Maxwell's Demon able to handle individual molecules. In the early 20
th century, the first 
observations and size measurements of nano- particles using an ultramicroscope were 
made possible in a study of gold sols and ot her nanomaterials with sizes down to 10 nm 
and less (Zsigmondy 1914). Zsigmondy (1914) wa s the first to characterize particle 
sizes using the term nanometer and he develo ped the first system of classification based 
on particle size in the nanometer range. Severa l advances in the field of nanomaterial 
characterization were possible with Langm uir and Blodgett (1920s) who introduced the 
monolayer concept, and Derjaguin and Ab rikosova (1950s) who conducted the first 
measurement of surface forces (Derjagu in, 1954). In 1959, Richard Feynman at an 
American Physical Society meeting at Caltech described a proposed process to 
manipulate individual atoms and molecules by using one set of precise tools (Gribbin, 
1997). Since then, several advances were made  in the study of nanos cale structures, but 
the term nanotechnology was first defined by Taniguchi (1974) as “Nano-technology 
mainly consists of the processing of, se paration, consolidation, and deformation of 
materials by one atom or one molecule”.  The tools and methods for nanotechnology 
involve imaging, measuring, modelling, and manipulating matter at  the nanoscale. In 
1980s, nanotechnology and nanoscience got a boost with two major developments: the birth of cluster science and the invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). 
Major current tools for nanot echnology measuring include many devices such as STM, 
scanning probe microscopes (SPMs), atom ic force microscopy (AFM) and molecular 
beam epitaxy (MBE) (Roco 1999). Diagnosis  of particles at the nanoscale level 
contributed extensively to the production, m odification and shaping of structures that 
were used in different industrial, h ealth and environmental applications. 
 Nanostructure science and t echnology is a broad research  area that encompasses the 
creation of new materials a nd devices from nanosized building blocks (Hu and Shaw, 
1998). Building blocks are used to make mol ecules that are arranged in nanostructures 
and nanomaterials with dimensions of 1 to 100 nm. This process is known as a “bottom 
up” approach where building blocks are arrange d and then assembled to form larger size 
material. The formation of powder component s (structural composite  material) through 
aerosol techniques is a main example of this approach (Wu et al., 1993). Many other 
approaches are being used to synthesize a nd assemble nanostructu res but the critical 
point remains in the control of the size a nd composition of nanocluster components and 
in the control of interfaces  and the distribution of na nocomponents within the fully 
formed materials (Hu and Shaw, 1998).  At the nanoscale level, materials are char acterized by different physical, chemical and 
biological properties than their normal size equivalents (Davies, 2006). For instance, 
materials as metals, metal oxides, polym ers and ceramics, and carbon derivatives 
(carbon nanotubes and fullerenes)  have a higher ratio of surface area to particle size at 
the nanoscale level. In other words, the surface area of partic les increases with 
decreasing particle size and as such, na noscale particles exhibit different optical, UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   electrical, and magnetic properties from the properties exhibited by macroscopic 
particles (Shelley, 2005). These remarkable char acteristics of particles at the nanoscale 
level possibly originated from the increase  in the number of su rface atoms with the 
decreasing of particle size.  
 Nanotechnology can easily merge with othe r technologies and m odify, endorse or 
clarify any existing scientific concept, which is why it is so called a “platform” technology (Shmidt, 2007). The use of nanot echnology in the future  is expected to 
expand into numerous industria l applications and help de crease production costs by 
reducing energy consumption, attenuate e nvironmental pollution and increase the 
production efficiencies in developed countries. Moreove r, nanotechnology may be a 
useful tool to address different social pr oblems of developing countries’ such as the 
need for clean water and the treatment of epidemic diseases (Fleischer and Grunwald, 
2008). Nanoscience and nanotechnology may not provide all the solutions for the ever 
increasing problems of this planet but coul d help the sustainable development of many 
social communities.  Many potential benefits of nanotechnology have already been  identified by many 
researchers in the environmental and water sector, medicine, and in several industry 
applications but the future nanotechnology might bring innovations  that can answer 
many existing scientific questions (Theron et al., 2008; Fleischer and Grunwald, 2008; 
Savage et al., 2008). Hence, nanotechnology is  going to play an important role in 
addressing fundamental issues such as h ealth, energy and water (Binks, 2007). Major 
potential environmental benefits of nanotechnology were reported in the draft 
nanomaterials research strategy by Sa vage et al. (2008), including:  
 
• Early environmental treatment and remediation 
• Stronger and lighter nanomaterials 
• Smaller, more accurate and more sensitive sensing and monitoring devices. 
 
Additional benefits lay in the cost-effec tive use of renewable energy, low energy 
requirement and low waste generation devices , early disease detectors for preventive 
treatment, pollution control, and the pr evention and remediation using improved 
systems.   
2. Benefits of Nanotechnology in Water and Wastewater Treatment 
 
2.1 Wastewater Treatment   
Wastewater is any water that has been a dversely contaminated by organic pollutants, 
bacteria and microorganisms, industrial effl uent or any compound th at deteriorated its 
initial quality. It can be sub-divided into : i) municipal wastew ater (liquid waste 
discharged by domestic residences and co mmercial properties),  and ii) industrial 
wastewater (liquid waste discha rged by industrial and agricu ltural activities). Some of 
the factors that might affect the composition of wastewater are: land uses, groundwater 
levels, and the degree of separation betw een stormwater and sanitary wastes. The 
composition of municipal wastewater is usually  less variable than industrial wastewater, 
the latter being highly affected by the t ype of industrial activ ity involved in the UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   discharge of effluent water. In general,  the organic compositi on of wastewater is 
estimated to consist of protei ns (50%), carbohydrates (40%),  fats and oils (10%), and 
trace amounts (e.g. μg/L or less) of priority polluta nts, surfactants, and emerging 
contaminants. On the other hand, wastewater often contains 105-108 colony forming unit 
(CFU)/mL of coliform organisms, 103-104 CFU/mL fecal streptococci, 101-103 
protozoan cysts, and 101-102 virus particles (Ellis, 2004). 
 
Treatment of municipal wastewater has to take  into consideration all the aspects related 
to water contamination and has to ensure that the product water is free from any 
substance that might adversely affect the health of humans and the environment. The 
treatment process in wastewater treatment plan ts is directly related to the composition of 
wastewater. Generally, conventional sewage treatment includes th e following stages 
(Shon et al. 2007):  1. Preliminary treatment: to remove coarse an d readily settleable i norganic solids with 
the size range of mo re than 0.01 mm. 
2. Primary treatment: to remove the bulk of suspended so lids including both organic and 
inorganic matter (0.1 mm to 35 µm). 
3. Secondary biological treatmen t: to degrade the biodegradab le binding organic matter 
and nutrients.  
4. Tertiary treatment: to remove a portion of the remaining organic and inorganic solids 
and pathogenic microorganisms through a filtration step. This treatme nt is followed by 
chemical disinfection. 
 
Industrial wastewater co uld be designated as the efflue nt produced from any industrial 
activity such as agricu lture, food industry, iron and steel in dustry, mine and quarries, etc. 
The composition of industrial effluent can vary according to the activity in question. Therefore, the treatment is selective to ensure high qu ality filtered water with 
consideration of the cost invol ved in the filtration process.  Wastewater from agricultural 
activities is high in organic compounds of animal and vegetable sources, 
microorganisms, and different chemicals used fo r the control of pest and diseases. It is 
not common to find agriculture  effluent contaminated with  heavy metals or petroleum 
derivatives. On the other hand, industrial wastewater originating from the metal 
processing industry, mines or chemical industrie s might be rich in heavy metals, organic 
and inorganic compounds as well as chlo rinated by-products. Treating industrial 
wastewater could follow the same stages de scribed for municipal wastewater treatment 
with modifications that might be integrated to ensure low concentrations of specific 
pollutants.  For the purpose of improving the above listed treatment processes, the use of nanomaterials is being researched to fabricate separation and reactive media which is of high quality in terms of reactivity and performance (Bellona and Drewes, 2007). 
Additionally, the use of nanomat erials and nanoparticles to bio-remediate and disinfect 
wastewater is gaining popularity (Hu et al., 2005; Mohan and Pittman, 2007). For instance, metal oxide nanomaterials such as TiO
2 are among the promising nano-
catalysts that were tested successfully for their antimicrobial activity. Moreover, 
fullerenes (C60) as pollution tracers, are be ing used to provide contaminant-fate 
information to assist in developing water remediation strategies ; magnetic nanoparticles UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   are being developed to adsorb metals a nd organic compounds; and nanocatalysts are 
being explored to reduce pollution of oxidi zed contaminants (Hillie et al., 2006). Metal 
processing wastewater often c ontains hexavalent chromium species, Cr(VI), which are 
toxic and can act as carcinogens, mutage ns and teratogens in biological systems 
(Dupont and Guillon, 2003). Metal industries are required to reduce the amount of 
chromium in their effluent to around 0.1 mg/L  (Ayuso et al., 2003) before discharging it 
into the sewer system. Maghemite nanoparticles were studied by Hu et al. (2005) for 
their potential in removing and recovering chro mium from wastewater. Hu et al. (2005) 
developed a new method by combining the ad sorption ability of nanoparticles and the 
magnetic separation technique. The method wa s space-saving, cost-e ffective, simple, 
and environmental-friendly. Additionally, chromium was successfully removed from 
the wastewater and the nanoscale maghemite retained the original metal removing 
capacity after six adsorption-desorption cycl es. The adsorption was pH dependent with 
optimal adsorption at pH 2.5. Industrial pollu tants such as phthalates, alkylphenols, 
bisphenol-A, pharmaceuticals and many others could be removed from industrial wastewater by using nanofiltra tion. Nanofiltration is being in tegrated in many industrial 
effluent treatment plants to produce efflue nt with low concentrations of industrial 
pollutants (Bruggen et al., 2008). The use of nanotechnology to remove contaminants in 
water is widespread and many advances ha ve already been achieved. A summary of 
recent advances in nanomaterial research fo r industrial wastewater treatment includes: 
the nanofiltration of biologica lly treated effluents from the pulp and paper industry 
(Manttari et al., 2006); the degradation of organic dyes using manganese–doped ZnO 
nanoparticles (Ullah and Dutta , 2008); the treatment of wastewater from molasses 
distilleries using nanosize pore membra ne (Satyawali and Balakrishnan, 2008).  
 
2.2 Water Treatment  
 
Water purification using nanofiltration techno logy or through adsorp tion and catalytic 
degradation processes was made possible by the advances achieved and mysteries 
revealed in the quantum world. Worldwide,  the need for clean water is increasing 
because of population increase, drought and the contamination of conventional water 
sources. WHO (2004) reported that  1 billion people are at risk because they do not have 
access to potable water and another 2.6 billi on people lack access to clean water. The 
innovation of new technologies to  increase the availability  of clean water commenced 
40 years ago (1960s) with the establishment of three membrane separation processes 
(Table 1): reverse osmosis (RO), ultraf iltration (UF) and microfiltration (MF) 
(Sutherland, 2008). During the 1970s and 1980s, nanofiltration membranes (Loose RO) 
were developed as an intermediate filtration material between ultrafiltration and reverse 
osmosis (Eriksson, 1988). Membrane processe s using different type s of membrane are 
becoming increasingly popular for the produc tion of drinking water from seawater, 
brackish water, wastewater, surface water a nd groundwater (Ventresque et al., 2000).  
 
Membrane type Pore size 
(nm) Pressure 
(bar) Product water 
Reverse osmosis  < 0.6 30 – 70 Pure water (PW) 
Nanofiltration 0.6 - 5 10 – 40 (PW) and low molecular solutes  
Ultrafiltration 5 - 50 0.5 – 10 All above and macromolecules 
Microfiltration 50 - 500 0.5 - 2 All above and colloids UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   Table 1. Membrane type and characteristics (Adapted from Thorse n and Flogstad, 2006) 
  
The impact of nanotechnology on the developm ent of tools and techniques for water 
treatment will be more pronounced in the near future. As scarcity of natural water 
threatens the advancement and the social  security of many communities around the 
world, it is expected that the solution will emerge from the exploitation of nanoparticles 
to make water recycling, seawater desalina tion and water remediation more efficient 
and cost effective. For instance, the use of nanofiltration membranes for treating water 
in rural areas of South Afri ca to provide drinking water was described by Smith (2006). 
The advantages of using nanofiltration relied in the direct humanitarian benefit from 
using nanotechnology and in the promotion of economical viabilities in rural 
communities. Therefore, the production of nanostructures, nanocomposites and modified nanostrucutres for water remediation will increase because of the need for producing clean water in fa st and low energy consumption ways. Nanotechnology 
should be regarded as the tool to ensure the sustainability of social communities in 
different places. This is possible through th e use of advanced filtration nanomaterials 
that enable desalination of seawater, recyc ling of contaminated wa ter and the reuse of 
wastewater (Theron et al., 2008).  
 
3. Application of Nanotechnology in Water and Wastewater Treatment 
 
Nanotechnology is being applied in the produc tion of water purification membranes. 
Recently, Theron et al. (2008) reported the following water filtration membranes 
produced from nanomaterials: i) nanostructured  membranes from nanomaterials such as 
carbon nanotubes, nanoparticles and dendrimer es, and ii) nanoreactive membranes from 
metal nanoparticles and other na nomaterial. On the other han d, adsorption is  considered 
as an effective, efficient and economic met hod to remove water contaminants (Jiuhui, 
2008). Effective adsorbents includ e: i) activated carbon, ii) clay minerals and silicas, iii) 
zeolites, iv) metal oxides, and v) modified  composites (Nouri et al., 2002; Zhang et al., 
2005; Theron et al., 2008). The decompositi on of organic compounds in water as well 
as the disinfection of water under UV light using TiO
2-mediated photocatalyst is 
gaining popularity as the eff ectiveness of the photocatalyst has been demonstrated by 
many scientific studies (Liu and Yang, 2003, Cho et al., 2005; We i et al., 2008; Kumar 
et al., 2008).  
 Nanotechnology for water remediation will play a crucial role in water security and 
consequently the food security  of the world. The applica tions of nanotechnology in the 
cleanup of contaminated water could be summarized by (Smith 2006):  
• Nanoscale filtration techniques 
• The adsorption of pollutants on nanoparticles 
• The breakdown of contaminants by nanoparticle catalysts.  
 
3.1 Nanomaterials and membrane filtration   
Since sedimentation, flocculation, coagul ation and activated carbon each remove a 
narrow spectrum of water pollutants, membra ne filtration (UF, MF, NF and RO) have 
played a significant role in reducing po llutants and producing high quality pure water UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   (Strathmann, 2001). In the last two decades, the development of polymeric and ceramic 
membranes has positively impacted on the us e of membranes. Nevertheless, membrane 
fouling is a major drawback in the membra ne filtration process and poses a serious 
problem that challenges the viability of the use of membrane.  
 Cohen (2006) reported  that a promising approach to improve membrane performance, 
while mitigating fouling, is to structure the membrane surfaces at the nano- and 
molecular scale. Porous carbons have a grea t potential in adsorption and in membrane 
synthesis for water filtration as they are considered as “molecular sieve materials”. Water filters from carbon nanotubes were synt hesized by Srivastava et al. (2004). Those 
filters were re-usable and showed eff ective removal of bacterial pathogens ( Escherichia 
coli and Staphylococcus aureus ) and Poliovirus sabin 1 from contaminated water.  
 The nano-structure manipulation of nanofiltra tion membranes to produce a surface with 
salt rejection selectivity was achieved with  Linder and Oren (2006). Membranes were 
prepared having above 70% re jection to NaCl and less than 40% rejection to CaCl
2 in 
single solution. This monovalent/d ivalent cation selection is ve ry important to minimize 
membrane fouling by calcium carbonate or sulpha te salts and to keep the Na to Ca ratio 
to a proper level for agricultural purposes. In a similar approach, the nanostructure 
surface modification of microporous ceramics was achieved by Wegmann et al. (2008) 
for the aim of efficient virus filtration. The procedure consis ted of coating the internal 
surface area of highly porous elements w ith a colloidal nanodispersion of hydrated 
yttrium oxide. It was then heat treated to obtain an electropositive Y 2O3 coated surface. 
Modified nanostructure filters were able to remove about 99.99% of 25 nm diameter 
MS2 bacteriophages from feed wa ter of pH between 5 and 9.  
 
Water filtration membranes fabricated from nanomaterials are already being promoted by water treatment companies. For instance, Agronide (Pittsburgh) has a product called 
“NanoCeram ”, which is a purifier that uses 2 nm diameter alumina nanofibres to 
remove 99.9999% of bacteria, viruses and prot ozoan cysts from water (Smith 2006).    
 The use of nanostructured material for im proving membrane filters will gain more 
interest in the near future , because of unlimited benefits  that accrue from producing 
membranes with superior performance in te rms of organic and biological contaminants 
removal, with metal se lectivity, that are resi stant to fouling, durable and cost-effective.  
 
Additionally, nanoreactive  material has been used to synthesize membranes for use in 
water treatment. Nanoreactive membranes were able to decompose pollutants such as 4-nitrophenol (Dotzauer et al., 2006) and bind metal ions (Hollman and Bhattacharyya, 
2004) in water solution. Polysulfonate ultr afiltration membranes impregnated with 
silver nanoparticles were found effective against E. coli  K12 and P. mendocina  bacteria 
strains and showed a significant improvement in virus removal (Zod row et al., 2008). 
Additionally, the nanosilver impregnated me mbranes (nAg-PSf) were resistant to 
biofouling mainly because the attachment of  bacteria to the membrane surface was 
prohibited by Ag
+.    
 
Recently, TiO 2 nanowire membrane has been successf ully fabricated with the capability 
of filtering organic contaminants from wate r with simultaneous photocatalytic oxidation UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   (Xiao et al., 2007). Nanowire membrane ha d uniform thickness, flexible, with 
nanowires of 20-100 nm in diameter (Figur e 1). It showed similar photocatalytic 
activity as P-25 for decomposing humic aci d in water and exhibited excellent anti-
fouling ability Zhang et al. (2008).  
 
Composite photocatalytic membranes that combine the separation technology provided 
by the membrane process and the photocataly tic activity of catalysts, were studied by 
several researchers (Molin ari et al., 2000; Zhang et  al., 2006; Yang and Li, 2008). 
TiO 2/Al 2O3 composite membranes fabricated by following the extrusion method and 
sol–gel/slip casting method effectively decomposed Direct Black168 dye (82% 
removal) when photocatalysis is  coupled with membrane sepa ration (Zhang et al., 2006). 
Similarly, Yang and Li (2008) have successf ully employed the extrusion method and 
sol–gel/slip casting method to pr epare inside-out tubular TiO 2/Al 2O3 composite 
membranes. They reported that the prepared tubular TiO 2/Al 2O3 composite membranes 
degraded a great amount of the water pollutant  of concern from the target wastewater 
that had a final permeate turb idity of lower than 0.75 NTU. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. TiO 2 nanowire membrane with simu ltaneous photooxidation potential 
 
- 
- 
-  
 
TO ACCESS ALL THE 21 PAGES  OF THIS CHAPTER,  
Visit: http://www.eolss.net/Eolss-sampleAllChapter.aspx  
 
 
 UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   Bibliography 
 
Ayuso E.A., Sanchez A.G., Querol X. (2003) Purifi cation of metal electroplating waste waters using 
zeolites. Water Research 37, 4855–4862. [This presents approaches to the study of water purification 
using zeolites] 
Bellona C., Drewes J.E. (2007) Viability of a low-pres sure nanofilter in treating recycled water for water 
reuse applications: A pilot-scale study. Water Resear ch, 41, 3948-3958. [This presents approaches to the 
study low-pressure nanofilter] Binks P. (2007) Nanotechnology & water: opportunities and challenges. Victorian Water Sustainability 
Seminar, May 15 2007. [This presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology for water issues] 
Bruggen B.V.D., Manttari M., Nystrom M. (2008) Drawbacks of  applying nanofiltration and how to 
avoid them: A review. Separation and Purification Technology, 63, 251-263. [This presents review 
approaches to the application of nanofiltration] 
Bowman R.S. (2002) Applications of surfactant-modified zeolites to environmental remediation. 
Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 61, 43-56.  [This presents applications of zeolites for 
environmental remediation] 
Chen W., Cai W., Zhang L., Wang G., Zhang L. (2001) Sonochemical processes and formation of gold 
nanoparticles within pores of mesoporous silica. Journal of Colloid Interf ace Science, 238, 291-295.  [This 
presents approaches to the study of the synthesis of metal nanoparticles] 
Cheng S.F., Wu S.C. (2001) Feasib ility of using metals to remediate water containing TCE. Chemosphere, 
43, 1023-1028. [This presents approaches to the study of the feasibility of water remediation using 
metals] Cho M., Chung H., Choi W., Yoon J. (2005) Different inactivation behaviours of MS-2 phage and 
Escherichia coli in TiO
2 photocatalytic disinfection. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 71, 270-
275. [This presents approaches to the study of bactericid al effect of TiO 2] 
Cho I.-H., Park J.-H., Kim Y.-G. (2005a) Oxid ative degradation and toxicity reduction of 
trichloroethylene (TCE) in water using TiO 2/solar light, comparative study of TiO 2 slurry and 
immobilized systems. Journal of Environmental Science and Health A, 40, 1033-1044. [This presents 
approaches to the study of TiO 2 photocatalyst for water remediation] 
Chong M.N., Vimonses V., Lei S., Jin B., Chow C., Saint C. (2009) Synthesis and characterization of 
novel titania impregnated kaolinite nano-photocatalys t. Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 117, 
223-242. [This presents approaches to the st udy of titania synthesis and characterization] 
Cohen Y. (2006) Membrane surface nano-structuring : Selective enhancement, fouling reduction and 
mineral scale formation. In US-Israeli Nanotechn ology for Water Purification Workshop, Arlington, 
Virginia, USA, March 13-15,  2006. [This presents approaches to the study of nanostructure surface of 
membranes] 
Davies J.C. (2006) Managing the effects of Nanotechnology. Woodrow Wilson International Center for 
Scholars, National Institutes of Health, Washington, D.C., USA. [This presents approaches to the study of 
nanotechnology management] 
Deng N., Luo F., Wu F., Xiao M. (2000) Discoloration of  aqueous reactive dye so lution in the UV/Fe0 
system. Water Research, 34, 2408–2411. [This presents approaches to the study of zerovalent iron under 
V light] 
Derjaguin, B.V. (1954) Investigations  of the forces of interaction of surfaces in different  media and their 
application to the problem of colloid stability . Discussion of the Faraday Society, 18, 24-27. [This 
presents approaches to the study of surf ace interaction forces of different media] 
Dotzauer D.M., Dai J., Sun L., Bruening M.L. (2006)  Catalytic membranes prepared using layer-by-layer 
adsorption of polyelectrolyte/metal nanoparticle films in porous supports. Nano Letters, 6, 2268-2272. 
[This presents approaches to the study  of catalytic membranes synthesis] 
Dvoranova D., Brezova V., Malati M.A. (2002) Investigations of metal doped titanium dioxide 
photocatalysts. Applied Catalysis B Environmental, 37, 91-105. [This presents approaches to the study UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   the metal doping of TiO 2] 
Dupont L., Guillon E. (2003) Removal of hexavalent chromium with a lignocellusic substrate extracted 
from wheat bran. Environmental Science and Technology, 37, 4235–4241. [This presents approaches to 
the study of the toxicity of chromium] 
Ellis T.G. (2004) Chemistry of wastewater. Encycl opedia of Life Support System (EOLSS), Developed 
under the Auspices of the UNESCO, Eolss Publishers, Oxford, UK, http://www.eolss.net  [This presents 
approaches to the study of wast ewater chemical characteristics] 
Eriksson P. (1988) Nanofiltration ex tends the range of membrane filtra tion. Environmental Progress, 7(1), 
58–62. [This presents approaches to the study of nanofiltration technology] 
Fleischer T., Grunwald A. (2008) Making nanotechnology developments sustainable. A role for 
technology assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 16, 889-898. [This presents approaches to the 
study of the sustainability of nanotechnology applications] 
Gribbin, J. (1997) Richard Feynman: A Life in Science. Dutton, pg 170. [This presents approaches to 
highlight life achievements of Richard Feynman in the science world] 
Gyliene O., Vengris T., Stoncius A., Nivinskiene O. (2008) Decontamination of solutions containing 
EDTA using metallic iron. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 159, 446-451. [This presents approaches to 
the study of metallic iron decontamination effects] 
Hamal D.B., Klabunde K.J.J. (2007) Synthesis, characterization, and visible light activity of new 
nanoparticle photocatalysts based on silver, carbon, and sulfur-doped TiO 2. Journal of Colloid Interface 
Science, 311(2), 514-522. [This presents approaches to study TiO 2 doping] 
Hilderbrand H., Machenzie K., Kopi nke F.D. (2008) Novel nano-catal ysts for wastewater treatment. 
Global NEST Journal, 10(1), 47-53. [This presents approaches to the study of  wastewater treatment by 
nanocatalysts] 
Hillie T., Munasinghe M., et al. (2006) Nanotechnol ogy, water and development. Global Dialogue on 
Nanotechnology and the Poor: Opportunities and Risks, Meridian Institute. [This presents approaches to 
the study of nanotechnology for water treatment] Hollman A.M., Bhattacharyya D. (2004) Pore a ssembled multilayers of charged polypeptides in 
microporous membranes for ion separation. Langmuir, 20, 5418-5424. [This presents approaches to the 
study of membrane structure technology] 
Hoyt V.W., Mason E. (2008) Nanotechnology emerging health issues. Journal of Chemical Health and 
Safety, March/April, 10-15. [This presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology health concerns] 
Hu J., Chen G., Lo I.M.C. (2005) Removal and recovery of Cr(VI) from wastewater by maghemite 
nanoparticles. Water Research, 39, 4528-4536. [This presents approaches to the study of wastewater 
remediation by maghemite] 
Hu E.L., Shaw D.T. (1998) Synthesis and assembly. In Nanostructure science and technology, eds. R.W. 
Siegel, E. Hu, M.C. Roco. Kluwer academic publis hers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands. [This presents 
approaches to the study of  nanostructure synthesis] 
Hung W.C., Chen Y.C., Chu H., Tseng T.K. ( 2008) Synthesis and ch aracterization of TiO
2 and Fe/TiO 2 
nanoparticles and their performance for photocatalytic degradation of 1,2-dichloroethane. Applied 
Surface Science, 255, 2205- 2213. [This presents approaches to th e study of titania for the decomposition 
of pollutants] 
Iorio M., Pan B., Capasso R., Xing B. (2008) Sorption of phenanthrene by dissolved organic matter and 
its complex with aluminum oxide nanoparticles. Environmental Pollution, 156, 1021-1029. [This presents 
approaches to the study of aluminum metal oxides for water remediation] 
Jiuhui Q. (2008) Research progress of novel adsorption processes in water purification: A review. Journal 
of Environmental Sciences, 20, 1-13. [This presents a review for approaches to the study of water 
purification by adsorption processes] 
Kuchibhaatla S.V.N.T., Karakoti A.S., Bera D., Seal S. (2007) One dimensional nanostructured materials. 
Progress in Materials Science, 52, 699-913. [This presents approaches to the study of nanostructured UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   materials] 
Kumar P.S.S, Sivakumar R., Anandan S., Madhavan J, Maruthamuthu P, Ashokkumar M. (2008) 
Photocatalytic degradation of Acid Red 88 using Au-TiO 2 nanoparticles in aqueous solutions. Water 
Research, 42, 4878-4884. [This presents approaches to the study of dye decomposition using metal doped 
TiO 2] 
Lepape H., Solano-Serena F., Contini P., Maftah A., Leprat P. (2002) Evaluation of the anti-microbial 
properties of an activated carbon fibre supporting silver using a dynamic method. Carbon, 40(15), 2947-
2954. [This presents approaches to the study of anti-microbial properties of silver impregnated activated 
carbon] 
Linder C., Oren Y. (2006) Relationships between mate rials parameters of nanofiltration membranes and 
the resultant membrane performance. In US-Israe li Nanotechnology for Water Purification Workshop, 
Arlington, Virginia, USA, March 13-15, 2006. [This presents approaches to the study of nanomaterials 
for membrane production] 
Li D., Lyon D.Y., Li Q., Alvarez P.J.J. (2008) Eff ect of soil sorption and aquatic natural organic matter 
on the antibacterial activity of a fullerene water suspension. Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry, 
27( 9), 1888–1894. [This presents approaches to the study of the antimicrobial activity of fullerenes] 
Liu H., Yang T. (2003) Photocatalytic inactivation of Escherichia coli and Lactobacillus helveticus by 
ZnO and TiO 2 activated with ultraviolet light. Process Biochemistry, 39, 475-481. [This presents 
approaches to the study of the antimicrobial activity of metal oxides] 
Liu Z., He Y.,Li F., Liu Y. (2006) Photocatalytic tr eatment of RDX wastewater with nano-sized titanium 
dioxide. Environmental Science and Pollution Resear ch International, 13, 328-332. [This presents 
approaches to the study of wastewater treatment by TiO 2] 
Lu C., Su F. (2007) Adsorption of natural organic matter by carbon nanotubes. Separation and 
Purification Technology, 58, 113-121. [This presents approaches to the study of natural organic 
adsorption by carbon nanotubes] 
Lyon D.Y., Adams L.K., Falkner J.C., Alvarez P.J.J.  (2006) Antibacterial activity of fullerene water 
suspensions: effects of preparation method and particle size. Environmental Science and Technology, 40, 
4360-4366. [This presents approaches to the study of antibacterial water remediation by fullerene] 
Lyon D.Y., Brown D.A., Alvarez J.J. (2008) Implica tions and potential applications of bactericidal 
fullerene water suspensions: effect of nC60 concen tration, exposure conditio ns and shelf life. Water 
Science and Technology, 57(10), 1533-1538. [This presents  approaches to the study of bactericidal effect 
of fullerene] 
Makhluf S., Dror R., Nitzan Y., Abramovich A., Jelinek R.,  Gedanken A. (2005) Microwave-assisted 
synthesis of nanocrystalline MgO and its use as a bact eriocide. Advanced Functional Materials, 15, 1708-
1715. [This presents approaches to the study of microbial activity of microwave synthesized magnesium 
oxide] 
Manttari M., Viitikko K., Nystrom M. (2006) Nanofiltr ation of biologically treated effluents from the 
pulp and paper industry. Journal of Membrane Science, 272, 152-160. [This presents approaches to the 
study of water remediation by nanofiltration] 
Mohan D., Pittman Jr.C.U. (2007) Arsenic removal from water/wastewater using adsorbents-A critical 
review. Journal of Hazardous Materi als, 142, 1-53. [This presents a review study of arsenic from 
wastewater] 
Molinari R., Mungari M., Drioli E., Paola A.D., Loddo V., Palmisano L., Schiavello M. (2000) Study on 
a photocatalytic membrane reactor for water purifica tion. Catalysis Today, 55 , 71-78. [This presents 
approaches to the study of water tr eatment by a photocatalytic membrane] 
Morgada M.E., Levy I.K., Salomone V., Farias S.S. , Lopez G., Litter M.I. (2008) Arsenic (V) removal 
with nanoparticulate zerovalent iron: Effect of UV light and humic acids. Catalysis Today, In press, 
Corrected proof, Available online 26 November 2008. [T his presents approaches to the study of arsenic 
removal by zerovalent iron nanoparticles] 
Nouri S., Haghseresht F., Lu M. (2002) Adsorption of aromatic compounds by activated carbon: effects UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   of functional groups and molecular size. Adsorption Science and Technology, 20(1), 1-15. [This presents 
approaches to the study of activated carbon adsorption] 
Nutt M.O., Hughes J.B., Wong M.S. (2005) Designin g Pd-on-Au bimetallic nanoparticle catalysts for 
trichloroethene hydrodechlorination. Environmental Science and Technology, 39, 1346-1353. [This 
presents approaches to the study of bimetallic nanoparticles for hydrodeclorination of trichloroethene] 
Pereira W.S., Freire R.S. (2006) Azo dye degradation by recycled waste zero-valent iron powder. Journal 
of the Brazilian Chemical Society, 17(5), 832-838.  [This presents approaches to the study of dye 
degradation by zerovalent iron] 
Powell R. M., Puls R. W., Hightower S. K., and Sabatini. D. A. (1995) Coupled iron corrosion and 
chromate reduction: mechanisms for subsurface reme diation. Environmental Sc ience and Technology, 29, 
1913-1922. [This presents approaches to  the study of subsurface remediation] 
Roco, M.C. (1999) Nanotechnology, shaping the world atom by atom. National Science and Technology 
Council, Committee on Technology, The Interagency Working Group on Nanoscience, Engineering and 
Technology, September 1999, Washington D.C., USA. [This presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology] 
Satyawali Y., Balakrishnan M. (20 08) Wastewater treatment in mola sses-based alcohol distilleries for 
COD and color removal: A review. Journal of Environmental Management, 86, 481-497. [This presents 
approaches to the study of i ndustrial wastewater treatment] 
Savage N., Wentsel R., et al. (2008) Draft nanomaterial research strategy (NRS). Environmental Protection Agency, United States, 1-2. [This presen ts approaches to the study of nanomaterials] 
Schiavello M. (1998) Photocatalysis and Environment. Kluwer, Dordecht, The Netherlands. [This 
presents approaches to th e study of photocatalysis] 
Schmidt K.F. (2007) Nanofrontiers, visions for the future of nanotechnology. Project on Emerging Technologies, Woodrow Wilson International Center  for Scholars, National Institutes of Health, 
Washington, D.C., USA.  [This presents approaches to the study of the future of nanotechnology] 
Shang Z., Huang S., Xu X., Chen J. (2009) Mo/MgO from avalanche-like reduction of MgMoO4 for high 
efficient growth of multi-walled carbon nanotubes by chemical vapor deposition. Materials Chemistry 
and Physics 114, 173–178. [This presents approaches to the study of multi-walled carbon nanotubes synthesis] 
Sharma V.K., Yngard R.A., Lin Y. (2009) Silver nanoparticles: Green synthesis and their antimicrobial 
activities. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 145, 83-96. [This presents approaches to the study 
of silver nanoparticles] 
Shelley S.A. (2005) Nanotechnology: Turning basic science into reality. In Nanotechnology: 
Environmental Implications and Solutions, Theodore, L., Kunz, R.G., Eds.; John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 61-
107. [This presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology applications] 
Shih Y.H., Chen Y.C., Chen M.Y., Tai Y.T., Tso C. P. (2009) Dechlorination of hexachlorobenzene by 
using nanoscale Fe and nanoscale Pd/Fe bimetallic pa rticles. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical 
and Engineering Aspects, 332, 84-89. [This presents approaches to the study of bimetallic nanoparticles 
for water remediation] 
Shon H.K., Vigneswaran S., Kandasamy J., Cho J. (2007) Characteristics of effluent organic matter in 
wastewater (EOLSS), Developed under the Auspices of the UNESCO, Eolss Publishers, Oxford, UK, 
http://www.eolss.net  [This presents approaches to the study of effluent organic matter] 
Smith A. (2006) Nanotech – the way forward for clea n water? Filtration and Separation, 43(8), 32-33. 
[This presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology applications for water treatment] 
Smith A.D. (1997) Oxford Dictionary of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Oxford University Press, 
North Carolina, USA. [This presents approaches to the study of biochemical terminologies] 
Strathmann H. (2001) Membrane separation processe s: current relevance and future opportunities. 
American Institute of Chemical Engineers Journal, 47(5), 1077-1087. [This presents approaches to the 
study of membrane processes] UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   Song W., Li G., Grassian V.H., Larsen S.C. (2005) Development of improved materials for 
environmental applications: Nanocrystalline NaY zeolites. Environmental Science and Technology, 39, 
1214-1220. [This presents approaches to the study of nanocrystalline zeolites] 
Srivastava A., Srivastava O.N, Ta lapatra S., Vajtai R., Ajayan P. M. (2004) Carbon nanotube filters. 
Nature Materials, 3, 610-614. [This presents approaches to the study of  filtration using carbon nanotubes] 
Stafiej A., Pyrzynska K. (2007) Adsorption of heavy metal ions with carbon nanotubes. Separation and 
Purification Technology, 58, 49-52. [This presents approaches to the study of heavy metal adsorption by 
carbon nanotubes] 
Sutherland K. (2008) What is nanof iltration? Filtration and Separation 45(8), 32-35. [This presents 
approaches to the study of nanofiltration] Taniguchi N. (1974) On the Basi c Concept of 'Nano-Technology’, Proceeding of the International 
Conference on Precision Engineering, Tokyo, Part II, Japan Society of Precision Engineering, 1974. [This 
presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology concept] 
Tavolaro A., Tavolaro P., Drioli E. (2007) Zeo lite inorganic supports for BSA immobilization: 
Comparative study of several zeolite crystals  and composite membranes. Colloids Surface B 
Biointerfaces, 55, 67-76. [This presents approach es to the study of zeolite inorganic supports] 
Theron J., Walker J.A., Cloete T.E. (2008) Nano technology and Water Treatment: Applications and 
Emerging Opportunities. Critical Reviews in Microbiol ogy, 34, 43-69. [This presents approaches to the 
application of nanotechnology for water remediation] Thorsen T., Flogstad H. (2006) Nanofiltr ation in drinking water treatment Literature review , Techneau, 
European Commission. [This presents a review of th e use of nanofiltration for the treatment of drinking 
water] Ullah R., Dutta J. (2008) Photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes with manganese-doped ZnO 
nanoparticles. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 156, 194-200. [This presents approaches to the study of 
organic dye decomposition by manganese doped ZnO nanoparticles] 
Umwelt Bundes Amt (UBA), (2006) Nanotechnoogy: Opportunities and risks for humans and the 
environment, www.umweltbundesamt.de/uba-info-presse-e/hintergrund/nanotechnology.pdf  [This 
presents approaches to the study of the effect of nanoparticles on human health] 
Ventresque C., Gisclon V., Bablon G., Chagneau G. (2000) An outstanding feat of modern technology: the Mery-sur-Oise Nanofiltration Plant. Desalination, 131, 1-16. [This presents approaches to the case 
study of a nanofiltration plant] 
Williams J.J., Lethbridge Z.A.D., Cl arkson G.J., Ashbrook S.E., Evans K.E., Walton R.I. (2009) The bulk 
material dissolution method with small amines for the synthesis of large crystals  of the siliceous zeolites 
ZSM-22 and ZSM-48. Microporous and Mesoporous Materials, 119, 259–266. [This presents approaches 
to the study of zeolites crystals] 
Wang X., Chen C., Chang Y., Liu H. (2009) Dechlorination of chlorinated methanes by Pd/Fe bimetallic 
nanoparticles. Journal of Hazardous Materials, 161, 815-823. [This presents approaches to the study of water remediation by Pd/Fe nanoparticles] 
Wegmann M., Michen B., Graule T. (2008) Nanostructured surface modification of microporous 
ceramics for efficient virus filtration. Journal of the European Ceramic Society, 28, 1603-1612. [This 
presents approaches to the study of surface modi fication in nanostructured material for achieving 
effective virus filtration] 
Wei F., Zeng H., Cui P., Peng S., Cheng T. (2008) Various TiO
2 microcrystals: Controlled synthesis and 
enhanced photocatalytic activities. Chemical Engineering Journal, 144, 119-123. [This presents 
approaches to the study of TiO 2 microcrystals] 
World Health Organization (WHO), (2004) Drinking  water quality. http://www.who.int/ water_sanitation  
_health/dwq/en/ 
Wu M.K., Windeler R.S., Steiner C.K., Bros T., Friedlander S.K. (1993) Controlled synthesis of 
nanosized particles by aerosol processes. Aerosol Science and Technology 19, 527-548. [This presents 
approaches to the synthesis of nanoparticles] UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)   Xiao L., Erdei L., McDonagh A., Cortie M. (2008) Photocatalytic nanofibres. ICONN, 2008. 
International Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.  [This presents 
approaches to the synthesis of titania nanofibres] 
Xu Z., Gan L. , Jia Y., Hao Z. , Liu M., Chen L. (2 007) Preparation and charact erization of silica-titania 
aerogel-like balls by ambient pressure drying. Journal of Sol-Gel Science and Technology, 41(3), 203-
207. [This presents approaches to the stud y and characterization of titania-silica balls] 
Yan H., Gong A., He H., Zhou J., Wei Y., Lu L. (200 6) Adsorption of microcystins by carbon nanotubes. 
Chemosphere, 62, 142-148. [This presents approaches to the study of microcystins adsorption by carbon 
nanotubes] 
Yang G.C.C., Li C.J. (2008) Tubular TiO 2/Al 2O3 composite membranes: prep aration, characterization, 
and performance in electrofiltration of oxide-CMP wast ewater. Desalination, 234, 354-361. [This presents 
approaches to the study of the synthesis of TiO 2/Al 2O3 composite membrane] 
Zhang H., Quan X., Chen S., Zhao H., Zhao Y. (2006) Fabrication of photocatalytic membrane and 
evaluation its efficiency in removal of organic pollutants from water. Separation and Purification 
Technology, 50, 147-155. [This presents approaches to the study of efficient removal of organics from 
water using a photocatalytic membrane] 
Zhang X., Du A.J., Lee P., Sun D.D., Leckie J.O. (2008) TiO 2 nanowire membrane for concurrent 
filtration and photocatalytic oxidation for humic acid in  water. Journal of Membrane Science 313, 44-51. 
[This presents approaches to the study of humic acid decomposition by a TiO 2 nanowire membrane] 
Zhang, W.-X., (2005) Nanotechnology for water purification and waste treatment. Frontiers in 
Nanotechnology, US EPA Millennium Lecture Series , July 18 2005, Washington, D.C., USA. [This 
presents approaches to the study of nanotechnology for water treatment] Zhao G.J., Stevens S.E. (1998) Multiple parameters for the comprehensive evaluation of the susceptibility 
of Escherichia coli to the silver iron. Biometals, 11, 27-32. [This presents approaches to the study of 
silver iron antibacterial properties] 
Zodrow K., Brunet L., Mahendra S., Li D., Zhang A., Li Q., Alvarez P.J.J. (2008) Polysulfone 
ultrafiltration membranes impregnate d with silver nanoparticles show improved biofouling resistance and 
virus removal. Water Research, In press, Corrected  proof, Available online 24 November 2008. [This 
presents approaches to the study of silver impre gnated ultrafiltration membranes efficiency for virus 
removal and biofouling resistance] 
Zsigmondy, R. (1914) Colloids and the Ultramicroscope. John Wiley and Sons, NY, USA. [This presents 
approaches to the study of colloids characterization] 
Biographical Sketches    
 
Ibrahim El Saliby is currently a PhD student in the School of Civil and Environmental Engineering at 
the FEIT, UTS. He is working on the development of  new filtration membranes from metal nanomaterial.  
He holds an Engineering diploma in plant production from the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences at the 
Lebanese University (2000), and a master degree in plant sciences from the Faculty of Agricultural and 
Food Sciences at the American University of Beir ut (2002). As an expert in plant propagation and 
production, especially of native wild Lebanese plants, he was the plant production coordinator in IBSAR 
production team at the American University of Beirut from 2002 to 2007. He joined the FEIT staff at 
UTS in February 2007 for studying the ways to improve the photocatalytic activity of titania produced 
from the incineration of sludge. 
 
Dr H.K. Shon  is currently a UTS Chancellor’ s postdoctoral research since 2006. His research interests 
include membrane processes and new analytical methods for wastewater treatment and reuse. He has 
made significant contributions to the understanding of membrane fouling in wastewater treatment 
processes.  
 
Dr J. Kandasamy is Senior Lecturer in the Faculty of Engineering University of Technology, Sydney, 
Australia. He obtained his PhD from University of Auckland., New Zealand where is also obtained his 
Bachelor in Civil Engineering and Masters in Civil Engineering. He has worked in the New South Wales 
Government as a Senior Engineer for 15 years and has wide industry knowledge.  UNESCO – EOLSS
SAMPLE CHAPTERSWATER AND WASTEWATER TREATMENT TECHNOLOGIES  - Nanotechnology for Wastewater Treatment: In Brief  - I.J. El 
Saliby, H.K. Shon, J. Kandasamy, S. Vigneswaran 
©Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (EOLSS)    
Dr S. Vigneswaran  has been working on water and wastewater treatment and reuse related research since 
1976. During the last twenty years, he has made significant contributions in physico-chemical water 
treatment related processes such as filtration, fl occulation, membrane-filtration and adsorption. His 
research activities both on new processes development and mathematical modeling are well documented 
in reputed international journals such as Water Re search, American Institute of Chemical Engineers 
Journal, Chemical Engineering Science, Journal of Am erican Society of Civil Engineers, and Journal of 
Membrane Science. He has also been involved in a number of consulting activities in this field in 
Australia, Indonesia, France, Korea, and Thailand through various national and international agencies. He 
has authored two books in this field at the invita tion of CRC press, USA, and has published more than 
230 papers in journals and conference's proceedings. Currently a Professor of the Environmental 
Engineering Group at the University of Technology, Sydney, he was the founding Head of and the 
founding Co-ordinator of the University Key Re search Strength Program in Water and Waste 
Management. He is coordinating the Urban Water Cycle and Water and Environmental Management of 
the newly established Research Institutes on Wate r and Environmental Resources Management and 
Nano-scale Technology respectively.  