Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203ReviewIntroduction
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) poses a significant multi -
dimensional challenge for emergency and intensive care physicians 
as well as neurologists [1, 2]. This primarily starts with the diagno -
sis and related detection and confirmation of NCSE, and continues through optimal therapy and difficult prognosis [3]. Although a 
convulsive status epilepticus (CSE) needs only to be distinguished 
from a non-epileptic dissociative convulsive state, in the differen -
tial diagnostic spectrum and in appearance, NCSE can range from migraine, stroke, coma or delirium to psychiatric disease patterns 
such as stupor and psychosis [4, 5]. Nowadays all paroxysmal focal 
(and sometimes even global) deficits are basically considered events suspicious of stroke, and therefore initially evaluated as 
such. While this may still be correct with respect to focal impair-
ments such as paralysis or aphasia, focal impairments with tempo -
rary changes in – or loss of – consciousness occur only with consid -
erable vertebrobasilar insufficiency of an ischemic nature, more 
frequently they are indicative of an epileptic, metabolic-toxic or 
migrainous origin. It should also be noted that a “plus” symptomol -
ogy (movements, paresthesia, olfactory, visual, emotional, acous -
tic impressions) is predominantly present in epileptic seizures and status epilepticus, whereas in cases of stroke there is a “minus” symptomology (paralysis, hypesthesia, aphasia, amaurosis, etc.). 
The picture is obscured by the fact that “minus” symptoms can 
occur during epileptic episodes (paresis, aphasia, apraxia), while 
during strokes “plus” symptoms (hyperkinesia – limb-shaking TIAs, 
paresthesia, visual phenomena, etc.) may be observed.
The following presents the definition, various manifestations 
and types, classification, causes, epidemiology, brief pathophysi -
ology as well as the diagnosis of NCSE.
Definition
It general it can be stated that NCSE is everything apart from CSE, but this is no real help. Shorvon formulated it more precisely: NCSE 
is a concept for a number of states in which electroencephalograph -
ic activity is present for an extended period, accompanied by non -
convulsive clinical symptoms [6]. Recently the Task Force of the 
 International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) published a compre -
hensive definition for the classification of status epilepticus:
“Status epilepticus is a condition resulting either from the failure 
of the mechanisms responsible for seizure termination or from the in -Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in Adults: Types, 
 Pathophysiology, Epidemiology, Etiology, and Diagnosis
  
Author
Stephan Rüegg
Affiliation
Department of Clinical Neurology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland
Key words
nonconvulsive status epilepticus, coma, encephalopathy behavioral changes, EEG
Bibliography
DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-103383
Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York
 
ISSN 2511-1795
Correspondence
Stephan Rüegg
Abteilung für Klinische Neurophysiologie
Neurologische KlinikUniversitätsspital BaselPetersgraben 4CH-4031 Basel
Switzerland
 
Stephan.Rueegg@usb.chAbstr Act
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) is defined by permanent elec -
troclinical nonconvulsive epileptic activity or a series of nonconvulsive 
seizures without recovery to baseline. This “silent” manifestation of lasting neurological symptoms, like aphasia, confusion, etc., impedes 
easily recognizing NCSE. The most important diagnostic step often is 
to consider the possibility of NCSE. NCSE can only be confirmed by an immediate EEG recording. Epidemiological studies show slight prepon
-
derance of convulsive status epilepticus (CSE) over NCSE (60:40 %); 
however, this might result from lack of recognition of NCSE because of its very unspectacular manifestation. Regarding pathophysiology, the 
neuronal mechanisms are identical for both NCSE and CSE, but they 
spare the primary motor neurons. Permanent hyperexcitability may damage the neurons involved in NCSE the same way as the motor neu
-
rons in CSE. However, NCSE is spared from the life-threatening second -
ary pathophysiological sequelae of CSE (lactic acidosis, respiratory ex -
haustion, rhabdomyolsis, etc.). Nevertheless, autonomic dysregulation (arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia/asystolia), apneas) may also ex
-
pose the patient to substantial acute risks. There are a myriad of causes for NCSE and they are mainly medication errors (insufficient adherence or addition of new drugs with interactions) in patients with known ep
-
ilepsy. In these patients and in those without known epilepsy, other causes include metabolic, toxic, structural (tumors, hemorrhages, is
-
chemia), infectious, inflammatory, and autoimmune causes. Thus, it is germane to extensively search for the cause of the NCSE because the immediate and proper therapy of the underlying cause of, especially 
the acute symptomatic, forms of NCSE is at least as important as the 
antiictal treatment.
E189
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Reviewitiation of mechanisms, which lead to abnormally, prolonged seizures 
(after time point t1). It is a condition, which can have long-term con -
sequences (after time point t2), including neuronal death, neuronal injury, and alteration of neuronal networks, depending on the type 
and duration of seizures” [7]. This definition includes 2 operational di -
mensions, that of time t1, in which an epileptic attack can be consid-ered to be clearly abnormally prolonged, and that of time t2, from 
which, with continued epileptic seizure, can result in with serious tem -
porary and/or irreversible subsequent damage within the nervous sys -
tem or even within the entire organism (in the case of the CSE). It is 
clear that t1 and t2 are different for the various types of SE, and that 
this definition allows situation-related adaptation. Whereas t1 desig -
nates the time from which immediate treatment should start, t2 is the time of ongoing seizure activity after which there is a risk of long-term 
consequences [7]. Although this concept is on target, it stands or falls 
depending on the data reliability of t1 and t2. Here is where the diffi-
culty begins. One the one hand, there are population-based studies 
in which the definitive duration of epileptic seizures or SE can often only be estimated and which tend to overestimate the duration of the 
seizure, since usually the postictal phase of the coma and the lack of 
response to external stimuli (being spoken to) are considered 
 continuation of the seizure. Thus it can be seen that with elderly pa -
tients who generally suffer partial complex episodes with a somewhat 
longer reorientation phase, a particularly longer seizure time is “ob -
served” [8, 9]. In this population, only long-term video EEG monitor-
ing (LVEM) could shed light on the actual duration of the seizure [10], 
but is seldom used [11]. On the other hand, studies of selected patient 
cohorts in which the duration of seizure could be determined exactly 
using LVEM demonstrated that 80 % of epileptic attacks lasted less 
than 1 min, and that 90 % continued for less than 2 min [12–15]. Fur-
thermore there are good indications that children’s epileptic seizures 
can last significantly longer than those of adults [16]. Overall, howev -
er, Lowenstein’s operational definition of 5 min seems justified for the 
CSE [17], as are the 10 min indicated by Young for focal NCSE [18], 
which the Task Force has now adopted for t1. In the absence of usable 
data, the authors of the Task Force decided, based on a form of gen -
eralized NCSE, absence status, a time of 10–15 min for t1. It is even 
more difficult to determine the time t2 for the different types of SE be -
cause most of the results are based on animal experimental data and can hardly be transferred directly to a human model. The leading caus -
es of SE in animal models do not occur in humans, and it remains un -
clear whether the time relationships in a rat, for example, an animal 
with a 2-year life expectancy can be applied unadapted to a human 
with an 80-year lifespan [19]. In concrete terms: if t2 lasts 20 min in a 
rat, is t2 still 20 min for humans or should it be multiplied by a factor 
of 40 or some intermediate value? Only few people are biopsied or au-
topsied after suffering SE. The few case reports and sole series [20] do 
not indicate exact duration of an SE to correlate histopathological 
changes with duration. Based on current knowledge, the Task Force 
decided to set this t2 for CSE at 30 min, and in the case of focal NCSE, 
more than 60 min. With respect to absence status, to date there are 
no clear indications that long duration is related to long-term damage.
Types and Classification
In 1962 at the first SE colloquium in Marseille, Gastaut noted that there are “so many types of SE as seizure types” [21]. This is true, since in clinical practice hardly one NCSE resembles another. Nevertheless, 
a certain classification is possible. ▶Fig. 1 illustrates a scheme based 
on the 2 dimensions of localization (focal vs. generalized) or con -
sciousness (retained vs. limited). These scheme is also compatible 
with the new ILAE Task Force classification of NCSE. This classifica -
tion is based on 4 axes, axis 1 being the semiology (▶ table 1); axis 
2 is the etiology (▶ table 2 ); axis 3 is EEG correlates (▶ table 3 ), and 
axis 4 is the age of the patient (▶ table 4). This concept takes 
 account of the requirements for a classification supporting a  clinical 
diagnosis, enabling research through standardization, while ensur-
ing an individualized treatment concept for the patient. The matrix 
structure also allows for overlaps, e. g., in the case of the age-de -
pendent SE forms (axis 4), which at the same time can also be se -
miological entities (axis 1) with partially specific etiology (axis 2) 
as well as EEG patterns (axis 3).
As a practical example, we present the example of the classifi-
cation of NCSE of an adult with anti-NMDA receptor based limbic 
encephalitis:
▶table 1 New ILAE classification of NCSE Axis 1 [7].
B-1: NCSE during coma, including so-called “subtle” status
B-2: NCSE without coma
 B-2a:  Generalized:
      B-2aa: Typical absence status
      B-2aa: Atypical absence status
      B-2ac: Myoclonic absence status
 B-2b: Focal:
     B-2ba: Without impairment of consciousness (aura continua, 
with autonomic, sensory, visual, olfactory, gustatory, 
emotional/psychic/experiential, or auditory symptoms)
     B-2bb: Aphasic status
     B-2bc: With impaired consciousness
 B-2c: Unclear whether focal or generalized
     B-2ca: Autonomic SE▶Fig. 1  Graphical representation of types of nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus.)RFDO* HQHUDOL]HG
3DUWLDOVLPSOH
ÃDSKDVLF
ÃDPDXURW LF
ÃVHQWLHQW
ÃH[SHULHQW LDO
3DUWLDOFRPSOH[
ÃG\VFRJQLWLYHSV\FKRPRWRU
ÃFRPSOH[DXUDF RQWLQXD
ÃIURQWDOOREHVWDWXV
ÃWHPSRUDOOREHVWDWXV
6WDWXVHSLOHSWLFXVLQFRPD
Ã´VXEWOHµVWDWXVHSLOHS WLFXVDIWHUFRQYXOVLYHVWDWXV
ÃVWDWXVHSLOHS WLFXVLQFULWLFDOLOOQHVVVWDWX V
ÃSRVWDQR [LFPLQLPDOP \RFORQLFVWDWXVHSLOH SWLFXVÃW\SLFDODEVHQF HVWDWXV
ÃDW\SLFDODEVHQF HVWDWXV
ÃGHQRYRDEVHQFHVWDWXVROGH U
SDWLHQWEHQ] RGLD]HSLQHDEXVH
ÃPLQLPDOP \RFORQLFVWDWXVZLWK
JHQHWLFJHQHUDOL] HGHSLOHSVLH V
E190
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203“predominant non-motor SE in an adult (axis 4) with limited 
consciousness (axis 1); EEG shows practically generalized rhythmic 
high-voltage delta activity as well as well as obscured high-frequen -
cy beta bursts (axis 3) due to acute (non-paraneoplastic, an -
ti-NMDA receptor based) limbic encephalitis”.
The types and semiology of the SE are determined by the locali -
zation of the focus and symptomatogenic zone. If motor areas in -
volved, the SE is manifested as convulsive. If the affected zone is out -
side the motor areas, the SE is considered non-convulsive. The so-
called “subtle” status epilepticus is a special case, that is, an SE that 
is initially convulsive, but changes to a nonconvulsive state. The sec-
tion “Pathophysiology” will briefly describe this in more detail.
The following electroencephalographic clinical examples are 
presented as an illustration of classical NCSE:
 ▪Inhibitory NCSE (▶ Fig. 2 ):
 ▪Aphasic NCSE (▶ Fig. 3 ): ▪Dyscognitive NCSE (▶ Fig. 4 ):
 ▪Absence status (▶ Fig. 5 ):
 ▪NCSE in metabolic coma (▶ Fig. 6 ): (cefepime)
 ▪NCSE with structural lesion (▶ Fig. 7 ): (tumor)
 ▪Postanoxic encephalopathy (▶ Fig. 8 ):
The concept of the NCSE encephalopathy continuum has been 
a very important finding in recent years regarding the classification of NCSE [22, 23]. The authors postulate that the more responsive 
the EEG appears, and the closer it resembles a seizure pattern, the 
more likely it is that the patient’s clinical condition is due to epilep -
tic activity. This implies not only an actual epileptic diagnosis, but 
also promises that an immediate antiepileptic treatment will most 
likely improve the condition. Conversely, rigid, very regular (rhyth -
mic or periodic), low-frequency ( < 2 Hz) and non-responsive EEG 
patterns in a comatose patient do not seem to support either the 
diagnosis of NCSE or a response to intensive antiepileptic therapy. 
This concept takes into account the fact that often clinical situa -
tions are accompanied by an acute change in consciousness and/or behavior along with epileptiform EEG changes, but there are rea -
sonable doubts whether a true NCSE is present, but rather it might be suspected that the patient is in an encephalopathic or psychiat-
ric state, and that the observed EEG changes reflect severely altered 
brain function. This gray area includes
 ▪epileptic encephalopathy (such as appearing as a result of Dra -
vet, Lennox-Gastaut syndromes or ring chromosome 20 
syndrome)
 ▪coma with static, non-developing EEG patterns (such as lateralized or generalized periodic discharges)
 ▪behavioral issues in patients with epilepsy (such as related to 
psychosis)
 ▪acute confusional states with epileptiform EEG discharges (such as during delirium).Complicating the last 2 items are clear cases of “postictal” psy-
chosis with continuous epileptic activity detected in deep electrode recordings [24, 25] as well as hypoactive delirium which can genu -
inely be of epileptic origin in the sense of NCSE.
In summary with respect to NCSE and concomitant coma, it 
should be noted that the better the responsiveness, and the more typical the EEG is (developing and declining epileptic activity), the 
better the treatability and prognosis are. Conversely, as a rule a 
non-responsive EEG and prominent structural brain damage are 
linked to an unfavorable prognosis [26, 27].▶table 2  New ILAE classification of NCSE Axis 2: Etiology [7].
A. Known cause:
– Acute: (e. g., stroke, intoxication, malaria, encephalitis, etc.)
– Remote: (e. g., posttraumatic, postencephalitic, post-stroke, etc.)
– Progressive (e. g., brain tumor, Lafora’s disease and other progressive myoclonic epilepsies)
– Status epilepticus in defined electroclinical syndromes (e. g., ring chromosome 20
B. Unknown cause (formerly “cryptogenic”)
▶table 3 New ILAE classification of NCSE Axis 3: EEG correlates [7].
A. Location: –  generalized (including bilateral synchronous 
patterns)
– lateralized
– bilateral independent
– mutlifocal
B. Name of the 
pattern:– periodic discharges
– rhythmic delta activity
–  spike-and-wave/sharp-and-wave plus subtypes
C. Morphology: – steepness/sharpness of phases
–  number of phases (e. g., triphasic morphology)
– absolute and relative amplitude– polarity (positive/negative)
D. Time-related 
features:– prevalence
– frequency– duration
– diurnal pattern duration and index
– onset (sudden vs. gradual)
– dynamics (evolving, fluctuating, or static)
E. Modulation: – stimulus-induced
– spontaneous
F. Effect of interven
-
tion on the EEG:– medication– stimulation
E191
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Review▶Fig. 2  Inhibitory NCSE: 52-year-old female with a perfused right 
temporo-parieto-occipital malformation 3 years prior to the current 
event. She remained free of stroke after embolization. On day of 
admission referral with stroke alarm due to sudden left brachiofacial paralysis with full consciousness without previous tonic-clonic 
 expression. An emergency MRI revealed neither reperfusion nor 
fresh ischemia. The EEG revealed continuous lateralized (pseudo) periodic discharges above the right temporal and central region. 
Symptoms ceased completely after IV administration of 5 mg mida -
zolam.
▶Fig. 3  Aphasic NCSE: 84-year-old male with long history of arteri -
al hypertension and depression. During an office visit to his personal physician, he suddenly could no longer speak, appeared very con -
fused and apractic. Referral with stroke alarm. Determination of 
motor-stressed global aphasia and apraxia, but without paresis on 
the right side. In emergency MRI no hemorrhage or fresh ischemia. 
EEG revealed lateralized periodic discharges as left temporal sharp waves. Rapid disappearance of this activity after IV administration of 
3 mg midazolam; in typical manner full recovery from aphasia only 
after several days.
▶table 4 New ILAE classification of NCSE Axis 4: Age of actual occurrence [7].
A. Neonatal (0 = 30 days): – Ohtahara syndrome
B. Infancy: – West syndrome
(1 month–2 years) – myoclonic status with Dravet syndrome
– focal status epilepticus
– febrile status epilepticus
C. Childhood und adolescence: – autonomic status epilepticus as part of Panayiotopoulos syndrome ( > 2 years–12 years)
– NCSE in specific childhood epilepsy syndromes and etiologies:
– ring chromosome 20– other karyotype abnormalities
– Angelman syndrome– Doose syndrome
– other childhood myoclonic encephalopathies
– tonic status in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome– myoclonic status epilepticus in progressive myoclonus epilepsies
– electrical status epilepticus in slow wave sleep (ESES)
– aphasic status epilepticus in Landau-Kleffner syndrome
D. Adolescence and adulthood: – myoclonic status epilepticus in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy
( > 12 years–59 years) – absence status in juvenile absence status epilepsy– myoclonic status in Down syndrome
E. In old age: –myoclonic status in Alzheimer’s disease
( ≥ 60 years) – nonconvulsive status epilepticus in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
– de novo (or relapsing) absence status in old age, benzodiazepine withdrawal
E192
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Pathophysiology
A detailed description of the pathophysiology of NCSE would go be -
yond the limits of this overview. Nevertheless the most significant 
pathophysiological basic concepts will be mentioned for 2 reasons. 
Firstly, as discussed above, the new definition and classification of SE 
by the selection of time points t1 and t2 clearly underlines the im -
portance of pathophysiological processes. Secondly, the mecha -
nisms of SE are important for understanding the treatment concepts 
mentioned in the rest of this article. Except for a few points (primar -
ily the systemic consequences) the pathophysiology of NCSE differs little from that of CSE; therefore the following will mention SE.
It should be emphasized again that over 99.9 % of all seizures 
cease by themselves; the brain thus has a variety of efficient mech -
anisms to halt seizures [28]. In the case of SE, what leads to a fail -
ure of this protection?
A definite imbalance of the inhibitory and excitatory influences 
at the molecular neuronal level is assumed. Receptor phenomena 
as well as critically increased energy consumption play an important 
role in this. If insufficient ATP is provided during SE, the ATP-  
dependent sodium-potassium pump fails, and the increased extra -
cellular potassium level results in over-excitability as well as  pronounced acidosis [29]. If an epileptic attack persists, the inhibi -
tively active gamma-amino-butyric acid (GABA) receptors, type A 
(GABA(A)R) are increasingly altered in their pentameric composi -
tion, which unlike GABA itself, also makes agonists such as benzodi -
azepines increasingly more resistant. In addition, GABA(A)  receptors are endocytosed in the synaptic cleft, and are reduced in their total 
number so that less inhibitory influences can also be effective there [30, 31]. Simultaneously, sustained epileptic activity results in an 
endoplasmic synthesis of the exciting glutamatergic N-methyl-D-as -
partate (NMDA) as well as α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxaz -
olepropionate (AMPA) receptors which maintains and prolongs syn -
aptic over-excitement [32,  33]. As a result, neurons and glial cells 
are flooded by glutamate, which can no longer buffer and regener-ate the glial cells, whereupon the neurons die from acute excitotox -
ic cell death by an unbraked inflow of Ca2 +  ions. Activation of AMPA 
receptors also leads to membrane dissolution, likewise with cell 
death. These processes, in turn, activate inflammatory processes 
(so-called inflammasome), leading to the opening of the blood-brain 
barrier, the invasion of defense cells and the production of cytokines 
and chemokines. While the latter lead to further inflammatory cells, 
the former, mainly interleukin-1β −  interleukin-2 and 6 as well as 
tumor necrosis factor α greatly reduce the seizure threshold [34,  35]. 
In addition, the efflux of albumin through the open blood-brain bar-
rier likewise promotes seizure [36]. It should be noted that in an in -
dividual patient the intensity of these reaction cascades is addition -
ally genetically and epigenetically determined [37].
Nowadays, epilepsy and related seizures are not considered con -
ditioned solely by these cellular mechanisms, but are increasingly understood as a network disorder. Therefore it should be assumed 
that in the development of an (NC)SE it is significant whether cell 
groups with important switching/linkage functions (so-called 
“hubs”) are involved in the generation and propagation of an SE, ▶Fig. 4  Dyscognitive NCSE: 69-year-old female patient with a decade of well-adjusted focal lesional epilepsy after extirpation of a right-side para -
prepontine arachnoid cyst via temporary access. Increased confusion after a few days. Neighbor found patient in open doorway, wet and wandering 
around. She was disoriented in every dimension, constantly repeated that she didn’t know what was going on. With structurally unchanged condi -
tions but inflammatory CSF, the diagnosis of non-paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis could be made with clearly positive anti-GAD antibodies and 
negative onco PET. The EEG demonstrated practically continuous lateralized periodic discharges in the right hemisphere with slight sharp wave and 
spike wave morphology a. One day later, only lateralized, continuous periodic discharges appear with right temporal delta waves and sharp-wave 
morphology after continuous administration of low-dose midazolam via perfusor and IV levetiracetam as well as  preexisting lacosamide and 
topiramate therapy b. After initiation of intensive immunomodulation with high-dose methyl-prednisolone and IV immunoglobulins followed by 
rituximab, epileptic activity decreased significantly 10 days after the onset of the symptoms; there were still (pseudo-) periodical lateralized dis -
charges seen in a clinical electroencephalographic borderland between status epilepticus and encephalopathy c. An additional 3 weeks later, only an 
intermittent mass with broad waves and right frontotemporal phase reversal can be seen d. Clinically, the patient continued to suffer from marked 
memory loss as well as pronounced perseveration.
E193
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Reviewsince these lead to changes in the often distantly connected excit-
ing and inhibiting networks. Likewise, complex systems such as the 
brain or individual regions of it can enter a state of increasing sus -
ceptibility or instability (criticality, such as triggering an avalanche [38]), in which frequently only an additional tiny impulse is need-
ed to develop a disproportionately strong, destructive reaction.
Within the context of pathophysiology, the concept of the “sub -
tle” SE, which corresponds in its appearance to NCSE, should also be mentioned. In animal experiments as well as in studies of hu -
mans with SE, Treiman and associates observed practically identi -
cal cascades of electroencephalographic-clinical phenomena. This shows a transition from initial typical dynamic EEG seizure patterns 
with clinically convulsive seizures over 5 stages towards a virtually 
non-responsive burst-suppression pattern with a clinically non-con -
vulsive appearance [39]. The stopping of the clinically convulsive activity was initially explained with energetic exhaustion (“empty ▶Fig. 5  Absence status: 47-year-old male patient with tonic-clonic awakening episodes and absence since the age of 17. Incomplete control using 
valproate and primidone. After slight dosage increase of valproate, unanticipated almost fatal hyperammonemic encephalopathy. Therefore change to 
levetiracetam, topiramate and lamotrigine. There were several episodes of absence status, in which the patient wandered aimlessly, asked repetitive 
questions, “answered” questions, but did so like a “symptomatic epileptic” (and not a classic psychiatric case) Ganser syndrome response (e. g. date 
confusion: 16th November instead of 17th October). The EEG disclosed almost continuous generalized periodic discharges with (poly-) spike-wave 
morphology and a frequency between 2.5 and 4 Hz interrupted by short sections of normal alpha-basic activity a. After fractional administration of 8 mg 
of lorazepam over 45 min, there was no change in the image, except for a flattening and frequency increase (beta overlay) of the basic activity b. After 
1 mg of midazolam c, epileptic activity completely disappeared within 90 s d, and the patient was reoriented within a few minutes.
▶Fig. 6  NCSE in metabolic coma: 83-year-old male patient with E. coli sepsis after hip prosthesis implantation with multiple retroperitoneal ab -
scesses. Treatment with rifampicin and cefepime. 2 days later, the patient became comatose in renal failure despite immediate initiation of hemodi -
alysis. The EEG a showed generalized periodic discharges with triphasic morphology ( * ) and fronto-occipital shift ( ** ). In addition, bilaterally inde -
pendent periodic discharges with sharp-slow-wave morphology were found ( *** /framing). After IV administration of 1 mg of lorazepam b, the bilat-
erally independent periodic as well as the generalized discharges with triphasic morphology disappeared.
E194
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203batteries”), but this occurs among humans only after the most 
 extreme physical stress. It was discovered later that cell groups in 
the substantia nigra and also the nucleus subthalamicus can block 
the motor pathways like a gate function during an SE without the 
SE ceasing, which leads to a clinical (“subtle”) NCSE [28].
In addition to these immediate effects, SE in its convulsive form 
causes marked systemic effects [40], such as lactic acidosis, hypox-
ia, sympathetic stress including myocardial damage and rhabdomy-
olysis which can immediately become life-threatening and 
 additionally directly result in the risk of neuronal damage, requiring 
urgent direct treatment. In animal experiments [41] and controver-
sially in humans [42, 43] NCSE can likewise result in neuronal cell 
death [44–49], although these findings were obtained indirectly through observation of cognitive restrictions or permanent MRI 
changes after the NCSE. The sympathetic stress can also be signifi -
cantly increased and cause autonomous symptoms (dysregulation, hyper-/hypotension, hyper-/hypoventilation, tachy-/bradyarrhyth -
mia to asystole) [50], which together with the frequently life-threat-
ening semiology likewise makes rapid vigorous treatment necessary.
Causes
In principle, the causes of NCSE are not significantly different from those that can trigger CSE. An important issue with regard to eti -
ology is the question of whether the patient is known to suffer from epilepsy or not. If the patient is known to suffer from epilepsy, then 
changes in medication, in the widest sense, are the most impor-
tant cause. This may result from a drop in the drug level due to a 
planned reduction or an attempt to gradually reduce antiepileptic 
therapy, or – more frequently – the patient attempts this on his 
own without consulting the treating physician or is non-compliant 
and takes medication irregularly. A drop in the effective concentra -
tion of antiepileptic drugs can also be caused by a supply gap (trav -el, car trouble, etc.). Less obvious reasons for a drop in effective 
medication level with subsequent development of SE can be the 
addition of an anti-inflammatory drug (e. g., gyrase inhibitor) or a 
strong enzyme inductor (rifampicin, carbamazepine, etc.) [51].
In the treatment of a genetically generalized epilepsy syndrome, 
absence or myoclonic status epilepticus can be precipitated by the use of an inappropriate antiepileptic medications such as carba -
mazepine/oxcarbazepine/phenytoin/tiagabine/vigabatrin/pregab -
alin/gabapentin [52]. Paradoxically, an overdose of any antiepilep -
tic medication (apart from benzodiazepines and barbiturates) or highly-toxic levels can cause SE. Conversely, withdrawal of alcohol, benzodiazepines and barbiturates can trigger a generalized CSE. 
The “de novo” absence status of generally older patients after ces -
sation of long-term consumption of benzodiazepines (in the form of sleeping pills) represents an outlier [53].▶Fig. 7  NCSE with structural lesion: 62-year-old female patient 
with right frontal meningioma removal 3 days previously. After 
unremarkable progress, the staff of the monitoring station noticed 
that the patient did not answer questions quickly, as she was other -
wise precise and was “awkward” during the morning care. The EEG 
revealed a bone gap and periodic high-amplitude discharges with 
sharp-wave morphology above virtually the entire right anterior quadrant which abated only after days despite midazolam perfusion 
and IV valproate and levetiracetam.
▶Fig. 8  Postanoxic encephalopathy. a 70-year-old male patient 
after cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) due to ventricular fibrilla -
tion with known severe CHD. After 24 h hypothermia (34  °C) the 
patient remained comatose without sedation. 72 h after CPR the EEG 
indicated a curve nonresponsive to exterocepive stimuli with gener -
alized periodic discharges with partial triphasic, partial sharp-wave 
morphology. b 53-year-old female patient with respiratory exhaus -
tion at home and long resuscitation (hypoxia 35 min). Treatment for 
hypothermia. After warming without sedatives, an image of a non-responsive burst-suppression curve with rhythmic discharges occurring in the bursts with spike-wave morphology, clinically ap -
pearing as generalized myclonia. The patient remained comatose and somato-sensory evoked median nerve potentials indicated no cortical-related stimulus response 72 h post-CPR.
E195
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203ReviewObviously many epilepsy syndromes, even those starting in 
childhood, are frequently associated with (nonconvulsive) SE. This 
particularly applies to Dravet syndrome, SE syndrome with focal 
seizures, ring chromosome 20 and Lennox-Gastaut syndromes, mi -
tochondriopathy, neuroceroid lipofuscinosis, etc.In a narrow majority of cases, SE occurs in patients without 
known epilepsy, usually symptomatically in the course of develop -
ing or acute diseases, ingestion of medications which lower the sei -
zure threshold, or drugs, or exposure to toxins. These causes are 
shown in ▶table 5.▶table 5 Causes of NCSE.
– Unknown, “cryptogenic”
– “symptomatic”:
– Intracerebral lesions:
– Ischemic microangiopathy
– Alzheimer’s disease
– Tumors (low grade  > higher grade > metastases > lymphoma > meningeosis)
– Intracranial hemorrhage (intracerebral lobar hemorrhage > subarachnoid hemorrhage > subdural hematoma > epidural hematoma)
– Ischemic stroke (territorial > lacunar infarction)
– Sinus vein thrombosis
– Hydrocephalus occlusivus
– Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES)
– Eclampsia
– Infections:
– Autoimmune diseases
– Antineuronal antibody limbic encephalitis (paraneoplastic or non-paraneoplastic)
– Systemic lupus erythematosus
– Multiple sclerosis
– Steroid-responsive encephalopathy with associated autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT)
– Sprue/celiac disease
– Vasculitis
– Sarcoidosis
– Infections
– Cysticercosis
– Herpes simplex encephalitis
– HHV-6 encephalitis with immune suppression
– Abscesses
– Empyema
– Toxoplasmosis
– HIV encephalopathy
– Cryptococcosis
– Tuberculosis
– Pneumo-, strepto-, meningio- and staphylococcal meningitis
– Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease
– Metabolic-toxic
– Mitochondriopathy (MELAS, MERRF, PCD19)
– Porphyria
– Medication (▶ table 6)
– Drugs:
– Stimulants (amphetamines and derivates, designer drugs)
– Cocaine
– High-dosage opiates (including IV heroin)
– Poison
– Nerve gas (Sarin XV, etc.)
– Domoic acid
– Bicuculline
– Muscimol
– Pentylenetetrazol
– Electrolyte imbalance
– Hyponatremia
– Hypomagnesemia
– (Hypocalcemia)
– Sepsis
– Hormonal
– Hypoglycemia
– Hyperthyroidism
– Postanoxic
E196
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203In cases of early-onset Alzheimer’s dementia epileptic seizures 
can occur 87 times more frequently with increased SE [54, 55]; the 
risk of seizure is reduced 3- to 4 fold in those over 70 years of age 
[56–59]. In an advanced course, NCSE is usually present in its dy-
scognitive form, which is rarely clinically distinguished from the 
fluctuating symptoms of the basic disease, and is therefore under-
standably often not discovered or only discovered at a later junc-
ture [60]. Pathophysiologically, Alzheimer’s dementia converges 
towards mesial temporal lobe pathology mainly due to the neuro -
toxic effect of epileptogenic beta-amyloid [61].
Interestingly, another neurodegenerative disease, idiopathic 
Parkinson’s disease, seems more likely to protect against epilepsy, but when seizures occur, they are often directly in the form of SE 
[62]. In general status epilepticus occurs 6 times more frequently 
above the age of 60 [8].
Epidemiology
There is no classical epidemiological study of the incidence of NCSE 
itself. If the data of the 5 previously published epidemiological stud-
ies on SE are summarized in all forms (population base: 
n = 2 562 000) [63–67], CSE has been observed in 60.2 % of cases, 
and NCSE in 39.8 % of cases. Expressed as pure incidences, 15 cases 
of CSE per 100 000 population and 9 cases of NCSE per 100 000 
should be expected [68]. The investigated regions included 2 in the USA (Richmond, Virginia and Olmsted County, Minnesota), one in 
francophone Switzerland, one in Hessen, Germany and one in Italy 
(Bologna).
However, the CSE/NCSE frequency distribution is significantly 
shifted toward NCSE if the incidence is based on an intensive care 
unit, since refractive forms (RSE) are treated there, the majority of 
which exhibit minimally convulsive or nonconvulsive manifesta -
tions after CSE (subtle SE). On the other hand, seriously ill persons can develop an SE due to acute etiology; in the majority of cases 
( > 80 % of cases) SE is manifested in a minimal to nonconvulsive 
form [69]. On the whole it can be presumed that outside of hospi -
tals or in facilities without immediate access to EEG recording, many NCSEs are not detected; the result is a large number of un -
reported or under-reported incidences of NCSE. In an early study, 34.3 percent of emergency patients presenting with an unex -plained loss of consciousness demonstrated NCSE [70]; in a more 
recent study out of Vancouver, this proportion was reduced to 9.3 % 
[71], and 8 % of comatose patients at an intensive care unit in Rich -
mond demonstrated NCSE [72]. A recent study showed that not only the availability of EEG as such, but also continuous monitor-
ing of persons with loss of consciousness in the ICU not only signif -
icantly increased NCSE detection, but doubled the detection rate [10].
Diagnosis
The previous finding leads directly to the diagnosis of NCSE. It 
should be emphasized that diagnosis is based both on clinical ob -
servation of the patient and the resulting general suspicion of the presence of NCSE, but this almost always requires an EEG for abso -
lute confirmation. The only exception to this rule is the situation – usually in an emergency – during which no EEG is immediately avail -
able, and the patient, after administration of a test dose of a ben -
zodiazepine, immediately recovers consciousness, that is, has a 
paradoxical reaction to the medication, and becomes more alert 
and reoriented.
The primary signs and symptoms of NCSE include an altered 
state of consciousness as well as speech impairment; ▶table 6  
summarizes the frequency of these phenomena.
It has proved useful to go through the following basic symptom 
categories when NCSE is suspected:
 ▪mental state
 ▪behavior
 ▪movement/impairment
 ▪higher cortical functions
 ▪autonomous signsAn initial typological classification of the NCSE can be made once 
the above have been carefully noted. ▶table 7  summarizes this in -
formation based on current reviews [5, 73].
If, due to clinical observations, NCSE can be reasonably suspect -
ed, it must be confirmed with an EEG [70]. In general, the condi -
tions apply to all other status epileptici: either epileptic activity can be seen continuously or there is a sequence of epileptic seizures 
between which the patient does not return to his prior condition. 
An initial frequently-used classification of EEG patterns in NCSE was 
presented by Young in 1996 [18], which was refined by Kaplan in 
2007 [74]. In 2014 Beniczky et al. developed “general” terminolo -
gy and criteria for EEG findings of NCSE (so-called “Salzburg crite -
ria”) [75]. The 3 classifications are clearly compared in ▶table 8 . 
At the same time, Sutter and Kaplan published a clinically very val -
uable encyclopedic collection and overview of the EEG patterns of the different types of NCES [76].
The likely most important and clearest step toward standardi -
zation of EEG diagnostics is the nomenclature of the American Clin -
ical Neurophysiology Society (ACNS) for the wave forms and pat-terns appearing in the EEG recordings of intensive care patients 
with change of consciousness [77]. Consistent use of these con -
cepts supports not only comparative studies for research purpos -
es, but also allows a broad understanding and reliable transfer of 
written EEG findings among different hospitals which can be essen -
tial for referrals. The structure and core concepts of the classifica -
tion are briefly summarized in ▶table 9. Basically, first localization ▶table 6 Primary appearance characteristics of NCSE (according to [64]).
– Altered state of consciousness: 82% of which:
– Confusion 49 %
– Coma 22 %
– Lethargy/apathy 21 %
– Memory impairment/loss 8 %
– Speech impairment 15 %
– Myoclonia 13 %
– Disturbed behavior 11 %
– Anxiety, restlessness or delirium 8 %
– Extrapyramidal signs 7 %
– Hallucinations 6 %
E197
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Review
▶table 7 Primary clinical characteristics of different types of NCSE (adapted from [5, 64].
NcsE t YPE sYMP tOMs
Mental state behavior Movement (impairment) Higher cortical functions Autonomous functions
Partial-simple N csE Unimpaired, generally 
no amnesiaOccasional fear status, depression, suicidal 
thoughtsTonic gaze or permanent nystagmus, (prolonged) 
paresis of extremities (“akinetic”, “hyper-inhibitory” 
NKSE) contralateral to epileptic focusDisturbed speech, physical 
orientation, metamorphopsia, 
(reversible) blindness/deafness, 
visual, olfactory, audible hallucina
-
tionsNausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, sweating, cardiac arrhythmia possible
Unilateral partial-  
complex N csE with 
frontal originUnimpaired, generally no amnesiaDisinhibition, emotional instability, confabulation, perseveration, fear, anger, irritabilityTonic gaze or permanent nystagmus, myoclonus of eyelid, half of face unilateral at most indicated in the extremities, prolonged paresis of extremities contralateral to epileptic focusDominant hemisphere: frequently speech disturbance otherwise speech not impaired Complex actions largely undisturbed
bi-frontal par
-
tial-complex N csEFluctuating conscious -
ness, amnesiaIndifference or “astonished” behaviorFrequently no specific movement, if “genuine” bilateral (“epileptic stupor”), if unilateral dominant with expansion to opposite side: tonic gaze or permanent nystagmus, myoclonus of eyelid, half of face unilateral at most indicated in the extremities, prolonged paresis of extremities contralateral to epileptic focusAphasia or mutism, stupor, rarely abulia: agitation, spatial-temporal disorientationFrequently no changes; if insular region involved, sweating, goose bumps, paleness, bilateral mydriasis as well as facial redness and cardiac arrhythmia possible
temporal par
-
tial-complex N csEFluctuating conscious -
ness, amnesia with variable manifestationFear, anger, irritability, fussinessAutomatism mainly in moth and hand region, especially lip smacking, lip licking, grunting, “directing” (hands) ipsilateral to epileptic focusAphasia, mutism, hallucinations, illusions (including déjà-vu, jamais-vu)Nausea, vomiting, sweating, hypertension, mydriasis, facial redness, cardiac arrhythmia
Generalized N csE: 
atypical or “de novo” absence status(Fluctuating) change of consciousness, psycho-motor slowing, amnesiaGenerally extensive detached behavior, occasionally agitated behaviorMyoclonus of both eyelids as well as perioral, rarely both arms or legsLimitation of speech capabilities (and counting!), as well as complex actions, spatial-temporal disorientationNausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, sweating
NcsE in coma 
(frequently in cases of severe cNs  
damage and/or multiple organ failure)Coma, amnesia None Subtle myoclonus of eyelids, perioral, in face and frequently on the lateral thoracic wall; prolonged paresis contralateral to epileptic focus (if bilaterally paralyzed: DD critical illness), polyneuro(myo)pathyPronounced diffuse limitations Highly variable
E198
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203is mentioned, then the temporal form of the discharges. These 2 
details can then be provided with additional indicators (so-called 
“modifiers”) as required. Finally, there is also information on both 
the quantity of observed changes in relation to the basic activity 
as well as the basic activity itself.
In the acute phase, the EEG is the only reliable diagnostic meth -
od for determining or confirming NCSE. If an EEG is not available 
(e. g., in a smaller hospital or outside the recording times), a per-
fusion CT could be performed [78]. In the case of neurological fail -
ure symptoms this would, in the event of paresis, ideally show per-
fusion failure or weakening with an epileptic genesis, classically hy-
perperfusion should be present. However, in the case of a postictal 
neurological function deficit (in the sense of Todd’s paralysis), 
 hypoperfusion is likewise evident with this method. Assuming an 
ischemic event, this could be misinterpreted as a stroke even 
though an epileptic seizure or NCSE was originally present [79]. 
Presumably in such a “stroke-mimic” not a few patients receive an 
intravenous thrombolysis. Fortunately few side effects can be ex-pected if the NCSE is treated with IVT [80].Additional diagnostic modalities in special cases include MRI as 
well as SPECT and PET. The logistically complex SPECT provides the 
same information as a CT perfusion and is therefore hardly used 
anymore in the diagnostic evaluation of NCSE. The more elaborate 
PET provides information similar to SPECT and perfusion CT, but 
does not measure the blood flow, but rather the metabolism of the 
brain regions. While hypometabolism occurs in a stroke, hyperme -
tabolism is evident during NCSE. Again, the same limitation applies to the equivocal assessment of hypometabolism as an expression 
of a postictal condition vs. ischemia.
It is interesting to note that typical changes are observed in the 
MRI of NCSE in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequences. In the 
region of the primary activity of a cortical status epilepticus a gar-
land-shaped edema can be seen (▶ Fig. 9 ), in the hippocampus and 
presumably in the putamen and nucleus caudatus there is gener-ally a point-like to diffuse cytotoxic edema such as is also present 
during ischemic strokes. While these changes are usually visible in 
the latter for approximately 3–6 weeks, the DWI changes disappear in the NCSE within a few days after its cessation [81–87].▶table 8 Summary of criteria for NKSE EEG patterns according to [64–66].
Young Kaplan beniczky
Primary criteria:
 1.  Repetitive generalized or focal spikes, 
sharp waves, spike-and-wave or 
sharp-and-slow wave complexes with a frequency > 3 Hz
2.  Repetitive generalized or focal spikes, sharp waves, spike-and-wave or sharp-and-slow wave complexes with a frequency < 3 Hz AND secondary 
criterion #4
3.  Sequential rhythmic waves and 
secondary criteria #1, 2 AND 3 with or 
without #4
secondary criteria1.  “Increasing” onset: increase in amplitude and/or increased/decreased frequency
2.  “Disappearing” end: decrease in amplitude or frequency
3.  “Attenuation”: curve flattening and/or slowing after end of discharge
4.  Significant improvement of clinical status or EEG after administration of anticonvulsantsIn patients WI tHOU t known epileptic 
 encephalopathy:
1.  Repetitive generalized or focal spikes, polyspikes, 
sharp waves, spike-and-waves or sharp-and-slow wave complexes with a frequency > 2.5 Hz
2.  Like 1) with discharges < 2.5 Hz with improve
-
ment in EEG as well as clinical status after prompt administration of anticonvulsants, generally benzodiazepines. Patient and EEG have to be tested for reactivity. EEG has to be reactive and baseline activity must resume.
3.  Like 1) with discharges < 2.5 Hz but with focal 
ictal manifestations (facial myoclonia, glance deviation, nystagmus, myoclonia on the trunk or extremities)
4.  Rhythmic waves (theta or delta) with  frequency > 0.5 Hz with:
a) developing onset: increase in amplitude and/
or increased/decreased frequency
b) changing dynamics (frequency increase/
decrease) ( > 1 Hz) or location, (changes in 
amplitude) or morphology insufficient
c) Decrease in amplitude or frequency toward 
the end
d) Post-ictal periodic discharges, slowed baseline 
activity or attenuation
a), b) and c) can be caused to vanish via IV 
 benzodiazepine
In patients WI tH known epileptic encephalopathy:
1.  Frequent or continuous generalized spike-wave discharges tending toward propagation or frequency increase/decrease compared to an initial EEG with clearly observable change of clinical status
2.  Decrease (improvement) of clinical and EEG 
parameters after administration of IV benzodiaz
-
epinesIn patients WI tHOU t known epileptic 
encephalopathy:
1.  Epileptic discharges in a frequency of > 2.5 Hz or Epileptic discharges in a 
frequency of < 2.5 Hz or rhythmic 
theta-delta activity ( > 0.5 HZ) AND one 
of the following criteria:
a) clinical and EEG-verified improve
-
ment after administration of IV antiepileptic medication (benzodiaz
-
epines) or
b) subtle clinical ictal phenomena 
during the EEG recordings described above
c) Typical spatial-temporal development 
(essentially these correspond to Kaplan’s item 4, however frequency must be > 1 Hz)
In patients WI tH known epileptic 
encephalopathy:1.  Strongly prominent phenomena 
described above increasing in 
frequency, when compared to the initial EEG and additionally with clearly observable improvement of the clinical status
2.  Clinical and EEG-verified after IV administration of anticonvulsants, especially benzodiazepines
E199
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Review
▶table 9 Condensed summary of EEG pattern classification of patients in the ICU according to the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society (ACNS) [68].
Fundamental concept 1 Fundamental concept 2 Additional indicators (modifiers)
Generalized (G) Periodic discharges (PD) Prevalence: continuous  ≥ 90 %/mainly: 50–89 %/frequently: 10–49 %/occasionally: 1–9 %/infrequently:  ≤  1 %
Lateralized (L) Rhythmic delta activity (RDA) Duration: very long:  ≥ 1 h/long: 5–59 min./moderately long: 1–4.9 min./brief: 10–59 s./very brief: < 10 s.
Bilateral independent (BI) Spike wave/sharp wave discharges Frequency: exact rate/bandwidth
Multifocal (Mf) Phases – number of discharges 1, 2, 3, > 3; not usable for rhythmic delta activity
Additional information: Steepness of all phases, if several: Spike: < 70 ms/sharp wave: 70–200 ms/sharply contoured/shallow or broad waves
Localizing information: Amplitude: absolute values: very flat:, 20 μV/flat: 20–49 μV/moderate: 50–199 μV/high:  ≥ 200 μV
– Generalized: Polarity: designation of the direction of the greatest amplitude: positive/negative/dipole, horizontal or tangential/
unclear
– Frontal predominant Stimulus-induced vs. spontaneous evolving vs. fluctuating: 2 changes in frequency and/or morphologywithin one minute vs.  ≥ 3 changes
– Occipital predominant within one minute
– Midline predominant “Plus”: additional characteristics for RD and PDA, not for SW: ( +  F): overlay with more rapid frequencies
– Truly generalized ( +  R): overlay with rhythmic frequencies
– Lateralized: ( +  S):  underlying sharp waves more than 1 SW every 10 s, but not rhythmic or periodic)
–  Unilateral vs. bilateral Asymmetrical ( +  FR): possible with PD
– Lobar dominance ( +  FS): possible with RDA
–  Bilateral independent and multifocal: Less significant additional indicators: – “Quasi”: incomplete (25–50 % of a magnitude)
– Sudden vs. incremental onset
– Symmetrical vs. asymmetrical – With triphasic morphology
– Lobar dominance – With frontal-occipital or occipital-frontal shift
Additional indicators:
Frequency of epileptic discharges  ≥ 1/10 s.: abundant/ ≥ 1/min, but less than 1/10 s.: frequent/ ≥ 1/h but less than 1/min.: 
occasional/ < 1/h: infrequent
Baseline activity:
Symmetry vs. asymmetry/dominance/Bone gap present?/propagation/regularity/REACTIVENESS/amplitude/sleep stage
Continuity: – Continuous
– Almost continuous (< 10 % interruption)
–  Attenuation: > 10 μV, but > 50 % amplitude 
reduction
– Suppression: amplitude  < 10 μV
– Discontinuous (10–49 % interruption)
–  Attenuation: > 10 μV, but > 50 % amplitude 
reduction
– Suppression: amplitude  < 10 μV
– Burst attenuation/burst suppression
– Suppression
E200
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Conclusions
NCSE is often “hidden”, with unspecific symptoms, especially in 
emergency and intensive care units, where is it usually important 
to consider NCSE as the cause of observed signs and symptoms. In 
this context, the lower frequency of NCSE observed in general ep -
idemiological studies compared to CSE may be explained by the fact that CSE cannot be overlooked, whereas this is unfortunately 
still the case with respect to NCSE. Pathophysiologically the same 
mechanisms are at work in both CSE and NCSE, but the systemic 
sequelae are less prominent in NCSE, but can also be fatal as the 
result of autonomous cardiopulmonary effects. Electroencepha -
lography plays a central diagnostic role, since using this modality can NCSE be diagnosed with certainty.
Conflict of interest
The author declare no conflicts of interest.
References
[1] Maganti R, Gerber P, Drees C et al. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus. 
Epilepsy Behav 2008; 12: 572–586
[2] Rosenow F, Knake S, Hamer HM. Nonkonvulsiver Status epilepticus. Modeerscheinung oder behandlungspflichtige Realität?  Nervenarzt 2012; 83: 1551–1558[3] Fernández-Torre JL, Kaplan PW, Hernández-Hernández MA. New understanding of nonconvulsive status epilepticus in adults: treatments and challenges. Expert Rev Neurother 2015; 15: 1455–1473
[4] Beleza P, Rocha J, Pinho J. Diagnosis, etiology, and treatment of nonconvulsive status epilepticus, a semiological oriented review. Neurologist 2015; 19: 160–167
[5] Sutter R, Semmlack S, Kaplan PW. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in adults – insights into the invisible. Nat Rev Neurol 2016,  [epub ahead of print] April 11 doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2016.45
[6] Shorvon S. What is nonconvulsive status epilepticus, and what are its subtypes?  Epilepsia 2007; 48 (Suppl 8): S35–S38
[7] Trinka E, Cock H, Hesdorffer D et al. A definition and classification of status epilepticus – report of the ILAE Task force on Classification of Status Epilepticus. Epilepsia 2015; 56: 1515–1523
[8] Sung CY, Chu NS. Status epilepticus in the elderly: etiology, seizures type, and outcome. Acta Neurol Scand 1989; 80: 51–56
[9] Cheng S. Non-convulsive status epilepticus in the elderly. Epileptic Disord 2014; 16: 385–394
[10] Sutter R, Fuhr P, Grize L et al. Continuous video-EEG monitoring increases detection rate of nonconvulsive status epilepticus in the ICU. Epilepsia 2011; 52: 453–457
[11] Naeije G, Depondt C, Meeus C et al. EEG patterns compatible with nonconvulsive status epilepticus are common in elderly patients with 
delirium: a prospective study with continuous EEG monitoring. 
Epilepsy Behav 2014; 36: 18–21
[12] Theodore WH, Porter RJ, Perry JK. Complex partial seizures: Clinical characteristics and differential diagnosis. Neurology 1983; 33: 1115–1121
[13] Theodore WH, Porter RJ, Albert P et al. The secondarily generalized tonic-clonic seizure: A videotape analysis. Neurology 1994; 44: 1403–1407
[14] Jenssen S, Gracely EJ, Sperling MR. How long do most seizures last? A systematic comparison of seizures recorded in the epilepsy monitoring unit. Epilepsia 2006; 47: 1499–1503
[15] Afra P, Jouny CC, Bergey GK. Duration of complex partial seizures: Intracranial EEG study. Epilepsia 2008; 49: 677–684
[16] Shinnar S, Berg AT, Moshé SL et al. How long do new-onset seizures in children last?  Ann Neurol 2001; 49: 659–664
[17] Lowenstein DH, Bleck T, Macdonald RL. It’s time to revise the definition of status epilepticus. Epilepsia 1999; 40: 120–122
[18] Young GB, Jordan KG, Doig GS. An assessment of nonconvulsive seizures in the intensive care unit using continuous EEG monitoring: An investigation of variables associated with mortality. Neurology 1996; 47: 83–89
[19] Sloviter RS, Zappone CA, Bumanglag AV et al. On the relevance of prolonged convulsive status epilepticus in animals to the etiology and 
neurobiology of human temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia 2007; 48 
(Suppl 8): S6–S10 Erratum in: Epilepsia 2007; 48 2382
[20] Corsellis JA, Bruton CJ. Neuropathology of status epilepticus in humans. Adv Neurol 1983; 34: 129–139
[21] Gastaut H. A propos d’une classification symptomatologique des états de mal épileptiques. In: Gastaut H, Roger J, Loeb H.eds.  Les états de mal épileptiques. Paris: Masson; 1967: 1–8
[22] Chong DJ, Hirsch LJ, Which EEG. patterns warrant treatment in the critically ill? Reviewing the evidence for treatment of periodic epileptiform discharges and related patterns. J Clin Neurophysiol 2005; 22: 79–91
[23] Bauer G, Trinka E. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus and coma. Epielpsia 2010; 51: 177–190
[24] Seeck M, Alberque C, Spinelli L et al. Left temporal rhythmic electrical activity: A correlate for psychosis? A case report. J Neural Transm 1999; 106: 787–794▶Fig. 9  DWI changes during NCSE in a female patient with known 
epilepsy and severe sepsis as well as prior antiepileptic medication 
discontinued due to sepsis. DWI hyperintensities and related re -
duced diffusion in the ADC maps in the right hemisphere include the 
thalamus, hippocampus, the head of the nucleus caudatus, and 
parts of the occipital lobe, along with a marked swelling of the cortex 
of the affected areas. This DWI distribution pattern rules out cerebral ischemia, in particular since the vessels of the circle of Willis are all 
normal. Contralateral to the right-hemispherical cortical and subcor-
tical abnormalities, DWI hyperintensities and reduced ADC maps were also found in the left cerebellar hemisphere, although they 
were less pronounced, but indicated an additional cerebral phenom -
enon, namely diaschisis.
E201
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203Review[25] Kuba R, Brázdil M, Rektor I. Postictal psychosis and its electrophysio -
logical correlates in invasive EEG: A case report study and literature 
reveiw. Epilepsy Behav 2012; 23: 426–430
[26] Sutter R, Kaplan PW, Valença M et al. EEG for diagnosis and prognosis of acute nonhypoxic encephalopathy: History and current evidence. 
 
J Clin Neurophysiol 2015; 32: 456–464
[27] Sutter R, Kaplan PW. Clinical, electroencephalographic, and neuroradi -
ological outcome predictors in acute nonhypoxic encephalopathy: A nine-year cohort study. Clin EEG Neurosci 2016; 47: 61–68
[28] Lado FA, Moshé SL. How do seizures stop?  Epilepsia 2008; 49: 1651–1664
[29] Meldrum BS. Concept of activity-induced cell death in epilepsy: Historical and contemporary perspectives. Prog Brain Res 2002; 135: 3–11
[30] Naylor DE, Liu H, Wasterlain CG. Trafficking of GABA(A) receptors, loss of inhibition, and a mechanism for pharmacoresistance in status epilepticus. J Neurosci 2005; 25: 7724–7733
[31] Goodkin HP, Joshi S, Mitchedlishvili Z et al. Subunit-specific trafficking of GABA(A) receptors during status epilepticus. J Neurosci 2008; 28: 2527–2538
[32] Hunt DL, Castillo PE. Synaptic plasticity of NMDA receptros: Mecha
-
nisms and functional implications. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2012; 22: 496–508
[33] Naylor DE, Liu H, Niquet J et al. Rapid surface accumulation of NMDA 
receptors increases glutamatergic excitation during status epilepticus. 
Neurobiol Dis 2013; 54: 225–238
[34] Holzer FJ, Seeck M, Korff CM. Autoimmunity and inflammation in status epilepticus: from concepts to therapies. Expert Rev Neurother 2014; 14: 1181–1202
[35] Vezzani A, Dingledine R, Rossetti AO. Immunity and inflammation in status epilepticus and its sequelae possibilities for therapeutic application. Expert Rev Neurother 2015; 15: 1081–1092
[36] Fabene PF, Navarro Mora G, Martinello M et al. A role for leukocyte-en
-
dothelial adhesion mechanisms in epilepsy. Nat Med 2008; 14: 1377–1383
[37] Henshall DC. MicroRNAs in the pathophysiology and treatment of status epilepticus. Front Mol Neurosci 2013; 6: 37 doi:10.3389/fnmol.2013.00037
[38] Worrell GA, Cranstoun SD, Echauz J et al. Evidence of self-organized criticality in human epileptic hippocampus. Neuroreport 2002; 13: 2017–2021
[39] Treiman DM, Walton NY, Kendrick C. A progressive sequence of electroencephalographic changes during generalized convulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res 1990; 5: 49–60
[40] Shorvon S. the management of status epilepticus. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001; 70 (Suppl2): II22–II27
[41] Sloviter RS. Decreased hippocampal inhibition and a selective loss of interneurons in experimental epilepsy. Science 1987; 235: 73–76
[42] Young GB, Jordan KG. Do nonconvulsive seizures damage the brain? – Yes. Arch Neurol 1998; 55: 117–119
[43] Aminoff MJ. Do nonconvulsive seizures damage the brain? – No. Arch Neurol 1998; 55: 119–120
[44] Wasterlain CG, Fujikawa DG, Penix L et al. Pathopyhsiological mechanisms of brain damage from status epilepticus. Epilepsia 1993; 34 (Suppl 1): S37–S53
[45] Krumholz A, Sung GY, Fisher RS et al. Complex partial status epilepticus accompanied by serious morbidity and mortality. Neurology 1995; 45: 1499–1504
[46] Fujikawa DG, Itabashi HH, Wu A et al. Status epilepticus-induced neuronal loss in humans without systemic complications of epilepsy. 
Epilepsia 2000; 41: 981–991[47] Parmar H, Lim SH, Tan NCK et al. Acute symptomatic seizures and 
hippocampus damage: DWI and MRS findings. Neurology 2006; 66: 1732–1735
[48] Bauer G, Gotwald T, Dobesberger J et al. Transient and permanent magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities after complex partial status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav 2006; 8: 666–671
[49] Vespa PM, McArthur DLXu Y et al. Nonconvulsive seizures after traumatic brain injury are associated with hippocampal atrophy. 
Neurology 2010; 75: 792–798
[50] van der Lende M, Surges R, Sander JW et al. Cardiac arrhythmias 
during after epileptic seizures. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2016; 87: 
69–74
[51] Sutter R, Rüegg S, Tschudin-Sutter S. Seizures as adverse events of antibiotic drugs: a systematic review. Neurology 2015; 85: 1332–1341
[52] Thomas P, Valton L, Genton P. Absence and myoclonic status epilepticus.precipitated by antiepileptic drugs in idiopathic general
-
ized epilepsy. Brain 2006; 129: 1281–1292
[53] Thomas P, Beaumanoir A, Genton P et al. “de novo” absence status of 
late onset: report of 11 cases. Neurology 1992; 42: 104–110
[54] Pandis D, Scarmeas N. Seizures in Alzheimerdisease: clinical and epidemiological data. Epilepsy Curr 2012; 12: 184–187
[55] Nicastro N, Assal F, Seeck M. From here to epilepsy: The risk of seizure in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Epileptic Disord 2016; 16: 1–12
[56] Amatniek JC, Hauser WA, DelCastillo-Castaneda C et al. Incidence and predictors of seizures in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. Epilepsia 
2006; 47: 867–872
[57] Scarmeas N, Honig LS, Choi H et al. Seizures in Alzheimer’s disease: Who, when, and how common?  Arch Neurol 2009; 66: 992–997
[58] Irizarry MC, Jin S, He F et al. Incidence of new-onset seizures in mild to 
moderate Alzheimer disease. Arch Neurol 2012; 69: 368–372
[59] Sherzai D, Losey T, Vega S et al. Seizures and dementia in the elderly: Nationwide inpatient sample 1999–2008. Epilepsy Behav 2014; 36: 53–56
[60] Beyenburg S, Elger CE, Reuber M. Acute confusion or altered mental state: Consider nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Gerontology 2007; 53: 388–396
[61] Noebels J. A perfect storm: Converging paths of epilepsy and 
Alzheimer’s dementia intersect in the hippocampal formation. 
Epilepsia 2011; 52 (Suppl 1): S39–S46
[62] Feddersen B, Rémi J, Einheilig M et al. Parkinson’s disease: Less epileptic seizures, more status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res 2014; 108: 349–354
[63] DeLorenzo RJ, Hauser WA, Towne AR et al. A prospective, popula
-
tion-based epidemiologic study of status epilepticus in Richmond, Virginia. Neurology 1996; 46: 1029–1035
[64] Hesdorffer DC, Logroscino G, Cascino G et al. Incidence of status 
epilepticus in Rochester, Minnestoa 1965–1984. Neurology 1998; 50: 
735–741
[65] Coeytaux A, Jallon P, Galobardes B et al. Incidence of status epilepticus in French-speaking Switzerland (EPISTAR). Neurology 2000; 55: 693–697
[66] Knake S, Rosenow F, Vescovi M et al. Incidence of status epilepticus in adults in Germany: A prospective, population-based study. Epilepsia 2001; 42: 714–718
[67] Vignatelli L, Tonon C, D’Alessandro R. Bologna Group for the Study of Status Epilepticus. Incidence and short-term prognosis of status epilepticus in adults in Bologna. Italy. Epilepsia 2003; 44: 964–968
[68] Rüegg S. Non-convulsive status epilepticus in adults: An overview. Schweiz Arch Neurol Psychiatrie 2008; 159: 53–83
[69] Rudin D, Grize L, Schindler C et al. High prevalence of nonconvulsive and subtle status epilepticus in an ICU of a tertiary care center: A three-year observational study. Epilepsy Res 2011; 96: 140–150
E202
Rüegg S. Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus in … Neurology International Open 2017; 1: E189–E203[70] Privitera M, Hoffman M, Moore JL. Jester D. EEG detection of 
nontonic-clonic status epilepticus in patients with altered conscious -
ness. Epilepsy Res 1994; 18: 155–166
[71] Alroughani R, Javidan M, Qasem A et al. Non-convulsive status epilepti -
cus: the rate of occurrence in a general hospital. Seizure 2009; 18: 38–42
[72] Towne AR, Waterhouse E, Boggs JG et al. Prevalence of nonconvulsive status epilepticus in comatose patients. Neurology 2000; 54: 340–345
[73] Sutter R, Rüegg S, Kaplan PW. Epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of nonconvulsive status epilepticus – opening Pandora’s box. Neurol Clin Pract 2012; 2: 275–286
[74] Kaplan PW. EEG criteria for nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsia 2007; 48 (Suppl 8): S39–S41
[75] Beniczky S, Hirsch LJ, Kaplan PW et al. Unified EEG terminology and criteria for nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsia 2013; 54 (Suppl 6): S28–S29
[76] Sutter R, Kaplan PW. Electroencephalographic criteria for nonconvul
-
sive status epilepticus: Synopsis and comprehensive survey. Epilepsia 2012; 53 (Suppl 3): 1–51
[77] Hirsch LJ, LaRoche SM, Gaspard N et al. American Clinical Neurophysio
-
logical Society’s Standardized Critical Care EEG Terminology: 2012 version. J Clin Neurophysiol 2013; 30: 1–27
[78] Hauf M, Slotboom J, Nirkko A et al. Cortical regional hyperperfusion in 
nonconvulsive status epilepticus measured by dynamic brain perfusion 
CT. Am J Neuroradiol 2009; 30: 693–698[79] Masterson K, Vargas MI, Delavelle J. Postictal deficit mimicking stroke: Role of perfusion CT. J Neuroradiol 2009; 36: 48–51
[80] Winkler DT, Fluri F, Fuhr P et al. Thrombolysis in stroke mimics: frequency, clinical characteristics, and outcome. Stroke 2009; 40: 1522–1525
[81] Lansberg MG, O’Brien MW, Norbash AM et al. MRI abnormalities associated with partial status epilepticus. Neurology 1999; 52: 1021–1027
[82] Flacke S, Wüllner U, Keller E et al. Reversible changes in echo planar perfusion- and diffusion-weighted MRI in status epilepticus. Neuroradiology 2000; 42: 92–95
[83] Szabo K, Poepel A, Pohlmann-Eden B et al. Diffusion-weighted and perfusion MRI demonstrates parenchymal changes in complex partial status epilepticus. Brain 2005; 128: 1369–1376
[84] Huang YC, Weng HH, Tsai YT et al. Periictal magnetic resonance imaging in status epilepticus. Epilepsy Res 2009; 86: 72–81
[85] Katramados AM, Burdette D, Patel SC et al. Periictal diffusion abnormalities of the thalamus in partial status epilepticus. Epilepsia 2009; 50: 265–275
[86] Canas N, Breia P, Soares P et al. The elctroclinical-imagological spectrum and long-term outcome of transient periictal MRI abnormal
-
ities. Epilepsy Res 2010; 91: 240–252
[87] Cartagena AM, Young GB, Lee DH et al. Reversible and irreversible cranial MRI findings associated with status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav 
2014; 33: 24–30
E203
