Loulmet DF, Yaffee DW, Ursomanno PA, Rabinovich AE, Applebaum RM,
Galloway AC, Grossi EA. Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve: a30-year perspective. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2014;148:2787 –2793.
Luckner G, Margreiter J, Jochberger S, Mayr V, Luger T, Voelckel W, Mayr
AJ, D ¨ unser MW. Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve with left
ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction: three cases of acute
perioperative hypotension in noncardiac surgery. Anesth Analg 2005;
100:1594 –1598.
Mingo S, Benedicto A, Jimenez MC, P ´ erez MA, Montero M. Dynamic left
ventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction secondary to catecholamine
excess in a normal ventricle. Int J Cardiol 2006;112:393 –396.
Numata S, Yaku H, Doi K, Yamazaki S, Yamamoto T, Kobayashi T, Manabe
K, Kawazoe K. Excess anterior mitral lea ﬂet in a patient with
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and systolic anterior motion.
Circulation 2015;131:1605 –1607.Popescu BA, Rosca M, Schwammenthal E. Dynamic obstruction in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Curr Opin Cardiol 2015;30:468 –474.
Ro R, Halpern D, Sahn DJ, Homel P, Arabadjian M, Lopresto C, Sherrid
MV. Vector ﬂow mapping in obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
to assess the relationship of early systolic left ventricular ﬂow and the
mitral valve. J Am Coll Cardiol 2014;64:1984 –1995.
Rosen B, Kriwisky M, Rozenman Y, Harpaz D. Hypovolemia-induced
reversible severe mitral regurgitation due to left ventricular out ﬂow
tract obstruction. Echocardiography 2002;19:679 –682.
Sherrid MV, Gunsburg DZ, Moldenhauer S, Pearle G. Systolic anterior
motion begins at low left ventricular out ﬂow tract velocity in
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2000;36:
1344 –1354.
Teo EP, Teoh JG, Hung J. Mitral valve and papillary muscle abnormalities
in hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. Curr Opin Cardiol 2015;
30:475 –482.CASE CONFERENCES
Case Conferences: The Clinical Physiologist 1855correcting these predisposing factors.
Intravascular volume expansion is essential
to increase left ventricular end-diastolic
volume. Switching from a vasopressorwith mixed a- and b-adrenergic effects
(i.e., dopamine, norepinephrine, or
epinephrine) to a pure a-agonist
(phenylephrine) reduces cardiac
contractility, heart rate, and LVOT velocity.
As in the case presented here, addition ofab-blocker or nondihydropyridine calcium
channel blocker can further decrease
heart rate and cardiac contractility andresolve LVOT obstruction.Answers
1. What was the cause of pulseless electrical
activity and refractory shock?
The cause of pulseless electrical activity and
refractory shock in this patient was
development of systolic anterior motion of
mitral valve causing left ventricle out ﬂow
tract obstruction.
2. What are the precipitating factors and
underlying mechanisms for the developmentof systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve?A smaller LV cavity from LV hypertrophy,
reduced diastolic ﬁlling from tachycardia,
or hypovolemia decreases the distance
between mitral valve and LVOT, allowingthe drag effect to trigger SAM and LVOT
obstruction. An increase in LV velocity
from hype0-contractility or reduced LVafterload precipitates LVOT obstruction by
pulling the mitral lea ﬂet into the LVOT via
venturi effect.
3. How should clinicians alter their
management of septic shock in patients
with SAM and LVOT obstruction?
The treatment should focus on correcting the
precipitating fact ors. This includes
intravascular volume expansion to increasing
LV end diastolic volume, reducing cardiac
contractility and heart rate by switchingvasopressors with least chronotropic and
inotropic effect. Ultra –short-acting b-blockers
can be considered to further decrease theheart rate and cardiac contractility. n
Author disclosures are available with the text
of this article at www.atsjournals.org.
Recommended Reading
Allen BD, Choudhury L, Barker AJ, van Ooij P, Collins JD, Bonow RO, Carr
JC, Markl M. Three-dimensional haemodynamics in patients with
obstructive and non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
assessed by cardiac magnetic resonance. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc
Imaging 2015;16:29 –36.
Brown ML, Abel MD, Click RL, Morford RG, Dearani JA, Sundt TM,
Orszulak TA, Schaff HV. Systolic anterior motion after mitral valve
repair: is surgical intervention necessary? J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
2007;133:136 –143.
Hori K, Matsuura T, Mori T, Nishikawa K. Usefulness and growing need for
intraoperative transthoracic echocardiography: a case series. BMC
Anesthesiol 2015;15:90.
Hwang HJ, Choi EY, Kwan J, Kim SA, Shim CY, Ha JW, Rim SJ, Chung N,
Kim SS. Dynamic change of mitral apparatus as potential cause of leftventricular out ﬂow tract obstruction in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Eur J Echocardiogr 2011;12:19 –25.
Hymel BJ, Townsley MM. Echocardiographic assessment of systolic
anterior motion of the mitral valve. Anesth Analg 2014;118:
1197 –1201.
Ibrahim M, Rao C, Ashra ﬁan H, Chaudhry U, Darzi A, Athanasiou T. Modern
management of systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg 2012;41:1260 –1270.
Jiang L, Shakil O, Montealegre-Gallegos M, Jainandunsing JS, Matyal R,
Wang A, Bardia A, Mahmood F. Systolic anterior motion of the mitral
valve and three-dimensional echocardiography. J Cardiothorac Vasc
Anesth 2015;29:149 –150.
Kruppa J, You EJ, Suh SY, Park YS, Moon J. Cardiogenic shock induced
by basal septal hypertrophy and left ventricular out ﬂow tract dynamic
obstruction in a critically ill patient with sepsis. Int J Cardiol 2012;156:
338–340.
Figure 5. Drag effect: blood ﬂow through left ventricle outﬂow tract (LVOT) drags the anterior mitral
leaﬂet into the LVOT.Table 1. Predisposing conditions for
systolic anterior motion and left ventricleoutﬂow tract obstruction
Reduced LV cavity size during systole
Decreased end-diastolic volume
HypovolemiaTachycardia (reduced diastolic ﬁlling
time)
LV hypertrophy (diffuse or isolated to the
septum)
Increased contractility
Increased LV ejection velocity
Increased contractility
Reduced LV afterload
Deﬁnition of abbreviation : LV = left ventricular.CASE CONFERENCES
1854 AnnalsATS Volume 13 Number 10 |October 2016Clinical Reasoning
The primary pathophysiologic abnormality
in septic shock is a loss of vasomotor tonecausing decreased left ventricular preload
and afterload, low mean arterial pressure,
and poor tissue perfusion. In response,increased sympathetic out ﬂow augments
the heart rate and myocardial contractility
to increase cardiac output and improvetissue perfusion to critical organs.
Decreased left ventricular end-diastolic
v o l u m e ,t a c h y c a r d i a ,a n di n c r e a s e dcardiac contractility provide the perfect
milieu for the development of SAM,
resulting in LVOT obstruction andcardiovascular collapse.
In our patient, the 0.9% saline
bolus given during cardiopulmonaryresuscitation partially reversed the
obstruction and led to a return of
spontaneous circulation, but ongoingintrusion of the anterior mitral valve lea ﬂet led
to persistent LVOT obstruction as a result of
decreased effective circulating blood volume,catecholamine-mediated tachycardia, andaugmented cardiac contractility.
The Clinical Solution
Therapy was directed at both increasingleft ventricular end-diastolic volumeby augmenting venous return and diastolic
ﬁlling time and reducing cardiac contractility.
The patient received 2 L of lactatedRinger solution and 5 mg of intravenous
metoprolol, and norepinephrine was changed
to phenylephrine. This was accompaniedby marked hemodynamic improvement.Another transthoracic echocardiogram
(Video 2) showed complete resolution
of SAM and LVOT obstruction.
The Science behind
the Solution
SAM of mitral valve was ﬁrst described
in the 1960s. It is de ﬁned as the anterior
excursion of one or both mitral valveleaﬂets into the LVOT during systole, which
leads to narrowing of the LVOT
(Figure 3). The hemodynamicconsequences of SAM are directly
related to the duration and extent of
contact between the mitral valve lea ﬂet
and the ventricular septum. Over the
last decade, there has been growing
recognition of the developmentof SAM in shock states, especiallywith the use of sympathomimetic
medications.
Systolic anterior motion of the mitral
valve is believed to result, at least in part,
from the Venturi effect, which describes
the drop in pressure created when a liquidﬂows at high velocity through a narrowed
oriﬁce (Figure 4). When heart rate and
contractility are increased, the high velocitythrough the LVOT is believed to pull the
mitral valve lea ﬂets toward the septum.
Alternatively, the drag effect (Figure 5)hypothesizes that some patients arepredisposed to the development of SAM
because their mitral valve lea ﬂets are
positioned in the path of LVOT ﬂow, which
drags them anteriorly and superiorly toward
the septum. Predisposing factors for SAM are
listed in Table 1 and include any conditionthat reduces LV systolic cavity size or
increases blood velocity through the LVOT.
Effective therapy of SAM and LVOT
obstruction is directed at reducing or
Figure 3. Elongated anterior mitral leaﬂet
obstructing the left ventricle outﬂow tract.
The associated mitral regurgitation is also
appreciated in this image.
Video 2. Parasternal long-axis view reveals resolution of systolic anterior motion of mitral leaﬂet and
left ventricle outﬂow tract obstruction.
High
pressureLow
pressureHigh
pressure
Slower
velocityFaster
velocitySlower
velocity
Figure 4. Venturi effect: an increase in ﬂuid velocity along with a decrease in pressure occurs as ﬂuid
ﬂows through a reduced cross-sectional area.CASE CONFERENCES
Case Conferences: The Clinical Physiologist 1853
The echocardiogram revealed a small,
under ﬁlled, hyperdynamic left ventricle
with systolic anterior motion (SAM) of theanterior mitral valve lea ﬂet into the left
ventricle out ﬂow tract (LVOT) (Figure 1).
Outﬂow tract obstruction was con ﬁrmed
using M-mode ultrasonography (Figure 2).
Questions
1. What was the cause of pulseless electrical
activity and refractory shock?
2. What are the precipitating factors and
underlying mechanisms for the developmentof systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve?
3. How should clinicians alter their
management of septic shock in patients with
SAM and LVOT obstruction?
[Continue onto next page for answers]
Figure 2. M-mode echocardiography. The arrows indicate systolic anterior motion of mitral leaﬂet
during systole, which narrows the left ventricular outﬂow tract.
Figure 1. Parasternal long-axis view of the left atrium (LA), left ventricle (LV), mitral valve (MV), and left
ventricle outﬂow tract (LVOT) during ventricular systole. BPM = beats per minute; RV = right ventricle.CASE CONFERENCES
1852 AnnalsATS Volume 13 Number 10 |October 2016CASE CONFERENCES
The Clinical Physiologist
Section Editors: John Kreit, M.D., and Erik Swenson, M.D.
All Shock States Are Not the Same
Systolic Anterior Motion of Mitral Valve Causing Left Ventricular Outﬂow Tract
Obstruction in Septic Shock
Siddharth Dugar, Mani Lati ﬁ, Ajit Moghekar, and Abhijit Duggal
Department of Critical Care, Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-3243-1417 (S.D.).
The Clinical Challenge
A 73-year-old man with a history of
orthotopic heart transplantation secondary
to myocarditis was admitted to the hospitalfor initiation of chemotherapy to treat
leptomeningeal involvement by B-cell
lymphoma. His hospital course wascomplicated by myelosuppression and
profound neutropenia.
Eight days into his admission, he was
found to be unresponsive on the regular
nursing ward, with a heart rate of 122 beats/
min and a blood pressure of 64/34 mm Hg.
The patient rapidly progressed to pulselesselectrical activity. Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation was performed, with return of
spontaneous circulation.
He was given 1 L of 0.9% saline and
was emergently intubated and transferred
to the medical intensive care unit. Due
to ongoing hemodynamic instability,
norepinephrine was started, and the
dose was escalated quickly over the next
hour due to continuing hypotension.
A bedside transthoracic
echocardiogram was performed to
determine other possible causes of hispersistent shock state (Video 1).
Video 1. Parasternal long-axis view reveals a hyperdynamic left ventricle, with the anterior mitral
leaﬂet moving into the left ventricle outﬂow tract during systole. A zoom-in view shows the systolic
anterior motion of the anterior mitral valve leaﬂet.
(Received in original form April 19, 2016; accepted in ﬁnal form June 30, 2016 )
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Siddharth Dugar, M.D., Department of Critical Care Medicine, Respiratory Institut e, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195. E-mail: siddharthdugarmd@gmail.com
Ann Am Thorac Soc Vol 13, No 10, pp 1851–1855, Oct 2016
Copyright ©2016 by the American Thoracic Society
DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201604-288CC
Internet address: www.atsjournals.org
Case Conferences: The Clinical Physiologist 1851
