Steroid responsive encephalopathy associated with 
autoimmune thyroiditis presenting with late onset depression
Fawzi A. Babtain, MBBS, FRCP(C).
1961966,1 and since then the interest in these cases continued 
despite the rarity of this disease. One of the reasons for 
the interest in this disease is the dramatic response to 
immune therapy, particularly corticosteroids, and some 
authors recommend a trial of steroid therapy for cases of 
unexplained encephalopathy with high titers of thyroid 
antibodies, and the non-responders to steroids were 
found to have atypical clinical features, and often were 
diagnosed to have neurodegenerative diseases.2 Among 
the heterogeneous neurological and psychiatric symptoms 
patients with SREAT may present with, depression is a 
known feature.3,4 In this report, a late onset depression 
in a middle aged patient was the initial presentation of 
SREAT , indicating the need to consider SREAT as a 
cause of depression in this age group, something rarely 
described in previous literature.5
Case Report.  A 61-year-old right-handed lady, 
with unremarkable medical history, started to have sleep 
disturbance, loss of appetite, and loss of interest in her 
usual hobbies and activities, with no prior history of 
depression. She was evaluated by a psychiatrist, and was 
started on citalopram 20 mg once daily. With no clinical 
improvement noted after 6 months of treatment, this 
was increased to 60 mg of citalopram daily. She then 
started to have hallucinations, both auditory and visual. 
She continued to be depressed, and suicide was a risk 
for which she was admitted to the hospital for further 
management. She was also noted to be tremulous with 
unstable gait, and the neurology service was consulted. 
Further history obtained from family members revealed 
that she had gradual decreased ambulation and an 
increased need for assistance, with intermittent brief 
body jerks involving the arms and legs randomly, and not 
associated with alteration of consciousness. One month 
prior to this admission, she was found to be forgetful, 
and missed some important appointments, something 
unusual for her. She also had periods of confusion, but 
no history of seizures. There was no history of exposure 
to toxins, and she was only taking antidepressants. 
Neurological examination showed that she was alert and 
attentive but easily distracted, and was oriented only to ABSTRACT
 يعتبر االعتالل الدماغي املصاحب اللتهاب الغدة الدرقية الناجم
 مرض نادر، و الذي يعرف أيضاً )SREAT ( عن املناعة الذاتية
باعتالل الدماغ هيشماتو، و يستجيب لعالج الكورتيزون 
(الستيرويد)، حيث تظهر أعراضه إما ملرة واحدة أو عدة مرات، 
و تشتمل هذه األعراض على هيئة اختالط عقلي، تشنجات، 
ذهان، خرف، أو أعراض مشابه للجلطات الدماغية. في هذا 
التقرير، نستعرض حالة أصيبت بهذا املرض حيث كان أول أعراض 
هذا املرض اكتئاب في مرحلة متأخرة في املرضى املتوسطي العمر، 
األمر الذي يدعو إلى االشتباه بهذا املرض كسبب لالكتئاب في 
عمر مجموعة املرضى هذه.
Steroid responsive encephalopathy associated with 
autoimmune thyroiditis )SREAT (, )also known as 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy( is a rare autoimmune 
encephalitis associated with high antithyroid 
antibodies, and presents with a relapsing-remitting 
or monophasic course, consisting of confusion, 
seizures, psychosis, dementia, or stroke-like episodes. 
In this report, a late onset depression was the initial 
presentation of SREAT in a middle aged patient, 
something rarely described before, indicating the need 
to suspect SREAT as a possible etiology for depression 
in this age group.
Neurosciences 2010; Vol. 15 (3): 196-199
From the Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, King 
Khalid University, Abha, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Formally from the 
Department of Neurology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada.
Received 11th November 2009. Accepted 27th January 2010. 
Address correspondence and reprint request to: Dr. Fawzi A. Babtain, 
Consultant Neurologist, Department of Internal Medicine,  College 
of Medicine, King Khalid University, PO Box 641, Abha, Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia. T el. +966 (7) 2417578. Fax. +966 (7) 2247570. 
E-mail: fawzi.babtain@yahoo.comCase Reports
The early description of cases of steroid responsive 
encephalopathy associated with autoimmune 
thyroiditis )SREAT (, also known as Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy )HE(, was documented by Lord Brain in 197 Neurosciences 2010; Vol. 15 )3( Late onset depression in SREAT ...  Babtain
Figure 1 - Memory examination showing  A) The geometric shapes used 
to test visual memory, which were shown for a short period of 
time. B) She was able to draw them immediately )immediate 
memory(, but was unable to draw them after 5 minutes )short-
term memory(. T remor was noted. C) She was asked to add all 
the numbers on a circle representing a clock  face, and set the 
time to 10 minutes past 11. She was unable to perform the 
task. She was also asked to write her name below the circle. D) 
Following steroid therapy, she was asked to perform the same 
task as in C). Marked improvement was noted.
person. She described her mood to be low, but claimed 
to have no other problems. A few myoclonic jerks were 
noted, involving the upper extremities, and tremors were 
also seen, postural and kinetic, but not at rest. Memory 
examination showed a normal recall of immediately 
provided verbal and visual information )Figures 1a & 
b(, but with impaired recall of that information after 5 
minutes, even with cuing. She could recall information 
on history and general knowledge. Language examination 
showed impaired writing and comprehension, but 
normal fluency and repetition. There was also disturbance of executive functions )clock drawing ( )
Figure 1c (. No 
apraxia or neglect was detected. Cranial nerves, motor, 
and sensory examinations were normal. She had ataxic 
gait, and kinetic tremors were noted with finger-nose 
and heel-shin testing. The differential diagnosis is 
shown in Table 1 . Investigations revealed normal blood 
counts, serum electrolytes, coagulation profile, liver 
enzymes, vitamin B12, T3, T4 and thyroid stimulating hormone )TSH (. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 
4 )normal value <10 ( and C-reactive protein level was 
<0.2 mg/dl )normal value <1.0 mg/dl (. Autoimmune 
screening )rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, 
anti-double stranded DNA antibodies, C3, C4, anti-SM 
Table 1 - Differential diagnosis.
Infective encephalopathy
  Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
  HIV encephalopathy
  Neurosyphilis 
  Lyme disease
  Cryptococcal meningitis
  Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
  Cytomegalovirus encephalopathy
Inflammatory
  Primary CNS vasculitis
  CNS lupus
  Sjögren’s syndrome
  Antiphospholipid syndrome
  Sarcoidosis 
Toxic/metabolic
  Hashimoto’s encephalopathy
  B12 deficiency
  Electrolyte disturbance )calcium, magnesium(
  Bismuth/mercury/arsenic toxicity 
Neoplastic
  Primary CNS lymphoma 
  Intravascular lymphoma
  Paraneoplastic encephalopathy
  Brain metastasis 
Neurodegenerative
  Dementia of Lewy bodies
  Fronto-temporal dementia
Psychiatric disorderantibodies, anti-SSA antibodies, anti-SSB antibodies, 
and anti-Jo 1 antibodies ( and paraneoplastic antibodies 
)anti-Yo antibodies, anti-Hu antibodies, and anti-Ri 
antibodies ( were negative, and serum and urine protein 
electrophoresis was also normal. Human immune deficiency virus )HIV( and Lyme serology were negative. 
A brain MRI showed diffuse signal changes involving the 
white matter bilaterally, and the anterior and posterior regions )
Figure 2 ( with no contrast enhancement. 
Cerebral angiogram was normal. An EEG showed mild 
generalized slowing, with no periodic sharp waves seen. 
The CSF analysis results are shown in Table 2 . Both CT 
of the chest and abdomen were normal, with no signs of 
occult malignancies. Serum concentration of antithyroid peroxidase antibodies was 320 IU/mL )reference level <60 
IU/mL (. Based on the clinical scenario, and the elevated 
serum antithyroid peroxidase antibodies and exclusion 
of other possible diagnoses, SREAT , or Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy was suspected. A trial of steroid therapy 
was initiated with methylprednisolone IV 1 gm daily 
for 3 days, followed by 60 mg of oral prednisone daily. 
She started to improve dramatically within days. She 
was more alert and oriented, and could recall new 
information after 5 minutes, with cuing at times. She 198Late onset depression in SREAT ...  Babtain
Neurosciences 2010; Vol. 15 )3(had normal language examination, including writing, 
with marked improvement in executive functions )Figure 
1d(. Over the next few months, her gait was normal, her 
mood improved markedly, and she returned to work. 
Her repeated antithyroid peroxidase antibodies level was 
34 IU/mL. She maintained this improvement for over a 
year on 25 mg of prednisone daily.
Discussion.  The incidence of late onset psychiatric 
symptoms, particularly depression, can be an indication 
of an underlying organic brain disease, either 
inflammatory or degenerative,6 for which extensive 
workup is warranted. The reported psychiatric symptoms 
in SREAT include depression, mania, hallucinations, and 
psychosis. Our patient showed an interesting psychiatric 
presentation, a late onset depression and psychosis, which 
did not respond to therapy after 6 months of treatment. 
Furthermore, the progressive neuro-cognitive impairment 
raised red flags on the etiology of the depression, which 
cannot be claimed to be within the spectrum of major 
depression with psychosis. This scenario enforces the 
fact that organic brain diseases should be suspected in 
cases with late onset psychiatric presentation. One may speculate that the first stage of her presentation, the 
depression, was the earlier stage of thyroiditis, namely, 
hypothyroidism. She was tested for thyroid disease, as 
part of the screening for depression, and was found to 
be euthyroid, even at later stages. This indicates that the 
depression was indeed the first symptom of SREAT , and 
was the only symptom for 6 months prior to the disease 
progression. This may also suggest the need to include 
antithyroid antibodies when screening for depression in 
addition to the routine thyroid function test, but further 
research will be required to validate this.
The pathophysiology of SREAT is not fully 
understood. Neuropathological data in the literature 
showed perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates, resembling 
vasculitis.7 However, the presence of other auto-immune 
diseases and improvement following the immune 
therapy, indicate the autoimmune nature of the disease. 
Due to the rarity of this syndrome, it is not easy to fully 
understand the exact nature of the disease,  which could 
contribute to better outcomes.
Anti-thyroid antibodies are linked to thyroiditis, and 
all patients with high concentrations of the antibodies 
have pathologic evidence of thyroiditis. The association 
between the stages of thyroiditis )namely, hypo-, eu-, or 
hyperthyroidism ( and SREAT is not clear, since SREAT 
is observed at any stage. Hence, the use of standard 
thyroid function test alone is not sufficient to predict 
SREAT . More importantly, the use of anti-thyroid 
peroxidase antibodies and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies 
is essential, in suspected cases, to diagnose SREAT .4 
However, patients with autoimmune thyroiditis, who 
were euthyroid with the absence of encephalopathy, 
were reported to have abnormal brain SPECT scan,8 
suggesting a higher incidence CNS involvement in cases 
of autoimmune thyroiditis.
Differentiating between myxedemic coma and coma 
caused by SREAT can be challenging. Features favoring 
the former include the presence of hypothermia, 
hyponatremia, and hemodynamic instability, with 
a history of precipitating factors such as exposure to 
cold, sepsis, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, burns, surgery 
or drugs. A thyroid function test in myxedemic coma 
shows elevated TSH, low T3 and T4 levels, and a normal 
thyroid function test in such cases will exclude myxedemic 
coma, but will not rule out SREAT . More importantly, 
myxedemic coma is more common than SREAT , and is 
easier to diagnose, yet differentiating these conditions is 
critical since therapy of the 2 conditions differ.
Rapidly progressive cognitive decline can have 
a wide differential diagnosis )Table 1 (. Classically, 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease )CJD( is the working diagnosis, especially in 
association with myoclonus. Our patient presented with 
a clinical syndrome similar to CJD, and in fact, cases 
of SREAT have been misdiagnosed initially with CJD.5 
Figure 2 - Axial T2 brain MRI showing hyperintense signal changes 
)arrows( involving the subcortical white matter bilaterally. 
Table 2 - Cerebrospinal fluid analysis results.
Variable Results Reference range
White cells
Red cells
Glucose
Protein 
Cultures 
Oligoclonal bands
Protein 14-3-3
VDRL
Cytology 33 )95% lymphocytes(
0
3.5 mmol/dL*
940 mg/dL
Negative
Present
Not detected
Non reactive
No malignant cells detected<5
0
2-4.4 mmol/dL
450 mg/dL
-
Not detected
Not detected
Non reactive
-
*- serum glucose = 6.0 mmol/dL, 
VDRL - Venereal Disease Research Laboratory199 Neurosciences 2010; Vol. 15 )3( Late onset depression in SREAT ...  Babtain
Differentiating the 2 diseases may not be an easy task, but 
the presence of high titers of antithyroid antibodies and 
improvement following steroid therapy strongly favors 
the diagnosis of SREAT . Other ways to differentiate the 2 
diseases are the presence of protein 14-3-3 in the CSF or 
periodic sharp waves on EEG, both of which are markers 
of CJD in the presence of the proper clinical settings, in 
addition to the typical neuropathological changes seen 
in CJD. Efforts should be made to differentiate the 2 
diseases, since the prognosis is dismal in CJD, while 
SREAT usually has a benign natural history.
Efforts have been made to propose a diagnostic criteria 
for SREAT .9 The clinical features, on which the criteria 
was based, are encephalopathy )cognitive decline, either 
slow or rapidly progressive, seizures, hallucinations, 
psychosis, or mood changes ( or stroke-like episodes, 
both of which could have a relapsing-remitting pattern, 
in addition to nonspecific abnormalities on EEG and 
brain MRI, the presence of high antithyroid antibodies 
titers, and exclusion of other possible etiologies. The 
response to steroid therapy was not observed in the 
first described case by Brain et al,1 although there was a 
consistent response to steroid therapy in reported patients 
in the literature, including the dramatic response in our 
patient. Long-term follow up has also shown relapse in 
some patients following withdrawal from steroids. 
The MRI changes were observed and included 
nonspecific cerebral atrophy, signal changes in the 
subcortical and periventricular white matter, or dural 
enhancements. Some of these changes may persist after 
treatment. Around half of the patients may have a normal 
brain MRI.1 The EEG usually shows generalized slowing 
that correlates with the degree of encephalopathy, which 
resolves following clinical improvement.10 This supports 
the key role of EEG in monitoring disease course. 
The EEG can also play a vital role in excluding other 
etiologies, particularly CJD. The CSF profile usually 
shows elevated white cells and negative bacterial and viral 
cultures. Proteins are usually elevated, and oligoclonal 
bands are infrequently present. Cases with elevated CSF 
antithyroid antibodies have been reported.11 
In conclusion, SREAT , or Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, 
is an important diagnosis to be considered in the 
presentation of encephalopathy or stroke-like episodes, 
as well as rapidly progressive dementia, since this is a 
treatable, but also life-threatening disease. Consequently, 
failure to identify patients with high antithyroid antibodies, who have a clinical profile consistent with 
SREAT , will lead to the wrong diagnosis and unnecessary 
impact on the patient and family. Increased awareness of 
SREAT by neurologists, endocrinologists, and internists 
will help to identify patients and better understand the 
disease.
Acknowledgment.  Special thanks to Professor Jason Barton, 
who provided endless educational advice during the patient’s treatment at 
Vancouver General Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada. Dr. Barton also consented to publication of 
this report.
References
 
  1. Brain L, Jellinek EH, Ball K. Hashimoto’s disease and 
encephalopathy. Lancet  1966; 2: 512-514.
  2. Castillo P , Woodruff B, Caselli R, Vernino S, Lucchinetti C, 
Swanson J, et al. Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated 
with autoimmune thyroiditis. Arch Neurol  2006; 63: 197-202.
  3. Mocellin R, Walterfang M, Velakoulis D. Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy : epidemiology, pathogenesis and management. 
CNS Drugs  2007; 21: 799-811.
  4. Mahmud FH, Lteif AN, Renaud DL, Reed AM, Brands CK. 
Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis in an adolescent with chronic hallucinations and 
depression: case report and review. Pediatrics  2003; 112: 686-
690.
  5. Laske C, Leyhe T, Buchkremer G, Wormstall H. [Depression in 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy. Successful treatment of a severe 
depressive episode with a glucocorticoid as an add-on therapy]. 
Nervenarzt  2005; 76: 617-622. German
  6. Brommelhoff JA, Gatz M, Johansson B, McArdle JJ, Fratiglioni 
L, Pedersen NL. Depression as a risk factor or prodromal 
feature for dementia? Findings in a population-based sample of 
Swedish twins. Psychol Aging  2009; 24: 373-384.
  7. Duffey P , Yee S, Reid IN, Bridges LR. Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy: postmortem findings after fatal status 
epilepticus. Neurology  2003; 61: 1124-1126.
  8. Piga M, Serra A, Deiana L, Loi GL, Satta L, Di Liberto M, 
et al. Brain perfusion abnormalities in patients with euthyroid 
autoimmune thyroiditis. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging  2004; 
31: 1639-1644.
  9. Sawka AM, Fatourechi V, Boeve BF , Mokri B. Rarity of 
encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis: a case 
series from Mayo Clinic from 1950 to 1996. Thyroid  2002; 12: 
393-398. 
10. Schäuble B, Castillo PR, Boeve BF , Westmoreland BF . EEG 
findings in steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with 
autoimmune thyroiditis. Clin Neurophysiol  2003; 114: 32-37.
11. Ferracci F , Moretto G, Candeago RM, Cimini N, Conte F , 
Gentile M, et al. Antithyroid antibodies in the CSF: their role 
in the pathogenesis of Hashimoto’s encephalopathy. Neurology 
2003; 60: 712-714.