October 2019
Volume 21, Number 10
Authors
Annalee Morgan Baker, MD, FACEP
Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine & Critical Care, Florida 
International University, Miami, FL; Clinical Assistant Professor 
of Emergency Medicine, NYU, New Y ork, NY; Clerkship Director, 
Emergency Medicine, Aventura Hospital & Medical Center, Aventura, FL
Matthew Amir Yasavolian, MD
Attending Physician, Memorial Regional Hospital, Hollywood, FL
Navid Reza Arandi, MD
Attending Physician, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Kaiser Permanente Woodland 
Hills Medical Center, Woodland Hills, CA
Peer Reviewers
Cappi Lay, MD
Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine and Neurocritical Care, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Y ork, NY 
Elaine Rabin, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Y ork, NY 
Felipe Teran, MD, MSCE
Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
Kyle B. Walsh, MD, MS
Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Neurointen -
sivist and Stroke Team Member, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OHNonconvulsive Status 
Epilepticus: Overlooked 
and Undertreated
 Abstract 
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) is characterized by 
persistent change in mental status from baseline lasting more 
than 5 minutes, generally with epileptiform activity seen on EEG 
monitoring and subtle or no motor abnormalities. NCSE can be a 
difficult diagnosis to make in the emergency department setting, 
but the key to diagnosis is a high index of suspicion coupled 
with rapid initiation of continuous EEG and early involvement of 
neurology. Benzodiazepines are the mainstay of first-line therapy, 
with antiepileptic drugs and anesthetics as second- and third-line 
therapies, respectively. The few established guidelines on the 
treatment of NCSE are highly variable, and the objective of this 
comprehensive review is to create a standardized evidence-based 
protocol for the diagnosis and treatment of NCSE.
Editor-In-Chief
Andy Jagoda, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine; Director, 
Center for Emergency Medicine 
Education and Research, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY
Associate Editor-In-Chief
Kaushal Shah, MD, FACEP  
Associate Professor, Vice Chair 
for Education, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Weill Cornell 
School of Medicine, New York, NY 
Editorial Board
Saadia Akhtar, MD, FACEP  
Associate Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Associate Dean 
for Graduate Medical Education, 
Program Director, Emergency 
Medicine Residency, Mount Sinai 
Beth Israel, New York, NY 
William J. Brady, MD  
Professor of Emergency Medicine 
and Medicine; Medical Director, 
Emergency Management, UVA 
Medical Center; Operational Medical 
Director, Albemarle County Fire 
Rescue, Charlottesville, VA 
Calvin A. Brown III, MD
 Director of Physician Compliance , 
Credentialing and Urgent Care 
Services, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA  
Peter DeBlieux, MD   
Professor of Clinical Medicine, 
Louisiana State University School of 
Medicine; Chief Experience Officer, 
University Medical Center, New 
Orleans, LADaniel J. Egan, MD
 Associate Professor, Vice Chair of 
Education, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Columbia University 
Vagelos College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY 
Nicholas Genes, MD, PhD
 Associate Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai,  New 
York, NY
Michael A. Gibbs, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Carolinas 
Medical Center, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel 
Hill, NC
Steven A. Godwin, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Assistant 
Dean, Simulation Education, 
University of Florida COM-
Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL
Joseph Habboushe, MD MBA  
Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, NYU/Langone and 
Bellevue Medical Centers, New York, 
NY; CEO, MD Aware LLC
Gregory L. Henry, MD, FACEP  
Clinical Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, University 
of Michigan Medical School; CEO, 
Medical Practice Risk Assessment, 
Inc., Ann Arbor, MI
John M. Howell, MD, FACEP
 Clinical Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC; Director 
of Academic Affairs, Best Practices, 
Inc, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls 
Church, VAShkelzen Hoxhaj, MD, MPH, MBA
 Chief Medical Officer, Jackson 
Memorial Hospital, Miami, FL
Eric Legome, MD  
Chair, Emergency Medicine, Mount 
Sinai West & Mount Sinai St. Luke's; 
Vice Chair, Academic Affairs for 
Emergency Medicine, Mount Sinai 
Health System, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
 Keith A. Marill, MD, MS  
Associate Professor, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA
Charles V. Pollack Jr., MA, MD, 
FACEP, FAAEM, FAHA, FESC  
Professor & Senior Advisor for 
Interdisciplinary Research and 
Clinical Trials, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Sidney Kimmel 
Medical College of Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA
Michael S. Radeos, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Weill Medical College 
of Cornell University, New York; 
Research Director, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, New York 
Hospital Queens, Flushing, NY
Ali S. Raja, MD, MBA, MPH
 Executive Vice Chair, Emergency 
Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital; Associate Professor of 
Emergency Medicine and Radiology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Robert L. Rogers, MD, FACEP, 
FAAEM, FACP  
Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, The University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MDAlfred Sacchetti, MD, FACEP  
Assistant Clinical Professor, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA
Robert Schiller, MD
 Chair, Department of Family Medicine, 
Beth Israel Medical Center; Senior 
Faculty, Family Medicine and 
Community Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
Scott Silvers, MD, FACEP
 Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Chair of Facilities and 
Planning, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL
Corey M. Slovis, MD, FACP, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
Ron M. Walls, MD  
Professor and COO, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA
Critical Care Editors
William A. Knight IV, MD, FACEP, 
FNCS
 Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine and Neurosurgery, Medical 
Director, EM Advanced Practice 
Provider Program; Associate Medical 
Director, Neuroscience ICU, University 
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
Scott D. Weingart, MD, FCCM
 Professor of Emergency Medicine; 
Chief, EM Critical Care, Stony Brook 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY
Research Editors
Aimee Mishler, PharmD, BCPS
 Emergency Medicine Pharmacist, 
Program Director, PGY2 EM Pharmacy Residency, Maricopa 
Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ
Joseph D. Toscano, MD  
Chief, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, San Ramon Regional 
Medical Center, San Ramon, CA
International Editors
Peter Cameron, MD  
Academic Director, The Alfred 
Emergency and Trauma Centre, 
Monash University, Melbourne, 
Australia
Andrea Duca, MD
 Attending Emergency Physician, 
Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, 
Bergamo, Italy  
Suzanne Y.G. Peeters, MD  
Attending Emergency Physician, 
Flevo Teaching Hospital, Almere,  
The Netherlands
Edgardo Menendez, MD, FIFEM  
Professor in Medicine and Emergency 
Medicine; Director of EM, Churruca 
Hospital of Buenos Aires University, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Dhanadol Rojanasarntikul, MD 
 Attending Physician, Emergency 
Medicine, King Chulalongkorn 
Memorial Hospital; Faculty of 
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Thailand
Stephen H. Thomas, MD, MPH
 Professor & Chair, Emergency 
Medicine, Hamad Medical Corp., 
Weill Cornell Medical College, Qatar; 
Emergency Physician-in-Chief, 
Hamad General Hospital,  
Doha, Qatar
Edin Zelihic, MD
 Head, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Leopoldina Hospital, 
Schweinfurt, Germany
Prior to beginning this activity, see “CME Information”  on the back page.
VISIT US AT ACEP 
SCIENTIFIC ASSEMBLY  
October 27-29, 2019
BOOTH 315activity are classified as nonconvulsive seizures . 
 Status epilepticus  has been traditionally defined 
as a continuous seizure that lasts > 30 minutes, or 
multiple seizures in a 30-minute period without re -
turn to baseline. This definition was based largely on 
pathophysiologic observations that long-term conse -
quences, including neuronal injury and death, result 
from seizures that last > 30 minutes. In practice, 
individual seizures that last > 5 minutes are prone to 
persist or recur before full recovery is made and, in 
all likelihood, represent status epilepticus.1 
 By definition, nonconvulsive status epilepti -
cus (NCSE) presents with a persistent alteration in 
behavior or consciousness in the absence of convul -
sive activity, but the range of possible symptoms is 
broad. (See Table 1 and Table 2, page 3.) Although 
overt convulsions are absent, subtle motor signs 
such as twitching or blinking, extrapyramidal signs, 
or myoclonus may be seen.2 Despite the lack of 
convulsive activity, NCSE may still result in neuro -
nal injury, making early recognition and treatment 
critically important. 
 NCSE is underdiagnosed, especially in patients 
without antecedent convulsive seizures.3 Many of 
these patients are not diagnosed in the emergency 
department (ED), either due to failure to con -
sider the diagnosis or to lack of access to emergent 
encephalography (EEG), which confirms NCSE.4,5 
The role of EEG in the ED is evolving, and newer 
portable technologies are being developed that may 
increase access and allow rapid confirmation of sus -
pected NCSE.6 
 This issue of Emergency Medicine Practice pro-
vides an evidence-based review of the diagnosis 
and management of NCSE. An emphasis is placed 
on increasing awareness in order to initiate timely 
therapy and prevent neurologic sequelae. 
 Classification and Taxonomy of Status
 Epilepticus
A 2015 report of the International League Against 
Epilepsy task force proposed a comprehensive clas -
sification system of convulsive and nonconvulsive  Case Presentations  
An 81-year-old woman presents with 1 day of behavioral 
changes. On examination, she is disoriented, with no focal 
neurologic findings and no evidence of seizure activity. 
Her medical history is remarkable for anxiety, arthritis, 
and hypertension; she has no history of stroke, trauma, 
or immunocompromise. Her medications include furose -
mide, lorazepam, and acetaminophen. After an extensive 
workup in the ED including ECG, CBC, CMP , UA, and 
brain CT, all of which were normal, she was admitted to 
the floor. You wonder: Is there something you forgot to 
consider in your differential diagnosis?
 A 35-year-old man with unknown history is brought 
to the ED following a 10-minute witnessed seizure. EMS 
administered 4 mg of lorazepam IV and fosphenytoin 
1200 PE IVPB, which terminated the seizure; however, 
the patient remained altered. Brain CT was normal. ECG, 
CBC, CMP , VBG, UDS, and UA were unremarkable 
other than an elevated lactate that quickly cleared. You 
admit him to the ICU, but wonder: Is he is altered because 
he is postictal? Is it from the lorazepam, or could there be 
another etiology to consider?  
 A 42-year-old homeless man with bipolar disorder 
arrives by EMS after being found on a park bench. He has a 
temperature of 38.1°C (100.6°F) but otherwise normal vital 
signs. He smells of alcohol and has abrasions on his hands 
and face. GCS score is 10, and he is mumbling inappropri -
ate but comprehensible words. Brain CT and cervical spine 
were normal. Laboratory testing demonstrated elevated 
BUN, Cr, CPK, and alcohol levels; mild leukocytosis; and 
normal UA and UDS. When his mental status did not 
improve, you order a lumbar puncture, but you wonder: 
Could another test could be diagnostic?
 Abbreviations of Types of Status Epilepticus 
ASE  Absence status epilepticus
CPSE  Complex partial status epilepticus
GCSE  Generalized convulsive status epilepticus
NCSE  Nonconvulsive status epilepticus
sCSE  Subtle convulsive status epilepticus 
SE Status epilepticus
SPSE  Simple partial status epilepticus
SSE  Subtle status epilepticus
 Introduction 
Seizures are classified as partial or generalized , and 
they can generate motor, sensory, psychiatric, or 
autonomic disturbances. A partial  seizure denotes 
abnormal neuronal firing within a limited area of 
1 brain hemisphere, whereas a generalized  seizure 
constitutes abnormal firing diffusely across both 
hemispheres. Partial seizures are simple  when 
they do not involve a change in mental status, and 
complex  when consciousness is impaired. Seizures 
with altered mental status (AMS) but without motor Table 1. Clinical Features of Nonconvulsive 
Status Epilepticus7
• Altered mental status (82%)
l					Confusion (49%)
l					Coma (22%)
l					Lethargy (21%)
l					Memory loss (8%)
• Speech disturbance (15%)
• Myoclonus (13%)
• Unusual behavior (11%)
• Anxiety, agitation, and delirium (8%)
• Extrapyramidal signs (7%)
• Hallucinations (6%)
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  2
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesstatus epilepticus  (CPSE); and (3) primary generalized 
(no focal origin), known as absence status epilepticus  
(ASE). ASE is sometimes associated with altered 
consciousness and is difficult to differentiate from 
CPSE. A fourth category sometimes included with 
NCSE is known as subtle convulsive status epilepticus  
(sCSE). sCSE is distinct from other forms of NCSE 
in that it occurs following untreated or undertreated 
generalized convulsive status epilepticus (GCSE), 
and it has a notably poor prognosis.9 In many ways, 
sCSE is better classified with GCSE than NCSE. 
 The prevalence of NCSE in the ED is difficult to 
ascertain due to its varied presentations and delay 
in diagnosis. An early study found EEG evidence of 
NCSE in 34% of ED patients presenting with un -
explained altered consciousness.10 A 2013 study by 
Zehtabchi prospectively assessed ED patients with 
AMS and found EEG evidence of NCSE in 5%.11 forms of status epilepticus that has been largely 
adopted in the literature. The task force included 4 
axes in its taxonomy: (1) semiology (clinical pre -
sentation), (2) etiology, (3) EEG correlates, and (4) 
age.8 Semiology is perhaps the most helpful to the 
emergency clinician. In this classification, NCSE 
is subcategorized by the degree of impaired con -
sciousness, and subcategorized further by clinical 
and electroencephalographic criteria. NCSE poses a 
diagnostic challenge to emergency clinicians, largely 
because the lack of convulsive activity leads to un -
derrecognition, and because its signs and symptoms 
are nonspecific.  
 There are 3 general categories of NCSE:  
(1) partial seizure with preserved consciousness, 
known as simple partial status epilepticus  (SPSE);  
(2) partial seizure with secondary generalization 
and altered consciousness, known as complex partial 
Table 2. Clinical Subtypes and Features of Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus8,13,14
NCSE Subtype ILAE 2015 Definition Clinical Features EEG Features Prognosis
Normal Consciousness
Simple partial status 
epilepticusFocal status epilepticus 
without impairment of 
consciousness• Positive or negative symptomatology 
with preserved awareness
• Can present with hemiparesis, ictal 
alien hand syndrome, and hemi-
spatial neglect 
• Sensory, autonomic, or cognitive 
symptoms, depending on cerebral 
localization of discharges 
• Underlying focal epilepsy is common• Variable findings or 
normal 
• Unilateral continuous 
or waxing and waning 
rhythmic spike-and-
wave or high-voltage 
slow-wave dischargesExcellent for status 
itself, but overall 
prognosis depends 
on underlying cause
Impaired Consciousness
Complex partial status 
epilepticus Focal status epilepticus 
with impairment of 
consciousness• Symptoms vary by involved area of 
cortex:
l	Temporal lobe: fluctuating 
consciousness, fear, irritability, 
aggression, automatisms
l	Frontal lobe type I: unilateral form 
with affective disinhibition and 
emotional lability
l	Frontal lobe type II: bifrontal form 
with confusion and severe altered 
mental status• Generalized slowing 
and/or suppression
• Waxing and waning 
rhythmic delta activity 
largely lateralized to 1 
sideGood to excellent, but 
often recurrent
Absence status 
epilepticus Generalized NCSE – 
typical absence status 
epilepticus • Prolonged altered mental status 
• Altered behavior, slow speech, or 
abnormal movements including 
regional bilateral (eyelid, perioral, or 
upper limb) myoclonus 
• Commonly seen in patients with 
known epilepsy• Generalized continuous 
or waxing and waning 
3-4 Hz spike and 
polyspike slow-wave 
dischargesExcellent, but may 
have recurrent 
attacks
Subtle status 
epilepticus NCSE with coma • Seen after convulsive status
• No convulsive activity
• May show myoclonus or nystagmus• Focal, lateralized, or 
generalized epileptiform 
discharges 
• May evolve to a 
low-voltage pattern 
with ictal/inter-ictal 
dischargesTypically poor
Abbreviations:  EEG, electroencephalography; ILAE, International League Against Epilepsy; NCSE, nonconvulsive status epilepticus.
www.ebmedicine.net
3 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netThird, definitive diagnosis is based on EEG, a mo -
dality rarely available on an emergent basis. Finally, 
advances in understanding of the clinical and EEG 
features of NCSE call into question data based on 
prior observational studies of status epilepticus, as 
well as the body of literature surrounding undif -
ferentiated AMS. When possible, recommendations 
in this article are evidence-based. Recommendations 
based on extrapolated status epilepticus consensus 
statements and accepted practice are noted as such.
 Etiology and Pathophysiology 
The majority of seizures are self-limited due to en -
dogenous gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-medi -
ated inhibitory pathways.20 When convulsive activ -
ity is prolonged, these pathways are overwhelmed, 
resulting in the perpetual state of excitation seen in 
status epilepticus. At the cellular level, increased en -
ergy consumption leads the ATP-dependent sodium-
potassium pump to fail, and rising extracellular 
potassium leads to over-excitability and acidosis.21 
GABA receptors are down-regulated, and remaining 
receptors are conformationally altered, rendering 
them less responsive to benzodiazepines.22,23 
Additionally, N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) recep -
tors are upregulated, potentiating neuronal excit -
ability. 1,19,24 These derangements form the molecular 
basis of GCSE. 
 NCSE is not a single illness, but a symptom with 
multiple potential etiologies. In CPSE and SPSE, 
neuronal networks in the hippocampus and adja -
cent limbic and neocortical structures experience 
the same cellular and molecular derangements that 
lead to self-perpetuating excitation in GCSE.25 In 
ASE, by contrast, a global “inhibitory” state occurs 
via GABA transmission in thalamocortical networks; 
NMDA-mediated excitotoxicity is not thought to 
play a role.2,25-27 This distinction is important, since 
it impacts pharmacologic management.
 Although the subtypes of NCSE share patho -
physiology with GCSE to a varying degree, there 
are 2 important distinctions in NCSE. First, the 
pathophysiology of the underlying cause is often 
as clinically significant as the NCSE itself. Medica -
tion withdrawal, trauma, infection, and stroke are 
just a few reported precipitating etiologies of NCSE 
that may independently contribute to neurotoxic -
ity. Second, much of the morbidity and mortality 
in GCSE is due to systemic sequelae of prolonged 
convulsions (lactic acidosis, respiratory failure, rhab -
domyolysis, etc), which is generally not relevant in 
NCSE. Nonetheless, animal experiments and more 
limited human studies support the hypothesis that 
sustained excitation may similarly damage neurons 
involved in excitatory forms of NCSE, but data are 
far less robust, and results are conflicting.28-36 
 Though it has never been proven that CPSE and However, this study used a 30-minute EEG; it may 
be speculated that continuous EEG (cEEG) for 24 to 
48 hours would increase detection rates. 
 AMS is the presenting complaint in approxi -
mately 5% of ED patients, with 30% found to have 
a neurologic condition.12 There is clinical overlap 
between NCSE and other etiologies of AMS, eg, 
stroke, traumatic brain injury, and encephalitis, all of 
which can also precipitate NCSE. Thus, the patient 
in NCSE is at risk for being misdiagnosed and even 
erroneously given a psychiatric diagnosis. 
 The prognosis is equally varied, depending on 
the subtype of NCSE and etiology of the underlying 
condition. NCSE in patients with hypoxic-ischemic 
encephalopathy after cardiac arrest have close to 
100% mortality, whereas the morbidity and mortality 
of ASE is closer to zero. As with many disease states, 
prognosis in NCSE is related to the underlying 
condition, as opposed to direct effects of prolonged 
nonconvulsive seizure activity. This is an area of 
great controversy in the literature. 
 Critical Appraisal of the Literature 
A review of the English-language literature was 
performed in PubMed, the Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, and MEDLINE®, using the 
following terms: nonconvulsive status epilepticus, non-
convulsive status epilepticus, and status epilepticus.  A 
literature search of status epilepticus retrieved thou -
sands of articles. However, many of these contained 
only cursory mention of NCSE. A more limited num -
ber of articles were retrieved when nonconvulsive sta -
tus was searched. Of these, references most relevant 
to adult emergency medicine were reviewed. 
 Literature surrounding NCSE is limited largely 
to retrospective studies, case series, and anecdotal 
reports. Due to the paucity of large trials, informa -
tion extrapolated from the status epilepticus lit -
erature was incorporated, namely large trials that 
included NCSE as a subset.
 There are no consensus statements or clinical 
guidelines regarding emergency management of 
NCSE, specifically. There are several guidelines re -
garding the management of seizures, status epilepti -
cus, and AMS, and to the extent that these guidelines 
could be extrapolated to NCSE, they were included 
in the review. Guidelines from the American Col -
lege of Emergency Physicians (ACEP), the American 
Epilepsy Society, the American Academy of Neurol -
ogy, the Society of Critical Care Medicine, and the 
Neurocritical Care Society were examined.1,15-19 
 By standard criteria and evidence scales, clini -
cal data on NCSE are relatively weak. There are 
several reasons for this. First, NCSE is uncommon, 
and rigorous clinical trials are resource-intensive to 
perform. Second, diagnostic criteria are evolving, 
and gathering of evidence requires standardization. 
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  4
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuessider NCSE in patients whose psychiatric disease 
abruptly worsens following reduction or addition of 
psychotropic or benzodiazepine medication.49 NCSE 
should also be in the differential for patients with no 
psychiatric history who suddenly develop isolated 
psychiatric symptoms such as delusions or halluci -
nations. Although hallucinations may be clinically 
indistinguishable from a primary psychiatric disor -
der, features that favor NCSE include altered aware -
ness, automatisms, and insight that the hallucina -
tions are not real.50 NCSE may also present similarly 
to neurologic diagnoses such as migraine with aura, 
transient global amnesia, and transient ischemic at -
tacks.13
 Prehospital Care 
Prehospital management of NCSE is primarily 
supportive unless sCSE is suspected. In these cases, 
emergency medical services (EMS) should follow 
status epilepticus protocols and/or contact medical 
control. Hypoglycemia is a consideration in all pa -
tients with AMS or seizures, so point-of-care blood 
glucose level should be obtained.16 Patients in NCSE 
may be unable to give history at the hospital, so the 
most important role of EMS may be in gathering 
information from witnesses and family and bringing 
in patient medications. ASE independently lead to brain damage, many 
experts argue that prompt identification and man -
agement of both NCSE and the underlying cause are 
important to prevent morbidity.33,37,38
 Although epilepsy is the condition most fre -
quently associated with NCSE, only 50% of patients 
with NCSE have a prior diagnosis of epilepsy.39 
Most episodes of NCSE in epilepsy are triggered by 
changes in antiepileptic drug (AED) levels, often 
caused by drug-drug interactions.40,41 The emergen -
cy clinician should consider NCSE when the patient 
has suffered structural, toxic, or metabolic insults to 
the brain. (See Table 3.) 
 Differential Diagnosis 
The primary reason that NCSE is underdiagnosed is 
that it is simply not considered. The only symptom 
seen consistently in NCSE is AMS, which ranges 
from mild confusion to obtundation.42 The differen -
tial diagnosis is thus the same as that for any patient 
with AMS. (See Table 4.) 
 NCSE (SPSE, CPSE, and ASE) can present with 
any type of psychiatric symptom, including mood 
disturbance, irritability/impulsivity, delusions, and 
psychosis.43 Patients may complain of hallucina -
tions, inappropriate behavior (eg, laughing or cry -
ing), or paranoia.44-46 SPSE can present with isolated 
fear.47 CPSE and SPSE are more likely than ASE to 
mimic all psychiatric conditions, with the exception 
of catatonia.48  
 Given that NCSE can be diagnosed only by EEG, 
it is not surprising that many patients go undiag -
nosed by psychiatrists and emergency clinicians, but 
certain factors should trigger investigation. Con -
Table 3. Common Etiologies of 
Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus
• Traumatic brain injury
• Stroke
l						Ischemic stroke
l						Hemorrhagic stroke
l						Subarachnoid hemorrhage
• Anoxic brain injury
• Medications 
l						Intoxication
n						Antibiotics: cephalosporins, penicillins, imipenem, ciprofloxacin
n						Other: ifosfamide, methotrexate, tiagabine, lithium, 
chloroquine, pseudoephedrine, tramadol
l						Withdrawal
n						Benzodiazepines, baclofen, opioids
• Encephalitis
l						Infectious
l						Autoimmune
l						Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
www.ebmedicine.netTable 4. Differential Diagnosis for 
Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus
Neurological
• Postictal state
• Cerebrovascular accident /transient ischemic attack
• Transient global amnesia
• Migraine with aura
• SMART syndrome
• Central nervous system infection
• Concussion
Psychiatric
• Interictal/postictal psychosis
• Psychiatric disorders
• Psychogenic nonepileptic seizures 
Other
• Metabolic encephalopathy/hypoglycemia
• Intoxication: lithium, tricyclic antidepressants, alcohol, 
benzodiazepines, baclofen, opioids
• Withdrawal: alcohol, benzodiazepines, baclofen, opioids 
• Neuroleptic malignant syndrome/serotonin syndrome
• Sepsis
• Malingering
Abbreviation: SMART, stroke-like migraine attacks after radiation 
therapy.
www.ebmedicine.net
5 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netalso precipitate NCSE.51 A social history of substance 
abuse may reveal risk factors for alcohol withdrawal 
and traumatic brain injury, both of which may lead 
to NCSE.
 A prospective case series of patients in whom 
NCSE was suspected found that remote risk fac -
tors for seizures (including previous stroke, tumor, 
previous neurosurgery, dementia, and meningitis), 
depressed mental state, and ocular movement ab -
normalities were all significantly more common in 
patients with NCSE than in age-matched controls.42 
The combination of remote risk factors for seizure 
and ocular movement abnormalities was 100% 
sensitive but only 55% specific for NCSE.42 Given 
that NCSE requires EEG for definitive diagnosis, no 
clinical finding is perfectly specific; however, highly 
sensitive findings may be used to determine which 
patients require urgent EEG.
 A key historical feature is prior events, espe -
cially if they are stereotypic. If the patient or family 
give a history of past events with the same features, 
such as a period of psychotic behavior with sudden 
onset and offset or prolonged periods of blank stare 
(perhaps with blinking), the diagnosis of NCSE is 
possible.
 Another key to the history is identifying factors 
that lower seizure threshold, including new medi -
cations, infection, drugs and alcohol, trauma, and 
AED noncompliance. Subtherapeutic AED levels are 
common, but even well-controlled patients may ex -
perience NCSE. The half-life of some AEDs is short, 
and missing even a single dose can be problematic. 
Patients with pre-existing epilepsy represent a sub -
set of NCSE with a favorable prognosis.52,53 
Physical Examination
There are several physical examination findings that 
may alert the clinician that the patient is in NCSE. 
The foundation of a thorough examination is a full 
set of vital signs (including fingerstick glucose) and 
general appearance of the patient. Fever and/or hy -
potension can suggest an infectious etiology of AMS, 
although low-grade fever can also be caused by a 
seizure. Evidence of head trauma, tongue biting, hy -
perreflexia, positive Babinski reflex, or incontinence 
suggest that a convulsive seizure recently occurred. 
 The neuropsychiatric examination is fundamen -
tal. This examination must be systematic, including 
cranial nerves, motor, sensory, cerebellar, reflexes, 
and cognition. The cranial nerve examination should 
include extraocular movements and evaluation of 
other abnormal eye movement such as nystagmus. 
The cognitive examination should include orienta -
tion, attention (months of the year in reverse), and 
recall of 5 objects at 1 and 5 minutes. The motor 
examination should look for evidence of automa -
tisms (ie, repetitive stereotypic movements), which 
are highly suggestive of ongoing NCSE. Of note,  Emergency Department Evaluation 
The first step in diagnosing NCSE is considering 
the diagnosis. Incorporating information from EMS, 
family, and the medical record, and performing a 
thorough physical examination are key to suspecting 
NCSE and starting therapy expeditiously. Table 5 
lists key history and physical findings.
History
The history is paramount in raising suspicion of 
NCSE. Age, medical comorbidities, and history of 
symptom time course are valuable parameters to ob -
tain. Reviewing the medical record and interviewing 
witnesses (such as EMS and family members) may 
provide critical information regarding recent events 
and a reliable indication of the patient’s baseline. A 
thorough history may rule in or out other causes of 
AMS and/or elicit risk factors for NCSE. One such 
risk factor is a sudden unexplained departure from 
baseline, such as the acute onset of psychosis with -
out prior psychiatric history, or an abrupt worsening 
of a known psychiatric condition, particularly in the 
context of recent changes to medications. 
 Background information regarding trauma, in -
fection, or recent illnesses is helpful and may guide 
management. AED noncompliance is the most com -
mon cause for recurrent seizures in the ED and may 
Table 5. Clinical Findings and Risk Factors 
in Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus
Suggestive Features
• Preceding convulsion with prolonged postictal confusion
• Altered mental status*: somnolence, subtle changes in cognition/
attention, disorientation
• Psychiatric symptoms*: mood (irritable, labile), psychosis, 
confabulation, bizarre behavior
• Ocular abnormalities: nystagmus, blinking, gaze deviation
• Sensory phenomena: pain, hot/cold sensation, hallucinations 
(olfactory, gustatory, auditory, visual)
• Subtle motor activity: limb paralysis or myoclonic jerks
• Automatisms: lip smacking, chewing
• Autonomic disturbances: mydriasis, sweating, hypertension, flushing 
• Speech disturbance: mutism, stuttering, echolalia, reduced speech
Risk Factors
• History of epilepsy 
• Remote/acute brain insult 
l					Stroke
l					Traumatic brain injury
l					Tumor 
l					Previous neurosurgery
l					Dementia 
l					Meningitis
• Elderly (females > males)
• Acute metabolic or septic triggers
• Recent medication changes or antiepileptic drug withdrawal
*Especially if rapid in onset or no prior psychiatric history.
www.ebmedicine.net
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  6
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesposterior circulation strokes can cause nonfocal mo -
tor weakness with AMS.
 Retrospective studies have identified statistically 
significant association of NCSE with head and eye 
deviation, nystagmus, focal myoclonus of the face or 
extremities, and automatisms such as lip smacking, 
orofacial movements, and hand/arm movements.54 
Numerous cognitive disturbances such as aphasia, 
perseveration, echolalia, and confabulation have been 
seen, as have psychic and sensory phenomena.54
 Diagnostic Studies
Laboratory Studies
Laboratory testing will not diagnose NCSE but can 
exclude alternative, reversible causes of AMS. Rec -
ommended tests include complete blood cell (CBC) 
count, complete metabolic profile (CMP), pregnancy 
test in women of childbearing age, serum AED levels 
(when appropriate), and urine drug screen.15,55-57
 ACEP has no guideline for NCSE, but guidelines 
for first-time seizures give Level B recommenda -
tions to measure glucose and sodium, and state that 
urine drug screen can be considered.15 Although an 
otherwise healthy adult patient with 1 new-onset 
seizure and return to baseline does not necessarily 
need laboratory testing, a patient with suspected 
NCSE will not be at baseline, and a more conserva -
tive approach is warranted. 
Neuroimaging
Once stabilized, patients with undifferentiated AMS 
or those suspected of having NCSE should undergo 
computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain. A 
summary statement from a collaboration of ACEP 
with organizations from neurology, neurosurgery, 
and neuroradiology recommended that head CT be 
performed in patients who have had a seizure and 
have a history of head trauma, malignancy, antico -
agulation, or immune compromise, and anyone with 
fever, persistent headache, new focal neurologic 
examination, age > 40 years, or focal onset before 
generalization.57 The ACEP clinical policy for AMS 
goes further, recommending CT in any patient with 
a depressed level of consciousness.55
Lumbar Puncture
Lumbar puncture is often performed in patients 
with unexplained AMS and a negative CT scan. 
ACEP recommends lumbar puncture in patients 
who are immunocompromised, or when suspicion 
for central nervous system infection or subarachnoid 
hemorrhage persists (Level B).15,55 White blood cells 
in the cerebrospinal fluid should be considered to be 
meningitis until proven otherwise, although pleo -
cytosis is found in 20% to 30% of patients who have 
had a convulsive seizure.58-61Electroencephalography
An EEG is required to confirm the diagnosis of 
NCSE. In addition to confirming the diagnosis, EEG 
may provide prognostic information and is helpful 
in monitoring response to treatment.62,63 
 EEG interpretation in NCSE is complex, even for 
experts in the field; however, it plays a critical role 
in confirming the diagnosis. There are several EEG 
classification systems used by epileptologists to aid 
in the diagnosis of NCSE. One systematically devel -
oped and validated classification system, known as 
the Salzburg criteria , is sensitive and specific for diag -
nosing NCSE.64 Application of the criteria requires 
expert analysis that may not be available in the ED. 
Nevertheless, a recent preliminary study showed 
that, with a brief EEG training module, emergency 
physicians can improve diagnostic accuracy of de -
tecting seizure activity on EEG.65 
 Of note, CPSE begins with a focal discharge that 
then becomes secondarily generalized; the EEG is 
not able to reliably distinguish CPSE from ASE when 
the patient is actively seizing; thus, an interictal EEG 
is needed.
 Treatment 
Therapeutic strategies in NCSE are controversial, 
due in part to differing prognosis across the sub -
types. There are no large prospective, randomized 
trials or specialty society guidelines regarding phar -
macotherapy in NCSE. Thus, management is based 
on expert consensus, small series and case reports, 
and extrapolation of the GCSE literature, when ap -
propriate. The most important considerations when 
determining the therapeutic approach are the NCSE 
subtype and the underlying etiology. 
 In 2016, the American Epilepsy Society pub -
lished a guideline that provides a 4-phase time-
dependent treatment algorithm for status epilepticus 
that has been endorsed by ACEP .16 Elements of 
this guideline are applicable to NCSE, particularly 
sCSE, including the stabilization and initial therapy 
phases. (See the Clinical Pathway, page 10.)
 In the stabilization phase (the first 5-20 minutes), 
priorities include cardiac monitoring, vital signs, 
fingerstick glucose, establishing intravenous (IV) 
access, securing the airway when indicated, and 
maintaining oxygenation and ventilation. In NCSE, 
as in GCSE, correctable etiologies should be ad -
dressed early. If the patient is hypoglycemic, 50 mL 
of 50% dextrose is administered IV . Thiamine 100 mg 
IV should be given to malnourished and alcoholic 
patients.66 In an altered patient with unexplained 
fever, empiric antibiotics should not be delayed for 
CT or lumbar puncture. 
7 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netrately analyzed sCSE.53,70-77 Many trials used older 
definitions of status epilepticus, limiting confidence 
in the extrapolation of this data to NCSE under the 
modern definition. 
 Lorazepam, diazepam, and midazolam are all 
effective as first-line agents in NCSE. Lorazepam is 
the most commonly used and most often-studied 
agent. Lorazepam has a smaller volume of distri -
bution and a longer duration of action than either 
diazepam or midazolam, which is advantageous in 
treating NCSE. A systematic review of 18 studies 
including 2755 patients with different types of status 
epilepticus determined that IV lorazepam was supe -
rior to diazepam.78 
 In patients without IV access, intramuscular 
(IM) lorazepam is recommended. Rectal diazepam 
is a consideration, but has delayed and erratic 
absorption. The 2012 RAMPART trial demonstrated 
superiority of IM midazolam in patients without 
established IV access.70
Second-Line Treatment
After administration of a first-line benzodiazepine, 
treatment with a long-acting AED is often indicated 
unless the NCSE was caused by a correctable factor Pharmacologic Therapy
It appears that subtypes of NCSE may respond 
differently to certain medications. The approach to 
NCSE is generally less aggressive than for GCSE, 
as the association with neurological morbidity is 
comparatively less clear (with the exception of 
sCSE).53 When suspicion for NCSE is high, empiric 
pharmacotherapy should be started, though it is 
ideally deferred until an EEG is obtained (except in 
sCSE). Additional management is guided by clinical 
improvement and EEG response. A subtype-specific 
treatment approach to NCSE is summarized in Table 
6, and specific pharmacologic agents are detailed in 
Table 7, page 9 .
First-Line Treatment
First-line treatment for NCSE is a benzodiazepine. 
ASE is exceptionally sensitive to these drugs. CPSE 
is often responsive as well, though response may be 
delayed and recurrence is common.68 By contrast, 
in sCSE, first-line drugs are more likely to fail than 
succeed, so the need for a second agent should be 
anticipated and ordered early.53 Nine randomized 
controlled trials have addressed the efficacy of initial 
therapy in status epilepticus, but few have sepa -
Table 6. Treatment Approach in Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus, by Subtype14,67,68
Subtype Treatment Strategy Treatment Response Prognosis
Absence status 
epilepticus• PO or IV benzodiazepine
l					4 mg lorazepam IV; repeat in 10 min as needed
l					If benzodiazepine fails, give PO valproic acid or IV valproate
• May consider IV levetiracetam, PO/NGT topiramate, or IV lacosamide in 
refractory cases (decision made with neurology consultation)• Excellent Excellent
Simple partial status 
epilepticus• IV benzodiazepine
l					4 mg lorazepam IV; repeat in 10 min as needed
• Consider IV phenytoin/fosphenytoin, valproate, or levetiracetam for 
second agent 
• Treat underlying cause
• May consider PO/NGT topiramate or IV lacosamide in refractory cases 
or as second agent (decision made with neurology consultation)• Excellent Good to excellent
Complex partial status 
epilepticus • IV benzodiazepine
l					4 mg lorazepam IV; repeat in 10 min as needed
• Consider IV phenytoin/fosphenytoin, valproate, or levetiracetam for 
second agent 
• Treat underlying cause
• May consider PO/NGT topiramate or IV levetiracetam in refractory cases 
or as second agent (decision made with neurology consultation)
• In protracted cases or critically ill patients, consider intubation and 
continuous propofol or midazolam• Good, but often 
delayed
• Limbic form may be 
more resistant to 
benzodiazepineGood to excellent
Subtle convulsive 
status epilepticus • IV benzodiazepine with second agent such as IV phenytoin/
fosphenytoin, valproate, or levetiracetam 
• Intubation and continuous propofol or midazolam as third-line agents 
• Consider additional agent such as PO/NGT topiramate, IV lacosamide, 
IV ketamine, or other strategies in conjunction with neurology/intensivist 
to ensure successful wean
• Most patients are managed in the ICU• Poor
• Treatment 
responsiveness 
is determined by 
underlying causePoor
Abbreviations: ICU, intensive care unit; IV, intravenous; NGT, nasogastric tube; PO, by mouth.
www.ebmedicine.net
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  8
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuestherapy is typically sufficient for control.68
 There are far fewer data regarding second-line 
medications, and no large randomized controlled 
trials comparing these drugs in NCSE. The most-
studied agents include phenytoin, fosphenytoin, 
valproate, and levetiracetam. Efficacy data are 
conflicting, and the choice may be guided by clinical 
parameters. For a patient with epilepsy, it is reason -(eg, hypoglycemia or hyponatremia).1 In a sense, 
“second-line” therapy is a misnomer, because most 
patients with NCSE require a second medication 
even if the benzodiazepine was successful in termi -
nation of the status. The notable exception is with 
ASE. True ASE is situation-dependent and rapidly 
responsive to benzodiazepines, so elimination of the 
precipitating factor and transient benzodiazepine 
Table 7 . Pharmacotherapy for Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus16,69 
Drug Dosing Infusion Rate Adverse Effects Considerations
Intermittently Dosed Medications, First Line
Lorazepam • 0.1 mg/kg IV up to 4 mg; 
repeat in 5-10 min IV push • Hypotension
• Respiratory depression• Best evidence, most-often used
• Long acting
Midazolam • 0.2 mg/kg IM or
• Up to 10 mg IVIV push • Hypotension
• Respiratory depression• Short duration 
• Useful if no IV access 
• Active metabolite, renal elimination
Diazepam • 0.15 mg/kg IV up to 10 mg; 
repeat in 5 min
• 0.2 mg/kg per rectum, max 
20 mgIV push • Hypotension
• Respiratory depression• Shorter duration of seizure 
suppression than lorazepam
• Active metabolite
Intermittently Dosed Medications, Second Line
Phenytoin • 20 mg/kg IV 
• May give additional 5-10 
mg/kg at 10 min No faster than  
 50 mg/min• Hypotension 
• Arrhythmia• Perform cardiac monitoring during 
loading dose
• Low pH may cause phlebitis/necrosis
Fosphenytoin • 20 mg phenytoin 
equivalent/kg
• May give additional  
5 mg/kg at 10 min No faster than  
 50 mg/min• Hypotension
• Arrhythmia• Cardiac monitoring during loading 
dose
• May be given IM
Levetiracetam • 40-60 mg/kg up to max 4.5 g Over 15 min • Rare • Not hepatically metabolized
Valproate • 20-40 mg/kg IV No faster than  
 10 mg/min• Rare • Works well in absence status 
epilepticus
Phenobarbital • 20 mg/kg IV
• May give additional 5-10 
mg/kg at 10 min 50-100 mg/min • Hypotension
• Respiratory depression• Synergistic respiratory depression 
with benzodiazepines
Intermittently Dosed Medications, Third Line
Lacosamide • 200-400 mg IV No faster than 200 
mg/15 min• PR prolongation • Limited experience in status 
epilepticus
Topiramate • 200-400 mg PO/NGT  N/A • Metabolic acidosis • No IV formulation 
Refractory/Continuous Medications (Require Mechanical Ventilation)
Drug Dosing Titration Rate Adverse Effects Considerations
Midazolam
(benzodiazepine)• 0.05-2 mg/kg/hr  0.05-1 mg/kg every 
3-4 hr• Respiratory depression
• Hypotension• Tachyphylaxis
• Short half-life
Pentobarbital
(barbiturate)• 5-15 mg/kg loading dose 
followed by a continuous 
infusion at 0.5-5 mg/kg/hr 0.05-1 mg/kg every 
12 hr• Respiratory depression
• Hypotension
• Cardiac depression
• Paralytic ileus
• Neurotoxic at high doses• Half-life 15-60 hr 
• Theoretically neuroprotective
• Must be withdrawn gradually
Propofol
(sedative-
hypnotic)• 1-2 mg/kg bolus followed 
by a continuous infusion of 
5-75 mcg/kg/min Start at 20 mcg/kg/
min and titrate by 
5-10 mcg/kg/min 
every 5 min • Respiratory depression
• Hypotension
• Propofol-related infusion 
syndrome • Short half-life
Abbreviations: IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; N/A, not applicable; NGT, nasogastric tube; PO, by mouth.
www.ebmedicine.net
9 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netClinical Pathway for Management of Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus19
NO
NO
NOYES
YES
YES
ASE
• Consider, with neurology, 
levetiracetam , topiramate, 
or lacosamide in refractory 
casesAre symptoms persisting or is there continuous seizure on EEG?Are symptoms persisting or is there continuous seizure on EEG?Are symptoms persisting or is there continuous seizure on EEG?
5-20 min
(initial therapy)0-5 min
(Stabilization)
20-40 min
(second-line 
therapy)
40-60 min
(third-line 
therapy)Patient presents to the emergency department with suspected NCSE: acute change in mental status with suggestive clinical 
features and/or risk factors, +/- recent convulsive seizure
1. Assess airway, breathing, circulation, and disability, with complete neurological examination
2. Assess time of seizure onset (if convulsive) or time course of altered mental status
3. Start IV, oxygen, cardiac monitor
4. Evaluate airway, give oxygen via nasal cannula/mask, consider intubation
5. Check blood glucose; if < 60 mg/dL, give 100 mg thiamine IV and 50 mL dextrose 50% in water IV
6. Send CBC, CMP , urine drug screen, pregnancy test, and AED levels
7. Order CT brain
8. Consult neurologist and initiate cEEG, when available
SPSE or CPSE
If clinically unstable:
• Continuous infusion propofol or midazolam
• Must be intubated and on cEEG
• Admit to neuro-ICUSPSE or CPSE
• Consider, with neurologist, adding third 
agent: phenytoin, levetiracetam , or 
valproateSPSE or CPSE (based on clinical/EEG 
suspicion):
• Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg IV (Class I) , 
repeat at 10 min and load with AED:
• Phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV or 
fosphenytoin 20 mg PE (Class I)
• Levetiracetam  60 mg/kg IV, max 4.5 g 
(Class II)
• Valproate 40 mg/kg IV, max 3 g 
(Class II)
• Treat underlying cause
sCSE
• Continuous infusion propofol or 
midazolam
• Must be intubated and on cEEG
• Admit to neuro-ICUProvide supportive careProvide supportive care
• Acceptable alternatives to lorazepam include midazolam and diazepam.
• Alcohol-associated NCSE: Give 100 mg thiamine IV. 
• History of epilepsy: Check AED levels and load patient’s prescribed 
AED. 
• Intubation: Status epilepticus < 15-20 min is not a contraindication to 
succinylcholine.
For Class of Evidence definitions, see page 11 .Abbreviations: AED, antiepileptic drug; ASE, absence status epilepticus; 
CBC, complete blood cell (count); cEEG, continuous EEG; CMP , complete 
metabolic panel; CPSE, complex partial status epilepticus; CT, computed 
tomography; EEG, electroencephalography; ICU, intensive care unit; 
NCSE, nonconvulsive status epilepticus; PE, phenytoin equivalent; PO, by 
mouth; sCSE, subtle convulsive status epilepticus; SPSE, simple partial 
status epilepticus.Timeline
Provide supportive careASE (based on clinical/EEG 
suspicion):
• Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg PO/
IV, repeat at 10 min
• Treat underlying cause
(Class I)sCSE (based on clinical/EEG suspicion):
• Lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg IV (Class I) , 
repeat at 10 min and load with AED:
• Phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV or fosphenytoin 
20 mg PE (Class I)
• Levetiracetam  60 mg/kg IV, max 4.5 g 
(Class II)
• Valproate 40 mg/kg IV, max 3 g  
(Class II)
• Treat underlying cause
ASE
• Administer valproate 40 mg/
kg PO or IV, max 3000 mgsCSE
• Consider, with neurologist, adding 
third agent: phenytoin, levetiracetam , 
or valproate 
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  10
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesbeen supportive of topiramate; however, topiramate 
is not available in IV form.88
 There is insufficient evidence that any particular 
second-line agent is superior overall, and it is unlike -
ly that a single agent is the correct second-line choice 
in every case of NCSE. The ongoing Established Sta -
tus Epilepticus Treatment Trial (ESETT) may bring 
us closer to the answer.91 In the meantime, decisions 
regarding second-line therapy should, whenever 
possible, involve the consultant neurologist and take 
into account the subtype of NCSE, the underlying 
precipitant, and the clinical status of the patient. 
Third-Line Treatment
If the benzodiazepine and AED are ineffective, a 
third AED is unlikely to terminate status epilepticus. 
The VA study showed that second-line drug therapy 
was successful 7% of the time, and third-line agents 
were successful in only 2.3% of patients.53
 At this stage, it is increasingly important to 
weigh the risks of continued NCSE against the side 
effects of additional medication. For critically ill 
patients with refractory GCSE (eg, significant auto -
nomic instability or respiratory failure), this stage 
of treatment involves preparation for intubation 
and continuous infusion of a seizure-suppressing 
anesthetic. This approach is applicable to sCSE and 
certain cases of CPSE, but is almost never appropri -
ate in ASE, where patients are typically less ill and 
morbidity from continued NCSE is presumed to be 
very low. Clinical monitoring for NCSE after rapid 
sequence intubation and paralysis is impossible; 
thus, cEEG is required. However, in emergent cases, 
securing the airway should not be delayed while 
waiting for EEG. These patients should be trans -
ferred to the intensive care unit.
 The agents most often studied for continuous 
infusion are midazolam, propofol, and pentobarbi -
tal. There are insufficient data to suggest a superior 
agent.92,93 A systematic review determined that the 
failure rate of pentobarbitone (8%) was lower than 
that of midazolam or propofol (23%);94 however, able to choose an IV formulation of their prescribed 
AED when levels are subtherapeutic. 
 The Veterans Affairs (VA) Cooperative Study 
was a large randomized controlled trial compar -
ing first-, second-, and third-line agents in status 
epilepticus (which included patients with sCSE). A 
much smaller margin of efficacy was achieved with 
all second-line agents, emphasizing the tendency for 
medications to become less effective as seizures per -
sist. Agents studied included lorazepam, phenytoin, 
phenobarbital, and diazepam in different combina -
tions, but there was no statistically significant differ -
ence between second-line agents.53
 The combination of a benzodiazepine and 
valproic acid has been shown to successfully treat 
and prevent recurrences of ASE.79,80 Phenytoin and 
valproate are effective in ASE in the elderly and in 
SPSE and nonlimbic CPSE when benzodiazepines 
fail; limbic CPSE and sCSE respond poorly.67 Some 
authors have suggested that phenytoin may worsen 
ASE.81,82  
 Levetiracetam has shown promise as a second-
line agent, but data are conflicting. Both SPSE and 
limbic CPSE have shown response.83,84 However, 
in a multicenter randomized controlled trial of IV 
levetiracetam (2.5 g) added to clonazepam (1 mg) in 
prehospital treatment of status epilepticus, leveti -
racetam did not confer additional benefit.85
 Newer broad-spectrum AEDs such as lacosamide 
and topiramate are sometimes used as second- and 
third-line agents.86-88 These drugs are relatively safe, 
with few drug-drug interactions. A large multicenter 
prospective noninterventional study of status epilep -
ticus (of which 18.5% of patients had NCSE) found 
that IV lacosamide was 77.6% effective.87 A 2013 re -
view of all reported cases of lacosamide noted overall 
efficacy of 56%; however, this included many cases of 
convulsive status epilepticus.89 A more recent review 
suggested that, taking into account efficacy and 
side-effect profiles, the combination of valproate and 
lacosamide may be superior to phenytoin and leveti -
racetam in the treatment of NCSE.90 Results have also 
This clinical pathway is intended to supplement, rather than substitute for, professional judgment and may be changed depending upon a patient’s individual 
needs. Failure to comply with this pathway does not represent a breach of the standard of care. 
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. www.ebmedicine.net . No part of this publication may be reproduced in any format without written consent of EB Medicine.Class I
• Always acceptable, safe
• Definitely useful
• Proven in both efficacy and effectiveness
Level of Evidence:
• One or more large prospective studies 
are present (with rare exceptions)
• High-quality meta-analyses
• Study results consistently positive and 
compellingClass II
• Safe, acceptable
• Probably useful
Level of Evidence:
• Generally higher levels of evidence
• Nonrandomized or retrospective studies: 
historic, cohort, or case control studies
• Less robust randomized controlled trials
• Results consistently positiveClass III
• May be acceptable
• Possibly useful
• Considered optional or alternative treat -
ments
Level of Evidence:
• Generally lower or intermediate levels of 
evidence
• Case series, animal studies,  
consensus panels
• Occasionally positive results Indeterminate
• Continuing area of research
• No recommendations until further 
research
Level of Evidence:
• Evidence not available
• Higher studies in progress
• Results inconsistent, contradictory
• Results not compelling Class of Evidence Definitions
Each action in the clinical pathways section of Emergency Medicine Practice  receives a score based on the following definitions. 
11 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netabnormalities.100 The authors named the condition 
subacute encephalopathy with seizures in alcoholics , or 
SESA syndrome . The diagnostic criteria for SESA syn -
drome have recently been modified, and it is now 
recognized to include focal NCSE in alcoholics who 
manifest transient neurologic deficits and charac -
teristic EEG abnormalities.68 Prognosis is generally 
good, although chronic AED therapy may be re -
quired to prevent recurrence.68 Increased awareness 
of this syndrome should trigger expedited EEG in 
the alcoholic patient presenting with new unex -
plained neurologic findings. 
 The treatment for alcohol withdrawal seizure is 
lorazepam. The treatment for alcohol withdrawal is 
a benzodiazepine, with one not showing superior -
ity over another. Phenytoin has no role in alcohol 
withdrawal syndrome seizure termination and 
preventing recurrent seizures. There are no studies 
comparing second- and third-line agents in alcohol-
related NCSE, so treatment should proceed using the 
pathway for the NCSE subtype, taking into account 
alcohol withdrawal management algorithms.  
 Adjunctive IV thiamine should be given em -
pirically. Thiamine deficiency is common in this 
population, and Wernicke encephalopathy has 
extensive clinical overlap with NCSE. Thiamine is 
inexpensive, well tolerated, and effective in treat -
ing Wernicke encephalopathy, and is unlikely to 
complicate treatment of status epilepticus.101 By 
contrast, alcohol-related deficiencies such as mag -
nesium and potassium should be confirmed rather 
than treated empirically.
Elderly Patients
The elderly are particularly susceptible to NCSE, 
and paradoxically more difficult to diagnose and 
manage.102,103 Higher susceptibility may be due to 
polypharmacy and a higher incidence of cerebrovas -
cular disease and other focal cerebral diseases that 
form a substrate for NCSE.104 Diagnosis is frequently 
delayed,102 presumably because changes in mental 
status may be mistakenly attributed to chronic ill -
nesses, medications, or age-related cognitive de -
cline.105 Morbidity and mortality are comparatively 
higher for elderly patients with NCSE.106
 Researchers have attempted to determine 
whether NCSE has unique features in elderly pa -
tients. Multiple groups have noted that NCSE in the 
elderly is far more common in women.49,107-110 One 
group found that, in patients aged ≥ 60 years pre -
senting with AMS of unknown etiology, female gen -
der, rapid onset (< 24 hours), and lack of response 
to commands were statistically more frequent in the 
NCSE subset when compared to the patients with 
nonepileptic confusion.106 Another study found that 
elderly patients with NCSE are less likely to have a 
history of epilepsy.111 
 Management of NCSE in the elderly poses a pentobarbitone was associated with a higher risk of 
severe hypotension, and mortality was high (48%) 
regardless of the drug used. In practice, propofol 
and midazolam are preferred and more commonly 
used.67,68 
 Propofol is an attractive option for emergency 
physicians and intensivists who are typically com -
fortable with its use, though it is known to cause 
hypotension and, rarely, the more ominous propofol 
infusion syndrome, which is marked by hepatotox -
icity and metabolic acidosis with rhabdomyolysis 
and cardiac failure.95 Midazolam may cause less 
hypotension; however, because the patient has failed 
benzodiazepine therapy, it may be preferable to add 
an agent with a different mechanism of action.1,94 
All continuously infused anesthetics require assisted 
ventilation and may require vasopressors for associ -
ated hypotension. 
 Special Populations 
Patients Abusing Alcohol 
Up to 40% of seizures presenting to the ED can be 
attributed to alcohol abuse, either by excess intake 
or withdrawal. Alcohol withdrawal has been re -
ported in 15% to 24% of patients with GCSE, but it 
may also play a role in NCSE.96 Alcoholics are also 
at increased risk for falls, and more prone to trau -
matic brain injury-related seizures, as alcohol use 
lowers the seizure threshold. Finally, alcohol abuse 
can cause metabolic disorders such as hypoglyce -
mia and hyponatremia and deficiencies in vitamins 
and electrolytes, which can predispose patients to 
seizure. These conditions should be rapidly as -
sessed and corrected. 
 Alcohol withdrawal syndrome occurs 6 to 48 
hours after decreased intake, and can last up to 
7 days, although it should be noted that the his -
tory may be inaccurate.97 Although simple alcohol 
withdrawal syndrome seizures may not mandate 
neuroimaging, all patients with status epilepticus or 
a first-time alcohol-related seizure warrant neuro -
imaging. A retrospective review of 259 patients with 
alcohol-related seizures found a clinically significant 
brain lesion on CT imaging in 6% of the subjects.98
 Chronic alcoholism is associated with neuropsy -
chiatric conditions including delirium tremens, al -
coholic hallucinosis, and Wernicke encephalopathy. 
Increasingly, alcohol is being recognized as a pre -
cipitant of NCSE.40 One group found that a history 
of alcohol abuse was frequently associated with de 
novo ASE.49 Additionally, cases of ASE precipitated 
by alcohol withdrawal have been reported, where 
patients presented with a protracted course of confu -
sion and cognitive abnormalities.99 
 Researchers in the 1980s first described a disor -
der in alcoholics that was characterized by confu -
sion, lethargy, transient motor deficits, and EEG 
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  12
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesemergency clinicians for the purpose of recognizing 
NCSE.120,121 Interpretation of these simplified EEGs 
requires training on wave patterns indicative of 
NCSE (ie, rhythmicity, periodicity, spike, and wave), 
but even with expert interpretation, these modalities 
have inferior sensitivity, and results must be con -
firmed with conventional EEG.118 Further research is 
needed to explore point-of-care EEG for the evalua -
tion of AMS in the ED. 
Additional Treatment Options
Ketamine, an NMDA-receptor antagonist, has 
been proven in multiple studies to be effective in 
status epilepticus, and has shown synergy with 
valproate, diazepam, and propofol.122-12 5 As GCSE 
evolves, the number of NMDA receptors increases, 
making ketamine theoretically more effective as 
time passes. In a 2013 multicenter retrospective re -
view, 58 adults received ketamine, and permanent 
control was achieved in 57% of the patients.126 A 
more recent retrospective review of 42 patients 
with refractory status epilepticus showed a resolu -
tion rate of 64%.127 It is unclear whether this effect 
would be as pronounced in ASE, in which NMDA 
receptors are not thought to play a primary role. 
In a trial that included convulsive and nonconvul -
sive forms of status epilepticus, the combination 
of ketamine and propofol effectively controlled 
NCSE in 9 of 13 patients.124
 Some evidence suggests a dosing regimen for 
ketamine of 1 to 3 mg/kg IV bolus followed by con -
tinuous infusion of up to 5 mg/kg/hour.66,122,123,127 challenge, as older patients are more susceptible to 
side effects of AED therapy (eg, respiratory/cardiac 
depression and sedation) and more likely to be tak -
ing other medications that lead to dangerous drug 
interactions.112 Some authors suggest that most of 
the morbidity and mortality seen in elderly patients 
with NCSE is related to underlying comorbidities, 
and a conservative approach is warranted.26,112 
However, studies have shown that the elderly can 
be safely and effectively treated,113 and experts have 
offered modified dosing protocols for AED therapy 
in older patients.105 Failure to treat NCSE promptly 
could lead to aspiration pneumonia, falls, and im -
paired quality of life. Therefore, treatment of NCSE 
in the elderly is warranted and important, albeit 
with a cautious approach that employs modified 
dosing and care to avoid drug-drug interactions.
 Controversies and Cutting Edge 
Bedside Electroencephalography
EEG is the gold standard for diagnosis of NCSE, 
and its role in the ED is evolving. The sensitivity of 
EEG increases when it is performed continuously, 
up to 48 hours.114 However cEEG is time- and 
resource-intensive, and there is controversy about 
which patients benefit most. Traditionally, cEEG 
has been recommended when GCSE is refractory 
to first- and second-line AEDs, as many of these 
patients require intubation with neuromuscular 
blockade, which may mask signs of continued sei -
zure activity.114 
 Current American and European guidelines call 
for targeted use of cEEG in ICU populations with 
GCSE in order to detect NCSE transformation;116 
however, NCSE is increasingly being recognized in 
patients without preceding convulsive activity and 
in patients who are not critically ill. In these patients, 
diagnosis is often delayed. The American Clinical 
Neurophysiology Society published a consensus 
statement in 2015 that included expanded recom -
mended indications for cEEG in the diagnosis of 
NCSE.117 (See Table 8.)  This guideline is explicitly 
for ICU patients; however, many of the criteria apply 
to ED patients as well. 
 ACEP has no official position on cEEG, but does 
give a Level C recommendation to considering emer -
gent EEG in patients with SSE or suspected NCSE, 
patients who have received a long-acting paralytic, 
or patients in a drug-induced coma.15 EEG availabil -
ity in the ED is limited, as few departments have ac -
cess to equipment and personnel trained to interpret 
findings. Several simplified bedside EEG systems 
are available, with sensitivities ranging from 40% 
to 93%.118 One group has advocated an emergency 
EEG kit, in a system that would employ a telemedi -
cine epileptologist to interpret the EEG remotely.119 
Other studies suggest EEG training modules for Table 8. Indications for Continuous EEG to 
Diagnose Nonconvulsive Status Epilepticus 
in the Critically Ill Patient
• Persistently abnormal mental status following generalized 
convulsive status epilepticus or other clinically evident seizures. 
• Acute supratentorial brain injury with altered mental status. 
• Fluctuating mental status or unexplained alteration of mental status 
without known acute brain injury.
• Generalized periodic discharges, lateralized periodic discharges, or 
bilateral independent periodic discharges on routine or emergent 
EEG. 
• Requirement for pharmacological paralysis and risk for seizures 
(eg, therapeutic hypothermia protocols, extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation). 
• Clinical paroxysmal events suspected to be seizures, to determine if 
they are ictal or nonictal.
Abbreviation: EEG, electroencephalography.
Susan Herman, Nicholas Abend, Thomas Bleck, et al. Consensus 
statement on continuous EEG in critically ill adults and children, part 
I: indications. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology . Volume 32, Issue 
2.  © 2015 by the American Clinical Neurophysiology Society. With 
permission of Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. https://journals.lww.com/
clinicalneurophys/fulltext/2015/04000/Consensus_Statement_on_
Continuous_EEG_in.1 .aspx
13 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.net1.  “I didn’t even consider it…”
The clinical presentation of NCSE is highly 
variable. NCSE must remain on the differential 
of AMS or it will surely be missed, as EEG 
monitoring is not routine. NCSE can mimic 
anything from migraines, stroke, toxic 
ingestions, to psychiatric disorders. The strategy 
in the ED involves high clinical suspicion and an 
appropriate differential.
2.  “They can call neurology when the patient gets 
to the ICU.”
Definitive diagnosis of NCSE requires an 
EEG, which may be difficult to obtain in the 
ED. Involvement of a multidisciplinary team 
is critical. Neurologists and neurointensivists 
encounter NCSE more frequently than other 
specialties, and their early involvement is 
important in the management of suspected 
NCSE.
3.  “Benzos didn’t work. I was starting a second-
line agent, and the nurse came to tell me that 
the sodium was 118.”
NCSE represents a final common pathway 
for numerous pathologies. Seizures can be 
precipitated by various chemical and metabolic 
insults, with or without structural central 
nervous system abnormality. It is important to 
consider all possible causes and focus medical 
management on identifying a correctable 
etiology before escalating therapy (ie, seizures 
brought on by hypoglycemia, pre-eclampsia, 
isoniazid overdose, and drug toxicity).
4.  “The ICU resident looked in the chart. The 
patient has a history of cocaine abuse and trau -
matic brain injury.”
Because patients are altered, EMS and caretakers 
are often the only source of information once the 
patient arrives to the ED. It is important to take a 
thorough history of events leading up to arrival 
at the ED, including EMS interventions, drugs 
of abuse, home medications, history of seizures, 
and any witnessed convulsive activity.
5.  “The patient still doesn’t have an IV .”
Obtaining IV access is one of the first steps when 
a critically ill patient presents to the ED. Always 
obtain multiple IV access sites and consider 
intraosseous access if IV access is difficult to 
obtain. If IV access is delayed, IM midazolam 
and rectal diazepam are viable options for first-
line therapy.6.  “Everything is back and all the tests are nor -
mal, but the patient is still altered. We can’t get 
an EEG. Should we give a benzo?”
When NCSE is suspected and EEG is unavail -
able, consider an early trial of benzodiazepines 
and observe for clinical improvement. Benzodi -
azepine efficacy decreases the longer a seizure 
persists, so the initial agent should be started as 
quickly as possible; however prior to empiric 
treatment, coordination with neurology is ideal. 
7.  “He didn’t respond to lorazepam; let’s give 
something different.”
4 mg IV lorazepam is the accepted standard 
dose for emergent treatment of seizures. 
However, this may be subtherapeutic in an 
average-sized person, as weight-based dosing 
is 0.1 mg/kg. Suboptimal dosing can lead to 
refractory seizures and NCSE.
8.  “If we use rapid sequence intubation, we won’t 
know if he is continuing to seize.”
Medically induced coma and intubation with 
neuromuscular blockade carry additional risks 
that can be anticipated and mitigated with good 
supportive care. cEEG allows for assessment 
of continued seizure activity. If EEG is delayed 
but the airway is in jeopardy, intubation should 
not be postponed. In the ED, the threshold for 
intubation must be low, as prolonged seizures 
carry a high rate of morbidity and mortality.
9.  “His oxygen saturation dropped to 60% dur -
ing the seizure, and he got hypotensive after 
intubation, but vitals are normal now. Phew!” 
Hypoxia and hypotension increase mortality 
in the setting of brain injury. In patients 
with suspected NCSE, basic management 
(airway, breathing, circulation) should proceed 
simultaneously with other therapy. It is critical 
to maintain normal oxygenation and perfusion 
during continuous seizure activity.
10.  “He stopped convulsing, but I’m not sure 
whether he is still seizing.”
The only way to truly know whether a patient 
is in NCSE is to monitor brain activity with 
cEEG. Failure to initiate cEEG early can lead 
to delayed recognition of clinical deterioration 
and diminished efficacy of antiepileptic therapy. 
Emergency clinicians must advocate at an 
institutional and specialty level for timely access 
to cEEG, initiated as soon as possible when the 
diagnosis of NCSE is considered.Risk Management Pitfalls for Patients With Nonconvulsive 
Status Epilepticus in the Emergency Department
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  14
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesazolam is an acceptable alternative if IV access is not 
established. Second-line treatments include phe -
nytoin, fosphenytoin, valproate, and levetiracetam. 
Patients who are clinically unstable with refractory 
sCSE may require intubation and medically induced 
coma with propofol, midazolam, or phenobarbital. 
Treatment success is measured by signs of neuro -
logic and/or EEG improvement.
 Case Conclusions 
The 81-year-old woman with AMS was evaluated by 
a neurologist on the floor. Her EEG showed irregular, 
rhythmic, generalized 2.0–2.5 Hz sharp-and-slow wave 
complexes that ceased after 10 mg of IV diazepam. Later, 
her husband noted that her daily lorazepam had recently 
been discontinued abruptly due to a change in insur -
ance. The patient was diagnosed with NCSE. NCSE can 
develop in a patient with or without underlying epilepsy, 
and should be included in the differential of unexplained 
AMS, especially in the setting of chronic benzodiazepine 
use. A high level of suspicion is essential for early diagno -
sis, but urgent confirmatory EEG is required.128 
 After transfer to the ICU, the 35-year-old man who 
had a 10-minute witnessed seizure was evaluated by a 
neurologist and underwent urgent EEG, which showed 
continuous generalized spike-and-wave and polyspike-
and-wave discharges. The patient was given levetirace -
tam 1500 mg IVPB, which produced marked improve -
ment on EEG and eventual normalization of mental 
status. His clinical picture and EEG findings confirmed 
the diagnosis of CPSE. After an uneventful ICU stay, 
the patient was discharged with oral levetiracetam 1000 
mg/day. NCSE should be on the differential diagnosis of 
any patient with status epilepticus who remains altered 
after convulsions have ceased. A high level of suspicion 
and urgent EEG are required to obtain early diagnosis 
and improve patient outcomes.
 After the lumbar puncture, the 42-year-old homeless 
man’s mental status remained poor. CSF showed only 
mild leukocytosis, and brain MRI revealed mild chronic 
involutional changes. EEG demonstrated generalized 
synchronous polyspike-and-wave discharges bilaterally. A 
trial of lorazepam led to rapid improvement in EEG and 
mental status. The patient was diagnosed with NCSE, 
and transitioned to oral levetiracetam. The differential 
diagnosis of AMS is broad, and in this case ranges from 
psychiatric disorder with concomitant drug abuse to 
posttraumatic amnesia. NCSE is difficult to diagnose in 
the emergent setting, and other causes of AMS must be 
systematically ruled out (ie, hypoglycemia, trauma, etc). 
Although the role of EEG in the ED is uncertain, the test 
is essential to diagnose NCSE.66When given in conjunction with propofol, report -
ed infusion rates are in the lower range (25-175 
mcg/kg/min), but there are no formal guidelines 
for “ketofol” in status epilepticus. 
 When pharmacotherapy has failed, there are an -
ecdotal reports of electroconvulsive therapy, vagal 
nerve stimulation, or repetitive transcranial mag -
netic stimulation, but none have been rigorously 
studied in NCSE.67 
 Disposition  
Patients with NCSE have a large spectrum of presen -
tations, ranging from ambulatory and well-appearing 
to comatose and critically ill. Disposition depends on 
subtype, comorbidities, and underlying precipitants. 
Nevertheless, definitive diagnosis of NCSE in many 
cases requires cEEG with round-the-clock interpreta -
tion. The neuro-ICU, when available, is typically the 
appropriate setting for this level of care.  
 Summary 
NCSE is underdiagnosed in the ED. It is a diagno -
sis that should be considered in all patients with 
new-onset AMS, new-onset unusual behavior, and 
in all patients who have had a seizure and exhibit 
a prolonged postictal state. Familiarity with NCSE 
subtypes and the range of possible presentations is 
critical in order for emergency clinicians to suspect 
the diagnosis. The 3 main categories of NCSE—
ASE, SPSE, and CPSE—have certain distinctive 
clinical features but also a great degree of overlap. 
All have a generally good prognosis, provided 
NCSE is recognized and treated promptly and the 
underlying cause is addressed. By contrast, sCSE, 
which often results from untreated GCSE, is not 
strictly a subtype of NCSE, and has a generally 
poor prognosis. The diagnosis of NCSE should be 
pursued and managed while continuing to seek 
and address the underlying cause. A multidisci -
plinary approach that includes neurology and criti -
cal care specialists is crucial in the management of 
these patients. 
 Emergency treatment begins with the basics of 
resuscitation and stabilization. Workup includes a 
CMP , CBC, urine drug screen, pregnancy test, AED 
levels for patients with pre-existing seizure disor -
ders (when appropriate), and a noncontrast head CT. 
Reversible factors such as hypoxia, hypoglycemia, 
and electrolyte imbalances should be corrected expe -
ditiously. The emergency clinician should advocate 
for cEEG initiation as early as possible in the course 
of the workup, in order to properly assess response 
to therapy. 
 IV lorazepam is the gold standard first-line 
agent; however, except for cases of sCSE, it should 
be held until a diagnostic EEG is obtained. IM mid -
15 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netand mortality in nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Neurol -
ogy. 2003;61(8):1066-1073. (Retrospective case series; 100 
patients)
4. Kaplan PW. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in the emer -
gency room. Epilepsia.  1996;37(7):643-650. (Retrospective 
case series; 23 patients)
5. Ziai WC, Schlattman D, Llinas R, et al. Emergent EEG in 
the emergency department in patients with altered mental 
states. Clin Neurophysiol . 2012;123(5):910-917. (Single-center 
prospective cohort intervention study; 82 patients)
6. Does the Use of Rapid Response EEG Impact Clinical Deci -
sion Making (DECIDE). Available at: https://clinicaltrials.
gov/ct2/show/NCT03534258 . (Prospective nonrandomized 
observational multicenter clinical trial)
7. Hesdorffer DC, Logroscino G, Cascino G, et al. Incidence of 
status epilepticus in Rochester, Minnesota, 1965-1984. Neurol -
ogy. 1998;50(3):735-741. (Epidemiological study)
8. Trinka E, Cock H, Hesdorffer D, et al. A definition and 
classification of status epilepticus--report of the ILAE Task 
Force on Classification of Status Epilepticus. Epilepsia . 
2015;56(10):1515-1523.  (Review)
9. Holtkamp M, Meierkord H. Nonconvulsive status epilepti -
cus: a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge in the intensive 
care setting. Ther Adv Neurol Disord.  2011;4(3):169-181. (Re-
view)
10. Privitera M, Hoffman M, Moore JL, et al. EEG detection of 
nontonic-clonic status epilepticus in patients with altered 
consciousness. Epilepsy Res . 1994;18(2):155-166. (Prospective 
clinical trial; 198 patients)
11. Zehtabchi S, Abdel Baki SG, Grant AC. Electroencepha -
lographic findings in consecutive emergency department 
patients with altered mental status: a preliminary report. Eur 
J Emerg Med . 2013;20(2):126-129. (Prospective observational 
study; 50 patients)
12. Kanich W, Brady WJ, Huff JS, et al. Altered mental sta -
tus: evaluation and etiology in the ED. Am J Emerg Med . 
2002;20(7):613-617. (Prospective cohort study; 317 patients)
13. Meierkord H, Holtkamp M. Non-convulsive status epilep -
ticus in adults: clinical forms and treatment. Lancet Neurol . 
2007;6(4):329-339. (Review)
14. Kinney MO, Craig JJ, Kaplan PW. Hidden in plain sight: 
non-convulsive status epilepticus-recognition and manage -
ment. Acta Neurol Scand . 2017;136(4):280-292. (Review)
15. Huff JS, Melnick ER, Tomaszewski CA, et al. Clinical policy: 
critical issues in the evaluation and management of adult pa -
tients presenting to the emergency department with seizures. 
Ann Emerg Med . 2014;63(4):437-447. (Clinical policy)
16. Glauser T, Shinnar S, Gloss D, et al. Evidence-based guide -
line: treatment of convulsive status epilepticus in children 
and adults: report of the Guideline Committee of the 
American Epilepsy Society. Epilepsy Curr . 2016;16(1):48-61. 
(Guideline)
17. Harden CL, Hopp J, Ting TY, et al. Practice parameter up -
date: management issues for women with epilepsy--focus on 
pregnancy (an evidence-based review): obstetrical complica -
tions and change in seizure frequency: report of the Quality 
Standards Subcommittee and Therapeutics and Technol -
ogy Assessment Subcommittee of the American Academy 
of Neurology and American Epilepsy Society.  Neurology . 
2009;73(2):126-132. (Consensus statement)
18. Le Roux P , Menon DK, Citerio G, et al. The International 
Multidisciplinary Consensus Conference on Multimodality 
Monitoring in Neurocritical Care: a list of recommenda -
tions and additional conclusions: a statement for healthcare 
professionals from the Neurocritical Care Society and the 
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Neurocrit Care . 
2014;21 Suppl 2:S282-S296. (Consensus statement)
19. Meierkord H, Boon P , Engelsen B, et al. EFNS guideline on 
the management of status epilepticus in adults. Eur J Neurol . 
2010;17(3):348-355. (Guideline) Time- and Cost-Effective Strategies  
• Coordinate the choice of neuroimaging.  
In the acute setting, virtually all patients with 
new-onset or traumatic seizures receive a brain 
CT. In the setting of suspected NCSE, the neu -
rologist may prefer MRI, due to its higher sensi -
tivity for subtle structural lesions. Although CT 
is often faster in the ED, coordinating early with 
a multidisciplinary team may avoid redundancy, 
lower costs, and expedite clinical management.
• Don’t wait for confirmed diagnosis in sCSE; 
start treatment early.  
The diagnosis of sCSE is rarely confirmed in the 
ED. If clinical suspicion is high, treatment must 
be initiated early. Prolonged seizures increase 
morbidity and mortality.
• Identify subtherapeutic AED levels.  
Subtherapeutic AED levels are a common 
precipitant and an easily correctable cause of 
seizures and status epilepticus. 
• Identify precipitating factors.  
Precipitating factors may be the key to suspect -
ing the diagnosis of NCSE, and addressing these 
factors may lead to termination of status. The 
key to eliciting these factors is a thorough his -
tory with attention to information provided by 
family and EMS.
• Suspect the diagnosis in acute-onset altered 
behavior, especially in the elderly.  
An acute onset of behavioral change, especially 
without a prior psychiatric or neurologic diag -
nosis, may be indicative of NCSE. If the time 
course corresponds to change in medications 
or other precipitating factors, the diagnosis of 
NCSE is further supported.
 References 
Evidence-based medicine requires a critical ap -
praisal of the literature based upon study methodol -
ogy and number of subjects. Not all references are 
equally robust. The findings of a large, prospective, 
randomized, and blinded trial should carry more 
weight than a case report. 
 To help the reader judge the strength of each 
reference, pertinent information about the study, such 
as the type of study and the number of patients in the 
study is included in bold type following the references, 
where available. The most informative references cited 
in this paper, as determined by the authors, are noted 
by an asterisk (*) next to the number of the reference.
1. Brophy GM, Bell R, Claassen J, et al. Guidelines for the 
evaluation and management of status epilepticus. Neurocrit 
Care.  2012;17(1):3-23. (Guidelines)
2. Fountain NB, Lothman EW. Pathophysiology of status epi -
lepticus. J Clin Neurophysiol . 1995;12(4):326-342. (Review)
3. Shneker BF, Fountain NB. Assessment of acute morbidity 
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  16
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesstatus epilepticus: usefulness of clinical features in select -
ing patients for urgent EEG. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry . 
2003;74(2):189-191. (Prospective case series; 48 patients)
43. Chicharro AV , Kanner KA. Psychiatric manifestations of 
NCSE. In: Kaplan PW, Drislane FW, eds. Nonconvulsive Status 
Epilepticus.  New York, NY: Demos Medical; 2009:203-215. 
(Textbook chapter)
44. Elliott B, Joyce E, Shorvon S. Delusions, illusions and hallu -
cinations in epilepsy: 2. Complex phenomena and psychosis. 
Epilepsy Res . 2009;85(2-3):172-186. (Review)
45. Takaya S, Matsumoto R, Namiki C, et al. Frontal nonconvul -
sive status epilepticus manifesting somatic hallucinations. J 
Neurol Sci . 2005;234(1-2):25-29. (Case report)
46. Ng YT, Rekate HL. Coining of a new term, “status gelasti -
cus”. Epilepsia . 2006;47(3):661-662. (Case report)
47. Brigo F, Ferlisi M, Fiaschi A, et al. Fear as the only clinical 
expression of affective focal status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav . 
2011;20(1):107-110. (Case report)
48. Kaplan PW. Behavioral manifestations of nonconvulsive 
status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav.  2002;3(2):122-139. (Review)
49. Thomas P , Beaumanoir A, Genton P , et al. ‘De novo’ 
absence status of late onset: report of 11 cases. Neurology . 
1992;42(1):104-110. (Case series; 11 patients)
50. Trimble M, Kanner A, Schmitz B. Postictal psychosis. Epilepsy 
Behav . 2010;19(2):159-161. (Review)
51. DeLorenzo RJ, Hauser WA, Towne AR, et al. A prospective, 
population-based epidemiologic study of status epilepticus 
in Richmond, Virginia. Neurology . 1996;46(4):1029-1035. (Pro -
spective population-based study)
52. Sutter R, Semmlack S, Kaplan PW. Nonconvulsive status epi -
lepticus in adults - insights into the invisible. Nat Rev Neurol . 
2016;12(5):281-293. (Review)
53. Treiman DM, Meyers PD, Walton NY, et al. A comparison of 
four treatments for generalized convulsive status epilepti -
cus. Veterans Affairs Status Epilepticus Cooperative Study 
Group. N Engl J Med . 1998;339(12):792-798. (Randomized 
double-blind study; 384 patients)
54. Shorvon S. Clinical forms of status epilepticus. In: Shorvon 
S, ed. Status Epilepticus: Its Clinical Features and Treatment in 
Children and Adults. New York, NY: Cambridge University 
Press; 1994:34-138. ( Textbook chapter)
55. American College of Emergency Physicians. Clinical policy 
for the initial approach to patients presenting with altered 
mental status. Ann Emerg Med . 1999;33(2):251-281. (Clinical 
policy)
56. Krumholz A, Wiebe S, Gronseth G, et al. Practice parameter: 
evaluating an apparent unprovoked first seizure in adults 
(an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards 
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and 
the American Epilepsy Society. Neurology . 2007;69(21):1996-
2007. (Practice parameter)
57. Practice parameter: neuroimaging in the emergency patient 
presenting with seizure (summary statement). American 
College of Emergency Physicians, American Academy of 
Neurology, American Association of Neurological Surgeons, 
American Society of Neuroradiology. Ann Emerg Med . 
1996;28(1):114-118. (Practice parameter)
58. Devinsky O, Nadi S, Theodore WH, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid 
pleocytosis following simple, complex partial, and general -
ized tonic-clonic seizures. Ann Neurol . 1988;23(4):402-403. 
(Retrospective chart review; 27 patients, 62 specimens)
59. Prokesch RC, Rimland D, Petrini JL Jr, et al. Cerebrospinal 
fluid pleocytosis after seizures. South Med J . 1983;76(3):322-
327. (Case series; 102 patients)
60. Rider LG, Thapa PB, Del Beccaro MA, et al. Cerebrospinal 
fluid analysis in children with seizures. Pediatr Emerg Care . 
1995;11(4):226-229. (Retrospective chart review; 212 chil -
dren)
61. Barry E HW. Pleocytosis after status epilepticus. Arch. Neurol . 
1994;51:190-193. (Retrospective chart review; 138 patients)20. Lado FA, Moshe SL. How do seizures stop? Epilepsia . 
2008;49(10):1651-1664. (Review)
21. Meldrum BS. Concept of activity-induced cell death in epi -
lepsy: historical and contemporary perspectives. Prog Brain 
Res. 2002;135:3-11. (Review)
22. Jones-Davis DM, Macdonald RL. GABA(A) receptor function 
and pharmacology in epilepsy and status epilepticus. Curr 
Opin Pharmacol.  2003;3(1):12-18. (Review)
23. Chen JW, Wasterlain CG. Status epilepticus: pathophysiol -
ogy and management in adults. Lancet Neurol . 2006;5(3):246-
256. (Systematic review)
24. Wasterlain CG, Niquet J, Thompson KW, et al. Seizure-in -
duced neuronal death in the immature brain. Prog Brain Res . 
2002;135:335-353. (Review)
25. Hosford DA. Animal models of nonconvulsive status epilep -
ticus.  J Clin Neurophysiol . 1999;16(4):306-313. (Review)
26. Drislane FW. Evidence against permanent neurologic dam -
age from nonconvulsive status epilepticus. J Clin Neurophysi -
ol. 1999;16(4):323-331. (Review)
27. Huguenard JR, Prince DA. Clonazepam suppresses GABAB-
mediated inhibition in thalamic relay neurons through 
effects in nucleus reticularis. J Neurophysiol . 1994;71(6):2576-
2581. (In vitro animal study; rats)
28. Meldrum BS, Vigouroux RA, Brierley JB. Systemic fac -
tors and epileptic brain damage. Prolonged seizures in 
paralyzed, artificially ventilated baboons. Arch Neurol . 
1973;29(2):82-87. (Review)
29. Sloviter RS. Decreased hippocampal inhibition and a selec -
tive loss of interneurons in experimental epilepsy. Science. 
1987;235(4784):73-76. (In vitro animal study)
30. Young GB, Jordan KG. Do nonconvulsive seizures damage 
the brain?--Yes. Arch Neurol . 1998;55(1):117-119. (Expert com -
mentary)
31. Wasterlain CG, Fujikawa DG, Penix L, et al. Pathophysio -
logical mechanisms of brain damage from status epilepticus. 
Epilepsia . 1993;34 Suppl 1:S37-S53. (Review)
32. Krumholz A, Sung GY, Fisher RS, et al. Complex partial 
status epilepticus accompanied by serious morbidity and 
mortality. Neurology . 1995;45(8):1499-1504. (Case series; 10 
patients)
33. Fujikawa DG, Itabashi HH, Wu A, et al. Status epilepticus-in -
duced neuronal loss in humans without systemic complica -
tions or epilepsy. Epilepsia . 2000;41(8):981-991. (Case series; 3 
patients) 
34. Parmar H, Lim SH, Tan NC, et al. Acute symptomatic 
seizures and hippocampus damage: DWI and MRS findings. 
Neurology.  2006;66(11):1732-1735. (Case series; 12 patients)
35. Bauer G, Gotwald T, Dobesberger J, et al. Transient and 
permanent magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities 
after complex partial status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav . 
2006;8(3):666-671. (Case report)
36. Vespa PM, McArthur DL, Xu Y, et al. Nonconvulsive seizures 
after traumatic brain injury are associated with hippocampal 
atrophy. Neurology . 2010;75(9):792-798. (Prospective case 
series; 16 patients)
37. Fernandez-Torre JL. Status epilepticus in idiopathic general -
ized epilepsy. Epilepsia . 2006;47(4):805-806. (Review)
38. Ruegg S. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in adults: types, 
pathophysiology, epidemiology, etiology, and diagnosis. 
Neurology International OPEN . 2017;01(03):E189-E203. (Re-
view)
39. Barry E, Hauser WA. Status epilepticus: the interaction of 
epilepsy and acute brain disease. Neurology . 1993;43(8):1473-
1478. (Prospective cohort; 217 patients)
40. Kaplan PW. Nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Semin Neurol . 
1996;16(1):33-40.  (Review)
41. Patsalos PN, Froscher W, Pisani F, et al. The impor -
tance of drug interactions in epilepsy therapy. Epilepsia . 
2002;43(4):365-385. (Review)
42. Husain AM, Horn GJ, Jacobson MP . Non-convulsive 
17 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.net1989;39(10):1294-1297. (Clinical trial; 25 patients)
81. Thomas P , Valton L, Genton P . Absence and myoclonic status 
epilepticus precipitated by antiepileptic drugs in idiopathic 
generalized epilepsy. Brain . 2006;129(Pt 5):1281-1292.  (Case 
series; 14 patients)  
82.  Osorio I, Reed RC, Peltzer JN. Refractory idiopathic absence 
status epilepticus: a probable paradoxical effect of phenytoin 
and carbamazepine. Epilepsia  2000;41(7): 887-894. (Retrospec -
tive chart review)
83. Eue S, Grumbt M, Muller M, et al. Two years of experience 
in the treatment of status epilepticus with intravenous leve -
tiracetam. Epilepsy Behav . 2009;15(4):467-469.  (Retrospective 
review; 43 patients)
84. Rupprecht S, Franke K, Fitzek S, et al. Levetiracetam as a 
treatment option in non-convulsive status epilepticus. Epi-
lepsy Res . 2007;73(3):238-244. (Retrospective chart review; 8 
patients)
85. Navarro V , Dagron C, Elie C, et al. Prehospital treatment 
with levetiracetam plus clonazepam or placebo plus clonaz -
epam in status epilepticus (SAMUKeppra): a randomised, 
double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet Neurol . 2016;15(1):47-55. 
(Randomized clinical trial; 107 patients)
86. Albers JM, Moddel G, Dittrich R, et al. Intravenous lacos -
amide--an effective add-on treatment of refractory status epi -
lepticus. Seizure . 2011;20(5):428-430. (Case series; 7 patients)
87. Lang N, Lange M, Schmitt FC, et al. Intravenous lacosamide 
in clinical practice-Results from an independent registry. 
Seizure . 2016;39:5-9. (Prospective observational study; 119 
patients)
88. Hottinger A, Sutter R, Marsch S, et al. Topiramate as an 
adjunctive treatment in patients with refractory status 
epilepticus: an observational cohort study. CNS Drugs . 
2012;26(9):761-772. (Observational cohort study; 268 pa -
tients)
89. Hofler J, Trinka E. Lacosamide as a new treatment option in 
status epilepticus. Epilepsia . 2013;54(3):393-404. (Review)
90. Wasim M, Husain AM. Nonconvulsive seizure control in the 
intensive care unit. Curr Treat Options Neurol . 2015;17(3):340. 
(Review)
91. Bleck T, Cock H, Chamberlain J, et al. The established status 
epilepticus trial 2013. Epilepsia . 2013;54 Suppl 6:89-92. (Mul -
ticenter randomized double-blind clinical trial; proposed 
sample size, 795 patients)
92. Rossetti AO, Lowenstein DH. Management of refractory sta -
tus epilepticus in adults: still more questions than answers. 
Lancet Neurol . 2011;10(10):922-930. (Review)
93. Rossetti AO. Which anesthetic should be used in the treat -
ment of refractory status epilepticus? Epilepsia . 2007;48 Suppl 
8:52-55. (Review)
94. Claassen J, Hirsch LJ, Emerson RG, et al. Treatment of 
refractory status epilepticus with pentobarbital, propofol, or 
midazolam: a systematic review. Epilepsia . 2002;43(2):146-153. 
(Systematic review)
95. Roberts RJ, Barletta JF, Fong JJ, et al. Incidence of propofol-
related infusion syndrome in critically ill adults: a prospec -
tive, multicenter study. Crit Care . 2009;13(5):R169. (Prospec -
tive review; 1017 patients)
96. Teran F, Harper-Kirksey K, Jagoda A. Clinical decision 
making in seizures and status epilepticus. Emerg Med Pract.  
2015;17(1):1-24. (Review)
97. McMicken D, Liss JL. Alcohol-related seizures. Emerg Med 
Clin North Am . 2011;29(1):117-124. (Review)
98. Earnest MP , Feldman H , Marx JA, et al, Intracranial lesions 
shown by CT scans in 259 cases of first alcohol-related 
seizures. Neurology . 1988;38(10):1561-1565. (Retrospective 
review; 259 patients)
99. Fernandez-Torre JL, Martinez-Martinez M. Non-convulsive 
status epilepticus as an unrecognized cause of acute confu -
sion in alcoholics. Eur J Neurol . 2007;14(8):e14-e15. (Case 
report)62. Jaitly R, Sgro JA, Towne AR, et al. Prognostic value of EEG 
monitoring after status epilepticus: a prospective adult 
study. J Clin Neurophysiol . 1997;14(4):326-334. (Case series; 
180 patients)
63. Nei M, Lee JM, Shanker VL, et al. The EEG and prognosis in 
status epilepticus. Epilepsia . 1999;40(2):157-163. (Case series; 
50 patients)
64. Leitinger M, Beniczky S, Rohracher A, et al. Salzburg consen -
sus criteria for non-convulsive status epilepticus--approach 
to clinical application. Epilepsy Behav . 2015;49:158-163. (Ret -
rospective case control study; 100 patients)
65. Chari G, Yadav K, Nishijima D, et al. Improving the ability of 
ED physicians to identify subclinical/electrographic seizures 
on EEG after a brief training module. Intl J Emerg Med.  
2019;12(1):11. (Randomized controlled trial; 30 emergency 
physicians at 3 institutions)
66. Shah AM, Vashi A, Jagoda A. Review article: convulsive and 
non-convulsive status epilepticus: an emergency medicine 
perspective. Emerg Med Australas . 2009;21(5):352-366. (Re-
view)
67. Sutter R, Ruegg S, Kaplan PW. Epidemiology, diagnosis, and 
management of nonconvulsive status epilepticus: opening 
Pandora’s box. Neurol Clin Pract.  2012;2(4):275-286. (Review)
68. Fernandez-Torre JL, Kaplan PW, Hernandez-Hernandez MA. 
New understanding of nonconvulsive status epilepticus 
in adults: treatments and challenges. Expert Rev Neurother . 
2015;15(12):1455-1473. (Review)
69. Lawson T, Yeager S. Status epilepticus in adults: a review of 
diagnosis and treatment. Crit Care Nurse . 2016;36(2):62-73. 
(Review)
70. Silbergleit R, Durkalski V , Lowenstein D, et al. Intramuscular 
versus intravenous therapy for prehospital status epilepti -
cus. N Engl J Med . 2012;366(7):591-600. (Randomized control 
trial; 893 patients)
71. Alldredge BK, Gelb AM, Isaacs SM, et al. A comparison of 
lorazepam, diazepam, and placebo for the treatment of out-
of-hospital status epilepticus. N Engl J Med . 2001;345(9):631-
637. (Randomized, double-blind clinical trial; 205 patients)
72. Leppik IE, Derivan AT, Homan RW, et al. Double-blind 
study of lorazepam and diazepam in status epilepticus. 
JAMA . 1983;249(11):1452-1454. (Randomized controlled 
trial; 78 patients)
73. Gilad R, Izkovitz N, Dabby R, et al. Treatment of status 
epilepticus and acute repetitive seizures with I.V . valproic 
acid vs phenytoin. Acta Neurol Scand . 2008;118(5):296-300. 
(Prospective clinical trial; 74 patients)
74. Misra UK, Kalita J, Patel R. Sodium valproate vs phenytoin 
in status epilepticus: a pilot study. Neurology . 2006;67(2):340-
342. (Randomized controlled trial; 82 patients)
75. Remy C, Jourdil N, Villemain D, et al. Intrarectal diazepam 
in epileptic adults. Epilepsia . 1992;33(2):353-358. (Prospective 
randomized study; 39 patients)
76. Shaner DM, McCurdy SA, Herring MO, et al. Treatment of 
status epilepticus: a prospective comparison of diazepam 
and phenytoin versus phenobarbital and optional phenytoin. 
Neurology . 1988;38(2):202-207. (Randomized clinical trial; 36 
patients)
77. Misra UK, Kalita J, Maurya PK. Levetiracetam versus loraz -
epam in status epilepticus: a randomized, open labeled pilot 
study. J Neurol . 2012;259(4):645-648. (Randomized open-
label pilot study; 79 patients)
78.  Prasad M, Krishnan PR, Sequeira R, et al. Anticonvulsant 
therapy for status epilepticus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2014;10(9):CD003723. (Cochrane review; 18 studies, 2755 
participants)
79. Kaplan PW. Intravenous valproate treatment of generalised 
nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Clin Eectroencephalogr.  
1999;30(1):1-4. (Case report)
80. Berkovic SF, Andermann F, Guberman A, et al. Valpro -
ate prevents the recurrence of absence status. Neurology . 
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  18
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesstudy; 332 patients)
121. Sergot P , Chari, G., Omurtag, A. Utility of a brief training 
module on improving emergency physicians’ ability to 
identify non-convulsive seizure on emergent electroencepha -
lography performed in patients with altered mental status. 
Ann Emerg Med.  2015;66(4):S111-S112. (Prospective study; in 
progress)
122. Zeiler FA. Early use of the NMDA receptor antagonist ket -
amine in refractory and superrefractory status epilepticus. 
Crit Care Res Pract . 2015;2015:831260. (Literature review)
123. Fung EL, Fung BB, Subcommittee on the Consensus State -
ment of the Hong Kong Epilepsy Society. Review and update 
of the Hong Kong Epilepsy Guideline on status epilepticus. 
Hong Kong Med J . 2017;23(1):67-73. (Consensus statement)
124. Sabharwal V , Ramsay E, Martinez R, et al. Propofol-ketamine 
combination therapy for effective control of super-refractory 
status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav . 2015;52(Pt A):264-266. 
(Retrospective review; 67 patients)
125. Niquet J, Baldwin R, Suchomelova L, et al. Treatment of ex -
perimental status epilepticus with synergistic drug combina -
tions. Epilepsia . 2017;58(4):e49-e53. (Animal study)
126. Gaspard N, Foreman B, Judd LM, et al. Intravenous ket -
amine for the treatment of refractory status epilepticus: a 
retrospective multicenter study. Epilepsia.  2013;54(8):1498-
1503. (Retrospective review; 60 patients)
127. Hofler J, Rohracher A, Kalss G, et al. (S)-ketamine in refrac -
tory and super-refractory status epilepticus: a retrospective 
study. CNS Drugs . 2016;30(9):869-876. (Retrospective review; 
42 patients)
128. Jones RM, Butler JA, Thomas VA, et al. Adherence to treat -
ment in patients with epilepsy: associations with seizure 
control and illness beliefs. Seizure.  2006;15(7):504-508. (Cross-
sectional study; 54 patients)100. Niedermeyer E, Freund G, Krumholz A. Subacute encepha -
lopathy with seizures in alcoholics: a clinical-electroenceph -
alographic study. Clin Electroencephalogr . 1981;12(3):113-129. 
(Case series)
101. Sechi G, Serra A. Wernicke’s encephalopathy: new clinical 
settings and recent advances in diagnosis and management. 
Lancet Neurol . 2007;6(5):442-455. (Review)
102. Sheth RD, Drazkowski JF, Sirven JI, et al. Protracted ictal 
confusion in elderly patients. Arch Neurol . 2006;63(4):529-532. 
(Case series; 22 patients)  
103. Rosenow F, Hamer HM, Knake S. The epidemiology of 
convulsive and nonconvulsive status epilepticus. Epilepsia . 
2007;48 Suppl 8:82-84. (Review)
104. Rohracher A, Reiter DP , Brigo F, et al. Status epilepticus in 
the elderly-a retrospective study on 120 patients. Epilepsy 
Res. 2016;127:317-323. (Retrospective case series; 120 pa -
tients)
105. Cheng S. Non-convulsive status epilepticus in the elderly. 
Epileptic Disord . 2014;16(4):385-394. (Review)
106. Veran O, Kahane P , Thomas P , et al. De novo epileptic confu -
sion in the elderly: a 1-year prospective study. Epilepsia.  
2010;51(6):1030-1035. (Prospective case series; 44 patients)
107. Dunne JW, Summers QA, Stewart-Wynne EG. Non-con -
vulsive status epilepticus: a prospective study in an adult 
general hospital. Q J Med . 1987;62(238):117-126. (Prospective 
case series; 113 patients)
108. Scholtes FB, Renier WO, Meinardi H. Simple partial status 
epilepticus: causes, treatment, and outcome in 47 patients. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry . 1996;61(1):90-92. (Retrospective 
case series; 47 patients)
109. Stephen LJ, Brodie MJ. Epilepsy in elderly people. Lancet. 
2000;355(9213):1441-1446. (Review)
110. Korn-Lubetzki I, Steiner-Birmanns B, Galperin I, et al. 
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus in older people: a diag -
nostic challenge and a treatable condition. J Am Geriatr Soc.  
2007;55(9):1475-1476. (Review)
111. Bottaro FJ, Martinez OA, Pardal MM, et al. Nonconvulsive 
status epilepticus in the elderly: a case-control study. Epilep -
sia. 2007;48(5):966-972. (Retrospective case-control study; 53 
patients)
112. Kaplan PW. Assessing the outcomes in patients with noncon -
vulsive status epilepticus: nonconvulsive status epilepticus 
is underdiagnosed, potentially overtreated, and confounded 
by comorbidity. J Clin Neurophysiol . 1999;16(4):341-352. (Re-
view)
113. Shavit L, Grenader T, Galperin I. Nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus in elderly a possible diagnostic pitfall. Eur J 
Intern Med . 2012;23(8):701-704. (Prospective case series; 14 
patients)
114. Sutter R, Fuhr P , Grize L, et al. Continuous video-EEG 
monitoring increases detection rate of nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus in the ICU. Epilepsia . 2011;52(3):453-457. (Review)
115. Bleck TP . Management approaches to prolonged seizures 
and status epilepticus. Epilepsia . 1999;40 Suppl 1:S59-S63. 
(Review)
116. Sutter R. Are we prepared to detect subtle and nonconvul -
sive status epilepticus in critically ill patients? J Clin Neuro -
physiol . 2016;33(1):25-31. (Review)
117. Herman ST, Abend NS, Bleck TP , et al. Consensus statement 
on continuous EEG in critically ill adults and children, part I: 
indications. J Clin Neurophysiol . 2015;32(2):87-95. (Consensus 
statement)
118. Kuroda Y. Neurocritical care update. J Intensive Care . 
2016;4:36. (Review)
119. Abdel Baki SG, Omurtag A, Fenton AA, et al. The new wave: 
time to bring EEG to the emergency department. Int J Emerg 
Med. 2011;4:36. (Review)
120. Roodsari GS, Chari G, Mera B, et al. Can patients with non-
convulsive seizure be identified in the emergency depart -
ment? World J Emerg Med . 2017;8(3):190-194. (Restrospective  Correction
The August 2019 issue of Emergency Medicine 
Practice  contained an error in Table 1, page 4. 
The rivaroxaban (Xarelto®) dosing for venous 
thromboembolism should have read: “15 mg 
twice daily for first 21 days, followed by 20 mg 
once daily. ” This has been corrected in the online 
version of the issue. We regret the error.
19 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.net4.  A 72-year-old man with a history of anxiety 
and hypertension presents to the ED with 
changes in behavior. He is otherwise neuro -
logically intact and has normal vital signs. 
Fingerstick glucose, blood work, and urinaly -
sis are normal. His wife notes that 3 days ago, 
he abruptly discontinued his alprazolam. An 
empiric trial of lorazepam in the ED leads to 
normalization of his mental status. Based on 
clinical gestalt and response to therapy, the pa -
tient is presumptively diagnosed with NCSE. 
Which additional test would have confirmed 
the suspected diagnosis?
a. Brain CT
b. Lumbar puncture
c. Electroencephalogram (EEG)
d. No additional test is needed; response to IV 
lorazepam is confirmatory
5.  Regarding benzodiazepines in NCSE, which of 
the following statements is TRUE?
a. Benzodiazepines are first line.
b. Diazepam is superior to lorazepam.
c. Benzodiazepines should not be initiated 
until diagnosis is confirmed.
d. Efficacy is maintained regardless of duration 
of NCSE.
6.  Which of the following medications is the first 
choice for empiric therapy of NCSE?
a. Phenobarbital IV
b. Diazepam IV
c. Phenytoin IV
d. Lorazepam IV
 7.  An elderly woman with a history of epilepsy 
presents with altered mental status (AMS). The 
ED workup is unrevealing, so a neurologist 
is consulted, and the patient undergoes emer -
gent EEG, which is diagnostic of NCSE. The 
patient is given IV lorazepam and a dose of 
IV levetiracetam, which she takes chronically. 
Her mental status and EEG abnormalities do 
not improve. Which of the following would be 
INAPPROPRIATE third-line therapy for this 
patient?
a. Etomidate IV
b. Phenytoin IV
c. Fosphenytoin IV
d. Valproate IV  CME Questions
Take This Test Online!
Take This Test Online!Current subscribers receive CME credit absolutely 
free by completing the following test. Each issue 
includes 4 AMA PRA Category 1 CreditsTM, 4 ACEP 
Category I credits, 4 AAFP Prescribed credits, or  
4 AOA Category 2-A or 2-B credits. Online testing  
is available for current and archived issues. To 
receive your free CME credits for this issue, scan 
the QR code below  with your smartphone or visit 
www.ebmedicine.net/ E1019 .
1.   Regarding the pathophysiology of nonconvul -
sive status epilepticus (NCSE), which of the 
following statements is TRUE? 
a. NCSE causes permanent irreversible 
damage, even when treated. 
b. NCSE often evolves into generalized 
convulsive status epilepticus (GCSE). 
c. NCSE is more likely than GCSE to cause 
widespread systemic physiologic changes.
d. Pathophysiology of NCSE is likely 
different for different subtypes (absence 
status epilepticus, complex partial status 
epilepticus)
 2.  In patients with epilepsy, the most common 
etiology of NCSE is:
a. Antiepileptic drug (AED) noncompliance or 
subtherapeutic AED levels
b. Progression of disease
c. A new focus of epileptiform activity
d. Trauma
3.  A 55-year-old woman with a history of breast 
cancer presents to the ED following a general -
ized tonic-clonic seizure. She is confused but 
alert. Her husband states that she has been 
complaining of left-sided weakness. On exami -
nation, she has full strength and sensation in 
all 4 extremities. Minimum testing in the ED 
must include:
a. CBC, chemistry, urinalysis, fingerstick 
glucose, and brain CT
b. CBC, chemistry, urinalysis, fingerstick 
glucose, brain CT, and lumbar puncture
c. CBC, chemistry, urinalysis, fingerstick 
glucose, and electrocardiogram
d. CBC, chemistry, urinalysis, and fingerstick 
glucose
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  20
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissues10.  Regarding treatment of NCSE in the elderly, 
which of the following statements is TRUE?  
a. Elderly patients are less sensitive to 
benzodiazepines. 
b. Elderly patients with NCSE should be 
treated more aggressively than younger 
patients. 
c. Elderly patients may require lower adjusted 
doses of medications to treat NCSE
d. NCSE in the elderly usually resolves 
without treatment.8.  Which of the following statements best de -
scribes the principles guiding diagnosis of 
NCSE?
a. Rule out other causes of AMS, maintain a 
high index of suspicion, consider EEG and 
empiric therapy early.
b. Consult neurology on all altered patients, 
perform MRI and EEG emergently, and 
consider starting therapy before diagnosis is 
confirmed.
c. Rule out other causes of AMS, maintain a 
high index of suspicion, and start 2 AEDs 
concurrently.
d. Encourage prehospital diagnosis and 
treatment of NCSE in altered patients, 
consult neurology, and perform lumbar 
puncture to rule out encephalitis.
9.  A 23-year-old man with unknown medical his -
tory is found down by bystanders. He has abra -
sions to his face, and a broken front tooth. He is 
awake but mumbling incomprehensibly, and not 
following commands. GCS score is 9. Trauma 
evaluation shows no injuries, and lab results, in -
cluding alcohol level and urine drug screen, are 
normal. On re-evaluation, his GCS score is 8 and 
the patient is obtunded. Vital signs are normal. 
What is the next step in management?
a. Stat psychiatry consultation
b. Rapid sequence intubation and emergent 
intubation
c. IV phenytoin
d. Emergent EEG
21 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.netDESCRIPTION	 AMOUNT
The 2019 Lifelong Learning And Self-Assessment Study Guide (now includes audio) 	 $219	
	 $169
The 2018 Lifelong Learning And Self-Assessment Study Guide 	 $219	
	 $169
The 2017 Lifelong Learning And Self-Assessment Study Guide	 $219	
	 $169
The 2016 Lifelong Learning and Self-Assessment Study Guide	 $219	
	 $169
•	 Full	reprints	of	the	original	articles.*		 FREE
•	 35	AMA PRA Category 1 CreditsTM	or	35	ACEP 	Category	I	CME	Credits.		 FREE
•	 A	handy	summary	of	key 	points	so	you 	get	the	“must-know” 	information	for 	each	article.	 INCLUDED
•	 An	in-depth	discussion	of	each	article	to	clarify	and	elaborate	on	the	key 	points.		 INCLUDED
•	 Sample	questions	to	help	you 	quiz	yourself	on	your	knowledge	of	the	material.		 INCLUDED
•	 Answers	and	explanations	to	the	sample	questions	that 	drive	home	the	main	points.		 INCLUDED
•	 A	critical	discussion	and	critique	of	the	article	that 	answers	the	question		 INCLUDED
									“What 	does	this	article	really	tell	us?”
•	 100%	money-back	guarantee:	If, 	for	any	reason,	you 	are	not	completely	satisfied		 INCLUDED
									simply	call	us	to	receive	a	full	and	immediate	refund.	No	questions	asked.
Order	 Your	LLSA 	Study	Guides	 Today
Published	by	EB	Medicine
PO	Box	1671/	 Williamsport,	PA 	17703
Contact 	678-366-7933	or	ebm@ebmedicine.net
Order	at 	www.ebmedicine.net/NMLJB *Due to copyright restrictions, 1 article 
from the 2018 LLSA and 2 articles and 1 
table from the 2017 LLSA  are not included 
in EB Medicine’s LLSA Study Guides (or any 
others published by a third party).
EXCLUSIVE	DISCOUNT	OFFER
Yes!	Please	send	me	the	LLSA 	Study	Guide(s).	Because	I	am	a	
preferred	customer,	I	am	eligible	for 	the	exclusive	discounted	rate 	
of	$169	(a 	$50	savings).	Promotion	Code	NMLJB
2019	LLSA 	Study	Guide....................$169	each	_____
2018	LLSA 	Study	Guide....................$169	each	_____
2017	LLSA 	Study	Guide....................$169	each	_____
2016	LLSA 	Study	Guide....................$169	each	_____
Delivery	method: n	Online	 Download	 Only		 n	Mail	 &	Online	 Download*
Check	enclosed	or	Charge	my 	Visa	/	MC	/	AmEx
Card	#	__________________________________________________
Exp	_______	Signature	_____________________________________
Hospital/Group	Name	 _____________________________________
Phone	__________________________________________________
Email	___________________________________________________
Your email address is required, and will only be used to service your account.
Meet all your LLSA needs now with  
The EB Medicine 2016-2019 LLSA Study Guides
Offer 
Expires 
Dec 15th
Receive FREE article reprints*, CME, and 
more when you order yours today!
$50
Off
$50
Off
$50
Off
$50
Off
Includes	
FULL 	Article	
Reprints*
Name:																																																																																																																																				________
Address:																																													 																																																																																 			________
City:																																																																________												 		State:														Zip:												 													
Phone:																																																																																																																																			________	
Email:																																																																																																																																	________			
Hospital/Group	(optional):																																																																																________													
Email	and	phone	are 	required	for 	online	delivery	and	to	service	your	account.	
We	respect 	your	privacy,	and	this	information	will	not 	be	shared	with	third	parties.New And Improved - 2019 LLSA With Audio
The 2019 Lifelong Learning and Self-Assessment Study Guide now includes quick high-
impact summaries of each article.
Listen to renowned speaker Dr. Haney Mallemat as he summarizes the key points of the 
articles ABEM has chosen for the exam.
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  22
Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissues23 Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. 
October 2019 • www.ebmedicine.net
New EXTRA! 
Available FREE for subscribers!
Key Learning Points:
• The ECASS III study showed a statistically significant benefit in selected patients treated with IV 
rt-PA between 3 hours and 4.5 hours from symptom onset. Additional studies have supported 
the use of intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) in a time window as late as 4.5 hours after symptom 
onset. Every eligible patient should receive IVT without delay. 
• In spite of the impact of IV rt-PA on the treatment of acute ischemic stroke, some patients do 
not respond to the drug, particularly those patients who harbor an embolus lodged in a vessel 
that is too large for the medication to lyse. Endovascular therapy has caused a paradigm shift in 
the field of hyperacute stroke management.
Free: 4 Stroke CME Credits!
Download now: 
www.ebmedicine.net/EXTRA
EXTRA! Ad_2_2c.indd   1 9/11/19   6:56 AMCME Information 
Date of Original Release:  October 1, 2019. Date of most recent review: September 10, 2019. 
Termination date: October 1, 2022. 
Accreditation:  EB Medicine is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical 
Education (ACCME) to provide continuing medical education for physicians. This activity has been 
planned and implemented in accordance with the accreditation requirements and policies of the 
ACCME. 
Credit Designation: EB Medicine designates this enduring material for a maximum of 4 AMA PRA 
Category 1 Credits™.  Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their 
participation in the activity.
Specialty CME: Included as part of the 4 credits, this CME activity is eligible for 3 Pharmacology 
CME credits.
ACEP Accreditation: Emergency Medicine Practice  is approved by the American College of Emergency 
Physicians for 48 hours of ACEP Category I credit per annual subscription.
AAFP Accreditation:  This Enduring Material activity,  Emergency Medicine Practice, has been 
reviewed and is acceptable for credit by the American Academy of Family Physicians. Term of 
approval begins 07/01/2019. Term of approval is for one year from this date. Physicians should 
claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity. Approved for 
4 AAFP Prescribed credits.
AOA Accreditation:  Emergency Medicine Practice  is eligible for 4 Category 2-A or 2-B credit hours 
per issue by the American Osteopathic Association.
Needs Assessment:  The need for this educational activity was determined by a survey of medical 
staff, including the editorial board of this publication; review of morbidity and mortality data from the 
CDC, AHA, NCHS, and ACEP; and evaluation of prior activities for emergency physicians.
Target Audience:  This enduring material is designed for emergency medicine physicians, physician 
assistants, nurse practitioners, and residents.
Goals:  Upon completion of this activity, you should be able to: (1) demonstrate medical decision-
making based on the strongest clinical evidence; (2) cost-effectively diagnose and treat the most 
critical presentations; and (3) describe the most common medicolegal pitfalls for each topic covered.
Objectives:  Upon completion of this article, you should be able to: (1) recognize the potential for 
NCSE in patients presenting with altered mental status; (2) initiate diagnostic and treatment strategies 
appropriate to clinical presentation; (3) describe the pharmacologic action of antiepileptic drugs and 
prescribe first-, second-, and third-line medications to stop seizures; and (4) describe the importance 
and benefits of a team approach to managing a seizing patient in the ED. 
Discussion of Investigational Information:  As part of the journal, faculty may be presenting inves -
tigational information about pharmaceutical products that is outside Food and Drug Administration 
approved labeling. Information presented as part of this activity is intended solely as continuing 
medical education and is not intended to promote off-label use of any pharmaceutical product. 
Faculty Disclosure:  It is the policy of EB Medicine to ensure objectivity, balance, independence, 
transparency, and scientific rigor in all CME-sponsored educational activities. All faculty participating 
in the planning or implementation of a sponsored activity are expected to disclose to the audience 
any relevant financial relationships and to assist in resolving any conflict of interest that may arise 
from the relationship. In compliance with all ACCME Essentials, Standards, and Guidelines, all faculty 
for this CME activity were asked to complete a full disclosure statement. The information received 
is as follows: Dr. Baker, Dr. Yasavolian, Dr. Arandi, Dr. Lay, Dr. Rabin, Dr. Teran, Dr. Walsh, Dr. 
Mishler, Dr. Toscano, Dr. Jagoda, and their related parties report no relevant financial interest 
or other relationship with the manufacturer(s) of any commercial product(s) discussed in this 
educational presentation. 
Commercial Support:  This issue of Emergency Medicine Practice  did not receive any commercial 
support.
Earning Credit: Two Convenient Methods: (1) Go online to www.ebmedicine.net/CME  and click on 
the title of the article. (2) Mail or fax the CME Answer And Evaluation Form (included with your June 
and December issues) to EB Medicine.
Hardware/Software Requirements:  You will need a Macintosh or PC to access the online archived 
articles and CME testing. 
Additional Policies:  For additional policies, including our statement of conflict of interest, source of 
funding, statement of informed consent, and statement of human and animal rights, visit  
www.ebmedicine.net/policies .
CEO: Stephanie Williford  Finance & HR Manager: Robin Wilkinson  Publisher: Suzanne Verity  
Director of Editorial Quality: Dorothy Whisenhunt, MS  Senior Content Editor & CME Director: Erica Scott  
Content Editor: Cheryl Belton, PhD, ELS  Editorial Project Manager: Angie Wallace
Office Manager:  Kiana Collier Account Executive:  Dana Stenzel 
Marketing Strategist:  Anna Motuz, MBA  Marketing Coordinator : Bridget Langley  Database Administrator:  Jose Porras
Subscription Information
Full annual subscription: $449 (includes 12 monthly evidence-based print 
issues; 48  AMA PRA Category 1 CreditsTM, 48 ACEP Category I credits, 48 AAFP 
Prescribed credits, and 48 AOA Category 2A or 2B CME credits. Call 
1-800-249-5770 or go to www.ebmedicine.net/subscribe  to subscribe.
Individual issues: $49  (includes 4 CME credits). Call 1-800-249-5770 or  go to 
www.ebmedicine.net/EMPissues  to order.
Group subscriptions at discounted rates are also available.  
Contact groups@ebmedicine.net  for more information.Direct all inquiries to:
EB Medicine
Phone: 1-800-249-5770 or 1-678-366-7933 
Fax: 1-770-500-1316 
PO Box 1671
Williamsport, PA 17703
E-mail: ebm@ebmedicine.net
Website: www.ebmedicine.net
To write a letter to the editor, please email: 
jagodamd@ebmedicine.netIn upcoming issues of 
Emergency Medicine Practice....
•	Pain	Management 	Beyond	Opioids
•	Dizziness
•	NSTEMI
•	Diabetic	Emergencies
July 2019
Volume 21, Number 7
Author
Adedamola Ogunniyi, MD
Associate Director, Residency Training Program, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, 
California; Assistant Professor, David Geffen School of Medicine at 
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
Peer Reviewers
May Li, MD
Assistant Clinical Professor, Associate Director, Undergraduate 
Medical Education, NYU School of Medicine, Ronald O. Perelman 
Department of Emergency Medicine, New Y ork, NY
Samuel D. Luber, MD, MPH, FACEP
Associate Professor, Vice-Chair of Education and Academic Affairs, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Assistant Dean for Graduate 
Medical Education, McGovern Medical School at The University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX
Prior to beginning this activity, see “CME Information”  on the back page.Emergency Department Management 
of Patients With Complications of 
Bariatric Surgery
 Abstract 
As bariatric procedures have become more common, more of 
these patients present to the emergency department postop-
eratively. The most common complaints in these patients are 
abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, though each of the 
surgical procedures will present with specific complications, 
and management will vary according to the surgical procedure 
performed. Computed tomography is often the primary imag-
ing modality, though it has it limits, and plain film imaging is 
appropriate in some cases. This review presents an overview of 
the various bariatric procedures, highlighting the potential com-
plications of each, both surgical and nonsurgical, and provides 
evidence-based recommendations regarding patient manage-
ment and disposition. 
Editor-In-Chief
Andy Jagoda, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Interim Chair, 
Department of Emergency Medicine; 
Director, Center for Emergency 
Medicine Education and Research, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY
Associate Editor-In-Chief
Kaushal Shah, MD, FACEP  
Associate Professor, Vice Chair 
for Education, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Weill Cornell 
School of Medicine, New York, NY 
Editorial Board
Saadia Akhtar, MD, FACEP  
Associate Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Associate Dean 
for Graduate Medical Education, 
Program Director, Emergency 
Medicine Residency, Mount Sinai 
Beth Israel, New York, NY 
William J. Brady, MD  
Professor of Emergency Medicine 
and Medicine; Medical Director, 
Emergency Management, UVA 
Medical Center; Operational Medical 
Director, Albemarle County Fire 
Rescue, Charlottesville, VA 
Calvin A. Brown III, MD
 Director of Physician Compliance, 
Credentialing and Urgent Care 
Services, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 
Peter DeBlieux, MD   
Professor of Clinical Medicine, 
Louisiana State University School of 
Medicine; Chief Experience Officer, 
University Medical Center, New 
Orleans, LADaniel J. Egan, MD
 Associate Professor, Vice Chair of 
Education, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Columbia University 
Vagelos College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY 
Nicholas Genes, MD, PhD
 Associate Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY
Michael A. Gibbs, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Carolinas 
Medical Center, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel 
Hill, NC
Steven A. Godwin, MD, FACEP 
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Assistant 
Dean, Simulation Education, 
University of Florida COM-
Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL
Joseph Habboushe, MD MBA  
Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, NYU/Langone and 
Bellevue Medical Centers, New York, 
NY; CEO, MD Aware LLC
Gregory L. Henry, MD, FACEP  
Clinical Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, University 
of Michigan Medical School; CEO, 
Medical Practice Risk Assessment, 
Inc., Ann Arbor, MI
John M. Howell, MD, FACEP
 Clinical Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC; Director 
of Academic Affairs, Best Practices, 
Inc, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls 
Church, VAShkelzen Hoxhaj, MD, MPH, MBA
 Chief Medical Officer, Jackson 
Memorial Hospital, Miami, FL
Eric Legome, MD  
Chair, Emergency Medicine, Mount 
Sinai West & Mount Sinai St. Luke's; 
Vice Chair, Academic Affairs for 
Emergency Medicine, Mount Sinai 
Health System, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
 Keith A. Marill, MD, MS  
Associate Professor, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA
Charles V. Pollack Jr., MA, MD, 
FACEP, FAAEM, FAHA, FESC  
Professor & Senior Advisor for 
Interdisciplinary Research and 
Clinical Trials, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Sidney Kimmel 
Medical College of Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA
Michael S. Radeos, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Weill Medical College 
of Cornell University, New York; 
Research Director, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, New York 
Hospital Queens, Flushing, NY
Ali S. Raja, MD, MBA, MPH
 Executive Vice Chair, Emergency 
Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital; Associate Professor of 
Emergency Medicine and Radiology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Robert L. Rogers, MD, FACEP, 
FAAEM, FACP  
Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, The University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MDAlfred Sacchetti, MD, FACEP  
Assistant Clinical Professor, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA
Robert Schiller, MD
 Chair, Department of Family Medicine, 
Beth Israel Medical Center; Senior 
Faculty, Family Medicine and 
Community Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
Scott Silvers, MD, FACEP
 Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Chair of Facilities and 
Planning, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL
Corey M. Slovis, MD, FACP, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
Ron M. Walls, MD  
Professor and COO, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA
Critical Care Editors
William A. Knight IV, MD, FACEP, 
FNCS
 Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine and Neurosurgery, Medical 
Director, EM Advanced Practice 
Provider Program; Associate Medical 
Director, Neuroscience ICU, University 
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
Scott D. Weingart, MD, FCCM
 Professor of Emergency Medicine; 
Chief, EM Critical Care, Stony Brook 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY
Research Editors
Aimee Mishler, PharmD, BCPS
 Emergency Medicine Pharmacist, 
Program Director, PGY2 EM Pharmacy Residency, Maricopa 
Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ
Joseph D. Toscano, MD  
Chief, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, San Ramon Regional 
Medical Center, San Ramon, CA
International Editors
Peter Cameron, MD  
Academic Director, The Alfred 
Emergency and Trauma Centre, 
Monash University, Melbourne, 
Australia
Andrea Duca, MD
 Attending Emergency Physician, 
Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, 
Bergamo, Italy 
Suzanne Y.G. Peeters, MD  
Attending Emergency Physician, 
Flevo Teaching Hospital, Almere,  
The Netherlands
Edgardo Menendez, MD, FIFEM  
Professor in Medicine and Emergency 
Medicine; Director of EM, Churruca 
Hospital of Buenos Aires University, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Dhanadol Rojanasarntikul, MD 
 Attending Physician, Emergency 
Medicine, King Chulalongkorn 
Memorial Hospital; Faculty of 
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Thailand
Stephen H. Thomas, MD, MPH
 Professor & Chair, Emergency 
Medicine, Hamad Medical Corp., 
Weill Cornell Medical College, Qatar; 
Emergency Physician-in-Chief, 
Hamad General Hospital,  
Doha, Qatar
Edin Zelihic, MD
 Head, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Leopoldina Hospital, 
Schweinfurt, Germany
August 2019
Volume 21, Number 8
Authors
Patrick Maher, MD
Assistant Professor, Emergency Medicine and Critical Care, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Y ork, NY
Emily Taub, MD
Department of Emergency Medicine and Critical Care, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Y ork, NY
Peer Reviewers
Dowin Boatright, MD, MBA, MHS
Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Y ale 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
Natalie Kreitzer, MD, MS
Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine, Neurocritical Care, 
and Stroke, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
Isaac Tawil, MD, FCCM
Associate Professor, Critical Care and Emergency Medicine, 
University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Albuquerque, NM
Prior to beginning this activity, see “CME Information”  
on the back page.
This issue is eligible for 4 Pharmacology CME credits.Emergency Department 
Management of Patients Taking 
Direct Oral Anticoagulant Agents
 Abstract 
Direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) agents have become com-
monly used over the last 9 years for treatment and prophylaxis 
for thromboembolic conditions, following approvals by the 
United States Food and Drug Administration. These antico-
agulant agents, which include a direct thrombin inhibitor and 
factor Xa inhibitors, offer potential advantages for patients over 
warfarin; however, bleeding emergencies with DOACs can 
present diagnostic and therapeutic challenges because, unlike 
traditional anticoagulants, their therapeutic effect cannot be eas-
ily monitored directly with common clotting assays. This review 
examines the growing body of evidence on the uses and risks 
of DOACs in the emergency department, including initiation of 
therapy and reversal strategies. 
Editor-In-Chief
Andy Jagoda, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Interim Chair, 
Department of Emergency Medicine; 
Director, Center for Emergency 
Medicine Education and Research, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, NY
Associate Editor-In-Chief
Kaushal Shah, MD, FACEP  
Associate Professor, Vice Chair 
for Education, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Weill Cornell 
School of Medicine, New York, NY 
Editorial Board
Saadia Akhtar, MD, FACEP  
Associate Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Associate Dean 
for Graduate Medical Education, 
Program Director, Emergency 
Medicine Residency, Mount Sinai 
Beth Israel, New York, NY 
William J. Brady, MD  
Professor of Emergency Medicine 
and Medicine; Medical Director, 
Emergency Management, UVA 
Medical Center; Operational Medical 
Director, Albemarle County Fire 
Rescue, Charlottesville, VA 
Calvin A. Brown III, MD
 Director of Physician Compliance, 
Credentialing and Urgent Care 
Services, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 
Peter DeBlieux, MD   
Professor of Clinical Medicine, 
Louisiana State University School of 
Medicine; Chief Experience Officer, 
University Medical Center, New 
Orleans, LADaniel J. Egan, MD
 Associate Professor, Vice Chair of 
Education, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Columbia University 
Vagelos College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY 
Nicholas Genes, MD, PhD
 Associate Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Icahn School 
of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY
Michael A. Gibbs, MD, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Carolinas 
Medical Center, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel 
Hill, NC
Steven A. Godwin, MD, FACEP 
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Assistant 
Dean, Simulation Education, 
University of Florida COM-
Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL
Joseph Habboushe, MD MBA  
Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, NYU/Langone and 
Bellevue Medical Centers, New York, 
NY; CEO, MD Aware LLC
Gregory L. Henry, MD, FACEP  
Clinical Professor, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, University 
of Michigan Medical School; CEO, 
Medical Practice Risk Assessment, 
Inc., Ann Arbor, MI
John M. Howell, MD, FACEP
 Clinical Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, George Washington 
University, Washington, DC; Director 
of Academic Affairs, Best Practices, 
Inc, Inova Fairfax Hospital, Falls 
Church, VAShkelzen Hoxhaj, MD, MPH, MBA
 Chief Medical Officer, Jackson 
Memorial Hospital, Miami, FL
Eric Legome, MD  
Chair, Emergency Medicine, Mount 
Sinai West & Mount Sinai St. Luke's; 
Vice Chair, Academic Affairs for 
Emergency Medicine, Mount Sinai 
Health System, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
 Keith A. Marill, MD, MS  
Associate Professor, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA
Charles V. Pollack Jr., MA, MD, 
FACEP, FAAEM, FAHA, FESC  
Professor & Senior Advisor for 
Interdisciplinary Research and 
Clinical Trials, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Sidney Kimmel 
Medical College of Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA
Michael S. Radeos, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Weill Medical College 
of Cornell University, New York; 
Research Director, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, New York 
Hospital Queens, Flushing, NY
Ali S. Raja, MD, MBA, MPH
 Executive Vice Chair, Emergency 
Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital; Associate Professor of 
Emergency Medicine and Radiology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
Robert L. Rogers, MD, FACEP, 
FAAEM, FACP  
Assistant Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, The University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MDAlfred Sacchetti, MD, FACEP  
Assistant Clinical Professor, 
Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA
Robert Schiller, MD
 Chair, Department of Family Medicine, 
Beth Israel Medical Center; Senior 
Faculty, Family Medicine and 
Community Health, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
Scott Silvers, MD, FACEP
 Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine, Chair of Facilities and 
Planning, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL
Corey M. Slovis, MD, FACP, FACEP  
Professor and Chair, Department 
of Emergency Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
Ron M. Walls, MD  
Professor and COO, Department of 
Emergency Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA
Critical Care Editors
William A. Knight IV, MD, FACEP, 
FNCS
 Associate Professor of Emergency 
Medicine and Neurosurgery, Medical 
Director, EM Advanced Practice 
Provider Program; Associate Medical 
Director, Neuroscience ICU, University 
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
Scott D. Weingart, MD, FCCM
 Professor of Emergency Medicine; 
Chief, EM Critical Care, Stony Brook 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY
Research Editors
Aimee Mishler, PharmD, BCPS
 Emergency Medicine Pharmacist, 
Program Director, PGY2 EM Pharmacy Residency, Maricopa 
Medical Center, Phoenix, AZ
Joseph D. Toscano, MD  
Chief, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, San Ramon Regional 
Medical Center, San Ramon, CA
International Editors
Peter Cameron, MD  
Academic Director, The Alfred 
Emergency and Trauma Centre, 
Monash University, Melbourne, 
Australia
Andrea Duca, MD
 Attending Emergency Physician, 
Ospedale Papa Giovanni XXIII, 
Bergamo, Italy 
Suzanne Y.G. Peeters, MD  
Attending Emergency Physician, 
Flevo Teaching Hospital, Almere,  
The Netherlands
Edgardo Menendez, MD, FIFEM  
Professor in Medicine and Emergency 
Medicine; Director of EM, Churruca 
Hospital of Buenos Aires University, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
Dhanadol Rojanasarntikul, MD 
 Attending Physician, Emergency 
Medicine, King Chulalongkorn 
Memorial Hospital; Faculty of 
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Thailand
Stephen H. Thomas, MD, MPH
 Professor & Chair, Emergency 
Medicine, Hamad Medical Corp., 
Weill Cornell Medical College, Qatar; 
Emergency Physician-in-Chief, 
Hamad General Hospital,  
Doha, Qatar
Edin Zelihic, MD
 Head, Department of Emergency 
Medicine, Leopoldina Hospital, 
Schweinfurt, Germany
Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved.  24 Reprints: www.ebmedicine.net/empissuesEmergency Medicine Practice  (ISSN Print: 1524-1971, ISSN Online: 1559-3908, ACID-FREE) is published monthly (12 times per year) by EB Medicine (PO Box 1671, Williamsport, PA 
17703). Opinions expressed are not necessarily those of this publication. Mention of products or services does not constitute endorsement. This publication is intended as a general 
guide and is intended to supplement, rather than substitute, professional judgment. It covers a highly technical and complex subject and should not be used for making specific 
medical decisions. The materials contained herein are not intended to establish policy, procedure, or standard of care. Copyright © 2019 EB Medicine. All rights reserved. No part of 
this publication may be reproduced in any format without written consent of EB Medicine. This publication is intended for the use of the individual subscriber only and may not be 
copied in whole or part or redistributed in any way without the publisher’s prior written permission. 