 
 
General rights  
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other  copyright 
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise  and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.  
 
 Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.  
 You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit -making activity or commercial gain  
 You may freely distribute the URL identifying the p ublication in the public portal  
 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the wo rk im mediately 
and investigate your claim.  
  
 
   
 
 
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Aug 30, 2024
Technologies for biological removal and recovery of nitrogen from wastewater
Rahimi, Shadi; Modin, Oskar; Mijakovic, Ivan
Published in:
Biotechnology Advances
Link to article, DOI:
10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107570
Publication date:
2020
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link back to DTU Orbit
Citation (APA):
Rahimi, S., Modin, O., & Mijakovic, I. (2020). Technologies for biological removal and recovery of nitrogen from
wastewater. Biotechnology Advances, 43, Article 107570. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107570Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Biotechnology Advances
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/biotechadv
Research review paper
Technologies for biological removal and recovery of nitrogen from
wastewater
Shadi Rahimia,⁎, Oskar Modinb, Ivan Mijakovica,c,⁎
aDivisionof SystemsandSyntheticBiology,Department ofBiologyandBiologicalEngineering,ChalmersUniversityof Technology,Gothenburg, Sweden
bDivisionof WaterEnvironmentTechnology,Departmentof ArchitectureandCivilEngineering,Chalmers Universityof Technology,Gothenburg,Sweden
cTheNovoNordisk FoundationCenter forBiosustainability, TechnicalUniversityof Denmark,Lyngby,Denmark
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
NitrogenNitrate
Ammonium
WastewaterRecoveryABSTRACT
Water contamination is a growing environmental issue. Several harmful effects on human health and the en-
vironment are attributed to nitrogen contamination of water sources. Consequently, many countries have strict
regulations on nitrogen compound concentrations in wastewater effluents. Wastewater treatment is carried out
using energy- and cost-intensive biological processes, which convert nitrogen compounds into innocuous dini-trogen gas. On the other hand, nitrogen is also an essential nutrient. Artificial fertilizers are produced by fixing
dinitrogen gas from the atmosphere, in an energy-intensive chemical process. Ideally, we should be able to spend
less energy and chemicals to remove nitrogen from wastewater and instead recover a fraction of it for use infertilizers and similar applications. In this review, we present an overview of various technologies of biologicalnitrogen removal including nitrification, denitrification, anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox), as well as
bioelectrochemical systems and microalgal growth for nitrogen recovery. We highlighted the nitrogen removal
efficiency of these systems at different temperatures and operating conditions. The advantages, practical chal-lenges, and potential for nitrogen recovery of different treatment methods are discussed.
1. Introduction
Ground- and surface waters are contaminated by nitrogen via nu-
merous routes (Fig. 1). Increasing application of fertilizers in agri-
culture was reported to contaminate surface and ground water sources
with around 293,000 tonnes/yr of nitrogen in Canada (Ritter et al.,
2002). Moreover, different types of waste, including industrial, animal,and domestic, result in contamination of water with nitrogen when
those wastes get discharged in water sources without treatment. Mu-
nicipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) also contribute to ni-
trogen loading into the surface and ground waters with approximately
80,000 tonnes/yr (Ritter et al., 2002). Strict nitrogen discharge stan-
dards are enforced by many countries. For example, municipal WWTPs
are allowed to discharge less than 5 mg L-1ammonium and 15 mg L-1
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107570
Received 1 November 2019; Received in revised form 22 May 2020; Accepted 22 May 2020Abbreviations: AB, algal biofilm; ABMFC, algae biofilm microbial fuel cell; AHL, acyl homoserine lactone; ALE, adaptive laboratory evolution; AMO, ammonia
monooxygenase; AnAOB, anaerobic ammonia oxidation bacteria; AOB, ammonium oxidizing bacteria; CANON, completely autotrophic nitrogen removal over nitrite;
C/N, carbon to nitrogen ratio; 2C4NP, 2-chloro-4-nitrophenol; Comammox, complete ammonia oxidizers; COD, chemical oxygen demand; CSTR, continuous stirred
tank reactor; DAMO, denitrifying anaerobic methane oxidation; DEA, diethylamine-functionalized polymer; DEAMOX, denitrifying ammonium oxidation; DO,dissolved oxygen; DSA, dimensionally stable anodes; EPS, extracellular polymeric substance; FA-MFC, flat-panel air-cathode MFC; GMM, genetically modifiedmicroorganism; HAO, hydroxylamine oxidoreductase; HF-MBfR, H
2-based hollow-fiber membrane biofilm reactor; HRAP, high rate algal pond; HRT, hydraulic
retention time; LUC, land use change; MABR, membrane-aerated biofilm reactor; MBBR, moving bed biofilm reactor; MBfR, membrane-biofilm reactor; MEC,microbial electrolysis cells; MFCs, microbial fuel cells; m-WWTPs, municipal wastewater treatment plants; NADH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADPH,nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; N/P, nitrogen to phosphorus molar ratio; NPs, nitrophenols; NOB, nitrite oxidizing bacteria; 3NT, 3-nitrotoluene; 4NT,
4-nitrotoluene; 2NTDO, 2-nitrotoluenene 2,3-dioxygenase; NTR, nitrate-to-nitrite transformation ratio; NXR, nitrite oxidoreductases; OLAND, oxygen-limited ni-
trification and denitrification; PAC, poly-aluminium chloride; PAOs, polyphosphate-accumulating organisms; PBRs, photobioreactors; PBS, poly(butylene succinate);PCL, poly(ε-caprolactone); PHAs, polyhydroxyalkanoates; PHBV, poly3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate; PLA, poly(lactic acid); PLLA, poly(l-lactic acid); PQS,
Pseudomonas quinolone signal; PVA, polyvinyl alcohol; QS, quorum sensing; rhl,acyl-homoserine-lactone synthase; SHARON, single reactor high activity ammonia
removal over nitrite; SNAD, simultaneous nitrification anammox and denitrification; SND, Simultaneous nitrification and denitrification; SRT, sludge retention time;
VHb,Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin b
⁎Corresponding authors.
E-mailaddresses: shadir@chalmers.se (S. Rahimi), ivan.mijakovic@chalmers.se (I. Mijakovic).Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
Available online 10 June 2020
0734-9750/ © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY/4.0/).
Ttotal nitrogen in China (GB18918-2002) (Du et al., 2015). Thus, ni-
trogen removal from wastewaters is extremely important to protect
water resources, especially for regions facing water shortage. Eu-
trophication in freshwater ecosystems is one of the direct and harmful
consequences of excessive nitrogen loading. The eutrophication phe-
nomenon degrades freshwater ecosystems by developing algal blooms,
spreading aquatic plants, oxygen depletion and hence loss of key spe-
cies (Taziki et al., 2015). Furthermore, blue green algae blooms can
produce natural toxins that pose risks to the human health (Ritter et al.,
2002; Taziki et al., 2015).
Nitrogen exists in different oxidation states which makes the process
of its removal from water complex and challenging. Adsorption or co-
precipitation treatment is most often not feasible due to the stability
and high solubility of nitrate, resulting in high energy and cost for
treatment of nitrate-contaminated water (Rezvani et al., 2019). Most
wastewater treatment systems have two levels of treatment: primary
(physical settling of solids) and secondary (various forms of biological
oxidation e.g. activated sludge or trickling filters). In regions where
regulations mandate higher effluent quality, tertiary treatment is also
used for nutrient removal and disinfection. Tertiary treatment as the
final cleaning process removes inorganic compounds and improves theeffluent quality before it is reused, recycled or discharged to the en-
vironment.
Biological approaches are known to effectively remove nitrogen
compounds in wastewater (EPA, 1993). The activated sludge process, as
the most common biological wastewater treatment method, was de-
veloped to enhance the effectiveness of nutrient removal. In a con-
ventional nitrogen removal process, wastewater goes through the ni-
trification and then the denitrification process. Nitrification is the
biological oxidation of ammonia or ammonium to nitrite followed by
oxidation of nitrite to nitrate, however, denitrification reduces nitrate
and ultimately produces N
2through a series of intermediate gaseous
nitrogen oxide products. When there is not sufficient organic carbon
source in wastewater for denitrification, this negatively affects the ni-
trogen removal efficiency (Blackburne et al., 2008). Various technolo-
gies for nitrification and denitrification of wastewater have been re-
viewed previously (Ali and Okabe, 2015; Rodríguez Arredondo et al.,
2015; Gonçalves et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2016; Taziki et al., 2015;
Tomaszewski et al., 2017). In this review, we aim to compare the ef-
ficiency and energy cost of different methods to hopefully facilitate
decisions on wastewater treatment policies based on local conditions.
We first describe the fundamental biological nitrogen removal pro-
cesses in WWTPs, such as nitrification, denitrification, and anaerobicammonium oxidation (anammox). We then present a comparativeoverview on the advantages and challenges presented by different
biological nitrogen removal processes, including their potential for
obtaining high effluent quality as well as for chemical/energy recovery.
We also discuss various physico-chemical factors that may affect the
efficiency of the biological nitrogen removal methods.
2. Major biological enzymatic processes of nitrogen cycle that
transform nitrogen into various oxidation states
Stein and Klotz (2016) suggested five nitrogen-transformation flows
(coloured arrows in Fig. 2A) which are the following: ammonification,
including reduction of dinitrogen or nitrogen fixation (red), assim-
ilatory and dissimilatory reduction of nitrite to ammonium (DNRA)
(blue); nitrification (green and orange) composed of ammonia oxida-
tion to nitrite (nitritation), and oxidation of nitrite to nitrate (nitrata-
tion); denitrification (purple); anammox, as a form of coupled ni-
trification–denitrification (pink); and nitrite–nitrate interconversion
(orange and cyan). The general processes of organic matter miner-
alization and assimilation by cellular life completes the movement of
reactive nitrogen through the biosphere. Microorganisms that partici-
pate in the above-mentioned biological processes of nitrogen cycle in-
clude heterotrophic denitrifying bacteria, autotrophic nitrifying bac-
teria, anammox bacteria, and microalgae (Fig. 2B).
In primary wastewater treatment, the major forms of nitrogen pre-
sent in the water are organic nitrogen and ammonium. During sec-
ondary treatment, these two major forms of nitrogen are rapidly con-
verted to nitrate by nitrifying bacteria, including ammonium oxidizing
bacteria (AOB) and nitrite oxidizing bacteria (NOB) (Taziki et al.,
2015). Newly identified complete ammonia oxidizers (Comammox) can
perform ammonia oxidation to nitrate (Daims et al., 2015) (Fig. 2B).
Nitrite is the most ephemeral form of nitrogen in the environment. In
both wastewater treatment systems and surface waters, it occurs as the
least prevalent form of inorganic nitrogen. Among the above-mentioned
biological processes of nitrogen cycle, nitrification, denitrification,
anammox, and nitrogen assimilation are discussed here.
3. Fundamental nitrogen removal processes
Biological wastewater treatment is operated based on the combined
activity of microorganisms in microbial community. Thus, it is im-
portant to know about the nitrogen removal processes along with the
microbial communities involved in the processes. Proteobacteria are a
Fig.1. Nitrogen loading (103tonnes/yr) to the surface water and groundwater in Canada from various sources. The nitrogen loading rates values are provided from
Ritter et al., 2002. It should be pointed out that not all atmospheric nitrogen deposition can be considered as contamination.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
2dominant phylum in activated sludge as the most common technology
for sewage treatment, followed by other groups such as Bacteroidetes,
Chloroflexi, Actinobacteria, Planctomycetes, Firmicutes, etc (Ferrera
and Sánchez, 2016). Here we discuss the nitrogen removal processes
driven by specific microbes. Table 1 presents total nitrogen removal
efficiency, chemical input, economic evaluation and main technicalparameters of different nitrogen removal processes compared to the
conventional process.
3.1. Nitrification
Nitrification consists of two sequential biological oxidation pro-
cesses. The first step is NH
4+oxidation to NO 2−, which is the limiting
step and is carried out by the AOB. This reaction is catalysed by am-
monia monooxygenase (AMO) and hydroxylamine oxidoreductase
(HAO), along with hydroxylamine (NH 2OH) formation as the inter-
mediate product. The NO 2−produced in the first step is rapidly con-
verted to NO 3−in the second step, carried out by the NOB, in the
presence of molecular oxygen. The conversion is catalysed by nitriteoxidoreductases (NXR) and nitrite-oxidizing systems, which are one-
step oxidation enzymes found in Nitrobacter and in the genera of
Nitrococcus,NitrospinaandNitrospira, respectively (Fig. 2B).
In comparison with the physicochemical processes for wastewater
treatment, biological nitrogen removal via nitrification and deni-trification is more cost-effective. However, several drawbacks remain,
such as slow nitrification reaction, decreasing nitrification activity by
ammonium and organic matter overload, necessity of oxygen control,
and the demand for two reactors: an aerobic one for nitrification and an
anaerobic one for denitrification. Also, large size reactor or long hy-
draulic retention time (HRT) are required to complete NH
4+removal
due to low nitrification rate, resulting in high operational cost (Shoda,
2017). Several biological nitrogen removal process systems have been
developed to reduce energy input into the process. These include si-
multaneous nitrification and denitrification, anammox, partial ni-
trification and denitrification, complete autotrophic nitrogen removal
over nitrite (CANON), aerobic deammonification, oxygen-limited ni-
trification and denitrification (OLAND), as well as combination of theseprocesses including membrane bioreactors and cell-immobilization (Ge
et al., 2015; Shoda, 2017) (Table 2). Partial nitrification via nitrite
offers several significant advantages in biological wastewater treatment
compared to the conventional nitrification including: i) 40% reduction
of chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 1.5–2 fold increase of nitrite
reduction rates in the subsequent denitrification stage, ii) saving 25%
oxygen consumption, 300% biomass reduction, and 20% CO 2emission
during denitrification. When partial nitrification is combined with
anammox, ammonium partially oxidizes to nitrite aerobically, and re-
maining ammonium subsequently reacts with nitrite to form nitrogen
gas anaerobically. This has several benefits, such as no requirement of
external carbon source, 80% reduced sludge production, and less en-
ergy and 60% reduced oxygen requirement compared to the conven-
tional nitrification/denitrification (Ge et al., 2015; Cao et al., 2017).
The partial nitrification is based on the condition favouring AOB bac-
teria but preventing NOB bacteria. Therefore, there are several para-
meters preferred by AOB bacteria positively affected partial nitrifica-
tion including i) pH (7.5 to 8.5) (Ge et al., 2015), ii) temperature
(higher than 25.0 °C) (Paredes et al., 2007), iii) dissolved oxygen (DO)
concentration (1.5 mg L−1) (Ruiz et al., 2006), iv) real-time control of
aeration and periodic anoxic and aerobic operation (Ge et al., 2014), v)
sludge retention time (SRT) (5 d) (Galí et al., 2007), vi) C/N ratio
(0.3 < C/N < 6) (Zafarzadeh et al., 2011; Mosquera-Corral et al.,
2005), vii) NOB inhibitor (such as sulfide, hydroxylamine, salt, heavy
metals, chlorate, cyanate, halide, azide, hydrazine, and organic che-
micals) (Sinha and Annachhatre, 2007), and viii) ultrasonic treatment
(frequency 40 kHz and density ultrasound 0.027 W mL−1for 2 h
(Zheng et al., 2013) (Fig. 3A).
The moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR) is composed of an aeration
tank with special plastic carriers for fixing biomass as the biofilm. Thecarriers are mixed in the tank by the aeration system and thereby
leading a good contact between the biomass on the carriers and the
substrate present in the influent wastewater. Recently, combination of
nitrification and poly-aluminium chloride (PAC) adsorption of organic
micropollutants were simultaneously performed in a nitrifying MBBR
(Cimbritz et al., 2019). However, due to inhibitory effect of nitrite on
polyphosphate-accumulating organisms (PAOs), the simultaneous
Fig.2. Major biological processes of the nitrogen cycle (A). Arrows with different colours are the major processes in nitrogen cycle including, ammonification (red),
assimilatory and dissimilatory reduction of nitrite to ammonium (DNRA) (blue), nitrification (green and orange), denitrification (purple), anammox (pink), ni-
trite–nitrate interconversion (orange and cyan). Organisms participated in the biological processes of nitrogen cycle (B). The coloured arrows and enzymes follow the
rules in figure (A). Both ammonification and assimilatory reduction of nitrite to ammonium are performed by microalgae. It should be pointed out that archaea can
also carry out nitrification and denitrification. AOB, ammonium oxidizing bacteria; NOB, nitrite oxidizing bacteria; AMO, ammonia monooxygenase; HAO; hy-droxylamine oxidoreductase; HH, hydrazine hydrolase; HZO, hydrazine-oxidizing enzyme. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, thereader is referred to the web version of this article.)S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
3Table 1
Total nitrogen removal efficiency, chemical input, economic evaluation, main technical parameters of different nitrogen removal process compared to conventional process.
Operation technique Total nitrogen removal
efficiencyChemical input Economic evaluation Main technical parameters References
Partial nitrification via nitrite 1.5–2 fold increase of nitritereduction rates in the
subsequent denitrification stage40% reduction of COD 25% reduced oxygen demand, 300% biomass
reduction, 20% CO
2emission during denitrificationpH, temperature, DO, real-time aeration control,
sludge retention time, substrate concentration,
alternating anoxic and aerobic operation, inhibitor,ultrasonic treatmentGe et al. (2015)
Partial nitritation /anammox ≥85% of nitrogen removal No need of external carbon
source60% reduced oxygen demand, 80% reduced sludgeproduction, 24 Wh/p/day, compared to a 44 Wh/p/day consumption in conventional treatmentCarbon concentrating pretreatment, suppression ofNOB especially under low temperatures (15–10 °C),intensification of anammox biofilm activity, reactor
design, final polishingCao et al. (2017)
Simultaneous nitrification and
denitrification (SND)82% nitrogen removal Requirement of external
carbon sourceSaving cost for anoxic tank, applicable only for lowC/N ratio (< 5) wastewatersReactor design, oxygen availability for nitrification,effective carbon source utilization for denitrificationGuo et al. (2005)
Shortcut nitrification and
denitrificationNitrite denitrification rate is 1.5
to 2 times higher than nitrate
denitrification rate40% lower demand of
electron donors in anoxic
phase25% reduced oxygen demand in aerobic phase with
60% saving energy, applicable for high ammonium
concentrations or low C/N ratios wastewatersDO, SRT, pH, temperature, substrate concentration
and load, operational and aeration pattern, inhibitorPeng and Zhu (2006)
Nitritation/anammox 81% nitrogen removal No need of external carbon
source60% reduced oxygen demand, energy recovery bymethane production, minimal surplus sludge
production, consumption of inorganic carbon CO
2, no
nitrous oxide emission, decrease in energy
consumption from 2.66 to 1.50 kWh per kg N
removed for reject water treatmentPoor effluent water quality, need of post-
denitrification processDu et al. (2015); Ma
et al. (2016); Li et al.
(2016a)
Simultaneous partial nitrification,
anammox, and denitrification
(SNAD)99% nitrogen removal Low concentrations of
organic matterSimultaneous removal of inorganic nitrogen andorganic carbon, applicable for wastewater with
complex composition and high ammonia
concentration and low C/N ratioIntermittent aeration, pH, DO Zhang et al. (2017)
Denitrifying ammonium oxidation
(DEAMOX)94% nitrogen removal,
simultaneous nitrate and
ammonium removal80% reduced demand of
organic carbon100% reduced aeration demand, 64.8% reducedsludge production, low nitrogen contained
wastewater, low/high-strength nitrate and
ammonium containing wastewater, reduced
greenhouse gas (CO
2and N 2O) emissionCo-existence of partial-denitrification and anammox
bacteriaDu et al. (2017)
Partial-denitrification/anammox More than 90% nitrogen
removal79% reduced demand of
organic carbon45% reduced oxygen demand, reduced biomassproduction, applicable for high-strength wastewaterAvoiding high organic matter in the effluent ofpartial denitrification reactorMa et al. (2016), Cao
et al. (2016)
Denitrification by bioelectrochemical
systems100% nitrate removal Required carbon sourceand buffering agent100% reduced oxygen demand, producing power andcurrent densities of 2.1 W/m3 and 26.6 A/m3Generation of high concentrations of ammonium inanode and cathodeNaga Samrat et al.(2018)
COD- chemical oxygen demand; DO- dissolved oxygen concentration; SRT- sludge retention time; Wh/p/day- watt hours per person per day.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
4Table 2
Comparison of nitrogen removal efficiencies between different anammox methods.
Optimization method Reactor type Operation technique Wastewater Total nitrogen
removalTemperature References
Combined anammox
systemSequencing batch reactors (SBR) Anammox-partial denitrification Synthetic wastewater 94.06% 30 °C20–26 °CDu et al. (2015)
SBR Anammox-denitrification Synthetic wastewater 97.47% 30 °C Du et al. (2014)
Plug-flow granular sludge-based pilot-scale
reactorOne-stage partial nitritation-anammox A-stage of the WWTP of Dokhaven, Rotterdam 46% 19 °C Lotti et al. (2015)
Upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor
(UASB) +SBRAnammox-partial denitrification Synthetic wastewater, domestic wastewater 97.8% 28 °C Cao et al. (2016)
Upflow reactor Synergy of sludge fermentation, denitrification and
anammox processesPre-treated domestic wastewater andsynthetic wastewater0.065 g N L
−1
d−116–29 °C Wang et al. (2016a)
Anaerobic upflow reactor Granular bed anammox Synthetic medium 60% 37 °C Cho et al. (2010)
Combining high rate anammox reactor
with sequential biocatalyst addition (SBA)SBA-anammox process Pharmaceutical wastewater 9.4 g N L−1d−135 °C Tang et al. (2011)
Membrane biofilm reactor (MBfR) Synergy of anammox and denitrifying anaerobic
methane oxidation (DAMO) microorganismsSynthetic wastewater 0.25 g N L−1d−1NA Shi et al. (2013)
SBR Simultaneous partial nitrification, anammox and
denitrification (SNAD)Synthetic wastewater 85-87% 35 °C Lan et al. (2011)
Lab-scale upflow membrane-aerated
biofilm reactor (UMABR)Granular nitritation-anammox Synthetic wastewater 81% 25 °C Li et al. (2016a)
Full-scale SBR Decentralized full-scale system Municipal wastewater 50% NA Fernandes et al. (2013)
Lab-scale sequencing batch biofilm reactors
(SBBR)Intelligent control system (ICS) and timer controlsystem (TCS)Synthetic wastewater 87.8% 25 °C Jin et al. (2012)
Lab-scale A2N-SBR Anaerobic-anoxic/nitrification Domestic wastewater 83% 22–25 °C Wang et al. (2009)
UASB Anaerobic digester seedling sludge Inorganic medium 42 g N L
−1d−130-35 °C Hu et al. (2010)
Low temperature Aerobic/anoxic sequence batch reactor SBR Removal of carbon and nutrients Synthetic wastewater 71.15% 20 °C Mansouri et al. (2014)
UASB Effect of seasonal temperatures on anammox Synthetic wastewater 3.77 g N L−1d−12.5–15.8 °C seasonal
variationsGuo et al. (2015)
Continuous reactor Gel carrier with entrapped anammox bacteria at
lower temperatureSynthetic water 0.36 g N L−1d−16.3 °C Isaka et al. (2008)
Gas-lift reactor Cold-adapted anammox species Synthetic medium 0.02 g N L−1d−110 °C Hendrickx et al. (2014)
SBR Direct treatment of municipal wastewater using
anammoxSynthetic media and municipal wastewaterfrom Dübendorf Switzerland0.046 g N L
−1
d−112.5 °C Laureni et al. (2015)
SBR Optimization of the nitrogen sludge loading rate
(NSLR)Synthetic sewage 0.029 g N L−1
d−113.2 °C Sánchez Guillén et al.
(2016)
Granular SBR Completely autotrophic nitrogen removal over
nitrite (CANON) processSupernatant of an anaerobic sludge digester ofthe WWTP of Lugo Spain0.2 g N L
−1d−115 °C Vázquez-Padín et al.
(2011)
Membrane bioreactor (MBR) Anammox at lower temperatures Synthetic nutrient medium 1.1 g N L−1d−115 °C Awata et al. (2015)
Upflow anaerobic biofilter (AF) Anammox for treating low-strength wastewater Synthetic wastewater 1.965 g N L−1
d−115.3 °C Taotao et al. (2015)
UASB High anammox activity and abundance Low strength wastewater 2.28 g N L−1d−116 °C Ma et al. (2013)
SBR Anammox at lower temperatures Synthetic autotrophic medium 0.325 g N L−1
d−118 °C Dosta et al. (2008)
Upflow anammox sludge bed (UAnSB)
reactorAnammox process at low temperature Nitrite-amended pre-treated real urbanwastewater82 ± 4% 11 °C Reino et al. (2018)
Up-flow column reactor (UCR) Porous polyester nonwoven fabric Synthetic inorganic medium 0.18 g N L
−1d−118 °C Osaka et al. (2012)
Gas-lift Direct anaerobic treatment of municipal
wastewatersSynthetic influent 0.29 g N L−1d−120 °C Hendrickx et al. (2012)
(continuedon nextpage)S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
5Table 2 (continued)
Optimization method Reactor type Operation technique Wastewater Total nitrogen
removalTemperature References
Anaerobic biological filtrated (ABF) reactor Porous polyester nonwoven fabric carriers as a
fixed bed for anammox bacteriaSynthetic water 8.1 g N L−1d−120–22 °C Isaka et al. (2007b)
Continuous reactor Gel carrier with entrapped anammox bacteria Synthetic water 2.8 g N L−1d−122 °C Isaka et al. (2008)
UCR Gas–solid separator Synthetic inorganic wastewater 17.5 g N L−1d−123 ± 2 °C Yang et al. (2011)
Single reactor high activity ammoniaremoval over nitrite (SHARON), SBRTwo-unit SHARON reactor coupled to anammoxSBRSupernatant of an anaerobic sludge digester ofthe WWTP of Lugo Spain0.08 g N L
−1d−120 °C Vázquez-Padín et al.(2011)
Moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR) Partial nitritation-anammox Synthetic wastewater 0.007 g N L
−1
d−110 °C Gilbert et al. (2015)
MBBR Partial nitritation-anammox Synthetic influent 0.015 g N L−1
d−110 °C Gilbert et al. (2014)
SBR Combination of aerobic ammonium-oxidizing
bacteria (AOB) and anammoxSynthetic pre-treated municipal wastewater 0.025 g N L−1
d−112 °C Hu et al. (2013)
OLAND rotating biological contactor (RBC) Oxygen-limited autotrophic nitrification/
denitrification (OLAND)Synthetic wastewater 0.5 g N L−1d−115 °C De Clippeleir et al.
(2013)
MBBR Partial nitritation-anammox Municipal wastewater 0.030 g N L−1
d−115 °C Laureni et al. (2016)
MBBR Integrated fixed-film activated sludge (IFAS) mode Mainstream wastewater 0.010 g N L−1
d−116 ± 1 °C Trojanowicz et al.(2016)
RBC Anammox process accompanied with autotrophic
nitrification and heterotrophic denitrificationMunicipal landfill leachate and artificialNaNO
2and NH 4Cl solutions0.5 g N L−1d−117 °C Cema et al. (2007)
Air-lift sequencing batch reactor (SBAR) Granular sludge-anammox based single stage Synthetic medium 85-75 % 10-20 °C Lotti et al. (2014)
Immobilization Continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR) Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)- immobilized system Synthetic and partially nitrified swine
wastewater0.5 g N L−1d−133 °C Magrí et al. (2012)
CSTR PVA, sodium alginate (SA)-immobilized system Synthetic wastewater and modified reject
water8.2 g N L−1d−133 °C Quan et al. (2011)
CSTR Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-immobilized system Digester liquor of biogas plant 4 g N L−1d−130 °C Furukawa et al. (2009)
CSTR PEG-immobilized system Digester supernatant 3.8 g N L−1d−130 °C Isaka et al. (2011)
CSTR PEG-immobilized system Ammonia-rich wastewater 6 g N L−1d−136 °C Isaka et al. (2008)
CSTR PEG-immobilized system Synthetic water 3.7 g N L−1d−136 °C Isaka et al. (2007a)
CSTR PEG-immobilized system Digester supernatant for sludge 3.8 g N L−1d−130 °C Kimura et al. (2013)
CSTR PVA-immobilized system Synthetic wastewater 4.4 g N L−1d−130 °C Ge et al. (2009)
CSTR PVA, SA-immobilized system Synthetic wastewater 1.69 g N L−1d−133-35 °C Qiao et al. (2013)
SBR PVA, SA-immobilized system Synthetic medium 0.58 g N L−1d−135 °C Zhu et al. (2014)
Up-flow glass column reactors (UFCR) PVA, SA-immobilized system Culture medium 10.8 g N L−1d−137 °C Ali et al. (2015)
Lab-scale MBR Bacillus methylotrophicus L7 Artificial wastewater 53% 25–30 °C Yao et al. (2013)
Pilot-scale SBR Activated sludge + A.tumefaciens LAD9,C.
testosteroni GAD3 andA.xylosoxidans GAD4Municipal wastewater 80.5% NA Chen et al. (2015)S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
6removal of nitrogen and phosphorus in partial nitrification systems has
not been achieved and needs to be further investigated.
3.1.1. Microorganismsinvolvedinnitrification
Nitrification, a two-step process of ammonia oxidation via nitrite to
nitrate, is catalysed by chemolithoautotrophic microorganisms oxi-
dizing either ammonia or nitrite. Two phylogenetically unrelated
groups of AOB and NOB are Gram-negative autotrophic bacteria re-
sponsible for aerobic nitrification. They obtain energy and carbon from
ammonia oxidation and CO 2, respectively and they use oxygen as the
terminal electron acceptor (Shoda, 2017). AOB have multi-layered cellwall morphology and are motile by means of flagella. Five recognized
genera of AOB include β-subclass of proteobacteria such as Ni-
trosomonas, Nitrosospira, Nitrosovibrio andNitrosolobus, and only Ni-
trosococcus from the γ-subclass proteobacteria (Ge et al., 2015). A total
25 AOB species have been collected from various environments, certainof which can grow under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions (Ge
et al., 2015). Interestingly, nitrification products of AOB species vary
based on the availability of DO. For example, Nitrosomonas eutropha
aerobic oxidation product at the DO higher than 0.8 mg L
−1is only
nitrite while some other products such as nitrogen gas, nitrite and nitric
oxides are produced at DO below 0.8 mg L−1(Ge et al., 2015). NOB are
more widespread than AOB and they are classified into four phylo-genetically distinct groups (Ge et al., 2015). Genera of Nitrococcus and
Nitrobacter belong to the α- and γ-subclass, respectively. Meanwhile,
theNitrospira genus with the first-deciphered complete genome of
Candidatus Nitrospira defluvii, is classified in the δ-subclass (Ge et al.,2015). Recent characterization of a complete nitrifying bacterium Ni-
trospira, that carries out a process called Comammox, fundamentallychanged the picture of microbial nitrification (Daims et al., 2015).
Pathways for ammonia and nitrite oxidation are concomitantly ex-
pressed in this organism during growth, leading to ammonia oxidation
to nitrate.
Overall, among AOB and NOB microorganisms previously detected
as the main nitrifiers in activated sludge and engineered system sam-
ples,Nitrosomonas sp. was present in all the systems described, as well
as the NOB Nitrospira (Ferrera and Sánchez, 2016). However, a singleAOB/NOB species was found as the dominant in some of these systems,
while different species existed in other systems. Furthermore, nitrifying
granules with high sedimentation property maintain β-proteobacterial
ammonia oxidizing bacteria and the Nitrospira-like nitrite-oxidizing
bacteria as the dominant bacteria in a reaction tank. As high-rate ni-
trification of 1.5 kgN m
−3day−1is achieved using real electronics
industry wastewater, which is 2.5–5 times faster than traditional acti-vated sludge methods (Hasebe et al., 2017).
3.1.2. Reactortechnologiesinnitrification
3.1.2.1. Partial nitritation and anammox. 200,000 m
3/day step-feed
activated sludge process of the Changi WRP, Singapore, and the
deammonification process in Strass WWTP, Austria, are two examples
full-scale application of partial nitritation and anammox suspended
sludge processes (Cao et al., 2013a; Cao et al., 2016; Wett et al., 2013).
Partial nitritation and anammox can be operated in a single-stage
process in one reactor which is cost-effective with less emission of
greenhouse gas N 2O compared with two-stage process in two reactors
(Fig. 3B) (Ge et al., 2015; Kampschreur et al., 2009). In spite of
remarkable progress in feasibility of mainstream partial nitritation and
anammox process at low temperatures (Lotti et al., 2014), “warm
anammox” operating between 20-30 °C is still promising compared
with the cold anammox (Sánchez Guillén et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016a).
Suppression of NOB bacteria can be achieved in partial nitritation and
anammox by controlling competition of AOB and NOB for oxygen in
oxygen-limited condition (Pérez et al., 2014).
AOB bacteria are the main producer of N 2O during nitrification.
However, there is no contribution by anammox to N 2O formation. The
aeration pattern was found to be the principal factor influencing theemission and formation of N
2O in reactors (Ma et al., 2017; Ni et al.,
2013; Castro-Barros et al., 2015). Periodic aeration with increasing
cycle frequency, transient aeration patterns from low (or anoxic) to
high aeration, and continuous aeration are some of the effective aera-
tion patterns for reducing N 2O production in reactor setups (Ni et al.,
2013; Castro-Barros et al., 2015).
3.1.2.2. NOB suppression in biofilm reactors. The membrane-biofilm
Fig. 3. Strategies for partial nitritation and anammox by ammonium oxidizing bacteria (AOB) and suppression of nitrite oxidizing bacteria (NOB). Schematic
structure of partial nitritation/anammox (B), simultaneous partial nitrification, anammox and denitrification (SNAD) (C) and partial denitrification/anammox (D)
reactors.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
7reactor (MBfR), also known as the membrane-aerated biofilm reactor
(MABR), is an attractive nitrogen removal technology in wastewater
treatment based on gas-transferring membranes. Gaseous substrates
acting as the electron donor or acceptor (such as oxygen, hydrogen, and
methane) are diffused through the hydrophobic and gas-permeable
membranes to a biofilm which is forming on the membrane surface
(Nerenberg, 2016).
Layered biofilm structure and oxygen-controlled system in MABRs
repress NOB activity, while providing favorable growth conditions for
AOB and/or anammox bacteria. Therefore, MABR setup can be parti-
cularly beneficial for allowing other bacteria to out-compete NOB. This
setup is much more efficient in this respect compared to e.g. adjustment
of DO in liquid phase of suspended sludge systems (Picioreanu et al.,
2016). In aerobic conditions, AOB bacteria grow in the outer surface of
biofilms, NOB can be found several μm deeper, and anaerobic ammonia
oxidation bacteria (AnAOB) are found in the anoxic interior. This ar-
rangement requires substrate diffusion among these different layers for
the full conversion (ammonium oxidation using nitrite, as electron ac-
ceptor, to produce nitrogen gas) (Cao et al., 2017). Another approach
for suppression of NOB in MBBR consists of supplying a small amount of
oxygen (Gilbert et al., 2015). Furthermore, biofilm thickness is a critical
property influencing the community structure and function. Aerobic
nitrifiers were abundant in 50 μm biofilms whereas anaerobic ammo-
nium oxidizers abundantly localized in 400 μm biofilms. Nitrifying
biofilms differing in thickness are composed of different nitrogen-
transforming bacteria and vary in their nitrogen transformation rates
(Suarez et al., 2018; Suarez et al., 2019).
3.2. Denitrification
Denitrification is the process of complete removal of nitrate to
harmless nitrogen gas as the end product, with relatively low genera-
tion of waste brine (Rezvani et al., 2019) (Fig. 2A). Denitrification
treats various contaminants at the same time, leading to a reduced
waste disposal cost. For denitrification, several primary factors are es-
sential: requirement for strict anoxic conditions, carbon sources, and
post-treatment. Additional organic carbon sources work as the electron
donor and are required for cell growth and heterotrophic denitrification
(Modin et al., 2007; Miao and Liu, 2018). Glucose, alcohols such as
methanol and ethanol, succinate and acetate are the most commoncarbon sources supplemented to the denitrification systems (Ji et al.,
2015; Miao and Liu, 2018). Due to the high biodegradability a wide
range of biopolymers including poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), poly(buty-
lene succinate) (PBS); polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), poly (l-lactic
acid) (PLLA), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), poly3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-
hydroxyvalerate (PHBV)/PLA, starch/PCL, and starch/PVA are ex-
amined for nitrate removal (Xu et al., 2018). It was also found that the
aerobic methane oxidation by methanotrophic bacteria can serve or-
ganic compounds acting as the electron donors for heterotrophic de-
nitrification (Modin et al., 2008; Modin et al., 2010).
In spite of several advantages offered by denitrification, these sub-
strates result in turbidity as the consequence of excessive biomass and
remnant carbon source, thereby necessitating further treatment.
There are several issues impeding large scale application of biode-
nitrification. There is a risk of gaseous nitrous oxide production, which
is a greenhouse effect-causing gas, more potent than the CO
2(Wang and
Wang, 2013). The requirement for continuous carbon source supply is aconsiderable burden, combined with the need for precise dosing to
avoid deterioration of effluent water quality by excessive biomass of
bacterial cells and remnant carbon source (Boley et al., 2000). Fur-
thermore, presence of oxygen during denitrification negatively affects
nitrogen removal efficiency and increases nitrite concentration in
treated water. This negative effect of oxygen varies according to the
type of electron donor used as the carbon source. For example, deni-
trification is less affected by DO when using alcohols, such as ethanol
and methanol, compared with sucrose as the carbon source (Gómezet al., 2002). This effect of alcohols is due to formation of smaller size ofbiofilms with higher density of bacteria, causing higher denitrification
rate versus nitrate reduction rate. These carbon sources are more ap-
propriate for the biological denitrification of water contaminated with
nitrate and containing DO. Other challenges with denitrification in-
clude slow reaction rate due to high start-up time and HRT, need for pH
adjustment and drop of productivity at cold temperatures (Rezvani
et al., 2019). Some of these problems such as the slow reaction rate may
be circumvented by increasing nitrate loading up to 130 mg L
-1, how-
ever, nitrate loading above this value adversely affects nitrate removal(Rezvani et al., 2019). One known exception is Thiobacillusdenitrificans-
dominated biofilms, which completely remove nitrate even at a nitrateloading rate of 600 mg L
-1h-1and an HRT of 10 min (Zou et al., 2016).
While biological denitrification effectively converts nitrate to nitrogengas, it is not amenable to nitrogen recovery, which can be considered as
a drawback of this process.
3.2.1. Microorganismsinvolvedindenitrification
Both autotrophic and heterotrophic bacteria can reduce nitrate. A
limited number of autotrophic denitrifiers have been discovered.
Compared to the heterotrophic denitrifiers, they exhibit slow growth
with low biomass production and inefficient assimilation (Rezvani
et al., 2019). Autotrophic denitrifiers oxidize inorganic matters and the
released electrons are delivered to the nitrate as the terminal electron
acceptor. There are two types of autotrophic denitrification: hydrogen-
based (Micrococcusdenitrificans andParacoccusdenitrificans) and sulfur-
based autotrophic denitrification (Thiobacillus denitrificans andT. thio-
parus), oxidizing H
2and sulfur compounds (such as elemental sulfur or
thiosulfate), as the electron donors, respectively (Rezvani et al., 2019;
Zou et al., 2016). Di Capua et al. (2019) investigated twelve electron
donors for autotrophic denitrification including hydrogen gas, chemi-cally synthesized and biogenic elemental sulfur, sulfide, thiosulfate,
sulfite, pyrite, thiocyanate, zero-valent iron, ferrous iron, arsenite and
manganese. Denitrification kinetics was found to be strongly affected
by the type of electron donor. Regardless of safety issues, fast kinetics,
low biomass yield, ecosustainability and reasonable cost of H
2, make it
the most promising electron donor. Meanwhile, reduced inorganicsulfur compounds are alternative to H
2, limiting effluent sulfate con-
centration and treating a wide range of nitrate-contaminated waters.Tian et al. (2020) recently confirmed exclusive autotrophic iron-de-
pendent denitrification seeded with activated sludge. A novel sulfur-based denitrification process coupled with iron(II) carbonate ore
(SICAD system) synergistically enhanced denitrification rate (up to
720.35 g N/m
3d) with reduced accumulation of intermediates (NO 2–
and N 2O) and production of sulfate (Zhu et al., 2019). Sulfur oxidizing
bacteria including Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans andThiobacillus deni-
trificans use iron sulfides as the efficient electron donors for autotrophic
denitrification treating nitrate in wastewater (Yang et al., 2017). OH−
ions generated by dissolved S2−hydrolysis buffer H+ions produced by
autotrophic denitrification of iron sulphides, thereby eliminating the
need for alkaline reagents for neutralization. Sulfur autotrophic deni-
trification also leads to SO 42−accumulation. This issue is less serious in
iron sulfide autotrophic denitrification, probably due to the incompleteS
2−oxidation to SO 42−.
In wastewater treatment systems, Thiobacillus sp. comprises the
majority of autotrophic denitrifiers (Miao and Liu, 2018). Interestingly,
cooperation of predominated hydrogenotrophic and heterotrophic de-
nitrifiers demonstrated a shift from autotrophic to heterotrophic deni-
trification in H 2-based hollow-fiber membrane biofilm reactor (HF-
MBfR) (Park et al., 2016).
Faster denitrification reactions performed by heterotrophs require
smaller reactor volumes, thereby reducing the cost. Pseudomonas and
Bacillus are the most common heterotrophic denitrifiers (Rezvani et al.,
2019). Heterotrophic bacteria utilize carbon from the complex organic
compounds, prefer low to zero DO, and use nitrate as the terminal
electron acceptor. Under both aerobic and anoxic environments, nitrateS. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
8can be removed by heterotrophic bacteria from wastewater. Under
anoxic conditions, nitrate is used as the terminal electron acceptor for
cell respiration instead of oxygen. Thus, nitrate gets reduced simulta-
neously with oxidation of organic matters. Some bacteria, such as
Thiosphaerapantotropha,Alcaligenesfaecalis, and Bacillus sp. possess the
capacity of aerobic denitrification, in addition to heterotrophic ni-trification (Chen et al., 2015). DO concentration, carbon to nitrogen
ratio (C/N) as well as temperature and pH are known to influence
aerobic denitrification rates (Ji et al., 2015). There are several ad-
vantages of aerobic denitrification using these organisms, such as high
growth rates, aerobic removal of ammonium and nitrate by simulta-
neous nitrification and denitrification, minimized acclimation pro-
blems, and reduced requirement for buffering (alkalinity produced by
denitrification partially compensates the alkalinity required for ni-
trification) (Chen et al., 2015). The nitrate and oxygen co-respiration in
these conditions are believed to result from microbial adaption to harsh
environment with high dosage of nitrate to degrade the toxic nitrogen
(Ji et al., 2015).
In wastewater treatment systems, members of the genera Thauera,
Paracoccus, Hyphomicrobium, Comamonas, Azoarcus, Denitratisoma,
Dechloromonas, and family Comamonadaceae are the major denitrifiers
contributing into the nitrogen removal (Jiang et al., 2012; Baumann
et al., 1996; Carvalho et al., 2007; Cowan et al., 2005; Neef et al., 1996;
Martineau et al., 2013; Gumaelius et al., 2001; Khan et al., 2002). In-
terestingly, microbial species composition in wastewater affects nitriteaccumulation in denitrification process. It can be due to the differential
pattern of denitrification pathway in various bacteria. The denitrifying
bacteria contributing in nitrate removal are shown in Fig. 4, which are
functioning in nitrite accumulation and or complete denitrification.Three different patterns of denitrification process are found in waste-
water treatment plants including i) reducing nitrate only to nitrite, ii)
reducing both nitrate and nitrite with no nitrite accumulation which the
rate of reducing nitrite is higher than that of nitrate in these bacteria,iii) reducing nitrate and nitrite, along with a transient nitrite accumu-
lation which rate of nitrite reducing is lower than that of nitrate in these
bacteria (Ma et al., 2016; Martienssen and Schops, 1997). To demon-
strate the effect of denitrifying community composition on nitrite ac-
cumulation, Cao et al. (2013a) investigated three different seeding
sludges (SA, SA–A–O, SA–A). SA was collected from the anoxic zone in
lab-scale anoxic and aerobic reactor treating domestic wastewater with
a long SRT; SA–A–O was collected from an anaerobic/anoxic and
aerobic reactor with high denitrifying phosphorus removal efficiencies;and SA–A was collected from an anaerobic sludge fermentation cou-
pling a anoxic denitrification reactor with a carbon source produced by
sludge fermentation. In denitrification process, SA and SA–A–O sludges
showed the transient accumulation of nitrite, however SA–A showed
high nitrite accumulation with a nitrate-to-nitrite transformation ratio
(NTR) of 80% before the nitrate reduced completely. Therefore, it can
be assumed that the denitrifiers, reducing nitrate only to nitrite, are
dominated microorganism communities (Cao et al., 2013b). Further-
more, nitrite accumulation due to inconsistent nitrite reductase and
nitrate reductase activities is also induced in several conditions in-
cluding carbon-limited condition, type of carbon sources such as glu-
cose, pH and nitrate concentration, oxygen concentration and toxic
compounds such as pesticide (Gong et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2012; Ge
et al., 2012; Glass and Silverstein, 1998; Cao et al., 2013c; Sáez et al.,
2003).
Bioaugmentation is a biological approach of adding specific mi-
croorganisms into a microbial community to enhance the capacity of
microbial community for degradation of specific contaminants.
Altogether, bioaugmentation with the strains that possess complete
denitrification capacity would be beneficial to achieve a complete de-
nitrification system for wastewater treatment.
3.2.2. Reactortechnologiesindenitrification
3.2.2.1. Simultaneous nitrification and denitrification (SND). SND
particularly for treating wastewaters with low C/N ratio (< 5) is the
occurrence of both nitrification and denitrification simultaneously in
the same reactor and saving cost for anoxic tank (Guo et al., 2005). SND
can be operated through the physical and biological mechanisms.
Physical mechanism is based on gradient of DO due to limitation of
oxygen diffusion through the flocs or biofilms. The nitrifiers and
denitrifiers localize in higher (more than 1–2 mg L
-1) and lower
concentration of DO (less than 0.5 mg L-1), respectively (Zhu et al.,
2008). However, the biological mechanism of SND is based on theactivity of heterotrophic nitrifiers and aerobic denitrifiers with the
capacity of denitrification even at oxygen-saturated condition (Chen
et al., 2015).
3.2.2.2. Shortcut nitrification and denitrification. Shortcut nitrification
and denitrification also called as partial nitrification-denitrification, is
feasible technology for treatment of wastewaters with high ammonium
concentrations or low C/N ratios. In this case, nitrite is produced by
nitrification as an intermediate product instead of nitrate and
subsequently reduced to N
2by nitrite denitrification (Zhu et al.,
2008). There are several advantages by shortcut nitrification anddenitrification compared with the conventional nitrification and
denitrification via nitrate; i) 25% lower consumption of oxygen in
aerobic phase with 60% saving energy within whole process, ii) 40%
lower demand of electron donors in anoxic phase, iii) nitrite
denitrification rate is 1.5 to 2 times higher than nitrate denitrification
rate (Peng and Zhu, 2006).
3.2.3. Syntheticbiologyindenitrification
Quorum sensing (QS) including rhl and las -two acyl homoserine
lactone (AHL)-mediated QS systems- andPseudomonas quinolone signal
(PQS) systems, is a cell–cell communication mechanism of Pseudomonas
playing crucial role in wastewater treatment (Kalia et al., 2018; Yong
et al., 2015). The denitrification activity of Pseudomonas aeruginosa
PAO1 was positively affected by QS mutants (Δ(Acyl-homoserine-lactone
synthase I)rhlI and ΔrhlR), indicating involvement of QS in denitrifica-
tion process (Yoon et al., 2002; Toyofuku et al., 2007). Regulatory
mechanism of denitrification by QS systems proposed that the deni-trification processes can be improved by engineering of QS systems.
Furthermore, regulatory role of PQS signalling molecule in deni-
trification suggests potential regulation of denitrification process by
manipulation of PQS signalling molecule biosynthesis in various deni-
trifying bacteria and microbial consortia (Toyofuku et al., 2008).
Fig. 4. Nitrite accumulation and complete denitrification by denitrifying bac-
teria.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
93.3. Anammox
Anaerobic digestion, transforming organic materials into mostly
CO2and methane (CH 4) is one of the technologies for commercial
production of energy from waste (Appels et al., 2008). The transfor-
mation of organic matter into biogas (60–70 vol% of CH 4) by anaerobic
digestion reduces final sludge solids, destroys most of the sludge pa-thogens and decreases odour problems associated with the residual
putrescible matter (Appels et al., 2008). Hydrolysis, acidogenesis,
acetogenesis and methanogenesis are the subsequent steps in anaerobic
digestion of organic materials. Organic matter as the main energy re-
source is used by the anaerobic methanogenic bacteria during metha-
nogenesis step of anaerobic digestion process. However, it is also used
by the heterotrophic denitrifiers present in wastewater microbial
community thereby lowering energy production by methanogenic
bacteria. However, nitrogen removal by autotrophic microorganisms
would be preferable, since it leaves the organic matter for methano-
genic bacteria during wastewater treatment. Autotrophic denitrification
(Ma et al., 2016), photoautotrophic systems (Ma et al., 2016) and
anammox processes (Kartal et al., 2010) are the autotrophic nitrogen
removal approaches. Among them, anammox process seems to be the
most promising for energy-neutral or energy-generating sewage treat-
ment (Kartal et al., 2010). In the anammox process, nitrite and am-
monium are utilized to form nitrogen gas through NO and N
2H4in-
termediates (Fig. 2B). In 2002, the first full-scale anammox reactor wasset up for treatment of reject water at Dokhaven, Rotterdam, Nether-
lands. In 2015, there were reportedly 114 full-scale anammox in-
stallations around the world with a capacity to treat 134 tons of N per
day (Ali and Okabe, 2015). Along with increasing number of installa-
tions, capacity volume of the anammox plants is also increasing. These
full-scale treatment plants are mainly treating reject water streams,
however, in terms of nitrogen loading rates, their main targets are
glutamate and amino acids industries and slaughterhouses (Ali and
Okabe, 2015).
Anammox bacteria oxidize ammonium using nitrite as the electron
acceptor. Nitrite can be obtained from nitritation (oxidizing ammonium
to nitrite) and partial denitrification (reducing nitrate to nitrite) (Ali
and Okabe, 2015). Thus, nitritation/anammox and partial denitrifica-
tion/anammox can remove biological nitrogen from wastewater
(Table 2). Since both anammox and nitritation are autotrophic pro-
cesses, they are advantageous compared with nitrification/denitrifica-
tion, since they do not utilize the carbon sources present in the was-
tewater. By comparison, nitrification/denitrification can use up to
100% of organic matter present in treated wastewater. With nitritation/
anammox, methane can be produced using organic matter, thereby
enhancing energy recovery from wastewater (Kartal et al., 2010).
Furthermore, energy consumption can be reduced due to about 60%
less oxygen demand in nitritation/anammox processes, and only ap-
proximately 50% of the ammonium must be oxidized to nitrite instead
of nitrate. In addition, surplus sludge production is minimal with ni-
tritation/anammox, due to lower cell production but higher rate of
nitrogen removal (Du et al., 2015; Kartal et al., 2010). The chemoau-
totrophic anammox utilizes inorganic carbon source of CO
2as it can
positively affect the anammox growth and activity. Therefore, nitrita-
tion/anammox processes could also decrease the emission of green-
house gases due to consumption of inorganic carbon CO 2as well as
lower N 2O emission (Du et al., 2015).
Besides the above-mentioned advantages of anammox process, there
is one crucial shortcoming: usually excessive amounts of nitrate areintroduced into the effluent. Consequently, a post-denitrification pro-
cess is required to meet the discharge standard, which is in demand of
external carbon source (Modin et al., 2007) (Fig. 5A). This comes at a
cost: energy consumption, surplus activated sludge and CO
2emission.
High C/N ratio, low temperature, and poor effluent water quality
are the main challenges for application of anammox process in treating
mainstream wastewater. When organic matter is present, heterotrophicdenitrifying bacteria are able to compete with anammox bacteria re-
sulting in lower ammonium removal efficiency. In addition, certain
organic compounds, such as methanol, inactivate anammox activity
completely or partially (Ali and Okabe, 2015). Low concentrations of
organic matter do not significantly affect anammox activity, so nitrogen
removal in the presence of low concentrations of organic matter can be
promoted via heterotrophic denitrification. This process is called si-
multaneous nitrification, anammox and denitrification (SNAD)
(Fig. 5A) (Lan et al., 2011), and can be used for treatment of main-
stream wastewater. Optimal temperature for anammox process is 37 °C
(Fig. 5B, Table 2), however, at 45 °C anammox irreversibly loses ac-
tivity due to the biomass lysis. Anammox bacteria can adapt to lowertemperatures and they are able to grow and maintain their activity at
10-20 °C in wastewater. Anammox activity can be detected at tem-
peratures as low as 4 °C in laboratory conditions (Oshiki et al., 2011). It
was shown when temperature decreased to 15 °C, the maximum reactor
capacity and system stability negatively affected due to nitrite accu-
mulation. However, anammox was adapted to low temperature and no
changes in sludge physical properties and/or bacterial populations were
found during the operation (Dosta et al., 2008). In contradiction with
previous finding, prolonged cultivation of anammox bacteria at 20 °C
results in deterioration of biomass-specific activity due to the required
long SRT in the system. The SRT controls the bacteria concentration
within the treatment and higher SRT can contribute to a higher bac-
terial concentration in the reactor. Long SRT causes non-active and non-
anammox bacterial cells such as heterotrophs growing on minimal or-
ganic carbon present in the influent and becoming dominant in the
reactor, thereby decreasing the biomass-specific activity (Hoekstra
et al., 2018).
Average NH
4+and NO 3−concentrations of 100 and 50 mg L−1are
found in the effluent of full-scale anammox installations, respectively
(Ali and Okabe, 2015). Hence, the effluent water quality needs to be
improved to meet the effluent discharge standard by further post-
treatment (increasing the cost and energy consumption).
3.3.1. Microorganismsinvolvedinanammox
Anammox is a recently discovered process in the nitrogen cycle. The
representative anammox bacteria are Candidatus “Brocadia anammox-
idans” and Candidatus “Kuenenia stuttgartiensis” (Shoda, 2017). Ana-
mmox bacteria belonging to phylum Planctomycetes (Strous et al.,
1999) and are ubiquitously found in anoxic environments such as
marine, freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems, where the nitrogen loss
mainly occurs due to anammox processes (Ali and Okabe, 2015). About
nineteen species and broadly six genera of anammox bacteria have been
characterized. No pure culture was found for anammox species, how-
ever, some of the anammox cultures have been enriched as the mono-
species in laboratory conditions (Oshiki et al., 2011).
3.3.2. Reactortechnologiesinanammox
3.3.2.1. Simultaneous partial nitrification, anammox, and denitrification
(SNAD). As there is no demand of organic carbon for the anaerobic
conversion of ammonia to N 2by anammox, it is an attractive
technology for the treatment of nitrogen rich wastewaters. However,
combination of partial nitrification with anammox through the
SHARON (single reactor high activity ammonia removal over nitrite)-
anammox (two-reactor system) and CANON (completely autotrophic
nitrogen removal over nitrite in single reactor system) produces the
electron acceptor nitrite required for anammox process. However, these
two processes are not able to eliminate organic carbon along with
ammonium. Furthermore, nitrate production in the system making the
necessity of further treatment. Therefore, SNAD process (simultaneous
partial nitrification, anammox, and denitrification) has been developed
for simultaneous removal of inorganic nitrogen and organic carbon. It
conducts three chemical reactions by three bacterial communities
aerobic AOB, anammox, and denitrifying bacteria in a single reactor
under oxygen limiting conditions (Fig. 3C) (Chen et al., 2009) (Fig. 5A).S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
10Nitrate production in mainstream anammox process and variation
in nitrite to ammonium ratio result in poor quality of anammox effluent
with total nitrogen concentration of above 10 mg N L−1(Xie et al.,
2018). The counter-diffusion delivery in MABR allows a higher effi-ciency of gas transfer and substrate consumption compared to the
conventional methods (Xie et al., 2018). The gaseous methane delivery
through the membrane causes growth of denitrifying anaerobic me-
thane oxidation (DAMO) organisms along with anammox bacteria.
Thus, nitrate produced by anammox reaction is consumed by DAMO
organisms. If the feed has non-optimal nitrite to ammonium ratio for
the anammox reaction, the additional nitrite is also removed by DAMO
organisms. Therefore, combination of anammox and denitrifying
anaerobic methane oxidation (DAMO) has been established in MBfR to
improve the mainstream anammox process. High nitrogen removal rate
and satisfactory effluent quality are achieved by this method in main-
stream wastewater treatment (Xie et al., 2018).
3.3.2.2. Denitrifying ammonium oxidation (DEAMOX). DEAMOX is the
novel process of anammox coupling with partial denitrification (nitrate
generates nitrite) simultaneously treats ammonia and nitrate containing
wastewaters. It obtains a stable performance (total nitrogen removal of
93.6%) despite the seasonal changes of temperature (29.2 °C–12.7 °C).
It is due to enhanced anammox activity by high accumulation of nitrite
through the partial-denitrification process (Du et al., 2017).
Interestingly, the partial-denitrification process creates broader range
of capacity for application of anammox technology (Fig. 3D). This
economically recommended technology has advantages compared tothe conventional biological nutrient removal such as i) 100% reduceddemand of aeration, ii) simultaneous nitrate and ammonium removal
with 80% reduced demand of organic carbon, iii) 64.8% reduced sludge
production, iv) low nitrogen contained wastewater, low/high-strength
nitrate and ammonium containing wastewater, and v) significant
reduction in greenhouse gas (CO
2and N 2O) emission (Cao et al.,
2019a).
3.3.3. Syntheticbiologyinanammox
AHLs-regulated metabolic pathways and AHLs-mediated QS me-
chanism in wastewater treatment were explored in anammox consortia
(Sun et al., 2018; Tang et al., 2018). Anammox fed with influent
comprising high ammonium concentration enriched more QS organ-
isms producing more AHLs, which likely benefited anammox activity.
Furthermore, more hydrophobic amino acid and protein were produced
in extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). Thus, active QS and EPS
synthesis in anammox might cause high nitrogen removal capacity and
dense biofilm (Sun et al., 2018). AHLs-mediated regulation of anammox
activity, growth rate, and EPS production implied that genetically en-
gineered bacteria carrying signal gene for AHLs synthesis could im-
prove nitrogen removal rate or biomass aggregation and thereby
overcoming limitations of long start-up required for wastewater treat-
ment in anammox reactor (Tang et al., 2018).
3.4. Nitrogen removalfromindustrialwastewater
Industrial wastewaters containing over 500 mg L-1ammonium are
Fig. 5. Anammox process with the need of post denitrification treatment leading SNAD (simultaneous nitrification, anammox and denitrification) process (A). In
SNAD process, ammonia is partially oxidized to form nitrite, and then anammox and denitrification together remove ammonia and nitrate, respectively. Comparison
of the nitrogen removal efficiencies at various temperatures (B), the graph was drawn based on the data shown in Table 2.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
11produced from oil refining, organic chemicals, glass manufacturing,
feed production, chemical fertilizer, iron alloy, meat processing, animal
husbandry, pharmaceutical industry, and other industries (Tabassum
et al., 2018). Industrial wastewater treatment was developed using
various anammox processes, as one-stage nitritation/anammox system
is feasible to treat numerous types of ammonium-enriched industrial
wastewaters (Zhang et al., 2015; Miao et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2016b;
Shen et al., 2012; de Graaff et al., 2011; Tang et al., 2011; Molinuevo
et al., 2009; Daverey et al., 2013). Complex components (heavy metals,
antibiotics and salinity) present in ammonium-enriched industrialwastewaters affect anammox activity, autotrophic nitrogen removal
performance, microbial community structure transformation, and
system stability (Li et al., 2018). Therefore, studying impact of these
components on anammox is of practical significance to provide insights
on anammox technology for treatment of different industrial waste-
waters.
High concentration of nitrate is also discharged from certain in-
dustries including stainless steel pickling rinse wastewater (450 mg L
-1),
fertilizer industry (950 mg L-1), liquid-liquid extraction process of ur-
anium nitrate raffinate (up to 77,000 mg L-1) (Fernández-Nava et al.,
2008; Zala et al., 2004; Biradar et al., 2008). Partial denitrification
coupled with anammox process (PD-A) is a new approach for nitrate-
enriched industrial wastewater treatment (Cao and Zhou, 2019). Toxic
substances including metals, fluoride, sulfate, chloride, toxic organics
present in nitrate-enriched industrial wastewaters could affect nitrate
and nitrite reductase activities, nitrite production for anammox process
and likely anammox activity (Jin et al., 2012). Granular sludge with
compact physicochemical structure as well as protection mechanisms
offered by EPS enhance tolerance of microorganisms to toxic com-
pounds (Cao and Zhou, 2019). Furthermore, granules are able to absorb
toxic substances. Therefore, granule-based systems should be favoured
to mitigate negative effects of toxic components in nitrate-enriched
industrial wastewater.
3.4.1. Removal of nitro group-containing chemicals from industrial
wastewater
Industrial wastewater also contains toxic nitro group-containing
chemicals such as nitrophenols (NPs) composed of benzene rings and
nitro (-NO 2) and hydroxyl (-OH) groups. NPs are widely used as a raw
material and intermediate in production of pharmaceuticals, pigments,wood, preservatives, dyes, pesticides, explosives and rubbers, while
listed as a priority pollutant (Park and Bae, 2018; Keith and Telliard,
1979). Common methods for NPs wastewater treatment are adsorption,
extraction and oxidation. These are complicated and costly processes
and generate secondary pollution. However, NPs can be consumed as
the sole carbon sources by some bacteria, which is a basis for an ef-
fective technology of their removal from the environment (Arora et al.,
2014; Xiong et al., 2019). Microbial degradation of NPs is considered to
be efficient when the concentration of NPs is under 200 mg L
-1. Re-
cently, Mei et al. (2019) constructed an integrated membrane-aerated
bioreactor system with anoxic and aerated zones. Using this reactor,
efficient simultaneous removal of NPs (95.86%) and nitrogen (94.81%)
was demonstrated on influent water with NPs concentration of 500 mg
L-1. The presence of different types of NP molecules in aqueous solution
limits bacterial remediation (Xiong et al., 2019).
3.4.2. Synthetic biology in removal of nitro group-containing chemicals
fromindustrial wastewater
Genetically modified microorganisms (GMM) show potential for
degrading pollutants in wastewater, but bio-environmental concernsrestrict their applications. For example, Bacillus cereus strain isolated
from pulp and paper wastewater effluent showed higher degradation of
NPs when it expressed a heterologous vgbgene encoding hemoglobin-
like protein, Vitreoscilla Hemoglobin b (VHb) from Vitrocillastercoraria
(Vélez-Lee et al., 2016). As an alternative to such targeted genetic en-
gineering, genetic mutations obtained during adaptive laboratoryevolution (ALE) can be used to facilitate NPs removal, thereby cir-cumventing the necessity of ecological safety evaluation for introduc-
tion of GMM into contaminated sites (Elena and Lenski, 2003;
Chaudhary and Kim, 2019). Pseudomonas sp. strain WBC-3 is an ex-
ample of NP-degrading bacteria that evolved to utilize 2-chloro-4-ni-trophenol (2C4NP) as a growth substrate in an ALE experiment. The key
mutation obtained by ALE was detected in a transcriptional regulator
PnpR, which activated expression of pnpA andpnpB operons. These
genes encode enzymes for the initial reactions in NP and 2C4NP cata-
bolism. In the mutated ALE strain, they were strongly expressed in the
absence of inducer and even higher induction was obtained by inducer
supplementation (Deng et al., 2019). Similarly, Acidovorax sp. strain
JS42 was able to grow either on 3-nitrotoluene (3NT) or on 4-ni-
trotoluene (4NT) after and ALE experiement, due to variations in 2-
nitrotoluenene 2,3-dioxygenase (2NTDO) and evolved activities of
2NTDO against 3NT and 4NT (Mahan et al., 2015). Therefore, the ALE-
based approaches can be suggested to optimize the capacity for bio-
degradation of toxic nitro group-containing components.
3.5. Bioelectrochemicalsystems
Specific interests are found in bioelectrochemical reactors for ni-
trogen removal from wastewaters, along with energy and/or chemicals
production. Significant progress has been made to improve bioelec-
trochemical system technology for large-scale treatment of various
wastewaters (Fig. 6B, Table 3). Bioelectrochemical systems utilize
electrochemically active microorganisms (bioanode/biocathode) withextracellular electron transfer capacity. Electrons driven by oxidation of
pollutants are transferred into the anode, resulting in pollutants re-
moval such as organic matter decomposition. According to the type of
cathodic reaction, there are two types of bioelectrochemical systems:microbial fuel cells (MFCs), which generated electrical power because
the anodic oxidation is coupled to a cathode reducing an electron ac-
ceptor with high reduction potential (such as O
2, Fe3+, and Cu2+) and
microbial electrolysis cells (MEC), which require electrical power be-cause the anodic oxidation is coupled to a cathode operated at low
potential, for example for the reduction of protons to hydrogen gas
(Rodríguez Arredondo et al., 2015).
3.5.1. Denitrificationbybioelectrochemicalsystems
Biological nitrogen removal using bioelectrochemical systems is
based on denitrification at the cathode (Rodríguez Arredondo et al.,
2015; Wu and Modin, 2013). Denitrification can be performed in the
cathode compartment of BES either by the production of H
2, which is
consumed by denitrifying autotrophs (Fig. 6A) or by denitrifiers di-
rectly accepting electrons from the cathode surface. An MFC func-
tioning with acetate as electron donor at the anode and nitrate as
electron acceptor at the cathode was demonstrated by Clauwaert et al.
(2007). Another study showed that denitrification is enhanced with aconstant electric field in a continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR), when
the cathode potential is maintained constant around the standard po-
tential value of the nitrate/nitrite redox couple (Parvanova-Mancheva
and Beschkov, 2009). The denitrification rate is influenced by applied
potential and current. When DO level is low, the positive effect of
current on nitrate removal is elevated (Sakakibara and Kuroda, 1993;
Tanaka and Kuroda, 2000).
There are several advantages offered by bioelectrochemical
methods of wastewater treatment, including removal of specific con-
taminants, reduced environmental footprint, stable operation at or-
dinary environmental temperatures, processing speed, and cost-effec-
tiveness due to cheap and self-propagating microorganisms. This type
of treatment also uses wastewater as a renewable source of energy
(Kato, 2015; Rajmohan et al., 2016). Furthermore, bioelectrochemical
systems can easily be coupled with other techniques or may be used forpost-treatment of effluents of other techniques. For example, the anodic
oxidation of organic matter produces electricity, while denitrificationS. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
12occurs at the cathode. In addition, an external nitrification reactor en-
ables the removal of ammonium from wastewater (Virdis et al., 2008).
Even simultaneous nitrification and denitrification can be achieved by
optimizing the oxygen supply in the aerated cathode chamber of an
MFC (Virdis et al., 2010). Furthermore, a tubular dual-cathode MFC
with an anoxic inner cathode for denitrification and an aerobic outer
cathode for the nitrification process was designed using both anion and
cation exchange membranes (Zhang and He, 2012). Interestingly an
algal biofilm (AB) integrated with an MFC was established as an algae
biofilm microbial fuel cell (ABMFC). It was shown to facilitate nitrogen
and phosphorous removal much better than an AB and MFC alone. In
case of bioenergy generation, ABMFC produced 18% higher power
density than the MFC alone (Yang et al., 2018). Another example of
combining MFCs with other technology comes from the cheese industry
wastewater treatment. This type of wastewater is treated with a
membrane bioelectrochemical reactor coupled with an MFC, in which
contaminants such as COD, suspended solids and nitrite are removed by
MFC. Since ratio of energy recovery and consumption is more than one
thereby energy gets recovered. Moreover, a high-quality effluent is
obtained by post-treatment in multiple bioelectrochemical reactors (Li
et al., 2014).
3.5.2. Microorganismsinvolvedinbioelectrochemicalsystems
Denitrification by autotropic microorganisms requires CO 2as the
inorganic carbon source and hydrogen as the electron donor (Ghafari
et al., 2008). However, faster denitrification reaction rate by hetero-
trophs requires smaller reactor volumes, thereby reducing the cost and
time. Firmicutes (Bacilli) are the dominant component of cathodicdenitrifying biofilms in anaerobic denitrification and under low DO
condition. Increasing DO results in a change of the predominant
phylum to Proteobacteria, predominantly α, β, and γ, classes (Zhao
et al., 2017). Several proteobacteria such as Geobacter,Shewanella,
Acidithiobacillus, as well as Bacteroidetes, Chloroflexi, and Gram-positive
bacteriaFirmicutes, and Archaea have extracellular electron transfer
ability which can support applications in bioelectrochemical systemsfor wastewater treatment (Kato, 2015). Enrichment of the electro-
chemically active bacterial community on the electrode can be posi-
tively affected by the electrode pre-treatment, optimization of poten-
tial, current, external resistance, chemical additions, bioaugmentation
and temperatures (Butti et al., 2016). Our understanding of the mi-
crobial extracellular electron transfer is not complete, and further stu-
dies are needed to provide engineering strategies for improving bioe-
lectrochemical reactors.
3.5.3. Syntheticbiologyinbioelectrochemicalsystems
Phenazines, heterocyclic nitrogen-containing and redox active sec-
ondary metabolites, are produced by Pseudomonas (Mavrodi et al.,
2006). Regardless of whether phenazines are produced by Pseudomonas
or by chemical synthesis, they play a crucial role as electron shuttles for
extracellular electron transfer between bacteria and electrodes andthereby enable efficient electricity production in MFC (Jayapriya and
Ramamurthy, 2012; Pham et al., 2008; Rabaey et al., 2005). Phenazine
biosynthesis by Pseudomonas species is regulated by QS systems (Yong
et al., 2011). Engineered QS systems in P. aeruginosa (overexpressing
rhlIandrhlRgenes) resulted in higher phenazine biosynthesis, efficient
extracellular electron transfer and thereby enhanced electricity
Fig. 6. Bioelectrochemical system for biological nitrogen removal from wastewater (A). Comparison of the nitrogen removal efficiencies of different bioelec-
trochemical setups (B), the graph was drawn based on the data shown in Table 3.⁎Measurement is based on net cathodic compartment (NCC),⁎⁎Total compartment
volume (TCV),⁎⁎⁎Net cathode volume (NCV).S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
13Table 3
Bioelechtochemical systems performance for removal and recovery of nitrogen.
Reactor type System Type of wastewater Removal mechanism Removal efficiency/
rateCurrent density A m−2References
Single-chamber MFC Air-cathode Swine wastewater Ammonia removal 60% NA Kim et al. (2008)
Dual-chamber MFC Anode with ferricyanide catholyte Swine wastewater Ammonia removal 69% NA Kim et al. (2008)
Dual-chamber MFC Gas diffusion cathode Urine Ammonia removal 3.3 g N m−2d−10.5 A m−2Kuntke et al.
(2012)
Dual-chamber MFC Urine Ammonia removal 9.57 g N m−2d−12.6 A m−2Kuntke (2013)
Three compartment
electrochemical systemH2recycling electrochemical system
(HRES)Synthetic urine Ammonia removal 335 gN m−2d−150 A m−2Kuntke et al.(2017)
Dual-chamber MEC Batch cathode Urine Ammonia removal 162.18 g N m
−2d−114.7 A m−2Kuntke et al.(2014)
Dual-chamber MFC Tubular reactor with an internal
cathodeSynthetic Nitrate reduction 146 g N m
−3NCC d−135 A m−3Clauwaert et al.
(2007)
Dual-chamber MFC Carbon and nitrogen removal Synthetic Carbon removal,
nitrification,
denitrification67.4% TN, 410 g NO 3-
m−3NCC d−1133 A m−3INCLUDEPICTURE "https://
www.rsc.org/images/entities/char_2009.gif" \*MERGEFORMATINET NCCVirdis et al.(2008)
Dual-chamber MFC In situ nitrification Synthetic Simultaneous nitrification
and denitrification94.1% TN, 104 g Nm
−3TCV d−139.7 A m−3TCV Virdis et al.(2010)
Dual-cathode MFC Tubular dual-cathode MFC Synthetic Nitrification and
denitrification67–90% TN, 140 g TNm
−3d−143 Am-3Zhang and He
(2012)
Single-chamber MFC Diethylamine-functionalized
polymer (DEA) as the Pt catalyst
binderSynthetic Simultaneous nitrification
and denitrification96.8% 3.6 A m−2Yan et al. (2012)
Dual-chamber MFC/MEC Anion exchange membrane (AEM) Synthetic Ammonia removal 2.94 g N m−2d−13.6 A m−2Haddadi et al.
(2013)
Dual-chamber MFC/MEC Cation exchange membrane Synthetic Ammonia removal 8.5 g N m−2d−13.6 A m−2Haddadi et al.
(2013)
Dual-chamber MFC/MEC Cation exchange membrane Synthetic Urea removal 37.8 g N m−2d−15 A m−2Haddadi et al.(2013)
Biofilm-electrode reactor Synthetic Nitrate removal 0.17 mg NO
3-N cm-2
biofilm surface area d-
1NA Park et al. (2005)
Integrated SNAD-MFC Short-cut nitrification andautotrophic denitrification (SNAD)-MFCUniversity of ConnecticutWastewater Treatment FacilityUConn-WTFAmmonia removal 99.9%, 12.5 g N m
-30.158 mA/cm2Li et al. (2016b)
Flat-panel air-cathode MFC FA-
MFCTwo separator electrode assembly(SEA)Domestic wastewater Organic and nitrogencompounds removal620 g N m
−3d−1401 ± 13 A m−3Park et al. (2017)
MFC Aerobic nitrification in the cathode,
heterotrophic denitrification in the
anodeRecirculating aquaculture
system (RAS) waterNitrate, ammonia removal 51 g N m−3NCC d−174.00 A m−3Zou et al. (2018)
Upward plug-flow baffled-reactor
MFCAutotrophic cathodic denitrifying Synthetic Nitrate removal 148.3 ± 1.4 g N m−3
NCV d−176.5 ± 0.5 A m−3NCV Al-Mamun et al.
(2017)
Dual-chamber MFC Seawater bacteria Synthetic Nitrate removal 100% 26.6 A m−3Naga Samrat et al.(2018)
MFC and electric membrane
bioreactor (EMBR)Proton exchange membrane (PEM)-
free MFCSynthetic Phosphorus, ammoniaremoval> 93% 0.0137 A m
−2Gao et al. (2017)
Dual-chamber MFC Single MFC reactor with zero alkalineconsumptionTannery wastewater Carbon and nitrogenremoval97.9% 0.83 A m
−2Wu et al. (2018)
MFC and MEC Continuous-flow membraneless MFCand MEC systemsSynthetic, municipal wastewater Carbon and nitrogen
removal0.38 g N m
−3d−10.34 A m−3Hussain et al.
(2016)
Dual-chamber MFC Anion exchange membrane AEM Synthetic Nitrate removal 48 g NO 3-m−3d−123.7 A m−3Lee et al. (2018)
Algae biofilm microbial fuel cell
(ABMFC)Integrating an algal biofilm (AB)with a MFCDomestic wastewater Carbon and nitrogenremoval96% 0.17 A m
−2Yang et al. (2018)
NCC: net cathodic compartment; TN: total nitrogen. d TCV: total compartment volume; NCV: net cathode volume.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
14production in MFCs. These results imply that engineering the QS system
is a promising strategy for improving the efficiency of bioelec-
trochemical systems.
4. Nitrogen recovery
Nitrogen is one of the key nutrients for survival of living organisms.
It is an important constituent of several biomolecules such as proteins
and DNA. Large proportion of nitrogen exist in N 2gas form in the at-
mosphere. However, it cannot be utilized by most of living organismsexcept some bacteria. Instead, it should be converted to reactive forms
such as nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, and ammonia to be used as a nu-
trient by living organisms. To supply food to a growing human popu-
lation, large amounts artificial fertilizers are applied to agricultural
land. The nitrogen content of artificial fertilizers is obtained by con-
verting N
2using the Haber-Bosch process, which is very energy-in-
tensive. The fixation of N 2and application of fertilizers have led to an
excess of reactor nitrogen in the environment, which has caused pol-
lution. Recovery of reactive nitrogen from wastewater for use in food
production could thus contribute both to lower energy consumption
and less pollution (Matassa et al., 2015). Two biological techniques that
potentially could be used for nitrogen recovery include bioelec-
trochemical systems and photosynthetic microorganisms. Bioelec-
trochemical systems have a wide range of applications including ni-
trogen removal and recovery from wastewaters while producing
electricity. Photosynthetic microorganisms include eukaryotic micro-
algae and prokaryotic cyanobacteria, which can assimilate nitrogen and
phosphorus present in wastewaters and recycle them in the form of
microalgal biomass for producing fertilizers. Nitrogen can be alter-
natively removed or recovered by chemical methods, such as stripping
process and struvite precipitation. Table 4 presents nitrogen recovery
efficiency, chemical input, economic evaluation and main technical
parameters of different nitrogen recovery processes.
4.1. Ammonia/ammoniumrecoverybybioelectrochemicalsystems
Biological nitrogen recovery using bioelectrochemical systems is
based on ammonia/ammonium recovery (Rodríguez Arredondo et al.,
2015; Wu and Modin, 2013). In the first mechanism, the biological
oxidation of organic matter in wastewater at the anodic compartment
contributes to energy recovery. At the same time, the ammonia/am-
monium in the wastewater is transported through the cation ion ex-
change membrane to the cathode compartment with elevated pH
catholyte, leading to ammonia recovery by stripping (Fig. 6A). The
electric field induces the ammonia/ammonium migration across the ion
exchange membrane. This process ultimately allows for chemical re-
covery of ammonia/ammonium from wastewater in a bioelec-
trochemical system. Ammonium recovery is also performed from urine
with a pre-treatment step for phosphate recovery via struvite pre-
cipitation (Rodríguez Arredondo et al., 2015). Ammonium was re-
covered from urine at rate of 9.7 gN m−2d−1with an energy yield of
−10 kJ gN−1at a current density of 2.6 A m−2(Kuntke, 2013).
Bioelectrochemical systems can also support ammonium oxidation
at the cathode. Modin et al. (2011) also utilized the alkalinity produced
in the cathodic compartment of an MFC to support nitrification of reject
water. Yan et al. (2012) used a cathode pre-enriched with a nitrifying
biofilm in a single-chamber MFC. The nitrifiers scavenged oxygen andoxidized ammonium at the gas-diffusion electrode.
In spite of many advantages of reactors, there are several issues with
this technology. Electrolytes in bioelectrochemical systems have large
number of cations and anions other than H
+and OH−. The transport of
these cations and anions through the ion exchange membranes de-
termines the pH gradient between the anode and cathode as well as the
membrane potential. Although transport of NH 4+is beneficial for N
recovery in some systems, pH gradients as well as concentration gra-dients of other cations than H
+are responsible for potential loss incation exchange membranes, which significantly affects the perfor-mance of bioelectrochemical reactors (Prosnansky et al., 2002; Sleutels
et al., 2017).
Performance of bioelectrochemical reactors has significantly im-
proved recently, as the current density of 400 A m
-3has been achieved
in flat-panel air-cathode MFC (FA-MFC) with a promise for energy
sustainable wastewater treatment (Park et al., 2017). To achieve
practical application of bioelectrochemical systems, it is expected that
the full-scale bioelectrochemical reactors should exhibit a volumetric
current density of 1000 A m-3reactor volume (Rozendal et al., 2008).
The challenge is still scaling-up of bioelectrochemical reactor volume
from lab scale reactors to larger volume with less internal resistance.
4.2. Nitrogen recoverybymicroalgaeandcyanobacteria
Unicellular species of microscopic photosynthetic microorganisms,
microalgae and cyanobacteria, are present in freshwater and marine
systems. Their cells can exist individually or in chains or groups and are
characterized by relatively fast growth and adaptability to harsh con-
ditions. Microalgae and cyanobacteria have been recently considered as
an alternative system for biological wastewater treatment with several
applications (Delgadillo-Mirquez et al., 2016; Sood et al., 2015). In
wastewater treatment, they photosynthetically generate O 2, which is
consumed by bacterial populations to decompose organic wastes to
simple inorganic nutrients. Furthermore, microalgae and cyanobacteria
remove inorganic nutrients in tertiary treatment before discharge to
receiving waters (Taziki et al., 2015; Pouliot et al., 1989). Large
amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus are required for fast growth of
microalgae and cyanobacteria, which can be effectively provided by
uptake of nitrogen and phosphorus from wastewaters. Their potential
for nitrogen recovery is the specific advantage of these microorganisms.
Nitrate and ammonia assimilated by microalgae and cyanobacteria are
converted to biomass rather than being released to the atmosphere as
the N 2gas by the dissimilatory nitrate reduction (Taziki et al., 2015).
The nitrogen removal capacity of microalgae and cyanobacteria relieson ammonification and assimilatory reduction of nitrite to ammonium
(Fig. 2B). Nitrogen is fixed by cyanobacteria converting atmospheric
molecular nitrogen into ammonia through the following reaction;
N
2+8H++8e−+16ATP→2NH 3+H2+16ADP+16Pi. Later, it can be
incorporated into the amino acids and proteins or excreted to the en-
vironment (Barsanti and Gualtieri, 2006).
NH4+, NO 3−, and NO 2−are fixed nitrogen forms which can be
assimilated and transported into the microalgae. NO 3−is the most
oxidized and stable inorganic form of nitrogen in aquatic environments.It needs to be reduced into NH
4+before assimilation. It goes into a two-
step process catalysed by the cytosolic nitrate reductase and chlor-oplastic nitrite reductase through the following reactions, NO
3−+2H+
+2e−→NO 2−+H2O, NO 2−+8H++6e−→NH 4++2H 2O (Barsanti
and Gualtieri, 2006) (Fig. 7A). NH 4+(resulting from NO 3−and NO 2−
reduction) is incorporated into the amino acids via glutamate dehy-drogenase (at high levels of ammonium concentrations) or glutamine
synthetase/glutamate synthase cycle (at low levels of ammonium con-
centrations) (Barsanti and Gualtieri, 2006; Taziki et al., 2015).
Higher production of biomass and absence of structural carbon such
as cellulose in cyanobacteria and microalgae (C/N 5-20) make them
more efficient in water reclamation and nitrogen recovery compared
with complex plants (C/N ratio 18-120) (Taziki et al., 2015). Phylo-
genetic position of nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase in microalgae
in comparison with other organisms was demonstrated in phylogenetic
trees constructed via the Neighbour-Joining method and established thereliability of each node through bootstrap methods, using MEGA 4
(Fig. 7B, C). Furthermore, the chloroplast localization of nitrate re-
ductases and nitrite reductases was investigated using Target P and
Chloro P and shown by green arrow in Fig. 7B and C. As it was shown,
nitrate reductase in some but not all of higher plants is located inchloroplast while this enzyme is localized in chloroplast of microalgaeS. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
15Chlorella sorokiniana andDunaliella salina. Immuno-specific electron
microscopy observation has indicated that the nitrate reductase is lo-
calized in pyrenoids of Monoraphidium braunii, Chlamydomonas re-
inhardii, Chlorella fusca, Dunaliella salina, and Scenedesmus obliquus
(Lopez-Ruiz et al., 1985). Pyrenoids are sub-cellular micro-compart-
ments in microalgal chloroplasts, with a possible role in photosynthesis.
Both photosynthesis-derived nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)
can be used as the electron donors for nitrate reduction in Chlorella sp.
Therefore, it can be hypothesized that the energy-intensive process ofnitrate reduction may be the reason for the chloroplast localization of
nitrate reductase in microalgae (Taziki et al., 2015).
Nitrogen and phosphorus taken up by microalgal biomass can be
used for producing fertilizers, bioenergy, food, animal feed and phar-
maceuticals. Wastewater treatment by algae also includes assimilation
of organic pollutants into cellular constituents such as lipids and car-
bohydrates. Furthermore, it is more environmentally friendly compared
to the conventional wastewater treatments with introduction of acti-
vated sludge, a biological floc. Biological treatments using microalgae
and cyanobacteria can offer a solution for the limitations of the current
tertiary treatment methods. Secondary and tertiary treatments use more
than half of the energy cost devoted to the municipal wastewater
treatment. This cost is mostly related to the oxygen transfer into the
secondary treatment and chemical demands in the tertiary treatment.
Chlorella sp. is frequently investigated for its nitrogen removal ca-
pacity in combination with other microalgae or bacteria (Table 5). Both
native and non-native consortia can be used for wastewater treatment.
The nitrogen removal efficiencies shown in Table 5 represent the
combined effects of such consortia. Few reports exist on the individualcapacity of microalgal species for nitrogen recovery, namely it was
found that Dunaliella tertiolecta, Neochloris oleobundans, and Chlorella
vulgais could individually uptake 155, 150, and 103 mg L
-1d-1, re-
spectively (Li et al., 2008; Hulatt et al., 2012).
4.2.1. Microalgaegrowth
Microalgae are cultivated through the suspended- and immobilized-cell
systems for wastewater treatment purposes (Table 5). Nutrients supply in-cluding inorganic carbon as well as nitrogen (NO
3−, NH 4+, and urea) and
phosphorus are required for the photosynthesis and production of proteinsand nucleic acids during microalgal growth (Grobbelaar, 2004). Microalgal
biomass production but not nitrogen and phosphorus removal is critically
affected by nitrogen to phosphorus molar ratio (N/P) in wastewater. The
ratio lower than 5 and higher than 30 causes nitrogen and phosphorus
deficiency for microalgal growth, respectively (Choi and Lee, 2015). Dif-
ferent wastewaters, including the piggery industry and domestic waste-
waters, as well as dairy manure and municipal sewage anaerobically-di-
gested wastewaters with the appropriate N/P molar ratios (9, 11, 14 and 15,
respectively) are suitable for microalgal growth (Gonçalves et al., 2017).
Interestingly, the nitrogen fixation capacity of cyanobacteria make them
able to survive at low concentration of nitrogen (Sood et al., 2015).
4.2.2. Factorsaffectingnitrogenremovalbymicroalgaeandcyanobacteria
For an optimal growth and nitrogen removal by microalgae, several
principle parameters should be carefully controlled. The solubility of
CO
2, required for microalgae photosynthesis, is negatively affected by
the medium pH and temperature. NH 4+volatilization also occurs at
increased pH and temperature, which adversely affects NH 4+removal
process by microalgae (Gonçalves et al., 2017). CO 2enrichment and
buffering can prevent the harmful effect of pH increase on growth and
nitrogen removal (Taziki et al., 2015). The microalgae optimal growthis influenced by temperature. Optimal temperature for microalgae
growth differs among various species from below 10 °C to moderate
temperatures (10–20 °C) and even some of them above 30 °C. Although,
increasing temperature usually increase metabolic activity when mi-
croalgal growth is reduced at lower temperatures (Xin et al., 2011;
Robarts and Zohary, 1987).Table 4
Nitrogen recovery efficiency, chemical input, economic evaluation, main technical parameters of different nitrogen recovery process.
Operation technique Recovery efficiency Chemical input Economic evaluation Main technical parameters
Ammonia/ammonium
recovery by MFCsEnergy recovery by biological oxidation
of wastewater organic matter at the
anodic compartmentNo demand for additional substances to
adjust pH for ammonia stripping at the
cathodic compartmentReduced COD consumption to 0.57 kg by MFC for 1
kg N recovery compared to 2.86 kg COD for 1 kg N
removal, no aeration demandBiocatalyst microorganism, electrode materials, reaction
control, resistance for electron transfer, large-scale reactor,
long-term durability, cost of electrode materials, cost offabrication and cost of operation
Microalgae and
cyanobacteriaNitrogen and phosphorus recovery No chemical input Reduced energy demand to 1.5-8 Wh per m
3
compared to 500 Wh per m3by activated sludge
process, reduced greenhouse gas (CO 2) emissionRequires vast land area for installing ponds, optimization of
wastewater characteristics (nutrients and toxic compounds),
environmental factors (pH, temperature, light, O 2, and CO 2)
Chemical stripping process Only NH 4+recovered, no impact on
phosphorous and COD removal fromwastewaterAdditional substances to adjust pH Expensive due to the complex process, cost of
chemicals and reconditioning of the ammoniumsulfate solution to a fertilizer productpH, temperature and mass transfer area
Chemical struvite
precipitationNH
4+and phosphorus recovery Required additional magnesium saltsand phosphateExpensive due to required chemicals, dewateringand drying of the precipitateMolar ratio of Mg:NH
4:P, pH
COD- chemical oxygen demand.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
16In terms of nitrogen recovery, a temperature-dependent specific
affinity is found for nitrate in microalgae (Q10≈3, Q10 is the pro-
portional change with 10°C increase in temperature), with no clear
temperature-dependence for ammonium assimilation. Temperature-
dependent nitrogen preference shows reduced affinity of microalgae for
nitrate utilization at reduced temperatures whereas ammonium uptake
and affinity is not affected suggesting ammonium as the more essential
nutrient for microalgae (Reay et al., 1999).
The capacity of cyanobacteria for nutrient removal is also influ-
enced by environmental factors such as light, temperature, pH, etc
(Sood et al., 2015). However, a cyanobacteria Phormidium strain iso-
lated from polar environment and Phormidium bohneri can efficiently
remove nutrients at temperatures below 10 °C and high temperatures
around 30 °C, respectively (Tang et al., 1997; Talbot and De la Noüe,
1993). These strains are sedimented for easy harvesting and they can be
suggested as the suitable strains for wastewater treatment at low and
high temperatures, respectively.
Light, both in quality (wavelength) and quantity can affect the
microalgae growth and nitrogen removal efficiency. For example, red
light is suggested as the optimum wavelength for C.vulgaris reproduc-
tion and wastewater total nitrogen removal efficiency. Whereas thestimulation of nitrate uptake and activation of nitrate reductase require
blue light (Azuara and Aparicio, 1984; Calero et al., 1980; Yan et al.,
2013). Wastewater treatment at dark condition is the best in terms of
economy and efficiency. Thus, wastewater treatment using combined
culture ofRhodobactersphaeroides andChlorellasorokiniana is suggested
to efficiently remove nutrients under aerobic dark heterotrophic con-dition (Ogbonna et al., 2000).4.2.3. Mixedheterotrophicbacteria-microalgaeculture
An interesting potential for nitrogen recovery is found in poly-
cultures of microalgae or microalgae and bacteria. These polycultures
have a broad range of metabolic activities which allow them to adapt to
various conditions. These valuable consortia can grow in different en-
vironments with various nutrient loads. The cooperative metabolic in-
teractions of microorganisms in consortium can lead to nutrient re-
moval from wastewater (Renuka et al., 2013). In such a beneficial
consortium, the oxygen generated by microalgae photosynthesis is used
by heterotrophic aerobic bacteria to biodegrade organic pollutants from
wastewater. Heterotrophic bacteria discharge CO
2, which can be used
by microalgae in the presence of light. Autotrophic, heterotrophic,mixotrophic, and photoheterotrophic are different metabolic types ofmicroalgae, which can be shifted in response to changes in environ-
mental conditions (Delgadillo-Mirquez et al., 2016). Under certain
conditions, they may also compete with heterotrophic bacteria. High
rate algal pond (HRAP) technology is used for mixed bacteria-micro-
algae culture to treat municipal, industrial and agricultural waste-
waters. HRAP is essentially a shallow race-track reactor (0.3-0.4 m
depth), equipped with mechanical mixing for the simultaneous growth
of algae and bacteria. HRAP is fed with the primary/secondary waste-
water, which is mixed with the algal and bacterial culture inside the
bioreactor. In this system, the removal of pollutants is caused by algal
assimilation, bacterial biological processes (nitrification/denitrifica-
tion) and stripping phenomena such as ammonia volatilization and
phosphorus precipitation (facilitated by high pH levels induced by
photosynthetic microalgal growth). Microalgal-bacterial consortia are
more beneficial than only microalgal consortia, as the microalgal-bac-
terial consortia can replace both secondary and tertiary treatment of
Fig. 7. Biological nitrogen removal mechanism by microalgae (A). Phylogenetic tree of nitrate reductase (B) and nitrite reductase (C) proteins in microalgae in
comparison with other organisms. Microorganisms used for wastewater treatments are marked with red circle.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
17Table 5
Application of microalgal and microalgal-bacterial consortia in nitrogen removal from different wastewaters and respective removal efficiencies.
Microorganisms Wastewater Operation technique Nitrogen removal
rate %References
Centrate wastewater native algal-bacterial consortium Centrates wastewater, primary-treateddomestic wastewaterImmobilized system with higher nutrient removal rates 60 Posadas et al. (2013)
70
Centrate wastewater native algal-bacterial consortium Synthetic domestic wastewater Closed suspended system and mixotrophic metabolism 99.8 Alcántara et al. (2015b)
Chlorellasorokiniana and activated sludge native bacteria Potato-processing wastewater Open suspended system and biogas production ≥ 95 Hernández et al. (2013)
Chlorellasorokiniana and activated sludge native bacteria Primary-treated piggery wastewater Open suspended system and biogas production 82.7 Hernández et al. (2013)
Chlorellasorokiniana and activated sludge native bacteria Primary-treated piggery wastewater Immobilized system biofilm reactor with simultaneous
denitrification/nitrification94–100 De Godos et al. (2009)
Chlorella sp.,Pediastrum sp.,Phormidium sp.,Scenedesmus sp. and
activated sludge native bacteriaPrimary-treated municipal wastewater Closed suspended system with microalgal bacterial flocs MaB-flocs 61.2 Van Den Hende et al.
(2011)
Chlorella spp. andAzospirillumbrasilense Municipal wastewater Co-immobilized system using alginate beads 15 NO3-N De-Bashan et al. (2004)
100 NH4-N
Chlorellavulgaris andAzospirillumbrasilense Synthetic wastewater Co-immobilized system using alginate beads 93 De-Bashan et al. (2002)
91100
Chlorellavulgaris andBacilluslicheniformis Synthetic medium Closed suspended system with pH control 78 Liang et al. (2013)
Chlorellavulgaris and activated sludge native bacteria Synthetic wastewater Closed suspended system considering food to microorganisms ratio F/M and hydraulic retention time HRT33.43–65.96 Medina and Neis (2007)
Chlorellavulgaris and primary-treated municipal wastewater native
bacteriaPrimary-treated municipal wastewater Closed suspended system 30.9–100 He et al. (2013)
Microalgal consortium from a high rate algal pond treating diluted
vinasse and activated sludge native bacteriaSynthetic wastewater Anoxic–aerobic closed suspended system with nitrous oxide emission 75–96 Alcántara et al. (2015a)
Microalgal consortium from a high rate algal pond treating domestic
wastewater and activated sludge native bacteriaDomestic wastewater Open suspended system with and without CO
2addition 91.8–96.9 Park and Craggs (2011)
Municipal wastewater native microalgae and activated sludge native
bacteriaPrimary-treated municipal wastewater Open suspended system and effect of sludge inoculation ratios 93.7–95.8 Su et al. (2012b)
Piggery wastewater native algal-bacterial consortium Fresh piggery wastewater Open suspended system 58.2–94.8 González-Fernández et al.
(2011)
Primary-treated wastewater native algal-bacterial consortium Primary-treated municipal wastewater Closed suspended system 100 Su et al. (2011)
Scenedesmus sp. and anaerobic sludge native bacteria Starch wastewater Closed suspended system 88.7 Ren et al. (2015)
Microalgal consortium composed by Ulothrixzonata, Ulothrixaequalis,
Rhizocloniumhieroglyphicum andOedogonium sp.Digested dairy manure wastewater Immobilized system biofilm reactor and dry matter/crude protein
yields62 Wilkie and Mulbry (2002)
Chlamydomonasreinhardtii,Scenedesmusrubescens andChlorellavulgaris Primary-treated municipal wastewater Closed suspended system considering biotic and abiotic factors 41.2–100 TN Su et al. (2012a)
Chlorella sp. andScenedesmus sp. Primary-treated municipal wastewaterat different concentrationsClosed suspended system under the climatic conditions specific toLithuania88.6–96.4 Koreiviene et al. (2014)
Chlorella sp.,Scenedesmus spp. andChlorellazofingiensis Dairy wastewater Closed suspended system for biodiesel production 87.0–91.0 Qin et al. (2016)
Chlorellavulgaris andPlanktothrixisothrix Municipal wastewater Closed suspended system and co-culture effect 43.9–81.5 Silva-Benavides andTorzillo (2012)
Microalgal consortium composed by the families Chlorophyta,
Cyanobacteria, Euglenozoa and OchrophytaPrimary-treated municipal wastewater Closed suspended system 100 Samorì et al. (2013)
Carpet mill industry wastewater native microalgal consortium Carpet mill industry wastewater Closed suspended system for biodiesel production 99.7–99.8 Chinnasamy et al. (2010)
Phormidium sp.,Limnothrix sp.,Anabaena sp.,Westiellopsis sp.,
Fischerella sp. andSpirogyra sp.Primary-treated sewage water Closed suspended system with native filamentous microalgal strains,native unicellular microalgal strains, selected microalgae from
germplasm83.3 Renuka et al. (2013)
100
Rhodobactersphaeroides andChlorellasorokiniana Synthetic high strength organic
wastewaterClosed suspended system 100100Ogbonna et al. (2000)
Synechocystissalina andChlorellavulgaris Synthetic medium Closed suspended system with polyculture 84.5 Gonçalves et al. (2016)
Chlorellavulgaris Treated sewage Algal biofilm airlift photobioreactor ABA-PBR with solid carriers 61.6 Tao et al. (2017)
Betaproteobacteria, Gammaproteobacteria,Flavobacterium,Chlorophyta,
Trebouxiophyceae,Bacillariophyceae, CyanobacteriaSynthetic domestic wastewater Photobioreactor with algal–bacterial granules 59.8-70.5 TN Zhang et al. (2018)
99% NH4-N
Chlorellavulgaris-Bacillus licheniformis
Microcystisaeruginosa-Bacillus licheniformisSynthetic wastewater Algae-bacteria symbiotic system 88.95 TN Ji et al. (2018)
21.56 TN
TN - total nitrogen mg N L− 1.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
18wastewater whilst microalgal consortia can be only applied in tertiary
treatment of wastewater (Gonçalves et al., 2017). HRAP with algae-
dominated consortium shows high removal efficiency for COD, total
nitrogen and phosphorus from untreated municipal wastewater (Kim
et al., 2014). Furthermore, a hydrodynamic model of HRAP with a ratio
length/width (L/W) higher than 10 shows better performance with
respect to the velocity uniformity and reduced shear stresses
(Hadiyanto et al., 2013). However, increasing depth significantly in-
creases overall areal productivity (Sutherland et al., 2014).
Despite their utility, the HRAP systems present some hurdles. In
these systems, there is lack of balance in oxygen consumption and
production by bacteria and algae, caused by difficulties in light pene-
tration and mixing. However, closed photobioreactors (PBRs) and
closed tanks have been proposed to overcome the obstacles of light
penetration, mixing and presence of predators (He et al., 2013;
Alcántara et al., 2015a). The demand of an additional step to harvest
microalgae biomass from treated effluent is another issue with HRAPs,
which is addressed by immobilized growth system. There are several
immobilization techniques to decrease time and costs for harvesting
microalgae as following; i) a centrate (the liquid removed from thick-
ened sludge) microalgal-bacterial consortium in biofilm reactor
(Posadas et al., 2013; De Godos et al., 2009), ii) growth immobilization
in solid carriers such as beads (De-Bashan et al., 2004), iii) usage ofmicroorganisms with flocculation characteristics as artificial consortia
(Van Den Hende et al., 2011). To further improve the capacity of these
systems in nutrient removal, some studies investigated the complex
interactions between physico-chemical factors such as light, photo-
period, temperature, nutrients concentration, pH, microalgal: bacterial
ratio and biological factors (Gonçalves et al., 2017). Examples of re-
levant biological factors include pathogens, viral attack, protozoa pre-
dation and competition with bacteria over the available nutrients
(Gonçalves et al., 2017). Large seasonal variations in photoperiod and
temperature affect wastewater treatment efficiency and biomass pro-ductivity in HRAP (Delgadillo-Mirquez et al., 2016). The photoperiod
duration has been shown to affect algal-bacterial population dynamics
in a photo-bioreactor for municipal wastewater treatment (Lee et al.,
2015).
4.3. Nitrogenrecoverybychemicalprocesses
4.3.1. Strippingprocess
The stripping technology is a chemical ammonium removal process
promoting conversion of NH
4+to NH 3by forcing air or other gas into
the wastewater to get NH 3into the gas phase. The ammonia stripping
process includes four major steps including: i) NH 4+conversion to
ammonia gas (NH 3), ii) NH 3diffusion to the air-water interface, iii) NH 3
release to the air at the interface, and iv) NH 3diffuses from the air-
water interface into the air above. The process is affected by pH, tem-
perature and mass transfer area. In common applications, NH 4+in
wastewater can be released from the aqueous phase by air, steam orbiogas (Limoli et al., 2016).
Both continuous and batch mode can be used for operation of
strippers. To avoid NH
3emission into the air causing the greenhouse
effect, NH 3is typically absorbed by phosphorus acid (Shen et al., 2017).
Sulfuric acid is also used for the absorption of the stripped ammonia as
ammonium sulphate. According to the initial ammonia concentration in
wastewater, it is introduced at stoichiometric concentration. The most
common use for nitrogen recovered in this process is the conversion to
fertilizer with 40%–60% ammonium sulfate solution and low organic
contamination. This can be produced directly from the ammonia
stripping process effluent after pH neutralization (Laureni et al., 2013).
Thus, the ammonia stripping process can be suggested as a beneficial
technology to support agriculture in areas where this is required.
However, only NH 4+can be removed by this method, with no impact
on phosphorous and COD removal from wastewater (Cao et al., 2019b).4.3.2. Struviteprecipitation
Struvite precipitation is considered as the one of the preferred
chemical technologies in NH 4+and phosphorus removal from waste-
water, with significant potential for nitrogen recovery (Cao et al.,
2019b; Huang et al., 2016; Song et al., 2018). It is a highly effective,
simple and environmentally friendly method, with nitrogen recoverableas the fertilizer (Barbosa et al., 2016). Struvite is a valuable fertilizer in
the form of white crystalline solid which is poorly soluble in water. It is
formed through the following simplified reaction; Mg
2++ NH 4+ +
PO43−+ 6H 2O → MgNH 4PO46H2O. This reaction can be mainly af-
fected by two factors including molar ratio of Mg:NH 4:P and pH (op-
timum pH 9.0–10.0) (Cao et al., 2019b). Struvite precipitation with anMg:NH4:PO4 ratio of 1:1:1 could remove 95% of NH
4+from anaero-
bically treated effluents in 30 s (Escudero et al., 2015). At higher pH,the solubility of struvite reduces resulting in struvite crystals formation.
Several studies investigated struvite formation and phosphorus and
ammonium recovery from urine, livestock manure, anaerobically-
treated effluents, industrial wastewater and landfill leachate (Etter
et al., 2011; Huang et al., 2011; Song et al., 2011; Crutchik and Garrido,
2011; Di Iaconi et al., 2010). One considerable difficulty with struvite
precipitation is the large amount of ammonium and phosphorus found
in anaerobically-treated effluents from livestock manures. These re-
quire large amounts of magnesium salts for effective struvite pre-
cipitation. Unfortunately, due to high cost of the reagents and necessity
of pH control, very few industrial-scale struvite crystallization plants
are in operation (Escudero et al., 2015). However, magnesium oxide
(MgO) is recently suggested as a proper Mg source for struvite crys-
tallization. It is cheap, existing in large quantities, and also it has high
alkalinity and adsorption capacity for removal of organic and polymeric
substance, such as polysaccharide, polyphenols, and organic acid (Cao
et al., 2019b; Chimenos et al., 2003; Cai et al., 2017). Furthermore,
combining ammonia stripping with struvite precipitation could feasibly
remove ammonia nitrogen, phosphate, and COD from digested swinewastewater with high efficiency, low cost, and environmental friend-
liness (Cao et al., 2019b). Furthermore, no pH adjustment is needed
using Na
3PO4·12H 2O as the PO 43−source which is an effective reagent
for ammonium removal and struvite precipitation due to reaching tohigh pH in the medium.
5. Perspectives
Partial nitritation and anammox for mainstream wastewater treat-
ment is an attractive concept because it would reduce energy require-
ments for aeration and allow a larger fraction of organic matter to be
valorized as biogas. However, the concept is challenging because of the
low growth rate of anammox bacteria at low temperatures, full-scale
operation is remaining a challenge under winter conditions. The long-
term stability of the process has also been pointed out as an aspect
requiring further research. Stable nitrite production plays a key role for
long-term operation of coupled partial nitritation and anammox.
Therefore, effective strategies such as organic carbon and reaction time,
etc should be further investigated to maintain nitrite production for
different wastewater compositions and operational conditions.
Another concern with anammox processes is the nitrate present in
effluent. Both the anammox bacteria themselves and failure to suppress
NOB activity will lead to nitrate production, which means the effluent
may require further treatment. This challenge could be addressed by a
SNAD process simultaneously accomplishing partial nitrification, ana-
mmox, and denitrification. However, these conditions present serious
difficulties for conventional nitrification and denitrification methods.
To address the issue with toxic substances present in nitrate-en-
riched industrial wastewaters, it is required to perform a comprehen-sive analysis of chemical composition and then adapt the treatment
process accordingly. Granules or biofilms based systems are promising
approaches when it comes to mitigating negative effects of toxic com-
ponents in nitrate-enriched industrial wastewater.S. Rahimi,etal. Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
19In case of nitrogen recovery, bioelectrochemical systems can make a
shortcut in ammonium removal from wastewater through the direct
recovery in the form of ammonia rather than reduction to nitrogen gas.
Nitrogen recovery by bioelectrochemical systems is advantageous, as
there is no demand for additional substances to increase pH for am-
monia stripping at the cathodic compartment. Furthermore, no aeration
is required for ammonium oxidation and nitrogen removal which makes
it an energy-efficient ammonia recovery system compared with other
nitrogen removal technologies.
The MFC capital cost is around 30 times higher than that of con-
ventional treatment of activated sludge for domestic wastewater. For
the commercialization of MFC-based wastewater treatment systems,
further assessment of several factors such as biocatalyst microorganism,
electrode materials, reaction control, resistance for electron transfer,
large-scale reactor, long-term durability, and the relatively high cost of
electrode materials, cost of fabrication and cost of operation are re-
quired to be considered.
From the synthetic biology point of view, ALE-based approaches
leading to evolved NP-degrading bacteria can facilitate biodegradation
of toxic nitro group-containing components circumventing necessity of
safety evaluation for introduction of GMM into contaminated sites.
Moreover, QS system plays a crucial role in wastewater treatment and
further engineering of the QS system can be promising strategy for
regulating denitrification process, improving activity and performance
of anammox, and efficient bioelectrochemical systems.
One kilogram phosphorus and nitrogen removal costs about 3.0 and
4.4 USD using biological conventional wastewater treatment, respec-
tively. Meanwhile, utilization of wastewater for microalgae cultivation
decreases almost 100% demand of freshwater and nutrient leading re-
markable reduction in their production cost. The utilization of micro-
algae for wastewater treatment has high efficiency for treatment of
various wastewaters, nutrient recovery in the form of valuable biomass
for biofertilizers, biopesticides, animal feed, and pharmaceuticals aswell as for energy recovery as feedstock to produce biofuels such as
biodiesel and bioethanol and reducing greenhouse gas (CO
2) emission.
In terms of energy demand, it competes with activated sludge processeswith energy demand of ~500 Wh per m
3of wastewater. Whereas only
energy ranges from 1.5 to 8.0 Wh per m3is needed for mixing which is
the most energy demanding factor in conventional HRAPs. However,
several challenges for microalgae-based technology should be ad-
dressed for the large-scale operation. This technology requires vast land
area for installing ponds. Therefore, possible environmental impacts of
land use change (LUC) and changes carbon stocks in soil should be
investigated. Furthermore, characteristics of wastewater such as nu-
trients and toxic compounds and environmental factors including pH,
temperature, light, O 2, and CO 2should be optimized for microalgae
growth and thereby efficient wastewater treatment.
Last but not least, to obtain more effective consortia for treating
different pollutants such as nitrogen sources, selection and bioaug-mentation of effective microorganisms from broad possible combina-
tions need to be evaluated. Novel computational tools such as genome-
scale metabolic models (GEMs) of relevant microbial species can be
employed to predict the efficient microbial species as well as optimum
ratio of those species in consortia achieving the maximum nitrogen
removal in wastewater.
Additionally, interactions between organisms in the consortia need
to be investigated through metabolite profiling to make beneficial
communications among microorganisms for optimal pollutant removal.
“Multi-omics” such as metagenomic/metatranscriptomic/metapro-
teomic approaches and microbiome analysis of wastewater treatment
processes are needed to enhance our understanding of genes involved in
wastewater treatment processes in specific microbial communities. This
information can be useful for improvement of treatment systems based
on different nitrogen removal technologies.Acknowledgment
This study was supported by a grant from the Carl Tryggers
Foundation [CTS17:312] and ÅForsk grant [19-508].
References
Alcántara, C., Domínguez, J.M., García, D., Blanco, S., Pérez, R., García-Encina, P.A.,
Muñoz, R., 2015a. Evaluation of wastewater treatment in a novel anoxic-aerobic
algal-bacterial photobioreactor with biomass recycling through carbon and nitrogen
mass balances. Bioresour. Technol. 191, 173–186. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2015.04.125.
Alcántara, C., Fernández, C., García-Encina, P.A., Muñoz, R., 2015b. Mixotrophic meta-
bolism ofChlorellasorokiniana and algal-bacterial consortia under extended dark-
light periods and nutrient starvation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 99, 2393–2404.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-014-6125-5.
Ali, M., Okabe, S., 2015. Anammox-based technologies for nitrogen removal: advances in
process start-up and remaining issues. Chemosphere 141, 144–153. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.06.094.
Ali, M., Oshiki, M., Rathnayake, L., Ishii, S., Satoh, H., Okabe, S., 2015. Rapid and suc-
cessful start-up of anammox process by immobilizing the minimal quantity of bio-
mass in PVA-SA gel beads. Water Res. 79, 147–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2015.04.024.
Al-Mamun, A., Baawain, M.S., Egger, F., Al-Muhtaseb, A.H., Ng, H.Y., 2017. Optimization
of a baffled-reactor microbial fuel cell using autotrophic denitrifying bio-cathode forremoving nitrogen and recovering electrical energy. Biochem. Eng. J. 120, 93–102.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2016.12.015.
Appels, L., Baeyens, J., Degrève, J., Dewil, R., 2008. Principles and potential of the
anaerobic digestion of waste-activated sludge. Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 34,
755–781. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecs.2008.06.002.
Arora, P.K., Srivastava, A., Singh, V.P., 2014. Bacterial degradation of nitrophenols and
their derivatives. J. Hazard. Mater. 266, 42–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.
2013.12.011.
Awata, T., Goto, Y., Kindaichi, T., Ozaki, N., Ohashi, A., 2015. Nitrogen removal using an
anammox membrane bioreactor at low temperature. Water Sci. Technol. 72,
2148–2153. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2015.436.
Azuara, M.P., Aparicio, P.J., 1984. Effects of light quality, CO 2 tensions and NO 3+-
concentrations on the inorganic nitrogen metabolism of Chlamydomonasreinhardii.
Photosynth. Res. 5, 97–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00028523.
Barbosa, S.G., Peixoto, L., Meulman, B., Alves, M.M., Pereira, M.A., 2016. A design of
experiments to assess phosphorous removal and crystal properties in struvite pre-
cipitation of source separated urine using different Mg sources. Chem. Eng. J. 298,
146–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2016.03.148.
Barsanti, L., Gualtieri, P., 2006. Algae-anatomy, Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Second
ed. CRC Press, USA, pp. 162–209.
Baumann, B., Snozzi, M., Zehnder, A.J.B., Van, Meer, Der, J.R., 1996. Dynamics of de-
nitrification activity of Paracoccusdenitrificans in continuous culture during aerobic-
anaerobic changes. J. Bacteriol. 178, 4367–4374. https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.178.
15.4367-4374.1996.
Biradar, P.M., Dhamole, P.B., Nair, R.R., Roy, S.B., Satpati, S.K., D'Souza, S.F., ... Pandit,
A.B., 2008. Long-term stability of biological denitrification process for high strength
nitrate removal from wastewater of uranium industry. Environ. Prog. 27 (3),
365–372. https://doi.org/10.1002/ep.10283.
Blackburne, R., Yuan, Z., Keller, J., 2008. Demonstration of nitrogen removal via nitrite in
a sequencing batch reactor treating domestic wastewater. Water Res. 42, 2166–2176.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2007.11.029.
Boley, A., Müller, W.R., Haider, G., 2000. Biodegradable polymers as solid substrate and
biofilm carrier for denitrification in recirculated aquaculture systems. Aquac. Eng.22, 75–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0144-8609(00)00033-9.
Butti, S.K., Velvizhi, G., Sulonen, M.L.K., Haavisto, J.M., Oguz Koroglu, E., Yusuf
Cetinkaya, A., Singh, S., Arya, D., Annie Modestra, J., Vamsi Krishna, K., Verma, A.,
Ozkaya, B., Lakaniemi, A.M., Puhakka, J.A., Venkata Mohan, S., 2016. Microbialelectrochemical technologies with the perspective of harnessing bioenergy: maneu-
vering towards upscaling. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 53, 462–476. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rser.2015.08.058.
Cai, Y., Li, C., Wu, D., Wang, W., Tan, F., Wang, X., Wong, P.K., Qiao, X., 2017. Highly
active MgO nanoparticles for simultaneous bacterial inactivation and heavy metalremoval from aqueous solution. Chem. Eng. J. 312, 158–166. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cej.2016.11.134.
Calero, F., Ullrich, W.R., Aparicio, P.J., 1980. Regulation by monochromatic light of ni-
trate uptake in Chlorella fusca. In: The Blue Light Syndrome. Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, pp. 411–421.
Cao, S., Zhou, Y., 2019. New direction in biological nitrogen removal from industrial
nitrate wastewater via anammox. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 103, 7459–7466.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-019-10070-3.
Cao, Y.S., Kwok, B.H., Yong, W.H., Chua, S.C., Wah, Y.L., Yahya, A.G., 2013a. The main
stream autotrophic nitrogen removal in the largest full scale activated sludge process
in Singapore: process analysis. In: Proceedings of WEF/IWA Nutrient Removal and
Recovery 2013: Trends in Resource Recovery and Use, pp. 28–31.
Cao, S., Wang, S., Peng, Y., Wu, C., Du, R., Gong, L., Ma, B., 2013b. Achieving partial
denitrification with sludge fermentation liquid as carbon source: the effect of seedingS. Rahimi,etal.
Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
20sludge. Bioresour. Technol. 149, 570–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.
09.072.
Cao, X., Qian, D., Meng, X., 2013c. Effects of pH on nitrite accumulation during waste-
water denitrification. Environ. Technol. (United Kingdom) 34, 45–51. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09593330.2012.679700.
Cao, S., Du, R., Niu, M., Li, B., Ren, N., Peng, Y., 2016. Integrated anaerobic ammonium
oxidization with partial denitrification process for advanced nitrogen removal from
high-strength wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 221, 37–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biortech.2016.08.082.
Cao, Y., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., Daigger, G.T., 2017. Mainstream partial ni-
tritation–anammox in municipal wastewater treatment: status, bottlenecks, and fur-ther studies. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 101, 1365–1383. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00253-016-8058-7.
Cao, S., Du, R., Peng, Y., Li, B., Wang, S., 2019a. Novel two stage partial denitrification
(PD)-Anammox process for tertiary nitrogen removal from low carbon/nitrogen (C/
N) municipal sewage. Chem. Eng. J. 362, 107–115.
Cao, L., Wang, J., Xiang, S., Huang, Z., Ruan, R., Liu, Y., 2019b. Nutrient removal from
digested swine wastewater by combining ammonia stripping with struvite pre-
cipitation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 26, 6725–6734. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-019-04153-x.
Carvalho, G., Lemos, P.C., Oehmen, A., Reis, M.A.M., 2007. Denitrifying phosphorus
removal: linking the process performance with the microbial community structure.
Water Res. 41, 4383–4396. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2007.06.065.
Castro-Barros, C.M., Daelman, M.R.J., Mampaey, K.E., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., Volcke,
E.I.P., 2015. Effect of aeration regime on N2O emission from partial nitritation-anammox in a full-scale granular sludge reactor. Water Res. 68, 793–803. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.10.056.
Cema, G., Wiszniowski, J., Zabczyński, S., Zabłocka-Godlewska, E., Raszka, A., Surmacz-
Górska, J., 2007. Biological nitrogen removal from landfill leachate by deammoni-fication assisted by heterotrophic denitrification in a rotating biological contactor
(RBC). Water Sci. Technol. 55, 35–42. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.239.
Chaudhary, D.K., Kim, J., 2019. New insights into bioremediation strategies for oil-con-
taminated soil in cold environments. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 142, 58–72. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2019.05.001.
Chen, H., Liu, S., Yang, F., Xue, Y., Wang, T., 2009. The development of simultaneous
partial nitrification, ANAMMOX and denitrification (SNAD) process in a single re-
actor for nitrogen removal. Bioresour. Technol. 100 (4), 1548–1554. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2008.09.003.
Chen, Q., Ni, J., Ma, T., Liu, T., Zheng, M., 2015. Bioaugmentation treatment of municipal
wastewater with heterotrophic-aerobic nitrogen removal bacteria in a pilot-scaleSBR. Bioresour. Technol. 183, 25–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.02.
022.
Chimenos, J.M., Fernández, A.I., Villalba, G., Segarra, M., Urruticoechea, A., Artaza, B.,
Espiell, F., 2003. Removal of ammonium and phosphates from wastewater resulting
from the process of cochineal extraction using MgO-containing by-product. Water
Res. 37, 1601–1607. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(02)00526-2.
Chinnasamy, S., Bhatnagar, A., Hunt, R.W., Das, K.C., 2010. Microalgae cultivation in a
wastewater dominated by carpet mill effluents for biofuel applications. Bioresour.
Technol. 101, 3097–3105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.12.026.
Cho, S., Takahashi, Y., Fujii, N., Yamada, Y., Satoh, H., Okabe, S., 2010. Nitrogen removal
performance and microbial community analysis of an anaerobic up-flow granular bed
anammox reactor. Chemosphere 78, 1129–1135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2009.12.034.
Choi, H.J., Lee, S.M., 2015. Effect of the N/P ratio on biomass productivity and nutrient
removal from municipal wastewater. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 38, 761–766. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00449-014-1317-z.
Cimbritz, M., Edefell, E., Thörnqvist, E., El-taliawy, H., Ekenberg, M., Burzio, C., Modin,
O., Persson, F., Wilén, B.M., Bester, K., Falås, P., 2019. PAC dosing to anMBBR–Effects on adsorption of micropollutants, nitrification and microbial commu-
nity. Sci. Total Environ. 677, 571–579.
Clauwaert, P., Rabaey, K., Aelterman, P., De Schamphelaire, L., Pham, T.H., Boeckx, P.,
Boon, N., Verstraete, W., 2007. Biological denitrification in microbial fuel cells.Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 3354–3360. https://doi.org/10.1021/es062580r.
Cowan, D., Meyer, Q., Stafford, W., Muyanga, S., Cameron, R., Wittwer, P., 2005.
Metagenomic gene discovery: past, present and future. Trends Biotechnol. 23,321–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2005.04.001.
Crutchik, D., Garrido, J.M., 2011. Struvite crystallization versus amorphous magnesium
and calcium phosphate precipitation during the treatment of a saline industrial was-
tewater. Water Sci. Technol. 64, 2460–2467. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2011.836.
Daims, H., Lebedeva, E.V., Pjevac, P., Han, P., Herbold, C., Albertsen, M., Jehmlich, N.,
Palatinszky, M., Vierheilig, J., Bulaev, A., Kirkegaard, R.H., Von Bergen, M., Rattei,
T., Bendinger, B., Nielsen, P.H., Wagner, M., 2015. Complete nitrification by
Nitrospira bacteria. Nature 528, 504–509. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16461.
Daverey, A., Su, S.H., Huang, Y.T., Chen, S.S., Sung, S., Lin, J.G., 2013. Partial ni-
trification and anammox process: a method for high strength optoelectronic in-
dustrial wastewater treatment. Water Res. 47, 2929–2937. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.watres.2013.01.028.
De Clippeleir, H., Vlaeminck, S.E., De Wilde, F., Daeninck, K., Mosquera, M., Boeckx, P.,
Verstraete, W., Boon, N., 2013. One-stage partial nitritation/anammox at 15 C on
pretreated sewage: feasibility demonstration at lab-scale. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 97, 10199–10210. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-013-4744-x.
De Godos, I., González, C., Becares, E., García-Encina, P.A., Muñoz, R., 2009.
Simultaneous nutrients and carbon removal during pretreated swine slurry de-
gradation in a tubular biofilm photobioreactor. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 82,187–194. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-008-1825-3.
de Graaff, M.S., Vieno, N.M., Kujawa-Roeleveld, K., Zeeman, G., Temmink, H., Buisman,C.J.N., 2011. Fate of hormones and pharmaceuticals during combined anaerobic
treatment and nitrogen removal by partial nitritation-anammox in vacuum collected
black water. Water Res. 45, 375–383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.08.
023.
De-Bashan, L.E., Moreno, M., Hernandez, J.P., Bashan, Y., 2002. Removal of ammonium
and phosphorus ions from synthetic wastewater by the microalgae Chlorellavulgaris
coimmobilized in alginate beads with the microalgae growth-promoting bacteriumAzospirillumbrasilense. Water Res. 36, 2941–2948. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-
1354(01)00522-X.
De-Bashan, L.E., Hernandez, J.P., Morey, T., Bashan, Y., 2004. Microalgae growth-pro-
moting bacteria as “helpers” for microalgae: a novel approach for removing ammo-nium and phosphorus from municipal wastewater. Water Res. 38, 466–474. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2003.09.022.
Delgadillo-Mirquez, L., Lopes, F., Taidi, B., Pareau, D., 2016. Nitrogen and phosphate
removal from wastewater with a mixed microalgae and bacteria culture. Biotechnol.
Reports 11, 18–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2016.04.003.
Deng, S.K., Zhang, W.M., Wang, J.P., Gao, Y.Z., Xu, Y., Zhou, N.Y., 2019. Single point
mutation in the transcriptional regulator PnpR renders Pseudomonas sp. strain WBC-
3 capable of utilizing 2-chloro-4-nitrophenol. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad. 143,
104732. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2019.104732.
Di Capua, F., Pirozzi, F., Lens, P.N.L., Esposito, G., 2019. Electron donors for autotrophic
denitrification. Chem. Eng. J. 362, 922–937. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2019.01.069.
Di Iaconi, C., Pagano, M., Ramadori, R., Lopez, A., 2010. Nitrogen recovery from a sta-
bilized municipal landfill leachate. Bioresour. Technol. 101, 1732–1736. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.10.013.
Dosta, J., Fernández, I., Vázquez-Padín, J.R., Mosquera-Corral, A., Campos, J.L., Mata-
Álvarez, J., Méndez, R., 2008. Short- and long-term effects of temperature on the
Anammox process. J. Hazard. Mater. 154, 688–693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jhazmat.2007.10.082.
Du, R., Peng, Y., Cao, S., Wu, C., Weng, D., Wang, S., He, J., 2014. Advanced nitrogen
removal with simultaneous Anammox and denitrification in sequencing batch reactor.
Bioresour. Technol. 162, 316–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.03.041.
Du, R., Peng, Y., Cao, S., Wang, S., Wu, C., 2015. Advanced nitrogen removal from
wastewater by combining anammox with partial denitrification. Bioresour. Technol.
179, 497–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.12.043.
Du, R., Cao, S., Li, B., Niu, M., Wang, S., Peng, Y., 2017. Performance and microbial
community analysis of a novel DEAMOX based on partial-denitrification and ana-
mmox treating ammonia and nitrate wastewaters. Water Res. 108, 46–56. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.10.051.
Elena, S.F., Lenski, R.E., 2003. Evolution experiments with microorganisms: the dynamics
and genetic bases of adaptation. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4, 457–469. https://doi.org/10.
1038/nrg1088.
EPA, 1993. Nitrogen Control. USEPA, Washington, DC.
Escudero, A., Blanco, F., Lacalle, A., Pinto, M., 2015. Struvite precipitation for ammonium
removal from anaerobically treated effluents. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 3, 413–419.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2015.01.004.
Etter, B., Tilley, E., Khadka, R., Udert, K.M., 2011. Low-cost struvite production using
source-separated urine in Nepal. Water Res. 45, 852–862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2010.10.007.
Fernandes, H., Jungles, M.K., Hoffmann, H., Antonio, R.V., Costa, R.H.R., 2013. Full-scale
sequencing batch reactor (SBR) for domestic wastewater: performance and diversity
of microbial communities. Bioresour. Technol. 132, 262–268. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biortech.2013.01.027.
Fernández-Nava, Y., Marañón, E., Soons, J., Castrillón, L., 2008. Denitrification of was-
tewater containing high nitrate and calcium concentrations. Bioresour. Technol. 99,
7976–7981. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2008.03.048.
Ferrera, I., Sánchez, O., 2016. Insights into microbial diversity in wastewater treatment
systems: how far have we come? Biotechnol. Adv. 34, 790–802. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biotechadv.2016.04.003.
Furukawa, K., Inatomi, Y., Qiao, S., Quan, L., Yamamoto, T., Isaka, K., Sumino, T., 2009.
Innovative treatment system for digester liquor using anammox process. Bioresour.
Technol. 100, 5437–5443. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2008.11.055.
Galí, A., Dosta, J., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., Mata-Alvarez, J., 2007. Two ways to achieve
an anammox influent from real reject water treatment at lab-scale: partial SBR ni-
trification and SHARON process. Process Biochem. 42, 715–720. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.procbio.2006.12.002.
Gao, C., Liu, L., Yang, F., 2017. Development of a novel proton exchange membrane-free
integrated MFC system with electric membrane bioreactor and air contact oxidation
bed for efficient and energy-saving wastewater treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 238,
472–483. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.04.086.
Ge, Y.S., Yamaguchi, A., Sakuma, H., 2009. Study on the performance of anaerobic am-
monium oxidation treatment using PVA gel as a carrier. Water Sci. Technol. 59,1037–1041. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2009.057.
Ge, S., Peng, Y., Wang, S., Lu, C., Cao, X., Zhu, Y., 2012. Nitrite accumulation under
constant temperature in anoxic denitrification process: the effects of carbon sources
and COD/NO 3-N. Bioresour. Technol. 114, 137–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2012.03.016.
Ge, S., Peng, Y., Qiu, S., Zhu, A., Ren, N., 2014. Complete nitrogen removal from mu-
nicipal wastewater via partial nitrification by appropriately alternating anoxic/
aerobic conditions in a continuous plug-flow step feed process. Water Res. 55,
95–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.01.058.
Ge, S., Wang, S., Yang, X., Qiu, S., Li, B., Peng, Y., 2015. Detection of nitrifiers and
evaluation of partial nitrification for wastewater treatment: a review. Chemosphere
140, 85–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.02.004.
Ghafari, S., Hasan, M., Aroua, M.K., 2008. Bio-electrochemical removal of nitrate from
water and wastewater – a review. Bioresour. Technol. 99, 3965–3974. https://doi.S. Rahimi,etal.
Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
21org/10.1016/j.biortech.2007.05.026.
Gilbert, E.M., Agrawal, S., Karst, S.M., Horn, H., Nielsen, P.H., Lackner, S., 2014. Low
temperature partial nitritation/anammox in a moving bed biofilm reactor treating
low strength wastewater. Environ. Sci. Technol. 48, 8784–8792. https://doi.org/10.
1021/es501649m.
Gilbert, E.M., Agrawal, S., Schwartz, T., Horn, H., Lackner, S., 2015. Comparing different
reactor configurations for Partial Nitritation/Anammox at low temperatures. Water
Res. 81, 92–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.05.022.
Glass, C., Silverstein, J., 1998. Denitrification kinetics of high nitrate concentration water:
pH effect on inhibition and nitrite accumulation. Water Res. 32, 831–839. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(97)00260-1.
Gómez, M.A., Hontoria, E., González-López, J., 2002. Effect of dissolved oxygen con-
centration on nitrate removal from groundwater using a denitrifying submerged
filter. J. Hazard. Mater. 90, 267–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3894(01)
00353-3.
Gonçalves, A.L., Pires, J.C.M., Simões, M., 2016. Biotechnological potential of
Synechocystis salina co-cultures with selected microalgae and cyanobacteria: nu-trients removal, biomass and lipid production. Bioresour. Technol. 200, 279–286.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.10.023.
Gonçalves, A.L., Pires, J.C.M., Simões, M., 2017. A review on the use of microalgal
consortia for wastewater treatment. Algal Res. 24, 403–415. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.algal.2016.11.008.
Gong, L., Huo, M., Yang, Q., Li, J., Ma, B., Zhu, R., Wang, S., Peng, Y., 2013. Performance
of heterotrophic partial denitrification under feast-famine condition of electrondonor: a case study using acetate as external carbon source. Bioresour. Technol. 133,
263–269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.12.108.
González-Fernández, C., Molinuevo-Salces, B., García-González, M.C., 2011. Nitrogen
transformations under different conditions in open ponds by means of microalgae-
bacteria consortium treating pig slurry. Bioresour. Technol. 102, 960–966. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.09.052.
Grobbelaar, J.U., 2004. Algal nutrition - mineral nutrition. In: Richmond, A. (Ed.),
Handbook of Microalgal Culture: Biotechnology and Applied Phycology. Blackwell
Science Ltd, Oxford, UK, pp. 3–19.
Gumaelius, L., Magnusson, G., Pettersson, B., Dalhammar, G., 2001. Comamonas deni-
trificans sp. nov., an efficient denitrifying bacterium isolated from activated sludge.
Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 51, 999–1006. https://doi.org/10.1099/00207713-51-3-
999.
Guo, H., Zhou, J., Su, J., Zhang, Z., 2005. Integration of nitrification and denitrification in
airlift bioreactor. Biochem. Eng. J. 23, 57–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2004.
05.010.
Guo, Q., Xing, B.S., Li, P., Xu, J.L., Yang, C.C., Jin, R.C., 2015. Anaerobic ammonium
oxidation (anammox) under realistic seasonal temperature variations: characteristics
of biogranules and process performance. Bioresour. Technol. 192, 765–773. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.06.049.
Haddadi, S., Elbeshbishy, E., Lee, H.S., 2013. Implication of diffusion and significance of
anodic pH in nitrogen-recovering microbial electrochemical cells. Bioresour. Technol.142, 562–569. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.05.075.
Hadiyanto, H., Elmore, S., Van Gerven, T., Stankiewicz, A., 2013. Hydrodynamic eva-
luations in high rate algae pond (HRAP) design. Chem. Eng. J. 217, 231–239. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2012.12.015.
Hasebe, Y., Meguro, H., Kanai, Y., Eguchi, M., Osaka, T., Tsuneda, S., 2017. High-rate
nitrification of electronic industry wastewater by using nitrifying granules. Water Sci.
Technol. 76, 3171–3180. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2017.431.
He, P.J., Mao, B., Lü, F., Shao, L.M., Lee, D.J., Chang, J.S., 2013. The combined effect of
bacteria and Chlorellavulgaris on the treatment of municipal wastewaters. Bioresour.
Technol. 146, 562–568. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.07.111.
Hendrickx, T.L.G., Wang, Y., Kampman, C., Zeeman, G., Temmink, H., Buisman, C.J.N.,
2012. Autotrophic nitrogen removal from low strength waste water at low tem-
perature. Water Res. 46, 2187–2193. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.01.037.
Hendrickx, T.L.G., Kampman, C., Zeeman, G., Temmink, H., Hu, Z., Kartal, B., Buisman,
C.J.N., 2014. High specific activity for anammox bacteria enriched from activatedsludge at 10°C. Bioresour. Technol. 163, 214–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2014.04.025.
Hernández, D., Riaño, B., Coca, M., García-González, M.C., 2013. Treatment of agro-in-
dustrial wastewater using microalgae-bacteria consortium combined with anaerobic
digestion of the produced biomass. Bioresour. Technol. 135, 598–603. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.09.029.
Hoekstra, M., de Weerd, F.A., Kleerebezem, R., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., 2018.
Deterioration of the anammox process at decreasing temperatures and long SRTs.Environ. Technol. (United Kingdom) 39, 658–668. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09593330.2017.1309078.
Hu, B. lan, Zheng, P., Tang, C. jian, Chen, J. wei, van der Biezen, E., Zhang, L., Ni, B. jie,
Jetten, M.S.M., Yan, J., Yu, H.Q., Kartal, B., 2010. Identification and quantification of
anammox bacteria in eight nitrogen removal reactors. Water Res. 44, 5014–5020.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.07.021.
Hu, Z., Lotti, T., de Kreuk, M., Kleerebezem, R., van Loosdrecht, M., Kruit, J., Jetten,
M.S.M., Kartal, B., 2013. Nitrogen removal by a nitritation-anammox bioreactor atlow temperature. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79, 2807–2812. https://doi.org/10.
1128/AEM.03987-12.
Huang, H., Xu, C., Zhang, W., 2011. Removal of nutrients from piggery wastewater using
struvite precipitation and pyrogenation technology. Bioresour. Technol. 102,2523–2528. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.11.054.
Huang, H., Liu, J., Xiao, J., Zhang, P., Gao, F., 2016. Highly efficient recovery of am-
monium nitrogen from coking wastewater by coupling struvite precipitation andmicrowave radiation technology. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 4, 3688–3696. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.6b00247.Hulatt, C.J., Lakaniemi, A.M., Puhakka, J.A., Thomas, D.N., 2012. Energy demands of
nitrogen supply in mass cultivation of two commercially important microalgal spe-cies,Chlorellavulgaris andDunaliella tertiolecta. Bioenergy Res. 5, 669–684. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12155-011-9175-x.
Hussain, A., Manuel, M., Tartakovsky, B., 2016. A comparison of simultaneous organic
carbon and nitrogen removal in microbial fuel cells and microbial electrolysis cells. J.Environ. Manag. 173, 23–33. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.02.025.
Isaka, K., Date, Y., Sumino, T., Tsuneda, S., 2007a. Ammonium removal performance of
anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing bacteria immobilized in polyethylene glycol gelcarrier: anammox bacteria immobilized in gel carrier. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
76, 1457–1465. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-007-1106-6.
Isaka, K., Sumino, T., Tsuneda, S., 2007b. High nitrogen removal performance at mod-
erately low temperature utilizing anaerobic ammonium oxidation reactions. J. Biosci.Bioeng. 103, 486–490. https://doi.org/10.1263/jbb.103.486.
Isaka, K., Date, Y., Kimura, Y., Sumino, T., Tsuneda, S., 2008. Nitrogen removal perfor-
mance using anaerobic ammonium oxidation at low temperatures. FEMS Microbiol.
Lett. 282, 32–38. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2008.01095.x.
Isaka, K., Itokawa, H., Kimura, Y., Noto, K., Murakami, T., 2011. Novel autotrophic ni-
trogen removal system using gel entrapment technology. Bioresour. Technol. 102,
7720–7726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2011.06.001.
Jayapriya, J., Ramamurthy, V., 2012. Use of non-native phenazines to improve the per-
formance of Pseudomonasaeruginosa MTCC 2474 catalysed fuel cells. Bioresour.
Technol. 124, 23–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.08.034.
Ji, B., Yang, K., Zhu, L., Jiang, Y., Wang, H., Zhou, J., Zhang, H., 2015. Aerobic deni-
trification: a review of important advances of the last 30 years. Biotechnol.
Bioprocess Eng. 20, 643–651. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12257-015-0009-0.
Ji, X., Jiang, M., Zhang, J., Jiang, X., Zheng, Z., 2018. The interactions of algae-bacteria
symbiotic system and its effects on nutrients removal from synthetic wastewater.
Bioresour. Technol. 247, 44–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.09.074.
Jiang, K., Sanseverino, J., Chauhan, A., Lucas, S., Copeland, A., Lapidus, A., Del Rio, T.G.,
Dalin, E., Tice, H., Bruce, D., Goodwin, L., Pitluck, S., Sims, D., Brettin, T., Detter,J.C., Han, C., Chang, Y.J., Larimer, F., Land, M., Hauser, L., Kyrpides, N.C.,
Mikhailova, N., Moser, S., Jegier, P., Close, D., DeBruyn, J.M., Wang, Y., Layton, A.C.,
Allen, M.S., Sayler, G.S., 2012. Complete genome sequence of Thaueraaminoar-
omatica strain MZ1T. Stand. Genomic Sci. 6, 325–335. https://doi.org/10.4056/sigs.
2696029.
Jin, Y., Ding, D., Feng, C., Tong, S., Suemura, T., Zhang, F., 2012. Performance of se-
quencing batch biofilm reactors with different control systems in treating synthetic
municipal wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 104, 12–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2011.08.086.
Kalia, V.C., Prakash, J., Ray, S., Koul, S., 2018. Application of microbial quorum sensing
systems for bioremediation of wastewaters. In: Quorum Sensing and its
Biotechnological Applications. Springer, Singapore, pp. 87–97.
Kampschreur, M.J., Temmink, H., Kleerebezem, R., Jetten, M.S.M., van Loosdrecht,
M.C.M., 2009. Nitrous oxide emission during wastewater treatment. Water Res. 43,
4093–4103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.03.001.
Kartal, B., Kuenen, J.G., Van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., 2010. Sewage treatment with ana-
mmox. Science (80-.) 328, 702–703. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1185941.
Kato, S., 2015. Biotechnological aspects of microbial extracellular electron transfer.
Microbes Environ. 30, 133–139. https://doi.org/10.1264/jsme2.ME15028.
Keith, L.H., Telliard, W.A., 1979. Priority pollutants. I. A perspective view. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 13, 416–423. https://doi.org/10.1021/es60152a601.
Khan, S.T., Horiba, Y., Yamamoto, M., Hiraishi, A., 2002. Members of the family coma-
monadaceae as primary denitrifiers in activated sludge as revealed by a polyphasic
approach. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68, 3206–3214. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.
68.7.3206.
Kim, J.R., Zuo, Y., Regan, J.M., Logan, B.E., 2008. Analysis of ammonia loss mechanisms
in microbial fuel cells treating animal wastewater. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 99 (5),1120–1127. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.21687.
Kim, B.H., Kang, Z., Ramanan, R., Choi, J.E., Cho, D.H., Oh, H.M., Kim, H.S., 2014.
Nutrient removal and biofuel production in high rate algal pond using real municipalwastewater. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 24, 1123–1132. https://doi.org/10.4014/jmb.
1312.12057.
Kimura, Y., Itokawa, H., Noto, K., Murakami, T., Isaka, K., 2013. Stability of autotrophic
nitrogen removal system under four non-steady operations. Bioresour. Technol. 137,
196–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.03.130.
Koreiviene, J., Valčiukas, R., Karosiene, J., Baltrenas, P., 2014. Testing of Chlorella/
Scenedesmus microalgae consortia for remediation of wastewater, CO2 mitigation
and algae biomass feasibility for lipid production. J. Environ. Eng. Landsc. Manag.
22, 105–114. https://doi.org/10.3846/16486897.2013.911182.
Kuntke, P., 2013. Nutrient and Energy Recovery from Urine.
Kuntke, P., Śmiech, K.M., Bruning, H., Zeeman, G., Saakes, M., Sleutels, T.H.J.A.,
Hamelers, H.V.M., Buisman, C.J.N., 2012. Ammonium recovery and energy produc-
tion from urine by a microbial fuel cell. Water Res. 46, 2627–2636. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2012.02.025.
Kuntke, P., Sleutels, T.H.J.A., Saakes, M., Buisman, C.J.N., 2014. Hydrogen production
and ammonium recovery from urine by a Microbial Electrolysis Cell. Int. J. Hydrog.
Energy 39, 4771–4778. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2013.10.089.
Kuntke, P., Rodríguez Arredondo, M., Widyakristi, L., Ter Heijne, A., Sleutels, T.H.J.A.,
Hamelers, H.V.M., Buisman, C.J.N., 2017. Hydrogen gas recycling for energy efficient
ammonia recovery in electrochemical systems. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 3110–3116.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b06097.
Lan, C.J., Kumar, M., Wang, C.C., Lin, J.G., 2011. Development of simultaneous partial
nitrification, anammox and denitrification (SNAD) process in a sequential batch re-actor. Bioresour. Technol. 102, 5514–5519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.
2010.11.024.S. Rahimi,etal.
Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
22Laureni, M., Palatsi, J., Llovera, M., Bonmatí, A., 2013. Influence of pig slurry char-
acteristics on ammonia stripping efficiencies and quality of the recovered ammo-
nium-sulfate solution. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 88, 1654–1662. https://doi.org/
10.1002/jctb.4016.
Laureni, M., Weissbrodt, D.G., Szivák, I., Robin, O., Nielsen, J.L., Morgenroth, E., Joss, A.,
2015. Activity and growth of anammox biomass on aerobically pre-treated municipalwastewater. Water Res. 80, 325–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.04.026.
Laureni, M., Falås, P., Robin, O., Wick, A., Weissbrodt, D.G., Nielsen, J.L., Ternes, T.A.,
Morgenroth, E., Joss, A., 2016. Mainstream partial nitritation and anammox: long-term process stability and effluent quality at low temperatures. Water Res. 101,
628–639. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.05.005.
Lee, C.S., Lee, S.A., Ko, S.R., Oh, H.M., Ahn, C.Y., 2015. Effects of photoperiod on nutrient
removal, biomass production, and algal-bacterial population dynamics in lab-scalephotobioreactors treating municipal wastewater. Water Res. 68, 680–691. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.10.029.
Lee, K., Choi, I., Lim, K., 2018. Nitrogen removal and electrochemical characteristics
depending on separators of two-chamber microbial fuel cells. Environ. Eng. Res. 24,443–448. https://doi.org/10.4491/eer.2018.211.
Li, Y., Horsman, M., Wang, B., Wu, N., Lan, C.Q., 2008. Effects of nitrogen sources on cell
growth and lipid accumulation of green alga Neochloris oleoabundans. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 81, 629–636. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-008-1681-1.
Li, J., Ge, Z., He, Z., 2014. A fluidized bed membrane bioelectrochemical reactor for
energy-efficient wastewater treatment. Bioresour. Technol. 167, 310–315. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.06.034.
Li, X., Sun, S., Badgley, B.D., Sung, S., Zhang, H., He, Z., 2016a. Nitrogen removal by
granular nitritation-anammox in an upflow membrane-aerated biofilm reactor. Water
Res. 94, 23–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.02.031.
Li, Y., Williams, I., Xu, Z., Li, Baikun, Li, Baitao, 2016b. Energy-positive nitrogen removal
using the integrated short-cut nitrification and autotrophic denitrification microbial
fuel cells (MFCs). Appl. Energy 163, 352–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.
2015.11.021.
Li, Jianwei, Li, Jialin, Gao, R., Wang, M., Yang, L., Wang, X., Zhang, L., Peng, Y., 2018. A
critical review of one-stage anammox processes for treating industrial wastewater:
optimization strategies based on key functional microorganisms. Bioresour. Technol.
265, 498–505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2018.07.013.
Liang, Z., Liu, Y., Ge, F., Xu, Y., Tao, N., Peng, F., Wong, M., 2013. Efficiency assessment
and pH effect in removing nitrogen and phosphorus by algae-bacteria combined
system ofChlorellavulgaris andBacilluslicheniformis. Chemosphere 92, 1383–1389.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.05.014.
Limoli, A., Langone, M., Andreottola, G., 2016. Ammonia removal from raw manure
digestate by means of a turbulent mixing stripping process. J. Environ. Manag. 176,
1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2016.03.007.
Lopez-Ruiz, A., Roldan, J.M., Verbelen, J.P., Diez, J., 1985. Nitrate reductase from
Monoraphidiumbraunii. Plant Physiol. 78, 614–618. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.78.3.614.
Lotti, T., Kleerebezem, R., Hu, Z., Kartal, B., Jetten, M.S.M., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M.,
2014. Simultaneous partial nitritation and anammox at low temperature with gran-
ular sludge. Water Res. 66, 111–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.07.047.
Lotti, T., Kleerebezem, R., Hu, Z., Kartal, B., De Kreuk, M.K., Van Erp Taalman Kip, C.,
Kruit, J., Hendrickx, T.L.G., Van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., 2015. Pilot-scale evaluation of
anammox-based mainstream nitrogen removal from municipal wastewater. Environ.
Technol. (United Kingdom) 36, 1167–1177. https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.
2014.982722.
Ma, B., Peng, Y., Zhang, S., Wang, J., Gan, Y., Chang, J., Wang, Shuying, Wang, Shanyun,
Zhu, G., 2013. Performance of anammox UASB reactor treating low strength waste-
water under moderate and low temperatures. Bioresour. Technol. 129, 606–611.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.11.025.
Ma, B., Wang, S., Cao, S., Miao, Y., Jia, F., Du, R., Peng, Y., 2016. Biological nitrogen
removal from sewage via anammox: recent advances. Bioresour. Technol. 200,
981–990. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.10.074.
Ma, C., Jensen, M.M., Smets, B.F., Thamdrup, B., 2017. Pathways and controls of N2O
production in nitritation-anammox biomass. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 8981–8991.https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b0122.
Magrí, A., Vanotti, M.B., Szögi, A.A., 2012. Anammox sludge immobilized in polyvinyl
alcohol (PVA) cryogel carriers. Bioresour. Technol. 114, 231–240. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2012.03.077.
Mahan, K.M., Penrod, J.T., Ju, K.S., Al Kass, N., Tan, W.A., Truong, R., Parales, J.V.,
Parales, R.E., 2015. Selection for growth on 3-nitrotoluene by 2-nitrotoluene-utilizing
Acidovorax sp. strain JS42 identifies nitroarene dioxygenases with altered specifi-
cities. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81, 309–319. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.
02772-14.
Mansouri, A.M., Zinatizadeh, A.A., Irandoust, M., Akhbari, A., 2014. Statistical analysis
and optimization of simultaneous biological nutrients removal process in an inter-
mittently aerated SBR. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 31, 88–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11814-013-0183-8.
Martienssen, M., Schops, R., 1997. Biological treatment of leachate from solid waste
landfill sites–alterations in the. Water Res. 31, 1164–1170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0043-1354(96)00364-8.
Martineau, C., Villeneuve, C., Mauffrey, F., Villemur, R., 2013. Hyphomicrobium ni-
trativorans sp. nov., isolated from the biofilm of a methanol-fed denitrification
system treating seawater at the Montreal Biodome. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 63,
3777–3781. https://doi.org/10.1099/ijs.0.048124-0.
Matassa, S., Batstone, D.J., Hülsen, T., Schnoor, J., Verstraete, W., 2015. Can direct
conversion of used nitrogen to new feed and protein help feed the world? Environ.
Sci. Technol. 49, 5247–5254. https://doi.org/10.1021/es505432w.
Mavrodi, D.V., Blankenfeldt, W., Thomashow, L.S., 2006. Phenazine compounds in
fluorescent Pseudomonas Spp. biosynthesis and regulation. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol.44, 417–445. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.phyto.44.013106.145710.
Medina, M., Neis, U., 2007. Symbiotic algal bacterial wastewater treatment: effect of food
to microorganism ratio and hydraulic retention time on the process performance.
Water Sci. Technol. 55, 165–171. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.351.
Mei, X., Liu, J., Guo, Z., Li, P., Bi, S., Wang, Yong, Yang, Y., Shen, W., Wang, Yihan, Xiao,
Y., Yang, X., Zhou, B., Liu, H., Wu, S., 2019. Simultaneous p-nitrophenol and nitrogen
removal in PNP wastewater treatment: comparison of two integrated membrane-aerated bioreactor systems. J. Hazard. Mater. 363, 99–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jhazmat.2018.09.072.
Miao, L., Liu, Z., 2018. Microbiome analysis and -omics studies of microbial denitrifica-
tion processes in wastewater treatment: recent advances. Sci. China Life Sci. 61,753–761. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-017-9228-2.
Miao, L., Wang, K., Wang, S., Zhu, R., Li, B., Peng, Y., Weng, D., 2014. Advanced nitrogen
removal from landfill leachate using real-time controlled three-stage sequence batchreactor (SBR) system. Bioresour. Technol. 159, 258–265. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2014.02.058.
Modin, O., Fukushi, K., Yamamoto, K., 2007. Denitrification with methane as external
carbon source. Water Res. 41, 2726–2738. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2007.
02.053.
Modin, O., Fukushi, K., Nakajima, F., Yamamoto, K., 2008. Performance of a membrane
biofilm reactor for denitrification with methane. Bioresour. Technol. 99 (17),8054–8060. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2008.03.042.
Modin, O., Fukushi, K., Nakajima, F., Yamamoto, K., 2010. Aerobic methane oxidation
coupled to denitrification: kinetics and effect of oxygen supply. J. Environ. Eng. 136(2), 211–219. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)EE.1943-7870.0000134.
Modin, O., Fukushi, K., Rabaey, K., Rozendal, R.A., Yamamoto, K., 2011. Redistribution
of wastewater alkalinity with a microbial fuel cell to support nitrification of reject
water. Water Res. 45, 2691–2699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.02.031.
Molinuevo, B., García, M.C., Karakashev, D., Angelidaki, I., 2009. Anammox for ammonia
removal from pig manure effluents: effect of organic matter content on process
performance. Bioresour. Technol. 100, 2171–2175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2008.10.038.
Mosquera-Corral, A., González, F., Campos, J.L., Méndez, R., 2005. Partial nitrification in
a SHARON reactor in the presence of salts and organic carbon compounds. Process
Biochem. 40, 3109–3118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2005.03.042.
Naga Samrat, M.V.V., Kesava Rao, K., Ruggeri, B., Tommasi, T., 2018. Denitrification of
water in a microbial fuel cell (MFC) using seawater bacteria. J. Clean. Prod. 178,
449–456. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.221.
Neef, A., Zaglauer, A., Meier, H., Amann, R., Lemmer, H., Schleifer, K.H., 1996.
Population analysis in a denitrifying sand filter: conventional and in situ identifica-
tion of Paracoccus spp. in methanol-fed biofilms. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62,
4329–4339.
Nerenberg, R., 2016. The membrane-biofilm reactor (MBfR) as a counter-diffusional
biofilm process. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 38, 131–136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
copbio.2016.01.015.
Ni, B.J., Smets, B.F., Yuan, Z., Pellicer-Nàcher, C., 2013. Model-based evaluation of the
role of Anammox on nitric oxide and nitrous oxide productions in membrane aerated
biofilm reactor. J. Membr. Sci. 446, 332–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.
2013.06.047.
Ogbonna, J.C., Yoshizawa, H., Tanaka, H., 2000. Treatment of high strength organic
wastewater by a mixed culture of photosynthetic microorganisms. J. Appl. Phycol.
12, 277–284.
Osaka, T., Kimura, Y., Otsubo, Y., Suwa, Y., Tsuneda, S., Isaka, K., 2012. Temperature
dependence for anammox bacteria enriched from freshwater sediments. J. Biosci.Bioeng. 114, 429–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.05.003.
Oshiki, M., Shimokawa, M., Fujii, N., Satoh, H., Okabe, S., 2011. Physiological char-
acteristics of the anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing bacterium “Candidatus Brocadia
sinica”. Microbiology 157, 1706–1713. https://doi.org/10.1099/mic.0.048595-0.
Paredes, D., Kuschk, P., Mbwette, T.S.A., Stange, F., Müller, R.A., Köser, H., 2007. New
aspects of microbial nitrogen transformations in the context of wastewater treatment
– a review. Eng. Life Sci. 7, 13–25. https://doi.org/10.1002/elsc.200620170.
Park, J., Bae, S., 2018. Formation of Fe nanoparticles on water-washed coal fly ash for
enhanced reduction of p-nitrophenol. Chemosphere 202, 733–741. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2018.03.152.
Park, J.B.K., Craggs, R.J., 2011. Algal production in wastewater treatment high rate algal
ponds for potential biofuel use. Water Sci. Technol. 63, 2403–2410. https://doi.org/
10.2166/wst.2011.200.
Park, H. Il, Kim, D.K., Choi, Y.J., Pak, D., 2005. Nitrate reduction using an electrode as
direct electron donor in a biofilm-electrode reactor. Process Biochem. 40,
3383–3388. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2005.03.017.
Park, J.H., Choi, O., Lee, T.H., Kim, H., Sang, B.I., 2016. Pyrosequencing analysis of
microbial communities in hollow fiber-membrane biofilm reactors system for treatinghigh-strength nitrogen wastewater. Chemosphere 163, 192–201. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.chemosphere.2016.07.099.
Park, Y., Park, S., Nguyen, V.K., Yu, J., Torres, C.I., Rittmann, B.E., Lee, T., 2017.
Complete nitrogen removal by simultaneous nitrification and denitrification in flat-panel air-cathode microbial fuel cells treating domestic wastewater. Chem. Eng. J.316, 673–679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.02.005.
Parvanova-Mancheva, T., Beschkov, V., 2009. Microbial denitrification by immobilized
bacteriaPseudomonasdenitrificans stimulated by constant electric field. Biochem. Eng.
J. 44, 208–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2008.12.005.
Peng, Y., Zhu, G., 2006. Biological nitrogen removal with nitrification and denitrification
via nitrite pathway. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 73, 15–26. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s00253-006-0534-z.
Pérez, J., Lotti, T., Kleerebezem, R., Picioreanu, C., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., 2014.
Outcompeting nitrite-oxidizing bacteria in single-stage nitrogen removal in sewageS. Rahimi,etal.
Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
23treatment plants: a model-based study. Water Res. 66, 208–218. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.watres.2014.08.028.
Pham, T.H., Boon, N., De Maeyer, K., Höfte, M., Rabaey, K., Verstraete, W., 2008. Use of
Pseudomonas species producing phenazine-based metabolites in the anodes of mi-
crobial fuel cells to improve electricity generation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 80,
985–993. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-008-1619-7.
Picioreanu, C., Pérez, J., van Loosdrecht, M.C.M., 2016. Impact of cell cluster size on
apparent half-saturation coefficients for oxygen in nitrifying sludge and biofilms.
Water Res. 106, 371–382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2016.10.017.
Posadas, E., García-Encina, P.A., Soltau, A., Domínguez, A., Díaz, I., Muñoz, R., 2013.
Carbon and nutrient removal from centrates and domestic wastewater using algal-
bacterial biofilm bioreactors. Bioresour. Technol. 139, 50–58. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.biortech.2013.04.008.
Pouliot, Y., Buelna, G., Racine, C., de la Noüe, J., 1989. Culture of cyanobacteria for
tertiary wastewater treatment and biomass production. Biol. Wastes 29, 81–91.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0269-7483(89)90089-X.
Prosnansky, M., Sakakibara, Y., Kuroda, M., 2002. High-rate denitrification and SS re-
jection by biofilm-electrode reactor (BER) combined with microfiltration. Water Res.
36, 4801–4810. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(02)00206-3.
Qiao, S., Tian, T., Duan, X., Zhou, J., Cheng, Y., 2013. Novel single-stage autotrophic
nitrogen removal via co-immobilizing partial nitrifying and anammox biomass.Chem. Eng. J. 230, 19–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2013.06.048.
Qin, L., Wang, Z., Sun, Y., Shu, Q., Feng, P., Zhu, L., Xu, J., Yuan, Z., 2016. Microalgae
consortia cultivation in dairy wastewater to improve the potential of nutrient re-moval and biodiesel feedstock production. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 23, 8379–8387.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-015-6004-3.
Quan, L.M., Khanh, D.P., Hira, D., Fujii, T., Furukawa, K., 2011. Reject water treatment
by improvement of whole cell anammox entrapment using polyvinyl alcohol/alginate
gel. Biodegradation 22, 1155–1167. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10532-011-9471-3.
Rabaey, K., Boon, N., Höfte, M., Verstraete, W., 2005. Microbial phenazine production
enhances electron transfer in biofuel cells. Environ. Sci. Technol. 39, 3401–3408.https://doi.org/10.1021/es048563o.
Rajmohan, K.S., Gopinath, M., Chetty, R., 2016. Review on challenges and opportunities
in the removal of nitrate from wastewater using electrochemical method. J. Environ.
Biol. 37 (6), 1519.
Reay, D.S., Nedwell, D.B., Priddle, J., Ellis-Evans, J.C., 1999. Temperature dependence of
inorganic nitrogen uptake: reduced affinity for nitrate at suboptimal temperatures in
both algae and bacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 65, 2577–2584.
Reino, C., Suárez-Ojeda, M.E., Pérez, J., Carrera, J., 2018. Stable long-term operation of
an upflow anammox sludge bed reactor at mainstream conditions. Water Res. 128,
331–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.10.058.
Ren, H.Y., Liu, B.F., Kong, F., Zhao, L., Ren, N., 2015. Hydrogen and lipid production from
starch wastewater by co-culture of anaerobic sludge and oleaginous microalgae withsimultaneous COD, nitrogen and phosphorus removal. Water Res. 85, 404–412.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.08.057.
Renuka, N., Sood, A., Ratha, S.K., Prasanna, R., Ahluwalia, A.S., 2013. Evaluation of
microalgal consortia for treatment of primary treated sewage effluent and biomass
production. J. Appl. Phycol. 25, 1529–1537. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10811-013-
9982-x.
Rezvani, F., Sarrafzadeh, M.H., Ebrahimi, S., Oh, H.M., 2019. Nitrate removal from
drinking water with a focus on biological methods: a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
26, 1124–1141. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-9185-0.
Ritter, L., Solomon, K., Sibley, P., Hall, K., Keen, P., Mattu, G., Linton, B., 2002. Sources,
pathways, and relative risks of contaminants in surface water and groundwater: aperspective prepared for the Walkerton inquiry. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A.
https://doi.org/10.1080/152873902753338572.
Robarts, R.D., Zohary, T., 1987. Temperature effects on photosynthetic capacity, re-
spiration, and growth rates of bloom-forming cyanobacteria. New Zeal. J. Mar.
Freshw. Res. 21, 391–399. https://doi.org/10.1080/00288330.1987.9516235.
Rodríguez Arredondo, M., Kuntke, P., Jeremiasse, A.W., Sleutels, T.H.J.A., Buisman,
C.J.N., Ter Heijne, A., 2015. Bioelectrochemical systems for nitrogen removal andrecovery from wastewater. Environ. Sci. Water Res. Technol. 1, 22–33. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c4ew00066h.
Rozendal, R.A., Hamelers, H.V.M., Rabaey, K., Keller, J., Buisman, C.J.N., 2008. Towards
practical implementation of bioelectrochemical wastewater treatment. Trends
Biotechnol. 26, 450–459. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2008.04.008.
Ruiz, G., Jeison, D., Rubilar, O., Ciudad, G., Chamy, R., 2006. Nitrification-denitrification
via nitrite accumulation for nitrogen removal from wastewaters. Bioresour. Technol.
97, 330–335. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2005.02.018.
Sáez, F., Pozo, C., Gómez, M.A., Rodelas, B., Gónzalez-López, J., 2003. Growth and nitrite
and nitrous oxide accumulation of Paracoccusdenitrificans ATCC 19367 in the pre-
sence of selected pesticides. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 22, 1993–1997. https://doi.org/
10.1897/02-351.
Sakakibara, Y., Kuroda, M., 1993. Electric prompting and control of denitrification.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 42 (4), 535–537. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.260420418.
Samorì, G., Samorì, C., Guerrini, F., Pistocchi, R., 2013. Growth and nitrogen removal
capacity of Desmodesmus communis and of a natural microalgae consortium in a
batch culture system in view of urban wastewater treatment: Part I. Water Res. 47,
791–801. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.11.006.
Sánchez Guillén, J.A., Cuéllar Guardado, P.R., Lopez Vazquez, C.M., de Oliveira Cruz,
L.M., Brdjanovic, D., van Lier, J.B., 2015. Anammox cultivation in a closed sponge-
bed trickling filter. Bioresour. Technol. 186, 252–260. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2015.03.073.
Sánchez Guillén, J.A., Lopez Vazquez, C.M., de Oliveira Cruz, L.M., Brdjanovic, D., van
Lier, J.B., 2016. Long-term performance of the Anammox process under low nitrogen
sludge loading rate and moderate to low temperature. Biochem. Eng. J. 110, 95–106.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2016.02.004.
Shen, L.D., Hu, A.H., Jin, R.C., Cheng, D.Q., Zheng, P., Xu, X.Y., Hu, B.L., 2012.
Enrichment of anammox bacteria from three sludge sources for the startup ofmonosodium glutamate industrial wastewater treatment system. J. Hazard. Mater.
199, 193–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.10.081.
Shen, Y., Tan, M.T.T., Chong, C., Xiao, W., Wang, C.H., 2017. An environmental friendly
animal waste disposal process with ammonia recovery and energy production: ex-
perimental study and economic analysis. Waste Manag. 68, 636–645. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.wasman.2017.07.027.
Shi, Y., Hu, S., Lou, J., Lu, P., Keller, J., Yuan, Z., 2013. Nitrogen removal from waste-
water by coupling anammox and methane-dependent denitrification in a membranebiofilm reactor. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47, 11577–11583. https://doi.org/10.1021/
es402775z.
Shoda, M., 2017. Heterotrophic nitrification and aerobic denitrification by Alcaligenes
faecalis No. 4. Nitrification Denitrification 31.
Silva-Benavides, A.M., Torzillo, G., 2012. Nitrogen and phosphorus removal through la-
boratory batch cultures of microalga Chlorellavulgaris and cyanobacterium
Planktothrixisothrix grown as monoalgal and as co-cultures. J. Appl. Phycol. 24,
267–276. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10811-011-9675-2.
Sinha, B., Annachhatre, A.P., 2007. Partial nitrification - operational parameters and
microorganisms involved. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 6, 285–313. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11157-006-9116-x.
Sleutels, T.H.J.A., ter Heijne, A., Kuntke, P., Buisman, C.J.N., Hamelers, H.V.M., 2017.
Membrane selectivity determines energetic losses for ion transport in bioelec-trochemical systems. ChemistrySelect 2, 3462–3470. https://doi.org/10.1002/slct.
201700064.
Song, Y.H., Qiu, G.L., Yuan, P., Cui, X.Y., Peng, J.F., Zeng, P., Duan, L., Xiang, L.C., Qian,
F., 2011. Nutrients removal and recovery from anaerobically digested swine waste-water by struvite crystallization without chemical additions. J. Hazard. Mater. 190,
140–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.03.015.
Song, W., Li, Z., Liu, F., Ding, Y., Qi, P., You, H., Jin, C., 2018. Effective removal of
ammonia nitrogen from waste seawater using crystal seed enhanced struvite pre-cipitation technology with response surface methodology for process optimization.
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 25, 628–638. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-0441-0.
Sood, A., Renuka, N., Prasanna, R., Ahluwalia, A.S., 2015. Cyanobacteria as potential
options for wastewater treatment. In: Phytoremediation. Springer, Cham, pp. 83–93.
Stein, L.Y., Klotz, M.G., 2016. The nitrogen cycle. Curr. Biol. 26 (3), R94–R98. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.12.021.
Strous, M., Fuerst, J.A., Kramer, E.H.M., Logemann, S., Muyzer, G., Van De Pas-Schoonen,
K.T., Webb, R., Kuenen, J.G., Jetten, M.S.M., 1999. Missing lithotroph identified asnew planctomycete. Nature 400, 446–449. https://doi.org/10.1038/22749.
Su, Y., Mennerich, A., Urban, B., 2011. Municipal wastewater treatment and biomass
accumulation with a wastewater-born and settleable algal-bacterial culture. WaterRes. 45, 3351–3358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.03.046.
Su, Y., Mennerich, A., Urban, B., 2012a. Coupled nutrient removal and biomass pro-
duction with mixed algal culture: impact of biotic and abiotic factors. Bioresour.
Technol. 118, 469–476. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.05.093.
Su, Y., Mennerich, A., Urban, B., 2012b. Synergistic cooperation between wastewater-
born algae and activated sludge for wastewater treatment: influence of algae and
sludge inoculation ratios. Bioresour. Technol. 105, 67–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2011.11.113.
Suarez, C., Piculell, M., Modin, O., Langenheder, S., Persson, F., Hermansson, M., 2018.
Biofilm thickness matters: deterministic assembly of different functions and com-
munities in nitrifying biofilms. bioRxiv 416701. https://doi.org/10.1101/416701.
Suarez, C., Piculell, M., Modin, O., Langenheder, S., Persson, F., Hermansson, M., 2019.
Thickness determines microbial community structure and function in nitrifying bio-
films via deterministic assembly. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
019-41542-1.
Sun, Y., Guan, Y., Zeng, D., He, K., Wu, G., 2018. Metagenomics-based interpretation of
AHLs-mediated quorum sensing in Anammox bio fi lm reactors for low-strength
wastewater treatment. Chem. Eng. J. 344, 42–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.
2018.03.047.
Sutherland, D.L., Turnbull, M.H., Craggs, R.J., 2014. Increased pond depth improves algal
productivity and nutrient removal in wastewater treatment high rate algal ponds.Water Res. 53, 271–281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.01.025.
Tabassum, S., Li, Y., Chi, L., Li, C., Zhang, Z., 2018. Efficient nitrification treatment of
comprehensive industrial wastewater by using Novel Mass Bio System. J. Clean. Prod.172, 368–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.022.
Talbot, P., De la Noüe, J., 1993. Tertiary treatment of wastewater with light and tem-
perature conditions. Water Res. 27, 153–159.
Tanaka, T., Kuroda, M., 2000. Improvement of submerged biofilter process by bioelec-
trochemical method. J. Environ. Eng. 126 (6), 541–548. https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)0733-9372(2000)126:6(541).
Tang, E.P.Y., Vincent, W.F., Proulx, D., Lessard, P., De la Noüe, J., 1997. Polar cyano-
bacteria versus green algae for tertiary waste-water treatment in cool climates. J.
Appl. Phycol. 9, 371–381. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007987127526.
Tang, C.J., Zheng, P., Chen, T.T., Zhang, J.Q., Mahmood, Q., Ding, S., Chen, X.G., Chen,
J.W., Wu, D.T., 2011. Enhanced nitrogen removal from pharmaceutical wastewater
using SBA-ANAMMOX process. Water Res. 45, 201–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2010.08.036.
Tang, X., Guo, Y., Wu, S., Chen, L., Tao, H., Liu, S., 2018. Metabolomics Uncovers the
Regulatory Pathway of Acyl-homoserine Lactones Based Quorum Sensing in
Anammox Consortia. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b05699.
Tao, Q., Gao, F., Qian, C.Y., Guo, X.Z., Zheng, Z., Yang, Z.H., 2017. Enhanced biomass/
biofuel production and nutrient removal in an algal biofilm airlift photobioreactor.
Algal Res. 21, 9–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2016.11.004.S. Rahimi,etal.
Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
24Taotao, Z., Dong, L., Huiping, Z., Shuibo, X., Wenxin, Q., Yingjiu, L., Jie, Z., 2015.
Nitrogen removal efficiency and microbial community analysis of ANAMMOX bio-
filter at ambient temperature. Water Sci. Technol. 71, 725–733. https://doi.org/10.
2166/wst.2015.019.
Taziki, M., Ahmadzadeh, H., Murry, M.A., Lyon, S.R., 2015. Nitrate and nitrite removal
from wastewater using algae. Curr. Biotechnol. 4, 426–440. https://doi.org/10.
2174/2211550104666150828193607.
Tian, T., Zhou, K., Xuan, L., Zhang, J.X., Li, Y.S., Liu, D.F., Yu, H.Q., 2020. Exclusive
microbially driven autotrophic iron-dependent denitrification in a reactor inoculatedwith activated sludge. Water Res. 170, 115300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.
2019.115300.
Tomaszewski, M., Cema, G., Ziembińska-Buczyńska, A., 2017. Influence of temperature
and pH on the anammox process: a review and meta-analysis. Chemosphere 182,
203–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2017.05.003.
Toyofuku, M., Nomura, N., Fujii, T., Takaya, N., Maseda, H., Sawada, I., Nakajima, T.,
Uchiyama, H., 2007. Quorum sensing regulates denitrification in Pseudomonasaeru-
ginosa PAO1. J. Bacteriol. 189, 4969–4972. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00289-07.
Toyofuku, M., Nomura, N., Kuno, E., Tashiro, Y., Nakajima, T., Uchiyama, H., 2008.
Influence of the Pseudomonas quinolone signal on denitrification in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. J. Bacteriol. 190, 7947–7956. https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.00968-08.
Trojanowicz, K., Plaza, E., Trela, J., 2016. Pilot scale studies on nitritation-anammox
process for mainstream wastewater at low temperature. Water Sci. Technol. 73,761–768. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2015.551.
Van Den Hende, S., Vervaeren, H., Desmet, S., Boon, N., 2011. Bioflocculation of mi-
croalgae and bacteria combined with flue gas to improve sewage treatment. NewBiotechnol. 29, 23–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbt.2011.04.009.
Vázquez-Padín, J.R., Fernández, I., Morales, N., Campos, J.L., Mosquera-Corral, A.,
Méndez, R., 2011. Autotrophic nitrogen removal at low temperature. Water Sci.
Technol. 63, 1282–1288. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2011.370.
Vélez-Lee, A.E., Cordova-Lozano, F., Bandala, E.R., Sanchez-Salas, J.L., 2016. Cloning and
expression of vgb gene in Bacilluscereus, improve phenol and p-nitrophenol biode-
gradation. Phys. Chem. Earth 91, 38–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pce.2015.10.017.
Virdis, B., Rabaey, K., Yuan, Z., Keller, J., 2008. Microbial fuel cells for simultaneous
carbon and nitrogen removal. Water Res. 42, 3013–3024. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2008.03.017.
Virdis, B., Rabaey, K., Rozendal, R.A., Yuan, Z., Keller, J., 2010. Simultaneous nitrifica-
tion, denitrification and carbon removal in microbial fuel cells. Water Res. 44,
2970–2980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2010.02.022.
Wang, X.M., Wang, J.L., 2013. Nitrate removal from groundwater using solid-phase de-
nitrification process without inoculating with external microorganisms. Int. J.
Environ. Sci. Technol. 10, 955–960. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13762-013-0236-x.
Wang, Y., Peng, Y., Stephenson, T., 2009. Effect of influent nutrient ratios and hydraulic
retention time (HRT) on simultaneous phosphorus and nitrogen removal in a two-sludge sequencing batch reactor process. Bioresour. Technol. 100, 3506–3512.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.02.026.
Wang, B., Peng, Y., Guo, Y., Zhao, M., Wang, S., 2016a. Nitrogen removal from waste-
water and external waste activated sludge reutilization/reduction by simultaneous
sludge fermentation, denitrification and anammox (SFDA). Bioresour. Technol. 214,284–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.04.075.
Wang, Z., Peng, Y., Miao, L., Cao, T., Zhang, F., Wang, S., Han, J., 2016b. Continuous-flow
combined process of nitritation and ANAMMOX for treatment of landfill leachate.
Bioresour. Technol. 214, 514–519. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.04.118.
Wett, B., Omari, A., Podmirseg, S.M., Han, M., Akintayo, O., Gómez Brandón, M., Murthy,
S., Bott, C., Hell, M., Takács, I., Nyhuis, G., O’Shaughnessy, M., 2013. Going formainstream deammonification from bench to full scale for maximized resource effi-
ciency. Water Sci. Technol. 68, 283–289. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2013.150.
Wilkie, A.C., Mulbry, W.W., 2002. Recovery of dairy manure nutrients by benthic
freshwater algae. Bioresour. Technol. 84 (1), 81–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-
8524(02)00003-2.
Wu, X., Modin, O., 2013. Ammonium recovery from reject water combined with hy-
drogen production in a bioelectrochemical reactor. Bioresour. Technol. 146,
530–536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.07.130.
Wu, D., Yi, X., Tang, R., Feng, C., Wei, C., 2018. Single microbial fuel cell reactor for
coking wastewater treatment: simultaneous carbon and nitrogen removal with zero
alkaline consumption. Sci. Total Environ. 621, 497–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.11.262.
Xie, G.J., Liu, T., Cai, C., Hu, S., Yuan, Z., 2018. Achieving high-level nitrogen removal in
mainstream by coupling anammox with denitrifying anaerobic methane oxidation in
a membrane biofilm reactor. Water Res. 131, 196–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2017.12.037.
Xin, L., Hong-ying, H., Yu-ping, Z., 2011. Growth and lipid accumulation properties of a
freshwater microalga Scenedesmus sp. under different cultivation temperature.
Bioresour. Technol. 102, 3098–3102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.10.
055.
Xiong, Z., Zhang, H., Zhang, W., Lai, B., Yao, G., 2019. Removal of nitrophenols and their
derivatives by chemical redox: a review. Chem. Eng. J. 359, 13–31. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cej.2018.11.111.
Xu, Z., Dai, X., Chai, X., 2018. Effect of influent pH on biological denitrification using
biodegradable PHBV/PLA blends as electron donor. Biochem. Eng. J. 131, 24–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2017.12.008.
Yan, H., Saito, T., Regan, J.M., 2012. Nitrogen removal in a single-chamber microbial fuel
cell with nitrifying biofilm enriched at the air cathode. Water Res. 46, 2215–2224.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.01.050.Yan, C., Zhao, Y., Zheng, Z., Luo, X., 2013. Effects of various LED light wavelengths and
light intensity supply strategies on synthetic high-strength wastewater purification by
Chlorellavulgaris. Biodegradation 24, 721–732. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10532-
013-9620-y.
Yang, J., Zhang, L., Hira, D., Fukuzaki, Y., Furukawa, K., 2011. High-rate nitrogen re-
moval by the Anammox process at ambient temperature. Bioresour. Technol. 102,672–676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2010.08.039.
Yang, X., Wang, S., Zhou, L., 2012. Effect of carbon source, C/N ratio, nitrate and dis-
solved oxygen concentration on nitrite and ammonium production from denitrifica-tion process by Pseudomonasstutzeri D6. Bioresour. Technol. 104, 65–72. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2011.10.026.
Yang, Y., Chen, T., Sumona, M., Gupta, B. Sen, Sun, Y., Hu, Z., Zhan, X., 2017. Utilization
of iron sulfides for wastewater treatment: a critical review. Rev. Environ. Sci.
Biotechnol. 16, 289–308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11157-017-9432-3.
Yang, Z., Pei, H., Hou, Q., Jiang, L., Zhang, L., Nie, C., 2018. Algal biofilm-assisted mi-
crobial fuel cell to enhance domestic wastewater treatment: nutrient, organics re-
moval and bioenergy production. Chem. Eng. J. 332, 277–285. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cej.2017.09.096.
Yao, Y.C., Zhang, Q.L., Liu, Y., Liu, Z.P., 2013. Simultaneous removal of organic matter
and nitrogen by a heterotrophic nitrifying-aerobic denitrifying bacterial strain in a
membrane bioreactor. Bioresour. Technol. 143, 83–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biortech.2013.05.120.
Yong, Y.C., Yu, Y.Y., Li, C.M., Zhong, J.J., Song, H., 2011. Bioelectricity enhancement via
overexpression of quorum sensing system in Pseudomonasaeruginosa-inoculated mi-
crobial fuel cells. Biosens. Bioelectron. 30, 87–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.
2011.08.032.
Yong, Y.C., Wu, X.Y., Sun, J.Z., Cao, Y.X., Song, H., 2015. Engineering quorum sensing
signaling of Pseudomonas for enhanced wastewater treatment and electricity harvest:
a review. Chemosphere 140, 18–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2014.
10.020.
Yoon, S.S., Hennigan, R.F., Hilliard, G.M., Ochsner, U.A., Parvatiyar, K., Kamani, M.C.,
Allen, H.L., DeKievit, T.R., Gardner, P.R., Schwab, U., Rowe, J.J., Iglewski, B.H.,
McDermott, T.R., Mason, R.P., Wozniak, D.J., Hancock, R.E.W., Parsek, M.R., Noah,
T.L., Boucher, R.C., Hassett, D.J., 2002. Pseudomonas aeruginosa anaerobic re-
spiration in biofilms: relationships to cystic fibrosis pathogenesis. Dev. Cell 3,
593–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1534-5807(02)00295-2.
Zafarzadeh, A., Bina, B., Nikaeen, M., Attar, H.M., Khiadani, M.H., 2011. Effect of dis-
solved oxygen and chemical oxygen demand to nitrogen ratios on the partial ni-
trification/denitrification process in moving bed biofilm reactors. Iran. J. Biotechnol.
9, 197–205.
Zala, S.L., Ayyer, J., Desai, A.J., 2004. Nitrate removal from the effluent of a fertilizer
industry using a bioreactor packed with immobilized cells of Pseudomonasstutzeri and
Comamonastestosteroni. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 20, 661–665. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11274-004-9982-8.
Zhang, F., He, Z., 2012. Integrated organic and nitrogen removal with electricity gen-
eration in a tubular dual-cathode microbial fuel cell. Process Biochem. 47,2146–2151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2012.08.002.
Zhang, L., Zhang, S., Peng, Y., Han, X., Gan, Y., 2015. Nitrogen removal performance and
microbial distribution in pilot- and full-scale integrated fixed-biofilm activated sludge
reactors based on nitritation-anammox process. Bioresour. Technol. 196, 448–453.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.07.090.
Zhang, F.Z., Peng, Y., Miao, L., Wang, Z., Wang, S., Li, B., 2017. A novel simultaneous
partial nitrification Anammox and denitrification (SNAD) with intermittent aeration
for cost-effective nitrogen removal from mature landfill leachate. Chem. Eng. J. 313,
619–628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2016.12.105.
Zhang, B., Lens, P.N.L., Shi, W., Zhang, R., Zhang, Z., Guo, Y., Bao, X., Cui, F., 2018.
Enhancement of aerobic granulation and nutrient removal by an algal–bacterial
consortium in a lab-scale photobioreactor. Chem. Eng. J. 334, 2373–2382. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.11.151.
Zhao, J., Wu, J., Li, X., Wang, S., Hu, B., Ding, X., 2017. The denitrification characteristics
and microbial community in the cathode of an mfc with aerobic denitrification at
high temperatures. Front. Microbiol. 8, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.
00009.
Zheng, M., Liu, Y. chen, Xu, K. ning, Wang, C. wen, He, H., Zhu, W., Dong, Q., 2013. Use
of low frequency and density ultrasound to stimulate partial nitrification and si-
multaneous nitrification and denitrification. Bioresour. Technol. 146, 537–542.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.07.044.
Zhu, G., Peng, Y., Li, B., Guo, J., Yang, Q., Wang, S., 2008. Biological removal of nitrogen
from wastewater. In: Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology.
Springer, New York, NY, pp. 159–195.
Zhu, G.L., Yan, J., Hu, Y.Y., 2014. Anaerobic ammonium oxidation in polyvinyl alcohol
and sodium alginate immobilized biomass system: a potential tool to maintain ana-mmox biomass in application. Water Sci. Technol. 69, 718–726. https://doi.org/10.
2166/wst.2013.762.
Zhu, T.T., Cheng, H.Y., Yang, L.H., Su, S.G., Wang, H.C., Wang, S. Sen, Wang, A.J., 2019.
Coupled sulfur and iron(II) carbonate-driven autotrophic denitrification for sig-nificantly enhanced nitrate removal. Environ. Sci. Technol. 53, 1545–1554. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b06865.
Zou, G., Papirio, S., Lakaniemi, A.M., Ahoranta, S.H., Puhakka, J.A., 2016. High rate
autotrophic denitrification in fluidized-bed biofilm reactors. Chem. Eng. J. 284,
1287–1294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.09.074.
Zou, S., Guan, L., Taylor, D.P., Kuhn, D., He, Z., 2018. Nitrogen removal from water of
recirculating aquaculture system by a microbial fuel cell. Aquaculture 497, 74–81.S. Rahimi,etal.
Biotechnology Advances 43 (2020) 107570
25