1 
 
“Study on long term storage of selected  immobilization  microalgal species  for 
 sustained feed and water quality  control for Aquaculture  “ 
 
 
 
 
 
Authors:  
 
Renee, Yi -Mond Yuan  
Dr Ingenieur agronome, AgroParistech  
Professor Associate, GIES, Tamkang University , Taipei , Taiwan  
( email: yuan@mail.tku.edu.tw ; yuan_tku@yahoo.com.tw ) 
Address: 151, Ying Chuan road, Tamshui district, 25137,New Taipei city, Taiwan  
Phone number : 886( 02) 2621 5656 ext: 3062, 2703  
 
Yean -Chang Chen  
Dr Institute of Oceanography, NTU, Taipei - Taiwan  
Professor, Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, Taiwan   
( email : ycchen@mail ntou.edu.tw ;ycchen.ntou@gmail.com ) 
Address: No.2 Peining Road, 20224,Keelung, Taiwan             
Phone number: 886(02)2462 2192 Ext:522  
 
 
 
Abstract:  
 
Compared study of long term storage Immobilization impact of entrapped and free 
microalgae cells SEM observation of cells morpholo gical change and cells viability, 
metabolic activities, biomass increase measurements and distinguish respective specie 
biomass contents carbohydrates, proteins, and high lipids content optima for 
aquaculture for Scenedesmus quadricauda  in fish culture, Isochrysis galbana  in clam 
culture, twelve species of benthic diatoms in post -larval abalone culture.  
 
 
Keywords:  
Immobilized microalgae , diatoms, quantification produced biomass  from waste water, aquaculture  
 2 
 
INTRODUCTION:  
 
Different applications of m icroal gae have been studied . In particular , they can be used  as waste 
water filter treatment  combined to emission of O2 that contribute to ponds continuous aeration .  
Authors  (Chen (2001) and Chevalier & de la Noüe (1985)  experimented quantitative decrease of 
Ammonium  (NH+
4–N concentrations ), CO 2, phosphate and sludge paired to  fast increase of microalgae 
colon ies under favorable conditions. Microalgae have been also applied  in aquaculture  
(Valenzuela -Espinoza et al. 1999) : microalgae act as  sensor to control the  water quality, thanks to 
chlorophyll  presence;  through photosynthesis and metaboli c activities , they fix N, P, K elements by 
consuming CO 2 to produc e lipids , proteins and other valuable byproducts  substances  to feed shellfish  
(Chevalier & de la Noüe (1985) , Wilkinson et al.,1990,  Proulx &  de la Noüe , 1988, Garbisu et al., 
1991) . Many other applications of microalgae exist  such as : food additives  ; protein complements , that 
may become a  new source of nutrition  (Spoeh  & Milner)  in the future in perspective of climate change 
enhancement and global depletion of soil, water or resources, to supply either aquaculture , animal or  
human feed  ; production of energy : biogas, coal, or biofuels  (biodiesel , bioethanol ) ; agricultural inputs : 
fertilizers and soil conditione rs ; pharmaceuticals, cosmeti cs and other valuable chemicals .(Christi, 
2007)  
 
In the present  paper , three immobilization  applications  of microalgae have to be studied for a  long term 
storage ( 1 to 3 years)  for use in  aquatic cultivation as feed or /and water quality control: Scenedesmus 
quadricauda  ( Chlorophyta, Chlorococcale) for fish culture, Isochrysis galbana  ( Haptophyc eae) in 
clam culture, twelve  species  of benthic diatoms  in post -larval abalone culture.  
Immobilization is one of the means to circumve nt the harvest problem (de la Nouë & de Pams,  1988) 
and can be considered as a gentle method . Entrapping  microalgae in beads  (calcium alginate natural 
algal extract) , that can be stored at low temperature for several years, can bring much convenience in 
aquaculture, under a  ready -to-use form, the activities of the cells are maintained during storage  without 
liquid medium , and remain active  after long term storage . When put back in liquid medium and normal  
conditions of temperature, light, atmosphere  the st ored cells show non differentiate respiratory  and 
metabolic activities or division  as normal free cells  does when they are in normal conditions. Harvest 
of the microalgae cells is possible, using the immobilization of the cells in beads . Harvest become s 
then very simple  and well controlled without lo ose of materials  for aquaculture food control or other  
microalgae applications such as lipid extraction for bioenergies production . For example, the beads can 
be gathered in plastic bags and instant aneous ly remo ved for further processing , while traditional 
methods,  less efficient  and more costly methods , and filtration, or energy intensive centrifugation 
(Richmond & Becker, 1986, Moha,1988, Oswald, 1998) or autoflocculation  method  (self-aggregation 
by sto pping a eration and decantation  ; i.e. Cyanobacteria, the sedimentation realized through  ultrasonic 
waves and ultrasound ( Bosma et al )). Determination of basic requirements  and properties of an 
efficient microalgae system and the ideal matrix for immobilized algae  goes through experimentations 3 
 
on entrapped cells : viability, ability to photosynthesis, high density of cells  impact , stability of growth, 
continuous productivity  ability , and proof  of immobilization superiority to free cells  (Mallick, 2006) .  
Then, n umerous reports on immobilized cells concerning algae, bacteria, in -vitro plant cell cultures, 
etc., have supported the view that cell metabolic activities and efficiencies may remain as they are in 
normal conditions. During immobilization, algal cells maintain th eir respiratory and photosynthetic 
activities. Immobilization prevents algal cells from being washed out or grazed by herbivores. 
Immobilized algae can, when stored at low temperatures (4℃) in darkness,  when put back in normal 
conditions they show same growth successful  after long storage;  more than 12 months of 
immobilization (Faafeng et al., 1994 ). Practical applications of immobilized algae include nutrient and 
heavy metal removal from wastewater (Chevalier and de la Nou ë, 1985; Wilkinson et al., 1990; Proulx 
and de la Nou ë, 1988; Garbisu et al., 1991 ). Entrapment, storage and processing into alginate -beads are 
useful in stock culture management. The preparation of alginate -bead is easie r, cheaper and more 
readily available than other methods, such as cryopreservation (Romo and P érez-Mart ınez, 1997 ). 
There are many immobilization techniques that have  been experienced . Entrapment is by far a 
preferred  method for microalgae immobilization, using polymers (natural or synthetic offering non 
toxicity matrix, such as alginates, carragee nan, called biocatalyst beads that  are photo -transparent and 
stable in growth medium. A definition o f immobilized cell has been suggested: “A cell that by natural 
or artificial means is prevent from moving independently of its neighbors to all parts of the  aqueous 
phase of the system under study” (Tampion and Tampion, 1987) . Alginates has some affinity and allow 
interactions with cell surfaces and form a labile structure that allow division inside the beads but 
resistant enough to do not disrupt : the beads are form ed from droplets of a suspension of microalgae in 
aqueous solution of the gelling material coming out from a nozzle (small orifice) into an interacting salt 
solution, which stabilize the microalgae into biocatalyst beads with Ca++ for alginate and K+ for 
carrageenan, entrapping the organism via polymerization or cross linking forming mono -dispersed 
beads of calcium alginate, sterile (size 0.2 -1.0 mm) . Six different types of immobilization methods can 
be distinguished: the covalent coupling, immobili zation by affinity, adso rption, confinement in a 
liquid -liquid emulsion, and capture  behind semi -permeable membrane and entrapment in hollow fibers  
bioreactors  and some others not classified.  
Immobiliz ation impact on the  cells shows some morphological change in many cases .  
 
Immobilized algae are applied primarily in wastewater treatment. There have been few studies that 
reported on immobilized algal cells for application in aquaculture, such as controlling fish culture water 
quality. The aim of this first stu dy was to test the feasibility of using an algal immobilization technique 
to preserve the microalgal species, Scenedesmus quadricauda , to determine the algal viability after 
long-term storage, and to test the use of immobilized algal beads for control of w ater quality in fish 
culture.  
Isochrysis galbana Parke (Haptophyta) primarily occurs as a unicellular flagellate, but also as 
palmelloid stages in brackish marine environments  with t wo long isokont flagella emerg ing from a 4 
 
gullet -like structure, but no ha ptonema is present. I. galbana , because of its good nutritional  qualities 
(i.e. highly unsaturated fatty acids) and small cell size, is widely used in aquaculture, principally as 
feed in the early stages of growth of mollus k larvae, fish and crustacean, wh ich cost of produc tion is 
high due live f eed culture cost , up to 30% of the total cost of production  (Valenzuela -Espinoza et al., 
1999). The aim in th is second study is to better understand the microalgae viability and metabolic 
activities for continuous  culture under immobilized microalgae, which could then diminish the cost and 
bring a convenient ready -for- use form . 
 
Diatoms are important primary producers due to their high li pid content (Chen 2012) and constitute 
a rich diet for marine organism s, becau se they are widely distributed in most aquatic habitats. They are 
unicellular photosynthetic eukaryotes within the class Bacillariophyceae. A peculiar feature of diatoms 
compared to other microalgae is their siliceous cell wall. The numbers of their genera  and species are 
approximately 250 and 100,000, respectively (Lebeau & Robert, 2003 ). Lipids are the major 
metabolites of diatoms, being composed of neutral lipids, polar lipids and traces of sterols. Neutral 
lipids are their main stored lipids . Benthic di atoms are the main food source for abalone post -larvae 
(Hahn, 1989a), and monospecific cultures of benthic diatoms have successfully been employed as feed 
for the culture of abalone post -larvae (Kawamura et al., 1995; Hillebrand and Sommer, 2000). 
However,  in Taiwan, abalone post -larvae grown in hatcheries are usually fed with natural populations 
of benthic diatoms, following the traditional method of using biofilms of mixed benthic diatoms as the 
settlement substrata for abalone post -larvae in hatcheries w orldwide (Hahn, 1989b; Daume et al., 1997, 
1999, 2000; Roberts, 2001; Gallardo and Buen, 2003).  
Carbajal -Miranda et al. (2005) recorded the effectiveness of Navicula incerta  and Amphiprora 
paludosa  var. hyaline as feeds for cultivation of post -larval red a balone, Haliotis rufescens , and Daume 
et al. (2000) documented the use of Navicula  sp., N. jeffreyi , Cylindrotheca closterium , Cocconeis  sp. 
and Amphora  sp. as feed for post -larvae of Haliotis rubra . Gordon et al. (2006) has reported that 
Amphora luciae  and Navicula  cf. lenzii  supported high post -larval growth and a high survival rate of 
Haliotis discus . Seven species of diatoms ( Achnanthes longipes , Nitzschia  sp., Cocconeis 
pseudomarginata , Navicula britannica , N. ramosissima , Navicula  sp. and Nitzschia ov alis) were used 
by Kawamura et al. (1998) to culture Haliotis iris  post-larvae. Mixed diatoms vs. monospecific cultures 
of Navicula  were used as feed for Haliotis asinina  by Gallardo and Buen (2003). Poor and 
unpredictable performance of abalone postlarvae  has been related to the differences in the species of 
diatoms they have been fed, and the composition of these diatoms (Kawamura et al., 1998), including 
their lipid, protein and extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs).  
 The effectiveness of different s pecies of diatoms as feed for the culture of post -larvae of H. 
diversicolor is not well known . Therefore, the aim of this third study is to survey the diversity of 
diatoms species found in H. diversicolor  hatcheries, and to isolate and develop a monocultur e that 
could be immobilized and encapsulated in alginate beads for long -term storage as algal stock. Their 
lipids, proteins, and EPS (soluble EPS, bound EPS, internal carbohydrate and residual carbohydrate)  5 
 
content  are determi ned and w ill be compared  to di stinguish t he twelve monospecific phytoplanktons . 
Their  metabolic activities after immobilization as well as their nutritional value  for feed use in  
cultivating the post -larvae of H. diversicolo  is maintained , to allow the most adapted species through 
long term storage immobilization , contribute to  diminish the cost of the feed with these phytoplankton s 
used as live feed by the post -larvae, similarly to the above clam study.  
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS : 
 
Different microalgae species have been immobilized (Chen ( 2001, 2003 & 2006) :  as per 
observed, long immobilization storage  and morphologic change not  affect ing the growth or the 
metabolic activities when placed back in normal liquid medium culture. This  method has been used on 
three microalgae:  
-  Immobilization microalgae Scenesdesmus quadricauda  for long term storage and for application 
for water quality control in fish culture:  
 
-  Immobilization microalgae  Isochysis galbana for long term storage and application for feed and 
water quality control in clam (Merextr ix lusoria) culture  
 
   -  Immobilization of 12 benthic diatoms species for long term storage and as feed for post -larval 
abalone  (Haliortis diversicolor)  
 
A) Immobilization Scenedesmus quadricauda  
 
1. Microalga culture  
Pure S. quadricauda cultures were is olated from the fishpond at the Department of Aquaculture, 
National Taiwan Ocean University, in Keelung, Taiwan. The microalgae were incubated in a 1000 -ml 
flask containing 600 ml of liquid medium (Provasoli‟s Enriched Freshwater, PEF medium, pH 7.0 ) 
(Prov asoli and Pintner, 1960 ) at 100 μmol photons m-2 s-1 at 24℃ and 12:12 dark:light photoperiods. 
The media were replaced weekly.  
2. Immobilization of the microalga  
Microalga entrapment in alginate -beads was performed as follows. A 3% (v/v) sodium alginate 
(Sigma A -7128 ) solution was autoclaved for 20 min at 121 ℃. The S. quadricauda strain was 
concentrated using centrifugation (10 min, 1000 ×g r.c.f.), and then mixed homogeneously into the 
sodium alginate solution to make the beads. The numbers of a lgal coenobi a 0.1 ml of mixture were 
counted (ca. 2 –30,000 coenobia ml y1) using a hemacytometer (Bright -Line, improved Neubauer, 
0.1-mm deep ) under a light microscope. Beads, about 4 mm in diameter, were formed by dropping the 
alginate –algal mixture into a solution of 0.03 M CaCl 2 at room temperature using a burette. In this 
experiment, 1 ml of the mixture could drop about 10 drops (beads). The beads were harden ed in the 6 
 
CaCl 2 solution for 30 min. Subsequently, they were washed 2 several times in autoclaved distilled 
water to remove excess CaCl 2. The wet beads were then directly and immediately stored in a well 
sealed flask without any liquid medium addition. The flask was wrapped with aluminum foil and then 
maintained in absolute darkness at 4 8°C until used, preventing algal growth. The number of re -cultured 
cells was also counted, 100 beads were dissolved in a solution of 6 ml of 5% sodium 
hexametaphosphate and 24 ml of PEF culture medium (Romo and P érez-Mart´ınez, 1997 ). The 
dissolved solution was then used for counting by a hemacytometer.  
3. Fixation of algal materials for electron microcopy studies  
The freshly made algal beads, the stored algal beads and the re -cultured algal beads were gently 
crush ed individually into fractions using forceps  (tongs) . These fractions and normal culture 
(free-living ) S. quadricauda cells were collected in 15 -ml centrifuge tubes followed by separate d 
fixation in 0.1 M sucrose solution containing 4% glutaraldehyde and 0 .1 M sodium cacodylate buffer 
(pH 7.0 ) at 4°C for 2 h. They were then rinsed twice with a 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 
10 mM CaCl 2, and sucrose 2 concentrations successively reduced to 0.05  M. This treatment was 
followed by two rinses by a pur e (sucrose -free) 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 10 mM 
CaCl 2. 
Post-fixation was performed with 2% OsO 4 in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 10 mM 
CaCl 2 for 1 h at 4 °C. Thereafter, all materials were rinsed four times with a sodium cacodyl ate buffer 
containing 10 mM CaCl 2, three times with aqueous ethanol (50%) and gradually dehydrated in ethanol 
(50, 70, 85, 95, 100% ). Dehydrated materials were prepared for transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM ) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM ). 
For TEM, some dehydrated materials were rinsed in propylene oxide (three times, 30 min each ), 
followed by infiltration in propylene oxide –Spurr‟s resin in a decreasing ratio from 2:1 (two parts 
propylene oxide:  one part Spurr‟s resin ) to 1:1, each for 4 h. Sam ples were then suspended in pure 
Spurr‟s resin for 2 days at 4 8C in darkness before embedding in Spurr‟s resin (Spurr, 1969 ). The 
thin-sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate according to Smith and Croft (1991 ). 
For SEM, some dehydrated materials were dropped onto specimen holders and then dried with a 
critical -point -drying machine (Hitachi -HCP -1). Finally, they were coated onto an ion coater (Joel, 
JCF-1100E ) for 220 s.  
 
4. Algal bead application for controlling fish culture water qualit y 
Four glass jars (60×55×33 cm ), each containing 100 l of freshwater, were assigned as groups 1, 2, 3 
and 4. Ten male tilapia, Oreochromis mossambicus (average body length 14 cm), were cultured in each 
jar. Groups 1 and 2 were cultured under continuous lig ht of 100 μmol photons m-2 s-1 irradiance at 24 ℃. 
Groups 3 and 4 were cultured under the same irradiance but with 12:12 dark /light photoperiods (light at 
8:00 and dark at 20:00 ) at 24℃. 
Freshly made algal beads (ca. 2 –3000 coen obia in each bead ) (Figure 1 -1) were cultured in PEF 
medium for 2 weeks. The beads were subsequently packaged into three nylon net bags (pore size was 7 
 
ca. 2 =3 mm in diameter ) (Figure 1 -2), each containing 4000 algal beads. They were then hung in 
groups 2, 3 and 4, respectively. For gr oup 4, the nylon bag was removed from the jar when the light 
turned off at 20:00 (the initial darkness ), and replaced until the light was turned on at 8:00 (the initial 
light). Group 1 was the control group, which only contained fishes . Tilapias in each jar were  fed with 
2.5 g of commercial feed (Abon, Taiwan ) everyday. The feed contained 45% of protein, 5% fat, 3% 
crude cellulose, 10% ash and 10% water. A pH meter (Suntex, Taiwan ), a digital oxygen meter (Lutron 
DO-5510, Taiwan ) and colorimetric test ki t (Aquamerck Ammonium, Merck, Germany ) were used to 
test the pH value, dissolved oxygen level (DO) and NH+
4–N concentration, respectively. The water 
quality of groups 1 and 2 was tested 4 once daily. However, groups 3 and 4 were tested twice daily (at 
8:00 and 20:00 ) as the light came on at 8:00 and turned off at 20:00. All cultures were adequately 
aerated during the period between day s 1 to 13. Aeration ceased from day 14 to 18.  
 
B) Immobilization Isochrysis galbana : 
1  Culture and isolation of alginate be ads 
The cultures were isolated from the marine fishpond at the Department of Aquaculture, 
National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, Taiwan. I. galbana was cultivated in 1000 -mL flasks 
containing 600 mL liquid medium (modified Provasoli‟s Enriched Seawater , PES medium, salinity = 
20) (Provasoli & Pintner, 1960) at 100 μmol photon m −2·s−1 at 24 ◦C and a 12:12, dark: light 
photo -period. The medium was replaced weekly.  
2  Entrapment of I. galbana in alginate -beads  was performed similarly as for the Scenedesmu s 
quadricauda  as exception for Isochrysis galbana strain was concentrated by centrifugation (1000 × 
g,20 min), the cell density count (ca. 6 –7 × 106 cells mL −1). Beads, about 4 –5 mm diameter. modified 
PES medium (20‰salinity) to remove excess CaCl 2., (Chen , 2001). The resulting solution was then 
used for counting the cells.  
3. Use of algal beads for controlling clam culture water quality and for feed  (Figure 5/ Figure 6 ) 
Method similar to S. quadricauda  
 
C) Immobilization of twelve benthic diatom species  
1  Collection and preparatory cultures of benthic diatoms  
Diatoms from small abalone hatchery ponds were scraped from abalone post -larvae settlement 
substrates (plastic plates), collected in l L collection bottles, placed in a cool icebox, and then 
transport ed to the Algal Laboratory of the National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung, Taiwan.  All 
the collected materials were cultured in 1 L flasks with 500 mL of autoclaved (at 1.1 atm and 121 °C 
for 20 min) Provasoli's Enriched Seawater (PES) (Provasoli, 1968) addition with 0.03 g/L of NaSiO3 
and 0.0013 g/L H2SeO3 and henceforth called „modified PES medium ‟. All collected materials were 
incubated in a plant growth chamber (Firstek, RI -201, Taiwan) with the culture conditions held at 24 
°C/22 °C (L/D), 12/12 (L/D  cycle) and 122 μmol photons m−2 s−1 light intensity.  
.2  Isolating diatom species for monospecific cultures  8 
 
   2.1 Streaking method of agar plate  
Agar plates were made by using 100 mL of modified PES medium with 2 g Baco -agar in a 250 mL 
flask. The openin g of the flask was sealed with a cotton plug and the contents autoclaved at 1.1 atm and 
121 °C for 20 min. When the solution was still hot, it was poured and dispensed into the γ-ray sterile 
plastic Petridishes (150×14.5 mm, Alpha Plus, Taiwan) on a clean bench (Laminar flow hood, High 
Ten, 3HT -24, Taiwan). The covers of the Petri dishes were sealed with parafilm. The Petri dishes were 
then stored at 4 °C for further use.  
Algal solutions from the preparatory cultures were streaked onto the agar plates using  an 
inoculating platinum loop sterilized with a Bunsen burner. After inoculation, the Petri dishes were 
cultured in the plant growth chamber with the same conditions as previously described, and were 
checked each day under an inverted microscope. When clea r colonies appeared on the surface of the 
agar plates, the colonies were individually removed from the plates to 250 mL flasks containing 150 
mL of modified PES medium using the flamed, sterile, inoculation method. The algal solutions derived 
from the isol ated colonies were checked using a microscope for identifying the species. If the cultured 
algal solutions still contained mixed diatom species, then the streaking methods were repeated until 
monospecific cultures emerged.   
2.2  Dilution method  
As it was l ikely that some of the diatoms would not survive when streaked onto solid agar plates, 
the dilution method was also used as follows: 0.01 mL algal solution of the preparatory cultures were 
separately diluted into 100 test tubes (16×100 mm), each containing  5 mL of modified PES medium. 
The test tubes were cultured in a plant growth chamber under the same culture conditions as previously 
described. One drop of the diluted solution from each tube was checked every week. If the test tubes 
contained mixed algal species, the dilution method was repeated using the algal solution from the test 
tubes until monospecies appeared. Once the test tubes contained monospecies of diatom, the algal 
solution was transferred from the test tube to a 250 mL flask containing 150 m L of modified PES 
medium, and was then cultured in the plant growth chamber as mentioned earlier.  
The size of the diatoms was determined using a microscope equipped with micro -rule (1 μm scales 
in the eye pieces).  
2.3  Using a Scanning Electron Microscope for confirming the diatom species classification  
Monospecies from the 250 mL flasks were collected in 15 mL centrifuge tubes, pre -fixed in 
modified PES medium with 2% glutaraldehyde at  4 °C for 2 h, and then fixed in a 0.1 M sucrose 
solution containing 4% glutaraldehyde and 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.0) at 4 °C for 4 h. 
They were then rinsed twice with a 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 10 mM CaCl2, and the 
sucrose co ncentration was successively reduced to 0.05 M. This was followed by two rinses in 
sucrose -free 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 10 mM CaCl2.  
Post-fixation was performed with 2% OsO4 in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer containing 10 mM 
CaCl2 for 1 h  at 4 °C.  
All materials were then rinsed four times with a sodium cacodylate buffer containing 10 mM CaCl2, 9 
 
three times with aqueous ethanol (50%) and gradually dehydrated in ethanol (50, 70, 85, 95, and 100%). 
Those dehydrated materials were dropped onto specimen holders and then dried with a 
critical -point -drying machine (Hitachi -HCP -1). Finally, they were coated onto an ion coater (Hitachi 
E101, Japan) for 220 s. They were observed using a SEM (Hitachi S2400, Japan) (see Chen, 2001, 
2003). Identification  was based on Patrick and Reimer (1966), Jin et al. (1985), Round et al. (1990) and 
Witkowski et al. (2000).  
2.4 . Immobilization of the monospecies diatoms it is similar as for  S. quadricauda , except for:   
each monospecies was concentrated through centrif ugation (20 min, 1000 ×g), and then mixed 
homogeneously into the sodium alginate solution to make the beads. The number of algal cells per mL 
of mixture was counted (ca. 106 –107 cells per mL) Beads, about 3 –4 mm in diameter,  
Table 1  
2.5  Cultivation of po st-larvae with the twelve immobilized monospecific diatom s 
The immobilized algal beads (100 beads of each of the 12 species) were gently crushed individually 
into small fractions using forcep s. Those fractions were separately collected in twelve 500 mL fla sks 
with 250 mL of modified PES media. These flasks were then cultured in a plant growth chamber under 
the same culture conditions as previously described. When the algal biomass of those flasks exceeded 
105 cells/mL, the algal solutions were separately tr ansferred to twelve 20 L Carboy plastic buckets, 
each containing 12 L of modified PES medium. These Carboys were cultured in the green house of our 
laboratory. If the sunlight was insufficient (less than 100 μmol photons m−2 s−1 light intensity), two 
40 W natural white fluorescent lights were positioned about 50 cm above the Carboys. When the 
diatom biomass of those Carboys reached 1×106 cells/mL, the algal solutions were then inoculated into 
50 L square PVC tanks containing 45 L of filtered fresh seawater using a 1 μm pore filter bag, to which 
0.03 g/L  of sodium silicate (Na 2SiO 3) had been added. These square tanks were also cultured in the 
green house and were equipped with white fluorescent lights. Seven plastic plates, each measuring 25 
cm×20 cm were hung vertical ly in each tank. All the tanks were well aerated using an air pump. After 
4–7 days of culture, when the surfaces of both sides of the plastic plates were covered by more than 
80% of benthic diatoms  (a prefixed level of diatoms presence for the experimentat ion), the seawater of 
each tank was refreshed with filtered seawater and inoculated freshly fertilized eggs of small abalone 
(obtained from the small abalone hatchery) at a density of 200 fertilized eggs/L. About 3 days later the 
fertilized eggs reached th e stage of post -larvae ready to settle on the surfaces of the plastic plates, and 
the filtered seawater was then refreshed, and every 3 days thereafter. The post -larvae were 
photographed using a stereomicroscope equipped with a digital camera to record the  numbers settling 
on the plastic plates, and their growth. This procedure was repeated 5 times between April 16, 2005 
and May 26, 2006.  
2.6. Protein and lipid analysis of the twelve monospecies of diato ms 
Following the methods of the Association of Officia l Analytical Chemists (AOAC, 1990), protein 
was determined with a Kjeltec semi -auto analyzer model 1007. Lipid was determined by the 
chloroform -methanol (2:1, v/v) extraction method (Folch et al., 1957).  10 
 
2.7  Isolation and analysis of extracellular  polymeric substances (EPSs)  
The procedures for the fractionation of intra - and extra -cellular carbohydrates followed those of De 
Brouwer and Stal (2002). Soluble EPS was obtained by centrifuging 10 mL of diatom culture at 1000 
×g for 20 min at room tempe rature. The supernatant was transferred to a centrifuge tube containing 30 
mL of cold ethanol (96%) and the soluble EPS was allowed to precipitate overnight at − 20 °C. After 
centrifugation (20 min, 1000 ×g), the EPS pellet was dried under a flow of nitrog en and subsequently 
re-suspended in 300 μL of distilled water. A volume of 200 μL was used for carbohydrate analysis. 
Bound EPS was extracted by resuspending the culture pellet in 2 mL of distilled water. The cell 
suspension was thoroughly stirred and incu bated for 1 h at 30 °C. After centrifugation at 1000 ×g for 
20 min, the bound EPS was isolated.  
The internal sugars were extracted by adding 1 mL 0.05MH2SO4 to the cell pellet. The suspension 
was mixed every 30 min for a period of 2 h. After centrifugation  (20 min, 1000 ×g) 200 μL of the 
supernatant was used for carbohydrate analysis. For determination of the residual carbohydrates, what 
was left of the cell pellet after the extraction of the internal sugars was re -suspended in 400 μL of 
distilled water. A volume of 200 μL of thi s suspension was used for analysis.  
Carbohydrates were measured in four different fractions (soluble EPS, bound EPS, internal 
carbohydrates, and residual carbohydrates) using the phenol/ H2SO4 assay (Dubois et al., 1956).  
 
Results  
A) Scenedesmus quadricaud a 
1. Storage, culture and electron microscopy studies of the immobilized S.quadricaudas  
Freshly made algal beads (Figure 1 / Figure 1 -1) contained an average of 2470 ±460 S. quadricauda 
coenobia in each bead. The wet beads without liquid medium were stored i n darkness at 4 ℃ for 3 years. 
The algal coenobia did not lose their reproduction ability within the beads after long -term storage, and 
the number of coenobia was the same as those of fresh algal beads. The amount of coenobia increased 
tremendously to avera ge 9×104± 2300 coenobia in each stored bead (Figure 1 / Figure 5 ), following 
culture in PEF medium for 4 weeks.  
Thin -sections of freshly made algal beads (Figure 1 / Figure 7 ) showed that a large chloroplast, 
filling most of the cell, was the predominant or ganelle. The chloroplasts were typically composed of 
stacks of thylakoids. The simple internal suspended pyrenoids were normally closely surrounded by 
caps reserve materials. The ultrastructures of freshly immobilized algal cells were the same as those of 
free-living algal cells. In contrast, in thin -sections of the long -term stored immobilized algal cells, the 
chloroplast pyrenoids had disappeared, although a chloroplast filled most of the cell (Figure 1 / Figure 
9). However, the pyrenoids were reconstructe d within a week after those cells were re -cultured in PEF 
medium at 100 μmol photons m-2 s-1 irradiance and 12:12 dark:light photoperiods at 24 ℃. 
The SEM observations of the fractions of stored algal beads showed that the morphology of the 
immobilized S. quadricauda coenobia (Figure 1 / Figure 10 ) was nearly the same as normal coenobia 
(Figure 1 -6), except that coenobia spines were modified into bent shapes.  11 
 
 
2. Application of algal alginate -beads for fish culture water quality control  
2.1. The NH+
4 –N concentrations of fish cultures  
As shown in Figure 2, NH+
4–N concentration of  group 1  (control group : only fish without  microalgae  
beads added)  increased quickly  to 17 mgl-1 within a week. The freshwater in group 1 was replaced on 
day 7, 20:00. However, NH+
4–N concentration still showed an increasing trend from 1.5 to 15 mgl-1 
during the period from day 8 to 18 after water was replaced.  (A colorimetric test kit/ Aquamerck 
Ammonium, Merck -Germany/ was used to control NH+
4–N concentration ) 
In contrast, groups 2, 3 and 4 showed low concentration levels of NH+
4–N (total 4 average was 5. 01 
mgl-1) during the period from day 1 to 13. The average NH+
4–N concentrations of groups 2, 3 and 4 
were 4.85, 4.96, and 5.24 mgl-1, respectively. After aeration ceased during the period between day 14 to 
18, the average NH+
4–N concentrations of groups 2,  3 and 4 were 0.66, 2.25, and 2.38 mgl-1, 
respectively.  In group 2. 3 and 4, presence of S. quadricauda microalgae proved that the physiological 
capabilities of the immobilized algal cells were not excessively disrupted by the immobilization. Thus, 
the imm obilized algae can be used successfully to control the water quality in the cultures. Chen (2001) 
and Chevalier & de la Noüe (1985) also reported that Scenedesmus cells immobilized in beads were as 
efficient as free cells in taking up ammonium.  
 
2.2. Fish culture DO levels  
 DO level of 4 cultures was compared and help ed to follow the evolution of fish culture groups without 
or with Scenedesmus quadricauda. As shown in Figure 3, DO levels of all culture groups were around 
7 mgl-1 with aeration . However, the re were obvious differences in DO levels between the four culture 
groups when aeration ceased. After ceasing aeration (from day s 14 to 18 ), group 2 showed the highest 
DO level of 4.8 mgl-1, (4.16 mgl-1 on average ). The DO levels of group 3 varied (1.7"0.8 mgl-1). The 
DO levels of group 4 were stable : 2.2 mgl-1 on average. The DO levels of group 1, while the control 
group  without microalagae , was the lowest, with only 0.96 mgl-1 on average. It is obvious that the alga e 
affected the DO level when no aeration w as provided. (DO was controlled  by a digital oxygen meter/ 
LutroDO -%%10 -Taiwan)  
 
2.3. Fish culture pH values  
As shown in Figure 4 pH values of group 3 were the most changed when aerated. However, the 
average pH values of the four groups were very close. The  average pH values of groups 1, 2, 3 and 4 
were 7.72, 7.78, 7,70 and 7.71, respectively. In contrast, after aeration was suspended, the pH values of 
all groups decreased. The average pH value of group 1 was 7.46. In contrast, the pH values of culture 
group s with algal beads were near to pH 7.0, in which, groups 2, 3 and 4 were 7.16, 6.96 and 7.07, 
respectively  (a pH meter / Suntex -Taiwan/ was used to test the pH value ]. This result showed that the 
algae controlled water quality to neutral when aeration cea sed. 
 12 
 
2.4. Body length of tilapia (the growth of tilapia)  
After 18 days of culture, the average body length of group 1 was 14.5 ±0.3 cm, the poorest in 
growth. Group 2 was 16.3 ±0.2 cm, the best growth. Group 3 was 15.1 ±0.3 cm and group 4 was 
15.5±0.2 cm.  
3.Discussions for S.quadricauda  
The alginate -beads method has the following advantages: (1) bead preparation is easier and cheaper 
than cryopreservation, (2 ) the beads can be stored in refrigerators, and (3) immobilized cells can be 
rapidly introduced into l iquid cultures. Romo and PérezMart´ınez (1997 ) reported that they found 
similar satisfactory results when this technique was used with the chlorophyte S. obliquus (Turp ) Kütz. 
The present study also confirmed that the technique is suitable for S. quadricau da. Moreover, algal 
alginate beads without liquid medium directly kept in darkness at 4 ℃ for more than 3 years were 
capable of growing and initiated new cultures when transferred into a fresh medium. The amount of S. 
quadricauda coenobia was 9 ×104 per bead . This was the same amount as found in a normal culture. 
Tamponnet et al. (1985 ) had similar results. They reported that immobilized Euglena gracilis alga was 
kept for more than 2 years in alginate -beads. It is important to point out that growth is possibl e within 
the alginate -beads under suitable culture, which reveals that the algal viability is maintained within the 
beads.  
The reason that S. quadricauda remained alive within the beads in the dark at low temperatures for 
an extended period may be due to t he caps reserve of the pyrenoids that present materials for 
maintaining their basic requirements. TEM observations showed that the ultrastructure of S. 
quadricauda cells lost the pyrenoids after extended storage. The lost pyrenoids were reconstructed 
when the algae were re -cultured in an aqueous medium with light. However, SEM observations 
showed that the morphology of S. quadricauda cells were not altered extensively when they were 
entrapped in the alginate -bead, with the exception of bent spines in contra st to the straight spines of 
normal free -living S. quadricauda cells.  
Ammonium (NH+
4–N. in fish cultures with algal beads was utilized by the immobilized microalga 
as nutrient and resulted in lower concentrations (ca. 5 mgl-1). The biomass of the immobiliz ed algae 
increased ca. 15 times in 18 days of culture in this experiment. This proved that the physiological 
conditions of the immobilized algal cells were not interrupted by the immobilization. Thus, the 
immobilized algae can be used successfully to contr ol the water quality in fish cultures. Chevalier and 
de la Nouë (1985 ) also reported that Scenedesmus cells immobilized on k-carrageenan beads are as 
efficient as free cells in taking up ammonium.  
Aeration maintained DO and pH at acceptable levels for tila pia. When aeration was suspended, the 
algal beads were able to increase the DO and they kept pH levels near 7.0 in water. In contrast, 
ammonium concentrations of tilapia cultures with algal beads  (group 2, 3 and 4)  were at low levels (i.e. 
1.76–5.01 mgl-1) regardless of whether the cultures were aerated. However, when aeration ceased, the 
ammonium concentration of the fish cultures with algal beads showed lower concentrations than those 
cultures with aeration (cf. the control group  1: no microalgae introduc ed)Aeration and variation of 13 
 
dissolved CO2 and O2 impacts are not further studied in this experience  
The average pH values of culture groups with algal beads were near 7.0, in which pH values of 
group 3 were the most affected. This is in contrast to pH va lues of group 4, which was more stable than 
those of group 3 when aeration ceased. These two groups were cultured under the same photoperiods, 
12:12 dark:light. However, the algal beads of group 4 were taken away from the jar following darkness. 
In this st udy, all immobilized algal cells could be removed from the water easily and immediately, just 
by taking away the algal containers (the nylon net bags ), to avoid the algal respiratory effects. In 
contrast, it is impossible to remove all the free -living and suspended microalgae from the water of 
normal cultures.  
By judging the data on ammonium, DO and pH (Figures 2,3,4 )?) and the results of tilapia growth 
clearly indicated that the water quality in cultures with algal beads (groups 2, 3 and 4 ) were better th an 
the culture without algal beads (group 1 ). The algal alginate -beads could control the water quality to be 
suitable for tilapia growing.  
In conclusion, the microalga S. quadricauda previously entrapped into alginate -beads maintained their 
normal physiol ogical activities and grew within the beads, just like free -living algal cells , no 
interruption during the immobilization, and the biomass of the immobilized microalgae  has increased 
15 times in 18 days of culture in this experiment . Therefore, this techni que is very suitable for 
preserving microalgal species and the application of microalga e in aquaculture for controlling water 
quality  in aquaculture  application  (group s 2,3 and 4 can manage to contribute to Tilapia optimum 
growth, while in the group 1  no microalgae  introduced, only the fish Tilapia, pH went highest to reach 
7.72, and fish body length the shortest.  
 
B) Immobilization Isochrysis galbana : 
 
Storage, culture and electron microscopy studies of immobilized cells.  
Freshly made algal beads containe d an average 6.8 × 105± 2.2 × 104 cells per bead. The wet beads 
without liquid medium were stored in darkness at 4 ◦C for a year. The immobilized cells did not lose 
their ability to grow after long -term storage, and cell number in the beads was the same than that of 
fresh algal beads. Cell number rose to 2.1 × 107± 5.4× 106 cells in each stored bead following culture in  
modified PES medium for 5 weeks.  
Thin sections of freshly made beads ( Figure 6 ) showed that a large chloroplast filled most of the 
cell. The conspicuous chloroplasts were typically composed of stacks of thylakoids in groups of three. 
The multilayered cel l coverings (organic scales) ( Figure 6,7), which were separated by amorphous 
electron  dense material were laid outside the distinct cytoplasmic membrane. The ultrastructure of 
freshly immobilized cells was the same as that of free -living Isochrysis (Figure 7). However, the cell 
covering in the latter was more developed. By contrast, after long -term storage of immobilized cells, 
the organic scales were minimal or had disappeared ( Figure 8 ), the cytoplasmic membrane was less 
distinct and the pyrenoids were sm aller than those of normal cells. However, the organic scales and 14 
 
pyrenoids appeared normal again within a week after cells had been cultured in modified PES medium 
at 100 μmol photon m −2s−1 irradiance and 12:12, dark: light photoperiods at 24 ◦C. 
SEM sections of immobilized cells, which had been stored for an extended period (1 year) and then 
re-cultured for five weeks, showed inconspicuous gullet -like structures ( Figure 10). Flagella protruded 
from these structures, and were lost when the organism was no longer alive. The morphology was 
nearly the same as that of normal cells ( Figure 10). In addition, cells located at the surface of the bead 
showed two long flagella ( Figure 11). These cells escaped from the beads and  feed the clams (as per 
explained in the following discussion) into the culture water after 5 ~6 weeks of reculture. Because of 
the small size of these cells (ca. 3 ∼5 μm diameter), the flagella of most I. galbana were „burned‟ away 
by the high voltage electron beam during SEM observation. However, some flagella on the 
immobilized beads were protected by the alginate, and could therefore be observed ( Figure 11).  
Use of algal alginate -beads for clam culture  
The ammonium concentration of group 1 increased to 9.5 mg L −1 at day 30 of culture and remained at 
this high value. During the 30 days of culture the ammonium -N concentration was 5.92 ± 3.1 mg L −1, 
the highest among  Isochrysis galbana  groups.  
In contrast, groups 2, 3 and 4 showed low concentrations of ammonium during the 30 days of 
culture. The ammonium concentration of group 2 increased to 3.5 mg L −1 at day 15, and then  
remained around at 3.3 to 3.5 mg L −1 from day s 15 to 30 of culture. The ammonium concentration of 
group 3 fluctuated with a slow trend toward increase, but remained between 4.3 to 4.5 mg L −1 during 
light periods and between 5 to 5.3 mg L −1 during dark periods after day 19 of culture. The ammonium 
concentrations of group 4 fluctuated with a trend towards increase, from 0.3 to 5.1 mg L −1 during light 
periods and from 0.1 to 6.3 mg L −1 during dark periods during the 30 days of culture.  In the present 
study ammonium of clam cultures was utilized as a nut rient by the immobilized alga, which resulted in 
lower concentrations (average 2.75 mg L −1). The cell numbers of the immobilized alga increased ca. 
32 times in 35 days of culture in this experiment. This proved that the physiological capabilities of the 
immobilized algal cells were not excessively disrupted by the immobilization. Thus, the immobilized 
algae can be used successfully to control the water quality in clam cultures (Chen , 2001 and Chevalier 
& de la Noüe , 1985).  
The average ammonium concentration s of groups 2, 3 and 4 were 2.75 ± 1.1, 3.65 ± 1.5 and 3.94 ± 
1.7 mg L −1, respectively. However, there was no significant difference in ammonium concentration 
between groups 2, 3 and 4 during light periods. There were obvious differences in DO concentrations 
among the four culture groups during the 30 days of culture. The DO  concentrations of group 1 showed 
a decreasing trend, from 7.2 to 6.2 mg L −1. DO concentrations of group 2 showed the highest values, 
from 7.3 increasing to 8.7 mg L −1. Groups 3 and 4 (especially the latter) showed fluctuating values. 
Average DO concentrat ion for groups 1, 2, 3, and 4 was 6.8 ± 0.36, 8.2 ± 0.5, 7.5 ± 0.58 and 6.6 ± 0.77 
mg L −1, respectively.  
The pH of group 1 was 6.5 at the end of the experiment, the lowest among all groups. The values 
for group 2 were steady at around pH 8.4. The values f or group 4 showed the most change. The 15 
 
averag e pH values for groups 3 and 4 were around 8.0 and 7.7, respectively.  
Initially, cells were rare in the liquid medium of groups 2, 3 and 4. After 1 week of culture some 
cells escaped from the alginate -beads, bec oming active and swimming freely in the water. The cell 
number in groups 2, 3 and 4 ranged between 8 × 102 and 3 × 103 cells mL −1 during the 30 days of 
culture. In group 2 some escaped cells assumed the palmelloid morphology and adhered to the wall of 
the jar in brown film -like layers (the biomass of those palmelloid cells was not assessed). In the algal 
bead re -culture experiment s, the concentration of escaped cells was ca. 5 × 104 cells mL −1 at week 6 
in a 5 -L flask containing 3 L modified PES medium. This value continued to rise until reaching 5.6 × 
107 cells mL −1.  
After 30 days of culture, the average clam length for groups 1,  2, 3 and 4 was 2.65 cm, 3.0 cm, 2.9 
cm and 2.8 cm, respectively. The clam survival rate for groups 1, 2, 3 and 4 was 25%, 85%, 80% and 
70%, respectively.  
The biomass of the escaped algae varied, possibly due to the physiology of the clams that ate the 
algae, as well as the environmental conditions affecting algal growth, such as the concentrations of 
ammonium and DO and pH value  and light or CO2 dissolved . Consumption by the clams reduced algal 
biomass, presumably by cells escaping from the surface of the beads due to continuous division inside 
the beads. The space inside the beads is limited; therefore the cell volume expanded and extruded 
excess cells out from the surface of the beads into the culture water. The escaped cells did not seem to 
affect the wa ter quality. This finding provides a sustainable clam culture system without the need to 
add live feed repeatedly.  
 
3.Discussion for Isochysis galbana  
This study confirmed that the technique reported by Romo & Pérez -Martí nez (1997) and Chen (2001) 
with the  non-motile freshwater green alga Scenedesmus is also suitable for the motile marine alga, 
Isochrysis galbana. Moreover, those algal alginate -beads without liquid medium kept in the dark at 4 
◦C for more than one year were capable of growth and initiated n ew cultures when transferred to fresh 
medium and suitable growth conditions.  
TEM showed that the pyrenoid size was reduced after extended storage. The cell covering 
component was also reduced, perhaps to save and store materials for cell survival. However , 
ultrastructural observations showed that the structures of I. galbana cells were not altered extensively 
when they were entrapped in the alginate -beads.  
The pH values of culture groups 2, 3 and 4 with algal beads were in the range 7.7 to 8.4. The values  
for group 2 were more stable than those of groups 3 and 4, which were cultured under the same 
irradiance and photoperiods. The algal beads of group 3 were removed from the jar during darkness to 
avoid the algal respiratory effects. The slight fluctuation in pH may therefore be due to the clam 
respiration during the periods without the alga.  
DO concentrations of group 2 were always higher than those of the other groups. The film -like 
palmelloid Isochrysis galbana layer in this group may have also aided in m aintaining good quality 16 
 
culture water. In group 3 the algal beads were removed during darkness, whereas the beads of group 4 
were not so, leading to lowest values for both pH and DO concentration s. 
Judging from the results of ammonium, DO and pH values and  the clam growth and survival rates, 
the water quality in cultures with algal beads (groups 2, 3 and 4) was better than the cultures without 
algal beads (group 1). The algal alginate -beads could maintain the water quality suitable for clam 
culture.  
The nu mber of cells was ca. (2.18 ×107) per bead after re -culture was similar to that found in a normal 
culture. Hertzberg & Jensen (1989) immobilized the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum in 
alginate beads and had similar results. However, the present stud y required only 5 weeks to reach that 
amount of cells in contrast to the study by Hertzberg & Jensen, which required 5.5 months. It is 
important to point out that growth is possible within the alginate -beads under suitable culture 
conditions , therefore  the method should reduce considerably the cost of clam culture compared to 
traditional culture methods, because the algal beads can act as a convenient „auto -feed‟ system to 
reduce the cost of clam culture ,  
 
C) Immobilization of twelve benthic diatom species  
1. Classification, isolation and immobilization of the benthic diatom species  
 
In the survey of the diatom species from the H. diversicolor post -larvae hatcheries (from East -north 
Taiwan and Penghu county), 29 species of pinnate diatom (belonging to 19 ge nera) were identified, in 
addition to 4 species of centric diatom (belonging to 4 genera). The diatom species are listed in Table  1. 
Among these diatoms, 12 species of pennate diatoms were successfully isolated to monospecies, either 
by streaking or by dil ution methods, and survived re -culture under laboratory conditions. These 
isolated monospecies were further observed via SEM to confirm their species (Fig. 12,13,14 ). They 
were also successfully immobilized in alginate beads (Fig ure 12,  A to F , Figure 13 G to L and Figure 
14).  
 
When the algal beads were stored in a 4 °C refrigerator for more than 1 year, the cell numbers of the 
diatoms remained at more than 105 cells/bead, capable of initiating new cultures. When the algal beads 
were then re -cultured in mo dified PES media to check their viabilities, all the diatom species in the 
beads were still alive and increased in biomass once again (Table 2).  
 
2. Post -larval survival and growth rates  
Twelve species of benthic diatoms were used as feed for post -larvae o f H. diversicolor . This work 
was repeated five times between April 16, 2005 and May 26, 2006. During that time the range of the 
average temperatures was 19.7 to 29.2 °C and the range of the average light intensities was 228.7 to 
2743.7 μmol m−2 s−1. These environmental conditions are suitable for the culture of small abalone 
fertilized eggs, larvae and post -larvae, according to Chen (1989). The detailed data of dates, 17 
 
temperatures and light intensities of the five experiments in the green house are listed i n Table 3. 
Because abalone larvae hatch without a shell gland and die within 1 or 2 days when the fertilized eggs 
are reared at 30.5 °C or above (Chen, 1989), no larvae were cultivated during the hot summer season 
(July and August) when the temperatures ri se to above 31 °C.  
The abalone survival (harvest) rates, growth rates, diatom sizes and diatom composition are 
summarized in Table 4. All 12 species of diatom attracted settlement of the small abalone post -larvae 
and could successfully be used as feed for the post -larvae, which will grow to 3 –4 mm shell lengths 
after 40 to 54 days of culture, and can then be transferred from the hatchery to farmers rearing juvenile 
abalone. The reddish colors of the shells of small abalone were not identical. Some shells we re 
brown -red in appearance, and some were fresh red, depending on the particular species of diatom they 
had been fed. The post -larvae fed with Cocconeis  scutellum and Cylindrotheca  sp. had pale areas on 
their shells and were noticeably different from other  postlarvae. There were big differences in the 
average numbers of post -larvae harvested from cultures fed different species of diatoms, ranging from 
7.7 to 112.6 post -larvae/1000 cm2. Nitzschia grossestriata  resulted in the best average harvest of 112.6 
post-larvae/ 1000 cm2 and the best average daily growth rate of 91.13 μm/day. In contrast, C. scutellum  
resulted in the lowest average harvest of 7.7 post -larvae/1000 cm2 and the slowest average daily growth 
rate of 65.33 μm/day. However, the growth rates (7 8.13–91.13 μm/day) were not significantly different 
between the diatom species except (65.33 –66.43 μm/day) for the last three listed in Table 4 
(Cylindrotheca  sp., Fragilaria schulzii and C. scutellum ). 
 
3. EPS and biochemical composition of the diatoms  
The EPS (soluble EPS, bound EPS, internal carbohydrates, and residual carbohydrates) of the diatom 
species varied. The soluble EPS had a positive effect on the survival of abalone larvae (Fig ure 15 A ). 
The protein content of the diatoms was fairly uniform, m ostly in the range of 10 –14% of dry weight, 
with Cylindrotheca  sp. lowest at 8.8%, and Caloneis platycephala  highest at 17.4%. In contrast, lipid 
contents (4.7 to 20.3% of dry weight) showed a larger variation, indicating a relationship with the 
survival a nd growth of post -larvae, with higher lipid contents resulting better survival and growth 
(Figure 12, Figure 1-2 and 1-3). The lipid content of  Cylindrotheca  sp. was the lowest at only 4.4% of 
dry weight, while Seminavis gracilenta  was the highest at 20.3%  and its bound EPS was also the 
highest at 11 90 pg/ 100 μm2. S. gracilenta  resulted in the second -highest harvest number (102.9 
post-larvae/1000 cm2), with the best harvest rate (112.6 post -larvae/1000 cm2) being obtained by using 
N. grossestriata  as the feed. Lipid, bound and soluble EPS contents of N. grosses triata were 13.7%, 
173.9 pg/100 μm2, and 212.31 pg/ 100 μm2, respectively. The amount of soluble EPS of N. 
grossestriata was the highest among the diatom species. The average diatom cell sizes, the average 
contents of internal and residual carbohydrates we re also varied between the diatom species, but 
showed no relation to the larvae harvest (survival) rate as well as the bound EPS ( Figure 12, Figure C 
and D). 
 18 
 
4. Discussion on twelve benthic diatoms species immobilization with compared quantitative efficie ncy 
of each specie s: 
In the survey of the diatom species from the small abalone hatcheries, 33 species of diatom were 
identified and 12 species of benthic diatoms were successfully isolated to generate monospecific 
cultures. Therefore, this paper focused o n isolating and culturing the benthic pennate diatoms. The 
present study confirms technical reports by Romo and Pérez -Martí nez (1997) and Chen (2001, 2003) 
showing that immobilized methods are also suitable for the benthic diatoms. In addition, benthic 
diatom alginate beads that were held without liquid medium and in the dark at 4 °C for more than 1 
year were capable of growth and initiating new cultures when transferred to fresh medium and suitable 
growth conditions. The numbers of cells of those diatoms w ere ca. 2.7×106 to 2.6×107 cells per bead 
after re -culture, similar to the values for a normal culture. Hertzberg and Jensen (1989) immobilized 
the marine diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum in alginate beads and obtained similar results. However, 
the present  study required only 4 weeks to reach that amount of cells, in contrast to the study by 
Hertzberg and Jensen, which required 5.5 months. It is important to point out that growth is possible 
within the alginate beads under suitable culture conditions (Chen,  2003).  
The immobilized monospecies were subsequently applied as feed for the culture of post -larvae of 
the small abalone, H. diversicolor , and yielded a good post -larval harvest (up to 112.6 post -larvae/1000 
cm2). The traditional H. diversicolor  culture u sing natural growth mixed diatoms had a similar harvest 
(Chen, 1989). However, in the present study post -larvae required only 40 –54 days to reach a 
harvestable size of 3 –4 mm, whereas those reared with traditional methods required 2 –3 months to 
reach the s ame size.  
In the present study the average daily growth rates were 65.33 –91.13 μm/day which were 
substantially faster than those recorded by Kawamura et al. (1998) for Haliotis iris post -larvae fed with 
8 monospecific cultures of diatoms (11.8 to 35.3 μm/day). Underwood et al. (2004) described the 
amount of EPS in diatom species using the unit of weight/cell (pg/cell). However, the cell sizes vary 
among diatom species, making it impossible to compare the EPS contents among species with accuracy. 
Therefore, in the present study the cell surface area was used for the denominator of the unit (pg/100 
μm2) to describe the amount of EPS in each diatom species.  
Various factors may influence the nutritional value of diatom cultures, including the nature and 
quantity of their extracellular polysaccharide (EPS), the health of the diatom culture, the associat ed 
microbial flora (Kawamura, 1996) and the biochemical composition of the diatom cell contents 
(Dunstan et al., 1994, 1996). Many of these characteristics will vary among diatom species. The 
present study has shown that even when cultured under the same l aboratory conditions, the 12 species 
all had different cell components (influencing their nutritional values).  
Daume et al. (2000) suggested that extracellular polysaccharides (EPS) produced by diatoms are 
responsible for the attachment of the cells and th at well attached Navicula  sp. produced the largest 
number of post -larvae with the highest survival rate. However, the present study found that sufficient 
lipid (ca. 7 –20.3% of dry weight) and soluble EPS (ca. 30 –212 pg/100 μm2) collectively improved the 19 
 
survival rate (harvest rate) of small abalone post -larvae.  
Gordon et al. (2006) indicated that the nutritional value of microalgae as feed is influenced to a 
great extent by their lipid. The protein composition of microalgae is generally conservative and is  
unlikely to account for major difference in the nutritional value of particular species. The present study 
also found that the protein contents of the 12 diatom species examined fell within a limited range, and 
were not significantly different. In contras t, the lipid and soluble EPS contents of these same diatom 
species were significantly different, and appeared to be the major factors affecting the abalone 
post-larvae survival  ( Figure 12 A,B and C)  
Hahn (1989c) reported that „good ‟ diatoms are defined a s ones that produce large amounts of 
secretion and are smaller than 10 μm. The present study had a similar result in that N. grossestriata  
secreted the highest amount of soluble EPS (212.31 pg/100 μm2), and this may well attract abalone 
larvae to settle on areas containing this diatom. The sizes of the diatom species bore no relationship to 
the abalone post -larval harvest rate. The fact that C. scutellum  resulted in the worst post -larval harvest 
rate contradicts the conclusions of Hahn (1989c). This diatom was the smallest of the diatom species 
examined, measuring 7 μm in leng th and 5 μm in width. However, Hahn (1989c) further indicated that 
Navicula  spp. and Nitzschia  spp. produce good growth rates. The present study yield similar results, 
with N. grossestriata  and N. panduriformis , as well s S. gracilenta  (similar to Navicula  spp.), 
producing good post -larval harvest rates.  
In conclusion, using the microalgal immobilization technique for long -term storage of 
monospecific cultures of diatoms and then subsequently re -culturing them for use as feed for the 
cultivation of post -larvae of the small abalone, H. diversicolor , proved to be a viable means of 
increasing the survival rate of the post -larvae, provided that the species of diatom employed had 
sufficient lipid content and a large amount of soluble EPS. This procedure can consi derably reduce the 
cost of abalone post -larval culture compared to the traditional methods , using microalgae which 
constitutes up to 30% of the total cost of production  (Valenzuela -Espinoza, Millan -Nunez & 
Nunez -Cebrero, 1999), as peculiar species of diato ms lipids composition shows higher effectiveness 
impact the growth and survival rates of marine organisms.  
 
III)  Conclusions  
 
In general the morphologic change observed in the cell  ( Spine bent,…) , seems not to have 
affected their  metabolism and the phys iological conditions of the algal cells not interrupted with 
capacity to grow , and multiply in aquaculture medium  after few weeks accli matization of the 
chloroplast  the Pyrenoid has reappeared.  The period o f storage was particularly long and successful for  
most of the immobilized microalgae. The  gel of Ca -Alginate constitutes an ideal matrix for the 
microcells  due the affinity with microalgae . It is offering a labile and mild interactive structure, 
allowing retention  of cells inside the beads , non toxic ity, photo -transparen cy, stability and mobility in 
liquid growth medium, offering a good resistance to a possible disruption of the beads by cells division , 20 
 
allowing  this way  extrusion of excess cells out from the surface of the beads as seen on electronic 
microscope (  Brouers et al, 1989) . It can preserve the microalgae specie s during storage and serves as a 
continuous feed for the culture.  
- S. quadricauda previously entrapped into alginate -beads maintained their normal physiological 
activities and grew within the beads, free -living algal cells . The algal alginate -beads could 
control the water quality to be suitable for tilapia growing.  Therefore, this technique is very 
suitable for preserving microalgal species . 
 
- I.galbana  alginate -beads could maintain the wate r quality suitable for clam culture too , those 
algal alginate -beads deprived of medium or of light, can keep aliveness after one year time and 
initiate new cultures when transferred to suitable growth conditions. The number of cells found 
was normal and gr owing very fast  (30 to 40 times) . 
- H. diversicolor . -Immobilization technique for long -term storage showed similar favorable 
results for the most nutritious Diatoms monospecific species  for the post -larvae of the small 
abalone,   
 
Certainly the environmental  conditions needs  to be further determined to find optima  growth 
(ammonium concentration,  DO, pH, light intensity , density of the cells  (some experiments suggesting 
that higher density would accelerate reaction rates) , respiratory activity effects in paral lel to 
photosynthetic activities  culture cycle , temperature  variation , day and night differences in ponds 
culture, seasons difference, and high probability  of heterotrophic presence during the culture . Also the 
incidence of immobilization on cells wall per meability, cells division and the leaking from the beads, 
could  be studied.  
   Then the three  studies information  can crosscheck, and match up with authors references, it even  
goes f or a longer  storage time, and pushed to quantification of microcells conte nts, while the use of 
TEM and SEM helped to bring in images  of the immobilized  cells in bead , during and after 
immobilization . It allowed following the life development of the microalgae and diatoms and clarifying 
each phase of the study and confirming  the advantages of biocatalyst entrapment in these cases studied .  21 
 22 
 
 
1) Scenedesmus quadricauda  immobilization : Tab & Fig ures  
 
Figure 1  
 23 
 
 
Figure 224 
 
 
Figure 3  25 
 
Figure 4  
 26 
 
2) Isochrysis galbana immobilization Fig ures and Tab  
 
Figure 5  27 
 
 
Figure 6  28 
 
 
Figure 729 
 
 
 
Figure 830 
 
 
Figure 9  31 
 
 
Figure 10  32 
 
 
Figure 11  33 
 
 
3) Twelve immobilized monospecific benthic diatoms Fig ures and Tab  
Table 1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 34 
 
 
Figure 12  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 35 
 
 
Figure 13  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 36 
 
 
Figure 14  The algal beads of the diatom after being re -cultured for 4 weeks.  
         The diameters of the beads measured ab out 3 -4 mm.  37 
 
Table 2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 38 
 
Table 3  
39 
 
Table 4 
40 
 
 
 
Figure 15  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41 
 
References  
 
AOAC (Association of Official Analytical Chemists), 1990. In: Kenneth, H. (Ed.), Official Methods of 
Analysis of the Association of Official Analytical Chemists, 15th edition. AOAC, Arlington,  VA. 
1298 pp.  
Carbajal -Miranda,M.J., Del Pilar Sanchez -Saavedra,M., Simental, J.A., 2005. Effect of monospecific 
and mixed benthic diatom cultures on the growth of red abalone postlarvae Haliotis rufescens 
(Swainson 1822). J. Shellfish Res. 24, 401 –405. 
Chen, H.C., 1989. Farming the small abalone, Haliotis diversicolor supertexta, in Taiwan. In: Hahn, 
K.O. (Ed.), Handbook of Culture of Abalone and other Marine Gastropods. CRC Press Inc., Florida, 
pp. 265 –283. 
Chen YC, 2001. Immobilized microalga Scenedesmus  quadricauda (Chlorophyta, Chlorococcales) for 
long-term storage and for application for water quality control in fish culture. Aquaculture 195/1 –2: 
71–80. 
Chen, Y.C., 2003. Immobilized Isochrysis galbana (Haptophyta) for long -term storage and applications  
for feed and water quality control in clam ( Meretrix lusoria ) cultures. J. Appl. Phycol. 15, 439 –444.  
Chen ,Y.C., 2006. Immobilization of twelve benthic diatom species for long term storage and as feed 
fro post larval abalone Haliotis diversicolor. Aquacu lture 263/97 -106. 
Chen ,Y.C., 2012,The biomass and total lipid content and composition of twelve species of marine 
diatoms cultured under various environments. Food Chemistry131/211 -219 
Chevalier, P., de la Noüe  , J., 1985. Wastewater nutrient removal with microalgae immobilized in 
carrageenan. Enzyme Microb. Techol. 7, 621 –624. 
Christi, Y., 2007, Biodiesel from Microalgae, Elsevier,Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007) 294 –306 
Faafeng, B.A., von Donk, E., Ka¨ llqvist, S.T., 1994. In situ measurement of algal grow th potential in 
aquatic ecosystems by immobilized algae. J. Appl. Phycol. 6, 301 –308. 
Daume, S., Brand -Gardner, S.,Woelkerling,W.J., 1997. Effects of post larval abalone (Haliotis rubra) 
grazing on the epiphytic diatom assemblage of coralline red algae. Mo lluscan Res. 18 (2), 119 –130. 
Daume, S., Brand -Gardner, S., Woelkerling, W.J., 1999. Preferential settlement of abalone larvae: 
diatom films vs. non -geniculate coralline red algae. Aquaculture 174, 243 –254. 
Daume, S., Krisinich, A., Farrell, S., Gervis, M. , 2000. Settlement and early growth of the abalone 
Haliotis rubra in response to different algal species. J. Shellfish Res. 19, 506 –507. 
De Brouwer, J.F., Stal, L.J., 2002. Daily fluctuations of exopolymers in cultures of the benthic diatoms 
Cylindrotheca closterium and Nitzschia sp. (Bacillariophyceae). J. Phycol. 38, 464 –472. 
Dubois, M., Gilles, K.A., Hamilton, J.K., Rebers, R.A., Smith, F., 1956. Colorimetric method for 
determination of sugars and related substances. Anal. Chem. 28, 350 –356. 
Dunstan, G.A ., Volkman, L.K., Barrett, S.M., Leroi, J. -M., Jeffery, S.W., 1994. Essential 
polyunsaturated fatty acids from14 species of diatom (Bacillariophyceae). Phytochemistry 35, 
155–161. 42 
 
Dunstan, G.A., Baillie, H.J., Barrett, S.M., Volkman, J.K., 1996. Effect of diet on the lipid composition 
of wild and cultured abalone. Aquaculture 140, 115 –127. 
Folch, J., Lee, M., Stanely, C.H.S., 1957. A simple method for the isolation and purification of total 
lipids from animal tissue. J. Biol. Chem. 226, 497 –509. 
Gallardo, W .G., Buen, S.M.A., 2003. Evaluation of mucus, Navicula, and mixed diatoms as larval 
settlement inducers for the tropical abalone Haliotis asinina. Aquaculture 221, 357 –364. 
Garbisu, C., Gil, J.M., Bazin, M.J., Hall, D.O., Serra, J.L., 1991. Removal of nitr ate from water by 
foam -immobilized Phormidium laminosum in batch and continuous -flow bioreactors. J. Appl. 
Phycol. 3, 221 –234. 
Gordon, N., Neori, A., Shpigel, M., Lee, J., Harpaz, S., 2006. Effect of diatom diets on growth and 
survival of the abalone Halio tis discus. Aquaculture 252, 225 –233. 
Hahn, K.O., 1989a. Survey of the important abalone species in the world. In: Hahn, K.O. (Ed.), 
Handbook of Culture of Abalone and other Marine Gastropods. CRC Press Inc., Florida, pp. 3 –11. 
Hahn, K.O., 1989b. Induction  of settlement in competent abalone larvae. In: Hahn, K.O. (Ed.), 
Handbook of Culture of Abalone and other Marine Gastropods. CRC Press Inc., Florida, pp. 
101–112. 
Hahn, K.O., 1989c. Nutrition and growth of abalone. In: Hahn, K.O. (Ed.), Handbook of Cultur e of 
Abalone and other Marine Gastropods. CRC Press Inc., Florida, pp. 135 –137. 
Hertzberg S, Jensen A (1989) Studies of alginate -immobilized marine microalgae. Bot. mar. 32: 
267–273. 
Hillebrand, H., Sommer, U., 2000. Diversity of benthic microalgae in resp onse to colonization time and 
eutrophication. Aquat. Bot. 67, 221 –236. 
Jin, D., Cheng, Z., Lin, J., Lin, S., 1985. TheMarine Benthic Diatoms in China.Acta Oceanologica 
SinicaChinaOcean Press, Beijing. 313 pp.  
Kawamura, T., 1996. The role of benthic diatoms  in early stages of the Japanese abalone (Haliotis 
discus hannai). In: Watanabe, Y., Yamashita, Y., Oozeki, Y. (Eds.), Survival Strategies in Early 
Stages of Marine Resource. A. A. Balkema, Brookfield, pp. 355 –367. 
Kawamura, T., Saido, T., Takami, H., Yama shita, Y., 1995. Dietary value of benthic diatoms for 
growth of post -larval abalone Haliotis discus hannai. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 194, 189 –199. 
Kawamura, T., Roberts, R.D., Nicholson, C.M., 1998. Factors affecting the food value of diatom 
strains for po st-larval abalone Haliotis iris. Aquaculture 160, 81 –88. 
Patrick, R., Reimer, C.W., 1966. Introduction. The diatoms of the United States, V ol. 1. Academy of 
National Sciences, Pennsylvania.  pp.688 
Proulx, D., de la Nouë, J., 1988. Removal of macronutrients  form wastewater by immobilized algae. In: 
Moo -young, M. (Ed.), Bioreactor Immobilized Enzymes and Cells: Fundamental and Application. 
Elsevier, London, pp. 301 –310. 
Provasoli, L., 1968. Media and products for the cultivation of marine algae. In: Watarabe,  A., Hattori, 
A. (Eds.), Cultures and Collections of Algae. Jap. Soc. Plant Physiol., Tokyo, pp. 63 –75. 43 
 
 
Provasoli, L., Pintner, I.J., 1960. Artificial media for freshwater algae: problems and suggestions. In: 
Tryon, C.A. Jr., Hartman, R.T. (Eds.), The Eco logy of Algae Pymatuning Laboratory ŽUniv. 
Pittsburg . Special Publ., vol. 2, pp. 84 –96. 
Roberts, R., 2001. A review of settlement cues for larval abalone (Haliotis spp.). J. Shellfish Res. 20, 
571–586. 
Romo, S., Pe´ rez -Mart´ınez, C., 1997. The u se of immobilization in alginate beads for lon g-term 
storage of Pseudanabaena galeata (Cyanobacteria ) in the laboratory. J. Phycol. 33, 1073 –1076.  
Round, F.E., Crawford, R.M., Mamm, D.G., 1990. The Diatoms. Press Syndicate of the University of 
Cambridge. 747 pp. mith, M., Croft, S., 1991. Embedding and  thin section preparation. In: Harris, I.R. 
(Ed.), Electron Microscopy in Biology. IRL Press, Oxford, pp. 17 –37. 
Spurr, A.R., 1969. A low viscosity epoxy resin embedding medium for electron microscopy. J. 
Ultrastruct. Res. 26, 31 –43. 
Tampion J., Tampion M. D., 1987/12/10, Immobilized cells Principles and Aplications, Cambridge 
University Press, 264pp.  
Tamponnet, C., Costantino, F., Barbotin, J. -N., Clavayrac, R., 1985. Cytological and physiological 
behavior of Euglena gracilis cells entrapped in a calcium al ginate gel. Physiol. Plant. 63, 277 –283. 
Underwood, G.J., Boulcott, M., Raines, C.A., Waldron, K., 2004. Environmental effects on 
exopolymer production by marine benthic diatoms: dynamics, changes in composition, and pat hways 
of production. J. Phycol. 40, 293 –304. 
Valenzuela -Espinoza E, Millán -Núñez R, Núñez -Cebrero F (1999) Biomass production and nutrient 
uptake by Isochrysis aff. Galbana (clone T -ISO) cultured with low cost alternative to the f/2 
medium. Aquacul. Engng.  20: 135 –147. 
Wilkinson, C.S., Goulding, K.H., Robinson, P.K., 1990. Mercury removal by immobilized algae in 
batch culture systems. J. Appl. Phycol. 2, 223 –230. 
Witkowski, A., Lange -Bertalot, H., Metzeltin, D., 2000. Diatom flora of marine coasts. Lange -Bertalot,  
H. A. R. G., Gantner Verlag, K.G., Hofheim. Vol. VII. 925 pp.  
 