 
 
General rights  
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other  copyright 
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise  and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.  
 
 Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.  
 You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit -making activity or commercial gain  
 You may freely distribute the URL identifying the p ublication in the public portal  
 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the wo rk im mediately 
and investigate your claim.  
  
 
   
 
 
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Aug 29, 2024
Effect of nitrogen source and acclimatization on specific growth rates of microalgae
determined by a high throughput in vivo microplate autofluorescence method
Podevin, Michael Paul Ambrose; De Francisci, Davide; Holdt, Susan Løvstad; Fotidis, Ioannis;
Angelidaki, Irini
Publication date:
2017
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link back to DTU Orbit
Citation (APA):
Podevin, M. P. A., De Francisci, D., Holdt, S. L., Fotidis, I., & Angelidaki, I. (2017). Effect of nitrogen source and
acclimatization on specific growth rates of microalgae determined by a high throughput in vivo microplate
autofluorescence method.Michael Podevin1,3• Davide De Francisci1• Susan L. Holdt1,2• Ioannis Fotidis1 •  Irini Angelidaki1
1 Department of Environmental Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Building 113, DK -2800 Kgs. Lyngby , Denmark 
2Current address: Susan L. Holdt: National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Søltofts Plads 221, DK -2800 Kgs. Lyngby , Denmark
3E-mail: mipp@env.dtu.dk
Specific growth rates (SGR) of fresh water algal strains ( Chlorella vulgaris , Auxenochlorella
protothecoides , and Chlorella sorokiniana ) and the marine strain Nannochloropsis oculata on various 
nitrogen sources (ammonium carbonate, ammonium chloride, sodium nitrate, and urea) could be 
determined by in vivo chlorophyll -a autofluorescence . These preferences could be determined before 
large pH changes occurred in the media, with no significant difference ( P> 0.05) between buffered and 
non-buffered media. In all algal species, acclimatization was observed with no significant difference ( P
> 0.05) between SGRs of second and third cultivations. ANOVA of SGRs in the acclimatized second and 
third cultivation revealed preferences for nitrogen sources among most of the algae; C. vulgaris
preferred sodium nitrate over other nitrogen sources, A.protothecoides adapted to urea after no 
growth in the first cultivation, and the SGRs of N.oculata showed an aversion for sodium nitrate over 
other nitrogen sources ( P< 0.05).Abstract
▪Developing a microplate screening technique  for high throughput screenings of 
microalgae.
▪to determine the preference of nitrogen source for algal growth for four industrially 
important microalgae
▪Determine the acclimatized SGR of each algae species to each nitrogen source.
▪Determine the SGR before large changes in pH occur. AimsEffect of nitrogen source and acclimatization on specific growth rates of 
microalgae determined by a high throughput in vivo microplate
autofluorescence method
Conclusions
▪In vivo microplate batch cultures can be used to compare specific growth rates of microalgae containing chlorophyll -a.
▪This method can be used to determine the specific growth rate before significant pH changes in the media occur, making the me thod useful for comparison of various modes of nitrogen assimilation.
▪It has been demonstrated that, at certain conditions, sodium nitrate is the most preferred nitrogen source and urea is the le astfavored nitrogen source for Chlorella vulgaris .
▪Auxenochlorella protothecoides demonstrated an acclimatization to urea, with no growth occurring in nitrate media in autotrophic conditions
▪Nannochloropsis oculata showed a clear aversion for sodium nitrate as a nitrogen source.
Fig. 4Specific growth rate (day-1) of a) Chlorella.vulgari,s b) Auxenochlorella protothecoides ), c) Chlorella 
sorokiniana , and d) Nannochloropsis oculata grown over three generations on the four different nitrogen sources 
(ammonium carbonate, ammonium chloride, sodium nitrate, and urea). The nitrogen source concentration was 1 M 
nitrogen.  Note different scale of y -axis.012345
Ammonium
CarbonateAmmonium
ChlorideSodium Nitrate UreaSpecific Growth Rate (d -1)a)
012
Ammonium
CarbonateAmmonium
ChlorideSodium Nitrate UreaSpecific Growth Rate (d-1)b)
012345
Ammonium
CarbonateAmmonium
ChlorideSodium Nitrate UreaSpecific Growth Rate (d-1)c)
012
Ammonium
CarbonateAmmonium
ChlorideSodium Nitrate UreaSpecific Growth Rate (d -1)d)
Starter Culture
ResultsMicroplate Reader 
Two serial transfers to new media
Stock CultureN-source
NaNO3(NH4)2CO3
NH4Cl
Urea
Ln(fRFU )
Fig. 2 Five point linear (large dashed line), and four point linear (solid red line ) 
representations of fluorescence vs. coulter cell concentration calibration curve of 
Nannochloropsis oculata . Direct correlation to cell concentration <15,000 RFU. Linear  (5 point)
y = 0.0186x
r² = 0.9765
05000100001500020000250003000035000Fluorescence (RFU)
Coulter Cell Concentration (cells mL-1)Linear (4 point)
y=0.0231x
r2= 0.99861
Methods
Light and shaker table assembly Gen5 Fluorescence (RFU) Readout
1st Cultivation 2nd Cultivation 3rd CultivationSynergy Mx
Microplate Reader
