Citation: Castañeda Ruiz, A.J.;
Shetab Boushehri, M.A.; Phan, T.;
Carle, S.; Garidel, P .; Buske, J.;
Lamprecht, A. Alternative Excipients
for Protein Stabilization in Protein
Therapeutics: Overcoming the
Limitations of Polysorbates.
Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
pharmaceutics14122575
Academic Editors: Hristo Svilenov
and Pernille Harris
Received: 20 October 2022
Accepted: 15 November 2022
Published: 23 November 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
pharmaceutics
Review
Alternative Excipients for Protein Stabilization in Protein
Therapeutics: Overcoming the Limitations of Polysorbates
Angel J. Castañeda Ruiz1, Maryam A. Shetab Boushehri1, Tamara Phan2, Stefan Carle2, Patrick Garidel2,
Julia Buske2,* and Alf Lamprecht1,*
1Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bonn, 53121 Bonn, Germany
2Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Innovation Unit, PDB, Birkendorfer Straße 65,
88397 Biberach an der Riss, Germany
*Correspondence: julia.buske@boehringer-ingelheim.com (J.B.); alf.lamprecht@uni-bonn.de (A.L.);
Tel.: +49-7351-54-145-398 (J.B.); +49-228-735-243 (A.L.)
Abstract: Given their safety and efﬁciency in protecting protein integrity, polysorbates (PSs) have
been the most widely used excipients for the stabilization of protein therapeutics for years. In
recent decades, however, there have been numerous reports about visible or sub-visible particles
in PS-containing biotherapeutic products, which is a major quality concern for parenteral drugs.
Alternative excipients that are safe for parenteral administration, efﬁcient in protecting different
protein drugs against various stress conditions, effective in protein stabilization in high-concentrated
liquid formulations, stable under the storage conditions for the duration of the product’s shelf-life, and
compatible with other formulation components and the primary packaging are highly sought after.
The aim of this paper is to review potential alternative excipients from different families, including
surfactants, carbohydrate- and amino acid-based excipients, synthetic amphiphilic polymers, and
ionic liquids that enable protein stabilization. For each category, important characteristics such as the
ability to stabilize proteins against thermal and mechanical stresses, current knowledge related to the
safety proﬁle for parenteral administration, potential interactions with other formulation components,
and primary packaging are debated. Based on the provided information and the detailed discussion
thereof, this paper may pave the way for the identiﬁcation or development of efﬁcient excipients for
biotherapeutic protein stabilization.
Keywords: polysorbate alternatives; excipient; surfactant; protein stabilization; protein biotherapeutic
formulations
1. Introduction
The term “biotherapeutics” encompasses a wide range of biological products used
with the prime objective of treating various human diseases. Unlike small molecular
drugs, however, the production of biotherapeutics, at least in part, requires the use of a
living host, capable of producing molecules with greater multidimensional complexity
with secondary, tertiary, or even quaternary conformations [ 1]. Biotherapeutics comprise a
broad range of biologically-derived therapeutics [ 2]. Among these, protein therapeutics
are the most extensively developed group and form a major part of the FDA-approved
biotherapeutics. Protein therapeutics consist of diverse subclasses such as antibodies (Ab),
Fc-fusion proteins, blood factors and anticoagulants, enzymes, growth factors, protein
hormones, cytokines, thrombolytics, scaffold proteins, etc. These are often used to replace
deﬁcient or abnormal proteins, promote or inhibit various cellular pathways, exert a
new and non-existing function, interfere with a molecule of interest, or deliver various
cargos to speciﬁc targets [ 3]. While the nature and the purpose of protein therapeutics is
quite diverse, monoclonal Abs (mAb) remain the most prevalent subcategory in terms of
clinical application.
Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575. https://doi.org/10.3390/pharmaceutics14122575 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/pharmaceuticsPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 2 of 52
In general, the development of protein therapeutics is a complex multiple step process,
during which maintaining the protein integrity from the puriﬁcation up to the administra-
tion of the ﬁnal product to the patient is fraught with numerous and diverse challenges.
Given their complex higher order conformational structures as well as the presence of
various functional groups, protein biotherapeutics are susceptible not only to chemical
degradation, but also to physical-induced conformational changes. The chemical insta-
bilities are related to the breakage and/or formation of covalent bonds in the protein’s
ﬁrst-order structure, generated by intramolecular modiﬁcations such as non-reducible
cross-linking [ 4,5], deamidation [ 4,6–9], formation of basic or acidic species [10,11] , glyca-
tion (Maillard reaction) [12] , isomerization [ 6,13] oxidation [ 4,11], fragmentation [ 10,14],
C-terminal clipping [15] , reduction [ 16], hydrolysis [ 17], and racemization [18] .Physical-
induced conformational changes, on the other hand, are often in the form of denaturation [19,20] ,
aggregation [ 21–25], surface adsorption [ 26], precipitation and unfolding [ 27], often impact-
ing the secondary or tertiary structures of the proteins [ 28]. The challenges associated with
maintaining the functionality and integrity of the protein drugs become more pronounced
in the case of mAb-based therapeutics, as they often require higher dose concentrations
(usually 50–200 mg/mL). The development of such high concentration liquid formula-
tions (HCLF) comes along with additional challenges in terms of protein solubility and
hydration, colloidal and conformational stability, and solution properties [ 29–32], which
are directly related to the formation of mAb particles [ 33,34]. With increasing protein
concentration of the biotherapeutic, viscosity and opalescence of the formulation also rises,
and liquid–liquid phase separation phenomenon becomes more likely to occur [ 35]. While
the liquid–liquid phase separation does not impact the native protein structure per se, it
promotes reversible or irreversible protein particle formation, which can result in a reduc-
tion of the therapeutic efﬁciency and trigger immune reactions upon administration [ 36].
Furthermore, exposure to various interfaces (air–liquid, solid–liquid, and liquid–liquid)
during different stages of manufacturing, including freeze–thawing, pumping, sterile ﬁl-
tration, lyophilization, and ﬁll and ﬁnish processes, as well as various post-production
stages such as storage in the primary packaging and transportation, can promote confor-
mational changes leading to protein denaturation [ 37–42]. When inadequately formulated,
proteins are adsorbed to such interfaces by virtue of their amphiphilic properties, and
thus undergo conformational changes to reduce the interfacial tension, or else create vis-
coelastic interfacial protein gels. While the former can act as a nucleating point for further
protein particle formation, the latter can facilitate agitation-mediated formation of protein
particles [43,44] . The formation of such protein particles can in turn affect the quality of
the ﬁnal product and lead to undesirable consequences such as irreversible loss of activity,
increase of the visible or sub-visible particle levels beyond the permitted threshold, and
potential immunogenicity [45–48] . Hence, preserving the integrity of the protein drug from
all potential sources of stress detailed above is not only relevant but of vital importance.
While factors such as harsh temperatures and extreme acidity or alkalinity can be
more easily avoided, stress-induced physicochemical protein instability due to, e.g., the
manufacturing is often inevitable. High protein concentrations are sometimes indispensable
to achieve a desired therapeutic outcome, and exposure to various interfaces within the
above-mentioned stages is unavoidable [ 17,49,50]. Hence, protein formulations require
additional protection from the inevitable exposure to interfaces to ensure their stability
during the product’s shelf-life (at least two years at 2–8C).
To ensure the integrity of the therapeutic protein in the ﬁnal formulation, typically
tonicity adjusting agents are added, which are not the focus of this review, as well as surface
active stabilizers, like surfactants. After decades of research and production of therapeutic
formulations, the excipient selection is frequently based on the approved commercialized
formulations [ 51]. The use of excipients plays a considerable role in formulation develop-
ment since the nature of the excipient inﬂuences directly or indirectly the stabilization of the
protein. For a proper selection of the excipient for a speciﬁc parenteral protein formulation,
several selection criteria must be considered [52,53]. These include:Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 3 of 52
1. The excipient’s effect on the overall quality , stability , and effectiveness of the drug product;
2. Physical, chemical, and biological compatibility of excipient with the drug as well as
the packaging system [54];
3. Compatibility of the excipient with the manufacturing process;
4. Amount of excipients that can be added to drug product, both from the formulation,
safety and toxicological perspectives.
Excipients such as surfactants are ubiquitously employed in the formulation to stabi-
lize protein biotherapeutics. This is primarily through the preferential adsorption of such
surfactants to the interfaces, sparing the protein drug from interface-mediated unfolding
and denaturation. The second possible mechanism involves the formation of protein–
surfactant complexes, which in turn minimizes the interaction of the protein with other
protein molecules and the interfaces [ 55,56]. The latter mechanism, however, seems to
be only applicable to certain types of proteins and is not possible in formulations with
the routinely used protein to polysorbate ratios [ 56,57]. As the third mechanism, some
surfactants have been shown to promote protein folding through a chemical chaperone
mechanism [57].
Within the context of protein stabilization, both ionic and non-ionic surfactants have
been proposed. Ionic surfactants such as sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate and sodium
dodecyl sulfate might offer the beneﬁt of a possible strong interaction with the charged pro-
tein molecules in addition to adsorption to the interfaces [ 58]. Notwithstanding, non-ionic
surfactants are more frequently used for the stabilization of parenteral protein formulations,
as they have a proven history of low toxicity, minimal reactivity, and good tolerability for
clinical use. On top of that, they are associated with the added beneﬁt that some have been
already approved by the regulatory bodies for use in various medicinal products [59–61].
Polysorbates (PSs) are the most prevalently used family of non-ionic surfactants
for protein stabilization (Figure 1a). Various types of PSs, including PS20 (Tween®20)
and PS80 (Tween®80), have been shown not only to prevent protein particle formation
as a result of exposure to liquid–air interfaces and freeze–thawing stresses, but also to
minimize the protein adsorption to various liquid–solid interfaces such as the sterilization
ﬁlters as well as the primary packaging. PS20 also prevents mechanical stress-induced
particle formation in the case of several protein types [ 43,62–64]. To achieve such desirable
stabilizing effects, PS20 and PS80 are often used in the formulation of the protein drugs
in a concentration range of 0.003–3 mg/mL based on the Physicians Desk Reference [ 55].
Table S1 provides an overview of the FDA and CBER (Center for Biologics Evaluation
and Research)-approved protein biotherapeutics stabilized with PSs, also indicating the
concentration of the surfactant.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 4 of 52
Pharmaceutics 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 56 
 
  
 
Figure 1.  (a) Idealized chemical structure of PSs and po tential surfactant alternatives containing 
ester bonds. The ester bonds are highlighted in red, and the POE moiety in green; ( b) Expected 
degradation mechanisms for ester bond/POE-containing surfactants [65]. 
Notwithstanding the offered benefits, PS surfactants are associated with the draw-
back of chemical instability [66–69] because of the hydrolysis of the ester bond, auto-oxi-dation, and cleavage of the ethylene oxide subunit [4,68,70–80]. 
In line with such limitations, the current paper seeks to review potential alternative 
excipients to PSs for the stabilization of the parenteral protein formulations. We will start 
by presenting the latest findings regarding the benefits and limitations of the PSs in the 
formulation of protein biotherapeutics. We will then provide a discussion of FDA-ap-proved surfactants for food and cosmetic applications that, given their chemical and phys-
ical similarity to PSs, could be tested for the preservation of parenteral protein therapeu-
tics. Finally, we will highlight other alternat ive, mostly non-surfactant, excipients of ap-
proved or non-approved regulato ry status that can be used to achieve protein stabilization 
without the drawbacks associated with the PS surfactants. In the end, it must be noted 
that most of the excipient classes discussed in paper, along with other inactive ingredients 
commonly used in the formulation of protein bio therapeutics, are well-established, and 
a thorough introduction of all is out of the scope of this paper. For more information, the reader is referred to several review articles that elaborate elegantly on the subject [81,82]. 
2. The Benefits and Drawbacks of Polysorbates in Protein Stabilization 
PSs have been shown to protect protein therapeutics against denaturation or particle 
formation during various stages of the formulation and manufacturing, such as freeze–
thawing [63], surface-induced agitation [83], lyophilization [84], and spray-drying [85]. 
Figure 1. (a) Idealized chemical structure of PSs and potential surfactant alternatives containing
ester bonds. The ester bonds are highlighted in red, and the POE moiety in green; ( b) Expected
degradation mechanisms for ester bond/POE-containing surfactants [65].
Notwithstanding the offered beneﬁts, PS surfactants are associated with the drawback
of chemical instability [ 66–69] because of the hydrolysis of the ester bond, auto-oxidation,
and cleavage of the ethylene oxide subunit [4,68,70–80].
In line with such limitations, the current paper seeks to review potential alternative
excipients to PSs for the stabilization of the parenteral protein formulations. We will start
by presenting the latest ﬁndings regarding the beneﬁts and limitations of the PSs in the
formulation of protein biotherapeutics. We will then provide a discussion of FDA-approved
surfactants for food and cosmetic applications that, given their chemical and physical
similarity to PSs, could be tested for the preservation of parenteral protein therapeutics.
Finally, we will highlight other alternative, mostly non-surfactant, excipients of approved
or non-approved regulatory status that can be used to achieve protein stabilization without
the drawbacks associated with the PS surfactants. In the end, it must be noted that most of
the excipient classes discussed in paper, along with other inactive ingredients commonly
used in the formulation of protein bio therapeutics, are well-established, and a thorough
introduction of all is out of the scope of this paper. For more information, the reader is
referred to several review articles that elaborate elegantly on the subject [81,82].Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 5 of 52
2. The Beneﬁts and Drawbacks of Polysorbates in Protein Stabilization
PSs have been shown to protect protein therapeutics against denaturation or particle
formation during various stages of the formulation and manufacturing, such as freeze–
thawing [ 63], surface-induced agitation [ 83], lyophilization [ 84], and spray-drying [ 85].
They have also been reported to protect the protein during storage, e.g., in preﬁlled
syringes [86] . Although showing stabilizing properties, the underlying mechanism(s)
of PS protecting protein integrity remains unclear. Different mechanisms have been pro-
posed, including the preferential adsorption to the interfaces and inhibition of protein–
protein interactions, leading to a reduction of the protein unfolding and protein particle
formation [56,87] . The latter has been discussed both to the competitive binding of the PSs
to the hydrophobic regions of the proteins [ 55], as well as the chemical chaperone effect [ 88],
either as a result of protein hydration [ 89,90], or else the reduction of the protein‘s interfacial
afﬁnity due to the surfactant‘s blocking properties [ 87,91]. Finally, Garidel et al. (2021)
showed the formation of protein–PS micelle complexes to be unlikely at the routinely used
protein to polysorbate ratio [56].
PSs are complex heterogenic mixtures of sorbitan polyoxyethylene (POE) fatty acid
esters and derivatives thereof, including POE, POE sorbitan, POE esters, sorbitan, sorbitan
esters, isosorbide, and isosorbide POE fatty acid ester [ 92–97]. European Pharmacopoeia
(Ph. Eur.) deﬁnes PSs as mixtures of partial esters of fatty acids with sorbitol and its
anhydrides, ethoxylated with approximately 20 moles of ethylene oxide for each mole of
sorbitol and sorbitol anhydrides [ 98,99]. Different types of PSs contain varying types of
fatty acids esteriﬁed with the POE sorbitan. For example, in the case of PS20, lauric acid
comprises 40–60% of its total fatty acid content [ 99], whereas at least 58% of the fatty acid
content in PS80 should be oleic acid [ 98]. As the PS chemical synthesis employs raw natural
materials, the fatty acid content of the ﬁnal product is rather heterogeneous [ 97,100–102].
According to the Ph. Eur., the composition of PS20 and PS80 is stipulated to contain at least
9 and 7 different types of fatty acids, respectively (see Table 1) [ 98,99]. Furthermore, the
varying amounts of POE, sorbitan POE and isosorbide POE fatty acid esters in the ﬁnal PS
product renders them a diversiﬁed pool of subspecies [ 102]. While other subspecies of PSs
are also available in the market, a detailed discussion of the structural properties of all PS
subspecies is beyond the scope of the current paper.
Table 1. Type and content of the fatty acids present in PS20 and PS80 raw material [98,99].
Fatty Acid Polysorbate 20 [%] Polysorbate 80 [%]
Caproic acid max. 1.0 -
Caprylic acid max. 1.0 -
Capric acid max. 10.0 -
Lauric acid 40.0–60.0 -
Myristic acid 14.0–25.0 max. 5.0
Palmitic acid 7.0–15.0 max. 16.0
Palmitoleic acid - max. 8.0
Stearic acid max. 7.0 max. 6.0
Oleic acid max. 11.0 Min. 58.0
Linoleic acid max. 3.0 max. 18.0
Linolenic acid - max. 4.0
Despite the enumerated beneﬁts, the limited stability of the PSs constitutes the main
drawback for their use in the formulation of protein therapeutics [ 79,80]. Early data
obtained by Donbrow et al. (1978) highlighted the instability of various types of PSs
upon storage in aqueous solutions, for these were associated with an increase of peroxide
content, continuous raise of acidity, decrease in the surface tension, and a drop in the cloudPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 6 of 52
point [ 73]. The degradation process of PSs, as well as the underlying mechanisms, needed
to be further investigated for two reasons. First and foremost, the degradation-mediated
reduction of PS concentration could increase the risk of protein particle formation over
time, and second, the impact of PS side-products upon the protein stability needed to
be explored [ 70,103,104]. Today, it is well-known that PSs undergo degradation mainly
through the enzymatic-induced hydrolysis of the fatty acid ester bonds [ 105] and auto-
oxidation [68,76,104,106,107] (see Figure 1b).
The hydrolytic degradation process for PSs is characterized by the cleavage of the
ester bond between the fatty acid moiety and the POE chain, releasing POE, POE sorbi-
tan, or POE isosorbide, as well as free fatty acids (FFAs) as major degradation products.
The chemical hydrolysis of these surfactants can be catalyzed both by acidic and alkaline
pHs [ 65], and is accelerated at high temperatures (e.g., 40C) [94]. The acid-catalyzed
reaction is thermodynamically favored by an SN2 (nucleophilic substitution type 2) mech-
anism, where an ester carbonyl is attacked by a molecule of H 2O under extremely acidic
conditions ( pH < 3) [105,108] . Hence, under normal pharmaceutical relevant conditions
(slightly acidic to neutral pH of the protein biopharmaceuticals (pH 5–7) [ 70], and storage
and administration temperatures of 2–8C and 25C, respectively), the chemical hydrolysis
of the incorporated PSs is negligible. The hydrolysis of PSs, however, has also been shown
to be enzyme-mediated [ 74,109–114]. This degradation route is the main cause of PS hydrol-
ysis in highly concentrated monoclonal antibody (mAb) formulations [ 115,116]. Enzymatic
hydrolysis of PSs is often induced by the host cell protein (HCP) traces, also referred to
as PS-degradation enzymes, which, despite the best efforts for their complete removal,
often linger in very small amounts in the puriﬁed therapeutic protein [ 117–119]. HCPs
such as lipoprotein lipase [ 117,120], lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) [ 120,121], phospholipases
(e.g., phospholipase A2 group VII (PLA2G7) [ 122], and group XV lysosomal phospholipase
A2 isomer X1 [ 111]), palmitoyl-protein thioesterase 1 (PPT1) [ 120], carboxylesterases [ 123],
carboxylester hydrolases [ 112], and sialate O-acetylesterases [ 124] have been indeed shown
to promote the enzymatic degradation of the PS in protein formulations. Due to their
low amounts, residual HCPs are difﬁcult to detect, and their measurement and control in
formulations are highly challenging [ 125]. Furthermore, analytical methods detecting lipase
activity vary from lipase to lipase and might thus lead to false positive results. For instance,
phospholipase B-like 2 (PLBD2) was ﬁrst proposed as a residual HCP responsible for PS
degradation [ 109]. However, recent studies showed that depletion of PLBD2 in host cells
did not diminish the degradation of PSs [126]. Hence, approaches that measure the lipase
activity should be further supported by PS-based monitoring analyses, e.g., ﬂuorescence
micelle assay and reverse-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) to
provide conclusive evidence about the PS degradation potentials of certain HCPs [ 127].
The reduction of the PS concentration and the precipitation of FFA particles as a result
of the enzymatic hydrolysis mediated by different HCP traces have been demonstrated
in various studies [ 74,109,111,122,128,129]. Concurring with these ﬁndings, protein con-
centration has been shown to signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the PS degradation rate, as this will
dictate the amount of the HCP residues in the product [ 130]. Furthermore, puriﬁcation
of mAbs from lipoprotein lipase knockout Chinese hamster ovarian cells has been shown
to account for signiﬁcantly reduced degradation of PS20 and PS80 in comparison with
those puriﬁed from the non-modiﬁed hosts [ 117]. Although HCPs are co-puriﬁed with the
active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), not all HCPs are active or degrade PSs speciﬁcally.
In the research of Graf et al. (2021), the identiﬁcation of HCPs in a mAb solution gave
60 different HCPs, of which 23 have different catalytic activities, and 3 of them act upon
PSs [ 120]. Similarly, in the study published by Dixit et al. (2016) [ 109], ten HCPs were
identiﬁed in a sulfatase drug, however, not all identiﬁed HCPs were ester hydrolases. The
work by Zhang et al. (2021) [ 124] also presents a screening of HCPs in seven different mAb
drug candidates (mAb 1–7), identifying 30 HCPs from which a few proteins have potential
lipase activity. Among these proteins, SIAE (sialate-O-acetylase) strongly enzymatically
degrades PS20 [ 124]. One of the latest reviews focusing on PS enzymatic degradabilityPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 7 of 52
lists 12 HCPs, including ceramidase, lipases, and esterase, which are responsible for the
enzymatic degradation of PS20 [ 80]. Based on these reports, it can be concluded that the
type of HCPs, and the amount thereof, present in biologic parenteral formulations varies
depending on the type of the API they have been co-puriﬁed with and the puriﬁcation pro-
cess. Furthermore, the activity of enzymes depends on the temperature and pH value of the
formulation buffer. As a result, some formulations might be more prone to HCP-mediated
enzymatic degradation of the PS when compared to others.
Adjunct to chemical and enzymatic hydrolysis, auto-oxidation is a further cause of PS
degradation in protein formulations. The reaction starts with a free radical initiation [ 130],
which is favored by traces of peroxide species and transition state metals (e.g., iron, copper),
as well as the presence of oxygen in contact with light, and is followed by propagation
and termination stages [ 70,73,107,116] (see Figure 1b). In reaction phase I, a carbon-based
radical is formed in either orcarbon on the POE chain [ 71]. In reaction phase II,
a reaction of the carbon radical with oxygen forms an organic peroxide, from which a
hydrogen atom is abstracted, and a carboxylic acid and new carbon radical are formed
allowing for the propagation reaction. In reaction phase III, the formation of bimolecular
interactions through radicals provides the quenching of the auto-oxidation process [ 73,106].
The principal degradation products of auto-oxidation are hydroperoxides generated from
the oxidation of the ethylene oxide moieties (of the PS20 and PS80) and short-chain POE
esters (in case of all PSs). These, in turn, degrade and lead to the formation of secondary
products that include acids, peroxides, alkenes, aldehydes, ketones, furanones, alcohols,
FFAs, and POE esters [ 71,73,78,130–132], products that may oxidize the therapeutic protein
under long term storage [ 67,74]. Intermediate radicals formed in reaction phase I have
the potential to oxidize the therapeutic protein, speciﬁcally methionine and tryptophan
residues [ 133], leading to the structural protein modiﬁcation and formation of oligomeric
species [ 116]. In addition to the POE moiety, unsaturated fatty acids present a further locus
of susceptibility to auto-oxidation. In the case of PS80, auto-oxidation has been shown to
largely depend on the number of the unsaturated fatty acids, e.g., oleic and linoleic acid,
and subunits [ 134]. Despite PS20 being mainly composed of lauric acid, it can contain up
to 1% of oleic acid and 0.3% linoleic acid according to the Ph. Eu. Hence, similar to PS80,
PS20 is also susceptible to auto-oxidation at the fatty acid subunits.
Another potential phenomenon in biotherapeutics containing PSs is the possibility of
light-induced degradation. Therapeutic proteins have shown susceptibility to photodegra-
dation, as tryptophan, tyrosine, phenylalanine, and cysteine/cysteine residues undergo
primary photo-oxidation. This might result in the modiﬁcation of the protein structure, and
subsequently has an impact on the bioactivity, long-term stability, and immunogenicity
of the product [ 135]. The light spectrum to which formulations are exposed is usually
in the visible or near UV (ultraviolet) wavelength regions [ 136,137]. While proteins do
not absorb in the visible spectrum, excipients like PSs do [ 68,136]. Similar to the case
of auto-oxidation, the photo-oxidation of the protein therapeutic formulations stabilized
with PSs leads to a series of outcomes such as structural changes and protein particle
formation [ 16,138–140], chemical modiﬁcation [ 9,135,141–143], partial unfolding [ 144], and
destabilization [ 16,145], as well as the degradation of the PSs, which in turn produces ROS
(reactive oxygen species) [ 11] that will further oxidize the protein, threatening the formu-
lation integrity [ 68,70,71,145]. Important to remark on is the effect of protein degradation
products, as is the case for tryptophan degradants L-kynurenine, hydroxyl tryptophan, and
N’-formylkynurenine. Owing to unsaturations in their structures, these can absorb light
and act as photosensitizers [135,136].
The use of PSs as the principal surfactant for parenteral formulations was initially
granted, given their ability to ensure biotherapeutic stability as well as their low toxicity in
human subjects. Nonetheless, over the last decades, the idealness of these surfactants for
the stabilization of protein therapeutics has been refuted by the clinical case reports and
published articles having raised concerns about the potential consequences of PS degrada-
tion in parental formulations [ 146–151]. The biggest concern within this context is the PSPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 8 of 52
degradation-mediated protein particle formation, which not only risks the loss of thera-
peutic activity of the formulation, but might lead, as supported by different case reports,
to severe immunogenic [ 146,147], and in certain cases anaphylaxis reactions [ 148–150]. In
addition to the particle-induced hypersensitivity reactions, PS-mediated immunogenicity
might be also triggered through the exaggerated response of the body to the POE moiety
of the surfactant [ 152]. Single observations reported PS-mediated hypersensitivity and
anaphylactic reactions in case of non-protein therapeutics, in which PSs have been used
as excipients for other purposes, e.g., solubility enhancement [ 150,151]. Similar cases
have also been reported in cases of protein therapeutics. Examples include PS-mediated
anaphylactoid reactions to omalizumab [ 153,154], urticaria following the treatment with
adalimumab and ustekinumab [ 155], anaphylactic response after long-term treatment
with mepolizumab [ 156], hypersensitivity to human papillomavirus vaccine [ 157], and
darbepoietin and erythropoietin [158].
Considering the limitations debated above, the search for alternative excipients that
offer the same beneﬁts as PSs while being devoid of the drawbacks associated therewith is
highly relevant. To address the lack of excipient development, the center of drug evaluation
and research (CDER) has launched the novel excipient review pilot program, which allows
excipient manufacturers to propose novel excipients to the FDA prior to their use in
drug formulations [ 159]. In the next section, we will review a number of excipients that
could constitute potential candidates to serve as alternative stabilizers in injectable protein
biotherapeutic formulations. Some of these still pose parts of the problems associated with
PS degradation, whilst avoiding the rest. Several have already been investigated within the
context of stabilizing parenteral protein therapeutics, whereas the investigation of others
within this frame inspires further research.
3. Potential Polysorbate Alternatives for Protein Stabilization in Injectable Formulations
3.1. Surfactants
As surfactants are the most common class of excipients with established protein
stabilization abilities, it comes as no surprise that the ﬁrst group of PS alternatives are
proposed from this class. Here, we classiﬁed PS alternative surfactants into two main
categories. The ﬁrst includes the surfactants that, like PSs, comprise an ester bond in their
structure. This means that, similar to the case of PSs, these are associated with the risk of
enzyme-mediated cleavage of the ester bond (Figure 1b). Unlike PS surfactants, however,
some of these might be less prone to auto- and photo-oxidation and are hence expected
to offer advantages in this regard (see the upcoming sections for more information) [ 160].
The second group involves PS alternatives, which, given the lack of ester bond in their
structure, are resistant to enzymatic hydrolysis and in cases, potentially, auto- and photo-
oxidation. In this section, we will debate each group of these surfactants separately and
discuss selected examples.
3.1.1. Surfactants Comprising Ester Bonds
The main surfactants in this category include the sucrose fatty acid esters and sugar
monoesters, polyethylene glycol (PEG) stearates, and PEG fatty esters, (Figure 1a). Similar
to PS surfactants, these are associated with the main advantage of biodegradability by
virtue of the cleavable ester bond in their structure, and have thus been approved by
the FDA for use in the food, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical industries (see FDA Inactive
Ingredient Database [ 161]). Yet again, the ester bond renders these prone to enzyme-
mediated hydrolysis when used in the formulation of protein therapeutics.
 Sucrose fatty acid esters and sugar monoesters
Sucrose fatty acid esters or sucrose esters (SEs) are non-ionic surfactants with a sucrose
backbone as the hydrophilic group, and a maximum of eight fatty acids per molecule as
the hydrophobic moiety (Figure 1a). The fatty acids are most commonly lauric, myris-
tic, palmitic, stearic, erucic, and oleic acid [ 162]. SEs are FDA-approved excipients used
mostly in the food and cosmetic sectors and, to a lesser extent, in the pharmaceuticalPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 9 of 52
sector [163,164]. According to the FDA Inactive Ingredients Database [161], two members
of the SE class, namely sucrose stearate and sucrose palmitate, are approved for use in oral
and topical formulations of small molecules [ 164] for drug solubility enhancement [ 165,166],
controlled drug release [ 167], and drug absorption and penetration enhancement [ 168–170].
SEs are also used as emulsiﬁers for the formulation of microemulsions for transdermal
drug delivery or in food and cosmetic application [ 171,172], and for the preparation of dif-
ferent micro- and nanoparticulate systems [ 173–175]. The most important SEs used within
this context include sucrose stearate, sucrose palmitate, sucrose erucate, sucrose laurate,
sucrose myristate, and sucrose oleate [ 176]. These are biodegradable and biocompatible
surfactants, as they comprise a cleavable ester bond in their chemical structure. Following
oral intake, most of these hydrolyze into FFAs and saccharide constituents, rendering them
gastrointestinal digestible [ 177,178]. On top of that, SEs are odorless, ﬂavorless, non-toxic,
and non-irritant to the skin. For such reasons, they have been granted the GRAS (generally
recognized as safe) status by the FDA [178].
As commonly used surfactants in the food industry, some information regarding the
biocompatibility and safety of the SEs is already in hand. In 1992, the Scientiﬁc Committee
for Food stated an acceptable daily intake (ADI) of 0–20 mg/kg body weight/day for SEs of
fatty acids and sucro-glycerides derived from palm oil, lard, and tallow fatty acids. In 2004,
the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) re-examined the safety of these food additives
based on new research and granted a group ADI of 40 mg/kg body weight/day for SEs of
all fatty acids [ 176]. Additionally, the absorption, distribution, and metabolism of the SEs
has been extensively investigated. Following oral intake, higher fatty acid esters of sucrose,
such as octa- and hepta-esters (e.g., Olestra [ 179]), are excreted unmetabolized, while lower
esters are partly hydrolyzed and absorbed as sucrose and individual fatty acids [ 180–182].
However, one study reported that intravenous administration of sucrose monopalmitate
in a relatively high dose of 0.5 g/kg could lead to hemolytic reactions in rats [ 183,184].
Interestingly, no hemolysis has been reported in case of the intravenous injection of palm
oil SEs and lard and tallow SEs in rats and mice, respectively [ 184]. These ﬁndings point
out the safety of SEs, at least in animal models. Nonetheless, more profound toxicological
studies are required to ensure the full safety of these surfactants following intravenous
application in human subjects. At the moment, only a few articles have described the
use of SEs in pharmaceutical products tested on humans, focusing mostly on transdermal
delivery systems, where SEs have been utilized as emulsiﬁers, or else for the control of
drug release and the enhancement of cutaneous absorption [ 185–187]. The only case where
SEs have been used for the formulation of parenteral injectables has been the exploitation
of sucrose laurate as a POE-free Cremophor®EL substitute in parenteral formulations for
the enhancement of the solubility of the poorly water-soluble drugs, such as cyclosporin A,
docetaxel, paclitaxel, and etoposide [188,189].
Accordingly, the potential of SE surfactants for the stabilization of injectable protein
biotherapeutic formulations, particularly at a mechanistic level and with regard to the
minimum required concentrations as well as the long-term stability of the surfactant under
different conditions, has to be investigated. Within the context of the latter, given the
presence of the ester bond, SEs will not be devoid of the same drawback that complicates
the use of PS surfactants in protein formulations. The chemical and enzymatic hydrolysis
of the SE surfactants can raise the same issues, e.g., precipitation of the FFAs, creation of
the visible or sub-visible particles, and endangering protein stability, leading to potential
immunogenic reactions. However, the rate of surfactant degradation, the size of the
potential FFA particles, and the minimum required concentration of the SEs for protein
stabilization are factors that need to be investigated to enable a decent comparison of the
SEs with the PSs. On the other hand, SEs offer obvious advantages when compared to their
conventionally used counterparts. For example, the chemical structure of SEs renders them
less susceptible to oxidative degradation when compared to the PSs, which can signiﬁcantly
improve the quality of the ﬁnal product over long-term storage. Additionally, the lack of
POE moiety decreases the risk of immunogenic, hypersensitivity and anaphylactic reactions.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 10 of 52
In all, while SEs seem to have potential to serve as effective PS substitutes, comparative
studies are required to state conclusively as to whether SEs could perform equal or superior
to PSs when used for the stabilization of protein biotherapeutics.
Similar to SEs, monoesters of sugars other than sucrose can serve as potential candi-
dates for protein stabilization. These have been introduced since a few decades as non-toxic
and biodegradable emulsiﬁers for use in the food industry [ 190]. Garofalakis et al. (2000)
investigated various sugar monoesters of xylose, galactose, and lactose esteriﬁed with dif-
ferent hydrophobic chain lengths. All sugar monoesters could reduce the surface tension of
the water in a manner comparable with commercial SEs (C8-C16 alkyl chain). The authors
further observed a decreased critical aggregation concentration of the surfactants with
increasing carbon chain length [ 191]. This early study provides a view of the unexploited
potential of some sugar monoesters, from which pharmaceutical formulations could beneﬁt.
These will be, however, potentially associated with similar advantages and drawbacks
detailed in the case of SEs.
 Polyethylene glycol (PEG) stearates and PEG fatty esters
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) stearates, also referred as macrogol stearates, polyoxylstearates,
POE stearates, or ethoxylated stearates, are non-ionic surfactants that contain a POE (also
known as PEG) segment that endows their hydrophilic character and a saturated fatty
acid as the hydrophobic moiety (mainly octadecanoic acid) linked with an ester bond
(Figure 1a) [ 192]. The average length or the molecular weight of the polymer chain is
often indicated in the name of the compound, e.g., PEG 8 stearate, and the ethylene oxide
monomer range can be between 2 to 150 units [ 192,193]. The longer the polymer chain in
the compound, the more water-soluble it is [192].
According to the FDA Inactive Ingredients Database [ 161], four different PEG stearates
are approved for use in pharmaceutical products. Within this context, PEG 40 stearate is
used in formulations for ophthalmic, oral, and topical application. The use of PEG 8
and PEG 100 stearates has been approved in topical and oral formulations, whereas
PEG 2 stearate is merely applicable in topical formulations. PEG stearates are common
excipients in cosmetic products, mainly due to their viscosity and solubility enhancement
properties, along with their low toxicity, humectant, and emulsifying properties [194].
Structurally speaking, PEG stearates, similar to PS surfactants, are prone to hydrolysis
of the ester bond present in their chemical structure, as well as the oxidation of the POE
moiety. However, little is known about the rate of degradation, and the potential inﬂuence
thereof upon the quality of the ﬁnal product. Furthermore, no information regarding the
efﬁciency of the surfactant in stabilizing different proteins and the required concentration
range is in hand. Adjunct to the factors related to the stability of these surfactants, the
potential interactions of the PEG stearates with the components of the primary packaging
and the subsequent inﬂuence upon the ﬁnal product quality is yet to be investigated.
However, as these are associated with relatively safe toxicological proﬁles, further
investigations regarding their potential application for protein stabilization are meaningful.
PEG stearates have been non-lethal in animal tests at a concentration of 10 g/kg body
weight, leading to minimal ocular irritation in rabbits and resulting in merely low-level
skin irritation in rabbits when tested at 100% concentration, and induced no irritation
in humans [ 194]. While low molecular weight PEG-2 stearate and PEG-9 stearate can
inﬂuence the skin barrier function at concentrations of 5% w/v, higher molecular weight
PEG-40 stearate does not exert the same effect [ 195]. Feeding animal models with PEG-8,
 40, and 100 stearates accounted for no impact upon the mortality rate, growth, and
histopathological and hematological abnormalities [ 196]. Similarly, PEG fatty acid esters
have been shown to induce no genotoxic effects [ 193,196,197], while carcinogenic and
chromosomal aberration data are yet to be provided.
Another FDA-approved surfactant belonging to the PEG fatty esters is polyoxyl
15 hydroxy stearate, commercially labelled as Kolliphor®HS 15 and Solutol®HS 15. This
surfactant has been approved by the FDA for the improvement of solubility of low water-
soluble drugs in parenteral and oral formulations [ 198]. Kolliphor®HS 15 is a non-ionicPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 11 of 52
surfactant synthesized using 1 mol 12-hydroxystearic acid and 15 mol ethylene oxide
(Figure 1a) [199] . Its chemical structure is based on 12-hydroxystearic acid (lipophilic moi-
ety) polyethoxylated at both the carboxyl and the hydroxyl groups with PEG (hydrophilic
moiety). As a mixture, Kolliphor®HS 15 also contains free PEG as a side product of the
epoxidation reaction [ 199]. It possesses a hydrophilic–lipophilic balance (HLB) value of
about 16 and a critical micelle concentration (CMC) ranging from 0.06 and 0.1 nM when
dissolved in water at 21C [198,200]. Due to these properties, Kolliphor®HS 15 has ef-
ﬁcient solubilization properties, having been thus used mainly for the solubilization of
poorly soluble vitamins and hydrophobic drugs, such as clotrimazole, carbamazepine,
ketoconazole, danazol, piroxicam, fenoﬁbrate, and cinnarizine [ 198,201–203]. Kolliphor®
HS 15 can also be used to protect macromolecules and some protein formulations [ 204]. As
an FDA-approved non-ionic surfactant, Kolliphor®HS 15 has been used in oral, parenteral,
and ophthalmic formulations for several years [ 205]. It has also been investigated for the
development of various types of injectable nanoparticle formulations, including but not
limited to self-emulsifying drug delivery systems, solid self-emulsifying drug delivery
systems, lipid nanocapsules, solid lipid nanoparticles, and nanostructured lipid carriers,
as well as other liquid and solid dispersion formulations [ 198]. Within the context of the
marketed injectable drugs, it has been mostly used as a component of non-biotherapeutic
formulations. These include injectable formulations of ibuprofen eugenol ester [ 206],
propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) [ 207], and a mixture of -tocopherol, ascorbic acid, and
-carotene [208].
The toxicological proﬁle of Kolliphor®HS 15 has been hitherto investigated, having
shown a superior safety and toxicity proﬁle in comparison with PS80 [ 209]. In animal
models, Kolliphor®HS 15 shows no acute toxicity in rats (intravenous LD 50> 1 g/kg body
weight, oral LD 50> 20 g/kg body weight), mice (oral LD 50> 20 g/kg body weight), dogs
(intravenous LD 50> 3 g/kg body weight), and rabbits (intravenous LD 50> 1 g/kg body
weight) [ 192,210]. Parenteral administration of 100 mg/kg body weight of Kolliphor®HS
15 has been shown to induce pseudo-allergic reactions associated with histamine release,
though no histopathological changes or signs of speciﬁc toxicity have been observed [ 210].
These allergic reactions, however, have not been limited to Kolliphor®HS 15, and have
been observed in the case of Kolliphor®EL, another PEG fatty acid, and PS80. Overall,
the results of these investigations conclude the safety and low toxicity of Kolliphor®HS
15 as a non-ionic surfactant in comparison with other commercial non-ionic PEG-based
surfactants [199].
Few studies have shown the ability of Kolliphor®HS 15 to stabilize proteins, e.g., amylase
and bovine serum albumin (BSA) [ 204]. However, as the ester bond available in the
structure of Kolliphor®HS 15 is chemically and enzymatically cleavable, the surfactant is
expected to be, at least to some extent, associated with similar drawbacks as PS surfactants.
Furthermore, the presence of the POE moiety renders the molecule susceptible to oxidative
degradation [ 211,212]. Here again, the rate of surfactant degradation along with the impact
of degradation products on the protein stability as well as quality of the ﬁnal product has
to be investigated in detail, in order to provide a comparative overview of the surfactant’s
efﬁciency in comparison to PSs for the stabilization of protein therapeutics. As in the
case of any other excipients used for parenteral biotherapeutic formulations, the analytical
characterization of the surfactant to detect impurities, as well as the plausible side products
from the auto-degradation process, is important for quality control. Several techniques
have been hitherto developed to quantitatively examine Kolliphor®HS 15 composition.
Examples include the use of ultraperformance liquid chromatography coupled with a nano
quantity analyte detector to quantify the lipophilic moieties as well as hydrophilic free
PEGs in the formulation [ 213], or else application of gel permeation chromatography to
quantify Kolliphor®HS 15 structural components [ 214]. Another most outstanding method
is the use of liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry with an ion suppression
effect, through which the identiﬁcation of twelve oligomers by electrospray ionization
has been possible. Based on these analyses, the lipophilic and hydrophilic components inPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 12 of 52
Kolliphor®HS 15 have been quantiﬁed to be around 63.3% and 36.7%, respectively [ 215,216].
Notwithstanding, except for the FFAs, little has been practically uncovered about the
degradation products of this surfactant and how these will affect protein stability. Moreover,
the potential interactions of the surfactant with the primary packaging have not been fully
investigated either. Hence, a thorough investigation of the applicability of Kolliphor®HS
15 for the stabilization of protein biopharmaceutics, the stability of the surfactant and the
effect of potential degradation products on the quality of the formulation, and the potential
interactions of the surfactant with the primary packaging inspires further research.
Similar to polyoxyl 15 hydroxy stearate, polyoxyl 35 castor oil (also known as Cremophor®
EL and Kolliphor®EL) is a non-ionic surfactant belonging to the PEG fatty ester family
(Figure 1a). It is made of reacting castor oil and ethylene oxide in a molar ratio of 1:35,
and has an HLB value in the range of 12 to 14 [ 217,218]. The surfactant has been approved
by the FDA for use in pharmaceutical formulations through intramuscular, intravenous,
intravesical, subcutaneous, ophthalmic, sublingual, and topical administration routes, and
it has been mainly used for the parenteral delivery of small molecular drugs [ 161]. In one
study, the ability of Kolliphor®EL to stabilize amylase over two months in the presence of
hydrogen peroxide has been compared to that of Kolliphor®HS 15 and PS80. Fluorescence
measurements revealed the ability of Kolliphor®EL in the preservation of amylase and the
reduction of the oxidative degradation to be superior to that of PS80. In addition, similar to
PS80 and Kolliphor®HS 15, Kolliphor®EL could efﬁciently protect the BSA exposed to
mechanical stress for a period of 7 days [204].
Although the FDA and EMA have confirmed the low oral toxicity and non-mutagenicity
of Kolliphor®EL, anaphylactic reactions associated with parenteral formulations, in
which the surfactant has been used as a delivery vehicle or an excipient, have been
reported [219–225] . This is not a side effect speciﬁc to Kolliphor®EL, but a drawback
shared by all PEG (POE) containing excipients. Similar to the PS structures, the PEG
moiety can induce mild to strong immunogenic and hypersensitivity reactions. Between
January 1977 and April 2016, 37 case reports of immediate-type hypersensitivity to PEG
emerged, of which 28 (76%) described hypersensitivity reactions that met anaphylaxis
criteria [ 226]. This shared drawback of all PEG containing excipients is not taken seriously,
as certain proteins or their aggregates can also trigger immunogenic reactions of their own,
or else induce the secretion of various immunoglobulins [ 227–229]. Combined, these might
lead to immunogenic reactions ranging from milder site-of-injection swelling and pain to
hypersensitivity reactions and anaphylactic reactions in extreme cases [ 152,230]. Hence,
more detailed clinical studies should be dedicated to uncovering the full extent and the
reasons behind the immunological concerns raised in the case of PEG-based surfactants
to thoroughly address the issue of the suitability of the surfactant for the stabilization of
injectable protein formulations.
3.1.2. Non-Ester Surfactants
The beneﬁt of the non-ester surfactants mainly lies in their lack of sensitivity to
enzymes currently detected in protein formulations. The most important surfactant class of
these include block polyethylene-propylene glycol and polyoxyethylene fatty ethers, as
well as non-ester sugar-based surfactants such as dodecyl glucoside and dodecyl maltoside,
and N-alkyl amino acid polyether amides such as N-myristoyl phenylalanine Jeffamine
M1000 diamide (FM1000) (Figure 2).Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 13 of 52
Pharmaceutics 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 56 
 
  
Figure 2. Chemical structures of potential surfactant PS  alternatives devoid of an ester bond: (a) 
Poloxamer, (b) Polyoxyethylene alkyl ether (Brij), (c) Dodecyl- β-D-maltoside, (d) Dodecyl gluco-
side, and (e) N-myristoyl phenylalanine Jeffamine M1000 diamide (FM1000). 
• Block polyethylene-propylene glycol 
Triblock copolymers of polyethylene oxid e-polypropylene oxide-polyethylene oxide 
(POE-PPO-POE), commercially available as Poloxamers® and Pluronics®, possess surfac-
tant properties resulting from the hydrophobic PPO block in the middle and the hydro-
philic POE blocks on the sides (Figure 2) [231]. Different Poloxamers® vary mainly in the 
molecular mass of the PPO core and the percentage of POE content [232]. The name of the copolymers commonly starts with the letter “P” (for Poloxamer
®) followed by three digits, 
the first two of which, when multiplied by 100, give the approximate molecular mass of 
the PPO core. Multiplication of the last digit by 10 provides information of the percentage POE content [160,233]. The two most well-known members of this family are Poloxamer
® 
188 (P188; PPO molecular mass of 5400 g/ mol and 80% POE content) and Poloxamer® 407 
(P407; PPO molecular mass of 4000 g/mol and 70% POE content). According to the FDA 
Inactive Ingredient Database, P188 is approved for use in a variety of formulations as an 
emulsifying, solubilizing, defoaming, and dispersing agent. In fact, P188 is one of the well-considered PS alternative surfactants, as it is already incorporated in commercial biother-
apeutic formulations such as Gazyva
® (0.2 mg/mL) [234,235], Orencia® (8 mg/mL) [236], 
Norditropin® (3 mg/mL) [237], and Hemlibra® (0.5 mg/mL) [234]. 
Since Poloxamers®, as efficient stabilizers of injectable protein biotherapeutics, have 
hitherto successfully found their way to the market, it is worth first detailing the stability and potential degradation of these surfactant s [160]. P188 has been shown to degrade in 
the solid state at high temperatures due to auto-oxidation and chain cleavage, resulting in 
aldehydes, organic acids, and smaller molecular weight polymers [238]. The solid-state 
degradation of the P188, trackable based on  the pH shifts, aldehyde formation, and 
changes in molar mass of the polymer has been shown to initiate at around 40 °C [238]. P407, on the other hand, has been shown to be stable, and the thermal degradation only 
initiated after 21 days at 80 °C, starting from the PPO center block, resulting in chain scis-
sions in both PPO and POE polymer blocks [238,239]. In this study, P188 comprised less antioxidant compared to the P407, which the authors mentioned as a potential reason be-
hind the higher sensitivity of the former to solid-state degradation. Based on the proposed 
mechanism, the solid-state degr adation of P407 is associated with the generation of free 
radicals [239]. It should be, however, noted that these degradation reactions are triggered 
Figure 2. Chemical structures of potential surfactant PS alternatives devoid of an ester bond:
(a) Poloxamer , (b) Polyoxyethylene alkyl ether (Brij), ( c) Dodecyl--D-maltoside, ( d) Dodecyl gluco-
side, and ( e) N-myristoyl phenylalanine Jeffamine M1000 diamide (FM1000).
 Block polyethylene-propylene glycol
Triblock copolymers of polyethylene oxide-polypropylene oxide-polyethylene ox-
ide (POE-PPO-POE), commercially available as Poloxamers®and Pluronics®, possess
surfactant properties resulting from the hydrophobic PPO block in the middle and the
hydrophilic POE blocks on the sides (Figure 2) [ 231]. Different Poloxamers®vary mainly in
the molecular mass of the PPO core and the percentage of POE content [ 232]. The name of
the copolymers commonly starts with the letter “P” (for Poloxamer®) followed by three
digits, the ﬁrst two of which, when multiplied by 100, give the approximate molecular
mass of the PPO core. Multiplication of the last digit by 10 provides information of the
percentage POE content [ 160,233]. The two most well-known members of this family are
Poloxamer®188 (P188; PPO molecular mass of 5400 g/mol and 80% POE content) and
Poloxamer®407 (P407; PPO molecular mass of 4000 g/mol and 70% POE content). Ac-
cording to the FDA Inactive Ingredient Database, P188 is approved for use in a variety
of formulations as an emulsifying, solubilizing, defoaming, and dispersing agent. In fact,
P188 is one of the well-considered PS alternative surfactants, as it is already incorporated in
commercial biotherapeutic formulations such as Gazyva®(0.2 mg/mL) [ 234,235], Orencia®
(8 mg/mL) [236], Norditropin®(3 mg/mL) [237], and Hemlibra®(0.5 mg/mL) [234].
Since Poloxamers®, as efﬁcient stabilizers of injectable protein biotherapeutics, have
hitherto successfully found their way to the market, it is worth ﬁrst detailing the stability
and potential degradation of these surfactants [ 160]. P188 has been shown to degrade in
the solid state at high temperatures due to auto-oxidation and chain cleavage, resulting in
aldehydes, organic acids, and smaller molecular weight polymers [ 238]. The solid-state
degradation of the P188, trackable based on the pH shifts, aldehyde formation, and changes
in molar mass of the polymer has been shown to initiate at around 40C [238]. P407, on the
other hand, has been shown to be stable, and the thermal degradation only initiated after
21 days at 80C, starting from the PPO center block, resulting in chain scissions in both PPO
and POE polymer blocks [ 238,239]. In this study, P188 comprised less antioxidant compared
to the P407, which the authors mentioned as a potential reason behind the higher sensitivity
of the former to solid-state degradation. Based on the proposed mechanism, the solid-state
degradation of P407 is associated with the generation of free radicals [ 239]. It should
be, however, noted that these degradation reactions are triggered at higher temperatures,Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 14 of 52
which are at any rate deteriorating to the stability of the protein and are hence avoided
during the production, storage, and administration phases of protein biotherapeutics.
Although the chemical degradation of P188 and P407 in the solid state has been
examined and published in greater depth, their chemical stability in solution has not
been thoroughly investigated [ 240]. In one of the few studies in the subject, Wang et al.
(2019) examined the degradation of P188 in solution as a function of the buffer type, pH,
temperature, trace metals, and peroxides [ 240]. The results obtained using direct injection
gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy were indicative of signiﬁcant degradation of the
polymer in 10 mM histidine buffer. Within this context, the thermal oxidation of the PPO
block initiates the oxidation of P188 triggered by the secondary radicals in the polymer
chain, which leads to secondary hydrogen peroxide. As a result, the oxidation of histidine
could be catalyzed by both secondary free radicals and secondary hydrogen peroxide
produced during the P188 oxidation process [ 240]. The authors concluded that, relative to
PS surfactants, P188 has a lower stability liability in liquid formulations [240].
Recently, the stabilizing properties of PSs and P188 in mAb formulations under dif-
ferent stress and storage conditions have been compared [ 241]. These studies have in-
dicated that both PSs and P188 could effectively protect mAbs from interfacial stress in
liquid vial formulations. However, unlike formulations containing PSs, clear protein–
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) particles were observed in vials of protein formulations
stabilized using P188 after long-term storage at 2–8C. Moreover, the use of P188 as surfac-
tant in vials with a bromobutyl teﬂonized and siliconized stopper led to the formation of
molecule-speciﬁc visible and sub-visible protein–PDMS particles in liquid mAb formula-
tions, when stored for an extended period of time [ 241]. The protein–PDMS particles found
in this study have been attributed to the siliconized stopper used in the primary packaging,
resulting from a shift of silicone oil traces from the non-product contacting side to the prod-
uct contacting side during the bulk storage and processing of the stoppers [ 241]. Hence,
while P188 seems to be a useful alternative to PSs for stabilizing liquid mAb formulations, a
change of chemical composition of the PDMS stoppers is necessary to avoid the formation
of protein–PDMS particles during storage, even at low temperatures. Even in cases where
non-PDMS stoppers have been used, Fourier-transform infrared microscopy has revealed
the formation of ﬂuoropolymer particles in the solution. On the other hand, a related study
examining the impact of excipients on the functionality of preﬁlled syringes discovered
that when compared to P407 and P188-containing formulations, those containing PS80
showed a signiﬁcant increase in glide force. While this was mostly observed at higher
temperatures (40C), which indicates a low risk of syringe failure during storage at room
temperature, an increase in protein concentration seems to accelerate this process and result
in an increase of glide force at 25C. In comparison, the performance of P188 in terms
of maintaining syringe functionality and stability, particularly in the case of HCLF, was
shown to be superior [242].
To sum up, it seems that the use of Poloxamers®, including P188 and P407, as protein
stabilizers in injectable formulations has both advantages and disadvantages depending on
the physicochemical traits of the protein, formulation ingredients, and the type of packaging
or delivery system in which the formulation is contained. Being FDA-approved excipients
already in use for the formulation of protein injectables, these are not associated with
safety and toxicological concerns, as is the case for the PS surfactants. However, unlike PSs,
Poloxamers®are not susceptible to HCP-mediated degradation. Nevertheless, it cannot be
denied that similar to PSs, the use of Poloxamers®in injectable protein formulations is still
fraught with concerns regarding the instability of the surfactant and the subsequent impact
on the protein integrity, the formation of visible and sub-visible particles, and the potential
biological interactions. More in-depth research is yet to be conducted to thoroughly address
such concerns and to optimize the protein formulations and primary packaging to fully
beneﬁt from the use of Poloxamers®as PS alternatives in such formulations. Moreover,
concerns regarding the potential immunological, hypersensitivity, and even anaphylactic
reactions originating from the PEG (POE) moiety of these polymers must be addressed.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 15 of 52
 Polyoxyethylene fatty ethers
POE ethers (commercially available as Brij®) comprise the POE (PEG) chain as a hy-
drophilic moiety, and the ethoxylated fatty alcohol constituting the lipophilic portion of the
surfactant (Figure 2). By using different types of fatty alcohols (lauryl alcohol, cetyl alcohol,
stearyl alcohol, and oleyl alcohol), different glycol ethers can be synthesized. According to
the FDA Inactive Ingredient Database, Brij®(cetomacrogol) is a polyether-based surfactant
approved as an inactive ingredient solely for topical formulations. This is reﬂected in the
review publications compiled by Jiao (2008) [ 243] and Sahoo et al. (2014) [ 244] focusing on
the use of POE alkyl ethers (Brij®35, 78, 98) in pharmaceutical formulations, which mainly
comprises a discussion of their role in the development of topical and ocular formulations.
In addition, the stabilizing effect of POE ethers in oral protein formulations has also been
investigated by Mesiha et al. (1981). The authors demonstrated that the incorporation of
Brij®58 as a surfactant enhanced the stability of orally administered insulin in male white
rabbits [245].
Since POE ethers have shown to provide good stability in topical formulations, their
stabilizing effect in protein-based liquid formulations has been compared to the PS sur-
factants. Bam et al. (1995) investigated how well Brij®92 could stabilize the rhGH (re-
combinant human growth hormone) as a model protein in comparison with PS80 as a
reference surfactant [ 246]. The surfactant activity was measured through the partitioning
behavior of a spin-label with electron paramagnetic resonance to determine the binding
stoichiometry [ 247]. The obtained results indicated that Brij®92 tends to behave in a similar
way as PS80 and could effectively stabilize the rhGH protein [ 246]. Similarly, through light-
scattering experiments, Krause et al. (2002) conﬁrmed that when used in a concentration of
0.001 mg/mL, Brij®58 could effectively inhibit the protein particle formation of chemically
denatured proteins (glucosidase, citrate synthase, and rhodanese) [248].
Even though the FDA approval of POE ethers as surfactants for parenteral formu-
lations is yet to be obtained, the last decade has witnessed a more detailed investigation
of the role of Brij®as a surfactant in injectable biotherapeutic formulations [ 249]. For
instance, Agarkhed et al. (2018) explored the effect of PS, Brij®35, and several other
POE-based surfactants on the mechanical, thermal, and photostability of a mAb injectable
formulation [250] . According to the ﬁndings of the mechanical and isothermal stability, as
well as the sub-visible particle counting, while all tested non-ionic surfactants demonstrated
a similar protein protecting effect, their performance was inferior to that of PS80. On the
other hand, formulations comprising non-PS surfactants, including Brij®35, could better
protect the mAb against photo-oxidation, as was evident from the decrease in methionine
and tryptophan oxidation [ 250]. In one of the latest studies on the subject, Yue et al. (2020)
proposed Brij®58 as a good alternative surfactant to PS20 and PS80 for the stabilization
of protein injectable formulations [ 249]. Through visual inspection and dynamic light
scattering, the authors conﬁrmed superior mAb protection ability of Brij®58 under forced
degradation conditions. Furthermore, ultra-performance liquid chromatography- charged
aerosol detector investigations revealed better inherent stability of the surfactant in protein
formulations when compared to PS20 and PS80. After 19 days of shaking and incubation
at 40C for 1 month, no signiﬁcant reduction of the Brij®58 concentration was observed,
while the concentrations of PS20/PS80 underwent an approximate decrease of 30%. On
top of that, the required concentration of Brij®58 as a surfactant was comparably low
(0.075 mg/mL versus 0.2 mg/mL in case of PS20/ PS80). In terms of toxicological in-
vestigations, the estimated LD 50in mice was equal to 343.4 mg/kg body weight, which
was lower than that reported for PS80 (5000 mg/kg body weight). The authors argued
that this would still leave a large safety window for Brij®58 in protein formulations, as
the required concentration of the surfactant is quite low. Indeed, no side effects were
observed in acute toxicological studies when administrated in a concentration of 20 mg/mL
in mice [ 249]. While these ﬁndings highlighted the potential of Brij®58 to be used as an
efﬁcient PS alternative in the formulation of injectable protein biotherapeutics, the authorsPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 16 of 52
also emphasized that the safety of the surfactant in human subjects when incorporated in
parenteral formulations is yet to be investigated [249].
In terms of stability, little has been reported about POE ethers in general. One might
argue that as non-ester surfactants, POE ethers might be superior to PSs in terms of
susceptibility to hydrolysis. On the other hand, since Brij®surfactants contain POE and
alkyl chains, the likelihood that they might undergo a similar oxidative degradation to
PSs cannot be completely ruled out. The literature holds only a few studies on Brij®
degradation in pharmaceutical formulations [ 78,251]. The most relevant publications within
this context report a metal-mediated oxidation in case of Brij®30 [78] and a photocatalytic
degradation of Brij®35 in the presence of inorganic minerals [ 251]. The ether moieties
available in the structure of Brij®molecules are susceptible to auto-oxidation in contact
with air through the formation of hydroperoxides. The oxidation process begins with
the formation of a free radical at the -carbon atom of the ether moiety. According to
Currie et al. (2004), the presence of silver ions leads to the removal of hydrogen, which
usually is caused by oxygen in non-metal-mediated oxidation processes. Particularly in
this metal-induced oxidation of Brij®surfactants, the susceptibility of long alkyl chains to
oxidation is greater than that of short alkyl chains. This has been attributed to the high
hydrogen fed capacity to the oxidative process by virtue of the several repetitive methylene
units in the saturated carbon chain [ 78]. The photocatalytic oxidation of POE moiety, on
the other hand, is promoted by UV light incidence and the presence of a photocatalyst. The
increase of oxygen concentration inﬂuences the rate of oxidation, but only up to a deﬁned
concentration where the system reaches a plateau [ 251]. With all this said, more profound
research is needed to address the stability of the Brij®surfactants in protein biological
formulations and the inﬂuence of the degradation products on the stability of the protein
cargo. Based on the available data at least, Brij®surfactants seem to have superior stability
to PS surfactants, and they seem to be valid candidates for further investigations within the
context of stabilizing parenteral biotherapeutic formulations. However, concerns regarding
the potential immunological, hypersensitivity and even anaphylactic reactions originating
from the POE moiety of these surfactants must be addressed.
 Non-ester sugar-based surfactants
Non-ester sugar-based surfactants such as dodecyl glucoside and dodecyl maltoside
(Figure 2) have been shown to reduce the surface tension of water in a matter comparable
with SEs [ 191]. EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) has reported dodecyl maltoside
to be a non-mutagenic, non-toxic, and non-irritating substance [ 252]. Dodecyl maltoside
was/is further patented for use in nasal, parenteral, and hydrogel formulations [ 253]. In
the case of different alkyl- -glycosides, degradation following oral administration and
the metabolism of the lipid and carbohydrate moieties through the relevant metabolic
pathways have been shown [ 190]. Being safe for human consumption, n-dodecyl- -D-
maltoside (DMM) has been exploited as a non-ionic alkyl saccharide surfactant for the
stabilization of a therapeutically active peptide (D-alanine Peptide T-amide (DAPTA))
during lyophilization and the subsequent reconstitution of the freeze-dried cake [ 253]. The
surfactant could successfully extend the product shelf-life independent of the lyophilization-
thawing process and could further increase the stability and reduce the aggregation and
immunogenicity of the therapeutic peptide [ 253]. In a later study, DMM was used as
a surfactant to stabilize interferon- in intranasal and subcutaneous formulations for
the treatment of multiple sclerosis [ 254]. Within this context, DMM could successfully
prevent protein particle formation in solution and reduce the immunogenicity of the
ﬁnal formulation [ 254]. Despite these promising results, the use of this surfactant in the
formulation of parenteral protein therapeutics in the market remains underexploited.
 N-alkyl amino acid polyether amides
N-alkyl amino acid polyether amides are a series of chemically deﬁned surfactants with
an amino acid as an alkyl tail linked to the polyether hydrophile through amide bonds [ 255].
These have been developed to reconcile the protein stabilization properties of the aminoPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 17 of 52
acids (detailed under amino acid-based stabilizers) with that of the non-ester surfactant
families. Due to the presence of the amide bond, rather than an ester bond, N-alkyl amino
acid polyether amides are resistant to the described HCP-mediated hydrolysis, while they
might be still associated with the problem of oxidation as in the case of PSs. N-alkyl amino
acid polyether amides also offer the advantage of low batch to batch variability due to
their chemically deﬁned structure [ 44]. One paramount example within this context is
N-myristoyl phenylalanine Jeffamine M1000 diamide (FM1000; Figure 2), which, when
used in a concentration of 1 mg/mL, could signiﬁcantly slow down the thermal-induced
aggregation of 10 mg/mL abatacept. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements and
size exclusion chromatograms demonstrated the reduction of thermal-induced protein
particle formation. Interestingly, compared to PS20, PS80, and P188, FM1000 resulted
in 3-fold more reduction of protein particle formation [ 255]. Following these interesting
ﬁndings, the efﬁciency of FM1000 for the stabilization of liquid biotherapeutics under
an induced mechanical stress was also investigated [ 256]. To this end, the efﬁciency of
FM1000 to inhibit protein particle formation in an immunoglobulin G (IgG) formulation
at a concentration of 20 mg/mL following exposure to 24-h-long agitation was compared
to that of PS20, PS80, and P188. Interestingly, the rate of protein particle formation was
highest in the case of P188, followed by PS80 and then FM1000 and PS20. Compared
to conventional surfactants, FM1000 could better facilitate the stabilization of air/water
and air/silicon interfaces in IgG containing formulation [ 256]. Furthermore, the effect of
FM1000 upon the agitation stress of abatacept in IV bags was explored. The protein stability
was highest in the case of FM1000, followed by P188, PS80, and PS20. The surface tension
measurements revealed that under the same conditions, the CMC of FM1000 was 10 times
lower than that of PS80 (0.55 versus 5.5 PPM) [ 257]. While the use of these amino acid-based
surfactants for protein stabilization has been successfully patented [ 257], their industrial
translation necessitates more in-depth investigations in terms of potential pharmacological
and toxicological side effects. It should also be highlighted, that the current available
stability studies were published by the manufacturer of FM1000; thus, it is unclear whether
“negative” examples related to protein stabilization of FM1000 would have been disclosed.
3.2. Carbohydrates and Their Derivatives
This category of potential alternative excipients includes disaccharides and their
chemical derivatives, sugar alcohols, cyclodextrins, and semisynthetic polysaccharides.
These are natural or in cases semi-synthetic compounds associated with an acceptable
safety proﬁle and have been hitherto exploited for protein stabilization, mainly during
lyophilization. The chemical structures of these compounds are presented in Figure 3.
 Disaccharides
Disaccharides such as sucrose and trehalose are well-known for their ability for protein
cryopreservation and protein stabilization in the lyophilized state [ 258]. What might be
less widely known is their ability to stabilize proteins in solution. As osmolytes, sucrose
and trehalose exert their protein stabilizing effect indirectly by altering the solvent prop-
erties and the consequent protein–solvent interactions [ 259]. By surrounding the protein
molecules, they also separate them from one another, thereby reducing the protein–protein
interactions [259] . Sucrose (Figure 3a) has been shown to inhibit the protein particle for-
mation of recombinant interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra), which tends to form
a soluble dimer during storage at 30C under minimal stressful conditions [ 260]. It is
proposed that proteins with an increased surface area tend to be thermodynamically less
stable in the presence of sucrose compared to those with a more compact structure. This
could lead to a shift of equilibrium from the aggregated to the unaggregated species over
time [260].Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 18 of 52
Pharmaceutics 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 56 
 
  
Figure 3. Chemical structures of potential carbohydrate PS alternatives: ( a) Disaccharides, ( b) Sugar 
alcohols, ( c) Cyclodextrins (CD), ( d) Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, and ( e) Dextran. 
• Disaccharides 
Disaccharides such as sucrose and trehalose are well-known for their ability for pro-
tein cryopreservation and protein stabilization in the lyophilized state [258]. What might 
be less widely known is their ability to stabilize proteins in solution. As osmolytes, sucrose 
and trehalose exert their protein stabilizing effect indirectly by altering the solvent prop-
erties and the consequent protein–solvent interactions [259]. By surrounding the protein 
molecules, they also separate them from one another, thereby reducing the protein–pro-tein interactions [259]. Sucrose (Figure 3a) ha s been shown to inhibit the protein particle 
formation of recombinant interleukin-1 receptor  antagonist (IL-1ra), which tends to form 
a soluble dimer during storage at  30 °C under minimal stressful conditions [260]. It is pro-
posed that proteins with an increased surface area tend to be thermodynamically less sta-
ble in the presence of sucrose compared to those with a more compact structure. This 
could lead to a shift of equilibrium from the aggregated to the unaggregated species over time [260]. 
Figure 3. Chemical structures of potential carbohydrate PS alternatives: ( a) Disaccharides, ( b) Sugar
alcohols, ( c) Cyclodextrins (CD), ( d) Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, and ( e) Dextran.
Trehalose (Figure 3a), according to the literature, acts superior to sucrose in terms
of protein stabilization, mainly through its speciﬁc solvent structure and dynamics [ 261].
Sun et al. (1998) demonstrated the superior ability of trehalose/glucose over sucrose/glucose
mixture to preserve the stability and the biological activity of a dehydrated dehydrogenase
enzyme, after long-term storage at 44C (ca. 80 days vs. 5 days), 60C (>70 h vs. ca. 50 h),
and 75C (ca. 30 h vs. <10 h) [ 262]. It has also provided protection and stabilization of the
enzymes like restriction during the vacuum-drying process [ 263]. Accordingly, trehalose is
a well-established excipient for the cryo- and lyoprotection of different proteins.
Research has highlighted the effective concentration of trehalose to maintain the pro-
tein stability during parenteral biotherapeutics (bevacizumab, ranibizumab, trastuzumab,
recombinant antihemophilic factor) to oscillate between 10–100 mg/mL, but it is usually
used in combination with PS surfactants, as it cannot provide adequate protein stability
in the absence of the latter [ 264]. Since the pharmaceutical industry currently endeavors
towards ﬁnding a substitution for polyethoxylated surfactants in biotherapeutic formula-
tions, unusual approaches have been taken to provide trehalose better protein stabilization
by modifying the molecule’s chemical structure [ 265–270]. One of these strategies involves
the modiﬁcation of trehalose with fatty acids to provide the molecule surfactant properties
(similar to sucrose fatty acid esters). Schiefelbein et al. (2010) synthesized 6-O-monolauroyl-
,-trehalose, and investigated its ability to stabilize human growth hormone (hGH)
subjected to agitation stress. At a concentration of 1 mg/mL, the trehalose-based surfactant
could stabilize the protein as effectively as PS20 and PS80 [ 265]. As a trehalose fatty acidPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 19 of 52
ester, 6-O-monolauroyl- ,-trehalose is prone to hydrolysis. Thus, a similar synthetic
approach was proposed by Messina et al. (2017), who produced 4 trehalose regioisomers
with an ether moiety. The compound was shown to prevent protein particle formation
(>97%) against thermal and mechanical-induced stresses [ 266]. In a recent study, synthetic
linear and 4-arm star glycopolymers (mannose, galactose, arabinose, lactose, and trehalose)
were investigated in terms of maintaining the conformational stability and reducing the
protein particle formation tendency of mAb1 as a model protein [ 267]. The stress conditions
used in this study involved storage at 25C and 40C for up to 7 weeks. According to the
static light scattering and differential scanning calorimetry results, the conformational and
colloidal stability of the mAb1 were affected by the sugar monomer concentration as well as
the polymer structure (linear or star). Unlike their low molecular weight sugar counterpart,
which increased mAb 1 formulation stability even at low concentrations, glycopolymers
had the opposite effect, leading to the destabilization of the Ab [ 267]. This was most pro-
nounced in the case of trehalose-based glycopolymers at higher concentrations and during
long-term storage both at 25C and 40C for up to 7 weeks. These results demonstrate
that unlike low molecular weight sugar excipients, their corresponding glycopolymers
cannot act as efﬁcient protein stabilizers [ 267]. In another study, Mancini et al. (2012) syn-
thetized a trehalose sidechain glycopolymer further conjugated to a thiolated hen egg white
lysozyme. This approach led to superior stability of the lysozyme against lyophilization,
and high temperatures compared to POE and trehalose excipients [ 268]. Nonetheless, it
also required the modiﬁcation of the protein, which can potentially affect the protein’s
activity. In a different study, trehalose glycopolymers, along with four different monomer
modiﬁcations, were synthetized, and their efﬁciency in terms of preserving the activity
of horseradish peroxidase and glucose oxidase at higher temperatures and after several
lyophilization cycles was investigated [ 269]. In comparison with trehalose monomers,
the polymerized glycopolymer made of four trehalose monomers better preserved the
protein activity and conformational stability. As an additional beneﬁt, the glycopolymer
was shown to be non-toxic for different cell lines when examined up to a concentration of
8 mg/mL [269] . In the most recent study, the authors continued their research on the same
trehalose glycopolymer by chemically conjugating it to insulin. This prevented insulin
from undergoing thermal and agitation-induced protein particle formation in solution.
When tested in mice, the conjugate had a signiﬁcantly more prolonged plasma circulation
than the free insulin [ 270]. Furthermore, from a safety perspective, the glycopolymer has
been shown to be biocompatible and non-toxic to mice when administered 1.6 mg/kg body
weight [269].
The above-debated studies highlight both the beneﬁts and limitations of disaccharides
for the stabilization of protein biotherapeutics. Disaccharides offer the advantage of safety
and lack of toxicity for parenteral, particularly intravenous, use. Sucrose and trehalose are
FDA-approved GRAS excipients commonly used in the injectable formulations. While these
are excipients of choice for the protection of the proteins against thermal and lyophilization
stresses, their ability to protect the proteins in solution remains to be optimized. In many
cases, the use of sucrose and trehalose alone cannot ensure adequate protein stability, as
these can only minimize protein–protein interaction to a certain degree and are not as
effective against sheer and interface stresses [ 258]. To overcome this issue, other classes of
glycopolymers based on the disaccharides have also been developed. However, a further
issue to consider is the excipient stability. Both sucrose and trehalose are susceptible to acid
hydrolysis, though sucrose is much more prone to this phenomenon than trehalose [ 271].
Hydrolysis of disaccharides creates reducing sugars, which must be avoided as they can
damage the proteins. Nevertheless, this is usually not an issue unless the pH is lower than
4, which is not the case for protein biotherapeutics [ 84]. Reducing sugars such as lactose or
maltose must be avoided, as they can chemically interact to proteins through the Maillard
reaction during storage [ 84]. Taken together, while disaccharides might not be adequate PS
alternatives in their crude form [ 264], they can provide a base for chemical modiﬁcation, orPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 20 of 52
else be used in combination with other classes of stabilizers, which can hopefully pave the
way for the synthesis of more suitable PS alternatives.
 Sugar alcohols
Sugar alcohols such as glycerol, sorbitol, and mannitol (Figure 3b) stabilize proteins
in solution as well as during lyophilization or storage [ 272–274]. Similar to trehalose and
sucrose, these mainly serve as osmolytes, protecting the integrity of the protein by alter-
ing the protein–solvent interactions [ 272], and by replacing the water molecules during
lyophilization [ 273,274]. Glycerol has been shown to shift the conformation of the native
protein towards a more compact state [ 275]. It also inhibits protein unfolding and aggrega-
tion through the stabilization of aggregation-prone intermediates. The main reason behind
this phenomenon is the amphiphilic nature of glycerol, which arranges at the interface of
the hydrophobic protein regions and the polar solvent [ 275]. To what extent glycerol can
improve the protein stability is, however, dictated by the nature of the protein in question.
Mannitol, a hexahydro alcohol, is often used as a bulking agent in freeze-dried and
spray-dried formulations [ 276,277]. In an amorphous state, mannitol also provides protein
stabilization during lyophilization, as it provides intimate H-bonding with the protein at
molar ratios of 360:1 or even higher. This leads to the shift of the lattice structure of the
protein towards an amorphous state, which renders these more stable than their crystalline
counterparts [ 276,277]. However, research has also demonstrated that the protein stabiliza-
tion effect of mannitol occurs up to a certain concentration of the excipient. In spray-dried
recombinant humanized mAb formulation, mannitol has been shown to exert a protective
effect up to an excipient: protein ratio of 200:1. At higher concentrations, the crystallization
of mannitol exerts a detrimental effect upon the protein stability [ 278]. Literature holds
many other reports describing the detrimental effect of crystallized mannitol upon protein
stabilization [ 279–283]. On the other hand, a recent review details varying techniques to
achieve a successful lyophilized injectable formulation without the inconveniences that
mannitol conveys. As a detailed discussion about the optimization of freeze-drying cycle
parameters in multi-component formulations is out of the scope of the current paper, the
reader is referred to a detailed review by Thakral et al. (2022) for further information [ 284].
The excipient to protein ratio has also been reported as essential to maintain the stability of
lyophilized protein formulations during storage [ 285]. Today, mannitol, along with PSs, is a
component of several marketed mAb formulations, including but not limited to Humira®,
Simulect®, and Ilaris®(Ilaris liquid formulation contains mannitol, while the lyophilized
formulation contains sucrose instead) [15,286].
Sorbitol is another common sugar alcohol used in marketed mAbs parenteral for-
mulations such as Vyepti®, Anthim®, Simponi®, etc [ 286]. It has been shown to protect
the proteins in a manner similar to mannitol but is associated with the drawback of re-
crystallization over time, which negatively impacts the protein stability during long-term
storage [ 287,288]. As in the case of mannitol, excipient to protein ratio seems to play an
important part, with sorbitol-recrystallization-mediated protein instability being less pro-
nounced when lower protein concentrations are used [ 288]. The combination of sorbitol
and sucrose has shown a synergistic protein stabilizing effect [289,290].
Like disaccharides, sugar alcohols possess acceptable safety proﬁles for intravenously
injectable formulations. Glycerol, the backbone of many lipids, is found in vegetable and
animal fats and oils within regularly consumed foods. Following ingestion, glycerol is
absorbed from the intestine and then follows two degradation pathways; it is transformed
to glycogen and carbon dioxide or used as a precursor for the anabolism of fatty acid in the
body [ 291]. Glycerol has been listed as GRAS, included in the FDA Inactive Ingredients
Database for pharmaceutical applications, and added to the Canadian list of acceptable
non-medicinal ingredients. Given its metabolism in the human body, glycerol is widely
employed in parenteral, topical, oral, and ophthalmic formulations, as well as a solvent
and sweetener [ 292]. In general, glycerol as a food additive or excipient has been proven to
be non-irritant and non-toxic [ 291]. Low concentrations of glycerol for oral formulations
present scarce side effects [ 293]. Nevertheless, high oral doses of glycerol can inducePharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 21 of 52
hyperglycemia, nausea, headache, and thirst. Intravenous or oral administration of glycerol
for the reduction of cerebral edema [ 294] has been linked to side effects such as hemolysis,
hemoglobinuria, and renal failure [ 295,296]. Of course, the concentration of glycerol used
for such purposes is potentially much higher than the amounts necessary to stabilize
protein formulations. Another side effect of high dosage use is the mucous membranes and
skin irritation [297].
Mannitol and sorbitol are also GRAS, FDA-approved excipients and, as previously
mentioned, part of the marketed injectable formulations. They are listed in the FDA
Inactive Ingredients Database for injectable formulations, and also in the Canadian List
of Acceptable Non-medicinal Ingredients [ 291]. The safety of these ingredients has been
established based on the lack of evidence signifying their systemic toxicity, irritation,
sensitization, and adverse clinical reports [ 291]. While mannitol is partially metabolized
by the gut microbiota, it is not degraded following intravenous administration. Both
mannitol and the products of its partial metabolism are cleared through renal excretion
in a few hours [ 298,299]. Sorbitol, on the other hand, is rapidly metabolized through
normal glycolytic pathways, ultimately creating carbon dioxide and water [ 299]. While
both excipients have been shown to be safe, literature holds a few reports about the
hypersensitivity towards intravenous administration of mannitol [ 300–302]. Even in cases
where mannitol has been used as an excipient in lower concentrations, hypersensitivity
reactions have been still reported [291].
While sugar alcohols offer the advantage of safety and appropriate regulatory status,
they often cannot provide the protein with adequate protection from all sources of stress,
in particular the interface-induced stresses. As a result, these often need to be used in
combination with a second, more surface-active excipient to ensure the adequate stability of
the protein during all stages of production and storage. They can also provide a backbone
for further chemical modiﬁcation to reconcile the advantages of these molecules with
the surface-active properties that can be provided through conjugation with other more
lipophilic moieties.
 Cyclodextrins
According to the Inactive Ingredient Database of the FDA, four different types of
cyclodextrins (CDs) have already been approved for use in pharmaceutical formulations.
These include 2-Hydroxypropyl- -cyclodextrin (HP- -CD) for ophthalmic and topical for-
mulations,-cyclodextrin ( -CD) or Alfadex for liquid and solid intracavitary formulations,
-cyclodextrin ( -CD) or Betadex for oral, topical, intramuscular, and intravenous formula-
tions, and sulfobutylether- -cyclodextrin (SBE- -CD) for intravenous and subcutaneous
formulations [ 161]. CDs are cyclic oligosaccharides (Figure 3c) and the diversity in the
ring size and in the sidechain of CDs confer them different properties that can be used
for a variety of applications [ 303]. CDs are produced through the enzymatic degradation
of starch and possess a hydrophilic outer surface and a hydrophobic cavity, rendering
them water-soluble and biocompatible [ 304]. The most popular natural CDs are ,,
and, which contain 6, 7, and 8 glucopyranose units, respectively [ 304]. These are non-
hygroscopic, crystalline, and homogeneous substances. Given their ideal cavity size for
accommodating small molecules of the size of an amino acid, efﬁcient drug complexation
and loading, availability, and low cost, -CDs provide an interesting candidate for the
complexation with various drugs, mainly for the purpose of enhancement of the drug
water solubility, improvement of the drug stability, increase of the drug dissolution rate
and bioavailability, reduction of the side effects, and manipulation of the drug’s physic-
ochemical characteristics [ 305]. To elaborate on the diverse role of CDs in drug delivery
systems and the variety of CD-based systems for parenteral use is out of the scope of the
current paper. For more information, the reader is referred to a well-structured review by
Ferreira et al. (2022) for further information [306].
Interestingly, some CDs, e.g., HP- -CDs (Hydroxypropyl- -cyclodextrin) and M -
CDs (Methyl- -cyclodextrins) have been shown to inhibit protein aggregation in a manner
similar to non-ionic surfactants [ 307–310]. This can be either a by-product of the preferentialPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 22 of 52
adsorption of the CDs to the interface or else originate from the interaction of the CD
molecules with the protein itself. It seems that both the nature and the concentration of
the protein and the properties of the CDs determine which of the two aforementioned
mechanisms will be dominant. Samra et al. (2010), who investigated the stabilizing effect
of seven different CDs on three pharmaceutically relevant proteins, reported that almost
all investigated CDs could successfully inhibit protein aggregation at a pH of 5.5. They
argued that this potentially pertains to the characteristics (isoelectric point, molecular
weight, and detailed tertiary structure) of the proteins, which in turn inﬂuences the nature
of the interaction of the CDs therewith [ 311]. Concurringly, CDs have been shown to
successfully stabilize rhGH through direct interaction therewith, for the unusually high
proportion of solvent-accessible aromatic amino acids favors such interactions. It appears
that stabilization due to the direct interaction between the CDs and the protein is often the
dominant mechanism in case the protein has substantial solvent exposure to hydrophobic
amino-acid residues [ 311]. Protein stabilization as a result of the preferential adsorption to
the interface, however, is governed by the degree of the surface activity of the CD-derivative
under investigation rather than the structure of the protein. For instance, HP- -CD has
been shown to reduce the interface-induced precipitation of porcine growth hormone [ 307].
HP--CD has also been shown to be a beneﬁcial PS alternative for the protection of the IgG
formulations from aggregation at the air–water interface [312,313].
As a result of the duality of the mechanisms involved in the CD-mediated protein
stabilization, i.e., reduction of the protein surface adsorption and protein stabilization
through direct interaction, it seems that a CD derivative beneﬁcial for one therapeutic
protein may have little effect on, or even jeopardize, the stability of another protein [ 314].
CD-derivatives that inhibit protein particle formation caused by one stress condition may
not be able to do so in case of a different stress condition. Moreover, the required CD to
protein concentration or molar ratio that would yield adequate stabilization differs greatly
depending on the nature of both components. Thus, for the selection of CD-derivatives
for the stabilization of biotherapeutic protein formulations, several factors should be
heeded. The ﬁrst is the stabilizing role that CDs are supposed to play in the formulation,
i.e., “direct” interaction with the protein versus prevention of “surface/interface-induced”
aggregation. Stabilization through the former may only be possible in certain cases, for
which the presence of the highly solvent accessible exposed hydrophobic residues on the
proteins might be an important but not compelling prerequisite [ 314]. The use of CDs to
prevent surface-induced aggregation, on the other hand, may be possible in many cases,
for which the surface activity of the CD-derivative must be taken into account [ 303]. The
concentration of the protein might also play an important part. In solutions with lower
protein concentrations, CDs might be able to better interact with the interface, leading to
more efﬁcient protection of the protein against interface-induced denaturation and particle
formation. In case the protein concentration in the solution is high, however, the interaction
of the CDs with the protein molecules might gain more relevance, which, as previously
elaborated, varies signiﬁcantly depending on the type of the CD and the presence of
hydrophobic residues in the protein structure [311].
While CDs offer the beneﬁt of chemical stability in biotherapeutic formulations, the
concern of their enzymatic degradation remains to be investigated. A recent study by
Zhang et al. (2022) investigated the chemical stability of HP- -CD in comparison to PS20
and PS80. When subjected to heat stress, autoclave, light, and oxidative stresses, HP- -CD
remains almost stable in contrast to PS20 and PS80 [ 315]. However, the degradation of
CDs can be triggered by various enzymes mainly from the glycoside hydrolase family 13 ,
including cyclodextrinase, -amylase, glycoamylase, and amylase belonging to the bacteria
and archaea domain involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates [ 316]. Some of these are
currently in use in CDs, and their derivates have shown low toxicity and resistance to the
enzymatic degradation [ 317]. The saccharide nature of CDs endows them with physico-
chemical properties similar to dextrins. An outstanding property of CDs is their resistance
against-amylase due to the lack of susceptible non-reducing end groups. Conversely, -Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 23 of 52
amylases are capable of hydrolyzing the CDs from the carbohydrate chain as in starch, but
to a lower extent [ 318]. The degree of hydrolysis is directly proportional to the size of the
free CD moiety. By burying oxygen bridges inside the CD cavity, the resistance to hydrolysis
increases [ 319]. Accordingly, - and-CDs are resistant to salivary -amylase, while -CDs
are sensitive to pancreatic and salivary -amylase [ 320,321]. Furthermore, Aspergillus
oryzae-amylase, a fungal amylase mainly used for saccharide fermentation, has shown
enzymatic activity towards -CDs, leading to the production of maltooligomers [ 322].
Additionally, two more -amylase enzymes with cyclo-malto-dextrinase speciﬁcity have
been identiﬁed in thermophilic bacterial strains [ 323]. It should be, however, noted that the
majority of the identiﬁed CD-degrading enzymes are of bacterial origin, and hence will not
create any issues in case the protein is puriﬁed from a eucaryotic host. In case of bacterial
hosts, quantiﬁcation of the CD degrading enzyme traces in HCPs and the determination of
the enzymes’ afﬁnity for the molecule is necessary to present a fair comparison between
CDs and PSs in terms of their potential sensitivity to HCP-mediated degradation.
CDs can also be used in combination with PSs to help mitigate their limitations. In an
interesting patented work, Connolly et al. (2017) demonstrated that the use of HP- -CD,
together with PS20, improves the stability of the latter towards enzymatic degradation.
This was conﬁrmed based on the decrease of the sub-visible particle formation in PS-
containing solutions in the presence of different HCPs. HP- -CD has also been shown to
protect PS20 in the presence of several enzymes (phosphotriesterase-like-lactonase, Candida
antarctica lipase B, renin-like enzyme, and lipoprotein lipase) in a concentration-dependent
manner [ 324]. It has been hypothesized that such protective effects might originate from the
“direct” interaction of the CD with PS20, leading to the formation of an inclusion complex.
This would in turn decrease the interaction between the host cell enzyme traces and the
PS20, thereby protecting the latter against degradation. Furthermore, it is described that
CDs can help solubilize the sub-visible particles originating from the enzymatic degradation
of the PS20 [ 324]. Accordingly, using a combination of CDs and PSs for the stabilization of
protein biopharmaceutics can be beneﬁcial. An improved stability of the PS surfactants
will help overcome some of the problems originating from the PS degradation, including
the potential damage to the protein structure as well as the sedimentation of visible or
sub-visible FFA particles. It should be, however, noted that combined use of CDs and PSs
would increase the complexity of the formulation. Moreover, CDs might disturb established
analytical methods to detect surfactants like PSs.
In addition to the enzymatic degradation, the oxidative cleavage of CDs is another
under-investigated potential instability mechanism for these excipients [ 325]. Within this
context, the presence of OH-radicals generated by auto-oxidation processes can lead to the
cleavage of glucosidic bonds of -CD, producing thereby different oligosaccharides like
D-xylose, D-threose, D-arabinose, and D-erythrose [325].
Overall, there seems to be a need for more in-depth research to provide further
information regarding the ability of the CDs to stabilize protein formulations. Furthermore,
the degradation proﬁle of the excipient, along with its consequences for the quality of the
ﬁnal product, particularly upon long-term storage, should be examined. The available
information at this point depicts a promising picture, where CDs, alone or in combination
with PSs, can help overcome the drawbacks of the latter in the formulation of injectable
protein biotherapeutics.
 Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose
Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) (Figure 3d) is a semi-synthetic cellulose ether,
well-known for its use as a pharmaceutical excipient in oral dosage forms [ 326]. HPMC is
a unique excipient in the sense of the malleability of its physicochemical characteristics,
which supports the molecule diverse applications. Within this context, HPMC has been
used for the formulation of mucoadhesive systems for the delivery of small molecules, as
an excipient in amorphous solid dispersions to enhance the bioavailability of poorly water-
soluble drugs, or as a component of various nanocarrier formulations [ 327,328]. HPMC
and other cellulose derivatives have been shown to be non-toxic following pulmonary,Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 24 of 52
oral, intraperitoneal, subcutaneous, or dermal application [ 329]. These have been shown
to be non-irritating to mildly irritating, non-sensitizing, and non-mutagenic in clinical
studies [329].
Interestingly, HPMC has been tested as a stabilizer for mAb formulations [ 330]. In
one study, different cellulose polymers, including methylcellulose, HPMC, hydroxypropyl
cellulose, and hydroxyethyl cellulose, were used to stabilize 1 mg/mL cetuximab. Among
these, low molecular weight HPMC could efﬁciently stabilize the Ab, with an efﬁciency
comparable with PS80 [ 330]. Similarly, the ability of low molecular weight HPMC to protect
abatacept has been demonstrated [330].
HPMC is classiﬁed as GRAS, included in the FDA Inactive Ingredients Database for use
in ophthalmic and nasal formulations, oral capsules, suspensions, syrups, and tablets, and
listed in the Canadian list of acceptable non-medicinal ingredients [ 161,291]. A high oral
dosage of HPMC has been evaluated for the treatment of postprandial insulinemia [ 329]
and metabolic syndromes such as hypertension, proinﬂammatory or inﬂammatory state,
prothrombotic state, atherogenic dyslipidemia, and insulin resistance [331].
Based on the above-debated information, more profound research is worth being dedi-
cated to the investigation of the ability of HPMC to stabilize protein formulations, degrada-
tion of the molecule, and the safety of the excipient following intravenous administration.
 Dextrans
Dextrans (Figure 3e), complex branched glucans, are another group of carbohydrate-
based polymers capable of protein stabilization through molecular crowding effect [ 332].
Dextrans can reduce the adsorption of the proteins to the liquid/air interface [ 53], thus
preventing the aggregation and denaturation thereof in liquid formulations. They can
also help maintain protein structural integrity during freezing, drying, and storage in the
solid state [ 333]. Within the context of the last point, the molecular weight of dextran
is a determining factor for the extent of protein stabilization. In a study comparing the
efﬁciency of dextrans with different molecular weights ranging from 12 kD to 2000 kD on
the structural stability of freeze-dried protein, the medium molecular weight of 512 kD was
shown to be most effective [ 334]. The reasons behind the differences in protein stability
among various molecular weight dextrans remain unknown [334].
The drawback of dextrans for protein stabilization lays in their tendency to form
polymerprotein aggregates. This occurs through a Maillard reaction between the protein’s
primary amines and dextran’s reducing ends. Typically, these reactions are observed
following storage at temperatures over 50C within the course of days. For some proteins,
such as those of blood origin, the reaction can occur even following around 6 months of
storage at room temperature or a month at 37C. Dextranol, a form of reduced dextran,
has been shown to solve this problem, thereby serving a more efﬁcient lyoprotectant [ 335].
Dextrans are FDA-approved and already part of several FDA-approved injectable
formulations. However, based on our literature search, there have been a few reports of
side effects in patients. For instance, infusion of dextran 40 (average molecular weight:
40,000 D) has been reported to induce renal diseases in patients with reduced urine ﬂow.
Infusion of dextran 70 (average molecular weight: 70,000 D) might induce hypersensitivity
reactions, such as urticaria, hypotension, and bronchospasm, and milder reactions like
fever and nasal congestion. Despite not being so common, anaphylactic reactions are still
possible when dextran is administered [ 294]. In fact, a case of anaphylactic reaction to
dextrans as a component of the BCG (Bacillus Calmette–Gu érin) vaccine and remimazolam
formulation has been reported [336,337].
Despite the potential beneﬁts, it is unclear whether the use of dextrans alone can
confer adequate stability to the protein biopharmaceuticals. Here again, the polymers can
be used, potentially in combination with a more surface-active excipient, as potential PS
alternatives, or else serve as a backbone for further chemical modiﬁcations to enhance their
surface-active properties.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 25 of 52
3.3. Amino Acid-Based Stabilizers
 Amino acids
Certain amino acids and their derivatives can inhibit protein aggregation and promote
protein refolding. Many of these are neutral osmo-protective molecules, e.g., proline [ 338],
taurine [ 339], glycine [ 340], arginine [ 341], etc. The mechanism behind this phenomenon
is rather diverse depending on the type of amino acid and the protein in question. As a
detailed discussion of these is out of the scope of the current paper, the reader is referred
to an elegant review by Mojtabavi et al. (2019) for further information [ 342]. While the
effect of amino acids upon protein stability seems to be protein dependent, arginine has
been proposed as a “universal” protein stabilizer and aggregation suppressor. Arginine has
been long since shown to reduce the thermally and dilution-induced particle formation of
proteins such as lysozyme [ 341,343], recombinant plasminogen activator (rPA) [ 343], and
lactoferrin. Another advantage of arginine is its ability to decrease the viscosity of liquid
formulations, as is the case for highly concentrated BSA (275 mg/mL) [ 344], bovine gamma
globuli (250 mg/mL) [ 345], and human gamma globulin (292 mg/mL) [ 345]. The molec-
ular mechanisms through which arginine fulﬁlls this are poorly understood. In solution,
arginine molecules tend to self-associate [ 346]. These supramolecular assemblies provide
a hydrophobic environment, which might interfere with the hydrophobic association of
the proteins, thus preventing protein aggregation [ 346]. Furthermore, the presence of the
carboxyl group in the arginine structure ensures enough interaction with the protein to
enable the stabilization of the partially unfolded intermediates, but not so strong to induce
protein unfolding [ 347]. Within the course of dehydration during freeze-drying, protonated
arginine can provide protein stability through the formation of effective bonds therewith,
partially attributable to the additional hydrogen binding of the protonated side chain of the
amino acid. It may also be favored by ion-dipole interactions between the protein and the
cationic charge of the amino acid [ 348]. Other amino acids, such as histidine and lysine,
which behave like arginine by virtue of comprising a cationic sidechain in their structure,
can also serve as effective stabilizers of mAbs [ 349]. Besides arginine, histidine, which is
primarily used as a buffering agent [350], has been reported to stabilize mAbs as well.
A more recent publication demonstrated that arginine could improve the stability
of high concentration protein solution. Here, Bramham et al. (2021) compared high
concentrated mAb formulation (171 mg/mL) with and without 100 mM arginine after
storage at 4C and 40C for 4 weeks. Antibody aggregation was not found in samples
stored at standard refrigerated conditions (4C) but under stressed conditions (40C).
However, the formulation with 100 mM arginine was more stable and displayed less
antibody aggregation at 40C compared to the formulation without arginine [351].
Amino acids are GRAS and FDA-approved for use in different drug products, in-
cluding injectable formulations [ 352]. A thorough assessment of the safety of different
amino acids for cosmetic use is published [ 352]. Many amino acids are available as sterile
solutions for use in pharmacy admixture programs for the preparation of intravenously
injectable ﬂuids. Among these, however, the safety of arginine is most widely investigated,
as it is already marketed as R-Gene®10 for direct intravenous infusion. The product
contains 10 g arginine hydrochloride to stimulate the pituitary for the release of hGH [ 353].
Intravenous infusion of R-Gene®10 in 1670 patients has been well-tolerated. With the
exception of single case reports, the only prevalent adverse effect reported by 3% of the
patients has been non-speciﬁc side effects such as nausea, vomiting, headache, ﬂushing,
numbness, and local venous irritation [ 353]. In one study, intravenous infusion of 30 g
L-arginine, as well as oral intake of 10 g L-arginine in healthy subjects was shown to be
well-tolerated [ 354]. Within this context, no signiﬁcant change in the vital signs and no
adverse reactions was observed [ 354]. On the other hand, 30-min-long infusion of 30 g of
L-arginine in healthy subjects has also been shown to reduce peripheral arteriolar tone and
inhibit platelet aggregation through the increase in nitric oxide formation [ 355]. According
to the data submitted to the European Chemical Agency (ECHA), orally administered LD 50
of arginine in male and female Wistar rats has been greater than the administered dosage,Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 26 of 52
i.e., 5110 mg/kg body weight [ 356]. Tsubuku et al. (2004) performed cytotoxicity studies
with rats to evaluate the toxicity of arginine when given at concentrations of 1.25%, 2.5%,
and 5% w/wfor a period of 13 weeks, followed by a 5-week-long recovery phase [ 357]. The
results showed no signiﬁcant impact of L-arginine upon parameters such as body weight,
organ weight, as well as histopathology and ophthalmology indicators. In the group having
received the highest dose (5% w/w), an elevated blood glucose level, though still within the
physiological range, as well as an increase in hemoglobin, along with a tendency toward
increased erythrocyte counts was observed in some animals [ 357]. According to a literature
review presented in document provided by the FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research, L-arginine has no adverse effect on animal reproduction, is not genotoxic, and is
not expected to be carcinogenic, given that it is a naturally occurring amino acid [ 358]. The
same document reports the safe level of arginine oral intake in healthy adults to be about
20,000 mg/day [358].
In conclusion, being safe and FDA-approved for parenteral administration, amino
acids provide viable options as stabilizers of protein formulations. However, they are asso-
ciated with the drawback of the complexity of their effect upon different proteins in various
biotherapeutic formulations. Accordingly, the type and concentration of the stabilizing
amino acids for each speciﬁc protein formulation must be individually optimized.
 Natural polyamines
Low molecular weight aliphatic polycations, polyamines, are ubiquitous highly
charged molecules synthesized from arginine, ornithine, and methionine [ 359]. Naturally
occurring polyamines have been demonstrated to prevent the heat-induced aggregation
and inactivation of proteins [ 360]. Kudou et al. (2003) reported the efﬁciency of sper-
midine and spermine polyamines (Figure 4) on the aggregation inhibition of lysozyme
heated at 98Cfor 30 min, though 50% of the protein had lost its activity as a result of
severe thermal stress [ 360]. Putrescine, a third polyamine (Figure 4), managed to prevent
aggregation under the same conditions, although it resulted in a preservation of a mere
15% of the lysozyme residual activity. Under identical conditions, Okanojo et al. (2005)
investigated the efﬁciency of different monoamines and diamines in terms of lysozyme
aggregation inhibition [361] . Unlike polyamines, monoamine compounds were not able
to prevent lysozyme thermal aggregation. Diamines, on the other hand, yielded bet-
ter results compared to monoamines [ 361]. It should be noted, however, that the stabi-
lizing effect of polyamines has been only established in case of formulations with low
protein concentrations (0.2 mg/mL). Accordingly, their ability to prevent protein inacti-
vation and particle formation in HCLF needs to be further investigated. Furthermore,
whether these can protect protein integrity in face of stress factors other than the ther-
mal load is yet to be explored. Finally, the investigation of the safety and tolerability of
these stabilizers is another vital aspect that requires more detailed investigation. In one
study, the safety and tolerability of orally administered spermidine from plant extract
in mice and older adults was conﬁrmed [ 362]. In a different study, Til et al. (1997) in-
vestigated the acute and subacute toxicity of 5 different polyamines, namely tyramine,
spermidine, spermine, putrescine, and cadaverine, in Wistar rats [ 363]. They established
an oral acute toxicity dose of 2000, 600, and 600 mg/kg body weight for putrescine, sper-
midine, and spermine, respectively [ 363]. In subacute toxicity studies, spermine was the
most toxic when given at the highest possible concentration. Based on these studies, the
no-observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) for the investigated polyamines following oral
administration was reported to be 2000 ppm (180 mg/kg body weight/day) for putrescine,
tyramine, and cadaverine, 1000 ppm ( 83 mg/ kg body weight/day ) for spermidine, and
200 ppm ( 19 mg/kg body weight/day ) for spermine [ 363]. The study also cast a look
on the effect of intravenous injection of these polyamines upon the blood pressure of
the rats. The results demonstrated that apart from tyramine, all polyamines resulted in
dose-dependent hypotension.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 27 of 52
Pharmaceutics 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 27 of 56 
 
 and spermine polyamines (Figure 4) on the aggregation inhibition of lysozyme heated at 
98 °C for 30 min, though 50% of the protein had lo st its activity as a result of severe thermal 
stress [360]. Putrescine, a third polyamine (Figure 4), managed to prevent aggregation 
under the same conditions, although it resulted in a preservation of a mere 15% of the 
lysozyme residual activity. Under identical co nditions, Okanojo et al. (2005) investigated 
the efficiency of different monoamines and diamines in terms of lysozyme aggregation 
inhibition [361]. Unlike polyamines, monoamine compounds were not able to prevent ly-
sozyme thermal aggregation. Diamines, on the other hand, yielded better results com-pared to monoamines [361]. It should be noted,  however, that the stabilizing effect of pol-
yamines has been only established in case of formulations with low protein concentrations 
(0.2 mg/mL). Accordingly, their ability to prevent protein inactivation and particle for-mation in HCLF needs to be further investigated. Furthermore, whether these can protect 
protein integrity in face of stress factors other than the thermal load is yet to be explored. 
Finally, the investigation of the safety and tolerability of these stabilizers is another vital 
aspect that requires more detailed investigation. In one study, the safety and tolerability 
of orally administered spermidine from plant extract in mice and older adults was con-firmed [362]. In a different study, Til et al . (1997) investigated the acute and subacute tox-
icity of 5 different polyamines, namely tyramine, spermidine, spermine, putrescine, and cadaverine, in Wistar rats [363]. They established an oral acute toxicity dose of 2000, 600, 
and 600 mg/kg body weight for putrescine, sp ermidine, and spermine, respectively [363]. 
In subacute toxicity studies, spermine was the most toxic when given at the highest pos-
sible concentration. Based on these studies, the no-observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) 
for the investigated polyamines following oral administration was reported to be 2000 ppm (180 mg/kg body weight/day) for putr escine, tyramine, and cadaverine, 1000 ppm 
(83 mg/ kg body weight/day) for spermidine , and 200 ppm (19 mg/kg body weight/day) 
for spermine [363]. The study also  cast a look on the effect of intravenous injection of these 
polyamines upon the blood pressure of the rats. The results demonstrated that apart from 
tyramine, all polyamines resulted in dose-dependent hypotension. 
 
Figure 4. Structures of low molecular weight polyamines used in the prevention of heat-induced 
aggregation and inactivation of proteins. 
• Albumin 
Albumin, the most prevalent plasma protein, is an effective stabilizer for protecting 
other proteins from denaturation and aggregation [364]. This is partially governed by the 
ability of albumin to competitively inhibit protein adsorption to the interfaces [365], as the 
methyl and carboxylic groups of the protein interact with hydrophobic hydrophilic 
phases, respectively [366]. Furthermore, the chemical structure of albumin enables the 
protection of other proteins through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions [367], as well as through intermolecular structure formation [368]. 
By virtue of the above-debated, and based on its favorable safety profile, albumin has 
been used to stabilize different interferon (IFN) formulations. Commercially available ex-amples include IntronA
® and Betaseron®, where albumin has been exploited to prevent or 
reduce particle formation [369]. Usually, higher concentrations of the human serum 
Commented [M3]: Please remove “(initially 
10,000 mg/kg and subsequently reduced to 5000 mg/kg from day 4)” 
Figure 4. Structures of low molecular weight polyamines used in the prevention of heat-induced
aggregation and inactivation of proteins.
 Albumin
Albumin, the most prevalent plasma protein, is an effective stabilizer for protecting
other proteins from denaturation and aggregation [ 364]. This is partially governed by the
ability of albumin to competitively inhibit protein adsorption to the interfaces [ 365], as the
methyl and carboxylic groups of the protein interact with hydrophobic hydrophilic phases,
respectively [ 366]. Furthermore, the chemical structure of albumin enables the protection of
other proteins through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions [ 367], as well as through
intermolecular structure formation [368].
By virtue of the above-debated, and based on its favorable safety proﬁle, albumin
has been used to stabilize different interferon (IFN) formulations. Commercially available
examples include IntronA®and Betaseron®, where albumin has been exploited to prevent
or reduce particle formation [ 369]. Usually, higher concentrations of the human serum
albumin (HSA) are used in the case of IFN- formulations, as these have higher aggregation
tendencies compared to the IFN- products [ 369]. As albumin has been shown to have
antioxidant properties, it might also prevent or mitigate protein oxidation [370].
Constituting more than 50% of the plasma proteins, albumin is safe for parenteral
use, is non-toxic, and has non-irritant properties. It is included in the FDA Inactive
Ingredients Database for intravenous injections and infusions, subcutaneous injectables,
nasal formulations, and oral dosage forms, and is also listed under the Canadian list of
acceptable non-medicinal ingredients [ 161,291]. Anaphylactic reactions are possible, but
not so common. It might, however, lead to minor side effects such as urticaria, skin rash,
nausea, vomiting, chills, and febrile reactions [291].
Notwithstanding the listed beneﬁts, the use of albumin in protein formulations is
fraught by several drawbacks. The ﬁrst is well-known in the case of IFN formulations,
where the molecular interactions between the two proteins can lead to the formation of
albumin–IFN aggregates. These aggregates are currently the paramount suspects behind
the immunogenicity of IFN formulations [ 23]. One strategy to overcome this issue has
been the design of a genetic fusion protein, albinterferon- -2b. This albumin derivative
has shown considerable stability towards stress-inducing conditions such as agitation and
high-temperature storage [371].
While HSA remains an established stabilizer for the improvement of the storage sta-
bility of lyophilized protein and mAb formulations [ 256,367], it is also associated with
the concern of immunogenicity and blood-transmitted diseases [ 256]. Being of animal
origin, the same concerns also apply to BSA [ 256]. An approach to tackle this has been the
design of recombinant albumin. In one early study, Tarelli et al. (1998) compared the ability
of recombinant albumin with HSA in terms of stabilizing three lyophilized preparations
containing thyroid-stimulating hormone, interleukin-15 and ranulocyte colony-stimulating
factor [ 372]. The ﬁndings conﬁrmed the comparable ability of the recombinant albumin to
HSA in terms of preserving the immunological, biological, and biochemical properties of all
three proteins [ 372]. Furthermore, both forms of albumin showed similar physicochemical
characteristics, e.g., similar binding afﬁnity to fatty acids [ 372]. Hence, recombinant albu-
min can provide a viable excipient for the stabilization of protein biologicals. It has to bePharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 28 of 52
mentioned, that the exact formulation composition, of commercially available recombinant
albumin is barely disclosed.
3.4. Synthetic Amphiphilic Polymers
Another group of potential excipients for protein stabilization includes the synthetic
amphiphilic polymers. These are debated here separately from the surfactant polymers
considering their limited surface-active properties in comparison to the latter group. The
advantage of synthetic polymers lies within the modiﬁability of their chemical structure,
molecular weight, and functionality, depending on the requirements of the formulation.
Some of these are already used as excipients in intravenously injected formulations, while
others still lack an acceptable regulatory status.
 Polyether polyols
The most famous members of this category are PEGs (Figure 5a), which have also been
included in the structure of various non-ionic surfactants. Chemical conjugation of PEGs to
various drugs is a highly sought-after method to enhance the drug solubility, improve the
drug stability, and prolong the drug’s residence time in the systemic circulation. Proteins
have been no exception, and different PEG–protein conjugates have been developed thus
far. Chemical conjugation of the PEG moiety to therapeutic proteins can reduce the aggre-
gation of the latter, probably attributable to the steric shielding of the protein’s superﬁcial
hydrophobic patches [ 373]. Short-chain PEGs have been shown to even protect the protein
intracorporeally, reducing its proteolytic degradability either through interacting with the
protein surface or else extending into the solvent [ 374]. Notwithstanding, the covalent bind-
ing of the PEGs to the proteins is associated with the disadvantage of requiring chemical
processing that can potentially inﬂuence the proteins’ biological activity. It also mandates
subsequent additional steps, including characterization and puriﬁcation. Fortunately, to
protect the protein integrity, PEGs do not necessarily need to be covalently bound thereto.
When used in optimal molar ratios, free PEGs of a higher molecular weight have been
shown to maintain the thermal stability of BSA and urokinase during lyophilization and
thermal stress, respectively [ 375,376]. However, considering the signiﬁcantly lower sur-
face activity of PEGs compared to PS surfactants, the efﬁciency of the polymer to reduce
monomer loss or particle generation is inferior to the latter. It also shares the drawback of
sensitivity to auto-oxidation [ 44]. A third drawback of PEGs and PEG-containing molecules,
that has been previously elaborated on, is their tendency to induce mild to life-threatening
immunogenic and hypersensitivity reactions [ 226]. Combined, these drawbacks highlight
the necessity of searching for more suitable polyether polyols with potential to serve as
PS alternatives.
Poly (propylene glycols) (PPGs; Figure 5a) is another polyether polyol exploited for
the stabilization of protein formulations. A patent published by Reform Biologics (2019)
investigated PPGs of different molecular weights (PPG 425, 1000, 2000) in terms of their
ability to stabilize a solution of 2 mg/mL cetuximab exposed to continuous shaking stress
(275 rpm) for 16 and 40 h at ambient temperature. The results demonstrated a comparable
performance of PPGs to PS80 and a superior effect compared to PEG 1000 and HPMC [ 330].
In general, PPGs have been shown to possess higher surface-activity than PEGs. For
instance, the surface tension of PEG and PPG hydrogels with a bulk concentration of
1.5 g/L has been measured as 36.58 and 33.01 mN/m, respectively [ 377]. Nonetheless, the
protein stabilization of the PPGs is hypothesized to be a function of direct interaction with
the protein molecules rather than interfacial competition [ 44]. From a safety perspective,
PPGs are also FDA-approved excipients, mainly used in oral and topical formulations.
Combined, these characteristics raise hope that PPGs might be viable PS alternatives for
protein stabilization. Nevertheless, two issues need to be addressed in respect to these
excipients. The ﬁrst issue relates to the stability of these polymers, and whether they
are also prone to undergoing auto-oxidative reactions. The second issue is the potential
immunogenicity of the polymer. To our best of knowledge, no reports of immunogenicity
and hypersensitivity to PPGs are currently available. However, cross-reactivity betweenPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 29 of 52
anti-PEG Abs and PPGs has been observed [ 378]. Thus, a thorough investigation of the
stability and immunogenicity of these polymers inspires further research.
Pharmaceutics 2022 , 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 29 of 56 
 
 disadvantage of requiring chemical processing that can potentially influence the proteins’ 
biological activity. It also mandates subsequent additional steps, including characteriza-
tion and purification. Fortunately, to protect the protein integrity, PEGs do not necessarily need to be covalently bound thereto. When used in optimal molar ratios, free PEGs of a 
higher molecular weight have been shown to maintain the thermal stability of BSA and 
urokinase during lyophilization and thermal st ress, respectively [375,376]. However, con-
sidering the significantly lower surface activity of PEGs compared to PS surfactants, the 
efficiency of the polymer to reduce monomer loss or particle generation is inferior to the latter. It also shares the drawback of sensitivity to auto-oxidation [44]. A third drawback 
of PEGs and PEG-containing molecules, that has been previously elaborated on, is their 
tendency to induce mild to life-threatening  immunogenic and hypersensitivity reactions 
[226]. Combined, these drawbacks highlight the necessity of searching for more suitable 
polyether polyols with potential to serve as PS alternatives. 
 
Figure 5. Chemical structures of synthetic amphiphilic polymers with potential to serve as PS alter-
natives: ( a) Polyether polyols, ( b) Sulfobetaine and its derivatives as examples of polyampholates.  
Poly (propylene glycols) (PPG s; Figure 5a) is another polyether polyol exploited for 
the stabilization of protein formulations. A pa tent published by Reform Biologics (2019) 
investigated PPGs of different molecular weights (PPG 425, 1000, 2000) in terms of their 
ability to stabilize a solution of 2 mg/mL ce tuximab exposed to continuous shaking stress 
(275 rpm) for 16 and 40 h at ambient temperat ure. The results demonstrated a comparable 
performance of PPGs to PS80 and a superior effect compared to PEG 1000 and HPMC [330]. In general, PPGs have been shown to possess higher surface-activity than PEGs. For 
instance, the surface tension of PEG and PPG hydrogels with a bulk concentration of 1.5 
g/L has been measured as 36.58 and 33.01 mN/m, respectively [377]. Nonetheless, the pro-
tein stabilization of the PPGs is hypothesized to be a function of direct interaction with the protein molecules rather than interfacial competition [44]. From a safety perspective, PPGs are also FDA-approved excipients, mainly used in oral and topical formulations. 
Combined, these characteristics raise hope that PPGs might be viable PS alternatives for 
protein stabilization. Nevertheless, two issues need to be addressed in respect to these excipients. The first issue relates to the stab ility of these polymers, and whether they are 
also prone to undergoing auto-oxidative reac tions. The second issue is the potential im-
munogenicity of the polymer. To our best of knowledge, no reports of immunogenicity and hypersensitivity to PPGs are currently available. However, cross-reactivity between 
Figure 5. Chemical structures of synthetic amphiphilic polymers with potential to serve as PS
alternatives: ( a) Polyether polyols, ( b) Sulfobetaine and its derivatives as examples of polyampholates.
 Polyampholytes
Polyampholytes are a subclass of zwitterionic materials that contain opposite charges
on different monomer subunits [ 379]. An example of these materials is the sulfobetaine-
based polymers (Figure 5b). Rajan et al. (2017) reported poly-sulfobetaine (poly-SPB) to
suppress thermal aggregation of lysozyme as a model protein [ 380]. The polymer showed
a good protective effect against conformational changes and helped retain more than 85%
protein activity following exposure to elevated temperatures. Furthermore, the zwitteri-
onic polymer has been shown to suppress the aggregation-induced collision within the
misfolded protein hydrophobic domains [ 380]. Employing the same sulfobetaine backbone,
poly-SPB was copolymerized with a hydrophobic monomer, butyl methacrylate, to pro-
duce copolymers with variable degrees of hydrophobicity [ 381]. The polymer was used to
stabilize insulin upon exposure to 37C for 24 h. The results demonstrated no turbidity,
which is often observed in inadequately stabilized formulations after 7 h of incubation.
Another zwitterionic polymer with similar properties was synthesized by Zhao et al. (2019),
where a poly-SPB was grafted to an "-poly-L-lysine-succinic anhydride carboxylated
backbone [ 382]. Compared to the unmodiﬁed poly-SPB, the grafted polymer yielded bet-
ter thermal aggregation inhibition of lysozyme [ 382]. These synthesized polymers have
shown promising protein particle formation inhibition at elevated temperatures. However,
their chemical stability, safety, and suitability for parenteral biotherapeutic formulations
remains uncovered.
3.5. Ionic Liquids
Organic salts with low melting points (typically < 100C) and often liquid at room
temperature, ionic liquids have recently gained remarkable interest for the stabilization
different proteins [ 383]. These are mostly made of an asymmetric organic cation in combi-
nation with an organic or inorganic anion. Considering the million possible anion/cation
combinations, the properties of ionic liquids are highly tunable [ 383]. Ionic liquids are often
classiﬁed as protic and aprotic, with the base being quaternized by protons in case of the
former and an alkyl group in case of the latter [ 384]. Accordingly, protic ionic liquids oftenPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 30 of 52
serve as hydrogen bond donors, whereas their aprotic counterparts act as hydrogen bond
acceptors [ 383]. Ionic liquids can be exploited to improve various stages of the development
of protein formulations, including protein extraction, separation, crystallization, solubi-
lization, and stabilization [ 385]. Within the context of protein stabilization, ionic liquids
have been both investigated as neat solvents and as co-solvents in aqueous solutions [ 383].
However, considering the high viscosity of the ionic liquids, their hypertonicity in the neat
form, their limited ability to dissolve high concentrations of proteins, and the reduced
activity of many proteins (enzymes) therein, the use of ionic liquids as cosolvents for protein
stabilization in aqueous solutions has been more widely sought after [ 383,386]. Depending
on the anion charge density as well as the presence or length of an alkyl group on the cation,
and perhaps the anion, ionic liquids can behave in a hydrophilic or a hydrophobic manner
in aqueous solutions [383].
Literature holds many favorable reports conﬁrming the ability of different ionic liquids
in protein stabilization. For instance, ammonium-based ionic liquids have been shown
to increase the denaturation temperature of insulin, and to prevent the aggregation and
increase the amount of the monomeric, i.e., the active form of the protein [ 387]. Further-
more, they have been shown to induce refolding and renaturation of chemically unfolded
lysozyme [ 388,389]. Summers and Flowers (2000) have proposed the protein stabilization
mediated by the ammonium-based ionic liquids to originate from both the interaction of
their hydrophobic groups with the hydrophobic sections of the protein and the subsequent
inhibition of intermolecular association thereof, as well as the ability of the charged portion
of the compound to stabilize the protein’s secondary structure [ 388]. Ammonium-based
ionic liquids have also been shown to protect proteins against thermal stress [ 390]. For in-
stance, ethylammonium formate (EAF), 2-methoxyethylammonium formate (MOEAF) and
propylammonium formate (PAF; up to 62.5% w/w) have been shown to effectively induce
lysozyme refolding following exposure to a temperature of 90C, while ethanolammonium
formate (EtAF) could completely protect lysozyme against thermal-induced denaturation
under the same conditions [ 390]. A second group of ionic liquids, imidazolium-based salts
can also exert a stabilizing effect on some proteins under the right conditions [383]. These
have been shown to successfully preserve the native form of lysozyme and to increase the
melting point of the enzyme, thereby improving the protein’s thermal stability [ 391]. The
formulation of horse heart cytochrome C in 1 mM aqueous solution of 1-methyl-3-octyl im-
idazolium chloride and 1-decyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride could maintain the stability
of the protein for up to 6 months when stored at room temperature [ 392]. Similarly, studies
have indicated that N’-alkyl and N /acute.ts1-(!-hydroxyalkyl)-N-methylimidazolium chlorides
can facilitate the refolding of lysozyme and single-chain antibody fragment, although
destabilization was observed with increasing salt concentration [ 393]. As a last example,
1-ethyl 3-methyl imidazolium ethyl sulfate and 1-ethyl 3-methyl imidazolium chloride
could enable the refolding of chemically denatured serum albumin [394].
While the ability of some ionic liquids in the stabilization of certain proteins has been
demonstrated, the underlying interactions are yet to be fully understood [ 384]. This is in
part due to the structural diversity of the proteins and ionic liquids, and is further compli-
cated by the presence of water, which forms hydrogen bonds with both components [ 384].
Constatinescu et al. (2010) have demonstrated that, depending the nature of the ions,
ionic liquids can have both stabilizing and destabilizing effects on RNase A as a model
protein [ 395]. They have also demonstrated that regardless of their stabilizing/destabilizing
abilities, all tested ionic liquids were able to inhibit protein aggregation when used in the
“right concentration” [ 395]. A detailed discussion of the why behind the controversial
stabilizing/destabilizing effect of ionic liquids on different proteins is out of the scope of
the current paper. For detailed information, the reader is referred to an elegant review by
Zhao (2016) [ 396]. In general, however, the stabilizing/destabilizing effect of ionic liquids
on different proteins seem to originate from and intricate interplay of various properties of
these solvents, including their hydrogen binding capacity, log P , nature of the anions (the
Hofmeister ion series) and cations, and the alkyl chain length of the cation [ 385]. One ofPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 31 of 52
the most important factors is the concentration of the salt, where higher concentrations
lead to more intense interactions with the protein, which facilitates the destabilization of
the latter [ 393,397,398]. Bisht et al. (2015) demonstrated that the protein stabilizing effect
of ammonium-based ionic liquids against thermal stress is reversely correlated with the
concentration of the salt, as in the presence of highly concentrated ionic liquids the strong
interaction between the ions and the amino acid residues of the protein becomes highly
favorable [ 397]. In addition to the concentration, the type of the anion is also determinant of
the outcome of ionic liquids’ interaction with the proteins. Kumar et al. (2014) observed that
short-chain imidazolium salts based on Br and Cl stabilized insulin, whereas anions such
as SCN , HSO 4 , CH 3COO , and I acted as denaturants [ 399]. Similar ﬁndings have
been reported by Kumar et al. (2017), who established the efﬁciency of imidazolium salts in
stabilizing stem bromelain to be in the order of Cl > Br > I , which is in accordance with
the Hofmeister series [ 400]. The length of the alkyl group on the cation is also a determining
factor. For instance, the loss of the activity of adenosine deaminase was signiﬁcantly higher
in the presence of the more hydrophobic 1-octyl 3-methyl-imidozolium chloride than the
less hydrophobic shorter-chain 1-allyl 3-methyl-imidazolium [ 401]. Similarly, short- and
medium-chain imidazolium-based ionic liquids performed superior to their long-chain
counterparts in terms of preserving the stability of green ﬂuorescent proteins [402].
Despite the promising ﬁndings supporting the potential of ionic liquids for efﬁcient
protein stabilization, the application of these as excipients in biotherapeutic formulations
requires addressing a number of issues. First and foremost, the controversial effect of
ionic liquids on the stability of different proteins necessitates the screening of potential
protein–ionic liquid pairs. This requires suitable analytical methods for the prediction of
the stabilization/destabilization outcome in the pre-formulation step. To this date, dif-
ferent techniques have been used to examine the effect of ionic liquids upon the stability
of various proteins. These include ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectroscopy, far and near
UV circular dichroism, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, in-
trinsic tryptophan ﬂuorescence, DLS, small-angle X-ray scattering, small angel neutron
scattering, tensiometry, microcalorimetry, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) [ 385].
Cheng et al. (2019) have proposed19F NMR as a simple analytical technique to study ther-
modynamics of the protein stability and protein–protein interactions in ionic liquids [ 403].
However, Bui-Le et al. (2020) have argued that considering the complex nature of the
interactions between different ionic liquids and proteins, a single technique investigation is
potentially not conclusive, and a multi-technique analytical framework is needed to paint a
complete picture of the underlying interactions [ 386]. The multi-technique analytical frame-
work proposed by the authors included a combination of circular dichroism, ﬂuorescence,
UV-Vis spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy, and small-angle X-ray scattering [386].
The second issue pertains to the isotonicity of these formulations. Isotonicity is one
of the important characteristics of parenteral formulations to be strived towards [ 404].
Should protein stabilization require high ionic liquid concentrations (e.g., >50% w/w),
issues related to the hypertonicity of the ﬁnal formulation will be unavoidable [ 383]. This
might be an issue, even when ionic liquids are used in lower amounts [ 405]. For instance,
a formulation containing 12% w/wcholine dihydrogenphosphate has an osmolality of
about 1520 mOsm/kg [ 405]. This level of osmolality is far beyond the near physiological
levels (300–600 mOsm/kg), which renders this formulation questionable for intravenous
bolus injection [ 405]. One potential approach to overcome such problems is to consider
diluting the preparation before administration, or to infuse the formulation with an adjusted
rate [ 383,406]. Alternatively, other routes of administration can be considered. For instance,
the intramuscular administration of 0.5 mL of a hypertonic formulation with an osmolality
up to 1100 mOsm/kg has been reported to be well-tolerated [406].
A last, but highly essential, issue with the use of ionic liquids is their under-investigated
toxicity and biocompatibility in humans [ 407]. To this date, the toxicity of ionic liquids for
bacteria, fungi, plants, and certain small animals such as Danio rerio (zebra ﬁsh), Mytilus
galloprovincialis ,Artemia salina ,Caenorhabditis elegans, and Galleria mellonella has been in-Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 32 of 52
vestigated and elegantly reviewed by Gonçalves et al. (2021) [ 408]. Currently, the only
available data regarding the toxicity of ionic liquids for humans are those obtained based
on cell culture studies on HeLa, CaCo-2, and HT-29 cells [ 409]. The results are indeed
dependent on the type of ionic liquid used for these experiments, as well as the cell line
under investigation [ 409]. In a comparative study, the cytotoxicity of 31 different ionic
liquids for normal human dermal ﬁbroblasts was investigated [ 410]. The results showed
imidazolium-based ionic liquids combined with dialkyl phosphate anions or with the ethyl
sulfate anion to have the lowest toxicity [ 410]. A different study comparing the toxicity of
eight different ionic liquids, including imidazolium-based salts, established the choline-
based ionic liquids as the type with the lowest toxicity for HeLa cells [ 411]. In general, the
ﬁndings of toxicological studies seem to point out that the toxicity of ionic liquids mostly
pertains to the toxicity of the anionic and cationic precursors used for the synthesis and
which remain as impurities in the ionic liquids [ 412]. The most important factors within
this context are the length of the alkyl chain, as well as the branching and hydrophobicity
of the cation [ 412]. By decreasing the hydrophobicity of the side chain through the addition
of hydrophilic functional groups (e.g., hydroxyls, nitriles, and polar ethers), their inter-
action with the cell membrane and the subsequent cytotoxicity of these solvents will be
reduced [ 412]. Moreover, the increase in the size of the anion can increase the toxicity of
the ionic liquids, as demonstrated by Weaver et al. (2010), who compared the toxicity of
choline-based ionic liquids containing ﬁve phosphate anions of varying sizes [ 413]. In all,
the increasing knowledge of the factors determining the toxicity of ionic liquids raises hope
that by choosing biocompatible, biodegradable, and non-toxic cations and counter anions,
a new generation of safe, non-toxic, biocompatible, and even biodegradable ionic liquids
can be synthetized [ 412]. Until then, the potential of ionic liquids to serve as PS alternatives
in protein therapeutic formulations will remain limited.
4. Discussion
Recent decades have witnessed a rapid rise in the development of protein biother-
apeutics for the treatment of various disorders, as these provide higher speciﬁcity and
lower side effects when compared to small molecular drugs in many cases. The formula-
tion of HCLF (high concentration liquid formulations), however, is fraught with unique
complications in terms of maintaining the stability of the therapeutic protein. Under such
conditions, a decrease in the protein solubility, along with the increase of the formulation
viscosity, can threaten the colloidal and conformational stability of the protein therapeutics.
Protein denaturation and aggregation are also promoted through protein adsorption to
various interfaces, as well as through shear and thermal stresses during different stages of
production, packaging, storage, transportation and even administration. As gold standards
for the stabilization of the protein biotherapeutics, PSs (polysorbates) are prevalently used
in the pharmaceutical industry given their compatibility with most bioactives, their ability
to prevent protein aggregation and surface adsorption, and their efﬁciency in protecting
the protein from different stress conditions. According to one of the latest reviews from
Strickley et al. (2021), there are 131 commercially available antibody formulations. From
these, PS80 is contained as the main surfactant in 82 of the commercialized formulations,
followed by PS20, which is contained in 32 commercialized formulations, poloxamer 188
(P188) in only 4 solution formulations, and macrogol in only 1 product [ 160,234]. The
remaining 12 commercialized products do not contain a surfactant [ 234]. To do a compari-
son between surfactants with other excipients regarding their presence in commercially
available antibody formulations is not possible, mainly because other excipients might
have been used to fulﬁll a different role in the formulation. For example, the main ex-
cipients used to adjust tonicity or osmolality and to serve as lyoprotectants are from the
carbohydrate families, and their order of occurrence in approved biological products
issucrose > trehalose > sorbitol > mannitol [234] . Although used as the most prevalent
non-ionic surfactant, PS has been associated with several drawbacks, mainly the suscep-
tibility of the ester bond to chemical and HCP-mediated (host cell proteins) enzymaticPharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 33 of 52
cleavage [74,109,111,122,128,129] , as well as the photo- and auto-oxidation, and the subse-
quent cleavage of the ethylene oxide subunit [68,70,73,107,116,136]. Thus, PS degradation
can culminate in protein denaturation, an increase in the number of visible or sub-visible
particles, and even undesirable mild to severe immunogenic reactions. Hence, the search
for excipients that can offer the advantages of PSs while being devoid of their shortcomings
is still ongoing. Novel excipients which have not been previously used in FDA-approved
drug products or in the food industry can be proposed by excipient manufacturers to the
Novel Excipient Review Pilot Program. This program will address the lack and foster the
development of excipients.
Excipients with the potential to serve as PS alternatives belong to diverse classes. These
can be surfactants, carbohydrate-, and amino acid-based excipients, synthetic amphiphilic
polymers, or perhaps ionic liquids. Table 2 presents a summary of the advantages and
limitations of each class as potential PS alternatives in protein biotherapeutic formulations.
To serve as a suitable PS alternative, the candidate excipient must have several charac-
teristics. In the ﬁrst and foremost place fall three different independent properties, which
are equally important for the selection of a suitable excipient. One is the ability to efﬁciently
stabilize the protein against thermal and mechanical stresses in amounts that are realistic
from a formulation development point of view. The second is, of course, the safety proﬁle
of the excipient for parenteral and particularly intravenous administration and commercial
GMP-availability for parenteral applications, and ﬁnally, the stability of the excipients
under storage conditions during the product’s shelf-life. These three characteristics provide
a chicken and egg scenario, where an excipient with good protein stabilization efﬁciency
but undeﬁned or suboptimal toxicity proﬁle is not suitable for pharmaceutical applica-
tion, and yet toxicological evaluations are not worth being carried out on molecules with
limited protein stabilization efﬁciency. The best solution to this controversy is perhaps to
investigate the protein stabilization efﬁciency of the excipients with already-established
safety proﬁles. Ideally, the excipient should be approved for parenteral and, in particular,
intravenous administration. However, excipients hitherto approved for other routes are
also worth considering, as their further investigation for parenteral administration is easier
to carry out.
In terms of protein stabilization efﬁciency, surfactants are the most promising can-
didates, as they can universally compete with proteins for various interfaces and inhibit
particle formation through direct interaction with certain proteins. For some excipients, the
efﬁciency to stabilize certain proteins has been compared to that of PS20 or PS80 (Table 2).
Table 2 provides a summary of the ﬁndings of the studies dedicated to this subject. As
observed, at least several excipients such as Kolliphor®HS15 [ 204], Kolliphor®EL [204],
Brij®92 [247], and Brij®58 [249] have exhibited comparable, or in some cases, even superior
protein-stabilizing efﬁciency to PSs, rendering them as viable candidates for the debated
purpose. Some non-surfactant excipients, such as HPMC (Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose,
have also been shown to stabilize certain proteins with an efﬁciency comparable with that of
PS80 [ 330]. The ability of other non-surfactant excipients to protect proteins is rather diverse.
Disaccharides and sugar alcohols are better known for their thermal and cryoprotective
effects, and often need to be combined with excipients with higher surface-active properties.
Others, such as albumin, are efﬁcient protectors against both stress conditions. Amino acid
excipients and ionic liquids can both stabilize and destabilize proteins depending on their
nature, concentration, and the structure of the protein in question.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 34 of 52
Table 2. Summary of the available information on the potential alternatives to PSs for the stabilization
of protein biotherapeutic formulations.
ExcipientProtein Stabilization
EfﬁciencyPhysicochemical
StabilityRegulatory Status
and SafetyComparative Studies to PS
SubcategorySurfactantsSucrose fatty
acid estersremains to be investigated. As
in the case of other surfactants,
protection of the protein
integrity through direct
interaction as well as
competitive interface
adsorption is expected.are susceptible to
chemical and
enzymatic cleavage of
ester bond and
enzymatic
degradation of the
sugar moiety- GRAS
- FDA-approved for food and
cosmetic use
- sucrose stearate and sucrose
palmitate: FDA-approved for oral and
topical formulations
- sucrose monopalmitate (0.5 g/kg):
resulted in hemolytic
reactions [183,184]Not available
Sugar monoestersremains to be investigated. As
in the case of other surfactants,
protection of the protein
integrity through direct
interaction, as well as
competitive interface
adsorption being expected.are susceptible to
chemical and
enzymatic cleavage of
ester bond and
enzymatic
degradation of the
sugar moietynontoxic and biodegradable
emulsiﬁers for use in the food
industry [190]Not available
Polyethylene
glycol (PEG)
stearates
and
PEG fatty esterspolyoxyl 15 hydroxy stearate
and polyoxyl 35 castor oil
(Kolliphor®HS 15 and
Kolliphor®EL): protect
amylase and bovine serum
albumin (BSA) from chemical
and mechanical stresses [204].
As in the case of other
surfactants, protection of the
protein integrity through direct
interaction therewith as well as
competitive interface
adsorption is expected.are susceptible to
chemical and
enzymatic cleavage of
ester bond and
oxidation of
POE [203]- PEG 2 stearate: FDA-approved for
topical application
- PEG 8 and 100 stearates :
FDA-approved for oral and
topical application
- PEG 40 stearate : FDA-approved for
ophthalmic, oral, and
topical applications
- polyoxyl 15 hydroxy stearate
and polyoxyl 35 castor oil : FDA
approval for oral, parenteral, and
ophthalmic application
- potential PEG-mediated
immunogenicity and hypersensitivity- polyoxyl 15 hydroxy stearate :
superior toxicity proﬁle to
PS80 [209]
- polyoxyl 15 hydroxy stearate
and polyoxyl 35 castor oil :
comparable efﬁciency in
protecting BSA against
mechanical stress for 7 days [204]
- polyoxyl 35 castor oil : superior
efﬁciency to stabilize amylase in
the presence of H 2O2over a
period of two months [204]
Block polyethylene-
propylene glycols
(Poloxamers®)protect the protein through
direct interaction as well as
competitive interface
adsorptionare susceptible to
thermal oxidation of
PPO block in solid
and liquid states- P188: FDA-approved for intravenous
formulations, part of commercial
biotherapeutic formulations such as
Gazyva®, Orencia®, Norditropin®,
and Hemlibra®
- potential PEG-mediated
immunogenicity and hypersensitivityP188: Comparable efﬁciency with
PSs in stabilizing mAb
formulations, production of
PDMS during long-term storage
due to interactions with the
silicone oil in the stopper in case
of P188 [241], increase of glide
force in preﬁlled syringes by PS,
but not P188
Polyoxyethylene
fatty ethers (Brij®)protect the protein through
direct interaction as well as
competitive interface
adsorption [247,248]might be susceptible
to metal- and
photo-induced
oxidation [78,251]- FDA-approved for
topical administration
- Brij®58: no side effects when
administrated in a concentration of
20 mg/mL in animal toxicological
studies [249]- Brij®92: comparable efﬁciency
to PSs in stabilizing rhGH [247]
- Brij®35: performed inferior to
PSs in improving the mechanical
and thermal stability of mAb, but
superior in protecting the protein
against photo-oxidation [250]
- Brij®58: superior inherent
stability of the surfactant in
protein formulations when
compared to PS20 and PS80 [ ?]
Non-ester
sugar-based
surfactantsn-dodecyl- -D-maltoside:
serves as cryoprotectant for
D-alanine Peptide
T-amide [253], reduces the
aggregation and
immunogenicity of human
IFN-[254], prevents insulin
self-association under
mechanical stress in liquid
state [253]susceptible to
enzymatic
degradation of the
sugar moiety- n-dodecyl- -D-maltoside: classiﬁed
by EPA as non-mutagenic, non-toxic,
and non-irritating [252]
- biodegradable and biocompatibleNot available
N-alkyl amino acid
polyether amidesN-myristoyl phenylalanine
Jeffamine M1000 diamide
(FM1000): protects proteins
from thermal and mechanical
stresses [255,256]FM1000: potential
susceptibility of the
amide bond to
hydrolysis, through
to a signiﬁcantly
lower extent
compared with ester
bond in ester
surfactantsNot availableFM1000: 3-fold more reduction of
thermal-induced abatacept
aggregation compared to PS20
and PS80 [255], inferior, and
superior IgG protection from
agitation-mediated stress
compared to PS80 and PS20,
respectively [256], protein
stabilization from
agitation-mediated stress in IV
bags was superior to both PS20
and PS80 [256]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 35 of 52
Table 2. Cont .
ExcipientProtein Stabilization
EfﬁciencyPhysicochemical
StabilityRegulatory Status
and SafetyComparative Studies to PS
SubcategoryCarbohydratesDisaccharides and
sugar alcohols- protect the proteins against
thermal and to some extent
mechanical stresses in solid
and liquid state, act mostly by
altering protein–solvent
interactions, also serve as
molecular crowders [259,272]
- mostly improve the thermal
stability of the protein
- act as cryoprotectants
- are associated with
inadequate protein protection
necessitating the co-application
of surfactants
- chemical modiﬁcation,
e.g., esteriﬁcation with fatty
acids, etc. improves the protein
stabilization efﬁciencyare susceptible
to enzymatic
degradationFDA-approved, GRAS, established
excipients in the formulation of
intravenously injected formulationsare often used in combination
with PSs to confer proteins
adequate stability
Cyclo-
dextrinsprotect protein either through
direct interaction (in case of
certain proteins with
substantial solvent exposure to
hydrophobic amino-acid
residues [311]) or competitive
interfacial adsorption (in case
of CD with higher
surface-active properties [307]),
dominant mechanism also
depends on protein
concentrationare potentially
susceptible to
enzymatic
degradation- 2-hydroxypropyl- -cyclodextrin;
FDA-approved for ophthalmic and
topical administration
--cyclodextrin : FDA-approved for
intracavitary administration
--cyclodextrin and
sulfobutylether- -cyclodextrin:
FDA-approved for oral, topical,
intramuscular, subcutaneous, and
intravenous administration (GRAS)hydroxypropyl- -cyclodextrin:
reduced the interface-induced
precipitation of porcine growth
hormone through a mechanism
similar to PS20 [307], protects
PS20 from enzymatic
degradation [324] thereby
combination of the two might be
beneﬁcial for overcoming the
drawbacks associated with
PS degradation
Hydroxypropyl
methyl cellulose
(HPMC)efﬁciently stabilizes mAb
formulations such as
cetuximab and abatacept [330]is potentially
susceptible to
enzymatic
degradationFDA-approved, GRAS excipient for
oral, buccal, vaginal, and
nasal administrationstabilization of cetuximab
comparable with PS80 [330]
Dextranstabilize the proteins through a
crowding effect [332], reduce
the surface adsorption of the
proteins in the liquid state [53],
maintain protein structural
integrity during freezing,
drying, and storage in the solid
state [333]potential
susceptibility to
enzymatic
degradationused in several injectable formulations Not availableAmino acid-based stabilizersAmino acids- certain amino acids promote
protein solubilization and
refolding mostly by altering
protein–solvent interactions,
also serve as molecular
crowders, stabilizing effect of
amino acids is protein
dependent
- arginine protects protein in
solution, and acts as a
cryoprotectant [255,256]are not prone to
degradation under
formulation and
storage conditions- GRAS
- FDA-approved for injectable
(intramuscular, intravenous), and
oral formulationsNot available
Polyaminesprotect proteins against
thermal aggregation
and denaturationNot available- oral acute toxicity dose of 2000, 600,
and 600 mg/kg body weight for
putrescine, spermidine, and spermine,
respectively [363]
- no-observed adverse effect level
(NOAEL) following oral
administration was 2000 ppm
(180 mg/kg body weight/day) for
putrescine, 1000 ppm
(83 mg/ kg body weight/day) for
spermidine and 200 ppm
(19 mg/kg body weight/day) for
spermine [363]
oral administration of spermidine in
human and animal models has been
well-tolerated [362]Not available
Albuminprotects protein through direct
interaction as well as
competitive interface
adsorption [365,366,368]is potentially prone to
forming aggregates
with itself or
other proteins- is marketed as an injectable product
on its own, and is approved as an
excipient for injectable formulations
- hypersensitivity and immunological
reactions to albumin-containing IFN
formulations have been reported [23]
- concerns regarding
blood-transmitted diseases in case of
human and bovine serum albuminNot availablePharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 36 of 52
Table 2. Cont .
ExcipientProtein Stabilization
EfﬁciencyPhysicochemical
StabilityRegulatory Status
and SafetyComparative Studies to PS
SubcategorySynthetic amphiphilic polymersPolyether polyols
(PEG)
and
Polypropylene
glycols (PPG)- PEGs : increase protein
stability through covalent
binding, protection of the free
protein from thermal
and lyophilization
stresses [373,374]
- PPGs: protect cetuximab from
agitation-induced stress,
potentially through direct
interaction with the
protein [330]are potentially
susceptible to
oxidation- PEGs : FDA-approved for
intravenous administration,
immunogenicity, and hypersensitivity
to formulations containing PEGs and
their derivatives have been
reported [226]
- PPGs : FDA-approved for oral and
topical formulations, cross-reactivity
of anti-PEG antibodies with PPGs is
possible [378]PPGs: comparable efﬁciency with
PS80 in protecting cetuximab
from agitation-induced
stress [378]
Polyampholytesprotect proteins from thermal
and agitation-induced
stress [380]Not available Not available Not availableIonic liquids- can protect the proteins
against thermal and
storage-mediated
unfolding [387,390–392]
- can induce refolding of
denatured proteins [388,389]
- stabilizing effects depends on
the concentration, the length of
the alkyl chain and the nature
and size of the anion [385]are generally
recognized as highly
stable [414]Toxicity studies have been limited to
bacteria, fungi, plants, small animals,
and human cell lines [408,409]Not available
BSA: bovine serum albumin, CD: cyclodextrin, EPA: environmental Protection Agency, FDA: Food and Drug
Administration, FM100: N-myristoyl phenylala-nine Jeffamine M1000 diamide, GRAS: generally recognized as
safe, HPMC: hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose, IFN- : interferon beta, IgG: immunoglobulin G, IV: intravenous,
mAb: monoclonal antibody, NOAEL: no-observed adverse effect level, P188: poloxamer 188, PEG: polyethyelene
glycol, PDMS: protein–polydimethylsiloxane, ppm: parts per million, PSs: polysorbates, POE: polyethylene oxide,
PPG: polypropylene glycol, PPO: polypropylene oxide, rhGH: recombinant human growth hormone.
Within the context of the safety proﬁle, surfactants such as Kolliphor®HS15, Kolliphor®
EL, P188, and other excipients, including albumin, amino acids, disaccharides, sugar al-
cohol, HP--CD (hydroxypropyl- -cyclodextrin), and dextrans, are most promising as
they are already approved by the FDA for parenteral administration. Others including
PEG (polyethylene glycol) 2, 40, 80, and 100 stearates, Brij®78 and 98, sucrose stearate
and sucrose palmitate, and other types of CDs possess acceptable regulatory status for
use in non-injectable dosage forms, having thereby the potential for further evaluation for
injection purposes. For an excipient to obtain acceptable regulatory status for intravenous
injection, it needs to be, among other things, non-hemolytic, non-toxic, non-immunogenic,
non-carcinogenic, and non-sensitizing. Interestingly, despite the FDA approval, there have
been reports of severe immunogenic and hypersensitivity reactions following the intra-
venous injection of certain excipients. Examples include PSs, PEGs, and PEG-containing
surfactants, as well as albumin–IFN (interferon) aggregates.
A further issue is, of course, the stability of the excipients. Similar to PSs, excipients
comprising an ester bond, such as sugar and PEG esters, suffer from susceptibility to chemi-
cal and enzymatic-mediated hydrolysis. Moreover, many of the debated surfactants contain
a POE (polyethylene oxide) group, which can be prone to auto-oxidation. Poloxamers®
degrade at higher temperatures, initiating from the PPO (polypropylene oxide) center block
and continuing by the breakage of the POE moiety. Carbohydrate excipients might also
be sensitive to enzymatic degradation through host cell polysaccharidase traces. To what
extent this is the case for each carbohydrate subclass, and how much it can exacerbate
the quality of the formulation, however, remains to be investigated. Even in the case of
potential instability of a given excipient, the rate of degradation and the minimum con-
centration required to protect the integrity of the protein are relevant factors that need to
be considered. Despite predisposition to degradation, an excipient might still serve as a
suitable PS alternative if a slower degradation rate is observed, or in case the surfactant
can maintain protein stability even at lower concentrations. On a ﬁnal note, on the subject,
the availability or development of suitable analytical methods is a prerequisite for thePharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 37 of 52
investigation of the excipient stability and the detection and quantiﬁcation of the potential
degradation products.
A last issue, which is perhaps less considered, is the compatibility of the excipient
not only with other formulation components, but also with the primary packaging. For
instance, due to interaction with silicone oil, P188 has been shown to generate large
PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) particles over long-term storage in vials with siliconized
stoppers [ 241]. Such ﬁndings, need however, to be further investigated. Further, PSs
and dodecyl- -d-maltoside have been shown to increase the glide force of the preﬁlled
syringes [ 242]. On the other hand, little is known about the stability of preﬁlled syringes
or regular glass vials with stoppers of different chemical compositions when in long-term
contact with surfactant containing formulations. These ﬁndings highlight the importance
of an in-depth investigation of not only the stability and degradation of the surfactant, but
also the potential interactions with the primary packaging.
The current review sought to introduce potential PS alternatives for protein stabiliza-
tion in parenteral biotherapeutic formulations. The fact that many of the debated excipients
are yet to be profoundly investigated raises hope that future research can uncover the
efﬁciency of some excipients to overcome the limitations and drawbacks of PSs in the
formulation of protein biotherapeutics. While some of the introduced excipients might
turn up to be suitable PS alternatives on their own, others can serve as a backbone for
chemical modiﬁcations, through which the shortcomings of the parent molecule can be
eliminated, or at least mitigated. An example is the development of the surfactant classes
SEs (sucrose esters) and sugar monoesters. In both cases, chemical modiﬁcation has enabled
a signiﬁcant improvement of the surface-active properties of the parent molecule, thereby
improving the ability of the excipient to protect the protein integrity. It should also be
noted that at the end of the day, one excipient on its own might not hold the key to the
optimal stabilization of protein biopharmaceutical formulations. Sometimes, the use of a
mixture of different excipients can provide a viable option [ 376]. Not only can this enable a
more efﬁcient stabilization of the protein formulation against different sources of stress, but
other excipients can also ensure the continued solubilization of the formed protein particles
and the potential degradation products of an excipient that has, for some reason, suffered
from instability. Using excipient mixtures also reduces the required concentration of each
component, which in turn decreases the risk of the potential side effects that can arise from
each inactive individually.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/pharmaceutics14122575/s1, Table S1: FDA and CBER-approved
protein biopharmaceuticals containing PS20 and PS80 as a surfactant indicating the amount of
surfactant per mL. Data obtained from https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/iig/index.cfm
(accessed on 10 August 2022).
Funding: The research was funded by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We would like to acknowledge Holger Thie, Jan Visser, Ingeborg Jost and Kerstin
Walke (Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG) for their support and discussion.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The company had no role in
the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the
manuscript, and in the decision to publish the results.
References
1. Vulto, A.G.; Jaquez, O.A. The Process Deﬁnes the Product: What Really Matters in Biosimilar Design and Production?
Rheumatology 2017 ,56, iv14–iv29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). What Are “Biologics” Questions and Answers ; FDA, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research: Silver Spring, MA, USA, 2019.
3. Dimitrov, D.S. Therapeutic Proteins. Methods Mol. Biol. 2012 ,899, 1–26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 38 of 52
4. Kroon, D.J.; Baldwin-Ferro, A.; Lalan, P . Identiﬁcation of Sites of Degradation in a Therapeutic Monoclonal Antibody by Peptide
Mapping. Pharm Res. 1992 ,9, 1386–1393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Tous, G.I.; Wei, Z.; Feng, J.; Bilbulian, S.; Bowen, S.; Smith, J.; Strouse, R.; McGeehan, P .; Casas-Finet, J.; Schenerman, M.A.
Characterization of a Novel Modiﬁcation to Monoclonal Antibodies: Thioether Cross-Link of Heavy and Light Chains. Anal.
Chem. 2005 ,77, 2675–2682. [CrossRef]
6. Harris, R.J.; Kabakoff, B.; Macchi, F.D.; Shen, F.J.; Kwong, M.; Andya, J.D.; Shire, S.J.; Bjork, N.; Totpal, K.; Chen, A.B. Identiﬁcation
of Multiple Sources of Charge Heterogeneity in a Recombinant Antibody. J. Chromatogr. B Biomed. Sci. Appl. 2001 ,752, 233–245.
[CrossRef]
7. Wang, W. Instability, Stabilization, and Formulation of Liquid Protein Pharmaceuticals. Int. J. Pharm. 1999 ,185, 129–188.
[CrossRef]
8. Cleland, J.L.; Powell, M.F.; Shire, S.J. The Development of Stable Protein Formulations: A Close Look at Protein Aggregation,
Deamidation, and Oxidation. Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carr. Syst. 1993 ,10, 307–377.
9. Xie, M.; Schowen, R.L. Secondary Structure and Protein Deamidation. J. Pharm. Sci. 1999 ,88, 8–13. [CrossRef]
10. Usami, A.; Ohtsu, A.; Takahama, S.; Fujii, T. The Effect of PH, Hydrogen Peroxide and Temperature on the Stability of Human
Monoclonal Antibody. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 1996 ,14, 1133–1140. [CrossRef]
11. Lam, X.M.; Yang, J.Y.; Cleland, J.L. Antioxidants for Prevention of Methionine Oxidation in Recombinant Monoclonal Antibody
HER2. J. Pharm. Sci. 1997 ,86, 1250–1255. [CrossRef]
12. Kennedy, D.M.; Skillen, A.W.; Self, C.H. Glycation of Monoclonal Antibodies Impairs Their Ability to Bind Antigen. Clin. Exp.
Immunol. 1994 ,98, 245–251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Cacia, J.; Keck, R.; Presta, L.G.; Frenz, J. Isomerization of an Aspartic Acid Residue in the Complementarity-Determining Regions
of a Recombinant Antibody to Human IgE: Identiﬁcation and Effect on Binding Afﬁnity. Biochemistry 1996 ,35, 1897–1903.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Zheng, J.Y.; Janis, L.J. Inﬂuence of PH, Buffer Species, and Storage Temperature on Physicochemical Stability of a Humanized
Monoclonal Antibody LA298. Int. J. Pharm. 2006 ,308, 46–51. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Wang, W.; Singh, S.; Zeng, D.L.; King, K.; Nema, S. Antibody Structure, Instability, and Formulation. J. Pharm. Sci. 2007 ,96, 1–26.
[CrossRef]
16. Liu, D.; Ren, D.; Huang, H.; Dankberg, J.; Rosenfeld, R.; Cocco, M.J.; Li, L.; Brems, D.N.; Remmele, R.L. Structure and Stability
Changes of Human IgG1 Fc as a Consequence of Methionine Oxidation. Biochemistry 2008 ,47, 5088–5100. [CrossRef]
17. Kozlowski, S.; Swann, P . Current and Future Issues in the Manufacturing and Development of Monoclonal Antibodies. Adv. Drug
Deliv. Rev. 2006 ,58, 707–722. [CrossRef]
18. Geiger, T.; Clarke, S. Deamidation, Isomerization, and Racemization at Asparaginyl and Aspartyl Residues in Peptides.
Succinimide-Linked Reactions That Contribute to Protein Degradation. J. Biol. Chem. 1987 ,262, 785–794. [CrossRef]
19. Chen, B.; Bautista, R.; Yu, K.; Zapata, G.A.; Mulkerrin, M.G.; Chamow, S.M. Inﬂuence of Histidine on the Stability and Physical
Properties of a Fully Human Antibody in Aqueous and Solid Forms. Pharm. Res. 2003 ,20, 1952–1960. [CrossRef]
20. Li, S.-Q.; Bomser, J.A.; Zhang, Q.H. Effects of Pulsed Electric Fields and Heat Treatment on Stability and Secondary Structure of
Bovine Immunoglobulin G. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2005 ,53, 663–670. [CrossRef]
21. Hermeling, S.; Crommelin, D.J.A.; Huub, S.; Huub, W. Structure-Immunogenicity Relationships of Therapeutic Proteins.
Pharm. Res. 2004 ,21, 897–903. [CrossRef]
22. Shire, S.J.; Shahrokh, Z.; Liu, J. Challenges in the Development of High Protein Concentration Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2004 ,
93, 1390–1402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Braun, A.; Kwee, L.; Labow, M.A.; Alsenz, J. Protein Aggregates Seem to Play a Key Role among the Parameters Inﬂuencing the
Antigenicity of Interferon Alpha (IFN-Alpha) in Normal and Transgenic Mice. Pharm. Res. 1997 ,14, 1472–1478. [CrossRef]
24. Sukumar, M.; Doyle, B.L.; Combs, J.L.; Pekar, A.H. Opalescent Appearance of an IgG1 Antibody at High Concentrations and Its
Relationship to Noncovalent Association. Pharm. Res. 2004 ,21, 1087–1093. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Andya, J.D.; Hsu, C.C.; Shire, S.J. Mechanisms of Aggregate Formation and Carbohydrate Excipient Stabilization of Lyophilized
Humanized Monoclonal Antibody Formulations. AAPS PharmSci. 2003 ,5, E10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Doran, P .M. Loss of Secreted Antibody from Transgenic Plant Tissue Cultures Due to Surface Adsorption. J. Biotechnol. 2006 ,
122, 39–54. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Wang, T.; Kumru, O.S.; Yi, L.; Wang, Y.J.; Zhang, J.; Kim, J.H.; Joshi, S.B.; Middaugh, C.R.; Volkin, D.B. Effect of Ionic Strength
and PH on the Physical and Chemical Stability of a Monoclonal Antibody Antigen-Binding Fragment. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013 ,
102, 2520–2537. [CrossRef]
28. Wang, W. Protein Aggregation and Its Inhibition in Biopharmaceutics. Int. J. Pharm. 2005 ,289, 1–30. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Garidel, P .; Blume, A.; Wagner, M. Prediction of Colloidal Stability of High Concentration Protein Formulations. Pharm. Dev.
Technol. 2015 ,20, 367–374. [CrossRef]
30. Garidel, P .; Pevestorf, B.; Bahrenburg, S. Stability of Buffer-Free Freeze-Dried Formulations: A Feasibility Study of a Monoclonal
Antibody at High Protein Concentrations. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2015 ,97, 125–139. [CrossRef]
31. Kalonia, C.; Toprani, V .; Toth, R.; Wahome, N.; Gabel, I.; Middaugh, C.R.; Volkin, D.B. Effects of Protein Conformation, Apparent
Solubility, and Protein-Protein Interactions on the Rates and Mechanisms of Aggregation for an IgG1 Monoclonal Antibody.
J. Phys. Chem. B 2016 ,120, 7062–7075. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 39 of 52
32. Saluja, A.; Badkar, A.V .; Zeng, D.L.; Kalonia, D.S. Ultrasonic Rheology of a Monoclonal Antibody (IgG2) Solution: Implications
for Physical Stability of Proteins in High Concentration Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2007 ,96, 3181–3195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Chi, E.E.; Krishnan, S.; Kendrick, B.S.; Change, B.S.; Carpenter, J.F.; Chi, T.w. Roles of Conformational Stability and Colloidal
Stability in the Aggregation of Recombinant Human Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor. Protein Sci. A Publ. Protein Soc. 2003 ,
12, 903–913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Saito, S.; Hasegawa, J.; Kobayashi, N.; Tomitsuka, T.; Uchiyama, S.; Fukui, K. Effects of Ionic Strength and Sugars on the
Aggregation Propensity of Monoclonal Antibodies: Inﬂuence of Colloidal and Conformational Stabilities. Pharm. Res. 2013 ,
30, 1263–1280. [CrossRef]
35. Reiche, K.; Harti, J.; Blume, A.; Garidel, P . Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation of a Monoclonal Antibody at Low Ionic Strength:
Inﬂuence of Anion Charge and Concentration. Biophys. Chem. 2017 ,220, 7–19. [CrossRef]
36. Jiskoot, W.; Randolph, T.W.; Volkin, D.B.; Middaugh, C.R.; Schöneich, C.; Winter, G.; Friess, W.; Crommelin, D.J.A.; Carpenter, J.F.
Protein Instability and Immunogenicity: Roadblocks to Clinical Application of Injectable Protein Delivery Systems for Sustained
Release. J. Pharm. Sci. 2012 ,101, 946–954. [CrossRef]
37. Schiefelbein, L.K.J. Sugar-Based Surfactants for Pharmaceutical Protein Formulations ; Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München:
Munich, Germany, 2011.
38. Gidalevitz, D.; Huang, Z.; Rice, S.A. Protein Folding at the Air-Water Interface Studied with X-ray Reﬂectivity. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 1999 ,96, 2608–2611. [CrossRef]
39. Jones, L.S.; Kaufmann, A.; Middaugh, R. Silicone Oil Induced Aggregation of Proteins. J. Pharm. Sci. 2005 ,94, 918–927. [CrossRef]
40. Liu, L.; Ammar, D.A.; Ross, L.A.; Mandava, N.; Kahook, M.Y.; Carpenter, J.F. Silicone Oil Microdroplets and Protein Aggregates
in Repackaged Bevacizumab and Ranibizumab: Effects of Long-Term Storage and Product Mishandling. Investig. Ophthalmol.
Vis. Sci. 2011 ,52, 1023–1034. [CrossRef]
41. Li, J.; Pinnamaneni, S.; Quan, Y.; Jaiswal, A.; Andersson, F.I.; Zhang, X. Mechanistic Understanding of Protein-Silicone Oil
Interactions. Pharm. Res. 2012 ,29, 1689–1697. [CrossRef]
42. Krayukhina, E.; Tsumoto, K.; Uchiyama, S.; Fukui, K. Effects of Syringe Material and Silicone Oil Lubrication on the Stability of
Pharmaceutical Proteins. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 527–535. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Gerhardt, A.; McUmber, A.C.; Nguyen, B.H.; Lewus, R.; Schwartz, D.K.; Carpenter, J.F.; Randolph, T.W. Surfactant Effects on
Particle Generation in Antibody Formulations in Pre-Filled Syringes. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 4056–4064. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Jordan, S.; Katz, J. Alternative Surfactants for Biologics Stabilization. 2020. Available online: https://www.pharma.dupont.com/
content/dam/dupont/amer/us/en/nutrition-health/general/pharmaceuticals/documents/Biologics%20stabilization%20
white%20paper.pdf (accessed on 29 September 2022).
45. van Beers, M.M.C.; Sauerborn, M.; Gilli, F.; Brinks, V .; Schellekens, H.; Jiskoot, W. Oxidized and Aggregated Recombinant Human
Interferon Beta Is Immunogenic in Human Interferon Beta Transgenic Mice. Pharm. Res. 2011 ,28, 2393–2402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Bessa, J.; Boeckle, S.; Beck, H.; Buckel, T.; Schlicht, S.; Ebeling, M.; Kiialainen, A.; Koulov, A.; Boll, B.; Weiser, T.; et al. The
Immunogenicity of Antibody Aggregates in a Novel Transgenic Mouse Model. Pharm. Res. 2015 ,32, 2344–2359. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
47. Palazzi, L.; Leri, M.; Cesaro, S.; Stefani, M.; Bucciantini, M.; Polverino de Laureto, P . Insight into the Molecular Mechanism
Underlying the Inhibition of -Synuclein Aggregation by Hydroxytyrosol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2020 ,173, 113722. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
48. Moussa, E.M.; Panchal, J.P .; Moorthy, B.S.; Blum, J.S.; Joubert, M.K.; Narhi, L.O.; Topp, E.M. Immunogenicity of Therapeutic
Protein Aggregates. J. Pharm. Sci. 2016 ,105, 417–430. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Yadav, S.; Laue, T.M.; Kalonia, D.S.; Singh, S.N.; Shire, S.J. The Inﬂuence of Charge Distribution on Self-Association and Viscosity
Behavior of Monoclonal Antibody Solutions. Mol. Pharm. 2012 ,9, 791–802. [CrossRef]
50. Yadav, S.; Liu, J.; Shire, S.J.; Kalonia, D.S. Speciﬁc Interactions in High Concentration Antibody Solutions Resulting in High
Viscosity. J. Pharm. Sci. 2010 ,99, 1152–1168. [CrossRef]
51. Rao, V .A.; Kim, J.J.; Patel, D.S.; Rains, K.; Estoll, C.R. A Comprehensive Scientiﬁc Survey of Excipients Used in Currently Marketed,
Therapeutic Biological Drug Products. Pharm. Res. 2020 ,37, 200. [CrossRef]
52. Rayaprolu, B.M.; Strawser, J.J.; Anyarambhatla, G. Excipients in Parenteral Formulations: Selection Considerations and Effective
Utilization with Small Molecules and Biologics. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2018 ,44, 1565–1571. [CrossRef]
53. Jorgensen, L.; Hostrup, S.; Moeller, E.H.; Grohganz, H. Recent Trends in Stabilising Peptides and Proteins in Pharmaceutical
Formulation-Considerations in the Choice of Excipients. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 2009 ,6, 1219–1230. [CrossRef]
54. Akers, M.J. Excipient-Drug Interactions in Parenteral Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2002 ,91, 2283–2300. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Wang, S.; Wu, G.; Zhang, X.; Tian, Z.; Zhang, N.; Hu, T.; Dai, W.; Qian, F. Stabilizing Two IgG1 Monoclonal Antibodies by
Surfactants: Balance between Aggregation Prevention and Structure Perturbation. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2017 ,114, 263–277.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Garidel, P .; Blech, M.; Buske, J.; Blume, A. Surface Tension and Self-Association Properties of Aqueous Polysorbate 20 HP and
80 HP Solutions: Insights into Protein Stabilisation Mechanisms. J. Pharm. Innov. 2021 ,16, 726–734. [CrossRef]
57. Garidel, P .; Hoffmann, C.; Blume, A. A Thermodynamic Analysis of the Binding Interaction between Polysorbate 20 and 80 with
Human Serum Albumins and Immunoglobulins: A Contribution to Understand Colloidal Protein Stabilisation. Biophys. Chem.
2009 ,143, 70–78. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 40 of 52
58. Otzen, D. Protein-Surfactant Interactions: A Tale of Many States. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2011 ,1814 , 562–591. [CrossRef]
59. Kaplon, H.; Reichert, J.M. Antibodies to Watch in 2019. MAbs 2019 ,11, 219–238. [CrossRef]
60. Kaplon, H.; Muralidharan, M.; Schneider, Z.; Reichert, J.M. Antibodies to Watch in 2020. MAbs 2020 ,12, 1703531. [CrossRef]
61. Kaplon, H.; Reichert, J.M. Antibodies to Watch in 2021. MAbs 2021 ,13, 1860476. [CrossRef]
62. Kreilgaard, L.; Jones, L.S.; Randolph, T.W.; Frokjaer, S.; Flink, J.M.; Manning, M.C.; Carpenter, J.F. Effect of Tween 20 on
Freeze-Thawing- and Agitation-Induced Aggregation of Recombinant Human Factor XIII. J. Pharm. Sci. 1998 ,87, 1597–1603.
[CrossRef]
63. Hillgren, A.; Lindgren, J.; Ald én, M. Protection Mechanism of Tween 80 during Freeze–Thawing of a Model Protein, LDH. Int. J.
Pharm. 2002 ,237, 57–69. [CrossRef]
64. Bam, N.B.; Cleland, J.L.; Yang, J.; Manning, M.C.; Carpenter, J.F.; Kelley, R.F.; Randolph, T.W. Tween Protects Recombinant
Human Growth Hormone against Agitation-Induced Damage via Hydrophobic Interactions. J. Pharm. Sci. 1998 ,87, 1554–1559.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Zhang, L.; Yadav, S.; Demeule, B.; Wang, Y.J.; Mozziconacci, O.; Schöneich, C. Degradation Mechanisms of Polysorbate 20
Differentiated by 18O-Labeling and Mass Spectrometry. Pharm. Res. 2017 ,34, 84–100. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Edelmann, F.; Ravuri, K. Instability of Polysorbates in Protein Biopharmaceutics. In Proceedings of the 10th Global Drug Delivery
and Formulation Summit, Berlin, Germany, 11–13 March 2019.
67. Santana, H.; Gonz ález, Y.; Campana, P .T.; Noda, J.; Amarantes, O.; Itri, R.; Beldarra ín, A.; P áez, R. Screening for Stability and
Compatibility Conditions of Recombinant Human Epidermal Growth Factor for Parenteral Formulation: Effect of PH, Buffers,
and Excipients. Int. J. Pharm. 2013 ,452, 52–62. [CrossRef]
68. Ha, E.; Wang, W.; Wang, Y.J. Peroxide Formation in Polysorbate 80 and Protein Stability. J. Pharm. Sci. 2002 ,91, 2252–2264.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Reyes, N.; Ruiz, L.; Aroche, K.; Ger ónimo, H.; Brito, O.; Hardy, E. Stability of Ala 125 Recombinant Human Interleukin-2 in
Solution. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 2005 ,57, 31–37. [CrossRef]
70. Kerwin, B.A. Polysorbates 20 and 80 Used in the Formulation of Protein Biotherapeutics: Structure and Degradation Pathways.
J. Pharm. Sci. 2008 ,97, 2924–2935. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Kishore, R.S.K.; Kiese, S.; Fischer, S.; Pappenberger, A.; Grauschopf, U.; Mahler, H.-C. The Degradation of Polysorbates 20 and 80
and Its Potential Impact on the Stability of Biotherapeutics. Pharm. Res. 2011 ,28, 1194–1210. [CrossRef]
72. Brange, J.; Langkjaer, L.; Havelund, S.; Vølund, A. Chemical Stability of Insulin. 1. Hydrolytic Degradation during Storage of
Pharmaceutical Preparations. Pharm. Res. 1992 ,9, 715–726. [CrossRef]
73. Donbrow, M.; Azaz, E.; Pillersdorf, A. Autoxidation of Polysorbates. J. Pharm. Sci. 1978 ,67, 1676–1681. [CrossRef]
74. Labrenz, R. Ester Hydrolysis of Polysorbate 80 in MAb Drug Product: Evidence in Support of the Hypothesized Risk after the
Observation of Visible Particulate in MAb Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2014 ,103, 2268–2277. [CrossRef]
75. Lipiäinen, T.; Peltoniemi, M.; Sarkhel, S.; Yrjönen, T.; Vuorela, H.; Urtti, A.; Juppo, A. Formulation and Stability of Cytokine
Therapeutics. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 307–326. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Jaeger, J.; Sorensen, K.; Wolff, S.P . Peroxide Accumulation in Detergents. J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 1994 ,29, 77–81. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
77. Li, S.; Schöneich, C.; Borchardt, R.T. Chemical Instability of Protein Pharmaceuticals: Mechanisms of Oxidation and Strategies for
Stabilization. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1995 ,48, 490–500. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Currie, F.; Andersson, M.; Holmber, K. Oxidation of Self-Organized Nonionic Surfactants. Langmuir ACS J. Surf. Colloids 2004 ,
20, 3835–3837. [CrossRef]
79. Wuchner, K.; Yi, L.; Chery, C.; Nikels, F.; Junge, F.; Crotts, G.; Rinaldi, G.; Starkey, J.A.; Bechtold-Peters, K.; Shuman, M.; et al.
Industry Perspective on the Use and Characterization of Polysorbates for Biopharmaceutical Products Part 1: Survey Report on
Current State and Common Practices for Handling and Control of Polysorbates. J. Pharm. Sci. 2022 ,111, 1280–1291. [CrossRef]
80. Wuchner, K.; Yi, L.; Chery, C.; Nikels, F.; Junge, F.; Crotts, G.; Rinaldi, G.; Starkey, J.A.; Bechtold-Peters, K.; Shuman, M.; et al.
Industry Perspective on the Use and Characterization of Polysorbates for Biopharmaceutical Products Part 2: Survey Report on
Control Strategy Preparing for the Future. J. Pharm. Sci. 2022 ,111, 2955–2967. [CrossRef]
81. Ionova, Y.; Wilson, L. Biologic Excipients: Importance of Clinical Awareness of Inactive Ingredients. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0235076.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Nema, S.; Brendel, R.J. Excipients and Their Role in Approved Injectable Products: Current Usage and Future Directions. PDA J.
Pharm. Sci. Technol. 2011 ,65, 287–332. [CrossRef]
83. Liu, L.; Qi, W.; Schwartz, D.K.; Randolph, T.W.; Carpenter, J.F. The Effects of Excipients on Protein Aggregation during Agitation:
An Interfacial Shear Rheology Study. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013 ,102, 2460–2470. [CrossRef]
84. Carpenter, J.F.; Chang, B.S.; Garzon-Rodriguez, W.; Randolph, T.W. Rational Design of Stable Lyophilized Protein Formulations:
Theory and Practice. Pharm. Biotechnol. 2002 ,13, 109–133. [CrossRef]
85. Jayasundera, M.; Adhikari, B.; Adhikari, R.; Aldred, P . The Effect of Protein Types and Low Molecular Weight Surfactants on
Spray Drying of Sugar-Rich Foods. Food Hydrocoll. 2011 ,25, 459–469. [CrossRef]
86. Gerhardt, A.; Bonam, K.; Bee, J.S.; Carpenter, J.F.; Randolph, T.W. Ionic Strength Affects Tertiary Structure and Aggregation
Propensity of a Monoclonal Antibody Adsorbed to Silicone Oil-Water Interfaces. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013 ,102, 429–440. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 41 of 52
87. Lee, H.J.; McAuley, A.; Schilke, K.F.; McGuire, J. Molecular Origins of Surfactant-Mediated Stabilization of Protein Drugs. Adv.
Drug Deliv. Rev. 2011 ,63, 1160–1171. [CrossRef]
88. Bam, N.B.; Cleland, J.L.; Randolph, T.W. Molten Globule Intermediate of Recombinant Human Growth Hormone: Stabilization
with Surfactants. Biotechnol. Prog. 1996 ,12, 801–809. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Lee, L.L.; Lee, J.C. Thermal Stability of Proteins in the Presence of Poly(Ethylene Glycols). Biochemistry 1987 ,26, 7813–7819.
[CrossRef]
90. Arakawa, T.; Timasheff, S.N. Mechanism of Poly(Ethylene Glycol) Interaction with Proteins. Biochemistry 1985 ,24, 6756–6762.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Dixit, N.; Maloney, K.M.; Kalonia, D.S. Protein-Silicone Oil Interactions: Comparative Effect of Nonionic Surfactants on the
Interfacial Behavior of a Fusion Protein. Pharm. Res. 2013 ,30, 1848–1859. [CrossRef]
92. Ayorinde, F.O.; Gelain, S.V .; Johnson, J.H.; Wan, L.W. Analysis of Some Commercial Polysorbate Formulations Using Matrix-
Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2000 ,14, 2116–2124.
[CrossRef]
93. Frison-Norrie, S.; Sporns, P . Investigating the Molecular Heterogeneity of Polysorbate Emulsiﬁers by MALDI-TOF MS. J. Agric.
Food Chem. 2001 ,49, 3335–3340. [CrossRef]
94. Dwivedi, M.; Blech, M.; Presser, I.; Garidel, P . Polysorbate Degradation in Biotherapeutic Formulations: Identiﬁcation and
Discussion of Current Root Causes. Int. J. Pharm. 2018 ,552, 422–436. [CrossRef]
95. Hewitt, D.; Alvarez, M.; Robinson, K.; Ji, J.; Wang, Y.J.; Kao, Y.-H.; Zhang, T. Mixed-Mode and Reversed-Phase
Liquid Chromatography–Tandem Mass Spectrometry Methodologies to Study Composition and Base Hydrolysis of
Polysorbate 20 and 80. J. Chromatogr. A 2011 ,1218 , 2138–2145. [CrossRef]
96. Tomlinson, A.; Zarraga, I.E.; Demeule, B. Characterization of Polysorbate Ester Fractions and Implications in Protein Drug
Product Stability. Mol. Pharm. 2020 ,17, 2345–2353. [CrossRef]
97. Pan, J.; Ji, Y.; Du, Z.; Zhang, J. Rapid Characterization of Commercial Polysorbate 80 by Ultra-High Performance Supercritical
Fluid Chromatography Combined with Quadrupole Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometry. J. Chromatogr. A 2016 ,1465 , 190–196.
[CrossRef]
98. European Pharmacopoeia Commission. European Pharmacopoeia PS80. In European Pharmacopoeia ; European Pharmacopoeia
Commission: Strasbourg, France, 2017; pp. 3591–3593.
99. European Pharmacopoeia Commission. European Pharmacopoeia PS20. In European Pharmacopoeia ; European Pharmacopoeia
Commission: Strasbourg, France, 2017; pp. 3589–3590.
100. Li, Y.; Hewitt, D.; Lentz, Y.K.; Ji, J.A.; Zhang, T.Y.; Zhang, K. Characterization and Stability Study of Polysorbate 20 in Therapeutic
Monoclonal Antibody Formulation by Multidimensional Ultrahigh-Performance Liquid Chromatography-Charged Aerosol
Detection-Mass Spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 2014 ,86, 5150–5157. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Sun, H.; Yang, R.; Wang, J.; Yang, X.; Tu, J.; Xie, L.; Li, C.; Lao, Q.; Sun, C. Component-Based Biocompatibility and Safety
Evaluation of Polysorbate 80. RSC Adv. 2017 ,7, 15127–15138. [CrossRef]
102. Ravuri, K.S.K. Polysorbate Degradation and Quality. In Challenges in Protein Product Development ; Warne, N.W., Mahler, H.-C., Eds. ;
AAPS Advances in the Pharmaceutical Sciences Series; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2018; pp. 25–62 .
ISBN 978-3-319-90603-4.
103. Kishore, R.S.K.; Pappenberger, A.; Dauphin, I.B.; Ross, A.; Buergi, B.; Staempﬂi, A.; Mahler, H.-C. Degradation of Polysorbates 20
and 80: Studies on Thermal Autoxidation and Hydrolysis. J. Pharm. Sci. 2011 ,100, 721–731. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
104. Khossravi, M.; Kao, Y.-H.; Mrsny, R.J.; Sweeney, T.D. Analysis Methods of Polysorbate 20: A New Method to Assess the Stability of
Polysorbate 20 and Established Methods That May Overlook Degraded Polysorbate 20. Pharm. Res. 2002 ,19, 634–639. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
105. Bates, T.R.; Nightingale, C.H.; Dixon, E. Kinetics of Hydrolysis of Polyoxyethylene (20) Sorbitan Fatty Acid Ester Surfactants.
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 1973 ,25, 470–477. [CrossRef]
106. Donbrow, M.; Hamburger, R.; Azaz, E.; Pillersdorf, A. Development of Acidity in Non-Ionic Surfactants: Formic and Acetic Acid.
Analyst 1978 ,103, 400–402. [CrossRef]
107. Donbrow, M.; Hamburger, R.; Azaz, E. Surface Tension and Cloud Point Changes of Polyoxyethylenic Non-Ionic Surfactants
during Autoxidation. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 1975 ,27, 160–166. [CrossRef]
108. Carey, F.A.; Sundberg, R.J. Advanced Organic Chemistry Part A: Structure and Mechanism. In Advanced Organic Chemistry ;
Springer Science & Business Media: Boston, MA, USA, 2002; pp. 289–472. ISBN 978-0-387-68354-6.
109. Dixit, N.; Salamat-Miller, N.; Salinas, P .A.; Taylor, K.D.; Basu, S.K. Residual Host Cell Protein Promotes Polysorbate 20 Degradation
in a Sulfatase Drug Product Leading to Free Fatty Acid Particles. J. Pharm. Sci. 2016 ,105, 1657–1666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Roy, I.; Patel, A.; Kumar, V .; Nanda, T.; Assenberg, R.; Wuchner, K.; Amin, K. Polysorbate Degradation and Particle Formation in
a High Concentration MAb: Formulation Strategies to Minimize Effect of Enzymatic Polysorbate Degradation. J. Pharm. Sci. 2021 ,
110, 3313–3323. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Hall, T.; Sandefur, S.L.; Frye, C.C.; Tuley, T.L.; Huang, L. Polysorbates 20 and 80 Degradation by Group XV Lysosomal
Phospholipase A2 Isomer X1 in Monoclonal Antibody Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2016 ,105, 1633–1642. [CrossRef]
112. McShan, A.C.; Kei, P .; Ji, J.A.; Kim, D.C.; Wang, Y.J. Hydrolysis of Polysorbate 20 and 80 by a Range of Carboxylester Hydrolases.
PDA J. Pharm. Sci. Technol. 2016 ,70, 332–345. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 42 of 52
113. Siska, C.C.; Pierini, C.J.; Lau, H.R.; Latypov, R.F.; Fesinmeyer, R.M.; Litowski, J.R. Free Fatty Acid Particles in Protein Formulations,
Part 2: Contribution of Polysorbate Raw Material. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 447–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Honemann, M.N.; Wendler, J.; Graf, T.; Bathke, A.; Bell, C.H. Monitoring Polysorbate Hydrolysis in Biopharmaceuticals Using a
QC-Ready Free Fatty Acid Quantiﬁcation Method. J. Chromatogr. B Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci. 2019 ,1116 , 1–8. [CrossRef]
115. Tomlinson, A.; Demeule, B.; Lin, B.; Yadav, S. Polysorbate 20 Degradation in Biopharmaceutical Formulations: Quantiﬁcation of
Free Fatty Acids, Characterization of Particulates, and Insights into the Degradation Mechanism. Mol. Pharm. 2015 ,12, 3805–3815.
[CrossRef]
116. Larson, N.R.; Wei, Y.; Prajapati, I.; Chakraborty, A.; Peters, B.; Kalonia, C.; Hudak, S.; Choudhary, S.; Esfandiary, R.; Dhar, P .; et al.
Comparison of Polysorbate 80 Hydrolysis and Oxidation on the Aggregation of a Monoclonal Antibody. J. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,
109, 633–639. [CrossRef]
117. Chiu, J.; Valente, K.N.; Levy, N.E.; Min, L.; Lenhoff, A.M.; Lee, K.H. Knockout of a Difﬁcult-to-Remove CHO Host Cell
Protein, Lipoprotein Lipase, for Improved Polysorbate Stability in Monoclonal Antibody Formulations. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2017 ,
114, 1006–1015. [CrossRef]
118. Mihara, K.; Ito, Y.; Hatano, Y.; Komurasaki, Y.; Sugimura, A.; Jones, M.; Liu, H.; Mai, S.; Lara-Velasco, O.; Bai, L.; et al. Host Cell
Proteins: The Hidden Side of Biosimilarity Assessment. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 3991–3996. [CrossRef]
119. Aboulaich, N.; Chung, W.K.; Thompson, J.H.; Larkin, C.; Robbins, D.; Zhu, M. A Novel Approach to Monitor Clearance of Host
Cell Proteins Associated with Monoclonal Antibodies. Biotechnol. Prog. 2014 ,30, 1114–1124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Graf, T.; Tomlinson, A.; Yuk, I.H.; Kufer, R.; Spensberger, B.; Falkenstein, R.; Shen, A.; Li, H.; Duan, D.; Liu, W.; et al. Identiﬁ-
cation and Characterization of Polysorbate-Degrading Enzymes in a Monoclonal Antibody Formulation. J. Pharm. Sci. 2021 ,
110, 3558–3567. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
121. Zhang, S.; Riccardi, C.; Kamen, D.; Reilly, J.; Mattila, J.; Bak, H.; Xiao, H.; Li, N. Identiﬁcation of the Speciﬁc Causes of Polysorbate
20 Degradation in Monoclonal Antibody Formulations Containing Multiple Lipases. Pharm. Res. 2022 ,39, 75–87. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
122. Li, X.; Chandra, D.; Letarte, S.; Adam, G.C.; Welch, J.; Yang, R.-S.; Rivera, S.; Bodea, S.; Dow, A.; Chi, A.; et al. Proﬁling Active
Enzymes for Polysorbate Degradation in Biotherapeutics by Activity-Based Protein Proﬁling. Anal. Chem. 2021 ,93, 8161–8169.
[CrossRef]
123. Zhang, S.; Xiao, H.; Molden, R.; Qiu, H.; Li, N. Rapid Polysorbate 80 Degradation by Liver Carboxylesterase in a Monoclonal
Antibody Formulated Drug Substance at Early Stage Development. J. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,109, 3300–3307. [CrossRef]
124. Zhang, S.; Xiao, H.; Li, N. Degradation of Polysorbate 20 by Sialate O-Acetylesterase in Monoclonal Antibody Formulations.
J. Pharm. Sci. 2021 ,110, 3866–3873. [CrossRef]
125. Li, X.; Wang, F.; Li, H.; Richardson, D.D.; Roush, D. The Measurement and Control of High-Risk Host Cell Proteins for Polysorbate
Degradation in Biologics Formulation. Antib. Ther. 2022 ,5, 42–54. [CrossRef]
126. Putative Phospholipase B-like 2 Is Not Responsible for Polysorbate Degradation in Monoclonal Antibody Drug Products.
J. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,109, 2710–2718. [CrossRef]
127. Glücklich, N.; Carle, S.; Buske, J.; Mäder, K.; Garidel, P . Assessing the Polysorbate Degradation Fingerprints and Kinetics of
Lipases—How the Activity of Polysorbate Degrading Hydrolases Is Inﬂuenced by the Assay and Assay Conditions. Eur. J.
Pharm. Sci. 2021 ,166, 105980. [CrossRef]
128. Saito, H.; Tomioka, H.; Watanabe, T.; Yoneyama, T. Mycobacteriocins Produced by Rapidly Growing Mycobacteria Are Tween-
Hydrolyzing Esterases. J. Bacteriol. 1983 ,153, 1294–1300. [CrossRef]
129. Tomioka, H. Puriﬁcation and Characterization of the Tween-Hydrolyzing Esterase of Mycobacterium Smegmatis. J. Bacteriol.
1983 ,155, 1249–1259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
130. Jones, M.T.; Mahler, H.-C.; Yadav, S.; Bindra, D.; Corvari, V .; Fesinmeyer, R.M.; Gupta, K.; Harmon, A.M.; Hinds, K.D.;
Koulov, A.; et al . Considerations for the Use of Polysorbates in Biopharmaceuticals. Pharm. Res. 2018 ,35, 148. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
131. Bodin, A.; Linnerborg, M.; Nilsson, J.L.G.; Karlberg, A.-T. Novel Hydroperoxides as Primary Autoxidation Products of a Model
Ethoxylated Surfactant. J. Surfact Deterg. 2002 ,5, 107–110. [CrossRef]
132. Bäcktorp, C.; Börje, A.; Nilsson, J.L.G.; Karlberg, A.-T.; Norrby, P .-O.; Nyman, G. Mechanisms of Air Oxidation of Ethoxylated
Surfactants–Computational Estimations of Energies and Reaction Behaviors. Chemistry 2008 ,14, 9549–9554. [CrossRef]
133. Singh, S.R.; Zhang, J.; O’Dell, C.; Hsieh, M.-C.; Goldstein, J.; Liu, J.; Srivastava, A. Effect of Polysorbate 80 Quality on Photostability
of a Monoclonal Antibody. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2012 ,13, 422–430. [CrossRef]
134. Yao, J.; Dokuru, D.K.; Noestheden, M.; Park, S.S.; Kerwin, B.A.; Jona, J.; Ostovic, D.; Reid, D.L. A Quantitative Kinetic Study of
Polysorbate Autoxidation: The Role of Unsaturated Fatty Acid Ester Substituents. Pharm. Res. 2009 ,26, 2303–2313. [CrossRef]
135. Kerwin, B.A.; Remmele, R.L. Protect from Light: Photodegradation and Protein Biologics. J. Pharm. Sci. 2007 ,96, 1468–1479.
[CrossRef]
136. Du, C.; Barnett, G.; Borwankar, A.; Lewandowski, A.; Singh, N.; Ghose, S.; Borys, M.; Li, Z.J. Protection of Therapeutic Antibodies
from Visible Light Induced Degradation: Use Safe Light in Manufacturing and Storage. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2018 ,127, 37–43.
[CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 43 of 52
137. Nejadnik, M.R.; Randolph, T.W.; Volkin, D.B.; Schöneich, C.; Carpenter, J.F.; Crommelin, D.J.A.; Jiskoot, W. Postproduction
Handling and Administration of Protein Pharmaceuticals and Potential Instability Issues. J. Pharm. Sci. 2018 ,107, 2013–2019.
[CrossRef]
138. Kim, H.-H.; Lee, Y.M.; Suh, J.-K.; Song, N.W. Photodegradation Mechanism and Reaction Kinetics of Recombinant Human
Interferon-Alpha2a. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2007 ,6, 171–180. [CrossRef]
139. Sreedhara, A.; Yin, J.; Joyce, M.; Lau, K.; Wecksler, A.T.; Deperalta, G.; Yi, L.; John Wang, Y.; Kabakoff, B.; Kishore, R.S.K. Effect of
Ambient Light on IgG1 Monoclonal Antibodies during Drug Product Processing and Development. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2016 ,
100, 38–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
140. Maity, H.; O’Dell, C.; Srivastava, A.; Goldstein, J. Effects of Arginine on Photostability and Thermal Stability of IgG1 Monoclonal
Antibodies. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 2009 ,10, 761–766. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
141. Bane, J.; Mozziconacci, O.; Yi, L.; Wang, Y.J.; Sreedhara, A.; Schöneich, C. Photo-Oxidation of IgG1 and Model Peptides: Detection
and Analysis of Triply Oxidized His and Trp Side Chain Cleavage Products. Pharm. Res. 2017 ,34, 229–242. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Pattison, D.I.; Rahmanto, A.S.; Davies, M.J. Photo-Oxidation of Proteins. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2012 ,11, 38–53. [CrossRef]
143. Roy, S.; Mason, B.D.; Schöneich, C.S.; Carpenter, J.F.; Boone, T.C.; Kerwin, B.A. Light-Induced Aggregation of Type I Soluble
Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor. J. Pharm. Sci. 2009 ,98, 3182–3199. [CrossRef]
144. Li, Y.; Polozova, A.; Gruia, F.; Feng, J. Characterization of the Degradation Products of a Color-Changed Monoclonal Antibody:
Tryptophan-Derived Chromophores. Anal. Chem. 2014 ,86, 6850–6857. [CrossRef]
145. Mason, B.D.; Schöneich, C.; Kerwin, B.A. Effect of PH and Light on Aggregation and Conformation of an IgG1 MAb. Mol. Pharm.
2012 ,9, 774–790. [CrossRef]
146. Fradkin, A.H.; Mozziconacci, O.; Schöneich, C.; Carpenter, J.F.; Randolph, T.W. UV Photodegradation of Murine Growth Hormone:
Chemical Analysis and Immunogenicity Consequences. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2014 ,87, 395–402. [CrossRef]
147. Torosantucci, R.; Schöneich, C.; Jiskoot, W. Oxidation of Therapeutic Proteins and Peptides: Structural and Biological Conse-
quences. Pharm. Res. 2014 ,31, 541–553. [CrossRef]
148. Pham, N.B.; Meng, W.S. Protein Aggregation and Immunogenicity of Biotherapeutics. Int. J. Pharm. 2020 ,585, 119523. [CrossRef]
149. Coors, E.A.; Seybold, H.; Merk, H.F.; Mahler, V . Polysorbate 80 in Medical Products and Nonimmunologic Anaphylactoid
Reactions. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2005 ,95, 593–599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Palacios Castaño, M.I.; Venturini D íaz, M.; Lobera Labairu, T.; Gonz ález Mahave, I.; Del Pozo Gil, M.D.; Blasco Sarrami án, A.
Anaphylaxis Due to the Excipient Polysorbate 80. J. Investig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 2016 ,26, 394–396. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Badiu, I.; Guida, G.; Hefﬂer, E.; Rolla, G. Multiple Drug Allergy Due to Hypersensitivity to Polyethylene Glycols of Various
Molecular Weights. J. Investig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 2015 ,25, 368–369. [PubMed]
152. Stone, C.A.; Liu, Y.; Relling, M.V .; Krantz, M.S.; Pratt, A.L.; Abreo, A.; Hemler, J.A.; Phillips, E.J. Immediate Hypersensitivity
to Polyethylene Glycols and Polysorbates: More Common than We Have Recognized. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. Pract. 2019 ,
7, 1533–1540.e8. [CrossRef]
153. Price, K.S.; Hamilton, R.G. Anaphylactoid Reactions in Two Patients after Omalizumab Administration after Successful Long-Term
Therapy. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2007 ,28, 313–319. [CrossRef]
154. Dreyfus, D.H.; Randolph, C.C. Characterization of an Anaphylactoid Reaction to Omalizumab. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol.
2006 ,96, 624–627. [CrossRef]
155. Pérez-P érez, L.; Garc ía-Gav ín, J.; Piñeiro, B.; Zulaica, A. Biologic-Induced Urticaria Due to Polysorbate 80: Usefulness of Prick
Test. Br. J. Dermatol. 2011 ,164, 1119–1120. [CrossRef]
156. Bergmann, K.C.; Maurer, M.; Church, M.K.; Zuberbier, T. Anaphylaxis to Mepolizumab and Omalizumab in a Single Patient: Is
Polysorbate the Culprit? J. Investig. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 2020 ,30, 285–287. [CrossRef]
157. Badiu, I.; Geuna, M.; Hefﬂer, E.; Rolla, G. Hypersensitivity Reaction to Human Papillomavirus Vaccine Due to Polysorbate 80.
BMJ Case Rep. 2012 ,2012 , bcr0220125797. [CrossRef]
158. Steele, R.H.; Limaye, S.; Cleland, B.; Chow, J.; Suranyi, M.G. Hypersensitivity Reactions to the Polysorbate Contained in
Recombinant Erythropoietin and Darbepoietin. Nephrology 2005 ,10, 317–320. [CrossRef]
159. Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER). Pilot Program for the Review of Innovation and Modernization of Excipients
(PRIME) ; FDA: Silver Spring, MA, USA, 2022.
160. Bollenbach, L.; Buske, J.; Mäder, K.; Garidel, P . Poloxamer 188 as Surfactant in Biological Formulations—An Alternative for
Polysorbate 20/80? Int. J. Pharm. 2022 ,620, 121706. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Inactive Ingredient Search for Approved Drug Products. Available online: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/iig/
index.cfm (accessed on 12 July 2022).
162. Csóka, G.; Marton, S.; Zelko, R.; Otomo, N.; Antal, I. Application of Sucrose Fatty Acid Esters in Transdermal Therapeutic
Systems. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2007 ,65, 233–237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
163. CFR-Code of Federal Regulations Title 21. Available online: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/
cfrsearch.cfm?fr=172.859 (accessed on 2 June 2022).
164. Scott, L.N.; Bergfeld, W.F.; Belsito, D.V .; Hill, R.A.; Klaassen, C.D.; Liebler, D.C.; Marks, J.G.; Shank, R.C.; Slaga, T.J.;
Snyder, P .W.; et al. Safety Assessment of Saccharide Esters as Used in Cosmetics. Int. J. Toxicol. 2021 ,40, 52S–116S. [CrossRef]
165. Obikili, A.; Deyme, M.; Wouessidjewe, D.; Duchˇ ene, D. Improvement of Aqueous Solubility and Dissolution Kinetics of Canrenone
by Solid Dispersion in Sucroester. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 1988 ,14, 791–803. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 44 of 52
166. Hahn, L.; Sucker, H. Solid Surfactant Solutions of Active Ingredients in Sugar Esters. Pharm. Res. 1989 ,6, 958–960. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
167. Abd-Elbary, A.; El-laithy, H.M.; Tadros, M.I. Sucrose Stearate-Based Proniosome-Derived Niosomes for the Nebulisable Delivery
of Cromolyn Sodium. Int. J. Pharm. 2008 ,357, 189–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
168. Lerk, P .C.; Sucker, H. Application of Sucrose Laurate in Topical Preparations of Cyclosporin A. Int. J. Pharm. 1993 ,92, 203–210.
[CrossRef]
169. Okamoto, H.; Sakai, T.; Danjo, K. Effect of Sucrose Fatty Acid Esters on Transdermal Permeation of Lidocaine and Ketoprofen.
Biol. Pharm. Bull. 2005 ,28, 1689–1694. [CrossRef]
170. Ahsan, F.; Arnold, J.J.; Meezan, E.; Pillion, D.J. Sucrose Cocoate, a Component of Cosmetic Preparations, Enhances Nasal and
Ocular Peptide Absorption. Int. J. Pharm. 2003 ,251, 195–203. [CrossRef]
171. Thevenin, M.A.; Grossiord, J.L.; Poelman, M.C. Sucrose Esters/Cosurfactant Microemulsion Systems for Transdermal Delivery:
Assessment of Bicontinuous Structures. Int. J. Pharm. 1996 ,137, 177–186. [CrossRef]
172. Fanun, M. Surfactant Chain Length Effect on the Structural Parameters of Nonionic Microemulsions. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol. 2008 ,
29, 289–296. [CrossRef]
173. Mollee, H.; de Vrind, J.; De Vringer, T. Stable Reversed Vesicles in Oil: Characterization Studies and Encapsulation of Model
Compounds. J. Pharm. Sci. 2000 ,89, 930–939. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
174. Honeywell-Nguyen, P .L.; Bouwstra, J.A. The in Vitro Transport of Pergolide from Surfactant-Based Elastic Vesicles through
Human Skin: A Suggested Mechanism of Action. J. Control. Release 2003 ,86, 145–156. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
175. Klang, V .; Matsko, N.; Raupach, K.; El-Hagin, N.; Valenta, C. Development of Sucrose Stearate-Based Nanoemulsions and
Optimisation through -Cyclodextrin. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2011 ,79, 58–67. [CrossRef]
176. Zheng, Y.; Zheng, M.; Ma, Z.; Xin, B.; Guo, R.; Xu, X. Sugar Fatty Acid Esters. In Polar Lipids ; Elsevier Inc.: Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2015; pp. 215–243. ISBN 978-1-63067-045-0.
177. Soultani, S.; Ognier, S.; Engasser, J.-M.; Ghoul, M. Comparative Study of Some Surface Active Properties of Fructose Esters and
Commercial Sucrose Esters. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 2003 ,227, 35–44. [CrossRef]
178. Younes, M.; Aggett, P .; Aguilar, F.; Crebelli, R.; Dusemund, B.; Filipiˇ c, M.; Frutos, M.J.; Galtier, D.; Gundert-Remy, U.; Kuhnle, G.G.
Scientiﬁc opinion on the safety of sucrose esters of fatty acids prepared from vinyl esters of fatty acids and on the extension of use
of sucrose esters of fatty acids in ﬂavourings|EFSA. EFSA J. 2010 ,8, 1512. [CrossRef]
179. Thomson, A.B.; Hunt, R.H.; Zorich, N.L. Review Article: Olestra and Its Gastrointestinal Safety. Aliment Pharmacol. 1998 ,
12, 1185–1200. [CrossRef]
180. Daniel, J.W.; Marshall, C.J.; Jones, H.F.; Snodin, D.J. The Metabolism of Beef Tallow Sucrose Esters in Rat and Man. Food Cosmet.
Toxicol. 1979 ,17, 19–21. [CrossRef]
181. Shigeoka, T.; Izawa, O.; Kitazawa, K.; Yamauchi, F.; Murata, T. Studies on the Metabolic Fate of Sucrose Esters in Rats. Food Chem.
Toxicol. 1984 ,22, 409–414. [CrossRef]
182. Noker, P .E.; Lin, T.H.; Hill, D.L.; Shigeoka, T. Metabolism of 14C-Labelled Sucrose Esters of Stearic Acid in Rats. Food Chem.
Toxicol. 1997 ,35, 589–595. [CrossRef]
183. Sucrose Esters of Fatty Acids, and Sucroglycerides (WHO Food Additives Series 5). Available online: https://inchem.org/
documents/jecfa/jecmono/v05je52.htm (accessed on 2 June 2022).
184. Drummond, C.J.; Fong, C.; Krodkiewksa, I.; Boyd, B.; Baker, I. Sugar Fatty Acid Esters. In Novel Surfactants: Preparation,
Applications and Biodegradability ; Marcell Dekker Inc: New York, NY, USA, 2003; pp. 95–128.
185. Savi´ c, S.; Tamburi´ c, S.; Savi´ c, M.M. From Conventional towards New-Natural Surfactants in Drug Delivery Systems Design:
Current Status and Perspectives. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 2010 ,7, 353–369. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
186. Sz˝ uts, A.; Szab ó-Révész, P . Sucrose Esters as Natural Surfactants in Drug Delivery Systems—A Mini-Review. Int. J. Pharm. 2012 ,
433, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
187. Gaudin, T.; Lu, H.; Fayet, G.; Berthauld-Drelich, A.; Rotureau, P .; Pourceau, G.; Wadouachi, A.; Van Hecke, E.; Nesterenko, A.;
Pezron, I. Impact of the Chemical Structure on Amphiphilic Properties of Sugar-Based Surfactants: A Literature Overview.
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2019 ,270, 87–100. [CrossRef]
188. Lerk, P .C.; Sucker, H.H.; Eicke, H.F. Micellization and Solubilization Behavior of Sucrose Laurate, a New Pharmaceutical Excipient.
Pharm. Dev. Technol. 1996 ,1, 27–36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
189. Brown, D.L. Parenteral Formulations Comprising Sugar-Based Esters and Ethers. U.S. Patent 20100125051A1, 20 May 2010.
190. Weber, N.; Benning, H. Metabolism of Orally Administered Alkyl Beta-Glycosides in the Mouse. J. Nutr. 1984 ,114, 247–254.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
191. Garofalakis, G.; Murray, B.S.; Sarney, D.B. Surface Activity and Critical Aggregation Concentration of Pure Sugar Esters with
Different Sugar Headgroups. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2000 ,229, 391–398. [CrossRef]
192. The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products. Polyethylene Glycol Searates and Polyethylene Glycol 15 Hydroxys-
tearate ; The European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2003.
193. Elder, E. Final Report on the Safety Assessment of PEG-2,-6, -8, -12, -20, -32, -40, -50, -100, and -150 Stearates. J. Am. Coll. Toxicol.
1983 ,2, 17–34.
194. Fruijtier-Pölloth, C. Safety Assessment on Polyethylene Glycols (PEGs) and Their Derivatives as Used in Cosmetic Products.
Toxicology 2005 ,214, 1–38. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 45 of 52
195. Bárány, E.; Lindberg, M.; Lod én, M. Unexpected Skin Barrier Inﬂuence from Nonionic Emulsiﬁers. Int. J. Pharm. 2000 ,195, 189–195.
[CrossRef]
196. Johns, C.H.; Pepper, W.P . 5 Final Report on the Safety Assessment of Propylene Glycol Stearate and Propylene Glycol Stearate
Self-Emulsifying. J. Am. Coll. Toxicol. 1983 ,2, 101–124. [CrossRef]
197. Johnson, W. Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel Final Report on the Safety Assessment of PEG-25 Propylene Glycol
Stearate, PEG-75 Propylene Glycol Stearate, PEG-120 Propylene Glycol Stearate, PEG-10 Propylene Glycol, PEG-8 Propylene
Glycol Cocoate, and PEG-55 Propylene Glycol Oleate. Int. J. Toxicol. 2001 ,20(Suppl. S4), 13–26. [CrossRef]
198. Ali, S.; Kolter, K. Kolliphor®HS 15-An Enabler for Parenteral and Oral Formulations. Am. Pharm. Rev. 2019 ,22, 22–34.
199. Reintjes, T. Solubility Enhancement with BASF Pharma Polymers-Solubilizer Compendium ; BASD SE Pharma Ingredients and Services:
Lampretheim, Germany, 2011.
200. Shubber, S.; Vllasaliu, D.; Rauch, C.; Jordan, F.; Illum, L.; Stolnik, S. Mechanism of Mucosal Permeability Enhancement of
CriticalSorb®(Solutol®HS15) Investigated in Vitro in Cell Cultures. Pharm. Res. 2015 ,32, 516–527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
201. Pilotaz, F.; Mercier, F.; Chibret, H. Preservative-Free Prostaglandin-Based Ophthalmic Solution. Portugal Patent PT2178504E,
31 January 2011.
202. Dai, W.-G.; Dong, L.C.; Li, S.; Pollock-Dove, C.; Chen, J.; Mansky, P .; Eichenbaum, G. Parallel Screening Approach to Identify
Solubility-Enhancing Formulations for Improved Bioavailability of a Poorly Water-Soluble Compound Using Milligram Quantities
of Material. Int. J. Pharm. 2007 ,336, 1–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
203. Berkó, S.; Regdon, G.; Erös, I. Solutol and Cremophor Products as New Additives in Suppository Formulation. Drug Dev. Ind.
Pharm. 2002 ,28, 203–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
204. Zakeri, B.; Kroll, S.; Romanski, F.S. Expanding the Toolbox of Surfactants Available for Biologics Formulations with Kolliphor ®HS 15 and
Kolliphor®ELP ; BASF: Ludwigshafen, Germany, 2020.
205. Ruchatz, F.; Schuch, H. Physicochemical Properties of Solutol HS 15 and Its Solubilizates. BASF ExAct 1988 ,1, 6–7.
206. Zhao, X.; Chen, D.; Gao, P .; Ding, P .; Li, K. Synthesis of Ibuprofen Eugenol Ester and Its Microemulsion Formulation for Parenteral
Delivery. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 2005 ,53, 1246–1250. [CrossRef]
207. Lee, E.-H.; Lee, S.-H.; Park, D.-Y.; Ki, K.-H.; Lee, E.-K.; Lee, D.-H.; Noh, G.-J. Physicochemical Properties, Pharmacokinetics, and
Pharmacodynamics of a Reformulated Microemulsion Propofol in Rats. Anesthesiology 2008 ,109, 436–447. [CrossRef]
208. Bartels, M.; Vilsendorf, A.; Kassahun, T.; Gerstenbergk, B.; Engelhart, K.; Vilsendorf, E.; Faber, S.; Biesalski, H. Protective Effect of
Antioxidative Vitamins against Lipid Peroxidation in Liver Ischemia and Reperfusion–an Animal Experimental Study. EXCLI J.
2007 ,6, 152–166. [CrossRef]
209. Volker, B. Pharmaceutical Technology of BASF Excipients , 3rd ed.; BASF: Ludwigshafen, Germany, 2008.
210. BASF. Product Regulations Safety Data Sheet- Kolliphor HS 15 ; Version 4; BASF: Ludwigshafen, Germany, 2016.
211. Borisov, O.V .; Ji, J.A.; Wang, Y.J. Oxidative Degradation of Polysorbate Surfactants Studied by Liquid Chromatography–Mass
Spectrometry. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 1005–1018. [CrossRef]
212. Hvattum, E.; Yip, W.L.; Grace, D.; Dyrstad, K. Characterization of Polysorbate 80 with Liquid Chromatography Mass Spec-
trometry and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy: Speciﬁc Determination of Oxidation Products of Thermally Oxidized
Polysorbate 80. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 2012 ,62, 7–16. [CrossRef]
213. Zhang, H.; Wang, Z.; Liu, O. Simultaneous Determination of Kolliphor HS15 and Miglyol 812 in Microemulsion Formulation by
Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography Coupled with Nano Quantity Analyte Detector. J. Pharm. Anal. 2016 ,6, 11–17.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
214. Coon, J.S.; Knudson, W.; Clodfelter, K.; Lu, B.; Weinstein, R.S. Solutol HS 15, Nontoxic Polyoxyethylene Esters of 12-Hydroxystearic
Acid, Reverses Multidrug Resistance. Cancer Res. 1991 ,51, 897–902.
215. Bhaskar, V .; Middha, A.; Tiwari, S.; Shivakumar, S. Identiﬁcation and Reduction of Matrix Effects Caused by Solutol Hs15 in
Bioanalysis Using Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry. J. Anal. Bioanal. Tech. 2013 ,4, 2. [CrossRef]
216. Bhaskar, V .V .; Middha, A.; Srivastava, P .; Rajagopal, S. Liquid Chromatography/Tandem Mass Spectrometry Method for
Quantitative Estimation of Solutol HS15 and Its Applications. J. Pharm. Anal. 2015 ,5, 120–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
217. Cervantes-Martinez, C.V .; Emo, M.; Lebeau, B.; Garc ía-Celma, M.-J.; St ébé, M.-J.; Blin, J.-L. Insights of the Kolliphor/Water System
for the Design of Mesostructured Silica Materials. Microporous Mesoporous Mater. 2019 ,285, 231–240. [CrossRef]
218. BASF. Product Regulations Technical Information Sheet- Kolliphor EL ; BASF: Ludwigshafen, Germany, 2019.
219. European Medicine Agency. Polyolyl Caster Oil, Polyoxyl Hydrogenated Caster Oil ; Summary Report; European Medicine Agency
Committee for Veterinary Medicinal Products: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1999.
220. Irizarry, L.; McKoy, J.; Samaras, A.; Fisher, M.; Carias, E.; Raisch, D.; Calhoun, E.; Bennett, C.; Brown, J.; Lurie, R. Cremophor
EL-Containing Paclitaxel-Induced Anaphylaxis: A Call to Action. Community Oncol. 2009 ,6, 132–134. [CrossRef]
221. Riegert-Johnson, D.L.; Volcheck, G.W. The Incidence of Anaphylaxis Following Intravenous Phytonadione (Vitamin K1): A 5-Year
Retrospective Review. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2002 ,89, 400–406. [CrossRef]
222. Baker, M.T.; Naguib, M. Propofol: The Challenges of Formulation. Anesthesiology 2005 ,103, 860–876. [CrossRef]
223. Ebo, D.G.; Piel, G.C.; Conraads, V .; Stevens, W.J. IgE-Mediated Anaphylaxis after First Intravenous Infusion of Cyclosporine. Ann.
Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2001 ,87, 243–245. [CrossRef]
224. Jenkins, D.J.; Wolever, T.M.; Taylor, R.H.; Reynolds, D.; Nineham, R.; Hockaday, T.D. Diabetic Glucose Control, Lipids, and Trace
Elements on Long-Term Guar. Br. Med. J. 1980 ,280, 1353–1354. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 46 of 52
225. Volcheck, G.W.; Van Dellen, R.G. Anaphylaxis to Intravenous Cyclosporine and Tolerance to Oral Cyclosporine: Case Report and
Review. Ann. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1998 ,80, 159–163. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
226. Wenande, E.; Garvey, L.H. Immediate-Type Hypersensitivity to Polyethylene Glycols: A Review. Clin. Exp. Allergy 2016 ,
46, 907–922. [CrossRef]
227. Rosenberg, A.S. Effects of Protein Aggregates: An Immunologic Perspective. AAPS J. 2006 ,8, E501–E507. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
228. Moore, W.V .; Leppert, P . Role of Aggregated Human Growth Hormone (HGH) in Development of Antibodies to HGH. J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metab. 1980 ,51, 691–697. [CrossRef]
229. Baert, F.; Noman, M.; Vermeire, S.; Van Assche, G.; D’ Haens, G.; Carbonez, A.; Rutgeerts, P . Inﬂuence of Immunogenicity on the
Long-Term Efﬁcacy of Inﬂiximab in Crohn’s Disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 2003 ,348, 601–608. [CrossRef]
230. Cox, F.; Khalib, K.; Conlon, N. PEG That Reaction: A Case Series of Allergy to Polyethylene Glycol. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 2021 ,
61, 832–835. [CrossRef]
231. Nagarajan, R. Solubilization of Hydrocarbons and Resulting Aggregate Shape Transitions in Aqueous Solutions of Pluronic ®(PEO–
PPO–PEO) Block Copolymers. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 1999 ,16, 55–72. [CrossRef]
232. Kabanov, A.V .; Batrakova, E.V .; Alakhov, V .Y. Pluronic Block Copolymers as Novel Polymer Therapeutics for Drug and Gene
Delivery. J. Control. Release 2002 ,82, 189–212. [CrossRef]
233. Emanuele, M.; Balasubramaniam, B. Differential Effects of Commercial-Grade and Puriﬁed Poloxamer 188 on Renal Function.
Drugs R D 2014 ,14, 73–83. [CrossRef]
234. Strickley, R.G.; Lambert, W.J. A Review of Formulations of Commercially Available Antibodies. J. Pharm. Sci. 2021 ,
110, 2590–2608.e56. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
235. Uchiyama, S. Liquid Formulation for Antibody Drugs. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2014 ,1844 , 2041–2052. [CrossRef]
236. Gervasi, V .; Dall Agnol, R.; Cullen, S.; McCoy, T.; Vucen, S.; Crean, A. Parenteral Protein Formulations: An Overview of Approved
Products within the European Union. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2018 ,131, 8–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
237. Highlights of Prescribing Information: Norditropin ®(Somatropin) Injection, for Subcutaneous Use. 2016. Available online:
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2017/021148s049lbl.pdf (accessed on 5 December 2021).
238. Erlandsson, B. Stability-Indicating Changes in Poloxamers: The Degradation of Ethylene Oxide-Propylene Oxide Block Copoly-
mers at 25 and 40C.Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2002 ,78, 571–575. [CrossRef]
239. Gallet, G.; Carroccio, S.; Rizzarelli, P .; Karlsson, S. Thermal Degradation of Poly(Ethylene Oxide–Propylene Oxide–Ethylene Oxide)
Triblock Copolymer: Comparative Study by SEC/NMR, SEC/MALDI-TOF-MS and SPME/GC-MS. Polymer 2002 ,43, 1081–1094 .
[CrossRef]
240. Wang, T.; Markham, A.; Thomas, S.J.; Wang, N.; Huang, L.; Clemens, M.; Rajagopalan, N. Solution Stability of Poloxamer 188
under Stress Conditions. J. Pharm. Sci. 2019 ,108, 1264–1271. [CrossRef]
241. Grapentin, C.; Müller, C.; Kishore, R.S.K.; Adler, M.; ElBialy, I.; Friess, W.; Huwyler, J.; Khan, T.A. Protein-Polydimethylsiloxane
Particles in Liquid Vial Monoclonal Antibody Formulations Containing Poloxamer 188. J. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,109, 2393–2404.
[CrossRef]
242. Wang, T.; Richard, C.A.; Dong, X.; Shi, G.H. Impact of Surfactants on the Functionality of Preﬁlled Syringes. J. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,
109, 3413–3422. [CrossRef]
243. Jiao, J. Polyoxyethylated Nonionic Surfactants and Their Applications in Topical Ocular Drug Delivery. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.
2008 ,60, 1663–1673. [CrossRef]
244. Sahoo, R.K.; Biswas, N.; Guha, A.; Sahoo, N.; Kuotsu, K. Nonionic Surfactant Vesicles in Ocular Delivery: Innovative Approaches
and Perspectives. Biomed. Res. Int. 2014 ,2014 , 263604. [CrossRef]
245. Mesiha, M.S.; El-Bitar, H.I. Hypoglycaemic Effect of Oral Insulin Preparations Containing Brij 35, 52, 58 or 92 and Stearic Acid.
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 1981 ,33, 733–734. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
246. Bam, N.B.; Randolph, T.W.; Cleland, J.L. Stability of Protein Formulations: Investigation of Surfactant Effects by a Novel EPR
Spectroscopic Technique. Pharm. Res. 1995 ,12, 2–11. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
247. Jones, L.S.; Bam, N.B.; Randolph, T.W. Surfactant-Stabilized Protein Formulations: A Review of Protein-Surfactant Interactions
and Novel Analytical Methodologies. In Therapeutic Protein and Peptide Formulation and Delivery ; ACS Symposium Series; American
Chemical Society: Washington, DC, USA, 1997; Volume 675, pp. 206–222. ISBN 978-0-8412-3528-1.
248. Krause, M.; Rudolph, R.; Schwarz, E. The Non-Ionic Detergent Brij 58P Mimics Chaperone Effects. FEBS Lett. 2002 ,532, 253–255.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
249. Yue, L.; Yan, Z.; Li, H.; Liu, X.; Sun, P . Brij-58, a Potential Injectable Protein-Stabilizer Used in Therapeutic Protein Formulation.
Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2020 ,146, 73–83. [CrossRef]
250. Agarkhed, M.; O’Dell, C.; Hsieh, M.-C.; Zhang, J.; Goldstein, J.; Srivastava, A. Effect of Surfactants on Mechanical, Thermal, and
Photostability of a Monoclonal Antibody. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2018 ,19, 79–92. [CrossRef]
251. Eng, Y.Y.; Sharma, V .K.; Ray, A.K. Photocatalytic Degradation of Nonionic Surfactant, Brij 35 in Aqueous TiO2 Suspensions.
Chemosphere 2010 ,79, 205–209. [CrossRef]
252. U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁce. Alkyl (C10–C16) Polyglycosides; Exemptions from the Requirement of a Tolerance ;
U.S. Government Accountability Ofﬁce: Washington, DC, USA, 2005.
253. Maggio, E.T. Stabilizing Alkylglycoside Compositions and Methods Thereof. U.S. Patent US12/050,038, 17 March 2008.Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 47 of 52
254. Rifkin, R.A.; Maggio, E.T.; Dike, S.; Kerr, D.A.; Levy, M. N-Dodecyl- -D-Maltoside Inhibits Aggregation of Human Interferon- -1b
and Reduces Its Immunogenicity. J. Neuroimmune Pharm. 2011 ,6, 158–162. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
255. Katz, J.S.; Tan, Y.; Kuppannan, K.; Song, Y.; Brennan, D.J.; Young, T.; Yao, L.; Jordan, S. Amino-Acid-Incorporating Nonionic
Surfactants for Stabilization of Protein Pharmaceuticals. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2016 ,2, 1093–1096. [CrossRef]
256. Katz, J.S.; Nolin, A.; Yezer, B.A.; Jordan, S. Dynamic Properties of Novel Excipient Suggest Mechanism for Improved Performance
in Liquid Stabilization of Protein Biologics. Mol. Pharm. 2019 ,16, 282–291. [CrossRef]
257. Katz, J.S.; Brennan, D.J.; Dan, F.; Tan, Y.; Jordan, S.L.; Young, T.J.; Song, Y. Polyalkoxy Fatty Compound. U.S. Patent
US20180273683A1, 27 September 2018.
258. Mensink, M.A.; Frijlink, H.W.; van der Voort Maarschalk, K.; Hinrichs, W.L.J. How Sugars Protect Proteins in the Solid State and
during Drying (Review): Mechanisms of Stabilization in Relation to Stress Conditions. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2017 ,114, 288–295.
[CrossRef]
259. Olsson, C.; Swenson, J. The Role of Disaccharides for Protein–Protein Interactions—A SANS Study. Mol. Phys. 2019 ,
117, 3408–3416. [CrossRef]
260. Carpenter, J.F.; Kendrick, B.S.; Chang, B.S.; Manning, M.C.; Randolph, T.W. Inhibition of Stress-Induced Aggregation of Protein
Therapeutics. In Methods in Enzymology ; Amyloid, Prions, and Other Protein Aggregates; Academic Press: Cambridge, MA, USA,
1999; Volume 309, pp. 236–255. ISBN 978-0-08-049667.
261. Panzica, M.; Emanuele, A.; Cordone, L. Thermal Aggregation of Bovine Serum Albumin in Trehalose and Sucrose Aqueous
Solutions. J. Phys. Chem. B 2012 ,116, 11829–11836. [CrossRef]
262. Sun, W.Q.; Davidson, P . Protein Inactivation in Amorphous Sucrose and Trehalose Matrices: Effects of Phase Separation and
Crystallization. Biochim. Et Biophys. Acta (BBA)-Gen. Subj. 1998 ,1425 , 235–244. [CrossRef]
263. Uritani, M.; Takai, M.; Yoshinaga, K. Protective Effect of Disaccharides on Restriction Endonucleases during Drying under
Vacuum. J. Biochem. 1995 ,117, 774–779. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
264. Ohtake, S.; Wang, Y.J. Trehalose: Current Use and Future Applications. J. Pharm. Sci. 2011 ,100, 2020–2053. [CrossRef]
265. Schiefelbein, L.; Keller, M.; Weissmann, F.; Luber, M.; Bracher, F.; Frieß, W. Synthesis, Characterization and Assessment of
Suitability of Trehalose Fatty Acid Esters as Alternatives for Polysorbates in Protein Formulation. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2010 ,
76, 342–350. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
266. Messina, M.S.; Ko, J.H.; Yang, Z.; Strouse, M.J.; Houk, K.N.; Maynard, H.D. Effect of Trehalose Polymer Regioisomers on Protein
Stabilization. Polym. Chem. 2017 ,8, 4781–4788. [CrossRef]
267. Mastrotto, F.; Francini, N.; Allen, S.; van der Walle, C.F.; Stolnik, S.; Mantovani, G. Synthetic Glycopolymers as Modulators of
Protein Aggregation: Inﬂuences of Chemical Composition, Topology and Concentration. J. Mater. Chem. B 2018 ,6, 1044–1054.
[CrossRef]
268. Mancini, R.J.; Lee, J.; Maynard, H.D. Trehalose Glycopolymers for Stabilization of Protein Conjugates to Environmental Stressors.
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012 ,134, 8474–8479. [CrossRef]
269. Lee, J.; Lin, E.-W.; Lau, U.Y.; Hedrick, J.L.; Bat, E.; Maynard, H.D. Trehalose Glycopolymers as Excipients for Protein Stabilization.
Biomacromolecules 2013 ,14, 2561–2569. [CrossRef]
270. Liu, Y.; Lee, J.; Mansﬁeld, K.M.; Ko, J.H.; Sallam, S.; Wesdemiotis, C.; Maynard, H.D. Trehalose Glycopolymer Enhances Both
Solution Stability and Pharmacokinetics of a Therapeutic Protein. Bioconjugate Chem. 2017 ,28, 836–845. [CrossRef]
271. Schebor, C.; Burin, L.; del PilarBuera, M.; Chirife, J. Stability to Hydrolysis and Browning of Trehalose, Sucrose and Rafﬁnose
in Low-Moisture Systems in Relation to Their Use as Protectants of Dry Biomaterials. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 1999 ,32, 481–485.
[CrossRef]
272. Li, J.; Chen, J.; An, L.; Yuan, X.; Yao, L. Polyol and Sugar Osmolytes Can Shorten Protein Hydrogen Bonds to Modulate Function.
Commun. Biol. 2020 ,3, 528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
273. Timasheff, S.N. Control of Protein Stability and Reactions by Weakly Interacting Cosolvents: The Simplicity of the Complicated.
Adv. Protein Chem. 1998 ,51, 355–432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
274. Carpenter, J.F.; Crowe, J.H. An Infrared Spectroscopic Study of the Interactions of Carbohydrates with Dried Proteins. Biochemistry
1989 ,28, 3916–3922. [CrossRef]
275. Vagenende, V .; Yap, M.G.S.; Trout, B.L. Mechanisms of Protein Stabilization and Prevention of Protein Aggregation by Glycerol.
Biochemistry 2009 ,48, 11084–11096. [CrossRef]
276. Jena, S.; Suryanarayanan, R.; Aksan, A. Mutual Inﬂuence of Mannitol and Trehalose on Crystallization Behavior in Frozen
Solutions. Pharm. Res. 2016 ,33, 1413–1425. [CrossRef]
277. Cui, Y.; Cui, P .; Chen, B.; Li, S.; Guan, H. Monoclonal Antibodies: Formulations of Marketed Products and Recent Advances in
Novel Delivery System. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2017 ,43, 519–530. [CrossRef]
278. Andya, J.D.; Maa, Y.-F.; Costantino, H.R.; Nguyen, P .-A.; Dasovich, N.; Sweeney, T.D.; Hsu, C.C.; Shire, S.J. Effect of Formulation
Excipients on Protein Stability and Aerosol Performance of Spray-Dried Powders of a Recombinant Humanized Anti-IgE
Monoclonal Antibody1. Pharm. Res. 1999 ,16, 350–358. [CrossRef]
279. Al-Hussein, A.; Gieseler, H. The Effect of Mannitol Crystallization in Mannitol–Sucrose Systems on LDH Stability during
Freeze-Drying. J. Pharm. Sci. 2012 ,101, 2534–2544. [CrossRef]
280. Izutsu, K.; Yoshioka, S.; Terao, T. Effect of Mannitol Crystallinity on the Stabilization of Enzymes during Freeze-Drying. Chem.
Pharm. Bull. 1994 ,42, 5–8. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 48 of 52
281. Izutsu, K.; Kojima, S. Excipient Crystallinity and Its Protein-Structure-Stabilizing Effect during Freeze-Drying. J. Pharm. Pharmacol.
2002 ,54, 1033–1039. [CrossRef]
282. Costantino, H.R.; Andya, J.D.; Nguyen, P .-A.; Dasovich, N.; Sweeney, T.D.; Shire, S.J.; Hsu, C.C.; Maa, Y.-F. Effect of Mannitol
Crystallization on the Stability and Aerosol Performance of a Spray-Dried Pharmaceutical Protein, Recombinant Humanized
Anti-IgE Monoclonal Antibody. J. Pharm. Sci. 1998 ,87, 1406–1411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
283. Pyne, A.; Chatterjee, K.; Suryanarayanan, R. Solute Crystallization in Mannitol–Glycine Systems—Implications on Protein
Stabilization in Freeze-dried Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2003 ,92, 2272–2283. [CrossRef]
284. Thakral, S.; Sonje, J.; Munjal, B.; Bhatnagar, B.; Suryanarayanan, R. Mannitol as an Excipient for Lyophilized Injectable Formula-
tions. J. Pharm. Sci. 2022 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
285. Cleland, J.L.; Lam, X.; Kendrick, B.; Yang, J.; Yang, T.; Overcashier, D.; Brooks, D.; Hsu, C.; Carpenter, J.F. A Speciﬁc Molar Ratio
of Stabilizer to Protein Is Required for Storage Stability of a Lyophilized Monoclonal Antibody. J. Pharm. Sci. 2001 ,90, 310–321.
[CrossRef]
286. Wang, S.S.; Yan, Y.S.; Ho, K. US FDA-Approved Therapeutic Antibodies with High-Concentration Formulation: Summaries and
Perspectives. Antib. Ther. 2021 ,4, 262–272. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
287. Piedmonte, D.M.; Summers, C.; McAuley, A.; Karamujic, L.; Ratnaswamy, G. Sorbitol Crystallization Can Lead to Protein
Aggregation in Frozen Protein Formulations. Pharm. Res. 2007 ,24, 136–146. [CrossRef]
288. Piedmonte, D.M.; Hair, A.; Baker, P .; Brych, L.; Nagapudi, K.; Lin, H.; Cao, W.; Hershenson, S.; Ratnaswamy, G. Sorbitol
Crystallization-Induced Aggregation in Frozen MAb Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2015 ,104, 686–697. [CrossRef]
289. Davis, J.M.; Zhang, N.; Payne, R.W.; Murphy, B.M.; Abdul-Fattah, A.M.; Matsuura, J.E.; Herman, A.C.; Manning, M.C. Stability of
Lyophilized Sucrose Formulations of an IgG1: Subvisible Particle Formation. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 2013 ,18, 883–896. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
290. Chang, L.L.; Shepherd, D.; Sun, J.; Tang, X.C.; Pikal, M.J. Effect of Sorbitol and Residual Moisture on the Stability of Lyophilized
Antibodies: Implications for the Mechanism of Protein Stabilization in the Solid State. J. Pharm. Sci. 2005 ,94, 1445–1455.
[CrossRef]
291. Rowe, R.C.; Quinn, M.E. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients , 6th ed.; Pharmaceutical Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
292. Kumar, A. Adverse Effects of Pharmaceutical Excipients. Advers. Drug React. Bull. 2003 ,222, 851–854. [CrossRef]
293. Pawar, S.; Kumar, A. Issues in the Formulation of Drugs for Oral Use in Children: Role of Excipients. Paediatr. Drugs 2002 ,
4, 371–379. [CrossRef]
294. Sweetman, S.C. Martindale: The Complete Drug Reference , 36th ed.; Pharmaceutical Press: London, UK, 2009.
295. Hägnevik, K.; Gordon, E.; Lins, L.E.; Wilhelmsson, S.; Forster, D. Glycerol-Induced Haemolysis with Haemoglobinuria and Acute
Renal Failure. Report of Three Cases. Lancet 1974 ,1, 75–77. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
296. Welch, K.M.; Meyer, J.S.; Okamoto, S.; Mathew, N.T.; Rivera, V .M.; Bond, J. Letter: Glycerol-Induced Haemolysis. Lancet 1974 ,
1, 416–417. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
297. Staples, R.; Misher, A.; Wardell, J., Jr. Gastrointestinal Irritant Effect of Glycerin as Compared with Sorbitol and Propylene Glycol
in Rats and Dogs. J. Pharm. Sci. 1967 ,56, 398–400. [CrossRef]
298. Porter, G.A.; Starr, A.; Kimsey, J.; Lenertz, H. Mannitol Hemodilution-Perfusion: The Kinetics of Mannitol Distribution and
Excretion during Cardiopulmonary Bypass. J. Surg. Res. 1967 ,7, 447–456. [CrossRef]
299. Safety Assessment of Mannitol, Sorbitol, and Xylitol as Used in Cosmetics 2019. Available online: https://www.cir-safety.org/
sites/default/ﬁles/Mannitol,%20Sorbitol,%20Xylitol_0.pdf (accessed on 29 September 2022).
300. McNeill, I.Y. Hypersensitivity Reaction to Mannitol. Drug Intell. Clin. Pharm. 1985 ,19, 552–553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
301. Lamb, J.D.; Keogh, J.A. Anaphylactoid Reaction to Mannitol. Can. Anaesth Soc. J. 1979 ,26, 435–436. [CrossRef]
302. Spaeth, G.L.; Spaeth, E.B.; Spaeth, P .G.; Lucier, A.C. Anaphylactic Reaction to Mannitol. Arch. Ophthalmol. 1967 ,78, 583–584.
[CrossRef]
303. Serno, T.; Geidobler, R.; Winter, G. Protein Stabilization by Cyclodextrins in the Liquid and Dried State. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev.
2011 ,63, 1086–1106. [CrossRef]
304. Vyas, A.; Saraf, S.; Saraf, S. Cyclodextrin Based Novel Drug Delivery Systems. J. Incl. Phenom. Macrocycl. Chem. 2008 ,62, 23–42.
[CrossRef]
305. Gidwani, B.; Vyas, A. A Comprehensive Review on Cyclodextrin-Based Carriers for Delivery of Chemotherapeutic Cytotoxic
Anticancer Drugs. Biomed. Res. Int. 2015 ,2015 , 198268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
306. Ferreira, L.; Campos, J.; Veiga, F.; Cardoso, C.; Paiva-Santos, A.C. Cyclodextrin-Based Delivery Systems in Parenteral Formulations:
A Critical Update Review. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2022 ,178, 35–52. [CrossRef]
307. Charman, S.A.; Mason, K.L.; Charman, W.N. Techniques for Assessing the Effects of Pharmaceutical Excipients on the Aggregation
of Porcine Growth Hormone. Pharm. Res. 1993 ,10, 954–962. [CrossRef]
308. Tavornvipas, S.; Tajiri, S.; Hirayama, F.; Arima, H.; Uekama, K. Effects of Hydrophilic Cyclodextrins on Aggregation of
Recombinant Human Growth Hormone. Pharm. Res. 2004 ,21, 2369–2376. [CrossRef]
309. Taneri, F.; Güneri, T.; Aigner, Z.; Kata, M. Improvement in the Physicochemical Properties of Ketoconazole through Complexation
with Cyclodextrin Derivatives. J. Incl. Phenom. 2002 ,44, 257–260. [CrossRef]
310. Yoshida, A.; Arima, H.; Uekama, K.; Pitha, J. Pharmaceutical Evaluation of Hydroxyalkyl Ethers of -Cyclodextrins. Int. J. Pharm.
1988 ,46, 217–222. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 49 of 52
311. Samra, H.S.; He, F.; Bhambhani, A.; Pipkin, J.D.; Zimmerer, R.; Joshi, S.B.; Middaugh, C.R. The Effects of Substituted Cyclodextrins
on the Colloidal and Conformational Stability of Selected Proteins. J. Pharm. Sci. 2010 ,99, 2800–2818. [CrossRef]
312. Serno, T.; Carpenter, J.F.; Randolph, T.W.; Winter, G. Inhibition of Agitation-Induced Aggregation of an IgG-Antibody by
Hydroxypropyl-Beta-Cyclodextrin. J. Pharm. Sci. 2010 ,99, 1193–1206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
313. Wu, H.H.; Garidel, P .; Michaela, B. HP- -CD for the Formulation of IgG and Ig-Based Biotherapeutics. Int. J. Pharm. 2021 ,
601, 120531. [CrossRef]
314. Aachmann, F.L.; Otzen, D.E.; Larsen, K.L.; Wimmer, R. Structural Background of Cyclodextrin–Protein Interactions. Protein Eng.
Des. Sel. 2003 ,16, 905–912. [CrossRef]
315. Zhang, H.; Hong, S.; Tan, S.S.K.; Peng, T.; Goh, L.Y.H.; Lam, K.H.; Chow, K.T.; Gokhale, R. Polysorbates versus Hydroxypropyl
Beta-Cyclodextrin (HP CD): Comparative Study on Excipient Stability and Stabilization Beneﬁts on Monoclonal Antibodies.
Molecules 2022 ,27, 6497. [CrossRef]
316. Stam, M.R.; Danchin, E.G.J.; Rancurel, C.; Coutinho, P .M.; Henrissat, B. Dividing the Large Glycoside Hydrolase Family 13
into Subfamilies: Towards Improved Functional Annotations of Alpha-Amylase-Related Proteins. Protein Eng. Des. Sel. 2006 ,
19, 555–562. [CrossRef]
317. Karginov, V .A. Cyclodextrin Derivatives as Anti-Infectives. Curr. Opin. Pharmacol. 2013 ,13, 717–725. [CrossRef]
318. Frömming, K.-H.; Szejtli, J. Cyclodextrins in Pharmacy ; Springer Science and Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 1994;
ISBN 978-94-015-8277-3.
319. Buedenbender, S.; Schulz, G.E. Structural Base for Enzymatic Cyclodextrin Hydrolysis. J. Mol. Biol. 2009 ,385, 606–617. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
320. Atwood, J.L.; Lehn, J.-M.; Szejtli, J. The Metabolism, Toxicity Abd Biological Effects of Cyclodextrins. In Comprehensive Supramolec-
ular Chemistry ; Pergamon: Oxford, UK, 1996; Volume 3. ISBN 978-0-08-042715-7.
321. Munro, I.C.; Newberne, P .M.; Young, V .R.; Bär, A. Safety Assessment of Gamma-Cyclodextrin. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2004 ,
39(Suppl. S1), S3–S13. [CrossRef]
322. Jodál, I.; Kandra, L.; Harangi, J.; N ánási, P .; Szejtli, J. Enzymatic Degradation of Cyclodextrins; Preparation and Application of
Their Fragments. J. Incl. Phenom. 1984 ,2, 877–884. [CrossRef]
323. Turner, P .; Labes, A.; Fridjonsson, O.H.; Hreggvidson, G.O.; Schönheit, P .; Kristjansson, J.K.; Holst, O.; Karlsson, E.N. Two Novel
Cyclodextrin-Degrading Enzymes Isolated from Thermophilic Bacteria Have Similar Domain Structures but Differ in Oligomeric
State and Activity Proﬁle. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2005 ,100, 380–390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
324. Connolly, B.; HAMBURG, L.; HOLZ, E. Formulations with Reduced Degradation of Polysorbate. French Patent WO2017117311A1,
6 July 2017.
325. Uchida, K.; Kawakishi, S. Oxidative Degradation of -Cyclodextrin Induced by an Ascorbic Acid-Copper Ion System. Agric. Biol.
Chem. 1986 ,50, 367–373. [CrossRef]
326. Mamani, P .L.; Ruiz-Caro, R.; Veiga, M.D. Matrix Tablets: The Effect of Hydroxypropyl Methylcellulose/Anhydrous Dibasic
Calcium Phosphate Ratio on the Release Rate of a Water-Soluble Drug through the Gastrointestinal Tract I. in vitro Tests. AAPS
PharmSciTech. 2012 ,13, 1073–1083. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
327. Ishikawa, T.; Watanabe, Y.; Takayama, K.; Endo, H.; Matsumoto, M. Effect of Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC) on the
Release Proﬁles and Bioavailability of a Poorly Water-Soluble Drug from Tablets Prepared Using Macrogol and HPMC. Int. J.
Pharm. 2000 ,202, 173–178. [CrossRef]
328. Maškov á, E.; Kubov á, K.; Raimi-Abraham, B.T.; Vllasaliu, D.; Vohl ídalov á, E.; Tur ánek, J.; Mašek, J. Hypromellose-A Traditional
Pharmaceutical Excipient with Modern Applications in Oral and Oromucosal Drug Delivery. J. Control. Release 2020 ,324, 695–727.
[CrossRef]
329. CiNii. Final Report on the Safety Assessment of Hydroxyethylcellulose, Hydroxypropylcellulose, Methylcellulose, Hydrox-
ypropyl Methylcellulose, and Cellulose Gum. J. Am. Coll. Toxicol. 1986 ,5, 1–59. [CrossRef]
330. Soane, D.S.; Mahoney, R.P .; Wuthrich, P .; GREENE, D.G. Stabilizing Excipients for Therapeutic Protein Formulations. French
Patent WO2019036619, 21 February 2019.
331. Lynch, S.; Turowski, M.; Yokoyama, W.; Hong, Y.; Conklin, J.; Hung, S.; Young, S. Uses of Water-Soluble Cellulose Derivatives for
Preventing or Treating Metabolic Syndrome. French Patent WO2008051794, 2 May 2008.
332. Sasahara, K.; McPhie, P .; Minton, A.P . Effect of Dextran on Protein Stability and Conformation Attributed to Macromolecular
Crowding. J. Mol. Biol. 2003 ,326, 1227–1237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
333. Flood, A.; Estrada, M.; McAdams, D.; Ji, Y.; Chen, D. Development of a Freeze-Dried, Heat-Stable Inﬂuenza Subunit Vaccine
Formulation. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0164692. [CrossRef]
334. Sun, W.Q.; Davidson, P . Effect of Dextran Molecular Weight on Protein Stabilization during Freeze-Drying and Storage. Cryo Lett.
2001 ,22, 285–292.
335. Jones, B.; Mahajan, A.; Aksan, A. Dextranol: A Better Lyoprotectant. bioRxiv 2018 , 490441. [CrossRef]
336. Rudin, C.; Günthard, J.; Halter, C.; Staehelin, J.; Berglund, A. Anaphylactoid Reaction to BCG Vaccine Containing High Molecular
Weight Dextran. Eur. J. Pediatr. 1995 ,154, 941–942. [CrossRef]
337. Uchida, S.; Takekawa, D.; Kitayama, M.; Hirota, K. Two Cases of Circulatory Collapse Due to Suspected Remimazolam
Anaphylaxis. JA Clin. Rep. 2022 ,8, 18. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 50 of 52
338. Bozorgmehr, M.R.; Monhemi, H. How Can a Free Amino Acid Stabilize a Protein? Insights from Molecular Dynamics Simulation.
J. Solut. Chem. 2015 ,44, 45–53. [CrossRef]
339. Bru´ zdziak, P .; Panuszko, A.; Kaczkowska, E.; Piotrowski, B.; Daghir, A.; Demkowicz, S.; Stangret, J. Taurine as a Water Structure
Breaker and Protein Stabilizer. Amino Acids 2018 ,50, 125–140. [CrossRef]
340. Platts, L.; Falconer, R.J. Controlling Protein Stability: Mechanisms Revealed Using Formulations of Arginine, Glycine and
Guanidinium HCl with Three Globular Proteins. Int. J. Pharm. 2015 ,486, 131–135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
341. Shiraki, K.; Kudou, M.; Fujiwara, S.; Imanaka, T.; Takagi, M. Biophysical Effect of Amino Acids on the Prevention of Protein
Aggregation. J. Biochem. 2002 ,132, 591–595. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
342. Mojtabavi, S.; Samadi, N.; Faramarzi, M.A. Osmolyte-Induced Folding and Stability of Proteins: Concepts and Characterization.
Iran. J. Pharm. Res. 2019 ,18, 13–30. [CrossRef]
343. Arakawa, T.; Tsumoto, K. The Effects of Arginine on Refolding of Aggregated Proteins: Not Facilitate Refolding, but Suppress
Aggregation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2003 ,304, 148–152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
344. Inoue, N.; Takai, E.; Arakawa, T.; Shiraki, K. Arginine and Lysine Reduce the High Viscosity of Serum Albumin Solutions for
Pharmaceutical Injection. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2014 ,117, 539–543. [CrossRef]
345. Inoue, N.; Takai, E.; Arakawa, T.; Shiraki, K. Speciﬁc Decrease in Solution Viscosity of Antibodies by Arginine for Therapeutic
Formulations. Mol. Pharm. 2014 ,11, 1889–1896. [CrossRef]
346. Das, U.; Hariprasad, G.; Ethayathulla, A.S.; Manral, P .; Das, T.K.; Pasha, S.; Mann, A.; Ganguli, M.; Verma, A.K.; Bhat, R.; et al.
Inhibition of Protein Aggregation: Supramolecular Assemblies of Arginine Hold the Key. PLoS ONE 2007 ,2, e1176. [CrossRef]
347. Shukla, D.; Trout, B.L. Interaction of Arginine with Proteins and the Mechanism by Which It Inhibits Aggregation. J. Phys.
Chem. B 2010 ,114, 13426–13438. [CrossRef]
348. Stärtzel, P . Arginine as an Excipient for Protein Freeze-Drying: A Mini Review. J. Pharm. Sci. 2018 ,107, 960–967. [CrossRef]
349. Falconer, R.J.; Chan, C.; Hughes, K.; Munro, T.P . Stabilization of a Monoclonal Antibody during Puriﬁcation and Formulation by
Addition of Basic Amino Acid Excipients. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 2011 ,86, 942–948. [CrossRef]
350. Holeˇ cek, M. Histidine in Health and Disease: Metabolism, Physiological Importance, and Use as a Supplement. Nutrients 2020 ,
12, E848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
351. Bramham, J.E.; Davies, S.A.; Podmore, A.; Golovanov, A.P . Stability of a High-Concentration Monoclonal Antibody Solution
Produced by Liquid–Liquid Phase Separation. MAbs 2021 ,13, 1940666. [CrossRef]
352. Burnett, C.L.; Heldreth, B.; Bergfeld, W.F.; Belsito, D.V .; Hill, R.A.; Klaassen, C.D.; Liebler, D.C.; Marks, J.G.; Shank, R.C.;
Slaga, T.J.; et al . Safety Assessment of -Amino Acids as Used in Cosmetics. Int. J. Toxicol. 2013 ,32, 41S–64S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
353. Label: R-Gene ®10 Arginine Hydrochloride Injection, USP for Intravenous Use. Available online: https://labeling.pﬁzer.com/
ShowLabeling.aspx?id=642 (accessed on 15 October 2022).
354. Tangphao, O.; Grossmann, M.; Chalon, S.; Hoffman, B.B.; Blaschke, T.F. Pharmacokinetics of Intravenous and Oral L-Arginine in
Normal Volunteers. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 1999 ,47, 261–266. [CrossRef]
355. Bode-Böger, S.M.; Böger, R.H.; Creutzig, A.; Tsikas, D.; Gutzki, F.M.; Alexander, K.; Frölich, J.C. L-Arginine Infusion Decreases
Peripheral Arterial Resistance and Inhibits Platelet Aggregation in Healthy Subjects. Clin. Sci. 1994 ,87, 303–310. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
356. Registration Dossier-ECHA. Available online: https://echa.europa.eu/de/registration-dossier/-/registered-dossier/13725/7/3/
1 (accessed on 27 September 2022).
357. Tsubuku, S.; Hatayama, K.; Mawatari, K.; Smriga, M.; Kimura, T. Thirteen-Week Oral Toxicity Study of l-Arginine in Rats. Int. J.
Toxicol. 2004 ,23, 101–105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
358. Tsai-Turton, M. Pharmacology/Toxicology NDA/BLA Review and Evaluation ; FDA: Silver Spring, MA, USA, 2016.
359. Minois, N.; Carmona-Gutierrez, D.; Madeo, F. Polyamines in Aging and Disease. Aging 2011 ,3, 716–732. [CrossRef]
360. Kudou, M.; Shiraki, K.; Fujiwara, S.; Imanaka, T.; Takagi, M. Prevention of Thermal Inactivation and Aggregation of Lysozyme by
Polyamines. Eur. J. Biochem. 2003 ,270, 4547–4554. [CrossRef]
361. Okanojo, M.; Shiraki, K.; Kudou, M.; Nishikori, S.; Takagi, M. Diamines Prevent Thermal Aggregation and Inactivation of
Lysozyme. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2005 ,100, 556–561. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
362. Schwarz, C.; Stekovic, S.; Wirth, M.; Benson, G.; Royer, P .; Sigrist, S.J.; Pieber, T.; Dammbrueck, C.; Magnes, C.; Eisenberg, T.; et al.
Safety and Tolerability of Spermidine Supplementation in Mice and Older Adults with Subjective Cognitive Decline. Aging 2018 ,
10, 19–33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
363. Til, H.P .; Falke, H.E.; Prinsen, M.K.; Willems, M.I. Acute and Subacute Toxicity of Tyramine, Spermidine, Spermine, Putrescine
and Cadaverine in Rats. Food Chem. Toxicol. 1997 ,35, 337–348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
364. Truong-Le, V .; Lovalenti, P .M.; Abdul-Fattah, A.M. Stabilization Challenges and Formulation Strategies Associated with Oral
Biologic Drug Delivery Systems. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2015 ,93, 95–108. [CrossRef]
365. Sönksen, P .H.; Ellis, J.P .; Lowy, C.; Rutherford, A.; Nabarro, J.D.N. A Quantitative Evaluation of the Relative Efﬁciency of Gelatine
and Albumin in Preventing Insulin Adsorption to Glass. Diabetologia 1966 ,1, 208–210. [CrossRef]
366. Jeyachandran, Y.L.; Mielczarski, E.; Rai, B.; Mielczarski, J.A. Quantitative and Qualitative Evaluation of Adsorption/Desorption
of Bovine Serum Albumin on Hydrophilic and Hydrophobic Surfaces. Langmuir 2009 ,25, 11614–11620. [CrossRef]
367. Haeuser, C.; Goldbach, P .; Huwyler, J.; Friess, W.; Allmendinger, A. Excipients for Room Temperature Stable Freeze-Dried
Monoclonal Antibody Formulations. J. Pharm. Sci. 2020 ,109, 807–817. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 51 of 52
368. Sønderby, P .; Bukrinski, J.T.; Hebditch, M.; Peters, G.H.J.; Curtis, R.A.; Harris, P . Self-Interaction of Human Serum Albumin: A
Formulation Perspective. ACS Omega 2018 ,3, 16105–16117. [CrossRef]
369. Castro, L.S.; Lobo, G.S.; Pereira, P .; Freire, M.G.; Neves, M.C.; Pedro, A.Q. Interferon-Based Biopharmaceuticals: Overview on the
Production, Puriﬁcation, and Formulation. Vaccines 2021 ,9, 328. [CrossRef]
370. Taverna, M.; Marie, A.-L.; Mira, J.-P .; Guidet, B. Speciﬁc Antioxidant Properties of Human Serum Albumin. Ann. Intensive Care
2013 ,3, 4. [CrossRef]
371. Chou, D.K.; Krishnamurthy, R.; Manning, M.C.; Randolph, T.W.; Carpenter, J.F. Physical Stability of Albinterferon- (2b) in
Aqueous Solution: Effects of Conformational Stability and Colloidal Stability on Aggregation. J. Pharm. Sci. 2012 ,101, 2702–2719.
[CrossRef]
372. Tarelli, E.; Mire-Sluis, A.; Tivnann, H.A.; Bolgiano, B.; Crane, D.T.; Gee, C.; Lemercinier, X.; Athayde, M.L.; Sutcliffe, N.;
Corran, P .H.; et al . Recombinant Human Albumin as a Stabilizer for Biological Materials and for the Preparation of International
Reference Reagents. Biologicals 1998 ,26, 331–346. [CrossRef]
373. Rajan, R.S.; Li, T.; Aras, M.; Sloey, C.; Sutherland, W.; Arai, H.; Briddell, R.; Kinstler, O.; Lueras, A.M.K.; Zhang, Y.; et al.
Modulation of Protein Aggregation by Polyethylene Glycol Conjugation: GCSF as a Case Study. Protein Sci. 2006 ,15, 1063–1075.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
374. Chao, S.-H.; Matthews, S.S.; Paxman, R.; Aksimentiev, A.; Gruebele, M.; Price, J.L. Two Structural Scenarios for Protein
Stabilization by PEG. J. Phys. Chem. B 2014 ,118, 8388–8395. [CrossRef]
375. Rawat, S.; Raman Suri, C.; Sahoo, D.K. Molecular Mechanism of Polyethylene Glycol Mediated Stabilization of Protein. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 2010 ,392, 561–566. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
376. Vrkljan, M.; Foster, T.M.; Powers, M.E.; Henkin, J.; Porter, W.R.; Staack, H.; Carpenter, J.F.; Manning, M.C. Thermal Stability of
Low Molecular Weight Urokinase during Heat Treatment. II. Effect of Polymeric Additives. Pharm. Res. 1994 ,11, 1004–1008.
[CrossRef]
377. El-hoshoudy, A.N. Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Glycol-Based Hydrogels through Waterﬂooding Processes
in Oil Reservoirs Using Molecular Dynamics and Dissipative Particle Dynamics Simulation. ACS Omega 2021 ,6, 30224–30240.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
378. McCallen, J.; Prybylski, J.; Yang, Q.; Lai, S.K. Cross-Reactivity of Select PEG-Binding Antibodies to Other Polymers Containing a
C-C-O Backbone. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2017 ,3, 1605–1615. [CrossRef]
379. Rajan, R.; Ahmed, S.; Sharma, N.; Kumar, N.; Debas, A.; Matsumura, K. Review of the Current State of Protein Aggregation
Inhibition from a Materials Chemistry Perspective: Special Focus on Polymeric Materials. Mater. Adv. 2021 ,2, 1139–1176.
[CrossRef]
380. Rajan, R.; Matsumura, K. Inhibition of Protein Aggregation by Zwitterionic Polymer-Based Core-Shell Nanogels. Sci. Rep. 2017 ,
7, 45777. [CrossRef]
381. Rajan, R.; Suzuki, Y.; Matsumura, K. Zwitterionic Polymer Design That Inhibits Aggregation and Facilitates Insulin Refolding:
Mechanistic Insights and Importance of Hydrophobicity. Macromol. Biosci. 2018 ,18, e1800016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
382. Zhao, D.; Rajan, R.; Matsumura, K. Dual Thermo- and PH-Responsive Behavior of Double Zwitterionic Graft Copolymers for
Suppression of Protein Aggregation and Protein Release. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019 ,11, 39459–39469. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
383. Reslan, M.; Kayser, V . Ionic Liquids as Biocompatible Stabilizers of Proteins. Biophys. Rev. 2018 ,10, 781–793. [CrossRef]
384. Shukla, S.K.; Mikkola, J.-P . Use of Ionic Liquids in Protein and DNA Chemistry. Front. Chem. 2020 ,8, 598662. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
385. Patel, R.; Kumari, M.; Khan, A.B. Recent Advances in the Applications of Ionic Liquids in Protein Stability and Activity: A Review.
Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2014 ,172, 3701–3720. [CrossRef]
386. Bui-Le, L.; Clarke, C.J.; Bröhl, A.; Brogan, A.P .S.; Arpino, J.A.J.; Polizzi, K.M.; Hallett, J.P . Revealing the Complexity of Ionic
Liquid–Protein Interactions through a Multi-Technique Investigation. Commun. Chem. 2020 ,3, 55. [CrossRef]
387. Kumar, A.; Venkatesu, P . Prevention of Insulin Self-Aggregation by a Protic Ionic Liquid. RSC Adv. 2012 ,3, 362–367. [CrossRef]
388. Summers, C.A.; Flowers II, R.A. Protein Renaturation by the Liquid Organic Salt Ethylammonium Nitrate. Protein Sci. 2000 ,
9, 2001–2008. [CrossRef]
389. Bisht, M.; Kumar, A.; Venkatesu, P . Refolding Effects of Partially Immiscible Ammonium-Based Ionic Liquids on the Urea-Induced
Unfolded Lysozyme Structure. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2016 ,18, 12419–12422. [CrossRef]
390. Mann, J.P .; McCluskey, A.; Atkin, R. Activity and Thermal Stability of Lysozyme in Alkylammonium Formate Ionic Liquids—
Inﬂuence of Cation Modiﬁcation. Green Chem. 2009 ,11, 785–792. [CrossRef]
391. Satish, L.; Rana, S.; Arakha, M.; Rout, L.; Ekka, B.; Jha, S.; Dash, P .; Sahoo, H. Impact of Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids on the
Structure and Stability of Lysozyme. Spectrosc. Lett. 2016 ,49, 383–390. [CrossRef]
392. Singh, U.K.; Kumari, M.; Khan, S.H.; Bohidar, H.B.; Patel, R. Mechanism and Dynamics of Long-Term Stability of Cytochrome c
Conferred by Long-Chain Imidazolium Ionic Liquids at Low Concentration. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2018 ,6, 803–815. [CrossRef]
393. Lange, C.; Patil, G.; Rudolph, R. Ionic Liquids as Refolding Additives: N0-Alkyl and N0-(!-Hydroxyalkyl) N-Methylimidazolium
Chlorides. Protein Sci. 2005 ,14, 2693–2701. [CrossRef]
394. Sindhu, A.; Bhakuni, K.; Sankaranarayanan, K.; Venkatesu, P . Implications of Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids as Refolding
Additives for Urea-Induced Denatured Serum Albumins. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2020 ,8, 604–612. [CrossRef]
395. Constatinescu, D.; Herrmann, C.; Weingärtner, H. Patterns of Protein Unfolding and Protein Aggregation in Ionic Liquids. Phys.
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010 ,12, 1756–1763. [CrossRef]Pharmaceutics 2022 ,14, 2575 52 of 52
396. Zhao, H. Protein Stabilization and Enzyme Activation in Ionic Liquids: Speciﬁc Ion Effects. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 2016 ,
91, 25–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
397. Bisht, M.; Kumar, A.; Venkatesu, P . Analysis of the Driving Force That Rule the Stability of Lysozyme in Alkylammonium-Based
Ionic Liquids. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015 ,81, 1074–1081. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
398. Baker, G.A.; Heller, W.T. Small-Angle Neutron Scattering Studies of Model Protein Denaturation in Aqueous Solutions of the
Ionic Liquid 1-Butyl-3-Methylimidazolium Chloride. Chem. Eng. J. 2009 ,147, 6–12. [CrossRef]
399. Kumar, A.; Venkatesu, P . The Stability of Insulin in the Presence of Short Alkyl Chain Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids. RSC Adv.
2014 ,4, 4487–4499. [CrossRef]
400. Kumar, P .K.; Jha, I.; Venkatesu, P .; Bahadur, I.; Ebenso, E.E. A Comparative Study of the Stability of Stem Bromelain Based on the
Variation of Anions of Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids. J. Mol. Liq. 2017 ,246, 178–186. [CrossRef]
401. Ajloo, D.; Sangian, M.; Ghadamgahi, M.; Evini, M.; Saboury, A.A. Effect of Two Imidazolium Derivatives of Ionic Liquids on the
Structure and Activity of Adenosine Deaminase. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2013 ,55, 47–61. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
402. Veríssimo, N.V .; Saponi, C.F.; Ryan, T.M.; Greaves, T.L.; Pereira, J.F.B. Imidazolium-Based Ionic Liquids as Additives to Preserve
the Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein Fluorescent Activity. Green Chem. Eng. 2021 ,2, 412–422. [CrossRef]
403. Cheng, K.; Wu, Q.; Jiang, L.; Liu, M.; Li, C. Protein Stability Analysis in Ionic Liquids by 19F NMR. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2019 ,
411, 4929–4935. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
404. Roethlisberger, D.; Mahler, H.-C.; Altenburger, U.; Pappenberger, A. If Euhydric and Isotonic Do Not Work, What Are Acceptable
PH and Osmolality for Parenteral Drug Dosage Forms? J. Pharm. Sci. 2017 ,106, 446–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
405. Foureau, D.M.; Vrikkis, R.M.; Jones, C.P .; Weaver, K.D.; Macfarlane, D.R.; Salo, J.C.; McKillop, I.H.; Elliott, G.D. In Vitro
Assessment of Choline Dihydrogen Phosphate (CDHP) as a Vehicle for Recombinant Human Interleukin-2 (RhIL-2). Cell Mol.
Bioeng. 2012 ,5, 390–401. [CrossRef]
406. Nony, P .; Girard, P .; Chabaud, S.; Hessel, L.; Th ébault, C.; Boissel, J.P . Impact of Osmolality on Burning Sensations during and
Immediately after Intramuscular Injection of 0.5 Ml of Vaccine Suspensions in Healthy Adults. Vaccine 2001 ,19, 3645–3651.
[CrossRef]
407. Kumar, A.; Bisht, M.; Jha, I.; Venkatesu, P . The Role of Ionic Liquids in Protein Folding/ Unfolding Studies. In Progress and
Developments in Ionic Liquids ; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2017; ISBN 978-953-51-2902-8.
408. Gonçalves, A.R.P .; Paredes, X.; Cristino, A.F.; Santos, F.J.V .; Queir ós, C.S.G.P . Ionic Liquids—A Review of Their Toxicity to Living
Organisms. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021 ,22, 5612. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
409. Thuy Pham, T.P .; Cho, C.-W.; Yun, Y.-S. Environmental Fate and Toxicity of Ionic Liquids: A Review. Water Res. 2010 ,44, 352–372.
[CrossRef]
410. Musiał, M.; Zor˛ ebski, E.; Malarz, K.; Kuczak, M.; Mrozek-Wilczkiewicz, A.; Jacquemin, J.; Dzida, M. Cytotoxicity of Ionic Liquids
on Normal Human Dermal Fibroblasts in the Context of Their Present and Future Applications. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2021 ,
9, 7649–7657. [CrossRef]
411. Gouveia, W.; Jorge, T.F.; Martins, S.; Meireles, M.; Carolino, M.; Cruz, C.; Almeida, T.V .; Ara újo, M.E.M. Toxicity of Ionic Liquids
Prepared from Biomaterials. Chemosphere 2014 ,104, 51–56. [CrossRef]
412. Moshikur, R.M.; Chowdhury, M.R.; Moniruzzaman, M.; Goto, M. Biocompatible Ionic Liquids and Their Applications in
Pharmaceutics. Green Chem. 2020 ,22, 8116–8139. [CrossRef]
413. Weaver, K.D.; Kim, H.J.; Sun, J.; MacFarlane, D.R.; Elliott, G.D. Cyto-Toxicity and Biocompatibility of a Family of Choline
Phosphate Ionic Liquids Designed for Pharmaceutical Applications. Green Chem. 2010 ,12, 507–513. [CrossRef]
414. Raiguel, S.; Dehaen, W.; Binnemans, K. Stability of Ionic Liquids in Brønsted-Basic Media. Green Chem. 2020 ,22, 5225–5252.
[CrossRef]