Originalarbeiten
Summary
Lightmicroscopical (LM) and electron microscopi-
cal (EM) techniques,have had a major influence onthe development and direction of cell biology, andparticularly also on the investigation of complexhost-parasite relationships. Earlier, microscopy hasbeen rather descriptive, but new technical andscientific advances have changed the situation.Microscopy has now become analytical, quantita-tive and three-dimensional, with greater emphasison analysis of live cells with fluorescent markers.The new or improved techniques that have be-come available include immunocytochemistryusing immunogold labeling techniques or fluores-cent probes, cryopreservation and cryosectioning,in situ hybridization, fluorescent reporters for sub-cellular localization, micro-analytical methods forelemental distribution, confocal laser scanningmicroscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy andlive-imaging. Taken together, these tools are pro-viding both researchers and students with a noveland multidimensional view of the intricate biolog-ical processes during parasite development in thehost.
Keywords: parasite, protozoa, host-parasite, electron micro-
scopy, confocal microscopy.Licht- und Elektronenmikroskopie zur Unter-
suchung der zellulären und molekularen Bio-logie von Parasiten und Parasitosen
Lichtmikroskopische (LM) und elektronenmikro-
skopische (EM) T echniken hatten seit jeher einengrossen Einfluss auf die Entwicklung der Zellbio-logie besonders in Bezug auf die Untersuchungvon komplexen Wirt-Parasit-Wechselwirkungen.Früher war die Mikroskopie eher deskriptiv, aberneue technische und wissenschaftliche Fortschrittehaben diese Situation stark verändert. Die Mikros-kopie ist heute analytisch, quantitativ und drei-dimensional, mit Schwerpunkt auf der Unter-suchung von lebenden Zellen mit Hilfe vonfluoreszierenden Markern. Neue oder verbesserteT echniken die uns heute zur Verfügung stehen sindImmunozytochemie mit Gold- oder Fluoreszenz-markern, Kryopräservation und Kryosektion, insitu Hybridisierung, fluoreszierende Reporter fürsubzelluläre Lokalisation,mikroanalytische Metho-den zur Untersuchung von Elementenverteilun-gen, konfokale Laser-Scanning-Mikroskopie,Raster-Tunnel-Mikroskopie und lebend-ZellAnalyse. Zusammen vermitteln diese Werkzeugesowohl Wissenschaftlern als auch Studierendeneine neue und multidimensionale Sicht der kom-plizierten biologischen Prozesse während der Ent-wicklung von Parasiten im Wirt.
Schlüsselwörter: Parasit, Protozoen, Wirt-Parasit-Wechsel-
wirkung, Elektronenmikroskopie, Konfokal-Mikroskopie.The use of light- and electron microscopy for studies on the cell- and
molecular biology of parasites and parasitic diseases 
A.B.Hehl1, A.Hemphill2
1Institute of Parasitology, University of Zürich,2Institute of Parasitology, University of Bern
Introduction
During the past decade most of the spectacular ad-
vances in our understanding of the functions of cells,and in particular parasites, have come through a com-bination of imaging techniques and molecular biol-ogy, immunology and biochemistry, all coupled withimproved techniques for in vitro culture of different
parasite life cycle stages. It has become clear that asingle protozoan parasite represents an enormouslycomplex organism and is dependent upon a high level
of structural, spatial and temporal organization. Theability to transfect parasites has revolutionized thestudy of these organisms. The function of specificgenes and/or gene products can be explored by dis-ruption of the locus or more subtly, by introductionof altered tagged versions. Using transgenic reportergenes (e.g. green fluorescent protein [GFP] or lu-
473Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk.
A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, Bern DOI 12.1024/0036-7281.148.09 .473Light- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
ciferase), cell biological processes can be studied in
living parasites and in real time.The combination ofthese in vivo markers with an increasingly diverse ge-
netic toolbox has opened many exciting experimen-tal opportunities. In addition, the enormous technicaladvances in digital imaging have made it possible notonly to visualize but also to functionally characterizethe role of individual parasite organelles or parasitemolecules in the host-parasite relationship.In this article, we will give an overview on the gen-eral concepts of imaging and briefly summarize thebasic steps that are required for the preparation ofsamples to be visualized by light or electron mi-croscopy. We will further highlight the more recentdevelopments in confocal microscopy, with a specialfocus on the use of transgenic parasites expressingproteins coupled to fluorescent markers for localiza-
tion studies. Some of these techniques require highlyspecialized skills as well as equipment, and shouldtherefore be first learned and acquired in a specializedlaboratory.
The basics of imaging
Resolving power, contrast and magnification
The effectiveness of any form of microscope dependson (i) the resolving power, (ii) the contrast, meaningthe ability to recognize differences in the componentsof the specimens to be examined, and (iii) the magni-fication. Magnification is only useful if the user cancontinue to identify and distinguish more and more
474 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, Bern
Figure 2. Neospora caninum and fibroblast host cell invasion/intra-
cellular parasitism. Panels A to D show different steps in the host cellinvasion process.T achyzoites first establish initial contact with the hostcell, probing the host cell surface with their apical end (arrow in A).T achyzoites then rapidly invade their host cells by forming a movingjunction between tachyzoite and host cell surface membrane (arrows inB and C), glide into the host cell cytoplasm, and simultaneously shedsurface- and secretory components (S). Following completion of hostcell invasion, the host cell surface membrane remains unharmed (D).Within the host cell (E), tachyzoites reside within a parasitophorousvacuole delineated by a membrane (arrows), and the TEM revealsnumber of hallmarks such as Golgi Apparatus (GA), mitochondria(mito), dense granules (dg) and apically located conoid (Co), microne-mes (mic), and rhoptries (rop).Within the vacuole, tachyzoites areembedded in a parasitophorous vacuole tubular network (ptn), and thewhite arrowhead in E points toward a tachyzoite that is in the processof dividing by endodyogeny. Scalebars: 2 µm (A–D), 0.5 µm (E).
 Figure 1. Giardia lamblia and host-parasite interactions visualized by
SEM and TEM. Panel A shows the two stages of Giardia, namely atrophozoite (T) and cyst (Cy). Panel B is a cross-section through atrophozoite, exposing the two nuclei (nu) and the cytoskeleton for-ming the ventral disc (vd). In panels C and D, trophozoites are inclose contact with the host intestinal tissue (HIT), whose microvillicannot be discerned by SEM (C) but by TEM (D).The contact islargely mediated through the vd. Panels E and F are higher resolutionSEM images demonstrating attachment of Giardia trophozoites todifferent cultured intestinal cell lines. Note that attachment of parasitesto a microvilli-rich surface (E) is different compared to attachment to asmooth cell surface (F). Smoother surface allows the parasite to estab-lish a much more intimate contact to its host (arrows). Scalebars: 8 µm(A), 2.2 µm (B), 8 µm (C), 2.2 µm (D), 3.2 µm (E), 3.2 µm (F).Light- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
elements in the object as magnification increases.The
magnification is largely dependent on the resolutionand contrast of a given microscope.Resolution is defined as the closest spacing of twopoints, each of which can still be clearly distinguishedas separate entity when looking through a micro-scope.This distance is determined by the wavelengthof the emissions from these two points. Commonemission sources are light in the LM, UV-light forfluorescence work and electrons in the EM.The shorter the wavelength the higher the resolvingpower of a given microscope. The wavelength oflight limits the resolution of the LM to a theoretical
0.2 µm.With an emission source made of electrons,which have a much shorter wavelength, the theoreti-cal resolution is theoretically down to the width of anatom. In practice, the resolution of a transmissionelectron microscope (TEM) can be as low as 0.2 nm,or 1000 times better than possible through lightmicroscopy.However, the basic concepts for visualizing parasiticmicro-organisms by LM and EM are strikingly simi-lar: In the LM, light waves or photons are emittedfrom a light source, and the deflected light creates theimage.TEM follows a very similar principle, in thatelectrons are emitted from an electron gun, throughapplication of a high voltage (20–100 kV), and thedegree of deflection is dependent on specimen thick-ness and stains, which are normally composed ofelements of high atomic number (e.g. osmium, lead,
475 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, Bern
Figure 3. SEM and TEM of African trypanosomes. SEM of Trypa-
nosoma brucei brucei bloodstream form (A) and procyclic stage parasite(B). Note in B the parasite is undergoing cell division. Ec: erythro-cyte; scalebars: 3 µm (A), and 5 µm (B). Panel C shows a T . congo-lense metacyclic form adhering to bovine aorta endothelial cells (BAE).Attachement of parasites  is mediated exclusively by the flagellum,and the flagellar cytoskeletal elements such as axonem (Ax) andparaflagellar rod (PFR) are clearly visible. Note the subpellicularlylocated microtubules (Mt), which form the cytoskeleton of the trypa-nosme cell body. D shows an adherent T . congolense with a morelongitudinally sectioned flagellum, and wheat-germ-agglutinin-goldlabeling and silver enhancement shows that the attachment is largelymediated by silaic acid residues (arrows). E presents a high resolutionthree-dimenional view of a detergent extracted flagellum prepared byquick freeze deep-etch rotary-shadowing TEM. In addition to theclassical cytoskeletal elements, dynein-heads and – stalks are clearlyvisible between the inter-microtubular spaces of the axoneme (arrows).The asterisk indicates flagellum-cell body linking filaments. Similarfilaments are visualized by negative staining of whole mount cyto-skeleton preparations (F).These filaments are specifically labeled withan antibody directed against a repetitive antigen of T . brucei brucei(arrows). Scalebars: 0.23 µm (C, D), 0.1 µm (E), 0.25 µm (F).
Figure 4. SEM and TEM of Echinococcus sp. Panel A shows a SEM
of an E. multilocularis metacestode, exposing the outer, acellular andcarbohydrate-rich laminated layer (LL) and the inner cellular germi-nal layer (GL).The corresponding cross-section in B reveals the micro-triches (arrows), microvilli-like protrusions that originate at thetegument and extend into the laminated layer.The germinal layerconsists of a number of cell types, most prominently seen here areglycogen storage cells (glyc). In C, a higher magnification of microtri-ches structure is seen. In D, metacestodes were fixed and processed forimmunogold-labeling, and embedded in LR-white acrylic resin.Theantibody used is directed against a prominent component of the lami-nated layer (LL). Note the presence of microtriches, but also that theoverall structural preservation is impaired. Panels E and F respresentinvaginated and evaginated protoscoleces, and panel G the fullydeveloped scolex of an adult E. multilocularis worm. Note the foursuckers and the rostellum (arrows). Scalebars: 200 µm (A), 2.8 µm(B), 0.7 µm (C), 50 µm (F and E), 80µm (G).Light- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
uranium, manganese, gold, tungsten).These stains are
the mechanism for achieving contrast. In a scanningelectron microscope (SEM),electrons are emitted andaccelerated by a voltage of 2–30 kV and are focusedand scanned across the surface of a specimen,which isusually coated with a thin layer of gold or platinum.Electrons reflected from the surface are collected byan appropriate detector, amplified and displayed on ascreen. Only surfaces can be examined using this typeof microscope, but the great depth of focus normallygives an excellent three-dimensional representation,no matter whether small protozoan parasites such asGiardia (Fig. 1), Neospora (Fig. 2), Trypanosoma (Fig. 3)
or larger objects such as Echinococcus adult and larval
stages (metacestodes) (Fig. 4) are investigated.
Approaches for visualizing parasites in the
microscope
The two mostly applied approaches for visualizing
parasites in the microscope are (i) whole mountpreparations and (ii) embedding / sectioning ap-proaches.While the former approach can provide in-formation on the overall three-dimensional shape ofa given object, the latter allows a glance into the in-side of the object of interest.
Embedding and sectioning (see Fig. 1B–D, 2E,
3C–D, and 4B–D) requires a series of sequentialpreparative steps to be performed. These includechemical fixation, dehydration of the sample, andembedding in a suitable resin (paraffin, epoxy oracrylic resin).These are followed by polymerization ofthe resin, and sections are cut on a microtome.Sections for LM are 1–10 µm in thickness, whilesections to be inspected in a TEM are 60–80 nm inthickness. Sections are then stained by chemical orenzymatic means, antibodies, lectins and/or otheragents, and are inspected by LM or TEM, dependingon the thickness of the section (for reviews onmethodology refer to (Smith M., 1990; Griffiths,1993; Hemphill A., 1997). The specimen size thatcan be processed is limited. Ideally, the processedtissue size for embedding and subsequent LM is notmore than 1 cm
3, and maximum 1 mm3for TEM.
A large variety of processing methods have been de-veloped.All preparative steps bear the risk of denatur-ing epitopes, which is a major problem for immuno-cytochemistry applications. For these applications, abalance must be found between preservation of thestructural integrity of the cell or tissues (by fixation)and maintenance of the antigenicity of epitopes (bymild treatments). As a consequence, the structuralpreservation of specimens used for localization of an-tibody binding sites is often impaired compared to aspecimen that has been fixed and processed for ultra-structural studies. This becomes most evident at thelevel of electron microscopy. For instance, the in-
tegrity of Echinococcus multilocularis metacestodes is
well preserved in sections fixed and processed forultrastructural studies (Figs. 4B, C), but less wellpreserved in sections that are subsequently on-sectionimmunogold-labeled using an antibody directedagainst a protein of the laminated layer (see Fig. 4D).In some instances, it is possible to perform immuno-gold-labeling prior to embedding. This is demon-strated in Fig. 3D for a protein on the surface ofbovine aorta endothelial cells that serves as a receptorof adhesion to the endothelial cell surface by theTrypanosoma congolense flagellum. In this case, gold
particles were silver-enhanced. Of course, thisapproach is only applicable for antibodies whose epi-topes are accessible from the outside.In specialized laboratories, fixation and resin-embed-ding steps have been replaced by treating the sampleswith a cryo-protectant and applying rapid freezingtechniques (to avoid the formation of ice crystals).Subsequent cryo-ultramicrotomy allows preparingultra-thin sections of frozen samples to be studied byTEM. Another technique is freeze-substitution,where the rapidly frozen specimen is dehydrated atlow temperatures by organic solvents, and finallyinfiltrated with an acrylic resin which is then cross-linked under UV .
Whole mount preparations are preferentially
applied for LM and SEM to investigate protozoanparasites (Fig. 1–3), helminths (Fig. 4) and even largerspecimens, but whole mounts can also be used forTEM for visualizing viruses, bacteria or cytsokeletalor organellar preparations of parasites (see Fig.3F).Forwhole mount preparations, the specimens are allowedto adhere to a suitable surface, followed by fixationand/or permeabilization. The specimens are thenprocessed for (immuno)staining.SEM is often used toobtain information on the overall shape and surfaceproperties of a given sample or to obtain basic mor-phological information on cellular interactions suchas the host cell invasion process by N. caninum tachy-
zoites (Fig. 2A–D). However, although three-dimen-sional images are obtained, the resolution is limited,as evidenced by SEM of e.g. Trypanosoma brucei
(Fig. 3A, B). For improving the resolution, a special-ized whole mount preparation method applicable forTEM, the quick-freeze deep-etch method, was estab-lished (see Fig. 3E). For this, the sample of interest israpidly frozen in liquid helium, freeze-dried in a highvacuum chamber, and rotary shadowed with plat-inum.Viewing the platinum replica by TEM providesa three-dimensional image of very high resolution,and has been used to investigate the cytoskeletal ar-chitecture of trypanosomes, e.g. (Hemphill et al.,1991). Other methods include the freeze-fracturetechniques, e.g. (T etley and Vickerman, 1985) and
476 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, BernLight- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
the wet cleaving technique e.g. (Sherwin and Gull,
1989),which have also been applied to trypanosomes.As a more simple technique, trypanosome cytoskele-tons can be stained with uranyl acetate in order tovisualize basic structural features in the TEM (seeFig. 3F), such as the thin filaments of the undulatingmembrane, that connect the cell body with theflagellum. In Fig. 3F , these filaments are labeled with aspecific antibody directed against a diagnostic antigen(Sherwin and Gull, 1989).
Staining of parasites does not necessarily reflect
reality
The purpose of staining is to achieve contrast and to
obtain specificity and localization of intrinsic compo-nents.It is important to keep in mind that the methodof staining largely determines the final image; there-fore different stains often result in different appearanceof the same specimen. Hence, rather than reflectingreality, staining produces an image of the object ofinterest which we finally interpret. In TEM, the bio-logical material as such will produce very little con-trast.While aldehyde fixatives have no staining prop-erties, OsO
4incorporates mostly into membranes.
Thus, a heavy metal stain, typically uranyl acetate andlead citrate, has to be introduced into the specimen,
and the differential distribution of these heavy metalsproduces the final image and allows to distinguish be-tween different organelles and cellular components,which are the hallmarks of different parasite speciessuch as Giardia (see Fig. 1B, D), Neospora (Fig. 2E),
Trypanosoma (Fig.3C,D) and Echinococcus (Fig.4B–D).
Specific proteins are best localized using antibody-colloidal gold complexes (immunogoldlabeling, seeFig. 3F , 4D), possibly combined with silver enhance-ment (see Fig. 3D).
Visualizing multidimensional systems
New imaging technology shapes our understanding
of host-parasite interactions
Physical interactions of parasites with tissues and cells
of their host organisms range from limited to highlycomplex depending on the system. Due to their smallsize and large numbers, protozoa often live in closecontact with, or even inside host cells and influencetheir host organism on a cellular, organ and systemiclevel during their residence. In addition, this host-parasite relationship is subject to dramatic changesas the infection goes its course. T ypically, infectionLight- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
develops from an acute to an often prolonged chronic
state to which the host eventually succumbs (e.g.African sleeping sickness) and/or suffers serious se-quelae (e.g. Chagas disease). Some parasites, however,are eventually eliminated from the host (e.g., Giardia
lamblia ). Only in a few cases, such as in toxoplasmosis,
a stable equilibrium of parasite proliferation andappropriate ( i.e.non-pathological) host immune
response is achieved.The researcher investigating suchhost-parasite interactions in vivo and in vitro is con-
fronted with multi-dimensional systems where theparameters and the characteristics of the intimateconnections between the two organisms can changedramatically over time. Thus, documenting parasitedevelopment in the host even on a basic level remainsone of the most challenging problems in cellularbiology. Modern molecular biology has proveninvaluable for investigating specific mechanisms in amuch focused manner. More recently, a series oftechnological innovations in the wake of the largegenome projects made analysis on a systems levelfeasible. Prominent examples are whole genomesequencing and data mining, array technology andproteomics.The greatest impact on our global under-standing of parasite development,however,came fromthe advances in digital microscopy during the last fewyears, and the capacity of this technology to provideus with a multidimensional view of events.
Three-dimensional imaging
Fluorescent light-based microscopy has been usedfor several decades to analyze parasites isolated frominfected hosts or maintained in cultures. In im-munofluorescence assays (IFA) antibodies are used todetect parasite proteins in structures of interest (e.g.organelles, cytoskeleton). Bound antibodies are labe-led with anti-IgG antibodies covalently coupled tofluorophores. Fluorophores are molecules that can beexcited with ultra-violet light and emit photons in acharacteristic section of the spectrum. For analysis,the sample is illuminated from one side by a lightsource (UV-lamp or laser), and the emitted fluores-cence is captured by a digital camera or photomulti-plier. Despite expensive optics, conventional wide-field fluorescence microscopy “only” producesprojection images of the x–y plane with a definedfocal depth determined by the objective. Even com-bined with precise stepwise adjustments of this focalplane in the z-direction to encompass the entire struc-ture under investigation,this method is not well suitedto generate a useful three-dimensional impression ofthe sample (Agard et al., 1989). Recently, three majoradvances have come together to make precise multi-dimensional cellular analysis possible: laser scanningconfocal microscopy, highly sensitive digital camerasor photomultipliers, and affordable workstations withsufficient processing power and storage capacity to
control fast data acquisition and to handle the volumeof image data for subsequent mathematical process-ing. Confocal microscopy was invented in the 1950s,but sensitive and precise digital data acquisition andnumerical representation of an image was developedmuch later and probably had the largest impact onmultidimensional imaging technology (Roux et al.,2004).Modern confocal microscopes scan the biolog-ical sample line by line with lasers which producelight of precise wavelengths. By sending the emittedfluorescence light through a small hole in a disk (pin-hole) before it arrives on the detector, most out-of-focus light, i.e.signals which originate from above or
below the focal plane, is eliminated, effectively gener-ating a precise optical section. The diameter of thepinhole can be varied and used to adjust the focaldepth. Thus, by focusing through the sample andrecording a series of images, equidistant optical sec-tions (optical tomogram) are produced. Figure 5A is
478 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, Bern
Figure 5. Optical sectioning and three-dimensional reconstruction of
Trypanosoma brucei cells.The fixed preparation was labeled withantibodies against a mitochondrial protein cpn60 (green) and adynamin-like protein (red).The nuclear and kinetoplast DNA isstained blue with DAPI. Panel A shows an image gallery of 21optical sections produced on a confocal microscope.A representativeDIC image of the group of cells is shown at the bottom right. PanelB: three-dimensional reconstruction of the image stack.The resultingvirtual volume object was further processed using the isosurfacefunction to render the structures as plastic and partially transparentobjects.Arrowheads point to selected accumulations of dynamin-likeprotein.Arrows indicate the position of the kinetoplast DNA which isembedded in the mitochondrion.The object can be rotated in alldirections to examine details and relative positions of the differentstructures (still frames 1–6).Light- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
an example for confocal immunofluorescence imag-
ing showing three African trypanosome cells in a fixedpreparation. Each planar x–y section in the figure is anumerical representation of the sample in a specificdepth.The raw data (serial image stack) can be furtherenhanced with so-called image deconvolution (Swed-low, 2003).These algorithms are designed to correcttwo systematic problems of fluorescence microscopy:spherical aberration (SA) and recording of out-of-focus signals. SA is an optical effect which causesapparent elongation of objects in the z-axis. Decon-volution programs calculate so-called pointspreadfunctions to correct the distortion.The overall effecton raw image stacks is that scattered light from out-of-focus objects is eliminated resulting in a much
higher signal-to-noise ratio. These enhanced tomo-grams are reconstructed to virtual three-dimensionalvolume objects (Figure 5B).The principal advantageof reconstructed serial image stacks over conventionalwide-field microscopy is that the sample can beexamined in all dimensions (Figure 5B, 1–6) (Liuand Chiang, 2003).This means that the exact relativepositions of labeled structures can be determined andthe degree of co-localization,if any,can be quantified.For example, a dynamin protein, which is stained redin Figure 5B, is closely associated with the greenlabeled mitochondria but does not co-localize. Onthe other hand, the kinetoplast DNA (smaller bluebodies) appears embedded in the proximal end of themitochondria.
Introducing the fourth dimension: live cell imaging
The sensitivity and computing capacity of currentlyavailable confocal laser scanning microscopy equip-ment is sufficient to analyze living cells during theirdevelopment in vitro (cell culture). Because antibod-ies cannot be used to label internal structures,a differ-ent approach to localize representative marker pro-teins is used in these cases. Naturally fluorescentproteins,which came into use about 15 years ago,pre-sent an elegant solution since they can be geneticallyfused to most endogenous proteins (Piston, Pattersonet al., 1999). The most prominent example is greenfluorescent protein (GFP), a 238 amino acid proteinof the jellyfish Aequorea victoria .The original sequence
of GFP has been derived and improved in vitro by
mutagenesis and selection in bacteria to generate anarray of GFP variants with different light emissioncharacteristics (e.g. yellow fluorescent protein,YFP)(Daabrowski, Brillowska et al., 1999) for multicoloranalysis. Live cell analysis combined with appropriateculture conditions allow investigation of transgenicparasites expressing GFP variants fused to targetproteins for a considerable time. Figure 6 illustratesthe possibilities for exploration of developmentalprocesses in the protozoan parasite Giardia lamblia
using GFP-tagged proteins. Four still frames from anextended time-lapse video analysis show GFP-labeledcyst wall protein (CWP) in specialized compartments,called encystation-specific vesicles (ESVs).The exam-ple in Fig.6 demonstrates that live cell imaging can beused to investigate the dynamics and development oforganelles in very small protozoa.The present analy-sis suggested that the knob-like ESVs are stationarycompartments and lack motility (data not shown).A more complicated question to address is thedynamics of protein transport from the endoplasmicreticulum (ER) to ESVs at this stage of development.This is done by a technique called fluorescence recov-ery after photobleaching (FRAP). In this application
479 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, Bern
Figure 6. Live cell microscopy using green fluorescent protein-tagged
cyst wall protein to label endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and knob-likeencystation-specific vesicle (ESV) compartments. Single interferencecontrast (left) or fluorescence (right) frames are shown for differenttime-points.The adherent cell was observed for >20 min. (top) beforepermanent photo-bleaching of all GFP molecules in one ESV andthe immediate surrounding ER as indicated by the circle (secondrow).The post bleaching image after 1 minute shows the absence offluorescence in this area.The cell was imaged for another 20 min. todocument appearance of imported fluorescent reporter from the ER.Recovery of fluorescence in the bleached ESV compartment after5 min. is significant (arrow, bottom row). Scalebar: 5 µm.Light- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
all GFP in a selected ESV organelle (Fig. 6, top row)
is permanently bleached by a strong laser pulse (Fig.6, second row). Recovery of fluorescence in thebleached compartment indicates import of newlysynthesized GFP-tagged protein from the ER (Fig. 6,third and fourth row). In addition to the commondifficulties of live cell imaging such as unwantedbleaching of the sample and phototoxicity, the vigor-ous motility of the Giardia cells presents a special chal-
lenge.Multidimensional microscopy in the true sense is howwe will look at host-parasite systems in the future.Currently, the technical limitations in addition to ap-propriate culture conditions are twofold:frame rate ofthe detector, i.e. how many high-resolution imagescan be recorded in a given time-span, and phototox-icity from illumination by the laser beams.The formeris a question of computing power alone and will besolved in due course. Highly sensitive (and expensive)detectors that can capture in excess of 60 frames persecond are already commercially available. Limiting
phototoxicity, however, is more difficult. Current ap-proaches attempt to minimize repeated illuminationof the cell or tissue under investigation, for instanceby using lasers to scan the sample from the side anddetect emitted light from above (e.g. Single PlaneIllumination Microscopy, SPIM) (Huisken et al.,2004).The dazzling images from the few operationalcustom-engineered prototype microscopes are thebest demonstration that fully multidimensionalmicroscopy is possible and will eventually becomeroutine.
Acknowledgements
Confocal images were produced in collaboration withDrs. A.-L. Chanez and A. Schneider, University ofFribourg, Switzerland.
480 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, BernMicroscopie optique et électronique dans
l’examen de la biologie cellulaire et molécu-laire des parasites et des parasitoses
Depuis longtemps la microscopie optique et élec-
tronique ont eu une grosse influence sur le déve-loppement de la biologie cellulaire, en particuliersquant à l’examen des interactions complexes entrel’hôte et le parasite. Autrefois la microscopie étaitsurtout descriptive mais de nouveaux progrès tech-niques et scientifiques ont fortement modifié cettesituation. La microscopie est ajourd’hui analytique,quantitative et tridimensionnelle en se concentrantsur l’examen de cellules vivantes à l’aide de mar-quers fluorescents. Les nouvelles techniques ouleurs améliorations dont nous disposons actuelle-ment sont: l’immunocytochimie, avec des mar-quers dorés ou fluorescents, la cryopréservation etla cryosection, l’hybridation in situ, les marquersfluorescents des localisations subcellulaires, les mé-thodes micro analytiques d’examens pour la répar-tition des éléments, la microscopie à balayage entunnel, et l’analyse des cellules vivantes. Ces outilsprocurent aussi bien aux chercheurs qu’aux étu-diants une vue nouvelle et multidimensionnelle desprocessus biologiques compliqués qui se produisentlors du développement des parasites dans l’hôte.Microscopia ottica e elettronica per l’analisi
della biologia cellulare e molecolare di paras-siti e parassitosi
T ecniche di microscopia ottica (MO) e elettronica
(ME) hanno da anni un grande influsso sullosviluppo della biologia cellulare in particolare inrelazione ad analisi di complessi effetti di scambioospite-parassita.All’inizio la microscopia era preva-lentemente descrittiva ma i progressi tecnici escientifici hanno modificato la situazione radical-mente. Oggigiorno la microscopia è analitica,quantitativa e tridimensionale con punti chiavenell’analisi di cellule vive con l’aiuto di marcatorifluorescenti.T ecniche nuove o migliorate che sonooggi a disposizione sono la chimica immunocitacon marcatori d’oro o fluorescenti,la preservazionecriogena e la criosezione, l’ibridizzazione in situ,i reporter fluorescenti per localilzzazioni subcellu-lari, i metodi microanalitici per l’esame di riparti-zione di elementi, la microscopia confocale laser-scanning, la microscopia a tunnel e l’analisi dicellule vive.Tutti questi metodi forniscono a ricer-catori e studenti una nuova visione multidimensio-nale dei processi biologici complessi durante losviluppi dei parassiti nell’ospite.Light- and electron microscopy for studies of parasites
References
Agard D.A., Hiraoka Y ., et al.: Fluorescence microscopy in
three dimensions. Methods Cell Biol. 1989, 30: 353–377.
Daabrowski S.,Brillowska A.,et al.: Use of the green fluores-
cent protein variant (YFP) to monitor MetArg humanproinsulin production in Escherichia coli. Protein Expr.Purif. 1999, 16: 315–323.
Griffiths G.: Fine structure immunocytochemistry,Springer
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg New Y ork. 1993.
Hemphill,A., Seebeck T ., et al.: The Trypanosoma brucei cy-
toskeleton: ultrastructure and localization of microtubule-associated and spectrin-like proteins using quick-freeze,deep-etch, immunogold electron microscopy. J. Struct.Biol. 1991, 107: 211–220.
Hemphill A.and Croft S: Electron microscopy in parasitology.
In: Analytical Parasitology. Ed. M.T. Rogan, Springer Ver-lag, 1997, 227–268.
Huisken J., Swoger J., et al.: Optical sectioning deep inside
live embryos by selective plane illumination microscopy.Science. 2004, 305: 1007–1009.
Liu Y .C.and A.S.Chiang: High-resolution confocal imaging
and three-dimensional rendering. Methods. 2003, 30: 86–93.Piston D.W ., Patterson G. H., et al.: Quantitative imaging of
the green fluorescent protein (GFP). Methods Cell Biol.1999, 58: 31–48.
Roux P .,Munter S.,et al.: Focusing light on infection in four
dimensions. Cell Microbiol. 2004, 6: 333–343.
Sherwin T .and Gull K.: Visualization of detyrosination along
single microtubules reveals novel mechanisms of assemblyduring cytoskeletal duplication in trypanosomes.Cell 1989,57: 211–221.
Smith M. and Croft S.: Embedding and thin-section prepa-
rations. In: Electron microscopy in biology. A practicalapproach. Ed. J. R. Harris, IRL-press, 1990, 17–37.
Swedlow J. R.: Quantitative fluorescence microscopy and
image deconvolution. Methods Cell Biol. 2003, 72: 349–367.
Tetley L. and Vickerman K.: Differentiation in Trypanosoma
brucei: host-parasite cell junctions and their persistenceduring acquisition of the variable antigen coat. J. Cell Sci.1985, 74: 1–19.
481 A.B.Hehl, A.Hemphill, Band 148, Heft 9, September 2006, 473–481 Schweiz.Arch.Tierheilk. ©2006 by Verlag Hans Huber, Hogrefe AG, BernAddress for correspondence
Winterthurerstrasse 266a, CH-8046 Zürich, Fax: +41-44-635-8907, E-Mail:Adrian.Hehl@access.unizh.ch 
Received: 12 June 2006
Accepted: 20 June 2006