 
    
   
  
    
  
    
 NTP T ECHNICAL  REPORT ON 
THE TOXICITY STUDIES OF 
MALACHITE GREEN CHLORIDE 
AND LEUCOMALACHITE GREEN 
(CAS N OS. 569-64-2 AND 
129-73-7 )
ADMINISTERED IN FEED 
TO F344/N RATS AND 
B6C3F1 MICE 
NTP TOX 71 
JUNE 2004 National Toxicology Program 
Toxicity Report Series Number 71 
NTP Technical Report
 
on the Toxicity Studies of
 
Malachite Green Chloride
 
and Leucomalachite Green
 
(CAS Nos. 569-64-2 and 129-73-7) 
Administered in Feed
 
to F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice
 
June 2004
 
NIH Publication No. 04-4416
 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
 
Public Health Service 
National Institutes of Health FOREWORD
 
The National Toxicology Program (NTP) is made up of four charter agencies of the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (DHHS):  the National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes of Health; the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), National Institutes of Health; the National Center for Toxicological Research (NCTR), Food and Drug Administration (FDA); and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In July 1981, the Carcinogenesis Bioassay Testing Program, NCI, was transferred to the NIEHS.  The NTP coordinates the relevant programs, staff, and resources from these Public Health Service agencies relating to basic and applied research and to biological assay development and validation. 
The NTP develops, evaluates, and disseminates scientific information about potentially toxic and hazardous 
chemicals.  This knowledge is used for protecting the health of the American people and for the primary prevention of disease. 
The studies described in this Toxicity Study Report were performed under the direction of the NCTR and were 
conducted in compliance with NTP laboratory health and safety requirements and must meet or exceed all applicable federal, state, and local health and safety regulations. Animal care and use were in accordance with the Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Animals. 
These studies are designed and conducted to characterize and evaluate the toxicologic potential of selected 
chemicals in laboratory animals (usually two species, rats and mice).  Chemicals selected for NTP toxicology studies are chosen primarily on the bases of human exposure, level of production, and chemical structure.  The interpretive conclusions presented in this Toxicity Study Report are based only on the results of these NTP studies. Extrapolation of these results to other species and quantitative risk analyses for humans require wider analyses beyond the purview of these studies. Selection per se  is not an indicator of a chemical’s toxic 
potential. 
Details about ongoing and completed NTP studies are available at the NTP’s World Wide Web site:  
http://ntp-server.niehs.nih.gov. Abstracts of all NTP Toxicity Study Reports and full versions of the most 
recent reports and other publications are available from the NIEHS’s Environmental Health Perspectives (EHP) http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov (866-541-3841or 919-653-2590). In addition, printed copies of these reports are available from EHP as supplies last.  A listing of all the NTP Toxicity Study Reports printed since 1991 appears on the inside back cover. National Toxicology Program 
Toxicity Report Series 
Number 71 
NTP Technical Report 
on the Toxicity Studies of 
Malachite Green Chloride 
and Leucomalachite Green
 
(CAS Nos. 569-64-2 and 129-73-7) 
Administered in Feed
 
to F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice
 
Sandra J. Culp, Ph.D., Study Scientist
 
National Center for Toxicological Research
 
Jefferson, AR 72079
 
June 2004
 
NIH Publication No. 04-4416 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
 
Public Health Service
 
National Institutes of Health
  
 2 
CONTRIBUTORS
 
The studies on malachite green chloride and leucomalachite green were conducted at the FDA’s National Center for Toxicological Research under 
an interagency agreement between the FDA and the NIEHS.  The studies were designed and monitored by a Toxicology Study Selectio n and Review 
Committee composed of representatives from the NCTR and other FDA product centers, NIEHS, and other ad hoc memb ers from other government 
agencies and academia.  The interagency agreement was designed to use the staff and facilities of the NCTR in the testing of FD A priority chemicals 
and to provide FDA scientists and regulatory policymakers information for hazard identification and risk assessment. 
Toxicology Study Selection 
and Review Committee 
B.A. Schwetz, D.V.M., Ph.D., Chairperson 
National Center for Toxicological Research 
W.T. Allaben, Ph.D. 
National Center for Toxicological Research 
F.A. Beland, Ph.D. 
National Center for Toxicological Research 
J.R. Bucher, Ph.D. 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
J.F. Contrera, Ph.D. 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, 
Food and Drug Administration 
D.W. Gaylor, Ph.D. 
National Center for Toxicological Research 
K.J. Greenlees, Ph.D. 
Center for Veterinary Medicine, Food and Drug Administration 
R.J. Lorentzen, Ph.D. 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Food and Drug Administration 
F.D. Sistare, Ph.D. 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Food and Drug Administration 
Bionetics 
Prepared animal feed and cared for rats and mice 
J. Carson, B.S. 
A. Matson, B.S. M. Moore National Center for Toxicological Research, 
Food and Drug Administration 
Conducted studies, evaluated and interpreted results and pathology 
findings, and reported findings 
S.J. Culp, Ph.D., Study Scientist 
F.A. Beland, Ph.D.,  Co-Study Scientist 
L.T. Mulligan, Ph.D.,  Co-Study Scientist 
W.T. Allaben, Ph.D. 
J.R. Appleget, B.S. R.W. Benson, B.S. L.R. Blankenship, B.S. D.W. Gaylor, Ph.D. C.D. Jackson, Ph.D. R.L. Kodell, Ph.D. J.M. Reed, M.S. L.G. Rushing, M.S. T.C. Schmitt, B.S. P.H. Siitonen, B.S. K.L. Witt, M.S.,
 ILS, Inc. 
W.M. Witt, D.V.M., Ph.D. 
Pathology Associates International 
Evaluated pathology findings 
T.J. Bucci, V.M.D., Ph.D. D.F. Kusewitt, D.V.M., Ph.D. R.E. Patton, B.S. 3 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
R.O.W. Sciences, Inc. 
Provided experimental support and statistical analysis 
J. Armstrong, B.S. 
M. Austen, M.S. D.L. Barton, M.S. B. Bryant K. Carroll X. Ding, M.S. S. Goldman J.M. Gossett, M.S. C.C. McCarty, M.S. W.A. McCracken, M.S. B. Spadoni B.T. Thorn, M.S. Biotechnical Services, Inc. 
Prepared Toxicity Study Report 
S.R. Gunnels, M.A.,  Principal Investigator 
P.A. Gideon, B.A. D.C. Serbus, Ph.D. W.D. Sharp, B.A., B.S. P.A. Yount, B.S. 4 
PEER REVIEW
 
The draft report on the toxicity studies of malachite green chloride and leucomalachite green was evaluated by the 
reviewers listed below.  These reviewers serve as independent scientists, not as representatives of any institution, company, or governmental agency.  In this capacity, reviewers determine if the design and conditions of these NTP studies are appropriate and ensure that the Toxicity Study Report presents the experimental results and conclusions fully and clearly. 
J. F. Kay, Ph.D. S.-M. Ho, Ph.D. 
Veterinary Medicines Directorate Department of Surgery, Division of Urology 
New Haw, UK University of Massachusetts Medical School 
Worcester, MA   
  
   
 
 
    
    
 
  5 
CONTENTS
 
ABSTRACT ........................................................................... 7
 
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................... 1 1
 
Chemical and Physi calProperties ....................................................... 1 1
 
Production, Use, and Human Exposure ................................................... 1 1
 
Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, and Excretion ........................................ 1 2
 
Toxic ity............................................................................ 1 3
 
Reproductive and Developmental Toxicity ................................................ 1 6
 
Carcinogenicity ...................................................................... 1 7
 
Genetic Toxic ity ..................................................................... 1 7
 
Study Rationale and Design ............................................................ 1 8
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS .......................................................... 1 9
 
Procuremen t and Characterization ....................................................... 1 9
 
Preparation and An alysisofDoseFormulations ............................................ 2 1
 
28-Da y Studies ...................................................................... 2 2
 
Statistical Methods ................................................................... 2 6
 
Quality Assurance Methods ............................................................ 2 8
 
Genetic Toxi cology .................................................................. 2 8
 
RESULTS ............................................................................. 3 1
 
Rats ............................................................................... 3 1
 
Mice .............................................................................. 3 5
 
Genetic Toxi cology .................................................................. 3 7
 
DISCUSSION .......................................................................... 3 9
 
REFERENCES ......................................................................... 4 5
 
APPENDIXES 
Appendix A Summa ryofLesionsinRats ............................................. A - 1
 
Appendix B Summa ryofLesionsinMice ............................................. B - 1
 
Appendix C Clinical Pathology Results ............................................... C - 1
 
Appendix D Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios ..................... D - 1
 
Appendix E Genetic Toxi cology .................................................... E - 1
 
Appendix F C hemicalCharacterization and Do seFormulation St udies ...................... F - 1
 6 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71  
 
   7 
ABSTRACT
 
N 
CH3 CH3 + H3C CH3 Cl 
N -
N 
CH3 CH3 H3C CH3 
N H 
MALACHITE GREEN CHLORIDE LEUCOMALACHITE GREEN 
CAS No. 569-64-2 CAS No. 129-73-7 
Chemical Formula:  C23 ClN2 Molecular Weight: 364.92 Chemical Formula:  C23 N2 Molecular Weight: 330.47 H25 H26
Malachite Green Chloride 
Synonyms: bis[p-(Dimethylamino)phenyl]phenylmethylium chloride; N-[4-[[4-(dimethylamino)-phenyl]phe nylmethylene]-2,5­
cyclohexadien-1-ylidene]- N-methylmethanaminium chloride 
Trade names: Aniline Green; Benzal Green; Benzaldehyde Green; China Green; C.I. Basic Green 4; C.I. 42000; Diamond Green B; 
Diamond Green Bx; Diamond Green P Extra; Fast Green; Light Green N; New Victoria Green Extra I; New Victoria 
Green Extra II; New Victoria Green  Extra O; Solid Green O; Victoria  Green B; Victoria Green WB 
Leucomalachite Green 
Synonym: p,p1-Benzylidenebis- N,N-dimethylaniline 
Malachite green chloride is a triphenylmethane dye used in the fish and dye industries.  Leucomalachite green is 
prepared by the reduction of malachite green chloride.  Malachite green chloride was nominated for toxicity and carcinogenicity testing by the Food and Drug Administration and selected by the National Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences for carcinogenicity testing by the National Toxicology Program (NTP) due to the potential for significant worker and consumer exposure and lack of carcinogenicity data.  The current 28-day studies were conducted as part of an overall effort by the NTP to determine the toxicity and carcinogenicity of malachite green chloride. 
Male and female F344/N Nctr BR rats and B6C3F
1/Nctr BR (C57BL/6N × C3H/HeN MTV—) mice were exposed 
to malachite green chloride (95% pure) or leucomalachite green (99% pure) (male rats and female mice only) in 
feed for 28 days. Animals were evaluated for clinical pathology and histopathology.  Genetic toxicity studies for malachite green chloride were conducted in vitro in Salmonella typhimurium and in vivo in rat bone marrow  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 8 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
erythrocytes and in mouse peripheral blood erythrocytes. Genetic toxicity studies for leucomalachite green were 
conducted in vivo  in mouse peripheral blood erythrocytes. 
Groups of eight male and eight female rats and mice were fed diets containing 0, 25, 100, 300, 600, or 1,200 ppm 
malachite green chloride for 28 days.  Additional groups of eight male and eight female rats designated for thyroid 
hormone assays were fed diets containing 0 or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride.  Groups of eight male rats and 
eight female mice were fed diets containing 0, 290, 580, or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green for 28 days. 
Additional groups of eight male rats designated for thyroid hormone assays were fed diets containing 0 or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green. 
All rats and mice survived to the end of the studies.  In the malachite green chloride study, the body weight gain 
of males rats in the 1,200 ppm group was significantly less than that of the controls.  The final mean body weight of female rats and mice in the 1,200 ppm groups and the body weight gains of female rats and mice in the 600 (rats 
only) and 1,200 ppm groups were significantly less than those of the controls.  In the leucomalachite green study, 
the final mean body weight of male rats and female mice in the 1,160 ppm groups and the mean body weight gains of male rats and female mice in the 580 and 1,160 ppm groups were significantly less than those of the control groups. 
In the malachite green chloride study, feed consumption by all exposed groups of male and female rats and mice 
was generally similar to that by the control groups.  Exposure concentrations of 25, 100, 300, 600, and 1,200 ppm resulted in average daily doses of 3 to 190 mg malachite green chloride/kg body weight to male and female rats and 5 to 250 mg/kg to male and female mice.  In the leucomalachite green study, feed consumption by all groups of exposed male rats was similar to that by the controls.  Dietary concentrations of 290, 580, and 1,160 ppm resulted in average daily doses of approximately 30, 60, and 115 mg leucomalachite green/kg body weight to male rats and approximately 62, 110, and 220 mg/kg to female mice. 
In female rats exposed to malachite green chloride, there was a significant increases in -glutamyltransferase 
activities with an activity in 1,200 ppm females seven times greater than that in the controls.  Likewise, 
-glutamyltransferase activity in male rats exposed to 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green was twice that in the 
controls. On days 4 and 21, the concentration of thyroxine was significantly decreased in male rats exposed to 
1,160 ppm leucomalachite green and the concentration of thyroid-stimulating hormone was significantly increased.  
 9 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
In the malachite green chloride study, the relative liver weights of 600 and 1,200 ppm male rats and the relative 
and absolute liver weights of 300 ppm or greater female rats were generally significantly greater than those of the controls. In the leucomalachite green study, the relative liver weights of 290 ppm or greater male rats were 
significantly greater than those of the control group. 
No gross lesions were observed in rats or mice and no microscopic lesions were observed in female mice that were 
attributed to malachite green chloride exposure.  Microscopically, the incidences of hepatocyte cytoplasmic vacuolization were significantly increased in 1,200 ppm male and female rats exposed to malachite green chloride. No gross lesions were observed in rats or mice that could be attributed to leucomalachite green exposure. Microscopically, the incidences of hepatocyte cytoplasmic vacuolization were significantly increased in 580 and 1,160 ppm male rats.  The incidence of multifocal apoptosis in the transitory epithelium of the urinary bladder was significantly increased in 1,160 ppm female mice exposed to leucomalachite green.  
Malachite green chloride, tested at concentrations of 0.1 to 10 µg/plate, was not mutagenic in any of several strains 
of Salmonella typhimurium , with or without S9 metabolic activation.  Negative results were also obtained in two 
in vivo micronucleus tests, one that assessed induction of micronuclei in rat bone marrow erythrocytes after three 
intraperitoneal injections of malachite green chloride, and a second study that determined the level of micronuclei 
in circulating erythrocytes of male and female mice following 28 days of exposure to malachite green chloride via dosed feed. The frequency of micronucleated normochromatic erythrocytes in peripheral blood was significantly increased in female mice exposed to leucomalachite green in feed for 28 days; no significant increases in micronucleus frequencies were observed in the polychromatic erythrocyte population. 10 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71    
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 11 
INTRODUCTION
 
CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 
Malachite green chloride is a green crystal with a metallic luster; it is soluble in ethanol, methanol, and amyl 
alcohol and is very soluble in water. Neutral water solutions are blue-green, with an absorption maximum of 616.9 nm; aqueous solutions are yellow below pH 2 ( Merck Index , 1996). The compound has a molecular 
weight of 364.92. 
Leucomalachite green is a faint green solid with an absorption maximum of 266 nm in tetrahydrofuran and an 
extinction coefficient of 3.34 × 10
4 (ChemSyn Science Laboratories, unpublished data).  The compound has a 
molecular weight of 330.47. 
PRODUCTION ,USE, AND HUMAN EXPOSURE 
Malachite green chloride, a triphenylmethane dye, is prepared as a double salt with zinc chloride for dyeing purposes.  It is prepared in a stepwise reaction that involves the condensation of benzaldehyde with 
N,N-dimethylalanine and oxidation of the resulting bis ( p-dimethylaminophenyl) phenylmethane, followed by 
reaction of the product with hydrochloric acid (Nelson, 1974). Leucomalachite green is prepared by the reduction of malachite green.  
The production and uses of malachite green chloride have been reviewed by Culp and Beland (1996).  Malachite 
green is widely used in the dye industry and as an antifungal agent in fish hatcheries.  Malachite green is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration or the Environmental Protection Agency for use on any aquatic species. However, it is relatively inexpensive, readily available, and highly efficacious; therefore, its continued use in some United States fisheries is likely.  The chemical has been used routinely in aquaculture since the early 1930s and is considered by many in the fish industry as the most effective antifungal agent (Schnick, 1988).  In 
a study of over 180 compounds tested for antifungal activity, none equaled malachite green for efficacy and low 
toxicity (Meyer and Schnick, 1989). A broad range of malachite green concentrations has been used to treat fungal and parasitic infections, with doses of 100 ppm for a few seconds of dip (Nelson, 1974) to a prolonged treatment of 0.1 ppm in ponds (Stoskopf, 1993).  Because of its use in commercial fish hatcheries, workers in the dye and aquaculture industries may potentially be exposed to the chemical.  The National Occupational Exposure Survey  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 12 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health between 1981 and 1983 estimated that 
more than 180,000 workers are potentially exposed to malachite green annually (NIOSH, 1990).  The general 
public may become exposed to malachite green through the consumption of treated fish.  Additional consumer 
exposure can occur via fish imported from Europe (Alabaster, 1982; Solbé, 1982; Schlotfeldt, 1992) and Canada (Thorburn and Moccia, 1993), where the use of malachite green has been documented.  While fish sold in the United States have not been routinely tested for malachite green, random sampling from markets in the United Kingdom indicates the continued use of malachite green in aquaculture (Veterinary Medicines Directorate, 1996). Concern about the use of malachite green has also been raised in the United Kingdom. A report prepared by the Water Research Centre for the Department of the Environment, Transport, and the Regions of the United Kingdom recommended an annual average environmental quality standard of 500 ng/L malachite green for the protection of freshwater aquatic life, although no standards were recommended for drinking water due to a lack of data (Burchmore and Wilkinson, 1993). 
Human exposure to leucomalachite green has been documented (Doerge et al., 1998; Veterinary Medicines 
Directorate, 1999). Doerge et al. (1998) analyzed edible flesh from trout purchased from retail outlets in the 
United Kingdom during 1994 and 1995 as part of nonregulatory food surveillance program.  Eight of the 
12 samples were positive for malachite green and leucomalachite green. Most noteworthy, the concentration of leucomalachite green in the samples was 12 to 37 times higher than that of malachite green. 
ABSORPTION ,DISTRIBUTION ,METABOLISM , AND EXCRETION 
Experimental Animals 
Little is known about the metabolism of malachite green in fish or other species.  Some studies have shown that malachite green is taken in and retained by the tissues of fish.  For example, Alderman and Clifton-Hadley (1993) 
exposed trout to a 1.6 ppm malachite green bath treatment for 40 minutes to examine the uptake, distribution, and 
elimination of the dye.  Maximum concentrations of malachite green in serum, liver, and kidney were detected immediately after exposure, with levels ranging from 7.8 to 34.0 ppm; a peak concentration of 10.8 ppm was reached in muscle 90 to 120 minutes after exposure. 
Other data suggest that malachite green is reduced to leucomalachite green after entering the body, and that the 
dye persists in the body in this form.  Werth and Boiteux (1968) reported the detection of leucomalachite green in liver, kidney, heart, lung, and muscle of rats 2 hours following an intravenous injection of malachite green and in Ehrlich’s ascitic tumor cells 3 hours after intraperitoneal injection of malachite green.  Bauer et al. (1988)   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 13 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
observed that trout excreted intact malachite green rapidly, but leucomalachite green was stored in muscle tissue 
for a relatively long time with a half-life of about 40 days.  In another study, Law (1994) demonstrated a rapid absorption of malachite green in fingerling trout exposed to 2 ppm malachite green for 1 hour.  The amount of chromatic malachite green (the ionic form) measured in whole tissue homogenates decreased with time, ranging from approximately 1 ppm 2 hours after treatment to 0.2 ppm 169 hours after treatment.  However, the levels of leucomalachite green increased to 3.5 ppm 24 hours after treatment and remained steady for the remainder of the 7-day study. Analysis of methylene chloride extracts of liver, muscle, and skin 73 hours or more after treatment showed the presence of leucomalachite green but little or no chromatic malachite green. 
Humans 
No studies on the absorption, distribution, metabolism, or excretion of malachite green chloride or leucomalachite green in humans were found in a review of the literature. 
TOXICITY 
Experimental Animals 
The toxicity data on malachite green is not complete because most reports do not adequately identify the purity of the malachite green used or the counterion with which the dye is associated.  Due to extensive use of malachite green in aquaculture, the majority of toxicity studies have been conducted with fish.  Results from a number of these studies are summarized below.  More extensive listings can be found in Nelson (1974), Bills et al. (1977), 
and Burchmore and Wilkinson (1993). 
Bills et al. (1977) determined the acute  toxicity of malachite green chloride to fingerling fish and nontarget aquatic 
organisms. After 96 hours of exposure, the LC
50 values in fish ranged from 30.5 to 383 µg/L, with bluegills being 
the most sensitive and Coho salmon being the most resistant. Asiatic clams tolerated more than 100 mg/L, with 
a 96-hour LC50 value of 122 mg/L.  The toxicity in all species tested increased with lengthening exposures.  With 
a 3-hour or 6-hour treatment, the toxicity to some of the species was greater in warm water (17( or 22( C) than 
in cool water (7 ( or 12( C). Only channel catfish were more sensitive to increased water temperatures during 
96 hours of exposure. 
Rather than mortality, biological effects have been the focus of many studies.  Gerundo et al. (1991) treated 
rainbow trout with 1.6 ppm malachite green (source unknown) for 40 minutes once every 7 days for 7 weeks. 
After the third exposure, a fairly consistent pattern of increasing pathological changes was observed in most livers.  
  
 
  
  
 
 14 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
These included sinusoidal congestion, focal coagulative necrosis, diffuse degenerative changes, and cytoplasmic 
vacuolation. Similar tissue changes have been reported in fish exposed to other toxins.  At the ultrastructural level, mitochondrial damage was evident and was thought to be due to the dye’s action as a respiratory enzyme poison. 
The gills generally demonstrated lesions and necrosis; the latter was more evident following longer periods of 
exposure. 
Physiological changes in fish blood have been reported by a number of investigators.  Grizzle (1977) continuously 
exposed fingerling channel catfish to 100 µg/L malachite green (source unknown) for up to 28 days and assayed blood samples at various times.  Compared to the controls, a large increase in neutrophils was measured in exposed 
catfish 1 and 3 days after treatment and was thought to be indicative of an inflammatory response.  Increases were 
also observed in erythrocyte counts and hemoglobin concentrations.  The latter effect was attributed to  impairment of gas exchange by the gills due to a thickening of the lamellar epithelium. In an earlier study, Glagoleva and 
Malikova (1968) found extensive leukopenia and slight erythropenia in Baltic salmon exposed to 1.33 mg/L 
malachite green for 20 minutes.  After 6 days, the number of erythrocytes returned to normal levels, but the number 
of leukocytes remained low.  Hlavek and Bulkley (1980) repeated the experiments and did not observe a difference 
in the number of leukocytes in exposed fish when compared to controls.  Leukocyte counts in both groups declined during the 24-hour period following treatment and recovered within the next 4 days.  These researchers concluded that the leukocyte changes were due to nonspecific vertebrate st ress syndrome as opposed to toxicity from exposure 
to malachite green chloride.  Other blood chemistry parameters, including potassium, glucose, sodium, calcium, magnesium, and chloride concentrations, were measured in Coho salmon 28 days after exposure to 100 µg/L 
malachite green chloride (Bills and Hunn, 1976).  An increase was found in potassium concentrations after 
exposure, while the other constituents remained unchanged. 
The therapeutic use of malachite green is not restricted to freshwater species and has been extended to control 
fungal and epibiotic growth on eggs and larvae of cultured American lobsters.  Fisher et al. (1976) noted that 
American lobster larvae exhibited decreased survival when treated with concentrations of malachite green (source 
unknown) greater than 8 ppm for 16 minutes every other day during their larval rearing period. Brief exposures to 20 ppm resulted in a delay in molting and a decrease in survival, with the majority of the dead animals showing the absence of one or more appendages. 
In mammalian studies, male and female Wistar rats were administered aqueous solutions of malachite green 
oxalate by gavage; the animals were observed over a 14-day period (Clemmensen et al., 1984). Acute effects 
included reduced motor activity on the first day and hyperemia and atonia of the intestinal walls where the dye had reached before the death of the animal.  Survivors were free of symptoms after 2 days.  The oral LD
50 was  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 15 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
calculated to be 275 mg/kg body weight.  These investigators also reported an LD50 of 50 mg/kg body weight for 
NMRI mice.  The acute oral toxicity of malachite green has also been determined in female Sprague-Dawley rats. 
Meyer and Jorgenson (1983) administered 300, 450, 600, or 750 mg malachite green oxalate/kg body weight, presumably by gavage.  The 24-hour LD
50 value for malachite green was determined to be 520 mg/kg.  Effects 
observed included depression, prostration, emaciation, coma, and death.  
In a 28-day study, Wistar rats were exposed to 0, 10, 100, or 1,000 ppm malachite green oxalate in feed 
(Clemmensen et al., 1984). The animals exposed to 1,000 ppm showed significant decreases in feed consumption 
and weight gain and increased hyperactivity. In addition, females exposed to 1,000 ppm showed an increase in 
lymphocytes and decreases in neutrophils and packed cell volume.  Males exposed to 1,000 ppm showed a significant increase in plasma urea. 
Meyer and Jorgenson (1983) reported that nonpregnant New Zealand white rabbits were able to tolerate 
13 consecutive daily gavage doses of 50 mg malachite green oxalate/kg body weight.  Pregnant rabbits were also 
dosed with 5, 10, or 20 mg malachite green/kg body weight by gavage on days 6 through 18 of gestation and observed daily for external signs of toxicity. Feed consumption was reduced in treated animals and the average total body weight was consistently lower after 29 days, although there were no overt signs of toxicity.  Females in the untreated group gained an average of 230 g.  The animals given 5 mg/kg malachite green gained an average of 60 g, while those given 10 or 20 mg/kg lost 30 g and 60 g, respectively. 
Lavender and Pullman (1964) infused malachite green (source unknown) into the renal arteries of dogs and found 
marked increases in the urinary excretion of water, sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, and phosphate.  The dye 
was localized primarily in the renal cortex, indicating proximal or distal tubular uptake.  In addition, it appeared to cause a direct vasoconstriction of the renal arterioles. 
The instillation of an aqueous solution of 8% malachite green oxalate into the eyes of rabbits resulted in marked 
edema, substantial discharge, and slight hyperemia of the conjunctiva (Clemmensen et al., 1984). Treatment with 
fine crystals of malachite green oxalate caused total opacification and bright red and edematous conjunctivae that lasted for 2 weeks. Clemmensen et al. (1984) also treated the skin of guinea pigs and rats with 400 µL of a 20% 
suspension of malachite green oxalate and found no visible erythema or edema.  In a study with humans, six of 11 eczema patients were found to be sensitized to patch tests using a 2% aqueous solution of malachite green (Bielicky and Novak, 1969). 
No data were found in the literature on the toxicity of leucomalachite green.  
 
 
 16 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Humans 
Malachite green has been reported to be injurious to the human eye (Grant, 1974).  No toxicity studies or reports 
of health effects related to exposure to leucomalachite green in humans were found in the literature. 
REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY 
Experimental Animals 
Meyer and Jorgenson (1983) observed significant teratologic effects in New Zealand white rabbits administered 0, 5, 10, or 20 mg malachite green oxalate/kg body weight by gavage on days 6 through 18 of gestation.  At all three doses there were significant increases in preimplantation losses, primarily due to early resorption of fetuses and decreases in the number of living fetuses.  The body weights of the progeny were less than those in the controls, with the differences being significant in the 5 and 20 mg/kg groups.  Developmental anomalies were observed in all treated groups.  Skeletal deviations were the most common abnormality and included incomplete ossification of vertebrae and phalanges and malformed skulls.  Enlargement of the liver, heart, and abdominal cavity was also observed. The percent of progeny with abnormalities were 18.5%, 38.0%, 33.9%, and 47.0%  in the 0, 5, 10, and 20 mg/kg treatment groups, respectively.  Thalidomide (150 mg/kg body weight), which was used as a positive control, caused similar types of changes in 94% of the progeny. 
Damage can also occur to rainbow trout eggs upon exposure to malachite green.  Using treatment regimens similar 
to those used in fisheries, Meyer and Jorgenson (1983) reported a delay in hatching, reduction in the average size 
of fry, and a significant increase in the percentage of fry with deformities. The abnormalities included head and jaw deformities, curvatures of the spine, missing fins, and a bobtailed condition. On the other hand, an increase in the percentage of eggs that hatched was increased in the treated groups compared to the untreated groups. 
No data were found in the literature on the reproductive and developmental toxicity of leucomalachite green. 
Humans 
No studies of reproductive or developmental effects of malachite green chloride or leucomalachite green in humans 
were found in a review of the literature.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  17 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
CARCINOGENICITY 
Experimental Animals 
The data relating to the carcinogenicity of malachite green are extremely limited.  However, malachite green 
enhanced the formation of hepatic tumors in rats initiated with diethylnitrosamine  (Fernandes et al., 1991). There 
is also suggestive evidence of carcinogenicity based on structure-activity relationships (reviewed by Culp and Beland, 1996). 
No data were found in the literature on the carcinogenicity of leucomalachite green. 
Humans 
No epidemiology studies of malachite green chloride or leucomalachite green were found in a review of the 
literature. 
GENETIC TOXICITY 
There are little published mutagenicity data for malachite green.  Clemmensen et al. (1984) reported that malachite 
green oxalate was mutagenic in Salmonella typhimurium strain TA98 in the presence of S9 activation enzymes, 
but they observed no mutagenicity in TA100, TA1535, or TA1537, with or without S9.  Another investigation of 
malachite green-induced mutagenicity in Salmonella found negative results in TA98, TA100, and TA1537, but 
these investigations were only conducted in the absence of S9 (Ferguson and Baguley, 1988).  Wolfe (1977) reported that malachite green inhibited DNA replication processes in Escherichia coli that were catalyzed by 
polymerase I, and Panandiker et al. (1994) reported induction of DNA single-strand breaks in Syrian hamster 
embryo cells exposed in vitro to 1 µg/mL malachite green.  However, Au and Hsu (1979) found no evidence of 
induced chromosomal aberrations in cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells incubated for 5 hours with 20 µM malachite green.  Furthermore, no increase in micronucleated erythrocytes was observed in bone marrow of mice 
administered a single dose of 37.5 mg/kg malachite green oxalate by gavage; the frequency of micronucleated cells 
was assessed at 24, 42, and 66 hours posttreatment (Clemmensen et al., 1984).  The testing protocol used in this 
in vivo assay is not the currently accepted standard, but the results of this investigation were nonetheless clearly 
negative. Finally, in a brief abstract, negative results were reported in a mammalian spot test ( in vivo mammalian 
mutation assay) conducted in mice treated with 10 to 40 mg/kg malachite green by gavage on days 8, 9, and 10 
of pregnancy (Jensen, 1984); no increase in the number of recessive coat color spots was observed in the offspring of treated females.   
 
 
  
 
  18 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
STUDY RATIONALE AND DESIGN 
In 1993, the FDA nominated malachite green as a priority chemical for carcinogenicity testing by the National 
Toxicology Program. In August 1994, the selection was reviewed by the Toxicology Study Selection and Review Committee, which oversees the Interagency Agreement between the NCTR and the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences.  The basis for the selection of malachite green was the potential for significant worker and consumer exposure (NIOSH, 1990), suggestive evidence of tumor promotion in rodent liver (Fernandes et al. , 1991), suspicion of carcinogenicity based on structure-activity relationships (IARC, 1978; Littlefield et al. , 
1985), and inadequacy of existing data to evaluate its carcinogenicity (reviewed by Culp and Beland, 1996). 
It has been reported that malachite green is reduced to and persists as leucomalachite green in the tissues of fish 
treated with malachite green.  Doerge et al. (1998) showed that humans are exposed to greater amounts of 
leucomalachite green than malachite green via the consumption of treated fish. There are no data available on the 
adverse effects to any species from exposure to leucomalachite green.  Therefore, 2-year feed studies were 
proposed as part of a research plan to determine the carcinogenic risk from exposure to malachite green and 
leucomalachite green. The present study was designed to evaluate the toxicity of malachite green chloride and leucomalachite green after 28 days of exposure, help assist in the dose selection for the 2-year bioassay, and provide fundamental information that could be used as the basis for additional mechanistic studies.   
 19 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
PROCUREMENT AND CHARACTERIZATION 
Malachite Green Chloride 
Malachite green chloride was obtained from Chemsyn Science Laboratories (Lenexa, KS) in one lot 
(CSL-96-645-88-23). Identity and purity analyses were conducted by the manufacturer and the study laboratory. Reports on analyses performed in support of the malachite green chloride studies are on file at the National Center for Toxicological Research (NCTR). 
Malachite green chloride, a green solid, was identified by the study laboratory using  
1H- and 13C-nuclear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)/mass spectrometry (MS).  The 
supplier also identified the chemical as malachite green chloride with 1H-nuclear magnetic resonance and 
ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy. 
The purity of malachite green chloride was determined with HPLC by the manufacturer, heavy metal and HPLC 
analyses by the study laboratory, and elemental and heavy metal analyses by Galbraith Laboratories, Inc. (Knoxville, TN). Heavy metal analyses by the study laboratory were conducted with inductively coupled plasma/atomic emission spectroscopy, normalized against standards provided by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (Gaithersburg, MD). 
Elemental analyses for carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and chlorine (total halogens) were in agreement with the 
theoretical values for malachite green chloride.  Results of heavy metal analyses by Galbraith Laboratories, Inc., indicated less than 20 ppm calculated as lead. Results of heavy metal analyses by the study laboratory indicated the following concentrations:  tin, 25.0 ppm; zinc, 23.1 ppm; aluminum, 3.69 ppm; iron, 2.25 ppm; copper, 
1.62 ppm; and magnesium, 1.17 ppm.  HPLC analyses conducted by the supplier indicated one major peak and 
four impurities with a combined area of approximately 5.1% of the total peak area.  Further HPLC analyses, conducted by the study laboratory, indicated one major peak and seven impurities with a combined area of approximately 4.7% of the total peak area; two of the impurities were identified as leucomalachite green and the desmethyl analogue of malachite green, present at concentrations of approximately 1% each based on peak areas, retention times, and spectral characteristics.  The overall purity was determined to be at least 95%.  
  
 20 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Reports on liquid chromatography/MS, electrospray ionization (ESI)/MS, and HPLC/ESI/MS analyses performed 
in support of the malachite green chloride studies are on file at the NCTR. 
The bulk chemical was stored in the original amber bottle in the dark at room temperature.  Analyses performed 
after the completion of the 28-day studies indicated no degradation of the bulk chemical; the stability of malachite green chloride was monitored at 6-month intervals over a 2-year period using HPLC with post-column oxidation. 
Leucomalachite Green 
Leucomalachite green was obtained from Chemsyn Science Laboratories in one lot (CSL-95-583-08-09).  Identity, purity, and stability analyses were conducted by the manufacturer and the study laboratory.  Reports on analyses performed in support of the leucomalachite green studies are on file at the NCTR. 
Leucomalachite green, a faint green solid, was identified by the supplier using 
1H-nuclear magnetic resonance, 
infrared, and ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy and by the study laboratory using 1H- and 13C-nuclear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy. The purity of leucomalachite green  was determined by elemental analyses (performed by Oneida Research 
Services, Inc., Whitesboro, NY), heavy metal analyses (performed by Galbraith Laboratories, Inc.), and HPLC. 
Elemental analyses for carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen were in agreement with the theoretical values for 
leucomalachite green.  Results of heavy metal analyses indicated less than 0.30 ppm lead and less than 1.0 ppm heavy metals calculated as lead.  HPLC indicated one major peak and two impurities with a combined area of 0.24% of the total peak area at a wavelength of 254 nm..  One impurity was identified as malachite green based on retention time and spectral characteristics.  The overall purity of lot CSL-95-583-08-09 was determined to greater than 99%. 
Reports on liquid chromatography-atmospheric pressure chemical ionization/MS, direct exposure probe/electron 
ionization/MS, and HPLC/electrospray ionization/MS analyses performed in support of the leucomalachite green studies are on file at the NCTR. 
The bulk chemical was stored in the original amber bottle with a double wrapping of Parafilm around the cap; the 
bottle was placed inside a plastic bag inside another plastic bag filled with a silica gel desiccant and stored at 20° C, protected from light.  Analyses performed after the completion of the 28-day studies indicated no  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  21 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
degradation of the bulk chemical; the stability of leucomalachite green was monitored at 6-month intervals over 
a 2-year period using HPLC. 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS OF DOSE FORMULATIONS 
The dose formulations for malachite green chloride were prepared on 6 days by dissolving the chemical in water and then mixing it with feed (Table F2). The 25 and 600 ppm dose formulations were prepared three times and the 100, 300, and 1,200 ppm dose formulations were prepared twice. The dose formulations for leucomalachite green were prepared by mixing the chemical with feed (Table F2).  A premix was prepared by hand and blended with additional feed. The 96 and 290 ppm dose formulations for leucomalachite green were prepared once and the 580 and 1,160 ppm dose formulations were prepared twice.  Dose formulations for each chemical were mixed in a Patterson-Kelly twin-shell blender with the intensifier bar on for 20 minutes.  Dose formulations were stored in stainless steel feed cans at 4 ( ± 2( C for up to 92 days (malachite green chloride) or 95 days (leucomalachite 
green). 
Homogeneity and stability studies of the 25 ppm malachite green chloride dose formulations were performed by 
the study laboratory using HPLC. Homogeneity was confirmed.  Stability of the malachite green chloride formulation was confirmed for 92 days for dose formulations stored protected from light at 4 ( C and for 10 days 
for dose formulations stored at room temperature, either protected from light or open to air and light.  Stability 
of the leucomalachite green formulation was confirmed for 95 days for dose formulations stored protected from light at up to 8( C and for 32 days for dose formulations stored at room temperature either protected from light 
or open to air. 
Periodic analyses of the dose formulations of malachite green chloride were conducted by the study laboratory 
using HPLC. Analyses of the dose formulations of malachite green chloride were conducted on one batch each of 25, 100, and 1,200 ppm dose formulations, on both batches of the 300 ppm dose formulations, and on all three of the 600 ppm dose formulations (Table F3).  During the 28-day studies, seven of eight dose formulations 
analyzed for rats and mice were within 10% of the target concentration, with no value greater than 103% of the target concentration. The formulation that was not within 10% of the target concentration was diluted with feed and remixed to provide a lower (300 ppm) concentration; the remix was analyzed and found to be within 10% of the target concentration. Analyses of the dose formulations of leucomalachite green were conducted by the study laboratory using HPLC. During the 28-day studies, all dose formulations were analyzed.  All 6 dose formulations for rats and mice were within 10% of the target concentration (Table F4).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    22 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
28-D AY STUDIES 
Male and female F344/N Nctr BR rats and B6C3F1/Nctr BR (C57BL/6N × C3H/HeN MTV—) mice were obtained 
from the study laboratory’s breeding colony.  The rats and mice were 4 to 5 weeks old at allocation and 6 to 
7 weeks old on the first day of exposure. 
Groups of eight male and eight female rats and mice were fed diets containing 0, 25, 100, 300, 600, or 1,200 ppm 
malachite green chloride for 28 days.  Additional groups of eight male and eight female rats designated for thyroid 
hormone assays were fed diets containing 0 or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride.  Groups of eight male rats and 
eight female mice were fed diets containing 0, 290, 580, or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green for 28 days. Additional groups of eight male rats designated for thyroid hormone assays were fed diets containing 0 or 
1,160 ppm leucomalachite green.  Feed and water were available ad libitum . Rats were housed two per cage and 
mice four per cage.  Clinical findings and feed consumption were recorded weekly.  The animals were weighed 
initially, weekly, and at the end of the studies.  Details of the study design and animal maintenance are summarized 
in Table 1. 
Clinical pathology studies were conducted on all core study animals at the end of the exposure period. The animals 
were anesthetized with carbon dioxide, and blood was collected by cardiac puncture (rats) or from the retroorbital sinus (mice).  For hematology analyses, blood was placed in tubes containing EDTA as anticoagulant.  Assessment of blood cells was determined by light microscopic examination of blood smears fixed in absolute methanol. For clinical chemistry analyses, blood samples were placed in tubes, allowed to clot, and then centrifuged, and the serum was collected.  Parameters were measured with a Roche Diagnostic Cobas Mira-Plus analyzer (Roche Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Montclair, NJ).  Reagents were obtained from the equipment manufacturer.  All parameters measured are listed in Table 1.  
Blood was collected by cardiac puncture from special study rats on days 4 and 21 for determination of thyroid­
stimulating hormone (TSH), triiodothyronine (T
3), and thyroxine (T4) concentrations. TSH was measured with 
double-antibody radioimmunoassay.  Freshly prepared 125I-TSH was allowed to react overnight with the specific 
antibody in the presence or absence of unlabeled hormone in the sample.  An excess of secondary antibody 
containing polyethylene glycol was added. The bound and unbound 125I-labeled hormones were separated by 
centrifugation and the radioactivity was measured in the precipitates.  The amount of TSH was calculated from 
a standard curve. Total T3 and total T4 were determined with a “Coat-A-Count” procedure obtained from DPC 
(Los Angeles, CA).  The procedure is a solid-phase radioimmunoassay, wherein 125I-labeled T3 or T4 competes with 
the T3 or T4 in the sample for antibody sites.  The parameters measured are listed in Table 1.    
   
 23 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Necropsies were performed on all core study animals.  The kidneys and liver were weighed. Tissues for 
microscopic examination were fixed and preserved in 10% neutral buffered formalin, processed and trimmed, 
embedded in paraffin, sectioned to a thickness of 5 µm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. A complete 
histopathologic examination was performed on core study control animals, 1,200 ppm animals exposed to malachite green chloride, and 1,160 ppm animals exposed to leucomalachite green.  The liver, pituitary gland, and 
thyroid gland from all core study animals and the urinary bladder from all core study mice were examined histopathologically. Table 1 lists the tissues and organs routinely examined.  
  24 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  1 
Experimental Design and Materials and Methods in the Feed Studies of Malachite Green Chloride 
and Leucomalachite Green 
Malachite Green Chloride Leucomalachite Green 
Study Laboratory 
National Center for Toxicological Research (Jefferson, AR) 
Strain and Species 
Rats: F344/N Nctr BR
 
Mice: B6C3F1/Nctr BR (C57BL/6N × C3H/HeN MTV—)
 
Animal Source 
National Center for Toxicological Research (Jefferson, AR) 
Time Held Before Studies 
2 weeks 
Average Age when Studies Began 
6 to 7 weeks 
Date of First Exposure of First Group 
16 December 1996 (Start dates for other groups were staggered 
over the following 11 weeks.) 
Duration of Exposure 
28 days 
Date of Last Exposure of First Group 
12 January 1997 (Stop dates for other groups were staggered over 
the following 11 weeks.) 
Necropsy Dates 
13 and 27 January; 4, 11, 18, and 25 February; and 3, 4, 24, 
and 25 March 1997 
Average Age at Necropsy 
10 to 11 weeks 
Size of Study Groups 
Rats: 8 males and 8 females (core study); 
16 males and 16 females (thyroid hormone assay) 
Mice: 8 males and females 
Method of Distribution 
Animals were distributed randomly into groups of approximately 
equal initial mean body weights 
Animals per Cage 
Rats: 2 
Mice: 4 
Method of Animal Identification 
Ear clip National Center for Toxicological Research (Jefferson, AR) 
Rats: F344/N Nctr BR 
Mice: B6C3F1/Nctr BR (C57BL/6N × C3H/HeN MTV—) 
National Center for Toxicological Research (Jefferson, AR) 
2 weeks 
6 to 7 weeks 
12 August 1996 (Start dates for other groups were staggered over 
the following 3 weeks.) 
28 days 
8 September 1996 (Stop dates for other groups were staggered 
over the following 3 weeks.) 
9, 10, 16, 17, and 24 September 1996 
10 to 11 weeks 
Rats: 8 males (core study); 
16 males (thyroid hormone assay) 
Mice: 8 females 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Rats: 2 
Mice: 4 
Ear clip   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 25 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE 1 
Experimental Design and Materials and Methods in the Feed Studies of Malachite Green Chloride 
and Leucomalachite Green 
Malachite Green Chloride Leucomalachite Green 
Diet 
NIH-31 open formula meal (pellets were autoclaved, then ground 
to powder) (Purina Mills, Richmond, IN), available ad libitum 
Water 
Millipore-filtered water (Jefferson municipal supply) via 
16-oz water bottle, available ad libitum 
Cages 
Polycarbonate (Allentown Caging Equipment Co., Allentown, NJ), 
changed twice weekly (rats) or weekly (mice); cages rotated 
weekly 
Bedding 
Hardwood chips (Northeastern Products Inc., Warrensburg, NY), 
changed twice weekly (rats) or weekly (mice) 
Cage Bonnets 
Microisolator tops (Lab Products, Inc., Maywood, NJ) 
Racks 
Metal animal cage racks (Allentown Caging Equipment Co., 
Allentown, NJ), changed weekly 
Animal Room Environment 
Average temperature: 
rats: 72.0(  F 
mice: 74.3( F 
Average relative humidity: 
rats: 47.5% 
mice: 50.6% 
Room fluorescent light:  12 hours/day 
Room air changes:  at least 10/hour 
Exposure Concentrations 
0, 25, 100, 300, 600 or 1,200 ppm in feed, available ad libitum 
Type and Frequency of Observation 
Animals were observed twice daily; animals were weighed 
initially, weekly, and at the end of the studies. Feed consumption and clinical findings were recorded weekly. 
Method of Sacrifice 
Asphyxiation with carbon dioxide, following overnight fasting 
Necropsy 
Necropsies were performed on all core study animals.  Organs 
weighed were kidneys and liver. Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Average temperature: 
rats: 73.8(  F 
mice: 71.4 ( F 
Average relative humidity: 
rats: 51.5% 
mice: 52.0% 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
0, 290, 580, or 1,160 ppm in feed, available ad libitum 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies 
Same as malachite green chloride studies  
 
 26 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  1 
Experimental Design and Materials and Methods in the Feed Studies of Malachite Green Chloride 
and Leucomalachite Green 
Malachite Green Chloride Leucomalachite Green 
Clinical Pathology 
Blood was collected by cardiac puncture (rats) or from the 
retroorbital sinus (mice) at the end of the exposure period for hematology and clinical chemistry and by cardiac puncture from special study rats for thyroid hormone assays on days 4 and 21. 
Hematology :   hematocrit; hemoglobin concentration; erythrocyte, 
reticulocyte, and platelet counts; mean cell volume; mean cell 
hemoglobin; mean cell hemoglobin concentration; and leukocyte count and differentials 
Clinical chemistry : urea nitrogen, creatinine, total protein, alanine 
aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and total bile acids for rats 
and mice; glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, 
phosphorus, albumin, cholesterol, triglycerides, aspartate aminotransferase, creatine kinase, sorbitol dehydrogenase, 
-glutamyltransferase, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 
triiodothyronine (T
3), and thyroxine (T4) for rats 
Histopathology 
Complete histopathology was performed on all core study rats and 
mice exposed to 0 or 1,200 ppm.  In addition to gross lesions and 
tissue masses, the following tissues were examined:  adrenal gland, 
bone with marrow, brain, clitoral gland, coagulating gland, ear, 
esophagus, eye, gallbladder (mice), harderian gland, heart, large 
intestine (cecum, colon, rectum), small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), kidney, lacrimal gland, larynx, liver, lung, lymph nodes (mandibular and mesenteric), mammary gland, muscle, 
nose, ovary, pancreas, parathyroid gland, peripheral nerve, 
pituitary gland, preputial gland, prostate, salivary gland, skin, 
spinal cord, spleen, stomach (forestomach and glandular), testis (with epididymis and seminal vesicle), thymus, thyroid gland, 
tongue, trachea, urinary bladder, uterus, vagina, and Zymbal’s 
gland. In addition, the liver, pituitary gland, and thyroid gland of 
rats and mice and the urinary bladder of mice were examined in 
the lower exposure groups. Blood was collected by cardiac puncture or from the retroorbital 
sinus of core study male rats and female mice at the end of the 
exposure period for hematology and clinical chemistry and by 
cardiac puncture from special study male rats for thyroid hormone 
assays on days 4 and 21. 
Hematology :   hematocrit; hemoglobin concentration; erythrocyte, 
reticulocyte, and platelet counts; mean cell volume; mean cell 
hemoglobin; mean cell hemoglobin concentration; and leukocyte count and differentials 
Clinical chemistry:  urea nitrogen, creatinine, total protein, 
alanine aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase for female 
mice; glucose, sodium, potassium, chloride, calcium, phosphorus, 
albumin, cholesterol, triglycerides, aspa rtate aminotransferase, 
creatine kinase, sorbitol dehydrogenase, -glutamyltransferase, 
total bile acids, for TSH, T
3, and T4 for male rats 
Complete histopathology was performed on all core study male 
rats and female mice exposed to 0 or 1,160 ppm.  In addition to 
gross lesions and tissue masses, the following tissues were 
examined:  adrenal gland, bone with marrow, brain, clitoral gland, 
coagulating gland, ear, esophagus, eye, gallbladder (mice), harderian gland, heart, large intestine (cecum, colon, rectum), small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ileum), kidney, lacrimal gland, larynx, liver, lung, lymph nodes (mandibular and mesenteric), mammary gland, muscle, nose, ovary, pancreas, 
parathyroid gland, penis, peripheral nerve, pituitary gland, 
preputial gland, prostate, salivary gland, skin, spinal cord, spleen, 
stomach (forestomach and glandular), testis (with epididymis and 
seminal vesicle), thymus, thyroid gland, tongue, trachea, ureter, 
urinary bladder, uterus, vagina, and Zymbal’s gland.  In addition, the liver, pituitary gland, and thyroid gland of male rats and female mice and the urinary bladder of female mice were examined in the 
lower exposure groups. 
STATISTICAL METHODS 
Calculation and Analysis of Lesion Incidences 
The incidences of lesions are presented in Appendices A and B as the numbers of animals bearing such lesions 
at a specific anatomic site and the numbers of animals with that site examined microscopically. Fisher’s exact test (Bradley, 1968) was used to compare the proportion of lesions in the control group to that in each of the exposed groups. The Cochran-Armitage test (Thomas et al. , 1977) for a dose-response trend on proportions was used when 
all four exposure groups were examined.  An exact test for this procedure was used because there were fewer than 
10 animals in each exposure group.  All tests are one sided in that decreases in incidence with an increasing   
 27 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
exposure concentration were not considered. The P values within pairwise comparisons were adjusted by Holm’s 
modification of the Bonferroni procedure as described by Wright (1992). 
Analysis of Continuous Variables 
Body weights were analyzed on a per cage basis.  The mixed-models approach to repeated measures analysis was used to model the mean cage body weights.  The weights were modeled using the fixed effects of exposure 
concentration, time, and exposure-by-time interaction.  Dunnett’s two-sided test was used to test for differences between the control group mean and the exposure group mean (Dunnett, 1955).  Contrasts were used to test for exposure-related trends. Feed consumption was analyzed by a mixed analysis with repeated measures.  Dunnett’s test was used to test between the control group mean and the exposure group mean for each week. 
A SAS GLM procedure was used to model the organ weights and the ratios of organ weights to body weights as 
functions of the exposure concentration, with the exposure concentration effect declared as a categorical variable. Dunnett’s test was used to test for differences between the control group mean and each exposure group mean. 
Differences in the amount of compound consumed for each of the exposure concentrations were compared at 
weekly intervals using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).  In instances where there was a non-normal 
distribution and/or an unequal variance, the analyses were conducted using a Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA 
on ranks (Glantz, 1992). Differences between the control group mean or median and each treatment group mean or median were tested by Dunnett’s method. 
For most hematology and clinical chemistry data, the variables were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA with 
randomized blocks, a one-way ANOVA with randomized blocks and excluding data identified as a potential 
outlier, or a nonparametric analysis.  Dunnett’s test was used to test for differences between the control group mean and each treatment group mean.  For leukocyte differentials and reticulocytes, the variables were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA, with differences between the control group mean and each exposure group mean being compared by Dunnett’s method.  In instances where there was a non-normal distribution and/or an unequal variance, the analyses were conducted using a Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA on ranks, with differences between the control group median and each exposure group median being tested by Dunnett’s method.   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 28 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
QUALITY ASSURANCE METHODS 
The 28-day studies were conducted in compliance with Food and Drug Administration Good Laboratory Practice 
Regulations (21 CFR, Part 58).  The Quality Assurance Unit of the National Center for Toxicological Research performed audits and inspections of protocols, procedures, data, and reports throughout the course of the studies. 
GENETIC TOXICOLOGY 
Salmonella typhimurium  Mutagenicity Test Protocol 
Testing was performed as reported by Zeiger et al. (1992). Malachite green chloride was sent to the laboratory 
as a coded aliquot from Radian Corporation (Austin, TX).  It was incubated with the Salmonella typhimurium 
tester strains TA97, TA98, TA100, TA102, TA104, and TA1535 either in buffer or S9 mix (metabolic activation 
enzymes and cofactors from Aroclor 1254-induced male Sprague Dawley rat or Syrian hamster liver) for 20 minutes at 37º C.  Top agar supplemented with 
L-histidine and d-biotin was added, and the contents of the tubes 
were mixed and poured onto the surfaces of minimal glucose agar plates.  Histidine-independent mutant colonies arising on these plates were counted following incubation for 2 days at 37º C. 
Each trial consisted of triplicate plates of concurrent positive and negative controls and five doses of malachite 
green chloride. The high dose was limited by toxicity.     
In this assay, a positive response is defined as a reproducible, dose-related increase in histidine-independent 
(revertant) colonies in any one strain/activation combination. An equivocal response is defined as an increase in revertants that is not dose related, is not reproducible, or is not of sufficient magnitude to support a determination of mutagenicity. A negative response is obtained when no increase in revertant colonies is observed following chemical treatment.  There is no minimum percentage or fold-increase required for a chemical to be judged positive or weakly positive. 
Rat Bone Marrow Micronucleus Test Protocol 
The standard three-exposure protocol is described in detail by Shelby et al. (1993). Male F344/N rats were injected intraperitoneally (three times at 24-hour intervals) with malachite green chloride dissolved in saline. Solvent control animals were injected with saline only. The positive control rats received injections of cyclophosphamide. The rats were killed 24 hours after the third injection, and blood smears were prepared from bone marrow cells obtained from the femurs.  Air-dried smears were fixed and stained; 2,000 polychromatic erythrocytes (PCEs) were scored for frequency of micronucleated cells in each of five rats per dose group.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 29 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
The results were tabulated as the mean of the pooled results from all animals within a treatment group plus or 
minus the standard error of the mean.  The frequency of micronucleated cells among PCEs was analyzed by a 
statistical software package that tested for increasing trend over exposure groups with a one-tailed 
Cochran-Armitage trend test, followed by pairwise comparisons with each exposure group and the control group (ILS, 1990). In the presence of excess binomial variation, as detected by a binomial dispersion test, the binomial variance of the Cochran-Armitage test was adjusted upward in proportion to the excess variation.  In the micronucleus test, an individual trial is considered positive if the trend test P value is less than or equal to 0.025 
or if the P value for any single exposure group is less than or equal to 0.025 divided by the number of exposure groups. A final call of positive for micronucleus induction is preferably based on reproducibly positive trials (as noted above).  Ultimately, the final call is determined by the scientific staff after considering the results of 
statistical analyses, reproducibility of any effects observed, and the magnitudes of those effects. 
Mouse Peripheral Blood Micronucleus Test 
A detailed discussion of this assay is presented by MacGregor et al. (1990). At the end of the 28-day studies, 
peripheral blood smears were obtained from eight male and female mice exposed to malachite green chloride and eight female mice exposed to leucomalachite green.  Smears were immediately prepared and fixed in absolute methanol.  The methanol-fixed slides were stained with acridine orange and coded.  Slides were scanned to 
determine the frequency of micronuclei in 2,000 PCEs and 2,000 normochromatic erythrocytes (NCEs) in each of eight mice per exposure group.  The results for PCEs and NCEs were analyzed as described for rat bone marrow PCEs. 
Evaluation Protocol 
These are the basic guidelines for arriving at an overall assay result for assays performed by the National Toxicology Program.  Statistical as well as bi ological factors are considered.  For an individual assay, the statistical 
procedures for data analysis have been described in the preceding protocols. There have been instances, however, in which multiple aliquots of a chemical were tested in the same assay, and different results were obtained among aliquots and/or among laboratories.  Results from more than one aliquot or from more than one laboratory are not simply combined into an overall result.  Rather, all the data are critically evaluated, particularly with regard to pertinent protocol variations, in determining the weight of evidence for an overall conclusion of chemical activity in an assay. In addition to multiple aliquots, the in vitro assays have another variable that must be considered in 
arriving at an overall test result. In vitro assays are conducted with and without exogenous metabolic activation. 
Results obtained in the absence of activation are not combined with results obtained in the presence of activation; 30 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
each testing condition is evaluated separately.  The results presented in the Abstract of this Toxicity Study Report 
represent a scientific judgement of the overall evidence for activity of the chemical in an assay.  
 
  
 
 31 
RESULTS
 
RATS 
All rats survived to the end of the studies (Tables 2 and 3). In the malachite green chloride study, the mean body 
weight gain of males in the 1,200 ppm group was significantly less than that of the controls.  The final mean body 
weight of females in the 1,200 ppm group and the body weight gains of females in the 600 and 1,200 ppm groups were significantly less than those of the controls.  In the leucomalachite green study, the final mean body weight of males in the 1,160 ppm group and the body weight gains of males in the 580 and 1,160 ppm groups were 
significantly less than those of the control group. There were no clinical findings related to exposure to malachite green chloride or leucomalachite green. 
In the malachite green chloride study, feed consumption by all exposed groups of males and females was generally 
similar to that by the control groups.  Exposure concentrations of 25, 100, 300, 600, and 1,200 ppm resulted in average daily doses of approximately 3, 12, 40, 70, and 175 mg malachite green chloride/kg body weight to males and 3, 12, 40, 75, and 190 mg/kg to females.  In the leucomalachite green study, feed consumption by all groups 
of exposed rats was similar to that by the controls. Dietary concentrations of 290, 580, and 1,160 ppm resulted 
in average daily doses of approximately 30, 60, and 115 mg leucomalachite green/kg body weight.  32 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE 2 
Survival, Body Weights, and Feed Consumption of Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride 
Concentration 
(ppm) Survival a Initial Mean Body Weight b (g) 
Final Change Final Weight 
Relative 
to Controls 
(%) Feed 
Consumption c 
Week 1 Week 4 
Male 
0 
25 
100 
300 600 
1,200 8/8 
8/8 
8/8 
8/8 
8/8 
8/8 114 ± 7 
116 ± 6 
110 ± 9 
115 ± 8 
115 ± 6 
115 ± 7 229 ± 7 
238 ± 7 
222 ± 15 
235 ± 10 
232 ± 6 
199 ± 8 115 ± 4 
123 ± 3 
112 ± 7 
121 ± 2 
117 ± 5 
84 ± 5*** 104 
97 
103 
101 
87 19.3 
23.6 
18.5 
24.8 
17.6 
21.9 20.6 
24.4 
20.0 
23.6 
20.8 
23.1 
Female 
0 
25 
100 
300 
600 
1,200 8/8
8/8 
8/8 8/8 
8/8 
8/8 99 ± 3 
103 ± 4 
101 ± 3 102 ± 3 
101 ± 2 
102 ± 3 154 ± 3 
155 ± 4 
154 ± 4 158 ± 4 
145 ± 3 
128 ± 3*** 56 ± 2 
52 ± 2 
54 ± 2 57 ± 2 
44 ± 2*** 
26 ± 2*** 100 
100 103 
94 
83 15.3 
17.0 
15.4 17.7 
18.2 
19.4 16.0 
16.3 
15.1 15.6
13.4 
16.3 
***Significantly different (P 0.001) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
a Number of animals surviving at 28 days/number initially in group  b Weights and weight changes are given as mean ± standard error. 
Average feed consumption is expressed as grams per animal per day.  
 
 
  33 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE 3 
Survival, Body Weights, and Feed Consumption of Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Green 
bFinal Weight Feed c Mean Body Weight (g) Relative Consumption a Concentration Survival Initial Final Change to Controls Week 1 Week 4 
(ppm) (%) 
0 8/8 137 ± 5 253 ± 5 116 ± 2 20.1 22.8 
290 8/8 137 ± 4 246 ± 6 109 ± 3 97 19.7 20.1 
580 8/8 138 ± 4 239 ± 5 101 ± 3** 94 17.7 19.2 
1,160 8/8 142 ± 4 231 ± 5* 89 ± 3*** 91 16.9 21.0 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 
***P0.001 a Number of animals surviving at 28 days/number initially in group  b Weights and weight changes are given as mean ± standard error. 
Average feed consumption is expressed as grams per animal per day.  
Malachite Green Chloride : The hematology and clinical chemistry data are presented in Table C1. Hematology 
changes in male rats included a decrease in mean cell hemoglobin values in the 300 ppm or greater groups and a 
significant decrease in mean cell volumes in the 600 and 1,200 ppm groups compared to controls.  In female rats, the erythrocyte count, hemoglobin and mean cell hemoglobin concentrations, and hematocrit and mean cell hemoglobin values in the 1,200 ppm group were significantly decreased.  There were no significant changes in the other hematology parameters measured in female rats.  
In male rats, there was a significant decrease in sorbitol dehydrogenase activity in the 1,200 ppm group compared 
to that in controls. In female rats, -glutamyltransferase activities were significantly increased in the 600 and 
1,200 ppm groups and cholesterol concentrations were significantly increased in the 300 ppm or greater groups. 
Additional groups of male and female rats were exposed to 0 or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride for 4 or 
21 days and blood was collected for thyroid-stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine, and thyroxine concentrations. 
The triiodothyronine concentration was significantly increased in 1,200 ppm female rats on day 21 (Table C2). Thyroxine concentrations were significantly decreased in 1,200 ppm females on days 4 and 21, while no significant differences were observed in thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations.  The thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration in 1,200 ppm males was significantly decreased on day 4 but not on day 21.  There were no significant changes in triiodothyronine or thyroxine concentrations in exposed males compared to the controls.  
 
  
 
 
 
 34 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
The relative liver weights of 600 and 1,200 ppm males and the relative and absolute liver weights of 300 ppm or 
greater females were significantly greater than those of the controls (Table D1). 
No gross lesions were observed that could be attributed to malachite green chloride exposure.  Microscopically, 
the incidences of hepatocyte cytoplasmic vacuolization in 1,200 ppm males and females were significantly greater than those in the controls (males:  0 ppm, 0/8; 25 ppm, 0/8; 100 ppm, 0/8; 300 ppm, 0/8; 600 ppm, 1/8; 1,200 ppm, 4/8; females:  0/8, 0/8, 0/8, 0/8, 0/8, 7/8; Tables A1 and A2; statistical analyses not presented). 
Leucomalachite Green : The hematology and clinical chemistry data are presented in Table C3. Significantly 
decreasing linear trends in the exposed groups were observed in erythrocyte counts, hemoglobin concentrations, 
and hematocrit values compared to controls (statistical analyses not presented).  The hemoglobin concentration, hematocrit value, and erythrocyte count in the 1,160 ppm group were significantly lower than those in the control 
group. The alkaline phosphatase activity was significantly decreased in the 1,160 ppm group, while triglyceride, 
creatinine, albumin, and cholesterol concentrations and alanine aminotransferase activities were generally 
significantly decreased in all exposed groups.  The phosphorus concentration and -glutamyltransferase activity 
were significantly increased in the 1,160 ppm group.  
Additional groups of male rats were exposed to 0 or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green for 4 or 21 days and blood 
was collected for thyroid-stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine, and thyroxine concentrations. There were significant decreases in thyroxine concentrations and significant increases in thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations in the 1,160 ppm group at both time points (Table C4). 
The absolute liver weights of 1,160 ppm males and the relative liver weights of all exposed groups were 
significantly greater than those of the control group (Table D2). No gross lesions were observed that could be attributed to leucomalachite green exposure.  The incidences of hepatocyte cytoplasmic vacuolization were significantly increased in 580 and 1,160 ppm males (0 ppm, 0/8; 290 ppm, 2/8; 580 ppm, 5/8; 1,160 ppm, 7/8; Table A3; statistical analyses not presented). Two of eight rats exposed to 1,160 ppm and two of eight rats exposed to 580 ppm leucomalachite green had apoptotic follicular epithelial cells in the thyroid gland. Morphologic changes consisted of sloughed follicular cells with condensed nuclei located within follicles.  No inflammatory reaction was present.  There was evidence of follicular epithelium regeneration, since even most severely affected follicles were still lined by viable epithelium.   
 
  
 35 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
MICE 
All mice survived to the end of the studies (Table 4 and 5).  In the malachite green chloride study, the final mean 
body weight and body weight gain of females in the 1,200 ppm group were significantly less than those of the controls. In the leucomalachite green study, the final mean body weight of females in the 1,160 ppm group and body weight gains of females in the 580 and 1,160 ppm groups were significantly less than those of the controls. There were no clinical findings related to exposure to malachite green chloride or leucomalachite green. 
In the malachite green chloride study, feed consumption by all exposed groups was similar to that by the controls. 
Exposure concentrations of 25, 100, 300, 600, and 1,200 ppm resulted in average daily doses of approximately 4, 18, 50, 100, and 220 mg malachite green chloride/kg body weight to males and 5, 20, 65, 120, and 250 mg/kg to females.  In the leucomalachite green study, feed consumption by the 580 and 1,160 ppm mice was less than that by the controls. Dietary concentrations of 290, 580, and 1,160 ppm resulted in average daily doses of approximately 60, 110, and 220 mg leucomalachite green/kg body weight. 
TABLE 4 
Survival, Body Weights, and Feed Consumption of Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride 
Concentration 
(ppm) Survival a Initial Mean Body Weight b (g) 
Final Change Final Weight 
Relative 
to Controls 
(%) Feed 
Consumption c 
Week 1 Week 4 
Male 
0 
25 
100 
300 
600 
1,200 8/8 
8/8 
8/8 
8/8 
8/8 
8/8 20.8 ± 0.4 
20.7 ± 0.4 
21.3 ± 0.4 
21.1 ± 0.3 
21.1 ± 0.7 
20.9 ± 0.8 25.3 ± 0.5 
25.4 ± 0.4 
25.8 ± 0.4 
25.7 ± 0.4 
25.0 ± 0.4 
23.8 ± 0.8 4.5 ± 0.4 
4.7 ± 0.4 
4.5 ± 0.4 
4.6 ± 0.3 
3.9 ± 0.5 
2.9 ± 0.4 100 
102 
102 
99 
94 3.2 
3.8 
3.8 3.7 
3.5 
3.8 3.6 
3.9 
4.4 4.1 
3.4 
4.0 
Female 
0 
25 
100 300 
600 
1,200 8/8
8/8 
8/8 8/8 
8/8 
8/8 17.6 ± 0.4 
17.0 ± 0.3 
17.4 ± 0.4 17.2 ± 0.4 
16.9 ± 0.2 
17.3 ± 0.3 19.3 ± 0.4 
19.2 ± 0.3 
19.6 ± 0.4 19.0 ± 0.3 
18.5 ± 0.2 
17.7 ± 0.3* 1.7 ± 0.3 
2.2 ± 0.2 
2.2 ± 0.2 1.8 ± 0.2 
1.6 ± 0.1 
0.4 ± 0.3* 99 
102 
98 
96 
92 3.2 
3.8 
3.9 
4.0 
3.8 
3.7 3.2 
3.8 
3.9 
4.0
3.2 
3.5 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
a Number of animals surviving at 28 days/number initially in group  b Weights and weight changes are given as mean ± standard error. 
Average feed consumption is expressed as grams per animal per day. c  36 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE 5 
Survival, Body Weights, and Feed Consumption of Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Green 
bFinal Weight Feed c Mean Body Weight (g) Relative Consumption a Concentration Survival Initial Final Change to Controls Week 1 Week 4 
(ppm) (%) 
0 8/8 16.7 ± 0.4 19.2 ± 0.4 2.5 ± 0.3 3.9 4.4 
290 8/8 17.6 ± 0.3 19.1 ± 0.3 1.5 ± 0.3 99 3.2 3.3 
580 8/8 17.3 ± 0.3 18.3 ± 0.4 1.0 ± 0.3** 95 3.5 3.6 
1,160 8/8 17.4 ± 0.4 17.9 ± 0.4* 0.5 ± 0.4*** 93 3.7 3.6 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 
***P0.001 a Number of animals surviving at 28 days/number initially in group  b Weights and weight changes are given as mean ± standard error. 
Average feed consumption is expressed as grams per animal per day. 
Malachite Green Chloride : The hematology and clinical chemistry data are presented in Table C5. In male and 
female mice, there were significant linear decreases in erythrocyte counts, hematocrit values, and hemoglobin 
concentrations (statistical analyses not presented). The erythrocyte counts, hematocrit values, and hemoglobin concentrations were significantly decreased in 300 ppm or greater males compared to the controls.  The mean cell volume, mean cell hemoglobin value, and reticulocyte count were significantly increased in 1,200 ppm males.  The 
erythrocyte counts were significantly decreased in 100 ppm or greater females compared to the controls. Hemoglobin concentrations were significantly decreased in 300 ppm or greater females and hematocrit values were significantly decreased in the 600 and 1,200 ppm females.  The mean cell volumes and reticulocyte counts were significantly increased in 300 ppm or greater females. 
In male mice, creatinine concentrations were significantly decreased in the 300 ppm or greater groups compared 
to the controls. Creatinine concentrations in 600 and 1,200 ppm females were significantly decreased, while bile acid concentrations were significantly decreased in 300 ppm or greater females. 
Significant decreases in absolute kidney weight occurred in female mice exposed to 600 or 1,200 ppm malachite 
green chloride, which may reflect the overall decrease in mean body weight.  No gross or microscopic lesions were observed that could be attributed to malachite green chloride exposure.  
 
  
   
   
  
 
 37 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Leucomalachite Green : The hematology and clinical chemistry data are presented in Table C6.  Total protein 
concentrations were significantly decreased in the 580 and 1,160 ppm groups compared to those in the controls. 
There were no significant changes in other parameters measured in mice. 
No gross lesions were observed that could be attributed to leucomalachite green exposure.  The incidence of 
multifocal apoptosis in the transitional epithelium of the urinary bladder was significantly increased in 1,160 ppm 
females (0 ppm, 0/8; 290 ppm, 0/8; 580 ppm, 0/7; 1,160 ppm, 8/8; Table B3; statistical analyses not presented). 
GENETIC TOXICOLOGY 
Malachite green chloride was tested for mutagenicity in bacteria and for chromosomal effects in mammalian  cells in vivo ; all results were negative. Malachite green chloride (0.1-10.0 µg/plate) was not mutagenic in Salmonella 
typhimurium strain TA97, TA98, TA100, TA102, TA104, or TA1535, with or without induced rat or hamster liver 
S9 activation enzymes (Table E1).  Results of a micronucleus test with malachite green chloride in rat bone marrow cells following three intraperitoneal injections at doses ranging from 1.094 to 8.750 mg/kg were negative 
(Table E2). Although the frequency of micronucleated polychromatic erythrocytes (PCEs) at the intermediate dose 
of 4.375 mg/kg malachite green chloride was si gnificantly greater than the control frequency, the increase was very 
small; also, the frequency of micronucleated PCEs was not significant at 8.750 mg/kg and no bone marrow toxicity 
was detected at this dose. Therefore, the bone marrow micronucleus test in rats was judged to be negative overall. 
A peripheral blood micronucleus test was performed in male and female mice after 28 days of exposure to 
malachite green chloride in feed (25-1,200 ppm), and results in males and females were negative for 
normochromatic erythrocytes (NCEs) (Table E3).  A peripheral blood micronucleus test was also performed in 
female mice after 28 days of exposure to leucomalachite green in feed; significant increases in the frequency of 
micronucleated NCEs were observed in the 290 and 580 ppm groups (Table E4).  The trend P value was not 
significant due to a downturn in micronucleated NCEs in the 1,160 ppm group; dropping the 1,160 ppm data and reanalyzing the remaining data yielded a trend P value of 0.001, which is significant.  The 28-day exposure period that was used in these studies is just short of the 30- to 35-day time period required for the circulating NCE population to attain equilibrium, a factor more critical to the interpretation of negative data than positive data.  In an effort to confirm the results seen in NCE frequencies, the PCE populations were scored for frequency of micronucleated cells.  For malachite green chloride, there was no indication of an increase and the frequency of 
micronucleated PCEs was unchanged, lending greater confidence to the negative call. For leucomalachite green, 
a small increase in the frequency of micronucleated PCEs was observed in the 290 and 580 ppm groups, patterning  38 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
the response seen in NCEs; however, the results were not significant. Nonetheless, the effects seen in NCEs were 
sufficient to conclude that the result of the micronucleus test with leucomalachite green was positive.  
  
 
   
 
 39 
DISCUSSION
 
Male and female F344/N Nctr BR rats and B6C3F1/Nctr BR (C57BL/6N × C3H/HeN MTV—) mice were fed diets 
containing 0, 25, 100, 300, 600, or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride or 0, 290, 580, or 1,160 ppm 
leucomalachite green (male rats and female mice only) for 28 days to determine the toxicity of malachite green chloride and leucomalachite green, to determine the appropriate doses to be used in 2-year studies, and to compare the biological effects of the administration of malachite green chloride to those of leucomalachite green.  
A significant reduction in mean body weight gain occurred in male and female rats exposed to 1,200 ppm 
malachite green chloride and in female rats exposed to 600 ppm malachite green chloride compared to that in the 
control group. Further data indicate that the decreases in mean body weight gain was due to a toxic response. 
Increased liver-weight-to-body weight ratios were present in 600 and 1,200 ppm male and 300 ppm or greater female rats, suggesting a liver abnormality.  Liver toxicity was indicated by the significantly increased incidences of hepa tocyte cytoplasmic vacuolization in 1,200 ppm male and female rats.  The increase in -glutamyltransferase 
activities in female rats exposed to 600 or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride probably reflect liver toxicity seen 
microscopically.  Furthermore, in a 28-day ancillary study by Culp et al. (1999), demethylated derivatives of 
malachite and leucomalachite green were observed by mass spectrometry and high-performance liquid 
chromatography analyses of livers from rats exposed to malachite green and male rats exposed to leucomalachite 
green. In addition, 
32P-postlabeling of liver DNA from rats exposed to either malachite green or leucomalachite 
green indicated the formation of a single major DNA adduct, which increased with increasing dose. 
In addition to the pathologic changes observed in the present study for rats exposed to malachite green chloride, 
a number of statistically significant clinical chemistry changes were observed in the dosed groups as compared to the control groups. In 1,200 ppm female rats, significant decreases in three related parameters (erythrocyte count, hemoglobin concentration, and hematocrit value) were observed.  In addition, a significant decreasing trend was observed for these parameters (statistical analyses not presented).  These data are indicative of anemia. 
In female rats exposed to 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride, decreased thyroxine concentrations were observed, 
suggesting thyroid dysfunction. However, thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations were unchanged and triiodothyronine concentrations increased, which is not consistent with primary thyroid abnormality.  Male rats  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  40 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
exposed to leucomalachite green had decreased thyroxine concentrations, while thyroid-stimulating hormone 
concentrations were significantly increased, indicating a primary thyroid abnormality. 
In male and female mice exposed to malachite green chloride, there were no changes in feed consumption, 
although sporadic increases were observed throughout the study. The intermittent changes may reflect the small number of cages (2 for each exposure group) and the tendency of young rodents to scatter their feed. A significant reduction in mean body weight gain was observed in female mice exposed to 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride at week 4 compared to that in the control group.  No significant decrease was observed in the male mice exposed to malachite green chloride, although the mean body weight of 1,200 ppm males was generally lower than that of the control group.  Significant decreases in absolute kidney weight occurred in the female mice exposed to 600 or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride, which may reflect the overall decrease in mean body weight. 
In mice exposed to malachite green chloride, a number of significant clinical chemistry changes were observed 
in exposed groups. As observed in female rats exposed to malachite green chloride, a significant decrease was observed for three related parameters (erythrocyte counts, hematocrit values, and  hemoglobin concentrations) in male and female mice exposed to malachite green chloride.  Decreasing dose trends in these parameters were also 
observed in male and female mice (statistical analyses not presented).  These data indicate a mild anemia.  A significant increase in reticulocyte counts suggests a regenerative anemia.  Additional changes to clinical chemistry parameters did not appear to be biologically significant, as they did not fit a pattern of abnormalities that would indicate a specific clinical condition. 
As summarized in Tables 6 and 7, female rats and mice appear to be more sensitive than males to the effects of 
malachite green chloride.  A number of effects observed in female rats exposed to malachite green chloride were 
not seen in male rats. In mice exposed to malachite green chloride, similar effects were observed in both sexes. 
However, when no outliers were excluded from the analysis, effects were generally observed at a lower dose in female mice than in male mice (statistical analyses not presented).  This indicates that, at a minimum, female rats and mice should be included in a 2-year study. 
The data also indicate that an exposure concentration of 1,200 ppm is too high for a 2-year study in rats exposed 
to malachite green chloride.  Mean body weights of male and female rats exposed to 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride were decreased. In addition, changes in the erythrocyte count; hematocrit and mean cell hemoglobin values; hemoglobin, mean cell hemoglobin, triidothyronine and thyroxine concentrations; and -glutamyltransferase activity as well as hepatocyte vacuolization occurred in female rats exposed to 1,200 ppm 
malachite green chloride.  Therefore, it is recommended that the highest exposure concentration selected for a
  41 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE 6 
Summary of Effects Observed in Male and Female Rats Exposed to Malachite Green Chloride 
or Leucomalachite Green for 28 Days 
a Lowest Dose Producing a Significant Effect 
Effect Male Rats Exposed to Female Rats Exposed to Male Rats Exposed to 
Malachite Green Chloride Malachite Green Chloride Leucomalachite Green 
Body weight 
Relative liver weight Erythrocyte count 
Hemoglobin concentration Hematocrit value 
Mean cell hemoglobin value 
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration 
Phosphorus concentration 
-Glutamyltransferase activity 
c Triiodothyronine concentration c Thyroxine concentration Thyroid-stimulating 
c    hormone concentration 
Hepatocyte vacuolization decrease, 1,200 ppm 
increase, 600 ppm b ns
 
decrease, 1,200 ppm
 
ns
 
decrease, 300 ppm
 
decrease, 1,200 ppm
 
ns
 
ns
 
ns
 ns
 
increase, 1,200 ppm
d increase, 1,200 ppm decrease, 1,200 ppm 
increase, 300 ppm 
decrease, 1,200 ppm 
decrease, 1,200 ppm 
decrease, 1,200 ppm 
decrease, 1,200 ppm 
decrease, 1,200 ppm 
ns 
increase, 600 ppm 
increase, 1,200 ppm 
decrease, 1,200 ppm 
ns d increase, 1,200 ppm decrease, 580 ppm
 
increase, 290 ppm
 
decrease, 1,160 ppm
 
decrease, 1,160 ppm
 
decrease, 1,160 ppm
 
ns
 
ns
 
increase, 1,160 ppm
 
increase, 1,160 ppm
 
ns
 
decrease, 1,160 ppm
 
increase, 1,160 ppm
d increase, 580 ppm 
a Dose at which the effect observed becomes significantly different from that of the control group b No significant difference from the control group
 Measured for rats exposed to 0 or 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride and 0 or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green
 
d Statistical analyses not presented 
TABLE 7 
Summary of Effects Observed in Male and Female Mice Exposed to Malach ite Green Chloride 
or Leucomalachite Green for 28 Days 
aLowest Dose Producing a Significant Effect
Effect Male Mice Exposed to Female Mice Exp osed to Female Mice Exposed to 
Malachite Green Chloride Malachite Green Chloride Leucomalachite Green 
b Body weight ns decrease, 1,200 ppm decrease, 580 ppm 
Relative liver weight ns ns increase, 1,160 ppm 
Erythrocyte count decrease, 300 ppm decrease, 100 ppm ns 
Hemoglobin concentration decrease, 300 ppm decrease, 300 ppm ns 
Hematocrit value decrease, 300 ppm decrease, 600 ppm ns 
Reticulocyte count increase, 1,200 ppm increase, 300 ppm ns 
Apoptosis of the bladder not observed not observed increase, 1,160 ppm 
a Dose at which the effect observed becomes significantly different from that of the control group b No significant difference from the control group  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 42 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
2-year rat study not exceed 600 ppm malachite green chloride.  In mice, 600 ppm is more problematic.  In female 
mice exposed to 600 ppm malachite green chloride for 28 days, there were significant decreases in erythrocyte 
count, hemoglobin concentration, and hematocrit value.  A significant increase in reticulocyte count was observed 
in female mice exposed to 300 ppm malachite green chloride. Based upon these observations, it is recommended that the highest exposure concentration selected for a 2-year mouse study not exceed 600 ppm malachite green chloride, with consideration given to the use of 450 ppm as the maximum dose. 
In the leucomalachite green study, a significant reduction in mean body weight gain occurred in 580 and 
1,160 ppm males compared to the controls.  Other data indicate that the decrease in mean body weight gain was due to a toxic response.  Specifically, incr eased liver-weight- to-body-weight ra tios occurred in all exposed groups. 
Hepatocyte vacuolization was present in all groups of rats exposed to leucomalachite green, including seven of eight rats exposed to 1,160 ppm.  Exposure concentration-related increases in  -glutamyltransferase activities in 
the rats exposed to leucomalachite green may reflect liver changes seen microscopically. 
Other histopathologic data revealed apoptotic follicular epithelial cells in the thyroid gland of two of eight rats in 
each of the groups exposed to 580 or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green.  Interestingly, thyroid gland tumors were 
observed in a 2-year study in male and female F344 rats exposed to gentian violet (Littlefield, 1988). Treatment­
related increases in the incidences of follicular cell adenocarcinoma of the thyroid gland were observed in the males at incidences of 1%, 5%, 3%, and 6% and in females at incidences of 1%, 1%, 5%, and 8% after being 
exposed to 0, 100, 300, and 600 ppm gentian violet, respectively.  In the present leucomalachite green study, 
thyroid-stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine, and thyroxine concentrations were analyzed on days 4 and 21 for male rats exposed to 0 or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green.  In the 1,160 ppm group, thyroxine concentrations were 
decreased while thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations were significantly increased compared to controls. 
A decrease in thyroxine concentration is consistent with hypothyroidism, but does not preclude other causes of low circulating thyroxine, such as decreased pituitary function, alterations in protein binding of thyroxine, and alterations in peripheral metabolism of thyroxine.  However, in combination with an increase in thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations, these findings suggest that pituitary function was normal in rats with decreased thyroxine levels and that primary hypothyroidism was the most likely cause of reduced thyroxine concentrations.  These data suggest leucomalachite green may have a potential harmful effect on the thyroid gland at high doses, as was the case with gentian violet. 
In addition to the pathologic changes observed in male rats exposed to leucomalachite green, several statistically 
significant clinical chemistry changes were observed in exposed groups.  There was a decreasing trend in three related parameters (erythrocyte count, hemoglobin concentration, and hematocrit value; Culp et al. , 1998).  These
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 43 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
data indicate a mild normocytic-normochromic anemia.  A significant increase in phosphorus concentration 
occurred, suggesting the anemia may have been due to intravascular hemolysis. 
In female mice exposed to leucomalachite green, differences in feed consumption between the control and exposed 
groups were irregular throughout the 28-day study.  This may reflect the small number of cages (two for each exposure group) and the tendency of young rodents to scatter their feed.  A significant reduction in mean body weight gain was observed in female mice exposed to 580 or 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green as compared to the control group. 
An increased liver-weight-to-body-weight ratio was observed in mice in the 1,160 ppm group, suggesting a toxic 
response to the liver at that exposure concentration. As noted earlier, demethylated derivatives of leucomalachite green and malachite green were observed by mass spectroscopy and high-performance liquid chromatography analyses of livers from mice fed leucomalachite green for 28 days (Culp et al. , 1999). 
Other histopathologic data from the present leucomalachite green study revealed that all female mice exposed to 
1,160 ppm leucomalachite green had apoptosis of the transitional epithelium of the urinary bladder.  The apoptotic 
cells were phagocytized by neighboring transitional epithelial cells and appeared to undergo dissolution in phagocytic vacuoles (Culp et al. , 1999). 
In addition to the pathologic changes observed in 1,160 ppm female mice, several statistically significant clinical chemistry changes were observed in exposed groups.  The changes did not appear to be biologically significant, as they did not fit a pattern of abnormalities that would indicate a specific clinical condition. 
Due to the decreased mean body weights and changes in clinical chemistry and pathology observed in the 
leucomalachite green rat and mouse studies, an exposure concentration of 1,160 ppm is considered too high for use in 2-year studies.  Based on the body weight data, in which effects were observed at 580 ppm in rats, and exposure concentration-related changes in several clinical chemistry parameters, 580 ppm leucomalachite green is recommended as the maximum exposure concentration for a 2-year study. 
In addition to determining recommended exposure concentrations for 2-year feed studies, the effects of malachite 
green chloride on rodents were compared to those of leucomalachite green.  Male rats and female mice were exposed to similar molar concentrations of leucomalachite green as compared to malachite green.  Specific changes were observed (Table 6). In general, leucomalachite green caused more changes in male rats and female mice than malachite green chloride.  Moreover, all lesions observed in malachite green chloride-exposed animals were  
 
 44 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
observed in leucomalachite green-exposed animals (except anemia in mice exposed to malachite green chloride). 
Hepatocyte vacuolization was generally more extensive in leucomalachite green-exposed rats (observed in all exposed groups) compared to malachite green chloride-exposed rats (observed in male rats exposed to 600 and 1,200 ppm and female rats exposed to 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride), and additional lesions were observed in rodents exposed to leucomalachite green.  Specifically, apoptosis of the transitional epithelium of the urinary bladder was observed in all female mice exposed to 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green, but not in female or male mice exposed to 1,200 ppm malachite green chloride.  Changes in mean body weights and relative liver weights 
occurred at lower exposure concentrations of leucomalachite green than of malachite green chloride.  Increased 
thyroid-stimulating hormone concentrations and decreased thyroxine concentrations indicated hypothyroidism in male rats exposed to 1,160 ppm leucomalachite green for 4 or 21 days. However, changes observed in thyroxine, 
thyroid- stimulating hormone, and triiodothyronine concentrations in rats exposed to malachite green chloride were 
not consistent with primary thyroid abnormality.  These data substantiate a recommendation that a 2-year feed study be conducted with leucomalachite green and malachite green chloride and indicate that exposure to 
leucomalachite green may be more harmful to rodents.  
 
 
 
 45 
REFERENCES
 
Alabaster, J.S. (1982). Survey of fish-farm effluents in some EIFAC countries.  In Report of the EIFAC Workshop 
on Fish-Farm Effluents , pp. 5-20.  European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission Publication No. T41.  Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
Alderman, D.J., and Clifton-Hadley, R.S. (1993). Malachite green:  A pharmacokinetic study in rainbow trout, 
Oncorhynchus mykiss  (Walbaum).  J. Fish Dis. 16, 297-311. 
Au, W., and Hsu, T.C. (1979). Studies on clastogenic effects of biologic stains and dyes. Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 
1, 27-35. 
Bauer, K., Dangschat, H., Knöppler, H.-O., and Neudegger, J. (1988). Uptake and excretion of malachite green 
by rainbow trout. Arch. Lebensmittelhyg. 39, 85-108. 
Bielicky, T., and Novák, M. (1969). Contact-group sensitization to triphenylmethane dyes. Arch. Dermatol. 100, 
540-543. 
Bills, T.D., and Hunn, J.B. (1976). Changes in the blood chemistry of Coho salmon exposed to malachite green. 
Prog. Fish Cult. 38, 214-216. 
Bills, T.D., Marking, L.L., and Chandler, J.H., Jr. (1977). Malachite green: Its toxicity to aquatic organisms, persistence and removal with activated carbon.  Invest. Fish Control 75, 1-6. 
Bradley, J.V. (1968). Fisher’s exact method for analyzing fourfold (2 x 2) contingency tables. In Distribution-
Free Statistical Tests.  Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Burchmore, S., and Wilkinson, M. (1993).  Proposed environmental quality standards for malachite green in water 
(DWE 9026). UK Department of the Environment, Transport, and the Regions Report No. 3167/2, prepared by the Water Research Centre, Marlow, Buckinghamshire, England.   
 
 
 
 46 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Clemmensen, S.,  Jensen, J.C., Jensen, N.J., Meyer, O., Olsen, P., and Würtzen, G.  (1984). Toxicological studies 
on malachite green:  A triphenylmethane dye.  Arch. Toxicol. 56, 43-45. 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 21, Part 58. 
Culp, S.J., and Beland, F.A. (1996). Malachite green: A toxicological review. J. Am. Coll. Toxicol. 15, 219-238. 
Culp, S.J., Mulligan, L.T., and Beland F.A. (1998).  Twenty-eight day range finding study in mice and rats 
administered malachite green and leucomalachite green in the diet (2118.03/04-leucomalachite green).  NCTR Technical Report for Experiment No. 2118, March 1998, National Center for Toxicological Research, Jefferson, AR. 
Culp, S.J., Blankenship, L.R., Kusewitt, D.F., Doerge, D.R., Mulligan, L.T., and Beland, F.A. (1999).  Toxicity 
and metabolism of malachite green and leucomalachite green during short-term feeding to Fischer 344 rats and 
B6C3F1 mice.  Chem. Biol. Interact. 122, 153-170. 
Doerge, D.R., Churchwell, M.I., Gehring, T.A., Pu, Y.M., and Plakas, S.M. (1998). Analysis of malachite green 
and metabolites in fish using liquid chromatography atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectrometry. 
Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 12, 1625-1634. 
Dunnett, C.W. (1955). A multiple comparison procedure for comparing several treatments with a control.  J. Am. 
Stat. Assoc. 50, 1096-1121. 
Ferguson, L.R., and Baguley, B.C. (1988). Verapamil as a co-mutagen in the Salmonella/mammalian microsome 
mutagenicity test.  Mutat. Res. 209, 57-62. 
Fernandes, C., Lalitha, V.S., and Rao, K.V.K. (1991).  Enhancing effect of malachite green on the development of hepatic pre-neoplastic lesions induced by N-nitrosodiethylamine in rats.  Carcinogenesis 12, 839-845. 
Fisher, W.S., Rosemark, T.R., and Shleser, R.A. (1976).  Toxicity of malachite green to cultured American Lobster 
larvae. Aquaculture 8, 151-156. 
Gerundo, N., Alderman, D.J., Clifton-Hadley, R.S., and Feist, S.W. (1991). Pathological effects of repeated doses 
of malachite green:  A preliminary study.  J. Fish Dis. 14, 521-532.  
 
 47 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Glagoleva, T.P., and Malikova, E.M. (1968). The effects of malachite green on the blood composition of young 
Baltic salmon.  Rybnoe Khozyaistvo 45, 15-18. 
Glantz, S.A. (1992). Primer of Biostatistics . 3rd ed. McGraw Hill, Inc., New York. 
Grant, W.M. (1974). Toxicology of the Eye, 2nd ed., pp. 430-433. Charles S. Thomas, Springfield, IL. 
Grizzle, J.M. (1977). Hematological changes in fingerling channel catfish exposed to malachite green.  Prog. Fish 
Cult. 39, 90-93. 
Hlavek, R.R., and Bulkley, R.V. (1980). Effects of malachite green on leucocyte abundance in rainbow trout, Salmo gairdneri  (Richardson). J. Fish Biol. 17, 431-444. 
Integrated Laboratory Systems (ILS) (1990). Micronucleus Data Management and Statistical Analysis Software, 
Version 1.4. ILS, P.O. Box 13501, Research Triangle Park, NC 27707. 
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) (1978). IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the 
Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man: Some Aromatic Amines and Related Nitro Compounds — Hair Dyes, 
Colouring Agents and Miscellaneous Industrial Chemicals,  Vol. 16. IARC, Lyon, France. 
Jensen, N.J. (1984). Lack of mutagenic activity of malachite green in the mammalian spot test.  Mutat. Res. 130, 
248. 
Lavender, A.R., and Pullman, T.N. (1964). The renal actions of malachite green, a diuretic dye.   J. Pharmacol. 
Exp. Ther. 146, 87-91. 
Law, F.C.P. (1994). Total residue depletion and metabolic profile of selected drugs in trout.  U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration Contract No. 223-90-7016.  Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada. 
Littlefield, N.A. (1988). Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity studies of gentian violet in Fischer 344 rats.  NCTR 
Technical Report for Experiment No. 338, November 1988, National Center for Toxicological Research, Jefferson, AR.  
 
  
 
 
 
 48 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Littlefield, N.A., Blackwell, B.-N., Hewitt, C.C., and Gaylor, D.W. (1985). Chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity 
studies of gentian violet in mice.  Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 5, 902-912. 
MacGregor, J.T., Wehr, C.M., Henika, P.R., and Shelby, M.D. (1990).  The in vivo erythrocyte micronucleus test: 
Measurement at steady state increases assay efficiency and permits integration with toxicity studies.  Fundam. 
Appl. Toxicol. 14, 513-522. 
The Merck Index (1996). 12th ed. (S. Budavari, Ed.), p. 972. Merck and Company, Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ. 
Meyer, F.P., and Jorgenson, T.A. (1983).  Teratological and other effects of malachite green on development of 
rainbow trout and rabbits. Trans. Am. Fish Soc. 112, 818-824. 
Meyer, F.P., and Schnick, R.A. (1989). A review of chemicals used for the control of fish diseases.  Rev. Aquat. 
Sci. 1, 693-710. 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) (1990).  National Occupational Exposure Survey 
(1981-1983), unpublished provisional data as of July 1, 1990. NIOSH, Cincinnati, Ohio. 
Nelson, N.C. (1974). A review of the literature on the use of malachite green in fisheries.  PB-235450. National 
Technical Information Service, Technology Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, VA. 
Panandiker, A., Maru, G.B., and Rao, K.V.K. (1994).  Dose-response effects of malachite green on free radical 
formation, lipid peroxidation and DNA damage in Syrian hamster embryo cells and their modulation by 
antioxidants. Carcinogenesis 15, 2445-2448. 
Schlotfeldt, H.J. (1992). Current practices of chemotherapy in fish culture.  In Chemotherapy in Aquaculture: 
From Theory to Reality (C. Michel and D.J. Alderman, Eds.), pp.  25-38. Office International des Epizooti, Paris. 
Schnick, R.A. (1988). The impetus to register new therapeutants for aquaculture. Prog. Fish Cult . 50, 190-196. 
Shelby, M.D., Erexson, G.L., Hook, G.J., and Tice, R.R. (1993). Evaluation of a three-exposure mouse bone marrow micronucleus protocol:  Results with 49 chemicals.  Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 21, 160-179.   
 
 49 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Solbé, J.F. de L.G. (1982). Fish-farm effluents; A United Kingdom survey. In Report of the EIFAC Workshop 
on Fish-farm Effluents , pp. 29-55.  European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission Publication No. T41.  Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 
Stoskopf, M.K. (1993). Fish Medicine, pp. 316-317. W.B. Saunders Co., Philadelphia, PA. 
Thomas, D.G., Breslow, N.,  and Gart, J.J. (1977). Trend and homogeneity and analyses of proportions and life
 
table data. Comput. Biomed. Res. 10, 373-381.
 
Thorburn, M.A., and Moccia, R.D. (1993).  Use of chemotherapeutics on trout farms in Ontario. J. Aquat. Anim.
 
Health 5, 85-91.
 
Veterinary Medicines Directorate (1996). Annual Report on Surveillance for Veteri nary Residues in 1996.
 
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London.
 
Veterinary Medicines Directorate (1999). Annual Report on Surveillance for Veterinary Residues in 1999.
 
PB 4514. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, London.
 Werth, G., and Boiteux, A. (1968).  The biological activity of malachite green.  Part VI: The detoxification of
 
malachite green in the organism by formation of leucomalachite green.  Arzneimittelforschung 18, 39-42.
 
Wolfe, A.D. (1977). Influence of cationic triphenylmethane dyes upon DNA polymerization and product
 hydrolysis by Escherichia coli polymerase I.  Biochemistry 16, 30-33.
 
Wright, S.P. (1992). Adjusted P-values for simultaneous inference.  Biometrics 48, 1005-1013.
 
Zeiger, E., Anderson, B., Haworth, S., Lawlor, T., and Mortelmans, K. (1992).  Salmonella mutagenicity tests:
 V. Results from the testing of 311 chemicals.  Environ. Mol. Mutagen. 19 (Suppl. 21), 2-141. 50 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 A-1 
APPENDIX A 
SUMMARY OF LESIONS IN RATS 
TABLE  A1 
TABLE  A2 
TABLE  A3 Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Male Rats 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride .............................. 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Rats 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride .............................. 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Male Rats 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green ................................. A - 2 
A - 4 
A - 6      
 A-2 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  A1 
aSummary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed  Study of Malachite Green Chloride
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Disposition Summary 
Animals initially in study 
Survivors 
Terminal sacrifice 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 
Animals examined microscopically 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Alimentary System 
Liver (8) (8) (8) (8) (8) (8)
     Developmental malformation 3 (38%)
     Vacuolization cytoplasmic, hepatocyte 1 (13%) 4 (50%) 
Salivary glands (8) (1) (8)
     Cytoplasmic alteration, parotid gland 5 (63%) 1 (100%) 7 (88%)
     Inflammation, focal, parotid gland, interstitium 1 (13%) 
Cardiovascular System 
Heart (8) (8)
     Cardiomyopathy, focal 2 (25%) 1 (13%)
     Cardiomyopathy, multifocal 3 (38%) 3 (38%) 
Endocrine System 
Adrenal gland (8) (8)
 Hyperplasia, focal, cortex 1 (13%) 
Vacuolization cytoplasmic, focal 1 (13%) 
Pituitary gland (8) (8) (8) (8) (8) (6)
     Cyst 1 (17%)
     Degeneration, pars distalis 1 (13%) 
Thyroid gland (8) (7) (8) (8) (8) (8)
 Degeneration, follicle 1 (13%) 1 (13%)
     Ultimobranchial cyst 1 (14%) 1 (13%) 
General Body System 
None 
Genital System 
Coagulating gland (8) (6)
     Inflammation, focal 1 (17%) 
Preputial gland (8) (7)
     Inflammation, multifocal 2 (25%) 
Prostate (8) (7)
 Apoptosis 1 (14%) 
Hematopoietic System 
None 
Integumentary System 
None A-3 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  A1 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed  Study of Malachite Green Chloride 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Musculoskeletal System 
None 
Nervous System 
Brain, cerebrum (8) (8)
 Hydrocephalus 1 (13%) 
Respiratory System 
Lungs (8) (8)
     Infiltration cellular, lymphocytic, focal, pleura 2 (25%) 
Nose (8) (8)
     Hyperplasia, multifocal, mucosa 1 (13%) 
Trachea (8) (8)
     Inflammation 1 (13%) 
Special Senses System 
Eye (8) (8)
 Degeneration, unilateral, retina 1 (13%) 
Harderian gland (8) (8)
     Inflammation, focal, interstitium 1 (13%) 3 (38%)
     Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium 1 (13%) 
Urinary System 
Kidney (8) (8)
     Inflammation, focal 1 (13%) 1 (13%) 
a Number of animals examined microscopically at the site and the number of animals with lesion      
     A-4 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  A2 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
aof Malachite Green Chloride
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Disposition Summary 
Animals initially in study 
Survivors 
Terminal sacrifice 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 
Animals examined microscopically 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Alimentary System 
Liver      Developmental malformation      Vacuolization cytoplasmic, hepatocyte 
Salivary glands 
     Cytoplasmic alteration, parotid gland (8) 
(8) 
4 (50%) (8) (8) (8) 
1 (13%) (8) 
1 (13%)(8)
7 (88%) 
(8)
8 (100%) 
Cardiovascular System 
Heart      Cardiomyopathy, focal      Cardiomyopathy, multifocal (8) 
2 (25%) 
1 (13%) (7)
1 (14%)
Endocrine System 
Pituitary gland      Degeneration, pars intermedia Thyroid gland 
Apoptosis, unilateral 
     Ultimobranchial cyst (8) 
(6) (8) 
(8) 
1 (13%) (8) 
(8) (8) 
1 (13%) 
(8) (8) 
(8) (8)
(6)
1 (17%)
1 (17%) 
General Body System 
None 
Genital System 
Clitoral gland (8) (8)
     Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium 2 (25%) 
Ovary (8) (2) (8)
     Cyst 1 (50%) 
Hyperplasia, interstitial cell 2 (25%) 
Uterus (8) (1) (8) 
Dilatation, bilateral    1 (100%) 
Hematopoietic System 
None 
Integumentary System 
None 
Musculoskeletal System 
None A-5 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  A2 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Nervous System 
None 
Respiratory System 
Lung, right 
Infiltration cellular, histiocytic, focal (8) (8)
1 (13%) 
Special Senses System 
Harderian gland 
     Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium Lacrimal gland 
Degeneration 
     Inflammation, focal, interstitium 
     Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium (8) 
1 (13%) 
(8) 
1 (13%)
1 (13%) (8)
4 (50%) 
(8)
1 (13%)
Urinary System 
Kidney 
     Inflammation, focal 
Mineralization 
Urinary bladder      Inflammation, focal (8) 
8 (100%) 
(8) 
1 (13%) (8)
1 (13%)
6 (75%) 
(8)
a Number of animals examined microscopically at the site and the number of animals with lesion A-6 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  A3 
aSummary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
Disposition Summary 
Animals initially in study 
Survivors   Terminal sacrifice 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 
Animals examined microscopically 8 8 8 8 
Alimentary System 
Liver      Vacuolization cytoplasmic, hepatocyte (8) (8) 
2 (25%) (8) 
5 (63%) (8)
7 (88%) 
Cardiovascular System 
Heart      Cardiomyopathy, focal      Cardiomyopathy, multifocal (8) 
1 (13%) 
1 (13%) (8)
2 (25%)
1 (13%) 
Endocrine System 
Pituitary gland      Cyst, pars distalis 
Thyroid gland 
Apoptosis, focal, follicular cell 
     Apoptosis, multifocal, follicular cell 
Concretion, focal (8) 
(7) (6) 
(7) 
1 (14%) (8) 
1 (13%) 
(8) 
1 (13%)
1 (13%) (7)
(8)
2 (25%)
General Body System 
None 
Genital System 
Prostate (8) (8)
     Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium 2 (25%) 1 (13%) 
Hematopoietic System 
None 
Integumentary System 
None 
Musculoskeletal System 
None 
Nervous System 
None A-7 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE A3 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed  Study of Leucomalachite Green 
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
Respiratory System 
Lungs 
Infiltration cellular, histiocytic, focal,
 subpleura 
     Infiltration cellular, lymphocytic, focal,
 subpleura 
     Infiltration cellular, lymphocytic, multifocal,
 subpleura (8) 
1 (13%) 
2 (25%) 
1 (13%) (8)
1 (13%)1 (13%)
Special Senses System 
Harderian gland 
     Inflammation, focal, interstitium      Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium (8) (8)
1 (13%)2 (25%) 
Urinary System 
None 
a Number of animals examined microscopically at the site and the number of animals with lesion A-8 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 B-1 
APPENDIX B 
SUMMARY OF LESIONS IN MICE 
TABLE  B1 
TABLE  B2 
TABLE  B3 Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Male Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride .............................. 
Summary of the Incidence of Neoplasms and Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride .............................. 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green ................................. B - 2 
B - 4 
B - 6  B-2 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  B1 
aSummary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Male Mice in the 28-Day Feed  Study of Malachite Green Chloride
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Disposition Summary 
Animals initially in study 
Survivors 
Terminal sacrifice 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 
Animals examined microscopically 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Alimentary System 
Gallbladder      Inflammation Liver      Inflammation, focal 
     Vacuolization cytoplasmic, focal (5) 
1 (20%) 
(8) 
2 (25%) (8) (8) 
1 (13%) (8) 
2 (25%) (8) 
2 (25%) (7)
(8)
1 (13%)
3 (38%) 
Cardiovascular System 
None 
Endocrine System 
Adrenal gland (8) (8)
 Cyst 1 (13%)
     Hyperplasia, focal, cortex 1 (13%) 
Pituitary gland (8) (8) (8) (7) (8) (6)
 Cyst 1 (13%) 
Thyroid gland (4) (8) (6) (8) (8) (3)
     Cyst 1 (17%) 
General Body System 
None 
Genital System 
Epididymis (8) (8)
     Aspermia 1 (13%) 
Preputial gland (8) (3) (3) (8)
 Cyst 1 (13%) 3 (100%) 3 (100%) 
Prostate (7) (7)
     Inflammation 1 (14%) 
Testes (8) (8)
 Degeneration 3 (38%) 1 (13%) 
Hematopoietic System 
None 
Integumentary System 
None 
Musculoskeletal System 
None B-3 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  B1 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Male Mice in the 28-Day Feed  Study of Malachite Green Chloride 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Nervous System 
None 
Respiratory System 
None 
Special Senses System 
None 
Urinary System 
Kidney 
     Inflammation Urinary bladder 
     Inflammation (8) 
3 (38%) 
(8) 
2 (25%) (8) (8) (8) 
1 (13%) (8) 
3 (38%) (8)
4 (50%) 
(6)
a Number of animals examined microscopically at the site and the number of animals with lesion B-4 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  B2 
Summary of the Incidence of Neoplasms and Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
aof Malachite Green Chloride
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Disposition Summary 
Animals initially in study 
Survivors 
Terminal sacrifice 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 8 
8 
Animals examined microscopically 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Alimentary System 
Liver      Vacuolization cytoplasmic, focal (8) 
2 (25%) (8) (8) (8) 
2 (25%) (8) (8)
1 (13%) 
Cardiovascular System 
None 
Endocrine System 
None 
General Body System 
None 
Genital System 
Uterus (8) (8)
 Dilatation, bilateral 1 (13%) 
Vagina (8) (8)
 Polyp 1 (13%) 
Hematopoietic System 
None 
Integumentary System 
None 
Musculoskeletal System 
None 
Nervous System 
Brain, cerebellum (6) (6)
 Proliferation, focal, glial cell 1 (17%) B-5 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  B2 
Summary of the Incidence of Neoplasms and Nonneoplastic Lesions in Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Respiratory System 
Lung 
     Infiltration, cellular, lymphocytic, focal,
 subpleura 
Nose 
     Exudate, nasolacrimal duct (8) 
1 (13%) 
(8) (8)
(8)
1 (13%) 
Special Senses System 
Harderian gland 
     Inflammation, multifocal, interstitium (7) 
1 (14%) (7)
Urinary System 
Kidney      Inflammation Urinary bladder 
     Inflammation (8) 
(8) 
4 (50%) (8) 
4 (50%) (8) 
3 (38%) (8) 
1 (13%) (8) (8)
1 (13%) 
(8)
2 (25%) 
a Number of animals examined microscopically at the site and the number of animals with lesion   B-6 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  B3 
aSummary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
Disposition Summary 
Animals initially in study 
Survivors   Terminal sacrifice 
Animals examined microscopically 8 
8 
8 8 
8 
8 8 
8 
8 8 
8 
8 
Alimentary System 
Liver 
Left lateral lobe, necrosis, multifocal, hepatocyte 
Median lobe, vacuolization cytoplasmic,
 focal, hepatocyte 
Salivary glands 
     Inflammation, focal, interstitium (8) 
1 (13%) 
1 (13%) 
(8) 
1 (13%) (8) 
2 (25%) (8) (8) 
2 (25%) 
(8)
Cardiovascular System 
Heart 
     Inflammation, focal, perivascular (8) 
1 (13%) (8)
1 (13%) 
Endocrine System 
Thyroid gland 
Degeneration, focal, follicular cell (8) (7) (4) (6)
2 (33%) 
General Body System 
None 
Genital System 
None 
Hematopoietic System 
None 
Integumentary System 
None 
Musculoskeletal System 
None 
Nervous System 
None 
Respiratory System 
Lung (8) (8)
     Inflammation, multifocal, perivascular 1 (13%) 1 (13%) B-7 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  B3 
Summary of the Incidence of Nonneop lastic Lesions in Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green 
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
Special Senses System 
None 
Urinary System 
Kidney 
     Inflammation, focal, interstitium Urinary bladder      Apoptosis, multifocal, transitional epithelium (8) 
2 (25%) 
(8) (8) (7) (8)
(8)
8 (100%) 
a Number of animals examined microscopically at the site and the number of animals with lesion B-8 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 C-1 
APPENDIX C 
CLINICAL PATHOLOGY RESULTS 
TABLE  C1 
TABLE C2 
TABLE  C3 
TABLE  C4 
TABLE  C5 
TABLE C6 Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride ................................................... 
Thyroid Hormone Data for Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride ................................................... 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Green ...................................................... 
Thyroid Hormone Data for Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Green ...................................................... 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloride ................................................... 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Green ...................................................... C - 2 
C - 4 
C - 5 
C - 6 
C - 7 
C - 9  
 
 C-2 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C1 
aHematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Male 
Hematology 
n 8 8 8 8 7 7 
b Hematocrit (%) 46.5 ± 0.6 46.3 ± 0.3 46.2 ± 0.6 b 45.9 ± 0.6 b 46.0 ± 0.6 44.9 ± 0.4 
Hemoglobin (g/dL) 6 17.2 ± 0.3 17.0 ± 0.2 17.2 ± 0.2 b 16.7 ± 0.3 b 16.9 ± 0.3 16.3 ± 0.1* 
Erythrocytes (10 /µL) c 8.81 ± 0.14 8.81 ± 0.08 8.87 ± 0.11 8.75 ± 0.12 8.84 ± 0.13 8.59 ± 0.09 d Reticulocytes (%) 2.0 ± 0.2 1.8 ± 0.2 2.3 ± 0.1 2.2 ± 0.2 2.0 ± 0.2 2.2 ± 0.3 e Mean cell volume (fL) 52.8 ± 0.2 52.6 ± 0.2 52.7 ± 0.3 b 52.6 ± 0.2 b 52.0 ± 0.1* e 52.1 ± 0.1* 
Mean cell hemoglobin (pg) 19.5 ± 0.1 19.3 ± 0.1 19.5 ± 0.1 19.0 ± 0.1*** 19.2 ± 0.1* 19.0 ± 0.1*** 
Mean cell hemoglobin b b concentration (g/dL)3 37.1 ± 0.2 36.7 ± 0.2 37.0 ± 0.2 e 36.3 ± 0.2*** 36.7 ± 0.2 36.3 ± 0.2* e Platelets (10 /µL)3 677.6 ± 10.5 682.6 ± 12.7 716.5 ± 19.0 704.6 ± 10.2 b 714.7 ± 12.3 695.3 ± 25.1 e Leukocytes (10 /µL) c8.06 ± 0.42 6.53 ± 0.54 8.30 ± 0.50 5.43 ± 0.49** 8.51 ± 0.40 6.45 ± 0.74 d Segmented neutrophils (%) c 13.9 ± 1.6 12.4 ± 1.0 12.3 ± 2.7 16.1 ± 1.6 11.4 ± 1.5 11.0 ± 0.5 d Lymphocytes (%) c 85.5 ± 1.8 86.6 ± 1.1 86.8 ± 2.9 83.4 ± 1.7 88.3 ± 1.5 88.6 ± 0.5 d Monocytes (%) c 0.30 ± 0.16 0.13 ± 0.13 0.80 ± 0.31 0.30 ± 0.16 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 d Eosinophils (%) 0.4 ± 0.3 0.9 ± 0.3 0.3 ± 0.2 0.4 ± 0.3 0.3 ± 0.2 0.4 ± 0.2 
Clinical Chemistry n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
b b b Urea nitrogen (mg/dL) 14.1 ± 0.4 b 14.8 ± 0.4 15.0 ± 0.4 13.9 ± 0.3 e 15.5 ± 0.3 15.8 ± 0.6 
Creatinine (mg/dL) 0.70 ± 0.03 0.60 ± 0.02** 0.71 ± 0.03 b 0.67 ± 0.03 0.66 ± 0.02 b 0.71 ± 0.03 b Glucose (mg/dL) 104 ± 3 109 ± 4 b 116 ± 8 97 ± 2 103 ± 5 b 95 ± 6 e Sodium (mmol/L) 155 ± 1 155 ± 1 155 ± 1 155 ± 1 154 ± 1 b 154 ± 0 
Potassium (mmol/L) 6.5 ± 0.3 6.3 ± 0.2 6.5 ± 0.1 b 6.2 ± 0.1 6.6 ± 0.2 6.3 ± 0.2 
Chloride (mmol/L) 101 ± 1 b 100 ± 1 101 ± 1 b 98 ± 2 100 ± 2 99 ± 1 
Calcium (mg/dL) 11.13 ± 0.48 12.10 ± 0.61 11.97 ± 0.27 11.51 ± 0.47 11.61 ± 0.62 11.43 ± 0.40 e e Phosphorus (mg/dL) 9.1 ± 0.4 e 8.7 ± 0.7 9.0 ± 0.3 9.2 ± 0.2 b 9.7 ± 0.6 9.4 ± 0.3 b Total protein (g/dL) 6.5 ± 0.1 6.6 ± 0.1 6.5 ± 0.1 b 6.7 ± 0.1 6.5 ± 0.1 6.4 ± 0.1 
Albumin (g/dL) 3.9 ± 0.1 3.9 ± 0.1 3.8 ± 0.1 e 3.9 ± 0.1 3.8 ± 0.1 3.7 ± 0.1 b Cholesterol (mg/dL) 49 ± 2 d 49 ± 1 55 ± 2* 51 ± 1 44 ± 1 b 53 ± 1 
Triglycerides (mg/dL) 87 ± 8 83 ± 3 100 ± 6 82 ± 7 84 ± 6 b 91 ± 8 
Alanine aminotransferase  (µg/L) 45 ± 3 40 ± 4 44 ± 3 40 ± 2 38 ± 3 40 ± 2 
Alkaline phosphatase (µg/L) 292 ± 12 291 ± 10 266 ± 12 288 ± 10 283 ± 12 b 254 ± 12 b Aspartate aminotransferase  (µg/L) 89 ± 2 81 ± 4 b 90 ± 3 83 ± 4 e 82 ± 6 b 88 ± 4 
Creatine kinase (µg/L) 241 ± 18 194 ± 26 285 ± 32 209 ± 21 b 208 ± 21 295 ± 35 
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (µg/L) 
-Glutamyltransferase (µg/L) 14 ± 1 
0.6 ± 0.1 15 ± 2 
0.5 ± 0.1 12 ± 1 
0.5 ± 0.1 b 15 ± 2 
0.5 ± 0.1 b 14 ± 2 
0.5 ± 0.1 9 ± 3* 
1.2 ± 0.3 
Bile acids (µmol/L) 16.1 ± 2.6 22.0 ± 4.5 16.3 ± 3.0 14.2 ± 2.4* 15.7 ± 4.0** 15.3 ± 2.6  C-3 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C1 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Female 
Hematology 
n 7 7 7 8 8 8 
e b Hematocrit (%) 48.8 ± 0.4 48.8 ± 0.5 48.7 ± 0.3 47.5 ± 0.3 47.3 ± 0.5 b 46.8 ± 0.4** b Hemoglobin (g/dL) 6 17.8 ± 0.1 17.9 ± 0.1 17.8 ± 0.1 17.6 ± 0.2 b 17.4 ± 0.2 16.4 ± 0.1*** e Erythrocytes (10 /µL) 8.88 ± 0.07 8.96 ± 0.07 8.84 ± 0.05 8.66 ± 0.10 8.66 ± 0.09 8.56 ± 0.07* c Reticulocytes (%) 2.0 ± 0.2 1.9 ± 0.1 d 1.8 ± 0.1 1.7 ± 0.2 1.8 ± 0.1 b 1.9 ± 0.2 
Mean cell volume (fL) 54.9 ± 0.1 54.3 ± 0.2 55.1 ± 0.2 55.5 ± 0.1 b 54.8 ± 0.2 b 54.3 ± 0.2 b Mean cell hemoglobin (pg) 20.0 ± 0.1 20.0 ± 0.0 20.1 ± 0.1 20.1 ± 0.1 20.0 ± 0.1 19.3 ± 0.1*** 
Mean cell hemoglobin b concentration (g/dL)3 36.5 ± 0.2 36.8 ± 0.1 36.5 ± 0.1 36.4 ± 0.2 36.5 ± 0.2  35.6 ± 0.2*** e Platelets (10 /µL)3 723.6 ± 16.5 694.3 ± 28.5 709.7 ± 15.2 714.3 ± 7.1 b 730.8 ± 11.6 658.5 ± 19.6 b Leukocytes (10 /µL) 6.86 ± 0.52 6.74 ± 0.83 7.17 ± 0.43 7.90 ± 0.90 6.26 ± 0.74 6.90 ± 0.95 c Segmented neutrophils (%) 11.0 ± 1.5 10.7 ± 1.8 10.1 ± 1.5 13.6 ± 2.4 13.9 ± 1.4 9.4 ± 1.9 c Lymphocytes (%) 88.3 ± 1.6 88.1 ± 2.0 88.7 ± 1.6 85.1 ± 2.4 85.3 ± 1.5 89.6 ± 1.9 c Monocytes (%) 0.14 ± 0.14 0.60 ± 0.30 0.30 ± 0.18 0.30 ± 0.16 0.30 ± 0.16 0.30 ± 0.16 c Eosinophils (%) 0.6 ± 0.2 0.6 ± 0.3 0.9 ± 0.3 1.0 ± 0.5 0.6 ± 0.3 0.8 ± 0.3 
Clinical Chemistry 
n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
d b Urea nitrogen (mg/dL) 16.8 ± 0.6 17.0 ± 0.5 18.0 ± 0.7 17.0 ± 0.4 17.4 ± 0.8 b 18.7 ± 0.4 
Creatinine (mg/dL) 0.61 ± 0.02 0.55 ± 0.02 0.69 ± 0.04* 0.70 ± 0.03*** 0.61 ± 0.03 0.64 ± 0.02 e e Glucose (mg/dL) 108 ± 5 110 ± 6 129 ± 9 b 128 ± 5* 119 ± 6 97 ± 3 
Sodium (mmol/L) 156 ± 2 b 157 ± 2 156 ± 2 b 156 ± 2 b 158 ± 2 b 156 ± 2 
Potassium (mmol/L) 6.3 ± 0.1 6.5 ± 0.2 6.5 ± 0.1 b 6.6 ± 0.2 6.4 ± 0.1 6.6 ± 0.1 
Chloride (mmol/L)  100 ± 1 b 100 ± 2 b 99 ± 2 98 ± 1 99 ± 2 b 98 ± 2 b Calcium (mg/dL) 11.36 ± 0.98 b 10.39 ± 0.35 11.04 ± 0.26 b 11.31 ± 0.14 b 10.70 ± 0.38 11.29 ± 0.14 
Phosphorus (mg/dL) 9.8 ± 0.9 12.3 ± 1.1 b 9.8 ± 0.6 9.7 ± 0.5 b 12.0 ± 1.2 9.6 ± 0.4 
Total protein (g/dL) 6.4 ± 0.1 6.4 ± 0.1 e 6.7 ± 0.1 b 6.8 ± 0.1** 6.7 ± 0.1* 6.6 ± 0.1 
Albumin (g/dL) 3.9 ± 0.1 4.1 ± 0.1 e 4.2 ± 0.1 4.0 ± 0.1 b 4.1 ± 0.1 4.0 ± 0.1 
Cholesterol (mg/dL) 91 ± 4 103 ± 7 b 95 ± 5 111 ± 2* 110 ± 6* 128 ± 4*** 
Triglycerides (mg/dL) 100 ± 12 108 ± 20 111 ± 14 141 ± 15 99 ± 14 118 ± 16 b Alanine aminotransferase (µg/L) 43 ± 2 40 ± 2 48 ± 2 b 40 ± 2 b 37 ± 2 e 36 ± 1 
Alkaline phosphatase (µg/L) 208 ± 5 b 198 ± 8 220 ± 9 200 ± 5 199 ± 6 b 206 ± 5 b Aspartate aminotransferase (µg/L) 91 ± 6 98 ± 7 b 98 ± 5 b 97 ± 7 95 ± 4 e 91 ± 3 
Creatine kinase (µg/L) 227 ± 26 b 193 ± 11 256 ± 21 b 337 ± 38 b 279 ± 43 b 293 ± 21 
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (µg/L) 
-Glutamyltransferase (µg/L) 15 ± 1 
0.6 ± 0.2 b 12 ± 1 
1.1 ± 0.4 15 ± 0 
0.1 ± 0.0 b 14 ± 2 
0.7 ± 0.2 12 ± 1 
1.7 ± 0.4* 13 ± 1 
4.2 ± 0.4*** e Bile acids (µmol/L) 14.1 ± 0.8 14.5 ± 0.9 15.1 ± 1.0 13.3 ± 0.6 14.5 ± 1.2 13.1 ± 0.6 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 
***P0.001 a Mean ± standard error.  Statistical tests were performed on unrounded data. b n=7
 Significant outliers were not excluded from statistical analyses.
 
d n=8 e n=6 c C-4 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C2 
Thyroid Hormone Data for Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloridea 
0 ppm 1,200 ppm 
n 8 8 
Male 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (ng/mL) 
Day 4 
Day 21 
Triiodothyronine (ng/dL) 
Day 4 
Day 21 
Thyroxine (µg/dL) 
Day 4 
Day 21 0.73 ± 0.06 
1.16 ± 0.15 
128.34 ± 6.48 
105.97 ± 5.21 
3.76 ± 0.17 
3.47 ± 0.05 1.14 ± 0.17* 
1.18 ± 0.17 
134.70 ± 6.09 
111.12 ± 7.60 
3.70 ± 0.05 
3.14 ± 0.04 
Female 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (ng/mL) 
Day 4 Day 21 
Triiodothyronine (ng/dL) 
Day 4 
Day 21 
Thyroxine (µg/dL) 
Day 4 
Day 21 0.86 ± 0.12 
0.75 ± 0.09 
116.18 ± 5.41 
105.42 ± 2.21 
3.09 ± 0.14 
3.00 ± 0.14 1.03 ± 0.12 
0.97 ± 0.13 
118.69 ± 6.13 
123.05 ± 4.12** 
2.55 ± 0.14* 
2.52 ± 0.11* 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 
a Mean ± standard error.  Statistical tests were performed on unrounded data. C-5 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C3 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Greena 
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
Hematology 
n 6 8 6 8 
Hematocrit (%) 49.1 ± 0.3 47.5 ± 0.5 48.0 ± 0.4 46.6 ± 0.5* 
Hemoglobin (g/dL) 6 17.7 ± 0.2 17.1 ± 0.2 17.3 ± 0.1 16.8 ± 0.2* 
Erythrocytes (10 /µL) 9.21 ± 0.06 9.00 ± 0.09 9.13 ± 0.06 8.78 ± 0.09* 
Reticulocytes (%) 2.97 ± 0.09 3.28 ± 0.16 2.93 ± 0.18 3.66 ± 0.26* 
Mean cell volume (fL) 53.3 ± 0.2 52.8 ± 0.2* 52.5 ± 0.2* 53.3 ± 0.2 
Mean cell hemoglobin (pg) 19.2 ± 0.1 18.9 ± 0.1 18.9 ± 0.1* 19.0 ± 0.1 
Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (g/dL) 3 36.0 ± 0.2 36.0 ± 0.2 36.0 ± 0.1 35.9 ± 0.1 
Platelets (10 /µL)3 600.2 ± 28.8 522.0 ± 72.0 684.0 ± 52.6 578.6 ± 85.0 
Leukocytes (10 /µL) 6.98 ± 1.12 6.84 ± 0.64 6.35 ± 1.50 7.81 ± 0.82 
Segmented neutrophils (%) 19.50 ± 0.99 18.00 ± 1.30 19.33 ± 0.88 18.63 ± 1.27 
Lymphocytes (%) 79.33 ± 0.80 81.13 ± 1.49 80.00 ± 0.82 80.38 ± 1.16 
Monocytes (%) 0.50 ± 0.22 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 
Basophils (%) 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 
Eosinophils (%) 0.67 ± 0.33 0.88 ± 0.35 0.67 ± 0.33 1.00 ± 0.27 
Clinical Chemistry n 8 8 7 8 
Urea nitrogen (mg/dL) 16.5 ± 0.3 14.9 ± 0.5* 14.9 ± 0.8* 17.5 ± 0.8 
Creatinine (mg/dL) 0.63 ± 0.02 0.55 ± 0.02* 0.54 ± 0.02* 0.51 ± 0.02* 
Glucose (mg/dL) 148 ± 17 107 ± 5 120 ± 10 128 ± 12 
Sodium (mmol/L) 153 ± 1 153 ± 1 155 ± 1 153 ± 1 
Potassium (mmol/L) 5.9 ± 0.1 6.1 ± 0.1 6.2 ± 0.1 6.4 ± 0.2* 
Chloride (mmol/L)  94 ± 1 
b 90 ± 7 b 95 ± 2 b 90 ± 5 b Calcium (mg/dL) 12.40 ± 0.33 11.95 ± 0.14 12.03 ± 0.17 12.25 ± 0.19 
Phosphorus (mg/dL) 8.8 ± 0.2 9.0 ± 0.2 9.6 ± 0.3 9.7 ± 0.2* 
Total protein (g/dL) 7.0 ± 0.1 6.8 ± 0.2 6.7 ± 0.1 6.9 ± 0.1 
Albumin (g/dL) 4.2 ± 0.1 3.8 ± 0.0* 3.8 ± 0.1* 3.9 ± 0.1* 
Cholesterol (mg/dL) 62 ± 2 47 ± 1* 46 ± 1* 55 ± 2* 
Triglycerides (mg/dL) 142 ± 9 88 ± 7* 75 ± 4* 64 ± 7* 
Alanine aminotransfera se (µg/L) 56 ± 3 47 ± 1* 45 ± 2* 50 ± 2 
Alkaline phosphatase (µg/L) 258 ± 8 256 ± 5 248 ± 7 216 ± 3* 
Aspartate aminotransferase (µg/L) 114 ± 12 95 ± 6 96 ± 10 85 ± 7 
Creatine kinase (µg/L) 480 ± 75 415 ± 29 500 ± 80 434 ± 64 c Sorbitol dehydrogenase (µg/L) 11 ± 1 11 ± 1 11 ± 1 12 ± 1 
-Glutamyltransferase (µg/L) 0.6 ± 0.2 0.8 ± 0.3 0.7 ± 0.2 1.3 ± 0.2* c Bile acids (µmol/L) 24.5 ± 3.6 19.3 ± 1.7 19.4 ± 4.2 18.8 ± 1.1 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test a Mean ± standard error.  Statistical tests were performed on unrounded data. b n=4 
n=7 c C-6 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C4 
Thyroid Hormone Data for Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Greena 
0 ppm 1,160 ppm 
n 8 8 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (ng/mL) b Day 4 1.86 ± 0.16 3.04 ± 0.44* 
Day 21 3.64 ± 0.80 6.30 ± 1.58* 
Triiodothyronine (ng/dL) 
Day 4 113.68 ± 5.25 107.96 ± 4.35 
Day 21 97.48 ± 3.56 98.49 ± 4.06 
Thyroxine (µg/dL) 
Day 4 4.95 ± 0.29 3.35 ± 0.18*** 
Day 21 2.96 ± 0.17 2.31 ± 0.13*** 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
***P0.001 a Mean ± standard error.  Statistical tests were performed on unrounded data. b n=7 C-7 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C5 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloridea 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Male 
n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Hematology 
b Hematocrit (%) 48.3 ± 0.5 b 46.7 ± 0.5* 47.6 ± 0.6 46.7 ± 0.5* 46.5 ± 0.4* 45.7 ± 0.7** 
Hemoglobin (g/dL) 6 17.0 ± 0.2 b 16.3 ± 0.2* 16.8 ± 0.2 16.2 ± 0.2** 16.3 ± 0.2* 16.0 ± 0.2** 
Erythrocytes (10 /µL) 9.94 ± 0.12 9.57 ± 0.13* 9.75 ± 0.11 9.52 ± 0.10* 9.50 ± 0.07** 9.27 ± 0.12*** c Reticulocytes (%) 2.5 ± 0.5 b 2.7 ± 0.2 3.4 ± 0.2 3.1 ± 0.2 3.8 ± 0.3 4.1 ± 0.4* 
Mean cell volume (fL) 48.6 ± 0.2 b 48.8 ± 0.2 48.8 ± 0.2 49.0 ± 0.2 48.9 ± 0.2 49.3 ± 0.2* 
Mean cell hemoglobin (pg) 17.1 ± 0.1 17.0 ± 0.1 17.2 ± 0.0 17.0 ± 0.1 17.1 ± 0.1 17.3 ± 0.1* 
Mean cell hemoglobin b concentration (g/dL)3 35.1 ± 0.1 34.9 ± 0.1 35.2 ± 0.1 34.7 ± 0.1** 35.1 ± 0.0 35.1 ± 0.1 
Platelets (10 /µL)3 897.0 ± 47.5 995.4 ± 15.0 943.0 ± 50.2 1,023.1 ± 34.3* 1,066.1 ± 15.5** 986.9 ± 60.1 
Leukocytes (10 /µL) c 3.01 ± 0.67 3.73 ± 0.59 3.75 ± 0.40 4.39 ± 0.63 b 3.80 ± 0.65 3.18 ± 0.49 
Segmented neutrophils (%) c 19.0 ± 4.4 20.5 ± 2.4 16.0 ± 1.7 14.4 ± 2.1 b 13.9 ± 1.7 10.4 ± 2.3 
Lymphocytes (%) c 80.9 ± 4.4 79.4 ± 2.5 84.0 ± 1.7 85.4 ± 2.1 b 86.1 ± 1.7 89.4 ± 2.3 
Monocytes (%) c 0.13 ± 0.13 0.13 ± 0.13 0.00 ± 0.00 0.14 ± 0.14 b 0.00 ± 0.00 0.30 ± 0.16 
Eosinophils (%) 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 
Clinical Chemistry 
Urea nitrogen (mg/dL) 26.8 ± 2.3 d 24.1 ± 0.9 d 24.6 ± 2.9 e 21.5 ± 0.5* f 24.6 ± 1.9g 25.9 ± 1.2 b 
Creatinine (mg/dL) 0.59 ± 0.02 0.55 ± 0.02 b 0.54 ± 0.02 b 0.51 ± 0.01** b 0.50 ± 0.02** 0.46 ± 0.02*** 
Total protein (g/dL) 6.2 ± 0.1 b 6.0 ± 0.0 5.9 ± 0.1* 6.1 ± 0.1 6.3 ± 0.1 6.3 ± 0.1 
Alanine aminotransferase (µg/L) 31 ± 4 32 ± 2 47 ± 10 27 ± 4 31 ± 5 26 ± 3 
Alkaline phosphatase (µg/L) 124 ± 6 126 ± 6 119 ± 5 b 115 ± 4 125 ± 5 133 ± 5 
Bile acids (µmol/L) 26.9 ± 2.1 21.6 ± 1.3* 21.4 ± 1.1* 19.7 ± 1.2** 22.3 ± 2.5* 22.8 ± 1.2  
 
 
 
 
 C-8 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C5 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Female 
Hematology 
n 8 8 8 8 8 7 
b Hematocrit (%) 48.3 ± 0.5 48.0 ± 0.2 47.4 ± 0.3 47.4 ± 0.4 46.8 ± 0.4** b 46.9 ± 0.3** 
Hemoglobin (g/dL) 6 17.2 ± 0.2 17.1 ± 0.1 16.8 ± 0.1 16.7 ± 0.1* 16.7 ± 0.2* b 16.6 ± 0.1** 
Erythrocytes (10 /µL) c 10.02 ± 0.10 9.98 ± 0.06 9.79 ± 0.06* 9.74 ± 0.06** b 9.61 ± 0.07*** 9.53 ± 0.06*** 
Reticulocytes (%) 2.18 ± 0.12 2.38 ± 0.24 2.94 ± 0.18 3.34 ± 0.38* 3.34 ± 0.22* b 4.07 ± 0.53* 
Mean cell volume (fL) 48.2 ± 0.1 48.1 ± 0.1 48.4 ± 0.2 48.7 ± 0.2* 48.7 ± 0.2* b 49.2 ± 0.2*** 
Mean cell hemoglobin (pg) 17.2 ± 0.1 17.1 ± 0.1 17.2 ± 0.1 17.2 ± 0.1 17.4 ± 0.1 17.4 ± 0.1 
Mean cell hemoglobin b concentration (g/dL)3 35.6 ± 0.1 35.6 ± 0.1 35.5 ± 0.2 35.3 ± 0.1 35.7 ± 0.1 35.4 ± 0.1 h Platelets (10 /µL)3 902.5 ± 19.6 879.9 ± 20.1 886.9 ± 21.5 825.4 ± 33.8* 848.3 ± 14.6 858.9 ± 27.1 h Leukocytes (10 /µL) c 5.09 ± 0.41 4.28 ± 0.53 6.45 ± 0.85 4.64 ± 0.77 6.01 ± 1.24 4.96 ± 0.96 h Segmented neutrophils (%) c 19.63 ± 2.46 21.13 ± 2.99 14.38 ± 2.70 21.63 ± 3.63 19.13 ± 3.16 14.25 ± 1.56 h Lymphocytes (%) c 79.88 ± 2.33 78.75 ± 3.04 85.50 ± 2.67 78.25 ± 3.60 80.88 ± 3.16 85.50 ± 1.57 h Monocytes (%) c 0.25 ± 0.16 0.13 ± 0.13 0.13 ± 0.13 0.13 ± 0.13 0.00 ± 0.00 0.25 ± 0.25 h Eosinophils (%) 0.25 ± 0.25 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 0.00 ± 0.00 
Clinical Chemistry n 8 7 7 7 7 8 
b h i Urea nitrogen (mg/dL) 19.8 ± 0.8 20.8 ± 0.5 20.0 ± 0.6 21.1 ± 0.9 20.2 ± 0.5 21.3 ± 0.7 b Creatinine (mg/dL) 0.61 ± 0.05 b 0.63 ± 0.02 0.57 ± 0.02 h 0.57 ± 0.02 0.47 ± 0.03** 0.50 ± 0.02* 
Total protein (g/dL) 6.2 ± 0.1 6.4 ± 0.1 6.2 ± 0.1 6.2 ± 0.1 6.0 ± 0.1 6.1 ± 0.1 
Alanine aminotransferase (µg/L) 74 ± 17 51 ± 6 h 42 ± 7 75 ± 17 55 ± 11 h 61 ± 18 
Alkaline phosphatase (µg/L) 193 ± 8 i 190 ± 4 f 181 ± 3 i 187 ± 5 i 182 ± 6 e 182 ± 7 f Bile acids (µmol/L) 22.5 ± 2.4 19.8 ± 2.2 17.7 ± 1.6 14.5 ± 1.2* 15.6 ± 4.6* 13.5 ± 1.5** 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 
***P0.001 a Mean ± standard error.  Statistical tests were performed on unrounded data. b n=7 c Significant outliers were not excluded from statistical analyses. d n=4 e n=3 f n=5 g n=2 h n=8 i n=6 C-9 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE  C6 
Hematology and Clinical Chemistry Data for Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Greena 
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
n 
Hematology Hematocrit (%)
Hemoglobin (g/dL) 
6 Erythrocytes (10 /µL)
 
Reticulocytes (%)
 
Mean cell volume (fL)
 Mean cell hemoglobin (pg)
 Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (g/dL)
 
3 Platelets (10 /µL)3 Leukocytes (10 /µL)
 
Segmented neutrophils (%)
 
Lymphocytes (%)
 
Clinical Chemistry
 
Urea nitrogen (mg/dL)
 
Creatinine (mg/dL)
 
Total protein (g/dL)
 
Alanine aminotransfera se (µg/L)
 
Alkaline phosphatase (µg/L)
 7 8 8 8 
47.5 ± 0.4 48.6 ± 0.5 47.8 ± 0.6 47.0 ± 1.3 
16.4 ± 0.2 16.8 ± 0.2 16.5 ± 0.2 16.3 ± 0.5 
9.73 ± 0.08 9.96 ± 0.11 9.80 ± 0.13 9.56 ± 0.26 b 3.66 ± 0.24 3.98 ± 0.23 3.89 ± 0.24 3.54 ± 0.17 
48.9 ± 0.1 48.8 ± 0.2 48.8 ± 0.1 49.2 ± 0.1 
16.9 ± 0.1 16.9 ± 0.1 16.9 ± 0.0 17.1 ± 0.1 
34.5 ± 0.1 34.6 ± 0.1 34.5 ± 0.1 34.7 ± 0.2 
770.7 ± 43.7 754.1 ± 95.7 956.8 ± 67.1 953.1 ± 51.9 
5.99 ± 0.58 3.86 ± 0.33 4.72 ± 0.69 4.55 ± 0.78 b 20.43 ± 1.79 23.63 ± 0.91 21.50 ± 1.32 22.75 ± 0.92 b 78.57 ± 2.03 76.25 ± 0.92 78.50 ± 1.32 77.00 ± 0.91 
c 25.9 ± 1.6 24.0 ± 1.0 23.7 ± 1.2 22.9 ± 1.0 c c 0.40 ± 0.00 0.40 ± 0.02 0.40 ± 0.02 0.33 ± 0.02 
5.8 ± 0.1 5.8 ± 0.1 5.4 ± 0.1* 5.4 ± 0.0* 
45 ± 7 55 ± 14 80 ± 27 74 ± 22 
181 ± 6 189 ± 7 196 ± 7 198 ± 5 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the control group by Dunnett’s test a Mean ± standard error.  Statistical tests were performed on unrounded data. b n=8 
n=6 C-10 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 D-1 
APPENDIX D
 
ORGAN WEIGHTS
 
AND ORGAN-WEIGHT-TO-BODY-WEIGHT RATIOS
 
TABLE D1 Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Rats 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride ................................... D - 2 
TABLE D2 Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Male Rats 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green ....................................... D - 3 
TABLE D3 Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride ................................... D - 4 
TABLE D4 Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Female Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green ....................................... D - 5 D-2 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE D1 
Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloridea 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Male 
n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Necropsy body wt 217 ± 4 227 ± 3 210 ± 8 229 ± 4 219 ± 3 188 ± 4** 
L. Kidney 
Absolute 0.889 ± 0.037 0.934 ± 0.022 0.845 ± 0.047 0.899 ± 0.038 0.892 ± 0.024 0.778 ± 0.036* 
Relative 4.10 ± 0.13 4.12 ± 0.04 4.06 ± 0.09 3.93 ± 0.10 4.09 ± 0.13 4.14 ± 0.05 
R. Kidney 
Absolute 0.876 ± 0.035 0.912 ± 0.021 0.834 ± 0.052 0.889 ± 0.037 0.894 ± 0.025 0.760 ± 0.032* 
Relative 4.04 ± 0.12 4.02 ± 0.06 3.99 ± 0.07 3.89 ± 0.11 4.10 ± 0.13 4.05 ± 0.04 
Liver 
Absolute 7.521 ± 0.325 8.055 ± 0.236 7.562 ± 0.478 8.299 ± 0.392 9.072 ± 0.372** 8.082 ± 0.443 
Relative 34.66 ± 1.19 35.48 ± 0.60 36.14 ± 0.58 36.28 ± 1.08 41.62 ± 1.91** 42.96 ± 0.93** 
Female 
n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Necropsy body wt 145 ± 2 146 ± 2 146 ± 2 149 ± 2 138 ± 1** 119 ± 2** 
L. Kidney 
Absolute 0.623 ± 0.020 0.638 ± 0.024 0.627 ± 0.026 0.644 ± 0.020 0.602 ± 0.009 0.523 ± 0.022** 
Relative 4.28 ± 0.08 4.36 ± 0.06 4.28 ± 0.08 4.31 ± 0.05 4.38 ± 0.07 4.38 ± 0.13 
R. Kidney 
Absolute 0.613 ± 0.020 0.626 ± 0.026 0.617 ± 0.023 0.634 ± 0.025 0.591 ± 0.013 0.512 ± 0.018** 
Relative 4.21 ± 0.07 4.27 ± 0.08 4.22 ± 0.09 4.23 ± 0.07 4.29 ± 0.06 4.29 ± 0.05 
Liver 
Absolute 4.257 ± 0.104 4.491 ± 0.239 4.457 ± 0.221 4.924 ± 0.148** 4.996 ± 0.089** 4.953 ± 0.116** 
Relative 29.30 ± 0.39 30.61 ± 0.88 30.45 ± 1.05 32.97 ± 0.47** 36.28 ± 0.47** 41.62 ± 0.85** 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the vehicle control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 
a Organ weights (absolute weights) and body weights are given in grams; organ-weight-to-body-weight ratios (relative weights) are  given as mg organ 
weight/g body weight (mean ± standard error). D-3 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE D2 
Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Male Rats in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Greena 
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
n 8 8 8 8 
Necropsy body wt 239 ± 3 234 ± 4 227 ± 3* 219 ± 3** 
Kidney 
Absolute 1.817 ± 0.032 1.813 ± 0.052 1.740 ± 0.039 1.785 ± 0.053 
Relative 7.6 ± 0.1 7.8 ± 0.1 7.7 ± 0.1 8.1 ± 0.1** 
Liver 
Absolute 7.953 ± 0.242 8.619 ± 0.243 8.580 ± 0.291 10.137 ± 0.251** 
Relative 33.2 ± 0.4 36.9 ± 0.4** 37.8 ± 0.8** 46.3 ± 0.7** 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the vehicle control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 a Organ weights (absolute weights) and body weights are given in grams; organ-weight-to-body-weight ratios (relative weights) are  given as mg organ 
weight/g body weight (mean ± standard error). D-4 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE D3 
Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Malachite Green Chloridea 
0 ppm 25 ppm 100 ppm 300 ppm 600 ppm 1,200 ppm 
Male 
n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Necropsy body wt 22.4 ± 0.3 21.8 ± 0.2 23.1 ± 0.6 23.1 ± 0.1 21.4 ± 0.3 22.3 ± 0.6 
L. Kidney 
Absolute 0.168 ± 0.001 0.166 ± 0.005 0.170 ± 0.016 0.176 ± 0.006 0.148 ± 0.005 0.164 ± 0.014 
Relative 7.5 ± 0.2 7.6 ± 0.3 7.3 ± 0.3 7.6 ± 0.3 6.9 ± 0.4 7.3 ± 0.3 
R. Kidney 
Absolute 0.180 ± 0.005 0.170 ± 0.006 0.183 ± 0.016 0.188 ± 0.009 0.155 ± 0.008 0.171 ± 0.013 
Relative 8.0 ± 0.2 7.8 ± 0.3 7.9 ± 0.3 8.2 ± 0.4 7.2 ± 0.3 7.7 ± 0.2 
Liver 
Absolute 0.893 ± 0.035 0.880 ± 0.025 0.932 ± 0.053 0.924 ± 0.013 0.897 ± 0.032 0.920 ± 0.045 
Relative 39.8 ± 0.9 40.3 ± 0.9 40.4 ± 0.4 40.1 ± 0.2 41.8 ± 0.5* 41.2 ± 0.4 
Female 
n 8 8 8 8 8 8 
Necropsy body wt 17.3 ± 0.2 16.8 ± 0.2* 17.2 ± 0.2 16.3 ± 0.2** 16.3 ± 0.1** 15.6 ± 0.2** 
L. Kidney 
Absolute 0.128 ± 0.005 0.119 ± 0.003 0.125 ± 0.004 0.122 ± 0.005 0.113 ± 0.003* 0.108 ± 0.004** 
Relative 7.4 ± 0.2 7.1 ± 0.2 7.3 ± 0.2 7.5 ± 0.3 7.0 ± 0.2 6.9 ± 0.3 
R. Kidney 
Absolute 0.133 ± 0.005 0.128 ± 0.003 0.131 ± 0.004 0.127 ± 0.004 0.119 ± 0.003* 0.116 ± 0.003** 
Relative 7.7 ± 0.2 7.7 ± 0.1 7.6 ± 0.2 7.8 ± 0.2 7.3 ± 0.2 7.4 ± 0.2 
Liver 
Absolute 0.768 ± 0.036 0.766 ± 0.012 0.803 ± 0.023 0.787 ± 0.027 0.775 ± 0.030 0.734 ± 0.020 
Relative 44.4 ± 1.4 45.7 ± 0.6 46.6 ± 0.5 48.2 ± 1.3* 47.6 ± 1.7 47.0 ± 1.2 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the vehicle control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 a Organ weights (absolute weights) and body weights are given in grams; organ-weight-to-body-weight ratios (relative weights) are  given as mg organ 
weight/g body weight (mean ± standard error). D-5 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE D4 
Organ Weights and Organ-Weight-to-Body-Weight Ratios for Female Mice in the 28-Day Feed Study 
of Leucomalachite Greena 
0 ppm 290 ppm 580 ppm 1,160 ppm 
n 8 8 8 8 
Necropsy body wt 17.6 ± 0.2 17.1 ± 0.2 16.6 ± 0.2** 16.0 ± 0.2** 
L. Kidney 
Absolute 0.130 ± 0.003 0.123 ± 0.004 0.113 ± 0.003** 0.109 ± 0.004** 
Relative 7.4 ± 0.1 7.2 ± 0.1 6.8 ± 0.1** 6.8 ± 0.1** 
R. Kidney 
Absolute 0.138 ± 0.004 0.130 ± 0.004 0.121 ± 0.004** 0.117 ± 0.004** 
Relative 7.8 ± 0.2 7.6 ± 0.1 7.3 ± 0.2* 7.3 ± 0.2* 
Liver 
Absolute 0.748 ± 0.014 0.724 ± 0.010 0.712 ± 0.018 0.715 ± 0.019 
Relative 42.6 ± 0.7 42.5 ± 0.7 43.0 ± 0.6 44.8 ± 0.8* 
*S ignificantly different (P 0.05) from the vehicle control group by Dunnett’s test 
** P0.01 a Organ weights (absolute weights) and body weights are given in grams; organ-weight-to-body-weight ratios (relative weights) are  given as mg organ 
weight/g body weight (mean ± standard error). D-6 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 E-1 
APPENDIX E 
GENETIC TOXICOLOGY 
TABLE  E1 
TABLE  E2 
TABLE  E3 
TABLE  E4 Mutagenicity of Malach ite Green Chloride in Salmonella typhimurium ................. 
Induction of Micronuclei in Bone Marro w Polychromatic Erythrocytes of Male Rats 
Treated with Malachite Green Chlorid e by Intraperitoneal Injection .................. 
Frequency of Micronuclei in Peripheral Blood Erythrocytes of Mice 
Following Administration of Malachite Green Chloride in Feed for 28 Days ............. 
Frequency of Micronuclei in Peripheral Blood Erythrocytes of Female Mice 
Following Administration of Leucomalachite Green in Feed for 28 Days ................ E - 2 
E - 4 
E - 5 
E - 6     
     E-2 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE E1 
Mutagenicity of Malachite Green Chloride in Salmonella typhimuriuma 
Revertants/Plateb 
Strain       Dose
 (µg/plate) Trial 1 S9 
Trial 2 + hamster S9 
10% 30% + rat S9 
10% 30% 
TA102 0 
0.1 0.3 1.0 3.3 
10.0 272 ± 2.1 
282 ± 2.3 288 ± 1.8 267 ± 2.1 277 ± 3.1 
271 ± 2.3 284 ± 1.8 
280 ± 1.8 290 ± 2.3 295 ± 2.3 300 ± 2.6 
285 ± 2.4 256 ± 2.6 
250 ± 2.9 258 ± 2.7 259 ± 1.8 249 ± 2.0 
260 ± 1.5 266 ± 2.1 
255 ± 2.6 274 ± 2.7 271 ± 2.4 282 ± 3.1 
258 ± 1.9 259 ± 2.0 
257 ± 1.8 264 ± 2.2 274 ± 2.3 280 ± 1.7 
259 ± 3.2 337 ± 4.6 
342 ± 4.5 336 ± 5.5 349 ± 4.7 357 ± 4.6 
325 ± 3.4 
Trial summary Positive control
c Negative 
1,416 ± 14.2 Negative 
961 ± 2.3 Negative 
831 ± 4.3 Negative 
759 ± 4.2 Negative 
892 ± 3.6 Negative 
1,027 ± 12.5 
TA104 0 
0.1 
0.3 1.0 3.3 
10.0 279 ± 9.0 
272 ± 2.0 
289 ± 0.6 292 ± 1.2 289 ± 1.5 
273 ± 1.8 343 ± 2.3 
349 ± 1.5 
358 ± 2.0 364 ± 2.4 358 ± 2.6 
348 ± 2.4 280 ± 1.3 
288 ± 2.8 
277 ± 2.0 286 ± 1.3 273 ± 1.8 
277 ± 2.2 284 ± 2.3 
277 ± 4.1 
286 ± 1.8 289 ± 1.3 299 ± 1.8 
293 ± 1.8 276 ± 1.9 
283 ± 2.1 
281 ± 4.6 278 ± 4.1 282 ± 3.2 
280 ± 1.7 284 ± 2.6
288 ± 1.5 
290 ± 1.8 286 ± 2.1 290 ± 2.6 
289 ± 1.8 
Trial summary Positive control Negative 
818 ± 6.5 Negative 
1,116 ± 4.9 Negative 
1,343 ± 17.5 Negative 
1,396 ± 3.8 Negative 
1,463 ± 13.7 Negative 
989 ± 8.0 
TA100 0 0.1 
0.3 
1.0 3.3 
10.0 127 ± 0.9 
127 ± 1.2 
127 ± 0.9 
127 ± 1.7 128 ± 1.3 
129 ± 0.9 129 ± 1.2 
132 ± 1.2 
131 ± 2.7 
140 ± 1.9 138 ± 1.5 
132 ± 1.8 126 ± 0.3 
133 ± 2.3 
134 ± 2.7 
142 ± 1.5 135 ± 3.0 
125 ± 1.5 151 ± 1.5 
150 ± 1.5 
147 ± 1.5 
152 ± 2.7 156 ± 1.2 
153 ± 1.8 112 ± 2.0 
115 ± 3.2 
108 ± 3.2 
113 ± 1.8 113 ± 1.8 
114 ± 2.1 137 ± 1.5 
149 ± 1.7 
154 ± 1.8 
144 ± 0.9 145 ± 2.3 
136 ± 1.0 
Trial summary Positive control Negative 
531 ± 5.2 Negative 
467 ± 15.2 Negative 
734 ± 5.4 Negative 
729 ± 3.5 Negative 
885 ± 3.8 Negative 
882 ± 4.6 
TA1535 0 0.1 0.3 
1.0 
3.3 
10.0 17 ± 1.3 
17 ± 0.9 17 ± 1.0 
17 ± 1.8 
17 ± 1.7 
17 ± 0.9 17 ± 0.9 
17 ± 0.7 19 ± 0.6 
18 ± 1.9 
17 ± 1.5 
17 ± 0.9 17 ± 0.7 
15 ± 0.9 17 ± 1.2 
16 ± 0.3 
16 ± 1.2 
17 ± 1.3 14 ± 0.3 
16 ± 1.2 16 ± 0.9 
17 ± 1.0 
17 ± 1.5 
16 ± 1.7 17 ± 0.9 
18 ± 0.9 15 ± 1.5 
15 ± 1.0 
17 ± 1.2 
16 ± 0.7 20 ± 1.5 
21 ± 2.1 20 ± 1.2 
18 ± 1.2 
21 ± 1.7 
18 ± 2.6 
Trial summary Positive control Negative 
563 ± 3.5 Negative 
230 ± 4.0 Negative 
221 ± 4.9 Negative 
180 ± 2.6 Negative 
274 ± 4.8 Negative 
238 ± 9.0      
 E-3 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE E1 
Mutagenicity of Malachite Green Chloride in Salmonella typhimurium 
Revertants/Plate 
Strain       Dose S9 + hamster S9 + rat S9 
(µg/plate) Trial 1 Trial 2 10% 30% 10% 30% 
TA97 0 118 ± 1.5 123 ± 1.5 127 ± 2.1 130 ± 1.7 153 ± 4.1 128 ± 2.1 
0.1 128 ± 0.7 121 ± 2.1 122 ± 1.2 125 ± 1.9 158 ± 3.5 125 ± 1.3 
0.3 126 ± 1.2 125 ± 0.9 124 ± 2.0 128 ± 1.2 146 ± 3.2 124 ± 1.5 
1.0 126 ± 1.0 127 ± 1.7 127 ± 1.2 123 ± 0.6 157 ± 2.0 134 ± 2.3 
3.3 124 ± 0.7 120 ± 2.4 125 ± 2.7 125 ± 2.6 137 ± 4.4 134 ± 0.6 
10.0 118 ± 1.3 126 ± 1.2 128 ± 1.9 128 ± 0.9 134 ± 3.8 127 ± 1.2 
Trial summary Negative Negative Negative Negative Negative Negative 
Positive control 387 ± 3.5 251 ± 5.9 472 ± 6.7 781 ± 4.6 533 ± 22.3 462 ± 7.2 
TA98 0 46 ± 0.3 21 ± 0.6 34 ± 1.8 29 ± 0.6 37 ± 1.0 35 ± 2.0 
0.1 45 ± 2.1 25 ± 0.7 34 ± 1.2 27 ± 0.9 37 ± 3.3 32 ± 0.6 
0.3 44 ± 1.5 25 ± 2.0 36 ± 1.8 29 ± 0.3 39 ± 3.2 34 ± 1.5 
1.0 45 ± 1.0 28 ± 1.2 38 ± 1.2 31 ± 0.6 39 ± 1.2 36 ± 1.5 
3.3 47 ± 0.9 24 ± 2.1 38 ± 0.3 34 ± 1.5 41 ± 1.5 36 ± 1.8 
10.0 45 ± 1.3 20 ± 0.9 34 ± 1.5 33 ± 1.8 46 ± 0.7 36 ± 0.9 
Trial summary Negative Negative Negative Negative Negative Negative 
Positive control 285 ± 3.8 344 ± 9.6 983 ± 6.7 829 ± 2.6 360 ± 3.5 442 ± 3.8 
a Study was performed at Environmental Health Research and Testing, Inc.  The detailed protocol is presented by Zeiger et al. (1992). 
0 µg/plate was the solvent control. 
b	 Revertants are presented as mean ± standard error from three plates. 
The positive controls in the absence of metabolic activation were sodium azide (TA100 and TA1535), 9-aminoacridine (TA97), 4-ni tro­
o-phenylenediamine (TA98), mitomycin-C (TA102), and methyl methanesulfonate (TA104).  The positive control for metabolic activat ion 
with all strains was 2-aminoanthracene. E-4 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE E2 
Induction of Micronuclei in Bone Marrow Polychromatic Erythrocytes 
of Male Rats Treated with Malachite Green Ch loride by Intraperitoneal Injectiona 
Compound Dose 
(mg/kg) Number of Rats 
with Erythrocytes 
Scored Micronucleated PCEs/ 
1,000 PCEsb P Valuec 
Phosphate-buffered salined 5 1.00 ± 0.52 
Malachite green chloride 1.094 
2.188 
4.375 
8.750 5 
5 
5 
5 1.00 ± 0.42 
1.10 ± 0.43 
2.50 ± 0.45 
1.50 ± 0.32 0.500 0.414 
0.006 
0.159
 P=0.051e 
Cyclophosphamidef 7.5 5 9.60 ± 0.58 0.000 
a Study was performed at Integrated Laboratory Systems, Inc.  The detailed protocol is presented by Shelby et al. (1993).
 
PCE=polychromatic erythrocyte
 
b Mean ± standard error 
Pairwise comparison with the solvent control.  Dosed group values are significant at P 0.006; positive control value is significant at P 0.05 
(ILS, 1990) 
d Solvent control 
e Significance of micronucleated PCEs/1,000 PCEs tested by the one-tailed trend test; significant at P 0.025 (ILS, 1990) 
f Positive control   E-5 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE E3 
Frequency of Micronuclei in Peripheral Blood Erythrocytes of Mice Following Administration 
of Malachite Green Chloride in Feed for 28 Daysa 
Compound           Dose
           (ppm) Number of Mice 
with Erythrocytes 
Scored Micronucleated Cells/1,000 Cellsb
 PCEs                                 NCEs 
Male 
Vehicle control 0 8 3.31 ± 0.68 1.81 ± 0.29 
Malachite green 
chloride 25 
100 
300 
600 
1,200 8 
8 
8 8 
8 2.75 ± 0.36 
2.44 ± 0.44 
1.50 ± 0.20 2.25 ± 0.22 
2.00 ± 0.43 1.81 ± 0.39
1.94 ± 0.31 
1.88 ± 0.25 1.31 ± 0.15 
1.38 ± 0.26 
P=0.973
c P=0.937 
Female 
Vehicle control 0 8 2.63 ± 0.42 1.94 ± 0.36 
Malachite green 
chloride 25 
100 
300 
600 
1200 8 
8 
8 8 
8 2.06 ± 0.48 
2.31 ± 0.34 
2.69 ± 0.62 3.00 ± 0.23 
1.67 ± 0.22 1.94 ± 0.38
3.00 ± 0.54 
3.19 ± 0.45 3.13 ± 0.39 
2.50 ± 0.38 
P=0.879 P=0.193 
a Study was performed at Integrated Laboratory Systems, Inc.  The detailed protocol is presented by MacGregor et al. (1990). 
PCE=polychromatic erythrocyte; NCE=normochromatic erythrocyte 
b Mean ± standard error
 
Significance of micronucleated cells/1,000 cells tested by the one-tailed trend test; significant at P 0.025 (ILS, 1990)
   
 E-6 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE E4 
Frequency of Micronuclei in Peripheral Blood Erythrocytes of Female Mice Following Administration 
of Leucomalachite Green in Feed for 28 Daysa 
Compound           Dose
           (ppm) Number of Mice 
with Erythrocytes 
Scored Micronucleated Cells/1,000 Cellsb 
PCEs                                       NCEs 
Vehicle control 0 7 3.07 ± 0.41 2.14 ± 0.26 
Leucomalachite 
green 290 
580 
1,160 8 
8 
8 3.63 ± 0.38
3.50 ± 0.41
2.00 ± 0.37 3.69 ± 0.33*
 4.19 ± 0.50* 
3.44 ± 0.53
 P=0.984c P=0.067 
*Significantly different from the vehicle control group (P 0.008; ILS, 1990) 
a Study was performed at Integrated Laboratory Systems, Inc.  The detailed protocol is presented by MacGregor et al. (1990). 
PCE=polychromatic erythrocyte; NCE=normochromatic erythrocyte 
b Mean ± standard error 
Significance of micronucleated cells/1,000 cells tested by the one-tailed trend test; significant at P 0.025 (ILS, 1990)
 F-1 
APPENDIX F
 
CHEMICAL CHARACTERIZATION
 
AND DOSE FORMULATION STUDIES
 
PROCUREMENT AND CHARACTERIZATION ..................................................... F - 2
 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS OF DOSE FORMULATIONS .......................................... F - 3
 
FIGURE F1 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrum of Malachite Green Chloride .................. F - 5
 
FIGURE F2 Infrared Absorption Sp ectrum of Leucomalachite Green ............................ F - 6
 
FIGURE F3 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Sp ectrum of Leucomalachite Green ..................... F - 7
 
TABLE  F1 High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Systems Used in the Feed Studies 
of Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green ............................ F - 8
 
TABLE  F2 Preparation and Storage of Dose Formulations in the Feed Studies 
of Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green ............................ F - 9
 
TABLE  F3 Results of Analyses of Dose Formulations Administered to Rats and Mice
 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Malachite Green Chloride .............................. F - 1 0
 
TABLE  F4 Results of Analyses of Dose Formulations Administered to Male Rats and Female Mice
 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green ................................. F - 1 0
 F-2 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
CHEMICAL CHARACTERIZATION 
AND DOSE FORMULATION STUDIES 
PROCUREMENT AND CHARACTERIZATION 
Malachite Green Chloride 
Malachite green chloride was obtained from Chemsyn Science Laboratories (Lenexa, KS) in one lot 
(CSL-96-645-88-23). Identity and purity analyses were conducted by the manufacturer and the study laboratory. Reports on analyses performed in support of the malachite green chloride studies are on file at the National Center for Toxicological Research (NCTR). 
Lot CSL-96-645-88-23, a green solid, was identified as malachite green chloride by the study laboratory using 
1H- and 13C-nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC)/mass spectrometry (MS) by system A (Table F1).  The supplier also identified the chemical as 
malachite green chloride with 1H-nuclear magnetic resonance and ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy.  All spectra 
were consistent with the structure of malachite green chloride.  The nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum is 
presented in Figure F1. 
The purity of malachite green chloride was determined with HPLC (system B) by the manufacturer, heavy 
metal and HPLC (system C) analyses by the study laboratory, and elemental and heavy metal analyses by 
Galbraith Laboratories, Inc. (Knoxville, TN). Heavy metal analyses by the study laboratory were conducted 
with inductively coupled plasma/atomic emission spectroscopy, normalized against standards provided by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (Gaithersburg, MD). 
Elemental analyses for carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and chlorine (total halogens) were in agreement with the 
theoretical values for malachite green chloride.  Results of heavy metal analyses by Galbraith Laboratories, Inc., indicated less than 20 ppm calculated as lead.  Results of heavy metal analyses by the study laboratory indicated the following concentrations: tin, 25.0 ppm; zinc, 23.1 ppm, aluminum, 3.69 ppm; iron, 2.25 ppm; copper, 1.62 ppm; and magnesium, 1.17 ppm.  HPLC by system B indicated one major peak and four impurities with a combined area of approximately 5.1% of the total peak area.  HPLC by system C indicated one major peak and seven impurities with a combined area of approximately 4.7% of the total peak area; two of these impurities were identified as leucomalachite green and the desmethyl analogue of malachite green, present at approximately 1% each, based on peak areas, retention times, and spectral characteristics.  The overall purity was determined to be at least 95%. 
Reports on liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization (ESI)/MS, ESI/MS, and HPLC/ESI/MS analyses 
performed in support of the malachite green chloride studies are on file at the NCTR. 
The bulk chemical was stored in the original amber bottle in the dark at room temperature.  Analyses 
performed after the completion of the 28-day studies indicated no degradation of the bulk chemical; the stability of malachite green chloride was monitored at 6-month intervals over a 2-year period using HPLC with post-column oxidation. 
Leucomalachite Green 
Leucomalachite green was obtained from Chemsyn Science Laboratories in one lot (CSL-95-583-08-09). Identity, purity, and stability analyses were conducted by the manufacturer and the study laboratory.  Reports on analyses performed in support of the leucomalachite green studies are on file at the NCTR. F-3 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
Lot CSL-95-583-08-09, a faint green solid, was identified as leucomalachite green by the supplier using 
1H-nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared, and ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy and by the study laboratory using 
1H- and 13C-nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  All spectra were consistent with the structure of 
leucomalachite green.  The infrared and nuclear magnetic resonance spectra are presented in Figures F2 
and F3. 
The purity of leucomalachite green was determined by elemental analyses (performed by Oneida Research 
Services, Inc., Whitesboro, NY), heavy metal analyses (performed by Galbraith Laboratories, Inc.), and HPLC systems D (supplier) and E (study laboratory). 
Elemental analyses for carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen were in agreement with the theoretical values for 
leucomalachite green.  Results of heavy metal analyses indicated less than 0.30 ppm lead and less than 1.0 ppm heavy metals calculated as lead.  HPLC by system D indicated one major peak and two impurities with a combined area of 0.24% of the total peak area.  HPLC by system E indicated one major peak and two impurities at each absorbance.  One impurity was identified as malachite green based on retention time and spectral characteristics.. The overall purity of lot CSL-95-583-08-09 was determined to greater than 99%. 
Reports on liquid chromatography-atmospheric pressure chemical ionization/MS, direct exposure 
probe/electron ionization/MS, and HPLC/electrospray ionization/MS analyses performed in support of the leucomalachite green studies are on file at the NCTR. 
The bulk chemical was stored in the original amber bottle with a double wrapping of Parafilm around the cap; 
the bottle was placed inside a plastic bag inside another plastic bag filled with a silica gel desiccant and stored 
at 20° C, protected from light.  Analyses performed after the completion of the 28-day studies indicated no 
degradation of the bulk chemical; the stability of leucomalachite green was monitored at 6-month intervals 
over a 2-year period using HPLC. 
PREPARATION AND ANALYSIS OF DOSE FORMULATIONS 
The dose formulations for malachite green chloride were prepared on 6 days by dissolving the chemical in water and then mixing it with feed (Table F2).  The 25 and 600 ppm dose formulations were prepared three times and the 100, 300, and 1,200 ppm dose formulations were prepared twice.  The dose formulations for leucomalachite green were prepared by mixing the chemical with feed (Table F2).  A premix was prepared by hand and blended with additional feed. The 96 and 290 ppm dose formulations for leucomalachite green were prepared once and the 580 and 1,160 ppm dose formulations were prepared twice.  Dose formulations for each chemical were mixed  in a Patterson-Kelly twin-shell blender with the intensifier bar on for 20 minutes.  Dose formulations were stored in stainless steel feed cans at 4 ( ± 2( C for up to 92 days (malachite green chloride) 
or 95 days (leucomalachite green). 
Homogeneity and stability studies of the 25 ppm malachite green chloride dose formulations were performed 
by the study laboratory using HPLC by system F.  Homogeneity was confirmed, and stability was confirmed for 92 days for dose formulations stored protected from light at 4 ( C and for 10 days for dose formulations 
stored at room temperature, either protected from light or open to air and light.  Homogeneity and stability studies of the 96 ppm leucomalachite green dose formulations were performed by the study laboratory with HPLC by system E.  Homogeneity was confirmed, and stability was confirmed for 95 days for dose formulations stored protected from light at up to 8 ( C, and for 32 days for dose formulations stored at room 
temperature either protected from light or open to air. 
Periodic analyses of the dose formulations of malachite green chloride were conducted by the study laboratory 
using HPLC by system F (Table F3).  Analyses of the dose formulations of malachite green chloride were F-4 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
conducted on one batch each of the 25, 100, and 1,200 ppm dose formulations, on both batches of the 300 ppm 
dose formulations, and on all three of the 600 ppm dose formulations. During the 28-day studies, seven of 
eight dose formulations analyzed for rats and mice were within 10% of the target concentrations, with no value greater than 103% of the target concentration (Table F3). The formulation that was not within 10% of the target concentration was diluted with feed and remixed to provide a lower (300 ppm) concentration; the remix 
was analyzed and found to be within 10% of the target concentration.  Periodic analyses of the dose formulations of leucomalachite green were conducted by the study laboratory using HPLC by system E. 
During the 28-day studies all dose formulations were analyzed.  All dose formulations for rats and mice were within 10% of the target concentrations, with no value greater than 104% of the target concentration (Table F4). F-5 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71                                            
FIGURE F1 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrum of Malachite Green Chloride                                                           F-6  Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
FIGURE F2 
Infrared Absorption Spectrum of Leucomalachite Green F-7 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71                                            
FIGURE F3 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrum of Leucomalachite Green  F-8 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE F1 
High-Performance Liquid Chromatography Systems Used in the Feed Studies 
aof Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green
Detection System Column Solvent System 
System A 
Ultraviolet light (260 nm) and 
evaporative light scattering detection coupled with mass spectrometry 
System B 
Ultraviolet (254 nm) 
System C 
Ultraviolet/visible photodiode array (scanning from 230 nm to 750 nm), with monitoring at 254 nm and 618 nm 
System D 
Ultraviolet (254 nm) 
System E 
Ultraviolet/visible photodiode array and evaporative light scattering detection, with monitoring at 254 nm and 618 nm 
System F 
Visible (620 nm) VYDAC C18 Pharmaceutical,
 
250 mm × 4.6 mm, 5-µm particle size
 (Vydac, Hesperia, CA)
 
Inertsil 5 ODS 2, 150 mm × 4.6 mm,
 
5-µm particle size (GL Sciences, Japan)
 
Spherisorb S5 Nitrile 
(250 mm × 4.6 mm) (Waters Corp.,
 Milford, MA)
 
Phenomenex Partisil 5 ODS (3),
 
150 mm × 4.6 mm, 5-µm particle size
 (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA)
 
Supelco Cyano, 200 mm × 4.6 mm,
 
5-µm particle size (Supelco, Inc.,
 Bellefonte, PA)
 
Spherisorb Cyano (250 mm × 4.6 mm),
 
5-µm particle size (Waters Corp.)
 A) Water and B) methanol with 0.1% formic acid; 50% A:50% B for 10 minutes, then linear gradient to 5% A:95% B in 5 minutes at a flow rate of 500 µL/minute 
A) Methanol:50 mM phosphate, pH 3.0; 
and B) gradient from 50% B to 80% A:20% B in 25 minutes at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/minute 
A) Acetonitrile:0.05 M ammonium 
acetate buffer, pH 4.6 (40:60) and B) acetonitrile:0.05 M ammonium acetate buffer, pH 4.6 (60:40); 100% A for 5 minutes, then linear gradient  to 100% B from 5 to 10 minutes at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/minute 
A) Acetonitrile and B) 25 mM 
phosphate, pH 3.0 (75% A:25% B); flow rate 1.0 mL/minute 
A) Acetonitrile and B) 0.05 M 
ammonium acetate buffer, pH 4.6 (60% A:40% B); flow rate 1.0 mL/minute 
A) Acetonitrile and B) 0.05 M 
ammonium acetate buffer, pH 4.5 (70% A:30% B); flow rate 1.0 mL/minute 
a Chromatographs were manufactured by Varex (Hopkins, MN) (system A) and Varian, Inc. (Palo Alto, CA).  
 F-9 Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE F2 
Preparation and Storage of Dose Formulations in the Feed Studies 
of Malachite Green Chloride a nd Leucomalachite Green 
Malachite Green Chloride Leucomalachite Green 
Preparation 
Malachite green chloride was dissolved in deionized, distilled 
water and mixed with feed and then blended in a Patterson-Kelly twin-shell blender with the intensifier bar on for 20 minutes. Three batches each of the 25 and 600 ppm dose formulations and 
two each of the 100, 300, and 1,200 ppm dose formulations were 
prepared. 
Chemical Lot Number 
CSL-96-645-88-23 
Maximum Storage Time 
92 days 
Storage Conditions 
Stored in stainless steel feed cans at 4 ( ± 2( C 
Study Laboratory 
National Center for Toxicological Research 
(Jefferson, AR) Leucomalachite green was ground into a fine powder with a mortar and pestle.  A premix of feed and leucomalachite green was 
prepared by hand and then layered into the remaining feed and 
blended in a Patterson-Kelly twin-shell blender with the intensifier 
bar on for 20 minutes.  One batch each of the 96 and 290 ppm dose formulations and two batches each of the 580 and 1,160 ppm dose formulations were prepared. 
CSL-95-583-08-09 
95 days 
Stored in stainless steel feed cans at 4 ( ± 2( C 
National Center for Toxicological Research (Jefferson, AR) F-10 
c Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green, NTP TOX 71 
TABLE F3 
Results of Analyses of Dose Formulations Administered to Rats and Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Studi es of Malachite Green Chloride 
Target Determined Difference 
Date Prepared   Date Analyz ed Concentration Concentration a from Target 
(ppm) (ppm) (%) 
3 November 1996 3 November 1996 25 24.7 1 
8 November 1996 8 November 1996 100 100 0 
300 303 +1 
20 November 1996 20 November 1996 600 599 0 
1,200 1,241 +3 
7 January 1997 7 January 1997 600 532 b 11 
26 February 1997 26 February 1997 300 
600 293 
554 c 2 
8 
a Results of triplicate analysesb Remixed 
Results of remix 
TABLE F4 
Results of Analyses of Dose Formulations Administered to Male Rats and Female Mice 
in the 28-Day Feed Study of Leucomalachite Green 
Target Determined Difference 
Date Prepared   Date Analyz ed Concentration Concentration a from Target 
(ppm) (ppm) (%) 
11 June 1996 11 June 1996 96 
580 95 
576 1 
1 
5 July 1996 5 July 1996  290 
580 
1,160 301 
573 
1,133 +4 
1 
2 
3 September 1996 3 September 1996  1,160 1,109 4 
a Results of triplicate analyses NTP Technical Reports on Toxicity Studies
 
Printed as of June 2004
 
Chemical 
Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene 
n-Hexane Acetone 1,2-Dichloroethane Cobalt Sulfate Heptahydrate Pentachlorobenzene 1,2,4,5-Tetrachlorobenzene D & C Yellow No. 11 o-Cresol, m-Cresol, and p-Cresol 
Ethylbenzene Antimony Potassium Tartrate Castor Oil Trinitrofluorenone 
p-Chloro-",","-trifluorotoluene 
t-Butyl Perbenzoate 
Glyphosate Black Newsprint Ink Methyl Ethyl Ketone Peroxide Formic Acid Diethanolamine 
2-Hydroxy-4-methoxybenzophenone 
N, N-Dimethylformamide o-Nitrotoluene, m-Nitrotoluene, and p-Nitrotoluene 
1,6-Hexanediamine Glutaraldehyde Ethylene Glycol Ethers Riddelliine Tetrachlorophthalic Anhydride 
Cupric Sulfate Dibutyl Phthalate Isoprene Methylene Bis(thiocyanate) 2-Chloronitrobenzene and 4-Chloronitrobenzene TOX No. 
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
 
7
 
8
 
9
 
10
 
11
 
12
 
13
 
14
 
15
 
16
 
17
 
18
 
19
 
20
 
21
 
22
 
23
 
24
 
25
 
26
 
27
 
28
 
29
 
30
 
31
 
32
 
33
 Chemical TOX No. 
1-Nitropyrene 34
 
Chemical Mixture of 25 Groundwater Contaminants 35
 
Pesticide/Fertilizer Mixtures 36
 
Sodium Cyanide 37
 
Sodium Selenate and Sodium Selenite 38
 
Cadmium Oxide 39
 
$-Bromo-$-nitrostyrene 40
 
1,1,1-Trichloroethane 41
 
1,3-Diphenylguanidine 42
 
o-, m-, and p-Chloroaniline 43
 
o-Nitrotoluene and o-Toluidine Hydrochloride 44
 
Halogenated Ethanes 45
 
Methapyrilene Hydrochloride 46
 
Methacrylonitrile 47
 
1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane 49
 
Cyclohexanone Oxime 50
 
Methyl Ethyl Ketoxime 51
 
Urethane 52
 
t-Butyl Alcohol 53
 
1,4-Butanediol 54
 
trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene 55
 
Carisoprodol 56
 
Benzyltrimethylammonium Chloride 57
 
60-Hz Magnetic Fields 58
 
Chloral Hydrate 59
 
Benzophenone 61
 
3,3N,4,4N-Tetrachloroazobenzene 65
 
3,3N,4,4N-Tetrachloroazoxybenzene 66
 
2- and 4-Methylimidazole 67
 
Butanal Oxime 69
 
p-tert-Butylcatechol 70
 
Malachite Green Chloride and Leucomalachite Green 71
 
Diazoaminobenzene 73
  National Toxicology Program 
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
National Institutes of Health P.O. Box 12233, MD K2-05 Durham, NC 27709 Tel: 984-287-3211 ntpwebrequest@niehs.nih.gov 
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov ISSN 2378-8992 