Enhancing the vascularization of three-dimensional porous
alginate scaffolds by incorporating controlled release basicfibroblast growth factor microspheres
Anat Perets,1Yaacov Baruch,2Felix Weisbuch,2Gideon Shoshany,3Gera Neufeld,4Smadar Cohen1,5
1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel
2Liver Unit, Medical Center and The Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Haifa, Israel
3Department of Pediatric Surgery, Rambam Medical Center and The Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine,
Haifa, Israel
4Faculty of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
5Dept. of Biotechnology Engineering and The Institute for Applied Biosciences, Bldg. 39, Room 222 Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel 84105
Received 3 May 2002; revised 5 August 2002; accepted 13 August 2002
Abstract: Site-speciﬁc delivery of angiogenic growth fac-
tors from tissue-engineered devices should provide an efﬁ-cient means of stimulating localized vessel recruitment tothe cell transplants and would ensure cell survival andfunction. In the present article, we describe the constructionof a novel porous alginate scaffold that incorporates tinypoly (lactic- co-glycolic acid) microspheres capable of con-
trolling the release of angiogenic factors, such as basic ﬁbro-
blast growth factor (bFGF). The microspheres are an integral
part of the solid alginate matrix, and their incorporationdoes not affect the scaffold porosity or pore size. In vitro ,
bFGF was released from the porous composite scaffolds in acontrolled manner and it was biologically active as assessedby its ability to induce the proliferation of cardiac ﬁbro-blasts. The controlled delivery of bFGF from the three-di-mensional scaffolds accelerated the matrix vascularization
after implantation on the mesenteric membrane in rat peri-toneum. The number of penetrating capillaries into the
bFGF-releasing scaffolds was nearly fourfold higher thaninto the control scaffolds (those incorporating microsphericBSA and heparin but not bFGF). At day 10 posttransplanta-tion, capillary density in the composite scaffolds was 45 /H11006
3/mm
2and it increased to 70 /H110067/mm2by day 21. The
released bFGF induced the formation of large and matured
blood vessels, as judged by the massive layer of mural cellssurrounding the endothelial cells. The control over bFGFdelivery and localizing its effects to areas of need, may aid in
the wider application of bFGF in therapeutic angiogenesis as
well as in tissue engineering. © 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.J Biomed Mater Res 65A: 489 – 497, 2003
Key words: bFGF; controlled release; PLGA microspheres;
alginate scaffolds; vascularization; tissue engineering
INTRODUCTION
Tissue engineering has evolved to address the
increasing need in tissues and organs for transplan-tation. The neotissue is constructed by seeding func-tional cells, originated from either donors or differ-entiated stem cells, within three-dimensional (3D)polymeric scaffolds, which provide the biomechani-cal support until the cells develop into a functioning
tissue.
1,2Thus, an ideal scaffold should be fabri -
cated from materials conducive to the seeded cells,such as polysaccharides resembling the glyco-com-ponents of the extracellular matrix. It should behighly porous to accommodate a large number ofcells and should possess pores with diameters /H1102250
/H9262m to allow vascular ingrowth after device implan-
tation.
To meet these requirements, we developed porous
scaffolds from calcium-crosslinked alginate solutionsby a freeze-dry method.
3,4Alginate, a polysaccharide
derived from brown seaweed, is a biocompatible poly-
mer widely used as a material for cell transplanta-tion.
5,6The alginate scaffolds were fabricated to pos -
sess 90% porosity and pore diameters of 100 –150 /H9262m.3
The hydrophilic nature of the alginate scaffolds en-Correspondence to: Prof. Smadar Cohen; e-mail:
scohen@bgumail.bgu.ac.il
Contract grant sponsor: Israel Science Foundation; con-
tract grant number: 52/99-1
Contract grant sponsor: Israel Ministry of ScienceContract grant sponsor: Niedersachsen; contract grant
number: 180039
© 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.abled high cell loading and the seeded cells main-
tained viability and function in culture.7,83D cardiac
muscle constructs based on alginate scaffolds are ca-
pable of preventing the deterioration in cardiac func-tion after an extensive myocardial infarction in rats.
9
Histological cross sections in the 1-mm thick im-planted grafts, 55 days postimplantation, revealed anextensive vascular ingrowth into the implantedbiograft from neighboring coronary vessels and well-formed striated cardiac ﬁbers within the biograft.
In thicker implants, however, nutrient and waste
transport to and from the transplanted cells may be amajor concern. Cells that are more than 0.2– 0.5 mmfrom a blood vessel suffer from hypoxia and limitationof other nutrients.
10Although capillary ingrowth is
often noted in the implanted thick cellular constructs
over time, the vascularization is either too slow orlimited to provide sufﬁcient nutrient transport formost of transplanted cells. Thus, stimulation of bloodvessel ingrowth into the implant would assure tissuesurvival and function. One way of achieving this goalis by incorporating angiogenic factors into the scaf-fold, such as the potent basic ﬁbroblast growth factor(bFGF), an 18-kDa heparin-binding protein, which in-duces the proliferation of endothelial cells, ﬁbroblasts,smooth muscle cells, and hepatocytes.
11–14
Yet, the incorporation of bFGF into open-pore ma-
trices imposes a great challenge because of the inher-ent inability of these matrices to efﬁciently entrap andcontrol the release of macromolecules. Several groupsattempted to overcome this challenge by attaching thebFGF to heparinized matrices
15–17or by incorporating
bFGF containing microspheres into the matrix.18In the
present work, we explore and develop alginate com-
posite scaffolds, which incorporate 3- /H9262m diameter mi-
crospheres without interfering the porous structure ofthe scaffold. These microspheres are capable of con-trolling the release of the angiogenic factor, bFGF.After implantation on the mesenteric membrane in ratperitoneum, the extent of matrix vascularization, andcapillary morphology were evaluated and comparedwith that observed in the control composites, that is,scaffolds containing microspheric bovine serum albu-min and heparin but no bFGF.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Recombinant human basic ﬁbroblast growth factor (rHu
bFGF) was produced in Escherichia coli using the T7-based
expression vector pet-8C and was afﬁnity-puriﬁed on hep-arin-Sepharose columns.
15Bovine serum albumin (BSA),
poly (vinyl alcohol), and sodium heparin were from Sigma
Chemical Co. (St Louis, MO). Poly ( D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)(PLGA; 0.2 dL/g, RG 502H) was from Boehringer Ingelheim
(Ingelheim, Germany). Sodium alginate (Protanal LF120),with 70% guluronic acid (G) content, was from PronovaBiopolymers (Drammen, Norway). The media and supple-
ments were purchased from Biological Industries, Kibbutz
Beit Ha’Emek (Israel), unless otherwise speciﬁed. All chem-icals were analytical grade.
Encapsulation of bFGF within PLGA microspheres
PLGA microspheres containing bFGF (0.5 /H9262g/mg poly-
mer), heparin (0.5 /H9262g/mg polymer), and BSA (50 /H9262g/mg
polymer) or BSA and heparin but no bFGF (control) were
prepared by the solvent extraction method based on a dou-
ble emulsion.19,20The co-encapsulation of albumin and hep -
arin intended to stabilize bFGF during encapsulation andrelease. Microsphere size was manipulated by changing the
extent of homogenization during the second emulsiﬁca-tion.
21The size was analyzed using a laser light-quenching
particle size analyzer (Galai Cis-1, Israel). Enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA; Quantikine Human FGF Ba-
sic Immunoassay; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) deter-
mined the percentage of bFGF loading into the microspheresafter dissolving them in dichloromethane and extracting theprotein into phosphate buffer, pH 7.
Preparation of composite alginate scaffolds
The alginate composite scaffolds were fabricated as de-
scribed in Perets et al.22Brieﬂy, sodium alginate was dis -
solved in water, to a ﬁnal concentration o f 2 % (w/v) and
ﬁltered through 1.2-, 0.45-, and 0.2- /H9262m nylon membrane
ﬁlters. Basic FGF- or BSA-containing microspheres were dis-
persed in the sterile alginate solution (40 mg micro-spheres/mL alginate), and the alginate was crosslinked withcalcium ions by adding an equal volume of 0.4% (w/v)calcium gluconate solution. One mL/well of the crosslinked
alginate solution was placed in 24-well plate, frozen in liq-
uid nitrogen ( /H11002196°C) and lyophilized at /H1102110 mbar until
dry.
Scanning electron microscopy
The morphology of alginate composite scaffolds and
PLGA microspheres was observed by scanning electron mi-croscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-35CF). PLGA microspheres or
thin sections (20 /H9262m) of the composite scaffolds were at-
tached to sample stubs with conductive paint and sputter-coated with an ultrathin (100 Å) layer of gold in a Polaron E5100 coating apparatus. The samples were viewed underSEM at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV.
Release studies and bFGF analysis by ELISA
Alginate composite scaffolds containing bFGF were
placed in Dulbecco’s buffered saline (pH 7.2) and incubated490 PERETS ET AL.on a rotating incubator at 37°C. The buffer was replaced
daily and the amount bFGF in releasing media was deter-mined by an ELISA. ELISA was performed according to the
procedure of the kit (Quantikine Human FGF Basic Immu-
noassay; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN).
Western blot analysis
For determination of the physical state and immunoreac-
tivity of the released bFGF, releasing media from differenttime intervals were subjected to Western blot analysis. The
samples were run on 15% polyacrylamide gels and trans-
ferred electrophoretically (Trans-Blot SD, Bio-Rad, Hercules,CA) to nitrocellulose membranes. An equal loading andtransfer efﬁciency were veriﬁed by staining with 2% Pon-
ceau S. The membranes were blocked overnight with
PBS/5% fat-free skim milk and then incubated fo r4ha t
room temperature with a 1:500 diluted monoclonal antihuman bFGF (R&D). For detection, we used horseradish
peroxidase-linked anti human IgG antibody (1:200 ,1ha t
room temperature; R&D) and enhanced chemiluminescencesubstrate (Amersham).
Bioassay for bFGF
The biological activity of the released bFGF was deter-
mined by testing its ability to stimulate the proliferation ofcultured neonatal rat cardiac ﬁbroblasts. The cells were iso-
lated, puriﬁed and cultured on two-dimensional culture
dishes as previously described.
8The ﬁbroblasts were plated
at a density of 5000 cells/cm2on tissue culture dishes and
overnight incubated in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle medium
at 37°C in 5% CO2. After cell adhesion, the culture superna -
tant was replaced by a fresh medium and 100 /H9262Lo ft h e
releasing medium was added into each well. After incuba-
tion for 96 h, the cells were detached with EDTA/trypsin
and the cell number was counted using a hemocytometer.
In vivo angiogenesis
Female Lewis rats (6 to 8 weeks old) were purchased from
Harlan Laboratories. The study was performed with theapproval and according to the guidelines of the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee. The rats were anesthe-
tized with inhalational methoxyﬂurane, prepped anddraped. After a midline incision, the alginate compositescaffolds containing bFGF (20 /H9262g;n/H110053 rats per time point)
or the control composites ( n/H110053 rats per time point) were
implanted on the mesenteric membrane using 5-0 Prolene,with one polymer construct per animal. At days 5, 10, and 21days postimplantation, the rats were sacriﬁced and the scaf-folds were retrieved, ﬁxed in formalin, parafﬁn embedded,and sectioned for histology and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E).The number of capillaries in 15 different ﬁelds for each
time point, randomly selected from captured images of threeH&E slides from each animal, was determined using Im-
agePro 3. The results of capillary density are reported as
means /H11006standard deviations. Statistical analysis of data was
performed by analysis of variance single factor, using ExcelSoftware 2000.
Immunohistochemistry
Sections (4 /H9262m thick) were cut from the parafﬁn blocks of
the scaffold samples and placed onto precoated slides. Thesamples were deparafﬁnized and rehydrated gradually. The
endogenous peroxidase was blocked with 0.6% (v/v) hydro-
gen peroxide in methanol. Immunological detection wasachieved with commercially available polyclonal antibodiesto Von Willebrand factor (VWF) (Dako) and /H9251-smooth mus-
cle actin ( /H9251-SMA; Sigma).
RESULTS
Fabrication of the alginate composite scaffold
The alginate scaffolds are characterized by high po-
rosity ( /H1102290%) with an average pore size of 130 /H9262mi n
diameter and high degree of pore interconnectivity.3,4
These matrix properties should enable the penetrationof blood vessel into alginate scaffolds and their efﬁ-cient vascularization after implantation. To maintainthe scaffold structural properties, it was necessary tofabricate microspheres with particle size that wouldnot interfere with the pore structure of the scaffold,following their entrapment in the scaffold. Thus,RG502H microspheres with an average diameter of1–3/H9262m were made by the solvent evaporation-double
emulsion method, using an extensive homogenizationduring the second emulsiﬁcation.
21According to size
measurements [Fig. 1(a)], 98% of the microspheres
were less than 10 /H9262m in diameter. The microspheres
displayed an intact surface as judged by SEM [Fig.1(b)]. The incorporation efﬁciency of bFGF into themicrospheres was 90%, as determined by ELISA.
The incorporation of these tiny PLGA microspheres
during fabrication of the scaffolds had no signiﬁcanteffect on the scaffold internal morphology, as shownby the SEM micrograph [Fig. 1(c)]. The alginate com-posite scaffolds maintained their 90% porosity and theopen-pore structure with an average pore size of 130/H9262m. The incorporated PLGA microspheres were uni-
formly distributed throughout the alginate matrix. Ina higher magniﬁcation picture, the microspheres ap-peared to be an integral part of the solid alginatematrix [Fig. 1(d)]. In contrast, the incorporation ofPLGA microspheres to preformed alginate scaffolds3D POROUS ALGINATE SCAFFOLDS 491resulted in the accumulation of most microspheres on
the surface of the scaffold (data not shown).
Kinetics of bFGF release and bioactivity
The release rate of bFGF from the alginate com-
posite scaffolds was fairly constant after an initialburst of 40%, and the cumulative release increased
linearly with time, as judged by ELISA [Fig. 2(a)].By day 8 of the release study, approximately 90% ofthe encapsulated growth factor was released to theexternal medium. The release proﬁle was similar tothat obtained from bFGF-containing microspheresnot incorporated into the alginate scaffolds. In con-trast, incorporating bFGF and heparin directly ontothe alginate scaffolds resulted in a rapid release ofthe growth factor from the scaffolds (data not
shown).
Western blotting of the releasing media from bFGF-
containing matrices showed one major band with amolecular weight of 17.8 kDa, which corresponds tomonomeric bFGF (standard bFGF, lane 6), and a mi-nor band at a higher molecular weight, between 31and 41 kDa [Fig. 2(b)]. The minor band probably rep-resents bFGF dimer and it is found in the originalbFGF solution (standard bFGF, lane 6). Thus, it ap-pears that the encapsulation of bFGF within PLGAmicrospheres had no affect on the physical state of thegrowth factor. Monomeric bFGF was detected in thereleasing medium by western blotting for 12 days,indicating the ability of PLGA microspheres to sustainthe release of bFGF.
The released bFGF was further assessed for its abil-
Figure 1. Morphology of alginate composite scaffolds. (A) Size distribution of the incorporated PLGA (RG502H) micro-
spheres, as determined by Galai Cis-1 (Israel); (B) SEM picture of the microspheres; (C) SEM picture of the alginate composite
scaffold; and (D) higher-magniﬁcation, SEM picture of the composite scaffold.492 PERETS ET AL.ity to stimulate ﬁbroblasts proliferation in vitro . The
growth factor was collected at three time points dur-ing the 12-day release study. We focused our attentionon this time period because angiogenesis must occurwithin this time frame to maintain survival of thetransplanted cells. The results presented in Figure 2c
reveal that the releasing media collected from bFGF-containing matrices during the 12-day study stimu-lated the proliferation of cardiac ﬁbroblasts in vitro .
The highest proliferation response was obtained whenthe cells were exposed to the cumulative releasingmedia from days 1–3 of the experiment. This result is
in accordance with the ELISA results, which revealedthe highest amount of released bFGF at initial days(days 1–3). Comparison of the effective concentrationof bFGF from the proliferation assay with the amountreleased by ELISA [Fig. 2(a)] shows that the releasedgrowth factor is more than 90% active at all times.
In vivo angiogenesis
Five days after implantation of the bFGF-releasing
alginate composite scaffolds on the mesenteric mem-brane in the peritoneal cavity, a thin layer of transpar-ent tissue that was enriched with blood capillaries,surrounded the scaffolds. H&E of cross sections in thescaffolds at this time point showed minimal host tis-sue penetration into the perimeter of the scaffolds. Atday 10 post-implantation, a signiﬁcant host tissue in-growth onto the composite scaffolds was noted. Thetissue was nourished by a large number of bloodvessels, 45 /H110063 capillaries/mm
2(Fig. 3). In the absence
of bFGF, the density of penetrated capillaries wassigniﬁcantly smaller, 9 /H110061 capillaries/mm
2. It thus
appears that incorporating controlled release bFGF
Figure 3. Kinetics of scaffold vascularization after implan-
tation on the mesenteric membrane in rat peritoneum. Bloodvessel density (number per mm
2) was determined in 15
different ﬁelds per each time point, randomly selected from
captured images of three H&E slides per one animal, usingImage Pro 3.0. Each group consisted of three animals. *Thedifference between the two groups for each time is signiﬁ-cant (analysis of variance, single factor; p/H110050.0000013 for p/H11021
0.01).
Figure 2. Basic FGF release proﬁle and activity from algi-
nate composite scaffolds. (A) Cumulative bFGF release byELISA; (B) Western blot analysis of releasing media at days0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 12, lanes 1–5, respectively, as compared withoriginal bFGF solution (lane 6) and size markers (lane 7); (C)bioactivity of the released bFGF. The bioactivity was deter-
mined using cardioﬁbroblast proliferation assay. Y-axis is
the relative cell proliferation resulting from the addition ofbFGF released from the microspheres at days 1–3, 6 – 8, and10 –12, as compared with controls. Values represent meanand standard deviation ( n/H110053).3D POROUS ALGINATE SCAFFOLDS 493into the 3D scaffolds enhances the rate and extent of
matrix vascularization. The blood vessel density in-creased with time and by day 21, the bFGF releasingcomposites contained 70 /H11006 7 capillaries/mm
2,
whereas in the absence of bFGF, they contained only
18/H110065 capillaries/mm2. The increase in the number of
blood vessels indicates that the composite scaffolds
slowly release their bFGF contents over that time pe-riod.
Most of the blood vessels in the membrane sur-
rounding the implant as well as those penetrating thebFGF-releasing composites, at day 21 after implanta-tion, appeared to be large ( /H1102210/H9262m in diameter) and
matured [Fig. 4(a,b)]. The endothelial cells lining theblood vessels created a consistent layer [Fig. 4(c),staining for VWF] that was surrounded by cells posi-tively stained for /H9251-SMA [Fig. 4(d)]. No signiﬁcant
inﬂammatory and immune response was observed inthe implanted alginate composites, following the ini-
tial phase of wound healing.
In the control composites, on the other hand, the
majority of the blood vessels were micro-capillaries(/H1102110/H9262m in diameter) [Fig. 4(e,f)]. Slightly larger cap-
illaries were seen in the membrane surrounding theimplants [Fig. 4(g)], yet they were much smaller in sizeand number than those seen in the membrane sur-rounding the FGF-releasing scaffolds.
DISCUSSION
One of the challenges in engineering a thick tissue
construct is to provide adequate nutrients and oxygento the transplanted cells within a few hours after im-plantation. The surroundings at the implant site is
Figure 4. Histological cross sections (5 /H9262m-thick) of tissues implanted with alginate composite scaffolds, 21 days after
implantation on the mesenteric membrane in rat peritoneum. (A-D) Cross-sections in tissues implanted with compositesreleasing bFGF. (A, B) micrographs of H&E-stained sections taken at the scaffold and membrane interface (A) and in scaffold(B). (C) Von Willebrand factor and (D) /H9251-SMA staining of the bFGF-releasing composite scaffolds. (E-G) Cross-sections in
tissues implanted with control scaffolds; (E, F) micrographs of H&E-stained sections taken at the scaffold and membrane
interface (E) and in scaffold (F), (G) Von Willebrand factor staining of the scaffolds. [Color ﬁgure can be viewed in the online
issue, which is available at www.interscience.wiley.com.]494 PERETS ET AL.usually nutrient-poor by virtue of being several cell
layers away from the nearby capillaries, and is likelyto remain so until angiogenesis occurs. Thus, the si-multaneous delivery of potent angiogenic agents, suchas bFGF, from the tissue-engineered biograft may al-low the vascularization to be enhanced.
In the present article, we aimed at exploring and
developing 3D alginate scaffolding for tissue engi-neering with the capacity for the controlled delivery ofbFGF. Basic FGF was ﬁrst encapsulated within 3- /H9262m
diameter, biodegradable PLGA microspheres, whichwere then incorporated onto the scaffold during itsfabrication. The incorporated microspheres did notinterfere with the porous structure of the alginatescaffold and they were integral part of the continuoussolid wall of the matrix. Such scaffold morphologyshould enable the penetration of blood vessels
throughout the matrix volume, without the bottleneck
of interfering microspheres. Furthermore, the reten-tion of 90% porosity in the scaffold should enable alarge space for accommodating high-density cell cul-tures.
Basic FGF was co-entrapped with heparin and BSA
in the polymeric microspheres to enhance the stabilityof the growth factor during encapsulation and release.
At physiological pH and temperature, the in vitro half-
lifetime of bFGF activity is approximately 12 h.
23Its
binding to heparin induces a conformational change
in the bFGF molecule resulting in an increased resis-tance against thermal denaturation and enzymaticdegradation, and a reduced activation at acidicpH.
24,25Our studies reveal that the entrapment of
bFGF-heparin, 1:1 weight ratio, enabled the stabiliza-
tion of bFGF within the microspheres, in agreementwith the stoichiometry of heparin binding to bFGF.
26
The release proﬁle of bFGF from the PLGA micro-
spheres was nearly linear after the burst, and thegrowth factor was biologically active as assessed by itsability to induce the proliferation of cardiac ﬁbro-blasts. The release of the entrapped growth factor wasmainly controlled by microsphere degradation. Ac-cording to GPC measurements, the RG502H polymer(M
W12 kDa; 50% glycolic acid content; H for hydro -
philic) losses 50% of its initial molecular weight withina week at 37°C (data not shown). Consequently, whilethe microsphere matrix erodes, the encapsulated pro-tein is released. Most probably, the majority of theentrapped bFGF was released while it is still bound to
Figure 4. (Continued from the previous page )3D POROUS ALGINATE SCAFFOLDS 495heparin, due to the high afﬁnity binding between the
two molecules. This interaction appears also to governthe behavior of the complex within the alginate scaf-folds. When the bFGF-heparin complex was incorpo-rated directly onto the alginate scaffolds, it was rap-idly released. Thus, it appears that the negativelycharged alginate can not compete with the highly-speciﬁc interactions between bFGF and heparin; those
are mediated by ionic interaction between both 2-O -
sulfate groups and N-sulfate groups of heparin mole-
cules
27and certain lysine and arginine residues in
bFGF.28Because binding of bFGF to heparin or hepa -
ran sulfate facilitates the binding of bFGF to high-afﬁnity cell membrane receptor, the fact that bFGF isreleased while in complex with heparin may explainits enhanced biological activity on the cardiac ﬁbro-blasts.
The local, sustained bFGF release over time has
been shown to enhance the rate and extent of vascu-larization of the alginate scaffolds, when implanted inrat peritoneum on the mesenteric membranes. Thecontinuous increase in the number of capillaries pen-etrating the scaffolds from day 10 to 21 after implan-tation indicated that bFGF is continuously presentedat the implantation site over that time period. In gen-eral, the soluble bFGF has a short half-life, /H110113 min,
and is rapidly degraded in vivo .
29,30Thus, its pro -
longed effect, as seen in this study, may be the resultof its slow release in vivo . It has been shown before
that controlled release of bFGF over time is preferredover the bolus administration of the same dose ofgrowth factor; the sustained release of bFGF was up tothreefold more potent at increasing vascular endothe-lial and smooth muscle cell proliferation than bolusadministration.
31
The continuously released bFGF induced the forma-
tion of matured and larger blood capillaries within theimplanted 3D alginate scaffolds as compared withthose formed in control scaffolds, which contain mi-crospheric BSA and heparin but no bFGF. The exten-sive positive staining for /H9251-actin, a marker for smooth
muscle cells, indicated the formation of matured bloodvessels. The ability of bFGF to induce matured bloodvessels is attributed to its wide mitogenic effects onthe different cells that build a matured vessel, that is,endothelial and mural cells. Furthermore, it appearsthat bFGF may induce the expression of vascular en-dothelial factor (VEGF), which is a speciﬁc mitogen toendothelial cells.
32Masaki et al.32have found that
overexpression of bFGF boosted the expression of en-
dogenous VEGF in murine model of critical limb isch-emia, and that the therapeutic effects of FGF-2 werecompletely diminished by anti-VEGF neutralizing an-tibody in vivo . Thus, it appears that bFGF is a critical
player in therapeutic angiogenesis. In comparisonwith bFGF, therapeutic angiogenesis protocols basedon VEGF requires the participation of additionalgrowth factors, such as Angiopoietin-1
33and platelet-
derived growth factor-BB,34which recruit the mural
cells to induce the formation of matured blood vessels.
The growth factors need to be delivered at differentdevelopmental stages of the matured blood vessels, asthey can have antagonistic actions. Recently, the dualdelivery of VEGF and platelet-derived growth fac-tor-BB from a polymeric system, each with a distinctkinetics, resulted in the formation of matured bloodvessels,
35thus proving the advantageous of incorpo -
rating controlled delivery system in therapeutic angio-genesis.
It is expected that controlled delivery systems,
which can localize the angiogenic effect of bFGF to adesired site while minimizing its systemic undesiredeffects, may facilitate the use of bFGF in therapeuticangiogenesis. In tissue engineering, its incorporationinto the cell delivery vehicle would ensure tissue sur-vival and function.
The authors thank Ms. Parvin Zerin and Ms. Larisa Shen-
kar for histology.
References
1. Langer R, Vacanti JP. Tissue engineering. Science 1993;260:
920 –926.
2. Vacanti JP, Langer R. Tissue engineering: The design and
fabrication of living replacement devices for surgical recon-struction and transplantation. Lancet 1999;354:32–34.
3. Shapiro L, Cohen S. Novel alginate sponges for cell culture and
transplantation. Biomaterials 1997;18:581–590.
4. Zmora S, Glicklis R, Cohen S. Tailoring the pore architecture in
3-D alginate scaffolds by controlling the freezing regime dur-ing fabrication. Biomaterials 2002;23:4087– 4094.
5. Atala A, Cima LG, Kim W, Paige KT, Vacanti JP, Retik AB,
Vacanti CA. Injectable alginate seeded with chondrocytes as apotential treatment for vesicoureteral reﬂux. J Urol 1993;150:745–747.
6. Lanza RP, Ecker DM, Ku ¨ htreiber WM, Marsh JP, Ringeling J,
Chick WL. Transplantation of islets using microencapsulation:studies in diabetic rodents and dogs. J Mol Med 1999;77:206 –210.
7. Glicklis R, Shapiro L, Agbaria R, Merchuk JC, Cohen S. Hepa-
tocyte behavior within three-dimensional porous alginate scaf-folds. Biotechnol Bioeng 2000;67:344 –353.
8. Dar A, Shachar M, Leor J, Cohen S. Cardiac tissue engineering:
Optimization of cardiac cell seeding and distribution in porousalginate scaffolds. Biotechnol Bioeng 2002;80:305–312.
9. Leor J, Aboulaﬁa-Etzion S, Dar A, Shapiro L, Barbash IM,
Granot Y, Battler A, Cohen S. Bioengineered cardiac grafts torepair the infarcted myocardium and attenuate heart failure.Circulation 2000;02:III-56 –III-61.
10. Colton CK. Implantable biohybrid artiﬁcial organs. Cell Trans-
plant 1995;4:415– 436.
11. Baird A, Walicke PA. Fibroblast growth factors. Br Med Bull
1989;45:438 – 452.
12. Burgess WH, Maciag T. The heparin-binding (ﬁbroblast)
growth factor family of proteins. Ann Rev Biochem 1989;58:575– 606.
13. Neufeld G, Gospodarowicz D. Identiﬁcation of the ﬁbroblast
growth factor receptor in human vascular endothelial cells.J Cell Physiol 1988;136:537– 42.496 PERETS ET AL.14. Baruch Y, Shoshany G, Neufeld G, Enat R. Basic ﬁbroblasts
growth factor is hepatotropic for rat liver regeneration. J Hepa-tol 1995;23:328 –32.
15. Edelman ER, Mathiowitz E, Langer R, Klagsbrun M. Con-
trolled and modulated release of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor.Biomaterials 1991;12:619 – 626.
16. Wissink MJB, Beernink R, Pieper JS, Poot AA, Engbers GHM,
Beugeling T, van Aken WG, Feijen J. Binding and release ofbasic ﬁbroblast growth factor from heparinized collagen ma-trices. Biomaterials 2001;22:2291–2299.
17. Tanihara M, Suzuki Y, Yamamoto E, Noguchi A, Mizushima Y.
Sustained release of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor and angio-genesis in a novel covalently crosslinked gel of heparin andalginate. J Biomed Mater Res 2001;56:216 –21.
18. Tabata Y, Miyao M, Yamamoto M, Ikada Y. Vascularization
into a porous sponge by sustained release of basic ﬁbroblastgrowth factor. J Biomater Sci Polym Ed 1999;10: 957–968.
19. Cohen S, Yoshioka T, Lucarelli M, Hwang LH, Langer R.
Controlled delivery systems for proteins based on poly (lactic/glycolic acid) microspheres. Pharm Res 1991;8:713–720.
20. Chen L, Apte R, Cohen, S. Determinants of release rate of
interleukin-1 from biodegradable polyester microspheres. JControl Release 1997;43:261–272.
21. Mullerad J, Cohen S, Voronov E, Apte RN. Macrophage acti-
vation for the production of immunostimulatory cytokines bydelivering IL-1 via biodegradable microspheres. Cytokine2000;12:1683–1690.
22. Perets A, Baruch Y, Spira G, Cohen S. Fabrication of alginate
composites containing vascular endothelial growth factor toenhance scaffold vascularization. In: Park K, Potts RO, editors.Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on Con-trolled Release Bioactive Materials CRS; 1998. p 225–226.
23. Westal FC, Rubin R, Gospodarowicz D. Brain derived ﬁbro-
blast growth factor: a study of its inactivation. Life Sci 1983;33:2425–2459.
24. Gospodarowicz D, Cheng J. Heparin protects basic and acidic
FGF from inactivation. J Cell Physiol 1986;128:475– 484.
25. Gospodarowicz D, Ferrara N, Schweigerer L, Neufeld G. Struc-
tural characterization and biological functions of ﬁbroblastgrowth factor. Endocr Rev 1987;8:95–114.26. Arakawa T, Wen J, Philo JS. Stoichiometry of heparin binding
to basic ﬁbroblast growth factor. Arch Biochem Biophys 1994;308:267–273.
27. Rusnati M, Coltrini D, Caccia P, Dell’Era P, Zoppetti G, Oreste
P, Valsasina B, Presta M. Distinct role of 2-O -,N-, and 6-O -
sulphate groups of heparin in the formation of the ternarycomplex with basic ﬁbroblast growth factor and soluble FGF
receptor-1. Biochim Biophys Res Commun 1994;203:450 – 458.
28. Erikson AE, cousins LS, Weaver LH, Matthews BW. Three-
dimensional structure of human basic ﬁbroblast growth factor.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1991;88:3441–3445.
29. Whalen GF, Sing Y, Folkman J. The fate of intravenously
administered bFGF and the effect of heparin. Growth Factors1989;1:157–164.
30. Edelman ER, Nugent MA, Karnovsky MJ. Perivascular and
intravenous administration of basic ﬁbroblast growth factor:
vascular and solid organ deposition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA1993;90:1513–1517.
31. Dinbergs ID, Brown L, Edelman ER. Cellular response to trans-
forming growth factor- /H92521 and basic ﬁbroblast growth factor
depends on release kinetics and extracellular matrix interac-
tions. J Biol Chem 1996;271:29822–2934.
32. Masaki I, Yonemitsu Y, Yamashita A, Sata S, Tanii M, Komori
K, Nakagawa K, Hou X, Nagai Y, Hasegawa M, Sugimachi K,
Sueishi K. Angiogenic gene therapy for experimental critical
limb ischemia: acceleration of limb loss by overexpression of
vascular endothelial growth factor 165 but not of ﬁbroblast
growth factor-2. Circ Res 2002;90:966 –973.
33. Thurston G, Suri C, Smith K, McClain J, Sato TN, Yancopoulos
GD, McDonald DM. Leakage resistant blood vessels in mice
transgenically overexpressing angiopoietin-1. Science 1999;286:
2511–2514.
34. Benjamin LE, Hemo I, Keshet E. A plasticity window for blood
vessel remodeling is deﬁned by pericyte coverage of the pre-formed endothelial network and is regulated by PDGF-B and
VEGF. Development 1998;125:1591–1598.
35. Richardson TP, Peters MC, Ennett AB, Mooney DJ. Polymeric
system for dual growth factor delivery. Nat Biotech 2001;19:
1029 –1034.3D POROUS ALGINATE SCAFFOLDS 497