757 NACHIAPP AN AND MUTHUKUMAR: PRETREATMENT OF TEXTILE EFFLUENT FOR BIODEGRADABILITY Journal of Scientific & Industrial Research
Vol. 71, November 2012, pp. 757-765
*Author for correspondence
E-mail: muthukumar@annauniv.eduPretreatment of textile effluent by ultrasound based hybrid methods for the
enhancement of biodegradability
Senthilnathan Nachiappana and Karuppan Muthukumarb*
a Department of Chemical Engineering, St. Joseph’s College of Engineering, Chennai 600119, India
b Department of Chemical Engineering, Alagappa College of Technology, Anna University Chennai,
Chennai 600 025, India.
Received 17 July 2012; revised 23 August 2012; accepted 21 September 2012
This study presents the biodegradation of real textile effluent pretreated with different hybrid methods. The experiments
were carried out with and without pretreatment of effluent to analyze the influence of different pretreatment methods. The
advanced oxidation processes such as sonolysis, sono-sorption and sono-Fenton-sorption were employed for the pretreatment of
the effluent. In sono-sorption and sono-Fenton-sorption, eco-friendly, cost effective and easily available tea waste was used as an
adsorbent. The sorbent was activated using formaldehyde followed by sonolysis. The biodegradation was carried out using mixed
culture and the optimal initial pH and incubation temperature were found to be 7 and 32 oC, respectively. The UV-vis and FTIR
analyses of untreated and treated effluents confirmed the degradation of organic pollutants. The microbial growth data obtained
were tested with Monod, Powell, Haldane, Luong and Edward equations and the obtained data were found to fit well with Haldane
model.
Keywords: Textile effluent, Pretreatment, Advanced oxidation process, Sonolysis, Biological treatment
Introduction
The synthetic dyes are often found in environment
due to their wide use in various industries. The industries
such as plastics, textile, food, paper and cosmetics are
using these dyes in large quantities to colour their
products. However, the textile industry ranks first in the
consumption of dyes. It is estimated that approximately
10 – 15% of total amount of dyes produced were
released into the environment mainly through
wastewater1. Since the dyes are very toxic, treatment
of such effluents is highly essential before disposing into
the environment. But the biorefractory nature of these
effluents restricts the applicability of biological treatment.
Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) can be
successfully used to enhance the biodegradability of
wastewater containing recalcitrant compounds. Though
AOPs are highly efficient, the operating cost associated
with that restricts their applicability as a sole treatment
method. Therefore, methods involving AOP and biological
method are reported as an economically attractive for
treating such effluents2. Among the various AOPs, theapplication of ultrasound (US) for the destruction of
recalcitrant organics has gained greater attention in the
recent past. Entezari and Al-Hoseini3 employed sono-
sorption to remove methylene blue from aqueous solution
and utilized waste newspaper as sorbent. The application
of ultrasound increased the mass transfer and surface
area of the sorbent, which in turn increased the methylene
blue removal rate.
Shemer and Narkis4 studied the removal of
trihalomethanes from aqueous solution with ultrasound
and Fenton’s oxidation individually and also with the
combination of both. Gopinath et al.5 pretreated the
Congored using sonolysis to enhance its biodegradability.
In our previous study6, the treatment of real textile effluent
using different AOPs such as sonolysis, sono-sorption
and sono-Fenton-sorption (SFS) was reported and higher
performance was reported for SFS. Onat et al.7 studied
the hybrid method involving ultrasound irradiation and
biological treatment. Initially, decolorization of Reactive
Red 2 (RR2), Reactive Blue 4 (RB4), and Basic Yellow
2 (BY2) was studied by continuous ultrasonic irradiation
at 20 kHz and then was treated microbially using
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. The highest decolorization
yield reported was 93%, which was observed for the758 J SCI IND RES   VOL 71  NOVEMBER  2012
sample with RR2 at 50 mg/L initial dye and 6 g/L cell
concentrations. The studies reported in the literature deals
with simulated textile wastewater prepared using one or
more dyes. Therefore, the present study focuses on the
biodegradation of real textile effluent with different
pretreatment methods such as sonolysis, sono-sorption
and sono-Fenton-sorption. The main purpose of
combining different treatment processes was to achieve
the destruction of recalcitrant compounds into
biodegradable, which would facilitate the biodegradation
of organic pollutants easily. The development of hybrid
methods is much important for the treatment of textile
effluent to overcome the operational problems associated
with biological treatment alone employed.
Materials and methods
Materials
The effluent used in the present study was collected
from a textile dyeing unit located at southern part of Tamil
Nadu, India and its characteristics are presented in Table
1. It is learnt that the dyeing unit uses different azo dyes
for coloring the textiles. The tea waste was collected
from the canteen and its physical and chemical properties
are given in Table 2. The chemicals and reagents used in
the present study were of analytical reagent.
Microorganism
In the present study, microbial consortium isolated
from textile effluent was used. This was added into the
nutrient broth containing peptone 5 g/L, beef extract
1 g/L, yeast extract 2 g/L, sodium chloride 5 g/L and
effluent (3 g COD/L) and the contents were incubated
at 37oC. It was then acclimatized in nutrient broth
medium containing effluent (6 g COD/L) and then the
sludge was acclimatized to withstand even higher
concentrations of dye. The morphological and
biochemical tests performed with indigenous consortium(Table 3) revealed that the consortium majorly contains
Pseudomonas sp. and Bacillus sp.
Biodegradation
About 200 ml of effluent was placed in an Erlenmeyer
flask and inoculated with 2 ml of microbial consortium.
The samples withdrawn from the flask at regular time
intervals were centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 20 min and
the supernatant was subjected to further analysis. The
degradation of effluent was assessed based on % COD
reduction and it was determined using Eq. 1.
% COD reduction = 
                     ...(1)Table 1 - Physicochemical characteristics of real textile effluent
Parameter Values
Color Greenish Blue
pH 5.0-5.2
COD, mg/L 29,333-30,667
BOD5, mg/L 9,260-9,780
TDS, mg/L 8,800
Density, kg/m3973.8Table 2-Chemical and physical properties of tea waste used in the
experiment
Chemical characteristics
Parameter Value (%)
Water soluble components 5.2
Insoluble components 83.8
Moisture 8.0
Ash 3.0
Physical Characteristics
Parameter Value
Bulk density 0.279 g/cm3
Particle size 80 - 354 mm
Table 3 - Morphological and Biochemical analyses of
microorganisms
Parameter Analysis Bacillus sp . Pseudomonas sp.
Morphology Rod Rod
Gram staining + -
Oxidase - +
Indole - -
Methyl Red + -
VP test + -
Citrate + +
HS Production + -
Motility + -
Gelatin hydrolysis - +
D-Glucose + +
Gas production - -
L-Arabinose + +
Lactose + -
Maltose + -
Mannitol - +
Mannose + +
Catalase + +
Nitrate reduction + +759 NACHIAPP AN AND MUTHUKUMAR: PRETREATMENT OF TEXTILE EFFLUENT FOR BIODEGRADABILITY
where, C0 and C are the initial COD in mg/L and COD
at any time t in min, respectively. The cell pellets, thus
collected were washed twice with distilled water and
the biomass was estimated using wet weight method.
The effect of initial pH (4-9), temperature (28 to 44 oC)
and initial concentration (20-100% v/v) on the
biodegradation of textile effluent was studied. The initial
concentration was varied by diluting the effluent to the
desired concentration.
Pretreatment
Sonolysis
Sonolysis was performed in a bath type sonicator
operating at 30 kHz (Oscar Ultrasonics, OU-Mini type)
and the ultrasonic waves were emitted from the bottom
of the reactor. The temperature of the sonicator (volume
of 3.5 L) was controlled using cooling coil. About 500 ml
of effluent was charged into the reactor and was
subjected to ultrasound irradiation at different desired
time limits. The sonicated effluent (200 ml) was then
added into Erlenmeyer flask and inoculated with
microbial consortium. The samples were withdrawn at
regular time intervals and subjected to COD analysis.
Sono-sorption
Sono-sorption was performed using activated tea
waste as sorbent under the influence of ultrasonic
irradiation. Tea waste (discarded tea dust after use) is
an eco-friendly, cost effective and easily available waste
material and India is the largest producer and consumer
of tea. For better performance, the activation of tea waste
is essential and in the present study, tea waste was
activated by formaldehyde followed by ultrasound6.
About 500 mL of effluent and 6 g/L of activated tea
waste (optimized size of 80 – 120 µm) were charged
into the sonochemical reactor and the mixture was
irradiated for the desired time. The samples were
withdrawn at regular time intervals and subjected to COD
analysis.
Sono-Fenton-sorption
Sono-Fenton-sorption experiments were conducted
similar to sono-sorption and in addition, Fenton’s reagent
(50 mg/L of Fe (II) and 400 mg/L of H2O2) was added
into the sonochemical reactor along with 500 mL of
effluent and 6 g/L of activated tea waste6. The pH of
the solution was maintained at 3 to prevent the
precipitation of iron as iron hydroxide8.Analytical methods
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) was determined
by open reflux method9. A digital calibrated pH meter
(Elico, Li 127 type) was used to determine the pH. The
untreated and the effluent after different treatments were
analyzed using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy
(Perkin Elmer Spectrum 1 FT-IR spectrometer) and the
absorbance spectra were recorded from 4000 – 400 cm-1.
Ecotoxicity test
The ecotoxicity of the textile effluent was performed
before and after biodegradation using disc diffusion
method. The test was performed as outlined by
NCCLS10. The test was carried out with Escherichia
coli (MTCC 443) and the diameter of inhibition zone
was measured in mm using a ruler. The values reported
in present study include the disc diameter of 6 mm.
Kinetics
The knowledge on microbial growth kinetics is
essential to understand the degradation capability of the
microorganism and biokinetic constants are essential to
scale-up the process. Since the growth of microbes is a
result of anabolic and catabolic enzymatic activities,
substrate utilization or growth associated product
formation can be quantitatively described on the basis of
growth models. In this study, the data obtained were
tested with Monod, Powell, Haldane and Luong equations.
The specific growth rate was determined using Eq.  2.
...(2)
where, µ is the specific growth rate (1/h), x is the biomass
concentration (g/L) at time t (h) and dx is change in
biomass concentration with respect to change in time,
dt. The growth of microbes without any inhibition can be
modeled using Monod equation11 and is given as
...(3)
where µmax is the maximum specific growth rate (1/h), S
is the substrate concentration and KS is the half saturation
constant (g/L). This model is simple and describes the
dependence of specific growth rate on the initial substrate
concentration. The specific growth rate was studied for
different substrate concentrations by changing the initial
concentration of the effluent by diluting with distilled
water. The biomass concentration was determined760 J SCI IND RES   VOL 71  NOVEMBER  2012
through wet weight method. The original Monod model
was modified by Powell12 and is given as:
...(4)
where m is the maintenance rate (1/h).
Monod and Powell models are particularly fit the
non-inhibitory growth data well whereas in the present
study, as the biodegradation was performed for real textile
effluent of very high COD content, it is required to test
the data obtained with different growth kinetic models
accounting inhibition too. In the present study, growthdata obtained were tested with Haldane, Edward and
Luong model.
A modified version of Monod model is Haldane
model13 which incorporates inhibitory effects of toxic
substrates and is given as:
...(5)
where Ki is the substrate inhibition constant (g COD/L).
Edward14 proposed a mathematical model similar to
Haldane model and is given as:
Fig. 1 - Effect of operating parameters on % COD reduction of effluent during biodegradation.
Fig. 1(a) Conditions: Effluent volume: 200 ml, Incubation time: 24 h, initial concentration of effluent: 100% (undiluted), incubation
temperature: 32 oc;
Fig. 1(b) Conditions: Effluent Volume: 200 ml, Incubation time: 24 h, initial ph: 7, incubation temperature: 32 oc; and
Fig. 1(c) Effluent Volume: 200 ml, Incubation time: 24 h, initial ph: 7, initial concentration of effluent: 100%.761 NACHIAPP AN AND MUTHUKUMAR: PRETREATMENT OF TEXTILE EFFLUENT FOR BIODEGRADABILITY
...(6)
This model has an additional term [1+(S/K)] in the
denominator, which includes a positive constant K and
the higher value of K indicates the more suitability of
Edward model compared to Haldane model.
The inhibitory effect of substrate on microbial growth
under batch conditions can also be modeled using Luong
equation15. The assumptions of this model include no lag
phase, organism death, endogenous respiration, substrate
used for maintenance energy or inhibition by the
products16. Luong model is given as:
...(7)
where Smis the critical inhibitor concentration above
which the biodegradation stops and n is the positive
integer. All equations were fitted with the data by
nonlinear regression method using MATLAB®.
Results and discussion
Biodegradation
Effect of initial pH and initial concentration
In order to find the optimum pH for the effective
degradation by microbial consortium, experiments were
performed at six different initial pH and the results
obtained are shown in Fig.1a. After 24 h of incubation,
the % COD reduction at pH 4 was 12.4 and at pH 5 and
6, the reduction was 20.45 %. At neutral conditions, the
maximum COD reduction (24.7%) was observed. The
degradation was less at basic conditions and the COD
reduction was about 15.91 and 13.5% for pH of 8 and 9
respectively. From the results, the optimum pH arrived
was 7 and further experiments were carried out at the
optimum pH. The results indicated that the microbial
consortium isolated from the real effluent was found to
be efficient on degrading the organic pollutants under
wide pH ranging from 4 to 9. Therefore, the microbial
consortium can be effectively used to treat the textile
effluents, which are generally prone to have varying pH
levels. The influence of initial concentration on
biodegradation was studied and the results (Fig. 1b)
showed the decrease in COD reduction with an increase
in initial concentration. This may due to the increase in
organics load and inhibition of microbial growth at higher
concentrations.Effect of temperature
The influence of incubation temperature on the time
required for the complete degradation by microbial
consortium was studied by varying the temperature from
28 to 44oC and the results obtained are shown in Fig.1c.
No growth was observed at 44oC and the growth was
significant over the temperature range from 28-40oC.
The maximum % COD reduction was observed at 32oC
and hence, further experiments were carried out at 32oC.
Cetin and Donmez17 investigated the decolourization of
reactive dyes by microbial consortium isolated from textile
effluent and reported no growth of microbial consortium
at 45oC and reported maximum color removal at 35oC.
Pretreatment of effluent
The % COD reduction of effluent using microbial
consortium at optimum conditions was found to be 24.7%
after the incubation period of about 24 h. To enhance
the degradation rate, three pretreatment methods such
as sonolysis, sono-sorption and sono-Fenton-sorption
were employed.
Sonolysis
The effluent was irradiated with ultrasound at
different time intervals and then was subjected to
biodegradation. The COD reduction after 24 h of
incubation was observed to be 24.7, 38.2, 48.3 and 55.1%
when the effluent was pretreated with sonolysis for 0,
30, 60 and 90 min, respectively. Here, 0 min indicates no
pretreatment and the effluent was degraded by biological
treatment. The application of ultrasound into the aqueous
effluent generates tiny bubbles and when these bubbles
reach high pressure region it collapses. This violent
collapse generates very high temperature of several
thousand Kelvin and pressure of several hundred
atmospheres18, 19. The higher temperatures generated
pyrolytically cleave the pollutants and also produce
hydroxyl radicals, which are strong oxidizing agents. Thus,
during ultrasound irradiation, the complex organic
molecules were converted into simpler molecules through
oxidation and pyrolytic decomposition20. These simpler
molecules can easily be biodegraded and this leads to
better reduction in COD.
Sono-sorption
Sonolysis can be improved by the addition of solid
particles into the reaction medium. It is well established
that the presence of solid particles will accelerate the
sonolytic degradation as these added particles enhance
the nucleation sites in the liquid bath and hence, cavitation762 J SCI IND RES   VOL 71  NOVEMBER  2012
was significantly improved. Keck et al.21 reported that
presence of inert particles doubled the reaction rate
compared to the rate observed in the absence of particles
in the sonicator. This may be attributed to the induced
turbulence and additional convective mass transfer inside
the pores caused by high velocity micro jets produced by
the ultrasound irradiation22. Therefore, effluent was
pretreated with sono-sorption at different time intervals
and then was subjected to biodegradation. The COD
reduction observed after 24 h of incubation was 57.3, 73
and 82% when the effluent was pretreated with sono-
sorption for 30, 60 and 90 min respectively. Thus, the
effluent after sono-sorption pretreatment was easily
biodegraded and hence, significant reduction in COD was
observed with biological treatment. This is attributed to
the fact that the complex organic pollutants were initially
adsorbed on the surface of the sorbent. The organic
molecules are present on the surface and hence, well
exposed to the oxidizing agents. This phenomenon
indicates that the sorbent acts as a catalyst for the better
pyrolytic decomposition of textile effluent by ultrasound.
Sono-Fenton-sorption
The sono-sorption process may be further improved
by incorporating Fenton process. This is because of the
production of highly reactive hydroxyl radicals and other
oxidants by both sonolysis and Fenton processes. Thus,
the produced powerful oxidants and pyrolytic action of
ultrasound irradiation degraded the organic pollutants
present in the effluent effectively and in addition, the
mass transfer rate was enhanced significantly in the
presence of ultrasound. The pretreatment of effluent by
sono-Fenton-sorption for 30 and 60 min showed 71.9
and 84.3% COD reduction respectively, after 24h of
incubation. Complete degradation (100%) was achieved
when the effluent was pretreated with SFS for a period
of 90 min followed by the biodegradation.
Comparison of pretreatment methods
The presence of non-biodegradable compounds in
the textile effluent prevents the treatment by biological
methods. Therefore, the effluent was subjected to
pretreatment to convert complex organics into simpler
molecules, which can be treated biologically. In this study,
the real textile effluent was subjected to different
pretreatment methods and the results presented in Fig. 2
showed that better performance was observed with SFS.
The pretreatment of effluent for 30 min with sonolysis,
sono-sorption and sono-Fenton-sorption enhanced theCOD reduction in biological treatment from 24.7 to 38.2,
57.3 and 71.9%, respectively. In order to confirm the
influence of pretreatment, biodegradation of pretreated
effluent (by sono-Fenton-sorption; initial COD of 16 g/
L) and the diluted effluent (initial COD of 16 g/L) was
carried out. Even though both the effluents had similar
COD levels, the COD reduction observed for the diluted
effluent was 89.9% after 24 h incubation. On the other
hand, complete degradation was achieved when the
effluent was pretreated with SFS. This confirmed that,
enhancement in COD reduction was attributed by
synergistic effect and not due to the effect of less
substrate concentration. The pretreatment of effluent
oxidized the highly complex organic pollutants into simpler
molecules, which made biodegradation simple.
Degradation analysis
The FT-IR spectral comparison between untreated
textile effluent and effluent after biological degradation
with pretreatment of sonolysis, sono-sorption, sono-
Fenton-sorption (treatment of 90 min each) clearly
confirmed the degradation of organic compounds present
in the effluent (Fig. 3). It can be observed that, majority
of the peaks present in the FT-IR spectrum of the
untreated effluent were either shifted or disappeared
during the treatment. The peaks in the range of 3800 -
3200 cm-1 correspond to –OH bridging groups in all the
systems and might be attributed to O-H stretching of
either phenolic or alcoholic group. The peaks at 1396
and 763 cm-1 in the untreated effluent spectrum (Fig.
3a) confirmed the presence of phenolic group. The peak
at 1396 cm-1represents the presence of aromatic nitro
Fig. 2 - Effect of different pretreatment methods such as (a)
sonolysis, (b) sono-sorption, (c) sono-Fenton-sorption, for
different time duration, followed by biodegradation for 24 h.
Conditions: Frequency: 30 kHz, effluent volume: 500 mL, initial
pH: 5.2, sorbent dosage: 6 g/L.763 NACHIAPP AN AND MUTHUKUMAR: PRETREATMENT OF TEXTILE EFFLUENT FOR BIODEGRADABILITY
compounds and the peak at 763 cm-1 indicate the
presence of mono-substituted aromatic compounds in the
untreated effluent. The –N=N- stretching vibrations
formed peaks around 1623 – 1653 cm-1 , while the more
complex amide band was located at 1279 cm-1. The peak
at 2127 cm-1may be due to stretching vibrations of C=N.
After biodegradation with pretreatment of sonolysis and
sono-sorption (Figs. 3b and 3c), the absence of peaks at
1396 and 1279 cm-1confirmed the mineralization of
aromatic nitro and complex amide compounds. On theother hand, the presence of peaks at 1651 and 1639 cm-1
after sonolysis followed by biodegradation and at 1644
cm-1 after sono-sorption followed by biodegradation
indicates the presence of azo bond in the dyes. In addition,
the mono-substituted aromatic compounds constituted the
peaks at 757 and 733 cm-1 after sonolyis and sono-sorption
followed by biodegradation respectively. This confirmed
the incomplete degradation after sonolysis followed by
biodegradation (COD reduction of 55.1%) and sono-
sorption (COD reduction of 82%). Figure 3d shows the
FT-IR spectrum of the effluent treated with SFS followed
by biological treatment. The peak at 3418 cm-1 may be
due to the hydroxyl stretching of alcoholic group. The
C=O stretching vibration produced the peak at 1707 cm-
1 and C=N stretching vibration produced the peak at 2145
cm-1. The results clearly indicate the absence of complex
aromatic compounds and this confirmed the complete
degradation of organic pollutants present in the effluent.
Ecotoxicity test
The degradation of effluent may produce organic
intermediates or final products, which are sometimes
more toxic than the untreated effluent. In this study, disc
diffusion susceptibility test was carried out with
Escherichia coli, to analyze the toxicity of effluent,
before and after treatment. Under similar conditions, the
diameter of inhibition zone was found to be 19 mm for
untreated effluent whereas it was about 16 and 11mm
for effluent after biodegradation with pretreatment using
sonolysis and sono-sorption, respectively. No such
inhibition zone was observed for the effluent treated by
Fig. 3 - FT-IR spectra of effluent (a) untreated; (b-d) treated with
different pretreatment methods followed by biodegradation with
(b) sonolysis, (c) sono-sorption, (d) sono-Fenton-sorptionFig. 4 - Monod, Powell and Haldane models fitted to experimental
data764 J SCI IND RES   VOL 71  NOVEMBER  2012
SFS followed by biodegradation. It clearly indicates the
hybrid method of SFS followed by biodegradation
completely removed the toxicity of the effluent.
Growth kinetics
The growth data obtained were fitted with Monod,
Powell and Haldane models and model parameters values
obtained are presented in Table 4. Fig. 4 shows the fits
obtained for different models and it can be seen from
the figure that the trend observed for Monod and Powell
models is almost similar. This may be due to the fact that
the value of maintenance coefficient obtained was very
less and hence, the model results in almost similar to that
of Monod model. The substrate affinity constant (KS)
was found to be 0.8918 (Monod model) and
0.8941 g COD/L (Powell model) and these values are
much lesser than initial substrate concentration
(29.67 g COD/L). The kinetic models accounting inhibition
such as Haldane, Edward and Luong models were also
tested. Haldane model was found to fit the data well
with high correlation coefficient.
The critical substrate concentration (Scrt) was
estimated using Eq. 8, above which the substrate removal
rate falls due to the inhibition effect.
...(8)
where, Ks and KI are substrate affinity constant
(g COD/L)and substrate inhibition constant (g COD/L),
respectively. The critical substrate concentration obtained
in the present study was 14.426 g COD/L. The other
models such as Edward and Luong models did not fit the
data well.
Conclusions
The more stringent legislations with respect to the
discharge of textile effluents motivate to develop novel
treatment techniques for the benefit of industries across
the world. The obtained results proved that the treatment
of real textile effluent using novel hybrid pretreatment,
sono-Fenton-sorption followed by biodegradation, is very
effective on COD reduction. The FT-IR analyses
confirmed that the degradation of organic pollutants andthe treated effluent was proved as non-toxic through
ecotoxicity test. The microbial growth data obtained were
fitted with different models and Haldane model was found
to fit the data well.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank DST, Government of India
and SAIF, IIT Madras, Chennai for providing the FT-IR
facility.
References
1 Tan N C G, Borger A, Slenders P, Svitelskaya A, Lettinga G &
Field J A, Degradation of azo dye Mordant Yellow 10 in a
sequential anaerobic and bioaugmented aerobic bioreactor, Water
Sci. Technol, 42 (2000) 337-344.
2 Martin M M, Perez J A, Fernandez F G, Sanchez  J L, Lopez J
L & Rodriguez S M, A kinetics study on the biodegradation of
synthetic wastewater simulating effluent from an advanced
oxidation process using Pseudomonas putida  CECT 324,
J. Hazard. Mater,  151 (2008) 780–788.
3 Entezari M H & Sharif Al-Hoseini Z, Sono-sorption as a new
method for the removal of methylene blue from aqueous solution,
Ultrason.Sonochem , 14 (2007) 599-604.
4 Shemer H & Narkis N, Trihalomethanes aqueous solutions sono-
oxidation, Water Res, 39 (2005) 2704-2710.
5 Gopinath K P, Asan Meera Sahib H, Muthukumar K & Velan
M, Improved biodegradation of Congo red by using Bacillus sp,
Bioresour. Technol. 100 (2009) 670-675.
6 Nachiappan S & Muthukumar K, Intensification of textile effluent
chemical oxygen demand reduction by innovative hybrid
methods, Chem. Eng. J, 163 (2010) 344-354.
7 Onat T A, Gumusdere H T, Guvenc A, Donmez G & Mehmetoglu
U, Decolorization of textile azo dyes by ultrasonication and
microbial removal, Desalination, 255 (2010) 154–158.
8 Ghodbane H & Hamdaoui O, Degradation using 1700 kHz
ultrasonic irradiation: ultrasound/Fe (II) and ultrasound/H2O2
combinations, Ultrason. Sonochem,  16 (2009) 593–598.
9 APHA, AWWA, WEF, Standard methods for the examination of
water and wastewater , 19th ed. Washington, DC, 1995.
10 NCCLS (National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards),
Performance Standards for Antimicrobial Disk Susceptibility
Test. 6th ed. Approved Standard, Wayne Pa. (1997) M2-A6.
11 Monod J, The growth of bacterial cultures, Annu Rev Microbiol,
3 (1949) 371–394.
12 Powell E O, The growth rate of microorganisms as function of
substrate concentration, Microbial physiology and continuousTable 4-Growth kinetic parameters obtained from different models
S. No. Model µmax (1/h) Ks (g COD/L) Ki (g COD/L) K   m                  R2
1 Monod 0.07678 0.8894 - -   -                    0.9262
2 Powell 0.07677 0.8902 - -   2.498x10-50.9262
3 Haldane 0.3036 20.12 10.36 -   -                     0.9671765 NACHIAPP AN AND MUTHUKUMAR: PRETREATMENT OF TEXTILE EFFLUENT FOR BIODEGRADABILITY
culture, Evans CGT, Strange RE, Tempest W Edition, HMSO,
London, United Kingdom, 1967.
13 Andrews J F, A mathematical model for the continuous culture
of microorganisms utilizing inhibitory substrates, Biotechnol.
Bioeng, 10 (1968) 707-723.
14 Edward V H, The influence of high substrate concentrations on
microbial kinetics, Biotechnol Bioeng, 12 (1970) 679–712.
15 Luong J H T, Generalization of monod kinetics for analysis of
growth data with substrate inhibition, Biotechnol Bioeng, 29
(1986) 242–248.
16 Raghuvanshi S & Babu B V, Biodegradation kinetics of methyl
iso-butyl ketone by acclimated mixed culture, Biodegradation,
21 (2010) 31–42.
17 Cetin D & Donmez G, Decolorization of reactive dyes by mixed
cultures isolated from textile effluent under anaerobic conditions,
Enzyme Microb. Technol, 38 (2006) 926-930.18 Dahlem O, Demaiffe V, Halloin V & Reise J, Direct sonication
system suitable for medium-scale sonochemical reactors, AIChE
J, 44 (1998) 2724–2730.
19 Suslick K S, Doktycz S J & Flint E B, On the origin of
sonoluminescence and sonochemistry. Ultrasonics , 28 (1990)
280–290.
20 20 Liang J, Komarov S, Hayashi N, Recent trends in the
decomposition of chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons by
ultrasound irradiation and Fenton’s reagent, J Mater Cycles Waste
Manage, 9 (2007) 47–55.
21 Keck A, Gilbert E & Koster R, Influence of particles in
sonochemical reactions in aqueous solutions, Ultrasonics, 40
(2002) 661–665.
22 Hamdaoui O, Naffrechoux E, Tifouti L & Petrier C, Effects of
ultrasound on adsorption-desorption of p-chlorophenol on
granular  activated carbon, Ultrason. Sonochem, 10  (2003)
109–114.