 
 
General rights  
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other  copyright 
owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise  and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.  
 
 Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.  
 You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit -making activity or commercial gain  
 You may freely distribute the URL identifying the p ublication in the public portal  
 
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the wo rk im mediately 
and investigate your claim.  
  
 
   
 
 
Downloaded from orbit.dtu.dk on: Aug 29, 2024
Multi-faceted strategy based on enzyme immobilization with reactant adsorption and
membrane technology for biocatalytic removal of pollutants: A critical review
Zdarta, Jakub; Meyer, Anne S.; Jesionowski, Teofil; Pinelo, Manuel
Published in:
Biotechnology Advances
Link to article, DOI:
10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.05.007
Publication date:
2019
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link back to DTU Orbit
Citation (APA):
Zdarta, J., Meyer, A. S., Jesionowski, T., & Pinelo, M. (2019). Multi-faceted strategy based on enzyme
immobilization with reactant adsorption and membrane technology for biocatalytic removal of pollutants: A
critical review. Biotechnology Advances, 37(7), Article 107401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.05.007Accepted Manuscript
Multi-faceted strategy based onenzyme immobilization with
reactant adsorption and membrane technology forbiocatalytic
removal of pollutants: A critical review
Jakub Zdarta, Anne S. Meyer , Teofil Jesionowski, Manuel Pinelo
PII: S0734-9750(19)30090-4
DOI: https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.biotechadv .2019.05.007
Reference: JBA 7401
To appear in: Biotechnology Advances
Received date: 29 November 2018
Revised date: 29 April 2019
Accepted date: 20 May 2019
Please citethisarticle as:J.Zdarta, A.S. Meyer ,T.Jesionowski, etal.,Multi-faceted
strategy based onenzyme immobilization with reactant adsorption and membrane
technology forbiocatalytic removal ofpollutants: Acritical review ,Biotechnology
Advances, https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.biotechadv .2019.05.007
This isaPDF fileofanunedited manuscript thathasbeen accepted forpublication. As
aservice toourcustomers weareproviding thisearly version ofthemanuscript. The
manuscript willunder gocopyediting, typesetting, andreview oftheresulting proof before
itispublished initsfinal form. Please note thatduring theproduction process errors may
bediscovered which could affectthecontent, andalllegal disclaimers thatapply tothe
journal pertain.ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Research review paper  
Multi -faceted strategy base d on enzyme immobilization with reactant adsorption and 
membrane  technology  for biocatalytic removal of pollutants: A critical review  
 
Jakub Zdarta1,2,*,jakub. zdarta@put.poznan.pl , Anne S. Meyer2, Teofil Jesionowski1, 
Manuel Pinelo2 
 
1Institute of Chemical Technology and Engineering, Faculty of Chemical Technology, Poznan 
University of Technology,  Berdychowo 4, PL -60965 Poznan, Poland  
 
2Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Center for BioProcess  Engineering,  
Technical University of Denmark, Soltofts Plads 229, DK -2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark  
 
 
*Corresponding author . 
  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Abstract  
In the modern era, the use of  sustainable,  environmentally  friendly alternatives  for removal of 
recalcitrant pollutants  in streams  resulting  from industrial processes is of key importance . In 
this context, biodegradation of phenolic compounds,  pharmaceuticals and dyes in wastewater  
by using  oxidoreductases offers numerous benefits.  Tremendous research efforts have been 
made to develop novel, hybrid strategies for simultaneous immobilization of oxidoreductase 
and removal of  toxic compounds.  The use of support  materials with the options for combining 
enzyme immobilization with adsorption technology focused on  phenolic  pollutants and 
products of biocatalytic conversion  seems to be of particular interest . Application of 
enzymatic reactors based on immobilized oxidoreductase s for coupling enzyme -aided 
degradation and membrane separation also attract still growing attention.  However , prior 
selection of the most suitable support/sorbent material and/or membrane as well as 
operational mode and immobilization technique is required  in order to achieve high removal 
efficiency . Thus, i n the framework of this review , we present  an overview o f the impact  of 
support/sorbent material on the catalytic properties of immobilized enzyme s and sorption of 
pollutants  as well as parameters  of membranes for effective bioconversion and separation. 
Finally, future perspectives of the use of processes combi ning enzyme immobilization and 
sorption technology as well as application of enzymatic  reactors for removal of environmental 
pollutants are discussed.  
 
Keywords:  oxidoreductases,  enzyme immobilization, support materials, hazardous pollutants 
removal, pharmaceuticals, enzymatic biodegradation, enzymatic  adsorption, enzymatic 
bioreactors, enzymatic  membrane  reactors  
  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
1. Introduction  
The t otal amount of active pharmaceutical ingredients  used in the medicine  has exceed ed 
100,000 tons per year (Weber et al., 2016 ). This number includes antibiotics, anti -
inflammatory drugs , pain kil lers and contraceptive hormones, and it  is known that  many  of 
these substances are introduced  into the environment (Kümmerer, 2009 ). Another group of 
pollutants include s dyes,  colorants and pigments which  are used in various industrial sectors , 
such as textiles, food and other consumer goods , in the amount of approx.  105 tons per year 
(Vikrant et al., 2018 ) and are also commonly released into the environment. Consequently , the 
risk of water pollution  with such compounds is high and there are no signs that this problem is 
decreasing . The r eported values of specific  phenolic compounds, pharmaceuticals and dyes  in 
aqueous environment al systems such as hospital wastewaters, industrial effluents , surface 
water, ground water and even seawater are scarce, but usually  are within  the range from ng/L 
to μg/L  for pharmaceuticals (Heberer, 2002, Cruz -Morato et al., 2014 ) and to mg/L  and even 
g/L for dyes  (Li et al., 2017 , Vikrant et al., 2018 ), with large variations  depending on the type 
of substance, type of effluent and sampling places  as well as the type of the water reservoir 
(ground water, surface waters or wastewaters) which contributes to a global scale of the 
problem  (Table1) . These  pollutants may negatively affect living organism s as well as the 
ecosystem , thus there is a need to remove them from the environment in order to ensure  a 
health ier and more sustainable development (Lonappan et al., 2016 , Rasheed et al., 2019 ). 
Data regarding the  type, structure and  level of the selected examples of  pharmaceutical 
environmental pollutants collected from various reports was presented in Table 1 .   
Despite their highly diverse uses, the chemical structure s of phenols, dyes and pigments as 
well as  some key antibiotics, pain killers and contraceptive hormones are similar in the sense 
that the majority  of compounds , but not all,  contai n a phenolic group  in their  chemical 
structure  (Anku et al., 2017) . As discussed below, phenolic compounds  and non -phenolic 
pharmaceuticals  are target substrates for several natural enzymes, which is why enzymatic 
conversion can be crucial  for the removal of these diverse c ompounds from the environment 
(Ba and Kumar, 2017 ). Biodegradation with the use of enzymes seems  to be a promising 
strategy to control the level of dyes as well as  pharmaceutical pollutants and their derivatives 
in waters and soils, mainly because enzymes are characterized by  distinct selectivity and can 
catalyze targeted conversion reactions. Inspection  of the discussed  data infers that the 
reduc tion of  the quantities of pharmaceutical residue compounds present in the environment , ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
particularly in wastewate rs, is an important environmental challenge  (Ba et al., 2013, Barrios -
Estrada et al., 2018a, Zdarta et al., 2018 a). However, it should be clearly stated that enzymes 
cannot be used for detoxification of raw wastewater due to the high content of organic and  
inorganic substances , which should be treated  before the recalcitrant phenols or 
pharmaceuticals. Thus , only properly pretreated wastewater, without interferents and lower  
concentration of pollutants , can be treated by oxidoreductases in order  to remove toxic 
compounds.  
 
Table 1.  Selected examples of the various types of pharmaceutical environmental pollutants *. 
Type Compound  Base chemical structure*  Levels reported in environment  References  
Antibiotics  Example:  Tetracyclin  
 
 
 Wastewaters: 280–540 ng/L  
Ground waters: 4.4 –9.3 ng/L  
Surface waters: 5.7 –8.7 ng/L  (Javid et al., 2016 ) 
Pain killers  Example: Paracetamol  
 
 
 Wastewaters: 120 –900 μg/L 
Ground waters:  4.4 ng/L –30 ng/L  
Surface waters:  0.3–4.5 μg/L 
 (Cruz -Morato et al., 
2014 , Sousa et al., 
2016, Rivera -Jaimes et 
al., 2017 ) 
 
Antidepressants  Example: Carbamazepine  
 
 
 Wastewaters: 0.5 μg/L  
Ground waters:  N/A 
Surface waters:  up to 1.8 μg/L  (Cruz -Morato et al., 
2014 , Sousa et al., 
2016 ) 
Anti-inflammatories  Example: Naproxen  
 
 
 Wastewaters:  13 μg/L  
Ground waters : N/A  
Surface waters:  up to 1.6 μg/L  (Cruz -Morato et al., 
2014 , Sousa et al., 
2016 ) 
Contraceptive 
hormones/estrogenes  Example: Estradiol  
 
 
 Wastewaters: 6.2 –42.2 ng/L  
Ground waters: 2.5 ng/L  
Surface waters: 1 –22 ng/L  (Adeel et al., 2017 ) 
* Several other pharmaceuticals do not contain a phenolic group, but some of their impurities do e.g. p-salicylic 
acid and 4 -hydroxy iso -phthalic acid, which are impurities of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin). No immediate data 
are available on their occurrence in the environment.  
N/A – not available  
 
Enzymes which belong to  the oxidoreductase class (EC 1 .x.x.x , where 1 denotes type of the 
catalytic group and type of catalyzed reaction [redox - oxidation/reduction reactions for 
oxidoreductases ], the second and the third x denote the enzyme’s sub -class and sub -sub-class, 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
respectively, and describe the reaction with respect to the compound, group, bond or product 
involved in the process, and the final x indicates the  position in th e sub -sub class and denotes 
specific metabolites and cofactors involved , such as tyrosinases, laccases and peroxidases ) 
(Table 2 ) are increasingly investigated as  green biocatalysts for the removal of hazardous 
compounds, including phenol and its derivativ es, synthetic and natural dyes, pharmaceuticals 
and even hormones  (Cabana et al., 2009, Bilal et al., 2017 a, Skoronski et al., 2017 , Bilal et al., 
2019 a, Costa et al., 2019 ). The oxidoreductases are general ly known for their high specificity 
constants, however, they vary depend ing on the type of enzyme , its origin and type of the 
substrate (Baldrian, 2005). This means that  these enzymes can not only efficiently conver t the 
above -mentioned compounds, but also exhibit high affinity to the pollutants. This is 
particularly important due to the low concentrations of phenols and their derivatives in 
wastewater. Notably , laccases ( EC 1.10.3.2 , where 10 denotes acting on diphenols and related 
substances as donors, 3 denotes reaction with oxygen as acceptor and 2 indicate s second place 
in this sub -sub group ), which  are produced by both fungi and bacteria, can catalyse  the 
conversion and hence “destruction” of many of the  above -mentioned  compounds via their 
ability to catalyse  the oxidation of phenolic OH -groups during the reduction of oxygen to 
water  (Lloret et al., 2013 , Tavares et al., 2017 ). The main substrates of the laccases include  
monophenols, polyphenols, methoxy -substituted pheno ls as well as aromatic amines and 
diamines. On the other hand,  tyrosinases  (EC 1.14.18.1 , where 14 denotes acting on paired 
donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen, 17 indicates acting with another 
compound as one donor, and incorporation of one atom of oxygen and 1 indicates  first place 
in this sub -sub group ) possess the narrowest  substrate specificity . They are mainly act ive in 
case of  phenols and catechols, if they do not bear electron -withdrawing substituents and O 2 
molecules required for catalytic action. H owever , their mechanism is different compared to  
that observed for laccases. The oxidation process catalysed  by tyrosinases generate s ortho -
quinones (Land et al., 2003 ), whereas the  conversion wit h the use of laccases mainly reactive 
phenoxy radicals as intermediate products (Bronikowski et al., 2017 ). Regardless,  oligomers 
and polymers  are formed as the products of the oxidation of phenolic compounds  in case of 
both enzymes . On the other hand, horseradish peroxidase  (EC 1.11.1.7) , manganese 
peroxidase (EC 1.11.1.13), and lignin peroxidase  (EC 1.11.1.14 ) where 11 denotes acting on a 
peroxide as a separate acceptor , 1 denotes use of peroxides as substrates and 7, 13 and 14 
indicate the place of these enzyme s in the sub -sub group, are characterized by different 
substrate specificity . These enzymes exhibit activity towards  phenolics, aromatic amines and 
also non -phenolic compounds with various efficiency and require hydrogen peroxide which  is ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
reduced to water during the catalytic conversion of phenolic compounds. For instance, 
horseradish peroxidase is a hem e-containing enzyme which  catalyses  the oxidation of 
phenolic acids, aromatic phenols and non -aromatic amines. Manganese  peroxidase can 
catalyse  the oxidation of a wide spectrum of phenolic compounds, different mono - and 
dimeric phenols, and even dyes. Mea nwhile , lignin peroxidase oxidize s a wide range of 
aromatic phenolic and non -phenolic compounds as well as other organic substances, such as  
xenobiotics (Bilal et al., 2019 b). Nevertheless all of the above -mentioned biocatalysts possess  
a high biotechnolo gical potential and several  report s confirm their  ability to cataly se the 
oxidation of a wide range of hazardous  environmental pollutants (Nicolucci et al., 2011, 
Mukherjee et al., 2013, Le et al., 2016 , Bilal et al., 2018a ). 
 
Table 2.  Oxidoreductase enzymes most frequently used for environmental application s and 
their selected properties.  
Enzyme name  EC 
number  Sources  Main substrates  pH and 
temperature 
optimum  References  
Laccase  (Lac)  1.10.3.2  fungi, bacteria, 
plants  monophenols, diphenols, 
polyphenols, diamines,  
aromatic amines, N -heterocycles,  
phenothiazines  pH 3.5 –5 
temp . 20–25 °C (Faccio et 
al., 2016, 
Senthivelan 
et al., 2016 ) 
Tyrosinase  
(Tyr)  1.14.18.1  fungi, bacteria, 
plants,  insects and 
mammalian issues  phenol, monophenols, bisphenols, 
multi -substituted  
phenol derivatives, including 
chloro - and nitrophenols  pH 5.5 –8 
temp . 30–40 °C (Ihekata and 
Nicell, 2000, 
Tonin et al., 
2012 ) 
Horseradish 
peroxidase  
(HRP)  1.11.1.7  roots of 
horseradish  phenolic  
acids, aromatic phenols and their 
derivatives,  
non-aromatic amines,  
indoles  pH 7  
temp. 25 –40 °C  (Bilal et al., 
2017 b, Bilal 
et al., 2018 b) 
Lignin 
peroxidase  
(LiP)  1.11.1.14  white -rot fungi 
and 
microorganisms  aromatic phenolic and non -
phenolic compounds, xenobiotics 
with 
redox potential up to 1.4 V  pH around 3  
temp . 35–45 °C (Vialli et al., 
1990, 
Shaheen et 
al., 2017 ) 
Manganese 
peroxidase  
(MnP)  1.11.1.13  white -rot fungi 
and bacteria  dyes, monomeric  
and dimeric phenols  pH around 4  
temp. 30 –40 °C 
 (Bilal et al., 
2017c , Yehia 
et al., 2017 ) 
 
However, in order to efficiently exploit enzymes for such purposes – involving low but 
significant concentrations of the problematic pollutants  in aqueous ecosystems  – high 
efficiency and robustness of the enzymatic reaction systems are  of key importance . As it was 
previously mentioned, the concentration of the pharmaceuticals in wastewaters usually does 
not exceed several  μg/L (Table 1) which affects the  enzymatic kinetics and  conversion rat es. 
In order to  enhance the removal efficienci es of phenolic compounds by oxidoreductases , 
various mediators can be used (Husain and Husain, 2008).  There are two possible 
mechanisms of action of mediators. They may act as electron transfer agents between the ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
oxidoreductase and the substrate, in case  of which  the oxidized form of the mediator diffuses 
from the enzyme catalytic pocket and is able to oxidize the substrates molecules which are 
inaccessible or too bulky for the enzymes. On the other hand, the mediator may expand the 
oxidizing capability o f the oxidoreductases towards oxidation of non -phenolic compounds at 
higher  redox potential by providing alternative reaction pathways of oxidation (Munk et al., 
2018). It should be mentioned  that the addition of mediator  agents also alters the enzymatic 
kinetic s. However, the Michaelis –Menten kinetic model could be used to estimate  the affinity 
of the oxidoreductases towards different mediators and reaction substrates after the addition 
of the mediators, and to evaluate the changes in the enzyme kinetics ( Lyons, 2003). The most 
frequently  used mediator agents  include e.g.  2,2′-azino -bis(3 -ethylbenzothiazoline -6-
sulphonic acid) (ABTS), 1 -hydroxybenzotriazole (HBT), N -hydroxyphthalimide (HPI) or  
2,2,6,6 -tetramethylpiperidin -1-yloxy (TEMPO ). However, the selection of a suitable mediator 
is directly associated  with the enzyme (redox potential, substrate specificity) and the type of 
substrate (Baiocco et al., 2003, D’Acunzo et al., 2006).  Although the use of mediators affects 
the costs of the remediation process , their application  is constantly growing over recent years 
due to the significant improvement of the removal efficiencies. Moreover, the use of such 
compounds may also significantly reduce the duration of the process which  at least partially 
justifies  the costs of the mediators.    
It should also be mentioned that use of oxidoreductases has not been scaling  up yet due to 
several obstacles. The most important is sue is related e.g. to the market pri ce of the enzymes. 
According to Sigma -Aldrich web page , the price of the commercially  available laccase fr om 
Trametes versicolor  is approximately equal to $1000 per 10 g , however the costs of the 
mushroom tyrosinase and horseradish peroxidase are higher  and amount to  approx.  $2000 per 
1 g and even $15000 per 1 g, respectively (Sigma -Aldrich , 2019a,b,c ). Moreover, these 
enzyme s suffer due to insufficient catalytic activity. Thus , it would not be feasible  to use the 
commercially available biocatalysts at an industrial scale. One of the possible solution s to 
overcome this problem is the on-site production of enzymes and their purification to obtain 
highly  active biocatalysts  which  results  in a reduc tion of total process costs. Nevertheless, it is 
difficult to establish the total costs of the enzyme s requir ed for wastewater purification as they 
depend  on several factors, such as enzyme dosage, its activity, the type of removed 
compounds and the required process efficiency (Liu et a., 2016) . In addition, other strategies  
have been employed in order  to improve  the efficiency of enzymatic removal of hazardous 
pollutants. The most important one is enzyme immobilization, which significantly improve s 
enzyme stability and reusability. Moreover , optimization of the process conditions , ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
particularly in terms of pH and temperature , as well as the use of enzymatic reactors and 
recycling of enzyme s should be highlighted  and considered as promising to obtain high 
process efficiency  (Østergaard, et al., 2015 , Aguilar et al., 2018 ). Enzyme immobilization 
facilitate s the  recycling and reusability of enzyme s which allows to reduc e the cost of the 
process even by up to 50% (Jørgensen and Pinelo, 2017).   
A notable  number of scientific and technical (engineering) reports testing novel enzyme 
immobilization strategies and reac tion designs are available,  thus indicat ing that 
bioremediation via enzymatic technology c an be a new step forward which provid es 
alternative strategies and materials involving e.g. adsorpt ion technology  (Hai et al., 2007, Su 
et al., 2016 , Bilal et al., 2018 c). Enzyme immobilization technology is crucial for 
environmental technology to maximize the reuse of enzymes in order to provide maximal 
biocatalytic productivity and hence lowest possible enzyme costs  (Jesionowski et al., 2014 , 
Zucca et al., 2014 , Bilal and Iqbal, 2019 ). Immobilization of the enzymes provides long -term 
usability and high biological activity and effectivity of the immobilized oxidoreductases for 
the removal of pharma ceutical products (Zdarta et al., 2018 c) and other environmentally 
undesirable phenolic compounds such as colorants (Ahmad et al., 2015 ). However, the 
immobilization process also possess drawbacks, e.g. its costs, required equipment as well as 
conformational restrictions of the immobilized enzyme which lead  to a decrease of catalytic 
properties (Bilal et al., 2018d).  In addition , there is a need to find suitable support material, 
characterized by operational resistance and the presence of functional moieties which  
facilitate stable attachment of the biomolecules. Moreover, it should be emphasized that only 
a proper immobilization allows for  enzyme stabilization and retention of high catalytic 
properties by the biomolecules ( Adeel et al., 2018 ). From this point of v iew, the particular 
interest is oriented  to multipoint enzyme immobilization which  may improve the enzyme 
activity, specificity or selectivity or even purify the enzyme  (Bilal et al., 2019 c). This 
technique facilitate s stable binding of the enzyme which  reduces enzyme leakage  and 
enhance s the  catalytic activity ( Mateo et al., 2007 ). Finally, oriented immobilization 
contributes to the fact  that immobilized biomolecules are deposited onto the surface in such  
way that their active sites are accessible for the substrate molecules. This is critical for the 
oxidoreductase s, as their active site require  a proper enzyme -support connection to facilitate 
the efficient transfer or uptake  of the electrons to or from the support (Hernandez and 
Fernandez -Lafuente, 2011). Nevertheless, e nzyme immobilization combined with substrate 
adsorption technology  as well as the use of enzymatic bioreactors  appear to be a particularly 
promising strategy.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Simultaneous e nzymatic biodegradation with adsorption or separation enhance the removal 
efficiency of pollutants using oxidoreductase -based systems at an industrial and 
environmentally -relevant scale  during  bioremediation , and maximize the effectiveness of the 
process combinations (Martínez -Hernández et al., 2016 ). The combination of c onversion and 
removal results in  numerous  advantages, including increased effectiveness of remediation, 
reduced time of the process by avoiding product accumulation and potential inhibition and , in 
turn, cleaner effluents; sorption is notably  relevant as a new technology in such reactions due 
to the sorption of products of enzymatic conversion. Additionally, by means of simultaneous 
sorption and biodegradation, easier operational control of the process and cost reduction can 
be achieved, which  is important for high biocatalytic productivity and thus competitive 
applications of immobilized enzymes (Homem and Santos, 2011 ). 
Furthermore, precise catalysis of  low substrate levels and handling of large volumes  of 
effluents  are required in order to efficiently convert and remove environmental pollutants as 
these compounds are usually present in dilute levels of g/L. From this point of view , 
membranes -based technologies are  very suitable and of particular interest. However, the use 
of enzymatic biorea ctor systems involving immobilized enzymes has been found to work 
effectively rather than removal of pollutants by simple filtration, such as micro - or 
nanofiltration  (Rondon et al., 2015 ). The greatest advantage of bioreactors with immobilized 
enzymes is the fact that biodegradation and removal processes can occur  separately, 
simultaneously or consecutively, depending on the pollutant and the process requirements (Li 
et al., 2007 ). Moreover , through careful process control, parameters such as pH and 
temperature can be properly adjusted and maintained to ensure constant operational 
conditions (Al-Khalid and El -Naas, 2012 ). These facts contribute to a  more effective and less 
expensive  enzyme -catalysed  biodegradation of hazardous pollutants . 
In this article, we review the current state of knowledge concerning  the application of 
simultaneous adsorption/enzymatic biodegradation processes via employment of enzymatic 
bioreactors for the removal of h azardous compounds. Various types of degradation processes, 
types of reactors and their operating modes which allow to achieve  the highest removal 
efficiency, and properties of support material for enzyme immobilization for such processes 
are highlighted and discussed. It is also emphasized  how the immobilization technique and 
operational parameters of the process affect the degradation of toxic compounds. Possible 
directions  and future trends for de velopment of advanced methods for removal of persistent 
pollutants by immobilized enzymes are also presented and discussed.  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
2. Simultaneous enzymatic biodegradation and adsorption of  environmental pollutant s 
As it is well known , immobilized oxidoreductases are commonly used to degrade numerous  
hazardous pollutants present in  the environment. Nevertheless, i t should be emphasized , that 
attempts are currently made to combine biodegradation and adsorption methods in order to 
develop even more efficient and economical ly justified  strateg ies for the degrad ation of 
hazardous compounds  (Fig. 1) . This solution concerns the use of the same material as support 
for enzyme adsorption and/or covalent immobilization , which  improves the stability and 
reusability  of the biocatalyst , in order  to achieve higher bioconversion rates and simultaneous  
physical sorption of selected undesired compounds , which  enhances the total removal 
effectivity (Antecka et al., 2018 ).   
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic diagram of simultaneous enzyme immobilization and 
sorption/biodegradation processes of environmental pollutants.  
 
Although the biodegradation of hazardous compounds with the use of immobilized enzymes 
is generally highly efficient, it also possesses  some limitations and disadvantages. First of all, 
due to the fact that enzymes exhibit high catalytic properties only within relatively narrow 
ranges of temperature and pH, incomplete removal or degradation of pollutants is observed. 
Moreover, the formati on of oligomeric and polymeric products with high molecular weight 
may block the active sites of the biomolecules and thus reduce the remediation ability of the 
enzyme, as it has been reported in case of  biodegra dation of various bisphenols (Gasser et al.,  
2014 ).  
In contrast, adsorption is much less sensitive to changes of the process conditions and can 
occur  over much wider pH and temperature ranges, even when the enzyme has lost its 
catalytic properties. The a dsorption process is also very useful when bi odegradation of a 
solution with a high concentration of toxic compounds  is carried out . Since enzymes are 
highly efficient , mainly in lower concentration ranges, on the one hand high concentrations 
may increase conversion rates, but on the other the high quantity of pollutant s extends  the 
biodegradation time, which in turn increases the costs of the process. Adsorption strongly 
enhances the elimination of hazardous compounds and allows  to attain high removal 
efficiencies at a shorter time (Chung et al., 200 3). It should also be noted that adsorption of 
the pollutants  may occur in two ways:  
ENZYMES  
HAZARDOUS COMPOUNDS  
BIODEGRADATION PRODUCTS  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
(i) by adsorption of the hazardous pollutants  (enzyme substrate) ,  
(ii) by adsorption of the products of enzymatic conversion (biodegradation)  (Imran et 
al., 2012 ).  
In the first case, adsorption not only increases the final efficiency of the removal of toxic 
compounds, but also ensures the continuous supply of substrates  for high enzyme activity. 
However, adsorption is also used for elimination of the biodegradation p roducts. The 
compounds formed after enzymatic treatment are usually less toxic, but are still undesired in 
the reaction mixture. They can be removed  by using appropriate sorbents, making the solution 
even more environmentally friendly (Castellana and Loffr edo, 2014 ). It should be added  that 
sorption processes are general ly less selective than enzymatic biodegradation, which 
corresponds to the fact  that a wider range of pollutants can be removed. However,  the 
reusability of the support material for the immob ilization of a new batch of enzyme is greatly 
limited by the fact that various toxic compounds  are adsorbed on its surface , which causes  
fouling due to the affinity towards both the immobilized enzyme and pollutants to be 
adsorbed.  Fouling of the support may lead to a significant loss of enzyme activity as well 
changes in the physicochemical properties of the support. Furthermore, when pollutants are 
adsorbed onto the surface of the matrix, active sites of the enzyme molecules might be 
inhibited, which res ults in a decrease of enzymatic activity.  In addition, fouling of the suppo rt 
may also negatively affect  the structure of the enzyme , leading to its inactivation.  In fact, 
fouling of the support is one of the most important reason s which  limits the practic al 
application of the simultaneous sorption/enzymatic degradation at a wider scale. Moreover, 
after adsorption of the pollutants , the  availability of the functional groups and porosity of the 
support decrease and , in consequence , a decrease of  sorption cap acity is also observed. In this 
case, the  regeneration of the sorbent is expensive and  unfavourable  in terms  of practical 
applications. This means that the degradation  parameters must be carefully controlled, which 
makes the process more com plex and less cost -effective (Zhou and Hartmann, 2013 ). 
Nevertheless, in order to retain high catalytic properties of the immobilized enzyme and good 
sorption properties of the sorbent , there is a need to regenerate the  support. One of the 
possible solutio n is selective desorption of the pollutant from the support material (Al -Jabari 
et al., 2017). In this case , the  enzyme remains  immobilized onto the support surface. 
However, this technique possess some limitations, e.g. stable enzyme -support interactions or 
formation of the multipoint biomolecules attachment are required to avoid enzyme leaching. 
Moreover, a proper eluent should be selected to remove the pollutants from the support.  On 
the other hand, after inactivation of the immobilized enzyme, mainly du e to repeated use and ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
complete loading of the  support with toxic compounds,  there is a possibilit y to elute both  the 
inactiv e enzyme and adsorbed pollutant . This solution is much easier, as compared to the 
previous one, however there is a risk that the use of a toxic eluent may partially damage the 
structure of the support/sorbent material.      
The degradation of environmental pollutants by immobilized enzymes combined with 
adsorption process has become a subject area of interest to many research group s, particularly 
during the last decade . Nevertheless, we strongly believe that this approach should still be of 
high interest and further studies  should be undertaken to develop this technique . This solution 
is highly effective due to the sorption of both environmental pollutants as well as products of 
their enzy matic conversion by the sorbent.  These facts facilitate the process feasibility  and 
result in  less toxic and less polluted effluents  (Shen et al., 2011 ). Moreover, catalytic 
properties of the biocatalyst are usually improved as a result of its immobilization.  Although 
the type of the used enzyme is associated with  the environmental pollutant  which  should be 
removed , the proper selection of the support/sor bent material  is the crucial step in this 
methodology as this material affects both enzyme immobilization and sorption processes . 
Thus, e xamples of the materials which  are used for both enzyme immobilization and 
simultaneous adsorption of toxic compounds  were presented in Table 3  (to enable clearer 
understanding, the sorption and biodegradation efficiencies were presented separately ). 
 
2.1. Materials used for simultaneous adsorption of pollutants and enzyme 
immobilization  
Several  different compounds of inorganic, organic and hybrid/composite origin , characterized 
by various morphology, porous structure and different features have been applied for 
simultaneous enzyme immobilization and sorption of pollutants.  Selected examples of t he 
above -mentioned materials and removed  pollutants were summarized in Table 3.  
Nevertheless, materials used for concurrent biosorption a nd biodegradation processes  possess  
some limitations and must fulfil certain criteria in order to become effective supp ort materials 
for biomolecules and , at the same time , highly efficient sorbents. First of all, such materials 
must offer high stability and mechanical resistance under harsh reaction conditions  (Zdarta et 
al., 2018b) . Furt hermore, their porous structure , including pore diameter  and surface area, 
should grant  them appreciable affinity not only for effective enzyme immobilization, but also 
for adsorption of hazardous compounds (Bhatnagar and Sillanpaa, 2010 ). Moreover, 
according to Loffredo and Senesi (2006) , high contents of carbon and oxygen and a stable 
chemical structure of the sorbent also increase adsorption efficiency. However, the presence ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
of many various functional groups on the surface of the material is the most important feature 
for an effective i mmobilization of enzyme s and sorption of pollutant. This strongly enhances 
enzyme binding, but also determines the surface properties of the material as a sorbent  (Gao 
et al., 2011 ). For instance , a significant amount of hydrophilic groups is  essential for  
immobilized oxidoreductases, which  exhibit better catalytic activity when supported using  
hydrophilic supports (Strong and Claus, 2011 ). Moreover, i t should be clearly stated that 
improvement of enzyme stability and reusability is usually observed after p roviding covalent 
bonds between the enzyme and the support. In this case , heterofunctional supports are of 
particular interest  which are defined as  materials that possesses  several different functional 
moieties capable to bind the protein ( Barbosa et al., 2013, Rodrigues de Melo et al., 2017 ). 
Groups which  facilitate the formation  of the enzyme -support covalent bonds  include e.g.  
glyoxyl, epoxy and divinyl  sulfone groups. Although such functional  groups  might be very 
useful in enzyme immobilization , they possess  several limitations. A two steps 
immobilization protocol is required for most of these strategies, in which the enzyme is 
immobilized by adsorption at first  followed by formation of  covalent interactions at alkaline 
pH ( Santos et al., 2015 ). This mig ht have negative effect on the protein s tructure and enzyme 
activity (Barbosa et al., 2014 ). The use of glutaraldehyde (GA)  is an interesting alternative , as 
one the most universal and , in fact , commonly used  surface modifying agent s. Techniques in 
which GA is used are simple, efficient, relatively cheap and are among  the most frequently 
used in enzyme immobilization. Although glutaraldehyde react s mainly with primary amino 
groups in the enzyme structur e, biomolecules might also be bound  by reacti on of GA with 
thiols, phenols and imidazoles  moieties creating stable, single or multipoint  enzyme -support 
interactions (Fernández -Lorente et al., 2006 ).  
The simultaneous use of a material for enzyme immobilization and for adsorption also means 
that the f unctional groups must not only be compatible with chemical groups of the 
biomolecule, but should  also exhibit affinity to the pollutant or to the products of its 
bioremediation. Due to the variation in the structure and chemistry of the immobilized and/or 
adsorbed  molecules, there is a great diversity of interactions formed between the attached 
enzyme and support as well as the hazardous pollutant s and sorbent. In general, hazardous  
compounds may be attached to the surface of sorbents by means of several complex 
mechanisms, such as surface adsorption, ion exchange, complexation (coordination) or 
chelation (Crini, 2006 ). On the other hand, enzymes are linked with the matrix mainly by 
adsorption and covalent bonds, however, immobilization by entrapment and encapsulation has 
also been reported  (Koyani and Vazquez -Duhalt , 2016, Bilal  et al., 2017 c). Nevertheless, the ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
immobilization  of the enzyme onto the surface of the support (adsorption  and covalent 
immobilization) is particularly desirable for removal of toxic compounds due to reduced 
diffusional limitations and improved  exposure of the biocatalysts active sites for the substrates  
dissolved in the solution as well as adsorbed on the su pport material  (Bilal et al., 2018 e). 
Thus, the selection of a material with appropriate features plays a key role for effective 
immobilization and sorption of pollutants. Additionally, the surface properties of the sorbent 
should be selected in order  to m inimize the negative impact of the adsorbed compound on the 
catalytic activity of the biomolecules.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
15 
 Table 3 . Materials of various origin used for simultaneous immobilization of oxidoreductases and adsorption/biodegradation of environmental 
pollutants.  
Adsorption/  
immobilization  
material  E nzyme  Immobilization 
technique  Pollutants  
(enzyme substrates)  Process  
conditions  Sorption  Degradation  Reference  
Total removal  
efficiency  
Alumina spherical pellets  Laccase from 
Trametes villosa  Adsorption 
immobilization  Reactive Black 5  pH 5, 45 °C, 24 h  79% 5% (Zille et al., 
2003) 82% 
Alumina pellets  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Reactive Black 5  pH 5, 50 °C, 36 h  <10%  >90%  (Osma et al., 
2010) 100%  
Multi -walled carbon 
nanotubes  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Adsorption 
immobilization  Bisphenol A , 
 
Catechol  pH 7, 25 °C, 24 h  9% 71% (Pang et al., 
2015)  80% 
5% 85% 
90% 
Epoxy -functionalized silica  Laccase from 
Myceliophthora 
thermophila  Covalent 
immobilization  Phenol,  
 
p-Chlorophenol  pH 4.5, 25 °C, 24 h  10% 70% (Mohammadi 
et al., 2018)  80% 
<5% 60% 
60% 
Hollow mesoporous carbon 
spheres  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Tetracycline  pH 5, 25 °C, 3 h  77% 55% (Shao et al., 
2019)  100%  
Potato dextrose agar  Laccase from  
Pleurotus ostreatus  Adsorption 
immobilization  Municipal landfill  
leachate  30 °C, 20 days  65% 15% (Loffredo et 
al., 2014)  >75%  
Chitosan film  Tyrosinase from 
mushroom  Covalent 
immobilization  p-Cresol,  
 
m-Cresol,  
 
Catechol,  
 
p-Chlorophenol,  
 
m-Chlorophenol  pH 7, 45 °C, 1 h  92% 100%  (Yamada et 
al., 2005)  92% 
94% 100%  
94% 
100%  98% 
98% 
99% 100%  
99% 
68% 72% 
70% 
 
 
 
 
     
  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
16 
  
Cross -linked chitosan 
beads  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Sulfur Blue 15,  
 
Sulfur Brown GD  pH 6.5, 30 °C,  20% 65% (Nguyen et 
al., 2016a)  82% 
20% 50% 
  
71% 
Chitosan beads  Manganese  
peroxidase  Entrapment  Textile effluent  pH 4.5, 5 h  20% 90% (Bilal et al., 
2016)  97% 
Polyacrylonitrile  Horseradish 
peroxidase  Covalent 
immobilization  Phenol  pH 6, 25 °C  <10%  >90% (Wang et al., 
2016)  95% 
Chitosan/Fe membrane  Laccase from 
Myrothecium 
verrucaria  I-5 Adsorption 
immobilization  Acid Red 73,  
 
Acid Blue 113  pH 7, 28 °C, 12 h  30% 70% (Wen et al., 
2015)  100%  
25% 70% 
95% 
Chitosan/Diaion WK-20 
(cation exchange resin)  Tyrosinase  Covalent 
immobilization  Phenol,  
 
p-Chlorophenol,  
 
p-Methoxyphenol,  
 
p-Cresol,  
 
Catechol  pH 7, 25 °C, 2 h  100%  100%  (Wada et al., 
1993)  100%  
100%  100%  
100%  
100%  100%  
100%  
100%  100%  
100%  
85% 90% 
90% 
Chitosan/Diaion WK -10 
beads  Tyrosinase from 
mushroom  Covalent 
immobilization  p-Cresol,  
 
4-n-Nonylphenol,  
 
4-sec-Butylphenol  25 °C, 4 h  65% 98% (Tamura et 
al., 2010)  100%  
50% 99% 
96% 
60% 96% 
100%  
Chitosan/alginate beads  Tyrosinase from 
Agaricus bisporus  Entrapment  Phenol  25 °C, 4 h  30% 85% (Ensuncho et 
al., 2005)  92% 
Cellulose/cellulose 
fibril/maleic anhydride  Laccase  Covalent 
immobilization  Chlorinated biphenyl  pH 4, 25 °C, 3 h  45% 40% (Li et al., 
2018)  85% 
Polyacrylonitrile/  
montmorillonite/  
graphene oxide nanofibers  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Catechol  pH 4, 25 °C  60% 35% (Wang et al., 
2014)  39% ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
17 
 Poly(vinyl alcohol)/  
poly(acrylic acid)/SiO 2 Horseradish 
peroxidase  Covalent 
immobilization  Paracetamol  pH 3, 25 °C, 1.5 h  15% 83% (Xu et al., 
2015)  98% 
Polyvinyl alcohol/ 
halloysite  beads  Laccase from 
Aspergillus sp.  Covalent 
immobilization  Reactive blue  pH 5, 25 °C, 8 h 16% 74% (Chao et al., 
2018)  90% 
Poly(D,L -lactide -co-
glycolide)/  
multi -walled carbon 
nanotubes  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Encapsulation  Bisphenol A  pH 5, 25 °C, 5 h  10% 85% (Dai et al., 
2016)  
95% 
Poly(acrylic acid)/SiO 2 
nanofibrous membranes  Laccase from  
white -rot fun  Covalent 
immobilization  Triclosan  pH 4, 30 °C, 2 h  45% 20% Xu et al., 
2014 65% 
Poly(D,L -lactide -co-
glycolide) /polyethylene 
glycol/poly( p-phenylene 
oxide) fibers  Horseradish 
peroxidase  Encapsulation  Pentachlorophenol  pH 3, 25 °C, 2 h  55% 30% (Niu et al., 
2013)  
85% ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
18 
 2.1.1. Inorganic materials  
A w ide variety of different inorganic materials has been used for simultaneous removal of 
hazardous pollutants by both immobilized enzymes and by adsorption. Organic oxides 
including e.g. silica, titanium , alumin a and iron oxides have been used for the immobilization 
of oxidoreductases and selective sorption of pollutant s such as synthetic and natural dyes, 
phenolic compounds and antibiotics due to the presence of many functional moieties , mainly 
hydroxyl groups,  as well as well a define d porous structure, good sorption properties and high 
stability , in (Champagne and Ramsay, 2007, Kim et al., 2011, Yu et al., 2015 ). There are also 
other inorganic materials, such as minerals and carbon -based materials , which offer high 
stability and good  sorption properties that  can be successfully applied  for pollutant removal 
by enzym atic oxidation and subsequent adsorption (Choi et al., 2008, Ding et al., 2016 ). An 
interesting example of the utilization of inorganic oxides  (alumina)  was reported by Zille et al. 
and Osma et al. Laccase was immobilized by adsorption o nto spherical alumina pellets or  by 
covalent binding onto Al 2O3 pellets , respectively , and used for the decolorization  of industrial 
effluents containing Reactive Black 5 . It was f ound that in both cases  the decolor ization 
occurred due to two processes: adsorption of the dye on the  support material and its 
degradation by the laccase. However, an interesting phenomenon was observed : when the 
biomolecule was attached to the matrix via weak adsorption interaction s, approx.  80% of the 
dye was removed due to the adsorpti on process and only 4% was degraded by  the 
immobilized laccase (Zille et al., 2003 ). On the other hand , covalent binding of t he 
biomolecules completely reversed th ese proportions: in this case o ver 90% of the Reactive 
Black 5 was biodegraded and less than 10% was adsorbed onto the alumina pellets . These 
observations may be explained by the type of the interactions formed  between the enzyme and 
support. Covalent immobilization of the enzyme and the usually accompan ying multipoint 
attachment of the biocatalysts resulted in the saturation  of the majority  of active sites on the 
surface of the support . This limited  the number of free active sites available for the dye 
molecules and , as a consequence , the  sorption capacity of  the material with immobilized 
enzyme towards the dye was decreased (Osma et al., 2010). Furthermore covalent binding of 
the laccas e increased  its stability and enzyme leakage was strongly reduced , which also 
enhance d the  enzymatic removal of the RB5 dye . Nevertheless, under optimal conditions, the 
biodegradation process was highly efficient  in both batch and continuous modes , indicating 
that such biocatalytic systems may be suitable for potential implementation at an industrial 
scale.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
19 
 It can be briefly sum marize that use of the inorganic materials as support for simultaneous 
immobilization and removal of pollutants allow s to achieve high removal efficiencies which  
exceed 90%. A wide range of toxic compounds may be removed , including dyes , phenols and 
antibi otics.  However, enzymatic conversion is the main mechanism of degradation of phenols , 
as the adsorption process  enhance s the total removal efficiency . For this technique, mainly 
laccases are immobilized using adsorption or covalent binding which  facilitate the activity of 
the used biocatalytic systems.  Moreover, enzymes immobilized onto inorganic materials are 
characterized by improve d stability and exceptional operational and mechanical resistance .    
Simultaneous enzyme immobilization a nd adsorption of toxic pollutants using inorganic 
materials is facilitated due to t he p resence of numerous  functional groups , mainly hydroxyl , 
extraordinary stability and  their mechanical resistance . Using the se materials , enzymes are 
immobilized mainly by adsorption which  protect s their catalytic properties due to the fact that 
the three -dimensional structure of the biocatalysts is unaltered . However,  due to the 
multipoint attachment, elution of the enzyme molecules from t he support is restricted. 
Moreover, due to the presence of many functional moieties, the formation  of the covalent 
bonds also can not be excluded , which additionally reduces enzyme leakage. Also effective 
sorption of both environmental pollut ants and produc ts of their bioconversion is enhanced by 
the presence  of several  functional groups.  It should be  emphasize d that among inorganic 
materials , inorganic oxides should be  of particular interest for researchers and industrial 
applications . This is mainly due to their well-developed surface area and porous structure 
(numerous micropores and macropores) as well as particle size s, defined morphology and 
exceptional stability. These features are directly associated with  the properties of the naturally 
occurr ing inorganic oxides and the methodology of their synthesis which  allows for the 
production of materials with desired physico -chemical characteristics. Moreover, it should be 
added that such materials are frequently and are easy to obtain , which  makes them r elatively 
cheap. Furthermore,  the use of  inorganic oxides for simultaneous enzyme immobilization and 
pollutants adsorption results in high removal efficiencies. It should also be added that 
inorganic oxides exhibit  supplementary properties, such as magneti c properties in case of 
magnetite or photocatalytic properties  in case of  titanium, which, respectively, facilitate rapid  
separation of the material after the process by using external magnetic field or may enhance  
the removal efficiency by photocatalysis.       
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
20 
 2.1.2. Organic materials  
Aside from  many inorganic materials, biopolymers and synthetic polymers are also used for 
simultaneous enzyme immobilization and sorption of hazardous compounds. The presence of 
numerous  of chemical moieties , such as: –OH, –NH 2, C=O and COOH,  in their structure 
enhances  efficient immobilization  of biocatalysts  and sorption of en vironmental pollutants 
from water  solutions . Biopolymers of different origin, abundant in nature, such as agar, starch  
and carrageenan, are used  for the simultaneous biodegradation and adsorption of toxic 
compounds  mainly due to their good sorption properties and relatively low cost  (Costa and 
Reis, 2004, Srinivasan and Viraraghavan, 2010 , Loffredo et al., 2014). General ly, due to the 
presence of functional moieties and their natural origin , most of these materials exhibit rather  
high affinity to peptides ( Bilal and Iqbal, 2019 ). Moreover, due to their negligible negative 
effect on the biocatalysts,  biopolymeric supports improve the operational and  storage stability 
of the immobilized enzymes and prolong their catalytic activity  which  in consequence 
enhances the practical applications of the produced biocatalytic systems . The most commonly 
used biopolymer is chitosan , in a variety of forms and sizes . For instance , Nguyen et al. used 
chitosan beads crosslinked by glutaraldehyde for the removal of sulfur dyes (Sulfur Blue 15 
and Sulfur Brown GD) from a water solution through biosorption and subsequent degradation 
by immobilized laccase. Enzymatic biodegradation was the leading mechanism of pollutant 
removal. Even at low laccase concentration , over 70 and 80% of Sulfur Brown GD and Sulfur 
Blue 15 , respectively  was removed at pH 6.5 from the dye solution  at a concentration of 200 
mg/L . Howe ver, when a mixture of  dyes was treated under the same conditions, the efficiency 
of removal of each dye significantly decrease d (Nguyen et al., 2016 a). This is associated with  
the fact that dye  molecules compete with each other  for access to the active sites of enzymes 
and not every dye molecule could be converted  due to their overcrowding . That is the main 
limitation of the presented solution and more enzyme s should be immobilized to increase the 
amount of catalytic active sites  in order to overcome this problem . In another study,  chitosan 
film was used as a support  for covalent immobilization of mushroom tyrosinase. The 
produced biocatalytic system was applied  for the biodegradation of phenol derivatives from 
artificial wastewat er and subsequent sorption of quinone derivatives formed after tyrosinase -
catalyzed oxidation of toxic compounds.  It was found that pH 7 and a temperature of 45 °C 
were the optim al conditions for both enzymatic biodegradation and quinone adsorption , which 
additionally improve d the efficiency of the process. After biodegradation and subsequent 
sorption of products of phenol bioconversion , over 90% of p-cresol, m-cresol, catechol and p-
chlorophenol were removed by this procedure (Yamada et al., 2005 ). Apart from polymers of ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
21 
 natural origin, synthetic polymers are also used for simultaneous biodegradation and  
adsorption of hazardous compounds . Monomers commonly applied in enzyme 
immobilization , including  polystyrene and polyvinyl alcohol , have also been  used for the 
production of materials for both attachment of laccases or tyrosinases and the sorption of dyes 
or other phenolic derivatives  in one process (Leidig et al., 1999, Zhang et al., 2014 ). Wang et 
al. investigated the use of polyacrylonitrile memb ranes for the immobilization of horseradish 
peroxidase and further degradation of phenol. The immobilized peroxidase  was additionally 
crosslinked with  glutaraldehyde , which  on the one hand  reduce d the  elution of the 
biomolecules  from t he matrix, but on the  other  hand significantly decrease d the number of 
chemical moieties able to adsorb phenol . The removal process could be divided into two 
steps: (i) adsorption  of phenol  on the surface and in  pores of the membrane to increase its 
availability to the immobilized enzyme  and (ii) enzymatic conversion . Nevertheless , the main 
mechanism of removal was enzymatic biodegradation , and ultimately less than 10% of the 
phenol was removed by sorption. With the use of the described  system , almost total removal 
of ph enol from water solution s at concentrations up to 10  mg/L was achieved , which suggests 
that a polyacrylonitrile membrane with immobilized horseradish peroxidase has promising 
applications for the removal of phenol from water solutions  (Wang et al., 2016 ). 
It can be briefly summarized that the use of  organic materials of both synthetic and natural 
origin, such as polyacrylonitrile or chitosan , for simultaneous enzyme immobilization and 
adsorption of hazardous compounds, mainly phenol and its derivatives and dyes, allows for 
their remov al from wastewaters with high efficiencies, wh ich usually exceed 90%. Moreover, 
oxidoreductases retain ed their high catalytic properties after immobilization  as an effect of 
their attachment to the support, mainly by stable cova lent bonds. Due to this fact, enzymatic 
conversion is the main mechanism which  determines  the removal processes of the pollutants.  
Furthermore, a wide range of enzymes , including laccases, tyrosinases and peroxidases, can 
be immobilized by adsorption, covalent binding and even encapsulation using polymeric 
supports. Nevertheless, in our opinion, biopolymers such as chitosan, are more suitable for 
application in simultaneous immobilization and sorption due to  the presence o f many 
chemical groups, formation of various geometrical shapes (which  is of particular interest for 
application in bioreactors and in continuous processes ) as well as  biocompatibility and 
frequent abundance in nature, that makes them ren ewable and relativ ely cheap.  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
22 
 2.1.3. Hybrid and composite materials  
During recent years, hybrid and composite materials are of particular interest  among wide 
range of supports/sorbents used for enzyme immobilization and simultaneous removal of 
pollutants.  Hybrid materials may be a combination of inorganic -organic, inorganic -inorganic 
and organic -organic species . The role of their formation results from the possibility to obtain 
novel  materials which combine the properties of both components. Depending on the 
requirements , the hybrid materials may be synthesized using different methods, and the 
selection of an appropriate method determines their physicochemical properties, such as 
morphology and dispersive character, electrokinetic and thermal stability as well as 
parameters of the porous structure a nd hydrophilic -hydrophobic nature . A broad spectrum of 
synthesis  methods allows to design hybrid materials characterized by diverse physicochemical 
and structural parameters suitable for enzyme immobilization and removal of hazardo us 
compounds. Another advantage is associated with the fact that the ir properties may be freely 
designed by selection of the components which are included in the hybrid materials as well as 
by means of further treatment using different surface modification s with multifunctional 
organic or bioorganic substances. On the other hand, composite materials include  at least two 
components – one of them is dispersed in the second one. T he most commonly known 
composite materials are polymer s, metallic and ceramic co mposites. Compared to hybrid 
materials, properties of the composite materials are not a sum of the properties of its 
components. Nevertheless, both type s of the above -mentioned materials exhibit unique 
properties which  enable their application as effective  supports/sorbents used for enzyme 
immobilization and simultaneous removal of pollutants.  
 
2.1.3.1. Organic -inorganic hybrid materials  
There are numer ous reports concerning the use of combinations of precursors of different 
origin  to produc e functional hybrid materials with  different properties . For example, 
polyacrylonitrile was combined with a naturally occurring montmorillonite to create 
nanofibers , which were enriched with graphene oxide to increase electron transfer. This 
material was used for the immobilization of laccase from Trametes versicolor , and then for 
the removal of catechol (Wang et al., 2014 ). Although addition of graphene oxide enhanced 
the catalytic properties of the enzyme, most of the functional groups of the precursors are 
involved in the formation of a hybrid. In consequence, the amount of immobilized enzyme as 
well as sorption capacity of the above -mentioned material are limited, which  is the main 
disadvantage  of the proposed support/sorbent resulting in relatively low total removal ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
23 
 efficiency. In a s imilar study by Dai et al.  (2016) , poly(D,L -lactide -co-glycolide)/multi -walled 
carbon nanotubes hybrid fibers , produced via an electrospinn ing technique , were used  for the 
encapsulation of laccase. The resulting biocatalytic system with a high electron transfer rate 
was further used for the biodegradation of bisphenol A from a water solution. The 
immobilized enzyme exhibited good storage stab ility and reusability , and was more stable 
than native laccase even at a temperature of 60 °C. It has been reported that  the removal of 
BPA was mainly due to the enzymatic biodegradation , as adsorption of the pollutant did not 
exceed 10% . Other synthetic polymers, including poly(vinyl alcohol ), poly (acrylic acid ) and 
polyamine, as well as biopolymers such as chitosan or alginate , have also been combined  with 
inorganic precursors such as silica, clays and iron ions to produce stable and effic ient 
materials for enzyme immobilization and for further application of such systems in the 
biodegradation and simultaneous adsorption of dyes, phenols and pharmaceuticals  (Perullini 
et al., 2010, Xu et al., 2015 ). The combination of a biopolymer (chitosan) with iron ions and 
creation of a hybrid membrane was suggested by Wen et al. (2015) for the economical and 
effective degradation of dyes. The membrane demonstrated excellent sorption capacity with 
respect to the laccase as well as the  dye. The results proved that the dyes can be removed by 
the enzyme and the membrane synergistically ; however , the dyes wer e first adsorbed on the 
membrane and then degraded by the enzyme. This solution improved substrate accessibility 
for the immobilized enzyme which  result ed in the total removal of Acid Red 73 and Acid 
Blue 113 at mild conditions . 
 
2.1.3.2. Organic -organic hybrid materials  
Aside from  combination s of inorganic and organic precursors , hybrids produced by linking of 
organic materials are also used . These materials are characterized by biocompatibility and 
high affinity towards peptides which  is highly desirable  for effective enzyme immobilization. 
Moreover, the presence of functional moieties additionally increase s the  efficiency of sorption 
properties of both hazardous pollutants and products of their conversion. An interesting 
example was reported by Ensuncho et al.  (2005) regarding  the combin ation of two 
biopolymers, chitosan and alginate , to form a chitosan matrix crosslinked with glutaraldehyde 
with an alginate -filled pore space , for entrapment  immobilization of tyrosinase from Agaricus 
bisporus . The produced beads  presented good mechanical properties and preserved the unique 
adsorption characteristics of chitosan. The b iocatalytic system was used for the removal  of 
phenol from water solution and further sorption of o-quinone as the product of enzymatic 
conversion . This solution allowed  to retain  good catalytic properties of tyrosinase over ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
24 
 repeated biodegradation cycles , while protect ing the immobilized enzyme against inactivation 
caused by the by-products  of bioconversion . With the use of th is system, over 90% of the 
phenol was removed  under optimal conditions after four hours  of the process . However, 
adsorption efficiency reached approx.  30% as enzymatic conversion reached over 60%.  
Materials which combine  synthetic polymers and biopolymers are also used for effective 
simultaneous enzymatic biodegradation and adsorption of pollutants. For instance, chitosan 
was linked with  the weakly acidic cation exchange resins Diaion WK10 and WK20.  
Tyrosinase  was then covalently immobilized on the hybrid material and used f or the removal 
of alky lphenols from aqueous solutions . In both cases  the enzyme  exhibit ed its  highest 
catalytic activity in the temperature range of 30–45 °C and the pH range of 7–10. Under such 
conditions , alkylphenols were e ffectively removed through qui none oxidation by the  
immobilized biomolecules  with efficiencies equal to 100%  (Wada et al., 1995, Tamura et al., 
2010 ). After enzymatic oxidati on, subsequent quinone adsorption by the chitosa n beads was 
observed. Moreover, the authors suggest ed that the removal efficiency would increase  with 
increased quantity of chitosan in the beads due to the fact that  quinone adsorption may exceed 
enzymatic conversion of quinone s at a certain point (Tamura et al., 2010 ). Furthermore, they 
report ed that the total amount of phenol was removed after two hours from the solution by the 
immobilized tyrosinase  and chitosan beads . The presented solution  is highly effective and 
ensures great enzyme reusability  due to the combination of cationic resin, responsible for  
covalent binding of the tyrosinase , and chitosan, which  plays a crucial role in adsorption 
process (Wada et al., 1995 ). For efficient encapsulation of horseradish  peroxidase , the 
poly(D,L -lactide -co-glycolide)/polyethylene glycol/poly( p-phenylene oxide) f ibers were 
produced via emulsion electrospinning. Further more , adsorption and degradation of 
pentachlorophenol (PCP) by the immobilized peroxidase was investigated. It was found that 
the sorption of PCP follows the pseudo -second -order model  and its efficiency reached 55% . 
Additionally, sorption of the pollutant strongly enhanced the efficiency  of its removal , due to 
interactions between the adsorbed pentachlorophenol and immobilized enzyme. A total 
removal efficiency of over 85% of PCP at the temperature of 25 °C and pH ranging from 2 to 
4 was observe d. Moreover, after encapsulation by emulsion electrospinning, the operational 
and storage stability of the i mmobilized biomolecules were significantly improved. This 
indicates that the produced b iocatalytic system may find practical applications in the 
biodegradation of PCP from actual  wastewaters. However, it should also be underlined that 
pH of the solution is the factor which  limits the application of the above -mentioned system in 
alkaline conditions, as no adsorption and degradation were  observed  at pH above 4.7 , due to ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
25 
 the deprotonation of PCP , enzyme inactivation and its leakage from the support  (Niu et al., 
2013 ). 
In order t o briefly summarize the presented  literature review , we would like to highlight  that 
there is a fairly wide group of s upport materials of various origin that can be applied  for the 
simultaneous biodegradation and adsorption process ; however , inorganic materials 
characterized by good mechanical and operational properties together with synthetic  or 
natural organic substances  known from their biocompatibility , are used most frequently.  
Aside from  operational stability, such materials must also exhibit good sorption properties, a 
favorable and defined porous structure, and the presence of numerous functional groups for 
effective enzyme binding and so rption of hazardous pollutants. Over recent years hybrid 
and/or composite materials are also more and more commonly used for simultaneous 
immobilization and adsorption , mainly due to their tailor -made properties  suitable for both  the 
immobilized enzyme and pollutant or product of its conversion to be adsorbed. Therefore we 
encourage to carry out even more advanced stud ies in the topic of application of 
hybrid/composite materials for oxidoreductase immobilization and toxic compounds sorption, 
as the development of solutions resulting in high removal rates of dyes or phenolic 
compounds could be impo rtant in terms  of environmental protection.  However, we would like 
to emphasize that each of the above -mentioned group s of materials also possesses  
disadvantages . For instance, most of the organic materials are characterized by low sorption 
properties  due to low porosity and low surface area . On the other hand , the presence of mainly 
hydroxyl groups on surface o f the inorganic materials results in the fact  that their 
functionalization is required to form stable enzyme -matrix interactions. Moreover, hybrid 
materials, aside from  exhibiting  tailor -made properties , are relatively expensive to obtain.  
This technique dates back to the beginning of the last decade, but a rapidly growing  interest in 
applications of the method has been observed during the last few years. The greatest 
advantage of this method is the fact that compounds which  are resistant to enzymatic 
degradation are effectively removed from polluted  solutions by adsorption . Additionally, due 
to the complex  mechanism of remediation, a very wide group of toxic compounds could be 
efficiently  eliminated from solution , usually with extraordinary efficiencies . However, 
reusability of the matrix after inactivation of the enzyme is  limited, since desorption of the 
pollutants and regeneration of the sorbent are expensive and unfavorable. Consequently, 
extensive research is still required to improve the process control and efficiency, and to 
identify new groups of compounds which  may be used for effective simultaneous enzyme ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
26 
 immobilization and pollutant removal, thus increasing the applicability of the method in the 
bioremediation of toxic compounds from wastewaters and industrial effluents.  
 
3. Enzymatic  reactors  for removal of environmental  pollutants  
Due to the increasing  amount of pollutants prevalent in the environment , there is still a need 
to evaluate and develop efficient, eco -friendly and cos t-effective solutions for their removal. 
Aside from  simultaneous enzyme immobiliz ation and sorption of toxic compounds, another 
interesting solution based on the use of enzymes is application of bioreactors for 
biodegradation and removal of persistent substances from wastewaters and industrial 
effluents. Enzymatic b ioreactors usually offer a very good flow regime, reduc ing the mass  
transfer limitations  which  are commonly observed when heterogeneous catalysts are used 
(Luckarift, 2008 ). These features mean that removal and biodegradation processes performed 
in bioreactors are usually characterized by high selectivity and efficiency . Furthermore, due to 
the reduc ed time and energy consumption , processes carried out in bioreactors are more 
environmentally friendly and cost -effective (Balcao et al., 1996 ). Additionally, it should be 
emphasized that the effectivity of an enzymatic bioreactor is improved when immobilized 
enzymes are used as catalysts, due to their improve d stability and reusability compared to free 
enzymes  (Husain, 2017) . 
Many different configurations of enzymatic reactors for environmental application s have been 
developed  in recent years . In general, these  bioreactors may be divided into two groups: (i) 
enzymatic bioreactors (EBR s) and (ii) enzymatic membrane reactor s (EMR s) (Nanba et al., 
2007, Rios et al., 2014 ). In both EBRs and EMRs immobilized laccases, tyrosinases and other 
oxidoreductases (mainly horseradish peroxidase) are employed for the removal of hazardous 
compounds. However, there are great differences between the se two types. EBRs are 
frequently used i n various operational modes, such as batch reaction or continuous reaction, to 
increase the efficiency of the biocatalytic process. However, after biocatalytic conversion, an 
additional step is required, namely the  separation of the immobilized enzyme from  the 
reaction mixture. In the  EMR, however, the catalytic action is simultaneous with membrane 
separation of the products from the reaction mixture, which results in high purity of the 
products and reaction effluents  (Sanchez -Marcano and Tsotsis, 2002 ). Selected examples of 
the use of EBRs with immobilized oxidoreductases for environmental applications were 
reviewed in section 3.1, whereas  instances of the use of EMRs for biodegradation and 
removal of hazardous pollutants were discussed in detail in sec tion 3.2.  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
27 
 3.1. Enzym atic bioreactors (EBR s) 
An e nzymatic bioreactor, in broad terms , is a device in which  enzyme -catalyzed 
transformation of substrates into products occur  under mild reaction conditions (Miyazaki and 
Maeda, 2006 ). Selection of the reactor type and operational mode is conducted  according to 
the process conditions, enzyme activity and required product purity. Immobilized 
oxidoreductases  are, in general, use d in two types of bioreactors: (i) batch reactors and (ii) 
continuous reactors  (Webb et al., 2004, Xue and Woodley, 2012 , Barrios -Estrada et al., 
2018 b) as presented in Fig. 2 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Schematic representation of the batch -mode and continuous -mode enzymatic 
bioreactors for environmental applications.   
 
Batch reactors  used for the removal of environmental pollutants by immobilized 
oxidoreductases  include the stirred -tank reactor, the most frequently used type of enzyme 
reactor,  as well as the fluidized  bed reactor. Batch reactors are characterized by simplicity and 
flexibility of use at an industrial scale, offer e asy control of the process  and are very us eful for 
slow rea ctions in a viscous mixture (Darnoko and Cheryan, 2000, Shimada et al., 2002 ). 
Furthermore, due to their simple construction and relatively high efficiencies , batch reactors 
require less capital investment than continuous processes . It should be added that  immobilized 
laccases and tyrosinases applied in batch bioreactors offer very good reusability  as they can 
often  be used in more than ten consecutive biodegradation cycles (Srikanlayanukul et al., 
2016 ). On the other hand, the advantage of continuous -mode reactors is that immobilized 
enzymes are constantly in contact with the stream of substrates , which enhance s the activity 
of the biomolecules. Moreover, the flux of the reaction mixture through the biocatalytic bead s 
can be controlled to meet process requi rements (Bolivar et al., 2011 ). The u se of a bioreactor 
in continuous mode also allows  to avoid the usually cost ly separation of the biocatalyst  from ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
28 
 the reaction mixture (Almeida et al., 2003 ). In consequence, after detoxification by 
immobilized laccases, effluent streams with a purity of over 95% can be obtained (Palli et al., 
2017 ). Since both batch and continuous processes  have advantages  in practical use , it is 
impossible to clearly indicate the best  operational mode.  
It should be highlight ed that the design  of an enzymatic bioreactor is a complex engineering 
task. Nevertheless , the key idea is to design reactors capable of  achiev ing the highest 
conversion rate and the highest quality of products at the lowest costs. First of all, to ensure 
high efficiencies of the enzymatic reaction, the bioreactor should provide optimal process 
conditions for the biomolecules , such as substrate supp ly, product and by -product removal, 
controlled pH, temperature and agitation speed (Benz, 2011, Le-Clech et al., 2006 ). Thus, 
prior to bioreactor design, a detailed stud y concerning type of the enzyme and substrate as 
well as conditions for the highest bio conversion efficiency should be carried out . 
Furthermore, enzymatic bioreactors should ensure the efficient use of the biomolecules and 
their substrates, reduce diffusional limitations and exhibit  low energy require ments (Pino et 
al., 2018). Finally, the b ioreactors should be characterized by simplicity and optimized 
volume of the vessel to ensure high rate of substrate conversion per volume of the reactor .   
Nevertheless, we would like to poin t out that selection of the most suitable operational 
method is usually influenced  by several variables, such as enzyme stability, type of support 
materials, process time and required purity of the solution after the process . However, to 
increase the efficiency of th e processes carried out in enzymatic bioreactor s and to enhance  
the biocatalytic properties of the enzymes, biomolecules in immobilized form are commo nly 
used. Support materials of inorganic, organic and hybrid  or composite  origin may be used for 
the immob ilization of tyrosinases, laccases and horseradish peroxidase for subsequent use in 
the biodegradation of hazardous pollutants. Selected examples of biocatalytic systems used in 
enzymatic bioreactors (EBRs) for environmental application s were summarized in Table 4 . ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
29 
 Table 4. Materials of various origin used for immobilization of laccases and tyrosinases for application in enzymatic bioreactors (EBR s) towards  
biodegradation of various environmental pollutants.  
React or  
type Process  
conditions  Support  
material  E nzyme  Immobilization 
technique  Pollutants  
(enzyme substrate)  Removal  
efficiency  Reference  
Packed bed 
reactor  pH 7, 28 °C,  
60 days  Granular activated 
carbon  Laccase from 
Aspergillus oryzae  Adsorption 
immobilization  Sulfamethoxazole, 
Carbamazepine,  
Diclofenac,  
Bisphenol A  94% 
92%,  
95%,  
97% (Nguyen et al., 
2016b) 
Packed bed 
reactor  pH 4, 40 °C, 30 h  γ-Aluminum oxide 
pellets  Laccase from  
Trametes modesta  Covalent 
immobilization  Lanaset Blue 2R,  
Terasil  Pink 2GLA,  
Indigo Carmine,  
Crystal Violet  100%,  
70%,  
99%,  
97% (Kandelbauer et 
al., 2004 ) 
Bioreactor  pH 6.5, 20 °C, 7 h  Aminopropyl -
controlled pore glass  Tyrosinase from 
mushroom  Covalent 
immobilization  Phenol,  
p-Cresol,  
Catechol,  
4-Methylcatechol,  
4-Chlorophenol  60%,  
100%,  
100%,  
100%,  
100%  (Girelli et al., 
2006) 
Core -shell 
microreactor  pH 6.5, 25 °C,  
15 min  Superparamagnetic 
hydrophobic 
particles/glass plates  Laccase  Covalent 
immobilization  Syringaldazine  75% (Al-Kaidy and 
Tippkotter, 
2016) 
Column -packed 
reactor  pH 5, 28 °C, 5 days  Na-alginate beads  Laccase from 
Polyporus rubidus  Entrapment  Reactive Blue,  
Remazol Black 5,  
Reactive Orange,  
Congo Red  85%,  
100%,  
90%,  
100%  (Dayaram and 
Dasgupta, 
2008) 
Fluidized bed 
bioreactor  pH 5, 20 °C,  
100 min Na-alginate beads  Laccase  Entrapment  Pharmaceuticals  75% (Du et al., 
2013) 
Packed bed 
reactor  30 °C, 6 h  Ca-alginate beads  Laccase from 
Streptomyces  
psammoticus  Entrapment  Phenol  70% (Niladevi and 
Prema 2008) 
Fixed bed reactor  pH 4.5, 20 °C, 4 h  Cu-alginate beads  Laccase from 
Pleurotus ostreatus  Entrapment  Remazol Brilliant Blue R  70% (Palmieri et al., 
2005) 
Bioreactor  pH 7, 25 °C, 12 h  Cu-alginate beads  Laccase from 
Ganoderma  sp. KU -
Alk4,  Entrapment  Indigo Carmine,  
Remazol Brilliant Blue R,  
Bromophenol Blue,  
Direct Blue 15  100%,  
100%,  
65%,  
54% (Teerapatsakul 
et al., 2017 ) ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
30 
 Continuous -flow 
microreactor  pH 5, 30 °C, 1 h  Glutaraldehyde and 
paraformaldehyde  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Cross -linking  Estrone,  
17-β-Estradiol,  
17-α-Ethinylestradiol  100%,  
100%,  
100%  (Lloret et al., 
2013) 
Perfusion basket 
reactor  pH 4.5, 35 °C  Poly(ethylene glycol ) 
and 
glutaraldehyde  Laccase from 
Cirripectes polyzona  Cross -linking  Nonylphenol,  
Bisphenol A,  
Triclosan  95%,  
100%,  
100%  (Cabana et al., 
2009) 
Packed bed 
reactor  25 °C, 5 days  Polyurethane foam 
cubes  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Remazol Brilliant Blue R,  
Anthraquinone dye B4,  
Acid Black 24  100%,  
98%,  
65% (Yang et al., 
2012) 
Packed bed 
reactor  pH 7, 24 °C,  
30 min Eupergit C 250L  Laccase from 
Myceliophthora 
thermophila  Covalent 
immobilization  Estrone,  
17-β-Estradiol,  
17-α-Ethinylestradiol  65%,  
80%,  
80% (Lloret et al., 
2012) 
Fixed bed tubular 
bioreactor  pH 6.5, 25 °C, 60 h  KC-Microperl 
MP100  Co-immobilized 
laccase Pyricularia 
oryzae  and tyrosinase  Covalent 
immobilization  α-Naphthol,  
4-Chlorophenol,  
2-Chlorophenol,  
p-Cresol  100%,  
66%,  
50%,  
28% (Krastanov, 
2000) 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
31 
 As is shown in Table  4, materials of both inorganic and  organic origin as well as 
hybrids  and composites  are used as support s for the immobilization of enzymes for 
application in bioreactors. These materials must be insoluble in the reaction environment and 
offer good mechanical and operational stability , with regard to the long duration of the 
process and its repeatability. Moreover, these supports are notable for their good sorption 
properties and the presence of many functional groups in their structure, f or effective binding 
of the enzyme molecules to preve nt elution of the catalyst from the support during the process  
(Illaes and Wilson, 2003 ).  
 
3.1.1. Inorganic materials  as support materials in EBRs  
Among various  inorganic materials, minerals, silicas, inorganic oxide s such as  γ-aluminum 
oxide, and carbon -based materials are the most frequently used to produce enzyme -matrix 
systems for application in EBR s (Kandelbauer et al., 2004 ). For example, in a study described 
by Nguyen et al. , laccase was immobilized by adsorption on granular activated carbon, known 
for its good sorption properties, and applied for the degradation of sulfamethoxazole, 
carbamazepine, diclofenac and bisphenol A in a packed  bed column bioreactor. The pollutants  
were removed with efficiencies of over 90% by enzymatic degradation following their 
adsorption onto activated carbon. The s ignificantly higher efficiency of bioremoval achieved 
in the EBR with  immobilized biomolecules compared to the EBR with free enzyme is 
associated with  the fact that after enzyme immobilization on carbon material, transfer of 
electrons between the laccase and adsorbed substrate molecules  was enhanced an d bioreactor 
effectivity was improved . Moreover, the system demonstrated exceptional reusability : the 
immobilized biocatalyst retain ed its activity even after two months of continuous operation 
(Nguyen et al., 2016b ).  
 
3.1.2. Organic materials  as support materials in EBRs  
Synthe tic polymers and  biopolymer s such as chitosan are also used, due to their mechanical 
stability u nder operational conditions and  strong binding of the enzyme to the support . In 
view of their very good gelation properties and the mechanical resistance of the formed beads , 
alginates are a commonly used biopolymer (Gana ie et al., 2014 ). In another study, 
polyurethane foam cubes were used for covalent immobilization of laccase from Trametes 
versicolor  by Yang et al. (2012) . This b iocatalytic system was used in a packed  bed reactor 
for decolorization of Remazol Brilliant Blue R, Anthraquinone dye B4 and Acid Black 24  
from model and industrial wastewaters.  The i mmobilized laccase was used in five sequential ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
32 
 degradation cycles and was able to decolorize all tested dyes  efficiently , even at a 
concentration of 2000 ppm. Furthe rmore, the duckweed test showed a significant reduction of 
the toxicity of the efflu ents after enzymatic treatment . In another study, alginate w as 
additionally cross -linked by CuSO 4 to form blue spherical beads with entrapped laccase from 
Pleurotus ostreat us. Copper ions were used not only for the gelation of the biopolymer, but 
also to enhance the catalytic properties of the immobilized enzyme. A fixed bed reactor with 
enzymatic beads working in continuous mode was use d for decolorization of the 
anthraquinonic dye . Degradation efficiency of 70% was  achieved after four hours  of the 
process at pH 4.5 and temperature of 20 °C. The immobilized laccase exhibited remarkable 
reusability, achieving a high efficiency of decoloriz ation (over 60%) even after 20 catalytic 
cycles  (Palmieri et al., 2005 ). Although copper ions improve the activity of the immobilized 
laccase, the limitation of this sol ution, resulting in approx.  70% degradation , is associated 
with fact that formed coordi native bonds distort the enzyme structure and decrease its 
properties. Moreover, cross -linking of the alginate beads resulted in  the occurrence of  some 
diffusional limitations, which  could additionally decrease the total removal efficiency.   
 
3.1.3. EBR s operational modes   
Aside from  type of the support material, the operational mode of the bioreactor also affects its 
operational effectivity. As has been shown , there are different types of enzymatic bioreactors 
with immobilized enzymes for environmental applications working in batch and continuous 
mode s. These may be classified as: (i) packed  bed re actors, (ii) fixed  bed reactor s, (iii) 
fluidized  bed reactor s and (iv) continuous flow reactor s (Williams, 2002 ). The type of used 
reactor as well as the support material are selected appropriately to the enzyme and the type of 
catalytic process . Moreover, the choice of reactor and operational mode is usually intended to 
increase  the operational effectiveness of the equipment and the reaction  yield. For example, 
Krastanov  (2000)  used a continuous fixed bed tubular bioreactor with laccase from 
Pyricularia o ryzae and mushroom tyrosinase co-immobilized onto KC -Microperl MP100, for 
a rapid  degradation of phenols from aqueous solutions. The bioreactor achieved high 
operational efficiency. W ith the use of the described method, phenolic derivatives  such as α-
naphthol or catechin could be total ly removed from the mixture  after a single pass through the 
reactor . Moreover, after immobilization, the operational stability of the immobilized enzymes 
with respect to particular substrate type s, such as 2,4 -dichloropenol and guaiacol , was 
significantly improved . In another study by Du et al. (2013) , a fluidized  bed reactor in which  
the biocatalytic beads  consisted of  laccase immobilized by entrapment into sodium alginate ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
33 
 capsu les was applied in order to increase the intensity of contact between the enzyme and 
substrates and to reduce reaction time . It was found that the optim al capacity of the bioreactor 
was 1.5 L and the following  conditions were optimal for the degradation of pharmaceuticals : 
pH 5, temperature 20 °C and reaction time 100 min. Under  these conditions, more than 75% 
of the pharmaceuticals  were removed from wastewater. However,  low mediator concentration 
and insufficient quantity of used laccase should be indicated  as the main limitation factors 
which did not allow  to achieve total remo val efficiency . As it was mentioned above, it is hard 
to clearly indicate and suggest a universal and , at the same time , the most suitable operationa l 
mode for the removal of all of  the environmental pollutants by immobilized oxidoreductases 
in EBRs. Thus we suggest careful consideration  of the type of the enzymatic bioreactor , 
taking the type and form of the support material with immobilized enzyme  into account , to 
ensure enzymatic activity as high as possi ble and its contact with stream of the substrates.   
 
3.1.4. Enzyme i mmobilization techniques in EBR s 
Depend ing on the type and form of sup port material  and the reactor construction , enzyme s 
can be immobilized via different techniques  to increase the efficiency of the degradation 
process . However, the main concern is that the immobilized enzyme has to be strongly 
connected with the support to prevent its elution during repeated reaction cycles  and to 
maintain good catalytic properties . Thus, mainly covalent immobilization as well as 
entrapment are frequently applied, however , adsorption, encapsulation and even cross -linking , 
are also used to produce biocatalytic beads for bioreactors  (McMorn and Hutchings, 2004 ). 
An interesti ng example was reported by Dayram and Dasgupta  (2008)  regarding the use of  
laccase from Polyporus rubidus  for the degradation of four reactive dyes commonly occurr ing 
in effluents. The e nzyme was immobilized via an entrapment method into calcium alginate 
beads and used in an enzymatic  column -packed reactor. The biocatalytic system demonstrated 
excellent operational stability, and over 85% of the dyes were removed from wastewater. 
Additionally, due to  the limited inte rference in  the enzyme structure, the systems produced by 
entrapment exhibited good storage stability as  their properties were  unaltered after ten days of 
storage. Thus, immobilization by entrapment may be indicated a s a promising way to develop 
easy and cost-effective method s for production of biocatalytic systems for  remediation of 
hazardous dyes . Moreover, it should be emphasized that with the use of immobilized 
oxidoreductases  as a beads in bioreactors , usually over 80% of toxic compounds can be 
remove d. For instance, p henol and its derivatives, such as p-cresol, catechol and 4-
methylcatechol , were biodegraded using  a bioreactor with mushroom tyrosin ase covalently ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
34 
 immobilized onto aminopropyl -controlled pore glass. Under pH 6.5 and at ambient 
temperature, total removal of phenolic compounds was observed . Additionally, in order to 
obtain effluent which  was as pu re as possible  after the enzymatic treatme nt, adsorption of 
colored quinone -type biodegradation products on  a chitosan trap was applied  (Girelli et al., 
2006 ). This solution should be indicated as particularly interesting since the  pollutants were 
removed via simultaneous enzymatic biodegradation by immobilized enzymes and adsorption 
by support/sorbent material, which  additionally increased the removal efficiency, improved 
the purity of  the effluents and decreased their  toxicity.  In another study, laccase entr apped 
into copper alginate beads was used in a bioreactor for remediation of selected commercial 
aromatic dyes. The immobilized laccase exhibit ed better stab ility than the free enzyme and  
higher efficiency  in the removal of various synthetic dyes under non -buffered conditions. The 
airflow rate was the key parameter affecting degradation time and number of batch runs. An 
airflow rate of 4 L/min was  the most suitable for degradation of Indigo Carmine and Remazol 
Brilliant Blue R. Under this airflow, the t otal quantity of the dyes was removed from aqueous 
solution  at pH 7 and temperature of 25 °C (Teerapatsakul et al., 2017 ). 
To summarize the application of EBRs equipment based on the immobilized oxidoreductases 
for removal of environmental pollutants, it can be concluded that  conversion of hazardous 
compounds can be achieved  in a short er time and under mild  conditions.  A great advantage of 
the EBRs is associated with the  fact that materials of various origin could be used  as a 
supports for immobilized enzyme . However, substances characterized by high stability and 
resistance as well as numerous functional groups on their surface, which  enable the creat ion 
of stable enzyme -support interactions, such as inorganic oxides and synthetic polymers should 
be of parti cular interest. As noted above , enzymatic bioreactors can be classified as packed  
bed, fixed  bed and fluidized  bed reactor s, which can operate in both continuous and batch 
mode s. The selection  of the bioreactor ’s operational mode is usually dictated by the process 
condition s, the type of pollutant and the form of the immobilized enzyme. Various 
immobilization techniques can be applied  to improve process efficiency  and different sizes 
and forms of the produced biocatalytic beads may be obtained . The form of beads is selected 
to increase the contact time of the enzyme with substrate molecules and the efficiency  of the 
reaction . It is governed mainly by the operational mode of the process and concentration of 
the toxic compound. Nevertheless,  in our opi nion, the spherical beads, usually at nano - or 
microscale, based on materials characterized by high stability and mechanical resistance  
should be of particular interest due to their operational stability and low diffusional limitations 
between the immobili zed enzyme and ingredients of the reaction mixture. It should also be ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
35 
 added that the type and form of the support material also affects the type of the 
immobilization. Although various techniques were applied, we encourage the use of covalent 
immobilizatio n, as this method enhanced the formation of stable, covalent enzyme -support  
interactions which prevents enzyme elution and ensure s high operational stability and 
reusability of the formed biocatalytic beads.  The foregoing examples have shown that a wide 
range of toxic organic compounds can be effectively removed with the use of EBRs ; however , 
the type of pollutan t and the used biocatalyst  strongly affect the bioremediation conditions.  In 
our opinion, f uture research will focus increasingly on the app ropriate selection of the 
operational mode and the form of the biocatalytic beads in order to maximize the efficiency of 
the processes carried out in EBRs. As a result , enzymatic bioreactors should  be used as 
effective and efficient tools not only for the remediation of hazardous compounds but also in 
biocatalytic conversion of biomass or production of biofuels.   
 
3.2. Enzymatic membrane reactors (EMR s) 
Among enzymatic bioreactors, in recent years there has been an increasing interest in the use 
of enzymatic membrane reactors (EMR s) with the immobilized oxidoreductases for the 
biodegradation of environmental pollutants from wastewaters. The greatest advantage of 
EMRs is that they combine selective mass transport with  simultaneous  biocatalytic 
conversion. Thus , selective removal of products from the reaction mixture is  achieved. Th is 
increase s the efficiency of the process by enhancement of the conversion of product -inhibit ed 
molecules and by forcing of thermodynamically unfavourab le reactions (Rasera et al., 2009 ). 
Enzymatic membrane reactors are applied at an industrial scale mainly for  production and 
bioconversion processes (Agustian et al., 2011 ); however, in this review , particular attention 
is paid to the use of EMR s in wastew ater treatment  as a sustainable, eco -friendly and efficient 
alternative for the currently  used techniques . Moreover, t he recent trend s towards 
environmentally friendly technologies  make EMRs an attractive solution, because they 
operate under mild conditions in terms of pH, temperature and pressure, reduce diffusional 
limitations , and allow for easy separation of  by-products. Moreover , they do not require 
complex e quipment or chemical additives (Brindle and Stephenson, 1996 ). The use of 
immobilized oxidoreductases  in EMRs provides the possibility of application  of biocatalytic 
transf ormation s carried out in bioreactors at a large scale (Busca et al., 2008 ). Additionally, 
the high reusability of the immobilized enzymes ensures that EMRs offer excellent 
operational stability , reusability  and high productivity in repeated biodegradation  cycles. 
Depend ing on the immobilization technique, the form of the immobilize d biocatalysts and the ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
36 
 
ENZYMATIC MEMBRANE  BIOREACTORS  
ENZYME IMMOBILIZED 
“IN” THE MEMBRANE  
ENZYME IMMOBILIZED 
“OVER” THE MEMBRANE  
MEMBRANE  
required purity of the products , microfiltration or  ultrafiltration membranes can be used in 
EMRs for applications in wastewater treatments (Prazeres and Cabral, 2001 ). However, the 
most frequently used membrane configurations are: (i) flat sheet (frame and plate), (ii) hollow 
fibers and (iii) tubular (Galucci et al., 2011 ). In addition,  enzymatic membrane reactors can 
operate in both batch and continuous mode s. It should be also strongly emphasized that EMRs 
use membranes as both a porous separator, to selectively divide components of the reaction 
mixtu re, as well as a matrix for enzyme immobilization. This solution allows to reduce 
operation cost associated with  the use of additional support materials and provides an 
opportunity to design the optimal parameters and duration of the process to achieve high 
efficien cy and productiv ity (Marshall et al., 1993 ). Enzymatic membrane reactors with 
immobilized laccases, tyrosinases and other oxidoreductases  “over” and ”in” the membranes 
are nowadays more and more frequently used for the degradation of toxic compounds , mainly 
with regard to the increase d operability of the process and purity of the effluents  (Fig. 3). 
Different types of membranes of various origin as well as various immobilization techniques 
are used to produce biocatalytic systems for use in EMRs . Selected examples of the 
application of enzymatic memb rane reactors with immobilized oxidoreduc tases  for the 
bioremoval of environmental pollutants from aqueous solution  were summarized in Table 5 . 
Figure 3 . Schematic representation of enzymatic membrane bioreactors for environmental 
application. Immobilized enzyme “over” the membrane means that enzyme is immobilized on 
support material and placed in the reactor  together with the support  (membrane is not a 
support and act s as a separation unit) , whereas  in case of enzyme immobilized “in” the 
membrane, there is no support materi al, the membrane act s as a support for biomolecules  and 
a separation unit . 
 
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
37 
 Table 5 . Reactor operational mode and materials of various origin used for immobilization of laccases, tyrosinases and peroxidases for  
application in enzy matic membrane reactors for the biodegradation of various environmental pollutants.  
Reactor 
operational 
mode  Process  
conditions  Support  
material  E nzyme  Immobilization 
technique  Pollutants  
(enzyme substrate)  Removal 
efficiency  Reference  
Continuous 
reactor  pH 6 , 25 °C  Ceramic membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Tetracycline  >75%  (Abejon et 
al., 2015 ) 
Continuous 
reactor  pH 6, 25 °C, 24 h  Ceramic membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Adsorption 
immobilization  Bisphenol A  97% (Arca -
Ramos et 
al., 2015 ) 
Continuous 
reactor  pH 7, 24 h  Ceramic membrane  Laccase  Covalent 
immobilization  Sulfadiazine,  
Penicillin G,  
Doxycycline  99% 
94%,  
60%,  (Becker et 
al., 2016 ) 
Fully -recycling 
continuous 
reactor  pH 5.5, 22 °C, 48 h  Carbon nanotubes/ 
poly(vinylidene 
fluoride) membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Bisphenol A,  
Carbamazepine,  
Diclofenac,  
Clofibric acid,  
Ibuprofen  90%,  
45%,  
75%,  
40%,  
60% (Ji et al., 
2016) 
Batch reactor  pH 6, 30 °C,  
2 h Chitosan membrane  Laccase from 
Pleurotus ostreatus  
1804 Covalent 
immobilization  Acid black 10 BX  95% (Katuri et 
al., 2009 ) 
Batch reactor  25 °C, 24 h  Gelatin -ceramic 
membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Tetracycline  87% (de Cazes 
et al., 
2015) 
Batch reactor  pH 7, 25 °C, 48 h  Microporous  
polypropylene hollow 
fiber membranes  Co-immobilized 
laccase from Rhus 
vernificera and 
horseradish 
peroxidase  Entrapment  3,4-Dimethylphenols,  
4-Ethylphenol,  
2-Hydroxy -1,2,3,4 - 
tetrahydronaphthalene,  
2-Hydroxy -
decahydronaphthalene,  
4-Hydroxy -biphenyl  80%,  
56%,  
87%,  
 
34%,  
 
85% (Moeder et 
al., 2004 ) 
Isothermal and 
non-isothermal 
continuous 
reactor  pH 7.5, 25 °C  Nylon membrane  Laccase from  
Rhus vernicifera  Covalent 
immobilization  Hydroquinone  >80%  (Durante et 
al., 2004 ) 
  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
38 
 Non-isothermal 
batch reactor  pH 5.5, 25 °C, 1 h  Nylon membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Bisphenol A  85% (Diano et 
al., 2007 )  
Isothermal and 
non-isothermal  
batch reactor  30 °C, 1 h  Nylon membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Bisphenol A  >95%  (93) (Mita 
et al., 
2009) 
Continuous 
reactor  pH 5.3, 30 °C, 2 h  Polyethersulfone 
membrane  Laccase from 
Cerrena unicolor   Adsorption 
immobilization  Acid Blue 62  100%  (Lewanczu
k and 
Bryjak, 
2015) 
Stirred tank 
continuous 
reactor  pH 5, 26 °C, 100 h  Polyethersulfone 
membrane  Laccase from 
Myceliophthora 
thermophila  Covalent 
immobilization  Estrone,  
17-β-Estradiol, 17 -α-
Ethinylestradiol  80%,  
100%,  
100%  (Lloret et 
al., 2013 ) 
Non-isothermal 
batch reactor  pH 5.5, 30 °C,  
30 min  polypropylene 
membranes  Laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  Phenol,  
3-Methoxyphenol,  
4-Acetamidophenol,  100%,  
78%,  
44% (Georgieva 
et al., 
2010) 
Batch reactor  pH 4, 22 °C, 48 h  Poly(vinylidene 
fluoride) membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Adsorption 
immobilization  Bisphenol A  95% (Jahangiri 
et al., 
2014) 
Batch reactor  pH 5, 25 °C, 24 h  Poly(vinylidene 
fluoride) 
microfiltration 
membrane  Laccase from  
Trametes versicolor  Covalent 
immobilization  N’,N’ -(dimethyl) -N-(2-
hydroxyphenyl) urea  100%  (Jolivalt et 
al., 2000 )  
Fully -recycling 
batch reactor  pH 7, 30 °C, 3 h  NF270 polyamide 
membrane  Co-immobilized 
laccase from 
Trametes versicolor  
and horseradish 
peroxidase  Adsorption 
immobilization  Bisphenol A  95% (Escalona 
et al., 
2014) ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
39 
 3.2.1. Membr anes properties and materials  used in EMR s 
As it was shown in Table 5, various materials of different origin have been used to prepare 
membranes with immobilized enzymes for use in enzymatic membrane reactors. The 
selection  of membrane material and its properties, including pore size, the presence of 
functional group s, hydrophilicity and surface charge, have a crucial effect on the catalytic 
activity and stability. For instance, membranes with small pores may limit the access of the 
substrates to the enzymatic active sites or block changes of the laccase conformation after 
attachment, reducing the efficiency of the entire biocatalytic process (Butterfield et al., 2001 ). 
On the other hand, it is known that the use of a permeable membrane enables the integration 
of the separation process with the chemical reaction. Howev er, from a structural point of 
view, each pore in the membrane may be considered as a separate microsystem. Thus, the 
correct deposition of enzyme molecules in a membrane plays a significant role in ensuring the 
capture of substrate molecules by the immobi lized enzymes and increasing the contact time  
between the substrate and the biocatalyst (Hou et al., 2014 ), as high permeate flux and , in 
consequence , shorter contact time may be the limiting factors which significantly reduce the 
efficiency of the process. The selection of a membrane with properties suitable for the 
immobilized biomolecules and for the separation of the stream of substrates and products, and 
stable under operational conditions, provides the possibility of precise control of the process 
and can minimize losses of substrate and products. Furthermore, an appropriate selec tion of 
the membrane can lead to a faster reaction rate and higher yields. It is also possible to achieve 
lower operational costs and a cleaner produ cts stream (Taboda -Puig et al., 2016 ). 
Nevertheless, membrane fouling  is one of the most critical factor influencing  efficiency of the 
EMRs . This is due to the fact that fouling may result in a decrease  of the permeate flux  and 
water permeability as well as lead to the changes in membrane selectivity and retention due to 
deposition of solid molecules onto membrane surface (Guo et al., 2012). There are few main 
mechanisms of membrane fouling , such as pore blocking, surface adsorp tion, gel or cake 
formation as well as inorganic precipitation and biological fouling (Luo et al., 2014a) . It 
should be cle arly stated that the fouling phenomenon  depends on various factors, however the 
most important include  the type, material and propert ies of the membrane, process conditions, 
nature of the solution and interactions between membrane and a solutes (Pino et al., 2018).  
Enzymes are usually immobilized into pores of the membrane, thus tend to form internal 
fouling. However, biomolecules might  also be deposited onto the surface of the membrane. In 
this case , fouling is usually observed due to cake layer formation. In order  to counter  the 
above -mention ed facts, various strategies have been applied to completely avoid or at least to ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
40 
 minimize the fouling effect. According to the previously published reports , the most 
promising approach consist of operating  in a cross -flow filtration mode and using  a properly 
pretreated solution, without solids (Jørgensen and Pinelo, 2017, Pino et al., 2018).         
The materials used as supports  (membranes ) in EMRs can be classified in three main groups: 
(i) inorganic  (mainly ceramic ), (ii) metallic , and (iii) polymeric , however, b iopolymeric and 
hybrid membranes are also used . The a pplied materials should offer excellent stability and 
good mechanical resistance to provide operational stability and repeatability for enzymatic 
bioreactors (Jochems et al., 2011 ). Also , the  presence of many functional groups in the 
structure of the material is required for effe ctive enzyme binding. For example, the presence 
of numerous  hydroxyl groups on the surface of a ceramic membrane with a mean pore  
diameter of 1.4 µm was exploited for the covalent immobilization of laccase. The membrane 
was then used in a continuous enzymatic bioreactor for the degradation of tetracycline, a 
common ly known  antibiotic, in the treatment of effluents from hospital, municipal and 
industrial wastewater. The results showed that the efficiency of biodegradation strongly 
depende d on the quant ity of immobilized laccase. When this quantity was appropriately 
selected , 75% of the tetracycline was removed under optim al conditions  of pH 5 and 
temperature of 25 °C . This demonstrate s that in order  to ensure the economic and technical 
competitiveness o f the proposed technique, al l parameters must meet the process requirements 
(Abejon et al., 2015 ). However, high pore diameter, far exceeding the size of the tetracycline 
and enzyme molecules , is the factor which  limits higher removal efficiency as some of the 
pollutant molecules pass through the membrane  unconverted . Aside from  inorganic 
membranes, some polymeric materials also possess features which  make them a suitable 
barrier for both enzyme immobilization and  mixture separation. The use of polyethersulfone, 
a hydrophilic, water -insoluble polymer with a high quantity of free  sulfone groups , enables 
the formation of effective interactions with an immobilized enzyme. Moreover, this polymer 
is known for its high resistan ce to mineral acids, alkali s and electrolytes, at pH ranging from 2 
to 13 , and is commonly used as a skin layer material for various membranes . A 
polyethersulfone membrane was used for adsorption immobilization of laccase from Cerrena 
unicolor , and the obtained system was applied for the degradation of A cid Blue 62 dye at he 
temperature of 30 °C  and pH equal to 5.3. After two hours  of the process, total decolorization 
of the solution was observed. With the EMR  operating in continuous  mode , the immobilized 
laccase was used for dye removal for four days, achieving over 98% conversion of Acid Blue 
62. It should also be noted that the immobilized enzyme was stable over six successive 
reaction cycles without additional aeration (Lewanczuk and Bryjak,  2015 ). Nevertheless, at ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
41 
 the membrane selection  stage , particular  care must be taken to prevent the destruction and 
decomposition of the immobilized enzyme , so as to maintain the high catalytic activity of the 
biomolecules during repeated catalytic cycles.  For this reason,  a microporous polypropylene 
hollow -fiber membrane was used for entrapment co -immobilization of laccase from Rhus 
vernicif era and horseradish peroxidase. This membrane offers low interference in  the 
structure of the enzyme, and thus the catalytic activity is maintained at a high level. 
Moreover,  the membrane protect s the biocatalysts  against the negative effect s of the reaction 
conditions  by the formation of the shell by the membrane fibers around enzyme molecules , 
and additionally increa ses the  stability of the entrapped biomolecules. The system was used in 
a batch reactor for the remediation of selected hydroxylated aromatic compounds. It was 
demonstrated that after 48 h of the process, the prepared membrane can remove hazardous 
compound s from aqueous solution with efficiencies of over 80% (Moeder et al., 2004 ). The 
drawback of this solution is the fact, that deposition of the enzyme into the membrane fibers  is 
associated with  diffusional limitations which decrease the total removal efficiency. Moreover,  
the use of membrane s in bioreactors has a great impact on the permeate flux. This is affected  
by the quantity of immobilized enzyme, the transmembrane pressure, the axial velocity and 
the operational mode (He et al., 2017 ). Usually, substrate particles accumulate on the top of 
the membrane , which on one hand ensure s a supply of  new substrate molecules to the 
immobilized biocatalysts, but on the other hand may create diffusional limitations  and, in 
consequence , decrease the remediation effectivity . Th is was observed in  case of  a nylon 
membrane grafted with glycidyl methacrylate and phenylen ediamine, with covalently 
immobilized laccase from Trametes versicolor , in a study by Diano et al.  (2007).  This 
biocatalytic system was used for the bioremediation of water polluted with bisphenol A  
(BPA) . Under optimal conditions (pH  5.5 and temperature 25 °C) , and  after only one hour 
over 85% of the BPA was remediated. It was also established  that the affinity of the 
immobilized laccase to  the BPA molecules increase d with an increase of temperature, under 
non-isothermal conditions . Nevertheless , the formation of a substrate layer on  the membrane 
induced a diffusional resistance , which reduced the catalytic effici ency of the immobilized 
enzyme .  
Simu ltaneous catalytic act ion and separation, which is a significant advantage of enzymatic 
membrane reactors, provides the ability to retain undesired by -products and unreacted 
substrates above the membrane and to obtain a stream of products characterized by  high 
purity. This is particularly important in the case of laccase enzymes, due to the formation of 
products with high molecular mass (oligomers and polymers) during the catalytic ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
42 
 transformation of phenolic pollutants (Nazari et al., 2007 ). The pore size of the membrane 
must be selected appropriately for the used enzyme  and the molecular weight of the undesired 
compounds. The pore size must be such as to retain the enzyme on  the membrane’s surface 
and to prevent it from passing through the membrane , so as  to allow the bioreaction. 
Furthermore, the pores should be large enough to allow the products to pass through and to 
retain other ingredients of the reaction mixture. For example, commercially available nylon 
membrane with a pore diameter of 0.2 µ m wa s used for covalent immobilization of laccase 
from Trametes versicolor . The bioremediation of bisphenol A was investigated under 
isothermal and non -isothermal conditions. After one hour of the process in non -isothermal 
conditions , over 95% of the BPA was d egraded. It was also found that increasing the 
concentration of bisphenol caused a decreas e in the efficiency of the membrane , due to 
overcrowding of the substrate molecules. Nevertheless, it was show n that the membrane was 
able to fully retain high -molecular -weight products of the reaction, as these compounds were 
not detected in the effluent (Mita et al., 2009 ). 
Various materials of different origin have been used for fabrication of membranes which  act 
as a support material for enzyme immobilization  and a separation barrier in enzymatic 
membranes reactors. The production of a membrane based on the selected materials should be 
simple and  such material should be characterized by mechanical resistance to ensure the long -
term operational stability of the  membrane. From this point of view, in our opinion, synthetic 
polymers should particularly attract growing attention as t o fulfill the above -mentioned 
requirements and moreover offer the presence of numerous  functional groups which  enhance 
enzyme immobiliz ation and may affect selective  membrane separation. However, the main 
drawback of the polymeric materials as membranes is their tendency to undergo fouling, 
which  is highly undesirable as it could affect both  the catalytic conversion and flux properties. 
Aside from  membrane materials, another important factor which  has to be taken under 
consideration during membrane selection is its pore size, which on the one hand ensure s 
enzyme retention but on the other hand must ensure high flux -regime to reduce operat ional 
time of the process and avoid enzyme inhibition. Membranes with different pore size s are 
used as supports  in EMRs, however, we strongly believe that the polymeric micro - and 
ultrafiltration membranes  are most suitable for both enzyme immobilization a nd 
removal/separation of environmental pollutants , due to their  pore size as well as mechanical 
and operational stability . Moreover, we would like to add that in the recently published 
studies there is generally  little information related to the costs of t he membranes for use in 
EMRs as they depend on membrane material, bioreactor operational mode and energy ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
43 
 demand. Nevertheless, based on the available data , it has been assumed that the total costs of 
the membrane for use in bioreactor should not exceed 30%  of the total costs of bioreactor 
construction ( Young et al., 2013 , Lo et al., 2015 ).  
 
3.2.2. EMR s operational modes  
Apart fr om the type of the support material and  the type of membrane used,  the configuration 
of an enzymatic reactor also has a significant impact on its operational effectivity.  There are 
two main types of configuration  for EMRs : (i) a reactor integrated  with a membrane operation 
unit and (ii) a reactor with a membrane used as an active catalytic and separation unit  (Lopez 
et al.,  2002 ). Both configurations can operate in batch and continuous mode. In the case of the 
reactor with a membrane operation unit, immobilized enzymes usually circulat e freely in the 
operational volume of the bioreactor . After the biocatalytic process , immob ilized 
biomolecules are fully retained on the retentate side following membrane filtration and are 
easy to reuse in the next catalytic cycle. In the case of EMRs , in which  the membrane is used 
as a simultaneous catalytic and separation unit, enzymes are immobilized on the surface of the 
membrane or are loaded inside its pores.  An enzymatic membrane reactor with laccase 
immobilized onto a ceramic membrane, operating in continuous mode , was designed by Arca -
Ramos et al.  (2015).  The continuous removal of tox ic compounds was carried out from 
synthetic and actual  biological ly treated wastewaters at pH 6 and  temperature of 25 °C , for 48  
h. After that time 97 % and over 70% of BPA was removed from the model and actual  
solution , respectively . In contrast, a study by Katuri et al.  (2009)  present  the use of a batch 
mode reactor with laccase from Pleurotus ostreatus 1804 immobilized in  a chitosan 
membrane  for decolorization of Acid Black 10 BX . The optimal process parameters for each 
batch of the degradation cycle  were established  as follows:  pH 6, temperature 30 °C and 2 h  
process  duration. Under these conditions , over 95 % of the dye was removed. Moreover, it was 
found that the EMR with immobilized laccase operating in batch  mode was characterized by a 
short conta ct time and ensure d reusability of the immobilized biocatalyst for a number of 
cycles . It also exhibited excellent operational stability in  repeated application s of the 
immobilized laccase and achieved high efficiency of dye removal . Although both solution s 
with enzyme immobilized “over” and “onto/in” membrane are interesting, in order  to avoid 
additional expenses  and to simplify the process and the equipment, we encourage to develop 
solutions which utilize  membranes as simultaneous catalytic and separation  unit. Moreover , 
the use of such systems allows to obtain a stream of products characterized by  higher purity .  
 ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
44 
 3.2.3. Immobilization techniques for EM Rs 
In comparison with enzymatic membrane reactors with free biomolecules, EMRs with 
biocatalysts immobilized in the membrane  or on to its surface  can significantly improve the 
reusability of enzymes and limit their inhibition by product molecules. The te chnique of 
immobilization , and consequen tly the form of the immobilized enzyme, used to produce 
biocatalytic systems for EMRs is determine d mainly by the reactor configuration, but 
increasing the quantity of protein  usually increases the catalytic activity  until it reaches  the 
maximum, after which  the binding of additional  amounts of the enzyme do es not improve the 
catalytic properties  (Rekuc et al., 2010 ). Enzyme molecules can be immobilized in  or on the 
membrane via covalent bonds as well as by various non-covalent interactions, such as 
electrostatic or hydrophobic adsorption  and hydrogen bonds , or by entrapment (Zhai et al., 
2014 ). Nevertheless, e nzymes f or use in EMRs are immobilized mainly by covalent binding 
or adsorption to ensure stable binding and reusabil ity of the biocatalytic system. For example, 
an efficient technology was developed based on an EMR with laccase from Myceliophthora 
thermophila  covalently immobilized with the use of polyethersulfone membrane for 
continuous removal of estrogenic c ompounds from wastewaters. The immobilized enzyme 
enabled the effective conversion of estrone, 17 -β-estradiol and 17 -α-ethinylestradiol with 
efficiencies over 80%. Moreover, the immobilized biocatalysts exhibited improved thermal 
stability and excellent op erational stability, allowing the enzymatic membrane reactor to 
operate effectively for 100 h, which confirms its high productivity and potential a s an 
enzymatic reactor system (Lloret et al., 2013 ). As immobilization is carried out using covalent 
binding,  a study associated with  the optimization of the amount of immobilized biocatalysts 
and some surface modification of the membrane to increase enzyme -membrane distance 
should be performed  to achieve higher removal efficiency . 
However , enzyme immobilization using membranes as support materials is also a promising 
method for co -immobilization of biocatalysts, because i t can be carried out under mild 
conditions in a single step and the formed interactions maintain the enzym atic activity a t a 
high level (Luo et al., 2014 b). The co -immobilization  involves the integration of at least two 
types of enzymes immobilized on the same matrix to increase the catalytic ability of the 
system for the conversion of compounds (Morthensen et al., 2017 ). A very good example of 
this technique was reported by Escalona et al. (2014) . Laccase f rom Trametes versicolor  and 
horseradish peroxidase were co -immobilized by adsorption onto the surface of a polyamide 
NF270 commercial membrane  to facilitate the removal of  bisphenol A. It was found that over 
95% of the BPA was removed after 3 h of the process at the temperature of 30 °C  and pH 7.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
45 
 The EMR coupled with an enzyme recycling system was tested and found to achieve a similar 
removal efficiency to that of a classic membrane reactor with co -immobilized laccase and 
horseradish peroxidase. The nanofiltration membrane retain ed the  products of BPA 
remediation and produce d an  effluent of high pur ity. Additionally, only approx.  30% flux 
decay was observed . The results show that the system is very interesting from the point of 
view of pot ential large -scale applications .  
Attention should also be paid to  the immobilization of enzymes in membrane s using a simple 
and effective method based on membrane fouling. The immobi lization technique  presented  in 
Fig. 4 is based on adsorption and/or entrapment of the biomolecules in the pores of the 
membrane and/or on its surface , and is called fouling -induced enzyme immobilization (Luo et 
al., 2013, 2015 ). 
 
 
Figure 4. Graphical representation of fouling -induced enzyme immobilization.  
 
Based on the above -mentioned examples, it can be briefly concluded, that enzymatic 
membranes react ors (EMRs) based on the immobilized oxidoreductases  still attract increasing  
attention for application in conversion and removal of environmental pollutants  over recent 
years . Pure and less toxic effluents can be obtained  mainly due to the fac t that high 
bioremoval efficiencies can be achieved  under mild conditions and d ue to simultaneous 
bioconversion and separation of reaction mixture . This results from the selection of the most 
suitable operational mode, membrane and technique of the immobilization. As it was 
presented above, two operational modes are applied, however,  in our opinion, a bioreactor 
with a membrane act ing as an biocatalytic and separation unit  should be of particular 
attention . In this solution , there is no need to use additional support material because the 
membrane is the matrix for the biomolecules. To ensure high operational efficiency of the 
EMRs, stable and mechanically resistant membranes are required. Attention should be paid to 
PERMEATE 
MEMBRANE  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
46 
 the polymeric, commercially available membranes  due to their availability and possibility  of 
selection of membranes with desired pores size. These membranes also offer the presence of 
functional groups on the ir surface and in the pores , which enhance the formation  of covalent 
bonds. Formation of covalent linkage prevents enzyme leakage and usually increases  the 
reusability of the system. Nevertheless, it should be emphasized that after proper selection of 
operational conditions, various environmental pollutan ts, such as dyes, phenols, bisphenols 
and even estrogenes can be removed with efficienc ies usually exceeding 90%. It should be 
added that enzymatic membranes reactors are also used in different branches  of life sciences 
and industry, such as pharmacy, chemical synthesis or biomass conversion . This fact confirms 
the flexibility and significan ce of the EMRs -based approaches in their application at the broad 
industrial scale.  
 
4. General remarks  and future perspectives  
Environmental pollutants, including a wide range of phenolic compounds as well as natural 
and synthetic dyes, are produced as waste  substances by many br anches of industry and 
consequently these compounds occur  in waters and soils.  Their removal at an industrial scale, 
in green and sustainable ways , has  become an important problem over recent years, which 
might be solved by the use of free or immobilized biocatalysts such as laccases or tyrosinases. 
These enzymes are able to convert numerous pollutants of environmental concern into less  
toxic derivatives.  To achieve high bioconversion efficiency, more advanced solutions, base d 
on immobilized oxidoreductases, have been developed. Thus, in this review, we have 
presented brief information regarding  simultaneous sorption and biodegradation processes as 
well as the use of bioreactors with immobilized enzymes for bioremediation proc esses. We 
have highlighted the advantages  of the se process es and established  that with their use: 
(i) bioconversion of environmental pollutants  is carried out under mild conditions, 
without organic solvents, in line with the principles of green chemistry ; 
(ii) total conversion of hazardous pollutants into less  toxic compounds c an be achieved ; 
(iii) biodegradation can be carried out in more efficient and cost -effective way s; 
(iv) one-step removal and separation of toxic compounds and their conversion products, 
to obtain an effluent stream of high purity.  
Information concerning support materials, immobilization techniques , and the equipment and 
operational modes of bioreactors used for the biodegradation of toxic compounds  has also 
been presented which allowed to  indicate the  most suitable solutions for achievement of high 
process efficiency . We have also summarize d the criteria for the selection of factors which ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
47 
 enable  the production of highly stable and highly resistant biocatalytic systems for  the  
removal process es.  
Although many methods which apply  free or immobilized enzymes for the biodegradation of 
hazardous compounds have been reported, there is still a need to develop more advanced 
solutions that increase the efficiency and cost -effectiveness of the removal process.  
Application of enzymatic bioreactors and simultaneous separation and catalytic conversion to 
be a promising option for large-scale bioremediation processes under  mild conditions  in the 
future appears  (meaning that the reactions can be accomplished at the n atural water 
temperature and pH) , in accordance with the rules of green chemistry.  In contrast to 
“industrial manufacture” processes, the discussed  processes are focused on  the remov al of  
undesirable compou nds but not necessarily on the production of  a com mercial product, hence 
particular attention has to be paid to the  operational efficiency and maximal conversion. Thus, 
further studies to identify the most suitable and most long -term robust carriers for 
oxidoreductases  are required . Future development of support/sorbent materials will be 
focused on use of microporous nanomaterials  and their modification for: (i) targeting enzyme 
immobilization, to retain high catalytic properties and (ii) selective sorption of pollutants, by 
ensuring higher affinity of th e sorbent to the molecules of toxic compounds. Also 
hybrid/composite materials will be intensively studied in future due to the possibility of 
fabrication of tailored support, with desired properties for both enzyme immobilization and 
adsorption. This will improve the biodegradation efficiency even more and reduce the time 
and costs of the process.  We strongly believe that further study leading to new enzymes 
development will be carried out, as there is still a need to look for  oxidoreductases 
characterized  by high long -term and operational stability. Moreover, the mechanism of 
catalytic conversion and oxygen/hydrogen peroxide supply for oxidoreductases will be 
investigated in order  to obtain high biocatalysts efficiency. Future development of enzymatic 
reactors will be  focused on new, stable and reusable membranes  with numerous functional 
groups for stable binding of the biocatalysts. In our opinion , the application of the solution  
using membrane as a support for immobilization of oxidoreductase and , simultaneously , as 
separation unit  will also be more common . This solution enhances the bioconversion 
efficiency and allows to obtain  pure stream s of effluents.  Moreover, future investigations will 
focus on the implementations of the developed solutions at large-scale applications for the 
bioremediation of wastewaters. We hope that this review may provide certain suggestions and 
ideas for the design and implementation of novel, more efficient solutions for detoxification 
processes of actual  wastewaters with the use of  immobilized oxidoreductases.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
48 
 Acknowledgements  
This work was supported by research grant funds from the National Science Center Poland in 
accordance with decision no.  DEC -2015/19/N/ST8/02220.  
 
References:  
 
Abejon, R., De Cazes, M., Belleville, M.P., Sanchez -Marcano, J., 2015. Large -scale 
enzymatic membrane reactors for tetracycline degradation in WWTP effluents. Water Res. 
73, 118 –131. 
Adeel, M., Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Sharma, A., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2018. Graphene and graphene 
oxide: Functionalization and nano -bio-catalytic system for enzyme immobilization and 
biotechnological perspective. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 120, 1430 –1440.  
Adeel, M., Song, X., Wang, Y., Francis, D., Yang, Y., 2017. Environmental impact of 
estrogens on human, ani mal and plant life: A critical review. Environ. Int. 99, 107 –119. 
Aguilar, D.L., Rodríguez -Jasso, R.M., Zanuso, E., Lara -Flores, A.A., Aguilar, C.N., Sanchez, 
A., Ruiz, H.A., 2018. Operational strategies for enzymatic hydrolysis in a biorefinery. 
Biorefini ng Biomass Biofuels, 14, 223 –248. 
Agustian, J., Kamaruddin, A.H., Bhatia, S., 2011. Enzymatic membrane reactors: the 
determining factors in two separate phase operations. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol. 86, 
1032 –1048.  
Ahmad, A., Mohd -Setapar, S.H., Chuong, C .S., Khatoon, A., Wani, W.A., Kumar, R., 
Rafatullah, M., 2015. Recent advances in new generation dye removal technologies: Novel 
search for approaches to reprocess wastewater. RSC Adv. 5, 30801 –30818.  
Al-Jabari, M., Iqefan, N., Zahdeh, N., Dweik, H., 2017.  Adsorption of organic pollutants from 
dairy wastewater on soil: Pollution problem and control. Int. J. Global Environmental 
Issues, 16, 149 –161. 
Al-Kaidy, H., Tippkotter, N., 2016. Superparamagnetic hydrophobic particles as shell 
material for digital micr ofluidic droplets and proof -of-principle reaction assessments with 
immobilized laccase. Eng. Life Sci. 16, 222 –230. 
Al-Khalid, T., El -Naas, M., 2012. Aerobic biodegradation of phenols: A comprehensive 
review. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 42, 1631 –1690 . 
Almeida, C., Branyik, T., Moradas -Ferreira, P., Teixeira, J., 2003. Continuous production of 
pectinase by immobilized yeast cells on spent grains. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 96, 513 –518. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
49 
 Anku, W.W., Mamo, M.A., Govender, P.P., 2017. Phenolic Compounds in Water: Sources, 
Reactivity, Toxicity and Treatment Methods, in: Soto-Hernández, M., Tenango, M.P., 
García -Mateos, R. (Eds.) Phenolic Compounds Natural Sources, Importance and 
Applications. InTech, London, pp. 419 –443. 
Antecka, K., Zdarta, J., Siwińska -Stefańska, K., Sztuk, G., Jankowska, E., Oleskowicz -Popiel, 
P., Jesionowski, T., 2018. Synergistic degradation of dye wastewaters using binary or 
ternary oxide systems with immobilized laccase. Catalysts 8, 402 –420.  
Arca -Ramos, A., Eibes, G., Feijoo, G., Lema, J.M.,  Moreira, M.T., 2015. Potentiality of a 
ceramic membrane reactor for the laccase -catalyzed removal of bisphenol A from 
secondary effluents. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 99, 9299 –9308.  
Ba, S., Arsenault, A., Hassani, T., Jones, P., Cabana, H., 2013. Laccase  immobilization and 
insolubilization: From fundamentals to applications for the elimination of emerging 
contaminants in wastewater treatment. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 33, 404 –418. 
Ba, S., Kumar, V.V., 2017. Recent developments in the use of tyrosinase and la ccase in 
environmental applications. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 37, 819 –832. 
Baiocco, P., Barreca, A.M., Fabbrini, M., Galli, C., Gentili, P., 2006. Promoting laccase 
activity towards non -phenolic substrates: a mechanistic investigation with some laccase -
media tor systems. Org. Biomol. Chem., 1, 191 –197. 
Balcao, V.M., Paiva, A.L., Malcata, F.X., 1996. Bioreactors with immobilized lipases: State 
of the art. Enzym. Microb. Technol. 18, 392 –416. 
Baldrian, P., 2005. Fungal laccases: Occurrence and properties. FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 30, 
215–242. 
Barbosa, O., Ortiz, C., Berenguer -Murcia, Á., Torres, R., Rodrigues, R.C., Fernandez -
Lafuente, R., 2014. Glutaraldehyde in bio -catalysts design: A useful crosslinker and a 
versatile tool in enzyme immobilization. RSC Adv., 4, 1583 –1600.  
Barbosa, O., Torres, R., Ortiz, C., Berenguer -Murcia, A., Rodrigues, R.C., Fernandez -
Lafuente, R., 2013. Heterofunctional supports in enzyme immobilization: fromtraditional 
immobilization protocols to opportunities in tuning enzyme properties. B iomacromol., 14, 
2433−2462.  
Barrios -Estrada, C., de Jesús Rostro -Alanis, M., Muñoz -Gutiérrez, B.D., Iqbal, H.M.N., 
Kannan, S., Parra -Saldívar, R., 2018b. Emergent contaminants: Endocrine disruptors and 
their laccase -assisted degradation -A review. Sci. Tot al Environ., 612, 1516 –1531.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
50 
 Barrios -Estrada, C., Rostro -Alanis, M.J., Parra, A.L., Belleville, M.P., Sanchez -Marcano, J, 
Iqbal, H.M.N., Parra -Saldívar, R., 2018b. Potentialities of active membranes with 
immobilized laccase for Bisphenol A degradation. Int . J. Biol. Macromol., 108, 837 –844. 
Becker, D., Giustina, S.V.D., Rodriguez -Mozaz, S., Schoevaart, R., Barcelo, D., de Cazes, 
M., Belleville, M.P., Sanchez -Marcano, J, de Gunzburg, J., Couillerotf, O., Völker, J., 
Oehlmann, J., Wagner, M., 2016. Removal of  antibiotics in wastewater by enzymatic 
treatment with fungal laccase – Degradation of compounds does not always eliminate 
toxicity. Bioresour. Technol. 219, 500 –509. 
Benz, G.T., 2011. Bioreactor design for chemical engineers, Am. Inst. Chem. Eng. 1, 21 –26. 
Bhatnagar, A., Sillanpaa, M., 2010 Utilization of agroindustrial and municipal waste materials 
as potential adsorbents for water treatment – A review. Chem. Eng. J. 157, 277 –296. 
Bilal, M., Adeel, M., Rasheed, T., Zhao, Y., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019b. Emerging  contaminants of 
high concern and their enzyme -assisted biodegradation – A review. Environ. Int., 124, 
336–353. 
Bilal, M., Asgher, M., Cheng, H., Yan, Y., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019c. Multi -point enzyme 
immobilization, surface chemistry, and novel platforms: a pa radigm shift in biocatalyst 
design. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 39, 202 –219. 
Bilal, M., Asgher, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., Hu, H., Wang, W., Zhang, X., 2017c. Bio -catalytic 
performance and dye -based industrial pollutants degradation potential of agarose -
immobilized Mn P using a packed bed reactor system. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 102, 582 –
590. 
Bilal, M., Asgher, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., Hua, H., Zhang, X., 2016. Chitosan beads immobilized 
manganese peroxidase catalytic potential for detoxification and decolorization of textile  
effluent. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 89, 181 –189. 
Bilal, M., Asgher, M., Parra -Saldivar, R., Hu, H., Wang, W., Zhang, X., Iqbal, H.M.N., 
2017a. Immobilized ligninolytic enzymes: An innovative and environmental responsive 
technology to tackle dye -based indus trial pollutants – A review. Sci. Total Environ. 576, 
646–659. 
Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.F.Z., 2019.  Naturally -derived biopolymers: Potential platforms for 
enzyme immobilization, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., article in press, DOI: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.02.152  
Bilal, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., Guo, S., Hu, H., Wang, W., Zhang, X., 2018c. State -of-the-art 
protein engineering approaches using biological macromolecules: A review from 
immobilization to implementation view point. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 108, 893 –901. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
51 
 Bilal,  M., Iqbal, H.M.N., Hu, H., Wang, W., Zhang, X., 2017b. Development of horseradish 
peroxidase -based cross -linked enzyme aggregates and their environmental exploitation for 
bioremediation purposes. J. Environ. Management 188, 137 –143. 
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T. , Iqbal, H.M.N., Hu, H., Wang, W., Zhang, X., 2018b. Horseradish 
peroxidase immobilization by copolymerization into cross -linked polyacrylamide gel and 
its dye degradation and detoxification potential. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 113, 983 –990. 
Bilal, M., Rashe ed, T., Iqbal, H.M.N., Hu, H., Wang, W., Zhang, X., 2017b. Novel 
characteristics of horseradish peroxidase immobilized onto the polyvinyl alcohol -alginate 
beads and its methyl orange degradation potential. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 105, 328 –335. 
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Iqbal, H.M.N., Yan, Y., 2018a. Peroxidases -assisted removal of 
environmentally -related hazardous pollutants with reference to the reaction mechanisms of 
industrial dyes. Sci. Total Environ., 644, 1 –13. 
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Nabeel, F., Iqbal , H.M.N., Zhao, Y., 2019. Hazardous contaminants in 
the environment and their laccase -assisted degradation - A review. J. Environ. Manage., 
15, 253 –264. 
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Zhao, Y., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019a. Agarose -chitosan hydrogel -
immobilized horseradi sh peroxidase with sustainable bio -catalytic and dye degradation 
properties. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 124, 742 –749. 
Bilal, M., Rasheed, T., Zhao, Y., Iqbal, H.M.N., Cui, J., 2018e. “Smart” chemistry and its 
application in peroxidase immobilization using di fferent support materials. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. 119, 278 –290. 
Bilal, M., Zhao, Y., Rasheed, T., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2018d. Magnetic nanoparticles as versatile 
carriers for enzymes immobilization: A review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 120, 2530 –2544.  
Bolivar, J .M., Wiesbauer, J., Nidetzky, B., 2011. Biotransformations in microstructured 
reactors: More than flowing with the stream? Trends Biotechnol. 29, 333 –342. 
Brindle, K., Stephenson, T., 1996. The application of membrane biological reactors for the 
treatment of waste -waters. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 49, 601 –610. 
Bronikowski, A., Hagedoorn, P.L., Koschorreck, K., Urlacher, V.B., 2017. Expression of a 
new laccase from Moniliophthora roreri  at high levels in Pichia pastoris  and its potential 
application in micropollutant degradation. AMB Express 73, 1 –13. 
Busca, G., Berardinelli, S., Resini, C., Arrighi, L., 2008. Technologies for the removal of 
phenol from fluid streams: A short review of recent developments. J. Hazard. Mat er. 160, 
265–288. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
52 
 Butterfield, D.A., Bhattacharyya, D., Daunert, S., Bachas, L.G., 2001. Catalytic biofunctional 
membranes containing site -specifically immobilized enzyme arrays, J. Membr. Sci. 181, 
29–37. 
Cabana, H., Alexandre, C., Agathos, S.N., Jones, J .P., 2009. Immobilization of laccase from 
the white rot fungus Coriolopsis polyzona  and use of the immobilized biocatalyst for the 
continuous elimination of endocrine disrupting chemicals. Bioresour. Technol. 100, 3447 –
3458.  
Cabana, H., Jones, J.P., Agatho s, S.N., 2009. Utilization of cross -linked laccase aggregates in 
a perfusion basket reactor for the continuous elimination of endocrine -disrupting 
chemicals. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 102, 1582 –1592.  
Castellana, G., Loffredo, E., 2014. Simultaneous removal of en docrine disruptors from a 
wastewater using white rot fungi and various adsorbents. Water Air Soil Pollut.  225, 
1872 –1884.  
Champagne, P.P., Ramsay, J.A., 2007. Reactive blue 19 decolouration by laccase 
immobilized on silica beads. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechn ol. 77, 819 –823. 
Chao, C., Guan, H,, Zhang, J., Liu, Y., Zhao, Y., Zhang, B., 2018. Immobilization of laccase 
onto porous polyvinyl alcohol/halloysite hybrid beads for dye removal. Water Sci. 
Technol., 77, 809 –818.  
Choi, K.J., Kim, S.G., Kim, S.H., 2008. Removal of antibiotics by coagulation and granular 
activated carbon filtration. J. Hazard. Mater. 151, 38 –43. 
Chung, T.P., Tseng, H.Y., Juang, R.S., 2003. Mass transfer effect and intermediate detection 
for phenol degradation in immobilized Pseudomonas putida systems. Process Biochem. 38, 
1497 –1507.  
Costa, J.B., Lima, M.J., Sampaio, M.J., Neves, M.C., Faria, J.L., Morales -Torres, S., Tavares, 
A.P.M., Silva, C.G., 2019. Enhanced biocatalytic sustainability of laccase by 
immobilization on functionalized ca rbon nanotubes/polysulfone membranes. Chem. Eng. J. 
355, 974 –985.  
Costa, S.A., Reis, R.L., 2004. Immobilisation of catalase on the surface of biodegradable 
starch -based polymers as a way to change its surface characteristics. J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. 
Medici ne 15, 335 –342. 
Crini, G., 2006. Non -conventional low -cost adsorbents for dye removal: A review. Bioresour. 
Technol. 97, 1061 –1085.  
Cruz-Morato, C., Lucas, D., Llorca, M., Rodriguez -Mozaz, S., Gorga, M., Petrovic, M., 
Barceló, D., Vicent, T., Sarrà, M., Ma rco-Urrea, M., 2014. Hospital wastewater treatment ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
53 
 by fungal bioreactor: Removal efficiency for pharmaceuticals and endocrine disruptor 
compounds. Sci. Total. Environ. 493, 365 –376. 
D’Acunzo, F., Galli, C., Gentili, P., Sergi, F., 2006. Mechanistic and ste ric issues in the 
oxidation of phenolic and non -phenolic compounds by laccase or laccase -mediator 
systems. The case of bifunctional substrates. New. J. Chem., 30, 583 –591. 
Dai, Y., Yao, J., Song, Y., Liu, X., Wang, S., Yuan, Y., 2016. Enhanced performance of 
immobilized laccase in electrospun fibrous membranes by carbon nanotubes modification 
and its application for bisphenol A removal from water. J. Hazard. Mater. 317, 485 –493. 
Darnoko, D., Cheryan, M., 2000. Kinetics of palm oil transesterification in a b atch reactor. J. 
Amer. Oil Chem. Soc. 77, 1263 –1267.  
Dayaram, P., Dasgupta, D., 2008. Decolorisation of synthetic dyes and textile wastewater 
using Polyporus rubidus . J. Environ. Biol. 29, 831 –836. 
de Cazes, M., Belleville, M.P., Mougel, M., Kellner, H., Sanchez -Marcano, J., 2015. 
Characterization of laccase -grafted ceramic membranes for pharmaceuticals degradation. J. 
Membr. Sci. 476, 384 –393. 
Diano, N., Grano, V., Fraconte, L., Caputo, P., Ricupito, A., Attanasio, A., Bianco, M., 
Bencivenga, U., Rossi, S ., Manco, I., Mita, L., Del Pozzo, G., Mita, D.G., 2007. Non -
isothermal bioreactors in enzymatic remediation of waters polluted by endocrine 
disruptors: BPA as a model of pollutant. Appl. Catal. B Environ. 69, 252 –261. 
Ding, H., Wu, Y., Zou, B., Lou, Q., Z hang, Q., Zhong, J., Lu, L., Dai, G., 2016. Simultaneous 
removal and degradation characteristics of sulfonamide, tetracycline, and quinolone 
antibiotics by laccase -mediated oxidation coupled with soil adsorption. J. Hazard. Mater. 
307, 350 –358. 
Du, F., Li,  Z., Zhang, A., 2013. Study on advanced treatment of pharmaceutical wastewater 
by fluidized bed laccase bioreactor. J. Chem. Pharmaceut. Res. 5, 223 –227. 
Durante, D., Casadio, R., Martelli, L., Tasco, G., Portaccio, M., de Luca, P., Bencivenga, U., 
Rossi, S., Di Martino, S., Grano, V., Diano, N., Mita, D.G., 2004. Isothermal and non -
isothermal bioreactors in the detoxification of wastewaters polluted by aromatic 
compounds by means of immobilized laccase from Rhus vernicifera . J. Mol. Cat. B 
Enzym. 27, 191 –206. 
Ensuncho, L., Alvarez -Cuenca, M., Legge, L.R., 2005. Removal of aqueous phenol using 
immobilized enzymes in a bench scale and pilot scale three -phase fluidized bed reactor. 
Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 27, 185 –191. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
54 
 Escalona, I., de Grooth, J., Font, J., Ni jmeijer, K., 2014. Removal of BPA by enzyme 
polymerization using NF membranes. J. Membr. Sci. 468, 192 –201. 
Faccio, G., Kruus, K., Saloheimo, M., Thöny -Meyer, L., 2012. Bacterial tyrosinases and their 
applications. Process Biochem. 47, 1749 –1760.  
Fernández -Lorente, G., Palomo, J.M., Mateo, C., Munilla, R., Ortiz, C., Cabrera, Z., Guisán, 
J.M., Fernández -Lafuente, R., 2006. Glutaraldehyde cross -linking of lipases adsorbed on 
aminated supports in the presence of detergents leads to improved performance. 
Bioma cromol., 7, 2610 –2615.  
Gallucci, F., Basile, A., Hai, F.I., 2011. Membranes for membrane reactors: Preparation, 
optimization and  selection. Wiley InterScience, New Jersey.  
Ganaie, M.A., Rawat, H.K., Wani, O.A., Gupta, U.S., Kango, J., 2014. Immobilization of 
fructosyltransferase by chitosan and alginate for efficient production of 
fructooligosaccharides. Proc. Biochem. 49, 840 –844. 
Gao, Z., Du, B., Zhang, G., Gao, Y., Li, Z., Zhang, H., Duan, X., 2011. Adsorption of 
pentachlorophenol from aqu eous solution on dodecylbenzenesulfonate modified nickel –
titanium layered double hydroxide nanocomposites. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 50, 5334 –5345.  
Gasser, C., Yu, L., Svojitka, J., Wintgens, T., Ammann, E., Shahgaldian, P., Corvini, P.X., 
Hommes, G., 2014. Adv anced enzymatic elimination of phenolic contaminants in 
wastewater: A nano approach at field scale. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98, 3305 –3316.  
Georgieva, S., Godjevargova, T., Mita, T.G., Diano, N., Menale, C., Nicolucci, C., Carratelli, 
C.R., Mita, L., G olovinsky, E., 2010. Non -isothermal bioremediation of waters polluted by 
phenol and some of its derivatives by laccase covalently immobilized on polypropylene 
membranes. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym. 66, 210 –218. 
Girelli, A.M., Mattei, E., Messina, A., 2006. Phe nols removal by immobilized tyrosinase 
reactor in on -line high performance liquid chromatography. Analytica Chimica Acta 580, 
271–277. 
Guo, W., Ngo, H. -H., Li, J., 2012. A mini -review on membrane fouling. Bioresour. Technol., 
122, 27 –34. 
Hai, F.I., Yamamot o, K., Fukushi, K., 2007. Hybrid treatment systems for dye wastewater. 
Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 37 315 –377. 
He, Z., Miller, D.J., Kasemset, S., Paul, D.R., Freeman, B.D., 2017. The effect of permeate 
flux on membrane fouling during microfiltration  of oily water. J. Membr. Sci. 525, 25 –34. 
Heberer, T., 2002. Occurrence, fate, and removal of pharmaceutical residues in the aquatic 
environment: A review of recent research data. Toxicol. Lett. 131, 5 –17. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
55 
 Hernandez, K., Fernandez -Lafuente, R., 2011. Cont rol of protein immobilization: coupling 
immobilization and site -directed mutagenesis to improve biocatalyst or biosensor 
performance. Enzyme Microb Technol. 48, 107 –122. 
Homem, V., Santos, L., 2011. Degradation and removal methods of antibiotics from aqueo us 
matrices – A review. J. Environ. Manage. 92, 2304 –2347.  
Hou, J., Dong, G., Ye, Y., 2014. Enzymatic degradation of bisphenol -A with immobilized 
laccase on TiO 2 sol-gel coated PVDF membrane. J. Membr. Sci. 469, 19 –30. 
Husain, M., Husain, Q., 2008. Applications of redox mediators in the treatment of organic 
pollutants by using oxidoreductive enzymes: A review. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 
38, 1 –42. 
Husain, Q., 2017. Nanomaterials as novel supports for the immobilization of amylolytic 
enzymes an d their applications: A review. Biocatal., 3, 37 –53. 
Ihekata, K., Nicell, J.A., 2000. Characterization of tyrosinase for the treatment of aqueous 
phenols, Bioresour. Technol. 74, 191 –199. 
Illaes, A., Wilson, L., 2003. Enzyme reactor design under thermal in activation. Critic. Rev. 
Biotechnol. 23, 61 –93. 
Imran, A., Asim, M., Tabrez, A.K., 2012. Low cost adsorbents for the removal of organic 
pollutants from wastewater. J. Environ. Manage. 113, 170 –183. 
Jahangiri, E., Reichelt, S., Thomas, I., Hausmann, K., Sch losser, D., Schulze, A., 2014. 
Electron beam -induced immobilization of laccase on porous supports for wastewater 
treatment applications. Molecules 19, 11860 –11882.  
Javid, A., Mesdaghinia, A., Nasseri, S., Mahvi, A.H., Alimohammadi, M., Gharibi, H., 2016. 
Assessment of tetracycline contamination in surface and groundwater resources proximal 
to animal farming houses in Tehran, Iran. J. Environ. Health Sci. Eng. 14, 4 –9. 
Jesionowski, T., Zdarta, J., Krajewska, B., 2014. Enzymes immobilization by adsorption: A 
review. Adsorption 20, 801 –821. 
Ji, C., Hou, J., Chen, V., 2016. Cross -linked carbon nanotubes -based biocatalytic membranes 
for micro -pollutants degradation: Performance, stability, and regeneration. J. Memb. Sci. 
520, 869 –880. 
Jochems, P., Satyawali, Y., Diels, L., Dejonghe, W., 2011. Enzyme immobilization on/in 
polymeric membranes: Status, challenges and perspectives in biocatalytic membrane 
reactors (BMRs). Green Chem. 13, 1609 –1623.  
Jolivalt, C., Brenon, S., Caminade, E., Mougin, C., Pontie, M., 2000. I mmobilization of 
laccase from Trametes versicolor  on a modified PVDF microfiltration membrane: ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
56 
 Characterization of the grafted support and application in removing a phenylurea pesticide 
in wastewater. J. Membr. Sci. 180, 103 –113. 
Jørgensen, H., Pinelo, M.,  2017. Enzyme recycling in lignocellulosic biorefineries. Biofuels 
Bioprod. Biorefining, 11, 150 –167. 
Kandelbauer, A., Maute, O., Kessler, R.W., Erlacher, A., Gubitz, G.M., 2004. Study of dye 
decolorization in an immobilized laccase enzyme -reactor using on line spectroscopy, 
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 87, 552 –563. 
Katuri, K.P., Mohan, S.V., Sridhar, S., Pati, B.R., Sarma, P.N., 2009. Laccase -membrane 
reactors for decolorization of an acid azo dye in aqueous phase: Process optimization. 
Water Res. 43, 3647 –3658.  
Kim, B.C., Lee, J., Um, W., Kim, J., Joo, J., Lee, J.H., Kwak, J.H., Kim, J.H., Lee, C., Lee, 
H., Addleman, R.S., Hyeon, T., Gu, M.B., Kim, J., 2011. Magnetic mesoporous materials 
for removal of environmental wastes. J. Hazard. Mater. 192, 1140 –1147.  
Koyani, R.D., Vazquez -Duhalt, R., 2016. Laccase encapsulation in chitosan nanoparticles 
enhances the protein stability against microbial degradation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int., 
23, 18850 —18857.  
Krastanov, A., 2000. Removal of phenols from mixture by co -immob ilized laccase/tyrosinase 
and Polycar adsorption. J. Industr. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 24, 383 –388. 
Kümmerer, K., 2009. Antibiotics in the aquatic environment – A review – Part I. 
Chemosphere 75, 417 –434. 
Land, E.J., Ramsden, C.A., Riley, P.A., 2003. Tyrosin ase autoactivation and the chemistry of 
ortho -quinone amines. Acc. Chem. Res. 36, 300 –308. 
Le, T.T., Murugesan, K., Lee, C.S., Vu, C.H., Chang, Y.S., Jeon, J.R., 2016. Degradation of 
synthetic pollutants in real wastewater using laccase encapsulated in core–shell magnetic 
copper alginate beads. Bioresour. Technol. 216, 203 –210. 
Le-Clech, P., Chen, V., Fane, T.A.G., 2006. Fouling in membrane bioreactors used in 
wastewater treatment. J. Memb. Sci. 284, 17 –53. 
Leidig, E., Prusse, U., Vorlop, K.D., Winter, J ., 1999. Biotransformation of poly R -478 by 
continuous cultures of PVAL - encapsulated Trametes versicolor  under non -sterile 
conditions. Bioproc. Eng. 21, 5 –12. 
Lewanczuk, M., Bryjak, J., 2015. Continuous decolorization of Acid Blue 62 solution in an 
enzyme  membrane reactor. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 177, 237 –252. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
57 
 Li, R., Gao, B., Guo, K., Yue, Q., Zheng, H., Wang, Y., 2017. Effects of papermaking sludge -
based polymer on coagulation behavior in the disperse and reactive dyes wastewater 
treatment. Bioresour.  Technol. 240, 59 –67. 
Li, X., Xu, H., Wu, Q., 2007. Large -scale biodiesel production from microalga Chlorella 
protothecoides  through heterotrophic cultivation in bioreactors. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 98, 
764–771. 
Liu, G., Zhang, J., Bao, J., 2016. Cost evaluati on of cellulase enzyme for industrial -scale 
cellulosic ethanol production based on rigorous Aspen Plus modelling. Bioproc. Biosyst. 
Eng., 39, 133 –140. 
Lloret, L., Eibes, G., Moreira, M.T., Feijoo, G., Lema, J.M., 2013. On the use of a high -redox 
potential laccase as an alternative for thetransformation of non -steroidal anti -inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs). J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym. 97, 233 –242. 
Lloret, L., Eibes, G., Moreira, M.T., Feijoo, G., Lema, J.M., 2013. Removal of estrogenic 
compounds from filtered secon dary wastewater effluent in a continuous enzymatic 
membrane reactor. Identification of biotransformation products. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2013, 4536−4543.  
Lloret, L., Eibes, G., Moreira, M.T., Feijoo, G., Lema, J.M., Miyazaki, M., 2013. Improving 
the catal ytic performance of laccase using a novel continuous -flow microreactor. Chem. 
Eng. J. 223, 497 –506. 
Lloret, L., Hollmann, F., Eibes, G., Feijoo, G., Moreira, M.T., Lema, J.M., 2012. 
Immobilisation of laccase on Eupergit supports and its application for the  removal of 
endocrine disrupting chemicals in a packed -bed reactor. Biodegradat. 23, 373 –386. 
Lo, C.H., McAdam, E., Judd, S., 2015. The cost of a small membrane bioreactor. Water Sci 
Technol., 2015, 1739 –1746.  
Loffredo, E., Castellana, G., Senesi, N., 201 4. Decontamination of a municipal landfill 
leachate from endocrine disruptors using a combined sorption/bioremoval approach. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 21, 2654 –2662.  
Loffredo, E., Senesi, N., 2006. In viable methods of soil and water pollution monitoring,  
protection and remediation. Springer, Dordrecht.  
Lonappan, L., Pulicharla, R., Rouissi, T., Brar, S.K., Verma, M., Surampalli, R.Y., Valero, 
J.R., 2016. Diclofenac in municipal wastewater treatment plant: quantification using laser 
diode thermal desorptio n – atmospheric pressure chemical ionization – tandem mass 
spectrometry approach in comparison with an established liquid chromatography ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
58 
 electrospray ionization – tandem mass spectrometry method. J. Chromatogr. A 1433, 106 –
113. 
Lopez, C., Mielgo, I., Morei ra, M.T., Feijoo, G., Lemo, J.M., 2002. Enzymatic membrane 
reactors for biodegradation of recalcitrant compounds. Application to dye decolourization. 
J. Biotechnol. 99, 249 –257. 
Luckarift, H.R., 2008. Silica -immobilized enzyme reactors. J. Liquid Chromat. Related 
Technol. 31, 1568 –1592.  
Luo, J., Marpani, F., Brites, R., Frederiksen, L., Meyer, A.S., Jonsson, G., Pinelo, M., 2014b. 
Directing filtration to optimize enzyme immobilization in reactive membranes. J. Membr. 
Sci. 459, 1 –11.  
Luo, J., Meyer, A.S., J onsson, G., Pinelo, M., 2013. Fouling -induced enzyme immobilization 
for membrane reactors. Bioresour. Technol. 147, 260 –268. 
Luo, J., Meyer, A.S., Jonsson, G., Pinelo, M., 2014a. Enzyme immobilization by fouling in 
ultrafiltration membranes: Impact of memb rane configuration and type on flux behavior 
and biocatalytic conversion efficacy. Biochem. Eng. J., 83, 79 –89. 
Luo, J., Meyer, A.S., Mateiu, R.V., Pinelo, M., 2015. Cascade catalysis in membranes with 
enzyme immobilization for multienzymatic conversion of  CO 2 to methanol. New 
Biotechnol. 32, 319 –327. 
Lyons, M.E.G., 2003. Mediated electron transfer at redox active monolayers. Part 4: Kinetics 
of redox enzymes coupled with electron mediators. Sensors, 3, 19 –42. 
Marshall, A.D., Munro, P.A., Tragardh, G., 1993 The effect of protein fouling in 
microfiltration and ultrafiltration on permeate flux, protein retention, and selectivity: A 
literature review. Desal. 1993, 91, 65 –108. 
Martínez -Hernández, V., Meffe, R., Lópe z, S.H., de Bustamante, I., 2016. The role of 
sorption and biodegradation in the removal of acetaminophen, carbamazepine, caffeine, 
naproxen and sulfamethoxazole during soil contact: A kinetics study. Sci. Total. Environ. 
556, 232 –241. 
Mateo, C., Grazu, V. , Palomo, J.M., Lopez -Gallego, F., Fernandez -Lafuente, R., Guisan, 
J.M., 2007. Immobilization of enzymes on heterofunctional epoxy supports. Nat. Protoc., 
2, 1022 –1033.  
McMorn, P., Hutchings, G.J., 2004. Heterogeneous enantioselective catalysts: Strategies  for 
the immobilisation of homogeneous catalysts. Chem. Soc. Rev. 33, 108 –122. 
Mita, D.G., Diano, N., Grano, V., Portaccio, M., Rossi, S., Bencivenga, U., Manco, I., 
Nicolucci, C., Bianco, M., Grimaldi, T., Mita, L., Georgieva, S., Godjevargova, T., 2009. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
59 
 The process of thermodialysis in bioremediation of waters polluted by endocrine 
disruptors. J. Mol. Cat. B Enzym. 58, 199 –207. 
Miyazaki, M., Maeda, M., 2006. Microchannel enzyme reactors and their applications for 
processing. Trends Biotechnol. 24, 463 –470. 
Moeder, M., Martin, C., Koeller, G., 2004. Degradation of hydroxylated compounds using 
laccase and horseradish peroxidase immobilized on microporous polypropylene hollow 
fiber membranes. J. Membr. Sci. 245, 183 –190. 
Mohammadi, M., As'habi, M.A., Salehi, P., Yousefi, M., Nazari, M., Brask, J., 2018. 
Immobilization of laccase on epoxy -functionalized silica and its application in 
biodegradation of phenolic compounds. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 109, 443 –447. 
Morthensen, S.T., Meyer, A.S., Jørgensen, H., Pinelo,  M., 2017. Significance of membrane 
bioreactor design on the biocatalytic performance of glucose oxidase and catalase: Free vs. 
immobilized enzyme systems. Biochem. Eng. J. 15, 41 –47. 
Mukherjee, S., Basak, B., Bhunia, B., Dey, A., Mondalet, B., 2013. Poten tial use of 
polyphenol oxidases (PPO) in the bioremediation of phenolic contaminants containing 
industrial wastewater. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 12, 61 –73. 
Munk, L., Andersen, M.L., Meyer, A.S., 2018. Influence of mediators on laccase catalyzed 
radica l formation in lignin. Enzym. Microb. Technol., 116, 48 –56. 
Nanba, H., Yasohara, Y., Hasegawa, J., Takahashi, S., 2007. Bioreactor systems for the 
production of optically active amino acids and alcohols. Org. Proc. Res. Development 11, 
503–508. 
Nazari, K.,  Esmaeili, N., Mahmoudi, A., Rahimi, H., Moosavi -Movahedi, A.A., 2007. 
Peroxidative phenol removal from aqueous solutions using activated peroxidase 
biocatalyst. Enzym. Microb. Technol. 41, 226 –233. 
Nguyen, L.N., Hai, F.I., Desseto, A., Richardson, C., Pri ce, W.E., Nghiem, L.D., 2016b. 
Continuous adsorption and biotransformation of micropollutants by granular activated 
carbon -bound laccase in a packed -bed enzyme reactor. Bioresour. Technol. 210, 108 –116. 
Nguyen, T.A., Fu, C.C., Juang, R.S., 2016a. Effective  removal of sulfur dyes from water by 
biosorption and subsequent immobilized laccase degradation on crosslinked chitosan 
beads. Chem. Eng. J. 304, 313 –324. 
Nicolucci, C., Rossi, S., Menale, C., Godjevargova, T., Ivanov, Y., Bianco, M., Mita, L., 
Bencivenga, U., Mita, D.G., Diano, N., 2011. Biodegradation of bisphenols with 
immobilized laccase or tyrosinase on polyacrylonitrile beads. Biodegrad. 22, 673 –683. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
60 
 Niladevi, K.N., Prema, P., 2008. Immobilization of laccase from Streptomyces psammoticus  
and its application in phenol removal using packed bed reactor. World J. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. 24, 1215 –1222.  
Niu, J., Xu, J., Dai, Y., Xu, J., Guo, H., Sun, K., Liu, R., 2013. Immobilization of horseradish 
peroxidase by electrospun fibrous membranes for  adsorption and degradation of 
pentachlorophenol in water. J. Hazard. Mater. 246 –247, 119 –125. 
Osma, J.F., Toca -Herrera, J.L., Rodriguez -Couto, S., 2010. Biodegradation of a simulated 
textile effluent by immobilised -coated laccase in laboratory -scale react ors. Appl. Catal. A: 
General 373, 147 –153. 
Østergaard, M., Lindedam, J., Dan, M., Elleskov, M., Cristina, A., Gama, M., Jørgensen, J., 
Felby, C., 2015. Continuous recycling of enzymes during production of lignocellulosic 
bioethanol in demonstration scale. Appl. Energy, 159, 188 –195. 
Palli, L., Castellet -Rovira, F., Pérez -Trujillo, M., Caniani, D., Sarrà -Adroguer, M., Gori, R., 
2017. Preliminary evaluation of Pleurotus ostreatus  for the removal of selected 
pharmaceuticals from hospital wastewater, Biotechnol . Prog. 33, 1529 –1537.  
Palmieri, G., Giardina, P., Sannia, G., 2005. Laccase -mediated Remazol Brilliant Blue R 
decolorization in a fixed -bed bioreactor. Biotechnol. Prog. 21, 1436−1441.  
Pang, R., Li, M., Zhang, C., 2015. Degradation of phenolic compounds b y laccase 
immobilized on carbon nanomaterials: Diffusional limitation investigation. Talanta, 131, 
38–45. 
Perullini, M., Jobbagy, M., Mouso, N., Forchiassin, F., Bilmes, S.A., 2010. Silica -alginate -
fungi biocomposites for remediation of polluted water. J. Mater. Chem. 20, 6479 –6483.  
Prazeres, D.M.F., Cabral, J.M.S., 2001. Multiphase bioreactor design. Taylor & Francis, 
London.  
Rasera, K., Ferla, J., Dillon, A.J.P., Riveiros, R., Zeni, M., 2009. Immobilization of laccase 
from Pleurotus sajorcaju  in polyamide  membranes. Desal. 245, 657 –661. 
Rasheed, T., Bilal, M., Nabeel, F., Adeel, M., Iqbal, H.M.N., 2019. Environmentally -related 
contaminants of high concern: Potential sources and analytical modalities for detection, 
quantification, and treatment. Environ. In t., 122, 52 –66. 
Rekuc, A., Bryjak, J., Szymanska, K., Jarzebski, A.B., 2010. Very stable silica -gel-bound 
laccase biocatalysts for the selective oxidation in continuous systems. Bioresour. Technol. 
101, 2076 –2083.  
Rios, G.M., Belleville, M.P., Paolucci, D. , Sanchez, J., 2014. Progress in enzymatic 
membrane reactors – A review. J. Memb. Sci. 242, 189 –196.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
61 
 Rivera -Jaimes, J.A., Postigo, C., Melgoza -Alemán, R.M., Aceña, J., Barceló, D., López de 
Alda, M., 2017. Study of pharmaceuticals in surface and wastewate r from Cuernavaca, 
Morelos, Mexico: Occurrence and environmental risk assessment. Sci. Total Environ. 613 –
614, 1263 –1274.  
Rodrigues de Melo, R., Alnoch, R.C., Vilela, A.F.L., Maltempi de Souza, E., Krieger, N., 
Ruller, R., Sato, H.H., Mateo, C., 2017. New heterofunctional supports based on 
glutaraldehyde -activation: A tool for enzyme immobilization at neutral pH. Molecules, 2 2, 
article number 1088.  
Rondon, H., El -Cheikh, W., Boluarte, I.A.R., Chang, C. -Y., Bagshaw, S., Farago, L., 
Jegatheesan, V., Shu, L., 2015. Application of enhanced membrane bioreactor (eMBR) to 
treat dye wastewater. Bioresour. Technol. 183, 78 –85. 
Sanchez -Marcano, J., Tsotsis, T.T., 2002. Catalytic Membranes and Membrane Reactors, 
Wiley VCH, Weinheim.  
Santos, J.C.S.D., Barbosa, O., Ortiz, C., Berenguer -Murcia, A., Rodrigues, R.C., Fernandez -
Lafuente, R., 2015. Importance of the support properties fo r immobilization or purification 
of enzymes. ChemCatChem, 7, 2413 –2432.  
Senthivelan, T., Kanagaraj, J., Panda, R.C., 2016. Recent trends in fungal laccase for various 
industrial applications: An eco -friendly approach – A review. Biotechnol. Bioproc. Eng. 
21, 19 –38. 
Shaheen, R., Asgher, M., Hussain, F., Bhatti, H.N., 2017. Immobilized lignin peroxidase from 
Ganoderma lucidum  IBL-05 with improved dye decolorization and cytotoxicity reduction 
properties. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 103, 57 –64. 
Shao, B., Liu, Z., Z eng, G., Liu, Y., Yang, X., Zhou, C., Chen, M., Liu, Y., Jiang, Y., Yan, 
M., 2019. Immobilization of laccase on hollow mesoporous carbon nanospheres: 
Noteworthy immobilization, excellent stability and efficacious for antibiotic contaminants 
removal. J. Haz ard. Mater., 312, 318 –326. 
Shen, S., Shen, Y., Wen, Y., Wang, H., Liu, W., 2011. Fast and highly efficient removal of 
dyes under alkaline conditions using magnetic chitosan -Fe(III) hydrogel. Water Res. 45, 
5200 –5210.  
Shimada, Y., Watanabe, Y., Sugihara, A. , Tominaga, Y., 2002. Enzymatic alcoholysis for 
biodiesel fuel production and application of the reaction to oil processing. J. Mol. Cat. B 
Enzym. 17, 133 –142. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
62 
 Sigma -Aldrich, horseradish peroxidase, 2019c. Enzyme pricing. 
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catal og/search?term=hrp&interface=All&N=0&mode=mat
ch%20partialmax&lang=pl&region=PL&focus=product/ (accessed 16 March 2019).  
Sigma -Aldrich, laccase from Trametes versicolor , 2019a. Enzyme pricing. 
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/search?term=Laccase&interfa ce=All&N=0&mode
=partialmax&lang=pl&region=PL&focus=product/ (accessed 16 March 2019).  
Sigma -Aldrich, mushroom tyrosianse, 2019b. Enzyme pricing. 
https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/catalog/product/sigma/t3824?lang=pl&region=PL/ 
(accessed 16 March 2019).  
Skorons ki, E., Souza, D.H., Ely, C., Broilo, F., Fernandes, M., Furigo Junior, A., Ghislandi, 
M.G., 2017. Immobilization of laccase from Aspergillus oryzae  on graphene nanosheets. 
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 99, 121 –127. 
Sousa, J.C.G., Ribeiro, A.R., Barbosa, M.O., P ereira, M.F.R., Silva, A.M.T., 2016. A review 
on environmental monitoring of water organic pollutants identified by EU guidelines. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 344, 146 –162. 
Srikanlayanukul, M., Khanongnuch, C., Lumyong, S., 2016. Decolorization of textile 
wastewater  by immobilized Coriolus versicolor RC3 in repeated -batch system with the 
effect of sugar addition. Chiang Mai University J. Nat. Sci. 5, 301 –306. 
Srinivasan, A., Viraraghavan, T., 2010. Decolorization of dye wastewaters by biosorbents: A 
review. J. Enviro n. Manage. 91, 1915 –1929.  
Strong, P.J., Claus, H., 2011. Laccase: A Review of its past and its future in bioremediation. 
Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol. 41, 373 –434. 
Su, C.X.H., Low, L.W., Teng, T.T., Wong, Y.S., 2016. Combination and hybridization of 
treatments in dye wastewater treatment: A review. J. Environ. Chem. Eng. 4, 3618 –3631.  
Taboada -Puig, R., Eibes, G., Lloret, L., Lu -Chau, T.A., Feijoo, G., Moreira, M.T., Lema, 
J.M., 2016. Fostering the action of versa -tile peroxidase as a highly efficient bi ocatalyst for 
the removal  of  endocrine  disrupting  compounds. New Biotechnol. 3, 187 –195. 
Tamura, A., Satoh, E., Kashiwada, A., Matsuda, K., Yamada, K., 2010. Removal of 
alkylphenols by the combined use of tyrosinase immobilized on ion -exchange resins a nd 
chitosan beads. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 115, 137 –145. 
Tavares, A.P.M., Silva, C.G., Xavier, A.M.R.B., 2017. Laccase properties, reaction 
mechanisms and applications: An overview in Laccase: Applications, investigations and 
insights. Nova Science Publishers.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
63 
 Teerapatsakul, C., Parra, R., Keshavarz, T., Chitra don, L., 2017. Repeated batch for dye 
degradation in an airlift bioreactor by laccase entrapped in copper alginate. Int. 
Biodeteriorat. Biodegradat. 120, 52 –57.  
Tonin, F., Melis, R., Cordes, A., Sanchez -Amat, A., Pollegioni, L., Rosini, E., 2016.   
Compar ison of different microbial laccases as tools for industrial uses. New Biotechnol. 
33, 387 –398.  
Valli, K., Wariishi, H., Gold, M.H., 1990. Oxidation of monomethoxylated aromatic 
compounds by lignin peroxidase: Role of veratryl alcohol in lignin biodegradation. 
Biochem. 29, 8535 –8539.  
Vikrant, K., Giri, B.S., Raza, N., Roy, K., Kim, K. -H., Rai, B.N., Singh, R.S., 2018. Recent 
advancements in bioremediation of dye: Current status and challenges. Bioresour. Technol. 
253, 355 –367. 
Wada, S., Ichikawa,  H., Tatsun, K., 1993. Removal of phenols from wastewater by soluble 
and immobilized tyrosinase. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 42, 854 –858. 
Wang, Q., Cui, J., Li, G., Zhang, J., Li, D., Huang, F., Wei, Q., 2014. Laccase immobilized on 
a PAN/adsorbents composite nano fibrous membrane for catechol treatment by a 
biocatalysis/adsorption process. Molecules 19, 3376 –3388.  
Wang, S., Liu, W., Zheng, J., Xu, X., 2016. Immobilization of horseradish peroxidase on 
modified PAN -based membranes for the removal of phenol from buffe r solutions. 
Canadian J. Chem. Eng. 94, 865 –871. 
Webb, C., Koutinas, W.R., Wang, R., 2004. Developing a sustainable bioprocessing strategy 
based on a generic feedstock. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol. 87, 195 –268. 
Weber, F.A., aus der Beek, T., Bergmann, A. , Carius, A., Grüttner, G., Hickmann, S., Ebert, 
I., Hein, A., Küster, A., Rose, J., Koch -Jugl, J., Stolzenberg, H. -Ch., 2016. 
Pharmaceuticals in the environment – the global perspective. Occurrence, effects, and 
potential cooperative action under SAICM, F ederal Ministry of the Environment, Berlin.  
Wen, Y., Liang, Y., Shen, C., Wang, H., Fue, D., Wang, H., 2015. Synergistic removal of 
dyes by Myrothecium verrucaria immobilization on a chitosan –Fe membrane. RSC Adv. 5, 
68200 –68208.  
Williams, J.A., 2002. Key s to bioreactor selections. Chem. Eng. Prog. 98, 34 –41. 
Xu, R., Si, Y., Li, F., Zhang, B., 2015. Enzymatic removal of paracetamol from aqueous 
phase: Horseradish peroxidase immobilized on nanofibrous membranes. Environ. Sci. 
Pollut. Res. 22, 3838 –3846.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
64 
 Xu, R., Si, Y., Wu, X., Li, F., Zhang B., 2014. Triclosan removal by laccase immobilized on 
mesoporous nanofibers: Strong adsorption and efficient degradation. Chem. Eng. J. 255, 
63–70.  
Xue, R., Woodley, J.M., 2012. Process technology for multi -enzymatic rea ction systems. 
Bioresour. Technol. 115, 183 –195. 
Yamada, K., Akiba, Y., Shibuya, T., Kashiwada, A., Matsuda, K., Hirata, M., 2005. Water 
purification through bioconversion of phenol compounds by tyrosinase and chemical 
adsorption by chitosan beads. Biotech nol. Prog. 21, 823−829.  
Yang, G., Lu, K., Su, X., 2012. Decolorization and detoxication of reactive industrial dyes by 
immobilized laccases. Adv. Mater. Res. 550, 2279 –2283.  
Yehia, R.S., Rodriguez -Couto, S., 2017. Discoloration of the azo dye Congo Red by 
manganese -dependent peroxidase from Pleurotus sajor -caju, Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 
53, 222 –229. 
Young, T., Smoot, S., Peeters, J., Côté, P., 2013. When does building an MBR make sense? 
How variations of local construction and operating cost parameters impact overall project 
economics. Proc. Water Environ. Federation, 8, 6354 –6365.  
Yu, L., Zhang, X.Y., Tang, Q.W., Li, J., Xie, T., Liu, C., Cao, M.Y., Zhang, R.C., Wang, S., 
Hu, J.M., Qiao, W.C., Li, W.W., Ruan, H.H., 2015. Decolorization characteristics o f a 
newly isolated salt -tolerant Bacillus sp. strain and its application for azo dye -containing 
wastewater in immobilized form, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 21, 9277 –9287.  
Zdarta, J., Antecka, K., Frankowski, R., Zgoła -Grześkowiak, A., Ehrlich, H., Jesiono wski, T., 
2018a. The effect of operational parameters on the biodegradation of bisphenols by 
Trametes versicolor  laccase immobilized on Hippospongia communis  spongin scaffolds. 
Sci. Total Environ. 615, 784 –795. 
Zdarta, J., Meyer, A.S., Jesionowski, T., Pinelo, M., 2018b. A general overview of support 
materials for enzyme immobilization: characteristics, properties, practical utility. Catalysts, 
8, article number 9.  
Zdarta, J., Meyer, A.S., Jesionowski, T., Pinelo , M., 2018c. Developments in support 
materials for immobilization of oxidoreductases: A comprehensive review. Adv. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 258, 1 –20. 
Zhang, X., Pan, B., Wu, B., Zhang, W., Lv, L., 2014. A new polymer -based laccase for 
decolorization of AO7:  Long -term storage and mediator reuse. Bioresour. Technol. 164, 
248–253. ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPTACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
65 
 Zhao, F., Li, H., Jiang, Y., Wang, X., Mu, X., 2014. Co -immobilization of multi -enzyme on 
control -reduced graphene oxide by non -covalent bonds: an artificial biocatalytic system for 
the one -pot production of gluconic acid from starch. Green Chem. 16, 2558 –2565.  
Zhou, Z., Hartmann, M., 2013. Progress in enzyme immobilization in ordered mesoporous 
materials and related applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 42, 3894 –3912.  
Zille, A., Tzanov, T., G ubitz, G.M., Cavaco -Paulo, A., 2003. Immobilized laccase for 
decolourization of Reactive Black 5 dyeing effluent. Biotechnol. Lett. 25, 1473 –1477.  
Zucca, P., Sanjust, E., 2014. Inorganic materials as supports for covalent enzyme 
immobilization: Methods and  mechanisms. Molecules 19, 14139 –14194.  ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT