Abstract. Background/Aim: Hair dye may contain 
mutagenic compounds which could be associated with an 
increased incidence of breast cancer in women who use it.
The aim of this study was to examine the association between 
the personal use of hair dyes and the risk of breast cancer.
Materials and Methods: We conducted a literature review of
epidemiological studies reporting breast cancer-specific risks 
among hair dye users versus non-users. The data for the 
incidence of breast cancer following the ‘ever’ use of hair 
dye in studies which met the inclusion criteria was analysed 
using a meta-analysis. The relative risk ratio (RR) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CI) were determined. Results: A total
of eight case-control studies published between 1980 and 
2017 met the selection criteria and were included in the 
meta-analysis. Compared to non-users, using a random 
effects model and the Duval and Tweedie’s trim and fill
procedure to adjust for publication bias in the presence of
between studies heterogeneity, the adjusted RR for women 
using hair dyes was 1.1885 (95% CI=1.03228-1.36835).
This indicates an 18.8% increased risk of future development
of breast cancer among hair dye users. Conclusion:
Although further work is required to confirm our results and 
clarify potential mechanisms, our findings suggest that
exposure to hair dyes may contribute to an increased breast
cancer risk.
Hair dye is a commercial product that many members of the 
public, specifically women, use to cosmetically alter their 
appearance for a variety of reasons, from covering up grey 
hair to completely changing the appearance of their hair.
Within Europe and the USA, it has been estimated that more than one-third of women over the age of eighteen and 
approximately 10% of men over the age of 40 use some type 
of hair dye (1). Although certain components of hair dye 
have been identified as harmful to human health based on 
laboratory and animal studies and have consequently been 
banned by the European Commission (2), hair dyes continue 
to contain chemicals which are potentially carcinogenic. 
Most permanent hair dye products contain aromatic 
amines such as para-phenylenediamine (PPD: C 6H8N2), a 
well-documented potent skin sensitizer, as primary 
intermediates. They are mixed with couplers and an 
oxidizing agent such as hydrogen peroxide and the oxidized 
products impart hair coloration. Elevated levels of DNA- 
adducts of aromatic amines have been detected in breast 
epithelial cells of hair dye users. Furthermore in vitro 
genotoxicity studies showed PPD to be mutagenic and in 
vivo animal studies demonstrated that topical and 
subcutaneous administration was associated with an 
increased incidence of benign and malignant mammary 
tumours (3). The International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (IARC) has classified such aromatic amines as 
probably carcinogenic to humans who are exposed to them 
on an occupational basis such as hairdressers and barbers 
(2A risk category) but not to humans who use them on a 
personal basis (4). It should be noted that the 
epidemiological studies in this meta-analysis had no specific 
focus on examining any potential existing causative 
relationship between the use of PPD in hair dye and the 
subsequent incidence of breast cancer, so it is not possible 
to comment specifically on this. PPD has been included as 
an example of a chemical widely used in hair dye which 
merits further detailed epidemiological investigation due to 
its probable carcinogenicity. 
Epidemiological studies investigating the relationship 
between the use of hair dyes and breast cancer risk have 
yielded conflicting results. Therefore, from a public health 
perspective, it is important to examine the various 
epidemiological studies which investigated this relationship 
707 Correspondence to: Kefah Mokbel, London Breast Institute,
Princess Grace Hospital, London, U.K. Tel: +44 2079082040, 
e-mail: kefahmokbel@hotmail.com 
Key Words:Hair dye, breast cancer, meta-analysis, literature review.ANTICANCER RESEARCH 38 : 707-716 (2018) 
doi:10.21873/anticanres.12276 
Does the Use of Hair Dyes Increase the Risk of Developing 
Breast Cancer? A Meta-analysis and Review of the Literature 
RITIKA GERA 1,2 , RAMIA MOKBEL 3, IVANNA IGOR 1and KEFAH MOKBEL 1
1The London Breast Institute, Princess Grace Hospital, HCA Healthcare, London, U.K.;
2University College London Medical School, London, U.K.;
3Department of Dermatology, St. Mary’s Hospital and Imperial College Healthcare, London, U.K.and subsequently perform a meta-analysis to improve 
statistical power and attempt to determine if there is any 
overall increased risk. 
Materials and Methods 
Literature search. The initial searches were conducted on online 
databases: PubMed, Science Direct, NCBI. Search terms used were: 
‘hair dye’ and ‘breast cancer’. Abstracts were found and then 
scrutinised. An abstract which showed clear evidence of not 
fulfilling the inclusion criteria was rejected. If the abstract did not 
conflict with the inclusion criteria the full document was sourced 
and examined. In the instance that the full document fit the 
inclusion criteria, the study was included in the meta-analysis and 
this process was repeated. 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria. The epidemiological studies 
included in this meta-analysis must have had female participants 
with no previous diagnosis of breast cancer. The studies must have 
reported a RR/odds ratio (OR) and a 95% confidence interval and 
included data concerning the ‘ever’ versus ‘never’ use of hair dye.
The studies must have also been found as full text journal articles 
along with the abstract; studies were excluded if only the abstract 
was found. The studies must have reported full selection criteria for 
cases and controls and provided the baseline category information. 
Studies examining any non-breast related cancer as a case were 
excluded. Any studies which did not make hair dye a key risk factor 
being investigated or in which the key hair product investigated was 
not hair dye were excluded. Any studies which did not publish the full 
raw data collected or include adequate controls were also excluded. 
Any epidemiological studies which failed to meet the above 
inclusion criteria/met any of the above exclusion criteria were 
excluded. 
The search within NCBI yielded 47 scientific and medical 
abstracts/citations within PubMed, 1997 full-text journal articles in 
PubMed Central and 3257 search results in Science Direct. Of these,
24 studies were considered relevant and initially selected to examine 
further of which 8 studies were included in this meta-analysis (5-6,
8-10, 12-14) and 16 were excluded (10, 15-29). The studies 
fulfilling the selection criteria were published between 1980 and 
2017 and contained a total of 38037 participants.
Analysis. The following data was recorded from the studies: 
RR/OR, lower and upper limits of CI, number of cancer and control 
cases, and country of study. To perform the meta-analysis, the RR 
and CIs were used as a measurement of the effect of ‘ever’ use of 
hair dye on the incidence of breast cancer. 
The meta-analysis was conducted using models of both fixed 
and random effects. Statistical heterogeneity was tested for using 
the following: the funnel plot, I 2, and Tau squared. Numbers in the 
range 0-100% were used as an indication of statistical 
heterogeneity. In cases where the p-value was less than 0.1,
homogeneity could not be assumed. Estimates were taken from the 
random effects model. 
The risk for publication bias was calculated using the Begg and 
Mazumdar rank correlation. Egger’s regression intercept was also 
used. Duval and Tweedie’s trim and fill was used to adjust for 
publication bias within the meta-analysis. To describe the results of 
the meta-analysis, a forest plot was created.Results 
Using a random-effects model the pooled RR was estimated 
to be 1.1465 (95% CI=0.9962-1.3194). The p-value 
calculated from the z-test is 0.056, which indicates 
significance at the 6% significance level. The probability that 
the true RR is less than 1 is 2.84% (Figure 1). 
To investigate the risk of publication bias and statistical 
heterogeneity, a funnel plot (Figure 2) was created. The 
funnel plot is fairly symmetrical which suggests a reasonable 
degree of statistical heterogeneity. This is supported by the 
result of the ‘I’ squared test: 73.89432. However, the tau 
squared test seemed to indicate considerable statistical 
heterogeneity: 2.70. 
There is one outlier within the funnel plot (Figures 2 and 
3). The funnel plot does not give an impression of severe 
publication bias. However, there are too few studies to make 
a reasonable inference from the plot. Duval and Tweedie’s 
trim and fill found no necessity to trim studies to the left of 
the combined effect, but to the right of it, one study was 
determined. The adjusted combined effect according to the 
Duval and Tweedie’s Trim and Fill procedure revealed a RR 
of 1.1885 (95%CI=1.03228-1.36835). The lower bound of 
the confidence interval clearly exceeds 1. 
Using a fixed effects model revealed similar estimates of 
the RR being 1.16548 (95%CI=1.098-1.237) prior to 
adjustment and 1.14680 (95% CI=1.079-1.219) after 
adjustment for publication bias in the presence of between 
studies heterogeneity.
After examining the excluded studies, an unweighted RR 
was calculated by averaging the OR/RR/hazard ratio (HR) 
present in each suitable individual excluded study. The 
studies (n=6) included in the average (16-17, 20, 23, 27-28) 
fulfilled the following basic criteria: they should examine 
only women, the total number of participants in the study 
should be available and they should provide the RR, OR, or 
HR of developing breast cancer following the ever use of 
hair dye. There was a total of 317,963 women included in 
this average. The average unweighted RR was 2.295, with 
the range of all 6 excluded studies included in this 
calculation being 0.93-8.62. The average OR weighted 
according to the total sample size of the study was 1.051.
The study with the highest RR of 8.62 (20) also had one of 
the smallest sample sizes: 200 women in total. This study 
was excluded from the meta-analysis due to its many 
limitations which include: the seemingly anomalous result 
and the very small sample size.  It is not possible to 
comment on the validity of this average because they were 
excluded from this meta-analysis and so were not examined 
to the fullest degree.
Five studies excluded in this meta-analysis (21, 23, 27- 
29) were prospective. Of these, three studies (23, 27-28) 
were included in the average of the excluded studies ANTICANCER RESEARCH 38 : 707-716 (2018) 
708 calculated above. These prospective studies were excluded 
from the meta-analysis for various reasons: the death rate 
was recorded instead of the rate of incidence of breast 
cancer (21, 29), there was no information provided on the 
number of controls used (23), an HR was used instead of an 
OR/RR and the study had a high focus on other types of 
cancer (27), and there was no baseline category information 
published (28). Due to the large number of excluded 
prospective studies, the reliability of this statistical analyses 
has decreased. There was no significant correlation between 
the use of hair dye and incidence of/death from breast 
cancer in all five prospective studies.
Discussion 
The findings of this meta-analysis suggest that the personal 
use of hair dyes is associated with an increased risk of 
developing breast cancer. Its strength lies in providing a 
combined estimate of several case-control studies which 
reported raw data and met strict inclusion criteria. However,
the lack of accurate information regarding different exposure 
characteristics across multiple studies included in this meta- 
analysis prohibited the analysis of duration and frequency of 
exposure and type of hair dye used in the context of breast 
cancer risk. Therefore, our study does not provide any 
insights into the dose-effect relationship or the chemical 
constituents implicated in potential causation. There was 
significant heterogeneity among studies and no uniform 
adjustment for confounding factors. It is also important to 
note that there can be a vast amount of variation between 
different populations, from genetics to cultural habits 
surrounding hair dye application to socioeconomic status.There were eight epidemiological studies included in this 
meta-analysis and each study has been analysed below for 
its individual strengths and weaknesses. However, a 
significant number of studies was excluded due to our 
selection criteria thus limiting the combined sample size and 
statistical power. Furthermore, the retrospective nature of 
these studies introduces a significant risk of recall or 
interviewer bias thus limiting their internal validity. The 
necessary criteria for future studies examining the 
relationship between breast cancer risk and hair dye have 
been outlined later in this article. 
Study 1: Relationship of hair dye use, benign breast disease 
and breast cancer (5). In this retrospective case-control 
study, female patients between the ages of 20-84 were 
selected from 3 upstate New York counties to be used as 
cases and controls. There were 118 cases and 233 controls.
The patient list was “stratified by age and county”. However,
it is unclear to what degree participants were matched up 
according to age; the maximum difference in age between 
the case and the control was never specified. If the case was 
deceased, the interview was conducted with a close member 
of their family, which greatly increased the risk of recall 
bias. The number of hair dye applications required to 
constitute the ‘ever’ use of hair dye was not strictly 
quantified at any point. Data was collected through a 
standardised interviewer, and all interviews were conducted 
through telephone without any visual prompts which greatly 
increases recall bias. 
The following known risk factors for developing breast 
cancer were tested for in relation to hair dye exposure 
prospectively: “previous benign breast disease (BBD), "ever" Gera et al: Hair Dye and Breast Cancer Risk 
709 
Figure 1. The normal distribution of log odds ratio demonstrating that the probability of the combined odds ratio being less than 1 is only 2.84 
percent.versus "never" pregnant, age at first pregnancy, menopause 
induced by operation, age at menarche, and education”. A 
multivariate analysis was used to determine the impact of 
these confounding factors and it found that BBD, both 
ovaries being removed surgically (surgical menopause) and 
years of education had a “significant impact on the risk of 
breast cancer”. All three were noted as potential confounding 
factors and controlled for in “later” experiments. It should 
also be noted that the BBD was never medically confirmed 
and was instead based only on cases’ answers to the 
interviewer. 
Patients with BBD were found to be significantly more 
susceptible to any ill effects present in hair dye. A woman 
with BBD who uses hair dye had a RR of 9.31 for 
developing breast cancer whereas a woman with BBD who 
does not use hair dye had a RR of 2.45 ( p= 0.047). However,
this was based on a relatively small selection of 24 women,
which is too few a number to determine a correlation 
between BBD, use of hair dye and breast cancer. 
There were some faults found with the data provided by 
the investigators. The OR formula is applied to what they 
term the RR. The formulae applied to calculate the 95% 
confidence interval of their RR are not clarified. We have 
calculated the RR for developing breast cancer following 
exposure to hair dye as being 1.15 (95%CI=0.86-1.55). 
Study 2: Use of hair colouring products and breast cancer 
risk: a case-control study in Connecticut (6). This is a case- 
control study conducted on women in Connecticut between 
the ages of 30-80. Six hundred and eight cases and 609 controls were used. Although there is a large age range, an 
“effort” was made to try and match the cases and controls 
within a span of five years. As cases tended to be slightly 
older than controls, age was a controlled factor in all 
following analyses. All cases and controls did not have any 
previous history of cancer, aside from non-melanoma skin 
cancer. According to a study conducted by the Women’s 
Health Initiative (7), the risk of developing breast cancer 
following NMSC is 1.07 (95%CI=0.95-1.20) in post- 
menopausal women (this analysis used 70 246 White and 
Hispanic women between the ages of 50-79). 
Women were selected if they had had surgery related to 
the breasts at the Yale-New Haven Hospital or if they were 
residents of Tolland County “between 1st January 1994 and 
31st December 1997”. “Surgery related to the breasts” is not 
limited to breast cancer surgery; controls were also chosen 
by looking at patients undergoing operations on the breasts 
who were histologically confirmed to not have breast cancer.
However, no description of the type of surgery they were 
having is provided. It is not possible to determine if the risk 
of developing breast cancer has changed for these patients 
compared to a female population which has not undergone 
breast-related surgery, or if these risks differ depending on 
the type of breast surgery.  
At the time of interview, cases and controls had to have been 
alive. All interviews were conducted in person with the 
interviewers trained in showing participants the labels of hair 
products prompt memory, which decreased the chance of recall 
bias. A “standardised questionnaire” is used to uncover various 
social, demographic and pathological data, including potential ANTICANCER RESEARCH 38 : 707-716 (2018) 
710 
Figure 2. The funnel plot of the studies included in the metanalysis demonstrating heterogeneity and a limited publication bias.risk factors for developing breast cancer such as family history.
Risk was assessed by type and colour of hair dye. 
The OR for the ‘ever’ use of hair dye being linked to the 
development of breast cancer was 0.9 with a 95% confidence 
interval of 0.7-1.2. 
Study 3: An epidemiologic case-control study of breast cancer 
and exposure to hair dyes (8).This retrospective case-control 
study was conducted in “18 contiguous counties of New York 
State” using women between the ages of 20 and 79 who 
resided within the study area. Cases were matched to controls 
by stratifying through the following criteria: sex, birth year,
county of residence. 1,617 cases and 1,617 controls were 
used. Interviews were conducted over the telephone.
Patients who were diagnosed in another hospital outside 
the study area were identified through the New York State 
Cancer Registry. This is more effective than focusing on a 
specific hospital because it accounts and controls for the 
various confounding variables that may be present when 
patients live in different counties. The diagnosis must have 
been made between 1st April 1982 and 31st March 1984. 
Individual hair dyes, along with their combinations, were 
tested for to see if they increased the chance of developing 
breast cancer. Here, there was no association between the use 
of hair dye, a diagnosis of BBD (at any age) and the 
development of breast cancer. In this study population, 889 
women had BBD. If a woman had BBD but had never used 
hair dye the adjusted OR of her developing breast cancer was 
1.67 (95%CI=1.28-2.20). If a woman had BBD and used hair 
dye, the adjusted OR of her developing breast cancer was 
1.92 (95%CI=1.55-2.38). A clear overlap between the two 
confidence intervals can be seen here. The ever use of hair dye correlated with the development 
of breast cancer with an OR of 1.04 (95%CI=0.9-1.21). 
Study 4: Hair dye use and breast cancer: a case-control
study among screening participants (9). A standardised 
telephone interview was used to collect data in this 
retrospective case-control study conducted among patients 
from a screening centre in New York City. A total of 398 
cases and 790 controls were used. Both groups were selected 
between 1977 and 1981. A complete history of hair dye use 
was taken, along with a range of confounding factors which 
were known or suspected influencers of the risk of 
developing breast cancer. Two factors decreased bias: 
interviewers were not informed whether the participant was 
a case or control and participants were told breast cancer 
risks were being investigated (hair dye was not specified at 
any point). Surrogate interviews, in cases of death/extreme 
illness, were conducted for 28 cases and 7 controls. 
The study reports that the participants were 
“predominantly well educated, white, and largely of the 
Jewish religion, with a median age in years in the late 50’s”.
The trend towards a specific subset of women indicates that 
these results must be treated with caution when applied to 
different socioeconomic or racial subgroups; they cannot 
generally be applied to all women. 
There are no individual results for each kind of dye 
because some patients could not identify which type they had 
used (temporary, semi-permanent, and permanent). As 
individual data sets for types of hair dye are not provided, it 
is difficult to distinguish between dyes and discern a 
particularly harmful effect from any one of them. However,
the ‘ever’ use of hair dye could be adequately assessed using 
the data provided. Gera et al: Hair Dye and Breast Cancer Risk 
711 
Figure 3.A graphical display of estimated results from the eight studies included in the meta-analysis using the Forest plot.A key issue, raised within the study itself, is that of 
selection bias. Some women may not have received their 
cancer diagnosis through screening (for example if they were 
checked by a doctor when they became symptomatic), so 
they would not be included in this study. As screening is a 
voluntary effort there may be overrepresentation within this 
sample of certain types of women; women who attend 
screening appointments are likelier to be more educated and 
affluent. Age is another factor which may have had an effect,
because screening is not recommended until women are over 
fifty years old. These various selection factors have been 
included in the multivariate logistic model and subgroups 
which are potentially biased were progressively removed 
from the analysis (for example women under 40 years of 
age). Despite the progressively homogenous nature of the 
analysis, the results remained similar. 
The adjusted OR for a breast cancer patient having used 
hair dye was 0.8 (95%CI=0.6-1.1). 
Study 5: Does hair dye use increase the risk of breast cancer? 
A population-based case-control study of Finnish women (10).
A retrospective case-control study conducted in Finland, this 
population-based study used 6567 cases and 21598 controls 
between 22-60 years of age who underwent age matching.
This is the largest study included in the meta-analysis. The use 
of the population-based cancer registry in Finland meant the 
selection bias was thought to be “negligible”. A self- 
administered quiz determined the use of hair dye amongst 
participants, examining: “cumulative number of hair dye 
episodes during life, age at first use and the types of dyes 
used”. The age at which hair dye was first used was 
categorised: under 20 years, 20-29, 30-39, 40 years or older.
The self-administered questionnaire method was examined by 
Shore et al., and was found to be valid. This is referenced 
within the study by Heikkinen et al. (10) The duration of hair 
dye from two telephone interviews one year apart with similar 
coefficients for cases and controls was similar (r=0.86) (11).
This potentially reduces the risk of recall bias for studies 
which did not conduct in-person interviews. 
Multiple confounding factors were accounted for. If a 
patient used hair dye more than twice in their life, it is 
classified as the ‘ever’ use of hair dye. Zero, 1 or 2 
applications of hair dye throughout the lifetime were 
classified as never use. The clear definition of ‘ever’ use of 
hair dye provides a standardisation tool when comparing the 
results of this epidemiological study to other studies.
Participants who had deceased before the study had started 
were excluded. Although this means more aggressive cases 
may be missed, hair dye is such a widely used compound 
that this should not have a significant impact on the results,
as clearly stated by the authors of this case-control study. 
Hair dye use, in this study, is an indicator of a woman’s use 
of other risk factors for breast cancer. For example, 7% of women who used hair dye did not drink as opposed to the 27% 
of women who did not use hair dye and did not drink. Risk 
factors were adjusted for. Socioeconomic status was considered 
the likeliest source of uncontrolled confounding bias.
The participants of this study were likely to be Caucasian,
blonde and otherwise homogenous. As such, the results obtained 
should only be applied to populations with a Caucasian majority. 
The biological basis of this epidemiological study is the 
use of 4-ABP, which was classified by the International 
Agency for Research on Cancer as carcinogenic for humans 
(16). There are concerns expressed in this paper that it is 
being used in hair dye products at concentrations above the 
legal limits, and it is suggested that certain potential 
carcinogenic effects of PPD are due to its contamination with 
4-ABP during the production process. However, there is no 
focus on a specific chemical within this study; the focus was 
to determine if hair dye significantly increases the risk of 
breast cancer, and dyes are subdivided according to type 
(permanent, semi-permanent, temporary, bleach, partial) as 
opposed to specific chemicals found in them. 
The OR for developing breast cancer following the use of 
hair dye was 1.23 (95%CI=1.11-1.36). 
Study 6: Epidemiology of breast cancer and hair dyes (12).
This is a retrospective case-control study conducted using 
401 breast cancer patients and 625 controls who were white,
20-80 years of age and participants admitted to Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Centre Between June 1979 and 
February 1981. The criteria for controls were as follows: 
they were admitted to the MSK Cancer Centre within two 
months of the breast cancer cases, they must not have a 
primary diagnosis of breast cancer, they must not have any 
medical history of breast cancer and they must not have had 
a diagnosis of BBD within a year of the study. The controls 
were matched by age at diagnosis within three years, as 
opposed to matched by age itself. The ‘ever’ use of hair dye 
is classified as “one or more applications of a particular 
product during the individual’s lifetime”. 
Interviews were conducted via a trained interviewer in 
person administering a standardised questionnaire. The 
patients were shown images of 60 hair dye brands as 
memory aids and then asked to select what they had used.
Family history and other potential confounding factors were 
examined: demographic data, family history, medication 
history, dietary history, occupational history, gynaecological 
history and use of known risk factors such as alcohol,
tobacco, caffeine, and saccharin. Participants were stratified 
according to the risk factors. 
Because all participants of this study were selected from 
a cancer centre, there is a high risk of selection bias; women 
who were treated here tended to be “well educated, in a high 
socioeconomic stratum, and Jewish”. The greater number of 
Jewish women as cases (42.6%) instead of controls (25.5%) ANTICANCER RESEARCH 38 : 707-716 (2018) 
712 was significant ( p< 0.001). The association of hair dye use 
with religion was significant ( p= 0.003). For subsequent 
analyses, case-control comparisons were adjusted. However,
these results may not be reflective of other populations. 
Any women with diseases thought to be associated with 
the use of hair dye (apart from breast cancer) were excluded 
from the study. When the control group was dichotomised 
into cancer and non-cancer subgroups, “no significant main 
effects” were seen for any hair dye use associated variables.
Wynder and Goodman assessed all the studies conducted 
prior to their own and discussed the other published results 
in tandem with the faults in these investigations. 
The OR for developing breast cancer following the use of 
hair dye was 1.02 (95%CI=0.77-1.32). 
Study 7: Hair colouring, stress, and smoking increase the 
risk of breast cancer: A case-control study (13). This is a 
population-based study conducted in Iran which used 526 
newly diagnosed cases and 526 controls frequency matched 
on age and chosen from Namazi Hospital in the period 
November 2014-March 2016. The cases were based on a 
pathology report and were undergoing radio/chemotherapy 
in the hospital at the time of the study. The controls were 
admitted during the same period due to non-neoplasm 
diseases and did not disclose any previous diagnosis of 
cancer. The focus on non-neoplasm diseases helps reduce 
any confounding effect which could have been introduced 
were any other diseases at admission included. 
An “interview-administered questionnaire” was used to 
collect data. Confounding factors were tested for along with 
information regarding their use of hair dye. As there are 
multiple risk factors focussed on throughout the study, more 
detail regarding its use (type, longevity and duration of use,
age at first use) was not achieved. 
A multivariate analysis was used to determine if there was 
an increased risk of developing breast cancer following the 
use of hair dye. A menopause-stratified analysis was 
conducted to account for the biological and hormonal 
changes associated with this significant milestone. However,
the results of the menopause and non-menopause participants 
were so similar that this data is not presented. The 
occurrence of breast cancer is recorded here as opposed to 
the survival of the patient following the diagnosis. As with 
any retrospective study, the risk of recall bias is present. 
The author of this study underlines how the population of 
Iran is incredibly different to that of the West. He also points 
out how Iranian women have undergone huge epidemiological 
changes over the last few decades; for example, the birth rate 
dropped from over 7 children per woman to 1.7 over the 
course of approximately thirty years (early 1980s to 2007).
Therefore, the epidemiological differences between Iranian 
and Western women are such that it would be difficult to apply 
these results to Western women. The OR for developing breast cancer following the use of 
hair dye was 1.93 (95%CI=1.41-2.62). This study was the 
outlier of the funnel plot. 
Study 8: Hair product use and the risk of breast cancer in 
young women (14). This retrospective case-control study was 
conducted across three counties of Washington using white 
female residents who fit the following criteria: 844 cases 
aged 45 or less and diagnosed with breast cancer in the 
period 1983-1990, and 960 controls of a similar age. In- 
person interviews were utilised (excepting 32 participants 
who were interviewed over telephone) to ascertain 
information regarding participants’ hair product use. The key 
focus of this investigation is hair dye; however, some 
attention is detracted from hair dye to hair spray. 
The cases were identified using the Cancer Surveillance 
System in Western Washington. Cases had a “first invasive” 
breast cancer. Patients who had died prior to interview were 
excluded from the study. One patient had an unknown 
application of hair colouring and she was also excluded.
Identification of controls occurred through random digit 
dialling. Controls were frequency age matched to cases 
within five years of themselves. Participants were given 
photographic displays and calendars which recorded major 
life events to prompt recall. Those interviewed by telephone 
were done so following receipt of the calendars/photographs 
by post. Women were questioned regarding their hair dye 
use, hair spray use and any exposure to known risk factors 
for cancer prior to their diagnosis (lifestyle and demographic,
reproductive and substance use history). 
Adjustments for the multivariate risk estimates were as 
follows: age, parity, weight, history of breast cancer in first 
degree relatives. Confounding risk factors were also adjusted 
for. Separate analyses were conducted for: women diagnosed 
with invasive and in situ breast cancer, hair colouring 
application before and after hair started turning grey, women 
with at least four instances of hair colour application. Similar 
results to the original set were produced for each, although 
they are not provided in the study. 
Risk was assessed, and data provided for women with any 
use of hair dye, including non-exclusive use, and women 
with exclusive use of one type of hair dye. Women with any 
use of hair dye classify as the ‘ever’ use. The increase in 
breast cancer risk “appeared to be driven by” women using 
combinations of hair dye, not by exclusive use of a single 
type. This led the investigators to conclude that hair 
colouring application does not influence breast cancer risk. 
The OR for developing breast cancer following the use of 
hair dye was 1.3 (95%CI=1.0-1.6).
Other systematic reviews/meta-analyses examining the 
relationship between the use of hair dye and the risk of
developing breast cancer. We sourced two other meta- Gera et al: Hair Dye and Breast Cancer Risk 
713 analyses which looked at whether there was an increased risk 
of developing human cancer after using hair dyes: Hair dye 
use and risk of human cancer and Personal Use of Hair Dyes 
and Risk of Cancer: A Meta-analysis.
Hair Dye use and Risk of Human Cancer (30). Eleven case- 
control and four cohort studies when examining the 
relationship between breast cancer and hair dye in this 
systematic review. The relationship between the incidence of 
different cancers and the use of hair dye was scrutinised. All 
studies included in this systematic review have also been 
cited in this meta-analysis (5-6, 8-9, 11-12, 14-18, 20-21, 23,
26, 28). Exposure was only established through a single 
simple questionnaire at the start of the study. They 
highlighted some positive associations when the duration of 
use and type of hair dye use were considered in certain 
studies. A 2.5-fold (95% CI=1.6, 3.9) increased risk was 
found among women who reported using any hair dye 
products after bleaching (14). Within this study, there was 
also a range of other results, for example: a significantly 
increased risk was also observed for women who reported 
using any rinse (OR=1.7, 95% CI=1.2, 2.5) and any 
frosting/tipping (OR=1.5, 95% CI=1.2, 2.0) before applying 
hair dye products; and among women who reported using two 
or more types of hair dye products, a 3.1-fold (95%CI=1.6,
6.1) increased risk of breast cancer was observed for those 
who used hair dyes for 90 or more total episodes during their 
lifetime. Furthermore, for individuals using exclusively semi- 
permanent types of hair colouring products, the OR was 
elevated (6). An increase in risk was also noted for women 
who changed hair colours multiple times (8). Two of the five 
cohort studies (21, 29) examined the mortality rate as 
opposed to the incidence of breast cancer, and this runs the 
risk of excluding many breast cancer cases which did not 
result in death. Both studies used the same cohort which was 
analysed at two different time points. These observations 
underscore the complexity of investigating the relationship 
between the personal use of hair dyes and breast cancer and 
emphasize the need for well-designed prospective population 
studies. The authors’ suggestion that genetic polymorphism 
could modify the risk deserves further investigation, although 
this concept was applied in the systematic review specifically 
to the different aetiologies of the majority of Non-Hodgkin’s 
Lymphoma diagnoses.
Personal Use of Hair Dyes and Risk of Cancer (31).
Fourteen studies were used in this meta-analysis to examine 
the relationship between the use of hair dye and breast 
cancer to draw the overall conclusion that the “random- 
effects pooled RR of breast cancer for any type of hair dye 
use was 1.06 (95% CI, 0.95-1.18)”. Twelve studies were 
case-control and 2 were cohort. All studies included by 
Takkouche et al. have been cited in our meta-analysis (5-6,8-9, 11-12, 14-15, 17-18, 20, 23, 26, 29). The largest cohort 
study included in this meta-analysis (29) investigated the 
relationship between the personal use of hair dye and 
mortality from multiple cancers including that of the breast,
which introduces the risk of underestimating the number of 
breast cancer events. This cohort study did not report any 
positive association between the personal use of hair dyes 
and breast cancer related mortality and this finding factored 
significantly in the meta-analysis due to its large sample size.
The mortality data sets were obtained from cancer registries 
which are recognised to have a limited accuracy. This meta- 
analysis investigated multiple cancers hence breast cancer 
was not the sole focus of their investigation. There was a 
“moderate to large” degree of heterogeneity across all studies 
(0.68), which could be explained by the inclusion of a case- 
control study which has a RR of 8.62 (20). Upon the 
exclusion of this study, the level of heterogeneity dropped 
down to 0.36. Egger’s test for the asymmetry present in the 
funnel plot yielded p= 0.90 with the outlier and p= 0.72 
without. 
Furthermore, the authors of this meta-analysis chose to 
include many studies which were excluded by us (11, 15, 17,
18, 20, 23, 26, 29). The study by Shore et al. (11) was 
relatively small and did not report the overall RR and 95% 
CI. The two studies which have been recorded and weighed 
separately by this meta-analysis (15, 18) are in fact using the 
same cohort. The different RRs appear because one is taken 
from the data set in Toronto and the other is taken from the 
data set in London. This small study was excluded by us 
because there was no average provided for the combination 
of the London and Toronto users and because in total, from 
Toronto and London, only 85 breast cancer patients were 
used. Takkouche et al. also chose to include the report by 
Petro-Nustas et al. (20) which has several limitations 
including a very small sample size and use of a convenience 
control group. Our strict inclusion criteria led to the 
exclusion of other studies which failed to adequately control 
for confounding factors (23, 26) or provide an accurate RR 
and 95% CI (17). We excluded 29 for reasons listed above.
Criteria for future studies concerning the relationship 
between breast cancer and hair dye. All chemical 
compounds used in hair dyes which are considered 
mutagenic and carcinogenic according to in vitro and in vivo 
animal studies must be identified at the outset and the 
presence of these components and their actual concentrations 
in the hair dye used are accurately recorded. 
The ideal study to investigate this association would be a 
prospectively designed cohort study of a large sample size 
with accurate recording of background demographics that 
could affect the future risk of developing breast cancer.
Assuming an annual incidence rate of 200 per 100,000 
female participants aged 40 years or older and assuming a ANTICANCER RESEARCH 38 : 707-716 (2018) 
714 35% exposure rate a sample size of 1,360,000 would be 
needed to allow a robust statistical analysis with 80% power 
and 2-sided 5% significance level to detect a RR of 1.1 (or 
0.9) during a 5 year period of follow up. To demonstrate a 
RR of 1.2 or 0.8 (with 80% statistical power and a 2-sided 
5% significance level), the required sample size decreases to 
356 590 women (32).
The participants must not have any previous history of 
cancer, they must not be undergoing any radiotherapy or 
chemotherapy at the time of recruitment and they must not 
have genes predisposing them to be at a high risk of breast 
cancer (for example BRCA1 and BRCA2 ). The participants 
can be recruited from breast cancer screening centres that 
start screening mammography at the age of 40 and assessed 
for inclusion suitability through an initial questionnaire. The 
baseline demographics must include accurate recording of 
data regarding important risk factors for breast cancer such 
as family history, reproductive factors (parity and age at 
puberty), socioeconomic status, alcohol intake, use of 
hormone replacement therapy and the oral contraceptive pill,
smoking habits, body mass index (BMI), previous breast 
biopsy, mammographic density and physical activity. 
A standardised questionnaire should be prepared which is 
initially sent out to potential participants to determine 
suitability for inclusion. Then a detailed questionnaire is sent 
to selected participants to accurately determine the baseline 
characteristics listed above in addition to determining the 
extent of exposure to hair dyes including initial use,
frequency and type of product and whether the use has 
changed over time. A follow-up questionnaire should be sent 
at 2-3 years after recruitment to ascertain any change in 
exposure characteristics. Ideally in person interviews should 
be conducted with visual aids as prompts. These interviews 
should be conducted at the beginning of the study, at regular 
intervals throughout the study and at the end of the study.
Outcomes are recorded as lack/development of breast cancer 
as the primary endpoint; mortality does not need to be 
examined. It is expected that within 5 years of completing 
recruitment the study will have sufficient statistical power to 
answer questions related to the potential impact of personal 
use of hair dyes on breast cancer risk. Prospective cohort 
studies are expensive, time-consuming and vulnerable to 
attrition bias. The multibillion dollar hair dyes industry could 
be invited to participate in the funding of such studies. 
A large retrospective case-control study with individual 
matching and the use of multiple controls with measures to 
minimise the risk of recall and interviewer bias and ensure 
accuracy of data recording would represent a faster and 
cheaper alternative to prospective cohort studies. The 
selection criteria for cases and controls must be carefully 
established and baseline category information must be 
accurately recorded. These potential confounding factors must 
be stratified or accounted for in a multivariate analysis (33).Conclusion 
Our study suggests that the personal use of hair dyes may be 
associated with an increased risk of breast cancer. Consumers 
should be aware of this potential association; however, to make 
informed choices, further research is required to confirm our 
results and clarify the possible mechanisms using the criteria 
we have outlined above. Based on the current knowledge, it is 
reasonable that cosmetic industry regulators consider limiting 
the concentration of the potentially carcinogenic chemical PPD 
to a maximum 2% as recommended by the Scientific 
Committee on Consumer Safety of the European Commission 
which could not draw conclusions regarding its carcinogenicity 
in humans (34) and manufacturers should adhere to such 
guidelines and accurately label hair products. The European 
Union Cosmetic Directive currently allows a maximum PPD 
concentration of up to 6% in hair dyes in the context of allergy 
(35). Our findings do not represent evidence for the presence 
of a cause-effect relationship. 
Acknowledgements 
We are very grateful to Breast Cancer Hope Charity for supporting 
our research. 
References 
1Hair Dyes and Cancer Risk [Internet]. National Cancer Institute.
2016 [cited 12 September 2017]. Available from: https:// 
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/myths/hair- 
dyes-fact-sheet#r1 
2List of 181 substances banned for use in hair dye products 
[Internet]. European Commission, growth: internal market,
industry, entrepreneurship and SMEs. 2015 [cited 22 September 
2017]. Available from: http://ec.europa.eu/DocsRoom/ 
documents/13209/attachments/1/translations 
3Chong HP, Reena K, Ng KY, Koh RY, Ng CH and Chye SM: 
Para-phenylenediamine containing hair dye: An overview of 
mutagenicity, carcinogenicity and toxicity. J Environ Anal 
Toxicol 6(5): 403, 2016.
4IARC Working Group on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk to 
Humans: Some aromatic amines, organic dyes, and related 
exposures. In : Iarc monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic 
risks to humans. IARC Monographs, IARC Vol 99, 2012.
5Nasca PC, Lawrence CE, Greenwald P, Chorost S, Arbuckle JT 
and Paulson A: Relationship of hair dye use, benign breast 
disease, and breast cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 64(1): 23-28,
1980.
6Zheng T, Holford T, Mayne S, Owens P, Boyle P, Zhang B,
Zhang Y and Zahm S: Use of hair colouring products and breast 
cancer risk: A case–control study in connecticut. Eur J Cancer 
38(12): 1647-1652, 2002.
7Pressler M, Rosenberg CA, Derman BA, Greenland P, Khandekar 
J, Rodabough RJ, McTiernan A and Simon MS: Breast cancer in 
postmenopausal women after non-melanomatous skin cancer: 
The women’s health initiative observational study. Breast Cancer 
Res Treat 139(3): 821-831, 2013.Gera et al: Hair Dye and Breast Cancer Risk 
715 8Nasca PC, Baptiste MS, Field NA, Metzger BB and DeMartino 
R: An epidemiologic case-control study of breast cancer and 
exposure to hair dyes. Ann Epidemiol 2(5): 577-586, 1992.
9Koenig KL, Pasternack BS, Shore RE and Strax P: Hair dye use 
and breast cancer: A case-control study among screening 
participants. Am J Epidemiol 133(10): 985-995, 1991.
10 Heikkinen S, Pitkäniemi J, Sarkeala T, Malila N and Koskenvuo 
M: Does hair dye use increase the risk of breast cancer? A 
population-based case-control study of finnish women. PloS one 
10(8): e0135190, 2015.
11 Shore RE, Pasternack BS, Thiessen EU, Sadow M, Forbes R and 
Albert RE: A case-control study of hair dye use and breast 
cancer 2. J Natl Cancer Inst 62(2): 277-283, 1979.
12 Wynder EL and Goodman M: Epidemiology of breast cancer and 
hair dyes 2. J Natl Cancer Inst 71(3): 481-488, 1983.
13 Dianatinasab M, Fararouei M, Mohammadianpanah M, Zare- 
bandamiri M and Rezaianzadeh A: Hair coloring, stress, and 
smoking increase the risk of breast cancer: A case-control study.
Clinical Breast Cancer pii: S1526-8209(17)30135-0, 2017.
14 Cook LS, Malone KE, Daling JR, Voigt LF and Weiss NS: Hair 
product use and the risk of breast cancer in young women.
Cancer Causes Control 10(6): 551-559, 1999.
15 Stavraky KM, Clarke EA and Donner A: Case-control study of 
hair dye use by patients with breast cancer and endometrial 
cancer 2. J Natl Cancer Inst 63(4): 941-945, 1979.
16 Hennekens C, Speizer F, Rosner B, Bain C, Belanger C and Peto 
R: Use of permanent hair dyes and cancer among registered 
nurses. The Lancet 313(8131): 1390-1393, 1979.
17 Kinlen L, Harris R, Garrod A and Rodriguez K: Use of hair dyes 
by patients with breast cancer: A case-control study. Br Med J 
2(6083): 366-368, 1977.
18 Stavraky KM, Clarke EA and Donner A: A case-control study of 
hair-dye use and cancers of various sites. Br J Cancer 43(2):
236-239, 1981.
19 Llanos AA, Rabkin A, Bandera EV, Zirpoli G, Gonzalez BD,
Xing CY, Qin B, Lin Y, Hong C-C and Demissie K: Hair product 
use and breast cancer risk among african american and white 
women. Carcinogenesis 38(9): 883-892, 2017.
20 Petro -Nustas W, Norton ME and Al -Masarweh I: Risk factors 
for breast cancer in jordanian women. J Nurs Scholarsh 34(1):
19-25, 2002.
21 Thun MJ, Altekruse SF, Namboodiri MM, Calle EE, Myers DG 
and Heath CW Jr.: Hair dye use and risk of fatal cancers in us 
women. JNCI 86(3): 210-215, 1994.
22 Skov T and Lynge E: Cancer risk and exposures to carcinogens 
in hairdressers. Skin Pharmacol 7(1-2): 94-100, 1994.23 Green A, Willett WC, Colditz GA, Stampfer MJ, Bain C, Rosner 
B, Hennekens CH and Speizer FE: Use of permanent hair dyes 
and risk of breast cancer 2. J Natl Cancer Inst 79(2): 253-257,
1987.
24 Hartz AJ and He T: Cohort study of risk factors for breast cancer 
in post menopausal women. Epidemiol Health 35 : e2013003,
2013.
25 Pollán M and Gustavsson P: High-risk occupations for breast 
cancer in the swedish female working population. Am J Public 
Health 89(6): 875-881, 1999.
26 Boice JD, Mandel JS and Doody MM: Breast cancer among 
radiologic technologists. JAMA 274(5): 394-401, 1995.
27 Vedel-Krogh S, Nielsen SF, Schnohr P and Nordestgaard BG: 
Morbidity and mortality in 7,684 women according to personal 
hair dye use: The copenhagen city heart study followed for 37 
years. PloS One 11(3): e0151636, 2016.
28 Mendelsohn JB, Li QZ, Ji BT, Shu XO, Yang G, Li HL, Lee 
KM, Yu K, Rothman N and Gao YT: Personal use of hair dye 
and cancer risk in a prospective cohort of chinese women.
Cancer Sci 100(6): 1088-1091, 2009.
29 Altekruse SF, Henley SJ and Thun MJ: Deaths from 
hematopoietic and other cancers in relation to permanent hair 
dye use in a large prospective study (united states). Cancer 
Causes Control 10(6): 617-625, 1999.
30 Zhang Y, Kim C and Zheng T: Hair dye use and risk of human 
cancer. Front Biosci (Elite edition) 4: 516, 2012.
31 Takkouche B, Etminan M and Montes-Martínez A: Personal use 
of hair dyes and risk of cancer: A meta-analysis. JAMA 293(20):
2516-2525, 2005.
32 Lwanga SK, Lemeshow S and Organization WH: Sample size 
determination in health studies: A practical manual, Geneva: 
World Health Organization, 1991.
33 Risk factors|Breast cancer|Cancer Research UK [Internet].
Cancerresearchuk.org. 2017 [cited 29 September 2017].
Available from: http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/about-cancer/ 
breast-cancer/risks-causes/risk-factors 
34 European Commission, Scientific Committee on Consumer 
Safety. Opinion on p-Phenylenediamine, 17-18 September, 2012.
35 Kim K-H, Kabir E and Jahan SA: The use of personal hair dye 
and its implications for human health. Environ Int 89 : 222-227,
2016.
Received October 6, 2017 
Revised November 29, 2017 
Accepted December 18, 2017 ANTICANCER RESEARCH 38 : 707-716 (2018) 
716 