                                                                    
University of Dundee
Epigenetic Regulation of Virulence Gene Expression in Parasitic Protozoa
Duraisingh, Manoj T.; Horn, David
Published in:
Cell Host & Microbe
DOI:
10.1016/j.chom.2016.04.020
Publication date:
2016
Licence:
CC BY
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Link to publication in Discovery Research Portal
Citation for published version (APA):
Duraisingh, M. T., & Horn, D. (2016). Epigenetic Regulation of Virulence Gene Expression in Parasitic Protozoa.
Cell Host & Microbe, 19(5), 629-640. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2016.04.020
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in Discovery Research Portal are retained by the authors and/or other
copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with
these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 29. Aug. 2024Cell Host & Microbe
Review
Epigenetic Regulation of Virulence
Gene Expression in Parasitic Protozoa
Manoj T. Duraisingh1,*and David Horn2,*
1Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, 651 Huntington Avenue, Boston,
MA 02115, USA
2Division of Biological Chemistry & Drug Discovery, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK
*Correspondence: mduraisi@hsph.harvard.edu (M.T.D.), dhorn@dundee.ac.uk (D.H.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chom.2016.04.020
Protozoan parasites colonize numerous metazoan hosts and insect vectors through their life cycles, with the
need to respond quickly and reversibly while encountering diverse and often hostile ecological niches. Tosucceed, parasites must also persist within individuals until transmission between hosts is achieved. Severalparasitic protozoa cause a huge burden of disease in humans and livestock, and here we focus on the par-
asites that cause malaria and African trypanosomiasis. Efforts to understand how these pathogens adapt to
survive in varied host environments, cause disease, and transmit between hosts have revealed a wealth ofepigenetic phenomena. Epigenetic switching mechanisms appear to be ideally suited for the regulation ofclonal antigenic variation underlying successful parasitism. We review the molecular players and complexmechanistic layers that mediate the epigenetic regulation of virulence gene expression. Understandingepigenetic processes will aid the development of antiparasitic therapeutics.
Introduction
Protozoan parasites demonstrate varied and complex life cyclesas they are transmitted within susceptible vertebrate popula-
tions. The diverse ecologies that parasites encounter have re-
sulted in the evolution of signiﬁcant species-speciﬁc elabora-tions for survival and propagation. A large number of these
elaborations are epigenetic phenomena mediated by molecular
determinants encoded by multigene families that can be highlydiversiﬁed and variantly expressed.
Now that we are armed with a vast number of parasite ge-
nomes, it is clear that virulence genes often belong to multi-gene families that are greatly expanded, often numbering hun-dreds to thousands of genes, and representing an incredible
commitment of resources in each genome. The vast majority of
these virulence-related genes are found in specialized regionsof protozoan chromosomes, typically the subtelomeric regions,
facilitating both their variant expression and diversiﬁcation
through recombination. These ‘‘variantomes,’’ all of the genesthat vary clonally in expression within a parasite, can encode
for cell surface antigens, of which a few can act as adhesins to
facilitate host cell attachment. Variant expression facilitatesimmune evasion and the colonization of different niches. Indeed,
parasitic antigenic variation within vertebrate hosts has long
been recognized as a key survival strategy, providing a mecha-nism for persistence in the face of host immune attack, by para-sites as diverse as those that cause malaria, African trypanoso-
miasis and amebic dysentery.
In this review, we explore our emerging understanding of the
epigenetic molecular mechanisms used by parasites to survive,
transmit, thrive, and ultimately result in pathogenesis. We focus
on two parasites, Plasmodium falciparum andTrypanosoma bru-
cei, because they present evolutionarily distant organisms that
have evolved disparate strategies for persistence in vertebrate
hosts and have been the focus of considerable study. Whilethe antigenic molecules themselves are completely unique toeach parasite, the epigenetic regulators demonstrate many
conserved features between protozoan parasites and model or-ganisms. We will illustrate the common challenges of parasitism
and highlight the varied solutions that these parasites have
developed. However, it is now becoming clear that epigeneticcontrol can also regulate other aspects of the parasitic life
cycle, including the control of the switch from proliferative to
developmental programs and the adaptation required for hostand cellular tropism in different host niches.
Parasite Persistence through Antigenic Variation
Malaria is caused by infection of vertebrate hosts by Plasmo-
dium parasites that belong to the phylum apicomplexa and are
transmitted between hosts by mosquitoes. The parasite goes
through multiple morphological transformations in their verte-brate hosts as the sporozoite form ﬁrst colonizes liver cells toform hepatic schizonts and merozoites that then infect red blood
cells (RBCs). In RBCs, most parasites replicate in asexual cycles
of proliferation. While in their human hosts, malaria parasitescause signiﬁcant pathology following considerable proliferation
and increase in parasite biomass. A few parasites become
sexual forms that are subsequently taken up by the Anophelinemosquito vector for further transmission to humans.
P. falciparum exports hundreds of proteins in the infected RBC
(Hiller et al., 2004; Marti et al., 2004 ), dramatically transforming
the cell and its surface with numerous proteins, including adhe-
sins that facilitate sequestration to endothelial surfaces to avoid
clearance of infected RBCs by the spleen. The main proteininvolved in cytoadhesion is P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein 1 (PfEMP1), which is encoded by the highly polymorphic
vargene family of /C2460 virulence genes. Through the clonal and
variant expression of single members of the vargene family,
PfEMP1 variants are expressed one at a time, in a mutually
exclusive fashion, facilitating antigenic variation ( Scherf et al.,
1998 )(Figure 1 ). Ectopic recombination and immune selection
Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016 ª2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. 629
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).has resulted in a remarkable diversity in these genes. The
expression of a subset of PfEMP1 variants is associated with
severe disease, as they bind speciﬁc host receptors, resultingin tropism for the brain or the placenta ( Sampath et al., 2015;
Turner et al., 2013 ).
Several other gene families have demonstrated antigenic vari-
ation in P. falciparum (Rovira-Graells et al., 2012; Witmer et al.,
2012 ), including parasite ligand families required for RBC inva-
sion ( Coleman et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2010 ) and proteins on
the surface of infected RBCs that bind to uninfected RBCs in aprocess known as rosetting ( Niang et al., 2014 ). Analysis of
clonal lines of P. falciparum has indicated that variant expression
occurs in many other multi-gene families involved in parasiticprocesses beyond antigenic variation, the transformation of the
RBC during growth, transcriptional regulation, and lipid meta-
bolism ( Rovira-Graells et al., 2012 ).
African trypanosomes proliferate in the mammalian host
bloodstream and, if a patient is untreated, will invade the CNS,
which is ultimately lethal. These T. brucei parasites also have a
complex life cycle with multiple proliferating and non-prolifer-ating developmental stages. Morphological changes and major
changes in energy metabolism and surface architecture occur
when trypanosomes transition from the mammal to the insecthost and also when parasites migrate from the tsetse ﬂy mid-
gut to the salivary gland. T. brucei cells also undergo consider-
able morphological changes while in the bloodstream, including
Time Parasitaemia A
B10-8 
10-6 
10-4 
10-2 Genetic mutation 
Copy number variation 
Translation errors High 
Low Medium Figure 1. The Frequency of Epigenetic
Variation Is Suitable for Driving Antigenic
Variation
(A) Molecular variation and epigenetic inheritance:
frequency of variation generated during different
molecular processes commonly seen in parasitic
protozoans. Low frequency mutational events are
heritable for much longer periods. Epigeneticvariation maintains both a medium level frequency
of variation and heritability and is ideally suited
to respond to changes occurring within a trans-mission cycle.
(B) Antigenic variation. Malaria parasites and Afri-
can trypanosomes cause relapsing bloodstream
parasitaemia in mammals. This is due to waves of
parasites expressing different surface molecules(different colors): P. falciparum PfEMP1 molecules
and T. brucei variant surface glycoproteins
(VSGs). These VSGs are highly immunogenic,typically triggering an effective and lasting immune
response, although immunosuppression can occur
later during infection. The populations present atany time point can in fact be far more complex than
shown and may contain large numbers of different
clonal variants.
the transition from proliferative slender
forms to non-proliferative stumpy forms
pre-adapted for transmission to the ﬂy.
The extracellular environments encoun-
tered by T. brucei are quite distinct from
the intracellular environments encoun-
tered by other pathogenic trypanosoma-
tids like Trypanasoma cruzi , and by Plas-
modium parasites. Indeed, T. brucei do
not appear to enter host cells at any point
during their life cycle. As an adaptation to cope with this extracel-
lular lifestyle, where innate and adaptive immune attack is likely
the greatest challenge, bloodstream-form T. brucei are coated
with a dense layer of a super-abundant variant surface glycopro-tein (VSG). The VSG s are subject to epigenetic control ( Horn,
2014 ) and, like vargenes, are typically clustered at subtelomeres
(Berriman et al., 2005 ), in polycistronic VSG expression sites
(VSG -ESs). Approximately twenty VSG s are linked to promoters
that, in this case, recruit RNA polymerase I and are therefore
competent for expression, but only one is expressed at a time.VSG -ESs contain up to twelve ES-associated genes that encode
variant and surface-exposed transferrin receptors ( ESAG6/7 ),
adenylate cyclases ( ESAG4 ), and folate transporters ( ESAG10 ),
proteins that likely facilitate the establishment and maintenanceof an infection. The trypanosome surface is an attractive poten-
tial ‘‘point-of-attack.’’ Indeed, the VSG coat also accommodates
other surface receptors and channels, either known or sus-pected to be involved in nutrition and metabolic control
(Schwede et al., 2015 ). Genomic and other approaches are
also now revealing many more African trypanosome surface pro-teins operating at the host-parasite interface ( Jackson et al.,
2010 ). In insect stage cells, the VSG coat is replaced by a procy-
clin coat consisting of EP and GPEET proteins that containcharacteristic amino acid repeats, with ‘‘early’’ procyclic forms
exhibiting a form of ‘‘social motility’’ that may be important for
colonization and migration in the ﬂy ( Imhof et al., 2014 ), although,
630 Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016Cell Host & Microbe
Reviewremarkably, the procyclins themselves are not required for colo-
nization of the mid-gut.
Silencing Multigene Families
Silencing the varGenes of P. falciparum in
Heterochromatin
In sequential generations of a clonal line of P. falciparum ,
most parasites will express the same vargene/PfEMP1 variant;
however, at a very low switch-rate ( /C240.1%–2%) ( Frank et al.,
2007 ), the formerly active var gene will become silenced,
concomitant with the activation of a new vargene, resulting in
antigenic variation. Genome sequences have provided a road-
map toward understanding the chromosomal organization ofvargenes in P. falciparum . Almost all vargenes fall into three
subgroups based on sequence similarities of their promoter
regions: upsA, upsB, and upsC. Subgroups of PfEMP1 appearto possess different adhesive properties and switch-rates,suggesting that the expression of different members within
each subgroup might represent different survival advantages.
Recently, it was found that a subset of PfEMP1 with speciﬁc do-mains termed DC8 and DC13, encoded by upsA vargenes, bind
to endothelial protein C receptor (EPCR) within the brain, which
could be a major factor in the pathogenesis of cerebral malaria(Sampath et al., 2015; Turner et al., 2013 ). Common to all of
these genes is residence in subtelomeric regions or in tandem
arrays, and all appear to localize to clusters at the nuclearperiphery. These are perceived to be zones of silencing where
repressive heterochromatin is formed ( Figure 2 A). In addition,
epigenomic proﬁling has revealed at high resolution the distri-bution of histone modiﬁcations at a genome-wide level ( Ay
et al., 2014; Gupta et al., 2013; Hoeijmakers et al., 2013 ). It
is clear that several histone marks are concentrated in the
multi-gene families that encode virulence genes. This includesthe H3K9me3 mark that is an evolutionarily conserved
marker of heterochromatin ( Lopez-Rubio et al., 2009 ) and the
H3K36me3 mark ( Jiang et al., 2013 ).
Many recent functional studies have determined that parasites
require several enzymatic modiﬁers of histones, the writers
and erasers of the histone code, for the silencing of all vargenes
(Table 1 ). These include a histone methyltransferase, PfSET2
(also known as PfSETvs) with a speciﬁcity for H3K36me3 ( Jiang
et al., 2013; Ukaegbu et al., 2014 ), as well as the histone deace-
tylase PfHda2 ( Coleman et al., 2014 ). In addition, a central role
can be attributed to the histone code reader P. falciparum het-
erochromatin protein 1 (PfHP1), whose depletion also results
in a global deregulation of vargene expression ( Brancucci
et al., 2014 ). Indeed, in all of these cases, other genes that are
enriched in the histone marks for heterochromatin (H3K9me3
and H3K36me3) were also largely deregulated, suggesting thatthat PfSET2, PfHda2, and HP1 are required for the formation
and/or maintenance of heterochromatin.
Interestingly, the two members of the sirtuin histone deacety-
lase gene family, PfSir2a and PfSir2b, appear to silence alterna-tive subsets of the vargene family, upsA and upsB vargenes,
respectively, suggesting that different vargene subsets are regu-
lated through different silencing complexes ( Duraisingh et al.,
2005; Tonkin et al., 2009 ). This demonstrates a ‘‘division of la-
bor’’ for epigenetic regulators as observed in model systems.
PfSir2a is enriched at varpromoters, and this binding can beovercome by overexpression of a domain of the origin replication
complex protein (Orc1), suggesting a functional interaction
(Deshmukh et al., 2012 ). Interestingly, depletion of PfRNase II,
a chromatin-associated exoribonuclease enriched at silencedvargenes, speciﬁcally removes the silencing of upsA vargenes
(Zhang et al., 2014 ), a phenotype similar to that observed
following PfSir2a depletion ( Duraisingh et al., 2005 ). These
overlapping phenotypes following the perturbation of differentepigenetic regulators suggest intimate functional interactions,
either due to their presence in molecular pathways or even in
protein complexes. PfSir2a-mediated effects on vargene were
observed in one strain 3D7, and not in the strain FCR-3 ( Merrick
et al., 2015 ), suggesting the importance of genetic background
and potential variation in the contributions of different epigeneticregulators.
Silencing complexes, as found in other eukaryotes, remain to
be deﬁned in P. falciparum . Recently, a bromodomain protein,
PfBDP1, has been identiﬁed that is required for the silencing ofgenes involved in the invasion of RBCs by merozoites ( Josling
et al., 2015 ). Interestingly, PfBDP1 was found to be complexed
with several other proteins including another bromodomainprotein, PfBDP2. A comprehensive nuclear proteomic analysis
has been carried out that should facilitate the identiﬁcation of
silencing complexes and many other aspects of nuclear biologyinP. falciparum (Oehring et al., 2012 ). Future studies will
be required to determine whether the effect of disruption of
an epigenetic regulator on virulence gene silencing is dueto a direct loss of enzymatic activity or due to disruption of a
complex.
How heterochromatin is targeted to speciﬁc regions of the
genome and not to others also remains an outstanding question.This could result from the action of DNA-binding domains with
sequence speciﬁcity, such as members of the ApiAP2 family of
DNA binding proteins. Interestingly, PfSIP2, an ApiAP2 proteinthat binds to speciﬁc sequence elements (SPE2) in the pro-
moters of vargenes, actually promotes the formation of hetero-
chromatin and vargene silencing ( Flueck et al., 2010 ).
Silencing the VSG Genes of T. brucei
The mechanism of VSG allelic exclusion, like that in malaria par-
asites, is not fully understood, but there are some commonthemes, in particular in terms of the requirements for genesilencing. Although VSG -ESs localize to the nuclear envelope
and appear to form constitutive heterochromatin in insect
midgut-stage cells ( Figure 2 B), they localize to the extranucleolar
nucleoplasm in bloodstream-form cells ( Navarro et al., 2007 ),
possibly reﬂecting competence for expression and enhanced
competence for recombination in this life cycle stage. Theantigenic variation mechanism operating in the bloodstream-
form African trypanosome, as in malaria parasites, requires the
silencing of all but one variant gene. A role for repressive hetero-chromatin is clearly a common theme here. In the case of the
T. brucei VSG s, nucleosomes are speciﬁcally depleted from
the single active polycistronic VSG -ES ( Figueiredo and Cross,
2010; Stanne and Rudenko, 2010 ), while knockdown of histone
levels relieves silencing at inactive sites; histones H1 ( Pena
et al., 2014; Povelones et al., 2012 ) and H3 ( Alsford and Horn,
2012 ) have been tested.
In addition to core chromatin components, facultative chro-
matin components and histone modiﬁcations also play a role
Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016 631Cell Host & Microbe
Review(Table 1 ). A subtelomere-enriched histone H3-variant, H3.V,
has recently been shown to have an impact on VSG silencing
(Reynolds et al., 2016; Schulz et al., 2016 ), and multiple factors
that either post-translationally modify histones, the writers and
erasers, or bind modiﬁed histones, the readers, also have an
impact. The dispensable histone tri-methyltransferase DOT1Bthat targets H3K76, for example, is required for rapid VSG -ES
silencing and for an efﬁcient transition from the active to the
silenced state ( Figueiredo et al., 2008 ). More recently, DOT1B
was also shown to be responsible for spreading the silentdomain from an initiation site at the VSG (Batram et al.,
2014 ). Notably, DOT1A, the H3K76 di-methyltransferase, is
required for mitotic checkpoint control in bloodstream-formT. brucei (Janzen et al., 2006 ), and DOT1B is required for karyo-
kinesis in the ﬁrst cell division during differentiation to the insect
stage ( Dejung et al., 2016 ). The histone deacetylases, DAC1
and DAC3 ( Wang et al., 2010 ), and the acetyl-lysine binding
proteins, BDF2 and BDF3 ( Schulz et al., 2015 ), also have an
impact on subtelomeric gene silencing, but the sites or subte-lomeric regions they modify and bind, respectively, are not yetknown; BDF3 is known to bind transcription start sites at chro-
mosome-internal loci. A feature that appears to contrast to the
situation in malaria parasites is that the sirtuin histone deacety-lase, SIR2, although involved in telomeric silencing in T. brucei ,
has little to no impact on VSG silencing, presumably because
SIR2 silencing is restricted to a small domain immediately
Figure 2. Nuclear Architecture and Locus-Speciﬁc Changes for Allelic Exclusion in P. falciparum and T. brucei
(A) The nuclei of P. falciparum parasites (left panel) contain 14 chromosomes (only seven are shown) with vargenes (orange, only a subset of the /C2460 genes are
shown) found at all telomeres, and in internal tandem arrays. All vargenes (sub-telomeric and internal) are localized at the nuclear periphery. Silenced vargenes
are found together in clusters of four to seven chromosome ends. Each nucleus normally has a single active vargene that is in a distinct domain at the nuclear
periphery. Right panel: Transitions between an active and silent state for a vargene are associated with change at the locus from euchromatin to heterochromatin,
associated with differences in the enrichment of speciﬁc histone modiﬁcations, the histone variant H2A.Z, and ncRNA. The active vargene is accessible to
speciﬁc transcription factors, and the vargene is transcribed by RNA polymerase II.
(B) An African trypanosome nucleus (left panel) contains eleven pairs of diploid chromosomes (only three shown) with VSGs (orange) at most, maybe all , telo-
meres. A single telomeric VSG is active in bloodstream-form cells and sequesters an extranucleolar pool of RNA polymerase I (green); a larger pool of pol I is
sequestered at the nucleolus (No).VSG s and procyclins (yellow) locate to the nuclear periphery in the stages in which they are inactive. Right panel: In blood-
stream-form cells, the active VSG -ES is depleted of nucleosomes (blue) but enriched with a high mobility group protein (TDP1, dark green), RNA polymerase I
(light green) and SUMOylated proteins.
632 Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016Cell Host & Microbe
Reviewadjacent to the telomere in T. brucei (Alsford et al., 2007 ). A
bloodstream-stage-speciﬁc modiﬁed DNA base, J or hydroxy-
methyluracil found at silent VSG -ESs, and the factors respon-
sible for its synthesis have also recently been shown to havea modest impact on VSG -ES silencing ( Reynolds et al., 2016 ).
Factors that organize chromatin and its structure are also
required for VSG -ES silencing ( Table 1 ), including the histone
chaperones, FACT ( Denninger et al., 2010 ), ASF1 and CAF1 ( Als-
ford and Horn, 2012 ), the ISWI chromatin remodeler ( Stanne
et al., 2015 ), and the trypanosome nuclear lamin, NUP1 ( DuBois
et al., 2012 ). Defects in DNA replication and chromosome segre-
gation also lead to loss of silencing at VSG -ESs, as demon-
strated by perturbation of origin recognition complex compo-nents ( Benmerzouga et al., 2013 ), a mini-chromosome
maintenance (MCM)-binding protein involved in the initiation of
DNA replication ( Kim et al., 2013 ) and cohesin components
that link sister chromatids together ( Landeira et al., 2009 ). Since
many silent VSG s are subtelomeric, telomeric silencing in
other cell types suggests that telomeres are also likely to be
important for organizing silent chromatin in T. brucei . In support
of this view, several telomere-binding proteins contribute to VSG
silencing, RAP1 in particular ( Yang et al., 2009 ), but also TRF2
(Jehi et al., 2014a ) and TIF2 ( Jehi et al., 2014b ).A recent study links inositol phosphate signaling to VSG
expression control ( Cestari and Stuart, 2015 ). In this study,
knockdown of phosphatidylinositol 5-kinase or telomere-asso-ciated phosphatidylinositol 5-phosphatase, or overexpressionof glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) phospholipase C, dere-
pressed silent VSG -ESs, and in the case of the kinase, triggered
VSG switching. The VSG is connected to the surface membrane
by a GPI anchor, so this may reﬂect communication between the
cell surface and epigenetic machinery operating at the telomeric
VSG -ESs. It should be noted here that in many instances above
derepression phenotypes are moderate, despite substantial loss
of viability, suggesting that there is more to allelic exclusion than
gene silencing.
Activation and Switching of Virulence Genes
While the vast majority of virulence genes are silenced, a singlegene is expressed to carry out a speciﬁc parasitic function,also known as singular choice. While many regulators that are
required for silencing have now been identiﬁed, the molecular
basis for the selective activation of a single virulence gene re-mains mysterious. Recent studies have enigmatically deﬁned
speciﬁc features of the cellular architecture associated with acti-
vated virulence genes.Table 1. Epigenetic Regulators with Functional Evidence
Genes Epigenetic Class Mutation Genes Affected ReferencesPlasmodium falciparumHda2 Writer, class II HDAC KD Var,all; ApiAP2-G Coleman et al., 2014
HP1 Reader, chromodomain KD Var,all; ApiAP2-G Brancucci et al., 2014
SET2 Writer, KMT KO Var, all Jiang et al., 2013
SET10 Writer, KMT DN Single varoverexpression Volz et al., 2012
PfRNase II Exonuclease KD Var, upsA Zhang et al., 2014
Sir2a Writer, class III HDAC KO Var, upsA (3D7, not FCR3) Duraisingh et al., 2005
Sir2b Writer, class III HDAC KO Var, upsB (3D7, not FCR3) Tonkin et al., 2009
BDP1 Reader, bromodomain KD Invasion Josling et al., 2015
Trypansoma bruceiBDF2 Reader, bromodomain KO VSG genes Schulz et al., 2015
BDF3 Reader, bromodomain RNAi VSG genes Schulz et al., 2015
DOT1B Writer, KMT KO VSG genes Figueiredo et al., 2008
FACT Histone chaperone RNAi VSG genes Denninger et al., 2010
ISWI Remodeller RNAi VSG genes Stanne et al., 2015
MCM-BP DNA replication RNAi VSG genes Kim et al., 2013
NLP Remodeler RNAi VSG genes Narayanan et al., 2011
NUP1 Nuclear lamin RNAi VSG genes DuBois et al., 2012
ORC DNA replication complex RNAi VSG genes Benmerzouga et al., 2013
PIP5K Inositol phosphate pathway RNAi VSG genes Cestari and Stuart, 2015
PIP5Pase Inositol phosphate pathway RNAi VSG genes Cestari and Stuart, 2015
PLC Inositol phosphate pathway OverX VSG genes Cestari and Stuart, 2015
RAP1 Telomeric protein RNAi VSG genes Yang et al., 2009
Siz1/PIAS1 Writer, SUMOylation RNAi VSG genes Lo´pez-Farfa ´n et al., 2014
SUMO SUMOylation RNAi VSG genes Lo´pez-Farfa ´n et al., 2014
TDP1 Chromatin component RNAi VSG genes Narayanan and Rudenko, 2013
H3.V Chromatin component KO VSG genes Schulz et al., 2016; Reynolds et al., 2016
HDAC, histone deacetylase; KMT, lysine methyltransferase; KO, knockout; KD, knockdown; OverX, overexpression; RNAi, knockdown; DN, dominant
negative.
Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016 633Cell Host & Microbe
ReviewAn Activation Domain at the P. falciparum Nuclear
Periphery for varGene Expression
Analyses using FISH have identiﬁed all silenced vargenes local-
ized together in several clusters at the nuclear periphery ( Freitas-
Junior et al., 2005 ), while Hi-C proﬁling, which assesses the
spatial arrangement and conformation of genomes, also sug-gests that all vargenes are in close proximity to each other ( Ay
et al., 2014; Lemieux et al., 2013 ). The histone mark H3K9me3
associated with silent vargenes co-localizes with the CENP-A
marker associated with heterochromatin in model systems
(Volz et al., 2010 ). Surprisingly, H3K9me3 appears to be concen-
trated in single foci, not in obvious clusters ( Dahan-Pasternak
et al., 2013 ). In P. falciparum , transcription of a single var
gene occurs at a speciﬁc locus at the nuclear periphery, where
the activated gene moves away from the silenced clusters(Figure 3 A) (Duraisingh et al., 2005; Freitas-Junior et al., 2005 ).
The cellular architecture supporting the active vartranscriptional
site is being elucidated. For example, the histone methyltransfer-
ase PfSET10 appears to co-localize with the transcriptionallyactive vargene. Interestingly, nuclear actin has been found com-
plexed with PfSET10, which has been suggested to play a role in
the movement of the locus during activation and heterochromat-
Active Poised 
Switched A 
99% 
1% Active 
Activated H3K36 H3K36
Trophozoite, cycle 1 Trophozoite, cycle 2 Schizont, cycle 1 Trophozoite, cycle 1 Trophozoite, cycle 2 Schizont, cycle 1 
Active Recombination switch 
(DNA break-induced) 
Transcription switch Proximity-dependent 
Break-induced BFigure 3. Locus-Speciﬁc Switching in
Malaria Parasites and African
Trypanosomes
(A) Switching between silenced and active forms in
P. falciparum . In ring-stage P. falciparum tropho-
zoites, a single vargene is expressed from an
activation domain at the nuclear periphery with
histones enriched in H3K9Ac. At the time of nucleardivision, the vargene that will be active in the
following cycle remains in an activation domain
in a ‘‘poised’’ state, with histones enriched inH3K4me3. At a low frequency ( /C240.1%–2%), a new
vargene is activated while the previously active
vargene becomes silenced. Vargenes that are
deeply silenced between generations in hetero-
chromatin contain histones enriched in H3K9me3and H3K36me3.
(B) Switching genetic and epigenetic states in
T. brucei . Left panel: Extranucleolar RNA poly-
merase I (green) accumulates at the site of the
active VSG (blue). A silent VSG (orange) can be
duplicated and activated, replacing the active VSG
(top panel) or by competing for pol I (lower panel).
Right panel: Two features are shown that may
impact these switching mechanisms; proximity
may increase the probability of recombination or
transcription switching (top panel), and a DNAbreak at the active site may liberate pol I,
increasing interactions with other VSG s.
ic silencing ( Volz et al., 2012; Zhang et al.,
2011 ). It appears that the activation
domain usually only accommodates
expression of one gene at a time. Howev-er, it can support the expression of at least
two vargenes ( Brolin et al., 2009; Joer-
gensen et al., 2010 ) as well as high
numbers of var promoters ( Dzikowski
and Deitsch, 2008 ). Increased copy num-
ber of the varpromoter results in silencing
of all vargenes, suggesting that activation
of a single vargene is dependent on a limiting transcription factor
(Brancucci et al., 2012 ). Similarly, promoters of other multigene
families can also silence their family members, and transcriptionof members of the riﬁnfamily also co-localize to the activation
domain ( Howitt et al., 2009 ). It is unknown whether the activation
domain is a discrete entity through which different chromosomespass or whether the domain forms and is stabilized at the site
of active transcription. Interestingly, the sub-telomeric rep20
repeat sequence appears to be sufﬁcient for recruitment to thesame domain as active vargenes, suggesting the activation
domain is a discrete nuclear structure ( Duraisingh et al., 2005 ).
As with vargene silencing, varactivation is associated with a
speciﬁc histone code ( Figure 2 A), including the conversion
from H3K9me3 to H3K9Ac, as well as trimethylation at H3K4
on histones, and the latter may be maintained by the action of
PfSET10 ( Volz et al., 2012 ). It has been postulated that PfSET10
maintains the active vargene in a poised state during schi-
zogony, after it has been transcribed during the ring stage, which
can epigenetically seed the inheritance of the vargene activation
in the next asexual cycle ( Volz et al., 2012 ). The poised state is
characterized by the enrichment of H3K4me3, presumably
through the activity of PfSET10.
634 Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016Cell Host & Microbe
ReviewVargene promoters and introns require a one-to-one pairing
for silencing, suggesting a complex interaction ( Frank et al.,
2006 ). The identiﬁcation of ‘‘sterile’’ transcripts emanating
from the intron has suggested a key role for long non-codingRNAs (lncRNAs) in the regulation of vargenes. A bidirectional
promoter within the intron produces transcripts that run into
both neighboring exons, associated with chromatin at the nu-clear periphery. Strikingly, the lncRNAs are associated withthe single active vargene only when its promoter is active
(Amit-Avraham et al., 2015 ), and a silent vargene can be acti-
vated by expression of its cognate lncRNA in trans . Removal
of these lncRNAs resulted in a loss of vargene expression,
epigenetic memory, and switching ( Amit-Avraham et al.,
2015 ). Analogy with other systems suggests that the lncRNA
may direct the formation of chromatin with the loading of nu-
cleosomes to propagate the activation state of a locus be-
tween generations. Indeed, active vargene promoters are
also enriched with nucleosomes containing the histone variantH2A.Z ( Petter et al., 2011 ). It remains to be seen whether
the lncRNAs can recruit other key histone-modiﬁers to var
gene loci.Switching in the Expression of var Genes
A picture that emerges for the ordering of events is as follows.
In parasites that have survive d the previous round of selec-
tion, the histone code is written onto new histones soon after
synthesis. The vargene locus presumably transitions between
heterochromatic and euchromatic regions of the nucleus in astochastic fashion but with low frequency. Evidence suggests
that this relocation is actin mediated ( Volz et al., 2012; Zhang
et al., 2011 ), and the frequency of the movement could vary in
response to external stimuli. A silenced allele of the variantlytranscribed invasion gene, PfRh4, can be forced out of the
heterochromatic region shared with silenced vargenes by
activation of the neighboring gene; however, this does notautomatically result in the complete activation of PfRh4
(Coleman et al., 2012 ). Instead, the frequency of activation
of PfRh4 increases, suggesting that location alone is not suf-ﬁcient for activation. With the transition of the locus from a
heterochromatic to euchromatic region, activation presumably
also requires the demethylation of H3K9, and the acquisitionof the appropriate histone marks, followed by its stabilizationas a euchromatic ‘‘poised’’ gene, ( Figure 3 A). In this scenario,
the time spent in the heterochromatic or euchromatic zone
being exposed to histone code writers/erasers will determinethe on and off rate. The sum activity of these epigenetic
regulators will result in post-translational modiﬁcations that
describe a local histone code allowing readers such asPfHP1 and additional effectors to be recruited to the histone
tails and seed the formation of heterochromatin. Once acti-
vated, vargene expression is maintained in successive gener-
ations in a clonal line.
In addition to the movement away from the silenced clusters at
the nuclear periphery, it is clear that increased accessibility of thevargene promoter, as measured by hypersensitivity to micro-
coccal nuclease (MNase), is positively associated with activation
(Duraisingh et al., 2005 ). This is analogous to the increased
accessibility seen at the activated promoter of PfRH4, whichalso switches expression at high frequency ( Coleman et al.,
2012; Jiang et al., 2010 ). With increased accessibility, it is likelythat sequence-speciﬁc DNA-binding proteins, such as members
of the ApiAP2 family, bind to speciﬁc sequences in the varpro-
moter and facilitate transcription.
InP. falciparum , both antigenic variation and sexual conver-
sion occur at approximately 0.1%–2% per generation ( Bran-
cucci et al., 2015; Frank et al., 2007 ). Modeling suggests that
this rate of switching is critical to allow antigenic variation to besuccessful in the long term in the face of the immune system ( Co-
leman et al., 2014
). However, the frequency of switching be-
tween vargenes can vary dramatically between parasite strains
(Fastman et al., 2012; Merrick et al., 2015 ). It also appears that
the rate of switching differs dramatically depending on the var
gene that is currently active ( Enderes et al., 2011 ). The order
may be related to different functions, such as cytoadhesion tospeciﬁc niches within the body resulting from the expression of
speciﬁc vargene subgroups. Members of upsA appear to be
predominant in the host ex vivo, while in in vitro culture it is mem-bers of the upsB/upsC subgroups. An additional phenotype thathas been little explored is the overall level of vartranscription that
also appears to be different between strains ( Merrick et al.,
2015 ). This suggests that there are signiﬁcant differences in
the ability of different vargenes to remain activated, presumably
due to differences in the machinery involved. Further, switching
and the level of expression may be modulated by external factorsboth in vitro ( Rosenberg et al., 2009 ) and in vivo ( Merrick et al.,
2012 ).
Evidence has now been obtained that the critical choice be-
tween asexual proliferation and sexual development leading
to transmission in malaria blood-stage infections is epigenet-
ically regulated. In P. falciparum , parasites persist within their
human hosts in a state of asexual proliferation, with a smallnumber of parasites converting into sexual forms. Recent
evidence clearly demonstrates shared machinery between
the regulators of antigenic variation and sexual development.Depletion of PfHP1 results in a dramatic conversion of asexual
parasites toward sexual development ( Brancucci et al., 2014 )
due to the activation of the pfap2-g gene that encodes a DNA-
binding protein required for sexual conversion in both
P. falciparum and the rodent malaria parasite Plasmodium
berghei (Kafsack et al., 2014; Sinha et al., 2014 ). PfHP1 is
found enriched at pfap2-g as well as at vargenes. Clues to
how speciﬁcity of a locus for silencing is determined may be
provided by the observation that as var genes and the
pfap2-g gene all have ﬂanking insulator-like pairing element
sequences ( Avraham et al., 2012 ). Similar deregulation of
both pfap2-g and vargenes has also been observed following
depletion of the PfHda2 histone deacetylase, identifying apotential upstream regulator of an epigenetic cascade
with PfHda2 regulating PfHP1 for the switching between
silenced and active states at speciﬁc genes ( Coleman et al.,
2014 ). Interestingly, depletion of PfSET2 does not result in
activation of pfap2-g but does result in the deregulation of
vargenes.
It will be of great interest to identify the molecules that the para-
site uses to sense changes in the environment and how these sig-
nals result in a switch to the sexual development program.
PfHda2 and PfHP1 may be involved at different stages of thesignaling cascade ( Brancucci et al., 2014; Coleman et al.,
2014 ). Interestingly, PfHda2 is expressed in the schizont-stage
Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016 635Cell Host & Microbe
Reviewof the parasite when it could sense/transduce parasite signals.
The timing of expression of PfHda2 allows it to act as a sensor
of the environment by modulating its activity in the cycle before
the rate of sexual conversion to gametocytes is altered. Epige-netic regulation is suitable for this switch as the change will be
heritable for several cycles and can also be reversible in case
the environment changes again.
Epigenetic switching on and off of transcription is the main
mode of antigenic variation in P. falciparum , while recombination
into expression sites as seen in T. brucei is rare. However,
another layer of translational regulation exists in addition toepigenetic regulation for a speciﬁc vargene involved in placental
malaria, var2csa ( Bancells and Deitsch, 2013; Mok et al., 2008;
Ukaegbu et al., 2015 ). Translation of a small upstream open
reading frame (uORF) precludes translation of the downstream
var2csa gene. It has been suggested that var2csa could play
a central role in coordinating antigenic variation as vargene
expression frequently defaults to this locus.A Single VSG Expression Site Body in Trypanosomes
Recombination-based and transcriptional mechanisms can lead
toVSG switching ( Figure 3 B, left-hand panel), but recombination
makes a greater contribution to immune evasion in T. brucei
compared to P. falciparum , and much research has therefore
focused on DNA-repair in trypanosomes. The majority ofVSG -switching events require RAD51-dependent homologous
recombination, although microhomology-mediated end-joining
also appears to make a substantial contribution ( Glover et al.,
2013 ). Indeed, the subtelomeric location of VSG -ESs is thought
to favor recombination, since these domains are relatively unsta-
ble and prone to replication-fork collapse ( Glover et al., 2013 ).
VSG -ESs, present in multiple copies per genome, also harbor
repetitive sequences, additional features that likely facilitate
high rates of recombination.
In a clear parallel to the situation in P. falciparum , a large body
of evidence supporting a role for telomeric chromatin in VSG
gene silencing is now well established. Allelic exclusion, how-
ever, is more complicated and not so well understood. Exclusionrequires coordination among gene-family members, with estab-
lishment and maintenance of distinct gene expression states. In
T. brucei , a particular challenge is to understand how processive
RNA polymerase I transcription is concentrated at one telomericVSG- ES (Kassem et al., 2014 ) and how this can switch from one
telomere to another ( Figure 3 B, right-hand panel). Indeed, a sin-
gle extranucleolar focus of pol-I is present in bloodstream-formT. brucei and associates with the active VSG -ES ( Navarro and
Gull, 2001 ). These ESs segregate late during mitosis in a cohe-
sin-dependent manner ( Landeira et al., 2009 ) and, during the
developmental transition to the insect stage of the life cycle,
relocate to the nuclear periphery, concomitant with transcription
inactivation and disassembly of the pol-I focus ( Landeira and
Navarro, 2007 ), consistent with conversion to a ‘‘closed’’ chro-
matin state ( Figure 2 B).
Progress has been made in this area recently, but a funda-
mental question remains. VSG exclusion could involve an active
‘‘default’’ state requiring negative control at all but one locus, or
a silent ‘‘default’’ state requiring positive control at a single
locus. Another alternative is a ‘‘default’’ state that is subject to
coordinated activation or silencing. In particular, only modest
derepression, typically observed following perturbations ofnumerous chromatin-associated factors, supports the latter
scenario, which also invokes dedicated machinery for singular
gene activation.
Although the active VSG is always adjacent to a telomere, sug-
gesting that this location is important, no known telomere-bind-
ing protein has been found to be involved in VSG activation. The
importance of chromatin structure and modiﬁcation is alsounclear, since nucleosomes are depleted at the active VSG -ES
(Rudenko, 2010 ). A few factors associated with the active
VSG -ES are implicated in activation, however. The high mobility
group box protein, TDP1, appears to substitute for histones andto facilitate pol-I transcription at rDNA loci and at the active
VSG -ES ( Narayanan and Rudenko, 2013 ). Indeed, recent evi-
dence suggests that TDP1 excludes nucleosomes and maintainsthe ‘‘open’’ chromatin structure at the active VSG -ES ( Aresta-
Branco et al., 2016 ). A feature that appears to be speciﬁc
to the active VSG -ES is a focus of protein SUMOylation; although
the SUMOylated factor(s) are not known, the SUMO ligase SIZ1does appears to facilitate pol-I transcription ( Lo´pez-Farfa ´n et al.,
2014 ).
Although telomeres appear to be the only loci that naturally
support VSG transcription, a VSG can be transcribed at a telo-
mere-distal site ( Batram et al., 2014 ). This was achieved using
an engineered phage promoter and polymerase and wasfound to transiently interfere with native VSG expression. In
another experiment revealing communication among VSG s,
artiﬁcial blockade of the active VSG -ES allowed the high-fre-
quency activation of other VSG -ESs ( Aresta-Branco et al.,
2016 ). These results are consistent with a remarkably robust
exclusion mechanism operating in T. brucei and failure to
select two stable, simultaneously active VSG -ESs ( Chaves
et al., 1999 ).
It can be a major challenge to determine whether a chromatin-
associated factor is a cause or the consequence of a particulargene-expression status. For instance, are histones removed
from VSG -ESs leading to activation, or does activation lead to
histone removal? In this regard, it is worth considering allelicexclusion in the context of ‘‘directors’’ and ‘‘actors.’’ Based on
this distinction, many conserved chromatin components and
modiﬁers are likely actors, while speciﬁcity must be directedby other means (see Ptashne, 2013 ). As in P. falciparum , non-
coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are excellent candidates that may confer
speciﬁcity, but proteins are also likely involved. Remarkable ex-
amples of nucleotide-sequence programmable activities includethe RNAi and the CRISPR-Cas9 machinery, and we wonder
whether sequence programmable activities might also underpin
allelic exclusion mechanisms in parasites and beyond.VSG Switching Dynamics
Rates of antigenic variation are low in ‘‘experimental’’ T. brucei
cultures, in the order of one switch per 10,000 to 1 million cellsper generation. In contrast, recently ﬂy-transmitted T. brucei
have a much higher switch-rate, in the order of one switch per
500 cells per generation ( Turner, 1997 ). High rates may reﬂect
switching among or away from the subset of monocistronic sub-
telomeric VSG s active in the ﬂy salivary gland; the distinct poly-
cistronic VSG -ESs are activated in established bloodstream-
form cells ( Hertz-Fowler et al., 2008 ). The higher rates may also
persist later in a bloodstream infection, and it has been
suggested that high-frequency VSG rearrangement ( Robinson
636 Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016Cell Host & Microbe
Reviewet al., 1999 ), due to short telomeres ( Hovel-Miner et al., 2012 ), is
responsible. Regardless of the ‘‘natural’’ rate of switching, 30-
day experimental infections in mice reveal complex mixtures of(/C2430) variants at any time point ( Mugnier et al., 2015 ), suggesting
the need for de novo assembly of chimeric and novel VSG st o
sustain a long-term infection ( Hall et al., 2013; Mugnier et al.,
2015 ).
Chromatin-associated ‘‘silencing-factors’’ have also been
implicated in controlling the rate of VSG switching and antigenic
variation, either through changing the frequency of switchingtranscription from one telomeric VSG -ES to another or through
changing the frequency of successful recombination and repair,
allowing new VSG s to replace the previously active VSG . The fre-
quency of switching increases when cohesin components
(Landeira et al., 2009 ) or the telomere-binding proteins, TRF2
(Jehi et al., 2014a ) or TIF2 ( Jehi et al., 2014b ), are depleted, for
example. In terms of VSG recombination, topoisomerase 3 a
(Kim and Cross, 2010 ) and the associated RMI1 subunit ( Kim
and Cross, 2011 ) are suppressive, and this may be necessary
to maintain the integrity of the VSG -ES.
Future Perspectives
Epigenetic phenomena are increasingly recognized to be at thecore of parasitic processes through their life cycles. Parasites
demonstrate an amazing variety of life cycles, moving through
diverse hosts, tissues, and cell types in their mammalian hostsand insect vectors. Indeed, the in vivo environment can pro-
foundly affect the rate of switching. Environmental perturbations
can include the development of an immune response, changes inthe nutrition of the host, as well as host polymorphisms betweenhosts within a population. These all appear to be common chal-
lenges facing all parasites ( Figure 4 ).
For the study of virulence gene expression, we need to further
develop in vivo models and in vitro culture systems. Parasites
may behave signiﬁcantly differently in vivo, for example, due to
particular host signals or features that are not effectively recapit-
SENSING MOLECULES 
EPIGENETIC REGULATORS 
MOLECULAR SWITCHES 
switching frequency  
specific programs  levels of expression  
PHENOTYPIC CHANGES development for 
transmission 
antigenic variation  nutrient  
acquisition drug-resistance host/cellular 
tropism Figure 4. In Vivo Sensing and Epigenetic
Regulation of Life Cycle Choices
Parasites experience a variety of ecological niches
during progression through their life cycles. Envi-
ronmental signals are sensed by sensor molecules
(including epigenetic regulators). These signals are
integrated into decisions that are executed by the
epigenetic machinery. These decisions can resultin (1) different developmental programs being
chosen, (2) differences in switch-rates for given
choices, and (3) increases/decrease in the levels ofspeciﬁc virulence molecules and pathways. These
transcriptional programs result in parasite pro-
cesses, including choices between antigenic vari-
ation programs, sexual development, nutrient
acquisition, and cellular tropism.
ulated in culture systems. Interactions
with host immune effectors, and differ-ences between host organs and compart-ments, are obvious examples.
Many fundamental mechanistic ques-
tions remain to be elucidated. Can wedeﬁne different silencing complexes that
regulate speciﬁc transcriptional programs? What is the nature
and architecture of activation domains? What are the moleculardeterminants of singular choice? What are the epigenetic path-
ways for integrating diverse environmental signals? Increasingly
powerful techniques will be employed to comprehensively mea-sure post-translational modiﬁcations in various settings. For
instance, DNA methylation has only recently been recognized
inP. falciparum (Ponts et al., 2013 ).
It will also be important to understand which key regulators
or interactions may be exploited for drug development. Prolif-
eration and life cycle transitions could be targeted. Forinstance, the persistence of malaria parasite hypnozoite forms
in the liver of vertebrate hosts could be eliminated through the
use of drugs targeting epigenetic regulators ( Dembe ´le´et al.,
2014 ). High-throughput screening assays will identify speciﬁc
inhibitors of these processes that can also be used in chemical
biology studies. A tangential translational approach would
be the use of mutant parasites that are deleted in key epige-netic regulators, as vehicles for blood-stage vaccination,
due to their expression of the complement of the virulence
antigens due to failed allelic exclusion. Finally, a comparativebiological analysis of related protozoan parasites could be
particularly useful with regards to the recent evolutionarily
pressures that have resulted in the species-speciﬁc elabora-tions observed.
Ten years ago, epigenetic regulation was a mysterious
mechanism. An understanding of epigenetic phenomena is
now revealing the remarkable capabilities of parasites to survivein a myriad of changing and often hostile environments as they
are propagated through their life cycles. Signiﬁcant progress
has largely drawn on similarities with model systems. Also, theuse of democratic genomic and functional genomic tools has
led to the identiﬁcation of the machinery involved. Powerful
experimental systems are now in place for different parasites,and we are on the verge of a golden age, where mechanistic
insights will be mapped to the processes of parasitism.
Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016 637Cell Host & Microbe
ReviewACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Kristen Skillman for critical reading of the manuscript. This work
was supported by a Burroughs Wellcome Fund New Investigator in the Path-
ogenesis of Infectious Disease Fellowship previously awarded to M.T.D. and
by a Wellcome Trust Investigator Award to D.H. (100320/Z/12/Z). Due to space
considerations, we apologize for not citing all manuscripts critical to thedescribed insights.
REFERENCES
Alsford, S., and Horn, D. (2012). Cell-cycle-regulated control of VSG expres-
sion site silencing by histones and histone chaperones ASF1A and CAF-1b
inTrypanosoma brucei . Nucleic Acids Res. 40, 10150–10160 .
Alsford, S., Kawahara, T., Isamah, C., and Horn, D. (2007). A sirtuin in the Af-
rican trypanosome is involved in both DNA repair and telomeric gene silencing
but is not required for antigenic variation. Mol. Microbiol. 63, 724–736 .
Amit-Avraham, I., Pozner, G., Eshar, S., Fastman, Y., Kolevzon, N., Yavin, E.,
and Dzikowski, R. (2015). Antisense long noncoding RNAs regulate var gene
activation in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 112, E982–E991 .
Aresta-Branco, F., Pimenta, S., and Figueiredo, L.M. (2016). A transcription-
independent epigenetic mechanism is associated with antigenic switching in
Trypanosoma brucei. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 3131–3146 .
Avraham, I., Schreier, J., and Dzikowski, R. (2012). Insulator-like pairing
elements regulate silencing and mutually exclusive expression in the malariaparasite Plasmodium falciparum. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, E3678–
E3686 .
Ay, F., Bunnik, E.M., Varoquaux, N., Bol, S.M., Prudhomme, J., Vert, J.P.,
Noble, W.S., and Le Roch, K.G. (2014). Three-dimensional modeling of the
P. falciparum genome during the erythrocytic cycle reveals a strong connec-
tion between genome architecture and gene expression. Genome Res. 24,
974–988 .
Bancells, C., and Deitsch, K.W. (2013). A molecular switch in the efﬁciency of
translation reinitiation controls expression of var2csa, a gene implicated inpregnancy-associated malaria. Mol. Microbiol. 90, 472–488 .
Batram, C., Jones, N.G., Janzen, C.J., Markert, S.M., and Engstler, M. (2014).
Expression site attenuation mechanistically links antigenic variation and devel-
opment in Trypanosoma brucei . eLife 3, e02324 .
Benmerzouga, I., Concepcio ´n-Acevedo, J., Kim, H.S., Vandoros, A.V., Cross,
G.A., Klingbeil, M.M., and Li, B. (2013). Trypanosoma brucei Orc1 is essential
for nuclear DNA replication and affects both VSG silencing and VSG switching.
Mol. Microbiol. 87, 196–210 .
Berriman, M., Ghedin, E., Hertz-Fowler, C., Blandin, G., Renauld, H., Bartho-
lomeu, D.C., Lennard, N.J., Caler, E., Hamlin, N.E., Haas, B., et al. (2005).
The genome of the African trypanosome Trypanosoma brucei . Science 309,
416–422 .
Brancucci, N.M., Witmer, K., Schmid, C.D., Flueck, C., and Voss, T.S. (2012).
Identiﬁcation of a cis-acting DNA-protein interaction implicated in singular var
gene choice in Plasmodium falciparum. Cell. Microbiol. 14, 1836–1848 .
Brancucci, N.M., Bertschi, N.L., Zhu, L., Niederwieser, I., Chin, W.H., Wamp-
ﬂer, R., Freymond, C., Rottmann, M., Felger, I., Bozdech, Z., and Voss, T.S.
(2014). Heterochromatin protein 1 secures survival and transmission of malaria
parasites. Cell Host Microbe 16, 165–176 .
Brancucci, N.M., Goldowitz, I., Buchholz, K., Werling, K., and Marti, M. (2015).
An assay to probe Plasmodium falciparum growth, transmission stage forma-
tion and early gametocyte development. Nat. Protoc. 10, 1131–1142 .
Brolin, K.J., Ribacke, U., Nilsson, S., Ankarklev, J., Moll, K., Wahlgren, M., and
Chen, Q. (2009). Simultaneous transcription of duplicated var2csa gene copiesin individual Plasmodium falciparum parasites. Genome Biol. 10, R117 .
Cestari, I., and Stuart, K. (2015). Inositol phosphate pathway controls tran-
scription of telomeric expression sites in trypanosomes. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 112, E2803–E2812 .
Chaves, I., Rudenko, G., Dirks-Mulder, A., Cross, M., and Borst, P. (1999).
Control of variant surface glycoprotein gene-expression sites in Trypanosoma
brucei . EMBO J. 18, 4846–4855 .Coleman, B.I., Ribacke, U., Manary, M., Bei, A.K., Winzeler, E.A., Wirth, D.F.,
and Duraisingh, M.T. (2012). Nuclear repositioning precedes promoter acces-
sibility and is linked to the switching frequency of a Plasmodium falciparum in-
vasion gene. Cell Host Microbe 12, 739–750 .
Coleman, B.I., Skillman, K.M., Jiang, R.H., Childs, L.M., Altenhofen, L.M.,
Ganter, M., Leung, Y., Goldowitz, I., Kafsack, B.F., Marti, M., et al. (2014). A
Plasmodium falciparum histone deacetylase regulates antigenic variation
and gametocyte conversion. Cell Host Microbe 16, 177–186 .
Dahan-Pasternak, N., Nasereddin, A., Kolevzon, N., Pe’er, M., Wong, W.,
Shinder, V., Turnbull, L., Whitchurch, C.B., Elbaum, M., Gilberger, T.W.,
et al. (2013). PfSec13 is an unusual chromatin-associated nucleoporin of
Plasmodium falciparum that is essential for parasite proliferation in human
erythrocytes. J. Cell Sci. 126, 3055–3069 .
Dejung, M., Subota, I., Bucerius, F., Dindar, G., Freiwald, A., Engstler, M.,
Boshart, M., Butter, F., and Janzen, C.J. (2016). Quantitative Proteomics
Uncovers Novel Factors Involved in Developmental Differentiation of Trypano-
soma brucei. PLoS Pathog. 12, e1005439 .
Dembe ´le´, L., Franetich, J.F., Lorthiois, A., Gego, A., Zeeman, A.M., Kocken,
C.H., Le Grand, R., Dereuddre-Bosquet, N., van Gemert, G.J., Sauerwein,
R., et al. (2014). Persistence and activation of malaria hypnozoites in long-
term primary hepatocyte cultures. Nat. Med. 20, 307–312 .
Denninger, V., Fullbrook, A., Bessat, M., Ersfeld, K., and Rudenko, G. (2010).
The FACT subunit TbSpt16 is involved in cell cycle speciﬁc control of VSG
expression sites in Trypanosoma brucei . Mol. Microbiol. 78, 459–474 .
Deshmukh, A.S., Srivastava, S., Herrmann, S., Gupta, A., Mitra, P., Gilberger,
T.W., and Dhar, S.K. (2012). The role of N-terminus of Plasmodium falciparum
ORC1 in telomeric localization and var gene silencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 40,
5313–5331 .
DuBois, K.N., Alsford, S., Holden, J.M., Buisson, J., Swiderski, M., Bart, J.M.,
Ratushny, A.V., Wan, Y., Bastin, P., Barry, J.D., et al. (2012). NUP-1 Is a large
coiled-coil nucleoskeletal protein in trypanosomes with lamin-like functions.
PLoS Biol. 10, e1001287 .
Duraisingh, M.T., Voss, T.S., Marty, A.J., Duffy, M.F., Good, R.T., Thompson,
J.K., Freitas-Junior, L.H., Scherf, A., Crabb, B.S., and Cowman, A.F. (2005).
Heterochromatin silencing and locus repositioning linked to regulation of
virulence genes in Plasmodium falciparum. Cell 121, 13–24 .
Dzikowski, R., and Deitsch, K.W. (2008). Active transcription is required
for maintenance of epigenetic memory in the malaria parasite Plasmodium
falciparum. J. Mol. Biol. 382, 288–297 .
Enderes, C., Kombila, D., Dal-Bianco, M., Dzikowski, R., Kremsner, P., and
Frank, M. (2011). Var Gene promoter activation in clonal Plasmodium falcipa-
rum isolates follows a hierarchy and suggests a conserved switching program
that is independent of genetic background. J. Infect. Dis. 204, 1620–1631 .
Fastman, Y., Noble, R., Recker, M., and Dzikowski, R. (2012). Erasing the
epigenetic memory and beginning to switch–the onset of antigenic switching
of var genes in Plasmodium falciparum. PLoS ONE 7, e34168 .
Figueiredo, L.M., and Cross, G.A. (2010). Nucleosomes are depleted at the
VSG expression site transcribed by RNA polymerase I in African trypano-
somes. Eukaryot. Cell 9, 148–154 .
Figueiredo, L.M., Janzen, C.J., and Cross, G.A. (2008). A histone methyltrans-
ferase modulates antigenic variation in African trypanosomes. PLoS Biol. 6,
e161 .
Flueck, C., Bartfai, R., Niederwieser, I., Witmer, K., Alako, B.T., Moes, S., Boz-
dech, Z., Jenoe, P., Stunnenberg, H.G., and Voss, T.S. (2010). A major role
for the Plasmodium falciparum ApiAP2 protein PfSIP2 in chromosome endbiology. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000784 .
Frank, M., Dzikowski, R., Costantini, D., Amulic, B., Berdougo, E., and Deitsch,
K. (2006). Strict pairing of var promoters and introns is required for var gene
silencing in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. J. Biol. Chem. 281,
9942–9952 .
Frank, M., Dzikowski, R., Amulic, B., and Deitsch, K. (2007). Variable switching
rates of malaria virulence genes are associated with chromosomal position.
Mol. Microbiol. 64, 1486–1498 .
Freitas-Junior, L.H., Hernandez-Rivas, R., Ralph, S.A., Montiel-Condado, D.,
Ruvalcaba-Salazar, O.K., Rojas-Meza, A.P., Ma ˆncio-Silva, L., Leal-Silvestre,
R.J., Gontijo, A.M., Shorte, S., and Scherf, A. (2005). Telomeric heterochromatin
638 Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016Cell Host & Microbe
Reviewpropagation and histone acetylation control mutually exclusive expression of
antigenic variation genes in malaria parasites. Cell 121, 25–36 .
Glover, L., Alsford, S., and Horn, D. (2013). DNA break site at fragile subtelo-
meres determines probability and mechanism of antigenic variation in African
trypanosomes. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003260 .
Gupta, A.P., Chin, W.H., Zhu, L., Mok, S., Luah, Y.H., Lim, E.H., and Bozdech,
Z. (2013). Dynamic epigenetic regulation of gene expression during the lifecycle of malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003170 .
Hall, J.P., Wang, H., and Barry, J.D. (2013). Mosaic VSGs and the scale of
Trypanosoma brucei antigenic variation. PLoS Pathog. 9, e1003502 .
Hertz-Fowler, C., Figueiredo, L.M., Quail, M.A., Becker, M., Jackson, A.,
Bason, N., Brooks, K., Churcher, C., Fahkro, S., Goodhead, I., et al. (2008).
Telomeric expression sites are highly conserved in Trypanosoma brucei .
PLoS ONE 3, e3527 .
Hiller, N.L., Bhattacharjee, S., van Ooij, C., Liolios, K., Harrison, T., Lopez-
Estran ˜o, C., and Haldar, K. (2004). A host-targeting signal in virulence proteins
reveals a secretome in malarial infection. Science 306, 1934–1937 .
Hoeijmakers, W.A., Salcedo-Amaya, A.M., Smits, A.H., Franc ¸ oijs, K.J., Treeck,
M., Gilberger, T.W., Stunnenberg, H.G., and Ba ´rtfai, R. (2013). H2A.Z/H2B.Z
double-variant nucleosomes inhabit the AT-rich promoter regions of the Plas-
modium falciparum genome. Mol. Microbiol. 87, 1061–1073 .
Horn, D. (2014). Antigenic variation in African trypanosomes. Mol. Biochem.
Parasitol. 195, 123–129 .
Hovel-Miner, G.A., Boothroyd, C.E., Mugnier, M., Dreesen, O., Cross, G.A.,
and Papavasiliou, F.N. (2012). Telomere length affects the frequency and
mechanism of antigenic variation in Trypanosoma brucei . PLoS Pathog. 8,
e1002900 .
Howitt, C.A., Wilinski, D., Llina ´s, M., Templeton, T.J., Dzikowski, R., and De-
itsch, K.W. (2009). Clonally variant gene families in Plasmodium falciparum
share a common activation factor. Mol. Microbiol. 73, 1171–1185 .
Imhof, S., Knu ¨sel, S., Gunasekera, K., Vu, X.L., and Roditi, I. (2014). Social
motility of African trypanosomes is a property of a distinct life-cycle stage
that occurs early in tsetse ﬂy transmission. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004493 .
Jackson, A.P., Sanders, M., Berry, A., McQuillan, J., Aslett, M.A., Quail, M.A.,
Chukualim, B., Capewell, P., MacLeod, A., Melville, S.E., et al. (2010). The
genome sequence of Trypanosoma brucei gambiense , causative agent of
chronic human african trypanosomiasis. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 4, e658 .
Janzen, C.J., Fernandez, J.P., Deng, H., Diaz, R., Hake, S.B., and Cross, G.A.
(2006). Unusual histone modiﬁcations in Trypanosoma brucei. FEBS Lett. 580,
2306–2310 .
Jehi, S.E., Li, X., Sandhu, R., Ye, F., Benmerzouga, I., Zhang, M., Zhao, Y., and
Li, B. (2014a). Suppression of subtelomeric VSG switching by Trypanosoma
brucei TRF requires its TTAGGG repeat-binding activity. Nucleic Acids Res.
42, 12899–12911 .
Jehi, S.E., Wu, F., and Li, B. (2014b). Trypanosoma brucei TIF2 suppresses
VSG switching by maintaining subtelomere integrity. Cell Res. 24, 870–885 .
Jiang, L., Lo ´pez-Barraga ´n, M.J., Jiang, H., Mu, J., Gaur, D., Zhao, K., Felsen-
feld, G., and Miller, L.H. (2010). Epigenetic control of the variable expression of
a Plasmodium falciparum receptor protein for erythrocyte invasion. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 107, 2224–2229 .
Jiang, L., Mu, J., Zhang, Q., Ni, T., Srinivasan, P., Rayavara, K., Yang, W.,
Turner, L., Lavstsen, T., Theander, T.G., et al. (2013). PfSETvs methylation ofhistone H3K36 represses virulence genes in Plasmodium falciparum. Nature
499, 223–227 .
Joergensen, L., Bengtsson, D.C., Bengtsson, A., Ronander, E., Berger, S.S.,
Turner, L., Dalgaard, M.B., Cham, G.K., Victor, M.E., Lavstsen, T., et al.
(2010). Surface co-expression of two different PfEMP1 antigens on single
plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes facilitates binding to ICAM1
and PECAM1. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001083 .
Josling, G.A., Petter, M., Oehring, S.C., Gupta, A.P., Dietz, O., Wilson, D.W.,
Schubert, T., La ¨ngst, G., Gilson, P.R., Crabb, B.S., et al. (2015). A Plasmodium
Falciparum Bromodomain Protein Regulates Invasion Gene Expression. Cell
Host Microbe 17, 741–751 .Kafsack, B.F., Rovira-Graells, N., Clark, T.G., Bancells, C., Crowley, V.M.,
Campino, S.G., Williams, A.E., Drought, L.G., Kwiatkowski, D.P., Baker,
D.A., et al. (2014). A transcriptional switch underlies commitment to sexual
development in malaria parasites. Nature 507, 248–252 .
Kassem, A., Pays, E., and Vanhamme, L. (2014). Transcription is initiated on
silent variant surface glycoprotein expression sites despite monoallelicexpression in Trypanosoma brucei . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 8943–
8948 .
Kim, H.S., and Cross, G.A. (2010). TOPO3alpha inﬂuences antigenic variation
by monitoring expression-site-associated VSG switching in Trypanosoma
brucei. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000992 .
Kim, H.S., and Cross, G.A. (2011). Identiﬁcation of Trypanosoma brucei RMI1/
BLAP75 homologue and its roles in antigenic variation. PLoS ONE 6, e25313 .
Kim, H.S., Park, S.H., Gu ¨nzl, A., and Cross, G.A. (2013). MCM-BP is required
for repression of life-cycle speciﬁc genes transcribed by RNA polymerase I in
the mammalian infectious form of Trypanosoma brucei . PLoS ONE 8, e57001 .
Landeira, D., and Navarro, M. (2007). Nuclear repositioning of the VSG
promoter during developmental silencing in Trypanosoma brucei . J. Cell
Biol. 176, 133–139 .
Landeira, D., Bart, J.M., Van Tyne, D., and Navarro, M. (2009). Cohesin regu-
lates VSG monoallelic expression in trypanosomes. J. Cell Biol. 186, 243–254 .
Lemieux, J.E., Kyes, S.A., Otto, T.D., Feller, A.I., Eastman, R.T., Pinches, R.A.,
Berriman, M., Su, X.Z., and Newbold, C.I. (2013). Genome-wide proﬁling of
chromosome interactions in Plasmodium falciparum characterizes nuclear
architecture and reconﬁgurations associated with antigenic variation. Mol.
Microbiol. 90, 519–537 .
Lo´pez-Farfa ´n, D., Bart, J.M., Rojas-Barros, D.I., and Navarro, M. (2014).
SUMOylation by the E3 ligase TbSIZ1/PIAS1 positively regulates VSG expres-
sion in Trypanosoma brucei . PLoS Pathog. 10, e1004545 .
Lopez-Rubio, J.J., Mancio-Silva, L., and Scherf, A. (2009). Genome-wide anal-
ysis of heterochromatin associates clonally variant gene regulation with peri-
nuclear repressive centers in malaria parasites. Cell Host Microbe 5, 179–190 .
Marti, M., Good, R.T., Rug, M., Knuepfer, E., and Cowman, A.F. (2004). Target-
ing malaria virulence and remodeling proteins to the host erythrocyte. Science
306, 1930–1933 .
Merrick, C.J., Huttenhower, C., Buckee, C., Amambua-Ngwa, A., Gomez-Es-
cobar, N., Walther, M., Conway, D.J., and Duraisingh, M.T. (2012). Epigenetic
dysregulation of virulence gene expression in severe Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. J. Infect. Dis. 205, 1593–1600 .
Merrick, C.J., Jiang, R.H., Skillman, K.M., Samarakoon, U., Moore, R.M., Dzi-
kowski, R., Ferdig, M.T., and Duraisingh, M.T. (2015). Functional analysis of
sirtuin genes in multiple Plasmodium falciparum strains. PLoS ONE 10,
e0118865 .
Mok, B.W., Ribacke, U., Rasti, N., Kironde, F., Chen, Q., Nilsson, P., and
Wahlgren, M. (2008). Default Pathway of var2csa switching and translational
repression in Plasmodium falciparum. PLoS One 3,http://dx.doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0001982 .
Mugnier, M.R., Cross, G.A., and Papavasiliou, F.N. (2015). The in vivo dy-
namics of antigenic variation in Trypanosoma brucei . Science 347, 1470–1473 .
Narayanan, M.S., and Rudenko, G. (2013). TDP1 is an HMG chromatin protein
facilitating RNA polymerase I transcription in African trypanosomes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 41, 2981–2992 .
Narayanan, M.S., Kushwaha, M., Ersfeld, K., Fullbrook, A., Stanne, T.M.,
and Rudenko, G. (2011). NLP is a novel transcription regulator involved
in VSG expression site control in Trypanosoma brucei . Nucleic Acids
Res. 39, 2018–2031 .
Navarro, M., and Gull, K. (2001). A pol I transcriptional body associated with
VSG mono-allelic expression in Trypanosoma brucei . Nature 414, 759–763 .
Navarro, M., Pen ˜ate, X., and Landeira, D. (2007). Nuclear architecture under-
lying gene expression in Trypanosoma brucei. Trends Microbiol. 15, 263–270 .
Niang, M., Bei, A.K., Madnani, K.G., Pelly, S., Dankwa, S., Kanjee, U., Gunalan,
K., Amaladoss, A., Yeo, K.P., Bob, N.S., et al. (2014). STEVOR is a Plasmodium
falciparum erythrocyte binding protein that mediates merozoite invasion and
rosetting. Cell Host Microbe 16, 81–93 .
Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016 639Cell Host & Microbe
ReviewOehring, S.C., Woodcroft, B.J., Moes, S., Wetzel, J., Dietz, O., Pulfer, A.,
Dekiwadia, C., Maeser, P., Flueck, C., Witmer, K., et al. (2012). Organellar pro-
teomics reveals hundreds of novel nuclear proteins in the malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. Genome Biol. 13, R108 .
Pena, A.C., Pimentel, M.R., Manso, H., Vaz-Drago, R., Pinto-Neves, D.,
Aresta-Branco, F., Rijo-Ferreira, F., Guegan, F., Pedro Coelho, L., Carmo-Fon-seca, M., et al. (2014). Trypanosoma brucei histone H1 inhibits RNA polymer-
ase I transcription and is important for parasite ﬁtness in vivo . Mol. Microbiol.
93, 645–663 .
Petter, M., Lee, C.C., Byrne, T.J., Boysen, K.E., Volz, J., Ralph, S.A., Cowman,
A.F., Brown, G.V., and Duffy, M.F. (2011). Expression of P. falciparum var
genes involves exchange of the histone variant H2A.Z at the promoter. PLoS
Pathog. 7, e1001292 .
Ponts, N., Fu, L., Harris, E.Y., Zhang, J., Chung, D.W., Cervantes, M.C., Prud-
homme, J., Atanasova-Penichon, V., Zehraoui, E., Bunnik, E.M., et al. (2013).
Genome-wide mapping of DNA methylation in the human malaria parasite
Plasmodium falciparum. Cell Host Microbe 14, 696–706 .
Povelones, M.L., Gluenz, E., Dembek, M., Gull, K., and Rudenko, G. (2012).
Histone H1 plays a role in heterochromatin formation and VSG expression
site silencing in Trypanosoma brucei. PLoS Pathog. 8, e1003010 .
Ptashne, M. (2013). Epigenetics: core misconcept. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
110, 7101–7103 .
Reynolds, D., Hofmeister, B.T., Cliffe, L., Alabady, M., Siegel, T.N., Schmitz,
R.J., and Sabatini, R. (2016). Histone H3 variant regulates RNA polymerase
II transcription termination and dual strand transcription of siRNA loci in Trypa-
nosoma brucei . PLoS Genet. 12, e1005758 .
Robinson, N.P., Burman, N., Melville, S.E., and Barry, J.D. (1999). Predomi-
nance of duplicative VSG gene conversion in antigenic variation in African try-
panosomes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 19, 5839–5846 .
Rosenberg, E., Ben-Shmuel, A., Shalev, O., Sinay, R., Cowman, A., and
Pollack, Y. (2009). Differential, positional-dependent transcriptional response
of antigenic variation (var) genes to biological stress in Plasmodium falcipa-
rum. PLoS ONE 4, e6991 .
Rovira-Graells, N., Gupta, A.P., Planet, E., Crowley, V.M., Mok, S., Ribas de
Pouplana, L., Preiser, P.R., Bozdech, Z., and Corte ´s, A. (2012). Transcriptional
variation in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Genome Res. 22,
925–938 .
Rudenko, G. (2010). Epigenetics and transcriptional control in African trypano-
somes. Essays Biochem. 48, 201–219 .
Sampath, S., Brazier, A.J., Avril, M., Bernabeu, M., Vigdorovich, V., Mascare-
nhas, A., Gomes, E., Sather, D.N., Esmon, C.T., and Smith, J.D. (2015). Plas-
modium falciparum adhesion domains linked to severe malaria differ in
blockade of endothelial protein C receptor. Cell. Microbiol. 17, 1868–1882 .
Scherf, A., Hernandez-Rivas, R., Buffet, P., Bottius, E., Benatar, C., Pouvelle,
B., Gysin, J., and Lanzer, M. (1998). Antigenic variation in malaria: in situ
switching, relaxed and mutually exclusive transcription of var genes during
intra-erythrocytic development in Plasmodium falciparum. EMBO J. 17,
5418–5426 .
Schulz, D., Mugnier, M.R., Paulsen, E.M., Kim, H.S., Chung, C.W., Tough, D.F.,
Rioja, I., Prinjha, R.K., Papavasiliou, F.N., and Debler, E.W. (2015). Bromodo-
main proteins contribute to maintenance of bloodstream form stage identity in
the African trypanosome. PLoS Biol. 13, e1002316 .
Schulz, D., Zaringhalam, M., Papavasiliou, F.N., and Kim, H.S. (2016). Base J
and H3.V regulate transcriptional termination in
Trypanosoma brucei . PLoS
Genet. 12, e1005762 .
Schwede, A., Macleod, O.J., MacGregor, P., and Carrington, M. (2015). How
Does the VSG Coat of Bloodstream Form African Trypanosomes Interactwith External Proteins? PLoS Pathog. 11, e1005259 .Sinha, A., Hughes, K.R., Modrzynska, K.K., Otto, T.D., Pfander, C., Dickens,
N.J., Religa, A.A., Bushell, E., Graham, A.L., Cameron, R., et al. (2014). A
cascade of DNA-binding proteins for sexual commitment and development
in Plasmodium. Nature 507, 253–257 .
Stanne, T.M., and Rudenko, G. (2010). Active VSG expression sites in Trypa-
nosoma brucei are depleted of nucleosomes. Eukaryot. Cell 9, 136–147 .
Stanne, T., Narayanan, M.S., Ridewood, S., Ling, A., Witmer, K., Kushwaha,
M., Wiesler, S., Wickstead, B., Wood, J., and Rudenko, G. (2015). Identiﬁcationof the ISWI chromatin remodeling complex of the early branching eukaryote
Trypanosoma brucei . J. Biol. Chem. 290, 26954–26967 .
Tonkin, C.J., Carret, C.K., Duraisingh, M.T., Voss, T.S., Ralph, S.A., Hommel,
M., Duffy, M.F., Silva, L.M., Scherf, A., Ivens, A., et al. (2009). Sir2 paralogues
cooperate to regulate virulence genes and antigenic variation in Plasmodium
falciparum. PLoS Biol. 7, e84 .
Turner, C.M. (1997). The rate of antigenic variation in ﬂy-transmitted and
syringe-passaged infections of Trypanosoma brucei . FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
153, 227–231 .
Turner, L., Lavstsen, T., Berger, S.S., Wang, C.W., Petersen, J.E., Avril, M.,
Brazier, A.J., Freeth, J., Jespersen, J.S., Nielsen, M.A., et al. (2013). Severe
malaria is associated with parasite binding to endothelial protein C receptor.
Nature 498, 502–505 .
Ukaegbu, U.E., Kishore, S.P., Kwiatkowski, D.L., Pandarinath, C., Dahan-Pas-
ternak, N., Dzikowski, R., and Deitsch, K.W. (2014). Recruitment of PfSET2 by
RNA polymerase II to variant antigen encoding loci contributes to antigenicvariation in P. falciparum. PLoS Pathog. 10, e1003854 .
Ukaegbu, U.E., Zhang, X., Heinberg, A.R., Wele, M., Chen, Q., and Deitsch,
K.W. (2015). A Unique Virulence Gene Occupies a Principal Position in Immune
Evasion by the Malaria Parasite Plasmodium falciparum. PLoS Genet. 11,
e1005234 .
Volz, J., Carvalho, T.G., Ralph, S.A., Gilson, P., Thompson, J., Tonkin, C.J.,
Langer, C., Crabb, B.S., and Cowman, A.F. (2010). Potential epigenetic regu-latory proteins localise to distinct nuclear sub-compartments in Plasmodium
falciparum. Int. J. Parasitol. 40, 109–121 .
Volz, J.C., Ba ´rtfai, R., Petter, M., Langer, C., Josling, G.A., Tsuboi, T.,
Schwach, F., Baum, J., Rayner, J.C., Stunnenberg, H.G., et al. (2012).
PfSET10, a Plasmodium falciparum methyltransferase, maintains the active
var gene in a poised state during parasite division. Cell Host Microbe 11, 7–18 .
Wang, Q.P., Kawahara, T., and Horn, D. (2010). Histone deacetylases play
distinct roles in telomeric VSG expression site silencing in African trypano-
somes. Mol. Microbiol. 77, 1237–1245 .
Witmer, K., Schmid, C.D., Brancucci, N.M., Luah, Y.H., Preiser, P.R., Bozdech,
Z., and Voss, T.S. (2012). Analysis of subtelomeric virulence gene families
in Plasmodium falciparum by comparative transcriptional proﬁling. Mol. Micro-
biol. 84, 243–259 .
Yang, X., Figueiredo, L.M., Espinal, A., Okubo, E., and Li, B. (2009). RAP1 is
essential for silencing telomeric variant surface glycoprotein genes in Trypano-
soma brucei . Cell 137, 99–109
.
Zhang, Q., Huang, Y., Zhang, Y., Fang, X., Claes, A., Duchateau, M., Namane,
A., Lopez-Rubio, J.J., Pan, W., and Scherf, A. (2011). A critical role of perinu-clear ﬁlamentous actin in spatial repositioning and mutually exclusive expres-
sion of virulence genes in malaria parasites. Cell Host Microbe 10, 451–463 .
Zhang, Q., Siegel, T.N., Martins, R.M., Wang, F., Cao, J., Gao, Q., Cheng, X.,
Jiang, L., Hon, C.C., Scheidig-Benatar, C., et al. (2014). Exonuclease-medi-
ated degradation of nascent RNA silences genes linked to severe malaria.
Nature 513, 431–435 .
640 Cell Host & Microbe 19, May 11, 2016Cell Host & Microbe
Review