EATING LITTER
In cetaceans, ingestion of debris can have multiple
impacts including:
•Complete blockage of the digestive system 
and starvation; 
• Internal injury and disease;• Inducing the feeling of satiation and reducing the 
feeding stimulus leading to reduced growth rates andproductivity, endocrine disruption and malnutrition;
• Increased pollution loads.Ingestion of micro-plastics (pieces smaller than 5mm) 
is an additional source of pollutants for cetaceans.Some pollutants absorb onto small pieces of plasticwhich are then consumed by animals. Plastics also contain certain substances, such as plasticisers, which
may also be transferred through ingestion of particles.
8
The impacts of marine debris on cetaceans have notbeen adequately studied, and it is difficult to safelyascribe trends in exposure rates. However, in combination with increasing levels of marine debris in the marine environment, data indicate a worryingincrease in ingestion by cetaceans. According to arecent review, ingestion of debris has now been documented in 252 cases, affecting at least 38 cetacean species, 44% of all known cetacean species.
9
It is probable that, to some extent, all species areaffected but some populations may be particularly vulnerable, in particular those whose feeding groundsare affected by the accumulation of debris. 
Plastics constitute the majority (56%) of the debris
recorded as ingested by cetaceans, with derelict fishinggear also a dominant component (27%). Debris items
INTRODUCTION
Increasingly global in its distribution and pervading even the deep seas 
and polar regions, marine debris poses a serious threat to marine habitats and wildlife. 
The term ‘marine debris’ refers to solid materials of man-made origin in the marine environment, and encompasses all forms
of discarded or lost waste. Estimates indicate that approximately 6.4 million tonnes - equivalent to the weight of 40,000Boeing-747 airplanes - of marine litter enters the oceans every year, resulting in an estimated 13,000 pieces of litter withinevery square kilometre of ocean.
1In hotspots of accumulation, this exceeds 3.5 million pieces of litter per square kilometre.2
These quantities are only set to rise; plastics now constitute between 60-80% of marine debris and persist in the marine environment.
3They may fragment, but do not usually biodegrade, potentially persisting for hundreds to thousands of years.4
Meanwhile, there is mixed evidence as to whether international legislation has had any impact in stemming debris inputs.5
Marine wildlife is now paying the price for our throwaway society. Although there is a lack of up to date information on thescale of the problem, it can be very conservatively estimated that each year more than 100,000 marine mammals die fromingesting or becoming entangled in debris.
6Marine debris has the potential to affect all trophic levels and for its impacts to
affect the entire food chain, from planktonic microorganisms through to marine megafauna including cetaceans.7
DYING AT OUR CONVENIENCE
The impact of marine debris on whales, dolphins and porpoises
© M. Carillo/canariasconservacion
July 20122ingested range in size from microplastics
to large pieces of plastic sheeting or netting.
10
Examples include:
• Sperm whale: Ingestion of 105 pieces
of netting, line and plastic, ranging in size from 10cm2 to 16m2;
11
• Cuvier’s beaked whale: Ingestion 
of 378 items with a collective weight of 33kg;
12
• Minke whale: Ingestion of 22 pieces 
of plastic, equalling a total volume of around 15 litres.
13
Low detectability
There are often no obvious externalsigns of ingestion of debris and it has ahigh potential to remain undetected.
14
If taken at face value, the 252 cases ofingestion recorded in a recent review,and the resulting mortality rates, mightbe interpreted as an insignificant threatto cetacean populations. However,stranding rates of dead cetaceans arevery low,
15few bodies are adequatelyexamined to allow detection of debris 
as the cause of death, and thus the realmortality rates are likely much greater.Detection of debris ingestion by some ofthe whales living in the deepest oceansmay be exceptionally difficult as so fewbodies are ever seen and yet some ofthese whales, for example the beakedwhales that feed in deep trenches wheremarine debris might accumulate, may be especially vulnerable.
16
Ingestion is likely to be a more seriousissue than it may appear as evidencedby those studies which have consideredlarger sample sizes from animalsbycaught in nets. These show debrisingestion prevalence rates of 10-27%.
17
Whilst mortality rates are the principalconcern resulting from debris ingestion,there may also be significant chroniceffects on health which threaten thelong-term viability of cetacean populations.
18
ENTANGLEMENT
Whilst it frequently remains difficult toseparate entanglement in active fishinggear from entanglement in debris, some 57 cases of debris-entanglementinvolving 15 cetacean species have been recorded and  the data indicatethat this is increasing. Abandoned, lostor discarded fishing gear (ALDFG) causes the majority of entanglements of cetaceans. With ALDFG, there is ahigh risk of repeated ‘ghost-fishing’ with nets and lines ensnaring multiple individuals.
Entanglement can often cause progressive
debilitation over a period of months or years, resulting in a painful and prolonged progression to death. Inlethally-entangled North Atlantic rightwhales, the average time to death wasfound to be 5.6 months but in some individuals took up to one and a halfyears.
19Beyond the mortality of entangled
cetaceans, the welfare implications ofentanglements are severe, representing“one of the worst forms of human-causedmortality in any wild animal”.
20
© Cascadia Research Collective
 © Cascadia Research Collective
TOP:
marine debris found in the 
stomach of a stranded gray whale. 
ABOVE:
Plastic cylinder ingested by gray whale. Effects of entanglement can include:
• Immediate mortality through drowning;
• Injury;• Progressive constriction and tissue 
damage as individuals grow;
• Limited foraging ability and increased
energy expenditure, leading to malnutrition, starvation and consequent impacts on productivity; 
• Reduced capacity for engaging in 
social behaviours, including reproduction;
• Reduced mobility making cetaceans 
more prone to other threats such as vessel strikes.
Examples include:•Bowhead whale:
Approximately 10% of the populationsuffers from entanglement in fishing gear, of which ALDFG is the main likely culprit.
21The resulting 
mortality rates and population impacts are unknown;
•North Atlantic right whale:
57% of the population bears evidenceof entanglement interactions. Entanglement is identified as one of the factors impeding population recovery.
22The contribution of 
ALDFG or active gear to these 
entanglements is unknown;
Low recovery rates of dead bodies also
affect the evaluation of entanglements.Studies of scarring patterns of strandedwhales suggest that less than 12% ofentanglement interactions are reported.
23
An added problem is that the relativecontribution that ALDFG, as opposed to actively deployed gear, makes toentanglement mortalities is unclearbecause the origin of gear cannot always be determined. In a recentreview, records of cetacean entanglementwhere the origin of fishing gear wasunknown or likely included both activegear and ALDFG numbered 2,281, compared to the 57 cases where ALDFGwas identified.
24It is therefore highly
likely that under-detection of entanglementin debris occurs due to misidentificationof ALDFG as active gear.
CONCLUSIONS
The continual influx of litter frommarine and land based sources into ouroceans has produced a marine environmentin which no region or species mayremain unaffected. For cetaceans, thethreats posed by marine debris are multiple, ranging from direct injury andmortality as a result of entanglement in,or ingestion of, debris, to secondaryeffects through transfer of chemical 
pollutants, habitat degradation andeffects on prey populations. 
Marine debris interactions are a largely
unseen and unquantified threat withrespect to cetaceans. Clearly marinedebris presents significant animal welfare problems at the individual leveland, therefore, warrants attention frommarine policy makers. At the populationor species level, our low ability to detectdebris interactions, combined with thelow power to detect changes in popula-tion abundance from current estimates,prevents us from determining and quan-tifying the scale of the impacts. Howevereven low observed rates of entanglementhave resulted in population-levelimpacts in other marine mammalspecies. The impact of marine debris oncetaceans therefore urgently requiresmore dedicated research. 
Over the last ten years a growing number
of governments
25and inter-governmental
organisations – including UNEP,26the
Convention on Biological Diversity,27the
Convention on Migratory Species28and
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation29
– have formally recognised the need for urgent and co-ordinated action toaddress this multi-faceted problem andstated an intention to take suchactions.
30However, despite the adoption
of a number of international laws andother initiatives dating from 1973onwards and aimed at reducing inputs of marine and land-based waste into themarine environment, evidence suggeststhat quantities of debris and debrisinteraction rates are continuing toincrease.
31Greater effort needs to be
made to better understand the risk thatingestion of and entanglement in marinedebris poses to cetaceans – both as individuals and populations. The IWCprovides an ideal forum for experts tocoordinate international monitoring ofimpacts, develop mitigation and advanceinternational action on this issue withregard to cetaceans. 
3“Plastics form the
majority of thedebris recorded as ingested bycetaceans”
BELOW:
Sperm whale stranded in 
Canary Islands.
©  NOAA ©  M. Carrillo/canariaconservacion1 UNEP (2005) UNEP Regional Seas Programme, Marine 
litter and abandoned fishing gear. Report to the Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Office of Legal Affairs, UNHQ. Regional Seas Coordinating Office, UNEP, Nairobi.
2Yamashita, R., Tanimura, A. Floating plastic in the Kuroshio Current area, western North Pacific Ocean. Marine Pollution Bulletin 54, 485-8 (2007).
3Derraik, J.G.B. The pollution of the marine environment by plastic debris: a review. Marine Pollution Bulletin 44, 842-52 (2002).
4Barnes, D.K. a, Galgani, F., Thompson, R.C. & Barlaz, M. Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences 364, 1985-98 (2009).
5See UNEP Marine Litter, An analytical overview. (2005); Henderson, J.R. A Pre- and Post-MARPOL Annex V summary of Hawaiian Monk Seal entanglements and marine debris accumulation in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, 1982–1998. Marine Pollution Bulletin 42,584-589 (2001); Johnson, S.W. Deposition of trawl web on an Alaska beach after implementation of MARPOL Annex V legislation. Marine Pollution Bulletin 28, 477-481 (1994).
6Wallace, N. Debris entanglement in the marine environment:A review. Proceedings of the Workshop on the Fate and Impact of Marine Debris 259-277 (1985).
7Derraik (2002), ibid; Barnes et al. (2009) ibid; and Gregory, M.R. Plastic “scrubbers” in hand cleansers: a further (and minor) source for marine pollution identified. Marine Pollution Bulletin 32, 867-871 (1996).
8Goldstein, M.C., Rosenberg, M. & Cheng, L. Increased oceanic microplastic debris enhances oviposition in an endemic pelagic insect. Biol Lett rsbl.2012.0298-(2012). doi:10.1098/rsbl.2012.0298
9Baulch, S. & Perry, C. (2012) A sea of plastic: Evaluating the impacts of marine debris on cetaceans. Paper SC/64/E10 submitted to the 64th meeting of the International Whaling Commission Scientific Committee, Panama July 2012.
10Baulch, S. & Perry, C. (2012), ibid.
11Jacobsen, J.K., Massey, L. & Gulland, F. Fatal ingestion offloating net debris by two sperm whales (Physeter 
macrocephalus) . Marine pollution bulletin 60, 765-7(2010).
12Poncelet, E., van Canneyt, O. and Boubert, J.J. Considerable amount of plastic debris in the stomach of aCuvier’s beaked whale 
(Ziphius cavirostris) washed ashore on the French Atlantic coast. European Research 
on Cetaceans 14, 44–47 (2000).
13Mauger, G., Kerleau, F., Robin, J.P., Dubois, B., De Pierrepont, J.F., De Meersman, P. & Custers, I. Marine debris obstructing stomach of a young minke whale 
(Balaenoptera acutorostrata) stranded in Normandy, 
France. American Cetacean Society International Conference (2002).
14Derraik (2002), ibid.
15Williams, R., Gero, S., Bejder, L., Calambokidis, J., Kraus, S.,Lusseau, D., Read, A., Robbins, J. Underestimating the damage: interpreting cetacean carcass recoveries in the context of the Deepwater Horizon/BP incident. Conservation Letters 4, 228-233 (2011); Fisheries and Oceans Canada Recovery Strategy for the Northern and Southern Resident Killer Whales (Orcinus orca) in Canada.Species at Risk Act Recovery Strategy Series. 81 (Ottawa, 2008)
16Simmonds, M.P. in press. Cetaceans and marine debris: the great unknown. Journal of Marine Biology.
17Evans, K., Morrice, M., Hindell, M. & Thiele, D. The diet of sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus) in southern Australian waters. Marine Mammal Science 18, 622-643 (2002); Tonay, A. M., Dede, A., Öztürk, A., Öztürk, B. Stomach content of harbour porpoises 
(Phocoena 
phocoena) from the Turkish western Black Sea in spring 
and early summer. Rapp. Comm. int. Mer Medit. 616 (2007); Walker, W. A., Coe, J.M. Survey of Marine Debris Ingestion by Odontocete Cetaceans. Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Marine Debris 2-7 (1990);  Gomer i , M., Galov, A., Gomer i , T., Škrti , D. & urkovi , S., Luci , H., Vukovi , S., Arbanasi , H., Gomer i , H. Bottlenose dolphin 
(Tursiops truncatus) 
depredation resulting in larynx strangulation with gill-netparts. Marine Mammal Science 25, 392-401 (2009).
18McCauley, S. J. and Bjorndal, K. A. Conservation implications of dietary dilution from debris ingestion: Sublethal effects in post hatchling loggerhead sea turtles. Conservation Biology 13, 925-929 (1999).
19Moore, M., Bogomolni, A., Bowman, R., Hamilton, P., Charles, T., Knowlton, A., Landry, S., Rotstein, D., Touhey,K. Fatally entangled right whales can die extremely slowly. Atlantic 4, 1999-2001 (2006); Knowlton, A.R. & Kraus, S.D. Mortality and serious injury of northern right whales 
(Eubalaena glacialis) in the western North 
Atlantic Ocean. Journal of Cetacean Research and Management 193-208 (2001).
20Cassoff, R. et al. Lethal entanglement in baleen whales. Diseases of aquatic organisms 96, 175-85 (2011).
21Citta, J. et al. Does the winter range of bowhead whales 
overlap commercial fisheries in the Bering Sea? 19th Biennial Conference on the Biology of Marine Mammals (2011).
22Knowlton, A.R. & Kraus, S.D. Mortality and serious injury of northern right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) in the 
western North Atlantic Ocean. Journal of Cetacean Research and Management 193-208 (2001).
23Robbins, J. A review of the frequency and impact of entanglement on Gulf of Maine humpback whales. 9 (2010).
24Baulch & Perry (2012), ibid.
25An example of a governmental response can be found in the 2011 decision by the Autoridad de los Recursos Acuáticos de Panamá (ARAP) to initiate a programme to address the problem of marine debris and ghost nets in the Baru district in the province of Chiriqui.
26E.g. Progress in the implementation of UNEP’s marine litter activities 2007-2011 and the way forward from 2012to 2016 Intergovernmental Review Meeting on the implementation of the Global Programme of Action for the Protection of the Marine Environment from Land-based Activities. Third session Manila, 25-27 January 2012. UNEP/GPA/IGR.3/INF/6. See also: http://www.unep.org/regionalseas/marinelitter/ and the Honolulu commitment adopted at the 5th International Marine Debris Conference held in Honolulu, Hawaii, 20-25 March 2011 (hosted by NOAA and UNEP) available at: http://www.5imdc.org/
27E.g. Agenda item 6.2 of the 16th meeting of the Subsidiary Body on Scientific and Technological Advice  (STAP) to the Convention on Biological Diversity. Montreal, 30 April - 5 May 2012
28E.g. UNEP/CMS/Resolution 10.4: Resolution on MARINE DEBRIS Adopted by the CMS Conference of the Parties at its Tenth Meeting (Bergen, 20-25 November 2011)
29Macfadyen, G., Huntington, T., Cappell, R. Abandoned, lost or otherwise discarded fishing gear. UNEP Regional Seas Reports and Studies, No 185. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper, No 523. Rome, UNEP/FAO. 2009. 115p.
30ARAP. “Programa contra las ‘Redes Fantasmas’ llega a Chiriqui”. La Marea. Boletin Informativo no 101. November2011. 
31UNEP (2005), ibid.REFERENCES
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE IWC
We recommend that the IWC holds a workshop on marine debris, the primary aim of which would be to
determine how to best investigate quantitatively the ways in which marine debris is affecting cetaceansand how best to monitor and mitigate for these effects. A workshop could also build the foundations forthe IWC to undertake future actions on this issue, which could include:
• Dedicated surveys of habitats which may be especially affected, including those in the deep seas;
• Producing a centralized database to collate cases of debris interactions;• Standardisation of data from strandings networks to allow more certain identification of types of fishing gear and whether 
gear is active or derelict (i.e. debris) at the time of impact; 
• Analysis of global data to determine the rate of interactions, resulting rates of mortality and other fitness-related patholog y
in order to evaluate population level impacts; 
• Identification of which types of marine debris (including different types of fishing gear) are most likely to result in morbid ity
and mortality of cetaceans;
• Consultation with veterinarians and animal welfare experts to more fully understand the negative health and welfare 
implications of cetaceans’ interactions with marine debris;
• Determination of the prevalence of micro-plastic ingestion, potential toxicological impacts for cetaceans and principle 
sources of micro-plastics in the marine environment; 
• Identification of populations and habitats of highest concern and priority areas for future research; • Formulation of actions to prevent and mitigate the impacts of marine debris on cetaceans and co-ordination with other 
relevant IGOs working on marine debris, including UNEP’s Honolulu Strategy, to promote synthesis of mitigation efforts. 
For more information, contact info@eia-international.org 