 International Journal of  
Molecular Sciences
Review
Love at First Taste: Induction of Larval Settlement by
Marine Microbes
Sergey Dobretsov1,2,* and Daniel Rittschof3
1Centre of Excellence in Marine Biotechnology, Sultan Qaboos University, Al Khoud 123 P .O. Box 50,
Muscat 123, Oman
2Department of Marine Science and Fisheries, College of Agricultural and Marine Sciences,
Sultan Qaboos University, Al Khoud 123 P .O. Box 34, Muscat 123, Oman
3Marine Science and Conservation, Marine Laboratory, Nicholas School, Duke University,
135 Duke Marine Lab Road, Beaufort, NC 28516, USA; ritt@duke.edu
*Correspondence: sergey@squ.edu.om
Received: 13 January 2020; Accepted: 20 January 2020; Published: 22 January 2020
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Marine bioﬁlms are composed of many species of bacteria, unicellular algae, and protozoa.
Bioﬁlms can induce, inhibit, or have no e ect on settlement of larvae and spores of algae. In this
review, we focus on induction of larval settlement by marine bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes and
review publications from 2010 to September 2019. This review provides insights from meta-analysis
on what is known about the e ect of marine bioﬁlms on larval settlement. Of great interest is
the impact of di erent components of marine bioﬁlms, such as bacteria and diatoms, extracellular
polymeric substances, quorum sensing signals, unique inductive compounds, exoenzymes, and
structural protein degradation products on larval settlement and metamorphosis. Molecular aspects
of larval settlement and impact of climate change are reviewed and, ﬁnally, potential areas of future
investigations are provided.
Keywords: bioﬁlm; larval settlement; bacteria; diatoms; protozoa; settlement pheromones
1. Introduction
Any clean substratum submerged in seawater is quickly colonized by molecules,
micro-organisms [ 1], and propagules [ 2]. On the surface of the substratum, microbial colonizers
form complex bioﬁlms composed of bacteria, archaea, fungi, protozoa, and unicellular microalgae [ 3].
Marine bioﬁlms are mixed complex microbial communities dominated by bacteria and diatoms
(Bacillariophyceae) [ 4]. Bioﬁlms are three dimensional in structure. Micro-organisms in bioﬁlms
are surrounded by a self-produced matrix of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), composed
of polysaccharides, proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids [ 5]. EPS keep microbial cells together and
provide suitable micro-environmental conditions [ 6]. Marine bioﬁlms are highly dynamic. Changes in
temperature, salinity, solar radiation, etc., result in corresponding changes in microbial communities
inhabiting bioﬁlms [ 3]. Additionally, in the presence and absence of macro-organisms micro-organisms
interact with each other within a bioﬁlm, which changes microbial densities, bioﬁlm’s species
composition, and chemistries in space and time [ 7]. Products of exoenzymes, part of degradative
microbial processes on structural materials, including proteins and proteinaceous glues, are integral to
the organization of marine communities [8].
Investigations of marine bioﬁlms, their composition, and dynamics started less than 100 years
ago with the pioneering work of Claude Zobell and Ester Allen [ 9] who observed microbial bioﬁlms
and developed culture-dependent methods to isolate and cultivate marine bacteria. This pioneering
work on isolation and culturing of bacteria began a fruitful area of research [ 10]. Culture-dependent
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731; doi:10.3390 /ijms21030731 www.mdpi.com /journal /ijmsInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 2 of 19
methods continue to be intensively used and have been supplemented by development of molecular
and metagenomic methods (see reviews [ 3,4,7,11]). Polymerase chain reaction combined with high
throughput next generation sequencing methods allow characterization of non-cultivable and rare
microorganisms present in bioﬁlms [ 12]. Additionally, these methods allow identiﬁcation of genes
and prediction of their functions [ 3]. Recently developed metabolomic methods are employed to
identify metabolites produced by microbes in bioﬁlms in response to environmental stress [ 13,14].
Combinations of metagenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics methods enables
study of changes in composition of bioﬁlms and chemical compounds produced as well as their
functions. Though still in their infancy with respect to analysis and interpretation, these new methods
have already demonstrated remarkable potential.
Cell-to-cell communication called quorum sensing (QS) allows bacteria in bioﬁlms to coordinate
their adhesion, swarming, luminescence, and production of bioactive compounds [ 15,16]. Bacteria
produce and release small inductive molecules (autoinducers) and respond to them once they reach
to a threshold concentration [ 17,18]. QS autoinducers depend on the density of producing bacteria.
Dierent Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria use di erent QS signals for communication
(see reviews [ 15,16,19]). The best studied QS autoinducers are acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs).
Speciﬁcity of this autoinducers is related to the length of R-group side chain. Bacteria not only produce
QS signals but also inhibit or disrupt QS of other bacteria (see reviews [ 20–22]). Additionally, some
marine eukaryotes respond to bacterial QS signals and disrupt them [16].
Marine organisms that are sessile as adults routinely have free living planktonic dispersal stages
called larvae and sporelings and other kinds of propagules [ 11]. These are referred to generally
as propagules. During the planktonic stage, propagules may or may not, feed, grow, and develop.
All propagules disperse some distance in the water column before they settle [ 23,24]. While some
species of marine invertebrates are highly specialized and settle in the particular habitats, other species
are generalists and settle and attach to any available substratum [ 25]. For most propagules, the selected
substratum is particularly important for subsequent survival and reproduction. Once larvae or spores
attach to the substratum, they metamorphose into juveniles and gather energy growing quickly or
slowly into adult organisms. Many macro-fouling organisms involved in fouling of man-made surfaces
grow very quickly and are reproductive within weeks of settlement.
The relationship of propagules to the substrate is complex. Microbial bioﬁlms can either induce,
inhibit or have no e ect on the settlement of marine organisms (see reviews [ 7,25,26]). Depending on
the species, settlement can be rapid, even faster than initial attachment by bacteria and can be triggered
by surface energy and organic ﬁlms [ 27–30]. In many cases, specialist larvae require general or speciﬁc
bacterial ﬁlms for settlement [25,26,31].
All larvae of specialist species and most larvae of generalist species respond to cues and pheromones
produced by symbionts and conspeciﬁcs. Di erences in a bioﬁlm’s species composition, age, and the
density of di erent species inﬂuence the attractiveness of the substratum to larvae through modiﬁcation
of its physical and chemical properties [26,31–33].
Biofouling is undesirable growth of micro- and macro-organisms on man-made structures.
Biofouling causes huge economic losses to maritime industries, thus development of antifouling
solutions that prevent settlement of larvae is of particular importance [ 34–36]. Microbes are so adaptive
that usually even antifouling coatings are colonized by bacteria and diatoms [13,37].
The process of larval settlement is particularly important for biofouling and aquaculture
research [ 11]. Sessile species, like the barnacle Amphibalanus (=Balanus )amphitrite , the polychaete
Hydroides elegans , and the bryozoan Bugula neritina are global major biofouling species [ 25]. Larval
settlement is important for aquaculture of mussels, oysters, abalone, scallops, and algae. Important to
restoration ecology is the rehabilitation of habitat-forming species, like hard corals and oysters, and
restoration of the stocks of commercially important shellﬁsh [11].Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 3 of 19
Over the past several decades few reviews about marine bioﬁlms have been published and there
are even fewer reviews of larval-bioﬁlm interactions [ 3,4,7,11,38]. Previous reports show that bioﬁlms
can induce or inhibit larval settlement and metamorphosis [7,26,28,39].
Since the discovery of natural products inhibitors of biofouling [ 29,40,41], natural products from
marine organisms, including bacteria and diatoms, that inhibit biofouling have been reviewed [ 7,42–46].
Several reviews analyzed chemical ecology and natural products of microbes, invertebrates, vertebrates,
and plants [47–50].
Hadﬁeld and Paul [ 51] provided a comprehensive review of induction of larval settlement
of invertebrates from 10 phyla by bioﬁlms. Subsequent reviews focused either on biofouling
and commercially important species [ 11,25] or particular processes, like quorum sensing and its
inhibition [ 16,22]. Molecular mechanisms of larval settlement and inhibition were recently reviewed as
well [ 52–55]. The development of novel omic-methods (metagenomics, metabolomics, transcriptomics,
proteomics) resulted in many new ﬁndings in larval settlement and attachment. Thus, it is timely to
summarize ﬁndings on induction of larval settlement by marine bioﬁlms.
The main aim of this publication is to review recent publications on the induction of propagule
settlement of macro-organisms by microbial bioﬁlms published from January 2010 to September 2019.
For earlier scientiﬁc publications readers should refer to above cited reviews and papers on this subject.
Of great interest of this review is the impact of di erent components of marine bioﬁlms, such as
exoenzymes, EPS, bacteria and diatoms, QS autoinducers on larval settlement and metamorphosis,
and unique inductive compounds from marine microorganisms. Molecular aspects of larval settlement
are reviewed and, ﬁnally, future perspectives, and conclusions are provided. Additionally, the e ect of
factors associated with climate change on bioﬁlms and larval settlement is discussed. Our ultimate
goal is to begin to provide a coherent picture of the range of critical roles that microbes play in the
development of marine communities.
2. Meta-Analysis of Recent Publications
Analysis of publications suggested that the number of papers dealing with induction or inhibition
of propagules settlement published for the last 19 years remains quite low (469). The percentage of
publications dealing with larval settlement in response to bioﬁlms did not exceed 35%, while the
percentage of algal spore publications even lower (~21%, Figure 1). There was a sudden drop in the
percentage of larval settlement and algal spore publications in 2011.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 19 
 46]. Several reviews analyzed chemical ecology and natural products of microbes, invertebrates, 
vertebrates , and plants  [47–50]. 
Hadfield and Paul [51] provided a  comprehensive review of induction of larval settlement of 
invertebrates from 10 phyla by biofilms . Subsequent reviews focused either on biofouling and 
commercially important species [11,25] or particular processes , like quorum sensing and its inhibition 
[16,22]. Molecular mechanisms of larval settlement and inhibition were recently reviewed  as well 
[52–55]. The development of novel omic -methods (metagenomics, metabolomics, transcriptomics, 
proteomics) resulted in m any new findings  in larval settlement and attachment . Thus, it is timely  to 
summarize findings on induction of larval settlement by marine biofilms.  
The main aim of this publication is to review recent publications on the induction  of propagule  
settlement  of macro -organisms  by microbial biofilms published from January 2010 to September 
2019. For earlier scientific publications readers should refer to above cited reviews and papers on this 
subject. Of great in terest of this review is the impact of different  components of marine biofilms, such 
as exoenzymes, EPS, bacteria and diatoms, QS autoinducers on larval settlement and metamorphosis , 
and unique inductive compounds from marine microorganisms . Molecular aspects of larval 
settlement are reviewed and, final ly, future perspectives , and conclusions are provided. Additionally, 
the effect of factors associated with climate change on biofilms and larval settlement is discussed.  
Our ultimate goal is to begin to provide a coherent picture of the range of critical r oles that microbe s 
play in the development of ma rine communities.  
2. Meta-Analysis of Recent Publications  
Analysis of publications suggested that the number of papers dealing with induction or 
inhibition of propagules settlement published for the last 19 years remains quite low  (469). The 
percentage of publications dealing with larval settlement in response to biofilms did not exceed 35% , 
while the percentage of algal spore publications even lower ( ~21%, Figure 1).  There was a sud den 
drop in the percentage of larval settlement and al gal spore publications in 2011.  
 
Figure 1.  Percent of publications dealing with settlement of invertebrate larvae (black circle) and algal 
spores (open circle) and microb es. The search was performed us ing Google Scholar for the period of 
2000–2019. The search keywords were “marine microbe” and “larva” or “marine microbe” and “spore”.  
The reason for that drop in the percentage of publications is not clear. Overall, the percentage of 
studies investigating  propagule settlement decreased from 2000 to 2019. This may be related to the Years2000 2005 2010 2015 2020% publications
10152025303540
Larvae 
Spores 
Figure 1. Percent of publications dealing with settlement of invertebrate larvae (black circle) and algal
spores (open circle) and microbes. The search was performed using Google Scholar for the period of
2000–2019. The search keywords were “marine microbe” and “larva” or “marine microbe” and “spore”.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 4 of 19
The reason for that drop in the percentage of publications is not clear. Overall, the percentage of
studies investigating propagule settlement decreased from 2000 to 2019. This may be related to the
decrease of biofouling-related publications in recent years due to decreased funding opportunities
in basic research on marine larvae and increased funding for basic and applied studies related to
biofouling management [56].
The systematic review of 469 publications by the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic
Reviews and Meta-Analyses) method resulted, after citation screening, in 31 articles about induction
of larval settlement by bioﬁlms (Table S1). During the screening, duplicates and articles not related
to the topic as well as reviews were eliminated. The number of publications that met our criteria
increased from 2010 to 2012 and decreased from 2014 to 2019 (Figure 2). The highest numbers of
publications (5) about induction of larval settlement by bioﬁlms were published in 2012 and 2014 and
the lowest number (1) was published in 2013, 2017, and 2018. Overall, the average rate of publication
was 3.1 papers per year.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 19 
 decrease of biofouling -related publications in recent years due to decreased funding opportunities in 
basic research on marine larvae and increased funding for basic and applied studies related to 
biofouling management  [56]. 
The systematic review of 469 publications by the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta -Analyses) method resulted, after citation screening, in 31 articles about 
induction of larval settlement by biofilms (Table S1). During the screening, duplicates and articles 
not related to the topic as well as reviews were eliminated. The number of publications that met our  
criteria increased from 2010 to 2012 and decreased from 2014 to 2019 (Figure 2). The highest numbers 
of publications (5) about induction of larval settlement by biofilms were published in 2012 and 2014  
and the lowest number (1) was published in 2013, 2017 , and 2018. Overall, the average rate of 
publication was 3.1 papers pe r year. 
 
Figure 2.  Number of publications that examined the induction of larval se ttlement by marine biofilms . 
The publications include from January 2010 to September 2019. This figure only includes the 
publications that met all inclusion criteria.  
The reviewed articles on induction of larval settlement by marine biofilms were published in 
journals that represented general interest (e.g., PLoS ONE, Science, Scientific Reports), microbiology 
(ISME Journal, Microbial Ecology), marine ecology and biology (Mar ine Ecology Progress Series), 
biofouling, and aquaculture fields (Figure 3). The highest number of articles (10) was published in 
general field journals with open access and the lowest number (1) was published in an aquaculture 
journal. However, though low in number the collective group of papers w as represented in very high 
impact factor journals. All 31 article s reported  induction of larval settlement by bacteria  or biofilms 
(Table S1) . Not any diatom-related study  reporting induction o f larval settlement  was published in the 
last 10 years. Fifteen of 31 articles reported effects of  monospecies films of bacteria, while 16 of 31 
reported effects of multispecies biofilms . The highest number of articles reported induction of 
polychaete sett lement (mostly Hydroides elegans ) followed by mussel (mostly Mytilus spp.) larval 
settlement  (Figure 4). Induction of coral planulae settlement by bacteria  and biofilms  is represented by  
seven articles. One article was published on induction of sponge larvae settlement by bacterial biofilms . 
Most publications focused on species with high economic significance, either because they can 
cause a significant biofouling problem (e.g., barnacles and polychaetes) or because they are 
commercially exploited (e.g. , mussels and corals).  By in large , our conclusion on th e topic of 
publications is due to the decrease in availability of funding and need to target focused bacteria -Years2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020Number of publications
0123456
Figure 2. Number of publications that examined the induction of larval settlement by marine bioﬁlms.
The publications include from January 2010 to September 2019. This ﬁgure only includes the publications
that met all inclusion criteria.
The reviewed articles on induction of larval settlement by marine bioﬁlms were published in
journals that represented general interest (e.g., PLoS ONE, Science, Scientiﬁc Reports), microbiology
(ISME Journal, Microbial Ecology), marine ecology and biology (Marine Ecology Progress Series),
biofouling, and aquaculture ﬁelds (Figure 3). The highest number of articles (10) was published in
general ﬁeld journals with open access and the lowest number (1) was published in an aquaculture
journal. However, though low in number the collective group of papers was represented in very high
impact factor journals. All 31 articles reported induction of larval settlement by bacteria or bioﬁlms
(Table S1). Not any diatom-related study reporting induction of larval settlement was published in
the last 10 years. Fifteen of 31 articles reported e ects of monospecies ﬁlms of bacteria, while 16
of 31 reported e ects of multispecies bioﬁlms. The highest number of articles reported induction
of polychaete settlement (mostly Hydroides elegans ) followed by mussel (mostly Mytilus spp.) larval
settlement (Figure 4). Induction of coral planulae settlement by bacteria and bioﬁlms is represented by
seven articles. One article was published on induction of sponge larvae settlement by bacterial bioﬁlms.
Most publications focused on species with high economic signiﬁcance, either because they can
cause a signiﬁcant biofouling problem (e.g., barnacles and polychaetes) or because they are commercially
exploited (e.g., mussels and corals). By in large, our conclusion on the topic of publications is due
to the decrease in availability of funding and need to target focused bacteria-larvae interactions of
specialist settlers, like Hydroides elegans in order to be competitive for that limited funding. Support for
this view is limited to observations by Holm [ 56] on productivity of publications on the best-studiedInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 5 of 19
model organisms for fouling management, barnacles, as compared to other model organisms with
global distribution such as calcareous tube worms and bushy bryozoans. Holm showed reports of
studies using barnacles are outstripping other biofouling models due to a focus on barnacles as globally
important biofoulers. Because biofouling is a major driver of a major source of funding, when several
funding agencies switched from biological solutions for biofouling management materials science
solutions both micro- and macro-fouling research were less supported. These changes contributed
to the decrease of reports of bacterial induction of settlement of generalist species, especially of less
mature models such as bryozoans and ascidians that have highly variable responses to microbial ﬁlms,
are under-represented in the last decade. In this ﬁeld, part of the changes represents a shift in focus
from interaction with bacteria to studies of biological glues, novel materials, and less environmentally
damaging forms of fouling management.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 19 
 larvae interactions of specialist settlers, like Hydroides elegans in order to be competit ive for that 
limited funding. Support for this view is limited to observations by Holm [56] on productivity of 
publications on the best -studied model organisms for fouling management, barnacles, as compared 
to other model organisms with global distribution  such as calcareous tube worms and bushy 
bryozoans. Holm showed reports of studies using barnacles are outstripping other biofouling models 
due to a focus on barnacles as globally important biofoulers. Because biofouling is a major driver o f 
a major source  of funding, when several funding agencies switched from biological solutions for 
biofouling management materials science solutions both micro - and macro -fouling research were less 
supported. These changes contributed to the decrease of reports of bacteria l induction of settlement 
of generalist species, especially of less mature mode ls such as bryozoans and ascidians that have 
highly variable responses to microbial films, are under -represented in the last decade. In this field, 
part of the changes represents a shift in focus from interaction with bacteria to studies of biological 
glues, novel materials, and less environmentally damaging forms of fouling management.  
 
Figure 3.  Number of articles that examined the induction of larval settlement by ma rine biofilms from 
January 2010 to September 2019 according to the subject area. This figure only includes the 
publications that met all inclusion criteria.  Number of articles0 2 4 6 8 10Journal subject
GeneralMicrobiologyBiology and EcologyBiofoulingAquaculture
Figure 3. Number of articles that examined the induction of larval settlement by marine bioﬁlms from
January 2010 to September 2019 according to the subject area. This ﬁgure only includes the publications
that met all inclusion criteria.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  6 of 19 
 . 
Figure 4.  Number of articles that examined the induction of larval settlement by marine biofilms  from 
January 2010 to September 2019 according to the group of larvae. This figure only includes the 
publications that met all inclusion criteria.  
3. Induction of Larval Settlement by Bacteria and Biofilms  
3.1. Multispecies Biofilms and Macrofouler Settlement  
From 2010 to 2019, the majority of researchers studied t he effect of multispecies biofilms on 
larval settlement of polychaetes, mollusks , and corals (Figure 4; Table S1). Researchers observed 
highly diverse bacterial biofilms developed on differ ent substrata in intertidal and subtidal zones 
[57]. The composition of these biofilms varied with season and tidal level [57], as well as with biofilm 
age [58]. Additionally, biofilm age and the type of substratum alter metabolites produced by 
microorgani sms (biofilm’s chemical profile) [59]. 
The studies demonstrated that age-dependent composition of biofilms determines settlement of 
invertebrate larvae  (Figure 5) . For example, older biofilms induced higher larval settlement of Mytilus 
coruscus compare d to young biofilms [58]. The authors concluded that the change in bacterial 
community composition could explain the change in biofilm’s attractiveness. Similar findings were 
observed for larval settlement of the bivalve Mytilus edulis  [60]. Moreover, the in ductiveness of 
biofilms for the filter -feeding bivalve was higher in the absence of food (phytoplankton ). This 
suggests that the influence of composition of biofilms could be more critical larval settlement when 
nutrient resources are absent or limited (Figure 5) . 
Larvae of the sponge Rhopaloeides odorabile  settle more on biofilms developed over longer periods 
and at higher temperatures [61]. This suggests that environmental variables, such as temperature, 
affect the composition and probably metabolites  of biofilms, which, in turn, affect settlement of larvae 
(Figure 5). During settlement, larvae of the sea urchin Heliocidaris erythrogramma  respond to the 
specific biofilm composition on the surface of macroalgae [62]. In contrast, another sea urchin 
Holopneustes purpurascens  does not  respond to epibiotic biofilms [62].  
Settlement of the barnacle Amphibalanus ( =Balanus) amphitrite  on biofilms developed in the 
intertidal zone was higher than on biofilms developed in the subtidal zone, which correlated with  
the presence of Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria species [57]. While composition of biofilms 
developed  at inshore and offshore sites was different, larvae of the specialist species H. elegans  
indiscriminately settled on all biofilms [63]. Settlement of H. elegans was strongly correlated with 
bacterial abundance s in biofilms , which confirmed previous findings [64,65]. Since the density of Number of articles0 2 4 6 8 10Testing organisms
polychaetemolluskcoral barnaclesea urchinsponge
Figure 4. Number of articles that examined the induction of larval settlement by marine bioﬁlms
from January 2010 to September 2019 according to the group of larvae. This ﬁgure only includes the
publications that met all inclusion criteria.
3. Induction of Larval Settlement by Bacteria and Bioﬁlms
3.1. Multispecies Bioﬁlms and Macrofouler Settlement
From 2010 to 2019, the majority of researchers studied the e ect of multispecies bioﬁlms on
larval settlement of polychaetes, mollusks, and corals (Figure 4; Table S1). Researchers observed
highly diverse bacterial bioﬁlms developed on di erent substrata in intertidal and subtidal zones [ 57].
The composition of these bioﬁlms varied with season and tidal level [ 57], as well as with bioﬁlm age [ 58].Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 6 of 19
Additionally, bioﬁlm age and the type of substratum alter metabolites produced by microorganisms
(bioﬁlm’s chemical proﬁle) [59].
The studies demonstrated that age-dependent composition of bioﬁlms determines settlement
of invertebrate larvae (Figure 5). For example, older bioﬁlms induced higher larval settlement of
Mytilus coruscus compared to young bioﬁlms [ 58]. The authors concluded that the change in bacterial
community composition could explain the change in bioﬁlm’s attractiveness. Similar ﬁndings were
observed for larval settlement of the bivalve Mytilus edulis [60]. Moreover, the inductiveness of bioﬁlms
for the ﬁlter-feeding bivalve was higher in the absence of food (phytoplankton). This suggests that the
inﬂuence of composition of bioﬁlms could be more critical larval settlement when nutrient resources
are absent or limited (Figure 5).
Larvae of the sponge Rhopaloeides odorabile settle more on bioﬁlms developed over longer periods
and at higher temperatures [ 61]. This suggests that environmental variables, such as temperature,
aect the composition and probably metabolites of bioﬁlms, which, in turn, a ect settlement of larvae
(Figure 5). During settlement, larvae of the sea urchin Heliocidaris erythrogramma respond to the speciﬁc
bioﬁlm composition on the surface of macroalgae [ 62]. In contrast, another sea urchin Holopneustes
purpurascens does not respond to epibiotic bioﬁlms [62].
Settlement of the barnacle Amphibalanus ( =Balanus) amphitrite on bioﬁlms developed in the
intertidal zone was higher than on bioﬁlms developed in the subtidal zone, which correlated with the
presence of Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria species [ 57]. While composition of bioﬁlms developed
at inshore and o shore sites was di erent, larvae of the specialist species H. elegans indiscriminately
settled on all bioﬁlms [ 63]. Settlement of H. elegans was strongly correlated with bacterial abundances in
bioﬁlms, which conﬁrmed previous ﬁndings [ 64,65]. Since the density of bacteria and their exopolymers
usually increases over time, it is not surprising that extracts of older bioﬁlms induced higher settlement
ofH. elegans than the younger ones [59].
The presence of pollutants, like heavy metals, can change microbial composition of bioﬁlms
and, in turn, can a ect larval settlement (Figure 5). The settlement of the polychaete H. elegans on
bioﬁlms developed in the presence of copper was lower compared to pristine bioﬁlms [ 66]. Moreover,
the inductiveness of young bioﬁlms was more easily altered by the presence of copper than that of
older bioﬁlms. Bao et al. [ 66] suggest that these changes were due to changes in bioﬁlm composition
and production of microbial chemical compounds.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 19 
 bacteria and their exopo lymers usually increases over time, it is not surprising that extracts of older 
biofilms induced higher settlement of H. elegans  than the younger ones [59]. 
The presence of pollutants , like heavy metals , can change microbial composition of biofilms and, 
in turn, can affect larval settlement  (Figure 5) . The settlement of the polychaete H. elegans  on biofilms 
developed in the presence of copper was lower compared to pristine biofilms [6 6]. Moreover, the 
inductiveness of young biofilms was more easily altered by the presence of copper than tha t of older 
biofilms. Bao et al.  [66] suggest that these change s were due to changes in biofilm composition and 
production o f microbial chemical compounds.  
 
Figure 5.  Interactions between biofilms, their chemical compounds , and larvae of invertebrates  at 
variable environmental conditions . 
3.2. Monospecies Bacterial Films and Macrofouler Settlement  
Most natural  biofilms are complex communities which include  Prokaryotes  and unicellular 
Eukaryotes . Because this complexity cannot be duplicated in controlled conditions most  researchers 
work with  cultivable  bacteria in monospecies biofilms  in the laboratory  (Table S1). While such 
biofilms never exist in the marine environment, they are useful tools for investigation of mechanism s 
of larval settlement. Cell cultures of α -Proteobacterial strain, Roseivivax  sp. 46E8, significantly 
increased larval settlement in Porites astreoides  only during active growth phase [67]. Treatment of 
monospecies biofilms of Shewanella  sp. 1 with antibiotics, formalin , and ultra -violate radiation 
significantly reduce settlement o f Mytilus coruscus  [68]. This indicates that live bacteria produce 
inductive cues . While the red colored bacterium Pseudoalteromonas  sp. SF57 inhibits larval settlement 
of the polychaete H. elegans, the white mutant WM1 of this bacterium is inductive  [69]. Analysis of 
the disrupted genes suggests that the type II secretion pathway, the LysR transcriptional regulator,  
NAD(P)-binding proteins, exonuclease, pyruvate metabolism, flagella assembly, and cell membrane 
processes play a role in the regulation of pig mentation and inductiveness of Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 
[69]. 
Figure 5. Interactions between bioﬁlms, their chemical compounds, and larvae of invertebrates at
variable environmental conditions.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 7 of 19
3.2. Monospecies Bacterial Films and Macrofouler Settlement
Most natural bioﬁlms are complex communities which include Prokaryotes and unicellular
Eukaryotes. Because this complexity cannot be duplicated in controlled conditions most researchers
work with cultivable bacteria in monospecies bioﬁlms in the laboratory (Table S1). While such bioﬁlms
never exist in the marine environment, they are useful tools for investigation of mechanisms of larval
settlement. Cell cultures of -Proteobacterial strain, Roseivivax sp. 46E8, signiﬁcantly increased larval
settlement in Porites astreoides only during active growth phase [ 67]. Treatment of monospecies bioﬁlms
ofShewanella sp. 1 with antibiotics, formalin, and ultra-violate radiation signiﬁcantly reduce settlement
ofMytilus coruscus [68]. This indicates that live bacteria produce inductive cues. While the red colored
bacterium Pseudoalteromonas sp. SF57 inhibits larval settlement of the polychaete H. elegans , the white
mutant WM1 of this bacterium is inductive [ 69]. Analysis of the disrupted genes suggests that the
type II secretion pathway, the LysR transcriptional regulator, NAD(P)-binding proteins, exonuclease,
pyruvate metabolism, ﬂagella assembly, and cell membrane processes play a role in the regulation of
pigmentation and inductiveness of Pseudoalteromonas sp. [69].
The marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea produces phage tail-like structures (tailocins)
that comprise of contractile structures with outward-facing baseplates linked by tail ﬁbers and a
hexagonal sheath [ 70] (Figure 6). These structures have bacteriocin activities. It has been demonstrated
using bacterial mutants that tailocins or metamorphosis-associated contractile structures (MACs) of
P . luteoviolacea trigger metamorphosis of H. elegans [71,72]. Sequencing of the genome and transcripts
ofH. elegans before and after larval settlement revealed that MACs induce the regulation of groups
of genes important for tissue remodeling, innate immunity, and mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling [71].
The following sequence of bacteria-induced metamorphic events was proposed. First, MACs
induce larval settlement. Second, MACs encoded by a speciﬁc locus in P . luteoviolacea initiate larval cilia
loss and activate metamorphosis-associated transcription. Finally, signaling through mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathways alters gene expression and leads to initiation of metamorphosis [ 71].
A subsequent study investigated the presence of tailocins in other inductive species of bacteria,
such as Cellulophaga lytica ,Bacillus aquimaris , and Staphylococcus warneri [73]. Using electron microscopy
and genomic analysis the authors found only P . luteoviolacea has tailocins. This suggests that tailocins
are not universal inducers across inductive bacterial species.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 19 
 The marine bacterium Pseudoalteromonas luteoviolacea  produces phage tail -like structures 
(tailocins) that comprise of contractile structures with outward -facing baseplates linked by tail fibers 
and a hexagonal sheath [70] (Figure 6). These structures have bacteriocin activities. It has been 
demonstrated using bacterial mutants that tailocins or metamorphosis -associated contractile 
structures (MACs)  of P. luteoviolacea  trigger metamorphosis of H. elegans  [71,72]. Sequencing of the 
genome and transcripts of H. elegans  before and after larval settlement revealed that MACs induce 
the regulation of groups of genes important for tissue remodeling, innate immunity, and mitogen -
activated protein kinase signaling [71]. 
The following sequence of bacteria -induced metamorphic events was proposed. First, MACs 
induce larval settlement. Second, MACs encoded by a specific locus in P. luteoviolacea  initiate larval 
cilia loss and activate metam orphosis -associated transcription. Finally, signaling through mitogen -
activated protein kinase pathways alters gene expression and leads to initiation of metamorphosis 
[71]. A subsequent study investigated the presence of tailocins in other inductive speci es of bacteria, 
such as Cellulophaga lytica , Bacillus aquimaris , and Staphylococcus warneri  [73]. Using electron 
microscopy and genomic analysis the authors found  only P. luteoviolacea has tailocins . This suggests 
that tailocins are not universal inducers across inductive bacterial species.  
 
Figure 6.  (A). Structure of tailocins  of bacteria . (B). Top view of a transverse section of tail tube. 
Reproduced with permission from Chequire and De Mot [70]. 
Another study investigated genes of the marine bacterium P. luteoviolacea  important for larval 
settlement of H. elegans  [74]. Genes ORF1, ORF2, and ORF4 absent in non -inductive strain of P. 
luteoviolacea  were necessary for induction of larval settlement. This is one of the first studies that 
identified bacterial ge nes required for induction of settlement and metamorphosis of a marine 
invertebrate. Future studies are needed in order to determine if these genes are present and active in 
other inductive bacteria  and to identify gene functions.  
4. Microbial Eukaryotes and Larval Settlement  
Information on effects of microbial eukaryotes on larval settlement is limited ( Table S1). Diatoms 
(Bacilariophytae) induce larval settlement of the polychaete H. elegans in laboratory experiments [75]. 
Lam et.al. [76] reported that  carbohydrates not proteins from EPS of the diatoms  Achnanthes  sp. and 
Nitzschia constricta  induced settlement of H. elegans . Metamorphosis of the abalone Haliotis asinina  
was significantly higher on biofilms of Navicula compare to unfilmed surfaces [77]. Similarly, 
settlement of the mussel Argopecten purpuratus  was higher on natural diatom biofilms [78]. Cyprids 
of Amphibalanus  (=Balanus ) amphitrite  predominantly settled on biofilms of Cocconeis  sp. and Navicula 
ramosissima [79]. Higher densities of diatom s triggered higher settlement rate of the barnacle. Larval 
attachment of the bryozoan Bugula neritina  correlated  with the density of diatoms in biofil ms [80]. 
Dahms et al. [81] demonstrated that different diatom species affect B. neritina  settlement in  different 
Figure 6. (A) Structure of tailocins of bacteria. ( B) Top view of a transverse section of tail tube.
Reproduced with permission from Chequire and De Mot [70].
Another study investigated genes of the marine bacterium P . luteoviolacea important for larval
settlement of H. elegans [74]. Genes ORF1 ,ORF2 , and ORF4 absent in non-inductive strain of
P . luteoviolacea were necessary for induction of larval settlement. This is one of the ﬁrst studies
that identiﬁed bacterial genes required for induction of settlement and metamorphosis of a marine
invertebrate. Future studies are needed in order to determine if these genes are present and active in
other inductive bacteria and to identify gene functions.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 8 of 19
4. Microbial Eukaryotes and Larval Settlement
Information on e ects of microbial eukaryotes on larval settlement is limited (Table S1). Diatoms
(Bacilariophytae) induce larval settlement of the polychaete H. elegans in laboratory experiments [ 75].
Lam et.al. [ 76] reported that carbohydrates not proteins from EPS of the diatoms Achnanthes sp. and
Nitzschia constricta induced settlement of H. elegans . Metamorphosis of the abalone Haliotis asinina was
signiﬁcantly higher on bioﬁlms of Navicula compare to unﬁlmed surfaces [ 77]. Similarly, settlement of
the mussel Argopecten purpuratus was higher on natural diatom bioﬁlms [ 78]. Cyprids of Amphibalanus
(=Balanus )amphitrite predominantly settled on bioﬁlms of Cocconeis sp. and Navicula ramosissima [79].
Higher densities of diatoms triggered higher settlement rate of the barnacle. Larval attachment of
the bryozoan Bugula neritina correlated with the density of diatoms in bioﬁlms [ 80].Dahms et al. [81]
demonstrated that di erent diatom species a ectB. neritina settlement in di erent ways. The highest
percentage of settlement of larvae of B. nertina was mediated by bioﬁlms of Achnanthes sp.,Amphora
cofeaeformis ,Amphora tenerrima , and Nitzschia constricta , while the lowest settlement was observed
onNitzschia frustulum bioﬁlms. When low inductive and highly inductive diatom strains were
combined together in a multispecies bioﬁlm, their resulting activity was always highly inductive for
B. neritina [81]. Thus, responses to multispecies and monospecies bioﬁlms are di erent. There have
been no publications reporting induction of larval settlement by diatoms from 2010 to 2019 (Table S1).
While ﬂagellates are the third largest group in marine bioﬁlms [ 82], there is no evidence that this group
can induce or inhibit larval settlement of invertebrate larvae.
Ciliates and other Protista are a ubiquitous component of bioﬁlms [ 82]. However, only one study
reported impacts of ciliates on settlement of larvae of invertebrates (Table S1). Watson et al. [ 83]
investigated the e ect of four di erent species of planktonic and vagile ciliates on the settlement
of the polychaete Galeolaria caespotisa . Compared to control, settlement was signiﬁcantly reduced
in the presence of three species of ciliates: Amphisiella sp.,Euplotes minuta , and Uronema marinum .
Larval settlement was inhibited in the physical presence of ciliates but not with just their metabolites.
Additionally, ciliates changed the distribution of bacteria in bioﬁlms indicating that ciliates can control
settlement indirectly [83].
5. Bioactive Compounds from Bioﬁlms Inducing Settlement and Metamorphosis
5.1. Bacterial Chemical Signals
Review of publications dealing with induction of larval settlement and metamorphosis by bioﬁlms
showed a limited number of studies that identiﬁed chemical inducers produced by microorganisms
(Table S1). The larvae of the acropoid coral Acropora millepora metamorphose in the presence of coralline
algae Neogoniolithon fosliei and Hydrolithon onkodes [84].Pseudoalteromonas bacteria isolated from
coralline algae induce metamorphosis of larvae of the acropoid coral Acropora millepora . The bacterial
metamorphosis cue was identiﬁed as tetrabromopyrrole (TBP , Figure 7). While other Pseudomonas
species produce brominated compounds, only TBP induced almost 100% of larval metamorphosis
without attachment [ 84]. Another study conducted with Pseudoalteromonas sp. PS5 associated with
coralline algae showed that this strain also produces TBP [ 85]. TBP induced settlement of several species
of corals, such as Porites astreoides ,Orbicella (Montastraea) franksi , and Acropora palmata . The e ect of
TBP binding protein on gene expression of larvae A. millepora was studied using reverse-transcriptase
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) [ 86]. TBP-containing bacterial extract changed expression of 24 out
of 42 genes of interest. Expression of genes was concentration dependent. At the threshold TBP
concentration only 14 of these genes were signiﬁcantly regulated [ 86].Amgalaxin-like-1 genes were
upregulated and the SCRiP genes were down regulated during larval metamorphosis. Additionally,
lectin encoding genes were either not a ected or downregulated, suggesting that lectins are not
involved in A. millepora larval metamorphosis but probably used in larval substrate exploration.
This in accordance with previous ﬁndings that suggested that lectins, like concanavalin A of larvaeInt. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 9 of 19
Neodexiospira braziliensis are involved in larval recognition of bioﬁlmed substrata through speciﬁc
‘lock-and-key’ binding with polysaccharides of the bacterial ﬁlm [87].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 19 
 ways. The highest percentage of settlement of larvae of B. nertina was mediated by  biofilms of 
Achnanthes  sp., Amphora cofeaeformis , Amphora tenerrima , and Nitzschia constricta , while the lowest 
settlement was observed  on Nitzschia frustulum  biofilms. When low inductive and highly inductive 
diatom strains  were combined together in a multispecies biofilm, their resulting activity was always 
highly inductive for B. neritina  [81]. Thus, response s to multispecies and monospecies biofilms are 
different. There have been no publications reporting induction of larval settlement by diatoms  from 
2010 to 2019  (Table S1). While flagellates are the third largest group in marine biofilms [82], there is 
no evidence that this group can induce or inhibit larval settlement of invertebrate larvae.  
Ciliates and other Protista are a ubiquitous component of biofilms  [82]. However , only one study 
reported impacts of ciliates on settlement of larvae of invertebrates (Table S1).  Watson et al. [83] 
investigated  the effect of four different species of planktonic and vagile ciliates on the settlement of 
the polychaete Galeolaria caespotis a. Compared to control, s ettlement was significantly reduced in the 
presence of three species of ciliates: Amphisiella  sp., Euplotes minuta , and Uronema marinum . Larval 
settlement was inhibited  in the physical presence of ciliates but not  with just  their metabolites. 
Additionally, ciliates change d the distribut ion of bacteria in biofilms indi cating that ciliates can 
control settlem ent indirectly [83]. 
5. Bioactive Compounds from Biofilms Inducing Settlement and Metamorphosis  
5.1. Bacterial Chemical Signals  
Review of publications dealing with induction of larval settlement and metamorphosis by 
biofilms showed a limited number of studies that identified chemical inducers produced  by 
microorganisms (Table S1) . The larvae of the acropoid coral Acropora millepora  metamorphose in the 
presence of coralline algae Neogoniolithon fosliei  and Hydrolithon onkodes [84]. Pseudoalteromonas  
bacteria isolated from coralline algae induce metamorphosis of larvae of the acropoid coral Acropora 
millepora . The bacterial metamorphosis cue was identified as tetrabromopyrrole ( TBP, Figure 7). 
While other Pseudomonas  species produce brominated compounds , only TBP induced almost 100% of 
larval metamorphosis  without attachment [84]. Another study conducted with Pseudoalteromonas  sp. 
PS5 associated with coralline algae showed that this strain also produces TBP [85]. TBP induced 
settlement of several species of corals, such as Porites astreoides , Orbicella (Montastraea) franksi , and 
Acropora palmat a. The effect of TBP binding protein on gene expression of larvae A. millepora  was 
studied using reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT -qPCR) [86]. TBP-containing bacterial 
extract changed expression of 24 out of 42 genes of interest. Expression of genes was concentration 
dependent. At the threshold TBP concentration only 14 of these genes were significantly regulated 
[86]. Amgalaxin -like-1 genes were upregulated and the SCRiP genes were down regulate d during 
larval metamorphosis. Additionally, lectin encoding genes were either not affected or 
downregulated, suggesting that lectins are not involved in A. millepora  larval metamorphosis  but 
probably used in larval substrate exploration . This in accordance with previous findings that 
suggested that lectins , like concanavalin A  of larvae Neodexiospira braziliensis  are involved in larval 
recognition of biofilmed substrata through specific ‘lock -and-key’ binding with polysaccharides  of 
the bacterial film  [87]. 
 
Figure 7. Tetrabromopyr role produced by Pseudomonas  bacteria inducing metamorphosis of coral larvae. 
Figure 7. Tetrabromopyrrole produced by Pseudomonas bacteria inducing metamorphosis of coral larvae.
5.2. Quorum Sensing and Settlement
Although the ﬁrst QS compound named acyl homoserine lactone (AHL, Figure 8) was isolated from
the marine bacterium Vibrio ﬁsheri associated with the light organ of the squid Euprymna scolopes [88],
information concerning the presence of QS molecules in the marine environment is scarce [ 15]. AHL
QS signals were found predominantly in Vibrio species and in the Roseobacter clade. The production of
AHLs by bacteria colonizing di erent marine habitats—such as marine snow [ 89], marine sponges [ 90,
91], corals [ 92], and dinoﬂagellates [ 93]—have been reported. N-dodecanoyl-L-homoserine lactone
(C12-HSL) was found in marine tropical subtidal bioﬁlms [ 94]. These ﬁndings suggest that QS signals
are present in bioﬁlms and produced by bacteria in vivo.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 19 
 5.2. Quorum Sensing and Settlement  
Although the first QS compound named acyl homoserine lactone ( AHL, Figure 8) was isolated 
from the marine bacterium Vibrio fisheri  associated with the light organ of the squid Euprymna scolopes  
[88], information concerning the presence of QS molecules in the marine  environment  is scarce [15]. 
AHL QS signals were found predominantly in Vibrio species and in the Roseobacter clade. The 
production of AHLs by bacteria coloniz ing different marine habitats —such as marine snow [89], 
marine sponges [90,91], corals [92], and dinoflagellates [93]—have been reported. N -dodecanoyl -L-
homoserine lactone (C12-HSL) was found in marine tropical subtidal biofilms [94]. These findings 
suggest that QS signals  are present in biofilms and produced by bacteria in vivo. 
 
Figure 8.  Generalized structure of acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs). R —fatty acid acyl chain with 
number of carbons from 4 to 18.  
QS autoinducer signals produced by bacteria can work as inter -kingdom signals  (Table 1). For 
example , zoospores of th e green alga Ulva (=Enteroporpha ) sp. use AHLs produced by  Vibrio 
anguillarum  to attach [95,96]. Similarly, the epiphytic bacteria Sulfitobacter  spp. and Shewanella  spp. 
associated with the alga Ulva linza  produce AHLs  and these QS signals increased zoospore 
germinat ion and grow th [97]. AHLs produc ed by epibiotic bacteria associated with Gracilaria dura  
and Acrochaetium  sp. induce algal spore liberation [98] (Table 1). Interestingly , unsaturated long chain 
hydrocarbons and dibutylphthalates also induce settlement in U. linza [99].  
Not only macro-algae respond to bacterial QS signals. AHL producing bacterial strains Vibrio 
anguillarum , Aeromonas hydrophila , and Sulfitobacter  sp. induce larval settlement of barnacle larvae 
Balanus improvises [100] (Table 1) . Mutants of bacterial strains that do not produce AHLs do not 
induce barnacle larval settlement. Additionally, synthetic AHLs at concentrations similar to those 
found within natural biofilms resulted in increased  barnacle larval  settlement.  Similarly, l arvae of the 
polychaete Hydroides elegans  stop swimming and start crawling on the bottom when exposed to 
synthetic AHLs or biofilms producing AHLs [94]. These publications suggested that QS signals 
produced by bacteria could control larval and spore settlement as well as spore germination. There 
is no clear evidence that eukaryotes evolved with bacteria to sense QS signals and there is no known 
direct benefit from such communication to the bacteria.   
6. Molecular Aspects of Induction of Settlement  
Expanding perspective from consortia communicatio n and tapping into that communication as 
described above, one can move to the ecosystem level. Ecosystems can be considered as complex 
symbiotic assemblages. Within estuarine ecosystems , three examples of a scale that provides a 
tractable experimental unit  are clam beds, mussel patches , and oyster reefs. Clam beds, mussels , and 
oyster reefs are examples of what was classically described in the 1950s and 1960s as gregarious 
settlement [101–105]. Gregarious settlement is a complex process that involves flows,  textures, and 
species-specific settlement cues. However,  unlike QS cues, these settlement cues are much more 
Figure 8. Generalized structure of acyl homoserine lactones (AHLs). R—fatty acid acyl chain with
number of carbons from 4 to 18.
QS autoinducer signals produced by bacteria can work as inter-kingdom signals (Table 1).
For example, zoospores of the green alga Ulva (=Enteroporpha ) sp. use AHLs produced by Vibrio
anguillarum to attach [ 95,96]. Similarly, the epiphytic bacteria Sulﬁtobacter spp. and Shewanella spp.
associated with the alga Ulva linza produce AHLs and these QS signals increased zoospore germination
and growth [ 97]. AHLs produced by epibiotic bacteria associated with Gracilaria dura and Acrochaetium
sp. induce algal spore liberation [ 98] (Table 1). Interestingly, unsaturated long chain hydrocarbons and
dibutylphthalates also induce settlement in U. linza [99].
Not only macro-algae respond to bacterial QS signals. AHL producing bacterial strains Vibrio
anguillarum ,Aeromonas hydrophila , and Sulﬁtobacter sp. induce larval settlement of barnacle larvae
Balanus improvises [100] (Table 1). Mutants of bacterial strains that do not produce AHLs do not
induce barnacle larval settlement. Additionally, synthetic AHLs at concentrations similar to those
found within natural bioﬁlms resulted in increased barnacle larval settlement. Similarly, larvae of
the polychaete Hydroides elegans stop swimming and start crawling on the bottom when exposed
to synthetic AHLs or bioﬁlms producing AHLs [ 94]. These publications suggested that QS signals
produced by bacteria could control larval and spore settlement as well as spore germination. There is
no clear evidence that eukaryotes evolved with bacteria to sense QS signals and there is no known
direct beneﬁt from such communication to the bacteria.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 10 of 19
6. Molecular Aspects of Induction of Settlement
Expanding perspective from consortia communication and tapping into that communication as
described above, one can move to the ecosystem level. Ecosystems can be considered as complex
symbiotic assemblages. Within estuarine ecosystems, three examples of a scale that provides a
tractable experimental unit are clam beds, mussel patches, and oyster reefs. Clam beds, mussels,
and oyster reefs are examples of what was classically described in the 1950s and 1960s as gregarious
settlement [ 101–105]. Gregarious settlement is a complex process that involves ﬂows, textures, and
species-speciﬁc settlement cues. However, unlike QS cues, these settlement cues are much more
primitive and less well understood. At least some cues are based upon degradation of structural
protein substrates. The best understood of which are proteins degraded by exoenzymes [106].
Oyster reefs are interesting because the biological habitat generated extends o the substrate,
undergoes succession and many ecological details are well studied. Oyster reef communities are
organized and informed by the actions of symbiotic bacteria that are known mainly through the
products of their exo-enzymatic activity on host structural proteins. All this biochemistry provides
communication between the nodes of this complex community [8,101,105,107–109].
Table 1. Quorum sensing (QS) compounds production and their e ect on eukaryotes
Target Species Source of QS QS Molecule Mechanism Reference
Algae
Ulva (Enteromorpha)
sp.Vibrio anguillarum3-oxo-C12-HSL
C6-HSLAttachment of
spores[95,96,110]
Ulva sp. Schewanella sp.C4-HSL, C6HSL,
C12-HSLAttachment of
spores[111]
Ulva linza Dierent species C12-HSLGermination of
spores[97]
Gracilaria dura Epibiotic bacteria C6HSL Spore liberation [112]
Scrippsiella
trochoideaEpibiotic bacteria ? Growth [113]
Acrochaetium Epibiotic bacteria C4HSL Spore liberation [98]
Polychaete
Hydroides elegans BioﬁlmsC6-HSL, C12-HSL,
3-oxo-C8-HLSSettlement
behavior[94]
Barnacle
Balanus improvisusVibrio anguillarum,
Aeromonas hydrophila,
Sulﬁtobacter sp.C8-HSL,
3-oxo-C10-HSL,
C12-HSLSettlement [100]
? Molecule is not known. C4-HSL—butanoyl-homoserine lactone; C6-HSL—hexanoyl-homoserine
lactone; C8-HSL—octanoyl-homoserine lactone; C10-HSL—decanoyl-homoserine lactone;
3-oxo-C10-HSL—3-oxo-decanoyl-homoserine lactone; C12-HSL—dodecanoyl-homoserine lactone;
3-oxo-C12-HSL—3-oxo-dodecanoyl-homoserine lactone.
Rather than being based on production and secretion of signal molecules, larvae of gregarious
settlers—like oysters—recognize species-speciﬁc degradative products that result from actions of
exoenzymes on structural proteins and biological glues. The best studied of these settlement
pheromones are those associated with gregarious settlement of barnacles and oysters. Though
in separate phyla, settlement pheromones can be mimicked by the same pure synthetic and natural
neutral amino acids, basic carboxyl terminal amino acid, tripeptides glycil-glycil-arginine that can be
generated by the action of trypsin-like serine proteases on proteins found in periostraca, in the organic
matrix of shells and by degradation of natural glues [8].Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 11 of 19
The basic structure of an oyster reef is organized by bacterial exoenzymes that produce oyster
and barnacle settlement pheromones from barnacle and oyster structural proteins. That not all
exoenzymes originate from microbes reﬂects the complexity and interdependence of complex symbiotic
assemblages [ 8]. The settlement pheromones, in some cases in concert with speciﬁc bacteria [ 114,115],
result in gregarious settlement of planktonic larvae. Growth of gregariously settled individuals
results in the structure of the reef [ 108]. Gregarious settlement is important and often essential for
reproduction [116].
Bacteria-barnacle interactions can at one level be negative [ 117–119]. Settling barnacles kill the
bacteria on the surface they are gluing to by releasing reactive oxygen species, antibacterial peptides
and activating enzyme cascades associated with the innate immune response [ 117,120,121]. Similarly,
large mobile predators, like blue crabs, use enzymes to remove biofouling from places they cannot
scratch, their gills, and their brooded eggs [ 117]. However, at another level, these processes produce
species speciﬁc settlement cues and pheromones. Bacteria thrive on cured glues [ 122] by digesting
them with proteolytic enzymes including serine proteinases. Enzyme generated peptides directly
impact oysters and barnacles as well as other members of the community.
In the crabs, both fouling and cleanliness come a cost because they both generate body odors. Prey
detect the odors of stone crabs and blue crabs, and avoid contact by ﬂeeing or ‘hiding’ by stopping
ventilation (clamming up) while the crab is in the immediate vicinity. In the reefs, body odors enable
individual recognition. Snapping shrimp that live in pairs recognize their mates [ 123] and shrimp that
have lost an aggressive encounter with another shrimp recognize the winner by its odor [124].
It is fascinating that barnacle settlement pheromones also attract predatory snails that eat barnacles
and oysters and other sessile organisms [ 125,126]. Predatory snails have tapped into an essential
sexual communication system for oysters and barnacles [ 125]. It is also likely that a parasitic symbiotic
crab that lives in oysters uses these cues as do the intermediate hosts of trematode parasites that cycle
through oysters ﬁsh and birds.
Over the last 15 years, understanding of the roles of exoenzyme actions is expanding [ 106,117–
122,125–128]. However, this is just the tip of the iceberg. New shotgun proteomics technologies and
microbiome technologies provide huge potential for study of this most basic of positive interactions
between microbes and gregarious macro-organisms.
7. Impact of Climate Change on Bioﬁlms and Larval Settlement
Release of anthropogenic CO 2in the atmosphere increases temperatures of our planet [ 129].
This increases sea surface temperatures of the oceans and leads to ocean acidiﬁcation [ 130]. Such
changes will have a direct and indirect impact on bioﬁlms, chemical cues, and larval settlement [ 131].
In several studies, the impact of increased sea temperature and acidiﬁcation on di erent species
of biofouling organisms has been studied. It is predicted that acidiﬁcation will impact aragonite
and magnesium calcite producers—such as coralline algae, corals, mussels, barnacles, and some
bryozoans [ 132–135]—and will increase abundances of soft-bodied organisms [ 136]. At the same time,
information about the impact of climate change on bioﬁlms and larvae of invertebrates is limited [ 131].
Climate change can alter the structure of microbial communities, which, in turn, can have impact
on the structure of macro-fouling communities [ 60]. Microbial communities developed at 23C and 30
C had di erent structure from those developed at 16C [137]. Settlement of larvae of barnacles of
Amphibalanus (=Balanus )amphitrite and Balanus trigonus on bioﬁlms developed at high temperature
was di erent from settlement on bioﬁlms developed at low temperatures. Similarly, only bioﬁlms
developed at elevated temperatures stimulated sponge larval settlement [60].
Acidiﬁcation also a ects microbial communities. For example, seawater acidiﬁcation (a decrease
of 0.2 pH units) over 100 days decreased the density of diatoms, which in turn, increased densities of
sponges, tunicates, and decreased the density of spirorbids [ 136]. These examples show that factors
associated with climate change directly a ect the composition and densities of microorganisms in
bioﬁlms and indirectly reduce or enhance larval settlement of macro-fouling species.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 12 of 19
8. Future Studies
In general, there was a substantial amount of work on the roles of microbes and larval settlement
from the 1980s until the ﬁrst decade of the 2000s and this work is comprehensively reviewed by
Hadﬁeld and Paul [ 51]. Most, if not all, of this work focused on microbial ﬁlms on inert surfaces
and features of the bacteria, like age of ﬁlm, and components of the ﬁlm, like EPS. The majority
of studies are about induction of larval settlement by bacteria. The new omic techniques—such as
metagenomics, metabolomics, proteomics, and transcriptomics—allow to characterize microbes in
bioﬁlms, identifying metabolites produced and genes responsible for their production [ 11–14,86].
In the future, the development of such techniques and the lower cost of such methods will result in an
increase of molecular studies of microbe–larva interactions. This will enhance our understanding of
receptors, genes, and pathways responsible for larval settlement and metamorphosis.
The future of ‘omics’ technologies is extension of these technologies to interactions between larvae
and bacteria living on complex biological substrates like macroalgae, shells, biological glues, and wood.
This aspect is especially important for understanding gregarious settlement, which often depends on
interactions of exoenzymes from bacteria and symbionts on structural components during feeding and
cleaning. Although there is ecological evidence that there is induction of especially gregarious larval
settlement by less investigated groups of microorganisms—like diatoms, ciliates, and ﬂagellates—the
technology is now available to study these phenomena.
Speciﬁc bacterial–larval interactions are productive and worthy of continued investigation.
Another area understudied by modern techniques is settlement due to constitutive and induced
exoenzymes and their products should be a fruitful area of research especially with microbiome
technology, proteomic and metabolomic and shotgun sequencing techniques [ 52,138]. The majority of
bacteria secrete enzymes when they feed on biological substrates. We postulate products that escape
consumption may be central to the organization of marine communities [ 8]. Degradation products of
structural proteins generated by serine proteases and hydrolysis of complex amino sugars are the only
examples to date [106] and more future research is required.
9. Conclusions
Analysis of published literature suggested that induction of larval settlement by marine microbes
is by three major routes: (1) release of inductive molecules including those involved in quorum sensing
from established bioﬁlms and consortia; (2) release of exoenzymes during microbial feeding generating
degradation products that act as settlement cues and pheromones; (3) inductive molecules and even
physical viral-like structures, like tailocins found within bacteria. In the last decade, a relatively
small number of very high impact reports signiﬁcantly advanced the ﬁeld of microbe macro-fouler
interactions to include genes involved in settlement and metamorphosis, speciﬁc groups of inductive
microbes, and physically unique induction mechanisms. Most recent advances employed sophisticated
and new molecular biology techniques. These reports are exciting and at the same time humbling in
that they support our contention that understanding of the roles of bacterial induction of settlement
are in their research infancy. The future in this area is in communities, large symbiotic assemblages,
and the impact of environmental change due to human impacts on complex ecosystems.
Supplementary Materials: Supplementary materials can be found at http: //www.mdpi.com /1422-0067 /21/3/731/s1.
Author Contributions: Both authors are equally contributed to design, writing, review, and editing. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by TRC grant RC /AGR /FISH /16/01 (ORG /EBR/15/003) and SQU grants
CL/SQU-SA /18/01 and IG /AGR /FISH /18/01 to S.D.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 13 of 19
References
1. Wahl, M. Marine epibiosis. I. Fouling and antifouling: Some basic aspects. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 1989 ,58,
175–189. [CrossRef]
2. Clare, A.S.; Rittschof, D.; Gerhart, D.J.; Maki, J.S. Molecular approaches to nontoxic antifouling.
Invertebr. Reprod. Dev. 1992 ,22, 67–76. [CrossRef]
3. Salta, M.; Wharton, J.A.; Blache, Y.; Stokes, K.R.; Briand, J.-F. Marine bioﬁlms on artiﬁcial surfaces: Structure
and dynamics. Environ. Microbiol. 2013 ,15, 2879–2893. [CrossRef]
4. Antunes, J.; Le ão, P .; Vasconcelos, V . Marine bioﬁlms: Diversity of communities and of chemical cues.
Environ. Microbiol. Rep. 2019 ,11, 287–305. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Flemming, H.-C.; Wingender, J. The bioﬁlm matrix. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010 ,8, 623–633. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
6. Flemming, H.-C.; Neu, T.R.; Wozniak, D.J. The EPS matrix: The “house of bioﬁlm cells ”. J. Bacteriol. 2007 ,
189, 7945–7947. [CrossRef]
7. Dobretsov, S.; Dahms, H.-U.; Qian, P .-Y. Inhibition of biofouling by marine microorganisms and their
metabolites. Biofouling 2006 ,22, 43–54. [CrossRef]
8. Rittschof, D. Trypsins: Keystone enzymes in marine communities. JSM Enzymol. Protein Sci. 2017 ,2, 1009.
9. Zobell, C.E.; Allen, E.C. The signiﬁcance of marine bacteria in the fouling of submerged surfaces. J. Bacteriol.
1935 ,29, 239–251. [CrossRef]
10. O’Toole, G.A. Classic spotlight: Before they were bioﬁlms. J. Bacteriol. 2015 ,198, 5. [CrossRef]
11. Qian, P .-Y.; Lau, S.C.K.; Dahms, H.-U.; Dobretsov, S.; Harder, T. Marine bioﬁlms as mediators of colonization
by marine macroorganisms: Implications for antifouling and aquaculture. Mar. Biotechnol. 2007 ,9, 399–410.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Franklin, M.J.; Chang, C.; Akiyama, T.; Bothner, B. New technologies for studying bioﬁlms. Microbiol. Spectr.
2015 ,3. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Briand, J.-F.; Pochon, X.; Wood, S.A.; Bressy, C.; Garnier, C.; R éhel, K.; Urvois, F.; Culioli, G.; Zaiko, A.
Metabarcoding and metabolomics o er complementarity in deciphering marine eukaryotic biofouling
community shifts. Biofouling 2018 ,34, 657–672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Brauer, J.I.; Makama, Z.; Bonifay, V .; Aydin, E.; Kaufman, E.D.; Beech, I.B.; Sunner, J. Mass spectrometric
metabolomic imaging of bioﬁlms on corroding steel surfaces using laser ablation and solvent capture by
aspiration. Biointerphases 2015 ,10, 019003. [CrossRef]
15. Hmelo, L.R. Quorum sensing in marine microbial environments. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci. 2017 ,9, 257–281.
[CrossRef]
16. Dobretsov, S.; Teplitski, M.; Paul, V . Mini-review: Quorum sensing in the marine environment and its
relationship to biofouling. Biofouling 2009 ,25, 413–427. [CrossRef]
17. Kjelleberg, S.; Molin, S. Is there a role for quorum sensing signals in bacterial bioﬁlms? Curr. Opin. Microbiol.
2002 ,5, 254–258. [CrossRef]
18. Miller, M.B.; Bassler, B.L. Quorum sensing in bacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2001 ,55, 165–199. [CrossRef]
19. Mukherjee, S.; Bassler, B.L. Bacterial quorum sensing in complex and dynamically changing environments.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019 ,17, 371–382. [CrossRef]
20. Dobretsov, S.; Teplitski, M.; Bayer, M.; Gunasekera, S.; Proksch, P .; Paul, V .J. Inhibition of marine biofouling
by bacterial quorum sensing inhibitors. Biofouling 2011 ,27, 893–905. [CrossRef]
21. Grandcl ément, C.; Tanni ères, M.; Mor éra, S.; Dessaux, Y.; Faure, D. Quorum quenching: Role in nature and
applied developments. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2016 ,40, 86–116. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Chen, J.; Wang, B.; Lu, Y.; Guo, Y.; Sun, J.; Wei, B.; Zhang, H.; Wang, H. Quorum sensing inhibitors from
marine microorganisms and their synthetic derivatives. Mar. Drugs 2019 ,17, 80. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Crisp, D.J. The larval stages of balanus hameri (ascanius, 1767). Crustaceana 1962 ,4, 123–130. [CrossRef]
24. Thorson, G. Reproductive and larval ecology of marine bottom invertebrates. Biol. Rev. 1950 ,25, 1–45.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Hadﬁeld, M.G. Bioﬁlms and marine invertebrate larvae: What bacteria produce that larvae use to choose
settlement sites. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci. 2011 ,3, 453–470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Wieczorek, S.K.; Todd, C.D. Inhibition and facilitation of settlement of epifaunal marine invertebrate larvae
by microbial bioﬁlm cues. Biofouling 1998 ,12, 81–118. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 14 of 19
27. Mullineaux, L.S. The role of settlement in structuring a hard-substratum community in the deep sea. J. Exp.
Mar. Biol. Ecol. 1988 ,120, 247–261. [CrossRef]
28. Rittschof, D.; Forward, R.B., Jr.; Cannon, G.; Welch, J.M.; McClary, M., Jr.; Holm, E.R.; Clare, A.S.; Conova, S.;
McKelvey, L.M.; Bryan, P .; et al. Cues and context: Larval responses to physical and chemical cues. Biofouling
1998 ,12, 31–44. [CrossRef]
29. Rittschof, D.; Hooper, I.R.; Costlow, J.D. Barnacle settlement inhibitors from sea pansies, Renilla reniformis .
Bull. Mar. Sci. 1986 ,39, 376–382.
30. Roberts, D.; Rittschof, D.; Holm, E.; Schmidt, A.R. Factors inﬂuencing initial larval settlement: Temporal,
spatial and surface molecular components. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 1991 ,150, 203–221. [CrossRef]
31. Tamburri, M.N.; Luckenbach, M.W.; Breitburg, D.L.; Bonniwell, S.M. Settlement of Crassostrea ariakensis
larvae: E ects of substrate, bioﬁlms, sediment and adult chemical cues. J. Shellﬁsh Res. 2008 ,27, 601–608.
[CrossRef]
32. Dobretsov, S.V . E ects of macroalgae and bioﬁlm on settlement of blue mussel ( Mytilus edulis L.) larvae.
Biofouling 1999 ,14, 153–165. [CrossRef]
33. Unabia, C.R.C.; Hadﬁeld, M.G. Role of bacteria in larval settlement and metamorphosis of the polychaete
Hydroides elegans .Mar. Biol. 1999 ,133, 55–64. [CrossRef]
34. Alberte, R.S.; Snyder, S.; Zahuranec, B.J.; Whetstone, M. Biofouling research needs for the United States
Navy: Program history and goals. Biofouling 1992 ,6, 91–95. [CrossRef]
35. Mar échal, J.-P .; Hellio, C. Challenges for the development of new non-toxic antifouling solutions. Int. J.
Mol. Sci. 2009 ,10, 4623–4637. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Yebra, D.M.; Kiil, S.; Dam-Johansen, K. Antifouling technology—Past, present and future steps towards
ecient and environmentally friendly antifouling coatings. Prog. Org. Coat. 2004 ,50, 75–104. [CrossRef]
37. Muthukrishnan, T.; Abed, R.M.M.; Dobretsov, S.; Kidd, B.; Finnie, A.A. Long-term microfouling on commercial
biocidal fouling control coatings. Biofouling 2014 ,30, 1155–1164. [CrossRef]
38. Mieszkin, S.; Callow, M.E.; Callow, J.A. Interactions between microbial bioﬁlms and marine fouling algae:
A mini review. Biofouling 2013 ,29, 1097–1113. [CrossRef]
39. Maki, J.S.; Mitchell, R. Biofouling in the marine environment. In Encyclopedia of Environmental Microbiology ;
American Cancer Society: New York, NY, USA, 2003; ISBN 978-0-471-26339-5.
40. Bakus, G.J.; Targett, N.M.; Schulte, B. Chemical ecology of marine organisms: An overview. J. Chem. Ecol.
1986 ,12, 951–987. [CrossRef]
41. Standing, J.D.; Hooper, I.R.; Costlow, J.D. Inhibition and induction of barnacle settlement by natural products
present in octocorals. J. Chem. Ecol. 1984 ,10, 823–834. [CrossRef]
42. Dobretsov, S.; Abed, R.M.M.; Teplitski, M. Mini-review: Inhibition of biofouling by marine microorganisms.
Biofouling 2013 ,29, 423–441. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Qian, P .-Y.; Li, Z.; Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Fusetani, N. Mini-review: Marine natural products and their synthetic analogs
as antifouling compounds: 2009–2014. Biofouling 2015 ,31, 101–122. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Saha, M.; Goecke, F.; Bhadury, P . Minireview: Algal natural compounds and extracts as antifoulants.
J. Appl. Phycol. 2018 ,30, 1859–1874. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Satheesh, S.; Ba-akdah, M.A.; Al-Sofyani, A.A. Natural antifouling compound production by microbes
associated with marine macroorganisms—A review. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 2016 ,21, 26–35. [CrossRef]
46. Wang, K.-L.; Wu, Z.-H.; Wang, Y.; Wang, C.-Y.; Xu, Y. Mini-review: Antifouling natural products from marine
microorganisms and their synthetic analogs. Mar. Drugs 2017 ,15, 266. [CrossRef]
47. Hay, M.E. Marine chemical ecology: Chemical signals and cues structure marine populations, communities,
and ecosystems. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci. 2009 ,1, 193–212. [CrossRef]
48. Paul, V .J.; Ritson-Williams, R.; Sharp, K. Marine chemical ecology in benthic environments. Nat. Prod. Rep.
2011 ,28, 345–387. [CrossRef]
49. Paul, V .J.; Puglisi, M.P .; Ritson-Williams, R. Marine chemical ecology. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2006 ,23, 153–180.
[CrossRef]
50. Paul, V .J.; Ritson-Williams, R. Marine chemical ecology. Nat. Prod. Rep. 2008 ,25, 662–695. [CrossRef]
51. Hadﬁeld, M.; Paul, V . Natural chemical cues for settlement and metamorphosis of marine-invertebrate
larvae. In Marine Chemical Ecology ; McClintock, J., Baker, B., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2001;
Volume 20015660, pp. 431–461. ISBN 978-0-8493-9064-7.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 15 of 19
52. Chandramouli, K.H.; Qian, P .-Y.; Ravasi, T. Proteomics insights: Proteins related to larval attachment and
metamorphosis of marine invertebrates. Front. Mar. Sci. 2014 ,1. [CrossRef]
53. Chen, L.; Qian, P .-Y. Review on molecular mechanisms of antifouling compounds: An update since 2012.
Mar. Drugs 2017 ,15, 264. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Qian, P .-Y.; Chen, L.; Xu, Y. Mini-review: Molecular mechanisms of antifouling compounds. Biofouling 2013 ,
29, 381–400. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Thiyagarajan, V . A review on the role of chemical cues in habitat selection by barnacles: New insights from
larval proteomics. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 2010 ,392, 22–36. [CrossRef]
56. Holm, E. Barnacles and biofouling. Integr. Comp. Biol. 2012 ,52, 348–355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Lee, O.O.; Chung, H.C.; Yang, J.; Wang, Y.; Dash, S.; Wang, H.; Qian, P .-Y. Molecular techniques revealed
highly diverse microbial communities in natural marine bioﬁlms on polystyrene dishes for invertebrate
larval settlement. Microb. Ecol. 2014 ,68, 81–93. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Wang, C.; Bao, W.-Y.; Gu, Z.-Q.; Li, Y.-F.; Liang, X.; Ling, Y.; Cai, S.-L.; Shen, H.-D.; Yang, J.-L. Larval
settlement and metamorphosis of the mussel Mytilus coruscus in response to natural bioﬁlms. Biofouling
2012 ,28, 249–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Chung, H.C.; Lee, O.O.; Huang, Y.-L.; Mok, S.Y.; Kolter, R.; Qian, P .-Y. Bacterial community succession and
chemical proﬁles of subtidal bioﬁlms in relation to larval settlement of the polychaete Hydroides elegans .
ISME J. 2010 ,4, 817–828. [CrossRef]
60. Toupoint, N.; Mohit, V .; Linossier, I.; Bourgougnon, N.; Myrand, B.; Olivier, F.; Lovejoy, C.; Tremblay, R. E ect
of bioﬁlm age on settlement of Mytilus edulis. Biofouling 2012 ,28, 985–1001. [CrossRef]
61. Whalan, S.; Webster, N.S. Sponge larval settlement cues: The role of microbial bioﬁlms in a warming ocean.
Sci. Rep. 2014 ,4, 4072. [CrossRef]
62. Nielsen, S.J.; Harder, T.; Steinberg, P .D. Sea urchin larvae decipher the epiphytic bacterial community
composition when selecting sites for attachment and metamorphosis. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2015 ,91, 1–9.
[CrossRef]
63. Lema, K.A.; Constancias, F.; Rice, S.A.; Hadﬁeld, M.G. High bacterial diversity in nearshore and oceanic
bioﬁlms and their inﬂuence on larval settlement by Hydroides elegans (Polychaeta). Environ. Microbiol. 2019 .
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Huang, S.; Hadﬁeld, M.G. Composition and density of bacterial bioﬁlms determine larval settlement of the
polychaete Hydroides elegans .Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2003 ,260, 161–172. [CrossRef]
65. Lau, S.C.K.; Mak, K.K.W.; Chen, F.; Qian, P .-Y. Bioactivity of bacterial strains isolated from marine bioﬁlms in
Hong Kong waters for the induction of larval settlement in the marine polychaete Hydroides elegans .Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2002 ,226, 301–310. [CrossRef]
66. Bao, W.-Y.; Lee, O.-O.; Chung, H.-C.; Li, M.; Qian, P .-Y. Copper a ects bioﬁlm inductiveness to larval
settlement of the serpulid polychaete Hydroides elegans (Haswell). Biofouling 2010 ,26, 119–128. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
67. Sharp, K.H.; Sneed, J.M.; Ritchie, K.B.; Mcdaniel, L.; Paul, V .J. Induction of larval settlement in the reef coral
Porites astreoides by a cultivated marine roseobacter strain. Biol. Bull. 2015 ,228, 98–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Yang, J.-L.; Shen, P .-J.; Liang, X.; Li, Y.-F.; Bao, W.-Y.; Li, J.-L. Larval settlement and metamorphosis of
the mussel Mytilus coruscus in response to monospeciﬁc bacterial bioﬁlms. Biofouling 2013 ,29, 247–259.
[CrossRef]
69. Huang, Y.-L.; Li, M.; Yu, Z.; Qian, P .-Y. Correlation between pigmentation and larval settlement deterrence
byPseudoalteromonas sp. sf57. Biofouling 2011 ,27, 287–293. [CrossRef]
70. Ghequire, M.G.K.; De Mot, R. The tailocin tale: Peeling o phage tails. Trends Microbiol. 2015 ,23, 587–590.
[CrossRef]
71. Shikuma, N.J.; Antoshechkin, I.; Medeiros, J.M.; Pilhofer, M.; Newman, D.K. Stepwise metamorphosis of
the tubeworm Hydroides elegans is mediated by a bacterial inducer and MAPK signaling. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 2016 ,113, 10097–10102. [CrossRef]
72. Shikuma, N.J.; Pilhofer, M.; Weiss, G.L.; Hadﬁeld, M.G.; Jensen, G.J.; Newman, D.K. Marine tubeworm
metamorphosis induced by arrays of bacterial phage tail-like structures. Science 2014 ,343, 529–533. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 16 of 19
73. Freckelton, M.L.; Nedved, B.T.; Hadﬁeld, M.G. Induction of invertebrate larval settlement; Di erent bacteria,
dierent mechanisms? Sci. Rep. 2017 ,7, 42557. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Huang, Y.; Callahan, S.; Hadﬁeld, M.G. Recruitment in the sea: Bacterial genes required for inducing larval
settlement in a polychaete worm. Sci. Rep. 2012 ,2, 228. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Harder, T.; Lam, C.; Qian, P .-Y. Induction of larval settlement in the polychaete Hydroides elegans by marine
bioﬁlms: An investigation of monospeciﬁc diatom ﬁlms as settlement cues. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2002 ,229,
105–112. [CrossRef]
76. Lam, C.; Harder, T.; Qian, P .-Y. Induction of larval settlement in the polychaete Hydroides elegans by
extracellular polymers of benthic diatoms. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2005 ,286, 145–154. [CrossRef]
77. Gallardo, W.G.; Buen, S.M.A. Evaluation of mucus, Navicula , and mixed diatoms as larval settlement inducers
for the tropical abalone Haliotis asinina .Aquaculture 2003 ,221, 357–364. [CrossRef]
78. Avendaño-Herrera, R.; Riquelmes, C.; Silva, F.; Avendañod, M.; Irgang, R. Optimization of settlement of
larval Argopecten purpuratus using natural diatom bioﬁlms. J. Shellﬁsh Res. 2003 ,22, 393–399.
79. Jouuchi, T.; Satuito, C.G.; Kitamura, H. Sugar compound products of the periphytic diatom Navicula
ramosissima induce larval settlement in the barnacle, Amphibalanus amphitrite .Mar. Biol. 2007 ,152, 1065–1076.
[CrossRef]
80. Kitamura, H.; Hirayama, K. E ect of primary ﬁlms on the settlement of larvae of a bryozoan Bugula neritina .
Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 1987 ,53, 1377–1381. [CrossRef]
81. Dahms, H.-U.; Dobretsov, S.; Qian, P .-Y. The e ect of bacterial and diatom bioﬁlms on the settlement of the
bryozoan Bugula neritina .J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 2004 ,313, 191–209. [CrossRef]
82. Railkin, A.I. Marine Biofouling: Colonization Processes and Defenses ; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2003;
ISBN 978-0-203-50323-2.
83. Watson, M.G.; Scardino, A.J.; Zalizniak, L.; Shimeta, J. Inhibition of invertebrate larval settlement by bioﬁlm
ciliates. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 2016 ,557, 77–90. [CrossRef]
84. Tebben, J.; Tapiolas, D.M.; Motti, C.A.; Abrego, D.; Negri, A.P .; Blackall, L.L.; Steinberg, P .D.; Harder, T.
Induction of larval metamorphosis of the coral Acropora millepora by tetrabromopyrrole isolated from a
Pseudoalteromonas Bacterium. PLoS ONE 2011 ,6, e19082. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Sneed Jennifer, M.; Sharp Koty, H.; Ritchie Kimberly, B.; Paul Valerie, J. The chemical cue tetrabromopyrrole
from a bioﬁlm bacterium induces settlement of multiple Caribbean corals. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2014 ,281,
20133086. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Siboni, N.; Abrego, D.; Seneca, F.; Motti, C.A.; Andreakis, N.; Tebben, J.; Blackall, L.L.; Harder, T. Using
bacterial extract along with di erential gene expression in Acropora millepora larvae to decouple the processes
of attachment and metamorphosis. PLoS ONE 2012 ,7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Kirchman, D.; Graham, S.; Reish, D.; Mitchell, R. Bacteria induce settlement and metamorphosis of Janua
(Dexiospira) brasiliensis Grube (Polychaeta:Spirprbidae). J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 1981 ,56, 153–163. [CrossRef]
88. Eberhard, A.; Burlingame, A.L.; Eberhard, C.; Kenyon, G.L.; Nealson, K.H.; Oppenheimer, N.J. Structural
identiﬁcation of autoinducer of Photobacterium ﬁscheri luciferase. Biochemistry 1981 ,20, 2444–2449. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
89. Gram, L.; Grossart, H.-P .; Schlinglo , A.; Kiørboe, T. Possible quorum sensing in marine snow bacteria:
Production of acylated homoserine lactones by Roseobacter strains isolated from marine snow. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2002 ,68, 4111–4116. [CrossRef]
90. Mohamed, N.M.; Cicirelli, E.M.; Kan, J.; Chen, F.; Fuqua, C.; Hill, R.T. Diversity and quorum-sensing signal
production of proteobacteria associated with marine sponges. Environ. Microbiol. 2008 ,10, 75–86. [CrossRef]
91. Taylor, M.W.; Schupp, P .J.; Baillie, H.J.; Charlton, T.S.; de Nys, R.; Kjelleberg, S.; Steinberg, P .D. Evidence
for Acyl homoserine lactone signal production in bacteria associated with marine sponges. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2004 ,70, 4387–4389. [CrossRef]
92. Golberg, K.; Eltzov, E.; Shnit-Orland, M.; Marks, R.S.; Kushmaro, A. Characterization of quorum sensing
signals in coral-associated bacteria. Microb. Ecol. 2011 ,61, 783–792. [CrossRef]
93. Wagner-Döbler, I.; Thiel, V .; Eberl, L.; Allgaier, M.; Bodor, A.; Meyer, S.; Ebner, S.; Hennig, A.; Pukall, R.;
Schulz, S. Discovery of complex mixtures of novel long-chain quorum sensing signals in free-living and
host-associated marine alphaproteobacteria. ChemBioChem 2005 ,6, 2195–2206. [CrossRef]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 17 of 19
94. Huang, Y.-L.; Dobretsov, S.; Ki, J.-S.; Yang, L.-H.; Qian, P .-Y. Presence of Acyl-homoserine lactone in subtidal
bioﬁlm and the implication in larval behavioral response in the polychaete Hydroides elegans .Microb. Ecol.
2007 ,54, 384–392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Joint, I.; Tait, K.; Wheeler, G. Cross-kingdom signalling: Exploitation of bacterial quorum sensing molecules
by the green seaweed Ulva .Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2007 ,362, 1223–1233. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Tait, K.; Joint, I.; Daykin, M.; Milton, D.L.; Williams, P .; C ámara, M. Disruption of quorum sensing in seawater
abolishes attraction of zoospores of the green alga Ulva to bacterial bioﬁlms. Environ. Microbiol. 2005 ,7,
229–240. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Twigg, M.S.; Tait, K.; Williams, P .; Atkinson, S.; C ámara, M. Interference with the germination and growth of
Ulva zoospores by quorum-sensing molecules from Ulva -associated epiphytic bacteria. Environ. Microbiol.
2014 ,16, 445–453. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
98. Weinberger, F.; Beltran, J.; Correa, J.A.; Lion, U.; Pohnert, G.; Kumar, N.; Steinberg, P .; Kloareg, B.; Potin, P .
Spore release in Acrochaetium sp. (Rhodophyta) is bacterially controlled. J. Phycol. 2007 ,43, 235–241.
[CrossRef]
99. Qi, Y.; Wu, Z.; He, J.; Rittschof, D.; Su, P .; Ke, C.; Feng, D. Conspeciﬁc cues that induce spore settlement in the
biofouling and green tide-forming alga Ulva tepida provide a potential aggregation mechanism. Int. Biodeterior.
Biodegrad. 2019 ,145, 104807. [CrossRef]
100. Tait, K.; Havenhand, J. Investigating a possible role for the bacterial signal molecules N-acylhomoserine
lactones in Balanus improvisus cyprid settlement. Mol. Ecol. 2013 ,22, 2588–2602. [CrossRef]
101. Browne, K.A.; Tamburri, M.N.; Zimmer-Faust, R.K. Modelling quantitative structure-activity relationships
between animal behaviour and environmental signal molecules. J. Exp. Biol. 1998 ,201, 245–258.
102. Crisp, D.J. Chemical factors inducing settlement in Crassostrea virginica (Gmelin). J. Anim. Ecol. 1967 ,36,
329–335. [CrossRef]
103. Crisp, D.J.; Meadows, P .S.; Brambell, F.W.R. Adsorbed layers: The stimulus to settlement in barnacles. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 1963 ,158, 364–387.
104. Crisp, D.J.; Meadows, P .S.; Brambell, F.W.R. The chemical basis of gregariousness in cirripedes. Proc. R. Soc.
Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 1962 ,156, 500–520. [CrossRef]
105. Tamburri, M.N.; Zimmer-Faust, R.K.; Tamplin, M.L. Natural sources and properties of chemical inducers
mediating settlement of oyster larvae: A re-examination. Biol. Bull. 1992 ,183, 327–338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Rittschof, D.; Cohen, J.H. Crustacean peptide and peptide-like pheromones and kairomones. Peptides 2004 ,
25, 1503–1516. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Decho, A.W.; Browne, K.A.; Zimmer-Faust, R.K. Chemical cues: Why basic peptides are signal molecules in
marine environments. Limnol. Oceanogr. 1998 ,43, 1410–1417. [CrossRef]
108. Hidu, H. Gregarious setting in the American oyster Crassostrea virginica Gmelin. Chesap. Sci. 1969 ,10, 85–92.
[CrossRef]
109. Zimmer-Faust, R.K.; Tamburri, M.N. Chemical identity and ecological implications of a waterborne, larval
settlement cue. Limnol. Oceanogr. 1994 ,39, 1075–1087. [CrossRef]
110. Wheeler, G.L.; Tait, K.; Taylor, A.; Brownlee, C.; Joint, I. Acyl-homoserine lactones modulate the settlement
rate of zoospores of the marine alga Ulva intestinalis via a novel chemokinetic mechanism. Plant Cell Environ.
2006 ,29, 608–618. [CrossRef]
111. Tait, K.; Williamson, H.; Atkinson, S.; Williams, P .; C ámara, M.; Joint, I. Turnover of quorum sensing signal
molecules modulates cross-kingdom signalling. Environ. Microbiol. 2009 ,11, 1792–1802. [CrossRef]
112. Singh, R.P .; Baghel, R.S.; Reddy, C.R.K.; Jha, B. E ect of quorum sensing signals produced by
seaweed-associated bacteria on carpospore liberation from Gracilaria dura .Front. Plant Sci. 2015 , 6.
[CrossRef]
113. Zhou, J.; Lyu, Y.; Richlen, M.L.; Anderson, D.M.; Cai, Z. Quorum sensing is a language of chemical signals
and plays an ecological role in algal-bacterial interactions. Crit. Rev. Plant Sci. 2016 ,35, 81–105. [CrossRef]
114. Bonar, D.B.; Coon, S.L.; Walch, M.; Weiner, R.M.; Fitt, W. Control of oyster settlement and metamorphosis by
endogenous and exogenous chemical cues. Bull. Mar. Sci. 1990 ,46, 484–498.
115. Bonar, D.B.; Weiner, R.M.; Colwell, R.R. Microbial-invertebrate interactions and potential for biotechnology.
Microb. Ecol. 1986 ,12, 101–110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 18 of 19
116. Knight-Jones, E.W.; Crisp, D.J. Gregariousness in barnacles in relation to the fouling of ships and to
anti-fouling research. Nature 1953 ,171, 1109–1110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Essock-Burns, T.; Wepprich, A.; Thompson, A.; Rittschof, D. Enzymes manage bioﬁlms on crab surfaces
aiding in feeding and antifouling. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 2016 ,479, 106–113. [CrossRef]
118. Essock-Burns, T.; Gohad, N.V .; Orihuela, B.; Mount, A.S.; Spillmann, C.M.; Wahl, K.J.; Rittschof, D. Barnacle
biology before, during and after settlement and metamorphosis: A study of the interface. J. Exp. Biol. 2017 ,
220, 194–207. [CrossRef]
119. Fears, K.P .; Orihuela, B.; Rittschof, D.; Wahl, K.J. Acorn barnacles secrete phase-separating ﬂuid to clear
surfaces ahead of cement deposition. Adv. Sci. 2018 ,5, 1700762. [CrossRef]
120. Dickinson, G.H.; Vega, I.E.; Wahl, K.J.; Orihuela, B.; Beyley, V .; Rodriguez, E.N.; Everett, R.K.; Bonaventura, J.;
Rittschof, D. Barnacle cement: A polymerization model based on evolutionary concepts. J. Exp. Biol. 2009 ,
212, 3499–3510. [CrossRef]
121. So, C.R.; Scancella, J.M.; Fears, K.P .; Essock-Burns, T.; Haynes, S.E.; Leary, D.H.; Diana, Z.; Wang, C.; North, S.;
Oh, C.S.; et al. Oxidase activity of the barnacle adhesive interface involves peroxide-dependent catechol
oxidase and lysyl oxidase enzymes. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017 ,9, 11493–11505. [CrossRef]
122. Essock-Burns, T. Exploring the Interface between Macroorganisms and Microorganisms: Biochemical,
Ecological, and Evolutionary Contexts. Ph.D. Thesis, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, 2015.
123. Hughes, M. The function of concurrent signals: Visual and chemical communication in snapping shrimp.
Anim. Behav. 1996 ,52, 247–257. [CrossRef]
124. Caldwell, R.L. Cavity occupation and defensive behaviour in the stomatopod Gonodactylus festai: Evidence
for chemically mediated individual recognition. Anim. Behav. 1979 ,27, 194–201. [CrossRef]
125. Rittschof, D. Oyster drills and the frontiers of chemical ecology: Unsettling ideas. Am. Malacol. Bull. 1985 ,1,
111–116.
126. Rittschof, D. Body odors and neutral-basic peptide mimics: A review of responses by marine organisms.
Integr. Comp. Biol. 1993 ,33, 487–493. [CrossRef]
127. Endrizzi, B.J.; Stewart, R.J. Glueomics: An expression survey of the adhesive gland of the sandcastle worm.
J. Adhes. 2009 ,85, 546–559. [CrossRef]
128. Essock-Burns, T.; Soderblom, E.J.; Orihuela, B.; Moseley, M.A.; Rittschof, D. Hypothesis testing with
proteomics: A case study using wound healing mechanisms in ﬂuids associated with barnacle glue. Front.
Mar. Sci. 2019 ,6. [CrossRef]
129. Reports—IPCC. Available online: https: //www.ipcc.ch /reports /(accessed on 17 November 2019).
130. Doney, S.C.; Fabry, V .J.; Feely, R.A.; Kleypas, J.A. Ocean acidiﬁcation: The other CO 2problem. Annu. Rev.
Mar. Sci. 2009 ,1, 169–192. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Dobretsov, S.; Coutinho, R.; Rittschof, D.; Salta, M.; Ragazzola, F.; Hellio, C. The oceans are changing: Impact
of ocean warming and acidiﬁcation on biofouling communities. Biofouling 2019 ,35, 585–595. [CrossRef]
132. Chan, V .B.S.; Li, C.; Lane, A.C.; Wang, Y.; Lu, X.; Shih, K.; Zhang, T.; Thiyagarajan, V . CO 2-driven ocean
acidiﬁcation alters and weakens integrity of the calcareous tubes produced by the serpulid tubeworm,
Hydroides elegans .PLoS ONE 2012 ,7, e42718. [CrossRef]
133. Doney, S.C.; Ruckelshaus, M.; Emmett Du y, J.; Barry, J.P .; Chan, F.; English, C.A.; Galindo, H.M.;
Grebmeier, J.M.; Hollowed, A.B.; Knowlton, N.; et al. Climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.
Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci. 2012 ,4, 11–37. [CrossRef]
134. Lane, A.C.; Mukherjee, J.; Chan, V .B.S.; Thiyagarajan, V . Decreased pH does not alter metamorphosis but
compromises juvenile calciﬁcation of the tube worm Hydroides elegans .Mar. Biol. 2013 ,160, 1983–1993.
[CrossRef]
135. Meng, Y.; Li, C.; Li, H.; Shih, K.; He, C.; Yao, H.; Thiyagarajan, V . Recoverable impacts of ocean acidiﬁcation
on the tubeworm, Hydroides elegans : Implication for biofouling in future coastal oceans. Biofouling 2019 ,35,
945–957. [CrossRef]
136. Peck, L.S.; Clark, M.S.; Power, D.; Reis, J.; Batista, F.M.; Harper, E.M. Acidiﬁcation e ects on biofouling
communities: Winners and losers. Glob. Chang. Biol. 2015 ,21, 1907–1913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020 ,21, 731 19 of 19
137. Lau, S.C.K.; Thiyagarajan, V .; Cheung, S.C.K.; Qian, P .-Y. Roles of bacterial community composition in
bioﬁlms as a mediator for larval settlement of three marine invertebrates. Aquat. Microb. Ecol. 2005 ,38,
41–51. [CrossRef]
138. Zhang, Y.; Fonslow, B.R.; Shan, B.; Baek, M.-C.; Yates, J.R. Protein analysis by shotgun /bottom-up proteomics.
Chem. Rev. 2013 ,113, 2343–2394. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
©2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http: //creativecommons.org /licenses /by/4.0/).