p~~,irf: < 4 A+f R I V- T 79-0,!l
Uahetshy of %cede htanrl %4eine Techno% Repeet 88
92
~ ~~ oocter a grant fr~ Ae t4scicmat
O'6 T C pg~
e. ~ Grate-494-6-3%-leXR. Ibm~~ ~ 4stnbvte ~mI - ~~~~~~~a ~~h
~~~h4efa em~ ~ue, aai~a~s.Unit.~~~~~~ ~~ ~~~&MUaarevAty gf ~ g~~
ABSTRACTS OF METHODS USED TO ASSESS FISH QUALITY
Sudip Jhaveri
Joseph Montecalvo, Jr.
Pavlos Karakoltsidis
Jeffrey Howe
Food Science and Nutrition
Mar ine Advis ory S ervi c e
University of Rhode Island
Marine Technical Report 69
CONTESTS
4 5 7 58
72
81
87
95
97
99
100
101Acknowledgments
introduction
Chemical Methods for Determining Fish Quality
Biochemical Methods for Determining Fish Quality
Microbiological Methods for Determining Fish Quality
Organoleptic Methods for Determining Fish Quality
Miscellaneous Methods for Determining Fish Quality
Review Articles on Methods of Determining Fish Quality
Appendix
List of Journals
List of Books
Lndex by Key Word
ACKHOWLKDI26ÃZS
We are truly grateful to the many people who provided assis-
tance and substance to make this publication a reality. Though
the authors researched and assembled the abstracts, without the
dedicated effort of those involved in fisheries research this
publication could not have taken form. We are especially grate-
ful to them for their work over the years, and this publication is
a tribute to that effort.
A note of special thanks is in order to the National Fisheries
Institute for their support, guidance and patience.
As with many publications, the proper preparation of a
manuscript is an essential, tine-consuming task which requires the
cooperation of many. This was handled expertly by Mrs. Geraldine
garotkin, Department of Food Science and Nutrition, Mrs. Deborah
Prefontaine, Marine Advisory Service, and Vicki Des]srdins, Publica-
tions Office.
For everyone's long hours of work and unending patience we
are deeply indebted.
INTRODUCTION
In the fall of 1976, the National Fisheries Institute decided
that an up-to-date compilation of relevant available material on
fish quality was needed. This could be used as an aid to the
seafood industry and provide some standardization in methods.
The National Fisheries Institute awarded the Narine Advisory
Service at URI a scholarship grant in January 1977 to coordinate
the research of the literature for this publication. The exper-
tise of Dr. Spiros Constantinides in the Department of Food Science
and Nutrition was used to research and assemble all the available
data. The efforts of his group focused on reputable publications,
international journals, trade journals, and reports presented at
technological conferences. The entire spectrum of methods presented
in this publication was collected and reviewed, and organized into
five major categories: Chemical, Biochemical, Nicrobiological,
Organoleptic and Miscellaneous. Review articles on the methods of
determining fish quality are listed in the section that follows
these categories. Each abstract is quoted in as complete a form
as possible in order to provide a reference for further informa-
tion. We in no way feel that the abstract can act as a substitute
for the article and encourage the reader to review the articles for
a greater understanding of the methods practiced. The abstracts
are given in chronological order to point out the most recent
material.
It is our sincerest hope that this publication will provide a
valuable reference and tool for those interested in assessments of
fish quality. Additionally, we hope some standardization may
result and that needs for future work may be recognized and ultimately
realized.
CHEMICAL METHODS FOR DETERMINING FISH QUALITY
Chemical Quality Index of Canned Tuna As Determined by High Pressure
Liquid Chromatography
John L. Nietz
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education
and Welfare,
Philadelphia District Office, Philadelphia, PA
and Endel Karmas Department of Food Science, Rutgers University,
New Brunswick, NJ
Journal of Food Science 42:155-l58, 1977
A chemical quality index of canned tuna was established
for estimating the extent of decomposition in fresh tuna
prior to canning. Histamine has frequently been used as
such an indicator, but by itself it has not always proved
useful. The relationship of 5 amines  histamine, putres-
cine, cadaverine, spermine and spermidine! was studied to
generate a chemical index of tuna decomposition, The
amines were extracted from authentic pack and commercially
prepared canned tuna samples. The dansyl derivatives
were formed and determined by reverse phase, linear
gradient elution., high pressure liquid chromatography.
An index was developed from the individual amines and the
resulting chemical indices scores compared favorably to
organoleptic and. authentic pack value scores.
A Total Reducing Substance Test For Ascertaining Oyster Quality
Joseph A. Liuzzo, Stephen C. Lagarde, Robert M. Grodner and
Arthur F. Novak
Department of Food Science, Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge, LA
Journal of Food Science 40:125  128, 1975
From the results of statistical analysis and correlations
between the various chemical, microbiological and organo-
leptic tests, it would appear that the total reducing
substance test offers a rapid and reliable means of
ascertaining the quality of ice stored oysters. Of all
the methods tested as indices of oyster quality, the TRS
 total reduced substances! method most nearly approaches
the criteria which a chemical indicator for food quality
should possess.
Deve]opment of a Chemical Test For Shrimp Quality
Bryant F. Cobb IIl and Carl Vanderzant
Department of Animal Science, Texas A6N University, College
Station, TX
Journal of Food Science 40:121-124, 1975
The total volatile nitrogen/amino-nitrogen  TVN/AA-N!
ratio may be a more accurate indicator of shrimp quality
 organoleptic! than bacterial counts. In tests on frozen
imported shrimp, some samples with TVN/AA-N ratios > 1.5 mg.
N/mN had bacterial counts ranging from 11,000 to 95,000
per gram, These shrimp, which were from freezer boats,
were rejected as spoiled by a trained taste panel.
The Gas Chromatographi.c Determination of Trimethylamine and
Dimethylamine in Fish, Fishery Products and Other Foodstuffs
T.M. Ritskes
Journal of Food Technology 10:221-228, 197$
Baseline separation. of trimethylamine  TMA! and dimethy-
lamine  DNA! is obtained on a Carbowax 400/polyethylene
imine column provided with an alkaline pre-column. Based
on this separation, a method of analysis for these amines
in fish and other foodstuffs was worked out.
Quantitative distillation of traces of DNA could be
achieved by addition of ethylamine prior to distillation.
A sensitivity increase up to the ppm range was found to
be possible. Amine oxides, after reduction with titanous
chloride, can be determined in the same way. The auto-
mation of the gas chromatographic injection procedure is
described.
Simultaneous Neasurements of Trimethylamine and Dimethylamine in
F«h, and Their Vse for Estimating quality of Frozen-Stored Gadoid
Fillets
C.H. Castell, Barbara Smi.th, and W.J. Dyer
Department of the Environment, Fisheries and Marine Service,
Halifax Laboratory, Halifax, N.S.
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 31:383-389, 1974
On the basis of some of the recent modifications of
Dyer's colorimetric tests for measuring trlmethylamine
 TNA! in fish, a procedure is described that gives both
the TMA and the dimethylamine  DNA! contents. Neasure-
ments on 84 frozen-stored fillets of haddock, cod, pollock,
cusk, and hake showed a correlation coefficient of 0.94
between DMA values obtained by the copper-dithiocarbamate
test and those obtained by the picric acid procedure.
The simultaneous measurements of TMA and DNA are useful
in escimating the quality of frozen-stored gadoid fillets,
the TMA value indicating the extent of microbial spoilage
before the muscle was frozen and the DMA value the extent
of deterioration through action of tissue enzymes during
frozen storage.
Hypoxanthine Measurement in Assessing Freshness of Chilled Canned
Catfish ctaluzus pe~tates!
Larry R. Beuchat
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 21!:453-455, 1973
Existing methods were ~odified for the inexpensive,
objective measurement of hypoxanthine in muscle of chan-
nel catfish  Zctaku~s punctatus! stored at 2 postmortem
for up to 22 days. Sensory ratings were performed by
appearance, color, aroma, texture, and flavor and compared
to the rate of hypoxanthine accumulation in the same
fish. Measurement of the purine, especially prior to
noticeable spoilage, shows potent.i.al value as an index in
assessing freshness of chill-stored catfish.
An Automation Analysis of Trimethylamine in Fish Muscle
Noboru Kato and Hitoshi Uchiyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
39 8! 899-903, 3.973
The conditions of automatic analysis of trimethylamine
 TMA! were examined by using a Technicon autoanalyzer.
To the trichloroacetic acid  TCA! extract of fish muscle,
10X formaldehyde and 30X potassium hydroxide solutions
are successively added, and then the mixture is heated in
an oil bath of 60'C. The TMA thus liberated from the
reaction mixture is captured in a gas trap, then mixed
with a solutio~ of bromothymol blue, and finally deter-
mined colorimetrically at 620 mp.
Within the range of 3-50 ug I/ml, there was a linear
relation between optical density and TMA concentration.
Results obtained using this method correlate very well
with those obtained by the picrate method in which
potassium hydroxide was substituted for potassium
carbonate.
10
titatj ve and Selective Gas Chromatographic Analysis of Dirnethyl-Quantnd Trimethylamine in Fish
Alexander Miller III, Richard A. Scanlan, Jong S. Lee, and
Leonard M. Libbey
Journal of Agricullural and Food Chemistry 29!:709-711, 1972
The selective gas chromatographic separation of methy-
lamines was accomplished using columns containg Graphon
and tetraethylenepentamine with an alkali flame ionization
dectector  AFID!. Trimethylamine  TMA, 10 ppm! and
dimethylamine  DMA, 50 ppm! added to fish were easily
detected by equilibrium vapor analysis. Greater sensitivity
5 ppb TMA and 100ppb DMA! was obtained by using the
AFID in con]unction with a gas entrainment, on column
trapping procedure,
Detection of Frozen Fish Deterioration by An Ultraviolet
Spec trophotomet ric Me thod
A. A. Danopoulos and V. L. Ninni
Athens Graduate School of Economics and Business Science,
Chemistry and. Technology Laboratory, Athens, Greece
Journal of Food Science 37.'649-651, 1972
Ultraviolet absorption has been found to give a rea-
sonably satisfactory measure of the extent of oxidation
for tissue oil in frozen fish. This method is applicable
not only at the early stages of oil oxidation but also
at the advanced stages, when peroxide value determina-
tion cannot be used bec.ause of rapid decomposition of
hydroperoxides,
The Separation of Aliphatic Amines in Dilute Aqueous Solution by
Gas Chromatography and Application of This Technique to the Quanti-
tative Analysis of Tri- and Dimethylamine in Fish
J.N. Keay and R. Hardy
Department of Trade and Industry, Tarry Research Station,
Aberdeen, Scotland
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 23;9-19, 1972
Gas chromatography on an alkaline Dowfax 9N9 column has
been found to be suitable for the qualitative and quanti-
tative analysis of alkylamines in dilute aqueous solution,
The method has been applied to the analysis of trimethylamine
 TMA! and dimethylamine  DMA! in fish and has been
used to throw further light on uncertainties concerning
the use of the "picrate" procedure for TNA determination.
An Investigation of the Method of Determining Trimethylamine in
Fish Muscle Extracts by the Formation of Its Picrate Salt-Part II
C.K. Murray and D,M. Gibson
Department of Trade and Industry, Torry Research Station,
Aberdeen, Scotland
Journal of Food Technology 7;47-51, 1972
Thi.n layer chromatography, gas liquid chromatography and,
colorimetric procedures were used to identify and determine
amines present in standard solutions, cod muscle extracts,
and in the toluene phase of a modified %MA procedure.
These tests show that the use of potassium hydroxide
solution to liberate ~ from formalized trichloracetic
acid extracts of fresh or frozen cod is superior to
potassium carbonate solution.
Volatile Basic Nitrogen  VBN! as a Freshness Indicator of Fish For
Canning
M. Akiba and E. Tanikawa
Laboratory of Marine Food Technology, Faculty of Fisheries,
Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan
and Y. Fujii
Tokai Regional Fisheries Research Laboratory, Tokyo, Japan
Food and Agricultural Organization 115:39-43, 1971
This study deals with the relationship between the decom-
position products of ATP and volatile basic nitrogen
content VBN on fresh and canned salmon. The VBN content
can be used to determine the acceptability of the raw
material. It is recommended that the fish must be
processed before the VNB index reaches 20mgX. Fish with
a greater content of VBN results in poor quality canned
products,
Quality Assessment of Iced Cod and Prepackaged Cod Fillets
K.J.A. van Spreekens
Institute for Fishery Products TNO, Ijmuiden, The Netherlands
Pood and Agricultural Organization 115:83-94, 1971
Deterioration of fresh cod and of iced fillets were
studied using total bacteria counts, total volatile
bases, a hypoxanthine method and organoleptic methods.
The effect of hygienic conditions, quality of the raw
material and temperature of storage were studied.
12
Significance in Neasuring Volatile Base and Trimethylamine Nitrogen
d Nucleotides in Fish Muscle as Indices of Freshness of Fish
Hitoshi Uchiyama, Shigea Ehira, Hiroshi Kobayashi, and Wataru
Shimizu
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
3Q!:177, 1970
Among the various tests for elucidating the freshness of
fish, measurements of volatile base and trimethylamine
nitrogen in the muscle have been used widely by many
investigators, However, little information is available
on the relation between the value of these tests and the
freshness evaluated commercially by organoleptic tests.
Typical uncooked Japanese seafoods, "Sashimi", or sliced
raw fish, and "Sushi" condiments were prepared from fish
which were selected with the traditional severe scrutiny
for flavor. Using these samples obtained from local
markets, and fish killed immediately after being caught,
the significance in measuring volatile base, trimethylamine
nitrogen, and nucleotides and related compounds for
estimating the freshness was studied. The main features
are as follows:
1. The distribution of value of volatile base and trimethy-
lamine nitrogen, far fram showing linear correlation
among the fish killed immediately after being caught,
"Sashimi" and "Sushi" condiments of several grades of
qualities, appeared to be nearly random, and no trend can
be discerned. In measuring the amounts of these bases,
we were only able to estimate the limit of acceptability
or the onset of spoilage of the foods.
2. From the results of statistical examinations, the
nucleotide decomposition ratio, K value,was found to be a
useful index for "Ikino yosa", or freshness in the true
sense of the word, which was used as a sensory criterion
in the commercial purchase and sales of fish.
Effect of Dimethylamine on the Value of Trimethylamine Determined
by the Dyer's Method
Harumi Tozawa, Kazuko Enokibara, and Keishi Amano
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
36 e>:60e, 197O
It has been known that the picrate colour reaction is not
specific for trimethylamine  TMA! because the reaction
also occurs with many types of amines formed during the
spoilage of fish. Thus, the TMA level in the muscle of
gadoid fish are considered to be over-estimated by the
DYER's picrate method, since the muscle often con-
tains a considerable amount of dimethylamine  DNA! even
in a good grade of quality,
13
By chance the authors observed that the picrate value of
cod muscle, obtained by HASHIMOTO's method using KOH
instead of K2C03, was too low for the expected level from
the amount of DMA contained, and therefore, examined the
colour development of DMA picrate in relation to the
reagents employed in the picrate method.
Optical density of DMA picrate was much smaller with the
combined use of KOH and 1 ml of 10X formaldehyde  FA!,
than the 0, D. obtained with K2C03 and FA. The ratio of
the O,D. of DMA picrate to the O.D. of the equivalent
picrate  ratio of colour development! was approximately
4X for the KOH method, while the ratio was about 50%%d
in the case of K2C03.
The amount of FA showed markedly different effects in the
two methods: with K2CO3, the colour intensified in proportion
to the increase of FA, while with KOH, a miximum value
occurred in the absence of FA and abruptly dropped with
the addition of 0.5 to 1.0 ml of FA, followed by a gradual
intensification in colours as FA increased.
The use of KOH as well as K2C03 was examined to determine
their effect on the picrate values of fish samples. Cod
and Alaska pollock fillets, including irradiated or
salted, were analyzed after chilled or frozen storage.
The picrate values with the use of KOH were found close
to the "real" TNA values measured by gas-liquid chromato-
graphy  GLC!, except one sample which contained a larger
amount of DMA. However, the picrate values obtained with
K C03 were much higher than the GI.C values.With regard to the results mentioned above, the authors
propose that KOH be used instead of K2C03 as the alkali
reagent, and the amount of 10X FA added be kept to 1 ml,
when gadoid fishes are subjected to TMA analysis by the
picrate method.
Formation of Dimethylamine in Stored Frozen Sea Fi.sh
C. H. Castell, Wanda Neal, and Barbara Smith
Fisheries Research Board of Canada. Halifax Laboratory, Halifax,
N.S.
Journal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada 27 lO!:1685-
1690, 1970
In cod fillets undergoing deterioration during frozen
stot'age, the dimethylamine content increases  and not the
trimethylamine content as previously reported by us!.
There was no evidence to show an accumulation of dimethy-
lamine in the muscle of frozen scallops, lobster, or
shrimp that were purposely held at relatively high storage
temperatures. It is suggested that for fish of the
family Gadidae dimethylamine might be used as a measure
of "frozen-storage deterioration" in much the same way as
trimethylame has been used as a measure of microbial
spoilage in the unfrozen fish.
14
Evaluation of Muscle Hypoxanthine and Volatile Bases as Potential
Quality Indices for Industrial Bottomfishes From the Gulf of Mexico
Enrique J. Guardia and Gerhard J. Haas
Fisheries Industrial Research 5!:117-122, 1969
Croaket'  hfioropogoa unduhx~! and spot  Leiostornua
mnthurua! are the two species of fish found most
commonly in catches of industrial bottomfish in the Gulf
of Mexico. Hypoxanthine increased linearly in both
species during the first 2 weeks that these fish were
stored in ice. This test for hypoxanthine could thus
indicate the quality of both croaker and spot and pre-
sumably that of the whole catch. Only after the fish had
been stored 1 veek in ice, however, did the total amount
of volatile bases increase. Consequently, this latter
test could not be used as an index of freshness, although
it might be used as an index of spoilage.
Studies on Freshness Determination of Fish Meat by the Distillation
Ratio of Volatile Acids-IX.
On the Applicability of D.R. Value to the Determination of The
Freshness of Oyster
Suezo Asakawa
Bulletin af the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
24 9!:714, 1969
The distillation ratio of volatile acids  D . R. value!
was measured on the Japanese oyster, Oats  Craesoatrea!
g~ae Thunberg, during the course of the deterioration of
its freshness, The results indicated that  I! the D.R.
value of very fresh oyster is smaller than that of fish
flesh, ! the value decreases rapidly as the freshness
lowersy and ! there is no relationship between D.R.
value and the freshness.
! D.R. value was decreased by the presence of such a
large amount of glycogen as is found in oyster, !
there exists much differences between the composition of
lower volatile acids produced during spoilage of oyster
and that of ordinary fish flesh, ! in the case of
oyster, higher volatile acids precipitated in the distillate,
causing the D.R, value to decrease rapidly with the
deterioration of freshness. Thus, D.R. value and freshnessshowed no correlation in oyster on account of the high
glycogen content of the body and the various kinds of
acids distilled out.
From the above, it was concluded that the "D.R. standard
scale" previously proposed for fish flesh can not be
applied to oyster, and no substitute standard scale was
proposed for oyster.
15
An Improved Automated Analysis of Hypoxanthine
J. R. Burt, J, Murray and G. D. Stroud
Journal of Food Technology 3:165-170, 1968
The level of hypoxanthine in fish muscle is a good
indicator of fish quality. Its routine determination can
be carried out reliably and quickly with the Auto Analyzer
using a redox indicator dye, Interference from formal-
dehyde and acetaldehyde in extracts of fish muscle, at
concentrations greater than would be expected there, is
not signifi.cant. Results obtained using this method
correlate very well with those from the standard manual
enzymatic assay procedure.
Production. of Trimethylamine in Frozen Cod Muscle
C. H. Castell, D. M. Bishop, and Wanda E. Neal
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 25!:921-
933, 1968
Trimethylamine  TNA! was produced in frozen cod fillets
and in scallop muscle under conditions where bacterial
activity could not take place. The amounts formed were
smaller than those which usually accompany bacterial
deterioration of unfrozen fish. Decreases in storage
temperature between -3' and -26'C reduced the rate of TNA
formation. At -26'C no measurable increase of TMA was
produced in cod fillets during storage periods up to 700
days.
TMA formation appeared to be related to other chemical
changes taking place in the frozen muscle. It followed
shortly after the formation of free fatty acids and was
almost simultaneous with changes taking place in the
amounts of extractable protein.
Determination of Volatile Amines in Fish Muscle by Gas-Liquid
Chromatography-I. Trimethylamine
Junsadu Nonaka, Hitomi Mitani, and Chiaki Koizumi.
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
33 8!:735-757, 1967
A convenient method of trimethylamine  TMA! determination
has been studied by gas-liquid chromatography  G.L.C.!,
The recommended procedure is as follows: A 2 ml portion
of 5X trichloracetic acid extract of fish muscle is placed
in a test tube with a 2G ml capacity. To the test tube,
0 ml of n-heptane and 2 ml of 50K potassium hydroxide
are added successivley, and the tightly stoppered test
tube is kept 5 minutes at 55'C in a water bath. The test
16
tube is vigorously shaken for 2 minutes, and after standing
for 10 minutes, an aliquot of the supernatant n-heptane
layer is applied to a G.L.C. equipped with both hydrogen
flame ionization detector and 1.5m x 4mm column packed
with 20K acetylalcohol +2%%d potassium hydroxide on C-22
firebrick of 60  80 mesh. Column temperature is ad-
Justed at 52'C and nitrogen is used as carrier gas.
The average recovery of TMA was estimated as more than
98K. Comparative determinations of TMA were run by the
G,L.C. and the Dyer method on the horse mackerel and the
mackerel muscles which were stored at 1-4'C for 0, 2, 5,
8 and ll days, respectively . It was confirmed that the
former always gave better than the latter especially when
the fish became unsound.
Hypoxanthine in Iced Freshwater Fish
L. C. Dugal
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Freshwater Institute
of Winnipeg, Canada
Journal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada 24 ll!:2229-
2239, 1967
The formation of hypoxanthine in ordinary muscle was fol-
lowed in 36 individual yellow walleye  Stizostediorc
vitveum! and in 22 individual whitefish  Coregonus elupea-
fo~is! stored in ice, At the time of death, the average
hypoxanthine content was approximately the same for
the two species  . 25 umole/g!; it increased gradually to
l. 52 umole/g in 22 days and to Z. 54 pmole/g in 18 days in
yellow walleye and in whitefish respectively. The average
rate of formation in yellow walleye  . 06 umole/g per
day! was the same as in ordinary muscle of swordfish; the
rate of formation in whitefish  . 13 pmole/g per day!
was slightly higher than that of Atlantic salmon, but
lower than that of haddock, petrale sole, and several
othet' marine species. Large variation in the rate of
formation was noticed between individual yellow walleyes.
The average hypoxanthine content of both yellow walleyes
and whitefish taken as groups was found to be proportional
to the number of days in storage. No difference in
average rate of formation was noticed between whitefish
fillets from opposite sides of the fish, nor between fresh
and thawed fish. The hypoxanthine content appears to be
suitable as an index of freshness of groups of fish, not
of individual fish.
17
Measurement of Hypoxanthine Concentration in Canned Herring as an
Index of the Freshness of the Raw Material, With a Comment on
Flavour Relations
R. B. Hughes and N. R. Jones
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 17:434-436, 1966
Hypoxanthine concentration in skeletal muscle increases
during the storage of raw herring at 7-12 C or in ice. No
further increase occurs during canning and subsequent
short-term storage, Consequently, the concentration of
the purine in the canned material affords an index of the
quality of the fish at processing. Relative differences
in hypoxanthine concentration at points of inedibility are
discussed in relation to current flavour theory.
Measurement of Hypoxanthine in Fish as a Method of Assessing Freshness
J. Spinelli, M. Eklund and D. Miyauchi
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries Technological Laboratory,
Seattle, Washington
Journal of Food Science 29:710-714, 1964
The hypoxanthine contents of fresh fillets taken from
three species of fish in Pacific Northwest waters were
found to be almost zero, and increased at a fairly uniform
rate during the first 8-10 days of storage in me3,ting ice.
Tbe hypoxanthine content reached maximum values in about
8-10 days. Total nucleotides reached a minimum in about
6-8 days. Fillets stored at -20'F showed practically no
change in hypoxanthine content during four months of
storage.
Hypoxanthine can be rapidly measured and the data can be
used to judge the l.ength of time fish has been held in
storage.
Rapid Estimations of Hypoxanthine Concentrations as Indices of the
Freshness of Chill-Stored Fish
N. R. Jones, J. Murray and {in part! Mrs. E. I'. Livingston and
C. K. Murray
Journal of the Science of Food and Agricu3.ture 15:763-774, 1964
Rapid estimates of hypoxanthine concentration in muscle
extracts by xanthine oxidase reaction agreed well with
those obtained by ion exchange chromatography. Assay by
precipitati.on as the silver salt was subject to some
inaccuracy. Concentrations of hypoxanthine increased
throughout the period of useful storage of a number of
species. The increases correlated well with most evaluations
of quality by taste panel.
18
Ammonia as an Index of Decomposition in Crabmeat
James L. Burnett
Food and Drug Administration, Seattle, WA
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural
Chemists 48!:624-627, 1964
A method based upon the color reaction between NH3,
thymol, and bromine, uses ammonia as an index of de-
composition in fresh and frozen crabmeat. The color is
extracted into n-butyl alcohol and net absorbance is
determined by subtracting absorbance at 475 mu from thatat 682 mu. Sensitivity is about 1 ppm NH3. The method is
very rapid and requi res no special apparatus. Samples of
crabmeat decomposed under controlled conditions were
examined and graded organoleptically, Ammonia content was
determined and found to increase uniformly and rapidly
with spoilage. Good repxoducibility and low results were
obtained on fresh crabmeat. Ammonia can be detected by
this method before spoilage can be detected organoleptically.
Rancidity in Lean Fish Muscle I. A Proposed Accelerated Copper-
Catalyzed Method for Evaluating the Tendency of Fish Muscle to
Become Rancid
J. MacLean and C. H. Castell
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Technological Research
Labortory, Halifax, N.S.
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 21!:
1345-1359, 1964
A method that can be carried out within 24-72 hr is sug-
gested for determining the tendency of fish muscle to
become rancid. It consists of adding measured, trace
amounts of copper ion to muscle that has been blended withwater :3! followed by storage at 0 C. Rancidity isobserved subjectively by noting the odours that develop
and objectively by means of the thiobarbituric acid
reaction.
Detetmination of Adenine, Hypoxanthine, Adenosine and Inosine by Ion
Exchange Chromatography
Ken-ichi Arai and Tsuneyuki Saito
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
29!:168, 1963
The assay method is based on the separation of adenine A!, hypoxanthine  H!, adenosine  AR!, inosine  HR!, and
nucleotides by using the ion exchange resins, DIA-ION SA-100  formate type! and Dowex lx2  chloride type! . Theformer is used for adsorption of nucleotides and the
l9
latter for adenine, hypoxanthine, adenosine and inosine.
It is possible to differentiate adenine, hypoxa«bine>
adenosine and inosine from Dowex lx2 quantitatively owing
to their differences in the rate of elution by using
solvent system, NH4OH NCI Na2B407, in which A is 0.1NNH4OH-0.035N HCI-0. 005N Na2B40~, B is 0.001N HCI-0. 0002N
in the stepwise elution system.
Quality Evaluation Studies of Fish and Shellfish from Certain »«hem
European Waters
Lionel Farber
Seafood Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper Foundation,
University of California, San Francisco, California
Food Technology 17110-114, 1963
Sensory judgements and determinations of trimethylamine
nitrogen  TNAN! and of volatile reducing substances  VRS!
were made on the white-fleshed fish cod, haddock, whiting,
plaice, sole, and gurnard, on red-fleshed Atlantic herring,
and on shrimp in fisheries research laboratories in Aberdeen,
Paris, Zjmuiden, Copenhagen, Goteborg, Bergen, and Reykjavik.
In general, correlations of the contents of TMAN and the
VRS with sensory judgements for the white-fleshed fish
were parallel, with coefficients of correlation of 0.8-0.9.
In contrast were the results for the herring= the VRS
values increased and the TMAN values were not related to
the progress of spoilage. The VRS values for the shrimp
sampled paralleled the sensory judgements. The methods
used in California to evaluate the quality of Pacific
Coast fish and shellfish were useful for the varieties
caught in northern Euopean waters.
A Fluorometric Method for Determining The Freshness of Fish
Toyoki Ono, Fumio Nagayama, Takuichiro Yoshikane and Yoshinori
Muto
Bulletin of the 3apanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
28 9!:936, 1962
As the technique for measurement of fluorescence is simple
and not time-consuming, this method has been proposed by
several workers for food inspection which requir'es rapidity.
However, there is no established method for fish.
present investigation was undertaken to see whether fluoro-
metry could be used for determining the quality of fish.
Sole flesh gave a clear solution extracted with 5 volumes
of 70X ethanol, but gave a turbid solution which is not
suitable for f luorometry when extracted with water
Maximum fluorescence of the extracts was found at 460 mu.
20
Therefore, the measurement could be standardized with
quinine sulfate solution. Heat treatment of flesh in-
creased fluorescence of the extracts especially in the
presence of glucose. Fluorescence from spoiled flesh was
greater than that from fresh flesh.
Development of fluorescence was closely related to the
storage time. Fluorescence from flesh which was steam
boiled with glucose seemed to be a better indication of
quality of the flesh than VBN value.
Susmary of Chemical Data on Progressive Decomposition Studies of
Cod, Haddock and Perch
Fred Hilling, L.R. Shelton, Jr. and J.H. Loughrey
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, Washington, D,C.
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
45:724, 1962
Previously reported results by chemical methods for
detecting decomposition are summarized to set limiting
values for fish which are judged organoleptically
satisfactory, with cod, haddock and perch,
Comparison of pH, Trimethylamine Content, and Picric Acid Turbidity
as Indices of Iced Shrimp guality
Sammie Bethea and Mary K. Ambrose
Commercial Fisheries Review 24:7-10, 1962
4
As possible indices of quality during iced storage, a
study was made of the changes in pH and trimethylamine
nitrogen content of raw headless brown shrimp. Results
were compared with those obtained from picric acid turbidity
tests conducted simuftaneously on the same shrimp and
previously reported. The quality ratings of the shrimp
as determined by a taste panel were used as standards for
all tests. Changes in color and viscosity of shrimp
homogenates were also observed for possible use as acces-
sory tests of quali.ty.
2l
Chromate Color Test For Estimating Age-Temperature History of Raw
Shucked Oysters
N. L. Schafer, J. E. Campbell, and K. H. Lewis
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 10!:261-267, 1962
Public Health Service, Robert A. Taft, Sanitary Engineering
Center, Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Cincinnati'
Ohio
In less than 15 minutes with little or no preliminary
preparation the concentration in oyster liquor of organic
substances capable of reducing chromate ion to chromium III!
is measured in a highly acidic medium, Between 0 and 10
mg. of chromium  III! in residual chromium  VI! is deter-
mined from the absorbance at 580 mm  standard deviation
0.08!. By comparison with visual standards the concentration
chromium III! in the same concentration range is estimated
within +0.5 mg. of that obtained by spectrophotometric
measurement. During storage at O'C the concentration of
the organic reducing substances  RS! gradually increased
in freshly shucked oysters from Chesapeake Bay. A direct
relationship was observed between storage temperature
 from O' to 35'C! and the rate of RS increase. Of indivi-
dual tests at 2- to 3-day intervals on 3.5 samples held at
O'C for 14 to 30 days, 94X fell within + two standard
deviations of the average curve defined by an equation
describing the increase and 61X within + one standard
deviation. Shucked oysrers frozen and then thawed showed
a much greater rate of increase in RS at corresponding
storage temperatures than did unfrozen samples.
Formation of Acetoin in Cod and Other Bottom-Fish Fillets During
Refrigerated Storage
Herman S. Groninger
Technologica3. Laboratory Bureau, Commercial Fisheries,
Seattle, Washington
Food Technology 15!:10  12, 1961
Acetoin and the total volatile bases were measured in
samples of commercial bottom fish fillets that were stored
34'F. The content of acetoin increased from <I to 7-10
mg/IOO g after 4 to 8 days storage. The usefulness of the
acetoin content as a measure of quality of connnercial
fj.3.lets appears to be quite limited, because the increase
of acetoin does not occur until just before the time the
sample mould be considered unacceptable.
22
Chemical Methods for the Determination of the Freshness of Fish
Dard!o Somaatmadja, John J. Powers, and Dan E. Pratt
Department of Food Technology, University of Georgia, Athens,
Georgia
Journal of Milk and Food Technology 24;2-6, 1961
Various oh/ective methods to estimate the degree of
freshness of fish and fishery products were compared. The
total volatile nitrogen  TVN! and ammonia-nitrogen of carp
flesh reached values of 30-33 mgX when carp stored at 0-
4'c and 25-27 C began to have a bad odor. For catfish
stored at 0-4 C and 25-27'C these values reached 20-30
mgX. Trimethylamine was not found in fresh and spoiled
carp and catfish. The determination of trimethylamine as
an index of spoilage cannot be used for these fresh-water
fish. The determination of tryosine and volatile reducing
substances  VRS! cannot be used to estimate the degree of
freshness of fish if the temperature at which the fish had
been stored is not known. If t'hese two methods were
combined with TVN and ammonia-nitrogen one could determine
the degree of freshness of fish and the temperature at
which the fish were stored. The determination of tyrosine
combined with TVN ammonia-nitrogen can give further sup-
port as to whether fish are absolutely fresh. If the
temperature under which fish have been stored is known
each of the tests used in this study can be applied
individually to determine the degree of freshness of fish,
Studies on the Evaluation of Freshness and the Estimation of the
Storage Life of Raw Fishery Products
Lionel Farber and Peter Lerke
Fisheries Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper
Foundation, University of Cali.fornia, San Francisco, California
Food Technology l5191-196, 1961
Determinations of the contents of volatile reducing substances VRS! and trimethylamine nitrogen  TNN!, and of the percentage
of pigmented bacteria before and after 5 hours of incubation
of 31 C  88'F! are suggested as useful criteria for evalu-
ating the freshness of raw fish samples and estimating the
deeping quality at refrigerated storage temperatures abovefreezing, Applications to flatfish and rockfish fillets,salmon steaks, tuna, and unpeeled beheaded shrimp are
given for both experimentally stored and commercial samples.
23
Physical and Chemical Properties of Shrimp Drip as Indices of
Quality
Sammie Bethea and Mary E, Ambrose
Commercial Fisheries Review 23:9-13, 1961
Physical and chemical characteristics of drip
from frozen  thawed shrimp were studied
changes in these cha~acteristics could be correlated with
quality as determined by a taste panel. Shrimp were
tested that had been stored  l! on ice followed by a
minimum of frozen storage for the formation of drip> !
at -10'F, and ! both on ice and at -2.0
The pH of the drip appeared to be a satisfactory objective
quality index. Drip from shrimp considered "good" by the
taste panel gave pH readings of 7,50 to 8. 25, from shrimp
considered "acceptable," from 8.26 to 8.40, and from
shrimp considered "unacceptable," 8.41 and higher. The
color and optical density of the drip changed correspondingly
with quality, and objective measurements of the optical
density could be made with a photoelectric colorimeter.
Trimethylamine nitrogen content of shrimp drip showed good
correlation with spoilage but gave no indication of the
state of freshness of the unspoiled shrimp. The volume of
drip collected and the nitrogen content of the drip were
of little or no value as a quality index.
Studies On the Method For Testing The Spoilage Of Pood  XVI
A Method for Determination of VRS by Micro-Diffusion Technique
Tetsuo Tomiyama and Seiya Fuj ino
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
87!:678-683, 1961
A method which was developed in this study is as following:
Place to the outer chamber of CONEY unit a 2  cc. aliquot
of sample flesh extract which can be prepared by mixing a
25-cc aliquot of 7X trichloracetic acid solution with a
mixture of 3. 8g. of ground flesh and 10 cc. of distilled
water. Place to the inner chamber exactly 1 cc,-aliquot
of alkaline solution of 0.05 N KMn04. Then, add 1 cc. of
saturated K2C03 solution to the sample extract in the
outer chamber, followed by immediately sealing the unit
with a cover, and leave the unit stand for two hours at
room temperature, Remove the cover, add O. 55cc.
20X KI to the inner chamber, and further add few drops of
sulfuric acid :5!, followed by immediate addition of
0. 05 N Na S203 while being stirred with a magnetic stirrer.Titrate tie excess thiosulfate by 0.05 N KHI206, using a
KIRK  type capillary micro-burette- and a starch solution as
indicator.
24
VRS obtained by the present method was about one-half as
much as that by the distillation method. It is to be
noted that VRS value of canned flesh obtained by the
present method could not be employed for the estimate of
the freshness of its material.
The Separation and Determination of Free Purines, Pyrimidines and
Hucleoside in Cod Muscle
N. R, Jones
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Torry Research
Station, Aberdeen, Scotland
Analyst g5:ll-ll8, l960
A procedure is described for the quantitative separation
of purines pyrimidines and nucleoside present in extracts
of cod muscle. After the removal of nucleotide at pH 6.5
by a strongly basic anion-exchange resin in the formate
form, the purines, etc.. are exchanged on to a similar
resin in chloride form at pH ll to 12. They are then
eluted by a gradient of increasing chloride and tetraborate
concentrations, and diminishing pH, for evaluation by
ultra-violet spectrophotometry.
Studies On The Method For Testing the Spoilage of Food-XV
An Improved Aeration Method for Determination of VRS
Tetsuo Tomiyama, Shigenobu Oyama and Seiya Fujino
Lab. Fish. Chem., Fac. Agric., Kyushu Univ., Fukuoka
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
26!:520, l960
The present study deals with the improvement of the Farber
method of employing deproteinized extract for the aerationin place of the red muscle juice and on aeration of pH 9. 3
rather than unadjusted pH of sample tissue.
The VRS value of mackerel and albacore obtained by the
present method amounts approximately one-hal.f as much as
that by the Tomiyama et al's steam distillation method.
This infers that VRS determined by the aeration method
involves volatile substances possessing higher volatility.
It was found that the volatility of VRS varied with the
freshness of sample flesh and that trimethylamine couldhardly be removed at pH 7, 0-7. 7 whereas nearly one-half as
much removed at pH 9. 3. It was also noted that the Farber
method was capable of determining rather a small fraction
9K! of the neutral substances as compared with the
Tomiyama et, al. method.
25
Studies on The Methods for Testing The Spoilage of Food-XVII.
Fracti.onation of Volatile Reducing Substances  VRS! With Ion-
Exchanger
Tetsuo Tomiyama and Kazuya Ikeura
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
26!:128-135, 1960
Fractionation with Amberl.ite IRC 50 and IRA 400 was
carried out of VRS in steam distillates obtained from a
deproteinized extract of mackerel flesh whose pH's ««
adjusted at 2.0, 6.0 and 9.3 before the distillation.
Data clearly indicates that VRS which are distilled off
at pH 6. 0 are contaminated with basic substances and
appreciably increase with a slight rise of pH of the
sample extract. The fractionation into acidic, basic and
neutral VRS with ion-exchange resulted in a fairly good
conformity with respective VRS values obtained by the
steam di.stillati.on. It is clearly seen that the basic-
VRS increases after 1-day storage and nearly stops its
increase at 3 to 4 day storage while the neutral VRS
increases after 2-day storage and continues to increase
up to a 4-day storage.
Studies on The Method For Testing The Spoilage Of Food-XI .
Determination Of Volatile Reducing Substances of Mackerel Flesh By
Steam Distillation
Tetsuo Tomiyama, Kazuya Ikeura and Shigenobu Oyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Soci.ety of Scientific Fisheries
26!:33-38, 1960
Lab. Fish. Chem., Fac, Agr., Kyushu Univ.. Fukuoka
In Strochecker's method of VRS determination difficulties
were experienced due to foaming in the distillation step
and in removing protein coagulum adhered to the distillation
flask, Volatile reducing substance  VRS! can be determined
on an extract which is freed from protein by magnesium
sulfate, eliminating the difficulties inherent in Strochecker's
method.
Since it was found that both neutral and basic volatile
reducing substances were increased at incipient spoilage
the steam distillation of the extract is to be carried
out in alkaline reaction  about pH 9.3!. This improvement
in the method gives rise to a more pronounced increase in
VRS at incipient spoilage. VRS is, among several chemical
indices, the most sensitive one. for bacterial spoilage
mackerel flesh.
26
The present method in. which a six-minute distillation
followed by a 5-minute boiling with potassium permanganate
is employed, enables us to run six determinations with a
single apparatus within one hour.
Chemical Xndexes of Decomposition in Flounder
F. Hillig, L.R. Shelton, Jr., J.H. Loughrey, B.F. Fitzgerald
and S. Bethea
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,and Welfare, Vashington, D.C.
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists43:755-760, 1960
The techniques of previous studies were applied to flounder.Analyses during progressive decompn. showed that volatileacid no., HC02H, AcOH, volatil.e bases and amines, and CH3H gave a high degree of correlation with organoleptic!udgment.
Studies on The Influence of Treatments Immediately After CatchingUpon The quality of Fish Flesh-V,
Determination of Lactic Acid in Pish Huscle
Yasuhiko Tsuchiya and Xiyoshi Kuni.iBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Pisheries26!:284-288, 1960
The development of lactic acid in fish is not only influencedby the degree of muscular exercise in life, but also bythe condition of treatment. after death. This reportdeals with the results conducted by the authors on thedetermination of lactic acid in fish muscle. The dorsalmuscle of bonito, Entete vagary, showed the highestvalue of 1,170 mg. per cent of lactic acid, while theventral muscle of flat fish, XysCmas gHgo~jerdi, showedthe lowest 34 mg. per cent among 14 kinds of fish purchasedfrom the fish shops at Sendai City, Miyagi Prefecture.The muscle of the fish employed in this experiment isroughly classified into three groups as red, mediUm redand white muscle fish. The amount of lactic acid wasfound in the range of 283 to 1,170 in the red muscles ofbonito, tunny, sardine etc., 283 to 639 in the mediumred in carp,' Clupanadon punoMtue and Lateolabrax japonicaand 34 to 185 mg. pet cent in the, white in codfish,flatfish etc. These differences are discussed from anecological point of view. The lactic acid content indark muscle is generally lower than that in normal one.
27
The highest concentration of lactic acid in carp muscle
killed immediately after catching was found at 55 hours
in storage at O'C and at 25 hours at 10'C. When fish
were killed after being left to weaken in the air at room
temperature for 5 hours it was 5 to 15 hours at O'C and 1
to 5 hours at 10'C.
Studies On The Determination of Spoilage In Brined Fresh-Water
Fishes-I.
Comparison of Various Methods For The Determination of Spoilage in
Brined C'araasaue carasaius L.
Riichi Kuroda
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
26 9!:944-524, 1960
A comparison of various chemical methods for the determination
of spoilage in freshwater fish, especially Camasius
earaasius L, in Lake Biwa, was made. The chemical methods
included HgCl2 test, pH test, volatile basic nitrogen
 VBN! and volatile reducing substances  VRS!. The HgC12
test was unfavorable and the pH test uncertain for the
fresh-water fish. VRS was measured by steam distillation
on 10 ml of water extract from flesh for 20 minutes, the
reagents and titration were the same with Farber' s method.
VRS is a more sensitive method in evaluating the degree
of spoilage of fresh or brined fresh-water fish, and its
values are closely correlated with those of organoleptic
g udgement.
Assessment of the Progressive Spoilage of Ice-stored Shrimp
J. R. Iyengar, K. Visweswariah, M. N. Moor]ani and D. S.
Bhatia
Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, India
Journal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada 17!:475-
485, 1960
Freshly caught shrimp, stored in ice, were sampled for
chemical and bacteriological tests. Data has been pre-
sented to correlate the results of these tests with the
quality and spoilage of shrimp. Rapid methods based on
use of test papers have been developed as an index
of shrimp spoilage.
28
A Simple and Rapid Method for the Determination of Histamine in
Fish Flesh
Toshiharu Kawabata, Yutaka Uchida and Taeko Akano
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
262!:1183, 1960
The method described employs a cationic exchanger, Amberlite
CG-50 type 1 00-200 mesh! for separating histamine  Hm!
from such interfering substances as histidine  Hd!,
tyrosine, tyramine, etc., in a trichloroacetic acid
extract  TCA-extract! of fish flesh. A 10ml portion of a
TCA-extract is ad!usted to pH 4.6 and added to top of a
cat:ionic exchanger column  8x55mm; flow rate, 2-3ml/min.;
pH of the resin is pre-conditioned to pH 4.6 with 0.2N
acetate buffer! . The column is rinsed with 80 ml of 0.2N
acetate buffer at pH 4. 6 and the Hm absorbed on the resin
column is eluted with 8ml of 0.2N HCL. The reaction of
the elute is adjusted to pH 7 and the volume is filled
to 10 ml with distilled water,
A 2ml aliquot of the elute is distributed in a colorimetrictube containing 5 ml of 1.1N Na2C03, coupled with 2 ml of
Paury's diazo reagent, and the absorbance is determined
at 5IO mp by a Coleman spectrophotometer.
The recovery of Hm by this method was 99 to 101%. The
maximum exchangeable capacity for Hm of the column was
7,000y with pure Hm-0.2NJCl solution and 6,000y with
decomposed fish extract. The presence of Hd, tyrosine,
or tyramine in TCA-extract did not influence the Hm
value.
An Evaluation of the Indole and Trimethylamine Tests for Oyster
Quality
Donald Lartigue, Arthur F. Novak, and Ernest A. FiegerDepartment of Agricultural Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Food Technology 14!:109-112, 1960
Indole and trimethylamine tests were investigated for
applicability as quality tests for freshly-shucked and
refrigerated oysters. Some modifications were made which
were necessary for adapting these tests to oysters, and
these modified tests were found to be accurate andreproducible. Both are sensitive and capable of detecting
microgram quantities of compounds,
29
These determinations along with bacterial count liquid
measurements, and organoleptic ratings were employed in
oyster quality tests, and their value indices of oyster
spoilage was determined. Since indole and 'IllA concentra-
tions showed no definite pattern during storage, these
tests are not recommended for assessment of oyster quality.
Bacterial counts and liquid measurements closely parallel
organoleptic ratings. Spoilage was usually evident from
the eighteenth to the twentieth day of storage, and the
oysters at this time had bacterial counts of about l0
million per gram, and had increased in weight by about
13K due to the loss of fluid from the meats.
The effects of CTC  Chlorotetracycline! on these tests
and on ext.ending the storage life of oysters were also
investigated. The antibiotic did not interfere with the
tests, nor did it suppress the formation of indole and
TMA; but it did limit the bacterial count, and the
development of odors.
Chemica1. Studies on the Herring  C2upea ~engels!-I. Trimethylamine
Oxide and Volatile Amines in Fresh, Spoiling and Cooked Herring
Flesh
R.B. Hughes
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 10:43l-436,
1959
Gas chromatography was applied to a study of the production
of volatile amines and ammonia in herring flesh under
various conditions. Fresh f1esh contained ammonia and a
small quantity of trimethylamine, but no monomethylamine,
kimethylamine or higher amines in the range of ethylarnine
to pentylamine were detected. The trimethylamine oxide
content varied according to the season, being higher in
winter than in summer. During storage at 10-13'C, ammonia
and trimethylamine were formed, and also smaller quantities
of di- and mono-methylamine. No higher amines were
detected after 4 days. The trimethylamine oxide content
dropped over the period. Cooking in sealed glass tubes
at 120' resulted in breakdown of trimethylamine oxide,
and formation of armnonia, tri- di- and mono-methylamine
 trace!. No higher volatile amines were detected in the
cooked flesh. The possible significance of the results
in relation to the development of flavour in canned
herring is discussed.
30
Report on Chemical Indices of Decomposition in Fish  Histamine!
David W. Williams, Associate Referee
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, San Francisco, California
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
42..287-289, 1959
A comparative study on the methodology of determining
histamine was evaluated. Recommendations for changes in
methods were proposed by the Associate Referee.
lnosinic Acid Content of Foods-I. Determination Method
Takeo Fujita, Yoshiro Hashimoto and Takajiro Mori
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
25!:149, L9S9
Inosinic acid, an alleged tasting substance of foods,was determined by the column chromatographic method using
an ion-exchange resin, Dowes l. The separation ofnucleoside monophosphates is attained by adopting alonger column and a slightly modified eluting agent. It
was also found that the time required for elution ofinosinic acid is reducible without any decrease in
accuracy by changing the flow rate and composition ofeluting agent.
The content of inosinic acid determined on the perchloricacid extracts of several kinds of foods is listed togetherwith the results of recovery tests on the added inosinicacid. The fish meat reveals higher values, whereas theacid is not detected in the foods of vegetable origi~,dried mushroom and miso  bean paste!.
Studies On The Method For Testing The Spoilage Of Food-X.Errors Involved In Ota's Method for Determination of Histamine
At sushi Tsuda, Kenji Mori and Testuo Tomiyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
25!:361, 1959
The chemical estimate of fish freshness is not always inaccord with the organoleptic observation, Tomiyama etal. showed that the histamine  Hm! content of sardineflesh ran parallel wi.th the organoleptic grade. A pre-requisite for the study on the applicabi.lity of thisobjective test to judge quality of mackerel is to devise
an appropriate practical method for the determination.
Ota reported a practical method in which he employed p-
nitrobenzene diazonium ion  p-NBD! as diazotizing reagent
and ethyl acetate as extractant of Hrn azo-pigment.
However, when Hm determination of mackerel flesh vas made
by thi.s method in our laboratory, it was found that high
Hm values vere always obtained on fresh fish extract and
that the absorption specturm of the Hm azo-pigment from a
pure Hm solution vas different from that from Hrn in the
presence of flesh extract. The present paper deals with
the improvement of the Ota's method by removing inter-
fering substances with Amberlite IRA400  OH-form! and
introducing nitrous acid treatment prior to diazotization.
Data herein presented revealed that ! a maximal formation
of the Hm pigment occurs at a pH range of 9 to 9.5, !
the determination is greatly interfered by the presence
of various amino acids in flesh extract and mechanism of
the interference involved is due to consunrption by p-NBD
by amino acids giving, an orange pigment, and ! the
interfering substances can be eliminated by percolating a
trichloracetic acid extract of sample flesh through
Amberlite IRA-400  OH-form! leaving Hm in effluent,
histamine being absorbed on Arnberlite IRC-50 and eluted
with 0. 2N HCI, followed by the nitrous acid treatment and
coupling with p-NBD.
Studies on the Method for Testing the Spoilage of Food-XI.
A New Method for Determination of Histamine in Tissues
Atsushi Tsuda and Testuo Tomiyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
25!:45l., 1959
The method described employs Amberlite IRC-50  H-form!
for separating histamine  Hm! from interfering substances
in a trichloracetic acid extract of sample tissue. Hm
which is absorbed on the ion exchanger at pH 4.6 is
eluted with 0.2N HC1, treated with nitrous acid, and
freed from amnronia by vacuum distillation in alkaline
reaction. Hm azo pigment which is formed by coupling
with p-nitrobenzene diazoniurn chloride at pH 9 can be
extracted with ethylacetate, the extract being dehydrated
with anhydrous sodium sulfate. Shortly after a srrrall
amount of ammonia is added, the absorbance of the azo
pigment solution is determined at 550 mu.
The recovery of Hm included in several muscle tissue
extracts vas found to be 96 to 106%. It was found that
the Hm content of mackerel flesh ran parallel with bacterial
counts and showed a marked change with quality of the
flesh as compared with total volatile bases nitrogen,
32
Comparison of Certain Scottish and Canadian Experiments in Respect
of Grading Fish for Quality
J. M. Shewan and A. S. C. Khrenberg
Journal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada 16!:555-557,
1959
It was found that sensory assessments of quality for fish
such as cod and haddock under normal conditions of storage
tend to be highly correlated with the TNA content of fish
muscle. However, the relationship between quality and
TMA differed from one catch of fish to another, even when
the catches were made under very similar conditions and
subsequent storage was carefully controlled.
2-Thiobarbituric Acid Method for the Measurement of Rancidity in
Fishery Products II. The Quantitative Determination of Malonaldehyde
Russel 0. Sinnhuber and T. C. Yu
Oregon Agricultural Experiment Station, Seafoods Laboratory
Astoria, Oregon
Food Technology 12!:9-l2, 1958
Oxidative rancidity in fat-containing foods leads to the
formation of malonaldehyde or derivatives of this com-
pound. The red reaction product formed by the reaction
of malonaldehyde and 2-thiobarbituric acid  TBA! is an
effective means of measuring the extent of autoxidation.
The TBA procedures previously described, although useful
in studying the development of oxidative rancidity, are
of empirical usage. A quantitative, 2-thiobarbituric
acid procedure for measurement of malonaldehyde, using
the stable compound TKP ,1,3,3-Tetraethoxypropane!
as a standard, is proposed. Acid hydrolysis of TEP
yields malonaldyde which reacts with 2-thiobarbituric
acid, under the conditions described to afford a quanti-
tative method for the determination of malonaldehyde.
The term, TBA number of milligrams of malonaldehyde per
1000 grams of material, is suggested. The reaction time,
total recovery, and spectral characteristics of this
reaction compound are presented. The method is sensitive
to 10-8 moles of malonaldehyde in 100 ml. of solution.
The autoxidation that occurs in frozen tuna scrap and the
effect of the antioxidants, DPPD  N,N'-diphenyl-p-phenyl-
enediamine and Tenox IV! in preventing oxidative rancidity
was followed with this procedure. The present paper',
although presenting a quantitative method for malonaldehyde,
does not definitely establish that free malonaldehyde
exists in rancid fish products. The mechanism of the
development of ma3.onaldehyde and the role of this compound
in fat oxidation awaits positive identification and
isolation of this material from oxidized fat. Research
on the isolation of this material and characterization
of the TBA-malonaldehyde pigment is in preparation.
33
Review of the Value of Volatile Reducing Substances for the Chemical
Assessment of the Freshness of Fish and Fish Products
Lionel Farber and Peter A. Lerke
Fisheries Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper
Foundation, University of California, San Francisco,
California
Food Technology 12 2!:677-680, 1958
Applicability of the VRS  Volatile Reducing Substances!
procedure for the determination of spoilage in a number
of commercial samples of fish and fish products has
been shown. Products tested included raw flat fish
fillets, rockfish fillets, halibut, salmon, swordfish,
white sea bass and corbina and whale meat, salted cod and
herring, raw and canned smoked yellowtail, canned kipper
snacks, and canned abalone, jack mackerel and Pacific
sardines in tomato sauce. The correlation of the VRS
content with the organoleptic judgments has been pointed
out. The significance of the VRS method as a generally-
applicable test for fish spoilage has been discussed in
the light of a number of criteria and applications. It
has been concluded that of all the fish spoilage tests
reported to date the VRS method most closely approaches
the specifications of a generally useful test for all
kinds of fish and fish products and their diverse
spoilage patterns under varying storage conditions.
Chemical Indices of Decomposition in Cod
Fred Hillig, L. R. Shelton, Jr., J. H. Loughrey, and Jerome
Eisser
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Washington, DC
Journal of Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
41!:763-776, 1958
A study of the individual analyses leads to the con-
clusion that volatile acid number  VAN!, formic acid,
acetic acid, volatile bases, volatile amines and
trimethylamine  TNA! show the highest degree of cor-
relation with organoleptic judgement, while succinic
acid and alcohol show less correlation.
34
On the Formation of Amine in Pish Muscle-lll.
Simple Method for the Detection of Histamine in Fish Muscle
Fuyuo Ota
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
24 l!:37, 1958
A simple method for the detection of histamine in fishmuscle, based on the extraction of histamine azo-compound
vith organic solvent, is presented. When p-nitroanilinewas used for the preparation of diazoreagent, using
ethyl-acetate as a extracting agent, histamine azo-
compound vas easily transferred into the ester and
separated from histidine. The azo  compound of almost allthe diazo-reaction positive substances presumably con-tained in fish muscle was also prevented from being
transferred into the eater. At high concentrationsoi' histidine, histidine azo-compound passed slightly intothe ester but it vas possible to remove this by treatment
with dilute alkaline solution.
Detection procedure waa summarized as follows: Pishmuscle extract was obtained by shaking and filter.ingafter being added 20 volumes of mater  or successivelyIO volumes of vater and of SZ CCI3COOH!. To 1.0ccof the extract vas added 2.0cc of 2.0Z Ha2CO3. To theabove solution, was added lcc of diazo-reagent. Af'terbrief standing, 7cc of ethylacetate vas added to it andits solution vas shaken vigorously. Histamine concentrationvas measured roughly from the intensity of rose color ofester layer. Diazo-reagent vas freshly prepared byadding O.lcc of 5Z NaMO to 5cc of 0.1Z p-nitroaniline inO.lw HCl solution, and lt vas used immediately after
preparation.
Studies on the Buffering Capacity of Pish Muscle-I.The Buffering Capacity as a Measure of Freshness
Michizo Suyama and Tadashi TokuhiroBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries24 !: 267, 1958
The buffering capacities of fish muscle and muscleextractives were studied to test its value as a criterionof the degree of freshneas of fish muscle. Although]udgement of freshness by buffering capacities was notproved to be accurate enough, measurement of the so-called B-value proposed by Stansby et al was found to be
promising.
As a rule, the muscle of elasmobranch shows a higherdegree in the capacity than muscle of common fish. Itmay be ascribed to the abundance of trimethylamine oxidecontained in the muscle of elasmobranch.
35
Carbonyl Compounds in Fish as Related to the Deterioration-I.
Detection of Volatile Carbonyl Compounds Formed in Fish Flesh
Fuyuo Ota
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
24!.334, 1958
A simplified method for estimating volatile carbonyl
compounds  VC! in fish is presented. This method proved
to show good results in the recoveries of VC added on the
one hand to fish flesh and to its steam-distillate on the
other.
A modified procedure for the paper chromatographic analy-
sis of VC, by which lower VC were found to be easily
identified, is also presented. In fresh fish, VC were
very smail in amount. Their contents increased with the
length of storage-time, and tended to decrease in the
stage of advanced spoilage. The rate of VC formation
varied according to the difference of state of flesh
stored and also with varying parts of fish. By the
modified paper chromatographic method, the formation of
acetaldehyde, butyl-aldehyde and acetoin in fish flesh
during storage was revealed.
Carbonyl Compounds in Fish as Related to the Deterioration-II,
Thermal Production of Formaldehyde in Fish Flesh
Fuyuo Dta
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
24 !: 338, 1958
After a short time of steam heating no appreciable amount
of formaldehyde  FA! was produced from fish flesh, but by
heating under prcssure' it was produced to a measurable
extent together with a considerable amount of dimethylamine
 DMA!. The amount of DNA thus produced was almost pro-
portional to trimethylamine oxide  TMAO! contents in the
flesh, whereas that of FA was not.
Thermal breakdown of TMAO was accelerated by the presence
of fish extracts or certain kinds of amino acids. The
degree of decomposition of TMAO in the presence of cysteine
was proportional to the concentrations of 'iKLO and cysteine:
Quantitative ratio between these two decomposition products,
however, was not theoretical in any case of experiments,
which might be attributed to some subordinate reaction of
FA with certain kinds of amino acids.
In several marine canned foods, content of FA was much
less than that of DNA.
36
The Vse Of Tetrazolium Salts For Assessing The Quality of Iced White
Fish
J. M. Shewan and J. Liston
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 8:222-226, 1957
2-p-lodophenyl-3-p-nitrophenyl-5-phenyltetrazolium chlorideis used in a colorimetric method of assessing the quality
of iced fish. The results are compared with those obtained
from organoleptic examination, viable bacterial counts and
the contents of trimethylamine and volatile bases.
2-Thiobarbituric Acid Nethod for the Measurement of Rancidity in
Fishery Products
T. C. Yu and Russel 0. SinnhuberOregon Agricultural Experiment Station, Seafoods Laboratory,Astoria, Oregon
Pood Technology 1l!:104-108, 1957
A modified TSA method was found to be effective means forthe determination of oxidative rancidity in a wide varietyof fishery products. The oxidation of fat in fish meal,fish oil, fresh, and frozen fish was satisfactorily deter-mined by this procedure. The reaction is performed onthe intact sample eliminating the difficult extractionwhich is necessary in many rancidity methods. Conditionswhich affect the sensitivity of the reaction were investigated-Preliminary results indicate that it may be used as anindex of quality of stored fishery products.
Chemical Changes Occurring in Cod Muscle During Chill Storage andTheir Possible Use as Ob]ective Indices of Quality
J. N. Shewan and N. R. JonesJournal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 8:491-497, 1957
Studies have been made on the extractives and volatilesubstances  amino-acids, amines and other nitrogenouscompounds, sugars, etc.! of freshly caught cod muscle andof some of the changes that occur during autolysis  storageat 0 under sterile conditions! along or combined withbacterial spoilage as in normal trade practice  storagein ice!. The merits of some of these changes as objectiveindices of quality, particularly in relation to tastepanel assessment, are discussed.
37
Studies on Freshness Determination of Fish Meat by the Distillation
Ratio of Volatile Acids-VI. On the Form of Volatile Acids in Fish
Meat
Suezo Asakawa
]ju]letin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
23&8!:463, 1957
The present study was carried out to survey the form of
volatile fatty acids and its change during the deterioration
of fish meat. Using the minced meat of a kind of blue fin
tuna as a test material, volatile acids vere fractionated
into free, salt and ester forms. The fractions obtained
were further examined on their component fatty acids by
paper chromatography.
Among the three forms found, the salt form was most abundant
through all stages of deterioration. The proportion of
these forms and the pattern of component fatty acids were
observed to vary according to the freshness of meat. In
the chromatographic study it was suggested that the component
fatty acids in the free and salt forms were gradually
replaced by the higher volatile acids with the progress of
deterioration. In the ester form, the presence of higher
acids  >C ! was presumed,
Reporting on Organic Acids as Indices of Decomposition Chromatographic
Separation
Halver C. VanDame, Associate Referee
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, Kansas City, MG
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
40!-404, 1957
Several organic acids are useful. indices of decomposition
in foods. Among the ones of most value are the volatile
acids  formic, acetic, propionic, and butyric!, lactic,
and succinic. The methods for the determination of these
acids now in Official Methods of Anal sis are varied and
somewhat empirical. The volatile acids are steam dis-
tilled, and acetic, propionic, and butyric acids are rhen
separated by chromatography. Formic acid is determined on
a fraction of the distil.late by the weight of Hg2CL2
formed when the formic acid is refluxed with Hg2CI2.
Latic acid is determined by a ferric chloride colorimetric
method. Succinic acid is determined after separati.on
from lactic acid by a chromatographic procedure.
38
On the Determination of Trimethylamine and Trimethylamine Oxide. A
Modification of the Dyer Nethod
Yoshiro Mashimoto and Tomotoshi Okaichi
Faculty of Agr iculture, Tokyo University
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
23!:269, 1957
The extraction of trimethyiamine  TNA! wi.th toluene was
found to be affected by temperature, sorts of alkali and
number of times shaken, whereas the color development
with picric acid was not influenced by temperature. From
these observations, the extraction procedure was modified
to be carried out at e standard temperature 0'C! . In an
incubator, test solutionsy reagents and funnels were
previously warmed before extraction and the funnels shaken
60 times were again left for 5 minutes in it before the
separation of toluene layer.
In the second place, the same volume of 25X potassiumhydroxide solution was adopted instead of the original 50Z
potassium carbonate soluti.on, which was confirmed to be
not suitable for the TNA solution resulting from the
reduction of trimethylamine oxide  TNO! with Devarda's
alloy and hydrochloric acid. Results indicate that some
constituents of the alloy may disturb the extraction of
TNA in the case. of potassium carbonate, but not' in the
case of the hydroxide. This agrees veil with the factthat the carbonate forms white colloidal precipitates,perhaps carbonates of Al and Zn, in the aliquot of theheated reducing mixture, and the precipitates were sus-
pected to absorb or occlude TNA. The hydroxide does not
give such precipitates.
The modification above-mentioned facilitated the determinationof the smaller amount of BlAO and the modified method gaveover 97Z recovery down to 0.025mg N which is far lowerthan 0.4 mg N in the method. The recovery of TKO added tocarp muscle extracts was also satisfactory.
A Chemical Method for the Determination of Histamine in Canned TunaFish
O.S. Sager and William HorwitzFood and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,and Welfare, Washington, D.C.
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists40! .'892-904, 1957
Discrepancies between the biological and chemical methodsfor histamine were found to be eliminated by modifying thebioassay method so that the acid extracts were neutralizedwith sodium bicarbonate and Ringer-Locke solution ratherthan with solid sodium carbonate. When the extracts vereneutralized in this manner, the pH vas uniformly about
39
7.5; thus alkaline simulation of the guinea pig ileum
was avoided, and results checked well with those obtained
by the chemical method.
Report on Chemical Indices of Decomposition in Fish  Histamine!
David W. Williams, Associate Referee
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, San Francisco, California
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
39!:609, 1956
A biological method for the determination of histamine in
fish was submitted to collaborative study by the Associate
Referee in accordance with the recommendation of Subcom-
mittee.
Each collaborator was sent 5 samples of ground mixed fish
in hermeically sealed containers. Sample A consisted of
Class I canned bonito; Sample g, Class I canned tuna;
Sample C, Class 2 canned tuna; Sample D, Class 3 canned
tuna; and Sample E, Class 4 canned tuna. The Associate
Referee prepared Samples A and K by grinding the material
in a food chopper, mixing it mechanically, and sterilizing
the product in glass jars. Samples B,C, and D were a part
of a canned experimental pack prepared by Hillig in 1950.
Each collaborator was sent a. copy of the procedure published
in 1956.
Volatile Reducing Substances  VRS! and Volatile Nitrogen Compounds
in Relation to Spoilage in Canned Fish
Lionel Farber and Michael Ferro
Fisheries Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper Foundation,
University of California, San Francisco, California
Food Technology 10;303-304, 1956
The VRS apparatus was changed to provide a closed system
with a recirculating pump and spherical ball and joint
connections.
The content of volatile reducing substances  VRS!; total
volatile and trimethylamine nitrogen  TV%, IRH! in canned
California anchovies, California and Atlantic herring,
California mackerel, California sardines in brine and in
tomato sauce and tuna was determined for material judged
organoleptically passable and not passable. The content
of VRS correlated quite closely with the organoleptic
judgement, whereas the content of TVN and TNN did not show
any definite correlation. The content of trimethylamine
nitrogen apparently varies with the species of fish
canned and is the same in fish of different states of
freshness for any single species.
Studies on the Method for Testing the Spoilage of Food-VI .
h New Turbidimetric Method for Determination of Freshness of Cooked
Fish-paste "Kamaboko"
Tetsuo Tomiyama, Yasuo Tone and Norisuke Sugawara
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
21 8!:954, 1.955
During spoilage of cooked fish-paste, it was observed that
the surface is gradually decomposed by various micro-
organisms. It follows that, on washing the surface withwater by using brush, a turbid washing will be resulted,its turbidity being proportional to the degree of develop-
ment of the micro-organisms.
Data presented in this paper have revealed that freshnessof cooked fishpaste can readily be estimated by determiningthe turbidity of the washi.ng which is made wi.th 250 ccwater by employing a brush of soft hair. The turbidity
measurement has been carried out by the electrophotometerwith a filter of 470 mu. A marked increase in the valuefor t' he turbidity during the spoilage has been found to bein good conformity with a marked increase in the catalaseactivity of the washing vhich was already reported as anindex of incipient spoilage.
The Effects of Iced and Frozen Storage Upon the TrimethylamineContent of Flounder  Paz'oph~s vetulue! Muscle
Charlie M. Cood and Joseph A. SternSchool of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, WashingtonFood Technology 9:327-332, 1955
English sole  Parophzys vefulus! were held in iced storagefor periods ranging from 0 to 15 days. At intervalsduring this period samples were removed from the ice andfilleted. Fillets were packaged, frozen and held infroren storage at O'F for periods up to 24 weeks. Sampleswere sub]ected to various spoilage tests prior to freezingand at intervals during the period of frozen storage. Ofthe various tests investigated, only the determination oftri,methylamine was found to be of value in estimating thequality of English sole prior to freezing . The trimethylaminecontent of the fillets did not change during frozenstorage, and it was concluded that the test could be used,after frozen storage, to indicate the quality of the fleshat the time it was frozen.
41
A Comparison of Ob]ective Tests for Quality of Gulf Shrimp
E. A. Fieger and J. J. Friloux
Department of AgricUltural Chemistry and Biochemi.atry,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Food Technology 8:35-38, 1954
Freshly caught Gulf shrimp stored. in crushed ice were
sampled daily for chemical, bacteriological and organo-
leptic tests. The correlation of the results of the
chemical and bacteriological data to quality and
spoilage is discussed,
Individual Volatile Acids, Succinic Acid, and Histamine as Indices
of Decomposition in Atlantic "Little Tuna"  Futhynnue aZZetewatus!
Fred Hillig
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, Washington, DC
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
37:927-931, 1954
Progressive decomposition studies on "little tuna" demon-
strate that volatile acid number, content of formic,
acetic, propionic, butyric, and succinic acids, and his-
tamine are indices of decomposition, and that these values
correlate with the progress of decomposition of the
raw material from which the canned product vas prepared.
Studies On Freshness Determination of Fish Meat by the Distillation
Ratio of Volatile Acids-VII. Proposi.tion of a New Scale for the
Freshness Determination
Suezo Asakawa
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
20!:158, 1954
The correlation coefficient  r! between the amount of
volatile basic nitrogen and the 2nd distillation ratio
was -0.83. Moreover volatile fatty acids at each. degree
of freshness or spoilage were detected by the paper
chromatography. Therefore, the distillation ratio determines
the degree of deterioration of fish meat.
Various teleost fish-meats were cl.assified as to their
freshness according to the author's sensory tests, and
their pH-values, volatile basic ni.trogen amounts, and the
2nd distillation ratios measured.
42
A new standard scale is proposed for freshness deter-
mination of fish meat by means of the 2nd distillation
ratio  D.R.! as follovs:-
D. R. >130 Excellent freshness
130-100 Freshness
99- 90 Inferior freshness
89- 80 Early stage of spoilage
79- 70 Spoilage
< 70 Advanced stage of spoilagethis scale may be applied not only to many kinds of teleoat
fish but also to shark-fish, ray-fish and cuttle-fish.
Studies on Freshness Determination of Fish Meat by the Distillation
Ratio of Volatile Acids-VZ.
Sueso Asakava
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
20!r157, 1954
Block, minced, and brayed meat prepared from fresh orspoiled fish muscle vere compared to determine the degreeof crush using the steam distillate method. In view ofthe practical treatment, sample meat must be brayed in a
mortar. Often the brayed raeat from a complete putrid fishmuscle gives a larger ratio than its exact value when it
must be suspended in the distillate flask liquid, An all
titrating alkaline solution can be used in about 0.02N
concentration.The preservative conditions in a dilute H2S04 solution
are also determined.
Colorimetric Method for Measuring the Quantities of Armonia in Fish
Meat on the Rapid Method
Fuyuo Ota and Zentaro Oshiro
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
192! r1150, 1954
Some experiments vere carried out to determine the bestmethod for measuring ammonia in fish meat.The instrument, whi.cb vas specially devised by us tosimplify the process of weighing the fish meat, provedvery suitable for the present purpose.Some precautions on the preparation and use of the reagentsfor the determination were shown.By shaking vigorously vith vater for about one minute,ammonia was completely extracted from fish meat.Mixture of potassium dichromate and cobalt nitrate vassuitable as a standard color solution for the visual
measurement of color intensity in Nessler's method.
43
Analytical procedure is as follows: Five grams of finely
minced fish meat was weighed with the above described
instrument and extracted with 10 volumes of water by
vigorous shaking by hand for about one minute and filtered
through a gauze or a cotton cloth. To 10cc of the extract
was added 2. 5cc of 15X sulphosalicylic acid containing 5X
of sulphuric acid and 1.5g of activate carbon, and then it
was filtered after being adequately mixed,
To l. Occ of the filtrate taken in the colorimetric tube
was added 4. 8cc of the mixture of l.2X sodium hydroxide
with 4.2X Rochelle salt  : 1! and further to the mixed
solution was added 0.2cc of Nessler's reagent. Color-
intensity was immediately compared with the standard. color
solution.
The Determination of Volatile Reducing Substances  V.R.S.! as an Aid
in Quality Control of Fish Products
Lionel Farber and Anne Cederqui.st
Fisheries Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper Foundation,
University of California, San Francisco, California
Pood Technology 7:478-480, 1953
The concept of quality is discussed from two points of
view; namely, the distinction between an acceptable or
wholesome product and one that is not, and the extent to
which a given commodity meets some ideal condition or
standard. Illustrative data have been presented showing
the possible application for the determination of the
content of volatile reducing substances as an aid in
evaluating the aforementioned aspects of quality. Data
for the content of volatile nitrogen compounds have also
been included.
The Quantitative Determination of Histamine with Cotton Acid Succinate
Hajime Kadota and Juntaro Inque
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
19 8!:916, l.953
Hclntire' s method for the purification of histamine was
applied to the quantitative determination of histamine
produced in decomposed meat extract of fish.
It was found that this method is very suitable for rapid
determination of histamine in a large number of samples.
The essential features of this method are as follows: A
decomposed meat extract of fish which contains histamine
is extracted with n-hutanol under conditions such that 83%%d
of the histamine is removed from the aqueous phase in one
extraction,
44
The histamine is recovered from the butanol by means of a
new action exchange medium, cotton acid succinate. The
histamine is eluted from cotton acid succinate with a
small volume of diluted hydrochloric acid and the elute is
neutralized with sodium carbonate and diluted with water
to give a suitable concentration for colorimetrical
determination with disso-reaction.
Fundamental Studies on the Determination of Volatile Basic Nitrogenby Aeration Method-ZV. Special Factors Affecting the Velocity
Constant in Removing the Volatile Base
Toshiharu Kawabata
BuU.etin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheriea
l9!:819, 1953
This paper deals with some of the factors affecting thevelocity constant in removing the volatile base by aera-
tion method, with special reference to the freshness of
the fish meat examined.
The fresh meat from several species of fish showed no
di.fference in the velocity constant, but showed a con-siderable difference in the velocity constant upon spoil-
age. The curves of volatile base obtained were not in
complete agreement with the first order reaction. The
cause of this error was found to be due to the high con-
tent of trimethylamineoxide in the muscle.
The curves obtained from the samples of spoiled fish meatwhich have relatively small amounts ot. no oxide, such asalbacore, mackerel, carp snd whale meat, were found to
have curves nearly or completely in agreement with the
theoretical curves.
A shortened procedure is presented, which is based on
obtaining a 50 per cent removal of total volatile baseand is able to determine within a short period of 15
minutes aerating at 45 C, 50 1/hr.
Fundamental Studies on the Determination of Volatile Basic Nitr'ogenby Aeration Method. Studies on Some Determinative Factors Influencingthe Volatile Bases Obtainable from Fish Meat
Toshiharu Rawabata and Hiroshl Terui
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
19!:746, 1953
The experiments were carried out on the trichloracetic
acid extracts of fresh and spoiled mackerel meat. Theresults obtained on some determinative factors were not incomplete agreement with those obtained from the equations
45
described in our previous report, especially on the
aeration temperature. The curves of the amount of
volatile basic nitrogen obtained when plotted by tem-
perature showed two irregular increases at the tempera-
tures of 45' and 70'C, which seemed to have no direct
relation to the freshness of the material examined.
Studies on the Method of Determination for Freshness of Fish-flesh
by "Distillation Ratio" of Volatile Acids in Steam Distillate-I.
Suezo Asakawa
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
I9!:I18, 1953
In the determination of freshness of tuna, the "Distillation
ratio"  X by acidity of the 2nd fraction 0 cc! to the
1st fraction 0cc! at the steam distillation with sample
solution H2S04 acidic condition - was changed proportionaely
by the freshness of the fish flesh.
Studies on a Simplified Method for Estimating Freshness of Pish-I.
On the Inhibitory Nature of Pish Muscle Extract Revealed in Kruger's
Reaction of Acetic Acid
Taneko Suzuki
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
19!:106, 1953
Volatile acids, such as formic, acetic, iso-valeric and
butyric acid increased during fish spoilage. So it was
tried to estimate the freshness of fish by detecting
volatile acid, especially acetic acid. The results obtained
would be summarized as follows:
l. It was proved by paper chromatography that acetic acid
was not detected in newly caught fish muscle, while it was
found in the period descending in freshness.
2, It was found that the detective reaction of acetic
acid, so called Ianthanblue reaction by Kruger, was
inhibited by fish muscle extract.
3. A remarkable relation between the degree of the inhibi-
tion of the reaction and the freshness of fish was noticed.
Determination of Volatile Acids for Judging the Freshness of Fish
Taneko Suzuki
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
l9!:102, 1953
Friedemann's method for estimating the amount of volatile
acids was adopted to determine freshness of several kinds
of fish.
46
At hi.gh temperature 20'C-30 C, the increasing curves of
volatile acids were sharper than those of volatile basic
nitrogen which were usually taken as an index of spoilage.
For fish stored above O'C, the determination of volatile
acids was a reliable test for quality.
By using Behrens method, it was disclosed that formic acid
was found in the distillate of fresh fish while butyric,
iso~aleric and acetic acid was found in the distillate of
spoiled fish.
Studies on Freshness Determination of Fish Neat by the Di.stillation
Ratio of Volatile Acids-V. Differences in the Distillation Ratio by.
Anatomical Parts
Suezo Asakawa
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
19!:167, 1953
In order to see if the ratio of steam distillation of
volatile aci.ds is feasible i.n determining freshness of
fish meat, a ser'ies of tests have been carried out using
samples taken from the bonito, Zuthprutus yaito Kishinouye.
Fresh meat sampled from the dorsal, caudal, ventral, and
dark muscle of a carcass was separately comminuted. The
spoiled samples were prepared from similar parts of another
fish which had been left under natural condition for three
days. The ratios obtained from steam distillation of the
samples were compared with the values of pH and volatile
basic nitrogen  V-N! measured for each sample.
The quality of the fresh samples tested with V-N or pH
revealed little difference among the anatomical parts.
However, when expressed in the ratio of second distil-
lation, the fresh samples had di.fferent values in accor-
dance with the parts as:100 for dorsal, 93 for caudal,
82 for ventral, and 74 for dark muscle.
Spoilage measured with V-N and pH of the deteriorated
samples was fairly distinct between the parts, The second
distillation ratios of the samples were 75 for dorsal, 75
for caudal, 59 ventral, and S6 for dark muscle. Neglecting
individual variance between the two specimens, the spoil.
age of the samples caused by three days' standing may be
expressed as 75X for dorsal, 81X for caudal, 72X for
ventral, and 75X for dark muscles. The greatest spoilage
took place in the ventral muscle.
Freshness of two fish belonging to the same species can
be examined by comparing the distillation ratios obtained
from similar parts of them, although quality of a round
fish cannot be determined from the ratio of its parts.
47
Studies on Freshness Determination of Fish Neat by the Distillation
Ratio of Volatile Acids-IV. The Cause of the 2nd Distillation Ratio
Exceeding 100 Percent
Suezo Asakawa
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
19!x162, 1953
0n the basis of the results obtained from the previous
experiments the author has made the assumptions as follows:
l. Volatile acids in fish meat may consist of two kinds,
one being free acids, and the other bound acids.
2. The second distillation ratio of the acids from fresh
meat of fish exceeds 100 percent because the bound acids
are greater than the free acids in mount so that few
aci.ds could be obtained in the first distillation.
3. However, the amount of the free acids increase, while
the bound acids decrease, in response to deterioration of
the meat. Such fluctuations in the acids seem to account
for the second distillation ratio lowering below 100
percent in case of a spoiled meat.
In order to prove the above assumptions the following
experiments have been carried out.
Prepare three kinds of samples from fresh meat of fish;
minced meat, its water exudation, and a protein  free
solution by treating the sample with 20X sodium tungstate.
The similar group of the samples is prepared from the
spoiled meat of a fish. Apply steam distillation to
each sample. It was found as a result that the free acids
were almost removed by exudation, for volatile acids
contained in the residue of the exudation were measured.
When free volatile acids were wrapped as a reagent together
with gelatin, they were formed into bound acids to some
extent.
Studies on Methods for Determining Freshness of Foods-VI.
A Comparative Study of Methods for Determining Freshness of "Kamaboko"
Tetsuo Tomiyama and Yasuo Yone
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
180!:521! 1953
No consistent value for the volatile base-nitrogen has
been observed at the start of the spoilage of "Xamaboko"
as reported by Kimata who gave 30-40 mgX as a criterion
for spoilage. Data have also been presented showing that,
contrary to Uchixama' s report, a 60 mgX value for volatile
acid seems to be inadequate as the criterion for beginning
of spoilage.
It has been clearly shown that the catalase activity on
the surface of "Kamaboko" shows a parallel relationship to
the degree of growth of micro-organisms. This data infers
a possibility of presenting a new method for expressing
freshness of "Kamaboko".
48
Report on Pish  Indole in Crab! Indole as an Index of Decomposition
in Dungeness Crab
David W. Milliams
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,and Melfare, San Francisco, California
Journal of the Association of Offi.cial Agricultural Chemists35!:525-526, 1952
A method to determine indole was investigated. Difficulty
was experienced with foaming in the distillation and thisgreatly extended the time of analysis. This difficulty
was corrected by using a silicone antifoam  D .C . AntifoamA!, Standards and blanks were run using the antifoam and
it was found to have no effect on the results.
Studies on the Method for Testing the Spoilage of Foods  V. AStudy on the Aeration Method for the Determination of Volatile Base
Tetsuo Tomiyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
17.2!:405, 1952
This paper deals with a study of factors governing the rateof removal of volatile base by aeration.
On.ly a slight increase in the rate of removal of the basewas observed when the aeration tube was completely emergedin a water bath and by changing the dimensions of the
aeration tube and drop catcher. This rate decreases withdecreased freshness of the sample. A considerable increaseXn this rate, however, has been made by increasing theamount of potassium carbonate which is added prior toaeration. Raising the temperature also remarkably reducedthe length of time needed for complete determination. Byraising temperature of the aeration, mackerel flesh gavean excess amount of base while whale meat did not give
any excess amount even at 80 C .
Studies on the Method for Testing the Spoilage of Foods  Ill. A NewSteam-Distilling Method for the Determination of Volatile Base in
Fish Flesh
Tetsuo Tomiyama, Katsumi Ide and Tsutomu Akiyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
17!:1, 1952
A new steam-distilling method has been presented for thedetermination of the volatile base-N in fish flesh. Data
is presented showing that the fish muscle brei on direct
steam distillation at either pH 7.6 or 9.0 gave a value ofabout 145/ of that obtained by the vacuum method. A 1-3/trichloracetic acid extract of the brei gave a value of
nearly the same as that by the vacuum method, irrespecti.ve
of the freshness of the sample used.
49
Simple Colorimetric Method for Measuring the Quantities of Annnonia
in Fish Meat-II. An Application of Nessler's Colorimetric Method
Fuyuo Ota
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
17:309, 1951
The adaptability of Nessler's method to the estimation of
ammonia in fish meat with the aid of some preliminary
treatments was reported in the previous paper.
In the present paper experimental conditions in practicing
this method were discussed with the following results.
1. The increasing rate of ammonia determined by this
method, in the decrease of freshness of fish and in the
fish meats heated under pressure, was nearly parallel with
that of volati.le basic nitrogen determined by distillation
method usually employed.
2. This method made the determination of ammonia contents
of various marine products and other fleshes very easy and
simple.
Simple Colorimetric Method for Measuring the Quantities of Ammonia
in Pish Meat-I. A Device to Remove Obstructing Substance in Messier's
Reaction
Fuyuo Ota
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
16 !: 264, 1950
Some experiments were carried out to apply Nessler ' s
colorimetric method for measuring the quantities of
ammonia in fish meat. The colour reaction by Nessler's
reagent for extracts of fish meat, does not indicate
characteristic colour which is to be induced by ammonia,
but colours differently; and it was shown that some srjb-
stances which obstruct Nessler's reaction are removed by
adding the adsorbent vhich does not influence annnonia in
acidified solutions.
Therefore, Nessler's method may be adapted as a simple
method for the estimation of ammonia in fish meat., by the
following itemsr
1. Treating the aqueous extracts of fish meat with protein-
precipitants charged with definite acidity and adsorbent,
2. Changing alkali earth metal ious into complex iona,
dissolved out to filtrate from adsorbent,
3. Preparing a durable standard solution.
50
The Color Reaction Method for the Judgement of the Fish-Meat Freshn.ess3. Application of the Color Reaction of p-Qufnone Induced by theputrefaction Products of Fish-Heat to the Quantitative Determinationof the Fi.sh-Meat Freshness
Y. Obata and M. Ishida
Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Agriculture, HokkaidoUniversity, Hakodate, Japan
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries16 ! 147, 1950
In the previous paper we have reported that the p-quinonereaction was applicable qualitatively as a simple deter-mination method of the fish-meat freshness .The present experiments were carried out to see whetherthe same reaction would be applicable or not as a quanti-tative determination method. The results so far obtainedare as follows.The reddish btown color of the reagent shows a tendency tobecome darker, in proportion as the l.oss of the fish-meatfreshness advances. But it is impossible to detect pre-cisely by the color reaction method the critical grade ofthe loss in the fish-meat freshness considered from thesanitary point of view.Furthermore, the color reaction of p-quinone proves hardlyapplicable to a quantitative colorimetric determination of
difthe fish-meat freshness on account of a lot of t h i 1o ec n caficulties in preparing necessary standard colors.
The Color Reaction Method for the Judgement of the Fish-M t F h
s  eat res nesse u gement of the Fish-Neat Freshness by Means of p-Quinone
Y. Obata and K. ZamaBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries l6 l!:10,
The color reaction pf pyperidin, of the bacterial decompositionproduct of Lysin, against p-quinone has been proved applic-able as a simple method for the judgement of the fish meatfreshness, as it was recognised that the fish meat treatedwith p-quinone assumed a red color more rapidly in proportionto the progress of its putrefaction. This method isapplicable also for fr'eshess evaluation of boiled fishpaste and smoked fish. In the case of smoked fish, thecolor reaction is affected by the wood-tar component whichis contained in the sample as shown by its alcohol extract.
51
The New, Simplified Method of Determination for Freshness of Fishes
 I!
T, Mori and M. Hats
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries 15 8!:
407, l949
The periodical variation of reducing power of the ll fish
meats by the Anson-Mirsky's Ferricyanide method. was investi-
gated.
Reducing power increases in proportion to the lowering of
the freshness.
The increasing rate of reducing power of various fish are
nearly equal.
The reducing power at the beginning of putrefaction is
approximately equal among various fish.
The increase of reducing power runs nearly parallel with
that of volatile basic nitrogen. Therefore, it is possible
to use this method as a standard for the determination of
freshness in fish.
Simplified Test on the Freshness of Fish Meat-III. Non-Precipitability
of Hexon Base with Mercuric Chloride
K. Amano, H. Uchiyama and F. Tomiya
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
15 !: 262, l 949
As a delicate and characteristic method for detecting the
early stages of decomposition of fish flesh, we reported
the coagulation test of soluble protein-like substances
with mercuric chloride solution. In the previous paper,
it was described that the coagulum probably contains
soluble protein, and also mercuric-aminochloride but in
lesser amounts. However, some questions have been left as
to whether the coagulum contains hexon bases. To solve
this problem, the precipitability of mercuric chloride
with hexon bases was examined in aqueous extracts of
fish muscle.
The Color Res.ction Method for the Judgement of the Fish Neat Fresh-
ness 1. The Color Reaction of the Component Responsible for the
Fish-odor against p  Quinone.
Y. Obata and K. Zama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
15  9!:499, ].949
The color reaction against p-quinone was examined with the
dilute aqueous solutions of ammonia, methylamine, trimethy-
lamine and pyperidin, which have hitherto been thought as
52
the components responsible for the fish-odor. Ammonia andtrimethylamine assumed a brovn color while methylamineand pyperidin a red colot'. By the fact that albuminshowed no reactionti n against p-quinone, the color reactionin question proved to have nothing to do with protein.
y, y amining the odor producing conditions offresh salmon muc us and the reaction against p-quinone ofthe substance reesponsible for the odor, it vas recognizedthat the color reactaction appeared more rapidly in proportionto the production of fish-odor.
Simplified Teat on the Fre hn
f s ness of Fish Meat-IV. Effect of Freshness o Fish Meat on the Stabib lity of Its Aqueous Extract Against Alcohol
K. Amano and F. Tomiya
Bulletin off the Japanese Soci.ety of Scientific Fisheries152:753, 1949
Zn the present report the stability of water solubleprotein of fish meat against alcohol was examined con-cerning freshness of the fish meat by the followinmethod: 1.0cc ofo : . cc o water extract of the meat 0gms of meat:a y e o owing
100cc of distilled water! was put into a 50cc beakerand absolute alcohol was added dropvise from a burette
Occ per minute; and the amount of alcoholrequired to form both turbidity and precipitation vasdetermined, Thene , e concentration of alcohol necessary tocoagulate protein in extract of fresh meat lies between 70to OX, vhile in the case of decaying meat 30 to 40Xa co o is enough to aggregate the protein. Probably thisp enomenon involves the strength of hydration of thesoluble protein.
It vas found that c oagulation of protein occurs in lesserconcentration of alcohol in the presence of HgCL thanin the absence of e ce o g 2 than
alcoho o the salt. Also it vas proved thata cohol coagulable nitrogen increased in parallel vith theamount of HgCI2 contained in the solution. Naemp oye in the above experiments vere mackerel, tuna fish
In the light of the results obtained, one of the reasonsor nonprecipitability of mercuric chloride in the extracto fresh fish meat may be due to the strength of hydrationof the protein enough to prevent precipitation betweenprotein and mercuric chloride.
53
On the Method of Microdetermination of Formaldehyde in the Smoked
Foods
E, Tan ikawa
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientifi.c Fisheries
14.!:56! 1948
To determine the quantity of formaldehyde in smoked fish
by Iodometry, N/100 Iodine and Sodium Thiosulfate solutions
were prepared, and the accuracy of the method was tested
with diluted formaline solutions of defi.nite concentration.
About 5/100,000 diluted formaldehyde could be detected.
To d'etermine the quantity of formaldehyde in smoked fish
meat, di,stillates of ground smoked fish meat prepared by
steam distillation serves for Iodometry. Each 50 cc of
the distillate is separately obtained at every 5 minutes
and must be prepared in this way up to the 6th distillate.
All the 6 distillates are mixed together for the next
Iodometry. The maximum quantity of formaldehyde in the
smoked fish meat can be obtained when the meat is ground
and soaked immediately in distilled water. This micro-
determination of formaldehyde in the smoked foods demands
careful attention in the experiment, otherwise the exact
amount can not be ascertained.
Simplified Test on the Freshness of Fish Meat-l, An Application of
Walkiewicz's Method for Measuring the Freshness of Whale Meat
K. Amano and H. Utiyama
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
14!:48, 1948
A rapid and simple method of measuring the freshness of
raw beef, which was introduced by W, Walkiewicz, was
applied to fish and whale meat. The Walkiewicz tests may
be applicable as a rapid and simple method in detecting
the first stages of decomposition of some fish meat.
Mfferential Spectrophotometry of Purine Compounds by Means of
Specific Enzymes I. Determination of Hydroxypurine Compounds
Herman N. Kalckar
Division of Nutrition and Physiology, The Public Health Research
Institute of the City of New York, Inc., New York
Journal of Biological Chemistry 167:729-742, 1947
Methods are given for the determination of very small
amounts of hypoxanthine, inosine, xanthine, guanine,
guanosine, and uric acid. These methods are based on
54
changes in the ultraviolet absorption of these compounds
resulting from the action of specific enzymes. The pro-
cedures combine marked sensitivity with high specificity
and seem ta be well suited for the study of these purines
and purine derivatives in biological materials.
Comparisons of Chemical Tests of the quality of Fish
G.J. Sigurdsson
Food Technology Laboratories, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA
Industrial and Bngineering Chemistry E9:892  902, 1947
The literature on the spoilage of fish is criticallyreviewed and a method not previously used for determiningvolatile acids in fish products is described . Methods of
measuring the rate of spoilage of herring are compared
for fish stored at different temperatures . For fish storabove O'C determination of the total volatile acids or
trimethylamine is found to be the most reliable, but thes
tests alone do not give full information about the state
of all constituents in the muscle. For fish stored below
zero these tests are unreliable, and a measurement of the
protein breakdown is necessary.
Amines in Fish Muscle I, Colorimetric Determination of Trimethylami
as the Picrate Salt
W.J. Dyer
Atlantic Fisheries Experimental Station, Halifax, Nova ScotiaJournal of the Fisheries Rdsearch Board of Canada 6!:351, l94
A sensitive accurate colorimetric method for trimethylamindetermination is presented, based on the extraction wi.thtoluene of an alkaline sample containing 0.002 to 0.02 mg.trimethylamine nitrogen, and the formation of the yellowcoloured picrate by mixing with a picric acid reagent. Thapplication of the method in fishery products and effectsof interfering substances have been investigated .
Histamine Content of Unprocessed and Canned Fish. A TentativeMethod for ~ntitative Deterodnation of Spoilage
E. Geiger
Van Camp Laboratories, Terminal Island, California
Food Research 10:293-297, 1944
It was reported in an earlier paper by Geiger, Courtney,and Schnakenberg 944! that the muscle tissue of marine
fish contains a biologically very active substance which
55
was identified as histamine. The histamine content of the
fresh fish was found to be very low, but it increasespost mortem rapidly. The changes in the histamine content
vere so evident and so regular that it seemed to be pro-raising to use the histamine content as a criterion for the
freshness of fish.
Determining Volatile Bases in Fish Comparison of Precision of Certain
Methods
Maurice E. Stansby, Roger W. Harrison, John Dassov, and
Mary Anne SaterTechnological Laboratory, U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
Seattle, WAIndustrial and Engineering Chemistry, Analytical Edition
16  9!: 593-596, 1944
Methods were investigated for determining total volatile
base and tertiary volatile base in fish flesh as an indexof spoilage. Sampling methods tested included use ofpress Juice, protein-free press !ulcc, 60X ethanol-leachedsamples, samples "liquidized" with 60X ethanol, and samplesof ground fish suspended directly in solution. Volatile
base was removed by microdiffusion, distillation, andaeration. Most precise results were obtained for total
volatile base by extracting the fish flesh with 60Xethanol and removing the volatile base by distillation
from the solution made alkaline with borax.
The Pungent Principles of Fishes Produced by Decrease in. FreshnessPart III. On the Colorimetric Determination of Histamine in the
Canned Fishes and Several Food Stuffs
Hikomi IgarasiBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries 8-
6!:161, 1939-40.
In Parts I and Il the writer described the isolation ofhistamine from fish with decreased freshness and from fishwhich were treated with bleaching powder, «-and S-naphtholand kept at 24-25 C for two days. By applying the methodof R. Yokoyama the writer determined the amount of histamine
in canned fish as well as other food-stuffs.
56
The Pungent Principles of Fishes Produced by Decrease i.n Freshness.
Part II.
Hikomi Igarasi
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
8-6!:158, 1939-40.
In the previous communication, the writer has shown that
the pungent principle of fish produced by a decrease in
freshness is histamine and has given a method of isolation
of the amine. Biological observations on the formation of
hi.stamine have been made by many workers, The writercould isolate histamine from Seombez' japonious  Houttuyn!treated with bleaching powder containing 0.04X chlorine,~- and 8-naphthol 0.5X and kept at 24-25 C for two days.
The Alcohols as a Measure of Spoilage in Canned Fish
Duncan A. Holaday
Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education,and Welfare, Washington, DC
Journal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists22!:418-420, 1939
A determination of the amount of alcohol present is pro-posed as a measure of the extent of decomposition of
canned fish.
SA Chemical Procedure for Kvalua
simon and Tuna Fish a uating Spoilage in Canned Fish Especiallyl
F. Hillig and E. P. Clark
Journal of the Association of Of
21:688-695, 1938 o ficial Agricultural Chemist' s
Suspended a 50- sa 1-g amp e of canned fish in water andphosphotungstic acid, filter off the solids
co lect the distie resu t ng liquid by the modified Dyer method'I
separatel allate in 2-].00-cc portions d titan rate
and det. formic acid. Thy as proposed by Dyer, unite the ie port onsormic acid. These data are sufficient tot e extent of spoils e in
tabulat g in canned fish, as is well shown byta u ated data. With modification the me
vo at e acid no. on such material  sardines! is of littl~va ue ecause of the excessive
e essentially AcOH!: howcessive quantities of acids in
is detd. owever, if the formic acid no.et ., the method becomes as valuable as an index ofion o any sample under investigation .
57
The BeasurBea urement of Spoilage in Fish
S. A. Beatty and N. E. GibbonsAtlantic Fisheries Experimental Station, B lifJournal of Biological Research Board of Canada 3~1!:77. 1937
The increase in volatile nitrogenous bases in codfish
muscle between the pre-rigor period and the first appearance
of odour is approximately 6mg. per 100 grams of tissue,and is due almost entirely to the action of bacteria. It
can be used to follow the course of spoilage only if theoriginal value of the fish in question is known, as the
range in variation of the original values is as great as
the increase to the appearance of odour.A method for the rapid determination of "trimethylamine"
in cod muscle has been devised. Its increase parallels
the increase in bacterial population. Gdours alvaysappear at approximately the same level of "trimethylamine".
The increase resulting from autolysis is negligible. The
increase during the development of spoilage is fifteen totwenty times the original value. Spoilage can be followedin fish preserved with borates as veil as in untreated
fish.
Relation Between the Rate of Decomposition of Fish Muscle and Chemical
Constituents
Yarokuro YoursBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
I-6!:75, 1932-33
The following empirical formula is obtained betveen the
ammonia-content at the beginning of decomPositio«ffish muscle A , and that after D-days A. A A eM where
K is a constant.The values of K are calculated by the for u» f
of types of fish. Tt is shovn that the val e o
remarkable correlation vith total nitrogen
and water,W.
BIOCHEMICAL METHODS FOR DETERMINING FISH QUALITY
A Rapid Visual Enzyme Test to Assess Fish Quality
F. D. Jahns, J. L. Howe, R. J. Coduri Jr. A. J. Rand Jr.D epartment of Food Science and Technology, University ofRhode Island, Kingston, RI
Food Technology 30:27, 1976
A visual test strip has been developed to assess fishfreshness. The visual method closely resembles thecolorimetric data making it possible to predict thepractical use of the test strip as a semi-quantitativeana ysis to detect hypoxanthine concentrations in a givenanal
sample of fish.
Relation Between the Quality of Canned Pish and Its Content of ATP-Breakdown-III. ATP-Breakdown in Canned Albacore and Skipjack inRelation to the Organoleptic Inspection
Yutaka Fujii, Katsuo Shudo, Kunisuke Nakamura, Senji Ishikawaand Minoru Ikada
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries39 I!:69-84, 1973
The ratios of Hx and IMP content to total Hx, HxR and IMPcontent in canned albacore and skipjack meat were measuredand correlated with organoleptic judgements by Japaneseand American inspectors in order to establish a usefulchemical index of meat "decomposition". A linearrelation expressed by a simple equation and a high cor-relation coefficient  over 0. 9! between the Hx or IMPratios in raw and canned meat was obtained. As theinspection scores  odour judgements by Japanese inspec-tors! passed from high rating a' through b, d' down tolow ratings C and D, there is a definite increase in theHx ratios of the respectively rated canned meats. From
thist s it was inferred that the Japanese inspection standardof odour is closely related to the freshness of fishmaterial. The Japanese inspection scores based on odourand the American inspection judgements of "decomposition"
o canned albacore and skipjack prepared from frozen fishf
agreed fairly well with each other. There was, however,
a pronounced disagreement in inspection judgements ofcanned "winter albacore" and canned skipjack prepared
from iced fish.
59
A Rapid Method for Determination of Inosine, Hypoxanthine, UricAcid, and Nucleotides in Pish Muscle by Continuous Gradient Column
Chromatography
Noboru Kato, Hitoshi Uchiyama, and Pumiaki UdaBu3.latin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
39 0!: 1039-3.044 $1973In a previous paper, the authors reported that a rapidmethod for determination of ATP-related compounds in fishmuscle by concave gradient column chromatography isuseful for judgement of enzymatic freshness of fish.However, by this method, inosine and hypoxanthine couMnot be separated from each other. When sodium borate isadded to an inosine solution, the hydroxyl radicals atthe cis-position of ribose in inosine react with theborate and a complex compound, having an affinity towardan ion exchange resin greater than that of inosine,is produced. By adding sodium borate to the extract offish muscle, inosine vas completely separated fromhypoxanthine in an appropriate pH range.Hypoxanthine, inosine, uric acid, AMP, IMP, A33P, and ATPcan be separated completely from each other within 3.5hrwith satisfactory recoveries. The distribution patternsof these compounds in muscle of sea bass ~ dark muscle oftuna and chicken muscle during ice storage were examined
by the improved method.
Hypoxanthine and Nucleotide Levels in Pacific Halibut Stored inRefrigerated Sea Water, In Ice, and Plait Frozen
D. E. KramerVancouver Laboratory, Fisheries Research Board of Canada,
Vancouver, British Columbia, CanadaFood and Agricultural Organization, Fisheries Report
115:28-32, 3.971
Pacific halibut was frozen, kept in refrigerated seawater or kept in ice. The first samp1e has the control time 0! and the others were stored for 5-10-15-20 dayperiods. Determination of the hypoxanthine index and
total nucleotides were made.
Simple and Rapid Method for Estimating the Freshness of Fish
Hiroshi Kobayashi and Hitoshi UchiyamaBulletin of the Tokai Regional Fisheries Research Laboratory
61.21, 1970
The K value proposed as an index of freshness of fish hasbeen recognized to be effective by many workers. Asimple and rapi d determination method for the X value wasdeveloped. The main features are as follows:
60
l. Using column chromatography of Dowex lx4 chloric type
and authentic ATP and its related compounds, the recoveries
of 97-100K were obtained by eluting the mixture of HxR
and Hx with 50 ml of O.OOI N HCl solution, and that of
AMP, IMP, ADP and ATP with the same volume of 0.6 N NaCl
in 0. 01 N HCl solution.
2. ATP and its related compounds were eluted faster on
Dowex lx4 chloric type column than on Dowex lx8 formic
type column.
3. By using a simple apparatus the method presented here
was practical for the rapid estimation of the freshness
of fish and the values determined by this method agreed
with those obtained by the column chromatography of
Dowex lx8 formic type resin.
A Rapid Method for Determination of the Acid-soluble Nucleotides in
Fish Muscle by Concave Gradient Elution
Shigeo Ehira, Hitoshi Uchiyama, Fumiaki Uda, and Hiroyuki
Matsumiya
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
36!:491-496, 1970
Many workers have investigated to elucidate the relation
between the degradation of nucleotides and freshness of
fish. Me have also reported that the ratio of nucleotide
decomposition  K value! has been found to be a more
useful index for freshness of fish than the amount of
bacterial decomposition products such as volatile base
and trimethylamine, Prom the results of these studies,
it may be safely said that pursuing the changes of
nucleotides in the fish muscle is a prerequisite for
estimating the freshness of fish. ion-exchange chromato-
graphy with stepwise elution is usually used in this
field. The method is, however, so time consuming and
troublesome that it is inappropriate for rapid deter-
mination of nucleotides and their related compound.s. The
procedure described in the present report used Dowex
lx4  Ci! column with concave gradient elution system by
employing a simple apparatus. The results were a rapid
separation of HxR, Hx, IMP, AMP, ADP and ATP with adequate
resolution and ease of detection.
Premortem Stress and Postmortem Biochemical Changes in Skip]ack
Tuna and Their Relation to Quality of the Canned Product
Ladell Crawford and Enid J. Irwin, John Spinelli and W. D. Brown
Journal of Food Science 35:849-851, 1970
l.ive skipjack were caught, brought to shoreside and held
in tanks 24-48 hours. At this time some were exercised
to simulate stress during commercial capture, sacrificed,
61
held at 74' and 32 F for 6 hours, sampled for chemicalanalyses, then canned, Unstressed  rested! skipjackwere treated similarly. Some autolytic degradationproducts postmortem were measured and the differencesnoted. Organoleptic evaluation was made on canned fishfrom the various treatment groups. While there weredifferences in various organolepti.c parameters among thegroups subjected to different treatments, there was nooverwhelming evidence connecting stress or temperature of
holding to quality in the canned product.
Alpha-Glycerophosphate Dehydrogenase as an index of iced-Storage ofFresh, Gutted Haddock  N Lan A /, !
Kd it h GouldBureau of Commercial Fisheries, Technological Laboratory, MAJournal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada
262!:3175-3181, 1969
A new test described for judging the iced-storage age ofunspoiled gutted haddock, from early loss of quality tothe first gross signs of spoilage. The test is a mess~reof the changing properties of alphaglycerophosphatedehydrogenase in tissue fluid with time after death,and is interpreted as an indication of leaching of tissueduring the first 7 days of storage. Such functionalchanges in an enzyme system are a particularly sensitivecriterion of freshness in fish during the first 4 or
days of iced storage.
Rapid Estimation of Freshness of Fish by Nucleoside Phosphorylase
and Xanthine Oxidase
Shigeo Ehira and Hitoshi UchiyamaTokai Regional Fish Research Laboratory, Chuo-Ku,
Tokyo, JapanBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
351!:1080-1085
A rapid estimation of freshness of fish muscle has beenmodified for application to the muscle of fi.sh whereinosine instead of hypoxanthine is accumulated afterdeath. The method involves the use of nucleosidephosphorylase besides xanthine oxidase. Perchloric acidextract of the muscle tissue is neutralized with potassiumhydroxide and the precipitated perchlorate is removed.The above extract is buffered with phosphate buffer  pH7.6! and mixed with an aqueous solution containing both
62
nucleoside phosphorylase and xanthine oxidase. After the
mixture i.s incubated at 37'C for 30 minutes., the uric
acid produced is determined by measuring the absorption
at 293 mp. Another aliquot of the extract is treated in
the same way, except that the solution containing xanthine
oxidase only is used as the enzyme solution, and the uric
acid derived from hypoxanthine in the tissue is determined.
This amount is subtracted from the total uric acid to
yield the content of uric acid originated from inosine in
the tissue. Recoveries of inosine and hypoxanthine
added to the extracts of fish muscle were fairly good,
being 92-106K and 95-106X, respectively. The values
obtained by this method agreed well with those by ion-
exchange chromatography. In the course of this experiment,
it was found that jack mackerel was of the inosine accumula-
ting type, as is the already known Pacific salmon.
Nucleotide Degradation and Organoleptic guality in Fresh and Thawed
Mackerel Muscle Held at and Above Ice Temperature
D,I, Fraser, D.P. Pitts and W.3. Dyer
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Halifax Laboratory,
Halifax, N.S.
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
25!:239-253, 1968
In mackerel, by the time of initial sampling, adenine
nucleotides had been deaminated to inosine monophosphate
 INP! in the ordinary muscle; in the red muscle the
degradative sequence was even more advanced, as indicated
by high initial levels of inosine. Postmortem rates of
degradation of IMP to hypoxanthine through inosine were
similar in both types of muscle; at ice temperature the
rates were slower than in cod but faster than in swordfish.
A delay in icing of 6-8 hours after catching accelerated
the gradual decline in eating quality with replacement
of the characteristic fresh mackerel flavor by tastelessness.
BP dephosphorylation paralleled development of taste-
lessness while spoilage  organoleptic! had developed
prior to accumulation of appreciable amounts of hypo-
xanthine. At higher temperatures, 5-20' C, rates of IMP
dephosphorylation, hypoxanthine accumulation, and quality
loss vere markedly increased. Thawing did not influence
subsequent deterioration rates, but ascorbic acid dips
delayed darkening of the flesh in thawed samples.
63
Excellent correlation of taste vith both IMP and hypo-xanthine content, and vith various simple measures if IMPdephosphorylation was obtained under the various handlingconditions investigated, including delayed icing, holdingat elevated temperatures, and after thawing. The simpletests - ultraviolet absorption at 248 mn of a Dawextreated perchloric acid extract, and ratio of ultravioletabsorption of extracts at 251 mp after Dowex treatment tothat before treatment  proved as good indices of pro-gressive quali.ty loss to the unacceptability level as themore complex estimation of IMP or hypoxanthine.
Nucleotide Degradation, Monitored by Thin-Layer Chromatography, andAssociated Postmortem Changes in Relaxed Cod Muscle
Doris Fraser, J.R. Dingle, J.A. Hines, S.C. Nowlan and
W.J. DyerFisheries Research Board of Canada, Halifax Laboratory,
Halifax, NSJournal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
24 8!:1837-1840, 1967
Cod muscle relaxed at death, containing, high initiallevels of CP and ATP and very low levels of lactate,maintained. its elevated level of ATP during iced storageat 24 hr postmortem; as a result, nucleotide catabolism,glycolysis, and onset of rigor vere delayed. The thin-layer chromatographic procedure used proved a useful.qualitative and semiquantitative tool for following thepattern of nucleotide degradation quickly and easily.
A Study on the Change in Nucleotides and Freshness of Carp Muscle
During Chill- Storage
Tetsuo Tomiyama, Kunio Dobayashi, Keiko 1U.tahara, Ktsuko
Shiraishi and Nobuyoshi OhbaLab. Fish. Chem., Fac. Agr., Kyushu University, FukuokaBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
32!:262-266, 1966
A number of studies have been reported on the change inthe acid soluble nucleotide of muscle tissue. In fishmuscle, however, few works have been done on the relationbetween the change in the nucleotides and the freshnessbased on the bacterial spoilage, It is proposed recentlyfrom a consumer's standpoint that the flavar qualityindex of muscle tissue is more desirable as freshnessrather than the bacterial spoilage index. The presentpaper deals with the relationship between the change inthe concentrations of various nucleatides, V35 and thenumber of bacteria in carp muscle during chill-storage.
The concentration of IMP is quite important as the index
of flavor quality of fish muscle, because IMP is the
ma!or nucleotide in fish flesh as the flavor-enhancing
constituent. The amount of IMP reached the maximum level
.5 p mole/g! at 0-4'C one day after slaughter of carp.
IMP stays about three days without appreciable change
under the chill-condition. Following 4-day storage,
however, IMP was decreased rather rapidly. On the other
hand, the bacterial spoilage was found to occur after ll-
day storage. Therefore, the maintenance time of IMP,
namely, the time of keeping passable flavor quality of
carp muscle was one third to one half of the time of
incipient spoilage.
Nucleotide Measurement: Rapid Measurement of Inosine Monophosphate
and Total Adenosine Nucleotides in Fish Tissue
John Spinelli and Barbara Rcmp
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Technological Laboratory,
Seattle, Washington
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 14!:176-178, 1966
A method. is described for the rapid determination of
inosine monophosphate  IMP! and total adenosine nucleotides
in fish tissue. Perchloric acid extracts of the tissue
are made, and the nucleotides are absorbed and separated
for nucleosides and purine bases on a Dowex I-X4- Cl!
resin. After elution from the resin with H2SO4, total
adenosine and inosine nucleotides are determined by
measuring the absorbency of the effluent at 250 mu.
Adenosine nucleotides in the effluent are then determined
chemically and subtracted fran the total nucleotides to
yield the IMP content of the extract. The method is
useful over varying concentrations of adenosine and
inoeine nucleotides, and values are in close agreement
with those obtained by using classical ion exchange
systems.
Studies on Relation Between Freshness and Biochemical Changes of
Fish Muscle During Ice Storage
Hitoshi Uchiyama, Taneko Susuki, Shigeo Ehira and
Elisabro Noguchi
Tokai Regional Fisheries Research Laboratory, Chuo-Ku,
Tokyo, Japan
Bulletin of the Japanese Soceity of Scientific Fisheries
32!;280-285, 1966
Studies have been made on the relation between the lowering
of freshness and the biochemical changes in the fish
muscle during ice storage using plaice and skip]ack. The,
changes in total amounts of free amino acids, salt-
65
soluble proteins, volatile bases and trimethylamine,together with bacterial count, pH and "K" value  absorp-
tion ratio in percentage of 250 mu of inosine plushypoxanthine fraction to the perchloric-acid extract ofmuscle! which had been proposed for an index for freshness.Psychlorphylic bacteria were little increased during thef irst 10 days for plaice and throughout the storage time 9 days! for skipjack. The solubility of 0.6N KCI-soluble proteins was not changed significantly in bothcases. The amount of volatile bases was fairly well,
increased at the earlier stage and thereafter keptconstant. However, trimethylamine was not increaseduntil 14 days and 9 days for plaice and skipjack,respectively. The amount of free amino acids wasobserved to increase derring the storage for plaice, andon the tendency to increase was rather unexpectedly forskipjack. The freshness was organoleptically observed tobe markedly lowered at the 14th days for plaice, and atthe 4th day for skipjack, earlier than bacterial countsand substances such as volatile bases and trimethylaminewere not increased so much. Based on these results, itmay be said that in the early stage of the storage thedeterioration of freshness of fish is effected by autolysisrather than bacteri.al action. Also in the present study,
of fish, i.e. amounting to 40-50X when freshness was
recognized to be markedly lowered in both cases.
Nucleotide Degradation and guality in Ordinary and Red Nuscle of
Iced and Frozen Swordfish  Xaphias cILadium!
W. J. Dyer, Doris I. Fraser, and Dianne P. LohnesFisheries Research Board of Canada, Halifax Laboratory,
Halifax, N. S.Journal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada 232!:1821-
1834, 1966
In iced dressed swordf ish, inosine monophosphate, initiallythe predominant nucleotide . 2 pmole/g!, was dephosphozylated
to inosine during 19 days of storage. Hypoxanthineincreased very slowly to about 1 pmole/g while quality taste panel! showed no significant decrease up to 15days but was near borderline at l9 days. These changesoccurred more slowly than in cod and related species.The sequence of nucleotide changes occurred much earlierin the red muscle. Rapid freezing and storage at -26Cfor 4-5 months inhibited nucleotide enzymic activity, andquality remained unchanged. Slow freezing and storagefor 1 week at 4'C significantly reduced quality to border-line or unacceptable levels, but only slightly affected
the nucleotide degradation, indicating that other
66
factors vere responsible for the loss in quality.
Dephosphorylation and hypoxanthine accumulation continued
during further storage at -4C. The levels of hypoxan-
thine reached during 19 days iced storage or 4-5 months
frozen storage were not sufficiently high enough
impart bitter flavors, except possibly in the red muscle.
A simple measure of inosine  + hypoxanthine! may be
useful as a quality test; a supplementary hypoxant»ne
test could be used to confirm spoilage.
Sugar Fhosphates as Indicators of Fish Quality
J.R. Burt
~rechnolo of Fish Utilisetion, R. Kreuzer, ed.,
pp. 176-179, Fishing Newsh London, 1965
The COnaiderable contributiOns made by hexOse phOsphatesF
pentose phosphates and nucleotides to fish quality,
particularly in the early post-mortem states, is reviewed.The lack of suitable methods for determini.ng single
compounds of the above classes would appear to preclude
their use as indicators of quality. It is concludedthat two general, comparatively nonspecific, chemical
tests might have some practical applications, The
resorcinol reaction for ketohexose and ketohexosephosphate, when carried out on extracts of frozen fishmuscle, could give indications of time elapsed priorto freezing and of time and temperature of storage.The "barium, alcohOl nonprecipitab1e pentomeff indeXof Shewan and Jones ie of use in deciding on the suit-ability for freezing of certain fish,
Estimation of Hypoxanthine Concentrations of Fish Muscle by aRapid, Visual Modification of the Enzymatic Assay procedure
J.R. Burt, G.D. Stroud, and N.R. Jones~Technolo of Fish Utilization, R. Kreuzer, ed.,
pp. 367-370, Fishing News, London, 1965
The several existing methods of determining hypoxanthine concentrations in extracts of fish musclediffer in their accuracy, their ease and speedexecution and the amount of instrumentatioon required . The enzymatic assay procedure, which using xanthineoxidase monitors hypoxanthine as its oxidatia on product uric acid, requires complex instruments for ts opera-tion. A method of simplifying this techniquc n que as been developed by incorporating the oxidation-redn-re uction
67
indicator, 2,6-dichlorophenoli.ndophenol, into the reaction
mixture. This is decolourized to an extent proportional
to the amount of hypoxanthine present. Amounts of dye,
vhose total decolourization would correspond to a pre-set
rejection limit and to levels just above and. below that
limit are used. Extracts of fish muscle can then rapidly
be screened and classified as  a! well below,  b! just
below,  c! just above, or  d! well above the rejection
limit. A large number of extracts have been examined by
this procedure and the fish from vhich they vere prepared
were classified with a high degree of accuracy. After
comparing the results of this test with the correct
hypoxanthine concentrations i.t was found that 94 and 95
percent of the samples would have been correctly rejected
and accepted respectively.
The advantages that the hypoxanthine test has over many
other tests of fish freshness, particularly during the
early post-mortem stages of autolytic deterioration makes
it potentially of great use in. screening iced fish prior
to freezing ashore, Tn addition, hypoxanthine concentra-
tions in stored frozen fish are known to be a good index
of pre-freezing quality.
Bypoxanthine and Other 7urine  Containing Fractions in Fish Muscle
as Indices of Freshness
N.R. Jones~rechnolo of Fish Utlllzetlon, R. Krenzer, ef.,
pp. ill-l80, Pishing News, London, 1965
Adenosine 5'-triphosphate  ATP! is degraded to hypoxanthine
in chill-stored musca.e, and thereafter the purine ring is
cleaved, The early reactions, of the sequence producing
these changes, are autolytic. Bacterial enzymes becomeprogressively more active in later stages. Analogous
autolytic reactions can occur in the frozen state.This degradation of mononucleotides results in a deteriora-
tion in flavour. Two key stages in the reaction-sequenceare slov enough to allow their measurement as objective
indices of freshness:The dephosphorylation of inosine 5'-monophosphate  IMP!is predominant1y autolyti.c. Consequently, its estimation
can be a measure of freshness for fish before the onset
of bacterial attack. Nethods for the estimation are
discussed. A rapid procedure, based on selective ion-exchange from muscle extracts on to resin suspensions, is
described.
68
The accumulation of hypoxanthine results from both auto-
lytic and bacterial activation in muscle so that measure-
ment can be valuable throughout storage "life", Relative
performances of a number of procedures for estimating the
purine are discussed. A modified xanthine oxidase
assay, suitable for multiple analyses in quality control
laboratories, is described, together with an assessment
of its potential value as an index of storage time and of
quality.
It was ascertained that the injection of the mercurous
chloride solution resulted in the increase of both the hexa-
tocrit value and the erythrocyte count, while the rearing in
the same solution were followed by the marked decrease in
oxygen consumption. Treatment in the natrium chloride
solution resulted in a remarkable increase in both the
erythrocyte count and the erythrocyte resistance.
Degradati.on of Adenine- and Hypoxanthine- Nucleotide in the Muscle of
Chill-Stored Trawled Cod  gradus Ca7,~as!
N.R. Jones and J. Murray
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 13:475-480, 1962
The muscle of trawled cod contains little adenosine 5'- .
triphosphate and much inosine 5'-monophosphate at death, The
adenosine 5'triphosphate remaining in the muscle is rapidly
converted to inosine 5'monophosphate during chill storage.
This is dephosphorylated to inosine, which is itself cleaved
to hypoxantbine and either ribose or ribose I-phosphate.
The stoicheiometry and nature of the reactions liberating the
free base, ribose and the isomeric ribose phosphates are
discussed in relation to their technological implications.
A New Method for Estimating the Freshness of Fish
Tsuneyuki Saito, Ken-ichi, Arai and Minoru Matsuyoshi
Department of Fisheries, Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan
Bu1letin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
24 9!:749-750, 1950
In spite of the extreme importance of phosphate eaters as
metabolic intermediates, published reports on studies of their
changes in fish muscle especially such dealing with acid
soluble nucleotides, are few in number. According to the
facts related to the role of these eaters in living
muscle, it may be considered that the freshness of fish
must be closely related to the changes in the acid soluble
nucleotides. By determining the content of ribosederived from nucleotides, this principle vas applied inestimating the freshness of fish. On the other hand, inthe previous paper it has been reported that when carpmuscle is frozen at a slow rate there occur rapid splittingof ATP and instantaneous accumulation of IMP. Furthermore,IMP thus formed is slovly converted to inosine and thento hypoxanthine. At room temperature these changesare accelerated and as a result inosine and hypoxanthine,especially the latter, are predominantly accumulated.Using these results as a basis, it has been decided thatthe freshness of raw or frozen fishes may be judged byestimating their content of inosine and hypoxanthine.
Rapid Measures of Nucleotide Dephosphorylation in Iced Fish Muscle.Their Value as Indices of Freshness and of Inosine 5'-Monophosphate
Concentration
5.R. Jones and J. MurrayJournal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 15:684-690,
1964
Ion-exchange chromatographic procedures vere modified sothat nonphosphorylated derivatives in muscle extracts
could be separated rapidly from nucleotide precursors.Separations were effected either by filtration through aresin bed or by the shaking of extracts at appropriate pHwith resin. Nucleotide dephosphorylation was calculatedfrom ultraviolet absorption measurements before and after
treatment. The performances of the procedures werecompared with that of the fractionation of extracts withbarium. The validities of these rapid analyses as indicesof absolute nucleotide breakdovn, inosine 5'-monophosphate
concentration and freshness are discussed.
Nucleotide Degradation in the Muscle of Iced Haddock  Gadus zeglefinus!,Lemon Sole  P7euraneetes rnicrocepha5m!, and Plaice  Ple~nactea
pIatessa!
Bugn-Orn Kassemsarn, B. San Perez, J. Murray, and N.R. Jones
Torry Research Station, Aberdeen, Scotland
Journal of Food Science 28:28-32, 1963
The muscle of travl-caught haddock, lemon sole, andplaice contained little adenosine 5'-triphosphate  ATP!and much inosine 5'-monophospbate  IMP! at death. ATPIadenosine 5'-diphosphate  ADP!, and adenosine 5'-mono-phosphate  AMP! levels changed rapidly after the fishdied. IMP was lost from the muscle more slowly, with
70
liberation of inosine, which was, in turn, degraded to
h xanthine. A little adenine was formed by an alterna-ypoxantive pathway of ATP degradation in lemon sole. A relatively
high initial level of guanine was found in plaice muscle.
Traces of xanthine was detectable in spoiling muscle from
the three species. Implications of the findings are
discussed in relation to quality testing and. flavor
changes in iced fish.
Nethod for Judging the Physiological Condition of Fish by the
Quantitative Changes of the Blood Characters-l.
Osamu Tamura, Masato Yasuda and Tetsuo Fujiki
Fac. of Fish., Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scienti.fic Fisheries
28!:504, 1962
An attempt is made in the present paper to select a
technique estimating environmental and physiological
conditions of fish by means of some blood characters.
The differences between the first and second blood
samples from the intact carp were used as a standard in
the values of hematocrit, erythrocyte count, erythrocyte
resistance and oxygen consumption. Then the differences
between the blood samples before and after treatment
were compared with the standard obtained above. The
treatments tried were as follows:  group 1! the injec-
tion of 0.2cc of mercurous chloride solution  ,2-0,4
ppm! into the lateral muscle; {group 2! keeping in
the same solution  .2 ppm! for ten days;  group 3!
keeping in a natrium chloride solution {1X! for one or
two days.
Enzymatic Method for the Estimation of Freshness of Fish.  II.
Relationship between Freshness of Fish and Succinic Dehydrogenase
Activity
Hironari Fukuda
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
2368!t490, 1957
The change of succinic dehydrogenase activity of fish
tissues with incubation of 25'C are discussed. Although
great variations in the enzymatic activity were observed
among various tissues, a decrease in the enzyme activity
of a certain sample tissue showed a significant correlation
with decrease of its freshness. Therefore, the freshness
of sample fish can be judged from decrease in the enzyme
activity  freshness-index value K! of various sample
tissues, and the values were compared with those values
of fresh fish of the same kind.
71
Enzymatic Method for the Estimation of Freshness of Fish-Z.Estimation of Freshness of Fish by Determining Activity of Succinic
Dehydrogenase of Fish-Tissues
Kironari FukudaBulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
2368!, 486, 1957
The activity of succinic dehydrogenase in fish organs wasfound to decrease with deterioration of their freshness.
The determination of succinic dehydrogenase activity with2,6-Dichlorophenolindo-o-chlorophenol, was appl.ied to the
estimation of freshness of fish.The freshness can be expressed as "Freshness-index",
which is equal to the value of succinic dehydrogenaseactivity per one gram of fresh tissue as previously
described. "Freshness-index" of various organsor' tissues can be conveniently expressed as Ek, El, Edm,
etc. for kidney, liver, dark muscle, etc. depending on
each tissue tested, The "freshness-index" value of
various tissues will indicate the actual freshness of
the fish sample as a whole.
72
MICROBIOLOGICAL METHODS FOR DETERMINING FISH QUALITY
SpoilaSe and Spoilage Indicators in Queen Scallops  Chlamya opereu1~s
Ef fects of Processing
<- B Thomson, H.K. Davis, J.C. Early and J.R. Burt
Tarry Research Station, Aberdeen, Scotland
Journal of Food Technology 10, 81-89, 1975
Queen scallops were shucked and held as prepacked. meats.
Some of the prepacked meats were frozen and held frozen
together with some shell on queens. At various times of
storage, organoleptic descriptions of the meats were
g iven along with determinations of TMA, TVB, VRS, glycogen,
hypoxanthine, ribose fractions and optical density ratios
before and after treatment with ion-exchange resin. Of
these tests, only hypoxanthine showed. any promise as a
freshness indicator under all the conditions covered.
Rapid Methods for the Determination of Faecal Contamination in
Oysters
R. B.. Quadri, K.A. Buckle, and R.A. Edwards
Department of Food Technology, University of New South
Males, Kensington, Australia
Journal of Applied Bacteriology 37:7-14, 1974
Two methods for the rapid detection and estimation of
numbers of faecal coliforms and Eschemchia coLi type
I in oysters have been developed, That for faecal coli-
forms involves incubation of tubes of MacConkey broth for
2 h at 37'C and then for 22-24 h at 44'C. The second
method is specific for K. oo2i type I and makes use of the
same system of incubation, but requires the inoculation
of tubes of peptone water as well as MacConkey broth, the
former tubes being used for subsequent testing foz indole
formation. Both methods take only 24  26 h and are as
sensitive and accurate as the Most Probable Number
methods which are in common use and which take
upwards of 72-96 h to complete.
73
gacterial Counts and Quality of Iced 'Fish Retailed. at a Lusaks
Market, Zambia
K. Watanabe and Grete Ulstrup
Central Fisheries Research Institute, Chilanga, Zambia
Journal of Applied Bacteriology 36:513-522, 1973
The counts of total viable, coliform, streptococcal and
sulphite reducing anaerobic bacteria and the presence of
salmonellae were determined on 134 iced fish obtained
from Luburma Market, Lusaka, Zambia, during June-December
1970. The quality of the uncooked fish was also assessed
by appearance and odour. The purpose of these determinations
was to obtain a picture of the variations of the bacterial
counts in relation to season, origin, fish species
and market quality, Total viable and coliform counts
were of the order of millions and tens of thousands/cm of
skin surface, respectively. Higher counts were obtained
in the hot season during September-October but with
little change in appearance of the fish.
There was a significant correlation  P<0.01! of both
total via coliform bacteria with quality scores. Amaximum permissible level of 10 cells/cm2 of skin
surface was proposed for total viable counts and
105/cm for coliform bacteria, for iced fish of accep-
table quality in Zambia.
A 24-Hour Method for the Detection of Coagulase-Positive Staphylococci
in Pish and Shrimp
N. P, Insalata, C. W. Nshnke, W. G. Dunlap and C. C. Beazley
Pood Technology 26:78-82, 1972
Of the 14 diagnostic tests evaluated, the coagulase
slide, catalase activity, gram stain and the coagulase
tube tests proved the most successful with the 143 total
samples tested. The coagulase tube, gram stain and the
catalase activity gave 78. 9, 86. 8 and 88. 7X agreement,
respectively, for staphyloccocal actions in 24 hours.
74
Bacteriological Aspects of Frozen Prawn Products and Their Significance
in +ality Evaluation
T.S.G. Iyer, D.R. Chaudhuri and V. K. Pillai
Central Institute of Fisheries Technology, Ernakulam,
Cochin, IndiaFood and Agricultural Organization 115t59-69, 1971
Bacteriological aspects of frozen prawn products have
been studied. During freezing, 92-95X of ~.
25-35X of streptococci are destroyed. Subsequent storage
at -20'C  -O' F! has a greater effect on the L',
comparison to Streptocoeez',.
Bacteria Active in the Spoilage of Certain Sea Foods
R.A. Herbert, Margaret S. Hendrie, D.M. Gibson and J.M. Shewan
Torry Research Station, Ministry of Technology, Aberdeen,
Scotland
Journal of Applied Bacteriology 34 !:41-50, 1971
Spoilage of certain sea foods is caused by the activities
of some groups of gram negative bacteria. The characteristic
of odours and flavours of naturally spoiling cod and
haddock have been reproduced in blocks of sterile cod
muscle by organisms identified as Pssudomonas putida, Ps.
fragi, Ps. pu5refaeiens and other Pseudomonas happ.
An Accelerated System for Screening of Process Variables and
Freshness Indices of Irradiated Fishery Products
N.D. Alur, V.N. Madhavan, N. F. Lewis and U. S. Kumta
Biochemistry and Food Technology Divi.sion., Bhabha Atomic
Research Center, Trombay, Bombay, India
Journal of Food Technology 6:73-83, 1971
Incubation of fish homogenates at 30'C led to enhancement
of microbial growth of other freshness indices like TMA
and TVBN values enabling rapid screening of process
variables. This accelerated test system was found to be
successful when applied to shrimps and four species of
locally available fish, viz. Indian Salmon  S2euhoe~«n
rsfmdactylum! Surmai  Scomber orna~ getM~!, »mf ret
 St~teua cinerous! and Bombay duck  H~o~ nehersus!;
which were either untreated or subjected to g~a radra-
tion with or without combination of sodium nitrite and
benzoic acid.
75
The Bacteriology of "Scampi"  Nephrops ru!rVegicus!. I. Preliminary
Bacteriological, Chemical and Sensory Studies
P . Walker, D. Cann and J.M. Shewan
Journal of Food Technology 5:375-383, l970
A bacteriological, chemical and sensory study has been
made of iced and un-iced scampi  ¹phrops noroegicus!
stored at an ambient temperature of 2.2 C. After 8-10
days storage, the scampi became inedible due to the
presence of strong, ammoniacal, sour odours and flavours.
The bacterial counts, of iced and un-iced scampi, both of
which were made at 20 C and 37'C rose sharply after the
fourth day reaching values of 10 /g at 20'C and 10 /g at
37'C at the end of the storage period. The initial
bacterial flora, consisting mainly of coryneforms  80K!,
gradually changed during storage until it finally consisted
mainly of Aohromobaeter species 0X!. The total volatile
base and trimethylamine content of the flesh also increased
considerably during storage, reaching values of approximately
70 and 20 mg/N100 g flesh after 10-12 days; initial
values were about 20 and 0. 5 mg n/100 g flesh, respectively.
Direct Bacterial Count as a Rapid Freshness Test for Fish Fillets
Peter Lerke and Lionel Farber
Seafood Research Laboratory,
George Williams Hooper Foundation, University of California
San Francisco, California
Applied Microbiology 17!:197-201, 1969
Comparison of various indices of deterioration of
refrigerated fish fillets showed that the direct bac-
terial count can be used to predict the stor.age life of
the foodstuff. For direct counts, a thin film made from
fillet surface material was spread on a microscope
slide, stained, and read. Initial counts were found to
correlate well with keeping quality; a period of freshness
of 24 or 48 hr at 5 C could be reliably predicted.
Preliminary data indicated that hypoxanthine estimation
could probably also be used for the prediction of shelf
life but that the relative complexity of the procedure
detracted from its usefulness.
76
taction and Incidence of Specific Species of Spoi.lage Bacteria ofetect o
Pish I. Methodology
R.E. Levin
Science and Technology. U
Massachusetts, Axaherst, Massachusetts
Applied Microbiology 16 ll!:l734, 1968
The ability of Pseudomoms putrefaoiens to form H2S
was found to serve as a singularly useful criterion of
identity for this species and was used to directly
enumerate the organism for haddock fillets by the use
of pour plates of Peptone-Iron Agar. Subsurface colonies
appear intensely black, whereas surface colonies are
black or gray. A highly sensitive soft-agar-gelatin
overlay technique has been found useful for directly
determining the numbers of weakly and strongly proteolytic
organisms from fish tissue.
Bacteriology of Spoilage of Fish Muscle-II. Incidence of Spoilers
During Spoilage
R. Adams, L. Farber, and P. Lerke
Seafood Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper Foundation,
University of California, San Francisco, California
Applied Microbiology, 12!:277-279, 1964
A test medium consisting of a sterile raw press juice
from fish muscle was used to determine the incidence of
spoilage bacteria on stored fillets of English sole
 Parophrys veMlmt!. The initial load of spoilers was
shown to be consistently below lOX. This percentage rose
but slightly toward the middle of the spoilage runs, and
actually declined when spoilage was most apparent both
organoleptically and chemically. Further evidence
implicating the Peeudomomzs and Aohramobaoter groups in
the spoilage of fresh fish is presented.
»«eriological Survey of Filleting Process in the Pacific Northwest
l ~ Comparison of Methods of Sampling Pish for Bacterial Counts
Wayne I. Tretsven
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Technological Laboratory, U.S.
Department of the Interior, Seattle, Washington
Journal of Milk and Pood Technology 26 9!:302-306, 1963
Lots of incoming commercial cod were sampled by six
different methods to determine the best one for measuring
the bacterial load on the fish. Rinses of simi.lar whole
77
cod gave bacterial counts that were relatively lov and
quite variable, whereas spraying a rinse against the
surface resulted both in higher and in more uniform
counts. When similar S-cm areas were sampled, bacterial
counts obtained by swabbing represented 3SX and scraping
represented 46%%d of that obtained from the excised surface.
Counts differed more between the lots of fish than between
fish or between portions of the same fish. Swabbing
appears to be a practical method of sampling in-lineprocessing of fish, as it is non-destructive and relatively
efficient in removing large and. fairly uniform numbers of
bacteria.
Bacteriology of Spoilage of Pish Muscle-I. Sterile Press Juice as
a Smitable Experimental Medium
P. Lerke, R. Adams and L. FarberSeafood Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper Foundation,
University of California, San Prancisco, California
Applied Microbiology ll:458, 1963
A sterile raw fish muscle press juice, diluted 1:4 withsaline, has been prepared. This dilution greatly facilitated
Seitz filtration and affected the spoilage properties of
the medium only negligibly. At 5. S'C, the spoilage
pattern of naturally contaminated diluted juice was
almost identical to that of naturally contaminated fillets.
This was shown by comparing the quantitative and qualitativeaspects of the bacterial flora on the two substrates and
by measuring the production of volatile reducing substances
 VRS! and of trimethylamine  TNA!. With the sterile
raw muscle press juice, some preliminary data shoved thatindividual. members of the genera Aehromobaoter and Pseudonetuts
differ markedly in their spoilage capabilities: some
grew but did not produce spoilage detectable either
organoleptically or chemically; others gave rise tostrong off odors and to higher levels of VRS and 'I%I..
Storage Changes in Frozen Pish: Comparison of Objective and Subjective
Tests
Keratin Andersson and Carl Erik Danielson
Pindus Research Laboraotry, Bjuv, Sweden
Pood Technology 15:55-57, 1961
Herring fillets, treated by dipping in 0. SX ascorbic acid
and untreated as reference, vere frozen aod analyzed at
monthly periods using the TBA method accompanied byorganoleptic estimations, The chemical changes ascertainedby the TBA method exhibit good agreement with the changes
in taste. The untreated samples became rancid after 2
months' storage, whereas the treated samples remained
palatable for ll months.
78
The Action of Pseucjorna~ on Fish Muscle. 3. Identification of
Organisms Producing Fruity and Oniony Odours
C.H. Castellan ~xone F. Greenough and Jacqueline Dale
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Technological
Station, Halifax,
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
16 !: 13  19, 3.959
Bacteria capable of producing fruity and onion-like
odours have been isolated from Atlantic cod and haddock
f illets that had developed of f odours of this type.
These organisms have been identified as being nonpro-
teolytic strains of Pssudomonos f>&i
Compared to other f ish-spoiling bacteria, including
cultures of Sea ratio Proteus Achromabactez and green
pigmented J'eeudomonas, Ps. fzagi is quite sensitive to
the bacteriostatic action of antibiotics of the tetracycline
group.
C.H. Castell and Maxine F. Greenough
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Technological
Station, Halifax, N.S.
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
14 !: 617-625, 1957
Many of the odours characteristic of the earlier stages
of spoilage of chilled fish muscle have been reproduced
by inoculating sterile fish and fish media with pure
cultures of bacteria isolated from fish. These organisms
belong to the P88420movlos and the ma!ority are neither
proteolytic nor break down trimethylamine oxide. They
are chief ly achromogenic, although a few green pigmented
species are included. Odour production of these organisms
appears not to be inhibited by sodium nitri.te. Similar
odours, Produced by similar types of organisms, have been
observed in the Past on dairy products, eggs, meat,
poultry and other protein foods held in cold storage.
Rapid Prncedures for Approximation of Bacterial Counts in Shrimp
and Oysters
A F yovak p A. Fieger and M,R. Bailey
De par tment o f Ag r i cultural Chemistry and
Louisiana State Vniversity, Baton Rouge,
Food Technology 10: 66-67, 1956B io c hernia t r y,
Louisiana
Two methods «r raPid aPProximation of bacterial counts
in shrimp and y ters are described. Measured samples ofThe Action of Pse~onaa on Fish Muscle. 1. Organisms Responsible
for Odours Produced Baring Incipient Spoilage of Chilled Fish
Muscle
80
R iation of Bacterial Counts to quality of Cod Fillets
Castell, C.W. Aaderson and Hiiliard Pivnick
gtlsntic Fisheries Experimental Station, Halifax, N,S.
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada 7!:378-
388! 1948
Bacterial counts are valueless as a measure of the degree
of spoilage in fresh fillets. There is very close correlation
betweeu the number of psychrophitlic Gram negative organisms
of fillets and their keeping time in cold storage. This
correlation degenerates into a "general tendency" which
cannot always be appled to individual samples, i.f the
counts used include all the organisms gro~ing on plates
incubated at 25'C. Counts made on plates incubated at
37'C are of no value for estimating the keeping quality
of fillets stored at low temperatures .
81
ORGANOLEPTIC METHODS FOR DETERMINING FISH QUALITY
Organoleptic Technique Predicts Refrigeration Shelf Life of Fish
S.E. Charm, R. J. Learson, L. J, Ronsivalli, and N. SchwartzNational Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration, U. S. Department of Commerce,At:lantic Fishery Products Technology Centre, Gloucester, MA
Food Technology 26!:65-68, 1972
Temperature is a critical variable in the quali.ty offresh foods, especially fish. It would be useful if foodscientists could estimate the shelf life of such foods atany given refrigerated temperature, and since storagetemperatures for fish in the commercial distributionchain are variable, at any given set of varying, storageconditions. To evaluate the quality of foods, foodscienti.sts use either organoleptic methods or so-calledobjective methods which must ultimately be correlatedwith organoleptic data to establish their reliability.Variability in sensory panels  and consequently inchemical and physical indices-has implied an. erraticprocess of spoilage for most fish species. The questionis often asked whether it is the spoilage process or thesensory panel that is erratic. Based on our resultswith cod fillets, we believe that the latter is the case.
A New Approach for Evaluating the Quality of Fishery Products
R.J. Learson and Louis J. RonsivalliBureau of Commercial Fisheries Technological Laboratory,
Gloucester, NAFisheries Industrial Research 4!t249-259, 1969
Although organoleptic panels lack precision, they are theonly instrument that, at present, can integrate all the
factors that affect quality. Described here is a newappt'oach to improving panel precision, Using the approach,a panel expresses quality in terms of the estimatedstorage time of the sample rather than in such ambiguousterms as "excellent," "very good," and "borderline."The approach obviates the need for arbitrary terms todescribe quality and assists the panelist in making hisevaluations objectively. Statistical analysis of theresults obtained when a panel used the method on samplesof fresh cod fillets indicates that the storage age ofsuch samples can be estimated to within +2.2 days with a
reliability of 95 percent.
82
A T~ste Panel Technique for Evaluating the Eating guality of Frozen
Cod
Baines, J.J. Connell, D.M. Gibson, P.F. Howgate,
Evelyn I. Livingston and J.M. Shewan
~preezfn and Ixradfarion of Fish, R. Kreuzer, ed., pp. 361-370,
Fishing News, London, 1969
The final eating quality of frozen fish reaching the
consumer will depend in general upon the sum of, or
interaction between, the deteriorations occurring in both
the unfrozen and frozen states of the fish throughout
its history.
Detailed descriptions of the organoleptic changes occurring
during unfrozen storage of fish are available, but similar
comprehensive descriptions of the changes occurring,
during freezing and frozen storage are lacking. A new
study i.s therefore being made of the changes in organo-
leptic characteristics of frozen fish, and taste panel
scote sheets based on the findings are being constructed.
This study is confined to white fish, and to date only
Cod  Gadtca fpfOi'huaJ has been surveyed.
It is now clear from this and previous work at this
Station that two distinctive types of change of equal
importance occur during frozen storage. These are
changes in texture and flavour  including odour!, and it
has been found possible to clearly differentiate these
changes for those occurring during ordinary chill storage.
It has been established that the organoleptic characteristics
described in the Shewan-Ehrenberg score sheet are not
appreciably modified by frozen storage, and that the
initial freshness does not affect the nature of the
changes occurring during frozen storage. Thus it is
possible to score reasonably accurately any sample of
frozen cod in terms of the deteriorations occuring
during both the unfroz.en and frozen stages of its history.
Objective Measurement of the Hardness Parameter in Cooked Fish
Muscle
A. H. Sutton. and G. Main
~Freesia and Irradiaxfon of Fish, R. Kreuzer, ed ., pp. 371-
Fishing News, London, 1969
There are two principal physical parameters which characterize
cooked fish texture. These are hardness and succulence.
Chewiness is also of importance but since chewiness and
hardness are generally closely associated, a separate
measurement of this is rarely required. A combination of
hardness, succulence and chewiness produce a major
proportion of the possible cooked fish textures.
83
The hardness of muscle has a simple physical significance,and the problems associated with its objective measurementare purely instrumental. A penetrometer-type instrumentwas constructed which measures the pressure build-up vhenthe sample is compressed to a fixed distance. In designingthe equipment portability was considered to be an importantfactor, and our total instrument weight is less than 20
pounds.A good correlation has been found between the instrumentand taste panel assessment of hardness. Statisticalanalysis of the results show that the instrument producesa more precise mean value of hardness than the tastepanels, and it is hoped to improve this further. Themain problem has been in obtaining uniforra packing of thesample, this causing fairly large standard mean deviationsin the results. This is overcome at present by taking alarge number of samples, but various other preparative
procedures are being investigated.The instrument is proving to be a very useful tool wheremore precise texture measurements are required, and willbe invaluable where trained taste panels are not available.
Sensory and Objective Measureraents of the Quality of Frozen Stored
Haddock of Different Initial Preshnesses
J. J. Connell and P.F. HowgateMinistry of Technology, Torry Research Station, Aberdeen,
ScotlandJournal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 20:469-476, 1969
The quality of haddock fillets cut from fish held fordifferent periods in melting ice and then stored i.n the
frozen state of three different temperatures has beenassessed on the same samples by a taste panel and bya series of objective tests. The measured changes in thetexture and flavour of the fi.sh vere compared with changesin objective parameters in order to determine the valueof the latter in predicting eating quality. The resultsfor fish caught in the North Sea show that haddock fillets
keep less well than cod fillets during frozen storage.
Sensory and Objective Measurements of the Quality of Frozen Stored
Cod of Different Initial Freshnesses
J.J. Connell and P.F. HowgateJournal of the Science of Pood and Agriculture 19:342-3S4,
196S
The eating quality of cod kept for different periods in
melting ice before being frozen and stored at three
different temperatures has been evaluated by a tastepanel using a new score sheet. Objective measurements
84
of both init'ial freshness before freezing and deteriora-
tion during frozen storage were carried out on the same
samples. Correlations were obtained between the ob!ective
measurements and various aspects of eating quality. The
relative contributions of the various aspects of eating
quality to the final overall acceptability were obtained,
and the value of the ob]ective measurements in predicting
overall acceptability assessed.
Hucleotide Degradation and Organoleptic quality in Fresh and
Thawed Mackerel Muscle Held at and above Ice Temperature
Doris I. Fraser, Dianne P. Pitts, and W.S. Dyer
Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Halifax Laboratory,
Halifax, H.S.
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
25!:239-253, 1968
In mackerel, by the time of initial sampling, adenine
nucleotides had been deaminated to inosine monophosphate
 IMP! in the ordinary muscle; in the red muscle the
degradative sequence was even more advanced, as indicated
by high initial levels of inosine. Postmortem rates of
degradation of IMP to hypoxanthine through inosine were
similar in both types of muscle; at ice temperature the
rates were slower than in cod but faster than in sword-
fish. A delay in icing of 6-8 hr after catching accele-
rated the gradual decline in eating quality with replace-
ment of the characteristic fresh mackerel flavor by
tastelessness.
IHP dephosphorylation paralleled development of tasteless-
ness, and spoilage  organoleptic! hsd developed prior to
accumulation of appreciable amounts of hypoxanthine. At
higher temperatures, 5-20'C, rates of IMP dephosphorylation,
hypoxanthine accumulation, and quality loss vere markedly
increased. Thawing did not influence subsequent deterioration
rates, but ascorbic acid dips delayed darkening of the
flesh in the thawed samples.
Excellent correlation of taste with both INP and hypo-
xanthine content, and with various simple measures of IMP
dephosphorylation, was obtained under the various handling
conditions investigated, including delayed icing, holding
at elevated temperatures, and after thawing. The simple
tests  ultraviolet absorption at 248 mp of a Dowex
treated perchloric acid extract, and ratio of ultraviolet
absorption of extracts at 251 mp after Dowex treatment
to that before treatment  proved as good indices of
progressive quality loss to the unacceptabil.ity
level as the more complex estimation of IMP or hypoxanthine.
85
Development of Standard Rating Scales for Mechanical Parameters ofTexture and Correlation Between the Objective and the Sensory
Methods of Texture Evaluation
Alina Surmacka Szczesniak, Margaret A. Brandt, and Herman H.
Fr iedmanGeneral Foods Corporation, Technical Center, Tarrytown, New York
Journal of Food Science 28:397-403, 1963
Standard rating scales of hardness, brittleness, chewiness,gumminess, viscosity, and adhesiveness were establishedfor quantitative evaluation of food texture. The scalescover the entire intensity range found in food productsand may be expanded at any desired point for greaterprecision in a narrower range. Each point on the scaleis represented by a food product selected on the basis ofavailability, familiarity, constancy of textural charac-teristics, and other criteria. Using the developedscales, correlation was good between sensory and instru-mental  texturometer and viscosimeter! evaluations of
texture.
Rapid Determination of the guality of Whole Eviscerated Haddock
B.E. Proctor, J.T. R. Nichlos, T.L. Fazzina, L.J. Ronsivalli,
R. K. Smith and J. SternDepartment of Food Technology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MAFood Technology 13!:224-228, 1959
Optimal density tests on haddock eye fluids gave promisingresults but were not as suitable as were the refractive
index measurements for quality indication.Changes in the physical properties of haddock eye fluidsduring stora.ge at refrigerator temperatures above freezingare probably due to enzyme act.ion, since there was noevidence that bacterial composition is involved in such
changes,
Post-Mortem Changes in the Lenses of Fish EyesIl. Effects of Freezing, and Their Usefulness in Determining the
Past History of the Fish
R.M, LoveJournal of the Science of Pood and Agriculture 7:220-226, l954
It is possible to show if a fish has been frozen or notby examining the eye lenses. A positive reaction isshown by opacity in the lens and the fish must be cooledto at least -4. 8'C for the effect to occur. It is onlymasked by storage in ice for more than 16 days, or 'bysalting the fish for l day or more before freezing. The
mechanism of the phenomenon is deduced.
86
development of a Numerical Scoring System f or the SensoryTheAssessment of the Spoilage of Wet White Fish Stored in Ice
Shewan, R.G. MacIntosh, C,G. Tucker and A.S.C. Khrenberg
Journal o f the Science of Food and Agricu 1 ture 4: 283-298, 19 53
An attempt is made to classify the sensorily perceptible
quality-f actors of cod f ish, stored in ice, throughout
the spoilage chain from absolute freshness to putridity.
The classification is given numerical form to ease the
handling and interpretation of the resulting data. A
panel has been trained to agree in assessing any one
sample, and its internal consistency is discussed on the
basis of some experimental data.
The importance of the method would seem to be that those
factors are classified which would give rise to opinions
of preference in the ordinary consumer, were the food
presented to him. In practice the accuracy obtained by
the panel was such that samples could be clearly dif-
ferentiated, in terms of periods of storage i.n ice under
certain standard conditions, to within a day or two.
The Objective Approach to Sensory Tests of Food
A.S.C. Ehrenberg and J.N. Shewan
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 4:482-490, 1953
The use of a technique, previously described, is discussed.
Results are given to show that the explicit training of a
panel of assessors to agree is a chief factor in achieving
accuracy. The validity of comparing resu.its from different
investigati.ons is then examined, with reference to such
factors as the internal consistency of the panel, the use
of control samples or standards and of certain physicochemical
criteria.
87
MISCELLANEOUS METHODS FOR DETERÃINING FISH QUALITY
~thods for Quality Assessment in Fishery Products
George W. ChangUniversity of California, Berkely, CaliforniaINR Reference Number 78-101, Sea Grant Publication Number
61r1170 1977The major objective of this research was the developrrrentof more convenient ways of' detecting spoilage in seafoods.Efforts were directed at the detection of hypoxanthine HX!, since this substance is a good indicator of seafoodquality. There is almost no HX in the muscle of livingfish, but after death i.ts level rises and if the fish arekept under adverse conditions it rises at a faster rate.In order to simplify the measurement of HK, a prototypespecific electrode has been developed.
Trimethylamine Specific Electrode for Fish Quality Control
George W. Chang, Wai Lin Chang and Kitty B.K. LewDepartment of Nutritional Sciences, University of California,
Berkeley, California3ournal of Food Science 4l:723-724, 1976
Trimethylamine  TMA! is one of the major components ofthe smell of spoiled marine fish. An increased T8A level.is so characteristic of spoilage that the TMA levels havebeen used as an objective index of fish quality. Aspecific electrode was developed in order to simplifythe measurement of TNA. The Orion ammonia electrode wasmade specific for TMA by replacing the inner fillingsolution with 0. 024 THA  HCI in 0.04M KC1 and by addingenough formaldehyde to the sample solutio~ to obtain aconcentration of 0, 22K  .0755!. The electrode issuitable for the measurement of TNA in aqueous solutionsand in homogenates of fish muscle. The use of thiselectrode is much simpler than the methods now used forTNA analysis and it may be applicable in commercial
practice.
88
Comparison of Methods of Freshness Assessment of Wet Fish. II.
Instrumental and Chemical Assessments of Boxed Experi.mental Fish
J.R. Burt, D.M. Gibson, A.C. Jason and H.R. Sanders
Journal of Food Technology 11:73-89, 1976
Samples of cod were obtained fram different fishing
grounds at different seasons. They were stored in boxes
with ice for periods of up to 20 days. At regular inter-
vals measurements by Tarry Fish Freshness Meter and
Intelectron Fish Tester V and determinations of hypo-
xanthine and trimethylamine concentrations were made.
Linear relationships with length of time of storage were
established and calibrations with sensory tests are
presented.
Ground and seasonal effects were found in the relationships
with days of storage and with sensory assessment. The
amounts of spoilage measured by the different tests are
correlated.
Comparison of Methods of Freshness Assessment of Wet Fish. III.
Laboratory Assessments of Commercial Fish
J. R. Burt, D,M. Gibson, A.C. Jason and H.R. Sanders
Journal of Food Technology ll:117-128, 1976
Samples of. cod were obtained during four commercial
fishing trips and stored in boxes and in bulk storage.
After landing, freshness assessments were made by a
sensory panel, two instrumental methods  Tarry Fish
Freshness Meter and Intelectron Fish Tester V  and two
chemical methods-the determination of hypoxanthine and
trimethylamine indices. The results from the chemical
methods were in close agreement with those previously
obtained on experimental fish. The instrumental methods
were strongly affected by the type of storage.
Comparison of Methods of Freshness Assessment of Wet Fish. IV.
Assessment of Commercial Fish at Port Markets
J.J. Connell, P.F. Howgate, I.H. Mackie, H.R. Sanders and
G.L. Smith
Journal of Food Technology ll:297-308, 1976
Tvo sensory methods  General Appearance and Raw Odour!
and two instrumental methods  Torry Fish Freshness Meter
and Intelectron Fish Tester V! were tested on Aberdeen
and Hull Markets. The variability of each method, comparisons
between the methods and the time required to carry them
out under market conditions were obtained. The instrumental
methods  particularly the averaging version of the Tarry
instrument! are t.he most economical to operate.
The Construction of Grading Schemes Based on Freshness Assessm nt
pf Fish
H. R. Sanders and G.L. SmithJournal of Pood Technology 11: 365-378, j 976
Srandard acceptance sampling schemes can be modified foruse in grading ~here grades are defined by one or twoboundaries and a percentage permitted to fall below thelower boundary. Schemes are constructed to grade fishby freshness, using sampling by attributes or by variables,where the method of assessment is Raw Odour. %ben anothermethod of testing, such as the Torry Pish Freshnesslumeter, is used, it is not sufficient in the attributesscheme to convert to new grade boundaries; the correspondingpercentages falling below the grade boundaries for tbenew test must be determined. The procedures for derivinga scheme are not restricted to grading of fish, but maybe applied to any similar quality control situation.
How the GR Torrymeter Aids Quality Control in the Pishing Industry
Anne CheyneTorry Research Station, Aberdeen, ScotlandFishing News Tnternational 14:71, l975
The torrymeter measured systematic changes in certainphysical properties of fish muscle and skin duringstorage in the vet state, and different methods ofhandling and processing will affect these measurements,The torrymeter has been found to give a satisfactory anand
rapid indication of freshness.
Comparison of Methods of Freshness Assessment of Met Fi».h. Pat't l.
Sensory Assessments of Boxed Experimental Fish
J.R. Burt, D.li. Gibson, A.C. Jason and H.R. SandersJournal of Pood Technology 10:645-~56~
Samples of cod were obtained from dif««nent. fishing
were stored in boxesgrounds at di f f erent seasons. They v«eda s. Freshnesswith ice for periods of up to twenty rv methods wereassessments by sensory and non-sensa«carried out at regular interval~- actors by a se" »Results obtained on four freshness 'The different factorsa«reported in this paper. Tbe ie a le variations aresimilar results, but ccnsidezafish from different catches.
90
Ef feet 0f f t of Special Handling of Haddock on the Postirradiat ion Shelf
Life of H ddock Fillets
Vincent G. Ampola and Louis J. Ronsivalli
Fisheries industrial Research 4 !: 109-111, 1969
improved techniques for handling eviscerated haddock
after capture resulted in superior quality of the fish
prior to irradiation and a significant extension in the
postirradiation shelf life of fillets cut from them.
The "Intelectron Fish Tester V" A New Electronic Nethod and Device
for the Rapid Measurement of the Degree of Freshness of "Wet" Fish
Christian Hennings
~rechoolo of Fish Utflfzstfoo, ft. Kreozer, ecf,, FF lhs
Fishing News, London, 1965
The comparison of the AC resistances or impedances of a
fresh cell tissue measured at two different frequencies
can give some infornfation about the capacitance of a cell
wall. The cell walls of the dead fish become increasingly
permeable due to enzymatic breakdown of the protein
and consequent'ly lose their capacitance gradually during
storage. Thus the differences in the impedances measured
in fresh tissue become less and less during storage and
finally disappear so that these differences would seem to
be correlated with freshness and therefore could be used
as indices of freshness.
The method of measurement and the operation of the instrument
are explained and results of investigations are discussed.
Only unskinned fish can be used and measurements have to
be made at areas where the skin is undamaged. The measurements
made during storage of cod at various temperatures resulted
in a fairly good agreement with experience gained by
other means in relation to the loss of freshness during
storage. Each species of fish has its own characteristic
curve differing from others both in control value and
with the change of slope. The "Q" values of fish which
have reached the borderline of acceptability differed
from species to species.
The readings on the "freshness scales" of the instrument
correctly reflect the true condi.tion of the fish, but as
with other methods, the device cannot simultaneously give
an indication of the rate of loss of freshness. Various
factors which influence the measurements are discussed
e-g. mechanical damage of the skin and tissue, role of
the interstitial liquid, texture of cell tissue of different
species, formation of ice crystals in the tissue, electrolytic
substances such as salt.
91
post-l4ortem Changes in the l.enses of Pish Eyes: Assessment of
Storage Time and Fish Quality
R.M, LoveTorry Research Station, Aberdeen, Scotland Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture 5:566-572, 1954
The eye lenses of fish stored for increasing lengths oftime in ice become progressively turbid. The cause ofthis turbidity i,s shown to be the diffusion of waterthrough the corneas into the intra-ocular fluid, followedby gradual hydration of the lens, Iu iced fish kept8 room of fairly constant air temperature it wasfound possible by examination of 20 or more lenses toassess the storage time with an error of not more than 1day. The limitations of the method are discussed.
Changes in the pH and Buffering Capacity of Fish During Spoilage
C.L. Cut tingDepartment of Scientzfic and Industrial R search, Torry
Research Station, Aberdeen, ScotlandJournal of the Science and Food and Agriculture 4:597-
603, 1953Claims have recently been made once again for a test forfreshness of fish based on a decrease in buffering capacitywith increasing staleness. This decrease has been shownto be due chiefly to the bacterial reduction of trimethylamineoxide. However, under commercial conditions the resultsappear to be too irregular for such a test to be reliable.The buffering capacity of fish flesh in various ranges ofpH and its variation with degree of spoilage have beenalmost completely accounted for by the contributions ofproteins and water-soluble constituents. The pH changesin fresh and spoiling fish, which depend in large measureon buffering capacity, are also too irregular to besatisfactorily correlated with freshness.
n Assay Method for Freshness of Fishes by the Estimation of pH
Value
Makoto Yamamoto and Hasanori SoneharaHulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
9 !:761, 1953The present paper is concerned with the accuracy andusefulness of pH determination in terms of freshness ofspecial glass electrode connected with an amplif iercapable of reading exactly 0.50 mV intervals was used.
92
The resul.ts obtained are shown and may be summarized as
follows: ! The pH value of fish meats wi11 be adopted
as a criterion of the freshness of fish to some extent.
! However, the pH value varies according to the part of
body. And some divergencies are also observed according
to the fishing season and species of fish. ! The pH
value of fish meats at early spoilage was 6.85 in the
white meat of fish and 6. 27 in red meat.
F»luation of Surface pH as a Freshness Index of Fish Fillets
R, Paul Elliott
Fishery Technological Laboraotry, U. S. Pish and Wildlife
Service, Seattle, Washington
Food Research 12!:87-98, 1946
The organolepti.c data was classified as fresh, flat,
sweet, stale, and putrid. A fillet designated as "fresh"
had the normal odor of freshly caught fish. If it was
"flat" there was an absence of odor-normal or otherwise.
A "sweet" fillet had an odor not especially unpleasan.t
but reminiscent of watermelon. A "stale" fillet had a
characteristic arrmonia-Like odor  odor of ammonia and
other mixed ami.nes! but had not reached the "putrid"
stage at which point the odor became obnoxious  hydrogen
sulfide, indole, skatole, etc.! All fish exarained in
this study spoiled in the above nranner except whiting and
rosefish. At the sweet stage whiting developed a perfume-
like aroma instead of the usual watermelon-like odor.
Rosefish did not become sweet but passed directly from
flat to slightly stale.
The author and those who co-operated with him considered
the fillets edible through the "sweet" stage, of questionable
edibility at "very sweet" and "slightly stale," and
inedible at "stale" and at more advanced stages of decom-
position.
The "Stinkometer"  New Tool
O.W Lang, L. Farber and F. Yerman
Seafood Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper Foundation,
University of California Medical Center, San Prancisco,
California
Food Industries 11 8!:78 '
Tbe "Stinkometer" develops a new and reliable means of
e»lusting freshness in foods by measuring volatile
odors. It also can be used to measure the loss of desirable
flavors.
Tbe method apparently is applicable to meats, prunes and
raisins, as well as fish, in the first' instance, and to
coffee, spices and perfumes in the second.
93
h Ra pid Test for Detection of Spoilage in Sea Pish
8-J. Dyer, G. J. Sigurdsson and A.J. Wood Atlantic Pisheries Experimental Station, 8alifax, 8ova Scotia
Pood Research 10:183, 19444 satisfactory routine practical method for the deter-mination of the index of spoilage for several sea fishhas been developed. The p8 at the surface of the filletor fish is measured by placing a glass electrode of aB«kman p8 meter in contact with the moist surface ofthe tissue. Et has been found that fresh fish gave a p8range of 6. 2 to 6. 8; pH levels above 6. 8 are indicativeof spoilage; and the higher the p8 above 6, 8 the moreextensive have been the spoilage changes. This method issimple, rapid, and adapted for use aa a cosssercial test.Correlation with other spoilage tests is satisfactory.h much better indication of conditions of incipient spoilage is afforded than that obtained by currently used'methods. The standard scale of the direct reading p8meter may be replaced by one showing the degree offreshness of the fisheries product.
x the Use of the pH Value as a Measure of the Freshness of Pish
Ãoscle Tissue
F. Charnley and D.H. GoardCanned Salmon Enspection laboratory, Department of
Pisheries, Vancouver, BC Canadian Journal of Research 20 20 32, 1942The p8 value of the aqueous liquors derived from fishmuscle tissue is connected through statistical relationswith the buffer action of the liquor, the log bacterialcount of the sample, and with a subjective estimate offreshness determined on the basis of odour. En the caseof p8 and odour rating the relation is not a correlationinstead, a linear relation between the means of aseries of populations. By means of the latter it ispossible from observations of the p8 of the aqueous liquor in the sample to determine objectively the fresh-ness of a parcel of canned chum salmon to any desireddegree of accuracy by increasing the sise, n, of the
sample taken for examination.
94
An Electrometric Method for Detection of Relative Freshness of
Haddock
Naurice E. Stansby and James M, Lemon
U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, Gloucester, NA
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, pp. 208, Nay 15, 1933
A reliable test for the freshness of fish has been
described, based on buffer capacity measurements. The
test requires less than one hour to perform. It gives
information, not only as to the accumulation of bacterial
end products, but, what is even more important, as to the
amount of protein breakdown taken place.
95
REVIEW ARTICLES OM METHODS OZ DZTNMINIMG FIST qUALITV
Quality Assessment of Fresh Fish and the Role of the Naturally
Occuring Microflora
R.E. Martin, R- J.H. Gray and M,D. FiersonFood Technology, 32!:188-192. 1978
Methods of Assessment of the Freshness of Fish
A, SwaneyJBL Seafood Ltd., AucklandFishing Industry Board Report on Quality in Fish
Products 3: 1971
Methods of Qua1ity Assessment VPish Ins ection and ualit Control, R. Kreuzer, ed.,pp- 172-215, Pood 6 Agricultural Organization, 1971Organoleptic Assessment of Quality pp. 172-182Objective Methods of Quality Assessment pp. 183-215
The Microbiology of Fish and Fishery Products-A Progress Report
J. M. ShewanJournal of Applied Bacteriology 34!:229-315, 1971Address of the President of the Society of AppliedBacteriology delivered at a meeting of the Society of
13 January 1971
Bacteriological Standards of Pish and Fishery Pr'oducts
J-M. ShewanMinistry of Technology, Torry Research Station,
Aberdeen, ScotlandChemistry and Industry 1:193-199, 1970
Ihe Bacteriology of Presh and Spoiling Pish and Some Related
Chemical Changes
J.M. ShewanRecent Advances in Pood Science 1 167-193, 1962
96
Freshness Tests
I ionel Farber
Seafood Research Laboratory, George Williams Hooper
Foundation, University of California, Ssn Francisco, CA
Fish As Food, Borgstrora, ed., pp, 65-126, Academic Press,
Hew York, 1961
The Spoilage of Fish and Its Preservation by Chilling
G.A. Reay and J.N. Shewan
Torry Research Station, Aberdeen, Scotland
Fish As Food, G. Borgstron, sd., pp. 343-398, Academic
Press, Neo York, 1961
A Determinative Scheme for the Identification of Certain Genera
of Grama-Negative Bacteria, With Special Reference to the
Pseudomonadaceae
J.M. Shewan, G. Hobbs, and W. Hodgkiss
Torry Research Station, Aberdeen, Scotland
Journal of Applied Bacteriology 23!:379-390, 1960
97
99
LIST OE JOURNALS
Analyst
Applied Microbiology
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts
Australian FisheriesBulletin of Hokkaido University Faculty of Fisheries
Bulletin of the Japanese Society of Scientific Fisheries
Bulletin of the Tokai Regional Fisheries Research Laboratory
Canadian Journal of Research
Chemistry and Industry
Coeaercial Fisheries Reviev
Fisheries Industrial Research
Fishing Gazette
Fishing Industry Board
Fishing News International
Food and Agricultural Organization
Food Industries
Food Product Development
Food Research
Food Science and Technology Abstracts
Food Science and Technology Proceedings
Eood Technology
Indian Journal of Fishery
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry
Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry
Journal of Applied Bacteriology
Journal of Biological ChemistryJournal of the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists
100
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of Canada
Journal of Food Science  Food Research!
Journal of Food Technology
Journal of Lipid Research
Journal of Microbiology
Journal of Milk and Food Technology
Journal of Association of Public Analysts
Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture
Process Biochemistry
Quick Frozen Foods
Recent Advances in Food Science
LIST OF BOOKS
1976 Recommended International Code of Practice for Fresh
Fish, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. Codex
Alimentarius Commission CAC/RCP 9
1975 Connell, J.J., Control of Fish ualit , Fishing Hews
 Books! Ltd., London
Gould, E., and Peters, J.A., On Testin the Freshness
of Frozen Fish, Fishing Hews  Books! Ltdes London
Kreuzer, R., ed., Fish Ins ection and ualit Control,
F.A.O.1971
1965 Kruezer, R., ed., Technolo of Fish Utilization,
Fishing Hews  Books! Ltd., London
Herschdoerfer, S.M., edee uaXit Control in the Food
~Industr, Academic Press, New York1962
Borgstrom, G., ed., Fish as Food,
Academic Press, Hew York19611969 Kreuzer, R., ed., Technical Conference on the Freezin
and Irradiation of Fish, Fishing News  Books! Ltdss London
101
INDEX BY KEY WORD
A
acetic acid, 33, 37, 45, 46
acetoin, 21, 35
Achromobacter spp,, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79
adenine, 18, 19, 68, 70
adenosine, 18, 19
ADP, 59, 60, 69
aeration method, 24, 44, 45, 48, 55
AHP, 59, 60, 69ATP, 11, 58, 59, 60, 63, 67, 69, 70
adhesiveness, 85
alcohol, 33, 52, 56
aUcylamines, 10alpha-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, 61
Amberlite, 31amines, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 19, 26, 34, 36, 54
amino acids, 31, 35, 36, 64, 65
ammonia, 18, 29, 31, 42, 49, 51, 52, 57
ascorbic acid, 77, 84
automation analysis. 9, 15
Bbacterial counts, 11, 29, 36, 65, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80
blood characters, 70
buffering capacity, 34, 91, 94
butyric acid, 37, 41, 45, 46
C
catalase activity, 73
cationic exchanger, 28
chemical quality index, 7
chewiness, 82, 85
chlorotetracycline, 29
chromate color test, 21
chromatography, 37
coliforms, 72, 73
color reaction method, 50, 51, 52
colorimetric method, 8, 11, 36, 37, 42, 43, 49, 55, 58
column chromatographic method, 30, 60
concave gradient chromatography, 59
concave gradient elution, 60
cotton acid succinate, 43, 44
D
differential spectrophotometry, 53
dimethylamine, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 29, 35
distillation ratio, 14, 37, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47
Dowex column, 60, 69, 84
Dowex treatment, 63, 84
102
E
electrodes, 87, 91, 93
electrophotometer, 40
enzymatic assay procedure, 66
enzyme activity, 9, 54, 67, 70, 71, 85, 90
erythrocyte resistance, 68, 70
Escherichia coli, 72, 74
F
fish eyes, 85, 91
fluorometry, 19, 20
formaldehyde, 9, 35, 53, 87
formic acid, 33, 37, 41, 45, 46, 56
G
gas chromatography, 8, 10, ll, 29
gas-liquid chromatography, 15
grading schemes, 89
gumminess, 85
H
hardness, 82, 83, 85
hexon base, 51
hexose phosphates, 66
histamine, 7, 28, 30, 31, 34, 38, 39, 41, 43, 54, 55, 56
hydroxy purine compounds, 53
hypoxanthine, 9, ll, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 53, 58, 59, 60,
61, 62, 63, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 72, 75, 84, 87, 88
I
indole, 28, 29, 48, 72
inosine, 18, 19, 59, 61, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70, 84
inosine manophosphate, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 84
inosinic acid, 30
Intelectron Fish Tester V, 88, 90
iodometry, 53
ion exchange, 30, 64, 67
ion exchange chromatography, 17, 18, 60, 62, 69, 72
K
K value, 12, 57, 59, 60, 65
L
lactic acid, 26, 27
liquid chromatography, 7
malonaldehyde, 32
mercuric chloride, 27, 51, 52, 68, 70
methylamine, 29, 51, 52
micro-diffusion technique, 23
103
N
nucleoside phosphorylase, 61, 62nucleotide degradation, 60, 62, 63, &5, 67, 68, 69, 84
nucleotide dephosphorylation, 65, 66, 68, 69, 84
nucleotides, 12, 17, 18, 59, 60, 62, 63, 64, 66, 68, 69
numerical scoring system, 86
0
organic acids, 37organisms, 27, 40, 47, 65, 16, 78, 79, 80
Ppaper chromatographic method, 35, 37, 41, 45
penetrometer, 83
pentose phosphate, 66
peroxide, 10pH, 20, 24, 25, 27, 2S, 38, 41, 46, 59, 61,
phosphate esters, 68
picrate method, 9, 10, 12, 13
picric acid, 20, 38, 54
p-quinone, 50, 51, 52
press !ulcc, 24, 55, 76, 77
propionic acid, 37, 41
proteins, 52, 54, 65, 68, 90, 91, 94
Proteus spp., 78
P d f i, 74, 78
Pseudomonas spp., 74, 76, 77, 7S
Pseudomonas utida, 74
Pseudomonas utrefaciens, 74, 16
purines, 9, 17, 24, 53, 54, 67, 68
pyperidin, 50, 51, 52
pyrimidines, 2465, 69, 91, 92, 93
R
rancidity, 18, 32, 36
S sensory panels, 8, 36, 58, 65, 81, 82, S3, 86, 88, 89, 92
Serratia spp., 78
shrimp drip, 23
steam distillation method, 24, 25, 26, 37, 42, 45, 46, 47,
48, 53, 56
Stinkometer, 92
stress measure, 60, 61
succinic acid, 37, 41
succinic dehydrogenase, 70, 71
sugar phosphates, 66
104
T
temperature, 15, 21, 22, 38, 48, 61, 79, 81, 83, 84
tetrazolium, 36
texturometer, 85
thin-layer chromatography, ll, 63
thiobarbituric acid, 18, 32, 36
toluene, 38
Totry Fish Freshness Heter, 88, 89
total reducing substances test, 7
total volati.le bases, ll, 21, 31, 55, 72, 75
total volatile nitrogen, 8, 22, 74
trimethylamine, 8, 9, 10, ll, 12, 15, 16, 22, 24, 28, 29, 32, 33, 36
38, 40, 51,, 52, 54, 57, 60, 65, 72, 74, 75, 77, 87, 88
trimethylamine nitrogen, 12, 19, 20, 22, 39, 54
trimethylamine oxide, 29, 34, 35, 38, 44, 78, 91
turbidity, 40, 52
U
ultraviolet spectrophotometry, 10, 24
uric acid, 53, 59, 62, 66
V
viscosimeter, 85
visual enzyme test, 58
volatile aci.ds, 14, 26, 33, 37, 41, 42, 45, 46, 47, 54, 56volati.le amines, 15, 29!' 33
volatile bases, ll, 12, 14, 26, 33, 36, 44, 48, 55, 57, 60, 65
volatile carbonyl compounds, 35
volatile basic nitrogen., 11, 20, 27, 39, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49,
51, 57, 63
volatile reducing substances, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 33, 39,
43, 72, 77
X
xanthine oxidase, 17, 61, 62, 66, 68
