IN FOCUS: NANOMEDICINE - REVIEW
Self-Assembled Peptides: Characterisation and In Vivo Response
David R. Nisbet •Richard J. Williams
Received: 12 September 2011 / Accepted: 9 November 2011 / Published online: 11 February 2012
/C211The Author(s) 2012. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract The fabrication of tissue engineering scaffolds
is a well-established ﬁeld that has gained recent promi-
nence for the in vivo repair of a variety of tissue types.Recently, increasing levels of sophistication have been
engineered into adjuvant scaffolds facilitating the con-
comitant presentation of a variety of stimuli (both physicaland biochemical) to create a range of favourable cellular
microenvironments. It is here that self-assembling peptide
scaffolds have shown considerable promise as functionalbiomaterials, as they are not only formed from peptides
that are physiologically relevant, but through molecular
recognition can offer synergy between the presentation ofbiochemical and physio-chemical cues. This is achieved
through the utilisation of a unique, highly ordered, nano- to
microscale 3-D morphology to deliver mechanical andtopographical properties to improve, augment or replace
physiological function. Here, we will review the structures
and forces underpinning the formation of self-assemblingscaffolds, and their application in vivo for a variety of
tissue types.1 Introduction
Nanotechnology has been identiﬁed as having the potential to
beneﬁt many aspects of society, from health care to elec-
tronics [ 1]. Inspiration within this ﬁeld often comes from
functional nano-architectures discovered within the biologi-cal world, where seemingly simple rules and forces underpin
the formation of complex systems [ 2,3]. A key challenge
presented to researchers is to selectively utilise these princi-ples; most notably within the ﬁeld of tissue engineering,
where there is a pressing need for the formation of biologi-
cally relevant 3-D scaffolds for regenerative medicine anddeﬁned cell culture matrices [ 4]. The recent advancement of
interdisciplinary research that involves nanotechnology,
cellular and molecular biology and biomaterial science pro-vides an optimistic outlook for the development of adjuvant
tissue engineering scaffolds for in vivo repair. Ideally, such
scaffolds should have the capacity to concomitantly utilisemechanical, topographical and biochemical properties to
stimulate the cellular milieu and promote endogenous
regeneration. Understanding features of the cellular niche,
biological function, associated pathophysiology and the
cascade of regenerative event for each individual applicationare crucial for engineering adjuvant scaffold that promote
repair. Thus far, engineered scaffolds cannot appropriately
recreate tissue analogues due to the intricate complexity andhierarchical nature of physiological tissue.
Recently, the non-covalent self-assembly of relatively
simple peptide based molecules has gained increasingattention for the formation of nanostructured, biologically
functional materials. Here, inherent structural properties
allow the simple self assembly of these peptides to yieldordered nanostructures (e.g. tubes, rods, and sheets) [ 5],
and this organisation enables the noncovalent presentation
of the peptides chemical functionality to the surface of
This article is part of the Topical Collection ‘‘In Focus:
Nanomedicine’’.
D. R. Nisbet
Research School of Engineering, College of Engineering
and Computer Science, The Australian National University,Acton, ACT 0200, Australia
R. J. Williams ( &)
Centre for Biotechnology, Chemistry and Systems Biology,
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Deakin University,Waurn Ponds, VIC 3217, Australiae-mail: r.williams@deakin.edu.au
123Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
DOI 10.1007/s13758-011-0002-xthese nanoscale features. When multiples of these struc-
tures come together, a supramolecular network is estab-
lished. These have the beneﬁt of biocompatibility and ease
of synthesis not necessarily found in polymeric or cova-lently linked systems [ 6]. Once robust mechanisms for the
assembly of ﬁbrillar networks are established, cell-inter-
active stimuli (both physical and chemical) can be easilyintroduced and presented by the supramolecular ordering
of the assembly process. This then allows the customisation
of these materials to activate the innate regenerative cas-
cade of speciﬁc cell types; through tuning the peptide
sequence, controlling the rate of formation, and introducingbiologically relevant molecules.
2 Self-Assembling Peptides as Biomaterials
for In Vivo Applications
For successful tissue reconstruction/regeneration it is neces-
sary to provide a cellular microenvironment that facilitates
cell migration and/or transplantation, their 3-D organisationand, where appropriate, extracellular matrix (ECM) deposi-
tion. To this end, the development of adjuvant tissue engi-
neering scaffolds have considerable promise, as theypotentially offer synergy between the delivery/recruitment of
cells, presentation of biochemical and physio-chemical cues,
3-D morphology and mechanical and topographical stimuli toimprove or replace physiological function [ 7].
Within the past decade, a variety of 3-D tissue engi-
neering scaffolds have emerged; for instance, ﬁbrousscaffolds produced from a diverse range of polymers, both
natural and synthetic, have been fabricated using a variety
of methods, notably electrospinning [ 8–10]. These ﬁbrous
networks, through subsequent biochemical and physio-
chemical modiﬁcation, may present appropriate stimuli for
in vivo repair [ 11,12]. However, the deployment of such
scaffolds will be disease/injury speciﬁc, as while the
ﬁbrous morphology can encourage cell migration, differ-
entiation and elongation their potential to encourageregeneration within lesions is debatable, as they cannot
readily interface with the surrounding tissue. Conversely
hydrogels have shown utility toward these applications dueto their inherent high water content, the ability to tune their
mechanical properties, biocompatibility and, perhaps most
importantly, their ability to ﬁll irregularly shaped voids[13,14]. However, whilst they can be produced from both
natural and synthetically derived polymers they generally
lack the ﬁbrous morphologies reminiscent to the nativeECM. Therefore, an ‘off-the-shelf’ material with the ability
to concurrently incorporate the advantages of both of these
types of scaffolds, and that can be engineered and opti-mised for a variety of different applications will be of
clinical relevance. The nanoscale ﬁbrillar structure andsubsequent hydrogels produced by the controlled self-
assembly of peptides (and peptide derivatives) are there-
fore excellent candidates to provide some of the critical
aspects to the in vivo cellular microenvironment [ 15]. This
class of material not only provides the stable 3-D micro-
environment required to mimic some of the features of the
ECM (morphological and dimensional), but the nanoscalepresentation of the peptides within the ﬁbre scan also
encourage interaction with endogenous cells and the native
ECM [ 16]. This enables the scaffold, through their bioin-
spired motifs, (both chemical and physical), to inﬂuence
cell signaling, which is responsible for coordinating theirfunction (i.e. survival, proliferation, migration, differenti-
ation and the like). As the scaffolds are formed from
peptides they are also inherently biocompatible. For thepurposes of this review, we deﬁne biocompatible as not
producing a chronic inﬂammatory response showing the
materials are well-tolerated upon implantation, with mini-mal scar tissue formed. The self-assembled synthetic
microenvironments are ideal vectors for exogenous cell
transplantation, allowing host cell migration and prolifer-ation within the matrix [ 17], and, in the case of some tissue
types, enhance natural ECM deposition [ 18].
A key advantage to this approach is the facile synthesis
of the peptides via manual or automated synthetic processes
from biologically relevant molecules. Whilst many other
tissue engineering scaffolds have employed animal derivedproducts to fabricate a favourable niche with some success,
clinically this is not ideal due to unknown contamination
and the possibility of rejection and pathogen transmission.There are also issues of reproducibility in regards to protein
content that will have a direct impact on cell function. The
use of self-assembling peptide scaffolds avoids this limi-tation, as they have no batch-to-batch variability, and the
stepwise manner of their synthesis allows the incorporation
of bioactive moieties [ 19–21]. In addition, they have a long
shelf life being stable at room temperature for many years,
which is critical for translation to the clinic.
As tissue engineering scaffolds the systems can be deliv-
ered in a variety of minimally invasive ways, chieﬂy via
(micro)injection. The physical hydrogels undergo a profound
gel/solution/gel transition upon application and removal ofshear, allowing a preformed hydrogel to be delivered as a
liquid [
22,23]. Alternatively, the peptides can be injected in
vivo as a solution with the assembly/gelation triggered byphysiological conditions such as temperature, biocatalysis
and ionic strength [ 24–26]. This allows spatially deﬁned
application directly to the site of therapeutic need; unlike thecovalently linked, polymeric ﬁbrous scaffolds mentioned
above, these materials can be injected into, diffuse through-
out, and assemble within irregular shaped lesions (Fig. 1c).
This ﬂexibility is crucial for a variety of applications as it
allows intimate contact with the surrounding tissuePage 2 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
123facilitating cell migration, whilst also physically supporting
the stroma/parenchyma. It also provides the scaffolds with
the unique ability to control inﬂammation and avoid scar
formation not only through physical support but also bio-
chemically if they are further functionalised with, or used to
encapsulate drugs via hydrogelation.
In this review we will discuss the structures and forces
underpinning these systems, and recent progress (since
2000) of their application in vivo. As this ﬁeld is an
emerging one, we will provide a perspective of current
challenges and future opportunities.
2.1 Self-Assembly of Peptide Materials
Nature uses peptide sequences to yield an array of structural
components, with b-sheets, a-helices, random coils, turns
and loops being well known structural motifs. Thesestructures are formed by interactions governed by the
physicochemical properties of the side chains of the speciﬁc
amino acid sequences that contribute to these formations,
yet the overall fundamental interactions are remarkably
conserved [ 27,28]. Post-expression interactions drive the
formation of protein structures and higher order interac-
tions, governed by the properties of the amino acid residues
as presented within the polypeptide chain. These forces
include hydrogen bonds (polar amino acids), hydrophobic
interactions (non-polar), ionic bonds and electrostatic
interactions (acidic and basic), p-stacking, van der Waals
interactions (aromatic), induction of turns (conformational
constraint), the formation of disulphide bridges (sulphur
containing) and especially relevant for biological systems,
water mediated hydrogen bonds (all residues) [ 27,29].
Several research groups have utilised these properties to
pioneer the self-assembly of (oligo-) peptide systems to
Fig. 1 a In order to trigger the self-assembly process, peptides freely in
solution must be stimulated (temp, pH, ionic strength, etc.) to change
into a form by which the ordered assembly is more favourable than
remaining in solution. bIn order to functionalise the self-assembled
ﬁbrils, signals must be included. Methods for achieving this include: ithe
functional epitope self-assembles (e.g. fmoc-RGD), iidoping creating a
heterogenous assembly (e.g. fmoc-FF doped with fmoc-RGD), iiithe
assembling motif is capped with the signal, allowing the ordered
presentation (e.g. peptide amphiphiles capped with IKVAV) or ivthesignal is attached to the assembled ﬁbril post assembly (whole proteins
or peptide tags). cIn order for the material to be delivered, the assembly
process should either occur in vitro (and have cells pre-cultured on the
material if required), or the peptides in solution are mixed with the
appropriate signals (and cells), to assemble in vivo. These are then
transferred to a delivery vector (e.g. microinjection). Once introduced to
the tissue, the peptide assemblies interact with the implanted cells,
directly contacting and supporting the host tissue, or, more typically, rely
on endogenous cells migrating into the scaffold to promote repairBiointerphases (2012) 7:2 Page 3 of 14
123form nanostructured ﬁbrous materials. Here, we deﬁne
molecular self-assembly as the spontaneous organisation of
molecules under thermodynamic and kinetic conditions
into stable and structurally welldeﬁned arrangements [ 30,
31]. This process is driven/governed by a range of
numerous weak non-covalent interactions. Although each
of the bonds or interactions formed are weak, the collectiveinteractions can impart deﬁned intermolecular order
resulting in stable structures and materials [ 32]. These
systems operate on a hierarchy of scales; the underlying
molecular interactions between peptides give rise to the
formation of nanostructures, supramolecular associationsbetween these form microscale networks, which ultimately
give rise to macroscale materials that are easily handled.
Simply put, individual peptides are completely solvatedand only exist individually, or in disordered aggregates.
Upon the application of a stimulus (pH, ionic strength,
temperature, etc.), the peptides decrease in solubility andincrease in attractive force facilitating their interaction
(Fig. 1a). Firstly, two or more individual peptides amal-
gamate to form a nucleating aggregate; additional buildingblocks then amalgamate and become ordered, based on the
innate structural information provided by the peptide chain.
This yields a single, supramolecular ﬁbril. Multiple ﬁbrilsthen interweave, based on their surface properties, to form
bundles, which in turn interact to form a branched network
(the peptide scaffold). This network is highly porous, andresults in the formation of a hydrogel ( *0.1% w/v),
through the entrapment of the solvent in which assembly
occurs.
Recently, focus has been on developing assembly strat-
egies using the easily accessible structures elicited by
ﬁbrillating peptide sequences found in, or inspired by,nature. Robust mechanisms have been developed for the
formation of nanoscale spheres, ﬁbres, sheets and tubes.
These include: complementary peptide repeats which utilisecomplementary charges to self-organise [ 29]; glutamine
rich sequences [ 20]; peptide-amphiphiles, where a hydro-
phobic alkyl tail is attached to a peptide driving tubularmicelle formation [ 33]; aromatic N-terminally capped
peptides or aromatic residues which take advantage of
p-stacks or aromatic motifs [ 5,32]; proline containing hairpinforming oligopeptides [ 34]; and a-helical coiled coil peptides
utilising the self recognition inherent in leucine zippers [ 35]
(see Table 1and Fig. 2for more examples).
A wide range of techniques have been used to charac-
terise these systems spectroscopically, optically and
mechanically at each stage of the assembly process [ 23,30,
32,36,37]. Individual subunit interactions have been
characterised by UV–vis spectroscopy, in which the
emission wavelength changes during aggregate formation.
Circular dichroism has been employed to gain insight
towards the chiral ordering of the molecules, with addi-
tional characterisation of peptide interactions being moni-tored by infra red measurement of the amide I band, and
the spacings between the molecules observed by small and
wide angle X-ray scattering. Small angle neutron scatteringand circular dichroism is utilised in combination to deter-
mine supramolecular interactions between the assembled
structures. The nanoscale assemblies formed can bedirectly visualised by (cryo-) transmission electron
microscopy, and the microscale networks through (cryo-)
scanning electron microscopy and (wet) atomic forcemicroscopy. It should be noted that cryo techniques are
more desirable than the utilisation of a metal stain/coating,
as the structures are embedded in vitrous ice, and thereforebear more relevance to the actual assembled morphologies.
The mechanical properties of the resultant hydrogels are
analysed primarily through parallel plate rheometry, whichprovides information on the elastic properties of the net-
works, which arise from the interactions and organisation
of the supramolecular structures.
2.2 Functionalisation of Peptide Materials
The ﬁrst examples of self assembling peptide (SAP) scaf-
folds were initially engineered to produce robust, control-
lable nanoscale assemblies [ 4
]. More recently, next
generation systems are being modiﬁed to introduce func-
tionality, potentially at the expense of homogeneous
assembly, as depicted in Fig. 1[38,39]. This approach
generally attempts to mimic the ECM to provide structural
and biochemical support to control and augment tissue
repair. The ECM contains proteins rich in structure, such as
Table 1 Structure and bonding of different classes of SAP scaffolds
Entry Class Bond Structure References
1 Tripeptide repeats (RAD) n Hydrophobic/complementary charge ß-sheet tapes [ 17,18,24,75–81]
2 Glutamine-rich Hydrophobic/ p–pstack b-sheet ribbons [ 82–88]
3 Peptide Amphiphiles Ionic/amphiphillic Cylindrical micelles [ 19,33,54,58,89–96]
4 N-terminally capped peptides p–p-stack, H-bonds Nanotubes, nanoﬁbres [ 5,26,30,32,38,52,97,98]
5 Beta hairpin Ionic/hydrophobic/H bond b-sheets tapes [ 34,99–102]
6 Coiled coils Hydrophobic/complementary charge a-helical rods [ 35,103–108]Page 4 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
123laminin and ﬁbronectin, which can be attached to artiﬁcial
biomaterials either covalently or physically. Whole pro-
teins have been incorporated into SAP scaffolds: perma-
nently through the use of hydrophobic ﬁbrils to allow
stable inclusion of whole basement membrane proteins
[23]; or temporarily, utilising the electrostatic interactions
of charged residues, producing zero order slow release
system [ 40]. Peptide amphiphile systems have been shown
to self-assemble in the presence of, and subsequently
actively bind, heparin through the inclusion of a heparin
binding motif, whilst retaining its bioactivity [ 41]. In order
to avoid the problems associated with the use of biologi-
cally derived whole proteins, some bioactive peptide
sequences from oligopeptides have been utilised to engi-
neer SAP scaffolds, such as LAIKNDNLVYVY to shorter
motifs such as IKVAV, and RGD [ 42]. Indeed, tripeptide
motifs represent an important class of biological signals,
both in structure induction and functionality [ 43]. As such,
these are an ideal target for inclusion within self-assembledscaffolds, both as a SAP and bioactive signal. Studies
suggest that the tripeptide motif is retained in both structure
and function within the self-assembled construct, but the
mechanism by which it is included is important (Fig. 1b).
For example, the bioactive sequence fmoc-RGD self-
assembles into a well ordered p–bnanoscale assembly and
a clear hydrogel [ 44]. However, doping of fmoc-RGD into
a system predominantly consisting of fmoc-FF results in
the disruption of the ordering of the system but an increase
in the biofunctionality [ 38]. The presentation of RGD has
also been observed to be a function of the aromatic side-
chains ﬂanking the epitope, where fmoc-RDGF has a
greater bioavailability than fmoc-FRGD, possibly through
increased rigidity provided by the aromatic residue at the C
terminal [ 45]. When the RGD peptide was included as a
pendant molecule on an oligopeptide, the biological
response was increased without disrupting the mechanism
of assembly as the pendant signal was not integral to the
assembly process [ 20]. Incorporating bioactive sequences
Fig. 2 a Shows the molecular arrangement of a p–bﬁbril formed
from fmoc-FF. Red indicates the inclusion of the fmoc-RGD motif.
Reprinted from Ref. [ 38]. Copyright (2009), with permission from
Elsevier. bThe anti-parallel b-sheet motif of (RADA) 3(pink arrows )
allows the bioactive epitope of IKVAV ( blue) to be ordered within the
nanoscale structure. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 21].
cThrough the inclusion of a heparin-binding motif to a peptide
amphiphile, heparin is recruited post-assembly to the surface of the
nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 73]. Copyright(2006) American Chemical Society. dNanoscale ﬁbrils of
Q11-RGDS and Q11-IKVAV peptides visualized by TEM shows
the underlying ﬁbrillar structure of the hydrogel. Reprinted from Ref.
[20]. Copyright (2009) with permission from Elsevier. eIndividual
ﬁbrils intertwine to form a scaffold as evidenced here by atomic force
microscopy image of an fmoc-peptide/protein hybrid matrix.
Reprinted from Ref. [ 23]. Copyright (2011), with permission from
ElsevierBiointerphases (2012) 7:2 Page 5 of 14
123by supramolecular decoration of SAP scaffolds has also
been achieved. The forces responsible for assembly have
been shown to be available for the non-covalent decoration
of these networks. Peptide ‘tags’ containing oppositelycharged functional sequences (at physiological pH) have
been included on the surface of ﬁbrillar assemblies, facil-
itating stable decoration in a spatially deﬁned way [ 46].
Bioconjugation has also been possible using Click chem-
istry, where side chains of lysine, included within the SAP
scaffold backbone, were modiﬁed with azide moieties to
allow post assembly modiﬁcation with no apparent
decrease in order [ 47]. This highlights the potential for
larger molecules and sequences to be conjugated. How-
ever, when decorating a self-assembled network, consid-
eration of the method of functionalisation is essential toavoid overwhelming the assembly mechanism; the addition
of an antibiotic has been shown to disrupt the scaffolds by
providing an alternative supramolecular structure through amore favourable ligand/receptor binding event [ 48].
2.3 Tailoring Mechanical PropertiesThe viscoelastic properties of a hydrogel matrix can have a
profound effect on the behaviour of encapsulated cells, andthe endogenous cell response within adjacent tissue [ 7,49].
Having a system in which these properties can be tuned is
therefore desirable. The stiffness of the self-assembledhydrogels is a combination of the peptide sequence, mor-
phology of the ﬁbrils, their supramolecular ordering, and
the strength of the bonds between them. For example, theminimalist SAP fmoc-VLK form linear networks, whereas
the same residues in the sequence fmoc-KLV form bran-
ched networks with an order of magnitude increase instiffness [ 50], showing that the relative position of single
residues can have a profound effect on the macroscopic
properties. The rate at which the peptides self-assemble hasbeen shown to be a controlling factor over the material
properties of the physically underpinned system. This
process is directly related to the kinetics of the solution/geltransition [ 34,36], and as such is determined by the type,
extent and conditions of the stimulus. If the ﬁbrils rapidly
coalesce, non-ideal interactions lead to entanglements andstiffer gels, whereas slow controlled formation results in
increased ﬁbre alignment and weaker gels. When formed
from identical peptides, this is directly related to the type,and extent of the stimulus, and the conditions under which
assembly occurs. This effect is particularly obvious when
using enzymes as a trigger [ 31]. One way reactions allow
variable stiffness from identical peptides by altering the
enzyme concentration and therefore the rate of formation,
which has been exploited to control cell fate [ 26,51].
Conversely, reversible mechanisms under thermodynami-
cally controlled conditions result in identical gels, as theyachieve more ordered interactions via component selection
[30,52]. However, such systems are also useful for tissue
engineering as they can be employed to incorporate whole
proteins for in vivo delivery [ 23,40].
Once the matrix has been formed based upon the
supramolecular properties of the ﬁbrils, efforts have been
made to improve the stiffness post assembly. In oneexample, chemical crosslinking via native chemical liga-
tion (NCL) has been used to introduce covalent bonds
between ﬁbrils [ 53]. Importantly for biological applica-
tions, this is a mild, aqueous reaction that allows the
linkage of the N terminal Cys residue with a C terminalthioester on 11 residue peptides, yielding a ﬁvefold
increase in storage modulus without disrupting the ﬁbril.
Ligation resulted in increased proliferation of humanumbilical vein endothelial cells cultured within the peptide
hydrogels and increased expression of platelet endothelial
cell adhesion molecules on the cell surface. This demon-strates the importance of tunable storage modulus for in
vivo applications [ 53]. Remodelling of the material in
response to the biological environment is also important,which has been achieved by the introduction of degradation
sequences that have proteolytic susceptibility. For instance,
peptide sequences allowing cleavage speciﬁc to matrixmetalloproteinase-13, important to tissue remodeling dur-
ing wound healing, have been incorporated into SAP
hydrogels, demonstrating varying degrees of proteolyticdegradation [ 17,54,55]. Such sophisticated systems that
control the degradation kinetics are critical for the
manipulation and tuning of biological responses, as well as
for facilitating dynamic changes to the material in response
to the changing environment; properties particularly rele-
vant to in vivo applications.
3 Utilising Self-Assembled Peptide Materials In Vivo
The design of the SAP scaffolds must support the survival
of speciﬁc cellular phenotypes (application dependant) andtheir subsequent integration, proliferation and differentia-
tion etc., as shown in Fig. 1c. This has been demonstrated
extensively in vitro, for instance a variety of stem cellshave been cultured on different SAP scaffolds, demon-
strating a capacity to modulate fate speciﬁcation [ 56,57].
Results from such studies are now being translated in vivo.However, this presents a raft of complications that are not
experienced in the static in vitro environment. Chief
amongst these is the inﬂammatory cascade. This complexbiological phenomenon occurs as a response to harmful
stimuli, which in the case of utilising SAP scaffolds in vivo
may include a foreign body reaction and local cell damage.Among other things, which are speciﬁc to each tissue type,
the initial stages of inﬂammation are designed to protectPage 6 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
123the integrity of surrounding tissue and prevent collateral
injury through attenuating injurious stimuli. This reaction
is critical to tissue repair. However, one of the ironies is
that in order to achieve this, the phagocytosis of damagedcells and foreign material must occur, but the same process
may also lead to the rapid degradation of implanted bio-
materials. However, despite such complications associatedwith the deployment of SAP scaffolds in vivo, foundational
research has demonstrated repair of a variety of different
tissue types upon implantation, highlighting the exciting
potential to further engineer these systems to produce
hierarchical tissue engineering scaffolds. Below we willdiscuss several tissue types where administration of SAP
scaffolds has shown signiﬁcant potential for reparative
medicine.
3.1 Neural Applications
Neural applications have typically relied upon scaffolds
formed from covalently linked polymers such as poly
(
L-lactic acid), which require functionalisation, or biologi-
cal polymers such as collagen, gelatin or ﬁbrin, which then
carry the possibility of activating a foreign immune
response. The scaffolds are generally prefabricated 2- or3D scaffolds which are post functionalised and seeded with
cells prior to implantation [ 58]. SAP scaffolds that have
predominately been employed for neural tissue engineeringapplications contain the laminin derived peptide epitope
IKVAV. Through the decoration of the C terminal of a
peptide amphiphile with IKVAV, these nanoﬁbrous sys-tems have been demonstrated to promote regeneration of
descending and ascending axons across a compression
spinal cord injury in a mouse model, resulting in signiﬁcantimprovement in the animals motility [ 59]. Here, self-
assembly was initiated in response to the ionic strength of
the tissue. The network, upon assembly, thereby displayedIKVAV at extremely high densities, and encouraged a
number of desirable effects. These included reduced as-
trogliosis (associated with the inﬂammatory responsewithin the central nervous system that can result in tissue
destruction and necrosis, foiling the preceding trophic
phases) and reduced cell death, possibly by the improve-ment of the cellular microenvironment at the wound site.
Therefore, it is likely that inﬂammation attenuation was a
major contributor to the behavioral improvement observed.In another example, after sciatic axotomy, a 10 mm gap
between the nerve stumps was ﬁlled with RADA16-1
hydrogels [ 60,61]. The supramolecular nature of the gels
allowed the lesion to be completely ﬁlled and facilitated
full contact with the ‘stump’, promoting the two-way
migration of cells (Fig. 3b, c). This scaffold was then used
as a carrier for tissue speciﬁc cell types; green-ﬂuorescent
protein (GFP) positive neural progenitor cells and Schwanncells, achieved by the preconditioning of cells within the
hydrogels for 7 days prior to implantation. The delivery of
cells to the injury site increased axonal regeneration, pos-
sibly due to the cells becoming acclimatised to the artiﬁcialenvironment and secreting trophic molecules that augment
the regenerative process. An important observation was
that if the hydrogel did not contain culture media, cavitiesand cysts formed around the implant due to its low pH, a
consequence of the mechanisms used to trigger the
assembly process. Scaffolds based on the RADA16-1
peptide have also been implanted into the injured cortex of
adult rats where regeneration was also observed [ 62]. This
was evident by the absence of cavities after 6 weeks, in
addition to a reduction in recruited microglia/macrophages
and astrocytosis compared to the sham (Fig. 3d). Again,
this demonstrates and potential of the RADA based peptide
system to minimise collateral injury through attenuation of
the immune response. An important functional milestonewas reached when this material demonstrated an ability to
restore vision in hamsters post severance of the optical tract
[24], demonstrating the promotion of neurite elongation
and appropriate reconnection (i.e. synapse formation). The
next step will be to expand the current work by charac-
terising the associated functional recovery with behav-ioural analysis and electrophysiological studies.
3.2 Restoring Muscle FunctionThe deployment of SAP scaffolds for the treatment of
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy (DMD) by the distributionof an otherwise depleted protein has shown considerable
promise. DMD is a degenerative disease in which laminin
is missing from the basement membrane. As a result, themuscle ﬁbres fail to attach appropriately. Some therapeutic
activity has been observed by injecting free laminin, but
this undergoes rapid diffusion away from the site of ther-apeutic need. SAP scaffolds have been deployed to treat
this condition by distributing laminin within the tissue and
retaining it at the site of therapeutic need. Here, a 3-Dscaffold formed from an enzymatically triggered fmoc-
tripeptide p–bsystem was employed [ 23]. The use of an
enzyme permitted the formation of the network to beplaced under thermodynamic control, allowing the assem-
blies and protein to interact in a supramolecular fashion.
The hydrophobic leucine residues expressed on the surfaceof the ﬁbrils interact with structural binding domains on the
laminin. This results in a peptide/protein matrix, which has
enhanced material properties arising from the additionalstructural contribution of the protein. The therapeutic
beneﬁt of such a scaffold was tested in a zebraﬁsh model,
where the scaffold was delivered in vivo using microin-jection, which allowed precise delivery adjacent to the cell
wall (Fig. 3a). The peptide/protein matrix was observed toBiointerphases (2012) 7:2 Page 7 of 14
123Fig. 3 a Confocal image of a peptide/protein hydrogel ( red) injected
into the muscle of a dystrophic zebraﬁsh ( green ) showing the
localisation of the hydrogel within the tissue. TEM image shows the
existence of the self-assembled ﬁbrils in vivo. bShows the integration
of self-assembled peptide hydrogels within an injured spinal cord. AP
staining ( arrows ) showed that blood vessels grew into the implants,
whereas the ﬂuorescent image shows the distribution of co-implanted
GFP neural precursor cells within the matrix. Reprinted from Ref.
[61]. Copyright (2007), with permission from Elsevier. cLongitudinal
sections through the membrane conduit and the distal nerve end,
respectively, at 3 weeks following sciatic nerve injury and repair.
Regenerating axons are shown immunostained for bIII-tubulin
(green ) along with S100-positive Schwann cells ( red) after trans-
plantation of BD hydrogel with Schwann cells midconduit, and in the
distal stump. Scale bar represents 100 and 25 lm. Reprinted from
Ref. [ 60]. Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier. dArrow
shows a 1 9292 mm void cut into the right hemisphere of a rat
brain, which, post bleeding, was ﬁlled with preformed SAP. Nissl and
DAPI staining shows the lesion sites of the SAP. The dashed area
indicates the extent of the SAP scaffold 6 weeks post implantation,demonstrating good integration with the brain tissue with no visible
voids. Reprinted from Ref. [ 62]. Copyright (2009), with permission
from Elsevier. eScaffolds formed from IKVAV peptide amphiphiles
promote the regeneration of motor axons after spinal cord injury.
Neurolucida tracings of BDA-labeled descending motor ﬁbers within
a distance of 500 lm rostral of the lesion in vehicle-injected and
IKVAV peptide amphiphile-injected animals, respectively, clearly
showing the ﬁbres crossing the injury in the presence of the self-
assembled scaffold. The dotted lines demarcate the borders of the
lesion reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 59]. Copyright (2008).
fShows a full-thickness osteochondral defect of a femoropatellar
joint 12 weeks post injury. The defect is seen to regenerate when
treated with a direct injection of SAP hydrogel. Reprinted from Ref.
[65]. Copyright (2010), with permission from Elsevier. gMicrographs
of the in vivo angiogenesis of rat cornea. Neovascularisation is not
observed with growth factors alone, nor collagen and growth factors
(not shown), whereas an injected hydrogel of heparin bound to a
SAP networks (containing growth factors) shows an extensive
effect. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [ 73]. Copyright (2006)
American Chemical SocietyPage 8 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
123maintain its nanostructure over a number of days with no
signiﬁcant inﬂammation. This shows that the biostability of
the scaffolds can be tuned by performing the assembly step
at the environmental conditions found in vivo under ther-modynamic control. Although the stable in vivo presenta-
tion of the missing protein is an important step, further
work will need to be done to conﬁrm that the signals arebiologically available. Such SAP systems also have sig-
niﬁcant potential to be further developed and optimised to
mimic features of the basal lamina for wider reaching tis-
sue engineering applications.
3.3 Bone Formation
Hydroxyapatite coatings are the standard method employed
in a clinical setting to encourage bone ingrowth and
regeneration for dental and orthopaedic implants. Whilst
such coatings enhance osteoconduction and osteoinductionthey are not easily biofunctionalised with growth factor and
inhibit vascularisation due to their condensed nature.
Therefore, extensive research is being conducted toimprove such coatings and/or develop new methods to
encourage the implants to directly integrate with the sur-
rounding tissue. To this end, SAP scaffolds have beenutilised to provide biofunctionality to inert titanium foam
implants, whereby a peptide amphiphile nanoﬁbre matrix
was assembled on and within the surfaces of the scaffoldpores [ 63]. It was shown that the scaffold was capable of
encapsulating mouse calvarial pre-osteoblastic cells, dem-
onstrating the feasibility of using such a hybrid scaffold forcell transplantation. The assembly of nanostructures from a
highly penetrating ﬂuid phase was useful in this case, as it
allows the resultant ﬁbres to completely penetrate thetitanium support. This strategy yielded a phosphorylated,
anionic nanoﬁbre gel matrix, which was used as a strongly
nucleating template to spatially conﬁne the formation ofhydroxyapatite crystals yielding nanostructured artefacts
[64]. These composite scaffolds were implanted within the
femur of adult rats using a bone plug model. After 4 weeks,highly mineralised bone was observed around the implant
and within the pores, along with some evidence of vascu-
larisation. These results suggest that composite materialsformed in this way are orders of magnitude stronger than
the hydrogels alone, well tolerated, biocompatible and,
importantly for implants, facilitate host cell migration asevidenced by this osteoconductive effect.
3.4 Repair of CartilageDegeneration of the cartilage, either through aging and/or
injury is a debilitating condition leading to chronic pain,loss of mobility and a reduced quality of life. In order to
utilise SAP scaffolds to stimulate the formation of newcartilage, bone marrow stem cells (BMSC) along with
transforming growth factor- b1 (TGF-1), dexamethasone,
and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) have been pre-
mixed into a solution of trimeric KLD and injected into afull sized cartilage defect model in skeletally mature rab-
bits [ 65]. The assembly of the matrix was triggered by the
ionic strength in the defect and ﬁlled the area completely(Fig. 3f). When the SAP matrix was injected into the
defect, improved collagen II and Safranin-O staining was
observed. Upon inclusion of the growth factors and drugs
within the matrix there was an increased aggrecan pro-
duction, a proteoglycan found within the ECM of cartilage.Interestingly, there was no beneﬁcial effect from the
inclusion of the growth factors within the scaffold com-
pared with the administration of the SAP scaffold alone.Therefore, the effect observed when the matrix is injected
into the defect site, as discussed previously, could well be
due to stabilisation of the wound site via full contact withthe surrounding tissue. However, it should be noted that co-
injection with BMSC lead to an undesirable increase in
ﬁbrous tissue formation, possibly through the lack ofappropriate signaling that may have been inﬂuenced by
growth factors secreted from the transplanted cells. As
growth factors easily diffuse out of the matrix, in thisinstance the sequestration of these molecules may be
highly desirable. In order to test the effects of free growth
factor versus bound, IGF-1 and streptavidin were mixedwith KLD before assembly to facilitate weak adsorption, or
were strongly tethered through binding biotinylated IGF
with the peptide [ 66]. As expected tethering of factors lead
to improved retention times over soluble or adsorbed, but
surprisingly decreased bioactivity. The delivery of growth
factor from these systems therefore depends on the speciﬁcgrowth factor, the method of delivery and the location of
the tethering site to the growth factor binding domain,
which can be optimised by the freedom afforded by themechanism of attachment. Control over growth factor
delivery is essential for a vast range of tissue engineering
application. For instance, it would be possible to combinethe regenerative mechanism of this system with the
reported visco supplementation of the synovial ﬂuid (found
in the cavities of synovial joints) using the unique prop-erties of the SAP systems. Current treatments for osteoar-
thritis involve using regular injections of hyaluronic acid
(HA). The physical and shear responsive peptide hydrogelsare therefore good potential candidates, as they spontane-
ously assemble upon injection, permeate throughout the
area of degeneration, and exhibit the capacity to form andreform over time, reducing the needed frequency of
injection. The ability to mimic HA has been demonstrated
by the network of ribbons and tapes that was formed fromalternating polar and apolar 11-mer peptides [ 67]. When
the solutions of the (unassembled) peptides were deliveredBiointerphases (2012) 7:2 Page 9 of 14
123to sites of damage the viscous ﬂuids and hydrogels formed
were effective in reducing friction and allowing lubrica-
tion, in some cases showing improved performance over
HA.
3.5 Improved Recovery Post Glaucoma Surgery
Glaucoma surgery requires postoperative ﬁltering to lower
intraocular pressure (IOP) for effective recovery, but this
process attracts signiﬁcant scarring. There are other asso-
ciated risks with such surgery that arise from iatrogenic
injuries, such as bleeding, infection and pain. However, themost common complications are associated with the pro-
liferation of ﬁbroblasts around bleb sites following tra-
beculectomy surgery. When this occurs an implantabledrain device must be used to relieve IOP, which adds
additional complication. Therefore, it is advantageous to
inhibit ﬁbroblast proliferation around the bleb to increasethe success rate of trabeculectomy surgery. To this end
many growth factors and drugs have been delivered to
attempt to inhibit ﬁbroblast proliferation. Recently SAPmaterials have been employed for this purpose. In this
instance, fmoc-FFRGDF peptide derivatives self-assem-
bled to form a biocompatible scaffold containing the RGDﬁbronectin motif [ 68]. The hydrogel formed was used to
achieve time resolved drug release of the anti-proliferative
drug 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-Fu), as an attempt to preventexcessive scarring that results from ﬁbroblast proliferation.
The drug itself was incorporated during the assembly
process, and the loaded hydrogel injected during surgery.This proved to be effective for the reduction of ﬁbrosis and
therefore IOP, as the biocompatible peptide scaffold
facilitated slow release (via diffusion) of the drug to thesurrounding tissues, limiting toxicity and increasing its
effective half-life. This accentuates the potential of such
systems to increase the success rate of trabeculectomysurgery, limiting the need to utilise invasive implantable
drainage devices.
3.6 Regeneration of Myocardium
Heart disease is the leading cause of death and a major
cause of disability within the western world. Myocardial
infarction results from the reduction in blood supply of a
proportion of the myocardium that ultimately leads toirreversible necrosis and if severe, heart failure. In order to
treat myocardial infarction, cell transplantation is of great
interest, as mammalian cardiomyocytes have limitedregenerative capacity, even if blood supply is restored.
Many different types of tissue engineering hydrogels have
been investigated to improve the survival of transplantedcells for myocardial repair, which include SAP hydrogel
scaffolds. Myocardial cells have been shown to tolerate apeptide hydrogel microenvironment formed from RAD16
peptides. These hydrogel microenvironments were repro-
ducible and non-inﬂammatory when injected into the
myocardium [ 69]. They were easily identiﬁable within the
tissue, and were observed to allow the ingress of host
endothelial progenitor cells, resulting in the formation of
smooth muscle cells, an important step toward functionalvascular structures. In addition, when neonatal cardio-
myocyctes were co-injected with the hydrogel, cell
recruitment was increased. This natural migratory effect is
of particular interest, as the constituent peptides were un-
functionalised, allowing the potential for improved func-tionality through the use of various factors. Therefore, the
properties of the SAP scaffold in creating functional,
injectable microenvironments that promote the survival ofimplanted cells, and encouraging the migration and re-
vascularisation of damaged tissue is a promising new
mechanism for the treatment of heart disease by allowingspatially controlled regeneration of the damaged tissue.
3.7 HaemostasisInevitably surgery results in iatrogenic injury, which results
in bleeding. This must be stopped not only to minimiseblood loss from the patient, but for a variety of other rea-
sons including reducing the need for postoperative drain-
age, saving operative time and expense and decreasing thelength of hospital stay. It is common practice to apply
electrocautery and topical haemostats, such as synthetic
sealants, gels and fabrics. Each of these systems hasassociated advantages and disadvantages, providing stim-
ulus for continuing research investigating the use of SAP
scaffolds for this purpose. The space-ﬁlling properties of anSAP scaffold that can assemble in vivo have been shown to
provide haemostatic properties [ 70]. The injection of a
solution of RADA based peptides resulted in the formationof an integrated nanoﬁbrous barrier that quickly and
effectively stopped bleeding in a range of tissue types
including liver, brain, spinal cord, artery and skin [ 71].
Here, self-assembly occurred rapidly in response to the
ionic strength of the blood, resulting in complete cessation
of bleeding ( \15 s). This mechanism was not attributed to
clotting, as platelet formation was not observed until sev-
eral minutes after application of the SAP solution.
Although not directly tested, it is hypothesised that thesolution permeates throughout the wound, allowing the
resultant nanoﬁbres to penetrate all regions to provide a
ﬂexible barrier, which illustrates the excellent contactbetween tissue and scaffold upon self-assembly in situ. The
rapid rate at which the ﬂow of blood is arrested suggests
that only a small amount of nanoﬁbres closely associatedwith the tissue are required, as the time scale is too short to
achieve full assembly of the peptide. The gel alsoPage 10 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
123prevented the lysing of red blood cells and allowed sur-
rounding cells to migrate into the hydrogel. Somewhat
counter intuitively, this phenomena is most effective in
‘soft’ hydrogels, as opposed to those which form a stiffermatrix, as these were found to fail along fractures, thereby
allowing bleeding to recommence. Such preliminary works
shows the potential of SAP scaffolds to be developed assuperior haemostatic agents that are clinically translational.
3.8 AngiogenesisImparting angionesic properties to the SAP scaffolds is of
great interest for tissue engineering to achieve rapid re-
vascularisation of damaged tissues and to introduce blood
ﬂow to the biomaterial to provide a favourable cellularmilieu. However, even for materials containing ECM
proteins and peptides prevascularised in vitro, the ingrowth
of new vasculature is a real concern [ 72]. In order to induce
the formation of new vessels into peptide amphiphile
nanostructures, a heparin binding sequence was added to
the C-terminus [ 73]. These signals presented in a high
density on the surface of the nanostructure resulted in the
co-assembly and presentation of heparin, as shown in
Fig. 2c. The heparin binding peptide amphiphile scaffold,
heparin and appropriate growth factors were injected to the
cornea of adult rats, a tissue that is free of vascularisation,
and thereby allows facile visual analysis. Here, the heparinbinding system was shown to have considerable propensity
for the generation of new vascular tissue, interestingly
more so than if the scaffold was exchanged for a more‘traditional’ scaffold formed by collagen (Fig. 3g). In an
extension of this work, percutaneous injections of the
preformed hydrogels were applied to a mouse model. Here,the hydrogel re-formed to yield a stable mass [ 74].
Importantly for their potential use as an implant, there was
no evidence of the formation of a ﬁbrotic capsule, norpenetration of immune cells. Post implantation (10 days)
the scaffold remained stable, and had induced the pene-
tration of host ﬁbroblasts, which had begun to form vas-cularised tissue. This process was accompanied by the
reduction and replacement of the SAP scaffold leading to a
conversion toward well vascularised connective tissue,with a high density of blood vessels, important for the long-
term survival of tissue formed within the implant.
4 Perspectives
The examples discussed above represent a number of
diverse approaches toward tissue engineering utilising the
unique properties of materials formed via peptide self-assembly. This reﬂects the strength of the approach in
allowing a range of supramolecular structures to be formedfrom a solution of molecules modularly synthesised from a
common and easily accessible toolbox of physiological
building blocks. The macroscopic material properties are
easily governed by the stimulus and environmental condi-tions under which the assembly process occurs. The
assembly process can be triggered by stimuli found upon
injection into host tissue; either preformed or an injectionof precursors, which begin to assemble as a response to the
environmental chemical milieu, or triggered by the bio-
catalytic action of enzymes. The self-assembly of peptides
is therefore an approach which allows access to a variety of
systems with rationally designed material characteristics.First amongst these is the ability to easily manufacture
robust nano- to macroscale structures of varying mechan-
ical strength, ﬁbre diameter and surface property. Theseunderlying motifs provide structures with the ability to
provide a skeleton upon which the chemical signals can be
decorated. A considerable amount of research has beenfocused toward forming networks that present a variety of
signals and further development of these will allow tuning
by the end user to illicit tissue speciﬁc regenerative cas-cades. The presentation of such signals can be achieved in
a variety of ways; built into the scaffold, or tethered to it,
and examples exist demonstrating the selective binding,and/or controlled release of growth factors, along with the
recruitment of bioactive molecules including peptides and
proteins. What is clear is the potential and requirement fora variety of multiple epitopes of various densities co-
assembled into a single heterogeneous assembly, which can
be rationally tuned toward a speciﬁc biological niche. Akey development will be the programmed ability of the
scaffold to modulate its structure at predetermined and
variable rates to allow the material to respond to thedynamic environment of a regenerating tissue. The inclu-
sion of cleavable sites allows some control over this, as
does a slow degradation observed as an effect of theexternal forces presented by a dynamic, living system.
However, to date, these effects are currently an observa-
tion, rather than designed phenomenon.
Therefore, whilst the biological outcomes of all of the in
vivo studies mentioned previously generate optimism, for
these technologies to be truly transferred beyond academicinterest to the clinic, progress must be made in regards to
controlling and understanding precisely how the nano- and
microstructures of the individual scaffolds providemechanical, topographical and biochemical properties to
interact with the tissue. While it is clear that the scaffolds
inﬂuence inﬂammation, cell migration, angiogenesis, etc.,such responses are currently (relatively) uncontrolled;
hence their inﬂuence must be fully characterised, and this
may require the development of new analytical methodsand the adaption of existing techniques to fully visualise.
Inherent in this class of system is the propensity toBiointerphases (2012) 7:2 Page 11 of 14
123disassemble, which is a desirable property in a long-term
implant that encourages tissue regeneration. Precise control
over the degradation rate is essential, because if the rate of
ECM formation is slower than that at which the scaffolddegrades, undesirable and harmful void formation will
result. The mechanisms driving degradation will most
likely result from the aqueous, enzymatic and/or the cel-lular environment in vivo, and the largest dynamic induc-
tion of these arise through the inﬂammatory process. A
natural part of the healing inﬂammation is associated with a
cascade of biochemical events that can either promote
tissue regeneration or prevent it through chronic inﬂam-mation, tissue destruction, ﬁbrosis and necrosis. Therefore,
when engineering an ‘ideal’ SAP scaffold for in vivo
deployment it must be recognised as ‘self’ by the immuneresponse, avoiding, or at least limiting the rate of phago-
cytosis. In addition the inﬂammatory cascade post
implantation must be controlled and optimised to encour-age acute inﬂammation to be trophic and promote repair
and reconstruction. Scaffolds formed from peptides there-
fore present enormous potential for regenerative medicinesince they are assembled using structural motifs that are
physiologically present, they simulate nature in regards to
the molecular recognition of epitopes, and thereby conductbiochemical activity using the physicochemical properties
inherent in the amino acids of which they are formed.
5 Conclusions
The use of man made scaffolds that effectively integrate
with biology for controlled tissue engineering holds sig-
niﬁcant promise for regenerative medicine. Currently, theneed for region speciﬁc physical and biochemical cues
(which are essential for instructing, stimulating and/or
augmenting the cellular microenvironment) have not beenrealised in vivo. While tissue engineering scaffolds have
the potential to be therapeutic, they do not deﬁne regen-
erative events but rather through their interaction withcells, whether endogenous or transplanted, instruct cells to
behave tropically for the repair and reconstruction of tissue.
It is obvious that the rapidly evolving ﬁeld of SAP scaf-folds is beginning to fulﬁll their rich promise by moving
toward being a functional biomaterial, as demonstrated by
preliminary success in encouraging the regeneration ofselected tissues in vivo .The key advantages of these sys-
tems arise from the versatility imparted by the constituent
peptides; peptide synthesis is a common and easily per-formed synthetic technique, allowing researchers to readily
ultilisea range of molecules. As peptides are the structural
motif used by nature, they have the inherent ability to formbiologically relevant supramolecular structures on the
nanoscale, but also have the beneﬁt of structure andchemical functionality. Therefore, by utilising these prop-
erties, the scaffolds formed can not only physically and
mechanically support cells, but have the potential to pro-
vide the enduser with and ability to tailor tissue speciﬁcmulticomponent scaffolds through manipulating the struc-
tural hierarchy. The nano- to macro-ordering of these
scaffolds also offer the possibility of delivering variouscombinations of growth factors, proteins, cytokines and
hormones that are tailored to control and harness the
endogenous response, spatially and temporally. The
examples explored in this review show the feasibility of
these features, and serve as inspiration; the challenge pre-sented to researchers in this ﬁeld is to take this under-
standing and perform systematic studies of the outcomes of
rational design to yield a more quantitative understandingof the biological response to these systems. Although none
of these systems have FDA approval, and are therefore a
long way from the clinic, we envisage that exploiting theincreasing complexity of SAP scaffolds will ultimately
enable bioengineers to actively modulate the regenerative
cascade for speciﬁc cellular microenvironments, offeringan effective next-generation treatment to some of the most
debilitating disease states.
Acknowledgments DRN is funded by an Australian Research
Council Postdoctoral Fellowship. RJW is funded by an Alfred Deakin
Research Fellowship.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, dis-
tribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the originalauthor(s) and source are credited.
References
1. Whitesides GM, Grzybowski B (2002) Science 295(5564):
2418–2421
2. Stupp SI, LeBonheur V, Walker K, Li LS, Huggins KE, Keser
M, Amstutz A (1997) Science 276(5311):384–389
3. R. F. Service, Science 309(5731), 95 (2005)
4. Zhang SG (2003) Nat Biotechnol 21(10):1171–11785. Reches M, Gazit E (2004) Nano Letters 4(4):581–585
6. Maskarinec SA, Tirrell DA (2005) Curr Opin Biotechnol
16(4):422–426
7. Lutolf MP, Hubbell J (2005) Nat Biotech 23(1):47–55
8. Nisbet DR, Rodda AE, Horne MK, Forsythe JS, Finkelstein DI
(2009) Biomaterials 30(27):4573–4580
9. Nisbet DR, Forsythe JS, Shen W, Finkelstein DI, Horne MK
(2009) J Biomater Appl 24(1):7–29
10. Kang YM, Lee BN, Ko JH, Kim GH, Kang KN, Kim DY, Kim
JH, Park YH, Chun HJ, Kim CH, Kim MS (2010) Int JMolecular Sci 11(10):4140–4148
11. Horne MK, Nisbet DR, Forsythe JS, Parish CL (2009) Stem
Cells Develop 19(6):843–852
12. Nisbet DR, Pattanawong S, Ritchie NE, Shen W, Finkelstein DI,
Horne MK, Forsythe JS (2007) J Neural Eng 4(2):35
13. Nisbet DR, Crompton KE, Horne MK, Finkelstein DI, Forsythe JS
(2008) J Biomed Mater Res B Appl Biomater 87B(1):251–263Page 12 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
12314. Nisbet DR, Rodda AE, Horne MK, Forsythe JS, Finkelstein DL
(2010) Tissue Eng Part A 16(9):2833–2842
15. Frantz C, Stewart KM, Weaver VM (2010) J Cell Sci
123(24):4195–4200
16. Firth A, Aggeli A, Burke JL, Yang X, Kirkham J (2006)
Nanomedicine 1:189–199
17. Chau Y, Luo Y, Cheung ACY, Nagai Y, Zhang SG, Kobler JB,
Zeitels SM, Langer R (2008) Biomaterials 29(11):1713–1719
18. Kisiday J, Jin M, Kurz B, Hung H, Semino C, Zhang S, Grod-
zinsky AJ (2002) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 99(15):9996–10001
19. Guler MO, Hsu L, Soukasene S, Harrington DA, Hulvat JF,
Stupp SI (2006) Biomacromolecules 7(6):1855–1863
20. Jung JP, Nagaraj AK, Fox EK, Rudra JS, Devgun JM, Collier JH
(2009) Biomaterials 30(12):2400–2410
21. Li Q, Chau Y (2010) J Biomed Mater Res Part A 94A(3):688–69922. Yan C, Altunbas A, Yucel T, Nagarkar RP, Schneider JP,
Pochan DJ (2010) Soft Matter 6(20):5143–5156
23. Williams RJ, Hall TE, Glattauer V, White J, Pasic PJ, Sorensen
AB, Waddington L, McLean KM, Currie PD, Hartley PG (2011)
Biomaterials 32(22):5304–5310
24. Ellis-Behnke RG, Liang YX, You SW, Tay DKC, Zhang SG, So
KF, Schneider GE (2006) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA103(13):5054–5059
25. Pettikiriarachchi JTS, Parish CL, Shoichet MS, Forsythe JS,
Nisbet DR (2010) Aust J Chem 63(8):1143–1154
26. Yang ZM, Liang GL, Ma ML, Gao Y, Xu B (2007) Small
3(4):558–562
27. Mart RJ, Osborne RD, Stevens MM, Ulijn RV (2006) Soft
Matter 2(10):822–835
28. Anﬁnsen CB (1973) Science 181(4096):223–230
29. Zhang SG, Zhao XJ (2004) J Mater Chem 14(14):2082–2086
30. Williams RJ, Smith AM, Collins R, Hodson N, Das AK, Ulijn
RV (2009) Nat Nanotechnol 4(1):19–24
31. Williams RJ, Mart RJ, Ulijn RV (2010) Peptide Science
94(1):107–117
32. Smith AM, Williams RJ, Tang C, Coppo P, Collins RF, Turner
ML, Saiani A, Ulijn RV (2008) Adv Materials 20(1):37–41
33. Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI (2002) Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 99(8):5133–5138
34. Ozbas B, Kretsinger J, Rajagopal K, Schneider JP, Pochan DJ
(2004) Macromolecules 37(19):7331–7337
35. Smith AM, Acquah SFA, Bone N, Kroto HW, Ryadnov MG,
Stevens MSP, Walton DRM, Woolfson DN (2005) Angew
Chem Int Edit 44(2):325–328
36. Hirst AR, Roy S, Arora M, Das AK, Hodson N, Murray P,
Marshall S, Javid N, Sefcik J, Boekhoven J, van Esch JH,
Santabarbara S, Hunt NT, Ulijn RV (2010) Nat Chem2(12):1089–1094
37. Tang C, Smith AM, Collins RF, Ulijn RV, Saiani A (2009)
Langmuir 25(16):9447–9453
38. Zhou M, Smith AM, Das AK, Hodson NW, Collins RF, Ulijn
RV, Gough JE (2009) Biomaterials 30(13):2523–2530
39. Lee O-S, Stupp SI, Schatz GC (2011) J Am Chem Soc
133(10):3677–3683
40. Branco MC, Pochan DJ, Wagner NJ, Schneider JP (2010) Bio-
materials 31(36):9527–9534
41. Rajangam K, Arnold MS, Rocco MA, Stupp SI (2008) Bioma-
terials 29(23):3298–3305
42. Gumera C, Rauck B, Wang Y (2011) J Mater Chem
21(20):7033–7051
43. Ung P, Winkler DA (2011) J Med Chem 54(5):1111–1125
44. Cheng G, Castelletto V, Jones RR, Connon CJ, Hamley IW
(2011) Soft Matter 7(4):1326–1333
45. Orbach R, Adler-Abramovich L, Zigerson S, Mironi-Harpaz I,
Seliktar D, Gazit E (2009) Biomacromolecules 10(9):2646–265146. Mahmoud ZN, Grundy DJ, Channon KJ, Woolfson DN (2010)
Biomaterials 31(29):7468–7474
47. Verch A, Hahn H, Krause E, Colfen H, Borner HG (2010) Chem
Commun 46(47):8938–8940
48. Zhang Y, Gu HW, Yang ZM, Xu B (2003) J Am Chem Soc
125(45):13680–13681
49. Lutolf MP, Gilbert PM, Blau HM (2009) Nature 462(7272):
433–441
50. Cheng G, Castelletto V, Moulton CM, Newby GE, Hamley IW
(2010) Langmuir 26(7):4990–4998
51. Thornton K, Smith AM, Merry CLR, Ulijn RV (2009) Biochem
Soc Trans 37:660–664
52. Toledano S, Williams RJ, Jayawarna V, Ulijn RV (2006) J Am
Chem Soc 128(4):1070–1071
53. Jung JP, Jones JL, Cronier SA, Collier JH (2008) Biomaterials
29(13):2143–2151
54. Jun HW, Yuwono V, Paramonov SE, Hartgerink JD (2005) Adv
Materials 17(21):2612–2617
55. Giano MC, Pochan DJ, Schneider JP (2011) Biomaterials
32(27):6471–6477
56. Marı ´-Buye ´N, Semino CE (2011) Methods Mol Bol
690:217–237
57. Matsumoto T, Tadokoro M, Hattori K, Ougushi H, Satou J
(2011) Bioceramics Develop Appl 1:4
58. Silva GA, Czeisler C, Niece KL, Beniash E, Harrington DA,
Kessler JA, Stupp SL (2004) Science 303(5662):1352–1355
59. Tysseling-Mattiace VM, Sahni V, Niece KL, Birch D, Czeisler
C, Fehlings MG, Stupp SI, Kessler JA (2008) J Neurosci
28(14):3814–3823
60. McGrath AM, Novikova LN, Novikov LN, Wiberg M (2010)
Brain Res Bull 83(5):207–213
61. Guo J, Su H, Zeng Y, Liang Y-X, Wong WM, Ellis-Behnke RG, So
K-F, Wu W (2007) Nanomed Nanotechnol Biol Med 3(4):311–321
62. Guo J, Leung KKG, Su H, Yuan Q, Wang L, Chu T-H, Zhang
W, Pu JKS, Ng GKP, Wong WM, Dai X, Wu W (2009) Nan-
omed Nanotechnol Biol Med 5(3):345–351
63. Sargeant TD, Guler MO, Oppenheimer SM, Mata A, Satcher
RL, Dunand DC, Stupp SI (2008) Biomaterials 29(2):161–171
64. Spoerke ED, Anthony SG, Stupp SI (2009) Adv Materials
21(4):425–430
65. Miller RE, Grodzinsky AJ, Vanderploeg EJ, Lee C, Ferris DJ,
Barrett MF, Kisiday JD, Frisbie DD (2010) Osteoarthr Cartil
18(12):1608–1619
66. Miller R, Kopesky P, Grodzinsky A (2011) Clin Orthop Relat
Res/C210469(10):2716–2724
67. Bell CJ, Carrick LM, Katta J, Jin Z, Ingham E, Aggeli A, Boden
N, Waigh TA, Fisher J (2006) J Biomed Mater Res Part A78A(2):236–246
68. Xu X-D, Liang L, Chen C-S, Lu B, Wang N-l, Jiang F-G, Zhang
X-Z, Zhuo R-X (2010) ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
2(9):2663–2671
69. Davis ME, Motion JPM, Narmoneva DA, Takahashi T, Hakuno
D, Kamm RD, Zhang S, Lee RT (2005) Circulation
111(4):442–450
70. Ellis-Behnke RG, Liang Y-X, Tay DKC, Kau PWF, Schneider
GE, Zhang S, Wu W, So K-F (2006) Nanomed Nanotechnol
Biol Med 2(4):207–215
71. Ellis-Behnke R (2011) Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nano-
biotechnol 3(1):70–78
72. West JL, Moon JJ (2008) Curr Topics Med Chem 8(4):300–310
73. Rajangam K, Behanna HA, Hui MJ, Han X, Hulvat JF,
Lomasney JW, Stupp SI (2006) Nano Letters 6(9):2086–2090
74. Ghanaati S, Webber MJ, Unger RE, Orth C, Hulvat JF, Kiehna
SE, Barbeck M, Rasic A, Stupp SI, Kirkpatrick CJ (2009)
Biomaterials 30(31):6202–6212Biointerphases (2012) 7:2 Page 13 of 14
12375. Zhang SG, Holmes TC, Dipersio CM, Hynes RO, Su X, Rich A
(1995) Biomaterials 16(18):1385–1393
76. Holmes TC, de Lacalle S, Su X, Liu GS, Rich A, Zhang SG
(2000) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 97(12):6728–6733
77. Gelain F, Horii A, Zhang SG (2007) Macromol Biosci
7(5):544–551
78. Genove E, Shen C, Zhang SG, Semino CE (2005) Biomaterials
26(16):3341–3351
79. Zhang SG, Holmes T, Lockshin C, Rich A (1993) Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 90(8):3334–3338
80. Gelain F, Bottai F, Vescovi S, Zhang S (2007) PLoS ONE
1(1):1–11
81. Yokoi H, Kinoshita T, Zhang SG (2005) Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 102(24):8414–8419
82. Aggeli A, Bell M, Boden N, Keen JN, Knowles PF, McLeish TCB,
Pitkeathly M, Radford SE (1997) Nature 386(6622):259–262
83. Nyrkova IA, Semenov AN, Aggeli A, Bell M, Boden N,
McLeish TCB (2000) Eur Phys J B 17(3):499–513
84. Aggeli A, Nyrkova IA, Bell M, Harding R, Carrick L, McLeish
TCB, Semenov AN, Boden N (2001) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
98(21):11857–11862
85. Carrick L, Tassieri M, Waigh TA, Aggeli A, Boden N, Bell C,
Fisher J, Ingham E, Evans RML (2005) Langmuir
21(9):3733–3737
86. Davies RPW, Aggeli A, Beevers AJ, Boden N, Carrick LM,
Fishwick CWG, McLeish TCB, Nyrkova I, Semenov AN (2006)Supramol Chem 18(5):435–443
87. Carrick LM, Aggeli A, Boden N, Fisher J, Ingham E, Waigh TA
(2007) Tetrahedron 63(31):7457–7467
88. Collier JH, Messersmith PB (2003) Bioconj Chem 14(4):748–755
89. Niece KL, Hartgerink JD, Donners J, Stupp SI (2003) J Am
Chem Soc 125(24):7146–7147
90. Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI (2001) Science
294(5547):1684–1688
91. Capito RM, Azevedo HS, Velichko YS, Mata A, Stupp SI
(2008) Science 319(5871):1812–181692. Jun HW, Paramonov SE, Hartgerink JD (2006) Soft Matter
2(3):177–181
93. Hsu L, Cvetanovich GL, Stupp SI (2008) J Am Chem Soc
130(12):3892–3899
94. Tsonchev S, Niece KL, Schatz GC, Ratner MA, Stupp SI (2008)
J Phys Chem B 112(2):441–447
95. Stendahl JC, Rao MS, Guler MO, Stupp SI (2006) Adv Funct
Mater 16(4):499–508
96. Paramonov SE, Jun HW, Hartgerink JD (2006) J Am Chem Soc
128(22):7291–7298
97. Mahler A, Reches M, Rechter M, Cohen S, Gazit E (2006) Adv
Mater 18(11):1365–1370
98. Yang ZM, Gu HW, Zhang Y, Wang L, Xu B (2004) Chem
Commun 2:208–209
99. Haines-Butterick L, Rajagopal K, Branco M, Salick D, Rughani
R, Pilarz M, Lamm MS, Pochan DJ, Schneider JP (2007) Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 104(19):7791–7796
100. Veerman C, Rajagopal K, Palla CS, Pochan DJ, Schneider JP,
Furst EM (2006) Macromolecules 39(19):6608–6614
101. Nagarkar RP, Hule RA, Pochan DJ, Schneider JP (2008) J Am
Chem Soc 130(13):4466–4474
102. Schneider JP (2002) J Am Chem Soc 124:15030–15037103. Smith AM, Banwell EF, Edwards WR, Pandya MJ, Woolfson
DN (2006) Adv Funct Mater 16(8):1022–1030
104. Pandya MJ, Spooner GM, Sunde M, Thorpe JR, Rodger A,
Woolfson DN (2000) Biochemistry 39(30):8728–8734
105. Ryadnov MG, Woolfson DN (2003) Nat Mater 2(5):329–332
106. Straussman R, Ben-Ya’acov A, Woolfson DN, Ravid S (2007) J
Mol Biol 366(4):1232–1242
107. Papapostolou D, Smith AM, Atkins EDT, Oliver SJ, Ryadnov
MG, Serpell LC, Woolfson DN (2007) Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
104(26):10853–10858
108. Hadley EB, Testa OD, Woolfson DN, Gellman SH (2008) Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 105(2):530–535Page 14 of 14 Biointerphases (2012) 7:2
123