Overview
Self-assembly in nature: using
the principles of nature to createcomplex nanobiomaterials
Ana C. Mendes,1,2Erkan T. Baran,1,2Rui L. Reis1,2
and Helena S. Azevedo1,2∗†
Self-assembly is a ubiquitous process in biology where it plays numerous
important roles and underlies the formation of a wide variety of complex
biological structures. Over the past two decades, materials scientists have
aspired to exploit nature’s assembly principles to create artiﬁcial materials, withhierarchical structures and tailored properties, for the fabrication of functional
devices. Toward this goal, both biological and synthetic building blocks have been
subject of extensive research in self-assembly. In fact, molecular self-assemblyis becoming increasingly important for the fabrication of biomaterials because it
offers a great platform for constructing materials with high level of precision and
complexity, integrating order and dynamics, to achieve functions such as stimuli-
responsiveness, adaptation, recognition, transport, and catalysis. The importance
of peptide self-assembling building blocks has been recognized in the last years,as demonstrated by the literature available on the topic. The simple structure
of peptides, as well as their facile synthesis, makes peptides an excellent family
of structural units for the bottom-up fabrication of complex nanobiomaterials.Additionally, peptides offer a great diversity of biochemical (speciﬁcity, intrinsic
bioactivity, biodegradability) and physical (small size, conformation) properties
to form self-assembled structures with different molecular conﬁgurations. Themotivation of this review is to provide an overview on the design principles for
peptide self-assembly and to illustrate how these principles have been applied to
manipulate their self-assembly across the scales. Applications of self-assemblingpeptides as nanobiomaterials, including carriers for drug delivery, hydrogels for
cell culture and tissue repair are also described.
©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
How to cite this article:
WIREs Nanomed Nanobiotechnol 2013, 5:582–612. doi: 10.1002/wnan.1238
∗Correspondence to: hazevedo@dep.uminho.pt
13B’s Research Group—Biomaterials, Biodegradables and
Biomimetics, University of Minho, Headquarters of the EuropeanInstitute of Excellence on Tissue Engineering and RegenerativeMedicine, Guimar ˜aes, Portugal
2ICVS/3B’s—PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/
Guimar ˜aes, Portugal
†Present address: School of Engineering & Materials Science, Queen
Mary University of London, Mile End, London, UK
Conﬂict of interest: The authors have declared no conﬂicts of interest
for this article.INTRODUCTION
Molecular self-assembly is the spontaneous orga-
nization of molecules, due to their mutual
interactions (from the noncovalent type) into ordered
aggregates (spatial and/or temporal ordering) withoutexternal control.
1–4Supramolecular chemistry pro-
vides the basis of self-assembly where the instructions
of how to assemble larger entities are coded in thestructural motifs of individual molecules.
5According
to Whitesides,6the components of a molecular self-
assembling system consist of a group of molecules orsegments of a macromolecule that interact with one
another. These molecules, or molecular segments, may
582 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
be the same or different. Their interaction starts from a
less ordered state (a solution, disordered aggregate orrandom coil) leading to a ﬁnal state (a crystal or folded
macromolecule) that is more ordered. Although the
deﬁnition of self-assembly still remains ambiguous,
being used inconsistently in the literature, the above
described deﬁnition will be used throughout this arti-
cle. Within the deﬁnition of self-assembly, Whitesides
and Grzybowski have been considering two main
classes of self-assembly: static and dynamic.
1,2,7In
static self-assembly, components form ordered static
structures (structure does not change in time) without
energy exchange with the environment. In contrast,dynamic self-assembly refers to ordered nonequi-
librium structures, which are maintained far from
equilibrium through an input of energy from an
external source and subsequent dissipation into the
environment.
SUPRAMOLECULAR INTERACTIONS
The interactions relevant in molecular self-assembly
are noncovalent forces (electrostatic, hydropho-
bic, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals inter-
actions, aromatic stacking, metal coordination)
(Figure 1). These interactions are individually weak
(2–250 kJ mol−1) when compared with covalent bonds
(100–400 kJ mol−1) but collectively, if in sufﬁcient
number, they can generate highly stable assemblies
and their subtle balance govern the shape and function
of the ﬁnal assembly.
Electrostatic Interactions
Coulombic interactions are long range nonselective
interactions that can result in attractive or repulsive
effects. Ionic self-assembly has been employed
as straightforward and reliable method for the
organization of different building blocks (e.g.,
polyelectrolytes, charged surfactants, peptides, and
lipids) as described in the following sections.
Hydrophobic Effects
The hydrophobic effect is a unique organizing force
based on repulsion of solute by the solvent. Nonpolar
molecules tend to avoid an aqueous surrounding.
Aromatic Stacking ( π-πStacking)
Aromatic stacking (also called π-πstacking) refers
to attractive interaction between aromatic rings when
oriented face-to-face as in a stack of coins, being
responsible for intramolecular stability.Hydrogen Bonding
Hydrogen bonding is a form of association between an
electronegative atom and a hydrogen atom attached
to a second, relatively electronegative atom. Both
electronegative atoms are usually N, O, or F. The
atom to which the hydrogen is connected is referred
as hydrogen-bond acceptor and the hydrogen is called
hydrogen-bond donor (Figure 1). Hydrogen bonding
(H-bonding) interactions are highly directional and
can be of either short- or long-range nature. Hydrogen
bonds may be intermolecular or intramolecular. The
strength of single hydrogen bonds depends mainly
on the nature of donor or acceptor, although it
is inﬂuenced by a larger extent by the solvent.
Combining several hydrogen bonds in a functional
assembly strengths the interaction and their spatial
arrangement enhances its speciﬁcity.
BIOLOGICAL SELF-ASSEMBLIES
Biology is replete with examples of highly functionalcomplex nanoscale structures formed by self-
assembly.
4Self-assembly is of central importance
to life. It generates much of the functionality ofthe living cell. A variety of biological structures,
ranging from proteins and nucleic acids to viruses and
cell membranes (Figure 2), possess a highly precise
organization on the nanometer scale which derives
from speciﬁc interactions at molecular level. Being
this organization critical for their function, biological
self-assembly uses biomolecular building blocks of
precisely deﬁned shape, size, hydrophobicity, and
spatial distribution.
Protein folding (Figure 2(a)) clearly illustrates
the noncovalent interactions involved in the self-
assembly in aqueous solution. The peptide sequence
(primary structure) is synthesized from the 20
amino acids by translation of a sequence present
in a messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA). When
viewed in a simplistic perspective, proteins appear
to be an assembly of linear strands of covalently
linked amino acids. Precise folded proteins involve,
however, the assembly of prefolded intermediates
before yielding perfectly functioning proteins. The
secondary structure of proteins may be constituted
byα-helices (stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen
bonds between the carbonyl oxygen atoms C =O with
amide NH groups, four residues away in the helix) and
β-sheets consisting of several β-strands, kept together
by a network of intermolecular hydrogen bonds.
The formation of protein tertiary structure
is mediated by how α-helices and β-sheets bend
a n dp a c ki n t oe a c ho t h e ro r i g i n a t i n gap r o t e i n
subunit. The conformation of the tertiary structure is
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 583Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
Repulsive force
+ +
++
++ +__ _
_
_ __
_ _
_+Attractive force
Repulsive force
Attractive forceRepulsive force
Non-directional force
Medium range interaction (1/r2)
Significantly weaker than ion-ion interactionsAttractive force
Attractive force(250 kJ/mol)ionic lattice
Somewhat directional forceNon-directional force
Long range interaction (1/r)
Highly dependant on the dielectric 
constant of the medium
Short range interation (1/r3)
Significantly weaker then ion-dipole 
interactions
water
Aggregation of amphiphiles into micellesThe tendency of hydrocarbons to form intermolecular 
aggregates in an aqueous medium, and analogous intramolecular interactions
Repulsion of solute by the solvent (non-ploar molecules tend to avoid aqueous surroundings
(Difficult to assess the interaction strength)Folding of proteins
Occur between molecules that have permanent net dipoles (polar molecules)
Weak electrostatic interaction 
between aromatic rings
N
NN
NN
OO NHH
H
CytosineDirectional force
Short range interaction 
(2.5-3.5Å)
Forms when a hydrogen atom is 
positioned between two electronegative atoms, mainly O and N
Special case of dipole-dipole 
interactions, but can be significantly stronger than typical dipole-dipole
GuanineHHHN
NHEdge-to-faceFace-to-faceIon-Ion interaction (50-250 kJ/mol) Ion-Dipole interaction
(5.50 kJ/mol)
(0-50 kJ/mol)(10-50 kJ/mol)Dipole-Dipole interaction
Hydrogen bond donorN
δ+H
HH
NN
Hydrogen bond acceptorHydrophobic effects
O
H
π-π interactionCarbon nanotubes
Hydrogen bondingHydrogen bonding 
between guanine and cytosine, one of two types of base pairs in DNA.NaCINa Na
Na
Na NaNa
Na Na
Na
NaNa
Na
Na Na
Na NaCI CI
CI
CI
CI
CICICI
CI
CI
CI CI
CI
CICI
CI
FIGURE 1 |An illustration showing the noncovalent interactions involved in supramolecular chemistry and their strength.2,8
provided by the number and type of interactions (e.g.,
hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic, and ionic interactions)and it is at this stage of protein folding that thefunctional regions of the protein (e.g., catalyticand binding points) become assembled. Lastly, thequaternary structure of proteins is formed when thesubunits previously formed are interacting together.Nevertheless, it is the primary structure, containingthe speciﬁc order of amino acids that primarilydictates how the folding will occur. Consequently,the same sequence will give every time the samestructure, except when disturbance is introducedinto the system.
9Besides their structural function,
proteins also serve as transporting agents, scaffolds of
biological catalysis (enzymes), protection agents andhormone receptors.
9,10
A particularly important example of self-
assembly is provided by the double-stranded (ds) DNA
molecule. The building blocks of DNA are nucleotides,consisting of a 5-carbon sugar (deoxyribose), anitrogen containing base attached to the sugar, anda phosphate group. There are four different types ofnucleotides [adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G),and thymine (T)] found in DNA, differing only in thenitrogenous base. The DNA backbone is a polymerwith an alternating sugar-phosphate sequence whereA, G, C, and T bases extend away from the chain and
stack on the top each other. Complementary pairsof nucleobases (A–T and C–G) from two antiparallelstrands wrap around one another in the double helix.This conﬁguration allows the formation of stablehydrogen bonds that sustain the strands together,reinforced by π-πstacking interactions between
cyclic purine (A and G) and pyrimidine (C and T)bases (Figure 2(b)). The stability resulted from thecombination between these two pairs of nucleobasesis unique and responsible for the effectiveness of DNAreplication, transcription, and ribosomal translation.DNA helix has a diameter of approximately 2 nm, a
helical repeat of 3.4 nm (10.5 base pairs) and persistent
length of about 50 nm.
11
Viruses are protein and nucleic acid based
supramolecules, with different shapes and varietyof sizes, that manifest their functionality throughself-assembly. A typical virus possesses a proteinouter shell (capsid) composed of multiple copies ofcoat proteins arranged in a symmetrical fashion,housing the viral genome. In general, virusesadopt an icosahedral or helical structure, givinga spherical or rod-shape particle.
12To assemble
into an icosahedral geometry, the capsomers,the structural units of icosahedral viruses, are
584 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
(a) (b)
(c) (d)Self-assembly Self-assemblySelf-assemblyHydrogen bonds
C G
A
A
ATT
T
G
G
GC
C
C
A
AT
TTT - TT
stackingNucleotide
Thymine (T)
Adenine (A)
Cytosine (C)Guanine (G)
2 nm
50 nmBaseSugarPhosphateBuilding block
Hydrogen bondsSelf-assemblyα-helix
Hydrogen bonds
Hydrophobic interactions
Ionic interactions
RNA
Protein Self-assemblyTobacco Musaic Virus (TMV)
Self-assembly
O OO
PCH2CH2-N(CH2)3 Hydrophobic interactions
Two stacked discs made of 34 building block
subunits
Beginning of the helix
formationHelical turns are
threaded onto the RNA1-6 nm
18 nm
300 nm
Double hydrophobic
alkyl chainHydrophilic
headgroupBuilding block
Building blocksPolypeptide
Building block
PhospholipidReceptorMembrane
Ca2+
Na+K+
Channel
2–4 nmSecondary structure Tertiary structure Quaternary structureR
H2NR
ROH
O
nO
H
HNN
O+ C
C
OO
OO
O
O
OO
O H
HHO
H
NH2H HNH
NNN
O
PO
ONNH2N
O HH
H
HHPHOHH
N
N N
NO
O
PONOH
OHHH
H
HHNH2NHH
HP
OO
O
O O C C
CH2 CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3CH2CH2CHHC
CH2
CH3CH2HC CH2 H2C
FIGURE 2 |Examples of biological self-assembled structures showing the building blocks and the relevant interactions involved in the
self-assembly process. (a) Protein folding; (b) ds-DNA; (c) tobacco mosaic virus (TMV); and (d) cell membrane.
distributed symmetrically despite their self-assembly
from asymmetrical components. The tobacco mosaicvirus (TMV), which self-assembles into rod-like
structures,
9,13represents an excellent example of
effective control over size of self-assembled structures.First, the TMV protein forms a two-layer disk,
with 17 proteins in each ring. A special initiation
sequence in the RNA then binds in the hole at thecenter. This cause the disk to dislocate, forming a
lockwasher shaped ring with 16 1/3 subunits pert turn.
The remaining subunits then stack in this structureelongating until the RNA is covered. Thousands ofcoat proteins (2130 identical protein units each with
158 amino acid residues) self-assemble into 300 nm
long cylinder (protein shell—capsid) around a singleRNA molecule (that comprises 6400 nucleotides)
which acts as a template (Figure 2(c)). The length of the
assembly is determined by the length of the enclosedRNA template. In the absence of the RNA template,
the TMV coat proteins assemble into cylinders with
the same diameter (18 nm) as the templated capsidsbut with variable length. The RNA template limits theself-assembly of the capsid proteins through speciﬁc
molecular interactions. The head to tail conﬁguration
of TMV represents a superb example of a biologicalself-assembled system. One of the interesting features
of the TMV is that if the virus is broken into its sub-
unities, when re-mixed in physiological conditions,the virus has the ability to self-assemble exactly into
the previous structure constituting a full replica.Thecytoplasmic membrane (Figure 2(d)) is a
phospholipid bilayer that serves to create a conﬁned
space (the cell) isolated from the external environment.
The phospholipid bilayer is arranged so that the polar
ends of the molecules (the phosphate and glycerolportion of the phospholipid that is hydrated in water)
form the outermost and innermost surface of the
membrane, while the nonpolar ends (the fatty acid
portions of the phospholipids that are insoluble in
water) cluster in the nonpolar region of the membrane.This membrane is stable enough to serve as a barrier
to the transport of water soluble ions (Na
+,K+,a n d
Ca2+)and molecules and has the ﬂuidity to allow the
entrance of particles inside the cell by endocytosis (the
process by which cells take in solutes or particles byenclosing them into vesicles or vacuoles pinched off
from the cytoplasmic membrane).
The previously described examples clearly show
how sophisticated self-assembly can be and how
nature’s assembly principles are used to createsupramolecular materials.
DESIGN OF SUPRAMOLECULAR
MATERIALS
From a materials science point of view, self-assembly
can be a simple and low cost bottom-up fabrication
process to obtain functional supramolecular materials
from pre-existing components (building blocks)
involving a reduced number of steps.3Different
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 585Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
TABLE 1 Synthetic and Biological Building Blocks Used in Supramolecular Self-Assembly for Obtaining Diverse Complex Structures and Their
Potential Biomedical Applications4,15–20
Building-Blocks Supramolecular Assemblies Applications
Polymers
Synthetic
Surfactants
Others
Viruses
Biological
Saccharides
Amylose
(helical)
PeptidesNucleic acids
LipidsRNA
Fatty acidPhospholipidDNAhHPBVλ phage CPMVPorphyrin RotaxaneGrapheneCationicDendronsMicelles
Nanoparticles
Micelles
Nanotubes
ToroidsVesicles
Carbon
nanotubes
ParticlesFibrilsAligned phage film
DNA origami
Lipid bilayerVesicles Films
Nanotube
Double
helixSpherical
micelle
Hydrogel biomaterials;
drug delivery; tissueengineering; 3D cellculture
40–48Drug delivery;biosensors
38,39Nanoreactors; artificialorganelles; controleddrug delivery
19, 36–37Therapeutics (vehicles fordrug delivery); diagnostics(biosensing)
11, 34, 35Biomaterials; cell culturesubstrates
30–33Nanomedicine;drug delivery;hydrogels
8, 28, 29Drug and gene deliverysystems; antimicrobial andantifungal activity
26, 27Nanocarriers for drug andgene delivery
23–25Nanoreactors; artificialorganelles; nanocarriersdrug delivery
21, 22
Vesicles Tubes
Nanofibers
AnionicBranched (e.g. dendrimers)ABLinear (e.g. block-co-polymers)
ABA ABC
Neutral
Cholesterol
Cyclodextrin
(cyclic)
OHHOHH
HHOHOO O O O OO OO OOOH
OHONa S
OOO O
O
O
O
OOP
O NO
HOH
O
NH 2NH 2 OH2N
OHOH
SHO
OOHOHO O
O OO O
OH
H2NNH
N H
NH
NN
HN
H
Random coil β-sheet α-helix Helix proteinEACQ SYVK
CPMV, cowpea mosaic virus; λphage, lambda bacteriophage; hHPBV, human hepatitis B virus.
building blocks (synthetic and biological, Table 1)
have been extensively studied for this purpose.
These building blocks can be atoms, small moleculesor macromolecules, and be designed (chemical
nature of the blocks, composition, length, and
molecular architecture) to contain all the necessary
information that encodes their self-assembly for
speciﬁc applications. In most cases, their self-assemblyis reversible and allows the combination of different
building blocks. The instructions for assembly lie on
the molecular structure of the building components,
namely on the precise geometrical positioning of
functional groups, which provides multiple intra- and
intermolecular interactions. Tuning the strength and
directionality of interactions among building blocks isthe key feature that deﬁnes the ﬁeld of supramolecular
materials.
14The interactions that provide high degree
of directionality to the assembly process of the
different building blocks are potential elements inthe design. By controlling the multiple interactions
during assembly will lead to a wide range of orderedstructures. The supramolecular structures that emergethrough self-assembly are triggered by controllingenvironmental variables, which create a driving forcethat pushes the system to a new thermodynamicminimum. Each of these characteristics of the self-assembling system is described in detail in thefollowing sections.
Self-Assembling Building Blocks
A wide range of different molecules (Table 1) canbe used to form supramolecular nanostructures ina variety of different assembling conditions. Themolecules must have the potential to form multiplenoncovalent interactions in a given solvent.
Synthetic block copolymers have been widely
used for fabricating a variety of organized assemblies
586 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
with distinct morphologies (e.g., micelles, vesicles,
and tubes). Self-assembly of these supramolecular
monomers relies on properties such as molecular
dimension (including the relative volume fractions
of the blocks), composition, solubility, stability, andstimulus responsive behavior.
49
Dendritic molecules (e.g., dendrons) are syn-
thetic molecules which have a well-deﬁned (monodis-
perse) 3D branched architecture. Dentritic building
blocks can assemble into more complex nanoscaleassemblies (nanoparticles, nanoﬁbers) by noncovalent
interactions.
25
Surfactants are compounds that consist of a
hydrophobic (usually a long hydrocarbon chain)
and a hydrophilic (ionic or polar group).26
Examples of surfactants are the well-known sodium
dodecylsulfate (SDS) and sodium oleate. Numerous
studies have demonstrated that surfactants self-
assemble in aqueous solution into micellar, vesicle,
and multilayer structures.
Viruses have been used as robust building blocks
in nanosciences due to their canonical shape (rod or
sphere) and size uniformity. The surface properties of
viruses can be manipulated genetically or chemically
without disrupting their integrity and morphology.They have been employed to generate long-range
ordered assemblies for biomaterials development.
30,33
In biology, nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) are
fundamental molecules of life as carriers of molecular
information. DNA’s base sequence stores and impartsinstructions, while RNA’s sequence plays the role of
a messenger and a regulator of gene expression. As
biological polymers, nucleic acids possess recognition
capabilities and interesting chemical properties which
depend on their base sequence. Nucleic acids canbe synthesized with a nearly inﬁnite number of
sequences.
11As referred before, the nucleobases
present in DNA and RNA molecules can formhydrogen bonds and π-πstacking interactions and
these interactions can be engineered for the bottom-
up fabrication of a variety of nanostructures.
50DNA
double helix is inherently a nanoscale object. Although
being more chemically labile, RNA molecules havestructural components that are very similar to DNA.
In addition, most RNAs are single-stranded molecules
with nanoscale motifs that mediate precise intra- and
intermolecular interactions. Two strands of DNA with
completely complementary sequences can bind to eachother and form a fully bases-paired duplex structure.
Lipids are the most important building blocks
of cell membranes. Generally, they are composed of
a hydrophilic head group and a hydrophobic tail
region.
51Due to the large variability in the head
group and tail chemistries, lipids are often categorizedinto polar and nonpolar. The hydrophobic nature and
rigid structure of lipids creates a tendency of these
molecules to aggregate into larger structures in water
in which the position and orientation of the molecules
is organized. In addition, the structural diversityof lipids (fatty acids, triglycerides, phospholipids,
and cholesterol) with different polarities, charged
groups and lengths allows the formation of dynamic
(e.g., monolayers, bilayers) and compartmentalized
(e.g., micelles, vesicles) structures in water, acting asbarriers, within which isolated processes can occur.
High-molecular weight saccharides (polysaccha-
rides) are produced by a broad variety of plants and
microorganisms with remarkable chemical (neutral,
charged, and linkage type) and structural diversity(linear or branched, random coil or helical confor-
mation). Polysaccharides contain multiple OH groups
capable of hydrogen bonding. In addition, carbohy-
drates play key roles in many molecular recognition
processes (e.g., bacterial and viral infection, cancermetastasis, and inﬂammatory reactions),
52are highly
adaptable and can introduce densely charged tem-
plates into nanostructured assemblies.53
Amino acids are naturally occurring molecules
being the constituents of peptides and proteins. There
are 20 natural ( l-form) amino acids that are used by
cells to synthesize peptides and proteins. Their names,
three-letter and one-letter codes and structures are
given in Table 2.
With the exception of glycine (G), all amino
acids are chiral and have the same basic structure,
a central αcarbon atom to which a hydrogen atom,
an amino group, a carboxyl group and side chain
R group are attached. The nature of their side
chain (charged, polar, nonpolar, aliphatic, aromatic,Table 2) contributes to their biochemical mode of
action and dictates the conformation assumed by
peptides and proteins. The aliphatic residues (A, I,L, M, V) provide a hydrophobic environment while
amino acids with aromatic (F, W, Y) side chains can
be engaged in π-πstacking. Neutral polar residues (N,
Q, S, T) can be involved in the formation of hydrogen
bonding through OH (S, T) or CONH (N, Q) groups.Basic (H, K, R) residues can be positively charged and
acidic amino acids (D, E) can carry a negative charge.
The presence of charged groups in these residues can
be used to create electrostatic interactions that are
important to drive the self-assembly process.
There are other amino acids that contain
functional groups with the ability to bind other
compounds. For example, cysteine (C) can bind to
gold surfaces and histidine (H) has high afﬁnity for
binding Ni
2+ions. Additionally, cysteine contains
thiol groups (SH) available for the formation of
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 587Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
TABLE 2 The Twenty Gene-Coded/Natural L-Amino Acids: Structure and Properties (Nature and pKa Values for the Ionizable Side Chains and
Their Tendency for α-Helix-Promoting/Breaking and β-Structure Promoting/Breaking when Part of a Peptide. Neutral: 0.8–1.00, No Tendency Either
Way)17,54
Amino 
acidThree/ 
One-letter code
L-Alanine
L-Arginine
L- 
Asparagine
L-Aspartic 
Acid
L-Cy steine
L-Glutamic 
Acid
L-Glutamine
Glycine
L-Histine
L-IsoleucineCys (C)Asp (D)Asn (N)Arg (R)Ala (A)
Glu (E)
Gln (Q)
Gly (G)
His (H)
IIe (I)Hydropho bic 
Aliph aticHydrophilic 
Basic (+) 
pKa ~ 6.1Polar 
NeutralHydrophilic 
Acidic (-) pKa ~ 4.2Hydrophilic 
Acidic (-) pKa ~ 3.8Polar 
Neutr
alHydrophilic 
Basic (+) 
pKa ~ 12.4Hydropho bic 
Aliph atic
OOHCH 3
NH 2
NH 2NHH
H
HN
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
HO
O
O
OHOH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
NH
OH
OHO
OSH
HOH2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2NHNNH 2H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
HH
HH
H
H
HH
HNSOH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
NH
OH
OH
OH
OHO
OHONH 2
CH 3H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2N
H2NH1.45 
(promoting)
0.79 
(neutral)
0.73 
(breaking)
0.98 
(neutral)
0.77 
(neutral)
1.53 
(promoting)
1.17 
(promoting)
0.53 
(breaking)
1.24 
(promoting)
1.00 
(neutral)1.60 
(promoting)0.71 
(breaking)0.81 
(neutral)1.23 
(promoting)0.26 
(breaking)1.30 
(promoting)0.80 
(neutral)0.65 
(breaking)0.90 
(neutral)0.97 
(neutral) L-Leucine
L-Lysine
L-Methionine
L- 
Phenyl alanine
L-Proline
L-Serine
L-Threonine
L-Tryptoph an
L-Tyro sine
L-Valine Val (V)Tyr (Y)Trp (W)Thr (T)Ser (S)Pro (P)Phe (F)Met (M)Lys (K)Leu (L)Hydropho bic 
Aliph atic
Hydrophilic 
Basic (+) 
pKa ~ 10.5
Hydropho bic 
Aliph atic
Hydropho bic 
Arom atic
Polar 
Neutral
Polar 
Neutral
Hydropho bic 
Arom atic
Hydropho bic 
Arom atic 
pKa ~ 10.1
Hydropho bic 
Aliph atic1.14 
(promoting)0.61 
(breaking)1.14 
(promoting)0.82 
(neutral)0.79 
(neutral)0.59 
(breaking)1.12 
(promoting)1.20 
(promoting)1.07 
(neutral)1.34 
(promoting)1.22 
(promoting)
0.75 
(breaking)
1.67 
(promoting)
1.28 
(promoting)
0.62 
(breaking)
0.72 
(breaking)
1.20 
(promoting)
1.19 
(promoting)
1.29 
(promoting)
1.65 
(promoting)Polar 
Can form di sulfide 
bond upon 
oxidation 
pKa ~ 8.2StructureNature/ 
pKa side ch ainα-Helix 
promoting/ breakingβ-Sheet 
promoting/ breakingβ-Sheet 
promoting/ breakingα-Helix 
promoting/ breakingAmino 
acidThree/ 
One-letter codeStructureNature/ 
pKa side ch ain
intra and intermolecular disulﬁde bonds (crosslinking)
upon oxidation, while serine (S), threonine (T) and
tyrosine (Y) provide chemical groups for chemicalor enzymatic modiﬁcation (e.g., OH groups in serine
can be phosphorylated to yield phosphoserine). The
absence of a side chain in glycine (G) allows a higherdegree of ﬂexibility compared with other residues.
On the contrary, proline (P) having its side chain
attached to the amino terminus, can add structuralrigidity due to its locked conformation.
17Amino
acids are therefore simple building blocks that provide
relevant noncovalent interactions to build complexsupramolecular assemblies. Peptides are formed by
linking a series of amino acids by peptide (amide)
bonds. Just using natural amino acids, the number ofpossible combinations that can be obtained for a single
peptide or protein is extremely large (20
n,w h e r e nis
the number of amino acids in the sequence). Havingthe ﬂexibility of using 20 chemically different amino
acids, peptides are versatile assembly components
due to the intrinsic functional diversity of aminoacids and have been widely studied as self-assemblingsystems. The unique self-assembling properties of
peptides and their ability to form emergent structures
are increasingly being exploited for the developmentof new bioactive materials. A number of very
important physiological and biochemical functions
of life are inﬂuenced by peptides. For example,peptides are involved in receptor-mediated signal
transduction, inﬂuencing cell–cell communication
upon interaction with receptors. Another importantfeature of peptides is related with their aggregation
state and its implications in human diseases. Long,
unfolded polypeptides have an innate tendency toform aggregates, such as amyloid ﬁbrils which are
known to be involved in Alzheimer’s disease. The self-
assembly process involved in collagen ﬁbrillogenesis isalso determinant for proper animal development and
may be associated with certain pathological situations.
The isolation of peptides from natural sources
is often problematic and the demand of synthetic
peptides in biological applications is steadily
increasing. Peptides can be obtained through chemicalsynthesis or genetic engineering.
588 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
Synthetic routes include conventional synthesis
in solution or solid-phase chemistry which allows for
the synthesis of short peptides (2–30 amino acids).Several reviews covering solid-phase peptide synthesishave been published.
55–57The easy preparation of
short peptides by solid phase has provided ample
opportunities for peptide design and to study the
effect of molecular design on their properties.
As self-assembling building blocks, peptides
are readily accessible through chemical synthesis;the information required for their self-assembly
is encoded within their sequence; their self-
assembly is usually spontaneous (simple methodto develop nanostructured materials), instantaneous(milliseconds), and reproducible (deﬁned stablestructures). Furthermore, by varying systematically
the chemical structure (e.g., sequence size and nature
of the amino acid side groups) during synthesis itis possible to adjust the self-assembling propertiesof the building blocks as well as to produce avariety of diverse nanostructures (e.g., micelles, ﬁbers,
vesicles).
58The speciﬁc ﬁeld of peptide self-assembly
will be the focus of this review.
Classes of Self-Assembling Peptides
Different peptide sequences have been designed toyield peptides with self-assembling properties. Themost widely described in the literature are discussedbelow.
α-Helix/Coiled-Coil Forming Peptides
α-Helical coiled-coil motifs are highly diverse, in
terms of structure and function, and are therefore
excellent starting units to form ﬁbrous structures.15
Most coiled coils are based on heptad sequence repeat
(abcdefg). The ﬁrst and fourth positions (a and d) areusually hydrophobic residues and the remaining siteslargely polar. This conﬁguration results in a rope-like
assembly that measures 1 nm per heptad. Excellent
reviews on coiled coil based systems have beendescribed by Woolfson and colleagues
59,60and such
systems are not discussed in detail here. Due to theirsupramolecular arrangement, coiled-coil peptides can
be used to present biological epitopes with high
density.
59Villard et al.61showed that α-helical coiled-
coil peptides carrying the RGD motif at the N-terminal(GRGDSPSG
2QLAQ 2L(Q 2LAQ 2L)4) could be used
as soluble antagonists or surface-immobilized agonists
to inhibit or promote integrin-mediated cell adhesion.
Replicating the helical structure of collagen
is very appealing and Chaikof62and Hartgerink63
have developed a strategy that employs electrostaticinteraction to guide the self-assembly of heterotrimerictriple helices using aminoacid triplets (Pro-Arg-Gly)
n,
(Glu-Hyp-Gly) n, (Pro-Hyp-Gly) non their peptide
chain design. In a recent paper, Hartgerink64described
the synthesis of collagen mimetic peptides (Pro-Lys-Gly)
4(Pro-Hyp-Gly) 4(Asp-Hyp-Gly) 4that was shown
to replicate the self-assembly of collagen (from peptidechain to triple helix formation to nanoﬁber and ﬁnallyto a hydrogel). This ﬁnding demonstrates the utility ofelectrostatic interactions for stabilizing triple helices.
β-Sheet Forming Peptides
A wide range of natural proteins possess intrinsic
propensity to self-assemble into ﬁbrillar nanostruc-tures that are rich in β-sheet secondary structure.
65
Theβ-strands in the nanoﬁbrils are organized per-
pendicularly to the ﬁbril axis and connected througha dense hydrogen-bonding network between amidesand carbonyls in the protein backbone.
66Several dif-
ferent β-sheet forming peptides have been designed
sharing a common motif of alternating hydrophobicand hydrophilic residues.
Self-Complementary Peptides
The group of Zhang at MIT has developed aclass of self-assembling peptides termed as self-complementary ionic peptides inspired by thesegment (RERERKRK)
2found in the Z-DNA
binding protein zuotin.67The peptides, termed as
RAD16-I ((RADA) 4), KLD-12 ((LKLD) 3), EAK16-II
((AE) 2(AK) 2(AE) 2(AK) 2) are composed of alternating
hydrophilic and hydrophobic amino acids residues(Figure 3(a-i)), present β-sheet conﬁguration and
ability to form hydrogels through changes in ionicstrength or pH (addition of salts or buffers).
68
Glutamine-Rich Peptides
The Ac-Q 2RFWQFEQ 2-Am (P 11-2)β-strand form-
ing sequence was ﬁrst described by Aggelli andco-workers.
69The design is based on alternating
hydrophilic (R, Q, E) and hydrophobic (F, W) residuesi nt h ec o r ew h i c hf a v o r e da β-strand conformation.
An odd number of amino acid residues were selectedto encourage a complete register of the adjacentamphiphilic peptide strands in an antiparallel β-sheet
tape. Side-chain interactions are another importantfactor in driving strand assembly. Dimethylene groupson the glutamine residues provide hydrophobic side-chain interactions, while the hydrophobic aromaticresidues additionally interact via π-πstacking interac-
tions. Aqueous solubility of peptide tapes is promotedthrough the presence of hydrophilic residues. Finally,the positively charged arginine and the negatively
charged glutamic acid residues are positioned such
that the complementary charges of arginine and glu-tamic acid on neighboring strands are adjacent to each
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 589Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
other if the peptide is in an antiparallel β-sheet con-
ﬁguration. P 11-2 was found to form self-supporting
gels at a concentration of approximately 15 mg/mL in
pH-neutral water. Following the initial design, other
β-sheet ﬁbrillizing peptides have been designed. For
example, the 11-residues sequence rich in glutamine
(Q11 peptide), containing arginine and glutamic acid
at positions 3 and 9 (AcQ 2RQ 5EQ2-CONH 2) was
shown to form antiparallel β-sheets that at higher
concentrations (0.01 mM) form semi-ﬂexible tapes
(Figure 3(a,b-ii)).70
β-Hairpin Peptides
β-hairpin peptide sequences have been explored
by Schneider and Pochan71,72due to their ability
to self-assemble into gels by its intramolecular
folding propensity. The design of β-hairpin peptides
comprises a tetra-peptide turn sequence (–VDPPT–)
and two neighboring βstrands of alternating
hydrophobic valine (V) residues and hydrophilic
lysine (K) residues [(VK) 4VDPPT-(KV) 4-NH 2] (Figure
3(a-iii)).72,73This initial peptide sequence has been
referred as MAX1. At acidic pH, the lysines
are protonated preventing peptide self-assembly.Neutralizing the charge, by addition of counterions
or increase of pH, results in the formation of self-
supporting rigid hydrogels by self-assembly. Replacingthe lysine residue at position 15 with a negatively
charged glutamic acid (E) residue [(VK)
4VDPPT-
K(VE)(VK) 2V-NH 2], the gelation kinetic of the
resultant peptide (MAX8) increased signiﬁcantly
in response to identical cell culture conditions.74
It has been demonstrated that the gel properties
(e.g., gelation kinetics, stiffness, network mesh
size) of the β-hairpin peptides have the ability
to be modulated for cell encapsulation74or
controlled release75purposes by changing the
peptide sequence, concentration, ionic strength and/ortemperature.
76
Amphiphilic Peptides
Amphiphilic peptides contain both hydrophobicand hydrophilic segments on their structure.
This class of self-assembling peptides includes
surfactant-like peptides and peptide amphiphiles(PAs) and is beginning to attract great interest in
bionanotechnoogy, due their versatility and potential
to form bioactive nanostructures by self-assembly.Their self-assembly properties have been investigated
and exploited by several groups.
77
Surfactant-Like Peptides. Zhang’s group designed
surfactant-like peptides in which the amphipathicnature of the peptide molecules derives solely fromthe sequence of amino acids. These peptides have
a hydrophobic tail and a hydrophilic head and areable to self-assemble into organized nanostructures
including micelles, vesicles, and tubes in water
(Figure 3(a,b-iv)).
43,78The nonpolar tail consists
of six amino acids with variable hydrophobicity,
such as G, A, V, I, L, and F, followed by
charged amino acids (D, K) as the hydrophilichead to ensure solubility in water. Examples of
surfactant-like peptides are: Ac-A
6D-OH, Ac-A 6K-
NH 2,A c - V 6K2-NH 2,D A 6-NH 2,A c - A 6K-OH, Ac-
I6K2-NH 2,A c V 6D2-OH, KA 6-NH 2,a n dA c - V 6R2-
NH 2. By varying the number of glycines from 4
to 10 as the component of the hydrophobic tails
and aspartic acid as the hydrophilic heads (G nD),
they showed that these peptides formed nanotubesand nanovesicles in water at neutral pH and the
obtained nanostructures became more polydisperse
as the length of the glycine tails increased.
79A
different design proposed by Zhang includes cone-
shaped amphiphilic peptide (e.g., Ac-GAVILRR-NH 2)
with a hydrophilic head of two charged amino acids
and a tail with decreasing hydrophobic and side chain
(R) size.
Peptide Amphiphiles. PAs are peptide-alkyl-chain
surfactants in which a peptide segment is covalently
bond to a very hydrophobic segment, usually asimple alkyl tail found in lipid molecules (Figure
3(a-v)). Their surfactant nature orients the more
hydrophilic peptide segment into the periphery,and the hydrophobic segment to the core of
the assembly. The laboratory of Stupp has given
important contributions in understanding the self-
assembly of PAs.
42The peptide segment can be
divided in two or three domains.41The sequence
close to the hydrophobic segment was designed to
promote β-sheet formation between PA molecules and
is the driving force for the formation of cylindricalnanostructures instead of spherical micelles. The
presence of charged elements into the peptide block,
not only enhances their solubility in aqueous solutions,
but also suppress their self-assembly as a result of
charge repulsion. The net charge also endows the PAresponsive to pH variations and salt addition and
drives their self-assembly into cylindrical nanoﬁbers
(Figure 3(b-v)) upon neutralization or chargescreening. The nanoﬁbers intertwine into 3D
networks resulting into a self-supporting gel matrix.
Additionally, a bioactive peptide sequence (e.g., cell-adhesive sequence—RGD), can be incorporated on
the other side of the PA molecule, allowing its
display at the water interface upon self-assembly,
being accessible to be recognized by or to recognize
590 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
(a)
i. Self-complementary peptide
ii. Glutamine-rich peptides
iii. β-hairpin peptides
iv. Surfactant-like peptides
v. Peptide amphiphile
vi. Drug amphiphile
vii. Multi-domain peptide
Fmoc-FFK2(QL)6K2CPTDAK3PAV6DMAX1Q11NH2NH2
OO
O
OHN
N
H
NORAD16-I5 nm
pH 7
salts
pH 9
50 nm
2 nm
pH 9–10
8 nm
6 nm
3 nm
pH 7FibrilpH 10Micelle50 nm3 nm20 nm6.6 nm
500 nm
100 nm
100 nm
100 nm 100 nm
100 nm
50 nm
100 nm 100 nm
100 nm 50 nm50 nm50 nm100 nm
Fibril
Vesicle
Cylindrical
micelle
H2O
pH 12
saltsReducible linker
100 nm
NanotubeΔT
UnfoldedFacial
association
Lateral
association∼ 3 nm
viii. Aromatic short peptide derivatives(b) (c)
Hydrophobic
drugβ-sheet
peptideOOO
O O
O OO OO
O
OO
O
HO H 2N H2N H2NH2N
H2N
NH2H2N
OH
HNH
NH
NH
NH
N
N
HH
NN
OO O
OO O
O O HO HO HO O HOH
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
N
H2N H2N H2N H2NNH
NHNH
NHNH NHHN
O
NH NHN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
H
O O O O O O O O
O
O
OO
O
O
NOH
HOOO
OO O
O OH
NH
NH
NN
HN
HN
HH
NO
O
OO O
OO
OOH2N
H2NON
HN
HN
HN
H
H
NH
NH
NH
NKH
NH
NH
N
N
HN
HN
HN
HHO OO O O O
OO
N
KK
KK
K
O O
HNNH
NH
HNNH
HNNH
HN
OO
OO
OO
H
N
OO O
O
O O OO O
O
N
HN
HH
N
O
NH2H2NH2NH2NH2NH2N H2NH2NNH2
NH2
NH2NH2
O
O
OO
H
NH
NH
NH
NH
NH
NN
HN
HN
HN
HN
HN
H
O OO
O
O O
O
OOHH
N
N
HO
O OO O
OONH2NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
O
O OOHO
O
O OHO
OOS OS
OH
NN
HN
HN
HN
HH
NH
NH
NN
HNH2
NH2OOK
KON
HN
HN
H
FIGURE 3 |Examples of self-assembling peptides with β-sheet secondary structure: Molecular structure (a) of peptide building blocks, molecular
graphics (b) showing their self-assembly mechanism and TEM/AFM images (c) of corresponding self-assembled nanostructures. (b-i, c-i: Reprinted
with permission from Ref 101. Copyright 2005 National Academy of Sciences, USA; c-ii: Reprinted with permission from Ref 102. Copyright 2010
National Academy of Sciences, USA; b-iii, c-iii: Reprinted with permission from Ref 103. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society; b-iv, c-iv:Reprinted with permission from Ref 78. Copyright 2002 National Academy of Sciences; b-iv: Reprinted with permission from Ref 104. Copyright 2002
Elsevier and Reprinted with permission from Ref 79. Copyright 2002 American Chemical Society; b-vi, c-vi: Reprinted with permission from Ref 91.
Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; b-vii, c-vii: Reprinted with permission from Ref 94. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society; (b-viii,c-viii: Reprinted with permission from Ref 100. Copyright 2009 Elsevier)
other biomolecules. The nature of the cylindrical
assembly of the PA system allows the presentation
of high density of biological signals perpendicular to
the long axis of the nanoﬁber, an external presentationthat is favorable for cell signaling.
80The Stupp
lab has designed a variety of PA molecules withhigh control over their nanostructure morphologyand functionality.
41,42,81The amino acids in the
peptide segment and the type of alkyl tail can bevaried to change the pathway of self-assembly andthe physical properties of the ﬁnal self-assembledstructure.
The group of van Hest has also created
amphiphilic peptides using the GANPNA
2G sequence
(derived from the CS protein of the malaria parasite)acylated at the N or C termini with alkyl chains of
variable length (C n-GANPNA 2G-OH, n=6, 10, 12,
14, 16, 18)82and with diacetylene functionality83,84
to tune their assembly behavior. When the peptidewas coupled to short alkyl chains (containing 12 or
less carbons) no aggregates were formed, whereas
with longer tails (containing more than 16 carbons)the PAs formed highly stable assemblies. Tirrell andco-workers have investigated PA molecules that can
self-assemble into micellar structures.
85–89Ad i f f e r e n t
PA design, containing a pentapeptide head groupbased on a sequence from procollagen I attachedto a hexadecyl lipid chain (C
16-KT 2KS) was shown
to assemble into extended nanotapes in aqueous
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 591Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
solution.90This is the only PA currently in use in
the market.77
Drug Amphiphiles. A new type of PAs, known
as drug amphiphiles (DAs), has been reportedrecently.
91,92A typical DA combines a hydrophobic
drug (e.g., camptothecin, CPT) with a small β-
sheet forming peptide sequence (VQIVYK) derivedfrom the Tau protein, conjugated through a linker(Figure 3(a-vi)). These amphiphilic molecules were
shown to self-assemble into discrete ﬁlamentous
nanostructures (nanoﬁbers or nanotubes, Figure 3(b,c-vi)). These nanostructures can act as self-deliveringdrugs, without the need for additional carriers,
allowing the precise control of drug content by
attaching one or more drug molecules.
Multi-Domain Peptides
Hartgerink’s group has proposed a distinct designof peptides termed as multi-domain peptides (MPDs).The MDP consists of an ABA block motif
93,94in which
the B block is composed of alternating hydrophilic
and hydrophobic amino acids (glutamine or serineand leucine, respectively, Figure 3(a-vi)) surroundedby the charged ﬂanking A blocks (e.g., glutamate or
lysine). K
2(QL) 6K2,K2(SL) 6K2,E ( Q L ) 6E, E(SL) 6Ea r e
examples of MDPs investigated by the Hartgerinkgroup. The A block provide water solubility andcounteract ﬁber assembly via electrostatic repulsion.
This design allows all glutamine or serine side chains
to lie on one face of the peptide and leucine side chainson the other. In aqueous environment, there will be asigniﬁcant driving force for two of these hydrophobic
faces to pack against one another forming a
hydrophobic sandwich which consequently stabilizesthe fully extended conformation. An intermolecular β-
sheet hydrogen-bonding network can then be created
between two or more pairs of these sandwiches (Figure
3(b-vii)). Different variations of these MPDS havebeen previously synthesized and demonstrated to self-assemble into well-deﬁned nanoﬁbers (Figure 3(c-vii))
with various bioactive epitopes
95–97and form self-
supporting gels when the charge is screened (e.g., in thepresence of multivalent anions such as phosphate).
94
Aromatic Short Peptide Derivatives
Another class of self-assembling peptides is short
aromatic peptides based on the amyloid-forming pep-
tides containing the diphenylalanine (FF) polypeptiderecognition motif.
16These short peptides form highly
stable hollow nanotubes in solution. Different vari-
ations of these low molecular weight peptides have
been investigated, including di- or tripeptides con-jugated with bulky aromatic groups, such as ﬂuo-renylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc), or naphthalene, at theN-terminus. Self-assembly occurs by a combination
of hydrogen bonding and π-πstacking of the aro-
matic rings. Fmoc-peptides have been investigated byGazit
65,98and Ulijn99(Figure 3(a-viii)). For example,
Ulijn’s group has investigated the self-assembly ofFmoc-dipeptides with varying hydrophobicity (Fmoc-FF-OH, Fmoc-FG-OH, Fmoc-GF-OH, Fmoc-LG-OH,
Fmoc-AA-OH, Fmoc-AG-OH, Fmoc-GG-OH).
40An
interesting feature of these systems is the formationof stable hydrogels which can be used to encapsulatecells. Therefore, these peptide systems have been func-tionalized with biological motifs (Fmoc-FRGD-OH,Fmoc-RGD-OH).
98,100This class of peptides consists
on much shorter and simpler peptide sequences as
compared to those described in the other categories,which might lower their costs and facilitate their com-mercialization.
Methods and Techniques for the
Characterization of Self-Assembled PeptideNanostructures
The function of self-assembling peptides clearly
depends on their structural properties. There area number of techniques that have been used tocharacterize the structure of self-assembled peptidesand study their assembly. This structural informa-tion is important to understand the mechanism of
peptide self-assembly and determine potential appli-
cations. For example, circular dichroism (CD) andnuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopiescan provide information about the self-assemblybehavior (folding) of peptides in solution, whileatomic force microscopy (AFM) and Transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) have been used to pro-
vide high-resolution information on the size andnanoscale morphology of the assembled structures(Figure 4).
46,105
Solution and solid state NMR have been
used to determine secondary structure of peptides
and their self-assembly mechanism, as it allows
to characterize aggregation at the atomic level.Solution state NMR can measure bulk solutionproperties, such as aggregation of complex moleculesin solution over time (early events of aggregation)and probing the effect of the environment on theself-assembly (e.g., pH, solvent, temperature).
107–109
In addition, it has the advantage of preserving thenative peptide conformations. 2D NMR spectroscopywas used to elucidate the assembly mechanism duringthe co-assembly of oppositely charged PAs.
110By
providing evidences on close intermolecular contactsbetween amino acids of different PA molecules, it
was hypothesized that the two oppositely charged
592 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
LENGTH SCALE
Atoms
Molecules
X-ray, NMR CD AFM, TEM SEM Optical microscopy1 cm 100 nmWavelength (nm)
190
0 2 4 6
PFM8 10 12200 210 220 230 240CD (mdeg)Fibers
TapesFiber bundlesSheets
Plaques1Å
Covalent bond
Hydrogent bond
Van der Waals
Electrostatic forces1 nm 10 nm 100 nm 1 mmHIERARCHICAL STRUCTUREHIERARCHICAL STRUCTURE STRUCTURAL ANALYSISSTRUCTURAL ANALYSISLENGTH SCALE
PlaquesSheetsFiber bundlesFibers
TapesAtoms
Molecules
FIGURE 4 |Length scales of the forces involved in self-assembly106(ﬁrst panel) and the hierarchical complex structures generated by peptide
self-assembly (second panel). Spectroscopy and microscopy techniques used for structural characterization of peptide molecules and assemblies f rom
the nanometer to centimeter length scales (third panel). NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance; X-ray, X-ray diffraction; CD, circular dichroism; AFM,
atomic force microscopy; TEM, transmission electron microscopy; SEM, scanning electron microscopy.
molecules are thoroughly mixed within any given
nanoﬁber as opposed to molecules segregating into
mixtures of homomeric ﬁbers.
The conformation of peptides in solution
can be determined by CD spectroscopy and this
technique has been widely used to study peptide
self-assembly.111–114β-sheet structures show a strong
maximum at 195 nm in positive CD, zero CD at 207
and 250 nm and a maximum at 217 nm with medium
intensity in the negative CD. A characteristic CDsignature of α-helices shows maximum at 191 nm
(positive CD) and 208, 222 nm (negative CD)
with zero CD at 202 and 250 nm. An unordered
(random) conformation exhibits a maximum (weak)
at 218 nm in the positive CD, zero CD at 211,
234, and 250 nm, with a strong CD signal at
197 nm and very weak at 240 nm in the negativeCD. The secondary structure content in peptidescan be calculated using CD data and Chou-Fasman
rules.
115
X-ray diffraction techniques have been widely
used to measure the degree of order in self-
assembled structures and include analysis in the
small-angle (small-angle X-ray scattering, SAXS) andwide-angle (wide-angle X-ray scattering, WAXS).
SAXS allows determination of order in the range
1–100 nm, whereas WAXS is used on atomic length
scale ( <1 nm). For example, in situ SAXS and
WAXS were used, respectively to characterize the
wall thickness (1–100 nm) and 2D molecular crystal
structure (angstrom scale) of crystalline membranesobtained by co-assembly of oppositely charged
amphiphiles.
116
Optical polarization microscopy can also be used
to quickly observe structure orientation and obtain
information about liquid crystalline-like structures.117
Electron microscopy is useful to supplement SAXS
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 593Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
analysis as it can provide information on the
morphology of the self-assembled nanostructures
(Box 1).118
BOX 1
ADVANCED MICROSCOPY TECHNIQUES
FOR THE CHARACTERIZATION OFSELF-ASSEMBLED PEPTIDE
NANOSTRUCTURES
Advances in electron microscopy [scanning elec-
tron microscope (SEM) and transmission electronmicroscopy (TEM)] have permitted the visualiza-tion of nanostructures in their natural state withminimal artifacts or interference from samplepreparation. In cryo-SEM and -TEM, the exam-ination is done below ambient temperature(typically between −100
◦Ca n d −175◦C), allow-
ing the structure of the sample to be preservedand recorded in the fully hydrated and chem-ically unmodiﬁed state. For example, cryo-TEMprovides a method to directly visualize nanos-tructures in the solution state through a thinﬁlm of vitriﬁed solvent.
119,120AFM, together
with TEM, has been used to characterize themorphology
113and dimensions (e.g., width and
height of nanoﬁbers)121,122of self-assembled
peptide nanostructures. Nanoindentation exper-iments on single peptide nanoﬁbers have beenperformed using AFM to evaluate the nanome-chanical properties of the assemblies.
122,123In
addition, AFM allows specimen imaging in wetconditions, avoiding artifacts caused by specimendrying, and enabling live observation.
118
Strategies to Control the Self-Assembly
Process
The self-assembly of molecules is normally carried out
in solution (Figure 5(a)) or at an interface (Figure 5(c))
to allow the required motion of the components. The
interaction of the components with their environmentcan strongly inﬂuence the course of the process. A
driving force causes the movement of the system
through the different possible conﬁgurations intoa ordered ﬁnal state. For self-assembly to occur,molecules must be mobile. In solution, thermal motion
provides the major part of the motion required
to bring the molecules into contact. Therefore,one of the challenges consists on assuring the
mobility of the components; as they become larger
than molecules, Brownian motion rapidly becomesirrelevant, and gravity and friction become important.The concentration of self-assembling units is expectedto inﬂuence the diffusion and the mobility of the
components. Increasing the concentration will driveassembly of larger structures.
For self-assembly to generate ordered structures,
the association either must be reversible or must allow
the components to adjust their positions within an
aggregate once it has been formed. The strength ofthe bonds between the components, therefore, mustbe comparable to the forces tending to disrupt them.
Environment and Driving Force
There are many pathways to trigger and/ordrive the self-assembly by changing graduallythe environmental conditions (e.g., building block
concentration, pH, temperature, ionic strength,
solvent, Figure 5(a)) or using an external input(e.g., light, enzyme activity). The presence ofions in solution, as well the pH and solventpolarity, are signiﬁcant factors that affect the
noncovalent interactions and hence the assembly
routes. The pH environment can modulate the degreeof protonation/deprotonation of amino acids withionizable groups (carboxyl and amino side chains,
Table 2) in peptides and proteins and thus control
their electrostatic interactions (attraction/repulsion).Similarly, ionic strength also affects the strengthof ionic interactions. Repulsive forces, due to ionic
interactions, can be neutralized due to changes in pH,
or addition of multivalent ions or charged polymers.In an early paper, Stupp and co-workers showed threedifferent modes of self-assembly of PA molecules,
using pH control, addition of divalent ions and
concentration.
124At neutral pH, the PAs have a
net negative charge, which keeps PA molecules fromself-assembly as a result of electrostatic repulsion.
When exposed to HCl vapor, and as the acid diffused
into the solution, the negative charge is eliminatedwith the consequent aggregation of the alkyl tailsand gel formation. In a similar effect of chargescreening, the addition of a divalent ion, such as
Ca
2+, causes gelation of the solution. Increased PA
concentration due to solvent evaporation was alsoshown to drive the PAs self-assembly. In anotherexample, heparin, a sulfated glycosaminoglycan, was
used to induce the self-assembly of a positively
charged PA.
125pH variation has been used in
other self-assembling peptide systems for inducinggelation, including Ulijn’s Fmoc-dipeptides.
40More
recently, Adams’s group has exploited salt-induced
gelation of functionalized-dipeptides to form rigidhydrogels.
126,127The effects of solvent type and ﬁnal
concentration on the hydrogel strength were studied
by Gazit and colleagues using aromatic dipeptides.128
594 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
The peptides were ﬁrst dissolved in an organic
solvent (hexaﬂuoroisopropanol or acetone) and then
diluted with water, resulting in the formation of a
strong and rigid hydrogel. As expected, the peptide
ﬁnal concentration inﬂuenced the hydrogel strength,the storage modulus increased with an increasing
peptide concentration, in the range 2–10 mg mL
–1.
Aromatic dipeptides (e.g., Fmoc-LD) also showed
thermoreversible behavior.129When such peptides
are dissolved in water at concentrations below 1%at 100
◦C, and cooled below 60◦C, they formed turbid
solutions.
Bulk self-assembly of small molecules frequently
yields structures that exhibit a high degree of order
on the nanometer scale, whereas at the micrometerscale they exhibit more disordered morphologies.
A method to dynamically control the self-assembly
process consist of designing self-assembling molecules
that are sensitive to external stimulus, such as
light or catalytic activities. This external stimuluscan convert a nonassembling precursor into self-
assembling element which is produced locally. A
major challenge in self-assembly is to control the
kinetics of the process (nucleation and growth) and
avoid defects in the formed assemblies. There is,therefore, a need to design self-assembling systems
(building blocks and assembling pathways) that allow
the spatiotemporal control of the process. Light-
triggered self-assembly was demonstrated by the Stupp
group by conjugation of a 2-nitrobenzyl group withthe amide nitrogen of the amino acid closest to
the hydrophobic segment (alkyl tail) of PA
130This
chemical conﬁguration protects the amide nitrogen
from hydrogen bonding. The 2-nitrobenzyl group can
be cleaved photochemically (upon light irradiation at350 nm) restoring a standard PA.
The speciﬁc activities of enzymes have been
also explored in the context of dynamic self-assembly by designing self-assembling building blocks
that are sensitive to enzymatic activities under
controlled conditions of pH, temperature, and
ionic strength. Enzyme-directed self-assembly can be
achieved either by catalyzing the synthesis of self-assembling molecules, or by removing a blocking
from the molecules.
17For that, several enzymes have
been used to generate supramolecular assemblies
via bond cleavage (proteases, phosphatases, and
esterases, which catalyze hydrolysis reactions) orbond formation (e.g., kinases, which catalyze the
transfer of a functional group from one molecule
to another). A PA was designed containing a
sequence which is a substrate of a protein kinase A
(PKA).
131Upon treatment with PKA, the PA molecules
became phosphorylated causing the disassemblyof the original cylindrical structures. Subsequent
treatment with alkaline phosphatase enzyme, which
cleaves the phosphate groups, resulted in PAreassembly. The laboratory of Ulijn has provided veryinteresting examples on enzymatically controlled self-assembly.
113,132 –134They have used a protease enzyme
(subtilisin) to produce building blocks in reversible
and spatially conﬁned manners using aromatic PA(Fmoc-dipeptide methyl esters) as self-assemblingprecursors. Subtilisin catalyzes the hydrolysis of theseesters to yield a Fmoc-peptide that self-assembles into
hollow nanotubular structures.
113Because the rate of
formation of the self-assembling building blocks isdetermined by the kinetics of the enzymatic reaction,different folded structures may be formed, henceoffering additionally the possibility of controlling the
mechanical properties.
Directed Self-Assembly
In directed self-assembly (DSA), the positions of self-
assembling building blocks are guided by an externalinput to introduce hierarchical organization insupramolecular materials. Examples of external inputsinclude temperature gradients, radiation, mechanical,
magnetic, and electric forces (Figure 5(b)) and
chemically or topographically patterned substrates(Figure 5(c)).
Temperature is known to play a role on the
kinetics of self-assembly by regulating the formation
and size of ordered aggregates.
135An interesting
study reporting the use of temperature control onPA assembly at the micro and macroscale by theformation macroscopic bundles of aligned nanoﬁbershas been demonstrated by Stupp and co-workers.
117
Field-Directed Self-Assembly
Externally applied ﬁelds can also be used to direct theself-assembly process. Field-directed self-assembly has
the added advantage that ﬁelds can be switched on/off
and tuned dynamically. Therefore, these externalforces can be used to template assemblies withimproved long-range order and controlled orientation.Time varying ﬁelds can be used to agitate an
equilibrium structure in order to allow kinetically
trapped defects to be removed from the systemor to establish and sustain a dynamically self-assembled system. For example, the van Hest grouphas shown the alignment of diacetylene-containing
PA nanoﬁbers in the presence of a strong magnetic
ﬁeld (20 T).
136They found that it was necessary to
ﬁrst disassemble the ﬁbrous structures by heatingthe sample to 90
◦C and after cooling down in
a magnetic ﬁeld resulted in signiﬁcant alignment
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 595Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
of the PA assemblies and the ﬁbers were oriented
parallel to the applied magnetic ﬁeld. Furthermore, the
alignment on a molecular level was passed on to the
high-molecular-weight chains that formed upon light-
induced polymerization of the diacetylene groups andwas reﬂected in optical properties of the material. This
study shows that through a convenient hierarchical
build up of self-assembling materials, structural
information on a molecular scale is transferred to
macroscopic properties, allowing the development ofnew materials that are well deﬁned on all dimension
scales. Later, the same group reported the patterning
of a solid ﬁlm using polarization holography (variation
of the light polarization direction) and diacetylene-
containing PA ﬁbers aligned in a strong magnetic ﬁeld,with no template, mask, or mechanical contact with
the ﬁlm.
137Using polarized light, spatially conﬁned
polymerization was achieved because polymerization
only took place at positions where the polarization of
the incident light was parallel to the ﬁber orientation,yielding a polymer pattern.
X-ray irradiation was also shown to induce
the crystallization of like-charge supramolecular
peptide ﬁlaments by repulsive forces at low peptide
concentrations (at concentrations greater than orequal to 1 wt% the crystallization is spontaneous).
138
The X-ray triggered organization of peptide ﬁlamentsfrom a disordered state to a hexagonally ordered state
was attributed to an increase in charge density caused
by X-ray irradiation leading to enhanced electrostaticrepulsions among ﬁlaments. Addition of ions that
screened the charges on the ﬁlaments suppressed the
formation of crystalline structures. More recently,
Stupp and co-workers reported the effect of an
electrical ﬁeld during the dynamic self-assembly ofa negatively charged polyelectrolyte and a positively
charged PA in water leading to the formation
of an ordered membrane.
139The superposition
of an external electric ﬁeld during molecular co-
assembly and diffusion of the charged species allowed
controlling both growth rate and directionality of the
ﬁbrils that made up the membrane. Depending on the
strength and orientation of the ﬁeld, they observed asigniﬁcant increase or decrease of up to nearly 100%
in the membrane thickness, or the controlled rotation
of nanoﬁber growth direction by 90
◦, which led to
a signiﬁcant increase in mechanical stiffness. These
results suggest the possibility of using electric ﬁeldsto control structure in self-assembly processes that
involve the diffusion of oppositely charged molecules.
Zhang ﬁrst reported the use of microcontact
printing, together with self-assembling oligopeptides
containing cell adhesion sequences, to fabricate a vari-ety of surface patterns.
140They showed the formationof complex cell patterns on the engineered surfaces.
Stupp and co-workers have also used surface pattern-
ing techniques, including dip-pen nanolithography141
and soft lithography142–144to control the self-
assembly of PAs on different substrates to alignand generate precise patterns of self-assembledpeptide nanoﬁbers over large areas (Box 2). The ﬁnal
BOX 2
TEMPLATED SELF-ASSEMBLY
In templated self-assembly (TSA), a prefab-
ricated template (2D substrate chemically ormechanically patterned) orients and directs theassembling components to (1) create structureswith better long-range order than their nontem-plated counterparts, (2) control the morphologyof the resulting assemblies, and/or (3) form novelstructures/phases that would not be favorable inthe absence of the template.
2The patterned sub-
strate interacts selectively with the assemblingcomponents and their organization near the sub-strate is governed largely by the patterns on thetemplate and this organization is propagatedinto the bulk of the assembling structure via theinteraction between the components. TSA canbe used to hierarchically organize self-assembledstructures for higher order assemblies. In theTSA approach, speciﬁc physical and chemicalinteractions of the molecules and componentswith the surfaces are the driving forces for theformation of stable organized ﬁlms at solid sub-strates (Figure 5(c)). Vertical and horizontal seg-regation of components, their chemical bindingand anchoring density determine supramolec-ular organization in a self-assembled ﬁlm.
morphology of assembled peptide nanostructures and
organization are likely to be mediated by the surfacecharge and evaporation conditions. Steric conﬁnementis also expected to play a role, promoting thetransition to a lyotropic liquid crystalline phase assolvent evaporates. More recently, Mendes et al.
145
have successfully used conventional lithographytechniques to guide the self-assembly of a positivelycharged MPD with the anionic biopolymer hyaluronicacid, to generate different regular patterns withmicrosized dimensions on self-supporting membranes.They demonstrated that integration of bottom-upand top-down fabrication processes allowed thedevelopment of membranes with a hierarchicalstructure composed of self-assembled nanoﬁbersand well-deﬁned microtopographies (Figure 5(c-iii)).Another approach toward TSA is the use of geometric
596 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
(a)
Ionic strength
pH
Temper ature
LightEnzyme activity
Peptide n anofibers
Aligned 
nanostructureshv
Heat/cool 
radiation 
electric field
Nano-scale ordering
Micro-scale orderingNanofiber stacking
Mem braneChemic ally patterned subs trate
Topogr aphically patterned subs trate
Polymer
Peptide +−Peptide molec ules 
in solution
i) ii)
iii)
iv)
Microfl uidics device
Self-assembled microc apsules125 μm2 μm20 μm5 μm(b)
(c)
FIGURE 5 |Examples of spontaneous self-assembly in solution (a) and directed by external forces (b) or by a chemical/physical template (c). DSA
can be used to guide the self-assembly process and lead to speciﬁc orientation, alignment, ordering, or new microdomain structures. (b) DSA using
energy (electric and magnetic ﬁelds, shear, temperature gradients). (c-i) TSA on chemically patterned substrates. (c-ii) Self-assembly across th e length
scales, from nano to microscale. (c-iii) TSA of a multi-domain peptide in the presence of hyaluronic acid on topographically patterned soft substrat et o
fabricate freestanding thin membranes.145(c-iv) TSA using microﬂuidics (conﬁned space) to precisely generate spherical capsular structures with
monodispersed size.146
conﬁnement to orient bulk structures or to induce
the formation of novel morphologies not found in
bulk systems. For example, our group has used
microﬂuidics to generate polymer microdroplets toserve as templates for the formation of polymer-peptide microcapsules which are formed by self-assembly upon contact of the polymer droplets,containing the anionic polysaccharide xanthan, with
positively charged a MPD (Figure 5(c-iv)).
146
Combining external ﬁelds with templates will
allow a better control over the spatial distributionand orientation of self-assembling building blockstoward the fabrication of complex hierarchicalmaterials.
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 597Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
Cell culture Drug delivery
Microcapsules
Tissue-like matricesMembranesProteins
ElectrostaticWater
HydrophobicViruses
Hydrogen bonding
AromaticN
HN
H
NHHydrogels
Cell encapsulationDNA
Cell
membraneK4
Na+Ca2+
Tissue engineering250 nm50 μm
125 μm
250 μm
100 μm
Cells
Scaffolds10 μm
ÖNon-covalent interactionsSelf-assembly
FIGURE 6 |Advances in peptide self-assembly have contributed to the generation of nanostructured biomaterials enabling their expansion into
different applications in regenerative medicine.
APPLICATIONS OF SELF-ASSEMBLING
PEPTIDE BIOMATERIALS INREGENERATIVE MEDICINE
The extracellular matrix (ECM) of tissues is a
dynamic and hierarchically organized nanocompositethat regulates essential cell functions such as adhesion,migration, proliferation, and differentiation. Engi-
neering complex tissues requires biomaterial scaffolds
that recapitulate the structure and composition ofECM to provide cells with physical and biochemicalsignals that are important for tissue developmentand organization (functional tissue). 3D scaffolds, inwhich cells are randomly distributed, offer limited
control over spatial cell organization and tissue
architecture. To recreate the structure and functionof natural ECMs, self-assembling peptides enable thecreation of scaffolds based on a network of nanoﬁbers.At sufﬁciently high concentration, the ﬁbrillization
of peptides is accompanied by gelation. Nanoﬁbers
obtained by self-assembly can become entangled toform network hydrogels. The nanoﬁbers can havediameters as small as 10 nm (signiﬁcantly smaller thatthose obtained by electrospinning, a top-down fab-rication technique) and be designed with bioactivityto provide cells with instructive cues toward tissue
formation. Cell adhesion or macromolecular-binding
sequences can be incorporated into the peptide struc-tures and are natural choices to recreate bioactiveartiﬁcial ECMs. For effective display of these signalson the nanoscale, it is also necessary a careful synthetic
design for presenting the peptide signals in a proper
supramolecular setting that allows better interactionwith target cell receptors. Peptide nanoﬁbers candisplay high epitope densities that facilitate receptor
clustering for signaling and simultaneously maximize
successful binding. Peptide self-assembly technologycan further provide additional routes for the spatialand temporal program of selective binding of relevantbiomolecules to nanoﬁber networks for stimulating
and guiding tissue regeneration. Such class of materi-
als would be useful throughout medicine. This part ofthe review describes self-assembled peptide systemsdesigned for applications in regenerative medicine,
including artiﬁcial matrices for cell culture, controlled
drug delivery, and tissue engineering (Figure 6). Themost relevant works that the authors consideredof particular interest and signiﬁcance in the ﬁeldare highlighted. Several excellent reviews are cited
598 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
that are sources of more detailed descriptions and
discussions.
Peptide Hydrogels for 3D Cell Culture
Traditional cell culture is performed on 2D plastic sur-
faces which are far from the complex 3D environmentwhere cells naturally reside. 3D environments provideanother dimension for external mechanical and chemi-cal inputs, which dramatically affects integrin ligation,
cell contraction, and associated intracellular signaling.
Furthermore, 3D models might help to isolate andinvestigate speciﬁc cell–cell and cell–ECM interac-tions. Well-deﬁned synthetic 3D systems requirecontrol not only of cell adhesion sites and matrixviscoelasticity, but of nano and microporosity (whichregulates cell motility and the transport of soluble
molecules), growth factor binding and matrix degra-
dation. Peptide hydrogels offer signiﬁcant potentialto recreate 3D cell culture biomimetic environmentsbecause the formation of these self-assembled matri-ces occurs under physiological and cytocompatibleconditions enabling the direct encapsulation of
cells in a 3D environment. Zhou and co-workers,
developed a peptide-based bioactive hydrogel as3D scaffolds for anchorage-dependent cells.
100
This hydrogel is formed through self-assemblingof two aromatic short peptide derivatives: Fmoc-FF (ﬂuorenylmethoxycarbonyl-diphenylalanine)and Fmoc-RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartate) and
exhibited a highly hydrated, stiff, and nanoﬁbrous
network comprising bioactive ligands at the ﬁbersurface, mimicking some features of the ECM.Encapsulated dermal ﬁbroblasts were observed toadhere, spread, and proliferate within this hydrogel(Figure 7(a)), suggesting the use of these self-assembled
matrices as suitable model scaffolds for 3D cell
culture.
To provide a proper environment for encapsulat-
ing chondrocyte cells, Sinthuvanich et al.
147designed
peptide sequences based on MAX8 self-assemblingpeptide to form 3D hydrogels for cell culture and toexamine the effect of charge on their behavior.
Several works describing the use of self-
assembled peptide hydrogels for cell encapsulationand 3D cell culture (Figure 7, Table 3) have beenreported in the literature.
17,70Some examples will
be also described in the topic peptide hydrogels asscaffold for tissue repair.
Peptide Hydrogels/Nanostructures for
Delivery of Bioactive Factors
Peptide-based matrices have also been used for
the delivery of therapeutic agents such as proteinsand small molecules (e.g., drugs). Physical encap-
sulation/entrapment of proteins (e.g., lysozyme,
trypsin inhibitor, bovine serum albumin (BSA),
and immunoglobulin (IgG)) was reported by Kout-
sopoulos using self-complementary ionic peptide gels(Figure 7(d)).
148,149It was demonstrated that the
protein release through the peptide hydrogels was
dependent on the protein size and the density of the
peptide nanoﬁbers. Similar strategy was applied by
Branco and co-workers150for entrapping proteins
(BSA, IgG, lysozyme, α-lactalbumin, myoglobin, and
lactoferrin) within β-hairpin gels. The release rate of
the protein was shown to be dependent on the protein
charge density. These systems have also been used for
the controlled release of small drugs. Herein, the drugis encapsulated by physical entrapment within the gel,
as reported by Altunbas et al.
75in the encapsulation
of the hydrophobic polyphenol curcumin within
β-hairpin gel. The release rate was modulated as
function of peptide concentration. Webber131also
demonstrated the ability to encapsulate chemother-
apeutics, such as doxorubicin (anticancer drug) in
the core of PA nanoﬁbers. The drug was released
through the disassembly of peptide nanoﬁbers
triggered by enzymatic phosphorylation of a serineresidue. To increase the drug loading efﬁciency,
Cui and co-workers have developed supramolecular
nanostructures formed by DAs.
91,92Using anticancer
drugs (e.g., camptothecin and paclitaxel) on their DA
formulation, they showed high drug loading contents(23–41%). Since most of the anticancer drugs need
to be internalized by cells to exert its cytotoxic effect,
a reducible linker (disulfylbutyrate, a molecule that
breaks down in the presence of glutathione a reducing
agent present in the cytosol) was incorporatedbetween the hydrophobic drug and the peptide
segment, to allow intracellular drug release. Assuming
that the hydrophobic drug and the linker are buriedin the core of the ﬁlamentous nanostructures, the
supramolecular morphology of DAs provides protec-
tion from the external environment and a mechanism
for drug controlled release. In vitro toxicity experi-
ments with different cancer cell lines revealed identicaltoxicity of the synthesized DAs compared to free
drug.
Self-assembling peptides have also been designed
to act as reservoir for the local and temporal release
of growth factors (GFs) through the incorporationof GF binding sequences. Stupp and co-workers
111
found peptide sequences by phage display withbinding afﬁnity for BMP-2 (e.g., YPVHPST) and
TGF-β1 (e.g., LPLGNSH) GFs with potential use in
bone and cartilage regeneration, respectively. The useof heparin binding peptide sequences has been also
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 599Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
(a1)
(a2)
(c1)
(c3)G′ = 48 kPa G ′ = 10 kPa (d1)(d2)Hydrophilic side
6 – 15 nmIgG Hydrophobic side
(d3)(d5)1.0
0.8
0.6Mt/M∞
0.4
0.2
0.0
02 0 4 0(KLDL)3 0.3%(RADA)4 0.5%
(RADA)4 1.0%
(RADA)4 1.5% (KLDL)3 0.6%
60
Time (days)80 100(d4)5 mm
0.5 μmRADA16-I
KLD-12(c2)
(c4)(a3)(b1)
(b3) (b4)
(b5) (b6)1 day 5 days
5 days 1 day(b2)
(a4)With RGD
With RGE100 μm
100 μm25 μm 400 nm
100 μm
400 nm 25 μm50 μm
50 μm
100 μm
50 μmUnblocked
integrins
Blocked
integrins(a)
(c) (d)(b)
FIGURE 7 |Examples of peptide hydrogels used for in vitro 3D cell culture and delivery of protein molecules. (a) Cell (human dermal ﬁbroblasts)
adhesion and morphology in Fmoc-FF/Fmoc-RGD (a1) and Fmoc-FF/Fmoc-RGE (a2) hydrogels; Cells are well spread in the Fmoc-FF/Fmoc-RGD
hydrogels while in Fmoc-FF/Fmoc-RGE maintain a round morphology. Integrin ( α5β1) blocking experiments proved direct interaction of the cells with
RGD after 20 h (a3, a4). (Reprinted with permission from Ref 100. Copyright 2009 Elsevier) (b) Enzymatically degradable peptide hydrogels allows
cleavage of self-assembled peptide structures by speciﬁc enzymes, as visualized by cryo-TEM images which show intact nanoﬁbers of a multi-domain
peptide containing enzyme cleavage sites before (b1) and after incubation with MMP-2 (b2) resulting in the disintegration of the nanoﬁbrousnetwork; The presence of a MMP-2 cleavage site allows cell migration into the peptide hydrogels (b5, b6) whereas in nondegradable hydrogels
green-ﬂuorescent cells remain as monolayer on top (b3, b4). (Reprinted with permission from Ref 96. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society) (c)
Effect of mechanical properties of self-assembled peptide (Q11) hydrogels on the growth and proliferation of primary human umbilical veinendothelial cells (HUVECs) seeded on top of the gels; HUVECs were nearly conﬂuent on the stiffer gels (c1, storage modulus G
/prime=48 kPa) and
expressed signiﬁcantly higher levels of the cell–cell adhesion protein PECAM (CD31, expression of CD31 at cell–cell contacts is expected in normall y
functional endothelial cells) (c3) whereas on less stiffer gels (G/prime=10 kPa) cells are sparse and spindle-shaped (C2) (green-CD31, blue-DAPI);
(Reprinted with permission from Ref 151. Copyright 2008 Elsevier) (d) Two-layered (d1) self-assembling peptide (d2) nanoﬁber (d4) hydrogel (d3) fo r
the long-term sustained delivery of antibodies such as immunoglobulin G (d5). (Reprinted with permission from Ref 149. Copyright 2012 Elsevier)
applied for the controlled release of angiogenic GFs
for therapeutic applications in islet transplantationand cardiovascular disease.
48
Peptide Hydrogels as Scaffolds for Tissue
Repair
Bone
Despite four decades of research on bone regeneration
therapies, the gold standard in bone replacement ther-
apy is still the use of autografts (patient’s own bone)or allografts (donor bone). However, both approaches
present drawbacks such as morbidity and severe paincomplications at the donor-site of harvesting, risk ofseptic complications, viral transmission, or diseasetransfer and limited bone volume at donor site.
152In
that respect, there is an enormous need for syntheticreplacements for bone repair and regeneration. Theuse of self-assembling peptides for bone repair applica-
tions has been reviewed elsewhere.
68,81Several studies
demonstrated the potential of these materials for bone
600 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
regeneration. For example, 3D self-assembled peptide
nanoﬁbers were shown to enhance signiﬁcantly thein vitro proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) when compared with
conventional cell culture plate.
153Moreover, it was
found that self-assembling peptide sequences contain-
ing the phosphoserine (S(P)) residue and the RGD
cell adhesion sequence (C 16O-C 4G3S(P)RGD) have
the ability to induce hydroxyapatite mineralization in2D.
154Later, this combination of signaling epitopes
(5% RGDS and S(P) 95%) simultaneously with pre-
osteoblastic cells were loaded as a gel into a porous
titanium foam in order to increase biocompatibility
of typical metallic implants.155,156The ability of these
amphiphilic self-assembled matrices (GS(P)E 2L3A3-
OC 16and SDGRK 2L3A3-OC 16) to induce faster bone
regeneration at tissue interfaces was demonstrated.
The same nanoﬁber matrix was tested in a rat femoral
critical-size defect and showed signiﬁcant bone
formation (Figure 8(a)).157In another study, peptide
functionalized with RGDS (CH 3(CH 2)14CONH–
GTAGLIGQ–RGDS) and DGEA (CH 3(CH 2)14
CONH–GTAGLIGQ–DGEA) sequences were inves-
tigated as an ECM-mimicking biomaterial to provide
an instructive microenvironment for osteogenic dif-
ferentiation of human MSCs,158showing osteogenic
differentiation with and without the addition of
osteogenic media. Additionally, self-assembled
nanostructures consisting of BMP receptor-binding
peptides,159,160as mentioned previously, have been
explored due to its osteoinductive potential to be
applied in bone repair therapies. RAD16 peptide-
based gels have also been demonstrated to be valuable
in enhancing bone regeneration.68,161,162
Cartilage
Cartilage is an avascular tissue with low capacity ofself-repair mainly due to the reduced availability of
chondrocytes and absence of progenitor cells in carti-
lage tissue, and restricted mobility of chondrocytes in
the dense ECM. Cartilage lesions, caused by trauma,or disease, results in the loss of partial or complete
tissue functionality. Thus, one of the approaches in
regenerative medicine for repairing cartilage defects
consist on the use of an injectable system capable
of gelling in situ, to deliver autologous chondro-
cytes and stimulating cells to produce cartilage.
Signiﬁcant advances have been made in developingself-assembling gels for creating well-controlled 3D
environments for encapsulating chondrocytes to
foster the formation of cartilage. For instance, a
self-assembling KLD-12 peptide hydrogel was used as
a 3D scaffold for encapsulation of chondrocytes.
163
This self-assembling matrix was found to support cellsurvival and to retain the chondrocytic phenotype with
increased production of glycosaminoglycans and typeII collagen (components of cartilage ECM). Moreover,
an increase in dynamic stiffness of the matrix material
during the culture period was observed. In another
study, bone marrow stromal cells were encapsulated
within a self-assembling peptide hydrogel containing
two peptide sequences (KLD-12 and RAD16-I)
known to enhance chondrogenic differentiation.
164
Chondrogenesis in these self-assembling peptide
matrices was shown to be superior when com-
pared with agarose hydrogels, as shown by ECM
production, DNA content, and aggrecan molecular
structure.
Also in the context of cartilage repair using
self-assembling peptide hydrogels, a PA (Table 3)was designed to form nanoﬁbers for cartilage
regeneration and displaying a high density of TGF β-1
binding sequence. These materials were shown to
support the survival and promote the chondrogenic
differentiation of MSCs.
165Moreover, regeneration
of articular cartilage was also observed in a full
thickness chondral defect (microfracture in a rabbitmodel) treated with this PA gel, with or even without
the addition of exogenous GF (Figure 8(b)).
Central Nervous System
The central nervous system (CNS) is a dynamic organwhich is prone to injury and degeneration. Stimulation
of the CNS to regenerate after trauma (e.g., after spinal
cord injury, SCI) both structurally and functionally,
still remains a signiﬁcant challenge due to the inherent
complexity of the adult CNS, as well as the inability of
the central neurons to regenerate correct axonal anddendritic connections. Strategies for regenerating the
adult CNS include cellular replacement, neurotrophic
factor delivery, axon guidance, and removal of growth
inhibition, manipulation of intracellular signaling,
cellular bridging using artiﬁcial substrates, and modu-
lation of the immune response.
166Artiﬁcial substrates
may be useful for repair of lesions where cellular bridg-ing is necessary. The ideal artiﬁcial substrate will have
a molecular composition that is easily manipulated
and immune tolerant, and will contain a porous struc-
ture for nerve regeneration and cell repopulation that
will be easily absorbed by the CNS. Different types
of self-assembled peptide hydrogels have been inves-
tigated for CNS repair. A PA containing the IKVAVepitope (Table 3) and able to form 3D networks of
nanoﬁbers by self-assembly, was used to encapsu-
late neural progenitor cells. The IKVAV sequence is
derived from the protein laminin responsible for neu-
rite growth.
80This artiﬁcial nanoﬁber scaffold was
shown to induce very rapid differentiation of cells into
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 601Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
neurons, while discouraging the development of astro-
cytes comparatively to laminin. These ﬁndings had ledthe same authors to use a similar PA molecule contain-ing the IKVAV epitope (C
16O-(SL) 2A3EIKVAV) in
vivousing a mouse model of SCI.167The peptide solu-
tion was injected at the site of injury where gelationtook place. It was found that treatment with the PA
reduced astrogliosis, reduced cell death, and increased
number of oligodendroglia at the injury site. In addi-tion, the IKVAV based peptide gel promoted the regen-eration of injured motor and sensory axons, while ininjured spinal cords treated with peptide gel (withoutIKVAV sequence) axons were unable to traverse the
lesion. Later, using two SCI models (compression and
contusion) and two different species (mice and rats),the injection of IKVAV PA on the animal functionalrecovery was investigated.
168This study conﬁrmed the
regeneration potential of the IKVAV PA in improvingbehavioral outcome by stimulating axon regeneration
through the lesion (Figure 8(c)).
Peptide hydrogels, formed by self-assembly
of ionic self-complementary peptides (RAD16-I(RADA)
4and RAD16-II (RARADADA) 2)a tp h y s -
iological conditions, were also shown to performsuccessfully in neurorepair strategies.
169It was
demonstrated the ability of these gels to support neu-
ronal cell attachment, differentiation, and extensive
neurite outgrowth, being permissive substrates forfunctional synapse formation between the attachedneurons. The authors postulated that the bioactivityof these peptides is due to the similarity of the tripep-tide arginine-alanine-aspartate (RAD) sequence in the
peptide with the RGD motif which is known as a
binding site for some cell integrins. The ability of thesepeptide hydrogels for brain repair was also demon-strated using a severed optic tract in a hamster model.Injection of peptide solution at the lesion site createda permissive environment for regenerated axons to
reconnect to target tissues with sufﬁcient density to
promote functional recovery, as demonstrated by areturn of lost vision.
170In another study, (RADA) 4
peptide was used as a scaffold for transplantationof neural progenitor cells and Schwann cells into thetransected dorsal column of spinal cord of rats to eval-uate its potential for SCI repair.
171The self-assembled
matrix was shown to promote survival, migration, and
differentiation of both cells. In addition, migration ofhost cells, growth of blood vessels, and axons into thescaffolds was also observed. The same hydrogels werealso investigated on the reconstruction of acutelyinjured brain. Increased brain tissue restoration was
observed in groups treated with this hydrogel.
172Revascularization Therapies
Angiogenesis, the process of new blood vessels
formation from existing ones, assumes great relevance
in wound healing. Heparin based molecules have
shown to play an important role in angiogenesis
due to their ability to bind, stabilize, and protect
proangiogenic proteins such as vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) and basic ﬁbroblast growth
factor (FGF-2). On the basis of this knowledge,
heparin was used to trigger the self-assembly of PA
molecules125,173containing heparin binding sequences
(Table 3) demonstrating the ability of these systems
to stimulate new blood vessel formation in vivo .I n
diabetes type I, loss of vascular networks during islet
isolation from donor tissue is common. However,
implanting heparin-containing peptide gels delivering
VEGF, FGF-2 in diabetic mouse signiﬁcantly increased
vascular density in the transplant site and improved
islet engraftment, as evidenced through the higher
cure percentages and shorter times to achieve
normoglycemia.174These heparin binding peptide
nanoﬁbers with heparin displayed on their surfaces has
shown to increase islet survival and insulin secretionand if combined with angiogenic GFs lead to enhanced
levels of islet endothelial cells sprouting
175that may be
valuable in islet transplantation to treat diabetes type I.
There is a need of cell-based therapies for
ischemic tissue repair in cardiovascular diseases, as
result of limited regeneration of cardiomyocytes.176
To overcome this limitation, a biocompatible matrixis normally required to support cell functions during
the transplantation, once the direct cell transplan-
tation (embryonic stem or endothelial progenitor
cells) results in low cellular viability and minimal
retention.
177A scaffold constituted of self-assembled
peptide nanoﬁbers containing ﬁbronectin-derived
RGDS cell adhesion epitope was used to encapsulate
bone marrow-derived stem and progenitor cells
in vivo .177Enhanced viability, proliferation, and
adhesion of encapsulated cells suggested the potential
of these materials to be applied in cell therapies
for ischemic diseases. Self-assembled RAD16 based
gels have also shown to support the survival of
encapsulated endothelial and myocardial cells178
and the potential to create a 3D microenvironmentwhen injected in myocardium by recruiting both
endogenous endothelial and smooth muscle cells
with stimulation of vascularization.
176Very recently,
self-assembling peptide Ac-(RA) 2(DA) 2(RA) 2(DA) 2)
nanoﬁber scaffolds containing VEGF were shown
to create a microenvironment for arteriogenesis and
cardiac repair when injected into the heart tissue after
myocardial infarction (Figure 8(d)).179
602 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
(a1)
(a3) (a4)Sprague
dawley ratPA gel
New Zealand
White Rabbit
GAGs
MI + PBS
MI + VEGF (100 ng/mL) MI + NF/VEGF (100 ng/mL)MI + NF(b3)
10% TGFBPA alone
CD-1 mouse
100
IKVAV-PA
Cardic troponin I
Green
proteinFluorescent
Nuclei
GFP/cTnI/DAPIEQS-PA
Sham*
*
*
***% of Fibers80
60
40
20
0
To
lesionEnter 25% 50% 75% 100% Enter
rostral
SCMerCreMer-ZEG
mouseIntramyocardial injection of various treatments after MICollagen II2 mm2 mm
Proximal end of the defect
Proximal end of the defectDistal end of the defect
Distal end of the defectF
E
BC1 mm
1 mmGap
Gap(a7)
(a8)(a)
(c)(b)
(d)(a5)
(c4)(c1)
(c2)
(c3)(a6)PA gel 5 mm
5 mm
Newly formed boneNewly formed bone
Original boneOriginal bone1 mm 1 mm(a2) (b1) (b2)
FIGURE 8 |In vivo studies showing the potential of self-assembling peptides as regenerative biomaterials and their advanced testing stages
toward clinical applications. (a) Bone regeneration mediated by a self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber gel matrix that has the capacity to mineralize; A
critical-size (5 mm wide) defect (a1, a3 empty defect) in a rat femoral was treated with these gels (a2, a4); Microcomputed tomography analysis ofthe rat femurs after 4 weeks of gel implantation revealed the formation of new bone (a6, a8) when compared with empty defects (a5, a7). (Reprinted
with permission from Ref 157. Copyright 2010 Elsevier) (b) Cartilage regeneration in a full thickness articular cartilage defect (microfracture ra bbit
model, b1) treated with a PA gel (b2) displaying a high density of binding epitopes to transforming growth factor β-1 (TGF β-1) a growth factor
known to maintain articular cartilage in the differentiated phenotype; Histological evaluation of cartilage samples 12 weeks after treatment with PA
gels (b3), containing the TGF β-1 epitope (TGFBPA) with or even without the addition of exogenous growth factor, showed formation of hyaline-like
tissue within the defect space, as observed by the glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and collagen II stainings. (Reprinted with permission from Ref 165.Copyright 2010 National Academy of Sciences, USA) (c) IKVAV PA promotes regeneration of sensory axons after spinal cord injury (SCI); Brightﬁeld
images of biotinylated dextran amine-labeled tracts from IKVAV PA-injected (c1), EQS PA (nonbioactive PA)-injected (c2) and sham (c3) animals at
11 weeks postinjury; Sensory axon tracing (ﬁbers through the lesion indicated by red arrows) was only observed in the IKVAV PA-injected group andjust up to and slightly into the lesion in EQS PA-injected and sham groups; Approximately 55% of labeled dorsal column axons in the IKVAV PA group
entered the lesion compared with only about 18% of the ﬁbers in sham controls and less than 10% in EQS PA injected animals (c4). (Reprinted with
permission from Ref 168. Copyright 2010 John Wiley and Sons, Inc.) (d) Nanoﬁber (NF) peptide (RAD16-II) scaffolds with vascular endothelial growthfactor (VEGF) create a microenvironment for cardiac repair; Immunostained images at myocardium border zone for each treated group at 28 h after
myocardial infarction (MI) shows a higher number of newly generated cardiomyocyte-like cells (GFP
–/cTnl+, small cells indicated by arrows and
magniﬁed in the inset images) derived from endogenous stem/progenitors cells in the animals treated with NF/VEGF that is favorable for induction ofendogenous cardiomyocyte regeneration. (Reprinted with permission from Ref 179. Copyright 2012 AAAS)
Heparin binding peptide nanoﬁber gels were
observed to have binding ability for paracrine factorsfrom hypoxic conditioned stem cell media.
180When
injected in coronary artery ligation, the preservationof hemodynamic function in a mouse ischemia(reperfusion model of acute myocardial infarction)was observed and revascularization in chronic ratischemic hind limb models was stimulated.Peptide nanostructures containing bioactive
signals offer exciting novel therapies with potentialimpact in regenerative medicine. Table 3 displayssome examples of self-assembling peptide structurescontaining different biological epitopes for speciﬁcapplications.
As described previously, self-assembling pep-
tides offer numerous advantages for biomedical
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 603Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
TABLE 3 Self-Assembling Peptide Biomaterials Presenting Different Functionalities and Biological Epitopes for a Variety of Regenerative
Applications
Selective differentiation of neural
progenitor cells.
Bone regeneration.80
155–157,
181
177
125, 175,
180, 182
165
183
142
184
95
97
185
186
187
188
162
189
190
100Cartilage regeneration.Delivery of angiogenic factors for
enhancing angiogenesis is islet
transplantation, wound healing,
treatment of cardiovascular diseases.
Ischemic tissue repair.
Substrate to study behavior of human
mesenchymal stem cells.
Promote angiogenesisavoiding the
use of heparin and exogenous growth
factors.
Dental tissue regeneration.
Dental pulp tissue engineering.
Cell encapsulation.
Defined matrices for endothelial cell
growth.
Peptide immobilized on synthetic
membranes for hepatocyte culture.
Substrate for endothelial cell culture.
Peptide nanofiber scaffolds for
osteobast proliferation and
differentiation.
Cell encapsulation/3D culture.3D cell culture system.Bifunctional scaffolds mimicking the
remodeling of natural ECM.Cell delivery in cell-based therapies.Application Refs.Peptide Sequence/Design
Self-Assembling Block +
C16O-A4G3E-IKAV
C16O-A3L3-E2-S(P)
C16O-V3A3-E3-RGDS
C16O-A3L3-LRK2LGKA
C16O-V2A2K3-GKLTWQELYQLKYKGI -NH2
C12O-V2AG-EGDK(sulfobenzoic acid)S -NH2
C16O-GTAGLIGQ E-RGDS
Negative PA + MMP-2 cleavage + FN cell adhesion sequences
Ac-K(SL)3-RG-(SL)3K-GRGDS -CONH2
FN cell adhesion  sequence + β-sheet fibrillizing peptide
FN cell adhesion  sequence + Self-complementary peptide
LM 1 cell adhesion  sequence + Self-complementary peptide
Coll IV cell adhesion  sequence + Self-complementary peptideLM cell adhesion  sequence + β-sheet fibrillizing peptide
LM cell adhesion  sequence + β-sheet fibrillizing peptide
FN cell adhesion  sequence + β-sheet fibrillizing peptideAc-G GRDS -GGG- QQKFQFQFEQQ -CONH2
Ac-GG- IKVAV -GGG- Q11-CONH2
Ac-GG- YIGSR -GGG- Q11-CONH2
Ac-G RGDS -PGG- (RADA)4-CONH2
Ac-YIGSR- GG-(RADA)4-CONH2
Ac-RYVVLPR- GG-(RADA)4-CONH2
Ac-TAGSCLRKFSTM- GG-(RADA)4-CONH2
Ac-(RADA)4-GG- ALKRQGRTLYGF -CONH2
Ac-(RADA)4-GG- DGRGDSVAYG -CONH2
Ac-(RADA)3-PVGLIG -(RADA)3-CONH2
Ac-(RADA)4-GG- SKPPGTSS -CONH2
Ac-(RADA)4-GG- PFSSTKT -CONH2
Self-complementary peptide + Bone marrow homing peptide
Fmoc-FF , Fmoc- RGD
Fmoc-protected dipeptide + FN cell adhesion sequenceSelf-complementary peptide + MMP-2 cleavage sequenceSelf-complementary peptide + Osteogenic growth peptide
and OPN cell adhesion  motifsAc-GG- REDV -GGG- Q11-CONH2Positive MDP + MMP-2 Cleavage + CN cell adhesion sequencesPositive PA + VEGF-mimetic peptidePositive PA + Heparin binding sequence
HSNGLPL -GGGS-E3-A3V3(K)-CO(CH2)10CH3
RGDS -KKLLA(K)-(COC3H16)-diacetylene-(C2H25)
FN-derived cell adhesion sequence + Positive diacetylene PA
Heparin mimetic  PATGF β1 binding sequence + Reverse negative PANegative PA + FN cell adhesion sequenceNegative PA + Phosphorylated seriner residue  for
hydroxyapatite mineralizationNegative PA +LM cell adhesioin  sequenceFunctionality  + EpitopeSupramolecular Material
Self-Assembling Mode
Gel formed by addition of
culture medium.
Gel formed by the addition of
Ca2+ ions.
Gel formed by the addition of
Ca2+ ions.
Gel formed by the addition of
heparin.
Gel formed by the addition of
Ca2+ ions.
Non-assembled material.
Gel formed by the addition of
CA2+ ions.
Gel formed by the addition of
phosphate or heparin.
Microgel formed by the addition
of PBS in a water-in-oilemulsion.
Hydrogel formed by the addition
of PBS.
Gel formed by addition of
hepatocyte culture medium.
Gel formed by addition of PBS.
Gel formed by the addition of
 maintenance culture medium.
Gel formed by addition of PBS.
Gel formed by addition of basal
medium.
Gel formed by pH and
temperature changes.Patterned gel formed by diffusion
of NH4OH vapor and further
polymerized by UV radiation.
Gel formed by mixing with PA of
opposite charge ( C12-O-V2AGK-NH2)
Coll, collagen; Fmoc, ﬂuorenylmethoxycarbonyl; FN, ﬁbronectin; LM, laminin; MDP, multi-domain peptide; MMP-2, matrix metalloproteinase-2; OPN ,
osteopontin; PA, peptide amphiphile; PBS, phosphate buffered saline; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor (angiogenic signaling protein); T GFβ1,
transforming growth factor β1 (chondrogenesis promoter protein).
604 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
applications as versatile and efﬁcient biomaterials. In
addition to biological epitopes, different ﬂuorescent
compounds can be easily attached to the peptidesduring synthesis to enable their visualization anddetection by ﬂuorescence microscopy in in vitro
andin vivo studies.
157,175Similarly, contrast agents
have been incorporated to provide a noninvasivevisualization method to track in vivo the integration
of the material by magnetic resonance imaging.
191
An important feature of biomaterials for
applications in regenerative medicine is biodegrad-
ability. Peptide biomaterials can degrade overtime byhydrolytic and enzymatic processes into amino acidswhich are nontoxic and easily cleared in the body.To control the degradation of self-assembled peptidematrices, peptides can be designed to be susceptible toenzymatic cleavage. For example, proteolytic degra-dation of MPDs containing the MMP-2 consensuscleavage motif (Figure 7(b), Table 3) by collagenaseIV was demonstrated using mass spectrometry and
cryo-TEM.
96
Despite the promising results obtained in cell
culture studies,192there are not many reports on the
in vivo stability/degradation, biocompatibility and
immunogenicity193of this class of supramolecularpeptide-based biomaterials. Detailed studies to
evaluate the risks associated with their use in vivo are
necessary to consider their clinical application in the
near future.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
Understanding how to control the fabrication and
organization of matter across multiple length scales
is of growing interest to construct complex materialswith practical utility in regenerative medicine. Hier-
archical structures are of great advantage for tissue
engineering applications as they provide a more nat-ural environment for cells to grow and develop into
tissues. The exciting ﬁndings on peptide self-assembly
suggest that this bottom-up technology can offer tools
to the 3D assembly of supramolecular objects at scales
and with geometrical complexity and regularity notaccessible to top-down technologies. Despite the level
of precision, it has been difﬁcult to construct self-
assembling systems across length scales. The integra-tion of self-assembly into existing microtechnologies
could offer new possibilities to fabricate reproducible
hierarchical biomaterials with precise biomolecularand physical properties and the opportunity to better
tune them with spatiotemporal control.
194
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support provided by the Portuguese Foundation for Science
and Technology (FCT): grants with reference PTDC/EBB-BIO/114523/2009 and SFRH/BD/42161/2007
(Ana C. Mendes doctoral grant). We thank Dr Ricardo M. P. da Silva from the Institute for BioNanotechnology
in Medicine at Northwestern University (Chicago, IL, USA) for valuable discussion and critical comments onthe manuscript.
REFERENCES
1. Whitesides GM, Grzybowski B. Self-assembly at all
scales. Science 2002, 295:2418–2421.
2. Grzybowski BA, Wilmer CE, Kim J, Browne KP,
Bishop KJM. Self-assembly: from crystals to cells. Soft
Matter 2009, 5:1110–1128.
3. Whitesides GM, Kriebel JK, Mayers BT. Self-assembly
and nanostructured materials. In: Huck WTS, ed.
Nanoscale Assembly: Chemical Techniques .N e w
York: Springer; 2005, 217–239.
4. Whitesides GM, Mathias JP, Seto CT. Molecular
self-assembly and nanochemistry—a chemical strategy
for the synthesis of nanostructures. Science 1991,
254:1312–1319.
5. Boncheva M, Whitesides GM. Making things by self-
assembly. MRS Bull 2005, 30:736–742.6. Whitesides GM, Boncheva M. Beyond molecules: self-
assembly of mesoscopic and macroscopic components.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:4769–4774.
7. Bishop KJM, Campbell CJ, Mahmud G, Grzy-
bowski BA. Biomimetic Design of Dynamic Self-Assembling Systems. In: Krasnogor N, GustafsonS, Pelta DA, Verdegay JL, eds. Systems Self-
Assembly: Multidisciplinary Snapshots, Series Studies
in Multidisciplinarity, vol. 5. Amsterdam: Elsevier;2008, 21–48.
8. Hoeben FJM, Jonkheijm P, Meijer EW, Schenning
APHJ. About supramolecular assemblies of pi-conjugated systems. Chem Rev 2005, 105:1491–1546.
9. Steed JW. Core Concepts in Supramolecular Chemistry
and Nanochemistry . Chichester: John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd; 2007.
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 605Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
10. Bhagavan NV. Medical Biochemistry . San Diego:
Academic Press; 2002.
11. Li HY, LaBean TH, Leong KW. Nucleic acid-based
nanoengineering: novel structures for biomedical
applications. Interf Focus 2011, 1:702–724.
1 2 . L i uZ ,Q i a oJ ,N i uZ W ,W a n gQ .N a t u r a l
supramolecular building blocks: from virus coatproteins to viral nanoparticles. Chem Soc Rev 2012,
41:6178–6194.
13. Pelesko JA. The Science of Things That Put Themselves
Together . Chapman and Hall/CRC; Boca Raton,
2007.
14. Aida T, Meijer EW, Stupp SI. Functional supramolec-
ular polymers. Science 2012, 335:813–817.
15. Bromley EHC, Channon K, Moutevelis E, Woolfson
DN. Peptide and protein building blocks for syntheticbiology: from programming biomolecules to self-organized biomolecular systems. ACS Chem Biol
2008, 3:38–50.
16. Scanlon S, Aggeli A. Self-assembling peptide nan-
otubes. Nano Today 2008, 3:22–30.
17. Ulijn RV, Smith AM. Designing peptide based
nanomaterials. Chem Soc Rev 2008, 37:664–675.
18. Zayed JM, Nouvel N, Rauwald U, Scherman OA.
Chemical complexity-supramolecular self-assembly ofsynthetic and biological building blocks in water.Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39:2806–2816.
19. Schnur JM. Lipid tubules—a paradigm for molecularly
engineered structures. Science 1993, 262:1669–1676.
20. Hirst AR, Escuder B, Miravet JF, Smith DK. High-
tech applications of self-assembling supramolecularnanostructured gel-phase materials: from regenerativemedicine to electronic devices. Angew Chem Int Ed
2008, 47:8002–8018.
21. Tanner P, Baumann P, Enea R, Onaca O, Palivan C,
Meier W. Polymeric vesicles: from drug carriers tonanoreactors and artiﬁcial organelles. Acc Chem Res
2011, 44:1039–1049.
22. Giacomelli C, Schmidt V, Aissou K, Borsali R. Block
copolymer systems: from single chain to self-assemblednanostructures. Langmuir 2010, 26:15734–15744.
23. Zhou YF, Huang W, Liu JY, Zhu XY, Yan
DY. Self-assembly of hyperbranched polymers andits biomedical applications. Adv Mater 2010,
22:4567–4590.
24. Zeng FW, Zimmerman SC. Dendrimers in supramolec-
ular chemistry: from molecular recognition to self-assembly. Chem Rev 1997, 97:1681–1712.
25. Smith DK. Dendritic supermolecules—towards con-
trollable nanomaterials. Chem Commun 2006:34–44.
26. Reynhout IC, Cornelissen JJLM, Nolte RJM. Synthesis
of polymer-biohybrids: from small to giant surfactants.
Acc Chem Res 2009, 42:681–692.
27. Kitamoto D, Morita T, Fukuoka T, Konishi M,
Imura T. Self-assembling properties of glycolipidbiosurfactants and their potential applications. Curr
Opin Colloid Interf Sci 2009, 14:315–328.
28. Yamamoto T, Fukushima T, Aida T. Self-assembled
nanotubes and nanocoils from pi-conjugated building
blocks. Self-Assembled Nanomaterials II: Nanotubes,
vol. 220. Berlin Heidelberg:Springer, Verlag, 2008,
1–27.
29. Terrones M, Botello-Mendez AR, Campos-Delgado
J, Lopez-Urias F, Vega-Cantu YI, Rodriguez-Macias FJ, Elias AL, Munoz-Sandoval E, Cano-
Marquez AG, Charlier JC, et al. Graphene
and graphite nanoribbons: morphology, properties,
synthesis, defects and applications. Nano Today 2010,
5:351–372.
30. Rong JH, Niu ZW, Lee LA, Wang Q. Self-assembly
of viral particles. Curr Opin Colloid Interf Sci 2011,
16:441–450.
31. Merzlyak A, Lee SW. Phage as templates for hybrid
materials and mediators for nanomaterial synthesis.
Curr Opin Chem Biol 2006, 10:246–252.
32. Merzlyak A, Indrakanti S, Lee SW. Genetically engi-
neered nanoﬁber-like viruses for tissue regenerating
materials. Nano Lett 2009, 9:846–852.
33. Chung WJ, Oh JW, Kwak K, Lee BY, Meyer J,
Wang E, Hexemer A, Lee SW. Biomimetic self-templating supramolecular structures. Nature 2011,
478:364–368.
34. Pinheiro AV, Han DR, Shih WM, Yan H.
Challenges and opportunities for structural DNA
nanotechnology. Nat Nanotechnol 2011, 6:763–772.
35. Krishnan Y, Simmel FC. Nucleic acid based molecular
devices. Angew Chem Int Ed 2011, 50:3124–3156.
36. Yu XF, Liu ZH, Janzen J, Chafeeva I, Horte S,
Chen W, Kainthan RK, Kizhakkedathu JN, Brooks
DE. Polyvalent choline phosphate as a universal
biomembrane adhesive. Nat Mater 2012, 11:468–476.
37. Urata K, Takaishi N. Cholesterol as synthetic building
blocks for artiﬁcial lipids with characteristic physical,
chemical and biological properties. Eur J Lipid Sci
Technol 2001, 103:29–39.
38. Gattuso G, Menzer S, Nepogodiev SA, Stoddart JF,
Williams DJ. Carbohydrate nanotubes. Angew Chem
Int Ed 1997, 36:1451–1454.
39. Numata M, Shinkai S. Self-assembled polysaccharide
nanotubes generated from β-1,3-glucan polysaccha-
rides. . Self-Assembled Nanomaterials II: Nanotubes,
vol. 220. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer, Verlag, 2008,
65–121.
40. Jayawarna V, Ali M, Jowitt TA, Miller AE, Saiani
A, Gough JE, Ulijn RV. Nanostructured hydrogels for
three-dimensional cell culture through self-assembly
of ﬂuorenylmethoxycarbonyl-dipeptides. Adv Mater
2006, 18:611–614.
41. Webber MJ, Kessler JA, Stupp SI. Emerging peptide
nanomedicine to regenerate tissues and organs. JI n t e r n
Med 2010, 267:71–88.
606 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
42. Cui HG, Webber MJ, Stupp SI. Self-assembly of
peptide amphiphiles: from molecules to nanostructures
to biomaterials. Biopolymers 2010, 94:1–18.
43. Yang YL, Khoe U, Wang XM, Horii A, Yokoi
H, Zhang SG. Designer self-assembling peptidenanomaterials. Nano Today 2009, 4:193–210.
44. Luo Z, Zhang S. Designer nanomaterials using
chiral self-assembling peptide systems and theiremerging beneﬁt for society. Chem Soc Rev 2012,
41:4736–4754.
45. Lakshmanan A, Zhang SG, Hauser CAE. Short self-
assembling peptides as building blocks for modernnanodevices. Trends Biotechnol 2012, 30:155–165.
46. Fairman R, Akerfeldt KS. Peptides as novel smart
materials. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2005, 15:453–463.
47. Ryan DM, Nilsson BL. Self-assembled amino acids
and dipeptides as noncovalent hydrogels for tissueengineering. Polym Chem 2012, 3:18–33.
48. Matson JB, Stupp SI. Self-assembling peptide scaffolds
for regenerative medicine. Chem Commun 2012,
48:26–33.
49. Blanazs A, Armes SP, Ryan AJ. Self-assembled
block copolymer aggregates: from micelles to vesiclesand their biological applications. Macromol Rapid
Commun 2009, 30:267–277.
50. Ko SH, Su M, Zhang CA, Ribbe AE, Jiang W,
Mao CD. Synergistic self-assembly of RNA and DNAmolecules. Nat Chem 2010, 2:1050–1055.
51. Collier JH, Messersmith PB. Phospholipid strategies
in biomineralization and biomaterials research. Annu
Rev Mater Res 2001, 31:237–263.
52. Varki A. Biological roles of oligosaccharides—all of
the theories are correct. Glycobiology 1993, 3:97–130.
53. Capito RM, Azevedo HS, Velichko YS, Mata A, Stupp
SI. Self-assembly of large and small molecules intohierarchically ordered sacs and membranes. Science
2008, 319:1812–1816.
54. Barrett GC, Elmore DT. Amino Acids and Peptides .
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1998.
55. Albericio F. Orthogonal protecting groups for N
α-amino and C-terminal carboxyl functions in
solid-phase peptide synthesis. Biopolymers 2000,
55:123–139.
56. Alvarez M, Isidro-Llobet A, Albericio F. Amino acid-
protecting groups. Chem Rev 2009, 109:2455–2504.
57. Chan WC, White PD. Fmoc Solid Phase Peptide
Synthesis—A Practical Approach . Oxford: Oxford
University Press; 2000.
58. Gazit E. Bioinspired chemistry diversity for self-
assembly. Nat Chem 2010, 2:1010–1011.
59. Woolfson DN. Building ﬁbrous biomaterials from
α-helical and collagen-like coiled-coil peptides.
Biopolymers 2010, 94:118–127.
60. Boyle AL, Woolfson DN. Rational design of peptide-
based biosupramolecular systems. In: Gale PA, SteedJW, eds. Supramolecular Chemistry: From Molecules
Nanomaterials . Oxford: John Wiley, Ltd.; 2012.
61. Villard V, Kalyuzhniy O, Riccio O, Potekhin S, Melnik
TN, Kajava AV, Ruegg C, Corradin G. Synthetic
RGD-containing α-helical coiled coil peptides promote
integrin-dependent cell adhesion. J Pept Sci 2006,
12:206–212.
62. Rele S, Song YH, Apkarian RP, Qu Z, Conticello VP,
Chaikof EL. D-periodic collagen-mimetic microﬁbers.
JA mC h e mS o c 2007, 129:14780–14787.
63. Fallas JA, O’Leary LER, Hartgerink JD. Synthetic
collagen mimics: self-assembly of homotrimers,
heterotrimers and higher order structures. Chem Soc
Rev2010, 39:3510–3527.
64. O’Leary LER, Fallas JA, Bakota EL, Kang MK,
Hartgerink JD. Multi-hierarchical self-assembly of a
collagen mimetic peptide from triple helix to nanoﬁbre
and hydrogel. Nat Chem 2011, 3:821–828.
65. Gazit E. Self-assembled peptide nanostructures: the
design of molecular building blocks and their
technological utilization. Chem Soc Rev 2007,
36:1263–1269.
66. Knowles TPJ, Buehler MJ. Nanomechanics of
functional and pathological amyloid materials. Nat
Nanotechnol 2011, 6:469–479.
67. Zhang S, Holmes T, Lockshin C, Rich A. Spontaneous
assembly of a self-complementary oligopeptide to forma stable macroscopic membrane. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 1993, 90:3334–3338.
68. Semino CE. Self-assembling peptides: from bio-
inspired materials to bone regeneration. J Dent Res
2008, 87:606–616.
69. Maude S, Tai LR, Davies RP, Liu B, Harris SA,
Kocienski PJ, Aggeli A. Peptide synthesis and self-assembly. Top Curr Chem 2012, 310:27–69.
70. Collier JH, Rudra JS, Gasiorowski JZ, Jung JP. Multi-
component extracellular matrices based on peptideself-assembly. Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39:3413–3424.
71. Hule RA, Nagarkar RP, Hammouda B, Schneider
JP, Pochan DJ. Dependence of self-assembledpeptide hydrogel network structure on local ﬁbrilnanostructure. Macromolecules 2009, 42:7137–7145.
72. Schneider JP, Pochan DJ, Ozbas B, Rajagopal K,
Pakstis L, Kretsinger J. Responsive hydrogels from theintramolecular folding and self-assembly of a designedpeptide. JA mC h e mS o c 2002, 124:15030–15037.
73. Rughani RV, Schneider JP. Molecular design of β-
hairpin peptides for material construction. MRS Bull
2008, 33:530–535.
74. Haines-Butterick L, Rajagopal K, Branco M, Salick
D, Rughani R, Pilarz M, Lamm MS, Pochan DJ,Schneider JP. Controlling hydrogelation kinetics bypeptide design for three-dimensional encapsulationand injectable delivery of cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2007, 104:7791–7796.
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 607Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
75. Altunbas A, Lee SJ, Rajasekaran SA, Schneider
JP, Pochan DJ. Encapsulation of curcumin in self-assembling peptide hydrogels as injectable drugdelivery vehicles. Biomaterials 2011, 32:5906–5914.
76. Yan C, Mackay ME, Czymmek K, Nagarkar RP,
Schneider JP, Pochan DJ. Injectable solid peptide
hydrogel as a cell carrier: effects of shear ﬂowon hydrogels and cell payload. Langmuir 2012,
28:6076–6087.
77. Hamley IW. Self-assembly of amphiphilic peptides.
Soft Matter 2011, 7:4122–4138.
78. Vauthey S, Santoso S, Gong HY, Watson N, Zhang SG.
Molecular self-assembly of surfactant-like peptides toform nanotubes and nanovesicles. Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 2002, 99:5355–5360.
79. Santoso S, Hwang W, Hartman H, Zhang SG. Self-
assembly of surfactant-like peptides with variableglycine tails to form nanotubes and nanovesicles. Nano
Lett2002, 2:687–691.
80. Silva GA, Czeisler C, Niece KL, Beniash E, Harrington
DA, Kessler JA, Stupp SI. Selective Differentiationof Neural Progenitor Cells by High-Epitope DensityNanoﬁbers. Science 2004, 303:1352–1355.
81. Matson JB, Zha RH, Stupp SI. Peptide self-assembly
for crafting functional biological materials. Curr Opin
Solid State Mater Sci 2011, 15:225–235.
82. Lowik DWPM, Garcia-Hartjes J, Meijer JT, van Hest
JCM. Tuning secondary structure and self-assembly of
amphiphilic peptides. Langmuir 2005, 21:524–526.
83. van den Heuvel M, Lowik DW, van Hest JC.
Self-assembly and polymerization of diacetylene-containing peptide amphiphiles in aqueous solution.
Biomacromolecules 2008, 9:2727–2734.
84. van den Heuvel M, Lowik DW, van Hest
JC. Effect of the diacetylene position on thechromatic properties of polydiacetylenes from self-assembled peptide amphiphiles. Biomacromolecules
2010, 11:1676–1683.
85. Trent A, Marullo R, Lin B, Black M, Tirrell M.
Structural properties of soluble peptide amphiphilemicelles. Soft Matter 2011, 7:9572–9582.
86. Shimada T, Sakamoto N, Motokawa R, Koizumi
S, Tirrell M. Self-assembly process of peptideamphiphile worm-like micelles. J Phys Chem B 2012,
116:240–243.
87. Shimada T, Megley K, Tirrell M, Hotta A. Fluid
mechanical shear induces structural transitions in
assembly of a peptide-lipid conjugate. Soft Matter
2011, 7:8856–8861.
88. Shimada T, Lee S, Bates FS, Hotta A, Tirrell M. Worm-
like micelle formation in peptide-lipid conjugates
driven by secondary structure transformation of theheadgroups. JP h y sC h e mB 2009, 113:13711–13714.
89. Missirlis D, Chworos A, Fu CJ, Khant HA,
Krogstad DV, Tirrell M. Effect of the peptidesecondary structure on the peptide amphiphile
supramolecular structure and interactions. Langmuir
2011, 27:6163–6170.
90. Castelletto V, Hamley IW, Adamcik J, Mezzenga R,
Gummel J. Modulating self-assembly of a nanotape-
forming peptide amphiphile with an oppositely
charged surfactant. Soft Matter 2012, 8:217–226.
91. Cheetham AG, Zhang PC, Lin YA, Lock LL, Cui HG.
Supramolecular nanostructures formed by anticancer
drug assembly. JA mC h e mS o c 2013, 135:2907–2910.
92. Lin R, Cheetham AG, Zhang PC, Lin YA, Cui
HG. Supramolecular ﬁlaments containing a ﬁxed
41% paclitaxel loading. Chem Commun 2013,
49:4968–4970.
93. Aulisa L, Dong H, Hartgerink JD. Self-assembly of
multidomain peptides: sequence variation allows con-
trol over cross-linking and viscoelasticity. Biomacro-
molecules 2009, 10:2694–2698.
94. Dong H, Paramonov SE, Aulisa L, Bakota EL, Hart-
gerink JD. Self-assembly of multidomain peptides:
balancing molecular frustration controls conforma-
tion and nanostructure. JA mC h e mS o c 2007,
129:12468–12472.
95. Galler KM, Cavender A, Yuwono V, Dong H, Shi
ST, Schmalz G, Hartgerink JD, D’Souza RN. Self-
assembling peptide amphiphile nanoﬁbers as a scaffold
for dental stem cells. Tissue Eng Part A 2008,
14:2051–2058.
96. Galler KM, Aulisa L, Regan KR, D’Souza RN,
Hartgerink JD. Self-assembling multidomain peptide
hydrogels: designed susceptibility to enzymatic cleav-
age allows enhanced cell migration and spreading.
JA mC h e mS o c 2010, 132:3217–3223.
97. Galler KM, Hartgerink JD, Cavender AC, Schmalz
G, D’Souza RN. A customized self-assembling peptide
hydrogel for dental pulp tissue engineering. Tissue Eng
Part A 2012, 18:176–184.
98. Orbach R, Mironi-Harpaz I, Adler-Abramovich L,
Mossou E, Mitchell EP, Forsyth VT, Gazit E, Seliktar
D. The rheological and structural properties of
fmoc-peptide-based hydrogels: the effect of aromatic
molecular architecture on self-assembly and physical
characteristics. Langmuir 2012, 28:2015–2022.
99. Smith AM, Williams RJ, Tang C, Coppo P, Collins RF,
Turner ML, Saiani A, Ulijn RV. Fmoc-diphenylalanine
self assembles to a hydrogel via a novel architecture
based on pi-pi interlocked β-sheets. Adv Mater 2008,
20:37–41.
100. Zhou M, Smith AM, Das AK, Hodson NW, Collins
RF, Ulijn RV, Gough JE. Self-assembled peptide-basedhydrogels as scaffolds for anchorage-dependent cells.
Biomaterials 2009, 30:2523–2530.
101. Yokoi H, Kinoshita T, Zhang SG. Dynamic reassembly
of peptide RADA16 nanoﬁber scaffold. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2005, 102:8414–8419.
608 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
102. Rudra JS, Tian YF, Jung JP, Collier JH. A self-
assembling peptide acting as an immune adjuvant.Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2010, 107:622–627.
103. Rajagopal K, Lamm MS, Haines-Butterick LA, Pochan
DJ, Schneider JP. Tuning the pH responsiveness
ofβ-hairpin peptide folding, self-assembly, and
hydrogel material formation. Biomacromolecules
2009, 10:2619–2625.
104. Zhang SG, Marini DM, Hwang W, Santoso S. Design
of nanostructured biological materials through self-
assembly of peptides and proteins. Curr Opin Chem
Biol2002, 6:865–871.
105. Hamley IW. Peptide ﬁbrillization. Angew Chem Int
Ed2007, 46:8128–8147.
106. Palermo V, Samori P. Molecular self-assembly across
multiple length scales. Angew Chem Int Ed 2007,
46:4428–4432.
107. Lisitza N, Huang XD, Hatabu H, Patz S. Exploring
collagen self-assembly by NMR. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2010, 12:14169–14171.
108. Liu G, Prabhakar A, Aucoin D, Simon M, Sparks
S, Robbins KJ, Sheen A, Petty SA, Lazo ND.
Mechanistic studies of peptide self-assembly: transient
α-helices to stable β-sheets. JA mC h e mS o c 2010,
132:18223–18232.
109. Hamley IW, Nutt DR, Brown GD, Miravet JF,
Escuder B, Rodriguez-Llansola F. Inﬂuence of the
solvent on the self-assembly of a modiﬁed amyloid β
peptide fragment. II. NMR and computer simulation
investigation. JP h y sC h e mB 2010, 114:940–951.
110. Niece KL, Hartgerink JD, Donners JJJM, Stupp
SI. Self-assembly combining two bioactive peptide-amphiphile molecules into nanoﬁbers by electrostatic
attraction. JA mC h e mS o c 2003, 125:7146–7147.
111. Behanna HA, Donners JJJM, Gordon AC, Stupp SI.
Coassembly of amphiphiles with opposite peptide
polarities into nanoﬁbers. JA mC h e mS o c 2005,
127:1193–1200.
112. Paramonov SE, Jun HW, Hartgerink JD. Self-
assembly of peptide-amphiphile nanoﬁbers: the roles
of hydrogen bonding and amphiphilic packing. JA m
Chem Soc 2006, 128:7291–7298.
113. Hirst AR, Roy S, Arora M, Das AK, Hodson N,
Murray P, Marshall S, Javid N, Sefcik J, Boekhoven J,
et al. Biocatalytic induction of supramolecular order.
Nat Chem 2010, 2:1089–1094.
114. Haines LA, Rajagopal K, Ozbas B, Salick DA,
Pochan DJ, Schneider JP. Light-activated hydrogelformation via the triggered folding and self-assembly
of a designed peptide. J Am Chem Soc 2005,
127:17025–17029.
115. Chou PY, Fasman GD. Empirical predictions of
protein conformation. Annu Rev Biochem 1978,
47:251–276.
116. Leung CY, Palmer LC, Qiao BF, Kewalramani
S, Sknepnek R, Newcomb CJ, Greenﬁeld MA,Vernizzi G, Stupp SI, Bedzyk MJ, et al. Molecu-
lar crystallization controlled by pH regulates meso-
scopic membrane morphology. ACS Nano 2012,
6:10901–10909.
117. Zhang SM, Greenﬁeld MA, Mata A, Palmer LC, Bitton
R, Mantei JR, Aparicio C, de la Cruz MO, Stupp SI.
A self-assembly pathway to aligned monodomain gels.Nat Mater 2010, 9:594–601.
118. Mammadov R, Tekinay AB, Dana A, Guler MO.
Microscopic characterization of peptide nanostruc-
tures. Micron 2012, 43:69–84.
119. Newcomb CJ, Moyer TJ, Lee SS, Stupp SI. Advances
in cryogenic transmission electron microscopy for
the characterization of dynamic self-assembling
nanostructures. Curr Opin Colloid Interf Sci 2012,
17:350–359.
120. Cui H, Hodgdon TK, Kaler EW, Abezgauz L, Danino
D, Lubovsky M, Talmon Y, Pochan DJ. Elucidating
the assembled structure of amphiphiles in solution
via cryogenic transmission electron microscopy. Soft
Matter 2007, 3:945–955.
121. Nagarkar RP, Hule RA, Pochan DJ, Schneider JP. De
novo design of strand-swapped β-hairpin hydrogels. J
Am Chem Soc 2008, 130:4466–4474.
122. Helen W, de Leonardis P, Ulijn RV, Gough J,
Tirelli N. Mechanosensitive peptide gelation: mode
of agitation controls mechanical properties and nano-
scale morphology. Soft Matter 2011, 7:1732–1740.
123. Cinar G, Ceylan H, Urel M, Erkal TS, Tekin ED,
Tekinay AB, Dana A, Guler MO. Amyloid inspired
self-assembled peptide nanoﬁbers. Biomacromolecules
2012, 13:3377–3387.
124. Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI. Peptide-
amphiphile nanoﬁbers: a versatile scaffold for the
preparation of self-assembling materials. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:5133–5138.
125. Rajangam K, Behanna HA, Hui MJ, Han XQ,
Hulvat JF, Lomasney JW, Stupp SI. Heparin binding
nanostructures to promote growth of blood vessels.
Nano Lett 2006, 6:2086–2090.
126. Chen L, Pont G, Morris K, Lotze G, Squires A,
Serpell LC, Adams DJ. Salt-induced hydrogelation of
functionalised-dipeptides at high pH. Chem Commun
2011, 47:12071–12073.
127. Chen L, McDonald TO, Adams DJ. Salt-induced
hydrogels from functionalised-dipeptides. RSC Adv
2013, 3:8714–8720.
128. Mahler A, Reches M, Rechter M, Cohen S, Gazit E.
Rigid, self-assembled hydrogel composed of a modiﬁed
aromatic dipeptide. Adv Mater 2006, 18:1365–1370.
129. Vegners R, Shestakova I, Kalvinsh I, Ezzell RM,
Janmey PA. Use of a gel-forming dipeptide derivative
as a carrier for antigen presentation. J Pept Sci 1995,
1:371–378.
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 609Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
130. Muraoka T, Koh CY, Cui HG, Stupp SI. Light-
triggered bioactivity in three dimensions. Angew Chem
Int Ed 2009, 48:5946–5949.
131. Webber MJ, Newcomb CJ, Bitton R, Stupp SI. Switch-
ing of self-assembly in a peptide nanostructure with a
speciﬁc enzyme. Soft Matter 2011, 7:9665–9672.
132. Roy S, Ulijn RV. Exploiting biocatalysis in the
synthesis of supramolecular polymers. Enzym Polym
2010, 237:127–143.
133. Williams RJ, Mart RJ, Ulijn RV. Exploiting
biocatalysis in peptide self-assembly. Biopolymers
2010, 94:107–117.
134. Williams RJ, Smith AM, Collins R, Hodson N, Das
AK, Ulijn RV. Enzyme-assisted self-assembly under
thermodynamic control. Nat Nanotechnol 2009,
4:19–24.
135. Keum JW, Hathorne AP, Bermudez H. Controlling
forces and pathways in self-assembly using viruses andDNA. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Nanomed Nanobiotech-
nol2011, 3:282–297.
136. Lowik DWPM, Shklyarevskiy IO, Ruizendaal L,
Christianen PCM, Maan JC, van Hest JCM. A highlyordered material from magnetically aligned peptide
amphiphile nanoﬁber assemblies. Adv Mater 2007,
19:1191–1195.
137. van den Heuvel M, Prenen AM, Gielen JC, Christianen
PCM, Broer DJ, Lowik DWPM, van Hest JCM.Patterns of diacetylene-containing peptide amphiphiles
using polarization holography. JA mC h e mS o c 2009,
131:15014–15017.
138. Cui HG, Pashuck ET, Velichko YS, Weigand SJ,
Cheetham AG, Newcomb CJ, Stupp SI. Spontaneous
and X-ray-triggered crystallization at long range
in self-assembling ﬁlament networks. Science 2010,
327:555–559.
139. Velichko YS, Mantei JR, Bitton R, Carvajal D, Shull
KR, Stupp SI. Electric ﬁeld controlled self-assembly of
hierarchically ordered membranes. Adv Funct Mater
2012, 22:369–377.
140. Zhang SG, Yan L, Altman M, Lassle M, Nugent H,
Frankel F, Lauffenburger DA, Whitesides GM, Rich A.
Biological surface engineering: a simple system for cell
pattern formation. Biomaterials 1999, 20:1213–1220.
141. Jiang HZ, Stupp SI. Dip-pen patterning and surface
assembly of peptide amphiphiles. Langmuir 2005,
21:5242–5246.
142. Mata A, Hsu L, Capito R, Aparicio C, Henrikson K,
Stupp SI. Micropatterning of bioactive self-assemblinggels.Soft Matter 2009, 5:1228–1236.
143. Hung AM, Stupp SI. Understanding factors affecting
alignment of self-assembling nanoﬁbers patterned
by sonication-assisted solution embossing. Langmuir
2009, 25:7084–7089.
144. Hung AM, Stupp SI. Simultaneous self-assembly,
orientation, and patterning of peptide-amphiphilenanoﬁbers by soft lithography. Nano Lett 2007,
7:1165–1171.
145. Mendes AC, Smith KH, Tejeda-Montes E, Engel
E, Reis RL, Azevedo HS, Mata A. Co-assembledand microfabricated bioactive membranes. Adv Funct
Mater 2013, 23:430–438.
146. Mendes AC, Baran ET, Lisboa P, Reis RL, Azevedo
HS. Microﬂuidic fabrication of self-assembled peptide-polysaccharide microcapsules as 3D environments forcell culture. Biomacromolecules 2012, 13:4039–4048.
147. Sinthuvanich C, Haines-Butterick LA, Nagy KJ,
Schneider JP. Iterative design of peptide-based
hydrogels and the effect of network electrostaticson primary chondrocyte behavior. Biomaterials 2012,
33:7478–7488.
148. Koutsopoulos S, Unsworth LD, Nagai Y, Zhang
S. Controlled release of functional proteins through
designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber hydro-
gel scaffold. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009,
106:4623–4628.
149. Koutsopoulos S, Zhang SG. Two-layered injectable
self-assembling peptide scaffold hydrogels for long-
term sustained release of human antibodies. J Control
Release 2012, 160:451–458.
150. Branco MC, Pochan DJ, Wagner NJ, Schneider JP. The
effect of protein structure on their controlled releasefrom an injectable peptide hydrogel. Biomaterials
2010, 31:9527–9534.
151. Jung JP, Jones JL, Cronier SA, Collier JH. Modulating
the mechanical properties of self-assembled peptidehydrogels via native chemical ligation. Biomaterials
2008, 29:2143–2151.
152. Khan Y, Yaszemski MJ, Mikos AG, Laurencin CT.
Tissue engineering of bone: material and matrix
considerations. J Bone Joint Surg 2008, 90:36–42.
153. Hosseinkhani H, Hosseinkhani M, Tian F, Kobayashi
H, Tabata Y. Osteogenic differentiation of mesenchy-mal stem cells in self-assembled peptide-amphiphilenanoﬁbers. Biomaterials 2006, 27:4079–4086.
154. Hartgerink JD, Beniash E, Stupp SI. Self-assembly
and mineralization of peptide-amphiphile nanoﬁbers.Science 2001, 294:1684–1688.
155. Sargeant TD, Oppenheimer SM, Dunand DC, Stupp
SI. Titanium foam-bioactive nanoﬁber hybrids for
bone regeneration. J Tissue Eng Regen Med 2008,
2:455–462.
156. Sargeant TD, Guler MO, Oppenheimer SM, Mata
A, Satcher RL, Dunand DC, Stupp SI. Hybridbone implants: self-assembly of peptide amphiphilenanoﬁbers within porous titanium. Biomaterials 2008,
29:161–171.
157. Mata A, Geng Y, Henrikson KJ, Aparicio C, Stock
SR, Satcher RL, Stupp SI. Bone regeneration mediatedby biomimetic mineralization of a nanoﬁber matrix.Biomaterials 2010, 31:6004–6012.
610 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013WIREs Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology Self-assembling in nature
158. Anderson JM, Vines JB, Patterson JL, Chen H, Javed
A, Jun HW. Osteogenic differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells synergistically enhanced bybiomimetic peptide amphiphiles combined with con-ditioned medium. Acta Biomater 2011, 7:675–682.
159. Hosseinkhani H, Hosseinkhani M, Khademhosseini A,
Kobayashi H. Bone regeneration through controlledrelease of bone morphogenetic protein-2 from 3-D
tissue engineered nano-scaffold. J Control Release
2007, 117:380–386.
160. Lee JY, Choo JE, Choi YS, Suh JS, Lee SJ, Chung
CP, Park YJ. Osteoblastic differentiation of human
bone marrow stromal cells in self-assembled BMP-2 receptor-binding peptide-amphiphiles. Biomaterials
2009, 30:3532–3541.
161. Misawa H, Kobayashi N, Soto-Gutierrez A, Chen
Y, Yoshida A, Rivas-Carrillo JD, Navarro-Alvarez N,Tanaka K, Miki A, Takei J, et al. PuraMatrix facilitatesbone regeneration in bone defects of calvaria in mice.
Cell Transplant 2006, 15:903–910.
162. Horii A, Wang X, Gelain F, Zhang S. Biological
designer self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaffolds
signiﬁcantly enhance osteoblast proliferation, differ-
entiation and 3-D migration. PLoS One 2007, 2:e190.
163. Kisiday J, Jin M, Kurz B, Hung H, Semino C, Zhang
S, Grodzinsky AJ. Self-assembling peptide hydrogel
fosters chondrocyte extracellular matrix productionand cell division: Implications for cartilage tissuerepair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2002, 99:9996–10001.
164. Kopesky PW, Vanderploeg EJ, Sandy JS, Kurz B,
Grodzinsky AJ. Self-Assembling Peptide HydrogelsModulate In Vitro Chondrogenesis of Bovine Bone
Marrow Stromal Cells. Tissue Eng Part A 2010,
16:465–477.
165. Shah RN, Shah NA, Lim MMD, Hsieh C, Nuber
G, Stupp SI. Supramolecular design of self-assembling
nanoﬁbers for cartilage regeneration. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2010, 107:3293–3298.
166. Horner PJ, Gage FH. Regenerating the damaged
central nervous system. Nature 2000, 407:963–970.
167. Tysseling-Mattiace VM, Sahni V, Niece KL, Birch D,
Czeisler C, Fehlings MG, Stupp SI, Kessler JA. Self-
assembling nanoﬁbers inhibit glial scar formation andpromote axon elongation after spinal cord injury. J
Neurosci 2008, 28:3814–3823.
168. Tysseling VM, Sahni V, Pashuck ET, Birch D, Hebert
A, Czeisler C, Stupp SI, Kessler JA. Self-assemblingpeptide amphiphile promotes plasticity of serotonergicﬁbers following spinal cord injury. J Neurosci Res
2010, 88:3161–3170.
169. Holmes TC, de Lacalle S, Su X, Liu G, Rich A, Zhang
S. Extensive neurite outgrowth and active synapse
formation on self-assembling peptide scaffolds. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2000, 97:6728–6733.
170. Ellis-Behnke RG, Liang Y-X, You S-W, Tay DKC,
Z h a n gS ,S oK - F ,S c h n e i d e rG E .N a n on e u r ok n i t t i n g :peptide nanoﬁber scaffold for brain repair and axon
regeneration with functional return of vision. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2006, 103:5054–5059.
171. Guo J, Su H, Zeng Y, Liang YX, Wong WM, Ellis-
Behnke RG, So KF, Wu W. Reknitting the injured
spinal cord by self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber
scaffold. Nanomed Nanotechnol Biol Med 2007,
3:311–321.
172. Guo J, Leung KKG, Su H, Yuan Q, Wang L, Chu
TH, Zhang W, Pu JKS, Ng GKP, Wong WM, et al.
Self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaffold promotes
the reconstruction of acutely injured brain. Nanomed
Nanotechnol Biol Med 2009, 5:345–351.
173. Rajangam K, Arnold MS, Rocco MA, Stupp SI. Peptide
amphiphile nanostructure-heparin interactions and
their relationship to bioactivity. Biomaterials 2008,
29:3298–3305.
174. Stendahl JC, Wang LJ, Chow LW, Kaufman DB,
Stupp SI. Growth factor delivery from self-assembling
nanoﬁbers to facilitate islet transplantation. Trans-
plantation 2008, 86:478–481.
175. Chow LW, Wang LJ, Kaufman DB, Stupp SI.
Self-assembling nanostructures to deliver angiogenic
factors to pancreatic islets. Biomaterials 2010,
31:6154–6161.
176. Davis ME, Motion JPM, Narmoneva DA, Takahashi
T, Hakuno D, Kamm RD, Zhang S, Lee RT.Injectable self-assembling peptide nanoﬁbers create
intramyocardial microenvironments for endothelial
cells. Circulation 2005, 111:442–450.
177. Webber MJ, Tongers J, Renault MA, Roncalli JG,
Losordo DW, Stupp SI. Development of bioactive
peptide amphiphiles for therapeutic cell delivery. Acta
Biomater 2010, 6:3–11.
178. Narmoneva DA, Vukmirovic R, Davis ME, Kamm
RD, Lee RT. Endothelial cells promote cardiac
myocyte survival and spatial reorganization. Circu-
lation 2004, 110:962–968.
179. Lin YD, Luo CY, Hu YN, Yeh ML, Hsueh YC,
Chang MY, Tsai DC, Wang JN, Tang MJ, Wei EIH,
et al. Instructive nanoﬁber scaffolds with VEGF create
a microenvironment for arteriogenesis and cardiac
repair. Sci Transl Med 2012, 4:146ra109.
180. Webber MJ, Han X, Prasanna Murthy SN, Rajangam
K, Stupp SI, Lomasney JW. Capturing the stem cell
paracrine effect using heparin-presenting nanoﬁbres to
treat cardiovascular diseases. J Tissue Eng Regen Med
2010, 4:600–610.
181. Spoerke ED, Anthony SG, Stupp SI. Enzyme directed
templating of artiﬁcial bone mineral. Adv Mater 2009,
21:425–430.
182. Chow LW, Bitton R, Webber MJ, Carvajal D, Shull
KR, Sharma AK, Stupp SI. A bioactive self-assembled
membrane to promote angiogenesis. Biomaterials
2011, 32:1574–1582.
Volume 5, November/December 2013 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 611Overview wires.wiley.com/nanomed
183. Webber MJ, Tongers J, Newcomb CJ, Marquardt KT,
Bauersachs J, Losordo DW, Stupp SI. Supramolecularnanostructures that mimic VEGF as a strategy forischemic tissue repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011,
108:13438–13443.
184. Mammadov R, Mammadov B, Toksoz S, Aydin
B, Yagci R, Tekinay AB, Guler MO. Heparinmimetic peptide nanoﬁbers promote angiogenesis.
Biomacromolecules 2011, 12:3508–3519.
185. Tian YF, Devgun JM, Collier JH. Fibrillized peptide
microgels for cell encapsulation and 3D cell culture.Soft Matter 2011, 7:6005–6011.
186. Jung JP, Moyano JV, Collier JH. Multifactorial
optimization of endothelial cell growth using modular
synthetic extracellular matrices. Integr Biol 2011,
3:185–196.
187. Wu J, Mari-Buye N, Muinos T, Borros S, Favia P,
Semino C. Nanometric self-assembling peptide layers
maintain adult hepatocyte phenotype in sandwichcultures. J Nanobiotechnol 2010, 8:29.
188. Genove E, Shen C, Zhang SG, Semino CE. The effect
of functionalized self-assembling peptide scaffolds on
human aortic endothelial cell function. Biomaterials
2005, 26:3341–3351.189. Chau Y, Luo Y, Cheung ACY, Nagai Y, Zhang SG,
Kobler JB, Zeitels SM, Langer R. Incorporation of
a matrix metalloproteinase-sensitive substrate into
self-assembling peptides—a model for biofunctionalscaffolds. Biomaterials 2008, 29:1713–1719.
190. Gelain F, Bottai D, Vescovi A, Zhang SG. Designer
self-assembling peptide nanoﬁber scaffolds for adultmouse neural stem cell 3-dimensional cultures. PLoS
One 2006, 1:e119.
191. Bull SR, Guler MO, Bras RE, Meade TJ, Stupp SI. Self-
assembled peptide amphiphile nanoﬁbers conjugated
to MRI contrast agents. Nano Lett 2005, 5:1–4.
192. Haines-Butterick LA, Salick DA, Pochan DJ, Schneider
JP. In vitro assessment of the pro-inﬂammatory
potential of β-hairpin peptide hydrogels. Biomaterials
2008, 29:4164–4169.
193. Rudra JS, Tripathi PK, Hildeman DA, Jung JP, Collier
JH. Immune responses to coiled coil supramolecular
biomaterials. Biomaterials 2010, 31:8475–8483.
194. Smith KH, Tejeda-Montes E, Poch M, Mata
A. Integrating top-down and self-assembly in the
fabrication of peptide and protein-based biomedical
materials. Chem Soc Rev 2011, 40:4563–4577.
FURTHER READING
Bowerman CJ, Nilsson BL. Self-assembly of amphipathic β-sheet peptides: insights and applications. Biopolymers 2012,
98:169–184.
Cavalli S, Albericio F, Kros A. Amphiphilic peptides and their cross-disciplinary role as building blocks for nanoscience.
Chem Soc Rev 2010, 39:241–263.
Dankers PYW, Meijer EW. Supramolecular biomaterials. A modular approach towards tissue engineering. Bull Chem Soc
Jpn2007, 80:2047–2073.
Gale PA, Steed JW. Supramolecular Chemistry: From Molecules to Nanomaterials . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012.
Geisler IM, Schneider JP. Evolution-based design of an injectable hydrogel. Adv Funct Mater 2012, 22:529–537.
Rybtchinski B. Adaptive supramolecular nanomaterials based on strong noncovalent interactions. ACS Nano 2011,
5:6791–6818.
612 ©2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Volume 5, November/December 2013