 
Azo and triphenylmethane dye degradation in Mycobacterium smegmatis 
 
Mamta Rawat, Ph.D, Arishma Rajkarnikar Singh, Ph. D , Ruzan Orkusyan, Alisha Ramlan Hussain 
California State University, Fresno, Department of Biology, Fresno, 93740 mrawat@csufresno.edu   
 
Key words: azo dyes, triphenylmethane dyes, Mycobac teria 
 
Introduction. Azo and triphenylmethane dyes are used 
extensively in the coloration of paper, clothing, f ood, 
cosmetics and pharmaceuticals.  These dyes and thei r 
degradation by-products have been deemed hazardous by 
the Environmental Protection Agency as they may be toxic 
and/or mutagenic to living organisms. Bioremediatio n is an 
environmentally friendly and inexpensive alternativ e to 
chemical decomposition of these toxic products and many 
microorganisms capable of decolorizing and degradin g 
azo and triphenylmethane dyes have been isolated. I n the 
case of triphenylmethane dyes, a triphenylmethane 
reductase is responsible for the decolorization of the 
triphenylmethane dye, malachite green in Gram-negat ive 
bacteria, such as Citrobacter  sp.  Azoreductases that 
cleave the N=N bond in such dyes as methyl red have  
been characterized from a number of species, includ ing 
Staphylococcus aureus (Chen et al., 2005). We have 
previously demonstrated that Mycobacterium smegmatis , 
a saprophyte, is able to decolorize and degrade bot h 
malachite green and methyl red.  Malachite green is  
decolorized through a Coenzyme F420 dependent 
process as mutants lacking this cofactor are unable  to 
decolorize malachite green (Guerra-Lopez  et al. , 2007). 
The enzyme that uses this cofactor has not been 
identified. In addition, a gene encoding a potentia l 
azoreductase has been identified in M. smegmatis . We 
present data on the recombinant azoreductase and 
describe the characterization of a M. smegmatis  mutant 
disrupted in azoR.   
 
Methods.  To identify mycobacterial genes involved 
triphenylmethane dye decolorization, a random 
transposon mutant library of M. smegmatis was 
constructed and screened for mutants unable to 
decolorize malachite green. The site of transposon 
insertion was identified as by inverse PCR and arbi trary 
PCR as described in Guerra-Lopez et al . (2007) and the 
sequences obtained were BLAST searched against the M. 
smegmatis  genome to identify the disrupted gene.   
 
To validate that Mycobacterium smegmatis annotated 
gene MSMEG_3381 codes for an azoreductase, it was 
cloned into the recombinant protein expression vect or, 
pet22, expressed and purified using affinity 
chromatography. An unmarked mutant disrupted in thi s 
gene was constructed using the two step method 
described by Parish et al (Parish & Stoker, 2000).  
Azoreductase assays were performed and the mutant w as 
characterized with respect to growth on a range of azo 
dyes, quinone compounds, and oxidants (Liu  et al. , 2009). 
 Results. Over 20 000 M. smegmatis transposon mutants 
have been screened and approximately fifty mutants that 
are unable to decolorize malachite green have been 
identified.  Aside from mutants disrupted in genes involved 
in coenzyme F420 biosynthesis, malachite green sens itive 
mutants are disrupted in genes that code for protei ns that 
range in function from membrane transporters to gen es 
involved in multiple cellular processes such as DNA  repair.   
However, none of the genes identified showed any 
sequence homology to a reductase that would be able  to 
reduce malachite green in a coenzyme F420 dependent  
manner.  
 
A mutant disrupted in MSMEG_3381 does not have a 
severe growth defect and is able to grow as well as  the 
wild-type strain under normal lab conditions. It is  unable to 
decolorize azo dyes, such as methyl red and amido b lack. 
Since the E. coli  azo reductase is also able to reduce 
quinone, the sensitivity to these electrophilic age nts, such 
as catechol and menadione, was also tested and the 
mutant was found to be more sensitive as compared t o 
wild-type. As menadione is also a redox cycling age nt, 
sensitivity to other oxidants, such as diamide, hyd rogen 
peroxide, and cumene hydroperoxide, was also tested .  
 
Conclusions. In  M. smegmatis, the enzymes responsible 
for the degradation of triphenylmethane dyes remain  still 
to be identified; however, an azoreductase is invol ved in 
the degradation of azo dyes in M. smegmatis . 
 
Acknowledgements .  
Funding has been provided by the CSU, Fresno Facult y Sponsored 
Student Research Award and CSU, Fresno Associated S tudents 
rGRANT to Ruzan Orkusyan and Heather Uptont  the CS U Faculty-
Student Collaborative Research Seed Grant Program t o Dr. Mamta 
Rawat. We would also like to thank Ruzan Orkusyan, Heather Upton, Yer 
Yang, Alisha Ramlan Hussain, and Dr. Arishma Rajkar nikar SIngh for  
technical assistance. 
 
References.  
Chen, H., Hopper, S. L. & Cerniglia, C. E. (2005).  Biochemical and 
molecular characterization of an azoreductase from Staphylococcuc 
aureus, a tetrametric NADPH-dependent flavoprotein.  Microbiology  151 , 
1433-1441. 
Guerra-Lopez, D., Daniels, L. & Rawat, M. (2007).  Mycobacterium 
smegmatis mc2 155 fbiC and MSMEG_2392 are involved in 
triphenylmethane dye decolorization and coenzyme F4 20 biosynthesis. 
Microbiology  153 , 2724-2732. 
Liu, G., Zhou, J., Fu, Q. S. & Wang, J. (2009).  The Escherichia coli 
Azoreductase AzoR Is Involved in Resistance to Thio l-Specific Stress 
Caused by Electrophilic Quinones. J Bacteriol  191 , 6394-6400. 
Parish, T. & Stoker, N. G. (2000).  Use of a flexible cassette method to 
generate a double unmarked  Mycobacterium tuberculo sis tlyA plcABC  
mutant by gene replacement. Microbiology  146 , 1969-1975.  