INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #9626 PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015
Seymour Katz, M.D., Series EditorINFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #96
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: 
Hazards of Generalizing the Evidence
Vineet S. Gudsoorkar Bincy P . Abraham
Vineet S. Gudsoorkar, MD, Gastroenterology Fellow, 
Houston Methodist Hospital. Bincy P . Abraham, MD, MS, 
FACG, Director, Gastroenterology Fellowship Program 
Director, Underwood Center - Fondren Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease Program, Houston Methodist 
Academic Gastroenterology Office, Houston, TXdisease under control, no definite cure has yet been 
identified. With the advent of new therapies, the 
epidemiology of IBD appears to be changing; and 
with improved patient longevity, gastroenterologists are 
expected to encounter more and more elderly patients 
with IBD in their clinical practice. Yet, there remains 
a remarkable paucity of literature focusing primarily 
on the geriatric IBD patient population.
Changing Epidemiology: A Function of Overall 
Survival, or Missing Links in Pathogenesis?
Classically, IBD has been thought to carry a bimodal 
distribution of incidence with a peak in the 2nd-
4th decade of life, followed by a smaller second 
peak in the 6th- 7th decade. As the etiology of IBD 
is considered multifactorial involving interactions INTRODUCTION
Ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD) 
collectively referred to as inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), continue to pose significant 
challenges to the healthcare system. The latest 
estimates show that IBD affects approximately 1.2 
million Americans.1 Despite such extensive burden, 
our understanding of the pathogenesis of IBD remains 
incomplete; and although significant strides have been 
made in the field of therapies aimed at keeping the The prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in the elderly population is on the rise. Several 
challenges exist in managing the geriatric population with these chronic disorders. The physiology 
of aging affects not only disease expression, but also the treatment and surveillance strategies. 
Despite such considerations, which are unique to elderly IBD patients, the existing evidence for their  
treatment is extrapolated from studies that often suffer from a suboptimal representation of this 
patient subgroup. In this review, we discuss the existing evidence for IBD in the elderly and the  
potential hazards of its unchecked extrapolation to, arguably, a more fragile and susceptible population.INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #96Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the EvidencePRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015 27
IBD in the Elderly:  
Review of Evidence and Caveats
Despite the limitations outlined above, given the lack 
of data addressing exclusively the geriatric population 
clinical decisions are often made extrapolating the 
current available evidence to the elderly population. 
The following section reviews the available evidence 
and problems unique to the elderly.
a) Disease Characteristics
The disease phenotype of IBD in elderly is distinct from 
that in the young. Several factors may account for such 
difference: immune senescence, less contribution of 
genetic influences and possibly, altered environmental 
factors such as the gut microbiota. Compared to the 
younger patients (17-59 years old), the elderly-onset 
patients with CD tend to have ileocolonic or colorectal 
involvement, less frequent involvement of the upper 
gastrointestinal tract, and a less aggressive disease 
course with relatively lower rate of progression to 
stricturing or penetrating disease.5,6 Similarly, compared 
to the younger patients the elderly onset UC patients 
tend to have more limited (proctitis or left sided) 
colonic disease and also seem to have a less aggressive 
disease course.5,6 Such key differences in epidemiology, 
disease phenotype and disease progression highlight 
the heterogeneity of the disease among the different 
age groups. 
b)  Medical Therapy: Drug Metabolism, Eficacy 
and Safety Considerations
Important pharmacokinetic changes in the elderly 
population result from the physiology of aging. 
These physiologic alterations include changes in 
body composition such as reduced lean body mass 
and subsequent reduction in total body water, reduced 
first-pass metabolism and a reduction in renal mass 
and glomerular filtration rate (GFR).6 Also, the elderly 
patients are frequently on a variety of other medications 
increasing the risk of drug-drug interactions in the 
setting of altered pharmacodynamics. 
5-Aminosalicylic acids
Oral 5- aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) derivatives are 
used in the treatment of active disease as well as for 
maintaining remission in CD and UC, although their 
therapeutic utility appears to be more evident in UC.7,8 The 
safety and efficacy of the various 5-ASA formulations 
(continued on page 36)between environmental influences, adaptive and 
innate immunity, and genetics; the exact reason of such 
bimodal distribution is unclear.2 Current epidemiologic 
studies demonstrate that approximately 10-15% of the 
newly diagnosed IBD patients are above 60 years of 
age.3 
One such study analyzing over a decade of data in 
the Department of Veterans Affairs suggested that the 
incidence of IBD has stabilized in the USA, but there 
appears to be an increase in the prevalence.4 Considering 
IBD is a chronic disease without a significant direct 
mortality risk, this can be thought of a direct result of 
increased survival.
Such change in epidemiology of IBD has several 
direct and important implications that affect short 
and long-term management of the disease. In the age 
of evidence-based medicine, the older, and arguably 
more fragile patient population has the least amount 
of evidence on management of IBD.
IBD in the Elderly: Hazards  
of Generalizing the Evidence
Despite the rising prevalence of IBD in the geriatric 
population, evidence- based data specifically addressing 
the management of older IBD patients is scarce. The 
reasons for such scarcity are manifold, starting with the 
definition of the term “elderly”. In the literature, the 
age cut-off for defining the elderly population has been 
variable, ranging most commonly from 50 to 65 years of 
age. Without a standardized cut-off, the generalizability 
of evidence remains limited. 
Similarly, the current opinions on the management 
of such patients are derived from subgroup analyses of 
clinical trials involving the general population. Geriatric 
patients are often excluded or poorly represented in such 
trials. A valid statistical analysis cannot be performed of 
the outcomes in non-predefined subgroups. Additionally, 
at extremes of the age distribution curve the statistical 
power is expected to be quite low given the low number 
of the patients analyzed.
Apart from statistical considerations, applying the 
results of clinical trials to the geriatric population would 
fail to take into consideration age-related physiologic 
changes such as alterations in pharmacokinetics of 
the medications, physiology of aging, presence of 
comorbidities and importantly, quality of life. This 
article aims at exploring practical considerations and 
caveats in application of current management principles 
of IBD to the geriatric population.36 PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the Evidence
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #96appear to be uniform across all patient populations 
without any significant age-related variations.9 Older 
data from rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with 
sulfasalazine suggest that the elderly patients have 
higher steady-state concentration of its metabolites;10 
however has not been observed with the newer 5-ASA 
(mesalamine) formulations. Pharmacokinetics of 5-ASA 
may not be very relevant from an efficacy standpoint 
as most of its therapeutic effect is topical in nature and 
pharmacokinetic variations may be driven more by 
genetic influences (such as enzymatic polymorphism) 
rather than age.11 Nephrotoxicity, which is perhaps the 
most concerning adverse effect of these compounds, 
occurs at an incidence of less than 1 in 500.11 A recent 
retrospective study showed that there was a significant 
dose- and treatment duration- dependent decline in 
creatinine clearance (CrCl) in IBD patients treated with 
5-ASA. Although the patient age at treatment onset did 
not significantly affect the CrCl, a pre-treatment renal 
dysfunction correlated with a greater decline in CrCl.12 
To conclude, ASA drugs remain a reasonable option 
in the armamentarium of clinicians treating geriatric 
IBD patients but close monitoring of renal function, 
particularly during the initiation of therapy and yearly 
thereafter is warranted considering the physiological 
decline in renal function in this age group.
Antibiotics
Antibiotics are frequently used to treat infectious 
complications of IBD such as abscesses, fistulizing 
CD, and pouchitis in UC. Metronidazole and 
ciprofloxacin have been the most studied in IBD. 
Their role in modifying the primary disease process 
is controversial although alteration of gut microbiota 
has been recently suggested as a putative mechanism 
for their actions. Metronidazole is eliminated mainly 
via hepatic metabolism. Data regarding the influence 
of age on its pharmacokinetics, derived mainly from 
non-IBD patient population, suggest a decreased renal 
excretion of metronidazole and its metabolites in the 
elderly,13 although age-dependent dose adjustment is 
not common.
Ciprofloxacin, on the other hand, is eliminated 
renally. While some studies have shown an increased 
serum concentration, slower renal clearance, and 
prolonged half-life of ciprofloxacin in the elderly, 
recommending a dose frequency of not less than every 
12 hours;14 whereas others did not find such difference its elimination half-life, and attributed the higher serum 
concentration to a lower volume of distribution.15 
Considering the physiologic decline in GFR, attention 
should be paid to the dosage even in the absence of 
overt renal insufficiency given that adverse effects of 
quinolones such as diarrhea can often be mistaken for 
a flare of the underlying IBD. Additionally, older age 
(>60 years) and concurrent steroid use are known risk 
factors for tendonopathy associated with quinolones.16
Clostridium difficile infection remains an important 
risk associated with antibiotic use. Other important risk 
factors include older age, fluoroquinolone exposure, 
and immunosuppression. These place the geriatric IBD 
patients at a significantly higher risk of acquiring C. 
difficile infection which, in addition to confounding the 
underlying disease activity assessment, is associated 
with a greater morbidity, mortality, healthcare costs as 
well as need for colectomy.17
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids have long been used to induce remission 
in the treatment of IBD, which is either severe or 
unresponsive to 5-ASA therapy. The risks associated 
with prolonged steroid use in general population are well 
known. In the geriatric population steroids have been 
associated with increased relative risk for developing 
adverse effects such as hypertension, diabetes, altered 
mental status as compared to younger (< 50 years old) 
patients.18 Additionally the age-specific incidence rate 
ratio (IRR) of osteoporotic fractures is 40% higher in 
all IBD patients as well as the elderly subgroup (>60 
years of age) compared to the age- and sex- matched 
general population. The incidence of fractures in IBD 
patients increases with age.19 Chronic use of steroids, 
combined with vitamin D deficiency, which is often 
coexistent in IBD,20 further increases this risk. Age 
related loss of muscle mass and nutritional deficiencies 
may also exacerbate steroid-induced myopathy in the 
elderly. It has been suggested that persons above the 
age of 65 may have increased unbound (free) fraction 
of prednisolone;21 although it is not clear whether a dose 
reduction is necessary in the elderly patients. 
Budesonide and budesonide MMX, synthetic 
corticosteroids that have linear pharmacokinetics, 
differential absorption when administered orally 
versus rectally, and fewer acute adverse effects;22 is an 
alternative to prednisone for elderly patients. However, 
it should be noted that most patients included in major 
trials evaluating the conventional corticosteroids as (continued from page 27)Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the EvidencePRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015 37
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the Evidence
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #96immunomodulator use with AZA/6MP/ MTX showed a 
bimodal risk distribution with relative risk of lymphoma 
being higher in patients below 35 years of age but the 
highest absolute lymphoma risk with a standardized 
incidence ratio of 4.78 (1:354 cases per patient-year) 
was seen in IBD patients older than 50 compared to the 
younger IBD population. However these observations 
were not reproduced when data from a previously 
excluded “outlier” study were included in the analysis.33
With regards to skin cancer, a large population-
based study showed an association between 
immunomodulatory use for more than 5 years and non-
melanoma skin cancer [Odds ratio (OR) 1.78],34 whereas 
a similar study from Olmstead County, Minnesota 
reported an increased risk of melanoma in patients 
treated with immunomodulators.35 A meta-analysis 
addressing the association between non-melanoma skin 
cancers and thiopurine use demonstrated a modest risk 
(pooled adjusted hazard ratio 2.28), but this association 
lost statistical significance after excluding studies with a 
relatively short-term (< 3 years) follow-up. The authors 
concluded that there is not enough evidence to suggest 
that the cancer risk outweighs the treatment benefit with 
thiopurines.36 None of these studies identified age as an 
independent risk modifier.
Periodic monitoring of complete blood count, liver 
and kidney function and skin examinations should be 
a part of routine surveillance of all IBD patients on 
immunomodulator therapy but special precautions 
should be taken in the elderly as they are at higher 
risk of the drugs adverse effects than their younger 
counterparts.
Biologics
The fourth major class of drugs used to treat moderate to 
severe IBD is biologics, either antibodies against tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)-α (infliximab, adalimumab, 
certolizumab, golimumab), or anti-integrins 
(natalizumab and vedolizumab). These agents have 
been shown to induce and maintain remission, improve 
quality of life, and reduce hospitalizations for IBD 
patients.37,38
An analysis of IBD patients >65 years of age treated 
with TNF-α inhibitors demonstrated an 11% incidence 
of severe infections and 10% total mortality in the 
elderly group- as compared to 2.6% and 1% incidence 
of severe infections and mortality, respectively, in the 
younger patients.39 Another study confirmed these 
results with a 3 times high risk of severe adverse events well as the formulations of budesonide were in the 3rd 
to 4th decade of life.23-26 Older age and chronic steroid 
use have been associated as the two key risk factors for 
potential drug interaction.27 As noted by Parian and Ha, 
a majority of late-onset IBD patients- including those 
in remission or those with mild disease activity- often 
receive chronic maintenance therapy with steroids and 
steroid-sparing therapies remain underused in these 
patients. Therefore, caution should be exercised in older 
patients on long-term steroids (typically, >7.5 mg per 
day of prednisone for > 1 month).
Appropriate screening including bone mineral 
density, vitamin D levels, electrolytes and blood 
glucose must be periodically performed; feasibility of 
a steroid-sparing regimen should be considered early; 
medications should be reviewed for potential drug-drug 
interactions and clinical predisposition for infections 
should be assessed frequently in older patients on 
steroid therapy.
Immunomodulators
Immunomodulators such as methotrexate (MTX), 
azathioprine (AZA), and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) 
are most commonly used as steroid-sparing agents 
or in combination therapy with biologic agents. AZA 
and 6-MP, the thiopurine compounds are catabolized 
by the enzyme thiopurine S-methyltransferase 
(TPMT). Patients with TPMT gene mutations and 
enzyme deficiency are at higher risk for developing 
severe hematological toxicity such as bone marrow 
suppression. While screening patients for TPMT 
deficiency prior to starting thiopurine therapy is 
standard of care, age-related variations in TPMT 
activity have been documented.28,29 Although these 
findings suggest a multifactorial regulation and not 
necessarily only age related linear association of TPMT 
activity, clinicians should be aware of a potentially 
exaggerated myelosuppression in the elderly patients, 
particularly considering the physiological changes in 
the bone marrow activity with aging.30
Concern exists regarding the risk of malignancy- 
particularly lymphomas, melanoma and non-melanoma 
skin cancers in association with immunomodulator 
therapy. Studies have shown an increased risk of 
lymphoma as high as fourfold with thiopurines.31 Of 
note, a German study demonstrated 18% incidence of 
lymphoma in IBD patients over 50 years of age, as 
compared to 4% incidence in those less than 50 years 
old, when treated with thiopurines.32 A meta-analysis of 38 PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the Evidence
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #96between age and nocturnal bowel movements.49 From 
the patient perspective, however, 89-100% reported that 
they would undergo their surgery again, and 93-100% 
reported that they would recommend it to others.50
d) Colorectal Cancer Screening/Surveillance
While the IBD population is at a higher risk for 
developing colorectal cancer (CRC), the exact 
magnitude of this relationship is not clear. A meta-
analysis from 2001 showed an increased risk for 
developing CRC in UC patients- 2% by 10 years, 8% by 
20 and 18% by 30 years.51 In contrast, more recent data 
have suggested a progressive reduction in the excess 
CRC risk in IBD patients and that the disease extent 
and duration are important risk factors for developing 
CRC.52 In a case-control study, the histological 
inflammation score was the only significant determinant 
of CRC risk.53 Taken together, the risk of CRC in IBD 
patients has reduced in magnitude but remains present 
as long as the patients are not in histological remission. 
Therefore, elderly patients- particularly the early-onset 
subgroup- will still carry a higher risk of progression 
to CRC, unless complete histological remission is 
achieved. This brings forward the issue of screening 
and surveillance strategies in the elderly subgroup. The 
current guidelines do not specify an upper age cutoff 
for endoscopic screening and surveillance in the IBD 
population. In general population, colonoscopy in the 
elderly has been shown to be associated with a lower 
rate of procedure completion,54 a higher likelihood of 
suboptimal bowel preparation,55 and an incremental risk 
of perforation with increasing age and comorbidities.56
Although the risk of neoplasia increases with age, 
overall life expectancy decreases. A study showed that 
the mean extension of life expectancy in the patients 
undergoing routine screening colonoscopy was 0.17 
years in the healthy population between the age 75-79, 
and 0.13 years in those older than 80 years of age; as 
compared to 0.85 years in those between 50-54 years 
of age, respectively.57 However, data addressing this 
issue specifically in the IBD are lacking, and decisions 
regarding surveillance need to be individualized.
CONCLUSION
The growth of the elderly IBD population in the 
upcoming decades will bring on a unique set of 
management challenges. Studies evaluating this 
population are disproportionally low as clinical trials 
often exclude this population. Thus, extrapolating the in the >65 year old IBD patients compared to those <65 
on anti-TNF therapy.40 These findings further prompt 
concerns about the applicability of results of clinical 
trials to the geriatric population. 
Older age has been shown to be a statistically 
significant predictor of suboptimal early response to 
anti-TNF therapy.40,41 Additionally, Desai et al. noted 
a 70% discontinuation rate at the end of 2 years of 
anti-TNF therapy in patients > 60 years of age, and 
concluded that older age was a significant risk factor 
for discontinuation of this treatment.42 
Of the two anti-integrin molecules, vedolizumab 
was recently approved for the treatment of moderate to 
severe IBD. The mean age of patients in the two phase 3 
randomized trials comparing vedolizumab to placebo for 
CD and UC was 35-40 years.43,44 Similarly, randomized 
clinical trials involving natalizumab for the treatment 
of CD had the mean patient age of approximately 35-
40 years.45,46 Although no age-specific differences were 
seen in efficacy or safety analyses in these clinical trials, 
surveillance strategies in patients above the age of 65 
on anti-integrin therapy remain undefined as the clinical 
data of anti-integrin therapy in the elderly population 
is quite sparse. 
c)  Surgical Therapy: Restorative Surgery 
versus Permanent Ileostomy
Advanced age is a significant risk factor and predictor 
of outcomes for patients undergoing surgery for IBD. 
Advanced patient age is associated with a longer 
operating room time, longer length of hospitalization 
and higher odds for postoperative complications.47  Ileo-
pouch anal anastomosis (IPAA), being a more complex 
procedure was traditionally reserved for “younger” 
patients with IBD. In a population-based study of veterans 
above 50 years of age with UC, Longo et al. noted that 
64% of the patients underwent proctocolectomy and 
permanent ileostomy.48 However, a recent systematic 
review evaluating medical and surgical complications 
in IBD patients observed encouraging outcomes after 
IPAA in the elderly population. Neither was there an 
increase in mortality in the IPAA group compared to 
total proctocolectomy group regardless of age, nor an 
association between age and IPAA failure rates seen. 
The functional outcomes were also comparable between 
the older and younger patients with no difference in 
daytime functional impairment.  However, an increased 
incidence of post-IPAA nocturnal bowel incontinence 
was noted in the elderly group, as well as an association Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the EvidencePRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015 39
Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the Evidence
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #96efficacy and risk data from the younger population 
may not always accurately describe the effects that we 
need to take into account for the geriatric population. 
Specifically, changes in metabolism and potentially 
poorer response to medications, increased risk of 
infections, and lack of specific guidelines such as 
colorectal cancer surveillance for this population 
contributes to this challenge. At this time providers 
should take into account not just physiologic age but 
also comorbidities to individualize potential risks and 
create a treatment plan that provides optimal benefit 
for the elderly IBD population. 
References
1. Kappelman MD, Moore KR, Allen JK, Cook SF. Recent 
trends in the prevalence of Crohn’s disease and ulcerative 
colitis in a commercially insured US population. Dig Dis Sci.  
2013;58:519-25.
2. Ananthakrishnan AN. Epidemiology and risk factors for 
IBD. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2015;12:205-17.
3. Taleban S, Colombel JF, Mohler MJ, Fain MJ. Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease and the Elderly: A Review. J  Crohns Colitis . 
2015;9:507-515.
4. Hou JK, Kramer JR, Richardson P, Mei M, El-Serag HB. 
The incidence and prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease 
among U.S. veterans: a national cohort study. Inflamm Bowel 
Dis. 2013;19:1059-64.
5. Charpentier C, Salleron J, Savoye G, Fumery M, Merle 
V , Laberenne JE, Vasseur F, Dupas JL, Cortot A, Dauchet 
L, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Lerebours E, Colombel JF, Gower-
Rousseau C. Natural history of elderly-onset inflamma -
tory bowel disease: a population-based cohort study. Gut. 
2014;63:423-32.
6. Mangoni AA, Jackson SH. Age-related changes in phar -
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics: basic principles and 
practical applications. Br J Clin Pharmacol.  2004;57:6-14.
7. Feagan BG, Macdonald JK. Oral 5-aminosalicylic acid for 
maintenance of remission in ulcerative colitis. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2012;10:CD000544.
8. Lim WC, Hanauer S. Aminosalicylates for induction 
of remission or response in Crohn’s disease. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev . 2010;(12):CD008870.
9. Feagan BG, Chande N, MacDonald JK. Are there any dif -
ferences in the efficacy and safety of different formulations 
of Oral 5-ASA used for induction and maintenance of remis -
sion in ulcerative colitis? evidence from cochrane reviews. 
Inflamm Bowel Dis . 2013;19:2031-40.
10. Taggart AJ, McDermott BJ, Roberts SD. The effect of 
age and acetylator phenotype on the pharmacokinetics of 
sulfasalazine in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Clin 
Pharmacokinet 1992;23:311-20.
11. Perrotta C, Pellegrino P, Moroni E, De Palma C, Cervia 
D, Danelli P, Clementi E. Five-aminosalicylic Acid: an 
update for the reappraisal of an old drug. Gastroenterol Res 
Pract ;2015:456895.
12. Patel H, Barr A, Jeejeebhoy KN. Renal effects of long-term 
treatment with 5-aminosalicylic acid. Can J Gastroenterol  
2009;23:170-6.
13. Lau AH, Lam NP, Piscitelli SC, Wilkes L, Danziger LH. 
Clinical pharmacokinetics of metronidazole and other nitro -
imidazole anti-infectives. Clin Pharmacokinet  1992;23:328-64.14. LeBel M, Barbeau G, Bergeron MG, Roy D, Vallee F. 
Pharmacokinetics of ciprofloxacin in elderly subjects. 
Pharmacotherapy  1986;6:87-91.
15. Bayer A, Gajewska A, Stephens M, Stark JM, Pathy J. 
Pharmacokinetics of ciprofloxacin in the elderly. Respiration  
1987;51:292-5.
16. Stahlmann R, Lode H. Safety considerations of fluoroquino -
lones in the elderly: an update. Drugs Aging . 2010;27:193-
209.
17. Ananthakrishnan AN, Binion DG. Impact of Clostridium 
difficile on inflammatory bowel disease. Expert Rev 
Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2010;4:589-600.
18. Akerkar GA, Peppercorn MA, Hamel MB, Parker RA. 
Corticosteroid-associated complications in elderly Crohn’s 
disease patients. Am J Gastroenterol  1997;92:461-4.
19. Bernstein CN, Blanchard JF, Leslie W, Wajda A, Yu BN. 
The incidence of fracture among patients with inflammatory 
bowel disease. A population-based cohort study. Ann Intern 
Med 2000;133:795-9.
20. Juneja M, Baidoo L, Schwartz MB, Barrie A 3rd, Regueiro 
M, Dunn M, Binion DG. Geriatric inflammatory bowel 
disease: phenotypic presentation, treatment patterns, nutri -
tional status, outcomes, and comorbidity. Dig Dis Sci . 
2012;57:2408-15.
21. Frey BM, Frey FJ. Clinical pharmacokinetics of prednisone 
and prednisolone. Clin Pharmacokinet  1990;19:126-46.
22. Sachar DB. Budesonide for inflammatory bowel disease. Is 
it a magic bullet? N Engl J Med  1994;331:873-4.
23. Rutgeerts P, Lofberg R, Malchow H, Lamers C, Olaison 
G, Jewell D, Danielsson A, Goebell H, Thomsen OO, 
Lorenz-Meyer H, et al. A comparison of budesonide with 
prednisolone for active Crohn’s disease. N Engl J Med  
1994;331:842-5.
24. Greenberg GR, Feagan BG, Martin F, Sutherland LR, 
Thomson AB, Williams CN, Nilsson LG, Persson T. 
Oral budesonide for active Crohn’s disease. Canadian 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Study Group. N Engl J Med  
1994;331:836-41.
25. Travis SP, Danese S, Kupcinskas L, Alexeeva O, D’Haens 
G, Gibson PR, Moro L, Jones R, Ballard ED, Masure J, 
Rossini M, Sandborn WJ. Once-daily budesonide MMX in 
active, mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis: results from the 
randomised CORE II study. Gut. 2014;63:433-41.
26. Sandborn WJ, Travis S, Moro L, Jones R, Gautille T, 
Bagin R, Huang M, Yeung P, Ballard ED, 2nd. Once-
daily budesonide MMX(R) extended-release tablets induce 
remission in patients with mild to moderate ulcerative 
colitis: results from the CORE I study. Gastroenterology . 
2012;143:1218-26 e1-2.
27. Parian A, Ha CY . Older age and steroid use are associated 
with increasing polypharmacy and potential medication 
interactions among patients with inflammatory bowel dis -
ease. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2015 ;21:1392-400.  
28. Serpe L, Calvo PL, Muntoni E, D’Antico S, Giaccone M, 
Avagnina A, Baldi M, Barbera C, Curti F, Pera A, Eandi M, 
Zara GP, Canaparo R. Thiopurine S-methyltransferase phar -
macogenetics in a large-scale healthy Italian-Caucasian pop -
ulation: differences in enzyme activity. Pharmacogenomics  
2009;10:1753-65.
29. Ferroni MA, Marchi G, Sansone E, Romeo P, Giulianotti PC, 
Pietrabissa A, Mosca F, Pacifici GM. Variability in the rate 
of 6-mercaptopurine methylation in the erythrocytes, liver 
and kidney in an Italian population. Eur J Clin Pharmacol  
1996;51:23-9.
30. Nakamura-Ishizu A, Suda T. Aging of the hematopoietic 
stem cells niche. Int J Hematol . 2014;100:317-25.
31. Kandiel A, Fraser AG, Korelitz BI, Brensinger C, Lewis Inflammatory Bowel Disease in the Elderly: Hazards of Generalizing the Evidence
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE: A PRACTICAL APPROACH, SERIES #9640 PRACTICAL GASTROENTEROLOGY • AUGUST 2015JD. Increased risk of lymphoma among inflammatory bowel 
disease patients treated with azathioprine and 6-mercaptopu -
rine. Gut. 2005;54:1121-5.
32. Beigel F, Steinborn A, Schnitzler F, Tillack C, Breiteneicher 
S, John JM, Van Steen K, Laubender RP, Goke B, Seiderer 
J, Brand S, Ochsenkuhn T. Risk of malignancies in patients 
with inflammatory bowel disease treated with thiopurines or 
anti-TNF alpha antibodies. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf . 
2014;23:735-44.
33. Kotlyar DS, Lewis JD, Beaugerie L, Tierney A, Brensinger 
CM, Gisbert JP, Loftus EV , Jr., Peyrin-Biroulet L, Blonski 
WC, Van Domselaar M, Chaparro M, Sandilya S, Bewtra M, 
Beigel F, Biancone L, Lichtenstein GR. Risk of lymphoma 
in patients with inflammatory bowel disease treated with 
azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine: a meta-analysis. Clin 
Gastroenterol Hepatol . 2015;13:847-58 e4; quiz e48-50.
34. Kopylov U, Vutcovici M, Kezouh A, Seidman E, Bitton A, 
Afif W. Risk of Lymphoma, Colorectal and Skin Cancer 
in Patients with IBD Treated with Immunomodulators and 
Biologics: A Quebec Claims Database Study. Inflamm Bowel 
Dis. 2015 May 19. [Epub ahead of print]
35. Yadav S, Singh S, Harmsen WS, Edakkanambeth Varayil J, 
Tremaine WJ, Loftus EV , Jr. Effect of Medications on Risk 
of Cancer in Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: 
A Population-Based Cohort Study from Olmsted County, 
Minnesota. Mayo Clin Proc . 2015;90:738-46.
36. Ariyaratnam J, Subramanian V . Association between thio -
purine use and nonmelanoma skin cancers in patients 
with inflammatory bowel disease: a meta-analysis. Am J 
Gastroenterol . 2014;109:163-9.
37. Lichtenstein GR, Hanauer SB, Sandborn WJ. Management of 
Crohn’s disease in adults. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104:465-
83; quiz 464, 484.
38. Kornbluth A, Sachar DB. Ulcerative colitis practice guide -
lines in adults: American College Of Gastroenterology, 
Practice Parameters Committee. A m J Gastroenterol . 
2010;105:501-23; quiz 524.
39. Cottone M, Kohn A, Daperno M, Armuzzi A, Guidi L, 
D’Inca R, Bossa F, Angelucci E, Biancone L, Gionchetti P, 
Ardizzone S, Papi C, Fries W, Danese S, Riegler G, Cappello 
M, Castiglione F, Annese V , Orlando A. Advanced age is 
an independent risk factor for severe infections and mortal -
ity in patients given anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy for 
inflammatory bowel disease. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol . 
2011;9:30-5.
40.  Lobatón T, Ferrante M, Rutgeerts P, Ballet V , Van Assche 
G, Vermeire S. Efficacy and safety of anti-TNF therapy in 
elderly patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Aliment 
Pharmacol Ther . 2015;Jun 24. doi: 10.1111/apt.13294. 
[Epub ahead of print]
41. Ferrante M, Vermeire S, Katsanos KH, Noman M, Van 
Assche G, Schnitzler F, Arijs I, De Hertogh G, Hoffman 
I, Geboes JK, Rutgeerts P. Predictors of early response to 
infliximab in patients with ulcerative colitis. Inflamm Bowel 
Dis. 2007;13:123-8.
42. Desai A, Zator ZA, de Silva P, Nguyen DD, Korzenik J, 
Yajnik V , Ananthakrishnan AN. Older age is associated 
with higher rate of discontinuation of anti-TNF therapy in 
patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel 
Dis. 2013;19:309-15.
43. Sandborn WJ, Feagan BG, Rutgeerts P, Hanauer S, Colombel 
JF, Sands BE, Lukas M, Fedorak RN, Lee S, Bressler B, Fox 
I, Rosario M, Sankoh S, Xu J, Stephens K, Milch C, Parikh 
A. Vedolizumab as induction and maintenance therapy for 
Crohn’s disease. N Engl J Med.  2013;369:711-21.
44. Feagan BG, Rutgeerts P, Sands BE, Hanauer S, Colombel 
JF, Sandborn WJ, Van Assche G, Axler J, Kim HJ, Danese S, Fox I, Milch C, Sankoh S, Wyant T, Xu J, Parikh A. 
Vedolizumab as induction and maintenance therapy for 
ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:699-710.
45. Sandborn WJ, Colombel JF, Enns R, Feagan BG, Hanauer 
SB, Lawrance IC, Panaccione R, Sanders M, Schreiber S, 
Targan S, van Deventer S, Goldblum R, Despain D, Hogge 
GS, Rutgeerts P. Natalizumab induction and maintenance 
therapy for Crohn’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:1912-
25.
46. Targan SR, Feagan BG, Fedorak RN, Lashner BA, Panaccione 
R, Present DH, Spehlmann ME, Rutgeerts PJ, Tulassay Z, 
V olfova M, Wolf DC, Hernandez C, Bornstein J, Sandborn 
WJ. Natalizumab for the treatment of active Crohn’s dis -
ease: results of the ENCORE Trial. Gastroenterology.  
2007;132:1672-83.
47. Page MJ, Poritz LS, Kunselman SJ, Koltun WA. Factors 
affecting surgical risk in elderly patients with inflammatory 
bowel disease. J Gastrointest Surg.  2002;6:606-13.
48. Longo WE, Virgo KS, Bahadursingh AN, Johnson FE. 
Patterns of disease and surgical treatment among United 
States veterans more than 50 years of age with ulcerative 
colitis. Am J Surg. 2003;186:514-8.
49. Shung DL, Abraham B, Sellin J, Hou JK. Medical and sur -
gical complications of inflammatory bowel disease in the 
elderly: a systematic review. Dig Dis Sci . 2015;60:1132-40.
50. Delaney CP, Fazio VW, Remzi FH, Hammel J, Church JM, 
Hull TL, Senagore AJ, Strong SA, Lavery IC. Prospective, 
age-related analysis of surgical results, functional outcome, 
and quality of life after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis. Ann 
Surg.  2003;238:221-8.
51. Eaden JA, Abrams KR, Mayberry JF. The risk of colorec -
tal cancer in ulcerative colitis: a meta-analysis. Gut. 
2001;48:526-35.
52. Lutgens MW, van Oijen MG, van der Heijden GJ, Vleggaar 
FP, Siersema PD, Oldenburg B. Declining risk of colorectal 
cancer in inflammatory bowel disease: an updated meta-
analysis of population-based cohort studies.  Inflamm Bowel 
Dis. 2013;19:789-99.
53. Rutter M, Saunders B, Wilkinson K, Rumbles S, Schofield 
G, Kamm M, Williams C, Price A, Talbot I, Forbes A. 
Severity of inflammation is a risk factor for colorectal neo -
plasia in ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology.  2004;126:451-
9.
54. Ure T, Dehghan K, Vernava AM, 3rd, Longo WE, Andrus 
CA, Daniel GL. Colonoscopy in the elderly. Low risk, high 
yield. Surg Endosc.  1995;9:505-8.
55. Lukens FJ, Loeb DS, Machicao VI, Achem SR, Picco MF. 
Colonoscopy in octogenarians: a prospective outpatient 
study. Am J Gastroenterol.  2002;97:1722-5.
56. Gatto NM, Frucht H, Sundararajan V , Jacobson JS, Grann 
VR, Neugut AI. Risk of perforation after colonoscopy and 
sigmoidoscopy: a population-based study. J Natl Cancer 
Inst. 2003;95:230-6.
57. Lin OS, Kozarek RA, Schembre DB, Ayub K, Gluck M, 
Drennan F, Soon MS, Rabeneck L. Screening colonoscopy 
in very elderly patients: prevalence of neoplasia and esti -
mated impact on life expectancy. JAMA.  2006;295:2357-65.
practicalgastro.com