Central brain hemisphere and 
eye-antenna disc of Drosophila 
melanogaster  at the third larval 
stage stained with three Alexa 
dyes and imaged on a Zeiss LSM 
510 Meta. Image courtesy of 
Veta Trunova, The Johns Hopkins 
University.
Fluorescent proteins. Image 
courtesy of Roger Tsien, University 
of California at San Diego.Focus on ﬂuorescence imaging
Principles and practice of microscope techniques
When Sir George Gabriel Stokes first described the phe -
nomenon of fluorescence in 1852 it is doubtful many 
people ever considered its potential as a tool for biolo -
gists. As often happens with new discoveries, however, scientists 
figured out a way to exploit this physical process and began to 
use fluorescent molecules as biological labels. In concert with 
microscopy this permitted previously undreamt-of possibilities 
for detection and visualization.
Notably, immunofluorescence techniques became powerful 
tools for inquisitive biologists. Recently, the description of new 
imaging modalities such as confocal and two-photon micros -
copy, the creation of new fluorescent molecules, and the discov -
ery and exploitation of fluorescent proteins have triggered an 
explosion in fluorescence microscopy techniques. This has also 
resulted in their use within living systems where they are revo -
lutionizing biological imaging. A sampling of seminal papers 
documenting this advance is available in the ‘Classics Library’ 
on the Focus website.
The application of fluorescence techniques to living speci -
mens presents many challenges to users. There is thus a greater 
need for users to understand the principles of fluorescence 
and how different imaging systems work so biologists can fully 
exploit this revolution. Determining the most suitable equip -
ment and reagents for an application, and properly designing 
and conducting experiments both require a clear understanding 
of the basic principles involved. This Focus is intended to pres -
ent this basic information as well as practical advice that biolo -
gists need to use these powerful techniques in their work.
We are pleased to acknowledge the support of Carl Zeiss 
Microscopy as principal sponsor and Intelligent Imaging 
Innovations, Inc. as supporting sponsor in producing this 
focus. As always, Nature Methods  carries sole responsibility for 
all editorial content and peer review.
Daniel Evanko
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 901CONTENTS
COMMENTARY
902 Fluorescence 
microscopy today
Rafael Yuste
PERSPECTIVE
905 A guide to choosing 
fluorescent proteins
Nathan Shaner, Paul 
Steinbach & Roger Tsien
 REVIEWS
910  Fluorescence 
microscopy
Jeff Lichtman & José-
Angel Conchello
920 Optical sectioning 
microscopy
José-Angel Conchello & 
Jeff Lichtman
932 Deep tissue two-
photon microscopy
Fritjof Helmchen & 
Winfried Denk
941 Fiber-optic 
fluorescence imaging
Benjamin Flusberg, 
Eric Cocker, Wibool 
Piyawattanametha, 
Juergen Jung, Eunice 
Cheung & Mark Schnitzer
Editor, Nature Method s 
Veronique Kiermer
Focus Editor  Daniel EvankoSenior Production Editor 
Renee Lucas
Copy Editor  Irene KaganmanDesign  Erin Boyle
Sponsorship  Claire Hines
Marketing  Eric Claiborne©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsA guide to choosing fluorescent proteins
Nathan C Shaner1,2, Paul A Steinbach1,3 & Roger Y Tsien1,3,4
The recent explosion in the diversity of available fluorescent proteins (FPs)1–16 
promises a wide variety of new tools for biological imaging. With no unified standard for assessing these tools, however, a researcher is faced with difficult questions. Which FPs are best for general use? Which are the brightest? What additional factors determine which are best for a given experiment? Although in many cases, a trial-and-error approach may still be necessary in determining the answers to these questions, a unified characterization of the best available FPs provides a useful guide in narrowing down the options.
We can begin by stating several general requirements for 
the successful use of an FP in an imaging experiment. First, the FP should express efficiently and without toxic-ity in the chosen system, and it should be bright enough to provide sufficient signal above autofluorescence to be reliably detected and imaged. Second, the FP should have sufficient photostability to be imaged for the duration of the experiment. Third, if the FP is to be expressed as a fusion to another protein of interest, then the FP should not oligomerize. Fourth, the FP should be insensitive to environmental effects that could confound quanti-tative interpretation of experimental results. Finally, in multiple-labeling experiments, the set of FPs used should have minimal crosstalk in their excitation and emission channels. For more complex imaging experiments, such as those using fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
17 or selective optical labeling using photocon-
vertible FPs12,15, additional considerations come into 
play. General recommendations to help determine the optimal set of FPs in each spectral class for a given experiment are available in Box 1 , along with more detail 
on each issue discussed below.
‘Brightness’ and expression
FP vendors typically make optimistic but vague claims as to the brightness of the proteins they promote. Purely qualitative brightness comparisons that do not pro-vide clear information on the extinction coefficient and quantum yield should be viewed with skepticism. For example, the newly released DsRed-Monomer 
(Clontech) is described as “bright,” even though in fact, it is the dimmest monomeric red fluorescent protein (RFP) presently available.
The perceived brightness of an FP is determined by 
several highly variable factors, including the intrinsic brightness of the protein (determined by its maturation speed and efficiency, extinction coefficient, quantum yield and, in longer experiments, photostability), the optical properties of the imaging setup (illumination 
wavelength and intensity, spectra of filters and dichroic mirrors), and camera or human eye sensitivity to the emission spectrum. Although these factors make it impossible to name any one FP as the brightest over-all, it is possible to identify the brightest protein in each spectral class (when more than one protein is available), as this depends only on the intrinsic optical proper-ties of the FP . The brightest proteins for each class are listed in Table 1 , with greater detail on the properties of 
each listed protein available in Supplementary  Table 1  
online. As discussed below in relation to photostability, the choice of optimal filter sets is critical to obtaining the best performance from an FP .
Generally, FPs that have been optimized for mam-
malian cells will express well at 37 °C, but some pro-
teins may fold more or less efficiently. We have not done extensive tests in mammalian cells to determine relative efficiency of folding and maturation at 37 °C 
versus lower temperatures, but expression of proteins in 
1Department of Pharmacology, 2Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute and 4Department of Chemistry 
and Biochemistry, 310 Cellular & Molecular Medicine West 0647, Universi ty of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jol la, CA 
92093, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to R.Y.T. (rtsien@ucsd.edu).
PUBLISHED ONLINE 18 NOVEMBER 2005; DOI:10.1038/NMETH819
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 905PERSPECTIVE©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsbacteria at 37 °C versus 25 °C gives some indication of the relative 
efficiencies. These experiments suggest that there are several pro-teins that do not mature well at 37 °C. Indications of potential fold-
ing inefficiency at 37 °C should not be taken with absolute certainty, 
however, as additional chaperones and other differences between mammalian cells and bacteria (and even variations between mam-malian cell lines) could have substantial influences on folding and maturation efficiency.
Generally, modern Aequorea -derived fluorescent proteins (AFPs, 
see Supplementary T able 2  online for mutations of common 
AFP variants relative to wild-type GFP) fold reasonably well at 37 °C⎯in fact, several recent variants have been specifically opti-
mized for 37 °C expression. The UV-excitable variant T-Sapphire
6 
and the yellow AFP (YFP) variant Venus1 are examples of these. 
The best green GFP variant, Emerald18, also folds very efficiently 
at 37 °C compared with its predecessor, enhanced GFP (EGFP). 
The only recently developed AFP that performed poorly in our tests was the cyan variant, CyPet
2, which folded well at room tem-
perature but poorly at 37 °C. All orange, red and far-red FPs (with 
the exception of J-Red and DsRed-Monomer) listed in Table 1  
perform well at 37 °C.
An additional factor affecting the maturation of FPs expressed 
in living organisms is the presence or absence of molecular oxygen. The requirement for O
2 to dehydrogenate amino acids during chro-
mophore formation has two important consequences. First, each molecule of AFP should generate one molecule of H
2O2 as part 
of its maturation process18, and the longer-wavelength FPs from 
corals probably generate two19. Second, fluorescence formation is 
prevented by rigorously anoxic conditions (< 0.75 µM O2), but is 
readily detected at 3 µM O2 (ref. 20). Even when anoxia initially 
prevents fluorophore maturation,  fluorescence measurements are 
usually done after the samples have been exposed to air21.Photostability
All FPs eventually photobleach upon extended excitation, though at a much lower rate than many small-molecule dyes ( Table 1 ). In 
addition, there is substantial variation in the rate of photobleaching between different FPs ⎯even between FPs with otherwise very simi-
lar optical properties. For experiments requiring a limited number of images (around 10 or fewer), photostability is generally not a major factor, but choosing the most photostable protein is critical to success in experiments requiring large numbers of images of the same cell or field.
A unified characterization of FP photostability has until now been 
lacking in the scientific literature. Although many descriptions of new FP variants include some characterization of their photostability, the methods used for this characterization are highly variable and the resulting data are impossible to compare directly. Because many FPs have complex photobleaching curves and require different excitation intensities and exposure times, a standardized treatment of photosta-bility must take all these factors into account.
T o provide a basis for comparing the practical photostability of 
FPs, we have measured photobleaching curves for all of the FPs listed in Table 1  under conditions designed to effectively simulate wide-
field microscopy of live cells
4. Briefly, aqueous droplets of purified 
FPs (at pH 7) were formed under mineral oil in a chamber that allows imaging on a fluorescence microscope. Droplets of volumes comparable to those of typical mammalian cells were photobleached with continuous illumination while recording images periodically to generate a bleaching curve. T o account for differences in bright-ness between proteins and efficiency of excitation in our microscope setup, we normalized each bleaching curve to account for the extinc-tion coefficient and quantum yield of the FP , the emission spectrum of the arc lamp used for excitation, and the transmission spectra of the filters and other optical path components of the microscope 
BOX 1  RECOMMENDATIONS BY SPECTRAL CLASS 
Far-red.  mPlum is the only reasonably bright and photostable far-red monomer available. Although it is not as bright as many 
shorter-wavelength options, it should be used when spectral separation from other FPs is critical, and it may give some advanta ge 
when imaging thicker tissues. AQ143, a mutated anemone chromoprotein, has comparable brightness ( ε = 90 (mM  cm)–1, quantum 
yield (QY) = 0.04) and even longer wavelengths (excitation, 595 nm; emission, 655 nm), but it is still tetrameric31.
Red. mCherry is the best general-purpose red monomer owing to its superior photostability. Its predecessor mRFP1 is now obsolete. 
The tandem dimer tdTomato is equally photostable but twice the molecular weight of mCherry, and may be used when fusion tag size does not interfere with protein function. mStrawberry is the brightest red monomer, but it is less photostable than mCherr y, 
and should be avoided when photostability is critical. We do not recommend using J-Red and DsRed-Monomer.
Orange.  mOrange is the brightest orange monomer, but should not be used when photostability is critical or when it is targeted to 
regions of low or unstable pH. mKO is extremely photostable and should be used for long-term or intensive imaging experiments o r 
when targeting to an acidic or pH-unstable environment.
Yellow-green.  The widely used variant EYFP is obsolete and inferior to mCitrine, Venus and YPet. Each of these should perform well 
in most applications. YPet should be used in conjunction with the CFP variant CyPet for FRET applications.
Green.  Although it has a more pronounced fast bleaching component than the common variant EGFP, the newer variant Emerald 
exhibits far more efficient folding at 37 °C and will generally perform much better than EGFP.
Cyan.  Cerulean is the brightest CFP variant and folds most efficiently at 37 °C, and thus, it is probably the best general-purpose CFP. 
Its photostability under arc-lamp illumination, however, is much lower than that of other CFP variants. CyPet appears superior to 
mCFP in that it has a somewhat more blue-shifted and narrower emission peak, and displays efficient FRET with YFP variant YPet,  
but it expresses relatively poorly at 37 °C.
UV-excitable green.  T-Sapphire is potentially useful as a FRET donor to orange or red monomers.
906 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSPERSPECTIVE©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methods(see4 and Supplementary Discussion  online for additional descrip-
tion of bleaching calculations). This method of normalization pro-vides a practical measurement of how long each FP will take to lose 50% of an initial emission rate of 1,000 photons/s. Because dimmer proteins will require either higher excitation power or longer expo-sures, we believe this method of normalization provides a realistic picture of how different FPs will perform in an actual experiment imaging populations of FP molecules. Bleaching experiments were performed in parallel for several (but not all) of the FPs listed in Table 1  expressed in live cells and gave time courses closely matching 
those of purified proteins in microdroplets.
Based on our photobleaching assay results, it is clear that photo-
stability can be highly variable between different FPs, even those of the same spectral class. Taking into account brightness and folding efficiencies at 37 °C, the best proteins for long-term imaging are the 
monomers mCherry and mKO. The red tandem dimer tdT omato is also highly photostable and may be used when the size of the fusion tag is not of great concern. The relative photostability of proteins in each spectral class is indicated in Table 1 . Some AFPs, such as Cerulean, had 
illumination intensity–dependent fast bleaching components, and so photobleaching curves were taken at lower illumination intensities where this effect was less pronounced. The GFP variant Emerald dis-played a very fast initial bleaching component that led to an extremely short time to 50% bleach. But after this initial fast bleaching phase, its photostability decayed at a rate very similar to that of EGFP . All YFPs, with the exception of Venus, have reasonably good photostability, and thus, YFP selection should be guided by brightness, environmental sensitivity or FRET performance (see Box 1 for greater detail and for general recommendations for all spectral classes, and Supplementary 
Fig. 1  online for sample bleaching curves).
Our method of measuring photobleaching has some limitations 
in its applicability to different imaging modalities, such as laser scan-ning confocal microscopy. Although we believe that our measure-ments are valid for excitation light intensities typical of standard epifluorescence microscopes with arc lamp illumination (up to 10 W/cm
2), higher intensity (for example, laser) illumination (typi-
cally >>100 W/cm2) evokes nonlinear effects that we cannot predict 
with our assay. For example, we have preliminary indications that even though the first monomeric red FP , mRFP1, shows approxi-mately tenfold faster photobleaching than the second-generation monomer mCherry, both appear to have similar bleaching times when excited at 568 nm on a laser scanning confocal microscope. The CFP variant Cerulean appears more photostable than ECFP with laser illumination on a confocal microscope
3 but appears less photo-
stable than ECFP with arc lamp illumination. Such inconsistencies between bleaching behavior at moderate versus very high excita-tion intensities are likely to occur with many FPs. Single-molecule measurements will be even less predictable based on our population measurements, because our extinction coefficients are averages that include poorly folded or nonfluorescent molecules, whereas single-molecule observations exclude such defective molecules.
It is critical to choose filter sets wisely for experiments that require 
long-term or intensive imaging. Choosing suboptimal filter sets will lead to markedly reduced apparent photostability owing to the need to use longer exposure times or greater illumination intensities to obtain sufficient emission intensity.
Table 1 | Properties of the best FP variantsa,b 
Class ProteinSource laboratory 
(references)Excitationc 
(nm)Emissiond 
(nm)BrightnessePhotostabilityfpKa Oligomerization
Far-red mPlumgTsien (5) 590 649 4.1 53 <4.5 Monomer
Red mCherrygTsien (4) 587 610 16 96 <4.5 Monomer
 tdTomatogTsien (4) 554 581 95 98 4.7 Tandem dimer
 mStrawberrygTsien (4) 574 596 26 15 <4.5 Monomer
 J-RedhEvrogen 584 610 8.8*13 5.0 Dimer
 DsRed-monomerhClontech 556 586 3.5 16 4.5 Monomer
Orange mOrangegTsien (4) 548 562 49 9.0 6.5 Monomer
 mKO MBL Intl. (10) 548 559 31*122 5.0 Monomer
Yellow-green mCitrineiTsien (16,23) 516 529 59 49 5.7 Monomer
 Venus Miyawaki (1) 515 528 53*15 6.0 Weak dimerj
 YPetgDaugherty (2) 517 530 80*49 5.6 Weak dimerj
 EYFP Invitrogen (18) 514 527 51 60 6.9 Weak dimerj
Green EmeraldgInvitrogen (18) 487 509 39 0.69k6.0 Weak dimerj
 EGFP Clontechl488 507 34 174 6.0 Weak dimerj
Cyan CyPet Daugherty (2) 435 477 18*59 5.0 Weak dimerj
 mCFPmmTsien (23) 433 475 13 64 4.7 Monomer
 CeruleangPiston (3) 433 475 27*36 4.7 Weak dimerj
UV-excitable green T-SapphiregGriesbeck (6) 399 511 26*25 4.9 Weak dimerj
aAn expanded version of this table, including a list of other commercially available FPs, is available as Supplementary Table 1 . bThe mutations of all common AFPs relative to the wild-type protein are 
available in Supplementary Table 3 . cMajor excitation peak. dMajor emission peak. eProduct of extinction coefficient and quantum yield at pH 7.4 measured or confirmed (indicated by *) in our laboratory 
under ideal maturation conditions, in (mM  cm)–1 (for comparison, free fluorescein at pH 7.4 has a brightness of about 69 (mM  cm)–1). fTime for bleaching from an initial emission rate of 1,000 photons/s 
down to 500 photons/s (t1/2; for comparison, fluorescein at pH 8.4 has t1/2 of 5.2 s); data are not indicative of photostability under focused laser illumination. gBrightest in spectral class. hNot recommended 
(dim with poor folding at 37 °C). iCitrine YFP with A206K mutation; spectroscopic properties equivalent to Citrine. jCan be made monomeric with A206K mutation. kEmerald has a pronounced fast bleaching 
component that leads to a very short time to 50% bleach. Its photostability after the initial few seconds, however, is comparab le to that of EGFP. lFormerly sold by Clontech, no longer commercially available. 
mECFP with A206K mutation; spectroscopic properties equivalent to ECFP. 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 907PERSPECTIVE©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsOligomerization and toxicity
Unlike weakly dimeric AFPs, most newly discovered wild-type FPs are tightly dimeric or tetrameric
7,9–12,14,22. Many of these wild-type pro-
teins, however, can be engineered into monomers or tandem dimers (functionally monomeric though twice the molecular weight), which can then undergo further optimization
4,10,12,17. Thus, even though 
oligomerization caused substantial trouble in the earlier days of red fluorescent proteins (RFPs), there are now highly optimized mono-mers or tandem dimers available in every spectral class. Although most AFPs are in fact very weak dimers, they can be made truly mono-meric simply by introducing the mutat ion A206K, generally without 
deleterious effects
23. Thus, any of the recommended proteins in 
Table 1  should be capable of performing well in any application 
requiring a monomeric fusion tag. Researchers should remain vigil-iant of this issue, however, and always verify the oligomerization sta-tus of any new or ‘improved’ FPs that are released. Lack of visible pre-cipitates does not rule out oligomerization at the molecular level.
It is rare for FPs to have obvious toxic effects in most cells in cul-
ture, but care should always be taken to do the appropriate controls when exploring new cell lines or tissues. As so many new FPs have become available, it is unknown whether any may be substantially more toxic to cells than AFPs. In our hands, tetrameric proteins can be somewhat toxic to bacteria, especially if they display a substan-tial amount of aggregation, but monomeric proteins are generally nontoxic. It seems difficult or impossible to generate transgenic mice widely expressing tetrameric RFPs, whereas several groups have suc-cessfully obtained mice expressing monomeric RFPs
24,25.
Environmental sensitivity
When images must be quantitatively interpreted, it is critical that the fluorescence intensity of the protein used not be sensitive to factors other than those being studied. Early YFP variants were relatively chloride sensitive, a problem that has been solved in the Citrine and Venus (and likely YPet) variants
1,2,16. Most FPs also have some acid 
sensitivity. For general imaging experiments, all FPs listed in Table 
1 have sufficient acid resistance to perform reliably. More acid-
sensitive FPs, however, may give poor results when targeted to acidic compartments such as the lumen of lysosomes or secretory granules, and may confound quantitative image interpretation if a 
given stimulus or condition leads to altered intracellular pH. Because of this, one should avoid using mOrange
4, GFPs or YFPs for experi-
ments in which acid quenching could produce artifacts. Conversely, the pH sensitivity of these proteins can be very valuable to monitor organellar luminal pH or exocytosis
26,27.
Multiple labeling
One of the most attractive prospects presented by the recent devel-opment of such a wide variety of monomeric FPs is for multiple labeling of fusion proteins in single cells. Although linear unmixing systems promise the ability to distinguish between large numbers of different fluorophores with partially overlapping spectra
28, it is pos-
sible even with a simpler optical setup to clearly distinguish between three or four different FPs. Using the filter sets recommended in Table 2 , one may image cyan, yellow, orange and red (Cerulean or 
CyPet, any YFP , mOrange or mKO and mCherry) simultaneously with minimal crosstalk. T o produce even cleaner spectral separa-tion, one could image cyan, orange and far-red (Cerulean or CyPet, mOrange or mKO, and mPlum)
2,4,5,10.
Additional concerns for complex experiments
For more complex imaging experiments, additional factors come into play when choosing the best genetically encoded fluores-cent probe, many of which are beyond the scope of this perspec-tive. For FRET applications, the choice of appropriate donor and acceptor FPs may be critical, and seemingly small factors (such as linker length and composition for intramolecular FRET constructs) may have a substantial role. The recent development of the FRET-optimized cyan-yellow pair CyPet and YPet holds great promise for the improvement of FRET sensitivity
2, and it is the current favorite 
as a starting point for new FRET sensors but has yet to be proven in a wide variety of constructs. For experiments requiring photo-activatable or photoconvertible tags, several options are available, including photoactivatable GFP (PA-GFP)
15 and monomeric RFP 
(PA-mRFP)13, reversibly photoswitchable Dronpa29, the tetrameric 
kindling fluorescent protein (KFP)9, and the green-to-red photo-
convertible proteins KikGR14 and EosFP12 (the latter is available as 
a bright tandem dimer) and cyan-to-green photoconvertible mono-mer PS-CFP
8. A more detailed (but probably not exhaustive) list of 
options for these more advanced applications of FPs are listed in Supplementary  Table 3  online. In addition, a recent review is avail-
able detailing the potential applications of photoactivatable FPs
30.
Future developments
Although the present set of FPs has given researchers an unpre-cedented variety of high-performance options, there are still many 
areas that could stand improvement. In the future, monomeric pro-teins with greater brightness and photostability will allow for even more intensive imaging exper iments, efficiently folding monomeric 
photoconvertible proteins will improve our ability to perform pho-tolabeling of fusion proteins, FRET pairs engineered to be orthogo-nal to the currently used CFP-YFP pairs will allow imaging of several biochemical activities in the same cell, and the long-wavelength end of the FP spectrum will continue to expand, allowing for more sen-sitive and efficient imaging in thick tissue and whole animals. By applying the principles put forth here, researchers may evaluate each new development in the field of FPs and make an informed decision as to whether it fits their needs.Table 2 | Recommended filter sets 
Fluorescent protein ExcitationaEmissiona
Multiple labeling Cerulean or CyPet 425/20 480/40
mCitrine or YPet 495/10 525/20
mOrange or mKO 545/10 575/25mCherry 585/20 675/130mPlum 585/20 675/130
Single labeling T-Sapphire 400/40 525/80
Cerulean or CyPet 425/20 505/80
Emerald 470/20 530/60mCitrine or YPet 490/30 550/50mOrange or mKO 525/20 595/80tdTomato 535/20 615/100mStrawberry 550/20 630/100mCherry 560/20 640/100mPlum 565/40 670/120
aValues are given as center/bandpass (nm). Bandpass filters with the steepest possible cutoff are 
strongly preferred.
908 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSPERSPECTIVE©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsNote: Supplementary information is available on the Nature Methods website.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to S. Adams for helpful advice on choosing filter sets. N.C.S. is a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Predoctoral Fellow. This work was additionally supported by US National Institutes of Health (NS27177 and GM72033) and Howard Hughes Medical Institutes.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare competing financial interests (see Nature Methods  website for 
details).
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/
1. Nagai, T. et al. A variant of yellow fluorescent protein with fast and efficient 
maturation for cell-biological applications. Nat. Biotechnol.  20, 87–90 
(2002).
2. Nguyen, A.W. & Daugherty, P.S. Evolutionary optimization of fluorescent 
proteins for intracellular FRET. Nat. Biotechnol.  23, 355–360 (2005).
3. Rizzo, M.A., Springer, G.H., Granada, B. & Piston, D.W. An improved cyan 
fluorescent protein variant useful for FRET. Nat. Biotechnol.  22, 445–449 
(2004).
4. Shaner, N.C. et al. Improved monomeric red, orange and yellow fluorescent 
proteins derived from Discosoma sp. red fluorescent protein. Nat. 
Biotechnol.  22, 1567–1572 (2004).
5. Wang, L., Jackson, W.C., Steinbach, P.A. & Tsien, R.Y. Evolution of new 
nonantibody proteins via iterative somatic hypermutation. Proc. Natl, Acad. 
Sci. USA  101, 16745–16749 (2004).
6. Zapata-Hommer, O. & Griesbeck, O. Efficiently folding and circularly permuted 
variants of the Sapphire mutant of GFP. BMC Biotechnol.  3, 5 (2003).
7. Ando, R., Hama, H., Yamamoto-Hino, M., Mizuno, H. & Miyawaki, A. An 
optical marker based on the UV-induced green-to-red photoconversion of a fluorescent protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  99, 12651–12656 (2002).
8. Chudakov, D.M. et al. Photoswitchable cyan fluorescent protein for protein 
tracking. Nat. Biotechnol.  22, 1435–1439 (2004).
9. Chudakov, D.M. et al. Kindling fluorescent proteins for precise in vivo  
photolabeling. Nat. Biotechnol.  21, 191–194 (2003).
10. Karasawa, S., Araki, T., Nagai, T., Mizuno, H. & Miyawaki, A. Cyan-emitting 
and orange-emitting fluorescent proteins as a donor/acceptor pair for fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Biochem. J.  381, 307–312 (2004).
11. Matz, M.V. et al. Fluorescent proteins from nonbioluminescent Anthozoa  
species. Nat. Biotechnol.  17, 969–973 (1999).
12. Wiedenmann, J. et al. EosFP, a fluorescent marker protein with UV-inducible 
green-to-red fluorescence conversion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
 101, 
15905–15910 (2004).
13. Verkhusha, V.V. & Sorkin, A. Conversion of the monomeric red fluorescent 
protein into a photoactivatable probe. Chem. Biol.  12, 279–285 (2005).
14. Tsutsui, H., Karasawa, S., Shimizu, H., Nukina, N. & Miyawaki, A. Semi-rational engineering of a coral fluorescent protein into an efficient 
highlighter. EMBO Rep.  6, 233–238 (2005).
15. Patterson, G.H. & Lippincott-Schwartz, J. Selective photolabeling of 
proteins using photoactivatable GFP. Methods  32, 445–450 (2004).
16. Griesbeck, O., Baird, G.S., Campbell, R.E., Zacharias, D.A. & Tsien, R.Y. 
Reducing the environmental sensitivity of yellow fluorescent protein. Mechanism and applications. J. Biol. Chem.  276, 29188–29194 (2001).
17. Zhang, J., Campbell, R.E., Ting, A.Y. & Tsien, R.Y. Creating new fluorescent 
probes for cell biology. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.  3, 906–918 (2002).
18. Tsien, R.Y. The green fluorescent protein. Annu. Rev. Biochem.  67, 509–
544 (1998).
19. Gross, L.A., Baird, G.S., Hoffman, R.C., Baldr idge, K.K. & Tsi en, R.Y. The 
structure of the chromophore within DsRed, a red fluorescent protein from coral. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  97, 11990–11995 (2000).
20. Hansen, M.C., Palmer, R.J., Jr, Udsen, C., White, D.C. & Molin, S. 
Assessment of GFP fluorescence in cells of Streptococcus gordonii under 
conditions of low pH and low oxygen concentration. Microbiology  147, 
1383–1391 (2001).
21. Zhang, C., Xing, X.H. & Lou, K. Rapid detection of a gfp-marked 
Enterobacter aerogenes  under anaerobic conditions by aerobic fluorescence 
recovery. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.  249, 211–218 (2005).
22. Verkhusha, V.V. & Lukyanov, K.A. The molecular properties and 
applications of Anthozoa  fluorescent proteins and chromoproteins. Nat. 
Biotechnol.  22, 289–296 (2004).
23. Zacharias, D.A., Violin, J.D., Newton, A.C. & Tsien, R.Y. Partitioning of 
lipid-modified monomeric GFPs into membrane microdomains of live cells. Science  296, 913–916 (2002).
24. Long, J.Z., Lackan, C.S. & Hadjantonakis, A.K. Genetic and spectrally 
distinct in vivo  imaging: embryonic stem cells and mice with widespread 
expression of a monomeric red fluorescent protein. BMC Biotechnol.  5, 20 
(2005).
25. Zhu, H. et al. Ubiquitous expression of mRFP1 in transgenic mice. Genesis  
42, 86–90 (2005).
26. Miesenbock, G., De Angelis, D.A. & Rothman, J.E. Visualizing secretion 
and synaptic transmission with pH-sensitive green fluorescent proteins. Nature  394, 192–195 (1998).
27. Matsuyama, S., Llopis, J., Deveraux, Q.L., Tsien, R.Y. & Reed, J.C. Changes 
in intramitochondrial and cytosolic pH: early events that modulate caspase activation during apoptosis. Nat. Cell Biol.  2, 318–325 (2000).
28. Hiraoka, Y., Shimi, T. & Haraguchi, T. Multispectral imaging fluorescence 
microscopy for living cells. Cell Struct. Funct.  27, 367–374 (2002).
29. Habuchi, S. et al. Reversible single-molecule photoswitching in the GFP-
like fluorescent protein Dronpa. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  102, 9511–9516 
(2005).
30. Lukyanov, K.A., C hudakov, D. M., Lukyanov, S. & Verkhusha, V.V. 
Innovation: Photoactivatable fluorescent proteins. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.  
(2005); advance online publication, 15 September 2005 (doi:10.1038/nrm1741).
31. Shkrob, M.A. et al. Far-red fluorescent proteins evolved from a blue 
chromoprotein from Actinia equina . Biochem. J.  (2005); advance online 
publication, 15 September 2005 (doi: 10.1042/BJ20051314). 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 909PERSPECTIVE©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsFluorescence microscopy
Jeff W Lichtman1 & José-Angel Conchello2,3
Although fluorescence microscopy permeates all of cell and molecular biology, most 
biologists have little experience with the underlying photophysical phenomena. Understanding the principles underlying fluorescence microscopy is useful when attempting to solve imaging problems. Additionally, fluorescence microscopy is in a state of rapid evolution, with new techniques, probes and equipment appearing almost daily. Familiarity with fluorescence is a prerequisite for taking advantage of many of these developments. This review attempts to provide a framework for understanding excitation of and emission by fluorophores, the way fluorescence microscopes work, and some of the ways fluorescence can be optimized.
Many of the technical improvements in microscopes over 
the years have centered on increasing the contrast between what is interesting (signal) and what is not (background). Fluorescence microscopy is the quintessential example, as it aims to reveal only the objects of interest in an otherwise black background. Because of its intrinsic selec-tivity, fluorescence imaging has become the mainstay of microscopy in the service of biology. Over the past several decades, organic chemists have devised many thousands of fluorescent probes that provide a means of labeling virtually any imaginable aspect of biological systems. For example, the Molecular Probes Handbook, tenth edition online (http://probes.invitrogen.com/handbook/), which is perhaps the largest compendia of fluorescence applica-tions for biologists, has 23 chapters, 14 of which describe the 3,000 or so fluorescent probes for a wide range of cell biological questions. The large spectral range of available fluorophores allows simultaneous imaging of different cellular, subcellular or molecular components. In addition, the co-opting of intrinsically fluorescent gene products, most notably green fluorescent protein (GFP) and its variants, has allowed molecular biologists to genetically tag protein components of living systems and usher in a new era for fluorescence. Lastly, the rap-idly advancing innovations of laser scanning confocal and two-photon microscopes mean that fluorescence approaches now provide a powerful approach to seeing 
microscopic structures in three dimensions, even deep within tissues. For these reasons it is difficult to do cell or molecular biology without understanding the basics of fluorescence, and this trend is accelerating. According to PubMed, 127,804 articles used the word ‘fluorescence’ in their title or abstract in 2004—that is more than the total number of fluorescence papers in the previous five years (1999 −2003) combined. Our aim is to describe 
concepts that underpin fluorescence microscopy and highlight some of the pitfalls frequently encountered. There are several more detailed accounts that focus on specific aspects of this large subjec t, which we will refer 
to frequently to guide more in-depth reading.
PRINCIPLES OF FLUORESCENCE
Excitation and emissionFluorescence microscopy requires that the objects of interest fluoresce. Fluorescence is the emission of light that occurs within nanoseconds after the absorption of light that is typically of shorter wavelength. The difference between the exciting and emitted wavelengths, known as the Stokes shift, is the critical property that makes fluores-cence so powerful. By completely filtering out the excit-ing light without blocking the emitted fluorescence, it is possible to see only the objects that are fluorescent. This 
1Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. 2Molecular, Cell 
and Developmental Biology, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 N.E. 13th Street, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA. 3Program 
in Biomedical Engineering, University of Oklahoma, 100 East Boyd Street, Norman, Oklahoma 73019, USA. Correspondence should be addressed to J.W.L. (jeff@mcb.harvard.edu).
PUBLISHED ONLINE 18 NOVEMBER 2005; DOI:10.1038/NMETH817
910 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsapproach to contrast is superior to absorption techniques in which 
objects are stained with agents that absorb light. With absorbance dyes, the amount of light absorbed becomes only infinitesimally dif-ferent from the background for small objects. In fluorescence, how-ever, even single fluorescent molecules are visible if the background has no autofluorescence.
Fluorophores
Molecules that are used by virtue of their fluorescent properties are called fluorophores. The outermost electron orbitals in the fluoro-phore molecule determine both its efficiency as a fluorescent com-pound and the wavelengths of absorption and emission. When fluorescent compounds in their so-called ‘ground state’ absorb light energy (photons), alterations in the electronic, vibrational and rotational states of the molecule can occur. The absorbed energy sometimes moves an electron into a different orbital that is on aver-age farther away from the nucleus. This transition to an ‘excited state’ occurs very rapidly (in femtoseconds). Usually the excitation process also sets in motion molecular vibrations in which the internuclear distances vary over time. All this absorbed energy is eventually shed. Vibrational relaxation and fluorescence emission are the chief ways a fluorophore returns to its low-energy ground state.
Whereas many organic substances have intrinsic fluorescence (auto-
fluorescence), and a few are useful for specific labeling of components in biological systems, the typical approach to fluorescence micro-scopy is to take advantage of synthesized compounds that have some degree of conjugated double bonds. Such compounds often have ring structures (aromatic molecules) with pi bonds that easily distribute outer orbital electrons over a wide area. These compounds are optimal for fluorescence microscopy because the energy differences between excited state and ground state orbitals are small enough that relatively low-energy photons in the visible part of the electromagnetic spec-trum can be used to excite electrons into excited states. In general, the more conjugated bonds in the molecule, the lower the excited energy requirement and the longer the wavelength (redder) the exciting light can be. The emitted light is shifted in the same direction. In addition, the efficiency, as measured by fluo rescent quantum yield, increases 
with the number of pi bonds.In GFP , a post-translational alteration of three amino acids, (Ser-
Tyr-Gly) located in an α helix running down the center of the barrel-
shaped protein forms an imidazolidone ring with conjugated double bonds and planar structure
1. This ring structure is the chromophore. 
Mutations in the ring structure that add more conjugated bonds shift the fluorescence excitation and e mission to longer wavelengths—as 
in yellow fluorescent protein (YFP).
Jablonski diagrams
A useful approach to understand the details of the excitation and emission process is to render the process in the form of a diagram first conceived by Alexander Jablonski in the 1930s ( Fig. 1a ). Those 
interested in a more rigorous treatment of this subject might read the first few chapters in several excellent texts
2−4. On the left side of 
the diagram are the singlet states. These states maintain the paired + ½ and − ½ spin states of the electrons as they are normally, with 
each electron in a pair having opposite spins (see Box 1  for useful 
Figure 1  | Fluorescence fundamentals. ( a) Jablonski diagram displaying 
the energy states of a molecule. Molecules not absorbing energy are mainly confined to the lowest vibrational states of the ground state S
0. (b) The 
spectral characteristics related to absorption and emission of energy by a molecule can be related to the size of the energy steps needed to bring a molecule from one energy level to another. The absorption and emission spectra of the common fluorophore FITC are shown below a Jablonski diagram. Each vertical gray line aligns the spectra with the energy of the absorbed (arrows pointing up) or emitted (arrows pointing down) photons. The arrows are colored to represent the wavelength of the photons. For example, the purple arrow to the left represents the energy of an ultraviolet photon that can cause the molecule to transition from the ground state to the second singlet excited state. The orange arrow on the right represents the lowest energy photon that can be emitted by this molecule as it drops back from the lowest energy state of S
1 to a high vibrational state of S0. 
Note in the region of overlap of the absorption and emission spectra, some photons (for example, the green, up-pointing arrow) are absorbed when the vibrational level is not at its lowest level. Also note the symmetry between the absorption and emission curves owing to the similarity of transitions to vibrational states in S
0 and S1. (c) The times that the various steps in 
fluorescence excitation and emission and phosphorescence take.
a
b
c
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 911REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsdefinitions). S0 is the ground state and represents the energy of a 
molecule that is not being excited by light. S1 and S2 are excited 
singlet states in which an outer electron is boosted into a differ-ent orbital. S
2 contains more energy than S1 and S1 more energy 
than the ground state, S0. On the right of the diagram are the triplet 
states in which an outer electron, boosted to a new orbital, has also undergone a subsequent reversal in spin so that a former pair of electrons are now parallel. From quantum theory, it is forbidden that an electron be in any spin state other than the two that exist in the paired electrons (+½ or –½); thus, for the electron to reverse spin it must go through a ‘forbidden’ transition, which is relatively unlikely. Nonetheless electrons can undergo ‘intersystem crossing’ between singlet and triplet states. This has important consequences, which will be discussed later.
Excitation spectra
When a fluorophore absorbs light, all the energy possessed by a pho-ton is transferred to the fluorophore. This energy is inversely related to the photon’s wavelength ( E = h × c / λ, where h is Plank’s constant 
and c and λ are the speed and wavelength of light in vacuum, respec-
tively). If the absorbed photon’s energy is greater than that needed to exactly transition from the ground state to the lowest energy level of S
1, the molecule will also undergo a change in vibration, rotation 
and/or move into an even higher electronic orbital (S2). Thus, there is 
a range of wavelengths that can excite a molecule. The minimum ener-gy required for fluorescence, however, is from a photon that can cause the transition of an electron into a higher electronic excited state (that is, S
0 to S1).
The time it takes a molecule to transition 
from the ground state to an excited state is extremely brief, on the order of femtoseconds (roughly equal to the time over which a pho-ton of a particular wavelength traveling at the speed of light takes to cross paths with a mol-ecule). Whereas one photon of the appropri-ate energy typically causes this transition, it is also possible for multiple photons to add their energy to bring a molecule to the excited state. For example, if two photons with half the energy (that is, twice the wavelength) of that needed to reach the excited state impinge on a molecule at the same time, their energies can sum and provide for two-photon excita-tion. Given the brevity of the absorption pro-cess, only enormously high light intensities provide sufficient probability for multiple low-energy (infrared) photons to be in the same place at nearly the same time.
The excitation spectrum of a fluorophore 
can be determined empirically by measur-ing the fluorescence yield by shining light of various wavelengths on a cuvette containing the fluorophore and recording the amount of fluorescent Stokes-shifted light that is pro-duced at the peak wavelength of the fluores-cence spectrum. The peaks and valleys in the excitation spectrum reflect the energy levels in the molecule’s Jablonski diagram ( Fig. 1b ). 
For example, for many molecules there are only few vibrational or rotational states between the highest energy 
level of S
1 and the lowest level of S2, hence for many fluorophores the 
absorption spectrum shows a dip between the longer wavelength peak related to exciting to an S
1 level and the shorter wavelength absorption 
to an S2 level. Not surprisingly, given the threshold energy needed to 
get excitation, the energy for excitation has a sharper cutoff on the low-energy −long-wavelength side of the spectrum than the short-
wavelength −high-energy side where there is no sharp cutoff; although 
practically speaking, the op tical opacity of glass to ultraviolet light 
limits excitation in a fluorescent microscope beyond the near UV .
The probability that a fluorophore will absorb a photon is called 
its molar extinction coefficient, ε, in units of M
−1cm−1. This prop-
erty, which measures the probability of absorption of light as it passes through a solution containing the fluorophore, is similar (although the units are different) to the dye’s ‘cross-section’ , implying that the molecule can be imagined as a target and the bigger the cross-section, the more likely it is that it will catch a photon. The value of ε is 
specified for the wavelength that is the absorption maximum, which is where its cross-section is largest. Useful small organic fluorophores have ε values between ~25,000 and ~200,000 (the higher, the better the 
absorber). So-called ‘enhanced’ GFP (EGFP) has an excitation maxi-mum shifted to 488 nm and an ε of approximately 60,000, which is 
five times higher than wild-type GFP with an excitation maximum of 470 nm. Dyes with high extinction coefficients tend to be useful when light intensity needs to be kept to a minimum, such as when imaging living tissues or when there are very few fluorophore molecules
5. All 
BOX 1  ELECTRONIC STATES
Spin. Spin is the amount of angular momentum associated with an elementary 
particle or a nucleus. Electrons have an intrinsic and invariable internal motion that corresponds to a spin of ½ and provides the electron with directional orientation. The electron also has an intrinsic magnetic moment directed along its spin axis. In the case of an atomic electron, the magnetic moment will be oriented parallel or antiparallel, with respect to the magnetic field, to the rest of the atom, which is indicated by the associated spin quantum number with values of +½ or –½.
Singlet state.  Electrons normally reside as pairs with opposite spins within a single 
orbital; this results in a cancellation of their magnetic moments to produce a so-called singlet state.
Triplet state.  A pair of nonbonding electrons may exist in two separate orbitals 
with the electron spins parallel to each other. Atoms or molecules with such a configuration will have an overall magnetic moment that may be parallel, perpendicular or antiparallel to the direction of a magnetic field. These three possible alignments correspond to three forms of slightly different energy, so the atom or molecule can exist in all three forms and is said to be in a triplet state. Triplet states tend to be relatively long-lived.
Ground state. This is the normal, no nexcited state of a molecule. When talking 
about the ground electronic  state, a molecule may still have excess vibrational and 
rotational energy.
Excited state.  When an electron absorbs sufficient energy, it can transition to 
a higher energy level (higher orbital) and thus create an atom or molecule in an 
excited state. Excited states tend to be relatively short-lived and return to electronic states of lower energy, ultimately to the ground state, by losing their excess energy. 
This energy loss may involve radiationless transitions—such as internal conversion, intersystem crossing or vibrational relaxation—or radiative transitions—such as fluorescence and phosphoresence.
912 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsother things being equal, a dye with a higher extinction coefficient 
will also give a greater signal for the same amount of light-induced background than a dye with a lower extinction coefficient.
Emission spectra
Once excited, the molecule uses several different pathways to ulti-mately lose the absorbed energy and return to the ground state (Fig. 1c ). ‘Internal conversion’ is a transition between electron orbital 
states (such as S
2 to S1). Strictly speaking, internal conversion allows 
isoenergetic transitions from low vibrational energies of one elec-tronic state to high vibrational modes of a lower electronic state, so no energy is lost during this transition but the extra energy is even-tually shed through vibrational relaxation. During vibrational relax-ation the vibrational energy in the fluorophore is transferred to nearby molecules via direct interactions. In aqueous medium, water is the likely energy recipient. Notably, vibrational relaxation does not lead to any emitted photons. Internal conversion and vibrational relaxation takes picoseconds and typically bring the molecule back to the lowest energy level of S
1. Internal conversion sometimes transitions excited 
molecules all the way to the ground state S0 but for most fluorophores 
the energy difference between the ground state vibrational modes and first singlet excited state is large enough that this path is not preferred. The excited molecule now has a similar vibrational state as it did in the ground state but the outer electron orbital still contains extra energy. 
In good fluorophores, the preferred final energy path back to the 
ground state is the expulsion of a photon whose energy covers the gap between the lowest vibrational state of S
1 and any one of the vibra-
tional or rotational states of S0. The emission spectrum of a fluoro-
phore is just the range of wavelengths this emitted photon can have (Fig. 1b ). This spectrum can be empirical ly determined by exciting the 
fluorophore (typically at its peak absorbance wavelength) and using a device to measure the fluorescence spectrum. Given the nonradia-tive drop back to the lowest level of S
1, the wavelength of the emitted 
light is not related to the particular wavelength of the exciting light; thus one cannot shift the emission spectrum by changing the color of the exciting light. In most cases the outgoing emitted light is also not related to the incoming direction of the exciting photons so photons can be emitted in the opposite direction of the incoming photons, as occurs in standard epifluorescence microscopes described below.
Because the emission starts from the lowest level of S
1, the energy of 
the emitted photon is typically less than the absorbed photon as vibra-tional relaxation and internal conversion remove the excess energy—this is the origin of the Stokes shift. The magnitude of the Stokes shift varies considerably from one fluoro phore to another. Generally large 
shifts have the advantage of easier separation of the exciting and emit-ted light. But not all fluorescent emission occurs at longer wavelengths 
than the exciting light. Often a minority the ground state fluorophores is in one of the higher vibrational states of S
0 when they are excited. In 
these cases a photon can drop back in a larger energy jump than was needed to reach S
1, accounting for the overlap of the emission and 
excitation spectra ( Fig. 1b ).
A more serious overlap concern relates to imaging multiple fluoro-
phores in the same sample. Given the broad excitation and emission spectra of each fluorophore, even  spectrally shifted fluorophores can 
be excited by the same wavelength and exhibit overlapping emis-sion. These overlaps can cause confusing crosstalk or bleed-through between signals associated with different fluorophores in the same sample. This difficulty has been ameliorated by organic synthesis of ever wider spectral ranges of fluorophores (by adding more conju-gated bonds) that now permit a user to choose fluorophores with little overlap in excitation and/or emission spectra ( Fig. 2a ,b). Crosstalk, 
however, remains a serious problem with fluorescent proteins that have very broad excitation and e mission spectra relative to small 
organic chemical fluorophores ( Fig. 2c ). Here too, new wavelength-
shifted variants may come to the rescue
6.
Although shifted to longer wavelengths, the spectrum of the emitted 
fluorescence has mirror symmetry with the main part of the spectrum of the absorbed light ( Fig. 1b ). This symmetry is related to final drop 
back to the ground state from the lowest vibrational state of S
1. The 
vibrational transitions going back to the ground state are the same as those that occurred during absorbance. In each case the molecule is beginning typically in the ‘0’ vibrational state and moving to either 
a
b
c
Figure 2 | The spectral and structural properties of fluorophores. 
(a) Three Alexa fluorescent molecules have conjugated double bonds but 
the excitation and fluorescence emission characteristics shift to longer wavelengths in proportion the degree of conjugated bonds. The 17 Alexa Fluor dyes, sold by Invitrogen’s Molecular Probes span the near-UV, visible and near infrared. Along with the wavelength shift, the cross-section of the dyes increases. Alexa 350 has an extinction coefficient of 19,000 cm
–1M–1, 
whereas for Alexa Fluor 750 it is 240,000 cm–1M–1. (b) The absorption 
spectra and emission spectra are largely nonoverlapping for these particular Alexa fluorophores. ( c) In contrast, the mutated spectral variants of 
fluorescent protein from the Aequorea  species of jelly fish and Discosoma  
species of reef coral have substantial overlap in both excitation and emission spectra. Recent attempts to generate more red-shifted fluorescent proteins have raised the possibility that eventually cross-talk will not be a major problem for fluorescent proteins either
6. Data in a from32; b, from the 
Invitrogen pamphlet on Alexa Fluor Dyes; c, from the Clontech website.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 913REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsthe same or a higher vibrational state, for example, 0, 1, 2 or 3. These 
vibrational transitions have the same likelihood in either direction. For example, S
0 level vibrational level 0 to S1 level 3 is comparable in 
likelihood to S1 vibrational level 0 to S0 level 3. Hence the absorption 
peaks and the emission peaks are the same but shifted to longer wave-lengths for the emission. Knowing the absorbance and the emission spectrum for a fluorophore helps decide which filters are optimal, 
which lasers in scanning microscopes to excite dyes with, and how best to get excitation of one dye without crosstalk from another.
Intersystem crossing
Unfortunately, fluorescence emission is not the only way fluoro-phores in the excited state can lose energy. Another pathway of energy loss occurs after intersystem crossing by means of a forbidden tran-sition to the triplet state ( Fig. 1a ,c). In many fluorophores, triplet 
state vibrational energy levels overlap with the lowest energy level in S
1. This overlap favors intersystem crossing followed by internal 
conversion to the lowest energy of T1. The triplet state molecule now 
has no easy path back to the lower-energy singlet ground state, as this transition requires the triplet outer electron to again undergo a forbidden transition. Although some triplet-state molecules reach the ground state without light emission, in many cases light emission termed phosphorescence does occur, but it can take microseconds as it depends on the unlikely forbidden transition. In the meantime triplet-triplet transitions can move the molecule into higher trip-let states if another photon is absorbed, further delaying any light emission. In laser scanning microscopes where the fluorescence is measured serially in rapid succession from one point to the next, the delay of the phosphorescent photon is often too long to allow it to be counted for the correct pixel, thus weakening the fluorescent signal. Furthermore, as molecules in the triplet state are unable to cycle through absorbance and emission rapidly, the state temporarily removes potentially fluorescent molecules from the total pool. Last, and perhaps the most problematic issue, is that triplet-state mol-ecules can undergo photochemical reactions that cause irreversible bleaching and phototoxicity.
Quantum yield and fluorescence intensity
The quantum yield of a fluorophore is a measure of the total light emission over the entire fluorescence spectral range. It is measured as the ratio of fluorescence emission to nonradiative energy losses. With very intense light sources, such as lasers used in laser scanning microscopes, the quantum yield provides an accurate measure of the maximum intensity that can be obtained with a fluorophore. With dimmer light sources, the intensity depends critically on the product of the extinction coefficient and the quantum yield.
A fluorescent dye such as fluorescein has a high quantum yield of 
about ~0.9 and GFP has a quantum yield of ~0.8. Higher quantum yield not only increases fluorescence intensity but also means alterna-tive competing photochemical processes associated with intersystem crossing, such as bleaching and free radical formation, are less likely. Except in situations where one is trying to do some photochemistry with a dye, the closer the quantum yield is to 1 the better. For example, eosin, a brominated derivative of fluorescein, has a quantum yield that is one-fifth that of fluorescein, but a 20-fold greater yield of a reactive intermediate (singlet oxygen) from interactions between its triplet state and oxygen. Eosin excitation can be used to photoconvert diamino benzidine into an electron-dense product to mark sites of fluorescence for electron microscopic work
7.Excited state lifetime, energy transfer and photochemistry
The time the molecule remains excited before yielding a photon is called the excited state lifetime. This time is dominated by the dura-tion the molecule spends in the lowest level of S
1, which is typically 
several nanoseconds before spontaneous decay to the ground state. The lifetime can be made briefer if another molecule nearby can absorb the energy. Such intermolecular interactions both reduce the fluorescent lifetime and the quantum yi eld. Fluorescence lifetime 
imaging microscopy (FLIM) probes alterations in the milieu in the immediate vicinity of a fluorescent molecule and is thus an important tool for studying molecular interactions between fluorescently labeled molecules and their interacting partners
8,9. If the interacting partner is 
itself a fluorophore, the energy in an excited state molecule can excite the nearby fluorophore. This phenomenon, known as fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) occurs when a very nearby fluoro-phore’s absorption spectrum ov erlaps with the emission spectrum of 
the excited fluorophore. The donor’s energy is absorbed by the accep-tor, which then emits a photon shifted to a longer wavelength
10. The 
strong distance dependence of this energy transfer allows FRET to assay changes in intramolecular distances that are far below the reso-lution of the light microscope.
Excited state molecules can also participate in a wide range of pho-
tochemical reactions
4. Photouncaging, for example, is widely used in 
biology to release biologically active compounds after light induced release of a blocking group. Some fluorescent proteins can also under-go a change in structure and spectral properties with light. Notably, the red chromophore in Kaede, a fluorescent protein from a coral is generated from a green form of this protein that is converted by expo-sure to ultraviolet light
11,12.
PHYSIOLOGICAL FLUOROPHORES
At present, there are many probes that assay some aspect of physio-logical processes by accumulating in organelles such as mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum, nucleus or synaptic vesicles
13,14. Fluorophores 
have also been developed to take advantage of the fact that a fluoro-phore’s absorption and emission properties can be highly sensitive to a changing milieu. Fluoresce nt sensors change their absorbance 
and/or emission spectra when bound to calcium ions
15,16 hydrogen 
ions17 or other molecules of interest. Although many sensors allow 
only an estimation of the change in concentration of their target by undergoing a simple increase or decrease in fluorescence, some of these fluorophores can be used in ‘ratiometric’ assays that provide a quantitative way to measure concentration. By taking the ratio of the dye’s behavior at two emission or absorption wavelengths—one being the wavelength sensitive to the target molecule and the other being one that is insensitive to the target—it is possible to normalize for changes unrelated to a change in target concentration, such as the distance through a cell, an inhomogeneous milieu or local dye con-centrations that might make local absorbance or emission intensity vary for reasons other than changes in the local concentration of the molecule being studied. Doing ratiometric imaging correctly requires a full understanding of the sources of measurement errors and how the calculations are made. Fortunately there are a number of excellent reviews of this powerful quantitative technique (see
18).
Genetically encoded fluoresc ent probes that monitor calcium and 
a variety of other intracellular signals are rapidly evolving, and are beginning to provide windows into intracellular metabolism in intact systems
19−21. Some dyes are sensitive to electrical fields, and thus, when 
located in a membrane separating two compartments at different 
914 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodspotentials, they can provide an optical signal 
of transmembrane voltage22,23. Fluorescent 
proteins that sense membrane potential by coupling to voltage-sensitive ion channels offer the possibility of someday monitoring neural activity in many neurons simultane-ously in living animals
24.
Clearly the evolution of fluorescence indicators of physiological 
functions is one of the triumphs of modern cell and molecular bio-logy. The key point to their use, however, requires looking over time as well as space. Such multidimensional imaging requires highly efficient detectors and sometimes rapid switching of filters, and overcoming the many challenges of imaging living cells
14,18,25.
THE FLUORESCENCE MICROSCOPE
Given the Stokes shift, it is easy to imagine how one might build a fluo-rescence microscope: illuminate the specimen with one wavelength and filter the return light to only see longer wavelength–shifted fluo-rescence. Indeed this is similar to the way Sir George Gabriel Stokes first noted fluorescence: purportedly, a purple stained glass window filtered sunlight onto a flask of quinine water, which he then observed to emit blue light through a glass filled with white wine that blocked the purple light
3. The preferred approach in modern fluorescence 
microscopes is epi-illumination ( Fig. 3a ). In this configuration the 
microscope objective not only has the familiar role of imaging and magnifying the specimen, but also serves as the condenser that illu-minates it. The advantage of this approach over transmission, or dia-scopic, fluorescence microscopes (in which the exciting light comes through the condenser and the emission is collected by the objective) is that whereas the excitation of the fluorophore is equivalent in both epi- and transmitted microscopes, only the small percentage of the exciting light that is reflected off the sample needs to be blocked in the return light path in the epi-illumination mode. The main technical hurdle with this approach is that the exciting light and fluorescence emission overlap in the light path requiring a special kind of beam splitter, a dichroic mirror, to separate the excitation from the emission. 
The dichroic beamsplitter mirror is designed to be used in light paths at 45°. In ordinary fluorescence microscopes, the dichroic reflects shorter wavelength light originating from the light source and trans-mits the longer wavelengths of the emitted fluorescence. Each dichroic is designed to have a transition from reflection to transmission that resides between the excitation and emission peaks of the fluorophore it is designed to be used with ( Fig. 3b ). Dichroics are rarely used without 
two additional filters: the excitation filter, which preselects the exciting wavelengths, and a barrier filter that only allows passage of the longer wavelength light back to the detector. All three types of filter are typi-cally interference filters which have very specific wavelength selectivity. 
These are marvels of engineering composed of many stacks of thin materials that alternate in index of refraction (Reichman, J. Handbook 
of optical filters for fluorescence microscopy . Chroma T echnology Corp. 
(http://www.chroma.com/resources/PDF_files/handbook4.pdf; 2000). With these three elements, the exciter, beamsplitting dichroic and barrier, the separation of the exciting light from the emitted light can be very good. For example, a modern filter set might pass only one photon in 10,000 of the wrong excitation color to the specimen, and there is a similar ratio in the return light. Such high ratios are absolutely required for imaging small numbers or single fluorescent molecules.
Filter cubes
Many fluorescence microscopes provide a convenient way of selecting the precise wavelength bands for excitation and emission related to particular fluorophores by means of small block-shaped filter holders that are composed of the exciter, dichroic mirror and barrier filter 
a
bFigure 3 | The fluorescence microscope. 
(a) Epi-illumination fluorescence microscopes 
use the objective both to illuminate and image the specimen. Shown is an upright microscope with the slide at the bottom. The light source, in this case an arc lamp, sends full-spectrum light to the specimen by way of a fluorescence ‘cube‘ that selectively illuminates the specimen with a wavelengths that excite a particular fluorophore (shown, green light to excite rhodamine). The red fluorescence that is excited sends photons in all directions and a fraction are collected by the objective and sent through the cube to the eye or camera port above. The cube has two filters, the dichroic mirror and barrier filter, to prevent the exciting wavelengths from reaching the detector. ( b) The details of a cube designed by 
Chroma Technologies to excite and detect EGFP. The three main components (labeled 2, 3 and 4) have specific spectral features that are ideal for GFP. Note that the dichroic mirror
3 splits between 
reflection and transmission right between the absorption and emission peaks of the GFP, which are superimposed in blue and green, respectively.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 915REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsChoice of fluorophore.  Maximize the absorption coefficient and 
quantum yield (http://probes.invitrogen.com/handbook/).
Concentration of the fluorophore.  Especially when staining 
thick tissue blocks, it is sometimes difficult to get sufficient fluorophore inside the block. The potential solution of staining longer or with a higher concentration (for example, of a fluorescent secondary antibody) sometimes does not help as the background increases faster than the signal. Optical sectioning microscopes such as confocal can provide some help by removing background fluorescence from the image. In other cases the epitope or structure being labeled is just in low abundance, so the signal will be intrinsically dim. Brighter signals can be obtained by amplification methods
34.
Excitation intensity.  With arc lamps, the brighter the light, 
the brighter the signal (and background). Unlike with a laser, it is not possible to saturate the fluorescence with an arc. The most intense arcs are the ones with the highest mean luminous density
26.
Arc lamp alignment. If the arc is not focused sharply on the back 
aperture, the specimen plane will be unevenly illuminated. Ask a microscope company representative to show you how to align and focus the arc. Alternatively, you may consider a liquid light guide–based light source, which provides even illumination and no moving parts to get out of alignment once properly set up.
Wavelength of the exciting light.  Another way to increase the 
intensity of fluorescence is to use a wide-band exciter—in this way more photons that are capable of exciting the fluorophore are impinging on it. Narrow-band exciters are only useful when there is potential cross-talk with another fluorophore (see http://www.chroma.com/ or http://www.omegafilters.com/ for further details).
Emission filters.  Broad-band emission will give a larger signal 
and should always be used except when there is cross-talk with the emission of another fluorophore in the same sample.
NA of the objective.  Fluorescence intensity dramatically 
increases with the objective’s NA
26,27. For low-NA objectives that 
are used both to illuminate and collect the light (the standard epi-illumination microscope), the amount of light reaching the detector is proportional to (NA)
4. For high-NA, the light excitation 
and collection efficiency is actually a bit better.
Magnification.  The magnification of an image spreads the 
light out and decreases the intensity per pixel in proportion to 1/magnification squared . Sometimes in order to get a high resolution image that matches the optical characteristics of the objective (that is, a diffraction-limited image) with the pixel size of the detector, it is necessary to zoom beyond the magnification of the objective. The price for getting a diffraction-limited image may be a very dim image with insufficient signal to see the resolution. There is no simple solution other than being sure that there is no ‘empty’ magnification that magnifies more than is necessary to get to twice the diffraction limit (the Nyquist limit). It is worth noting that light loss caused by magnification is not an issue with laser scanning ‘zoom’, which concentrates more light over a smaller area—but bleaching can be almost instantaneous.Ionic milieu (quenching).  It is worth making sure that iodine 
and several other metal ions are not contaminating your samples.
Bleaching. Keep samples in the dark when not in use. Use only 
enough light to get the image you need. Use antifade age nts. K eep 
oxygen tension low.
Background fluorescence.  Autofluorescence background 
is progressively reduced at higher wavelengths. Several companies offer red and infrared dyes to mitigate background problems (Atto fluorophores from Sigma-Aldrich, and Alexa fluors from Molecular Probes). Long-wavelength fluorescence has its own challenges, however
35. Fixatives often increase 
autofluorescence. Glutaraldehyde, which is used in electron microscopy fixation, is a great fixative but is totally unusable for fluorescence imaging as the background is huge. Use of 4% or even 2% paraformaldehyde has low autofluorescence and for many applications is often adequate. A simple way to reduce background is to use the field diaphragm on the epi-illumination port ( Fig. 3a ) to limit the illumination to the small region of 
interest. Sometimes fluorescence that is totally invisible can be revealed by stopping the field aperture to a very small spot. Of course this limits the field of view. The index of refraction mismatch between the immersion medium between the coverslip and the objective versus the sample medium can cause a blurry image with extra background glow owing to spherical aberration. Objectives such as the Leica AS MDW 60×, 1.3 NA that provide the opportunity to use the same proportions of water and glycerol on both sides of the objective can dramatically re move this 
background artifact.
Light passing properties of optical path. UV dyes are difficult 
to excite with ordinary glass objectives that are opaque to light <350 nm.
Degradation of fluorophore.  If possible, store slide boxes in 
refrigerator or freezer.
Path length. Blue and near-UV emitting fluorophores are 
harder to see the deeper they are located within a thick tissue block owing to Rayleigh scattering. Since scattering is inversely proportional to λ
4 a red-shifted dye can help dramatically.
Detector sensitivity.  Digital cameras are potentially very useful 
for detecting signals that seem too dim for the ‘naked’ eye. Two technical approaches for different applications are available. When exposure time can be long, a cooled charge-coupled device (CCD) is probably the best option. Recent improvements in CCDs make the quantum efficiency very high so that more exotic thinned, back illuminated CCDs are no longer typically required. Large pixel size or binning increases sensitivity further. When the signal needs to be obtained quickly, an intensifier in front of the CCD is the better alternative
26.
Membrane fluorescence optical artifact. The edges of 
membrane labeled cells that are orthogonal to the image plane are always brighter than membranes parallel to the plane. This artifact is due to the fact that within the optical thickness of an image plane there can be many more fluorescent molecules contributing to a pixel if the membrane is vertical than when the membrane is horizontal.BOX 2  FACTORS THAT REDUCE THE QUALITY OF FLUORESCENCE IMAGES
There are many different reasons fluorescence imaging is sometimes not sufficiently good to provide useful data. Many of the is sues 
have been touched upon above. In the following list, we itemize some of the most common factors that decrease the quality of fluorescence imaging and what can be done to improve the situation.
916 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methods(Fig. 3b ). The cube fits into a circular carousel or linear block that can 
hold from three to nine separate cubes. These cubes can be moved into position either manually or by a computer driven motor. Thus, to switch between imaging a red fluorescing fluorophore like TRITC, a green fluorescing dye such as fluo rescein, and a blue fluorescing 
dye such as DAPI, is as easy and rapid as moving from one cube to another. One point of caution should be remembered. Because the cubes are not necessarily perfectly aligned (especially the 45° angle 
of the dichroic), the images with the various cubes may be slightly offset, requiring care when overlapping two images taken with dif-ferent cubes. The cubes can be sele cted based on not only spectral 
matching to particular fluorophores, but also whether they are broad or narrow band. Broad-band cubes attempt to give the largest signal for a dye based on its excitation and emission spectra. Such cubes are preferred when one is looking for a signal from a single dye and you are not concerned with crosstalk. Alternatively, there are many situations in which the location of different fluorophores in the same sample is essential. In these cases, it is useful to use narrow-band cubes. In determining what is the right cube for a particular applica-tion the user must have access to the excitation and emission curves of the fluorophore as well as the spectral filtering properties of the 
three elements of the cube. An example, shown in Figure 3b,  is of a 
cube that is designed to image EGFP .
It is also possible to use a dichroic mirror with filter wheels that rap-
idly switch between different exciting and barrier filters. This approach offers the user the possibility of rapid switching between fluorescence channels, and the alignment of the images is better because the same dichroic beamsplitter is used for each fluorophore. For this approach, the dichroic mirror must be more sophisticated. One may use a dou-ble, triple or even quadruple dichroic; these mirrors selectively reflect the exciting wavelengths for two, three or four fluorophores while at the same time transmitting the fluorescence for each of these dyes. Such dichroics are useful when scanning to find sites of overlap of two different fluorophores or for situations where filter wheels allow rapid switching in the excitation wavelengths. Given the large number of colors that are passed by such cubes, the background may appear more gray than black. Several companies (for example, Omega Optical and Chroma T echnology) will even generate custom filter cubes and dichroics if you have a particular unconventional fluorophore.
Light sources
There are several different strategies for fluorescence illumination. Traditionally the intensities needed for comfortable viewing by eye or rapid camera exposure come from arc lamps. Mercury and xenon arc lamps are expensive, potentially dangerous, and require special lamp houses and power supplies. These two types of arc lamps differ in several important ways. Depending on your requirements xenon or mercury is the better choice. Xenon has the advantage of being rela-tively even in the coverage of wavelengths throughout the UV , visible and near infrared. Mercury, however, is a spectrally peaky light source with several extremely intense lines
26. If these lines coincide with the 
excitation spectrum of the fluorophores you are using, it provides brighter light. Mercury is not a good light source for some ratiometric dyes, such as fura 2, for which comparisons between the signal at two nearby excitation wavelengths are confounded by the fact that one of the wavelengths overlaps with a mercury peak but the other does not. With such exceptions in mind, the most intense fluorescence usually comes from the 100-W mercury. The reason why this is the brightest source is that the mean luminous flux per surface area is highest.Because the image of the arc is focused onto the back aperture of the 
objective in Kohler-style illumination, the key to bright illumination is 
the intensity of the image of the arc. The surprising fact is that whereas arcs with higher power (wattage) produce more light, they are larger, and their image needs to be reduced below its actual size to fit in the objective’s back aperture, and this minification causes the image to be less intense. For this reason a small highly intense arc provides more intense excitation light.
With time, arcs will not ignite easily owing to blunting of the 
cathode and anode. The bulb will also begin to show variations in intensity and slight movements in arc position that cause flickering. Thus once a bulb has reached its useable lifetime (200 h for mercury and 400 h for many xenon), the bulb should be replaced. It is also possible for the alignment to drift so that the image of the arc is not centered on the objective’s back aperture, requiring adjustment of the alignment every week or so. This requires setting a number of adjustments on the lamp house and requires a bit of practice, but ignoring this step will lead to uneven illumination and often unac-ceptably dim images.
The most even illumination comes when a sharp image of the 
arc is placed on the back aperture of the objective lens. Although this sharp image means that there will be regions without light, that absence only has the effect of removing some potential angles of illumination of the specimen. Because fluorescence emission is 
typically not sensitive to the angle of illumination, the inhomogene-ity in the angles of illumination is invisible. Conversely, when the arc is not well focused on the back aperture there can be inhomo-geneities in the intensity at various positions on the sample. This artifact causes brighter and dimmer fluorescence within the image. Recently these issues have been tackled by the development of liq-uid light guides coupled to new ultrahigh pressure 120-W mercury halide bulbs similar to those used in LCD projectors. Some of these systems have been specifically developed for fluorescence micros-copy illumination (for example, X-Cite 120 from Exfo Photonic Solutions). The emission spectra of these bulbs are similar to tradi-tional mercury arc lamps but have some additional spectral broad-ening owing to the high-pressure collisions that alter the vibrational energy of the excited atoms in the arc. This broadening, especially in the fluorescein excitation region, makes these bulbs superior to traditional mercury arcs. Such systems, although expensive, provide much longer time between arc replacement (>1,000 h versus 200 h), the convenience of not having the lamp house attached directly to the microscope, no alignment problems and uniform illumina-tion in the microscope field. The recent development of bright light–emitting diodes (LEDs) raises the possibility that arc lamps will someday be replaced by these lightweight, inexpensive light sources.
Objectives
Because the microscope objective is both the source of light that excites the fluorescence in the specimen and the optical element that collects the fluorescence, its properties have a large impact on the fluorescence image. The design of objectives is beyond our scope and is nicely described in other reviews
27. It is important, however, to 
understand that because the design of microscope objectives has in the past centered on features that improve the quality of brightfield color images, much effort has been put into correcting chromatic aberra-tions. These corrections are somewhat less important to the fluores-cent microscopist who is more typically concerned with excitation and collection efficiency, resolution, and contrast. 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 917REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsThe ideal fluorescence microscope objective has a high numerical 
aperture (NA). The NA of an objective is a critical parameter and can be found on the barrel of the objective. It is more important than the magnification, as it sets both the resolving power and light effi-ciency of the objective. The value of the NA is derived by multiplying the sine of the ‘half angle’ (the angle between the vertical and most extremely angled ray that can be collected by the objective) with the index of refraction of the medium between the objective and the coverslip. The larger the half angle, the greater number of photons that can be collected and the greater the amount of light that can be used to excite the specimen. For this reason the amount of exciting light through an objective is roughly proportional to (NA)
2, and at 
the same time the amount of the fluorescence emission collected is also proportional to (NA)
2. The intensity observed is thus propor-
tional to the (NA)4. In addition, oil immersion lenses (in which the 
oil matches the index of refraction of the coverslip) prevent light losses owing to reflections and refraction off the coverslip and thus improve excitation and collection efficiency. Image intensity is also related inversely to magnification squared, so the most intense images will come from relatively low magnifications. High NA also increases the resolving power of the objective. The minimal resolvable distance is 0.61 λ / NA. Additionally, the ideal fluorescence objective will have 
relatively few lens elements to reduce losses owing to reflection and glare from stray light. The lens elements and cements ideally have very low intrinsic fluorescence so the field appears absolutely black 
in the absence of fluorescence sig nal. Lastly, the ideal fluorescence 
objective will pass exciting wavelengths in the UV , visible and near infrared. All of this information is available (albeit, with some dig-ging) from manufacturers. 
It is fair to say that objectives d esigned particularly for the special 
needs of the fluorescence microscopist are becoming more common but that no objective is ideal in all circumstances. Users whose sam-ples are thick may want to consider lenses that also have a correction collar for spherical aberrations, as these aberrations cause blurring and loss of contrast when samples have a different index of refrac-tion than the material between the coverslip and the objective. If one is routinely dealing with thin sections, one may want a ‘plan’ lens that images a flat field in the specimen—otherwise the edges may be blurry. If the main aim is perfect alignment between blue, green and 
red fluorescent material in one sample plane, an apochromatic lens should be considered. It is appropriate to try out an expensive objec-tive on your own sample before purchase to make sure it provides the kind of image you are expecting.
BLEACHING
The phenomenon of bleachingAlthough in principle a fluorophore can cycle between ground and excited states an unlimited number of times, the conditions in which organic fluorophores are used usually limit the number of cycles. Estimates of 10,000–40,000 cycles are often cited as the limit before permanent bleaching occurs for good fluorophores. Bleaching is a generic term for all of the processes that cause the fluorescent signal to fade permanently. Quenching on the other hand, is a reversible loss of fluorescence owing to noncovalent interactions between a fluorophore and its molecular milieu. FRET, mentioned above, is an example of collisional or dynamic quenching of the excited state fluorophore. Static quenching occurs when the ground-state fluoro-phore associates with another molecule (sometimes other identical fluorophores: self-quenching).At the molecular level there are several different ways bleaching 
can occur, and it is fair to say that the photochemistry is not well worked out for most fluorophores. What is clear is that the long-lived triplet state provides more opportunities for a molecule with an excited electron to interact with other molecules than the briefer singlet states. Hence, most bleaching is thought to be associated with triplet states. It also appears that one of the important ingredients in bleaching is an interaction between a triplet state fluorophore and molecular oxygen. The triplet state can transfer its energy to oxygen (which is itself a triplet in the ground state), exciting oxy-gen to its singlet excited state. Singlet oxygen is a reactive molecule that can participate in may kinds of chemical reactions with organic molecules. These chemical reactions can covalently alter the fluo-rophore to inactivate its ability to fluoresce (that is, bleaching it). In addition, the singlet oxygen can int eract with other organic molecules 
causing phototoxicity for living cells.
Dealing with bleaching
There are many reasons why fluorescence signals are not as bright as one might hope (see Box 2  for a list of problems and potential solu-
tions), but bleaching is perhaps the most serious. One way to reduce bleaching is to use no more light than absolutely necessary to image a sample. If the microscope has an aperture diaphragm on the epi-illumination port ( Fig. 3a ), use it to titrate the light level to a low value. 
The field diaphragm can also be stopped down to illuminate only a small region to minimize general bleaching and also improve con-trast. In fixed samples, the amount of bleaching appears to be directly related to the number of excitation emission cycles a fluorophore goes through, so dim light does not automatically eliminate bleach-ing. Slides that contain fluorescence samples should therefore always be stored in the dark when not in use because ambient light of long enough duration can bleach them.
It is important to realize that fluorophores with similar excitation 
and emission spectra can have dramatically different bleaching rates. Companies, like Invitrogen’s Molecular Probes or Sigma-Aldrich, sell new-generation fluorophores that have greater photostability than previous well-known dyes such as fluorescein, rhodamine and T exas red. The Alexa dyes are one such example ( Fig. 2 ), with bleaching rates 
that are several-fold slower than older dyes
28. Not surprisingly, the 
relative lack of bleaching of newer fluorophores comes with another benefit; their intensity is high owing to their high quantum yield because efficient fluorescence e mission antagonizes the tendency of 
molecules to end up in the triplet state.
Unfortunately even with the best dyes, it is sometimes necessary to 
use intensities that will cause bleaching, as for example when taking an image with a camera or prolonged time lapse imaging. In fixed samples, immersing a sample on a slide with a mounting medium that is designed to reduce bleaching is an effective strategy. A number of antifade agents can be made up in the lab rather inexpensively or pur-chased ready to use. All of these are designed only for fixed specimens for which there are a variety of options
29. p-Phenylenediamine is very 
effective for FITC and rhodamine, but discolors with exposure to light, so slides must be stored in a dark container. Also, it is a reactive chemi-cal that needs to be used with care to minimize contact
30. DABCO 
(‘Slow Fade’ is the commercial version from Molecular Probes) is a bit less effective but has greater light resistance and less toxicity
31. N-pro-
pylgallate is better than the previous two for rhodamine32. In addition, 
there are several proprietary antifade mounting media (Vectashield from Vector Labs, ProLong Gold from Molecular Probes). 
918 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsIt is worth emphasizing that not all dyes are equally susceptible to 
all anti-fade agents. An agent that works quite well for one dye may be almost useless for another, whereas the reverse may be true for another antifade agent. All of  these antifade mountants typically con-
tain a water-glycerine mix plus a chemical designed to reduce fading by reducing the generation of singlet oxygen or its lifetime. The water glycerin mix has a refractive index that is between water and oil. Thus several companies are now making objectives for immersion media between the objective and the coverslip to match the refractive index of the mountant on the other side of the coverslip. Index matching mitigates spherical aberration in the sample images. For living speci-mens, antifade agents are still not perfected although ascorbic acid, vitamins C and E, beta-carotene and low oxygen tension might pro-vide some relief.
In all imaging applications, high-quality optical filters that provide 
efficient passage of all or nearly all of the emitted wavelengths can also decrease the bleaching. Use of fast film or cameras with high quantum efficiency or low noise allow for shorter exposures and less bleach-ing
14,26. Of course, fluorescent probes that don’t bleach would be 
the best solution. This seemingly unlikely proposition has now been realized with the development of Quantum dots
33. These complex 
three-layered nanocrystals use cadmium salt semiconductors as the equivalent of the fluorophore. The outer shell of the dot provides a 
convenient chemical substrate to attach the dots to biological ligands like avidin. They have many remarkable properties both in terms of an enormous range of absorption and wavelengths based in part on the particular cadmium salt and partly on their size. Because they can be small (nanometers) they are useful for a variety of labeling tech-niques. Their resistance to bleaching also makes them ideal for single molecule detection.
CONCLUSIONS
The use of fluorescence to probe biological phenomena is rapidly expanding into all fields of cell and molecular biology. The underlying principles in photophysics and chemistry that underlie fluorescence and fluorophores may seem far removed from biology but under-standing them are central to good fluorescence microscopy. Moreover, many new modalities such as confocal, multiphoton, stimulated emis-sion depletion (STED), structured illumination, total internal reflec-tion fluorescence (TIRF), FRET, FLIM, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS). Lastly, the genetic engineering of fluorescent proteins to moni-tor living cellular activities is among the most powerful new windows into biology. Thus for the foreseeable future, biology and fluorescence will be deeply intertwined.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/
1. Tsien, R.Y. The green fluorescent protein. Annu. Rev. Biochem.  67, 509–544 
(1998).
2. Valeur, B. Molecular Fluorescence: Principles and Applications.  (Wiley-VCH, 
Weinheim, 2002).
3. Lakowicz, J.R., ed. Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy . 2
nd ed. (Plenum 
Press, New York, 1999).
4. Turro, N.J. Modern Molecular Photochemistry . (University Science Books, 
Sausalito, California, 1991).5. Irvine, D.J., Purbhoo, M.A., Krogsgaard, M. & Davis, M.M. Direct observation of 
ligand recognition by T cells. Nature  419, 845–849 (2002).
6. Wang, L., Jackson, W.C., Steinbach, P.A. & Tsien, R.Y. Evolution of new 
nonantibody proteins via iterative somatic hypermutation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA  101, 16745–16749 (2004).
7. Deerinck, T.J. et al. Fluorescence photooxidation with eosin: a method for high 
resolution immunolocalization and in situ hybridization detection for light and electron microscopy. J. Cell Biol.  126, 901–910 (1994).
8. Suhling, K., French, P.M. & Phillips, D. Time-resolved fluorescence microscopy. 
Photochem. Photobiol. Sci.  4, 13–22 (2005).
9. Elson, D. et al. Time-domain fluorescence lifetime imaging applied to 
biological tissue. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci.  3, 795–801 (2004).
10. Jares-Erijman, E.A. & Jovin, T.M. FRET imaging. Nat. Biotechnol.  21, 1387–
1395 (2003).
11. Mizuno, H. et al. Photo-induced peptide cleavage in the green-to-red 
conversion of a fluorescent protein. Mol. Cell  12, 1051–1058 (2003).
12. Ando, R., Hama, H., Yamamoto-Hino, M., Mizuno, H. & Miyawaki, A. An optical 
marker based on the UV-i nduced green-to-red photoconversion of a fluorescent 
protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  99, 12651–12656 (2002).
13. Mason, W.T., ed. Fluorescent and Luminescent Probes for Biological Activity: A 
Practical Guide for Quantitative Real-Time Analysis.  (Academic Press Harcourt 
Brace and Co., Boston, 1993).
14. Periasamy, A., ed. Methods in Cellular Imaging  (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
2001).
15. Rudolf, R., Mongillo, M., Rizzuto, R. & Pozzan, T. Looking forward to seeing 
calcium. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.  4, 579–586 (2003).
16. Tsien, R.Y. Fluorescent indicators of ion concentrations. Methods Cell Biol.  30, 
127–156 (1989).
17. Bassnett, S., Reinisch, L. & Beebe, D.C. Intracellular pH measurement using 
single excitation-dual emission fluorescence ratios. Am. J. Physiol.  258, 
171–178 (1990).
18. Yuste, R. & Konnerth, A., eds. Imaging in Neuroscience and Development: A 
Laboratory Manual . (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, 2005).
19. Zhang, J., Campbell, R.E., Ting, A.Y. & Tsien, R.Y. Creating new fluorescent 
probes for cell biology. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.  3, 906–918 (2002).
20. Griesbeck, O. Fluorescent proteins as sensors for cellular functions. 
Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol.  14, 636–641 (2004).
21. Ohmichi, T. et al. DNA-based biosensor for monitoring pH in vitro  and in living 
cells. Biochemistry  44, 7125–7130 (2005).
22. Grinvald, A. & Hildesheim, R. VSDI: a new era in functional imaging of cortical 
dynamics. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  5, 874–885 (2004).
23. Kuhn, B., Fromherz, P. & Denk, W. High sensitivity of Stark-shift voltage-
sensing dyes by one- or two-photon excitation near the red spectral edge. Biophys. J.  87, 631–639 (2004).
24. Reiff, D.F. et al. In vivo performance of genetically encoded indicators of 
neural activity in flies. J. Neurosci.  25, 4766–4778 (2005).
25. Goldman, R.D. & Spector, D.L., eds. Live Cell Imaging: A Laboratory Manual.  
(Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York, 2004).
26. Inoué, S. & Spring, K.R. Video Microscopy . 2
nd edn. (Plenum Publishing, New 
York, 1997).
27. Abramowitz, M., Spring, K.R., Keller, H.E. & Davidson, M.W. Basic principles of 
microscope objectives. Biotechniques  33, 772–781 (2002).
28. Panchuk-Voloshina, N. et al. Alexa dyes, a series of new fluorescent dyes that 
yield exceptionally bright photostable conjugates. J. Histochem. Cytochem.  47, 
1179–1188 (1999).
29. Ono, M. et al. Quantitative comparison of anti-fading mounting media for 
confocal laser scanning microscopy. J. Histochem. Cytochem.  49, 305–331 
(2001).
30. Johnson, G.D. & Nogueira Araujo, G.M. A simple method of reducing the fading 
of immunofluorescence during microscopy. J. Immunol. Methods  43, 349–350 
(1981).
31. Johnson, G.D. et al. Fading of immunofluorescence during microscopy: a 
study of the phenomenon and its remdedy. J. Immunol. Methods  55, 231–242 
(1982).
32. Giloh, H. & Sedat, J.W. Fluorescence microscopy: reduced photobleaching of 
rhodamine and fluorescein protein conjugates by n-propyl gallate. Science  
217, 1252–1255 (1982).
33. Alivisatos, A.P., Gu, W. & Larabell, C. Quantum dots as cellular probes. Annu. 
Rev. Biomed. Eng.  7, 55–76 (2005).
34. van Gijlswijk, R.P. et al. Fluorochrome-labeled tyramides: use in 
immunocytochemistry and fluorescence in situ  hybridization. J. Histochem. 
Cytochem.  45, 375–382 (1997).
35. Cullander, C. Imaging in the far-red with electronic light microscopy: 
requirements and limitations. J. Microsc.  176, 281–286 (1994).
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 919REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsOptical sectioning microscopy
José-Angel Conchello1,2 & Jeff W Lichtman3
Confocal scanning microscopy, a form of optical sectioning microscopy, has radically 
transformed optical imaging in biology. These devices provide a powerful means to eliminate from images the background caused by out-of-focus light and scatter. Confocal techniques can also improve the resolution of a light microscope image beyond what is achievable with widefield fluorescence microscopy. The quality of the images obtained, however, depends on the user’s familiarity with the optical and fluorescence concepts that underlie this approach. We describe the core concepts of confocal microscopes and important variables that adversely affect confocal images. We also discuss data-processing methods for confocal microscopy and computational optical sectioning techniques that can perform optical sectioning without a confocal microscope.
One problem with fluorescence microscopy is that, 
regardless of where the microscope is focused vertically in a specimen, illumination causes the entire specimen thickness to fluoresce. Thus, it is not unusual that in a given two-dimensional (2D) image more than 90% of fluorescence is out-of-focus light that can com-pletely obscure the in-focus detail and greatly reduce the contrast of what remains. For example, a fluores-cent cell might be 5 to 15 µm thick, whereas the depth 
of focus (that is, thickness of the imaging plane) of a high numerical aperture (NA) objective (NA ≥ 1.3) 
is only about 300 nm or less. Thus the vast major-ity of the cell volume is out of focus. In addition to light that is out of focus the contrast in fluorescence images is adversely affected by scatter. Scattered light comes from fluorescent emission that may be dif-fracted, reflected and refracted by the specimen on its way to the objective lens and thus it appears to have been emitted from the last point of scattering and not from the actual location of the fluorophore that emitted it. Because imaging deeper into the speci-men increases the chances of scatter, more light will appear to be coming from planes closer to the surface of the specimen than from those deeper inside it, thus producing an image that is more consistent with a specimen preparation in which the concentration of 
fluorescent dye decreases with specimen depth.
A general approach to improve this problem is to 
use techniques capable of optical sectioning. Confocal scanning microscopy is presently the most widely used optical sectioning technique for fluorescence imaging, whereas computational optical sectioning techniques allow sectioning using a conventional widefield fluores-cence microscope. Multiphoton fluorescence excitation microscopy is an important and very powerful technique for optical sectioning microscopy. This technique is described in detail elsewhere
1, and thus we will not cover 
it here.
CONFOCAL MICROSCOPY
Optical sectioning acquires images of thin slices of a thick specimen by removing the contribution of out-of-focus light in each image plane. This removal of unwanted light provides greater contrast and permits three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions by computationally combining the image data from a stack of images. Confocal scan-ning microscopy has an added benefit too: the in-plane or x-y resolution of the image can be improved beyond 
what is possible with conventional widefield fluores-cence microscopy. Whereas confocal microscopy can 
1Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA. 2Program 
in Biomedical Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma 73019, USA.  3Molecular and Cell Biology Department, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. Corresponden ce should be addressed to J.-A.C. (jose-conchello@omrf.ouhsc.edu).
PUBLISHED ONLINE 18 NOVEMBER 2005; DOI:10.1038/NMETH815
920 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsbe implemented in many different ways, all of the approaches are 
based on the same concept. This idea was first described in a pat-ent application by M. Minsky
2 and subsequently described by him 
in a delightful memoir3. Minsky, who is perhaps better known as 
the founder of the field known as artificial intelligence, as a young man built a confocal microscope to improve reflected-light images of  brains in which the Golgi apparatus was stained in hopes of see-ing more clearly the connections wi thin a thick tissue block. Whereas 
his design and theoretical analysis was exactly correct, there was little interest in his idea at the time.  He never published a paper using the technique and received no royalties over the 17-year life ofthe patent.
Subsequent rediscoveries of the confocal idea have led to two rather 
different implementations, those in which an optical image is directly formed in the retina, film or camera faceplate, and those that must make the images electronically. All confocal techniques, however, share the same fundamental attribute: they are scanning microscopes. ‘Scanning’ means that the image of each section is built up by adding information from regions that are sampled in sequence. The main drawback of scanning is that image acquisition is not as rapid as wide-field techniques in which the entire image is acquired simultaneously. Thus some imple-mentations aim to speed the process with some potential loss of quality. Other confocal techniques are slower 
but in principle do not sacrifice any of the potential benefits.
In all confocal microscopes the central concept is to do two 
things simultaneously ( Fig. 1 ): scan the image by illuminating 
individual regions in sequence (scanning the illumination) and at the same time mask all but the illuminated regions from pro-viding return light to the detector (scanning the detection). The magnitude of the confocal improvement is inversely related to the size of the region(s) that are sampled at any one moment. T o explain why this small scan area is necessary and why the dual scan approach is so effective, we need to dissect the two scan-ning processes.
CONFOCAL PRINCIPLES
Scanning the illumination and detectionA confocal microscope illuminates one region after another until the whole field of view is sampled. In most confocal microscopes the aim is to illuminate with light that is focused to the very small-
a
b
cFigure 1  | The confocal principle. ( a) Layout of 
the confocal microscope. The excitation light is directed by the scanning mirror and focused into the specimen. The fluorescent emission is separated from the excitation by the dichroic mirror and the barrier filter. Light emitted from the location of the scanning spot goes through the pinhole in front of the detector. ( b) Path 
of the fluorescent light with the excitation and scanning not shown. The scanning spot is at the center of the in-focus plane. Light emitted from the in-focus plane (solid lines) is focused into the image plane where the confocal pinhole aperture is located. Light not emitted from the location of the scanning spot focuses on the opaque portions of the pinhole aperture and thus does not reach the PMT detector. Out-of-focus light emitted from points deeper (dashed line) or less deep (dash-dot line) than the in-focus plane come to focus in front or behind the aperture plane, respectively, and thus only a small portion of this light passes through the pinhole aperture. ( c) The 
scanning spot (green intensity profile) excites fluorescence. Fluorescent molecules at the location of this spot emit strongly and produce an Airy diffraction pattern at the plane of the confocal pinhole (red solid-line profile), whereas molecules away from this spot weakly fluoresce producing a dimmer Airy diffraction pattern whose peak intensity does not coincide with the pinhole aperture (red dashed-line profile) and, furthermore, their peak intensity does not coincide with the pinhole aperture. As a result, the fluorescence detected from these spots is greatly reduced relative to that coming from the location of the scanning spot.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 921REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsest spot possible in the plane of focus. This diffraction-limited spot 
of illumination is created by sending a collimated plane wave into the back of the objective where it is transformed into a converging spherical wave by the lens. Thus the full NA of the lens ( Fig. 1a ) is 
used to focus the light sharply at a single point at the so-called ‘waist’ of an hourglass-shaped beam. A laser beam is an ideal light source for this task as it contains all of its energy in a collimated coherent plane wave. In the absence of scattering, the cone of light will focus to its narrowest at the waist of the hourglass-shaped beam ( Fig. 2 ), 
but because of diffraction, the cone will not evenly illuminate the specimen. This distribution is calle d the point spread function (PSF) 
because the image of a small luminous point-object has the exact same pattern. The higher the NA and the shorter the wavelength, the smaller the beam waist will be (diameter = 1.22 λ/ NA, where λ is the 
wavelength of the excitation light). If the specimen does not absorb light as it passes through the sample, the total amount of illumination is of course the same in all levels of the sample. As the light travels to the waist of the beam, the same amount of light is concentrated into a smaller area, thus the irradiance increases and is highest at the waist. This form of illumination does not selectively illuminate the plane 
of interest or prevent scattering. Thus, scanning the illumination is insufficient to remove unwanted light, and it is necessary to add some mechanism by which light from out-of-focus sources does not reach the detector. This is achieved by placing a pinhole aperture in front of the detector at a plane that is conjugate to the in-focus plane, such that the illumination spot and the pinhole aperture are simultane-ously focused at the same spot ( Fig. 1a ). Because this microscope 
requires scanning the illumination spot and having this spot always remain in focus with the pinhole aperture, the instrument is called a confocal scanning microscope (CSM).
Effect on contrast
A measure of the contrast in an image is given by the brightness dif-ference between the signal and the background relative to the back-ground brightness. In widefield fluorescence microscopy the speci-men is being illuminated by light converging at every spot in the focal plane simultaneously, and this induces two kinds of background that lower contrast: scatter within the plane of focus and contributions of out-of-focus fluorescence to the in-focus image. Excessive back-ground is the bane of many microscope images. These sources of background are largely removed by confocal imaging. 
T o get a better idea of how these sources of background arise and 
why confocal microscopy eliminates them, it is useful to think about what happens with illumination of a single spot with one focused 
converging spherical wave. In the plane of focus where the light is most intense, some of the exciting light is scattered by particles in the specimen to excite fluorescence out of the region where the focused spot is. This gives a glowing cloud of fluorescence excitation around the waist of the beam. In addition, the return light is scattered on its way out of the tissue, making a fuzzy image of the spot that has the brightest fluorescence. Above and below the plane of focus, the exciting light is less intense but covers a wider area. The net effect is that a uniformly fluorescent sample w ith negligible absorption and 
scattering will have the same amount of fluorescence excitation at all depths. Because all but one of these depths is out of focus, the fluores-cence from these planes appears as a diffuse background. Scattering in these other planes only makes matters worse. If the sample is thick, the vast majority of the fluorescence signal elicited by illuminating a spot comes from the out-of-focus components.So how can all this background be removed? In the CSM, the pin-
hole in front of the detector allows the light from the focused spot to reach a detector on the other side of the pinhole ( Fig. 1b ). At the 
same time, the pinhole rejects the scattered halo of light around the illuminated spot. It also rejects much, although not all, of the out-of-focus light collected by the objective. This light either is focused before reaching the plane of the pinhole and thus has re-expanded at the pinhole plane, or is on its way to converging to a focused spot but is largely blocked by the pinhole. The pinhole’s effectiveness is clear-ly related to its size, and it might seem that the background would become infinitesimal when the pinhole is very small ⎯even smaller 
than the projected image of the diffraction-limited spot. The loss of signal, however, eventually outpaces the loss of background, so the optimal pinhole size is between 60% and 80% of the diameter of the diffraction-limited spot
4,5.
The pinhole has no effect at rejecting out of focus back-
ground when the sample is illuminated all at once rather than by an hourglass shaped beam because in this case out of focus light getting through the pinhole is no less intense than the in-focus light. The image will be identical to that seen in a widefield fluorescence microscope.
As a result of the selective illumination with an hourglass-shaped 
beam of only one spot in the plane of focus and an aligned pinhole in a conjugate image plane in the return light path, the light originat-ing from one spot in one plane is selectively detected. This provides excellent contrast because if the exciting light is focused on a spot that does not contain any fluorophores, the detector sees a dark area, and if it contains fluorophores, it sees the light emitted from those fluo-rophores only. Of course the arrangement just described would only provide the light from one spot. T o make an image the scope needs to sample each spot on the specimen plane the same way (the scanning methods for doing this are described below). The accumulated result is a dramatic improvement in contrast and a thin optical section.
Effect on resolution
An important but rarely used property of the CSM is its ability to improve the resolving power of a microscope beyond what is 
Figure 2  | The PSF. Light distribution near the location of the confocal 
scanning spot for a 100 ×, 1.4 NA oil-immersion lens and an excitation 
wavelength of 530 nm (brightness in log-scale with three decades). Bar, 0.5 µm.
922 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsachievable with even the highest-NA objectives. This improve-
ment only occurs if the pinhole is stopped down below the size of the central disk of the Airy pattern (< 1.2 λ / NA). T o understand 
why this improvement occurs, consider a confocal beam scanning across a very small fluorescent bead that is itself smaller than the diffraction-limited spot of the scanning beam. The beam itself will project an Airy pattern onto the specimen plane, which in the focal plane will appear as a center bright disc surrounded by concentric rings of progressively lower intensity. As this light approaches the small bead, the first interaction will be between a segment of an outer ring of the illumination spot and the bead. This will give rise to very weak excitation of the bead, whose dim image (also an Airy pattern) will be projected to the site of the pinhole aperture. The pinhole is always aligned with the center of the illumination Airy pattern so only a portion of an outer ring of the image of the bead will be passed through the aperture ( Fig. 1c ). Given that the bead is 
being weakly excited and only a small part of the emission is being collected, only an extremely dim part of the fluorescence emitted by the bead will be collected at this point. As the illumination beam moves closer to the bead, the intensity of the excitation of the bead increases and the collection is now from a region of the bead’s Airy pattern that contains more emitted light. Finally, when the Airy pattern of the illumination coincides with the bead, the brightest part of the illumination excites the bead, and the brightest part of the emission is collected through the pinhole. The result is that the scanning and pinhole aperture in combination attenuate the Airy pattern of the bead image so that more of the detected intensity is related to the actual position of the bead and not the side rings, which are typically no longer detectable. In addition, the intensity distribution of the central Airy disc is also narrowed for the same reason. In more technical terms, the PSF of the confocal microscope is the product of the PSFs of the objective lens at the excitation and emission wavelengths. 
The effect of reducing the rings and also the central disc is that 
beads that are close together are more easily resolved. In Figure 3a  
we plotted the intensity profile of the in-focus PSF of a conventional and a confocal scanning microscope. Because the PSF of the confocal microscope is ‘pushed down’ relative to the PSF of the wide-field-illu-
mination microscope, the PSF is also narrower. This means that the two-point resolution of the CSM is approximately 1.4 × better than 
in a wide-field microscope.
One question that confronts all users of laser scanning confocal 
microscopes is what is the appropriate size of the pinhole aperture, an easily adjusted parameter in all commercial devices. Based on experimental and theoretical measures of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and optical sectioning ( Fig. 3 ), it is clear that there is a sub-
stantial gain in SNR by opening the pinhole aperture to be about the size of the projected image of the diffraction-limited spot (1.22 λ / NA) with little degradation of the depth discrimination
4. But 
further increasing the aperture radius marginally increases the SNR but drastically reduces the depth discrimination power of the micro-scope. The actual optimal size of the pinhole will depend on the magnification of the objective and any relay optics in the path. For example, the optimal pinhole sizes for a 100 ×, 1.4 NA and a 60 ×, 1.4 
NA objective are in a ratio of 100:60. For the former, the optimal pinhole size is 1.67 times larger than for the latter. In some laser confocal microscopes, the software will give you information about the pinhole diameter in Airy units, with 1 unit being the diameter of the Airy disk. In others, the numbers are measured in millimeters or in arbitrary units, making it a bit more difficult to know exactly what the size is relative to the diameter of the Airy disc requiring you to ask the technical staff of the manufacturer what is the relation for their microscope. This is an important variable and definitely worth knowing.
CONFOCAL SCANNING IMPLEMENTATIONS
Specimen scanning versus illumination scanningThus far we have not mentioned how scanning the illumination and collection is achieved. One simple albeit impractical solution is to align the focused light source and the pinhole on the same spot and then raster scan the specimen by moving it with a motorized stage. Whereas such a scheme is used in certain industrial settings, biologi-cal samples, especially living ones, will not tolerate the shaking from fast scanning. The main advantage of specimen scanning is that it a bc
Figure 3  | PSF, SNR and background rejection. ( a) PSF of the wide-field and confocal microscopes. ( b) SNR in the confocal microscope with finite aperture 
normalized such that with a fully open–aperture SNR = 1. ( c) Background rejection in multiple-aperture confocal scanning microscopy. Graph of overall 
intensity due to a horizontal thin layer of fluorescence as a function of the distance from focus. For the wide-field microscop e the intensity does not change 
with the distance from the in-focus plane. For the single-aperture confocal microscope it decreases in inverse proportion to th e square of the distance from 
focus. The spinning-disk confocal microscope shows a hybrid behavior. Close to the in-focus plane, the intensity decreases as i n the confocal microscope. At 
more distant planes, the intensity remains constant as in the wide-field microscope. The figure shows this behavior for apertur es that are 1.25 µm and 2.5 µm 
apart (when projected to the specimen). The further apart the apertures are, the stronger the background rejection. 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 923REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsavoids off-axis aberrations and thus can be used with a variety of 
objectives, including those that are not ‘plan’ and thus suffer from field curvature. In confocal implementations for use in biology, how-ever, the illumination is scanned w hile the specimen remains still. 
In illumination scanning, the scanning spot is typically moved in a raster-scan fashion over the specimen. The illumination-scanning mechanism is often away from the stage and thus its vibration, if any, does not affect the location of the spe cimen relative to the objective. 
There are several different approaches for illumination scanning. In all implementations, however, if the lens suffers from off-axis aber-rations (astigmatism, coma and field curvature), this will degrade the image. Specifically, coma spreads the excitation light away from the location of the aberration-free scanning spot, thus decreasing the amount of fluorescence from this location that reaches the detector. Astigmatism and curvature both move the scanning spot away from the nominal plane of focus, thus exciting light that would otherwise be out of focus.
Laser scanning
The most common method for illumination scanning used by the first commercial CSM designed at the MRC (Biorad MRC 600), and still used today, is based on using two oscillating mirrors to deflect the angle of the light beam going into the specimen (called scanning) and deflecting the angle of emitted light in the return light path (called descanning). One mirror scans the illumination and detection along the ‘fast axis’ (for example, the horizontal direction), and the other mirror scans the ‘slow axis’ (for example, the vertical direction). This process continues until an entire 2D image is collected, and it can be repeated at the same focus to generate a time series of images or the focus can be vertically stepped up or down to generate a 3D image stack. The speed of this method is limited by the mechanical char-acteristics of the fast-axis mirror. It is difficult to drive this mirror to oscillate fast enough to scan at video rates: 30 frames per second, at 512 lines per frame, means that the mirror has to oscillate at 30  × 512 
= 15,360 times per second. It is possible to achieve close to video-rate scanning by using ‘resonant’ oscillating mirrors (see below). In addition to the mechanical limitation, the time the scanning spot dwells over a pixel is a limitation of the CSM. If a 512 × 512 image is 
collected in one second, it means that the spot dwells for 1 s / (512 × 
512) ≈ 4 µs on each pixel, although it is possible to scan substantially 
faster (<<1 µs per pixel). In
  reference 6, it is calculated that to excite 
detectable fluorescence in such a short time with a typical sample, it is necessary to deliver about 80 microWatt ( µW) of light to each pixel. 
For brightly fluorescent samples less power can be used, but this still requires laser illumination.
The slow acquisition time derives from the fact that the laser 
scanning approach builds an image sequentially one pixel at a time. The detector is typically a photomultiplier tube (PMT), which has low noise and a fast response. PMTs are ideal for detecting weak signals, even single photons. Unfortunately PMTs are not very effi-cient. They detect 10% or less of the fluorescence signal that gets through the pinhole. Thus as scanning speeds increase, the num-ber of detected photons per pixel may drop to such a low number that noise from the PMT will limit the quality of the image. Slow scanning speed is not only an inconvenience, but it also limits the utility of the instrument, especially when rapidly changing signals are being studied. In some cases users do ‘line scans’ to essentially bypass the slower 2D image for the more rapid speeds possible by using just the fast-scan mirror.Spinning-disk 
One way to decrease the scan time without compromising the SNR is to multiplex: illuminate several pixels simultaneously and collect light from all of them at the same time. One successful method is to use a disc with a series of pinhole apertures. Each aperture illumi-nates a different spot on the specimen and the emitted fluorescence is then focused onto another pinhole aperture on the disk
7,8 or through 
the same one9,10. In the most common form, the fluorescent image 
of the illuminated spots coincide with the location of the pinholes on the disk, thus the pinholes serve both to focus spots of light on the specimen and also as the confocal pinholes. The light that passes through the apertures is then imaged on a detector. In this case the detector is either the retina or a camera, typically a charge-coupled device (CCD) or intensified CCD camera. The arrangement of the pinhole apertures over the disk is such that as the disk rotates, the illumination spots scan the entire field of view of the microscope. 
A notable advantage of the spinning-disk CSM is that, because 
many spots can be illuminated simultaneously (typically hun-dreds or more over the field of view) and rapid rotation of the disc illuminates the same spot several times within a frame time (for example, within the 33 ms exposure required for video rate), the total dwell time can be much larger than for the CSM with a single pinhole aperture. This increase in dwell time allows for much faster frame rates. A variation of this spinning-disk CSM that affords potentially faster frame rates has slit apertures on the disk, but its principle is otherwise similar, that is, rotation of the disk makes the slits illumi-nate the entire specimen (a simple and inexpensive plan for a such a microscope can be found in
11,12).
One disadvantage of the spinning-disk CSM as described is its 
rather inefficient use of the excitation light. For example, if the pin-holes occupy only 1% of the disc area 99% of the illumination of the disc is wasted. A new design for the spinning-disk CSM (‘Y okogawa’ design) was introduced in which another disk with an array of micro-lenses is placed on top of the pinholes on the illumination side of the disk. These lenses are illuminated by a collimated laser beam, which the lenses focus into the pinholes, thus greatly increasing the illumination efficiency of the spinning-disk CSM to about 60% or more. Because it is difficult and expensive to build a microlens array that does not suffer from chromatic aberration, two disks need to be used, one for the apertures and the other for the microlenses. A fluo-rescence filter cube is placed between the two disks so the microlenses are not in the fluorescent return-light path
13,14.
The spinning-disk CSM presents a trade-off between resolution 
and SNR in terms of the aperture size. In commercially available spinning-disk CSMs, the aperture size is fixed during manufactur-ing and cannot be adjusted. The size, type and spacing of the aper-ture on the disc control the background rejection capabilities of the microscope. 
In CSMs, the brightness of the out-of-focus excitation decreas-
es with the square of the distance from the in-focus plane. This is because, as already mentioned, the excitation light has an hourglass shape with the waist at the in-focus plane and with the total amount of light the same in each plane. The area over which it is distributed is the area of the circle resulting from the intersection of the cone with the out-of-focus plane. Since this area increases with the square of the out-of-focus distance, the excitation that a pixel receives decreas-es with the square of this distance. This inverse square law holds as long as out-of-focus structures are illuminated by a single aperture on the disk, but in the spinning-disk CSM, many apertures are used 
924 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsto illuminate the specimen. Each of  these apertures produces a two 
cone−shaped illumination about the sp ecimen. Close to the in-focus 
plane, the cones from different apertures in the disk are distant from each other so that out-of-focus material is illuminated by at most one cone. As the distance from the in-focus plane increases, however, the cones from apertures adjacent in the spinning disc come closer to each other until at some distance (which depends on the NA of the lens and the distance between the apertures
15), the cones from 
different apertures cross and more than one cone (and thus by more than one aperture) excite fluorescence. It can be shown that from that distance on, the excitation intensity does not decrease with the out-of-focus distance but remains constant, although at a much lower level than in the wide-field illumination microscope
15. 
Figure 3c  compares the background discrimination capabilities of 
the spinning-disk CSM against those of the wide-field and the single-pinhole aperture confocal microscopes. The closer the apertures are, 
the larger the constant background intensity and the closer to the in-focus plane it remains constant.
Line scanning
Another method to increase the dwell time without decreasing the frame rate is to illuminate an entire line of the specimen simultane-ously and focus the fluorescence into a linear CCD array (that is, a row of CCD wells). The use of line illumination obviates the need for scanning the fast axis using an oscillating mirror. Currently, there is one commercial line-scan CSM, the Zeiss LSM 5 Live. This CSM achieves video frame rates by exciting with a line illumination and using a slit confocal aperture. In addition, the microscope can have more than one fluorescent channel and thus can simultaneously detect more than one fluorophore. A slit-confocal-aperture micro-scope, however, does not afford the resolution improvement of a spot scanning system.
Other scanning approaches
Over the years there have been ingenious attempts to increase the speed of the fast axis scan such as a rotating mirrored polygon
16, or a 
series of holographic or curved mirrors mounted on a rotating disk, such that each mirror illuminates a different pixel in the specimen
17. 
Another method is to drive the fast-axis mirror at its resonance oscil-lating frequency. In this approach, the fast-axis oscillating mirror and the galvanometer that controls its position are designed such that their resonant frequency is fast enough for video rate scanning, then the electronics drive the mirror at that frequency. One notable cus-tom-built version of this microscope has been described
18. In a con-
ventional CSM, the raster scan is such that the time between adjacent pixels along the fast scan axis is the same across the scanned field. With the resonant-mirror approach, however this no longer holds. 
This is because when the mirror is driven at its resonant frequency, the position of the scanning spot across the scan field changes with time according to a sinusoid. This has the potential problem of non-uniform bleaching.
Lasers
Confocal microscopes come with a wide range of options concerning lasers. A purchaser needs to decide which laser lines will be needed to excite the fluorophores in use. The recent advent of solid state lasers adds more choices. The most common workhorse is the multiline argon-ion laser which can emit from the UV (230 nm) to the green (514 nm) with useable power at 257, 477 and 514 nm. Helium-neon (He-Ne) lasers are inexpensive and although they are single-line, they provide useful coverage from the green to the red with useful lines at 534, 567, 594 and 612 nm. Although they have less power than most lasers, power is rarely the limitation that prevents good confocal imaging. Krypton-ion lasers also provide a good selec-tion of lines from the green to the red. When combined with argon; (Ar-Kr laser), it provides lines from the blue to the red. Users who need blue light for CFP use either a helium-cadmium (He-Cd) at 440 nm, a finicky laser, or solid state lines of the zinc-selenium (Zn-Se) diode laser. Users interested in DAPI or some calcium-indicator dyes require UV excitation. At the moment these wavelengths are possible mainly from large argon lasers that sometimes need water cooling. Recently, diode-pumped or lamp-pumped semiconductor lasers that emit in the infrared, such as the neodymium-yttrium alu-minum garnet (Nd-YAG) and neodymium-yttrium lithium fluoride (Nd-YLF), have been combined with nonlinear crystals that generate second-, third- or fourth- harmonics. This combination gives lines in the green, UV and deep UV
19. The lines for different lasers are 
summarized in Table 1 .
POTENTIAL PROBLEMS
BleachingThe use of the CSM brings with it several potential problems that do not apply to the wide-field microscope. Foremost among them is the increased risk of bleaching. The probability that a molecule bleaches depends on its exposure to the excitation light. This is the product of the irradiance a molecule receives and the time it receives it. Thus, a molecule that receives irradiance I
1 of duration t1 is as 
likely to bleach as one that receives twice the irradiance (2 I1) for 
half the time ( t1/2). In a CSM, the excitation light is spread over 
an area that increases with the square of the out-of-focus distance. Consequently, the irradiance decreases in proportion to the square of the distance. Conversely, the time a pixel is exposed is propor-tional to the area of the excitation and thus to the square of the out-of-focus distance. Therefore, the product of the time an out-of-focus molecule is exposed and the irradiance it receives is almost the same at every depth if the effects of scattering and absorption are negligible. As a result, in-focus and out-of-focus molecules bleach at almost the same rate. With the high irradiance and low per-frame rates typical of the CSM, photobleaching is a serious drawback for many specimens.
When the scanning mechanism uses oscillating mirrors, bleach-
ing occurs not only while the microscope is collecting data, but also during the retrace when the scanning spot is moving back to the beginning of the next image line. During the retrace time, the laser is exciting fluorescence that is not being collected but nonetheless is Table 1  | Useful spectral lines for lasers available for confocal 
microscopy
Laser Useful lines (nm)
Argon ion (Ar) 257, 488, 514
Kripton ion (Kr) 531, 568, 647
Ar-Kr 488, 568, 647Helium-neon (He-Ne) 543, 594, 612, 633Helium-nadmium (He-Cd) 442Zinc-Selenium (Zn-Se) diode 430Neodymium–yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd-YAG) 532, 355, 266Neodymium–yttrium lithium fluoride (Nd-YLF) 527, 349, 262
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 925REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsbleaching the fluorophore. Placement of a shutter that closes at the 
end of each line and opens at the beginning of the next, adds to the already long frame scan time of the CSM. Another approach, used in the Zeiss 510 CSM, is to use an acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF) to prevent fluorescence excitation during the retrace. Because the AOTF has no moving parts, it can be tuned very quickly to block or to pass the excitation light and thus does not increase the scan time.
SNR, NA and magnification
The processes of photon absorption, emission and detection are ran-dom and thus the numbers of photons measured from two pixels with equal amounts of fluorophore are similar but not equal. This random variation gives the image a grainy appearance that is stronger for lower image irradiance. Ideally, one would attempt to maximize the number of photons per pixel to increase the SNR. In practice, however, there are limitations and trade-offs to balance ( Box 1 ). The 
characteristics of the CSM that have the largest effects on image SNR are the size of the pinhole and the NA of the objective.The light-gathering efficiency of a microscope is proportional to 
the square of the objective’s NA. When also used for illumination, as in confocal scanning microscopy, the overall sensitivity of the CSM is proportional to (NA)
4 and is unaffected by magnification 
power because in the CSM the pinhole aperture size can be adjusted according to the NA and magnification of the objective to obtain the same resolution and SNR with both objectives. For example, the PSF in front of the pinhole for a 100 ×, 1.4 NA objective is 100 / 60 
= 1.67 times larger than the PSF of a 60 ×, 1.4 NA objective at the 
same wavelength. Thus, opening the pinhole aperture by a factor of 1.67 will achieve the same resolution and SNR with both objectives. In addition, the CSM has the advantage of an electronic zoom that allows a user to obtain additional (even if empty) magnification by scanning a smaller area with the same number of pixels. Although the electronic zoom does not degrade the SNR, it causes faster pho-tobleaching because the closer the pixels are in the specimen, the longer the excitation dwells over neighboring pixels and thus bleaches them faster.
LOW SIGNAL
Effective signal strength measured by the SNR is impacted by 
many different factors as discussed below.
NA of the objective.  The NA of the objective is one of the most 
critical variables that impacts signal quality in a CSM. Because resolution is determined by the NA and the pinhole size, but is independent of magnification, the best image is obtained by using an objective with a higher NA rather than a higher magnification.
Pinhole size.  Reducing the pinhole size rejects more background 
light and thus increases the depth discrimination. But it also produces a grainy appearance in the image owing to the reduction in the signal compared to random variations recorded by the detector. The optimal pinhole size is between 60% and 80% of the diffraction-limited spot. In practice, larger pinholes must often be used when imaging dim samples or fluorophores that bleach easily. Alternatively, increasing the pinhole beyond (1.22 λ / NA 
when projected to the specimen) reduces effective imaging depth. With newer bleach-resistant fluorescent quantum dots, however, 
it may be easier to image with smaller pinhole diameters. Pinholes smaller than 60% of the diffraction limited spot, however, a ctually 
worsen the grainy appearance of the image.
PMT gain.  Increasing the gain on the PMT will increase the 
signal but also results in higher shot noise. Such a trade-off may be necessary if bleaching is a problem. This increase in signal and noise is different than the increase that results from ’brightness‘ control in that the latter increases signal and noise by the same amount and thus has no effect on the grainy appearance of the recorded image.
Laser power.  Increasing the laser power is a simple way of 
increasing the apparent signal but greatly increases the risk of sample bleaching and, more importantly, fluorescence saturation as well as other deleterious effects, so all other optimizations should be attempted first.
Decreasing graininess.  The grainy appearance can also be 
ameliorated by increasing the signal by a larger factor than the random variations that cause the grainy appearance. This can be accomplished by increasing the dwell time at the risk of increased BOX 1 TROUBLESHOOTING AND CAVEATS
bleaching. It is also possible to increase the scanning speed and reduce the laser power while using filtering methods to combine data from multiple scans.
Fluorophore concentration.  The fluorescent emission intensity 
is proportional to the concentration of fluorescent dye, but there are practical limitations to this concentration. A very high concentration could have toxic effects on the organism under study, interfere with the process being observed, or leave a large amount nonspecific fluorescence. To avoid these pitfalls, the concentration of fluorescent dye is usually kept low with a resulting low fluorescence intensity that brings a low SNR. Quantum dots and other new fluorophores with improved characteristics can help reduce these problems.
SLOW IMAGING
For users of fluorescence widefield microscopes in which video-rate or faster imaging is relatively straightforward, the slow rate of data flow in laser scanning confocal microscopes can be frustrating. T hus, for moving the stage and finding 
objects of interest, many users still resort to direct viewing of the widefield fluorescence image by eye and then initiating a scan. Most modern laser scanners, however, have a ‘focus’ 
mode with scans of 5 or more frames per second. Although these images are noisy and severely undersample the data, they may serve to speed the process of finding a particular spot to image. When data itself must be sampled quickly, ‘line scans’ are an option.
BLEEDTHROUGH
It is becoming increasingly common to simultaneously use two or more fluorescent dyes for imaging different properties or structures of the specimen. If more than one dye is present, however, a channel designed for a particular dye will collect 
fluorescence from other dyes whose excitation and fluorescence spectra overlap with the dye of interest. When this is not taken into account and compensated for, the recorded images for a given dye are artifactual because of contributions from other dyes. The linear unmixing methods described in the text can effectively separate the different dyes.
926 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsConversely, in the wide-field microscope, the objective magnifica-
tion has a strong effect on the image SNR. Given two objectives with the same NA and using the same camera, the objective with the larger magnification spreads the light over a larger area in proportion to the square of the magnification.
Too much scatter (deep imaging)
When a CSM is used to image detail within a relatively thick layer of tissue, the excitation and the emission photons must travel through the tissue where molecular interactions will change their direction. As a result, the excitation light is spread over a volume much larger than the diffraction-limited spot and thus the excitation is weaker over a larger volume. The fluorescence emitted from a molecule within this volume can be scattered on its way to the objective so that it no lon-ger seems to come from the scanning spot. Thus, out-of-focus light might appear to come from the location of the scanning spot whereas in-focus light is rejected because it is scattered by out-of-focus tissue. The resulting image has two major degradations, namely, it is severely blurred and has a very low SNR. For deep imaging in tissue, two-pho-ton fluorescence microscopy may be more suitable
1.
DATA PROCESSING
Averaging approachesDespite the marked improvement in contrast owing to rejection of out-of-focus light, images from CSMs have low SNR because of the small number of photons that can be excited from each pixel in the short time the pixel is under the scanning spot. This problem is obvious in the graininess of many confocal images. Some users attempt to correct this problem by increasing the laser power dur-ing the scan, but this is generally a mistake. The laser intensity pos-sible in most commercial laser scanning confocals far exceeds that necessary to saturate the fluorophore in the focal plane. In other words, the fluorescent molecules at the waist of the hourglass-shaped beam are cycling between excited state and ground state as fast as they can, and greater illumination irradiance provides no additional fluorescence. On the other hand, increased illumina-tion will cause increasing amounts of out-of-focus light to per-colate through the pinhole, causing the image to loose resolution in all dimensions. If one keeps the laser power low (that is, <~1.5 mW for a scanning spot 0.5 µm across
20) one can still improve the 
SNR by collecting several images of the same plane and averaging or adding them. The two most widely used methods are a simple average and the Kalman filter, which is an auto-regressive moving-average filter (for a detailed description of the Kalman filter see
21,22). 
Each pixel of the final image is obtained from measurements of the same pixel at different times. As these averaging approaches oper-ate in time, not space, they have little or no effect on the resolution (strictly speaking, there is a degradation in resolution because the scanning mechanism may not place the scanning spot precisely enough during repeated scans).
In the simple average filter all the 2D images are simply averaged. 
This increases the SNR in direct proportion to the square root of the number of frames that are averaged. That is, averaging four frames doubles the SNR, whereas averaging 16 increases the SNR by a factor of (16)
1/2 = 4. The Kalman filter is a more elaborate statistical filter 
that uses auto-regression of prior measurements to predict the pres-ent measurement and then corrects the estimate with a moving aver-age as soon as  the present measurement is available. The strongest advantage of the Kalman filter over simple filtering is that it requires very few frames (typically less then 5) to reach a steady value for each 
pixel, whereas the simple average requires more frames. The disad-vantage of the Kalman filter is that it assumes that noise is additive. Although not strictly correct, this assumption has little effect on the results when the number of photons per pixel is above ~20. In cases with a lower number of photons, simple averaging might be a better choice of method.
Another approach to noise reduction is to increase the dwell time 
by slowing the scan speed. Most commercial laser scanners allow the user to adjust the scan time over a wide range. This approach has one drawback: as a population of fluorophores are excited they tend to progressively partition into the long-lived triplet state where they are no longer able to fluoresce and are subject to bleaching. Thus, with a long duration exposure of each pixel, the laser excitation will first initiate good fluorescence but within several hundred nanoseconds the same laser intensity will become less effective
20. In summary, fast 
scanning with low power and averaging is probably the best way to obtain a good image, although the ability of the scanning mirrors to accurately go to exactly the same position may tend to blur these images a bit. Some trial and error is required to find the best noise reduction method for a particular device.
Linear unmixing
The large cadre of fluorescent probes available at different wave-lengths provides both unprecedented opportunities for multispec-tral imaging and a problem: crosstalk between different fluorescent signals. The most straightforward approach to disambiguating fluo-rescence signals is to sequentially record images at the emission wave-lengths of the different fluoresc ent dyes. Sequential scanning gives 
excellent separation of fluorophore images because both the excita-tion and emission can be altered (as with standard filter cubes). The problem with sequential imaging is that if one wishes to take a stack of images the time of imaging increases in proportion to the number of images. A stack of 100 images with three fluorophore sequential imaging in which each image is averaged three times to remove noise will take ~15 min. A second problem with sequential imaging is that it is sometimes unable to remove crosstalk because the dyes’ absorp-tion and emission spectra overlap too much. This is a considerable problem with fluorescent proteins that typically have wide emis-sion and absorbance spectra
23, though newer variants are helping 
to reduce this problem24. CSMs offer the possibility of simultane-
ous scanning because the emitted light can routinely be beam-split to different detectors to collect different emission wavelengths. The wavelengths can be separated by color filters (for example, dichroic or interference filters) or spatially by a prism that takes advantage of dispersion to produce a rainbow-colored pattern. This dispersion is used by Leica spectral confocal microsc opes, to bring different colors 
of light to different detectors.
One serious drawback of trying to image more than one fluores-
cent dye at a time, however, is that the overlap of excitation and emis-sion spectra make it difficult or even impossible to find an emission wavelength that detects one fluoro phore and none of another. A solu-
tion is to record what is sometimes called a λ scan, which is a fluo-
rescence excitation spectrum of all the dyes while exciting with one or more wavelengths. Unlike a typical spectrum done at one point, this scan is done spatially on a whole image plane. The number of spectral points in the scan must equal or exceed the number of dyes one is trying to separate. Taking images at several wavelengths takes time. In the Zeiss version of this approach (Meta) a prism is used to 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 927REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsobtain the spectral images simultaneously. 
In the Olympus configuration the λ scan is 
done sequentially. In both cases, however, the narrowness of the spectral bands reduces the SNR, requiring averaging and more time. Conversely, the λ scan does provide access 
to the full fluorescence emission of a fluo-rophore and using the emission spectra of each different fluorophore to identify the contribution of each provides a means of eliminating crosstalk
24–28.
T o see how this method works, assume 
that a specimen is stained with three different fluorescent dyes ( Fig. 4a ). Cyan fluorescent 
protein (CFP; triangles) has a peak emission at 477 nm, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC; squares), at 535 nm, and tetramethyl rhoda-mine isothiocyanate (TRITC; circles), at 575 nm. The rectangles in Figure 4a  represent the 
ideal response of barrier filters commonly used for the three dyes. It is clear that there is substantial overlap of the three spectra and that none of the filters completely rejects fluorescence from another dye. The super-position of images collected with the three filters is shown in Figure 4b . We have circled 
and labeled three spots that have different concentrations of the three fluorescent dyes. Spot 1 has 10% CFP , 30% FITC and 60% TRITC. Spot 2 has 10% CFP , 60% FITC and 30% TRITC. Finally, Spot 3 has 70% CFP , and 15% each FITC and TRITC. The indi-vidual images collected with the three filters show that the three labeled spots appear in more than one image not only because of the mixture of dyes but also because of the overlap of the three spectra ( Fig. 4c –e). 
Emission curves show the λ scan at each of 
the three fluorescent spots and the vertical bars show the readings obtained using the barrier filters for each of the three dyes assuming that each filter collects all the fluorescence within its passband ( Fig. 4f –h). Using these profiles and the spectra 
in Figure 4a , it is possible to write a set of linear equations that relate 
the relative concentrations of the three dyes to the amount of light measured by each detector. Using the measured intensities from the detectors the linear equations can be solved to obtain the amount of each of the fluorescent dyes at each of the spots. This is called linear unmixing, and it is not restricted to unmixing three dyes. By using at least as many channels and filters as there are fluorescent dyes in the sample, it is possible to unmix more dyes, and additional channels will reduce the effects of noise.
OTHER OPTICAL SECTIONING TECHNIQUES
Deconvolution (computational optical microscopy)A method that has steadily gained acceptance as an alternative as well as a complement to confocal scanning and two-photon fluorescence excitation microscopy is computational optical sectioning micro-scopy (COSM), also known as deconvolution microscopy and some-times as ‘digital confocal’ (although the latter is a misnomer because in COSM with a widefield microscope, the specimen is under Köhler 
illumination and thus excitation is maximally out of focus at the specimen, whereas the term confocal means excitation and detec-tion are in focus at the same point). In COSM, as with a CSM, a 3D image is collected as a series of 2D images (or optical slices), each with the microscope focused at a different plane through the specimen. If a wide-field microscope is used, each of the 2D images has the in-focus information plus substantial contributions from out-of-focus material. In COSM, a computational method derived from informa-tion about the process of image formation and recording is used to remove the out-of-focus light from each optical slice. Several meth-ods have been derived for COSM whose differences stem from the different mathematical models used for the process of image forma-tion and recording. Because a very accurate model for the process of image formation and recording would be mathematically and com-putationally intractable, different models rely on different simplify-ing assumptions. Better models of the process of image formation and recording lead to better results, usually at the expense of higher computational cost. The earliest models were heavily simplified and led to methods with very low computational demands. As comput-
ab
cd e
fg h
Figure 4  | Linear unmixing. ( a) Emission spectra for CFP, FITC and TRITC. The rectangles represent the 
ideal response of barrier filters commonly used for the three dyes. The numbers on top of the rectangles are the cut-off wavelengths for each of the filters. ( b) Color composite made with the images recorded at 
the peaks of the three dyes. The three spots marked with circles have known mixtures of the three dyes. (c–e) Images obtained with each of the three barrier filters. ( f–h) λ scans at each of the three spots 
circled in c–e collected with ideal narrow-band barrier filters. As in a, the rectangles are ideal responses 
of the three barrier filters commonly used for the three dyes. The vertical bars indicate the response collected by the detector with each of the three filters at each of the three spots (the bars are placed at the mean wavelength of each filter; this wavelength is indicated at the top of each rectangle).
928 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsing power increased, it allowed the use of methods based on more 
exact formulations of the imaging process, and algorithm developers tapped into the increased computer power to derive methods based on more precise models. Here we will briefly touch on the results and limitations of some methods ( Fig. 5 ). For a more thorough review 
see reference 29.
Nearest neighbors deconvolution.  One of the first COSM 
methods, called nearest neighbors subtraction (NNS), is based on a simple model of image formation, namely that out-of-focus light from a given optical slice is relevant only in the two adjacent slices. T o undo this degradation, the method blurs the adjacent slices with a 2D PSF calculated for a miss-focus distance equal to the distance between adjacent optical slices and subtracts them from the optical slice of interest to remove the out-of-focus light. The result can be filtered with a Wiener-type filter to remove some of the in-focus blur. This process is repeated for all the optical slices. Although the method is based on a very simplified model, it applies when the fluorescent light rapidly decreases away from the focus, as for small puncta, thin filaments, or a combination of them. For example, in a single optical slice of fluorescentl y labeled actin filaments extracted 
from a 3D image stack ( Fig. 5a ) the NNS method effectively removes 
the out-of-focus blur ( Fig. 5b ). For specimens in which the fluores-
cence covers larger areas (for example, cell membranes) or volumes (for example, neuromuscular junctions), the simple model does not apply and a different approach is necessary.
Frequency-based deconvolution.  One such different approach 
is based on how the microscope images periodic structures. Given a periodic structure, such as a diffraction grating, the contrast in the image greatly depends on the frequency of the structure (mea-sured, for example, in cycles per µm). For small frequencies, the 
image shows very good contrast, but as the frequency of the grat-ing is increased (the distance between adjacent stripes reduced), the contrast is reduced until it vanishes completely when the frequency of the grid reaches 2 NA / λ. Frequencies higher than this cut-off fre-
quency are not passed by the microscope to the image. The way the microscope images periodic structures is mathematically described by the optical transfer function (OTF). This is the Fourier transform of the PSF of the microscope. Any image can be analyzed into a series of periodic structures of different frequencies, amplitudes and phases that, when superimposed, give rise to the image. These series of structures are called the frequency components of the image. It is computationally straightforward to obtain the frequency compo-nents of an image by using a Fourier transform.
Because the frequency components of the image are the frequency 
components of the specimen multiplied by the OTF, the frequency components of the specimen can be obtained by dividing the image frequency components by the OTF. This simple operation, however, is not possible because the OTF is zero for all frequencies above the cut-off frequency. The two most widely-used approaches to avoid this division by zero are the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse (MPPI; Fig. 5c )
30 and the Wiener or, more properly, Wiener-Helstrom filter 
(WHF, Fig. 5d ). Each of these methods introduces a small arbitrary 
correction factor ε, thus avoiding the division by zero, but use differ-
ent methods of doing so. For a thorough description see reference 31. The choice of ε controls the tradeoff between the resolution and the 
amount of noise in the resulting specimen estimate. Small ε results 
in finer resolution but more noise. The MPPI and WHF operate on the whole 3D stack, not on each optical slice as the NNS, and thus they can remove out-of-focus light from more distant planes. An optical slice from a 3D image of fluorescently labeled membranes of Hystoplasma capsulatum  is shown in Figure 5e . The NNS not only 
does not remove the out-of-focus light inside the membrane, but results in a grainy appearance that gives the impression of a speci-men made of small puncta ( Fig. 5f ). Both the MPPI and the WHF, 
however, remove the out-of-focus light and do not ‘break’ the cell membrane into a series of spots ( Fig. 5g,h ).
abc d
ef gh i j
kl m n oFigure 5  | Deconvolution results. ( a–d) A 
specimen consisting mostly of puncta and thin filaments (images courtesy of T. Karpova, National Cancer Institute). The original image slice ( a) and deconvolutions obtained using 
NNS ( b), MPPI ( c) and WHF ( d) methods. 
Bar, 5 µm. (e–j) H. capsulatum  with the cell 
membrane fluorescently labeled (images courtesy of W. Goldman, Washington University School of Medicine). The original image slice (e) and deconvolutions obtained using NNS 
(f), MPPI ( g) and WHF ( h), JvC ( i) and the 
expectation-maximization maximum-likelihood (j) methods. Bar, 2 µm. (k–o) Sections through 
the center of a 3D image stack of a 10- µm 
diameter polystyrene microsphere (images courtesy of J.G. McNally, National Cancer Institute). Top, lateral section; Bottom, axial section. The original image slice ( k) 
and deconvolutions obtained using a MPPI (l), JvC (500 iterations, smoothing every 10 
iterations; m), constraint maximum-likelihood 
expectation maximization (3,000 iterations; n) 
and gradient-based method (100 iterations; o). 
Bar, 10 µm.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 929REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsConstraint deconvolution.  One serious drawback of the meth-
ods described above is that they cannot estimate frequency com-ponents of the specimen at frequencies that are not passed by the objective. These frequencies, however, are often necessary for the correct estimation of the specime n. For example, image sections 
through the center of a 3D image stack of a 10- µm-diameter poly-
styrene microsphere with a thick supe rficial fluorescent layer 1 to 2 
µm thick are shown in Figure 5i . This image has two problems. (i) 
There is no fluorescent dye in the core of the microsphere but the image shows a bright core and (ii) although the specimen is a sphere, the xz section has a diamond shape in addition to dimmer ‘butterfly 
wings’ . We have demonstrated that the diamond shape results from the lack of important frequency components
32. Because the image 
lacks frequency components, the MPPI can not recover the spheri-cal shape of the specimen and only partially removes the ‘butter-
fly wings’ from the image ( Fig. 5j ). The results from the WHF (not 
shown) are similar. Because these frequency components are not in the image, it is necessary to derive algorithms that use informa-tion about the specimen known a priori . This information might 
be the fact that fluorescence is neither negative nor infinite or that the specimen has a finite size. Prior knowledge about the specimen is used to enforce constraints that the specimen estimate must sat-isfy. Incorporating these constraints into the algorithm usually leads to iterative methods that perform se veral operations over and over 
until certain criteria are satisfied.
The most widely used methods for constraint deconvolution 
are the Jansson-van Cittert (JvC) method of repeated convolu-tion
33 as modified in reference 34 and commercially distributed by 
Applied Precision; the constrained least squares method developed by Carrington
35,36 and distributed by Scanalitics; and the maxi-
mum-likelihood image estimation independently developed by Holmes
37,38 and by Conchello4,39,40 from the expectation maximi-
zation formalism41. The Holmes method is commercially distributed 
by AutoQuant Imaging and the Conchello method is freely available online (http://www.omrfcosm.omrf.org). Although the JvC method does correctly find the dark core of the microsphere and removes the ‘butterfly wings’ it still shows the diamond shape in the axial section (Fig. 5m ). The expectation maximization–maximum likelihood 
method recovers the spherical shape of the specimen albeit at the expense of a large number of iterations ( Fig. 5n ). The maximum-
likelihood estimation method, however, can be improved by using a different method than expectation maximization to find the maxi-mum of the likelihood function. In fact, by using a gradient-based algorithm we found a substantial increase in speed with little or no degradation in performance ( Fig. 5o )
42.
New wide-field techniques
In recent years, new methods for optical sectioning microscopy have been developed for wide-field illumination, which do not use uni-
form illumination. Instead, these methods give some spatial structure to the illumination. The most notable ones are aperture-correlation microscopy
43–46 and sine-modulated illumination microscopy. The 
former method, however, required a large number of images to be collected at each focal plane and thus found little application. The latter, which is more often called structured illumination microscopy (SIM), is a simpler and more powerful method for optical sectioning 
microscopy
47–55. In SIM, a sinusoidal illumination pattern is focused 
by the objective into the in-focus plane of the specimen and an image I
1 is collected. The pattern is then shifted laterally by a third of the cycle of the pattern, and a second image I2 is collected. The illumina-
tion pattern is shifted a second time a third of its cycle and a third image is recorded. Each of these images contains both in-focus and out-of-focus information. The in-focus information, however, is modulated by the sinusoidal illumination pattern, whereas the out-of-focus information is much less affected by the structure of the illumination. There are two simple ways to remove the sinusoidal illumination pattern from the images. One is by simply averaging of the three images. The result, however, is the image that would have been obtained with a conventional wide-field microscope. That is, it contains the out-of-focus light. The other is to calculate
The pairwise subtraction of images removes the parts that are 
common to the images in the pair. This is mostly out-of-focus light that was not affected by the structure of the illumination. Thus, the resulting image contains little out-of-focus light. In fact the depth resolution possible with the SIM is similar to that achievable with the CSM. T o our knowledge, there is currently only one commercial version of the SIM, namely the Zeiss Apotome (Karl Zeiss). Because the price of the Apotome is much less than that of a laser CSM, the SIM is sometimes called a ‘poor-man’s confocal microscope’ .
CONCLUSIONS
Optical sectioning microscopy is a powerful tool for biological inves-tigation, and confocal microscopy is often the method of choice. As explained above, CSMs have the capability to record 3D images that are not affected by out-of-focus light, thus increasing the contrast and resolution of the recorded image. In addition, the wide selection of available fluorescent probes, lasers and filters makes the CSM a powerful tool for multispectral imaging when aided by linear unmix-ing. In addition to the CSM, the ‘digital confocal microscope’ and the ‘poor-man’s confocal microscope’ provide alternative methods for 3D microscopy that have image collection times much shorter than those typical of the CSM. The interested user is encouraged to read available literature 
56–68.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/
1. Helmchen, F. & Denk, W. Deep tissue two-photon microscopy. Nat. Methods  2, 
932–940 (2005).
2. Minsky, M. (US patent 3013467, 1961).3. Minsky, M. Memoir on inventing the confocal scanning microscope. Scanning  
10, 128–139 (1988).
4. Conchello, J-A., Kim, J.J. & Hansen, E.W. Enhanced 3D reconstruction from 
confocal scanning microscope images. II: depth discrimination vs. signal-to-noise ratio in partially confocal images. Appl. Opt.  33, 3740–3750 (1994).
5. Sandison, D.R., Piston, D., Williams, R.M. & Webb, W.W. Quantitative comparison 
of background rejection, signal-to-nose ratio, and resolution in confocal and full-field laser scanning microscopes. Appl. Opt.  34, 3576–3588 (1995).
6. Tsien, R.Y. & Waggoner, A. Fluorophores for confocal microscopy. In Handbook 
of biological confocal microscopy  (ed. Pawley, J.B.) 267–279 (Plenum Press, New 
York, 1995).
7. Petràn, M., Hardvsky, M., Egger, M.D. & Galambos, R. Tandem scanning 
reflected-light microscope. J. Opt. Soc. Am.  58, 661–664 (1968).
8. Petràn, M., Boyde, A. & Hardvsky, M. Direct view confocal microscopy. In 
Confocal Microscopy  (ed. Wilson, T.) 245–284 (Academic Press, New York, 1990).Ip =            ( I1 – I2)2 + (I1 – I3)2 + (I3 – I2)2     . 2
3
930 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methods9. Kino, G.S. & Xiao, G.Q. Real-time scanning microscopes. In Confocal Microscopy  
(ed. Wilson, T.) 361–388 (Academic Press, London, 1990).
10. Lichtman, J.W. Confocal microscopy. Sci. Am.  271, 30–35 (1994).
11. Lichtman, J.W. High-resolution imaging of synaptic structure with a simple 
confocal microscope. New Biol.  1, 75–82 (1989).
12. Lichtman, J.W. & Sunderland, W.J. (Washington Univeristy; US patent 4884880, 
1990).
13. Inoué, S. & Inoué, T. Direct-view high-speed confocal scanner: The CSU-10. In 
Cell biological applications of confocal microscopy  (ed. Matsumoto, B.) 88–128 
(Academic Press, New York, 2002).
14. Tanaami, T. et al. High-speed 1-frame/ms scanning confocal microscope with a 
microlens and a Nipkow disk. Appl. Opt.  41, 4704–4708 (2002).
15. Conchello, J-A. & Lichtman, J.W. Theoretical analysis of a rotating-disk 
partially confocal scanning microscope. Appl. Opt.  33, 585–596 (1994).
16. Stutz, G.E. Laser scanning system design. Photonics Spectra  24, 113–116 
(1990).
17. Tsien, R.Y. & Bacskai, B.J. Video-rate confocal microscopy. In Handbook of 
biological confocal microscopy  (ed. Pawley, J.B.) 459–478 (Plenum Press, New 
York, 1995).
18. Callamaras, N. & Parker, I. Construction of a confocal microscope for real-time 
x-y and x-z imaging. Cell Calcium  26, 271–279 (1999).
19. Gratton, E. & vande Ven, M. J. Laser sources for confocal microscopy. In 
Handbook of biological confocal microscopy  (ed. Pawley, J.B.) 69–97 (Plenum 
Press, New York, 1995).
20. Sandison, D.R., Williams, R.M., Wells, K.S., Stricker, J. & Webb, W.W. 
Quantitative fluorescence confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). In Handbook of biological confocal microscopy  (ed. Pawley, J.B.) 39–53 (Plenum 
Press, New York, 1995).
21. Srinath, M.D. & Rajasekaran, P.K. Statistical Signal Processing with Applications  
(John Willey and Sons, New York, 1979).
22. Kay, S.M. Fundamentals of statistical signal processing (Prentice Hall, 1993).23. Lichtman, J. & Conchello, J.-A. Fluorescence microscopy. Nat. Methods  2, 
910–919 (2005).
24. Shaner, N.C., Steinbach, P.A. & Tsien, R.Y. A guide to choosing fluorescent 
proteins. Nat. Methods  2, 905–909 (2005).
25. Zimmermann, T. Spectral imaging and linear unmixing in light microscopy. In 
Microscopy techniques advances in biochemical engineering/biotechnology  95, 
245–265 (2005).
26. Zimmermann, T., Rietdorf, J. & Pepperkok, R. Spectral imaging and its 
applications in live cell microscopy. FEBS Lett.  546, 87–92 (2003).
27. Zimmermann, T., Rietdorf, J., Girod, A., Georget, V. & Pepperkok, R. Spectral 
imaging and linear un-mixing enables improved FRET efficiency with a novel GFP2-YFP FRET pair. FEBS Lett.  531, 245–249 (2002).
28. Hiraoka, Y., Shimi, T. & Haraguchi, T. Multispectral imaging fluorescence 
microscopy for living cells. Cell Struct. Funct.  27, 367–374 (2002).
29. Conchello, J.-A. An overview of three-dimensional and four-dimensional 
microscopy by computational deconvolution. In Cell Imaging-Methods Express  
(ed. Stevens, D.) 181–204 (2005).
30. Preza, C., Miller, M.I. & Thomas, L.J. Jt. & McNally, J. G. Regularized linear 
method for reconstruction of three-dimensional microscopic objects from optical sections. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 9, 219–228 (1992).
31. Frieden, B.R. Probability, statistical optics, and data testing.  206–210 (Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 1982).
32. McNally, J.G., Preza, C., Conchello, J-A. & Thomas, L.J., Jr. Artifacts in 
computational optical sectioning microscopy. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A  11, 1056–
1067 (1994).
33. Frieden, B.R. Image enhancement and restoration. In Picture processing and 
image filtering  (ed. Huang, T.S.) 179–248 (Springer-Verlag, New York, 1975).
34. Agard, D.A. Optical sectioning microscopy. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng.  13, 
191–219 (1984).
35. Carrington, W.A. Image restoration in 3D microscopy with limited data in 
Bioimaging and two-dimensional spectroscopy  (ed. Smith, L.C.) 72–83 (SPIE 
Press, Bellingham, Washington, 1990).
36. Carrington, W.A. & Fogarty, K.E. (US patent 5047968, 1991).37. Holmes, T.J. Maximum-likelihood image restoration adapted for noncoherent 
optical imaging. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A  5, 666–673 (1988).
38. Holmes, T.J. & Liu, Y-H. Richardson-Lucy/maximum likelihood image 
restoration algorithm for fluorescence microscopy: further testing. Appl. Opt.  
28, 4930–4938 (1989).
39. Conchello, J-A. Super-resolution and convergence properties of the expectation 
maximization for maximum-likelihood deconvolution of incoherent images. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A  15, 2609–2619 (1998).
40. Conchello, J-A. & Hansen, E.W. Enhanced 3D reconstruction from confocal 
scanning microscope images I: Deterministic and maximum likelihood reconstructions. Appl. Opt.  29, 3795–3804 (1990).
41. Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M. & Rubin, D. B. Maximum likelihood from 
incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J. R. Stat. Soc.  B 39 1–38 (1977).
42. Markham, J. & Conchello, J-A. Fast maximum-likelihood image restoration 
algorithms for three-dimensional fluorescence microscopy. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A  
18, 1062–1071 (2001).
43. Hanley, Q.S., Verveer, P.J. & Jovin, T.M. Optical sectioning fluorescence 
spectroscopy in a progammagle array microscope. Appl. Spectrosc.  52, 783–789 
(1998).
44. Verveer, P.J., Hanley, Q.S., Verbeek, P.W., van Vliet, L.J. & Jovin, T.M. Theory of 
confocal fluorescence imaging in the programmable array microscope (PAM). J. 
Microsc.  189, 192–198 (1998).
45. Wilson, T., Juskaitis, R., Neil, M.A.A. & Kozubek, M. Confocal microscopy by 
aperture correlation. Opt. Lett.  21, 1879–1881 (1996).
46. Dixon, T. Microscopy - Random mask brightness image. Nature  383, 760–761 
(1996).
47. Neil, M.A.A., Juškaitis, R. & Wilson, T. Method for obtaining sectioning by 
using structured light in a conventional microscope. 
Opt. Lett.  25, 1361–1363 
(1997).
48. Wilson, T., Neil, M.A.A. & Juškaitis, R. Optically Sectioned images in wide-
field fluorescence microscopy. In Three-dimensional and multidimensional 
microscopy: Image Acquisition and Processing V  (eds. Cogswell, C.J., Conchello, 
J.-A., Lerner, J.M., Lu, T. & Wilson, T.) 4–6 (SPIE Press, Bellingham, Washington, 1998).
49. Gustafsson, M.G.L., Agard, D.A. & Sedat, J.W. Doubling the lateral resolution 
of wide-field fluorescence microscopy using structured illumination. In Three-
dimensional and multidimensional microscopy: image acquisition and processing VII (eds. Conchello, J.-A., Cogswell, C.J. & Wilson, T.) 141–150 (SPIE Press, 
Belingham, WA, 2000).
50. Gustafsson, M.G.L., Agard, D.A. & Sedat, J.W. Surpasing the lateral resolution 
by a factor of two using structured illumination microscopy. J. Microsc.  198, 
82–87 (2000) .
51. Neil, M.A.A., Juškaitis, R. & Wilson, T. Real time 3D fluorescence microscopy by 
two beam interferece illumination. Opt. Commun.  153, 1–4 (1998).
52. Neil, M.A.A., Juškaitis, R. & Wilson, T. A light efficient optically sectioning 
microscope. J. Microsc.  189, 114–117 (1998).
53. Wilson, T., Neil, M.A.A. & Juškaitis, R. Real-time three-dimensional imaging of 
macroscopic structures. J. Microsc.  191, 116–118 (1998).
54. Gustafsson, M.G.L. Extended resolution fluorescence microscopy. Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol.  9, 627–634 (1999) .
55. Fedosseev, R., Belyaev, Y., Frohn, J. & Stemmer, A. Structured light 
illumination for extended resolution in fluorescence microscopy. Opt. Lasers 
Eng. 43, 403–314 (2005).
56. Conn, P.M. (ed.) Confocal Microscopy  (Academic Press, New York, 1999).
57. Diaspro, A. (ed.). Confocal and two-photon microscopy: Foundations, 
applications and advances. (John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2001).
58. Inoué, S. & Spring, K.R. Video Microscopy. The Fundamentals  (Plenum Press, 
New York, 1997).
59. Matsumoto, B. (ed.). Cell biological applications of confocal microscopy  
(Academic Press, New York, 2003).
60. Murphy, D.B. Fundamentals of light microscopy and electronic imaging (Wiley-
Liss, New York, 2001).
61. Pawley, J.B. (ed.). Handbook of biological confocal microscopy  (Plenum Press, 
New York, 1995).
62. Paddock, S. (ed.). Confocal Microscopy  (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001).
63. Periasamy, A. (ed.). Methods in Cellular Imaging  (Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2001).
64. Sheppard, C.J.R. & Shotton, D.M. Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy  (BIOS 
Scientific Publisers, Oxford, 1997).
65. Stevens, J.K., Mills, L.R. & Trogadis, J.E. Three-dimensinoal confocal 
microscopy: Volume investigation of biological systems  (Academic Press, New 
York, 1994).
66. Toomre, D. & Manstein, D.J. Lighting up the cell surface with evanescent wave 
microscopy. Trends Cell Biol.  11, 298–303 (2001).
67. Tsien, R.Y. Imagining imaging’s future. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol.  
4 (Suppl.), 
SS16–SS21 (2003).
68. Yuste, R., Lanni, F. & Konnerth, A. (eds.) Imaging neurons: A laboratory manual 
(Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, 2000).
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 931REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsDeep tissue two-photon microscopy
Fritjof Helmchen1 & Winfried Denk2
With few exceptions biological tissues strongly scatter light, making high-resolution 
deep imaging impossible for traditional ⎯including confocal ⎯fluorescence microscopy. 
Nonlinear optical microscopy, in particular two photon–excited fluorescence microscopy, has overcome this limitation, providing large depth penetration mainly because even multiply scattered signal photons can be assigned to their origin as the result of localized nonlinear signal generation. Two-photon microscopy thus allows cellular imaging several hu ndred microns d eep in various organs of living animals. 
Here we review fundamental concepts of nonlinear microscopy and discuss conditions relevant for achieving large imaging depths in intact tissue.
Microscopists have always desired to look inside vari-
ous organ tissues to study structure, function and dysfunction of their cellular constituents. In the past, this has frequently required tissue extraction and his-tological preparation to gain access. Traditional optical microscopy techniques, which use linear (one-photon) absorption processes for contrast generation, are lim-ited to use near the tissue surface (less than 100 µm) 
for high-resolution imaging because at greater depths strong and multiple light scattering blurs the images. Scattering particularly strongly affects signal strength in confocal microscopy, which achieves three-dimensional resolution and optical sectioning with a detection pin-hole that rejects all light that appears not to originate from the focus.
During the past two decades new optical micro-
scopy techniques have been developed that use non-linear light-matter interactions to generate signal contrast (reviewed in
1–7). Nonlinear optical micro-
scopy techniques have special features that make them less sensitive to scattering and thus are well suited for high-resolution imaging in tissues. In particular, two photon–excited fluorescence laser-scanning microscopy (2PLSM)
8, combined with in vivo  fluorescence label-
ing techniques, has opened a rapidly expanding field of imaging studies in intact tissues and living animals. Specimens as diverse as lymphatic organs
9,10, kidney11, 
heart12, skin13 and brain2,4 can now be examined in detail at depths of up to one millimeter14, while leaving 
the tissue intact. Moreover, 2PLSM is used as a tool to study the development, progression and potential treat-ment of pathological conditions such as tumors
15 and 
Alzheimer disease16.
Although 2PLSM by now is a well-established tech-
nique, using turn-key laser sources and commercial microscope systems, it remains important to understand the underlying principles and key technical aspects, espe-cially when optimizing a microscope system to achieve large imaging depths. In this review, we discuss physi-cal principles, with special emphasis on imaging-system parameters important for deep imaging, and summarize technical issues regarding the application of 2PLSM for high-resolution imaging in living animals.
NONLINEAR OPTICAL MICROSCOPY
In optical microscopy one can distinguish between lin-ear and nonlinear excitation. Traditional techniques, including confocal microscopy, generate contrast from light-matter interactions, in which the elemen-tary process involves a single photon and which there-fore depend linearly on the incident light intensity. Nonlinear techniques are fundamentally different in that they use ‘higher-order’ light-matter interactions involving multiple photons for contrast generation. The nonlinear nature of these interactions leads to qualita-tively new imaging properties.
1Department of Neurophysiology, Brain Research Institute, University of Zurich, CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland. 2Department of 
Biomedical Optics, Max Planck Institute for Medical Research, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Correspondence should be addressed t o F.H. 
(helmchen@hifo.unizh.ch) or W.D. (winfried.denk@mpimf-heidelberg.mpg.de).
PUBLISHED ONLINE 18 NOVEMBER 2005; DOI:10.1038/NMETH818
932 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsMultiphoton absorption
Several different nonlinear processes can occur when light interacts with matter ( Fig. 1 ). Most widely used in biological imaging is fluo-
rescence excitation by two-photon absorption
17. Two photons that 
arrive ‘simultaneously’ (within ~0.5 fs) at a molecule combine their energies to promote the molecule to an excited state, which then pro-ceeds along the normal fluoresc ence-emission (or photochemical-
reaction) pathway
1,17. Similarly, three or more photons can combine 
to cause excitation.
The efficiency of multiphoton absorption depends on physi-
cal properties of the molecule (the ‘multiphoton absorption cross-section’)
5,18, and on the spatial and temporal distribution 
of the excitation light. Most nonlinear processes have in com-mon that the transition probabilities are extremely low at ‘nor-mal’ light intensities. T o generate sufficient signal, excitation light has to be concentrated in space and time. High spatial den-sities are (cheaply) generated by focusing a laser beam through a high numerical aperture (NA) objective. Concentration in the time domain requires the use of (expensive) lasers that emit ‘ultrashort’ pulses (less than a picosecond long) with cor-respondingly high peak intensities. For laser pulses of width τ occurring at a rate f
R, the signal is enhanced by a factor of 
1 / (τ fR)n – 1 compared to continuous-wave illumination, where 
n is the number of photons involved in the elementary process. 
Lasers typically used in 2PLSM provide 100-fs pulses at about 100 MHz, with a ‘two-photon advantage’
1 of about 105.
Other nonlinear effects
Multiphoton absorption is but one of several possible nonlinear interactions
7. Another is 
optical-harmonic generation, in which two or more photons are ‘simultaneously’ scat-tered, generating a single photon of exactly twice (thrice, and so on) the incoming quantum energy ( Fig. 1a ). Harmonic gen-
eration requires no actual absorption but is enhanced near a resonance, albeit at the expense of parasitic absorption
6. It also dif-
fers from multiphoton absorption in that it is a coherent, that is, phase-preserving process, which causes speckles, possible cancellation, predominantly forward-directed emission and supralinear dependence on the chromo-phore density. In practice, only second-har-monic
6 and third-harmonic generation19,20 
have been used. Second-harmonic (but not third-harmonic) generation depends on the absence of inversion symmetry, which not only requires that individual molecules are inversion-asymmetric (as most biological molecules are) but also that they are spa-tially ordered. Second-harmonic generation has, therefore, been useful for investigating ordered structural protein assemblies such as collagen fibers
21or microtubuli22. Similarly, 
dyes that are incorporated preferentially in one leaflet of the plasma membrane can be used to detect membrane voltage
23,24. A further process used for microscopy is ‘coherent anti-Stokes Raman 
scattering’ ( Fig. 1a ), which is sensitive to molecular vibration states 
and can be used to detect the presence of specific chemical bond types
25,26.
Why nonlinear is more than linear
All nonlinear microscopy techniques require expensive pulsed laser systems to achieve sufficient excitation rates. Two major advantages make the investment worthwhile. First, because multiple excitation photons combine their quantum energies in nonlinear microscopy, the photons generated (or the transitions excited) have higher ener-gies than the excitation light making emission ‘bluer’ than the excita-tion, which is different from traditional fluorescence. For commonly used fluorescent markers, multiphoton absorption occurs in the near-infrared wavelength range (700–1,000 nm), whereas emission occurs in the visible spectral range. Near-infrared light not only pen-etrates deeper into scattering tissue ( Box 1 ) but is also generally less 
phototoxic owing to the lack of significant endogenous (one-photon) absorbers in most tissues
27.
The second major advantage of two-photon absorption and, 
in fact, of all nonlinear contrast mechanisms, is that the signal ( S) 
depends supralinearly ( S ∝ In) on the density of photons, that is, the 
light intensity ( I). As a consequence, when focusing the laser beam 
through a microscope objective, multiphoton absorption is spatially 
Figure 1  | Nonlinear optical microscopy. ( a) Jablonski diagram, illustrating two-photon absorption (2PA), 
second-harmonic generation (SHG) and coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS). Note that in second-harmonic generation and Raman scattering no actual electronic excitation takes place. ( b) Spatial 
confinement of signal generation with nonlinear excitation. Visible (‘blue-ish’) light is used for excitation in single-photon microscopy, whereas near-infrared (‘red-ish’) light is used in 2PLSM. In single-photon microscopy an entire cone of fluorescence light (green) is generated, whereas nonlinear signal production is localized to the vicinity of the focal spot. ( c) Generic nonlinear laser-scanning microscope. A laser source 
provides near-infrared ultrashort pulses; intensity and beam size are adjusted before coupling the laser beam to the microscope. The focal lengths of the scan lens ( f
S), the tube lens ( fT) and the objective ( fO) are 
indicated. Two-photon excited fluorescence (2PEF), which is isotropically emitted (inset), can be collected in epi- and/or trans-collection mode, using whole-area detection by photomultiplier tubes (PMTs). Forward-directed optical-harmonic and Raman signals are detected in transcollection mode in transparent samples. For in vivo  experiments epicollection is used exclusively.PMTbLinear NonlinearScan
lens
Tube
lens 
ObjectivePMTfS+fTfS
fT
fOxy scanner c
Epicollection
Transcollection10 ns 100 fs
Tunable 
pulsed
NIR laser
(700–1,000 nm)Beam size Intensity
CondensorTimea
Ground
stateExcited
state2PA SHG CARS
Virtual
states
Specimen
SHG2PEFCollection lens
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 933REVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsconfined to the perifocal region ( Fig. 1b ). 
The absence of multiphoton absorption in out-of-focus planes contrasts with confocal microscopy, where (single-pho-ton) absorption occurs within the entire excitation light cone. The lack of out-of-focus excitation in nonlinear microscopy further reduces photodamage and thus increases tissue viability, which is crucial for long-term imaging
28. Localization 
of excitation also provides excitation-based three-dimensional resolution with no need for spatially resolved detection through a confocal pinhole. By the same token, multiphoton absorption allows highly localized photomanipulations, such as photobleaching and photolytic release of caged compounds, within femtoliter volumes
29–31, which, however, is beyond 
the scope of this review.
Localization of excitation is main-
tained even in strongly scattering tissue because the density of scattered excita-tion photons generally is too low to gen-erate significant signal, making nonlin-ear microscopy far less sensitive to light scattering than traditional microscopy (Fig. 2 ). This is of paramount impor-
tance for deep imaging, because it means that all fluorescence photons are known to originate from near the focus and thus can provide useful signal. The best detec-tion strategy therefore becomes: collect as many photons as possible, wherever they seem to come from, but look at their color. Scattering does, however, increase the spatioangular range (the phase space) within which fluorescence light emerges from the tissue so that special detection optics is needed to optimize fluorescence collection from deep foci.
A TWO-PHOTON MICROSCOPE SETUP
In many respects, a 2PLSM is similar to a confocal microscope. The main differences are the excitation laser and the detection pathway. Commercial confocal micro-scopes can be converted into multiphoton microscopes
8, but major modifications 
and partial rebuilding may be required to achieve optimal perfor-mance, especially for deep imaging. Alternatively, the microscope can be custom built, which is cheaper but requires technical exper-tise or help from specialized companies. Custom-built microscopes typically lack a microscope corpus, a design that is advantageous for in vivo  imaging because it provides space for placing the ani-
mal, and imposes fewer constraints on the size and position of the detectors. The availability of laser-scanning software
32,33 facilitates 
such custom designs. Here we only describe the basic microscope design; detailed instructions are available elsewhere
5,33–35.A multiphoton microscope requires a pulsed laser source ( Fig. 
1c). Historically, the use of nonlinear light-matter interactions in a 
microscope only became possible after the development of ultrafast pulsed lasers (for a collection of reprints see 36). Whereas the first two-photon images
8 were taken using a lab-built laser system, suit-
able near-infrared femtosecond laser systems have now been com-mercially available for more than a decade. Most widely-used is the Titanium-sapphire (Ti:sapphire) oscillator, with a repetition rate (~100 MHz) that matches typical fluorescence lifetimes, thus balanc-ing excitation efficiency and onset of saturation. The wavelength can BOX 1 LIGHT SCATTERING IN BIOLOGICAL TISSUE
In most biological tissues absorption of light is negligible compared to scattering, 
particularly in the near-infrared wavelength range. Scattering is the deflection of a light ‘ray’ from its original direction; if the photon energy stays unchanged, it is termed ‘elastic’. Elastic scattering depends on refractive index inhomogeneities, which are present even in glass but are much stronger in tissue because cells are a heterogeneous 
mixture of molecules and supramolecular structures with varying molecular 
polarizabilities. The strength of scattering is described by the ‘mean free path’ ( l
s), the 
average distance between scattering eve nts. The lik elihood and angular distribution 
of scattering depend on refractive index variation, object size and wavelength λ. 
For very small objects (such as isolated atoms or molecules in a gas) scattering is nearly isotropic and strongly wavelength-dependent ( ∝ λ
–4; ‘Rayleigh scattering’). 
For objects comparable in size to the wavelength (as in cells) scattering is directed mostly in the forward direction. This can be quantified by the anisotropy parameter (g) or by the ‘transport mean free path’, l
t = ls / (1 – g), which is the distance after 
which ‘direction memory’ is lost. Measurements in brain gray matter yielded values for l
s of 50–100 µm at 630 nm in extracted tissue50,51 and of about 200 µm at 800 nm in 
vivo43,53. Scattering decreases with wavelength albeit less than expected for Rayleigh 
scattering43. The anisotropy parameter generally is high ( ≈0.9) in brain tissue51.
In nonlinear optical microscopy only ballistic (non-scattered) photons contribute to 
signal generation in the focal volume. The ballistic power fol lows a L ambert-Beer–like 
exponential decline with imaging depth z  
with length constant ls and surface power PO. Because of the quadratic intensity-
dependence in 2PLSM, the fluorescence signal declines as
Conversely, we need an exponentially increasing laser power entering the 
surface ( P0 ∝ ez/l) to maintain the same ballistic intensity at the focus. The 
reduction in focal intensity depends on ls and not lt, because even a small 
deflection from the original path causes a ray to miss the focus ( Fig. 2 ). In 
contrast, the forward-directed angular distribution of scattering is important for the calculation of the near-surface background
103 (P. Theer and W.D., unpublished 
data). Both ls and g depend not only on tissue type but can change substantially 
with age and upon re moval of the tissue from the animal43. Surface scattering can 
become important if the beam crosses between media with substantially different refractive indices, for example when imaging through the skull.
Scattering of fluorescence photons is important for the detection process. 
Because of the short mean free path of visible light, the ballistic fraction becomes quickly irrelevant with increasing focal depth. For sufficient depth, multiply scattered fluorescence light leaves the sample from a diffusely radiating region on the surface, which has a full-width-at-half-maximum intensity (FWHM) of about 1.5 × the focal depth, independent of the scattering length
44.Pball = P0 e–z/ls (1)
F2PE ∝ (e–z/l)2 = e–2z/ls s (2)
934 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsbe tuned over a large range (670–1,070 nm), allowing the excitation 
of many  fluorophores used in biology18. Key parameters that have to 
be considered when choosing a laser system are available power at the desired wavelength and pulse length. An optimal pulse length, how-ever, cannot be strictly defined. Depending on the microscope design, relatively short pulses (<100 fs) at the laser output may end up as longer pulses at the sample than initially longer pulses will end up because they are broadened by dispersive optical glass components in the excitation path to a larger extent. Dispersive broadening can be precompensated by a prism or grating arrangement
37,38, thus restor-
ing the initial pulse width at the sample and maximizing two-photon absorption. Another complicating factor is that, at least at high power, photobleaching and photodamage depend more-than-quadratically on excitation intensity
39–41. Hence, for a given microscope setup and 
specimen, an optimal pulse length (or even pulse shape42) may have 
to be empirically determined, requiring a compromise between fluo-rescence yield and photodamage.
Compact Ti:sapphire laser systems are now available, no longer 
requiring user adjustments and providing computer-controlled wavelength tuning over a broad range. Although these laser systems are more user-friendly than a mercury arc lamp, it is still helpful to understand the characteristics of the laser beam, in particular if one aims to optimize the system for deep imaging. The available output power is one of the limiting factors for the maximum imaging depth but the average power (~1W) provided by these commercial systems over the central portion of the tuning range is sufficient for most applications, even with losses in the optical pathway.
The excitation pathway of a typical multiphoton microscope is 
as follows (all optics should be optimized for near-infrared light). Starting from the laser, the beam is expanded using a telescope (using either curved mirrors or lenses) followed or preceded by a laser inten-sity modulator ( Fig. 1c ). Because the laser beam is linearly polar-
ized, the intensity can be adjusted easily, albeit slowly, by using a λ/2 
waveplate and a polarizer. Alternatively, acousto- or electro-optical devices can be used, providing high extinction ratios and permitting rapid intensity changes. Such devices can also be used to automati-cally compensate for power loss with depth if the scattering length in the tissue is known ( Box 1 ). The beam is then scanned by a xy-
deflection module (usually a pair of galvanometric scanners) and further expanded by the combination of scan and tube lens in order to ‘fill’ the back aperture of the microscope objective, which focuses 
the light into the sample.
Although the descanned confocal detector pathway (not shown 
in Fig. 1c ) can be used to obtain two photon–excited fluorescence 
images in clear specimens, clipping at the pinhole will decrease the available signal by several orders of magnitude deep in scattering specimens. Hence a simpler but better detector arrangement is used in nonlinear microscopy to capture as many of the potentially highly scattered signal photons as possible. In most systems a ‘whole-area’ epi-detection scheme is used, with all light that is collected by the objective also guided onto the detector
1,33,34,43,44. For small or trans-
parent specimens trans -collection through a high-NA condensor can 
be used instead or, better, in addition, capturing even more light ( Fig. 
1c). Because of the preferentially forward-directed signal, trans-col-
lection is the principal detection mode in optical-harmonic genera-tion and Raman scattering. In deep, scattering specimens, however, no light will penetrate, and epicollection is the only mode that can be used. Epicollection results in surprisingly little signal loss pro-vided the detector’s field of view is large enough because most signal photons eventually leave the tissue surface after multiple scattering events. For optical-harmonic generation and Raman scattering, the detection field of view needs to be  especially large because the initially 
forward-propagating light has to ‘turn around’ first ( Fig. 2 ).
OPTIMIZATION FOR DEEP IMAGING
We now consider how fluorescence generation and detection can be optimized for deep imaging and what fundamentally limits the imaging depth.
Excitation wavelength
T o look deep inside tissue sufficient signal needs to be generated, which means that sufficient light needs to reach the focus with-out being scattered (the ‘ballistic’ fraction). Less-scattering long-wavelength light thus should allow deeper penetration ( Box 1 ). 
The optimal wavelength for deep tissue imaging is, however, also affected by the two-photon absorption spectrum of the fluorophores used and by the fact that less power is available at the extremes of the laser tuning range.
Beam size
Loss of excitation power, for example, by clipping at apertures in the light path, lowers the achievable maximum depth. Although many of the lenses in the beam path will allow the passage of larger beams than speci-fied, this is not true for the back aperture of the objective lens, which defines the NA and thus determines the achievable spatial reso-lution ( Box 2 ). Because the radial intensity 
profile of a laser beam is Gaussian-shaped, an exact match to an aperture is impossible, and a compromise between resolution and transmitted power has to be found
33. The 
width of a Gaussian beam is often defined No scatter Scatter No scatter ScatterExcitation
Fluorescence
Objectiveθf
θNA
Figure 2  | Signal generation and fluorescence collection in clear tissue (no scatter) and in scattering 
tissue (scatter). In clear tissue all excitation light reaches the focus, but in scattering tissue, scattering (even by a small angle) causes light rays to miss the focus and be lost to signal generation. This leads to a roughly exponential decrease in excitation with depth. In clear tissue only fluorescence light rays initially emitted into the collection cone, determined by the objective’s NA, can be detected, but in scattering tissue fluorescence light is (multiply) scattered and may even ‘turn around’. Fluorescence light apparently originates from a large field of view but a larger fraction than in the nonscattering case is actually within the angular acceptance range θ
f of the objective.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 935REVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsby where intensity drops to 1/e2 (13.7%). With a fill factor of one, 
defined here as the 1/e2-intensity width being equal to the back-aper-
ture diameter, power transmission is 86% ( Fig. 3 ). The lateral and 
axial resolution (defined, for example, by the 1/e-width of the radial and axial profile of the focal spot
5) are nearly unchanged in this case 
compared to uniform illumination (8% and 4% increases, respec-tively). A further reduction of beam size improves power transmis-sion but broadens the focal volume as the ‘effective’ NA is reduced (Fig. 3 ). The resolution loss is, however, smaller than it would be for a 
‘top-hat’ beam because for a Gaussian profile large-angle rays are still present up to the nominal NA of the objective. Note that large-angle rays are more likely to be scattered than central rays simply because they travel a longer distance to the focus, which leads to a reduction of the effective NA with increasing depth in scattering tissue.
For objects that are large compared to the focal volume, a reduction 
of the effective NA does not lead to a reduction in the total two-pho-ton excited fluorescence
45; smaller structures will, however, become 
dimmer. Underfilling the back apertu re also lowers the peak intensity, 
potentially reducing photobleaching and photodamage, which have been found to have a more-than-quadratic intensity dependence in some cases
39–41. Finally, the narrower light cone of a lower effective 
NA is less likely to run into obstacles (for example, blood vessels) as it penetrates the tissue.
Pulse width
A complicating factor is that ultrashort pulses are broadened (‘dis-persed’) while propagating in material, reducing the two-photon absorption efficiency. The underlying physical principle is that lon-ger-wavelength (‘red’) components of the pulse spectrum travel faster in optical materials than short-wavelength (‘blue’) components, so that the pulse is lengthened and ‘chirped’ (frequency-modulated). It is possible to compensate for the group-delay dispersion of the Image formation in a microscope is described using the image 
of a point (for example, of a fluorophore), the so-called point-spread function (PSF). The image of any object is obtained convolving the object intensity distribution with the PSF. The three-dimensional PSF depends on the wavelength and the NA and, for an aberration-free lens of circular aperture, is given by
104
J0 denotes the zero-order Bessel function and v = k(NA)r and 
u = k(NA)2 z are radial and axial normalized optical coordinates 
with the wave number k = 2π / λ. For a confocal microscope 
the detection pinhole adds a second PSF for the detection side. Assuming an ideal pinhole and similar wavelengths for 
illumination and fluorescence the effective PSF isFor 2PLSM with whole-area detection the effective PSF is the 
square of the illumination PSF
with v/2 and u/2 indicating an about doubled illumination 
wavelength compared to confocal. Spatial resolution can be 
quantified using the width of the effective PSF (approximate expressions for PSF widths in 2PLSM are available
5). Because of 
the longer excitation wavelength used in 2PLSM, the theoretical PSF width is larger in 2PLSM than in confocal microscopy. In 
practice, however, the achievable spatial resolutions are similar 
because finite-sized pinholes have to be used in confocal microscopy, broadening the effective PSF
105.
The resolution also depends on the intensity distribution in the 
back aperture of the objective and a pupil function P(ρ), which 
needs to be included ( Fig. 3 ). P(ρ) = 1 for uniform illumination 
and is exp(– ρ2 / T2) for a Gaussian beam ( T is the fill factor 
DBeam / DBA with DBeam the 1/e2-intensity width and DBA the 
back-aperture diameter).PSF( v,u) = ⏐2 ∫P(ρ) J0 (νρ) exp( iuρ2 / 2)ρ dρ⏐1
02
PSFconfocal = PSFillumination × PSFdetection ≈ PSF2(v,u) PSFtwo-photon = (PSFillumination)2  ≈  PSF2 (v/2, u/2)BOX 2  IMAGE FORMATION AND SPATIAL RESOLUTION
(3)
(4)(5)
Figure 3  | Beam size adjustment relative to the 
objective’s back aperture. ( a) ‘Matched’ filling 
of the back aperture with an expanded beam (fill factor of one; power transmission 86%; left). In this case most of the NA is used and almost diffraction-limited resolution is reached. Underfilling of the back aperture (right). The beam is expanded less to optimize power transmission. Because a lower effective NA is used, spatial resolution is reduced. (b) Focal spot size and power transmission as 
a function of the fill factor, the ratio between D
Beam (1/e2-width) and DBA. Radial width ( ωxy) 
and axial width ( ωz) of the focal volume are 
normalized to the values for a uniformly filled back aperture. For fill factors around 0.7, nearly all power is transmitted with only minor losses in lateral and axial resolution.
Objective
FocusFilling 
 Underfilling 
DBA
DBeam/DBATransmission (%) Normalized 
focal spot size
100
90
8070
1.0 0.54
3
2
10
1.0 0.5
ω ωxy zωzωxyωz 1/e2ab
936 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsmicroscope by giving the short-wavelength components a sufficient 
head start (negative ‘prechirp’) so that blue and red components arrive at the sample at the same time, restoring as-short-as-possible (‘band-limited’) pulses at the focus. Such compensation is useful if average power is limiting, for example, because of availability or single photon–induced damage. Prechirping can be achieved by using grating or prism arrangements, which first spatially separate the different-wavelength components, then impose different path lengths, and finally recombine the spectral components. Most com-monly the laser beam double-passes a pair of prisms or gratings, the spacing of which determines the amount of negative prechirp
37,38. A 
disadvantage of prechirp units is that their optical surfaces can lead to power losses.
Pulse repetition rate
The ‘two-photon advantage’ can also be increased by lowering f
R 
while maintaining average power levels. Because in mode-locked lasers f
R is determined by the optical resonator geometry (in most 
commercial systems around 100 MHz), it cannot easily be changed by a substantial factor. Much reduced repetition rates are provided by regenerative amplifiers, which amplify a submultiple of pulses from an oscillator. As a consequence the peak power is increased by as much as 10
8 in extreme cases at the expense of lowering the repeti-
tion rate to around 1 Hz46. For imaging applications at least one pulse 
per pixel is needed, however, limiting the reduction in fR to about a 
factor of 1,000 (assuming 10- µs pixel dwell time). This approach can 
be used to enhance depth penetration47 and has been demonstrated 
for in vivo  imaging14.
Correcting for tissue inhomogeneities
Signal generation is strongly affected if the focus quality is degrad-ed by distortion of the incoming wave front. Such distortions are due to inhomogeneity of the refractive indices within the tissue, as caused for example by blood vessels or clusters of cell bodies acting as microlenses. Wavefront distortions can ⎯if they can be 
measured
48⎯be corrected49 by using wave-shaping elements such 
as deformable mirrors.
Fluorescence collection
As important, or perhaps even more important, as the maximi-zation of signal generation is the optimization of collection and detection efficiencies. Because scattering is more severe for shorter wavelengths, the contribution of ballistic fluorescence photons is minor beyond about one scattering mean-free-path (50–90 µm at 
600 nm in brain gray matter
50,51), and is negligible several hundred 
microns deep into brain tissue. Hence the confocal detection path-way becomes useless and attention has to be paid to the detection of scattered light, which emerges from the tissue surface spanning an area that is wider than the focus is deep ( Fig. 2 ). Therefore, even 
with a small imaged field of view, efficient fluorescence detection requires a large detected field of view
43,44. Because a large field 
of view corresponds to low magnification, special objectives that combine high NA with low magnification have particularly high collection efficiencies
43. For a large field of view, the post-objective 
detection pathway has to be carefully designed to guide all light onto the detector ( Fig. 1c ). A large spatio-angular spread also rules 
out the use of certain types of detectors ⎯such as photon-count-
ing avalanche photodiodes, which have some of the highest detec-tion quantum efficiency for fluorescence but a small area ⎯and of spectrometer detectors. In vivo  two-photon microscopes thus use 
photomultiplier tubes, available with large sensitive areas and rea-sonable quantum efficiencies.
The depth limit
The maximum achievable imaging depth is proportional to the scat-tering mean-free-path and depends logarithmically on available laser power, two-photon advantage and collection efficiency
43. With a laser 
oscillator providing ~100-fs pulses, the maximum depth usually is limited by the available average power (1 W average power allows imaging depths of about 600–800 µm in the neocortex)
52–56. When 
a regenerative amplifier is used, it is possible to image deeper (up to 1 mm in the neocortex)
14. Eventually, however, fluorescence generated 
near the sample surface becomes a limiting factor14. The resulting 
contrast reduction might be impossible to overcome in samples with a wide fluorophore distribution as, for example, in transgenic mice with extensive GFP expression. The achievable imaging depth also strongly depends on other tissue properties such as microvascula-ture organization, cell body arrangement, collagen or myelin content, which will more-or-less degrade the laser focus and limit signal gen-eration deep inside the tissue. If deeper structures need to be reached and if less-scattered longer wavelengths cannot be used, mechanical penetration or removal
57 of overlying tissue may be necessary. Efforts 
in this direction have been made using very narrow objective lenses made from gradient-index (GRIN) material
58–61.
LOOKING INSIDE LIVING TISSUE
The special advantages of 2PLSM for imaging deep within intact tissue have led to a rapid expansion of its use in various fields of biological research. 2PLSM is now used for high-resolution imaging in various organs of living animals. Here we summarize additional aspects important for in vivo  imaging using mainly examples of cel-
lular and subcellular imaging in the intact brain.
In vivo  labeling techniques
For fluorescence imaging, structures of interest need to be labeled unless they are autofluorescent
13,62. In vivo  labeling techniques for 
staining cells in living tissues have greatly advanced. ‘Traditional’ syn-thetic dyes still are indispensable and can be introduced by a variety of methods: injection into the blood stream to label vasculature, for example, to measure blood flow in the brain
53 or the kidney11; fill-
ing of individual cells via recording electrodes52,63 (Fig. 4a ); uptake 
and anterograde transport of dextran-conjugated dyes in axons64,65; 
high-affinity binding of certain dyes to protein aggregates66; cell-spe-
cific spontaneous uptake of water-soluble dyes56; and bulk-loading of 
membrane-permeable calcium indicators67. Cells can also be labeled 
ex vivo  and introduced back into mice10.
Fluorescent proteins can be introduced using molecular genetics 
(for reviews see68,69). Widespread but cell-specific labeling can be 
achieved in transgenic animals expressing anatomical markers70 or 
functional indicators71,72. Viral systems allow local expression, either 
short-term but less cell-specific73,74, or long-term under control 
of specific promoters75. Different approaches can be combined to 
achieve multicolor labeling of various tissue elements.
Monitoring cell structure and function
Once cells of interest are labeled, various preparations and procedures can be used to study structural and functional dynamics. For short-term studies of the brain a cranial window is opened above the area of 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 937REVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsinterest, which also provides access for recording electrodes ( Fig. 4a ). 
Other organs are surgically exposed in a similar manner or, as in the case of kidney, are exteriorized
11. A general problem for in vivo  imag-
ing is motion induced by heart beat and breathing. Therefore, tissue pulsation should be dampened as much as possible, for example, by covering or embedding the exposed organ with agar. Tight control of the anesthesia or artificial respiration can help to alleviate pulsation. For time-lapse imaging of cell structures, we recommend acquiring small subvolumes (image stacks of 10 to 20 focal planes) in anticipa-tion of lateral or focal drift, which can then be corrected offline using correlation methods. Image acquisition can also be synchronized to the heartbeat by triggering individual frames using a simultaneously recorded electrocardiogram, to ensure that all images have the same phase relationship to the heart beat
76.
For long-term imaging over days to months, animals are multiply 
reanesthetized and image stacks of the same subvolume are acquired. In the brain, these experiments are performed either through the thinned skull
66,77–79 or through a chronically implanted glass win-
dow80–82 (Fig. 4a ). In cancer research, a dorsal skin-fold chamber 
with a glass window is used for imaging implanted tumors15. To 
repeatedly find the same structure (for example, a cell, a blood vessel, an amyloid plaque or even a synapse), stable anatomical landmarks, such as the surface blood vessel pattern can be used.
Functional imaging from neuronal dendrites in the intact neocor-
tex has, so far, still required the introduction of synthetic calcium indicators via electrodes
52,54,55,63,83,84, which has the advantage 
of providing additional in vivo  intracellular electrophysiological 
data. The combination of two-photon optophysiology with elec-trophysiology
85 will be crucial for studying synaptic integration 
and single-cell computation in living animals. Great hope still rests on the in vivo  application of genetically-encoded functional 
indicators
69,71,72,86,87.
Imaging cellular network dynamics
The ability to label entire cell populations with calcium indicator in living animals, using a rather generally applicable bulk dye-injec-tion method
67, has allowed two-photon imaging of neural and 
glial network activity with cellular resolution. Somatic and den-dritic calcium transients, for example, have revealed spontaneous and evoked activity patterns in the mammalian neocortex
67,88, now 
with single-spike resolution89, as well as in the cerebellar cortex90 
and in zebrafish91,92. Calcium signals are also found in the neuro-
pil, providing additional information about the input activity in afferent pathways89,90. Because bulk-loading does not discriminate 
well between cell types, specific counterstaining with synthetic or genetically encoded markers may be necessary to highlight particu-lar cell types
56.
Imaging of population activity in neuronal networks pushes 
present scanning technology to its limit because fast acquisition rates are required to simultaneously measure activity in many cells. Although resonant galvanometric scanners
93 and acousto-
optical deflectors94 can achieve video-rate full-frame acquisi-
tion (30 frames/s) of a single optical plane, a further technologi-cal challenge is the equally fast recording of cells distributed in three dimensions.
Visualization of pathological states
In vivo  imaging is increasingly applied to study tumorgenesis, 
immune responses and various brain diseases. For example, the evolution of senile Alzheimer disease plaques
66,95, their effects on 
neighboring neuronal structures96 and the effectiveness of poten-
tial treatments97 can be followed over months. The ability to image 
microglial cells in the neocortex opens new possibilities to study their role in a variety of brain diseases
76,98.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
The main strength of 2PLSM and other nonlinear microscopy tech-niques is the ability to maintain resolution and contrast within scat-tering tissue. This has permitted, in many fields for the first time, direct visualization of the normal behavior of cells in their natural environment, as well as their response to systematic manipulations. The use of 2PLSM is particularly powerful in neuroscience, where one ultimately wants to correlate cellular activity patterns with the animal’s experience and behavior. Moreover, in vivo  two-photon 
imaging allows longitudinal studies of structural and functional changes in the same animal over long periods of time (potentially over years). Cellular behavior thus can be put into the larger context, both spatially and temporally.
abFigure 4  | In vivo  two-photon imaging in the intact neocortex. ( a) Different 
types of brain access. Open cranial window with the dura mater  removed so 
that micropipettes for cell labeling and electrophysiological recordings can be inserted (top). Pulsation of the exposed brain is reduced by covering the craniotomy with agar and a coverglass. Thinned-skull (20–40 µm thickness) 
preparation (middle). Cellular structures are either prelabeled (for example, with fluorescent proteins in transgenic mice) or stained through a tiny hole lateral to the thinned area. Chronically implanted glass window replacing the skull (bottom). Agar is used underneath the window for stabilization. (b) Example of deep two-photon imaging in mouse neocortex. Maximum-
intensity side projection of a fluorescence image stack, obtained in a transgenic mouse expressing Clomeleon, a genetically-encoded chloride indicator
101, under the control of the Thy1-promoter102, preferentially in 
deep layer 5 (L5) pyramidal cells. Data were taken with a 10 W pumped Ti:sapphire oscillator using a 40 ×, NA 0.8 water-immersion lens (Zeiss). Note 
that nearly the entire depth of the neocortex can be imaged.
938 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsWhat will the near future bring? In vivo  applications of 2PLSM will 
expand further into other fields, taking advantage of user-friendly laser systems and of ongoing technological developments such as the use of regenerative amplifiers, extended application of optical harmonic generation and other nonlinear effects, and microscope miniaturization. Miniaturized, fiber-based microscopes will allow imaging in freely moving animals
99. Moreover, flexible submillime-
ter-sized microscope probes58–61 may be used to reach deeper into the 
tissue, beyond the depth limit set by surface-generated background, albeit using a more invasive endoscopic approach. In neuroscience, the direct optical measurement of electrical potentials using two-photon excitation of voltage-sensing dyes
100 or second-harmonic 
signals23,24 could have a large impact.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank T. Kuner, G. Augustine and G. Feng for providing the Clomeleon mouse and W. Göbel for help with numerical calculations.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare competing financial interests (see the Nature Methods  website 
for details).
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/
1. Denk, W., Piston, D.W. & Webb, W.W. Two-photon molecular excitation in laser-
scanning microscopy. In Handbook of Biological Confocal Microscopy  2
nd edn. 
(ed. Pawley, J.B.) 445–458 (Plenum Press, New York, 1995).
2. Denk, W. & Svoboda, K. Photon upmanship: why multiphoton imaging is more 
than a gimmick. Neuron  18, 351–357 (1997).
3. So, P.T., Dong, C.Y., Masters, B.R. & Berland, K.M. Two-photon excitation 
fluorescence microscopy. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng.  2, 399–429 (2000).
4. Helmchen, F. & Denk, W. New developments in multiphoton microscopy. Curr. 
Opin. Neurobiol.  12, 593–601 (2002).
5. Zipfel, W.R., Williams, R.M. & Webb, W.W. Nonlinear magic: multiphoton 
microscopy in the biosciences. Nat. Biotechnol.  21, 1369–1377 (2003).
6. Campagnola, P.J. & Loew, L.M. Second-harmonic imaging microscopy 
for visualizing biomolecular arrays in cells, tissues and organisms. Nat. 
Biotechnol.  21, 1356–1360 (2003).
7. Mertz, J. Nonlinear microscopy: new techniques and applications. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol.  14, 610–616 (2004).
8. Denk, W., Strickler, J.H. & Webb, W.W. Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence 
microscopy. Science  248, 73–76 (1990).
9. Cahalan, M.D., Parker, I., Wei, S.H. & Miller, M.J. Real-time imaging of 
lymphocytes in vivo . Curr. Opin. Immunol.  15, 372–377 (2003).
10. Bousso, P. & Robey, E.A. Dynamic behavior of T cells and thymocytes in 
lymphoid organs as revealed by two-photon microscopy. Immunity  21, 349–
355 (2004).
11. Molitoris, B.A. & Sandoval, R.M. Intravital multiphoton microscopy of dynamic 
renal processes. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol.  288, F1084–F1089 (2005).
12. Rubart, M. Two-photon microscopy of cells and tissue. Circ. Res.  95, 1154–
1166 (2004).
13. Laiho, L.H., Pelet, S., Hancewicz, T.M., Kaplan, P.D. & So, P.T. Two-photon 
3-D mapping of ex vivo  human skin endogenous fluorescence species based on 
fluorescence emission spectra. J. Biomed. Opt.  10, 024016 (2005).
14. Theer, P., Hasan, M.T. & Denk, W. Two-photon imaging to a depth of 1000 
microns in living brains by use of a Ti:Al2O3 regenerative amplifier. Opt. Lett.  
28, 1022–1024 (2003).
15. Jain, R.K., Munn, L.L. & Fukumura, D. Dissecting tumour pathophysiology 
using intravital microscopy. Nat. Rev. Cancer  2, 266–276 (2002).
16. Skoch, J., Hickey, G.A., Kajdasz, S.T., Hyman, B.T. & Bacskai, B.J. In vivo  
imaging of amyloid-beta deposits in mouse brain with multiphoton microscopy. Methods Mol. Biol.  299, 349–363 (2005).
17. Goeppert-Mayer, M. 
Über Elementarakte mit zwei Quantensprüngen  (On 
elementary processes with two quantum steps) Ann. Phys.  9, 273–294 (1931).
18. Xu, C. & Webb, W.W. Measurement of two-photon excitation cross sections of 
molecular fluorophores with data from 690 to 1,050 nm. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B  13, 
481–491 (1996).
19. Squier, J., Muller, M., Brakenhoff, G. & Wilson, K. Third harmonic generation 
microscopy. Opt. Express  3, 315–324 (1998).20. Oron, D. et al. Depth-resolved structural imaging by third-harmonic generation 
microscopy. J. Struct. Biol.  147, 3–11 (2004).
21. Mohler, W., Millard, A. & Campagnola, P. Second harmonic generation imaging 
of endogenous structural proteins. Methods  29, 97–109 (2003).
22. Dombeck, D.A. et al. Uniform polarity microtubule assemblies imaged in native 
brain tissue by second-harmonic generation microscopy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 100, 7081–7086 (2003).
23. Bouevitch, O., Lewis, A., Pinevsky, I., Wuskell, J. & Loew, L. Probing 
membrane-potential with nonlinear optics. Biophys. J.  65, 672–679 (1993).
24. Moreaux, L., Sa ndre, O., Blan chard-Desce, M. & Mertz, J. Membrane imaging by 
simultaneous second-harmonic generation and two-photon microscopy. Opt. 
Lett. 25, 320–322 (2000).
25. Cheng, J., Volkmer, A. & Xie, X. Theoretical and experimental characterization 
of coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B  19, 
1363–1375 (2002).
26. Wang, H., Fu, Y., Zickmund, P., Shi, R. & Cheng, J. Coherent anti-stokes Raman 
scattering imaging of axonal myelin in live spinal tissues. Biophys. J.  89, 
581–591 (2005).
27. Svoboda, K. & Block, S.M. Biological applications of optical forces. Annu. Rev. 
Bioph. Biomol. Struct.  23, 247–285 (1994).
28. Squirrell, J.M., Wokosin, D.L., White, J.G. & Bavister, B.D. Long-term two-
photon fluorescence imaging of mammalian embryos without compromising viability. Nat. Biotechnol.  17, 763–767 (1999).
29. Denk, W. Two-photon scanning photochemical microscopy: mapping ligand-
gated ion channel distributions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  91, 6629–6633 
(1994).
30. Svoboda, K., Tank, D.W. & Denk, W. Direct measurement of coupling between 
dendritic spines and shafts. Science  272, 716–719 (1996).
31. Matsuzaki, M. et al. Dendritic spine geometry is critical for AMPA receptor 
expression in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons. 
Nat. Neurosci.  4, 1086–
1092 (2001).
32. Pologruto, T.A., Sabatini, B.L. & Svoboda, K. ScanImage: flexible software for 
operating laser scanning microscopes. Biomed. Eng. Online  2, 13 (2003).
33. Tsai, P.S. et al. Principles, design, and construction of a two-photon laser 
scanning microscope for in vitro  and in vivo  brain imaging. In Vivo  Pptical 
Imaging of Brain Function . (Frostig, R.D., ed.) (CRC Press, New York, 2002).
34. Mainen, Z.F. et al. Two-photon imaging in living brain slices. Methods  18, 
231–239 (1999).
35. Majewska, A., Yiu, G. & Yuste, R. A custom-made two-photon microscope and 
deconvolution system. Pflugers Arch.  441, 398–408 (2000).
36. Gosnell, T.R. & Taylor, A.J. (eds.) Selected Papers on Ultrafast Laser Technology.  
(SPIE Optical Engineering Press, Bellingham, 1991).
37. Treacy, E.B. Optical pulse compression with diffraction gratings. IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron.  5, 454–458 (1969).
38. Diels, J.-C.M., Fontaine, J.J., McMichael, I.C. & Simoni, F. Control and 
measurement of ultrashort pulse shapes (in amplitude and phase) with femtosecond accuracy. App. Opt.  24, 1270–1282 (1985).
39. Patterson, G.H. & Piston, D.W. Photobleaching in two-photon excitation 
microscopy. Biophys. J.  78, 2159–2162 (2000).
40. Hopt, A. & Neher, E. Highly nonlinear photodamage in two-photon 
fluorescence microscopy. Biophys. J.  80, 2029–2036 (2001).
41. Koester, H.J., Baur, D., Uhl, R. & Hell, S.W. Ca
2+ fluorescence imaging with 
pico- and femtosecond two-photon excitation: signal and photodamage. Biophys. J.  77, 2226–2236 (1999).
42. Kawano, H. et al. Attenuation of photobleaching in two-photon excitation 
fluorescence from green fluorescent protein with shaped excitation pulses. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.  311, 592–596 (2003).
43. Oheim, M., Beaurepaire, E., Chaigneau, E., Mertz, J. & Charpak, S. Two-
photon microscopy in brain tissue: parameters influencing the imaging depth. J. Neurosci. Methods  111, 29–37 (2001).
44. Beaurepaire, E. & Mertz, J. Epifluorescence collection in two-photon 
microscopy. Appl. Opt.  41, 5376–5382 (2002).
45. Birge, R.R. 2-photon spectroscopy of protein-bound chromophors. Acc. Chem. 
Res. 19, 138–146 (1986).
46. Wang, H. et al. Generation of 10-W average-power, 40-TW peak-power, 24-fs 
pulses from a Ti:sapphire amplifier system. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B  16, 1790–1794 
(1999).
47. Beaurepaire, E., Oheim, M. & Mertz, J. Ultra-deep two-photon fluorescence 
excitation in turbid media. Opt. Comm.  188, 25–29 (2001).
48. Feierabend, M., Ruckel, M. & Denk, W. Coherence-gated wave-front sensing in 
strongly scattering samples. Opt. Lett.  29, 2255–2257 (2004).
49. Booth, M., Neil, M., Juskaitis, R. & Wilson, T. Adaptive aberration correction in 
a confocal microscope. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  99, 5788–5792 (2002).
50. Taddeucci, A., Martelli, F., Barilli, M., Ferrari, M. & Zaccanti, G. Optical 
properties of brain tissue. J. Biomed. Opt.  1, 117–123 (1996).
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 939REVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethods51. Yaroslavsky, A. et al. Optical properties of selected native and coagulated 
human brain tissues in vitro  in the visible and near infrared spectral range. 
Phys. Med. Biol.  47, 2059–2073 (2002).
52. Svoboda, K., Denk, W., Kleinfeld, D. & Tank, D.W. In vivo  dendritic calcium 
dynamics in neocortical pyramidal neurons. Nature  385, 161–165 (1997).
53. Kleinfeld, D., Mitra, P.P., Helmchen, F. & Denk, W. Fluctuations and stimulus-
induced changes in blood flow observed in indiv idual capillaries in layers 
2 through 4 of rat neocortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  95, 15741–15746 
(1998).
54. Svoboda, K., Helmchen, F., Denk, W. & Tank, D.W. Spread of dendritic excitation 
in layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons in rat barrel cortex in vivo . Nat. Neurosci.  2, 
65–73 (1999).
55. Helmchen, F., Svoboda, K., Denk, W. & Tank, D.W. In vivo  dendritic calcium 
dynamics in deep-layer cortical pyramidal neurons. Nat. Neurosci.  2, 989–996 
(1999).
56. Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F., Kerr, J.N. & Helmchen, F. Sulforhodamine 101 as 
a specific marker of astroglia in the neocortex in vivo . Nat. Methods  1, 31–37 
(2004).
57. Mizrahi, A., Crowley, J., Shtoyerman, E. & Katz, L. High-resolution in vivo  
imaging of hippocampal dendrites and spines. J. Neurosci.  24, 3147–3151 
(2004).
58. Jung, J. & Schnitzer, M. Multiphoton endoscopy. Opt. Lett.  28, 902–904 
(2003).
59. Levene, M., Dombeck, D., Kasischke, K., Molloy, R. & Webb, W. In vivo  
multiphoton microscopy of deep brain tissue. J. Neurophysiol.  91, 1908–1912 
(2004).
60. Jung, J., Mehta, A., Aksay, E., Stepnoski, R. & Schnitzer, M. In vivo  mammalian 
brain Imaging using one- and two-photon fluorescence microendoscopy. J. Neurophysiol.  92, 3121–3133 (2004).
61. Göbel, W., Kerr, J.N., Nimmerjahn, A. & Helmchen, F. Miniaturized two-photon 
microscope based on a flexible coherent fiber bundle and a gradient-index lens objective. Opt. Lett.  29, 2521–2523 (2004).
62. Huang, S., Heikal, A.A. & Webb, W.W. Two-photon fluorescence spectroscopy 
and microscopy of NAD(P)H and flavoprotein. Biophys. J.  82, 2811–2825 
(2002).
63. Waters, J., Larkum, M., Sakmann, B. & Helmchen, F. Supralinear Ca
2+ influx in 
dendritic tufts of layer 2/3 neocortical pyramidal neurons in vitro  and in vivo . 
J. Neurosci.  23, 8558–8567 (2003).
64. Wachowiak, M., Denk, W. & Friedrich, R.W. Functional organization of sensory 
input to the olfactory bulb glomerulus analyzed by two-photon calcium imaging. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  101, 9097–9102 (2004).
65. Kreitzer, A., Gee, K., Archer, E. & Regehr, W. Monitoring presynaptic calcium 
dynamics in projection fibers by in vivo  loading of a novel calcium indicator. 
Neuron  27, 25–32 (2000).
66. Christie, R.H. et al. Growth arrest of indiv idual se nile plaques in a model of 
Alzheimer’s disease observed by in vivo  multiphoton microscopy. J. Neurosci.  
21, 858–864 (2001).
67. Stosiek, C., Garaschuk, O., Holthoff, K. & Konnerth, A. In vivo  two-photon 
calcium imaging of neuronal networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  100, 7319–
7324 (2003).
68. Young, P. & Feng, G. Labeling neurons in vivo  for morphological and functional 
studies. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.  14, 642–646 (2004).
69. Miesenbock, G. Genetic methods for illuminating the function of neural 
circuits. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.  14, 395–402 (2004).
70. Feng, G. et al. Imaging neuronal subsets in transgenic mice expressing multiple 
spectral variants of GFP. Neuron  28, 41–51 (2000).
71. Hasan, M.T. et al. Functional fluorescent Ca
2+ indicator proteins in transgenic 
mice under TET control. PLoS Biol.  2, e163 (2004).
72. Wang, J.W., Wong, A.M., Flores, J., Vosshall, L.B. & Axel, R. Two-photon 
calcium imaging reveals an odor-evoked map of activity in the fly brain. Cell 
112, 271–282 (2003).
73. Kim, J. et al. Sindbis vector SINrep(nsP2S726): a tool for rapid heterologous 
expression with attenuated cytotoxicity in neurons. J. Neurosci. Methods  133, 
81–90 (2004).
74. Lendvai, B., Stern, E.A., Chen, B. & Svoboda, K. Experience-dependent 
plasticity of dendritic spines in the developing rat barrel cortex in vivo . Nature  
404, 876–881 (2000).
75. Dittgen, T. et al. Lentivirus-based genetic manipulations of cortical neurons 
and their optical and electrophysiological monitoring in vivo . Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA  101, 18206–18211 (2004).
76. Nimmerjahn, A., Kirchhoff, F. & Helmchen, F. Resting microglial cells are highly 
dynamic surveillants of brain parenchyma in vivo . Science  308, 1314–1318 
(2005).
77. Grutzendler, J., Kasthuri, N. & Gan, W.B. Long-term dendritic spine stability in 
the adult cortex. Nature  420, 812–816 (2002).78. Yoder, E.J. & Kleinfeld, D. Cortical imaging through the intact mouse skull 
using two-photon excitation laser scanning microscopy. Microsc. Res. Tech.  56, 
304–305 (2002).
79. Zuo, Y., Lin, A., Chang, P. & Gan, W.B. Development of long-term dendritic spine 
stability in diverse regions of cerebral cortex. Neuron  46, 181–189 (2005).
80. Trachtenberg, J.T. et al. Long-term in vivo  imaging of experience-dependent 
synaptic plasticity in adult cortex. Nature  420, 788–794 (2002).
81. Majewska, A. & Sur, M. Motility of dendritic spines in visual cortex in vivo : 
changes during the critical period and effects of visual deprivation. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA  100, 16024–16029 (2003).
82. Holtmaat, A.J. et al. Transient and persistent dendritic spines in the neocortex 
in vivo . Neuron  45, 279–291 (2005).
83. Waters, J. & Helmchen, F. Boosting of action potential backpropagation by 
neocortical network activity in vivo . J. Neurosci.  24, 11127–11136 (2004).
84. Charpak, S., Mertz, J., Beaurepaire, E., Moreaux, L. & Delaney, K. Odor-evoked 
calcium signals in dendrites of rat mitral cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  98, 
1230–1234 (2001).
85. Margrie, T.W. et al. Targeted whole-cell recordings in the mammalian brain in 
vivo. Neuron  39, 911–918 (2003).
86. Kerr, R. et al. Optical imaging of calcium transients in neurons and pharyngeal 
muscle of C. elegans.  Neuron  26, 583–594 (2000).
87. Reiff, D.F. et al. In vivo  performance of genetically encoded indicators of neural 
activity in flies. J. Neurosci.  25, 4766–4778 (2005).
88. Ohki, K., Chung, S., Ch’ng, Y., Kara, P. & Reid, R. Functional imaging with 
cellular resolution reveals precise micro-architecture in visual cortex. Nature  
433, 597–603 (2005).
89. Kerr, J.N., Greenberg, D. & Helmchen, F. Imaging input and output of 
neocortical networks in vivo . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  102, 14063–14068 
(2005).
90. Sullivan, M.R., Nimmerjahn, A., Sarkisov, D.V., Helmchen, F. & Wang, S.S.-H. 
In vivo  calcium imaging of circuit activity in cerebellar cortex. J. Neurophysiol.  
94, 1636–1644 (2005).
91. Brustein, E., Marandi, N., Kovalchuk, Y., Drapeau, P. & Konnerth, A. “ In vivo ” 
monitoring of neuronal network activity in zebrafish by two-photon Ca2+ 
imaging. Pflugers Arch.  446, 766–773 (2003).
92. Niell, C.M. & Smith, S.J. Functional imaging reveals rapid development of 
visual response properties in the zebrafish tectum. Neuron  45, 941–951 
(2005).
93. Fan, G.Y. et al. Video-rate scanning two-photon excitation fluorescence 
microscopy and ratio imaging with cameleons. Biophys. J.  76, 2412–2420 
(1999).
94. Roorda, R.D., Hohl, T.M., Toledo-Crow, R. & Miesenbock, G. Video-rate 
nonlinear microscopy of neuronal membrane dynamics with genetically encoded probes. J. Neurophysiol.  92, 609–621 (2004).
95. Bacskai, B.J. et al. Four-dimensional multiphoton imaging of brain entry, 
amyloid binding, and clearance of an amyloid-beta ligand in transgenic mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  100, 12462–12467 (2003).
96. Tsai, J., Grutzendler, J., Duff, K. & Gan, W. Fibrillar amyloid deposition leads to 
local synaptic abnormalities and breakage of neuronal branches. Nat. Neurosci.  
7, 1181–1183 (2004).
97. Lombardo, J.A. et al. Amyloid-beta antibody treatment leads to rapid 
normalization of plaque-i nduced neuritic alterations. J. Neurosci.  23, 10879–
10883 (2003).
98. Davalos, D. et al. ATP mediates rapid microglial response to local brain injury in 
vivo. Nat. Neurosci.  8, 752–758 (2005).
99. Helmchen, F., Fee, M.S., Tank, D.W. & Denk, W. A miniature head-mounted two-
photon microscope. high-resolution brain imaging in freely moving animals. Neuron  31, 903–912 (2001).
100. Kuhn, B., Fromherz, P. & Denk, W. High sensitivity of Stark-shift voltage-
sensing dyes by one- or two-photon excitation near the red spectral edge. Biophys. J.  87, 631–639 (2004).
101. Kuner, T. & Augustine, G.J. A genetically encoded ratiometric indicator for 
chloride: Capturing chloride transients in cultured hippocampal neurons. Neuron  27, 447–459 (2000).
102. Berglund, K., Dunbar, R.L., Psyche, L., Feng, G. & Augustine, G.J. A practical 
guide: Imaging synaptic inhibition with Clomeleon, a genetically encoded indicator. in Imaging in Neuroscience and Development: a Laboratory Manual.  
(Yuste, R. & Konnerth, A. eds.) (Cold Spring Harbor Press, Cold Spring Harbor, 2005).
103. Ying, J., Liu, F. & Alfano, R. Effect of scattering on nonlinear optical scanning 
microscopy imaging of highly scattering media. App. Opt.  39, 509–514 (2000).
104. Sheppard, C.J. & Gu, M. Image formation in two-photon fluorescence 
microscopy. Optik 86, 104–106 (1990).
105. Cox, G. & Sheppard, C.J. Practical limits of resolution in confocal and non-
linear microscopy. Microsc. Res. Tech.  63, 18–22 (2004).
940 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsCorrigendum:  Deep tissue two-photon microscopy
Fritjof Helmchen & Winfried Denk
Nat. Methods  2, 932–940 (2005).
The wrong reference (ref. 24) was mistakenly provided for the work on second-harmonic imaging of membrane-potential changes. Th e 
correct reference 24 is: Moreaux, L. et al.  Electro-optic response of second-harmonic generation membrane potential sensors. Opt. Lett.  28, 625–627 (2003).
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.3 NO.3 | MARCH 2006 | 235CORRIGENDA©2006 Nature Publishing Group  http://www.nature.com/naturemethodsFiber-optic fluorescence imaging
Benjamin A Flusberg, Eric D Cocker, Wibool Piyawattanametha, Juergen C Jung, 
Eunice L M Cheung & Mark J Schnitzer
Optical fibers guide light between separate locations and enable new types of 
fluorescence imaging. Fiber-optic fluorescence imaging systems include portable handheld microscopes, flexible endoscopes well suited for imaging within hollow tissue cavities and microendoscopes that allow minimally invasive high-resolution imaging deep within tissue. A challenge in the creation of such devices is the design and integration of miniaturized optical and mechanical components. Until recently, fiber-based fluorescence imaging was mainly limited to epifluorescence and scanning confocal modalities. Two new classes of photonic crystal fiber facilitate ultrashort pulse delivery for fiber-optic two-photon fluorescence imaging. An upcoming generation of fluorescence imaging devices will be based on mic rofabricated device components.
Fiber-optic fluorescence imaging has become increas-
ingly versatile over the last decade as fiber-based devices have declined in size but gained in functionality. Three classes of applications in live animal and human sub-jects provide the primary motivations for innovation in fiber-optic imaging. First, basic research on biological and disease processes would benefit enormously from instru-mentation that permits cellular imaging under conditions in which conventional light microscopy cannot be used. Many cell types reside within hollow tissue tracts or deep within solid organs that are inaccessible to optical imaging without devices that can reach such locations in a mini-mally invasive manner. Flexible fiber-optic devices also allow handheld imaging and imaging in freely moving animals
1. Second, fiber devices might be implanted within 
live subjects for long-term imaging studies. This capabil-ity will not only benefit research on the cellular effects of aging, development or experience, but also will lead to new in vivo  assays for testing of drugs and therapeutics. By 
allowing examination of cells concurrently with observa-tion of disease symptoms and animal behavior, fiber-optic imaging will permit studies correlating cellular proper-ties and disease outcome in individual subjects over time and could reduce the numbers of animals needed. A third set of applications concerns development of minimally invasive clinical diagnostics and surgical procedures
2. 
Although much work remains, fiber-optic instrumen-tation has already broadened the applicability of in vivo  
fluorescence imaging.
The seeds for development of fiber optic in vivo  imag-
ing were planted by early uses of fiber-optics and fluores-cence for chemical sensing and spectroscopy, including classic work on detection of intracellular redox states
3–5. 
Use of fiber optics for remote sensing and spectroscopy remains strong today
6, and has expanded to include 
bioluminescence detection7. The recent proliferation of 
fluorescent probes has widened the set of potential uses for fiber-based fluorescence imaging devices, which may be classified by size into the three broad categories of microscopy, endoscopy and microendoscopy.
The simplest application of fiber-optics in microscopy 
is remote delivery of light
8–16, which allows the excita-
tion light source or photodetectors to reside apart from a conventional microscope. Optical fiber also enables miniaturized or compact forms of microscopy for por-table usage
1,17,18. Flexible fiber-optic endoscopy involves 
optical probes that are usually a few millimeters in diam-
eter and well suited to imaging either superficial tissues such as skin or hollow tissue cavities such as the cervix or digestive tract
19–34. Fluorescence microendoscopy 
(FME) involves optical probes that are typically 0.25–1 mm in diameter for minimally invasive insertion into solid tissue. Such probes can either be mainly rigid and one to several centimeters in length, for use akin to a 
James H. Clark Center for Biomedical Engineering and Sciences, Stanford University, 318 Campus Drive, Stanford, California 9430 5, USA. 
Correspondence should be addressed to M.J.S (mschnitz@stanford.edu)
PUBLISHED ONLINE 18 NOVEMBER 2005; DOI:10.1038/NMETH820
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 941REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsneedle biopsy35–37, or mated to flexible fiber optics38–43. Both types 
of FME have allowed cellular imaging deep within solid tissues of live mammalian subjects
2,35,37,38,42,44.
All three categories of fiber-based imaging, microscopy, endos-
copy and microendoscopy, can involve the fluorescence modalities reviewed elsewhere in this issue, including one-photon epifluo-
rescence, scanning confocal fluorescence and two-photon excited fluorescence. Many strengths and limitations of the conventional tabletop systems also characterize the corresponding fiber-optic forms ( Table 1 ). We focus here on components and embodiments 
that are particular to fiber-based imaging to help readers choose and construct imaging devices best suited to their needs.
COMPONENTS
Several features of fiber-optic imaging systems are nearly universal. Optical fiber delivers illumination,  and one or more lenses focus this 
light at the specimen plane and collect fluorescence emissions. In many cases a focusing mechanism allows adjustment of the imaging plane. For confocal and two-photon modalities, a scanning mecha-nism moves one or more focal spots across the field of view.
Optical fiber
Optical fiber commonly ranges from ~80 µm up to several millime-
ters in diameter and can perform many jobs, including light delivery and collection, as well as image transmission. How are these func-
tions accomplished? In conventional fibers, known as step-index fibers, there are two zones with distinct indices of refraction, an outer cladding and an inner core, which enable light transmission down the fiber axis by total internal reflection
45. A subclass of step-index fibers 
called single-mode fiber (SMF) guid es only a single spatial mode of 
light ( Box 1 ). SMF, which is widely available commercially, is well 
suited for illumination delivery in the scanning imaging modalities because the single spatial mode can be focused to a near diffraction-limited spot in the specimen plane, allowing high-resolution imag-ing. The same SMF core that delivers light can also act as a pinhole detector, rejecting out-of-focal plane fluorescence emissions
8–11,13–
15,43,46,47.
Fibers that guide more than one spatial mode are called multimode 
fibers ( Box 1 ). Step-index multimode fibers are better suited for fluo-
rescence collection than SMF, because not only do they possess larger core diameters, commonly ∼50 µm up to a few millimeters, but they 
also usually have greater numerical aperture (NA) values. All-poly-mer multimode fibers tend to be more flexible than their silica coun-terparts and are available with NA values up to ~0.5.
In a particular class of multimode fiber known as gradient refrac-
tive index (GRIN) fiber, the refractive index in the core declines approximately quadratically with radius from the central axis. Unlike in step-index multimode fibers, in GRIN fibers the different electro-
Table 1  | A comparison of fiber-optic fluorescence imaging modalities
Embodiments Advantages Limitations
EPIFLUORESCENCE Ease of use, full-frame acquisition for high-speed 
imaging. Low-cost incoherent light source. Viewing through eyepieces or by camera.Lack of optical sectioning, not robust to light scattering.
One-photon FME
35,79Proximal focusing with external objective lens. GRIN endoscope probes are short and rigid.
Fiber-bundle epifluorescence59Mechanical flexibility. Ease of handheld use. Pixilation of image reduces resolution. Distal focusing 
mechanism hinders miniaturization.
CONFOCAL FLUORESCENCE Optical sectioning. Laser source much less costly than 
for two-photon imaging.Not robust to light scattering, penetration depths of ~50 µm 
in tissue. Distal focusing mechanism hinders miniaturization.
Single-fiber confocal22,24,26–29,67–69Mechanical flexibility. Single fiber for both excitation 
delivery and emission collection. Distal scanning mechanism hinders miniaturization.
Dual-axis fiber confocal81–83Mechanical flexibility. High axial resolution. Long 
working distance optics allow post-objective scanning for large fields of view and reduced aberrations.Distal scanning mechanism hinders miniaturization. Reduced 
fluorescence collection efficiency because of the low-NA collection aperture. 
Fiber-bundle confocal
19,23,25,30,31,40,42Mechanical flexibility. Ease of handheld use. Proximal 
scanning mechanism facilitates miniaturization. Line scanning can enable fast frame rate imaging. Pixilation of image reduces resolution. 
TWO-PHOTON FLUORESCENCE Optical sectioning. Reduced photobleaching and 
photodamage. Robustness to scattering. Penetration depths in tissue up to ~300 µm.Cost of ultrashort-pulsed laser.
Two-photon FME
35–37Proximal focusing with external objective lens.
Proximal scanning. Minimal pulse dispersion and SPM. GRIN endoscope probes are short and rigid. 
Single-fiber two-photon1,38,43Mechanical flexibility. No pulse distortion in PBF for 
zero-dispersion wavelength. Reduced SPM in LMA-PCF.Distal scanning and focusing mechanisms hinder 
miniaturization. Dispersion compensation may be needed.
Fiber-bundle two-photon39Mechanical flexibility. Proximal scanning. Ease of 
handheld use.Pixilation of image reduces resolution. Distal focusing 
mechanism hinders miniaturization. Dispersion compensation needed. SPM at higher pulse energies.
Multi-focal two-photon
17,18Mechanical flexibility. Lens array enables high-speed 
multi-focal imaging. No pulse distortion in PBF for zero-dispersion wavelength. Reduced SPM in LMA-PCF.Currently too large for endoscopy. Distal scanning and 
focusing mechanisms hinder miniaturization. Multiple foci decrease robustness to light scattering.
Double-clad two-photon
57,58Mechanical flexibility. Fluorescence collection and 
excitation delivery achieved in one fiber. Reduced SPM in LMA-PCF.Distal scanning and focusing mechanisms hinder 
miniaturization. Dispersion compensation needed.
Abbreviations: self-phase modulation (SPM); photonic bandgap fiber (PBF); large mode area photonic crystal fiber (LMA-PCF).
942 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsmagnetic spatial modes comprising an image propagate at nearly the 
same velocity. This means that GRIN fibers can serve as lenses when cut to specific lengths (see Objective optics below), enabling remote adjustment of the focal plane in the specimen using optics placed on the opposite side of the fiber
48. The number of guided spatial modes 
in a GRIN medium limits the optical resolution of the transmitted image. This situation contrasts with how a fiber bundle transmits a pixilated image composed of an array of light intensities, in which case an optical focal mechanism must reside on the fiber side proximal to the specimen (see Fiber bundles below).Important issues arise in two-photon fiber-optic imaging con-
cerning the remote delivery of the ultrashort optical pulses (~80–250 fs in duration) typically used for two-photon excitation ( Box 1 ). 
Particularly for in vivo  studies, it is common to use pulses of nanojoule 
energies  for two-photon imaging up to hundreds of micrometers deep within tissue. Such brief pulses are so intense that a light-matter interaction in the glass fiber core can distort both the pulse shape and spectrum through a nonlinear process known as self-phase modu-lation (SPM). This effect makes it challenging to excite two-photon fluorescence efficiently using SMF
49–51. A newly developed class of 
OPTICAL FIBER
Single mode fibers
In step-index optical fibers, the fiber core has a refractive index 
(n1) that is typically 1–2% higher than that of the cladding 
(n2), leading to a numerical aperture NA = ( n12 – n22)1/2 equal 
to the sine of the half-angle of the cone of light emitted from the fiber. The solutions to Maxwell’s equations with boundary conditions appropriate for electromagnetic wave propagation down a cylindrically symmetric fiber dictate that a fiber with a core radius a guides only a single spatial mode of light if the 
wavelength λ in vacuum satisfies the inequality V < 2.405, 
where the quantity V = (2 πa NA)/ λ is known as the ‘normalized 
wave number’
45. Such fibers are single-mode and have typical 
core diameters of ~3–7 µm for visible light.
Multimode fibers
If V > 2.405 the fiber can guide more than one spatial mode. The 
number of transmitted spatial modes increases approximately quadratically as a function of V, and so-called multimode fibers 
operate in the limit in which the number of guided modes is large, usually a hundred or more. Multimode fibers have core diameters of ~50 µm up to several millimeters.
GRIN fibers and lenses
In cylindrically symmetric GRIN lens and fibers the refractive 
index commonly varies as n(r) = n0(1 – g2r2/2), where r is the 
radius from the fiber axis, n0 is the refractive index on axis and g 
is a constant parameter. In a ray description, paraxial light rays follow an approximately sinusoidal path with a period of length P = 2π/g as they propagate down the cylindrical axis of a GRIN 
medium
45. Thus, two primary determinants of the properties of a 
GRIN lens are the lens length and refractive index profile.
ULTRASHORT PULSE DELIVERY IN OPTICAL FIBER
Ultrashort pulses of ~80–250 fs duration and nanojoule energies are commonly used to induce two photon–excited fluorescence in vivo . When such pulses propagate through an optical fiber, 
both group velocity dispersion and self-phase modulation can distort the pulse’s temporal profile and impact the efficiency of two-photon excitation, which varies inversely with pulse duration.
Group velocity dispersion
Chromatic or group velocity dispersion (GVD) occurs when different colors of light travel through optical fiber or other optical components at distinct speeds, thereby incurring differential propagation delays. In optical fiber there are two sources of GVD, known as material and waveguide dispersion. Material dispersion results from the different speeds at which each spectral component travels through silica glass
45. Waveguide dispersion arises because a different proportion of 
the pulse energy at each wavelength propagates through the fiber cladding. These two components cancel at the so-called zero-GVD wavelength. Configurations of diffraction gratings
55 
or prisms56 can compensate for GVD by negatively ‘pre-chirping’ 
optical pulses—that is, giving wavelengths that travel more slowly through optical fiber a head start, so that all spectral components exit the fiber simultaneously. This counteracts GVD, which by itself yields pulses that are positively chirped and temporally broadened.
Self-phase modulation
Intense laser pulses interact with the silica core in SMF and transiently raise the local refractive index. This index rise induces a phase shift and a corresponding spectral distortion in the pulse through self-phase modulation (SPM), which occurs in a nonlinear manner that depends on the pulse’s temporal profile of wavelength and intensity
45. Because of this nonlinear dependence 
it is difficult to compensate for SPM, which leads to spectral narrowing and temporal broadening of negatively pre-chirped pulses propagating in SMF, for wavelengths shorter than the zero-GVD wavelength of 1.3 µm
49–51. Hollow-core PBF ( Fig. 1a ) and 
LMA-PCF ( Fig. 1b ) ameliorate the problems associated with SPM 
and can deliver ultrashort pulses with little distortion.
Exploiting nonlinear pulse distortion
It is possible to harness nonlinear effects in optical fiber to alter the pulse spectrum for particular two-photon imaging applications
12,90,91. Small core (~1- to 3- µm diameter) or ‘highly 
nonlinear’ photonic crystal fibers can enhance SPM-induced spectral broadening of positively chirped ultrashort pulses below the zero-GVD wavelength ( Fig. 1d ). Subsequent temporal 
recompression of the pulses can increase the two-photon fluorescence excitation efficiency by up to almost an order of magnitude
91. The spectral broadening created by SPM can also 
enable the excitation of dyes, such as fura-2, whose two-photon absorption spectra are below the wavelength range of most common ultrashort laser sources
90.
Measurements of pulse width
A simple means of characterizing the temporal width of ultrashort pulses is to use an autocorrelator, which splits the beam between two paths and then recombines these on a nonlinear detector. Because the two pulses from the separate paths must arrive almost coincidentally at the nonlinear detector to register the maximum amplitude signal, pulse duration can be inferred from how the detector signal changes as the relative path length between the two paths varies. Other pulse diagnostics, such as frequency-resolved optical gating, can provide information about both the intensity and wavelength temporal profiles.BOX 1 OPTICAL FIBER AND ULTRASHORT PULSE DELIVERY
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 943REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsoptical fiber known as photonic crystal or microstructured fiber can 
be used either to circumvent or  harness SPM.
Photonic crystal fiber is named after the periodic arrays of air holes 
and silica glass these fibers exhibit within their internal structure (Fig. 1 ). Many forms of silica-core microstructured fiber guide light 
by a modified form of total internal re flection, in which the effective 
refractive index of the air-silica array in the cladding is less than that of the core. Photonic bandgap fiber (PBF) is a form of microstructured fiber that does not rely on total internal reflection for guiding light (Fig. 1a ).
PBF uses diffractive effects that arise from interactions between 
light and internal air-silica arrays with structure at the same length scale as the wavelength. A carefully designed air-silica lattice creates a photonic bandgap analogous to an electronic bandgap in crystal-line solids, which prevents light within a certain wavelength range from propagating in the cladding. An air core within such a PBF can act as a lattice defect, localizing light to the core, much as crystalline solid defects create localized electronic states. Wavelengths within the bandgap are thus contained and transmitted within the core, with the lowest-order mode typically having a Gaussian-like spatial profile
52. 
PBF has transformed the possibilities for fiber-based two-photon excited fluorescence and other nonlinear optical imaging modalities, because even high-energy pulses do not undergo SPM in an air core. Moreover, within the transmission window of PBF, which is called the bandgap and usually covers a spectral range of several tens to over 
a hundred nanometers, there is usually a wavelength at which group velocity (chromatic) dispersion vanishes ( Box 1 ). Pulses centered 
at this wavelength scarcely suffer any broadening, making PBF an excellent choice for pulse delivery
16,17,38,53,54. For other transmitted 
wavelengths only tens of nanometers away, however, dispersive pulse broadening can be more severe than in conventional SMF. Application of basic methods for disp ersion compensation
55 can alleviate much 
of such broadening ( Box 1 ), but for fiber lengths greater than a few 
meters additional compensation for ‘higher-order’ dispersion might 
also be required38,56.
A good alternative means for delivery of ultrashort pulses involves 
a class of microstructured fiber known as large mode area photon-ic crystal fiber (LMA-PCF; Fig. 1b ). These low-NA fibers not only 
have a large core of up to ~35 µm in diameter, in which pulse inten-
sity is much reduced compared to the ~5–6 µm core of SMF, but 
also are ‘endlessly single mode’ in that only one spatial mode propagates regardless of wavelength within the silica transparency window. The reduced intensity diminishes, but does not eliminate SPM. Group veloc-ity dispersion can be compensated using basic approaches because higher order dis-persion appears to be much less important than in current forms of PBF. An especially interesting LMA-PCF for two-photon imag-ing is a ‘double-clad’ fiber that is essentially two fibers in one and can accomplish both excitation pulse delivery and fluorescence emission collection
57,58. An inner LMA core 
delivers ultrashort pulses, and together with an inner cladding also serves as the core for a surrounding multimode fluorescence col-lection fiber ( Fig. 1c ). An outer multimode 
fiber cladding is composed almost entirely of air, leading to a high NA for visible light collection up to ~0.6. 
Use of such double-clad fiber for two-photon microscopy has been demonstrated
57,58. All types of photonic crystal fiber discussed here 
are commercially available.
Fiber bundles
Fiber-optic bundles consist of up to ~100,000 individual step-index fibers in a closely packed arrangement, hundreds of micrometers to a few millimeters in total diameter. Image-guiding bundles maintain the relative arrangements of the individual fibers throughout the length of the bundle, allowing transmission of an intensity image in pixilated form. Such bundles are commercially available and are commonly used for both epifluorescence
59 and scanning confocal or two-photon  
imaging19,23,25,30,31,39,40,42,60–62. However, unlike in lenses or GRIN 
fibers, only intensity information is transmitted. This limitation can hinder miniaturization if one desires a built-in focusing mechanism that does not require moving the entire imaging head, because such a mechanism has to be engineered within the optics proximal to the specimen
25,30,31. Many devices based on fiber bundles lack such focal 
capability, sacrificing functionality for size reduction39,40,42. On the 
other hand, use of a fiber bundle facilitates miniaturization of laser-scanning modalities by allowing scanning mechanisms to reside on the side of the bundle distal to the sp ecimen for sequential illumina-
tion of the individual fibers ( Fig. 2a–c ).
The main disadvantage of fiber bundles is that pixilation reduces 
the lateral optical resolution in the specimen plane to about twice the average core-to-core distance between fibers divided by the optical magnification of the imaging lenses. Furthermore, the thin layer of cladding between adjacent fiber cores leads to optical cross talk in which light from neighboring image pixels can leak into one another, reducing contrast. In scanning confocal imaging this problem may be reduced by use of a nonordered bundle, in which the relative fiber positions are randomized and not maintained throughout the bun-dle. This approach requires having to reconstruct the sample image based on knowledge of the scrambled fiber arrangement, but helps to reduce cross talk. Nonordered bundles are especially useful for laser line-scanning forms of fast confocal imaging, in which adjacent fibers at one side of the bundle are illuminated concurrently but the result-ing fluorescence originates from physically separate locations in the sample
62. In all fiber-bundle applications, calibration of the intrinsic 
ab c d
Air core Silica coreOuter cladding
Inner cladding
Figure 1  | Photographs of photonic crystal fibers. ( a) Hollow-core PBF. Wavelengths within the 
transmission band are localized to the air core, virtually eliminating SPM. ( b) Large-mode area photonic 
crystal fiber (LMA-PCF). Light guidance in the silica core is ‘endlessly single mode’ and the large mode area reduces SPM. ( c) Double-clad photonic crystal fiber. A silica LMA core and a surrounding air-
silica inner cladding comprise an inner lower-NA fiber that can guide ultrashort pulses with reduced SPM. An outer cladding composed nearly exclusively of air creates a higher-NA fiber that can collect fluorescence efficiently. Acrylate structural support surrounds the outer cladding and is not fully shown. ( d) Highly nonlinear photonic crystal fiber. The small silica core can be used to harness SPM 
for broadening the spectrum of ultrashort excitation pulses. Scale bars, 20 µm. Photographs kindly 
provided by R. Kristiansen (Crystal Fibre A/S).
944 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsautofluorescence, precise position and optical 
throughput for each fiber in the bundle can facilitate postacquisition image processing and substantially improve image quality
42.
Objective optics
For applications without severe size con-straints, a conventional microscope objective lens nearly always provides superior optical resolution and fluorescence detection effi-ciency. When miniaturization is required, custom high-NA (0.46–1.0)
19,23,30,31 objec-
tive lenses can be designed with outer diam-eters as small as 3–7 mm. Use of injection-molded plastic lenses to construct a custom objective is a particularly lightweight and economical approach
23.
The creation of minimally invasive micro-
endoscope probes has benefited greatly from recent advances in the fabrication of GRIN microoptics. GRIN microlenses ranging from 350–1,000 µm in diameter have been 
used for one-photon, confocal and two-pho-ton FME
35–40,43. As in GRIN fiber, cylindri-
cal GRIN lenses exhibit a refractive index that declines approximately quadratically with radius ( Box 1 ). Compound GRIN microen-
doscope probes usually measure one or more centimeters in length and combine two or more GRIN lenses with different character-istics
35–37. These are typically a 0.4–0.6 NA 
objective lens that enables micromet er-scale resolution and a longer 
relay lens that projects a real image of the specimen plane and supplies sufficient length for reaching deep tissue
35–37. Optical aberrations in 
current GRIN lenses limit the resolving power to approximately twice the diffraction limit
35–38. A detailed description of GRIN endoscope 
probes is available in ref. 35, and custom GRIN lenses are available from multiple vendors.
Scanning mechanisms
It is common to speak of scanning mechanisms as being either prox-imal or distal to the light source. Proximal scanners are located in the illumination pathway upstream of the fiber and are used with a fiber bundle. Distal scanners are located on the fiber side distal to the light source and usually scan illumination from a single fiber over the specimen. Proximal scanning offers the benefit of separating bulky scanners from a miniaturized imaging head and typically involves a pair of galvanometer-mounted scanning mirrors ( Fig. 2a )
19,23,25,30,3
1,39,40,42,61,62. These can provide high image-acquisition rates (up to 
~1 kHz per image line), particularly in a fast line-scanning approach that can allow video-rate imaging ( Fig. 2b ), and optical deflection 
angles up to ~40°. However, because the galvanometer approach involves sweeping the illumination across the bundle, light enters the cladding between adjacent cores  during much of the scanning cycle, potentially diminishing image contrast.
Use of a spatial light modulator such as a pixilated micromirror 
array to illuminate each fiber se quentially, without sweeping the 
beam, can reduce errant excitation light ( Fig. 2c )
60. Nonetheless, 
much of the excitation power is lost, because although the entire modulator is illuminated with light, only a fraction of the pixels will 
be activated at any given moment during a scan. This loss may not pose much problem for imaging at superficial tissue depths. Both one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) spatial light mod-ulators are available commercially.
The use of a single fiber for illumination delivery necessitates 
a distal scanning mechanism. Portable microscopy can rely on a piezoelectric-driven, 2D tip-tilt mirror ( Fig. 2d ), which has a lower 
bandwidth (~200 Hz) but a smaller footprint than cascaded galva-nometers
17,18,63. However, endoscopy and microendoscopy require 
more compact scanning mechanisms. One approach relies on either a piezoelectric
1,38,64 or an electromagnetically excited65,66 actuator 
to drive mechanical resonance vibrations of the fiber tip ( Fig. 2e ). 
Although fiber tip scanning allows stationary imaging optics to be inserted into solid tissue
38, it can also introduce off-axis aberrations 
that might limit the achievable resolution. T o preclude such aberra-tions, one can attach both the fiber and the imaging lens to a reso-nant cantilever and scan them together using electrostatic forces
67 or 
piezoelectric actuators20,24 (Fig. 2f ). Although this method needs an 
actuator that delivers more force, the required angular scanning range is reduced because the scanned focal spot is not further demagnified. A disadvantage of resonant scanning is that it is usually not possible to offset the center of the image field from the main optical axis without addition of another deflector.
In recent years, microfabricated microelectromechanical systems 
(MEMS) torsion scanning mirrors ~0.5–2 mm in diameter have emerged as versatile miniaturized scanning mechanisms ( Figs. 2d and 
3)
68–70. MEMS scanners are created through sequential material etch-
Fiber bundle Fiber bundle Fiber bundle
Objective
lensMirror
array
2D
scanner1D
scanner1D
scanners
Fiber Fiber 
Fiber Cylindrical
lensab c
de f
Figure 2  | Scanning mechanisms. ( a) Proximal scanning. Cascaded galvanometer-mounted mirrors 
scan the excitation beam across the proximal end of a fiber bundle. ( b) Proximal line-scanning. A 
cylindrical lens focuses the illumination to a line that is scanned across the face of a fiber bundle in one dimension. ( c) Proximal scanning with a spatial light modulator, which can illuminate pixels 
sequentially without sweeping the beam. ( d) Distal 2D mirror scanning. A piezoelectric driven tip-tilt 
mirror or a miniaturized MEMS mirror pivots in two angular dimensions. ( e) Distal fiber tip scanning. 
The tip of the excitation delivery fiber is vibrated at resonance by an actuator (not shown). ( f) Distal 
fiber-objective scanning. Both the fiber and the objective lens are mounted together on a cantilever (not shown) that is vibrated at resonance by an actuator.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 945REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsing and deposition processes analogous to those used for integrated 
circuit fabrication; 2D scanning involves cascaded 1D scanners or a single 2D scanner. The latter simplifies the optical design and reduces overall size. MEMS scanners that rely on electrostatic actuation are the most commonly used owing to the small size, low power consumption and high force that can be achieved. Among the electrostatic actuators, vertical comb actuators
71–73 offer greater force and angular range than 
parallel plate actuators68,69. These interdigitated silicon comb actua-
tors provide electrostatic torque to rotate the mirror in one direction, and torsional springs supply a restoring torque ( Fig. 3 ). Operating 
such scanners in DC mode permits static offsets of the field of view and mechanical angular rotations of up to ~6° (ref. 71). Alternatively, because ~1-mm-diameter MEMS mirrors have mechanical resonance frequencies in the kHz range, resonance scanning can enable video-rate imaging with large angular mirror rotations (>30°)
72, albeit at the 
expense of not being able to make lateral offsets in the field of view. A disadvantage of MEMS scanners is that although they are ideal for miniaturization, their fabrication requires much expertise. However, MEMS scanning mirrors are becoming commercially available.
Focusing mechanisms
Many applications benefit from having a built-in mechanism for altering the image focus without having to move the entire imag-ing probe. As with scanners, such mechanisms are positioned either proximal or distal to the light source relative to the fiber. Distal focus-ing mechanisms tend to hinder miniaturization because they are integrated with the objective optics, whereas proximal mechanisms are of conventional size and do not enter the specimen. For instance, it can be helpful to leave a GRIN microendoscope probe stationary within tissue while adjusting the image plane by moving the exter-nal microscope objective lens that also delivers illumination into the 
probe
35,37,74. Because of optical demagnification between image and 
object planes, a focal shift of ~100 micrometers in the tissue often requires movement of focusing optics over millimeter-sized distances, 
beyond the range of small piezoelectric actuators. For flexible modali-ties that require distal focusing, one can use a hydraulic or pneumatic system to move the end of a fiber with respect to the objective optics 
when a fluid is injected into or withdrawn from a reservoir
25,30,31. 
Another lightweight approach relies on a miniature motor to alter the distance between the fiber and the imaging optics
38. In the future, 
millimeter-sized liquid lenses that alter their focus via electrowetting, will allow fast, remotely controlled distal focusing and beam steering for endoscopy and FME
75–77.
Design and integration
As imaging systems have become increasingly miniaturized, optical and mechanical designs have grown increasingly intricate. Zemax and Code V are optical ray-tracing software programs that are commonly used for optical design and tolerance analysis. Computer-aided design programs such as SolidWorks and AutoCad can generate 3D models and technical drawings of mechanical configurations. We have found such software invaluable for designing complex imaging systems.
EMBODIMENTS
Fiber-optic epifluorescence, scanning confocal and two-photon imaging each has distinct sets of strengths and limitations
78 (Table 
1). The latter two forms offer 3D optical sectioning, important for 
many applications, but sectioning is not always needed or desired. For example, in vivo  epifluorescence microendoscopy readily allows 
viewing, by eye or with video-rate recordings, of red blood cell flow, without the need for laser sources or fast scanners
35,44. Further, lack 
of sectioning may facilitate faster imaging speeds in some applica-tions by aggregating fluorescence signals acquired simultaneously from adjacent tissue depths. The key advantage of two-photon imag-ing is robustness to scattering and increased penetration depths, but the high cost of an ultrashort-pulse laser is a distinct disadvantage. Nonetheless, when using epifluorescence or confocal modalities to image through more than ~50 µm of tissue, image contrast declines 
sharply with depth due to scattering. Additionally, these two modali-ties are more vulnerable to photobleaching and phototoxicity, which unlike in two-photon imaging occur not only at the focus but also in out-of-focus planes.
Epifluorescence imaging modalities
One-photon epifluorescence imaging can involve a compound GRIN microendoscope probe, a flexible fiber bundle or both. Unlike exist-ing forms of either fiber-optic confocal or two-photon imaging, one-photon endoscopy and microendoscopy are currently the only fiber imaging varieties that enable images to be directly viewed by eye.
In the simplest form of one-photon FME ( Fig. 4a ), a conventional 
microscope is equipped with a GRIN endoscope probe ≤1 mm in 
diameter. The microscope objective directs illumination light into the 
probe and adjustment of the objective position provides a noninvasive focusing mechanism for altering the image plane in the tissue
35,36. 
Inner
torsion beam
Outer
torsion 
beamMirror
Gimbal
Comb
Actuatory axis
x axisa
b
Figure 3  | An MEMS scanner. ( a) Scanning electron micrograph of 2D 
MEMS vertical comb scanner. Electrostatically driven angular verti-cal comb actuators rotate the 1-mm-diameter mirror about the torsion beams. Gimbal mounting of the mirror and actuators allows 2D scanning. Scale bar, 500 µm. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of vertical comb 
actuators. Scale bar, 100 µm. Material is this figure is based on work by 
Piyawattanametha et al.
71
946 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsThis approach has enabled imaging of neuronal activity and blood 
flow in deep brain regions of live rodents2,35,79, but the use of short, 
rigid microendoscope probes c oupled to a full-sized microscope 
restricts applications to immobilized specimens.
The use of fiber bundles alleviates this stipulation and provides 
mechanical flexibility while imaging in deep tissue59 (Fig. 4b ). Similar 
approaches have been used for reflectance imaging in freely moving cats
80. With a bare fiber bundle, only objects in direct contact with 
the tip of the bundle are in focus, but addition of a miniature lens to the distal end of the bundle can add optical working distance. As with conventional epifluorescence microscopy, out-of-focus and scattered fluorescence photons reduce image contrast.
Confocal imaging modalities
Fiber-optic confocal imaging can involve one SMF, two SMFs for dual-axis imaging or a fiber bundle. SMFs are used in confocal microscopy for remote light delivery, but their main application is in flexible endoscopy. Miniaturized optics and compact distal scanning mechanisms, such as fiber-tip scanning
22,65 (Fig. 2e ), fiber-objective lens scanning20,24,67 (Fig. 2f ) or MEMS mirror–based scanning ( Figs. 
2d and  3)68,69, have enabled SMF-based confocal endoscopes with 
an outer diameter as small as 3.5 mm ( Fig. 4c )24. Nonetheless, reduc-
tion of imaging and scanning optics to the millimeter scale nearly always compromises some combination of resolution, field of view and working distance. With confocal endoscopy based on one SMF (Fig. 4c ), design pressures tend to center on the choice of high NA 
objective optics, which are a key determinant of image quality and fluorescence collection efficiency.
Dual-axis confocal imaging provides an alternate set of compromis-
es, reducing ease of alignment and efficiency of fluorescence collection to gain longer optical working distance, immunity to off-axis aberra-tions, and good axial resolution using economical objective lenses. 
Two SMFs mounted at an angle to one another deliver light and collect fluorescence, respectively ( Fig. 4d ). Axial resolution is determined by 
the angle between the fibers and the transverse size of the illumination beam. Thus, two low-NA, long-working-distance objectives can pro-vide an effective high-NA for axial sectioning,  although the fluores-cence collection NA remains low. A compact postobjective scanning 
Dichroic
mirror
Objective
FiberFiber
FiberLens
Objective
FiberSpecimen 
planeGRIN
probe
Scanning Mirror
MicroprismCollection
fiber
Imaging 
opticsImaging 
opticsImaging 
opticsImaging 
optics
Fiber bundleFiber bundle
Fiber bundleDichroic
mirror
Dichroic
mirrorMicrolens
arrayab c
de f
gh iGRIN
probeFigure 4  | Fiber-optic fluorescence imaging 
embodiments. ( a) One-photon FME using a GRIN 
microendoscope probe. Visible illumination is coupled into the probe, which focuses the light onto the sample. Fluorescence returns through the probe. ( b) One-photon epifluorescence 
imaging using a fiber bundle. Illumination travels through the fiber bundle to a small objective or GRIN lens, which focuses the light onto the sample. Fluorescence returns through the bundle. ( c) Confocal imaging using SMF. The SMF 
delivers illumination to lenses that collimate and focus the light onto the specimen. The SMF core also serves as a pinhole for collecting in focus but rejecting out-of-focus fluorescence emissions. For microscopy, this embodiment generally relies on galvanometer scanning mirrors, which would be located between the fiber and lenses. For flexible endoscopy, the miniaturized distal scanning mechanisms are appropriate. ( d) Dual-axis confocal microscopy. 
One SMF delivers excitation light and a second SMF, mounted at an angle with respect to the first, collects fluorescence from the overlapping region of the two fiber apertures. ( e) Fiber 
bundle confocal imaging. Visible excitation light is scanned across a fiber bundle. A miniaturized objective or GRIN lens focuses the light onto the sample. Fluorescence returns through the probe and is routed to a pinhole detector. ( f) 
Two-photon FME with a GRIN microendoscope probe. Ultrashort pulses are coupled into the probe, which focuses the light onto the sample. Fluorescence returns back through the probe and is routed to a photodetector. ( g) Single-fiber 
two-photon imaging. Ultrashort pulses exiting a single fiber are scanned in 2D  before entering a miniaturized objective or GRIN lens, which focuses the near-infrared excita tion pulses onto the sample. A 
coated microprism can serve as a dichroic mirror. A large-core multimode fiber collects fluorescence. ( h) Fiber bundle two-photon imaging. Ultrashort pulses 
are scanned across the proximal end of a fiber bundle. A miniature objective or GRIN lens focuses the light onto the sample. Fl uorescence returns through 
the bundle to a detector. ( i) Multifocal two-photon imaging. A single fiber delivers the excitation light to a collimating lens. A micro-lens array divides  the 
beam into multiple ‘beamlets’, which are scanned in 2D and focused onto the sample. In all panels, blue represents visible fluo rescence excitation light, red 
represents ultrashort-pulsed near-infrared light for two-photon excitation, and green represents visible fluorescence emission.  Arrows show the directions of 
light propagation. Detectors and cameras are omitted. Scanners and dichroic mirrors are not shown except where explicitly label ed.
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 947REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsmechanism, such as a 2D tip-tilt mirror ( Fig. 2d ), offers broad fields of 
view up to ~500 µm81–83. T o date, dual-axis imaging has been demon-
strated in microscopy, but dual-axis endoscopy should emerge soon.
Fiber bundle confocal imaging facilitates miniaturization by use 
of conventional scanners proximal to the light source but reduces resolution through image pixilation ( Fig. 4e ). Many fiber bundle 
confocal designs also forgo a focusing mechanism to reduce size. For example, simply fusing a compound GRIN micro-lens onto the tip of a bundle enables handheld confocal FME probes with diameters as small as 300 µm
40,42. Such probes and accompanying imaging sys-
tems are now commercially available. By comparison, fiber bundle confocal endoscopes with remotely controlled distal focusing and miniature objective lenses exist with outer diameters as small as 3 mm
30. With either variety, a descanning pinhole rejects out-of-focus 
fluorescence to achieve optical sectioning. Scanning a line of excita-tion light across the bundle ( Fig. 2b ) boosts the image-acquisition 
rate, enabling video-rate imaging, although one must then use a descanning slit that does not reject out-of-focus light along the slit’s linear dimension
25,30,31. 
Two-photon fluorescence imaging modalities
For two-photon FME, a conventional two-photon microscope can be furnished with a GRIN microendoscope probe for insertion into tissue ( Fig. 4f ). As in one-photon FME, adjustment of the microscope 
objective position alters image focus. Although image frame rates have been lower (up to several Hz) than in one-photon FME, localized two-photon excitation provides inherent optical sectioning up to hundreds of micrometers from the tip of the endoscope probe. Two-photon FME has enabled in vivo  imaging of individual neurons and blood 
vessels deep in the brain
35,37.
As with one-photon endoscopy, the combination of a short endo-
scope probe and a flexible fiber removes the requirement for speci-mens to be immobilized ( Fig. 4g ). A two-photon FME system based 
on a PBF for delivery of ultrashort pulses and a GRIN microendo-scope probe has been created with an imaging head that is ~3.5 cm × 1.2 cm × 1.5 cm in size and 3.9 g in mass
38. This device uses resonant 
fiber tip scanning1, DC micromotor–based focusing and collection of 
fluorescence using a large-core multimode fiber. By comparison, fiber-optic two-photon microscopy based on a small microscope objective 
provides finer resolution and higher collection efficiency but does not allow the same degree of miniaturization
1.
For both flexibility and superior miniaturization, a fiber bundle 
based approach to two-photon FME has been realized ( Fig. 4h )39. 
Because fluorescence excitation is localized to the focal spot, the descanning pinhole of confocal modalities is unnecessary, enabling whole-area detection in which fluorescence is collected across the entire bundle. Nonlinear distortion of the excitation pulses in each fiber ( Box 1 ) currently limits fiber-bundle two-photon imaging to 
applications in surface tissue that do not require nanojoule energy pulses
39. Unfortunately, arrays of hollow core PBF or LMA-PCF do 
not yet exist with sufficiently large numbers of pixels for imaging.
The combination of a single PBF for light delivery, a micro-lens 
array for generating multiple foci and a small 2D scanning mirror has enabled high-speed, handheld two-photon microscopy ( Fig. 4i )
17,18. 
Because multiple laser foci exist within the sample it is necessary to use a camera or multianode photomultiplier tube for signal detec-tion. When the field of view is small and imaging is performed deep within tissue, scattering of fluorescence emissions can lead to cross talk between pixels and reduced contrast. T o date, multifocal, two-photon imaging has been demonstrated for portable microscopy17,18, 
but further miniaturization might enable endoscopy.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Fiber-optic fluorescence imaging will continue to benefit from prog-ress in miniaturized and microfabricated components. There is also growing interest in other nonlinear optical modalities, such as second harmonic generation (SHG)
84 and Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman 
Scattering (CARS)85, that provide inherent optical sectioning as in 
two-photon imaging but with intrinsic contrast generation mecha-nisms that do not require a dye label. Fiber-optic SHG and CARS imaging will benefit from the same trends towards miniaturization that are driving progress in fiber-optic fluorescence imaging.
Future fiber-optic systems will likely use microfabricated 
components in addition to scanning mirrors. Electrostatically actuated lenses are an alternative to MEMS mirrors for minia-turized scanning
86. In addition, optical fibers and small lenses 
can be integrated by micromachining a v-groove or optical benches directly into a silicon wafer
68,87,88. Optical fibers for 
light delivery and collection may eventually become unneces-sary with the advent of integrated semiconductor laser sources and photodetectors
89. Imaging systems in which all compo-
nents are fabricated monolithically would provide a new degree of miniaturization, inherent alignment and potential for highly parallel imaging. T ogether, such advances will propel imag-ing applications that require both portability and a high degree of functionality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our work on fiber-optic imaging is supported by grants to M.J.S from the Human Frontier Science Program, the US National Institute on Drug Abuse, the US National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the US National Science Foundation, the US Office of Naval Research, the Arnold & Mabel Beckman Foundation and the David & Lucille Packard Foundation. B.A.F is a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellow. E.D.C. is a member of the Stanford Biotechnology Program. W.P. is an affiliate of the National Electronics and Computer Technology Center of Thailand. E.L.M.C. is supported in part by a Dean’s Fellowship, Stanford School of Medicine. We thank R. Kristiansen of C. Fibre for providing images of photonic crystal fiber.
COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.
Published online at http://www.nature.com/naturemethods/
Reprints and permissions information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/
1. Helmchen, F., Fee, M.S., Tank, D.W. & Denk, W. A miniature head-mounted two-
photon microscope. high-resolution brain imaging in freely moving animals. Neuron  31, 903–912 (2001).
2. Monfared, A. et al. In vivo  imaging of mammalian cochlear blood flow using 
fluorescence microendoscopy. Otol. Neurotol.  (in the press) .
3. Bashford, C.L., Barlow, C.H., Chance, B., Haselgrove, J. & Sorge, J. Optical 
measurements of oxygen delivery and consumption in gerbil cerebral cortex. Am. J. Physiol.  242, C265–C271 (1982).
4. Chance, B., Cohen, P., Jobsis, F. & Schoener, B. Intracellular oxidation-reduction 
states in vivo . Science  137, 499–508 (1962).
5. Mayevsky, A. & Chance, B. Intracellular oxidation-reduction state measured in 
situ by a multichannel fiber-optic surface fluorometer. Science  217, 537–540 
(1982).
6. Epstein, J.R. & Walt, D.R. Fluorescence-based fibre optic arrays: a universal 
platform for sensing. Chem. Soc. Rev.  32, 203–214 (2003).
7. Yamaguchi, S. et al. View of a mouse clock gene ticking. Nature  409, 684 
(2001).
8. Bird, D. & Gu, M. Fibre-optic two-photon scanning fluorescence microscopy. J. 
Microsc.  208, 35–48 (2002).
9. Ghiggino, K.P., Harris, M.R. & Spizzirri, P.G. Fluorescence lifetime measurements 
using a novel fiber-optic laser scanning confocal microscope. Rev. Sci. Instrum.  
948 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methods63, 2999–3002 (1992).
10. Dabbs, T. & Glass, M. Fiber optic confocal microscope: FOCON. Appl. Opt.  31, 
3030–3035 (1992).
11. Bird, D. & Gu, M. Compact two-photon fluorescence microscope based on a 
single-mode fiber coupler. Opt. Lett.  27, 1031–1033 (2002).
12. Bird, D. & Gu, M. Resolution improvement in two-photon fluorescence 
microscopy with a single-mode fiber. Appl. Opt.  41, 1852–1857 (2002).
13. Delaney, P.M., Harris, M.R. & King, R.G. Novel microscopy using fibre optic 
confocal imaging and its suitability for subsurface blood vessel imaging in vivo . 
Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol.  20, 197–198 (1993).
14. Delaney, P.M., Harris, M.R. & King, R.G. Fiber-optic laser scanning confocal 
microscope suitable for fluorescence imaging. Appl. Opt.  33, 573–577 (1994).
15. Delaney, P.M., King, R.G., Lambert, J.R. & Harris, M.R. Fibre optic confocal 
imaging (FOCI) for subsurface microscopy of the colon in vivo . J. Anat.  184, 
157–160 (1994).
16. Tai, S.P. et al. Two-photon fluorescence microscope with a hollow-core photonic 
crystal fiber. Opt. Express  12, 6122–6128 (2004).
17. Kim, D., Kim, K.H., Yazdanfar, S. & So, P.T.C. Optical biopsy in high-speed 
handheld miniaturized multifocal multiphoton microscopy. Proceedings of SPIE  
5700, 14–22 (2005).
18. Kim, D., Kim, K.H., Yazdanfar, S. & So, P.T.C. High speed handheld multiphoton 
multifoci microscopy. Proceedings of SPIE  5323, 267–272 (2004).
19. Carlson, K. et al. In vivo  fiber-optic confocal reflectance microscope with an 
injection-molded miniature objective lens. Appl. Opt.  44, 1792–1796 (2005).
20. Giniunas, L., Juskaitis, R. & Shatalin, S.V. Scanning fibre-optic microscope. 
Electronics Lett.  27, 724–726 (1991).
21. Giniunas, L., Juskaitis, R. & Shatalin, S.V. Endoscope with optical sectioning 
capability. Appl. Opt.  32, 2888–2890 (1993).
22. Kiesslich, R. et al. Confocal laser endoscopy for diagnosing intraepithelial 
neoplasias and colorectal cancer in vivo . Gastroenterology  127, 706–713 (2004).
23. Liang, C., Sung, K.B., Richards-Kortum, R. & Descour, M.R. Design of a high-
numerical aperture miniature microscope objective for an endoscopic fiber confocal reflectance microscope. Appl. Opt.  41, 4603–4610 (2002).
24. Ota, T., Fukuyama, H., Ishihara, Y., Tanaka, H. & Takamatsu, T. 
In situ  
fluorescence imaging of organs through compact scanning head for confocal laser microscopy. J. Biomed. Opt.  10, 1–4 (2005).
25. Rouse, A.R. & Gmitro, A.F. Multispectral imaging with a confocal 
microendoscope. Opt. Lett.  25, 1708–1710 (2000).
26. Swindle, L.D., Thomas, S.G., Freeman, M. & Delaney, P.M. View of normal human 
skin in vivo  as observed using fluorescent fiber-optic confocal microscopic 
imaging. J. Invest. Dermatol.  121, 706–712 (2003).
27. Anikijenko, P. et al. In vivo  detection of small subsurface melanomas in athymic 
mice using noninvasive fiber optic confocal imaging. J. Invest. Dermatol.  117, 
1442–1448 (2001).
28. Bussau, L.J. et al. Fibre optic confocal imaging (FOCI) of keratinocytes, blood 
vessels and nerves in hairless mouse skin in vivo . J. Anat.  192, 187–194 
(1998).
29. Papworth, G.D., Delaney, P.M., Bussau, L.J., Vo, L.T. & King, R.G. In vivo  fibre 
optic confocal imaging of microvasculature and nerves in the rat vas deferens and colon. J. Anat.  192, 489–495 (1998).
30. Rouse, A.R., Kano, A., Udovich, J.A., Kroto, S.M. & Gmitro, A.F. Design and 
demonstration of a miniature catheter for a confocal microendoscope. Appl. Opt.  
43, 5763–5771 (2004).
31. Sabharwal, Y.S., Rouse, A.R., Donaldson, K.A., Hopkins, M.F. & Gmitro, A.F. Slit-
scanning confocal microendoscope for high-resolution in vivo  imaging. Appl. 
Opt. 38, 7133–7144 (1999).
32. McLaren, W., Anikijenko, P., Barkla, D., Delaney, T.P. & King, R. In vivo  detection 
of experimental ulcerative colitis in rats using fiberoptic confocal imaging (FOCI). Dig. Dis. Sci.  46, 2263–2276 (2001).
33. McLaren, W.J., Anikijenko, P., Thomas, S.G., Delaney, P.M. & King, R.G. In 
vivo detection of morphological and microvascular changes of the colon in 
association with colitis using fiberoptic confocal imaging (FOCI). Dig. Dis. Sci.  
47, 2424–2433 (2002).
34. Vo, L.T. et al. Autofluorescence of skin burns detected by fiber-optic confocal 
imaging: evidence that cool water treatment limits progressive thermal damage in anesthetized hairless mice. J. Trauma  51, 98–104 (2001).
35. Jung, J.C., Mehta, A.D., Aksay, E., Stepnoski, R. & Schnitzer, M.J. In 
vivo mammalian brain imaging using one- and two-photon fluorescence 
microendoscopy. J. Neurophysiol.  92, 3121–3133 (2004).
36. Jung, J.C. & Schnitzer, M.J. Multiphoton endoscopy. Opt. Lett.  28, 902–904 
(2003).
37. Levene, M.J., Dombeck, D.A., Kasischke, K.A., Molloy, R.P. & Webb, W.W. In vivo  
multiphoton microscopy of deep brain tissue. J. Neurophysiol.  91, 1908–1912 
(2004).
38. Flusberg, B.A., Jung, J.C., Cocker, E.D., Anderson, E.P. & Schnitzer, M.J. 
In vivo  brain imaging using a portable 3.9 gram two-photon fluorescence microendoscope. Opt. Lett.  30, 2272–2274 (2005).
39. Gobel, W., Kerr, J.N., Nimmerjahn, A. & Helmchen, F. Miniaturized two-photon 
microscope based on a flexible coherent fiber bundle and a gradient-index lens objective. Opt. Lett.  29, 2521–2523 (2004).
40. Knittel, J., Schnieder, L., Buess, G., Messerschmidt, B. & Possner, T. Endoscope-
compatible confocal microscope using a gradient index-lens system. Opt. 
Commun.  188, 267–273 (2001).
41. D’Hallewin, M-A., Khatib, S.E., Leroux, A., Bezdetnaya, L. & Guillemin, F. 
Endoscopic confocal fluorescence microscopy of normal and tumor bearing rat bladder. J. Urol.  174, 736–740 (2005).
42. Laemmel, E. et al. Fibered confocal fluorescence microscopy (Cell-viZio™) 
facilitates extended imaging in the field of microcirculation. A comparison with intravital microscopy. J. Vasc. Res.  41, 400–411 (2004).
43. Bird, D. & Gu, M. Two-photon fluorescence endoscopy with a micro-optic 
scanning head. Opt. Lett.  28, 1552–1554 (2003).
44. Mehta, A.D., Jung, J.C., Flusberg, B.A. & Schnitzer, M.J. Fiber optic in vivo  
imaging in the mammalian nervous system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.  14, 617–628 
(2004).
45. Saleh, B.E.A. & Teich, M.C. Fundamentals of photonics  (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
New York, USA, 1991).
46. Harris, M.R. (US patent 5120953, 1992).47. Fu, L., Gan, X. & Gu, M. use of a single-mode fiber coupler for second-harmonic-
generation microscopy. Opt. Lett.  30, 385–387 (2005).
48. Yariv, A. Three-dimensional pictorial transmission in optical fibers. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 28, 88–89 (1976).
49. Helmchen, F., Tank, D.W. & Denk, W. Enhanced two-photon excitation through 
optical fiber by single-mode propagation in a large core. Appl. Opt.  41, 2930–
2934 (2002).
50. Myaing, M.T., Urayama, J., Braun, A. & Norris, T.B. Nonlinear propagation of 
negatively chirped pulses: Maximizing the peak intensity at the output of a fiber probe. Opt. Express  7, 210–214 (2000).
51. Ouzounov, D.G. et al. Delivery of nanojoule femtosecond pulses through large-
core microstructured fibers. Opt. Lett.  27
, 1513–1515 (2002).
52. Knight, J.C. Photonic crystal fibres. Nature  424, 847–851 (2003).
53. Gobel, W., Nimmerjahn, A. & Helmchen, F. Distortion-free delivery of nanojoule 
femtosecond pulses from a Ti:sapphire laser through a hollow-core photonic crystal fiber. Opt. Lett.  29, 1285–1287 (2004).
54. Tai, S.-H., Chan, M.-C., Tsai, T.-H., Guol, S.-H., Chen, L.-J. & Sun, C.-K. Two-
photon fluorescence microscope with a hollow-core photonic crystal fiber. Proceedings of SPIE  5691, 146–152 (2005).
55. Treacy, E.B. Optical pulse compression with diffraction gratings. IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron.  QE-5, 454–458 (1969).
56. Fork, R.L., Brito Cruz, C.H., Becker, P.C. & Shank, C.V. Compression of optical 
pulses to six femtoseconds by using cubic phase compensation. Opt. Lett.  12, 
483–485 (1987).
57. Ye, J.Y. et al. Development of a double-clad photonic-crystal-fiber based 
scanning microscope. Proceedings of SPIE  5700, 23–27 (2005).
58. Fu, L., Gan, X. & Gu, M. Nonlinear optical microscopy based on double-clad 
photonic crystal fibers. Opt. Express  13, 5528–5534 (2005).
59. Hirano, M., Yamashita, Y. & Miyakawa, A. In vivo  visualization of hippocampal 
cells and dynamics of Ca2+ concentration during anoxia: feasibility of a fiber-optic plate microscope system for in vivo  experiments. Brain Res.  732, 61–68 
(1996).
60. Lane, P.M., Dlugan, A.L.P., Richards-Kortum, R. & MacAulay, C.E. Fiber-optic 
confocal microscopy using a spatial light modulator. Opt. Lett.  25, 1780–1782 
(2000).
61. Gmitro, A.F. & Aziz, D. Confocal microscopy through a fiber-optic imaging 
bundle. Opt. Lett.  18, 565–567 (1993).
62. Lin, C.H. & Webb, R.H. Fiber-coupled multiplexed confocal microscope. Opt. 
Lett. 25, 954–957 (2000).
63. Dong, C.Y., Koenig, K. & So P.
 Characterizing point spread functions of two-
photon fluorescence microscopy in turbid medium J. Biomed. Opt. 8, 450–459 
(2003).
64. Seibel, E.J. & Smithwick, Q.Y. Unique features of optical scanning, single fiber 
endoscopy. Lasers Surg. Med.  30, 177–183 (2002).
65. Delaney, P.M. & Harris, M.R. In Handbook of Biological Confocal Microscopy (ed. 
Pawley, J. B.) 515–523 (Plenum Press, New York, 1995).
66. Harris, M.R. (UK patent W09904301, 1999).67. Dickensheets, D. & Kino, G.S. Scanned optical fiber confocal microscope.  
Proceedings of SPIE  2184, 39–47 (1994).
68. Dickensheets, D.L. & Kino, G.S. Micromachined scanning confocal optical 
microscope. Opt. Lett.  21, 764–766 (1996).
69. Hofmann, U., Muehlmann, S., Witt, M., Dorschel, K., Schutz, R. & Wagner, B. 
Electrostatically driven micromirrors for a miniaturized confocal laser scanning microscope. Proceedings of SPIE  3878, 29–38 (1999).
70. Piyawattanametha, W., Toshiyoshi, H., LaCosse, J. & Wu, M.C.  Surface 
NATURE METHODS  | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | 949REVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methodsmicromachined confocal scanning optical microscope.  In Technical Digest Series 
of Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO),  447–448 (San Francisco, 
2000).
71. Piyawattanametha, W., Patterson, P., Hah, D., Toshiyoshi, H. & Wu, M.C. A 2D 
scanner by surface and bulk micromachined angular vertical comb actuators. In IEEE/LEOS International Conference on Optical MEMS,  93–94 (Waikoloa, Hawaii, 
2003).
72. Schenk, H. et al. Large deflection micromechanical scanning mirrors for linear 
scans and pattern generation. J. Select.  Topics in Quantum Electronics  6, 
715–722 (2000).
73. Lee, D. Solgaard, O. T. Two-axis gimbaled microscanner in double SOI layers 
actuated by self-aligned vertical electrostatic combdrive. In Proceedings of 
the Solid-State Sensor and Actuator Workshop,  352–355 (Hilton Head, South 
Carolina, 2004).
74. Rector, D.M., Rogers, R.F. & George, J.S. A focusing image probe for assessing 
neural activity in vivo . J. Neurosci. Methods  91, 135–145 (1999).
75. Kuiper, S. & Hendriks, B.H.W. Variable-focus liquid lens for miniature cameras. 
Appl. Phys. Lett.  85, 1128–1130 (2004).
76. Berge, B. & Peseux, J. Variable focal lens controlled by an external voltage: an 
application of electrowetting. Eur. Phys. J. E  3, 159–163 (2000).
77. Kuiper, S., Hendriks, B.H.W., Hayes, R.A., Feenstra, B.J. & Baken, J.M.E. 
Electrowetting-based optics. Proceedings of SPIE  5908, 5908OR-1–5908OR-7 
(2005).
78. George, M. Optical methods and sensors for in situ  histology in surgery and 
endoscopy. Min. Invas. Ther. & Allied.  Technol.  13, 95–104 (2004).
79. Fisher, J.A.N., Civillico, E.F., Contreras, D. & Yodh, A.G. In vivo  fluorescence 
microscopy of neuronal activity in three dimensions by use of voltage-sensitive dyes. Opt. Lett.  29, 71–73 (2004).
80. Poe, G.R., Rector, D.M. & Harper, R.M. Hippocampal reflected optical patterns 
during sleep and waking states in the freely behaving cat. J. Neurosci.  14, 2933–2942 (1994).
81. Wang, T.D., Contag, C.H., Mandella, M.J., Chan, N.Y. & Kino, G.S. Dual-
axes confocal microscopy with post-objective scanning and low-coherence heterodyne detection. Opt. Lett.  28, 1915–1917 (2003).
82. Wang, T.D., Contag, C.H., Mandella, M.J., Chan, N.Y. & Kino, G.S. Confocal 
fluorescence microscope with dual-axis architecture and biaxial postobjective scanning. J. Biomed. Opt.  9, 735–742 (2004).
83. Wang, T.D., Mandella, M.J., Contag, C.H. & Kino, G.S. Dual-axis confocal 
microscope for high resolution in vivo  imaging. Opt. Lett.  28, 414–416 (2003).
84. Brown, E. et al.
 Dynamic imaging of collagen and its modulation in tumors in 
vivo using second-harmonic generation. Nat. Med.  9, 796–800 (2003).
85. Cheng, J.-X., & Xie, X.S. Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering microscopy: 
instrumentation theory, and applications. J. Phys. Chem. B 108, 827–840 (2004). 
86. Kwon, S. & Lee, L.P. Micromachined transmissive scanning confocal 
microscope. Opt. Lett.  29, 706–708 (2004).
87. Lee, K.-N., Jang, Y.-H., Choi, J. & Kim, H. Silicon scanning mirror with 54.74 ° 
slanted reflective surface for fluorescence scanning system. Proceedings of SPIE  
5641, 56–66 (2004).
88. Sheard, S., Suhara, T. & Nishihara, H. Integrated-optic implementation of a 
confocal scanning optical microscope. Journal of Lightwave Technology  11, 
1400–1403 (1993).
89. Thrush, E. et al. Integrated semiconductor verticle-cavity surface-emitting 
lasers and PIN photodetectors for biomedical fluorescence sensing. IEEE J. 
Quantum Electron.  40, 491–498 (2004).
90. McConnell, G. & Riis, E. Photonic crystal fibre enables short-wavelength two-
photon laser scanning fluorescence microscopy with fura-2. Phys. Med. Biol.  
49, 4757–4763 (2004).
91. McConnell, G. & Riis, E. Two-photon laser scanning fluorescence microscopy 
using photonic crystal fiber. J. Biomed. Opt.  9, 922–927 (2004).
950 | VOL.2 NO.12 | DECEMBER 2005 | NATURE METHODSREVIEW©2005 Nature Publishing Group  http://ww w.nature.com/nature methods