UNIT 2C.1 Basic Confocal Microscopy
INTRODUCTION
Confocal microscopy is a powerful tool
for visualizing ﬂuorescent specimens. The
principal advantage of confocal microscopy
over conventional wide-ﬁeld microscopy is
that it can reveal the three-dimensional struc-
ture of the specimen. Fluorescent specimens
viewed with a conventional wide-ﬁeld ﬂuores-
cent microscope appear blurry and lack con-
trast because ﬂuorophores throughout the en-
tire depth of the specimen are illuminated,
and ﬂuorescence signals are collected not
only from the plane of focus but also from
areas above and below. A confocal micro-
scope selectively collects light from a thin
(<1µm) optical section at the plane of fo-
cus in the specimen (Fig. 2C.1.1). Structures
within the focal plane appear more sharply de-
ﬁned than with a conventional microscope be-
cause there is essentially no ﬂare of light from
out-of-focus areas. A three-dimensional view
of the specimen can be reconstructed from a
series of optical sections at different depths
(Fig. 2C.1.2).
Several types of confocal microscopes are
available. The most common type is the laser
scanning confocal microscope (LSCM), which
captures images by scanning the specimen
with a focused beam of light from a laser
and collecting the emitted ﬂuorescence signals
with a photodetector. LSCMs sometimes are
referred to as “spot-scanning” confocal micro-
scopes, to distinguish them from microscopes
that scan the specimen with a slit of light (slit-
scanning) or multiple spots of light (spinning-
disk or Nipkow disk). Spot-scanning LSCMs
have slower image acquisition rates than slit-
scanning or spinning-disk microscopes ( <1
frame/sec versus 30 frames/sec or higher).
However they are more versatile in a num-
ber of ways. They can accommodate lasers
with a wide range of wavelengths (from the
UV to the infrared) and can be conﬁgured to
image multiple ﬂuorophores either simultane-
ously or sequentially. Some include spectral
detectors that can capture the entire spectrum
of the ﬂuorescence emitted at each pixel in
the image. The most sophisticated LSCMs al-
low the user to control the illumination wave-
length and intensity on a microsecond time
scale. This feature makes it possible to perform
experiments that require selectively illuminat-
ing ﬂuorophores in a deﬁned region of inter-est in order to photobleach (Fig. 2C.1.1D) or
photoactivate them. Measurement of ﬂuores-
cence recovery after photobleach (FRAP) or
ﬂuorescence loss in photobleach (FLIP) can
provide information about molecular mobil-
ity and binding (Cole et al., 1996; McNally
and Smith, 2002; Lippincott-Schwartz et al.,
2003; Sprague and McNally, 2005). Photo-
sensitive molecules include certain ﬂuores-
cent proteins (for example, see Patterson and
Lippincott-Schwartz, 2002, for the ﬂuorescent
protein PaGFP and see Ando et al., 2002,
for the photosensitive protein Kaede), “caged”
molecules such as caged Ca2+chelators,
neurotransmitters, and second messengers
(Nerbonne, 1996). Confocal microscopy also
can be used to measure ﬂuorescence resonance
energy transfer (FRET; Wouters and Basti-
aens, 2000).
In microbial research, confocal microscopy
is widely used for applications that require vi-
sualizing microorganisms within their hosts
(Roux et al., 2004; Fig. 2C.1.3A,B). Top-
ics that have been addressed include the
mechanisms of microbial adhesion and en-
try into host cells (Elphick et al., 2004;
Ferrari et al., 2003), mechanisms of intracel-
lular motility (Satpute-Krishnan et al., 2003;
Viachou et al., 2004; Forest et al., 2005), and
the reactions of host cells to infection (Per-
rin et al., 2004; Shaner et al., 2004). Confocal
microscopy also has been used to characterize
the growth and physical properties of bioﬁlms
(Drenkard and Ausubel, 2002; Rani et al.,
2005; Daims et al., 2006; Fig. 2C.1.3C,D). The
current generation of confocal microscopes,
particularly those that utilize charge-coupled
devices (CCDs) as photon detectors, are suf-
ﬁciently sensitive to detect weak ﬂuorescence
signals and potentially could be used for imag-
ing structures within individual microorgan-
isms.
The purpose of this unit is to provide back-
ground information and practical tips for op-
timizing confocal imaging. The ﬁrst section
(Basis of Optical Sectioning) explains the
basic principle of confocal imaging as im-
plemented in a LSCM. The second section
(Conﬁguration of an LSCM) describes the
components and light path in a typical LSCM
and compares this with the light paths of
spot-scanning microscopes and a new type of
slit-scanning confocal microscope. The third
Contributed by Carolyn L. Smith
Current Protocols in Microbiology (2006) 2C.1.1-2C.1.19
Copyright C/circlecopyrt2006 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.Microscopy
2C.1.1Basic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.2
Current Protocols in Microbiology
Figure 2C.1.1 Applications of laser scanning microscopy. ( A, B). Imaging in thick specimens.
Neurons in a Drosophila embryo were immunolabeled with antibodies against three different
transcription factors (images provided by Dr. Ward Odenwald of the National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Md.; reproduced from Kamabadur et al., 1998). ( A) A single optical section ( ∼2.5-µm)
captured with 25 ×, 0.8-NA objective. Labeled neurons in the plane of focus appear sharply deﬁned,
while those outside it are not visualized. ( B) A maximum projection of 65 optical sections collected
at 2-µm intervals in the zaxis. ( C) Imaging intracellular structures. Dissociated rat ﬁbroblasts
were immunolabeled with anti-tubulin antibodies to visualize microtubules (green) and stained
with ﬂuorescent probes for mitochondria (Mitotracker, red) and DNA (DAPI, blue). The image is
a projection of 20 optical sections (0.3- µm intervals) captured with a 100 ×, 1.4-NA objective. ( D)
Measuring molecular mobility in living cells. In a living ﬁbroblast expressing a Golgi membrane
protein (galactosyltransferase) fused to GFP (S65T), GFP ﬂuorescence (green) is localized in
the Golgi complex, shown superimposed on a DIC image of the cell. After the ﬁrst image was
collected, the boxed region (yellow) was scanned with full laser power to photobleach the GFP in
the boxed area. The second image was collected 2 sec later. Subsequent images (not illustrated)
showed that the GFP-galactosyltransferase rapidly diffused back into the photobleached area.
Images were captured with a LSM410 (Carl Zeiss, Inc.). For the color version of this ﬁgure go to
http://www.currentprotocols.com .
section (Practical Guidelines) provides guide-
lines for preparing specimens and conﬁgur-
ing the critical parameters for confocal imag-
ing. The Commentary provides references to
sources of additional information.
BASIS OF OPTICAL SECTIONING
Confocal microscopes accomplish optical
sectioning by scanning the specimen with
af o c u s e db e a mo fl i g h ta n dc o l l e c t i n gt h e
ﬂuorescence signals emitted by the specimenvia a pinhole aperture. The pinhole aperture
blocks signals from out-of-focus areas of the
specimen whereas light from the focal plane
passes through the pinhole to reach the detec-
tor. The physical basis of optical sectioning is
illustrated in Figure 2C.1.4. The microscope
objective focuses light from a point source
(a laser) to a diffraction-limited spot in the
specimen. The irradiation is most intense at the
focal spot, but areas of the specimen above and
below the focal spot are also illuminated. Fluo-
rescent molecules excited by the incident lightMicroscopy
2C.1.3
Current Protocols in Microbiology
Figure 2C.1.2 3-D Imaging in living specimens. Comparison of water- and oil-immersion objec-
tives. ( A,B,E,F ) Living yeast cells expressing a GFP construct that targets to the mitochondrial
matrix were visualized with C-APO 63 ×1.2 NA (water) objective ( A,B)o raP l a n a p o c h r o m a t
100×1.4 NA (oil) objective ( E,F). The images show xyandyzprojections of stacks of 40 images
collected at 0.2- µm intervals along the optical axis. The xyprojections appear sharper than the
yzprojections because the resolution is higher in the focal plane of the objective than along the
optical axis. The yeast were embedded in an aqueous solution with 0.2% agarose. Panels C and
Ga r e yzprojections of images of 0.19- µmﬂ u o r e s c e n tb e a d sc a p t u r e dw i t ha6 3 ×(water; C)o r
100×(oil;G) objective. The beads were embedded in an aqueous solution with 2% agarose. D
andHare intensity proﬁles along the horizontal and vertical axes of the beads. A 63 ×1.2 NA
(water) objective provides better axial resolution than an 100 ×1.4 NA objective (oil) in specimens
in an aqueous solution. Scale bars =5µm(A,B,E,F ); 0.5 µm(C,G). Images were captured with
aL S M 5 1 0( C a r lZ e i s s ,I n c . ) .
emit ﬂuorescence in all directions. The objec-
tive captures a portion of the emitted light. The
objective projects light from the focal spot in
the specimen to a conjugate spot in an “im-
age” plane. The pinhole aperture is positioned
in the image plane so as to be centered on this
spot. The light that passes through the aperture
is detected by a photomultiplier tube (PMT).
Light from out-of-focus areas of the specimen
is spread out at the image plane and is largely
blocked by the pinhole aperture.
The diameter of the pinhole determines how
much of the ﬂuorescence emitted by the illu-
minated cone in the specimen is detected, as
well as the thickness of the optical section.
From wave optics, it is known that a point light
source in the plane of focus of an objective pro-
duces a three-dimensional diffraction pattern
in the image plane. The cross-section at the im-
age plane is an Airy disk, a circular diffraction
pattern with a bright central region. The radius
of the bright central region of the Airy disk in
the reference frame of the specimen is given by
RAiry=0.61λ/NA where λis the emission
wavelength and NA is the numerical aperture
of the objective (Inou ´ea n dS p r i n g ,2 0 0 2 ) .A tthe image plane, the radius of the central re-
gion is RAirymultiplied by the magniﬁcation
at that plane (Wilson, 1995).
Adjustment of the pinhole to a diameter
slightly less than the diameter of the cen-
tral region of the Airy disk allows most of
the light from the focal point to reach the
detector and reduces the background from
out-of-focus areas by ∼1000-fold relative to
wide-ﬁeld microscopy (Sandison et al., 1995).
The separation of the in-focus signal from the
out-of-focus background achieved by a prop-
erly adjusted pinhole is the principal advan-
tage of confocal microscopy for examination
of thick specimens.
Point illumination and the presence of a
pinhole in the detection light path also produce
improved lateral and axial resolution relative
to conventional microscopy (Table 2C.1.1).
The actual extent of improvement depends on
the size of the pinhole. Near-maximal axial
resolution is obtained with a pinhole radius of
∼0.7×RAiry,w h e r e a so p t i m a ll a t e r a lr e s o l u -
tion is obtained with a pinhole smaller than
0.3×RAiry(Wilson, 1995). However, a pin-
hole smaller than ∼0.7×RAirysigniﬁcantlyBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.4
Current Protocols in Microbiology
Figure 2C.1.3 Applications of confocal microscopy in microbial research. ( A, B ). Human red
blood cells (RBC) infected with malaria parasites ( Plasmodium falciparum ; 3D7 strain). Biotinylated
human RBC were labeled with streptavidin-conjugated Quantum Dots 525 (CA; green color;
http://www.qdots.com )a n d0 . 5 -t o4 - µMF M - 6 4( M o l e c u l a rP r o b e s ,r e dc o l o r ) .T h ec e l l sw e r e
injected into chambers (HybriWell HBW20 from Grace Bio-Labs) and were examined with an LSM
510 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.) with a 100 ×1.4-NA oil objective. Panel A shows two
RBC, one containing a parasite at the trophozoite stage; panel B shows a parasite at the schizont
stage. The schizont was extruded from the RBC for better imaging of individual parasites (red).
The green signal in the center of the schizont represents autoﬂuorescence from hemazoin in
the digestive vacuole. Images were provided by Dr. Svetlana Glushakova (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Md.; methods described in Glushakova et al., 2005). ( C, D) Bioﬁlm composed
of microcolonies of nitrifying bacteria (ammonia oxidizers; Nitrosomonas sp. ) and nitrite oxidizers
(Nitrospira sp. ). Both populations were labeled by ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with
16S rRNA-targeted oligonucleotide probes. Nitrosomonas colonies are green; Nitrospira colonies
are red. Images are 3-D reconstructions created using the Daime imaging program (see Daims
et al., 2006, and Internet Resources) from stacks of optical sections collected with an LSM 510
(Carl Zeiss, Inc). Panel C shows an overview of the projected image of the bioﬁlm, while panel D
shows a smaller region at higher zoom. Images were provided by Dr. Holger Daims (Universit ¨at
Wien, Vienna, Austria). For the color version of this ﬁgure go to http://www.currentprotocols.com .
reduces the total signal, a sacriﬁce that may
not be worth the gain in resolution, especially
when imaging dim samples. In ﬂuorescenceimaging, resolution is also inﬂuenced by the
emission and excitation wavelengths (Table
2C.1.1).Microscopy
2C.1.5
Current Protocols in Microbiology
Figure 2C.1.4 The basis of optical sectioning. Illumination from a point light source is reﬂected
by a dichroic mirror into the back aperture of a microscope objective. The objective lens focuses
the light to a diffraction-limited spot within the specimen. Fluorophores at the focal spot and within
the cones of illumination above and below it are excited, emitting ﬂuorescence in all directions.
The ﬂuorescence captured by the objective passes through the dichroic mirror because the ﬂuo-
rescence is at a longer wavelength than the excitation. The confocal pinhole allows ﬂuorescence
from the focal spot to reach the photodetector and blocks ﬂuorescence from out-of-focus areas.
Redrawn from Shotton (1993).
Table 2C.1.1 Theoretical Resolutions of Confocal and Conventional Microscopesa,b
Objective
λx/λem 10×,0 . 4N A ,a i r 4 0 ×,0 . 8 5N A ,a i r 6 0 ×,1 . 4N A ,o i l
Lat. res. Ax. res. Lat. res. Ax. res. Lat. res. Ax. res.
Confocal ﬂuorescence microscope
488/518 0.55 4.50 0.26 0.99 0.16 0.56
568/590 0.64 5.17 0.30 1.09 0.18 0.64
647/677 0.72 5.88 0.34 1.28 0.21 0.72
Conventional ﬂuorescence microscope
518 0.79 6.48 0.37 1.43 0.24 0.93
590 0.90 7.38 0.42 1.63 0.28 1.06
680 1.04 8.50 0.49 1.88 0.32 1.22
aData reprinted from Brelje et al. (1993) by permission of Academic Press.
bλexandλem,e x c i t a t i o na n de m i s s i o nw a v e l e n g t h s ;l a t .r e s .a n da x .r e s . ,l a t e r a la n da x i a lr e s o l u t i o n s .Basic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.6
Current Protocols in Microbiology
Figure 2C.1.5 The light path of a laser-scanning confocal microscope. The diagram illustrates
the light path of a LSCM set up for simultaneous imaging of FITC and lissamine rhodamine. The
488- and 568-nm lines of a krypton-argon laser are reﬂected by dichroic beam splitter 1 into the
optical axis of the microscope. The beam is reﬂected by a mirror into the microscope objective,
which focuses the beam to a diffraction-limited spot in the specimen. The scanner consists of a pair
of galvanometer mirrors that deﬂect the laser beams so as to scan the spot across the specimen
in a raster pattern. Fluorescence emitted as each point is illuminated travels the reverse path
through the scanning system. The FITC ﬂuorescence (peak at 520 nm) and lissamine rhodamine
ﬂuorescence (peak at 590 nm) pass through dichroic beam splitter 1 to dichroic beam splitter
2, which transmits the lissamine rhodamine ﬂuorescence to photomultiplier tube 1 and reﬂects
the FITC ﬂuorescence to photomultiplier tube 2. A variable pinhole in front of each photodetector
blocks light from out-of-focus areas of the specimen while allowing light from the focal plane to
reach the detector.
CONFIGURATION OF AN LSCM
Confocal microscopes use lasers for illu-
mination because they provide intense exci-
tation within a narrow range of wavelengths.
Mixed krypton-argon gas lasers are popular
for multicolor confocal microscopy because
they emit at three wavelengths (488, 568, and
647 nm) that excite many commonly-used
ﬂuorophores—e.g., FITC, rhodamine, Cy3,
Cy5, Alexa 488/555/568/647, green ﬂuores-
cent protein (GFP), and red ﬂuorescent pro-
tein (mRFP or DsRed). The disadvantage of
krypton-argon lasers is that their life spans are
short ( ∼2000 hr). Another way to achieve mul-
tiwavelength excitation is to combine the out-
puts of multiple lasers. Many of the confocal
microscopes currently on the market combine
an argon laser (488 nm) with a green helium-
neon (HeNe) laser (543 or 594 nm) and a red
HeNe laser (633 nm). The argon laser also
may provide 458 and 514 nm lines, which can
be used to excite the cyan and yellow variants
of GFP (CFP and YFP). Some confocal mi-
croscopes can accommodate a 405-nm diodelaser. The 405-nm laser is more optimal for
excitation of CFP than the 458 line of the ar-
gon laser and also excites photosensitive GFP
(PaGFP). It can even be used to visualize some
UV ﬂuorophores such as DAPI and Hoechst
DNA dyes, although 405 nm is not the opti-
mal excitation wavelength for these dyes. UV
argon lasers (351/364 nm) also are available.
Inclusion of a 405 nm or UV argon laser adds
considerably to the cost of the confocal mi-
croscope system due to the requirement for
additional optical components to handle these
wavelengths.
The light path in a simple confocal micro-
scope is illustrated in Figure 2C.1.5. The out-
put of the laser (or the combined output of mul-
tiple lasers) is reﬂected into the optical axis of
the microscope by the primary dichroic beam
splitter (splitter 1 in Fig. 2C.1.5). Wavelength-
selection ﬁlters are inserted into the light
path to block speciﬁc laser lines, and neutral-
density ﬁlters may be inserted to attenuate
the illumination. In current, high-end confocalMicroscopy
2C.1.7
Current Protocols in Microbiologysystems, the line selection and neutral-density
ﬁlters have been replaced with an electroni-
cally controlled acousto-optical tunable ﬁlter
(AOTF). An AOTF can alter its transmission
characteristics so as to pass selected wave-
lengths, while completely blocking others. An
AOTF also provides precise control over the
attenuation of the individual laser beams.
The scanner deﬂects the laser beam into
the objective at varying angles in order to scan
the laser beam across the specimen. Several
different technologies for scanning have been
devised. The most common method employs
a pair of galvanometer mirrors. One mirror os-
cillates rapidly to excite sequential spots along
thex-axis of the specimen, and the second mir-
ror oscillates more slowly to move the illumi-
nation from line to line in the y-axis.
The ﬂuorescence emissions that are col-
lected by the objective follow the reverse
path through the scanner to the primary
dichroic beam splitter, and thereby are “des-
canned” (Fig. 2C.1.5). The ﬂuorescence sig-
nals (which are at a longer wavelength than
the excitation due to the Stokes shift; are
transmitted through the beam splitter. To si-
multaneously image ﬂuorescence from mul-
tiple ﬂuorophores requires selection of a pri-
mary dichroic beam splitter that reﬂects each
of the required excitation wavelengths and
transmits the emissions of all of the ﬂuo-
rophores. Secondary dichroic mirrors split the
ﬂuorescence emissions from different ﬂuo-
rophores for detection by separate detectors.
Emission ﬁlters are inserted in the light path
to the detectors (Fig. 2C.1.5) to block back-
scattered excitation light and to reduce bleed-
through of signals between channels. Current
high-end confocal microscopes use more so-
phisticated technology for emission discrimi-
nation; descriptions of the designs of speciﬁc
systems are available from the vendors (see
SUPPLIERS APPENDIX ).
The ﬂuorescence captured by the objective
focuses to a stationary spot (Airy disk) in the
image plane (Fig. 2C.1.4). The pinhole aper-
ture is positioned in the image plane so as to be
centered on the Airy disk. The diameter of the
pinhole aperture can be adjusted to allow op-
timization for different Airy-disk sizes, which
vary with the objective’s numerical aperture
and the emission wavelength. Adjustment of
the diameter of the pinhole to a value of 0.7
to 1.0 Airy Unit allows most of the in focus
light to reach the detector and blocks most of
the out-of-focus light. In systems with a sep-
arate pinhole aperture for each detector, the
pinhole apertures are located immediately infront of the detectors. Incorporation of a sep-
arate pinhole for each detector allows the user
to optimize the pinhole settings for different
wavelengths.
The photodetectors in LSCMs are photo-
multiplier tubes (PMTs), which generate elec-
trons at a rate proportional to the intensity of
the incoming ﬂuorescence signal (Art, 1995).
The PMT output is converted to a digital image
that can be displayed on a computer monitor
and stored as a digital ﬁle for later analysis.
Digitization may be at 8-bit (256 gray lev-
els), 10-bit (1024 gray levels) or 12-bit resolu-
tion (4096 gray levels). Confocal microscopes
typically have two to four PMTs for reﬂected
light/epiﬂuorescence imaging and may have,
in addition, a photodetector for transmitted
light.
In spinning disk confocal microscopes, the
illumination from a laser or white light source
passes through pinholes in the Nipkow disk so
as to excite ﬂuorescence at multiple ( ∼1000)
sites within the specimen. The disk revolves
rapidly (1000 to 5000 rpm) causing the il-
luminating spots to sweep across the speci-
men as uniformly-spaced scan lines (Inou ´ea n d
Inou´e, 2002). Fluorescence emitted by the
specimen that is collected by the objective re-
turns through the same pinholes in the Nipkow
disk that provided the excitation light before
it is detected by a full-ﬁeld CCD camera. In
this way, point light sources and detector pin-
holes to block out-of-focus ﬂuorescence are
provided, with the advantage of higher collec-
tion speeds than a spot scanner. Drawbacks
of this approach include decreased illumina-
tion to the specimen from light loss through
the pinholes and the inability to change the
pinhole diameter. This means that, unlike the
case with a spot scanner, optimal confocal-
ity is achieved only for one objective magni-
ﬁcation, and the thickness of the optical sec-
tion cannot be changed. Although the reduced
specimen illumination generates a smaller ﬂu-
orescent signal, scientiﬁc-grade CCD cameras
have signiﬁcantly higher quantum efﬁciencies
than the PMTs used for ﬂuorescence detec-
tion in LSCMs and are able to more than ad-
equately detect these levels of ﬂuorescence.
Fluorescent specimens have been reported to
undergo less photobleaching during examina-
tion with a spinning disk confocal microscope
than with a LSCM. The lower rate of photo-
bleaching is thought to be due to the lower
illumination levels (Inou ´ea n dI n o u ´e, 2002).
An e wt y p eo fs l i t - s c a n n i n gc o n f o c a lm i -
croscope (LSM 5 Live; Carl Zeiss, Inc.) that
allows images to be acquired at rates as fastBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.8
Current Protocols in Microbiologyas or faster than can be achieved with a
spinning disk confocal microscope and with
as low or lower rates of photobleaching has
recently been introduced. The system adopts
principles from both the spot scanner and the
spinning disk in that it uses a single scan-
ning galvanometer to move an illumination
line that is combined with a sensitive single-
line CCD detector. The point source of light
from the laser is optically converted to a nar-
row line, which is reﬂected onto the specimen
by a novel beam splitter consisting of a mir-
rored line on transparent glass. The line illu-
mination is scanned across the specimen. The
emitted ﬂuorescence from the specimen that
is collected by the objective passes through
the beam splitter and is detected by a linear
CCD detector. A slit aperture in front of the
detector blocks out-of-focus light, analogous
to the pinhole aperture in an LSCM. The LSM
5L i v eh a ss o m e w h a tp o o r e rr e s o l u t i o nt h a na
spot-scanning LSCM, and the initial version
is less versatile but can capture images much
more rapidly.
PRACTICAL GUIDELINES
Sample Preparation
The preeminent goal in preparing samples
for imaging with a confocal microscope is to
maximize the ﬂuorescence signals while pre-
serving the three-dimensional structure of the
specimen. Ideally, the sample should be less
than ∼50µmi nt h i c k n e s s ,a l t h o u g ht h i c k e r
samples can be visualized. Guidelines for
preparing ﬁxed and living samples are de-
scribed below.
Fixation
As t a n d a r dﬁ x a t i v ef o rﬂ u o r e s c e n c em i -
croscopy is 2% to 4% formaldehyde in
PBS. Formaldehyde penetrates cells rapidly
and preserves the antigen-recognition sites
for many antibodies. However, formaldehyde
cross-links proteins slowly and may cause
vesiculation of membranes. Some commercial
preparations of formaldehyde (formalin) con-
tain methanol, which shrinks cells. Techniques
for optimizing formaldehyde ﬁxation are de-
scribed by Bacallao et al. (1995). Fixatives
containing a small amount of glutaraldehyde
(0.125% to 0.25%) in addition to formalde-
hyde preserve cellular morphology better, but
glutaraldehyde destroys the epitopes for some
antibodies. Glutaraldehyde ﬁxation inducesautoﬂuorescence but autoﬂuorescence can be
reduced by treating the sample after ﬁxation
with NaBH 4(1 mg/ml in PBS, pH 8.0, using
two treatments of 5 min each for dissociated
cells, longer for thicker samples). An alter-
native procedure for preparing specimens for
immunocytochemistry is to immerse them in
cold ( −20◦C) methanol or acetone but ﬁxation
by this method causes severe shrinkage.
Choices of ﬂuorophores
The choice of ﬂuorophores should take into
account the available laser lines and the detec-
tor channels of the confocal microscope. Ex-
citation is most efﬁcient at wavelengths near
the peak of the excitation spectrum of the
ﬂuorophore, but a precise match is not re-
quired. For experiments that require imaging
multiple ﬂuorophores with standard photode-
tectors (PMTs), it is best to select ﬂuorophores
that are excited by different laser lines, in
order to minimize spectral crossover (bleed-
through) between the channels (Fig. 2C.1.6).
Excitation and emission spectra for many ﬂu-
orophores are available via the Internet (see
Internet Resources). A recommended combi-
nation of ﬂuorophores for excitation at 405
nm, 488 nm, 543/561 nm, and 633 nm would
comprise Marina Blue, Alexa 488, Alexa 555,
and Alexa 647 (all available from Molecu-
lar Probes/Invitrogen). The nucleic acid stain
DAPI can be excited by illumination at 405
nm, although ultraviolet excitation (350 nm)
is more optimal. The cyanine dyes Cy2,
Cy3, and Cy5 (available from Jackson Im-
munoResearch Laboratories) are also suitable
for confocal microscopy. For multiwavelength
imaging with a spectral detector and spectral
unmixing, it is important to select ﬂuorophores
that have distinct emission spectra, but there
is no advantage in using ﬂuorophores that
have differing excitation spectra. Indeed, it
is best to use ﬂuorophores that have simi-
lar excitation maxima, so that they can be
excited with a single laser line reﬂected
into the microscope with a single-wavelength
dichroic mirror. Other important criteria to
consider in selecting ﬂuorophores for confocal
microscopy are the quantum efﬁciencies and
rates of photobleaching. In addition, the
staining protocol should be designed so as
to produce similar signal intensities in each
channel. More information about selecting ﬂu-
orophores for confocal imaging is available at
the Molecular Expressions Web site (see In-
ternet Resources).Microscopy
2C.1.9
Current Protocols in Microbiology
Figure 2C.1.6 Excitation spectra of representative ﬂuorophores and emission wavelengths of
lasers for confocal microscopy. The graph at the top shows the excitation spectra of Marina Blue,
Alexa 488, Alexa 555, and Alexa 647 (Molecular Probes). The emission wavelengths of lasers
commonly used for confocal microscopy are shown below. Data for the excitation spectra are from
Molecular Probes.
Control samples
Confocal microscopes rely on electronic
image enhancement techniques that can make
even dim autoﬂuorescence signals or non-
speciﬁc background staining look bright. In
order to distinguish a real signal from back-
ground, it is essential to prepare and examine
appropriate control samples. For immunoﬂu-
orescence experiments with one primary an-
tibody, the appropriate control samples are
unstained specimens and specimens treated
with the secondary antibody but no primary
antibody. Other control experiments may be
required to verify the speciﬁcity of labeling.
Experiments with two primary and secondaryantibodies require additional controls to test
whether the secondary antibodies cross-react
with the “wrong” primary antibody. Singly
stained samples also should be prepared and
imaged to determine the extent of spectral
cross-over between the channels.
Mounting the specimen
Selection of a mounting medium should
take into account the type of microscope ob-
jective that will be used to observe the speci-
men (see section on Microscope Objectives).
In order for an objective to perform optimally,
the mounting medium should have the same
refractive index as the objective immersionBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.10
Current Protocols in MicrobiologyTable 2C.1.2 Refractive Indexes of Common Immersion and Mounting Media
Medium RI
Immersion media
Air 1.00
Water 1.338
Glycerol 1.47
Immersion oil 1.518
Mounting media
50% glycerol/PBS/DABCO 1.416a
5%n-propyl gallate/0.0025% p-phenylene diamine (PPD) in
glycerol1.474a
0.25% PPD/0.0025% DABCO/5% n-propyl gallate in glycerol 1.473a
VectaShield (Vector Labs) 1.458a
Slow Fade (Molecular Probes) 1.415b
ProLong (Molecular Probes) 1.3865b,c
aData from Bacallao et al. (1995).
bData from Molecular Probes.
cRefractive index (RI) for liquid medium. (RI for solidiﬁed medium will be higher.)
medium. Mismatches in the refractive indices
produce spherical aberration leading to loss of
light at the detector, as well as decreased z-axis
resolution and incorrect depth discrimination.
Image deterioration caused by spherical aber-
ration increases with depth into the specimen;
therefore, matching the immersion and mount-
ing medium refractive indices is particularly
important for thick specimens. The refractive
indices of some commonly used mounting me-
dia are listed in Table 2C.1.2.
Mounting media that have refractive in-
dices close to that of immersion oil (RI =
1.51) include DPX (RI =1.5; ProSciTech) and
Permount (RI =1.52; ProSciTech). However,
specimens must be dehydrated prior to mount-
ing in these media, and dehydration causes
shrinkage and distortion. Moreover, some ﬂu-
orophores cannot withstand dehydration. Cells
retain their three dimensional shapes when
they are kept in physiological saline (PBS) or
am i x t u r eo fP B Sa n dg l y c e r o l( B a c a l l a oe ta l . ,
1995). If the specimen is to be mounted under
a coverglass, it may be necessary to support the
coverglass to avoid damaging the specimen.
Addition of an antioxidant (antifade agent)
to the mounting medium helps to alleviate
photobleaching of synthetic ﬂuorophores
such as those used for immunocytochemistry.
One of the best antifade agents is 100 mg/ml
1,4-diazabicyclo[2,2,2]octane (DABCO;
Sigma; Bacallao et al., 1995). n-propyl
gallate (Giloh and Sedat, 1982) and p-phenylenediamine (PPD; Johnson et al.,
1982) are also effective antifade agents,
but the former may cause dimming of the
ﬂuorescence while the latter may damage
the specimen (Bacallao et al., 1995). A wide
variety of mounting media are available
from commercial sources (Biomeda, Electron
Microscopy Sciences, ProSciTech, Molecular
Probes, Vector Laboratories) and many of
these contain antifade agents. It is wise to
check a the ﬂuorophore provider for recom-
mendations about which mounting medium
and antifade agents to use. Antioxidants do
not reduce photobleaching of ﬂuorescent
proteins.
Living specimens
Microscopy on living specimens grown in
vitro is most conveniently performed with an
inverted microscope, because the specimens
can be viewed through the bottom of the
culture chamber and the top can be opened
for access. To allow imaging with an oil- or
water-immersion objective, the culture cham-
ber substrate should be a coverglass. The glass
coverslip can be coated with poly- L-lysine
(using a 1 mg/ml solution; Sigma) to pro-
mote adhesion of the specimens (either
eukaryotic cells or microorganisms). Nonad-
herent specimens can be immobilized by em-
bedding them in a thin layer of low-melting-
point agar (0.2% for eukaryotic cells, up to
2% for smaller organisms). Motile specimensMicroscopy
2C.1.11
Current Protocols in Microbiologysuch as Paramecium can be attached to the
substrate with CellTak (BD Biosciences; W.
Bell, pers. comm.). Culture chambers with
coverglass substrates can be made from stan-
dard plastic petri dishes by boring holes in
their bottoms and afﬁxing coverglasses to the
holes with Silgard (Dow-Corning). Culture
chambers with coverglass substrates are also
available from commercial sources (Labtek
coverglass chamber, Fisher Scientiﬁc; MatTek
glass-bottom culture dish, MakTek Corp). Al-
ternatively, cells may be grown on a coverglass
that can be mounted in a chamber for observa-
tion on a microscope. A simple chamber can be
constructed from a gasket cut from a sheet of
silicon rubber or a soft plastic ruler and afﬁxed
to a glass microscope slide with silicon grease.
The well formed by the gasket is ﬁlled with
medium, and then the coverglass with cells at-
tached is sealed onto the well. More elaborate
chambers, some having built-in heaters and/or
ports for perfusion, are available from com-
mercial sources (see Internet Resources for a
list of suppliers).
Specimens that need to be kept warm dur-
ing observation pose a particular challenge be-
cause temperature transients can make it difﬁ-
cult to maintain focus. Probably the best way
to keep specimens warm is to place the entire
microscope in a temperature-controlled en-
closure. Alternative strategies include warm-
ing the microscope stage with heated air (us-
ing an air stream incubator or hair dryer)
or infrared lamps, or using a temperature-
controlled specimen chamber (Terasaki and
Dailey, 1995). If an oil or water immersion
objective is used, heating the objective helps
to maintain the specimen at the desired tem-
perature. Microscope enclosures, stage warm-
ers, temperature-controlled chambers, and
objective heaters are available from suppliers
of microscopes and microscope accessories.
Living specimens should be kept in a
medium that is buffered to maintain the correct
pH. Many commonly used culture media are
buffered with bicarbonate and require an atmo-
sphere with 5% to 10% CO 2to maintain the
correct pH. For microscopy, it is more conve-
nient to use a buffer that maintains the correct
pH in air. Many types of cells can be main-
tained for several hours in a balanced saline so-
lution or culture medium that is buffered with
HEPES (10 to 20 mM). Use of a medium that
contains phenol red should be avoided because
phenol red adds background ﬂuorescence and
can produce oxygen radicals when exposed
to intense illumination. Addition of 0.3 U/ml
Oxyrase (Oxyrase, Inc.) to the medium canhelp to alleviate photobleaching of synthetic
ﬂuorophores (Waterman-Storer et al., 1993).
Optimizing Imaging Parameters
Microscope objectives
High-NA objectives are optimal for ﬂuor-
escence microscopy because they collect more
light than low-NA objectives (brightness is
proportional to NA4). Oil-immersion objec-
tives have the highest numerical apertures
(NA =1.4 or 1.45). However, oil-immersion
objectives have short working distances (100
to 200 µm). Moreover, they work optimally
only with specimens mounted in a medium
with a refractive index the same as that of
immersion oil ( n=1.51). Mismatch of the
refractive indices leads to a deterioration of
image quality that becomes increasing severe
with depth into the specimen. When a high-
NA oil objective is used to image a specimen
mounted in an aqueous medium, image qual-
ity and signal brightness decline noticeably at
distances of 5 to 10 µm from the coverglass.
Mismatch of the refractive indices also leads
to spatial distortion in the z-axis. The actual
movement of the focal plane in the specimen
(ds)p r o d u c e db yam o v e m e n to ft h eo b j e c t i v e
(dobj)d e p e n d so nt h er a t i oo ft h er e f r a c t i v ei n -
dexes: ds/dobj=ηs/ηobj(Majlof and Forsgren,
2002).
Aw a t e r - i m m e r s i o no b j e c t i v ei su s e f u l
for imaging living specimens that are more
than a few microns thick. Water-immersion
objectives with numerical apertures of 1.2
are available. These objectives are designed
for viewing specimens mounted under a cov-
erglass (0.17 µm; no. 1.5) and have fairly short
working distances (130 to 220 µm). “Dipping”
objectives, which are intended for use without
ac o v e r g l a s s ,h a v el o w e rn u m e r i c a la p e r t u r e s
(NA =0.9) and longer working distances (1
to 2 mm).
Objectives differ in their transmission ef-
ﬁciency and degree of correction for spheri-
cal and chromatic aberration and ﬂatness of
ﬁeld. Plan Apochromat objectives provide the
ﬂattest ﬁelds of view and color correction
for three wavelengths. Plan Apocromat ob-
jectives generally transmit efﬁciently through-
out the visible spectrum (400 nm to 700 nm),
but may transmit poorly in the UV ( <400
nm) or infrared ( >700 nm; Keller, 1995).
Some objectives that are less highly corrected
(Fluar, Plan NeoFluar, Plan Fluor) provide
higher transmission at visible, UV, and in-
frared wavelengths. For additional information
about objectives for confocal microscopy seeBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.12
Current Protocols in MicrobiologytheUNIT 2A.1 ,K e l l e r( 1 9 9 5 ) ,B e n h a m( 2 0 0 2 ) ,
and the Molecular Expressions Web site (see
Internet Resources).
Pinhole size
As explained in the section on the Basis of
Optical Sectioning, the size of the detector pin-
hole has a critical inﬂuence on image quality.
A pinhole with a diameter slightly less than
or equal to the diameter of the bright central
region of the Airy disk will let most of the
light from the plane of focus reach the detec-
tor, while blocking most of the out-of-focus
ﬂare. The lateral resolution will be ∼10% bet-
ter than that obtainable by conventional mi-
croscopy with the same optics (Centonze and
Pawley, 1995), although not as good as can be
achieved with a smaller pinhole. Lateral reso-
lution continues to improve as pinhole radius
is decreased down to a pinhole size of ∼0.2×
Airy disk radius, but a pinhole this small ex-
cludes ∼95% of the signal (Wilson, 1995).
Axial resolution improves as pinhole size de-
creases, down to ∼0.7×Airy disk radius, then
levels off. The best trade-off between signal
intensity and resolution will depend on the
characteristics of the sample and the required
resolution.
Scan zoom
The scan zoom determines the dimensions
of the area in the specimen that is scanned.
Increasing the zoom reduces the dimensions
of the scan area. The pixel number remains
the same; consequently, individual pixels rep-
resent a smaller area. For example, the scan
area at zoom 2 is one quarter the scan area at
zoom 1 and the pixel dimensions are half as
large in each dimension. That is, if the pixel
dimensions represent 0.25 µm×0.25 µma t
zoom 1, then dimensions are 0.125 ×0.125
µma tz o o m2 .
For each objective, there is an optimal
zoom setting that yields pixel dimensions suf-
ﬁciently small to take advantage of the full
resolution of the objective but large enough
to avoid oversampling. In order for the min-
imum resolvable entity to be visible on the
display monitor, the pixel dimension needs to
be smaller than (less than one-half) the optical
resolution. However, if the pixel size is made
too small by using a higher-than-optimal zoom
factor, the specimen is subjected to more irra-
diation than necessary, with an increased risk
of photobleaching. The rate of photobleach-
ing increases proportionally to the square of
the zoom factor (Centonze and Pawley, 1995).
Ag u i d e l i n ef o rs e l e c t i n ga na p p r o p r i a t ez o o mfactor derived from information theory (the
Nyquist Sampling Theorem) states that the
pixel dimensions should be equal to the op-
tical resolution divided by 2.3 (see Webb and
Dorey, 1995). The optical resolution in confo-
cal imaging depends on the numerical aperture
of the objective, the refractive index of the im-
mersion medium, the excitation and emission
wavelengths, and the diameter of the pinhole
aperture. Values calculated for different objec-
tives and wavelengths using the point-spread
functions (PSF) for wide-ﬁeld and confocal
microscopy are given in Table 2C.1.1. The lat-
eral resolution for confocal microscopy can be
approximated by: Reselx,yconfocal =0.4λ/NA,
where λis the wavelength of the illumination
and NA the numerical aperture of the objec-
tive (see Webb and Dorey, 1995). The above
equation assumes the use of an inﬁnitesimal
pinhole; Resel x,ywill be larger with a pinhole
of 0.7 to 1 Airy unit.
z-axis sectioning interval
In order to study the three-dimensional
structure of a specimen, a series of images
are captured at ﬁxed intervals throughout the
entire depth of the specimen. The interval be-
tween focal planes needed to achieve opti-
mal resolution in the z-axis is not as small
as the x,ypixel dimensions because the axial
resolution is poorer than the lateral resolution
(see Table 2C.1.1). The optimal interval (ac-
cording to the Nyquist Sampling Theorem)
is equal to the axial resolution divided by
2.3. The axial resolution for an objective in
confocal imaging can be approximated by:
Reselzconfocal =1.4λη/NA2where nis the re-
fractive index (see Webb and Dorey, 1995).
Collecting images at shorter intervals results
in oversampling, with an increased risk of pho-
tobleaching.
Illumination intensity
Fluorescence emission increases linearly
with illumination intensity up to a level at
which emission saturates. Optimal signal-
to-background and signal-to-noise ratios are
obtained with illumination levels well below
saturation (Tsien and Waggoner, 1995). The
illumination intensity on a laser-scanning mi-
croscope can be adjusted by operating the
laser at submaximal power and by inserting
neutral-density ﬁlters into the light path or
varying the transmission through the AOTF.
In general, the best images are obtained with
illumination levels that are as high as possi-
ble without producing unacceptable rates of
photobleaching.Microscopy
2C.1.13
Current Protocols in MicrobiologyPMT black level and gain
The contrast and background of confo-
cal images are determined by the gain and
black-level settings of the photomultiplier tube
(PMT) ampliﬁers. To obtain maximal infor-
mation, the black level and gain should be
adjusted to take advantage of the full dynamic
range of the PMTs. The appropriate black-
level setting can be found by scanning while
the light path to the PMT is blocked. The im-
age that appears on the display monitor should
be just barely brighter than the background,
which is black (gray level =0). To set the
gain, scan the specimen and adjust the gain so
that the brightest pixel in the image is slightly
below white (gray level =255, for 8-bit im-
ages). Ensuring that all signals fall within the
dynamic range of the PMT is especially im-
portant for quantitative imaging experiments.
Confocal imaging software typically includes
ap s e u d o c o l o ri m a g ed i s p l a ym o d e( “ r a n g ei n -
dicator”) that facilitates selection of appropri-
ate black level and gain settings by highlight-
ing pixels with intensity values near 0 or 255.
Averaging
Confocal images of dimly ﬂuorescent spec-
imens captured at the fastest scan rate on a
typical LSCM ( ∼0.5 sec/frame) appear noisy
because of the small numbers of photons col-
lected from each spot. Improved signal-to-
noise can be attained by scanning the specimen
at a slower rate or by scanning multiple times
and averaging the signals. Current LSCMs al-
low individual lines in the image to be re-
peatedly scanned and averaged. Line averag-
ing generally produces sharper images than
frame averaging (which averages full frames)
because there is less risk of blurring due to
movements or changes in the specimen.
Imaging multiple ﬂuorophores
Confocal microscopes can typically be con-
ﬁgured to capture images of two or more
ﬂuorophores simultaneously or sequentially.
Each approach has advantages and disadvan-
tages. For simultaneous imaging, the speci-
men is scanned with all of the required ex-
citation wavelengths and the emissions of
the different ﬂuorophores are split for detec-
tion by separate photodetectors (Fig. 2C.1.5).
The drawback of this approach is that spec-
tral cross-over between channels may occur if
the emission spectra of the ﬂuorophores over-
lap. If each ﬂuorophore is excited by only
one laser line, then exciting them sequentially
will avoid spectral cross-over. The disadvan-
tage of sequential excitation is that there maybe misalignment of the signals in different
channels, particularly if the specimen is alive
and moving. A third way of imaging multi-
ple ﬂuorophores is available in confocal sys-
tems in which the laser excitation is controlled
with an AOTF; such systems can scan each
line of the specimen sequentially with differ-
ent excitation wavelengths with a time delay
between scan lines of less than a millisec-
ond. Line-by-line wavelength switching pro-
vides rapid acquisition of ﬂuorescence signals
from each spot in the specimen while avoiding
the spectral cross-over between channels that
may occur when the ﬂuorophores are excited
simultaneously.
Image display
Confocal images are typically displayed as
8-bit grayscale or 24-bit RGB (red/green/blue)
color images. Each channel of an RGB im-
age can represent a different ﬂuorophore (Fig.
2C.1.1A to C). Color mixtures indicate colo-
calization of ﬂuorophores within a pixel. A
RGB ﬂuorescence image can be merged with
ag r a y s c a l et r a n s m i t t e dl i g h ti m a g eb ya d d i n g
the transmitted light image to each channel of
the RGB image (Fig. 2C.1.1D; ﬂuorescence in
green channel merged with DIC image).
The three-dimensional dataset obtained by
capturing a series of optical sections through
the specimen can be used to compute views
of the specimen from different viewing an-
gles. Commercial confocal microscopes typ-
ically include the capability to generate or-
thogonal views of the specimen ( xy,xz,a n d
yz)a n dm a yp e r m i tv i e w sf r o ma r b i t r a r ya n -
gles. An xyprojection or “ z-series projection”
is a two-dimensional display formed by merg-
ing multiple image planes (Fig. 2C.1.1B,C,
Fig. 2C.1.2A,E). The most common type
of projection is a “maximum” projection in
which each pixel represents the intensity of
the brightest pixel in the z-axis. Another type
of projection, referred to as “surface render,”
displays the most superﬁcial pixels with in-
tensities above a deﬁned threshold. Projec-
tions also can be created for different view-
ing angles (Fig. 2C.1.2B, F). Projections of
the specimen from different viewing angles
can be combined to create an animation in
which the specimen appears to rotate in space.
Such animations give the viewer a striking
impression of the three-dimensional geome-
try of the specimen. Generating two projec-
tions at azimuths differing by 4◦to 10◦cre-
ates stereo pairs that can be visualized with
as t e r e ov i e w e ro rc o l o r - c o d e da n dm e r g e d
to form a stereo anaglyph. Volume-renderingBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.14
Current Protocols in Microbiologyimaging software is available that provides ad-
ditional options for three-dimensional visual-
ization and measurements (see Internet Re-
sources).
COMMENTARY
Effective use of a confocal microscope re-
quires understanding of the principles of image
formation and knowledge of how to set up and
use a microscope. The unit on Proper Align-
ment and Adjustment of the Light Microscope
(UNIT 2A.1 )d e s c r i b e st h ec o m p o n e n t so fal i g h t
microscope and provides protocols for set-
ting up a microscope for transmitted light and
epiﬂuorescence imaging. This unit also lists
references to literature on light microscopy.
The Handbook of Biological Confocal Mi-
croscopy (edited by V. Centonze and J. Pawley,
1995, new edition planned for March 2006) is
ac o m p r e h e n s i v er e f e r e n c eb o o ko nc o n f o c a l
microscopy. It includes chapters on the funda-
mental principles, instrumentation, image ac-
quisition and display, sample preparation, and
much more. Confocal Microscopy (Wilson,
1990) provides a thorough discussion of the
principles behind confocal imaging. Cell Bio-
logical Applications of Confocal Microscopy
(edited by B. Matsumoto, 2002) discusses the
performance of different types of confocal mi-
croscopes and contains practical information
about common applications such as imaging
immunoﬂuorescence and calcium ion indica-
tors. Additional applications are described in
Confocal and Two Photon Microscopy: Foun-
dations, Applications and Advances (Diaspro,
2002). The Molecular Expressions Web site
also is an excellent source of information
about light microscopy, including confocal mi-
croscopy (see Internet Resources).
Confocal microscopy is only one of
several available techniques for capturing
optical sections in ﬂuorescent specimens. An
alternative to confocal microscopy is compu-
tational “deconvolution” of images captured
by wide-ﬁeld epiﬂuorescence microscopy
(McNally et al., 1999; Boccacci and Bertero,
2002). Computational deconvolution makes
use of all of the ﬂuorescence captured by the
objective, in contrast to confocal microscopy,
which discards ﬂuorescence from out-of-focus
areas. In addition, wide-ﬁeld microscopy can
employ CCD cameras that have higher quan-
tum efﬁciencies than the photodetectors used
for confocal microscopy. For these reasons,
wide-ﬁeld microscopy and deconvolution can
be superior to confocal microscopy for imag-
ing dim specimens or specimens that are sus-
ceptible to photobleaching or photodamage.However, computational deconvolution of im-
ages is time-consuming and does not work
well in specimens with high levels of dispersed
ﬂuorescence. Confocal microscopy allows di-
rect visualization of optical sections and is ap-
plicable to a wider range of specimens.
Another technique for confocal imaging
takes advantage of the optical phenomenon
known as multiphoton excitation. Multiphoton
microscopy allows deeper penetration into tis-
sue than either wide-ﬁeld microscopy or con-
ventional (single-photon) microscopy, and is
particularly useful for imaging in thick speci-
mens such as tissue slices or multicellular or-
ganisms. However, this method suffers loss of
resolution due to the longer illumination wave-
length and absence of a detector pinhole.
Troubleshooting
Test samples are useful for monitoring the
performance of a confocal microscope. A mi-
crometer slide should be used to check the spa-
tial calibration of each objective. Fluorescent
microspheres with mixtures of ﬂuorophores
(FluoSpheres; Molecular Probes) are useful
for checking the x,yand axial alignment of
images acquired at different excitation wave-
lengths. Misalignment of the images in the xy
plane may indicate that the pinholes are not
centered or that the lasers need to be aligned;
misalignment in the zaxis may be due to incor-
rect setting of a collimating lens, misalignment
of pinholes, or chromatic aberration in the ob-
jective. The optical resolution of the micro-
scope can be measured by capturing images of
submicroscopic ( <0.2 nm) ﬂuorescent micro-
spheres (Fig. 2C.1.2C,G). The images of the
microspheres should be radially symmetrical
in the xyplane and elliptical in the z-axis (Fig.
2C.1.2C). Horizontal and axial resolutions are
deﬁned by the full width at half maximal in-
tensity (FWHM) of intensity proﬁles along the
horizontal and vertical axes of the beads (Fig.
2C.1.2D,H).
Anticipated Results
Confocal microscopy provides sharp im-
ages of ﬂuorescent structures in thick speci-
mens (Fig. 2C.1.1, Fig. 2C.1.2, Fig. 2C.1.3C,
D). The maximum depth at which adequate
images can be obtained depends on the objec-
tive and the optical properties of the specimen.
With a high-NA immersion objective, it may
be possible to capture images at depths of >100
µmi nas p e c i m e nt h a ti st r a n s p a r e n ta n dn o t
heavily stained (Centoze and Pawley, 1995).
However, if the specimen scatters light, both
the illumination intensity and the proportionMicroscopy
2C.1.15
Current Protocols in Microbiologyof the emitted ﬂuorescence that is captured
by the objective decline with increasing fo-
cal depth. Mismatch of the refractive indexes
of the immersion medium and specimen will
further reduce the depth at which adequate sig-
nal can be obtained. A low-NA objective can
capture images at greater depths but provides
much poorer axial resolution.
At h r e e - d i m e n s i o n a lr e c o n s t r u c t i o no ft h e
specimen can be generated from a series of
optical sections at appropriately spaced inter-
vals along the optical axis. The reconstruction
can be viewed from any angle, but the view
along the optical axis of the objective will ap-
pear sharper than off-axial views, because the
lateral resolution of the objective is better than
the axial resolution (Fig. 2C.1.2). The axial
distortion can be corrected by computational
deconvolution (Wouterlood, 2005).
Confocal imaging in living specimens is
feasible although care must be taken to avoid
phototoxicity and photodamage. Robust ﬂu-
orophores such as the ﬂuorescent proteins
EGFP and EYFP can be imaged hundreds of
times with minimal photobleaching and no
apparent phototoxicity, provided that the il-
lumination is kept at a low level. Synthetic
ﬂuorophores, such as organelle-speciﬁc dyes
(Molecular Probes), generally are more pho-
tosensitive, although in some applications the
rate of bleaching can be reduced by the addi-
tion of Oxyrase. The maximum rate at which
images can be collected will depend on the
scan speed, resolution, and area. Typical scan
times for a 512 ×512 image are 1 to 4
sec/frame.
Ac o m m o na p p l i c a t i o no fc o n f o c a lm i -
croscopy is to determine the relative distri-
butions and extent of colocalization of the
molecules tagged with different ﬂuorophores
(Brelje et al., 2002). As many as four dif-
ferent ﬂuorophores can be discriminated on
ac o n f o c a lm i c r o s c o p ew i t hl a s e re x c i t a t i o n
at 350/405, 488, 546/568, and 633/647 nm,
and standard photodetectors, provided that
the excitation spectra of the ﬂuorophores are
well separated and matched to the laser lines.
Confocal microscopes with spectral detectors
can discriminate larger combinations of ﬂuo-
rophores on the basis of their emission spectra.
Spectral detection and linear unmixing allows
discrimination of ﬂuorophores with highly
overlapping emission spectra, such as GFP and
YFP (Dickinson, et al., 2001).
Confocal microscopy also is well suited for
visualizing variants of the green ﬂuorescent
protein. CFP and YFP can be visualized with
minimal cross-talk between channels on a con-focal microscope with 405 nm and 514 nm
excitation. The overlap of the excitation and
emission spectra of CFP and GFP or GFP and
DsRed may result in cross-talk between chan-
nels in experiments with these combinations
of ﬂuorophores. New ﬂuorescent proteins have
been developed that potentially could provide
more optimal combinations for multi-color
imaging (Shaner et al., 2004). Fluorescent pro-
teins have also been incorporated into bio-
chemical reporters for measuring intracellular
calcium, kinase activity, and other signaling
molecules (Zhang et al., 2002).
Photosensitive ﬂuorescent proteins are
available that undergo a change in spectral
properties upon photoactivation. Photactivat-
able GFP (PaGFP; Patterson and Lippincott-
Schwartz, 2002) exhibits little ﬂuorescence
under 488 nm illumination prior to activation
but undergoes a 100-fold increase in ﬂuores-
cence after photoactivation at 400 to 430 nm.
An LSCM with a 405- or 413-nm laser can
be used to photoactivate PaGFP within a user-
deﬁned region of interest within the specimen
and thereby selectively “highlight” GFP ﬂu-
orescence within that region. The activated
GFP retains its ﬂuorescence indeﬁnitely and,
importantly, manifests these properties even
when fused to another protein. PaGFP fusion
proteins provide a useful tool for studying
the intracellular dynamics of proteins and or-
ganelles (Karbowski et al., 2004).
LSCMs that incorporate an AOTF to con-
trol the illumination wavelength and intensity
can be conﬁgured to perform various types of
photobleach experiments. Measurement of ﬂu-
orescence recovery after photobleach (FRAP)
or ﬂuorescence loss in photobleach (FLIP) can
provide information about molecular mobility
and binding (Cole et al., 1996; McNally and
Smith, 2002; Lippincott-Schwartz et al.,
2003). In FRAP, ﬂuorescence in a small region
of the specimen is photobleached by scanning
with high-intensity illumination, and recovery
of ﬂuorescence into the bleached area is then
monitored by scanning with low-intensity il-
lumination. The rate of return of ﬂuorescent
molecules into the bleached area may be gov-
erned by diffusion, binding interactions with
other molecules, or a combination of both, and
appropriate mathematical models have been
developed to analyze these responses (Sprague
and McNally, 2005). In FLIP, a region of the
specimen is photobleached several times with
ad e l a yb e t w e e nt h eb l e a c hs c a n sa n di m a g e s
are collected during this process to monitor the
distributions of bleached and nonbleached ﬂu-
orescent molecules. Observation of FLIP canBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.16
Current Protocols in Microbiologyshow whether there is exchange of ﬂuorescent
molecules between two compartments of a cell
or whether a ﬂuorescent structure is a single
organelle or a network of contiguous but inde-
pendent organelles (Cole et al., 1996).
The spatial precision by which two ﬂu-
orophores can be said to colocalize on the
basis of light microscopy is limited by the
optical resolution ( ∼0.2µmi nt h e xyplane
and 0.6 µmi nt h e z-axis). The phenomenon
of ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) can potentially reveal whether two
ﬂuorophores are within <10 nm proximity.
FRET (Wouters and Bastiaens, 2000) is the
nonradiative transfer of energy from a ﬂuores-
cent donor molecule to an acceptor molecule.
Energy transfer occurs only if the molecules
are within a distance of less than ∼10 nm,
and only if the emission spectrum of the donor
overlaps the excitation spectrum of the accep-
tor. One application of FRET is to determine
whether two populations of molecules undergo
binding interactions. One population is labeled
with donor ﬂuorophores (e.g., CFP) and the
second is labeled with acceptor ﬂuorophores
(e.g., YFP). Several techniques for measuring
FRET have been devised (Jares-Erijman and
Jovin, 2003) and many of these can be carried
out with current LSCMs.
Current LSCMs are much superior to their
predecessors in sensitivity, speed of image ac-
quisition and versatility. Although they are ex-
pensive ($200,000 to $600,000) and require
costly service contracts to ensure optimal per-
formance, their many beneﬁts justify these
costs.
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank Dr. Albert
Neuztner (National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Md.) for providing the cells illus-
trated in Fig. 2C.1.3 and Dr. James Galbraith
(also of the National Institutes of Health) for
helpful comments on the manuscript. This re-
search was supported by the Intramural Re-
search Program of the National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke at the Na-
tional Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.
LITERATURE CITED
Ando, R., Hama, H., Yamamoto-Hino, M., Mizuno,
H., and Miyawaki, A. 2002. An optical marker
based on the UV-induced green-to-red photo-
conversion of a ﬂuorescent protein. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99:12651-12656.
Art, J. 1995. Photon detectors for confocal mi-
croscopy. InHandbook of Biological Confocal
Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley, ed.) pp. 183-
196. Plenum, New York.Bacallao, R., Kiai, K., and Jesaitis, L. 1995. Guiding
principles of specimen preservation for confocal
ﬂuorescence microscopy. InHandbook of Bio-
logical Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley,
ed.) pp. 311-326. Plenum, New York.
Benham, G. 2002. Practical aspects of objective
lens selection for confocal and multiphoton dig-
ital imaging techniques. InCell Biological Ap-
plications of Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (B.
Matsumoto, ed.) pp. 247-300. Academic Press,
San Diego, Calif.
Boccacci, P. and Bertero, M. 2002. Image-
restoration methods: Basics and algorithms. In
Confocal and Two-Photon Microscopy: Founda-
tions, Applications, and Advances (A. Diaspro,
A., ed.), pp. 253-269. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, N.J.
Brelje, T.C., Wessendorf, M.W., and Sorenson, R.L.
1993. Multicolor laser scanning confocal im-
munoﬂuorescence microscopy: Practical appli-
cations and limitations. InCell Biological Appli-
cations of Confocal Microscopy (B. Matsumoto,
ed.) pp. 98-182. Academic Press, San Diego,
Calif.
Brelje, T.C., Wessendorf, M.W., and Sorenson, R.L.
2002. Multicolor laser scanning confocal im-
munoﬂuorescence microscopy: Practical appli-
cations and limitations. InCell Biological Ap-
plications of Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (B.
Matsumoto, ed.), pp. 166-244. Academic Press,
San Diego, Calif.
Centonze, V. and Pawley, J. 1995. Tutorial on prac-
tical confocal microscopy and use of the con-
focal test specimen. InHandbook of Biological
Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley, ed.)
pp. 549-570. Plenum, New York.
Cole, N., Smith, C., Sciaky, N., Terasaki, M.,
Edidin, M., and Lippincott-Schwartz, J. 1996.
Diffusional mobility of Golgi proteins in mem-
branes of living cells. Science 237:797-801.
Daims, H., Lucker, S., and Wagner, M. 2006.
Daime , a novel image analysis program for mi-
crobial ecology and bioﬁlm research. Environ.
Microbiol. 8:200-213.
Diaspro, A. (ed.) 2002. Confocal and Two Pho-
ton Microscopy: Foundations, Applications and
Advances. Wiley-Liss, New York.
Dickinson, M.E., Bearman, G., Tille, S., Lansford,
R., and Fraser, S.E. 2001. Multi-spectral imag-
ing and llinear unmixing add a whole new
dimension to laser scanning ﬂuorescence mi-
croscopy. Biotechniques 31:1274-1278.
Drenkard, E. and Ausubel, F.M. 2002. Pseu-
domonas bioﬁlm formation and antibiotic resis-
tance are linked to phenotypic variation. Nature
416:740-743.
Elphick, G.F., Querbes, W., Jordan, J.A. Gee, G.V.,
Eash, S., Manley, K., Dugan, A., Stanifer, M.,
Bhatnagar, A., Koreze, W.K., Roth, B.L., and
Atwood, J.W. 2004. The Human Polyomavirus,
JCV, uses serotonin receptors to infect cells. Sci-
ence 306:1380-1383.
Ferrari, A., Pellegrini, V., Arcangeli, C., Fittipaldi,
A., Giacca, M., and Beltram, F. 2003. Caveolae-
mediated internalization of extracellular HIV-1Microscopy
2C.1.17
Current Protocols in MicrobiologyTat fusion proteins visualized in real time. Mol.
Ther. 8:284-294.
Forest, T., Barnard, S., and Baines, J.D. 2005. Ac-
tive intranuclear movement of herpes virus cap-
sids. Nat. Cell Biol. 7:429-431.
Giloh, H. and Sedat, J.W. 1982. Fluorescence
microscopy: Reduced photobleaching of rho-
damine and ﬂuorescein protein conjugates by
n-propyl gallate. Science 217:1252-1255.
Glushakova, S., Yin, D., Li, T., and Zimmerberg, J.
2005. Membrane transformation during malaria
parasite release from human red blood cells.
Curr. Biol. 15:1645-1650.
Inou´e, S. and Inou ´e, T. 2002. Direct-View High-
Speed Confocal Scanner: The CSU-10. In
Cell Biological Applications of Confocal Mi-
croscopy, 2nded. (B. Matsumoto, ed.) pp. 88-
128. Academic Press, San Diego, Calif.
Inou´e, S. and Spring, K.R. 1997. Video Microscopy:
The Fundamentals, 2nd ed. Plenum, New York.
Jares-Erijman, E.A. and Jovin, T.M. 2003. FRET
imaging. Nat. Biotechnol. 21:1387-1395.
Johnson, G.D., Davidson, R.S., McNamee, K.C.,
Russell, G., Goodwin, D., and Holborow, E.J.
1982. Fading of immunoﬂuorescence during mi-
croscopy: A study of the phenomenon and its
remedy. J. Immunol. Methods 55:231-242.
Kamabadur, R., Koizumi, K., Stivers, C., Nagle, J.,
Poole, S., and Odenwald, W. 1998. Regulation of
POU genes by castor andhunchback establishes
layered compartments in the Drosophila CNS.
Genes Dev. 12:246-260.
Karbowski, M., Arnoult, D., Chen, H., Chan, D.C.,
Smith, C.L., and Youle, R.J. 2004. Quantitation
of mitochondrial dynamics by photolabeling of
individual organelles shows that mitochondrial
fusion is blocked during the Bax activation phase
of apoptosis. J. Cell Biol. 164:493-499.
Keller, E. 1995. Objective lenses for confocal mi-
croscopy. InHandbook of Biological Confocal
Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley, ed.) pp. 111-
126. Plenum, New York.
Lippincott-Schwartz, J., Altan-Bonnet, N., and
Patterson, G.H. 2003. Photobleaching and pho-
toactivation: Following protein dynamics in liv-
ing cells. Nat. Cell Biol. Suppl:S7-S14.
Majlof, L. and Forsgren, P. 2002. Confocal mi-
croscopy: Important considerations for accu-
rate imaging. InCell Biological Applications of
Confocal Microscopy 2nd ed. (B. Matsumoto,
ed.) pp. 149-164. Academic Press, San Diego,
Calif.
Matsumoto, B. (ed.) 2002. Cell Biological Appli-
cations of Confocal Microscopy. 2nd ed. Aca-
demic Press, London.
McNally, J., Karpova, T., Cooper, J., and Conchello,
J. 1999. Three-dimensional imaging by decon-
volution microscopy. Methods 19:373-385.
McNally, J.G. and Smith, C.L. 2002. Photobleach-
ing by confocal microscopy. InConfocal and
Two Photon Microscopy: Foundations, Appli-
cations and Advances (A. Diaspro, ed.) pp. 525-
538. Wiley-Liss, New York.Nerbonne, J.M. 1996. Caged compounds: Tools
for illuminating neuronal responses and connec-
tions. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 6:379-386.
Patterson, G.H. and Lippincott-Schwartz, J. 2002.
Ap h o t o a c t i v a t a b l eG F Pf o rs e l e c t i v ep h o t o l a -
beling of proteins and cells. Science 297:1873-
1877.
Perrin, A.J., Jiang, X., Birmingham, C.L., So, N.S.,
Burmell, J.H. 2004. Recognition of bacteria in
the cytosol of mammalian cells by the ubiquitin
system. Curr. Biol. 14:806-811.
Rani, S.A., Pitts, B., and Stewart, P.S. 2005. Rapid
diffusion of ﬂuorescent tracers into Staphylococ-
cusepidermis bioﬁlms visualized by time lapse
microscopy. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
49:728-732.
Roux, P., Munter, S., Frischknecht, F., Herbomel, P.,
and Shorte, P. 2004. Focusing light on infection
in four dimensions. Cell. Microbiol. 6:333-343.
Sandison, D.R., Williams, R.M., Wells, K.S.,
Strickler, J., and Webb, W.W. 1995. Quantita-
tive ﬂuorescence confocal laser scanning mi-
croscopy. InHandbook of Biological Confocal
Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley, ed.) pp. 39-54.
Plenum, New York.
Satpute-Krishnan, P., DeGiorgis, J.A., and Bearer,
E.L. 2003. Fast anterograde transport of Her-
pes Simplex Virus: Role for the amyloid precur-
sor protein of Alzheimer’s disease. Aging Cell
2:305-318.
Shaner, N.C., Campbell, R.E., Steinbach, P.A.,
Giepmans, B.N., Palmer, A.E., and Tsien, R.Y.
2004. Improved monomeric red, orange and yel-
low ﬂuorescent proteins derived from Disco-
soma sp. Red ﬂuorescent protein. Nat. Biotech-
nol.22:1567-1572.
Shotton, D.M. 1993. Electronic acquisition of
light microscope images. InElectronic Light
Microscopy (D.M. Shotton, ed.) pp. 1-38.
Wiley-Liss, New York.
Sprague, B.L. and McNally, J.G. 2005. FRAP anal-
ysis of binding: Proper and ﬁtting. Trends Cell
Biol. 15:84-91.
Terasaki, M. and Dailey, M.E. 1995. Confocal mi-
croscopy of living cells. InHandbook of Biolog-
ical Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley,
ed.) pp. 327-346. Plenum, New York.
Tsien, R.Y. and Waggoner, A. 1995. Fluorophores
for confocal microscopy. InHandbook of Bio-
logical Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley,
ed.) pp. 267-280. Plenum, New York.
Viachou, D., Zimmermann, T., Cantera, R., Janse,
C.J., Waters, A.P., and Kafatos, F.C. 2004.
Real-time, in vivo analysis of malaria ookinete
locomotion and mosquito midgut invasion. Cell
Microbiol. 6:671-685.
Waterman-Storer, C.M., Sanger, J.W., and Sanger,
J.M. 1993. Dynamics of organelles in the mi-
totic spindles of living cells: Membrane and mi-
crotubule interactions. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton
26:19-39.
Webb, R.H. and Dorey, C.K. 1995. The pixilated
image. InHandbook of Biological ConfocalBasic Confocal
Microscopy
2C.1.18
Current Protocols in MicrobiologyMicroscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley, ed.) pp. 55-68.
Plenum, New York.
Wilson,T. (ed.) 1990. Confocal Microscopy. Aca-
demic Press, London.
Wilson, T. 1995. The role of the pinhole in confo-
cal imaging system. InHandbook of Biological
Confocal Microscopy, 2nd ed. (J. Pawley, ed.)
pp. 167-182. Plenum, New York.
Wouterlood, F.G. 2005. 3-D reconstruction of neu-
rons from multichannel confocal laser scanning
image series. InCurrent Protocols in Neuro-
science (J.N. Crawley, C.R. Gerfen, M.A. Ro-
gawski, D.R. Sibley, P. Skolnick, and S. Wray,
eds) pp. 2.8.1-2.2.8.16. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, N.J.
Wouters, F.S., and Bastiaens, P.I.H. 2000. Imag-
ing protein-protein interactions by ﬂuores-
cence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
microscopy. InCurrent Protocols in Cell Biol-
ogy (J.S. Bonifacino, M. Dasso, J.B. Harford, J.
Lippincott-Schwartz, and K.M. Yamada, eds.)
pp. 17.1.1-17.1.15. John Wiley & Sons,
Hoboken, N.J.
Zhang, J., Campbell, R.E, Ting, A., and Tsien,
R.Y. 2002. Creating new ﬂuorescent probes
for cell biology. Nature Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
3:906-918.
KEY REFERENCES
Inou´ea n dS p r i n g ,1 9 9 7 .S e ea b o v e .
Covers the basics of light microscopy, video mi-
croscopy, and much more.
Matsumoto, 2002. See above.
Good source of practical information about confo-
cal imaging.
Pawley, J. (ed.) 1995. See above.
Comprehensive reference book on confocal mi-
croscopy.
Russ, J. 2002. The Image Processing Handbook.
4th edition. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Fla.
Guide to digital image processing.
INTERNET RESOURCES
http://www.microbial-ecology.net/daime
Daime Web site, from which the Daime software ap-
plication can be downloaded. Daime (digital image
analysis in microbial ecology) is an open-source
software program for 2-D and 3-D image analysis
developed by Holger Daims, Sebastian L ¨ucker, and
Michael Wagner (Universit ¨at Wien, Vienna, Aus-
tria). The features of Daime and its application to
analysis of bioﬁlms are described in Daims et al.
(2006).
http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij
ImageJ is a public domain image analysis pro-
gram developed by W. Rasband (Research Ser-
vices Branch, National Institute of Mental Health,
NIH) for operating systems running Java (including
Windows/PC and OSX/Macintosh). ImageJ has
many useful tools for analysis of confocal images.http://www.uhnres.utoronto.ca/facilities/
wcif/imagej/
A manual written by Tony Collins that describes
the use of ImageJ to visualize and analyze confocal
images.
http://www.molecularexpressions.com
The Molecular Expressions Web site is a rich source
of information about all aspects of light microscopy,
including confocal microscopy. It includes sections
on the basic principles of confocal imaging, instru-
mentation, sample preparation, and choices of ﬂu-
orophores. An interactive tutorial “Choosing ﬂu-
orophore combinations for confocal microscopy”
allows the user to determine the extent of spec-
tral cross-over that will occur when imaging differ-
ent combinations of ﬂuorophores with speciﬁc laser
lines and ﬁlter sets.
Web sites of vendors of confocal
microscopes
These provide product descriptions, manuals, tuto-
rials and literature.
http://www.zeiss.com
Carl Zeiss, Inc.
http://www.leica-microsystems.com/company
Leica Microsystems.
http://www.nikonusa.com
Nikon, Inc.
http://www.microscopyu.com
For information about light microscopy and confo-
cal microscopy.
http://www.olympusconfocal.com/
Olympus, Inc.
http://www.perkinelmer.com/
PerkinElmer, Inc.
http://www.solameretech.com/
Solamere Technology.
Spectra of ﬂuorophores
http://ﬂuorescence.nexus-solutions.net/
frames6.htm
Biorad Microsciences ﬂuorochrome database and
charting application.
http://home.earthlink.net/ ∼ﬂuorescentdyes/
George McNamara Multiprobe Microscopy.
http://www.probes.com/
Molecular Probes.
http://www.molecularexpressions.com
Molecular Expressions.
http://www.olympusﬂuoview.com/resources/
specimenchambers.html
Sources of chambers for maintaining living speci-
mens during observation by microscopy.Microscopy
2C.1.19
Current Protocols in Microbiologyhttp://listserv.buffalo.edu/user/sub.html
Many topics of interest to confocal microscopists
are discussed on the confocal listserver operated
by the listserver at the University at Buffalo. To
subscribe to the lis,t go to the URL and type “con-
focal” in the box that asks which list one wishes to
join.
Contributed by Carolyn L. Smith
National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke
Bethesda, Maryland