4 
Fungal Decolourization and Degradation 
of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects 
Aleksander Pavko 
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Technology 
Slovenia 
1. Introduction 
There are more than 100,000 different synthetic dyes available on the market, produced in over 
700,000 tons annually worldwide. They are used  in the textile, paper, cosmetics, food and 
pharmaceutical industries. Some of them ar e dangerous to living or ganisms due to their 
possible toxicity and carcinogenicity. About 10%  of the above mentioned amount is lost in 
wastewater, which justifies the concern about the environment. Among the nume rous water-
treatment technologies, research interest in the fungal bioremediation, i. e. decolourization and 
degradation of synthetic dyes, has increased significantly in the last three decades. 
The physico-chemical methods of dye degradat ion have already been well recognized from 
the chemical engineering point of view and also  widely applied on the industrial scale. In 
the last few decades, research in the dye bioremediation technologies has gained its 
significance. From the available literature, it ca n be seen that the majority of research has 
been performed from the biochemical and micr obiological point of view on a laboratory 
scale, while there is a lack of chemical engineering approach to  the research of this serious 
problem. The purpose of this work is to revi ew the chemical engineering principles, which 
should be applied during the research and transfer of dye bioremediation technologies to a 
large scale. Accordingly, a brief review of re search results from bioreactors of volumes 
larger than 1.0 L is presented. 
2. Alternative technologies 
The dyes in wastewaters presen t a significant problem in the wastewater treatment, due to 
the complex and varied chemical structure of these compounds along with other residual 
chemical reagents and impurities. Genera lly, organic contents are high, while the 
BOD/COD ratios are low due to the not easily degradable nature of dyes. In addition, the 
degradation of products may be toxic. Accord ing to the latter, no universal method is 
known for their treatment. The degradation of  synthetic dyes in waste streams can be 
performed with various technologies, which can be subdivided into four main groups: 1) 
physical, 2) chemical and photochemical, 3) elec trochemical, and 4) biol ogical processes. The 
processes are presented in Table 1 and briefly described below (Robinson et al, 2001; Joshi et 
al, 2004; Singh, 2006).  
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 66 
Regulatory agencies, esp. in developed coun tries, are concerned wi th environmental and 
public health, and with the impo sition of the stringent environmental legislation, which is 
increasingly causing problems for the textil e and dyestuff industry. The legislation and 
colour standards for waste discharge vary in di fferent states. In addition, there are several 
standard methods for determining the colour st andards, which aggravates a comparison of 
different colour degradation methods from vari ous sources (Hao et al, 2000; Singh, 2006). 
2.1 Physical methods 
Adsorption  has gained a favourable interest due to the efficient pollutant removal, quality 
product and economical feasibility. It is influenced by many physico-chemical factors, e.g. 
dye-sorbent interaction, adsorbent surface ar ea and particle size, temperature, pH and 
contact time. Materials, like activated carbon, peat, wood chips, fly ash and coal, silica gel, 
microbial biomass, and other inexpensive materials (e.g. natural clay, corn cobs, rice hulls), 
are used, since they do not require regeneration. Sedimentation  is a solid-liquid separation 
method. In the case of dye solutions, it is used  in a combination with chemical or biological 
methods producing particles containing dye or dye degradation products with 
coagulation/precipitation or with some other chemical methods, or adsorption on various 
materials. The rate of sedimentation of particles suspended in a fluid can be described with 
Stoke’s law and is influenced by many physico-chemical factors. The disadvantage here is a 
high sludge production. Flotation  is a foam separation technique. Generally, it is performed 
by adding a surface active ion of the opposite  charge to the ion to be separated from the 
solution. The solid product wh ich appears on the gas-liquid surface is levitated to the 
surface of the solution by means of a gentle stream of fine gas bubbles. Coagulation  can be 
induced by an electrolytic reaction at elec trode surface or by ch anging pH or adding 
coagulants (Shakir et al, 2010). Furthermore,  membrane filtration  can be used to remove dye 
molecules. The classification of membranes is conducted on the basis of their pore size to 
retain solutes with different molecular we ights. The membrane parameter is called 
molecular weight cut off (MWCO). In the case of dye separation, reverse osmosis (MWCO < 
1000), nanofiltration (500 < MWCO < 15000) and ultrafiltration (1000 < MWCO < 100000) 
membranes can be used according to the dye char acteristics. In addition  to the dye solution 
separation, membranes can be used also for the separation of particles after the adsorption 
or coagulation/precipitation instead of the sedimentation (Hao et al, 2000). The  radiation  
itself can be classified as a physical method. However, in the case of dye degradation, the 
radiation dose in aqueous media leads to the formation of strong oxidizing species such as 
*OH radicals, which are able to react with dye molecules, degrade them and consequently, 
 
Physical Chemical Electrochemical Biological 
Adsorption  
Sedimentation  
Flotation  
Coagulation 
Membrane filtration 
Radiation H2O2 oxidation  
Fenton oxidation  
Ozonization 
Chlorination 
Photochemical oxidation 
Wet air oxidation 
Reduction Electrocoagulation 
Electroflotation 
Electrooxidation 
Electroreduction Bacterial aerobic 
Bacterial anaerobic 
Algae 
Fungi 
Yeast 
Table 1. Methods for dye degradation and decolourization in waste streams 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 67 
enhance the degradation process. Therefore, ra diation methods are usually included in the 
advanced oxidation processes (A OPs) (Rauf et al, 2009). During ultrasonic irradiation , the 
propagation of an ultrasound wave leads to  the formation of cavitation bubbles. The 
collapse of these bubbles spawns high temper atures and pressures, which leads to the 
production of radical species and in conseq uence, to the chemical reaction of dye 
degradation (Vinodgopal et al, 1998). In general,  solid waste disposal is required after the 
physical methods of separation. 
2.2 Chemical and elect rochemical methods 
Chemical oxidation is the most commonly used method of decolourization, mainly due to 
its simplicity of application. The oxidising agent is usually hydrogen peroxide, which needs 
to be activated due to its stability in the pure form. Methods vary according to the way in 
which H 2O2 is activated. It removes th e dye from the effluent with an aromatic ring cleavage 
of dye molecules. A well known activator is Fe(II) salt known as Fenton’s reagent. The result 
of sorption or bonding of dissolved dyes is a sludge generation through the flocculation of 
reagent and dye molecules, which needs disp osal and is therefore disadvantageous. H 2O2 
can be activated also with ozonization. A majo r drawback is a short half-life of ozone in 
water and its cost – it degrades in about 20 mi nutes and has to be applied continuously. In 
addition, its stability is affected by the pres ence of dyes, salts, pH and temperature. 
Hydrogen peroxide can be activated also wi th UV radiation. The major advantage of 
H2O2/UV treatment is that the use of no other chemicals is required. The wet air oxidation 
(WAO) process presents a hydrothermal treatm ent of dissolved and suspended components 
in water, and has been successfully used also  for several azo dyes (Kusvuran et al, 2004; 
Rodriguez et al, 2009). Chlorination, using chlo rine gas or sodium hypochloride, is an 
inexpensive and effective method. It has become less frequent due to the generation of toxic 
and carcinogenic compounds. In addition, the use of chemicals containing chlorine is 
restricted due to environmental reasons. As already mentioned, photochemical methods are 
based on the use of UV light, which activate s the chemicals and cons equently, enhances the 
chemical reaction and makes the process more efficient.  
The principle of electrochemical methods is to charge the electric current through electrodes 
made of different materials (e.g. iron or alum inium) resulting in the oxidation process at 
anode and reduction at the cathode with H 2 production. The resulting processes are known 
as electrocoagulation, electroflo tation, electrooxidation and elec troreduction. The majority of 
the above mentioned methods are the so-called ‘advanced oxidation processes’ (AOP), and 
are essentially based on the generation of highly reactive radial species (Hao et al, 2000; 
Slokar & Majcen, 1998; Joshi et al, 2004). 
2.3 Biological methods 
A biological treatment presents a degradatio n of organic substances by microorganisms 
under aerobic or anaerobic conditions, and has been widely used and researched. The dyes 
themselves are generally resistant to oxidative biodegradation. In addi tion, toxicity, as well 
as the acclimating ability is a drawback of  using microbial cultures. It has been 
demonstrated that mixed bacterial cultures  are capable of decolourizing textile dye 
solutions. Nevertheless, several studies show th at little biodegradation  actually occurs and 
that the primary mechanism is adsorption to the microbial biomass (Slokar, 1998; Robinson 
et al, 2001; Knapp, 2001). 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 68 
A continuous aerobic or anaerobic treatment can be conducted in a variety of bacterial 
bioreactors, e.g. reactors with  activated sludge, reactors with biofilm in the form of fixed 
bed, rotating discs or rotati ng drum. An aerobic and anae robic treatment can also be 
combined. It has also been reported that few species of algae are capable of degrading azo 
dyes and utilize them as a sole source of ca rbon. Some articles on yeasts capable of dye 
decolourization can also be found in the liter ature (Joshi et al, 2004). Several fungal systems 
have been demonstrated to degrade various classes of dyes. A particular interest was 
devoted to the white-rot fungi and azo dyes, th e largest class of commercial dyes. A fungal 
treatment of dyes is an econ omical and feasible alternative to the present treatment 
technologies (Knapp, 2001; Singh, 2006). 
3. Dyes 
The main common property of dyes is to absorb  light due to the chromophore, a part of the 
molecule responsible for its colour. The colour arises when a molecule absorbs certain 
wavelengths of visible light and transmits or re flects the others. However, the variation in 
the structure is enormous and many thousand  different dyes are produced for commercial 
use. In general, dyes can be classified accord ing to their chemical structure, particularly 
chromophore, and the method of application. Th e classes of dyes from the textile industry 
together with some of their typical represen tatives are presented in Table 2 (Corbmann, 
1983; Hao et al, 2000). 
 
 
Classification according to chemical 
structure and/or chromophore Classification according to 
method of application 
azo 
anthraquinone 
triphenylmethane 
phthalocyanine 
indigo 
sulphur acid 
basic 
direct 
reactive 
disperse 
vat 
mordant 
sulphur 
Table 2. Main groups of dyes according to chemical structure and method of application 
Among 12 different chromophores, azo and an thraquinone dyes are the major units. Azo 
dyes, characterized by nitrogen to nitrogen double bonds account for up to 70% of all textile 
dyestuff produced and are the most co mmon chromophore of reactive dyes. Anthraquinone 
dyes derive from anthraquinone with a quinoid ring acting as the chromophore and either 
hydroxyl groups or amino groups a ttached to the general structure. Triphenylmethane dyes  
are synthetic organic dyes with a molecular structure based on the hydrocarbon 
triphenylmethane, used in textile applications where lightfastness is not important. The 
phthalocyanine dyes  derive from the macrocyclic compound which forms a coordination 
complex with most elements of the periodic table. They are few in number, but commonly 
used. Indigo  is an organic dye with a distinctive bl ue colour. Historically, it was extracted 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 69 
from plants; however, nearly all indigo produced today is synthetic. Sulphur  dyes are a 
group of sulphur-containing complex synt hetic organic dyes (Hao et al, 2000). 
Acid dyes  are water soluble anionic dyes with di fferent chromophore groups substituted 
with acidic functional groups such as nitro-, carboxyl- and sulphonic acid, for the dye to 
become soluble. Basic dyes  are cationic types with chromo phores typically having amino 
groups. Direct dyes  are highly water-soluble salts of sulphonic acid of azo dyes. Reactive dyes  
are highly water-soluble anionic dyes with wet fastness and binding to textile fibres via 
covalent bonds. Disperse dyes  are substantially water-insoluble non-ionic dyes for the 
application to the hydrophobic fi bres from aqueous dispersions. Sulphur dyes  are dyes 
applied in two parts. The initial bath consists of the yellow or pale chartreuse colour, which 
is aftertreated with a sulphur compou nd in place to pr oduce dark black. Mordant dyes  
require a mordant (usu. potassium dichromate), which improves dyestuff fastness on a 
dy ein g  m aterial in  water  m ed ia. Man y  mordants can be hazardous to health. Vat dyes  are 
essentially insoluble in water and incapable of direct dyeing of fibres. A reduction in 
alkaline liquor makes them water soluble and atta chable to textile fibres, while a subsequent 
oxidation reforms the originally  insoluble dye (Corbmann, 1983). 
4. Fungal decolourization and degradation of dyes 
4.1 White-rot fungi 
White-rot basidiomycetes are a group of fung i capable of depolymerizing and mineralizing 
otherwise not easily degradable lignin with th eir extracellular and non-specific ligninolytic 
enzymes. In the 1980s, this fact stimulated rese arch on the ability of  ligninolytic fungi to 
degrade organic pollutants (Pointing, 2001; Gao et al., 2010). It was established that 
Phanerochaete chrysosporium  is capable of biodegrading va rious pollutants and it soon 
became a model white-rot fungus with most of  the research done up to now. The enzymes 
produced with this fungus are lignin pe roxidase (LiP) and manganese peroxidise 
(MnP)(Podgornik et al, 2001; Faraco et al, 2009). In the next decade, a few new species of 
white-rot fungi like Pleurotus ostreatus  and Trametes versicolour  (Heinfling et al, 1997; 
Sukumar et al, 2009; Pazarlioglu et al, 2010) were  characterized for the dye degradation. A 
more intense research with Irpex lacteus  (Novotny et al, 2009) and Bjerkandera adusta  
(Robinson et al, 2001; Eichlerova et al, 2007) star ted in the last decade, while the interest in 
the decolourization capability of Ceriporiopsis subvermispora  (Babi č & Pavko, 2007; Tanaka et 
al, 2009) and Dichomites squalens  (Eichlerova et al, 2006; Pavko & Novotny, 2008) has 
increased in the last few years. 
 
Organism Enzyme activities Reference 
Bjerkandera adusta  
Ceriporiopsis subvermispora  
Dichomitus squalens  
Irpex lacteus  
Phanerochaete chrysosporium  
Pleurotus ostreatus   
 
Trametes versicolour MnP, Lac, LiP 
MnP,Lac 
MnP, Lac 
MnP, Lac, LiP 
LiP, MnP 
LiP, Lac 
 
Lac, LiP Robinson et al, 2001; Eichlerova et al, 2007 
Babi č & Pavko, 2007; Tanaka et al, 2009 
Eichlerova et al, 2006; Pavko & Novotny, 2008  
Novotny, 2009 
Podgornik et al, 2001; Faraco et al, 2009 
Heinfling et al,1997; Sukumar et al, 2009;  
Pazarlioglu et al, 2010 
Heinfling et al,1997; Sukumar et al, 2009;  
Pazarlioglu et al, 2010 
Table 3. Some white-rot fungi used in biod egradation/decolourization studies and their 
most commonly expressed enzyme activities 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 70 
Some white-rot fungi used in the biodegradation/decolourization studies and their most 
commonly expressed enzyme activities are presen ted in Table 3. The data are collected from 
numerous research articles, where the cultivation conditions varied and it is thus possible 
that an activity would or would not occur under different cultivation conditions, esp. 
nitrogen contents (Knapp, 2001; Singh, 2006).  
4.2 Mechanisms of fungal dye degradation and decolouri zation 
The mechanisms of fungal dye decolourizatio n and degradation are listed in Table 4. The 
accumulation of chemicals with the microbial biomass is termed biosorption , and can take 
place on living or dead biomass. Waste and/or  dead microbial biomass can be used as an 
efficient adsorbent, especially if containing a natural polysaccharide chitin and its derivative 
chitosan in the cell walls. Chit osan, a cell wall component of many industrially useful fungi, 
has a unique molecular structure with a high affinity for many classes of dyes (Joshi et al, 
2004).  
 
Adsorption (biosorption) 
Biodegradation 
Adsorption and biodegradation 
Mineralization 
Utilization as carbon source 
Table 4. Mechanisms of fungal dye degradation and decolourization 
I t  i s  k n o w n  t h a t  m o s t  o f  t h e  w h i t e - r o t  f u n g i produce at least two of the three highly 
nonspecific enzymes like LiP, MnP and Lac, wh ich enable the generation of free radicals 
when conducting a variety of reac tions (Pointing, 2001; Knapp, 2001).  The structure of dyes 
strongly influences their degradability by pure cultures and isolated enzymes. Numerous 
data about biodegradation of various synthetic dyes with selected white-rot fungi have been 
published. Nevertheless, a limited number of data are available on systematic studies about 
the relation between the structure and biodeg radability, esp. for commercial dyes with a 
complex structure. According to the above mentio ned, in the presence of biomass in the dye 
solution, it has to be distinguished between th e dye depletion due to adsorption and the one 
due to enzymatic degradation. The fungal action  rarely leads to the mineralization of dyes 
and very much depends on the chemical structure. A higher mineralization occurs with 
dyes containing substituted arom atic rings in their structure compared to the unsubstituted 
rings. A better mineralization is observed also under nitrogen limited conditions. Some 
reports on the utilization of dyes as a carbon so urce have been published in the last decade. 
Certain bonds in the dye molecule are clea ved and utilized as a carbon source, the 
chromophore not being affected. This mechanis m occurs preferably in the consortium of 
microorganisms (Knapp, 2001; Singh, 2006).  
4.3 Factors affecting fungal decol ourization and degradation of dyes 
The fungal growth and enzyme production , and consequently, decolourization and 
degradation are influenced by numerous factors, e.g. media composition, pH value, 
agitation and aeration, temperature and initial dye concentration. Their effect is briefly 
presented and discussed below.  
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 71 
4.3.1 Media composition 
There is no doubt that media composition has an enormous effect on fungal growth and 
production of their decolourization systems. It must be noted that real industrial effluents 
vary with location and time, not to mention the often very complex composition with a lack 
of nutrients, compared to the usually well de fined media used in the research. Therefore, 
attention has to be focused on the supply of carbon and nitrogen sources together with 
mineral nutrients and other additives (Hao et al, 2000; Knapp, 2001; Singh, 2006). 
Carbon source . A carbon source is necessary for fungal growth and to provide the supply for 
oxidants, the fungus requires for decolourizatio n. Glucose has been used in the majority of 
research studies. Alternatives are fructose, su crose, maltose, xylose and glycerol, while also 
starch and xylan seem to be useful. Surprisi ngly, cellulose and its derivatives were not 
effective. For initial experiments, glucose at 5–10 g/L is a good choice. Effluents from dyeing 
or chemical/dye production usually do not co ntain usable carbon substrates, while others 
from distilling or paper pulping may have a range of carbohydrates as useful substrates fo r 
certain white-rot fungi. The need to add carbon source depends on the organism and type of 
the dye to be treated. 
Nitrogen source . The nitrogen demand for growth and especially enzyme production differ 
markedly among fungal species. It is well known that the production of ligninolytic 
enzymes with P. chrysosporium  is much more effective under the conditions of nitrogen 
limitation. On the other hand, B. adusta  produces more LiP and Mn P in nitrogen-sufficient 
media. White-rot fungi can use inorganic as well as organic nitrogen sources. Inorganic 
nitrogen, in most cases ammonium salts, has been used during the research of fungal 
growth and enzyme production, since the organi c nitrogen seems not to be advantageous. In 
the case of effluents, the presence of usab le nitrogen sources should be considered. 
Other media components.  Many studies have been using growth factors. However, 
considering their expense, it is not econom ical to use them in the decolourization 
technologies. All microbes have certain requir ements for mineral nutrients, e.g. white-rot 
fungi need iron, copper and mangan ese. They can be a part of the effluent or must be added 
to the media. A variety of other materials, like  veratryl alcohol, tryptophan and aromatics, 
e.g. phenol and aniline, can act as low molecular mass redox  mediators of ligninolytic 
activities and therefore promote the decolo urization (Knapp, 2001; Singh, 2006). It is 
interesting that some components in wood an d straw induce the enzyme production with 
white-rot fungi. For example, the enzyme ac tivity ratio Lac/MnP can be regulated using 
beech wood as the immobilization support an d inducer together with a combination of 
various concentrations of additional nitrogen and carbon source in the liquid media during 
the cultivation of Ceriporiopsis subvermispora (Babi č & Pavko, 2007). The ligninolytic enzyme 
production by Dichomitus squalens  can be substantially induced by adding beech wood and 
straw particles to the liquid media (Pavko & Novotny, 2008). 
4.3.2 pH 
Most of the research on growth and enzyme  production has been performed in batch 
cultures, usually without the pH control during the cultivation, for the influence of initial 
pH value, sometimes with adequate bufferi ng, to be investigated. The majority of 
filamentous fungi together with white-rots gr ow optimally at acidic pH values. Depending 
on the used substrate, pH changes during cultivation. The growth on carbohydrate-
containing media generally causes acidificatio n of the media, which depends on the carbon 
source and present buffering. The decolourization can be conducted with a whole 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 72 
fermentation broth (mycelium and enzymes) or with isolated enzymes. It has to be 
distinguished between the optimum pH for gr owth and enzyme production, the optimum 
pH for the action of isolated enzymes and th e optimum pH for dye degradation. Therefore, 
optimum pH depends on the medium, fungus and its enzyme system, as well as on the 
decolourization under consideration. The majority of researchers suggest that the optimum 
pH values are likely to be in the range 4–4.5 (Knapp, 2001). 
4.3.3 Temperature 
Temperature has to be considered from variou s viewpoints: its influence on the growth and 
enzyme production, the enzymatic decolourization rate and the temperature of the waste 
stream. Most white-rot fungi are mesophiles wi th the optimal cultivation temperature 27–30 
°C. The optimal temperatures for enzyme re actions are usually higher, but the enzyme 
instability and degradation has to be taken in to account at temperatures approaching for 
example 65 °C. Various textile and dye effluent s are produced at temperatures 50–60 °C. The 
optimal decolourization process temperature for a particular process has to be thus selected 
from case to case according to the mentioned parameters (Knapp, 2001; Singh, 2006).  
4.3.4 Agitation and aeration 
Ligninolytic fungi are obligate aerobes and therefore need oxygen for growth and 
maintenance of their viability. In addition, lignin degradation also requires oxygen, either 
for the mycelial generation of H 2O2 for peroxidases or for the direct action of oxidases. 
Oxygen could also act directly on lignin fragments. The oxygen demand depends on the 
fungus and its ligninolytic system. 
The oxygen supply to the culture media during the cultivation has been an interesting 
research topic for decades and has been covere d in numerous articles. The major problem is 
its low water solubility, which is only 8 mg/L at 20 °C. To satisfy the microbial oxy gen 
requirements during the cultivation and to e nhance the oxygen gas-liquid mass transfer, the 
aeration and agitation are necessary. This migh t affect the morphology of filamentous fungi 
and lead to the decreased rate of enzyme synthesis (Žnidarši č & Pavko, 2001). As a result, 
various bioreactor types generally divided into static and agitated configurations were 
invented to provide enough oxygen. The choice of the reactor depends on the particular 
system although an appropriate agitation gives as good or even  better results as those from 
static conditions. Particular studies on the e ffect of agitation and aeration only on the 
decolourization process were not found in the literature (Knapp, 2001). 
4.3.5 Initial dye concentration 
It is important to optimize the initial dye conc entration for colour removal. Dyes are namely 
usually toxic to microorganisms, while the toxici ty depends on the type of dye. Higher dye 
concentrations are always toxic. The range of  initial dye concentrations studied in the 
literature generally varies from 50–1000 mg/L, and depends on the investigated 
microorganism and type of dye (Singh, 2006). 
5. Reactor design considerations 
The reactor design uses information, knowledg e and experience from various areas, e.g. 
thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, fluid mechan ics, mass and heat tran sfer, and economics. 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 73 
To select a proper reactor configuration and size , it is necessary to know how materials flow 
and contact in the reactor, and how fast is the process. Usually, th e conversion of the 
reactant should be as high an d as fast as possible at the lowest costs (Levenspiel, 1999). 
In our case, two different processes are taking place. The first one is the fungal growth and 
enzyme synthesis with fungal biomass, and the second one is the decolourization and 
degradation of dyes caused by the produced enzymes. Fungal enzymes can be intracellular 
or extracellular products, synt hesized during the growth or after the growth phase. The 
colour depletion in wastewater can take plac e due to the enzymatic degradation or only 
adsorption on the biomass. The enzyme production and decolourization must be 
simultaneously optimized to get the best dye co nversion in the shortest time. According to 
this, two main strategies can be pursued, i.e. (1) the direct transformation of dye with the 
active biomass in one reactor, or (2) the use of extracted en zymes from the culture medium. 
The biomass growth and enzyme production as  well as dye degradation take place in the 
liquid phase. Under aerobic conditions, the aera tion of the reactor is necessary, while under 
anaerobic conditions, methane is produced. The microbial biomass, especially when 
immobilized, can be treated as a solid phase; therefore, the reactor can be considered as a 
gas-liquid-solid system with all its liquid flow and mass transfer characteristics. 
For a successful design of the process with a given capacity, the reactor type, i.e. shape and 
size, as well as the operation mode of the reactor must be selected at the beginning. 
Moreover, the operating conditions such as co ncentrations, flow rates, temperature and pH 
must be defined. One of the most important da ta for the design is the reaction rate, which 
allows the calculation of time in the batch mo de or flow throughput in a continuous mode 
for the necessary reactant conversion – in our case, dye degradation or decolourization 
degree. Frequently, pilot plant experiments in addition to laboratory data are necessary to 
establish the proper scale up method for the tr ansfer of the process from the laboratory to 
industrial scale. Finally, an econ omical evaluation is crucial before the realization of the 
project. All these facts are briefly describe d in the continuation of this chapter. 
5.1 Reaction rate 
In the chemical reactor design, chemical re actions can be usefully classified into 
homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions according to the present gas, liquid and solid 
phases. In addition, a distinction can be made between non-catalytic an d catalytic reactions. 
The reaction rate of the reaction component is usually based on the unit volume of reaction 
fluid (mol/Ls); however, it can be based on the unit mass of catalyst, unit interfacial surface 
in the heterogeneous system etc. On the ot her hand, a chemical reaction follows the 
stoichiometric equation. In the simplest case  of a homogenous reaction of components A 
and B in a liquid phase: 
 aA + bB → products (1) 
the expression for the reaction rate of disapp earance of the component A can be written as 
follows: 
 dC A /dt = –r A = k CAaCBb = k CAa (b/a)bCAb = kC Aa+b = kC An (2) 
where k = k(b/a)b is the reaction rate constant, a and b are the reaction order with respect to 
A and B – the power to which the concentration is raised, while n is the overall reaction 
order. The integrated form of the equation allows the calculation (prediction) of time 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 74 
required to achieve the desired degradation le vel or conversion for the component A (e.g. 
dye) in a batch reactor for a given concentration at the beginning (C A0) and the end (C A) of 
the process: 
 
0/( )A
AC
A A
Ctd C r =− −∫ (3) 
For elementary reactions, the correlation betw een the stoichiometric and rate equation is 
simple, while with non-elementary reactions,  the reaction mechanism must be known to 
write down the correct rate equation. The en zyme-substrate reactions are a typical case 
(Levenspiel, 1999). With heterogeneous reaction s, the oxygen transfer from air bubbles to 
the liquid phase or the transport of dye from the bulk solution  inside the biomass particle 
and its degradation has to be considered. In th is case, the rate expression and the design 
equation to predict the conversion in the reactor of selected size and operating conditions 
are much more complicated. 
Figure 1 shows that the shape of the concentrat ion vs. time curve varies with the reaction 
order (n = 0 : k = 1.2 mg/Lh; n = 1 : k = 0.1 h–1; 0 < n < 1 : k 1 = 1 h–1, k2 = 1 mg/L). A 
mathematical analysis of the experimental da ta allows the determination of the kinetic 
Equation 2. 
 
048121620
0 5 10 15 20 25
time, hconcentration, mg/Lshifting order
zero order
first order
 
Fig. 1. Concentration profile of reactant followi ng reaction of zero and first order, and for 
shifting order (enzyme catalysed reaction following Monod kinetics) in batch reactor 
5.2 Fluid flow 
Ideal reactors have three ideal flow or contac ting patterns. In a well mixed batch reactor, a 
uniform composition is everywhere in the reactor, but the composition and consequently, 
the reaction rate changes with time. For a cont inuous operation, two types of ideal flow can 
be achieved. In a mixed flow, the same compos ition is everywhere within the reactor and 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 75 
also at the exit. Furthermore, the reaction ra te is the same at any point in the reactor. 
Therefore, the performance equation can be  written for the reactor as a whole:  
 τ  = V/F = (C A0 – C A)/(–r A) (4) 
where τ (s) is the space time or time required to process one reactor volume of feed 
measured at specified conditions, V (m3) is the fluid volume in the reactor, F is the 
volumetric flow (m3/s), C A0 and C A are the concentrations of reac tant in the inlet and outlet 
stream, while –r A (g/m3s) is the expression for the reacti on rate of disappearance of the 
reactant – in our case dye. 
 
00,020,040,060,080,10,12
0123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0
concentration, mg/L1/(-rA), Lh/mgplug flow
mixed flow
 
Fig. 2. Effect of ideal fluid flow on reac tor performance: for same inlet and outlet 
concentrations, and fluid flow rate, volu me of plug flow reactor is smaller 
In the reactor with a plug flow, the composition of the fluid varies from point to point along 
the flow path. To obtain the performance equati on for the whole reactor, an integration of 
differential mass balance equation for a diff erential volume elem ent is necessary.  
 
0// ( )A
AC
A A
CVF d C rτ== − −∫ (5) 
In the above equation, τ (s) is the space time or time requ ired to process one reactor volume 
of feed measured at specified conditions, V (m3) is the fluid volume in the reactor, F is the 
volumetric flow (m3/s), C A0 and C A are the concentrations of reac tant in the inlet and outlet 
stream, while –r A (g/m3s) is the expression for the reacti on rate of disappearance of the 
reactant, in our case dye. 
Typical shapes of reactors where the plug flow can be achieved are tubu lar reactors or long 
columns. A consequence of the type of flow is  that the reactor volume for mixed flow and 
plug flow (for reaction order not equal zero) is different for the same fluid throughput and 
reactant inlet concentrations and its conversion at  the exit. This very important fact has to be 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 76 
considered in the reactor selection and design. Figure 2 shows the case for the Michaelis-
Menten enzyme kinetics (v max = 100 mg/Lh, K m = 2.0 mg/L, C A0 = 20 mg/L, C A = 1 mg/L). 
It can be seen that the space time and consequently, the volume for the mixed flow reactor is 
proportional to the area below the horizontal line (cf. Equation 4), while for the plug flow 
reactor, the space time is proportional to th e area below the curve (cf. Equation 5). In 
consequence, the required volume of plug flow reactor is by 50% lower (Doran, 1995; 
Levenspiel, 1999). 
Real reactors always deviate from an ideal fl ow due to stagnant regions, fluid channelling, 
or short-circuiting. To predict the behaviou r of a continuous reactor, the velocity 
distribution of fluid elements or their re sidence time distribution (RTD) has to be 
considered. This information can be obtained easily and directly with stimulus-response 
experiments. In a two phase reactor, stirre d tank with aeration or bubble column for 
example, each phase can have its own fl ow characteristics (Levenspiel, 1999). 
5.3 Types of operation 
In general, two basic modes of reactor operation are known. A constant volume batch 
operation is a typical non-steady state process.  Here, the final concentration of the produced 
biomass and enzyme and/or degraded dye an d degradation products in the reactor are 
achieved after a certain process time. During the constant volume continuous process, the 
biomass growth and enzyme production as well as dye degradation take place in the reactor 
with the reactant inflow, in our case substr ate and/or dye, and liquid outflow with the 
products of the process. The outflow may co ntain biomass, produc ed enzyme, non-used 
substrate, non-degraded dye and dye degradat ion products. The type of flow must be 
considered and a steady state can be achiev ed. To increase the process performance, 
biomass and/or enzymes can be immobilized and kept in the reactor. Extracellular enzymes 
can be retained in the reactor by using a membrane, which permeates the dye with its 
degradation products. The concentrations at  the liquid outflow mainly depend on the 
kinetics of growth, enzyme production and dye degradation as well as space time, defined 
as the reactor volume divided by volumetric feed rate. An inverse value of space time is 
dilution rate, a well known parameter in biotechnology of continuous processes. Other 
types of operation are also known, i.e. fed batch, repeated fed batch and recycle (Doran, 
1995).  
5.4 Productivity and throughput 
The simplest case, a direct transformation of  dye with active biomass in one reactor is 
considered here. The productivity of biomass during the batch fermentation can be simply 
defined as an increase in the biomass concentr ation at the point of productivity estimation 
from the point of inoculation divided by the process time. The productivity is shown in 
Figure 3 as the slope of the line. The maximum biomass productivity is achieved earlier than 
the maximum biomass concentration. For the process time, growth time after inoculation as 
well as ‘dead’ periods like cleaning, sterilizin g and harvesting are taken into account. It 
should be noted that the maximum biomass productivity is not always at the point of 
maximum biomass concentration. In the case of batch dye decolourization/degradatio n, 
productivity should be redefined as dye degradation or dye decolourization capacity 
according to a specific case. For example, if the growth and enzyme production is followed 
by the dye degradation process in a batch reacto r, the dye concentration drop from the point 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 77 
of dye addition till the end of degradation proc ess should be divided with the whole process 
time for growth, enzyme production, decolourization, plus dead time. For such a definiti on, 
the decolourization capacity very much depend s on the initial and final dye concentrations, 
and the decolourization/degradation rate around the final dye concentration.  
 
 
024681012
02 0 4 0 6 0 8 0
time, hbiomass, productivity biomass (g/L)
productiv ity  at max.biomass (g/Lh)
max.productivity (g/L)
 
 
02468101214161820
0 0,2 0,4 0,6 0,8
dilution rate, 1/hsubstrate, biomass, productivitysubstrate (g/L)
biomass (g/L)
productivity (g/Lh)
 
 
Fig. 3. Biomass productivity during batch (above) and cont inuous operation (below) of 
stirred tank reactor 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 78 
The steady state concentrations during a contin uous fermentation in a constant volume ideal 
stirred tank bioreactor are dependent on the dilu tion rate D = F/V, i.e. the ratio between the 
liquid volumetric flow rate and liquid volume  in the reactor. Here, the variables like 
substrate, dye, enzyme, biomass and product co ncentrations can be co nsidered. The critical 
operating point is the value of dilution rate , where the biomass and fermentation products 
are washed out from the reactor and the inle t stream with its components simply flows 
through the reactor, since there is no chemic al reaction within the reactor. Figure 3 
demonstrates the case of continuous biomass production for Monod growth kinetics (S o = 
20 g/L; Y x/s = 0.5; K s = 0.2 g/L; µ max = 0.8 h–1). The biomass productivity  here is defined as a 
product between biomass concentration (X) and dilu tion rate (D). It can be seen that it has 
its maximum at a certain dilution rate; therefore, the dye degradation should be controlled 
around this point (around 0,7 h-1 in our case). The dosing of dye to the reactor can be 
performed separately or together with the substr ate inflow (F). The dye flow into the reactor 
with a given volume (V) must correspond to the requested dye conversion and degradation 
rate according to Equation 4 (Doran, 1995). 
5.5 Mathematical modelling 
Mathematical modelling is a useful tool for chemical engineers, which leads to better 
understanding of the process and reduces the number of experiments. It helps designing 
experiments and it is successfully used for the process regulation and control. Mathematical 
simulations can also be a very good enrichment for the teaching process. Briefly, it means 
writing down an idea of a process in the mathem atical language. It consists of several steps. 
The system with its boundaries has to be define d first, where a chemical reaction can occur, 
and then the mass and energy exchange can take place. In bioremediation, the reactor is a 
typical system. Afterwards, the process variables and parameters have to be defined, e.g. 
biomass, enzyme and dye conc entrations. The analysis of process dynamics gives useful 
information, which of the process variables considerably changes with time, or which 
remains constant. One of the main steps is the formulation of the mathematical model on the 
basis of previous steps. The type of fluid flow  and various physical an d chemical laws have 
to be considered. Equations describing mass and heat transfer, reaction rate and correlations 
for various coefficients are written and solved for the corresponding initial and boundary 
conditions. On the basis of parametric sensitivity analysis which follows, the effect of 
various parameters on process va riables is seen and the model can be simplified. The crucial 
step is the verification of the mathematic al model, which means a comparison of the 
calculated results with the model and experiment al results. If the results agree within the 
expected deviation, the model is good and useful . If not, previous steps must be repeated by 
including new data (Snape et al, 1995).  
5.6 Scale up 
The development of a microbiological process is  usually conducted in three scales, i.e. 1) 
laboratory scale, where a basic screening and gr owth conditions are investigated; 2) pilot 
plant, where an optimization of environmental factors is studied; and 3) plant scale, where 
the process is brought to an economic function. Environmental conditions involve chemical 
factors (e.g. media composition, pH) and physical factors (e.g. mixing, aeration, shear). They 
are crucial for the successful aerobic growth  and enzyme production in an aerobic 
bioreactor, which is considered a two phas e system. The transpor t phenomena like gas-
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 79 
liquid oxygen transfer, heat transfer and mixing, as well as the chemical reactions in a l iquid 
phase like oxygen and substrat e consumption, the biomass growth and enzyme production 
take place simultaneously during the cultivation. On the basis of regime analysis, it must be 
established which of the above mentioned proce sses is the slowest, and therefore controls 
the microbial growth and enzyme production. Du ring the transfer from the laboratory to 
larger scale, an optimization of this process must be considered. Historically, keeping a 
constant gas-liquid oxygen transfer rate in a small and large scale was mostly used, proving 
as a successful scale up criteria. Namely, the low rate of this process compared to other 
previously mentioned is characterized by low oxygen solubility in water, and can be 
improved with increased mixing and aeration. Usually, the geometrical similarity of both 
reactors was ensured and the maximum allowed impeller tip speed to avoid cell damage 
was taken into account. According to the above mentioned, a general scale up criteria for the 
microbial cultivation is to keep the optimal environmental conditions as much as possible 
on all scales to obtain the necessary  productivity (Wang et al., 1979).  
The dye degradation and/or decolourization re actions at a given enzyme activity in the 
solution take place in a liquid phase, and do not depend on oxygen gas-liquid mass trans fer. 
According to the literature data, these reactions are mostly slow. The scale up of this process 
needs the expression of the reaction rate at a given dye concentration range, as well as the 
optimal pH and temperature. On the basis of  the reactor type, its operation mode, rate 
equation and given dye conversion, the necessary  degradation time in a large batch reactor 
of a given volume can be estimated. Similarly, the dye feed rate in a large continuous reactor 
can be calculated (cf. Equations 3–5). 
In the case of biodegradation or decolourizatio n in the presence of th e biomass, the situation 
is much more complex, since the dye transport from the liquid to the active site inside the 
biomass has to be taken into account. Here, the degradation and/or adsorption can take 
place. Generally, proper mixing or fluid flow, as well as the biomass thickness can affect the 
dye depletion rate in the solution. For a successful scale up, a detailed investigation of the 
effect of the mentioned parameters on the reac tion rate is necessary on the laboratory and 
pilot plant scale. The scale up principle may vary from case to case. Unfortunately, no 
research data covering this topic were found in the available literature. 
5.7 Costs 
Costs fall into two categories, i.e. capital cost s and operating costs. Capital costs generally 
include initial and periodic expenses and consis t of 1) design and construction, 2) equipment 
and installation, 3) buildings and structures, an d 4) auxiliary facilities. The costs for a start 
up have to be taken into account in this category as well. Operating costs generally cover 1) 
labour, 2) equipment maintenance and parts, 3) expendable supplies and materials, 4) 
utilities (e.g. electricity, water, steam, gas,  telephone etc), 5) ongoing inspection and 
engineering, and 6) laborato ry analyses (Freeman, 1998).  
The degradability of the dye strongly depends on its chemical structure. This fact plays an 
important role during the biorem ediation. In addition, the fungal cultivation is done under 
sterile conditions, which increases the costs of  the process. The dye removal efficiency is 
usually better with one of the chemical oxid ation methods, where it can exceed 90%. The 
time required for oxidative decolourizations are much shorter (in minutes) compared to 
those needed for the adsorption or biodegradation (in hours or days) (Slokar & Majcen Le 
Marechal, 1998). 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 80 
Practically no data on the costs of dye removal can be found. Only the evaluation of water 
reuse technologies for the spent dyebath wastew ater containing three reactive dyes from a 
jig dyeing operation was found in the literature.  With several methods, e.g. electrochemical 
oxidation, oxidation with ozone, reduction with sodium borohydride and adsorption on 
activated carbon, the colour removal was 78–98% , while the operating costs were estimated 
to be 10–94 $ per 1,000 gallons treated. Unfort unately, the dyes were toxic to the tested 
microorganisms and the biodegradation method was unsuccessful (Sarina, 2006).  
Therefore, from this point of view, chemical methods seem for the time being more 
economical than the fungal bioremediation. 
6. Bioreactors for fungal degradation and decolourization  of dyes 
A variety of reactor configurations has been us ed, similar to those for the fungal cultivation 
under submerged conditions. Gentle mixing an d aeration have usually been the necessary 
prerequisites for a successful biomass growth  and enzyme production. The immobilization 
of fungal mycelia also showed useful results. Batch and continuous operations were shown 
to be effective – both having advantages and disadvantages. Several papers have reported 
the repeated use of mycelia over several cycles of decolourization lasting from several 
weeks to a few months. Most of the studies were performed under aseptic conditions, while 
some were effective also during non-aseptic cond itions. The toxicity of the dye highly affects 
the dye degradation and decolourization. Selected references from the last decade for 
laboratory reactors with volumes larger than 1.0 L are briefly presented below. 
 
Type of reactor Volume Organism Dye Removal   Duration Reference 
Stirred tank 
Stirred tank 
 
 
Stirred tank 
Stirred tank 
Bubble column 
Bubble column 
Packed bed 
Trickle bed 
Rotating discs 
Rotating discs 
Rotating discs, 
Rotating discs 
 
 
Biofilm 
 
Biofilm 
Membrane 
Membrane 5 L 
3.5 L 
 
 
4.0 L 
1.0 L 
1.5 L 
1.5 L 
2.0 L 
1.0 L 
1.7 L 
1.6 L 
1.0 L 
1.0 L 
 
 
1.0 L 
 
10.0 L 
11.8 L 
5.0 L B. adusta 
T. versicolour 
 
 
T. versicolour 
T. versicolour 
T. versicolour 
T. versicolour 
Strain F29 
I. lacteus 
C. versicolour 
P. Sordida 
I. lacteus 
D. squalens 
 
 
Fungal 
consortium 
C. versicolour 
C. versicolour 
P. chrysosporium  Black 5 
R. Black 5 
R. Red 198 
Brilliant Blue R 
 
Poly R-478 
Orange G 
Grey Lanaset G 
Orange I  
RO16 
Everzol T Blue G
Basic Blue 22 
RO16 
RBBR, 
Azure B  
Methylene blue 
RB5, AR249, 
RR M-3BE 
Everzol T Blue G
Acid Orange II 
RBR X-3B 95% 
91–99% 
 
 
90% 
80% 
97% 
90% 
95% 
95% 
80% 
80% 
95% 
99% 
92% 
59% 
70–90% 
 
82% 
97% 
90% 20 d 
8 d/200 d 
 
 
10 d 
19 d 
20 h 
42 d 
3.5 d HRT/60 d 
6 d  
2 d/12 d 
2 d/12 d 
10 d 
6 h 
8 d 
30 h 
12 h/96 d 
 
50 h 
1 d/62 d 
1 d/65 d Mohorčič, 2004
Borchert, 2001 
 
 
Libra, 2003 
Leidig, 1999 
Casas, 2007 
Blanquez, 2004 
Zhang, 1999 
Tavčar, 2006 
Kapdan, 2002 
Ge, 2004 
Tavčar, 2006 
Trošt, 2010 
 
 
Yang, 2009 
 
Kapdan, 2002 
Hai, 2008 
Gao, 2009  
Table 5. Fungal bioreactors for degradation and decolourization of dyes 
6.1 Stirred tank bioreactor 
The decolourization of the diazo dye Reactive Black 5 with Bjerkandera adusta  was conducted 
in a 5-L aerated stirred tank bioreactor. The fu ngus was immobilized on a plastic net in the 
form of a cylinder inside the vessel. The decolourization of the dye in an initial 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 81 
concentration of 0.2 g/L from black-blue to in tense yellow (95% removal) was reached in 20 
days. Initially, lignin peroxidases and subseq uently manganese dependent peroxidases were 
responsible for the decolourization (Mohor čič et al, 2004). 
The white-rot fungus Trametes versicolour  p r o v e d  t o  b e  c a p a b l e  o f  d e c o l o u r i z i n g  R e a c t i v e  
Black 5, Reactive Red 198 and Brilliant Blue R.  in a 3.5-L aerated stirred tank bioreactor 
during a sequencing batch process. The de colourization activity was related to the 
expression of extracellular nonspecific peroxidases, which could be continuously reactivated 
by sheering the suspended mi crobial pellets. Under sterile conditions, 12 cycles of 
decolourization were performed, while under non-sterile conditions, only 5 cycles of 
decolourization could be achieved. One cycle la sted for 5–20 days. 91–99% of colour removal 
was achieved in the experiments which lasted  up to 200 days (Borchert & Libra, 2001). 
Various strategies for the decolourization of Reactive Black 5 with Trametes versicolour in a 4-
L aerated stirred tank reactor with two flat-blade impellers under non-sterile conditions 
were compared. To obtain poor growth conditions for bacterial contamination, medium pH 
and nitrogen source were reduced during the cultivation of T. versicolour  in two separate 
experiments. The enzyme, produc ed during the fungus cultiv ation and then isolated, was 
used alone for the decolourization. These thr ee strategies were not as successful as the 
fourth one, where the fungus wa s grown on lignocellulosic solids as a sole substrate, such as 
straw and grain. Here, more than 90% degree of decolourization was achieved under non-
sterile conditions in 10 days (Libra et al, 2003). 
The mycelia of Trametes versicolour  were aseptically encapsulated in the PVAL hydrogel 
beads 1–2 mm in diameter to be protecte d against the microbial contamination and 
mechanical stress. The encapsulated fungi, whic h were grown in a 1.0-L aerated stirred tank 
bioreactor under non-sterile conditions, expr essed the ligninolytic enzymes which were 
capable of decolourizing polyvinylamine su lphonate anthrapyridone (Poly R-478). The 
average dye elimination of 80% was achiev ed in 19 days (Leidig et al, 1999). 
6.2 Bubble column bioreactor 
The white-rot fungus Trametes versicolour  in the form of pellets was cultivated in a 1.5-L 
bioreactor, where the fluidization of biomass wa s achieved with a puls ating introduction of 
air at the bottom. The reactor was filled with separately cultivated microbial pellets, media 
with glucose and Orange G synthetic dye. The obtained percentage of decolourization was 
97% in only 20 h. As high as 3500 AU/L of la ccase was determined, while no MnP activity 
was detected. Better results were obtained this way compared to In Vitro  experiments with 
commercial purified laccase from T. versicolour (Casas et al, 2007). 
The batch and continuous operation mode of a 1.5-L bubble column bioreactor were used fo r 
the cultivation of T. versicolour  in the pellet form and degrad ation of Grey Lanaset G metal-
complex dye. A six days long batch operation was followed by a 36-day continuous operation.  
In both experiments, the decolourization was effi cient (90%), but could no t be correlated with 
extracellular laccase activities. The degradation occurs in several steps including the initial 
adsorption of the dye onto the biomass, followed by its transfer into the cells, where the 
degradation occurs due to the enzymes attached to the membrane (Blanquez et al, 2004). 
6.3 Packed bed bioreactor 
A vertical glass jar of 2.0-L working volume with an open-ended stainless wire mesh 
cylinder as support for mycelia growth was used for the cultivation of the fungal strain F29, 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 82 
assuming to be white-rot fungus and capabl e of producing lignin peroxidase, manganese 
peroxidase and laccase. In the first 7 days of the submerged batch cultivation under 
aeration, the mycelium grew on the wire mesh rather than in suspen sion. Afterwards, the 
reactor was operated in a continuous mode by pumping nitrogen limited media with dye 
Orange II to study the decolourization proces s. At the retention time 3–3.5 days, the 
decolourization remained high (95%) for two months (Zhang et al, 1999). 
 
air pump
timerairair
filter
filter
sampling
liquid
medium with dyetimerliquid pumpperforated
support
plateliquid
distributor
reactor
cubes with
myceliumfilter
air
 
Fig. 4. Trickle bed reactor for decolourization of RO 16 with Irpex lacteus 
The trickle bed reactor was constructed using a 10-cm ID glass cylinder, where 2-cm PUF 
cubes were used for the Irpex lacteus  immobilization support. A special liquid distributor 
was used to uniformly distribute the liquid ov er the culture surface from the top of the 
reactor. A 2-L Erlenmeyer flas k was used as a reservoir containing 1.0 L of the growth 
medium together with Reactive orange 16 (initial concentration 0.3 g/L), which circulated in 
the reactor by the means of a peristaltic pu mp. The reactor was also aerated through the 
bottom. The inoculation was done with the 10-day old fungal biomass grown on PUF. A 
successful decolourization due to the extracellular activities of MnP and laccases as well as 
the mycelium-associated laccase was performed in six days (Tav čar et al, 2006). 
6.4 Rotating discs bioreactor 
The biodiscs reactor consisted of 13 plastic discs with 13 cm in diameter in a horizontal 
cylinder with a liquid volume of 1.7 L. The ro tation speed was 30 rpm. For the first three 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 83 
days, the fungi Coriolus versicolour  was cultivated in a nitrogen limited media for the biofilm 
formation. Then the media was replaced with  fresh media with nutrients and dyestuff 
Everzol Turquoise Blue G. The reactor was oper ated in a repeated-batch mode by removing 
the liquid media, reloading the coloured fresh media every two days for the 12 days of 
operation. The decolourization efficiency wa s around 80% for 50–200 mg/L and 33% for 500 
mg/L of initial dye concentration (Kapdan & Kargi, 2002). 
The biological decolourization of Basic Blue 22 by Phanerochaete sordida  was studied in a 1.6-
L biodiscs reactor with 15 plastic discs with a 15-cm diameter at various rotational speeds 
10–50 rpm. During the first 3 days, fungi were  cultivated in the reactor for the biofilm 
formation. After that, the reactor operated in a repeated-batch mode in 2-day cycles for 12 
days. A metal mesh covering the discs gave the best results, while the highest 
decolourization efficiency was obtained at th e rotational speed 40 rpm. The TOC removal 
efficiency was around 80% for 50–200 mg/L and 52% for 400 mg/L of dyestuff 
concentration (Ge et al, 2004). 
The rotating discs reactor with six 1-cm thick and 8-cm OD PUF plates was used to study 
the decolourization of Reactive orange 16 with Irpex lacteus . The liquid volume in the reactor 
was 1.0 L. The reactor was also aerated. Fi rst, the growth media in the reactor was 
inoculated with a culture homogenate and afte r 10 days of cultivation, when the fungus 
colonized the discs, the liquid in the reacto r was replaced with 1.0 L of fresh medium 
containing 0.3 g/L of the dye. A successful deco lourization due to extracellular activities of 
MnP and laccases, as well as mycelium-asso ciated laccase was conducted in ten days 
(Tav čar et al, 2006). 
 
airair pump
timer
timerfilterfilterair
air
filter
sampling
liquidmedium with dyemotor drive
discs with myceliumlid for biomass
sampling
 
Fig. 5. Rotating discs reactor for decolourization of RO 16 with Irpex lacteus 
Dichomitus Squalens was grown on 8.0 cm beech wood discs  in a 3.0-L laboratory rotating-
disc reactor (RDR) with 1.0 L of cultivation media. Three cultivations were done and the 
produced enzymes were used to decolourize thr ee types of synthetic dyes, each in separate 
experiments: anthraquinone dye Remazol Brill iant Blue R (RBBR), thiazine dye Azure B 
(AB) and phenothiazine dye Methylene Blue (MB) . The dye solution to obtain the initial dye 
concentration 50 mg/L was added to the reac tor after 5 days and the following final 
decolourization efficiencies were obtained: 99% for RBBR after 6 h, 92% for AB after 200 h, 
and 59% for MB after 30 h (Trošt & Pavko, 2010). 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 84 
020406080100120
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260
time, hdegree of decolourization, %Azure B
Methylene blue
RBBR
 
Fig. 6. Decolourization of variou s dyes in rotating discs reactor 
6.5 Biofilm reactor 
A biofilm reactor was made up of a plastic column filled with polyethylene fibre wads with 
a 4.5-L effective volume. 1.0 L of selected mi crobial consortium (obtained from rotten wood 
soil samples and a textile wastewater treatm ent plant) together with 3.0 L of growth 
medium were introduced into the reactor and ge ntly aerated for the biofilm to culture under 
non-sterile conditions. The growth medium was replaced several times until a complete 
biofilm was formed. Fungi were the dominant population in the biofilm. Then, various 
synthetic azo dyes (Reactive Black RB5, Acid  Red AR 249 and Reactive Red RR M-3BE) and 
textile wastewater were continuously fed into the reactor. The whole process lasted for 96 
days at hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 12 h.  The colour removal efficiencies were 70–80% 
for 100 mg/L of dye solutions and 79–89% for textile wastewaters (Yang et al, 2009). 
The white-rot fungus Coriolus versicolour  in the form of a biofilm on surfaces of inclined 
plates immersed in the aeration tank together  with the activated sludge culture and wood 
ash particles as adsorbents were used for si multaneous adsorption and degradation of the 
textile dyestuff Everzol Turquoise Blue G. Th e major process variables such as dyestuff and 
adsorbent concentrations and sludge retentio n time on decolourization efficiency were 
studied. HRT was 50 h in all experiments. The highest colour removal efficiency was 82% at 
200 mg/L of dyestuff concentration, 150 mg/L of adsorbent concentration and sludge age of 
20 days (Kapdan & Kargi, 2002). 
6.6 Membrane reactors 
In a membrane reactor, the bioc atalyst is retained within the system with a semi-permeable 
membrane, allowing a continuous operation wi th a substrate feed and product withdrawal 
(Lopez et al, 2002). 
A cylindrical PVC bioreactor wi th an 11.8-L working volume was used in the study of Acid 
Orange II decolourization with the white-rot fungus Coriolus versicolour.  A hollow fibre 
membrane module (pore size 0.4 µm) was submerged into the reactor. The system was first 
inoculated with the fungus and kept under ae ration for 2 weeks to obtain the necessary 
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 85 
enzyme and biomass concentration. Afterwards , a continuous operation started by adding 
the nutrient sufficient synthetic wastewater with 100 mg/L of dye at HRT of 1 day under 
non-sterile conditions. During 62 days of successful operation, 97% of decolourization in the 
permeate was achieved. Later, the bacterial co ntamination ceased the enzymatic activity and 
consequently, the process ef ficiency (Hai et al, 2008). 
A membrane bioreactor with an effective vo lume of 5.0 L comprised of the membrane 
reaction zone and hollow fibre membrane separation zone. In the reaction zone, 
Phanerochaete chrysosporium  was cultivated in the form of  a biofilm on the fibrous inert 
material. The polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (pore size 0.2 µm) was used for the 
separation of the permeate. The reactor was aera ted during operation. After the inoculation, 
the reactor was operated under aeration for 8 days for the biofilm formation. Then, the dye 
wastewater with the dye concentration 100 mg/L wa s fed to the reactor, in order to achieve 
24 h of the retention time. The decolourization efficiency was between 79.3% and 90.2% for 
the 65 days of operation, when the peroxida se isoenzyme activities were high enough. 
Afterwards, the biofilm retrogra dation occurred and the enzyme activities decreased (Gao et 
al, 2009). 
7. Conclusions 
An enormous number of articles published in  the last two decades cover the ‘fungal dye 
decolourization’. This pr oves that great attention has been paid by researchers to use the lignin 
degrading enzymatic system of white-rot fungi for solving this serious pollution problem. A 
considerable amount of work in the fungal de colourization studies has been conducted on a 
laboratory scale to find fungal strains with ef fective enzymes. The main fungal enzymes have 
been indicated and various mech anisms have been explained, however, several studies show 
that unknown enzymes or mechanisms, respecti vely, are still present. The studies mainly 
cover chemically defined dyes, while the research  with wastewater from dyestuff industry is 
rare. White-rot fungi as a group can decolourize a wide range of dyes. Nevertheless, the 
chemical and physical decolourization and/or degradation processes ar e usually faster than 
the processes using fungal cultur es. In addition, a fungal cultivation takes place under sterile 
conditions, which increases the cost of bioremed iation technology and additionally lowers the 
economics of the process. Unfort unately, there are not many resu lts of dye degradation during 
the cultivation under non-sterile operation conditio ns available yet. Therefore, the research of 
screening or genetic manipulation of fungi to be more resistant, to be capable of faster dye 
degradation, to reach higher mineralization degree or to use dyes as sole substrates would also 
be of great interest. 
The experiments in various types of bioreactors on a laboratory and pilot plant scale present 
an engineering approach to the scale up of the pr ocess, which leads to some interesting results. 
From the economical point of view in general, the process should be fa st and effective. There 
are several descriptions of degradation kineti cs with isolated enzymes and a few with the 
whole mycelia, but for the industrialization of fungal bioremediation, more attention should 
be paid to the degradation kinetics studies. Th e studies of pilot plant reactors with volumes 
10–100 L for the transfer to a larger scale could be  more intense. There is a lack of comparative 
data to indicate the best reactor configuration. On the other hand, the research in the last 
decade shows that the membrane reactors have an interesting potential. There is practically no 
data about the bioremediation costs; it would be very interesting to compare this promising 
technology with alternative pr ocesses for the treatment of e ffluents with synthetic dyes. 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 86 
Moreover, the mathematical modelling of the decolourization process has not gained such 
significance here, as it has in other fields of biotechnology. 
8. References 
Babi č, J. & Pavko, A. (2007). Producti on of ligninolytic enzymes by Ceriporiopsis 
subvermispora  for decolourization of synthetic dyes. Acta Chim. Slov.,  54, 730 -734, 
ISSN 1318-0207 
Blanquez, P.; Casas, N.; Font, X.; Gabarrell, X.; Sarra, M.; Caminal,G. & Vicent, T. (2004). 
Mechanism of textile metal dye biotransformation by Trametes versicolor ,  Water 
Research,  38, 2166 – 2172, ISSN 0043-1354 
Borchert, M. &  Libra, J. A. (2001). Decolorizati on of reactive dyes by the white rot fungus 
Trametes versicolor in sequencing batch reactors, Biotechnology and Bioengineering,  3, 
312-321, ISSN 0006-3592 
Casas, N.; Blanquez, P.; Gabarrell, X.; Vicent, T.; Caminal, G. & Sarra, M. (2007). Degradation 
of orange G by laccase: Fungal versus enzymatic process, Environmental Technology , 
28, 1103-1110, ISSN 0959-3330 
Corbman, B. P. (1983). Textiles: Fiber to fabric , pp. 201-222, McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-066263-3, 
New York 
Doran, P. M. (1995). Bioprocess engineering principles , pp. 352-377, Academic Press, ISBN 0-12-
220855-2, London NW1 7DK 
Eichlerova, I.; Homolka, L. & Nerud, F. (2006). Synthetic dye decolorizati on capacity of white 
rot fungus Dichomites squalens.  Bioresource Technology,  97, 2153-2159, ISSN 0960-8524  
Eichlerova, I.; Homolka, L. & Nerud, F. (2007) . Decolorization of high concentrations of 
synthetic dyes by the white rot fungus Bjerkandera adusta  strain CCBAS 232. Dyes 
and Pigments,  75, 38-44, ISSN 0143-7208 
Ergas, S. J., Therriault, B. M. & Rechkow,  D. A. (2006), Evaluation of water reuse 
technologies for textile industry. Journal of Environmental engineering,  March 2006, 
315-323. ISSN 0733-9372.  
Faraco, V.; Pezzella, C.; Miele, A.; Giardina, P. & Sannia, G. (2009). Bio-remediation of colored 
industrial wastewaters by the white-rot fungi Phanerochaete chrysosporium  and 
Pleurotus ostreatus  and their enzymes. Biodegradation,  20, 209-220, ISSN 0923-9820 
Freeman, H. M. (Ed), (1998). Standard Handbook of hazardous Waste Treatment and Disposal , pp. 
10.28-10.29, Mc Graw Hill, ISBN 0-07-0212044-1, New York. 
Gao, S.; Chen, C.; Tao, F.; Huang, M.; Ma, L.; Wang, Z. & Wu, L. (2009). Variation of 
peroxidise isoenzyme and biofilm of Phanerochaete chrysosporiom  in continuous 
membrane bioreactor for Reactive Brilliant Red X3-B treatment. Journal of 
Environmental Sciences,  21, 940-947, ISSN 1819-3412 
Gao, D.; Du, L.; Yang, J.; Wu, W. M. % Liang, H. (2010). A critical review of the application of 
white rot fungus to environmental pollution control. Critical Reviews in 
Biotechnology , 30, 70-77, ISSN 0738-8551 
Hai, F. I.; Yamamoto, K.; Nakajama, K. & Fuku shi, K. (2008). Factors governing performance 
of continuous fungal reacto r during non-sterile operation – The case of a membrane 
reactor treating textile wastewater. Chemosphere,  74, 810- 817, ISSN 0045-653 
Hao, O. J.; Hyunook, K.; Chiang P. (2000). Decolorization of wastewater. Critical reviews in 
environmental science and technology , 30, 449-505, ISSN 1064-3389  
Heinfling, A.; Berghauer, M. & Szewzyk,  U. (1997), Biodegradation of azo and 
phthalocyanine dyes by Trametes versicolor and Bjerkandera adusta . Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol,  48, 261-266, ISSN 0175-7598  
www.intechopen.comFungal Decolourization and Degradation of Synthetic Dyes  
Some Chemical Engineering Aspects   
 87 
Joshi, M.; Bansal, R. & Purwar, R. (2004) . Color removal from textile effluents, Indian Journal 
of Fibre & Textile research , 29, 239-259, ISSN 0971-042 
Kapdan, I. K. & Kargi, F. (2002). Biological  decolorization of textiledyestuff containing 
wastewater by Coriolus versicolor   in a rotating biological contactor. Enzyme Microb. 
Technol.,  30, 195-199, ISSN 0141-0229 
Kapdan, I. K. & Kargi, F. (2002). Simultaneous  biodegradation and adsorption of textile 
dyestuff in an activated sludge unit.  Process Biochemistry,  37, 973-981, ISSN 0032 -9592 
Knapp, J. S.; Vantoch-Wood, E.  J. & Zhang, F. (2001). Use of Wood – rotting fungi for the 
decolorization of dyes and industrial effluents, In: Fungi in Bioremediation,  G. M. 
Gadd(Ed.), pp.253-261, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0 521 78119 1, 
Cambridge 
Kusvuran E.; Gulnaz, O.; Irmak,  S.; Atanur, O. M., Yavuz, H. I. & Erbatur, O. (2004). 
Comparion of several advanced oxidation processes for the decolorization of 
Reactive red 120 Azo dye in aqueous solution. Journal of Hazardous Materials,  B109, 
85-93, ISSN 0304-8394 
Leidig, E.; Pru sse, U.; Vorlop, K.D. & Winter, J. (1999) . Biotransformation of poly R-478 by 
continuous cultures of PVAL-encapsulated Trametes versicolor  under non-sterile 
conditions. Bioprocess Engineering,  21, 5-32, ISSN 1226-8372 
Levenspiel O. (1999). Chemical Reaction Engineering,  pp.13-22, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-
471-25424-X, New York 
Libra, J. A.; Borchert, M. &  Banit, S. (2003). Competition strategies for the decolorization of a 
textile reactive dye with the white-rot fungi Trametes versicolor  under non-sterile 
conditions.  Biotechnology and Bioengineering,  6, 736-744, ISSN 0006-3592 
Lopez, C.; Mielgo, I.; Moreira, G.; Feijoo, G. & Lema, J. M. (2002). Enzymatic membrane 
reactors for biodegradation of recalc itrant compounds. Application to dye 
decolourisation. Journal of Biotechnology,  99, 249-257, ISSN 0168-1656 
Mohor čič, M.; Friedrich, J. & Pavko, A. (2004). Doco loration of the diazo dye reactive black 5 
by immobilised Bjerkandera adusta  in a stirred tank bioreactor. Acta Chim. Slov.,  51, 
619-628, ISSN 1318 -0207  
Novotny, Č.; Cajthaml, T.; Svobodova, K.; Šušla, M. & Šašek, V. (2009), Irpex lacteus , a white-
rot fungus with biotechnological potential – review. Folia Microbiol,  54, 375-390, 
ISSN 0015-5632  
Pavko, A. & Novotny, Č. (2008). Induction of ligninolytic enzyme production by Dichomitus 
squalens  on various types of immobilization support. Acta Chim. Slov.,  55, 648-652, 
ISSN 1318-0207 
Pazarlioglu, N. K.; Akkaya, A.; Akdogan, H. A. & Gungor, B. (2010). Biodegradation of 
direct blue 15 by free and immobilized Trametes versicolor. Water Environment 
Research,  82, 579-585, ISSN 1061-4303. 
Podgornik, H.; Poljanšek, I. & Perdih, A.  (2001). Transformation of Indigo carmine by 
Phanerochaete chrysosporium ligninolytic enzymes. Enzyme and Microbial Technology , 
29, 166-172, ISSN 0141-0229  
Pointing, S.B. (2001). Feasibility of bi oremediation by white-rot fungi. Appl Microbiol 
Biotechnol,  57, 20-33, ISSN 0175-7598 
Qingxiang, Y; Chunmao,  L.;  Huijun,  L.;  Yuhui, L. & Ning, Y. (2009). Degradation of 
synthetic reactive azo dyes and treatm ent of textile wastewater by a fungi 
consortium reactor. Biochemical engineering Journal,  43, 225-230, ISSN1369-703X 
Rauf, M. A. & Ashraf, S.S. (2009). Ra diation induced degradation of dyes. Journal of hazardous 
materials , 166, 6-16, ISSN 0304-3894 
www.intechopen.com Waste Water - Treatment and Reutilization 
 88 
Robinson, T.; Chandran, B. & Nigam, P. (2001). Studies on the production of enzymes by 
white-rot fungi for the decolourisation of textile dyes. Enzyme and Microbial 
technology,  29, 575-579, ISSN 0141-0229 
Robinson, T.; McMullan, G.; Marchant, R. Nigam, P. (2001). Remediation of dyes in textile 
effluent: a critical review on current treatment technologies with a proposed 
alternative. Bioresource technology,  77, 247-255, ISSN 0960-8524 
Rodrigues, A.; Garcia, J.; Ovejero, G. & Mest anza, M. (2009). Wet air and catalytic wet air 
oxidation of several azo dyes from wastewaters: the beneficial role of catalysis. 
Water Science and technology,  60, 1989-1999, ISSN 0273-1223 
Shakir, K.; Elkafrawy, A. F.; Gh oneimy, H. F.; Behir, S. G. E. &Refaat, M. (2010). Removal of 
rhodamine B (a basic dye) and thoron (an ac idic dye) from dilute aqueous solutions 
and wastewater simulants by ion flotation. Water research , 44, 1449-1461. ISSN 0043-
1354 
Singh, H. (2006). Mycoremediation-Fungal Bioremediation , pp. 421-471, Wiley Interscience, 
ISBN-13: 978-0-471-75501-2, Hoboken 
Slokar Y. M.; Majcen Le Marechal, A. (1998). Me thods of decoloration of textile wastewaters. 
Dyes and Pigments,  37, 335-356, ISSN 0143-7208 
Snape, J. B.; Dunn, I. J.; Ingham, J. & Prenosil, J. E. (1995). Dynamics of environmental 
bioprocesses. Modelling and simulation . pp. 1-6. VCH Publishers, ISBN 3-527-
28705-1, New York 
Sukumar, M.; Sivasamy, A. & Swaminathan, G. (2009). In situ biodecolorization kinetics of 
Acid Red 66 in aqueous solutions by Trametes versicolor . Journal of hazardous 
materials,  167, 660-663, ISSN 0304-8394 
Tanaka, H.; Koike, K.; Itakura, S. & Enoki, A. (2009). Degradation of wood and enzyme 
production by Ceriporiopsis subvermispora.  Enzyme and Microbial Technology,  45, 384-
390, ISSN 0141-0229.  
Tav čar, M.; Svobodova, K., Kuplenk,J.; Novotny, Č. & Pavko A. (2006). Biodegradation of 
azo dye RO16 in different reactors by immobilized Irpex lacteus . Acta Chim. Slov., 53, 
338-343. ISSN 1318-0207 
Trošt, N. & Pavko, A. (2010). Li gninolytic enzyme production by Dichomitus squalens  
immobilized on beech wood, Proceedings: Slovenski kemijski dnevi 2010, pp. 25, 
ISBN 978-961-248-241-1, September 1010, Sloven sko Kemijsko Društvo, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia 
Vinodgopal K.; Peller, J.; Makogon, O.; Kamat P.V. (1998) Ultrasonic Mineralization of a 
reactive textile azo dye Remazol Black B. Water research,  32, 3646-3650, ISSN 0043-1354 
Wang, D.I.C.; Cooney, C.L.; Dema in, A.L.; Dunhill, P. ; Humphrey, A.E. & Lilly, M.D. (1979). 
Fermentation and enzyme technology,  pp. 194-212, John Wiley and Sons, ISBN 0-471-
91945-4, New York  
Yang, G.; Liu, Y. & Kong Q .(2004). Effect of en vironmental factors on dye decolorization by 
P. sordida  ATCC90872 in an aerated reactor. Process Biochemistry , 39, 1401 – 1405, 
ISSN 0032-9592 
Zhang, F; Knapp, J. S. & Tapley K.N. (1999). Development of bioreactor systems for 
decolorization of Orange II using white rot fungus. Enzyme Microb. Technol. , 24, 48-
53, ISSN 0141-0229 
Žnidarši č, P. & Pavko, A. (2001). The morpholo gy of filamentous fungi in submerged 
cultivations as a bioprocess parameter. Food technol. biotechnol.,  39, 237-252, ISSN 
1330-9862 
www.intechopen.comWaste Water - Treatment and Reutilization
Edited by Prof. Fernando SebastiÃ¡n GarcÃa Einschla g
ISBN 978-953-307-249-4
Hard cover, 434 pages
Publisher InTech
Published online 01, April, 2011
Published in print edition April, 2011
InTech Europe
University Campus STeP Ri 
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A 
51000 Rijeka, Croatia 
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447 
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.comInTech China
Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai 
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China 
Phone: +86-21-62489820 
Fax: +86-21-62489821The steady increase in industrialization, urbanizat ion and enormous population growth are leading to
production of huge quantities of wastewaters that m ay frequently cause environmental hazards. This mak es
waste water treatment and waste water reduction ver y important issues. The book offers a collection of  studies
and findings concerning waste water treatment, mini mization and reuse.
How to reference
In order to correctly reference this scholarly work , feel free to copy and paste the following:
Aleksander Pavko (2011). Fungal Decolourization and  Degradation of Synthetic Dyes Some Chemical
Engineering Aspects, Waste Water - Treatment and Re utilization, Prof. Fernando SebastiÃ¡n GarcÃa
Einschlag (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-249-4, InTech, A vailable from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/wast e-
water-treatment-and-reutilization/fungal-decolouriz ation-and-degradation-of-synthetic-dyes-some-chemic al-
engineering-aspects
© 2011 The Author(s). Licensee IntechOpen. This chapter is distributed
under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike-3.0 License
, which permits use, distribution and reproduction for
non-commercial purposes, provided the original is properly cited and
derivative works building on this content are distributed under the same
license.