 
Page | 254  
 
Thrust Area 5: Carbon Capture & Nuclear  
Biocatalytic Lignin Modification for Carbon Sequestration  
 
PI: Jon Stewart  
Students:   Bradford Sullivan (postdoctoral fellow), Filip Boratynski (postdoctoral fellow)  
 
 
Description:  After cellulose, lignin is the second most abundant forma of carbon in plants. Lignin’s 
complex structure makes it difficult to use this material in value -adde d products, and ahte vast majority of 
lignin is currently burned to provide energy for factory operations. While burning plant derived lignin 
does not add to global greenhouse gas levels, having options to remove lignin from the global carbon 
cycle would l ead to diminished atmospheric CO2 levels. This could be accomplished by chemically 
altering lignin’s structure to facilitate long -term terrestrial sequestration or using it in value -added 
products that would not be discarded immediately. We will use Nature ’s catalysts (enzymes) to tailor the 
chemical structure of lignin for both deep -well injection (by using lignin derivatives as drilling “muds”) 
and for materials that can be used in building, packaging, and other manufactured products.)  
 
Budget:  $200,000  
Universities:  UF 
 
Progress Summary  
 
Bradford Sullivan joined this project as a postdoctoral fellow in February 2010 with extensive experience 
in both organic synthesis and in dioxygenase enzymes.  To the best of our knowledge, no one has applied 
dioxygenas es to lignin and/or lignin model compounds.  Enzymes such as toluene dioxygenase offer the 
possibility of converting this renewable feedstock into valuable building blocks.  In preliminary studies, 
Brad has applied toluene dioxygenase to model compounds de rivable from lignin to create small molecule 
mediators required by laccases for lignin breakdown.  Some reaction was obse rved.  We are also setting 
up a collaboration  between our lab and those of Steven Sherman and Charles Turick (Savannah River 
National L aboratory), who have developed a simple method for lignin extraction from a variety of soft 
materials such as switchgrass as well as woody tissues.  This will provide us with the material for 
exploring ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents for laccase -catalyzed lignin conversions.  Filip 
Boratynski joined the project in September 2011 with a background in biocatalysis.  He will be focusing 
on experiments using the lignin samples provided by our collaborators at Savannah River.  
 
Funds leveraged/new partne rships created : 
 
 
New collaborations  
Steven 
Sherman, 
Charles Turick 
(Savannah 
River National 
Laboratory)  Steve and Chuck have agreed to supply us with lignin 
samples prepared in their lab using a newly -
developed extraction method.  This product stream 
will be employed for enzyme -catalyzed reactions in 
our lab using safe, non -volatile solvents (ionic liquids 
and deep eutectic solvents)  No external funding 
yet for this work  
 
 
  
Page | 255  
 
 
 
Proposals  
Title  Agency  Reference 
Number  PI, Co-investigators 
and collaborators  Funding 
requested  Project time 
frame (1 
year, 2 years, 
etc.) Date 
submitted  
Adapting 
Kernel 
Metabolism 
to Enhance 
Cereal 
Yield 
Under 
Adverse 
Conditions  USDA  2011 -
67003 -
30215  L. Curtis Hannah 
(P.I.), Tracy 
Hennen -Bierwagen 
(co-P.I.), Karen 
Koch (co -P.I.), Don 
McCarty (co -P.I.), 
Alan Meyers (co -
P.I.), Mark Settles 
(co-P.I.), Jon 
Stewart (co -P.I.), 
William Tracy (co -
P.I.) $5M  5 years  June 2010  
Improving 
Alkene 
Reductases 
for 
Applications 
in 
Asymmetric 
Synthesis  NSF NSF 10 -1 Jon Stewart (P.I.)  497,851  3 years  December 
2010  
 
 
Grants Awarded  
Title  Agency  Reference 
Number  PI, Co-
investigators and 
collaborators  Period of 
Performance  Funding 
awarded  
Adapting Kernel 
Metabolism to Enhance 
Cereal Yield Under 
Adverse Conditions  USDA  2011 -
67003 -
30215  L. Curtis Hannah 
(P.I.), Tracy 
Hennen -Bierwagen 
(co-P.I.), Karen 
Koch (co -P.I.), 
Don McCarty (co -
P.I.), Alan Meyers 
(co-P.I.), Mark 
Settles (co -P.I.), 
Jon Stewart (co -
P.I.), William 
Tracy (co -P.I.) $5M  5 years  
Improving Alkene Reductases 
for Applications in  
Asymmetric Synthesis  NSF CHE -
0615776  Jon Stewart (P.I.)  497,851  3 years  
 
 
 
 
  
Page | 256  
 
 
2011 Annual Report  
 
Lignin makes up approximately 20% of the carbon fixed by plants [1] and must be separated from the 
cellulosic fraction in a number of processes including pulping and bioethanol production [2].  Traditional 
Kraft pulping chemically derivatizes lignin with sulfonic acid moieties, allowing it to be soluble under 
basic conditions, but also imparting a strong odor that makes it difficult to employ the lignin for  any 
purpose other than combustion [3].  Steam treatment is typically employed in cellulosic ethanol processes, 
and this operation yields a lignin stream better suited to value -added uses [4].  It should be noted that 
sugarcane bagasse has a lower density of ortho -substitution, increasing its ability to be derivatized [5].  
  
 
Figure 1:  Typical lignin structure (re -drawn from http://www.dfrc.ars.usda.gov/ligninmodels.html).  
 
 
Laccases are the best -known enzymes that accept li gnin as a substrate.  These multi -copper proteins are 
produced by a wide variety of species and play important roles in lignin degradation by white - and 
brown -rot fungi [6].  These enzymes mediate the four -electron reduction of O2 using lignin as the 
ultim ate electron source.  Because lignin can be highly crosslinked and interior portions are difficult to 
access by large proteins, laccases are paired with small molecule, diffusible electron carriers (mediators) 
[7].  Depending on reaction conditions, laccas e / mediator systems can cross -link lignin internally, 
covalently add small molecules to lignin or degrade the lignin substrate [7 -9].  We will focus on laccase -
mediated molecular additions since these conversions can alter lignin properties in useful ways .  To 
facilitate re -using laccases, these enzymes have been immobilized on a variety of solid supports (for a 
summary, see [9]).  
 
Mai and co -workers have shown that polyacrylamide can be grafted onto lignin by simultaneous 
treatment with laccase and a smal l-molecule peroxide [10, 11].  The reaction is believed to proceed by by 
laccase -mediated radical formation within lignin.  These radicals couple with radicals found at growing 
ends of polyacrylamide chains (Scheme 1).  The resulting co -polymer had solubil ity properties suitable 
for use as deep -well drilling fluid.  In addition to polymer grafting, laccase also cross -links the lignin into  
  
Page | 257  
 
 
higher  molecular weight assemblies, increasing its mechanical strength.  These results suggest that other 
living radical polymerizations might also be amenable to lignin attachment.  
  
 
 
 
Non-covalent polymer blends represent an i mportant means of using lignin for value -added products.  
Unfortunately, native lignin interacts poorly with existing materials.  In an effort to solve this problem, 
Thielemans and Wool acylated kraft lignin in an effort to identify a derivative that disso lved in styrene 
[12].  While successful in this regard, only a limited number of acyl chains were examined in this study.  
This approach also depended on chemically synthesizing activated acyl derivatives (anhydrides, acyl 
chlorides).  By contrast, lipases  can utilize carboxylic acids directly and tolerate a wide variety of 
functional groups.  
 
We are investigating the first step in the conversion of aromatic substrates into catechols by using 
cinnamyl alcohol as a model compound for lignin -derived materials .  It appears that bacterial toluene 
dioxygenase does indeed accept cinnamyl alcohol and convert it to the corresponding diol.  The next steps 
will be to combine this enzyme system with a dehydrogenase to yield the catechol in situ and to probe the 
possibi lity of oxidizing more complex lignin -derived materials.  This can be combined with the polymer 
grafting approach described above to lower the costs of these materials even further.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
References : 
1. Ruiz -Dueñas, F.J. and Á.T. Martínez, Microbial Degradation of Lignin:  How a Bulky 
Recalcitrant Polymer is Efficiently Recycled in Nature and How We Can Take Advantage of This. 
Microb. Biotechnol., 2009. 2: p. 164 -177. 
2. Lora, J.H. and W.G. Glasser, Recen t Industrial Applications of Lignin:  A Sustainable Alternative 
to Nonrenewable Materials. J. Poly. and the Environ., 2002. 10: p. 39 -48. 
3. Stewart, D., Lignin as a Base Material for Materials Applications:  Chemistry, Applications and 
Economics. Ind. Cro ps and Prod., 2008. 27: p. 202 -207.  
Page | 258  
 
 
4. Li, J., G. Gellerstedt, and K. Toven, Steam Explosion Lignins; Their Extraction, Structure and 
Potential as Feedstock for Biodiesel and Chemicals. Bioresource Technol., 2009. 100: p. 2556 -2561.  
5. Doherty, W., et al. , Studies on Polymers and Composites from Lignin and Fiber Derived from 
Sugar Cane. Polymers for Adv. Technol., 2007. 18: p. 673 -678. 
6. Bouws, H., A. Wattenberg, and H. Zorn, Fungal Secretomes - Nature's Toolbox for White 
Biotechnology. Appl. Microbiol. B iotechnol., 2008. 80: p. 381 -388. 
7. Widsten, P. and A. Kandelbauer, Laccase Applications in the Forest Products Industry:  A 
Review. Enz. Microb. Technol., 2008. 42: p. 293 -307. 
8. Burton, S.G., Laccases and Phenol Oxidases in Organic Synthesis - a Review . Curr. Org. Chem., 
2003. 7: p. 1317 -1331.  
9. Mikolasch, A. and F. Schauer, Fungal Laccases as Tools for the Synthesis of New Hybrid 
Molecules and Biomaterials. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009. 82: p. 605 -624. 
10. Mai, C., O. Milstein, and A. Hüttermann , Fungal Laccase Grafts Acrylamide onto Lignin in 
Presence of Peroxides. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1999. 51: p. 527 -531. 
11. Mai, C., O. Milstein, and A. Hüttermann, Chemoenzymatical Grafting of Acrylamide onto 
Lignin. J. Biotechnol., 2000. 79: p. 173 -183. 
12. Thielemans, W. and R.P. Wool, Lignin Esters for Use in Unsaturated Thermosets:  Lignin 
Modification and Solubility Modeling. Biomacromolecules, 2005. 6: p. 1895 -1905.  
 
 
 
 
  