16th Swiss Geoscience Meeting, Bern  2018 
 
Geogenic contaminants  in groundwater re sources of 
Amazonian riverine communities : results of a vast 
exploratory field -study   
 
Caroline de Meyer *, Juan Rodriguez **, Ingo Wahnfried *** , Rolf Kipfer* & 
Michael Berg * 
 
*Eawag , Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science & Technology , Ueberlandstrasse 
133, CH - 8600 Dübendorf  (caroline .demeyer @eawag .ch) 
**Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional de Ingeniería, Av. Tupac Amaru 210, 
Lima, Peru  
***Geosciences Department, Universidade Federal do Amazonas, Av. Gal. Rodrigo 
Otávio Jordão Ramos, 3000, Manaus, Brazil  
 
World -wide, river basins and deltas with arsenic (As) and manganese (Mn) 
contaminated groundwater are characterized by a locally high s patial variability 
of contaminant concentrations. Since As and Mn are of concern for human 
health , it is important to understand where and under which  environmental 
conditions these elements are mobil ized from aquifer sediments and 
accumulated in groundwat er. Unraveling  the regional geochemical mechanisms 
triggering the enrichment of toxic elements in groundwater forms therefore a 
particularly important step to raise awareness and implement mitigation where 
needed.  
Here, we discuss  the results of a large -scale field study , exploring geogenic 
contaminants in shallow groundwater resources  throughout  the vast Amazon 
Basin. We sampled groundwater from house hold tube-wells from riverine 
communities  along  the main Amazon River  and some of its major tributaries , 
covering large parts of the Peruvian and B razilian Amazon region.     
We compare  the main and trace element hydrochemistry of groundwater 
pumped by wells located on the older terraces , with those located in the actual  
river plain, char acterized by young , reactive  deposits . The latter are most prone 
to reach aquifers in which strongly reducing conditions prevail, leading to 
mobiliz ation of redox sensitive trace elements, such as arsenic, manganese and 
iron. We further link patterns of measured groundwater ars enic concentrations 
with available remote sensing data for different geological settings along the 
Amazon River and its tributaries, with the aim to gain insights on the factors 
inducing spatial variability in contaminant groundwater chemistry.   
Our study highlights  the importance of the geological history of this dynamic 
river basin on the presence and distribution of trace elemen ts in groundwater 
resources of Amazon ian riverine communities .  
 
 