AUTHORSDETAILS
Distribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  
(Request Permission)  Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Visit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:
–  Access to free PDF downloads of thousands of scientiﬁc reports
–  10% off the price of print titles
–  Email or social media notiﬁcations of new titles related to your interests
–  Special offers and discounts


BUY THIS BOOK
FIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at  


SHARE http://www.nap.edu/21866
224 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACK
ISBN 978-0-309-38835-1 | DOI: 10.17226/21866
Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water 
Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits 
Committee on the Beneficial Use of Graywater and Stormwater: An 
Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits; Water Science and 
Technology Board; Division on Earth and Life Studies; National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Committee on the Beneficial Use of Graywater and Stormwater: 
An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Water Science and Technology Board 
Division on Earth and Life Studies
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS  500 Fifth Street, NW    Washington, DC 20001
This activity was supported by the City of Madison, Wisconsin; Grant No. EP-C-09-003, TO #23 and EP-C-14-005, TO #9 
from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power; this material is based on 
work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. CBET-1321776; the National Water Research Institute; 
the Water Environment Research Foundation; the Water Research Foundation Agreement No. 04521; the WateReuse Research 
Foundation; and with additional support from the National Academy of Sciences Arthur L. Day Fund, the National Academy of 
Sciences W.K. Kellogg Foundation Fund, and the National Academy of Sciences George and Cynthia Mitchell Endowment for 
Sustainability Science. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication do not necessar -
ily reflect the views of any organization or agency that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-38835-1
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-38835-X
Digital Object Identifier: 10.17226/21866
Cover credit ( clockwise from top left ): Images courtesy of Water Replenishment District of Southern California; Innovative 
Water Solutions, LLC, Austin, Texas; and Mother Earth News.  
Additional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, 
Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2016 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2016. Using Graywater and Stormwater to 
Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
doi: 10.17226/21866.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
The National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 by an Act of Congress, signed by President Lincoln, as a private, 
nongovernmental institution to advise the nation on issues related to science and technology. Members are elected by their peers 
for outstanding contributions to research. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964 under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences to 
bring the practices of engineering to advising the nation. Members are elected by their peers for extraordinary contributions to 
engineering. Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president.
The National Academy of Medicine  (formerly the Institute of Medicine) was established in 1970 under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences to advise the nation on medical and health issues. Members are elected by their peers for 
distinguished contributions to medicine and health. Dr. Victor J. Dzau is president.
The three Academies work together as the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine  to provide independent, 
objective analysis and advice to the nation and conduct other activities to solve complex problems and inform public policy 
decisions. The Academies also encourage education and research, recognize outstanding contributions to knowledge, and 
increase public understanding in matters of science, engineering, and medicine. 
Learn more about the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine at www.national-academies.org . 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
vCOMMITTEE ON THE BENEFICIAL USE OF GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER:  
AN ASSESSMENT OF RISKS, COSTS, AND BENEFITS
RICHARD G. LUTHY , Chair, Stanford University, California
RICHARD W. ATWATER , Southern California Water Committee, Studio City, California
GLEN T. DAIGGER , University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
JÖRG DREWES , Technische Universität München, Garching, Germany
BENJAMIN H. GRUMBLES , Maryland Department of the Environment, Baltimore
ARPAD HORV ATH , University of California, Berkeley
ROBERT E. PITT , University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa
MARCUS M. QUIGLEY , OptiRTC, Boston, Massachusetts
ROBERT S. RAUCHER , Stratus Consulting/Abt Associates, Boulder, Colorado
SYBIL SHARVELLE , Colorado State University, Fort Collins
CLAIRE WELTY , University of Maryland Baltimore County
MARYLYNN V . YATES , University of California, Riverside
Academies Staff
STEPHANIE E. JOHNSON , Study Director, Water Science and Technology Board
MICHAEL J. STOEVER , Research Associate, Water Science and Technology BoardCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
viiPreface
Much of the United States faces chronic or episodic wa -
ter shortages. It is the topic of daily news in the West, where 
a historic 4-year drought has caused California to restrict the 
delivery of water to cities and farms. At the same time, the 
Midwest and Northeast have received drenching rains and 
heavier than normal snow. Against this backdrop—of not 
enough water or too much water—the National Academies 
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s Water Science and 
Technology Board initiated a study on the beneficial use of 
stormwater and graywater. Graywater is a year-round source 
of water for nonpotable use, and use of urban stormwater can 
augment local water supplies, reduce demand for imported 
water, and lessen impacts from discharge. 
As detailed in this report, increased attention to the use 
of stormwater and graywater has been driven by factors forc -
ing change in the design and management of urban water 
supplies and infrastructure. Among the drivers are water 
scarcity in regions of the country facing water shortages 
and the impacts of climate change and population growth 
that exacerbate these shortages. In these places stormwater 
and graywater use may diversify the water supply portfolio, 
thereby achieving greater resiliency in the face of uncertain 
water deliveries. Furthermore, in many parts of the coun -
try—from the humid midcontinent to coastal cities—pol -
lution control and discharges to impaired water bodies are 
driving changes in the ways that stormwater is managed, and 
stormwater capture and use can reduce pollution from urban 
runoff, including combined sewer overflows. 
Stormwater and graywater use exemplify a growing 
trend of embracing sustainable urban water management and 
green design practices. The concept of a re-imagined urban 
water infrastructure—variously termed low-impact design, 
blue-green city, or water sensitive city—embraces sustain -
able practices in which metropolitan regions could serve as 
water supply catchments, provide ecosystem services, and 
prioritize livability, sustainability, and resilience. However, 
realizing this vision raises questions on exactly how gray -water and urban stormwater should be captured, stored, and 
used. Because of the absence of ample documentation of 
costs, performance, and risks, many utilities are hesitant to 
integrate the practices into their long-term water resource 
plans beyond the simplest applications. Potential public 
health risks from microbial or chemical contamination as -
sociated with graywater or stormwater use raise concerns 
about safety, regulation, and management. To better address 
these challenges, the Academies formed a committee to 
study the risks, costs, and benefits of stormwater and gray -
water use to augment and conserve existing water supplies. 
Although there are challenges in advancing ever-more use 
of graywater and urban stormwater, this report documents 
the committee’s finding that graywater and urban stormwater 
have substantial potential to contribute to local water supply 
needs while providing other benefits such as stormwater pol -
lution reduction, water supply diversification, and increased 
local control of water supplies. Graywater and stormwater 
use could be an important part of a broader effort to reimag -
ine urban water infrastructure to efficiently use water, en -
ergy, and financial resources while enhancing water supply 
reliability and resiliency and the livability of cities. 
This study was supported with funding from the Envi -
ronmental Protection Agency Office of Water and Office of 
Research and Development; National Science Foundation; 
Water Research Foundation; Water Environment Research 
Foundation; Los Angeles Department of Water and Power; 
WateReuse; City of Madison, Wisconsin; National Water 
Research Institute; and the National Academies’ President’s 
fund. We appreciate the sponsor liaisons, including Robert 
Bastian, Robert Goo, Christopher Kloss, John Whitler, and 
Andy Niknafs, for help with information gathering in sup -
port of the study and the many presenters to the committee 
for the helpful insights provided. The committee also appre -
ciates the research assistance from Amy Streitwieser, Adam 
Schempp, Will Derwin, Jonathan Bradshaw, and Thomas 
Hendrickson.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
viii Preface
The committee had the excellent fortune to be assist -
ed by a dedicated and talented Academies staff, including 
Stephanie Johnson and Michael Stoever. I speak for the en -
tire committee in expressing our profound respect and appre -
ciation to Stephanie Johnson for her tireless effort and clear 
thinking. This report would not have been possible without 
her exceptional support and good humor. I very much enjoyed working with the Academies’ staff 
and the committee members. I am sure each of us learned 
more than we contributed, and we offer this report in hopes 
that it will advance our nation on a path toward more sustain -
able urban water futures. 
Richard Luthy, Chair
Committee on the Beneficial Use of Graywater and 
Stormwater: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and BenefitsCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ixAcknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by persons 
chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise. 
The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in mak -
ing the published report as sound as possible and to ensure 
that it meets institutional standards of objectivity, evidence, 
and responsiveness to the study charge. The review com -
ments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the 
integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the 
following individuals for their review of this report: 
Nicholas Ashbolt, University of Alberta
Michael Barrett, University of Texas
Peter Dillon, International Association of Hydrogeologists  
   Commission on Management of Aquifer Recharge
Jerome B. Gilbert, Consulting Engineer
Peter Gleick, Pacific Institute for Studies in Development,  
   Environment, and Security
Eberhard Morgenroth, Eawag
Sheila Olmstead, University of Texas
Kevin Price, Middle East Desalination Research Center
Karl Rockne, University of Illinois at Chicago
Larry A. Roesner, Colorado State University
Bahman Sheik, Independent Water Resources and Reuse Specialist
Eric W. Strecker, Geosyntec, Inc.
Rhodes Trussell, Trussell Technologies, Inc.
Wendy E. Wagner, University of Texas School of LawAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many 
constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked 
to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they 
see the final draft of the report before its release. The review 
of this report was overseen by Kenneth W. Potter, University 
of Wisconsin, and Michael Kavanaugh, Geosyntec, Inc. They 
were responsible for making certain that an independent ex -
amination of this report was carried out in accordance with 
institutional procedures and that all review comments were 
carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of 
this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and 
the institution.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
xiSUMMARY .........................................................................................................................................................................................  1
1 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................................................  9
Definition of Stormwater Runoff and Graywater, 10
Current Drivers, 11
Assessment of Current Stormwater and Graywater Use Trends, 20
Future Perspectives, 22
Committee Charge, 23
Outline of the Report, 25
2 BENEFICIAL USE OPTIONS FOR GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER ............................................................................  26
Graywater and Stormwater Use Across Multiple Scales, 26
Common Applications to Conserve Conventional Water Supplies, 29
Summary, 38
3 QUANTITIES A V AILABLE FOR BENEFICIAL USE AND POTENTIAL IMPACTS ON WATER DEMAND .............  39
Graywater, 39
Stormwater, 48
Conclusions, 60
4 QUALITY OF GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER ...........................................................................................................  62
Graywater Quality, 62
Stormwater Quality, 64
Conclusions, 75
5 CHARACTERIZING AND MITIGATING HUMAN HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS ................................. 77 
Overview of the Quantitative Risk Assessment Process for Human Health, 77
Quantitative Risk Assessment for Graywater and Stormwater Reuse, 83
Risks from System Failures, Cross-Connections, and Groundwater Contamination, 87
Environmental Risks, 90
Conclusions, 92
6 STATE OF DESIGN PRACTICE FOR STORMWATER AND GRAYWATER .................................................................. 94 
Overall Design Process, 94
Graywater System Design, 94
System Design for Stormwater Beneficial Use, 103
Systems That Integrate Stormwater and Graywater Use, 116
Unit Treatment Processes, 116
Conclusions, 116ContentsCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
xii Contents
7 COSTS AND BENEFITS ......................................................................................................................................................... 121
Range of Potential Benefits and Costs, 121
Financial Costs, 123
Financial Benefits, 129
Social Benefits and Costs, 133
Environmental Benefits and Costs, 135
Incentives and Decision Making, 138
Conclusions, 139
8 LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUES .................................................................................................................................. 141
Potential Legal Barriers in the Water Quantity Context, 141
Potential Legal Issues in the Water Quality Context, 144
Policy Implications, 151
Conclusions, 152
9 GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER IN THE CONTEXT OF INTEGRATED WATER SUPPLY PLANNING ........... 154
Decision Framework, 154
Decision Considerations at Household and Neighborhood Scales, 161
Conclusions, 166
10 PRIORITIES FOR RESEARCH ............................................................................................................................................ 167
Risk and Water Quality, 167
Treatment Technology, 169
Infrastructure, 170
Social Science and Decision Analysis, 171
Policy and Regulatory Issues, 172
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................................................................ 173 
APPENDIXES
A CALCULATING THE BENEFITS OF ROOFTOP RUNOFF CAPTURE SYSTEMS ....................................................... 187
B SUMMARY OF STATE LAWS AND REGULATIONS FOR GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER ............................... 201
C WATER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY BOARD ............................................................................................................. 207
D BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND STAFF .................................................................. 208Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
1Summary
Chronic and episodic water shortages are becoming 
common in many regions of the United States, and urban 
population growth in water scarce regions further com -
pounds the challenges. In mid-2015, much of California 
faced an “exceptional drought” within an already moderate 
to severe drought throughout much of the western United 
States, but non-arid regions, such as the Southeast, have not 
been exempt from major water shortages. Increasingly, alter -
native water sources such as stormwater and graywater are 
being viewed as resources to supplement scarce water sup -
plies, particularly in urban areas experiencing large popula -
tion growth. 
Stormwater runoff is the water from rainfall or snow that 
can be measured downstream in a pipe, culvert, or stream 
shortly after the precipitation event. For the purposes of this 
report, the term “stormwater” is used broadly to include run -
off from rooftops, as well as other runoff from small to large 
source areas. Graywater is untreated wastewater that does 
not include water from the toilet or kitchen, and may in -
clude water from bathroom sinks, showers, bathtubs, clothes 
washers, and laundry sinks. Both can offer on-site alternative 
water supplies to a household or building, although storm -
water can be captured and used at neighborhood and regional 
scales and graywater can be reused in neighborhoods and 
large multi-residential developments. 
Stormwater and graywater can serve a range of nonpo -
table uses, including irrigation, toilet flushing, washing, and 
cooling, although treatment may be needed. Stormwater may 
also be used to recharge groundwater, which may ultimately 
be tapped for potable use. In addition to increasing of local 
water supply, harvesting stormwater has many potential ben -
efits, including saving energy, preventing pollution, reducing 
the impacts of development on urban streams, and enhancing 
the livability of cities. Similarly, the reuse of graywater can 
enhance water supply reliability and extend the capacity of 
existing wastewater systems in growing cities. Despite the benefits of using local alternative water 
sources to address water demands, many questions remain 
that have limited the broader application of graywater and 
stormwater capture and use. In particular, limited informa -
tion is available on the costs, benefits, and risks of these proj -
ects, and beyond the simplest applications, many state and 
local public health agencies have not developed regulatory 
frameworks for full use of these local water resources. With 
funding support from the Environmental Protection Agen -
cy (EPA); National Science Foundation; Water Research 
Foundation; Water Environment Research Foundation; Los 
Angeles Department of Water and Power; WateReuse; City 
of Madison, Wisconsin; National Water Research Institute; 
and the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine’s President’s Fund, the Academies formed the 
Committee on the Beneficial Use of Graywater and Storm -
water to analyze the risks, costs, and benefits on various uses 
of stormwater and graywater, as described in Box S-1. This 
study addresses technical, economic, regulatory, and social 
issues associated with graywater and stormwater capture and 
use across a range of uses and scales. 
Graywater and stormwater capture and use can expand 
local water availability while providing additional financial, 
environmental, and social benefits, such as reduced wa -
ter pollution and combined sewer overflow discharges (for 
stormwater), drought-resistant year-round water availability 
(for graywater), and diversification of water supplies. For 
stormwater, neighborhood- and regional-scale stormwater 
capture projects can contribute significantly to urban wa -
ter supplies. In most cases, the technology is mature, and 
treatment can be provided to address contaminants to meet 
“fit-for-purpose” water quality objectives. However, broader 
implementation is hindered by the absence of risk-based 
guidelines for stormwater and graywater use across a range 
of applications, as well as water quality data (particularly for 
human pathogens) necessary to assess these risks.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
2 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX S-1 Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will conduct a study and prepare a report that will analyze the risks, costs, and benefits of various beneficial uses 
of stormwater and graywater and approaches needed for its safe use. The study will address:
1. Quantity and suitability. How much stormwater capture and graywater reuse occurs in the United States and for what applica -
tions? What is the suitability—in terms of water quality and quantity—of captured stormwater and graywater to significantly in -
crease in the United States, and where regionally would increases in these practices have the most benefit? How would significant 
increases in the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater affect water demand, downstream water availability, aquifer recharge, 
and ecological stream flows? What research should be pursued to understand these issues?
2. Treatment and storage.  What are typical levels and methods of treatment and storage for stormwater capture and graywater re -
use for various end uses? What types of treatment are available to address contaminants, odors, and pathogens, and how do these 
treatment methods compare in terms of cost and energy use? What research opportunities should be pursued to produce improved 
technologies and delivery and ensure adequate safeguards to protect public health and the environment?
3. Risks.  What are the human health and environmental risks of using captured stormwater and graywater for various purposes? 
What existing state and regulatory frameworks address the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater, and how effective are they 
in assuring the safety and reliability of these practices? What lessons can be learned from experiences using captured stormwater 
and graywater both within and outside the United States that shed light on appropriate uses with varying levels of treatment? What 
local measures can be taken to reduce risk?
4. Costs and benefits. What are the costs and benefits of the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater (including nonmonetized 
costs and benefits, such as effects on water and energy conservation, environmental impacts, and wastewater infrastructure)? 
How do the economic costs and benefits generally compare with other supply alternatives? Can cost improvements be achieved 
through research? 
5. Implementation. What are the legal and regulatory constraints on the use of captured stormwater and graywater? What are the 
policy implications regarding the potential increased use of stormwater and graywater as significant alternative sources of water 
for human consumption and use? 
As part of its review, and to help benchmark U.S. standing worldwide, the committee will consider international experiences in onsite 
stormwater and graywater management, as it deems relevant.
There is no single best way to use graywater or storm -
water to address local water needs because project drivers 
and objectives, legal and regulatory constraints, potential 
applications, local site and climatic conditions, source water 
availability, and project scales all vary widely. The report 
instead recommends clear objectives and provides a decision 
framework in Chapter 9 that can be used when considering 
the use of graywater or stormwater, with supporting infor -
mation for each of the decision steps. Major report findings 
are highlighted below along with recommended research 
needs to improve support for decision making. 
WATER A V AILABILITY
Potential potable water savings from graywater and 
stormwater will vary based on factors such as local climatic 
conditions, approaches, and scales. Chapter 3 details lessons 
learned regarding water saving potential largely based on 
an original scenario analysis in six U.S. locations. The sce -narios considered medium-density residential development 
using graywater or stormwater for conservation irrigation of 
turfgrass, toilet flushing, or both. 
Water savings from stormwater capture and use are 
dependent on tank size and the amount and timing of 
precipitation relative to water demand. Substantial poten -
tial household-scale water savings (24 to 28 percent) from 
the capture and use of roof runoff were calculated for sce -
nario analyses in four of the six cities analyzed using one 
moderately sized (2,200-gallon [8,300-liter]) storage tank 
per house. These cities—Lincoln, Nebraska; Madison, Wis -
consin; Birmingham, Alabama; and Newark, New Jersey 
(all located in the Midwest or East Coast)—have year-round 
rainfall closely matching irrigation demands. In contrast, the 
scenario analysis showed lower potential potable water sav -
ings for Los Angeles and Seattle (5 and 15 percent, respec -
tively). In much of the arid West, the timing and intensity 
of rainfall limits the capacity of household-scale stormwater 
collection to reduce potable water use. Very small stormwa -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Summary  3
ter water storage volumes provide much lower water savings 
benefits (less than 2 percent in Los Angeles to up to 10 per -
cent in Newark using two 35-gallon [130 liter] rain barrels 
per house, for example).
Neighborhood- and regional-scale stormwater cap -
ture projects can contribute significantly to urban water 
supplies.  This is especially important for arid climates in 
which stormwater can be stored in aquifers for use during 
drought or the dry season. Based on 1995-1999 data for Los 
Angeles, average stormwater runoff from medium-density 
residential developments, if captured and stored, would be 
roughly sufficient to meet indoor residential water needs in 
those areas. 
Graywater reuse offers the potential for substantial 
potable water savings and could provide a reliable source 
of water for arid regions. Based on the committee’s sce -
nario analyses, graywater reuse in Los Angeles and Seattle 
provides greater potential potable water savings than does 
household-scale stormwater capture, because graywater 
provides a steady water source during summer months with 
little or no rainfall. Additionally, the analyses showed that 
graywater can more effectively meet toilet flushing demand 
compared to stormwater in all cities analyzed. Graywater use 
for toilet flushing has been demonstrated to achieve potable 
water savings as theoretically expected without impacting 
water availability to downstream users, but water savings 
associated with graywater irrigation at the household scale 
have not been demonstrated with confidence. Little is known 
about the impact of installing on-site nonpotable water sys -
tems on human water use behavior, which points to the need 
to study behavioral responses to conservation measures. 
Beneficial use of graywater is typically more appro -
priate for residential and multi-residential applications 
than commercial application. Most commercial facilities 
do not generate enough graywater to justify use for toilet 
flushing or irrigation. Even offices that have on-site showers 
are not likely to generate enough graywater to meet end-use 
demands (toilet or irrigation). Some commercial applica -
tions for which graywater use may be appropriate include 
fitness facilities, hotels, and laundromats.
If water conservation is the primary objective for 
stormwater and graywater investments, then strategies 
that reduce outdoor water use should first be examined. 
In arid regions, potential potable water savings for residen -
tial and multi-residential use of stormwater and/or graywater 
are significant, but small relative to today’s outdoor water 
demand. Although use of graywater or roof runoff for toilet 
flushing can reduce indoor demand by up to 24 percent, the 
committee’s scenario analysis estimated potential water sav -
ings of only 13 percent with graywater use in the Los Ange -
les area (and significantly less for stormwater capture, even using large tanks). Significantly reducing or eliminating ir -
rigation demand, for example through the use of xeriscap -
ing, would provide much larger reductions in water demand 
in arid regions. In these circumstances, graywater could be 
used to supply irrigation water to meet specific small irriga -
tion needs. Otherwise, graywater and stormwater may help 
facilitate the continued use of landscaping that is not sus -
tainable in the long term and inappropriate for local climate 
conditions. 
WATER QUALITY
Understanding the potential applications of graywater and 
stormwater as on-site water supplies and associated treatment 
needs requires a clear understanding of source water quality. 
Pathogens and organic matter in graywater impact 
opportunities for beneficial uses without treatment. Hu-
man pathogens are likely to occur in graywater, although the 
specific types and concentrations vary substantially among 
sources and their occurrence and fate are not yet well under -
stood. Organic matter is present in high enough concentra -
tion in graywater to enhance microbial growth, thus limiting 
the potential uses of graywater without disinfection. Sodium, 
chloride, boron, and other chemicals can impact the quality of 
graywater for irrigation uses. Best management practices exist 
for source control of microbial and chemical constituents, and 
such practices can be implemented at the household scale to 
reduce concentrations of these constituents in graywater. 
Stormwater quality is highly variable over space and 
time and might contain elevated levels of microorganisms, 
metals, organic chemicals, and sediments, potentially ne -
cessitating treatment to facilitate various beneficial uses. 
Stormwater quality is a direct function of land use, source 
area, catchment size, and climatic and seasonal factors. Exist -
ing data suggest that most stormwater contains elevated levels 
of organic matter, suspended sediment, and indicator bacteria. 
Metals are also commonly found in urban stormwater runoff 
and may pose concerns for some beneficial uses, including ir -
rigation and surface reservoirs or wetland features. Despite the 
enormous spatial and temporal variability of stormwater qual -
ity, the treatment systems required for achieving end uses may 
be relatively consistent over a wide variety of catchments. 
Land uses, contributing areas, and collection materials can be 
selected that minimize contaminants of concern to optimize 
stormwater quality and minimize treatment requirements for 
the intended use. 
Little is known regarding the occurrence of human 
pathogens and organic chemicals in stormwater, and ad -
ditional research is needed to characterize their occur -
rence and fate.  Studies on the presence of microorganisms 
in stormwater have consistently reported high concentrations Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
4 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
of fecal indicator microorganisms across different source 
areas. In the few studies that have analyzed for pathogenic 
microorganisms in stormwater, they have generally been 
detected, at least in some samples. However, more work is 
needed to characterize their occurrence and fate, particularly 
for roof runoff systems where the beneficial use of untreated 
stormwater is common and raises concerns for uses with the 
potential for human exposure. More research is also needed 
to characterize the occurrence of organic chemicals in storm -
water and their fate during various uses. 
HUMAN HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS
Although no documented reports of adverse human 
health effects from the beneficial use of stormwater or gray -
water have been identified, additional examination of risk is 
necessary to support safe and appropriate design and imple -
mentation of stormwater and graywater use systems. 
Risk assessment provides a means to determine “fit-
for-purpose” water quality criteria or treatment needs 
based on human exposures. Risk from graywater or storm -
water is a factor of chemical or microbial concentrations and 
exposure (typically, the amount of water ingested). Thus, un -
like drinking water criteria, which are established based on 
2 liters of water consumed per day, criteria for applications 
with minimal human exposures might allow for much higher 
concentrations of contaminants in graywater or stormwater 
and still result in acceptably low health risks. Risk assessment 
tools provide a ready means for developing such criteria for 
many chemicals and microbes for which drinking water cri -
teria exist. As nonpotable on-site use of graywater and storm -
water becomes more common, additional public health risk 
communication efforts would be beneficial to help the public 
understand risk-based treatment objectives and appropriate 
safeguards.
Considering the low exposures in most nonpotable 
graywater and stormwater applications, pathogens rep -
resent the most significant acute risks. Available risk as -
sessments and the committee’s risk calculations using lim -
ited, observed pathogen data and various possible exposure 
scenarios suggest that disinfection is necessary for many 
uses of graywater, including spray irrigation, food crop ir -
rigation, and toilet flushing, to protect human health. Subsur -
face landscape irrigation (including drip systems covered by 
landscape) with graywater does not pose significant risk, if 
best practices are followed, because human exposure is min -
imized. These findings are consistent with most regulatory 
guidance, although the risk of surface drip irrigation (with -
out landscape cover) at the household scale remains unre -
solved. Limited data on pathogens in roof runoff suggest that 
treatment may also be needed, even for low levels of human exposure, such as toilet flushing, although more research on 
pathogens in roof runoff is needed. Chemicals become of 
concern in groundwater infiltration projects, where drinking 
water supplies could be impacted. 
Extremely limited data are available on the pathogen 
content in graywater and roof runoff, which precludes 
a full assessment of microbial risks. Most water quality 
monitoring assesses microbial indicator data, and microbial 
risk assessments are conducted using assumed relationships 
between the concentrations of indicator microorganisms 
and pathogenic microorganisms. Consistent relationships 
between surrogates and contaminants have not been estab -
lished for graywater or stormwater. This is a particular con -
cern for roof runoff, which may include microbial indicator 
organisms from the waste of animals that do not transmit 
human pathogens. 
Enhanced infiltration of stormwater for groundwa -
ter recharge poses risks of groundwater contamination 
and necessitates careful design to minimize those risks. 
The risk of groundwater contamination from stormwater re -
charge is related to the contaminants present, any pretreat -
ment processes installed, the capacity for the subsurface soil 
and engineered media used in the infiltration basin to remove 
them, and the proximity to groundwater used as a drinking 
water supply. Dry wells, which directly inject water into the 
subsurface, and surface infiltration through sandy soils do 
not effectively attenuate chemical contaminants. 
Environmental impacts from the outdoor use of gray -
water and stormwater generally appear low, but risks de -
pend upon several factors, including water quality, appli -
cation rates, and plant or animal species exposed. Effects 
of irrigation on plant and soil health can occur from salts, bo -
ron, and metals, but source control practices and appropriate 
irrigation rates can reduce these impacts. If not controlled at 
the source, then long-term build-up of boron or salt can pose 
risk to plant and soil health, depending on soil and climatic 
conditions. Constructed stormwater ponds and wetlands typi -
cally contain elevated contaminant levels sufficient to impair 
reproduction among some aquatic species, often leading to 
a habitat dominated by pollution-tolerant organisms. Such 
ecological affects may be acceptable, considering the overall 
environmental benefits provided by such features, including 
reduced pollution to other surface waters, but the ecological 
objectives of such projects are often unclear, hindering efforts 
to limit ecological risks through improved management and 
design. 
STATE OF PRACTICE AND SYSTEM DESIGN
The report also outlines the state of practice for graywa -
ter and stormwater system designs at household, neighbor -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Summary  5
hood, and regional scales and treatment that may be used to 
meet specific quality objectives.
Graywater irrigation at the household scale can be 
achieved with simple systems that require little energy 
and maintenance.  These simple systems, such as the laun -
dry-to-landscape system or systems that include storage, 
coarse filtration, and pumps, typically do not include organic 
matter removal or disinfection, and risk is managed through 
a series of best management practices. Neighborhood-scale 
systems typically provide disinfection where access-control 
is not feasible, which creates more system complexity and 
requires more energy. 
Graywater reuse for toilet flushing requires plumb -
ing components and treatment systems that are most 
appropriate in multi-residential buildings or neighbor -
hoods.  Graywater systems for toilet flushing require dual 
plumbing with a connection to potable water and backflow 
preventers that require annual inspection. Treatment systems 
for toilet flushing should include disinfection to reduce risk 
and prevent bacterial growth, and existing technologies are 
available. Even the simplest treatment systems require peri -
odic maintenance that can be a burden at the household level, 
although such maintenance is more easily managed by con -
tractors or on-site staff at the neighborhood/multi-residential 
scale. For broader adoption of graywater for toilet flushing 
at the household scale, treatment systems are needed that are 
low maintenance and include process automation and con -
trol to ensure safe use at a reasonable cost. 
Many state graywater treatment standards for toilet 
flushing are not risk-based or fit-for-purpose.  Standards 
vary widely across states, resulting in an inconsistency in 
treatment systems that can be applied, and several are based 
on standards unrelated to residential or multi-residential toi -
let flushing. Many standards for toilet flushing may be un -
necessarily strict in terms of organic content and turbidity 
removal, resulting in requirements for technologies that are 
costly, energy-intensive, and require frequent maintenance. 
Additional research is needed to determine appropriate de -
sign standards for dissolved organic carbon and turbidity 
that prevent aesthetic and maintenance issues while allowing 
proper function of disinfection systems when using graywa -
ter for toilet flushing.
New developments and future urban planning pro -
vide opportunities for rethinking the conveyance and use 
of various water and waste streams for maximum cost, 
energy, and water savings.  Separation of graywater results 
in blackwater that is more concentrated in solids and organic 
matter than conventional domestic wastewater and may be 
amenable to methane biogas production. These systems can 
also be integrated with urine separation including nutrient 
capture. Thus, graywater reuse can be a key element of ener -gy-efficient urban water and resource management systems 
that not only minimize net water abstraction from the envi -
ronment but also achieve a high level of energy and nutrient 
recovery.
The state of practice and development of cost-effec -
tive and safe stormwater capture systems for roof runoff 
are hindered by the lack of data on human pathogens and 
the risk associated with various uses.  Design and treat -
ment standards are generally well accepted for nonpotable 
use of runoff collected from land surfaces, and no treatment 
other than coarse solids removal is needed for subsurface ir -
rigation where human exposures are minimal. For beneficial 
uses of roof runoff with low to moderate exposures, addi -
tional pathogen data and risk analyses are needed to estab -
lish a consistent state of practice for on-site stormwater use. 
Technologies are mature and can be readily adapted for vari -
ous scales and uses.
Operations and maintenance of household and 
neighborhood graywater and stormwater use systems 
is not well guided or monitored.  All systems that capture 
graywater and stormwater for beneficial use require rou -
tine maintenance. For systems where disinfection is not re -
quired (e.g., subsurface irrigation), failure to conduct needed 
maintenance poses operational concerns but does not pose 
a significant risk for human health or environmental qual -
ity. However, for systems with disinfection processes to pro -
tect human health (i.e., systems for toilet flushing), ongoing 
maintenance is critical. Although many states require that 
installed systems meet certain water quality targets, ongoing 
monitoring is not required. More guidance is needed to en -
sure safe operations of graywater and stormwater treatment 
systems at household and neighborhood scales. Because fre -
quent routine water quality analyses are expensive and im -
practical even at the neighborhood scale, system operational 
performance standards and online monitoring of surrogate 
parameters (e.g., residual chlorine, suspended solids, or tur -
bidity) should be considered.
Stormwater infiltration for aquifer recharge is com -
monly practiced, but designs and regulations in the Unit -
ed States may not be adequately protective of ground -
water quality. Design for large-scale stormwater infiltration 
projects are still emerging. For many locations, the design 
and performance standards for stormwater infiltration have 
been developed to address surface water regulatory drivers 
rather than the protection of groundwater quality. Of particu -
lar concern is the infiltration of organic contaminants and 
salts from highly urbanized areas into water supply aquifers, 
although human pathogens may also be of concern depend -
ing on the infiltration site characteristics. Thoughtful plan -
ning, source area selection, source control, and mechanisms 
to integrate treatment into the watershed could improve ef -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
6 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ficiency of these systems and reduce the amount of treatment 
required. Treatment systems, such as engineered wetlands 
and filter media, may also be needed for regional-scale sys -
tems where source control is challenging. 
COSTS AND BENEFITS
It is important to recognize the full suite of benefits—as 
well as the full costs—of graywater and stormwater projects, 
although it may be empirically challenging to do so. Some 
of these benefits are financial and can be readily estimated 
and portrayed in monetary terms, such as the value of wa -
ter savings or the avoided cost of obtaining water from an 
alternative supply. In addition, important social and environ -
mental benefits may apply but may be difficult to quantify 
or monetize. Costs for graywater and stormwater projects 
are highly dependent on scale, system design, and plumbing 
requirements, and generally are better understood than the 
benefits, yet there is a lack of well-documented and complete 
cost information for many of the possible applications. The 
following findings are based on limited available cost data 
and some example analyses of potential water savings based 
on the committee’s scenario analysis. 
Simple household-scale graywater reuse or roof run -
off capture systems can offer reasonable financial pay -
back periods under certain water use scenarios and ap -
propriate climate conditions. For example, considering the 
committee’s scenario analysis of potential water savings in 
medium-density residential development, simple laundry-
to-landscape graywater systems can offer payback periods 
as low as 2.5-6 years (not accounting for the cost of labor), 
with the shortest payback periods in the Southwest and cen -
tral United States. These estimates assume graywater for 
irrigation actually offsets potable use—an assumption that 
remains to be demonstrated. Longer payback periods were 
estimated for rain barrels (5-26 years) and cisterns (14 to 
more than 50 years, not accounting for labor) used for con -
servation irrigation. The longer payback periods reflect lo -
cations where distinct wet and dry seasons do not coordi -
nate well with irrigation demands, as in the arid Southwest. 
The cost of installation (whether by contracting with a paid 
professional or valuing homeowner-provided labor) greatly 
extends the payback period, as do water uses in which ad -
ditional plumbing and treatment are required. 
Economies of scale are evident for large stormwater 
and graywater use projects.  Several regional stormwater 
capture and recharge projects in Southern California, for ex -
ample, can pay back large dividends by avoiding the cost 
of expensive imported water in addition to other social and 
environmental benefits. Based on available unit cost data, 
stormwater alternatives designed to recharge groundwater at neighborhood and regional scales tend to be much less 
expensive than on-site or neighborhood tank capture. Pub -
lished cost data from larger-scale graywater projects is ex -
tremely limited, but some efficiencies of scale would be 
associated with graywater toilet flushing systems in large, 
new multi-residential developments (particularly compared 
to smaller retrofits). Additional incentives may be possible if 
such investments defer water and wastewater infrastructure 
expansion in densely populated urban areas. 
Depending on the stormwater or graywater sys -
tem design, energy savings are possible compared with 
conventional water supplies, but data for a sound as -
sessment are lacking. Conventional water systems in the 
United States are reported to provide water to customers at 
an energy cost of between less than 1 kWh/m3 to as much as 
5 kWh/m3, depending mostly on pumping costs for convey -
ing the water from the source to the water treatment plant. 
Rooftop stormwater capture systems have been reported in 
a limited number of studies to have a greater energy demand 
(median is 1.4 kWh/m3) in practice than in theoretical stud -
ies (0.2 kWh/m3), but many potential variables (e.g., scale, 
pumping, treatment, material inputs) will drastically affect 
the life-cycle energy demands of these systems, and the ef -
fects of these variables in practice remain poorly understood. 
LEGAL AND REGULATORY ISSUES
As technologies and strategies continue to advance, gray -
water and stormwater use is being incorporated into law in a 
variety of respects at the federal, state, and local levels. How -
ever, as is often the case with innovative technologies, the law 
has not evolved quickly enough to keep up with the technol -
ogy and its use. Several legal and regulatory constraints re -
main that hinder the capacity for graywater and stormwater to 
significantly expand the nation’s water supplies.
In most western states, acquisition of water rights 
is a requirement for large-scale stormwater capture and 
use projects, and water rights may limit widespread im -
plementation of smaller-scale stormwater and graywater 
projects for consumptive uses. Unless water rights can be 
acquired or legislative solutions developed, opportunities for 
large-scale stormwater capture projects to expand existing wa -
ter supplies would largely be limited to coastal regions with 
no downstream users or to non-consumptive uses (e.g., toi -
let flushing). Several states (e.g., California, Kansas, Oregon, 
Utah, and Washington) have established regulations that allow 
small-scale roof runoff capture projects to proceed without 
water rights permits, and only one state (Colorado) has strict 
limits on stormwater capture and use out of concern for water 
rights impacts. The right to stormwater and graywater use in 
most prior-appropriation states has not been firmly resolved Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Summary  7
through judicial decisions, leaving an unclear outlook for proj -
ects that have not acquired water rights, because they could be 
vulnerable to legal challenges. New scientific analyses of the 
impacts to return flows of various on-site water uses in differ -
ent regions would help clarify these concerns, but additional 
legal research and guidance could better facilitate the use of 
on-site water supplies, considering potential legal challenges. 
 There is substantial variation in on-site graywater 
and stormwater regulations at the state level with respect 
to design and water quality for household-scale projects, 
which leads to varying exposures and risk.  As one example, 
there is lack of consistency among states on whether outdoor 
graywater use is limited to subsurface irrigation. At least three 
states allow drip irrigation without landscape cover, which 
could lead to higher pathogen exposures. In addition, states 
vary on their regulation of untreated graywater irrigation of 
food crops. Whether such exposures would lead to unaccept -
able risks at various scales has not been definitively resolved, 
but higher risks are likely with increased exposures. Regu -
lations affecting large-scale graywater and stormwater use 
where public access is not controlled tend to include conser -
vative public health protection measures, such as disinfection. The lack of authoritative, risk-based guidelines for 
the design and potential applications of graywater and 
stormwater in the United States is a major impediment to 
their expanded use. The wide variability in existing regu -
lations and absence of federal guidance leaves stakeholders 
and local decision makers uncertain about the safety of these 
practices and the appropriate level of treatment necessary for 
particular uses. Development of rigorous, risk-based guide -
lines for graywater and stormwater across a range of possible 
uses and exposures could improve safety, build public con -
fidence in the practices, reduce expenditures on unnecessary 
treatment, and assist communities that lack an existing regu -
latory framework for on-site water supplies. Such guidelines 
could be developed by the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), a collaboration of states, or a collaboration of U.S. 
water organizations working with the EPA. This guidance 
could then serve as a basis for developing standards of prac -
tice for on-site nonpotable water use. Oversight and enforce -
ment of water quality standards for applications with signifi -
cant exposures is also important but challenging, and local 
enforcement agencies would benefit from additional guid -
ance on appropriate, cost-effective maintenance, monitoring, 
and reporting strategies. 
BOX S-2 Summary of Research Needs to Enhance the Safe and Reliable Use of Graywater and  
Stormwater and Conserve Water, Energy, Environmental, and Financial Resources
Risk and water quality
1. Assess the occurrence and fate of pathogens in graywater and stormwater
2. Assess the occurrence and fate of chemical contaminants in stormwater 
3. Understand the implications of enhanced water conservation on graywater quality and use
4. Develop risk-based water quality guidance for various uses that could serve as a basis to develop standards of practice 
5. Develop monitoring technology and strategies to assure compliance with water quality criteria 
Treatment technology
6. Develop treatment systems to meet tailored (fit-for-purpose) water quality objectives across a range of scales 
7. Understand the long-term performance and reliability of graywater and stormwater treatment systems (from small to lar ge 
scales) 
Infrastructure
8. Envision opportunities for water- and energy-conserving infrastructure designs in new construction and demonstrate their 
performance
9. Identify strategies to retrofit existing infrastructure for enhanced beneficial use of stormwater 
Social science and decision analysis
10. Understand behavioral impacts on overall water use in the context of graywater and stormwater projects
11. Collect performance data (including cost, energy, water savings, water quality, and other benefits) in support of integrated  
water supply management, decision making, and refinement of decision tools 
Policy and regulatory issues 
12. Identify incentives and various regulatory strategies that have proven ef fective in the implementation of stormwater or gray -
water systems to conserve water supplies Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
8 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
RESEARCH NEEDS
Information is generally available to support water 
management decision making for simple, household-scale 
graywater and stormwater systems with minimal human 
exposures, but additional research would enhance deci -
sion making for larger systems or those with significant 
exposures. Key uncertainties affect the capacity to make 
fully informed decisions on appropriate and cost-effective 
designs, particularly for larger or more complex graywater or 
stormwater beneficial use systems, including
  
• Fit-for-purpose water quality objectives that are protec -
tive of public health;• The occurrence and fate of pathogens in stormwater and 
graywater; 
• Costs and benefits for neighborhood- and regional-scale 
systems, including nonmonetized benefits, such as water 
pollution control and community amenities;
• Energy implications of on-site alternative water sup -
plies; and
• Long-term system performance and maintenance needs. 
A summary of research needs to enhance decision mak -
ing and ensure the safe and reliable use of graywater and 
stormwater to reduce water demand is provided in Box S-2. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
91
Introduction
Many parts of the United States face chronic or episodic 
water shortages. In the Colorado River Basin and Califor -
nia, recent multi-year droughts have resulted in reservoirs 
at near record low levels (Figure 1-1), forcing state drought 
declarations and decreased water allocations for many us -
ers. Climate change is anticipated to further impact water 
supplies by altering the timing and amounts of precipita -
tion, increasing evapotranspiration, and altering snowmelt 
and the timing of runoff in the western states (Barnett and 
Pennell, 2004). Also, longer-term droughts are expected to 
intensify in the southwest, the Great Plains, and the southeast  
(Melillo et al., 2014). Meanwhile, population growth in the 
more water scarce regions of the United States (Figure 1-2) 
compounds the issue, placing additional strain on water sup -
plies and infrastructure. For example, the states of California, 
Nevada, Arizona, Texas, and Florida saw their populations 
increase between 85 percent and 400 percent between 1970 
and 2009, while the overall population of the United States 
increased by less than 50 percent during that same timespan 
(NRC, 2012a). The current population in the United States 
(321 million) is expected to grow by 30 percent by 2060, 
mostly in cities (Colby and Ortman, 2014). To help alleviate these water shortage problems, alter -
native water sources such as stormwater and graywater are 
increasingly being viewed as resources to supplement scarce 
water supplies rather than as waste or nuisance water. Har -
vesting stormwater has many potential benefits including 
water conservation, energy savings, and reduced impacts of 
urban development on the environment. Even in the more 
humid areas of the United States, stormwater capture and use 
are growing in popularity as a means to enhance water sup -
ply and reduce nutrient loads to receiving waters. Similarly, 
the reuse of graywater for residential and building landscape 
irrigation or other nonpotable uses can reduce the year-round 
demand on public water supplies treated to drinking water 
standards (hereafter called potable water). 
Stormwater and graywater use are two options among 
many in a diverse water supply portfolio, including conser -
vation, desalination, managed aquifer recharge, and waste -
water reuse (see NRC, 2008a, 2009a, 2012a). Conserva -
tion and water use efficiency are generally the best ways to 
address water supply problems on a broad scale. In some 
water-challenged areas, numerous water conservation initia -
tives have already been implemented, including installing 
FIGURE 1-1  The impacts of the recent drought in California are exemplified in Folsom Lake, which was at 97 percent capacity in 2011 and 
at 17 percent capacity in January 2014. SOURCE: California Department of Water Resources.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
10 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
low-flow devices in buildings and incentivizing less-water-
intensive landscaping, but water utility managers need ad -
ditional strategies to address current and future challenges 
of water supply reliability and water demand. For example, 
an analysis of the water supply portfolio for the City of Los 
Angeles shows that continued conservation efforts over the 
next 20 years (based on utility projections) may accommo -
date future population growth but are not likely to signifi -
cantly reduce the present demand for imported water (Luthy 
and Sedlak, 2015).
Brackish and seawater desalination and wastewater re -
use have received substantial attention as means to augment 
public water supplies (NRC, 2008a, 2012a), but less infor -
mation is available on the beneficial use of graywater and 
stormwater. The process through which graywater and urban 
stormwater are captured, stored, and used has mostly devel -
oped in an ad hoc manner (Grebel et al., 2013). Because of 
the absence of ample documentation of costs, performance, 
and risks, many utilities are hesitant to integrate the practices 
into their long-term water resource plans. Potential public 
health risks from microbial or chemical contamination as -
FIGURE 1-2  County-level population trends in the United States between 1970 and 2030. Each block on the map illustrates one county in 
the United States. The height of each block is proportional to that county’s population density in the year 2000, and so the volume of the block 
is proportional to the county’s total population. The color of each block shows the county’s projected change in population between 1970 
and 2030, with shades of orange denoting increases and blue denoting decreases. SOURCE: National Assessment Synthesis Team (2001).
sociated with graywater or stormwater use also raise con -
cerns and subsequent debate over the appropriate regulatory 
framework to protect public health without adding exces -
sive cost and permitting burdens to these projects (EBMUD, 
2009). To better address these challenges, the National Acad -
emies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (Academies) 
formed a committee to conduct a study on the risks, costs, 
and benefits of stormwater and graywater use to augment 
and conserve existing water supplies.
DEFINITION OF STORMWATER  
RUNOFF AND GRAYWATER
Stormwater runoff is the water from rainfall or snow that 
can be measured downstream in a pipe, culvert, or stream 
shortly after the precipitation event (NRC, 2009a). What 
constitutes “shortly” depends on the size of the watershed 
and the efficiency of the drainage system. From a practical 
perspective, stormwater runoff is water that may be in an 
engineered feature, running over the ground surface, or seep -
ing into the shallow subsurface and soon reemerges as seeps. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  11
Stormwater runoff is distinct from deeper percolation of pre -
cipitation that moves slowly through the ground and sustains 
the base flow of streams and rivers and recharges ground -
water. Urbanization results in an increase in the amount of 
land covered with impervious surfaces, resulting in a greater 
percentage of precipitation appearing as stormwater runoff. 
Rainfall that is captured directly from rooftops and 
stored on site in barrels or cisterns is frequently called rain -
water harvesting. For the purposes of this report, the term 
“stormwater” is used broadly to include runoff captured di -
rectly from rooftops, and the term “roof runoff” is used when 
flows from the ground surface are not included.
Graywater is the wastewater produced from bathroom 
sinks, showers, bathtubs, clothes washers, and laundry sinks 
and is derived from residential buildings or commercial es -
tablishments. Graywater is mainly a byproduct of washing 
and does not include toilet water (sometimes called “black -
water”). This report and most recent scientific papers also 
exclude water from kitchen sinks and dishwashers from 
the definition of graywater (Sharvelle et al., 2013), because 
kitchen water contains high levels of organic matter and sol -
ids along with foodborne pathogens (Eriksson et al., 2002), 
necessitating more extensive treatment (with unit process -
es similar to wastewater reuse). Nevertheless, some states 
regulations (e.g., Wash. Chap. 246-274) include water from 
kitchen sinks and dishwashers in the definition of graywa -
ter. Graywater, as defined in this report, accounts for about 
one-half of a typical indoor home wastewater flow (Sheikh, 
2010). The definition of graywater could conceivably include 
condensate from air conditioning units, which represents an 
additional on-site water resource, although condensate is not 
typically included in the definition of graywater. 
Stormwater and graywater can be captured and used 
at various scales using engineered conveyance, treatment, 
and storage systems of varying complexity. For stormwater, 
this may include the household, neighborhood (or multi-
residential building), or regional scales. Accordingly, the 
annual capture can vary from several hundred gallons for 
rain barrels to millions of gallons in large subsurface tanks 
to billions of gallons for large, regional surface reservoirs 
or groundwater infiltration systems. Graywater systems also 
can be applied at varying scales, from the individual resi -
dence to the multi-residential building to a large residential 
development with a semi-centralized graywater treatment 
system serving as many as 10,000 people. 
CURRENT DRIVERS
Many different drivers exist for local water capture and 
use, and these drivers vary by region as to their relative im -
portance. Current interest in the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater is driven by water scarcity in regions of the 
country that experience chronic or episodic droughts. Ad -
ditional drivers are flood control, pollution prevention, nu -
trient management, reduced hydromodification, and energy 
savings associated with locally sourced water supplies. Al -
though water scarcity, flood control, and pollution preven -
tion are primary drivers depending on local conditions, other 
co-benefits such as green space, community amenities, and 
public education may be equally important to decision mak -
ing. The relative importance of each of these drivers deter -
mines the graywater and stormwater strategies that might be 
appropriate for a particular site or region.
Scarcity
Many areas in the West, Southwest, and Southeast face 
water shortages. Chronic water shortages exist from Cali -
fornia and the desert Sun Belt to the Colorado Front Range 
and the Great Plains. A 14-year drought has lowered the 
water levels in the Colorado River basin to historic levels, 
forcing communities in the southwest that rely on water 
from the Colorado River to look for alternative supplies. 
In northern California, communities that have traditionally 
taken groundwater from the Carmel River basin (Monterey 
County) are under state mandate to preserve water for the 
river ecosystem, withdraw less, and find other supplies  
(MPWMD, 2014). In California, 2013 was the driest calen -
dar year since the Gold Rush when record keeping began, 
and by the winter of 2015, the state had the lowest snowpack 
in recorded history. California has been under a drought state 
of emergency since 2014 (Governor of the State of Califor -
nia, 2014) with substantial water use and water delivery re -
strictions (CA DWR, 2014). 
Such problems, however, are not confined to the West. 
The southeastern United States experiences extended peri -
ods of low rainfall as a normal component of the climate 
system (Figure 1-3), resulting in conflicts between Georgia 
and Florida over water supply for the city of Atlanta versus 
water releases to the Chattahoochee River and Apalachicola 
Bay (NRC, 2009b). Water shortages and the over-pumping 
of groundwater resulted in Tampa becoming the first large 
U.S. city to substantially augment its water supply via sea -
water desalination (Tampa Bay Water, 2008). 
Population growth and redistribution to water scarce 
regions has exacerbated these challenges. Figure 1-2 shows 
high levels of projected population growth in the Southwest 
and Southeast in areas already facing water challenges. 
Climate change may add further stresses to water scarce 
regions that are already exceeding the limits of imported sur -
face water supplies and sustainable yields from groundwater 
basins to meet the needs of urban users. These conditions Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
12 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 1-3  Lake Lanier reached record lows in 2007 during an extended drought. The lake is the water supply to 5 million people in greater 
Atlanta and periodic droughts continue to threaten this resource. SOURCE: Courtesy of Bill Kinsland; http://www.srh.noaa.gov/images/ffc/
lanier12108.jpg.
are leading communities to conserve existing potable water 
supplies and seek out alternative sources, such as stormwater 
and graywater (see Box 1-1). 
Water Supply Reliability and Diversification
The beneficial use of stormwater and graywater also 
provides ways to augment and diversify local water supplies 
and reduce reliance on imported water supplies. In Los An -
geles, for example, 88 percent of the current water supply 
is imported, and the city seeks to diversify its water portfo -
lio and increase the use of local water supply sources, such 
as stormwater (Box 1-2). In 2010, Los Angeles announced 
plans to meet at least 4 percent of its water supply through 
new stormwater capture systems by 2035 (Figure 1-4;  
LADWP, 2010), although this could grow to become even 
larger as a result of recent stormwater capture planning (see 
Box 1-2). More aggressive timelines for reducing depen -
dence on imported water are presented in the 2015 sustain -
ability plan for Los Angeles (City of Los Angeles, 2015). 
California’s State Water Resources Control Board has am -
bitious goals for increasing stormwater capture and use by 
an additional 500,000 AF/yr (620 million m3/yr) by 2020 
and by 1 million AF/yr (1.2 billion m3/yr) by 2030 to re -
duce the state’s reliance on imported water (SWRCB, 2013). 
For comparison, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern 
California (MWDSC, 2010) estimated that as of 2007 ap -
proximately 470,000 AF/yr (580 million m3/yr) of stormwa -
ter was being captured in the coastal plain of southern Cali -
fornia, with significantly less urban stormwater captured in northern California (e.g., the San Francisco Bay Area). The 
Pacific Institute concluded that additional urban stormwater 
capture in southern California and the San Francisco Bay 
Area could potentially increase water supplies by 420,000 to 
630,000 AF/yr (520 to 780 million m3/yr) (Pacific Institute 
and NRDC, 2014). 
Graywater systems offer a reliable, year-round source 
of water to irrigate landscaping or flush toilets that can help 
conserve existing water supply sources. This reliability of -
fers a major benefit in areas that face frequent outdoor water 
use restrictions during times of drought. 
Pollution Prevention
Urban stormwater contains a number of contaminants 
and is a major source of nonpoint pollution to surface waters 
for chemicals and pathogens (EPA, 1994). Chemical con -
taminants include those derived from paving materials, auto -
mobile tires, and urban biocides (Grebel et al., 2013). Storm -
water runoff also contributes substantial loads of nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and sediment, which can cause algal blooms, 
low dissolved oxygen, and reduced water clarity and signifi -
cantly impact aquatic life in inland water bodies and coastal 
estuaries. Nutrient discharges from urban and agricultural 
runoff, wastewater discharges, and air pollution have created 
a “dead zone” with low oxygen in the Chesapeake Bay (Fig -
ure 1-5), which has motivated a multi-state pact to reduce 
pollution loads.1 
1 Urban stormwater is estimated to contribute 8 percent of the total 
nitrogen loads and 15 percent of the phosphorus loads to the Chesa -
peake Bay. See http://stat.chesapeakebay.net.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  13
BOX 1-1  Arizona Prison
A graywater reuse system that uses shower and hand-washing water to flush toilets was installed during construction of the Eloy De -
tention Center located in Arizona, which houses up to 6,492 inmates (Figure 1-1-1). Drivers for the installation of the system included 
water conservation, a desire for environmentally friendly practices in the facility design, and cost savings associated with a reduced 
hydraulic load to the on-site septic tank, which facilitated the use of a smaller septic system. 
The graywater is treated by filtration and chlorination, with the goal of no detection of fecal coliform bacteria. Water samples are 
monitored and reported to the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality on a weekly basis. The system has been in compliance 
for non-detectable fecal coliform bacteria since the permit was issued in 2008. Because this system was the first large-scale application 
of graywater use for toilet flushing in Arizona and the state lacks a standard regulation that addresses large-scale (i.e., commercial or 
multi-residential) graywater use for toilet flushing, the permitting process was lengthy. Since the system has been in operation, water 
savings of 20 gallons per day (gpd; 80 liters per day [lpd]) per inmate have been observed (or approximately 130,000 gpd [145 AF/yr 
or 179,000 m3/yr] at full prison capacity).
SOURCES: C. Graf, Arizona Department of Environmental Quality, personal communication, 2014; T. Valentine, Valentine Engineers, 
personal communication, 2014.
FIGURE 1-1-1  The Eloy Detention Center, located in Arizona, reuses graywater for toilet flushing to stretch its water supplies. SOURCE: 
http://www.law.arizona.edu/clinics/Immigration_Law_Clinic/deportation_defense.cfm.
FIGURE 1-4 Current plans for diversifying Los Angeles’ water supplies by 2035 through increased use of local sources, including storm -
water capture. Existing stormwater capture through spreading operations, about 27,000 AF/yr (33 million m3/yr), is included within “local 
groundwater” in the left-hand chart. Ongoing stormwater capture planning could further increase this percentage. SOURCE: LADWP, Water 
Management Group.
TODAY (2006 – 2010) 
Average 621,700 AF/yr
(767 million m3/yr)FUTURE (2035)
711,000 AF/yr
(877 million m3/yr)Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
14 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 1-2  Stormwater Capture in Los Angeles
The 2013 update of the Greater Los Angeles County Region Integrated Regional Water Management Plan (GLAC IRWM, 2013) 
describes a 20-year horizon for meeting the Los Angeles region’s water supply needs. In 2010, the Los Angeles County region’s storm -
water capture and direct use was 1,000 AF/yr (1.2 million m3/yr) and stormwater capture for aquifer recharge totaled 196,000 AF/yr 
(242 million m3/yr). In the next 20 years, Los Angeles County aims to increase stormwater capture and direct use by 26,000 AF/yr (32 
million m3/yr) and increase stormwater recharge by 75,000 AF/yr (93 million m3/yr) (GLAC IRWM, 2013). Thus, in the Greater Los 
Angeles region, additional stormwater capture for water supply is expected to increase by more than 50 percent over the next 20 years. 
Presently in the City of Los Angeles, 29,000 AF/yr (36 million m3/yr) of stormwater are recharged on average through spreading 
grounds; incidental stormwater infiltration accounts for an additional 35,000 AF/yr (43 million m3/yr) in recharge to the city’s aqui -
fers (see Figure 1-2-1), but existing challenges from aquifer overpumping and groundwater contamination prevent all of this recharge 
from being used to meet current water demands. In 2010, the City of Los Angeles set a target of capturing an additional 25,000 AF/yr  
(31 million m3/yr) of stormwater by 2035 (LADWP, 2010). However, additional planning is under way through the Stormwater Capture 
Master Plan that is likely to expand this goal. Los Angeles Department of Water and Power has identified additional stormwater capture 
strategies that could contribute between 115,000 (142 million m3/yr) and 194,000 AF/yr (239 million m3/yr) to the region’s water supply 
(LADWP, 2015). Figure 1-2-1 shows potential stormwater capture by 2099 according to an aggressive and a conservative path, with the 
aggressive path potentially tripling the amount of stormwater currently captured. These goals are aspirational and need technical and 
financial feasibility assessment. The extent to which this stormwater capture would address future water demand depends on managing 
existing groundwater contamination, assumptions about land use and groundwater recharge and recovery sustainable yield analysis, fi -
nancing, and other factors. Nonetheless, these analyses demonstrate that stormwater capture has the potential to contribute significantly 
to Los Angeles’ water supply and reduce the need for imported water.
FIGURE 1-2-1  The City of Los Angeles’ Stormwater Capture Master Plan is considering scenarios that potentially could nearly triple the 
amount of stormwater captured with aggressive action by 2099. SOURCE: LADWP  (2015).
In numerous U.S. cities, particularly in the Midwest and 
Northeast, stormwater and wastewater infrastructure were 
constructed together (termed combined sewer systems), such 
that stormwater runoff drains into sewers and passes through 
the wastewater treatment plant (Figure 1-6). In areas with 
advanced wastewater treatment, such construction can be a 
benefit under low to normal hydrologic conditions, because 
the treatment plant can remove nutrients and sediment from 
both stormwater and wastewater. However, combined sewer 
systems were constructed with overflows that would pre -
vent the wastewater treatment plant from being overloaded 
after storm events. Under extreme wet weather conditions or when blockages or mechanical failures occur, combined 
sewer overflows (CSOs) discharge untreated wastewater, 
polluting the surface waters with pathogens, organic matter, 
and nutrients. Improved stormwater capture and use provide 
a means to reduce CSOs and the associated pollution loads.
In coastal regions, stormwater may be a significant con -
tributor to pathogens that pollute recreational waters. Storm -
water runoff is the most frequently identified source of beach 
closings and advisory days, and the U.S. Environmental Pro -
tection Agency (EPA) estimates that more than 10 trillion 
gallons (38 trillion liters) of untreated stormwater make their 
way into our surface waters each year (EPA, 2004a). In 2012 Estimated FutureAggressive Future
Existing
Baseline/Existing
Capture
Baseline Conservative AggressiveAverage Annual Capture Volume (1,000 AF)050100150200250300Potential Capture in
Future Distributed
Facilities
Existing Incidental 
Distributed Capture
Existing CentralizedCapturePotential Capture inFuture Centralized
FacilitiesCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  15
FIGURE 1-5 Dissolved oxygen conditions in August 2009 in the 
Chesapeake Bay. Dissolved oxygen levels below 2 mg/L are con -
sidered hypoxic, but impacts to biota have been observed at levels 
below 4 mg/L (Buchheister et al., 2013). SOURCE: http://www.
cbf.org/about-the-bay/maps/pollution/dead-zones. 
FIGURE 1-6 Combined sewer overflows exist in 772 cities, predominantly in the Northeast and Midwest. To avoid costly infrastructure 
replacement to meet water quality standards, these cities are increasingly turning to intensive stormwater management strategies, including 
stormwater capture and use. SOURCE: EPA (2004a).Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
16 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
there were more than 20,000 beach closing and advisory 
days, with more than 80 percent caused by bacteria levels 
in recreational waters that exceeded public health standards 
(Dorfman and Haren, 2013).
Discharges to impaired (i.e., degraded) water bodies are 
typically governed by “total maximum daily load” (TMDL) 
requirements, which outline the maximum amount of a pol -
lutant that a water body may receive and still meet water 
quality standards (with a factor of safety). TMDLs have been 
approved for pathogens, nutrients, mercury, other metals, and 
sediment, among others.2 Stormwater management efforts are 
often driven by TMDLs (discussed in more detail in Chapter 
7), and meeting TMDLs can be an expensive and uncertain 
proposition. However, stormwater capture and use provides a 
strategy to reduce pollution while providing additional water 
supply benefits (see Box 1-3).
Hydromodification and Flood Management
Stormwater runoff in urban areas is characterized by 
increased volumes of runoff and more intense peak flows 
compared to the more natural state. This change in runoff re -
gime, called “hydromodification,” is caused by land use and 
altered landscapes in the watershed that destabilize stream -
beds and impair stream condition and function (Goodman 
and Austin, 2011). As watersheds urbanize and are covered 
with impervious surfaces, runoff is conveyed directly to 
streams via the conventional storm drain system. Infiltration 
into soil is reduced and overland flow increases. As a re -
sult, the magnitude and duration of flows entering receiving 
streams increase, which contributes to more erosive energy 
within the channel. Unless managed, hydromodification can 
cause channel erosion, unstable stream banks, altered base 
flow, change in bed material composition, and biological im -
pacts to stream systems (Figure 1-7; OEHHA and SWRCB, 
2009; Paul and Meyer, 2001). 
Hydromodification management in new developments 
seeks to mimic natural hydrologic conditions by retaining 
stormwater and subsequently releasing it to match pre-devel -
opment flow volumes, durations, and frequencies. The the -
ory is that if the pre-development distribution of in-stream 
flows is maintained over a broad range of critical flow rates 
for long periods, then the baseline capacity to transport sedi -
ment, a proxy for the geomorphic condition, will be main -
tained as well. Stormwater infiltration or capture alters the 
runoff hydrograph of a site through the changes to the tim -
ing of discharges, and stormwater capture also reduces the 
overall volume. Evaluation of onsite stormwater use for hy -
dromodification management typically involves sizing such 
strategies based on continuous simulation of both the pre-de -
2 See http://water.epa.gov/lawsregs/lawsguidance/cwa/tmdl.velopment and post-development conditions and incorporat -
ing demand for onsite use and iterative design of the facility 
until flow duration control is achieved. Hydromodification 
management can provide a flood control benefit by holding 
up and releasing water more slowly to waterways. 
Since the early 1900s, water suppliers and flood control 
agencies in the southwestern United States have been cap -
turing floodwaters behind dams and/or diverting stormwater 
into large-scale spreading basins to replenish groundwater 
basins and manage flood risk. These facilities can be com -
bined with flow control (e.g., constructed wetlands) to ben -
efit hydromodification control strategies (Santa Clara Val -
ley, 2005). The development of multi-purpose flood control 
and stormwater capture facilities to enhance percolation of 
stormwater (or historically called flood water) supplies along 
the river channel or alongside the river banks into recharge 
percolation ponds has developed into a more sophisticated 
water resources management strategy in recent decades 
(see Box 1-4). Los Angeles County’s Department of Public 
Works alone operates 27 spreading basins to enhance local 
water supplies.3 
Energy Savings and Greenhouse Gas Reductions
Beneficial use of stormwater and graywater can save en -
ergy compared to conventional sources under certain condi -
tions. In the western and southwestern United States, there is 
a mismatch between population centers and areas of precipi -
tation, and massive systems have been constructed to con -
vey water over long distances to urban areas. Many of the 
conventional water supplies are derived from surface water 
that is pumped long distances, with significant energy and in -
frastructure costs. A study commissioned by the California 
State Water Resources Control Board concluded that captur -
ing 1 acre-foot (1,200 m3) of southern California stormwater 
and storing it in the ground saves roughly a metric ton of 
carbon dioxide (CO2) compared to imported water supplies 
(Spencer, 2013). Although energy savings from stormwater 
and graywater are highly variable (see Chapter 6), it may 
be feasible to reduce energy use and greenhouse gas emis -
sions through the increased use of stormwater or graywater, 
particularly when these local water sources require minimal 
treatment or pumping.
Environmental Stewardship
The implementation of stormwater and graywater benefi -
cial use projects may also be driven by a sense of environmen -
tal stewardship, even in the absence of specific water conser -
vation or pollution prevention goals. Individuals, businesses, 
3 See http://dpw.lacounty.gov/wrd/SpreadingGround.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  17
BOX 1-3  Stormwater Use in the Twin Cities Brings Multiple Benefits
In the land of 10,000 lakes, stormwater use is receiving attention for the multiple benefits it can provide. In 2011, the Metropolitan 
Council for the Twin Cities region of Minneapolis/St. Paul issued a guide to stormwater capture and use with the dual goals of reduc -
ing potable water demands that would otherwise require costly treatment plant upgrades and decreasing the pollution loads associated 
with stormwater discharges (Metropolitan Council, 2011). Notable projects in the Twin Cities are the Saint Anthony Village water reuse 
facility and the Target Field Rainwater harvesting system. 
At Saint Anthony Village stormwater is collected from 15 acres (6 hectares [ha]) along with filter backwash from the city’s water 
treatment plant. The water is stored in a half million-gallon reservoir below an open stormwater pond (Figure 1-3-1) and is used to 
irrigate a 20-acre (8 ha) park and city hall campus. The capital costs for the project were $1.5 million, with operating costs of about 
$3,000/yr. The total annualized cost (amortized capital outlay plus annual operation and maintenance costs), assuming a 5 percent 
interest cost over a 30-year lifetime, amounts to approximately $100,000 per year. The project reduces stormwater discharges by more 
than 4.6 million gallons (17 million liters) per year and saves $16,000/yr in potable water charges and more than $15,000/yr in avoided 
wastewater disposal fees. Thus, the net costs amount to about $69,000 per year. The project has reduced total suspended solids loading 
by 95 percent and phosphorus loads by 77 percent (Metropolitan Council, 2011). Other non-monetary benefits are beautifying the urban 
landscape through the reflection pool and fountains, and creating community awareness of public water management issues through 
signage and tours. 
At the Leadership in Engineering and Environmental Design (LEED) silver-certified Target Field—home of the Minnesota Twins 
in downtown Minneapolis—a runoff recycling system saves approximately 2 million gallons (7.6 million liters) per year. The system 
includes a 200,000-gallon (800,000-liter) underground cistern located below the playing field and a treatment system comprised of 
filtration, ultraviolet disinfection, and chlorination. The water is used for field irrigation and wash-down of the lower grandstands. 
Capital costs are estimated between $150,000 and $500,000, and operating and maintenance costs are $50,000/yr including energy and 
winterization. Besides the water savings, the Target Field project provides public education regarding stormwater treatment and reuse 
(Metropolitan Council, 2011). The total annualized cost (amortized capital outlay plus annual operation and maintenance costs), based 
on the midpoint of the capital cost estimates and assuming a 5 percent interest cost over a 30-year lifetime, amounts to approximately 
$70,000 per year. The potable water savings yield a cost savings benefit of approximately $8,000 per year (assuming local potable water 
supplies costs of $4 per 1,000 gallons). The net costs per year thus amount to approximately $62,000 per year, which may be weighed 
against the non-monetized benefits associated with public recognition of environmental stewardship (through LEED certification), pub -
lic education, stormwater-related impacts and loadings avoided, and other values generated by the project.
FIGURE 1-3-1 A half million-gallon stormwater storage reservoir at Saint Anthony Village lies below an attractive stormwater pond with 
fountains. The system reduces the use of water treated to drinking water standards for irrigation and reduces phosphorus discharges to surface 
water. SOURCE: Metropolitan Council (2011).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
18 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 1-7  Urbanization has increased stormwater runoff in Paint Branch, in College Park, Maryland. The resulting hydromodification 
causes more erosion, deepening of urban streams, and unstable channels compared to the pre-development state. SOURCE: http://www.
anacostiaws.org/news/blog/tags/12.
and municipalities may be driven toward “green” practices out 
of a motivation to be good stewards to the earth. Individuals 
and communities may be motivated by the positive emotional 
return from making investments in green infrastructure, and 
businesses and municipalities may aim to enhance their public 
image through such initiatives.
There is a growing trend of environmental practices that 
embrace the concepts of sustainable urban water management 
and “green design” (Allen et al., 2010; WERF, 2009). For 
example, low-impact development projects, including green 
roofs and enhanced stormwater capture and infiltration, help 
manage the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff and bet -
ter mimic the undeveloped landscape. These projects can re -
duce pollution, provide habitat, and contribute to the creation 
of a greener, more aesthetically pleasing city. Once considered 
pioneering, these practices now are widely implemented (e.g., 
Prince George’s County, Maryland, 1999) and are required in 
some cities for development or redevelopment (e.g., San Fran -
cisco [SFPUC, 2009]). 
The U.S. Green Building Council’s trademark Leader -
ship in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certifica -
tion program recognizes environmental practices in building 
design.4 The LEED program credits graywater irrigation to re -
duce water consumption and wastewater discharges, rainwater 
capture systems, pervious pavements, and on-site infiltration 
to reduce stormwater runoff.5 Innovative water management 
4 See http://www.usgbc.org/leed#why.
5 See http://www.leeduser.com/credit/NC-2009/SSc6.1 and http://  strategies, such as on-site use of graywater or stormwater to 
reduce indoor and outdoor water demand and stormwater dis -
charge, can earn builders up to one-half of the points required 
for basic LEED certification,6 which can be a motivator even 
in areas where water scarcity is not a primary driver (Box 1-3). 
Likewise, the Sustainable Sites Initiative is a voluntary 
effort to transform land development and landscaping in ways 
that offset impacts and use less energy and water.7
Extending the Capacity of Existing Infrastructure 
America’s urban water infrastructure was largely devel -
oped in the middle of the twentieth century, a time of inex -
pensive energy, smaller urban populations, and less appre -
ciation of environmental impacts such as damage to aquatic 
habitat and consequences of greenhouse gas emissions. Mas -
sive dams, aqueducts, and pipelines were built to supply wa -
ter to metropolitan areas such as the Colorado Front Range, 
the San Francisco Bay Area, the Los Angeles basin, Phoenix, 
and Dallas. Many of these water systems were characterized 
by a linear pattern of taking, treating, and discharging, using 
capital- and energy-intensive technologies with high costs 
for maintenance and operation (Daigger, 2009). In many ur -
ban areas today, this water infrastructure is reaching the end 
of its design life (ASCE, 2009). 
www.leeduser.com/credit/NC-2009/WEp1?usgbc=1.
6 See http//www.usgbc.org/credits.
7 See http://www.sustainablesites.org.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  19
BOX 1-4  Re-Operation of Impoundments to Capture and Recharge Stormwater in California
In several locations in California, existing impoundments are managed to capture and enhance the recharge of stormwater. On the 
Santa Ana River, two U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) dams (Seven Oaks and Prado Dams) for decades have been operated 
to store stormwater on a temporary basis to allow for percolation and recharge into the groundwater aquifers within the Santa Ana 
River watershed. Although the primary purposes of these impoundments are for flood control, efforts are ongoing to optimize the dam 
operations to increase the recharge of Santa Ana River stormwater flows. Over the past two decades, about 100,000 AF/yr (120 million 
m3/yr) of stormwater have been recharged along the Santa Ana River based on the operations of the Seven Oaks and Prado Dams (Santa 
Ana River Watermaster, 2014). In addition, with improved forecasting of storm events the Corps is working with the local water districts 
to improve the coordinated operation of these facilities to increase the ef fective capture and recharge of stormwater.
The Los Angeles County Flood Control District has also been working to manage its impoundments along two Corps dams (Santa Fe 
and Whittier Narrows) within the San Gabriel River watershed to increase infiltration downstream. Between 90 and 95 percent of the 
precipitation in average years above Whittier Narrows Dam is conveyed to a network of facilities in a coordinated manner to recharge 
the Main San Gabriel and Central groundwater basins (on average about 150,000 acre-feet per year [190 million m3/yr] of stormwater 
recharge is re-operated and recharged; Figure 1-4-1) (C. Stone, LA County Flood Control District, personal communication, 2014).a 
a See www.dpw.lacounty.gov/wrd/index/cfm.
FIGURE 1-4-1 Rio Hondo Spreading Grounds, which receives controlled releases from San Gabriel Canyon, Santa Fe, and Whittier Narrows 
dams for groundwater recharge. SOURCE: http://www.wrd.org/engineering/groundwater-replenishment-spreading-grounds.php.
Alternative water supplies, such as stormwater and gray -
water, can provide a means to prolong the life of existing in -
frastructure and avoid or postpone costly upgrades to central -
ized infrastructure. For example, New York City launched a 
plan to address the city’s pollution problems from combined 
sewer overflows that included $2.4 billion in spending on 
green infrastructure, including incentives for graywater use 
and stormwater capture. If realized over a 20-year period, 
then it is estimated to save the city $1.4 billion compared to 
the conventional infrastructure approach (NYSDEC, 2013). 
At the household scale, graywater reuse may prolong the op -
erating life of septic systems.8
8 See http://extension.missouri.edu/p/EQM104F.In dense urban areas, population growth and rising real 
estate prices often spur even denser use and taller buildings. 
If water use patterns remain the same, then this would require 
that additional water supply capacity be provided, along with 
a commensurate increase in wastewater collection and con -
veyance capacity. Because water supply and wastewater col -
lection facilities are generally located in existing streets and 
adjacent rights-of-way, constructing these facilities is quite 
costly both monetarily and in terms of the traffic and busi -
ness disruption caused by construction in existing roadways. 
Engineers in Tokyo have found that localized wastewater or 
graywater reuse for nonpotable purposes can be quite cost-
effective because it can eliminate the need to construct new 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
20 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
water supply and wastewater collection facilities to serve the 
more dense areas. Implementing nonpotable water reuse can 
reduce the net water supply requirement and wastewater pro -
duction volume by about one-half, meaning that even if the 
total demand is doubled, existing water supply and waste -
water collection infrastructure can serve the new facility.  
Tokyo requires graywater reuse in all new buildings larg -
er than 32,000-54,000 ft2 (3,000-5,000 m2) and in existing 
buildings larger than 320,000 ft2 (30,000 m2) or with the ca -
pacity to reuse 26,000 gpd (100 m3/d) (Ogoshi et al., 2001; 
CSBE, 2003). 
Financial Incentives and Business Opportunities
Builders and developers may also implement stormwa -
ter capture and graywater reuse systems to take advantage of 
financial incentives or even to permit development in some 
water scarce regions. For example, the California legislature 
passed two bills in 2003 (SB 221 and SB 610) to advance 
water supply planning for growing communities. These laws 
require future water reliability assessments for all develop -
ment projects subject to the California Environmental Qual -
ity Act and written verification by the water agency serving 
that project prior to approval of the project. The result of 
these requirements has been that new urban development in 
California has to go through a process of ensuring that new 
development has a reliable supply. Developers are thus mo -
tivated to have a minimal impact on local/regional supply 
reliability and typically incorporate state-of-art water use ef -
ficiency and conservation practices for indoor and outdoor 
water use, including on-site stormwater capture with low-
water-use landscapes. Some cities also offer tax incentives 
or zoning allowances to LEED-certified buildings.
Increasingly, regulated municipal separate storm sewer 
system operators are looking for effective strategies to re -
duce the cost of compliance. To this end, Washington, DC, 
was the first entity to establish a true stormwater credit trad -
ing system with the intent of using a market-based approach 
to improve the efficiency of implementation of stormwater 
controls. The District of Columbia Stormwater Retention 
Credit Trading Program9 allows private and public devel -
opers the ability to both buy and sell “stormwater retention 
credits” (SRCs). Properties can generate SRCs by building, 
operating, and maintaining green infrastructure that reduces 
stormwater runoff, including stormwater capture and use 
systems. Owners can sell their SRCs in an open market to 
developers or other private or public entities who can use 
them to meet regulatory requirements for retaining storm -
water within the District. The first SRC trades occurred in 
the fall 2014 at $2.27/gallon per year ($0.60/liter per year) 
9 See http://green.dc.gov/src.for a total value of about $25,000 (Brian VanWye, DDOE, 
personal communication, 2015).
Balancing Multiple, Sometimes Conflicting Drivers
The many drivers discussed here can lead to a wide va -
riety of different water management strategies, depending on 
which drivers are given the highest priority. A stormwater 
capture system that maximizes pollution prevention could 
be designed quite differently from one that maximizes cap -
ture and use, although systems can be designed to optimize 
multiple drivers. Likewise, a household graywater system 
could be designed in concert with native plantings to maxi -
mize water conservation, while a similar graywater system 
to provide a supplemental low-cost, reliable water supply for 
new nonnative plantings in an arid climate could actually 
increase overall water use. 
Because urban water systems typically provide social 
and environmental benefits in addition to financial benefits 
and costs, it is important to fully account for the broad array 
of benefits and costs that may be associated with a graywater 
or stormwater beneficial use project, in the context of over -
all objectives (see Chapters 7 and 9). Multi-criteria decision 
analysis or broadly defined benefit-cost analysis are two im -
portant tools that may be useful for evaluating future man -
agement strategies that create such a broad spectrum of valu -
able outcomes. These decision support methodologies may 
include both monetized and non-monetized objectives such 
as water reliability and resiliency, locally sourced water and 
reduced imports, energy savings and conservation, financial 
incentives and cost sharing, environmental outcomes, com -
munity acceptance, and support of nongovernmental organi -
zations (see Chapter 9). 
ASSESSMENT OF CURRENT STORMWATER  
AND GRAYWATER USE TRENDS 
The combined drivers of water scarcity, pollution pre -
vention, infrastructure replacement costs, and concerns 
about energy and the environment have expanded efforts to 
capture and use stormwater and graywater. 
Stormwater
Historically stormwater management meant flood con -
trol, but since passage of new sections in the Clean Water 
Act in 1987, attention has focused on control of pollutants 
from runoff under stormwater programs. Today, stormwa -
ter management can mean many different things, including 
controlling pollution and improving urban waterways, im -
proving aquatic habitat, creating green space, and recharging Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  21
local groundwater. Urban stormwater control measures are 
also a vital part of managing flooding and drainage in a city 
(NRC, 2009a). 
There has been a recent increase in the use of stormwater 
practices that recharge groundwater. In wetter climates in -
filtration can raise groundwater levels, increase base flows, 
and sustain wetlands and lakes. Stormwater infiltration has 
been practiced in scattered locations for a long time. On 
Long Island, New York, infiltration basins were built in the 
1930s to reduce the need for a storm sewer system. In Los 
Angeles, managed aquifer recharge with stormwater has been 
practiced since 1938, when the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel 
Coastal Spreading Grounds were opened by the Los Angeles 
County Flood Control District (Johnson, 2011; see Box 1-4). 
Within the area served by the Metropolitan Water District 
in the greater Los Angeles area, an annual average of about 
477,000 AF/yr (588 million m3/yr) of stormwater runoff is 
captured for recharge (MWD IRP Technical Work Group, 
2009). In the 1980s, Maryland took the lead on the East Coast 
in developing statewide infiltration practices, and the num -
ber of states embracing low-impact development infiltration 
practices has increased (NRC, 2009a). These facilities, and 
low-impact development systems, were originally managed 
for fast infiltration. Today there is interest in understanding 
how these infiltration systems can provide water treatment 
in addition to improved aesthetics and new habitats that en -
hance community acceptance. 
Evidence shows increasing trends and interest for 
stormwater use spreading to other parts of the country. A 
number of states are viewing stormwater as a resource for 
development of additional, local water supplies and reduc -
tions in demands on an aquifer. With increasing population 
and greater extent of impervious surfaces in urban areas, the 
Texas Water Development Board is assessing stormwater 
runoff to augment water supplies. The Board’s report (Alan 
Plummer Associates, 2010) goes beyond small-scale rainwa -
ter harvesting and provides guidance on intermediate-scale 
stormwater harvesting to capture larger amounts of overland 
flow. Even temperate regions that normally experience ad -
equate rainfall are exploring stormwater use (see Box 1-3). 
The Minnesota Pollution Control Agency began a pilot pro -
gram for beneficial use of stormwater in industrial processes 
that otherwise would use groundwater (MPCA, 2012). 
National data on the use of urban stormwater for water 
supply are not currently available. Rather, the literature de -
scribes many examples of systems at different scales, ranging 
from household to regional scales, and in different U.S. cli -
matic zones, from the humid East Coast to the dry Southwest. 
Evidence of increased interest in stormwater harvesting is 
illustrated by signature projects in the past dozen years de -signed to comply with LEED certification, help reduce storm -
water discharges to combined sewer systems, or develop sus -
tainable urban environments in water-stressed cities. As part 
of its planning, the San Francisco Public Utilities Commis -
sion (SFPUC, 2013) documented numerous neighborhood-
scale case studies such as the Solaire in New York City, where 
stormwater is collected in a 10,000 gallon (38,000 liters) tank 
for irrigation, and the Olympic Village in Sydney, Australia, 
where stormwater runoff from the 1,580-acre (640 ha) Olym -
pic Park is harvested and reused for irrigation, washing, and 
other uses. Singapore harvests stormwater on a large-scale 
for its drinking water supply (PUB, 2015). Within the service 
district of the Metropolitan Water District of southern Cali -
fornia there are 34 stormwater projects anticipated for com -
pletion between 2009 and 2020 that could increase regional 
stormwater capture by about 50,000 AF/yr (60 million m3/
yr) (MWD IRP Technical Work Group, 2009), and even more 
new projects will be developed as part of the Los Angeles 
Stormwater Master Plan (see Box 1-2). 
Graywater
In recent years, interest in graywater reuse has greatly 
increased. Documenting this trend are state laws that promote 
graywater reuse. As of 2013, 20 states allow some form of 
graywater reuse, and Arizona and California are considered 
leaders in promoting graywater reuse (Sharvelle et al., 2013). 
Arizona allows graywater reuse without a permit for sys -
tems less than 400 gpd (1,500 lpd), while California allows 
household laundry-to-landscape systems without a permit 
as long as they follow specific design guidelines (EBMUD, 
2009; California Plumbing Code Ch. 16A, Sec. 108.4.1). The 
heightened interest in graywater reuse is also documented by 
an increase in the number of national conferences and work -
shops on graywater reuse and ways to promote the practice, 
such as an EPA workshop in Atlanta in 2010 on graywater 
practices and regulations (EPA, 2010). Professional societ -
ies have sponsored studies on graywater practices and effects 
(e.g., Sheikh, 2010) and offer official policy statements on 
water use efficiency including appropriate on-site graywater 
reuse (e.g., Olson, 2014). 
Interest in safe and effective graywater use has prompted 
some limited surveys on the practice. A 1999 survey by the 
Soap and Detergent Association reported that 7 percent of 
U.S. households reuse graywater, mainly for irrigation, with 
the largest concentration residing in the West and Southwest 
(NPD Group, 1999). A 2000 survey in Pima County, Arizona, 
found about 8 percent of respondents employed some form 
of graywater reuse but this was highly variable depending on 
water district and ranged from 2 to 25 percent (Little, 2000).Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
22 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 1-5  Rapid Water Infrastructure Changes: Low-Flow Toilets
Low-flow toilets were introduced in 1988 when California was in the midst of a significant drought. In 1988 water districts in southern 
California began conducting pilot studies with Swedish low-flow toilets that used about 1.6 gallons (6.1 liters) per flush. At the time, 
American manufacturers made toilets that used 3 or more gallons (11 liters) per flush. Based on these pilot studies, programs to install 
these low-flow toilets began in 1990. The programs were so successful that by 1992 U.S. manufacturers began making low-flow toilets, 
and the U.S. Congress enacted legislation that changed the standard for toilets to the 1.6 gallons per flush. By 1993 approximately 1 
million toilets in Los Angeles County had been replaced through rebates and financing by the local water districts. Together with high-
efficiency washing machines, low-flow toilets have been a major contributor to declines in indoor water use observed nationally over 
the past 15 years (DeOreo et al., 2016; Mayer et al., 1999). The efficiency standard for toilets in California was further reduced to 1.28 
gallons (4.85 liters) per flush in April 2015 (CEC, 2015).FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Recent trends suggest that beneficial use of graywater 
and stormwater are small but increasing parts of the nation’s 
water supply portfolio. To meet future water demands amidst 
challenges from aging infrastructure, population growth and 
redistribution, and climate change, an array of water supply 
and conservation alternatives and innovative water manage -
ment strategies will be necessary. The nature of this re-in -
vention of urban water management is difficult to predict, 
but the nation’s water infrastructure will likely look quite 
different in 50 years than it does today. Future water infra -
structure designs could create more cost-effective opportu -
nities for the use of local or on-site water sources, such as 
stormwater and graywater. Currently, few buildings contain 
dual plumbing to take advantage of nonpotable water use, 
but as buildings are redeveloped in the future, major changes 
in water distribution and use become possible. Thus, con -
sideration of the potential for graywater and stormwater to 
augment the nation’s water supply should not be limited by 
current infrastructure constraints. An example of a recent, 
rapid change in water infrastructure can be found in adoption 
of low-flow toilets (see Box 1-5).
Drivers of water management evolve over time with 
changing infrastructure, water availability, prices, and so -
cietal and individual values. Today’s infrastructure invest -
ments may shape water management practices for decades 
and should ideally support future water management priori -
ties rather than maintaining outdated or inefficient practices 
that are anticipated to decline over time. For example, early 
water reuse efforts in the Southwest provided dual delivery 
of nonpotable reclaimed wastewater for landscape irrigation 
in parks and highway medians; today, such infrastructure 
may be seen as wasteful, when native landscaping strategies 
can significantly reduce irrigation demand. Thus, graywater 
and stormwater infrastructure investment decisions ideally 
include the anticipation of the role of alternative water sup -plies in the future, rather than simply solving today’s water 
management challenges. 
Further advances in water use efficiency and conserva -
tion could impact the demand for alternative water sources, 
such as stormwater and graywater, as well as the supply of 
graywater available for reuse. Graywater relies upon the re -
use of laundry, sink, and shower water, and additional im -
provements in water efficiency in these applications, such 
as further advances in the water efficiency of washing ma -
chines, would impact the amount and quality of graywa -
ter available for reuse. Developments in source separation 
(separating urine from solid waste) could reduce water use, 
increase the cost-effectiveness of water reuse, and allow 
the recovery of energy and nutrients to provide important 
sources of revenue in the future (Daigger, 2009; Guest et al., 
2009). Similarly, climate change could increase the intensity 
of precipitation, which in some regions could result in less 
capture and/or recharge of stormwater with existing systems. 
Thus, the potential contributions of graywater and stormwa -
ter to the nation’s water supply will evolve over time based 
on demand and supply and evolving requirements for urban 
water, wastewater, and stormwater utilities in the United 
States (Hering et al., 2013). 
In the United States, despite steady population growth, 
total water use has declined since its peak in 1980 (Figure 
1-8) because of improvements in industrial and domestic wa -
ter efficiency, conservation, and recent declines in the use of 
once-through thermoelectric cooling. Even public water sup -
ply use, which supplies domestic, commercial, and industrial 
uses, declined 5 percent between 2005 and 2010 after increas -
ing steadily between 1950 and 2005, although these declines 
may be related to the economic recession (Figure 1-9). Per 
capita domestic use declined at an even steeper rate, from 
100 gpcd (380 lpcd) in 2005 to 89 gpcd (340 lpcd) in 2010  
(Maupin et al., 2014). However, domestic water use varies 
widely across the country. At the city level, an analysis of data 
from 2005 to 2010 for 21 U.S. cities found median domestic Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  23
FIGURE 1-8  Trends in U.S. freshwater withdrawals and population growth. SOURCE: Maupin et al. (2014).water use ranged from 43 to 177 gpcd (160 to 670 lpcd) with 
some correlation with a city’s precipitation and temperature 
(Kenny and Juracek, 2012). In drier climates outdoor resi -
dential water use is typically much greater than indoor water 
use. For example, the Water Research Foundation (Coomes 
et al., 2010) reported three times or more residential water 
use in Dallas and Phoenix compared to Seattle; similarly, a 
U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) state-by-state survey of pub -
lic water supplies showed a threefold difference in residential 
water use from 55 gpcd (210 lpcd) in Maine to 168 gpcd (636 
lpcd) in Idaho (Maupin et al., 2014). By contrast, in Australia 
residential water use is less at about 39 gpcd (150 lpcd) in 
Melbourne on the wetter east coast (Gan and Redhead, 2013; 
Melbourne Water, 2013/2014) and about 76 gpcd (290 lpcd) 
in arid Perth on the west coast with about 39 percent for ir -
rigation (The Water Corporation, 2010).
At a household level, substantial improvements in out -
door water use efficiency are possible through the use of 
native landscaping, but once high-efficiency appliances and 
plumbing fixtures are installed, indoor water use is unlikely 
to see substantial additional declines without the use/reuse 
of on-site sources such as stormwater or graywater. Mean -
while, population growth and redistribution will continue to 
increase urban water demand. 
Domestic water conservation and trends in water use 
in agricultural and industrial sectors will influence regional 
water availability and the benefits of graywater and storm -
water use in the future. Today water professionals and urban 
designers understand that more efficient use of water and re -sources is possible. The “Cities of the Future” initiative by 
the International Water Association seeks to integrate water 
and city planning much more closely and support innova -
tion and strategic thinking (Daigger, 2011). So-called water-
centric urban design can lead to both better use of resources 
and an enhanced urban environment. In the same fashion, the 
concept of the “water sensitive city” embraces sustainable 
urban water planning and management practices in which 
cities serve as water supply catchments, provide ecosystem 
services and prioritize livability, sustainability and resilience 
(Ferguson et al., 2013). These concepts are examples of 
where the future could be going and the role that graywater 
and stormwater could play.
COMMITTEE CHARGE
Despite several drivers supporting increased use of local 
alternative water supplies to address water demands, many 
questions remain that have limited the broader application 
of graywater and stormwater capture and use. In particular, 
limited information has been available on the costs, benefits, 
and risks of these projects, and beyond the simplest applica -
tions, many state and local public health agencies have not 
developed regulatory frameworks for full use of these local 
water resources. With the timeliness of a severe drought in 
the West and periodic water shortages elsewhere and funding 
support from the EPA Office of Water, EPA Office of Re -
search and Development, EPA Region 9, National Science 
Foundation, Water Research, Water Environment Research Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
24 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 1-9 Trends in total U.S. freshwater withdrawals by category of water use. Public supply includes domestic, commercial, and 
industrial uses. Uses may be consumptive or nonconsumptive. SOURCE: Maupin et al. (2014).
Foundation, Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, 
WateReuse Foundation, City of Madison, Wisconsin, Na -
tional Water Research Institute, and the Academies’ Presi -
dent’s fund, the Academies formed a Committee on the Ben -
eficial Use of Graywater and Stormwater. This study builds 
on previous work of the Academies to assess the augmenta -
tion of urban water supplies by desalination (NRC, 2008a) 
and reuse of municipal wastewater (NRC, 2012a), with a 
new focus on two on-site water sources—graywater and 
stormwater. The goals of the committee are to be forward 
looking and to conduct a study and prepare a report on the 
risks, costs, and benefits of various uses of stormwater and 
graywater and the approaches needed for their safe use. The 
committee’s work considers multiple scales for these ap -
proaches—from the household scale to multi-residential or 
neighborhood scales to large municipal systems. The study 
will address both technology and policy questions:
1. Quantity and suitability.  How much stormwater cap -
ture and graywater reuse occurs in the United States 
and for what applications? What is the suitability—
in terms of water quality and quantity—of captured 
stormwater and graywater to significantly increase in 
the United States, and where regionally would increas -
es in these practices have the most benefit? How would 
significant increases in the beneficial use of stormwater 
and graywater affect water demand, downstream wa -ter availability, aquifer recharge, and ecological stream 
flows? What research should be pursued to understand 
these issues?
2. Treatment and storage.  What are typical levels and 
methods of treatment and storage for stormwater cap -
ture and graywater reuse for various end uses? What 
types of treatment are available to address contami -
nants, odors, and pathogens, and how do these treat -
ment methods compare in terms of cost and energy 
use? What research opportunities should be pursued to 
produce improved technologies and delivery and en -
sure adequate safeguards to protect public health and 
the environment?
3. Risks.  What are the human health and environmental 
risks of using captured stormwater and graywater for 
various purposes? What existing state and regulatory 
frameworks address the beneficial use of stormwater 
and graywater, and how effective are they in assuring 
the safety and reliability of these practices? What les -
sons can be learned from experiences using captured 
stormwater and graywater both within and outside the 
United States that shed light on appropriate uses with 
varying levels of treatment? What local measures can 
be taken to reduce risk?
4. Costs and benefits.  What are the costs and benefits 
of the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater (in -
cluding non-monetized costs and benefits, such as ef -
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Introduction  25
fects on water and energy conservation, environmental 
impacts, and wastewater infrastructure)? How do the 
economic costs and benefits generally compare with 
other supply alternatives? Can cost improvements be 
achieved through research? 
5. Implementation. What are the legal and regulatory 
constraints on the use of captured stormwater and gray -
water? What are the policy implications regarding the 
potential increased use of stormwater and graywater as 
significant alternative sources of water for human con -
sumption and use? 
The committee’s report and its conclusions and recom -
mendations are based on a review of relevant technical lit -
erature, briefings, discussions, and field trips at its six meet -
ings, and the experience and knowledge of the committee 
members in their fields of expertise. The committee received 
briefings from a range of experts, including water utilities, 
practitioners, government and public health officials, non -
governmental organizations (including public interest and 
industry groups), and academics. 
The report focuses on nonpotable uses of graywater and 
stormwater, such as irrigation and toilet flushing (see Chap -
ter 2), which can be met with little or no additional treat -
ment, and recharge of groundwater that eventually may be 
used for drinking water supplies. The committee did not 
examine technologies for direct on-site use of graywater 
or stormwater for drinking water, because of the associ -
ated unique safety issues and treatment requirements and 
the unlikely potential for expanding such uses in the United 
States in ways that significantly augment existing water sup -
plies. The committee recognizes that roof runoff is used to 
meet potable needs in many rural areas in the United States 
and around the world, and other reports are available that 
recommend specific capture and treatment practices (e.g., 
Macomber, 2010; TWDB, 2005).10 In light of this report’s 
focus on the potential water supply contributions of gray -
water and stormwater projects, the report’s stormwater com -
ponents focus on stormwater capture and infiltration efforts 
that have intentional or inadvertent water supply benefits. A 
full discussion of stormwater management strategies, includ -
ing those designed primarily for water quality benefits, are 
described in NRC (2009a). 
10 See also http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/gdwqrevi  
sion/rainwater.pdf.OUTLINE OF THE REPORT
Following this introduction, the statement of task is ad -
dressed in eight subsequent chapters of this report:
• Chapter 2 describes potential uses of graywater and 
stormwater and specific water quality constraints on 
these uses.
• Chapter 3 describes the potential water savings pro -
vided by stormwater or graywater, and provides the 
results of an original scenario analysis in six different 
locations of the country.
• Chapter 4 describes what is known about the water 
qualities of various sources of stormwater and graywa -
ter before treatment.
• Chapter 5 describes approaches for characterizing 
the risk of on-site nonpotable uses of graywater and 
stormwater and summarizes the research to character -
ize these risks.
• Chapter 6 examines the state of the technology of gray -
water and stormwater system components.
• Chapter 7 analyzes the costs and benefits (including 
both financial and non-monetized costs and benefits) 
of stormwater and graywater projects.
• Chapter 8 outlines the legal and regulatory controls 
on graywater and stormwater projects and identifies 
the largest impediments to expanding the use of such 
sources.
• Chapter 9 synthesizes the major report findings, as they 
are relevant to the perspective of a local decision mak -
er, and presents major steps to consider in the develop -
ment of such projects. 
• Chapter 10 summarizes major research needs to en -
hance the implementation of graywater and stormwater 
to meet current and future water demands.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
262 
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater
Stormwater and graywater can provide on-site or local 
sources of water for an array of uses. As discussed in Chapter 
1, the practice of capturing graywater and urban stormwater 
for safe use has many potential benefits, such as reducing the 
impact of urban development on water quality and stream 
flow and contributing toward water conservation objectives. 
This chapter provides an overview of the suitability of gray -
water and stormwater for various beneficial applications. 
GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER  
USE ACROSS MULTIPLE SCALES
Graywater and stormwater can be captured and used to 
meet water demands or to conserve conventional water sup -
plies across a range of scales. The scale of the application 
usually determines which beneficial uses are reasonable, the 
feasibility of treatment (considering maintenance require -
ments and cost), and appropriate sizing of cost-effective 
storage. Both graywater and stormwater use can occur at the 
household (or small building) scale, at the neighborhood/
multi-residential scale, or at the regional scale (Figure 2-1). 
The committee’s definitions of these scales are provided in 
Table 2-1.
At the household (or small building) scale, storage ca -
pacities and treatment for captured stormwater and gray -
water are typically limited because of cost. At this scale, 
irrigation with untreated graywater is most common and 
provides a small but steady year-round source of irrigation 
water. Larger storage and treatment systems at the house -
hold scale are possible, but they are expensive and require 
periodic maintenance. Stormwater capture tanks at the resi -
dential scale also tend to be small (rain barrels or cisterns) 
and generally provide supplemental water for irrigation and 
outdoor uses near times of rainfall. Although rooftop capture 
at the household scale can reduce some domestic water use 
and reduce stormwater discharges, it does not represent a re -
liable long-term source of water, especially in arid regions. For residential stormwater harvesting, most of the attention 
is given to roof runoff, because its quality is typically better 
than other source areas, and it is elevated above the likely 
use areas, easily captured, and therefore hydraulically sim -
pler to utilize. 
At the neighborhood or multi-residential scales (includ -
ing large commercial buildings and institutions), more com -
plex stormwater and graywater system designs with storage 
and treatment become feasible. The added treatment expands 
the array of applications available, particularly those in 
which human contact and inadvertent ingestion is possible. 
For stormwater, larger storage extends the capacity to ad -
dress water supply needs during periods without rain through 
the use of retention basins or subsurface tanks. Construction 
of infiltration facilities resulting in managed groundwater re -
charge is feasible at a neighborhood scale, where blended 
runoff from several source areas is utilized.
At the regional scale, stormwater capture and infiltra -
tion systems can be developed in some areas to collect runoff 
from multiple neighborhoods or a large drainage basin result -
ing in managed aquifer recharge for later recovery. Regional 
stormwater capture systems might also offer opportunities 
to establish water features in public parks for aesthetics and 
recreational purposes in addition to water storage. Stormwa -
ter runoff collected at a regional scale comes from a wide 
variety of land uses resulting in a water quality that requires 
a higher level of treatment prior to use. Regional-scale gray -
water capture and beneficial reuse have been adopted very 
recently in large new developments (see Box 2-1). Because 
of the infrastructure requirements to separate graywater from 
blackwater at larger scales, regional graywater use might not 
always be economically feasible, particularly in existing 
buildings, and instead, reuse of municipal wastewater efflu -
ents can be implemented at large scales to make use of this 
locally available water supply (NRC, 2012a). 
Currently, captured stormwater and graywater are used 
primarily for nonpotable applications, mainly irrigation (i.e., Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater  27
lawn, trees, xeriscape) and selected urban applications (e.g., 
toilet flushing, air conditioning, car washing). In addition, 
stormwater can be used for wildlife habitat maintenance and 
recreational uses and to recharge groundwater, which even -
tually may serve potable uses or maintain stream base flow 
for aquatic habitat. Common and specific uses for storm -
water and graywater, their typical scale, and some limita -
tions of these applications are summarized in Table 2-2. 
Although it is feasible to treat stormwater or graywater for 
on-site potable use (Ahmed et al., 2010), such applications are uncommon in the United States, except in remote areas 
with no reliable groundwater supplies where rainwater may 
be harvested from roofs for household supplies.1 Given the 
complexity and unique safety issues associated with on-site 
potable use of graywater and stormwater at the household 
and neighborhood scales and the unlikely potential for ex -
panding such uses in the United States to maintain and ex -
pand existing water supplies, the committee did not examine 
issues surrounding on-site potable use in this report.
1 For example, see http://health.hawaii.gov/sdwb/raincatchment.
FIGURE 2-1  Illustrations of graywater and stormwater beneficial uses across scales. For graywater, the scale of use can range from simple 
laundry-to-landscape systems, to multi-residential capture and treatment for use in toilet flushing, to large new communities with centralized 
graywater capture and treatment (see Box 2-1). For stormwater, the scale of use can range from household capture if roof runoff in rainbarrels 
or cisterns, to neighborhood stormwater capture facilities, to large regional capture and infiltration systems. SOURCES: Allen and Woelfle-
Erskine 2011; Robert Pitt Waterscan 2014; Diane Sullivan, National Capital Planning Commission, personal communication, 2013; http://
www.semizentral.de; http://dpw.lacounty.gov/adm/sustainability/ProjectSP.aspx?id=69. 
Graywater StormwaterHousehold Neighborhood/Multi ‐residential RegionalCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
28 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 2-1 The Semicentral Resource Recovery Center, Qingdao, China
In most fast-growing urban areas, the existing infrastructure is challenged by the high demand for drinking water and energy as 
well as rapidly increasing amounts of wastewater and solid waste. One possible approach to address these challenges is the so-called 
“semicentralized” supply and treatment system. This innovative approach was developed by the Technical University of Darmstadt, 
Germany, for applications in fast-growing urban areas, such as those in China. It focuses on the integrative assessment of the different 
material and energy flows, in particular water, wastewater, and waste. The treatment of waste, graywater, and blackwater takes place 
in a semicentralized Resource Recovery Center (RRC) within or close to the residential area, and the water is reused for nonpotable 
uses. Depending on site-specific conditions, 30-100 percent of wastewater can be reused, resulting in a significantly lower amount of 
wastewater to be discharged into water bodies. The other main advantage is internal energy recovery enabled by the increased biogas 
production through co-digesting biowaste with waste-activated sludge. 
The first RRC opened in April 2014 in Qingdao Shiyuan, China, serving a total of 12,000 population equivalents (Figure 2-1). Its 
service area consists of residential areas, a large administration center with guest houses, and two hotel complexes. Graywater from 
showers, hand washbasins, and washing machines is collected and transported separately from the blackwater to the RRC (Figure 2-1-
1). Graywater treatment consists of mechanical pre-treatment, biological treatment (elimination of organic carbon compounds), and 
disinfection. To meet the strict quality standards for service water and irrigation water, a membrane bioreactor (MBR) with subsequent 
chlorine disinfection is employed. The RRC will provide service water for toilet flushing via a separate distribution system. In addition, 
service water is used for street cleaning. Blackwater from kitchens and toilets is also conveyed to the RRC and treated separately from 
graywater (Figure 2-2-1). 
The third important material flow within the RRC in Qingdao is food waste from restaurants and canteens. Following pre-treatment, 
the food waste is mixed with waste-activated sludge and thermophilically co-digested. The digestate is used as biosolids in landscaping, 
utilizing phosphorus from the wastewater as a fertilizer. The biogas derived from anaerobic treatment and a combined heat and power 
unit generates electricity and heat, resulting in a self-sufficient operation of the RRC. 
FIGURE 2-1-1 Flow schematic of the semicentralized Resource Recovery Center in Qingdao, China. SOURCE: J. Tolksdorf, S. Bieker,  
P. Cornel, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Germany, http://www.semizentral.de.TABLE 2 -1 Scales of Beneficial Use of Graywater and Stormwater, as Defined by the Committee  
 Householda Neighborhoodb Regional  
Approximate number of people served  < 10 10-8,000  >8,000  
Number of land uses  1 ≤3c >3b 
Approximate area d < 1 acre  1 acre -1 mi2 >1 mi2 
aThe parameters for household scale were identified as those likely to fall under the lowest tier of typical state tiered regu latory systems, 
which are commonly limited to 400 gpd (1,500 1pd) or less (see Chapter 8).  
bMulti -residential  units fall under the neighborhood scale.  
cAt neighborhood scales, land uses are typically selected to minimize sources of contaminants, such as residential, commercial , or 
institutio nal. At regional scales, many urban land uses are typically included with in the project footprint and may include industrial uses and 
high traffic roadways.  
d1 acre = 0.4 hr; 1 mi2 = 260 hr.  
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater  29
COMMON APPLICATIONS TO CONSERVE  
CONVENTIONAL WATER SUPPLIES
Graywater and stormwater are being used in many plac -
es in the United States and worldwide in ways that conserve 
conventional water supplies. Common graywater and storm -
water uses are illustrated in Table 2-2, but other uses could 
be considered in the future for each water source. As noted 
in Chapter 1, there are many drivers behind graywater and 
stormwater use, and water supply may be a primary objec -
tive or only a peripheral benefit supplementing the primary 
drivers for the project. These applications are discussed in 
the following section, along with water quality concerns for 
particular end uses. 
Urban Applications
An array of on-site uses for stormwater and graywater 
exist for urban applications, including toilet and urinal flush -
ing, wash water, air conditioner chiller water, firefighting, 
commercial laundries, vehicle washing, street cleaning, dec -
orative fountains, and other water features. As an alternative 
supply source for these nonpotable uses, stormwater requires 
treatment mainly to address particulate matter and pathogens 
for applications with significant potential human exposures 
(see also Chapter 5). Graywater requires treatment prior to most uses other than subsurface irrigation to minimize hu -
man health risks from microbial contaminants and to provide 
a stable water quality because microbial growth occurs when 
untreated graywater is stored (see Chapter 5). Treatment sys -
tems (discussed in Chapter 6) can vary substantially in com -
plexity and the degree of treatment achieved. 
Toilet Flushing
A popular beneficial application that reduces consump -
tion of conventional water supplies is the use of captured 
stormwater or graywater for toilet flushing. Toilet flushing 
makes up approximately 24 percent of domestic water use 
(equivalent to about 14 gallons [53 liters] per person per day); 
thus, the savings potential for potable water is significant 
(Reichel et al., 2011; DeOreo et al., 2016). Water use for toilet 
flushing varies with population, toilet design (i.e., low-flow 
versus standard toilets), and demand fluctuations. For exam -
ple, weekend versus weekday water use patterns are different, 
and seasonal variations occur because of varying workforce 
numbers or student populations at schools or in cities.
Using a nonpotable water supply for toilet flushing re -
quires a plumbing system separate from the potable water 
system (known as dual plumbing). Dual plumbing is most 
cost-effective to install in new construction, although some 
buildings have been retrofitted to accommodate stormwater TABLE 2 -2 Current Uses of Graywater and Stormwater in the United States to Enhance Water Supplies and Relevant Scales  
Category of Use  Specific Types of Use  Graywater Appl ication  Stormwater Application  
Limitations  House hold/  
Small building  Neighborhood/  
Multi -residential  Regional  House hold/  
Small building  Neighborhood/  
Institutions  Regional  
Urban 
Applications  Toilet and urinal flushing  X X X X X  • Dual distribution system costs  
• Building -level dual plumbing may be 
required  
• Greater burden on cross -connection control  Heating and air conditioning 
makeup water or evaporative 
cooling     X X  
Fire fighting      X  
Laundries      X  
Vehicle washing  X X  X X  
Street cleaning   X X  X  
Decorative fountains/other 
ornamental water features     X X  
Landscape 
irrigation  Lawns , flowerbeds  X X X X X  • Dual distribution system costs  
• Uneven seasonal demand  
• High total dissolved solids (TDS) and 
sodium adsorption ratio (SAR) of graywater 
water can adversely affect plant health  Parks , golf courses      X  
Playgrounds /schools      X  
Agriculture     X X  
Greenways      X  
Wildlife habitats 
and recreational 
uses Wetlands   X X  X X • Dual distribution system costs  
• Nutrient removal may be required to  
prevent algal growth  
• Potential ecological impacts depending on 
graywater quality and sensitivity of species  Ornamental or recreational  
water body      X X 
Large -scale water 
supply 
augmentation  Surface impoundments      X X • Treatment for contaminant removal may  
be needed  
• Recharge requires specific hydrogeological 
conditions  
• Potential for water quality degradation in 
subsurface  Groundwater recharge  
    X X 
NOTES: Other uses are possible but not commonly applied. Certain uses require a high level of treatment. Scales are defined i n Table 2 -1. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
30 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
and graywater for toilet flushing. Treatment systems are typi -
cally used, with the primary objective of controlling microbial 
growth and human health risks from pathogens (discussed fur -
ther in Chapters 5 and 6). Given the treatment system mainte -
nance requirements, the use of on-site water sources for toilet 
flushing is more common in multi-residential or office build -
ings (see Box 2-2) rather than individual households. Treat -
ment systems for single residences are commercially available 
and have been successfully installed and operated. 
Outdoor Water Features
Stormwater can be used to provide water for outdoor 
fountains or other ornamental water features (Box 1-3). In 
Germany, there are several examples of stormwater beneficial 
uses where aesthetic values were important in the stormwater 
management system. Dreiseitl (1998) states, “[S]tormwater 
BOX 2-2 Graywater Use for Toilet Flushing at a Colorado State University Residence Hall
At Aspen Residence Hall on the campus of Colorado State University, shower and handwash water from 14 rooms (up to 28 residents) 
is collected and subsequently used for toilet flushing. The drivers for project installation were the university’s desire to save water and 
green building initiatives (including LEED certification). The water savings are estimated to be 5.4 gallons (20 liters) per person per day. 
Graywater is treated by coarse filtration (particle exclusion > 1 mm) and disinfection (Figure 2-2-1). Online chlorine monitoring is 
integrated in the system to ensure safety in case of malfunction of the disinfection system. If the chlorine residual drops below a set point 
(originally 1.0 mg/L), then supply is automatically switched to municipal water . 
The capital cost of the system totaled $66,000 with operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of $5,000 per year. Implementation 
issues involved costly plumbing modifications necessary to meet state plumbing board requirements and weekly cleaning for the 
chlorine measurement probe. Odor problems occurred when the chlorine residual approached 1 mg/L, and the low set point for chlorine 
was increased to 1.75 mg/L to address this concern.
FIGURE 2-2-1 Storage and treatment system for the graywater toilet flushing system at Aspen Residential Hall, Colorado State University. 
SOURCE: Courtesy of Sybil Sharvelle.is a valuable resource and opportunity to provide an aes -
thetic experience for the city dweller while furthering envi -
ronmental awareness and citizen interest and involvement.” 
For example, in Berlin at the Potsdamer Plaza, roof runoff is 
captured in large underground tanks. Some of the runoff is 
treated for toilet flushing and irrigation use, and the rest flows 
into a 3.8-acre (1.4 ha) artificial lake in the center of the devel -
oped area (Figure 2-2), reducing stormwater discharges into 
local rivers. The Potsdamer Plaza project also has numerous 
fountains (Dreiseitl, 1998). Pitt et al. (2011) describe several 
other cases where stormwater has been used for aesthetic pur -
poses. At the Cincinnati Zoo, harvested stormwater is used as 
makeup water for moats surrounding animal enclosures and 
for flowing water features (artificial streams) through the zoo 
grounds (Box 2-3). Water treatment typically focuses on re -
moval of human pathogens and possibly particulate matter to 
minimize clogging and other maintenance issues depending 
on the storage and conveyance systems used.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater  31
Washing
Stormwater and graywater can be used for washing 
vehicles, equipment, and paved surfaces. Graywater reuse 
is commonly practiced by commercial car washes, which 
often reuse their wash water to substantially reduce over -
all water use. In Washington, DC, a number of fire stations 
are equipped with stormwater capture systems, and the har -
vested stormwater is available for daily fire engine spray 
washing and refill of fire truck day tanks. Although the DC 
stormwater capture systems are primarily designed to reduce 
runoff flowing to the combined sewer during wet weather, 
the captured stormwater is also available onsite to reduce 
potable water use. Typical vehicle wash water is filtered and 
disinfected at the time of use to reduce risk associated with 
any human pathogens that might be present. 
Firefighting
Water for firefighting can be supplemented with stormwa -
ter runoff generated on site or within the immediate neighbor -
FIGURE 2-2  Beneficial use of stormwater at the Potsdamer Plaza, Berlin, Germany. SOURCE: http://www.dreiseitl.com/index.php?  
id=82&lang=en. Reprinted with permission; copyright 2016, Ramboll Studio Dreiseitl.hood, provided there is sufficient storage. Wet detention ponds 
can provide much needed reliability of access to firefighting 
water during times of natural disasters. As an example, dur -
ing re-building of Veteran’s Administration hospitals in Los 
Angeles after the Northridge earthquake, stormwater deten -
tion ponds were planned that would hold sufficient additional 
water for firefighting needs. If stormwater flow is insufficient 
to maintain the water level in the ponds to the level needed 
to meet firefighting needs, then the detention pond would be 
supplemented with makeup water. Firefighting water volume 
needs for specific building types and sizes can be calculated 
based on the International Fire Code (ICC, 2012). As an ex -
ample, a 50,000 ft2 building made from heavy timber with 
noncombustible external materials would require a fire flow 
of 4,000 gpm (15,000 L/min) for a duration of 4 hours. There -
fore, a total volume of about 960,000 gallons (3.6 million li -
ters) must be available for on-site storage of firefighting water. 
In most cases, sufficient treatment is provided in the wet de -
tention pond, although additional disinfection may be required 
if fecal indicator bacteria levels exceed use requirements.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
32 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 2-3 Stormwater Use at the Cincinnati Zoo
The Cincinnati Zoo’s stormwater management objective is to have no site runoff from the new African Savannah exhibit area for all 
rains up to the 50-year storm event (Talebi and Pitt, 2013). To meet this objective, the Cincinnati Zoo has implemented a number of 
stormwater management strategies, including permeable pavers and a large stormwater capture and storage system in its new African 
Savannah exhibit (Figure 2-3-1). Roof runoff along with other runoff from parking areas and trails is redirected from the existing 
combined sewer toward the stormwater capture system. 
Sand filtration is used for pre-treatment prior to storage in the 410,000-gallon (1.6 million-liter) subsurface storage tanks. Water is 
treated with ultrafiltration prior to use. The collected water is used for exhibit water (such as the polar bear pool), on-site irrigation of the 
horticulture gardens, and replenishment of the zoo’s other outdoor water features (Figure 2-3-2; Warren, 2013). The total annual water 
savings from this installation is about 13 million gallons (49 million liters). The total project costs (including the new exhibit areas plus 
the stormwater management efforts) are estimated to be about $26 million.a
a See http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6SJLraXsxys.
FIGURE 2-3-1  Construction of subsurface stormwater storage at the Cincinnati Zoo (top). SOURCE: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6S  
JLraXsxys.
FIGURE 2-3-2  An ornamental water feature at the Cincinnati Zoo that is replenished by a stormwater capture system. SOURCE: Robert Pitt.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater  33
Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
Increasingly HV AC systems are being integrated into 
on-site water use. Captured and treated stormwater can be 
used as makeup water in evaporative cooling systems. Cool -
ing water has been estimated as 15 percent of total water use 
for commercial and industrial land uses (Gleick et al., 2003). 
Barclays Center in Brooklyn, New York, utilizes retained 
stormwater as a water supply source for the cooling towers. 
Air conditioning condensate is also a reliable source of 
onsite water supply, although the water can be high in heavy 
metals (e.g., copper, lead). Some on-site stormwater capture 
systems include collection of condensate for landscape ir -
rigation or other nonpotable uses. This approach has been 
used at a range of scales from small household air condi -
tioning systems to major commercial properties. The rate of 
condensate generation in HV AC systems typically correlates 
well with seasonal demands for irrigation water.
Landscape Irrigation
Stormwater and graywater are commonly used for land -
scape irrigation at both household and neighborhood scales. 
Three basic irrigation methods are as follows:
• Subsurface irrigation , in which graywater or storm -
water is supplied through drip systems either through 
buried distribution pipes below the ground surface or 
beneath a thick layer of mulch or through direct drain -
age into mulch basins;
• Surface irrigation , in which water is supplied through 
a drip system without a thick mulch cover; and
• Spray irrigation , in which graywater or stormwater is 
supplied through spray nozzles (i.e., sprinklers).
Irrigation systems that use graywater and stormwater 
can be very simple (see Chapter 6) and have been widely ac -
cepted within the regulatory community, although state laws 
may restrict surface or spray irrigation and the irrigation of 
food-crops (see Chapter 8). Important chemicals of concern 
in graywater for irrigation uses are sodium, chloride, and bo -
ron. In stormwater, deicing salts (particularly, sodium chlo -
ride) also pose a concern because they can negatively impact 
soil quality and plant health. These contaminants are typi -
cally managed through source control.
Graywater, at the household scale, is most commonly 
used for landscape irrigation via simple laundry-to-landscape 
systems, which provide subsurface irrigation of untreated 
graywater (Box 2-4). Larger graywater systems in offices and 
other commercial buildings may also be used for landscape 
irrigation, although large-scale graywater supplies are com -monly disinfected prior to use to reduce possible human health 
risks, unless exposures are carefully controlled (see Chapter 5 
for a more detailed discussion of risk and exposure).
Many cities and water utilities have implemented rain 
barrel rebate programs to encourage household stormwater 
capture and outdoor irrigation use with the hope of reduc -
ing adverse environmental impacts of stormwater. Small 
household irrigation systems do not typically provide treat -
ment, but treatment systems can be added to facilitate lon -
ger-term storage. Similarly, neighborhood-scale stormwater 
systems have captured area runoff for irrigation of parks, 
playgrounds, school lawns, and greenways. For example, 
the National Park Service recently completed a major proj -
ect designed to capture local stormwater for irrigation of the 
National Mall in Washington, DC, for the purpose of reduc -
ing potable water use (Box 2-5). Large storage facilities can 
be designed to extend the use of stormwater for landscape 
irrigation, in particular through periods with low and no pre -
cipitation, at greater project cost.
Wildlife Habitats and Recreational Uses
The capture and use of stormwater can enhance and in 
some cases create aquatic habitat. Possible uses include neigh -
borhood-scale wetlands to absorb nutrients and filter sediment 
from stormwater or stormwater retention ponds. The use of 
stormwater for habitat creation is a potentially important ap -
plication of stormwater, especially in rapidly growing regions 
with limited availability of surface water. Wetlands, such as 
the Rory M. Shaw Wetlands Park (Box 2-6), provide recre -
ational features, community amenities, educational opportuni -
ties, and urban habitat. As such, stormwater-created wetlands 
are gaining support of environmental groups and stakeholder 
communities. However, inherently variable stormwater flows 
complicate the design of systems intended to enhance or cre -
ate aquatic habitats and may necessitate access to other water 
sources during extended dry periods. Wet ponds are generally 
better at providing wildlife habitat and require more space 
than do dry ponds (Barnes and Adams, 1998). The Rio Salado 
Environmental Restoration Project established through a part -
nership between the City of Phoenix and the U.S. Army Corps 
of Engineers serves as an example to restore native wetlands 
and riparian habitats with recreational and educational uses 
at a regional scale using a 5-mile section of the Salt River  
(DeSemple, 2006).
Stormwater wetlands provide habitat services when 
designed properly (NCSU, 2011; Duffield, 1986). Because 
urban stormwater wetlands may accumulate contaminants 
from the urban landscape, these effects should be monitored 
and mitigated if possible. Sparling et al. (2004) investigated Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
34 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 2-4 Long Beach, California, Laundry to Landscape Program
In 2011, the City of Long Beach, California, created a pilot program called the Laundry-to-Landscape Backyard Irrigation Program 
to explore water conservation through graywater systems. The pilot program was motivated by the possibility of reducing potable water 
use by an estimated 14 to 40 percent. This savings would represent a fundamental shift in the city’s water demand and contribute to the 
its reputation as a leader in conservation and sustainability (City of Long Beach, 201 1)
The program tested the use of graywater from home washing machines for subsurface irrigation of trees, shrubs, and gardens (Figure 
2-4-1), anticipating potable water savings of about 15 gallons (57 liters) per person per day. The pilot program selected 33 single-family 
homes by lottery throughout the city for free installation. Long Beach is believed to be the first community in southern California to 
municipally fund a graywater program. The systems included a valve to divert washing machine water directly to mulch basins in the 
garden for landscape irrigation, or to the sewer if necessary if bleach or harsh detergents were used in the wash cycle. Installations were 
performed in 2012 and 2013 at an average cost of $1,248 for materials and labor per household. 
Follow-up interviews for systems installed for at least 6 months found a high level of satisfaction with the systems. The main problem 
reported was unequal distribution of water to discharge points located in mulch basins, which was overcome by a simple adjustment of 
valves. Although residents reported heightened awareness of water usage, only 7 of 33 homes showed decreased water use. On average 
potable water usage increased about 700 gallons (3,000 liters) per month based on monthly metering (City of Long Beach, 2011). 
Though limited by the small number of homes, this finding ran counter to the expected water savings. Reasons for this increase in 
potable water use compared to pre-project conditions remain unknown but could include a lower than average winter rainfall or added 
landscaping because of a perceived more abundant water supply, or the perception that more water use was not wasteful (J. Gallop, City 
of Long Beach, personal communication, 2014). Research needs to better understand behavioral impacts on water use are discussed in 
Chapter 10.
FIGURE 2-3-1  The City of Long Beach piloted a laundry-to-landscape graywater program at 33 homes to assess costs, homeowner satisfaction, 
and water savings. Laundry water is conveyed directly from a clothes washer via buried pipes to drip irrigation systems. SOURCE: Photo 
courtesy of Jason Gallup, Office of Sustainability, City of Long Beach.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater  35
BOX 2-5 Stormwater Capture for Turf Irrigation on the National Mall, Washington, DC
As part of a major turf restoration project on the National Mall in Washington, DC, the National Park Service is installing a 1-million 
gallon (3.8 million liters) stormwater capture and treatment system to supply water for irrigation. In Phase 1 of the project, completed 
in December 2012, new turf, engineered soil, and a new irrigation and drainage system were installed along with two 250,000-gallon 
(950,000-liter) subsurface cisterns to capture stormwater runoff from the lawns and walkways (see Figures 2-5-1 and 2-5-2). Prior to 
use, the stormwater is treated using filtration and ultraviolet disinfection. The remaining 500,000-gallon (1.9 million-liter) storage is 
anticipated to be installed by 2016. The stormwater capture and treatment system will serve as the primary water source for irrigation, 
reducing potable water demand and reducing harmful stormwater discharges. The capital cost for all four cisterns is estimated to be 
$1.75 million, which does not include the costs of the treatment system or the piping and drainage components. Full operating costs 
(including electrical costs for pumping and the treatment system) have yet to be determined, although maintenance costs are estimated 
at $35,000 per year. The project is expected to provide approximately 68 percent of the 11 million gallons (42 million liters) of irrigation 
water needed annually, while improving area surface water quality.
SOURCE: M. Stachowicz, NPS, personal communication, 2014, 2015.
FIGURE 2-5-1 Phase 1 of the National Mall turf restoration project rehabilitated eight lawn panels between 3rd and 7th Street, NW, and 
installed 500,000 gallons (2 million liters) of stormwater storage capacity . SOURCE: M. Stachowicz, NPS, personal communication, 2014.
FIGURE 2-5-2  Installation of a 250,000-gallon (950,000-liter) cistern beneath the National Mall in Washington, DC. The captured stormwater 
is used to irrigate the turf along the National Mall. SOURCE: M. Stachowicz, NPS, personal communication, 2014.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
36 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 2-6 Neighborhood-scale Stormwater Capture in Sun Valley-Los Angeles, California
When completed in 2020, the Rory M. Shaw Wetlands Park located in the Sun Valley neighborhood of Los Angeles will convert a 
former quarry and inert material landfill into a stormwater capture facility and multipurpose park. The 46-acre (19-ha) site will provide 
recreational space, reduce flooding, treat stormwater in naturalistic wetlands, and recharge local groundwater. A storm drain system 
will collect runoff from a 929-acre (376-ha) drainage area, and the detention ponds and wetlands will capture and treat stormwater. 
The treated stormwater will be pumped to adjacent infiltration basins in Sun Valley Park. The amount of water infiltrated is estimated 
to be 900 AF/yr (1 million m3/yr) (Hagekhalil, et al., 2014). Total project cost is about $52 million with $28 million for purchase of the 
property (LACFCD, 2012).
The central feature of the project is the conversion of a defunct landfill and blighted landscape into 46 acres of green space and 
recreation for a community that is currently underserved for recreational opportunities. This project illustrates how co-benefits and 
public support may be achieved with neighborhood-scale stormwater capture. By working with local groups the project generated greater 
effectiveness in community engagement and links between decision makers and the people they serve. One such group, TreePeople Inc., 
an environmental nonprofit, partnered on this project with Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and the Los Angeles Bureau of 
Sanitation to promote sustainable solutions and encourage communities to take personal responsibility for their urban environment. The 
Sun Valley Watershed Stakeholders Group promoted features such as trails, tennis and basketball courts, a tot lot, and picnic and play 
areas, while addressing chronic stormwater flooding problems, retaining water in the watershed, and reducing stormwater pollution.
FIGURE 2-6-1  The Rory M. Shaw Wetlands Park project in the Sun Valley neighborhood of Los Angeles will augment local groundwater 
supplies in a multipurpose facility. A former 46-acre quarry will provide open space and recreational opportunities along with stormwater 
capture, treatment, and recharge. SOURCE: LACFCD (2012).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Beneficial Use Options for Graywater and Stormwater  37
13 stormwater wetlands in the Maryland suburbs near Wash -
ington, DC. The accumulation of zinc in hatchlings of red-
winged blackbirds inhabiting wetlands in industrial areas 
suggested nestling stress and impairment. Overall nestling 
success compared favorably with national averages. Al -
though the zinc concentrations were elevated, the authors 
concluded that the benefit of stormwater habitat provided by 
stormwater wetlands might outweigh the negative impacts 
of contaminant accumulation provided by the stormwater 
habitat because of the scarcity of such habitats in urban ar -
eas. Controlling sedimentation rates and periodic dredging 
of sediments would prevent urban stormwater wetlands from 
accumulating toxic chemicals (Sparling et al., 2004).
Surface Impoundments and Groundwater Recharge
On-site capture and infiltration of urban stormwater is 
often used to mitigate stormwater runoff and contaminant 
loading to surface waters and reduce flows to combined 
sewer systems. Under appropriate hydrogeological condi -
tions and project design, stormwater infiltration can be used 
to recharge local aquifers and thereby expand groundwater 
supplies. Several projects exist in southern California to re -
charge stormwater (see Box 1-4 and Figure 2-3), and more 
are in the planning stage (Box 1-1). In some areas underlain 
by low permeability rock or sediment (e.g., clay), infiltration does not reach the deeper aquifers that provide water supply 
(Figure 2-4). However, in areas with appropriate hydrogeol -
ogy, stormwater recharge and storage basins can be designed 
at neighborhood or regional scales in engineered infiltration 
facilities to recharge local aquifers. 
Groundwater infiltration projects capture surface run -
off from relatively large and diverse source areas, and the 
stormwater is likely to contain a broad array of contami -
nants, such as petrochemicals, urban pesticides, and flame 
retardants (discussed in more detail in Chapter 4) (Eriksson 
et al., 2007). If these chemicals are not removed by soil-aqui -
fer treatment upon infiltration, then additional water quality 
treatment may be necessary to prevent groundwater contam -
ination. Suspended sediment also needs to be removed prior 
to infiltration to prevent clogging of the infiltration basins. 
Surface water impoundments may also capture storm -
water runoff for water supply and can sometimes be oper -
ated to optimize groundwater recharge (Box 1-4). Singapore  
harvests and treats stormwater on a large-scale for its public 
drinking water supply (PUB, 2015). Referred to as one of 
the “four taps,” stormwater is harvested from a network of 
drains and canals and stored in reservoirs—including river 
estuaries dammed to hold runoff—as part of a diversified 
water supply portfolio for water self-sufficiency. 
The major benefits from use of regional solutions for cap -
tured stormwater are that larger infiltration or storage sites can 
FIGURE 2-3  Managed recharge of stormwater and other water sources by the Orange County Water District has increased substantially over 
the past 30 years in the Santa Ana River basin. The figure shows recharge of surface water base flow, managed stormwater recharge, managed 
recharge of imported water, and reclaimed water from the Orange County Groundwater Replenishment System (GWRS). NOTE: From 1936 
to 1990, the year shown reflects the water year (October to September). From 1991 to 2014, the year reflects the fiscal year (July to June). 
SOURCE: A. Hutchison, OCWD, personal communication, 2015.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
38 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
be designed, operated, and maintained by water supply agen -
cies to maximize stormwater capture and provide treatment as 
needed to remove hazardous contaminants. Regional facilities 
can also bring an efficiency of scale (see Chapter 6). 
SUMMARY
A large number of potential beneficial use options ex -
ist for graywater and stormwater depending on scale and 
treatment provided. Stormwater capture projects can serve 
a range of uses from irrigation to toilet flushing and HV AC cooling water to large-scale groundwater recharge. Storm -
water treatment needs will vary with land use and catch -
ment size, potential human exposures, and whether captured 
stormwater will contribute to urban water supplies. Tradi -
tional applications of graywater have focused on household-
level nonpotable uses, including landscape irrigation and 
toilet flushing. However, neighborhood- and regional-scale 
projects are now emerging worldwide that integrate graywa -
ter reuse into the design of fast-growing urban centers and 
facilitate decentralized resource recovery in large new de -
velopments.
FIGURE 2-4  Stormwater infiltration effects on groundwater supplies using regional recharge facilities. This illustrates the favorable location 
of recharge facilities in places with permeable soil to recharge aquifer systems. SOURCE: SCWC (2012).Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
393
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and  
Potential Impacts on Water Demand
Graywater and stormwater can be used in many appli -
cations to reduce the reliance on conventional water supply 
sources (Chapter 2), but the availability of that water varies 
in most cases locally, regionally, and by source area and land 
use. This chapter presents an approach that can be used to 
examine the quantities of graywater and stormwater available 
for beneficial uses and the potential impacts on water demand 
for various applications. The results from a medium-density 
residential scenario at six U.S. locations are discussed.
GRAYWATER
Graywater can be reused in the residential setting, at 
household, multi-residential, and even regional scales, and 
in commercial and industrial settings. Each offers different 
quantities available for reuse and different potential impacts 
on water demand. 
Household and Multi-residential Use
Indoor water use has been determined to be largely 
consistent throughout the United States and among varying 
socioeconomic groups (Mayer and DeOreo, 1999). Thus, 
residential graywater production does not vary regionally, 
and graywater can be considered a more consistently avail -
able source of water than stormwater in arid regions. A study 
by DeOreo et al. (2016)1 revealed that indoor water use in 
nine North American cities was on average 138 gallons per 
1 When this report was written and then approved by the National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, the committee 
referenced a research paper, DeOreo and Mayer (in press), which 
was subsequently published as DeOreo et al. (2016).  The per capita 
water use data reported in the final paper differed from the pre -
liminary data provided to the committee (M. Hodgins, WaterRF, 
personal communication, 2013)—the same household water use 
data were reported but the final analysis reported fewer persons per 
household, resulting in higher per capita water use values (for de -
tails, see Box 3-1). The newer data did not change the committee’s 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations; however, the text and 
Figure 3-4 were updated with the newer data.household per day (gphd) or 59 gallons per capita per day 
(gpcd; 522 liters per household per day [lphd] and 220 liters 
per capita per day [lpcd]). Based on these data, graywater2 
comprises approximately 45 percent of household wastewa -
ter (Figure 3-1).  
In a typical household, the graywater produced (63 gphd 
or 26 gpcd [240 lphd or 98 lpcd]) exceeds the demand for 
toilet flushing (33 gphd or 14 gpcd [120 lphd and 53 lpcd]; 
Figure 3-1), enabling use of graywater to meet the total toilet 
flushing demand in residential settings, with excess graywa -
ter available for irrigation or other nonpotable uses (DeOreo 
et al., 2016). Use of graywater for toilet flushing alone would 
reduce indoor water demand on average by 24 percent. For 
comparison, a study on 10 homes using graywater to flush 
toilets showed consistent reductions in water use of 6 gpcd 
(23 lpcd; City of Guelph, 2012). This is lower than the previ -
ous reported savings of 14 gpcd above, but 8 of the 10 homes 
were using low-flow toilets (1.2 gallons [4.5 liters] per flush). 
Case studies report savings from toilet flushing ranging from 
5.4 gpcd [20 lpcd] in a dormitory setting (Box 2-2) and 20 
gpd [76 lpd] per inmate in a prison setting (Box 1-1).
Indoor water use does not vary substantially between 
single residence and multi-residential units when reported on 
a per-capita basis (Mayer and DeOreo, 1999). Thus, water 
savings reported in this chapter also apply to multi-residential 
units and regional-scale applications. For example, if graywa -
ter were used for all of the toilet flushing needs in a multi-  
residential unit with 100 housing units, then assuming 33 gphd 
water use for toilet flushing and no change in water use behav -
ior as the result of graywater reuse, a total of 3,300 gallons 
(12,000 liters) water per day could be saved in the building.
Water savings achieved by using graywater instead of 
potable water for irrigation will depend on irrigation de -
mand. If all residential graywater is used for irrigation to 
replace prior watering using potable supplies, then potable 
water demand can be reduced by 63 gphd (240 lphd), the av -
2 As defined in Chapter 1, graywater includes water from bathroom 
sinks, showers, bathtubs, clothes washers, and laundry sinks but 
does not include water from toilets, kitchen sinks, or dishwashers.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
40 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 3-1 Average allocation of indoor household water use (138 gphd) in nine North American cities. SOURCE: Based on data from 
DeOreo et al. (2016).
erage graywater available. This is typically not enough water 
to meet the entire outdoor residential demand in most areas, 
depending on the vegetation being irrigated.  Native vegeta -
tion requires minimal additional irrigation, while turfgrass 
in arid regions could demand substantial irrigation volumes. 
In areas where irrigation is seasonal, the noted reduction in 
irrigation demand resulting from graywater use will only oc -
cur during irrigation months. Thus, water demand reduction 
associated with seasonal graywater irrigation will be lower 
than 63 gphd over the course of the year. 
A common practice at the household scale is to use laun -
dry water to irrigate landscape vegetation, particularly be -
cause systems can be installed in existing households with -
out major plumbing retrofits (SFPUC, 2012; see Box 2-4). 
Laundry water makes up about 36 percent of household 
graywater on average, or 9.6 gpcd (DeOreo et al., 2016). 
Thus, savings of approximately 23 gphd (87 lphd) can be 
achieved when all of the laundry water is used for landscape 
irrigation, compared to 63 gphd when all graywater is used. 
These savings can only be realized if irrigation rates do not 
increase with installation of the graywater system. Laundry-
to-landscape initiatives in Long Beach and San Francisco, 
California (Box 2-4) documented more households with 
water demand increases than decreases after installation of 
graywater systems. In Long Beach, only 7 of the 33 homes 
showed a reduction in water use, and program-wide an av -
erage household increase of 700 gallons (2,600 liters) per 
month was observed (City of Long Beach, 2013). In San 
Francisco, 29 sites had increased water use compared to 27 sites with reduced water use (P. Kehoe, SFPUC, personal 
communication, 2014), likely from new landscape installa -
tions, variability in the data, or changes in behavior during 
the study period. More research is needed to evaluate the 
quantity of water savings actually achieved when graywa -
ter is used for irrigation and whether there are behavioral 
changes that result in increased use of water when graywater 
systems are installed (see Chapter 10). 
Published Assessments of Graywater Impact on  
Water Demand
A modeling study evaluated potential water demand re -
duction from graywater use with varying irrigation demand 
(Reichel et al., 2011). This study calculated a 5 to 6 percent 
reduction in municipal water demand when 50 percent of the 
population adopted graywater reuse at the residential level 
(10 percent use for toilet flushing, 30 percent use for irriga -
tion, 10 percent use for combined toilet flushing and irriga -
tion). The study cities were Fort Collins, Colorado; Orlando, 
Florida; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; San Diego, California; 
and Seattle, Washington. Although total per capita water de -
mand reduction was greater in areas with year-round irriga -
tion (Orlando and San Diego), the higher irrigation demand 
in those regions resulted in similar percentage reductions as 
those cities with seasonal or limited reductions. Although 
average water savings of 63 gphd in water demand are pos -
sible through graywater reuse, the largest savings are only 
likely to be achieved in new development or redevelopment Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  41
areas. Retrofitting existing homes to either collect graywater 
or use treated graywater for toilet flushing is a large barrier 
for adoption. However, new homes can easily be built with 
dual plumbing systems for graywater collection and use at a 
low marginal cost (see also Chapters 6 and 7).
Committee’ s Assessment of Graywater Impact on  
Water Demand 
To examine potential potable water savings from gray -
water use, the committee developed scenarios of wide-scale 
adoption of graywater use in six U.S. cities (Los Angeles, 
California; Seattle, Washington; Lincoln, Nebraska; Madison, 
Wisconsin; Birmingham, Alabama; and Newark, New Jersey), 
representing a range of climatic conditions and geographical 
distribution. These cities were also selected because compa -
rable data were available on land use characteristics for all six 
locations that would support parallel analyses of potential wa -
ter savings from stormwater or graywater use. The committee 
conducted an original analysis to examine changes in potable 
water demand for a hypothetical 100-acre (40-ha), medium-
density, residential community (with 12 persons per acre) in 
each of the six cities. The analysis considered the following 
four water demand and graywater use scenarios detailed in 
Box 3-1: 
FIGURE 3-2 Minimum monthly irrigation demands (bright red) that are not met by rainfall, shown in six locations based on monthly 
evapotranspiration (ET) (red/purple) for standard turfgrass versus average monthly rainfall from 1995 to 1999 (blue/purple). Data sets to 
develop the figure, including reference ET rates, are described in Appendix A. Monthly precipitation averages as shown here may underestimate 
irrigation demand if precipitation events are clustered over several days rather than spread evenly across a month. • Base scenario:  Potable water is used for all indoor 
and outdoor household water needs. Outdoor irrigation 
demand was calculated as that necessary to meet the 
minimum evapotranspiration deficit for turfgrass (the 
most common household irrigated vegetation), which 
varies by location (see Figure 3-2). 
• Scenario 1 (irrigation):  Graywater and supplemental 
potable water as needed is used to irrigate turfgrass 
to barely meet the evapotranspiration deficit (see Box 
3-1). Indoor potable water use is unchanged.
• Scenario 2 (toilet flushing): Water demand for toilet 
flushing is entirely met by graywater. Potable demand 
for outdoor irrigation is unchanged from the base sce -
nario.
• Scenario 3 (irrigation and toilet flushing):  Toilet 
flushing demands are entirely met by graywater, and 
remaining graywater is available to address irrigation 
demand, as needed.
Graywater production was estimated considering typi -
cal wastewater generation from showers, baths, laundry, and 
one-third of faucets (excludes kitchen sink faucets) based on 
preliminary data from the DeOreo et al. (2016) survey of 
indoor water use (M. Hodgins, WaterRF, personal commu -
nication, 2013). In each scenario, it was assumed that 100 
percent of the residential population in a 100-acre, medium-
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
42 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 3-1 Nonpotable Water Demand Scenarios: Irrigation and Toilet Flushing
To assess the potential for stormwater and graywater to meet water needs and provide potable water savings, the committee considered four 
water demand and use scenarios in six cities. 
Base scenario. Potable water is used for all indoor and outdoor household water needs, and all analyses are based on a 100-acre (40-ha), 
medium-density, residential development with 12 people per acre (40 people per hectare).  Indoor water use does not vary for different climatic 
conditions and was therefore assumed to be consistent for all of the cities examined.  An indoor water use rate of 46 gpcd (170 lpcd or 20.3 
Mgal/yr per 100 acres) was used based on preliminary updated data on indoor water use in nine North American cities (M. Hodgins, WaterRF, 
personal communication, 2013). The water use data reflects the same household-level water use data as that reported in DeOreo et al. (2016), 
but the preliminary data used by the committee assumed 3 persons per household, while DeOreo et al. (2016) ultimately reported fewer persons 
per household and a nonlinear relationship between household size and water use.  This difference resulted in lower per capital values for in -
door water use, total graywater production, laundry, and toilet flushing (46, 21, 7.6, and 11 gpcd, respectively) used in this analysis compared 
to the data reported in DeOreo et al. (2016) (58.6, 26, 9.6, and 14 gpcd, respectively). Outdoor irrigation demand was calculated according to 
conservation irrigation requirements (irrigation only to meet the minimum evapotranspiration deficit) for turfgrass, the most common household 
irrigated vegetation. The number of houses and percentage of landscaped area in each of the six locations were determined from regional data 
(see Table A-2 in Appendix A). 
Monthly long-term averaged evapotranspiration rates for the candidate cities were obtained from the literature and adjusted for turfgrass 
conditions (see Pitt et al., 2011, and Appendix A). Average monthly rainfall values based on 1995-1999 rainfall records (1996-1999 for Lincoln, 
due to missing data) were then subtracted from the monthly evapotranspiration values to calculate typical monthly irrigation demands for each 
location. Irrigation demands only occur in months when the evapotranspiration requirements are greater than the recorded average monthly 
rainfall. As is shown in Figure 3-2, monthly rainfall (blue) and evaporation deficit (red) patterns vary greatly in different parts of the country. The 
largest evapotranspiration-driven deficits occur during the mid-summer months in arid areas when irrigation water is usually applied to make 
up the deficit. Irrigation requirements tend to be much lower during the winter (especially in those areas with dormant growing conditions).
Daily irrigation rates for each month were applied at a constant rate for each month reflecting the prior calculated monthly irrigation demands. 
The daily use rate is the same for the same month in different years, an assumption made necessary by the lack of monthly evapotranspiration 
data at each site for the time periods analyzed and use of monthly long-term averaged evapotranspiration data. Table 3-1-1 summarizes average 
monthly conservation irrigation demands for conventional warm season turfgrass for residential areas for these six geographical areas based 
on 1995-1999 rainfalls (1996-1999 for Lincoln). These 4- to 5-year rainfall records were not significantly different from the complete several-
decade rain records, although there are some apparent differences (see Appendix A and Box 3-2). The water volumes necessary to barely meet 
conservation irrigation demands were then calculated, considering the average landscaped portion of the medium-density residential land use 
for each location. In the base scenario, the irrigation volume is provided by potable water supply .
Scenario 1: Irrigation. Using the irrigation demand data described under the base scenario, the committee examined the potential for gray -
water and stormwater to address irrigation needs with indoor potable water use unchanged. Irrigation of site vegetation is one of the most direct 
and popular beneficial uses of graywater and stormwater. Irrigation with nonpotable on-site water can reduce potable water use, as long as the 
landscaped area requiring irrigation is not increased once a graywater or stormwater capture system is installed or the amount of irrigation water 
applied is not significantly increased with the use of the newly available water. As with the base scenario, the committee’s analysis assumes that 
irrigation is applied to barely satisfy the evapotranspiration deficits (conservation irrigation) for turfgrass, which is usually recommended when 
minimizing water use. However, it should be recognized that most homeowners use much more water than this minimum amount. The same 
analyses could also be conducted with different landscaping choices. Careful planting (such as xeriscaping with native plants) could result in 
minimal (or no) irrigation requirements, which would likely result in even greater reductions of domestic water used for irrigation compared to 
the beneficial uses of graywater or stormwater for irrigation. 
For the graywater analysis, potable water demand for irrigation for each city was calculated by subtracting monthly graywater generation (21 
gpcd x 1,200 people) from the monthly irrigation demand over the 100-acre, medium-density, residential area calculated in the base scenario. It 
was assumed that a storage tank was installed with sufficient volume to store the daily graywater generated, and thus that all graywater gener -
ated was available for use. No change occurred in indoor water use, and the total potable water use was summed over the year for each location 
(Figure 3-2). 
The ability of stormwater to reduce potable water use depends on the size of the tank storage facilities and by location (dry periods and avail -
able rain) compared to the irrigation demand. A model was used to conduct multi-year, water-balance analyses to assess the availability of roof 
runoff to meet daily irrigation demands, described in more detail later in this chapter and in Appendix A. 
Scenario 2: Toilet flushing. Under scenario 2, 11 gpcd graywater or stormwater is used to meet toilet flushing water demand.  Potable de -
mand for outdoor irrigation is unchanged from the base scenario. The typical household produces more graywater per day than is needed to meet 
toilet flushing demand, and therefore total indoor potable water demand was reduced by 11 gpcd multiplied by the population (1,200) within the 
100-acre area for each location. The ability for stormwater to meet toilet flushing demand is dependent on storage facilities and the frequency 
and amount of rainfall, and was calculated based on continuous model simulations. 
Scenario 3: Irrigation and toilet flushing.  For graywater, the analysis assumed that toilet demand (11 gpcd) was entirely met by graywater 
and the remaining 10 gpcd graywater was applied toward the monthly irrigation demand. For stormwater, continuous model simulations calcu -
lated the ability for on-site roof runoff to meet (or partially meet) toilet flushing and irrigation demands.
(Continued)Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  43
BOX 3-1 Continued
density, residential area adopted the specified graywater use 
practices.  These scenario analyses were intended to provide 
an estimate of the maximum possible potential for demand 
reduction that can be achieved through graywater reuse and 
does not reflect what can be realistically achieved in the near 
future. See Box 3-1 for a full description of the scenario as -
sumptions. The results were calculated by a simple spread -
sheet analysis, described in Box 3-1.
The results of the scenario analysis of a medium-density 
residential community based on climate data from 1995 to 
1999 (1996-1999 for Lincoln) (see Figure 3-3 and Table 3-1) 
show that average potable water demand reductions rang -
ing from 13 percent (Los Angeles) to 26 percent (Madison, 
Wisconsin) are possible with graywater reuse for both irriga -
tion and toilet flushing (Scenario 3). Such savings assume 
that indoor and outdoor water use habits are unchanged by 
this new low-cost water source, an assumption that remains 
untested (see Box 3-2 for discussion of key uncertainties, in -
cluding behavioral factors). Reductions in potable water de -
mand resulting from the use of graywater for irrigation vary 
widely with climate. Among the six cities analyzed, the low -
est potential irrigation demand savings are noted for New -
ark, New Jersey, where there is only an irrigation demand for 
4 months of the year (see Figure 3-3). Los Angeles has the 
highest irrigation demand of the study cities, resulting in 11 
percent potable water savings, although only 17 percent of 
the minimum irrigation demand for turfgrass in Los Angeles 
is met through graywater reuse in the irrigation-only scenar -
io. A scenario using more acreage of native vegetation would 
enable graywater to meet a greater percentage of irrigation demand. Additionally, areas with year-round irrigation re -
quirements would result in greater savings than those with 
limited seasonal irrigation requirements. Results from these 
hypothetical scenarios demonstrate that use of graywater for 
toilet flushing decreases indoor use by 24 percent across all 
regions, although this savings as a fraction of overall water 
use is dependent on the amount of water used for irrigation 
(see Table 3-1). 
Laundry-to-landscape systems result in even lower 
potential water savings, because graywater is derived only 
from the washing machine. Table 3-2 shows average poten -
tial water savings for laundry-to-landscape systems in the six 
cities analyzed, although savings would be less with water-
conserving washers and greater with older washers that use 
more water. 
Downstream Impacts from Graywater Use.  In many areas 
of the western United States, it is important to consider im -
pacts to downstream water users in conjunction with water 
savings because of considerations of water rights and en -
vironmental uses (see Chapter 8). Graywater use for toilet 
flushing is a nonconsumptive use of water, because water 
used for toilet flushing will flow either to a wastewater treat -
ment plant or septic tank, without any significant losses in 
downstream flows. On the contrary, using graywater for irri -
gation results in evapotranspiration losses and is considered 
a consumptive use of water. If existing landscape irrigation 
with potable water is replaced with graywater, then the prop -
erty would have the same effect on downstream water avail -
ability as it did prior to graywater use assuming that the wa -TABLE 3 -1-1 Minimum Monthly Irrigation Demands to Meet Turfgrass  Evapotranspiration Deficit  
 Irrigation Requirements (Mgal/month/100 -acre, medium -density, residential area)  
Los Angeles, CA  Seattle, WA  Lincoln, NE  Madison, WI  Birmingham, AL  Newark, NJ  
Jan 0.00 0.00 0.28 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Feb 0.00 0.00 0.99 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mar 0.57 0.00 1.6 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Apr 4.2 0.00 0.70 0.00 0.00 0.00 
May 5.2 2.3 0.00 1.4 0.02 0.50 
Jun 6.3 3.5 1.3 0.00 2.6 1.7 
Jul 7.2 5.3 4.3 0.68 0.24 0.24 
Aug 7.1 3.5 0.56 0.50 0.79 2.0 
Sept 5.4 0.96 3.0 1.4 0.53 0.00 
Oct 3.7 0.00 2.2 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Nov 0.88 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Dec 0.00 0.00 0.72 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Total annual  40.5 15.6 15.6 4.0 4.2 4.5 
NOTES: These calculations are determined by subtracting average monthly precipitation (1995 -1999, except for Lincoln, which used 1996 -
1999) from average monthly evapotranspiration rates. These data may underestimate irrigation requirements when rainfall is cl ustered in a 
few days within a month for some years, but these variations are expected to be evened out with the multi -year an alyses. SOURCE: See 
Appendix A.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
44 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 3-2 Assumptions and Uncertainties in the Committee’s Scenario Analyses
There are a number of uncertainties associated with the committee’s evaluation of potential for graywater and stormwater to reduce 
potable water demand based on the assumptions, data, and calculations used. The committee did not intend for the analysis to be used as 
a definitive estimate of on-site water availability. The analysis instead provides a means to compare the potential of graywater and roof 
runoff under a similar set of assumptions in different locations in the country, with varying hydrology and land-use patterns. Large-scale 
projects should consider similar analytical approaches tailored to specific site conditions to support decision making. Key uncertainties 
and limitations of the analysis are discussed below. 
• Expected variability in potential potable water savings.  The committee’s analysis produced only a 5-year average of potential 
water savings, rather than annual values that illustrate year-to-year variability. Evapotranspiration rates were only available for 
long-term average monthly conditions, and rates for the actual months during the calculation period were not available. Year-to-
year variations in evapotranspiration are expected to be moderate (but probably not as great as the year-to-year rainfall variations), 
and therefore actual potable savings are likely to be greater in some years and less in others. 
• Limited rainfall period and differences from long-term conditions.  Rainfall conditions during the calculation period were 
somewhat different from the complete data set (but not shown to be significantly different by statistical tests; see Appendix A). 
The 5-year rainfall conditions for Birmingham, Newark, Madison, and Lincoln (4 years) were quite similar to the long-term re -
cords, although Seattle had greater rains over that period compared to long-term conditions. The largest differences were apparent 
for Los Angeles. During the 1995-1999 analysis period, Los Angeles had greater rains and wider variation compared to long-term 
conditions (see Figure A-1 in Appendix A), including 2 years of unusually high winter rainfall, which likely reduced the average 
irrigation demand in some winter months below the likely long-term average and overestimated the average annual stormwater 
available. However, even with this additional rainfall, Los Angeles could not satisfy much of the household water use for indoor 
and outdoor demands considering reasonable-sized storage tanks with its long dry periods. Large-scale, city-wide analyses would 
require design-oriented evaluations with longer rainfall records, but Los Angeles projects may have less stormwater available for 
recharge compared to the calculations in the report. 
• Domestic water use and the impacts of water conservation. The base domestic water use rates used in this report when calcu -
lating potential water savings are also subject to variations and trends. The per capita water use values used are slightly lower than 
those recently reported by DeOreo et al. (2016).  The per capita rates were calculated using the same household water use data 
as DeOreo et al. (2016) but assuming three residents per household. The data should be reasonable for the comparative purposes 
of this analysis, based on the assumptions stated (medium-density residential with 12 residents per acre [40 per ha], conservation 
irrigation of turfgrass), although the water savings reported will be lower than similar calculations using the most recent data on 
per capita water use (DeOreo et al., 2016). At an individual household level, water use will vary based on the use of water-savings 
fixtures and appliances, the number of household members, the percentage of time the house is occupied, the type and extent of 
vegetation requiring irrigation, irrigation rates and frequency, and other behavioral factors. Most individuals irrigate at rates much 
higher than the conservation irrigation rates assumed in this analysis, which may underestimate potential potable water savings in 
locations having moderate to large rainfall amounts. However, water conservation trends may also impact water savings. Based 
on two studies of roof runoff capture systems in Australia, Beal et al. (2015) observed significantly reduced potable water savings 
in homes with water restrictions or that recently experienced severe water restrictions.  In one study, the potable water savings in 
areas with no or low-water restrictions were approximately three times larger than water savings observed in areas with moderate 
or severe water restrictions. A second study in a semi-arid climate reported the lowest savings in communities that had recently 
experienced severe water restrictions (Beal et al., 2015). Large and significant beneficial use projects should be supported by 
measured local rates and expected future conditions as part of the design process.
• Behavioral factors associated with on-site water use.  A significant uncertainty is associated with behavioral factors associated 
with a “free” on-site water supply that affect water savings. The committee calculated potential water savings, based on several 
assumptions, including that water use habits do not change with the installation of a graywater or stormwater system. However, 
this assumption has not been proven, and two laundry-to-landscape pilots have shown that potable water use can actually increase 
after installation (see Box 2-1). Mukheibir et al. (2013) suggest multiplying theoretical water savings of roof runoff capture sys -
tems by a “functionality factor” of 0.5 to 0.7 when estimating actual potable water savings to account for behavioral factors, poor 
installation, and operational issues. Beal et al. (2015) summarized the results of an Australia study of roof runoff capture systems 
(1,300-gallon [5,000-liter] tanks plumbed for indoor nonpotable household uses) that resulted in actual water savings of only  
0.3 to 0.6 times the theoretical savings. 
• Other limits of the analysis.  The analysis reports an average irrigation demand in Lincoln, Nebraska, in the winter time (Novem -
ber through February account for about 14 percent of the total annual demand), when under usual considerations during typically 
sub-freezing conditions, surface irrigation is unlikely. These calculations were based on 4 years of rain records, which indicated 
some winter months having less precipitation than other years. The long-term average winter evapotranspiration values reflect 
winter irrigation during some mild winters, but this is not expected to be the case for all years and would be rare for most home -
owners. Thus, the analysis may over-estimate the irrigation demand and total potable water savings in Lincoln for typical winters.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  45
FIGURE 3-3 Estimates of demands for a hypothetical 100-acre, medium-density, residential area of each study city. Base demand reflects 
typical U.S. indoor water use based on three residents per household (see Box 3-1) and irrigation necessary to barely satisfy the evapotrans -
piration deficit for turfgrass for that location. Scenario 1 (S1) assumes 100 percent adoption of graywater use for irrigation, and irrigation 
is supplied only to meet the evapotranspiration deficit. Scenario 2 (S2) assumes 100 percent adoption of graywater reuse for toilet flushing. 
Scenario 3 (S3) reflects 100 percent adoption of graywater reuse for combined toilet flushing and irrigation. Note that these irrigation volumes 
are based on the minimum water required to maintain turfgrass (conservation irrigation), and actual irrigation rates in these locations may be 
significantly greater. 
TABLE 3 -1 Potential Potable Water Savings in Six Cities from Various Graywater Use Scenarios Based on a 100 -Acre, Medium -Density, 
Residential Area  
 Base demand  
(Mgal/yr)  Volume Potable Water Savings   Potable Water Savings  
S1: Irrigation  
use only  (Mgal/yr)  S2: Toilet flushing  
(Mgal/yr)  S3: Irrigation  
and toilet flushing 
(Mgal/yr)   
S1: Irrigation  
use only  (%) S2: Toilet  
flushing  (%) S3: Irrigation  
and toilet  
flushing  (%) 
Los Angeles, CA  60.7 6.7 4.8 8.1  11 7.9 13 
Seattle, WA  35.7 3.9 4.8 6.7  11 13 19 
Lincoln, NE  35.8 6.8 4.8 8.4  19 14 23 
Madison, WI  24.2 2.7 4.8 6.3  11 20 26 
Birmingham, AL  24.3 2.3 4.8 6.2  9.5 20 25 
Newark, NJ  24.7 2.3 4.8 6.2  9.3 20 25 
NOTE:  These savings assume that indoor and outdoor water use habits are unchanged by this new low -cost source of water, an assumption 
that remains untested.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
46 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ter supply is from the same watershed and not imported (the 
details are discussed in Box 3-3). However, if irrigation with 
graywater exceeds the prior irrigation rates, then impacts 
would be felt on downstream users. Thus, graywater use for 
toilet flushing, as a nonconsumptive use of water, does not 
pose the water rights issues that graywater irrigation does.
Graywater and Water Conservation.  The committee’s es -
timates of potential potable water savings associated with the 
use of graywater (Figure 3-3) are based on the most recently 
available data on indoor water use in North America. Trends 
in indoor water use in the United States show substantially 
decreased water use over the past 10-15 years (Figure 3-4) 
from 69 gpcd (260 lpcd; Mayer et al., 1999) to 59 gpcd (220 
lpcd; DeOreo et al., 2016).  Water use data collected from 
efficient new homes (36 gpcd [140 lpcd]; DeOreo et al., 
2011) suggest continued reductions in indoor water demand. 
Meeting targets for water efficient homes will decrease the 
amount of graywater available for use, although graywater is 
projected to continue to meet toilet demand even in a highly 
water efficient home (Figure 3-4). For comparison, water 
use in Germany (32 gpcd; leaks not included) is closer to 
meeting high-efficiency targets than are U.S. water users in 
2014.  Shower water use remains relatively constant over all 
samples, including older U.S. data and high-efficiency new 
homes (Figure 3-4), suggesting a relatively steady source of 
graywater. In contrast, significant reductions in laundry wa -
ter use have been documented between 1999 and 2014, and 
further reductions are possible, reducing the contributions of 
a key graywater source.
As indoor water conservation fixtures continue to be in -
stalled, there is likely to be an impact on graywater quality. 
Despite the decrease in water used, use of personal care and cleansing products are likely to be used in similar amounts 
and pathogenic organisms would be loaded similarly. For 
example, graywater quality in a peri-urban area of Durban, 
South Africa, where water use was limited to 52 gphd (200 
lphd), graywater chemical constituents were greater than 
those reported for European and U.S. homes by a factor of 
2-10 (Salukazana et al., 2005). To date, a consistent trend of 
increasing concentrations of graywater constituents has not 
been observed in the United States despite decreased indoor 
water use over the past 10-15 years. Graywater quality is so 
variable (Eriksson et al., 2002; see Chapter 4), that such a 
trend would be difficult to detect. Nonetheless, aggressive 
indoor water conservation practices could render graywater 
of a quality in terms of organic matter and salt concentra -
tions not suitable for use for irrigation and could increase the 
extent of treatment needed for all end uses as a result of in -
creases in concentrations of pollutants due to lower dilution 
rates. Additional research could improve the understanding 
of the implications of water conservation trends on the qual -
ity and quantity of graywater and impacts on the cost-effec -
tiveness and feasibility of specific uses (see Chapter 10).
Commercial Use
In general, commercial water use is highly variable 
(Dziegielewski et al., 2000; see Figure 3-5), and most com -
mercial facilities do not generate enough graywater to ren -
der its use for either irrigation or toilet flushing worthwhile. 
Gleick et al. (2003) reported that restroom and laundry water 
represented only 16 and 2 percent, respectively, of Califor -
nia’s commercial and industrial sectors water use. Of the re -
stroom water, only 11 percent was graywater (showers and 
hand washing basins), with the remainder used by toilet and 
urinal flushing. In contrast, landscaping water accounted 
for 35 percent of the total commercial and industrial water 
use, which is the largest water demand (including industrial 
process water). Overall, the amount of graywater generat -
ed is substantially less than the amount that could be used 
for irrigation or toilet flushing. Some commercial facilities 
and offices have on-site showers and/or facilities (e.g., ho -
tels, fitness, and aquatic centers). Use of graywater can be 
beneficial at such facilities as long as showers or laundry 
facilities are frequently used. Although the quantity of gray -
water generated at hospitals is likely enough to meet toilet 
demands, on-site recycling of graywater at hospitals is not 
recommended because of the potentially large load of patho -
gens and high sensitivity of the population in contact with 
the treated graywater.
A study of water use was conducted at an office build -
ing located in Fort Collins, Colorado, occupied by nearly 
1,700 employees daily that had an on-site gym with show -TABLE 3 -2 Potential Potable Water Savings Calculated for Six  
Cities from Laundry -to-Landscape Systems Based on a 100 -Acre,  
Medium -Density, Residential Ar ea  
 Laundry to Landscape  
Volume Potable Water  
Savings (Mgal/yr)  Potable Water Savings (%)  
Los Angeles, CA  2.5  4.1 
Seattle, WA  1.4 3.9 
Lincoln, NE  2.8 7.7 
Madison, WI  1.1 4.6 
Birmingham, AL  1.1 4.5 
Newark, NJ  1.1 4.4 
NOTE:  These savings assume that indoor and outdoor water use 
habits are unchanged by this new low -cost source of water, an 
assumption that remains untested.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  47
BOX 3-3 Effects of Graywater Use in Existing Developments on Downstream Water Availability
Some state laws protect the availability of water to downstream users who hold appropriated water rights (see Chapter 8). Thus, it 
is important to understand the potential impact of increased graywater use on the availability of water to downstream users. Graywater 
reuse at any scale can have impacts on downstream return flows to the hydrologic cycle (Figure 3-3-1; summarized in Table 3-3-1). 
When graywater is used for toilet flushing, potable water demand is reduced by the amount of graywater used for flushing. This use 
results in an equivalent reduction of the wastewater volume generated by the household. There is no change in downstream water flows 
at a larger scale, because the reduction in wastewater generated is in balance with reduced water demand by the household. The mass of 
waste constituents discharged remains the same although less water is available for dilution, resulting in increased concentrations in the 
discharged wastewater along with reduced flow volumes.
If graywater is used for lawn and garden irrigation in an existing development, then the effects on downstream users are dependent 
upon whether the amount of water applied to landscaping remains constant after a graywater system is installed. Assuming the land -
scaping and the total amount of irrigation water applied are unchanged, potable water demand and the volume of wastewater gener -
ated are reduced by the volume of graywater used for irrigation. Use of graywater for irrigation results in the same water losses from 
evapotranspiration and from recharge to groundwater, as would have been the case for potable water applied to existing landscaping 
that the graywater replaced. Thus, there should be no net effect on downstream water availability because the reduction in the volume of 
wastewater generated is in balance with the reduced potable water use, and the evaporative and recharge losses from the use of graywa -
ter for irrigation should be the same as in the base scenario. Because a portion of household waste constituents contained in graywater 
is diverted from the sewer system, the mass load to the sewer system is slightly reduced, although the concentration of wastewater 
constituents increases because less water is available for dilution. 
If installation of a graywater irrigation system results in a greater demand for irrigation water use on a property (such as from addi -
tional plantings that require more irrigation than landscaping being replaced), then this could result in a situation where there is little or 
no reduction in potable water use. If plantings requiring irrigation are substantially increased, then it is possible that potable water use 
actually increases compared to water use prior to the graywater installation. Under a scenario of expanded landscaping where a greater 
volume of water is being used for irrigation, there is enhancement of losses due to evapotranspiration (a consumptive use) as well as 
additional groundwater recharge (a nonconsumptive use) compared to the base case. However, under efficient irrigation, evapotranspira -
tion (consumptive) losses typically far exceed groundwater recharge (Bijoor et al., 2014). Thus, assuming efficient irrigation methods, 
increased evaporative effects would reduce water availability for downstream users. This scenario results in the same effects on the 
wastewater volume, concentrations, and loads as graywater irrigation of existing landscape (see Table 3-3-1).
FIGURE 3-3-1  Typical hydrologic cycle at a household scale. When considering impacts to downstream water availability, scenarios can be 
assessed to evaluate relative changes to inputs and outputs. Water inputs to the property include potable water supply and precipitation. Water 
outputs include wastewater (graywater and blackwater), stormwater, evapotranspiration, and groundwater recharge from infiltrated water (pre -
cipitation and applied irrigation water that is not evapotranspired or incorporated into plant biomass). Consumptive uses—evapotranspiration 
and that incorporated into plant biomass—reduce the amount of water available to those downstream. At the neighborhood scale, inputs and 
outputs are composed of the collection of inputs and outputs from individual properties.
(Continued)Regional
water supplyPotable
waterStormwater
Wastewater
Groundwater rechargeAvailable to 
downstream
usersIrrigationPrecipitation EvapotranspirationCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
48 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 3-3 Continued
ers that were perceived to be used often (Vandegrift, 2014). 
However, an analysis of building water use showed that the 
showers actually contributed less than 1 percent of the total 
building water use, while the toilets accounted for 10 per -
cent. This study only evaluated one such building, so broad 
conclusions cannot be made. However, the data indicate that 
showers in office buildings may not contribute enough gray -
water to render graywater reuse projects feasible. On-site 
laundry machines in offices, hotels, and other commercial 
facilities may result in enough graywater generation to ren -
der reuse feasible. In this same study, 79 percent of water 
generated at a fitness facility was estimated to be graywater, 
which would easily meet the toilet demand with much excess 
water available for irrigation. In addition, a hotel was found 
to produce a substantial quantity of graywater, with an esti -
mated 25 percent of water use in laundry, showers, and sinks 
(Vandegrift, 2014). Site-specific analysis of the availability 
of commercial graywater for onsite use is therefore neces -
sary to determine the potential for water savings.
STORMWATER
This section explores the amount of stormwater poten -
tially available for various beneficial uses at different scales 
in a community, from the smallest on-site capture of roof 
runoff for irrigation of surrounding landscaped areas, to 
large-scale community collection of stormwater in regional 
impoundments to augment the water supply. The amount 
of stormwater generated greatly depends on the amount of 
rainfall in the area, the land development characteristics, and 
the effectiveness of the stormwater collection system. The 
amount of the stormwater that can be effectively used by the 
different beneficial uses is based on complex interactions of timing of the rainfall and the desired use patterns, the ability 
to collect and store the runoff, and coordination with other 
uses and supplies. Thus, estimating the availability of storm -
water to address water demands across the United States is 
much more complex than for graywater. This committee 
presents (1) an approach to identify the amount of water 
available from different source areas and land uses and (2) 
the results of an original analysis to approximate potential 
water savings from household-scale stormwater capture for 
various uses in medium-density, residential development in 
six different locations in the United States. 
Factors Affecting the Quantity of  
Stormwater from Different Areas
Key factors that affect the quantity of stormwater avail -
able for beneficial use are rainfall and land development 
characteristics. The total amount of rainfall and the distribu -
tion of rain depths for different periods of the year vary dra -
matically throughout the country, affecting the quantities of 
runoff available for different beneficial uses. Land uses also 
vary by region, affecting the quantity of runoff available for 
large-scale stormwater collection for beneficial uses. 
Rainfall Characteristics
Important factors affecting stormwater runoff quantities 
across the United States include the amount of the rainfall, 
depth of individual events, and seasonal patterns of the rains. 
The six locations examined by the committee represent a 
range of climatic conditions in the United States and are not 
intended to represent all of the conditions in each region, or 
all regions. TABLE 3 -3-1 Summary of Water Budget Effects from Graywater Adoption at Existing Developments  
 Water Quantity Effects   Water Quality Effects  
Potable water demand  Wastewater  
volume generated  Water available to  
downstream water users   Wastewater constituent 
concentration  Wastewater  
constituent load  
Graywater reuse for toilet flushing  Reduced  Reduced  No change   Increased  No change  
Graywater reuse for existing irrigated 
landscape  Reduced  Reduced  No change   Increased  Slightly reduced  
Graywater reuse for increased  
irrigation (e.g., expanded landscaping)  May be slightly  
reduced, unchanged  
or increased  Reduced Reduced   Increased  Slightly reduced  
NOTES: These calculations are determined by subtracting average monthly precipitation (1995 -1999, except for Lincoln, which used 1996 -
1999) from average monthly evapotranspiration rates. These data  may underestimate irrigation requirements when rainfall is clustered in a 
few days within a month for some years, but these variations are expected to be evened out with the multi -year analyses. SOURCE: See 
Appendix A.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  49
• Los Angeles, California, in the Southwest, having a me -
dian rainfall of about 12 inches per (30 cm) year over 
the long-term record (17 inches [43 cm] average during 
the 5-year calculation period)
• Seattle, Washington, in the Northwest, having a median 
rainfall of about 37 inches (94 cm) of rainfall per year 
(42 inches [110 cm] average during the 5-year calcula -
tion period)
• Lincoln, Nebraska, in central United States, having a 
median rainfall of about 26 inches (66 cm) of rainfall 
per year) (28 inches [71 cm] average during the 4-year 
calculation period)
• Madison, Wisconsin, in the Great Lakes region, having 
a median rainfall of about 32 inches (81 cm) of rainfall 
per year (30 inches [76 cm] average during the 5-year 
calculation period)
• Birmingham, Alabama, in the Southeast, having a me -
dian rainfall of about 54 inches (140 cm) of rainfall 
per year (50 inches [130 cm] average during the 5-year 
calculation period)
• Newark, New Jersey, in the East Coast region, having a 
median rainfall of about 43 inches (110 cm) of rainfall 
per year. (44 inches [110 cm] average during the 5-year 
calculation period)
FIGURE 3-4 Average indoor water use in the United States in 1999 (69 gpcd) and 2014 (59 gpcd), Germany in 2013 (32 gpcd), and efficient 
new homes (36 gpcd). NOTES: Data collected in Germany do not include leaks, bathtubs, or other sources; thus, total water use figures are 
not comparable. Fixture data for high efficiency homes based on average household data and 3 persons per household. SOURCES: Data 
from Mayer et al. (1999); DeOreo et al. (2011; 2016); http://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/224682/umfrage/trinkwasserverbrauch-in-
deutschen-haushalten.Rainfall can vary greatly from year to year, and the com -
mittee’s analyses examined 4-5 years of data for each city 
(1995-1999). The seasonal distributions of rains at these six 
locations vary greatly, as shown on Figure 3-2. The West 
Coast locations (Los Angeles and Seattle) experience most 
(or all) of their rains during the winter months, the central 
and Great Lakes locations (Lincoln and Madison) experi -
ence more rain during the summer months, and the Southeast 
and the East Coast locations (Birmingham and Newark) ex -
perience more evenly distributed rains throughout the year. 
One of the main challenges with effective beneficial uses of 
stormwater, therefore, is matching water needs with available 
stormwater runoff, which may necessitate significant storage. 
The depth of individual rainfall events also varies across 
the country, necessitating varied designs to appropriately 
capture stormwater. Medium-size rains (from about 0.5 to 
2 inches [1.3 to 5 cm]) account for the majority of the an -
nual runoff from the most common land uses in all areas, 
but higher percentages of the rainfall occur as runoff as the 
rain depth increases. For example, about 900 gallons (3,400 
liters) of roof runoff would be produced from a typical 1,500 
ft2 (140 m2) roof area during a 1-inch (2.5 cm) rainfall. In 
comparison, a more common 0.25-inch rain would produce 
about 200 gallons (760 liters) of runoff for this same roof 
area. Median rains in these six areas between 1995 and 1999 
range from about 0.1 (Seattle) to 0.25 inches (Birmingham), 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
50 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 3-5  Variability in commercial water use. Note that in commercial restrooms, toilet flushing represents the majority of water use, 
limiting graywater production. Among commercial facilities, those with showers and large laundry facilities, such as fitness centers, laun -
dries, and hotels, tend to generate the most graywater. SOURCE: EPA (2015).
FIGURE 3-6 Distribution of different rain depths for different U.S. locations, shown as the probability of a rainfall of a certain depth or 
smaller. SOURCE: Based on National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) hourly rainfall data supplied by EarthInfo (Santa 
Monica, California) (5-year periods, depending on completeness of rain record: all were from 1995 through 1999, except for the Lincoln 
calculations, which were from 1996 through 1999 due to many missing 1995 rainfall records).Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  51
TABLE 3 -3 Summary of Major Land Use Characteristics  
Land Use Category  Average Percentage Directly Connected 
Impervious Area (coeff. of  variation)  Average Percentage Partially Connected 
Impervious Area (coeff. of variation)  Average Percentage Pervious Area 
(coeff. of variation)  
Commercial  80 (0.3)  2 (2.8)  19 (1.0)  
Industrial  54 (0.3)  21 (0.4)  24 (0.5)  
Institutional  50 (0.4)  9 (0.9)  41 (0.3)  
Open space  10 (1.2)  11 (1.3)  79 (0.3)  
Residential  24 (0.6)  12 (0.5)  64 (0.2)  
Freeway and highway  32 (1.2)  27 (1.2)  41 (0.3)  
NOTES: Represents more than 100 research sites in the United States. The coefficient of variation is the ratio of the st andard deviation to the 
average value, an indication of the spread in the data. SOURCE: Pitt (2011a).  
and some locations (e.g., Birmingham, Newark, and Los An -
geles) have a greater percentage of heavy rainfall (greater 
than 1 inch) (Figure 3-6).
Land Development and Source Area Characteristics
Directly connected impervious areas (e.g., roofs, streets, 
and paved parking areas connected directly to the drainage 
system) are usually responsible for most of the runoff in de -
veloped urban areas and are therefore the major source areas 
of runoff available for capture for beneficial uses. Partially 
connected impervious areas (e.g., roof drains or paved areas 
draining to pervious areas before entering the drainage sys -
tem) contribute smaller amounts of runoff that occur later 
times during larger rains, while the pervious areas contrib -
ute small flows and only after substantial rain has occurred. 
However, pervious areas can be important sources of runoff 
in residential areas and other land uses where landscaped 
and undeveloped land comprise a large portion of the land 
area (Figure 3-7). Average percentages of directly connected 
impervious areas, partially connected impervious areas, and 
pervious areas for six major land use categories from loca -
tions throughout the country are shown in Table 3-3. 
Mathematical models can be used to calculate the 
stormwater runoff available for different rainfall events, sur -
face materials, and land characteristics, highlighting both 
the quantities available for beneficial use and the associated 
storage challenges (Figure 3-8). Table 3-4 shows the calcu -
lated associated annual stormwater runoff yields for the six 
locations examined. These runoff amounts and the fraction 
of rainfall that is converted to runoff (or runoff coefficient, 
see Table 3-5) vary significantly for different land uses and 
locations. However, the extent to which conventional water 
demand can be reduced will depend upon the amount of stor -
age provided, the water demand, and the timing of rainfall 
relative to water demand. The feasibility of household- or building-scale storm -
water capture for irrigation purposes depends on the ratio of 
the roof area to the area to be irrigated. Areas having rela -
tively small roofs and large landscaped areas may not be able 
to supply sufficient quantities of water to meet irrigation de -
mands, depending on the rainfall patterns and storage tank 
sizes. Areas having large roof areas compared to the adjacent 
landscaped areas (e.g., commercial buildings) could have 
abundant water for irrigation, in which case excess stormwa -
ter could be made available for other beneficial uses. 
Committee Scenario Analysis of Stormwater  
Availability for Household-scale Water Uses 
Roof runoff offers the most suitable source for building-
scale stormwater collection for beneficial uses because of its 
generally better water quality (see Chapter 4), high runoff 
yield per unit area, and elevation above storage tanks and ir -
rigated land (which reduces energy use). To assess the capac -
ity for rooftop runoff to address on-site water demands, the 
committee analyzed four scenarios in each of six geographi -
cal locations in the United States (Los Angeles, California; 
Seattle, Washington; Lincoln, Nebraska; Madison, Wiscon -
sin; Birmingham, Alabama; and Newark, New Jersey), par -
allel to the graywater analysis (detailed in Box 3-1):
• Base scenario:  Potable water is used for all household 
water needs (indoors and outdoors), using the same 
base scenario assumptions as described in the graywa -
ter analysis discussed earlier in this chapter. The land 
surface characteristics represented by medium-density, 
residential development in each of the six locations 
(e.g., percentage landscaped area [needed for irrigation 
calculations] and roof area [needed for runoff quanti -
ties]) vary based on site characteristics and are outlined 
in Appendix A. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
52 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 3-7  Source area percentages (top) and 
percentage contribution to overall runoff (bot -
tom) for different land uses at Madison, Wiscon -
sin. The residential area land use is represented 
by medium-density development characteristics. 
In general, low-density residential areas would 
have few roofs and more landscaped areas, while 
high-density residential areas would have more 
roofs and fewer landscaped areas. NOTE: Al -
though the land use data shown in Figure 3-7 
(top) are specific to Madison, Wisconsin, the 
distributions are generally similar to other geo -
graphic regions of the country. However, the run -
off data in the bottom figure are more variable 
by geographical area than are the land use char -
acteristics because of differences in the rainfall 
patterns. For example, the Southeast and East 
Coast have a greater abundance of larger rains 
with more runoff from landscaped areas in rela -
tionship to impervious areas. SOURCE: Source 
areas from the standard land use files used by 
the nonpoint source section of the Wisconsin 
Department of Natural Resources as maintained 
by the U.S. Geological Survey. (http://wi.water.
usgs.gov/slamm).
FIGURE 3-8  Runoff quantity for different rain depths at four different source areas. SOURCE: Appendix A describes the modeling calcula -
tions used to determine the runoff amounts from the different source areas.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  53
• Scenario 1 (irrigation): Rooftop runoff is captured 
and used to irrigate landscaped areas and offset potable 
water demand to meet the evapotranspiration deficit 
for turfgrass.
• Scenario 2 (toilet flushing): Rooftop runoff is cap -
tured and used for toilet flushing.
• Scenario 3 (irrigation and toilet flushing): Both irri -
gation and toilet flushing demands are addressed using 
captured rooftop runoff.
The capacity to capture and use stormwater at the build -
ing scale is strongly dependent upon storage tank size. The 
optimum tank size is best determined through continuous 
simulation of stormwater model analyses for a given loca -
tion. However, for simplicity, only two stormwater storage 
volumes were considered for each of the above scenarios, 
using continuous simulations for 4 or 5 years:
• 70 gallons (260 liters) per household, representing two 
rain barrels at 35 gallons each, and
• 2,200 gallons (8,300 liters) per household, represent -
ing a single larger tank (8 ft [2.4 cm] diameter and 6 ft 
[1.8 m] tall). 
These tank volumes reflect commonly used household-scale, 
rooftop-runoff capture systems, although larger tanks are 
certainly possible and may offer additional benefits. 
Given the number of factors that affect stormwater runoff 
and availability for beneficial use, assessments of stormwater 
availability are most effectively conducted using a continu -
ous stormwater model. The committee performed its analy -
ses using the continuous stormwater model WinSLAMM, 
using similar procedures as described by Pitt et al. (2011) 
to assess the potential contributions of stormwater to reduce 
conventional water supplies in six cities in different regions 
of the country. WinSLAMM3 (Pitt, 1997) was selected for 
these analyses because of the committee’s familiarity with the 
model and the similar analyses conducted previously by Pitt 
et al. (2011). Specifically, WinSLAMM was able to conduct 
continuous, long-term analyses considering different water 
uses, storage tank volumes, and rainfall records with minimal 
pre- and post-processing. The model calculated the amount 
of water available in the storage tanks and how much of the 
irrigation demand could be satisfied during a 5-year period 
(1995 through 1999 for all areas, except for Lincoln, where 
1996 through 1999 rains were used). Details of the commit -
tee’s analysis are described in Appendix A. Other models, 
such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) 
3 See http://winslamm.com. Robert Pitt, committee member, is 
one of the developers of WINSLAMM.SWMM model4 or SUSTAIN model5 may be used to perform 
these analyses, but they do not incorporate the features need -
ed for these analyses without modifications. However, for 
large-scale projects, it is always worthwhile to use comple -
mentary models having different approaches to obtain better 
insights and understandings of complex systems. 
Beneficial Use Scenarios
As in the graywater analysis, the committee considered 
two beneficial uses of on-site nonpotable water—irrigation 
and toilet flushing. In addition to the factors described in Box 
3-1, specific stormwater considerations are discussed below.
Irrigation.  Three primary irrigation strategies are relevant 
to the use of stormwater for irrigation: conventional irri -
gation, conservation irrigation, and land application. Each 
strategy involves a different approach to the rate at which 
water is applied to landscaped areas. In conventional irri -
gation, a consistent, average amount of water is applied to 
plants on a fixed schedule, independent of water losses due 
to evapotranspiration or infiltration. Conservation irrigation 
strategies apply only the minimum amount of water needed 
to meet the vegetation demand, considering local deficits 
between evapotranspiration requirements and available rain -
fall. Finally, land application strategies are intended to maxi -
mize the use of stormwater for irrigation by applying water, 
when available, at the maximum rate that does not produce 
runoff while preventing damage to plants. Land application, 
therefore, provides substantial stormwater runoff reduction 
benefits, while providing potable water conservation benefits 
that are often similar (depending on climate) to other storm -
water capture systems used only for irrigation. Irrigating to 
barely satisfy the evapotranspiration deficits (conservation 
irrigation) is typically recommended when minimizing wa -
ter use and is the focus of the committee’s analysis, although 
many homeowners use much more water than recommended 
under conservation irrigation. 
One of the primary considerations for determining con -
servation irrigation requirements involves comparing the 
time series of evapotranspiration and available rainfall for 
an area (as shown in Figure 3-2). The methodology for the 
analysis and calculations of irrigation demand are summa -
rized in Box 3-1 and documented in more detail in Appen -
dix A. Table 3-1-1 (Box 3-1) shows irrigation demands for 
conventional warm season turfgrass for residential areas by 
month for the six locations examined. 
4 See http://www2.epa.gov/water-research/storm-water-managem  
ent-model-swmm.
5 See http://www2.epa.gov/water-research/system-urban-stormwa  
ter-treatment-and-analysis-integration-sustain.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
54 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Toilet Flushing. At all locations examined in this scenario 
analysis for medium-density, residential land use, the avail -
able roof runoff on an average annual basis is greater than 
the toilet flushing water requirements (see Box 3-1 and Table 
3-4). However, the ability to use this water is dependent on 
storage facilities (see Chapter 6), especially in arid areas 
where seasonal rainfalls result in greatly uneven amounts of 
runoff throughout the year. The committee analyzed the ca -
pacity for two rooftop capture systems to meet toilet flushing 
demand throughout the year at the six locations to bracket 
typical conditions. These scenario analyses were designed to 
examine the potential for stormwater capture at the house -
hold scale to address common nonpotable water demands 
(irrigation and toilet flushing) and to allow direct comparison 
with the graywater scenarios considered earlier. The com -
mittee recognizes that small-scale rooftop capture systems 
(e.g., rain barrels) are not typically used for toilet flushing, 
but the scenario could represent other year-round nonpotable 
uses. The larger storage tank option could enable more effec -tive use of the roof runoff for toilet flushing, as well as other 
potential nonpotable uses not considered in this scenario.
Scenario Analysis Results
The calculated water savings associated with each of the 
beneficial use scenarios for the six locations are summarized 
in Tables 3-5 and 3-6. Table 3-7 shows the percentages of 
roof runoff used for these beneficial use options, of most in -
terest to stormwater managers interested in runoff volume 
reductions. The use of irrigation plus toilet flushing in the 
central United States can use most (74 percent) of the roof 
runoff for beneficial uses when the larger tank volume is 
considered. The other locations use from about 31 to 62 per -
cent of the total roof runoff for conservation irrigation plus 
toilet flushing when the large water storage tank option is 
used. Some of this roof runoff could therefore be made avail -
able for shallow groundwater recharge using rain gardens, 
but this infiltration was not considered in these analyses. The 
TABLE 3 -4 Calculated Annual Runoff Quantities (in gallons/year/acre) for Different Land Uses in Six Cities, 1995 -1999  
 Los Angeles, CA  Seattle, WA  Lincoln, NE  Madison, WI   Birmi ngham, AL  Newark, NJ  
Commercial  320,000  730,000  490,000  560,000  940,000  820,000  
Industrial  250,000  630,000  460,000  450,000  610,000  710,000  
Medium -density residential  210,000  380,000  260,000  270,000  310,000  490,000  
NOTE: Calculated u sing WinSLAMM (see Appendix A). Calculations are based on 100 percent of a single land use type. Lincoln data 
represents only 1996 -1999.  See Appendix A for methods used to derive these data.  
TABLE 3 -6 Potential Potable Water Savings in Six Cities Based on a 100 -Acre, Medium -Density, Residential Area Using Two 35 -gallon 
Rain Barrels per Household  
 Volume Potable Water Savings   Potable Water savings  
 Base use  
(Mgal/yr)  S1: Irrigation use  
only (Mgal/yr)  S2: Toilet  
flushing  (Mgal/yr)  S3: Irrigation  
and toilet flushing 
(Mgal/yr)   
S1: Irrigation  
use only  (%) S2: Toilet  
flushing  (%) S3: Irrigation and 
toilet flushing  (%) 
Los Angeles, CA  60.7 0.6 0.8 1.1  1.0 1.2 1.8 
Seattle, WA  35.7 1.1 2.3 3.0  3.1 6.4 8.3 
Lincoln, NE  35.8 1.8 1.5 2.3  5.0 4.2 6.3 
Madison, WI  24.2 0.9 1.7 2.1  3.8 7.0 8.6 
Birmingham, AL  24.3 0.6 1.6 1.8  2.6 6.4 7.3 
Newark, NJ  24.7 0.9 2.1 2.5  3.5 8.6 10 
 TABLE 3 -5 Calculated Runoff Coefficients for Differe nt Land Uses in Six Cities, 1995 -1999  
 Los Angeles, CA  Seattle, WA  Lincoln, NE  Madison, WI   Birmingham, AL  Newark, NJ  
Commercial  0.70 0.65 0.65 0.70 0.64 0.69 
Industrial  0.55 0.55 0.60 0.56 0.42 0.60 
Medium Density Residential  0.46 0.34 0.35 0.34 0.21 0.42 
NOTE: The runoff coefficient (Rv) values represents the fraction of the rainfall that is converted into runoff. Calculations are based on 100 
percent of each land use type. Source area components for each land use type are determined by local  data for each location. Roof runoff 
represents approximately 25 to 30 percent of the total residential area flows.  Lincoln data represents only 1996 -1999.  See Appendix A for 
methods used to derive these data.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  55
use of two rain barrels per house only allows about 14 to 19 
percent of the roof runoff to be used because of the limited 
storage provided. 
The results are also presented in Figures 3-9 to 3-10 to 
illustrate the total amount of water demand per household, 
separated by indoor and outdoor uses. For the base condi -
tion and the irrigation or toilet flushing scenarios, the indoor 
and outdoor water uses can be shown separately. However, 
for the combined irrigation and toilet flushing use, the flows 
are withdrawn from the tank as a combined demand in the 
model, and separate data are not available. 
Regional Differences in Potable Water Demand Reduc -
tion. Figures 3-9 and 3-10 show the domestic water use for 
all six cities examined in the committee’s scenario analyses. 
The least potable water savings are shown for Los Ange -
les, California, located in the arid Southwest. Even with the 
2,200-gallon storage tank, water use is reduced by very small 
amounts (up to 5.4 percent), because of the poor alignment 
of periods of rainfall and irrigation demand and the normal, 
long, dry periods during the summer months that outlast the 
availability of stored roof runoff. Only 42 percent of the roof 
runoff water is captured with the larger tank in the modeled 
scenario, showing the impact of intense rainfalls that over -
fill the tank before it can be used. In areas with similar cli -
mate conditions, shallow groundwater recharge using on-site 
rain gardens and/or larger capture and reuse options (such 
as regional groundwater recharge projects) may be needed 
to achieve greater contributions to local water supplies and 
reductions in stormwater runoff, especially considering the 
very large variability of rainfall in the area. In the arid South -
west, outdoor irrigation demand is very high for typically 
used landscaping plants (because of the large evapotranspi -
ration requirements and limited rainfall). Significant water 
conservation potential is possible through the use of native 
plants that do not rely on applied irrigation water. Compared to stormwater, graywater is a larger and more consistent 
source of water in the arid Southwest.
Seattle, Washington, located in the northwest, has a 
similar seasonal precipitation pattern as Los Angeles with 
irrigation demands concentrated in the summer when rainfall 
is lower (Figure 3-2). The longer-duration and less-intense 
rains and smaller evapotranspiration demands in Seattle al -
low for more efficient capture of roof runoff for beneficial 
uses. However, even with large storage tank use and both 
toilet flushing and conservation irrigation, the potential wa -
ter demand reduction is only 15 percent (Table 3-6). 
At Lincoln, Nebraska, located in the central United 
States, on average, precipitation occurs simultaneously with 
periods of irrigation demand (see Figure 3-2), which results 
in greater opportunities for capturing roof runoff for on-
site irrigation. The potential potable water savings for these 
scenarios ranges from about 11 to 26 percent when using a 
2,200-gallon tank, with 21 percent savings for irrigation only 
(the largest irrigation savings by volume and by percentage 
of the six sites; see Table 3-8). 
The precipitation in Madison, Wisconsin, also matches 
irrigation demands reasonably well, with irrigation demand 
in only 4 months of the year, which limits potential water 
savings from conservation irrigation with captured stormwa -
ter (see Figure 3-2 and Table 3-1-1). With 2,200-gallon tanks, 
water use savings of up to 28 percent are possible. Because 
of the low irrigation demand in this area, toilet flushing with 
captured runoff offers greater potential potable water sav -
ings (18 percent) compared to irrigation alone (13 percent). 
At Birmingham, Alabama, located in the Southeast, and 
at Newark, New Jersey, located on the East Coast, the ir -
rigation requirements are relatively modest compared to the 
large amounts of rainfall in these areas (see Figure 3-2). The 
largest beneficial use potential for roof runoff in these loca -
tions is associated with toilet flushing (17 and 18 percent). 
The maximum potential potable water savings is about 24 
TABLE 3 -7 Potential Potable Water Savings in Six Cities Based on a 100 -Acre, Medium -Density, Residential Area Using One 2,200 -gallon 
Stormwater Tank per Household  
  Volume Potable Water Savings   Potable Water Savings  
 Base use  
(Mgal/yr)  S1: Irrigation use  
only (Mgal/yr)  S2: Toilet  
flushing  (Mgal/yr)  S3: Irrigation  
and toilet flushing 
(Mgal/yr)   
S1: Irrigation  
use only  (%) S2: T oilet  
flushing  (%) S3: Irrigation and 
toilet flushing  (%) 
Los Angeles, CA  60.7 2.4 2.7 3.3  4.0 4.5 5.4 
Seattle, WA  35.7 2.8 4.2 5.5  7.8 12 15 
Lincoln, NE  35.8 7.6 3.9 9.2  21 11 26 
Madison, WI  24.2 3.2 4.3 6.8  13 18 28 
Birmingham, AL  24.3 2.4 4.3 5.8  9.7 18 24 
Newark, NJ  24.7 3.2 4.2 6.9  13 17 28 
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
56 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 3-9 Effects on water de -
mand from the beneficial use of 
roof runoff for conservation irriga -
tion and/or toilet flushing using two 
35-gallon rain barrels per house, 
based on a typical 100-acre, medium-
density, residential development.
FIGURE 3-10  Effects on water de -
mand from the beneficial use of roof 
runoff for conservation irrigation and/
or toilet flushing using one 2,200-  
gallon stormwater capture tank per 
house, based on a typical 100-acre, 
medium-density, residential develop -
ment.
TABLE 3 -8 Percentage Reduction in Roof Runoff in Six Cities Using Two Rain Barrels or One 2,200 -gallon Stormwater Tank  
per Household  
 Reduction in Roof Runoff Using Two 35 -gallon Rain Barrels   Reduction in  Roof Runoff Using a 2,200 -gallon  
Stormwater Tank  
S1: Irrig ation  
use only  (%) S2: Toilet  
flushing  (%) S3: Irrigation and  
toilet flushing (%)   S1: Irrigation  
use only  (%) S2: Toilet  
flushing  (%) S3: Irrigation and  
toilet flus hing (%) 
Los Angeles, CA  7.7 10 14  31 35 42 
Seattle, WA  6.1 13 17  16 24 31 
Lincoln, NE  14 12 18  61 31 74 
Madison, WI  8.4 15 19  29 39 62 
Birmingham, AL  5.7 14 16  21 38 52 
Newark, NJ  4.9 12 14  18 24 39 
NOTE: Based on analysis considering 100 -acre, medium -density, residential area.  
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  57
percent in Birmingham and 28 percent in Newark when us -
ing the larger storage tanks and with both toilet flushing and 
irrigation uses (only 10 and 13 percent, respectively, with 
irrigation alone). 
Tank Size.  Larger water storage volumes result in more 
potable water savings, but the differences are related to the 
magnitude and timing of precipitation relative to the de -
mand. Figure 3-11 shows the effects of increasing water stor -
age tank sizes on the annual domestic water savings based 
on simulated capture of rooftop runoff in medium-density, 
residential areas in Los Angeles. In this case, all of the an -
nual roof runoff was used for irrigation when the total stor -
age tank volume for the area was about 11 Mgal (42,000 m3) 
of storage per 100 acres of medium-density, residential area 
(a very large storage volume corresponding to about 10 tanks 
of 8 ft diameter and 6 ft tall per house). The annual domestic 
water savings in this maximum situation is about 7.7 Mgal 
(29,000 m3) per 100 acres. For this maximum roof runoff 
storage amount, the corresponding total stormwater runoff 
reduction for this area is about 37 percent (the percentage 
of roof runoff to the runoff from the whole area). For this 
arid area, more reasonably sized water storage tanks result in 
much less of the roof runoff being available for on-site use. 
Based on the scenario analysis for irrigation use only, the 
2,200-gallon tanks can result in savings of 2.5 to 4.8 times 
FIGURE 3-11 Example plot showing increasing water savings for a typical, medium-density, residential area in Los Angeles with increasing 
storage volumes. Two 35-gallon rain barrels per home (70 gal) correspond to 0.036 Mgal of storage per 100 acres, and a 2,200-gallon 
stormwater tank per home (8 ft diameter and 6 ft tall) corresponds to 1.14 Mgal of storage per 100 acres. To maximize rooftop runoff 
collection in Los Angeles, tank sizes would need to be nearly 10 times larger than the single 2,200-gallon tank.more potable water than the use of two 35-gallon rain barrels, 
for the six regions examined, but the large water tanks are 
32 times larger than the two rain barrels. Rain barrels saved 
the largest amount of potable water (5 percent) in Lincoln, 
Nebraska, which has a low but near-year-round irrigation 
demand, and the lowest amounts in Los Angeles (where the 
storage needs are huge) and Birmingham (where the runoff 
volumes are huge) (Table 3-6). Ultimately, the selection of 
tank size is dependent upon local climate conditions, storm -
water runoff area relative to on-site water demands, site con -
ditions, overall objectives, costs, and benefits (see Chapter 
7). Many factors affect the interaction of storage volumes 
and domestic water savings (most notably demand vs. avail -
ability patterns and roof areas vs. landscaped areas), requir -
ing continuous simulations for site-specific analyses, as was 
conducted for these analyses. The scenarios examined here 
show typical ranges of conditions and resulting expectations 
over a broad range of geographical conditions.
Runoff Reduction. Runoff reductions are a common goal of 
most stormwater management plans and options to use that 
runoff on site and prevent its discharge during rain events. 
This can be an important secondary benefit of beneficial use 
strategies. The results of these scenario analyses show that 
tank capture and beneficial use of roof runoff lead to maxi -
mum reductions (assuming use for irrigation and toilet flush -
0.1110
0.001 0.01 0.1 1 10 100Annual water savings (Mgal/100 ac/yr)
Tank volume (Mgal/100 ac)Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
58 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ing) between 31 percent (Seattle) and 74 percent (Lincoln; 
see Table 3-7) of annual roof runoff in residential areas. Rain 
barrels result in significantly smaller maximum reductions 
in runoff, ranging from 14 percent (Los Angeles and New -
ark) to 18 percent (Lincoln); for irrigation only, rain barrels 
reduce runoff by 5 to 14 percent (Newark and Lincoln, re -
spectively). Factors influencing the magnitude of runoff re -
duction include the timing of rainfall relative to irrigation 
and toilet flushing demand as well as the ratio of rooftop area 
to irrigated land in each area (which varies depending on 
local development patterns, see Table A-2 in Appendix A). 
Again, because of the nature of these analyses using multi-
year modeling, some years will have greater benefits than 
these estimates, while other years will have smaller benefits.
Other Land Uses. Water savings from irrigation uses are 
typically much smaller in industrial and commercial areas 
compared to the above residential area examples because 
they have less irrigated landscape areas compared to roof 
areas. However, the large roof areas offer potential for other 
nonpotable uses, such as cooling water, toilet flushing, or in -
dustrial uses. In most regions of the country, high-density, 
residential and institutional areas result in the greatest water 
savings potentials from irrigation for similar storage tank 
sizes, although the water savings vary (greatest in the central 
and East Coast areas, and the least in the Southwest). 
Water Savings Compared to Shallow Groundwater Infil -
tration. Rain gardens are popular on-site controls that have 
relatively low costs compared to other options and can sig -
nificantly reduce the discharges of roof runoff from homes. 
The water infiltrating in a rain garden contributes to shal -
low groundwater recharge, which, depending on the local 
hydrogeology, may or may not eventually augment regional 
drinking water supplies. In analyses of rain gardens in Kan -
sas City, Missouri, Pitt et al. (2014) reported that 10 Mgal/
yr per 100 acres (38,000 m3/yr per 40 ha) could be infiltrated 
with rain gardens in a community having about 600 homes 
per 100 acres and 39 inches of rain per year. Only a small 
fraction of the incoming water was lost through evapotrans -
piration in the rain garden (usually less than 10 percent) be -
cause of the large amount of water applied to relatively small 
areas. This total groundwater infiltration is about the same as 
the maximum potable water savings from the committee’s 
scenario analysis for Lincoln, Nebraska (9.2 Mgal/yr per 100 
acres [35,000 m3/yr per 40 ha] for toilet flushing and irriga -
tion uses; Table 3-6), although water supply savings would 
depend on whether groundwater supplies are under stress 
from excessive withdrawals and whether shallow groundwa -
ter infiltration projects ultimately recharge deeper aquifers 
used for water supply.Stormwater Availability from  
Neighborhood-scale Projects 
Neighborhood-scale stormwater capture for beneficial 
use commonly mixes stormwater flows originating from sev -
eral areas located close together. The most common situation 
is collecting gutter flows in areas that are several acres to a 
few hundred acres in size. The captured stormwater is either 
stored in large subsurface tanks for nearby nonpotable use 
(e.g., irrigation, toilet flushing, washwater, aesthetic water 
features [see Chapter 2]) or used for aquifer recharge. 
Overall, the potential water savings from neighborhood-
scale stormwater capture is related to the available storm -
water storage volume and the groundwater infiltration rate, 
source area, land development types, and correlation of wa -
ter demand with rainfall. Several examples of neighborhood-
scale projects are highlighted in Chapter 2. In the Sun Valley 
neighborhood of Los Angeles, a new neighborhood storm -
water capture and infiltration project is expected to add 300 
Mgal/yr (900 AF/yr or 1.1 million m3/yr) to the groundwa -
ter supply based on drainage from a 929-acre area (3.8 km2; 
Box 2-6). The new stormwater capture project for irrigation 
of the National Mall in Washington, DC, is anticipated to 
save 7.5 Mgal/yr (28,000 m3/yr; Box 2-5). Because neigh -
borhood-scale stormwater capture projects are centrally 
managed, they offer the opportunity to reduce conventional 
water use over a larger area without necessitating investment 
and maintenance by individual homeowners, simplifying 
implementation and increasing the reach of stormwater cap -
ture programs. 
The stormwater flows for neighborhood-scale projects 
are greater compared to just capturing roof runoff. Table 3-4 
summarizes average annual runoff quantities from 1995 to 
1999 for the most common three land uses (i.e., commercial, 
industrial, and medium-density residential) for six locations 
in the United States. Flow from a given mixed land use area 
would need to be calculated based on the percentages of var -
ious land use types (see Appendix A). For a simplified ex -
ample, Los Angeles in the Southwest has total runoff ranging 
from 210,000 to 320,000 gallons/yr/acre (2,000 to 3,000 m3/
yr/ha), depending on land use (Table 3-4). Even if sufficient 
storage is not available to capture some periods of very high 
flows, most of the annual runoff could be retained for ben -
eficial uses at the neighborhood scale. These flows provide 
roughly four times the annual volumes needed to meet toilet 
flushing demand for a medium-density residential commu -
nity6 (48,000 gallons/yr/acre or 450 m3/yr/ha), leaving sub -
stantial water available for other nonpotable uses. Yet, total 
6 Assuming a population density of about 12 persons/acre and av -
erage toilet flushing water use of about 11 gallons/person/day.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  59
capture of stormwater in the Los Angeles area could sup -
ply roughly only one-half of the outdoor irrigation require -
ments for medium-density, residential areas having turfgrass 
(410,000 gallons/yr/acre or 3,800 m3/yr/ha). For the Lincoln 
and Newark scenarios, the available flows shown in Table 
3-4 provide more than enough water to meet medium-den -
sity, residential toilet flushing (48,000 gallons/yr/acre) and 
irrigation needs (150,000 gallons/yr/acre [1,400 m3/yr/ha or 
450 m3/yr/ha] in Lincoln, Nebraska; 45,000 gallons/yr/acre 
[420 m3/yr/ha] for Newark, New Jersey; see Appendix A). 
All of the stormwater used for these beneficial uses would 
directly decrease demand on the normal public water supply 
system. However, this would require substantial investments 
in infrastructure (e.g., storage, treatment, and a dual-water 
distribution system to deliver the water to the buildings, plus 
substantial building modifications to accommodate a dual-
water system). The design of such systems is discussed in 
Chapter 6, and the costs and benefits are broadly discussed 
in Chapter 7.
Stormwater Availability from Regional-Scale Projects
Regional-scale systems for the beneficial uses of storm -
water collect runoff from many different land uses in relative -
ly large areas. These may incorporate the complete communi -
ty, ranging from several to many square miles in area. Given 
the large scale of these projects, the typical applications of 
the captured stormwater are aquifer recharge through large 
infiltration basins designed to recharge water supply aquifers 
or surface impoundments used to augment the conventional 
water supply. The amount of stormwater potentially available 
from regional-scale projects has been estimated for the en -
tire Los Angeles basin as part of a stormwater conservation 
study (RMC, 2014). This study is intended to provide an un -
derstanding of the potential benefit of additional stormwater 
capture systems that could be implemented across the basin 
by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District and its 
partners. Considering centralized stormwater capture—such 
as spreading basins for managed replenishment/recharge of 
local groundwater basin in an engineered facility—the es -
timate for the next 20 years is 239,000 AF/yr (295 million  
m3/yr) increasing potentially to 494,000 AF/yr (609 million 
m3/yr) by 2095. 
Calculations of stormwater availability at a regional 
scale could be similar to those in the prior section on neigh -
borhood-scale. For the Los Angeles area, average annual run -
off ranges from 210,000 to 320,000 gallons/yr/acre (2,000 to 
3,000 m3/yr/ha), based on land use and data from 1995-1999 
(Table 3-4). Assuming a population density of about 12 per -
sons/acre and a total indoor water use of about 46 gallons/
person/day, the total water demand would be about 200,000 gallons/acre. Therefore, if entirely captured and stored for 
later use through a regional stormwater infiltration system, 
based on 1995-1999 data, then Los Angeles stormwater could 
supply all of the total annual domestic indoor water demand, 
although outdoor water requirements would not be met. Un -
der wetter East Coast and Southeast conditions, stormwater at 
a regional scale could supply at least twice the water demand 
for indoor use, providing sufficient additional water for ir -
rigation and other beneficial uses. 
The runoff volumes shown in Table 3-4 are modeled 
runoff averages based on five years of data, and annual run -
off would be expected to vary widely. In addition, extensive 
infrastructure would likely be needed to collect, store, treat, 
and deliver this water to the points of use (see Chapter 6). 
Not all of the water that is used for groundwater recharge 
is withdrawn, and non-recovered groundwater and seepage 
and evaporation losses would also need to be considered in 
the water supply evaluations using more complex regional 
groundwater modeling. Water rights laws may also restrict 
regional scale water capture unless water utilities can secure 
the water rights to stormwater that is recharged into a water 
supply aquifer (see Chapter 8).
Downstream Effects of Stormwater  
Use in Existing Developments
On-site beneficial uses of stormwater can raise water 
rights concerns for downstream users. Therefore, it is impor -
tant that, when water rights present an issue (see Chapter 8), 
the impact of potential beneficial uses of stormwater on vari -
ous components of the local water budget (Figure 3-3-1) and 
its effects on downstream water availability be understood 
in existing developments. For new developments, there will 
be increased runoff from the development compared to the 
undeveloped landscape that further complicate any evalua -
tion of impacts to downstream water availability and would 
necessitate more detailed water budget analysis to deter -
mine the overall effects of on-site stormwater capture. When 
stormwater is used for toilet flushing, potable water use is 
reduced by the volume used for flushing, as is the amount 
of stormwater runoff from the property. Therefore, there is 
no net effect on regional hydrology in terms of downstream 
water availability because reduction in stormwater runoff is 
balanced by reduction in potable water demand (see Table 
3-9), assuming that the water supply is from the same water -
shed. If potable water supply is provided by imported water, 
then widespread stormwater use for nonconsumptive appli -
cations could reduce the need for water imports. In such a 
case, downstream water availability in the basin with storm -
water use could be reduced, although the basin from which 
the water is imported would see increased water flows.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
60 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
If stormwater is captured for landscape irrigation in 
existing development, then potable water use is reduced by 
the volume of stormwater used for irrigation, assuming the 
amount of water applied to landscaping is not increased after 
installation of the stormwater capture system. Use of storm -
water for irrigation results in the same water losses to the hy -
drologic cycle from consumptive use because of evapotrans -
piration and recharge to groundwater, as would have been 
the case for potable water applied to existing landscaping 
that the stormwater replaced. The amount of stormwater run -
off from the property is reduced by the amount used for irri -
gation, which can result in decreased flows to local receiving 
water bodies or to a regional stormwater collection system 
by the amount used for irrigation. However, there is no net 
effect on regional hydrology in terms of water availability 
within a watershed because reduction in stormwater runoff is 
balanced by reduction in potable water demand, again if the 
domestic water is not imported. 
If the use of stormwater for irrigation results in a greater 
demand for irrigation water use on a property (such as from 
additional plantings), then this could result in little or no re -
duction in potable water use (i.e., potable water continues 
to be used for irrigation but is supplemented by stormwa -
ter). With an expanded area of irrigated landscape, there 
would be increased evapotranspiration losses compared to 
the base case, resulting in reduced flows to downstream us -
ers. If the area of irrigated landscape is unchanged but the 
irrigation rate increases, then the downstream impacts are 
less clear. There could be increased evapotranspiration loss -
es but groundwater recharge would likely also increase, and 
these gains and losses to downstream users would need to be 
compared to the base conditions of evapotranspiration and 
groundwater recharge in the environment.CONCLUSIONS
The following conclusions are based on the commit -
tee’s scenario analyses of graywater and stormwater uses for 
conservation irrigation of turfgrass, toilet flushing, or both, 
as well as other assessments of potable water savings in the 
literature. The committee’s analyses primarily focused on 
on-site capture and use of graywater or stormwater at the 
medium-density, residential scale, using 1994-1999 pre -
cipitation data. However, the potential for neighborhood 
and regional stormwater capture was also considered. These 
analyses were not intended as a definitive assessment of po -
tential potable water savings and should not be considered as 
such, given the assumptions of the analysis and the inherent 
uncertainties (see Box 3-2). However, broad lessons can be 
learned from a comparative analysis of the results.
Water savings associated with beneficial use of storm -
water are dependent on tank size and the amount and 
timing of precipitation relative to water demand.  Substan -
tial, potential, household-scale water savings (24 to 28 per -
cent) from the capture and use of roof runoff were calculated 
for scenario analyses in four of the six cities analyzed using 
one moderately sized (2,200-gallon) storage tank per house. 
These cities—Lincoln, Nebraska; Madison, Wisconsin; Bir -
mingham, Alabama; and Newark, New Jersey (all located in 
the Midwest or East Coast)—have year-round rainfall closely 
matching irrigation demands. In contrast, the scenario analy -
sis showed lower potential potable water savings for Los An -
geles and Seattle (5 and 15 percent, respectively). In much 
of the arid West, the timing and intensity of rainfall limits 
the capacity of stormwater collection to reduce potable water 
use at the household scale. Very small stormwater water stor -
age volumes provide much lower water savings benefits (less 
than 2 percent in Los Angeles to up to 10 percent in Newark 
using two 35-gallon rain barrels per house, for example). TABLE 3 -9 Summary of Water Budget Effects from the Beneficial Use of Stormwater at Existing Developments  
 Water Quantity Effects   Water Quality Effects  
Potable water use  Wastewater  
volume generated  Off-site  
stormwater runoff  Water available  
to downstream  
water users   
Stormwater  
contaminant loading  
Stormwater use for toilet flushing  Reduced  No change  Reduced  No change   Reduced  
Stormwater use for irrigation  
of existing landscapea Reduced  No change  Reduced  No change   Reduced  
Stormwater use f or irrigation  
of expanded landscape  May be slightly 
reduced, unchanged,  
or increased  No change  Reduced  Reduced   Reduced  
Stormwater irrigation of existing 
landscape at  
increased rates  Reduced  No change  Reduced  Dependent on local 
hydrogeologic  
conditions   Reduced  
aAssumes irrigation rates throughout the year are the same before and after installation of the stormwater capture system.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quantities Available for Beneficial Use and Potential Impacts on Water Demand  61
Neighborhood- and regional-scale stormwater cap -
ture projects can contribute significantly to urban water 
supplies. This is especially important for arid climates in 
which stormwater can be stored in aquifers for use during 
drought or the dry season. The committee’s scenario analy -
ses showed that average 1995-1999 stormwater runoff for 
medium-density, residential developments in Los Angeles 
would be roughly sufficient to meet indoor, residential, water 
needs in those areas. However, extensive infrastructure for 
large-scale collection, treatment, and storage or infiltration 
would likely be needed.
Graywater reuse offers the potential for substan -
tial potable water savings and could provide a reliable 
source of water for arid regions. Based on the commit -
tee’s scenario analyses, graywater reuse provides greater po -
table water savings than does stormwater capture (based on 
a 2,200-gallon tank per house) in Los Angeles and Seattle, 
because graywater provides a steady water source during 
summer months with little or no rainfall. Additionally, the 
analyses showed that graywater can more effectively meet 
toilet flushing demand compared to stormwater in all cities 
analyzed. Graywater use for toilet flushing has been demon -
strated to achieve potable water savings as theoretically ex -
pected, but water savings associated with graywater irriga -
tion at the household scale have not been demonstrated with 
confidence. Little is known about the impact of installing on-
site nonpotable water systems on human water use behavior, 
which points to the need to study behavioral responses to 
conservation measures. 
Beneficial use of graywater is more appropriate for 
residential and multi-residential applications than for 
commercial application. Most commercial facilities do not 
generate enough graywater to justify use for toilet flushing 
or irrigation. Even offices that have showers on site are not 
likely to generate enough graywater to meet end use de -
mands (toilet or irrigation). Some commercial applications 
for which graywater use may be appropriate include fitness 
facilities, hotels, and laundromats.
If water conservation is the primary driver for storm -
water and graywater investments, then strategies that re -
duce outdoor water use should first be examined. In arid regions, potential potable water savings for residential and 
multi-residential use of stormwater and/or graywater are sig -
nificant, but small relative to today’s outdoor water demand. 
Although use of graywater or roof runoff for toilet flushing 
can reduce indoor demand by up to 24 percent, the potential 
annual reduction in domestic water demand for the Los An -
geles area estimated in the committee’s scenario analyses av -
eraged only 13 percent for graywater reuse (and significantly 
less for stormwater capture, even using large tanks). These 
limited reductions in total demand result from the very high 
irrigation demand in arid regions. Irrigation demand account -
ed for 67 percent of the total demand in Los Angeles in the 
hypothetical scenarios examined here. Thus, the largest re -
ductions in water demand in arid regions would be provided 
by approaches to reduce or eliminate irrigation demand, such 
as lawn-removal rebate programs and the use of xeriscap -
ing and other types of climate-appropriate, low-water-use 
landscapes. In these circumstances, graywater could be used 
to supply irrigation water to meet specific small irrigation 
needs. Otherwise, graywater and stormwater may help facili -
tate the continued use of landscaping that is not sustainable in 
the long term and inappropriate for local climate conditions. 
On-site use of nonpotable water for toilet flushing is 
a proven way to achieve potable water savings that does 
not impact the water availability to downstream users. 
Reductions in flows to sanitary sewers and stormwater run -
off are balanced by reductions in potable water demand, as -
suming these flows occur in the same watershed. Water sav -
ings and effects on regional water availability from irrigation 
with graywater or stormwater in existing developments de -
pend on whether irrigation rates or the area of irrigated land -
scape increases compared to the base case. If irrigation rates 
and landscaped areas are not increased, then potable water 
savings would occur that do not impact water availability to 
downstream users. If the irrigated landscape is expanded (or 
the supplemental irrigation water rate increased), then po -
table savings may be reduced and additional consumptive 
losses would occur from evapotranspiration, potentially im -
pacting downstream users. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
624
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater
Stormwater and graywater can contain a wide variety 
of contaminants, including inorganic (e.g., metals, nutrients, 
and salts) and organic (e.g., industrial chemicals, pesticides, 
household chemicals) chemicals and microorganisms. The 
most common applications of graywater and stormwater in -
volve nonpotable uses, such as irrigation, washing, and toilet 
flushing, but these uses can be associated with human contact 
and inadvertent ingestion exposures. Groundwater recharge of 
stormwater can also impact potable uses, and environmental 
impacts on plants and soils in irrigated areas are also possible 
(Australian SCEW, 2009; NRMMC et al., 2009a). Therefore, 
when considering the potential applications of graywater and 
stormwater to conserve conventional water supplies, it is im -
portant to understand water qualities, how they vary under a 
range of conditions, implications on various beneficial uses, 
and strategies to reduce the concentrations of harmful con -
taminants by source control and treatment. 
This chapter describes what is known about the quality 
of graywater and stormwater sources, and issues that water 
quality may present to certain end uses. Treatment options 
are available for uses that necessitate improved or more con -
sistent water quality (see Chapter 6). This chapter also dis -
cusses source area controls to manage water quality. Chapter 
5 presents the human health and environmental risks associ -
ated with graywater and stormwater uses, which then can 
inform decisions regarding additional treatment needed (see 
Chapter 6) and affect project costs (see Chapter 7). 
GRAYWATER QUALITY
Graywater may contain elevated levels of chemicals and 
disease-causing microorganisms (pathogens), but the quality 
of graywater can vary greatly from location to location based 
on the contributing sources (e.g., laundry, showers, baths), 
the amounts and types of chemicals used or disposed there 
(e.g., detergents, bleach, solvents, cleansers, personal care 
products), and the health of the residents in the source area. 
At smaller scales (i.e., households), these factors can result 
in widely variable contaminant concentrations in graywater, although larger-scale projects (i.e., large multi-residential 
developments) would likely have more consistent water 
quality, because variations in contaminant loads are aver -
aged over many more contributing households. Table 4-1 
presents general ranges of common physical, chemical, and 
microbial water quality constituents for graywater, consid -
ering a range of possible sources. Graywater quality varies 
substantially, and the ranges of water quality measurements 
provided in Table 4-1 are intended to provide a general idea 
of concentrations of each constituent that can be expected in 
graywater. The data are from Eriksson et al. (2002), which is 
the most comprehensive summary of graywater quality, and 
other sources where the committee deemed the number of 
persons contributing to the system and number of samples 
collected appropriate. Table 4-1 also includes water quality 
data from kitchen sources, which show high levels of solids, 
organic matter, and indicator organisms, demonstrating why 
kitchen water sources are typically excluded from graywater 
collection systems.
Many different types of microorganisms capable of caus -
ing human illness may be present in human fecal material. 
Depending on the specific sources contributing to the gray -
water, these microorganisms may be present. For example, 
laundry wash and rinse water, as well as shower and bath -
tub water may contain fecal material and therefore create the 
potential for pathogenic (disease-causing) microorganisms 
to be present in graywater. These microorganisms can be 
generally grouped into the following types: viruses, bacteria, 
protozoa, and helminths. The most common health concern 
caused by waterborne pathogens associated with direct ex -
posure to graywater is gastroenteritis, although many other 
illnesses, including hepatitis, encephalitis, and myocarditis, 
may result from exposure to enteric pathogens. Fecal indica -
tor bacteria (such as total coliform bacteria and fecal coli -
form bacteria) are often used as surrogates for the presence 
of pathogenic microorganisms, and their concentrations are 
therefore often used to set treatment requirements for dif -
ferent end uses. However, the detection of indicator bacteria 
does not necessarily mean that pathogenic organisms are also Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 63
present. Because pathogens are only excreted by infected in -
dividuals (Ashbolt et al., 2001), the greater the number of 
people contributing to graywater, the greater the likelihood 
of the presence of a range of pathogens. However, even in 
waste streams to which a small number of people contrib -
ute, when an infected individual is excreting pathogens, the 
concentration can be very high because of the relative lack 
of dilution. Perhaps more importantly, the absence of indi -
cator microorganisms does not necessarily mean an absence 
of pathogenic microorganisms, because many pathogens are 
more persistent than the indicator microorganisms. Microor -
ganisms capable of causing skin infections, such as Staphy -
lococcus aureus  and Pseudomonas aeruginosa , may also be 
present in graywater (Casanova et al., 2001). Table 4-2 sum -
marizes reported concentrations of microbial indicators and 
pathogens in graywater. 
The amount of organic matter is measured as total organ -
ic carbon (TOC), and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) is 
a measure of its degradability. These parameters can indicate the risk of oxygen depletion due to microbial degradation 
of organic matter during transport and storage of graywater, 
potentially resulting in hypoxia and sulfide production. High 
levels of biodegradable organic matter in graywater limit the 
potential for graywater to be stored or used for toilet flushing 
or in ornamental fountains without treatment, because of the 
likelihood of microbial growth.
Other pollutants present in graywater include xenobi -
otic organic chemicals, consisting of personal care products 
and household chemicals, although only a limited number of 
studies have comprehensively investigated the occurrence of 
these chemicals in graywater sources (Donner et al., 2010; 
Eriksson et al., 2002). Although trace organic chemicals, such 
as pharmaceuticals, household chemicals, and endocrine-
disrupting chemicals, have been reported to occur in domes -
tic raw wastewater at the household or neighborhood scale 
(Conn et al., 2010; Teerlink et al., 2012), the composition of 
graywater differs from wastewater sewage and usually exhib -
its lower concentrations of pharmaceutical residues and high -
TABLE 4 -1 Chemical and Microbial Quality of Untreated Graywater from Individual and Combined Sources  
Parameter  Bathroom Laundry Kitchen Sink and Dishwasher Graywater Combined  
(excludes kitchen water)  
Physical      
Temperature ( °C) 29 28-32 27-38  
Turbidity  28-240 14-210  15-140 
Total suspended solids (TSS), mg/L  54-200 120-280 240-2,400   
Total dissolved solids (TDS), mg/L  140-1,300    310-930 
Electrical conductivity ( µS/cm)  82-250 190-1,400    
Chemical      
pH 6.4 – 8.1 8.1-10 6.3-7.4 6.7-7.6 
Alkalinity  24-67 83-200 20-340 150-200 
BOD 5 (mg/L)  26-300 48-380 1,000 -1,500  125-250 
COD (mg/L)  100-630 13-720 3.8-1,400  250-430 
Total organic carbon (mg/L)  30-100 100-280 600-880  
Sodium absorption ratio     2.3 - 6 
Boron (mg/L)     0.1-1.6 
Chloride (mg/L)  9.0-19 9.0-90  22-34 
TN (mg/L)  5-17 6-21 0.3-74 0.6-5.2 
TP (mg/L)  0.1-4 0.1->100  68-74  
PO 4 (mg/L)  0.94-49 4-170 13-32 4-35 
NH 4 (mg/L)  <0.1-15 0.04-11 0.005 -6 0.15-3.2 
NO 3 (mg/L)  0.28-6.3 0.4-2 0.3-5.8 0-4.9 
Anionic surfactants (mg/L)  21 92 6  
Microbial      
Total coliform/100 mL  102.7-107.4 101.9-105.2 107-109 107.2-108.8 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa /100 ml     1.99 x 104 
E. coli/100 mL 101.6-103.4 101.5-103.9 105.4-109  
Cryptosporidium spp . no detection  no detection    
NOTE: Graywater as defined in this report does not include kitchen water.  
SOURCES:  Birks and Hills (2007); Casanova et al. (2001); Christova -Boal  et al. (1996);  Donner et al. (2010); Eriksson et al. (2002);  Gross et 
al. (2007); Mehlhart (2005);  Nolde (1999) ; Ottoson and Stenstrom (2003); Rose et al. (1991); Sharvelle et al. (2013); Sheikh (2010); 
Weingaertner (2013 ). Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
64 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
er concentrations of personal care products and antimicrobial 
chemicals found in hand soap (Etchepare and van der Hoek, 
2015; Table 4-3). These chemicals pose possible concerns for 
irrigation uses (see Chapter 5). 
Major ions such as sodium, chloride, and boron can also 
adversely affect vegetation if present at elevated concentra -
tions. Sodium has been reported to be elevated in soil ir -
rigated with graywater compared to potable water sources 
(Negahban-Azar et al., 2012). Boron in graywater can be 
derived from some laundry detergents and cleaning agents.
Source Control of Graywater Quality
Some practices can minimize graywater quality issues. 
To reduce adverse effects on irrigated plants and soils, liquid 
rather than powdered detergents should be used to prevent 
high sodium loads, and boron-containing detergents and 
cleaning agents should be avoided. In addition, use of prod -ucts containing antimicrobial compounds is not recommend -
ed when graywater is to be applied for irrigation. Materials 
containing large amounts of organic matter that would exert 
a high oxygen demand or interfere with the disinfection pro -
cess and toxic ingredients (e.g., paints, solvents) should not 
be poured down the drain into a graywater collection system.
The potential presence of human pathogens is a concern 
for irrigation, as well as for toilet flushing (see Chapter 5). 
The risks associated with these pathogens can be reduced 
by implementing such measures as not washing feces-soiled 
clothing or diapers in laundry machines that drain to the 
graywater system or diverting laundry water that is used for 
this purpose to the sewer.
STORMWATER QUALITY
The quality of stormwater is highly variable over time 
and space. Stormwater can be derived from a wide variety of 
TABLE 4 -2 Pathogenic and Indicator Microorganisms in Untreated Graywater  
Microorganism  Range Reported  Positive Samples (%)  Mean  Standard Deviation  
Pathogens      
E. coli  O157:H7 (per L)  ND 0   
Salmonella  (MPN/L)  detected  13   
Legionella pneumophila  ND 0   
Legionella  non-pneumophila  ND 0   
Campylobacter (per L)  ND 0   
Giardia (cysts/L)  0.5-1.5 63   
Cryptosporidium (oocysts/L)  ND 0   
Enterovirus (per 10 L)  ND 0   
Indicator organisms      
Total coliforms/100 ml    2.2 x 107 9.0 x 107 
E. coli /100 ml    3.9 x 105 2.4 x 106 
Fecal enterococci/100 ml    2.5 x 103 4.8 x 103 
NOTE: Eight pathogen samples were taken over 3 months from a graywater collection tank that received water from baths, shower s, and 
sinks from 18 units of an apartment building that primarily housed married students.   
SOURCE: Birks and Hills (2007).  
TABLE 4 -3 Maximum Concentrations of Trace Organic Chemicals Reported in European Graywater and Municipal Wastewater Effluents  
Chemical  Class  Graywater ( µg/L) WWTP Effluent ( µg/L) 
Salicylic acid  Pharmaceutica l 1.5 777 
Caffeine  Stimulant  0.5 43.5 
Benzophenone  Personal care product  4.9 0.23 
Galaxolide  Personal care product  19.1 2.77 
Tonalide  Personal care product  5.8 0.32 
Triclosan  Antimicrobial  35.7 6.88 
4-Nonylphenol  Surfactant  38 7.8 
4-Octylphenol  Surfactant  0.16 1.3 
Bisphenol A  Plasticizer  1.2 4.09 
Diethyl phthalate  Plasticizer  38 2.58 
SOURCE: Etchepare and van der Hoek (2015).   Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 65
source areas and land uses, ranging from rooftops and open 
spaces to industrial areas and high-traffic roadways. The 
concentrations of contaminants in stormwater will also vary 
depending on the building materials in the catchment area, 
the size of the drainage area, the intensity of the storm event, 
and environmental and seasonal factors. Small rain events 
(i.e., less than 0.5 inches [1.2 cm]) generally include most 
of precipitation events by number, but they produce a small 
percentage of annual runoff volumes. The largest rains (i.e., 
greater than 2 inches [5 cm]) also supply a relatively small 
percentage of total annual flows and pollutant discharges, 
although heavy rains can mobilize high concentrations of 
solids and sediment-associated pollutants. Most of the total 
annual stormwater flows and pollutant discharges (frequent -
ly more than 75 percent by mass) occur from intermediate 
rainfall events (i.e., 0.5 to 2 inches).
Compared to graywater, an even wider array of contam -
inants can be found in stormwater because of the diversity of 
source areas. Primary contaminants of concern for beneficial 
uses include metals, organic chemicals (including herbicides, 
industrial chemicals, and petroleum-derived chemicals), 
pathogens, salts, nutrients, and suspended solids. Table 4-4 
provides an overall summary of these contaminants, mea -
sured at stormwater outfalls at the neighborhood or regional 
scale, during more than 9,400 storm events. These data re -
flect a variety of land uses, with about 46 percent from resi -
dential areas, 19 percent from commercial areas, 17 percent 
from industrial areas, 8 percent from major transportation 
areas, 6 percent from open space areas, and 2 percent from 
institutional areas. For comparison, these data are presented 
next to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) drink -
ing water maximum contaminants levels and water reuse 
guidance for irrigation. Individual contaminant classes are 
discussed further in the sections that follow.
Nutrients and Organic Matter
When discharged into surface waters nutrients and or -
ganic matter can cause algal blooms and low oxygen condi -
tions, thereby harming aquatic life. Sources of nitrogen and 
phosphorus to stormwater include atmospheric nitrogen de -
position, fertilizer runoff, animal feces, and combined sewer 
overflows. In stormwater beneficial use scenarios, excess 
nutrients can foster algal growths in stormwater storage fa -
cilities or surface water features, such as ponds or fountains. 
Most storage tanks are designed to be opaque to restrict sun 
penetration and associated algal growths. Although nitrate 
poses human health concerns at high concentrations in drink -
ing water, most stormwater concentrations are well below 
the 10 mg/L maximum contaminant level (see Table 4-4). Excessive biodegradable organic matter can contribute 
to severe odor problems in storage systems and cause nui -
sances when the water is used, but organic matter in stormwa -
ter samples tends to be low. Less than 10 percent of samples 
in the National Stormwater Quality Database exceeded the 
recommended water reuse criteria for irrigation for BOD5, 
reflecting elevated levels of biodegradable organic matter. 
Suspended Sediment
Suspended sediment (total suspended solids [TSS]) con -
veys particle-associated contaminants (e.g., phosphorus, met -
als, some organic contaminants and pathogens) (Characklis 
et al., 2005; Jartun et al., 2008; Murakami et al., 2005). In 
stormwater beneficial use scenarios, suspended solids can 
clog irrigation systems and can result in reduced water clar -
ity, causing aesthetic concerns when the water is used in toilet 
flushing or ornamental water features. Greater than one-than 
half of the National Stormwater Quality Database observa -
tions exceed the recommended guidance for TSS, and the 
mean detected level is approximately 5 times greater than the 
recommended 30 mg/L level for irrigation use (Table 4-4). 
Salt
Salts represent a concern for irrigation uses and ground -
water infiltration. Plants have different salt tolerances, and 
high chloride concentrations can severely damage some 
plants. Excessive sodium concentrations (especially in rela -
tion to calcium and magnesium) can cause an elevated sodi -
um adsorption ratio (SAR). High SARs dramatically inhibit 
water infiltration in soils when the sodium interacts with 
even small amounts of clay. 
In northern areas, de-icing chemicals are major sources 
of salt to stormwater and could pose a risk to groundwater 
quality in stormwater infiltration projects. In a U.S. Geologi -
cal Survey (USGS) occurrence study of sodium and chlo -
ride in groundwater in 19 northern U.S. states, Mullaney et 
al. (2009) detected chloride contamination (above the EPA 
secondary criteria of 250 mg/L) in 1.7 percent of drinking 
water wells and exceedance of the sodium advisory level (20 
mg/L) in nearly 47 percent of public-supply wells and 34 
percent of domestic wells. Mullaney et al. (2009) determined 
that de-icing salts were the predominant source. Enhanced 
recharge of stormwater without attention to salt concentra -
tions could exacerbate this problem. 
Pathogens
Pathogenic microorganisms in stormwater are typically 
derived from animal wastes (e.g., Salmonella  and Campylo -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
66 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
TABLE 4 -4 Stormwater Quality Data at Neighborhood/Regional Outfalls from the National Stormwater Quality Database, Version 4 (March 
17, 2105 version)  
Constituent  EPA Drinking 
Water MCLa Irrigation  
Use Guidanceb All Locations Combined (9,052 total events)  
Average of 
detected valuesc 5th percentile  
of all valuesc 50th percentile  
of all values 
(median)c 95th percentile  
of all valuesc # of 
observations  % detected  
pH 6.5 to 8.5c 6 to 9  7.3 6.1 7.3 8.6 3,179  100 
Total dissolved solids (TDS) (mg/L)  500c  140 25 80 370 4,120  99 
Chloride (mg/L)  250c  26 1 6.2 92 869 84 
Total suspended solids (TSS) (mg/L)   30 140 7 63 510 7,637  99 
Turbidity (NTU)    39 4 19 120 936 100 
BOD 5 (mg/L)   30 14 2 8.3 42 5,152  95 
COD (mg/L)    79 6.3 51 240 5,214  96 
TOC (mg/L)    16 3 8.6 52 678 100 
Ammonia (mg/L as N)    0.77 <0.1 0.28 2.1 2,946  72 
Nitrate (mg/L as N)  10  0.97 <0.1 0.58 2.7 1,028  92 
Nitrite (mg/L as N)  1  0.17 <0.1 <0.1 0.38 714 64 
Total phosphorus (mg/L as P)    0.4 0.05 0.24 1.1 7,943  97 
Microorganisms  
Fecal coliforms (MPN/100 mL)   <200d 60,000  65 4,600  200,000  2,168  92e 
Fecal streptococci (MPN/100 mL)    73,000  500 19,000  300,000  1,317  94e 
Total coliforms (MPN/100 mL)  5.0% positive   260,000  300 24,000  1,600,000  282 77e 
E. coli  (MPN/100 mL)    5,900  23 1,200  28,000  139 98e 
Metals  
Arsenic, total (µg/L)  10 100 5.9 <5 1 8 2,367  34 
Barium, total (µg/L)  2,000   55 2 21 110 582 66 
Cadmium, total (µg/L)  5 10 3.5 <1 0.35 5 4,002  40 
Chromium, total (µg/L)  100 100 12 0.5 4 25 2,266  57 
Copper, total (µg/L)  1,300f 200 33 0.5 13 94 5,836  89 
Iron, total (µg/L)  300c 5,000  2,700  17 470 6,500  608 86 
Lead, total, since 1984 (µg/L)  15f 5,000  34 <5 8 100 4,960  74 
Nickel,  total (µg/L)   200 14 <5 4 30 2,090  51 
Zinc, total (µg/L)  5,000c 2,000  200 5.9 91 560 6,563  96 
Organic Contaminants  
Oil and grease, total (mg/L)    21 0.2 3 37 2,256  68 
Total petroleum hydrocarbons(mg/L)    3.9 0.3 1.8 9.6 295 65 
2-Chloroethylvinlether (µg/L)    3.4 0.2 2.4 5 624 58 
Dichlorobromoethane (µg/L)    0.85 <1 0.55 1.6 116 36 
1,2-Dichloroethane (µg/L)  5  1.5 0.05 0.15 1.8 247 21 
Methlenechloride (µg/L)    12 <1 <1 14 457 20 
aEPA  maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for drinking water (see http://water.epa.gov/drink/standardsriskmanagement.cfm).  
bEPA 2012 Water Reuse Guidelines (EPA, 2012a).  
cIndicates secondary MCL.  
dFecal coliform/100 mL (not MPN).  
eMost bacteria values that are n ot quantified exceeded the upper limit of the analytical method (over -range).  
fAction level.  
NOTE: Most of these data were obtained from the municipal stormwater  permit program (MS4), with additional data from the National Urban 
Runoff Program (EPA, 1983) and various research projects.  Although the database contains sampling sites in all nine rain zones in the United 
States, most of the sampling data has been coll ected from the upper Midwest and Northeast, mid -Atlantic, Southeast, Southwest, and Northwest 
areas. Because these data include multiple data sets, the concentrations reported may reflect different sampling points and t imes for different 
constituents. The median and percentile  values are calculated considering both the detected values and nondetected or over -range values, with no 
data substitutions, while the average values are for only the detected values. See Maestre (2005) for detailed discussions of  effects of the multiple 
data sets on the overall statistics.  Highlighted values exceed either the drinking water MCL or the irrigation guidance values.  
SOURCES: Maestre et al. (2015); National Stormwater Quality Database, version 4 (March 17, 2015, updates; s ee http://www.bmpdata  
base.org/nsqd.html ). Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 67
bacter  from birds), although leaking sewer systems or poorly 
functioning septic tanks can also introduce human waste into 
stormwater. As with graywater, given the number of possible 
organisms and the difficulty quantifying their occurrence, in -
dicator bacteria (e.g., total coliform bacteria, fecal coliform 
bacteria, fecal streptococcus, E. coli ) are often monitored 
instead of pathogens. However, as discussed previously, in -
dicator bacteria may be a poor analog for human pathogens, 
particularly if the organisms are not derived from wastewa -
ter, as is often the case for stormwater (Clary et al., 2014). 
Data presented in Table 4-4 illustrate that indicator bacteria 
were detected in high numbers from stormwater outfalls at 
the neighborhood scale or larger. Mean fecal coliform bacte -
ria concentrations exceeded the guidance value for irrigation 
water by more than 300-fold, while the 95th percentile fecal 
coliform value exceeded this guidance value by 1,000-fold.
Limited data are available on the occurrence of ac -
tual human pathogens in stormwater (Bambic et al., 2011; 
Page and Levett, 2010; Page et al., 2013; Vanderzalm et al., 
2014), and the data can be highly variable. In a review of 
the literature, O’Shea and Field (1992a) cited studies that 
reported that some of the disease-causing microorganisms 
isolated from urban stormwater and streams include entero -
viruses (e.g., poliovirus, coxsackieviruses, and echovirus) 
and bacteria (e.g., Pseudomonas aeruginosa , Staphylococ -
cus aureus , Campylobacter , and Salmonella ) (Olivieri et al., 
1977; Pitt and McLean, 1986; Qureshi and Dutka, 1979). In 
three studies, some with limited sampling, Salmonella  was 
the most commonly detected pathogenic bacterium in urban 
stormwater, with 3-80 percent positive detections reported, 
while the other bacterial pathogens were detected in less 
than 10 percent of the samples (Kinde et al., 1997; O’Shea 
and Field, 1992b; Schroeder et al., 2002). Two studies re -
ported 0-10 percent of stormwater samples with detectable 
Cryptosporidium , while none had detectable concentrations 
of Giardia  (Schroeder et al., 2002; Wohlsen et al., 2006). 
Page et al. (2013) reported protozoa detections in 50 percent 
of all stormwater samples for a catchment area in Australia. 
Bambic et al. (2011) reported that viruses are rarely detected 
in municipal stormwater. Adenovirus, rotavirus, enterovirus, 
human polyomavirus, and hepatitis A were monitored and 
detected in 0-5 percent of stormwater samples (Brownell et 
al., 2007; Grohmann et al., 1993; O’Shea and Field, 1992b; 
Rajal et al., 2007; Schroeder et al., 2002), although three 
studies reported positive adenovirus occurrences in 10-59 
percent of municipal stormwater samples (CREST, 2009; 
Jiang et al., 2007; Page et al., 2013).
Ahmed and Toze (2015) reviewed the literature on the 
microbiological quality of roof runoff. Most of the studies 
focused on indicator organisms, and many of the results are 
reported as presence or absence of the organisms, rather than pathogen concentrations (Ahmed et al., 2014; NRMMC et 
al., 2009a). The most commonly tested bacterial pathogen 
appears to be Campylobacter ; with reported occurrence rang -
ing from 0 to 125 samples (Simmons et al., 2001) and 45 
percent of 27 samples tested (Ahmed et al., 2008). Salmo -
nella  have also been detected, generally at lower frequen -
cies than Campylobacter  (Ahmed and Toze, 2015). Four of 
six samples tested for Shigella  and Vibrio  were positive in a 
study conducted by Uba and Aghogho (2000). Roof runoff 
has also been tested for the protozoan pathogens, Giardia  and 
Cryptosporidium , with the highest frequency of detection be -
ing reported by Crabtree et al. (1996): 23 and 45 percent oc -
currence, respectively, in 45 samples. No reports of virus de -
tection in roof-captured rainwater were found. The results of 
studies that reported concentrations are summarized in Table 
4-5. Most of the pathogen studies used molecular methods to 
detect the microorganism, so it is not possible to directly infer 
health risk from the presence of the pathogens.
Many of the studies of the presence of pathogenic mi -
croorganisms in stormwater have focused on the same organ -
isms. Because it is not possible to monitor water for the hun -
dreds of potential pathogens that it may contain, researchers 
typically choose a few that they believe are representative 
of the other pathogens. There are different reasons for the 
choices of the different organisms. For example, enterovi -
ruses are often chosen to represent enteric viruses, because 
the methodology for monitoring these viruses is standard -
ized and well established. Rotaviruses may be chosen to rep -
resent a “worst-case” scenario for viruses, because they have 
an extremely low infectious dose (i.e., very few organisms 
are required to cause infection, so the presence of just a few 
rotaviruses may signify a potential public health risk). Cryp -
tosporidium  is often a target of interest because of the very 
large (and widely publicized) outbreaks of drinking-water -
borne disease that it has caused in the United States, Europe, 
and Australia. Salmonella  is often chosen because it is one of 
the most commonly detected bacteria in wastewater. 
The limited data available exhibit wide ranges of oc -
currences and concentrations. This may be due to the size of 
the sample analyzed (e.g., only 5 or 10 percent of a sample 
may be analyzed because of methodological constraints), 
the temporal variability of infection in the population, and/
or limitations in analytical methods. Statistical comparisons 
and descriptive characteristics of these data would therefore 
require a much larger number of samples. 
Metals
Metals in stormwater are most commonly detected 
when source areas include industrial storage areas, high -
ways, streets, and parking areas. Additionally, roofing drain -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
68 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
age systems, conveyance systems, and water storage tanks 
are often made of metallic materials or components, includ -
ing aluminum, lead, zinc, and copper, which can affect water 
quality in stormwater capture systems (see Box 4-1). 
Chronic aquatic life criteria have been established by 
the EPA to protect aquatic life in receiving waters. Copper, 
lead, cadmium, and zinc are a concern for projects with sur -
face reservoirs or wetland features, because their mean con -
centrations exceed criteria for aquatic organisms (see Table 
4-6; Davis et al., 2001). Some plants may be sensitive to 
some metals, but irrigation guidelines mostly focus on metal 
uptake in plants that may be consumed, such as in house -
hold gardens. Although most metal concentrations detected 
in stormwater are below published irrigation use guidelines, 
elevated levels of iron could also pose concerns for irrigation 
use (see Table 4-4). 
Because of frequent exceedances of the EPA maximum 
contaminant level (MCL) (Table 4-4), lead, iron, and cadmi -
um pose human health concerns if stormwater is consumed 
in large quantities (Sabin et al., 2005). Median concentra -
tions exceeded the recommended drinking water standards 
for iron. Since the removal of lead from gasoline, about 35 
percent of recent lead observations exceeded the drinking wa -
ter MCL (National Stormwater Quality Database, version 4). 
The 95th percentile values in stormwater outfalls are close to 
the drinking water standards for arsenic and cadmium. 
Organic Chemicals
A wide array of organic contaminants can also be detect -
ed in stormwater, including pesticides, industrial chemicals 
and solvents, and petroleum-derived chemicals. Compared to total suspended solids, nutrients, and metals, however, 
relatively little information is available on concentrations of 
organic chemicals in urban stormwater (Grebel et al., 2013). 
Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are frequently 
detected because of releases from automobile exhaust and 
paving materials (see also Table 4-7). A number of chemi -
cals used in industrial manufacturing and consumer products 
have been detected in stormwater, such as tire additive chem -
icals (e.g., benzotriazoles), plastic additives (e.g., bisphenol 
A, phtalates), and flame-retardants (i.e., perfluorochemicals 
and organophosphates) (Stachel et al., 2010). A recent study 
in Arizona focusing on perfluorinated chemicals concluded 
that secondary wastewater effluents and stormwater runoff 
from downtown areas exhibited similar perfluorooctane sul -
fonate (PFOS) concentrations ranging from 10 to 1,000 ng/L 
(Quanrud et al., 2010). 
Also present in stormwater are herbicides (e.g., diuron, 
glyphosphate, 2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid [2,4-D]) and 
pesticides (e.g., pyrethroids, fipronil) used in residential and 
commercial properties and along transportation corridors 
(Blanchoud et al., 2004; Gan et al., 2012; Gilliom et al., 2007; 
Weston et al., 2009). A recent study of stormwater herbicides 
and insecticides conducted by the Montana Department of 
Agriculture reported 29 different pesticides in stormwater 
samples (Table 4-8). The most common groups of pesticides 
detected were the phenoxy herbicides (e.g., 2,4-D, 2-methyl-
4-chlorophenoxyacetic acid [MCPA], and methylchloro -
phenoxypropionic acid [MCPP]) and herbicides used as soil 
sterilants (e.g., diuron, glyphosate, prometon, tebuthiuron, 
and triclopyr). Only two pesticides (i.e., 2,4-D and malathion) 
were detected at levels that exceeded aquatic life benchmarks, 
and none exceeded drinking water standards.
TABLE 4 -5 Reported Number s of Indicator and Pathogenic Microorganisms in Rooftop Runoff  
Microorganism  Rooftop Runoff Storage Tank  Rooftop Runoff Toilet Bowla 
E. coli  (cfu/100 ml)  ND-990 ND-54,000  
Enterococci (cfu/100 ml)  ND-110 ND-110 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  (cfu/100 ml)  <1-20 <1-870 
Aeromonas  sp. (cfu/ml)  <10-30 <10-4,400  
Legionella pneumophila ND ND 
Legionella  non-pneumophila  ND-detected  ND-detected  
Campylobacter ND-detected  ND-detected  
Campylobacter  (by qPCR; cells/L)  ND-110 ND-110 
Mycobacterium avium  ND-detected  ND 
Salmonella (by qPCR; cells/L)  ND-7,300  ND 
Giardia (cysts/L)  ND ND 
Giardia lamblia (by qPCR; cells/L)  ND-580 ND-40 
Cryptosporidium (oocysts/L)  ND-50 ND-10 
aSamples were also taken from a toilet for which untreated roof -runoff was used for toilet flushing.  No pathogens were detected in toilet 
bowls containing domestic tap water.  
SOURCES: Ahmed et al. (2012); Albrechtsen (2002);  Despins et al. (2009).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 69
BOX 4-1  Effects of Stormwater Capture Materials on Water Quality
Roofing materials, pipes, and storage tanks can, in some cases, significantly degrade the quality of stormwater, leading to high 
concentrations of zinc, copper, and lead. For all scales of stormwater capture, suitable materials need to be selected to minimize these 
problems.
Zinc
Galvanized materials, including zinc-based roofing materials and drainage systems, are the largest sources of zinc in stormwater 
runoff. Runoff from roofs with galvanized steel components, such as roofing sheets, flashing, or gutters, can exceed 10,000 µg/L (Table 
4-1-1). Factory-coated galvanized materials have much less zinc releases than do exposed galvanized material (Clark et al., 2008a). 
Ogburn (2013) reported that elevated zinc concentrations were detected after short (0.5 to 27 hours) and long exposures (1 to 3 months) 
to galvanized steel. When numeric discharge limits are proposed for zinc by regional water quality control boards (usually about 100 to 
200 µg/L), roof runoff samples frequently exceed these limits.
Copper
In general, the highest copper runoff concentrations are typically observed in runoff from exposed copper materials. However, as 
shown in Table 4-1-1, very high copper concentrations have been observed from other materials (e.g., copper-based paints). Some stud -
ies have found relatively constant copper concentrations in runoff over time , while others observed higher concentrations in runoff from 
new copper materials compared to older copper materials (Clark et al., 2008a). Runoff from clay tile and cedar shake roofs can have 
very high copper concentrations, possibly from copper algaecides added to these roofing materials (Clark et al., 2008a; Gromaire-Mertz 
et al., 1999; Zobrist et al. 2000).
Lead
Galvanized steel and PVC can be sources of lead in roof runoff (Table 4-1-1). Increased material age and exposure time and lower pH 
levels have been associated with higher lead releases (Ogburn, 2013). Additionally, lead can be released into stormwater from materials 
painted with older lead-based paints (Davis and Burns, 1999). 
TABLE 4 -1-1 Concentrations of Zinc, Copper, and Lead in Roof Runoff Based on 
Roof Material Type  
Roof Materials  Runoff Concentration (µg/L)  
Zinc   
New uncoated galvanized steel  500-10,000  
Old uncoated galvanized steel  1,000 -38,000  
Coated galvanized steel  200-1,000  
Uncoated galvanized aluminum  200-15,000  
Coated galvanized aluminum  100-200 
Other (aluminum, stainless steel, titanium, polyester, gravel):  <200  
Copper   
Uncoated cooper  2-175 
Uncoated galvanized steel  <3 
Clay tiles  3-4,000  
New asphalt shingles  10-200 
New cedar shakes  1,500 -27,000  
Aged/patinated copper  900-9,700  
Lead   
Uncoated galvanized steel  1-2,000  
Coated and uncoated galvanized aluminum  <0.1-6 
Painted materials  <2-600 
SOURCES: Zinc data: Clark et al. (2008a,b); Faller and Reiss (2005); Förster (1999); 
Gromaire -Mertz et al. (1999); Heijerick et al. (2002); Mendez et al. (2011); Schriewer 
et al. (2008); Tobiason (2004); Tobiason and Logan (2000); Zobrist et al. (2000).  
Copper data: Clark et al. (2008a); Gromaire-Mertz et al. (1999); Karlen et al. (2002); 
Wallinder et al. (2009); Zobrist et al. (2000).  Lead data: Clark et al. (2007); Davis and 
Burns (1999);  Förster (1999); Gromaire -Mertz et al. (1999); Good (1993); Gumbs and  
Dierberg (1985); Mendez et al. (2011); Schriewer et al. (2008).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
70 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Comprehensive data on organic contaminants in storm -
water have been collected by the state of Washington (see 
Table 4-7). No information relating to land uses or other site 
features are available, although it is expected that much of 
these data are associated with mixed land use areas. In many 
cases, the organic contaminants reported in these stormwater 
samples (including many organochlorine pesticides, PAHs, 
and polychlorinated biphenyls [PCBs]) exceeded the state’s 
proposed human health water quality criteria (set accord -
ing to drinking water uses). In some cases, even median and 
minimum reported concentrations exceeded the proposed 
water quality criteria. At these concentrations, organic chem -
icals can pose hazards to aquatic life if stormwater is stored 
in surface reservoirs or wetlands. Additionally, toxic organic 
chemicals can cause cancer risks at significant exposures, 
particularly when drinking water supplies are augmented 
with stormwater through groundwater recharge (see Chapter 
5). Some persistent organic chemicals, such as PFOS, do not 
have a strong sorption potential (Higgins and Luthy, 2006) 
and may percolate through soil with concentrations essen -
tially unchanged (Quanrud et al., 2010). Very similar results 
were reported in an occurrence study of organic chemicals 
in stormwater across different stormwater catchment sites 
in Australia (Vanderzalm et al., 2014). Among the chemi -
cals targeted, herbicides and notably simazine were the most 
detected organic chemicals, but at no site did the 95th per -
centile of herbicide analytes exceed the Australian drinking 
water guideline.
The occurrence of pollutants in stormwater can change 
over time based on changes in the use of certain chemicals 
and materials in the drainage area. This is especially true for anthropogenic compounds such as pesticides. Figure 4-1 il -
lustrates the decreasing concentrations of Diazinon in storm -
water in Fresno, California, following a ban on the pesticide 
(NRC, 2009a). 
Source Area and Land Use Effects on  
Stormwater Quality and Source Control
Source areas, such as roofs, parking lots, streets, and 
landscaped areas, have a significant effect on stormwater 
quality, but there are limited data describing the quality of 
stormwater originating from specific source areas. There 
can also be large variations in contaminant concentrations 
within a source area type associated with building or con -
struction materials and the activities conducted at a particu -
lar site. Most of the data on the impacts of specific source 
areas on stormwater quality has been collected for studies 
on the effects of roofing materials on runoff quality (see Box 
4-1). However, stormwater runoff samples compiled from 
research sites in Wisconsin and Michigan showed significant 
differences in TSS, phosphorus, copper, and zinc by source 
area type (Figure 4-2) (J. Horwatich, USGS, personal com -
munication, 2015). These data included residential, com -
mercial, and light industrial land uses. Figure 4-2a shows 
significantly lower levels of TSS and phosphorus in roof 
runoff compared to lawns, undeveloped areas, and paved 
surfaces such as parking lots, driveways, and streets. In con -
trast, lawns show the lowest levels of zinc (Figure 4-2d). 
Zinc concentrations in roof runoff ranged widely because 
galvanized metals are common materials in roof flashings. 
Roofs and lawns show the lowest average concentrations of TABLE 4 -6 Stormwater Quality Data at Neighborhood/Regional Outfalls Compared to Chronic Aquatic Life Criteria  
Constituent  EPA Chronic /Aquatic Life Criteriaa Medianb 5th percentileb 95th percentileb Approximate Percentage 
Exceeding EPA Chronic 
Aquatic Live Criteria  
Chloride (mg/L)  230 6.2 1.0 92 1 
Arsenic, dissolved (µg/L)  150 0.62 <5 2.7 0 
Cadmium, dissolved (µg/L)  0.25 <1 <1 1.0 35 
Copper, dissolved (µg/L)  BLMc 7 0.8 40 n/a 
Iron, dissolved (µg/L)  1,000  60 <100  930 4 
Lead, dissolved (µg/L)  2.5 1.0 <5 15 20 
Mercury, dissolved (µg/L)  0.77 <1 <1 0.06 <1 
Nickel, dissolved (µg/L)  52 2.0 <5 11 <5 
Zinc, dissolved (µg/L)  120 55 6 450 30 
aSee http://water.epa.gov/scitech/swguidance/standards/criteria/aqlife/index.cfm.  
bThe median and percentile  values are calculated using detected and nondetected values with no substitutions for nondetected or over -range 
values.  
cChronic aquatic life criteria for copper are calculated using the biotic ligand model (BLM), which considers water quality pa rameters,  
including hardness, that affect copper bioavailability.  See http://water.epa.gov/scitech/swguidance/standards/criteria/aqlife/copper . 
SOURCE: National Stormwater Quality Database,  version 4, updated March 17, 2015 (http://www.bmpdatabase.org/nsqd.html).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 71
TABLE 4 -7 Observed Stormwater Contaminants in the State of Washington  
Pollutant # of  
Obser vations % Detected  Reported Results (µg/L)  Proposed State  Drinking 
Water Limits (µg/L)  Minimum  Median  Maximum  
Metals        
Antimony  50 32 0.52 1 50 14 
Arsenic  275 83 0.17 1 30 10 
Copper  1,495  92 0.001  6.4 12,300  1,300  
Nickel  141 71 0.24 2.2 30 156 
Selenium  74 15 0.5 0.70 120 141 
Zinc 1,653  98 0.017  49 21,000  2,347  
Organochlorine Pesticides  
4,4'-DDD  38 39 0.000064  0.0025  0.88 0.00036  
4,4'-DDE  47 57 0.00012  0.013  0.88 0.00025  
4,4'-DDT  46 57 0.00049  0.0096  1.8 0.00025  
alpha -HCH  38 32 0.000093 0.0025 0.5 0.0039 
beta-BHC  38 16 0.00012  0.0025  0.44 0.014  
Dieldrin  38 42 0.000064  0.0038  0.88 0.000061  
Endosulfan sulfate  48 58 0.0003  0.012  6.07 0.93 
Endrin  38 13 0.00011  0.0025  0.88 0.034  
gamma -HCH (Lindane)  48 25 0.00049  0.0025  0.44 0.019  
Heptachlo r epoxide  38 47 0.00012  0.0025  0.44 0.000045  
Isophorone  31 13 0.03 0.06 10 8.4 
PAHs  
Benzo(a)Anthracene  658 24 0.002  0.08 11 0.0028  
Benzo(a)Pyrene  862 22 0.004  0.1 15 0.0028  
Benzo(b)Fluoranthene  503 27 0.0052  0.1 13 0.0028  
Benzo(k)Fluoranthene  499 22 0.0075  0.1 13 0.0028  
Chrysene  786 38 0.003  0.1 16 0.0028  
Dibenzo (a,h) anthracene  786 10 0.003  0.1 10 0.0028  
Fluoranthene  781 50 0.005  0.1 33 16 
Indeno (1,2,3 -cd) pyrene  786 22 0.003  0.1 10 0.0028  
Pyrene  781 55 0.0054 0.1 26 331 
Volatile Organic Comp ounds —BTEX  
Benzene  209 10 0.13 1 190 1.2 
Ethylbenzene  209 11 0.1 1 65 934 
Toluene  210 15 0 1 460 4,132  
Trichloroethylene  87 11 0.02 0.17 2 2.7 
Other Organics        
PCBs  15,277  28 0.000002  0.00004  0.28 0.00017  
Pentachlorophenol  769 23 0.02 0.5 60 0.28 
2,4-Dimethylphenol  31 10 0.06 1 10 87 
Phenol  83 14 0.01 0.1 10 10,690  
Phthalates        
Bis(2 -Ethylhexyl) phthalate  669 51 0.024  1.2 41 1.8 
Butylbenzyl phthalate  623 14 0.018  0.59 10 215 
Diethyl phthalate  619 23 0.024  0.67 10 4,332  
Dimethyl phthala te 623 11 0.021  0.5 13 96,386  
Di-n-Butyl phthalate  623 15 0.023  0.5 10 455 
NOTE: Only compounds having greater than 10 percent detection frequencies of concentrations within the reporting range limits  are shown.  
The proposed drinking water limits shown a re the state’s human health water quality criteria as contained in the proposed amendments to the 
Water Quality Standards for Toxicants as published in September 2014.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
72 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
copper, although some high concentrations were observed in 
roof runoff (Figure 4-2c). Heating, ventilation, and air con -
ditioning (HV AC) condensers are commonly constructed of 
copper and as such can be a source of copper in runoff when 
located on rooftop areas. 
Bacteria levels in source areas vary widely (see Clary 
et al., 2014; Pitt et al., 2005a,b,c) but are notably increased 
by the presence of animals (see Figure 4-3). As an example, 
E. coli and enterococci levels in roof runoff vary dramati -
cally depending on the extent of squirrel and bird activity 
in trees above the roofs and possibly the season. If roofs are 
not shaded by trees (which provide habitat for squirrels and 
birds), then bacteria levels are much lower (Shergill and Pitt, 
2004). The presence of contaminated materials or inappro -
priate connections with sewage can also increase bacteria 
concentrations in stormwater. Overall, roof runoff is gener -
ally the preferred source area for beneficial stormwater uses 
based on water quality, but treatment, especially for bacteria, 
may be necessary to meet beneficial use guidelines, and roof -
ing materials should be considered (see Box 4-1). 
Land uses (e.g., residential, industrial, institutional) may 
contain multiple source area types (e.g., roofs, paved surfac -es, landscaped areas), and although water quality is widely 
variable within a given land use, some general water quality 
trends can be observed among various land use types. Na -
tional Stormwater Quality Database outfall data (see Table 
4-4) were analyzed to identify statistically significant group -
ings of the data by land use categories (Pitt and Maestre, 
2014). An example is shown in Figure 4-4 for copper, which 
showed significantly elevated concentrations in runoff from 
freeways and industrial land uses, compared to residential, 
institutional, commercial, and open land uses, although cop -
per concentrations are extremely variable in all three land 
use groupings. In an analysis of Wisconsin stormwater qual -
ity by source area, only a few samples had copper concentra -
tions in excess of the 200 µg/L irrigation guidance, and these 
were associated with runoff from streets and highways (Fig -
ure 4-2). If specific contaminants pose a risk for the desired 
beneficial use of stormwater, then land use effects on those 
contaminants should be understood and less-impacted areas 
can be selected to reduce the contaminant load at the source 
and reduce the level of treatment required.
For neighborhood- and regional-scale beneficial use 
projects in existing developed areas, source control strate -TABLE 4 -8 Herbicides and Insecticides Observed in Helena and Billings, Montana, Stormwater  
 Total # of Samples  % Detected  Median (µg/L)  Max. (µg/L)  Human Health Drinking  
Water Standard (µg/L)  Lowest Aquatic Life 
Benchmarksa (µg/L)  
Herbicides  
2,4-D  23 100 1.23 27 70 13.1 
Bromacil  23 35 0.02 0.26 90 6.8 
Chlorsulfuron  23 30 0.007  0.036  1,750  0.055  
Chlopyralid  23 22 0.029  0.8 3,500  56,500  
Dichloprop  23 39 0.0029  0.099  n/a n/a 
Diuron  23 91 0.042  0.92 10 2.4 
Glyphosate  19 58 0.0029  0.01 700 1,800  
Imazapic  23 57 0.0015  0.0081  4,000  n/a 
Imazapyr  23 96 0.021  0.53 21,000  24 
MCPA  23 100 0.093  2.2 4 20 
MCPP  23 100 0.14 4.6 7 14 
Picloram  23 22 0.13 0.39 500 550 
Prometon  23 100 0.025  0.61 100 98 
Simazine  23 22 0.003  0.023  4 36 
Sulfomuterun  23 17 0.056  0.2 2,000  0.48 
Tebuthiuron  23 78 0.0015  0.0024  500 50 
Triclopyr  23 96 0.014  3 350 100 
Insecticides  
Imidacloprid  23 30 0.015  0.05 400 1.05 
Malathion  23 17 0.036  1.1 100 0.035  
aAquatic  life benchmarks listed here reflect the lowest benchmark values considering acute and chronic effects on fish, acute and chro nic 
effects on invertebrates, acute effects on nonvascular plants, and acute effects on vascular plants.  
NOTE: Sixteen samples wer e collected from four locations during four storms in Helena, and seven samples were collected from four 
locations during two storms in Billings. These samples were collected from streams and storm drains that received stormwater and represent 
mixed land u se areas. The samples were analyzed for 148 pesticides.  
SOURCE: Montana Department of Agriculture  (2011).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 73
FIGURE 4-1  Trend of the organophosphate pesticide Diazinon in stormwater discharges in Fresno County, California, following its 
nonagricultural ban starting in 2002. SOURCE: Reprinted, with permission, from Brosseau (2007). Copyright 2006 by Fresno Metropolitan 
Flood Control District.
gies can be used to focus stormwater collection on the least 
contaminated source areas and land uses, considering ex -
posed materials and on-site activities. Industrial or freeway 
land uses should probably be avoided, unless extensive water 
quality treatment is incorporated. Areas mostly comprised of 
residential, open space, and institutional areas are generally 
most suitable, although areas with low animal activity would 
be preferred for beneficial uses when bacteria are a concern. 
Even in areas having the best quality stormwater, there are still 
constituents that may cause concern with some beneficial uses 
requiring treatment before use. Chapter 5 discusses methods 
to evaluate exposures and risk to guide treatment design.
Materials Management for Source Control 
Where stormwater is captured for subsequent beneficial 
use, an important element of source control is the manage -
ment of roofing, drainage, and tank materials, particularly in 
new construction. There is an increasing trend in the use of 
metal roofs (mainly galvanized) in residential areas for in -
creased service life, aesthetics, and fire protection. However, 
metal roofs can release significant amounts of zinc, copper, and lead over both short and long time frames and under 
a wide range of pH and salinity conditions (see Box 4-1). 
There may also be use of copper flashing and gutters in high-
end residential and commercial areas, which is not advised 
because of the associated copper releases to stormwater, 
particularly in coastal areas. Factory-applied coatings on the 
galvanized metals result in greatly reduced metal releases, 
while homeowner applied coatings (and painting) are not as 
durable and these surfaces have large metal releases within 
a few years of application (Clark et al., 2008a). The use of 
lead flashing even occurs in new construction in some areas  
1and would be a significant source of lead in roof runoff for 
those buildings.
Galvanized materials are also not advised for roof run -
off capture and storage because of the substantial zinc releas -
es. Storage tanks and other components made from concrete, 
high-density polyethylene, and vinyl materials can instead 
be used in stormwater capture systems without elevated met -
al releases (Ogburn, 2013). 
1 See http://marsmetal.com/sheet-lead/roofing-and-flashing for ex -
ample.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
74 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 4-2 Box and whisker plots of: (a) total suspended solids (TSS), (b) total phosphorus, (c) total copper, and (d) total zinc, by source 
area type. The boxes designate the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles, while the end of the whiskers indicate the 5th and 95th percentiles. The 
dots are observations that are less than and greater than the 5th and 95th percentile values. NOTES: The stormwater data collected by the 
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources and the USGS between 1991 and 1997 for multiple research studies were compiled and analyzed 
as a single data set. The data include sampling locations at roofs, streets, driveways, parking lots, lawns, and undeveloped areas in residential, 
commercial, and light industrial land uses (Bannerman et al., 1983; Corsi et al., 1999; Holmstrom et al., 1995, 1996; Roa-Espinosa and 
Bannerman, 1995; Steuer et al., 1997; Waschbusch et al., 1998). The data include the following numbers of event samples: 158 from roofs, 
141 from parking lots, 70 from driveways, 41 from lawns, 418 from streets and highways, and 12 from undeveloped areas (J. Horwatich, 
USGS, personal communication, 2015).
 
E. coli  (MPN/100 mL)  
FIGURE 4-3  Comparisons of E. coli by source area type affected or unaffected by domestic pets and urban wildlife. The presence of these 
animals were observed as dogs being “walked” by owners in park areas, and trees having large squirrel and bird populations over roofs 
or in parking areas and streets. Parallel samples were obtained during the same rains for comparison from multiple locations. SOURCE: 
Sumandeep and Pitt (2004).
Roof Parking Driveway Lawn Streets/ Undevel.
Lot HwysA
Roof Parking Driveway Lawn Streets/ Undevel.
Lot HwysB
Roof Parking Driveway Lawn Streets/
Lot HwysC
Roof Parking Driveway Lawn Streets/
Lot HwysDCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Quality of Graywater and Stormwater 75
FIGURE 4-4 Significant differences among land use types for copper in stormwater. Data are from the National Stormwater Quality Database 
(version 4) with significant land use groupings determined by non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance on rank tests 
along with multiple pairwise comparisons with Dunn’s Method. SOURCE: Pitt and Maestre (2014).
A well-known example of materials management for 
source control is limiting copper in brake pads. In urban wa -
tersheds, up to one-half of the copper originates from brake 
pads.2 California and Washington recently passed legisla -
tion limiting the amounts of copper and other heavy met -
als in brake pads (Ch. 173-901 WAC; California Health and 
Safety Code sections 25250.50–25250.65). That legislation 
inspired similar bills in other states, effectively setting a na -
tional standard (Motavalli, 2012). 
CONCLUSIONS
The quality of graywater and stormwater determines 
their potential uses without treatment, but many additional 
applications are possible with treatment. Chapter 5 discusses 
a risk assessment approach to determine the appropriate lev -
els of treatment, but this approach requires a clear under -
standing of source water quality.
Pathogens and organic matter in graywater impact 
opportunities for beneficial uses without treatment. Con-
sidering the source water, human pathogens are likely to oc -
cur in graywater, although the specific types and concentra -
tions vary substantially. The occurrence and environmental 
fate of pathogens in graywater are not yet well understood. 
2 See http://www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/hwtr/betterbrakes.html.Organic matter is present in high enough concentration in 
graywater to enhance microbial growth, thus limiting the 
potential uses of graywater without disinfection. Graywater 
also contains a wide array of personal care products. So -
dium, chloride, boron, and other chemicals can impact the 
quality of graywater for irrigation uses. Best management 
practices exist for source control of microbial and chemical 
constituents, and such practices can be implemented at the 
household scale to reduce concentrations of these constitu -
ents in graywater. 
Stormwater quality is highly variable over space and 
time and might contain elevated levels of microorgan -
isms, metals, organic chemicals, and sediments, poten -
tially necessitating treatment to facilitate various ben -
eficial uses.  Stormwater quality is a direct function of land 
use, source area, catchment size, and climatic and seasonal 
factors. Existing data suggest that most stormwater con -
tains elevated levels of organic matter, suspended sediment, 
and indicator bacteria. Metals are also commonly found in 
urban stormwater runoff and may pose concerns for some 
beneficial uses, including irrigation and surface reservoirs or 
wetland features. Nutrients may also impact the function of 
some stormwater applications, such as ornamental water fea -
tures, without treatment. Despite the enormous spatial and 
temporal variability of stormwater quality, the data show 
that there are a number of water quality parameters with at 
Land UseFreeway Industrial Residential, Commercial, 
Institutional, and Open SpaceCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
76 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
least 5 percent of samples consistently above the guideline 
values for irrigation, drinking, or protection of aquatic life. 
This suggests that in spite of aggregated data showing high 
variability, the treatment systems required for achieving 
end uses may be relatively consistent over a wide variety of 
catchments. 
Little is known regarding the occurrence of human 
pathogens and organic chemicals in stormwater, and ad -
ditional research is needed to characterize their occur -
rence and fate. Studies of the presence of microorganisms 
in stormwater have consistently reported high concentrations 
of fecal indicator microorganisms across different source ar -
eas. In the few studies that analyzed for pathogenic microor -
ganisms in stormwater, they were generally detected, at least 
in some samples. However, more work is needed to charac -
terize their occurrence and fate, particularly for roof runoff 
systems where the beneficial use of untreated stormwater is 
common and raises concerns for uses with the potential for 
human exposure. More research is also needed to character -
ize the occurrence of organic chemicals in stormwater and 
their fate during various uses. 
Land uses, contributing areas, and collection ma -
terials can be selected that minimize contaminants of 
concern to optimize stormwater quality and minimize 
treatment requirements for the designated beneficial use. Even though all land uses have the potential for problematic 
water quality conditions in runoff, residential areas gener -
ally have lower concentrations of these contaminants than do 
commercial and industrial areas. Local data should be used 
to help select the best source area. On average, residential 
roofs have the highest quality runoff of the various source 
areas, but there are many exceptions. Copper and galvanized 
metals in roofing, piping, and stormwater capture tanks can 
create hazardous levels of lead, zinc, and copper in roof run -
off. The presence of pets and urban wildlife can cause high 
levels of indicator bacteria, which may indicate the presence 
of disease-causing microorganisms. Regional stormwater 
capture and recharge systems drain large source areas and 
many land uses, and opportunities for catchment area separa -
tion may be limited. With increasing catchment area, storm -
water quality will be more difficult to manage and treatment 
may be required prior to beneficial use. However, targeted 
source control of contaminants through materials manage -
ment may be possible at larger scales. For example, storm -
water containing high concentrations of road salt should be 
diverted from stormwater capture and infiltration systems. 
Limiting copper and other heavy metals in brake pads is an -
other example. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
775
Characterizing and Mitigating  
Human Health and Environmental Risks
The reuse of graywater and stormwater has the potential 
to significantly impact the use of the potable water supply. 
However, the potential presence of a variety of contami -
nants in these water sources raises concerns about their uses. 
These concerns may be exacerbated by the lack of federal 
guidelines for the use of these types of waters and inconsis -
tencies among limited existing state and local regulations or 
guidelines for the beneficial use of graywater and stormwa -
ter (see Chapter 8).
The presence of a contaminant does not automatically 
equate to significant risk. The situation in which the water 
is used has a significant impact on the potential risk. When 
there is little potential for human exposure to the water (such 
as subsurface irrigation with graywater), the risk will be 
lower than when the same quality of water is used in higher 
exposure environments (such as spray irrigation with gray -
water, where the potential for ingestion exists). 
In a literature review, the committee could not find any 
documented reports of adverse health effects from the use 
of stormwater or graywater. Sharvelle et al. (2013) surveyed 
health departments from 15 states that allow graywater re -
use, who reported no sicknesses resulting from graywater 
reuse, including Arizona, which has promoted graywater 
systems for more than 10 years. Although these results help 
bound the extent of risk—that is, the risk is unlikely to be 
large—waterborne infectious diseases tend to be underre -
ported (Yang et al., 2012). Given the many potential expo -
sure routes, linking illness with water supply contamination 
is challenging, particularly for distributed on-site sources 
such as graywater or stormwater. Therefore, in this chapter, 
the committee relies on risk assessment strategies to assess 
the risks of stormwater and graywater use.
When assessing the potential risk posed by graywater 
and/or stormwater reuse, a number of factors should be con -
sidered. These include the fact that potential risks may vary 
considerably, based on the specific nature of the water, how the water will be used, the potential exposure to the water, 
and the characteristics of the environment in which the wa -
ter will be used. It is also critical to understand that it is not 
possible to reduce to zero the risks associated with the use 
of these waters, just as the risks associated with the use and 
consumption of conventional drinking water are not zero. 
However, an understanding of the risks associated with gray -
water and stormwater use can inform responsible decision 
making regarding the integrated use of all available water 
resources and facilitate communication with stakeholders. 
This chapter provides an overview of the most common 
methods that can be used to assess human health risk as -
sociated with graywater or stormwater use. The chapter also 
summarizes what is known about human health and environ -
mental risks.
OVERVIEW OF THE QUANTITATIVE RISK  
ASSESSMENT PROCESS FOR HUMAN HEALTH
Different methods can be used to calculate the risk as -
sociated with a particular activity or contaminant. In terms 
of potential impacts on human health, the National Research 
Council (NRC, 1983) risk assessment method is the most 
commonly used. The following sections describe the ma -
jor elements of that process—hazard assessment, exposure 
assessment, dose-response assessment, and risk character -
ization—although readers seeking a complete description 
should consult NRC (1983, 2009c). Once the risk assess -
ment is completed, the risk management phase considers 
the overall benefits and costs of various risk management 
approaches as well as social justice and legal issues (Figure 
5-1). In its 2009 review of the U.S. Environmental Protec -
tion Agency’s (EPA) risk assessment process, the NRC reaf -
firmed the process but stated that more attention should be 
focused on the design of the risk assessment, especially in 
the beginning stages of the process. Specifically, there is a Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
78 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
need to bring all stakeholders into the process to determine 
the major factors to be considered, to define the decision-
making context, and to agree upon the timeline and depth 
needed to ensure that the right questions are being asked in 
the context of the assessment. This will increase the likeli -
hood that the outcome of the risk assessment will be more 
useful and better accepted by decision makers and the regu -
lated community (NRC, 2009c).
Hazard Assessment
The first step in the risk assessment process is hazard 
assessment, in which the contaminants of concern are identi -
fied. Such contaminants will vary, depending on the specific 
situation, including the source water quality and its end use. 
In the case of graywater, because it is derived from domes -
tic wastes, the contaminants of most concern include hu -
man pathogenic microorganisms and inorganic and organic chemicals found in wash waters. In the case of stormwater, 
the contaminants of concern include metals, pesticides, other 
organic contaminants, and pathogens, derived from runoff 
from streets, roofs, lawns, and industrial and commercial ar -
eas. Chapter 4 discusses contaminants of concern in storm -
water and graywater.
Under sufficient exposures, chemical and microbial con -
taminants can cause a range of adverse health effects, either 
acute or chronic. Acute illnesses occur suddenly and severely 
after only one or a few exposures to a contaminant and are 
common after exposure to human pathogenic microorgan -
isms. Acute illnesses associated with exposures to waterborne 
pathogens include gastroenteritis (stomach flu), skin and re -
spiratory infections, and conjunctivitis (pinkeye). Chronic 
health effects are long-lasting and typically occur after repeat -
ed, long-term exposures, most commonly by ingestion of con -
taminated water. Examples of possible chronic health effects 
include various cancers and adverse reproductive outcomes.FIGURE 5-1 A framework for risk-based decision making. SOURCE: NRC (2009c).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 79
Exposure Assessment
The next step in the process involves determination of 
the nature of an individual’s exposure to the hazard(s). Ex -
posure assessment requires knowledge of the amount of con -
taminant to which the individual is exposed (e.g., the con -
taminant concentration multiplied by the volume of water 
ingested), as well as the route(s) and frequency of exposure. 
This can be one of the most challenging steps in the process, 
because exposures can vary from day to day, location to lo -
cation, and person to person.
Contaminant Concentration
As discussed in Chapter 4, different source areas can 
generate different qualities of stormwater, and source con -
trol practices substantially impact the quality of graywater 
or stormwater. For graywater, factors affecting contaminant 
concentrations include whether best management practices 
are followed, such as bypassing laundry water when washing 
diapers or other soiled clothing, not disposing of hazardous 
chemicals down the sink, and avoiding storage of untreated 
water. For stormwater, rooftop rainwater capture tends to re -
sult in the highest water quality, but some roof and storage 
tank materials can leach high levels of metals such as cop -
per, zinc, and lead. Runoff from parks and lawns may contain 
pesticides and fecal microorganisms. Larger source areas, in -
cluding more roadways and parking areas, can result in high -
er concentrations of organic contaminants (see Chapter 4). 
There may be hundreds of different types of chemicals 
or microorganisms in graywater or stormwater. Therefore, 
it is common to analyze the water for indicator or surro -
gate contaminants, rather than for each of the contaminants 
themselves. For example, rather than monitoring for human 
pathogenic microorganisms, which can be extremely costly 
and time-consuming, indicator microorganisms, such as fe -
cal coliform bacteria, are commonly used. Although this 
simplifies the monitoring process, the use of surrogates to 
determine the risk of a water source can be problematic for 
a number of reasons. 
 In the case of indicator bacteria, such as E. coli , these 
microorganisms are present in the intestines of numerous ani -
mals as well as humans. Therefore, they are always present in 
domestic wastewater and are often detected in stormwater (see 
Chapter 4, Table 4-3). However, pathogenic microorganisms 
are only present in the intestines when an individual is infect -
ed. Additionally, E. coli  and enterococci have been detected 
in a variety of environmental reservoirs (Clary et al., 2014; 
Byappanahalli et al., 2006; Yamahara et al., 2007). Therefore, 
the detection of indicator bacteria in water does not necessar -
ily mean that the water contains disease-causing microorgan -isms. Thus, the reliance on indicators alone limits the capacity 
to accurately assess human health hazards in a water source. 
Additionally, wide variation in concentrations of specif -
ic pathogens in graywater exists between individual house -
holds, and therefore the use of indicator microorganisms 
(especially from individual households) to predict patho -
gen concentrations and associated risks can be problematic 
(O’Toole et al., 2014). The wide variation in pathogens exists 
for several reasons, including the numbers, ages, and health 
of the inhabitants; the fact that fecal shedding intensity and 
duration varies considerably from person to person; and the 
source of graywater used (e.g., shower, laundry), which can 
have a significant impact on the concentrations and types of 
microorganisms present in the graywater. 
There are also situations in which pathogens are pres -
ent in the absence of the indicator microorganisms, par -
ticularly for more environmentally stable pathogens such 
as protozoan parasites. Many waterborne disease outbreaks 
have occurred in which indicator bacteria were absent but 
pathogenic microorganisms were present in sufficient num -
bers to cause illness (e.g., MacKenzie et al., 1994). Overall, 
the reliance on indicator microorganisms, although practical 
from an economic and analytical perspective, may not pro -
vide accurate information regarding the water’s safety for its 
intended end use. Instead, indicator organisms serve as an 
imperfect but low-cost screening tool that can indicate pos -
sible concerns but cannot be used to prove safety.
Water quality treatment (see Chapter 6) may be applied 
to graywater and stormwater to reduce the concentrations of 
contaminants present for end uses with a higher degree of 
human exposure. Water quality may also degrade over time 
with extended storage, either from contact with tank materi -
als (e.g., zinc [Hart and White, 2006]) or from the growth of 
microorganisms (Pitt and Talebi, 2012a).
Route(s) and Volumes of Exposure 
Individuals can be exposed to contaminants through 
many different routes, including ingestion, inhalation, and 
dermal exposure. Some contaminants pose a potential haz -
ard through many exposure routes, while others are harmful 
only if exposure is through a specific route. Some micro -
organisms, such as Legionella spp. , are transmitted through 
inhalation. Others can cause harm through dermal exposure 
(e.g., Pseudomonas , Schistosoma ) or exposure of the mu -
cous membranes (e.g., adenovirus), resulting in eye and ear 
infections. For many microorganisms that are transmitted 
through water (e.g., Salmonella , Cryptosporidium , norovi -
ruses), ingestion is the primary exposure route of concern. 
In addition to exposure from the direct ingestion of water, 
exposure can also result from consumption of food crops that Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
80 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
have been spray irrigated with graywater or stormwater that 
contains pathogens or chemicals. In determining the dose of 
the hazard to which an individual is exposed, it is critical 
that all potential exposure routes be considered so that an 
accurate risk assessment can be made. 
The volume of water to which the individual is exposed 
is often determined by the specific exposure scenario. There 
are no standard exposure volumes for the different types of 
possible exposure. The District of Columbia’s Department 
of the Environment (DDOE, 2013) developed exposure vol -
umes based on stormwater use and exposure conditions that 
vary from 0.01 mL from ingestion of aerosol spray from toi -
let flushing to 200 mL from ingestion of water in a swim -
ming pool (Table 5-1). Other organizations may assume dif -
ferent exposure volumes.
In addition to the volume of water to which an individ -
ual is exposed, certain activities may affect the amount of 
contaminants present at the point of exposure. For example, 
foods that are irrigated with stormwater and then consumed 
uncooked will expose the consumer to a higher number of 
pathogens compared to the same food if it is consumed after 
cooking. Likewise, foods that are spray irrigated with gray -
water or stormwater have a higher probability of containing 
pathogenic microorganisms than food crops that are watered 
via subsurface irrigation (with the exception of root crops).Frequency of Exposure
In the exposure assessment, the frequency with which 
the individual will be exposed to the hazard is another criti -
cal piece of information for consideration. In some situ -
ations, there may be only a single exposure; for example, 
an individual who inadvertently swallows some water while 
playing in a fountain on a hot day. In other cases, exposure 
might be on a daily basis, such as in the case of an indi -
vidual who is exposed to aerosol spray from graywater used 
for toilet flushing. Frequency of exposure will also vary 
considerably depending on the water use and exposure con -
ditions. For example, DDOE (2013) assumed that an indi -
vidual would be exposed to aerosols via toilet flushing more 
than 1,000 times/yr but would accidentally ingest 100 mL of 
stormwater as a result of using stormwater for home lawn 
or garden spray irrigation only a single time per year (Table 
5-1). Where data are lacking on the frequency of exposure, 
conservative assumptions are often made. 
Scale Issues
Other considerations related to the exposure of the indi -
vidual to the hazard include those of scale—both temporal 
and spatial. The time that elapses from the release of the con -
TABLE 5 -1 Exposure Assumptions Based on Stormwater Use and Exposure Conditions Developed by the District of  
Columbia’s Department of the Environment  
Stormwater Use  Route of Exposure, Conditions  Exposure Assumptions  
Volume ingested  (mL)  
in a single exposure  Events per year  
Home lawn or garden  
spray irrigation  Ingestion of aerosol spray from typical watering  0.1  90 
Ingestion after contact with plants/grass  1  90 
Infrequent inadvertent ingestion of stormwater  100  1 
Open space or municipal  
park drip or spray irrigation  Ingestion via casual contact with irrigated grass (picnic, walking pet)  0.1  32 
Ingestion via low -intensity sports on irrigated field (golf, Frisbee)  1  32 
Ingestion via high -intensity sports on irrigated field (baseball, soccer)  2.5  16 
Ingestion on playground by child (frequent hand -to-mouth activity)  4  130 
Indirect ingestion of spray from public fountain with spray element  0.1  130 
Infrequent ingestion of public fountain water from standing pool  
on hot days  4  130 
Home garden drip or  
spray irrigation  Ingestion of irrigated vegetables and fruit  7  50 
Commercial farm produce drip  
or spray irrigation  Ingestion of irrigated vegetables and fruit  10  140 
Home car wash spray application  Ingestion of water and spray  5  24 
Commercial car wash spray  Ingestion of water and spray by car wash operator  3  250 
Toilet  Ingestion of aerosol spray  0.01  1100  
Washing machine use  Ingestion of sprays  0.01  365 
Fire fighting  Ingestion of water and spray  20  50 
NOTE: In a correctly designed subsurface irrigation system (with no surface ponding and no application to food crops) no water would be 
ingested.   
SOURCE:  DDOE (2013).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 81
taminant to the exposure may have a significant impact on 
the concentration or nature of the contaminant. For example, 
human pathogenic microorganisms have a finite lifetime in 
the environment. This may range from less than a day to sev -
eral months or years, depending on the specific microorgan -
ism and the environmental conditions. Chemical contami -
nants may degrade over time, and depending on the specific 
chemical, the transformation products could be more or less 
harmful than the parent compound. Modified risk assess -
ment models have been developed to include dynamic mod -
eling (see, e.g., Eisenberg et al., 2004), as well as to allow for 
the effects of environmental factors on the concentrations of 
the contaminants (see, e.g., Whelan et al., 2014)
Spatial scale is also important. If the graywater or storm -
water is collected over a large area, then a large number of in -
dividuals/households/businesses will contribute to the water’s 
composition. This may result in the water containing microor -
ganisms or chemicals that it would not have contained had the 
contributing area been smaller. The project’s scale will also 
affect the number of people who may be exposed to potential 
hazards in the water. At the household scale, graywater use 
does not significantly increase risk of illness from pathogens 
because there are many other pathways for spreading com -
municable illnesses among members of the same household 
(Maimon et al., 2010). However, untreated graywater used in 
larger scale (e.g., multi-residential) projects could substan -
tially increase risk, because graywater use creates exposure 
pathways between infected and uninfected individuals that 
otherwise did not exist. Therefore, larger-scale projects will be 
more likely to involve some type of treatment than will proj -
ects that occur on an individual homeowner’s property (see 
Chapter 6). A project that occurs over a large spatial scale may 
also, by necessity, involve a longer time scale, so attenuation 
of contaminants may occur as a result. 
Dose-Response Assessment
After the amount of the contaminant to which the in -
dividual will be exposed is known, it is necessary to under -
stand the effect that that amount of the contaminant will have 
on the exposed individual—in other words, what response 
will a specific dose produce? Typically, information on the 
dose-response relationship of a particular contaminant is ob -
tained from published literature values, rather than from con -
ducting a dose-response study for each contaminant in each 
specific situation. Box 5-1 describes the approaches used to 
determine dose-response relationships for individual micro -
bial or chemical contaminants. 
For both chemicals and microorganisms, however, ex -
posure is commonly to mixtures of the contaminants, rather than to single contaminants. Unfortunately, little is known 
about the effects on the dose-response relationship of con -
taminants when an individual is exposed to more than one 
contaminant at a time. Exposure to a mixture of contami -
nants can cause effects that are equal to, less than, or greater 
than that of the individual components, and understanding 
these effects is the focus of ongoing research (see, e.g., 
Backhaus, 2014; Jarvis et al., 2014). 
Risk Characterization
The next step in the process is to calculate the risk, con -
sidering the contaminant of interest, the level and frequency 
of exposure, and the dose-response relationship. The risk 
may be expressed in several different ways. For microorgan -
isms, the acute risk of infection, illness, or mortality can be 
presented. In the case of many chemicals, the risk of cancer 
over the course of a lifetime is the endpoint of interest. 
The different outcomes associated with the contami -
nants of interest can make it difficult to compare risks and 
to make decisions regarding possible risk-risk tradeoffs. For 
example, how does one compare the risk of getting cancer to 
the risk of getting a norovirus infection? Cancer is typically 
acquired after long-term exposure to a relatively low dose 
of a chemical, while hepatitis can be acquired from a single 
exposure to contaminated food or water. Infection caused 
by norovirus is typically self-limiting, while cancer can be a 
short-term or long-term illness. 
One way to more easily compare the health effects 
caused by exposure to different types of contaminants with 
different health effects is to quantify the burden of disease 
morbidity and mortality through the use of disability-adjust -
ed life years (DALYs). Per the World Health Organization, 
“One DALY can be thought of as one lost year of ‘healthy’ 
life. The sum of these DALYs across the population, or the 
burden of disease, can be thought of as a measurement of the 
gap between current health status and an ideal health situa -
tion where the entire population lives to an advanced age, 
free of disease and disability.”1 DALYs are calculated by 
adding the number of years of life lost due to disability (for 
people who are living with the adverse health effect) to the 
number of years of life lost due to premature deaths across 
the exposed population. Results for specific scenarios can 
then be evaluated in the context of acceptable risk targets. 
For example, Australia developed guidelines for potable re -
use (NRMMC et al., 2006) that set a tolerable microbial risk 
of 10-6 DALYs per person per year (approximately 1 diar -
rheal illness per 1,000 people per year). 
1 http://www.who.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/metrics_d  
aly/en.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
82 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 5-1 Determining Dose-Response Relationships for Microbial and Chemical Contaminants
Microbes
Microbial dose-response relationships have typically been found to conform to one of two models—the exponential or the beta-
Poisson model (Haas et al., 2014). Determination of microbial dose-response relationships can be challenging. Numerous dose-response 
studies have been conducted using humans (Dupont et al., 1995; Ward et al., 1986), but the number of individuals who can participate 
in such studies is necessarily very small (fewer than 100), for reasons of logistics and cost, and these “feeding studies” are typically 
conducted with healthy individuals who are not elderly or very young. This raises concerns about the representativeness of the results 
when trying to assess the health impacts for more sensitive subpopulations, such as individuals who are immune-incompetent, elderly, or 
very young. Additionally, several different outcomes, commonly referred to as endpoints, may result from exposure: infection, clinical 
disease, or death. An individual who is infected but shows no clinical signs or symptoms of disease is still capable of transmitting the 
organism to another individual, a phenomenon known as secondary spread. In some disease outbreaks, more individuals are infected as 
a result of secondary spread than from exposure to the contaminated source water .
To account for some of these phenomena, enhancements to the quantitative microbial risk assessment models have been made for 
particular applications. For example, Parkin et al. (2003) developed a more detailed model to allow for the incorporation of differences 
in exposure responses of sensitive subpopulations, rather than assuming that all individuals have the same response to the same dose of 
a contaminant. Soller (2009) described a method to incorporate person-to-person transmission of human pathogenic microorganisms, 
allowing a calculation of the amount of disease that results from secondary transmission, rather than just the amount that results from 
primary exposure to the contaminated water. 
Chemicals
Chemical dose-response assessments and the subsequent risk assessment for chemical contaminants are typically derived by one of 
two approaches: threshold-based methods for noncancerous agents and linear methods for cancerous chemicals. For noncarcinogens, 
the dose-response is described above a threshold level, which is typically expressed as a reference dose or acceptable daily intake. 
Below this threshold daily dose (or no observed adverse effect level), humans are unlikely to incur additional health risks over their 
lifetimes. Risk can be screened by comparing contaminant exposures against the reference dose. Cancer risk from mutagenic chemicals 
does not follow a threshold approach, because a single molecule is capable of causing a mutation that causes cancer. Cancer risk is, 
therefore, assumed to be linearly proportional to chemical exposure, and is typically described by a linear model (described by a cancer 
slope factor) that can be extrapolated to low concentrations. 
Determination of the dose-response relationship for chemicals with chronic effects can be challenging, because it is generally not 
possible to conduct a study for the length of time that would be required to observe the health effects. Many times, researchers are 
limited to short-term studies using relatively large doses of the chemical, where the effects are manifest in a short period of time and at 
a measurably higher frequency than background. Generally, these studies require the use of animals, which raises questions about the 
suitability of the specific animal model used as a surrogate for the response of humans. In addition, extrapolation of effects from the 
high dose/high response seen in the studies to the response that would be expected at the lower concentrations to which people would 
typically be exposed can be problematic and subject to interpretation. 
As a point of reference, the “acceptable” dosage may be compared to drinking water maximum contaminant levels (MCLs), which, 
for carcinogenic chemicals, are typically set at a level associated with 1 additional cancer death per 100,000 to 1 million persons over 
the course of a lifetime. This can provide useful information that can be used as guidance when assessing risks from graywater and 
stormwater uses for which no regulations or guidelines have been established.
Risk Management
The process of calculating the risk from exposure to a 
contaminant is a scientific process. Once the risk is calcu -
lated, the determination of whether that risk is acceptable 
involves not only science but also technological feasibility, 
economics, politics, and societal factors. Interested readers 
should consult NRC (2009c) for a detailed discussion of risk 
management. Several cities have taken a tiered approach for manag -
ing the risks of harvested stormwater use, with increasing 
levels of regulation or treatment required with increasing 
exposures (see Los Angeles County Department of Public 
Health tiered framework in Table 8-2). The District of Co -
lumbia recently developed a quantitative process for tiered 
risk assessment and management for nonpotable uses of 
harvested stormwater (DDOE, 2013). The process (shown 
in Figure 5-2) uses tiered risk-based screening levels for Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 83
individual chemical and microbial contaminants and four 
exposure classes (low to severe; see Tables 5-2 and 5-3). 
The process allows planners to compare typical stormwater 
concentrations against tiered risk-based levels, with higher 
contaminant concentrations allowed for activities with low 
exposure. For cases when stormwater concentrations exceed 
these screening levels (i.e., the risk is considered unaccept -
able), the risk management process (Figure 5-2) requires 
treatment or additional justification for why treatment is not 
needed. Note that the examples in Table 5-2 are based only 
on direct human exposure—not ecological risk or indirect 
human exposure. Consideration of other pathways, includ -
ing the use of stormwater to recharge an aquifer used for 
water supply, would include different exposures and could 
result in different chemical concentration limits. 
Australia also adopted risk-based guidelines for manag -
ing the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater (NRMMC 
et al., 2006, 2009). The guidelines include treatment recom -
mendations for different applications based on 95th percen -
tile concentrations from existing pathogen data or conserva -
tive estimates where data were lacking. In addition, the risk 
management framework includes a commitment to respon -sible use and recommendations for preventive measures, 
management of system failures, employee and community 
awareness, evaluation, review, and continual improvement.
QUANTITATIVE RISK ASSESSMENT FOR  
GRAYWATER AND STORMWATER REUSE
Several quantitative human health risk assessments have 
been published on graywater and stormwater. The most rel -
evant to the uses considered in this report are presented here. 
Graywater
Microorganisms
In a review of onsite reuse of graywater for irrigation, 
Maimon et al. (2010) attempted to summarize the potential 
risks from exposures to human pathogenic microorganisms, 
using rotavirus as the example. Their scenario included ex -
posures from the accidental ingestion of untreated graywater 
(100 mL; once/yr), the routine ingestion of the graywater 
from touching irrigated plants (1 mL; 90 times/yr), and in -
TABLE 5 -2 Examples from the DDOE Chemical Risk -based Levels for Stormwater Use Based on Human Exposure Category and  
Comparison with DDOE’s Drinking Water Standards  
Contaminant (μg/L)  Drinking Water Standard  Direct Human Exposure Category  
Higha Mediumb Lowc 
Benzene  0.41 210 550 6,000 
Cadmium  18 9,100  25,000  270,000  
Helptachlor  0.015  7.5 20 220 
Polybrominated biphenyls  0.0022  1.1 3 32 
Polychlorinated biphenyls  0.50 250 670 7,300 
Trichloroethylene  2.0 1,000  2,700  29,000  
Zinc 11 5,500  15,000  160,000  
aHigh exposure includes a pplications such as commercial farm produce drip or spray irrigation, firefighting, and commercial car washes.   
bMedium exposure includes public fountains, spray irrigation of playgrounds, home garden spray irrigation, home drip irrigatio n of fruits and 
vegetables, and home car washing.   
cLow exposure includes toilet flushing, washing machine use, and open space spray irrigation of parks (non -playgrounds).  
NOTES: For each of the exposure classes (grouped by the amount of water ingested), the risk -based leve ls represent the contaminant 
conce ntrations corresponding to a cancer risk of 10-6 or a non -cancer hazard index of 1.0.  DDOE states that although EPA suggests a 
discretionary cancer risk level between 10-4 and 10-6, it selected this cancer risk level to ac count for the presence of multiple contaminants.   
SOURCE: DDOE (2013).  
TABLE 5 -3 Examples from the DDOE Microbial Risk -based Levels for Stormwater Use Based on Human Exposure Category  
Contaminant (μg/L)  Swimming  Direct Human Exposure Category  
High Medium  Low 
E. coli  (CFU/100 mL)  126a 1,714  4,615  50,000  
Cryptosporidiumb (oocyst/L)  NA 0.016  0.033  0.320  
aRSLs correspond to a risk level of 8 in 1,000 of developing a gastrointestinal disease.  
bRSLs correspond to a 10 -6 risk level of developing a g astrointestinal disease.  
NOTE : See Table 3 -2 for examples of exposure categories.  
SOURCE: DDOE (2013).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
84 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 5-2 The tiered risk assessment and management approach for stormwater use implemented by the District of Columbia. SOURCE: 
DDOE (2013).
gestion of the graywater spray (0.1 mL; 90 times/yr). Using 
the assumption that the acceptable annual risk of infection 
was 1.4 x 10-3 infections per person per year, they calcu -
lated the acceptable safe dose of rotavirus as 0.0024 viruses 
per exposure if the exposure occurs from the accidental in -
gestion of 100 mL of untreated graywater once per year or 
0.00014 viruses per exposure if the exposure is to 1 mL and 
occurs 90 times per year (e.g., from the routine ingestion of 
the graywater from touching irrigated plants). Using this ac -
ceptable dose and the estimated concentrations of rotavirus 
in graywater (based on three different assumed relationships 
between rotavirus and measured E. coli  concentrations), the 
maximum volume of graywater that can be “safely” ingested 
in a single exposure occurring once per year was calculated 
to range from 0.003 mL (assuming 0.8 rotaviruses/mL) to 
0.24 mL (assuming a rotavirus concentration of 0.01 rota -
viruses/mL). Maimon et al. (2010) concluded that most of 
the exposure scenarios examined would result in exposure 
that would exceed the acceptable safe dose and that using 
graywater for spray irrigation or food crop irrigation would 
necessitate disinfection to protect against rotavirus. The committee could not find any risk assessments of 
exposure from surface drip irrigation (no landscape cover) 
with graywater. Such exposures would presumably be higher 
than those of subsurface irrigation, but exposure estimates 
and the increase in risk at the household scale, where many 
vehicles of disease transmission already exist, are needed to 
inform safe design practices.
Using a different approach, Ottoson and Stenstrom 
(2003) calculated the risks associated with exposure to hu -
man pathogens in treated (but not disinfected) graywater.2 
Because fecal indicator bacteria can overestimate the amount 
of fecal material in the graywater, the authors used measured 
concentrations of coprostanol (a fecal sterol) at the site as an 
estimator of the amount of fecal material in the graywater, and 
estimated pathogen concentrations based on the prevalence 
of pathogens in the general population. Risks were modeled 
in three scenarios—direct contact, spray irrigation of sports 
fields, and daily consumption of groundwater recharged 
2 The treatment system included settling tanks, activated sludge, a 
biofilter, and surface storage in ponds.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 85
with treated graywater. In the case of groundwater recharge, 
it was assumed that the microorganisms traveled through a 
3-m-thick vadose zone and that reductions in the numbers of 
microorganisms occurred during transport as well as in the 
groundwater during retention. The study considered several 
pathogens, including Campylobacter jejuni , Cryptosporidi -
um parvum , Giardia lamblia , rotavirus, and Salmonella , and 
modeled rates of natural attenuation in the subsurface. These 
organisms were chosen as conservative representatives for 
the behavior of fecal bacteria, viruses, and protozoan para -
sites. Lack of disinfection resulted in sizable risk across a 
range of exposures, although the risks ranged considerably 
by pathogen and exposure scenario. The highest risks across 
all scenarios were associated with rotavirus, ranging from 
0.25 probability of infection from a single event with direct 
contact to 0.63 annual probabilities for both spray exposure 
and groundwater consumption after 1 month retention (see 
Table 5-4). Risks from groundwater consumption decreased 
notably over time and were negligible (less than 10-11) for 
all organisms after 6 months retention. In addition, the ef -
fects of removal during transport through the soil are clearly 
seen in the much lower risks for the larger protozoan para -
sites ( Cryptosporidium  and Giardia ) compared to those for 
the smaller, more easily transported bacteria and viruses. 
Calculating risk based on indicator concentrations pres -
ents many challenges. Ideally, risk assessment would be 
based on direct pathogens data. This effort, however, has 
been limited by the relative lack of quantitative data on the 
concentrations of pathogenic microorganisms in graywater 
and stormwater. One report on the concentrations of patho -
gens in untreated graywater was located (see Table 4-2; Birks 
and Hills, 2007), and these data were used to perform ex -
ample calculations of infection risk infection for two different 
scenarios in which individuals could be exposed to graywater 
(see Box 5-2), although these limited data should not be as -
sumed to describe the risk of graywater use generally.Chemicals 
The committee could not find any published chemical 
risks assessments for graywater. Debroux et al. (2012) re -
cently reviewed the potential human health effects associ -
ated with exposure to nonregulated trace organic compounds 
(including pharmaceuticals and personal care products) in 
recycled municipal wastewater from potable and nonpota -
ble reuse. They concluded that none of the risk assessments 
conducted over the past 10 years found any adverse human 
health effects or significant risks. The risk of ingesting trace 
organic compounds after uptake into food crops is not well 
understood and has been identified as a research need for 
nonpotable reclaimed water (NRC, 2012a). Concentrations 
of trace organic chemicals in graywater may differ from 
those in recycled municipal wastewater. Compared to non -
potable recycled water, graywater would contain higher con -
centrations of personal care products (which are primarily 
derived from sink and shower water, and therefore would be 
diluted by other water sources in wastewater) and lower con -
centrations of pharmaceuticals, which are primarily excreted 
in urine and occasionally flushed directly down the toilet. In 
addition, the treatment levels for potable and nonpotable re -
use tend to be much greater than those for typical graywater, 
if treatment is even applied, although the exposure levels for 
typical potable and nonpotable reuse projects are also much 
greater. Nevertheless, this analysis provides potentially use -
ful reference information. The risks of long-term, low-level 
exposures to mixtures of trace organic compounds remain 
unclear for conventional drinking water sources, and typi -
cal nonpotable graywater exposures under best management 
practices would be lower. 
Very limited information is available in the refereed lit -
erature on the risks of various uses of stormwater. A study of 
the risks associated with chemicals and pathogens in storm -
water that was treated in a reed bed and then recharged into 
TABLE 5 -4 Comparative Risks of Infection across Pathogens from Treated, Non -disinfected Graywater  
 Risk from Single Exposure  Annual Risk  
Pathogen  Direct contact   
(1 mL/event)  Spray irrigation  
(1 mL exposure,  
26 times/yr)   Groundwater recharge  (2 liter/day consumption)  
1 mo. retention  3 mo. retention  6 mo. retention  
Campylobacter jejuni  0.00158  0.00316   0.00316  3.2 x 10-9 <10-11 
Cryptosporidium parvu m 0.0000251  0.0002   7.9 x 10-8 <10-11 <10-11 
Giardia lamblia  0.00000316  0.0000316   1.26 x 10-8 <10-11 <10-11 
Rotavirus  0.25 0.63  0.63 0.000001  <10-11 
Salmonella  0.0000501  0.00001   0.01 10-11 <10-11 
SOURCE: Based on data in Ottoson and Stenstrom (2003).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
86 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 5-2 An Example Risk Calculation for Toilet Flushing with Untreated Graywater
From a graywater storage tank, Birks and Hills (2007) collected samples of untreated graywater derived from baths, showers, and 
hand basins from a subset of apartments in a residence hall and analyzed the samples for microorganisms. Giardia was found to be pres -
ent at concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 cysts per liter (see Table 4-3). This information was used to make two sets of calculations 
regarding potential risk from exposure to untreated graywater. To determine the exposure volume and frequency, the exposure assump -
tions in DDOE (2013) (see Table 4-1) were used. 
In the first example, a calculation of the risk from exposure to Giardia from using the untreated graywater for flushing toilets was 
made. DDOE (2013) assumes that an individual is exposed to 0.01 ml water from aerosols during a toilet flushing. The risk of Giardia 
infection was calculated using the following equation:
P = 1 – e-rN
Where: P = probability of infection
 N = number of microorganisms ingested in a single exposure
 r = fraction of microorganisms that survive to initiate infection; constant for a given microorganism. 
 In the case of Giardia, r = 0.0198 (Haas et al., 2014).
Using the highest measured concentration of Giardia cysts, 1.5 cysts/liter:
 N = 1.5 cysts/L x 0.01 mL x 1L/1,000 mL
     = 1.5 x 10-5 cysts
 
 P = 1 – e-(0.0198)(1.5E-5)
    = 2.97 x 10-7
This is interpreted to mean that an individual has a risk of 1 in 3,367,003 of infection by Giardia after a single exposure to graywater 
from aerosols created by flushing a toilet.
The calculation can also be performed to determine the annual risk of infection. Using DDOE’s assumption that the number of ex -
posures over the course of a year is 1,100:
Pannual risk = 1 – (1 – P)1100
= 1 – (1 – 2.97 x 10-7)1100
= 3.27 x 10-4
This is interpreted to mean that an individual has a risk of 1 in 3,061 of infection by Giardia over the course of a year from using un -
treated graywater to flush toilets. Note that this is the risk of infection; the risk of illness would be lower .
To put this risk into context, the amount of treatment that would have to be done on the graywater to achieve what the EPA considers 
an acceptable risk from microorganisms in drinking water was calculated. The EPA assumes that an acceptable annual risk of infection 
from microorganisms in drinking water is 1 infection per 10,000 individuals per year—an annual risk of 10-4. The calculation was done 
using the following process:
Pannual risk risk = 10-4 = 1 – (1 – P)1100
P = 9.091 x 10-8
P = 9.9091 x 10-8 = 1 – e-rN
N = 4.6 x 10-6 cysts
This is the number of cysts in the 0.01mL volume assumed to be the exposure volume from flushing toilets. This is equivalent to 0.46 
cysts/liter. To achieve the same risk level as is acceptable from drinking water, the concentration of Giardia cysts in the graywater would 
have to be reduced from 1.5 cysts/liter to 0.46/liter, a reduction of approximately 70 percent.
These calculations are meant only to illustrate what risk might be present in one situation and cannot be extrapolated to other environ -
ments and conditions.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 87
an aquifer prior to recovery and use was performed by a 
group of scientists at CSIRO (Page et al., 2013). Risks from 
three pesticides (i.e., diuron, simazine, and chlorpyrifos) and 
three human pathogens (i.e., rotavirus, Campylobacter, and 
Cryptosporidium) were calculated. Box 5-3 provides the de -
tails of this quantitative risk assessment. 
Albrechtsen (2002) published data on Cryptosporidium 
in roof runoff used for toilet flushing. These data are used in 
example calculations of risk for toilet flushing with captured 
rainwater (see Box 5-4). The results suggest a 1 in 2,170 
annual chance of Cryptosporidium infection using the data 
reported and exposure assumptions from DDOE (2013).
These very limited data suggest that the risks of storm -
water use should not be taken lightly in applications where 
human exposures are likely. They represent only two case 
studies, but they show how a risk framework can be useful 
for informing project treatment needs. 
RISKS FROM SYSTEM FAILURES,  
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AND  
GROUNDWATER CONTAMINATION
The risk assessment calculations discussed in the previ -
ous section represent risks incurred under routine exposures, 
but the risks of treatment failure, cross-connection between 
potable and nonpotable water lines, or inadvertent ground -BOX 5-3 Quantitative Risk Assessment of a Stormwater Aquifer Storage Transfer Recovery System
Page et al. (2013) conducted a quantitative risk assessment to determine the potential risks to human health and the environment from 
an aquifer storage transfer recovery (ASTR) project in Salisbury, South Australia. The ASTR system collects stormwater from a catch -
ment area and then transmits the water to an instream basin, a holding/storage basin, and a cleansing reed bed. The final phase involves 
injecting the water into an aquifer, from which it is ultimately withdrawn via a recovery well after approximately 200 days retention 
time. The researchers collected and analyzed water samples for numerous water quality constituents including nutrients, pathogens, 
indicator microorganisms, physical characteristics, major ions, metals, and organic micropollutants. The study focuses on the risk asso -
ciated with three uses for the harvested stormwater: open space irrigation, nonpotable residential applications (e.g., toilet flushing, laun -
dry), and drinking water. They found that the concentrations of most chemicals met most of the Australian Drinking Water Guidelines. 
Page et al. (2013) chose Cryptosporidium parvum , Campylobacter , and adenovirus as the study pathogens because of their high 
infectivity, high DALYs per case of infection, and possible prevalence in stormwater. Rather than comparing the final concentrations to 
drinking water guidelines (as with the chemical contaminants), the researchers used DALYs. This allows for easier comparison of the 
impacts across microorganisms that can have very different health outcomes—from minor diarrhea to much more severe health effects. 
Using a guideline value of 10-6 DALYs per person per year for drinking water, the researchers determined the reductions in pathogen 
numbers that would be required to ensure protection of human health. The reduction levels that would be required to meet the tolerable 
risk level of 10-6 DALYs per person per year were as follows:
• For open space irrigation: 1.6 log10 reduction of viruses, 0.6 log10 reduction of protozoa, and 1.2 log10 reduction of bacteria
• For nonpotable residential uses (e.g., toilet flushing, laundry): 2.7 log10 reduction of viruses, 1.8 log10 reduction of protozoa, and 
2.3 log10 reduction of bacteria
• For drinking water: 5.8 log10 reduction of viruses, 4.8 log10 reduction of protozoa, and 5.3 log10 reduction of bacteria.
water contamination also need to be considered as part of an 
overall understanding of risk. 
Treatment Failures
To date, there have been no reported adverse health ef -
fects resulting from failures of graywater reuse systems 
(Sharvelle et al., 2013). However, failures in highly engi -
neered systems will eventually occur, and the potential im -
pacts of such events must be understood. In systems with sub -
stantial human exposures, real-time monitoring or redundant 
treatment systems can be developed to reduce these risks (see 
Chapter 6).
Cross-Connections
No graywater or stormwater cross-connections have 
been reported, but accidental or intentional cross-connec -
tions between nonpotable and potable water supplies are a 
public health concern, particularly for non-disinfected water 
supplies. There have been several reports in which cross-
connections have occurred between potable water systems 
and nonpotable reclaimed water, some of which resulted in 
illnesses. For example, in 2007 it was reported that 12 in -
dividuals who worked at Melbourne Water became ill after 
consuming water in an administration building from a tap Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
88 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 5-4  Risk Calculation for Use of Stormwater for Toilet Flushing
Albrechtsen (2002) conducted a study of seven Danish stormwater collection systems, most of which harvested roof runoff, although 
some collected pavement runoff. The systems’ collection areas ranged from 200 m2 to more than 5,000 m2; the stormwater was stored 
in collection tanks holding from 4 to 115 m3 of water and was used to supply apartment buildings with 6 to140 units. Samples were 
collected from the storage tanks and from toilet bowls that contained untreated stormwater. Of the ten samples analyzed for Cryptospo -
ridium , one was found to be positive, containing 10 oocysts per liter. (None of the toilet bowls containing potable water was found to 
contain detectable levels of Cryptosporidium , leading the investigators to conclude that the rainwater was the source of the pathogen.) 
To assess the exposure volume and frequency, the committee used exposure assumptions developed by DDOE (2013). In this example, 
a calculation to determine the risk from exposure to Cryptosporidium  from toilet flushing was made. The DDOE assumes that an 
individual is exposed to 0.01 mL toilet water from ingestion of the aerosol spray generated during flushing. The calculation used the 
following equation:
P = 1 – e-rN
Where: P = probability of infection
 N = number of microorganisms ingested in a single exposure
 r = fraction of microorganisms that survive to initiate infection; constant for a given microorganism. 
 In the case of Cryptosporidium , r = 0.004191 (Haas et al., 2014)
 N = 10 oocysts/L x 0.01mL x 1L/1000 mL
 = 10-4 oocysts
 P = 1 – e-(0.004191)(10E-4)
= 4.191 x 10-7
This is interpreted to mean that an individual has a risk of 1 in 2,386,000 of infection by Cryptosporidium  after a single exposure to 
aerosols from flushing a toilet containing this graywater. 
The calculation can also be performed to determine the annual risk of infection. Using DDOE’s assumption that the number of ex -
posures over the course of a year is 1,100:
Pannual risk = 1 – (1 – P)1100
= 1 – (1 – 4.191 x 10-7)1100
= 4.609 x 10-4
This is interpreted to mean that an individual has a risk of 1 in 2,170 of infection by Cryptosporidium  after exposure to aerosols from 
flushing a toilet containing this graywater over the course of a year . This is 4.6 times more than the risk that the EPA considers to be 
acceptable from microorganisms in drinking water (1 infection per 10,000 people per year) (EPA, 1992).
that had been mistakenly connected to a reclaimed water pipe 
(Herald Sun, 2007). Another incident in Queensland, Aus -
tralia, involved 630 homes in a housing development with 
dual plumbing for toilet flushing and outdoor use (WQRA, 
2010). Within 2 days of the nonpotable reclaimed water be -
ing delivered to the homes, complaints of foul taste and odor 
were received from residents and a cross-connection was 
discovered. Hambly et al. (2012) described several cases in 
Australia in which cross-connections between potable water 
and reclaimed water occurred. Guidance and testing pro -
grams have been developed to minimize accidental cross-
connections in water systems (AWWA, 2009; EPA, 2003) 
that could be applied to dual-plumbed graywater or storm -water use systems, as appropriate. The California Plumbing 
Code recommends annual cross-connection inspections and 
testing for permitted graywater and stormwater use systems. 
Groundwater Contamination
Another potential failure that could affect human health 
is the unplanned recharge of stormwater or graywater into 
an aquifer used for a drinking water supply. Or planned 
aquifer recharge may not adequately remove contaminants 
before they reach a potable aquifer. Box 5-3 describes one 
published risk assessment for groundwater impacted by 
stormwater-derived contaminants. Because of the magnitude Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 89
of the potential health risks associated with long-term inges -
tion of contaminated water, the committee describes what 
is known about the potential for groundwater contamination 
from graywater and stormwater in this section. Chapter 4 
discusses contaminants of greatest concern to groundwater 
infiltration projects.
Graywater Infiltration
There is some concern about graywater constituents 
leaching to groundwater when graywater is applied for ir -
rigation, particularly in cases where graywater is applied 
over large areas at rates greater than required based on 
evapotranspiration. When graywater is used for irrigation, 
constituents of primary concern for groundwater quality 
include nitrogen, salts (including sodium, chloride, and bo -
ron), pathogens, and organic contaminants from cleaning or 
personal care products. However, the actual human health 
risk would depend on many factors, including contaminant 
concentrations in graywater (see Chapter 4), irrigation rates, 
potential for contaminant sorption or biodegradation, soil 
and aquifer characteristics that affect contaminant transport, 
depth to the water table, and distance to the point of ground -
water withdrawal. In a soil-column study, Negahban-Azar et 
al. (2013) showed that salts have potential to leach through 
graywater-irrigated soil. This would pose the most concern 
in soils with high sand content and/or where high infiltration 
rates are observed. Stevens et al. (2011) noted a risk for salt 
transport to groundwater, which would pose the most risk 
in arid climates where evapotranspiration is high. Although 
leaching of phosphorus is generally not a concern because 
of limited mobility in soil, leaching of inorganic nitrogen is 
possible. Surfactants leached from columns ranged from 0 
to 20 percent of what was added, resulting in low concentra -
tions in leachate, although surfactant concentration in leach -
ate increased over the 17-month duration of experiments. To 
reduce these risks, at least two states (i.e., New Mexico, Ari -
zona) recommend that household graywater not be applied 
in areas where the seasonally high groundwater table is less 
than 5 ft from the application point (Sharvelle et al., 2013). 
Source control (best management practices) can also be used 
to reduce the concentrations of contaminants in graywater 
used for irrigation (see Chapter 4).
Stormwater Infiltration
As described in Chapters 1 and 2 of this report, there is 
increased interest in urban stormwater capture and enhanced 
infiltration through engineered structures as a means to man -
age urban stormwater and peak flows, reduce non-point pol -
lution, and replenish groundwater supplies. Because urban runoff also contains pollutants, there exists the potential to 
contaminate groundwater during infiltration, especially in 
the future if large volumes of urban stormwater are captured 
for groundwater recharge, thereby increasing human health 
risks for current or future groundwater users. As outlined 
in Table 4-4, pollutants in urban stormwater include salts, 
suspended solids, nutrients (e.g., nitrogen and phosphorus), 
heavy metals (e.g., copper, lead, chromium, nickel, and 
zinc), organic compounds from automotive use and biocide 
applications, and pathogens. The likelihood for these pollut -
ants to migrate through the soil and contaminate groundwa -
ter during stormwater infiltration depends on a number of 
factors including the infiltration rate, permeability and char -
acter of the soil or infiltration media, biological activity in 
the subsurface, depth to the water table, and the properties 
of the pollutants. With the growing practice of “enhanced 
infiltration” for groundwater replenishment, there is concern 
that these practices may put the groundwater at risk from 
chemical and microbial contaminants (Nieber et al., 2014).
Risk Factors for Chemical Contamination of Groundwa -
ter. Chemical pollutants in urban stormwater that are most 
likely to contaminate groundwater are those that are relatively 
non-volatile, hydrophilic (dissolve or mix easily in water), 
ionic, and non-sorbing. Soluble, non-sorbing salts, such as 
road deicing compounds, will flow with the infiltrating run -
off and not be removed during infiltration (Bannerman et al., 
2014; Mullaney et al., 2009). The existing literature on the 
fate of organic compounds in stormwater infiltration systems, 
however, is much less than for heavy metals (Weiss et al., 
2008). Mikkelsen et al. (1996) studied metal movement in per -
colating stormwater at two infiltration systems in Switzerland, 
and metal concentrations in the water were found to decrease 
rapidly to background conditions within 1.5 m of depth. In 
Perth, Australia, Appleyard (1993) reported sediment concen -
trations of 3,500 ppm of lead in stormwater infiltration basins 
because of strong sorption to iron oxides. Nightingale (1987) 
studied water quality beneath five stormwater recharge basins 
in Fresno, California. The basins drained single-family resi -
dential neighborhoods and captured winter stormwater; sam -
pling at depths up to 26 m showed no contamination except 
for trace levels of diazinon. 
The potential for subsurface transport of metals and sorb -
ing organic chemicals into groundwater depends on the char -
acter of the media and whether fine solids are retained by fil -
tration. Stormwater contaminants are unlikely to be removed 
if stormwater infiltrates directly into coarse media or karst 
formations with extremely high percolation rates with little or 
no opportunity for attenuation or filtration (e.g., Stephensen 
et al., 1999). A study of 15 dry wells—precast concrete struc -
tures with open bottoms resting on and surrounded by crushed Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
90 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
stone for subsurface disposal of stormwater—found no sub -
surface changes in water quality for filtered forms of copper, 
lead, and zinc or for E. coli  and enterococci, even after perco -
lating through gravel and at least 4 feet of urban subsurface 
soils (Pitt and Talebi, 2012a). Similarly, groundwater is more 
at risk from stormwater contaminants in areas where the soil 
is sandy and the groundwater is shallow (Fischer et al., 2003). 
In a study of groundwater beneath 16 stormwater detention 
basins in New Jersey that had sandy and unconsolidated soils, 
the sampling showed elevated levels of petroleum hydrocar -
bons, as well as the herbicides metolachlor and prometon. 
Fischer et al. (2003) concluded that high recharge in urban 
stormwater basins may impact groundwater even when the 
constituent concentrations are low. 
Risk Factors for Pathogen Contamination of Groundwa -
ter. Few studies have examined the efficacy of infiltration 
practices for removing pathogenic organisms (Weiss et al., 
2008). Because pathogens are typically associated with par -
ticles, physical straining through the soil or engineered media 
may remove pathogens just as sand filters are used in water 
treatment, although the effectiveness will depend on the or -
ganism and the porous media properties. Straining is most ef -
fective for protozoan pathogens (greater than 3 microns), such 
as Giardia lamblia  and Cryptosporidium parvum , and larger 
bacteria (approximately 1-2 microns) than viruses, which are 
too small (0.02 to 0.08 microns) to be effectively removed 
by filtration through porous media. However, virus removal 
during passage through porous media may also occur via at -
tachment to soil particles or aquifer material, depending on 
the specific characteristics of the virus and the environment 
(see Schijven and Hassanizadeh, 2000). Clark and Pitt (2007) 
documented pathogen contamination of groundwater due to 
infiltration practices that included stormwater sand filters. 
High bacterial and virus concentrations were found in ground -
water on Long Island where the groundwater table was close 
to the land surface. In contrast, the Orange County Water Dis -
trict performed extensive analysis of viruses and protozoa in 
groundwater in the Santa Ana River basin, where reclaimed 
wastewater and stormwater recharges groundwater, and con -
cluded that the surface recharge is not a significant source of 
pathogens to groundwater (NWRI, 2004; OCWD, 2004).
Inactivation also plays a key role in determining whether 
pathogens present in the infiltrating water will survive to con -
taminate the underlying groundwater. A large body of litera -
ture describes the numerous factors that affect the length of 
time that microorganisms can survive in the subsurface (see, 
e.g., John and Rose, 2005). Typically, microorganisms sur -
vive longer at cooler temperatures and near-neutral pH con -
ditions (John and Rose, 2005; Yates et al., 1988). Some bacte -
ria are reported to survive longer in acidic soils and soils with a large amount of organic matter, as long as several months 
(Pitt et al., 1999). Viruses typically survive longer than bac -
teria (Yates  et al., 1988; Sidhu et al., 2010). As a general 
rule, protozoan parasites and helminth ova survive longer 
in the environment than the other types of enteric pathogens 
because of their environmentally resistant non-metabolically 
active forms (e.g., Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts).
ENVIRONMENTAL RISKS
In addition to health effects on humans, the potential 
impacts of contaminants in graywater and stormwater on the 
environment should be considered when significant environ -
mental exposures are likely. Assuming best practice are fol -
lowed and graywater is not ponded or discharged directly to 
surface water during irrigation, aquatic organisms should not 
experience significant contaminant exposures. For stormwa -
ter capture projects, ecological exposure scenarios may not 
be common, but for projects with surface impoundments or 
wetland treatment cells (see Box 2-6), aquatic life may be -
come an intentional or unintentional component of the proj -
ect, where they could be impacted by trace metals or organic 
contaminants (Grebel et al., 2013). Risks could also include 
algal blooms and low dissolved oxygen associated with el -
evated nutrients, leading to fish die off in stormwater ponds. 
The committee found only a few analyses of ecological risks 
involving graywater (Gross et al., 2005; Maimon et al., 2010), 
although more work has been done on ecological risks associ -
ated with stormwater ponds (reviewed in Tixier et al., 2011). 
Stormwater retention ponds and wetlands typically pro -
vide entirely new aquatic habitat, enhancing biodiversity in 
the urban environment (Brand and Snodgrass, 2010; Le Viol 
et al., 2009). However, in these settings stormwater-derived 
contaminants in water and sediment can exceed probable-
effect levels for aquatic life (VanLoon et al., 2000; Wik et 
al., 2008) and cause adverse ecological impacts, such as le -
thal and sublethal effects on embryonic and larval amphib -
ians (Bishop et al., 2000b; Snodgrass et al., 2008). Thus, 
stormwater ponds tend to be populated by more pollution-
tolerant organisms (Wik et al., 2008) and have low species 
richness (Bishop et al., 2000a). A central issue when consid -
ering ecological risk, therefore, is to determine what level 
of impairment is acceptable in consideration of the new en -
vironmental benefits provided. Without stormwater capture 
features, urban streams are impacted by the same contami -
nants as well as extremes in flow associated with runoff from 
largely impervious surfaces. The EPA (1998) developed a 
framework for ecological risk assessment that can be used 
to evaluate the probability of adverse ecological effects, 
which includes comparison of field data to reference sites. 
Selection of an appropriate reference site in the urban envi -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 91
ronment is critical because the degree of impairment in the 
reference site determines the magnitude of calculated risk 
and the habitat objectives of the stormwater project (Tixier 
et al., 2011). This challenge has led some researchers to call 
for new strategies to understand the ecological functioning 
of stormwater-based habitats to better develop ecological 
objectives and management measures (Lafont et al., 2007; 
Tixier et al., 2011). 
In addition to assessing potential toxicological effects 
on aquatic life, graywater or stormwater irrigation projects 
should be aware of potential water quality impacts to plants 
and to soil properties. Constituents of greatest concern for 
stormwater include salinity, sodium, chloride, and metals 
(EPA, 2012a). For graywater, contaminants of concern in -
clude nitrogen, phosphorus, salinity, boron, sodium, chlo -
ride, and surfactants (Sharvelle et al., 2013). As discussed 
in Chapter 4, salinity is a key concern, because of potential 
negative effects on plant health and because high quantities 
of sodium relative to calcium and magnesium (measured as 
the sodium adsorption ratio [SAR]) can impact soil structure, 
making the soil less permeable and more erodible, particu -
larly soils with a high clay content. In a study of seven U.S. 
households using graywater for irrigation, soil SAR levels 
were elevated in graywater-irrigated soil compared to fresh -
water-irrigated soil, and the soil SAR at a site with more than 
30 years of graywater irrigation was 2-22 times greater than 
at the control site. However, at all sites, the soil SAR was 
less than 5, low enough to prevent any harmful effect for 
plants’ water uptake (Sharvelle et al., 2012). Salinity is likely 
to be a greater concern in arid climates with high evapotrans -
piration rates and fewer rainfall events to flush the soils of 
salt build-up (Stevens et al., 2011).Excess concentrations of boron, metals, and surfactants 
can be toxic to plants, and surfactants in graywater can also 
cause the soil to become more hydrophobic, impacting plant 
health (Garland et al., 2000; Gross et al., 2005). A large per -
centage of the applied surfactants have been shown to bio -
degrade in the soil, and although surfactant concentrations 
are elevated in graywater-irrigated soils compared to con -
trol sites, surfactants do not accumulate in soils over time  
(Sharvelle et al., 2012). Boron has been found to accumu -
late in soils irrigated with graywater for more than 5 years 
(Negahban-Azar et al., 2012), which may be a concern. In 
addition, some plants may be more sensitive to contaminant 
effects than others. For example, Sharvelle et al. (2013) ob -
served reduced growth or adverse plant health effects from 
graywater irrigation on only 3 species (i.e., avocado, lemon 
tree, and Scotch pine) out of 22 studied.
Although indicator organisms are present in graywater, 
graywater-irrigated soil has not been found to consistently 
contain elevated concentrations of indicator organisms com -
pared to potable water-irrigated soil (City of Los Angeles, 
1992; Negahban-Azar et al, 2012; Sharvelle et al., 2012). In 
these studies, animals were known to contribute to indica -
tor organisms in both graywater- and potable water-irrigated 
areas, and it was not possible to differentiate the contribution 
of indicator organisms from graywater from other natural 
contributions of indicator organisms. Antimicrobial chemi -
cals have been found to accumulate in graywater-irrigated 
soil (Negahban-Azaer et al., 2012). The effects of antimicro -
bial chemicals on soils are not well understood, and there is 
increasing concern that they might contribute to the abun -
dance and persistence of antibiotic resistance in soil micro -
organisms (Auerbach et al., 2007).
TABLE 5 -5 Published Water Quality Guidelines for Irrigation  
Hazard  Australian and New Zealand Trigger Values  2012 EPA Water Reuse Guidelines  
Boron (mg/L)  0.500  0.75 
Cadmium (mg/L)  0.01 0.01 
Copper (mg/L)  0.2 0.2 
Iron (mg/L)  0.2 5.0 
Lead (mg/L)  2.0 5.0 
Zinc (mg/L)  2.0 2.0 
Salinity (µS/cm)  <950 to 12,200a  <700 to 3,000  
Chloride  <175 to >700 mg/L   
Sodium  <115 to >460 mg/L   
aDepending on crop sensitivity.  
NOTE: Trigger values are established to minimize soil build -up of contaminants and prevent direct toxic effects to crops.  Australian trigger 
values for metals reflect the long -term trigger values, assuming tolerance for 100 years.  
SOURCES: Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council and the Agriculture and Resource Management  Council of 
Australia and New Zealand (2000); EPA (2012a).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
92 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Guidelines for irrigation quality to minimize adverse ef -
fects have been established by the EPA and in Australia and 
New Zealand (see Table 5-5). Most stormwater outfall sam -
ples fall within these guidelines (see Table 4-4), although 
household-scale projects capturing runoff from roofs with 
certain materials could exceed guidelines for metals (see 
Box 4-1). Source control strategies can be used to control 
boron and sodium in graywater and salts in stormwater (see 
Chapter 3). 
CONCLUSIONS
Although no documented reports of adverse human 
health effects from the beneficial use of stormwater or gray -
water have been identified, additional examination of risk is 
necessary to support safe and appropriate design and imple -
mentation of stormwater and graywater use systems. This 
effort will be especially important as the use of graywater 
and stormwater becomes more widespread, particularly in 
water-scarce regions.
Risk assessment provides a means to determine “fit-
for-purpose” water quality criteria or treatment needs 
based on human exposures.  Risk from graywater or storm -
water is a factor of chemical or microbial concentrations and 
exposure (typically, the amount or water ingested). Thus, un -
like drinking water criteria, which are established based on 
2 liters of water consumed per day, criteria for applications 
with minimal human exposures might allow for much higher 
concentrations of contaminants in graywater or stormwater 
and still result in acceptably low health risks. Risk assess -
ment tools provide a ready means for developing such cri -
teria for many chemicals and microbes for which drinking 
water criteria exist. As nonpotable on-site use of graywater 
and stormwater becomes more common, additional public 
health risk communication efforts would be beneficial to 
help the public understand risk-based treatment objectives 
and appropriate safeguards. 
Considering the low exposures in most nonpotable 
graywater and stormwater applications, pathogens rep -
resent the most significant acute risks. Available risk as -
sessments and the committee’s risk calculations using lim -
ited, observed pathogen data and various possible exposure 
scenarios suggest that disinfection is necessary for many uses 
of graywater, including spray irrigation, food crop irriga -
tion, and toilet flushing, to protect human health. Subsurface 
landscape irrigation with graywater does not pose significant 
risk, if best practices are followed, because human exposure 
is minimized. These findings are consistent with most regu -
latory guidance (see Chapter 8), although the risk of surface 
drip irrigation (without landscape cover) at the household 
scale remains unresolved. Limited data on pathogens in roof runoff suggest that treatment may also be needed, even for 
low levels of human exposure, such as toilet flushing, al -
though more research on pathogens in roof runoff is needed. 
Chemicals become of concern in groundwater infiltration 
projects, where drinking water supplies could be impacted.
Extremely limited data are available on the pathogen 
content in graywater and roof runoff, which precludes 
a full assessment of microbial risks. Most water quality 
monitoring assesses microbial indicator data, and microbial 
risk assessments are conducted using assumed relationships 
between the concentrations of indicator microorganisms and 
pathogenic microorganisms. Consistent relationships be -
tween surrogates and contaminants have not been established 
for graywater or stormwater. Such relationships would be 
extremely variable at smaller scales but, even at large scales, 
could differ substantially from traditional indicator-pathogen 
relationships derived for municipal wastewater. This is a par -
ticular concern for roof runoff, which may include microbial 
indicator organisms from the waste of animals that do not 
transmit human pathogens. Therefore, the actual concentra -
tion of human pathogens in the water—and the associated 
risk of exposure to that water—may be much higher or lower 
than that calculated using the concentration of indicator mi -
croorganisms. 
Enhanced infiltration of stormwater for groundwa -
ter recharge poses risks of groundwater contamination 
and necessitates careful design to minimize those risks. 
The risk of groundwater contamination from stormwater re -
charge is related to the contaminants present, any pretreat -
ment processes installed, the capacity for the subsurface soil 
and engineered media used in the infiltration basin to remove 
them, and the proximity to groundwater used as a drinking 
water supply. Dry wells, which directly inject water into the 
subsurface and surface infiltration through sandy soils do not 
effectively attenuate chemical contaminants, and treatment 
prior to injection might be needed to prevent groundwater 
contamination. 
As the uses of graywater and stormwater become 
more common, care to prevent cross-connections needs 
to be taken. Cross-connections between potable and nonpo -
table water systems can expose residents to elevated risks. 
No reports of adverse health effects from cross-connections 
between graywater or stormwater systems and potable sys -
tems have been documented, but there have been reports of 
cross-connections between reclaimed water and potable sys -
tems that have resulted in illnesses. Regulatory guidance and 
inspection criteria can help reduce cross-connection risks. 
Environmental impacts from the outdoor use of 
graywater and stormwater generally appear low, but 
risks depend upon several factors, including water quali -
ty, application rates, and plant or animal species exposed. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Characterizing and Mitigating Human Health and Environmental Risks 93
Effects of irrigation on plant and soil health can occur from 
salts, boron, and metals, but source control practices and 
appropriate irrigation rates can reduce these impacts. If not 
controlled at the source, then long-term build-up of boron or 
salt can pose risk to plant and soil health, depending on soil 
and climatic conditions. Constructed stormwater ponds and 
wetlands typically contain elevated contaminant levels suf -
ficient to impair reproduction among some aquatic species, often leading to a habitat dominated by pollution-tolerant 
organisms. Such ecological affects may be acceptable, con -
sidering the overall environmental benefits provided by such 
features, including reduced pollution to other surface waters, 
but the ecological objectives of such projects are often un -
clear, hindering efforts to limit ecological risks through im -
proved management and design. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
946
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater 
Stormwater and graywater are similar in that they are 
on-site sources of water that, in many cases, can be used 
beneficially. However, source conveyance, capture, and 
distribution for end uses are very different. Although treat -
ment for both water sources is simple at the smallest scales 
and increases in complexity with scale and degree of human 
contact, graywater and stormwater pose different treatment 
concerns. This chapter describes general design principles, 
the state of practice for graywater and stormwater system de -
signs at household, neighborhood, and regional scales, and 
treatment that may be used to meet specific end use quality 
objectives. 
OVERALL DESIGN PROCESS
The overall planning and design processes for graywa -
ter and stormwater systems (including integrated graywater 
and stormwater systems) for beneficial use have many simi -
larities. Both start with the identification of project objec -
tives. Chapter 1 outlines a range of objectives that may be 
associated with on-site graywater or stormwater projects, 
such as providing a cost-effective alternative water supply, 
diversifying the water portfolio, reducing runoff volume and 
peak flows, reducing downstream pollutant loads, and con -
serving water and energy resources. In addition to the over -
arching project objectives, additional design objectives may 
drive major choices in system configuration (some common 
design objectives are included in Table 6-1). It is important 
to consider all project objectives when deciding whether and 
how to design a beneficial use project. 
Figure 6-1 outlines the general steps for the progression 
of project design, beginning with overall objectives for the 
beneficial use project. The quantity, quality, and timing of 
available on-site water supplies (see Chapters 3 and 4) then 
need to be assessed. The basic feasibility of beneficial use 
projects can be determined by comparing the available quan -
tity with the anticipated demands, considering the possible 
water use applications (see Chapter 2). Major mismatches in the quantity or timing of supply and demand suggest that 
the project may not be appropriate or cost-effective for the 
site conditions. Once general feasibility is determined, sys -
tem design alternatives for graywater or stormwater cap -
ture, storage, and treatment can be considered and evaluated 
based on their cost, other benefits provided, and the extent 
to which the project achieves its objectives. Unit processes 
within the treatment train (if applicable) would be selected 
based on factors such as water quality objectives, cost, main -
tenance requirements, and project scale. Figure 6-1 outlines 
the design-related steps within the broader decision frame -
work for a project, discussed in Chapter 9.
The following sections discuss system design consid -
erations for the beneficial use of graywater and stormwater. 
Unit processes for graywater and stormwater capture and use 
systems are discussed at the end of the chapter. 
GRAYWATER SYSTEM DESIGN
Typical graywater systems are designed to supply water 
for irrigation and/or toilet flushing. A key factor is matching 
the graywater supply with demand so that the resource is 
managed efficiently. Approaches to estimate graywater de -
mand are summarized in Bergdolt et al. (2011). Table 6-2 
summarizes some key considerations for graywater proj -
ect design across different scales. Graywater generation in 
multi-residential buildings may often be greater than can be 
effectively used for irrigation, while commercial or industri -
al buildings may not generate enough to meet specific needs. 
The following sections outline the state of practice for gray -
water use at the household or neighborhood scale.
Collection and Storage
Graywater collection requires separate collection of 
graywater sources (i.e., showers/baths, lavatory sinks, and 
laundry) from blackwater (i.e., toilet and kitchen water). In 
conventional homes, graywater sources are combined with Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  95
FIGURE 6-1  Typical steps to evaluate feasibility of and to design a graywater and stormwater beneficial use system.TABLE 6-1 Examples of System Design Objectives Relevant to On -site Use of Graywater or Stormwater  
Category  Typical Design Objectives  
Regulatory  Meet local, state, or federal requirements  
Cost Minimize capital, operation, and maintenance (life -cycle) costs or achieve lower unit costs than  
alternative water supplies  
Aesthetic and public perception  Improve appearance and public perception of a site  
Contribute to positive environmental action  
Maintenance  Operate within maintenance and repair schedule and requirements  
Design systems to allow for modification or expansion  
Longevity  Achieve long -term functionality  
Resources  Improve downstream aquatic environment  
Improve wildlife habitat  
Achieve multiple use functionality  
Safety, risk, and liability  Function without significant risk or liability  
Function with minimal environmental risk downstream  
SOURCE: Adapted from TRB (2006).  
Determine Project and Design Objectives
Evaluate Demand for Available Captured 
Water Considering Available Applications
Evaluate Feasibility of Beneficial Use Based on 
Generation, Demand, and Scale 
Evaluate System Design Alternatives; 
Select System Design and Treatment Train
Select Appropriate Unit ProcessesDetermine Quantity, Quality, and Timing of 
Runoff and/or Graywater Available
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
96 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
blackwater sources very near to plumbing fixtures. Where 
graywater is reused, separate pipes are installed for graywa -
ter collection from fixtures to divert graywater to a treatment 
and/or use system (Figure 6-2). Guidance on collection and 
use of graywater for both irrigation and toilet flushing is in -
cluded in Bergdolt et al. (2011).
In existing one-story homes with an unfinished basement 
or crawl space, graywater collection can be accomplished 
fairly simply. However, in most existing homes, retrofits for 
separate collection of household graywater are too costly to 
justify unless conducted as part of a major home remodeling 
effort. Simple laundry-to-landscape systems with no storage 
are often installed in existing development, and many home -
owners can build this simple, low-cost system themselves. 
New development projects, however, can consider separate 
collection of household graywater, and graywater may even 
be collected and treated at a neighborhood (multi-residential) 
scale (see Figure 2-1). Neighborhood-scale graywater reuse 
removes the burden of maintenance from the homeowner 
and enables centralized quality assurance inspections to en -
sure that the system is meeting water quality requirements. 
The two basic graywater systems are discussed below, fol -
lowed by discussions of treatment considerations.
Laundry to Landscape
A simple design for graywater irrigation systems is the 
laundry-to-landscape system (Figure 6-3), which is typically 
applied only at the household scale. This system does not 
require storage or filtration and has been applied at many households. Laundry water is pumped directly from the 
washing machine to valve boxes submerged in mulch ba -
sins. The water is then conveyed for subsurface irrigation 
into tree trenches or mulch basins or through subsurface ir -
rigation to minimize human contact. Mulch basins include 
drip irrigation systems below ground surface covered with 
mulch. Many states and the 2012 Uniform Plumbing Code 
recommend that drip irrigation systems be covered by at 
least 2 inches (5 cm) of mulch to reduce human exposures 
(see Chapter 8, Box 8-1). Many states also provide guidance 
on graywater application rates based on soil type to ensure 
adequate infiltration of graywater and minimize build-up of 
salt in clay soils. Pumps internal to laundry machines pro -
vide sufficient pressure to distribute graywater through these 
systems. Homeowners have generally been satisfied with 
laundry-to-landscape systems and have not noted exces -
sive maintenance issues (Box 6-1 and Box 2-4). In climates 
where freezing temperatures are observed in winter months, 
graywater is diverted to a wastewater collection system for 
those months to prevent breaks in the distribution plumbing.
Graywater Systems with Storage
Beyond the most simple laundry-to-landscape systems, 
graywater systems that collect water from multiple sources 
(e.g., laundry, shower, handwash basins, and bath tubs) need 
to include a storage tank (Figure 6-4). Storage tanks must 
be well sealed and include a vent and an overflow and drain 
to a wastewater collection system. The 2012 International 
Plumbing Code (IPC), which has been adopted by some 
TABLE 6 -2 Design and Feasibility Considerations Specific to Household, Neighborhood, and Commercial and Industrial Applications of 
Graywater Beneficial Uses  
 Household  Neighborhood/Multi -residential  Commercial and Institutional  
Irrigation  • Subsurface irrigation (necessary to 
reduce risk) sometimes not practical  
in grassy areas.  • At neighborhood scales, more graywater is 
often generated than is required for 
irrigation.  
• Treatment may be required depending on 
state regulations and whether there is a 
high likelihood f or human exposure.  
• Human health risks from untreated 
graywater are higher than at the household 
scale, because graywater could serve as a 
vehicle for disease spread between 
households (see Chapter 5).  • Graywater generation rates vary widely 
among commercial and institutional 
settings, so graywater production rates 
and demands for end uses need to be 
evaluated on case -by-case basis (see 
Chapter 3).  
• Often graywater production is not 
sufficient to meet end  use demands, but 
can be suitable when showers or laundry 
are on site (e.g., fitness facilities, hotels, 
offices with showers, aquatics centers).  
• Hospitals are not appropriate sites for 
graywater use because of contamination 
potential.  Toilet Flushing  • Treatment is required and systems can 
be complex for homeowners to 
maintain.  
• Difficult to enforce water quality 
requirements.  
• Risk for cross -connection and 
improper maintenance resulting in 
health risks.  • Graywater volume generated is often 
suitable for toilet flushing.  
• Treatment is required.  
• Maintenance is required (but can be 
provided by third -party).  
• Stacked plumbing can be favorable in 
buildings with less than 10 floors, but can 
be complex in high rises.  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  97
FIGURE 6-2 Plumbing for separate collection of graywater. SOURCE: Bergdolt et al. (2011).
FIGURE 6-3 Laundry to landscape system. SOURCE: SFPUC (2012).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
98 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 6-1 User Satisfaction with Graywater Reuse Systems
A number of studies have been conducted to assess user satisfaction with graywater reuse, and all studies focused on systems that 
were installed at the request of the homeowner or resident, rather than mandatory applications. A study was conducted on 25 homes in 
Guelph, Canada, using graywater for toilet flushing (City of Guelph, 2012). Of the 25 homes studied, the Brac Greywater Reuse Sys -
tem (no longer commercially available) was installed in 24. This simple treatment system includes filtration and chlorination. Organic 
matter and turbidity are not target constituents for removal in the system. Surveys were administered after 1 year of operation, and the 
majority of study participants rated their system as “good.” The following quote from City of Guelph (2012) describes user feedback 
on the graywater reuse systems (GWRS):
Some of the difficulties with the GWRS that were raised included: difficulties with motor controls, system operating too often and/
or too noisily, overflow and flooding issues, and difficulty with access to the tank and/or filter. The frequency of filter cleaning was 
mentioned as a problem for some users, while others were able to adapt to this new responsibility. Most users that were interviewed 
indicated that the system requires a lot of diligence in cleaning. Some went as far to say that when the routine of the cleaning is 
established, the system functions quite well. Of those interviewed, five users indicated that they clean their filters weekly, and 5 
users cleaned their filters monthly.
In summary, users were generally happy with the installed systems to flush toilets with graywater but noted some challenges in manag -
ing required maintenance.
Participants of the City of Long Beach’s Laundry-to-Landscape Pilot Program were also surveyed (Gallup, City of Long Beach, 
personal communication, 2014). In this study, 15 of the 26 participating homeowners scored their level of satisfaction with the overall 
functioning of the system as 5/5, or “very satisfied.” Eight reported being “satisfied” (4/5), and 3 reported being “neutral” (3/5). No 
participating homeowner reported being “dissatisfied” or “very dissatisfied.” 
In summary, the few studies done on user satisfaction with graywater reuse indicate that users were generally happy with the installed 
systems. Maintenance was not an issue for users of laundry-to-landscape systems, but it was for users of the system to use graywater 
to flush toilets. 
states,1 specifies a maximum graywater storage time of 24 
hours for irrigation and 48 hours for toilet flushing. Thus, 
storage tanks are designed based on expected graywater gen -
eration such that graywater not used in a 24-48 hour period 
will overflow to a wastewater collection system. Guidance 
for design and sizing of storage tanks is provided in Bergdolt 
et al. (2011). Storage tanks act as a settling tank for large 
particles (e.g., lint and hair) present in graywater. Therefore, 
the graywater in storage tanks should not be mixed to avoid 
re-suspension of previously settled materials. 
Graywater irrigation systems with storage also include 
a coarse filter and pump (Figure 6-4; Bergdolt et al., 2011). 
Coarse filters should be selected based on specifications 
provided by the manufacturer of drip supply lines and will 
typically be around 120-150 mesh (110-125 µm). When 
graywater is used for toilet flushing, a separate contact tank 
is recommended for disinfection. Water is drawn as needed 
from the storage tank and then diverted to the disinfection 
tank. The technology is mature, and commercially avail -
able kits to install graywater irrigation systems may increase 
adoption of the practice. 
1 See http://www.iccsafe.org/gr/Documents/stateadoptions.pdf.Graywater Treatment Design Considerations
The extent and type of graywater treatment system de -
pends on the end use for graywater. The following section 
outlines basic treatment design considerations for various 
end use graywater applications. 
Subsurface Irrigation
When human exposures to graywater are minimized 
(e.g., subsurface irrigation), minimal treatment is required 
(see Chapter 5). The simple laundry-to-landscape design, 
where untreated graywater is supplied at least 2 inches be -
low the ground surface, is allowed in many of the states that 
allow graywater use for irrigation. Among the 25 states that 
currently allow household-scale graywater use for irrigation 
(see Chapter 8), 20 states have not established enforceable 
water quality requirements for subsurface irrigation at the 
household scale. Instead, common sense best management 
practices are provided to guide safe application of gray -
water for irrigation (Sharvelle et al., 2013). In such states, 
laundry-to-landscape systems with no treatment (Figure 6-3) Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  99
FIGURE 6-4  A storage tank for separate 
collection of graywater. This example 
shows components for irrigation end use. 
SOURCE: Bergdolt et al. (2011). 
FIGURE 6-5  Recommended treatment 
systems for graywater for various end 
uses and regulatory requirements. NOTE: 
Storage and filtration are not required for 
the laundry-to-landscape system, which 
is not included in this figure. 
or simple graywater systems with storage and particulate re -
moval (Figures 6-4 and 6-5a) are typically used. Filtration 
is necessary when a conventional drip irrigation system is 
used for graywater to prevent clogging (Figure 6-5a). Gray -
water systems without disinfection are appropriate where ex -
posures are restricted by subsurface irrigation systems. The 
additional risks associated with graywater applied by sur -
face irrigation (not covered by mulch) at the household scale 
are less clear, because pathogen data for graywater are ex -
tremely limited. Additionally, graywater is only one of many 
existing vehicles of infectious disease transmission already 
present within the household (see Chapter 5). Potential risks, 
therefore, increase with exposures to untreated graywater at 
neighborhood and regional scales, because graywater pro -
vides a new vehicle for disease spread between people that 
might not otherwise be in contact.Only four states impose water quality standards for sub -
surface irrigation at the household scale (Table 6-3). The 
states of Wisconsin and Maine have set indicator organism 
limits as part of their irrigation water quality requirements 
(Table 6-3). Based on typical graywater quality (see Chap -
ter 4; Table 4-1), disinfection is required in those states that 
impose limits on indicator organisms for subsurface irriga -
tion. Organic carbon or solids removal for single residence 
irrigation is required in five states that currently allow gray -
water irrigation (Table 6-3). In those states, requirements for 
organic carbon (often measured as 5-day biochemical oxy -
gen demand, BOD5) and total suspended solids (TSS) are 
well below typical amounts found in raw graywater. Thus, a 
treatment system would be required in these states to remove 
organic carbon and solids (see Figure 6-5b). Because organic 
carbon in graywater occurs primarily in the dissolved form 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
100 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
(i.e., from personal care products), more extensive treatment 
is required to remove dissolved organic carbon (DOC) com -
pared to stormwater, where organic carbon is often in the 
particulate form and can be removed through sedimentation 
and filtration. For graywater, biological or physicochemical 
treatment systems (discussed later in the chapter) are required 
to remove DOC if BOD5 concentrations of less than or equal 
to 30 mg/L are desired. Graywater systems that employ the 
treatment processes identified in Figure 6-5b are most ap -
propriate at the neighborhood scales or larger because of the 
complexities of system components that remove dissolved 
organic matter. Current regulations addressing organic mat -
ter in subsurface irrigation may be overly conservative. Re -
search conducted by Sharvelle et al. (2012) showed that such 
treatment is not required for successful operation of subsur -
face irrigation systems that use graywater. 
Some basic treatment systems are outlined in Figure 
6-5, where the contaminants of concern for removal include suspended solids, pathogens, and in some cases DOC. One 
other water quality concern for graywater treatment is odor. 
Graywater can become odorous after it is stored for several 
hours in an anaerobic environment. Storage tanks, as shown 
in Figure 6-4, must be properly sealed and vented to direct 
odorous emissions to an appropriate location, preventing 
odor buildup in the building.
Toilet Flushing
Further treatment is necessary to reduce human health 
risks when graywater is used to flush toilets because of po -
tential human exposures to pathogens present in untreated 
graywater (see Chapter 5). All states with graywater regu -
lations that address toilet flushing require disinfection, and 
seven states have laws that set specific water quality require -
ments for toilet flushing (Table 6-4). Wide variability exists 
in these state regulations in terms of target concentrations 
TABLE 6 -4 State Water Quality Standards for Graywater Reuse for Toilet Flushing  
 BOD 5 (mg/L)  TSS (mg/L)  Turbidity (NTU)  Total Coliform  
(cfu/100 ml)  Fecal Coliform  
(cfu/100 ml)  Disinfection  
California  -  -  -  2.2a -  -  
New Mexico  30 30 -  -  200 -  
Oregon  10 10 -  2.2a -  -  
Georgia  -  -  10 500b 100b -  
Texas  -  -  -  -  75b -  
Massachusetts  10 5 2 -  14b -  
Wisconsin  200 5 -  -  -  0.1-4 mg L-1  
residual chlorine  
State Water Reuse Regulations for 
Unrestricted Access Urban Reuse  5-60 5-60  2-10 2.2 (mean)  
23-240 (max.) 2.2-14 (med. or mean)  
14-200 (max.) - 
Reported range of typical Graywater  
prior to treatmentc 30-380 50-280  30-240 500-630,000  40-7,900  N/A 
aMedian value.  
bDaily or sample maximum  
cSee Table 4 -1 for data sources; includes single fixture graywater and combined sources (not including the kitchen sink or dishwasher).  
E. coli  reported for fecal coliform, which represents only one of the fecal coliform indicator bacteria that may be present.  
SOURCES: Sharvelle et al. (2013); EPA (2012a).  TABLE 6 -3 State Water Quality Standards for Residential Graywater Irrigation Through Surface Drip and Subsurface Systems  
 BOD 5 (mg/L)   TSS (mg/L)  Maximum Total  
Coliform (cfu/ 100ml)  Maximum Fecal  
Coliform (cfu/ 100ml)  
Florida  25 30 - - 
Georgia  30 30 - - 
Wisconsin  30 35 - 200 
Maine  30 10-30 10-100 - 
State water reuse regulations for restricted access urban reuse  10-60 5-60 240a 23-800a 
Reported range of typical graywater prior to treatmenta 30-380 50-280 500-630,000  40-7,900  
aSee Table 4 -1 for data sources; includes single fixture graywater and combined sources (not including the kitchen sink or dishwasher).  
E. coli  reported for fecal coliform, which represents only one of the fecal coliform indicator bacteria that may be present.  
NOTES: Approximately 20 states allow household -scale graywater irrigation with no water quality standards. Florida, Georgia, and Wisconsin 
standards  apply to subsurface irrigaton only.  
SOURCES: Sharvelle et al. (2013); EPA (2012a).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  101
for indicator organisms. The state of Wisconsin has simpli -
fied the issue by requiring a target range for residual chlorine 
rather than indicator organism targets (Table 6-4). Disinfec -
tion processes are also important to control odor, although 
treated graywater can become odorous when residual disin -
fectants are not maintained (Vandegrift, 2014). 
Additional removal of DOC (often measured as BOD5) 
and TSS or turbidity is required in some states for toilet 
flushing with graywater, although little research is available 
to clarify whether or how much DOC removal is necessary. 
Although a small portion of organic matter can be removed 
through sedimentation or other processes for particulate 
removal, much of the organic matter in graywater is in the 
form of DOC. Even extensive removal of DOC in graywater, 
resulting in measured BOD5 concentrations between 5-10 
mg/L, would not prevent regrowth of pathogenic organisms. 
Instead, disinfectant residual must be maintained to prevent 
regrowth of pathogens. Research has demonstrated that 
when adequate concentrations of residual total chlorine are 
achieved, regrowth of indicator organisms can be prevented 
for 3-4 days even when DOC is not removed from graywater 
during treatment (Wiles, 2013). Nevertheless, DOC or tur -
bidity removal allows residual disinfectant concentrations 
to be more reliably maintained. When residual disinfectant 
levels are not maintained, it is possible for biofilms to form 
in distribution systems that could contribute to the microbial 
load in treated graywater. Thus, treatment with DOC remov -
al in addition to disinfection (Figure 6-5d) is generally rec -
ommended at neighborhood or regional scales. Many com -
mercially available systems for household-scale treatment 
of graywater are not designed to remove DOC, which may 
be acceptable as long as disinfectant concentrations are ade -
quately maintained (Sharvelle et al., 2012). In these systems, 
disinfection residuals are often achieved via chlorine addi -
tion, with the potential concern associated with the forma -
tion of disinfection by-products. When treated graywater is 
used for toilet flushing, the ultimate fate of those disinfection 
by-products is a wastewater treatment system, where they 
may or may not be removed from the water depending on 
treatment practices. Many treatment technologies are avail -
able to meet the desired water quality objectives, and these 
unit processes are discussed later in the chapter. 
Commercial graywater treatment systems for toilet 
flushing vary substantially in complexity and the degree of 
treatment achieved. Those systems that achieve a high de -
gree of treatment are generally too expensive for current 
widespread adoption at the household scale, and there are 
reliability issues with systems that are more cost-effective. 
Some providers of graywater treatment systems have gone 
out of business in the past few years (e.g., Brac and Water Legacy), and maintenance issues have been cited as a cause 
for such failures. As of 2015, only two treatment systems 
have achieved National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) In -
ternational 350 certification for toilet flushing2 because of 
the extensive treatment required to meet the certification 
(see Box 6-2). In particular, the standards set for carbona -
ceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD) and turbidity 
in NSF 350 are difficult to achieve with simple treatment 
systems, such as sand filtration or cartridge filters (Friedler 
et al., 2006; Gual et al., 2008; Hodgson, 2012; Zuma et al., 
2009). Even ultrafiltration membranes were not found to 
achieve CBOD less than 10 mg/L when applied to graywater  
(Ramon et al., 2004). To achieve the CBOD and turbidity 
requirements outlined in NSF 350, graywater must be treated 
through a biological reactor, membrane filtration (nanofiltra -
tion or reverse osmosis), or activated carbon, all of which are 
technologies that have not previously proven to be practical 
for residential application because of complexity and associ -
ated high costs and maintenance. Some of these technologies 
become more cost-effective and practical at the neighbor -
hood scale, although one company recently launched a gray -
water treatment system for household use meeting NSF 350 
standards (Showley, 2015). 
In the committee’s judgment, NSF 350 (see Box 6-2) 
requires more extensive treatment than necessary to provide 
safe water for flushing toilets, and use of this standard as a 
basis for toilet flushing could increase project costs, unless 
novel technologies are developed. Additional research is 
needed to better understand the impacts on risk and reliabil -
ity associated with higher organic matter and turbidity levels 
in graywater for toilet flushing at a range of scales, because 
these factors significantly affect treatment costs. This research 
could inform the development of improved risk-based guid -
ance that could provide the basis for standards of practice. 
Spray Irrigation
If graywater is to be used for spray irrigation, then it 
must meet state water quality requirements for unrestricted 
use of reclaimed wastewater, which are summarized in Table 
6-4 and detailed in EPA (2012a). Generally, the regulations 
require BOD5 of less than 20-30 mg/L and very low num -
bers of indicator organisms (i.e., less than 23/100 mL total 
coliforms in California). Treatment of graywater for spray 
irrigation would require removal of organic matter and dis -
infection (Figure 6-5b), using treatment processes similar to 
those used for toilet flushing. Given the treatment costs and 
maintenance required, these systems are generally recom -
mended at neighborhood and municipal scales, but not at the 
household scale.
2See http://info.nsf.org/Certified/wastewater.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
102 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 6-2 NSF 350
The National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) International is a nonprofit, nongovernmental organization that develops minimum mate -
rial, design, and performance standards for a variety of products so that consumers can compare systems that meet a set standard, and 
understand, according to defined terms, the capacity of a product. NSF has developed a set of standards for graywater use for toilet 
flushing and for irrigation. NSF Standard 350 was developed to establish minimum material, design, construction, and performance 
requirements for on-site residential and commercial water reuse treatment systems (Table 6-2-1). This particular standard applies to 
residential and commercial graywater systems designed for toilet flushing or outdoor unrestricted urban water use. NSF 350 makes 
no distinction between graywater systems that do and do not include kitchen water, which would require very different treatment ap -
proaches. To receive system certification, manufacturers must undergo a 26-week testing period where the system will be dosed with 
synthetic graywater. NSF constructed a second standard (NSF 350-1) that covers graywater reuse for outdoor subsurface irrigation only. 
This regulation covers up to 1,500 gpd (5,700 lpd) for both residential and commercial applications. The testing procedure is identical 
to NSF 350 in regard to duration and stress tests, but the quality requirements are less strict with CBOD and TSS values of 25 mg/L and 
30 mg/L, respectively. The only other water quality requirement for NSF 350-1 is that pH is between 6 and 9.
Because of a lack of national risk-based guidance on appropriate quality for graywater use, some states (e.g., Washington and Califor -
nia) have used NSF 350 water quality requirements to set regulatory standards for graywater use to flush toilets. Colorado has included 
the NSF 350 standards in draft regulation. A risk-based approach was not applied to develop NSF 350 water quality standards. Instead, 
the basis for the water quality standards in NSF 350 was a review of water quality regulations in U.S. states where such standards existed 
and internationally, most of which applied to municipal use of treated effluent. Residential and multi-residential use of graywater differs 
from municipal reclaimed water systems in that storage time is less. Although E. coli, pH, and storage vessel residual chlorine limits 
are easily met by treatment systems (Hodgson, 2012), extensive treatment is required to meet CBOD5 and turbidity limits, and no risk 
analysis is available to show that such strict limits for these parameters are required to ensure safe use of graywater for toilet flushing.
Consideration of Scale for Selection of  Appropriate  
Treatment Processes
The most important drivers for selection of appropriate 
technology for graywater treatment processes are to achieve 
quality appropriate for the desired end use and to meet water 
quality requirements. However, another important consider -
ation is the scale of the system.
Household Scale. Untreated graywater is commonly applied 
for irrigation at the household scale (Sharvelle et al., 2012). 
There is some level of complexity in all treatment processes 
applied for toilet flushing (Figures 6-5c and 6-5d). Although 
technologies are commercially available that implement these treatment processes at the residential scale (particu -
larly in Australia; Sharvelle et al., 2013), they typically 
require substantial homeowner maintenance. Adoption of 
household-scale treatment systems that include the treatment 
steps outlined in Figures 6-5c or 6-5d has been limited in the 
United States because the maintenance required is generally 
not practical for most homeowners. The treatment processes 
identified in Figure 6-5c with only suspended sediment re -
moval and disinfection are more likely to be adopted at the 
residential scale than are those in Figure 6-5d, where DOC is 
also removed from graywater. DOC and turbidity remaining 
in treated graywater cause some aesthetic issues that may be 
acceptable to individual homeowners who want to use gray -
water for toilet flushing.TABLE 6 -2-1 Summary of NSF 350 Water Quality Requirements for Toilet Flushing  
Measure  Class Ra  Class Cb 
Test average  Single sample maximum   Test average  Single sample maximum  
CBOD 5 (mg/L)  10 25  10 25 
TSS (mg/L)  10 30  10 30 
Turbidity (NTU)  5 10  2 5 
E. coli  (MPN/100 mL)  14 240  2.2 200 
pH (SU)  6-9   6-9  
Storage vessel residual chlorine (mg/L)  ≥ 0.5 -< 2.5   ≥ 0.5 -< 2.5  
aClass R: Flows through graywater system are less than 400 gpd.  
bClass C: Flows through graywater system are less than 1,500 gpd.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  103
Neighborhood and Regional Scale.  Large-scale graywater 
systems for irrigation can be put in place in multi-residential 
and commercial facilities (Table 6-2). If untreated graywa -
ter is applied through subsurface irrigation systems so that 
human exposures are prevented, then the simplest treatment 
processes for graywater that include storage and coarse fil -
tration (Figure 6-5a) are still acceptable and appropriate. 
However, in multi-residential and/or commercial systems, 
more complex treatment can be considered when staff are 
available to maintain the system. This allows for a higher 
degree of treatment and the potential to use the treated gray -
water for spray irrigation in addition to subsurface drip irri -
gation. The current standard of practice is that disinfection is 
conducted for neighborhood-scale graywater systems (Fig -
ure 6-5b, with or without DOC removal). 
For toilet flushing at neighborhood or regional scales, 
DOC removal in addition to disinfection is often adopted 
to reduce turbidity and associated public concerns regard -
ing water quality (Figure 6-5d). In addition, at the multi-  
residential scale, typically staff are available to perform rou -
tine maintenance activities (Box 6-2), rendering such treat -
ment processes more practical than at the household scale. 
Multi-residential units can be a very good fit for graywater 
use for toilet flushing because of the reliable source of gray -
water and ease of collection and redistribution to toilets. In 
addition, economies of scale are realized and maintenance 
can be feasible.
Graywater System Operational Considerations
From the simplest laundry-to-landscape graywater sys -
tem to the treatment processes identified in Figure 6-5, all 
systems require maintenance that is critical to sustain safe 
graywater operations. The degree of maintenance required 
depends on the complexity of the system to be installed. 
Maintenance for graywater systems typically includes ac -
tivities such as changing and/or cleaning filters, replacing 
consumables, and replacing system components when they 
reach the end of their useful life. At the household scale, the 
burden of maintenance falls on the homeowner; thus, more 
success has been reported for systems that are very simple 
and require low maintenance. At the neighborhood scale, 
routine maintenance can be conducted by facilities staff or a 
homeowners association. 
For simple graywater irrigation systems (e.g., laundry-
to-landscape or the treatment system in Figure 6-5a), lack 
of maintenance typically results in the inability to operate 
the system and irrigate landscape, with limited risk to hu -
man health. However, when water quality goals are in place 
and the potential for human contact with graywater is high 
(e.g., toilet flushing or spray irrigation), lack of proper main -tenance can result in human health risk, and routine monitor -
ing is necessary to ensure safe operations. Thus, advances in 
online monitoring and automations would enable practical 
application of household graywater systems that achieve a 
high level of treatment (i.e., removal of organic matter and 
turbidity and disinfection) and thereby expand the potential 
use of graywater at the household scale.
Chlorine residual is an easily monitored parameter and 
a good indicator of the safety of treated graywater. Chlorine 
can be monitored online or with simple test kits. An example 
of online chlorine monitoring is at Aspen Residence Hall at 
Colorado State University (see Box 2-2) where the system 
automatically switches to municipal water supply when the 
residual chlorine concentration in treated graywater (collect -
ed directly after the treatment system) drops below 1.0 mg/L.
Energy Recovery from Graywater Systems
Heat from graywater can be captured through heat ex -
change systems to save energy. Graywater temperature rang -
es from 64 to 100oF (18-38oC; Ericksson et al., 2002), and 
sources of graywater tend to be heated water (e.g., show -
ers, baths and laundry). Several studies have demonstrated 
the capacity to recover energy from graywater, with energy 
requirements of potable water heating reduced by up to 30-
50 percent (Proskiw, 1998; McNabola and Shields, 2013; 
Smith, 1975), although the largest recoveries are possible 
closest to the drain point of the hot water. The heat recovered 
from graywater can be used for heating potable water or to 
improve the efficiency of absorption heat pumps. 
Eliminating graywater from the wastewater stream in -
creases concentrations of solids and organic matter com -
pared to domestic wastewater, making it amenable to an -
aerobic treatment and enhanced energy recovery (Liu et 
al., 2004; McCarty et al., 2011). An example is a system 
designed by Semizentral under implementation in Qingdao, 
China (Semizentral, 2015), which is designed for a popula -
tion of 12,000 and started in 2012 (see Box 2-1).
SYSTEM DESIGN FOR  
STORMWATER BENEFICIAL USE 
The design of systems for beneficial uses of stormwater 
(Figure 6-1) results from careful consideration of available 
design alternatives to meet a complex web of often compet -
ing objectives. In contrast with graywater project planning, 
regulatory drivers are frequently the top priority when es -
tablishing stormwater-related project objectives. Often, sev -
eral different regulations must be met for any given project. 
Stormwater regulations may dictate hydrologic, hydraulic, 
water quality, or design objectives. In many cases, regula -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
104 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
tions are highly prescriptive in how to design stormwater 
controls as well as directly govern the design process for 
beneficial use systems. The most common regulatory drivers 
that cause stakeholders to implement stormwater capture and 
use systems include the following:
• Combined sewer overflow regulations and associated 
standards for retaining certain rainfall depths on site,
• Total maximum daily load (TMDL) implementation 
plans,
• National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
Phase I and Phase II permit conditions,
• State regulations including water quality and design 
standards, 
• Potable water use restrictions (e.g., during times of 
drought), and 
• Local regulations (e.g., requiring or strongly motivat -
ing onsite use).
Stormwater beneficial use systems can be developed at 
many different scales, from household rain barrels and cis -
terns to neighborhood-scale stormwater collection to region -
al capture and infiltration systems to augment municipal wa -
ter supplies (see Chapter 2). Regardless of scale, design for 
stormwater capture and use projects includes assessments of 
the quantity of runoff available from the source area and wa -
ter quality relative to intended uses, as well as decisions on 
runoff conveyance, storage, treatment, and water delivery to 
meet the overall objectives. Many useful guidebooks exist 
to advise homeowners on how to design systems to capture 
rooftop runoff for on-site use (Carpenter et al., 2009; City 
of Bellingham, 2012; Despins, 2010; Jones and Hunt, 2014; 
Lawson et al., 2009; MPCA, 2015). The following sections 
describe typical approaches to storage and treatment for 
stormwater capture and use across a range of relevant scales, 
focused on two distinct strategies: (1) stormwater capture 
and tank storage and (2) groundwater recharge. 
Stormwater Capture and Tank Storage
The capture and on-site storage of stormwater for later 
withdrawal and use, sometimes called “active” stormwater 
harvesting, can be designed across a range of scales, from 
households to large buildings to neighborhoods. 
Stormwater Capture at Household and Single-Building Scales
Capture, Storage, and Distribution. Rooftop runoff can 
be readily captured at the household or large-commercial-
building scale for a range of beneficial uses. Irrigation is 
the predominant use for household-scale projects, although large tanks could provide water for nonpotable indoor uses 
(e.g., toilet flushing) or commercial applications (e.g., cool -
ing, washing, laundry [see Chapter 2 and Box 6-3]). Roof 
area and climate determine the quantity and timing of storm -
water runoff available for beneficial use (see Figure 3-2).
Tank size determines how much of the available storm -
water can be captured for beneficial use. Storage tank ca -
pacities can range from small containers, such as rain barrels 
that are about 35 gallons (130 liters) each, to large surface 
or subsurface tanks (Figures 2-1, 6-6, and 6-7). Rain bar -
rels are most commonly used at residential properties and 
are a component of many public education programs. Large 
above-ground tanks are often made of corrugated metal, pre -
cast or cast-in-place concrete, or polyethylene plastic. Be -
low-ground tanks are commonly made of precast concrete, 
plastic pipe, fiberglass reinforced plastic, or proprietary 
modular plastic storage systems surrounded with imperme -
able geotextile membranes (Figure 6-7). 
Rain barrels provide a small supplemental water sup -
ply and typically only capture a small fraction of roof runoff 
on an annual basis, even in arid climates, while larger tanks 
have been used to store substantial fractions of roof runoff 
for beneficial uses (see Chapter 3). The committee’s scenario 
analysis of stormwater irrigation use in Chapter 3 based on 
1,500 ft2 (140 m2) roof areas and medium-density residen -
tial development showed that two rain barrels captured and 
enabled the irrigation use of between 5 and 14 percent of 
roof runoff in the six locations analyzed, compared to be -
tween 16 and 61 percent for large 2,200-gallon (8,300 liters) 
cisterns, with the magnitude of capture depending on local 
rainfall patterns relative to on-site water demand (see Table 
3-7). The larger cisterns provided 4 to 21 percent potential 
potable water savings in total water use in the committee’s 
irrigation use scenario analysis, compared to 1 to 5 percent 
for two rain barrels per house (see Tables 3-5 and 3-6). Table 
6-5 provides an example highlighting the different levels of 
performance achieved, in terms of reducing stormwater run -
off, by larger storage tanks for a research site in Kansas City 
for roofs about 1,000 ft2 (92 m2) in area (Pitt et al., 2014). 
As tank size increases, fewer rain events are likely to overfill 
the tank, assuming the captured water is effectively used to 
match the evapotranspiration demand, and a larger percent -
age of the on-site stormwater is also be available for use. 
Larger tanks are common in Australia and New Zealand at 
homes where they supply much of the household noncon -
sumptive water requirements and, in some cases, provide 
drinking water (Cunliffe, 2004).
Sizing appropriate storage for household- or building-
scale use requires a careful assessment of the quantity and 
timing of on-site water demand (e.g., irrigation, toilet flush -
ing, other uses) relative to the quantity and timing of rooftop Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  105
FIGURE 6-6  Surface and subsurface cisterns as part of rooftop stormwater capture systems. SOURCE: City of Bellingham (2012).
FIGURE 6-7  Subsurface stormwater storage under construc -
tion for the Darien Library (a LEED Gold facility) in Darien, 
Connecticut. The tank holds 83,500 gallons. SOURCE: http://  
www.invisiblestructures.com/project_profiles/page/2. 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
106 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
runoff available in the context of overall project objectives. 
The relative importance of water supply versus stormwater 
runoff control will also influence the optimal project design. 
Larger tanks provide larger capture and allow less stormwater 
runoff, but if on-site use does not keep pace with availability, 
even large tanks can eventually fill, which negates their hy -
drologic and pollution reduction benefits. Depending on pre -
cipitation rates and timing relative to on-site use, a threshold 
can be met where increasing tank size does not provide addi -
tional benefits. This is particularly true in areas with abundant 
precipitation, such as the central or eastern United States. In 
the Southwest, where rainfall and irrigation demand are mis -
matched, extremely large tanks (approximately 20,000 gal -
lons for a 1,500 ft2 roof in a medium-density, residential de -
velopment; see Figure 3-11) would be needed to capture all of 
the available roof runoff, and the runoff would still not meet 
the total irrigation demand (see Chapter 3). Costs are also a 
significant factor in determining the appropriate size of stor -
age (see Chapter 7).
BOX 6-3 Chesapeake Bay Foundation: Rooftop Stormwater Harvesting for Nonpotable Uses
An example of a larger rainwater harvesting system is at the Chesapeake Bay Foundation’s headquarters in Annapolis, Maryland (a 
LEED® Version 1 Platinum certified building), which was completed in 2000. The commercial office building has about 32,000 ft2 
(2,900 m2) of floor area. Runoff from the approximately 10,000 ft2 (930 m2) galvanized metal roof is filtered and collected in three el -
evated cisterns (Figure 6-3-1). Further sand filtering treats the water before on-site use for washing, irrigation, and fire suppression. The 
building has only about 10 percent of the typical potable water demand compared to a conventional office building. 
SOURCE: http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy02osti/29500.pdf and http://www.cbe.berkeley.edu/mixedmode/chesapeake.html.
FIGURE 6-3-1  Schematic representation of the Chesapeake Bay Foundation headquarters and stormwater capture system. SOURCE: http://
www.nrel.gov/docs/fy02osti/29500.pdf.The elevation of the roof area and existing gutters can 
typically provide passive conveyance to storage tanks (see 
Figure 6-6). Ideally, tanks are located at a high point on the 
property, so that gravity can be used to distribute the rain -
water as needed, although pumps can also be added for in -
creased water pressure. 
All storage tanks need to be sealed and screened to pre -
vent mosquito issues. Rector et al. (2014) describe additional 
design and maintenance suggestions to prevent mosquitoes 
from entering and breeding in stormwater storage tanks. 
Treatment.  Roof runoff usually has the best water quality 
of the source flows in urban areas, which reduces the need 
for extensive water treatment. If the captured runoff is to be 
used untreated, then care should be taken to minimize con -
tamination by avoiding materials that release high levels of 
metals into the water (see Box 4-1) and avoiding collection 
from shaded roof areas, because the tree cover can serve as 
habitat for urban wildlife and increase bacteria loading to the 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  107
FIGURE 6-8  Recommend -
ed treatment processes for 
captured stormwater for var -
ious end uses and regulatory 
requirements. 
FIGURE 6-9  Small on-demand water treat -
ment system with ultraviolet (UV) disinfection 
used to treat roof runoff for vehicle washing at 
a Washington, DC, fire station. 
TABLE 6 -5 Storage Tank Sizes for Different Ranges of Captured Runoff from a 1,000 ft2 Residential Roof Area in Kansas City, Missouri  
Storage  
Volume (ft3) Storage  
Volume (gal.)  Approximate Annual Roof 
Runoff Captured (%)  Number of 35 gal  
Rain Barrels Needed  Numb er of 5 -ft-diam.,  
5-ft-tall tanks  Number of 10 -ft-diam.,  
10-ft-tall tanks  
10 75 20-30 2 0.1 NA 
30 224 45-60 6 0.3 NA 
100 748 80-90 21 1 0.1 
300 2,244  98-100 64 3 0.4 
500 3,740  99-100 107 5 0.7 
1,000  7,480  100 214 10 1.3 
NOTE: A 5-foot-diameter, 5 -foot-tall tank represents 730 gallons of storage or 98 ft3. A 10-foot-diameter, 10 -foot-tall tank holds 5,900 
gallons or 785 ft3. 
SOURCE: Pitt et al. (2014).  
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
108 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 6-4 Docklands Park: Neighborhood-Scale Stormwater Capture and Use in Melbourne, Australia
An example of a large stormwater storage facility is at Docklands Park in Melbourne, Australia. The 2.7-ha Docklands Park collects 
stormwater from downtown Melbourne and stores it in large underground tanks that supply water for park irrigation. Three wetlands in 
the park (Figure 6-4-1) provide the capacity to treat approximately 80 percent of the stormwater runoff in the 4.8-ha catchment. Treated 
stormwater is stored in underground tanks with a combined capacity of 130,000 gallons (490,000 liters), and the captured stormwater is 
treated using ultraviolet disinfection prior to use for irrigation.
FIGURE 6-4-1  Docklands, downtown Melbourne, Australia showing a public sculpture garden in a wetland area near very large underground 
tanks for stormwater storage. SOURCE: http://www.aecom.com/News/Where+We+Are/Europe/_news/Influencing+surface+water+manageme
nt+direction,+policy+and+practice+at+CIWEM%E2%80%99s+conference.
roof runoff. When source control is combined with applica -
tions that minimize human exposures, such as drip irrigation 
or restricted access to a spray-irrigated site, no treatment is 
needed other than removal of suspended solids to prevent 
clogging (see Figures 6-8a and 6-8b; see also Chapter 5). 
In all cases, some type of coarse filter is usually installed in 
the intake line to prevent organic leaf debris from entering 
the storage tank. In addition, many household roof harvest -
ing systems use “first-flush” diverters to direct the more con -
taminated initial runoff from the roof away from the storage 
tank, although there is little evidence to show the effective -
ness of these first flush diverters. To reduce fine solids and 
minimize problems with sprinkler head clogging, a simple 
sand or cartridge filter can be used in-line with the pressur -
ized line.
For applications with significant human exposures, risk-
based stormwater treatment design is complicated by limited 
data on the occurrence of human pathogens in stormwater at 
a range of scales and source areas. With site-specific patho -
gen data (reflecting multiple samples over a single year), the 
risk assessment framework outlined in Chapter 5 can be used to assess whether treatment is needed. In absence of these 
data, a typical conservative approach bases the treatment de -
sign on known or estimated concentrations of fecal indicator 
bacteria; but these may be poor indicators of the presence or 
concentrations of human pathogens in roof runoff (see Chap -
ter 5). Roof runoff may contain elevated fecal indicator bac -
teria, particularly if trees with urban wildlife (especially birds 
and squirrels) are close, as is common in residential areas. In 
some cases, the levels of indicator bacteria may decrease be -
cause of die-off during storage in the tank, but die-off is not 
consistent, and concentrations may even increase with stor -
age (Pitt and Talebi, 2012b). Therefore, if bacteria reduction 
is necessary to ensure safe operations in areas where access 
is not controlled and significant exposures are possible (or 
to meet regulatory requirements), then disinfection will be 
necessary (Figures 6-8c and 6-9). An array of unit processes 
are available to maintain bacteriological quality (discussed 
later in the chapter), but historically, chlorine has been used 
for small-scale installations. With an adequate recirculating 
pump system, it may be possible to maintain bacteriological 
quality in the tank without high chlorine residuals.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  109
Maintenance. Periodic maintenance of stormwater capture 
systems is essential to their appropriate function and safe 
use. Maintenance needs at the household or building scale 
are relatively low and mostly related to periodic removal of 
sediments that enter the tank as well as any routine mainte -
nance for any treatment systems (e.g., clean or replace fil -
ters) or mechanical systems (e.g., pump, first flush diverter) 
used. These tasks can be performed by the homeowner or a 
contractor. However, utility- or community-based inspection 
and maintenance programs could be developed to ensure ro -
bust maintenance, cost-effective operation, and low risks to 
human health. Such rigorous maintenance efforts would be 
necessary if the household capture of roof runoff was part of 
a regional water supply strategy. 
Stormwater Capture and Tank Storage at  
Neighborhood Scales
Capture, Storage, and Distribution.  Neighborhood-scale 
stormwater capture projects may use roof runoff from sev -
eral close buildings, such as at institutions or business parks, 
or collect mixed stormwater flows originating from several 
source areas (e.g., roofs, paved surfaces) located close to -
gether, allowing a larger percentage of total runoff to be cap -
tured. The most common situation is collecting at-grade sur -
face flow from parking lots and roadways. Subsurface water 
storage tanks are often used in neighborhood-scale stormwa -
ter collection systems and come in a range of designs, from 
traditional tanks to large subsurface storage units (see Box 2-5 and Figure 6-7). In Docklands Park in Melbourne, Aus -
tralia, subsurface tanks hold approximately 130,000 gallons 
of stormwater runoff collected from the surrounding urban 
area for irrigation use (see Box 6-4).
Larger neighborhood-scale systems frequently require 
extensive piping and pumping systems, because it is rarely 
the case that gravity drainage can provide adequate collec -
tion of runoff from disparate site areas to a central storage lo -
cation. For these reasons it is advisable to integrate plans for 
the beneficial use of stormwater into site-development plan -
ning as early as possible such that long-term energy costs 
and infrastructure maintenance can be minimized. This can 
be challenging because these considerations are not typically 
included as driving factors in site design. When assessing the 
costs and benefits of such systems, one may find that some of 
the economies of scale derived from neighborhood systems 
are offset by increased energy costs and infrastructure com -
plexity. In these cases, it is worth considering distributing 
storage around a site and utilizing transfer pumps to move 
water as needed to a central storage and treatment system. 
The National Park Service used this approach in retrofitting 
the National Mall in Washington, DC, with approximately 1 
million gallons of total storage for on-site irrigation use (Box 
2-5). The National Park Service designed a set of large dis -
tributed collection tanks that feed to a single central storage 
tank that then is used for treatment and distribution. 
At the neighborhood or large-building scale, real-time, 
logic-controlled release of captured stormwater can be used 
to optimize water conservation and meet water quality objec -
tives. These operations are usually designed as part of com -
bined sewer overflow and stormwater management activities 
and discharge captured stormwater based on predictions of 
the amount of runoff for a coming rain. This approach keeps 
the maximum amount of water in the tank for beneficial 
uses when needed, while ensuring that sufficient storage is 
available to retain the water from the upcoming storm. Dur -
ing operations before a predicted storm, a remote-operated 
computer system checks the tank water volume to ensure that 
sufficient storage volume is available to contain the expect -
ed runoff volume for the next rain. If insufficient volume is 
available, then the tank is drained to allow capture of the next 
event. Between events, the water in the tank is available for 
whatever beneficial uses are suitable (WERF, 2014).
Low-cost, programmable logic controller systems are 
now available and can be coupled with wired and wireless 
internet communications and low-cost sensor systems for 
both new construction and retrofits of stormwater storage 
systems. The commercial availability of highly distributed 
real-time control (DRTC) technologies first became avail -
able around 2013. The use of DTRC systems in stormwater 
harvesting is particularly compelling because they have been 
FIGURE 6-10 Kansas City 18th and Broadway downtown storm -
water park showing treatment flow and underground cistern for ir -
rigation. SOURCE: http://www.18broadway.com/water.html.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
110 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
shown to significantly enhance the performance of storm -
water capture when internet-based forecast data are effec -
tively integrated into control logic (WERF, 2005). Real-time 
systems result in lower overall water savings (based on re -
leases for forecasted storms that do not occur), but they offer 
notable advantages when water quality or wet weather flow 
objectives are also important. 
Treatment.  Runoff from the non-roof areas that drain into 
most neighborhood-scale stormwater capture systems is of -
ten of poorer quality than roof runoff (see Chapter 4) and 
therefore requires significant pre-treatment prior to storage. 
This pre-treatment can be integrated into site design to uti -
lize natural treatment systems such as biofiltration or bio -
retention to reduce sediment and other contaminant loading 
to a beneficial use system. For example, Figure 6-10 shows 
the site plan for a Kansas City neighborhood stormwater 
capture project that drains several blocks of the surround -
ing downtown urban area. Stormwater enters the peripheral 
zone of the site and cascades through surface swales for par -
tial treatment. The water is then captured and pumped to a 
40,000-gallon (150,000 liter) underground storage tank and 
subsequently withdrawn to irrigate the community gardens 
and other on-site landscaping. Pre-treatment prior to storage 
in stormwater capture projects also frequently includes the 
use of hydrodynamic stormwater treatment systems for gross 
solids and sediment removal where natural systems are in -
feasible to integrate into site design.
The additional treatment provided will depend on the 
intended use of the water and the extent of human expo -
sures (see Figure 6-8). More sophisticated water treatment 
systems are usually used for neighborhood-scale systems 
(Figure 6-11), compared to building-scale systems. Microor -
ganisms are the most critical constituent of concern for non -
potable applications of stormwater. Data on typical pathogen 
concentrations in stormwater are lacking, but disinfection is 
typically included when surface flows from paved or open 
space areas are included and significant human exposures are 
anticipated, because stormwater collected from land surfaces 
could contain pathogens from pet waste, leaking sewers, or 
septic tanks. ASCE (Clary et al. 2014) reported that biore -
tention, grass-lined detention basins, sand filters, and wet 
detention ponds lead to significant reductions in fecal co -
liform bacteria, but only disinfection consistently produced 
large reductions in indicator bacteria concentrations (Table 
6-6). ASCE (Clary et al. 2014) reported that concrete-lined 
detention basins, grass filter strips, infiltration basins, manu -
factured hydrodynamic separators, and wetlands showed no 
significant reduction in fecal coliform concentrations. Maintenance.  Maintenance of neighborhood-scale storm -
water capture systems includes essentially the same major 
items as discussed for household- or building-scale projects, 
although the technical sophistication and scale of the proj -
ect necessitates professional maintenance to ensure the sys -
tem is functioning properly. Larger scale systems can also 
integrate monitoring approaches that can provide real-time 
information to increase system reliability and performance 
by notifying of and/or predicting the need for maintenance. 
Groundwater Recharge 
An alternate strategy for the beneficial use of stormwa -
ter involves enhanced infiltration into shallow or deep aqui -
fers, with the intent of augmenting aquifers used for water 
supply. The extent to which groundwater recharge actually 
conserves conventional water supplies depends on the de -
gree to which the recharge area is hydrologically connected 
to aquifers used for water supply (or aquifers that might be 
used in the future) (see Figure 2-4). Thus, local hydrogeol -
ogy governs the capacity for groundwater recharge of storm -
water to substantially benefit public water supplies. 
Groundwater recharge projects using stormwater can 
be designed along an array of scales from small, household-
scale rain gardens to neighborhood-scale biofilters to region -
al-scale aquifer recharge projects. In all cases, water quality 
is an important consideration, because contaminants in urban 
stormwater may pose risks for groundwater contamination, 
as is discussed in Chapter 5. Unless treatment is provided to 
prevent groundwater contamination, source areas with the 
least contaminated runoff (e.g., roofs, possibly walkways 
and little used driveways) should be selected. Areas of auto -
mobile activity and commercial or industrial use should gen -
erally be avoided in the absence of any planned treatment. 
Direct injection should also be avoided, because infiltration 
through soils and sediment can provide additional contami -
nant removal (Pitt et al., 1996; discussed in more detail be -
low). Many guidance manuals are available on the construc -
tion of stormwater infiltration structures at the household 
and neighborhood scales, including King County Wash -
ington’s Stormwater Design Manual (King County DNRP, 
2009), Denver’s Urban Drainage and Flood Control’s Cri -
teria Manual (UDFCD, 2013), New York State Stormwater 
Design Manual (NYSDEC, 2015), Boston Water and Sewer 
Commission (2013), Water Environment Federation (WEF, 
2014), and the EPA’s website.3 Large-scale, urban, stormwa -
ter capture and recharge systems require thoughtful design 
because of the flows being handled and the likelihood of 
contaminants increasing in number and concentration with 
the greater extent and types of areas contributing to runoff. 
3 See http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/stormwater.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  111
FIGURE 6-11  Large stormwater treatment system underground of the Washington, DC, mall, designed to treat stormwater from tanks hold -
ing 1 million gallons (3.8 million liters) for spray irrigation. 
Design methodologies and treatment trains for large-scale, 
urban, runoff recharge systems are lacking.
 
Household-scale Groundwater Recharge: Rain Gardens 
Capture, Storage, and Infiltration.  At the household scale, 
rain gardens are simple excavations that are 1- to 2-feet (0.3-
0.6 meters) deep and sized to be about 10 to 20 percent of the 
roof drainage area with minimal subsurface preparation (see 
Figures 6-12 and 6-13). Specific site conditions including 
climate, rainfall intensity and frequency, and soil infiltration, 
will result in other production functions for other locations. 
As runoff enters the rain gardens, it infiltrates the underlying 
soil. If the entering runoff rate exceeds the infiltration rate, 
then the water ponds and is stored for later infiltration when 
the incoming runoff rate decreases. If the ponding becomes deep, then it can overflow through a surface outlet. Rain gar -
dens are planted with vegetation selected to withstand the 
highly variable dry to submerged conditions. 
Rain gardens are popular on-site controls that have low 
costs and can significantly reduce the discharges of roof run -
off from homes. If designed correctly, then almost all of the 
roof runoff can infiltrate into the shallow groundwater with 
little runoff overflowing to the drainage system. Additional 
impervious surfaces may also drain to simple rain gardens, 
including walkways and driveways. Some of the consider -
ations in the planning and design of rain gardens include the 
soil characteristics and depth to groundwater. The rate of in -
filtration limits rain garden use in poorly draining soils, as 
does the presence of a high groundwater table. In most cases, 
only a small percentage of the incoming water is lost through 
evapotranspiration (usually less than 10 percent) because of 
TABLE 6 -6 Influent and Effluent Fecal Coliform Levels for Stormwater  Controls (data from the International BMP Database)  
Stormwater Control  Events Represented  Geometric Mean (MPN/100 mL)   Median (MPN/100 mL)  
Influent  Effluent   Influent  Effluent  
Bioretention  27-30 3,355  886  5,000  750 
Grass -lined detention basins  162-165 2,218  639  2,497  700 
Disinfection systems  64-80 1,158  17  1,050  10 
Sand filters  150-157 1,463  632  1,600  593 
Wet detention ponds  23-24 2,930  637  3,200  1,500  
NOTE: Data derived from the International Best Management Practice Database (www.bmpdatabase.org).  
SOURCE: Clary et al. (2014).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
112 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 6-12  Household-scale rain garden. SOURCE: https://www.bae.ncsu.edu/topic/raingarden/stormwater.htm.the large amount of water applied to a relatively small area 
(Pitt et al., 2014). Long-term care is required to maintain the 
plants and to ensure the rain garden’s objectives. 
Treatment.  No additional treatment is typically provided for 
rain gardens at the household scale. Source control is used 
to limit stormwater collection to source areas with low con -
taminant levels. In cold climates, care needs to be taken to 
divert runoff from sidewalks or driveways that contains deic -
ing salts from reaching the rain gardens (discussed further in 
the next section).
Neighborhood-Scale Groundwater Recharge: Biofilters
Capture, Storage, and Infiltration. Neighborhood-scale 
infiltration areas can be designed to collect and infiltrate 
mixed stormwater from several homes or buildings. They 
are more sophisticated than simple rain gardens because their 
engineered soils provide much greater infiltration rates over 
smaller sizes than rain gardens, while maintaining hydraulic 
conductivity over long periods. Assuming adequate underly -
ing infiltration rates, almost complete runoff can be captured 
and infiltrated if sized correctly (generally about 2 percent or 
more of the paved drainage area). Sometimes biofilters in -
corporate subsurface storage tanks for beneficial use (Figure 
6-14). Large facilities have also been incorporated into neigh -
borhood parks and public gardens serving a several block 
area, especially when constructed in conjunction with other 
stormwater control elements (such as grass filtering swales 
and storage tanks) forming an effective treatment train. The 
biggest challenge when retrofitting these facilities is having adequate space to locate the biofilter in areas where the water 
can flow by gravity.
The performance of a biofilter is based on several key 
factors, including the size of the device, the inflow, the soil 
infiltration rate, the infiltration rate any engineered media fill 
used, the amount of subsurface storage (either in rock fill 
or structural storage), and the outlet structures. With exces -
sive particulate solids loadings resulting in accumulations 
between 10 and 25 kilograms per square meter, infiltration 
rates can significantly decline, which results in nuisance and 
public health concerns associated with frequent and long-
duration standing water. A biofilter with healthy plants can 
help sustain the infiltration rates at a desired level unless the 
accumulative particulate load occurs in just a few years, as 
can occur in biofilters that are not sized appropriately (Clark, 
2000; Clark and Pitt, 2009). Pretreatment components, such 
as grass filters or swales, can also help reduce sediment-
loading problems (Nara et al., 2006). An elevated sodium 
adsorption ratio, which may occur when deicing salts enter 
a biofilter with snowmelt, can also severely restrict infiltra -
tion capacity by causing dispersion of clays in a soil (Figure 
6-15). To prevent groundwater contamination and premature 
clogging in biofilters with even small amounts of clay in the 
soil, high-salt-content water must be diverted from the infil -
tration facility. 
Treatment.  Biofilters rely upon soil treatment, sometimes 
amended with engineered media, to provide treatment of the 
percolating stormwater to decrease the groundwater contami -
nation potential. Considerable literature exists on the capacity 
of biofilters, swales, and filter strips to capture contaminants 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  113
FIGURE 6-13  Percentage reduction in annual roof runoff with rain gardens for Kansas City. SOURCE: Pitt et al. (2014).on soil or infiltration media for household or neighborhood-
scale projects (e.g., Barraud et al., 1999; Dierkes and Geiger, 
1999; Payne et al., 2015; Regnery et al., 2013; Weiss et al., 
2008). Pollutants most likely to be removed during infiltra -
tion are metals or organic chemicals that sorb to soil or sus -
pended solids, which are then removed by physical strain -
ing by the soil media, or biodegradable organic chemicals. 
In studies on recharge basins receiving large metal loads, the 
removal of most of the heavy metals occurred in either the 
basin sediment or the unsaturated zone (Hampson, 1986; Ku 
and Simmons, 1986). Metals can also be removed by surface-
complexation reactions with oxide minerals such as ferric ox -
ide (Appleyard, 1993; Dzombak and Morel, 1990). Organic 
compounds in urban runoff from oils and gasoline have a 
high affinity for organic solids and surfaces. Optimal siting 
conditions include deep soils containing moderate amounts 
of organic content for enhanced pollutant removal. The po -
tential for contamination increases in areas with well-drained 
soils, typically sands with low organic content. In addition to 
sorption, organic compounds may also be removed through 
volatilization or biotransformation. 
Physical straining through the soil or engineered media 
may remove pathogens, which are typically associated with 
particles, although the effectiveness will depend on the or -
ganism and the porous media properties. Straining is more 
effective for protozoan pathogens (greater than 3 microns), 
such as Giardia lamblia and Cryptosporidium parvum, and 
larger bacteria (approximately 1-2 microns) than for viruses, 
which are too small (0.02-0.08 microns) to be effectively re -moved by filtration through porous media, although adsorp -
tion to some types of subsurface media does occur.
Contamination potential is highest in areas where the 
permeability is very high or the water table is shallow. Exam -
ples from the Midwest suggest that infiltration rates should 
be small enough to allow for soil treatment of contaminants 
but high enough to ensure that the ponded water remains 
oxygenated. Published criteria for infiltration include rates 
that are greater than 0.2 in/hr (0.5 cm/hr),4 but less than 5 
in/hr (13 cm/hr).5 States typically recommend that biofilters 
are sited between 2 and 5 feet (0.6-1.5 meters) above the 
seasonal high water table (Clark et al., 2010), although these 
values are generally derived from septic tank designs and 
may not be adequately protective of groundwater under a 
range of soil types and stormwater qualities. These design 
criteria also do not differentiate based on intended use of the 
groundwater, such as for drinking water supply. 
Maintenance.  Maintenance of biofilters includes periodic 
inspections to ensure proper drainage and removal of ac -
cumulated fine sediments as needed. Periodic sediment re -
moval in the upper soil layer (50 cm or less) can also help 
avoid breakthrough of metals (Nieber et al., 2010). Care of 
plants (and replacement as needed) is important to maintain 
effective drainage rates.
4 See http://www.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/water/water-types-and  
-programs/stormwater/stormwater-management/minnesotas-
stormwater-manual.html.
5 See http://dnr.wi.gov/topic/stormwater/standards/postconst_stan  
dards.html.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
114 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 6-14  Biofilter/swale under 
construction with underground wa -
ter storage vaults for irrigation use. 
SOURCE: Photo by Dan Bourdeau, 
Geosyntec, Inc.
FIGURE 6-15  Decreased infiltration 
rates with increased salt loadings and 
increased amounts of clays in under -
lying soil. SOURCE: Kakuturu and 
Clark (2015).
FIGURE 6-16  Available aqui -
fer storage in Southern Cali -
fornia (shown in acre feet). 
SOURCE:  Metropolitan Water 
District of Southern California Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  115
Regional Groundwater Recharge Projects
Capture, Storage, and Infiltration. Large-scale stormwa -
ter capture projects (Figure 2-1) are designed to recharge 
regional aquifers for future withdrawal to augment the local 
water supply. This can be accomplished through riverbank 
infiltration systems or infiltration basins in areas that recharge 
aquifers developed as water supplies. It is also possible to 
capture the stormwater in surface impoundments that are in -
tegral components of the water supply system. Regional-scale 
stormwater capture facilities are common in the arid South -
west of the United States, where for decades, water suppliers 
and flood control agencies have been capturing floodwaters 
in spreading basins both to replenish groundwater basins and 
to manage flood risk, while monitoring stormwater for wa -
ter contamination. For example, in Southern California many 
groundwater recharge spreading ponds and other stormwa -
ter capture facilities (e.g., inflatable rubber dams) have been 
built as a part of the river flood control facilities to enhance 
percolation of stormwater (or flood water). 
The geology and soil types are critical to identifying the 
best sites for recharge facilities. For example, Figure 6-16 
shows the variability in aquifer storage in Southern Califor -
nia. Near San Diego, the hydrogeological conditions (frac -
tured crystalline and semi-consolidated sedimentary rock) 
create mostly brackish aquifers with limited yield and stor -
age. Stormwater storage options are limited to alluvial aqui -
fers in San Diego. In contrast, the Los Angeles region has 
several large basins with vast storage capacity, although ex -
isting water contamination in some basins creates additional 
water management challenges.
Regional infiltration systems are designed to achieve 
and sustain maximum infiltration, with periodic maintenance 
to remove sediment that reduces infiltration rates. Water 
conveyance systems within the drainage basin and recharge 
basins are constructed and managed to optimize infiltration 
(see Box 6-5). Topography to support flow to locations at the 
bottom of localized or regional watersheds where sufficient 
space for recharge is also available are key siting consider -
ations. 
Treatment.  As with biofilters, discussed previously, water 
treatment for large stormwater infiltration systems is typical -
ly provided by soil aquifer treatment, sometimes amended 
with engineered media to enhance contaminant removal. In 
current practice, no standard design criteria exist for storm -
water treatment for large groundwater infiltration projects. 
At the spreading basins managed by the County of Los 
Angeles, no additional treatment is provided beyond soil 
aquifer treatment, but during a storm event operators moni -
tor total suspended solids (TSS) and allow stormwater TSS greater than 500 mg/L to bypass the facility rather than divert 
it into the spreading grounds. Consequently, the so-called 
first flush (which is expected to contain the highest pollut -
ant levels) bypasses the spreading grounds (MWH, 2003). In 
addition to protecting the water quality, this practice reduces 
the sediment load in the basins, thereby helping to sustain 
high infiltration rates. In Los Angeles, a stormwater recharge 
project in the Sun Valley neighborhood was designed to rem -
edy flooding and provide beneficial use of stormwater from 
a highly urbanized area while ensuring protection of ground -
water. The project incorporates hydrodynamic (swirl-type) 
separators with a media filter designed to treat the first flush, 
thereby removing suspended solids, oil, and heavy metals 
(CH2M-Hill, 2006).
Hatt et al. (2006) review treatment practices employed 
in Australia for use of urban stormwater for nonpotable pur -
poses. They conclude that practice is ahead of research, with 
no technologies designed specifically for stormwater use. 
Rather, standard technologies designed for general stormwa -
ter pollution control (e.g., sediment traps, swales and buf -
fers, wetlands and ponds) are employed. The authors make 
the case that the absence of specific guidelines will limit 
stormwater use to smaller scale, less complex systems. 
Maintenance and Operations.  Maintenance strategies at 
large stormwater recharge facilities are largely concerned 
with maintaining high infiltration rates, which consists of 
managing both sediment and ponding duration in the basins. 
Techniques to manage stormwater infiltration basins to sus -
tain performance are discussed in the Australian Guidelines 
for Water Recycling—Managed Aquifer Recharge (Austra -
lian SCEW, 2009) and in Kazner et al. (2012). Regarding 
sediment management, facility operators aim to minimize the 
accumulation of fine particulates in the surface layers of the 
spreading grounds, which decreases the soil’s hydraulic con -
ductivity and, consequently, infiltration rates. Maintenance 
activities include occasionally removing surficial soil layers 
and mechanically ripping the basin soil to break up any clog -
ging layers (Chambers Group, 2014; MWH, 2003). Facility 
operators manage ponding duration to control groundwater 
mounding, which decreases the pressure differential within 
the vadose zone, thereby decreasing infiltration rates. Pond -
ing management also helps avoid potential vector concerns 
associated with standing water. Ponding management con -
sists of allowing basins to sufficiently dry between wetting 
events; to that end, when possible, operators use a battery of 
infiltration basins to regulate the specific placement of water 
at the facility to leave some basins empty long enough to 
properly dry (Batman, Los Angeles County Department of 
Public Works, personal communication, 2014). Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
116 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
SYSTEMS THAT INTEGRATE  
STORMWATER AND GRAYWATER USE
Integration of the beneficial use of stormwater and gray -
water can offer many advantages including achieving larger 
reduction in water use compared to when either approach is 
used alone. In particular for irrigation applications, stormwa -
ter can help to flush salts that may accumulate in graywater-
irrigated soil. Below is a list of some of the possible con -
figurations of integrated graywater and stormwater systems:
1. Graywater and stormwater are used for irrigation
2. Graywater is treated for toilet flushing, and storm -
water is used for irrigation and/or supplementing 
indoor nonpotable uses as needed
3. Graywater is used for irrigation, and stormwater is 
used for indoor nonpotable use and to supplement 
graywater irrigation as available
There are some important design considerations for sys -
tems that integrate graywater and stormwater. Sizing of com -
bined systems needs to account for the complexities of the 
variable nature of the stormwater flows, the fairly consistent 
supply of graywater, and the demand profile for use. Given 
this complexity, it may be necessary to conduct continuous 
simulation of these systems to determine appropriate sizing 
and control logic. Integrated systems may be most advanta -
geous in combined sewer areas where potential overflow of 
graywater combined with stormwater does not have direct 
negative impacts on receiving waters. In Mediterranean cli -
mates, integrated systems could potentially provide storm -
water storage during the wet season and graywater storage 
during dry months. To avoid septic conditions, untreated 
graywater should not be stored for more than 48 hours. Most 
stormwater storage tanks are designed to store water for 
long durations to maximize water supply, but raw graywater 
should not be combined with stormwater in storage tanks 
that have storage times longer than 48 hours. If graywater 
is treated to remove a substantial portion of organic matter, 
then it could be combined with stormwater for longer du -
ration storage. Also important to consider in the design of 
integrated stormwater and graywater use systems is that the 
treatment required for each source of water is different for 
different uses. Therefore, to maximize treatment efficiency, 
graywater and stormwater may need to undergo treatment 
through separate processes or process trains. For example, 
graywater used to flush toilets may be treated through a se -
ries of filters and membranes to reduce organic content, while 
stormwater supplemented to graywater for toilet supply may 
be treated through a simple sand filter. The combined waters 
would then be disinfected prior to supply to toilets. In such a system, it would also be possible for stormwater to be treated 
through the same treatment train that is used to treat graywa -
ter, although that level of treatment provided would not be 
required for use in toilet flushing.
UNIT TREATMENT PROCESSES 
Depending on the water quality objectives, the treat -
ment processes may be similar for graywater and stormwa -
ter. Figures 6-5 and 6-8 present conceptual treatment systems 
for graywater and stormwater, respectively, for a variety of 
end uses and regulatory conditions. Based on the appropriate 
treatment system and desired water quality for the end use, 
unit processes can be selected. Because of a lack of national 
guidance for graywater and stormwater use and the wide vari -
ability of local regulations (see Table 6-4 and Chapter 8), no 
standard of practice shapes the design of treatment systems. 
Table 6-7 summarizes applicable unit processes, orga -
nized by contaminant class that can be easily paired with treat -
ment system designs as described in Figures 6-5 and 6-8. In 
some cases, unit processes that are typically applied for water 
and wastewater treatment but have potential to be applied to 
graywater or stormwater treatment are included. The most ap -
propriate configuration of these unit processes will develop 
through lessons learned from current and future projects. 
Unit treatment process efficiency and considerations 
specific to applications for graywater treatment are sum -
marized in Table 6-8. Similar information for application of 
these unit processes to stormwater can be found in Strecker 
et al. (2005) and Clark and Pitt (2012). In addition, a sum -
mary of commercially available graywater treatment sys -
tems can be found in Sharvelle et al. (2013). Stormwater 
control practices are usually built as part of the drainage 
system, but some commercial treatment units (especially 
media filters and hydrodynamic separators) are available. A 
NRC report (2009d) summarized many stormwater control 
options, along with features and expected performance. Pitt 
et al. (2011) describe some off-the-shelf treatment systems 
that have been used for roof runoff capture at the household 
scale, along with case study descriptions of stormwater treat -
ment systems that have been used for larger-scale stormwa -
ter beneficial use applications.
CONCLUSIONS
Graywater irrigation at the household scale can be 
achieved with simple systems that require little energy and 
maintenance. These simple systems, such as the laundry-to-
landscape system or systems that include storage, coarse fil -
tration, and pumps, typically do not include organic matter 
removal or disinfection, and risk is managed through a series Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  117
BOX 6-5 Stormwater Recharge in the Chino Groundwater Basin 
The Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA) in collaboration with the Chino Basin Watermaster (CBWM), the Chino Basin Water 
Conservation District (CBWCD) and the San Bernardino County Flood Control District (SBCFCD) jointly sponsor the regional ground -
water recharge program. An extensive water conveyance network directs stormwater run-off, imported water, and reclaimed water to 
16 recharge sites, where the water is held so that it percolates into the ground and replenishes the aquifer system (Figure 6-5-1). IEUA 
recharges 15,000 to 25,000 AF (18-31 million m3) of stormwater annually in addition to 10,000 AF (12 million m3) of reclaimed water 
and 40,000 to 50,000 AF (49-62 million m3) of imported water. The objective of the program is to mitigate future water shortages by 
expanding the local groundwater supplies. A rigorous monitoring plan samples stormwater and local runoff quarterly in storm and 
non-storm events, including analysis for total dissolved solids, metals, volatile organic compounds, synthetic organic compounds, and 
unregulated chemicals, to ensure that the recharge water meets permit requirements. 
Between 2002 and 2011, approximately $75 million in capital improvements were made to the existing flood control/stormwa -
ter capture facilities. Some of the funding was used to increase stormwater capture and recharge by approximately 12,000 acre-feet  
(15 million m3) per year by enhancing percolation rates in the recharge basins and improving flood control channels to provide con -
veyance to off-stream stormwater retention basins. The project also developed maintenance protocols for cleaning the recharge basins 
without dewatering and drying them to ensure optimum percolation rates during the winter season. New monitoring wells and lysimeters 
were installed to monitor groundwater quality. Approximately one-half of the capital improvement program was funded by grants, and 
the other one-half from local water fees and taxes. 
SOURCES: http//www.ieua.org/water-sources; Chino Basin Watermaster (2001); IEUA (2014).
FIGURE 6-5-1 Regional stormwater recharge in the Chino Basin. SOURCE: Rich Atwater.
of best management practices. However, there is a lack of 
clarity on the appropriateness of surface drip irrigation with 
no landscape cover, because the risk of this practice remains 
poorly defined at the household scale. Most guidance recom -
mends subsurface irrigation as a conservative strategy. Neigh -
borhood-scale systems typically provide disinfection where 
access-control is not feasible, which creates more system 
complexity and requires more energy, although the burden of 
maintenance is removed from individual homeowners. How -
ever, there is not yet a standard of practice for implementa -
tion of such neighborhood-scale systems, and many questions 
remain on who would implement, pay for, and maintain such 
systems.Graywater reuse for toilet flushing requires plumb -
ing components and treatment systems that are most ap -
propriate in multi-residential buildings or neighborhoods.  
Graywater systems for toilet flushing require dual plumbing 
with a connection to potable water and backflow preventers 
that require annual inspection. Treatment systems for toilet 
flushing should include disinfection to reduce risk and pre -
vent bacterial growth, and existing technologies are available. 
Even the simplest treatment systems require periodic main -
tenance that can be a burden at the household level, although 
such maintenance is more easily managed by contractors or 
on-site staff at the neighborhood/multi-residential scale. For 
broader adoption of graywater for toilet flushing at the house -
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
118 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
hold scale, treatment systems are needed that are low mainte -
nance and include process automation and control to ensure 
safe use at a reasonable cost. 
Many state graywater treatment standards for toilet 
flushing are not risk-based or fit-for-purpose.  Many gray -
water quality standards are based on state standards for unre -
stricted urban use of treated wastewater, discharge of treated 
wastewater to water bodies, or other standards for very dif -
ferent applications than use of graywater for toilet flushing. 
Many of the standards for graywater use for toilet flushing 
may be unnecessarily strict in terms of organic content and 
turbidity removal, resulting in requirements for technologies 
that are costly, energy-intensive, and require frequent main -
tenance. Standards also vary widely across states, resulting in 
an inconsistency in treatment systems that can be applied. As 
a result, graywater systems are more costly than they might be otherwise, because a single standard of practice has not 
been established across the country, and treatment system 
manufacturers must develop systems to meet varying objec -
tives. Additional research is needed to determine appropriate 
design standards for dissolved organic carbon and turbidity 
that prevent aesthetic and maintenance issues while allowing 
proper function of disinfection systems when using graywater 
for toilet flushing.
New developments and future urban planning pro -
vide opportunities for rethinking the conveyance and use 
of various water and waste streams for maximum cost, 
energy, and water savings. Separation of graywater results 
in blackwater that is more concentrated in solids and organic 
matter than conventional domestic wastewater and may be 
amenable to produce methane biogas through anaerobic di -
gestion. These systems can also be integrated with urine sepa -TABLE 6 -7 Unit Processes to Achieve Removal of Target Constituents De scribed in Figures 6 -5 and 6 -8 
Particulate Matter  Capital Cost  Maint. Required  Energy  Applicability Appropriate Scale  
Graywater  Stormwater  House hold Neighborhood  Regional 
Diameter > 5-10 µm      
Sedimentation  low low none       
Diameter 1 -5 µm      
Cartridge filtration medium  medium  low      
Sand or soil filtration medium  low medium       
Diameter < 1 µ m      
Membrane filtration  medium  medium  high      
Coagulationa medium  high medium       
DOC  
Biological aerated filters medium  high high      
Sequencing batch reactors medium  medium  high      
Membrane bioreactors  high medium  high      
Constructed wetland  medium  medium  low      
Soil aquifer treatment  medium  low low      
Sand and soil filtration  medium  low medium       
Membrane filtration  medium  medium  high      
Activated carbon  medium  medium  medium       
Pathogens  
Chlorine  low low low      
UV medium  high high      
Ozonationb medium  medium  medium       
Membrane filtrationb medium   medium  high      
Inorganic and Organic Contaminants  
Metals      
Chemically- active media filtration  high medium  low       
Sedimentation  medium  medium  low      
Organic Compounds       
Air stripping (active)  medium  medium  high      
Chemically- active filtration  high medium  low      
Sedimentation  medium  medium  low      
aCoagulation has rarely been used with stormwater, but it can be effective.  
bThese  disinfection processes are possible with stormwater, but they have been rarely used.  
NOTES: These unit processes are not stand alone and should be used in treatment systems as shown in Figures 6 -5 and 6 -8. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
State of Design Practice for Stormwater and Graywater  119
TABLE 6 -8 Summary of Unit Process Applicatio n to Graywater  
 Graywater Treatment Efficiency  Considerations Specific to Graywater Use  
Particulate Matter  
Diameter > 5 -10 µm    
Sedimentation  Not well documented  No specific graywater considerations  
Diameter 1 -5 µm    
Cartridge filtration  Highly variable depending on filter size  Clogging not ed in filters smaller than 100 µm  (pre-treatment required)a 
Sand or soil filtration  TSS: 62 -85%b,c,d 
Turbidity: 46 -87%b,c Several successful applications, good fit technology  
Diameter < 1 µm    
Membrane filtration  Turbidity: 92 -97% (UF), 98% (NF)e 
TSS: 100% (NF)e Potential for fouling is high, but can be reduced with extensive pretreatment  
Coagulation  Turbidity: 82 -91%f None  
DOC  
Biological aerated filters  Effluent BOD < 20 mg/Lg No specific graywater considerations  
Sequencing batch reactors  Effluent BOD < 20 mg/Lg No specific graywater considerations  
Membrane bioreactors  Effluent BOD < 4 mg/Lg No specific graywater considerations  
Constructed wetland  Effluent BOD 0.7 -80 mg/Lg No specific graywater considerations  
Soil Aquifer treatment  Not Applicable  Not Applicable  
Sand filtration  Effluent BOD 62 mg/Lb 
COD: 37 -61%b,c,d Several successful applications, good fit technology  
Membrane filtration  Effluent BOD 86 mg/L (UF),h 1.5 mg/L 
(RO)h 
COD: 45 -96% (UF), 93%  (NF), 98%  (RO)e,h Potential for fouling is high, but can be reduced with  
extensive pretreatment  
Due to low molecular weight of graywater DOC, NF or RO  
is needed for efficient removale 
Activated carbon  Effluent BOD 10 mg/Lh 
COD: 93%h No specific graywater considerations  
Chemical oxidation  Not Applicable  Removal of organic matter negligible when ozone generator was sized 
practically for residential or multi -residential applicationsi 
Photo -oxidation  Not Applicable  Graywater DOC (mostly surfactants) results in high turbidity,  
photo -oxidation is not effectivei 
Bacteria and Viruses  
Chlorine/Bromine  Depends on dose and initial water quality  Effective and low costi 
Not good for plants in irrigation application  
UV Can be effectivek 
Ozonation  Safety concerns at residential scale  
Hydrogen peroxide  Corrosive to toilet componentsj 
aE. Clerico, Natural Systems Utilities, personal communication, 2014.  
bFriedler et al. (2006).  
cGual et al. (2008).  
dZuma et al. (2009).  
eRamon et al. (2004).  
fPidou et al. (2008).  
gSharvelle et al. (2012).  
hSostar -Turk et al. (2005).  
iHodgson (2012).  
jKuru and Luettengen (2012).  
kWiles (2013).    Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
120 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ration including nutrient capture. Thus, graywater reuse can 
be a key element of energy-efficient urban water and resource 
management systems that not only minimize net water ab -
straction from the environment but also achieve a high level 
of energy and nutrient recovery.
The state of practice and development of cost effec -
tive and safe stormwater capture systems for roof runoff 
are hindered by the lack of data on human pathogens and 
the risk associated with various uses.  Design and treatment 
standards are generally well accepted for nonpotable use of 
runoff collected from land surfaces, and no treatment other 
than coarse solids removal is needed for subsurface irrigation 
where human exposures are minimal. For beneficial uses of 
roof runoff with low to moderate exposures, additional patho -
gen data and risk analyses are needed to establish a consistent 
state of practice for on-site stormwater use. Collection, stor -
age, and treatment technologies are mature and can be readily 
adapted for various scales and uses, but appropriate guidance 
based on risk assessments is generally lacking.
Operations and maintenance of household and neigh -
borhood graywater and stormwater use systems is not well 
guided or monitored.  All systems that capture graywater and 
stormwater for beneficial use require routine maintenance. For 
systems where disinfection is not required (e.g., subsurface ir -
rigation), failure to conduct needed maintenance poses opera -
tional concerns but does not pose a significant risk for human 
health or environmental quality. However, for systems with 
disinfection processes to protect human health (i.e., systems 
for toilet flushing), ongoing maintenance is critical. Although 
many states require that installed systems meet certain wa -ter quality targets, ongoing monitoring is not required. More 
guidance is needed to ensure safe operations of graywater and 
stormwater treatment systems at household and neighborhood 
scales. Because frequent routine water quality analyses are ex -
pensive and impractical even at the neighborhood scale, sys -
tem operational performance standards and online monitoring 
of surrogate parameters (e.g., residual chlorine, suspended 
solids, or turbidity) should be considered.
Stormwater infiltration for aquifer recharge is com -
monly practiced, but designs and regulations in the United 
States may not be adequately protective of groundwater 
quality. Design for large-scale stormwater infiltration proj -
ects are still emerging. For many locations, the design and 
performance standards for stormwater infiltration have been 
developed to address surface water regulatory drivers rather 
than the protection of groundwater quality from stormwater 
infiltration. Of particular concern is the infiltration of organic 
contaminants and salts from highly urbanized areas into water 
supply aquifers, although human pathogens may also be of 
concern depending on the infiltration site characteristics. In 
current practice, no standard design criteria exist for storm -
water treatment for large groundwater infiltration projects. 
Thoughtful planning, source area selection, source control, 
and mechanisms to integrate treatment into the watershed 
could improve efficiency of these systems and reduce the 
amount of treatment required. Innovative treatment systems, 
for example, engineered wetlands and filter media, may also 
be needed for regional-scale systems where source control is 
challenging. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
1217
Costs and Benefits
A key issue in evaluating the merits of the potential bene -
ficial uses of graywater and stormwater pertains to what bene -
fits are generated, and how those benefits compare to the costs. 
This is not a simple exercise, and it is not possible to draw 
broadly generalizable inferences for the following reasons: (1) 
many different types of benefits and costs may be relevant, (2) 
the types and magnitudes of benefits and costs typically are 
very use- and site-specific, and (3) the benefits and costs may 
be borne by a wide range of different individuals and entities. 
Each of these key issues is discussed in turn.
Furthermore, many of the potentially important benefits 
are difficult to quantify and value in monetary terms (i.e., 
they consist of what economists refer to as “nonmarket val -
ues”). Indeed, many of the motives for pursuing beneficial 
use projects for graywater or stormwater include aspirational 
and other values that extend beyond financial returns and 
water supply benefits. These facts may make it challenging 
to provide a viable and fair comparison of the key benefits of 
a stormwater or graywater project to its costs: the costs are 
generally identified and monetized, but many key benefits 
may not be readily amenable to monetization.1 This may cre -
ate an unfortunate imbalance in how beneficial use projects 
are perceived and evaluated, unless considerable effort is ap -
plied to fully recognize, account for, and estimate the full 
range of important, applicable benefits. 
RANGE OF POTENTIAL BENEFITS AND COSTS
The types of benefits and costs associated with graywa -
ter or stormwater use are highly diverse. Although the costs 
1 Various nonmarket valuation approaches may be applied on a 
case-specific basis to estimate many of the potential benefits. These 
approaches include hedonic or other revealed preference techniques 
and/or survey and related stated preference methods (Adamowicz 
et al., 1998; Alcubilla and Lund, 2006; Cadavid and Ando, 2013; 
NRC, 1997; Poor et al., 2007; Van Houtven, et al. 2014). The chal -
lenge is that such methods can be complicated, data intensive, and 
costly to apply properly, and need to be performed on a case- and 
site-specific basis.are primarily financial, the benefits may be financial, social 
(i.e., related to health, well-being, and quality of life),2 and 
environmental. The benefits may be broadly distributed or 
limited to the entity implementing the project.
Financial costs refer to the total out-of-pocket expense 
borne by whoever is paying for a graywater or stormwater 
project. Financial benefits may include returns to a home -
owner or municipality in terms of avoided costs (e.g., re -
duced purchases of potable or imported water or delayed 
infrastructure upgrades) or other monetary returns (such as 
avoided fines for stormwater violations). Environmental ben -
efits may accrue because of potential water-related savings 
in energy use and related emissions of carbon dioxide and 
other air pollutants associated with energy generation. Ad -
ditionally, stormwater capture and use can reduce harm to lo -
cal watersheds from otherwise poorly managed flows. Social 
benefits may include providing a community with aesthetic 
improvements due to increased green space or reducing traf -
fic disruptions associated with periodic urban street flooding 
during intense rain events. Public education and increased 
individual awareness of local water supply and related is -
sues may be considered as social benefits—although ones 
that can be particularly difficult to quantify and monetize. 
Box 7-1 provides an overview of many of the types of finan -
cial, social, and environmental benefits and costs that may be 
derived from a given graywater or stormwater application.
Many key benefits (and costs) can be highly site spe -
cific. In locations where water is relatively scarce, tapping 
graywater or stormwater resources is likely to reduce the 
demands on potable or other supplies that may be very ex -
pensive (at the margin) or associated with environmental 
stressors (e.g., diminishing stream flows to levels that place 
2 This is sometimes referred to as the Triple Bottom Line (TBL) 
framework. In the field of economics, the term “social values” is 
used to include all the possible benefits (and costs), including both 
the internal, financial aspects borne by private individuals and enti -
ties, as well as the broader array of external impacts that may be 
reflected under the “social” and “environmental” categories used in 
this chapter, but this definition is not used in this report.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
122 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 7-1 Potential Benefits and Costs Associated with Beneficial Use Options for Graywater or Stormwater  
Financial  a
Private Costs 
• Lifecycle costs to install, operate, and maintain a graywater or stormwater capture and treatment system
Public Costs
• Increased wastewater management costs associated with reduced wastewater volumes, increased pollutant concentrations, or the 
reduced viability of centralized water reuse programs
• Reduced income from potable water sales needed to cover fixed costs 
Private Benefits
• Reduced potable water purchases (for consumers)
• The value to homeowners of drought-proof landscaping (avoided replacement costs), although maintenance costs may be higher
• Possible associated increases in local property values, in properties and communities with added greening (e.g., trees) or street im -
provements (e.g., curbs and sidewalks)
• Potential sale of marketable stormwater retention credits (and/or reduced on-site stormwater management fees)
Public Benefits
• Reduced, avoided, or deferred utility costs related to developing new water sources, acquiring water rights, upgrading or expand -
ing treatment plants, or replacing water or wastewater conveyance systems infrastructure
• Possible reduced energy costs related to pumping imported water and possible energy production from advanced resource recov -
ery systems
• Reduced penalties and fines for overflow events (e.g., combined sewer overflow permit violations)
• Greater water supply reliability from stormwater capture and rechar ge in arid or semi-arid regions
Social  b
Private Benefits
• On-site aesthetic enhancements 
• Aspirational value to individuals and businesses for tapping local resources and promoting sustainability
Public Benefits and Costs
• Aesthetic enhancements (such as those derived from added greening of a neighborhood).
• Increased or enhanced local recreational opportunities due to added local green space, improved local riparian systems, etc.
• Public health effects (e.g., reduced heat stress from urban greening, reduced disease from combined sewer overflows, increased 
disease from failures in graywater or stormwater treatment or exposure control)
• Aspirational and public education value related to tapping local resources and promoting sustainability
• Increased robustness, resiliency, and reliability of local water supply portfolios, by diversifying mix of source waters
• Increase in “local control” of water resources and water supply (e.g., reducing reliance on regional or imported supplies)
• Potential increase in local job creation (e.g., to install and maintain stormwater or graywater infrastructure), if such jobs engage oth -
erwise under-employed labor resources (i.e., not a transfer of jobs from one region or sector to another) 
Environmental
Public Benefits
• Reduced hydromodification of urban streams 
• Reduced carbon footprint and improved air quality (where energy consumption is reduced)
• Reduced loadings of stormwater pollutants to surface waters 
• Reduced environmental impacts associated with developing new water supplies 
• Potential reduction in downstream water availability if projects expand irrigation and evapotranspiration (see Chapter 5)
a These are cash flow impacts on households, businesses, utilities, and other institutions that directly engage in beneficial use applications of 
graywater or stormwater. 
b This includes monetary and nonmarket benefits and costs for entities that may not be directly engaged in beneficial use projects (e.g., external 
benefits and costs).Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 123
special status fish species at risk, creating a large carbon 
footprint from seawater desalination). In such settings, the 
benefits of graywater or stormwater use may include both 
financial benefits and an array of benefits to the broader hu -
man and natural community. These same benefits would not 
be experienced in a location with abundant conventional wa -
ter supplies. 
Benefits and costs are also highly dependent on the spe -
cific type of application (i.e., end use) and the scale of the 
application. Graywater is typically reused through simple 
systems at the household scale, but large multi-residential 
properties and even regional systems are possible (see Table 
2-1 and Box 2-1) and involve more costly treatment and 
dual-distribution systems. Stormwater applications can also 
vary widely in scale, ranging from household to neighbor -
hood to regional levels. The scale will impact relative costs 
(e.g., because of economies of scale) and also the level and 
types of benefits generated. 
When examining the costs and benefits of graywater and 
stormwater use projects, who bears the costs and who realizes 
the benefits are additional important considerations. For ex -
ample, when a project generates significant external benefits 
(such as environmental benefits) that are not fully captured by 
those who bear the costs, how should the costs be equitably 
shared? In some cases, subsidies may provide a financial in -
centive for providing broader benefits. The distribution of the 
benefits and costs must address concerns about affordability, 
social equity (fairness), and environmental justice.
FINANCIAL COSTS 
This section presents what is known about the financial 
costs of graywater and stormwater projects. Ideally, financial 
costs should account for the full costs during the life cycle 
of the project, including initial installation (e.g., equipment, 
construction, permitting), annual operation and maintenance 
(O&M) over the full course of the project’s effective operat -
ing lifetime, any capital replacement required during the as -
set’s effective life, and any decommissioning and subsequent 
replacement costs at the end of useful life. These costs can 
be presented as total annualized costs (with capital expenses 
converted to equivalent amortized annual values, and added 
to annual O&M expenses) or as a total “present value” of all 
project costs in current dollars. However, there is a dearth 
of well-documented data on the full costs of such projects, 
particularly their life-cycle costs, because most are new with 
minimal data about long-term maintenance costs and perfor -
mance effectiveness.
It is important to include all costs, regardless of who 
bears them, and to keep track of who bears which costs. For 
example, a household may bear much of the expense of in -stalling a graywater system that taps its laundry machine and 
diverts the effluent to a subsurface drip system irrigating its 
garden. However, the local municipality and/or a local non -
governmental organization may provide subsidized support 
for these activities, and these expenses must be included in a 
full accounting of financial costs. 
Factors That Affect Financial Cost
Several key factors impact the costs of graywater and 
stormwater beneficial use projects. These factors include 
whether treatment is provided, the type and level of treatment, 
and the scale of the application (including size of storage). 
For simple, household-scale, laundry-to-landscape systems 
(Box 2-4) where untreated graywater is conveyed without ad -
ditional pumps to a subsurface irrigation system, capital costs 
are fairly minimal (primarily labor), with little if any O&M 
costs. In a multi-residential apartment building, graywater re -
use for toilet flushing requires treatment (see Chapter 6) as 
well as some mechanical pumping and more elaborate piping 
and storage investments. Treatment costs may vary depend -
ing on the water quality objectives, which may be governed 
by regulations that vary from state to state or even by locality 
(see Chapter 8). Costs will also be influenced by whether the 
application is part of a new development or a major renova -
tion effort, or a retrofit into an existing structure or established 
neighborhood. Retrofit on-site capture and use projects are 
typically considerably more expensive than installations in 
new developments.
Stormwater projects will also vary widely in their fi -
nancial costs, depending on the scale, location, and the type 
and extent of conveyance and treatment (if any) that may 
be necessary. When stormwater is collected and infiltrated 
into local groundwater basins in the same general proximity 
in which it is collected, the costs will be less, all else being 
equal, than when stormwater is harvested at one location and 
pumped a considerable distance to another location where it 
can be more suitably put to direct beneficial use. Stormwater 
infiltration projects may often require the purchase of land, 
which varies widely in price. The capture and use of storm -
water in some states may also require the purchase of water 
rights from downstream users.
Summary of Cost Data
This section summarizes the limited available data on the 
financial costs of graywater reuse and stormwater capture and 
use at the household and neighborhood scales. Most avail -
able data are focused on the household scale. Some data on 
regional-scale stormwater capture for groundwater recharge 
are also included, although such project costs would be highly Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
124 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
site specific. Monetary values reported in this chapter have 
been adjusted to 2014 U.S. dollars, unless stated otherwise.3
Household-scale Graywater Reuse
Graywater system costs at the household scale vary 
widely depending on the size and complexity of the system. 
Information on installing do-it-yourself laundry-to-landscape 
systems is widely available online, and some water utilities 
provide subsidies for material costs. San Francisco Public 
Utilities Commission (SFPUC, 2012) reports that laundry-
to-landscape systems cost a few hundred dollars for a self-  
installed system and $1,000-$2,000 for a professionally in -
stalled system. SFPUC has offered a $112 subsidy toward a 
$117 graywater kit that can be installed by a homeowner with -
out plumbing skills and without a permit (P. Kehoe, SFPUC, 
personal communication, 2014). Costs increase if a pump or 
filtration system is also needed and with professional installa -
tion (see Box 7-2). Nonmonetary costs arise when homeown -
ers devote their own time to installing the system (which may 
be valued in monetary terms based on a prevailing wage rate).
The financial costs of household-scale graywater systems 
increase with complexity, especially if they are profession -
ally installed and/or must be professionally maintained. Some 
systems that are more complex than laundry-to-landscape 
kits can still be installed by homeowners with basic plumb -
ing and electrical skills, reducing out-of-pocket installation 
costs but requiring investment of the homeowner’s time. 
SFPUC (2012) reports that a simple whole-house graywater 
system with a tank and pump, but no filtration costs between 
$500 and several thousand dollars, depending on the extent 
of plumbing work and whether the system is profession -
ally installed. Adding a sand filter system (but no disinfec -
tion) increases per household costs into the range of $5,000 
to $15,000 (SFPUC, 2012).4 Although cost data are limited, 
one whole-house graywater collection system for irrigation 
with professionally installed dual plumbing (installed during 
construction) and homeowner-installed tank and pump costs 
$2,300 for a five-bedroom house, with the bulk of that cost 
($1,700) being associated with the dual plumbing system (L. 
Roesner, Colorado State University, personal communica -
tion, 2015). A smaller home would have lower plumbing in -
stallation costs. The costs of retrofitting dual plumbing in an 
existing home would be substantially higher. 
Neighborhood and Regional Graywater Reuse
The costs associated with graywater systems naturally 
increase as they are scaled up to neighborhoods and regions, 
3 See http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/cpicalc.pl.
4 See additional cost estimates at http://www.graywateraction.org.although economies of scale may occur. In multi-residential 
settings, graywater is commonly used for both landscape ir -
rigation and toilet flushing. The costs for graywater reuse at 
the neighborhood scale depend on several factors, including 
the type and scale of graywater treatment, the extent of dual-
plumbing required (including whether dual collection for ir -
rigation or dual collection and distribution for toilet flushing 
is used), and whether the plumbing is installed as part of a 
new construction project or as part of a retrofit into an exist -
ing building. Extremely limited cost data are available on 
neighborhood-scale graywater projects. 
Hodgson (2012) breaks down capital and O&M costs 
for 14 different graywater system sizes (50-5,000 gpd; 190-
190,000 1pd) and for various disinfectant schemes (see  
Table 7-1). For example, for a 1,000 gpd (3,800 1pd) system 
(capable of treating enough graywater to provide toilet flush -
ing for about 150 to 160 people in a dormitory-type setting),5 
total storage and treatment costs (plumbing not included) 
amount to $4.39 per 1,000 gallons (Kgal). As shown in Table 
7-1, initial and annual operating costs increase with capac -
ity, but units over 100 to 300 gpd (380 to 1,100 1pd) achieve 
economies of scale that significantly reduce the cost per unit 
of water (Hodgson, 2012). These costs are comparable to 
or lower than potable water rates in many cities,6 and they 
are significantly lower if combined wastewater charges are 
considered. However, the plumbing cost, which is omitted 
but may be the most expensive component, especially for a 
retrofit application, would also need to be taken into account. 
An analysis of costs of graywater use in a mixed-use devel -
opment ranging from 40,000 to 500,000 ft2 (3,700 to 46,000 
m2) revealed that installation of dual collection and distribu -
tion plumbing during building construction represented 77 
to 93 percent of the capital costs for the project (RMC Wa -
ter and Environment, 2012), although Cordery-Cotter and 
Sharvelle (2014) reported lower plumbing costs for a small 
dormitory-scale project (see Box 7-3). 
An additional potential effect of wide-scale graywater 
use (if not accompanied by population growth) within exist -
ing development is the reduction of wastewater discharges 
to sewer systems, which may increase costs for wastewater 
utilities if reduced flows impede the in-sewer transport of 
wastes to the wastewater treatment facility and cause other 
problems in the sewer network. Reuse of graywater not only 
reduces the combined wastewater flow but also increases 
concentrations because most of the wastewater constituents 
must still be conveyed for treatment (see Box 3-3). Reduced 
flow decreases flow velocity in wastewater collection sys -
tems, which results in increased residence time, potentially 
5 Based on data provided in Cordery-Cotter and Sharvelle (2014).
6 See http://www.circleofblue.org/waternews/wp-content/uploads/  
2014/05/WaterPricing2014GraphsInteractive1.pdf.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 125
BOX 7-2 Benefit-Cost Analysis of a Single-Family Graywater Irrigation System
Costs.  The costs of a laundry-to-landscape system range from approximately $120 for a simple do-it-yourself (DIY) system with no 
treatment (see Box 2-4; P. Kehoe, SFPUC, personal communication, 2014) to $1,250 with professional installation (J. Gallup, City 
of Long Beach, personal communication, 2014). A self-installed, whole-house, graywater collection and irrigation system with dual 
plumbing professionally installed during home construction and a self-installed 150-gallon (570-liter) tank and water pump has been 
reported to cost $2,300 (L. Roesner, Colorado State University, personal communication, 2015), although professionally installed 
whole-house systems cost between $5,000 and $15,000.
A hidden cost to each household might occur if widespread graywater implementation in a community leads to significant reductions 
in potable water use, because it is possible that the water utility would need to raise its rates to continue to meet its fixed-cost obligations. 
Financial Benefits.  Potable water savings from single-family graywater systems depend on the behavior of the homeowner and how 
the irrigation rates change with installation of the graywater system. In laundry-to-landscape graywater pilot programs by the SFPUC 
and the City of Long Beach, the majority of households with newly installed laundry-to-landscape systems showed increased water 
demands (Gallup, personal communication, 2014; Kehoe, personal communication, 2014), possibly because of an expanded irrigated 
landscape or higher irrigation rates. A household only realizes a financial benefit from water savings to the extent that graywater reduces 
potable water costs. 
For a consistent comparison, the committee used the potential water savings calculated for a typical medium-density, residential 
development in six locations in the United States (see Table 7-2-1 and Chapter 3) to roughly estimate potential financial benefits for 
laundry-to-landscape and household (i.e., shower, laundry, bathroom sinks) graywater systems. These estimates are based on conserva -
tion irrigation to meet the evapotranspiration deficit for turfgrass, so actual savings could be more or less depending on the irrigation 
rates and extent and types of vegetation to be irrigated. Savings could also be reduced if the household water use increases with the 
availability of a no-cost water source. Additionally, these calculations are based on average graywater produced (see Box 3-1), but high-
efficiency washing machines will generate less water. At a potable water charge of $10 per 1,000 gallons (including associated waste -
water charges), potential water supply cost savings for a household might amount to approximately $23 to $53 per year for a laundry-
to-landscape system and $50 to $130 per year (on average) for a whole-house graywater system (based on the assumed water savings). 
A graywater system may also sustain valuable plants during drought restrictions, but such benefits are not included in this calculation.
Social and Environmental Benefits (and Costs). Various social and environmental benefits may arise, including:
• Public education and water awareness benefits, as households become more directly engaged with their own water use and enjoy 
aspirational values by reusing water on-site. 
• Neighborhood aesthetics and potential property value enhancements may apply, to the extent that the graywater system leads to 
improved landscaping conditions, particularly during an extended drought. 
Benefit-Cost Comparison. Based on the committee’s scenario assumptions (see Chapter 3), do-it-yourself, laundry-to-landscape sys -
tems can potentially offer low payback periods of 2.5 to 6.0 years at a 5 percent discount rate, assuming that total potable water use is 
actually reduced by the installation of the graywater system and no value is assigned to the homeowner’s labor. Payback periods are 
more than 50 years with the professionally installed laundry-to-landscape system, even with high-end water savings, and 44 years or 
longer for the whole-house system, considering water savings only. Payback periods would be shorter in households with more people 
and a higher existing irrigation demand. Payback periods would also be shorter in areas with near-year-round irrigation demand and 
longer in areas with irrigation demand limited to the summer. If water use increases substantially with installation of the reuse system, 
then no savings may occur. Nonfinancial benefits may also be important for households and communities.
TABLE 7 -2-1 Summary of Scenario Analysis of Potential Water Savings from Conservation Irrigation with Laundry -to-Landscape and 
Household Graywater in Six U.S. Regions  
 Self-installed  Laundry -to-Landscape   Self-installed  Household Graywater  
Average potential hous ehold  
water savings (ga llons/year)  Estimated potential a nnual  
cost savings  ($/year)   Average potential hous ehold  
water savings (ga llons/year)  Estimated potential ann ual  
cost savings ($/year)  
Los Angeles  4,800  48  13,000  130 
Seattle  2,800  28  7,800  78 
Lincoln  5,300  53  13,000  130 
Madison  2,600  26  6,200  62 
Birmingham  4,200  42  9,000  90 
Newark  2,300  23  5,000  50 
NOTE: See Chapter 3 for details of the analysis.  Scenarios assume medium -density, residential development with three persons per 
hous ehold and irrigation to meet the evapotranspiration deficit for turfgrass. Landscaped area and residential density determined by location -
specific data (see Appendix A).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
126 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
causing solids sedimentation, anaerobic conditions (septic -
ity), odor and corrosion problems, and increased frequency 
of sewer blockages. 
These effects on wastewater flows are already resulting 
from increased indoor water conservation from water sav -
ing devices. By comparison, the impact of graywater reuse 
within existing development is anticipated to be minor be -
cause of the challenge of retrofitting buildings for indoor 
nonpotable reuse. In new development, however, wastewater 
collection systems can be designed to accommodate reduced 
flows where significant graywater reclamation and reuse is 
planned. A full accounting of costs would consider increased 
wastewater system costs associated with widespread gray -
water implementation, although such an assessment has not 
been conducted. Widespread potable water use reductions, if 
they arise across the community, might result in the need for 
utilities to increase their water and wastewater rates to cover 
their fixed costs, potentially offsetting financial savings en -
joyed by residents.
Harvesting Roof Runoff 
Household roof runoff harvesting systems typically con -
sist of rain barrel or cistern collection systems (see Chapter 6). The cost of a residential-scale rain barrel is estimated to 
be in the range of $60 to $100. Some of this cost may be 
provided through utility subsidies. Rain barrels vary in size 
and material, with a typical barrel holding up to 35 gallons 
(130 liters) of roof runoff (Pitt et al., 2011). O&M costs are 
negligible.
For larger cistern-based household systems, data from 
Pitt et al. (2011) for two homeowner-constructed rainwater 
harvest systems indicate an upfront cost of about $1,500 to 
$1,600, although costs vary with the extent of new collection 
infrastructure required and the inclusion/exclusion of treat -
ment and pumps. One such system is located in Montana 
and entails a 2,500-gallon (9,500 liter) storage tank drawing 
water collected from a 925-square-foot (86 m2) roof, includ -
ing a first flush diverter and a pump. The storage tank cost 
$900 and the gutters cost $380, comprising the majority of 
the $1,500 initial cost. The second system, located in Port -
land, Oregon, and approved by the city for all household 
water uses, includes a 1,500-gallon (5,700 liter) tank with 
filters ($900), ultraviolet (UV) disinfection ($380), backflow 
prevention device ($130), and other components, for a total 
cost of $1,600. Labor costs for installation (either by home -
owner or contractor) are not included.TABLE 7 -1 Cost of Graywater Treatment and Storage Systems of Varying Scale, Including a Coarse Filter and Chlorine Disinfection  
System (Plumbing Excluded)  
System Size (gpd)  Capit al Annual Chemical and Energy  Annual Maintenance  $/Kgal  
50 $2,136  $18  $253  $24.33  
75 $2,136  $26  $253  $16.50  
85 $2,294  $29  $253  $15.17  
100 $2,294  $35  $505  $18.91  
150 $2,376  $56  $505  $13.08  
300 $2,369  $112  $505  $6.97  
500 $3,185  $186  $758  $6.16  
750 $3,767  $279  $758  $4.61  
900 $4,218  $335  $758  $4.13  
1000  $4,218  $372  $1,010  $4.39  
2000  $5,270  $744  $2,021  $3.96  
3000  $6,906  $1,116  $3,031  $3.86  
4000  $8,773  $1,487  $4,041  $3.83  
5000  $12,435  $1,859  $5,052  $3.92  
NOTES: Costs have been adjusted to 2014 dollars. The costs of dual plumbing and distribution plumbing during new construction projects 
(omitted in this table) have been reported to represent 77 to 93 percent of the cost for a large commercial graywater project (RMC Water and 
Environment, 2012), although the committee was unable to find detailed data on plumbing costs across a range of project types . Life -cycle 
costs are reported by Hodgson based on a 3 percent discount rate and a 10-year effective lifetime.  
SOURCE: Hodgson (2012).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 127
BOX 7-3 Benefit-Cost Analysis of a Dormitory Graywater System for Toilet Flushing
Costs.  Installation costs of a graywater toilet-flushing system for a dormitory with 28 residents (described in Box 2-2) were $66,500. 
Plumbing retrofitting for this system represented about 30 percent of the installation costs. O&M costs were $5,000 per year (Cordery-
Cotter and Sharvelle, 2014). 
Financial Benefits. Water savings were estimated at 65,000 gallons (250,000 liters) per year. Using local utility rates of $6 per 1,000 
gallons, the water supply cost savings are estimated to be $400 per year (Cordery-Cotter and Sharvelle, 2014). 
Social and Environmental Benefits (and Costs). Various social and environmental benefits may arise from household-level applica -
tions of graywater for toilet flushing, including water awareness benefits and the aspirational value associated with contributing to water 
conservation. Reductions in potable water demands may also ease environmental and hydrological stresses on source waters. 
Benefit-Cost Comparison. The financial benefits are considerably less than the financial costs in this illustration (and less than annual 
O&M costs). Relatively high costs are associated with retrofitting an existing building. However, the pilot project application included 
monitoring and other cost elements that are likely to be higher than those for a more routine installation and operation. Economies of 
scale may be feasible for larger scaled residential complexes (see Boxes 1-1 and 2-1), although the committee could not obtain detailed 
cost data for these systems. Incentives and other nonfinancial benefits may be important in decision making. 
Several commercial enterprises provide roof runoff cap -
ture systems for residential buildings. No published costs are 
available, but these systems generally cost up to about 10 
times the cost of the above homeowner-built systems (Pitt et 
al., 2011). The advantages of the commercial systems are the 
vendor’s relationships with local regulators and knowledge 
of the regulations, professional design and installation, and 
greater confidence concerning safety issues. Because local 
and regional regulations pertaining to rainwater harvesting 
and its use vary greatly throughout the country, the extra ser -
vice provided by the commercial suppliers of these systems 
may be beneficial.
Rooftop stormwater harvesting may be applied in larger 
contexts, such as commercial buildings or building complex -
es. For example, the Frankfurt Airport in Germany installed 
six 26,000-gallon (100-m3) cisterns to capture rooftop runoff 
for toilet flushing and outdoor irrigation. The system cost 
$109,000 and saves 26 million gallons (98 million liters) per 
year for an effective cost of $4.19/Kgal (Pitt et al., 2011). 
O&M costs are not available. 
Los Angeles Department of Water and Power (2015) 
reports that the highest costs per unit of water captured are 
associated with “on-site direct use” (Figure 7-1). Reported 
costs ranged from approximately $3,200/acre foot (AF) to 
nearly $14,000/AF, with a mean of more than $7,000/AF (or 
$21/Kgal) captured. 
Neighborhood Stormwater Capture and Use
Cost estimates for a wide range of stormwater capture 
or groundwater recharge projects at household and neigh -borhood scales are provided by Los Angeles Department of 
Water and Power (LADWP) in Figure 7-1. LADWP (2015)
reports the cost thresholds for projects identified for invest -
ments (less than $1,100/AF [$3.40/Kgal] for infiltration or 
less than $1,550/AF [$4.80/Kgal] for direct use), which are 
generally competitive with other new water supply options 
available in southern California (see Figure 7-2). The cost 
threshold for infiltration is lower because it does not reflect 
an analysis of how much of the stormwater is recoverable, 
and the actual cost per acre foot of recovered water is likely 
to be higher. 
Of the alternatives, infiltration projects were significant -
ly lower in costs than the stormwater tank capture and use 
projects, and neighborhood (“subregional”) scale infiltration 
projects are reported to be the most economical of the al -
ternatives (approximately $1,000/AF [$3.10/Kgal] average). 
Neighborhood-scale tank storage and use projects (“subre -
gional direct use”) were considerably more costly, ranging 
from approximately $1,200 to nearly $7,000/AF captured, 
with a median of $3,300/AF ($10/Kgal) considering life-cy -
cle costs (LADWP,  2015). By comparison, imported water 
through the State Water Project costs in the range of $450 to 
$1,300/AF (or $1.40 to $4.00/Kgal) depending on pricing 
“tier” and treatment. The costs of imported waters, however, 
are increasing at a rate greater than general inflation, and the 
water is not always available for communities wishing to ac -
quire additional supplies. Other new supply options such as 
desalination or water reuse typically cost between $950 and 
$2,200/AF ($2.90 to $6.75/Kgal) or more, as shown in Fig -
ure 7-2 (Raucher and Tchobanoglous, 2014; Sunding, 2013). Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
128 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 7-1 Life-cycle costs per captured volume, although infiltrated water may not be fully recoverable and may understate the true cost 
of supply. SOURCE: LADWP (2015).
FIGURE 7-2  Comparative lifetime unit costs of alternative water supply options, based on typical costs for California water utilities. NOTE: 
Costs may be considerably higher than shown for some options and locations, depending on site- and project-specific factors and other 
considerations. The displayed water use efficiency (i.e., conservation program) cost range reflects water utility-borne costs only (e.g., rebates 
for water efficient appliances), and do not include costs borne by customers. SOURCE: Raucher and Tchobanoglous (2014).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 129
FIGURE 7-3  Cost of stormwater capture and use projects by project size. SOURCE: Adapted from West et al. (2014). 
Regional Stormwater Capture
The costs of large centralized stormwater capture proj -
ects are highly location specific, and land acquisition re -
quirements and the suitability of existing flood water capture 
and conveyance systems for a stormwater capture project 
significantly affect overall costs. Regional-scale stormwater 
capture and recharge projects may be more cost-effective 
where existing flood management basins and related facili -
ties can be upgraded rather than developing new facilities 
with associated land acquisition costs.
Existing publicly available cost data for regional storm -
water capture are limited to southern California, so the full 
range of costs in other locations may not be represented. In 
an analysis of 118 stormwater projects in southern California, 
West et al. (2014) observed clear economies of scale among 
the larger stormwater capture projects (Figure 7-3). LADWP 
(2010) provides details on 11 large-scale stormwater cap -
ture and recharge projects, which were designed to provide 
an estimated 26,000 AF/year (32,000 m3/year) of additional 
groundwater recharge (essentially doubling the region’s prior 
stormwater capture and recharge levels), at a combined capi -
tal cost of $251.9 million (assumed to be reported in 2010 
dollars). LADWP (2010) estimates life-cycle costs at $60-
$300/AF ($0.18-$0.92/Kgal) for these projects. By compari -
son, LADWP (2015) analyzed 35 large centralized stormwa -
ter capture projects and reported a range of life-cycle costs 
from approximately $100/AF to $4,200/AF, with an average of approximately $1,000/AF (or $3.10/Kgal). Compared to 
other new water alternatives in Figure 7-2, these costs are 
very reasonable. A more case-specific benefit-cost compari -
son for enhancement of a single, large-scale, regional storm -
water capture and recharge project is provided in Box 7-4. 
The neighborhood-scale example in Chapter 2, Box 2-6, is 
illustrative of how community amenities and other nonmon -
etized co-benefits influence decision making for a major in -
vestment in a new stormwater capture system.
FINANCIAL BENEFITS
Financial benefits include the monetary (i.e., cash flow) 
savings or earnings that accrue to those that implement 
or otherwise benefit from a beneficial use of graywater or 
stormwater. There may also be monetary and nonmonetary 
benefits and costs that accrue to parties other than those that 
implement the project, and these impacts also need to be 
properly reflected in a comprehensive assessment of total 
benefits and costs. Environmental and social benefits are de -
scribed later in the chapter.
Financial Benefits from Household-level Applications
For a typical household-level application such as the use 
of graywater or on-site captured stormwater for landscape 
irrigation, the financial benefits primarily include the sav -
ings the user realizes if these practices lower their potable 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
130 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 7-4 Benefit-Cost Analysis of a Regional-scale Los Angeles Stormwater Recharge Enhancement Project
The Dominguez Gap Spreading Grounds West Basin Percolation Enhancements Project is intended to expand and rehabilitate an 
existing flood control and stormwater management basin managed by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LACFCD). 
When implemented, the project is estimated to increase local water supplies by an average of 1,000 AF/year (1.2 million m3/year) for 
the Central Groundwater Basin. This project secures local water supplies in a water-scarce region for long-term water supply reliability 
and will allow the region to reduce the amount of water imported from the Sacramento River Bay Delta. 
Monetized benefits from the project include avoided water import costs and reduced net carbon emissions from importing water. 
For 2013, LADWP paid $860/AF (in 2014 U.S. dollars) of treated water imported via the State Water Project, and this cost is expected 
to increase steadily over coming years. Reduced reliance on imported water will avoid the extensive energy requirements associated 
with transporting water from the Bay Delta and avoid 958 metric tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalents per year in greenhouse gas 
emissions associated with the production of this energy.a The social cost of carbon is estimated as the aggregate net economic value of 
damages from climate change across the globe and is expressed in terms of future net benefits and costs that are discounted to the present 
(IPCC, 2007), based on guidance for regulatory benefit-cost analyses from the Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon 
(2010; $23.23/MT in 2014 U.S. dollars). Over the 50-year project period, the social cost of carbon is escalated by 2.4 percent per year 
because CO2 will produce larger incremental damages as physical and economic systems become more stressed in responding to greater 
climate change. Nonmonetizable benefits include social health and safety and water quality benefits. 
Several costs are also associated with this increased local water supply. Primarily, the costs are associated with pumping the recharged 
groundwater from the aquifer at the point of extraction. In this case, that cost is $76/AF, for a total of more than $1 million (in 2014 
dollars) over the life of the project (MWDSC, 2007). 
A summary of all benefits and costs of the project are provided in Table 7-4-1. The monetizable benefits far outweigh the present value 
costs of this stormwater recharge project. Additionally, the project provides nonmonetized benefits such as improved water quality and 
reduced demand for net diversions from the Delta. 
a This value was calculated by applying a factor of 0.724 pounds of CO2 equivalents per kWh and converting to total tons of CO2 equivalents, 
based on the California Action Registry, General Reporting Protocol. See http://www.climateregistry.org/tools/protocols/general-reporting-
protocol.html.
water use (assuming there is not an offsetting water utility 
rate increase). Where wastewater charges are linked to me -
tered potable use, lower potable use may also translate into 
savings on wastewater charges as well. If the household is on 
a private well or septic system, they may save some of the 
operating and maintenance expense associated with running 
their own on-site supply and wastewater systems, although 
the effect of diverting graywater on the life of septic systems 
remains unclear. Calculating the potable water savings from graywater or 
stormwater use requires information on end uses (irrigation 
or additional uses, such as toilet flushing), seasonal irriga -
tion requirements of landscape, and graywater or stormwater 
availability. The discussion in Chapter 3 presents a scenario 
analysis of potential water savings based on conservation ir -
rigation of turfgrass in a medium-density development in six 
U.S. regions, but many other scenarios exist. TABLE 7 -4-1 Benefit -Cost Analysis Overview of Dominguez Gap Spreading Grounds Improvement Project Over the 50 -year Lifespan  
(present values, in 2014 U.S. dollars, 6 percent discount rate)  
 Present  Value  
Costs —Total Capital and O&M  $4,486,000  
Monetizable Benefits   
Increased local water supply ( 1,000 AF/year imports avoided ) $16,687,000  
958 metric tons per year of CO 2 equivalents avoided (includes 2.4%/year escalation)  $469,000  
Local groundwater  pumping costs (cost)  ($1,010,000)  
Total Monetizable Benefits  $16,146,000  
Qualitative Benefit or Cost  Effect on Net Benefits  
Social health and safety  a 
Other social benefits  a 
Improve water quality  a 
Improve long -term management of California groundwater resources  a
 
Reduce demand for net diversions from the Delta  b 
Provide a long -term solution  a 
Improve water supply reliability  a 
aLikely to increase net benefits relative to quantified estimates.  
bLikely to increase net benefits significantly.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 131
Graywater 
The committee’s analysis showed potential for 9 to 19 
percent reduction in water use from whole-house graywater 
for conservation irrigation and 13 to 26 percent potable wa -
ter savings where graywater is used for both toilet flushing 
and irrigation (see Chapter 3). This analysis assumes that the 
availability of a low- or no-cost water supply does not change 
household water use—an assumption that remains untested 
(see Box 3-2 for discussion of other assumptions and uncer -
tainties of the analysis). Water savings are lower for laundry-
to-landscape irrigation systems, with only 4 to 8 percent wa -
ter savings in the committee’s analysis (see Table 3-2). The 
amount of graywater from washing machines depends con -
siderably on the volume of water used per load, with a typi -
cal front-loading washer using 20 gallons (SFPUC, 2012). 
Water savings will also depend on the fill volume settings 
that the user selects, the number of loads per week, and the 
number of uses where the drain water is diverted to the sewer 
or septic system (e.g., when diapers have been washed). Sys -
tems that incorporate bathtub, shower, and bathroom sink 
graywater may provide water savings up to 19,000 gallons 
(72,000 liters) per household per year (assuming 2.5 persons 
per household). 
Actual financial benefits are determined by the extent 
to which graywater actually offsets potable water irrigation 
demand. In locations where irrigation is only needed dur -
ing one-half of the year, financial benefits would only ac -
crue during periods when irrigation is needed. Therefore, the 
highest financial benefits from graywater systems are asso -
ciated with year-round (or near-year-round) water demand, 
such as for toilet flushing and laundry or for irrigation in the 
Southwest or central United States (see Chapter 3). Example 
analyses of financial benefits from household-scale graywa -
ter use for irrigation and dormitory use for toilet flushing are 
outlined in Boxes 7-2 and 7-3.
Additional financial benefits may be derived from using 
graywater as a drought-proof irrigation source. For example, 
using graywater for landscape irrigation may enable house -
holds to maintain plantings in drought periods when water 
use curtailments would otherwise preclude outdoor water -
ing. Savings may be realized by avoiding the need to replace 
landscape vegetation after droughts. 
Stormwater
Water savings from stormwater capture projects will 
depend on local climate conditions, the size of the capture 
tank(s) (see Chapter 3), and the degree to which the benefi -
cial use of stormwater offsets potable water demand. When 
used for conservation irrigation, two 35-gallon (130-liter) rain barrels generated potable water savings of 1 to 5 per -
cent in the committee’s scenario analysis, and a 2,200-gallon 
(8,300 liter) tank for irrigation resulted in savings of 4 to 21 
percent, depending on the region of the country. When both 
irrigation and toilet flushing were considered, the larger tank 
resulted in potential potable water savings from 5 to 28 per -
cent. In all cases, financial benefits depend on the user actu -
ally reducing potable water demands. In addition, financial 
benefits may be decreased if potable water rate adjustments 
are needed because of reduced demand to cover fixed utility 
costs. Financial benefits from rain barrels and cisterns are 
described in Boxes 7-5 and 7-6. 
Financial Benefits of Neighborhood-  
and Regional-scale Applications
Water savings from neighborhood- and regional-scale 
graywater reuse projects depend heavily on the capacity of 
the system to offset potable water demand, in addition to lo -
cal and imported water rates. Larger building-wide graywater 
systems often see economies of scale over smaller systems. 
Hodgson (2012) compared graywater reuse in multi-residen -
tial buildings against local water rates across eight major U.S. 
cities and found that in the case of a 1,000 gpd (3,800 1pd) 
system, graywater reuse provided water savings that would 
cover treatment and storage costs in 0.7 to 4.6 years. How -
ever, Hodgson (2012) does not include plumbing costs, which 
would extend payback periods (perhaps considerably), given 
that retrofit plumbing costs may represent 80 to 90 percent of 
project costs (RMC Water and Environment, 2012). 
In multi-family dwellings where individual households 
pay the water bill, the financial benefits of graywater or 
stormwater use may not accrue to those who incur the costs 
of installation and maintenance (unless these costs are some -
how conveyed to the households). If the benefits and costs 
accrue to different parties, then there may be less incentive 
to pursue such investments.
Neighborhood-scale stormwater groundwater replen -
ishment projects may be associated with significant net cost 
savings to water utilities compared with the cost of other 
new water sources (Figures 7-1 and 7-2). Utilities can then 
rely on a greater volume of extractable local groundwater in 
lieu of far more expensive imported surface waters. 
At a more regional scale, water supply cost savings may 
arise at the utility and community levels in a number of ways, 
including avoided or deferred large-scale capital investments 
in developing new (or expanding existing) water supply and/
or water treatment facilities. These benefits may arise where 
graywater or stormwater use offsets sufficient quantities of 
potable water demands such that expensive, large-scale in -
vestments in existing conventional water infrastructure can Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
132 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 7-5 Benefit-Cost Analysis of Rain Barrels for Irrigation
Costs. The cost of a residential-scale rain barrel is estimated to be in the range of $60 to $100. Some of this cost may be offset by utility 
subsidies. Rain barrels vary in size and material, with a typical barrel holding up to 35 gallons of roof runoff (Pitt et al., 2011). Operating 
costs tend to be negligible when households divert the stored water to outdoor landscape irrigation (assuming no pumping or treatment 
is applied). The barrel lifetimes are assumed to be 20 years. 
Financial Benefits. Potential potable water savings for a basic rain barrel system—consisting of two 35-gallon rain barrels—used for 
irrigation are calculated based on the committee’s scenario analysis in Chapter 3, which assumed medium-density, residential develop -
ment (with housing density that varies somewhat by region) with 1,500 square feet of roof surface area per home and irrigation to meet 
the evapotranspiration deficit of turfgrass. Modeled average potential household potable water savings range from 1,100 gallons/year in 
Los Angeles to 3,400 gallons/year in Lincoln, Nebraska (see Table 7-2). Implicit in these savings estimates are the routine filling of the 
rain barrel from periodic rain events, the emptying of these tanks for irrigation during dry periods between precipitation events, and an 
assumption that the harvested water fully displaces potable supply (e.g., that potable water irrigation decreases fully by the amount that 
the rain barrels provide). Using a potable water charge of $10 per 1,000 gallons (including a typically linked wastewater charge), the 
water supply cost savings for a household might amount to approximately $1 1 to $34 per year. 
Social and Environmental Benefits (and Costs). Various social and environmental benefits may arise from household-level applica -
tions of rainwater harvesting barrels to supply landscape irrigation. These benefits might potentially include the following:
• Public education and water awareness benefits, as households become more directly engaged with their own water use and the 
local precipitation patterns and enjoy aspirational values from helping to conserve water by harvesting their own supply . 
• Surface water quality improvements associated with reduced pollutant dischar ges. 
Benefit-Cost Comparison. Based on a two-barrel system costing an average of $160, assumed water supply savings imply a potential 
payback period between 5 and 26 years (applying a 5 percent discount rate), depending on regional conditions. These payback periods 
are for equipment only and do not include costs associated with installation or maintenance. The short payback period corresponds to 
Lincoln where precipitation timing and near-year-round irrigation needs are better aligned for rain barrel use (although the scenario 
analysis may overestimate irrigation demand during winter months (see Box 3-2). The longer payback period reflects Los Angeles 
conditions, where irrigation needs do not coordinate well with time periods when rainfall is available. However, nonfinancial benefits, 
including water quality improvement and public awareness, may be important for some households and communities, regardless of 
anticipated financial paybacks. Indeed, the popularity of rain barrel programs despite the relatively long fiscal pay-off periods in some 
regions may be indicative that cost-effectiveness is not the prime motivation for households choosing to adopt these measures.
be postponed, downsized, or avoided (e.g., see Box 2-1). 
Savings in O&M expenses can also be realized based on the 
potential offset in potable water demands. 
An example of water supply cost savings arises in the 
context of southern California, where developing local water 
resources (including graywater and stormwater) can offset 
the amount of costly water imports via the State Water Proj -
ect. Box 7-4 provides a benefit-cost analysis of one large-
scale regional stormwater recharge project in the Los An -
geles region, in which the $4 million in present value costs 
to improve an existing facility is offset by $16 million in 
present value benefits in the form of avoided water imports, 
as well as a reduced carbon footprint, and several important 
nonquantified social and environmental benefits. 
Similar types of financial savings may be realized 
when stormwater or graywater management and beneficial 
use reduce wastewater system costs. For example, reduced 
volumes of graywater or stormwater inflow into combined 
sewer systems may defer investments in expanding waste -water conveyance or treatment plant capacity. These costs 
would be highly site-specific but could amount to large cost 
savings if major infrastructure upgrades could be avoided. 
A potentially significant cost savings may be realized when 
stormwater capture and use enables a community to cost-
effectively address combined sewer overflow (CSO) or 
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) compliance 
issues. Many municipal CSO-related consent decrees are as -
sociated with compliance costs of $1 billion or more, not 
including legal fees. Therefore, opportunities exist for sig -
nificant potential cost savings if beneficial use of stormwater 
can reduce CSO and other stormwater-related compliance 
issues and costs. 
Another financial benefit of stormwater capture and use 
is associated with stormwater control credit trading. The Dis -
trict of Columbia has implemented a market-based stormwa -
ter control credit trading system,7 in which developers can 
buy credits as needed to meet local stormwater management 
7 See http://green.dc.gov/src.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 133
BOX 7-6 Benefit-Cost Analysis of Rooftop Stormwater Capture Using 2,200-gallon Cisterns for Irrigation
Costs.  The cost of stormwater capture using storage tanks depends on several factors, including size and placement, the need for new 
collection equipment, and the extent to which treatment, pumping, and/or plumbing is required. This illustration considers a storage tank 
with a capacity of 2,200 gallons is placed above ground adjacent to the home (requiring about 50 square feet of surface area and about 6 
feet of height). As noted elsewhere in this chapter, costs for tank capture systems are about $1,500-$1,600, for do-it-yourself homeowner 
installation and operation (the value of homeowner labor is not included). More elaborate, contractor-supplied and -installed units may 
cost up to $16,000 (based on Pitt et al., 2011). 
Financial Benefits.  Potable water savings associated with a 2,200-gallon-capacity stormwater capture tank depend on the region (and 
associated seasonal precipitation levels and patterns) and intended water uses (irrigation alone, toilet flushing alone, or a combination of 
both if stored water volumes suffice). This benefit-cost analysis considers outdoor landscape irrigation only, and potential water savings 
calculated from the committee’s scenario analysis (see Chapter 3) are estimated to range between 4,600 gallons per household per year 
in Los Angeles and 14,000 gallons per household per year in Lincoln, Nebraska (see Table 7-2). Using a potable water charge of $10 
per 1,000 gallons (including a linked wastewater charge), the water supply cost savings for a household might amount to approximately 
$46 to $140 per year (region-dependent). 
Social and Environmental Benefits (and Costs). Various social and environmental benefits may arise from household-level applica -
tions of stormwater capture, similar to those described in Box 7-5. Large household tanks could result in surface water quality improve -
ments associated with reduced pollutant discharges and public health benefits associated with reduced combined sewer overflows. 
Benefit-Cost Comparison.  In regions where precipitation patterns are reasonably well coordinated with outdoor irrigation needs, 
potable water savings may offer sufficient financial benefit to offset the costs for a relatively simple do-it-yourself, household-level 
rainwater harvest storage tank system with a capacity on the order of 2,200 gallons (not including labor costs). Applying a cost of $1,500 
(representing a simple homeowner-installed system) and a 5 percent discount rate, the payback period is 16 years in Lincoln and greater 
than 50 years in Los Angeles. Payback periods are longer if homeowner labor is considered, and with professional installation, accrued 
financial benefits never exceed the costs (assuming a 5 percent interest rate). Under scenarios with larger irrigated areas or vegetation re -
quiring larger irrigation rates, the benefits would be greater and the payback period shorter. It is possible that other, nonfinancial benefits 
may be very important for some households and communities, thereby incentivizing broader use of such stormwater capture systems.
mandates, or sell credits when stormwater control systems 
are implemented that exceed regulatory requirements. The 
availability of stormwater credits will provide fiscal gains 
for those parties who can manage stormwater in a less costly 
manner through decentralized projects.
SOCIAL BENEFITS AND COSTS
Beyond the range of financial costs and benefits, there 
is a broad array of potential social benefits that may arise 
from the beneficial use of graywater or stormwater, as listed 
in Box 7-1. Not all of these benefits and costs will apply in 
every application or location; thus, care should be taken to 
identify when and where such benefits and costs apply, and 
whether they may be of appreciable value in that site- and 
scale-specific context.
Households may opt to engage in on-site graywater or 
stormwater use because of other values and goals that are im -
portant to them, such as the aesthetic value enjoyed from any 
additional or improved landscaping or garden areas attrib -
utable to the graywater- or stormwater-supplied irrigation. 
These nonfinancial benefits to the implementing households may be quite important and may be sufficiently valuable to 
the individuals to motivate their engaging in these activities 
regardless of the potential for no direct financial net gain. 
Widespread beneficial use of graywater or stormwater 
use across a community could collectively yield sufficient 
water savings to provide a more reliable (e.g., drought-resis -
tant) community-wide water supply, reduce energy demands 
by the local water utilities, and provide more aesthetically 
pleasing neighborhoods, which would improve public health, 
enhance property values, and offer recreational opportunities 
(see Philadelphia case study provided in Box 7-7). Addition -
ally, the direct hands-on involvement of citizens in water-re -
lated activities (such as managing an on-site rain barrel) may 
provide a higher level of awareness of the water cycle that 
may foster constructive engagement for local water and other 
resource management issues, although no research could be 
found that documents these changes. Regional-scale applica -
tions can yield significant levels of social beneficial value 
to a community, by providing a more diverse and resilient 
water portfolio and expanding local supplies, making these 
communities less vulnerable to limitations on imported wa -
ter as well as droughts and climate change impacts. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
134 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 7-7 Estimating the Value of Social Benefits of Philadelphia’s Green Infrastructure Initiatives
The Philadelphia Water Department (PWD) is pursuing an integrated approach for managing stormwater runoff and associated com -
bined sewer overflow (CSO) control. This approach includes a range of green infrastructure strategies that use natural and engineered 
approaches to capture and infiltrate stormwater on site (e.g., green roofs, rain gardens, permeable pavement). Although Philadelphia de -
signed these strategies to address water quality concerns (rather than water supply shortages), lessons can be learned from assessments 
of the social benefits that extend beyond improvements in receiving stream water quality, such as improved public health, increased 
recreation opportunities, and increased property values (Raucher et al., 2009). Understanding the full social costs and benefits of the 
program has helped justify the program to ratepayers, as well as regulators.
Raucher et al. (2009) assessed the quantitative and monetary value of a range of benefits and costs, applying standard techniques used 
in environmental and natural resource economics and related disciplines. Social benefits associated with a green infrastructure approach 
to stormwater management included streamside recreational opportunities from stream restoration and riparian buffer improvements, 
increased community aesthetics and property values with increased tree cover and other vegetation, and reduced heat-stress. Social 
benefits also included local green jobs that can be filled by local unskilled or otherwise unemployed laborers and reduced construction-
associated disruption. Environmental benefits included aquatic ecosystem improvements, wetland creation and enhancement, energy 
savings, and improved air quality. Table 7-7-1 summarizes the monetary value of the benefits for a scenario where runoff from 50 per -
cent of impervious surface in Philadelphia is managed through green infrastructure, compared to the traditional engineered approach 
using a 30-foot-diameter tunnel. These options were chosen to demonstrate the difference in net benefits between green and traditional 
infrastructure.
TABLE 7 -2 Summary of Scenario Analysis of Potential Water Savings from Conservation Irrigation with Rain Barrels and Cisterns in  
Six U.S. Locations  
 Two 35 -gallon Rain Barrels   2,200 -gallon Cistern  
Average potential household  
water savings (gallons/year)  Estimated potential annual  
cost savings  ($/year)   Average potential household 
water savings (gallons/year)  Estimated potential annual  
cost savings ($/year)  
Los Angeles  1,100  11  4,600  46 
Seattle  2,200  22  5,600  56 
Lincoln  3,400  34  14,000  140 
Madison  2,100  21  7,300  73 
Birmingham  2,300  23  9,400  94 
Newark  1,900  19  6,900  69 
NOTE: See Chapter 3 for details of the analysis. Scenarios assume medium -density, residential development, 1,500 ft2 rooftops, and 
irrigation to meet the evapotranspiration deficit for turfgrass, and results are based on 1995 -1999 precipitation data. Landscaped area and 
reside ntial density determined by location -specific data (see Appendix A).  TABLE 7 -7-1 Philadelphia -wide Benefits Through 2049 of Two Combined Sewer Overflow Options  
Benefit Categories  50% Green Infrastructure Option  Traditional 30 -ft-diam. Tunnel Option  
Increased recreational opportunities  $579   
Improved aesthetics/property value  $634   
Reduction in heat stress mortality  $1,167   
Water quality/aquatic habitat enhancement  $371  $209  
Wetland services  $1.8  
Social costs avoided by green collar jobs for under -employed locals  $138   
Air quality improvements from trees  $145   
Energy savings/usage  $37 $(2.8)  
Reduced (increased) damage from air pollution  $51 $(50)  
Reduced (increased) damage  from CO 2 emissions  $23 $(6.5)  
Disruption costs from construction and maintenance  $(6.2)  $(15)  
Total  $3,141  $135  
SOURCE: Raucher et al. (2009).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 135
ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS AND COSTS 
Environmental benefits and costs of graywater and 
stormwater projects are also important to consider in the 
overall assessment of project costs and benefits. Environ -
mental benefits of graywater and stormwater could include 
greenhouse gas reductions if on-site water use results in sig -
nificant energy savings. Beneficial use of stormwater can re -
sult in significant environmental benefits related to improved 
water quality and hydrology, although adverse environmen -
tal impacts of graywater and stormwater are also possible. 
Water Quantity and Quality Impacts 
Potential environmental benefits of widespread gray -
water use for toilet flushing or other nonconsumptive uses 
would be decreased stresses on existing surface water sourc -
es, which may enhance conditions for aquatic life. As dis -
cussed in Chapter 5, the potential environmental impacts of 
graywater use for irrigation are limited if best management 
practices that prevent surface ponding are followed. Some 
impact to soil properties or plant health may occur depend -
ing on the graywater quality, particularly with elevated lev -
els of sodium or boron, depending on local soil and climatic 
conditions (see Chapter 5). If graywater use for irrigation is 
implemented at a large scale in a way that uses more water 
for irrigation than was previously used with only potable wa -
ter, then downstream flows could be impacted, which could 
have a negative impact on aquatic life (see Box 3-1). Stormwater capture for beneficial use can provide sig -
nificant environmental benefits and some environmental 
risks. Increased infiltration of stormwater for the purpose 
of groundwater recharge and pollution management offers 
major environmental benefits to surface waters, particularly 
in areas with combined sewer systems. Stormwater capture 
or infiltration can reduce and delay peak surface water flows 
and reduce hydromodification of urban streams (see Chapter 
1, Figure 1-7). There are typically reduced deleterious ef -
fects on stream biota because of lower stream velocities and 
lower erosion rates. Stormwater infiltration can help rees -
tablish natural groundwater levels and increase base flow in 
streams across long reaches in a watershed. An example of 
changing hydrology based on enhanced stormwater infiltra -
tion is shown in Box 7-8. In coastal areas, increased ground -
water levels can provide enhanced groundwater discharge 
and reduce salt-water intrusion. Reduced stormwater flows 
reduce loads of phosphorus, sediment, metals, bacteria, and 
organic contaminants to inland and coastal waters. For com -
bined sewer systems, reduction of stormwater flowing to the 
combined system can reduce combined sewer overflows and 
therefore reduce contamination of receiving water bodies. In 
some locations, these benefits are so large that they are often 
the driving objectives for stormwater management projects 
(see Chapter 1). These benefits can be quantified to assess 
the magnitude of contaminant reductions by various storm -
water capture strategies (see Figure 7-4). 
If stormwater is captured and used in a way that con -
sumptive use of stormwater exceeds prior use of potable 
FIGURE 7-4 Total suspended sediment reductions vary with different stormwater capture or management strategies. SOURCE: Modified 
from LADWP (2015).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
136 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 7-8 Effects of Distributed Infiltration Practices on City-scale Hydrology
In 2012, the City of Philadelphia entered into an agreement with EPA to reduce the city’s combined sewer overflows (CSOs) by in -
vesting $2 billion in stormwater infiltration facilities over a 25- year period (EPA,  2012b). The Philadelphia Water Department (PWD) 
aims to replace up to 40 percent of impervious surface area with green infrastructure that includes swales, pervious pavement, rain gar -
dens, and tree trenches to promote stormwater infiltration. Concerns have been raised about the potential for such a massive introduction 
of stormwater into the subsurface to cause flooding of building basements in areas of high building density . 
In an effort to assess the potential changes to long-term water table elevations resulting from increased infiltration practices, PWD 
and its contractor, CDM-Smith, constructed a three-dimensional finite element groundwater model of Philadelphia’s 166 km2 CSO area 
(Maimone et al., 2011). The land area is underlain by Piedmont fractured rock to the west and the Atlantic Coastal Plain to the east, 
which is composed of layered sediments comprising aquifers and aquitards. Inputs to the model included estimates of recharge in areas 
without green infrastructure (45 cm/yr) as well as estimates of recharge in greened areas of the city (63 cm/yr). The model was run in 
the steady-state mode for a scenario of no green infrastructure and a scenario of a greened city, to evaluate predicted changes in water 
table elevation.
Results showed that the predicted rise in water table was spatially variable. Increases in water table elevation were less than 0.5 m in 
the Atlantic Coastal Plain and up to 1.8 m in small areas of the Piedmont (Figure 7-8-1). However, areas of greatest increase in water 
table elevation in the Piedmont were located in areas with existing greatest depth to groundwater (~9 m). The study concluded that the 
increased recharge due to green infrastructure infiltration practices is not likely to cause basement flooding. 
This study is unique in its attempt to quantify city-wide impacts on groundwater levels from implementation of distributed green 
infrastructure. 
FIGURE 7-8-1  Simulated water table mounding in response to infiltration from green infrastructure in the combined sewer region of Philadel -
phia, Pennsylvania. NOTES: Color code indicates depth to the water table at baseline conditions with no green infrastructure. Black contour 
lines indicate predicted increases in water table elevation due to installation distributed stormwater facilities. SOURCE: Maimone et al. (2011).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 137
water (see Chapter 3), then there may be impacts to down -
stream flows, which could, in turn, impact aquatic organ -
isms in streams and estuaries. There is also the potential risk 
that stormwater contaminants may find their way into local 
groundwater, which could threaten local water supplies that 
are dependent on groundwater withdrawal (see Chapter 5). In 
addition, enhanced infiltration has the potential to cause geo -
technical problems such as flooding basements (see Box 7-8) 
or altering movement of groundwater contaminant plumes. 
Energy Footprint of Stormwater and Graywater  
Compared to Traditional Water Systems
Energy could be saved in the process of substituting 
conventional sources of water with alternative local or on-
site sources. Energy production results in air and water pol -
lution and generation of waste; therefore, energy saved re -
sults in reduced pollution and waste. Depending on the area 
of the United States, saving electricity can translate to either 
more or less avoided emissions. For example, based on the 
amount of fossil fuels burned in electricity generation (EPA, 
2011), a MWh of electricity is responsible for about 100 kg 
of CO2 emissions for the electricity mix in Washington state 
and about 800 kg in Ohio. Furthermore, because energy pro -
duction requires water (e.g., for cooling in electric power 
plants), energy savings can also result in water savings.
For decision making, it is important to quantify the en -
ergy intensities and environmental impacts of these alterna -
tives and compare them to conventional supply of water. The 
following summarizes what is known about the energy needs 
of on-site graywater and stormwater use based on the cur -
rently available literature.
Energy Intensity of Water from Conventional Systems
The energy intensity of water provided to customers 
depends on the water source(s), pumping needs, treatment 
processes, and storage options. A range for embedded en -
ergy data for delivering water to customers is available from 
the published literature. However, the numbers may differ 
depending on the comprehensiveness of the energy assess -
ment (e.g., if supply-chain effects were also considered). 
The energy intensity of water supplied to U.S. cities is typi -
cally around 0.9 kWh/m3 (Copeland, 2014), but it can be 
five times higher, as reported in Table 7-4. Systems report 
higher energy use when they rely upon a large percentage of 
imported water (pumped from a long distance), use brackish 
or seawater desalination, or require groundwater pumping. 
For example, conveying water from northern to southern 
California via the California State Water Project is estimated 
to have an energy requirement of 2.1-4.4 kWh/m3 (Spencer, 2013). Groundwater pumping in southern California re -
quires an additional 0.3-0.8 kWh/m3 above energy needs for 
treatment and distribution. 
Overall, pumping and treatment tend to be the largest 
energy uses for water systems, but other life-cycle phases 
and supply chains (e.g., treatment chemicals and equipment, 
pipes, pumps, buildings, and utility vehicle fleets) may have 
significant embedded energy that should be accounted for in 
a comprehensive assessment of the energy intensity of wa -
ter. Life-cycle assessment (LCA) is a methodology that can 
provide comprehensive environmental analyses (e.g., Stokes 
and Horvath, 2009). Table 7-4 includes three examples of 
life-cycle energy intensities using LCA. In those examples, 
most of the energy is expended in conveying the water from 
the source to the water treatment plant and then to the cus -
tomers (Stokes et al., 2014). 
Energy Intensity of Stormwater Capture Systems
Seventy-five percent of residential U.S. rooftop storm -
water capture systems are utilized for irrigation purposes 
(Thomas et al., 2014). By replacing potable water with 
stormwater, rooftop systems offer opportunities to conserve 
local water sources while avoiding the required material and 
energy inputs needed to supply potable water for irrigation 
the traditional way. Theoretically, energy costs for pumping 
and treatment could be notably reduced. However, life-cycle 
energy demands can vary significantly based on the design 
and scale of the stormwater capture system and end uses. In 
the existing literature, empirical analyses of rooftop runoff 
capture systems report a greater energy demand (median is 
1.4 kWh/m3) than theoretical studies (0.2 kWh/m3) (Vieira 
et al., 2014). For Australian conditions, 1.4-1.8 kWh/m3 me-
dian energy consumption was reported for rainwater supply 
to urban dwellings (Sharma et al., 2015), but depending on 
the pump design, values range between about 0.4 kWh/m3 
and 5 kWh/m3. The energy intensity for household systems 
is characterized by material inputs (58 percent of total en -
ergy demand) and for agricultural systems is dominated by 
pumping needs (95 percent) (Ghimire et al., 2014). 
In combined sewer systems, stormwater use for irriga -
tion can reduce energy requirements associated with down -
stream wastewater treatment of stormwater. These savings 
were reported as 0.3 kWh/m3 in one study (Blackhurst et 
al., 2010), while another study, focusing on wastewater treat -
ment, calculated the energy cost to be 0.6 to 1.2 kWh/m3 
(Stokes and Horvath, 2010). Ultimately, these wastewater 
energy benefits would depend on the volume of stormwater 
diverted from the combined sewer system, which is likely 
to be less than the amount of stormwater used for on-site 
irrigation.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
138 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Energy Intensity of Graywater Reuse Systems
The energy footprint of graywater reuse depends on the 
system design (e.g., pipes, pumps, and other components), 
pumping needs, type and level of treatment, and the end use 
of water. For a graywater irrigation system that includes only 
storage and filtration, the primary energy demand is pump -
ing (beyond the embedded energy in system materials). The 
laundry-to-landscape system typically requires no energy 
beyond that embedded in system components. Systems that 
provide extensive graywater treatment, such as membrane 
filters and biological treatment, will have a high energy de -
mand. 
The current literature offers limited data on graywater 
energy use, particularly at the household scale. In the United 
Kingdom, the nonpotable water needs (met from graywater) 
of 500 households were calculated to require the following 
amounts of energy by three different treatment types: 9,200 
kWh for a reed bed, 197,000 kWh for membrane bioreac -
tor (MBR), and 238,000 kWh for membrane chemical re -
actor (Memon et al., 2007). An economic feasibility study 
of MBRs treating graywater estimated energy use at 1.0-1.5 
kWh/m3 (Friedler and Hadari, 2006). A California study as -
sessed a sand-filtration decentralized treatment system that 
reused graywater for irrigation purposes, including ultravio -
let treatment of effluents. The study found the life-cycle en -
ergy consumption to be 10.3 kWh/m3 (Shehabi et al., 2012). 
For comparison, Hendrickson et al. (2015) estimated the en -
ergy consumption of an office building-scale wetland system 
that recycles wastewater (not just graywater) for nonpotable 
use (toilet flushing and irrigation in a neighboring park) to be 
about 5.5 kWh/m3 throughout the system’s life cycle. There 
may also be opportunities to capture energy from blackwater 
when graywater is source-separated for reuse, as described 
in Chapter 6.INCENTIVES AND DECISION MAKING
One of the challenges in promoting sound graywater 
and stormwater beneficial use projects is the lack of direct 
financial incentives for those who bear the implementation 
costs. For example, at the household level, a family that in -
vests in stormwater capture and beneficial use via large cis -
terns may not save enough money on its water utility bills to 
justify the expense (i.e., the payback period may be longer 
than desired). As the cost of potable water increases, the fi -
nancial incentives may become larger. For multi-residential 
projects, the building owner or developer who makes the in -
frastructure investments to install a graywater or stormwater 
use system may not directly benefit, because the cost savings 
from reduced water use accrue to the residents. Nonfinancial 
motives such as the enjoyment associated with an irrigated 
garden and related environmental and social values (e.g., the 
desire to use local water resources wisely) also create posi -
tive incentives for projects that tap graywater or stormwa -
ter for beneficial uses, and these benefits may extend to the 
larger community.
Ultimately, aligning the proper fiscal incentives boils 
down to understanding and communicating where there are 
important external benefits to a beneficial use project. Once 
the externalities are recognized, such as through a compre -
hensive benefit-cost analysis that embodies full social and 
environmental accounting, the challenge is finding and 
implementing mechanisms that better align who pays with 
who benefits (e.g., by cost-share agreements or public-sector 
subsidies). 
For regional-scale projects, with relatively large budget 
implications, incentives may be more fiscally constrained, 
with altruistic values playing a lesser role. In such cases, it 
is important that the utility—and the broader regional com -
munity—recognize the important fiscal, social, and envi -TABLE 7 -4 Energy Requirements of Water from Several U.S. Cities or Regions  
City/Utility  Energy Requirement (kWh/m3) Life-cycle Assessment -based Number?  
New York City  0.7 yes 
Austin, Texas  1.3 yes 
Santa Clara Valley Water District (northern California) —current water mix  1.3 no 
Brackish water Santa Clara Valley Water District —brackish water desalination  2.6 no 
Small u tility (northern California, serving 40,000 people; 100% groundwater)  1.9 yes 
Medium utility (southern California, serving 180,000 people; 83% imported  
water, 17% brackish groundwater desalination, <1% recycled)  4.9 yes 
Large utility (northern Californ ia, serving 1.3 million people; 95% imported  
water, 5% local runoff collected in reservoirs, <1% recycled)  1.7 yes 
SOURCES: Copeland (2014); SCVWD (2011); Stokes et al. (2014).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Costs and Benefits 139
ronmental values that can be derived from a beneficial use 
project.8 It is important as well to account for the positive 
and negative externalities associated with these projects. 
For example, other communities may derive benefits when 
water savings or local water resource development relieves 
pressure on limited water resources shared by the broader 
area (e.g., where stormwater capture and recharge reduces 
regional demands for scarce and expensive imported wa -
ters). In such instances, some form of cost sharing across 
all beneficiaries will help incentivize projects that have 
a large number of beneficiaries outside of the immediate 
utility service area (i.e., subsidies may help internalize the 
positive impacts of such projects). This may take the form 
of suitable subsidies for projects that provide such external 
benefits and is evident in grants and cost-share arrangements 
such as those provided by the Bureau of Reclamation (e.g., 
Title XVI grants), the State of California (e.g., grants funded 
by Proposition 84), and the Metropolitan Water District of 
Southern California (via its local resources program). 
CONCLUSIONS 
It is important to recognize the full suite of benefits—
as well as the full costs—of graywater and stormwater 
projects, although it may be empirically challenging to 
do so.  A wide array of potential benefits may arise from proj -
ects that use graywater or stormwater. Some of these benefits 
are financial and can be readily estimated and portrayed in 
monetary terms, such as the value of water savings or the 
avoided cost of obtaining water from an alternative supply. 
In addition, important societal and environmental benefits 
may apply. These benefits may be difficult to quantify or 
monetize and are typically highly site- and scale-specific 
and dependent on the type of application. Costs for gray -
water and stormwater projects are also highly dependent on 
scale, system design, and plumbing requirements, and they 
are generally better understood than the benefits. Yet there 
is a lack of well-documented and complete cost information 
for many of the possible applications.
Simple household-scale graywater reuse or roof 
runoff capture systems can offer reasonable financial 
payback periods under certain water use scenarios and 
appropriate climate conditions.  For example, considering 
the committee’s scenario analysis of potential water sav -
ings in medium-density, residential development, simple 
8 One potentially useful approach is provided in Marsden (2013), 
which provides a water recycling evaluation framework that was 
applied as the basis for evaluating alternative stormwater harvest -
ing systems in an Australian community by Dandy et al. (2014). 
Dandy’s work accounts for financial costs and greenhouse gas 
emissions, and addresses the different benefits perceived by differ -
ent stakeholders.laundry-to-landscape graywater systems can offer payback 
periods as low as 2.5-6 years (not accounting for the cost of 
labor), with the shortest payback periods in the Southwest 
and central United States. These estimates assume graywa -
ter for irrigation actually offsets potable use—an assumption 
that remains to be demonstrated. Longer payback periods 
were estimated for rain barrels (5-26 years) and cisterns (14 
to more than 50 years, not accounting for labor) used for 
conservation irrigation. The longer payback periods reflect 
locations where distinct wet and dry seasons do not coordi -
nate well with irrigation demands, as in the arid Southwest. 
Shorter payback periods may be possible in more humid cli -
mates for households with large irrigated areas. The cost of 
installation (whether by contracting with a paid professional, 
or valuing homeowner-provided labor) greatly extends the 
payback period, as do water uses in which additional plumb -
ing and treatment are required. However, in household-scale 
applications, it may well be the non-financial benefits that 
motivate households to adopt beneficial use—such as a 
sense of conserving resources or having outdoor irrigation 
water reliably available to support landscaping during times 
of drought.
Some neighborhood- or regional-scale stormwater 
capture and use projects provide financial benefits that 
exceed costs, sometimes by a wide margin, in addition to 
other social and environmental benefits, and economies 
of scale are evident for both tank capture and infiltra -
tion projects. The regional stormwater capture and recharge 
projects in southern California, for example, can pay back 
large dividends to the community in the form of significant 
water supply enhancements (i.e., avoiding the cost of ex -
pensive imported water). Based on available unit cost data, 
stormwater tank capture and use at the neighborhood scale 
tend to be much more costly than alternatives designed to 
recharge groundwater. Larger scale projects may also reduce 
stormwater-related regulatory compliance costs and provide 
a wide variety of highly valued societal and environmental 
benefits, including enhanced aesthetics, property values, and 
recreational opportunities. 
Published cost data from larger-scale graywater 
projects are extremely limited, and therefore the finan -
cial benefits and cost options are difficult to assess be -
yond the pilot scale. Some efficiencies of scale would be 
associated with graywater toilet flushing systems in large, 
new, multi-residential developments (particularly compared 
to smaller retrofits), and additional incentives may be pos -
sible if such investments defer water and wastewater infra -
structure expansion in densely populated urban areas. 
Depending on the stormwater or graywater system 
design, energy savings are possible compared with con -
ventional water supplies, but data for a sound assessment Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
140 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
are lacking.  For decision making, it is important to quantify 
the life-cycle energy intensities of alternative water supplies 
and compare them to conventional supply of water. Energy 
saved could also result in reduced greenhouse gas and other 
pollutant emissions associated with energy production. The 
current literature contains little energy data for conventional 
and alternative systems. Conventional water systems in the 
United States are reported to provide water to customers at 
an energy cost of less than 1 kWh/m3 to almost 5 kWh/m3, 
depending mostly on pumping costs for conveying the water 
from the source to the water treatment plant. Roof runoff capture systems have been reported in a very limited num -
ber of studies to have a greater energy demand (median is  
1.4 kWh/m3) in practice than in theoretical studies (0.2 kWh/
m3), and thus may not be less energy intensive than conven -
tional drinking water systems. Where stormwater is diverted 
into combined sewer systems, additional energy savings of 
between 0.3 and 1.2 kWh/m3 may be obtained. Many po -
tential variables (e.g., scale, pumping, treatment, material 
inputs) will drastically affect the life-cycle energy demands 
of these systems, and the effects of these variables in practice 
remain poorly understood. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
1418
Legal and Regulatory Issues
This chapter outlines legal and regulatory factors that 
impact the capacity to use graywater or stormwater for ben -
eficial purposes. Water rights can be a barrier in some states, 
and local regulations related to water quality may limit po -
tential uses. However, the legal and regulatory framework 
for the beneficial use of on-site water sources appears to be 
rapidly evolving.
POTENTIAL LEGAL BARRIERS  
IN THE WATER QUANTITY CONTEXT
Legal barriers related to the water quantity impacts of 
graywater or stormwater use primarily concern water rights 
laws, which determine the rights to the use of water. Other 
laws protecting threatened and endangered species may also 
have relevance to large diversions of water from streams.
State Water Rights Laws
Laws concerning the allocation of water, particularly 
surface water, determine the rights to stormwater and gray -
water and thus can significantly influence the harvesting and 
use of that water. Water allocation is regulated primarily at 
the state level. Although each state has a unique set of laws, 
nearly every state uses one of two doctrines—prior appro -
priation or riparian rights—and in some cases both, as the 
foundation for its water allocation (see Figure 8-1).
Prior Appropriation 
The prior appropriation doctrine is the sole or predomi -
nant system of water allocation used by most states in the 
western half of the United States (Getches, 2009). Under this 
doctrine, the right to use water is allocated based upon the 
historical order in which rights to it were acquired, hence 
the adage “first in time, first in right.” In essence, the old -
est right is fulfilled, then the next oldest, then the next old -
est, and so forth until there is no water left to disperse or all rights are fulfilled. Traditionally, a key tenet of the prior 
appropriation doctrine is the prohibition against impairing 
other water rights. Therefore, appropriative water rights are 
generally well protected in law, as well as in politics and 
cultural norms.
When downstream water right holders exist, the effect, 
or even the potential effect, of stormwater and graywater 
harvesting and use on water rights can pose a challenge to 
the application of these technologies in prior appropriation 
states. Large-scale stormwater capture could result in less 
water eventually making its way to the stream and, as a result, 
cause a water right that otherwise would have been fulfilled 
to not to be. The same possibly could be said for small-scale 
stormwater capture, such as rain barrels and cisterns, when 
widely used in existing developments. Concern about this 
potential impact could lead, and in some cases has led, to op -
position by water right holders and caution by state regula -
tors with regard to the development of such infrastructure. 
Because urban development increases stormwater runoff and 
reduces evapotranspiration,1 on-site stormwater capture sys -
tems (depending on their design) may have minimal impact 
on downstream flows compared to pre-development condi -
tions. However, each western state has unique regulatory 
frameworks for governing water rights, which are not neces -
sarily allocated based only on pre-development conditions. 
Colorado is currently the only prior appropriation state 
with regulations that restrict the beneficial use of stormwater,2 
although a pilot program is under way to gather data in new 
developments regarding the feasibility of stormwater capture 
for water conservation without injuring the water rights of 
others.3 Six prior appropriation states have developed regu -
1 See http://www.coastal.ca.gov/nps/watercyclefacts.pdf.
2 An exception is allowed for rural residential property owners 
whose water is supplied by certain wells.
3 New developments that qualify as one of a limited number of 
pilot projects may harvest rainwater from impervious surfaces for 
nonpotable uses as long as the entire amount harvested is replaced 
to the stream by some other source. If, after a time, the development 
can calculate the amount of harvested rainwater that would have Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
142 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE 8-1  U.S. water rights systems by state. SOURCE: DOE (2014). 
lations to allow stormwater capture and use in some form, 
providing specific exemptions from water rights permitting, 
mostly for smaller-scale systems (see Table 8-1; supporting 
detail is provided in Table B-1 in Appendix B). Four of these 
six are coastal states, suggesting perhaps that states discharg -
ing stormwater directly to the ocean or Gulf of Mexico may 
be more willing to consider regulatory exemptions to water 
rights permitting for stormwater capture and use if the ben -
efits within the state are judged to outweigh the negative im -
pacts. Eleven prior appropriation states (all located inland) 
have not yet set regulations regarding stormwater use. Lack 
of specific regulations does not necessarily prohibit its use—
three of these states have issued statements or tax credits that 
encourage the capture and use of roof runoff (Table 8-1). New 
Mexico specifically states “the collection of water harvested 
in this manner should not reduce the amount of runoff that 
would have occurred from the site in its natural, pre-develop -
ment state.”4 However, it is possible that water right holders 
would sue owners of stormwater or graywater infrastructure 
for impairing their water rights, and the laws of the jurisdic -
tion would heavily influence the success of such a suit. 
been consumed by evapotranspiration from native vegetation, the 
development can ask the water court for permission to not replace 
that amount.
4 See http://www.rmwea.org/reuse/NewMexico.html.Explicit laws concerning these matters are still rela -
tively rare, and judicial interpretation of water appropria -
tion laws for these purposes is in its infancy. Although the 
precise rights of water right holders to runoff and return 
flows are, on the whole, unresolved at this point, it is not 
unprecedented for courts to hold in favor of technological 
improvement and perceived efficiency over the water rights 
of others.5 The answer also may depend on whether the 
individual capturing and using the stormwater or graywater 
has a pre-existing water right.
Riparian Rights 
The riparian rights doctrine is the sole system of water 
allocation used by 29 states (Getches, 2009). Borrowed from 
England, this doctrine grants the owners of land that abuts a 
natural stream, river, lake, or pond rights to that water. Most 
riparian rights states allow riparian landowners unlimited 
use of water for drinking, washing, and modest animal and 
garden needs and limit all other uses to “reasonable use.” 
Traditionally, if the reasonable needs of all riparian landown -
ers cannot be met with the available water, then usage is re -
duced proportionately. Many states using the riparian rights 
5 See, e.g., Montana v. Wyoming, 131 S. Ct. 1765 (2011).Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Legal and Regulatory Issues 143
doctrine now have some form of “regulated riparianism,” ef -
fectively a permitting system for the use of large volumes of 
surface water (see Figure 8-1; Getches, 2009). 
The right to unlimited use of surface water by riparian 
landowners for drinking, washing, and modest animal and 
garden needs should put stormwater and graywater use for 
these purposes squarely within the rights of riparian land -
owners. The use of that water for other purposes, to the ex -
tent that the total volume is less than what requires a permit, 
and perhaps even if more, would likely also fall within ri -
parian landowner rights, although it might need to be “rea -
sonable use” and might be subject to reduction in times of 
scarcity. Stormwater and graywater capture and use may be 
less secure for non-riparian landowners, if the harvested wa -
ter otherwise would have flowed to a stream or river. How -
ever, rights to water before it reaches a natural watercourse, 
whether from runoff or discharge, may be even more tenuous 
in this allocation system than under prior appropriation. The 
concept of equity that underlies the riparian rights doctrine, 
coupled with the limited accounting of volumes used, results 
in rights to water that are more difficult to quantify, poten -
tially dissuading lawsuits and political objections to storm -
water and graywater harvesting and use.
Determining a Violation of Downstream Water Rights 
With either allocation system, there is the possibility, 
however small, that a court finds state legislation allowing 
stormwater or graywater capture and use to result in a tak -
ing of a property right in water. The first step of that analysis 
would involve determining whether “property” is at issue and 
if “background principles of the State’s law of property and nuisance” already limited the property right.6 This involves 
asking at what point in the water’s migration does the right 
begin—for example, a roof, the ground, or its entrance into a 
natural watercourse. The answer to this question will depend 
on the laws of the jurisdiction and, in many states, has not 
been resolved. If the water right extends to the falling of rain 
and snow, then the remainder of the complex takings analysis 
must be conducted, the application of which to surface water 
rights neither has proven simple, nor is yet clear (Echeverria, 
2010; Lock, 2000). Thus, additional court challenges may be 
necessary to fully clarify the legal framework for stormwater 
and graywater, particularly in prior-appropriation states. 
Minimum Flows to Protect Aquatic Life
Reductions in streamflow that may result from stormwater 
and graywater capture and consumptive use have the potential 
to adversely affect not only water rights, but also the riparian 
ecosystems on which protected species rely. The U.S. Envi -
ronmental Protection Agency (EPA), in its 2012 Guidelines 
for Water Reuse , highlighted the concern: “[t]he most signifi -
cant constraint affecting use of reclaimed water is the need to 
assure instream flows sufficient to protect aquatic habitat. This 
is especially necessary in locations where instream flows are 
necessary to protect the habitat of threatened and endangered 
species” (EPA, 2012a). The federal Endangered Species Act, 
for example, has influenced many water allocation and use de -
cisions, because of the potential to violate explicit protection 
measures for species, such as minimum instream flows, or the 
potential impact an action may have on a population of threat -
6 Lucas v. South Carolina Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1029 
(1992).TABLE 8 -1 Examples of State Regulation of Stormwater Use  
Prior Appropriation States Without On-site 
Stormwater Capture and Use Regulationa States with Regulations That Specifically  
Allow On -site Capture and Use  States with Regulations That Limit or  
Prohibit On -site Capture and Use  
Alaska  California (rooftop capture exempted from water rights permitting)  Colorado  
Arizonab Georgia   
Idahoc Kansas (domestic, <15 AF/yr)   
Montana  Maryland   
Nebraska  North Carolina   
Nevada  Ohio   
New Mexicod Oregon   
North Dakota  Texas   
Oklahoma  Utah (<2,500 gallon storage with permit or <200 gallon without)   
South Dakota  
Wyoming  Washington (<360 gallon storage without permit and for single  
family dwellings)   
aLack of regulation should not be interpreted as a prohibition on such activities.  
bAlthough there is no formal regulation, Arizona has provided tax credits for rainwater harvesting systems.  
cAlthough there is no formal regulation to this effect, the Idaho Deputy Attorney General issued an opinion that on -site rainwater may be 
captured for beneficial use as long as there is no injury to the water rights of others.  
dAlthough there is no formal regulation, the New Mexico Office of the State E ngineer encourages the capture and on -site use of roof runoff.  
NOTE: See Appendix B -1 for details.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
144 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ened or endangered species themselves (Craig, 2008; EPA, 
2012a; Getches, 2001). Although the committee is unaware 
of any specific examples where graywater or stormwater use 
is currently threatening instream flows to support endangered 
species, many states have established instream flow laws to 
protect species in over-allocated basins (Bonham, 2006), and 
concerns may arise in the context of extensive consumptive 
graywater and stormwater use in areas with the potential to 
affect important habitats.
POTENTIAL LEGAL ISSUES IN THE  
WATER QUALITY CONTEXT
Although water allocation systems are generally a mat -
ter of state law, federal, state, and local laws all influence 
the framework for water quality regulation as it relates to 
the beneficial use of stormwater and graywater. Although 
this section focuses on existing U.S. federal, state, and local 
laws, regulatory frameworks or water quality guidance from 
other countries (e.g., NRMMC, et al., 2009a,b) illuminate 
alternative strategies for managing water quality concerns.
 
Stormwater Capture and Use
Federal Laws
Federal laws do not specifically govern the use of cap -
tured stormwater, but federal water quality laws may influ -
ence stormwater capture projects through the Clean Water Act 
(CWA) or the Underground Injection Control (UIC) program. 
The Clean Water Act and National Pollutant Discharge 
Elimination System Permits. The Federal Water Pollu -
tion Control Act, commonly known as the Clean Water Act 
(CWA), serves as the foundation for water quality regulation 
by the federal government and the states. The CWA sets out 
broad water quality restoration and maintenance objectives 
and establishes a two-pronged approach to achieve them, 
combining effluent limitations with ambient water quality 
standards. Under the water quality standards program, states 
are directed to adopt water quality criteria for contaminants, 
based on the water body’s designated use (e.g., public water 
supplies, recreation, protection of fish and wildlife), which 
must be approved by the EPA as adequately protective of the 
public health and welfare (33 U.S.C. § 1313). The primary 
tool in the CWA for meeting these criteria is the prohibition 
against discharging pollutants from any “point source” into 
U.S. waters without a permit issued under the National Pol -
lutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) (33 U.S.C.  
§ 1342).Most stormwater runoff discharges, such as those from 
certain construction sites and many categories of industrial 
facilities as well as municipal separate storm sewer systems 
(MS4s), fall under the definition of “point source,” and thus 
require a NPDES permit (EPA, 2012c). The permits, which 
are issued by authorized states7 or the EPA, can include re -
quirements for site-level stormwater management plans or 
programs. Traditionally, stormwater management practices 
have relied mainly on “end-of-pipe” treatment best manage -
ment practices (BMPs; e.g., filters) to trap or remove pol -
lutants shortly before the water is discharged to reduce the 
quantity of pollutants that reach surface waters. However, an 
emerging trend favoring low impact development (LID) en -
courages implementation of “green infrastructure” to mimic 
an area’s natural hydrology by retaining and managing storm -
water on-site (see Chapters 1 and 6; EPA, 2014a). LID in -
cludes various measures to reduce impervious surfaces and 
thus allow infiltration of water into the soil and the capture 
and storage of stormwater for use or timed release. 
Despite increasing recognition of the environmental, 
social, and economic benefits of green infrastructure (see 
Chapter 7), many local stormwater permits, administrative 
orders, and other enforceable documents that hold permit -
tees to their stormwater management obligations under the 
NPDES program have not been updated to include these 
alternative approaches (Stoner and Giles, 2011). Existing 
legal requirements with a historical preference for end-of-
pipe BMPs are likely to act as a deterrent to some facilities’ 
and municipalities’ adoption of stormwater capture and use, 
unless permittees can be confident they will receive legal 
credit (EPA, 2010). Thus, even though EPA has developed 
the Green Infrastructure Action Strategy  to encourage the 
incorporation of LID into stormwater management plan -
ning (EPA, 2008a, 2013a), current regulatory and enforce -
ment programs leave many permittees unable or unwilling to 
implement alternative BMPs (Stoner and Giles, 2011). EPA 
continues to work to address this issue (EPA, 2013a) and 
has developed extensive guidance for state and EPA NPDES 
permitting and enforcement staff on integrating green infra -
structure approaches into permits, control plans, and consent 
decrees.8
Numerous states and municipalities are adopting policies 
and tools to grant LID practices legal credit and “put it on a 
7 Forty-six states are authorized to issue NPDES permits. The EPA 
currently implements the NPDES permit program for Idaho, New 
Mexico, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, the District of Columbia, 
and tribal lands. See http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/basics/
NPDES-State-Program-Status.cfm.
8 See http://water.epa.gov/infrastructure/greeninfrastructure/gi_re  
gulatory.cfm#permittingseries.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Legal and Regulatory Issues 145
level playing field with other BMPs” (EPA, 2013b). States 
such as Virginia and North Carolina are developing storm -
water regulations that acknowledge the water quality benefits 
related to reductions in stormwater volume (EPA, 2013b). In 
southern California, several recently adopted MS4 stormwa -
ter permits require the on-site retention of a large percentage 
of expected runoff from rain events using a set of LID prac -
tices that includes rainwater capture and use (Strecker and 
Poresky, 2010). At the federal level, the 2007 Energy Inde -
pendence and Security Act set green infrastructure require -
ments in federal development and redevelopment projects, 
calling for “strategies for the property to maintain or restore, 
to the maximum extent technically feasible, the predevelop -
ment hydrology of the property,” which has been interpreted 
by the EPA to require on-site retention of the 95th percentile 
storm event (42 U.S.C. § 17094; EPA , 2009).
Underground Injection Control. Federal or state UIC Class 
V regulations govern projects that use shallow injection sys -
tems (including wells, dry wells, and manufactured infiltra -
tion chambers) to speed infiltration of captured stormwater 
into the subsurface. These UIC regulations are designed to 
protect potential sources of drinking water from contamina -
tion. Most stormwater infiltration practices (e.g., infiltration 
trenches, bioretention basins) do not meet the EPA Class 
V well definition (“any bored, drilled, driven shaft, or dug 
hole that is deeper than its widest surface dimension”) and 
can be installed without regulatory oversight, provided they 
meet any set state criteria protecting groundwater supplies 
(EPA, 2008b). Existing stormwater UIC regulations vary in 
structure and approach from state to state. For example, in 
Florida, Class V wells must be constructed so that they do 
not violate water quality standards at the point of ground -
water discharge. California is more stringent in its regula -
tions and prohibits any degradation in water quality while 
stored, a rule that can impose costly pretreatment require -
ments (NRC, 2009a). Because of concerns over potential 
groundwater contamination by direct injection or the costs 
of pretreatment, many projects instead use surface infiltra -
tion, which can be installed without federal oversight. Those 
that meet the Class V criteria can be operated without an in -
dividual permit, provided the injection does not endanger an 
underground source of drinking water and the operator sub -
mits basic inventory information to the permitting authority 
(EPA, 2013c).
State and Local Regulations Relevant to Stormwater Use 
Only a few states have regulations that specifically ad -
dress the use of stormwater as an on-site water supply (see 
Table 8-1). The legality of stormwater capture and use in the remaining states is, in many cases, less clear, but the lack of 
formal regulation should not be interpreted as a prohibition 
on such systems. In fact, some cities or states without for -
mal regulation have promoted and issued detailed guidance 
for installing on-site stormwater capture and use systems 
(e.g., City of Tucson, 2005; Minnesota’s Stormwater Man -
ual [MPCA, 2015]). State and local regulations on stormwa -
ter use for on-site water supply are evolving quickly as the 
practices are becoming more widespread. Yet, even in states 
where stormwater capture and use is allowed and encouraged 
through specific regulations (see Appendix B) or guidance, 
state and local public health codes may limit potential ben -
eficial uses or system designs. Underground injection control 
regulations may also impact how states are permitted to infil -
trate stormwater in larger scale projects.
Regulations on Stormwater Water Quality Criteria or 
System Design. Responding to citizen interest and concerns 
about water conservation and stormwater management, at 
least 10 states have developed specific regulations on storm -
water capture and use (Table 8-1). These regulations vary 
widely in complexity and consideration of possible uses (see 
Table B-1) and may be written from a range of perspectives, 
including public health, environmental management, or tax 
crediting. Many provide basic requirements for the design 
and permitting of stormwater capture systems, such as that 
described in the 2012 Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC; see 
Box 8-1), which as of December 2014 had been adopted (at 
least in part) by several states, including California, Hawaii, 
Iowa, and Washington. Other states have developed detailed, 
but not legally enforceable, guidance for developing storm -
water capture and use systems (e.g., Carpenter et al., 2009). 
Many state regulations (and the 2012 UPC) limit water col -
lection to roof runoff, although California allows collection 
from surface runoff, including paved roads and parking 
areas, as long as the water is used exclusively for subsur -
face irrigation or treated to applicable local water quality 
requirements (or National Sanitation Foundation [NSF] 350 
in absence of such requirements; see Box 6-2). NSF-350 
was developed for wastewater reuse systems and does not 
provide risk-based guidance for stormwater capture and use 
(see Chapter 6). Many of the state regulations (e.g., Utah, 
Washington) also provide permitting exemptions or reduced 
requirements for small rooftop harvesting systems used only 
for outdoor irrigation.
As of December 2014, only one state—California—had 
established specific water quality criteria for stormwater use 
projects. Box 8-2 summarizes water quality guidance or re -
quirements for four states, which vary substantially. Addi -
tionally, local governments may establish their own water 
quality criteria. For example, Los Angeles County Depart -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
146 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 8-1 Model Plumbing Codes
A plumbing code is the section of a building/housing code that requires plumbing facilities in buildings intended for human oc -
cupancy to be safe, sanitary, and efficient. The U.S. federal government does not promulgate national building codes; instead, various 
professional organizations have developed model codes (sometimes referred to as national or international codes), which are then ad -
opted by state or local governments at their discretion. Model codes and standards become enforceable only through the state or local 
government’s adoption process, at which point they become law. Model codes are often amended to fit the circumstances as well as the 
other laws and policies of the adopting jurisdiction. Although these provisions must be interpreted in the context of other state laws, they 
may have the effect of authorizing graywater (or stormwater) use.
The two most prevalent model plumbing codes are the International Plumbing Code (IPC) and the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), 
which address the design and installation of plumbing systems using prescriptive and performance-related provisions. Updated every 
few years, the IPC and UPC play a significant role in the widespread acceptance and implementation of innovative plumbing technolo -
gies and practices. The most current editions (ICC 2012) of both codes include provisions governing the on-site collection and reuse of 
graywater. The 2012 UPC also considers the use of rainwater and “treated non-potable water.”
Graywater in the IPC 
The IPC, updated triennially by the International Code Council, has provided for some form of graywater use since 1997. In the 2012 
edition, Chapter 13 regulates the design and installation of graywater collection and disposal systems for use in subsurface landscape 
irrigation and toilet flushing. Under the IPC, all graywater must be filtered to some degree and must then enter a collection reservoir. 
Percolation tests are required for subsurface irrigation. Graywater for toilet flushing must be disinfected and dyed blue or green prior to 
use. No specific water quality criteria are prescribed. The 2012 IPC does not address the beneficial use of stormwater.
 Stormwater and Graywater in the UPC 
The UPC is issued by the membership-based International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. Chapters 16 and 17 
of the 2012 edition govern reuse of roof runoff (“rainwater”), untreated graywater, and “treated nonpotable water” and outlines system 
and permitting requirements for various applications, including subsurface or surface drip irrigation and toilet flushing. Significantly 
revised from the 2009 UPC, the 2012 UPC added rainwater as an on-site water source. For untreated graywater, the code provides for 
subsurface irrigation (with supply piping covered by at least 2 inches of mulch) as long as there is no surface ponding. Food crop ir -
rigation is not permitted. Rainwater runoff from rooftops may be used for subsurface or surface drip irrigation, and small systems (less 
than 360 gallons on-site storage) are exempt from the permitting process. The 2012 UPC also describes treatment requirements for toilet 
flushing. On-site, nonpotable water must be filtered and disinfected for use in toilet flushing. Disinfection is not specifically required for 
roof runoff, but all water for toilet flushing must meet applicable water quality requirements set by the “public health authority having 
jurisdiction.” In absence of local water quality standards, the 2012 UPC directs local agencies to the EPA Water Reuse Guidelines (EPA, 
2004b) for guidance that might assist local development of such standards. As discussed in NRC (2012a), these nonpotable guidelines 
are not risk based, and for toilet flushing, are quite conservative compared to other state regulations in existence (see Table 6-4).
The existence of graywater provisions in the IPC and UPC and rooftop rainwater collection in the UPC effectively legalizes the instal -
lation of these systems in the states that have adopted the relevant sections of those codes. However, a state’s adoption of the IPC or UPC 
may not be sufficient to guarantee that such systems are legal in that state. Both the UPC and IPC note that permits are to be obtained by 
the appropriate authority before installation of new plumbing systems (although the UPC exempts small rainwater catchment systems), 
and building permits are issued by a local agency, which must determine the legality of on-site water systems in light of local laws. 
Moreover, internal inconsistencies between the adopted plumbing code and other areas of the state code (e.g., public health or sewage 
disposal laws) occur in a number of states. ment of Public Health established extensive tiered guide -
lines for outdoor uses of stormwater, ranging from no water 
quality criteria for rain barrel collection systems to rigorous 
permitting and monitoring requirements for systems with 
stormwater draining from industrial, high-traffic, or agricul -
tural areas (see Table 8-2). However, Los Angeles County 
does not yet have water quality guidelines for indoor uses, such as toilet flushing.9 The lack of a consistent, authorita -
tive source for water quality criteria that could be adopted by 
state or local governments serves as a major impediment to 
expanding the use of stormwater for indoor or large-volume 
9 In early 2016, after the release of this report in prepublication 
form, the Los Angeles Department of Public Health released new 
guidelines for both indoor and outdoor nonpotable uses of graywa -
ter and stormwater. See http://publichealth.lacounty.gov/eh/docs/
ep_cross_con_AltWaterSourcesGuideline.pdf.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Legal and Regulatory Issues 147
BOX 8-2 State Water Quality Criteria for Stormwater Use
Only a few states require or recommend specific water quality for end uses, and these criteria vary in terms of the considered end uses 
and contaminants as well as the recommended values. This box briefly summarizes California’s water quality requirements as estab -
lished in the 2013 state plumbing code (Title 24 CCR Part 5) and the water quality guidelines established by three states (Texas, Georgia, 
and Minnesota). Guidelines are not legally enforceable unless adopted by local regulators. The District of Columbia has established a 
tiered risk framework (see Figure 4-1 and Table 4-2) for setting stormwater quality criteria based on the extent of anticipated exposure. 
California
California’s revisions to the 2012 UPC set minimum water quality requirements for several stormwater use applications. For toilet 
flushing, ornamental fountains, spray irrigation (more than 360 gallon storage), and cooling tower make up, California requires:
• E. coli <100 cfu/100 ml and
• Turbidity <10 NTU,
in addition to minimum treatment technology requirements for filtration. No water quality criteria are provided for car washing and 
surface, subsurface, or drip irrigation, provided that the designs for these applications include a debris screen and a 100-µm filter .
Texas
In response to a mandate from the Texas legislature, the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB, 2006) recommended criteria for 
nonpotable indoor use (including toilet flushing) as
• total coliforms <500 cfu /100 ml and
• fecal coliforms <100 cfu/100 ml.
No water quality criteria are recommended for outdoor use. As of early 2015, Texas has not formally adopted these criteria into law. 
Georgia
The Georgia Rainwater Harvesting Guidelines (Carpenter et al., 2009) include the same water quality criteria published in  
TWDB (2006). 
Minnesota
Minnesota has developed detailed guidelines for public access irrigation systems, using stormwater, considering public health, plant 
health, and system function (Table 8-2-1). Additional water quality guidance is anticipated at a later date for irrigation of food crops and 
irrigation of areas with restricted access.a 
a See http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Stormwater_re-use_and_rainwater_harvesting.outdoor uses. Even when water quality guidelines are estab -
lished, communities may lack mechanisms for regulatory 
oversight of these requirements.
Regulations to Prevent Health Hazards from Standing 
Water. Large quantities of nonpotable standing water may 
create public health hazards associated with mosquito breed -ing, use of contaminated water, and algae growth. Therefore, 
some states with stormwater use regulations or guidelines 
have included express requirements aimed at public health 
protection, such as requiring opaque tanks to inhibit algal 
growth and screens to limit mosquito breeding (e.g., WVDEP, 
2012; see also EPA, 2013b). However, in jurisdictions where 
the capture of roof runoff is not formally regulated or ex -
TABLE 8 -2-1 Minnesota Water Quality Guidelines for Stormwater Capture and Use for Irrigation  
Water Quality Parameter  Impact of Parameter  Water Quality Guideline —Public Access Areas  
E. coli  Public health  126 E. coli /100mL  
Turbidity  Irrigation system function  2-3 NTU  
Total suspended solids (TSS)  Irrigation system function  5 mg/L  
pH Plant health  6-9 
Chloride  Plant heath, corrosion of metals  500 mg/L  
Zinc Plant health  2 mg/L (long -term use)  
10 mg/L (short -term use)  
Copper  Plant health  0.2 mg/L (long -term use)  
5 mg/L (short -term use)  
Temperature  Public health  Guidance to be determined at a future date  
SOURCE: MPCA (2015 ). Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
148 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
emptions have not been established, increased amounts of 
stagnant water (in cisterns or infiltration basins) may violate 
state or local public health laws that require private property 
owners to prevent conditions that contribute to vector harbor -
age, which is typically considered a public nuisance. In Con -
necticut, for instance, the state environmental commissioner 
is empowered to issue orders aimed at eliminating mosquito-
breeding places (Connecticut Gen. Stat. § 22a-45b), while lo -
cal health authorities are required to investigate reports that 
rain barrels or other receptacles near human habitations are 
breeding mosquitoes and cause any such breeding places to 
be abolished, screened, or treated (Connecticut Gen. Stat.  
§ 19a-213). An ordinance adopted by the city of Petersburg, 
Virginia, allows its health director to order occupants of pri -
vate property to drain standing water that is detrimental to the 
health, comfort, or general welfare of any of the inhabitants 
of the city (Petersburg, Va. Code of Ordinances § 50-64). In 
extreme cases, adverse effects on a neighbor’s use and en -
joyment of property caused by vectors or odors also could 
leave a stormwater harvester vulnerable to private nuisance 
liability. Graywater Reuse
No federal laws directly govern on-site management 
of graywater, leaving to the states policy decisions about 
whether and how to regulate on-site graywater reuse. 
State Graywater Reuse Laws 
Although some states have recognized graywater as 
legally distinct from wastewater for many years and have 
even encouraged segregated plumbing and reuse, a relatively 
recent surge of interest in graywater use as a conservation 
alternative has prompted a flurry of new legislation. As of 
December 2014, at least 26 states have laws allowing segre -
gation and reuse of graywater under less stringent treatment 
standards than those applied to reclaimed wastewater (see 
Table 8-3 and Appendix B, Table B-2). 
State regulations are widely variable with respect to al -
lowable graywater reuse applications and treatment require -
ments (Yu et al., 2013). As a threshold matter, states differ in 
what sources of household water are included in the defini -TABLE 8 -2 Summary of Los Angeles Tiered Guidelines for Stormwater Capture and Outdoor Use  
 Requirement  Uses  Water Quality Standard  Treatment  
Tier 1  
Roof runoff collected in rain barrels  
with on -site use  
(Household scale ) • Labeling and design 
requirements specified  • Irrigation  
• Car washing  None  None  
Tier 2  
Roof runoff collected in cisterns with  
on-site use  
(Large household scale; no source  
water from agricultural, manufacturing,  
or industrial land uses ) • Department of Public 
Health review required  
• Screens to prevent  
vector intrusion  • Drip or subsurface 
irrigation  
 
• Spray irrigationa 
• Non-interactive outdoor 
water feature  None  
 
 
• Total coliforms  
< 10,000 MPN/100 ml  
• Fecal coliforms  
< 400 MPN/100 ml  
• Enterococcus  
< 104 MPN/100 ml  • Pre-screening  
 
 
• Pre-screening  
• Disinfection  
Tier 3  
On-site or off -site stormwater collection  
in cisterns; off -site or onsite use  
(No high transportation corridors or 
agricultural, manufacturing, or  
industrial land uses ) • Reviews by Department of 
Public Health and building 
and safety department 
required  
• System design 
requirements  • Drip or subsurface 
irrigation  
 
• Spray irrigationa 
• Non-interactive outdoor 
water feature  
• Street sweeping  
• Dust control  None  
 
 
Same as Tier 2 spray  
irrigation  • Pre-screening  
 
 
• Pre-screening  
• Disinfection  
• Retention/ sedimentation  
(for street sweeping only)  
Tier 4  
On-site or off -site stormwater collection in 
cisterns; off -site or onsite use  
(Includes high transportation corridors  
or agricultural, manufacturing, or 
industrial land uses ) • Reviews by Department  
of Public Health and 
building and safety 
department required  
• System design 
requirements  
• Extensive monitoring 
requirements, including 
metals, volatile organic 
chemicals (VOCs) and  
semi -VOCs  • On-site drip or  
subsurface irrigation  
 
• Spray irrigationa 
• Non-interactive outdoor 
water feature  
• Street sweeping  
• Dust control  None  
 
 
Same as Tier 2 spray irrigation  
 
• Must meet Calif. 
Maximum Contaminant 
Levels and Calif. Toxics 
Rule Standards  • Pre-screening  
 
 
• Pre-screening  
• Disinfection  
• Retention/ sedimentation  
(for street sweeping only)  
aSpray irrigation is only allowed when there is negligible human exposure, such as after sunset and before sunrise.  
SOURCE: Los Angeles County Department of Public Health (2011).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Legal and Regulatory Issues 149
tion of “graywater”—generally faucets and showers, some -
times laundry, and sometimes the kitchen sink or dishwasher. 
In addition, states differ on where within their statutory and 
regulatory codes they cover the topic: plumbing or building 
codes, sewage disposal regulations, water pollution control 
regulations, health and safety codes, water and wastewater 
regulations, or a distinct section of code dedicated to gray -
water reuse requirements (Yu et al., 2013). The location and 
thoroughness of a state’s graywater provisions may be in -
dicative of its general priorities and objectives with respect 
to graywater reuse.
States in arid regions, where ever-growing pressure on 
municipal water supplies has prompted widespread interest 
in reuse, tend to have the most comprehensive graywater re -
use regulations or guidance (Martinez, 2013). For example, 
California—the first state to adopt legislation promoting 
graywater reuse in 1992—has updated its graywater regula -
tions several times to establish a workable framework for 
regulating residential and nonresidential graywater systems 
(Snodgrass, 2010). Arizona’s tiered permitting system is 
widely considered a model of effective regulation for gray -
water irrigation (see Table B-3 in Appendix B). 
In tiered regulatory frameworks (see Table 8-3), the re -
quirements for permitting increase with the size of the sys -
tem and the expected human exposures. For projects with 
large volumes captured for beneficial use, permitting may 
require design review, site inspections, and monitoring to 
ensure adequate public health protection. However, many 
tiered frameworks and some nontiered regulations allow the 
on-site reuse of small volumes of graywater without a for -
mal permit. Some policy analysts have noted that when a permitting process is too burdensome and is perceived by 
potential small-volume users as an added cost, it may have 
the effect of discouraging installation of graywater systems 
or incentivizing unauthorized reuse (Snodgrass, 2010; Yu 
et al., 2013). In fact, states where on-site graywater reuse 
is considered to be comparatively widespread also tend to 
be states whose regulatory schemes allow small volumes 
of graywater to be collected and reused without obtaining a 
formal permit—Arizona, California, New Mexico, Montana, 
Texas, and Wyoming. 
Among states with graywater regulations, there are nu -
merous differences with respect to allowable uses, permis -
sible equipment, and treatment/water quality standards. For 
example, Table 6-4 highlights varying graywater quality stan -
dards for toilet flushing in seven states, and Table 8-3 sum -
marizes the different regulatory strategies and end use limi -
tations used by states (see Table B-2 for more detail). Yu et 
al. (2013) suggest that this inconsistent regulatory landscape 
may be a barrier to graywater implementation. Specifically, 
the varied scales for which on-site systems are allowed and 
to what purposes the water may be put can keep the cost of 
available infrastructure products on the market high because 
the manufacturing industry cannot reach optimum scales of 
production. Additionally, lack of consistent, authoritative 
risk-based guidance may deter local or state governments 
from establishing their own regulations where they do not 
already exist or may lead local or state health departments to 
question the safety of these applications. 
Where water quality standards have been established for 
household- or neighborhood-scale systems, enforcing those 
standards and developing cost-effective regulatory or over -TABLE 8 -3 Summary of State Regulation of Graywater Reuse   
States Without Formal Graywater Regulations   States with Regulations Allowing Gra ywater Reuse  
States allowing wastewater 
reclamation that define 
graywater as wastewater  States not defining 
graywater  States treating  
graywater as septic   States permitting  
graywater using a  
tiered approach  States regulating  
graywater reuse without  
a tiered approach  States allowing 
graywater for  
irrigation uses only  
Alabama  Illinois  Connecticut   Arizona  Colorado  Hawaii  
Alaska  North Dakota  Kentucky   California  Florida  Idaho  
Arkansas  South Carolina  Maryland   New Mexico  Georgia  Kansas  
Delaware  Tennessee  Michigan   Oregon  Indiana  Maine  
Iowa   Minnesota   Washington  Massachusetts  Nevada  
Louisiana   Nebraska    Montana  Ohio  
Mississippi   New Hampshire    New York (non -residential)  Oklahoma  
Missouri   New Jersey    North Carolina  Utah  
Pennsylvania   West  Virginia    South Dakota   
Rhode Island      Texas   
Vermont      Virginia   
     Wisconsin   
     Wyoming   
NOTE: For details on states with regulations allowing graywater reuse see Appendix B, Table B -2. 
SOURCE: Updated from Sharvelle et al. (2013).  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
150 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
sight mechanisms to ensure the systems are appropriately 
maintained is a challenge. As noted in Chapter 6, additional 
maintenance and monitoring guidance is needed, with clear 
performance standards and possible online monitoring of sur -
rogate parameters for neighborhood- or large-building-scale 
systems. As part of San Francisco’s Non-potable Water Pro -
gram, the San Francisco Department of Public Health over -
sees water quality and monitoring requirements for graywater 
and stormwater use at multi-residential and commercial sites 
(see Box 8-3).
Graywater Provisions in Plumbing Codes 
Even in states without comprehensive graywater regula -
tions, special provisions for graywater systems can some -
times be found in plumbing codes (see Box 8-1). In a number 
of states, the plumbing code includes separate standards for 
the design and operation of on-site graywater reuse systems. 
The UPC and IPC, each of which has been adopted by many 
states, are the two most prevalent model plumbing codes. 
These model codes identify permissible graywater reuse pro -
cedures and contain treatment specifications for graywater 
according to categories of use (see Box 8-1). These model 
plumbing codes generally restrict legal use of graywater to 
use that limits human exposure to pathogens—namely, sub -
surface irrigation and toilet flushing—and specify any treat -
ment necessary (Yu et al., 2013). Provisions in a plumbing 
code also address cross-connections, backflow valves, air 
gaps, and other aspects of plumbing configuration, which 
may determine not only whether a certain system is permis -
sible, but also how the system is installed and how efficiently 
and economically it operates (Sharvelle et al., 2013). For ex -
ample, the 2012 IPC requires a graywater storage tank for 
subsurface irrigation, which would prohibit the more eco -
nomical, household-scale, laundry-to-landscape systems de -
scribed in Chapter 6.
On-site Wastewater Disposal Laws 
Even in states where the plumbing code accepts gray -
water for a limited class of nonpotable uses, the legality of 
reuse may ultimately be determined by wastewater disposal 
laws designed to protect drinking water supplies and regu -
late the entry of polluted water into the environment. On-site 
wastewater disposal laws affect the application of graywater 
to soil, which occurs in the course of the most common out -
door uses of graywater (e.g., subsurface irrigation). On-site 
wastewater disposal systems are permissible in many states 
under certain conditions. Some states only allow on-site dis -
posal systems where public sewer connections are impos -
sible or overly burdensome, but many are now also recogniz -ing “innovative” or alternative on-site systems. In a number 
of states, graywater can be applied to subsurface irrigation 
under these laws as part of the general domestic wastewater 
stream.10 However, some on-site wastewater disposal codes 
allow segregation and application of graywater at lower 
treatment standards than water that may contain sewage. In 
Maine, for example, the on-site wastewater disposal code 
permits “primitive” or “limited” graywater disposal to wa -
ter plants with untreated graywater by hand (Code of Maine 
Regs. § 10-144-241).
Despite increasing recognition of graywater systems as 
attractive disposal alternatives, in some states the inconsis -
tencies between plumbing code provisions and state or mu -
nicipal on-site sewage and health codes may yet constrain 
a property owner’s ability to legally implement a graywa -
ter reuse system (Snodgrass, 2010). In extreme cases, as in 
South Carolina and Maryland, a state may have regulations 
for graywater systems in its plumbing code, yet have public 
health or sewage disposal laws requiring all domestic waste -
water to be discharged to the sewer system (Sharvelle et al., 
2013). In other cases, it is unclear whether a law allowing 
subsurface application of graywater as a means of “disposal” 
has the effect of authorizing the application of graywater for 
subsurface “irrigation.” These contradictions and ambigui -
ties within a state’s own code can create direct legal obstacles 
to implementation. To make matters still more complicated, 
the agency responsible for enforcing building codes and is -
suing permits for indoor plumbing installations may differ 
from the public health or environmental agency charged 
with regulating any storage or application of graywater that 
occurs outside the building and/or the agency that regulates 
beneficial use of water resources. 
Potential Procedural Barriers
State and federal environmental impact analysis (EIA) 
laws provide varying levels of procedural and, on occasion, 
substantive protections of the public’s interests. EIA laws 
seek to identify risks in advance of a project; balance envi -
ronmental and socioeconomic values; ensure opportunities 
for stakeholder participation; and demand informed, rea -
sonable decision making. Since EIA’s emergence, litigation 
has played an important role in achieving these objectives  
(Taylor, 1984; Wathern, 1988). Federal projects are subject 
to the environmental review requirements of the National 
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. § 4331 et 
seq.), and many states have enacted “little NEPAs”—state 
EIA statutes that apply the same general principles to state 
10 For example, see http://extension.psu.edu/natural-resources/wa  
ter/septic-systems/on-site-wastewater-treatment-system-options/
drip-irrigation-on-lot-sewage-disposal-system.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Legal and Regulatory Issues 151
and municipal projects (Bender, 2014). Some of these state 
laws, notably the California Environmental Quality Act, de -
fine “project” and “environmental impact” quite broadly so 
that many government actions—from large-scale projects to 
permitting decisions and even policy changes—are subject 
to the environmental review requirements (California Public 
Resources Code § 21000 et seq.).
Although few of the state EIA laws include substantive 
provisions—and only a small percentage of the legal chal -
lenges result in the court prohibiting a project from ultimate -
ly moving forward—opponents of proposed actions who 
can credibly argue that a project’s potential environmental 
impacts will injure them often can influence the how and 
when of a project through EIA litigation (Riccardi, 2011;  
Wathern, 1988). Particularly in states where EIA laws are 
robust and litigated often, for example California, actions 
that alter downstream flows may face the additional hurdle 
of litigating claims brought under EIA laws.
POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Significant future expansion of graywater or stormwa -
ter to meet water supply needs raises a number of policy is -
sues to be addressed by local, state, or national governments. 
These issues involve water quality standards, source control, 
downstream impacts, and decentralized infrastructure.
As discussed in this chapter, few states have water qual -
ity regulations or guidance for graywater and stormwater 
use, and those that exist are widely variable (see Box 8-2 and 
Table 6-2). National guidance is lacking in the United States, 
although Australia has developed extensive guidelines on the 
use of stormwater and graywater (NRMMC, et al., 2009a,b). 
The 2012 EPA Water Reuse Guidelines are often cited as 
a reference, although its categories of recommended water 
quality criteria are broad and lump spray irrigation, fire pro -
tection, and toilet flushing—categories with far different ex -
posures—into a single category of “urban uses,” resulting in 
suggested water quality criteria that may be more protective 
than needed to protect public health. EPA (2012c) may be 
more useful for large-scale, groundwater infiltration projects 
or industrial applications. However, the wastewater sources 
considered in the development of these recommendations 
are significantly more contaminated with microorganisms 
and may contain lower concentrations of other contami -
nants, such as metals and organic contaminants found in ur -
ban, stormwater-draining, paved areas. Without risk-based 
guidance, local projects may face resistance from health de -
partments or the public, who question the safety and reliabil -
ity of these practices, or may lead to unnecessary treatment 
(and associated cost) to meet overly restrictive guidelines 
that were developed for different risk scenarios (or may not be risk-based at all). Therefore, additional risk-based water 
quality guidance is needed that can serve as the basis for 
developing standards of practice for typical stormwater or 
graywater applications. Fit-for-purpose guidelines will re -
quire substantial public education so that on-site waters are 
used appropriately with the necessary treatment.
Increased use of urban stormwater, particularly at large 
scales, leads to water quality concerns with runoff from road -
ways, parking lots, and industrial areas (see Chapter 4). Treat -
ment is an important component of large stormwater systems, 
but policy issues emerge about the role of enhanced source 
control in areas that rely upon urban stormwater to recharge 
potable aquifers. Limits on roofing materials, road salt ap -
plication, or even tire or brake pad composition could lead to 
significant improvements in stormwater quality (see Chapter 
4), but policy makers should weigh the costs and benefits of 
additional source control restrictions. 
As the on-site water capture and use movement grows, 
particularly for consumptive uses such as irrigation, ecosys -
tems and communities downstream will be impacted if the 
total volume of water used for irrigation exceeds that under 
prior conditions with only potable water use (see Chapter 
3 and Box 3-3). Thus, policy makers should evaluate the 
benefits of on-site water use for various applications com -
pared to the risks of harm to those downstream. In some 
prior appropriation states, the legal framework restricts 
the use of on-site graywater or stormwater out of concern 
for impacts to downstream water rights holders. However, 
impacts to downstream ecosystems, including streams and 
estuaries, also need to be considered. Although enhanced 
stormwater infiltration projects should increase base flow 
to streams, stormwater capture projects for expanded irriga -
tion could decrease stream flows, and such effects should 
be carefully assessed in advance (see Chapter 3). Graywater 
and stormwater projects for nonconsumptive uses, such as 
toilet flushing, do not impact the quantity of water delivered 
downstream and are, therefore, ideal applications in inland 
communities. 
Fully embracing the use of on-site water sources at 
household, neighborhood, and municipal scales requires a 
shift to decentralized treatment systems that ultimately sup -
plement larger centralized facilities. This shift may have im -
portant policy implications in the way these decentralized fa -
cilities are permitted, managed, monitored, and maintained, 
particularly for communities with entirely centralized water 
and wastewater systems. Additionally, the intersection of 
green building practices, stormwater management, and water 
supply brings together a diverse array of local government 
entities with a role in managing these decentralized projects. 
Thus, neighborhood- or municipal-scale implementation re -
quires the involvement of agencies responsible for city plan -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
152 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 8-3 San Francisco Non-potable Water Program
In dense urban areas, the use of on-site “alternate water sources” is an important strategy for conserving potable water. In San Fran -
cisco, the reuse of graywater and stormwater are addressed under the city’s Non-potable Water Program. Established by ordinance in 
September 2012, this program has created a streamlined approval process for new commercial, multi-family, and mixed-use develop -
ments to collect, treat, and reuse alternate water sources for toilet flushing, irrigation, and other nonpotable uses. The program developed 
a guidebook (City and County of San Francisco, 2014) for developers interested in installing nonpotable water systems in buildings. The 
guidebook includes information on alternate water sources, permissible use applications, water quality parameters, design and construc -
tion basics, and ongoing operation of on-site systems. 
Aimed at promoting reuse of nonpotable water while ensuring appropriate water quality standards, the program facilitates coordina -
tion between three municipal agencies involved in regulating on-site water reuse systems: the San Francisco Public Utilities Commis -
sion (SFPUC), the San Francisco Department of Building Inspection (SFDBI), and the San Francisco Department of Public Health 
(SFDPH). SFPUC reviews project water budgets, serves as a technical resource, and provides financial incentives for customers who are 
interested in nonpotable water use. SFDBI oversees the design and construction of nonpotable water systems by administering permits, 
conducting inspections, and issuing certificates of occupancy. Finally, SFDPH regulates the water quality and monitoring requirements 
for on-site treatment systems, issuing operating permits and establishing reporting requirements for on-site treatment systems. 
As of May 2014, less than 2 years after the program was implemented, six developments in San Francisco were operating a non -
potable water system or were in the process of installing one, including the Bill Sorro Community affordable housing project and the 
Market Street Place retail center (SFPUC, 2014a). The program was originally voluntary but was amended in July 2015 to require that 
all new buildings of at least 250,000 square feet to be constructed, operated, and maintained using available alternate water sources for 
urinal and toilet flushing and irrigation. New buildings located inside the city’s designated recycled water use area are required to meet 
this requirement beginning November 1, 2015, and new buildings within San Francisco city and county located outside of the designated 
area are required to meet this requirement by November 1, 2016. 
SOURCE: SFPUC (2015).ning, water supply, wastewater, stormwater, building safety, 
and public health, possibly necessitating new strategies for 
government collaboration (see Box 8-3).
Finally, advances in potable water conservation (includ -
ing but certainly not limited to graywater and stormwater 
capture and use) reduce the incomes of water and wastewater 
utilities, whose costs do not necessarily decline proportional -
ly with water use (Beecher and Chesnutt, 2012). In growing 
cities, conservation allows utilities to serve more customers 
without the need to invest in expensive new water sources. 
However, when conservation causes total utility incomes 
to decline, increased rates, supplemental fees, or new rate 
structures may be necessary to maintain water utility opera -
tions (Donnelly and Christian-Smith, 2013). 
CONCLUSIONS
As technologies and strategies continue to advance, gray -
water and stormwater use is being incorporated into law in 
a variety of respects at the federal, state, and local levels. A 
number of new laws at the state and local levels promote or 
regulate stormwater and graywater capture and use, and mod -
el plumbing codes have been updated to include provisions 
for these practices. Additionally, green infrastructure prac -tices, including stormwater capture and use, are increasingly 
being incorporated into NPDES permits. However, as is often 
the case with innovative technologies, the law has not evolved 
quickly enough to keep up with advances in the technology 
and its use. Several legal and regulatory constraints remain 
that hinder the capacity for graywater and stormwater to sig -
nificantly expand the nation’s water supplies.
In most western states, acquisition of water rights 
is a requirement for large-scale stormwater capture and 
use projects, and water rights may limit widespread im -
plementation of smaller-scale stormwater and graywater 
projects for consumptive uses.  The use of graywater and 
stormwater for consumptive applications, such as irrigation 
or cooling, may impact the water available to downstream 
users if total water use (including potable and nonpotable) 
for those applications exceeds previous potable water use 
(see Chapter 3). Thus, unless water rights can be acquired 
or legislative solutions developed, opportunities for large-
scale stormwater capture projects to expand existing water 
supplies could largely be limited to coastal regions with no 
downstream users or to nonconsumptive uses (e.g., toilet 
flushing). Several states (e.g., California, Kansas, Oregon, 
Utah, and Washington) have established regulations that al -
low small-scale roof runoff capture projects to proceed with -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Legal and Regulatory Issues 153
out water rights permits, and only one state (Colorado) has 
strict limits on stormwater capture and use out of concern 
for water rights impacts. However, the right to stormwater 
and graywater use in most prior-appropriation states has not 
been firmly resolved through judicial decisions, leaving an 
unclear outlook for projects that have not acquired water 
rights, because they could be vulnerable to legal challenges. 
New scientific analyses of the impacts to return flows of vari -
ous on-site water uses in different regions would help clarify 
these concerns, but additional legal research and guidance 
could better facilitate the use of on-site water supplies, con -
sidering potential legal challenges. 
There is substantial variation in on-site graywater 
and stormwater regulations at the state level with re -
spect to design and water quality, which leads to vary -
ing exposures and risk. As one example, there is lack of 
consistency among states on whether outdoor graywater use 
is limited to subsurface irrigation. At least three states allow 
drip irrigation without landscape cover, which could lead to 
higher pathogen exposures. In addition, states vary on their 
regulation of untreated graywater irrigation of food crops. 
Whether such exposures would lead to unacceptable risks at 
various scales has not been definitively resolved, but higher 
risks are likely with increased exposures. Regulations affect -
ing large-scale graywater and stormwater use where public 
access is not controlled tend to include conservative public 
health protections, such as disinfection, and meeting state 
maximum contaminant levels, but household-scale protec -
tions are more variable. 
The lack of authoritative, risk-based guidelines for 
the design and potential applications of graywater and 
stormwater in the United States is a major impediment 
to their expanded use.  The wide variability in existing regu -lations and absence of federal guidance leaves stakeholders 
and local decision makers uncertain about the safety of these 
practices and the appropriate level of treatment necessary for 
particular uses. Development of rigorous, risk-based guide -
lines for graywater and stormwater across a range of possible 
uses and exposures could improve safety, build public con -
fidence in the practices, reduce expenditures on unnecessary 
treatment, and assist communities that lack an existing regu -
latory framework for on-site water supplies. Such guidelines 
could be developed by the EPA, a collaboration of states, 
or a collaboration of U.S. water organizations, including the 
Water Research Foundation, WateReuse, and the Water En -
vironment Research Foundation working with the EPA. The 
Australian Guidelines for Water Recycling provide a useful 
example of such an effort. This guidance can then serve as a 
basis for developing standards of practice for on-site, nonpo -
table water use. Oversight and enforcement of water quality 
standards for applications with significant exposures is also 
important but challenging, and local enforcement agencies 
would benefit from additional guidance on appropriate, cost-
effective maintenance, monitoring, and reporting strategies. 
Inconsistencies often exist between plumbing codes 
and public health or on-site disposal laws within the same 
state, especially in the case of graywater, that need to be 
resolved to ease project implementation. Increased use of 
graywater and stormwater will require enhanced collabora -
tion among agencies with jurisdiction over different elements 
of on-site water systems, including wastewater disposal, wa -
ter supply, public health, pollution prevention, building safe -
ty, and city planning. As regulators continue to update laws 
to reflect increasing acceptance of new water reuse systems, 
legal barriers such as inconsistent or conflicting regulations 
are likely to be resolved.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
1549
Graywater and Stormwater in the  
Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning
Much information has been provided in this report 
about the quality and quantity of stormwater and graywa -
ter available in different locations, possible end uses, known 
risks, reported costs and benefits, and legal and regulatory 
constraints. Decision makers should understand these fac -
tors to determine the potential risks, costs, and benefits of 
investments in graywater and stormwater capture and use 
systems at a range of scales at the local level. For small-scale 
systems, home and business owners may want to determine 
whether their investments are better served by graywater or 
stormwater capture for their given geographic and building 
circumstances, water supply needs, and personal objectives. 
At a regional scale, graywater and stormwater use affects 
many aspects of water, wastewater, and stormwater manage -
ment, and decision making is best served by a holistic view 
of costs and benefits. This chapter attempts to synthesize this 
information within a water supply planning framework to 
help local decision makers, at the household, neighborhood, 
or regional scale, consider key information in assessing the 
potential role of stormwater and/or graywater as alternative 
local supplies to meet water needs. 
Over the long term, with increasing urban population 
growth and the potential for more climate variability, there 
will be an increasing trend to maximize water conservation. 
Efforts will also continue to address stormwater pollution 
through retrofits and new construction designs. The poten -
tial role for graywater and stormwater within this future will 
play out with different priorities and urgencies, depending on 
which drivers described in Chapter 1 are most relevant to local 
decision makers. Opportunities for graywater use will increase 
with (re)development and growth of urban populations resid -
ing in multiple dwelling units. As a practical matter, beneficial 
use of stormwater will be driven primarily by water scarcity 
and pollution regulations. The next 20 to 30 years is likely 
to see continued evolution in the nation’s approach to water 
management, but from today’s viewpoint, no clear pathway or 
single technology is evident. Political and geographical reali -
ties will affect decision making region by region.DECISION FRAMEWORK
Figure 9-1 presents broad decision steps for those con -
sidering stormwater and/or graywater capture and use. The 
major steps include defining objectives, identifying opportu -
nities and constraints, characterizing sites, identifying candi -
date strategies, selecting the system design, implementing the 
system, and engaging stakeholder involvement throughout 
the process. Each of these will be discussed below in the con -
text of the major findings of this report.
Stakeholder Engagement
Successful implementation of alternative water sys -
tems requires the effective engagement of a broad range of 
groups and individuals, typically referred to as stakeholders. 
A common definition of a stakeholder is any individual or 
group who can affect implementation of the subject project or 
program. Stakeholders are defined based on their legitimate 
interests in the matter at hand. Stakeholders may oppose or 
support the subject project. They may be internal or exter -
nal to the responsible organization. They are not only those 
who will benefit from or be impacted by a project but also 
those who are involved in implementing and operating the 
required infrastructure and/or are concerned about this prac -
tice. Therefore, stakeholders are relevant for projects across a 
range of scales and may include individual residents, frequent 
visitors, business owners, employees, and organizations. An 
effective stakeholder engagement process will identify the 
relevant stakeholders and involve them proactively in the 
decision process so that opponents’ concerns are fully con -
sidered and negative impacts are mitigated, if feasible, and 
supporters are fully informed.
For larger stormwater or graywater beneficial use proj -
ects, stakeholders can be identified by determining the issues 
relevant to the set of decisions to be made. These issues may 
relate to, for example, public health, environmental impacts, 
implementation, and costs in the context of other available Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Graywater and Stormwater in the Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning 155
FIGURE 9-1  Steps in a general decision framework applicable to graywater and/or stormwater across multiple scales.
water supply options. A stakeholder analysis (Table 9-1) is 
used to identify the groups and individuals that could be af -
fected by these issues and their credible representatives (e.g., 
governmental and nongovernmental organizations). The sig -
nificance of the impact of each identified issue on the deci -
sions to be made is also characterized. The next step is to 
reach out and engage the identified stakeholders in the deci -
sion process. 
Stakeholder engagement should begin relatively early in 
the decision process so that the relevant issues are appropri -
ately considered throughout the process. For large projects, 
it is certainly possible that different issues become more rel -
evant at different times in the decision process. If this is the 
case, then the extent of involvement of specific stakeholders 
may vary during the process. However, engagement of all 
relevant stakeholders from the beginning will reduce the ten -
dency for newly involved stakeholders to want to bring the 
process “back to square one.” Consistent and early involve -
ment helps to build a base of understanding and commitment 
to reach the necessary decisions by all relevant stakeholders.A rich literature is available on effective decision pro -
cesses (Lockie and Rockloff, 2005; NRC, 2005, 2008b, 
2009c, 2012b; World Bank, 2012), and it is beyond the 
committee’s charge to explore this in detail. In general, the 
process should be structured to involve three groups of par -
ticipants—stakeholders, subject matter experts, and facilita -
tors—whose relevant roles and responsibilities are clearly 
defined. Stakeholders define the issues and considerations 
that should be addressed in the decision process, and they 
bring a set of values that in an effective process are used 
to prioritize the relative importance of the identified issues 
and considerations. The subject matter experts bring tech -
nical knowledge that provides a factual basis for decision 
making. Facilitators structure the overall process to enable 
the various participants to function efficiently and effective -
ly in the context of their legitimate roles, responsibilities, 
and interests. As a practical matter, effective stakeholder 
engagement works best among groups that fundamentally 
trust one another and see the benefits of working together, 
even though strongly held opinions may vary. An example 
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
156 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
is the Watershed Management Groups in greater Los Ange -
les, which consists of agencies, cities, and nongovernmental 
organizations that focus on water resource management and 
future funding. Agencies and environmental groups (includ -
ing TreePeople and Green LA Coalition) are responsible for 
developing stormwater capture projects among stakeholders 
in Los Angeles (Luthy and Sedlak, 2015). However, stake -
holder groups comprising disparate interests and intractable 
adversaries are unlikely to resolve conflicts or achieve im -
plementable projects. The CALFED Bay-Delta Program has 
been criticized for such failures (LAO, 2006). 
Defining Objectives
A critical early step of any alternative water supply proj -
ect is to determine the objectives of the project. This step is 
sometimes overlooked, to the detriment of project effective -
ness and stakeholder satisfaction with the project, once com -
pleted. Chapter 1 discusses some major drivers for stormwa -
ter or graywater capture and use projects, including water 
supply, water reliability, pollution prevention, energy sav -
ings, and environmental stewardship and education. Brief 
summaries of the potential for graywater or stormwater to 
address these drivers are provided in Tables 9-2 and 9-3. Re -
lated project objectives could include reduced use of potable 
water supplies, enhanced local control of water supplies, and 
delayed need for infrastructure investments. Environmen -
tal objectives could include reduced stormwater discharges 
during rain events, reduced discharges to combined sewer 
systems to reduce the number and magnitude of overflows, 
reduced energy use, and enhanced groundwater recharge to 
reduce damage to urban streams from high-volume flows. 
Stormwater or graywater projects can often be designed 
to optimize particular objectives if they are clearly identified 
in advance. For example, if reduction of potable water use is 
the primary objective, stormwater capture and use systems 
can be designed with tanks that are sized to meet as much 
of the water demand as is feasible under local climate con -
ditions. Using stormwater and/or graywater for indoor non -
potable applications and limiting irrigation to that needed 
to preserve native landscaping would maximize water con -
servation. However, in many regions—particularly those 
working to minimize combined sewer overflows—pollution prevention is the primary objective of stormwater projects, 
and water supply provides a secondary benefit. In fact, to 
reduce stormwater pollution most cost-effectively, projects 
might instead use distributed shallow groundwater infiltra -
tion rather than stormwater capture. However, systems can, 
in many cases, be designed to balance multiple, sometimes 
competing objectives. For example, in areas working to 
manage combined sewer overflows, real-time weather fore -
casting can be used to automatically drain a tank to the sewer 
system in advance of a storm so that sufficient tank storage 
is available to capture runoff from the predicted storm (see 
Chapter 6). Such a system sacrifices some water supply to 
enhance the use of the tank to minimize stormwater pollu -
tion effects. The level of desired benefits also needs to be 
considered. For example, a project to advance public educa -
tion may not necessitate large benefits to be effective, but a 
project to meet regulated pollution reduction measures, such 
as those contained in combined sewer overflow consent de -
crees, would necessitate large quantifiable outcomes. 
Opportunities and Constraints
Next, local opportunities and constraints should be iden -
tified. Understanding the legal and regulatory controls on 
stormwater and graywater use is a key first step. As discussed 
in Chapter 8, water rights may limit large- or small-scale 
stormwater or graywater use in the western United States. 
This issue is discussed in more detail later in the chapter in 
several project examples. If downstream water rights could 
be impacted by the project, a water right permit may need 
to be secured. Graywater and stormwater use is regulated 
only at the state or local level, and relevant regulations may 
be found in state plumbing codes, wastewater disposal regu -
lations, environmental regulations, and state or local public 
health laws (see Tables B-1 and B-2 for major state regula -
tions, although this list is not exhaustive). A few states pro -
vide water quality guidance to determine when treatment 
is necessary for nonpotable uses (see Chapter 8, Box 8-2). 
Most of the existing regulations govern household- or small-
building-scale projects, and neighborhood/multi-residential 
projects or regional capture projects necessitate consultation 
with appropriate state and local agencies to determine proj -
ect design requirements. TABLE 9 -1 Example Framework for Stakeholder Analysis  
Issue  Stakeholder Group  Key People and 
Representative Groups  Type of Impact  Significance of Impact  Significance of Group 
Impact on Decision  
Issue 1       
Issue 2       
Issue 3       
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Graywater and Stormwater in the Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning 157
Once the legal and regulatory framework is understood, 
the opportunities for on-site use can be considered within 
existing constraints. Chapter 2 presents an array of applica -
tions for nonpotable water at the household, neighborhood, 
and regional scales. Opportunities should be considered that 
address multiple objectives, where possible, and that deliver 
a wide range of benefits, including some that are not easily 
monetized, such as aesthetic enhancements, public education, 
and aspirational value (see Chapter 7). 
Site Characterization: Water Availability and Quality
Understanding water availability and quality to meet the 
intended uses is an essential next step in the planning process. Quantity
The total annual quantity of graywater and/or stormwa -
ter from various sources should be assessed, along with its 
inter-annual variability. Key questions include the following:
• Is sufficient stormwater and/or graywater available on 
an average annual basis to meet water supply objec -
tives considering the target end uses? If not, then is 
supplemental water use acceptable?
• What is the timing of the water availability relative to 
the water demands? What storage capacity is needed to 
provide consistent water availability?TABLE 9 -2 Capacity to Address Drivers Through Graywater Reuse  
 Household Scale  Neighborhood to Regional Scales  
Water Supply (Quantity drivers)  
Water scarcity  Graywater can reduce indoor and outdoor household use  
(see Chapter 3), although indoor graywater use requires 
substantial treatment, dual plumbing, and rigorous 
maintenance.   
 
If water savings are the primary objective, then homeowners 
should first address outdoor irrigation demand by converting  
to native landscaping. Such efforts could reduce the size and 
complexity of the graywater irrigation systems needed while 
making more water available to downstream users.  Multi -residential buildings can achieve significant reductions  
in indoor water use through gra ywater reuse (approximately  
24% when used for toilet flushing, and more if other  nonpotable 
uses are included), with no impacts to the water available to  
downstream users.  
 
If water savings are the primary objective, then opportunities  
to reduce outdoo r irrigation demand should be considered by 
converting to native landscaping.   
Water supply reliability  During drought restrictions, graywater provides a modest but reliable water source for irrigation that can help maintain  
native landscaping.  
Water supply 
diversification  Not a major driver.  GW provides an additional drought -resistant supply to  
diversify a community’s water portfolio.  
Water Quality (Pollution drivers)  
Pollution prevention  Not a major driver.  Not a major driver.  
Environmental Practices  
Energy savings and 
greenhouse gas  
reductions  Laundry -to-landscape systems should provide  
low-energy on -site reuse for irrigation.   
 
Larger systems with pumps and treatment may require more 
energy than conventional water sources, although life -cycle 
energy requirements of various systems remain unknown.  Large graywater systems with pumps and treatment likely  
require more energy than conventional drinking water sources,  
but graywater treatment, even at small scales, requi res less energy 
than municipal wastewater treatment. Overall, the life -cycle energy 
requirements of various systems remain unknown.   
Environmental 
Stewardship  May be a major driver at the household scale. However,  
ways to minimize outdoor water use should also be  
considered when optimizing environmental stewardship.  May be an important driver for developers, who sometimes benefit 
from higher rental or resale values for green buildings.  
Hydromodification  Not a driver.  
Other  
Extend life of existing 
infrastructure  Graywater systems have been cited as ways to extend the life  
of septic systems, although the committee was unable to find 
data to support this claim.  In dense urban areas, graywater reuse can extend the life of existing 
wastewater infrastructure by allowing additional development 
without expanding conveyance capacity.  
Financial benefits  Rebates may be offered in some locations.  
 
Cost savings may be feasible for simple laundry -to-landscape 
systems bas ed on potable water savings.  Incentives may be available for large projects that extend the life of 
existing urban wastewater infrastructure.  
 
Cost savings may be feasible based on potable water savings, 
although capital and maintenance costs of large -scale systems are 
not well defined.  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
158 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Chapter 3 describes the quantities and timing of storm -
water and graywater availability in six locations in the 
United States based on 1995-1999 precipitation data for 
a medium-density residential scenario. The chapter also 
broadly discusses the potential for graywater and stormwater 
to address water supply needs by examining graywater and 
stormwater use scenarios for irrigation and/or toilet flush -ing. The information in Chapter 3, although not intended 
for site-specific planning, illuminates how local climate, 
storage capacity, and on-site applications all affect how on-
site water resources can reduce potable water use. For cit -
ies located in the central and eastern United States, where 
the timing of rainfall is better matched to irrigation demand, 
both graywater reuse and roof runoff capture with moderate TABLE 9 -3 Capacity to Address Drivers Through the Beneficial Use of Stormwater  
 Household Scale  Neighborhood to Regional Scales  
Water Supply (Quantity drivers)  
Water scarcity  • Stormwater can reduce indoor and outdoor household  
use, although indoor stormwater use requires treatment,  
dual plumbing, and rigorous maintenance.   
•  
• If wate r savings are the primary objective, then opportunities  
to reduce outdoor irrigation demand should be considered by 
converting to native landscaping   • Substantial potential exists to enhance regional water supplies  
by capturing and recharging stormwater,  if suitable aquifers  
and recharge conditions exist, although water rights may need  
to be acquired.  
•  
• Under suitable climatic conditions, multi -residential buildings  
can achieve significant reductions in indoor water use (up to 24% 
when used for toilet flushing, and more if other nonpotable uses  
are included), with no impacts to the water available to  
downstream users.  
•  
• If water savings are the primary objective, opportunities to reduce 
outdoor irrigation demand should be considered by converting to 
native landscaping.   
Water supply reliability  • Not a major driver; during drought, roof runoff could  
provide some irrigation supply, but household tanks are  
rarely large enough to provide reliability during an extended  
dry spell, and during drought cond itions, the roof runoff  
amounts available will be less than normal because of the  
lack of rain.  • Neighborhood or regional stormwater recharge during wet  
periods can significantly enhance groundwater availability  
during times of drought.  
•  
• Neighborhood -scale stormwater capture using large tanks can  
also enhance water reliability.  
Water supply 
diversification  Not a major driver.  • Large -scale stormwater recharge provides a means to diversify a 
community’s water portfolio.  
Water Quality (Pollution drivers)  
Pollution prevention  • Stormwater capture at the household scales can reduce runoff 
from the site, particularly with larger tanks, but pollution 
prevention is not usually a major driver at this scale.  • Reduction of stormwater pollution is often a major driv er behind 
large stormwater capture and use projects, which aim to provide 
multiple benefits from large required investments to reduce 
stormwater runoff.  
Environmental Practices  
Energy savings and 
greenhouse gas 
reductions  • Household -scale irrigation syst ems without pumps or  
treatment require minimal energy.  
•  
• Larger systems with pumps and treatment may require  
more energy than conventional water sources, although  
life-cycle energy requirements of various systems  
remain unknown.  • Large graywater systems  with pumps and treatment likely  
require more energy than conventional water sources,  
although life -cycle energy requirements of various systems  
remain unknown.  
Environmental 
stewardship  • May be a major driver at the household scale. However,  
ways to m inimize irrigation use should also be considered.  • May be an important driver for developers, who sometimes  
benefit from higher rental or resale values for green buildings.  
Hydro modification  • Not typically a major driver at the household -scale  
because th e benefits are small.   • Large -scale stormwater capture or recharge systems can reduce 
stormwater runoff, improve the timing of surface water flows, and 
reduce erosion, which may be an important driver in urban areas 
with degraded streams.  
Other  
Extend l ife of existing 
infrastructure  Not typically a major driver.  • Neighborhood and regional stormwater infiltration or capture 
systems can be part of distributed strategies to address combined 
sewer overflows, in place of an expensive new separate storm 
sewer s ystem.  
Financial incentives  • Rebates for rain barrels and tanks may be offered locally.  
• Long -term cost savings may be feasible based on potable  
water savings.  • Incentives may be available for large projects that contribute  
to regional water quality goals.  
•  
• Long -term cost savings may be feasible based on potable  
water savings.  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Graywater and Stormwater in the Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning 159
 
Project Objectives  
Environmental  
 Social  
 Economic  
Potable water 
savings  
Savings from deferred 
infrastructure 
investment  
Pollution 
prevention  
Public health  
(Weight X3) 
Local incentives  
Expan ded 
greenspace  
Reduced 
hydromodification  
Environmental 
stewardship  
Community 
develop ment   
 Reduced 
greenhouse gas  
emissions  
FIGURE 9-2  Example decision hierarchy, within which each objective can be scored according to the extent to which a project alternative 
addresses the objective.
BOX 9-1 Stakeholder Engagement in Decision Making: Example of Sonoma County
The Sonoma County Water Agency in California is undertaking scoping studies to identify stormwater management/groundwater 
recharge projects that would be located in the Sonoma Valley and Petaluma River watersheds. The process involves (1) articulation of 
the key project purpose; (2) screening of which project alternatives are not suitable for the project purpose; and (3) prioritization of the 
alternatives based on the ability to fulfill the objectives and the weight of the importance of the objective relative to other objectives. 
Based on the water agency’s 2010 Water Supply Strategies Action Plan and the 2007 Groundwater Action Plan, the key project purpose 
is two-fold—to reduce flood hazards and to increase opportunities for groundwater rechar ge. 
A screening process eliminates projects that do not meet the two-fold objective (e.g., levees and floodwalls do not address the ground -
water recharge objective). The next steps involve community engagement to acquire a sense of the public’s interest and preference as 
expressed by weighting objectives. This is achieved by county-wide meetings as well as local public workshops that reflect the interests 
of the region for which the project is intended. Supporting objectives were developed in consultation with stakeholders. Attendees were 
asked to prioritize elements of the two core project objectives and seven supporting objectives. Figure 9-1-1 shows the results for the 
Upper Petaluma Watershed, from which relative weights can be assigned and used to evaluate different project alternatives. 
FIGURE 9-1-1  Example of stakeholder engagement to assess public interests and relative importance for project decision making. SOURCE: 
RMC (2011).
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
160 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
tank sizes can lead to substantial potential reductions in total 
water demand (up to 26 percent for whole-house graywa -
ter and 28 percent for stormwater for the medium-density 
residential scenarios analyzed; see Tables 5-1 and 5-5). In 
contrast, in the arid Southwest, where precipitation is limited 
and concentrated in winter months when irrigation demand 
is low, very large storage capacity is needed to significantly 
reduce potable water demand through stormwater capture. In 
these areas, large-scale groundwater recharge is an attractive 
water supply management alternative, if appropriate con -
ditions for infiltration are available. In the arid Southwest, 
whole-house graywater can provide a substantial and con -
sistent water source, although small relative to average out -
door irrigation demand. If reducing potable water demand is 
the primary objective, then conservation efforts to convert 
nonnative vegetation to xeriscaping should be encouraged, 
because reductions in outdoor water use provide the greatest 
opportunities for overall water savings, particularly in the 
arid Southwest.
Quality
An advantage of on-site graywater or stormwater use is 
the capacity to match treatment needs to the end use, with 
the potential for minimal or no treatment for some uses with 
little or no human exposures. Planning, therefore, requires an 
understanding of the quality of the local graywater or storm -
water (Chapter 4) and the potential human exposures (Chap -
ter 5) to calculate the potential risks associated with those 
exposures. These risks can then be used to assess the need for 
additional treatment. For graywater, multi-residential-scale 
systems have an averaging effect on graywater quality, and 
representative data are available on physical and chemical 
properties, although pathogen data are more limited. At the 
household scale, quality can vary widely based on whether 
best management practices for source control are implement -
ed, although the additional risk of pathogenic illness from 
untreated household-scale graywater is lower considering the 
other potential pathways for disease spread within a house -
hold. For stormwater, a wide array of factors affect water 
quality (e.g., climate, rainfall intensity, land use, properties of 
surface materials), and there remains a significant shortage of 
information on human pathogens in stormwater (Chapter 4). 
For most nonpotable uses, human pathogens are the primary 
concern, although groundwater infiltration projects, particu -
larly at a large scale, also necessitate a thorough characteriza -
tion of organic and inorganic chemical constituents, includ -
ing salts, to determine an appropriate system design (Chapter 
4). When alternate water sources are considered for irrigation 
use, the salt content of the source water should be considered 
along with local soil conditions. Some applications may not be appropriate when salt content is high and local soil has a 
high clay content and/or elevated background salt content. In 
addition, opportunities for source control of pollutants can be 
considered.
Identify Candidate Strategies and Components
With a firm understanding of the project objectives 
(Chapter 1), opportunities for on-site use (Chapter 2), avail -
able water quantity (Chapter 3) and water quality (Chapter 
4), potential human exposures (Chapter 5), and legal and 
regulatory constraints (Chapter 8), planners can appropri -
ately narrow the suite of design and treatment options (see 
Chapter 6). For cities and water utilities, a key question to 
consider is project scale and whether to emphasize larger-
scale projects (neighborhood or regional) or incentivize 
household- and building-scale projects. Household-scale 
projects are relatively easy to implement, could be partially 
subsidized by utilities, and would not require land purchases. 
However, household-scale, on-site, graywater or stormwater 
capture and use projects must be maintained by individual 
homeowners, and the use of these systems (and therefore 
the associated benefits) could be challenging to assess. For 
example, if stormwater tanks are not routinely used for ir -
rigation or other nonpotable uses, then they provide neither 
the water supply nor pollution prevention benefits that are 
intended. Neighborhood-scale projects are typically paid for 
and managed by a water utility or a facility owner that can 
provide periodic maintenance and oversight, allowing the 
benefits to be documented if so desired. Neighborhood-scale 
systems also typically include more extensive treatment so 
that the water can be used safely for a wider range of benefi -
cial uses. Neighborhood- and regional-scale stormwater and 
graywater projects may provide efficiencies of scale. Recent 
estimates from LADWP (2014) for stormwater capture sug -
gest that neighborhood and regional stormwater infiltration 
systems can be comparable to other new water supply alter -
natives, while offering an array of additional benefits, such 
as pollution control and expanded greenspace in the urban 
environment (see Chapter 7). The availability of land and 
appropriate geology to support such projects should be de -
termined in areas considering this option.
System Design Selection
Final design selection involves weighing how well the 
project objectives are achieved, overall costs (including cap -
ital and operations and maintenance costs minus any subsi -
dies or incentives), and an assessment of financial, societal, 
and economic benefits. Projects at all scales should consider 
the acceptability to stakeholders. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Graywater and Stormwater in the Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning 161
For larger projects, where many stakeholders are in -
volved, structured decision tools, such as multi-criteria deci -
sion analysis, can be used. These tools provide a structured 
and transparent mechanism by which various alternatives 
are evaluated to support final project design selection. The 
stakeholders and subject matter experts collaborate to cre -
ate a decision hierarchy, as illustrated in Figure 9-2, that 
summarizes the key factors (or criteria) that affect the at -
tractiveness of various options. This hierarchy can then be 
used to rate each alternative by establishing quantitative or 
semi-quantitative measures of each factor, and each factor is 
weighted by stakeholders based on its relative importance. 
The resulting computation blends the technical qualities of 
each option, as determined by the subject matter experts, and 
the relative importance of each factor, reflecting the values 
of the stakeholders (see Box 9-1).
The process is not complete when the relative value of 
each option is computed, for several reasons. First, not all 
stakeholders will have the same value set. This can be ad -
dressed by assigning different relative weights, thereby al -
lowing the value of each option to be calculated and reflect 
the preference of individual stakeholders. Second, the results 
can lead to insights into which criteria are most important in 
distinguishing the relevant options. The most highly weight -
ed criteria that are also the most different from a technical 
perspective will create the greatest difference in the assess -
ment of alternatives. Both of these outcomes can be used to 
develop further options which, for example, can incorporate 
the most desirable elements of some of the original options 
as well as the key concerns of multiple stakeholders. There -
fore, one can understand that it is not only the computation 
of scores but also the discussion that the process elicits that 
is important when allowing a diverse group of stakeholders 
to reach a decision that all can support.
Implementation
Implementation issues vary in complexity, depending 
on the project’s scale. Project implementation issues include 
securing financing, working with regulators for necessary 
permits, developing mechanisms for system maintenance, 
and establishing appropriate system monitoring. Routine 
monitoring to assess treatment performance is a critical com -
ponent of system implementation to minimize health risks. 
Depending on the extent of exposures, real-time monitoring 
may be appropriate to provide quality assurance, with an au -
tomatic shut-off when the water treatment system malfunc -
tions (see Box 2-2). Monitoring on-site stormwater use may 
also be valuable, to ensure that the system is providing the 
intended benefits. Long-term maintenance and operations 
plans are also essential for effective operation. San Francisco Public Utilities Commission has devel -
oped a guidebook for implementing alternative on-site water 
supplies that identifies relevant requirements for permitting, 
design and construction, inspection, maintenance, and moni -
toring (SFPUC, 2015). A few other localities have developed 
specific, consolidated, on-site, water reuse programs (see 
SFPUC, 2014, for a blueprint on developing such programs); 
in other locations, project permitting may require approval 
from numerous local agencies.
DECISION CONSIDERATIONS AT HOUSEHOLD 
AND NEIGHBORHOOD SCALES
The decision framework outlined in Figure 9-1 and de -
scribed in the preceding section can be used at a range of 
scales to determine whether on-site graywater and/or storm -
water capture and use is a sound alternative considering the 
risks, costs, and benefits, and if so, what designs are most 
appropriate to implement. In the following section, the com -
mittee uses this framework to examine decisions in a house -
hold scale example and two neighborhood-scale examples. 
This information is presented to help synthesize information 
described elsewhere in the report (Chapters 1-8) for specific 
decision-making contexts.
 
Household-scale Example
Define Objectives
Defining objectives is the first step of any on-site water 
supply decision process. Typical drivers behind graywater 
and stormwater use projects and the extent to which house -
hold-scale projects address these drivers are summarized in 
Tables 9-2 and 9-3. At a household scale, common objectives 
of on-site alternative water supply systems include reducing 
potable water demand, environmental stewardship, cost sav -
ings from reduced potable water and wastewater fees, pollu -
tion prevention (stormwater), and reliability of water supply 
during drought (graywater) (see Chapter 1). Some conflicts 
may exist among objectives, such as the objective to reduce 
stormwater pollution versus the objective to maximize water 
conservation and preserve supplies for downstream users. 
The relative importance of any one of these objectives over 
the others may determine the most applicable strategies. For 
example, if reliability of irrigation water during periods of 
extended droughts is a key objective, then only graywater 
systems offer a constant supply of water regardless of cli -
matic conditions at a household scale. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
162 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Identify Opportunities and Constraints
The legal and regulatory framework should be under -
stood because some states have specific permitting require -
ments or limit the potential uses of stormwater and graywater. 
Water rights permitting can be a key constraint to stormwater 
capture and use in western states (Chapter 7), but several states 
offer permitting exemptions for household-scale projects. For 
example, California, Utah, and Washington currently allow 
capture of rooftop runoff without a water rights permit for 
small projects (see Table B-1). In Arizona and Texas, onsite 
capture from rooftops, paved surfaces, and landscaped areas 
is exempt from water rights permitting. Although no specific 
laws address stormwater use in Idaho and New Mexico, state 
publications encourage the capture and use of rooftop runoff. 
The capture and use of roof runoff is generally not permitted 
in Colorado unless a water right permit is secured (see Table 
B-1 for exemptions). 
State and local regulations may impact the potential end 
uses of graywater and stormwater and require specific best 
management practices or design standards (see Table B-3). 
Additionally, wastewater disposal regulations, environmental 
regulations, and state or local public health laws could impact 
implementation. Although Chapter 7 and Appendix B attempt 
to summarize the major legal and regulatory frameworks af -
fecting the on-site beneficial use of graywater and stormwa -
ter, state and local laws are likely to continue to evolve as 
more people express interest in these practices and as courts 
continue to assess the legal implications. Therefore, interest -
ed homeowners should seek clarity from state or local gov -
ernment agencies on the latest legal and regulatory context 
for on-site graywater and stormwater use.
Along with constraints, opportunities for on-site use 
should be identified. At the household scale, the most com -
mon use of graywater and stormwater is landscape irrigation. 
Use for washing or toilet flushing may be feasible but will 
require more extensive treatment because of the potential hu -
man exposures. 
Site Characterization—Water Availability and Quality
When considering stormwater or graywater capture and 
beneficial use at a household or building scale, it is critical 
to understand the amount of water available relative to the 
intended uses. At the household level, a water availability 
assessment for graywater is fairly straight-forward, given 
available water use data and the number of people living in 
the home. On average, 9.6 gpcd of graywater is provided 
from laundry water, with as low as 4 gpcd provided from 
high-efficiency washers with 14 gpcd or more from older, 
low-efficiency washers (Figure 3-4). On average, 26 gpcd graywater is available from all household water use, includ -
ing bathroom faucets, showers, bathtubs, and laundry (see 
DeOreo et al., 2016). The use of water saving appliances and 
fixtures may reduce the amount of graywater available (see 
Figure 3-4). Use of graywater for toilet flushing requires dual 
plumbing and diligent maintenance. Therefore, most home -
owners use graywater for irrigation and not toilet flushing. 
Chapter 3 outlines potential water savings for a medium-
density, residential development in six cities considering 
conservation irrigation of turfgrass, but an individual’s out -
door water use will vary with the local climate, type of veg -
etation, irrigation rates and frequency, and other behavioral 
factors. Homeowners should consider available graywater 
supply versus irrigation needs, recognizing that in arid cli -
mates, available graywater may only provide a small fraction 
of outdoor water demands for typical, non-native vegetation. 
However, graywater may be sufficient to provide a reliable 
supply of irrigation water for water-efficient landscaping. 
Stormwater availability for beneficial use at the house -
hold level will vary widely based on local climate condi -
tions, the source area available for stormwater capture (i.e., 
square footage of roof area), the storage volume, and the tim -
ing of rainfall relative to water demands. In the arid South -
west, the volume and timing of rainfall is poorly matched to 
the irrigation demand (see Figure 3-2), and extremely large 
storage tanks are needed to substantially reduce potable wa -
ter use. In California, for example, beneficial use of large 
volumes of stormwater can be achieved by neighborhood- or 
regional-scale capture facilities and storage by groundwater 
recharge. In the committee’s scenario analysis of potable wa -
ter savings potential in Los Angeles (see Chapter 3), two rain 
barrels used for irrigation only reduced potable water use by 
1 percent, and a moderate 2,200-gallon storage tank reduced 
potable water use by 4 percent. In contrast, in Lincoln, Ne -
braska, moderate-size storage tanks used only for outdoor 
irrigation resulted in a potential 21 percent reduction in over -
all water use, while two rain barrels resulted in 5 percent 
potential savings (see Tables 3-5 and 3-6).
Graywater and stormwater use present several water 
quality concerns at the household level. To minimize the 
risks of untreated graywater reuse at the household scale, 
residents should comply with best management practices and 
use subsurface (including landscape-covered drip) irrigation 
and only irrigate non-food crops. For stormwater use, roof 
runoff is primarily used because of its preferred water qual -
ity, but use of water from roofs with copper or galvanized 
steel materials should be avoided because of elevated metal 
content (see Chapter 4). Additionally, tree cover over roofs 
(as habitat for squirrels and birds) may result in high levels 
of indicator bacteria in the runoff, although the occurrence 
of human pathogens in roof runoff and other stormwater Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Graywater and Stormwater in the Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning 163
remains poorly understood (see Chapter 5). Human health 
risks can be reduced by minimizing uses that may cause in -
advertent exposure (see Chapter 5). 
Identify Candidate Strategies and System Components
With the objectives, constraints, and opportunities iden -
tified and the site characterized, candidate strategies can be 
considered in more detail. Graywater systems at the house -
hold scale include simple, low-cost, laundry-to-landscape 
systems to more complex, whole-house systems that require 
a storage tank and pump. If the system is used for applica -
tions with potential human exposures (e.g., spray irrigation, 
toilet flushing), then disinfection is also required. Whole-
house systems that include treatment and disinfection require 
substantial maintenance that is usually beyond the skills of 
the typical homeowner (see Chapter 6).
For stormwater capture, household options include cap -
turing roof runoff in cisterns or rain barrels or constructing 
rain gardens for shallow groundwater infiltration. Pitt et 
al. (2011) describes how to calculate benefits provided by 
various tank sizes for various roof areas and precipitation 
rates. Additionally, local or state regulations may influence 
system design requirements. In most cases, treatment is not 
necessary for irrigation, although human exposures should 
be minimized to reduce health risks. Disinfection may be de -
sirable for spray irrigation at commercial buildings or other 
areas with substantial potential human contact (Chapter 5). 
Household roof runoff capture systems without treatment 
are relatively easy to implement and require minimal main -
tenance. If installed, then treatment systems would need to 
be relatively simple and not require significant expertise or 
attention (see Chapter 6).
Select System Design
Once identified, alternative designs and treatment op -
tions can be assessed for their capacity to deliver water sup -
ply benefits, water reliability, pollution control, and other 
project objectives relative to the cost. A full range of ben -
efits, including social and environmental benefits (see Box 
7-1), should be considered, although the data to assess these 
benefits may not always be available. For example, ener -
gy savings may also be possible for on-site graywater and 
stormwater systems, but the data are lacking to quantify life-
cycle energy benefits (or costs) at the household scale. 
Costs for household-scale, on-site, graywater and storm -
water use can range widely depending on conveyance sys -
tems, tank size, whether treatment is included, and whether 
the system is self-installed or professionally installed (see 
Chapter 7). The committee calculated payback periods based on costs reported in the available literature and modeled po -
tential water savings from the scenario analyses in Chapter 3. 
The payback periods vary depending on the uses and climate 
factors. For conservation irrigation use1 only, calculated pay -
back periods based on the scenario analysis and the many 
associated assumptions (see Chapter 3) range from 5 to 26 
years for rain barrels, 14 years to more than 50 years for a 
self-installed 2,200-gallon (8,300 liter) tank, and 2.5 to 6.0 
years for a laundry-to-landscape system, assuming water use 
is actually reduced by the amount of graywater or stormwa -
ter utilized (see Chapter 7). These payback periods address 
only equipment and do not include the value of homeowner 
labor or the costs of maintenance. Local costs and benefits 
are needed to inform decision making for on-site reuse, be -
cause cost and benefits can vary substantially by location. 
Homeowners must weigh the various benefits against 
their own objectives and budgets. Consider, for example, a 
homeowner who lives in the arid Southwest and whose pri -
mary objectives are sustainability and water conservation. 
The largest water savings would be provided by approaches 
to reduce or eliminate potable water demand for irrigation, 
such as the use of xeriscaping and other types of climate-
appropriate, low-water-use landscapes (Mayer et al., 2015). 
Graywater irrigation through a simple laundry-to-landscape 
system could help maintain those landscapes, particularly 
during extended droughts, and reduce the costs associated 
with irrigation. In arid climates, simple laundry-to-landscape 
graywater systems have much shorter payback periods than 
do rain barrels or cisterns. If that homeowner lives in a city 
that already reuses wastewater through a centralized water 
reclamation facility, then graywater reuse would not change 
regional water savings, although simple laundry-to-landscape 
systems could reduce total energy use (definitive data are not 
available). Based on the scenario analyses, in Lincoln, Ne -
braska, rain barrels and laundry-to-landscape graywater sys -
tems are fairly comparable in terms of potential payback pe -
riods, although the volume of water conserved is smaller than 
other system designs. If sustainability and water pollution 
control are important objectives, then moderate-sized cisterns 
can provide substantial water savings (although with longer 
payback periods) and can reduce the adverse environmental 
effects of stormwater runoff. There is no single “best” con -
figuration to maximize on-site water supply at the household 
scale, because of site-specific factors and individual differ -
ences in overall project objectives.
1 The committee recognizes that many residents irrigate at rates 
far above that required to meet the evapotranspiration deficit; thus, 
potential potable water savings could be higher than reported here. 
However, behavioral factors that would lower actual water savings 
were not considered.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
164 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Implementation
At the household scale, installation can be performed 
by skilled do-it-yourselfers or professional installers. Main -
tenance needs should be well understood, because even the 
simplest rain barrel systems require periodic maintenance 
to remove sediment and ensure proper functioning. Own -
ers should be aware of how water use impacts the desired 
project benefits. For example, stormwater capture systems 
provide minimal pollution prevention benefits if the tanks 
are not regularly emptied so that they are available to capture 
runoff from the next storm. Likewise, homeowners who in -
crease the extent of landscaping to take advantage of newly 
available graywater supplies can ultimately increase potable 
water use even with the installation of graywater systems. 
Neighborhood-scale Examples
For the neighborhood scale, two examples are consid -
ered in the context of the decision framework presented in 
Figure 9-1—a multi-residential building development and 
an office-park development. These two examples provide 
different opportunities and considerations.
Define Objectives
The objectives of a neighborhood-scale project (either a 
multi-residential development or a business park with many 
distributed buildings) might include cost savings through re -
duced potable water and wastewater fees, financial incentives 
related to stormwater management or extending the capacity 
of existing water and wastewater infrastructure, enhanced 
water reliability, environmental stewardship, public educa -
tion, pollution prevention, and projecting a “green” image 
that could attract residents or businesses (see Chapter 1 and 
Tables 9-2 and 9-3). The relative priority of these objectives 
may influence the on-site water supply strategy selected.
Identify Opportunities and Constraints
Stormwater capture for beneficial use at the neighbor -
hood scale can be constrained by water rights laws and local 
and state regulations. As discussed in the household-scale 
example, several states (e.g., California, Utah, Washington) 
exempt small rooftop capture systems, but a large multi-res -
idential development or business park would likely exceed 
the capacity limits of these exemptions. Arizona and Texas 
water law appears to allow for stormwater capture before it 
has entered a natural water course (see Chapter 8 for more 
details). Coastal cities with no downstream users (e.g., San Francisco, Los Angeles) may be exempt from water rights 
permitting requirements. In prior appropriation states with -
out exemptions for stormwater capture, a water rights permit 
must be acquired. Local and state regulations may also con -
strain potential applications for captured stormwater. Some 
states and localities do not permit stormwater use for toilet 
flushing (or for any use other than irrigation) (see Chapter 8). 
Graywater regulations vary significantly from state to 
state. Five states (Arizona, California, New Mexico, Oregon, 
and Washington) have tiered regulatory frameworks that pre -
scribe increased requirements for large facilities (see Table 
8-3). States without a tiered framework may require addi -
tional consultation so that state and local agencies are com -
fortable that the project is adequately protective of public 
health. Several states (e.g., Idaho, Nevada, Ohio, Utah) only 
allow graywater to be used for irrigation, and because multi-
residential units (particularly high-rise buildings) are likely 
to generate much more graywater than needed for landscape 
irrigation, such restrictions would limit the usefulness of 
these projects. However, state and local laws on graywater 
and stormwater use are evolving quickly, so interested devel -
opers should consult with local and state government agen -
cies to understand the implications of the current legal and 
regulatory framework. 
In a multi-residential building or a business park develop -
ment, possible applications include landscape irrigation, shal -
low groundwater recharge, toilet flushing, ornamental water 
features, heating, ventilation, and air conditions (HV AC) cool -
ing water, and washing (see Chapter 2). 
Site Characterization—Water Availability and Quality 
Stormwater can be captured from rooftops, driveways, 
and parking areas, although on-site stormwater capture is 
typically limited to rooftop runoff, because it tends to have 
the highest quality (see Chapter 4). Potential on-site water 
supply benefits can be calculated based on the stormwater 
capture area, local climate conditions, tank size or infiltra -
tion basin design, and the timing of water demands (see 
Chapter 3 for regional specifics or Pitt et al., 2011 for water 
availability calculations). High-rise buildings, which have a 
small area of capture, provide limited water supply relative 
to the overall on-site water use, but office parks may have 
substantial roof area. Stormwater availability relative to tank 
size will be greatest where rainfall timing is well-matched 
to water demand for the intended applications. Among the 
cities analyzed, Lincoln, Madison, and Newark showed the 
best match between stormwater availability and irrigation 
demand. When considering the capacity of stormwater to 
address a continuous demand, such as toilet flushing, Madi -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Graywater and Stormwater in the Context of Integrated Water Supply Planning 165
son, Newark, Lincoln, and Birmingham provided the largest 
reductions in potable water use because of the substantial, 
near-year-round precipitation (see Table 3-6 and Figure 3-2). 
In the arid Southwest the highly seasonal rainfall that occurs 
when irrigation is typically not needed makes stormwater 
capture for beneficial use more challenging. Careful con -
sideration of roofing materials is advised to minimize metal 
contamination (Box 4-1). 
If a new multi-residential building is constructed with 
dual plumbing to capture all graywater from bathroom fau -
cets, showers, bathtubs, and laundry, then approximately  
26 gpcd of graywater (or 45 percent of indoor water used) 
could be available for reuse for indoor or outdoor nonpo -
table uses. In cases of multi-residential buildings, irrigation 
demand is often small relative to the amount of graywater 
generated. In such cases, graywater use for toilet flushing 
may be a more viable option to achieve reduced demand 
for potable water. For a large multi-residential building, be -
cause source control becomes more difficult to manage and 
potential human exposures increase, graywater treatment is 
needed for most applications. For a business park, a separate 
analysis of on-site sources of graywater is advised prior to 
further planning because graywater represents a fairly small 
percentage of total wastewater generated in most businesses 
and institutional buildings (see Chapter 3) unless laundry or 
showers represent a significant part of average water use. 
Identify Candidate Strategies and System Components
In a business park or institutional setting with large 
rooftop collection areas, stormwater could be captured, 
stored in large tanks, and treated for various on-site uses, or 
used to recharge groundwater (see Chapter 6). The design 
alternatives would need to be developed considering overall 
objectives, water availability, potential nonpotable uses, and 
water demand. For example, a system designed to capture 
all runoff from a 1-inch storm may be quite different from 
a system designed to optimize potable water savings. In the 
arid Southwest, where rainfall is concentrated during peri -
ods of low irrigation demand, very large stormwater stor -
age tanks are typically needed to significantly reduce potable 
water use on an annual basis. Under appropriate hydrogeo -
logic conditions, on-site or neighborhood-scale groundwa -
ter infiltration can instead be used to enhance regional wa -
ter supply while reducing stormwater pollution. Infiltration 
projects tend to have significantly lower costs compared to 
large-scale stormwater capture and use projects, although 
the benefits of such projects are distributed regionally rather 
than to the building developer. Source areas for infiltration 
projects should be selected to minimize contamination (see 
Chapter 4), although infiltration basins can be designed to provide additional water quality treatment during infiltra -
tion (Chapter 6). If stormwater is captured and used on-site, 
then the level of service provided by the on-site, non-potable 
water system should be considered in the system design to 
optimize its use (relative to potable water). For example, at 
a fire station where stormwater is used for washing and tank 
filling, the use of nonpotable water could be encouraged by 
adjusting the flow rate and pressure to be greater than the 
potable water system. 
New multi-residential buildings may be good candidates 
for dual-plumbed facilities that use treated graywater and/or 
stormwater for toilet flushing and other possible uses, such 
as laundry or HV AC. A building-wide treatment system can 
be managed and routinely maintained by trained operators, 
minimizing overall risk. Chapter 6 discusses the treatment 
necessary for specific applications of graywater (Figure 6-5) 
and stormwater (Figure 6-8), and an array of technologies 
are available at the multi-residential building scale to ad -
dress the treatment objectives (Table 6-3) for potential end 
uses and exposures (see Chapter 5). However, few localities 
have specified treatment guidelines or requirements objec -
tives, so developers may have to work closely with local 
public health agencies to develop treatment strategies that 
are protective of public health until such guidance is devel -
oped. Both graywater and stormwater can be used to meet 
nonpotable water demands, but combined systems typically 
involve separate treatment of the two sources before they are 
combined into a single collection (see Chapter 6). In some 
new developments, wastewater from toilets is also captured 
on site to maximize energy recovery (see Box 2-2). Differ -
ent system designs can be developed to maximize various 
project objectives.
Select System Design 
The potential benefits of on-site graywater and/or storm -
water capture and use (including potable water savings, 
averted wastewater fees, other incentives, pollution preven -
tion, energy recovery, environmental stewardship, public 
education, and improved public image) can be compared to 
the costs of various design alternatives and to a conventional 
water and wastewater system in the context of the overall 
project objectives. A full range of benefits, including social 
and environmental benefits (see Box 7-1), should be consid -
ered, although not all benefits have been thoroughly quanti -
fied. The financial costs and benefits of projects at this scale 
are site-specific and can be calculated by design engineers 
for the purpose of comparison among alternatives. General 
cost and benefit information for comparable projects would 
be helpful to inform decision making, but such information 
is currently not readily available. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
166 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Implementation 
Project implementation will necessitate close coordina -
tion with several local agencies (e.g., water, public health, 
building) for appropriate permitting of an on-site water 
capture and use project. SFPUC (2014, 2015) outlined a 
streamlined permitting process for on-site use of alternative 
water supplies in the San Francisco region and produced a 
“blueprint” for other cities that want to develop an on-site 
water program to encourage large-scale implementation. 
System maintenance and monitoring to assess treatment per -
formance is essential to minimize human health risks. Ad -
ditionally, residents should be informed about source control 
strategies to help maintain good system operation and mini -
mize public health risk (see Chapter 2).
CONCLUSIONS
There is no single best way to use graywater or storm -
water to address local water needs, because project drivers 
and objectives, legal and regulatory constraints, potential 
applications, site conditions, source water availability, and 
project budgets, all vary widely. This chapter lays out a deci -
sion framework that can be used when considering the use 
of graywater or stormwater to meet various objectives and 
summarizes information from the report relevant to key de -
cision steps at both the household and neighborhood scales.
Information is generally available to support water 
management decision making for on-site, nonpotable ap -
plications for simple, household-scale, graywater and/ 
stormwater systems with minimal human exposures. 
However, additional research would enhance decision mak -
ing for larger systems or those with treatment requirements. 
Adequate information is available (or could be obtained) on 
graywater and stormwater availability for small-scale sys -
tems such as basic water quality parameters, system design 
and treatment technology effectiveness, and the existing reg -
ulatory framework. This information can be used to assess 
the capacity for on-site or local alternative water supplies to 
meet water demands while providing other benefits. How -
ever, as projects grow in size and scope, detailed analysis is required to explore options, assess siting issues, and address 
concerns about water quality and availability. Therefore, key 
uncertainties affect the capacity to make fully informed deci -
sions on appropriate and cost-effective designs for larger or 
more complex graywater or stormwater beneficial use sys -
tems. These uncertainties, which could be reduced by ad -
ditional research, include:
• Water quality objectives for various uses that are pro -
tective of public health;
• The occurrence and fate of pathogens in stormwater 
and graywater; 
• Costs and benefits for neighborhood- and regional-scale 
systems, including nonmonetized benefits, such as water 
pollution control and community amenities;
• Energy implications of on-site alternative water sup -
plies; and
• Long-term system performance and maintenance needs. 
Lack of clarity on water rights and legal and regulatory 
inconsistencies are also impediments to water management 
decision making in some states. More discussion on research 
needs is provided in Chapter 10.
Stakeholder engagement is crucial to the evalua -
tion, selection, and implementation of any urban water 
management system and is particularly important when 
new options for distribution throughout the urban area, 
such as stormwater and graywater reuse, are being con -
sidered. The first step is understanding that stakeholders are 
those groups and individuals that can affect selection and 
implementation of the relevant system. Fortunately, effective 
and proven approaches exist to identify and engage appro -
priate stakeholders in the process, leading to the selection of 
implementable solutions. Experience shows that co-benefits, 
such as expanded greenspace or environmental stewardship, 
are often important to gaining stakeholder support. As noted 
in the discussion, experience shows that stakeholder engage -
ment founded on trust and shared responsibility can be ef -
fective in planning and implementing projects, while stake -
holder groups comprised of intractable adversaries are likely 
to have just the opposite effect.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
16710
Priorities for Research
There is substantial potential for graywater and storm -
water to contribute to local water supply needs while pro -
viding other benefits such as stormwater pollution reduction, 
water supply diversification, and increased local control of 
water supplies. Graywater and stormwater use could be an 
important part of a broader effort to reimagine urban water 
infrastructure to efficiently use water, energy, and financial 
resources while enhancing water supply reliability, resil -
iency, and the livability of cities. However, as discussed in 
Chapter 9, major gaps exist in our understanding that make 
decision making more difficult, particularly with regard to 
neighborhood- and regional-scale stormwater and graywater 
capture initiatives. 
This chapter highlights the major research needs iden -
tified by the committee that should be addressed to better 
support decision making. Additionally, this chapter presents 
research needs that look forward to ways to improve the wa -
ter and energy efficiency of our nation’s water infrastructure 
and maximize financial, environmental, and social benefits. 
These research needs, if addressed, have the potential to ad -
vance the use of graywater and stormwater to expand local 
water supplies and ensure its safe and reliable use. Twelve 
research needs are categorized according to five themes out -
lined in Box 10-1:
1. Risk and water quality 
2. Treatment technology 
3. Infrastructure 
4. Social science and decision analysis 
5. Policy and regulatory 
RISK AND WATER QUALITY
Although no documented reports of adverse human 
health effects from the use of stormwater or graywater have 
been identified, additional examination of risk from micro -
bial and chemical contaminants is necessary to support safe and appropriate design and implementation of stormwater 
and graywater use systems—particularly for large-scale 
systems. Such efforts can also facilitate adoption of water-
saving practices in areas lacking a regulatory framework. 
1. Assess the occurrence and fate of human pathogens in 
graywater and stormwater
Pathogens represent the most significant risks in nonpo -
table graywater and stormwater applications, considering the 
potential for adverse health effects from a single exposure to a 
small volume of water. Currently, most of the information on 
microorganisms in graywater and stormwater is limited to the 
occurrence of indicator microorganisms (e.g., total and fecal 
coliform bacteria, enterococci) rather than human pathogenic 
organisms. However, it is well documented that no consis -
tent quantitative relationship exists between the occurrence 
or concentrations of indicator organisms and pathogenic or -
ganisms. This is particularly true for roof runoff, in which the 
sources of indicator bacteria may be primarily derived from 
animal waste that may or may not contain human pathogens. 
Depending on the project scale and contributing source areas, 
human waste from leaking sewers or faulty septic systems 
may contribute to the pathogen loads of stormwater. There -
fore, additional work is needed to characterize the occurrence 
of pathogens in stormwater from various source areas (e.g., 
rooftops [tree covered and unshaded], open space, mixed use) 
and scales to inform guidance on appropriate treatment or ex -
posure control to protect human health.
In graywater, for which the source of pathogens is typi -
cally human waste from laundry or showers, the usefulness 
of indicator data to predict risk will vary based on the scale 
of the project and other vehicles of disease spread (graywater 
would represent one of many potential vehicles of infectious 
disease within a single household). Pathogen data from gray -
water are extremely limited and insufficient for comprehen -
sive risk analysis. Research is needed to assess the variabil -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
168 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
BOX 10-1  Summary of Research Needs to Enhance the Safe and Reliable Use of Graywater and  
Stormwater and Conserve Water, Energy, Environmental, and Financial Resources
Risk and Water Quality
1. Assess the occurrence and fate of pathogens in graywater and stormwater
2. Assess the occurrence and fate of chemical contaminants in stormwater 
3. Understand the implications of enhanced water conservation on graywater quality and use
4. Develop risk-based water quality guidance for various uses that could serve as a basis to develop standards of practice 
5. Develop monitoring technology and strategies to assure compliance with water quality criteria 
Treatment Technology
6. Develop treatment systems to meet tailored (fit-for-purpose) water quality objectives across a range of scales 
7. Understand the long-term performance and reliability of graywater and stormwater treatment systems (from small to large scales) 
Infrastructure
8. Envision opportunities for water- and energy-conserving infrastructure designs in new construction and demonstrate their  
performance 
9. Identify strategies to retrofit existing infrastructure for enhanced beneficial use of stormwater 
Social Science and Decision Analysis
10. Understand behavioral impacts on overall water use in the context of graywater and stormwater projects 
11. Collect performance data (including cost, energy, water savings, water quality, and other benefits) in support of integrated water 
supply management, decision making, and refinement of decision tools 
Policy and Regulatory Issues  
12. Identify incentives and various regulatory strategies that have proven effective in the implementation of stormwater or graywater 
systems to conserve water supplies
ity in pathogen concentrations in graywater under different 
scales, storage conditions, and with and without source con -
trol practices, with the goal of bracketing likely and possible 
pathogen concentrations for the basis of broad risk calcula -
tions. These data are needed to identify appropriate practices 
to limit exposure when untreated graywater is used and to 
devise effective treatment systems where appropriate. Ad -
ditionally, the implications of scale to the calculation of risk 
need to be examined. 
Because hundreds of potential pathogens could be pres -
ent in graywater or stormwater, it is necessary to choose rep -
resentative pathogens for which the water is to be analyzed. 
The choice of pathogens could be based on a “worst-case” 
approach, or other approach based on the specific local situ -
ation. 
2. Assess the occurrence and fate of chemical  
contaminants in stormwater
Stormwater quality is highly variable over space and 
time and is a direct function of land use, catchment size, 
and climatic and seasonal factors. Thus, stormwater water 
quality is difficult to predict. Organic contaminants, patho -gens, and salts pose a particular concern for groundwater 
recharge. Some organic contaminants in urban stormwater 
are not common to municipal wastewater, and therefore their 
occurrence and fate remain poorly understood. Future re -
search should investigate the occurrence and persistence of 
hazardous organic contaminants in urban stormwater. This 
research should identify those contaminants, such as urban 
pesticides and additives used in automotive and commercial 
applications, that are likely to be present in urban stormwater 
and may pose human health risks when stormwater is used 
for groundwater recharge. Information on the occurrence 
and fate of these compounds in urban settings can inform the 
development of appropriate source control and/or treatment 
strategies. In the case of large-scale projects, field studies 
and demonstration projects should proceed in tandem with 
planning for greater beneficial use of stormwater for water 
supply.
3. Understand the implications of enhanced water  
conservation on graywater quality and use
Indoor water conservation campaigns have had the 
most impact on use of water for flushing toilets and laundry Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Priorities for Research 169
(Chapter 3). As discussed in Chapter 3, decreased water use, 
particularly in laundry machines, has the potential to impact 
the quality of graywater, making it more concentrated. This 
has the most impact on laundry-to-landscape systems, which 
are the most practical graywater systems for implementa -
tion in existing development. Research to date on impacts of 
graywater irrigation on soil quality has focused on graywater 
systems that include water from multiple sources (bathroom 
and laundry water; Sharvelle et al., 2012). New improve -
ments in laundry machines continue to be made, reducing 
their water use. Such advances may render laundry-to-land -
scape programs obsolete. If homeowners are willing to adopt 
ultra-low water use washing machines, then this may be a 
more efficient way to reduce water demand than using laun -
dry water for irrigation. The impact of high-efficiency laun -
dry machines use for graywater irrigation needs to be better 
understood and evaluated in terms of water availability, wa -
ter quality, and subsequent impact to soil quality.
4. Develop risk-based water quality guidance for various 
uses that could serve as a basis to develop standards of 
practice
Risk-based water quality guidance should be developed 
for various stormwater and graywater uses based on an un -
derstanding of anticipated human exposures from nonpo -
table uses of graywater and stormwater and possible con -
taminant concentrations (to be informed by research needs 1 
and 2). Additional research is needed to better understand the 
impacts on risk and reliability associated with organic matter 
and turbidity levels recommended by the National Sanita -
tion Foundation (NSF) International NSF 350 standard for 
graywater and stormwater for toilet flushing at a range of 
scales, because these factors significantly affect treatment 
costs. This information is needed to help localities that are 
struggling with the lack of existing standards or guidance 
and project developers (e.g., multi-residential buildings us -
ing graywater or stormwater for toilet flushing) who want to 
know what level of treatment is necessary and appropriate to 
protect public health. Such guidance, if rigorously developed 
based on comprehensive water quality and exposure data, 
would also reassure stakeholders that stormwater and gray -
water nonpotable use projects meet common acceptable-risk 
standards. Once risk-based water quality guidance is devel -
oped, standards of practice can be developed to meet these 
objectives, which can allow for more focused and cost-effec -
tive technology development and production, ultimately re -
ducing costs for end users. Risk-based guidance also applies 
to large-scale groundwater recharge projects, although such 
guidance could vary with hydrogeologic conditions. 5. Develop monitoring technologies and strategies to assure 
compliance with regulatory criteria
The beneficial use of stormwater and graywater is 
achieved through distributed systems of varying scales. 
Because stormwater capture and recharge systems may be 
distributed over many locations, advanced monitoring and 
online control technologies could help reduce the costs as -
sociated with assessing system function and use. Research 
is needed to develop approaches for real-time monitoring 
of graywater and stormwater treatment systems for projects 
that have substantial human exposure. Technology advance -
ment on rapid pathogen detection would be beneficial for 
large-scale graywater reuse as well as other sectors of water 
management and reuse, although surrogate detection sys -
tems may be feasible. 
Stormwater capture and use systems are often installed as 
part of a broader effort to control stormwater discharges and 
combined sewer overflows. Advanced distributed monitoring 
systems could also assess the timing of water use relative to 
the demand for stormwater capture to assess the benefits pro -
vided and to identify strategies to optimize multiple benefits.
TREATMENT TECHNOLOGY
As graywater and stormwater use expands in scale 
and for uses other than subsurface or restricted access irri -
gation, treatment will likely be necessary to protect public 
health (Chapters 5 and 6). Additionally, managed recharge 
of stormwater may require treatment to prevent groundwater 
contamination (Chapter 5). Although treatment technology 
is relatively advanced, some focused research and develop -
ment could improve the cost-effectiveness and reliability of 
graywater and stormwater use.
6. Develop treatment systems to meet tailored  
(fit-for-purpose) water quality across a range of scales
There is a need to assess and design treatment systems 
for various beneficial uses of graywater and stormwater. In 
the absence of fit-for-purpose water quality guidance, com -
mon standards of practice for graywater and stormwater 
treatment for various applications have yet to be developed. 
A wide array of technologies is applied, with varying levels 
of treatment. For managed recharge of stormwater, existing 
unit processes and the sequence in which they are applied 
must be tailored to achieve efficient treatment in terms of 
cost, energy, and maintenance. Until a standard of practice 
for stormwater treatment for water supply augmentation is 
developed, systems will continue to be developed as one-off Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
170 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
designs that remain costly and may lack sufficient proof-of-
concept for wide-scale adoption. 
The current lack of a standard of practice results in a 
time-consuming design phase (particularly for neighbor -
hood- or regional-scale systems), which is often followed 
by iterations of design modifications once the system is in 
operation. Achieving a standard of practice that includes 
treatment process trains that are appropriate for stormwa -
ter or graywater use projects requires extensive application 
of technologies through demonstration projects. Rigorous 
monitoring of pilot and demonstration projects with exten -
sive data collection is needed to adequately synthesize find -
ings and to develop a standard of practice. Treatment system 
development, where feasible, should examine the capacity 
of natural, passive, or low-energy processes (e.g., wetlands, 
soils, engineered media, aeration) to reliably meet contami -
nant removal objectives while reducing energy use. 
7. Understand the long-term performance and reliability  
of graywater and stormwater systems (from small to  
large scales) 
Data on long-term performance of graywater and storm -
water systems are lacking. Many systems do not include 
water quality monitoring, and therefore performance of sys -
tems remains unreported and unknown. Concerns regarding 
long-term performance and reliability of graywater systems 
continue to be a limitation for acceptance of such systems. 
Public health departments remain wary of treatment system 
performance and the potential health risks that may result 
from lack of maintenance or system failures. An extensive 
effort to characterize long-term performance and reliability 
is needed, which can include monitoring and data collec -
tion from systems that are currently operational as well as 
installation and monitoring of new pilot or demonstration 
projects, especially at neighborhood or regional scales. De -
velopment of an online database such as the International 
Stormwater BMP Database1 is recommended to serve as a 
portal for collecting and sharing information on the costs 
and performance of graywater and stormwater capture and 
beneficial use systems (see research need 11). Research on 
long-term performance should also assess the human behav -
ioral dimensions of operation and maintenance of graywater 
and stormwater systems at various scales to assess long-term 
risks and develop strategies for better training or oversight, 
if needed. 
With respect to the groundwater recharge of stormwa -
ter, there is a need to better understand water quality im -
provements during storage and infiltration, including long-
term performance of natural treatment processes. Research 
1 See http://www.bmpdatabase.org.is needed to assess the level of water quality improvement 
that can be expected in urban stormwater during infiltration 
and storage (including pathogen and organic contaminant 
removal) to determine additional treatment or system main -
tenance needs. Regulatory flexibility may be needed to allow 
demonstration tests at reasonable scales in the field. Demon -
stration tests will inform risk management and operational 
procedures for improved resilience and reliability.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Today’s urban water infrastructure is not designed for 
large-scale graywater or stormwater use. In many places in -
frastructure does not exist for urban stormwater or graywa -
ter capture, requiring new visions of water infrastructure to 
reach potential water and energy saving efficiencies. These 
issues suggest the following research needs with respect to 
infrastructure: 
8. Envision new opportunities for water- and  
energy-conserving infrastructure and  
demonstrate their performance
Conventional design of stormwater and wastewater 
systems was developed many years ago when the beneficial 
uses were not envisioned, and retrofitting existing urban wa -
ter infrastructure to accommodate beneficial uses of on-site 
water sources is expensive. However, new construction at 
building or neighborhood scales could include these features 
at a relatively small incremental cost. New urban water man -
agement models that incorporate graywater and stormwater 
use offer the potential to be much more water- and resource-
efficient than traditional models. Research is needed to con -
tinue to develop new visions for urban water infrastructure 
that conserve water, reduce energy use (and generate energy 
where feasible), and reduce waste by recycling nutrients and 
other valuable resources. Important questions exist relative 
to key system components, including resource recovery and 
treatment technologies. Yet, this highly significant transfor -
mation can be achieved only if this potential is demonstrat -
ed. These systems could be incorporated into new urban de -
velopment, and practical learning from the demonstration of 
these models could subsequently be incorporated into urban 
redevelopment. 
9. Identify strategies to retrofit existing infrastructure for 
enhanced beneficial use of on-site water sources 
Research is needed on cost-effective strategies for ret -
rofitting these drainage and delivery components in existing 
developed areas to meet additional objectives, including im -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Priorities for Research 171
proving urban hydrology, reducing pollutant discharges, and 
enhancing water availability. Methods should be evaluated 
for retrofitting existing stormwater systems for enhanced 
stormwater capture, such as exploring options for conversion 
of stormwater detention ponds to enable stormwater capture. 
Given investments in existing systems and the future build-
out of water reuse facilities in some areas, the benefits and 
feasibility of joint reclaimed wastewater and stormwater in -
filtration systems should be assessed. Additionally, the im -
plications of extensive graywater use on existing wastewater 
conveyance infrastructure need to be better understood and 
the costs of managing such impacts evaluated. 
SOCIAL SCIENCE AND DECISION ANALYSIS
Understanding the human dimensions of graywater and 
stormwater use will inform better project design and imple -
mentation. In addition, compiling existing performance data 
in a centralized database could improve support for decision 
making. Key priorities for research include 
10. Understand behavioral impacts on overall water use  
in the context of graywater and stormwater projects 
A major unresolved issue is the extent to which behav -
ioral factors affect the benefits provided by graywater and 
stormwater projects. As noted in Chapter 3, two pilot proj -
ects on laundry-to-landscape graywater systems showed no 
reduction in potable water use, on average, and one of these 
studies showed increased potable water use. Similar studies 
on Australian household-scale stormwater capture projects 
have shown that actual water savings are only 0.3 to 0.7 times 
the theoretical value (see Box 3-2). It is well known that many 
rain barrels and cisterns are installed but not used sufficiently, 
compromising both water savings and pollution prevention 
benefits. The availability of a new low- or zero-cost water 
supply could cause households to plant more water-intensive 
landscaping or simply maintain existing landscaping more 
intensively. Similarly, knowledge that laundry water is being 
reused for irrigation may lead residents to do more laundry 
because the net cost of each load has been reduced. It is also 
possible that the positive emotional feeling (or “warm glow”) 
from making investments in green infrastructure may impact 
potable water consumption elsewhere, either positively or 
negatively. Therefore, research is needed to understand how 
such systems affect water use behavior. 
Research to assess user knowledge and experience with 
on-site graywater and stormwater use systems is also impor -
tant to assess the extent to which best management practices 
are understood, systems are properly installed and main -
tained, and appropriate source control practices are used. Additionally, research to understand homeowner-scale ap -
plications of stormwater and graywater would be useful to 
assess probable contaminant exposures as opposed to those 
anticipated if only best practices are followed. Such research 
would provide an improved understanding of household-
scale graywater and stormwater risks and benefits and could 
be used to identify opportunities for public outreach and edu -
cation to maximize potential benefits. 
11. Collect performance data (including cost, energy, water 
savings, and water quality) in support of integrated water 
supply management, decision making, and refinement of 
decision tools
Because of the absence of ample documentation of costs, 
performance, risks, and co-benefits (see Chapter 7), many util -
ities are hesitant to integrate graywater or stormwater capture 
and use into their long-term water resource plans. Alternative -
ly, some individuals and organizations may be over optimistic 
about the comparative benefits and costs of such projects for 
their communities. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agen -
cy (EPA) has a National Menu of Stormwater Best Manage -
ment Practices, but this menu contains limited case studies and 
performance data on stormwater capture projects. Additional 
data are needed to quantify the multiple benefits and costs of 
small- to large-scale stormwater and graywater projects. 
Improved financial cost data will reduce uncertainty for 
cost and benefits analyses and facilitate comparisons among 
alternatives. Well-documented case studies can better clarify 
capital costs and maintenance requirements, including docu -
mented energy costs and savings. Costs are easier to quan -
tify than benefits, but benefits are equally important because 
graywater and stormwater use can provide multiple benefits 
beyond water savings or supply, including many that are 
not easily monetized. Systematic approaches to accounting 
for the full range of benefits (including multi-sectorial ben -
efits and costs) should be developed to facilitate synthesis 
of project-specific information. In addition, water quality 
performance data, potential water supply capture benefits, 
and the broad array of potential co-benefits should be col -
lected in a database of graywater and stormwater projects. 
In many cases, the benefits information may be missing or 
quite limited, in which case a systematic effort to develop 
such information will be of considerable value. Many inno -
vative types of small-scale stormwater capture projects have 
minimal documentation of performance metrics. 
To advance the state of the art, this information should 
be synthesized, including both smaller- and larger-scale 
graywater and stormwater projects, so that utilities, cities, 
building developers, and residents can understand the state 
of the practice and the relative costs and benefits (e.g., wa -Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
172 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ter supply, energy savings, water quality, aesthetics). Such 
information could also be incorporated into decision tools 
to improve the statistical basis of the many variables consid -
ered for on-site water systems.
POLICY AND REGULATORY ISSUES
Beneficial use of graywater and stormwater is a relative -
ly new and growing practice in many regions of the United 
States, and, as a result, legal and regulatory policies have 
not evolved as quickly as the practices. Consequently, com -
munities would benefit from additional research on effective 
practices in regulatory programs and policies.
12. Examine how incentives and various regulatory 
strategies have proven effective in the implementation 
of stormwater or graywater systems to conserve water 
supplies 
Implementation of stormwater capture and graywater 
strategies may be constrained by institutional “silos” that in -
clude multi-jurisdictional inefficiencies that may hinder the 
maximal use of these two potential supply sources. In ad -dition, regulatory challenges to optimizing the capture and 
storage of stormwater for water supply purposes can be a 
significant hurdle for implementing an integrated stormwa -
ter capture and recharge strategy. Local governmental enti -
ties that have responsibility for stormwater or wastewater 
management vary significantly throughout the United States, 
so the institutional structure and constraints will likely vary 
from state to state and also within states. 
These issues point to the need to examine various regu -
latory strategies for effective practices that can enhance 
broader implementation of stormwater and graywater sys -
tems to conserve or enhance potable water supplies. Re -
search should assess regulatory innovations to increase on-
site water use including market incentives, pollution credit 
markets, and integrated watershed management planning 
that optimizes local sustainable water supplies. Research 
should include an assessment of regulatory barriers, includ -
ing those that may arise if conveyances and delivery systems 
cross property lines (or water management boundaries). This 
research should also assess the legal challenges and water 
rights issues for coastal and inland states and identify spe -
cific low barriers that can be overcome. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
173References
Adamowicz, W.L., P. Boxall, J. Louviere, J. Swait, and M. Williams. 
1998. Stated preference Methods for valuing environmental 
amenities. Pp. 460-479 in Valuing Environmental Preferences: 
Theory and Practice of the Contingent Valuation Method in the 
US, EC and Developing Countries, I. Bateman and K. Willis, 
eds. London, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ahmed, W., and S. Toze. 2015. Microbiological quality and associ -
ated health risks with the use of roof-captured rainwater. Pp. 
229-252 in Rainwater Tank Systems for Urban Water Supply: 
Design, Yield, Energy, Health Risks, Economics and Social Per -
ceptions, A. K. Sharma, D. Begbie, and T. Gardner, eds. Lon -
don: IWA Publishing. 
Ahmed, W., F. Huygens, A. Goonetilleke, and T. Gardner. 2008. 
Real-time PCR detection of pathogenic microorganisms in 
roof-harvested rainwater in Southeast Queensland, Australia. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 74(17):5490-5496.
Ahmed, W., A. Vieritz, A. Goonetilleke, and T. Gardner. 2010. Health 
risk from the use of roof-harvested rainwater in Southeast 
Queensland, Australia, as potable or non-potable water, deter -
mined using quantitative microbial risk assessment. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology 76(22):7382-7391.
Ahmed, W., L. Hodgers, J.P.S. Sidhu, and S. Toze. 2012. Fecal indi -
cators and zoonotic pathogens in household drinking water taps 
fed from rainwater tanks in Southeast Queensland, Australia. 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology 78(1):219–226.
Ahmed, W., H. Brandes, P. Gyawali, J.P.S. Sidhu, and S. Toze. 2014. 
Opportunistic pathogens in roof-captured rainwater samples, 
determined using quantitative PCR. Water Research 53:361-
369.
Alan Plummer Associates, Inc. 2010. Stormwater Harvesting Guid -
ance Document for the Texas Water Development Board. Fort 
Worth, TX: Alan Plummer Associates, Inc.
Albrechtsen, H.J. 2002. Microbiological investigations of rainwater 
and graywater collected for toilet flushing. Water Science and 
Technology 46(6–7):311-316. 
Alcubilla, R.G., and J.R. Lund. 2006. Derived willingness-to-pay for 
household water use with price and probabilistic supply. Journal 
of Water Resources Planning and Management 132(6):424-433.
Allen, L., and C. Woelfle-Erskine. 2011. From Landry to Landscape: 
Tap into Greywater. Mother Earth News, August/September 
2011. Available at http://www.motherearthnews.com/green-ho  
mes/home-design/greywater-zm0z11zphe.aspx.
Allen, L., J. Christian-Smith, and M. Palaniappan. 2010. Overview 
of Greywater Reuse: The Potential of Greywater Systems to Aid 
Sustainable Water Management. Oakland, CA: Pacific Institute.Allen, R.G., I.A. Walter, R.L. Elliot, T.A. Howell, D. Itenfisu,  
M.E. Jensen, and R. Snyder. 2005. The ASCE Standardized 
Reference Evapotranspiration Equation. ASCE and American 
Society of Civil Engineers. Available at http://www.kimberly.
uidaho.edu/water/asceewri/ascestzdetmain2005.pdf.
Appleyard, S.J. 1993. Impact of stormwater infiltration basins on 
groundwater quality, Perth metropolitan region, Western Aus -
tralia. Environmental Geology 21:227-236.
Aronson, L.J., A.J. Gold, R.J. Hull, and J.L. Cisar. 1987. Evapo -
transpiration of cool season turfgrasses in the humid Northeast. 
Agronomy Journal 79:901-905.
ASCE (American Society of Civil Engineers). 2009. Report Card  
for America’s Infrastructure. Reston, V A: ASCE.
Ashbolt, N.J., W.O.K. Grabow, and M. Snozzi. 2001. Indicators of 
microbial water quality. Chapter 13 in Water Quality: Guide -
lines, Standards, and Health, World Health Organization. Lon -
don: IWA Publishing.
Auerbach, E.A., E.E. Seyfried, and K.D. McMahon. 2007. Tetracy -
cline resistance genes in activated sludge wastewater treatment 
plants. Water Research 41:1143-1151.
Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation Council  
and the Agriculture and Resource Management Council of 
Australia and New Zealand. 2000. Australian and New Zea -
land Guidelines for Fresh and Marine Water Quality, V olume 1.  
Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra. Available at https://www.  
environment.gov.au/system/files/resources/53cda9ea-7ec2-
49d4-af29-d1dde09e96ef/files/nwqms-guidelines-4-vol1.pdf.
Australian SCEW (Standing Council on Environment and Water). 
2009. Australian Guidelines for Water Recycling: Stormwater 
Harvesting and Reuse, National Water Quality Management 
Strategy Document No 23. Natural Resource Management Min -
isterial Council Environment Protection and Heritage Council,  
and National Health and Medical Research Council. July. Avail -
able at http://www.scew.gov.au/system/files/resources/5fe5174a  
-bdec-a194-79ad-86586fd19601/files/wq-agwr-gl-stormwater-
harvesting-and-reuse-final-200907.pdf.
AWWA (American Water Works Association). 2009. Planning for 
the Distribution of Reclaimed Water, 3rd edition: Manual M24. 
Denver, CO: AWWA.
Backhaus, T. 2014. Medicines, shaken and stirred: A critical review 
on the ecotoxicology of pharmaceutical mixtures. Philosophi -
cal Transactions of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 
369(1656):20130585. 
Bambic, D., G. McBride, W. Miller, R. Stott, and S. Wuertz. 2011. 
Quantification of Pathogens and Sources of Microbial Indica -
tors for QMRA in Recreational Waters. Alexandria, V A: Water 
Environmental Research Foundation. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
174 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Bannerman, R., K. Baun, M. Bohn, P.E. Hughes, and D.A. Graczyk.  
1983. Evaluation of Urban Nonpoint Source Pollution Man -
agement in Milwaukee County, Wisconsin, V ol. I. PB 84-
114164. Prepared for U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Water Planning Division, by Wisconsin Department of Natural 
Resources. November.
Bannerman, R., S. Corsi, and J. Lorman. 2014. Road Salt Impacts-A 
Sleeping Giant. Iowa State Stormwater Conference. April.
Barnes, T.G., and L. Adams. 1998. Creating Urban Stormwater  
Control Ponds for Water Quality and Wildlife Habitat. College 
of Agriculture, University of Kentucky Extension Service. No -
vember.
Barnett, T.P., and W. Pennell, eds. 2004. Impact of Global Warm -
ing on Western U.S. Water Supplies. Climate Change 62 (Spec. 
V ol.).
Barraud, S., A. Gautier, J.P. Bardin, and V . Riou. 1999. The impact 
of intentional stormwater infiltration on soil and groundwater. 
Water Science and Technology 39(2):185-192. 
Beal, C.C., M.N. Chong, J. Fyfe, A. Turner, and T. Gardner. 2105. 
Quantifying mains water savings from residential rainwater 
tanks. Pp. 47-72 in Rainwater Tank Systems for Urban Water 
Supply: Design, Yield, Energy, Health Risks, Economics, and 
Social Perceptions, A. K. Sharma, D. Begbie, and T. Gardner, 
eds. London: IWA Publishing.
Beecher, J., and T. Chesnutt. 2012. Declining Water Sales and Util -
ity Revenues: A Framework for Understanding and Adapting. 
Alliance for Water Efficiency. Available at http://www.ipu.
msu.edu/research/pdfs/Summit-Summary-and-Declining-Wa -
ter-Sales-and-Utility-Revenues-2012-12-16.pdf. 
Bender & Company. 2014. Little NEPAs: State Environmental Poli -
cy Laws Using NEPA Approach. In Treatise on Environmental 
Law. LexisNexis database. Accessed April 6, 2014.
Bergdolt, J., S. Sharvelle, and L.A. Roesner. 2011. Guidance Manu -
al for Separation of Graywater from Blackwater for Graywater 
Reuse. WERF Project INFR4SG09a. Alexandria, V A: Water 
Environment Research Foundation.
Bijoor, N.S., D.E. Pataki, D. Haver, and J.S. Famiglietti. 2014. A 
comparative study of the water budgets of lawns under three 
management scenarios. Urban Ecosystems 17(4):1095-1117.
Birks, R., and S. Hills. 2007. Characterization of indicator organisms 
and pathogens in domestic greywater for recycling. Environ -
mental Monitoring and Assessment 129(1-3):61-69. 
Bishop, C.A., J. Struger, D.R. Barton, L.J. Shirose, L. Dunn, A. 
Lang, and D. Shepherd. 2000a. Contamination and wildlife 
communities in stormwater detention ponds in Guelph and 
the Greater Toronto area Ontario, 1997 and 1998, Part I. Wild -
life communities. Water Quality Research Journal of Canada 
35:399-435. 
Bishop, C.A., J. Struger, L.J. Shirose, L. Dunn, and G.D. Campbell. 
2000b. Contamination and wildlife communities in stormwa -
ter detention ponds in Guelph and the Greater Toronto Area 
Ontario, 1997 and 1998, Part II. Contamination and biological 
effects of contamination. Water Quality Research Journal of 
Canada 35:437-474.
Blackhurst, M., C. Hendrickson, and H.S. Matthews. 2010. Cost-ef -
fectiveness of green roofs. Journal of Architectural Engineering 
16(4):136-143.
Blanchoud, H., F. Farrugia, and J.M. Mouchel. 2004. Pesticide uses 
and transfers in urbanised catchments. Chemosphere 55(6):905-
913. Bonham, C.H. 2006. Perspectives from the field: A review of west -
ern instream flow issues and recommendations for a new water 
future. Environmental Law 36:1205-1235.
Boston Water and Sewer Commission. 2013. Stormwater Best Man -
agement Practices: Guidance Documents. Available at http://
www.bwsc.org/ABOUT_BWSC/systems/stormwater_mgt/
Stormwater%20BMP%20Guidance_2013.pdf.
Brand, A.B., and J.W. Snodgrass. 2010. Value of artificial habitats 
for amphibian reproduction in altered landscapes. Conservation 
Biology 24:295-301.
Brosseau, G. 2007. Summarizing the Report Fresno-Cloves Storm 
Water Quality Management Program Fresno Metropolitan 
Flood Control District, November 2006- Evaluation of Basin 
EK Effectives. Presentation to the NRC Committee on Reduc -
ing Stormwater Pollution, December 17, 2007, Irvine, CA.
Brown, P.W., C.F. Mancino, M.H. Young, T.L. Thompson, P.J. Wie -
renga, and D. Kopec. 2001. Penman-Monteith crop coefficients 
for use with desert turf systems. Crop Science 41:1197-1206.
Brownell, M., V . Harwood, R. Kurz, S. McQuaig, J. Lukasik, and 
T. Scott. 2007. Confirmation of putative stormwater impact on 
water quality at a Florida beach by microbial source tracking 
methods and structure of indicator organism populations. Water 
Research 41(16):3747-3757.
Buchheister, A., C.F. Bonzek, J. Gartland, and R.J. Latour. 2013. 
Patterns and drivers of the demersal fish community of Chesa -
peake Bay. Marine Ecology Progress Series 481:161-180.
Burton, G.A., Jr., and R.E. Pitt. 2002. Stormwater Effects Hand -
book: A Toolbox for Watershed Managers, Scientists, and En -
gineers. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Byappanahalli, M.N., R.L. Whitman, D.A. Shively, M.J. Sadowsky,  
and S. Ishii. 2006. Population structure, persistence, and sea -
sonality of autochthonous Escherichia coli in temperate, coast -
al forest soil from a Great Lakes watershed. Environmental 
Microbiology 8(3):504-513.
Cadavid, C., and A.W. Ando. 2013. Valuing preferences over storm -
water management outcomes given state-dependent prefer -
ences and heterogeneous status quo. Water Resources Research 
49(7):4114-4125.
CADWR (California Department of Water Resources). 2014. DWR 
Drops State Water Project Allocation to Zero, Seeks to Preserve 
Remaining Supplies. Press Release: January 31, 2014. Avail -
able at http://www.water.ca.gov/news/newsreleases/2014/013  
114pressrelease.pdf. Accessed July 23, 2014. 
Carpenter, F., M. Rietschier, B. Morris, E.U. Earn, D. Freedman, et 
al. 2009. Georgia Rainwater Harvesting Guidelines. Available 
at  http://www.dca.state.ga.us/development/constructioncodes/
programs/downloads/GeorgiaRainWaterHarvestingGuide -
lines_2009.pdf.
Casanova, L.M., C.P. Gerba, and M. Karpiscak. 2001. Chemical and 
microbial characterization of household graywater. Journal of 
Environmental Science and Health, Part A 36:395-401.
CEC (California Energy Commission). 2015. Energy Commission  
Approves Water Appliance Standards to Save More than 100 
Billion Gallons per Year. News Release: April 8, 2015. Avail -
able at http://www.energy.ca.gov/releases/2015_releases/2015-  
04-08_water_appliance_standards_nr.html. Accessed Novem -
ber 13, 2015.
CH2M-Hill. 2006. Operations and Maintenance Manual, Sun Val -
ley Watershed—Sun Valley Park Drain and Infiltration System. 
Available at https://dpw.lacounty.gov/wmd/svw/SVP.aspx.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
References  175
Chambers Group. 2014. Initial Study Checklist: Pacoima Spreading 
Grounds Improvement Project. Prepared for Los Angeles Flood 
Control District, Alhambra, CA, December. Available at https://
dpw.lacounty.gov/wrd/Projects/PacoimaSG/PacoimaSG-Final-
IS.pdf.
Characklis, G.W., M.J. Dilts, O.D. Simmons, C.A. Likirdopulos, 
L.A.H. Krometis, and M.D. Sobsey. 2005. Microbial parti -
tioning to settleable particles in stormwater. Water Research 
39(9):1773-1782.
Chino Basin Watermaster. 2001. Chino Basin Recharge Master Plan. 
Chino Basin Watermaster, Rancho Cucamonga, CA. August. 
Christova-Boal, D., R.E. Eden, and S. McFarlane. 1996. An inves -
tigation into greywater reuse for urban residential properties. 
Desalination 106(1-3):391-397.
CIMIS (California Irrigation Management Information System). 
2011. California Irrigation Management Information System. 
Available at http://wwwcimis.water.ca.gov/cimis. Accessed July  
21, 2011.
City and County of San Francisco. 2014. San Francisco’s Non-pota -
ble Water Program: Guidebook for the Collection, Treatment, 
and Reuse of Alternate Water Sources in San Francisco. Avail -
able at http://www.sfwater.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?  
documentid=4962.
City of Bellingham. 2012. Rainwater Harvesting: Guidance toward 
a Sustainable Water Future. Available at https://www.cob.org/
documents/pw/environment/water-conservation/rainwater-har -
vesting-booklet.pdf.
City of Guelph. 2012. Guelph Residential Greywater Field Test Final 
Report. Available at http://guelph.ca/wp-content/uploads/Grey -
waterFieldTestReport.pdf. 
City of Long Beach. 2011. Laundry to Landscape’ Graywater Pilot 
Program. Available at http://www.longbeach.gov/news/display  
news.asp?NewsID=5414&targetid=55.
City of Long Beach. 2013. “Laundry to Landscape” Graywater Pilot 
Program Report. July 2013. Pp. 56-58 in Water Reuse and Con -
servation in the City of Rosemount. Available at http://rcp.umn.
edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/PUBH-6132-Water-Reuse-
Report.pdf.
City of Los Angeles. 1992. Graywater Pilot Project: Final Project 
Report. Office of Reclamation. November.
City of Los Angeles. 2015. Sustainability City Plan. Los Angeles, 
CA: Office of the Mayor.
City of Tucson. 2005. Water Harvesting Guidance Manual. Available 
at http://www.tucsonaz.gov/files/transportation/2006WaterHarv
esting.pdf.
Clark, S. 2000. Urban Stormwater Filtration: Optimization of Design 
Parameters and a Pilot-Scale Evaluation. Ph.D. Dissertation, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham. 430 pp. 
Clark, S.E., and R. Pitt. 2007. Influencing factors and a proposed 
evaluation methodology for predicting groundwater contamina -
tion potential from stormwater infiltration activities. Water En -
vironment Research 79(1):29-36. 
Clark, S.E., and R. Pitt. 2009. Solids removal in storm-water filters 
modeled using a power equation. Journal of Environmental En -
gineering 135(9):896-899. 
Clark. S.E., and R. Pitt. 2012. Targeting treatment technologies to 
address specific stormwater pollutants and numeric discharge 
limits. Water Research 46(20):6715-6730. Clark, S.E., K.A. Franklin, J.M. Hafera, and J.T. Kirby. 2007. Roof -
ing as a Contributor to Urban Runoff Pollution. World Envi -
ronmental and Water Resources Congress 2007: Restoring Our 
Natural Habitat, May 15-19, 2007, Tampa, FL. CD-ROM.
Clark, S.E., B.V . Long, C.Y .S. Siu, J. Spicher, and K.A. Steele. 
2008a. Early-life roof runoff quality: Green vs traditional roofs. 
Pp.1-10 in The Low Impact Development for Urban Ecosystem 
and Habitat Protection: Conference Proceedings, November 16-
19, 2008, Seattle, WA, N. She, and M. Char, eds. Reston, V A: 
American Society of Civil Engineers. 
Clark, S.E., K.A. Steele, J. Spicher, C.Y .S. Siu, M.M. Lalor, R. Pitt, 
and J.T. Kirby. 2008b. Roofing materials’ contributions to 
storm-water runoff pollution. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage 
Engineering 134(5):638-645.
Clark, S.E., B. Pitt, and R. Field. 2010. Groundwater contamination 
potential from infiltration of urban stormwater runoff. Pp. 119-
164 in Effects of Urbanization on Groundwater: An Engineer -
ing Case-based Approach for Sustainable Development, N.-B. 
Chang, ed. Reston, V A: American Society of Civil Engineers.
Clary, J., R. Pitt, and B. Steets, eds. 2014. Pathogens in Urban Storm -
water Systems. Reston, V A: ASCE. 289 pp.
Colby, S.L., and J.M. Ortman. 2014. Projections of the Size and Com -
position of the U.S. Population: 2014 to 2060, Current Popu -
lation Reports. P25-1143. U.S. Census Bureau, Washington,  
DC.
Conn, K., K. Lowe, J.E. Drewes, C. Hoppe-Jones, and M.B. Tuchol -
ke. 2010. Occurrence of pharmaceuticals and consumer product 
chemicals in raw wastewater and septic tank effluent from sin -
gle-family houses. Environmental Engineering Science 27(4):  
347-356.
Coomes, P., T. Rockaway, J. Rivard, and B. Kornstein. 2010. North 
America Residential Water Usage Trends Since 1992. Denver, 
CO: WRF. Available at http://www.waterrf.org/PublicReportLi -
brary/4031.pdf. Accessed October 17, 2014.
Copeland, C. 2014. Energy-Water Nexus: The Water Sector’s Energy 
Use. Congressional Research Service Report R43200. Available 
at https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43200.pdf. Accessed Oc -
tober 29, 2015.
Cordery-Cotter, S., and S. Sharvelle. 2014. Workshop presentation: 
Graywater Reuse, A Case Study at Colorado State Univer -
sity. Available at https://www.watereuse.org/wp-content/uplo  
ads/2015/09/Presentation-Colorado-2014-Workshop-Graywa -
ter-Reuse-A-Case-Study-at-Colorado-State-University.pdf.
Corsi, S.R., S.R. Greb, R.T. Bannerman, and R.E. Pitt. 1999. Eval -
uation of the Multi-chambered Treatment Train, A Retrofit  
Water-Quality Management Device. U.S. Geological Survey 
Open-File Report 99-270. 24 pp.
Crabtree, K.D., R.H. Ruskin, S.B. Shaw, and J.B. Rose. 1996. The 
detection of Cryptosporidium oocysts and Giardia cysts in cis -
tern water in the U.S. Virgin Islands. Water Research 30(1):208-
216.
Craig, R.K. 2008. Climate change, regulatory fragmentation, and 
water triage. University of Colorado Law Review 79:825-876.
CREST (Cleaner Rivers through Effective Stakeholder-led TMDLs). 
2009. Los Angeles River Bacteria Source Identification Study: 
Final Report. 
CSBE (Center for the Study of the Built Environment). 2003. Graywa -
ter Reuse in Other Countries and its Applicability to Jordan. Avail -
able at http://www.csbe.org/assets/Greywater-Publications/Gray  
water-in-other-countries-E.pdf. Accessed November 20, 2015.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
176 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Cunliffe, D.A. 2004. Guidance on the Use of Rainwater Tanks. En -
health. Australian Government. Available at https://www.health.  
gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/D3E8C00F30413
04BCA257BF0001C685A/$File/env_rainwater.pdf.
Daigger, G.T. 2009. State-of-the-art review: Evolving urban water 
and residuals management paradigms: Water reclamation and 
reuse, decentralization, resource recovery. Water Environment 
Research 81(8):809-823.
Daigger, G.T. 2011. Interview. International Water Association, Au -
gust 27, 2011. Available at http://www.research-europe.com/
index.php/2011/08/dr-glen-daigger-president-of-the-interna -
tional-water-association.
Dandy, G., A. Ganji, J. Kandulu, D. Hatton MacDonald, A. Marchi, 
H. Maier, A. Mankad, and C.E. Schmidt. 2014. Managed Aqui -
fer Recharge and Stormwater Use Options: Net Benefits Report. 
Technical Report Series No. 14/1. Goyder Institute for Water Re -
search, Adelaide, Australia. 181 pp. Available at http://goyderin  
stitute.org/index.php?id=20.
Davis, A., and M. Burns, 1999. Evaluation of lead concentrations in 
runoff from painted structures. Water Research 33(13):2949-
2958.
Davis, A.P., M. Shokouhian, and S. Ni. 2001. Loading estimates of 
lead, copper, cadmium, and zinc in urban runoff from specific 
sources. Chemosphere 44(5):997-1009.
DDOE (District Department of Environment). 2013. Stormwater 
Management Guidebook. Available at http://doee.dc.gov/sw -
guidebook.
Debroux, J.F., J.A. Soller, M.H. Plumlee, and L.J. Kennedy. 2012. 
Human health risk assessment of non-regulated xenobiotics in 
recycled water: A review. Human and Ecological Risk Assess -
ment 18(3):517-546.
DeOreo, B., P. Mayer, B. Dziegielewski, and J. Kiefer. 2016. Resi -
dential End Uses of Water, Version 2. Water Research Founda -
tion.
DeOreo, W.B., P.W. Maye, L. Martien, M. Hayden, A. Funk, M. 
Kramer-Duffield, and R. Davis. 2011. California Single-Family 
Water Use Efficiency Study. Aquacraft Water Engineering and 
Management, Boulder, CO. Available at http://water.cityofda -
vis.org/Media/PublicWorks/Documents/PDF/PW/Water/Docu -
ments/California-Single-Family-Home-Water-Use-Efficiency-
Study-20110420.pdf.
DeSemple, D. 2006. Rio Salado Environmental Restoration Project. 
Pp. 2839-2852 in Proceedings WEFTEC 79th Annual Confer -
ence, October 21-25, 2006, Dallas, TX. Alexandria, V A: Water 
Environment Foundation. Available at http://acwi.gov/swrr/Rpt  
_Pubs/wef06_session36/Rio-Salado-224.pdf.
Despins, C. 2010. Ontario Guidelines for Residential Rainwater Har -
vesting Systems. Available at http://www.arcsa-edu.org/Files/
ONTARIO_RWH_HANDBOOK_2010.pdf. Accessed June 19, 
2015.
Despins, C., K. Farahbakhsh, and C. Leidl. 2009. Assessment of 
rainwater quality from rainwater harvesting systems in Ontario, 
Canada. Journal of Water Supply: Research and Technology-
AQUA 58(2):117-134.
Dierkes, C., and W.F. Geiger. 1999. Pollution retention capabilities 
of roadside soils. Water Scienceand Technology 39(2):201-208.
DOE (Department of Energy). 2014. The Water-Energy Nexus: 
Challenges and Opportunities. June 2014. Available at http://
www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2014/07/f17/WaterEnergy 
Nexus Full Report July 2014.pdf.Donnelly, K., and J. Christian-Smith. 2013. California Water Rates 
and the “New Normal.” The Pacific Institute. Available at http://
www.pacinst.org/publication/water-rates-series.
Donner, E., E. Eriksson, D.M. Revitt, L. Scholes, H.C. Holten-  
Lutzhof, and A. Ledin. 2010. Presence and fate of priority sub -
stances in domestic greywater treatment and reuse systems. The 
Science of the Total Environment 408(12):2444-2451.
Dorfman, M., and A. Haren. 2013. Testing the Waters: 23rd Annual 
Report. Washington, DC: Natural Resources Defense Council.
Dreiseitl, H. 1998. The role of water in cities. Pp. 25-29 in Sustain -
ing Urban Water Resources in the 21st Century, September 
7-12, 1997, Malmo, Sweden, A.C. Rowney, P. Stahre, and L.A. 
Roesner, eds. New York; ASCE. 
Duffield, J.M. 1986. Waterbird use of urban stormwater wetland sys -
tem in central California, USA. Colonial Waterbirds 9(2):227-
235.
Dupont, H., C. Chappell, C. Sterling, P. Okhuysen, J. Rose, and 
W. Jakubowski. 1995. Infectivity of Cryptosporidium parvum  
in healthy volunteers. New England Journal of Medicine 
332(13):855-859. 
Dziegielewski, B., J. Kiefer, E.M. Opitz, G.A. Porter, G.L. Lantz, 
W.B. DeOreo, and P.W. Mayer. 2000. Commercial and Insti -
tutional End-uses of Water. AWWA Research Foundation and 
American Water Works Association, Denver, CO. Available at 
http://ufdc.ufl.edu/WC13511002/00001/5j.
Dzombak, D.A., and F.M. Morel. 1990. Surface Complexation 
Modeling: Hydrous Ferric Oxide. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
& Sons. 
EBMUD (East Bay Municipal Utility District). 2009. Summary of 
Newly Adopted Graywater Code Fact Sheet. East Bay Munici -
pal Utility District.
Echeverria, J.D. 2010. Is regulation of water a constitutional taking? 
Vermont Journal of Environmental Law 11(3):581-583.
Eisenberg, J.N.S., J.A. Soller, J. Scott, D.M. Eisenberg, and J.M. 
Colford. 2004. A dynamic model to assess microbial health 
risks associated with beneficial uses of biosolids. Risk Analysis 
24(1):221-236. 
EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 1983. Results of the 
Nationwide Urban Runoff Program. Washington, DC: EPA,  
Water Planning Division. December. Available at http://www3.
epa.gov/npdes/pubs/sw_nurp_vol_1_finalreport.pdf. Accessed 
June 18, 2015.
EPA. 1992. Use of Microbial Risk Assessment in Setting U.S. Drink -
ing Water Standards. EPA 814/S-92-001. Available at http://ne -
pis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi?Dockey=20001W58.PDF. 
EPA. 1994. National Water Quality Inventory: 1994 Report to Con -
gress. Washington, DC: EPA.
EPA. 1998. Guidelines for Ecological Risk Assessment. EPA/630/
R-95/002-F. Available at http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/
files/2014-11/documents/eco_risk_assessment1998.pdf.
EPA. 2003. Cross-Connection Control Manual. EPA/816/R-03/002. 
Available at http://www.epa.gov/ogwdw/pdfs/crossconnection/
crossconnection.pdf.
EPA. 2004a. Report to Congress: Impacts and Control of CSOs and 
SSOs. EPA 833-R-04-001. Available at cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/
cso/cpolicy_report2004.cfm.
EPA. 2004b. Guidelines for Water Reuse. EPA/625/R-04/108. Avail -
able at http://www.epa.gov/ord/NRMRL/pubs/625r04108/625  
r04108.htm.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
References  177
EPA. 2008a. Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Ac -
tion Strategy. Available at http://water.epa.gov/infrastructure/
greeninfrastructure/upload/gi_action_strategy.pdf.
EPA. 2008b. Clarification on which stormwater infiltration practices/
technologies have the potential to be regulated as “Class V” 
wells by the Underground Injection Control Program. Memo -
randum, June 13, 2008. Available at http://www.ecy.wa.gov/
programs/wq/stormwater/municipal/resources/EPAmemoinfil -
trationclassvwells.pdf. Accessed January 22, 2015.
EPA. 2009. Technical Guidance on Implementing the Stormwater 
Runoff Requirements for Federal Projects under Section 438 of 
the Energy Independence and Security Act. EPA 841-B-09-001. 
Washington, DC: EPA. Available at http://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2015-09/documents/eisa-438.pdf.
EPA. 2010. Green Infrastructure Case Studies: Municipal Policies for 
Managing Stormwater with Green Infrastructure. Available at 
http://www.epa.gov/nscep/index.html.
EPA. 2011. eGRID2010 Version 1.1 Year 2007 Summary Tables. 
Washington, DC: EPA. 
EPA. 2012a. Guidelines for Water Reuse. EPA/600/R-12/618. Avail -
able at http://nepis.epa.gov/Adobe/PDF/P100FS7K.pdf.
EPA. 2012b. Administrative Order for Compliance on Consent. 
Docket No. CWA-03-2012-0264. EPA Region 3, Philadelphia, 
PA.
EPA. 2012c. Stormwater Program. In National Pollutant Discharge 
System (NPDES). Available at http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/ho  
me.cfm?program_id=6.
EPA. 2012d. National Menu of BMPs. In National Pollutant Dis -
charge Elimination System (NPDES). Available at http://cfpub.
epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm.
EPA. 2013a. Green Infrastructure Strategic Agenda. Available at 
http://water.epa.gov/infrastructure/greeninfrastructure/up -
load/2013_GI_FINAL_Agenda_101713.pdf.
EPA. 2013b. Rainwater Harvesting: Conservation, Credit, Codes, and 
Cost Literature Review and Case Studies. EPA-841-R-13-002. 
Washington, DC: EPA. Available at http://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2015-11/documents/rainharvesting.pdf.
EPA. 2013c. Storm Water Drainage Wells. Available at http://water.
epa.gov/type/groundwater/uic/class5/types_stormwater.cfm. 
Accessed January 22, 2015.
EPA. 2014a. Low Impact Development (LID) and Other Green 
Design Strategies. In National Pollutant Discharge Elimi -
nation System (NPDES). Available at http://cfpub.epa.gov/
npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/index.cfm?action=factsheet_
results&view=specific&bmp=124.
EPA. 2015. Water Sense: Types of Facilities. Available at http://
www3.epa.gov/watersense/commercial/types.html. 
Eriksson, E., K. Auffarth, M. Henze, and A. Ledin. 2002. Character -
istics of grey wastewater. Urban Water 4(1):85-104.
Eriksson, E., A. Baun, L. Scholes, A. Ledin, S. Ahlmann, M. Revitt, 
C. Noutsopoulus, and P. S. Mikkelsen. 2007. Selected stormwa -
ter priority pollutants—a European perspective. Science of the 
Total Environment 383(1-3):41-51.
Etchepare, R., and J.-P. van der Hoek. 2015. Health risk assessment 
of organic micropollutants in graywater for potable reuse. Water 
Research 72:186-198. 
Faller, M., and D. Reiss. 2005. Runoff behavior of metallic materials 
used for roofs and facades—a 5 year exposure study in Switzer -
land. Materials and Corrosion 56(4):244-249.Ferguson, B.C., N. Frantzeskaki, and R.R. Brown. 2013. A strategic 
program for transitioning to a water sensitive city. Landscape 
and Urban Planning 117:32-45.
Fischer, D., E.G. Charles, and A.L. Baehr. 2003. Effects of storm -
water infiltration on quality of groundwater beneath retention 
and detention basins. Journal of Environmental Engineering 
129(5):464-471.
Förster, J. 1999.Variability of roof runoff quality PB. Water Science 
and Technology 39(5):137-144.
Friedler, E., and M. Hadari. 2006. Economic feasibility of on-site  
greywater reuse in multi-storey buildings. Desalination 190(1):  
221-234.
Friedler, E., R. Kovalio, and A. Ben-Zvi. 2006. Comparative study 
of the microbial quality of greywater treated by three on-site 
treatment systems. Environmental Technology 27(6):653-663.
Gan, J., S. Bondarenko, L. Oki, D. Haver, and J.X. Li. 2012. Occur -
rence of fipronil and its biologically active derivatives in ur -
ban residential runoff. Environmental Science and Technology 
46(3):1489-1495. 
Gan, K., and M. Redhead. 2013. Melbourne Residential Water Use 
Studies, 10TR5-01. Smart Water Fund. Available at https://
www.yvw.com.au/yvw/groups/public/documents/document/
yvw1004065.pdf.
Garland, J.L., L.H. Levine, N.C. Yorio, J.L. Adams, and K.L. Cook. 
2000. Graywater processing in recirculating hydroponic sys -
tems: Phytotoxicity, surfactant degradation, and bacterial dy -
namics. Water Research 34(12):3075-3086.
Getches, D.H. 2001. The metamorphosis of western water policy: 
Have federal laws and local decisions eclipsed the states’ role? 
Stanford Environmental Law Journal 20(3):3-72. 
Getches, D.H. 2009. Water Law in a Nutshell. St. Paul, MN: West 
Publishing Co.
Ghimire, S.R., J.M. Johnston, W.W. Ingwersen, and T.R. Hawkins. 
2014. Life cycle assessment of domestic and agricultural rain -
water harvesting systems. Environmental Science and Technol -
ogy 48(7):4069-4077.
Gilliom, R.J., J.E. Barbash, C.G. Crawford, P.A. Hamilton, J.D. 
Martin, N. Nakagaki, et al. 2007. The Quality of Our Nation’s 
Waters Pesticides in the Nation’s Streams and Ground Water, 
1992–2001. Circular 1291. Reston, V A: U.S. Geological Sur -
vey.
 GLACIRWM (Greater Los Angeles County Integrated Regional 
Management). 2013. Greater Los Angeles County Integrated 
Regional Water Management Plan: 2013 Update. Prepared by 
the Leadership Committee of the Greater Los Angeles County 
Integrated Regional Management Region.
Gleick, P. H., D. Haasz, C. Henges-Jeck, V . Srinivasan, G.H. Wolff, 
K.K. Cushing, and A. Mann. 2003. Waste Not, Want Not: The 
Potential for Urban Water Conservation in California. Oakland, 
CA: Pacific Institute for Studies in Development, Environment, 
and Security.
Good, J.C. 1993. Roof runoff as a diffuse source of metals and aquat -
ic toxicity in storm water. Water Science and Technology 28(3-
5):317-321.
Goodman, J.A., and L. Austin. 2011. Predicting hydromodification 
impacts using a four factor approach. Pp. 499-508 in Proceed -
ings of World Environment and Water Resources Congress: 
Bearing Knowledge for Sustainability, R.E. Beighley, II, and 
M.W. Killgore, eds. Reston, V A: ASCE. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
178 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Governor of the State of California. 2014. Governor Edmund G. 
Brown, Jr., Declares Drought State of Emergency. Available at 
http://gov.ca.gov/news.php?id=18368. Accessed July 23, 2014.
Grebel, J.E., S.K. Mohanty, A.A. Torkelson, A.B. Boehm, C.H.  
Higgins, R.M. Maxwell, K.L. Nelson, and D.L. Sedlak. 2013. 
Engineered infiltration systems for urban stormwater reclama -
tion. Environmental Engineering Science 30(8):437-454. 
Grohmann, G.S, N.J. Ashbolt, M.S. Genova, G. Logan, P. Cox, and 
C.S.W. Kueh. 1993. Detection of viruses in coastal and river 
water-systems in Sydney. Australian Water Science Technology 
27:457-461.
Gromaire-Mertz, M.C., S. Garnaud, A. Gonzalez, and G. Chebbo. 
1999. Characterization of urban runoff pollution in Paris. Water 
Science and Technology 39(2):1-8.
Gross, A., N. Azulai, G. Oron, Z. Ronen, M. Arnold, and A. Nejidat. 
2005. Environmental impact and health risks associated with 
greywater irrigation: A case study. Water Science and Technol -
ogy 52(8):161-169.
Gross, A., D. Kaplan, and K. Baker. 2007. Removal of chemical and 
microbiological contaminants from domestic greywater using a 
recycled vertical flow bioreactor (RVFB). Ecological Engineer -
ing 31:107-114.
Gual, M., A. Moia, and J. March. 2008. Monitoring of an indoor pilot 
plant for osmosis rejection and greywater reuse to flush toilets 
in a hotel. Desalination 219:81-88.
Guest, J. S., S.J. Skerlos, J.L. Barnard, M.B. Beck, G.T. Daigger, H. 
Hilger, S.J. Jackson, K. Karvazy, L. Kelly, L. Macpherson, J.R. 
Mihelcic, A. Pramanik, L. Raskin, M.C.M. van Loosdrecht, D. 
Yeh, and N.G. Love. 2009. A new planning and design para -
digm to achieve sustainable resource recovery from wastewater. 
Environmental Scienceand Technology 43(16):6126-6130.
Gumbs, A.F., and F.E. Dierberg. 1985. Heavy metals in the drinking 
water from cisterns supplying single-family dwellings. Water 
International 10:22-28
Haas, C.N., J.B. Rose, and C.P. Gerba. 2014. Quantitative Microbial 
Risk Assessment, 2nd Edition. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley & Sons. 
Hagekhalil, A., S. Kharaghani, W. Tam, R. Haimann, and K. Susilo. 
2014. Becoming the green-blue city. Civil Engineering Maga -
zine 84(12):68-79, 90-91. 
Hambly, A.C., R.K. Henderson, A. Baker, R.M. Stuetz, and S.J. 
Khan. 2012. Cross-connection detection in Australian dual re -
ticulation systems by monitoring inherent fluorescent organic 
matter. Environmental Technology Reviews 1(1):67-80.
Hampson, P.S. 1986. Effects of Detention on Water Quality of Two 
Stormwater Detention Ponds Receiving Highway Surface Run -
off in Jacksonville, Florida. U.S. Geological Survey Water-
Resources Investigations Report 86-4151. Prepared in Coop -
eration with the Florida Department of Transportation. Denver, 
CO: USGS.
Hart, C., and D. White. 2006. Water quality and construction materi -
als in rainwater catchments across Alaska. Journal of Environ -
mental Engineering Science 5:S19-S25.
Hatt, B.E., A. Deletic, and T.D. Fletcher. 2006. Integrated treatment 
and recycling of stormwater: A review of Australian practice. 
Journal of Environmental Management 79:102-113.
Heijerick, D.G., C.R. Janssen, C. Karlen, I.O.Wallinder, and C.  
Leygraf. 2002. Bioavailability of zinc in runoff water from roof -
ing materials. Chemosphere 47(10):1073-1080. Hendrickson, T.P., M.T. Nguyen, M. Sukardi, A. Miot, A. Horvath, 
and K.L. Nelson. 2015. Life-cycle energy use and greenhouse 
gas emissions of a building-scale wastewater treatment and 
nonpotable reuse system. Environmental Science and Technol -
ogy 49(17):10303-10311.
Herald Sun. 2007. Staff ill from recycled water. Available at http://
www.herald.sun.com.au/news/Victoria/staff-ill-from-recycled-
water/story-e6frf7kx-1111113190490. Accessed October 15, 
2014.
Hering, J.G., T.D. Waite, R.G. Luthy, J.E. Drewes, and D.L. Sedlak. 
2013. A changing framework for urban water systems. Environ -
mental Science and Technology 47(19):10,721–10,726.
Higgins, C.P., and R.G. Luthy. 2006. Sorption of perfluoroinated sur -
factants on sediments. Environmental Science and Technology 
40(23):7251-7256.
Hodgson, B. 2012. Development of a Cost Effective and Energy Effi -
cient Treatment Systems for Graywater Reuse for Toilet Flush -
ing at the Multi-Residential Scale. M.S. Thesis, Colorado State 
University.
Holmstrom, B.K., D.L. Olson, and B.R. Ellefson. 1995. Water Re -
sources Data, Wisconsin Water Year 1995: U.S. Geological Sur -
vey Water – Data Report WI-95-1. Available at http://pubs.usgs.
gov/wdr/1995/wi-95-1/report.pdf.
Holmstrom, B.K., D.L. Olson, and B.R. Ellefson. 1996. Water Re -
sources Data, Wisconsin, Water Year 1996: U.S. Geological 
Survey Water – Data Report WI-96-1. 
ICC (International Code Council). 2012. International Fire Code. 
Available at http://publicecodes.cyberregs.com/icod/ifc/2012/
index.htm.
ICC. 2012. International Plumbing Code 2012. Available at http://
publicecodes.cyberregs.com/icod/ipc/2012.
IEUA (Inland Empire Utilities Agency). 2014. Groundwater Re -
charge Annual Report for Calendar Year 2013. May 2014.
Jartun, M., R.T. Ottesen, E. Steinnes, and T. V olden. 2008. Runoff of 
particle bound pollutants from urban impervious surfaces stud -
ied by analysis of sediments from stormwater traps. Science of 
the Total Environment 396(2-3):147-163. 
Jarvis, I.W.H., K. Dreij, A. Mattson, B. Jemstrom, and U. Stenius. 
2014. Interactions between polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
in complex mixtures and implications for cancer risk assess -
ment. Toxicology 321(3):27-39.
Jensen, M.E., R.D. Burman, and R.G. Allen, eds. 1990. Evapotrans -
piration and Irrigation Water Requirements. New York: ASCE. 
Jiang, S.C., W. Chu, B.H. Olson, J.W. He, S. Choi, J. Zhang, J.Y . Le, 
and P.B. Gedalanga. 2007. Microbial source tracking in a small 
southern California urban watershed indicates wild animals and 
growth as the source of fecal bacteria. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology 76(4):927-934.
John, D.E., and J.B. Rose. 2005. Review of factors affecting micro -
bial survival in groundwater. Environmental Science and Tech -
nology 39(19):7345-7356.
Johnson, T. 2011. The Increasing Role of Storm Water for Ground -
water Recharge in the Central Basin, Los Angeles Coastal Plain, 
Southern California. Managed Aquifer Recharge Symposium, 
January 25-26, Irvine, CA.
Jones, M.P., and W.F. Hunt. 2014. Urban Waterways. Rainwater 
Harvesting: Guidance for Homeowners. North Carolina Co -
operative Extension Service. Available at: http://content.ces.
ncsu.edu/rainwater-harvesting-guidance-for-homeowners.pdf 
Accessed June 19, 2015.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
References  179
Kakuturu, S.P., and S.E. Clark. 2015. Clogging mechanism of storm -
water filter media by NaCl as a deicing salt. Environmental En -
gineering Science 32(2):141-152. 
Karlen, C., I.O.,Wallinder, D. Heijerick, and C. Leygraf. 2002. Run -
off rates, chemical speciation and bioavailability of copper re -
leased from naturally patinated copper. Environmental Pollu -
tion 120(3):691-700. 
Kazner, C., T. Wintgens, and P. Dillon. 2012. Water Reclamation 
Technologies for Safe Managed Aquifer Recharge. London: 
IWA Publishing.
Kenny, J.F., and K.E. Juracek. 2012. Description of 2005–10 Do -
mestic Water Use for Selected U.S. Cities and Guidance for 
Estimating Domestic Water Use. U.S. Geological Survey Sci -
entific Investigations Report 2012–5163. 31 pp.
Kinde, H., M. Adelson, A. Ardans, E.H. Little, D. Willoughby, D. 
Berchtold, D.H. Read, R. Breitmeyer, D. Kerr, R. Tarbell, and E. 
Hughes. 1997. Prevalence of Salmonella in municipal sewage 
treatment plant effluents in southern California. Avian Diseases 
41:392-398.
King County DNRP (Department of Natural Resources and Parks). 
2009. King County Washington’s Stormwater Design Manual.
Available at http://www.kingcounty.gov/environment/waterand  
land/stormwater/documents/surface-water-design-manual.
aspx. Accessed June 19, 2015.
Ku, H.F., and D.L. Simmons. 1986. Effect of Urban Storm Water 
Runoff on Groundwater Beneath Recharge Basins on Long 
Island, New York. Water-Resources Investigations Report 85-
4088. U.S. Geological Survey. Available at http://pubs.usgs.
gov/wri/1985/4088/report.pdf.
Kuru, B., and M. Luettengen. 2012. Investigation of residential water 
reuse technologies. Pp. 1-14 in Water Smart Innovations Con -
ference, October 3-5, 2012, Las Vegas, NV .
LACFCD (Los Angeles County Flood Control District). 2012. Sun 
Valley Watershed, Rory M. Shaw Wetlands Park. Available at 
http://dpw.lacounty.gov/wmd/svw/docs/RoryMShawWetlands_
Factsheet.pdf. Accessed May 14, 2015.
LADWP (Los Angeles Department of Water and Power). 2010. Ur -
ban Water Management Plan. Available at https://www.ladwp.
com/cs/idcplg?IdcService=GET_FILE&dDocName=QOEL
LADWP005416&RevisionSelectionMethod=LatestReleased. 
Accessed March 11, 2013. 
LADWP. 2014. Stormwater Capture Master Plan Interim Report, 
Draft. Prepared by Geosyntec Consultants. December.
LADWP. 2015. Stormwater Capture Master Plan: The Master Plan -
ning Process—Final Report. Available at: https://www.ladwp.
com/cs/idcplg?IdcService=GET_FILE&dDocName=OPLAD
WPCCB421767&RevisionSelectionMethod=LatestReleased. 
Accessed November 11, 2015.
Lafont, M., L. Grapentine, Q. Rochfort, J. Marsalek, G. Tixier, and 
P. Breil. 2007. Bioassessment of wet-weather pollution on fine 
sediments in urban waters by benthic indices and the sediment 
quality triad. Water Science and Technology 56:13-20.
LAO (Legislative Analyst’s Office). 2006. Reforming the CALFED 
Bay-Delta Program. February. Available at http://www.lao.ca.  
gov/analysis_2006/resources/res_02_anl06.html.
Lawson, S., A. LaBranche-Tucker, H. Otto-Wack, R. Hall, B. Sojka, 
E. Crawford, D. Crawford, and C. Brand. 2009. Virginia Rain -
water Harvesting Manual. Available at https://www.radford.edu/  
content/dam/departments/administrative/Sustainability/Docu -
ments/Rainwater-Manual.pdf. Accessed June 19, 2015.Le Viol, I., J. Mocq, R. Julliard, and C. Kerbiriou. 2009. The contri -
bution of motorway stormwater retention ponds to the biodi -
versity of aquatic macroinvertebrates. Biological Conservation 
142:3163-3171.
Little, V .L. 2000. Residential Graywater Reuse: The Good, The Bad, 
The Healthy in Pima Arizona: A Survey of Current Graywater 
Reuse. Water Resources Research Center, University of Ari -
zona.
Liu, H., R. Ramnarayanan, and B.E. Logan. 2004. Production of elec -
tricity during wastewater treatment using a single chamber mi -
crobial fuel cell. Environmental Science and Technology 38(7):  
2281-2285.
Lock, M.J. 2000. Braving the waters of Supreme Court takings ju -
risprudence: Will the Fifth Amendment protect western water 
rights from federal environmental regulation? University of 
Denver Water Law Review 4:76-78.
Lockie, S., and S. Rockloff. 2005. Decision Frameworks: Assess -
ment of the Social Aspects of Decision Frameworks and Devel -
opment of a Conceptual Model. Coastal CRC Discussion Paper. 
Norman Gardens, Australia: Central Queensland University.
Los Angeles Department of Public Health. 2011. Guidelines for 
Harvesting Rainwater, Stormwater, and Urban Runoff for Out -
door Non-Potable Uses, September 2011. Available at http://
www.smgov.net/uploadedFiles/Departments/OSE/Categories/
Urban_Runoff/Guidelines_Harvesting_Rainwater_Stormwa -
ter_Urban_Runoff_Outdoor_Non-Potable_LA_County.pdf. 
Accessed June 22, 2015.
Luthy, R.G., and D.L. Sedlak. 2015. Urban water supply reinvention. 
Daedalus 144(3):72-82.
MacKenzie, W.R., N.J. Hoxie, M.E. Proctor, M.S. Gradus, K.A. 
Blair, D.E. Peterson, J.J. Kazmierczak, D.G. Addiss, K.R. Fox,  
J.B. Rose, and J.P. Davis. 1994. A massive outbreak in Milwau -
kee of Cryptosporidium infection transmitted through the pub -
lic water supply. New England Journal of Medicine 331:161-
167. 
Macomber, P.S.H. 2010. Guidelines on Rainwater Catchment Sys -
tems for Hawaii. University of Hawaii at Manoa. Available  
at http://www.ctahr.hawaii.edu/hawaiirain/Library/Guides&M  
anuals/HI_Guidelines_2010.pdf.
Maestre, A. 2005. Stormwater Characteristics as Described in the 
National Stormwater Quality Database. Ph.D. Dissertation, De -
partment of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineer -
ing, University of Alabama.
Maestre, A., R. Pitt, and J. Clary. 2015. The National Stormwater 
Quality Database (NSQD), Version 4. American Water Re -
sources Conference, November 16-19, 2015, Denver, CO.
Maimon, A., A. Tal, E. Friedler, and A. Gross. 2010. Safe on-site 
reuse of greywater for irrigation—a critical review of current 
guidelines. Environmental Science and Technology 44:3213-
3220.
Maimone, M., D.E. O’Rourke, J.O. Knighton, and C.P. Thomas. 
2011. Potential impacts of extensive stormwater infiltration in 
Philadelphia. Environmental Engineer: Applied Research and 
Practice 14:1-12. 
Marsden, J. 2013. Economic Viability of Water Recycling Systems. 
Australian Water Recycling Centre of Excellence. 62 pp. Avail -
able at http://www.australianwaterrecycling.com.au/research-
publications.html.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
180 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Martinez, C.J. 2013. Graywater Reuse in Florida. Doc. No. AE453. 
Gainesville, FL: Institute of Food and Agricultural Services, 
University of Florida. Available at http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/pdf -
files/AE/AE45300.pdf.
Maupin, M.A., J.F. Kenny, S.S. Hutson, J.K. Lovelace, N.L. Barber, 
and K.S. Linsey. 2014. Estimated Use of Water in the United 
States in 2010. U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1405. 56 pp. 
Available at http://dx.doi.org/10.3133/cir1405. 
Mayer, P.W., W.B. DeOreo, E. M. Opitz, J.C. Kiefer, W.Y . Davis, B. 
Dziegielewski, and J.O. Nelson 1999. Residential End Uses of 
Water. Denver, CO: AWWA Research Foundation and Ameri -
can Water Works Association Available at http://www.waterrf.
org/publicreportlibrary/rfr90781_1999_241a.pdf.
Mayer, P., P. Lander, and D. Glenn. 2015. Outdoor Water Savings 
Research Initiative, Phase 1. Analysis of Published Research. 
Chicago, IL: Alliance for Water Efficiency.
McCarty, P.L., J. Bae, and J. Kim. 2011. Domestic wastewater treat -
ment as a net energy producer—can this be achieved? Environ -
mental Science and Technology 45(17):7100-7106.
McNabola, A., and K. Shields. 2013. Efficient drain water heat re -
covery in horizontal domestic shower drains. Energy and Build -
ings 59:44-49.
MDE (Maryland Department of the Environment). 2012. Stormwa -
ter Design Guidance-Rainwater Harvesting. Available at http://
www.mde.state.md.us/programs/Water/StormwaterManage -
mentProgram/SedimentandStormwaterHome/Documents/ES -
DMEP%20Guidance%20RWH.pdf.
Mehlhart, G. 2005. Greywater Recycling – Planning Fundamentals 
and Operational Information. fbr – Information Sheet H 201. 
Fachvereinigung Betriebs and Regenwassernutzung fbr e.V .; 
Darmstadt, Germany. Available at http://www.fbr.de/fileadmin/
user_upload/files/Englische_Seite/H201_fbr-Information_
Sheet_Greywater-Recycling_neu.pdf.
Melbourne Water. 2013/2014. Water Use Data. Available at http://
www.melbournewater.com.au/waterdata/wateruse/Pages/de -
fault.aspx.
Melillo, J.M., T.C. Richmond, and G.W. Yohe, eds. 2014. Climate 
Change Impacts in the United States: The Third National Cli -
mate Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program, 
Washington DC.
Memon, F.A., Z. Zheng, D. Butler, C. Shirley-Smith, S. Lui, C. 
Makropoulos, and L. Avery. 2007. Life cycle impact assess -
ment of greywater recycling technologies for new develop -
ments. Environment Monitoring and Assessment 129:27-35.
Mendez, C.B., S. Bae, B. Chambers, S. Fakhreddine, T. Gloyna S. 
Keithley, L. Untung, M.E. Barrett, K. Kinney, and M.J. Kirisits. 
2011. Effect of Roof Material on Water Quality for Rainwater 
Harvesting Systems–Additional Physical, Chemical, and Mi -
crobiological Data Report. Texas Water Development Board, 
Austin, TX. Available at https://www.twdb.texas.gov/innova -
tivewater/rainwater/projects/rainquality/2011_02_rainqual -
ity_final_rpt.pdf.
Metropolitan Council. 2011. Stormwater Reuse Guide: A Guide for 
City Planners, Engineers, Homeowners and Green Thinkers. 
Fall 2011. Available at http://rfcd.pima.gov/pdd/lid/pdfs/31-
mn-metropolitan-council-stormwater-reuse-guide-2011.pdf. 
Accessed December 11, 2015.
Metropolitan Council. 2013. Municipalities Reusing Stormwater See 
Multiple Benefits. August 14. 2013.Mikkelsen, P.S., M. Hafliger, M. Ochs, J.C. Tjell, P. Jacobsen, and 
M. Boller. 1996. Experimental assessment of soil and ground -
water contamination from two old infiltration systems for road 
run-off in Switzerland. The Science of the Total Environment 
189/190:341-347.
Montana Department of Agriculture. 2011. Summary Report: Urban 
Storm Water Runoff Monitoring for Pesticides and Nitrate in 
Helena and Billings, 2011. Groundwater Protection Program. 
Available at http://agr.mt.gov/agr/Programs/NaturalResources/
Groundwater/Reports/PDF/Stormwater_report.pdf. 
Motavalli, J. 2012. Movement to banish copper from brake pads gains 
momentum. New York Times: February 3, 2012. Available at 
http://wheels.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/02/03/movement-to-
banish-copper-from-brake-pads-gains-momentum/?_r=0.
MPCA (Minnesota Pollution Control Agency). 2012. Beneficial Use 
of Wastewater and Stormwater: Capital Grants for Demonstra -
tion Projects, Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. February 
2012. Available at http://www.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/view-
document.html?gid=17179. Accessed December 11, 2015.
MPCA. 2015. Minnesota Stormwater Manuel: Stormwater Re-use 
and Rainwater Harvesting. Available at http://stormwater.pca.
state.mn.us/index.php/Stormwater_re-use_and_rainwater_har -
vesting. 
MPWMD (Monterey Peninsula Water Management District). 2014. 
Update: Water Supply for the Monterey Peninsula, Monterey 
County. IRWM Group, Monterey Peninsula Water Manage -
ment District. June 2014. Available at http://www.water.ca.gov/  
irwm/grants/docs/PlanReviewProcess/MontereyPeninsula_IR -
WMP/IRWMplan-Appendices_1to2c_w_linksJuly21.pdf. Ac -
cessed December 11, 2015. 
Mukheibir, P., T. Boyle, C. Moy, and S. White. 2013. Estimating the 
reliable residential water substitution from household rainwater 
tanks. In Proceedings of the 7th IWA International Conference 
on Efficient Use and Management of Water, October 22-25, 
2013, Paris. 
Mullaney, J.R., D.L. Lorenz, and A.D. Arntson. 2009. Chlorides in 
Groundwater and Surface Water in Areas Underlain by the Gla -
cial Aquifer System, Northern United States. USGS Scientific 
Investigation Report 2009-5086. Reston, V A: USGS. 41pp.
Available at http://pubs.usgs.gov/sir/2009/5086/pdf/sir2009-
5086.pdf.
Murakami, M., F. Nakajima,, and H. Furumai. 2005. Size- and den -
sity-distributions and sources of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar -
bons in urban road dust. Chemosphere 61(6):783-791. 
MWD IRP Technical Workgroup. 2009. Stormwater/Urban Runoff 
Issue Paper–Final, October 2009. Metropolitan Water District 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. 
MWDSC (Metropolitan Water District of Southern California). 
2007. Groundwater Assessment Study. Chapter 4—Groundwa -
ter Basin Reports, Central Basin. Report Number 1308.
MWDSC. 2010. Integrated Water Resources Plan. Report No. 1373. 
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, Los Ange -
les, CA. Available at: http://www.mwdh2o.com/Reports/2.4.1_
Integrated_Resources_Plan.pdf. Accessed December 11, 2015. 
MWH. 2003. Percolation Optimization Investigation. Los Angeles 
County Department of Public Works. December.
Nara, Y ., R. Pitt, S.R. Durrans, and J. Kirby. 2006. Sediment transport 
in grass swales. Pp. 379-402 in Stormwater and Urban Water 
Systems Modeling, Monograph 14, W. James, K.N. Irvine, E.A. 
McBean, and R.E. Pitt, eds. Guelph, Ontario: CHI. Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
References  181
National Assessment Synthesis Team. 2001. Climate Change Im -
pacts on the United States: The Potential Consequences of 
Climate Variability and Change. Report for the U.S. Global 
Change Research Program. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni -
versity Press.
NCSU (North Carolina State University). 2011. Urban Waterways: 
Stormwater Wetlands and Ecosystem Services. Available at 
http://www.bae.ncsu.edu/stormwater/PublicationFiles/Wetlan -
dEcosystemServices2011.pdf. Accessed May 14, 2015.
Negahban-Azar, M., S. Sharvelle, M. Stromberger, C. Olson, and L. 
Roesner. 2012. Fate of graywater constituents after long-term 
application for landscape irrigation. Water, Air, and Soil Pollu -
tion 223(8):4733-4749.
Negahban-Azar, M., S. Sharvelle, Y . Qian, and A. Shogbon. 2013. 
Leachability of chemical constituents in soil-plant systems ir -
rigated with synthetic graywater. Environmental Science: Pro -
cesses and Impacts 14(4):760-762.
Nieber, J.L., A.J. Erickson, P.T. Weiss, J.S. Gulliver, and R.M.  
Hozalski. 2010. Infiltration practices. In Stormwater Treatment: 
Assessment and Maintenance. University of Minnesota, St. An -
thony Falls Laboratory, Minneapolis, MN. Available at http://
stormwaterbook.safl.umn.edu/content/infiltration-practices.
Nieber, J.L., C.N. Arika, L. Lahti, J.S. Gulliver, and P.T. Weiss. 
2014. The Impact of Stormwater Infiltration Practices on 
Groundwater Quality, Department of Civil Engineering, Uni -
versity of Minnesota, Metropolitan Council. July. Available at 
http://www.metrocouncil.org/METC/files/9f/9f5e1d8d-30d0-
44f2-ba83-aeca8f372c61.pdf.
Nightingale, H.I. 1987. Water quality beneath urban runoff water 
management basins. Journal of American Water Resources As -
sociation 23(2):197-205.
Nolde, E. 1999. Greywater reuse systems for toilet flushing in multi-
story buildings—over ten years of experience in Berlin. Urban 
Water 1(4):275-284.
NPD Group. 1999. Graywater Awareness and Usage Study. Port 
Washington, NY: Soap and Detergent Association. 52pp. Avail -
able at http://www.aciscience.org/docs/graywater_habits_&_pr  
actices_survey.pdf.
NRC (National Research Council). 1983. Risk Assessment in the 
Federal Government: Managing the Process. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.
NRC. 1997. Valuing Groundwater: Economic Concepts and Ap -
proaches. Washington, DC: The National Academy Press.
NRC. 2005. Decision Making for the Environment: Social and Be -
havioral Science Research Priorities. Washington, DC: The Na -
tional Academies Press.
NRC. 2008a. Desalination: A National Perspective. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2008b. Public Participation in Environmental Decision Mak -
ing. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2009a. Urban Stormwater Management in the United States. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2009b. Summary of a Workshop on Water Issues in the Apala -
chicola-Chattahoochee-Flint and Alabama-Coosa-Tallapoosa 
(ACF-ACT) River Basins. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
NRC. 2009c. Science and Decisions: Advancing Risk Assessment. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.NRC. 2009d. Prospects for Managed Underground Storage of Re -
coverable Water. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.
NRC. 2012a. Water Reuse: The Potential for Expanding the Nation’s 
Water Supply through Reuse of Municipal Wastewater. Wash -
ington, DC: The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2012b. Science for Environmental Protection: The Road 
Ahead. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
NRMCC/EPHC (Natural Resource Management Ministerial Coun -
cil, and Environment Protection and Heritage Council) and 
Australian Health Ministers’ Conference. 2006. National Guide -
lines for Water Recycling: Managing Health and Environmental 
Risks. 415pp. Available at http://www.environment.gov.au/sys -
tem/files/resources/044e7a7e-558a-4abf-b985-2e831d8f36d1/
files/water-recycling-guidelines-health-environmental-21.pdf.
NRMMC/EPHC/NHMRC (Natural Resource Management Minis -
terial Council, Environment Protection and Heritage Council, 
and National Health and Medical Research Council). 2009a. 
Australian Guidelines for Water Recycling, Managing Health 
and Environmental Risks, V olume 2B. Stormwater Harvesting 
and Reuse. National Water Quality Management Strategy Doc -
ument 23. Available at http://www.environment.gov.au/water/
quality/publications/nwqms-australian-guidelines-water-recy -
cling-managing-health-phase2-stormwater.
NRMMC/EPHC/NHMRC. 2009b. Australian Guidelines for Water 
Recycling, Managing Health and Environmental Risks, V ol -
ume 2C. Managed Aquifer Recharge. NWQMS Document 24. 
Available at http://www.environment.gov.au/water/quality/pub -
lications/nwqms-australian-guidelines-water-recycling-manag -
ing-health-phase2-aquifer-recharge. 
NWRI (National Water Resources Institute). 2004. Report of Scien -
tific Advisory Panel, Orange County Water District’s Santa Ana 
River Water Quality and Health Study. August.
NYSDEC (New York State Department of Environmental Conserva -
tion). 2013. NYSDEC and NYCDEP Announce Ground Break -
ing Agreement to Reduce Combined Sewer Overflows Using 
Green Infrastructure in New York City. Press Release: March 
13, 2013. Available at http://www.dec.ny.gov/press/80919.html.
NYSDEC. 2015. New York State Stormwater Design Manual. Avail -
able at http://www.dec.ny.gov/chemical/29072.html.
OCWD. 2014. Tenth Annual Santa Ana Water Quality Monitoring 
Report, October 2014.
OEHHA and SWRCB (Office of Environmental Health Hazard As -
sessment and the State Water Resources Control Board). 2009. 
Hydromodification: Principles, Problems, and Solutions. Avail -
able at http://oehha.ca.gov/ecotox/pdf/hydromodfacts102109.
pdf. Accessed December 11, 2015.
Ogburn, O. 2013. Urban Stormwater Contamination Associated with 
Gutter and Pipe Material Degradation. Ph.D. dissertation. De -
partment of Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineer -
ing, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL. 
Ogoshi, M., Y . Suzuki, and T. Asano. 2001. Water reuse in Japan. 
Water Science and Technology 43(10):17-23.
Olivieri, V .P., C.W. Kruse, K. Kawata, and J.E. Smith. 1977. Micro -
organisms in Urban Stormwater. EPA-600/2-77-087. NTIS NO. 
PB-272245.
Olson, P.J. 2014. AWWA: Water Reuse Standards and Codes, Pre -
sentation to American Society of Plumbing Engineers. Avail -
able at https://www.aspe.org/sites/default/files/webfm/pdfs/
AWWA.pdf.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
182 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
O’Shea, M.L., and R. Field. 1992a. Detection and disinfection of 
pathogens in storm-generated flows. Canadian Journal of Mi -
crobiology 38(4):267-276.
O’Shea, M.L., and R. Field. 1992b. An evaluation of bacterial stan -
dards and disinfection practices used for the assessment and 
treatment of stormwater. Advances in Applied Microbiology 
37:21-40.
O’Toole, J., M. Sinclair, S.F. Barker, and K. Leder. 2014. Advice to 
risk assessors modeling viral health risk associated with house -
hold graywater. Risk Analysis 34(5):797-780.
Ottoson, J., and T.A. Stenstrom. 2003. Faecal contamination of 
greywater and associated microbial risks. Water Research 
37:645-655. 
Pacific Institute and NRDC. 2014. Stormwater Capture Potential 
in Urban and Suburban California. Issue Brief IB:14-05-G. 
June 2014. Available at http://pacinst.org/wp-content/uploads/
sites/21/2014/06/ca-water-stormwater.pdf.
Page, D., and K. Levett. 2010. Stormwater Harvesting and Reuse 
Risk Assessment for Various Uses. CSIRO: National Research 
Flagships Report. Available at http://www.clw.csiro.au/publica -
tions/waterforahealthycountry/2010/wfhc-stormwater-reuse-
risk-assessment.pdf.
Page, D., D. Gonzalez, P. Dillon, J. Vanderzalm, G. Vadakattu, S. 
Toze, J. Sidhu, K. Miotlinski, S. Torkzaban, and K. Barry. 2013. 
Managed Aquifer Recharge and Urban Stormwater Use Op -
tions: Public Health and Environmental Risk Assessment Final 
Report. Available at http://www.goyderinstitute.org/uploads/Pu  
blic%20Health%20Risk%20Assessment%20Final%20Report  
%20June%202014%20%282%29.pdf. Accessed November 11, 
2015.
Parkin, R.T., J.A. Soller, and A.W. Olivieri. 2003. Incorporating sus -
ceptible subpopulations in microbial risk assessment: Pediatric 
exposures to enteroviruses in river water. Journal of Exposure 
Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology 13(2):161-168. 
Paul, M.J., and J.L. Meyer. 2001. Streams in the urban landscape. 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 32:333-365.
Payne, E.G.I., B.E. Hatt, A. Deletic, M.F. Dobbie, D.T. McCarthy, 
and G. I. Chandrasena. 2015. Adoption Guidelines for Storm -
water Biofiltration Systems. Melbourne, Australia: Cooperative 
Research Centre for Water Sensitive Cities. 
Pidou, M., L. Avery, T. Stephenson, P. Jeffrey, S.A. Parsons, S. Liu, 
F. A. Memon, and B. Jefferson. 2008. Chemical solutions for 
greywater recycling. Chemosphere 71(1):147-155. Cincinnati, 
OH. 467 pp.
Pitt, R. 1987. Small Storm Urban Flow and Particulate Washoff Con -
tributions to Outfall Discharges, Ph.D. Dissertation, Civil and 
Environmental Engineering Department, University of Wiscon -
sin, Madison, WI. November.
Pitt, R. 1997. Unique features of the Source Loading and Manage -
ment Model (SLAMM). Pp. 13-37 in Advances in Modeling the 
Management of Stormwater Impacts, V olume 6, W. James, ed., 
Guelph, Ontario: CHI. 
Pitt, R. 2011a. Regional WinSLAMM Calibrations using Standard 
Land Use Characteristics and Pollutant Sources. Prepared for 
Geosyntec, Cadmus, and EPA in Support of New Stormwa -
ter Regulations. April 18, 2011. Available at http://unix.eng.
ua.edu/~rpitt/Publications/8_Stormwater_Management_and_
Modeling/WinSLAMM_modeling_examples/Standard_Land_
Use_file_descriptions_final_April_18_2011.pdf.Pitt, R. 2011b. Lincoln, Nebraska, Retrofit Stormwater Management 
Options Performance and Relative Costs. Prepared for Wright 
Waters, Denver, CO. July 29, 2011. Available at http://rpitt.eng.
ua.edu/Publications/8_Stormwater_Management_and_Model -
ing/Stormwater_management_and_decision_analyses/Storm -
water%20Management%20Options%20Lincoln%20Jly%20
29%202011.pdf. 
Pitt, R. 2011c. Lincoln, Nebraska, Standard Land Use Characteris -
tics and Pollutant Sources. Prepared for Wright Waters, Denver, 
CO. April 22, 2011. Available at http://rpitt.eng.ua.edu/Publica -
tions/4_Stormwater_Characteristics_Pollutant_Sources_and_
Land_Development_Characteristics/Land_development_char -
acteristics/Standard%20Land%20Use%20files%20and%20
sources%20Lincoln%20April%2022%202011.pdf. 
Pitt, R., and A. Maestre. 2014. Version 4 of the National Stormwa -
ter Quality Database.Available at http://www.bmpdatabase.org/
nsqd.html. 
Pitt, R., and J. McLean. 1986. Humber River Pilot Watershed Project. 
Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Toronto, Canada. June 
1986. 483 pp.
Pitt, R., and L. Talebi. 2012a. Evaluation of Dry Wells and Cis -
terns for Stormwater Control: Milburn Township, New Jersey. 
EPA/600/R-12/600. Edison, NJ: Urban Watershed Management 
Branch, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. October 2012. 
Available at http://nepis.epa.gov/Adobe/PDF/P100GLN2.pdf.
Pitt, R., and L. Talebi. 2012b. Evaluation and Demonstration of 
Stormwater Dry Wells and Cisterns in Milburn Township, New 
Jersey. Edison, NJ: EPA. 302 pp.
Pitt, R., S. Clark, R. Field, and K. Parmer. 1996. Groundwater Con -
tamination from Stormwater. Chelsea, MI: Ann Arbor Press. 
219 pp. 
Pitt, R., S. Clark, and R. Field. 1999. Groundwater contamination 
potential from stormwater infiltration practices. Urban Water 
1(3):217-236. 
Pitt, R., R. Bannerman, S. Clark, and D. Williamson. 2005a. Sources 
of pollutants in urban areas Part 1. Older monitoring projects. 
Pp. 465-484, 507-530 in Effective Modeling of Urban Water 
Systems, Monograph 13, W. James, K.N. Irvine, E.A. McBean, 
and R.E. Pitt, eds. Guelph, Ontario: CHI. Pitt, R., R. Banner -
man, S. Clark, and D. Williamson. 2005b. Sources of pollutants 
in urban areas Part 2—Recent sheetflow monitoring results. Pp. 
485-530 in Effective Modeling of Urban Water Systems, Mono -
graph 13. W. James, K.N. Irvine, E.A. McBean, and R.E. Pitt, 
eds. Guelph, Ontario: CHI. 
Pitt, R., D. Williamson, and J. V oorhees. 2005c. Review of historical 
street dust and dirt accumulation and washoff data. Pp. 203-246 
in Effective Modeling of Urban Water Systems, Monograph 
13., W. James, K.N. Irvine, E.A. McBean, and R.E. Pitt, eds. 
Guelph, Ontario: CHI. 
Pitt, R., J. V oorhees, and S. Clark. 2008. Evapotranspiration and re -
lated calculations for stormwater biofiltration devices: Proposed 
calculation scenario and data. Pp. 309-340 in Stormwater and 
Urban Water Systems Modeling, Monograph 16, W. James, 
E.A. McBean, R.E. Pitt, and S.J. Wright, eds. Guelph, Ontario: 
CHI. 
Pitt, R., L. Talebi. R. Bean, and S. Clark. 2011. Stormwater Non-
Potable Beneficial Uses and Effects on Urban Infrastructure. 
Report No. INFR3SG09. Alexandria, V A: Water Environment 
Research Foundation. 224 pp.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
References  183
Pitt, R., L. Talebi, D. O’Bannon, D. Bambic, and J. Wright. 2014. 
Modeling of Green Infrastructure Components and Large Scale 
Test and Control Watersheds at Kansas City, MO. Prepared for 
EPA and Tetra Tech. 357pp. 
Poor, P.J., K.L. Pessagno, and R.W. Paul. 2007. Exploring the he -
donic value of ambient water quality: A local watershed-based 
study. Ecological Economics 60(4):797-806.
Prince George’s County, Maryland. 1999. Low-Impact Development 
Design Strategies: An Integrated Design Approach. Department 
of Environmental Resources. June. Available at http://www.
lowimpactdevelopment.org/pubs/LID_National_Manual.pdf. 
Accessed December 11, 2015.
Proskiw, G. 1998. Technology Profile: Residential Greywater Heat 
Recovery Systems. Available at http://www.gfxtechnology.co  
m/Proskiw-NRCan.pdf.
PUB (Public Utilities Board). 2015. The Singapore Water Story. 
Available at http://www.pub.gov.sg/water/Pages/singaporewa -
terstory.aspx. Accessed August 5, 2015. 
Quanrud, D., L. Abrell, R. Arnold, and E. Saez. 2010. Perfluoronated 
Compounds in Arizona Groundwater: Sources of Contamina -
tion. Progress Report 2010. State Water Resources Research 
Institute Program. Project ID 2010AZ380B. U.S. Geological 
Survey.
Qureshi, A.A., and B.J. Dutka. 1979. Microbiological studies on the 
quality of urban stormwater runoff in southern Ontario, Canada. 
Water Research 13(10):977-985.
Rajal, V .B., B.S. McSwain, D.E. Thompson, C.M. Leutenegger, and 
S. Wuertz. 2007. Molecular quantitative analysis of human vi -
ruses in California stormwater. Water Research 41(10):4287-
4298.
Ramon, G., M. Green, R. Semiat, and C. Dosoretz. 2004. Low 
strength graywater characterization and treatment by direct 
membrane filtration. Desalination 170:241-250.
Rassier, P.J. 2008. Response of the Deputy Attorney General to Sen. 
Gary J. Schroeder regarding the capture and collection of rain -
water under Idaho law. Available at http://www.harvesth2o.
com/adobe_files/Idaho_Ltr%20Sen%20Schroeder%20081108.
pdf. Accessed July 21, 2014.
Raucher, B., and G. Tchobanoglous. 2014. The Opportunities and 
Economics of Direct Potable Reuse. WateReuse. 
Raucher, R., J. Clements, J. Cromwell, D. Mills, and L. Deck. 2009. 
A Triple Bottom Line Assessment of Traditional and Green In -
frastructure Options for Controlling CSO Events in Philadel -
phia’s Watersheds. Prepared by Stratus Consulting, Boulder, 
CO, for City of Philadelphia Water Department. August. Avail -
able at https://www.michigan.gov/documents/dnr/TBL.Assess -
mentGreenVsTraditionalStormwaterMgt_293337_7.pdf.
Rector, P., T. Duckworth, and D. Fonseca. 2014. Rain Barrels and 
Mosquitoes. Fact Sheet FS1240. Rutgers New Jersey Agricul -
tural Experiment Station. Available at https://njaes.rutgers.edu/
pubs/fs1240. Accessed November 3, 2015.
Regnery, J., J. Lee, P. Kitanidis, T. Illangasekare, J.O. Sharp, and 
J.E. Drewes. 2013. Integration of managed aquifer recharge for 
impaired water sources in urban settings—overcoming current 
limitations and engineering challenges. Environmental Engi -
neering Science 30(8):409-420.
Reichel, B., S. Sharvelle, and L. Roesner. 2011. Development of the 
Integrated Urban Water Model. WERF Project No. INFR4SGc.Riccardi, N. 2011. Firms turning to environmental law to combat 
rivals. L.A. Times, November 14, 2011. Available at http://ar  
ticles.latimes.com/2011/nov/14/local/la-me-development-ce -
qa-20111114. Accessed April 6, 2014.
RMC. 2011. Upper Petaluma River Watershed Flood Control Project 
Scoping Study—Conceptual Alternatives Screening Evalua -
tion, Draft Technical Memorandum, Prepared for Kent Gylfe, 
SCWA. December 6, 2011.
RMC Water and Environment. 2012. SFPUC Onsite Nonpotable 
Program: Final Nontechnical Summary. June.
RMC Water and Environment. 2014. Los Angeles Basin Stormwater 
Conservation Study, Task 2. Water Supply and Water Demand 
Projections. Prepared for County of Los Angeles Department of 
Public Works, Los Angeles County Flood Control District, U.S. 
Department of the Interior-Bureau of Reclamation. December.
Roa-Espinosa, A., and R.T. Bannerman. 1995. Monitoring BMP ef -
fectiveness at industrial sites. Pp. 467-486 in Stormwater NP -
DES Related Monitoring Needs, Proceedings of an Engineer -
ing Foundation Conference August 7-12, 1994, Mount Crested 
Butte, CO. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers. 
Romero, C.C., and M.D. Dukes. 2008. Turfgrass Crop Coefficients in 
the U.S. Available at http://irrigationtoolbox.com/ReferenceD -
ocuments/TechnicalPapers/IA/2008/2127translated.pdf.
Rose, J.B., G.S. Sun, C.P. Gerba, and N.A. Sinclair. 1991. Microbial 
quality and persistence of enteric pathogens in greywater from 
various household sources. Water Research 25(1):37-42.
Sabin, L.D., J.H. Lim, K.D. Stolzenbach, and K.C. Schiff. 2005. 
Contribution of trace metals from atmospheric deposition to 
stormwater runoff in a small impervious urban catchment. Wa -
ter Research 39(16):3929-3937.
Salukazana, L., S. Jackson, N. Rodda, M. Smith, T. Gounden, N.  
Macleod, and C. Buckley. 2005. Plant Growth and Microbiolog -
ical Safety of Plants Irrigated with Greywater. Paper presented 
at the Third International Conference on Ecological Sanitation, 
May 23-26, 2005, Durban, South Africa. Available at http://con -
ference2005.ecosan.org/papers/salukazana_et_al.pdf.
Santa Ana River Watermaster. 2014. Forty-third Annual report of 
the Santa Ana River Watermaster for Water Year October 1, 
2012-September 30, 2013. April 30, 2014. Available at http://
www.wmwd.com/DocumentCenter/View/2117.
Santa Clara Valley. 2005. Hydromodification Management Plan, 
Chapter 6. Guidance for Selection and Design of Hydromodifi -
cation Control Measures. Santa Clara Valley Urban Runoff Pol -
lution Prevention Program. April 2005. 
Schijven, J.F., and S.M. Hassanizadeh. 2000. Removal of viruses by 
soil passage: Overview of modeling, processes and parameters. 
Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology 
30(1):49125. 
Schriewer, A., H. Horn, and B. Helmreich. 2008. Time focused mea -
surements of roof runoff quality. Corrosion Science 50(2):384-
391.
Schroeder, E., W. Stallard, D. Thompson, F. Loge, M. Deshusses, 
and H. Cox. 2002. Management of Pathogens Associated with 
Storm Drain Discharge. Center for Environmental and Water 
Resources Engineering, Department of Civil and Environmen -
tal Engineering, University of California, Davis. Prepared for 
Division of Environmental Analysis, California Department of 
Transportation.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
184 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
SCVWD (Santa Clara Valley Water District). 2011. From Watts to 
Water. May 2011.
SCWC. 2012. Stormwater task force. In Stormwater Opportunities 
Paper on March 26, 2012.
Selbig, W.R., and N. Balster. 2010. Evaluation of Turf-Grass and 
Prairie-Vegetated Rain Gardens in a Clay and Sand Soil, Madi -
son, Wisconsin, Water Years 2004-08. Reston, V A: U.S. Depart -
ment of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.
Semizentral. 2015. Semizentral-Supply and Treatment Systems: 
Sub-project 3. Implementation of a RRC in Qingdao. Avail -
able at http://semizentral.de/en/projects/projects-china/imple -
mentation-of-semizentral-qingdao.
SFPUC (San Francisco Public Utilities Commission). 2009. San Fran -
cisco Stormwater Design Guidelines. Available at http://www.sf -
water.org/Modules/ShowDocument.aspx?documentID=2779. 
Accessed December 11, 2015. 
SFPUC. 2012. San Francisco Graywater Design Manual for Outdoor 
Irrigation. June. Available at http://sfwater.org/modules/show -
document.aspx?documentid=55.
SFPUC. 2013. District-scale Water Reuse Case Studies. October.  
Available at http://sfwater.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?  
documentid=6133.
SFPUC. 2014a. San Francisco’s Non-potable Water System Projects. 
Available at http://www.sfwater.org/modules/showdocument.as  
px?documentid=5499. 
SFPUC. 2014b. Blueprint for Onsite Water Systems. September.  
Available at http://sfwater.org/modules/showdocument.aspx?  
documentid=6057.
SFPUC. 2015. San Francisco’s Non-potable Water Program. San 
Francisco Water Power Sewer Services. Available at http://sf -
water.org/index.aspx?page=686. 
Sharma, A.K., D. Begbie, and T. Gardner, eds. 2015. Rainwater 
Tank Systems for Urban Water Supply: Design, Yield, Energy, 
Health Risks, Economics and Social Perceptions. London: 
IWA Publishing.
Sharvelle, S., L.A. Roesner, Y . Qian, M. Strobmerberger, and M. 
Negahban-Azar. 2012. Long-Term Study on Landscape Irriga -
tion Using Household Graywater—Experimental Study. WERF 
Project 06-CTS-1CO. Available at http://greywateraction.org/
wp-content/uploads/2014/12/Long-term-Study-on-Landscape-
Irrigation-Using-Household-Graywater.pdf.
Sharvelle, S., L. Roesner, and R. Glenn. 2013. Treatment, Public 
Health, and Regulatory Issues Associated with Graywater Re -
use. Alexandria, V A: WateReuse Foundation.
Shehabi, A., J.R. Stokes, and A. Horvath. 2012. Energy and air emis -
sion implications of a decentralized wastewater system. Envi -
ronmental Research Letters 7(2).
Sheikh, B. 2010. White Paper on Graywater. WateReuse Associa -
tion. Available at http://www.graywater.org.il/Documents/Gray  
waterFinal%20Report2010%20for%20the%20US%20-%20
AWWA.pdf.
Shergill, S.S., and R. Pitt. 2004. Quantification of Escherichia coli 
and enterococci levels in wet weather and dry weather flows. 
77th Annual Water Environment Federation Technical Expo -
sition and Conference, October 4-7, 2004, New Orleans, LA. 
Available at http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/npdes/stormwater/up  
load/sw_idde_bacteria.pdf.Showley, R. 2015. Recycling System Cuts Home Water Use. The San 
Diego Union-Tribune, June 22, 2015. Available at http://www.
sandiegouniontribune.com/news/2015/jun/22/water-recycle-
kb-homes. Accessed November 11, 2015.
Sidhu, J.S., S. Toze, L. Hodgers, M. Shackelton, K. Barry, D. Page, 
and P. Dillon. 2010. Pathogen inactivation during passage of 
stormwater through a constructed reedbed and aquifer stor -
age, transfer and recovery. Water Science and Technology 
62(5):1190-1197.
Simmons, G., V . Hope, G. Lewis, J. Whitmore, and W. Gao. 2001. 
Contamination of potable roof-collected rainwater in Auckland, 
New Zealand. Water Research 35(6):1518-1524.
Smith, I.E. 1975. Recovery and utilisation of heat from domestic 
waste water. Journal of Applied Energy 1(3):205-214. 
Snodgrass, J.W., R.E. Casey, D. Joseph, and J.A. Simon. 2008. Mi -
crocosm investigations of stormwater pond sediment toxicity 
to embryonic and larval amphibians: Variation in sensitivity 
among species. Environment and Pollution 154(2):291-297.
Snodgrass, R.F.M. 2010. Greywater—the reuse of household water: 
A small step toward sustainable living and adaptation to climate 
change. Georgetown International Environmental Law Review 
22:591-596.
Soller, J.A. 2009. The potential implications of person-to-person 
transmission of viral infection for U.S. EPA’s Groundwater 
Rule. Journal of Water Health 7(2):208-223.
Sostar-Turk, S., I. Petrinic, and M. Simonic. 2005. Laundry waste -
water treatment using coagulation and membrane filtration. Re -
sources, Conservation and Recycling 44(2):185-196.
Sparling, D.W., J.D. Eisemann, and W. Kuenzel. 2004. Contaminant 
exposure and effects in red-winged inhabiting stormwater reten -
tion ponds. Environmental Management 33(5):719-729.
Spencer, J.L. 2013. The Carbon Impacts of Stormwater Capture, A 
Study Conducted for the California State Water Quality Control 
Board, Goldman School of Public Policy, University of Califor -
nia Santa Barbara. May 2013.
Stachel, B., J.-U. Holthuis, W. Schulz, W. Seitz, W.H. Weber, K.T. 
Tegge, and I. Dobner. 2010. Treatment techniques and analysis 
of stormwater run-off from roads in Hamburg, Germany. Pp. 
445-461 in Xenobiotics in the Urban Water Cycle. D. Fatta-
Kassinos, K. Bester, and K. Kümmerer, eds. Dordrecht, the 
Netherlands: Springer. 
Stephenson, J.B., W.F. Zhou, B.F. Beck, and T.S. Green. 1999. High -
way stormwater runoff in karst areas—preliminary results of 
baseline monitoring and design of a treatment system for a 
sinkhole in Knoxville, Tennessee. Engineering Geology 52(1-
2):51-59.
Steuer, J., W. Selbig, N. Hornewer, and J. Prey. 1997. Sources of 
Contamination in an Urban Basin in Marquette, Michigan and 
an Analysis of Concentrations, Loads, and Data Quality, U.S. 
Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 97-
4242. Middleton, WI: USGS.
Stevens, D., P. Dillon, D. Page, M. Warne, and G-G Ying. 2011. As -
sessing environmental risks of laundry detergents in greywater 
used for irrigation. International Water Association Journal of 
Water Reuse and Desalination 1(2):61-77.
Stokes, J.R., and A. Horvath. 2009. Energy and air emission ef -
fects of water supply. Environmental Science and Technology 
43(8):2680-2687.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
References  185
Stokes, J.R., and A. Horvath. 2010. Supply-chain environmental ef -
fects of wastewater utilities. Environmental Research Letters 
5(1):014015.
Stokes, J.R., T.P. Hendrickson, and A. Horvath. 2014. Save water to 
save carbon and money: Developing abatement costs for ex -
panded greenhouse gas reduction portfolios. Environmental 
Science and Technology 48(23):13583-13591.
Stoner, N., and C. Giles. 2011. Memorandum: Protecting Water 
Quality with Green Infrastructure in EPA Water Permitting and 
Enforcement Programs. Washington, DC: EPA. Available at 
http://water.epa.gov/infrastructure/greeninfrastructure/gi_reg -
ulatory.cfm.
Strecker, E.W., and A.L. Poresky. 2010. The feasibility and desirabil -
ity of stormwater retention on site in California and on the West 
Coast. Pp. 1022-1035 in Proceedings of the 2010 International 
Low Impact Development Conference, April 11-14, 2010, San 
Francisco, CA, S. Struck, and K. Lichten, eds. Reston, V A: 
ASCE. 
Strecker, E.W., W.C. Huber, J. P. Heaney, D. Bodine, J.J. Sansalone, 
M.M. Quigley, D. Pankani, M. Leisenring, and P. Thayumana -
van. 2005. Critical Assessment of Stormwater Treatment and 
Control Selection Issues. Report No. 02-SW-1. Alexandria, V A: 
Water Environment Research Federation. 290 pp.
Sumandeep, S., and R. Pitt. 2004. Quantification of Escherichia coli 
and Enterococci Levels in Wet Weather and Dry Weather Flows. 
Available at http://www3.epa.gov/npdes/pubs/sw_idde_bacte -
ria.pdf. 
Sunding, D. 2013. Economic Analyses Conducted on the Bay Delta 
Conservation Plan. Presentation July 23, 2013. Available at 
http://www.mwdh2o.com/DocSvcsPubs/mwd_newsletter/
Oct2013/Bay-Delta.pdf. 
SWRCB. 2013. Recycled Water Policy, as modified by California 
State Water Board Resolution 2013-0003, January 22, 2013. 
Available at: http://www.swrcb.ca.gov/board_decisions/adopt -
ed_orders/resolutions/2013/rs2013_0003_a.pdf. Accessed De-  
cember 11, 2015. 
Talebi, L., and R. Pitt. 2013. Evaluation of Retrofitted Green Infra -
structure Stormwater Controls at Cincinnati State College, the 
Cincinnati Zoo, and the Clark Montessori High School. Pre -
pared for Metropolitan Sewer District of Greater Cincinnati and 
EPA. Available at http://unix.eng.ua.edu/~rpitt/Publications/5_
Stormwater_Treatment/GI_controls/Cincy_modeling_report_
Final.pdf.
Tampa Bay Water. 2008. Drought-Proof Water Supply Delivering 
Drinking Water, News Release: January 25, 2008. Available at 
http://www.tampabaywater.org/newsroom/agency-news/Art -
MID/551/ArticleID/119/Drought-Proof-Water-Supply-Deliver -
ing-Drinking-Water.aspx.
Taylor, S. 1984. Making Bureaucracies Think: The Environmental 
Impact Statement Strategy of Administrative Reform. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.
Teerlink, J., A. Hering, C. Higgins, and J.E. Drewes. 2012. Variabil -
ity of trace organic chemical concentrations in raw wastewater 
at three distinct sewershed scales. Water Research 46(10):3261-
3271.
Thomas, R.B., M.J. Kirisits, D.J. Lye, and K.A. Kinney. 2014. Rain -
water harvesting in the United States: A survey of common sys -
tem practices. Journal of Cleaner Production 75:166-173.Tixier, G., M. Lafont, L. Grapentine, Q. Rochfort, and J. Marsalek. 
2011. Ecological risk assessment of urban stormwater ponds: 
Literature review and proposal of a new conceptual approach 
providing ecological quality goals and the associated bioassess -
ment tools. Ecological Indicators 11(6):1497-1506.
Tobiason, S. 2004. Stormwater metals removal by media filtration: 
Field assessment case study. Pp. 1431-1448 in Watershed 2004; 
Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation.Alexandria, 
V A: Water Environment Federation.
Tobiason, S.A., and L. Logan., 2000. Stormwater Whole Effluent 
Toxicity (WET) testing and source tracing at SEA-TAC Inter -
national Airport. Pp. 617-632 in WEFTEC 2000: Proceedings 
of the Water Environment Federation. Alexandria, V A: Water 
Environment Federation.
TRB (Transportation Research Board). 2006. Evaluation of Best 
Management Practices for Highway Runoff Control. National 
Cooperative Highway Research Program Report 565.
TWDB (Texas Water Development Board). 2005. The Texas Manual 
on Rainwater Harvesting, 3rd Edition. Available at http://www.
twdb.texas.gov/publications/brochures/conservation/doc/Rain
waterHarvestingManual_3rdedition.pdf.
TWDB. 2006. Rainwater Harvesting Potential and Guidelines for 
Texas. Texas Rainwater Harvesting Evaluation Committee Re -
port to the 80th Legislature. Austin, TX. November.
Uba, B. N., and O. Aghogho. 2000. Rainwater quality from different 
roof catchments in the Port Harcourt district, Rivers State, Ni -
geria.Journal of Water Supply, Research and Technology-Aqua 
49:281-288.
UDFCD (Urban Drainage and Flood Control District). 2013. Den -
ver Urban Drainage and Flood Control’s Criteria Manual. 
Available at http://www.udfcd.org/downloads/down_critman -
ual_volIII.htm. Accessed June 19, 2015.
Van Houtven, G., C. Mansfield, D. J. Phaneuf, R. von Haefen, B. 
Milstead, M.A. Kenney, and K. H. Reckhow. 2014. Combining 
expert elicitation and stated preference methods to value eco -
system services from improved lake water quality. Ecological 
Economics 99:40-52.
Vandegrift, J. 2014. Implementation of Graywater Reuse in the State 
of Colorado. M.S. Thesis, Colorado State University.
Vanderzalm, J., D. Page, D. Gonzalez, K. Barry, S. Toze, R. Bartak, 
Q. Shisong, W. Weiping, P. Dillon, and M.H. Lim. 2014. Man -
aged Aquifer Recharge and Stormwater Use Options: Satellite 
Sites Stormwater Quality Monitoring and Treatment Require -
ments for Potable Supplies.  Technical Report Series No. 14/10, 
Goyder Institute for Water Research, Adelaide, South Australia. 
VanLoon, G., B.C. Anderson, W.E. Watt, and J. Marsalek. 2000. 
Characterizing stormwater sediments for ecotoxic risk. Water 
Quality Research Journal of Canada 35:341-364.
VDH (Virginia Department of Health). 2011. Virginia Rainwater 
Harvesting and Use Guidelines. March 31, 2011. Available at 
http://www.vdh.state.va.us/EnvironmentalHealth/ONSITE/
gmp/documents/2011/pdf/GMP_154.pdf.
Vieira, A.S., C.D. Beal, E. Ghisi, and R.A. Stewart. 2014. Energy 
intensity of rainwater harvesting systems: A review. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 34:225-242.
Wallinder, O.I., Y . Hedberg, and P. Dromberg. 2009. Storm water 
runoff measurements of copper from a naturally patinated roof 
and from a parking space. Aspects on environmental fate and 
chemical speciation. Water Research 43(20):5031-5038.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
186 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Ward, R.L., D.L. Bernstein, E.C. Young, J.R. Sherwood, D.R. 
Knowlton, and G.M. Schiff. 1986. Human rotavirus stud -
ies in volunteers: Determination of infectious dose and sero -
logical response to infection. Journal of Infectious Diseases 
154(5):871-880.
Warren, M. 2013. Rain and Stormwater Management at the Cin -
cinnati Zoo and Botanical Gardens. Presentation to the EPA 
Conference on Technologies and Innovative Solutions for Har -
vesting and Nonpotable Use of Rain and Stormwater in Urban 
Settings, April 24-25, 2013, Cincinnati, OH. Available at http://
www.arcsa-edu.org/epa_pdf%27s/Warren.pdf.
Waschbusch, R.J., R.T. Bannerman, and S.R. Greb. 1998. Yields of 
Selected Constituents in Street Runoff in Madison, Wisconsin, 
1994-95. U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investiga -
tion Report.
The Water Corporation. 2010. Perth Residential Water Use Study, 
2008-2009. Available at https://www.water.wa.gov.au/__data/
assets/pdf_file/0016/5272/98576.pdf. Accessed November 13, 
2015.
Waterscan. 2014. Gray Water Recycling: Going Green to Save Your 
Business. Available at http://water-recycling-harvesting.co.uk/
category/water-recycling.
Wathern, P. 1988. Environmental Impact Assessment: Theory and 
Practice. New York: Routledge.
WEF (Water Environment Federation). 2014. Green Infrastructure 
Implementation: A Special Report. Alexandria, V A: Water En -
vironment Federation.
Weingaertner, D. 2013. Greywater. Characteristics, Biodegradability 
and Reuse of Some Greywaters. Ph. D. Dissertation. Institute of 
Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany.
Weiss, P.T., G. LeFevre, and J.S. Gulliver. 2008. Contamination of 
Soil and Groundwater Due to Stormwater Infiltration Practices: 
A Literature Review. Prepared for Minnesota Pollution Con -
trol Agency, by University of Minnesota. June 23, 2008.Avail -
able at http://www.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/view-document.
html?gid=7732.
WERF (Water Environment Research Foundation). 2005. Critical 
Assessment of Stormwater Treatment and Control Selection Is -
sues. Project No. 02-SW-1. Available at https://www.werf.org/a/
ka/Search/ResearchProfile.aspx?ReportId=02-SW-1.
WERF. 2009. 21st Century Sustainable Water Infrastructure: Smart, 
Clean and Green. Water Environment Research Foundation, 
February 2009. 
WERF. 2014. Transforming Our Cities: High-Performance Green 
Infrastructure. INFR1R11. Available at http://www.werf.org/a/
ka/Search/ResearchProfile.aspx?ReportId=INFR1R11. 
West, T., Y . Sim, and K. Kuyunz. 2014. Integrated Stormwater Man -
agement Demonstration Project Database. Presentation at the 
3rd Annual Stormwater Task Force Workshop, June 26, 2014, 
Los Angeles, CA.
Weston, D.P., R.W. Holmes, and M.J. Lydy 2009. Residential runoff 
as a source of pyrethroid pesticides to urban creeks. Environ -
mental Pollution 157(1):287-294. Whelan, G., K. Kim, M.A. Pelton, J.A. Soller, K.J. Castleton, M. 
Molina, Y . Pachepsky, and R. Zepp. 2014. An integrated envi -
ronmental modeling framework for performing quantitative mi -
crobial risk assessments. Environment Modelling and Software 
55:77-91. 
Wik, A., J. Lycken, and G. Dave. 2008. Sediment quality assessment 
of road runoff detention systems in Sweden and the potential 
contribution of tire wear. Water Air and Soil Pollution 194:301-
314.
Wiles, K. 2013. Investigation of Pathogen Disinfection and Re -
growth for a Lost Cost Graywater Reuse Treatment System for 
Toilet Flushing. M.S. Thesis, Colorado State University.
Winward, G., L.M. Avery, R. Frazer-Williams, M. Pidou, P. Jeffrey, 
T. Stephenson, and B. Jefferson. 2008. A study of the microbial 
quality of grey water and an evaluation of treatment technolo -
gies for reuse. Ecological Engineering 32(2):187-197.
Wohlsen, T., J. Bates, B. Gray, P. Aldridge, S. Stewart, M. Williams, 
and M. Katouli. 2006. The occurrence of Cryptosporidium and 
Giardia in the Lake Baroon catchment, Queensland, Austra -
lia. Journal of Water Supply Research and Technology-Aqua 
55:357-366.
World Bank. 2012. Designing a Results Framework for Achieving 
Results: A How-to Guide. Available at http://siteresources.
worldbank.org/EXTEV ACAPDEV/Resources/designing_re -
sults_framework.pdf. Accessed February 28, 2013.
WQRA (Water Quality Research Australia). 2010. Coomera Cross-
Connection Incident. Public Health Newsletter of Water Quality 
Research Australia 57:1-4.
WV DEP (West Virginia Department of Environmental Protection). 
2012. West Virginia Stormwater Management and Design 
Guidance Manual. Available at http://www.dep.wv.gov/WWE/
Programs/stormwater/MS4/Pages/StormwaterManagement -
DesignandGuidanceManual.aspx.
Yamahara, K.M., B.A. Layton, A.E. Santoro, and A.B. Boehm, 
2007. Beach sands along the California coast are diffuse sourc -
es of fecal bacteria to coastal waters. Environmental Science 
and Technology 41(13):4515-4521.
Yang, K., J. LeJeune, D. Alsdorf, B. Lu, C.K. Shum, and S. Liang. 
2012. Global distribution of outbreaks of water-associated infec -
tious diseases. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 6(2):e1483.
Yates, M.V ., S.R. Yates, and C.P. Gerba. 1988. Modeling microbial 
fate in the subsurface environment. CRC Critical Reviews in 
Environmental Control 17(4):307-344.
Yu, Z.L., A. Rahardianto, J.R. DeShazo, M.K. Stenstrom, and Y .  
Cohen. 2013. Critical review: Regulatory incentives and im -
pediments for onsite graywater reuse in the United States. Wa -
ter Environment Research. 85(7):650-662.
Zobrist, J., S.R. Muller, A. Ammann, T.D. Bucheli, V . Mottier, M. 
Ochs, R. Schoenenberger, J. Eugster, and M. Boller. 2000. 
Quality of roof runoff for groundwater infiltration. Water Re -
search 34(5):1455-1462.
Zuma, B.M., R. Tandlich, K.J. Whittington-Jones, and J.E. Burgess. 
2009. Mulch tower treatment system, Part I: Overall perfor -
mance in greywater treatment. Desalination 242(1-3):38-56.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
187A
Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems
This appendix presents the methods used (with exam -
ples) to evaluate the beneficial uses of roof runoff harvest -
ing for irrigation of landscaped areas and for toilet flushing. 
The Source Loading and Management Model, WinSLAMM 
(Pitt, 1997), was used to calculate the benefits of harvesting 
stormwater for storage and later beneficial uses. The meth -
ods were previously used and described by Pitt et al. (2011, 
2014). WinSLAMM is a continuous model that evaluates a 
long series of rains for an area. WinSLAMM1 is licensed for 
sale but is available free of charge to academic institutions. 
An evaluation license is also available to interested readers 
who wish to examine the model for a limited time. Input files 
used in this scenario analysis are available in the Academies’ 
Public Access Records Office. 
For this report, WinSLAMM focused on the capture 
of rooftop runoff and use for turfgrass irrigation and toilet 
flushing, as described in Box 3-1. Different storage tank 
volumes were also evaluated. Average monthly (and daily) 
irrigation requirements were calculated by subtracting aver -
age monthly rainfall from 1995 to 1999 (1996-1999 for Lin -
coln, because of missing data) from average monthly evapo -
transpiration (ET) values. Then using WinSLAMM and the 
5-year precipitation time series, if rainfall was insufficient 
to meet the irrigation demand, then supplemental irrigation 
was required. If available, then the supplemental irrigation 
was supplied by previously stored roof runoff water in stor -
age tanks. Toilet flushing requirements were based on typical 
national indoor water uses (11 gpcd; see Box 3-1). The fol -
lowing is a summary of the main calculations and data used 
for these analyses. 
WINSLAMM 
WinSLAMM evaluates stormwater runoff volumes and 
pollutant loads under an array of stormwater management 
practices including rain barrels and water tanks, although 
the committee did not assess pollutants in this analysis (Pitt, 
1 See http://winslamm.com.1987). Using local rain records, the model calculates runoff 
volumes and pollutant loadings for each rain from individual 
source areas within various land use categories and sums the 
results over a given area or land use. Examples of runoff 
source areas considered by the model include roofs, streets, 
sidewalks, parking areas, and landscaped areas, which each 
have different runoff coefficients based on the type of sur -
face, slope, and soil properties (Pitt, 1987). Example land 
use categories include commercial, industrial, institutional, 
open space, residential, and freeway/highway. The commit -
tee’s scenario modeling exercise mainly focuses on roof run -
off for small-scale stormwater harvesting and on land use 
runoff for larger scale stormwater harvesting. 
Any length of rainfall record can be analyzed with  
WinSLAMM, from a single event to many decades. The rain -
fall files used in the committee’s calculations were developed 
from hourly rainfall data obtained from the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) rainfall stations as 
published on EarthInfo CD-ROMs. 
DATA REQUIREMENTS AND  
SOURCES OF INFORMATION
WinSLAMM uses various sets of information in its cal -
culations. The main data required for the analyses in this re -
port included rain data for the six locations examined (from 
NOAA weather stations), runoff coefficients for the source 
areas for different land uses, and land development charac -
teristics for the land uses in each area examined. 
Rainfall Data
As noted in the report, six areas of the country were ex -
amined to represent a range of climatic conditions:
• Los Angeles, California, having a median rainfall of 
about 12 inches per year over the long-term record (17 
inches average during the 5-year calculation period)Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
188 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
• Seattle, Washington, having a median rainfall of about 
37 inches of rainfall per year (42 inches average during 
the 5-year calculation period)
• Lincoln, Nebraska, having a median rainfall of about 
26 inches of rainfall per year (28 inches average during 
the 4-year calculation period)
• Madison, Wisconsin, having a median rainfall of about 
32 inches of rainfall per year (30 inches average during 
the 5-year calculation period)
• Birmingham, Alabama, having a median rainfall of 
about 54 inches of rainfall per year (50 inches average 
during the 5-year calculation period)
• Newark, New Jersey, having a median rainfall of about 
43 inches of rainfall per year (44 inches average during 
the 5-year calculation period)
Most of the modeling calculations focused on recent 5 
years of rainfall records (1995 through 1999 for all areas, ex -
cept for Lincoln, where 1996 through 1999 rains were used 
due to many missing rains in the 1995 record).The goal was to use a continuous period of actual rains 
that were similar to the long-term average conditions, be -
cause continuous simulations were needed to calculate the 
inter-event water demands based on the average ET values. 
The committee based its scenario analysis on 5-year rain 
periods to reduce data pre-processing demands and because 
long records are rarely available without data gaps. Moder -
ate rain record lengths reduce these gap problems (although 
Lincoln was missing 1995) and have been used to reduce 
large year-to-year variabilities while attempting to match the 
average monthly ET values. In Table A-1 and Figure A-1, the 
committee compares the rainfall data from the 4- to 5-year 
calculation periods with the long-term precipitation record. 
Some variations are apparent even though the differences 
are not statistically significant. Some of these differences are 
discussed in the context of analysis uncertainties in Box 3-2. 
The committee judges that the calculation methods and 
data used for these analyses represent reasonable conditions 
and present results that are useful for the comparative analy -
sis presented in Chapter 3. However, the data are not intend -
ed as definitive predictions or as a basis for design guidance.
TABLE A -1 Comparison of Precipitation Annual Rain Totals and Rain Counts Between the Scenario Analysis Calculation Period and the 
Long -term Rainfall Record  
 Los Angeles, CA  Seattle, WA  Lincoln, NE  Madison, WI  Birmingham, AL  Newark, NJ  
Long -term rain record  1948 -1999  1965 -2012  1973 -1999  
(1995 gap)  1948 -1999  1948 -1999  
(1978 -1987 gap)  1948 -1999  
Scenario analysis calculation 
period  1995 -1999  1995 -1999  1996 -1999  1995 -1999  1995-1999  1995 -1999  
Long -term annual median  
rain total (in)  11.70  36.69  26.45  31.85  53.68  42.51  
Scenario analysis calc. period 
median annual rain total (in)  15.82  42.10  28.62  31.19  52.40  41.28  
p values (<0.05 indicatesa 
significant difference)a 0.16 0.078  0.68 0.56 0.78 0.99 
Comment of rain depth box  
and whisker plot comparisons  The calculation 
period has greater 
rains and a wider 
variation than  
the long term 
conditions  The calculation 
period has greater 
rains but similar 
variations as the 
long term 
conditions  The calculation  
period has similar  
rain depths per year 
and the variations  
are similar  The calculation  
period has smaller  
rain depths per year 
and the variations  
are similar  The calculation  
period has similar  
rain depths per year  
and the  variations  
are similar  The calculation  
period has similar  
rain depths per year 
and the variations  
are similar  
Long -term annual median  
rain counts  29 138 97 109 106 103 
Scenario analysis calc. period 
median annual rain counts  32 140 97 103 97 97 
p values (<0.05 indicatesa 
significant difference)a 0.27 0.62 0.82 0.08 0.20 0.17 
aMann -Whitney rank sum p values (not independent data sets because the calculation period was included in the total period). Deemed  
acceptable as the hypothesis was to compare  the full set with the subset. None of the rain depth or rain count comparisons indicated 
significant differences for the number of data available.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix A: Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems  189
FIGURE A-1  Comparisons of the period of record with the scenario analysis period in terms of annual rain depth and number of rainfall 
events per year.  SeaTac Rains
1: 1965 through 2012
2: 1995 through 19991 2Annual Rain Depth (in)
2025303540455055
1 2Number of Rains per Year
100110120130140150160170180
 Lincoln Rains
1: 1973 through 1999
2: 1996 through 19991 2Annual Rain Depths (in)
15202530354045
X Data1 2Annual Number of Rains
60708090100110120130
 
 
1948 -1999  
 1948- 1999  
 1995-1999  
 1995-1999  
Los Angeles  
 Los Angeles  
Seattle  
 Seattle  
1995-1999  
 1995-1999  
 1965-2012  
 1965-2012  
1973-1999  
 1973-1999  
 1996-1999  
 1996-1999  
Lincoln  
 Lincoln  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
190 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
FIGURE A-1  Continued Madison Rains
1:1948 through 1999
2: 1995 through 19991 2Annual Rain Depths (in)
15202530354045
1 2Annual Rain Counts
708090100110120130140150
 Birmingham Rains
1: 1949 through 1999
2: 1995 through 19991 2Annual Rain Depth (in)
1020304050607080
1 2Annual Rain Count
20406080100120140
 Newark Rains
1: 1949 through 1999
2: 1995 through 19991 2Total Annual Rain Depth (in)
203040506070
1 2Rain Count per Year
8090100110120130140
 
Madison  
Newark  
Birmingham  
Madison  
Birmingham  
Newark  
1995-1999  
1995-1999  
1995-1999  
1995-1999  
1995-1999  
1995-1999  
 1948-1999  
1949-1999  
1948-1999  
1949-1999  
1949-1999  
 1949-1999  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix A: Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems  191
Land Development Characteristics
An important element in calculating stormwater benefi -
cial use opportunities using harvested roof runoff for land -
scaping irrigation is to know the typical areas of the roofs 
and the landscaped areas that are present in the different 
land uses and study locations. For larger-scale beneficial-use 
calculations, the areas of the other source areas in the land 
uses also need to be known. These areas were obtained from 
prior summaries conducted to support the U.S. Environmen -
tal Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) development of potential 
future stormwater regulations. These typical land develop -
ment characteristics throughout the country, described in Pitt 
(2011a,b,c), are summarized in Table 3-3. Pitt (2011a) con -
tains the citations and sources for the original data sources. 
More than 100 monitored locations were reviewed using 
site mapping and aerial photographs, along with concurrent 
monitoring data. 
For irrigation beneficial uses of stormwater, the most 
suitable source for the collected water is from the building 
roofs because of its generally better water quality, high unit 
area runoff yield, and elevation above storage tanks and ir -
rigated land. The landscaped areas represent the amount of 
area that can be irrigated with the harvested roof runoff wa -
ter. Therefore, areas having relatively large roofs and small 
landscaped areas are most likely to have most of the irriga -tion demand in the area satisfied (but may not reduce the 
overall stormwater discharges as much as areas having small 
roofs and large irrigable land). Table A-2 shows the roof and 
landscaped areas for these six land uses for the Los Angeles 
area. Commercial areas generally have the smallest ratios of 
landscaped to roof areas and therefore are more likely to be 
able to meet irrigation requirements with the abundance of 
roof runoff. In contrast, it would be much more challenging 
to replace much of the irrigation water currently supplied by 
potable water supplies using roof runoff in low-density areas 
because the amount of roof runoff water is a much smaller 
portion of the total irrigation requirements. There are some 
differences in these development characteristics by region, 
and the rainfall patterns and evapotranspiration requirements 
vary greatly by area. Table A-3 shows the percentage of 
landscaped and roof areas and typical housing densities for 
medium-density, residential land uses (the focus of the com -
mittee’s analysis) in each of the six locations of the country 
examined.
ROOF RUNOFF CALCULATIONS 
The following sections describe an example set of cal -
culations used to develop the analyses used in this report. 
These examples focus on medium-density, residential land 
use in Los Angeles. 
TABLE A -2 Roof and Landscaped Areas for Los Angeles Land Uses  
 Roof Area (%)  Landscaped Area (%)  Ratio of Landscaped Area to Roof Area  
Commercial  28.1 14.9 0.53 
High -density residential  20.7 46.4 2.24 
Medium -density residential  18.0 52.5 2.92 
Low-density residential  8.0 79.6 9.95 
Industrial  20.2 24.3 1.20 
Institutional  19.4 41.2 2.12 
 
TABLE A -3 Landscaped and Roof Area, and Number of Households for Medium -Density, Residential Land Use in Six U.S. Locations  
 Landscaped Areas (%)  Roof Areas (%)  # Roofs/100 Acres at 1,500 ft2 Each  
Los Angeles, CA  52.5 18.0 523 
Seattle, WA  63.5 17.1 497 
Lincoln, NE  62.8 18.1 526 
Madison, WI  63.3 15.0 436 
Birming ham, AL  81.3 8.8 256 
Newark, NJ  56.2 15.9 462 
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
192 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Runoff Quantity
Table A-4 is a small portion of the WinSLAMM mod -
eled scenario output showing runoff volume contributions 
for a 100-acre medium-density residential area in Los An -
geles. These analyses were repeated for six major land use 
areas (commercial, high-density residential, medium-densi -
ty residential, low-density residential, industrial, and insti -
tutional) and six U.S. locations. During this 5-year period 
examined (1995-1999), a total of about 84 inches fell, with 
rains as large as 3.5 inches (Table A-5). About 47 percent 
of the rainfall occurred as direct runoff for this area (or a 
the volumetric runoff coefficient [Rv] of 0.47), higher than 
for most residential areas, because these analyses assumed 
directly connected roof drainage, as would be the case for 
roof runoff harvesting. Most of the runoff volumes in this 
medium-density residential land use analysis originated 
from the street and roof areas, with smaller (and about equal 
amounts) from driveways, sidewalks, and landscaped areas. 
These relationships vary for different land uses and different 
geographical areas based on the local development charac -
teristics, soils, and rain patterns.
Based on the 1995-1999 period, 100 acres of medium-
density, residential area in Los Angeles produces about 14 
million ft3 of runoff, while the roofs in the area contribute 13,969 ,610  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
100  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎∗ 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
43,560  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2∗12 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓=38.48 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒,𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎 7.70 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒 𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑦𝑦𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎  𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎  
5,170 ,000  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
18 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎∗𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎
43,560  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2∗ 12 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓=79.13 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒,𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎 15.83 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒 𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 𝑦𝑦𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎  about 5.2 million ft3 of that runoff. These can be converted to 
inches of runoff over the drainage area for the 5-year period, 
for example:
For the roof area alone (which comprises 18 percent of 
the land use, or 18 acres):
The total rain depth for the 5 years is 83.67 inches, or 
16.73 inches per year. The volumetric runoff coefficient (Rv) 
is the ratio of the runoff total to the rain total. Therefore, for 
the whole area, the total flow-weighted annual Rv is:
while the Rv for the roof area alone is:7.70 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒
16.73 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒=0.45 
15.83 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒
16.73 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎ℎ𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒=0.95 
TABLE A -4 Portion of WinSLAMM Model Output for Southwest, Medium -Density , Residential Areas (100 -acre area) Showing Runoff 
Amounts (ft3) from Different Sources Areas f or Each Event and for All Areas Combined (5 years rain series)  
Month  Start Date  Rain  
Total (in.)  Runoff Amounts (ft3) 
Volumetric  
Runoff  
Coeff. (Rv)  Total  
Losses (in.)  Land Use 
Totals  Roofs  Driveways  Sidewalks/ 
Walks  Street Area  Small 
Landscaped  
Area  
1 1/3/1995  0.75 119,655  46,952  13,767  8,850  44,408  5,677  0.44 0.42 
1 1/4/1995  3.5 716,277  226,403  83,501  53,679  219,291  133,402  0.56 1.53 
1 1/7/1995  1.29 217,432  82,603  27,004  17,360  77,546  12,920  0.46 0.69 
1 1/8/1995  0.4 56,379  24,323  6,521  4,192 19,719  1,623  0.39 0.24 
1 1/10/1995  2.93 595,083  189,532  68,824  44,244  180,806  111,677  0.56 1.29 
1 1/11/1995  0.14 16,023  7,115  1,812  1,165  5,931  0 0.32 0.1 
1 1/11/1995  0.4 56,379  24,323  6,521  4,192  19,719  1,623  0.39 0.24 
1 1/14/1995  0.12 13,386  5,899 1,499  964 5,024  0 0.31 0.08 
1 1/20/1995  0.16 18,776  8,397  2,144  1,378  6,858  0 0.32 0.11 
About 150 events between these two dates are not shown on this summary table  
4 4/11/1999  1.36 229,828  87,085  28,777  18,499  81,753  13,713  0.47 0.73 
6 6/1/1999  0.52 77,811  32,034  8,880  5,709  28,535  2,653  0.41 0.31 
6 6/2/1999  0.05 3,334  1,152  476 306 1,401  0 0.18 0.04 
6 6/3/1999  0.02 314.4  166 90 58 0 0 0.04 0.02 
11 11/8/1999  0.27 34,913  15,520  4,046  2,601  12,344  402 0.36 0.17 
11 11/17/1999  0.01 78.6 41 23 15 0 0 0.02 0.01 
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix A: Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems  193
TABLE A -6 Overall Summary of Runoff Volume Contributions by Source Area and Month for Los A ngeles Med ium Density  
Residential Areas  
Five-Year Average Flows by Month  Rain T otal (in.)  Land Use  
Totals  Roofs  Drive ways  Sidewalks/  
Walks  Street Area  Small  
Land scaped Area  
Area (% of total land use)  n/a 100.00  18.00  7.00 4.50 18.00  52.50  
Avg Jan runoff volume (in/mo)  4.89 2.26 4.65 3.85 3.85 4.26 0.41 
Avg Feb runoff volume (in/mo)  3.76 1.88 3.63 3.13 3.13 3.38 0.49 
Avg March runoff volume (in/mo)  2.48 1.13 2.33 1.88 1.88 2.12 0.22 
Avg April runoff volume (in/mo)  0.86 0.35 0.78 0.60 0.60 0.70 0.03 
Avg May runoff volume (in/mo)  0.59 0.24 0.54 0.42 0.42 0.49 0.02 
Avg June runoff volume (in/mo)  0.25 0.09 0.21 0.15 0.15 0.18 0.00 
Avg July runoff volume (in/mo)  0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 
Avg Aug runoff volume (in/mo)  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Avg Sept runoff volume (in/mo)  0.05 0.02 0.05 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.00 
Avg Oct runoff volume (in/mo)  0.29 0.13 0.28 0.24 0.24 0.26 0.02 
Avg Nov runoff volume (in/mo)  1.30 0.56 1.22 0.95 0.95 1.11 0.05 
Avg Dec runoff volume (in/mo)  2.24 1.03 2.14 1.77 1.77 1.97 0.16 
 
All of the event data were sorted by month and then aver -
aged to develop 5-year averaged monthly summaries of run -
off volumes (average inches of runoff per month). Table A-6 
is an overall summary showing these runoff volume con -
tributions from each of the Los Angeles, medium-density, 
residential, source areas and the total annual flow conditions, 
expressed in average watershed-inches per month.
Evapotranspiration and Irrigation Demands
Evapotranspiration (ET) is defined as the rate at which 
readily available water is removed from the soil and plant 
surfaces, expressed as the rate of latent heat transfer per unit 
area or as a depth of water evaporated and transpired from 
a reference crop (Jensen et al., 1990). In the United States, 
ET monitoring is primarily focused in agricultural and wild 
land environments. With educational advancements stress -
ing water conservation in urban areas, there is a new desire 
to apply ET data as a part of stormwater harvesting options for supplemental irrigation and to fine-tune actual irriga -
tion requirements based on soil moisture and plant needs. 
Climate-based equations are the most common method used 
to determine ET. ET potential, ETo, is only relevant for a 
standard condition that reflects normalized agricultural con -
ditions. The ETo value is therefore adjusted according to the 
microclimate, soils, plants, and growing season conditions. 
Most of these adjustment factors were developed for agri -
cultural situations, and their use in highly disturbed urban 
environments has not been well documented. However, it is 
becoming more common to directly measure urban area ET 
as part of stormwater management projects. As an example, 
Selbig and Balster (2010) directly measured ET in an urban 
setting in Madison, Wisconsin, as part of a stormwater man -
agement project for a variety of soil and plant conditions, 
including when the plants were mostly covered with snow.
The California Irrigation Management Information Sys -
tem (CIMIS) is a comprehensive example for determining 
ET rates within a state. Its web services are capable of pro -TABLE A -5 Summary of All Events in 5 -Year Rain Series in WinSLAMM Model Output for Southwest, Medium -Density,  
Residential Areas (100  acre area)  
 Rain  
Total (in.)  Runoff Amounts (ft3) 
Volumetric  
Runoff  
Coeff. (Rv)  Total  
Losses (i n.) Land Use  
Totals  Roofs  Driveways  Sidewalks/  
Walks  Street Area  Small  
Landscaped  
Area  
Minimum  0.01 79 41 23 15 0 0 0.02 0.01 
Maximum  3.5 716,277  226,403  83,501  53,679  219,291  133,402  0.56 1.53 
Average  0.51 85,703  31,728  10,152  6,527  29,112  8,184  0.47 0.75 
Total  83.67  13,969,610  5,170,000  1,655,000  1,064,000  4,745,000  1,334,000  n/a 45.18  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
194 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ducing an array of useful information about most locations 
and regions in California. The stations monitored are not 
limited to traditional agricultural areas, with some monitor -
ing data also available in urban areas. 
The ASCE Standardized Reference Equation (Allen et 
al., 2005) is an example of an ET equation that has been 
adopted for reference ETo calculations. Both the ASCE 
and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO-56) have ap -
proved versions of the equation with only minor differences 
(standard crop height being the major difference). ASCE 
reference ETo can be calculated for only two specific crop 
heights—short (grasses) and tall (alfalfa). The data used in 
this report were calculated for a short reference crop, most 
relevant to typical home lawns. 
The monthly rainfalls (or soil moisture additions due to 
the rainfall) for each geographical area, expressed in inches/
month, were compared to the evapotranspiration rate require -
ments for landscaped area plants to determine the irrigation 
requirements to meet the plant’s minimum moisture needs. 
The reference evapotranspiration rates (ETo) were obtained 
from CIMIS for the southwest near Los Angeles and from 
the ASCE standardized reference equations for the other lo -
cations, as shown on Table A-7. The ETo values are given 
in inches/day and were therefore converted to inches/month 
for direct comparison to the monthly rainfall (or soil mois -
ture addition) values. The Los Angeles and Seattle rainfall monitoring locations were represented by two ETo stations 
that were averaged for these analyses. The other areas only 
had single ETo stations representing their rainfall monitoring 
locations. Table A-8 shows the monthly values, while Fig -
ure A-2 is a plot comparing the seasonal evapotranspiration 
values for these six rainfall monitoring locations. The ETo 
patterns are similar for all locations with the greatest values 
(maximums of about 5 to 6.5 inches/month) occurring in the 
summer months, while the minimum winter ETo values are 
less than 2 inches/month. Seattle has the lowest ETo values 
for most months (annual total of about 28 inches), while Los 
Angeles has the highest values for most months (annual total 
of about 49 inches). Specific details on modeling evapotrans -
piration are also given by Pitt, et al. (2008).
Tables A-9 through A-14, along with Figure 3-2, show 
the calculations and resulting plots indicating the aver -
age monthly irrigation requirements (based on 1995-1999 
rainfall; 1995-1999 for Lincoln) to meet the long-term av -
erage monthly ET values. A plant’s actual ET is calculated 
by multiplying ETo rates by coefficients for each plant type 
providing a daily moisture estimate for the crop under well-
watered conditions. Romero and Dukes (2008) prepared a 
summary of crop coefficients for the Southwest Florida Wa -
ter Management District and the Florida Agricultural Experi -
ment Station, which lists turfgrass coefficients for warm and 
humid areas that ranged from about 0.55 to 0.79 for warm 
TABLE A -8 Monthly ET o Values for Study Locations (inches/month)  
 Jan Feb March  April  May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual total  
(inches/yr)  
Los Angeles, CA  1.86 2.40 3.60 4.80 5.27 5.85 6.36 6.20 4.80 3.57 2.40 1.86 48.96  
Seattle, WA  0.78 0.99 1.80 2.85 3.26 4.05 4.81 3.88 2.25 1.71 1.20 0.78 28.33  
Lincoln, NE  0.93 1.41 3.00 4.50 5.58 6.30 6.20 5.27 4.50 3.72 2.10 0.93 44.44  
Madison, WI  0.31 0.57 1.50 3.60 4.96 5.10 5.58 4.34 3.00 2.17 1.20 0.31 32.64  
Birmingham, AL  1.24 2.26 3.30 4.50 4.96 4.80 4.96 4.65 4.20 3.72 2.10 1.55 42.24  
Newark, NJ  0.62 0.85 2.70 4.20 5.27 5.10 5.58 4.96 4.20 3.10 2.70 1.24 40.52  
 TABLE A -7 Evapotranspiration Reference  Rate (ET o) Stations Used for Beneficial Use Calculations  
Rain Gage Location  ETo Data Source  Station Name  Latitude  Longitude  Elev. (ft)  
Los Angeles Air port Weather Service Office, CA  CIMIS Average Monthly 
Rates, 1989 -2011  Glendale, CA  34.197  -118.230  1,111 
Long Beach, CA  33.799  -118.095  17 
Seattle Tacoma Airport, WA  ASCE Std. Ref. Eq.,  
2005 -2010  Quilcene, WA  47.82  -122.88  62 
Enumclaw, WA  47.2 -121.96  771 
Lincoln Airport, NE  ASCE Std. Ref. Eq. ,  
2008 -2011  Rainwater Basin NE  40.57  -98.17  1,790  
Madison Dane Co Airport, WI  ASCE Std. Ref. Eq. ,  
2005 -2011  Wautoma, WI  43.1 -89.333  857 
Birmingham Airport, AL  ASCE Std. Ref. Eq. ,  
2003 -2011  Talladega, AL  33.44  -86.081  600 
Newark International Airport, NJ  ASCE Std. Ref. Eq. ,  
2005 -2011  New Middlesex Coun ty NJ  40.41  -74.494  116 
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix A: Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems  195
FIGURE A-2 Monthly reference evapotranspiration rates for six study areas.season grasses. Aronson et al. (1987) listed coefficients for 
cool season grasses in the humid Northeast that ranged from 
about 0.6 to 1.04. Brown et al. (2001) presented a summary 
for arid areas with turfgrass coefficients ranging from about 
0.8 to 0.9. For the calculations in this report, a turfgrass coef -
ficient of 0.8 was used for all conditions.
Tables A-9 through A-14 show the monthly ETo refer -
ence values, the 0.8 turf grass coefficient that reduces the 
reference ETo values to obtain the actual expected evapo -
transpiration for typical turf grass, along with the average 
monthly rainfall amounts (based on 1995-1999 precipitation 
data for five locations and 1996-1999 data for Lincoln). The 
irrigation requirements shown here are simply the average 
amounts of water needed monthly in addition to rainfall to 
meet the ET requirements. Other calculations also consid -
ered the moisture added to the soil for each rain instead of 
the total rainfall, because not all of the rain infiltrates and 
is available for the plants. These tables show the actual dif -
ferences between the average ET and rainfall values, and 
some (especially in the wetter months, or months having 
low ET requirements) have negative values (the rainfall is 
greater than the ET requirements). The actual average irriga -
tion requirements per month ignore these negative values, as 
months with excessive rainfall cannot benefit months requir -
ing irrigation, unless the excess runoff is stored for later ben -
eficial uses (as indicated below in the storage tank modeling descriptions). Figure 3-2 graphically illustrates the average 
monthly irrigation requirements for the landscaped areas for 
each of these locations, which were then used in the model 
to calculate the effects of storage and roof runoff volumes 
for the different land uses on the resulting domestic water 
savings. 
Table A-15 shows the amount of landscaped area as a 
percentage of the total land use for different areas in the Los 
Angeles. The monthly irrigation needs in ft3 of water per acre 
of land use per month was calculated by unit conversions us -
ing the landscaped area percentage of the land use and the 
irrigation requirements in inches/month. Small rounding ef -
fects may be reflected in the summary tables and example 
calculations because the model and spreadsheet calculations 
are high precision, while the summaries and example calcu -
lations used truncated significant digits. Also shown on Table 
A-15 are the total runoff amounts from the roofs and for the 
whole area for these land uses in Los Angeles. Except for the 
commercial and industrial areas, land use runoff is not suf -
ficient to completely satisfy the irrigation requirements, and 
roof runoff alone is close to meeting the irrigation needs only 
for the commercial areas (simply on a total volume compari -
son, assuming sufficient storage is provided). The effects of 
storage tanks also need to be considered, as described below. 
Other geographical areas with differing rain and ET patterns, 
plus different land development characteristics, result in dif -
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
196 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
ferent conclusions. Table A-16 shows the irrigation require -
ment, expressed in gallons per day per 100 acres of the land 
use, as used by the model as the water demand for three of 
the six locations analyzed. 
Domestic Water Savings Due to Roof Runoff Harvesting
Two volumes corresponding to typical water storage 
scenarios (two water barrels per household and one large 
water storage tank per household) were examined with  
WinSLAMM corresponding to typical runoff harvesting sce -
narios. Table A-17 shows the storage volume calculations for 
the two water storage tank options examined, shown for the 
Los Angeles example. The model calculates the stormwater 
runoff volume reductions using continuous simulations for 
the study period. The water storage tanks are continuously 
modeled based on additions of roof runoff for each rain and 
withdrawals to meet monthly average irrigation demand to 
meet the ET deficits, considering rainfall-induced changes 
in soil moisture. Overall indoor and outdoor water use be -
havior was assumed to be the unchanged with the addition 
of low-cost onsite sources of water. If the tank is full while 
runoff is still occurring, then the excess runoff is discharged 
to the drainage system and is not available for beneficial use. 
If the tank empties due to water withdrawals, then supple -
mental potable water would be needed to meet additional 
water demands. Small tanks overflow and are empty more frequently than larger tanks and therefore supply less water 
for beneficial uses. 
The Los Angeles water savings are calculated based on 
the runoff reductions (with 153,731 ft3 of water storage vol -
ume per 100 acres, corresponding to a single 2,200-gallon 
water tank at each home). The model calculated 11.6 percent 
stormwater runoff reductions using this size tank for irriga -
tion in this medium-density, residential land use area. The to -
tal average annual runoff for the medium-density, residential 
area was also calculated to be 27,940 ft3 per acre. The aver -
age domestic water savings by using harvested roof runoff 
for this scenario analysis is therefore:
or 2.42 millions of gallons (Mgal) per year for 100 acres.
Indoor Use of Roof Runoff for Toilet Flushing  
for Medium Density Residential Areas 
Toilet flushing water use is based on a per capita water 
use of 11 gallons per capita per day. With 12 persons/acre 
and 100 acres of area, this is therefore11.6% 𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀𝑀  𝑎𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑎𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑖𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖
100∗27,940  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3 𝑎𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑖𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓
𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎−𝑦𝑦𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎=3,241  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3 𝑤𝑤𝑎𝑎𝑓𝑓𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎  𝑒𝑒𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒
𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎−𝑦𝑦𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 
 
100  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒∗12 𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒
𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎∗11 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒
𝑝𝑝𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖−𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑎𝑦𝑦=13,200  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒 /𝑟𝑟𝑎𝑎𝑦𝑦 
 
TABLE A -9 Los Angeles Irrigation Requirements to Meet ET Deficit  
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual  
LA ETo, in/mo (reference)  1.86 2.405  3.6 4.8 5.27 5.85 6.355  6.2 4.8 3.565  2.4 1.86  
Turf grass coefficient  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8  
LA ET, in/mo (corrected for turf grass)  1.488  1.921  2.88 3.84 4.216  4.68 5.084  4.96 3.84 2.852  1.92 1.488  39.169  
LA avg rainfall (in/mo)  4.89 3.76 2.48 0.86 0.59 0.25 0.01 0.00 0.05 0.29 1.30 2.24 16.734  
LA irrigation requirements to match  
ET (in/mo)  -3.406  -1.837  0.4 2.976  3.622  4.434  5.072  4.96 3.788  2.562  0.616  -0.752   
LA irrigation requirements, ignoring  
excessive rainfall periods (in/mo)  0 0 0.4 2.976  3.622  4.434  5.072  4.96 3.788  2.562  0.616  0 28.43  
 
TABLE A -10 Seattle Irrigation Requirements to Meet ET Deficit  
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual  
Seattle ETo, in/mo (reference)  0.775  0.989  1.8 2.85 3.255  4.05 4.805  3.875  2.25 1.705  1.2 0.775   
Turf grass coefficient  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8  
SeaTac ET, in/mo (corrected  
for turf grass)  0.62 0.791  1.44 2.28 2.604  3.24 3.844  3.1 1.8 1.364  0.96 0.62 22.663  
SeaTac avg rainfall (in/mo)  6.20 5.12 4.05 2.63 1.28 1.21 0.78 1.06 1.24 4.00 7.92 6.22 41.694  
SeaTac irrigation requirements  
to match ET (in/mo)  -5.576  -4.327  -2.612  -0.348  1.328  2.034  3.064  2.044  0.556  -2.632  -6.964  -5.598   
SeaTac irrigation requirements, 
ignoring excessive rainfall  
periods (in/mo)  0 0 0 0 1.328  2.034  3.064  2.044  0.556  0 0 0 9.026  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix A: Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems  197
For a year and 100 acres, this amounts to 4.82 Mgal/yr. The 
indoor per capita water use and population density values 
were assumed to be the same for all of the medium-density, 
residential areas examined.
Table A-18 summarizes the monthly Los Angeles wa -
ter uses for the three water demand scenarios examined in 
the report: conservation irrigation, toilet flushing, and con -
servation irrigation plus toilet flushing combined. Table 
A-19 shows the calculated potential water savings from the 
WinSLAMM model for the 5 years of rainfall data in a Los 
Angeles, 100-acre, medium-density, residential, study area. Values were obtained for both the roof areas alone and the 
total area to check the water savings values. The model cal -
culations for water savings were averaged to obtain the an -
nual runoff savings in both ft3 and millions of gallons. 
VERIFICATION OF ORIGINAL ANALYSIS
The committee performed several levels of verification 
on this original analysis of water savings potential to ensure 
that the results are sound. The committee members perform -
ing the analysis vetted the assumptions of the analysis with 
TABLE A -11 Lincoln Irrigation Requirements to Meet ET Deficit  
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual  
Lincoln E To, in/mo (reference)  0.93 1.4125  3 4.5 5.58 6.3 6.2 5.27 4.5 3.72 2.1 0.93  
Turf grass coefficient  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8  
Lincoln ET, in/mo (corrected  
for turf grass)  0.744  1.13 2.4 3.6 4.464  5.04 4.96 4.216  3.6 2.976  1.68 0.744 35.554  
Lincoln avg rainfall (in/mo)  0.58 0.55 1.47 3.19 5.29 4.30 2.44 3.89 1.82 1.69 2.15 0.31 27.675  
Lincoln irrigation requirements  
to match ET (in/mo)  0.1665  0.5775  0.935  0.4075  -0.826  0.7425  2.52 0.326  1.78 1.286  -0.47 0.434   
Lincoln irrigation  requirements, 
ignoring excessive rainfall  
periods (in/mo)  0.1665  0.5775  0.935  0.4075  0 0.7425  2.52 0.326  1.78 1.286  0 0.434  9.175  
 
TABLE A -12 Madison Irrigation Requirements to Meet ET Deficit  
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual  
Madison ETo, in/mo (reference)  0.31 0.565  1.5 3.6 4.96 5.1 5.58 4.34 3 2.17 1.2 0.31  
Turf grass coefficient  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8  
Madison ET, in/mo (corrected  
for turf grass)  0.248  0.452  1.2 2.88 3.968  4.08 4.464  3.472  2.4 1.736 0.96 0.248  26.108  
Madison avg rainfall (in/mo)  1.49 0.83 1.81 3.46 3.13 5.55 4.07 3.18 1.59 2.60 1.33 0.59 29.62  
Madison irrigation requirements  
to match ET (in/mo)  -1.244  -0.378  -0.614  -0.576  0.842  -1.47 0.394  0.288  0.812  -0.86 -0.368  -0.338   
Madis on irrigation requirements, 
ignoring excessive rainfall  
periods (in/mo)  0 0 0 0 0.842  0 0.394  0.288  0.812  0 0 0 2.336  
 
TABLE A -13 Birmingham Irrigation Requirements to Meet ET Deficit  
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual  
Birmingham ETo, in/mo (reference)  1.24 2.26 3.3 4.5 4.96 4.8 4.96 4.65 4.2 3.72 2.1 1.55  
Turf grass coefficient  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8  
Birmingham ET, in/mo (corrected  
for turf grass)  0.992  1.808  2.64 3.6 3.968  3.84 3.968  3.72 3.36 2.976  1.68 1.24 33.792  
Birmingham avg rainfall (in/mo)  6.88 4.32 5.96 4.26 3.96 2.66 3.86 3.36 3.12 4.92 3.72 2.82 49.84  
Birmingham irrigation requirements  
to match ET (in/mo)  -5.888  -2.512  -3.32 -0.66 0.008  1.18 0.108  0.36 0.24 -1.944  -2.04 -1.58  
Birmingha m irrigation requirements, 
ignoring excessive rainfall periods 
(in/mo)  0 0 0 0 0.008  1.18 0.108  0.36 0.24 0 0 0 1.896  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
198 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
TABLE A -16 Example Irrigation Demand for Land Uses in the Los Angeles, Lincoln, and Newark (gal/day per 100 acres of land use area)  
gal/day per 100 Acres of  
Land Use for Tank M odeling Roof  
area (%)  Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 
Los Angeles commercial  28.1 0 0 5,323  39,605  48,202  59,009  67,499  66,009  50,412  34,096  8,198  0 
Los Angeles high density res idential 20.7 0 0 16,577  123,335  150,107  183,759  210,200  205,558  156,987  106,177  25,529  0 
Los Angeles med. density res idential 18.0 0 0 18,406  141,504  166,665  210,830  233,386  228,233  180,114  117,890  29,290  0 
Los Angeles low density res idential 8 0 0 28,439  211,583  257,511  315,242  360,601  352,638  269,313  182,14 9 43,795  0 
Los Angeles industrial  20.2 0 0 8,682  64,591  78,612  96,236  110,083  107,652  82,215  55,606  13,370  0 
Los Angeles institutional  19.4 0 0 14,719  109,513  133,285  163,165  186,643  182,521  139,393  94,278  22,668  0 
Lincoln commercial  25.0 2,082  7,221  11,692  5,096  0 9,285  31,230  3,420  22,258  15,393  0 5,271  
Lincoln high density res idential 20.7 6,900  23,933  38,749  16,888  0 30,772  103,504  11,335  73,769  51,017  0 17,468  
Lincoln medium density reside ntial 18.1 9,165  34,878  51,465  23,177  0 42,231 138,707  17,944  101,241  70,784  0 23,888  
Lincoln medium density reside ntial 18.1 9,339  32,393  52,445  22,857  0 41,648  140,088  15,341  99,842  69,048  0 23,642  
Lincoln low density res idential 14.9 9,830  34,095  55,201  24,058  0 43,836  147,449  16,147  105,089  72,677  0 24,885  
Lincoln industrial  10.2 2,275  7,892  12,777  5,569  0 10,147  34,130  3,738  24,325  16,822  0 5,760  
Lincoln institutional  24 6,469  22,438  36,327  15,833  0 28,848  97,035  10,626  69,158  47,828  0 16,377  
Newark commercial  28.1 0 0 0 0 4,365  15,171  2,129  17,567  0 0 0 0 
Newark high density res idential 20.7 0 0 0 0 13,593  47,245  6,631  54,705  0 0 0 0 
Newark medium density reside ntial 15.9 0 0 0 0 16,464  57,224  8,031  66,259  0 0 0 0 
Newark low density res idential 8.0 0 0 0 0 23,320  81,05 0 11,375  93,847  0 0 0 0 
Newark industrial  20.2 0 0 0 0 7,119  24,743  3,473  28,649  0 0 0 0 
Newark institutional  19.4 0 0 0 0 12,070  41,950  5,888  48,574  0 0 0 0 
 TABLE A -14 Newark Irrigation Requirements to Meet ET Deficit  
 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Annual  
Newark ETo, in/m o (reference)  0.62 0.8475  2.7 4.2 5.27 5.1 5.58 4.96 4.2 3.1 2.7 1.24  
Turf grass coefficient  0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8  
Newark ET, in/mo (corrected  
for turf grass)  0.496  0.678  2.16 3.36 4.216  4.08 4.464  3.968  3.36 2.48 2.16 0.992  32.414  
Newark avg rainfall (in/mo)  4.56 3.07 3.71 3.70 3.89 2.94 4.30 2.65 4.65 3.60 3.58 2.86 43.514  
Newark irrigation requirements  
to match ET (in/mo)  -4.06 -2.388  -1.554  -0.336  0.328  1.14 0.16 1.32 -1.292  -1.122  -1.424  -1.872   
Newark irrigation requ irements,  
ignoring excessive rainfall  
periods (in/mo)  0 0 0 0 0.328  1.14 0.16 1.32 0 0 0 0 2.948  
 
TABLE A -15 Example Watershed Demand and Available Stormwater by Land Use in Los Angeles  
 Landsc aped 
Area (% of 
total land 
use) ft3 of irrigation water/ acre/mo  Total 
Annual 
Irrigation 
Demand to 
Meet ET 
(ft3/acre)  Total 
Annual 
Roof 
Runoff 
(ft3/acre)  Total 
Annual 
Land Use 
Runoff 
(ft3/acre)  Jan Feb March  April  May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 
Commercial  14.9 0 0 216 1,610  1,959  2,398  2,743  2,683  2,049 1,386  333 0 15,377  14,014  42,822  
High density 
residential  46.4 0 0 674 5,013  6,101  7,468  8,543  8,354  6,380  4,315  1,038  0 47,885  11,894  30,603  
Medium density 
residential  52.5 0 0 762 5,672  6,903  8,450  9,666  9,453  7,219  4,883  1,174  0 54,180  10,344  27,939 
Low density 
residential  79.6 0 0 1,156  8,599  10,466  12,812  14,655  14,332  10,945  7,403  1,780  0 82,148  4,596  14,892  
Industrial  24.3 0 0 353 2,625  3,195  3,911  4,474  4,375  3,341  2,260  543 0 25,078  10,074  33,534  
Institutional  41.2 0 0 598 4,451  5,417  6,631  7,585  7,418  5,665  3,832  921 0 42,519  9,676  30,920  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix A: Calculating the Benefits of Rooftop Runoff Capture Systems  199
the entire committee. Once the analysis was completed, 
two committee members and one staff person reviewed 
the spreadsheets containing the graywater analysis and the 
pre- and post-processing of the stormwater model analysis 
in detail to check for errors. Assumptions between the two 
analyses were compared for consistency, and a cell-by-cell 
assessment was performed to check that the appropriate val -
ues and formulas were used. Following this verification, a 
few minor errors that were detected were discussed with the 
staff and committee members responsible for the analysis 
and subsequently corrected.Additionally, the analysis (including Chapter 3, Ap -
pendix A, and associated spreadsheets and input files) was 
sent to two independent unpaid consultants who were famil -
iar with stormwater modeling to review. They were asked 
to assess whether the analysis and related assumptions were 
reasonable and appropriate and to identify any concerns or 
errors in the analysis. Feedback from the independent con -
sultants was used to strengthen the discussion of uncertain -
ties and the appropriate use of the scenario analysis findings. 
TABLE A -17 Site Characteristics and Storage Volumes for the Los Angeles Example  
Parameter  Calculation  
Roof area (ac per 100 ac of medium -density residential land uses, MDR)  18%  𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓 100 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒 =18 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒  
Number of homes in 100 acres (1500 ft2 roof)  
18 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒∗43,560 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2
𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎∗ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎
1,500 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2=523  ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒  
Rain barrel storage (gallons/100 ac)  70 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎∗523 ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒 =36,590 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒  
Rain barrel storage (ft3/100 ac)  36,590  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒∗ 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
7.4805  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒=4,891  𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3 
Rain barrel storage (ft3/ft2 roof area)  4,891 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
18 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒∗43,560 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2/𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎=0.006𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓 𝑎𝑎𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎  
Water tank storage (gallons/100 ac)  2,200 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒
ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎∗523 ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒 =1,149,984  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒  
Water tank storage (ft3/100 ac) 
1,149,984  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒∗ 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
7.4805  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑔𝑜𝑜𝑖𝑖𝑒𝑒=153 ,731 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3 
Water tank storage (ft3/ft2 roof area)  153 ,731 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
18 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒∗43,560 𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2/𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎=0.20𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓3
𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑓2𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓 𝑎𝑎𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓  𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎  
Landscaped area (ac per 100 ac of MDR)  52.5% 𝑜𝑜𝑓𝑓 100 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒=52.5 𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑒𝑒  
 
TABLE A -18 Average Monthly Wa ter Use Patterns for Los Angeles Scenario  
Gallons/day/100 ac Medium -  
Density Residential (MDR) Area  Southwest Minimum Irrigation  
Requirements (gal/day)  Southwest Toilet  
Flushing (gal/day)  Southwest Minimum Irrigation  
Plus Toilet Flushing (gal/day)  
Jan 0 13,200  13,200  
Feb 0 13,200  13,200  
Mar 18,406  13,200  31,606  
Apr 141,504  13,200  154,704  
May 166,665  13,200  179,865  
Jun 210,830  13,200  224,030  
Jul 233,386  13,200  246,586  
Aug 228,233  13,200  241,433  
Sept 180,114  13,200  193,314  
Oct 117,890  13,200  131,090 
Nov 29,290  13,200  42,490  
Dec 0 13,200  13,200  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
200 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
TABLE A -19 WinSLAMM Calculated Water Use Savings for Los Angeles, Medium -Density, Residential Scenario Using One  
2,200 -gallon Water Storage Tank per Household  
 Minimum Irrigation  Toilet Flushing  Minimum Irrigation Plus Toilet Flushing  
% volume reduction of roof runoff  31.26  35.48  42.36  
Total roof runoff (ft3/5 yrs/100 ac MDR)  5,172,000  5,172,000  5,172,000  
Volume of roof runoff used to replace domestic  
water use (ft3/5 yrs/100 ac MDR)a 1,616,767  1,835,026  2,190,860  
% volume reduction of entire MDR area  11.6 13.1 15.68  
Total MDR runoff (ft3/5 yrs/100 ac)  13,970,000  13,970,000  13,970,000  
Volume of runoff used to replace potable water  
use (ft3/5 yrs/100 ac)a 1,620,520  1,830,070  2,190,496  
Average annual volume of potable water replaced  
by roof runoff using water tank (ft3 per year/100 ac)  323,729  366,510  438,136  
Average annual volume of potable water replaced  
by roof runoff using water tank (M gal/yr/100 ac)  2.42 2.74 3.28 
aThese values should be the same and were therefore u sed to verify the calculations.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
201B
Summary of State Laws and Regulations 
for Graywater and Stormwater
Additional Legal and Regulatory Tables
TABLE B -1 Examples of Rooftop Runoff and Stormwater Capture Regulations in Prior Appropriation States and Some Riparian States  
State Statute/Regulation  Source 
Alaska None. State plumbing c odes based on 2009 UPC, which do not include stormwater use.  http://labor.alaska.gov/lss/forms/plumbing -stats-regs.pdf  
Arizona  None, although Arizona water rights laws limit surface water appropriation to water 
“flowing in streams, canyons, ravines or ot her natural channels, or in definite underground 
channels…and of lakes, ponds and springs on the surface.” The state previously offered 
tax credits for rainwater harvesting systems.  ARS § 45 -141 
California  The state recognizes that rainwater and stormwate r capture can contribute to local water 
supplies and, specifically, reduce reliance on the Delta. The state recommends rain 
gardens, cisterns, and other landscape features and practices that increase rainwater 
capture and create opportunities for infiltrat ion and/or on -site storage.  The Rainwater 
Recapture Act of 2012 exempts rooftop capture and on -site use from water rights 
permitting. In September 2014, the Stormwater Resources Planning Act was amended to 
require entities developing stormwater resource p lans to identify and prioritize 
opportunities using existing publicly owned lands to capture and use stormwater or dry 
weather runoff.  State plumbing code modified from 2012 UPC.  Cal. Water Code § 10571(c) (West 2014);  
Cal. Water Code § 10562(a);  
Cal. Cod e Regs. tit. 23, § 492.15;  
Cal. Code Regs. tit. 23, § 5003  
Colorado  Colorado’s “prior appropriation system” of water rights prevents the capture and use of 
rainwater falling on private property, unless senior water rights are satisfied.  There are 
two exc eptions:  
1. Rural residential property owners whose water is supplied by certain wells may 
utilize “rooftop precipitation collection systems” for capture and use of stormwater.  
2. New developments that qualify as one of a limited number of pilot projects may 
harvest rainwater from impervious surfaces for nonpotable uses as long as the entire 
amount harvested is replaced to the stream by some other source.  If, after a time, the 
development can calculate the amount of harvested rainwater that would have bee n 
consumed by evapotranspiration from native vegetation, then the development can ask 
the water court for permission to not replace that amount.  Colo. Rev. Stat. § 37 -90-105; 
Colo. Rev. Stat. § 37 -92-602;  
Colo. Rev. Stat. § 37 -60-115 
Georgia  Appendix I “Rainwater Recycling Systems” of the Georgia 2009 Amendments to the 
2006 International Plumbing Code allows rainwater harvesting in certain applications 
throughout the state. The state also provides state -level guidance on rainwater harvesting.  http://www. dca.state.ga.us/development/constructioncodes
/programs/documents/GARainWaterGdlns.040209.pdf  
Idaho None  
(Note: The Deputy Attorney General issued a 2008 opinion that on -site rainwater 
harvesting is legal under the state constitution “as long as there is n o injury caused to  
the water rights of others.”)  Rassier (2008)  
Kansas No permit is required for rainwater that is used for domestic purposes or for the annual 
diversion and beneficial use of not more than 15 acre feet of rainwater. (Kansas Statute 
82a-701(c) defines “domestic use” as the use of water by any person or by a family unit or 
household for household purposes, or for the watering of livestock, poultry, farm and 
domestic animals used in operating a farm, and for the irrigation of lands not excee ding a 
total of two acres in area for the growing of gardens, orchards and lawns.)  Kan. Stat. Ann. § 82a -728 
Maryland  The Maryland Department of the Environment requires a detailed supply and demand 
analysis for systems larger than 150 gallons. Indoor use  is typically limited to toilet 
flushing, cleaning, and laundry washing.  http://www.mde.state.md.us/programs/Water/Stormwater
ManagementProgram/SedimentandStormwaterHome/  
Documents/ESDMEP%20Guidance%20RWH.pdf  
(Continued)  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
202 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
TABLE B -1 Continued  
State  Statute/ Regulation  Source  
Minnesota  None, but does provide state -level guidance on rainwater harvesting, including water 
quality criteria for irrigation.  http://stormwater.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/Stormwater_
re-use_and_rainwater_harvesting  
Montana  None. State p lumbing codes based on 2009 UPC, which do not include stormwater use.  http://bsd.dli.mt.gov/bc/current_codes.asp  
Nebraska  None   
Nevada  None   
New Mexico  New Mexico Office of the State Engineer encourages the rooftop capture and use of 
rainwater at reside ntial and commercial sites for on -site landscape irrigation and other on -
site domestic uses. “The collection of water harvested in this manner should not reduce the 
amount of runoff that would have occurred from the site in its natural, pre -development 
state.” http://www.rmwea.org/reuse/NewMexico.html  
North 
Carolina  North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources encourages water reuse 
practices including rainwater harvesting and graywater. The state building code permits the 
use of cisterns  to provide water for flushing toilets and outdoor irrigation.  http://www.ncleg.net/Sessions/2011/Bills/House/PDF/  
H609v6.pdf  
http://www.ncleg.net/Sessions/2009/Bills/House/PDF / 
H749v4.pdf  
North Dakota  None  
Ohio Allows rooftop capture for potable uses, to ilet flushing, and laundry with a permit.  Ohio Administrative Code (OAC) 3701 -28-12 
Oklahoma  The Water for 2060 Act initiates grants for pilot programs including rainwater capture 
projects.  Okla. Stat. tit. 82 § 1088  
Oregon The Oregon Building Codes Divi sion approved rainwater rooftop harvesting systems as a 
statewide alternative method for providing water for nonpotable uses, including irrigation, 
toilet flushing, and HVAC makeup water, and provides detailed design criteria applicable 
to all projects exc ept irrigation uses. The collection of precipitation water from an artificial 
impervious surface and the use of such water do not require a water right application, 
permit, or certificate.  Or. Rev. Stat. § 455.060;  
Or. Rev. Stat. § 537.141  
South Dakota  None  
Texas The state has adopted laws that encourage municipalities to promote rainwater harvesting, 
outline safety and health standards for indoor and outdoor use of harvested rainwater, and 
prohibit homeowner associations from banning rainwater collecti on. Tex. Loc. Gov’t Code Ann. § 580.004 (West, 2014);  
Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. § 341.042 (West, 2014);  
Tex. Prop. Code Ann. § 202.007 (West, 2014)  
Utah A person who has registered with the state may capture and store 2,500 gallons of 
rainwater in s torage containers above or below ground. A person who has not registered is 
limited to two storage containers of not more than 100 gallons each.  Utah Code Ann. § 73 -3-1.5 (West, 2014)  
Virginia  None, but does provide state -level guidance regarding the use  of graywater and the 
harvesting and use of rainwater.  http://www.vdh.state.va.us/EnvironmentalHealth/  
ONSITE/gmp/documents/2011/pdf/GMP_154.pdf  
Washington  The Department of Ecology allows onsite capture of rooftop rainwater without a water 
right. The Wash ington Plumbing Code, based on the 2012 UPC, allows for rainwater 
capture with storage up to 360 gallons without a permit when used for drip or subsurface 
irrigation. A permit is also not required for rainwater catchment at single family dwellings 
where al l system components are located on the exterior of the building. The state requires 
that counties reduce by at least 10% the rate they charge for storm or surface water sewer 
systems for any new or remodeled commercial building that utilizes a permissive r ainwater 
harvesting system.  Wash. Rev. Code § 36.94.140(3);  Water Resources 
Program Policy Regarding Collection of Rainwater for 
Beneficial Use, Wash. Dept. of Ecology (Oct. 9, 2009); 
Wash. Admin. Code 51.56.1700  
Wyoming  None   
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix B: Summary of State Laws and Regulations for Graywater and Stormwater  203
TABLE B -2 Summary of State La ws Regulating Reuse of Graywater at Lower Treatment Standard Than Reclaimed Wastewatera 
State Law Source 
Arizona  Arizona water quality statute allows graywater reuse with a permit issued by Department of 
Environmental Quality (except in certain circumstan ces where reuse would interfere with 
water right). Department of Environmental Quality regulations governing direct reuse of 
reclaimed water include tiered graywa ter permit criteria (see Table B -3). Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 49 -201 et seq. (LexisNexis, 2014); 
Ariz. Admin. Code § 18 -9-701 et seq.  
California  The California Health and Safety Code directs the Building Standards Commission to 
adopt plumbing code standards for the construction, installation, and alteration of 
graywater systems for indoor and outdoor us es. The 2013 edition of the California 
Plumbing Code authorizes graywater systems in residential and nonresidential buildings 
subject to permits and code standards. The code authorizes single fixture systems without  
a permit as long as they follow specifi c best management practices.  Cal. Health & Safety Code § 17922.12, §  18941.8  
(West, 2014); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 24, part 5, 1602.0 
(2013) 
Colorado  Colorado statute signed into law in 2013 directs the Water Quality Control Commission to 
make rules describ ing requirements, prohibitions, and standards for the use of graywater 
for nondrinking purposes, to encourage the use of graywater, and to protect public health 
and water quality. The regulations restrict graywater use to areas where the local 
government h as adopted an ordinance or resolution approving use of graywater. Graywater 
ordinances will not alone create new water use rights, and that use of graywater shall be 
allowed only in accordance with the terms and conditions of the decrees, contracts, and 
well permits applicable to the use of the source water rights or source water and any return 
flows therefrom.  Colo. Rev. Stat. § 25 -8-205, § 30 -11-107, § 37 -90-102 
Florida Florida Plumbing Code allows graywater use for toilet flushing (disinfection required ). 
Public health statutes governing on -site sewage disposal systems empower the Department 
of Health to approve the installation of individual graywater disposal systems where 
blackwater is treated by central sewage system. Additionally, water conservation  statute 
“urges” public -owned and investor -owned water and sewerage systems to reduce 
connection fees and regular service charges for customers who utilize water -saving 
graywater systems.  2010 Florida Plumbing Code, Appendix C (adopted by 
reference at Fla.  Admin. Code § 61G -20-1.001);  
Fla. Admin. Code Ann. r.64E -6-011 et seq.;  
Fla. Stat. §  373.619  
Georgia  Health code authorizes private residential direct reuse of graywater for outdoor landscape 
irrigation under a set of criteria outlined in the statute (a nd county boards of health are 
directed to adopt the criteria by regulation). Natural resources code requires GA state 
agencies to provide rules and regulations to encourage the use of graywater in lieu of 
potable water and exempts graywater from outdoor w atering restrictions. The Georgia 
Amendments to the 2006 IPC allow graywater fixtures to discharge to an approved 
graywater system for flushing of toilets or subsurface irrigation.  Ga. Code Ann. § 31 -3-5.2;  
Ga. Code Ann. § 12 -5-4, 12 -5-7; 
Ga. Comp. R. & R egs. 110 -11-1.19-1.21 
Hawaii Pursuant to water pollution statutes, the health department may authorize any county  
to implement a graywater recycling program for irrigating lawns and gardens, but all use  of 
graywater must conform to the state plumbing cod e. Department of Health wastewater 
disposal regulations affirm that graywater may be used for subsurface irrigation. State -
specific amendments to 2006 Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), with state -specific 
amendments to the graywater chapter authorizing use of g raywater for subsurface 
irrigation.  Haw. Rev. Stat. § 342D -7;  
Haw. Code R. § 11 -62-31.1;  
Haw. Code R. § 3 -183-13  
(adopts UPC by reference with amendments)  
Idaho Graywater is defined as untreated wastewater from bathtubs, showers, and bathroom wash 
basins. Laundry water is not included in the definition of graywater. Residential graywater 
reuse systems are permitted for subsurface irrigation only and require a permit. The Idaho 
State Plumbing Code is modeled after the 2009 UPC; Idaho amendments clarify t hat 
graywater fixtures up to, but not including, exterior irrigation tanks must be inspected by 
the authority issuing building permits, while Department of Environmental Quality has 
jurisdiction to inspect and approve the installation of the exterior irrig ation system tank and 
all piping up to the point of disposal in accordance with Individual/Subsurface Sewage 
Disposal Rules.  Idaho Admin. Code r. 07.02.06.011; Idaho Admin.  
Code r. 58.01.03  
Indiana The 2012 Indiana Plumbing Code, modeled from the 2009 I nternational Plumbing Code 
(IPC), allows for the reuse of graywater for indoor and outdoor uses under permit.  675 Indiana Admin. Code 16 -1.4 
(Continued)  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
204 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
TABLE B -2 Continued  
State  Law Source  
Kansas In 2014, the Kansas Department of Health and Environment issued guidance for permitting 
subsurface residential graywater irrigation systems under a variance to KAR 28 -5-2 through 
7. Local authorities may adopt or prohibit such systems within their jurisdictions.  See http://www.kdheks.gov/nps/lepp/dow nload/  
Graywater_System_Specification_FINAL.pdf.  
Maine Maine has adopted the 2009 UPC but “does not adopt ‘Part I, Graywater Systems,’ in its 
entirety.” Maine’s subsurface wastewater disposal regulations allow for “limited” 
graywater systems with no more than 1,000 -gallon storage capacity.  02-395-004 Code R. § 1; 10 -144-241 Code R. § 1 -13 
Massachusetts  On-site sewage treatment and disposal regulations issued by the Department of 
Environmental Protection set out requirements for graywater systems in reside ntial, 
commercial, and public facilities. The Uniform State Plumbing Code governs all plumbing 
systems, including nonpotable water supply lines. Under the plumbing code, water recycling 
systems —including graywater systems —can be installed with special perm ission. 310 Mass. Code Regs. 15.000 et seq.; 248 Mass.  
Code Regs. 10.00 et seq.  
Montana  Environment code requires the Board of Environmental Review to establish rules allowing 
diversion of graywater from wastewater treatment systems. The graywater rules a llow 
graywater use for toilet flushing without a permit from the environmental quality 
department, but a permit is required for irrigation. Montana has also adopted the 2009 
UPC. Graywater may be land -applied at approved sites without vector or pathogen 
reduction only if it will not pollute state waters.  Mont. Code Ann. § 75 -5-326 et seq.; Mont. Admin. 
R. 17.36; Mont. Admin. R. 24.31.301 (adopts UPC); 
Mont. Admin. R 17.50.810  
Nevada  Nevada has adopted the UPC. Sewage disposal regulations allow single -famil y dwellings 
to use graywater systems for subsurface irrigation.  Nev. Rev. Stat. § 444.350; Nev. Admin. Code  
§ 444.7616, 444.7825, 444.837, 444.8732  
New Hampshire  Under New Hampshire’s plumbing code, based on the 2009 UPC, graywater fixtures are 
not requ ired to discharge to the sanitary drainage system where such fixtures discharge to 
an approved graywater system for flushing of water closets and urinals or for subsurface 
landscape irrigation. However, New Hampshire has not as of 2014 approved any uses 
beyond disposal.  N.H. Admin. Rules, Bcr § 304.01  
New Mexico  Graywater rules, located in the liquid waste disposal regulations, set out requirements for 
graywater use for irrigation and toilet flushing. New Mexico adopted the 2009 UPC with 
significant amendm ents to Chapter 16. New Mexico water quality statutes allow use of 
small quantities of graywater for residential irrigation without a permit. Surface drip 
irrigation is allowed.  N.M. Stat. Ann. § 4 -6-4; N.M. Code R. § 20.7.3.  
809-10; N.M. Code R. § 14.8.2.2 7. See also 
http://www.ose.state.nm.us/water -info/conservation/  
pdf-manuals/New MexGWGuide.pdf  
New York  Residential buildings are required to connect all plumbing systems to the sanitary drainage 
system. Appendix C of the 2010 New York Plumbing Code, based on the IPC, provides 
standards for use of graywater for toilet flushing and subsurface irrigation in nonresidential 
buildings only.  N.Y. Comp. R & Regs tit. 19, § 1222.1 
North Carolina  The 2012 NC plumbing code is adapted from the IPC and allows installa tion of graywater 
systems for toilet flushing. Public health statute states that graywater systems shall be 
regulated by the health department under rules promulgated by the environmental 
management commission to encourage and promote the safe and benefici al use of 
graywater. In 2008, North Carolina passed House Bill 2499, a drought bill that allows 
graywater reuse by watering with buckets in case of a drought year, which will sunset when 
graywater rules are promulgated.  N.C. Gen. Stat. § 130A -335; N.C. Gen . Stat.  
§ 143-350, 355.5  
Ohio Ohio health and safety statute directs the board of health to prescribe standards for 
regulation of graywater recycling systems. According to the Department of Health, the 
final draft of proposed rules (effective January 2015 ) will be adopted in to the 
administrative code at §  3701 -29-17 (http://www.odh.ohio.gov/rules/drafts/3701 -29.aspx). 
The proposed rules permit graywater reuse for irrigation only. Ohio Plumbing Code allows 
segregation of graywater from wastewater streams wh en the graywater discharges to a 
graywater recycling system approved by Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 
accordance with on -site disposal regulations.  Ohio Rev. Code Ann. § 3718.02; Ohio Admin Code 
4101:3 -3-01 
Oklahoma  Oklahoma passed a law in 2012 that allows graywater reuse without a permit when 
applying less than 250 gallons per day of untreated private residential graywater for 
gardening, composting, or landscape irrigation of the resident if a set of simple best 
management practices (BMP s) is followed that restrict surface ponding, spray irrigation, 
and off -site discharge. Surface drip irrigation is allowed.  Okla. Stat. 27A, § 2 -6-101 et seq.  
 Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix B: Summary of State Laws and Regulations for Graywater and Stormwater  205
TABLE B -2 Continued  
State  Law Source  
Oregon Public health statute declares it the public policy of the state to encourage reuse of 
graywater for beneficial uses. The statute prohibits any person from installing or operating 
a graywater system without a permit from the Department of Environmental Quality. Rules 
were approved by the Environmental Quality Commission in 2011 that prescribe tiered 
requirements for the permitting of graywater reuse systems.  Or. Rev. Stat. § 454.607; Or. Rev. Stat. § 444.610;  
Or. Admin. R. 340 -053-0050 to 0110  
South Dakota  On-site wastewater disposal regulations establish basic requirements for graywater reuse 
for toilet flushing or irrigation.  S.D. Admin. R. 74:53:01:38  
Texas The Texas Health and Safety Code and the Texas Water Code require the Commission on 
Environmental Quality to adopt rules implementing minimum standards for the use and 
reuse of graywater for a variety of uses; the Health Code specifies that regulations  may not 
require a permit for the domestic use of less than 400 gallons of graywater each day if the 
graywater originates from a private residence and is used for gardening, composting, or 
landscaping (observing certain simple BMPs). Environmental quality regulations—or the 
graywater code —provide criteria for domestic, industrial, commercial, institutional, and 
irrigation uses.  Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. § 341.039,  
§ 366.012; Tex. Water Code § 26.0311; 30 Tex.  
Admin. Code § 210.81 et seq.; 30 Tex. Ad min.  
Code § 285.80 et seq.  
Utah In 2013, Utah adopted water quality regulations governing graywater systems that apply to 
the construction, installation, modification, and repair of graywater systems for subsurface 
landscape irrigation for single -family residences. It is unlawful to construct, install, or 
modify a graywater system in a building or on a lot without first obtaining a permit from 
the local health department.  Utah Code Ann. § 15A -3-313; Utah Admin.  
Code R317 -401-1 et seq.  
Virginia  Regulati ons issued in 1999b require health and building code permits prior to installation of 
a graywater system. Graywater systems must be inspected by the State Health Department 
prior to operation. Virginia uses an amended version of the IPC that governs graywater 
systems for toilet flushing, irrigation, and other nonpotable applications. Utilization of 
harvested graywater is expressly exempted from requirements of the Water Reclamation 
and Reuse regulations.  Va. Code Ann. § 32.1 -248.2; 13 Va. Admin. Code  
§ 5-63-320; 13 Va. Admin . Code § 5 -63-210; 9  
Va. Admin. Code § 25 -740-10 et seq.  
Washington  State amendments to the 2009 UPC allow graywater to be used in lieu of potable water for 
indoor nonpotable uses and subsurface irrigation where permitted by the Department of Health rules and apply UPC standards to graywater systems. Department of Health 
regulation “Greywater Reuse for Subsurface Irrigation” sets out a comprehensive three -
tiered permitting system.
 Wa. Admin. Code § 51 -56-1600; Wa. Admin. Code  
§ 246- 274-001 et seq.  
Wyoming  As of July 2014, Wyoming’s graywater permitting system was undergoing a transition 
from permit -by-rule approach to a more comprehensive regulatory approach. However,  
the status of this effort is unclear.   
aThis table summarizes generally applicab le state statutes and regulations addressing graywater reuse. The summary does not include state constitutional 
provisions, court decisions, guidance documents, or local ordinances that may be relevant to the legality of graywater reuse in a particular loc ation. This table 
does not include state laws establishing green infrastructur e tax credits or grant programs . Inconsistencies among two or more areas of a state’s code may affect 
the legality of graywater reuse. Table 6 -3 describes the plain language of s tatutes and regulations addressing graywater reuse (retrieved from LexisNexis and 
Westlaw using keyword searches, June 2014) and is not intended to determine the legality of graywater reuse in light of ambig uous or contradictory provisions.  
bhttps://www.vd h.virginia.gov/EnvironmentalHealth/ONSITE/regulations/FormsDocs/documents/2010/pdfs/Graywater%20Use%20guidelines%20by%20VDH_f eb 
99.pdf.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
206 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
TABLE  B-3 Arizona Tiered Regulations for Graywater Irrigation  
Permit Type  Requirements for Direct Reuse of Graywater  
Type 1 Reclaimed Water General Permit for Graywater  
 
Graywater irrigation systems with a flow of <400 gallons per day  No prior approval or notice to the agency is necessary if the following 13 best practice 
measu res (BMPs) are followed:  
Human contact with graywater and soil irrigation by graywater is avoided.  
Graywater originating from the residence is used and contained within the property 
boundary for household gardening, composting, lawn watering, or landscape  
irrigation.  
Surface application of graywater is not used for irrigation of food plants, except for 
citrus and nut trees.  
Graywater does not contain hazardous chemicals derived from activities such as 
cleaning car parts, washing greasy or oily rags, or dis posing of waste solutions 
from home photo labs.  
The applications of graywater are managed to minimize standing water on the surface.  
The graywater system is constructed so that if blockage, plugging, or backup of the 
system occurs, graywater can be directed into the sewage collection system, or on -
site wastewater treatment or disposal system, as applicable. The graywater system 
may include filtration to reduce plugging and extend system lifetime.  
Any graywater storage tank is covered to restrict acce ss. 
The system is sited outside of a floodway.  
The system is operated to maintain a minimum vertical separation distance of at least 
5 feet from the point of graywater application to the top of the seasonally high 
groundwater.  
If using an on -site wastewat er treatment facility for blackwater treatment and disposal, 
the use of a graywater system does not change the design, capacity, or reserve area 
requirements for the on -site waste system.  
Any pressure piping used in a graywater system that may be susceptib le to cross 
connection with a potable water system clearly indicates that the piping does not 
carry potable water.  
Graywater applied by surface irrigation does not contain water used to wash diapers or 
similarly soiled or infectious garments unless the gr aywater is disinfected before 
irrigation.  
Surface irrigation by graywater is only by flood or drip irrigation. Graywater cannot 
be used for other purposes besides subsurface irrigation or drip irrigation.  
Type 3 General Permit for Graywater  
 
Graywater irr igation systems with a flow between 400 - 3,000 gallons  
per day A notice of intent to operate a graywater irrigation system must be submitted to the 
department 90 days before construction beings.  
The system must meet the setback and soil absorption rates under the on -site 
wastewater treatment facility requirements for shallow trenches.  
The depth of the graywater dispersal trenches should be designed for appropriate 
irrigation use but not more than 5 feet below the finished grade of the soil.  
The void space  of the aggregate fill in the dispersal trench must allow enough capacity 
to contain 2 days of graywater at design flow.  
The department has the authority to review design plans and details to accept a 
graywater irrigation system different from the typical  system provided sufficient 
performance and protection are provided.  
On-site disposal systems with flow >3,000 gallons per day  For large systems, the department handles permits on case -by-case basis.  
SOURCE: Ariz. Admin Code § 18 -9-711, 719. Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 49 -242, 243.  Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
207C
Water Science and Technology Board
GEORGE M. HORNBERGER , Chair, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
EDWARD J. BOUWER , Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland
DA VID A. DZOMBAK , Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
M. SIOBHAN FENNESSY , Kenyon College, Gambier, Ohio
BEN GRUMBLES , U.S. Water Alliance, Washington, DC
GEORGE R. HALLBERG , The Cadmus Group, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts
ARTURO A. KELLER , University of California, Santa Barbara
CATHERINE L. KLING , Iowa State University, Ames
LARRY LARSON , Association of State Floodplain Managers, Madison, Wisconsin
DINAH LOUDA , Veolia Institute, Paris, France
STEPHEN POLASKY , University of Minnesota, St. Paul
MARYLYNN V . YATES , University of California, Riverside
JAMES W. ZIGLAR, SR. , Van Ness Feldman, Potomac, Maryland
Staff
ELIZABETH EIDE , Acting Director
LAURA J. EHLERS , Senior Staff Officer
STEPHANIE E. JOHNSON , Senior Staff Officer 
ED DUNNE , Staff Officer
M. JEANNE AQUILINO , Financial/Administrative Associate
BRENDAN R. M cGOVERN , Senior Project AssistantCopyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
208D
Biographical Sketches of Committee Members and Staff
RICHARD G. LUTHY  (NAE), Chair , is the Silas H. Palm -
er Professor in the Department of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering, and Senior Fellow at the Woods Institute for 
the Environment at Stanford University. His area of teaching 
and research is environmental engineering and water quality 
with application to water reuse and management of contami -
nated sediments. He is the director of the National Science 
Foundation’s Engineering Research Center for re-inventing 
the nation’s urban water infrastructure (renuwit.org). The 
Center is a collaboration among four universities that pro -
motes more sustainable solutions to urban water challenges. 
His work includes study of persistent and bio-accumulative 
contaminants and emerging contaminants. Dr. Luthy is a 
past chair of the the National Academies of Science, En -
gineering, and Medicine’s Water Science and Technology 
Board, and he has served on various Academies committees. 
He is a former president of the Association of Environmen -
tal Engineering and Science Professors. He is a registered 
professional engineer, a board-certified environmental engi -
neer, water environment foundation fellow, and a member of 
the National Academy of Engineering. He received a B.S. 
in chemical engineering from the University of California, 
Berkeley, a M.S. degree in ocean engineering from the Uni -
versity of Hawai’i at Manoa, and an M.S. and Ph.D. degrees 
in environmental engineering from the University of Cali -
fornia, Berkeley.
RICHARD W. ATWATER  is the executive director of the 
Southern California Water Committee (SCWC), a nonprofit 
public education partnership focused on solving the water 
problems of southern California. Mr. Atwater has more than 
35 years of experience in water resources management and 
development in the western United States and has pioneered 
many award-winning water projects and implemented nu -
merous innovative water resource management programs. 
Prior to joining the SCWC, he served as the CEO and gen -
eral manager of the Inland Empire Utilities Agency, which 
provides wholesale water and wastewater utility services to more than 850,000 customers. Throughout his career, Mr. 
Atwater has accumulated extensive public agency manage -
ment experience in directing the development of some of the 
largest water projects in the United States. This includes the 
water recycling program for the West and Central Basin Mu -
nicipal Water Districts in California, which at the time were 
the largest in the country. He is the recipient of the Conserva -
tion Service Award, the highest citizen award for resources 
management, and has participated in policy formulation 
workshops and expert panels for the National Academy of 
Sciences, Western Governors Association, Western Water 
States Council, and the National Water Research Institute. 
Mr. Atwater received his B.S. degree in geology and envi -
ronmental science from Stanford University and his M.P.L. 
degree in urban and regional planning from the University of 
Southern California.
GLENN T. DAIGGER  (NAE) is a professor of engineering 
practice in the Department of Civil and Environmental En -
gineering at the University of Michigan. He is also president 
and founder of One Water Solutions LLC. Previously, he was 
the senior vice president with CH2M HILL in Englewood, 
Colorado. He served as chief wastewater process engineer 
and was responsible for wastewater process engineering on 
both municipal and industrial wastewater treatment projects 
on a firm-wide basis. Dr. Daigger was the first technical fel -
low for the firm, an honor that recognizes the leadership he 
provides for CH2M HILL and for the profession in devel -
opment and implementation of new wastewater treatment 
technology. He was also the chief technology officer for the 
firm’s Civil Infrastructure Client Group, which includes the 
water, transportation, and operations businesses. From 1994 
to 1996, Dr. Daigger served as professor and chair of the De -
partment of Environmental Systems Engineering at Clemson 
University. Dr. Daigger is a registered professional engineer 
in the states of Indiana and Arizona and a board-certified 
environmental engineer. He also has Academies experience, 
having recently served as chair of the Committee to Review Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix D: Biographical Sketches of Committee Members and Staff  209
EPA’s Economic Analysis of Final Water Quality Standards 
for Nutrients for Lakes and Flowing Waters in Florida. Dr. 
Daigger received his B.S.C.E. degree, his M.S.C.E. degree, 
and his Ph.D. degree, all in environmental engineering, from 
Purdue University.
JÖRG DREWES  is chair professor for urban water systems 
engineering at Technical University of Munich, and he is a 
professor emeritus and research professor at the Colorado 
School of Mines. He brings extensive knowledge and ex -
perience with graywater systems in Germany. His research 
interests focus on water and wastewater treatment engineer -
ing and potable and nonpotable water reuse. In particular, 
he focuses on technologies leading to indirect potable reuse 
(soil-aquifer treatment versus microfiltration/reverse osmo -
sis); beneficial reuse of produced water during natural gas 
exploration; desalination and concentrate volume minimiza -
tion; state-of-the-art characterization of natural and effluent 
organic matter; fate and transport of emerging contaminants 
(such as endocrine disrupting compounds, pharmaceutical 
residues and household chemicals) in natural and engineered 
systems as well as the rejection mechanisms of organic mi -
cropollutants in high-pressure membranes. Dr. Drewes re -
ceived his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in environmental 
engineering from the Technical University of Berlin.
BENJAMIN H. GRUMBLES  is Secretary of the Environ -
ment for the state of Maryland. Previously, he served as presi -
dent of the U.S. Water Alliance, where he worked to unite 
people and policies for water sustainability throughout the 
country. Prior to joining the Water Alliance, Mr. Grumbles 
led Arizona’s Department of Environmental Quality working 
on air quality and climate change, energy policy and waste 
management, water efficiency, and wastewater recycling. Re -
gional priorities in this effort included protecting the Grand 
Canyon, Colorado River, and Arizona-Mexico border envi -
ronment. Mr. Grumbles served as Assistant Administrator for 
Water at the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
from 2004 through 2008. He launched the EPA’s water ef -
ficiency labeling program, WaterSense, and initiatives on 
green infrastructure, water and climate change, and phar -
maceuticals. He carried out and defended the nation’s clean 
water, drinking water, ocean and coastal, and wetlands laws 
and worked on great waterbody collaborations from coast 
to coast. Mr. Grumbles is currently a member of the Acad -
emies’ Water Science and Technology Board. He received his 
B.A. degree from Wake Forest University, a master’s degree 
in environmental law from George Washington University 
Law School, and a J.D. degree from Emory University Law 
School.ARPAD HORV ATH  is a professor of civil and environ -
mental engineering at the University of California (UC), 
Berkeley. He heads the Energy, Civil Infrastructure and Cli -
mate Graduate Program and is the director of UC Berkeley’s 
Consortium on Green Design and Manufacturing and of UC 
Berkeley’s Engineering and Business for Sustainability Cer -
tificate Program. His research focuses on developing models 
for life-cycle environmental and economic assessment of 
products, processes, and services, particularly of civil infra -
structure systems. He has worked the environmental impli -
cations of transportation systems, buildings, construction, 
water and wastewater systems, and various service indus -
tries. Dr. Horvath is a member of the Environmental Engi -
neering Committee of the EPA’s Science Advisory Board, as 
well as the EPA’s Scientific and Technological Achievement 
Awards Committee. He is associate editor of the Journal of 
Infrastructure Systems  and is on the editorial boards of En-
vironmental Science & Technology, Environmental Research 
Letters , and the Journal of Industrial Ecology . Dr. Horvath 
was conference chair of the 6th International Conference on 
Industrial Ecology in 2011. He is a recipient of the Ameri -
can Society of Civil Engineers’ Walter L. Huber Civil Engi -
neering Research Prize, the Laudise Prize “for outstanding 
achievements in industrial ecology by a young scientist or 
engineer” of the International Society for Industrial Ecology, 
and the Excellence in Review Award from Environmental 
Science & Technology . Three of his co-authored papers have 
been named among the top three papers in Environmental 
Science & Technology  in 2008, 2011, and 2012. He received 
a Dipl. Eng. (M.S.) degree in civil engineering from the 
Technical University of Budapest and M.S. and Ph.D. de -
grees in civil and environmental engineering from Carnegie 
Mellon University.
ROBERT E. PITT is the Emeritus Cudworth Professor of 
Urban Water Systems in the School of Engineering at the 
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa. His major area of inter -
est is in stormwater management, especially the integration 
of drainage and water quality objectives associated with 
green infrastructure and combined sewers, development of 
stormwater treatment systems at critical source areas, system 
modeling or urban water systems, and the beneficial uses of 
stormwater. His research has also examined stormwater ef -
fects on groundwater. He is a member of the American So -
ciety of Civil Engineers and the American Water Resources 
Association and has served as a member of the Academies 
Committee on Reducing Stormwater Discharge Contribu -
tions to Water Pollution and the Groundwater Recharge 
Committee. He received his B.S. degree in engineering sci -
ence from Humboldt State University, his M.S. degree in Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
210 Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies: An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
civil engineering from San Jose State University, and his 
Ph.D. degree in civil and environmental engineering from 
the University of Wisconsin.
MARCUS M. QUIGLEY  is a founding partner and chief 
executive officer of OptiRTC, Inc., a company formed by 
Geosyntec, focused on intelligent control and decision sup -
port solutions for stormwater management. Previously, Mr. 
Quigley served as principal civil and environmental engi -
neer at Geosyntec Consultants, where he worked in the areas 
of surface water hydrology, hydraulics, water quality, and 
stormwater and erosion and sediment control permitting and 
management. He is recognized as a national technical leader 
in stormwater best management practice (BMP) design, re -
search and development, modeling, data analysis, and field 
data acquisition. He has been the lead designer for a number 
of conventional and low impact development (LID) controls 
systems, and has directed groundbreaking monitoring work 
to demonstrate the effectiveness of LID. Mr. Quigley regu -
larly conducts and directs complex surface water quantity 
and quality modeling efforts, and during the past 10 years he 
has provided technical leadership and project management 
for the International Stormwater Best Management Practices 
Database project. He received his B.S. degree in environ -
mental engineering from the University of Notre Dame and 
his M.S. degree in civil and environmental engineering from 
Oregon State University.
ROBERT S. RAUCHER  is a founding partner and princi -
pal at Stratus Consulting/Abt Associates. He specializes in 
economics, risk management, strategic planning, and regula -
tory policy analysis related to water utilities, water resourc -
es, and environmental quality. He is a noted expert on water 
resources management, benefit-cost analysis and water-re -
lated valuation issues, regulatory policy, and climate change-
related vulnerability assessment and adaptation strategies for 
water resource management. Dr. Raucher has been involved 
in desalination and water reuse planning and implementa -
tion issues, and he is actively engaged in research assess -
ing reliability values associated with water supply portfolio 
diversification through desalination and other “new” water 
options that offer drought-resistant yields. Dr. Raucher is 
an active member of the water supply and wastewater com -
munity, serving on numerous expert panels and committees, 
including three workgroups for the National Drinking Wa -
ter Advisory Council, and he is a member of the WateReuse 
Foundation’s Research Advisory Committee. He received a 
B.A. degree in economics and anthropology, an M.S. degree 
in econometrics, and a Ph.D. degree in natural resource eco -
nomics and public finance.SYBIL SHARVELLE  is an assistant professor in the De -
partment of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Colo -
rado State University (CSU). Her research interests focus 
on wastewater and graywater reuse; biological process engi -
neering; conversion of waste to energy; and integrated urban 
water management. Dr. Sharvelle is also a member of the 
CSU Sustainable Urban Water Research Working Group, 
where she works to address new and innovative infrastruc -
ture design concepts in water management through a multi -
disciplinary approach both in the United States and abroad. 
She received her B.S. and M.S. degrees in civil engineer -
ing from the University of Colorado and while pursuing her 
M.S. degree, she optimized the nitrification and denitrifica -
tion steps in a biological processor for treatment of waste -
water highly concentrated with ammonia. Dr. Sharvelle also 
received a Ph.D. degree from Purdue University, where her 
research involved design and optimization of a biotrickling 
filter for simultaneous treatment of graywater and waste gas. 
A major component of this research effort was to examine 
the fate of surfactants in the biotrickling filter.
CLAIRE WELTY  is a professor of civil and environmen -
tal engineering and director of the Center for Urban En -
vironmental Research and Education at the University of 
Maryland, Baltimore County. Her research is focused on 
developing an end-to-end system of field-deployed sensors 
and fully coupled groundwater-surface water mathematical 
models to quantify and predict the urban hydrologic cycle 
and coupled biogeochemical cycles from neighborhood to 
regional scales. Her goal is to be able to assimilate sensor 
data into hydrologic and water quality models in near-real 
time for predicting flow paths, fluxes, and stores of water and 
chemicals on land surfaces and in the subsurface. Dr. Welty 
has Academies experience, having served on a number of 
committees and as chair of the Water Science and Technol -
ogy Board. She received her B.A. degree in environmental 
sciences from the University of Virginia, her M.S. degree 
in environmental engineering from the George Washington 
University, and her Ph.D. degree in civil engineering from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
MARYLYNN V . YATES  is a professor of environmental 
microbiology at the University of California, Riverside. Dr. 
Yates conducts research in the area of water and wastewa -
ter microbiology. Her research focuses on assessing the po -
tential for the contamination of water by human pathogenic 
microorganisms. As the intentional use of reclaimed water 
and biosolids (which may contain pathogenic microorgan -
isms) increases, it is necessary to understand the potential 
impacts of these practices on public health. Dr. Yates has Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Using Graywater and Stormwater to Enhance Local Water Supplies:  An Assessment of Risks, Costs, and Benefits
Appendix D: Biographical Sketches of Committee Members and Staff  211
Academies experience, currently serving as a member of the 
Water Science and Technology Board. She received her B.S. 
in nursing from the University of Wisconsin, her M.S. de -
gree in chemistry from the New Mexico Institute of Mining 
and Technology, and her Ph.D. degree in microbiology and 
immunology from the University of Arizona.
Staff
STEPHANIE E. JOHNSON , study director, is a senior 
program officer with the Water Science and Technology 
Board. Since joining the National Academies of Science, 
Engineering, and Medicine in 2002, she has worked on a 
wide range of water-related studies, on topics such as de -
salination, wastewater reuse, contaminant source remedia -
tion, coal and uranium mining, coastal risk reduction, and 
ecosystem restoration. She has served as study director for 
15 committees, including all 6 Committees on Independent Scientific Review of Everglades Restoration Progress. Dr. 
Johnson received her B.A. degree in chemistry and geology 
from Vanderbilt University and her M.S. and Ph.D. degrees 
in environmental sciences from the University of Virginia. 
MICHAEL J. STOEVER  is a research associate with the 
Water Science and Technology Board. He has worked on a 
number of studies including Desalination: A National Per -
spective, the Water Implications of Biofuels Production in 
the United States, and the Committee on Louisiana Coastal 
Protection and Restoration. He has also worked on National 
Research Council studies on the review of Everglades res -
toration progress, the effect of water withdrawals on the St. 
Johns River, and Chesapeake Bay restoration. Mr. Stoever 
received his B.A. degree in political science from Stockton 
University in Pomona, New Jersey, and is currently working 
toward his M.S. degree in environmental sciences and policy 
from Johns Hopkins University. 