HANDBOOK OF 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND 
WASTE MINIMIZATION TECHNOLOGIES 
This Page Intentionally Left BlankHANDBOOK OF 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND 
WASTE MINIMIZATION 
TECHNOLOGIES 
Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff, Ph.D. 
N&P Limited 
I~UTTE RWO RTH 
W E I N E M A N N 
An imprint of Elsevier Science 
Amsterdam Boston London New York Oxford Paris 
San Diego San Francisco Singapore Sydney Tokyo 
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier Science. 
Copyright □9 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved. 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
Recognized the importance of preserving what has been written, Elsevier Science 
prints its books on acid-free paper whenever possible. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Cheremisinoff, Nicholas P. 
Handbook of solid waste management and waste minimization technologies / 
by Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-7506-7507-1 (alk. paper) 
1. Refuse and refuse disposal. 2. Waste minimization. I. Title. 
TD791 .C364 2003 
628.4'4-dc21 
2002034547 
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
The publisher offers special discounts on bulk orders of this book. 
For information, please contact: 
Manager of Special Sales 
Elsevier Science 
200 Wheeler Road, 6 th Floor 
Burlington, MA 01803 
Tel: 781-313-4700 
Fax: 781-313-4880 
For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann publications available, contact our 
World Wide Web home page at: http://www.bh.com 
1098765432 1 
Printed in the United States of America 
CONTENTS 
Preface, vii 
About the Author, xi 
Chapter 1. Source Reduction and Waste Minimization, 1 
Introduction, 1 
Future and Long-Term Liabilities, 2 
The Hierarchy of Waste Management, 3 
The Principles of Life Cycle, 6 
Costs of Environmental Management, 8 
P2 and Waste Minimization at Work, 14 
A Short Review, 21 
Chapter 2. Environmental Laws and Regulatory Drivers, 23 
Introduction, 23 
NEPA, 24 
RCRA, 24 
Clean Air Act, 26 
Clean Water Act, 26 
CERCLA, 26 
Emergency Planning and Community Right-To-Know Act, 27 
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act, 28 
National Contingency Plan, 29 
Oil Pollution Act, 30 
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act, 31 
Occupational Safety and Health Act, 31 
Pollution Prevention Act, 31 
Safe Drinking Water Act, 32 
Toxic Substances Control Act, 32 
A Short Review, 32 
Chapter 3. Municipal Solid Waste, 34 
Introduction, 34 
The Composition of Municipal Waste, 35 
Waste Volume Growth Trends, 37 
Waste to Energy, 39 
Composting, 66 
Waste Management through Resource Recovery, 80 
A Short Review, 87 
Recommended Resources, 92 
Chapter 4. Landfill Operations and Gas Energy Recovery, 96 
Introduction, 96 
Regulatory Considerations, 98 
The Composition of Landfill Gas, 101 
Landfill Design Considerations, 103 
Flaring Practices, 118 
Landfill Gas Energy Systems, 120 
Noncombustion Technologies, 125 
A Short Review, 127 
Recommended Resources, 128 
Chapter 5. Volume Reduction Technologies, 130 
Introduction, 130 
Size Reduction, 130 
Concentrating Methods, 133 
Incineration of Municipal Sludge, 147 
Industry Approaches to Sludge Volume Reduction, 162 
A Short Review, 168 
Recommended Resources, 169 
Chapter 6. Biosolids Technologies and Applications, 174 
Introduction, 174 
General Information and Background, 174 
Public Issues Concerning the Use of Biosolids, 175 
Biosolids Treatment, 181 
Applications, 183 
A Short Review, 186 
Recommended Resources, 186 
Chapter 7. Industry Practices, 188 
The Chemical Industry, 188 
Petroleum Refining, 208 
Aluminum Manufacturing, 249 
Iron and Steel, 258 
Lead and Zinc Smelting, 278 
Nickel Ore Processing and Refining, 283 
Copper Smelting, 287 
A Short Review, 290 
Chapter 8. Establishing P2 and Waste Minimization Programs, 291 
Introduction, 291 
P2 Drivers, 292 
Developing a P2 Program, 293 
Application of Life-Cycle Tools, 316 
A Short Review, 334 
Recommended Resources, 336 
Glossary of Environmental and Waste Management Terms, 337 
Index, 466 
vi 
PREFACE 
This volume covers the practices and technologies that are and can be applied to 
the management and prevention of solid waste. It is the third volume in a series 
that focuses on approaches to improving environmental performance in a cost- 
effective manner. Earlier volumes in this Butterworth-Heinemann series are the 
Handbook of Water and Wastewater Treatment Technologies and Handbook of 
Air Pollution Prevention and Control. In addition, the book Green Profits: The 
Manager's Handbook for ISO 14001 and Pollution Prevention establishes much 
of the foundation for and philosophy behind these volumes. 
The current volume is intended to provide engineers, environmental managers, 
and students with a survey of the technologies and strategies for reducing solid 
waste generation, and in applying resource recovery, and waste-to-energy 
techniques. Discussions focus on both municipal and industrial solid wastes. The 
interdependency of pollution and waste media cannot be readily distinguished, so 
in many instances relationships between waste management and pollution control 
and prevention strategies for air and water are included in topical discussions. 
There are eight chapters to this volume. Chapter 1 provides a general overview 
of the principles behind source reduction and waste minimization. Although 
differences between the strategies behind pollution prevention (P2) and waste 
minimization are pointed out, they are so closely linked that both subjects are 
treated interchangeably at times throughout the book. Chapter 2 provides a broad 
overview of the U.S. environmental statutes and liabilities associated with 
environmental management. Although the focus is on solid waste, it would be 
foolish to consider only those regulations that deal with this pollution medium. 
All regulations dealing with the environment and public safety have a bearing on 
solid waste management, particularly regulated hazardous chemicals. 
Chapter 3 focuses on the problem of municipal solid waste. This is a worldwide 
problem that impacts on the very sustainability of mankind and on the 
preservation of Mother Earth's natural resources. Scientific studies imply that the 
rate at which natural resources are being consumed exceeds the growth in 
renewable resources by nearly 20%. This means that our lifestyles and those of 
emerging nations and countries in transition which are improving their quality of 
life rapidly are unsustainable over the next several generations. A major 
philosophical change is needed in how we design and use products in our 
everyday lives, as well as how we view and manage wastes. We may look at 
solid waste as an enormous management issue that requires huge financial 
resources to address, or we can view the horrendous volumes of wastes as a 
source of renewable energy and materials recovery. 
Chapter 4 discusses landfill operations and focuses on gas energy recovery. 
Landfilling operations are the final disposal of solid wastes. The practice should 
be viewed plain and simply as a practice that is uneconomical. It requires 
vii 
enormous effort, it has many hidden costs, it limits land redevelopment 
opportunities, and it poses indefinite health threats. Despite these shortcomings, 
it is the most widely practiced strategy for solid waste disposal worldwide. As a 
strategy for both industry and municipalities, it should be discouraged and phased 
out. 
Chapter 5 provides an overview of solid waste volume reduction technologies. To 
reduce the costs for waste disposal, investments in these technologies are needed. 
These reduce waste transport and disposal fees and facilitate waste handling 
operations. They supplement landfilling operations, and hence, they are 
uneconomical from a broad sense of waste management strategies. These 
represent treatment technologies or in some cases they are control or end-of-pipe 
treatment technologies. They have high capital investments and long-term 
operation and maintenance costs, plus they are energy consumers. Until 
landfilling and incineration practices are phased out, these technologies are 
essential. Their one advantage is that they can be applied in P2 and waste 
minimization solutions, especially in developing refuse-derived fuels or in 
resource recovery and recycling applications. 
Chapter 6 provides and overview of biosolids applications. This is a strategy that 
converts municipal sludges into soil conditioners and fertilizers. Although touted 
as a green technology by EPA, in many ways it still represents a treatment 
strategy. The volume of municipal sludge generated by POTWs makes this an 
essential post-treatment technology. More than 11% of the biosolids generated 
presently in the United States still winds up in landfills, and further there is 
significant resistance on the part of many communities using this strategy. 
Biosolids applications do make sense; however, it is wrong to imply that this is a 
green technology. There are disadvantages, and further, the economics must 
make sense in order for this to be applied as an effective waste management 
strategy. 
Chapter 7 provides a summary of industry sources of waste and pollution, along 
with general practices and strategies for environmental management. It is 
intended to provide the reader with a general reference on industry strategies and 
an appreciation of the broad range of problems that industry deals with. Where 
appropriate, specific solid waste handling strategies are discussed. 
Chapter 8 covers the topic of establishing pollution prevention and waste 
minimization programs. In order for these to be effective, they must be 
implemented as formalized, dedicated programs. This is best accomplished 
through an environmental management system or EMS. For discussions on how 
an EMS and P2 work hand in hand, the reader should refer to Green Profits. 
Chapter 8 expands on the principles of environmental cost accounting methods 
presented in Green Profits by discussing the use of life-cycle costing methods. 
These calculation methods are standard tools used to assess the merits of any type 
of investment. They are most appropriate for devising waste management 
strategies because they enable one to select the least costly technologies. Waste 
viii 
management represents a long-term investment, and as such, cost considerations 
are a critical consideration. 
A key feature of this volume is the glossary provided at the end. The glossary 
contains more than 1000 terms and can serve as a handy reference for the reader 
in addressing waste management issues. 
Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff 
ix 
This Page Intentionally Left BlankABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Nicholas P. Cheremisinoff is an industry consultant specializing in pollution 
prevention and environmentally responsible care issues. He has more than 20 
years of experience in applied research, manufacturing, and international project 
management, and has worked extensively throughout Russia, parts of Central and 
Eastern Europe, Korea, Latin America, and the United States. He has assisted 
and implemented projects for the World Bank Organization, the U.S. Department 
of Energy, the U.S. Trade and Development Agency, the U.S. Export and 
Import Bank, the U.S. Agency for International Development, the European 
Union, Chemonics International, Booz-Allen & Hamilton, and many others. Dr. 
Cheremisinoff has contributed extensively to the industrial press, having 
authored, coauthored, or edited more than 100 technical reference books, and 
several hundred articles. He received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in 
chemical engineering from Clarkson College of Technology. He can be reached 
by e-mail at ncheremisi@aol.com. Interested readers may also visit his Web site 
at www.ecoexpert.net. 
xi 
This Page Intentionally Left BlankChapter 1 
SOURCE REDUCTION 
AND WASTE 
MINIMIZATION 
INTRODUCTION 
From an overall material consumption standpoint, excessive quantities of waste in 
society result from inefficient production processes on the industrial side, and 
low durability of goods and unsustainable consumption patterns on the consumer 
side. While total waste quantities are a reflection of the loss of resources, the 
hazardous components contained in product wastes and their release into the 
environment determine the priorities and challenges for effective waste 
management strategies, so that extensive environmental hazards can be avoided. 
The specific challenges for waste management for municipal and industrial 
wastes are both similar, and yet uniquely different. Compositions of wastes 
within each category vary enormously, but as a general rule, industrial waste 
streams contain a wider variety and more concentrated forms of hazardous 
materials and therefore require special technologies and handling procedures. 
In both categories of wastes there are major opportunities for both prevention and 
resource recovery. Furthermore, waste-to-energy options exist among those solid 
waste streams that have high organic contents, which generally is the case for 
many municipal wastes. 
As discussed in Green Profits: The Manager's Handbook for ISO 14001 and 
Pollution Prevention (Butterworth-Heinemann Publishers, 2001), those waste 
management strategies that focus on source reduction and resource recovery and 
reuse have proven to be more cost effective over the long run, and they are less 
damaging to the environment simply because they prevent or minimize waste 
generation at the source. It is this general theme that the book focuses on. Since 
there is a wealth of information that exists in printed matter and on the World 
Wide Web concerning regulatory requirements and control and treatment 
technologies, discussions concerning what has become a mature industry, namely 
waste management in the conventional sense, are not dwelled upon. This book 
focuses on those strategies and technologies that prevent and minimize solid 
waste and various forms of pollution rather than on end-of-pipe treatment 
techniques and disposal practices. For example, although landfilling is the most 
2 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
widely adopted practice worldwide for municipal waste disposal, the reader will 
not f'md detailed discussions dealing with this subject. Aside from the fact that 
there is an enormous amount of published information on landfill design and 
operation available, landfilling along with the various treatment technologies 
which stabilize hazardous materials are simply not cost-effective, even though 
they enable companies and municipalities to meet environmental compliance. 
Disposal and treatment technologies require major long-term investments in 
capital equipment and have ongoing costs. But in addition, the waste and 
pollution that are treated and disposed of still persist, posing continuous and 
future threats to the public and environment. 
This chapter lays the foundation for those approaches that are not based upon the 
so-called end-of-pipe treatment and disposal-based technologies. These 
alternatives are loosely coined waste minimization, waste-to-energy, and resource 
recovery and reuse or recycling. In previous publications we have referred to all 
of these simply as pollution prevention or P2. Although there may be a better 
general term or phrase that best describes all of these alternative strategies, we 
will be consistent with the earlier publications and apply the term P2 again, 
recognizing that it is not always used in the strictest sense of source reduction. 
Furthermore, little distinction, if any, is made between the terms waste and 
pollution. Pollution is waste. In an ideal world, processes would operate at 100% 
efficiency and consumers would not have any unusable or worn-out products to 
discard. But the reality is that all manufacturing operations generate by-products 
that have no value and consumer products have throw-away packaging and 
limited life spans. These forms of solid waste simply represent lost money 
stemming from the inefficiencies of industry and the lifestyles of society. This 
book focuses on recapturing and minimizing the financial losses, which will 
improve the environmental performances of both industry and the public. 
FUTURE AND LONG-TERM LIABILITIES 
For industry, when wastes and pollution are created during manufacturing, the 
generator maintains liability forever. In other words, the ownership of waste can 
never really be passed on. For example, when we landfill there is always the risk 
that wastes can breach the landfill liner and contaminate the groundwater. While 
the owner/operator of the landfill carries responsibilities for remediation in this 
scenario, the generator of the waste or portion of waste stream contributing to 
groundwater contamination also has a legal responsibility to share in the costs of 
remediation. This is what is meant by the terms joint and several liabilities. In 
the United States the federal environmental legislation, that defines this, is 
CERCLA (Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and 
Liability Act). 
SOURCE REDUCTION AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 3 
Following this scenario further, if the contaminated groundwater impacts on off- 
site property values or perhaps creates a public risk due to chemical or infectious 
exposures, then the generator faces liabilities from civil actions, which may 
include direct damages from further remediation, devaluation of property values, 
pain and suffering and medical bills for injured parties, and/or toxic torts. 
Even if the waste entering the groundwater is a nonregulated material, there may 
be legal exposure. This is especially true when we consider the fact that many 
chemicals were not recognized as being hazardous or toxic only a few years ago. 
A good example is ammonium perchlorate (used as an ingredient in some 
fertilizer and in rocket propellant formulations). For decades this chemical was 
considered a nontoxic material; however, in the late 1990s studies showed that it 
has adverse impacts on the human thyroid gland. Companies that inadvertently 
contaminated groundwater from the use of this chemical during a time period 
where it was considered safe and not regulated face huge cleanup costs plus toxic 
torts many years after their operations ceased. Such litigations can cost many 
millions of dollars in legal fees to address. 
Another important concept of our environmental laws is that they are retroactive. 
A company cannot obviate their responsibility for cleanup actions needed because 
waste disposal or chemical handling practices were considered legal at the time of 
the operations. And as history has shown us, environmental laws and 
enforcement become more stringent over time. 
These point to the concern that waste handling practices and wastes/pollution 
forms that are considered within legal and safe limits today may not be in the 
future. We can view these as future and long-term liabilities resulting from poor 
environmental performance and also derived from ignoring life-cycle principles. 
End-of-pipe treatment technologies and disposal practices not only carry high 
operating and capital costs, but they invite future and long-term liabilities. These 
technologies and practices only help to control emissions and wastes to within 
legal limits of the day, and although the limits protect the public and environment 
based on current understanding of risks, they incrementally add to the stockpile 
of waste materials. Since these wastes continue to persist long after disposal, the 
generator always has a smoking gun sitting around. The only true way to 
eliminate these liabilities is to eliminate the waste and pollution in the first place, 
at the source. 
THE HIERARCHY OF WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Waste and pollution management approaches can be described as strategies. At 
the municipal level these strategies traditionally have relied on disposal practices 
(predominantly landfilling and incineration), whereas industry has employed 
4 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
intermediate steps of treatment and stabilization of the more hazardous wastes. 
Industry strategies are based on end-of-pipe treatment technologies, which are 
more appropriately referred to as control strategies, meaning their aim is really to 
control emissions and wastes to within legally allowable limits of discharge. Both 
strategies have two disadvantages: 
1. They require ongoing costs that are associated with operations and 
maintenance and with use of energy, and they carry many hidden and indirect 
costs and liabilities. 
2. Releases of infectious, toxic, and hazardous components to the environment 
continue for many years, posing long-term health risks to the public and 
endangerment to the environment simply because waste forms are only 
transformed and not entirely eliminated or completely immobilized. 
Waste/pollution management strategies based on prevention strive to eradicate 
both of the above disadvantages because they eliminate the pollution or waste at 
the source. They tend to be only partially successful in reducing the first 
disadvantage because in a number of cases, P2 strategies rely on technology 
investments which have OM&R (operation, maintenance, and repair costs) as 
well as other ongoing costs (e.g., labor, energy). But in general, when properly 
implemented, they are more cost effective than disposal and treatment 
technologies. Minimization strategies tend to reduce the risks associated with the 
second disadvantage, but may also offset some of the costs and liabilities noted 
with the first disadvantage. 
When we view the gambit of strategies that are available, a generalized hierarchy 
based on long-term liabilities or risks associated with waste/pollution 
management and the costs associated with each becomes apparent. This hierarchy 
is as follows: 
Prevention - This strategy prevents wastes from ever being formed in the 
first place. 
Recycling~Resource Recovery~Waste-to-Energy (R3WE) - Recycling and reuse 
of materials, the recovery of certain wastes for reuse (known as resource 
recovery), and the conversion of certain types of waste into useful energy 
such as heat, electricity, and hot water are strategies which recover and offset 
costs for overall waste management. 
Treatment - When wastes cannot be prevented or minimized through reuse or 
recycling, then we need to pursue strategies aimed at reducing volumes 
and/or toxicity. Treatment technologies are processes that focus on 
stabilization of wastes, reducing toxicity, reducing volume before ultimate 
disposal, or in some cases creating limited-use by-products. 
SOURCE REDUCTION AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 5 
Disposal- The only other strategy available is disposal. Waste disposal 
practices are integrated into the environmental management strategies of all 
municipalities, are integral to most manufacturing operations, and quite often 
are among the highest direct cost components. From a business standpoint, it 
is the least desirable strategy and one that can be directly addressed by waste 
minimization and P2 practices. 
Figure 1 illustrates the hierarchy in a graphical format by comparing the relative 
risks and costs associated with each strategy. Strategies that reduce or eliminate 
wastes before they are even created are preferable to those that incur ongoing 
expenses for treating and disposing of wastes that are generated continuously 
because long-term risks and costs are lower. 
R 
I 
S 
K 
S 
& 
C 
O 
S 
T 
S 
Disposal Liability, 
Public Safety Concerns, 
Worker Safety 
Capital In vestment Requirements, 
Negative Return on In vestments, 
Increased Operating Costs 
Lower Capital In vestment 
Requirements, 
Partial Cost Recovery 
i i t □9 
v 
Treatment R3/WE Prevention 
POLLUTION AND WASTE MANAGEMENT 
STRATEGIES 
Figure 1. Hierarchy of pollution and waste management strategies. Cost Savings, 
Higher 
Productivity 
and Quality 
6 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
Prevention has been more successfully applied and understood at the 
manufacturing level than at the municipal, because companies can readily achieve 
direct cost savings. P2 strategies have proven to be advantageous since the 
practices are more cost effective than control-based technologies; hence, 
companies save money in meeting their environmental obligations. 
More recently, some companies have begun applying principles of designing for 
the environment, whereby new products entering the marketplace are more 
environmentally friendly and generate less solid waste, are biodegradable, or can 
be readily recycled. This approach is based on life-cycle principles, which we 
will get to shortly. 
At the municipal level, pollution prevention requires major changes in consumer 
patterns and lifestyles. The general public, while genuinely concerned and 
knowledgeable about the environment, has not received widespread education on 
preventive techniques, nor are there many choices in selecting more 
environmentally friendly forms of consumer products from among the items that 
support our lifestyles. This leaves municipalities with the option of R3WE. We 
may look at the hundreds of millions of tons of solid waste generated each year 
worldwide as an enormous and costly waste disposal effort that continues to 
deplete our natural resources and requires enormous ongoing expenditures, or we 
may view these wastes as a virtual gold mine of resources from which useful by- 
products and energy can be recovered. By the same token, resource recovery, 
WTE (waste-to-energy), and recycling strategies do not entirely eliminate solid 
waste disposal problems, and further, they only make sense when such strategies 
are economically viable. 
Figure 1 in some ways is an oversimplification. In terms of capital and direct 
operating costs, pollution control, treatment, and disposal options generally 
appear more cost effective than some high-level investments into so-called green 
technologies. A green technology is one which is considered environmentally 
friendly, but may carry a high investment. As an example, the investment in 
converting from a coal-fired electricity generating plant to natural gas is 
seemingly hard to justify from an economic standpoint, and indeed some case- 
specific studies show the investment to be unattractive. However, many 
investment studies often overlook the likelihood of long-term and future 
liabilities. These are rarely given sufficient attention in investment strategies that 
focus on pollution and waste management. 
THE PRINCIPLES OF LIFE CYCLE 
The term life cycle refers to cradle to grave. If we view any product as a living 
entity, that product has a birth, a period of life in society, and then death. 
SOURCE REDUCTION AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 7 
Historically, science and technology have focused on new ideas, concepts, 
products, and their applications, with the objective of giving a useful life to 
products that serve our needs. But in the past we have given little thought to the 
demise of these entities. By ignoring the end cycle, we lose sight of the fact that 
the natural resources that have gone into making products are not infinite, and 
that on a worldwide basis the rate at which we consume products with a throw- 
away mentality is unsustainable. Furthermore, we do long-term and even 
irreparable damage to our environment by introducing more and more waste and 
pollution into the environment. By the same token, when we rely on inefficient 
technologies to mass-produce products, we continually waste more resources and 
generate more pollution. 
Life-cycle principles give equal consideration to all three phases of existence of a 
product, including how the product is made. These principles are not new, and 
indeed have been around for decades, but we are only now getting around to 
learning how to apply them effectively in designing new products and more 
efficient technologies. This is known as design for the environment. 
We must recognize that since we do not live in a utopian society, economics 
overshadows many decisions. For industry, sustainability and growth are tied to 
profitability. To sustain businesses and to maintain or grow profit margins, 
among other things companies must meet their environmental obligations in a 
cost-effective manner. Few companies, if any, will spend more to protect the 
environment than is necessary beyond their legal requirements. Some industry 
readers may disagree with this statement and point out that there are companies 
that indeed "go beyond compliance." But even these businesses are in fact 
relying on economic forces that enhance their profitability. Companies that 
allocate more funds toward exceeding environmental performance reap financial 
benefits from such areas as public opinion and investor confidence that provide 
them competitive advantages. These impacts ultimately result in positive effects 
on profit margins. 
With this logic then, life-cycle principles are most effectively applied today as an 
economic instrument, which is called life-cycle costing or LCC. LCC is applied 
to life cycle costing analyses (LCCA) as a basis for comparing the economic 
attractiveness of different environmental management strategies or technology 
investments. In other words, instead of changing the product design (which 
ultimately is what needs to be done to really improve the environmental 
performance of society on the whole), LCC tools are being applied more 
effectively today in making decisions on whether simply meeting compliance with 
controls is less or more costly than preventive or minimization technologies. 
As an example, consider a steelmaking plant. The two technology routes for steel 
making are the basic oxygen converter and the electric arc furnace (EAF). The 
8 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
basic oxygen furnace (BOF) may be described as a "dirty" technology, producing 
significant amounts of air pollution, and therefore requiring many sophisticated 
and costly air pollution controls. Although the EAF steelmaking process is more 
environmentally friendly, it requires a very high capital investment. An LCC 
analysis will enable a comparison of the costs for each of these technologies over 
the life of the plant. By comparing all the costs components such as capital 
equipment, OM&R, energy requirements, productivities between the 
technologies, and the costs for controls or the savings from eliminating certain 
controls, as well as the final scrap value of the equipment, we can determine 
which is the least life cost or most attractive investment option. With both 
technologies we may meet legal requirements of safe air emissions, but only one 
of these is likely to be attractive from a financial standpoint based on local 
economies and the long-range business plans of the company, as well as the 
reduction of long-term risks associated with environmental management. LCC 
tools and their application to developing pollution and waste management 
strategies are discussed later in this book. 
COSTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT 
The costs for environmental management fall into four groups, which we have 
referred to as tiers in previous publications on P2, namely: 
* Tier 1. Usual and normal costs 
. Tier 2. Hidden and indirect costs 
□9 Tier 3. Future and long-term liability costs 
□9 Tier 4. Less tangible costs 
These categories are referred to as tiers because they represent layers of costs 
that we need to unveil in order to truly understand the life cycle costs associated 
with the level of environmental performance they target to achieve. 
Usual and normal costs are direct costs for compliance. These are easy to define 
for control-based technologies and most companies have a clear understanding of 
them up front. They generally are well tracked, or at least should be. Examples 
include capital equipment costs (e.g., costs for electrostatic precipitators, 
scrubbers, wastewater treatment equipment), the costs for operating those 
controls (e.g., manpower, utilities, such as water and electricity), OM&R costs 
for controls, operator training, waste transportation and disposal costs such as 
landfill tipping fees, and a number of other items that are recognizable in any 
capital intensive engineering project. Examples are provided in Fig. 2. Such cost 
components are easy to define in a LCC analysis and are the group of data most 
often relied upon in comparing life-cycle investment options between competing 
alternatives. However, they do not provide a complete or even a majority 
accounting for the true costs associated with environmental management. 
SOURCE REDUCTION AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
Tier 1 
Usual and Normal Costs 
Direct labor costs [ 
Raw materials (e.g., 
chemical additives for 
treatment, water) 
Permits to construct I 
Site preparation for 
pollution or waste control 
equipment 
Monitoring and 
instrumentation 
Transport and 
disposal costs 
(tipping fees) Energy I 
Pollution or waste fees 
(i.e., fees paid for 
discharging pollutants or 
wastes within legally 
allowable emissions 
standards) 
Capital equipment [ 
Employee training [ 
Equipment tie-ins and process 
modifications to 
accommodate pollution 
controls 
Environmental 
permits and licenses 
OM&R costs I 
Figure 2. Examples of easily tracked usual and normal costs. 
10 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
Tier 2 
Hidden and Indirect Costs 
Expenses associated 
with monitoring 
Environmental 
impact statements 
Legal costs Permitting fees (e.g., 
permits to operate, 
permit renewals, other) 
Environmental 
transformation 
costs ! 
Service agreements 
Health and safety 
assessments 
Control 
instrumentation 
Insurance premiums 
Environmental 
inspections Unplanned 
maintenance and 
replacement costs 
Reporting and 
recordkeeping 
OSHA compliance 
and inspections 
H&S monitoring 
and medical 
surveillance 
Figure 3. Examples of hidden and indirect costs not always tracked. 
SOURCE REDUCTION AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 11 
Hidden and indirect costs include those of monitoring (e.g., manpower, controls, 
lab support), permits to operate controls and for point source discharges, permits 
and licenses for waste storage and treatment, environmental impact statements, 
service agreements for transport, disposal, and instrumentation/equipment 
maintenance, manpower costs for recordkeeping and reporting, and insurance 
premiums to cover fire, explosion, and environmental damages that might occur 
from the operations. 
Among the hidden components are environmental transformation costs. These are 
the costs associated with transforming a pollution or waste problem from one 
form to another. For example, controlling an air pollution problem simply 
transforms the form of the pollution to a water and/or solid waste problem. There 
are both tier 1 and tier 2 costs associated with the transformation technologies. 
Some companies are sensitive to the tier 2 components, but many are not. They 
certainly are not examined closely enough when selecting many environmental 
management strategies, yet they can play a major role in an investment decision 
when LCC tools are applied. Examples of tier 2 costs are given in Fig. 3. A 
useful exercise for the reader is to add on to this list as it certainly is not all- 
inclusive. 
Some skeptical readers may argue that some of the components listed in Fig. 3 
are small and may be ignored. However, that depends on the magnitude of 
operations and whether or not they are recurring throughout the life of an 
operation. 
Future and long-term liability costs (tier 3) are among the hardest for many 
companies to account for because they are based upon future events. Cost 
components in this group depend upon both the level of environmental 
performance a company achieves, and the effectiveness of the environmental 
strategies employed. Examples are listed in Fig. 4. Among these examples, only 
inflation is a component that we might be able to predict with some degree of 
confidence and can factor into a LCC analysis when comparing options in terms 
of investment costs. But other costs in this tier depend on the likelihood of certain 
events occurring. 
Certainly, if a company consistently shows poor environmental performance, the 
probability of some of these costs materializing and developing into long-term 
liabilities and ongoing remediation costs is high. But even when companies are 
consistently within compliance requirements using control-based technologies 
there is the potential for future exposures to some of the items listed in Fig. 4 
since waste forms are never truly eliminated. Tier 3 costs can arise from the risks 
of relying upon certain technologies and strategies that, although enable 
companies to achieve consistent environmental performance from a regulatory 
standpoint, pose a future financial exposure from a scenario that is more likely 
12 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND WASTE MINIMIZATION 
than not to occur. As example; if landfilling is relied upon to dispose of 
hazardous wastes, the potential exists for the liner to be breached and 
contaminate the groundwater, resulting in offsite and third-party damages. Or if a 
manufacturing operation relies on a chemical component that is toxic, workers 
could sue a company for chromic exposures resulting from their handling of the 
material over their years of service. This in turn could result in an insurance 
company raising premiums for medical coverage. If these types of scenarios are 
more likely to occur than not, or simply stated, have a reasonably high 
probability of occurrence, then there is a strong basis for choosing pollution 
prevention and waste minimization strategies. 
Medical claims from 
personal injury and 
chronic health risks for 
workers 
Off-site damages and 
remediation 
More stringent 
compliance 
Toxic tort Tier 3 
Future and Long-Term Liability Costs 
i i ill 
On-site remedial 
action costs 
Inflation 
Property devaluation and 
restricted resale 
Litigation fees 
Class action suits from third-party damages 
Figure 4. Examples of costs related to future events (i.e., long-term and 
future liabilities). 
