Determining Early Life’s Evolutionary Rate   
A.C. Brown1, F.U. Battistuzzi1  
1Department of Biological Sciences, Oakland University  
Contact : acbrown@oakland.edu ; battistu@oakland.edu  
Abstract  
A chronological framework  of life is fundamental  to reconstruct  the major  
steps  of life’s  evolution  on Earth ; from  an astrobiological  perspective,  this 
can be used  to determine  the pace  of the origin  of unique  biological  
processes  on Earth  and how  they  relate  to the habitability  of a planet . 
However,  while  the estimation  of timetrees  in phylogenetic  studies  has 
increased  due to improved  understanding  of evolutionary  mechanisms,  
many  questions  remain  on their  accuracy . Questions  regarding  basic  
assumptions, such  as the variation  in evolutionary  rates  among  branches  of 
a phylogeny,  need  to be further investigated  to reduce  biases  derived  
during  the time  estimation  process . Here  we investigate  one of the 
assumptions, the fit of branch -specific  evolutionary  rates  to autocorrelated  
(AR) and uncorrelated  (UR)  rate models . Through  our large -scale  simulation  
study  of prokaryote  class  and phylum  phylogenies,  we compare  the 
simulated  distributions  of ancestor -descendant  rate changes  to empirical 
data  to determine  their  fit.  We  find variable rates  among  branches  but no 
significant  clustering  among  groups  sharing  the same  common  ancestor,  
even  for closely  related  lineages  that would  be expected  to share  similar  
rates  of evolution . Additionally,  we find that the empirical data  follows  
neither  the AR or UR model,  but rather  a combination  of the two patterns . 
These  results  suggested  caution  when  applying  these  assumptions  in 
divergence  time  estimations  and encourage  the use of molecular  clock  
methods  that implement  fewer  assumptions  to derive  timeline  estimations . 
Acknowledgments   
Thank  you to my lab for their  support . 
This research  was supported by Oakland  University,  Provost  award,  and  the Michigan  Space  Grant  
Consortium  Project  Overview  
Phylogenetic  trees  are constructed based  on comparisons of 
genetic  divergences  of sequences  among species . The lengths  of 
branches  represent  the accumulation of substitutions  within 
each  lineage ; higher numbers  of substitutions result  in longer 
branches . Because  branches  descending  from  the same  
ancestor  have  evolved  for equal  amounts of time,  higher  
substitution  rates  within that time  correspond to faster  
evolution. This leads  to branch -specific  evolutionary  rates . 
Unfortunately,  the mode  of rate change  from  one branch  to 
another  is highly debated . Two models  are currently used,  each  
rooted  in phylogenetic  or biological  properties  of empirical  
datasets  (Fig. 1). In a previous  study1, simulated data  were  used  
to test the applicability of AR and UR evolutionary rate models  
in the estimation  of parameters for sequences  simulated under  
these  models . The two possible  scenarios for the estimations 
were :  
Model agreement : the rate model  used  to estimate  parameters  
is the same  used  for the simulation of sequences .  Model disagreement : the rate model  used  to estimate  
parameters is different  from  the one used  during  simulations .  The results  showed  improved  accuracy  of estimates  when  
choosing the correct  model  of rate variation. However,  it is 
currently
 unknown how  each  of these  models  compares to 
observed  rate variation among branches,  resulting  in difficulty 
determining  the merit  of either  model . Our aim is to address  
this question by comparing  empirical and simulated rate 
variation models .  
  
Fig.1  Schematic representation of the two models of rate 
variation commonly used in phylogenetic analyses  Uncorrelated (UR)  
•Unconstrained rate changes  Autocorrelated  (AR) 
•Correlated rate changes  References  
1.Battistuzzi , F. U., Filipski , A., Hedges,  S. B. & Kumar,  S. 2010.  Performance  of Relaxed -Clock  
Methods in Estimating  Evolutionary  Divergence  Times  and Their Credibility  Intervals . Mol. Biol. 
Evol. 27, 1289– 1300.   
2.   Rosenberg , M. S. & Kumar, S. Heterogeneity of Nucleotide Frequencies Among Evolutionary 
Lineages and Phylogenetic Inference. Mol  Biol  Evol 20, 610– 621 (2003).  
3.   Kumar , S., Filipski , A., Swarna , V., Walker, A. & Hedges, S. B. Placing confidence limits on the 
molecular age of the human –chimpanzee divergence. PNAS  102,  18842– 18847 (2005).  
4.   Rambaut , A. & Grass, N. C. Seq -Gen: an application for the Monte Carlo simulation of DNA 
sequence evolution along phylogenetic trees. Comput  Appl  Biosci  13, 235– 238 (1997).  
5.Tamura , K. et al.  Estimating divergence times in large molecular phylogenies. PNAS  109,  
19333– 19338 (2012).  
6.Ihaka , R. & Gentleman, R. R: A Language for Data Analysis and Graphics. Journal of 
Computational and Graphical Statistics 5, 299– 314 (1996).  
 Methods 
Simulations  were  done  under 448 sets of parameters2  modeling  each  AR and UR for both  phylum  level  and class level  data  using  TvSim3 and SeqGen4. Empirical data  and 
simulations  were  analyzed with  RelTime5 for relative  rates . Percent  rate change  in rates  of ancestor  and descendant  branches  was then  estimated  (RC = ((Ra - Rd)/ Rd) where  RC is 
the % rate change,  Ra is the relative  rate of the ancestor  and Rd is the relative  rate of the descendant)  so distributions  of rate change  could be compared  between  empirical  and 
simulated AR and UR model  data . Statistical  analyses are based  on the Kolmogorov -Smirnov  test run in R6. 
Future Studies  
We plan  to expand  this analysis  to include  many  different  phylogenetic  levels,  from  populations  to 
phyla,  as well as to phylogenies  with  varying  depths,  mammals  and plants,  to assess  the effect  of 
early and recent evolutionary  history  on model  assumptions.  This will eventually  allow  us to assess  
the accuracy  of current  phylogenies  and timetrees.   Fig.3  The AR model  describes  evolutionary changes  among closely  related  species,  which  are expected  to have  similar evolutionary rates  due to the conservation  of biological  
processes that regulate  the accumulation  of genetic  changes in a genome . The UR model,  instead,  was proposed  to represent  phylogenetic  trees  of distantly related  species,  which 
are expected  to have  highly variable  evolutionary rates .  A and C: Distribution of the frequency  of rate change  between  ancestor  and descendant  lineages  for the phylum  (A) and 
class  (C) level  phylogeny .  B  and D: Statistical  tests  of model  matching  reveals  model  agreement  and disagreement. At the phylum  level  (B), the UR model’s  distribution most 
closely  follows  the empirical distribution and at the class level  (D), the AR model’s  distribution is closest  to the empirical distribution,  each  with  about  95% of the simulated genes  
in agreement  with  the empirical genes . At the class  level  however,  the UR model  also has similarities  in the distribution and about  50%  of the simulated genes  in agreement  with  
the empirical genes . Ultimately,  we find that the models  cannot  be applied universally and suggest  the use of methods deriving  timeline  estimations under fewer  assumptions.  051015202530
-100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100% frequency  
% rate change  Phylum Distribution  
AR 
UR Empirical  
051015202530
-100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90100% frequency  
% rate change  Class Distribution  
UR AR 
Empirical  
A B C D 
Class Level Simulations  
 
Fig.2  Large  datasets  were  chosen  
for empirical  data . A: Phylum  level  
data  with  218 species  and a root 
divergence  of 4.2 billion  years  
represents  a dataset  of high 
variation and older evolutionary  
history . B: Class  level  data  with  
129 species  and a root divergence  
of 1.8 billion years  was chosen  to 
represents  a dataset  with  more  
closely  related  lineages . Phylum  Level Simulations  
 0
1
2
3
40.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0 
 
 
0.5 
    
 1  
 
 
1.5 A B Results  
0 
  
1  
 
2 
 
 
3  
 
4 