sensors
Article
A Rapid In Situ Colorimetric Assay for Cobalt
Detection by the Naked Eye
Sung-Min Kang1,2,†, Sung-Chan Jang1,3,†, Gi Yong Kim1,2, Chang-Soo Lee2,*, Yun Suk Huh3,*
and Changhyun Roh1,4,*
1Biotechnology Research Division, Advanced Radiation Technology Institute (ARTI),
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), 29 Geumgu-gil, Jeongeup, Jeonbuk 56212, Korea;
smk@kaeri.re.kr (S.-M.K.); jsc@kaeri.re.kr (S.-C.J.); kgy@kaeri.re.kr (G.Y.K.)
2Department of Chemical Engineering, Chungnam National University, 99 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu,
Daejeon 34134, Korea
3Department of Biological Engineering, Biohybrid Systems Research Center (BSRC), Inha University,
100 Inha-ro, Incheon 22212, Korea
4Radiation Biotechnology and Applied Radioisotope Science, University of Science and Technology (UST),
217 Gajeong-ro, Daejeon 34113, Korea
*Correspondence: rhadum@cnu.ac.kr (C.-S.L.); yunsuk.huh@inha.ac.kr (Y.S.H.); chroh@kaeri.re.kr (C.R.);
Tel.: +82-42-821-5896 (C.-S.L.); +82-32-860-9177 (Y.S.H.); +82-63-570-3133 (C.R.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Academic Editors: Jong Seung Kim and Min Hee Lee
Received: 25 March 2016; Accepted: 26 April 2016; Published: 2 May 2016
Abstract: A simple, rapid, and convenient colorimetric chemosensor of a speciﬁc target toward
the end user is still required for on-site detection and real-time monitoring applications. In this
study, we developed a rapid in situ colorimetric assay for cobalt detection using the naked eye.
Interestingly, a yellow to light orange visual color transition was observed within 3 s when
a Chrysoidine G (CG) chemosensor was exposed to cobalt. Surprisingly, the CG chemosensor
had great selectivity toward cobalt without any interference of other metal ions. Under optimized
conditions, a lower detection limit of 0.1 ppm via a spectrophotometer and a visual detection limit
of 2 ppm with a linear range from 0.4 to 1 ppm (R2= 0.97) were determined. Moreover, the CG
chemosensor is reversible and maintains its functionality after treatment with chelating agents.
In conclusion, we show the superior capabilities of the CG chemosensor, which has the potential to
provide extremely facile handling, high sensitivity, and a fast response time for applications of on-site
detection to real-time cobalt monitoring for the general public.
Keywords: cobalt; colorimetric; chemosensor; on-site detection; naked eye
1. Introduction
The highly sensitive and selective determination of metal ions (e.g., light, heavy, rare, precious,
and alloys, etc.) has attracted signiﬁcant interest owing to their important role in the biological and
environmental ﬁelds [ 1]. Recently, many techniques have been reported for the detection of heavy
metal ions owing to their signiﬁcant impacts on human beings and the environment [ 2]. In particular,
as an important but harmful heavy metal ion, cobalt is a relatively rare element that is used in
various products such as supercapacitors [ 3], magnets [ 4], alloys [ 5], pigments [ 6], metal ﬁnishing [ 7],
mining [ 8], catalysts [ 9] and lithium-ion battery manufacturing [ 10], because of its speciﬁc hardness and
resistance to oxidation [ 11,12]. Although cobalt is used as a popular industrial material, its unregulated
exposure causes serious detrimental effects including alarms and asthma, cardiac and thyroid damage,
heart failure and heart disease, and elevated red blood cells [ 13–16]. In addition, other major sources
of cobalt in the environment are soil, dust, seawater, and forest ﬁres [ 17]. Moreover, it is released from
Sensors 2016 ,16, 626; doi:10.3390/s16050626 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensorsSensors 2016 ,16, 626 2 of 10
burning coal and oil, vehicle and airplane exhaust, diamond polishing, and chemical and hard metal
industries [ 18]. Hence, the development of efﬁcient methods for on-site and real-time monitoring is
crucial to detect cobalt in the environment for protecting human health.
Conventional methods, such as surface-enhanced Raman scattering spectroscopy [ 19], inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometry [ 20], inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry [ 21],
ﬁber optic-linear array detection spectrophotometry [22], ﬂame atomic absorption spectroscopy [23–25],
and electrochemical sensors [ 26,27], have been reported for the detection of cobalt. However, these
methods require expensive sophisticated instruments, tedious sample preparation procedures,
time, and well-trained experts. Moreover, the major disadvantage is that conventional methods are
unsuitable for on-site detection with real-time monitoring.
Colorimetric methods have their own advantages such as simplicity, high sensitivity and
selectivity, and a reasonable response time [ 28–31]. In particular, these methods, which can be
conveniently and easily monitored by the naked eye, are appropriate for real-time monitoring of
target heavy metal ions and potential application in on-site detection owing to their simplicity and
portability [ 32]. To date, several approaches are reported, such as chemiluminescence [ 33], electro
chemiluminescence [ 34], and ﬂuorescein probes [ 35–37]. In particular, a number of colorimetric sensors
based on functional gold and silver nanoparticles (NPs) have been reported [ 38–40]. The nanoparticles
show excellent selectivity and sensitivity as a colorimetric sensing probe. In particular, gold
nanoparticles offer excellent localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) properties, exhibiting
a well-deﬁned color, and easy visualization based on color changes between the dispersed and
aggregated nanoparticles [ 41]. However, there are still many things (e.g., nanoparticle size and shape
control, experimental conditions for ligand activation, and stabilizers) to consider when detecting
target materials [42,43].
In this paper, we present a rapid in situ colorimetric assay for cobalt in an aqueous solution.
Interestingly, the interaction between a Chrysoidine G (CG) chemosensor and cobalt induces a color
transition from yellow to light orange. Therefore, the feasibility for a sensitivity, selectivity, and
rapid assay of cobalt using a CG chemosensor has been extensively demonstrated. Furthermore, we
developed a reversible color “on-off” system using an external chelating agent for real-time on-site
detection. The proposed colorimetric assay shows great potential for the simple, easy, and quickly
responsive on-site detection of cobalt.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Chemicals
4-Phenylazo- m-phenylenediamine (Chrysoidine G, CG), lithium chloride, iron(II) chloride
tetrahydrate, iron(III) chloride hexahydrate, magnesium(II) chloride hexahydrate, manganese(II)
chloride tetrahydrate, and aluminum(III) chloride hexahydrate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
Chemicals (St. Louis, MO, USA). Cobalt standard solutions were purchased from Kanto Chemical Co.,
Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). Standard copper, zinc, arsenic, cadmium, and mercury solutions were purchased
from CPI International, Co. (Santa Rosa, CA, USA). All reagents and chemicals were of analytical
grade and were prepared using highly pure water with a resistivity of 18 M Wcm.
2.2. Preparation of CG Aqueous Chemosensor and Detection of Cobalt
The CG (180 mg) was dissolved in water (100 mL) and was diluted to double-distilled water to
make a ﬁnal concentration of 7 105M. The standard cobalt solutions were then adjusted to a CG
aqueous chemosensor and shaking gently for a three seconds. After the reaction, we checked the color
change by the naked eye and recorded the UV-vis spectra on an Inﬁnite®UVM200 spectrometer
(TECAN, Salzburg, Austria), using a 96-well plate for the measurements.Sensors 2016 ,16, 626 3 of 10
2.3. Optimization of Suitable Conditions for Colorimetric Detection
To examine the effect of pH, the desired pH solution was prepared by adjusting 1 N NaOH or
1 N HCl. The pH of the solution was measured using a SevenCompact ™pH/ion S220 meter (Mettler
Toledo Instruments Co., Greifensee, Switzerland). Moreover, various concentric CG chemosensors
were prepared to determine the initial concentration of the CG chemosensor (7 104M, 7105M,
and 7 106M).
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Selective Recognition Study for CG Chemosensor
To examine the detection behavior of the CG chemosensor in water, the visible color and UV-vis
absorbance spectra upon exposure to various metal ions were recorded. The ability of selective
recognition toward cobalt was demonstrated by considering physiologically and environmentally
relevant metal ions as their nitrate salts. As shown in Figure 1A, the CG chemosensor shows almost
no change in color in the presence of Li+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Mg2+, Fe2+, Fe3+, As3+, and
Al3+, whereas the presence of Co2+exhibited a color change from yellow to light orange (each of them
was added at 2 ppm). Figure 1B presents a selective cobalt detection UV-vis absorbance spectrum.
This result clearly shows that various metal ions without cobalt did not show any signiﬁcant response
to the CG chemosensor. In addition, the results represented that the UV-vis absorbance ratio toward
cobalt was signiﬁcantly higher than for the coexistent metal ions (Figure 1C). The color transition
phenomena occurred in the presence of 2 ppm of cobalt in each cation-CG chemosensor mixed aqueous
solution. The quantitative nature for the selective detection of cobalt by CG chemosensor is described
in Figure 1C. The distinct relative absorbance ratio of cobalt might be the cause for the distinct light
orange color of the CG chemosensor containing cobalt. Interestingly, this result implies that a CG
chemosensor can serve as a potential candidate for “naked eye” cobalt detection in aqueous systems.
Sensors  2016 , 16, 626 3 of 10 
 Toledo Instruments Co., Greifensee, Switzerland). Moreover, various concentric CG chemosensors 
were prepared to determine the initial concentration of the CG chemosensor (7 × 10−4 M, 7 × 10−5 M, 
and 7 × 10−6 M). 
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1. Selective Recognition Study for CG Chemosensor 
To examine the detection behavior of the CG chem osensor in water, the visible color and UV-vis 
absorbance spectra upon exposure to various meta l ions were recorded. Th e ability of selective 
recognition toward cobalt was demonstrated by considering physiologically and environmentally 
relevant metal ions as their nitrate salts. As sh own in Figure 1A, the CG chemosensor shows almost 
no change in color in the presence of Li+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Mg2+, Fe2+, Fe3+, As3+, and Al3+, 
whereas the presence of Co2+ exhibited a color change from yellow to light orange (each of them was 
added at 2 ppm). Figure 1B presents a selective co balt detection UV-vis absorbance spectrum. This 
result clearly shows that various metal ions withou t cobalt did not show any significant response to 
the CG chemosensor. In addition, the results repr esented that the UV-vis absorbance ratio toward 
cobalt was significantly higher than for the coexis tent metal ions (Figure 1C). The color transition 
phenomena occurred in the presence of 2 ppm of  cobalt in each cation-CG chemosensor mixed 
aqueous solution. The quantitative nature for the se lective detection of cobalt by CG chemosensor is 
described in Figure 1C. The distinct relative absorbance ratio of cobalt might be the cause for the 
distinct light orange color of the CG chemosensor co ntaining cobalt. Interestingly, this result implies 
that a CG chemosensor can serve as a potential cand idate for “naked eye” cobalt detection in aqueous 
systems. 
 
Figure 1.  (A) Photographs for color changes of CG chemos ensor upon addition of various metal ions 
under visible light; ( B) UV-vis absorbance spectra of CG chem osensor upon the addition of various 
metal ions in solution; ( C) High selectivity toward the cobalt ions and Absorbance responses of CG 
containing Co2+ with the other competing metal ions. Th e concentration of CG chemosensor and 
cobalt are 7 × 10−5 M and 2 ppm, respectively. Each experiment was conducted three times. 
Figure 1. (A) Photographs for color changes of CG chemosensor upon addition of various metal ions
under visible light; ( B) UV-vis absorbance spectra of CG chemosensor upon the addition of various
metal ions in solution; ( C) High selectivity toward the cobalt ions and Absorbance responses of CG
containing Co2+with the other competing metal ions. The concentration of CG chemosensor and cobalt
are 7105M and 2 ppm, respectively. Each experiment was conducted three times.Sensors 2016 ,16, 626 4 of 10
3.2. The Effect of pH and CG Chemosensor Concentration
Further experiments were conducted by various essential factors such as the pH of the aqueous
solution and the initial concentration of the CG chemosensor. First, to determine the optimized pH for
an efﬁcient colorimetric detection performance, experiments were performed in a pH range of 2–12, the
results of which are shown in Figure 2. The color change performance of the CG-Co2+complexation
occurred within the range between pH 6 and 8, while its color was maintained in the original state
at pH 2, 4, 10, and 12. This result indicates that cobalt can be clearly detected by the naked eye, and
UV-vis absorbance measurements using the optimized condition within a pH range of 6–8 (Figure 2).
Sensors  2016 , 16, 626 4 of 10 
 3.2. The Effect of pH and CG Chemosensor Concentration 
Further experiments were conducted by various es sential factors such as the pH of the aqueous 
solution and the initial concentration of the CG ch emosensor. First, to determine the optimized pH 
for an efficient colorimetric detection performance, experiments were performed in a pH range of 2–
12, the results of which are shown in Figure 2. The color change performance of the CG-Co2+ 
complexation occurred within the range between pH 6 and 8, while its color was maintained in the original state at pH 2, 4, 10, and 12. This result indicates that cobalt can be clearly detected by the naked eye, and UV-vis absorbance measurements using the optimized condition within a pH range 
of 6–8 (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2.  The color changes of CG-Co2+ complex at different pH. UV-vis analysis at pH conditions for 
colorimetric detection of cobalt. The concentration of cobalt is 2 ppm. Each experiment was performed 
three times. 
In addition, the optimum concentration of the CG  chemosensor was investigated to improve the 
visibility in an aqueous detecting system. In this regard, the initial condition of the CG chemosensor at different concentrations was demonstrated thro ugh simple naked eye monitoring and a UV-vis 
absorbance analysis. As shown in Supplementary Fi gure S1A, in a relatively high (1) and low (3) 
concentrated aqueous solution of CG chemosenso r, the addition of cobalt can cause a slight 
enhancement of the absorbance ratio, but only 7 × 10
−5 M (2) can induce a remarkable color change 
from yellow to light orange. In addition, the UV-vis absorbance analysis clearly showed the 
difference in color intensities between before and after CG-Co2+ complexation (Supplementary Figure 
S1B). Although a higher concentration of the CG ch emosensor was used to incr ease the sensitivity for 
cobalt, it lacks a difference in color transition for recognition by the naked eye. In addition, in the case of a lower concentration of the CG chemosensor, the color transition did not appear. This result 
indicates that the balance between the sensing probe and specific target is an essential parameter in 
a colorimetric naked eye system. Thus, a CG chemosensor concentration of 7 × 10
−5 M was used.  
3.3. Stoichiometric Binding Study of CG-Co2+ Complex 
To determine the stoichiometry between a CG chemosensor and cobalt ions, a Job’s plot 
experiment was carried out (Figure 3) [44]. The stoichiometry of binding between the CG 
chemosensor and cobalt was determined by keeping th e sum of the initial concentrations of the CG 
chemosensor and cobalt constant at 10 μM and varying the molar ratio of Co2+ (Xm = ([Co2+]/([Co2+] + 
[CG])). By following the change in absorbance ratio (A 460/A380), the maximum absorbance ratio of the 
CG-Co2+ complex was achieved at a mole fraction of approximately 50% of the cobalt ions. This result 
suggests that the stoichiometry of binding of the CG  chemosensor with cobalt ions is 1:1. Based on 
the stoichiometry study, we estimate that the complexation between the CG chemosensor and cobalt can be attributed to the hydrated cobalt size and the entropic free volume and spatial arrangement 
Figure 2. The color changes of CG-Co2+complex at different pH. UV-vis analysis at pH conditions for
colorimetric detection of cobalt. The concentration of cobalt is 2 ppm. Each experiment was performed
three times.
In addition, the optimum concentration of the CG chemosensor was investigated to improve the
visibility in an aqueous detecting system. In this regard, the initial condition of the CG chemosensor
at different concentrations was demonstrated through simple naked eye monitoring and a UV-vis
absorbance analysis. As shown in Supplementary Figure S1A, in a relatively high (1) and low
(3) concentrated aqueous solution of CG chemosensor, the addition of cobalt can cause a slight
enhancement of the absorbance ratio, but only 7 105M (2) can induce a remarkable color change
from yellow to light orange. In addition, the UV-vis absorbance analysis clearly showed the difference
in color intensities between before and after CG-Co2+complexation (Supplementary Figure S1B).
Although a higher concentration of the CG chemosensor was used to increase the sensitivity for
cobalt, it lacks a difference in color transition for recognition by the naked eye. In addition, in the
case of a lower concentration of the CG chemosensor, the color transition did not appear. This result
indicates that the balance between the sensing probe and speciﬁc target is an essential parameter in
a colorimetric naked eye system. Thus, a CG chemosensor concentration of 7 105M was used.
3.3. Stoichiometric Binding Study of CG-Co2+Complex
To determine the stoichiometry between a CG chemosensor and cobalt ions, a Job’s plot
experiment was carried out (Figure 3) [ 44]. The stoichiometry of binding between the CG chemosensor
and cobalt was determined by keeping the sum of the initial concentrations of the CG chemosensor
and cobalt constant at 10 M and varying the molar ratio of Co2+(Xm= ([Co2+]/([Co2+] + [CG])).
By following the change in absorbance ratio (A 460/A380), the maximum absorbance ratio of the
CG-Co2+complex was achieved at a mole fraction of approximately 50% of the cobalt ions. This result
suggests that the stoichiometry of binding of the CG chemosensor with cobalt ions is 1:1. Based on
the stoichiometry study, we estimate that the complexation between the CG chemosensor and cobaltSensors 2016 ,16, 626 5 of 10
can be attributed to the hydrated cobalt size and the entropic free volume and spatial arrangement of
azobenzene and the amino groups of Chrysoidine G [ 45,46]. Thus, a proposed mechanism of CG-Co2+
binding can be presented (Supplementary Figure S2).
Sensors  2016 , 16, 626 5 of 10 
 of azobenzene and the amino groups of Chrysoidin e G [45,46]. Thus, a proposed mechanism of CG-
Co2+ binding can be presented (Supplementary Figure S2). 
 
Figure 3.  Job’s plot obtained between CG chemosensor and cobalt. The total concentration of the CG 
chemosensor and cobalt was 10 μM. Each experiment was conducted three times. 
3.4. Response Time Monitoring for CG-Co2+ Complexation 
A fast response time is an important factor in  analytical sensing applications for real-time 
monitoring. To envision a real application, we conducted a real-time imaging experiment of the 
reaction between the CG chemosensor and cobalt. In terestingly, the color transition of an aqueous 
CG chemosensor solution occurred within a few seconds in the presence of cobalt ions, as shown in Figure 4. When 5 ppm of cobalt ions were a dded to an aqueous CG chem osensor, it gradually 
changed from yellow to light orange within 3 s. Th ese visible results suggest that the CG chemosensor 
can be applied to the real-time monitoring of a po rtable indicator with simple and rapid ‘naked eye’ 
detection of cobalt. 
 
Figure 4.  Time sequence images of aqueous CG chemosensor in the presence of cobalt. The concentration 
of CG chemosensor and cobalt are 7 × 10−5 M and 2 ppm, respectively. The scale bar is 3 cm. 
3.5. UV-Vis Titration Study for CG Chemosensor 
To evaluate the sensing performance toward cobalt, we performed a colorimetric titration 
experiment with different concentrations of coba lt ranging from 0.1 ppm to 50 ppm. As shown in 
Figure 5A, a color transition can be observed when the concentration of cobalt is beyond 2 ppm by 
the naked eye. In detail, we conducted a UV-vis ti tration experiment to demonstrate the absorbance 
change for a precise response of a CG chemosensor to ward cobalt ions (Figure 5B). Interestingly, the 
absorbance peak is clearly red-shifted at 460 nm, and a peak at 380 nm gradually decreased with an increases in cobalt concentration. Meanwhile, one clear isosbestic point appeared at 410 nm, 
indicating that the well-defined point is a cl ear interconversion between the complexed and 
uncomplexed forms that occur. It can also be explained that the CG chemosensor formed CG-Co
2+ 
Figure 3. Job’s plot obtained between CG chemosensor and cobalt. The total concentration of the CG
chemosensor and cobalt was 10 M. Each experiment was conducted three times.
3.4. Response Time Monitoring for CG-Co2+Complexation
A fast response time is an important factor in analytical sensing applications for real-time
monitoring. To envision a real application, we conducted a real-time imaging experiment of the
reaction between the CG chemosensor and cobalt. Interestingly, the color transition of an aqueous
CG chemosensor solution occurred within a few seconds in the presence of cobalt ions, as shown in
Figure 4. When 5 ppm of cobalt ions were added to an aqueous CG chemosensor, it gradually changed
from yellow to light orange within 3 s. These visible results suggest that the CG chemosensor can be
applied to the real-time monitoring of a portable indicator with simple and rapid ‘naked eye’ detection
of cobalt.
Sensors  2016 , 16, 626 5 of 10 
 of azobenzene and the amino groups of Chrysoidin e G [45,46]. Thus, a proposed mechanism of CG-
Co2+ binding can be presented (Supplementary Figure S2). 
 
Figure 3.  Job’s plot obtained between CG chemosensor and cobalt. The total concentration of the CG 
chemosensor and cobalt was 10 μM. Each experiment was conducted three times. 
3.4. Response Time Monitoring for CG-Co2+ Complexation 
A fast response time is an important factor in  analytical sensing applications for real-time 
monitoring. To envision a real application, we conducted a real-time imaging experiment of the 
reaction between the CG chemosensor and cobalt. In terestingly, the color transition of an aqueous 
CG chemosensor solution occurred within a few seconds in the presence of cobalt ions, as shown in Figure 4. When 5 ppm of cobalt ions were a dded to an aqueous CG chem osensor, it gradually 
changed from yellow to light orange within 3 s. Th ese visible results suggest that the CG chemosensor 
can be applied to the real-time monitoring of a po rtable indicator with simple and rapid ‘naked eye’ 
detection of cobalt. 
 
Figure 4.  Time sequence images of aqueous CG chemosensor in the presence of cobalt. The concentration 
of CG chemosensor and cobalt are 7 × 10−5 M and 2 ppm, respectively. The scale bar is 3 cm. 
3.5. UV-Vis Titration Study for CG Chemosensor 
To evaluate the sensing performance toward cobalt, we performed a colorimetric titration 
experiment with different concentrations of coba lt ranging from 0.1 ppm to 50 ppm. As shown in 
Figure 5A, a color transition can be observed when the concentration of cobalt is beyond 2 ppm by 
the naked eye. In detail, we conducted a UV-vis ti tration experiment to demonstrate the absorbance 
change for a precise response of a CG chemosensor to ward cobalt ions (Figure 5B). Interestingly, the 
absorbance peak is clearly red-shifted at 460 nm, and a peak at 380 nm gradually decreased with an increases in cobalt concentration. Meanwhile, one clear isosbestic point appeared at 410 nm, 
indicating that the well-defined point is a cl ear interconversion between the complexed and 
uncomplexed forms that occur. It can also be explained that the CG chemosensor formed CG-Co
2+ 
Figure 4. Time sequence images of aqueous CG chemosensor in the presence of cobalt.
The concentration of CG chemosensor and cobalt are 7 105M and 2 ppm, respectively. The scale
bar is 3 cm.
3.5. UV-Vis Titration Study for CG Chemosensor
To evaluate the sensing performance toward cobalt, we performed a colorimetric titration
experiment with different concentrations of cobalt ranging from 0.1 ppm to 50 ppm. As shown in
Figure 5A, a color transition can be observed when the concentration of cobalt is beyond 2 ppm by the
naked eye. In detail, we conducted a UV-vis titration experiment to demonstrate the absorbance changeSensors 2016 ,16, 626 6 of 10
for a precise response of a CG chemosensor toward cobalt ions (Figure 5B). Interestingly, the absorbance
peak is clearly red-shifted at 460 nm, and a peak at 380 nm gradually decreased with an increases in
cobalt concentration. Meanwhile, one clear isosbestic point appeared at 410 nm, indicating that the
well-deﬁned point is a clear interconversion between the complexed and uncomplexed forms that
occur. It can also be explained that the CG chemosensor formed CG-Co2+chelate bonds between the
CG chemosensor and cobalt ions. The absorbance intensity ratio (A 460/A380) as a function of cobalt
concentration is shown in Figure 5C. The saturation of the absorbance intensity ratio was reached with
an increase in cobalt concentration at 5 ppm of cobalt ions. The CG chemosensor exhibited a linear
range of detection for cobalt from 0.4 ppm to 1.0 ppm. In addition, the plot of A 460/A380against
various cobalt concentrations presented a good linear relationship (R2= 0.97), where A 460and A 380are
the UV-vis absorbance intensities in the presence of cobalt (Figure 5D).
Sensors  2016 , 16, 626 6 of 10 
 chelate bonds between the CG chemosensor and co balt ions. The absorbance intensity ratio (A 460/A380) 
as a function of cobalt concentration is shown in Figure 5C. The saturation of the absorbance intensity ratio was reached with an increase in cobalt concentration at 5 ppm of cobalt ions. The CG 
chemosensor exhibited a linear range of detection fo r cobalt from 0.4 ppm to 1.0 ppm. In addition, 
the plot of A
460/A380 against various cobalt concentrations presented a good linear relationship (R2 = 
0.97), where A 460 and A 380 are the UV-vis absorbance intensities in  the presence of cobalt (Figure 5D).  
 
Figure 5.  Colorimetric titration of cobalt. ( A) Photographs for the color change of CG chemosensor to 
the concentrations of cobalt; ( B) UV-vis absorbance changes of CG chemosensor in the presence of a 
serial concentration of the cobalt; ( C) Intensity ratio (A 460/A380) versus  the different concentrations of 
cobalt ion added; ( D) Linear plot of cobalt concentration based on UV-vis absorbance analysis; ( E) 
Quantitative analysis for RGB color profile of CG-Co2+ complexationss. The concentration of CG 
chemosensor and cobalt are 7 × 10−5 M and 2 ppm, respectively. 
Also, numerical data processing was performed using digital images taken with a smartphone. 
As shown in Figure 5E, numerical RGB values of the colorimetric images were extracted by using 
ImageJ software [47]. Interestingl y, the CG chemosensor exhibited hi gh response toward increasing 
cobalt concentrations in terms of decreased values  in Green (G) and Blue (B) compared to increased 
values in Red (R). Of note, cobalt could be detect ed by the naked eye by the colorimetric response of 
the CG chemosensor with a detection limit as a 2 ppm. In addition, an advantage of our colorimetric system is that it can be operated in pure water. A real sample was collected from the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI). Interestingly,  as shown in Supplementary Figure S3, the CG 
Figure 5. Colorimetric titration of cobalt. ( A) Photographs for the color change of CG chemosensor
to the concentrations of cobalt; ( B) UV-vis absorbance changes of CG chemosensor in the presence of
a serial concentration of the cobalt; ( C) Intensity ratio (A 460/A380)versus the different concentrations
of cobalt ion added; ( D) Linear plot of cobalt concentration based on UV-vis absorbance analysis;
(E) Quantitative analysis for RGB color proﬁle of CG-Co2+complexationss. The concentration of CG
chemosensor and cobalt are 7 105M and 2 ppm, respectively.Sensors 2016 ,16, 626 7 of 10
Also, numerical data processing was performed using digital images taken with a smartphone.
As shown in Figure 5E, numerical RGB values of the colorimetric images were extracted by using
ImageJ software [ 47]. Interestingly, the CG chemosensor exhibited high response toward increasing
cobalt concentrations in terms of decreased values in Green (G) and Blue (B) compared to increased
values in Red (R). Of note, cobalt could be detected by the naked eye by the colorimetric response of
the CG chemosensor with a detection limit as a 2 ppm. In addition, an advantage of our colorimetric
system is that it can be operated in pure water. A real sample was collected from the Korea Atomic
Energy Research Institute (KAERI). Interestingly, as shown in Supplementary Figure S3, the CG
chemosensor showed no color transition for a real sample (sample A). However, on-site detection
could be performed by simply introducing an artiﬁcial waste sample (sample B, including 2 ppm Co2+)
and observing the resulting color change from yellow to light orange. This result suggests that the
CG chemosensor test results can be easily conﬁrmed by the naked eye, even when the cobalt ions are
contaminate by unknown samples.
3.6. Reversibility Test
For the on-site reuse of a speciﬁc target, the limit of reversibility is important. To understand
further the afﬁnity interactions between the CG chemosensor and cobalt in water at the molecular level,
externally strong chelating agents such as NaOH were added after the detection of a CG chemosensor
response in the presence of cobalt. Reversibility is needed to reuse the CG chemosensor for the
detection of the same target. In this regard, a visible color change was observed in the presence of
2 ppm of cobalt followed by the introduction of a 1 N NaOH aqueous solution. Eventually, in the
presence of NaOH, the color is changed from light orange to yellow. This result indicates that Co2+
can preferentially react with NaOH for deprotonation into a more stable NaOH-Co2+complex in
basic medium. Sequentially, the recovery of a light orange color is induced by introducing a 1 N HCl
aqueous solution (Figure 6A).
Sensors  2016 , 16, 626 7 of 10 
 chemosensor showed no color transition for a real  sample (sample A). However, on-site detection 
could be performed by simply introducing an artificial waste sample (sample B, including 2 ppm Co
2+) and observing the resulting color change from ye llow to light orange. This result suggests that 
the CG chemosensor test results can be easily confir med by the naked eye, even when the cobalt ions 
are contaminate by unknown samples.  
3.6. Reversibility Test 
For the on-site reuse of a specific target, the lim it of reversibility is important. To understand 
further the affinity interactions between the CG ch emosensor and cobalt in water at the molecular 
level, externally strong chelating agents such as NaOH were added after the detection of a CG 
chemosensor response in the presence of cobalt. Re versibility is needed to reuse the CG chemosensor 
for the detection of the same target. In this regard , a visible color change was observed in the presence 
of 2 ppm of cobalt followed by the introduction of a 1 N NaOH aqueous solution. Eventually, in the presence of NaOH, the color is changed from light orange to yellow. This result indicates that Co
2+ 
can preferentially react with NaOH for deprotonation into a more stable NaOH-Co2+ complex in basic 
medium. Sequentially, the recovery of a light orange color is induced by introducing a 1 N HCl aqueous solution (Figure 6A).  
 
Figure 6.  (A) Photographs of the reversibility behavi or between CG chemosensor and cobalt; ( B) 
Continuously repeated UV-Vis absorbance profile during stepwise “on-off” switch reaction. The 
concentration of CG chemosensor is 7 × 10−5 M. 
These results suggest that the acidity or base level of the solution has no effect on the stability 
of the CG chemosensor. Moreover, this reversible color change procedure was continually repeated, 
as shown in Figure 6B. As shown in Figure 6, this  result led to the develo pment of a molecular level 
sensory technology signal using an “o n-off” absorbance intensity profile. 
4. Conclusions 
In conclusion, we successfully elucidated a ra pid colorimetric assay using a CG chemosensor. 
Importantly, the CG chemosensor exhibited good selectivity and sensitivity toward cobalt, which 
could be simply confirmed through a color transition phenomenon from yellow to light orange. In 
Figure 6. (A) Photographs of the reversibility behavior between CG chemosensor and cobalt;
(B) Continuously repeated UV-Vis absorbance proﬁle during stepwise “on-off” switch reaction.
The concentration of CG chemosensor is 7 105M.Sensors 2016 ,16, 626 8 of 10
These results suggest that the acidity or base level of the solution has no effect on the stability
of the CG chemosensor. Moreover, this reversible color change procedure was continually repeated,
as shown in Figure 6B. As shown in Figure 6, this result led to the development of a molecular level
sensory technology signal using an “on-off” absorbance intensity proﬁle.
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we successfully elucidated a rapid colorimetric assay using a CG chemosensor.
Importantly, the CG chemosensor exhibited good selectivity and sensitivity toward cobalt, which could
be simply conﬁrmed through a color transition phenomenon from yellow to light orange. In addition,
we found that the optimal conditions such as the external ( pH) and internal ( initial concentration
of CG) factors could be determined by the naked eye and through a UV-vis absorbance measurement.
Furthermore, the reversibility of the CG chemosensor was demonstrated through a simultaneous
injection of chelating agents. We note that the proposed CG chemosensor with a colorimetric assay
exhibits an enhanced on-site and real-time monitoring performance compared to existing methods:
(1) visual sensitivity with the naked eye has a limit of detection on the order of 2 ppm; (2) a reasonably
rapid response time (<3 s); and (3) excellent selectivity without any interference from other metallic
ions. We believe that it is a very simple, convenient and rapid detecting method for cobalt and can be
a potential candidate for practical applications such as on-site test kits and real-time monitoring.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/16/5/626/s1.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the Radiation Fusion Technology Program
(2015M2A2A6A02045263(2)) from Nuclear Research R&D Program through the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (MSIP), Republic of Korea.
Author Contributions: S.-M.K., S.-C.J., G.Y.K., C.-S.L., Y.S.H. and C.R. conceived the idea, designed the research
and performed the experiments and analyzed the data. S.-M.K., S.-C.J., C.-S.L., Y.S.H. and C.R. wrote the main
manuscript. S.-M.K., S.-C.J., Y.S.H. and C.R. analyzed the data and ﬁgure alignment. C.-S.L., Y.S.H. and C.R.
supervised the research. All authors discussed the results and reviewed the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
References
1. Kazantzis, G. Role of cobalt, iron, lead, manganese, mercury, platinum, selenium, and titanium in
carcinogenesis. Environ. Health Perspect. 1981 ,40, 143–161. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Siemiatycki, J.; Richardson, L.; Straif, K.; Latreille, B.; Lakhani, R.; Campbell, S.; Rousseau, M.-C.; Boffetta, P .
Listing occupational carcinogens. Environ. Health Perspect. 2004 ,112, 1447–1459. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Favre, J.; Fabrègue, D.; Yamanaka, K.; Chiba, A. Modeling dynamic recrystallization of L-605 cobalt
superalloy. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2016 ,653, 84–92. [CrossRef]
4. Nlebedim, I.; Snyder, J.E.; Moses, A.J.; Jiles, D. Dependence of the magnetic and magnetoelastic properties of
cobalt ferrite on processing parameters. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 2010 ,322, 3938–3942. [CrossRef]
5. Li, J.; Guo, L.; Zhao, N.; Yang, X.; Yi, R.; Li, K.; Zeng, Q.; Li, X.; Zeng, X.; Lu, Y. Determination of cobalt in
low-alloy steels using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy combined with laser-induced ﬂuorescence.
Talanta 2016 ,151, 234–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Jonynaite, D.; Senvaitiene, J.; Beganskiene, A.; Kareiva, A. Spectroscopic analysis of blue cobalt smalt
pigment. Vib. Spectrosc. 2010 ,52, 158–162. [CrossRef]
7. Khelifa, A.; Moulay, S.; Naceur, A. Treatment of metal ﬁnishing efﬂuents by the electroﬂotation technique.
Desalination 2005 ,181, 27–33. [CrossRef]
8. Kˇ ríbek, B.; Majer, V .; Veselovský, F.; Nyambe, I. Discrimination of lithogenic and anthropogenic sources of
metals and sulphur in soils of the central-northern part of the Zambian Copperbelt Mining District: A topsoil
vs.subsurface soil concept. J. Geochem. Explor. 2010 ,104, 69–86. [CrossRef]
9. Ramankutty, C.; Sugunan, S. Surface properties and catalytic activity of ferrospinels of nickel, cobalt and
copper, prepared by soft chemical methods. Appl. Catal. A 2001 ,218, 39–51. [CrossRef]Sensors 2016 ,16, 626 9 of 10
10. Mondal, A.K.; Liu, H.; Li, Z.-F.; Wang, G. Multiwall carbon nanotube-nickel cobalt oxide hybrid structure
as high performance electrodes for supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries. Electrochim. Acta 2016 ,190,
346–353. [CrossRef]
11. Raﬁghi, P .; Yaftian, M.; Noshiranzadeh, N. Solvent extraction of cobalt(II) ions; cooperation of oximes and
neutral donors. Separ. Purif. Technol. 2010 ,75, 32–38. [CrossRef]
12. Ahmadpour, A.; Tahmasbi, M.; Bastami, T.R.; Besharati, J.A. Rapid removal of cobalt ion from aqueous
solutions by almond green hull. J. Hazard. Mater. 2009 ,166, 925–930. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Seldén, A.I.; Norberg, C.; Karlson-Stiber, C.; Hellström-Lindberg, E. Cobalt release from glazed earthenware:
Observations in a case of lead poisoning. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2007 ,23, 129–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Okamoto, S.; Eltis, L.D. The biological occurrence and trafﬁcking of cobalt. Metallomics 2011 ,3, 963–970.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Rengaraj, S.; Moon, S.-H. Kinetics of adsorption of Co(II) removal from water and wastewater by ion
exchange resins. Water Res. 2002 ,36, 1783–1793. [CrossRef]
16. Krishnan, K.A.; Anirudhan, T. Kinetic and equilibrium modelling of cobalt(II) adsorption onto bagasse pith
based sulphurised activated carbon. Chem. Eng. J. 2008 ,137, 257–264. [CrossRef]
17. Lin, W.; Yuan, L.; Long, L.; Guo, C.; Feng, J. A ﬂuorescent cobalt probe with a large ratiometric ﬂuorescence
response via modulation of energy acceptor molar absorptivity on metal ion binding. Adv. Funct. Mater.
2008 ,18, 2366–2372. [CrossRef]
18. El-Safty, S.A. Functionalized hexagonal mesoporous silica monoliths with hydrophobic azo-chromophore
for enhanced Co(II) ion monitoring. Adsorption 2009 ,15, 227–239. [CrossRef]
19. Tsoutsi, D.; Guerrini, L.; Hermida-Ramon, J.M.; Giannini, V .; Liz-Marzán, L.M.; Wei, A.; Alvarez-Puebla, R.A.
Simultaneous SERS detection of copper and cobalt at ultratrace levels. Nanoscale 2013 ,5, 5841–5846.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Shi, J.; Lu, C.; Yan, D.; Ma, L. High selectivity sensing of cobalt in HepG2 cells based on necklace
model microenvironment-modulated carbon dot-improved chemiluminescence in Fenton-like system.
Biosens. Bioelectron. 2013 ,45, 58–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Rajabi Khorrami, A.; Fakhari, A.R.; Shamsipur, M.; Naeimi, H. Pre-concentration of ultra trace amounts of
copper, zinc, cobalt and nickel in environmental water samples using modiﬁed C18 extraction disks and
determination by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry. Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem.
2009 ,89, 319–329. [CrossRef]
22. Shokouﬁ, N.; Shemirani, F.; Memarzadeh, F. Fiber optic-linear array detection spectrophotometry in
combination with cloud point extraction for simultaneous preconcentration and determination of cobalt and
nickel. Anal. Chim. Acta 2007 ,601, 204–211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Ghaedi, M.; Ahmadi, F.; Shokrollahi, A. Simultaneous preconcentration and determination of copper, nickel,
cobalt and lead ions content by ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry. J. Hazard. Mater. 2007 ,142, 272–278.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Ghaedi, M.; Shokrollahi, A.; Ahmadi, F.; Rajabi, H.; Soylak, M. Cloud point extraction for the determination
of copper, nickel and cobalt ions in environmental samples by ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry.
J. Hazard. Mater. 2008 ,150, 533–540. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Youseﬁ, S.R.; Ahmadi, S.J. Development a robust ionic liquid-based dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction
against high concentration of salt combined with ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry using microsample
introduction system for preconcentration and determination of cobalt in water and saline samples.
Microchim. Acta 2011 ,172, 75–82.
26. Badocco, D.; Pastore, P .; Favaro, G.; Maccà, C. Effect of eluent composition and pH and chemiluminescent
reagent pH on ion chromatographic selectivity and luminol-based chemiluminescence detection of Co2+,
Mn2+and Fe2+at trace levels. Talanta 2007 ,72, 249–255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Zhao, S.; Huang, Y.; Shi, M.; Huang, J.; Liu, Y.-M. Quantiﬁcation of carnosine-related peptides by microchip
electrophoresis with chemiluminescence detection. Anal. Biochem. 2009 ,393, 105–110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Liu, Z.; Jia, X.; Bian, P .; Ma, Z. A simple and novel system for colorimetric detection of cobalt ions. Analyst
2013 ,139, 585–588. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. López, O.N.B.; Fuentes, H.C.; Perezgasga, F.V .; Casillas, H.A.M. Detection and analysis of cobalt in continuous
ﬂow using an analytical microsystem based on LTCC technology. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2016 ,227, 11–16.
[CrossRef]Sensors 2016 ,16, 626 10 of 10
30. Trigo-López, M.; Muñoz, A.; Ibeas, S.; Serna, F.; García, F.C.; García, J.M. Colorimetric detection and
determination of Fe(III), Co(II), Cu(II) and Sn(II) in aqueous media by acrylic polymers with pendant
terpyridine motifs. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2016 ,226, 118–126. [CrossRef]
31. Na, Y.J.; Choi, Y.W.; You, G.R.; Kim, C. A novel selective colorimetric chemosensor for cobalt ions in a near
perfect aqueous solution. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2016 ,223, 234–240. [CrossRef]
32. Leng, Y.; Zhang, F.; Zhang, Y.; Fu, X.; Weng, Y.; Chen, L.; Wu, A. A rapid and sensitive colorimetric assay
method for Co2+based on the modiﬁed Au nanoparticles (NPs): Understanding the involved interactions
from experiments and simulations. Talanta 2012 ,94, 271–277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Singh, A.K.; Mehtab, S.; Saxena, P . A novel potentiometric membrane sensor for determination of Co2+based
on 5-amino-3-methylisothiazole. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2007 ,120, 455–461. [CrossRef]
34. Zhang, L.; Zhou, J.; Hao, Y.; He, P .; Fang, Y. Determination of Co2+based on the cobalt(II)-catalyzed
electrochemiluminescence of luminol in acidic solution. Electrochim. Acta 2005 ,50, 3414–3419. [CrossRef]
35. Chen, J.; Zheng, A.; Gao, Y.; He, C.; Wu, G.; Chen, Y.; Kai, X.; Zhu, C. Functionalized CdS quantum dots-based
luminescence probe for detection of heavy and transition metal ions in aqueous solution. Spectrochim. Acta A
Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2008 ,69, 1044–1052. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Lin, W.; Yuan, L.; Cao, Z.; Feng, J.; Feng, Y. Fluorescence enhancement of coumarin–quinoline by transition
metal ions: Detection of paramagnetic Ni2+and Co2+.Dyes Pigm. 2009 ,83, 14–20. [CrossRef]
37. Mashraqui, S.H.; Chandiramani, M.; Betkar, R.; Poonia, K. A simple internal charge transfer probe offering
dual optical detection of Co(II) via color and ﬂuorescence modulations. Tetrahedron Lett. 2010 ,51, 1306–1308.
[CrossRef]
38. Zhang, F.; Zeng, L.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, H.; Wu, A. A colorimetric assay method for Co2+based on thioglycolic
acid functionalized hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide modiﬁed Au nanoparticles (NPs). Nanoscale
2011 ,3, 2150–2154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Zhang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Lou, T.; Pan, D.; Chen, L.; Qu, C.; Chen, Z. Label-free colorimetric sensing of cobalt(II)
based on inducing aggregation of thiosulfate stabilized gold nanoparticles in the presence of ethylenediamine.
Analyst 2012 ,137, 400–405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Zhang, Z.; Chen, Z.; Pan, D.; Chen, L. Fenton-like Reaction-Mediated Etching of Gold Nanorods for Visual
Detection of Co2+.Langmuir 2015 ,31, 643–650. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Yao, Y.; Tian, D.; Li, H. Cooperative binding of bifunctionalized and click-synthesized silver nanoparticles
for colorimetric Co2+sensing. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2010 ,2, 684–690. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Vilela, D.; González, M.C.; Escarpa, A. Sensing colorimetric approaches based on gold and silver
nanoparticles aggregation: Chemical creativity behind the assay. A review. Anal. Chim. Acta 2012 ,751, 24–43.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Sung, H.K.; Oh, S.Y.; Park, C.; Kim, Y. Colorimetric detection of Co2+ion using silver nanoparticles with
spherical, plate, and rod shapes. Langmuir 2013 ,29, 8978–8982. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Job, P . Formation and stability of inorganic complexes in solution. Ann. Chim. 1928 ,9, 133–203.
45. Sha, Y.; Mathew, I.; Cui, Q.; Clay, M.; Gao, F.; Zhang, X.J.; Gu, Z. Rapid degradation of azo dye methyl orange
using hollow cobalt nanoparticles. Chemosphere 2016 ,144, 1530–1535. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Kim, D.; Jo, A.; Seo, B.-K.; Lee, K.-W.; Park, W.H.; Lee, T.S. Colorimetric detection of transition metal ions
with azopyridine-based probing molecule in aqueous solution and in PMMA ﬁlm. Fiber Polym. 2013 ,14,
1993–1998. [CrossRef]
47. Yoon, B.; Park, I.S.; Shin, H.; Park, H.J.; Lee, C.W.; Kim, J.M. A litmus-type colorimetric and
ﬂuorometric volatile organic compound sensor based on inkjet-printed polydiacetylenes on paper substrates.
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2013 ,34, 731–735. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
©2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).