720 Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien }Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 
CLINICAL REVIEW      
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Demystifying serotonin  
syndrome (or serotonin toxicity) Editor’s key points 
} Serotonin syndrome, more aptly 
named serotonin toxicity, is a 
potentially fatal drug-induced 
condition caused by too much 
serotonin in synapses in the brain. 
Patients present with a combination 
of neuromuscular, autonomic, and 
mental status symptoms. 
}Most cases involve 2 drugs that 
increase serotonin in different ways 
or an overdose of 1 serotonin drug. 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 
serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors, and selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors are the most 
common culprits. The use of 2 high-
dose serotonin drugs at the same 
time should be avoided. 
}Prevention of serotonin toxicity is 
key. Education of prescribers and patients is important to avoid and 
detect serotonin toxicity. Ai-Leng Foong PharmD Kelly A. Grindrod PharmD MSc 
Tejal Patel PharmD Jamie Kellar PharmD 
Abstract 
Objective To review the symptoms of serotonin toxicity (commonly referred 
to as serotonin syndrome) and the causative drugs and their mechanisms of 
action, and to equip primary care providers with practical strategies to prevent 
and identify serotonin toxicity. 
Quality of evidence PubMed and Google Scholar were searched for relevant 
articles on serotonin toxicity, the causes, and the differential diagnosis using 
search terms related to serotonin toxicity (serotonin syndrome, serotonin 
toxicity, serotonin overdose), causes (individual names of drug classes, 
individual drug names), and diagnosis (differential diagnosis, neuroleptic 
malignant syndrome, anticholinergic toxicity, discontinuation syndrome, malignant hyperthermia, serotonin symptoms). Experts in psychiatric medicine, 
psychiatric pharmacy, clinical pharmacology, and medical toxicology were 
consulted. Evidence is level II and III. 
Main message Serotonin toxicity is a drug-induced condition caused by too 
much serotonin in synapses in the brain. Cases requiring hospitalization are rare, and mild cases caused by serotonin-mediated side effects are unlikely 
to be fatal. Patients present with a combination of neuromuscular, autonomic, 
and mental status symptoms. Serotonin-elevating drugs include monoamine 
oxidase inhibitors, serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and serotonin releasers. 
Most cases involve 2 drugs that increase serotonin in different ways; the most 
concerning combination is a monoamine oxidase inhibitor with a selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor or a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor. 
Conclusion Family physicians play a key role in identifying and preventing 
serotonin syndrome by teaching patients to recognize symptoms and 
monitoring patients throughout therapy. 
Serotonin toxicity (commonly referred to as serotonin syndrome) is a 
potentially life-threatening drug-induced condition caused by too much 
serotonin in the synapses of the brain.1-3 Patients present with a com-
bination of neuromuscular, autonomic, and mental status symptoms. Most 
cases involve 2 drugs that increase serotonin in different ways or an over-
dose of 1 serotonin-elevating drug.1-3 While the most common culprits are 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs), and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), the list 
of potential contributors is long and includes often-overlooked substances 
such as herbals and illicit drugs.1-3 
Cases of serotonin syndrome resulting in hospitalization or death are rare. 
Most cases do not require medication intervention, but can be managed by 
stopping the drug or decreasing the dose. Mild toxicity appears to be rare but 
is likely under-reported, unrecognized, or confused with other syndromes.2 
The lack of agreed-upon diagnostic criteria, inconsistencies in clinical symp-
toms, and clinicians who are not trained to identify it mean that case reports 
are published even when patients do not experience serotonin toxicity, which 
complicates the literature.1,2,4 With the ever increasing use of antidepressants Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 |Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien 721 
Demystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)  CLINICAL REVIEW      
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  for mood and other conditions such as anxiety, pain, 
sleep, and menopausal hot flashes, clarity is needed 
to help health care professionals prevent, identify, and 
manage serotonin toxicity.5,6 
The objective of this update is to review the symp-
toms of serotonin toxicity and the causative drugs and 
their mechanisms of action, and to equip primary care 
providers with practical strategies to prevent and iden-
tify serotonin toxicity. 
Quality of evidence 
We searched PubMed and Google Scholar for relevant 
articles on serotonin toxicity, the causes, and the dif-
ferential diagnoses. A selection of search terms related 
to serotonin toxicity (serotonin syndrome, serotonin tox-
icity, serotonin overdose), causes (individual names of 
drug classes, individual drug names), and diagnosis 
(differential diagnosis, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 
anticholinergic toxicity, discontinuation syndrome, malig-
nant hyperthermia, serotonin symptoms) was used. We 
consulted with experts in psychiatric medicine, psychi-
atric pharmacy, clinical pharmacology, and medical toxi-
cology. Recommendations were based on the criteria outlined by Canadian Family Physician, where level I evidence includes at least 1 properly conducted ran-domized controlled trial, systematic review, or meta-
analysis; level II includes other comparison trials and non-
randomized, cohort, case-control, or epidemiologic 
studies, and preferably more than 1 study; and level III 
includes expert opinion or consensus statements. 
Recommendations are based on level II and III evidence. 
Main message 
We developed the infographic in Figure 1 based on 
the best available evidence (Table 1).1-4,7-12 The info-
graphic and an English-only patient handout are avail-able at CFPlus.* 
Assess the patient. The best available information 
on the symptoms of serotonin toxicity is from a retro-
spective analysis of prospective data collected by the 
Hunter Area Toxicology Service in Australia (level II evi-
dence).
1 Patients present with a triad of neuromuscular, 
autonomic, and mental status changes that start within 
hours to 1 day of increasing a dose or adding a seroto-
nergic drug (Table 2).1,2,12,13 If untreated, serotonin toxic-
ity escalates quickly and can be fatal.2 Because toxicity 
presents on a spectrum rather than as a defned set of 
signs and symptoms (ie, a syndrome), serotonin toxicity 
is more accurate than serotonin syndrome.1 
Mild symptoms, which include nervousness, insom-
nia, nausea, diarrhea, tremor, and dilated pupils, can 
*The infographic (Figure 1) and an English-only patient handout 
are available at www.cfp.ca . Go to the full text of the article 
online and click on the CFPlus tab. progress to moderate symptoms such as hyperrefexia 
(increased refexes), sweating, agitation, restlessness, 
clonus (rhythmic muscle spasms), and ocular clonus 
(side-to-side eye movements). Patients with severe 
symptoms should be referred to the hospital immedi-
ately; severe symptoms include temperature greater 
than 38.5 °C (101.3 °F), confusion, delirium, sustained clo-
nus or rigidity, and rhabdomyolysis. 
Cases of serotonin toxicity that require hospitaliza-
tion are straightforward to diagnose, as severe symp-
toms (such as bilateral, symmetric clonus in the legs 
more than in the arms) are not common in other 
conditions. The combination of nonspecifc autonomic 
manifestations, a range of possible signs and symptoms, 
and a lack of definitive laboratory tests makes 
milder cases less straightforward to diagnose, although 
such cases are unlikely to be fatal. 
Assess the drug. Because serotonin toxicity is a drug-
induced condition, an accurate drug history is necessary 
for diagnosis, especially when a patient has recently 
used an MAOI or another serotonin-elevating drug. 
Serotonin toxicity most often happens when 2 or more 
serotonin-elevating drugs are used together, especially if 
they increase serotonin in different ways.1,2,12,13 An MAOI 
with an SSRI, an SNRI, or another MAOI is the riskiest 
combination, but other combinations can also result in 
toxicity. Some experts report that therapeutic doses of a 
single drug can cause toxicity, but the risk is low, as it is 
a dose-related drug toxicity.1,2,14 
Serotonin is formed from dietary tryptophan and 
stored in the presynaptic terminal.15 It is released into 
the synapse where it acts on the presynaptic and post-
synaptic terminals, and is taken back up into the presyn-
aptic terminal to be degraded by monoamine oxidase 
(Figure 2).15 Drugs that increase synaptic concentrations 
of serotonin include MAOIs, serotonin reuptake inhibi-
tors, and serotonin releasers.4 
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors: Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors slow the breakdown of serotonin by block-ing monoamine oxidase.
15 This class of drugs is most 
concerning, specifcally MAOIs that bind irreversibly and 
non-selectively to both types of monoamine oxidase 
(MAO-A and MAO-B); MAO-A inhibitors are more likely 
to cause toxicity because MAO-A plays a larger role in the breakdown of serotonin.
1,15 Combination of 2 MAOIs 
or an MAOI and another serotonergic drug carries the 
greatest risk of serotonin toxicity. Although not common anymore, the most recognizable MAOIs are those used 
to treat depression, such as phenelzine, isocarboxazid, tranylcypromine, and moclobemide. Other agents less 
frequently recognized as MAOIs include the antibiot-
ics isoniazid (irreversible, non-selective) and linezolid 
(reversible, non-selective).
3,16 722 Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien }Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 
CLINICAL REVIEW  Dem ystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)          
def. Toxicity caused by excessive serotonin levels that results from a drug overdose or interactionTarget Serotonin Syndrome Figure 1 
Assess the patient Symptoms start within hours to 1 day of increasing a dose or adding a drug 
Fever >38.5°C/101.3°F
Confusio n/delirium
Sustained clonu s/rigidity
Rhabdomyolysis
Death
Severe Moderate Mild 
Nervousness Hyperreflexia 
Insomnia Sweating 
Nausea/diarrhea Agitation/restlessness 
Tremor Inducible clonus 
Big pupils Side-to-side eye movements 
Assess all drugs Most cases involve 2 drugs that increase serotonin in different ways – full list on back 
Prescription drugs 
 OTC and natural drugs 
 Illicit drugs 
Rule out Serotonin syndrome can look like other things; diagnosis requires an accurate drug history 
Meningitis/Encephalitis
Neuroleptic Malignant Syndrome
Malignant Hyperthermia
Anticholinergic Toxicity
Antidepressant Discontinuation
Similar-looking Remind all 
conditions patients: 
Non-toxic increases in 
serotonin can cause anxiety, restlessness and irritability for 1-2 weeks 
Drug Overdose
Alcohol/Benzo Withdrawal
If you suspect serotonin syndrome Don’t wait, take action – it progresses rapidly 
Try other drugs or restart 
low doses slowly 
once symptoms 
are gone Refer patient 
to hospital 
Stop the 
drug(s) 
Prevent serotonin syndrome Stay alert – most cases can be prevented 
Use lowest effective dose Check drug monographs for Reassess the need for a 
tapering and wash-out periods serotonin drug yearly 
Ask about illicit drug use Follow up 1-2 days after upping Teach patients to recognize 
a dose or starting a new drug serotonin syndrome Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 |Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien 723 
Demystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)  CLINICAL REVIEW     
If a patient uses a Group B  drug and a second Group B  drug is added, start low, increase the dose
cautiously, and watch for symptoms for 24-48h after every changeMONITOR: 
TWO or more  Group B  drugs especially when ONE is used at a high doseCAUTION: 
Group A  with Group A     or     Group A  with Group BAVOID: 
Group A Group B 
Non-selective and irreversible 
MAOi A and B 
Isocarboxazid 
Isoniazid Phenelzine Tranylcypromine 
Non-selective and reversible Opioids and other pain medications 
Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI): Paroxetine, fluvoxamine,
sertraline, citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine
Serotonin Norepinephrine Inhibitors (SNRI): Venlafaxine, desvenlafaxine,
duloxetine
Tricyclic Antidepressants: Clomipramine, imipramineAntidepressants 
Ecstasy (MDMA), amphetamine, cocaine
Illicit drugs 
St. John’s wort, L-tryptophan, diet pillsNatural health products 
Dextromethorphan (”DM”), chlorpheniramineCough, cold and allergy 
Tramadol, meperidine, methadone, fentanyl (unlikely with morphine,
codeine, oxycodone, buprenorphine)
Selegiline (non-selective at higher
doses)RasagilineSelective and irreversible MAOi B 
Moclobemide
Methylene blue (non-selective athigher doses)
Selective and reversible MAOi A 
LinezolidMAOi A and B 
Triptans (e.g., sumatriptan)
Antidepressants: amitriptyline, mirtazapine, trazodoneAntiemetics: 5HT3 receptor antagonists (e.g., ondansetron),
metoclopramide
Buspirone, lithium
Commonly listed but unlikely to cause serotonin syndrome 
Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med 2005; 352:1112-20. 
Gardner DM. Serotonin Syndrome. Gillman K. A systematic review of the serotonergic effects of Mirtazapine. Hum Psychopharmacol Clin Exp 2005; 21(2):117-25. Gillman K. Triptans, serotonin agonists, and serotonin syndrome (serotonin toxicity): a review. Headache 2010; 50(2):264-72. Gillman K. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, opioid analgesics and serotonin toxicity. Br J Anaesth 2005 Oct;95(4):434-41. Gillman K. CNS toxicity involving methylene blue. J Psychopharmacol. 2011 Mar;25(3):429-36. Harada T et al. Incidence and predictors of activation syndrome induced by antidepressants. Depress Anxiety 2008; 25:1014-19. Isbister GK et al. Serotonin toxicity: a practical approach to diagnosis and treatment. Med J Aust 2007;187(6):361-5. Sinclair LI et al. Antidepressant-induced jitteriness/anxiety syndrome: systematic review. Br J Psychiatry 2009; 194:483-90. Dunkley EJC, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D, Dawson AH, Whyte IM. The Hunter Serotonin Toxicity Criteria. QJM. 2003;96(9):635-642. 
Content by Kelly Grindrod, PharmD; Tejal Patel, PharmD; Jamie Kellar, PharmD; Ai-Leng Foong, BSc. Design by Adrian Poon, BA 
©2017 Pharmacy5in5.com724 Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien }Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 
CLINICAL REVIEW  Dem ystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)      
   
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
       
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
       
 
        
 
 
  
 -Table 1. Evidence supporting the key considerations for practice 
CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS EVIDENCE RATING REFERENCES 
The best available evidence for the clinical presentation of toxicity is from the Hunter Area Level II* 1 
Toxicology Service in Australia 
Serotonin toxicity most often happens when 2 serotonin-elevating drugs are used together. The Level III† 1,3 
use of an MAOI with an SSRI, an SNRI, or another MAOI is the most concerning drug combination 
Some drugs thought to cause serotonin toxicity do not (eg, triptans, ondansetron) Level III† 1,4,7-11 
Prevention of serotonin toxicity through good prescribing practices and monitoring is important Level III† 2,12 
MAOI—monoamine oxidase inhibitor, SNRI—serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, SSRI—selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. 
*Level II: Comparison trials other than randomized controlled trials, systematic reviews, or meta analyses; non-randomized, cohort, case-control, or epidemiologic studies; and preferably more than 1 study. 
†Level III: Expert opinion or consensus statements. 
Table 2. Signs and symptoms of serotonin toxicity 
CATEGORY SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS 
Neuromuscular • Tremor 
• Hyperrefexia (increased refexes)* • Clonus (rhythmic muscle spasms that can 
be spontaneous, inducible, or ocular)* 
Autonomic • Mydriasis (dilated pupils) • Diaphoresis (sweating) • Tachycardia (increased heart rate) • Tachypnea (increased breathing rate) 
Mental status • Agitation 
• Excitement • Restlessness • Confusion • Delirium 
Data from Dunkley et al,1 Boyer and Shannon,2 Ables and Nagubilli,12 
and Isbister et al.13 
*Hyperrefexia and clonus are often worse in the legs than in the arms. 
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors: Serotonin reup-
take inhibitors prevent the transport of serotonin from 
the synapse back into the presynaptic terminal to be 
degraded, keeping it at the site of action.15 Drugs that 
prevent the reuptake of serotonin include SNRIs, SSRIs, 
tramadol, certain tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), cer-tain opioids, dextromethorphan, the antihistamines 
chlorpheniramine and brompheniramine, and herbals 
such as St John’s wort.
7,13 
After MAOIs, SNRIs and SSRIs are the most concern-
ing serotonergic drugs, as their main mechanism is to increase serotonin.
1,2 The SNRI venlafaxine causes toxicity 
more often than SSRIs do, possibly because it has another 
serotonergic mechanism other than a reuptake inhibitor.3 
Certain synthetic opioids such as tramadol, methadone, 
meperidine, fentanyl, and dextromethorphan are weak 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors and can cause toxicity, but opioids with a structure similar to morphine are not 
reuptake inhibitors, meaning that morphine, codeine, 
oxycodone, and buprenorphine do not cause toxicity.
7 
Because of the risk of dextromethorphan and the 
antihistamines chlorpheniramine and brompheniramine, 
remind patients who take serotonin drugs to talk to a physician or pharmacist before taking a cough and 
cold medication. 
Tricyclic antidepressants are also serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors, with clomipramine and imipramine being the 
most potent and likely the only TCAs to be involved in 
serotonin toxicity; other TCAs such as amitriptyline are 
weaker inhibitors and are thus unlikely to cause toxicity.3,7 
Serotonin releasers: Serotonin releasers cause more 
serotonin to be released from the presynaptic terminal 
into the synapse. Serotonin releasers include amphet-
amine, but not methylphenidate, and the illicit drug 
ecstasy (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine).3,7,12 
L-Tryptophan: A drug that does not ft into any of 
these 3 categories is L-tryptophan, which can be used 
for various mood disorders.3 L-Tryptophan can increase 
serotonin levels because serotonin is made from trypto-
phan; however, the risk is low. 
Controversies. Experts disagree on the list of implicated 
drugs. The lists of serotonin drugs published by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Health Canada 
include drugs that are unlikely to cause toxicity based 
on their mechanisms of action—either they work on different receptors than the ones involved in serotonin 
toxicity or they block rather than activate the recep -
tors.
8,9 Examples include triptans (used for migraines), 
antiemetics such as ondansetron, olanzapine, mirtazap-
ine, cyclobenzaprine, bupropion, trazodone, buspirone, lithium, and amitriptyline.
1,4,7-11 That these are unlikely to 
cause serotonin toxicity is supported by the lack of case 
reports implicating these drugs, through case series, by reviewing the evidence for case reports, and by under -
standing the pharmacology of these drugs. 
In 2016, an FDA warning
8 stated that opioids interact 
with migraine medications (triptans), a warning partly 
based on poor-quality case reports that did not use vali-
dated criteria (eg, the Hunter Serotonin Toxicity Criteria) 
to diagnose serotonin toxcity.4 Similarly, the FDA, Health 
Canada, and the World Health Organization issued 
warnings about 5-HT3 antagonists (eg, antiemetics such 
as ondansetron and granisetron) despite a lack of high-
quality evidence of this drug class causing toxicity.8-10,17,18 Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 |Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien 725 
Demystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)  CLINICAL REVIEW
     Figure 2. Serotonin physiology: Serotonin is formed in the presynaptic terminal from tryptophan. Once packaged into vesicles, it is released 
into the synaptic cleft where it can bind to serotonin receptors on the postsynaptic neuron to exert its action. Serotonin is transported through a transporter to the presynaptic terminal where it is broken down by monoamine oxidase.
15 The 3 classes of drugs that increase 
serotonin in synapses are highlighted in red. 
5HT—5-hydroxytryptamine. 726 Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien }Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 
CLINICAL REVIEW  Dem ystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)      
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
        
 
 
       
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
         
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Based on these controversial data, there is a risk that 
inaccurate information has been incorporated into drug 
interaction–checking software used in pharmacies and 
physicians’ offices. In Canada, RxVigilance and First 
Databank maintain updated databases that are used in 
electronic decision support tools for health care provid-ers, such as the drug information needed for an interac-
tion checker.
19,20 Although these companies recognize 
that the FDA and Health Canada have published infor-
mation based on weak evidence, their interaction check-
ers still fag combinations of drugs that are unlikely to cause serotonin toxicity. As a result, prescribers might 
avoid prescribing a medication that might otherwise 
prove to be useful for a patient. 
What to rule out. Other conditions look similar to sero-
tonin toxicity. 
Antidepressant discontinuation: Symptoms start 
within days of stopping or tapering a drug and are usu-
ally self-limited, lasting 1 week.
21 Symptoms include fu-
like symptoms, nausea, imbalance, sensory disturbances, 
hyperarousal, and changes in mood, sleep, and appetite.21 
Anticholinergic toxicity: Anticholinergic toxicity 
results from an overdose of anticholinergic medications. 
Symptoms include dry mouth, dry and fushed skin, uri-
nary retention, decreased bowel sounds, dilated pupils, 
blurry vision, fever, agitation, delirium, and hallucina-
tions.22 A distinguishing feature is that muscle tone and 
refexes are normal in anticholinergic toxicity.22 
Malignant hyperthermia: Malignant hyperthermia 
is triggered by specific volatile anesthetics during or 
shortly after surgery. Telltale signs include hyperthermia 
(>39 °C), tachycardia, tachypnea, acidosis, muscle rigid-
ity, and rhabdomyolysis.23 Family history is a factor. 
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome: Unlike serotonin 
toxicity, neuroleptic malignant syndrome is not dose-
related but is an idiosyncratic reaction to neuroleptic 
drugs. Onset is slower, taking place over days, and it is differentiated from serotonin toxicity by the presence of 
bradykinesia and lead-pipe or cogwheel rigidity.
23 
Other conditions: Other similar-looking conditions 
include meningitis or encephalitis, drug overdose, and 
alcohol or benzodiazepine withdrawal.12,13 Notably, it 
is normal for nontoxic increases in serotonin to cause 
anxiety, restlessness, and irritability for 1 to 2 weeks after starting a drug or increasing a dose.
24 
If you suspect serotonin toxicity. If you suspect sero-
tonin toxicity, stop the serotonin drugs. Refer patients 
with severe symptoms or patients who have ingested an 
MAOI and a serotonin reuptake inhibitor to the hospital, 
as their condition can worsen quickly.13 Teach patients 
to recognize serotonin toxicity and tell them to call their 
primary practitioner if they suspect toxicity. Once signs 
and symptoms have resolved, try other drugs or restart 
low doses slowly, and rule out other contributing drugs such as over-the-counter medications or illicit drugs. For 
most patients who experience serotonin-mediated side 
effects, these changes to their medications will manage 
symptoms and prevent toxicity, and a hospital referral 
will not be required. 
Preventing serotonin toxicity. Serotonin toxicity remains 
a confusing area for practitioners and can be a scary, 
potentially fatal experience for patients. As most cases are 
avoidable, learning to identify and prevent it is key. 
Before prescribing a serotonin drug and at check-
ups: Ask patients about over-the-counter drug, herbal, 
and illicit drug use. Remind patients to check with their 
prescribers or pharmacists before starting a new drug. 
When prescribing: Make sure you use the lowest 
effective dose and avoid the use of 2 high-dose sero -
tonin drugs at the same time. 
If stopping or switching drugs: Check drug mono-
graphs for tapering and wash-out periods, and stress 
careful adherence to the crossover schedule. 
After prescribing: Follow up with patients a few days 
after increasing the dose or starting a new drug, and 
check yearly if the patient still needs to be taking the drug. 
Conclusion 
Serotonin toxicity is an important topic for primary care 
providers. Education of both practitioners and patients 
is the only way to prevent serotonin toxicity. 
Dr Foong completed her Doctor of Pharmacy degree at the University of Waterloo School 
of Pharmacy in Ontario. Dr Grindrod is Assistant Professor in the University of Waterloo 
School of Pharmacy and a clinical pharmacist at the Kitchener Downtown Community 
Health Centre. Dr Patel is Assistant Clinical Professor in the University of Waterloo 
School of Pharmacy, part-time Assistant Clinical Professor in the Michael G. DeGroote 
School of Medicine at McMaster University, a clinical pharmacist with the Memory Clinic 
at the Centre for Family Medicine Family Health Team in Kitchener, a research scientist at the Schlegel–University of Waterloo Research Institute for Aging, and an affliate 
researcher with the Waterloo Institute for Complexity and Innovation. Dr Kellar is 
Assistant Professor and Acting Director of the Doctor of Pharmacy program at the Leslie 
Dan Faculty of Pharmacy at the University of Toronto in Ontario, an advanced practice 
hospital pharmacist at the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health in Toronto, a doctoral 
candidate in the School of Health Professions Education at Maastricht University in the 
Netherlands, and a research fellow at the Wilson Centre in Toronto. 
Acknowledgment 
We thank Adrian Poon, who designed the infographic and serotonin physiology 
fgure; Dr David Gardner, who provided comments on our infographic; and Dr Ken 
Gillman, who provided comments on our manuscript. Dr Gardner’s website, Medication 
InfoShare (medicationinfoshare.com), provides resources and research about mental 
health and medications. Dr Gillman’s extensive research on serotonin toxicity is com-
piled on his website, PsychoTropical Research (www.psychotropical.info). 
Contributors 
Dr Grindrod conceived of the project. All authors were involved in drafting the info-
graphic and the manuscript and approving the fnal draft. 
Competing interests 
None declared 
Correspondence 
Dr Kelly A. Grindrod; e-mail kgrindrod@uwaterloo.ca 
References 
1. Dunkley EJC, Isbister GK, Sibbritt D, Dawson AH, Whyte IM. The Hunter Serotonin 
Toxicity Criteria: simple and accurate diagnostic decision rules for serotonin toxicity. 
QJM 2003;96(9):635-42. 
2. Boyer EW, Shannon M. The serotonin syndrome. N Engl J Med 2005;352(11):1112-20. 
Errata in: N Engl J Med 2007;356(23):2437, N Engl J Med 2009;361(17):1714. 
3. Gillman PK. A review of serotonin toxicity data: implication for the mechanisms of 
antidepressant drug action. Biol Psychiatry 2006;59(11):1046-51. Epub 2006 Feb 7. 
4. Gillman PK. Triptans, serotonin agonists, and serotonin syndrome (serotonin toxic -
ity): a review. Headache 2010;50(2):264-72. Epub 2009 Nov 17. Vol 64: OCTOBER  | OCTOBRE  2018 |Canadian Family Physician | Le Médecin de famille canadien 727 
Demystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity)  CLINICAL REVIEW      
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 5. Morkem R, Barber D, Williamson T, Patten SB. A Canadian Primary Care Sentinel 
Surveillance Network study evaluating antidepressant prescribing in Canada from 
2006 to 2012. Can J Psychiatry 2015;60(12):564-70. 
6. Mojtabai R, Olfson M. National trends in psychotropic medication polypharmacy in 
offce-based psychiatry. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010;67(1):26-36. 
7. Gillman PK. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, opioid analgesics and serotonin toxicity. 
Br J Anaesth 2005;95(4):434-41. Epub 2005 Jul 28. 
8. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. FDA drug safety communication: 
FDA warns about several safety issues with opioid pain medicines; requires label 
changes. Silver Spring, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 2016. Available from: 
www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm489676.htm. Accessed 2017 Jul 27. 
9. Health Canada. Summary safety review—serotonin blocking drugs (serotonin 
antagonists) ALOXI (palonosetron), ANZEMET (dolasetron), KYTRIL (granisetron) and 
generics, and ZOFRAN (ondansetron) and generics—serotonin syndrome. Ottawa, 
ON: Health Canada; 2014. 
10. Gillman PK. Regulatory agencies (WHO, FDA) offer ill-conceived advice about serotonin 
toxicity (serotonin syndrome) with 5-HT3 antagonists: a worldwide problem. PsychoTropical 
Research; 2015. Available from: http://psychotropical.info/serotonin-toxicity-and-
5-ht3-antagonists. Accessed 2017 Jul 27. 
11. Gillman PK. Is there suffcient evidence to suggest cyclobenzaprine might be impli-
cated in causing serotonin toxicity? Am J Emerg Med 2009;27(4):509-10. 
12. Ables AZ, Nagubilli R. Prevention, diagnosis and management of serotonin syn-
drome. Am Fam Physician 2010;81(9):1139-42. 
13. Isbister GK, Buckley NA, Whyte IM. Serotonin toxicity: a practical approach to diag -
nosis and treatment. Med J Aust 2007;187(6):361-5. 
14. Isbister GK, Bowe SJ, Dawson A, Whyte IM. Relative toxicity of selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in overdose. J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 2004;42(3):277-85. 
15. Sanders-Bush E, Hazelwood L. 5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) and dopamine. In: 
Brunton LL, Chabner BA, Knollmann BC, editors. Goodman & Gilman’s. The pharma -
cological basis of therapeutics. 12th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2011. p. 335-62. 
16. Gillman PK. Advances pertaining to the pharmacology and interactions of ir -
reversible nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors. J Clin Psychopharmacol 
2011;31(1):66-74. 17. WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring. WHO pharmaceuticals 
newsletter. No. 3, 2012. Geneva, Switz: World Health Organization; 2012. Available from: 
www.who.int/medicines/publications/Newsletter_3_2012.pdf. Accessed 2017 Jul 27. 
18. WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring. WHO pharmaceuticals 
newsletter. No. 4, 2012. Geneva, Switz: World Health Organization; 2012. Available from: 
www.who.int/medicines/publications/PharmNewsNo4_2014.pdf. Accessed 2017 Jul 27. 
19. Vigilance Santé [database and software]. Repentigny, QC: Vigilance Santé; 2017. 
Available from: www.vigilance.ca. Accessed 2017 Aug 14. 
20. First Databank [database]. South San Francisco, CA: First Databank; 2018. Available 
from: www.fdbhealth.com. Accessed 2017 Aug 14. 
21. Kok RM, Reynolds CF 3rd. Management of depression in older adults: a review. JAMA 
2017;317(20):2114-22. 
22. Dawson AH, Buckley NA. Pharmacological management of anticholinergic delirium— 
theory, evidence, and practice. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2015;81(3):516-24. Epub 2015 Dec 29. 
23. Gillman PK. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome: mechanisms, interactions, and cau-
sality. Mov Disord 2010;25(12):1780-90. 
24. Sinclair LI, Christmas DM, Hood SD, Potokar JP, Robertson A, Isaac A, et al. 
Antidepressant-induced jitteriness/anxiety syndrome: systematic review. Br J 
Psychiatry 2009;194(6):483-90. 
This article is eligible for Mainpro+ certifed Self-Learning credits. To earn 
credits, go to www.cfp.ca  and click on the Mainpro+ link. 
This article has been peer reviewed. Can Fam Physician 2018;64:720-7 
La traduction en français de cet article se trouve à www.cfp.ca  dans la 
table des matières du numéro d’octobre 2018 à la page e422. 